IN THE ONE OF VHICH, THE NATVRE OF BODIES IN THE OTHER, THE NATVRE OF MANS SOVLE. IS LOOKED INTO: IN VAY OF DISCOVERY, OF THE IMMORTALIT REASONABLE SOVLES Yuxũuc õror aEſus q0 ll Kamuoſiou al4 suva⸗ ti Ar& s õv {cœLs; Anima naturam, abſque totius natura, Sufficienter cognoſii poſſe, exiſtimas? Plato in Phædr.  Printed by GILLES BL AIZOT. M. DC. XLIIII. KENELME DIGBY The calamity of this time being ſuch,as hath bereaft me of the ordinary meanes of expreſing my affection toyou ; J haue beene caſting about, to find ſome other nay of doing that in ſuch ſort, as you may receiue moſt profitby it. Therein I ſoone pitched vpon rhis conſderation; That Parents owe vnto their children, not onely materiall ſubſiſtence for their bodie ; hut much more, irituall contributions to their better part, their minde. I am much bound to God, that he hath endeved you with one very capable of the beſt inſtructions: andvithall,Ido therefore eſteeme my ſelſe obliged, to do my vimoſt for moulding it to its moſt aduantage. If my ayme therein do proue ſucceſſ efull, you vill vith more eaſe digeſtthoſe inconueniences and diſtreſſes, hich already you haue begun io be acquainted vith, and that threaten dayly worſe vnto yor For how can a man ſuffer his hart to be deiected att the priuation r any temporall bleſinges, nhiles he conſidereth the inanity of them ;and that nothing is worthy his ſerious thought, but what may accompany him to his eternall habitation ?W hat needeth he feare the deſolations ofwarre,and the vorſt that they cando againſt him, vho haue his eſtate in their po- er,when he maybe richvitha muchlnobler treaſure,thatnone but himſelfe can robbe him of ? Vithout doubt, he that shall ſeriouſly reflect vpon the excellency of his owne nature, and vpon arriue vnto, if he but veane himſelfe from thoſe vorldly impediments, that here clogge his ſoules ſils 5 can not chooſe but looke vitha diſdameful&- , upon the glittering tryfles, that veate ſpirits delight themſelues withall. If he deeme it not requiſite (as of old, the famous wiſi mandia ) to throw avay thoſe encumbrances, to the end he may the more freely attend vnto diuine contemplations (for wor dly goods, duely vſed, may be very aduantagious both to ones ſelfe, and to others) yet at the leaſt, he will notrepine att fortunes recalling of what she formerly had butlenthim, and but permitted him the vſe of. To the end then that you may be armed againſt the vorſt thar may arriue vnto ycu, in this vnhappy ſtate of affaires, in our diſtreſſed country; I ſend you thoſe conſiderations of the nature and Immortality of humane ſoules, vhich of late, haue beene my chiefe entertainement. The progreſſe you haue alveady made in the ſtudy of Philoſophy, hath (Iamperſuaded ) enabled you to benefitt your ſelfe, vitlo what I haue written vpon this ſubiect: onthe ſerious examining of wbich, if you vill employ but halfe the time,that Ihaue done in ſpinning out my thoughts, and weauing them into the piece you ſce, Idoubtnot but  you vill thereby receiue ſo much contentement, as vell as profit, that you vill not repent you of your paines. Beſides that, intellectuall entertainements are the pureſt, and the nobleſt, and the moſt proportionate to mans nature, and proue the moſt delightfull to him, when they are duely relished. You vill preſently agree, that the matter j handle, isthe moſt important and the moſt neighty, vithin the whole extent of humane nature, for a vorthy and a gallantperſon toemploy himſelfe about. The aduantage which man hath ouer vnreaſonable creatures, is, that hat he doth, is by election ; and he is himſelfe maſter of all his actions; whereas they are impelled by outward cauſes, unto all they doe: it s properly ſayd of them, that aguntur magis quam agunt: He onely is free: and in all varietyes of circumſtances, hath ihe pover to cliooſe one, and to reiect an other. Now, to haue thi election ſy made, and becoming a man, requireth that it be ſteered by knonlede. To do any thing well, a man muſt ſirſt know throughly all that concerneth ihe action he is about; and chiefely the end of it. And certainely, of all his actions, ithe gouernement of himſelfe, is the moſt important, and neerelieſt mans aymes, is by all men agreed to be Beatitude: that is, his being completely well, and in a condition of enioying the moſt happineſſe, that his nature is capable of. For arriuall whereunto, it is impoſsible to pitch vpon thedirect and ſure meanes, vnleſſe it be firſt determined, vhether the Beatitude ve ſpeake of, do belong to this life, or be not to be attained, till ne come io the next: or rather, whether or no, there be an other life beſides this, to be happy in. For if there remaineth an eternity vnto vs, afier the short reuolution of time ve ſo ſvifily runne ouer here on earth; it is cleare, that all the happineſſe which can be imagined in this fleeting ſtate, is not valuable, in reſpect of the future; nor any thingwe do here is conſiderable, othermiſe then as itconduceth to the making our condition then, better or vorſe. Now the vay to he ſure of this, is eyther infallible authority, or euident ſcience. Theythat relyon the ſæ depend of others: and they onely who know, are abſolutely complete of themſelues ;and hauè nithin themſlues, the principles whereby to gouerne their actions,in what is of higheſt conſequence to them. It is true, euery body is not of a ſtraine of witt and iudemenr, to he of ihis ranle: and who are not, muſt be contented to beleeue others, and be ſatisfyed with what is taught them. But he thatwill be of a ſuperior orbe, muſt make this his ſtudy. This is the adequate entertainement of a worthy perſon. To conceiue ho high and excellent, this ſcience of gouerning a man in order to Beatitude in the nextvorld is, ve may conſider, how among all aris that concerne this life, the art of a ſtatesman, vnto whome helongeth to ſee a common vealthell gouerned, is by much the nobleſt. All other arts, are but miniſteriall to him. He mateth vſe of the ſoldier, of the lawyer, of the orator, of the antiquary, of the plyſitian, as beſt conduceth to the end he aymeth att, of maling the common vealth he gouerneth, happy and flourishing. All other meaner trades ſerue him in a yet loer degree. Tet afier all, he muſt take his meaſures from the Metaphyſitian or Diuine. For ſince the gouernement of a ſociety of men, aymeth att giuing them the beſt being they are capable of; and ſince Mans æell being here in plislife, ubis inſtrumentally good, as being the meanes for him to be nell in the nextlife J is euident, that the ſtatesmans art, is but inſtrumentall to that, which sheeth, ho euery particular man muſt if a ſtatesman haue not this ſcience, he muſtbe ſubiect to a brauer man then himſelfe, whoſe prouince is to direct al his actions vnto this end. Ve are iold, how reuerently great Ceſar liſtened to the diſcourſes of learned Achoreus, how obſeruant Alexander was of his Maſter Ariſtotle, how ſecure Nero trode, whiles Seneca guided his ſteppes, how humble Conſtantine was to ſaint Sylueſters precepts,how Charlemaine gouerned himſelfe in his moſt important actions, by Alcuines aduiſe ſn a vord, all the great men ofantiquity, asvell amon g the Romanes, as among the Gretians, had their Poiloſophers, and Diuines in their hind, Delon ing to them; from wlome they might deriue rules of liuing and doing a they ought vpon all occaſions, if themſelues were not Masters in that ſuperior and all directing ſcience. He that ſeeth notby hisowne light, muſt in this dan gerous ocean ſteere by the lanterne which an other hangeth out io him. jſ the perſon he relyethvpon, eyther withholdeth the light from him, or sheweth him a falſe one, he is preſently in the darte, and can not faile of looſing his vay. Hov great an authority had the Augurs and prieſts among the rude Romanes, to forbid any publike act, or to breahe any aſſembly vpon pretence of Religious duties, when they lited not the buſineſſe that was in agitation?The lie may intereſſed Diuines among Clriſtians do, f the miniſters of ſtate haue not ſome inſightinto Diuinity. He leadeth a vexatious life, thatin his nobleſt actions is ſo gored vith ſcruples, that he dareth not mahe a ſteppe, vithout the authority of an other to varrant him. Tet I do not conclude, that he whome l deſigne by the character ofa braue man, should be a profeſſed ora complete Metaplytian or Diuine, and conſummate in euery curious circumſtance that belongeth to this ſcience ; it ſufficeth him to lnowit in bulle; and to haue ſo much Diuinity,as in common occurrents,to be able to gouerne himſelfe; and in ſpeciall vones, to vnderſtand vhat, and why his Diuine perſvadet him to any thing; ſo that euen then, though not without helpe, yet he gouerneth himſelfe, and is not blindely gouerned hy an other. He that aymeth att heing a perfect horſeman, is bound to lno in generall ( beſides the art of riding) the nature and temper of horſes; and to vnderſtand the different qualities of bittes, ſaddles, and other vtenſiles of a horſeman ; But the vimoſt exactneſſe in itheſe particulars, of all which, the iuditious rider knoveth ho to male due ſe, vhen he hath occaſion, for his principall end ; which is, orderly gouerning his horſe. In lite manner, he whom we deſigne by a complete braue man, muſt know ſlidely the maine end of vhat he is in the world for: and vithall, muſt lnow how to ſerue himſelfe when he pleaſeih, and that it is needfull to him, of the Diuines high contemplations, of the Metaphyſitians ſubtile ſpeculations, of the naturall Philoſophers minute obſeruations, of the Mathematicians nice demonſtrations ; and of whatſoeuer elſe of particular profeſions, may conduce to his end ; though vithout mating any of them his profeſſed huſineſſe. To lay groundes ſv ſuch knowledge as this, is the ſcope of m enſuing diſcourſe. My firſt ayme, was to begent it in my ſelfe to which end, the digeſting my thoughts into order, and ihe ſetting them downe in writing, nas neceſſary: for without ſuch ſtrict examination of them, as the penning them affordeth one meanes to malæ,they vould hardly haue auoyded being diſioynted and rouing ones. Now that Ihaue done that, my next ayme is that you, vnto whom Ivnish asmuch good as to my ſelfe, may reape as much benefit by the ſtudyingit, as Ihauè done by the compoſing it. My end then being a priuate one (as looking no ſiihe- then you my ſonne, and my ſelfe) I haue not endeauoured to expreſſe conceptions eyther in the phraſe, or in the language ofthe ſchooles. Itwill ſerue our turne, to comprehend the ſubſtance, without confining our ſelues to any ſerupulous exactneſſe, in what concerneth onels forme. And the ſame conſideration hathmade me paſſe ſlightly ouer many particulars, in my firſt Treatiſe of ihe Nature of Bodies ; vpon vhich learned and itty men might ſpinne out large volumes. For in that part, I ayme no furiher, then to shew what may he effected by corporeall agents. T here, poſibility ſerueth my iurne, as vell asthe determinate indiuiſible pointof truth. Iam obliged to that, onely in my maine great theme ; which is the ſoule. In regard of which, the numerous crooked narrow cranies, and the reſtrayned flexuous riuolets of corporeall thinges, are all contemptible, further then the inovledge of them ſerueth to the inovledge of the ſoule. And a gallant man, whoſe thoughts ſiye att the Venſ game, requireth no further inſight intothem, ſubtileſt of their myſteries for ſcience ſale. Beſides this liberty that ihe ſcope Iayme att alloweth me of paſing very curſerily ouer ſundry particulars ; I find now ait my reading ouerall to gether, vhat Ihaue vritten to deliuer it to h Printer, that euen in that which I ought to haue done io comply mith my owne deſigne and expectation, Iam fallen very short; ſo that if Ihad not vnuarily too farre engaged my ſelfe for the preſent publishing ir, truly Ishould haue ept it by me, till I had once againe gone ouer it. ] find the whole piece very confuſedly done ; the ſtile vnequall and vnpolished ; many particulars (hen they are not abſolutely neceſſary to my maine drift ) too ſlightly touched, and farre from being driuin home: and in a word, all of it ſeemeth to be rather but a looſe modell and roughcaſt of what I deſigne to do, then a complete vorke throughly finished. But ſince by my ouerforvard promiſing of this piece to ſeuerall frindes, that haue beene ver; earneſt for it, Ihaue non brought my ſelfe to that paſſe, that it would ill become me to delay any longer the publishing of ſome thing vpon this ſubiect; i obligations r an other nature permitt me not att the preſent to dvell any longer vpon ihis (beſides that, ſo layſj a braine as mine is, groveth ſoone weary when it hath ſo entanled a seane as this is to vnwind ) Ino ſend it you as it ir; & vith a promiſe, that att my firſt leiſure, Ivill tate a ſtrict ſuruey of it; and then in an other edition, vill polish, correct and adde what shall appeare needfull to me. If. any man shall tale the booke out of your hand, inuited by the title and ſubiect to looke into it; J pray you in my behalfe repreſent vnio him, hov diſtant my profeſion is, and how contrary my education hath beene, from nriting of hookes. In euery art, the plaineſt that is, there is an apprentiship neceſſary, before it can be expected one should worke in it a fashionable piece. Tho firſt attemptes are alvayes very imperfect ayminges ; and are Carce diſcernable what they are meaned for, vnleſſe the maſter guide his ſchollers hand. Much more vill the ſamt happen in ſo difficult and Iin an affaire, s the vriting vpon ſuch a nice and copious ſubiect as this is, to one that is ſo wholy ignorant of ihe laves of methode as I am. This free and ingenuous acknowledgement on my ſide, aill vhat Ihaue written, to aduertiſe me fairely ( if they iudge it vorth their while) of what they diſlile in it: to the endthat in an other more accurate edition, I may giue them better ſatisfaction. For beſides what faylinges may im the matter, Ican not doubt but that euen in the expreſions ofit, there muſt often be great obſcurity and shorteneſſe  which I, who haue my thoughts filled vith the thinges themſelues, am not avare ofSo that, hat peraduenture may ſeeme very full to me, becauſe euery imperfect touch bringeth into my minde the entire notion and vhole chaine of circumſtances belonging to that thing Ihaue ſo ofien beaten vpon ; may appeare very crude and maymed to a ſtranger, that can not gueſſe vhat Ivould be att, otheruiſe then as my direct wordes do leade him One thing more Ishall wish you to deſire of them who happily may peruſe theſe ruo Treatiſes; asvell for their owne ſaes, as for mine. And that is, that they ill not paſſe their cenſure vpon any particular piece, or broken parcell of eyther of them, taken by it ſelfe. Lett them draw the entire thridde through their fingers, and lett them examine the conſequentneſſe of the whole body of the doctrine I deliuer; and lett them compare it by a likè ſuruey with what is ordinarily taught in the ſchooles: and ifthey find in theirs, many brackes and short endes which can not be ſpunne into an euen piece, and in mine, a faire coherence throughout ; lshall promiſe my ſelfe a fauourable doome from them, and that they will haue an acquieſcence in themſelues to what I haue here preſensed them with : whereas, if they but rauell it ouer looſely, and pitch vpon diſputing againſt particular concluſions, that att the firſt encounter of them ſingle, may ſeeme harsh vnto them, (which is the ordinary courſe of flashy nits, who can not fadome ihe vhole extent of a large diſcourſe) it is impoſsible but that they should be very much vnſatisfyed bI me ; and goe ava vith a perſuaſion, that ſome ſuc truthes as vpon the vhole matter are moſt euident  one ſtone in the arch ſupporting an other, and ihe vhole) are meere chymeras and ilde paradoxes. ) then I ſpeate any longer of it here. Reade it carefully ouer, and lett me ſee by the effecis of your gouerning your ſelfe, thai you male ſuch right vſe of it, as may be comforted in hauing choſen you 1o bequeath it vnto. God in heauen bleſſe you. Paris the laſt of Auguſt i64. Your Louing Father A TABLE OF THE CHAP TERS: AND MATTERS HANDLED IN THE FIRST TREATISE CONCERNING BODIES. =Q He Preface. A Preamble to the whole diſcourſe; concerning 3 notions in generall. pag. I. ſ} Quantiiy is the firſt,and moſt obuious affection of a &5 body ibid. Vordes do not expreſſe thinges as they are in themſelues, but onely as they are painted in the mindes of men. pag. 2. The ſiſt error that may ariſe from hence; which is a multiplying of thinges, where no ſuch multiplicationis really found. ẽ5 Aſecond error; the conceiuing of many diſtinct thinges as really one thing. 3lllũ Vpag]. Great care to be taken to ouoyde the errors, which may ariſe from our manner of vnderſtanding thinges. Pag 4. Two ſorts of wordes to expreſſe our notions, the one common to all men, the other properto ſchollens. pag s Great errons ariſe by wreſting wordes from their common meaning to expreſſe a more particular or ſtudied notion. pag. 6. Of Quantity. pag. 8. Vee muſt know the vulgarand common notion of Quantity that wee may vnderſtand the nature of it. ibid. Extenſion or diuiſibility isthe common notion of Quantity. Pag. . Partes of Quantity are not actually in their whol:. pag io. If partes were actually in their whole, Quantity would be compoſed of indiuiſibles. ibid. Quantity can not be compoſed of indiuiſibles. pag. ii. An obicction to prooue that partes are actually in Quantity; with a declaration of the miſtake from whenceit proceedeth. ag. I2. The ſꝗution of the former obiection: and that ſenſe can not diſcerne whether one part be diſtinguished from another, or no ag. .3. An enumeration of the ſeuerall ſpecieſes of Quantity, which conbròh that the eſſence of it is diuiſibility. : paga⸗. Of Rarity and Denſity. ag. i5. æ is by -_n and Denſit. p It is euident that ſome bodies are rare and others denſe ; though obſcure, how they are ſuch. pag. i6, A breife enumeration of the ſeuerall properties belonging to rare and denſe bodies. ibid. The opinion of thoſe Philoſophe declared, who putt rarity to conſiſt in an actuall diuiſion of a Body into litle partes. ag.17 g . The former opinion reiected, and the ground of their error diſcouered. Th opinion ofthoſe Philoſophers related, who putt rarity to conſiſt in the mirtion of vacuity among bodies. ra, The opinion of vacuities refuted. ra-,-. 7 Rarity and Denſity conſiſt in the ſeuerall proportions which Quantity a F rm ii E—_———— , 25 l i . All muit aqmitt in Phyſicall bodies, a Metaphyſicall compoſition. Of the foure firſt qualities: and of the foure Elements. pag.as. The notions of denſity and rarity haue a latitude capable of infinite variety. ibid. Hw moyſtneſſe and dryneſſe are begotten in denſe bodies. pag. 2v. Fow moyſtneſſe and dryneſſe are begotten in rare bodies. pag. 28. Heate is a property of rare bodies, and cold of denſe ones. Dag. i8. OF the two denſe bodies, the leſſe denſe is more cold: but ofthe two rarcones, the Ieſſe rare is leſſe hoat. _ Tne extreme denſe body is more dry, then the extreme rare one. pag. 30. There are but foure ſimple bodies? and theſe are rightly named Elements. : ibid. The Author doth nott determine whether euery element doth comprehend vnder iĩts name one only Ioweſt ſpecies, or many: nor whether any of them be found pure. pag. ;i. Of ile oberations of the Elements in generall. And of their Actiuities com rlter. pag. ;2. The firſt operation ofthe Elements is diuiſion, out of which reſulteth locall motion. lll ibid. Vhat place is: both notionally, and really. lll bpag.a:. Locall motion is that diuiſion, whereby a body chãgeth ĩts place. pag. 33. The nature of quantity ofit ſelfe is ſufficient to vnitea body to its place. ibidem. : All operations amongſt bodies, are eyther locall motion, or ſuch as follow out of locall motion. pag. 35. Earth compared to waterin actiuity. : pag.36. The manner whereby fire getteth into fewel: prooueth that it excecdeth caithin actiuity. ibid. The ſame is prooued by the manner, whereby fire cometh out of fewell and worketh vpon other bodies. m”; Or Lignt: what it i. pag.19. 5. . In what ſenſe the Author reiecteth qualities. hid. S.2. In what ſenſe the Author doth admitt of qualitie. pag. 4o. S. 3. Fiue arguments propoled to proue that light is not a body. rag. à1. S. 4. I he two Hrſt realons to proue light to bea body are, the reſlemblance it nath vith fire; and becauſe if it were a quality, it would alwayes produce an equall to ĩt Ielfe. Pag. aæ. S. 5. The third realon; becauſe if we imagine to our ſelues the ſubſance of ſire to be rarifyed, it willhaue the ſme appearences which light hath, pag. 455. 6. The fourth reaſon, from the manner ofthe generation and corruption oflight, which agreeth with ſire. ibid. S. 7. The iſih reaſon ; becauſe ſuch properties belong to light as agree _ vanto bodies. pag. 4 P. vii. Tho objections anſuered againſt light being fire, a more ml proofe of its bein gſueh ibid. 32 That all light is hoat æld apt to heate. ibid. . The realon vhy ourbodies for the moſt part do not feele the heate of pure light. pag. 46. s The experience of burningę laſſes,and of ſoultry gloomy weather, proue 3light tobe ſire. 48. s.- Phſloſophers ought not to iudge of thinęes by the rules ſꝶ vulęar peopſe ibidem. s- The different names of ſight and fire proceede from diſferent notions of qthe iame iubitance. Pag498 / The realonw hy męny times fire andheate are depriucd of Iight. pag. s0. s - Vhiat becometh cſ the body otlight, when It dyeth ibid. s. 3. Anexprment oſ ſd pci li pouder. pag. sI. 5.7. Tae Authors opinion concerning lampes, pretended to haue been found in tombes, with inconſumprible lights. ibid. An anſvere to three other ob  jections formely propoſed, againſt rviI-lioht being a ſubſtance pPag. §; 5. . Li_htis not really in euery part of the roome ũt enlighteneth, nor filleth entirely any ſenſible part of i©t, though it ſeeme to vs to do ſo. ibid. S. 2. Tha leaſt ſenſible poynt ofa diaphanous hbody, hath roome ſuſficient to containe both ayre and light, together with a multitude of beames iſſuing fiom ſeuerall lights, wtchout penctrating oneanother. pag j⸗. 5.3. That ãht doth not enlighten any roomein an inſtant; and that ihe great rcelerity of its motion doth make it inperceptible to our ſenſes. ag. 56. 5. 2. The reaſon why the motion of light, is not diſcerned coming towardes vs; and that there is ſome reall tat liry in it. pag. 58. 5. 5. The planets are not certainely euerin that place where theya ppeare to be. pag: 59ẽ The reaſon why light being a body, doth not by its motion shatter Vmauu" : c 5. The reaſon why the body of light is neuer perceiued to be ſanned by the wind. pag. 61., The reaſons, for, and againſt lights being a body, compared together. c1. A Iummary repetition of the reaſons, which prooue that light is firẽ. ibidemm. Of locali &æcotion in commvn. pag 63. No locall motion can be performed without ſucceſſion. ibid. Time is the common meaſure of all ſucceſſion. Dav. 64. What velocity is, and that ĩt can not be inſinite. ibid. No force ſo litlẽ, thatis not able to moucthe greateſt weight imaginable: pag. 65. The cheife principle of Mechanikes deduęę out of the former dilcourſe. pag. 66. No moueable can paſſe from reſt toany determinate degree of vebæi , or froma leſſer degree toa greater, without paſſing throughall ſ intermediate degrees, which are below the obtained degree. pag 67. The conditions which helpe to motion, in the moueable are three, in the medium, one. pag. 65. No body hath any intrinſecall vertue to moue it ſelfe towardes any determinate part of the vniuerſe. pag. 79. The encreaſe of motion is alwayes made in the proportion of the odde numbers. . ibid. No motion can encreaſe for euer without coming to a pericde. paꝶ.7. Certaine problemes reſlolued concerning the proportion of ſome mouing Agents compared to theit effects. pav. 73. Vhen a moucable cometh to reſt, the motion doth decreaſe accordinæ to the rules ofencreaſe. pag. 75. Of Grauity and Leuity 3 and of Locall Motion, commonly termed Naturall. pag. 76. Thoſe motions are called naturall, which haue conſtant cauſes; and thoſe violent, which are eontrary to them. ibid. The firſt and moſt generall operation of the ſunne, is the making and raiſing of atomes. ibid. Thelight rebounding from the earth with atomes, cauſeth two ſtreames in the ayre; the one aſcending the orher deſcending; and both of them in a perpendicular line. pag77. A denſe body placed in the ayre betweene the aſcendingand deſcending ftreame, muſt needes deſcend. pag. 78. A more particular explication oſ all the former doctrine touching grauty.. ll Pag. 79. 5. 6. Grauity and leuity do not ſignify an intrinſecall inclination to ſuch a motion in the bodies themſelues which are termed heauy and light. ll pag.81. 5. 7. The mor denſea bodys, the more ſwifily ĩt deſcendeth. ibid. 5.8. TEVUtV oſ boſies deſcendding dothnot encreaſe Inproporton to the difference that may be betweene their ſeuerall denſities. pag. 32. 5. 9. More or Ieſſe grauity doth produce a ſwifteror a ſlower deſcending of a heauy body. Ariſtotles argument to diſproue motion in vacuo, is made good. pag. 834. 5. 10. The realon why attthe inferiour quarter ofa circle,a body doth deſcend faſter by the arch of that quarter, then by the chord ifit. pag. 35. Cu 1». An anſuere io objections againſt the cauſes ofnaturall motion, a. auoved inthe former chapter ;and arefutation of thecontrary opinion. pag.86. s. I. The ſirſt obiection anſwered; why a hollow body deſcendeth ſlower then a ſolide one. pag. 86. 5.2. The ſecond obiection anſwered, and the reaſons shewne, why atomes do continually ouertake the deſcending denſe body. pag. 88. s. 3 A curious queſtion left vndecided. pag.89. 5.4. The fourth obiection anſwered; why the deſcent of the me heauy bodies, is equall in ſo great inequality ofthe atomes which cauſe ĩt. ibidem. 5.5. The reaſon why the shelter of a thicke body doth not hinder the deſcent of that which ĩs vnder ĩt. pag. ol. s. 6. The/œſõ7 ẽhy ſome bodies inke, others ſſinme. ag.9z. 5. 7. The ſiſth obiection anſwered concerning the deſcending of P e eauy sim ſtreames. 5. 3. Thæ ſixt obicction anſwered: and that all heauy elements do weigh in their owne ſpheres. pag. 95. 5. 9. The ſeuenth obiection anſwered: and the reaſon why we do nor feele i the courſe of the ayre and atomes that beate continually vpon vs. ibidem. 5. 10. Hov in the ſame body, grauity may be greater then denſity, and denſity then grauity ; ſiugh they be the ſame thing6 H 3 . ag. 93y be the ſame th pag.⸗6. s. 11. The opinion ofgrauities being an intrinſecall inclination oſa body to conter; i fedby reaſon PZ, 97S. 12. The ſame opinion refuted by ſeuerall experiences. pag. 98. CHAP Of Violent Motion. pag. 10. Il1. r E S.1. The ſtate of the queſtion touching the cauſe ofviolent motion. ibid. 5. :. That the medium is the onely cauſe, which continueth violent motion. ibidem. li s. 3. A further explication ofthe former doctrine. pag. ion moueable. pag. ia; An anſwere to the ſirſt obiection; that ayre is not apt to conſerue motion: And how violent motion cometh to ceaſe. pag. 103. An anſwere to the ſecond obiection; that the ayre hath no power ouer heauy bodies. ag.104. An anſwere to the third obiection, that an arrowshould ſly faſter broadwayes then longwayes. pag. io5. Of three ſortes ofviolent motion, Refexion, Vndulation, and Refraction. pag. iob. That reflerion is a kind of violent motion. ibid. Reſlection is made at equall angles. ibid. The cauſes and properties of vndulation. pag. 107. Reſraction at the entrance into the reſlectent body is towardes the erpendicular ; at the going out it, is from it; when the ſecond Roficies is parallel to the firſt. pag. io8. A refutation of Monſicur Des Cartes his explication of refraction pag. 105. Au anſwere to the arguments brought in fauour of Monſieur Des Cartes his opinion. pag. ii. The true cauſe of refraction of light both at its entrance, and at its going cut from the reſlecting bodr pag. 2. A genenall rule to know the nature of reflection and refractions in all ſortes of ſurfaces. pag. 1i3. A body ofgreater partes and greater pores, maketh a greater refraction then one of leſſer partes and leſſer pores. pag. 1iã. A conſirmation of the former doctrine, out of the nature of bodie that refract light. pag iis. QF the compoſition, qualities, and generation of Mixed hodies. Pag. 116. The connexion of this chapter with the reſt, and the Authors intent init. ibid. That there isa leaſt ciſe of bodies: and that this leaſt ciſe is found in fire. ag. 117. m ſirtt coniunction of partes is in bodies of leaſt ciſe; and it is made by the force of Quantity. ibid. The ſccond ſort of coniunction, is compactedneſe in ſimple Elements, and it proce deth from denſity. pag. uis. The third coniunction is of parres of diſferent Elements, and it proceedeth from quantity and denſity together. ibid. The reaſon why liquide bodies do eaſily ioyne together; and dry ones difficultly. pag. nò. That no two hard bodies can touch one an other immediately. ibid. How mixed bodics are framed in generall. pag. 121. S. 9. The cauſe of the ſeuerall degrees of ſolidity in mixed bodies. ibid. S. 1. The rule where vnto are reduced all the ſeuerall combinations of Elements in compounding of mixed bodies. pag I22. S. 11. Earth and water are the baſis of all permanent mixed bodiess pag i23. S. 12. hat kind of bodies thoſe are where water is the baſis, and eaith the redominant Element ouer the other two. ibid. 5. 13. of thoſe bodies, where water being the baſis ayre is the predominant Element Jll ibid. S. 14. What kind ofbodies reſult, where water is the baſis and fire the predominant Element. Da”. 124s. 15. Ofthoſe bodies, where water is in exceſſe, it alone being bovh the baſis, and the predominant Element. pag. i25. 5. 16. Ofthoſe bodies, Where Earrhalone is the baſis, and alſo the predom inant in exceſſe ouer the other three Elemenis. ibid. 5 17. Of thole bodies where Earth is the baſis, and water the predominant Llement ouer the other two. ibid. 518. Of th ſe bodies, whereearth being the baſis ayre is the predominant. ibid. ] 5. 19. Of thoſe bodies, where Earth being the baſis, fire is the predominant. PP : 5. 20. All the ſecõd qualities of mixed bodies, ariſe from ſeuerall combinations of the ſiſt qualities: and are att laſt reſolued into ſeuerall degrees of rarity and denſity. ibid. s. 21, Thut in the planets and ſtarres there ĩs a like variety of mixed bodies cauſe by light as here vpon Earth. pag. 1z7. 6. 22. In what mauner the Elements do woike vpon one an other, in the compoſition of mixed bodies: and in particular fire which is the moſt actiue. ibid. 523. A particular declaration touching th- generation of mettalls. pag. 128. HAT. Of the diſſolution of Mixed hodies. pag. 130. xv ij Vhy ſome bodies are brittle, and others tough, or apt to withſland Sutware TFũ vioence thne nrũ mrument to dnięe] myeũ ood”rs. Inid,. 5.2. HOW outard violence doth worke vpon the moſt compacted bodies. ag~. 131. i j 53. ſcueral eſfects offire, the ſecond and chieſeſt inſtrument to diſolue all compounded bodies. ibid. 5. 4. T he reaſon why ſome bodies are not diſſolued by fire. pag. 3:. 5.5. The reaſon why fire melteth gold, but can not conſume it. ibd. s. c. Why leade is eaſily conſumed and calcined by fire. pag. 133. 5. 7. Vhy and how ſome bodies are diuided by fire into ſpirits, waters, oyles ſiltes and earth. And what thoſe partes are. ibid. How water the third inſtrument to diſſolue bodies, diſſolueth calx into ſalt; and ſo into Terra damnata. lIlIl Pag. i35. 5. 9. How water mingled with ſalt, becometh a moſt powerſull Agent to diſſolue other bodies. pag. i36. 5. 10. HoW putrefaction is cauſed. ibid. CHAP. An eæxplication ofcertaine Maximes touching the operations, xI. nd qualities of bodies: and whether the Elemvnis be found pure in any partorf the wortã. bag13 S. 1. What is the ſphere of actiuity in corporeall Agentss: ibid. 5.2. Thæ reaſon why no body can worke in diſtance. pnpag.138. 5. 3 An obiection anſwered againſt the ma icating the ſ axiome. pãg. 135 5. . OF reaction: and ſitſt in pure locall motion, that each Agent muſt ſuffer inacting and acte in ſuſfering. ibid4. S-5:The former doctrine applyed to orher locall motions deſigned by particular names. And that Suiſſeths argument is of no force againſt 5 this way of doctrine. ] pag. 141. Wny ſome notions do admitt of intenſion and Remiſſion; and others do rot. : ibid. ti fout habiable woilds allthæ ſoure Llements, 2:2 c found pure in ſmallatomes, but not inany great bule. pag. r4æ. ji of Rarefaction and Condenſation the two firſt motions of particular bodies. pag. i4ãq S.I. Thæ Authors intent in thisand the following chapters. ibid. 5. 2. That bodies may be rarifyed, both byo ; his is rformed. pag/i453. S.3. OF the great eſfects of Rarefaction. pag147. S. 4. The firit manner ofcondenſation, by heate. pag143. S. 5. The ſecond manner of condenſation by cold. pag149. S. &. That yce is not water rarifyed but condenſed. pag. isI. S. 7. How wind, ſnow, and haile are made; and vind by raine allayed. ag. i5s2. 5.8. Hou pattes of the ſame or diuers bodies, are ioyned more ſtrongly : together by condenſation. ag. 13. S.9. Vacuites can not be the reaſon, why water impregnated tothe * vith one kind of ſult, will notwithſtanding receiue more of an orher. 5. 15. The true reaſon of the former effct:LDpag. Ijs5. 1. The reaſon why bodies ofthe ſame nature do ioyne more eaſily l together then others : mpagieCuar. Of an other motion belonging to particular bodies, calle ii. Attrattion; and of certaine operations, rermed àviagicaii. pag. 57.. Vhat Attraction ĩs. and from whence it proceedeih. ibid. s. I S5.2. Thæ me ſenſ of the Maxime, that Nature abhorreih from ucuuy. The true reaſon of attraction. pag. i5. Vater may be brought by the force ofattraction to what height euer pag. 160. : The doctrine touching the attraction of water in ſyphons. ibid. That the ſyphon doth not proue water to weigh in its owne orbe. pag. iõI. Concerning attraction cauſed by fire. pag. i62. Concerning attraction made by vertue of hoat bodies, amulets etc. pag. i63. The naturall reaſon giuen for diuers operations, eſteemed by ſome to be magicall. ibid. Of three other motions belonging to particular bodies Filtration, Reſtitution, and Electricall attraction. pag. i66. What is Filtration; and how it is effected. ibid. Vhat cauſeth the water in filtration to aſcend. pag. 167. Vhy the filter will not droppe vnleſſe the labell hang loer then the vater. ibid. Of the motion of Reſtitution: and why ſome bodies ſtand bent, others not. : pag. 168. Vhy ſome bodies returne onely in part to their natural figures orhers entirely. pag. 170. Concerning the nature of thoſe bodies which do shrinke and ſtretch. ag. 171. Hoq” and wonderſull effects, proceed from ſmall, plaine, and ſimple principles. ibid. Cnneerning Electricallattraction, and the cauſes of it. pag i72. Cabeus his opinion refuted concerning the cauſe of Electricall motions. Pg174. ] Of the Loadeſtones generation ; and its particular motions. pag. 175. : The extreme heat of the ſunne vnder the zodiake, draweth a ſtreame of ayre from each Pole into the torride zone. ibid. The atomes of theſe two ſtreames coming together are apt to incorporate with one an other. pag 76. By the meeting and mingling together oftheſe ſtreames att the Equator, diuers riuolcts of atomes of each Pole, are continuated from one Pole to te other. pagi77. Of theſe atomes incorporated with ſome fitt matter in the bowels of the earth, is made a ſtone. pag. 179. This ſtone worketh by emanations, ioyned with agreeing ſtreames that meete them in the ayre; and in fine itis a loadeſtone. ibid. A methode for making experiences vpon any ſubiect. paga'i. The loadeſtones generation by atomes ſlowing from both Poles, is confirmed by experiments obſerued in the ſtone it ſelfe. ibid.  xperiments to proue that the loadeſtone worketh by emanations, meeting vith agreeing ſtreames. pag. 182. Doſitions dravne out of the former doctrine, and confirmed by experimentall proofes. pag. i85. The operations of the loadeſtone are wrought by bodies and not by qualities. ibid. Obiections againſt the former poſition anſwered. pag. 186. The loadeſtone is imbued with his vertue from an other body. ibid. The vertue of the loadeſtone is a double, and not one ſimple vertue. 188. The vertue of the laodeſtone orketh more ſtrongly in the Poles of it then in any other part. ibid. The laodeſtone ſendeth forth its emanations ſpherically. Which are oftwo kindes: and each kind is ſtrongeſt in that hemiſphere, through whoſe polary partes they iſſue out. ibid. Putting two loadeſtones within the ſphere of one an other, euery part of one laodeſtone, doth not agree with euery part of the other loadeſtone. pag. 189. Concerning the declinationand other reſpects ofaneedle, towardes the loadeſtone it toucheth. ibid. The vertue of the laodeſtone goeth from end to end in lines almoſt patalelle to the axis. pag.i51. The vertue of loadeſtone is not perfectly ſphericall though the ſtone be fuch. pag. i192. The intention of nature in all the operations ofthe loadeſtone, is to make anvnion betwixt the attractiue and attracted bodies. ibid. The maine globe of the earth is nota loadeſtone. ibid. The laodeſtone is generated in all partes or climats of the earth. pag-193. The conformity betwixt the to motions of magnetike thinges, and of heauy thinges ibid. A ſolution ofcertaine Problemes concerning the loadeſtone, and a short ſumme of the whole doctrine touching it. pag i94Vhich isthe North, and which the South Pole of a loadeſtone. ibid. Vhether any bodies beſides magnetike ones be attractiue. ibid. Vhether an iron placed perpendicularly towardes the earth doth gett a magneticall vertue o pointing towardes the north, or towardes the ſouth in that end that lyeth downewardes. pag 1osVhy loadeſtones aſfect iron better then one an other. ibid. Gilberts reaſon refuted touching a capped loadeſtone, that taketh vp more iron then one not cappedi and an iron impregnated that in ſome caſe draerh more ſtrongly then the ſtone it ſelte. ibid. Galileus his opinion touching the former eſfects refuted. pag.196. The Authors ſolution to the former queſtions. pag7. That the figure of an Animal is produced by ordinarie ſecond cauſes, as well as any other corporeall effect. ag. 226. That the ſeuerall figures of bodies proceed from a defect in one ofthe three dimenſions, cauſed by the concurrance of accidentall cauſes. ag. 227 The tormer doctrine is confirmed by ſeuerall inſtances. pag. 228 The ſame doctrine applyed to Plantes. pag. 229 The lame doctrine declared in leafes of trees. ibid. The ſame applyed to the bodies of Animals pag. 230 In what ſenſe the Author doth admitt of Vi formatrix. pag.231 How motion beginneth in liuing creatures. And of the motion of the hart ; circulation of the bloud ; Nutrition ; Augmentation ; and corruption or death. Pag. 231 Fromwhence doth proceed the primary motion and groth in Plantes. ibid. Monſieur des Cartes his opinion touching the motion ofthe hart. p.233 The former opinion reiected. ibid. The Authors opinionconcerning the motion of the hart. paga34 The motion of the hart dependeth originally of its fibers irrigated by bloud. pag. 236 An obiection anſwered againſt the former doctrine. pag. 237 The circulation of the bloud, and other effects that follow the motion of the hart. pag.158 Of Nutrition. pag239 Of Augmentation. pag.240 Of death and ſickneſſe. pagæ4: Of the motions of ſenſe ;and of the ſenſible qualities in generall; and in particular of thoſe which Lelong to Touch, Taſt, and Smelling pag.241 The connexion of the ſubſequent chapters with the precedent. ibid. Ofthe ſenſes and ſenſible qualities in generall. And ohiix end for which they ſerue. li ibid. Ofthe ſenſe of touching:and that bothit anã its qualities are bodies. 2 44 Ofthe taſt and its qualities: that they are bodies, pag. 245 That the ſmell and its qualities are reall bodies. ibid. Ofthe conformity betwixt the to ſenſes of ſmelling and taſting. p.2 46 The reaſon why the ſenſe of ſirelling is not ſo perfect in man as in beaſtes: vith a wonderfull hiſtorie of a man who could winda ſent as well as any beaſt. pag.æ 47 Of the ſenſe of hearing, and of the ſenſible quality ſound. p.149 Ofſthe ſenſe of hearing: and that ſound is purely motion. ibid. Of diuers artes belonging to the ſenſc of hearing: all which confirme that ſound is nothing but motion. pag. 250 S. 3. The ſame is confirmed by the eſfects cauſed by great noiſes pag. 25I 5. 4. That ſolide bodies may conueye the motion of the ayre or ſound to the organe of hearingg. paga; 5. 5. Where the motion is interrupted there is no ſound. ibid. 5. . That not only the motion ofihe ayre but all other motions coming to our eares make ſounds. pagas3 5.7. How one ſenſe may ſupply the want ofan other. ibid. 5. 3. Ofone who cculd diſcerne ſounds of words with his eyes. pag. 2 54 S. 9. Diuers reaſons to proue ſound to be nothing els but a motion of ſome reall body. ; pag 256 Ca* Of Sight ; and Colours. pag. 257 5. . That Colours are nothing but light mingled with darkeneſſe: or the diſpoſition oſfa bodies ſuperficies apt to reſlect light ſo mingled. ibid. 5. 2. Concemning the diſpoſition of thoſe Bodies hics produce hite or blacke coulours pag. 259 5.3. The former doctrine confirmed by Ariſtotles authority, realon, and experiencee:: - ibid. 5. 2. HoW the diuerſity of coulours doe follow out of various degrees ofrarity and denſity. pag.260 5. 53. Vhy ſome bodies are Diaphanous others opacous. pag. 261 5. G. The former doctrine of coulours confirmed by the generation of white Cn and Blacke in bodies. pag. 262 xxx. Of luminous or apparente Colours. pag.162 s. 1. Apparitions of coulours through a priſme or triangular glaſe arecf two ſortes. ibid. 5. 2. The ſcuerall parts of the obiect make ſeuerall angles at their entrance lll into the priſme. pag.i63 5. 3. The reaſon why ſome times the ſame obiect appeareth throwgh the priſme in two places: and in one place more liuely, in the other place r more dimme. ; : iibid. S. 4. The reaſon of the various colours that appeare in looking throwgh a priſme. i pag.264 5. 5. The reaſon hy the priſme in one poſition, may make the col ours appeare quite contrary to what they did, wheniit was in an other poſition. pag. 265 5. 6. The reaſon of the various colou in generall by pure light paſſing through a priſme. ll pag 266 5. 7. Vpon what ſide euery colour appeareth that is made by pure light paſſing through a priſme. llll pag167 Cua?. Thecauſes ofcertaine appearances in luminous Colours ; ith a xxxi. concluſion of the diſcourſe touching the ſenſes and the ſenſible The reaſon ofeach ſeuerall colour in particular cauſed by light paſſing througha priſme. pag. 268 A difficult probleme reſolued touching the priſme. pag. 270 OFf the rainebow, and how by the colourofany body wee may know the compoſition of the body it ſelfe. pag.272 Thuat all the ſenſible qualities are reall bodies reſulting out of ſeuerall mixtures of rarity and denſity. pag. 273 Vhy the ſenſes are only fiue in number: with a concluſion of all the former doctrine concerning them. pag.274 Of ſenſation,or the motion hereby ſenſe is properly exerciſed. 175 Monſieur des Cartes his opinion touching fenſation. ibid. The Authors opinion touching ſenſation. pag. 276 Reaſons to perſuade the Authors opinion. pag. 277 That vitall ſpiritts are the immediate inſtruments of ſenſation by conueying ſenſible qualities to the braine. pag. 278 How ſound is conueyed to the braine by vitall ſpirits. pag. 279 Ho colours are conueyed to the braine by vitall ſpirits. pag. æ8o Reaſons againſt Monſieur des Cartes his opinionn. ibid. That the ſymptomes of the palſie do no way confirme Monſicur des Cartes his opinion. pag. 282 That Monſicur des Cartes his opinion, can not giue a good account, how thinges are conſerued in the memory. ibid. Of Memory. pag. 284 How thinges are conſerued in the memory. ibid. How thinges conſerued in the memory are brought backe into the fantaſic. pag. 285 A Confirmation of the former doctrine. pag. 286 How (hin g renewed in the fantaſie, returne with the ſame circumſtances that they had atſirit. pag. 286 How the memory of thinges paſt is loſt, or confounded: andhow it is repaired againe. pag.287 Ofuoluntary motion: Naturall faculties: and paſions. p. 288 Ofwhat matter the braine is compoſed. ibid. Vhat is voluntary motion. pag.28, What thoſe poers are which are called naturall faculties. ibid. How the attractiue and ſecretiue faculties worke. pag.290 Concerning the concoctiue faculty. pag. 291 Concerning the retentiue and expulſiue faculties. Pibid. Concerning ex pulſion made by Phyſicke. pag. 292 How the braine is moued to woike voluntary motion. pag.29: Why pleaſing obiects doe dilate the pirits, and diſpleaſing ones contract them. pag.294 Concerning the fiue ſenſes for what vſeand end they are. ibid. Of the materiallinſtrument of i novledęe and Paſion ; of the ſeuerall effects o f Paſions ; of Paine and Pleaſure ; and how the vitall ſpirits are ſent from the braine into the intented partes of the body, vithout miſtaking their ay pag. 196 That Seprum Lucidum is the ſeat of the fanſie. ibid. Vhat cauſeth vs to remember not only the obiect it ſelfe, but alſo that we haue thought ofit before. pag 297 How the motions ofthe fantaſie, are deriued to the hartt ibid. Of paine and pleaſure. pag 2-8 Of Paſſion. ibid. OF ſeuerall pulſes cauſed by paſſions. pig.299 OFfſeuerall other effects cauſed naturally in the body by paſſions. p. 300 Of the diaphragma. pag. 302 Concerning paine and pleaſure cauſed by the memory of thinges paſt. pag303 How ſo ſmall bodies as aromes are, can cauſe ſo great motions in the hart. pag.304 How the vital ſpirits ſent from the braine, do runne to the intended part of the body without miſtake. ibid. How men are blinded by Paſſion. pag.305 Of ſome actions of beaſtes, that ſeeme to he formall actes of reaſon, a doubting, reſoluing, inuenting. pag. 306 The order and connexion of the ſubſequent Chapters. ibid. From whence proceedeth the doubting of beaſtes. pag. 309 Concerning the inuention of Foxes and other beaſtes. ibid. OF foxes that catch hennes by lying vnder their rooſt, and by gazing vpon them. pag. 309 From whence proceedeth the foxes inuention to ridde himſelfe of ſleaspag. 31I An explication oftwo other inuentions of foxes. pag.312 Concerning Mountagues argument to prooue that dogges make ſyllogiſmes. ibid. A declaration how ſome trics are performed by fores, which ſeeme to argue diſcourſe. pag 313 OFiſe laccatrays inuention in calling beaſtes to himſelfe. pag⸗i4 Ofthe laccalls deſigne in ſeruing the lyon. ibid. Of ſeuerall inuentions of fiſshes. ibid. A diſcouery of diuers thinges done by hares, which ſeeme to argue diſcourſee. pag. 315 Of a foxe reported to haue weigheda gooſe, before he would venture with it ouer ariuer; and of fbulous ſtories in common. pag.316 OF the ſeuerall cryings and tones of beaſtes: witha refutation ofthoſe authours who maintaine them to haue compleat languages. pag;17 Of the docility of ſome irrationall animals ; and of certaine continuate actions of a longtract oftime ſo orderly performed by them, that they ſeeme to argue knovledge in them pag19 How hawkes and other creatures are taught io doe what they are browght vp to. ibid. Of the Baboone that played on a guitarre. 3i0 Ofthe teaching of Elephantes and other beaſtes to doe diuers tricks. 321 Of the orderly traine of actions performed by beaſtes in breeding their young ones. pag.322 Of preſcienct of future euentes, prouidencies, the knowing of thinges neuer ſeene before; and ſuch other actions, olſerued in ſome liuing creatures ; hich ſeeme to be euen aboue the reaſon that is in man himſelfe. pag. 327 Vhy beaſtes are affraide of men. ibid. How ſome qualities cauſed at firſt by chance in beaſtes, may paſſe by generation to the whole offspring. pag. 328 How the parents fantaſic doth oftentimes worke ſtrange effects in their iſſue. pag. 329 of Antipathies. pag. 330 Of Sympathies. pag- 333 That the Antipathy oſbeaſtes toWards one an other, may be taken away by aſſuefaction. Pag334 Of longing markes ſeene in children g333 Why diuers men hate ſome certaine meates, and particulail cheets 336 Corcerningthe prouidence of Aunts in laying vp in ſtore b vinter.337 Concerning the foreknowing of beaſtes. pag338 The Concluſion of the firſt Treatiſe. pag.340 A TABLE O F THE CHA?PTERS AND MATTERS HANDLED IN THE SECOND TREATISE CONCERNING MANS SOVLE. HE Preface. Pag.349 ælLst Of ſimple Apprehenſions. Pag55 WVhat is a right apprehenſion of a thing. ibid. The very thing it ſelfe is truly in his vnderſtanding who rightly aprchendeth it. pag.356 The Apprehenſion of thinges comming vnto vs by our ſenſes, are reſolusble into other more ſimple apprehenſions. pag. 358 The apprehenſion of a Beingis the moſt ſimple and Baſis of all the reſt. ibid. The apprehenſion of a thing is in next degræe to that of Being, and it is the Baſis of all the ſubſequent ones. ibid. The apprehenſion ofthinges knowne to vs by our ſenſcs, doth conſiſt in certaine reſpects betwixt two thinges. Pag359 Reſpect or relation hath not really any formall being, but only in the apprehenſion of man. ibid. That Exiſtence or being is the proper affection of man: and that mans ſoule is a comparing power. pag. 360 A thing by coming into the vnderſtanding ofman, looſeth nothing of its owne peculiar nature. ibid. A multitude of thinges may be vnited in mans vnderſtanding without being mingled or confounded together. pag 361 Of abſtracted and concrete termes. pag.36æ Ofvniuerſal notions. pag 363 Ofapprehending a multitude vnder one notion. pag. 364 The power oſthe vnderſtanding reacheth as farre as the extent of being. pag.36 5 OfThining and noving pag;6;3 5.. Howa iudgement is made by the vnderſtanding. ibid. 5.2. That two or more apprehenſions are identifyed in the ſoule by vniting them in the ſtocke of being. pag. 365 5.3 HOW the notions of a ſubſtantiue and an adiectiue, are vnited in the ſoule, by the common ſtocke of being. pag. 367 5. 4. That a ſetiled iudgement becometh a part of our ſoule. pag.368 S. 5. How the ſoule commeth to deeme or ſettle a iudgement. ibid. 5. 5. HoW opinionĩs begotten in the vnderſtanding. pag371 57. Hov faith is begotten in the vnderſtanding. pag 372 5.8. Vhy truth isthe perfection ofa reaſonable ſoule:and why itis not found in ſimple apprehenſions as well as in Enuntiations. ibid. 5.9. Vhat isa ſolid iudgement, and whata ſlight one. pag373 5. 0. Vhat isan acute iudgement, and what a dull one. pag.375 5. 11. In what conſiſteth quickneſſe and Cleareneſſe of iudgement: and there opoſite vices. bid. HAP. Il. Of Diſcourſing. Pag. 376 5. . How diſcourſe is made. ibid. s. 2. Ofthe figures and moodes of Syllogiſmes. ibid. §. 3. Thatthe life of man as man, doth conſiſt in diſcourſe, and ofthe vaſt extent of it. pg. 377 5. 2. Ofhumane actions, and of thoſe that concerne ourſelues. pag. 379 5.5. Ofhumane actionsas they concerne our neighbours. pag 380 5. c. Of Logike. ibid. 5.7. Of Grammar. pag 381 5. 3. Of Rhetorike. bid. 5. 9. Of Poctry. pag-382 5. 10. Of the Power of ſpeaking. ibid. s. 1. Ofants that concerne dumbe and inſenſible creatures. pag. 383 5.13. Of Arithmetike. bid. s. 14. Of Prudence. id. S. 15. Obſeruations vpon what hath beene ſaid in this Chapter. pag384 cua- How a man proceedeth to Action. pag. 386 That humanea}tions proceed from two ſeuerall principles, vnderſtanding and ſenſe. ibid. . Howour generall and inbred maximes doe concurre to humane action. ag. 387 That the rules and maximes ofarts doe ore poſitiuely in vs though we thinke not of them. ag. 388 How the vnderſtanding doth caſt about when it wanteth ſufficieni grounds for action. pag. 38 How reaſon doth rule ouer ſenſe and paſſion. ibid. How we recall our thoughts from diſtractions. pag 390 How reaſon is ſometimes ouercome by fenſe and paſſion. pag. 391 Containing prooſes out of our ſingle apprehenſions, that our ſoule is incorporeall. Pag;93 The connection ofthæ ſubſequent Chapters with the precedent. ibid. The exiſtence cf corporeall thinges in the ſoule by the poer of apprehenſion, doth proue her to be immateriall. pag.394 The notion of being, which is innate in the ſoule, dorh proue the lame. ibid. The ſame is proued by the notion ofreſpects. pag. 39¢ That corporeall thinges are ſpiritualized in the vnderſtanding by meanes of the ſoules woiking in and by reſpects. ibid. That the abſtracting of notions fiom all particnlarand indiuiduallaccidents, doth proue the immaterialitie of the ſoule. pag397 That the vniuerſalitie of abſtracted notions doth proue the ſame. ibid. That collectiue apprehenſions do proue the ſame. pag. 398 The operations of the ſoule draing allwayes from multitude to vnitie, do proue the ſame. 399 The difference betwixt the notion ofa thing in our vnderſtanding, aud the impreſſion thu correſpondeih to the ſame thing in our funſic. doth proue the ſime. pag. 400 .The apprehenſion of negations and priuations do proue the ſame. 401 Containing proofes of our ſoules operations in knowing or deeming any thing, that she is of a ſpirituall nature. pag. 4080 The manner of iudging or deeming by apprehen:ling two thinges to be identiſied doth proue the ſoule to be immateriall. ibid. The ſame is proued by the manner of apprehending oppoſition in a negatiue iudgement.  19 That thinges in themſelues oppoſite to one an other hauing no oppoſition in the ſoule, doth proouè the ſame. pag404 That the fitſt truthes are identified to the ſoule. pag. 45 That che ſoule hath an infinite capacitie, and conſequently is immateriall. pag 406 That the oppoſition of contradictory propoſitions in the Soule doth proue her immaterialitie. ibid. Ho propoſitions of erernall truih, do proue the immaterialitie of the ſoule. pgao; That our diſcourſing doth prooue our ſoule to be incorporeall. pag. 408 That in diſcourſing the ſoule containeth more in it at the ſame time then is in the fantaſie, which prooueth her to be immaterial ibid. That the nature of diſcourſe doth prooue the ſoule to be ordered to infinite knowledge, and conſequently to be immateriall. pag. 409 That the moſt naturall obiects of the ſoule are immateriall, and conſequently the ſoule her ſelfe is ſuch. ibid. Containing proofes out of our manner of proceeding to action, that our ſeule is incorporeall pag. 410 That the ſoules being a power to orderthinges proueth her to be immateriall. ibid. That the ſoules being able to mooue without being mooued, doth prooue her to be immateriall. ag.4 That the ſoules proceeding to action with an vniuerſality, and indifferency doth prooue the ſame. pag 412 That the quiet proceeding ofreaſon doth prooue the ſame? pag. 414 A conclaton of what hath beene ſaid hetherto in this ſecond Treatiſe. ibid. That our ſoule is a Subſtance, anã Immortall. pag. 415 That Mans Soule isa ſubſtance. ibid. That man is compounded of ſome other ſubſtance beſides his body. ibid. That the ſoule doth ſubſiſt of it ſelfe independently of the body. pag. 416 Two other arguments to prooue the ſame: one poſitiue, the other negatiue. pag 417 The ſame is prooued becauſe the ſoule can not be obnoxious ſo the cauſe of mortality. ibid. The ſame is prooued becauſe the ſoule hath no contrary. pag. 418 The ſame is prooued from the end for which the ſoule was ercated. ibid. The ſame is prooued becauſe she can mooue without being mooued. ag. 420 The ſame is prooued from her manner of operation which is grounded in being ibid. Laſtly it is prooued from the ſcience of Morality, the principles whereof would be deſtroied if the ſoule were mortal pag. 411 Declaring hat the ſoule of a man, ſeparated from his body, is: and of her knoledge and manner ofworking. pag. 422 That the ſoule is one ſimple knowing act which is a pure ſubſtance and nothing but ſubſtance. ibid. That a ſeparated ſoule is in no place, and yet is notabſent from any lace. pag.4æ 4 That a ſeparated ſoule is not in time nor ſubiect to it. ibid. That the ſoule is an actiue ſubſtance, and all in it isactiuitie. pag.425 A deſcription of the ſoule. pag.426 That a Rparared ſoule knoweth all that which she knew whilſt she was in her bodie. ibid. That the leat knowledge which the ſoule acquireth in her bodie of anie one thing, doth cauſe in her, when she is ſeparated from her bodie a compſeat knnwledge ofall thinges whatſocuer. pag.427 An anſuere to th: nhiections of ſome Peripatetikes who maintaine the ſoule to perish with the body. pag.a29 The former Peripatetikes refuted out of Ariſtotle. pag. 431 The operations of a ſeparated ſoule compared to her operations in her bodie. ibid. That a ſeparated ſoule is in a ſtate of pure being, and conſequently immortall. pag.43: a Shewing whateffects, the diuers manners of liuing in thisworld, do cauſe in a ſoule, afier she is ſeparated from her body. p.433 That a ſoule in this life is ſubiect to mutation, and may be perfected in knowledge. ibid. That the knowledges which a ſoule getteth in this life, will make her knoledge in the next life more perfect, and firme. pag. 434 That the ſoules of men addicted to ſcience whilſt they liued here, are more peifect in the next world, then the ſoules of vnlearned men. ag. 435 That thoſe ſoules which embrace vertue in this world will be moſt perfect in the next, and thoſe which embrace vice moſt miſerable. ibid. The ſtate of a vitious ſoulein the next life. pag. 437 The fundamentall reaſon why as well happineſſe as miſery is ſo exceſſiue in the next life. pag. 439 The reaſon why mans ſoule requireth to be in a body, and to liue for ſome ſpace oftime ioyned withir. ag. 441 That the miſery of the ſoule in the next world, proceedeth out of inequality, and not out of falſity of her iudgements. pagia4: Of ihe perſeuerance of a ſoule, in the ſtate she findeth herſelſe in, at her firſt ſeparation from her body. Pag. 443 Theexplication, and proofe of that maxime, that, ifthe cauſe be in act, the eſfect muſt alſo be. ibid. The effects of all ſuch agents as woike inſtantaneouſly, are complete in the firſt inſtant that the agents are putt. ibid. All pure ſpirits do worke inſtantaneouſly. pag.444 That a Lule ſeparated from her body can not ſuffer any change after rhe firſt inſtant of her ſeparation. ibid. That temporallſinnes are iuſtly punished with eternall paines. pag. 445 æQ HIS vritingnas deſigned to haue ſeenethe light 2 vnder the name of one treatiſe. But after it nas 3 dra nein papersas loa a view ouer it, I found ſõl the proumiall part (V ichis that which treateth &æææ of Bodies) ſo ample in reſpect of the other( hich vas the end ofit ; and for hoſe ſale I medaled vith it) that I readily apprehended m reader  ould ihinke I had gone much aſtray from my text, when propoſingto ſpeale of the immortality of Mans Soule,three parts of foure of the whole diſcourſe, should notſo much as in one word mention that ſoule, whoſe natureand proprieties I aymed at the diſcouery of. To auoyde this incongruity, occa ſoned mee to change the name and vnity of the orle ; and to male the ſuruay of bodies, a body by it ſelfe: though ſubordinate to the treatiſe of ihe ſoule Vhich not ithnting ithe leſſe in bullæ then the other ;yet Idare promiſe my Reader, thatif he beſtow the paines requiſite to perſect him elſe in it, he will finda much time well ſpent in the due reading of it, as in the reading of the former treatiſe, though farre more lar e. l bur Idiſcerne an obiection obuious to be made ; or rather a queſtion mhy I should sſpend ſo much time in the conſideration of bodies whereas none that hath formerlyvritten o ſi⸗ ubiect, hath in any meaſure done thelite. Imightanſuere that they had, vpon other occaſions, firſt written of the nature of bodies: as I may inſtance in Aiſtotle ; and ſundry others, who either hane themſelues profeſſ edly treated ihe ſcience of bodies, or haue ſuppoſed that part ſufficientl performed by other pennes. But truly, Ivwasby an vnauoydable neceſity hereunto obliged : which is, a currrent of doctrine that at this day, much raigneth in the Chriſtian Schooles, vhere bodies and their operations, are explicared afierthe manner of ſpirituall thinges. For wee hauing very ſlender knowlede of irituall ſubſtances, can reach no povers, or qualities; but can ſeldome penetraie ſo deepe, as 10 deſcend to the particulars of ſuch Qualities,or Powers. Nou cur moderne Philoſophers haue introduced ſuch a courſe of learning into the ſchooles, that vnto all queſtions concerning tle proper natures of bodies, and their operations, it is held ſufficient to anſuere, they haue a quality ,or à pover to doe ſuch a thing. And aftervards they diſpute whether this Quality or Pover, be an Entity diſtinct from its ſubiect, or no; and how it is ſeperable, or vnſeperable from it, and the lile. Conformable to this, ho will looke into ihe bootes, which are in vogue in theſe ſchooles, shall find ſuch anſuers and ſuch controuerſies euery vhere, and fev others. As, of the ſenſible qualities: aste hat it is to be »hite or red, what to be ſpects or ſower, vhat to be odoriferous, or ſtincking, what to be cold or hott? And you are preſently paid nith, that it is a ſenſible quality, which hath the power to male a wall white or red, to male a meate agreeable or diſagreeable to the taſt, 1o male a gratefull or vngrateſull ſmell to the noſe etc: Likewiſe they mate ibe ſame queſtions and reſolutions, of Grauity and Leuity : as whether they be qualities, that , entities diſtinct from their ſubiect: and hether they be actiue or paſiue ; hich when they haue diſputed ſlightly , and in common, vwith logicall arguments ; they reſt there, ithout any furiher ſearching into the phyſicall cauſes or efject of theri. The lile you shall find of all ſtrange ef of them. The loadeſtone and Electricall hodies are produced for miraculous, and notmnderſtandable thinges ; and in which, it muſt be acknonledged , that they orke by hidden qualities, that mans vitt cannot reach vnio. And aſcending to liuing bodies, they giue it fora Maxime: that life is ibe action of ihe ſame Entity vpon it ſelſe: that ſenſe is liteiſe a vorhe of an intrinſecall pouer, in the part ve call ſenſe, vpon it ſelfe. Vhich, our predeceſſors held ihe greateſt al ſurdities that could be ſpolen in Philoſophy. Euen ſome Plyſitians, that tatæ vpon them to teach the curing of our hodies, do ofien pay vs nith ſuch termes, among them , you haue long diſcourſes of a retentiue, of an expullſiue, of a purging, of a conſo idating faculty: and ſo of cuer- thing that eyther paſſeth in our body, or is applied for remedy. And the meaner ſort of Phyſitians lnon no more, but that ſuch faculties are; though indeed they thar are truly Phyſitians, know alſo in vhat they conſiſt 5 vithout vhich inouledge it is much to be feared, Phyſitians ill do more harme then good. TBut to returne to our ſubiect: this courſe of doctrine in the ſchooles, hath forced me to a greate deale of paines in ſeeling to diſcouer the nature of all ſuch actions (or of the maine pari of them) as were famed for incomprehenſible: for hat hope could I haue, out of ile actions of the ſoule to conuince the nature of it to be incorporeall; if I could giue no other account of hodies operations, then that they ere performed by gualities occult, ſpecificall, or incomprehenſible ? Vould not my aduerſary preſentl anſuere, that any operation, out of which 1 should preſſe the ſoules being ſpirituall, vas performed by a corporeall occult quality: and t at ashe mu actnoulede ir ro be incomprehenſible, ſo muſt Iliteniſe acknon ledge other qualities of bodies, to he as incomprehenſible: and therefore could not with reaſon preſſe him, to shew how a body was able to doæ ſuch an operation, as I should inferre muſt of neceſityproceede from a ſpiritt, ſince that neyther could I giue account how the loadeſtone drev iron, or looled to the north; how a ſtone, and other heauy thinges vere carried downevardes ; hon ſight or fantaſit vas made ; how digeſtion or purging ere ficted : and inany other ſuch queſtions, hich ure ſo ſlightly reſolued in the ſchooles? : Beſides this reaſon, the very deſire of lnowledqe in my ſelſe ; and a nillingneſſe to he auajlable vnto others (att the leaſt ſo farre as to ſett them on ſeeting for it, nithout haning a preiudice of impoſibity in attaining it) vas vnto me a ſufficient motiue, to enlarge my ĩſcomſt to the bulle it is riſen unto. For vwhat a miſeryisit,thatihe flower and beſt virtes of Cliriſtendome, hich flocke to the Vniuerſities, vnder pretence and vpon hope of gaining nouledge, should be there deluded ; and aftermany jyeares of toyle and expence, be ſent home againe, nith nothing acquired more then a faculty, and readyneſſe to talle lile parrats of many thinges; but not to vnderſtand ſo much as anyone; and ithall nith a perſuaſion that in truth nothing can be knowne ? For ſetting nowledqe aſide, vhat can itauayle a man 1o be able to talle of any thing? What are thoſe wranglinges; nhere the diſcouery of truth i neyther ſought, nor hoped for, but meerely vanity and oſtentation ? Doth not all tend, 10 lett any body tale it ill at my handes, that I ſpeae thus of ihe moderne ools : for indeed it is rather themſelues then I that ſay it. Excepting Mathematihes, lett all the other ſchooles pronounce their oune mindes, and ſay ingenuouſly, whether they themſelues beleeue they haue ſo much as any one demonſiration, from the beginning to the ending of the whole courſe of their learning. And ifall, or the moſt part, will agree thatan one poſition is demonſtrated perfectly, and as it ought to ? and as thouſands b concluſions are demonſtrated in Mathematites ; lam ready to vndergoe the blame of hauing calumniated them, and vill as readily mate them amendes. But if they neither will, nor can; then their owne verdict cleareth me: and it is not ſo much I, as they, that mahe this profeſion of the shallowneſſe of their doctrine. And to this purpoſe Ihaue ofien hard the lamentations of diuers, as greate vittes as an that conuerſe in the ſchooles, complaining of this defect. But in ſo greate an euidence of tæ proofes are ſuperfiuous. Vherefore Iuill leaue this ſubiect, to declare what I haue here deſigned, and gone about, towardes the remedy of this inconuenience: Vhich is, that whereas in ihe ſchooles, there is a looſe methode, or rather none; but that it is lanfull, by the liberty ſ a commentator, to handle any quetion , in any place (which is the cauſe of ihe ſlightneſſe of their doctrine, and can neuer be the way to any ſcience or certitude) I haue taken my beginninges from the commoneſt ilinges that are in naturẽ: namely, from the notions of Quantity, and its ſiſtdifferences vwhich are the moſt ſimple, and radicall notionsthat are, and inwhichall the reſt are to be grounded. From them I endeauour by immediate compoſition of them, and deriuation from them, to bring downe my di ſcorse to the Elements, which are the primary, and moſt ſimple bodies in nature. From theſe, I proceed to compounded bodies ; firſt, to thoſe thatare called mixedi and rthen, to liuing bodies: declaring in common the proprieties and operations that belong vnto them And by occaſion as Ipaſſe along, I light here and there on thoſe operatigns, which ſeeme moſt admirable in nature,to shew how they are performed; or att the leaſt, ho they may lbe performeaã: that ihough Imiſſe in particular of ihe induſtry of nature, yet I may neuertheleſſe hitt my intent ; hich is, to trace out a vay, hov theſe, and ſuch liks operations may be effected by an exact diſpoſition, and ordering ( though intricate) of guantitatiue and corporeall partes: and io shew, that they oblige vs not to recurre vnto hidden and vnexplicable ualitis And if Ihaue declared ſo many of theſe, as may begett a probable ſerſuaſion in my reader, that the reſt, which I haue not touched, may liteniſe be di ſplayed , and sheved to ſpring out of the ſame groundes, if curious and conftant ſearchers into nature, vill mate their jashe to penetrate into them iJ haue therein obtained my deſire and intent ; which is onely, to shew from what principles, all hindes of corporeall operations do proceed ; and vhat ind of operations all theſe muſt be, which may iſſue out oftheſe principles: to the end, that I may from thence, mate a ſteppe toraiſe my diſcourſe to the contemplation of the ſoule ; and shew, that hor operations are ſuch, as cannot proceed from thoſe principles; which being adequate and common 1o all bodies, ve maj reſt aſſured, that hat cannot iſſue from them, cannothaue à body for its ſource. Ivill rhereſore end this preface, vith entreatins my reader to conſider, that in a diſcourſe proceeding in ũlt order as I haue declared, he muſt not expect io vnderſtand, and be ſatirfied, nith hat is ſaid in any midadle or later part, vnleſſe he firſt haue read, and vnderſtood what goeth before. Vherefore, if he cannot reſolue with himſelſe, to tate it along orderly as it lyeth from the beginning , he shall do himſelfe  a3well asme) right, notto meddle att allvith this boote. But if he will employ any time vpon it, to receiue aduantage by it, hie muſt be content to take the paines to vnderſtand throughly euery particular as it is ſett downe. And if his memory vill not ſerue him to carry euery one along with him, yet att the leaſt lett, him be ſure ſo remember the place where it is handled, and vpon occaſion, returne a looke backe vpon it, vhen it may ſtand him in ſeede. If he thinketh this diligence too burthenſome, lett him conſider that the vriting hereof, hath coſt the Author much more paines: who as he uill eſteeme them exceedingly 9ell employed, if they may contribute ought to the content or aduantage of any free and ingenuous mind ; ſo if any others shall expreſſe a neglect of what he hath ith ſo much labour heved our of the hard rocke of nature ; or shall diſtourtsonſh cauill att the notions he ſo freely imparteth unto them ; all the reſſentment be shall mahe thereof, nill be to deſir the frſt, to conſider, that their ſlight eſteeme of hisvorke, ob igeth them to entertaine their thoughts vith ſome more noble and more profittable ſubiect, and better treated, then this is: and ihe later ſort, to iuſtifie their diſlite of his doctrine, by deliuering a fairer and more complete Lody of Philoſophy, oftheir oune. Vhich if herevpon they do, his being the occaſion of the ones bettering themſelues, and of the others bettering the world, vill be the beſt ſucceſe le can vish hit boole. ICIũ 66l 66l õœõꝶ ò APPROBATIONES DOCTORVM.  Go infra ſcriptus natione Anglus, & in ſacra Theoloęiæ l Facultate Pariſienſi Magiſter, fidem facio me librum perlegiſſe Anglicano idiomate ſcriptum; cui titulus, Ta = treatiſes, in the one of which the nature of bodies, in the other the nature of mans ſoule is looked into , in. way of diſcouerie of the immortalitie of reaſonable ſoules, Authore nobiliſimo, & vndequaque eruditiſſimo viro Kenelmo Dighæo An glo. In quo nihil deprehendi aut fidei, aut pietati Catholicæ, & Romanæ Eccleſiæ diſſonum vel indignum. Quod etiam ſpondeo, priuſquam typis exoluetur, candidiori ac duplicato calculo teſtatum fore. Intereà verò ne tantum ſub modio lumen vel parumper deliteſcat, hoc ipſum proprio firmaui chirographo. Datum Pariſiis Kalendis Martij ab Incarnationis anno 16 44 H. HOLDEN. - Y leaue & order from our ſacred Facultie & vritten Doctors of Deuinitie of the Vniue & haue read ouer this booke, entitled , To ireatiſies, in the 7 one of which the nature of bodies, in the otherthe nature of mans ſoule is looked into, in way of diſcouerie of the immortalitie of reaſonalle ſoules. Written by Sir Kenelme Digby, & containing an hundred & ſixteene shites, printed in folio by Gilles Blaizot 6 44. Vhieh, as well for its chiefe ſubiects ſake, that neuer ought to be ſlightly handled , as alſo for its new & exotticke aſſertions in matters both of ſoule æ bodie, wee haue the more diligently peruſed. And whether it hath hitte or miſſed of the truth, we muſt needs eeſleme & highly extolle the authours manly deſigne to ayme at euidence. Eſi pecially in this ſchepticke age, herein ſo few ptofeſſe, or thinke it poſiible to know with certitude. Yea wherein euen many ofthoſe, who to the vulgar ſeeme Maiſters of learning, acknowledge all philoſophies deciſions only problematicalli and thence labouring to make their voluminous relations ofeach orhers phanſies & opinious paſſe for ſcience, haue quite banished her their ſchooles. But here we ſind a large & lofty ſoule, who not ſatis fyed with vnexamined words & ambiguous termes, longing to know dyues deepely into the bowells of all corporeall & compounded things: and then deuinely ſpeculats the nature of immateriall & ſubſiſtent formes. Nor this by wrangling in aerie names with chimericall imaginations & fained ſuppoſitions of vnknowne qualities, but ſtrongly ſtryuing to diſcloſehe reall & connaturall truth ofeach thing in it ſeit, andoſ one ũ jj , wee vnder Where many ofthe moſt abſtruſe & enigmaticke queſtions of natures ſecrets, hitherto vnreſolued, & for the moſt part weakely repreſented in empty language & verballshadowes ) are made no leſſe plaine & euident in their inward beings & eſfects, then pleaſant & gratefull in their ellclothed outſide & expreſsion. In which, though to the blind & common crowde (to vhom all thats vnuſuall is a paradox) there may perhapps appeare what they ll dare call extrauagant, and to the midlecyzed gymnaſtickes what they ll conceiue ill grownded, though ingenious queſſes, yet ſurely will the more ſolide reflections of all knowing men begette a liking of its ac quaintance. Howſoeuer this wee can & do affirme & teſtifye ( although the authour's prodigious parts publicke credit makes voide our approbation) that nething contained in either of thoſetwo treatiſes, diſcuſiing only the ordinarie courſe of nature, doth any way tende to the diſaduantage of the faith or pietie of our Catholike Roman church, whereof this Authour profeſſeth him ſelfe a dutifull & obedient child. And therefore wee ſigne & ſubſcribe our names here vnto. Paris this io. of Nouember 164 4. H. HOLDEN. E. TYRREL. 1D EM L ATIN E. Enià ac iuſſu Sacræ noſtræ Facultatis, Nos infiaſcripti S. Theologiæ Doctores Academiæ Pariſienſis, perlegimus l librum hunc, cui titulus, Duotractatus, in quorum vno na42L55 tura corporum, altero natura humanæ animæ inſpicitur, ad ueſtigandam animarum rationalium immortalitatem. Authore Kenelmo in Dighæo Equite aurato, centum & ſexdecim ſchedas continentem, typis gidij Blaizot in folio excuſum Anno i644. Quem, tim ob eius præcipuum ſubiectum, quod nunquam leuiter tractari conuenit, tum maximè ob nouas quaſdam & inuſitatas aſſertiones, tam in animæ quàm corporum materià, tanto diligentiori ſtudio peruoluimus. In quo ſiue ipſas veritatis apices adeptus ſit, ſiue non, audaces certẽ authoris animos, in ipſam euidentiam attentando non poſſumus non magnoperè commendare: in hoc ſceptico præſertim æuo, in quo tam pauci profitentur, aut poſibile reputant fieri poſſe vt quidquam certò Rgnotatur: imo verò in quo plurimi eorum qui vulgi opinione ſcientiarum magiſtri habentur, quotquot ſunt philoſophiæ poſitiones, non niſi totidem problemata agnoſcunt: quique proinde portentoſis voluminibus ſua aliorumque placita loco veræ ſcientiæ nobis obtrudere volentes, eam prorſus ſcholis ſuis exterminarunt. At hic generoſiorem animum inuenimus, qui nudis hiſce ac inexplicatis voculis haud acquieſcens, ſed veritatis ac tum demum immaterialium & ſubſiſtentium formarum naturam per ſpicaciſsimã mentis acie ſpeculatur. Nec ad hoc contentioſis vtitur verborum rixis, aut chimericas, ineognitaſque ualitates in ſubſidium conuocat, ſed genuinam cuiuſque rei, prout nb eſt, exhibens veritatem, vnOque, & eo continuo, ſcientiæ filo totum opus contexit. In quo plurima ex abſtruſioribus naturæ ſecretis ( quæ hactenus aut omninò non innotuerunt, aut ad ſummum vmbratili verborum fuco ſunt obuoluta) non minus clara & euidentia quoad interiores eorum naturas & effectus, quàm grata & iucunda quoad exteriorem ornatum exhibentur. Inter quæ ronnihil fortaſſe occurret, quod plebeo hominum generi (cui omne inuſitatum paradoxi loco habetur) longè à veritatis ſcopo aliecnum videri poterit; aut quod moderatioribus gymnaſiaſtis, inualidis quidem innixum fundamentis, attamen non niſi ingenioſis adinuentum coniecturis: Erit nihilominus quod poſt maturam diſcuſſionem, omnium verè doctorum animos ad ſui amorem ac deſiderium alliceat. Quicquid ſit, hoc ſaltem nos poſſumus, ac de facto teſtamur & notum facimus (vtvt Authoris conſpicua fame ac dignitas teſtimonium noſtrum inutile reddat) nihil in vtrolibet horum tractatuum contentum, in quibus ordinarius ſolim naturæ proceſſus conſideratur, in præiudicium fidei tendere, aut pietatis Catholicæ Romanæ Eccleſiæ, cuius author hic ſe ſilium obedientiſsimum profitetur. In cuius proinde rei teſtimonium hic noſtra ſubſcripſimus nomina, & ſubſignauimus. Actum Pariſiis 10. Nouembris anno i1644. H. HOLDEN. E. TYRREL. a .  r A⸗ V .  a Rudita eſt hæc lucubratio, eruditis edita cogitationibus, ni25 hil habet orthodoxis repugnans Maximis, magè maximum õ n magnæ Britanniæ decus oquitur authorem; vere virum, & primis Chriſtiani orbis componendum Heroibus, ca doctrinæ  fortitudinis laude, eo Caſtrenſis & literarij pulueris vſu, iis pro patria & Religione negotiationibus, ea potenti ſuada, tam ſupereminenti politia, tot terra, marique rebus geſtis inclytum, vt eius commentario prælatum Nomen, non modo lucis ipſi vſuram, ſed & quouis terrarum inoffenſo pede commeandi, & iura ciuium vindiaa ndi promereatur. Sic cenſuit Pariſiis in Collegio Pleſſæo 11. Nouembris Anno Domini IG44. IACOBVS DVLævs in ſacra Facultate | ) S  Ræc LARVM iſtud Opus, & aureum Viri nobiv liſſimi, illuſtriſſimi Equitis aurati, Domini mei 2 D. Kenelmi Digbæi, non eſt cur adgrediar approbare vel audeam. Satis illud probatum reddiderint Sapientiſſimi MM. NN. quibus, me abſente, longẽque alibi Gentium conſtituto, hanc prouinciam demandauit ſacra noſtra Facultas Pariſienſis. Inuat tamen admirari, ac venerari ſingularem atque præcellentem Viri Genium, pal ique virtute & fœlicitate Ingenium. Peragrauerat olim Oceanum, mareque Mediterrancum naualibus pugnis, victorijs, triumphis paruã, ſed bene inſtructà claſſiculà, tot & tam miranda patrauerat, quot, & quanta deinceps alij, ne regijs quidemclaſſibus, ſunt aſſequuti. Martigenam dixiſſes aut Ne; tunigenam. Nunc Apollini qubque ſacrum ſe, & charum oſtendit; Mineruæ, Muſartmque Alumnum. Principijs quippe ſubnixus purè naturalibus, paucis quidem, ſed validis, bene prouiſis, diligenter ſelectis, ferrea, vt ita dicam, Naturæ clauſtra perrumpit, atque refringit. Aſt quodnam mihi verbum exciderat ? aperit leniter potius, & recludit. Sinus, penetralia, receſſus, viſcera, mentis acumine pererrat: diuitiarum illinc theſauros eruit: vtendos, fruendos nobis elargitur. Principia illius, & elementa, ipſorumque inter ſeſe texturam & coagmentationem explicat; indeque exorientia mixta, perfecta, imperfecta, viuentia, animata, mouentia, rationis expertia, rationalia; horumque omnium virtutes, operationes, effectũs: tum, quibus inſtrumentis iſta moliatur Natura Architectrix. Hiſce attentà mente perpenſis, & quouſque pertingere valeat formarum, quæ plane ſunt materiales, vis & poteſtas; tum demũm clara luce viſendum oſtendit, Formam noſtram, non animam duntaxat eſ ſe, quãà ſumus, vegetamur, moue mur, ſentimus, ſed & animum, mentemquẽ, quãà ſapimus, & intelligimus: Hac nos præterita reminiſcendo recolere; præſentia ſupra ipſa reflectendo intueri; futura, non ex aẽris humor©mve immutatione, ſed ratiocinando, & verãà prouidentiã, in alteram quoque ætatem, & ſæcula proſpicere, & præcauere: eam ſupra ſemetipſam conuertere, ac retorquere: ac verè ſuam omnem ènergiam tunc exerere & ſtudioſiſſimè exercere; qui ſeſc eumdem teſtetur manifeſtẽ & intelligentem eſſe, & intelligibile. Aſſequi iſtud non poſſe Agentia, omnimodis à materia dependentia. Hinc ipſum euinci ſpiritualem, & immortalèm eſſe, & ſine corpore potentem ſubſũſtere. Abſtractæ proptereà ſtatum, vim, virtutem, functiones, operationes perſequitur accuratè, & aſſequitur; quantum fi. ri poteſt in ſubluſtribus & opacis terrenæ commorationis noſtræ vmbraculis. Atò bone Deus: Dum campos & lata mentis prætoria perluſtrat, abſtruſioraque voluntatis liberrimæ receptacula ; abditoſque grandis memoriæ receſsOs, & quæ reponuntur illic miris tamquam cellis & caueis; quam inde miranda nobis egerit, quam ſtupenda producit? Res illic eſſe innumerabiles, quarum ſonos verborum & nominum, tenueſue, languidas, emortuas per ſenſum hauſerimus vibras & imagines; viuidas autem & veraces intus nos habere earum notiones atque rationes; illius etiam quo quid eſt, quidquideſt, ſiue, vt more noſtro loquar, eſſentiarum ab omni materia depuratarum, definitiones, diuiſiones, quæque ex illis ſequuntur demonſtrationes. Noſtrum nos timorem ſine timore recolere, noſtramque triſtes lætitiam; vitam nos beatam prælibare, & purum ab omni fœce gaudium, quod in vno hominum nemine ſumus experti. Ad imitationem ſummi, poſt Apoſtolorum tempora, ingenio & doctrinà Theologi, exclamare libet: Quale tibi fabrieatus es cubile in mente mea Domine? Quale tibi ſanctuarium ædificaſti:Quid ego nunc ſtyli nitorem, & vbertatem deprædicem? Exemplorum, ſimilitudinum, experimentorum copiam & varietatem? Scientiarum omnium vnica in diſſertatione breuiarium & anacephalœoſim?Hiſce, Vir natalitijs, ingenio, doctrinã ſummus, riuulis, ſloribus, luminibus ita irrigauit, conueſtiuit, diſtinxit, læta reddidit horrida, vt videbanturarua & aſpera contemplationis Phyſicæ, vt certare poſſint cum lætiſſimis, & amœniſſimis hortis aliorum, & ſuburbanis. Gratulor magnæ Britanniæ, quondam fœcundæ maximorum ingeniorum parenti, & altrici; quæ ne hoc quidem æuo ſenectute & ſuauiſſimæ; cuius t men pomœ:ia longẽ lateque piouſt Author hic Iplendidiſſimus. Gratulor Philologis & h loſophis Anglis, quibus viam præiuit, quã ſe quoque poſſint vulgo eximere, atque in libertatem aſſerere; & horridiuſcula quæque & inculta nitidiſſimè ediſcrere. Gratulor demque generoſiſſimo beata prolis parenti, tam altam animi pacem, tranquillitatem, magnitudinem; vt inter nouercantis fortunæ procellas, bellorum tumultũs, aulæ ſtrepitũs, iſta tamen piocudere valuerit. H. MAILLARD. DECL ARING THE N ATV RE AND OPERATIONS OF BODIES. THE FIRST CHAPTER. A Preamble to the hole diſtourſe; concerning notions in general.  Ndeliuering any ſcience; the cleereſt and Sæ ſmootheſt methode; and moſt agregable to nature; is to begin Vith the conſidera“”lN tion of thoſe thinges, that are moſt comV4ꝗ mon and obuious; and by the diſſection of 7æ them to deſcend by orderly degrees and ſteppes ( as they lye in the wayJ vnto the 7aꝶ examination of the moſt particular and - remote ones. Now, in our preſent intended ſuruay ofa body, the firſt thing which occurreth to our ſenſe in the peruſall of it, is its Quantity, bulke, or magnitude: and this ſeemeth by all mankind, to be conceiued ſoinſeparable from a bodyas when a man would diſtinguish a corporeall ſubſtance from a ſpirituall one (vich is accounted indiuiſible) he naturally pitcheth vpon an apprehenſion of its hauing bulke, and beind ſolidte, tangible, and apt to make impreſſion vpon our outward ſenſes; according to that expreſſion of Lucretius, who ſtudying nature in a familiar and rationall manner telleth vs; l Tangere enim & tangi, niſi corpus nulla poteſt res. And therefore in our inquiry of bodies, we will obſerue that plaine methode which nature teacheth vs, and vill begin with examinin what Quantity is, as being their firſtand primary aſfection; and that vhich maketh the chinges we treate of, be what we intend to ſignify by the name of body. ꝶ A \ l 1 Al Quantity , an obuious But becauſe there is a greate variety of apprehenſions framed by learned men, of the nature of Quantity ( though indeede nothing can be more plaine and ſimple thenit is init ſclfe) Iconcciue it vill not be amiſſe, before we enter into the explication of it, to conſider how the myſtery of diſcourſing and expreſſing our thoughts to one an other by words (a prerogatiue belonging only to man) is ordered and gouerned among Vs: that ſo, e may auoyde thoſe rockes, which many, and for the moſt part, ſuch as thinke they ſpinne the fineſt thriddes, do ſuffer shippewracke againſt in theire ſubtileſt diſcourſes. The moſt dangerous of all which, aſſuredly is when they confound the true and reall natures of thinges, with the conceptions they frame of them in theire owne mindes. By which fundamentall miſcarriage of theire reaſoning, they fall into great errors and abſurdities: and whatſocuer they bũild vpon ſo ruinous a foundation, prooueth but vſeleſſe cobvebbes or prodigious Chymeras. It is true, wordes ſeruc to expreſſe thinges: but if you obſerue the matter well; you vill perceiue they doe ſo, onely according to the pictures we make of them in our owne thoughts, and not according as the thinges are in theire proper natures. Which is very reaſonable it should be ſo; ſince the ſoule, that giueth the names, hath nothing of the thinges in her but theſe notions, and knoweth not the thinges otherviſe then by theſe notions: and therefore can not giue other names but ſuch as muſt ſignify the thinges by mediation of theſe notions. In the thinges, all that belongeth vnto them is com riſed vnder one entire Entity: butinvs, there are framed as many euerall diſtinct formall conceptions,as that one thing sheweth it ſelfe vnto vs with differẽt faces. Euery one of which conceptions ſeemeth to haue for its obiect a diſtinct thing, becauſe the conception it ſelfe isas much ſeuered and diſtinguished from another conception or image, ariſing out of the very ſame thing that begott this, as it can be from any image painted in the vnderſtanding by an abſolutely other thing. It vill not be amiſſe to illuſtrate this matter by ſome familiar example. Imagine I haue an apple in my hand: the ſame fruite worLeth different effects vpon my ſeuerall ſenſcs: my eye telleth me itis reene orred: my noſe that it hath a mellow ſent: my taſte that it is ſweet, and my hand that it is cold and weighty. My ſenſes thus affected, ſend meſſengers to my fantaſie with newes ofthe diſcoueries they haue made: andthere, all of them make ſeuerall and diſtinct pictures of what entereth by theire dores. So that my Reaſon (hich diſcourſeth vpon vhat it findeth in my fantaſie ) can conſider greeneneſſe by it ſelfe, or mellowneſſe, or ſeeteneſſe, or coldneſſe, or any other quality whatſocuer, ſingly and alone by it ſelfe, without relation to any other that is painted in me by the ſame apple: in which, none of theſe haue any diſtinction at all, but are one and the preſſions vpon me, according to the various diſpoſitions of my ſeuetall ſenſes: as hereafter we shall explicate at large. But in my mind, euery one of theſc notions is a diſtinct picture by it ſelfe, and is as much ſcuered from any of the reſt ariſing from the ſame apple, as it would be from any impreſſion or image made in me, by a ſtone or any other ſubſtance whatſoeuer, that being entire in it ſelfe and circumſcribed vithin its owne circle, is abſolutely ſequeſtred from any communication vith the other: ſo that, what is but one entire thing inĩt ſelfe, ſeemeth to be many diſtinct thinges in my vnderſtanding. Vhereby, ifl be not very cautious, and in a manner vreſtle with the bent and inclination of my vnderſtanding (which is apt to referre the diſtinct and complete ſtampe it findeth within it ſelfe, vnto a diſtinct and complete originall character in the thing) I shall be in danger before I am avare, to giue actuall Beings to the quantity, figure, colour, ſmell, taſt, and orher accidents of the apple, each of them diſtinct one from an other, as alſo from the ſubſtance which they clothe; becauſe find the notions of them really diſtinguished (as if they vere different Entities) in my minde. And from thencel may inferre, there is noe contradiction in nature to haue the accidents really ſeuered from one an other, and to haue them actually ſubſiſt vithout theire ſubſtance: and ſuch other miſtaken ſubtilities; which ariſe out of our vnwary conceiting that ihinges are in theire owne natures, after the ſame fashion as we conſider them in ourvnderſtanding. And this courſe of the mindes diſguiſing and changing the impreſions it receiueth from outwaid obiects, into appearances quite differing from what the thinges are in theire owne reall natures, may be obſerued not only in multiplying Entities, where in truth there is but one: Butalſoina contrary manner, by compriſing ſeuerall diſtinct thinges, vnder one ſingle notion; which if afterwards it be reſlected backe vpon the thinges themſelues, is the occaſion of exceeding great errours, and entan gleth one in vnſuperable difficulties. As for example: looking vpon ſeuerallcubes or deyes, whereof one is of gold, an other of lead, a third of yuory, a fourth of wood, a fifih of glaſe and what other matter you pleaſe; all theſe ſeuerall thinges agree togetherin my vnderſtanding, and are there comprehended vnder one ſingle notionbfa cube; Which (like a painter that were to deſigne them onely in blacke and white) maketh one figure that repreſenteth them all. Now iſAemoouing my conſideration from this impreſſion which the ſeutrall cubes make in my vnderſtanding, vnto the cubes themſclues, Ishall vnwarily ſuffer my ſelfe to pinne this one notion pon euery one of them, and accordingly concciue it to be really in them; it will of neceſſity fall out by i misapplying of my intellectuall notion to the reallthinges, thatI muſt allow Exiſtence to other entities, which neuer had nor can haue any in nature, A jj A ſecond error; the conceiuing of many diſtinct thinges as really ond From this conception, Platos Idæas had theire birth; for he finding in his vndertanding, one vniuerſall notion ihat agreed exactly to euery Indiuiduall of the ſame ſpecies of ſubſtance, which imprinted that notion in him, and conceiuing that rhe picture of any thing muſt haue an exact correſpondence with the thing it repreſenteth and not conſidering that this was but an imperfect picture of the indiuiduall that made it: he did thence conceiue, there was actually in euery indiuiduall ſubſtance one vniverſall nature running through allof that ſpecies, which made them be what they were. And Hen conſidering that corporeity, quantity, and other accidents of matter, could not agree i this vniuerſall ſubſiſtent nature, he denyed all thoſe of it: and ſo, abſtracting from all materiality in his Idæas, and giuing them a reall and actuall ſubſiſtence in nature, he made them like Angels, whoſe eſſences and formall reaſons ere to be the Eſſence and to giue Exiſtence vnto corporeall indiuiduals: and ſo, each idæa was embodyed in euery indiuiduall of its ſpecies. Vnto which opinion ſ and vpon the ſame groundes) Auerroes did leane, in the Jurticular of mens ſoules. Likewiſe, Scotus finding in his vnderſtanding an vniuerſall notion ſpringing from the impreſſion that indiuiduals make in it, will, haue a ſee vniuerſall in the thing it ſelfe, ſo determining vniuerſals to vſe his owne language and termes) r0 be aparterei; and expreſſing the diſtinction they haue from the reſt ofthe thing, by the termes otaclu formaliter ſed non realiter: and therby maketh euery indiuiduall compriſe an vniuerſall ſubſiſtent nature init. Which inconuenience other moderne Philoſophers ſeeking to auoyde, vill not allow theſe vniuerſals a realland actuall ſubſiſtencè, but will lend them onely a fictitious Being, ſo making them as they call them Entia rationi. But herein againe they ſuſfer themſelues to be carried downe the ſtreame before they are aare by the vnderſtanding which is apt to pinne vpon the obiects, the notions it findeth ithin it ſelfe reſulting from them) and doe conſider an vnity in the thinges which indeede is onely in the vnderſtanding. Therefore one of our greateſt cares in the guidance of our diſcourſe, and a continual and ſedulous caution Rerein , ought to be vſed in this particular, where euery error is a fundamentallone, and leadeth into inextricable labyrinthes, and where that which is all our leuell to keepe vs vpright and euen (our vnderſtanding is ſoapt, by reaſon of its owne nature, and manner of operation to make vs ſlide into miſtaking and errour. And to ſumme vp in short what this diſcourſe aymeth att, we muſt narrovly take heed, leaſt reſlecting vpon the notions we haue in our mind, we afterwards pinne thoſe ayery ſuperſtructures vpon the materiall thinges themſelues, that beott them; or frame a new conception of the nature of any thing b ſe negotiation of our vnderſtanding vpon thoſe impreſſions hiel it ſelfe maketh in vs: whereas, we should acquieſce and be content with that naturall and plaine notion, which ſpringeth immediately and primarily from the rhing it ſelfe: which when we do not, the more ve ſeeme to excell in ſubtility, the further we goe from reality and truth; like an arrow, which being wrong leuelled at hand, falleth wideſt when shotrin the ſtrongeſt bove. Nov to come to an other poynt that maketh to our preſent pur- T c. poſe. Ve may obſerue there are two ſorts of language to expreſſe ru our notions by. The one belongeth in generall toall ankind the ſimpleſt perſon, that can but apprehend and ſpeake ſenſe, is as ttons; the o much iudge ofit, as the greateſt Doctour in the ſchooles: and in this, men, the ot the words expreſſe the thinges properly and plainely, according to ſoræ so the naturall conceptions that all people agree in making of them. The other ſort of language, is creleò in with narrower boundes; and is vnderſtood onely by thoſe thatin a parricular and expreſſe manner haue beene trayned vp vnto it: and many of the vordes which are proper to it, haue beene by the authors of it, tranſlated and wreſted from the generall conceptions of the ſame wordes, by ſome metaphore, or ſimilitude, or alluſion, to ſerue theire priuate turnes. Vithout the firſt manner of expreſſing our notions, mankind could not liue in ſociety together, and conuerſe with one an other: whereas, the other hath no further extent, then among ſuch perſons as haue agreed together to explicate and deſigne among semſelues articular notions peculiar to theire arts and affaires. Of the firſt kind, are thoſe tenne generall heads, which Ariſtotle calleth Prædicaments: vnder which he(who was the moſt iudicious orderer of notions, and directour of mens cõce ptions that euer liued) hath cõpriſed whatſoeuer hath,or can haue a being in nature. For whenany obiect occurreth to our thoughts, we eyther conſider the eſſentiall and fundamentall Being of it; or we referre it to ſome ſpecies of Quantity; or we diſcouer ſome qualities in it; or we perceiue that it doeth, or that it ſufereth ſome thing; or we conceiue it in ſome determinate place, or time, and the like. Of all which, euery man liuing that enioyerh but the vſe of reaſon, findeth naturally ithin himſclſe at the very firſt naming ofthem, a plaine, complete, and ſatisfying notion; which is the ſime vithout any the leaſt variation, in all markind; vnleſſe it be in ſuch, as haue induſtriouſly and by force, and with much labour, perplexed and depraued thoſe primary and ſincere impreſſions, which nature had freely made in them. Ofthe ſecond ſort, are the particular wordes ofart by which learned men vſe to expreſſe what they meane in ſciences; and the names of inſtruments, and of ſuch thinges as belong to trades, and the like: as a ſine, a tangent, an epicycle, a deferent, an axe, a trowell, and ſuch others; thè intelligence of which, belongeth not tothe generality of mankind; but onely to Geometricians, Aſtronomers, Carpenters, Maſons, and ſuch perſons as conuerſe familiaty and frelj thoſe thinges. To learne the true ſignification ofſuch ſi conſult with thoſe that haue the knowledge and practiſe of them: as in like manner, to vnder tan ihe other hind of plaine language, ve muſt obſerue how the wor æ that con oſe it are appreſiended, vſed, and applyed by mankind in generall : and not receiue into this examination the wreſted or Metaphoricall ſenſes of any learned men, who ſeeke oftentimesſ beyond any ground in nature) to frame a generall notion that may comprehend all the particular ones, which in any ſenſe, proper or improper, may ariſe out of the vſe of one word. And this is the cauſe of greate errors in diſcourſe, ſoe greate and important, as I cannot too much inculcate the caution requiſite to the auoyding oſthis rocke. Which that it may be the better apprehended, I vill inſtance in one example of a moſt plaine and eaſie conception wherein all mankind naturally agreeth, how the wreſting it from its proper, genuine, and originall ſignification, leadeth one into ſtrange abſurdities; and yet they paſſe for ſubtile ſpeculations. The notion of being in a place, is naturally the ſame in allmen liuing: aske any ſmpte artiſan; Vhere ſuch a man, ſuch a houſe, ſuch a tree, or ſucha thing is; and he vill anſWere you in the very ſame manner as the lcarnedeſt Philoſopher would doe: he will tell you, the man you aske for, is in ſch a church, ſitting in ſucha piew,and in ſuch acorneroſ it; that the howſe you enquire after, is in ſuch a ſtreete, and next to ſuch to buildinges on each ſide of it; that the tree you would find out, is in ſuch a foreſt, vpon ſuch a hill, neere ſucha fountaine, and by ſuch a bushs that the wine you would drinke of, is in ſucha cellar, in ſuch a part of it, and in ſucha caske. In concluſion, no man liuing that ſpeaketh naturally and freely out of the notion hee findeth clearely in his vnderſtanding, vill giue you other anſwere to the queſtion of where a thing u,then ſucha one as plainely expreſſeth his conceit of being in place, to be no other, then a bodies being enuironed and encloſed by ſome one, or ſeuerall others that are immediate vnto it; as the place, ofa liquor, is the veſſell that containeth it; and the place of the veſſcll, is ſucha part of the chamber, or houſe that it reſteth vpon, together vith the ambient ayre; which hath a share in making vp the places of moſt thinges. And this being the anſwere, that euery man whatſoeuer vill readily giue to this queſtion; and euery asker being fully ſatisfied with it; we may ſafely conclude, that all theire notions and conceptions of being ina place, are the ſame, and conſequently, that it is the naturalland true one. But then ſome others, conſidering that ſuch conditions as theſe vill not agree vnto other thinges, which they likewiſe conceite to be in a place ſfor they receiue it as an Axiome from theire ſenſe, that whatſoeueris, muſt be ſomewhere, and whatſoeuer is no where, is not att all) they fall to caſting about how they may frame ſome iilil common quently with common notion to comprehend all the ſeuerall kindes of being in place, which they imagine in the thinges they diſcourſe of. If there were nothing but bodies to be ranked by them in the Predicament ofplace; then that deſcription Ihaue already ſett downe, would be allowed by them, as ſutbcient. But ſince that ſpirits and ſpirituall thinges, (as Angels, rationall ſoules, verities, ſciencies, arts, and the like ) haue a being in nature; and yet will not be compriſed in ſuch a kind ofplace as abody is contained in; they racke theire thoughts to ſpeculate out ſome common notion of being in place, which may be common to theſe, as well as to bodies; like a common accident agreeing to diuerſe ſubjects. And ſoin the end, they pitch vpon an Entity, which they call an Vbi: and they conceite the nature and formallreaſon of tha to be, the ranking of any thing ina place, ?hen that Entity is therevnto affixed. And then they haue no further diſficulty, in ſcttling an Angell or any pure ſpirit, or immateriall eſſence, in a place as properly, and as completely, as if it were a corporeall ſubſtance. It is but aſſigning an Vbi to ſuch a ſpirit, and he is preſently riueted to what place you pleaſe: and by multiplying theVbies, any indiuiduall body vnto which they are aſſigned, is at the ſame inſtant in as many diſtant places, as they allott it different Vbies: and ifthey aſſigne the ſame Vbi to ſeuerall bodies, ſo many ſeuerall ones as they aſgne it vnto, vill be in one and the ſame place: and not onely many bodies in one place, but euen a whole bodie in anindiuiſible, bya kind of Vbi that hath a power to reſume all the extended partes, and encloſe them in a point of place. All which prodigious conceits and impoſſibilities in nature, doe ſpring out of theire miſtake in framing Metaphyſicall and bſtraced conceptions, inſteed of contenting themſeloes vith thoſe plaine, eaſy, and primary notions, vhich nature ſtampetha like in all men of common ſenſe, and vnderſtanding. As who deſireth to bee furtherinſtructed in this particular, may perceiue, if he take the paines to looke ouer what M. Vhite hath diſcourſed of Place in the Eet ofhis Dialogues De Aundo. Vnto vhich booke, I shall from time to time (according as I shall haue occaſion) referre my Reader in thoſe ſubiects the Author taketh vppon him to prooue; being confident that his Metaphyſicall demonſtrations Rere, are as Eime. as any Mathematicall ones (for Metaphyſicall demonſtrations haue in themſelues as much firmeneſſe, certainty and euidencyas they') and ſo will appeare as euident, as they, vnto whoſoeuer shall vnderſtand them throughly, and shall frame right conceptions of them: which  ho plaine ſoeuer they THE SECOND CHAPTER. Of Quantity. Scœæſi thoſe primary affections which occurre in the n I. X muſt know 2 peruſall of a body, Quantiy (as I haue obſerued in the vulgar and ZN precedent chapter) is one and ina manner the firſt and the of Quan- roote of all the reſt. Therefore ſaccording to the caution we haue thas beene ſo prolixe in giuing, becauſe it is of ſo maine importance) if we oſis ayme at right vnderſtanding the true nature ofit, we muſt examine, what apprehenſion all kindes of people ſthat is mankind in generall) maketh of i. By which proceeding, we doe not make the ignorant multitude iudge of that learning which groweth out of the conſideration of Quantity: but onely of the naturall notion which ſerueth learned men fora baſis and foundation to build ſcientificall ſuperſtructures vpon. For although, ſciencies be the workes and ſtructures oſthe vnderſtanding gouerned and leuelled by the ary and ſtrict rules of moſt ingenious artificers: yet the ground vpon which they are raiſed, are ſuch plaine notions of thinges, as naturally and ithour anyart doe preſent themſclues to euery mans apprehenſion: without which for matter to worke vpon, thoſe artificiall reflettions would leaue the vnderſtanding as vnſatisfied, as a cooke would the appetite, by a dish vpon which he should haue exerciſed all his art in dreſſing it, but whoſe firſt ſubſtance were not meate of ſolide nutriment. It ĩs the courſe market that muſt deliuer him plaine materialls to employ his cunning vpon: and in like manner, itis the indiſciplined/multitude that muſt furnish learned men vith naturall apprehenſions, and notions to exerciſe theire wittes about: which when they haue, they may vſe and order ad reflect vpon them as they pleaſe: but they muſt firſt receiue them in that plaine and naked forme, as mankind in generall pictureth them out in theire imaginations. And therefore the firſt worke ofſchollers, is to learne of the people Quem penes, arbitrium eſt & ius & norma loquendi, vhat is the true meaning and ſignification of theſe primary names, and what notions they Begent in the generality of mankinde ofthe thinges they deſigne. Ofthe common people then, we muſt enquire vhat Quantity à: and we shall ſoone be informed, if we but conſider what anſwere any ſenſible man willmake vpon the ſoddaine to a queſ tion whereofthat is the ſubiect: for, ſuch vnſtudyed replies expreſſe ſincerely the plaine and naturall conceptions, which they that make them, haue ofthe thinges they ſpeake of. And this of Quantity, is the laineſt and the frt. chat nature printeth invs, ofall the thinges ve he , feele, and conuerſe vith all; and that muſt ſerue for a ground vnto all our other inquiries and reſlections: for which cauſe , ve muſt be ſure not toreceiue it wreſted or diguiſed from its owne nature. Ifthen any one be asked; what Quantity there is in ſuch a thing, or hov greate it is; he vill preſently in his vnderſtanding compare It vith ſome other thing, ( equally knowne by both parties) that may ſerue fora meaſure vntoĩt; and then anſwere, thatit is as bigęe as it, or tvige as bigge, ornot halfe ſo bigge, or the like: in fine; that it is bigger or leſſer then an other thing, orequall to it. Itis of maine importance to haue this point throughly and clearely vnderſtood; thereforę it will not be amiſſe to turne it and veiwita little more particularly. Ifyou aske vhat Quantity there is, of ſuch a parcell of cloth, how much wood in ſucha piece of timber, how much gold in ſuch an ingott, how much vine in ſucha veſſell, how much time vas takenvp in ſuch an action; he that is to giue you an account of them, meaſureth them by elles, by feete, by inches, by poundes, by ounces, by gallons, by pintes, by daies, by houres, and the like; and then teller; you, how many ofthoſe parts, are in the whole that you enquire of. Which anſwere, euery man liuing will at the inſtant, vithout ſtudy, make to this queſtion; and with it, euery man that shallaske, will be fully appayed and ſatisfyed: ſo that it is moſ euident, it fully expreſſeth the notions of them both, and ofall mankind, in this particular. Vherefore, when we conſider that Quantity is nothing elſe, but the extenſion of a thing; and that this extenſion, is expreſſed by a determinate number of leſſer extenſions of the ſame nature; (which leſſer ones, are ſooner and more eaſily apprehended then greater; becauſe we are firſt acquainted and conuerſant vith ſuch; and our vnderſtanding graſpeth, weigheth and diſcerneth ſuch more ſteadily; and makethan exacter iudgement of them) and that ſuch leſſer ones are in the greater which ſ iey meaſure, as partes in a whole; and that the whole by com prehending thoſe partes, is a meere capacity to be diuided into them: we conclude , that Quantity or Biggneſſe, is nothing clſe but diuiſibility, and thata thing is bigge, by hauing a capacity to be diuided, or (Which is the ſame) to haue partes made of it. This is yet more euident ſif more may be) in Diſcrete Quantity (thatis, in number) then in continued Quantity, or extenſion. Forif we conſider any number whatſocuer, ẽ shallind the eſence of it, conſiſteth in a capacity of being reſolued and diuided into ſo man vnities, as are contained in it; which are the partes ofit. And this ſoœcies of Quantity being ſimpler, then the oher. ſerueth fora rule to determine it by: as we may obſcrue in the famiſiar anſeres to queſtions of continued Quãntiry, which expreſſe by number, the content ofit: as when one deliuereth the Quantity oba piece of ground, by ſucha number of furlonges, acars, perches, or the like. But we muſt take heed ofconceiuing, that thoſe partes, which we : conſider to diſcerne the nature of Quantity, are actually and really in the whole of any continued one that containeth them. Elles, feete, inches, are no more reall Entities in the whoſe that is meaſured by them, and that maketh impreſſions of ſuch notions in our vnderſtanding, then in our former example, colour, figure mellowneſſe, taſt, and the like are ſeuerall ſubſtances in the apple that affecterh our ſeuerall ſenſes with ſuch various impreſſions. It is but one wholr that may indeed be cutt into ſo many ſeuerall partes: but thoſe partes are not really there, till by diuiſion they are parcellod out: and then, the whole ſ(out of which they are made) ceaſeth to be any longer,; and the partes ſucceede in lieu of it; and are, euery one of them, a new whole. This truth, is euident out of the very definition we haue gathered of Quantity. For ſince it is Duiſibility (that is,a bare capacity to diuiſion) it followeth that it is not yet diuided: and conſequently that thoſe partes are not yetin it, which may be made ofit lor diuiſion, is the making to, or more thinges, of one. But becauſe this is a very greato controuerſy in ſchooles; and ſo important to be determined and ſettled, as without doing ſo, e shall be lyable to maine errors in ſearching the nature and operations of bodies, and that the whole progreſſe of our diſcourſe, will be vncertaine and vauering, if this principle and foundation be not firmely layed: we muſt apply our ucs ,to bring ſome more particular and immediate proofe of the verity of this aſſertion. Which we vill do , by shewing the inconuenience, impoſſibility, and contradiction, that the admittance of the other leadeth vnto. For if we allow actuall partes to be diſtinguished in Quantity, it vill follow that it is com poſed of points or indiuiſibles, which ve shall prooue to be impoſſible. The firſt will appeare thus: if Quantity vere diuided into all the partes into whichitis diuiſible, it would be diuided into indiuiſibles (for nothing diuiſible, and not diuided, would remaine init) butit is diſtinguished into the ſame partes, into whichit would be diuided, if it vere diuided into all the partes into whichitis diuiſible; there fore it is diſtinguished into indiuiſibles. The maior propoſition is euident to any man that hath eyes of vnderſtanding. The minor, is the confeſſionor rather the poſition of the aducrſary, when he ſayth that all its partes are actually diſtinguished. The conſequence cannot be calumniated, ſince that indiuiſibles, whether they be ſeperated or ioyned, are ſtill but indiuiſibles; though that which is compoſed of them be diuiſible. It muſt then be granted that all the partes which are in Quantity, are indiuiſibles; which partes being actually in it, and the whole being compoſed af theſe partes onely, it followeth, that Quantity is com poſed and made of indiuiſibles. If any should cauill atthe ſuppoſition, and ſay we ſtretch it further then they intend it, by taking all the partes to be diſtinguished; whereas they meane onely that there are partes actually in Quantity, abſtracting fromall: by reaſon that all, in this matter would inferre an infinity, which to be actually in any created thing, they will allow to be impoſſible. Our anſwere vill be, to repreſent vnto them how this is barely ſaid, without any ground or colour oſ reaſon, meerely to euade the inconuenience, that the argument driueth them vnto. For ifany partes be actually diſtinguished, why should not all be ſo? Vhat prerogatiue haue ſome that the others haue not? And how came they by it? f they haue theire actuall diſtinction out of theire nature of being partes, then all muſt enioy ita like, and allbe equally diſtinguished, as the ſuppoſition goeth: and they muſt all be indiuiſibles as e haue prooued. Beſides to preuent the cauill vpon the word all, ve may change the expreſſion of the Propoſition into a negatiue: for if they admitt ſ as they doe) that there is no part in Quantity, but is diſtinguished as farre as it may be diſtinguished, then the ſame concluſion followeth with no leſſe euidence; and all will prooue indiuiſibles, as before. Butit is impoſſible that indiuiſibles should make Quantity, for if they should, it muſt be done eyther bya finite and determinate number, or by an infinite multitude of them. If you ſay by a finite; lett vs take (forexample) three indiuiſibles, and by adding them together, lett vs ſuppoſea line to be compoſed, whoſe extent being onely longitude, ſt is the firſt and ſimplieſt ſpecies of Quantity, and therefore whatſoeuer is diuiſible into partes, muſt be at the leaſt a line. This line thus made, cannot be conceiued to be diuided into more partes then into three; ſince doing ſo you reduce it, into the indiuiſibles that compoſcd it. But Euclide hath demonſtratiuely prooued beyond all cauit , (in the tenth propoſition of his ſixt booke of Elements) that any line whatſocuer may be diuided into whatſoeuer number of partes; ſo thatif this be a line, it muſt be diuiſible into a hundred ora thouſand, ora million of partes: which being impoſſible in a line, that being diuided into three partes onely, euery one of thoſe three is incapable of further diuiſion it is euident, that neyther a line, nor any Quantity whatſoeuer, is compoſed or made of a determinate rumber of indiuiſibles. And ſince that this capacity of being diuiſible into infinite partes, is a property belonging to all extenſion ſfor Euclides demonſtration is vniuerſall) vee muſt needes confeſſe that itis the nature of indiuiſibles, when they are ioyned together, to be drowned in one another, for otherwyſe there would eltſ a kind of extenſion out of them, which would not haue that property; contrary to what Euclide hath demonſtrated. And fromhence it followeth that Quantity cannot be compoſed ofan infinite multitude of ſuch indiuiſibles va; this be the nature of indiuiſibles, though you putt neuer ſo greate a number B ij 5Quantit; not be poſed ol of them together, they vill ſtill drowne themſelues all in one indiuiſible point. For what difference can theire being infinite, bring to them, of ſuch force as to deſtroy theire eſſence and property: Ifyou but conſider how the eſſentiall compoſition of any multitude vhatſoeuer, is made by the continuall addition of vnities, till that number ariſe; it is euident in our caſe that the infinity of indiuiſibles muſt alſo ariſe, out of the continued addition of itill one indiuiſible to the indiuiſibles preſuppoſed: then lett vs apprehend a finite number of indiuiſibles, which ſ according as we haue prooued) do make no extenſion, but are all of them drowned in thè ſirſt; and obſeruing how the progeeſſe vnto an infinite multitude, goeth on by the ſteppes of one and one, added ſtill to this preſuppoſed number; we shall ſee, that euery indiuiſible added and conſequently the whole infinity, will be drowned in the firſt number, as that was in the firſt indiuiſible. Vhich vill be yet plainer, ifwe conſider that the nature of extenſion requireth that one parte be not in the ſame place, where the other is: then if this xtenſion be compoſed of indiuiſibles, lett vs take two pointes of place in which this extenſion is, and inquire whether the indiuiſibles that are in each one of theſe pointes, be finite or infinite. If itbe anſwered that they are finite, then the finite indiuiſibles in thoſe two pointes make an extenſion; which we haue prooued impoſſible. Butifthey be ſaid to be infinite; then infinite indiuiſibles are drowned in one point, and conſequently haue not the force to make extenſion, Thus then it remaineth firmely eſtablished, That Quantity is not compoſed of indiuiſibles ( neyther finite, nor infinite ones) and conſequently, that partes are not actually init. Yet before we leaue this point, although we haue already beene ſomewhat longabout it, I conceiue it vill not be tedious, ifwe be yet a litle longer, and bend our diſcourſe to remoouea difficulty that euen ſenſe it ſelfe ſeemeth to obiect vntovs. For doth not our eye euidently informe vs, there are fingers, handes, armes, legges, feete, toes and variety of other partes, in a mans body? Theſe are actually in him, and ſeeme to be diſtinct thinges in him, ſo euidently, that we cannot be perſuaded, but that we ſee, and feele, the diſtinction betweene dem: for euery one of them, hath a particular power of actuall working and doing what belongeth vntoits nature to do: each fingeris really there; the and is different from the foote; the legge from the arme; and ſo of the reſ. Are not theſe partes then actually and really in a mans body? And is not each of hem as really diſtinguished from any other? This appeareth at the firſi ſight to be an inſuperable obiection, becauſe of the confirmation and euidence that ſenſe ſeemeth to giue it. But looking neerely into the matter, we shall find that the difficulty ariſeth not from what ſenſe informeth vs of; but from our wrong applying the conditions of our notions vnto the thinges that make impreſſions vpon our ſenſe. Senſe iudgeth not which is a finger, which is a hand, or which is a foote. The notions agreeing to theſe wordes, as vellas the wordes themſelues, are productions of the vnderſtanding: which conſidering ſeuerall impre ſſions made vpon the ſenſe by the ſame thing as it hath a vertue, and poer to ſeuerall operations, frameth ſeuerall notions of it: as in our former example, it doth of colour, figure, taſt and the like, in an apple. Foras hel are not different bodies or ſubſtances, diſtinguished one from an other; but are the ſame one entire thing, working ſeuerally vpon the ſenſes, and that accordingly, maketh theſe different pictures in the mind; which are there as much diſtinguished, as ifthey were pictures of different ſubſtances. So, the partes which are conſidered in Quantity, are not diuerſe thinges: but are onely a vertue or power to be diuers thinges: vhich vertue, making ſeuerall impreſſions vpon the ſenſes, occaſioneth ſeuerall notions in the vnderſtanding: and the vnderſtanding is ſo much the more prone to conceiue thoſe pages as diſtinct thinges, by how much Quęntity is neerer to be diſtihct thinges, then the qualities of the apple are. For Quantity, is a poſſibility to be made diſtinct thinges by diuiſion: whereas the others, are buta vertue to do diſtinct thinges. And yet (as we haue touched aboue) nothing can be more manifeſt, then that if Quantity be diuiſibility ( which is a poſſibility, that many thinges may be madè of it) theſe partes are not yet diuers thinges. So that, if( for example) a rodde be layed before vs, and halfe of it be hid from our ſight, and the other halfe appeare; itis not one part or thing that sheweth it ſelfe, and an other part or thing that doth not shew itſelfe: butit is the ſame rodde or thing, which sheweth it ſelfe according to the poſſibility of being one ne thing, but doth not shew it ſelfe according to the poſſibility of being the other of the to thinges, it may be made by- diuiſion. Vhich example, if it be well conſidered will make it much more eaſily ſinke into vs, thata hand, or eye, or foote, is nota diſtinct thing by it ſelfe; but that it is the man, according as he hath a certaine vertue or power in him to diſtinct operations. For if you ſeuer any of theſe partes from the whole body, the hand can no more hold, nor the eye ſee; nor the foote walke; which are the powers that eſentially conſſitute them to be what they are:and therefore they are no longer a hand, an eye, ora foote. ] Now then ro come to the obiection; lett vs examine how farre, ſenſe may be allowed to be iudge in this dificulty: and we shall find, that ſenſe cannot determine any one part in a body: forif itcould, it would preciſely tell, here that part beginneth or endeth: but itbeing agreed vpon, that it beginneth and endeth in indiuiſibles; itis certaine, that ſenſe cannot determine of them. Ifthen ſenſe cannot determine any one part, how shallit ſee that it is diſtinguished from all other partes ? Againe; conſidering that all that vhereof ſenſe 5 capable, is diuiſible, it tilltellethvs, that in allit ſeeth, there are more partes then one: and therefore it can not diſcerne, norinforme vs of any that is one alone: nor knoweth what it is to be one; for it neuer could diſcerne it: but what is many, is many ones and can not be knowne, b that, which knoweth not, hat it is to be one: and conſequently oſ can not tellevs, that there are many. Wherefore itis euident, that we may not rely vpon ſenſe for this queſtion. And as forreaſon, she hath already giuen her verdict. So that nothing remaineth but to shew, why we talke as we do, in ordinary dſcouſe, of many partes: and that what e ſay in that kind, is true, notwithſtanding the vnity of the thing. Which vill appeare plainely, if we conſider that our vnderſtanding hath a cuſtome for the better diſcerning of thinges, to impoſe vpona thing as it is vnder one notion, the excluſion of it ſelfas it is vnder other notions. And this is euident vnto all ſchollers, when the marke of excluſion is expreſſely putt: as when they ſpeae ofa white thing, adding the reduplication, as it is white Fwhich excludeth all other conſiderations of that thing, beſides the whiteneſſe of it: but when it cometh vnder ſome particular name of the thing, it may deceiue thoſe that are not cunning: though indeede, moſt men diſcouer it in ſuch names as we callabſfracted; as humanity, animality, and the like. But it eaſily deceiueth when it cometh in concrete names; as it doth in the name of Part in generall, or in the names of particular partes; asa hand, an eye, aninch, an elle, and others of the like nature: for as you ſee that a part excludeth both the notion of the whole, and of the remaining partes: ſo doth a hand, an eye, an elle, exclude all the reſt of that thing, whereof the hand is a hand, and the elle is an elle, and ſo forth. Now then, as euery man ſeeth euidently that it can not be ſaid; the all as it is white is plaſter or ſtone: no more can it be ſaid, that the hand ofa manis a foote; becauſe the word hand ſignifieth as much in it ſelfe, as if the man were taken, by reduplication, to be the man as he is hand, oras he hath the power of holdin g. So likeviſe, in the rodde we ſpoke of before; it can not be ſaid rhat the part ſeene is the part vnſeene; becauſe the part ſeene, ſignifieth the rodde asit is a poſſibility to be made by diuiſion ſuch a thing, as it appeareth to the ſight And thus it is cleare how the difficulty of this point, ariſeth out of the wrongfull applying the conditions of our notions, and of names, to the obiects and thinges which we know: where of we gaue varning in the begining. After i there remaineth no more to be ſaid of this ſubie&, but to enumerate the ſeuerall ſpecieſes of Quantity, according to that diuiſion which Logitians for more facility of diſcourſe haue made of it. Namely, theſe i magnitudine, place, motion, time, number, and weight Ofwhich, the to firſt are permanent, and lye ſtill expoſed 1o the pleaſure of whoſoeuer hathi a mind to take a ſuruay of them. Vhich he may do by meaſuring what partes they are diuiſible into, how many elles, feete, inches, a thing is long broad or deepe, how reat a place is; whetherit be not bigger or leſſer then ſuch another, and by ſuch conſiderations as theſe, hich do all agree in this, that they expreſſe the eſſence ofthoſe two ſpecieſes of Quantity, to conſiſt in a capacity of being diuided into partes. The two next; motion and time; though they be ofa ſleeting propriety, yetitis euident that in regard of theire originall and e ſſentiall nature, they are nothing elſe buta like diuiſibility into partes; which is meaſured by paſſing ouer ſo great orſo litle diſtance; and by yeares, dayes, houres, minutes, and the like. Number ve alſo ſee is of the ſame nature; for itis diuiſible into ſo many determinate partes, and is meaſured by vnities, or by leſſer numbers ſo or ſo often contained ina propoſed greater. And the like is euident of weight, whichis diuiſible into poundes, ounces, drammes, or graines; and by them is meaſured. So that looking ouer all the ſeuerall ſpecieſes of Quantity, itis euident, our definition ofit isa true one, and expreſſeth fully the eſſence of it, hen we ſay it is diuiſibility, ora capacity to be diuided into partes: and that no other notion whatſoeuer, beſides this, reacheth the nature of it. THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of Rarity and Denſity.  INTE ND in this Chapter to looke as farre as Ican into the õV nature and cauſes of the to firſt differences of bodies, 3&& which follow out of Quantity as it concurreth with ſubſtance to make a body: for, the diſcouery of them, and of the various proportions of them among themſelues, vill be a great and important ſteppe in the iourney we are going. But the ſcarcity of our language is ſuch, in ſubiets remooued from ordinary conuerſation, ( though in others, Ithinke none is more copious or expreſſise ) as affordeth vs not apt wordes of our owne to expreſſe ſigni cantly ſuch notions as I muſt buſie my ſelfe about in this diſcourſe. Therefore I will preſume to borrow them from the Larine ſchoole, where there is muchadoe about them. I vould expreſſe the difference betweene bodies, that vnder the ſame meaſures and outward bulke, haue a greater thinneneſſe and expanſion, or thickneſſe and ſolidity, one then an other; which termes, ( orany Ican find in English) do not ſignify fully thoſe aſſections of Quantity thatI intend here to declare: therefore I will do it vnder the names of Rarity and Denſity; the true meaning of It is euident vnto vs, that there are different ſortes of bodics, of which though you take equall quantities in one regard, yet they vill be vnequalſ in an other. Theire magnitudes may be the ſame, but theire weights ill be different; or contrariviſe, theire weights being equall, theire outward meaſures will not be ſo. Take a pinte of ayre; and veigh it againſt a pinte of ater, and you vill ſce the ballance of the laſt goe downe amaine: but ifyou driue out the ayre by fillii gthe pinte with lead, the other pinte in which the water is, vill riſe againe as faſt: vhich if you poure out, and fill that pinte vith quickeſiluer, you vill perceaue the lead to be much lighter: and againe, you vill find a pinte of gold heauier then ſo much Mercury. And in like manner, if you take na; of the heauy bodies iill they agree in veight vith the lighter, they vill take vp and fill different proportions, and partes of the meaſure that shall containe them. But from whence this effect ariſeth, is the difficulty that ve would lay open. Our meaſures tellvs theire quantities are equall; and reaſon aſſureth vs, there can not be two bodies in one and the ſame place; therefore when we ſee that a pinte ofone thing outweigheth a pinte of an other that is thinner, we muſt conclude oat there is more body compacted together in the heauy thing then in the light: for elſe ho could ſo litle ofa ſolide or denſe thing, be ſtretched out, to take vp ſo reat roome, as we ſee in a baſen of water that being rarifyed into ſmoake or ayre, filleth a whole chamber? and againe ,shrinke backe into ſo litle roome, as vhen it returneth into water, oris contracted into yce? But how this compre henſion of more body in equall roome is efſected, doth not a litle trouble Philoſophers. To ſind a way that may carry vs through theſe difficulties that ariſe out of the Rarity and Derſity of bodies, lett vs do as Altronomers when they enquire the motions of the Spheres and Plancts: they take all the Phenomena or ſeuerall appearances of them to our eyes; and then attribute to them ſuch orbes, courſes, and periodes, as may ſquare and fitt with cuery one of them; and by ſuppoſing them, they can exactly calculate allthat will euer after happen to them in theire motions. So lett vs take into our conſideration the cheife properties of rare and denſe bodies, and then caſt with our ſelues to find our an hypoihcſis, or ſuppoſition (if it be poſſible) that may agree with them all. Firſt, it ſcemeth vnto vs that denſe bodies haue theire partes more cloſe and compacted, then others haue, that are more rare and ſubtile. Secondly they are more heauy, then rare ones. Againe, the rare are more eaſily diuided :hen the denſejbodies: for water, oyle, milke, honey, and ſuch like ſubſtances vill not onely yield eaſily to any harder thing that shall make its way through them, but they are ſo apt to diuition and to looſe theire continuity, that theire owne veights vill ouercome and breake it: whereas in iron, gold, marble, and ſuch denſe bodies, a much greater weightand force, is neceſſary to worke that effect. And indeed if wee looke well into it, we shall find that the rarer thinges, are as diuiſible in a leſſer Quantity, as the more denſe are in a greater: and the ſame force will breake the rarer thing into more and leſſer partes, then it will an equall one that is more denſe. Take a ſticke of light wood of ſuch 2 biggeneſe that being a foote long, you may breake it with your handes, and an other of the ſame biggeneſſe, but of a more heauy and compacted wood, and you shall not breake it, though it be to foote long: and with equall force you may breake a loafe of bread into more and leſſe partes, then a lumpe of lead that is of the ſame bi geneſſe. Vhich alſo will reſiſt more to the diuiſion of fire (the ſubrileĩt diuider that is) then ſo much water vill; for the litle atomes of fire (which we shall diſcourſe of hereafter) will pierce and cutt out in the vater, almoſt as litle partes as themſelues, and mingling themſelues with them they vill ly laway together, and ſo conuert the whole body of water into ſubtile ſmoake: whereas the ſame Agent, after long working vpon lead, will bring it into no leſſe partes then ſmall graines of duſt, which it calcineth it into. And gold, that is more dentt then lead, reſiſteth peremptorily all the diuiding power f fire; and vill not at all be reduced into a calx or lime by ſuch operation as reduced lead into it. So that remembring, how the nature of Quantiy is Diuiſibility; and conſidering that rare thinges are more diuiſible then denſe ones; we muſt needes acknouledęe that the nature of Quantity is ſome way more perfectly in thinges that are rare, then in thoſe that are denſe. On the other ſide, more compacted and denſe thinges, may happily ſeeme to ſome to haue more Quantity then thoſe farm rare; and that it is but shruncke together; which may be ſtretched out and driuen into much greater dimenſions then the Quantity of rare thinges, taking the quantities of each ofthem equall in outward appearance. As gold may bę beaten into much more and thinner eate, then an equall bulke of ſyluer or leadl Awaxe candle vill burne longer with equall light, then a tallow candle of the ſame biggeneſſe; and conſequently, be conuerted into a greater Quantity of ſire and ayre. Oyle will make much more flame then ſpiritt of wine, thatis farre rarer then it. Theſe and ſuch like conſiderations, haue much perplexed Philoſophers, and haue driuen them into diuerſe thoughts to find out the reaſons of them. Some obſeruing that the diuiding ofa body into litle artes, maketh it leſſe apt to deſcend, then when ĩt is in greater; haue belceved the whole cauſe of litghneſſe and rarity to be strined from diuiſion. As for example, they find that lead cuttinto litle pieces, vill not goe downe ſo faſt in water, as whenit is in bulke: and it may be reduced into ſo ſmall atomes, that it will for ſome ſpace ſvimme vpon the water like duſt of wood. l Vhich aſſumption is prooued by the greate Galileus; vnto whoſe excellent witt and admirable induſtry the vorld is beholding, not onely for his wonderfull diſcoueries made in the heauens, bur alſo for his accurate and learned declaring of thoſe very thinges that lye vnder our feete. He, about the 90 page of his firſt Dialogue of motion, doth clearly demonſtrate how any reall medium muſtof neceſſity reſiſt more the deſcent of a litle piece of lead, or any other weighty matter, then it woulda greater piece: and the reſiſtence ill be greaterand greater as the pieces are leſſerand leſſer. So that, as the pieces are made leſſe, they will in the ſame medium ſinke the ſlover; and do ſeeme to haue acquired a newnature of lightneſſe by theire diminution: not onely of hauing leſſe weight in them then they had, as halfe an ounce is leſſe then a whole ounce: but alſo of hauing in themſelues a leſſe proportion of weight to theire bulke then they had, as a pound of corke, is in regard of its magnitude lighter then a pound o lead: ſo as they conclude, that the thing whoſe continued partes are the leſſer, is in its owne nature the lighter and the rarer; and other thinges whoſe continued partes are greater, they be heauier and denſer. But this diſcourſe reachethnot home: for byit, the weight ofany body being diſcouered by the proportion ithath to the medium, in whichit deſcendeth, it muſteuer ſuppoſe a body lighter then it ſelfe in which it may ſinke and goe to the bortome. Now of that lighter body, I enquire what maketh it be ſo; and you muſt anſwere by what you haue concluded, that it is lighter then the other, becauſe the artes of it are leſſe, and more ſeuered from one another: for if they e as cloſe together, theire diuiſion auayleth them nothing, ſince thinges ſticking faſt together, do workeas if they were butone, and ſo a pound of lead thoughit be filed into ſmall duſt, if it be compacted hard together, will ſinke as faſt as ifit were in one bulke. Nov then alloing the litle partes to be ſeperated, Iaske, vhat other body ſilleth vp the ſpaces betweene thoſe litle partes of the medium in which your heauy body deſcended: For if the partes of vater are more ſeuered then the partes of lead, there muſt be ſome other ſubſtance to keepe the partes of it a ſunder: lett vs ſuppoſe this to be ayre: and Iaske, whether an equall part of ayre, be as heauy as ſo much vater? or whether it be not? If you ſay, it is,; then the compound of water and ayre, muſt be as heauy as lead; ſeeing that theire artes, one with an other, are as much compacted as the partes of hada For there is no difference whether thoſe bodies, whoſe litle partes are compacted together be ofthe ſame ſubſtance, or of diuers, or whether the one be diuided into ſmaller partes thenthe other, or no, (ſo they be of equall weights) in regard of making the whole equally heauy: as you may experience, if you mingle pinneduſt vitha ſand of equall weight, though it be beaten into farre ſmaller diuiſions then the pinneduſt, and putt them in a bagge together. But ifyou ſay that ayre is not ſo heauy as water, it muſt be, becauſe euery part of ayre hach againe its partes morẽ ſeuered by ſome other body, then the partes of water are ſeuered by àyre. And then, I make the ſame inſtance ofthat body which ſeuereth the partes of ayre. And ſo, att the laſt ( ſince there can not actually be an infinite proceſſe of bodies one lighter thenan other) you muſt come to one, whoſe litle panes filling the pores and ſpaces between the partes ofthe others, aue no ſpaces in themſelues to be filled vp. : But as ſoone as you acknowledge ſuch a body tobe lighter and rarer then all the reſt, you contradict and deſtroy all you ſaũd before. For by reaſon of its hauing no pores, it followeth by your rule, that the litle partes of it muſt be as heauy, if not heauier, then the litle partes of the ſame bigneſſe of that body whoſe pores it filleth; and conſequently it is proued by the experience we alleadged of pinneduſt mingled with ſand that the litle partes of it, can not by theire mingling with the partes of the body in which it is immediately contained, make that lighter then it would be iftheſe litle partes were not mingled with it. Nor would both theire partes mingled with the body vhich immediately containeth them, make that body lighter. And ſo proceeding on in the ſame ſort through all the mogled bodies, till you come tò the laſt, that is immediately mingled with vater; you vill make water nothing the lighter, for being mingled with all theſe; and by conſequence it should be as heauy and as denſe as lead. Now that which deceiued the authors of this opiniion, was that they had nota right intelligence ofthe cauſes which made litle partes ofbodies ( naturally heauy ) deſcend ſlowly, in regard of the velocity of greater partes of the ſame bodies deſcending: the doctrine of which we intend to deliuer hereafter. Others therefore perceiuing this rule to fallshort, haue endeauoured to piece it out by the mixtion of vacuity among bodies; beliening itis that which maketh one rarer then an other. Vhich mixtion they do not putt alayes immediate to the maine body they conſider: but if it haue otherrarer and lighter bodies mingled ith it, they conceiue this mixtion immediate onely to the rareſt, or lighteſt. As for example; a cryſtall being lighter and conſequently rarer then a diamond, they vill not ſay ſat there is more vacuity ina' cryſtallthen in a diamond, but that the pores ofa cryſtallare greater, and that conſequently there is more ayre in a cryſtall to fillthe pores of it, then is in a diamond; and the vacuities are in the ayre, vhich abounding ina cryſtall, more then ina diamond, maketh that lighterand rarer then this, by the more vacuities that are in the greater Quantity of ayre which is migled vith it But againſt this ſuppoſition, a powerfull aduerſary is vrged: for Ariſtorle, in his 44 booke of Phyſickes, hath demonſtrated that thère can be no motion in vacuity. Itis true, they endeauour to euade his demonſtration (as not reaching home to theire ſuppoſition) by acknovledging it to be an euident one in ſuch a vacuity as he there ſpeaketh of, which he ſuppoſed to be ſo great a one that a body may ſimme in itas in an ocean, and not touch or be neere any other body: whereas this opinion excludeth all ſuch vaſt inanity, and admitteth no vacuities but ſo litle ones as no body whatſocuer can come vnto but willbe bigger then they; and conſequently, muſt on ſome ſide or other touch the corporeall partes which thoſe vacuities diuide; for they are the ſeperations of the leaſt partes , that are, or can be, actually diuided from one an other: which partes, muſt of neceſſity touch one an other on ſome ſide; or elſe, they could not hang together to compoſe one ſubſtance; and therefore, the diuiding vacuities, muſt be leſſe then the diuided partes. And thus, no body vill euer be in danger of floating vp and downe without touching any thing: which is the diſficulty hat Ariſtotle chiefely impugneth. Iconfeſſel should be very glad that this ſuppoſition might ſerue our turne, and ſaue the Phœnomena that appeare among bodies, through theire variety of Rarity and Denſity: which if it might be, then would Iſtraight go on to the inquiring after what followed out of this ground, as Aſtronomers (to vſe our former ſimilitude) do calculate ſe future appearances of the celeſtiall bodies out of thoſe motions and orbes they aſſigne vnto the heauens. Foras this apprehenſion of vacuity in bodies is very eaſy and intelligibile: ſo the other (whichIconceiue to be the n of the caſe) is exceedingly abſtracted, and one of the moſt difficult pointes in all the Metaphyſickes: and therefore I would ſ(if it were poſſible) auoyde touching vpon it in this diſcourſe, which I deſire should be as plaine and eaſy, and as much remooued from ſcholaſticke termes, as may be. But indeed, the inconueniences that follow out of this ſuppoſition of vacuities, are ſo great, as it is impoſſible by any meanes to ſlide them ouer. As for example; lett vs borrow of Galilæus the proportion of weight betweene water and ayre. He sheweth vs how the one is 400 times heauyer then the other. And Marinus Ghetaldus teacheth vs that gold is 19 times heauyer then water: ſo that gold muſt be 7600 times heauyer then ayre. Now then conſidering that nothing in a body can weigh, but the ſolide partes ofit; it followeth that the proportionof the partes of gold ina ſphere of an inch diameter, is to the partes of ayre ofa like dimenſion as 7600is to one. Therefore in ayre it ſelfe the vacuities that are ſuppoſed init, will be to the ſolide partes of itin the ſame proportion as 7600 to one. Indeed, the proportion of difference will be greater: for euen in gold many vacuities muſt be admitted, as appeareth by the heating ofit which sheweth that in euery the leaſt part, it is exceeding porous. Butraccording to this rate, without preſſing the inconuenience any further, the ayre will by this reckoninglappeare to be like a nett, whoſe holes and diſtances, are to the lines and thriddes, in the proportion of 7600 to one; and ſo, would be lyable to haue litle partes of itè body ſwimme in thoſe greater vacuities, contrary to what they ſtriue to auoyde. Which would be exceedingly more, ifwe found on the one ſide any bodies heauyer and denſer then gold, and that were ſo ſolide as to exclude all vacuities; and on the other ſide should ballance them with ſuch bodies as are lighter and rarer then ayre; as fire is, and as ſome vill haue the æther 10 be. Butalready the diſproportion is ſo great, and the vacuity ſo ſtrangely exceedeth the body in which it is, as were 1oo great an abſurdity to be admitted. And beſides, it would deſtroy all motion of ſmall bodies in the ayre, ifit be true (as Ariſtotle hath demonſtrated in the 44 booke of his Phyſickes) that motion can not be made, but among bodies, and not in vacuo. Againe, if rarity were made by vacuity, rare bodies could not be gathered together; ithout looſing theire rarity and becoming denſe. The contrary of which, ve learne by conſtant experience; as when the ſmith and glaſemender, driue theire white and fury fires, (as they terme them;) when ayre pierceth moſt in the sharpe wind; and generally we ſee that more ofthe ſame kind of rare bodies, in leſſe place, worketh moſt efficaciouſly according to the nature that reſulteth out of that degree ofrarity. Which argueth, that euery litle part is as rare as it as before ( for elſe it would looſe the vertue of vorking according to that nature;) but that by theire being crowded together, they exclude all other bodies that Leſore aid mediate betweene the litle partes of theire maine body, and ſo, more partes being gotten together in the ſame place then formerly there were, they worke more forcibly. Thirdly, if ſuch vacuities were the cauſe of rarity; it would follow that fluide bodies being rarer then ſolide ones, they would be of themſelues ſtanding, like nettes or cobbewebbes: whereas contrariwiſe, we ſee theire natures are to runne together, and to fillvp euery litle creeke and corner: which effect, following out of the very nature of the thinges themſelues; muſt needes exclude vacuities out of that nature. And laſtly, ifit be true ſ(as we haue shewed in the laſt Chapter) that there are no actuall partes in Quantity; it followeth of neceſſity, that allQuantity muſt of it ſelſe.be one; as Me taphyſickes teach vs: and then, no diſtance can be admitted betweene one Quantity and an other. And truly, if I vnderſtand Ariſtotle right; he hath perfectly demonſtrated, that no vacuity is poſſible in nature; ncither great nor litle: and conſequently, the whole machine rayſed vpon that ſuppoſition, muſt be ruinous. His argument is to this purpoſe. What is nothtng, can not haue partes: but vacuum is nothing ſ becauſe as the aducrſaries conceiue it, vacuum is the vant ofa corporeall ſubſtance in an encloſing hòdy, within whoſe ſides nothing is, whereas a certaine body might be contained whithin them, as ifin a paile or bole of a gallon, there vere neither milke, nor water, norayre, nor any other body whatſoeuer) therefore, vacuum can not haue partes. Yet thoſe who admitt it do putt it expreſſely for a ſpace; which doth eſſentially include partes. And thus they putt two contradictories, nothing and partes, that is, partes. and no partes; or ſomething and nothing, in'the ſame propoſition. And this, I conceiue to be abſolutely vnauoydable. PFor theſe reaſons therefore, I muſt entreate my readers fauour, that he ill allow me to touch vpon metaphyſickes a litle more then I deſire or intended: but it shall be no otherviſe, then as is ſaid, of the dogges by the riuer Nilus ſide; who being thirſty, lappe haſtily of the vater, onely to ſerue theire neceſſity as they runne along the shore. Thus then; remembring how wee determined that Quantity is Diuiſibility: it followeth, that if beſides Quantity there be a ſubſtance or thing which is diuiſible,; that thing, if it be condiſtinguished from its Quantity or Diuiſibility, muſt of it ſelfe be indiuiſible: orſ to ſpeake more properly) it muſt be, not diuiſible. Putt then ſuch ſubſtance to be capable of the Quantity of the whole world orvniuerſe: and conſequenty, you putt it of it ſelfe indifferent to all, and toany part of Quantity: for in it, by reaſon of the negation of Diuſſibility, there is no variety of partes, whereof one should be the ſubiect of one part of Quantity, or another of another; or that one should be a capacity of more, another of leſſe. This then being ſo, wee haue the ground of more or leſſe proportion between ſubſtance and quantity: for if the whole quantity o the vniuerſe bee putt into ĩt, the proportion of Quantity 1o the capacity ofihat ſubſtance, vill bee greater then if but hafe that quantity were imbibed in the ſame ſubitance. And becauſe proportion changeth on both ſides by the ſingle change of onely one ſide: it followeth that in the latter, the proportion of that ſubſtance to its Quantity, is greater; and that in the former, it is leſſe; howbeit the ſubſtance in ĩt ſelfe be indiuiſible. VWhat vee haue ſaid thus in abſtract, vill ſinke more eaſily into vs if we apply it to ſome particular bodies here among vs, in which we ſee a difference of Rarity and Denſity; as to ayre, vater gold , or the like, and examine ifthe effects that happen to them, do follow out of this diſproportion betweene ſubſtance and Quantity. For example lett us conceiue that allthe Quantity of the world were in one vniforme ſubſtance, then the hole vniuerſe would be in one and the ſame degree of Rarity ad Denſity: lett that dogree, be the degree of vater; it vill then follow, that in what part ſoeuer there happeneih to be a change from this degree, that part illnot haue that proportion of quantity to its ſubſtance, which the quantity of the hole vorld had to the preſuppoſed vniforme ſubſtance. But ifit happeneth to haue the degree of rarity which is in the ayre, it will then haue more quantity in proportion to its ſubſtance, then would be due vnioĩt according to the preſuppoſed proportion of the quantity of the vniuerſe to ſe foreſaid vniforme ſubſtance; which in this caſe is as it were the ſtandard to try all other proportions by. And contrariviſe, if it happeneth to haue the degree of Denſity whichis found in Earth or in gold, then it will haue leſſe quantity in proportion to its ſubitance, then would be due vnto it according to the fore ſaid proportion, or common ſtandard. No to proceede from hence, with examining the effects which reſult out of this compounding of Quantity with ſubſtance, ve may firſt conſider, that the definitions which Ariſtoile hath 4iuen vs of Rarity and Denſity, are the ſame wee driue att: hee telleth vs, that that body is rare whoſe quantity is more, and its ſubſtance leſe,; that, contrariviſe denſe, where the ſubſtance is more and the quantity leſſe. Now if wee looke into the proprieties of the bodies wee haue named, or ofanyothers, wee shall ſee them all follow cleerely ous oftheſe deſinitions. For firſt, that one is more diffuſed, an other more compacted; ſuch diffuſion and compaction, ſeeme to be the very natures of Rarity and Denſity, ſuppoſing them to be ſuch as we haue defined them to be; ſeeingthat, ſubſtance is more diffuſed by hauing more partes, or by being in more partes; and is more compacted by the contrary. And then, that rare bodies are more diuiſible then denſe ones, you ſee is coincident into the ſame conceit with their diffuſion and compaction. And fromhence againe it followeth, that they are more eaſily diuided in great,and likeviſe, that they are by the force of naturall Agents diuiſible into leſſer partes: for both theſeſthat is facility ofbeing diuided, and eaſye diuiſibility into leſſer partes) are contained in being more diuiſibſe; or in more enioying the effect of quantity, which is diuiſibility. From this againe followeth, that in rare bodies there is leſſe reſiſtance to the motion of an other body through it, then in denſe ones; and therefore a like force paſſeth more eaſily through the one, then through the other. Againe; rare bodies are more penetratiue and actiue then denſe ones; becauſe beingſ by theire ouerproportion of quantity) eaſily diuiſible into ſmall partes, they can runne into euery litle pore, and ſo incorporate themſclues better into other bodies, then more denſe ones can. Light bodies likewiſe muſt be rarer, becauſe moſt diuiſible, if other circumſtances concurre equally. Thus you ſee decyphered vnto your hand, the firſt diuiſion of bodies flowing from Quantity as it is ordained to ſubſtance for the compoſitionòf a bodie: for ſince the definition ofa bodys; 4 ihing mhich hath partes ; and quantity is that, by whichit hath paries; and the firſt propriety of quantity is, to be bigger or leſſe; and conſequently the firſt differences of haueing partes, are to haue biggeror leſſe, more or fewer; what diuiſion of a body can be more ſimple, more plaine, or more immediate, then to diuide it by its Quantiy as making it to haue bigger orleſſe, more or fewer partes in proportion to iteſub ſtance: Neithet can Iĩuſtly be blamed for uching thus on Metaphyſickes, to explicate the nature of theſe two kindes of bodies; for Metaphyſickes being the ſcience aboue Phyſickes, it belongeth vnto her to declare the principles of Phyſickes: ofwhich, theſe wee haue now in hand, are the very ſirſt ſteppe. But much more, if wee conſider that the compoſition of quantity with ſubſtance, is purely Metaphyſicall, vee muſt neceſſarily allow the inquiry into the nature of Rarity and Denſity, to be wholy Metaphyſicall; ſeeing that the eſſence of Rarity and Denſity, ſtandeth in the proportion of quantity to ſubſtance, if we beleeue Ariſtorle, ſ the greateſt maſter that euer was, of finding out definitions and notions ) and truſt to the vncontroulable reaſons we haue broughtin the precedent diſcourſe. This explication of Rarity and Denſity, by the compoſition of ſubſtance with quantity, may peraduenture giue litle ſatisfaction vnto ſuch as are not vſed to raiſe theire thoughts aboue Phyſicall and naturall ſpeculations: who are apt to conceiue, there is no other compoſition orreſolution, but ſuch as our ſenſes she vs in compounding and diuiding of bodies according to quancariue partes. Now this obligeth vs to shew that ſuch a kind of compoſition and diuiſion as this, muſt neceſſarily be allowed of, euen in that courſe of doctrine which ſeemes moſt contrary to ours. To which purpoſe, lett vs ſuppoſe that the poſition of Democritus or of Epicurus is true; to witi, that the originall compoſition ofall bodies, is out ofvery litle ones of various figures; all of them, indiuiſible, not Mathematically, but Phyſically: and that this infinite number of indiuiſibles, doth floate in an immenſe ocean of vacuum or imaginary ſpace. In this poſition, lett any man who conceiueth theire groundes may be maintained, explicate how one of theſe litle bodies is mooued. For, taking two partes of vacuum, in which this body ſucceſſiuely is, itiscleare, that really, and not onely in my vnderſtanding, it is a difference in the ſaid body, to be now here, now there: wherefore, when the body is gone thither, the notion of being here, is no more in the body, and conſequently, is diuided from the body. And therefore, when the body was here; there was a compoſition, betweene the body, and its being here: which, ſeeing it can not be betwixt two partes of Quantity, muſt of neceſſity be ſuch a kind of compoſition, as wee purt betweene quantity and ſubftance. And certainely, lett men wracke theire braines neuer ſo much, they vill neuer be able to shew how motion is made, without ſome ſuch compoſition and diuiſion, vpon vwhot groundes ſoeuerthey proceede. : And Andifthenthey tell vs, that they vnderſtand not how there can be a diuiſibility betweene ſubſtance and quantity; wee may reply, that to ſuch a diuiſibility to thinges are required firſt that the notlons of ſubſtance and quantity be different; ſecondly, that the one of them may be changed without the other. As forthe firſt, itis moſt euident wee make an abſolute diſtinction betweene theire two notions; both, when wee ſay that Socrates was biggera man then a boy, and when wee conceiue that milke or water Eſ. it boyleth, orwine whiles it orketh, ſo as they runne ouer the veſſels they are in; are greater and poſſeſſe more place then when theyere coole and quier, and filled not the veſſell to the brimme. For howſoeuer, witty explications may ſeeme to euade, that the ſame thing is now greater, now leſſer, yettit can not be auoyded, but that ordinary men, who Iooke not into Phyloſophy, do both conceiue it to be ſo, and in theire familiar diſcourſe expreſſe it ſo, which they could not do, ifthey had not different notions of the ſubſtance, and of the quantity of the thing they ſpeake of. And though wee had no ſuch euidences, the very names and definitions of them would putt it beyond ſtrife: all men calling ſubſtance, a thing; quantity, biggeneſe: and referring a thing, to Being; as who would ſay; at whichis: but biggeneſſel, to ſome other of like nature, vnto whichit is compareds as, thatit is halfe as bigge, twice as bigge, orthe like. This then being vnauoydable, that the notions are diſtinguished; there remaineth no difficulty, but onely in the ſecond, namely that the one may be changed, and the other not. Which reaſon and demonſtration do conuince, as wee haue shewed. Wherefore, if any shall yett further reply, that they do not vnderſtand how ſuch change is made; wee shall anſwere, by asking them whether they know; how the change of being ſometimes here, ſometimes there is made by locall inotion in vacuum, withouta change in the body mooued. Vhich queſtion, if they can not ſatisfy, they muſt eyther deny that there is any locall motion in vacuum,; or elſe admitt a change in quantity, withouta change in ſubſtance; for this latter is as eiſently true, as they ſuppoſe the tormer to be; though the manner how they are eſſected, be alike obſcure in both, nd the reaſonof the obſcurity, the ſame in both. Vith which wee vill conclude the preſent Chapter; adding onely this note. That if all Phyſicall thinges and naturall changes do proceede out ofthe conſtitution ofrare and denſe bodies in this manner, as we do putt them, (as the worke wee haue in hand intendeth to shew) then, ſo manifold effects will ſo conuince the truth of this doctrine which wee haue declared, that there can remaine no doubt of it: neither can there be any, of the diuiſibility of quantity from ſubſtance: without which, this doctrine can not conſiſt. For it can not be vnderſtood, how there is a greater proportion of quantity then of D ſubſtance: or contrariwiſe, of ſubſtance then of quantity, if there be not a reall diuiſibility betweene quantity and ſubſtance. And much leſſe can it be concẽiued, that the ſame thing hath att one time a greater proportion of quantity, and att an other time a leſſe; if the greater or leſſer proportion, be not ſeperable from it; that is, ifthere be not a diuiſibility betwixt it and ſubſtance, as well as there are diſferent notions of them. Vhich to prooue by the proper principles belonging to this matter, would require vs to make a greater inroade into the very bowels of Metaphyſickes, and to take a larger circuite, then is fitting eyther for the ſubiect, or for the ntended breuity of this treatiſe. THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. of the foure firſt qualities : and of the foure Elements.  HE ſubiect of our diſcourſe hitherto, hath been three 1à7 ſimple notions; Quantity, Rarity, and Denſity. Nov it shall 77&be to inquire if by compounding theſe with grauity or  weight (Which isone of the ſpecieſes of Quaniisy aboue mentioned and ofwhich I shall ſpeake at lardge hereafter) wee may begett any further qualities, and ſo produce the foure firſt bodies , called Elements. In imitation of Logitians, who by compounding ſuch propoſitions as of themſelues are euident to mans nature aſſoone as hes are propoſed, do bring forth new knovledges: which thriddes they ſtilſentermixe and weaue together, till they grow into a faire piece. And thus the ſciencies tehy ſo much labour for, and that haue ſo reat an extent, do reſult out of few and ſimple notions in theire Beginninges But before wee fall to mingling and comparing them together, I thinke it will not be amiſſe to ſett downe, and determine what kind of thinges wee meane by rare and what by denſe, to the end that when the names are agreed vpon, wee may ſlippe into no error by miſtaking them. So then, although there be ſeuerall conſiderations, in regard of which, rarity and denſity may be differently attributed to bodies: yet becauſe mans diſcerning them, tobeable to diſcourſe accordingly fthem, is the principall reſpect for which theire denominations are to be allotted hem: hee may with reaſon call thoſe thinges denſe, wherein a man findeth a ſenſible dificulty to part them; and thoſe rare, where the reſiſtance is imperceptible. Andvnto theſe to notions of rarity and denſity, wee muſt allow a great latitude, farre from conſiſting inan indiuiſible ſtate; for ſeeing that rarefaction maketh a leſſer body equall to a bigger; and that all inequality betwixt two bodies, hath the conditions of a body; it followeth that the exceſſe of one body ouer an other, conſiſteth of infinite partes into which it might be diuided: and conſequently, that vhat is rarified, paſſeth as many degrees as the inequality orexceſſe hath partes. And the ſame law being in condenſation, both denſe and rare thinges muſt be acknowledged to be capable of infinite variety, and diuerſity of ſtates in regard of more and leſſe in the ſame kind. Theſe thinges being premiſed; and calling to mind thatit is the nature of denſity to make the partes ofa denſe thing compact, and ſticke together, and be hardly diuiſible; and on the contrary ſide, that it is the nature of rarity, to diffuſe and extenda rare thing, and to ten in x Hon neſſc i neſſe ai prepare and approach it to diuiſion, according to the proportion of bodies the degree of rarity which it hath; and that veight doth abound where there is exceſſe of denſity, and is very litle or none in exceſſe of rarity: wee may now begin in our imagination to putt theſe qualities into the ſcales one aganit an other, to ſee what effects they produce in bodies. And firſt, lett vs weigh grauity againſt denſity or ſticking together of partes: which ſticking or compactedneſſe being naturall to denſity, requireth ſome exceſſe of grauity in proportion to the denſity, or ſome other outward violence, to breake it. If then in æ denſe body the grauity ouercome the denſity,and do make the partes of it breake a ſunder, it vill draw them downewardes towards the center that grauity tendeth vnto, and villneuer lett them reſt till they come thither, vnleſſe ſome im pediment meete them by the way and ſtoppe theire iourney: ſo that ſucha body vill, as neere as poſſibly it can, lye in a perfect ſphericall figure inreſpect of the center; and the partes of it willbe changed and altered, and thruſt on any ſide that is the ready way thither; ſò that by the force of grauity working vpoi it, it will runne as farre as it meeteth with nothing to hinder it from attaining this ſphericall ſuperficies. Wherefore ſuch bodies, for ithe moſt part, haue noe ſertled outſide of theire owne; but do receiue theire figure and limits from ſuch letis as hinder them from attaining to that ſphericalneſſe they ayme att l Nov Ariſtorle ( whoſe definitions, are in theſe matters generally receiued, as fully expreſſing the notions of mankind) telleth vs, and our owne experience confirmeth it, that wee vſe to call thoſe thinges moiſt, which runne in ſuch ſort as wee haue here ſett downe, and that wee terme thoſe thinges dry, which haue a conſiſtence vithin themſclues; and which to enioya determinate figure, do not require the ſtoppe or hinderance of an other body to limit and circle them in: which will be the nature of thoſe that haue a greater proortion of denſity in reſpect of theire grauity. And thus, out of the compariſon of denſity with veight , wee haue found two more qualities then wee yett had mett withall, namely vetteneſſe and dryneſſe. Foralthougha body be denſe, (which of its owne nature, ſingly conſidered, would preſerue the continuity ofits partes, as making the body hardly diuiible; whereby n ould bę dry) yetifthe grauity that worketh vpon it, be in proportion greater then the denſity; it ill ſeuer the partes of it, and make them runne to the center, and ſo become ſiuide and moiſt: though not in ihe eminenteſt degree that may be of fluidity and moiſture; by reaſon that if the like oues ro porrion of grauity happen ina rare body, it vill there more powerfully worke its eſfect, then it can in a denſe body; becauſe a rare body will more eaſily obey, and yicld to the grauity that maſtereth it, then a denſe one vill; and conſcquently, vill be more fluide and moiſt then it. Now on the other ſide, in weighing rarity àgainſt grauity; if it happen that the rarity ouercome the grauity, then ihe grauity vill not change the ſigure of a body ſo proportioned, but what figure it hath from its proper naturall cauſes, the ſame will ſtill remaine with it: and conſcquently, ſuch a body will haue termes of its owne and vill not require an ambient body to limit, and circle ĩt in: which nature, wee call dry. But if the proportion of the grauity be the greater and do ouercome the rarity, then, by how much the rarity is greater, ſo much the more villthe grauity force it, to apply it ſelfe equally and onall ſides to the center: and ſucha body ur the more eaſily receiue iis figure from an other, and willbe leſſe able to conſiſt of it ſelfe: which proerties, wee attribute to wetteneſſe or moiſture. So that it appeareth, hou the qualities of wett andælry, which firſt wee found in thinges that vere denſe, are alſo common to that nature of bodies, which wee terme rare. And thus, by our firſt inquiry after what kind of bodies do reſult out of the compounding of rarity and denſity with grauity, wee diſcouer foure different ſortes: ſome denſc ones that are dry, and others likewiſe denſe that are moiſt: then againe, ſome rare ones that are likeviſe moiſt, and other rare ones that are dry. But wee muſt not reſt here: lett vs proceede a lirle further, to ſearch what other properties theſe foure kindes of bodies will haue; which wee shall beſt diſcouer, if wee apply them ſcuerally to ſome other compounded body (ofwhich nature, are all thoſe wee conuerſe with or ſee) and then conſider the effects which theſe do worke vpon it. To beginne with that, which wee ſaid, is ſo exceſſiuely rare that grauity hath no power ouer it. If vee looke vpon the multitude of litle partes it may be diuided into, whereof euery one vill ſubſiſt by it ſſre ( for wee haue already prooued it dry) and then ſuppoſe them to be mooued ith force and ſtrength againſt the body wee apply them to: it muſt neceſſarily follov, æ they vill forcibly gett into the porouſneſſe of it, and paſſe with violence betweene part and part, and of neceſſity ſeperate the partes ofthat thing one from an o:her; as a knife or vedge dotha ſolide ſubſtance, by hauing theire thinneſt partes preſſed into it: ſo that iſin the compounded thing, ſome partes be more weighty, others more light, ſas of neceſſity there muſt be) the heauieſt vill all fall loweſt, the lighteſt will iy vppermoſt, and thoſe whichare of a meane nature betweene the two extremes, vill remaine in the middle. In ſumme, by this action of an extreme rarę body vpon a compounded ore, all the partes of one kind that werę in the compounded one, vill be gathered into one place; and thoſe of diuers kindes into diuers places: which is the notion vhereby Ariſtotle hath expreſſed the nature of heate; and is an eſfect, which dayly experience in burning and boyling, teacheth vs to proceede from heate. And therefore wee can not doubt, but that ſuch extreme rare bodies are as well hoat as dry. DOn the other ſide, ifa denſe thing be applyed toa compound, it vill (becauſe it is weighty) preſſe it together: and if that application be continued on lſſties , ſo that noe part of the body thatis preſſed be free from the ſiege of the denſe body that preſſeth ĩt, it will forme it into a narrower roome, and keepe in the partes ofit, not permitting any of them to ſlippe out. So hat what thinges ſoeuer it ſinderh within its power to maſter, be they light or heauy, orof what contrary natures ſoeuer, it compreſſeth them as much as it can , and draveth them into a leſſe compaſſe, and holdeth them ſtrongly together, making them ſticke faſt to one an ꝑther. Vhich efiect, Ariſtorle tooke for the proper notion ofcold. and therefore gaue for definition of the nature of it, that it gahereth thinges of diuers natures: and experience sheweth vs in frceſing and all great coolinges, that this ũ proceedeth from cold. But if wee examine which of the two ſortes ofdenſc bodics ſ the fluide or the conſiſtent) is moſt efficacious in this operation; wee shall find that the leſſe denſe one is more capable of being applyed round about the body itshall beſiege; and therefore vill ſtoppe cloſer euery litle hole of it, and vill morè eaſily ſend ſubtile partes iAto euery litle veine of it, and by conſequence, shrinke it vp together and coagulate, and conſtringe it more ſtrongly, then a body can that is extremely denſe; which by reaſon of its great denſity, and the ſtubborneſſe of its partes, can not ſo eaſily bend and plye them to worke this ?ſſect. And therefore, a body that is moderately denſe, is colder thegan other that is ſo in exceſſe, ſeeing that cold is an actiue or working&power, and that which is leſſe denſe doth excell in workingæ On Ve contrary ſide, rare bodies being hoat, becauſe theire ſubtile paftes enuironing a compounded body vill ſinke into the pores of it, and to theire power ſeperate its partes, it followeth that thoſe vherein the grauity ouercometh the rarity, are leſſe hoat then ſuch others as are in the extremity, and highcſt exceſſe of rarity: both, becauſe the formerare notable to pierce ſo litle partes of the reſiſting denſc body, as extreme rare ones are; and likeviſe, becauſe they more eaſily take plye by the obſtacle of the ſolide ones they meete with, then theſe doe. j SO that out of this diſcourſe vee gaiher, ihat of ſuch bodies that differ preciſely by the proportion of Rarity and Denſity, thoſe which are extremely rare, are in the exceſſe of heate, and are dry vithall: that weighty rare bodies are extremely humide, and meancly hoat: that fluide denſe bodies are moiſt, though not in ſuch exceſſe as rarc ones that are ſo, but are coldeſt ofany: and lallly, that extreme denſe bodies are leſſe cold then fluide denſe ones, and that they are dry. But whether the extreme denſe bodies, be more or leſſe diy then ſuch as are extremely rare, remaineth yet to be decided. Which wee shall eaſily doe, if wee but reflect that it is denſity which maketh a thing hard to be diuided, and that rarity maketh iteaſie: for, a facility to yield vnto diuiſion, is nothing elſc but a plyableneſſe in the thinę that is to be diuided, whereby it eaſily receiueth the figure, vhich the thing that diuideth it doth caſt it into. Now this plyableneſſe belongctt more to rare then to denſe thinges: and accordingly, wee ſee fire bend more eaſily, by the concameration ofan ouen, then a ſtone can be reduced into due figure by hewing. And therefore, ſince dryneſſe is a quality that maketh thoſe bodies wheremnſit raigneth, to conſcrue themſelues in theire owne figure and limits, and toreſiſt the receiuing of any from an ther boty, it is manifeſt that thoſe are dryeſt, wherein theſe effects are moſt ſeene; vhich is, in denſe bodies: and conſequently, exceſſe of dryneſſe muſt be allotted vnto them, to keepe company with theire moderate coldneſſe. Thus wee ſee that the number of Elements aſſigned by Ariſtotle, is truly and exactly determined by him, and that there can be neither more nor leſſe of them; and that theire qualitics are rightly allotted to them: which to ſettle more firmely in our mindes, it will not be miſſe- ſpent time to ſumme vp in short, the eſſect of vhat wee haue hitherto ſaid to bring vs vnto this concluſion. Firſt, ee shewed that a body is made, and conſtituted a body by quantity. Next, that the ũrſt diuiſion of bodies is into rare and denſe ones; as differing onely by hauing more and leſſe quantity. And laſtly, that the coniunction of grauity with theſe two, breedeth two other ſorres of combinations: cach of whichis alſo twofold, the firſt ſort, concerning rarity, out of which ariſeth one extremely hoat and moderately dry, and an other extremely humide and moderately hoat: the ſecond ſort, concerning denſity, out of which, is produced one that is extremely cold and moderatly wett, and an other extremely dry and moderatly cold. And theſe are the combinations whereby are conſtituted, fire, ayre, water, and earth. So that wee haue thus, the proper notions of the foure Elements; and haue both them and theire qualities driuen vp and reſolued into theire moſt ſimple principles: which are, the notions of Luantiiy, and of the rwo moſt ſimple diferences of quantatiue thinges, Ræri y and Denſity. Beyond which, mans vitt can not penetrate; nor can his Wishes ayme att more in this particular: ſecing he hath attained to the knowledge af what they are, and of what maketh them, be ſo, and that it is impoſſible they should be otherviſe: and this , by the moſt ſimple and ſitſt principles, which enter into the com poſitio uf theire nature. Out ofwhich it is cuident, that theſe foure bodies are Elemenis: ſince they can not be reſolued into any others, by vay of phyſicall com poſition; themſlues, being conſtituted by the moſt ſimple diſſerences ofa body. And againe, allother bodies whatſoeuer muſt ofneceſſity, be reſolued into them forthe ſame reaſon ; becauſe no bodies can be exempt from the fiſt differencies of abody. Since then, vee meane by the name of an Element, a bod; not compoſed of any former bodies, and of which all other bodies are compoſed, wee may reſt ſatisfyed that theſe are rightly ſo named. But whether euery ſne of theſe foure elements , do comprehend : s . vnder its name one onely loweſt ſpecies , OF many (as, vhether there a u æ e one onely ſpecies of fire, or ſeuerall ; and the like ofthe reſt) termine uhewee intend not here to determine. Yet wee note, that there is a greate mengss elelatitude in cuery kind, ſeeing that, Rarity and Denſity (as wee haue comprehond ſaid before) are as diuiſible as quantity, Which latitudes, in the bodies vader its name wee conuerſe vithall, are ſo limited that what maketh it ſelfe and ſ ſen , o other thinges be ſeene (as being accom panied by light) is called fire. many: nor Vhat admitteth the illuminatiue action of fire,and is nor ſeene, is cal- her ſilt led ayre. What admitreh the ſame action, and is ſeene (in the ranke founa pure. of Elements ) is called water. And what through the denſity ofit adthe handlin gthem, is too particular for: and would make it too prolixe; Iteferre the Reader to ſeeke them for his ſatisfaction, it thoſt authors that treate phyſickes profeſſedly, and haue deliuered a compleate body of Philoſũ hy. And Ivillend this Chapter with aduertiſing him (leaſt Ishould be misvnderſtood) that though my diſquiſition Rere hath pitched vpon the foure bodies of fire, ayre, water, and earth; yet it is not my intention to aſfirme, that thoſe which wee ordinatily callſo, and do fall dayly within our vle, are ſuch asI haue here expreſſed them: or that theſe Philoſophicall ones (hich ariſe purely out ofthe combination bulkes, in any places of the world, be they neuer fo remote: as, ſire, in the hollow of the moones orbe; water, in the bottome ofthe ſea; ayre, aboue the cloudes; and earth below the mines. But theſe notions are onely to ſerue for certaine ldæas of Elements; by which, the foure named lodics, and the compoundes of them, may be tryed and receiue theire doome of more or leſſe pure and approaching to the nature from whence they haue theire denomination. And Is I vill not deny, but that ſuch perfect Elements may be found in ſome very litle quantities, in mixed bodies: and the greateſt aboundance of them, in theſe foure knowne bodies that we call in ordinary practiſe, by the names of the pure ones: for they are leaſt compounded, and opproach moſt to the ſimpleneſſe of the Elements. But to determine abſolutely theire exiſtence, or not exiſtence, eyther in bulke or in litle partes; dependeth of the manner of action among bodies: which as yet we haue not meddled with. THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Of the Operations of ihe Elements in generall. And of iheir Actiities compared with one another. AV I§G by our former diſcourſe, inquired out what degrees and propòrtions of rarity and denſity compounded with E5æ grauity, are neceſſary for the production of the Elements, and firſt qualſties; whoſe combinations, frame the Elements: our next conſideration, in that orderly progreſſe we haue propoſed vnto our ſelues in this treatiſe (herein our ayme is, to follow ſucceſſiuely the ſteppes, which nature hath printed out vnto vs) will be to examine the operations of the Elements, by which they worke vpon one an other. To which end, lett vs pro oſe to our ſelues: a rare and a denſe body encountring one an other b the impulſe of ſome exterior agent. ſn this caſe, ĩt is euident, that ſince rarity implyetha preater proportion of Quantity, and quantity is nothing but diuiſiility, rare bodie muſt needes be more diuiſible then denſe ones: and conſequently, when two ſuch bodies are reſſed one againſt an other, the rare body not being able to reſiſt diuiſion ſo ſtrongly, as the denſe one is; and being not permitted to retire backe, by reaſon of the externe violence im pelling it againſt the denſe body,i it folloeth, that the partes of the rare body muſt be ſeuered, to lett the denſe one come Berueene them: and ſo the rare body becometh diuided, and the denſe body the diuider. And by this we ſee that the notions of diuider and diuſſible, do immediately follow rare and denſe bodies; and do ſo much the more properly agree vnto them, as they exceed in the qualities of Rarity and Denſity. Likewiſe, we are to obſerue in our caſe, that the denſe or diuiding body muſt neceſſarily cutt and enter further and further into the rare or diuided body; and ſo the ſides of it be ioyned ſucceſſiuely to new and new partes of the rare body that giueth way vnto it, and forſake others it parteth from. Now the rare body being in a determinate ſituation of the vniuerſe, (which we call being in a place, and is a neceſſary condition belonging to all particular bodies) and the denſe body coming to be within the rare body, whereas formetly it was not ſo: itfolloweth, that it looſeth the place ithad, and gaineth an other. This effect, is that which we call locall mortion. And thus ve ſee, by explicating the manner of this action, that locall motion is nothing elſe, but the change of that reſpect or relation, which the body mooued hath to the reſt of the vniuerſe, following out of Diuiſion: and the name of locall motion, formally ſignifyeth onely the mutation of a reſpect to other extrinſecall bodies, ſubſequent to that diuiſion. And this is ſo euident and agreeable to the notions that all mankinde (Who, as we haue ſaid, is iudge and maſter of language) naturally frameth of place; as I vonder much why any will labour to giue other artificialland intricate doctrine of this that in it ſelfe is ſo plaine and cleare. What neede is there to introduce an imaginary ſpace ( or with Ioannes Grammaticus , a ſubſiſtent quantity) that muſt runne through all the world; and then entayle to euery body an ayery entity, an vnconceiuable moode, an vnintelligible Vbi, that by an intrinſecall relation to ſucha part of the imaginary ſpace, muſt thereunto pinne and faſten the body it is in? It muſt needes be a ruinous Philoſophy that is grounded vpon ſuch a contradiction, asis the allotting oſpanes vnto at , Which the authors themſelues (vpon the matter) acknovledge to be meerely nothings and vpon ſo weake a shift, (to deliuer them from the inconueniencies that in theire courſe of doctrine other circumſtances bring them vnto) as is the voluntary creating of new imaginary Entities in thinges, without any ground in nature for them. Learned men should expreſſe the aduantage and ſubtility ofiheire wittes, by penetrating further into nature, then the vulgar; not, by vexing and reſting it from its owne courſe. They should refine, and carry higher; not contradict and deſtroy the notions of mankind, in thoſe thinges that it is the competent Iudge of: as it vndoubtedly is, of thoſe primary notions which Ariſtotle hath ranked vnder ten heades: vhich ( as we haue touched before) euery body can conceiue in groſſe: and the worke of ſchollers, is to explicate them in particular, and not to make the vulgar beleeue they are miſtaken, in framing thoſe apprehenſions that nature taught them. Out of that which hath been hithertoreſolued it is manifeſt, that place really and abſtracting from the operation of the vnderſtandin B is nothing elſe but the inward ſuperſicies of a body that compaſſer and immediately containeth an other. Vhich ordinarily, being ofa rare body that dorh not shewit ſelfe vnto vs (namely, the ayre) is for the moſt part vnknowne by vs. But becauſe nothing can make imreſſion vpon our mind, and cauſe vs to giue it a name; otherwiſe then b being knowne: therefore our vnderſtanding to make a compleate notion, muſt adde ſomething elſe to this fleeting and vnremarkable ſuperficies that may bring it vato our acquaintance. And for this end we may conſider further, that as this ſuperficies hath init ſelfe, ſo the body encloſed in it gaineth, acertaine determinate reſpect unto the ſtable and immoouable bodies that enuiron it. As for example, ve vnderſtand ſuch a tree to be in ſuch a place, by hauing ſuch and ſuch reſpects to ſuch a hill neere it, orto hel a houſe that ſtandeth by it, or to ſuch a riuer that runneth vnder it, or to ſuch an immoouable point of the heauen that from the ſunnes riſing in the æquinor is called eaſt, and ſuch like. To which purpoſe, it importeth not whether theſe, that we call immoouable bodies and pointes, be truly ſo, or do but ſeeme ſo to mankinde. For man talking of thinges according to the notions he frameth of them in his minde, ( ſpeech, being nothing elſe but an expreſſion to an otherman, of the images he hath within himſelfe) and his notions being made according to the ſeeming of the thinges; he muſt needes make the ſame notions, whether the thinges Be truly ſo in themſelues, or but ſeeme to be ſo, when that ſeeming or appearance is alwayes conſtantly the ſame. Nov then, when one body diuiding an other, getteth a new immediate cloathing; and conſequently, new reſpects to the ſtable and mmoousble bodies (or ſeeming ſuch) that enuiron it; ve do vary in our ſelues the notion e firſt had of that thing, conceiuing it now accompanied with other circumſtances and orherreſpects hen formerly it had. Which notion we expreſſe by ſaying, it hath chan ged its place; and is now no longer where it was att the ſirſt. And this hange of place, we call Locall motion: to witt, the departing of a body from that hollow ſuperficies which incloſed it; and its changing vnto an other; whereby it gaineth ne reſpects to thoſe partes of the world that haue, or in ſome ſort may ſeeme to haue, immobility and fixed ſtableneſſe. So as hence it is euident that the ſubſtance of locall motion conſiſteth in diuiſion; and that the alteration of Locality folJoweth diuiſion; in ſuch ſort as becoming like or vnlike ofone wall to another, followerh the action whereby one of them becometh white. And therefore in nature we are not to ſeeke for any entity or ſpeciall cauſe of applying the mooued body toa place as place, hich is but a reſpect aæt uent to the effect of diuiſion) but onely to conſider what reall and phyſicall action vniteth it to that other body, hich is called its place, and truly ſerueth for that effect. And conſequently, they who thinke they haue diſcouered a notable ſubrility by bringing in an Entity to vnite a body to its place, haue ſtrained beyond beyond theire ſtrength, and haue graſped but a shadow. Which ill appeare yer more euident, if they but marke well how nothing is diuſſible, but what ofit ſelſe (abſtracting from diuiſion) is one. Forthe nature of diuiſion, is the making of many; which implyeth, that what is to be diuided, muſt of neceſſity be not many before it be diuided. Nov quantity being the ſubiect of diuiſion, it is euident that purely of it ſelfe, and without any force oradioyned helpes, it muſt needes be one, whereſocuer ſome outward agent doth not introduce multiplicity vponit. And whenſoeucr other thinges worke vpon quantity as quantity, it is not the nature and pover oFtheire operation, to produce vnity in itand make itone; for it is already one: but contrariviſe, the immediate neceſſary effect that floweth from them in this caſe, is to make one quantity many, according to the circumſtances that accompany the diuider, and that which ĩs to be diuided. And therefore, although wee may ſeeke cauſes why ſome one thing ſticketh faſter together then ſome other, yet to aske abſolutely ty a body ſticketh together, were preiudiciallto the nature of quantity; whoſe eſſence is, to haue partes ſticking together, or rather, to haue ſuch vnity, as without it, all diuiſibility muſt be excluded. Out of which diſcourſe it followerh, that in locall motion we are to looke only fora cauſe or power to diuide, but not forany to vnite. For the very nature of quantity vniteth any two partes that are indiſtant from one an other, without needing any other cement to glew them together: as we ſee the partes of water and all liquide ſubſtances, do preſently vnite themſelues to other partes of like bodies, when they meete with them, and to ſolide bodi: if they chance to be next vnto them. And therefore it is vaine to trouble our heades with Vnions and imaginary Moodes to vnite a body to the place itis in, when theire owne nature maketh them one as ſoone as they are immediate to each other. And accordingly, if when we ſee a boule mooue, we would examine the cauſes of ſx motion, we muſt conſider the quantity ofayre or water it maketh to breake from the partes next vnio it, to giue place vnto it ſelfe: and not ſpeculate vpon an intrinſecall relation from the body toa certaine part of the imaginary ſpace they vill haue to runne through all thinges. And by ballancing that quantity of ayre or water which it diuideth, ve may arriue to make an eſtimate of what force the boule necdeth to haue for its motion. Thus hauing declared that the locality of motion, is but an extrinſecall denomination, and no reality in the thing mooued; wee may nov caſt an eye vpon a vaſt conſequence that may be deduced out of what wee haue hitherto ſaid. For ifwe conſider the nature of a body, thatis, that a body is a body by quantity, and that the formall notion of quantity is nothing elſe but diuiſibility; and that the adæquate act of diuiſibility, is diuiſion: itis euident, there can be no other operation vpon . (by conſequence) among bodies, but muſt eyther be ſuc diuiſion, as we haue here explicated, or whar muſt neceſſarily follow out of ſuch diuiſion. And diuiſion, ſas e haue euen now explicated) being locall motion; it is euident, that all operations among bodies, are either locall motion, or ſuch as follow out of locall motion. Vhich concluſion, howſocuer vnexected, and may att the ſirſt hearing vi peare a Paradoxe; will ncuertheleſſe by the enſuing worke receiue ſuch euidence, asir can not be doubted of, and that, not onely by force of argumentation and by neceſſity of notions ( as is already deduced) but alſo by experience, and by declaration of particulars as they shall occurre. But now to apply what we haue ſaid, to our propoſed ſubiect: it is obuious to euery man, that ſceing the diuider is the agent in diuiſion and in locall motion; and that denſe bodies, are by theire nature diuiders; the earth, muſt in that regard be the moſt actiue amon the Elements, ſince itis the moſt denſe ofthem all. But this co to be againſt the common iudgement of all the ſearchers of nature;, who vnanimouſly agree that fire is the moſtactiue Element. As alſo, it ſeemeth to impugne what we our ſelues haue determined, when e ſaid, there were two actiue qualities, heate and cold, whereof the fitſt was in its greateſt exceſſe in fire, and the latter in water. To reconcilè theſe, we are to conſider that the action of cold in its greateſt height, is compoſcd of two partes, the one is a kind of preſſing; and the other, is penetration which requiraih applicability. OFwhich two,the former ariſeth our of denſity, but the latter, out of moderation of denſity, as I haue declared in the precedent Chapter. Vhere fore the former vill exceede more in earth; though the hole be more eminent in water. For though conſidering onely the force of moouing (which is a more ſimple and abſtracted notion, then the determination and particulariſation of the Elements, and is precedent to it) therein earth hath a recedency ouer water: yet taking the action as it is determined to he the action ofa particular Element, and as it concurreth to the compoſition or diſſolution of mixed bodies; in that conſideration (which is the chiefe worke of Elements, and requireth an intime application of the Agents) water hath the principality and exceſſe ouer earth. As for fire it is more actiue then eyther of them; as it will appeare clearely ifwe conſider, how when fire is applyed to fewell, and the violence of blowing is added to its owne motion, it incorporateth it ſelfe with the fewell, and in a ſmall time conuertetha great part of it into its owne nature, and shattereth the reſt into ſmoake and ashes. All uhich proceedeth from the exceeding ſmallneſſe and dryneſſe of the partes of fire; which being mooued with violence againſt the fewell, and thronging in multitudes vpon it; they eaſily pierce the porous ſubſtance ofit, like ſo many extreme sharpe needles. Andthat the force of fire is as greate and greater, then of earih, we may gather out of our former diſcourſe; where hauing reſolued, that denſity is the vertue by which a body is moued and doth cuttthe medium, and againe conſidering that celerity of motion, is a kind of denſity, (as we shall by and by declare) it is euident, that ſince blowing muſt of neceſſity preſſe violently and with a rapide motion, the partes of fire againſt the fewell,and ſo condenſe them exceedingly there, (both by ſeire celerity, and by bringing very many partes together there;) it muſt needes alſo giue them actiuity and vertue to pierce the body they are beaten againſt. Nov, that celerity is akind of denſity, will appeare by comparing theire natures. For if we conſider that a denſe body may be dilated ſo as to poſſeſſe and fill the place of a rare body that exceeded itin bigneſſe, and by that dilatation, may be diuided into as many and as greate partes as the rare body was diuiſible into, wee may conceiue that the ſubſtance of thoſe partes, was by a ſecret power of nature foulded vp in that litle j in which it was before. And euen ſo, if we reſlect vpon two riuers of equall channels and depths, whereof the one goeth ſifter then the other; and determine a certaine length of each channell, and a common meaſure of time: wee shall ſee at in the flme meaſure of time, there paſetha greater bulke of vater in the deſigned part ofthe channell of the ſwifter ſtreame, then in the deſigned part o the ſlover, though thoſe partes be equall. Neither doth it import, that in velocity we take a part of time, vhereas in denſity it ſecemeth that an inſtant is ſufficient; and conſequently, there would be no proportion betweene them. For knoving Philoſophers do all agree that here are no inſtants in time, and that the apprehenſion of them proceedeth meerely from the manner of our vndęrſtanding. And as for partes in time, there can not be aſſumed any ſolitle, in which the compariſon is not true: and.ſo in this regard, it is abſolutely good. And if the Reader haue difficulty att the diſparity of the thinges vhich are preſſed together in denſity and in celerity, for that in denſity there is onely ſubſtance, and in celerity there is alſo quantity, crowded vp vith the ſubſtance; he vill ſoone receiue ſatisfaction, vhen he shall conſider that this diſparity is to the aduantage of what we ſay, and maketh the nature of enſ; more perfect in celerity, and conſequently more powerfull in fire then in earth. Beſides, if there were no diſparity, it would not be a diſtinct ſpecies of denſity, but the very ſame. By what we haue ſpoken aboue, it appeareth how fire getteth into fewell, now lett vs conſider how it cometh out: for the actiuity of that fierce body, will not Iett it lye ſtill and reſt, as longas it hath ſo many enemies round about it to rouſe it i Vee ſee then that as ſoone as it hath incorporated it ſelfe with the fewell, and is growne maſter of it by introducing into it ſo many of its owne partes, (like ſo many ſoldiers, intoan enemies towne) they breake out againe on cuerv ſide with as much violence as they came in. For by reaſon of the me: reſiſtance of the fewell; theire continuall ſtreaming of nev partes v onit, and one ouertaking an other there where theire iourney was ſtoppes, (all which is encreaſed by the blowing, ) doth ſo exceedingly condenſe them into a narrover roome then theire: nature affecteth, that as ſoone as they gett liberty, and grow maſters of the fevel, (which att the firſt was theire priſon) they enlarge theire place, and conſequently come out and flye abroad; euer ayming right forwardes from the point where they begin theire iourney: for the violence wherevith hę ſecke to extend themſelues intoa larger roome, when they haue liberty to do ſo, will admitt no motion but the shorteſt, whichis, by a ſtraight line. So that if in our fantaſie, we frame an image of a round body all of fire; wee muſt ithall preſently conceiue, that the flame proceeding from it, would diffuſe it ſelfe cuery way indifferently in ſtraight lines; in ſuch ſort, that the ſource ſeruing for the center, there would be round about it an huge ſphere of fire and of light; vnleſſe ſome accidentall and externe ute , should determine its motion more to one part then to an other. Which compaſſe, becauſc it is round, and hath the figure ofa ſphere, is by Philoſophers termed the ſphere ofits actiuity. So that it is euident, that the moſt ſimple and primary motion of fire, is a fluxe in a direct line from the center of ĩt, to its circumference, taking the fewell forits center: as alſo, that when, itis beaten againſt a harder body, it may be able to deſtroy it, althoughthat body be in its owne nature, more denſe then fire. For the body againſt vhich it preſſeth; eyther hath pores, or hath none, ( as, the Elements haue none:) if it hath pores; then the fire, by reaſon of the violent motion of the impellent, driueth out the litle bodies which fill vp thoſe pores, and ſucceeding in theire roome, and being multiplyed there, cauſeth thoſe effects which in our diſcourſe ofthe Elemenis we aſigned to heat. But if it haue no pores; it will be eytherrare, or denſe: if it be rare; then, in caſe that the force of the impellent be grẽater then the reſiſtance of the rare body, it will force the fire to diuide the rare body. But ifit be denſe; as, ſome atome ofearth, then, though att the firſt it can not diuide it, yet by length of time and by continuall beating vpon it, it may come to weare off ſome part of it, the force of the impellent, by litle and litle bending the atome of the earth, by driuing a continuall ſtreame of a leſſer part of fire, egaint ſome determinare part of the atome. By which word Arome ; no body vill imagine we intend to expreſſe a perfect indiuiſible, but onely, the leaſt ſort of naturall bodies. THE THE SIXT CHAPTER. Of Light : what it is - Av§ę ſaid thus much of fire; the neere relation that is 7 E betweene itand light, inuiteth vs in the next place to bend In our eyes to that which vſeth to dazell theires who Iooke ã vnvarily vpon it. Certainely, as among all the ſenſible qualities, it ĩs tie the principall, ſo among all corporeall thinges, it ſeemeth to ayme righteſt att a ſpirituall nature, and to come neereſt vnto it. And by ſome hath beene iudged to be ſpirituall; if our eyes be capable to ſee ſpirits. No meaner man then Ariſtotle, leadeth the dance to hold light a quality, and mainely to deny it any bodily ſubſiſtence. And there hath followed him no fewer, then almoſt all the world euer ſince. And the queſtion importeth no leſſe, then the whole doctrine of qualities; foradmitt light to be a body, and hardly any man will hold vp his hand in defence ofany other quality: but if it be a quality; then all others come in by parity and for company. But before we goe any further, it will not be amiſſe to expreſſe what we meane when we reiect qualities; and how, in ſome ſenſe, we are content to admitt them. According to that deſcription that Philoſophers ordinarily do make of them, (and eſpecially the moderne) we can by no meanes giue way vnto them. I confeſſe ingenuouſly, I vnderſtand not what they meane by them; and I am conſident, that neĩther do they. For the very notion, that theire firſt wordes ſeeme to expreſſe of them, they contradict againe, before they make an end of deſcribing what they are. They vill haue them to be reall Entities or Thinges, diſtinct from the bodies they accompany: and yet, they deny them a ſubſiſtence or ſelf being, ſaying they do but inhere in theire ſubiect, which ſupporteth them; or which isallone, that their beingis a dependence of a ſubie?*.. If they vill reflect vpon what they ſay, and make theire thoughts and theire wordes agree; they will find, that the firſt pus of theire deſcription, maketh them complete ſubſtances; which afterwardes, in wordes they flattely deny: and it is impoſſible to reconcile theſe two meaninges. A reall Entity or thing, muſt neceſſarily haue an Exiſtence or Being ofits owne: which they allow them. And whatſoeuer hath ſo, becometh a ſubſtance: for it ſubſiſteth by its owne Exiſtence; or, ſto ſay plainer) is what it is by its owne Beings and needeth not the exiſtence ofan orher thing to giue ita Being. And then preſently to ſay that it doth not ſubſiſt ofit ſelfe; or that it requireth the ſubſiſtence ofa ſubſtance, to make it Bee is a pure contradiction to the former. This ariſeth from a wrong notion they make to themſelues of ſubſtance, exiſtence and ſubſiſtence: and from theire not conſulting ſufficiently with theire ovne thoughts, as well as ſtudying in bookes. They meete there with different termes; by helpe of which, they keepe themſelues from contradiction in wordes, but not in effect. If the termes were rightly conceiued, and notions duely fitted to them, (which requireth deepe meditation vpon the thinges themſelues, and a braine free from all inclination to ſiding, or affection to opinions for the authors ſakes, before they be well vnderſtood and examined) many of thoſe diſputes would fall to the ground, in which oftentimes both ſides looſe themſelues, and the queſtion, before they come to an end. They are in the darke before they are avare: and then, they make a noiſe, onely with termes; which like too heauy weapons that they can not weild, do carry theire ſtroakes beyond theire ayme. Of ſuch nature, are the qualities and moodes, that ſome moderne Philoſophers haue ſo ſubtiſiſed vpon. And in that ſenſe, we viterly deny them: which being a queſtion appertaining to Metaphyſickes, it belongeth not to our preſent purpoſe to ingage our a furtherin it. But, as they are ordinarily vnderſtood in common conuerſation, ve allow them. And our worke is but to explicate and shew the particulars in retaile, of, vhat men naturally ſpeake in groſſe. For that, ſerueth theirc turne to know what one an other meaneth: whereas, it belongeth onely vnto a Philoſopher, to examine the cauſes of thinges. Others, are content ith t effects: and thay ſpeake truly and properly when they deſigne them. As for example: when they ſay that ire bumne th by a quality of heate that it hath, or that a deye is ſquare by the quality of a cubicall figure that is in it; they ſpeake as they should do. But if others vill take occaſion vpon this, to lett theire vnderſtanding giue a Being vnio theſe qualities, diſtinct from the ſubſtances in which they conceiue them; there they miſſe. If we conſider the ſame man hungry, or thirſty, or weary, or ſleepy, or ſtanding, or ſitting, the vnderſtanding preſently makęth within it ſelfe, reall thinges of ſleepe, hunger, thirſt, wearineſſe, ſtanding, and ſiting. Whereas indeed, they are but different affections or ſituations of the ſame body. And therefore we muſt beware of applying theſe notions of our mind, to the thinges as they are in themſelues: as muchas ve muſt, of conceiuing thoſe partes to be actually in a continued quantity, whereof we can frame actually diſtinct notions in our vnderſtanding. Butas, when ordinary men ſay, that a yard containeth three feete; it is true in this ſenſc, that three feete may be made of it; but that whiles it is a yard, it is but one quantity or thing, and not three thinges: ſo, they who make profeſſion 1o examine rigorouſly the meaning of wordes, muſt explicate in what ſenſe it is true that heate and figure (our former examples) are qualities: for ſuch we grant them obe, and in no viſe do contradict the common manner of ſpeech; which entereth not into the Philoſohicall nature of them. Vee ſay then, that qualities are nothing elſe but the proprieties, or particularities wherein one thing diſfereth from an other. And therefore Logicians, call ſubſtantiall difſerencies, ſubſtantiall qualities: and ſay, they are prædicated in Quale quid. But the Prædicament of Quality, is ordered by Ariſtotle to conclude in it thoſe differences of thinges, which are neither ſubſtantiall nor quantitatiue, and yer are intrinſecall and abſolute. And ſo, that which the vnderſtanding calleth heate, and maketh a notion of, diſtinct from the notion of the fire from whence it iſſueth to burne the wood that is neere it; 15 nothing elſe, in the fire, but the very ſubſtance ofit in ſucha degree of rarity, or a continuall ſtreame of partes iſſuing out of the maine ſtocke of the ſame fire, that entereth into the wood, and by the rarity of it maketh its way through euery litle part, and diuideth them. All which actions, are compriſed by the vnderſtanding, vnder one notion of burning: and the pover, (whichis fire it ſclf) to doe theſe actions, vnder one notion o the quality ofheate: though burning in effect, and explicated Philoſophically, be nothing elſe bue the continuance of thoſe materiall motions we haue euen now deſcribed. In like manner, the cubicall figure of a deye, is nothing elſe but the very body ofthe deye it ſelfe, limited by other bodies from being extended beyond thoſe dimenſiõs it hath:and ſo the quality of figure or ſquareneſſe, vhich in common ſpeechis ſaid to be init; is truly, the ſubſtance it ſelfe, vnder ſuch a conſideration as is expreſſed by that word. But to come to our queſtion, vpon the deciſion of which dependeth the fate of all the fictitious Entities, which in the ſchooles are termed qualities. The cheife motiues that perſuade light to be one of thoſe; may, to my beſt remembrance, be reduced to fiue ſeuerall heades. The firſtis, that it' illuminateth the ayre in an inſtant, and therefore, can not be a body: for a body requirreth ſucceſſion of time to mooue in: whereas, this ſeemeth to ſpread it ſclfe, ouer the whole hemiſphere in an inſtant; for as farre as the ſunne is diſtant from vs, he no ſooner raiſeth his head aboue our horizon, but his dartes are in our face: and generally, no imagination can be framed, of any motion it hath in its dilatation. The next is; that whereas no body can admitt an other into its place, without being remooued avay it ſelfe, to leaue that roome vnto the aduenient one; neuertheleſſe, plaine experience sheweth vs dayly, that two lights may be in the ſame place; and the firſt is ſo farre from going away att the coming of the ſecond, that the bringing in of a ſecond candle, and ſerting it neere the firſt, enj the light in the roome: which diminisheth againe when the ſecond is remooued avay. And by the ſame reaſon; if light were a body, it should driue away the ayre (which is likewiſe a body) where\ ſocuer it is admitted: for within the whole ſphere of the irradiation of it, there is no point wherein one may ſett their eye, but light is found. And therefore; if it were a body, there would be no roome for ayre in that place which light taketh vp. And likeviſe, we ſee that it penetratethall ſolide bodies, (and particularly glaſe, ) as experience sheweth, in wood, ſtone, mettals, and any other body whatſoeuer, if it be made thinne enough. The third argument, why light can not be a body, is, that if it were ſo, it can be none other but fire, which is the ſubtileſt, and moſt rarifyed of all bodies whatſocuer. But if it be fire, then it can not be without heate:and cõſequently, a man could not feele cold in a ſunneshining day. The contrary of which is apparent all winter long, whoſe brigheſt dayes oftentimes proue the coldeſt. And Galilæus with diuers others ſince, did vſe from the ſunne to gather light ina kind of ſtone that is found in Italy (which is therefore by them called, la calamita della luce ) and yet no heate appeared in it. A glow worme vill giue light to read by, but not to warme you any whitt attall. Andit is ſaid, that diamonds and carbuncles will shine like fire in the greateſt darkes; yet no man euer complained of being ſerued by them, as the foolish Satyre was by kiſſing ofa burning couſe On the contrary ſide; ifone conſider how great heates may be made vithout any light att all, how can one be perſwaded that light and heate shoud be the ſame thing, or indeed any whitt of kinne:? The fourth motiue to induce vs to beleeue that light can not bea body, is the ſuddaine extinction of it, when any lolide body cometh betweene the fountaine of it, and the place where he ſenderh his beames. What becometh of that great expanſion of light that shined allabout, whena cloud nterpoſeth it ſelfe betweene the body of the ſunne and the ſtreames that come from it? Or when it leaueth our horizon to light the other orld? His head is no ſooner out of our ſight; but att the inſtant all his beames are vanished. If that which filleth ſo vaſt a roome were a body, ſome thing would become of it: it would att leaſt be changed to ſome other ſ.bſtance, and ſome relikes would be lefi of it; as when ashes remaine of burned bodies: for nature admitteth not the annihilation of any thing. And inthe laſt place; we may conceiue that if light were a body, it vould be shaken by the windes, and by the motion of the ayre; and wee should ſee it quauer inall bluſtering weather. Therefore, ſumming vp all e haue ſaid; it ſcemeth moſt improbable, and indeed vhol, impoſſible, that light should be a body; and conſequently, muſt haue his place among qualities. l . But on the other ſide; before we apply ourſelues to anſwere theſe obiections, lett vs take a short ſuruay of thoſe inducements , that preuayle with vs to belecue light a body, notvithſtanding ſo forcible oppoſitions. I admitt ſo farre ofthe thitd argument, as to allow light to be fire: for indeed t can not be imagined to be any thing elſe; all reſemblanec i mperties agreeing ſo fully betweene them. But vithall Imuſt adde; ndbecuſe fit that itis not ſire in euery forme, or fire ioyned with euery ſubſtance, æerea quſi;, chat expreſſeth it ſelfe by lighti but it is fire extremely dilated, and vayes producs vithout mixture of any other groſſe body. Lett mee hold a piece of an equall to it linnen or paper, cloſe by the flame ofa candle, and by litle, and litle elfe. emooue it further and further of; and me thinkes my very eyes rell me, that there is vpon the paper ſome part of that whichIſee in the candle: and that it groweth ſtill leſſe and leſſe like as I remooue the baper further fromit: ſo that, if I would beleene my ſenſe, Ishould Pelceue it as very a body vpon the paper, as in the candle; though enfeebled, by the laxity of the channell in which it floweth. And this ſeemeth to Le ſtrengihened, by the conſideration of the aduerſaries poſition: for if it were a quality, then, ſeeing it hath no contrary to deſtroy or ſtopperit, it should ſtill produce an equalltoit ſelfe, without end or growing feeble, whenſoeuer it meeteth with a ſubiect capable to entertayne ĩt, as ayre is. The better to apprehend how much this faint reſemblance of ſ flame vpon the paper, maketh for our purpoſe, lett vs turne the The nd leafe, and imagine in our owne thoughts, after what fashion that fire ſon Imgine to whichis in the Hame ofa litle candle, vould appeare vntovs, ifit were our ſelues the dilated and ſtretcched outto the vimoſt extent, that exceſſe of rarity ſobſtancæ of can bring it vnto. Suppoſe that ſo much flame, as would filla cone of nſye⸗, it vill two inches height and halfe an inch diameter should ſuffer ſo great an hauethe ſime expanſionas to replenish vith his light body a large chamber: and æſię⸗ light then, vhat can we imagine it would ſeeme to be2HõW would ſhe con- hath. tinuall driuing it into a thinner ſubſtance, as it ſtreameth in à perpetuall Hood from the dlame, ſeeme to play vpon the paper? And then iudge whether it be likely to bea body or no, when our diſcourſe ſuggeſteth vnto vs, that if it be a body, thoſe very appearances muſt follow, which our eyes giuevs euidence are ſo in cffect. If gold beaten into ſo ayery a thinneneſſe as we ſee ju lden vſe, doth remaine ſtill old notwithſtanding the wonderſul expanſion of it: why shall we not allow, that fire dilated to his vtmoſt periode, shall ſtill remaine firc; though ex tremely rarifyed beyond vhat is vas? We know that fire is the rareſt and the ſubtileſt ſubſtance that 6. nature hath made among bodies; and we know likeiſe, that it is The fousth reaengendered by the deſtroying and feeding vpon ſome other more fon, ſo s groſſe body: lett vs then calculate, vhen the oyle, ortallow, or waxe genetation and ofa candle, or the bulke ofa fagort or billet, is dilated and ranfyed ro to the degree of fire; how vaſt a place muſt it take vp? agrecth with To this lett vs adde what Ariſtotle teachethvs; thar fire is not like a fire. ſtanding poolc ,which continueth full with the ſame water; and as it hath no waſt, ſo hath it no ſupply: but it is a fluent and brookelike current. Vhich alſo we may learne, out of the perpetuall nutriment ,it requireth: for a new pan of feell, being conuerted intoa ſew part of fire (as we may obſerue, in the litle atomes of oyle, or melid waxe, that continually aſcend apace vp the weeke ofa burning candæ or lampe) of neceſſity the former muſt be gone to make roome fol the latter; and ſo, a new part of the riuer is continually flowing. Nov then, this perpetuall fluxe of fire, being made of a groſſe body that ſo rarifyed vill take v ſuch a vaſt roome; iſit dye not att the inſtant of its birth, but haue fome time to ſubſiſt ( be it neuer ſo short,) it muſt needes runne ſome diſtance from the fountaine whence it ſpringeth. Which if it do; you neede not wonder, that there should be ſo great an extent of fire as is requiſite to fill all that ſpace which light replenisheth nor, that it should be ſtill ſupplyed with new, as faſt as the cold of the ayre killeth it: for conſidering that flame is a much groſſer ſubſtance then pure fire, (by reaſon of the mixture with it, of that viſcous oyly matter, which being drawne out of the wood and candle, ſerueth for fewell to the fire,and is by litle and litle conuerted intoit;) and with all reflecting vpon the nature and motion offire,  hichis, to dilate it ſelfe extremely, and to flyall about from the center to the circumference;) you can not chooſe but conceiue, that the pure fire ſtruggling to breake away from the oyly fewell (which is ſtill turning into ne fire) doth art length free his winges from that birdlime, and then ſlyeth abroad with extreme ſiftneſſe, and ſnelleth and dilateth it ſeife toa huge bulke, now that it hath gotten liberty; and ſo filleth a vaſt roome; but remaineth ſtill fire till it dye: which it no ſooner doth , but it is ſtillſupplyed with new ſtreames of it, that are continually ſtrained, andas it were ſqueeſed, out of the thicke flame, which did impriſon it, and kept it withinit; till groving fullerof fire then it could containe ( by reaſon of the continuall attenuating the oyly partes of it, and conuerting them into fire) it giueth liberty vnto thoſe partes of fire, that are next the ſuperficies, to fiy whither theire nature will carry them. Andthus, diſcourſe would informe a blind man (aſter he hath vell reflected on the nature of fire) how it muſt needes filla mi hty extent of place; though it haue but a narrow begining att e ſpringhead of it: and that there, by reaſon of the condenſtion of it, and mixture with a groſſer body, it muſt needes burne other bodies: bur that whenir is freed from ſuch mixture, and ſufferethan extreme ex panſion, it can not haue force to burne, but may haue meanes to expreſ it ſelfe to be there preſent ſ ſome operationof it vpon ſome ody that is refined and ſubtiliſed enough to perceiue it. And this operation, a ſeeing man, vill tell you is done vpon his eyes, ſ whoſe fitteneſſe to receiũe impreſſion from ſo ſubtile an A gent, Anatomiſtes villteach you.) And I remember, howa blind ſchoolemaſter that I kept in my houſe to teach my children , (who had extreme ſubtile ſpirits, ſpirits, and a great tenderneſſe through his whole body; and met: with few diſtractions, to hinder him from obſeruing any impre ſion, neuer ſo nicely made vpon him) vſed often to tell me, that he felt it very perceptibly in ſeuerall partes of his body; but eſpecially in his braine. But to ſetile vs more firmely in the perſuaſion of light his being a body (and conſequently fire;) lett vs conſider that the properties ofa body, are perpetually incident to light; looke what rules a ball will keepe in its reboundes; the ſame, doth light in its reſlexions: and the ſame demonſtration, doth alike conuince the one and the other. Beſides, lightis broken like a body; as when it is ſnapped in pieces by a tougher body. It is gathered together into a litle roome, by looking or burning glaſſes; as water is, by ordering the gutters ofa houſe ſo as to bring into one ciſterne, all that raineth diſperſedly vpon the whole roofe. It is ſeuered and diſperſed by other glaſſes; and is to be wrought vpon, and caſt hither and thither, att Faure, al by the rule oforhet bodies. And what is done in light, e ſame will likewiſe be done in heate, in cold, in wind, and in ſound. And the very ſame inſtrumenits, that are made for light; will worke their effects in all theſe others, if they be duly managed. So that certainely, were it not for the authority of Ariſtotle' and of his learned followers, that preſſeth vs on the one ſide; and for the ſeemingneſſe of thoſe reaſons we haue already mentioned, which perſuadeth vs on the other ſide; our very eyes would carry vs by ſtreame into this conſent, that light is no other thing but the nature and ſubſtance of fire, ſpred farre and wide, and freed from the mixture ofall other groſſe bodies. Which will appeare Je more euident in the ſolutions ofthe oppoſitions we haue boug t againſt our owne opinion: forin them there will occurre other arguments of no leſſe importance to prooue this verity, then theſe we haue already propoſed. THE SEVENTH CHAPTER Two obiections anſered againſt light being fire; with a more ample proofe . of its being ſuch. 75ca AvING then ſaid thus much to perſuade vs of the corpoSãP reity of this ſubtile thing, that ſo queintly playeth with our ll eyes: wee ill in the next place examine thoſe obiections that at the beginning we did ſett downe againſt its being a body: and if after a through diſcuſſion of them, we find they doin truth conclude nothing of what att the firſt ſight they beare ſo great ashew of; but that we shall be able, perfectſy to ſolue and enerue their force; no body vill thinke it rashneſſe in vs to craue leaue of Ariſtotle that we may diſſent from him in a matter that he hath not Jooked to the bortome ofi and whoſe opinion therein, can not be defended from plaine contradictions and impoſſibilities. It is true, neuer any one man looked ſo farre as he into the bowels of nature; he may rightly be termed the Gemus ofit; and whoſoeuer followeth his principles in the maine, can not be led into error: but we muſt not beleeue, that he, orany manelſe that relyeth vpon the ſtrength and negotiation ofhis owne reaſon, cuer had a priuiledge of infallibilit entayled toall he ſaid. Lett vs then admire him for what he hath deliuered vs: and uhere he falleth short, or is weary in his ſearch, and ſuffereth himſclfe to be borne downe by popular opinions againſt his owne principles (which happeneth very ſeldome to him) ſett vs ſeele to ſupply and relieue him. But to purſue ourintent: wee ill begin ith anſwering the third obicction; which is, that if light were fire, it muſt heat as well as ænlighten where it shineth. There is no doubt but it doth ſo: as is euident by the weather glaſſes, and other artificiall muſicall inſtruments(as organs and virginals that played by themſelues) which Cornelius Drebbel (that admirable maſter of mechanikes) made to shew the king. AllWhich, depended vpon the rarefaction and condenſation of ſome ſubtile body, conſerued ina cauity within the bulke of the whole inſtrument: for as ſoone as the ſunne shined, they would haue motion and play their panies And there is no doubt but that gre out of the rarefaction ofthe ſubtile liquor he made vſe of, which vas dilated, as ſoone as the ayre was warmed by the ſunne beames. Of whoſe operation, it was ſo ſenſible, that they no ſooner leſt the horizon, but its motion ceaſed. And if but a cloude came betweene the inſtrument and them, the muſike would preſently goe ſlover time. And the antient miracle of Memnons ſtatue, ſeemeth to be a iuggling of the æhiopian Prieſts, made by the like inuention. But though he and they found ſome ſpirituall and refined matter, that would receiue ſuch notable impreſſions, from ſo ſmall alterations of temper. Yet it is no wonder that our groſſe bodies are not ſenſible of them, for we can not feele heate, vnleſſe it be greater then that which is in our ſenſe. And the heate there, muſt be in proportion to the heate of our blood: which is iſt a high degree of varmeth. And therefore it is very poſſible that an excee ding rarifyed fire, may cauſe a farre leſſe impreſſion of heate then we are able o feele. Conſider, how if you ſett pure ſpiritt of wine on fire, and ſo conuert it into actuall flame; yet it willnot burne, nor ſcarce warme your hand: and then, can you expect, ihat, the light of a candle, vhich filleth a great roome, should burne or warme you as farre as it shineth If you would exactly know what degree of heate, and power of burning, that light hath, which ſ for example) shineth vpon the wall in a great chamber, in the middeſt whereof there ſtandeth a candle: doe but calculate, what ouerproportion of quantity all the light in the whole roome beareth, to the quantity of the litle lame aſt the toppe of the candle; and that is the ouerproportion of the force of burning whichis in the candle, to the force of burning whichis in ſo much light att the wall as in extenſion is equall to the flame of the candle. Vhich when you haue conſidered you vill not quarrell att its not varming you att that diſtance; although yougrant it to be fire, ſtreaming out from the flame as from the ſpring that feedethit, and extremely dilated (according to the nature of ſire, hen it is att liberty) by going ſo farre uihout any other groſſe body to impriſon or clogge it. Itis manifeſt, that this rule of examining the proportion of burning in ſo much of the light, as the ſlame is, (by calculating the proportion ofthe quantity or extenſion of all the ſight in the roome to the extenſion of the flame of the candle, and then comparing the flame of the candle, to a part of light equall in extenſion vnto ĩt) is a good and infallible one, ifwe abſtract from accidentallinequalities: ſince, both the light and the flame, are ina perpetuall fluxe andall the light, was ſirſt in the flame; which is the ſpring, from whence it continually floweth. As in a riuer wherein euery part runneth vitha ſertled ſtreame; though one place be ſtraighter, and an other broaderi yet of neceſſity, ſince all the water that is in the broad place came outofthe narro; it muſt follo that in equall portions of time there is no more ater, where it hath the liberty ofa large channell, then where the bankes preſſe it intoa narroer bed, ſo or there be no inequalities in the botrome. In like manner, ifin a large ſtoue, a baſen of water be conuerted into ſteame; that rarifyed water which then filleth the whole ſtous, is no more then what the baſen contained before: and conſequently, the power of moiſtening whichis in a footes extenſion (forexample) of ſe ſtoue wherein that ſteame is, muſt be in proportion to the vertue of wetting in the footes extenſion ofwater; as the quantity of that great roome which the ſteame filleth, is to the quantity of the water contained in the baſin: for although the rarifyed water be not in euery leaſt part of that great place it ſeemeth to take vp; by reaſon that there is ayre, in which it muſt ſvimme. Yet the power of wetting that was in the baſin of vater, is dilated through the whole roome, by the coniunction ofthe miſte or dew to all the ſenſible partes of the ayre that is in the roome: and conſequently the power of wetring, vhich is in any foote of that roome, is in a manner as much leſſe then the power of wetting which as in the foote of water, as if the water ere rarifyed to the quantity of the whole roome, and no ayre were And in the ſame manner, it fareth with dilated fire, as it doth vith dilated water: with onely this difference peraduenture that fire groveth purer, and more towardes its owne nature by dilatationb whereas vater becometh more mixed and is carried from its nature by ſuffering the like effect. Yet dilated vater vill in proortion moiſten more then dilated fire vill burne: for the rarefaction of vater, bringeth it neerer to the nature of ayre ( whoſe chicf propriety is moiſture, ) and the fire that accompanieth it when it raiſcth it into ſteame, giueth it more powerfull ingreſſion into what body it meeteth withall: whereas ſire, vhen itis very pure, and att entire liberty to ſtretch and ſpread ĩt ſelfe as wyde as the nature ofit villcarry it gerteth no aduantage of burning by its mixture with ayre: and allthough it gaineth force by its purity, yet by reaſon of its extreme rarefaction it muſt needes be extremely fainte. But if by the helpe of glaſſes, you will gather into leſſe roome that which is diffuſed into a great one; and ſo condenſe it as much as itis (for example) in the flame of a candle; then that fire, or compacted light, vill burne much more forcibly then ſo much flame: for there is as much ofit in quantity (excepting what is loſtinthe carriage of it; ) and itis held in together inas litle roome; and it hath this aduantage beſides, that it is clogged with no groſſe body to hinder the actiuity of it. It ſcometh to me now, that the very anſwering this obiection, doth (beſides repelling the force of it) euidently prooue that light is nothing but fire in his owne nature, and exceedingly dilated: for if you ſuppoſe fire, (for example, the flame ofa candle) to be ſtrerched out to the vemoſt expanſion that you may ell imagine ſuch a groſſe body is capable or it is impoſſible it should appeare and worke otherviſe, then it doth in light as Ihaue she wed aboue. And againe, we ſee plainely, that light gathered together burneth more forcibly then any other fire vhatſocuer, and thèrefore muſt needes be ſireWhy then shall we not confidently conclude, that what is fire before it getteth abroade, and is fire againe when it comeih together, doth likewiſe remaine fire during alſ ins iourney? Nay euen in the iourney it ſelfe, we haue particular teſtimony that it is fire: for light returning backe from the earth charged with litle atomes (as it doth in ſoultry gloomy weather) heateth muchmore then before; iuſt as fire doth, when it is impriſoned in a denſe body. Philoſophers ought not to iudge by the ſame rules that the common people doth. Their groſſe ſenſe, is all their guide: and therefore they can not apprehend any thing to be ſire, that doth not make it ſclfe be knowne for ſuch by burning them. But he that iudiciouſly examineth the matter; and traceth the pedigree and periode of it; and ſceth the reaſon why in ſome circumſtances it burneth, and in others it doth not; is too blame, if he ſuſſer himſelfe to be led by others ignorance, contrary to his owne reaſon. Vhen they that are curious in perfumes, will haue their chamber ſilled with a good ſencin a hoat Eaſn , that agreeth not with burning perfumes, and therefore make ſome odoriferous vater be blowne about it by their ſeruants mouthes that are dexterous in that Miniſtery, ſasis vſed in Spaine in the ſummer time;) euery one that ſeeth it done, though on a ſuddaine the water he loſt to his eyes and touch, and is onely diſcernable by his noſe, yet he is well ſatisfyed that the ſent which recreateth him, is the very ater he ſaw in the glaſe extremely dilated by the forcible ſprouring of it out from the ſeruants mouth, and vill by litle and litle fall downe and become againe palpable water as it was before; and therefore doubteth not but it is ſtill water whiles it hangeth in the ayre dinided into litle atomes. hereas one that ſav not the beginning ofthis operation by ater, nor obſerued how in the end it shewerh it ſelfe againe in water; might the better be excuſed, if he should not thinke that what he ſnelled were water blowne about the ayre, nor any ſubſtance of it ſelfe (becauſe he neither ſeeth nor handleth it) burt ſome aduentitious quality he knoweth not how adhering 16 the ayre. The like diſference is betweene Philoſophers that proceede orderly in their diſcourſes, and others that pay themſelues with termes which they vnderſtand not. The one, ſce euidence in what they conclude; whiles the others gueſſe wildely att randome. Ihope the Reader vill not deeme it time loſt from our maine drift, vhich we take vp thus in examples and digreſſions: for if I be not much decciued, they ſerue exceedingly to illuſtrate the matter: whichl hope I haue nowrendred ſo plaine, as no man that shall haue well weighed it, will expect that fire dilated into that rarifyed ſubſtance whichmankind(who according to the different appearance of thinges to their ſenſe, giueth different na mes vnto them) calleth light, should burne like that groſer ſubſtance which from doing ſo they call fire; nor doubt but that they may be the ſame thing more or leſſe attenuated; as leafe gold, that flyeth in the ayre as light as downe, is as truly gold as that in an ingott which being heauier ithen any orher ſubſtance falleth moſt forcibly vnto the ground. Vhat we haue ſaid of the vnburning fire ( hich we call light ſtreaming from the ſlame of a candle; may eaſily be applyed to all other lights deprived of ſenſible heat, whereof ſome appeare with flame, others without it: of the firſt ſort of which, are the innoxious flames that are ofien ſeene on the haire of mens heads, and horſes manes, on the maſtes of shippes, ouer graues, and fatt marish roundes, and the like: and ofthe latter ſort, are glow wormes, and ſe lightconſeruing ſtones, rotten wood, ſome kindes of fish and of flesh When they begin to putrify, and ſome other thinges of the like nature. Now to anſ7ere the ſecond part of this obiection, that e dayly ſcc great heates without any light, as well as much light withou hy any heat, and therefore light and fire can not be the ſame thing: ue you may call to mind, how denſe bodies are capable of preas quantiof ties of rare ones; and thereby, it cometh to paſſe that bodies which repugne to the dilatation of flame, may neuertheleſſe haue much fireencloſed in them. As in a ſtoue; let the fire be neuer ſo great, yer it appeareth not outwardes to the ſight, although that ſtoue varme allthe roomes neere it. So when many litle partes of heate are impriſo ied in as many litle celles of groſſe earthy ſubſtance, (which are like ſo many litle ſtoues to them) that imprilonement vill not hinder them from being very hoat to the ſenſe of feeling (which is moſt perceptible of denſe thinges.) But becauſe they are choaked with the cloſeneſſe of the groſſe matrer wherein they are encloſed, they can not breake out into a body of flame or light, ſo to diſcouer their nature: Which ſas we haue ſaid before) is the moſt vnfitt way for burning, for e ſee that light muſt be condenſed, to produce flame and fire; as flame muſt be, to burne violently. Hauing thus cleared the third obiection, ſas Iconceiue;) lett vs goe th on to the fourths which requireth that we ſatisfy their inquiſition, of who aske what becometh of that vaſt body oſshining light ſ(if it be a body) that filleth all the diſtance betweene heauen and earthi and vanisheth ina moment, as ſoone as a cloude or the moone interpoſethit ſelfe betweene the ſunne and us; or that the ſunne quitteth our hemiſphere? No ſigne attall remainethof it after the extinction of it, as doth of allother ſubſtances: whoſe de ſtruction, is the birth ofſome new thing. Whither thenis it ſlovne? We may be perſuaded that a miſt is a corporeall ſubſtance, becauſe it turneth to droppes of water vpon the tigges that it enuironeth: and ſo we might eeoe light to be fire, ifatter the burning of it out, we found any ashes remaining: but experience aſſureth vs, that after it is extinguished, it leaueth not the leaſt ve ſtigium behind it of hauing beene there. No, beſore we anſivere this obiection, ve will entreate our aduerſary to call to minde, how we haue in our ſolution of the former, declared and proued that the light which( for example) shineth fromd candle, is no more t ien the flame is, from whence it ſpringeth, the one being condenſed, and the other dilated;) and that the flame is in a perpetuall fluxe of conſumption about the circumference, and of reſtauration att the center. æhere it ſucketh in the fewell: and then, we will enquire of him, what becometh of that body of flame which ſo continually dyeth and is renewed, an. leaueth no remainder behindit; as well as he doth ofvs, what becometh of our body of light, which in like manner is alwayes dying and alwayes ſpringing fresh ? And when he hath vell conſidered it, he vill find that one anſwere vill ſerue for both. Which is: that as the fire ſtreameth out from the fountaine of ir, and groveth more ſubtile by its dilatation, it ſinketh the more eaſily into thoſe bodies it meeteth withall: the firſt of which, and that enuironeth it round about, is ayre. With ayre then, it mingleth and incorporateth it ſelfe; and by conſequence, with the other litle bodies hat are mingled with the ayre: and in them, it receiueth the changes which nature worketh; by which, it may be turned into the other Elements,if there be occaſion; or be ſtill conſerued in bodies that require heate.  Vpon this occaſion, I remember a rare experiment that a noble 8. man of much ſincerity, and a ſingular frind of mine, told me he had An experiment ſeene: which was, that by meanes of glaſſes made ina very particu-  ſent . lar manner, and artificially placed one by an other, he had ſeene the light may be ſunne beames gathered together, and precipitared downe into a Pciptar brownish or purplish red pouder. There could be no fallacy in this P operation: for nothing whatſoeuer, was in the glaſſes when they were placed and diſpoſed for this intent: and it muſt be in the hoat time of the yeare; elſe the eſfect would not follow. And of this Magiſtery, he could gather ſome dayes, neere two ounces in a day. And it was of a ſtrange volatile nature: and would pierce and imprint his ſpirituall quality into gold it ſelfe (the heauieſt and moſt fixed body we conuerſe withall] in a very short time. If this be plainely ſo, without any miſtaking; then, mens eyes and handes may tell them what becometh of light when it dyeth, ifa great deale of it were ſwept together. But from what cauſe ſoeuer this experience had its eſfect, our reaſon may be ſatisfyed with what e haue ſaid aboue: forIconfeſſe, formy part, I beleeue the appearing body might be ſome thing that came along with the ſunne beames, and was gathered by them; but not their pure ſubſtance. Some peraduenture villobiect thoſe lampes, which both auncient The Autl and moderne writers haue reported to haue been found in tombes opinionconand vrnes, long time before eloſed vp from mens repayre vnto them ceming lnto ſupply them with new fewell: and therefore they beleeue ſuch ſ3ſſẽ beca fires to feede vpon nothing; and conſequently, to be inconſumptible found in tom. and perpetuall. Vhich if they be, then our doctrine that will haue bes, ish, inlight to be nothing but the body of fire perpetually floving from its ſghu. center, and perpetually dying; can not be ſound: for in time, ſuch fires would neceſſarily ſpend themſelues in light: although light be ſo ſubtile a ſubſtance that an exceeding litle quantity of fewell, may be dilated into a vaſt quantity of light. Yet ſtill there would be ſome conſumption; which how imperceptible ſocuer in a short time, yet after a multitude of reuolutions of yeares, it muſt needes diſcouer it ſelfe. To thisIanſuere: that for the moſt part, the wittneſſes who teſtify originally the ſtories of theſe lights, are ſuch as a rationall man can not expect from them that exactneſſe or nicety of obſeruation, vhich is requiſite for our purpoſe; for they are vſually, groſſe labouring people, who as they digge the ground for other intentions, do ſlumble vpon theſe lampes b chance before they are aware: and for the moſt part, they breake them in the finding, and they imagine they ſee a glimpſe of light, which vanisheth before they can in a manner take notice of it; and is peraduanture but rthe gliſtering of the broken glaſſe or glaſed pott, which reflecteth the outward light as ſoone as by rummaging in the ground and diſcouering the glaſſ, the light ſtriketh vpon it; (in ſuch manner as ſome times a diamond by a certaine encountring of light in a dusky place, may in the ſirſt twincling of the motion, ſeeme to ſparkle like fire:) and afterardes, vhen they shew their broken lampe, and tell their tale to ſome man of a pitch of witt aboue them, who is curious to informe himſelfe of all the circumſtances that may concerne ſuch lights; they ſtraine their memory to anſvere him ſatisfactorily vnto all his demandes: and thus, for his ſake they perſuade themſelues to remember what they neuer ſav. And he againe on his ſide, is willing to helpe out the ſtorya litle. And ſo, after awhile, a very formall and particular relation is made of it. As happeneth in like ſort, in reporting of all ſtrange and vnuſuall thinges: which, euen thoſe that in their nature abhorre from lying, are naturally apt to ſtraine a litle and fashion vp in a handſome mould; and almoſt to perſuade themſelues they ſaw more then they did: ſo innate it is vnto euery man, to deſire the hauing of ſome preeminence beyond his neighbours; be it but in pretending to haue ſeene ſome thing which they haue not. Therefore, before I engage my ſelfe in giuing any particular anſwere to this obiection of pretended inconſumptible lights, I would gladly ſee the effect certainely auerred and vndoubtedly roued: for, the teſtimonies which Fortunius Licetus produceth ſuho hath been very diligent in gathering them, and very ſubtile in diſcourſing vpon them and is the exacteſt author that hath ritten vpon this ſubiect) do not ſeeme vnto mee to make that certainty, which is required for the eſtablishing of a ground in Philoſophy. Neuertheleſſe, if there be aby certaine experience in this particular, I should thinke that there migh be ſome art by circulation of feell, to maintaine the ſame light for a great company of yeares. But I should not eaſily be perſuaded, that eyther flame or light could be made without any manner of conſuming the body which ſerueth them for feell THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. An anſuere to three other obicctions formerly propoſed, againſt light being a ſubſtance. xXarg⸗ Avino thus defended our ſelues from their obiectionss g who would not allow light to be fire; and hauing ſatisfyed Light 2EN their inquiſition, who would know what becometh of it Iy when it dyeth, if it be a body: we vill now apply our ſelues to rome anſere their diſficulties, who vill not lett it paſſe for a body, ſſihęene becauſe it is in the ſame place vith an other body; as, vhen the any ſen ſunrebeames enlighten all the ayre, and when the] ſeuerall lights of 2æt o n- : though rvo diſtinct candles are both ofthem euery where in the ſame roome. ſene t Vhich is the ſubſtance of the ſecond maine obiection. do ſo. This of the iuſtling of the ayre, is eaſily anſwered thus: that the ayre being a very diuiſible body, doth without reſiſtance yield as much place as is requiſite for light. And that light, though our eyes iudge it diffuſed cuery where, yet is nottruly in euery point or atome of ayre: but to make usſeę j& euery where, it ſuſiceth that itbe in euery part of the ayrè whichꝶt as bigge as the blacke or ſight of our eye, ſo that we can not ſett our eye in any poſition where it receiueth not impreſſions of light. In the ſame manner as perfumes: which though they be ſo groſſe bodies that they may be ſenſibly waſted by the wind; neuertheleſſe, they do ſo fill the ayre, that we can putt our noſc in nopart of the roome, where a perfume is burned, but ve shall ſmell it. And the like is of miſtes; as alſo of the ſprouted water to make a perfume, which we mentioned aboue. But becauſe pure diſcourſes, in ſuch ſmall thriddes as theſe, do but veakly bind ſuch readers as are not accuſtomed vnto them; and that Ivoud (if it be poſſible) render this treatiſe intelligible to euery rationall man, hov euer litle verſed in ſcholaſtike learning (among whom I expect it will haue a fairer paſſage, then among thoſe that are already dee pely imbued with other principles: ) lett vs try if we can herein informe our ſelues by our ſenſe, and bring our eyes for witineſſe of what we ſay. He then that is deſirous to ſatisfy himſclfe in this particular; may purt himſelfe in a darke roome, through vhich the ſunne ſendeth his beames by a cranie or litle hole in the wall; and he vill diſcouer a multitude of litle atomes flying about in that litle ſtreame of light; hich his eye can not diſcerne, when he is enuironed on all ſides witha fulllight. Then lett him examine, whether or no there be light in the middeſt /f thoſe litle bodies: and his owne reaſon vill eaſify tell him, that if thoſc bodies were as perſpicuous as the ayre, they would not reſlect vpon our eyes, the beames by vhich wee ſee them. And therefore, he vill boldly conclude, that att the leaſt ſuch partes of them as reflect lightvntovs, do not admitt it, nor lett it ſinke into them. Then let him conſider the multitude of them; and the litle diſtance betwixt one an other; and how neuertheleſſe they hinder not our ſight; but we haue it free to diſcouer all obiects beyond them, in what poſition ſoeuer ve place our eye: and when he thus perceiueth that theſe opacous bodies, which are euery where, do not hinder the eye from iudging light to haue an equall plenary diffuſion through the whole place that it irradiateth, he can haue no difficulty toallow ayre, ſthat is diaphanous, and more ſubtile farre then they, and conſcquendy, iniſib e into leſſeratomes, and hauing leſſer pores, giueth leſſe ſcope vnto our eyes to miſſe light, then they do) to be euery where mingled with light, though we ſee nothing but light, and can not diſcerne any breach or diuiſion of it. Eſpecially, when he shall adde vnto this conſideration; that the ſubtile body which thus filleth the ayre, is the moſt viſible thing in the vorld; and that, vhereby all other thinges are ſeene: and that the ayre which it mingleth itſelfe with,is not at all viſible, by reaſon of the extreme diaphancity of it, and eaſy reception of the light into euery pore of it without any reſiſtance or reũection: and that ſuch is the nature of light, as it eaſily drownetian obſcure body, if it be not toobigge: and not onely ſuch, but euen other light bodies: for ſo we kno as well the fixed ſtars as the planets, are concealed from our ſight, by neereneſſe to the ſunne; neither the lightneſſe of the one, nor the bigneſſe of the other, preuailing againſt the darkening of an exuperant light: and we haue dayly experience of the ſame, in very pure chryſtall 3laſſes and in very cleare water; which though we can not diſccrne by our ſight, if they be in certaine poſitions; neuertheleſſe, by experience we find that they reſlect much light, and conſequently haue great ſtore of opacous partes: and then he can not chooſe but concſude, that it is impoſſibſe, but light should appeare as it doth, to be euery where, and to be one continued thing, though unis diſcourſe withall aſſure himit is euery where mingled with ayre. 2. And this very anſwere Ithinke will draw withit by conſequence, Ian er the ſolution of thę other partofthe ſame obiection; which is, of many diaphenons lights ioyning in the ſame place; and the ſameis likewiſe, concerning body ſ- the images of colours euery where croſſing one an other without cent to con-hinderance. But to raiſe this contemplationa ſtraine higher; lett vs taineboth ayre conſider, how light being the moſt rare ofall knowne bodies is of and light, to- è La: ] 2eth -ith a its owne nature (by reaſon of the diuiſibility that followeth rarity) multitude. of diuiſible into leſſer partes then any other; and particularly then beames ituꝶ ſlame; which being mixed vith ſmoake and other corpulency, lights, mthout falleth very short oſ light. And this, to the proportion in hich it is penettatingpore rare then the body it is compared vnto. Nov a great Matheont an other. matician hauing deuiſed how to meaſure the rarefaction of gunnepowderinto flame, found the diameter ;0 times encreaſed; and ſo concluded, that the body of the flame, was in proportion to the body of the gunnepowder it as made of, as i25000 is to one. Vherefore, by the immediately proceeding conſequence, we find that 125000 partes of flame may be couched in the roome of one leaſt part of gunnepowder, and peraduenture, many more, conſidering how porousa body gunnepowder is. Which being admitted, it is enident that although light were as groſſe as the flame of gunnepowder, and gunnepowder were as ſolide as gold; yet there might paſſe 1;000 rayes of light, in the ſpace wherein one leaſt part of gunnepowder might be contained: which ſpace, would be ab olutely inuiſible vnto vs, and be contained many times in the bigneſſe of the ſight of a mans eye. Out of hich we may gather what an infinity of obiects may ſeeme vnto vs to croſſe themſelues in the ſame indiuiſible place, and yet may haue roome ſufficient for euery one to paſſe his way, ithout hindering his fellow. Wherefore, ſeeing that one ſingle light could not ſend rayes enough to fill euery litle ſpace ofayre that is capable of light, 7and the leſſe, the further it is from the ame )it is obuious enough to conceiue, how in the ſpace where the ayre is, there is capacity for the rayes of many candles. WVhich being well lummed vp will take away the great admiration how the beames of light, though they be corporeall, can in ſuch great mutitudes, without hindering one an other, enter into bodies and come to oureye: and vill she, that it isthe narrowneſſe ofour capacities, and not the defect of nature, which maketh theſe diũiculties ſeeme ſo great: forsh. hath ſufficiently prouided for all theſe ſubtile operations of fire; as alſo for the entrance of it into glaſſe, and intoall other ſolide bodies that are diaphanous (vpon which vas grounded the laſt inſtance the ſecond obiection preſſed:) forall ſuch bodies being conſiituted by the operation of fire (which isalwayes in motion) there muſt needes be wayes leſt for it both to enter in and to euaporate out. And this is moſt euident in glaſſe which being wrought by an extreme violent fire and ſelling With it,as water and other thinges do by the mixture of fire; muſt neceſſarily haue great ſtore of fire in it ſelfe whiles it is boyling, as we ſee byits being red hoat. And hence it is, that the workemen are forced to lett it coole by degrees in ſuch relentinges of fire as they call their nealing heates: leaſt it should shiuer in pieces by a violent ſucceeding of ayre in the roome of the fire; for hat being of greater partes then the fire, would ſtraine the pores of the glaſe too ſoddainly, and breake itallin pieces to gett ingreſſion: whereas in thoſe nealing heates the ayre being rarer, leſſer partes of it ſucceede to the fire, and leiſurely ſtretch the pores without hurt. And therefore we neede not wonder getteth through other bodies, ſeeing, the experience of Alchymiſtes dothaſſure vs thatit is hard to find any other body ſo impenetrable as glaſſe. But now to come to the anſere of the firſt, and in appearance moſt poerfull obiection againſt the corporeity of light; which vrgeth that his motionis performed in an inſtant, and therefore can not belong to what is materiall and clothed with quantity. Wee vill endeauour to shew how vnable the ſenſe is to iudge of ſundry ſortes of motions of Bodies, and how groſy it is miſtaken in them. And ihen, when it shall appeare that the motion of light muſt neceſſarily be harder to be obſerued then thoſe others: I conceiue, all that is raiſed againſt our opinion by ſo incomperent a iudge, vill fall flatt to the ground. Firſt then, lett mee putt the reader in minde, how if euer he marked children when they play with fireſtickes, they mooue and vhirle them round ſo faſt, that the motion vill coſen their eyes, and repreſent an entire circle of fire vnto them: and vere it ſomewhat diſtant, in a darke night, that one played ſo vith a lighted torch, it would appeare a conſtant wheele of ſire vithout any diſcerning of motion in it. And then, lett him conſider hov ſlow a motion that is in reſpect of what it is poſible a body may participate of: and he may ſafely conclude, that it is no wonder though the motion of light be not deſcryed, and that indeede no argument can be made from thence to prooue that light is. not a body. But lett vs examine this conſideration a litle further, and compare it to the motion of the earth or heauens: lett the appearin circle of the fire, be ſome three foote diameter, and the time i one entire circulation of it, be the ſixtieth part of a minute; of vhich minutes, there are 60. in an houre; ſo that in a whole day, there will be but 86400. of theſe partes of time. Now the diameter of the wheele of fire being but of three foote, the whole quantity of ſpace that it mooueth in that atome of time vill be att the moſt io. foote; which is three paces and a foote: of which partes, there are neere eleuen millions in the compaſſe of the carth: ſo that if the earth be mooued round in 24. houres, it muſt go neere 10. times as faſt as the boyes ſticke doth, which by its ſwift motion deceiueth our eye. But if we allow the ſunne, the moone, and the fixed ſtarrs to moue; how extreme ſwiſt muſt their flight be, and how imperceptible would their motion be in ſuch a compaſſe as our ſight would reach vnto? And this being certaine, that whether the earth or they do moue, the appearances to vs are the ſame; it is cuident, that as now they can not be perceiued to moue ſ as peraduenture they do not;) ſo it would be the very ſame in shew to vs, although they did moue. If the F BODIES, Chap. VII. 55 ſunne were neere vs, and galloped a that rate; ſurely-ve could not diſtinguish betweene the beginning and ending of his race: but therc would appeare one permanent line of light from Eaſt to Veſt, without any motion att all: as the torch ſcemerh to make, with ſo much a ſlover motion, one permanent immooueable vheele of fire. But contrary to this effect, ve ſee that the ſunne and ſtarrs by onely being remooued further from our ejes, do coſen our ſight ſo groſſely that we can not diſcerne them to be mooued art all. One would imagine that ſo rapide and ſwift a motion, should be perceiued in ſome ſort or other,  which, whether it be in the earth, or in them, is all one to this purpoſe.) Eyther we should ſec them change their places hiſes ve looke vpon them, as arrowes and birdes do when they ſly in the ayre: or elſe, they should make a ſtreame of light bigger then themſelues, as the torch doth. But none of all this happeneth: lett vs gaze vpon them ſo long and ſo attentiuely that our eyes be dazeled with looking, and all that while they ſeeme to ſtand immooueable: and our eyes can giue vs no account of their iourney till it be ended. They diſcerne it not whiles it is in doing: ſo that if we conſult with no better cownſailour then them, we may wonder to ſee that body at night ſetting in the Weſt, which in the morning ve beheld riſing in the Eaſt. But that which ſeemeth to be yett more ſtrange, is, that theſe bodies mooue croſſe vs, and neuertheleſſe are not perceiued to haue any motion att all. Conſider then how much eaſier it is for a thing that mooueth towardes vs, to be with vs before we are aware. A nimble fencer ill put in a thruſt ſo uicke, that the foile will be in your boſome, when you ſougt it a yard oſf, becauſe in the ſame moment you ſaw his point ſo farre diſtant, and could not diſcerne it to mooue towards you, till you felt the rude ſalutation it gaue you. If then you ill compare the body of light with theſe others that thus deceiue vs in regard of motion; you muſt needes agree it is much rashneſſe to conclude it hath no motion, becauſe ve can not diſcerne the ſucceſſion of it. Conſider that it is the ſubtileſt of all the bodies that God hath made. Exaftine the paths of it, which for the ſmallneſſe of their thriddes, and the extreme diuiſibility of them, and their pliant application of themſelues to whatſocuer hath pores, are almoſt without reſiſtance. Calculate the ſtrange multiplication of it, by a perpetuall momentary renouation of its ſtreames. And caſt with your ſelfe, with what extreme force it ſpringeth out and flyeth abroad. And on the other ſide, reflect how all theſe thinges are directly oppoſite and contrary in thoſe other great bodies, whoſe motion neuertheleſſe 58 A TREATISE appeareth not vnto us iill it Je done and paſt. And when you haue vell weighed all this; you muſt needes prant that they who in this caſe guide themſclues meerely by what appeareth vnto their eyes, are ill iudgers of what they haue not well examined. Bur peraduenture ſome who can not all of a ſoddaine be veaned from what their ſenſe hath ſo long fed them vith; may aske yet further, how it chanceth that we haue no effects of this motion? It sheweth not ĩt ſelfe in the ayre, coming to us a farre of. It ſtayeth not a thought, or ſlackneth his ſpeed in flying ſo vaſt a ſpace as is from the ſunne to vs. In fine there is no ĩſouery of it. But if Galileus his conception be well grounded; that lightning giueth vs an incling of its motion, beginning from a litle and encreaſing to a grearer: or if Monſieur des Cartes his opinion that it goeth ſlower in refraction, be true: we shall nor neede to ſtudy long for an anſwere. But in Galileus his experience, it may be the breaking of the cloude which receiueth that ſucceſſion of motion which we ſee: and no ſlowneſſe thãt light can acquire by the reſiſtance of the refracting body, can be ſo greate as to make that difference of lines which Monſieur Des Cartes moſt ingeniouſly (though I much doubt not truly) hath applyed to yield the reaſon of refraction: as will appeare in our further diſcourſe. Therefore, theſe being vncertaine; we vill, to shew the vnreaſonableneſſe of this queſtion, ſuppoſe there may be ſome obſeruable tardity in the motion of light; and then aske of them, how we should arriue to perceiue it? What ſenſe should we employ in this diſcouery: It is true, we are ſatisfyed that ſound taketh vp time in coming to our eares: but it is, becauſe our eyes are nimbler then they, and can perceiue a good way diſtant the carpenters axe falling vpon the timber that he heweth, or the fire ſlashing out of the canon, before they heare any newes of them: but shutt your eyes; or enquire of a blind man; and then neither you nor he can tell vhecher thoſe ſoundes fill your eares att the very inſtant they were begotten, or haue ſpent ſome time in their iourney to you. Thus then our eyes inſtruct our eares. But is there any ſenſe quicker then the ſight? or meanes to know ſpeedier then by our eyes? Or tan they ſee light, or any thing elſe; vntill it be vith them? Ve may then aſſuredly conclude, that its motion is not to be diſcerned as it cometh vpon vs; nor it ſelfe  be perceiued, till its beames are in our eyes. But if there were any meanes to diſcouer its motion, ſurely it muſt be in ſome medium, through which it muſt ſtruggle to gert, as fire doth through iron; which encreaſing there by degrees, at laſt (when it is red hoat) ſendeth beames of light quite through the plate that att the firſtrefuſed them paſſage. And it maketh to this purpoſe, that the lightconſeruing ſtones which are gathered in al mu bee ſert in the ſunne for ſome while before they retaine light: and the light willappeare in them when they are brought backe into the darke, greater or leſſer (vntillthey come to their vimoſt periode) according as they haue beene longer or a leſſer while in the ſunne. And our eyes the longer they reinaine in che light, the more dazeled they are if they be ſuddainely paſſed into the darke. And a curious experiencer did aſfirme, that the likeneſſe ofany obiect  but particularly he had often obſerued it of aniron grate) if it be ſtrongly enlightened will appeare to an other, in the eye of him that looketh ſtrongly and ſteadily vpon it till he be dazeled by it; euen after he shall haue turned his eyes from it. And the vheele of fire could neuer be made appeare vnto our eye by the whirling of the fireſticke we euen now ſpoke of; vnleſſe the impreſſion made by the fire from one place, did remaine in the eye a while after the fire was gone from the place vhence it ſent that ray. Whence it is euident, that lęht , andthe pictures of obiects, do require time to ſetile and to vnſcrile in a ſubiect. If then light maketh a greater impreſſion vith time, vhy should we doubt but the firſt cometh alſo in time; vere our ſenſc ſo nimble as to perceiue iu: 3illli But then it may be obiected, that the ſunne would neuer be truly in that place in whichvnto oureyes it appeareth to be: becauſe that, it beiag ſeene by meanes ofthe light which iſſueth from it; ifthat light required time to moue in, the ſunne (whoſe motion is ſo ſuift) would be remooued fromthe place where the light leftir, before itcould be vith vs to giue tidingesof him. To this I anſuere, allowing that peraduenture it may be ſo. Vho knoweth the contrary?Or what inconuenience would follow, ifit be admitted? Indeed, how can it be otherviſe:? In refraction, we are ſure it is ſo: and therefore att no time but when the ſunne is perpendicularly ouer our heades, we can be certaine of the contrary allthoughit should ſend its light to vs in an inſtant. Vnleſſe happily the truth of the caſe should be, that the ſunne doth normooue aboutvs; but we turne tò his light: and then, the obiection alſo looſethits ayme. But the more we preſſe the quickneſſeof light, the more ve engage our ſelues in the difficulty nꝶ light doth not shatter the ayre in pieces, as likewiſe all ſolide bodies whatſoeuer: for the maſters of naturall Philoſophy do tell us, that a ſofter thing witha great velocity, is as powe: full in effect when it giueth a blov, asa harder thing going ſlowly. And accordingly experience teacheth vs,thata tallow candle shott in gunne, vill goe through a borad or kill aman. Wherefore light hauing ſuchan infinite cèlerity, should alſo haue an vnreſiſtable foree, to pierce and shatter, not onely the ayre, but euen the hardeſt bodies at are. Peraduenture ſome may thinke it reaſonable i10 grant the conſequence (in due circu mſtances) ſince experience teacheth vs that the congregation ofa litle lizht by a glaſſc , vill ſert very ſolide bodies on fire,and will melt mertals ma very short ſpace; which sheweth agreat actiuity; and the great actiuity shewetha great percuſſion, burning being eſfected by a kind of attrition of the thing burned. And the great force vhich firesheweth in gunnes and in mines, being but a multiplication of the ſame, doth euidently conuince that of its owne nature, it maketh a ſtrong percu ſſion, vhen all due circumſtances concurre. Vhereas it hath but litle effect, ifthe due circumſtances be wantingias we may obſerue in the inſenſible burning of ſo ratifyed a body as pure ſpiritt ofwine conuerted into flame. But we muſt examine the matter more particularly, and muſt ſecke the cauſe why a violent effect doth not alwayes appeare, whereſoeuer light ſtriketh; forthe which wee are to note that three thinges do concurre to makea percuſſion great. The bigneſſe, the denſity and the celerity of the body mooued. Of which three, there is only one in light; to witt,celerity: for it hath the gieateſt rarity, and the rayes of it are the ſmalleſt parcels, ofall naturall bodies And theiefore ſince only celerity is conſiderable in the account of lights percuſſions, ve mult examine what celerity is neceſſary to make the ſtre ke ofa ray ſeaſible: firft then we ſee that all the motes cf the ayre, nay euen feathers and ſtrawes, do make no ſenſible percuſſion when they fallvpon vs: therefore we muſt in light haue att the leaſt a celerity that may be to the celerity ofthe ſtraw fulling vpon our hand ( for example,) as the denſity of the ſtraw is to the denſity of light, that the percuſſion of light may be in the leaſt degree ſenſible, But lett vs take a corne of gunnepowder inſteede of a ſtraw (betweene which there can not be much difference) and then putting that the denſity offire,is to the denſity of gunnepowder as i. to 1250003 and that the denſity ofthe light we haue here in the earth, is to the denſity ofthat part of fire which is in the ſunnes body, as the body ofthe ſunneĩs to that body which is called Orbs magnus, ( whoſe ſemidiameter is the diſtance betweene the ſunne and the earth;) which muſt be in ſubtriple proportion of the diameter of the ſunne to the diameter of the great orbe: it followeth that 12500. being multiplyed by the proportion ofthe great orbe vnto the ſunne ( vhich Galileo telleth vs is as 1o6000000. vnto one) will giue a ſcantling of what degree of celerity light muſt haue more then a corne of gunnepouder, to recompence the exceſſe of weight which is in a corne of gunnepouder, aboue that which is in aray of light, as bigge asa corne of gunnepouder. Which vill amount to be much greater then the proportion of the ſemidiater of Orbis magnus,to the ſemidiater ofthe corne of gunnepouder: for ifyou reckon ;. graines of gunnepouder to a barley cornes breadih,and i2. of them in an inch, ĩ I2. inches ina foote, and;. feete in a pace, and I000. paces in a mile,and 3500. miles in the ſemidiameter of the earth, magnus, there will be in it but ꝓ132430000000. graines of gunnepouder; whereas the other calculation maketh light to be 132530000000000. times raver then gunnepouder; which is almoſt tenne times a greater proportion then the other. And yet this celerity ſupplyeth but one ofihe two conditions wanting in light to make its percuſſions ſenſible, namely denſiry. Now becauſe the ſame velocity, in a body ofa leſſer bulke, doth not make ſo great a percuſion as it doth in a bigger body: and that the littleneſſe of the leaſt partes of bodies followeth the proportion of their rarity: this vaſt proportion of celerity muſt againe be drawne into it ſelfe, to ſupply for the exceſſe in bigneſſe that a corne of gunnepouder hath ouer an atome of light: and the product of this multiplication ill be the celerity required to ſupply for both defects. Which euidently sheweth, it is impoſſible that a ray of light should make any ſenſible percuſſion, though it be a body. Eſpecially conſidering that ſenſe neuer taketh notice of what is perpetually done in a moderate degree. And therefore, after this minute locking into all circumſtances, we neede not haue difficulty in allowing vnto light the greateſt celerity imaginable, and a percuſſion proportionate to ſucha celerity in ſo rarea bodyi and yett not feare any violent eſfect from its blowes: vnleſſe it be condenſed, and many partes of it be brought togerher to worke as if they were but one. As concerning the laſt obiection; that if light were a body, it would be fanned by the wind: wee muſt firſt conſider what is the cauſe ofa thinges appcaring to be mooued: and then examine what force that cauſe hath in Iight. As for the firſt part; we ſee that when a body is diſcerned now in one phcœno in an other, thenit appeareth te be mooucd. And this we ſee happeneth alſo in light; as when the ſunne or a candle is carried or mooueth, the light thereofin the body ofthe candle or ſunne ſeemeth to be mooued along with it. And the likeis in a shining cloud or comete. But to apply this to our purpoſe: wee muſt note that the intention of the obiectionis, that the light which goeth from the fire to an opacous body farre diſtant without interruption of its continuity, should ſeeme to be iogged orputt out of its way, by the wind that croſſeth it. Wherein the ſirſt fayling is,that the obiectour conceiueth sigh to ſend ſpecies vnto our eye from the middeſt ofits line: whereas with a litle conſideration he may perceiue, that no light is ſeene by vs but that whichis reflected from an opacous body to oureye: ſo that the light he meanerh in his obiection, is neuer ſeene att all. Secondlyi it is manifeſt that the light which ſtricketh our eye, doth ſtrike it in a ſtraight line;and ſeemeth to be att the end of that ſtraight line, whereſoeur that is; and ſo can neuer appeare to be in an other place: but the light which wee ſee in an other place, we econceiueto be an other light. Which maketh it againe euident, that the light can neuer appeare to shake, though wee should ſuppoſe that light may be ſeene from the middle ofits line; for no p: of wind orayre can come into any ſenſible place in that middle oft - line , with ſuch ſpeede that nev light from the ſource doth not illuminate it ſooner then it can be ſeene by vs: wherefore ĩt willappeare to vs illuminated as being in that place:and iherefore, the light can neuer appeare shaken. And laſtly, it is caſier for the ayre or vind to deſtroy the light, then it is to remooue it out of its place: wherefore, it can neuer ſo remoue it out of its place, as that we should ſee it in an other lace. But ifit should remooue it, it would wrappe it vp vithinit ſelfe and hide it. In concluſion; after this long diſpute concerning the nature of light:ifwe confider well what hath beene ſaid on both ſides(to which much more might be added, but that we haue already treſpaſſed in length, and I conceiue, enough is ſaid to decide the matrer) an equall iudge vill find the ballance of the queſtion to hang vpon heẽ termes: that, to proue the nature of light to be materiall and corporeall, are brought a company of accidents vell knowne to be the proprieties of quantity or bodies; and as vell knowne to be in light. Euen ſo farre as that itis manifeſt, that light in its begining before it be diſperſed, is fire;and ifagaine it be gathered together, it sheweth it ſelfe againe to be fire. And the receptacles of it,are the receptacles ofa body: being a multitude ofpores; as the hardneſſe and coldneſſe of tranſparent thinges, do giue vs to vnderſtand,; of which ve shall hereafter haue occaſion to diſcourſe. On the contrary fide, whatſocuer arguments are brought againſt lights being a body, are onely negatiues. As, that e ſee not any motion of light; that we do not diſcerne, where the confines are betweene light and ayre; that we ſee not roome for both of them, or for more lights to be together, and the likè: which is to oppoſe negatiue proofes againſt affirmatiue ones; and to build a doctrine vpon the defect of our ſenſes; or vpon the likeneſſe of bodies which are extremely vnlike, expecting the ſame eſfects from the moſt ſubtile as from the moſtgroſſe ones. All which, together with the autority of Ariſtotle and his followers, haue turned light into darkneſſe, and haue made vs almoſt deny the light of our owne eyes. Nov then, to take our leaue of this important queſtion: lett vs returne to the principles from whence we began, and conſider; that ſeeing fire is the moſt rare of all the Elements, and very dry: and that out of the forme it hath that it mày be cutt into very ſmall piceces; and out ofthe latter, that it conſerueth its owne figure, and ſo is apt to diuide, whatſoeuer ſluide body: and ioynin gto theſe two rinciples, that it multiplyeth extremely in its ſource. It muſt of nece ſity follow that it shooteth out in great multitudes, litle ſmall partes into the ayre and into other bodies circũfuſed, with great dilatation, ina ſphericall manner. And likeviſe that theſe litle partes are eaſily broken: and new ones, ſtill following the former, are ſtill multiplyed in ſtraięht lines from the place where they breae. Out of which it is euident, that of neceſſity it muſt in a manner fill all places; and that no ſenſible place is ſo litle, but that fire will be found in it, if the medium be capacious. As allo, that is extreme leaſt partes vill be very eaſily ſuallowed vp in the partes of the ayre, which are humide; and by their enfolding, be as it were quite loſt; ſoas tolooſ the appearance of fire. Againe that in its reſlections, it will follo the nature of groſſer bodies, and haue glidinges like them; which is that, we call refractions. That, litle ſtreaminges fromit will croſſe one an other in exceſſiue greãt numbers, in an vnſenſible part of ſpace, without hindering one an other. That its motion vill be quicker then ſenſe can iudge of,and therefore, will ſeeme to mooue inan inſtant, or to ſtand ſtillas in a ſtagnation. That if there be any bodies ſo porous with litle and thicke pores: as that the pores arriue neere vnto equalling the ſubſtance ofthe body, then, ſucha body villbe ſo filled vith theſe litle particles of fire, that it will appeare as if there were no ſtoppe in its paſſage, but were all filled with fire; and yet, many of theſe litle partes will be reſlected. And whatſoeuer qnalities else we find in light, we shall be able to deriue them outof theſe principles, and shew that fire muſt of neceſſity doe what experience teacheth vs that light doeth. That is to ſay in one word, it will shew vs that fire is light. But if fire be light, then light muſt needes be fire. And ſo we leaue this matter. THE NINETH CHAPTER. Of Locall Motion in common. 2 Ho võou in the fifth chapter, we made onely earth the æl5” pretender in the controuerſy againſt fire for ſuperiority in DFF actiuity; (and invery truth, the greateſt force of grauity doth appeare in thoſe bodies which are eminently earthy:) neuertheleſſe, both water and ayre (as appeareth out of the fourth chapter of the Elements) do agree ith earth in hauing grauity. And grauity, is the chicfe vertue to make them efficients. So that vpon the matter, this plea is common to all the three Elements. Vherefore, to explicate this vertue, vhereby theſe three weighty Elemẽts do worke; lett vs call to minde what we ſaid in the beginning of the laſt chapter concerning locall motion: to witt that according as the body mooued, or the diuider did more and more enter into the diuided body; ſo, it did ioyne it ſelfe to ſome new partes of the medium or diuided body, and did in like manner forſake others. Vhence it happeneth that in euery part of motion, it poſſeſſerth a reater part of the medium then it ſelfe can fill att once. And becauſe what it is,and no more; itis impoſſible that a leſſer body should att once equalliſe a greater. It followeth that this diuiſion or motion whereby a body attaineth to fill a place bigger theh it ſelfe, muſt be done ſucceſiuely: that is, it muſt fiſt ſill one part of the place it mooueth in, then an other : and ſo proceede on, till it Jaue meaſured it ſelfe ith euery part of the place hom the firſt beginning of the line of motion to the laſt periode ofit where the body reſteth. By which diſcourſeitis euident, that there can not in nature be a ſtrength ſo great as to make the leaſt or quickeſt mooueable that is, to paſſe In an inſtãt, or all together, ouer the leaſt place that can be imagined: for that vould make thæ mooued body remaining what it is, in regard ofits biggeneſſe) to equalliſe ad fitt a thing bigger then it is. Therefore it is manifeſt, that motion muſt conſiſt of rt partes as haue this nature; that whiles one ofthemis in heing, the others are not yet: and as by degrees euery new one cometh to be; all the others that were before, do vanish and ceaſe to be. Which circumſtance acco mpanying motion, we call ſucceſſion. And whatſoeuer is ſo done, is ſaid to be done in iime: vhich is the common meaſure ofall ſucceſſion, for, the change of ſituation of the ſtarrs, buteſi pecially ofthe ſunne and moone, is obſerued more or leſſe by all mãkind: and appearerh alike to euery man: andſ being the moſt knowne, conſtant, and vniforme ſucceſſion that men are vſed vnto) is as it were by nature it ſelfe ſett in their way and offered vnto them as fitteſt to eſtimate and iudge all other particular ſucceſſions, by comparing them both to it, and among themſelues by it. And accordingly we ſce all men naturally meaſure all other ſucceſſions, and xpreſſe their quantities, by comparing them to the reuolutions of the heauens: for dayes, houres, and yeares, are nothing elſe but they, or ſome determinate partes of them: vnto ſome of which,all other motions and ſucceſſions muſt of neceſſity be referred, if we vill meaſure them. And thus we ſee how all the myſtery of applying time vnto particular motions, is nothing elſe but the conſidering how farre the Agent that mooucth the ſunne, cauſcth it togo onin its iorney, whiles the Agent that mooueth a particular body, cauſeth it to performe its motion. So that it is euident, that velocity is the effect of the ſuperproportion ofthe one Agent ouer a certaine medium, in reſpect of he proportion which an other Agent hath to the ſame medium. And therefore, velocity is a quality by which one ſucceſſionis intrinſecally diſtinguished from an herthough our explication, vſcth to include time in the notions of velocity and tardity. Velocity then, is the effect ( as we ſaid) of more ſtrength in the Agent. And hauing before expreſſed, that velocity isa kind of denſity,; wee find that this kind of denſity is an excellency in ſucceſſion; as permanent denſity, is an excellency in the nature of ſubſtance, though an imperſection in the nature of quantity ſ by which we ſee,that quantity is a kind of baſe alloy added o hbſtanre; And out of this it is euident, that by how much th: quicker the motion is in equall mediums, by lo much thæ agent is the peifecter which cauſcrhit to be ſo quickæ Wherefore, it the velocity should aſcend ſo much as to admitt no propmition betweene the quickneſſe oſthe one and the tardity of the orh r,all othur circumſtances being cuen, excepting the ditference of the agents; then there mulſl be no proportion betweene the agents. Nor indeed can there be any proportion betweene them though ith re were neuer ſo great differences in other circumſtances, as long as thoſc diſferences be within any proportion. And conſequently, you ſee thtt if one agent be ſuppoſed to mooue in an inſtant, and an other in time; vhatſoeuer other diſſerences be in the bodies mooued and in ihe mediums, neuertheleſſe thæ agent which cauſeth metion in an inſtant, will be inſinite in reſpect of the agent which mooueth in time. Which is impoſlible: it being the nature of a body, that greater quantity oſ ihe ſame thing hith greater vertue, then aleſſe quantity hathiand rherefore, fora body to haue inſinire vertue, it muſt haue infinite magnitude. If any should ſay the contrays affirming that inſinite vertũe may he ina ſinite body: Iaske, whether in halfe thar body (were it diuided) the vertue would be inſinite or no? lf he acknowledge that it would not; I inferre thence, that ncither in the two partes togerher thre can be inſinite vertue: for two ſinites can not compoſe and m. k: vp one inſinite. But if he wili haue the vertue be infinite in each halfe, he therein alloweth that ih-re is no more vertue, in the whole body then in one halfe of it: hich is againſt th: nature of bodies. Now that a body can not be inſinite in greatneſſe, is prooued in the ſecond knott of M:. whires firſt Dialogue of the world. And thus it is euident, that by the vertue of pure bodies there can be no inotion in an inſtant. On the other ſide, it follow.th thit there can not he ſo litle a force in nature, but that giuing it time enough, it will mooue the greateſt eight that can be imagined: for, the thinges we treate of, being all of iſh'm quantities; they may by diuiſion and multiplication, be brought vnto cquality. As for example: ſuppoſing the weię hr of a mooueable, to be a milliò of poundesiand ihat the moouer is able to mooue the millioneth part of one of I hoſe poundes, in a million ofyeares, he millioneth partof a pace, througha mediũ of a certaine rsiy. Nov, ſecing that ycares may be multiplyed ſo, as to equaliſe the fnce of this moouer, vuto the weight of the mooueable. It followeth cleerely ihat in ſo many millions of ycares. this force may mooue t he whole weight of a million of poundes, throughth: determined medium in a determinate number of milliuns of ycares, a million of paces: for ſuch a force ĩs equall 10 the required cffect;and by conſequence, if the efſ. ct should not follow, there would be a complete cauſe putt, and no eſf ctreſult fromir. lll But peraduenture it is needſfull ro illuſtrate this point yet further: ſu proſe then a weight neuer ſo great Io be A B and a force neucr ſo litle to be B-Now if you concciue that ſome other force mooucth A, you muſt vithall conceiue that it mooueth A ſome ſpace, ſince all motion implyeth neceſſarily that it be ihrough ſome Ipace: lert thar ſpace be C D. And becauſe a body can not be mooued in a ſpace in an inſtant, but requireth ſome time to haue its motion performed in; it followeth that there muſt be a determined timæ, in which the conceiued force muſt mooue the weight A through the ſpace CD: lert that time be E F. Novthen; this is enident, that it is all one to ſay that B mooucth A,and to ſay that B mooueth A through a ſpace in a time ſo that if any part of this be left out, it can not be vnderſtood that B mooueth A. Therefore to expreſſe particularly the effect which B is to do vpon A, we muſt ſay that B muſt mooue A a certaine ſpace in a certaine time. Vhich Being ſo we may in the next place conſider that this effect of moouing A may be diminished two wayes, eyther becauſe the ſpace itis to be mooued in, is leſſenedi or the time taken vp in its motion, is encreaſed: for, asit is a greater eſfect, to mooue A through the ſpace CD, in a leſſerime then EF, ſoit isa leſſc eſfect to moue ihe ſume A, through the ſpace CD, in a greater time then EF; or through a Ieſſe ſpace then CD in the time EF. Now then, this being ſuppoſcd, thatit is a leſſe effect to mooue A through CD, in a greater time then EFE, it followeth alſo, that a leſſer vertue is able to mooue it through CD in a greater time then EF, then the vertue which is required to mooue it, htough the ſame ſpace in the time EF. Which if it be once granted ſasit can not be denyed) then multiplying the time, as much as the vertue or force required to mooue A through CD in the time EF isgreater then the force B; in ſo much time, the force B will be able to mooue A through CD. Vhich diſcourſe is enident, if we take it in the common termes: but if it be applyed to action, wherein phyſicall accidents intervene; the artificer muſt haue the iud gement to prouide for them, according to the nature of his matter. Vpon this laſt diſcourſe doth hang the principle which gouerneth Mechanikes, to witt, that the force and the diſtance of weights counterpoiſing one an other, ought to be reciprocall. That is, that by how much the one weight is heauyer then the other, by ſo much muſt the diſtance of the lighter fiom the fixed point vpon which they are mooued, be greater then the diſtance of the greater weight from the ſame point: for itis plaine that the weight which is more diſtant, muſt be mooued a greater ſpace, then the neerer weight, in the proportion of the two diſtãces. Wherefore, the force moouing it muſt carry it ina velocity of the ſuid proportion to the velocity of the orher. And conſe uently, the Agent or moouer, muſt be in that proportion more poverfi then the eontrary moouer. And out of this practiſe of Geometricians in Mechanikes ( hich is confirmed by experience) it is made euident that if other conditions be equall, the exceſſe of ſo mũch grauity willmake ſo much velocity. And ſo much velocity in proportion, will recom pence o much grauity. Out of the precedent concluſions, an other followeth: whichis, that nothing recedeth frò quictor reſt, and attaineth a great degree ofcelerity, but it muſt paſſe throughall the degrees of celerity that are below the obtained degree. And the like is, in paſſing from any leſſer degree ofvelocity vnto a greater: becauſe it muſt paſſe through all the intermediate degrees of- velocity. For by the declaration of velocity which we haue cuen now made, we ſee that there is as much reſiſtance in the medium to be ouercome vith ſpeede, as there is for it to be ouercome in regard of the quantity, or line of exrent of it: becauſe (as we haue ſaid) the force ofthe Agentin counterpoiſes, ought to be encreaſed as much as the line of extent of the medium which is to be ouercome by the Agent in equall time, doth exceede the line of extent of the medium, along which the reſiitent body is to be mooued. Vherefore, it being prooued that no line of extent, can be ouercome in an inſtant, it followeth that no defect of velocity which requirethas great a ſuperproportion in the cauſe, can be ouercome likewiſe inan inſtant. And by the ſame reaſon by which we prooue that a mooucable can not be drawne in an inſtant froma lower degree of velocity to a higher, it is with no leſſe euidence concluded that no degree of velocity can be attained in an inſtant: for diuide that degree of velocity into to halfes, and if the Agent had ouercome the one halfe, he could not ouercome the other halfe in an inſtant: much leſſe therefore is he able to ouercome the whole (that is, to reduce the mooucable from quiet to the ſaid degree ofvelocity)in an inſtant. Another reaſon may be, becauſc the moouers themſelues (ſuch moouers as we treate of here) are bodies likewiſe mooued, and do conſiſt of partes: whereof not euery one part, but a competent number of them, doth make the moouing body to be a fitt Agent able to mooue the propoſed body in a propoſed degree of celerity. Now this Agent meeting uh reſiſtance in the mooucable, and not being in the vimoſt extremity of denſity, but condenſable yet further, ?becauſe ĩt is a body; ) and that euery reſitance ( be it neuer ſo ſmall) doth worke ſomething vpon the moouer (though neuer ſo hard) to condenſe it; the partes of the moouer that are to ouercome this reſiſtance in the mooueable, muſt (to worke that effect)be condenſed and brought togetheras cloſe as is necdeſull, by this reſiſtance of the mooueable to the moouer; and ſo, the remote pores of the moouer, become neerer to the mooueable, which can not be done but ſucceſſiuely, becauſe it includeth locall motion. And this application being likeviſe diuiſible, and not all the partes flocking togetherin an inſtant to the place where they are to exerciſe their pover; it followeth, that whiles there are fewer moouing partes knitt together, they muſt needes mooue leſſe and more weakely, then when more or all of them are aſſembled and applyed to that orke. So that, the motiue vertue encreaſing thus in proportion ro the multiplying of the partes applyed to cauſe the motion; of neceſſity, the eſfect ( which is Edience to be mooued, and quickneſſe of motion in the mooueable muſt do ſo too: that is, it muſt from nothing, or from reſt, paſſe through all the degrees of celerity vntillit arriue to that which all the partes together are able to cauſe. As for ampſe , when with my hand I ſtrike a ball; till my hand toucherhit, itis in quiet; but then, it beginneth to mooue; yet with ſuchreſiſtance, that although itobey in ſome meaſure the ſtroke of my hand, neuertheleſſe it preſſerh the yielding flesh of my palme backwardes towardes the vpper and bony part of it. That part then ouertaking the other, by the continued motion of my hand; and both of them ioyning together to force the ball away; the impulſe becometh ſtronger, then att the firſt touching of ir. And the longer it preſſeth vpon it, the more the partes of my hand do condenſe and vnite themſelues to exerciſe their force; and the balltherefore muſt yield the more; and conſequently, the motion of it groweth quicker and quicker,till my hand parteth from it. Which condenſation ofthe partes of my hand encreaſing ſucceſſiuely by the partes ioyning cloſer to one an other, the velocity of the balles motion (which is an eſfect of irmuſt alſo encreaſe proportionably thereunto. And in like manner, the motion of my hand and arme, muſt grow quicker and quicker and paſſe all the degrees of velocity betweene reſt and the vimoſt degree it attaineth vnto: for ſeeing they are the ſpirits ſwelling the nerues, that cauſe the armes motion, ſas e shall hereafter shew;) vpon its reſiſtance, they flocke from other partes of the body to ouercome that reſiſtance. And ſince their iourney thither requireth time to performe it in;and that the neereſt come firſt; it muſt needes follow, that as they grow more and more in number, they muſt more poverfully ouercome the reſiſtance; and conſequently, encreaſe the velocity of the motion, in the ſame proportion as they flocke thither; vntill it attaine that degree of velocity, which is the vimoſt periode that the power, which the Agent hath to ouercome the reſiſtance of the medium, can bringit ſelfe vnto. Betweene which andreſt, or any inferiour degree vã velocity, there may be deſigned infinite intermediate degrees, proportionable to the infinite diuiſibility of time, and ſpace in which the moouer doth moue. Which degrees do ariſe out of the reciprocall yielding of the medium. And that is likeviſc diuiſible in he ſame infinite proportion. Since then, the power ofall naturall Agents is limited, the moouer (be it neuer ſo powerfull) muſt be confined to obſerue theſe proportions; and can not paſſe ouer all theſe infinite deſignable degrees in an inſtant; but muſtallott ſome time (which hatha like inſinity of deſignable partes)io ballance this infinity of degrees of velocity: and ſo conſequently, it requireth time, to attaine vnto any determinate degree. And therefore can not recede immediately from reſt vnto any degree of celerity ; but muſt neceſſarily paſſe through all the intermediate ones. Thus itis euident that all motion which hath a beginning muſt of neceſſity encreaſc for ſome time. And ſince the workes of nature are in proportion to their cauſes, it followeth rthat this encreaſe is in a determinate proportion. Which Galileus ( vnto vhom we owe the greateſt part of what is knowne concerning motion) teacheth vs how to find out; and to diſcouer what degree of celerity any mooueable that is moued by nature, hath in any determinate part of the ſpace it moueth in. Hauing ſettled theſe conditions of motion; we shall do well in the next place to enquire after the cauſes of it: as well in the body moued, as alſo in the mouer that occaſioneth the motion. And becauſe e haue already sheed, that locall motionis nothing in ſubſtance but diuiſion: we may determine that thoſe cauſes which contribute to diuiſion, or reſiſt it, are the cauſes which make, or reſiſt locall motion. It hath alſo beene ſaid, that Denſity hath in ita power of diuiding, and that Rarity is the cauſe of being diuided; likewiſe we haue ſaid that be by reaſon of its ſmall partes, into which it may be cutt ( which maketh them sharpe) hath alſo an eminence in diuiding: ſo that we haue two qualites, denſity and tenuity or sharpneſſe which concurre actiuely to diuiſion. e haue told you alſo how Galileus hath demonſtrated that a greater quantity of the ſame figure and denſity, hath a priuiledge of deſcending faſter then a leſſer. And that priuiledge conſiſteth in this, that the proportion of the ſuperficies to the body it limiteth ( which proportion the greater it is, the more it retardeth)is leſſe ina greater bulke then ina ſmaller. Ve haue therefore three conditions concurring to make the motion more efficacious namely, the denſity, the sharpeneſſe, and the bulke of the mooueable. And more then theſe three, we can not expect to find ina moued body: for quantity hath but ihree determinations: one, by denſity and rarity; of which, denſity is one of the three conditions: an orherby its partes; as by a foote, a ſpanne, &c; and in this way wee haue found that the greater excelleth he leſſẽr: the third and laſt, is by its figure; and in this we find that ſubtile or edged quantities do preuayle ouer blunt ones. Seeing therefore, that theſe three determinations be all that are in quantity; there can be no more conditions in the body moued ( which of neceſſity isa finite quantity) but the three named. And as for the medium which is to be diuided, there is onely rarity and denſity (the onè, to helpe; ithe other, to hinder,) that require conſideration on its ſidee For neither figure, nor littleneſſe and greatneſſe, do make any variationin it. And as forthe Agent, it is not as yet time, before we haue looked further inte the nature of motion, to determine his qualities. Nov then lett vs reflect how theſe three conditions do allagree in No bory lath this circumſtance, that they helpe nothing io diuiſion, vnlcſſe the any inniſecall body in which they are, be moued and preſſed againſt the body that meæ isto be diuided, ſo that we ſee no principle to perſuade vs, that any deerm-any body can mooue it ſelfe towards any determinate part or parr; orie place of the vniuerſe, of its owne intrinſecall inclination. For beſides that the learned Author of the Dialogues de Mundo (in his third Dialogue, and the ſecond knott) hath demonſtrated that a body can not mooue vnleſſe it be mooued by ſome extrinſccall Agent, we may eaſily frame vnto our ſelues a conceite, of how abſurd it is to thinke thata body bya quality in it can worke vpon it ſelfe: as if wee should ſay, that æitr(a hich is but more quantity)could worke vpon quantityor that figureſ whichis but that the body reacheth no further) could worke vpon the body:and in generall, that the manner of any thing, can vorke vpon that thing whoſe manner it is. For 5 ; Ariſtotle and St Thomas, and their intelligent commentatours, declaring the notion of uality; tell vs that io ve a Quality is nothing elſe but to be the determination or modification of the thing whoſe quality itis. Beſides, that the naturall manner of operation is, to worke according to the capacity of the ſubiect: but when a body is in the middeſt of an vniforme medium or ſpace, the ſubiect is equally prepared on all ſides to receiue the action of that body. Vherefore ſthough ve should allow it a force to mooue,) ifit bea naturall Agent, and haue no vnderſtanding, it muſt worke indiſſerently on all ſides, and by conſequence, can not mooue on any ſide. For if you ſay that the Agentin this cale (where the medium is vniforme) worketh rathervpon one ſide then vponan other; it muſt be becauſe this determination is within the Agent it ſelfe, and not out of the circumſtant diſpoſitions: whichis the marner of working of thoſe ſubſtances that worke for an end of their owne; that is, of vnderſtanding creatures, and not of naturall bodies. Nov he that would exactly determine what motiona body hath, Theem  ũoſ or is apt to haue; determining by ſuppoſition the force ofthe Agent, moion s muſt calculate the proportions of all theſe three conditions of the  ũe pre; mooueable, and the quality of the medium: which is a proceeding tion & the too particular for the intention of our diſcourſe. But to ſpeake in odde numbers. common, it Will not be amiſſe to examine in what proportion, motion doth encreaſe; ſince we haue concluded that all motion proceedeth from quiet by a continuall encreaſe. Galileus ſthat mitacle of our age, and whoſe witt was able to diſcouer whatſoeuer he had a mind tò employ it abour) hath told vs that naturall motion, encreaſeth in the proportion of the odde numbers. Which to expreſſe by example, is thus: ſuppoſe that in the going of the firſtyard it hath one degree of velocity, then in the going of the ſecond yard it will haue three degrees, and in going the third it will haue fiue: and ſo onwardes, ſtill adding two to the degrees of the velocity for euery one of the ſpace. Or to expieſſe it more plainely; if in the fiſt minute of time it gocth one yard of ſpace, then in the next minute it vill goe three yardes, in the third it will goe fiue, in the fourth ſcauen, and ſo forth. But we muſt enlarge this propoſition, vnto all motions, ſ as we haue done the former, of the encreaſe it ſelfe in velocity ;) becauſe the reaſon of itis common to all motions. Vhich is; that all motion (as may appeare out of what we haue formerly ſuid) proceedeth from two cauſes; namely, the Agent or the force that mooueth; und the diſpoſiton of the body mooued, asitis compoſed of the three qualities we larely explicated. In which is to be noted, that the Agent doth not mooue ſimply by its owne vertue, but it applyeth alſo the vertue of the body mooued, which it harh to diuide the medium when itis putt on. As when we cutt with a knife, the effect proceedeth from the Enife preſſed on by th? hnd; or from the hand as applying and putting inaction the edge and cutting power of the Enith Novw this in Phyſickes and nature is cleerely parallel to what in Geometry and Arithmetike the Mathematicians call drawing one number or one ſide into an other; for asin Mathemarikes, to draw one number into an orher is to apply the number drawne vnto euery part of the number into which it is drawne; as if ve draw three into ſeuen we mak⸗ twenty one, by making euery vnity or part of the number ſeuen to be three: and the like is of lines in Geometry. So in the preſent caſe, to euery part of the handes motion we adde the whole vertue of the curting faculty which is in the knife, and to euery part of the motion of the kniſe, weadde the whole preſſing vertue of the hnd. Therefore the encreaſe of the efſect proceeding from two cauſes ſo woiking, muſt alſo be parallel to the encreaſe of the quantities ariſing out of the like drawing in Mathematikes. But in thoſe, it is cuident that the encreae is according to the order of the odde numbers, and therefore it muſt in our caſe be the like: that is, the encreaſe muſt be in the ſaid proportion of bdde numbers. Now that in thoſe, the encreaſe proceedeth ſo, vill be euident, if you conſider the encreaſe of an Equicrure triangle; which becauſe it goeth vpon a certaine proportion of length and breadih, if ou compare the encreaſes of the whole triangle (that gaineth on each ſide) with the encreaſes of the perpendicular ( which gaineth onely in length) you ill ſee that they ſtillproceede in the foreſaid proportion of odde numbers. lilll Vhich vill be better vnderſtood, if we ſett downe the demonſtration ofit: lett the Equicrure triangle be ABC: and from the point A, draw the line AD perpendicularto the line BC, GH, inthe pointes I, and K. And I ſay that becauſe the line AK is tuice as long as the line AI, therefore the trapezium E F H G, is thrice as bigge as the triangle AEF: foras AK, is to Al, ſo ĩs GH to EFE. But the triangle AGH is to the triangle AEF, in a double proportion of the line G Fl to the line EF: which being double the propoition of one triangle to the other muſt be fourefold: ſo that ſubſtiacting the triangle AET, the trapezium EFH G remaineth thrice as bigge as it. And thus, the whole triangle getteth an encreaſe of three, whiles the perpendicular is enereaſed but one, to make his length two Which whæn it cometh to three, the trapezium GH CB that containeth the third diuiſion of the perpeniſicular, becometh fiue times as bigg as the triangle A EF, for ſince the line A D isthree times aslrg as ihie line AI and the line BC, is three rimes as long as EF; it followeth,that the triangle A B C is nine times as bigę as the trianale AEF; but AGH Is foure times as bigge as AEF, there fore ſubſli acting it from the whole triangle AB C, iĩt leaueth the trapezium GH C B ſiuetimes as bigę as the ſirſt triangle AEF. Vhich propoſition is very ingeniouſly ſett downe by the learned Monſieur Gaſſendi in his fiſt Epiſtle de moiu impreſſo a motore iranſilato, to the ſame urpoſe for which e bring it. Though we do not here make vſe of his he and way of demonſtration; becauſe we had fallen vpon this hefore his booke came abroad: and thereſore we onely note his to direct the Reader vnto it who peraduenture may like his betterthen ours. Howbeit we do nor conceiue that he hath in his diſcourſe there, arriued to thæ rruereaſon of the effect we ſearch into: as may appeare by what we haue already deliuered. But we muſt not imagine, that the velocity of motion vill alwayſe encreaſe thus for as long as wæ can fancy any motion: but when it is arriued vntothe vimoſt periode that ſuch a mooueable with ſuch cauſes is ca pable of.then it keepeth conſtantly the ſame pace, and goerh equally andvniſormely att the ſame rate. For ſince the denſity ofthe mooueable, and the force ofthe Agent mouing it, (which two, do cauſe the motion) haue a limited proportion to the reſiſtance of the medium, hov yielding ſocuer it be;it muſt ncedes follow, that when the motion is arriued vnto that height which ariſeth out of this proportion, it can not exceede ir, but muſt conrinue at that rate, vnleſſe ſome other cauſe giue yet a greater impulſe to the moueable. For velocity conſiſling in this, that the moueable cutteth through more of the medium in an equall rime; it is euident, that in the encreaſe of velocity, the reſiſtance oſ the medium, which is ouercome by it; groweth greaterand greater, and by litle and litle gainerth vpon ile foree of the;Agent; ſo that the ſuperproportion of the Agent, groweth ſtill leſſer and leſcer, as the velocity encreaſeihi and therefore, att the length they muſt come to be ballanced. And then, the velocity can encreaſe no more. And the reaſon of the encreaſe of it, for a while attthe beginning, is becauſe that coming from reſt it muſt paſſe, through all the intermediate degrees of velocity before it can attaine 1o the height of it, which requirerh time to performe, ind therefore falleth vnder the power ofour ſenſc to obſerue. But becauſe we ſee it do ſo for ſome time, we muſt not therefore conclude that the nature of ſuch motion, is ſtill to encreaſe without any periode or limit; like thoſe lines that perperually grow neerer, and yet can neuer meete: for we ſee that our reaſon examining the cauſes of this velocity, aſſureth vs that in continuance of time and ſpace, it may come to its height, which it can not exccede. And there, vould be the pitch att which diſtance weights being lete fall, would giue the greateſt ſtroakes and make greateſt impreſſions. It ĩs true that Galileus and Merſenius (two exact experimenters) do thinke they find this verity by their experiences. But ſurely that isimpoſſible to be done; for the encreaſe of velocity being in a proportion euer diminishing; it muſt of neceſity come to an inſenſible encreaſe in proportion before it endeth: for the ſpace which the moueable goeth through, is ſtill encreaſed; and the time whercin it paſſeth through that ſpace, remaineth ſtill the ſame litle one as was taken vp in paſſing a leſſe ſpace immediately before; and ſuch litle diffeiences of areit ſpaces paſſed ouer ina litle time, come ſoone to be vndiſcernable by ſenſe. But reaſon(which heweth vs, that if velocity never ccaſcd from encreaſing, it would in time arriue to exccede any particular velocity; and by conſequence, the proportion which the moouer hath to ihe medium: becauſe of the ad.ling ſtilla determinate part to its velocity)concludeth plainely that itis impoſſible, motion: hould encreaſe for euer, vithour coming toaperiode. Nov the impreſſion which falling weights do make, is of two kindes; for the bodu into which impreſlion is made, either can yield bac kward, orit can not. If it can yield hackward, then the impreſſion made is a motion: as we ſee a ſtroak with a rackett vpon a ball, or itha paile maile beetle vpon a houle makerhit ſly fromit. Bur if the ſtrucken body ean not vield backwardes,thænit maketh it yield on the ſides. And this, in dinerſe manre:s: forif the ſmitten body be dry and britile, it is lubiect to breake it, and make the pieces ſly round about: but iſ it be a tough body, it ſqueeſeth it into a larger forme. EE3 But becauſe the eſfect in any of theſe wayſcis eminently greater then the force of the Agẽt ſeemeth to beiit is worth our labour to looke into the cauſcs of it. To which end we may remember how we haue already declared that the force of the velocity is equall to a reciprocall force of weight in the vertue mouent: wherefore the effect of a blow thit aman giueth wilſa hammer, dependeth vpon the weight of the hmmer, vpon the velocity of th- motion,and vpon the hand, in caſe the hand accompanieth the blov. But if the motion of the hand ccaſeth before (as vhen ve throwa thing) then onely the velocity and the veight of the hammer remaine to be conſidered. Hovſoeuer, lett vs putt the hand and weight in one ſumme which we may equaliſe by lome other vertue or veight. Then lett vs conſider the way or ſpace, vhich a weight lying vpon the thing is to goe forvardes to do the ſame eſſect in the ſame time as the percuſhion doeth. And what exceſſe the line of the blow, hath ouer the line of that way oſ ſpace; ſuchan exceſſe ve muſt adde of equall weight or force, to the vei ght we had already taken. And the weight compoſed of both, vill be a fitt Agent to make the like impreſſion. This Probleme vas ropoſcd vnto me by that worthy religious man, Farher Merſenius o is not content with aduancing learning by his owne induſtry and labours; but beſides, is alwayſe ( out of his generous affection ro verity) inciting others to contribute to he ublike ſtocke of it. He propoſed to me likeviſe this ollowing queſtion, to irt why there is required a weight of water in double Geometricall proportion, to make a pipe runne tvice as faſt as it did , orto haue tice as much vater runne out in the ſame time? Vnto which I anſere out of the ſame ground as before. That becauſe in running tuice as faſt, there goeth out double water in euery part of time; and againe, euery part of water goeth a double ſpace in the ſame partof time; that is to ſay becauſe double the celerity is drawne into double the water, and double the water inro double the celerity,; therefore, the preſent effectis to the former effect, as the efſect or quadrate of a double line drawne into ĩt ſelfe, ĩs, to the eſfector quadrate of halfe the ſaid line drawne into it ſelſe. And conſequently the cauſe, of the latrer eſfect(which is the weight then) muſt be to the cauſe of the former efſectſthat is, to the former weight) in the ſame proportion, namely as thequadrate of a double line, is to the quadrate of halfe that line. And ſo ybu fee the reaſon of what he by experichce findeth to be true. Though I doubt not but when he shall ert out the treatiſe, vhich he hath made of this ſubiect, the reader will haue better ſatisfaction. J li In the meãne while, an experience which Galileo deliuereth, ill confirme this doctrine. He ſhych thas to make the ſame pendant goe twicè à: faſtas it did, or tõ make euery vndulation of it in halfè the timeit did; you muſt make the linè att vhich it hangeth, double in Geometricall proportion, to the line att which it hanged before. Vhence it followeth that the circle by which it goeth, is likewiſe in double Geometricall proportion. And this being certaine, that celerity to celerity hath the proportion of force, vhich veight hath to weight; itis euident, thatas in one caſe there muſt be Weight in Geometricall proportion; ſo in the othercaſe, where onsly celerity maketh the variance, the celerity muſt be in double Geometricaſl proportion according as Galileo findeth it by experience. But toreturne to our maine intent, there is to be further noted, that if the ſubiect ſtrucken be of a proportionate ceſſibility; it ſeemeth to dulland deaden the ſtroake: whereas, if the thing ſtrucken be hard the ſtroake ſeenieth to looſe no force, but to worke a greater eſſect. Though indeed the truth be, that in both caſes the effects are èquall; but diuerſe according to the natures of the thinges that are ſtrucken; for no force that once is in nature, can be loſt; but muſt haue its adequate effect, one vay or other: Lett vs then firſt ſuppoſe the body ſtrucken to be a hard body of no exceeding biggneſſe: in whichcaſe, if the ſtroake light perpendiculary vponit, it will carry ſuch a body before it. But if the body be too great, and haue its partes ſo conioyned, as that they are weaker thẽ the ſtroake; in this caſe, the ſtroake driueth one part before it, and ſo breakethit from the reſt. But laſtly, if the partes of the ſtrucken body be ſo eaſily ceſſible as without difficulty the ſtroake can diuide them, then it entereth into ſuch a body vntillit hath ſpent its force. So that now making vp ouraccount; we ſee that an equall eſſect proceedeth from an equall force, in allthe three caſes; thoughin themſelues, they be farre different. But we are apt to account that eſfect greater, which is more conſiderable vnto vs, by the profitt or damage it bringethvs. And therefore, we vſually ſay, that the blow vhich shaketh a wall, or beateth it downe, and killeth men with the ſtones it ſcattereth abroad; hath a greater effect then that which penetrateth farre into a mudde wall, and doth litle harme: for that innocuouſiſeſſe of the eſfect, maketh that although init ſelfe it be as greatas the other, yet itis litle obſerued or conſidered. This diſcourſe drawethon an other: which is to declare how motionceaſeth. And to ſumme that ? in shore, we ſay that when motion cometh vntoreſt, it decreaſeth and paſſeth throughallthe degrees of celerity and tardity that are betweene reſt, and the height of that motion, which ſo declineth. And that, in the proportion of the odde numbersas we declared aboue that it did encreaſe. The reaſon is cleare: becauſe that which maketh a motion ceaſe, is the reſiſtance it findeth: which reſiſtance, is an action of a moouer that mooueth ſome thing againſt the body which is mooued, or ſome ihing cquiualent to ſuchan action: wherefore it muſt follow the lawes that are common to all motions: ofwhich kind thoſe two are that we haue expreſſed in this concluſion. Now, that reſiſtance is a countermotion, or equiualent s0 one; is plaine by thisi that any body which is preſſed, muſt needes preſſe againe vpon the body that preſſeth it; wherefore the cauſe that hindereth ſuch a body from yielding, is a force mouing that body, againſt the body which preſſeth it. The particulars of all vhich we shall more att large declare, where we ſpeake of the action and reaction of particular bodies. THE TENTH CHAPTER Of Grauity and Leuity ; and of Locall Motion, commonly termed Naturall. æt47 Tis now time to conſider that diſtinction of motions which Thoſe motions 5 is ſo famous in Ariſtotle; to witt, that ſome motions are are callld B55ẽ naturall, others violent: and to determine what may be parall vhieh ſignifyed by theſe ternes. For ſeeing we haue ſaid that no body hath cauſes; and a naturall intrinſecall inclinarion vntoany place, to which it is able to ihoe violent moue it ſelfe; e muſt needes conclude that the motion of euery conttary to body followeth the percuſſion, of extrinſecall Agents. It ſcemeth them. therefore impoſſible that any body should haue any motion naturall to it ſelfe. And ifthere be none naturall, there can be none violent. And ſo this diſtinction will vainsh to nothing. But on the other ſide, liuing creatures do manifeſty shew naturall motions, hauing naturall inſtruments to performe certaine motions: wherefore ſuch motions muſt of neceſſity be natutall to them. But theſe are not the motions, vhich we are to ſpeake of; for Ariſtotles diuiſion is common to all bodies; or att the leaſt, to all thoſe we conuerſe withall: and particulary, to thoſe which are called heauy and light: which two termes, paſſe through all the bodies we haue notice of. There fore, proceeding vpon our groundes before laytd; to itt, that no body can be mooued of it ſelfe; wee may determine thoſe motions to be naturall vnto bodies which haue conſtant cauſes, or percutients to make them alwayſe in ſuch bodies: and thoſe violent, which are contrary to ſuch naturall motions. Which being ſuppoſed, we muſt ſearch out the cauſes that ſo conſtantly make ſome bodies deſcend towardes the center or middle of the earth  and others to riſe and goe from the center: by which, the world is ſubiect tothoſe reſtleſſe motions that keepe all thinges in perpetuall fluxe, in this changeing ſphere of action and paſſion. . Lett vs then begin with conſidering what effects the ſunne (which The fit? and is a conſtant and perpetuall cauſe) vorketh vpon inferior bodies, by jũ his being regularly ſometimes preſent and ſometimes abſent. the ſunne, is Obſerue in a pott of water hanging ouera fire, how the heate maketh the maling ſome partes of the ater to aſcend, and others to ſupply the roome atome. è of by delcending ; ſo that as longas it boyleth, it is in a perpetuall confuſed motion vp and downe. Now hauing formely cõcluded that ſire is light, and light is fire ; it can not be doubted but thar the ſunne doth ſerue inſtead of fire to ourglobe of earth and ater, ( vhich may be fitily comparedto the boyling pott;) and all the day long draveth vapors from thoſe bodies that his beames ſtrike vpon. For he shooting his little darts of fire, in multitudes, and in continued ſtreames, from his one center, againſt the Python the carth we liue on; they do there ouertake one another, and cauſe ſome degree of heate as farre as they ſinke in. But not being able(by reaſon of their great expanſion in their long iorney) to conuert it into their owne nature and ſertit on fire, ( which requireth a high degree of condenſation of the beames) they do but pierce and diuide it very ſubtilely,and cutt ſome of the outward partes of it into extreme litle atomes. Vnto vhich they ſticking very cloſe, and being ina manner incorporated with them(by reaſon of the moiſture that is in the)they do in their rebound backe from the earth carry them along with them; like a ballthat ſtruck againſt a moiſt wall, doth in its returne fromit, bring backe ſome of the mortar ſticking vpon it. For the diſtance of the earth from the ſunne, is not the vemoſt periode of theſe nimble bodies flighti ſo that, when by this ſolide body they are ſtopped in their courſe forvardes on, they leape backe fromit, and carry ſome litle partes of it with them: ſome of them, a farther; ſome of them,a shorter iorney; according as their litleneſſe and rarity, make them fitt to aſcend. As is manifeſt by the conſent of all authors that write of the regions of the ayre; who determine the lower region to reach as farre as the reflexion of the ſunne; and conclude this region to be very hoat. Forif we marke how the heate of fire is greateſt, when it is incorporated in ſome denſe body, ſas in iron or in ſeacoale) we shall eaſily conceiue that the heate of this region proceedeth mainely out of the incorporation of light ith thoſe litle bodis which ſticke to it in its reflexion. And experience teſtifyeth the ſame, both in our ſultry dayes, which we ſee are of a groſſe temper, and ordinarily goe before raine:as alſo in the hoat ſpringes of extreme cold countries, vhere the firſt heates are vnſufferable; Which proceede out of the reſolution of humidity congealed: and in hoat windes ,(which the Spaniards call Bochornos from Boca de horno by alluſion ro the breathing ſtcame of an ouen when it is opened) which do manifeſtly shew that the heate of the ſunne is incorporated in the litle bodies, which compoſe the ſteame of that wind. And by the principles we haue already layed, the ſame would be euident; though we had no experience to inſtruct vs; for ſeeing that the body of fireis dry, the wett partes (which are caſilyeſt reſolued by fire) muſt needes ſticke vnto them, and accompany them in their returne from the earth. Now whiles theſe aſcend, the ayre muſt needes cauſe others that are of a groſſer complexion to deſcend as faſt, to make roome for the formerand to Al the places they left, that there may be no vacuity in nature. And to hnd what partes they arc and from whence they come, that ſucceede in the roome of light and atomes gleved together that thus aſcend, we may takea hnte from the maxime of the Optikes, that light reſlecting maketh equall angles; vhence, ſuppoſing the ſuperficies of the earth to be circular, it will follow that a perpendicular to the center paſſeth iuſt in the middle betweene he two rayes; the incidentand the reflected. Vherefore the ayre betweene theſe two rayes, and ſuch dodies as are in it being equally preſſed on both ſides; thoſe bodies which are iuſt in the middle, are neereſt and likelyeſt to ſucceede immediately in the roome of the light and atomes which aſcend from the ſuperficies of the earth: and their motion to that point, isvpon the perpendicular. Hence it is euident, that the ayre and all ſuch bodies as deſcend to ſupply the place of lightandatomes, which aſcend from the earth, do deſcend perpendicularly towardes the center of the earth. And againe Rch bodies asby the force of light being cutt from the earth or vater, do not aſcend in forme of light, but do incorporate a hidden light and heate within them; (and thereby are rarer then theſe deſcending bodies) muſt of neceſſity be lifted vp by the deſcent of thoſe denſer bodies that goe downewardes, becauſe they (by reaſon of their denſity) are mooued witha greater force. And this lifting up, muſt be ina perpendicular line; becauſe the others deſcending on i ides perpendicularly, muſt needes raiſe thoſe that are betweene them equally from all ſides: that is, perpendicularly from the center of the earth. And thus we ſee a motion ſett on foore, of ſome bodies continually deſcending, and others continually aſcending: allin perpendicular lines, excepting thoſe which follow the courſe of lights reflexion. A paine as ſoone as the declining ſunne groweth weaker or leaueth our horizon, and that his beames vanishing do leaue the litle horſemen which rode vpon them, to their owne temper and nature (from whence they rced them;) they finding themſelues ſurrounded by a ſmart deſcending ſtreame, do tumble downe againe in the night, as faſt as in the day they were carryed . and crowding into their former habitations, they exclude thoſe that they find had vſurped them in their abſence. And thus, all bodies within reach of the hnes pover, but eſpecially our ayre, are in perpetuall motion; the more rarifyed ones aſcending, and the denſe ones deſcending. No thẽ; becauſe no bodies whereſoeuer they beſas we haue already shewed) haue any inclination to moue towardes a particular place, otherwiſe thẽ as they are directed and impelled by extrinſecall Agẽts: lett vs ſuppoſe thata body were placed att liberty in the opè ayre. And then caſting whether it would be mooued from the place we ſuppoſe it in; and which way it would be mooued: we shall find that it muſt of neceſſity, happen that it shall deſcend and fall downe till it meete vith ſome other groſſe body to ſtay and ſupport it. For although of it ſelfe it would mooue no way: yet if we find thatany other body ſtriketh efficaciouſly enough vpon it; we can not doubt bur that it will mooue that way which the ſtriking body impelleth it. No, itis ſtrucken vpon on both ſides (aboue and below) by the aſcending, and the deſcending atomes, the rare ones, ſlriking vpon the bottome of it, and driuing it vpwardes,and the denſer ones, preſſing vpon the toppe of it and bearing it downewardes. But if you compare the impreſſions that the denſer atomes make, with thoſe that proceede from the rare ones; it is euident that the denſe ones muſt be the more poverfull; and therefore vill aſſuredly determine the motion of the body in the ayre, that way they goe, which is downewardes. Nor neede we feare, leaſt the litleneſſe of the agents, orthe feebleneſſe of their ſtroakes, should not be ſuſficient to worke this effect; ſince there is no reſiſtance in the body it ſelfe, and the ayre is continually cutt in picces, by the ſunne beames, and by the motions of litle bodies; ſo that the adheſion vnto ayre ofthe body to be mooued, will be no hinderance to this motion: eſpecially, conſidering the perpetuall new percuſſions, and the multitude of themiand how no force is ſo litle, but that with time and multiplication it will ouercome any reſiſtance. But if any man deſireth to looke vpon, as it were att one view; the whole chaine of this doctrine of grauity: lett him turne the firſt caſt of his eyes vpon what we haue ſaid oſ fire when we explicated the nature of it. To vitt;that it beginneth from a litle ſource; and by extreme multiplication and rarefaction, it extendeth it ſelfe into a great ſphere. And then he ill perceiue the reaſon why light is darted fromthe bod; of the ſunne ith et incredible celerity, wherewith its beames flye to viſite the remoteſt partes of the world; and how;of neceſſity, it giueth motion to all circumſtant bodies; ſince it is violently thruſt forward by ſo extreme a rarefaction ; and the further it goeth, is ſtill the more raritved and dilated. Next,lett him reſlect how infinitely the quickeneſſe of lights motion, doth preuent the motion of a moiſt body, ſuch an one as ayre is: and then he vill plainely ſee, that the firſt motion which light isable to giue vnto theayre, muſt needes be a ſwelling of that moiſt element, perpendicularly round about the earth; for, theray deſcendent, and the ray reſlectent, fly ing with ſo great a ſpeede, that the ayre bet weene them can not takea formall plye any way before the beames of light be on both ſides of it: it followeth, that according to the nature of humide thinges, it muſt fitſt ohely ſell: for that is the beginning of motion inthem, vhen heate entereth into them, and worketh vpon them. And thus he may conſidently reſolue himſelfe, that the firſt motion which light cauſcthi in the ayre, will be à ſelling of it betweene the to rayes towardes the middle of them. That is; perpendicularly from the ſurfacc of the eacth Aud out of this,he will likewiſe plainely ſee, that if there be any other litle denſe bodies floating in the ayre, they muſt likewiſe mount a litle, through this ſielling and riſing of theayre. But that mounting will be Becauſe this motion is not by way of impulſe or ſtroake that theayre giueth thoſe denſer bodies; but by way of containing them init, and carrying them vithit, fo that it giueth them no more celerity, then to make them go ith it ſelfe,and as partes of it ſelfe. Then, lett him conſider, that light or fire, by much beating vponthe carth, diuideth ſome litle partes of it from others: whereof if any do become ſo ſmalland tractable, as not to exceede the ſtrengih which the rayes haue to manage them, the returning rayes, willatt their going backe, carry away with them or driue beforethem, ſuch litle atomes as they haue made or meete with: ndſo fill the ayre with litle bodies cutt out of the earth. After this, lett him conſider that when light carrieth vpan atome with it, the light and the atome do ſticke together, and do mæke one aſcending body, in ſuch ſort as when an empty dish lyeth vpon the water, theayre in the dish maketh one deſcendent body together with the dish it ſelfe: ſo that the denſity of the whole body of ayre and dish(whichin this caſe, are but as one body) is to be eſteemed according to the den ſity of the to partes; one of them being allayed by the other, as if the whole were throughout of ſuch a proportion of denſity, as would ariſe out of the compoſition and kneading together the ſeuerall denſities of thoſe two partes. Now then, when theſe litle compounded bodies of lightand earth, are carricd vp to a determinate height; the partes of fire or light, do by litle and litle breake away from them: and hereby, the bulke of the part which is left, becometh of a different degree of denſity ( quantity for quantity) from the bulke of the entire atome, vhen light was part of it: and conſequently it is denſer then it was. Beſides, lett him conſider that when theſe bodies aſcend; they do goe from a narrow roome to a large one, that is, from the centerwardes to the circumſerence: but when they come downe againe, they goe from a larger part to a narrower. Whence it followeth, that asthey deſcend, they draw cloſer and cloſcr together,and by conſequence, are ſubiect to meete and to fall in, one withan other; and thereby, to encreaſe their bulke, and to become more powerfull in denſity, not onely, by the loſſe of their fire; but alſo by the encreaſe of their quantity. And ſo itis euident, that they are denſer, coming downe, then going vp. Laſtly, lett him conſider, that thoſe atomes hich went vp firſt, and are patted from their volatile companions of fire or light, muſt begin to come downe apace, when orher new atomes  which ſtill haue their light incorporated with them) do aſcend to where they are, and do goe beyond them by reaſon of their greater leuity. And as the latter atomes come vp witha violence and a great celerity, ſo muſt the firſt goe downe vith a ſmart impulſe; and by conſequence, being more denſe then the ayre in which they are carryed, muſt of neceſſity curt their way through that liquide and rare mediumiand goe 1he next way to ſupply the deſect and roome of ithe atomes which aſcend that is , perpendicularly to the earth)and giue the like motion to any body they find in their way, if it be ſuſceptible of ſuch a motion: which it is euident that all bodies are, vnleſſe they be ſtrucken by ſome contrary impulſe. For ſince that a bodies being in a ꝓlace, is nothing elſe but the continuity of its outſide to the inſide of the body that containeth it and is its place; it can haue no other repugnance to locall motion ſ which is nothing elſe bur a ſucceſſiue changing of place) beſides this continuity. Now the nature of denſity Berrę the pover of diuiding: and euery leaſt power, hauing ſome force and effcacs. (as we haue shewed aboue) it folloveth that the ſtroake of euery atome (eyther deſcending, or aſcending) ill worke ſome thing vpon any body (thoughneuer ſo bigge) it chanceth to encounter with, and ſtrike vpon in its way, vnleſſe there be as ſtrong an impulſe the contrary way, to oppoſe it. But it being determined, that the deſcending atomes are denſer then thoſe that aſcend; it followeth, that ihe deſcending ones ill preuayle. And conſequently, all denſe bodies muſt necũſarily tend downe wardes, to the center  whichis, to be Heauy ) if ſome other more denſe body do not hinder them. Out of this diſcourſe, ve may conclude that there is no ſuch thin among bodies, as poſitiue grauity or leuity: but that their courſe vpwardes or downevardes happeneth vnto them by the order of nature, which by outward cauſes giueth them an impulſe one of theſe wayes: without which, they would reſt quictly whereſoeuer they are, as being of themſelues indifferent to any motion. But becauſe our wordes expreſſe our notions, and they are framed according to what appeareth vntovs; when we obſerue any body to deſcend conſtantly towardes our earth, we callit heauy;and if i: mooue contraryniſe, we callit light. But we muſt take heed of conſidering ſuch grauity and leuity as if they were Entities that worke ſuch effects: ſince vpon examination, it appeareth that theſe wordes are butshort ex breſſbns of the eſfects themſelues: the cauſes whereof; the vulgar of mankinde (who impoſe names to thinges) do not conſider; but leaue that worke vnto Philoſophers to examine, whiles they onely obſerue, vhat they ſee done; and agree vpon wordes to expreſſe that. Which wordes neither villin allcircumſtances alwayes agree to the ſame thing; for as corke doth deſcend in ayre and aſcend in water; ſo alſo will any other body deſcend if ic lighteth among others more rare then it ſelfe,and villaſcend if it lighteth among bodies thatare more denſe thenit. And we terme bodies light and heauy, onely according to the courſe, which we vſually ſce them take. Nov proceeding further on;and conſidering how there are various degrees of denſity or grauity: it were irrationall toconceiue, that all bodies should deſcend att the ſame rate, and keepe equall pace vith one an other, in their iourney downewardes. For as two knifes whereof one hath a keener edge then the other, being preſſed with deeper then the other: ſo, if of to bodies one be more denſe then the other, that which is ſo, willcutt the ayre more powerfully, and vill deſcend faſter then the other: for in this caſe, denſity may be compared to the knifes edge, ſince in it conſiſteth the power of diuiding; as we haue heretofore determined. And therebore , the preſſing them downeardes by the deſcending atomes, being equall in botſi (or peraduenture greater in the more denſe body, as anone we shall haue occaſion to touch) and there being no other cauſe to determine them that way; the effect of diuiſion muſt be the greater, vhere the diuider is the more powerfull. Vhich, the more denſe body is; and thereſore cutteth more ſtrongly through the reſiſtance of the ayre; and conſequently, paſſeth more ſiftly that way iris determined to mooue. : I do not meane, that the velocities of their deſcent shall be in th ſame proportion to one an other, as their denſities are: for beſides their denſity, thoſe other conſiderations vhich we haue diſcourſed of aboue when ve examined the cauſes of velocity in moũon, muſt likewiſe be ballaneed. And out of the compariſon of all them; not out of the conſideration of any one alone, reſulteth the differences of their velocities: (and that neither, but in as muchas concerneth the conſideration of the mooueables: for to make the calculation exact,the medium muſt likewiſe be conſidered; as by and by we shall declare) for ſince the motion dependeth of all them together; although there should be difference betweene the mooueables in regard of one onely, and that the reſt were equall; yet the proportion of the difference of their motions, muſt not follow the proportion of their difference in that one regard: becauſe their difference conſidered ſingle in that regard will haue one proportion; and with the addition of the other conſiderations (though alike in both) to their difference in this, they ill haue an other. As for example, reckon the denſity of one mooueable to be double the denſity of an other mooueable; ſo that in that regard it hath two degrees of power to deſcend, whereas the other hath but one: ſup or then the other cauſes of their deſcent to be alike in both, and reckon themall three: and then ioyne theſe three to the one vhich is cauſed by the denſity in one of the mooucables, as likewiſe to the two, which is cauſed by the denſity in the other mooueable: and you vill find that thus altogether, their difference of power to deſcend is no longer ina double proportion (as it would be, if nothing but their denſity were conſidered) but is in the proportion of fiue to foure. lilll Butaſter e haue conſidered all that concerneth the mooueables, we are then to caſt an eye vpon the medium they are to mooue inand we shall find the addition of that, to decreaſe the proportion of their difference, exceedingly more; according to the ce ibility of the medium. Vhich if it be ayre; the great diſproportion of its weight, to the weight of thoſe bodies which men vſe to take in making experiences of their deſcent in that yielding medium; vill cauſe their difference of velociry in deſcending, to be Rardly perceptible. Euen as the diſſference of a sharpe or dull knife, which is eaſily perceiued in cutting of ſlesh or bread, is not to be diſtinguished in diuiding of wateror oyle. And likeviſe in weights, a pound and a ſcruple vill beare downe a dramme in no ſenſible proportion of velocity more then a pound alone would do: and yet putt a pound in that ſcale in ſtead of the dramme, and then the difference of the ſcruple willbe very notable. So then, thoſe bodies, vhoſe difference of deſcending in vater is very ſenſible(becauſe of the greater proportion of weight in varer, to the bodies that deſcend in it) will yield no ſenſible difference of velocity when they deſcend in ayre, by reaſon of the great diſproportion of weight betweene ayre and the bodies that delcend init. The reaſon of this vill clearely shew it ſelfe in abſtracted proportions. Thus; ſuppoſe ayre to haue one degree of denſity, and vater to haue 400: then lert the mooueable A haue 410 degrees of denſity; and the mooucable B haue 500. Now compare their motion toone an other in the ſeuerall mediums of ayre and water. The exuperance of the denſity of A to wateris io degrees, but the exuperance of B, vnto the ſame water, is 1oo degrees:; ſo that B muſt mooue in water, ſwifter then A, in the proportion of 100 to tenne; that is, ofio to one. Then lett vs compre the exuperance of the two mooueables ouer ayre. A is 409 times more denſe then ayre; bur B is 499 times more denſe then it. By hichaccount, the motion of B, muſt be in that medium ſwifter then the motion of A, in the proportion of 499 to 409:that is, about s0, to 41:which ( to auoyde fractions) we may account as io to8. But in water they exceede one an other as 10 to one: ſo that their difference of velocity, muſt be ſcarce perceptible in ayre in reſpect of whatit is in vater. Out of all which diſcouiſe, I onely inferre in common that a greater velocity in motion, will follow the greater denſity of the mooueable; vithout determining here their proportions: which I leaue vnto them, vho make that examination their taske: for thus much ſerueth my preſent turne: hereinItake a ſuruay of nature, but in groſſe. And my chiefe drift in this particular is onely to open the way for the diſcouering how bodies that of themſelues haue no propenſion vnto any determinate place; do neuertheleſſe mooue conſtantly and perpetually one way; the denſe ones deſcending, and the rare ones aſcending: not by any intrinſecall quality that worketh vpon them: but by the oeconomy of nature, that hath ſett on foote due and plaine cauſes to produce knowne effects. Here we muſt craue patience of the great ſoule of Galileo  whoſe admirable learning all poſterity muſt reuerence whiles we reprehend in him that which e can not terme leſſe then abſurd: and yet, he not onely mainetainethit in ſeuerall places, but alſo profeſſeth Dial. P de motu. pag. 8. to make it more cleare then day. His poſtion is, that more or leſſe grauity contributeth nothing att all to the faſter or ſlover deſcending f a naturall body:but thatall the effect it giueth vnto a body, is to make it deſcend or not deſcend in ſuch a medium. Vhich is againſt the firll and moſt knowne principle that is in bodies: to witt,that more doth more; and leſſe doth leſſe; for he allowerh, that grauity cauſeth a body ro deſcend, and yer will not allow, that more grauity cauſeth it to delcend more. I vonder that he neuer maiked how in a paire of ſcales, a ſuperproportion of ouerweightin one ballance, lifted vp the other falter then a leſſe proportion of ouerweight would do. Or that more weight hanged to a iacke, made the ſpiti turne faſter, or to the lines of a clocke, made it goe faſter, and the like. But his argument whereby he endeauoureth to prooue his poſition, is yet more wonderfull: for finding in pendants vnequallin grauity, that the lighter ventin the ſame tme almoſt as faſt as the heyer he gathereth from thence, that the different weights hue eachof them the ſamecelerity: and that it is the oppoſition of the ayre, which maketh the lighter body not reach ſo farre at each vndulation, as the heauyer doth. For reply wherevnto: hirſt we muſt aske him; whether experience or reaſon taught him, that the ſloer going of the lighter pendant, proceeded onely from the medium, and not from want oſ grauity?A nd when he shall haue anſwered ( as he needes muſt) that experience doth not shew this; then we muſt importune him for a good reaſon but I do not find that he bringeth any artall Againe; if he admitte:h (which he doth in expreſſe termes) thata lighter body can not reſiſt the medium, ſo much as a heauyer body can; we muſt aske him, whetherit be notthe weight that makerh the heauyer body reſiſt more: which when he hath acknowled ged that it is; he hath therein likewiſe acknowledged, that whenſoeuer this happeneth in the deſcending of a body the more weight muſt make the heauyer body deſcend faſter. But we can not paſſe this matter without noting how himſelfe maketh good thoſe arguments of Ariſtotle, which he ſeemeth by no meanes toe ſteeme of: for ſince the grauity doth ouercome the reſitance of the medium in ſome proportion; it followeth that the propoitions betweene the grauity and the medium, may be multiplyed without end; ſo as, if he ſuppoſe that the grauity of a body do make ĩt goe att a certaine rate in imaginary ſpace, (Which is his manner of putting the force of grauity, ) then there may be giuen ſuch a proportion of a heauy body to the medium, as it shall goe in ſuch a medium att the ſame rate; and neuertheleſſe, there will be an infinite difference, betwixt the reſiſtance of the medium compared to that body,and the reſiſtance of the imaginary ſpace compared to that other body which he ſuppoſeth to be mooued in it at the ſame rate: which no man villſticke att confeſſing to be very abſurd. T hen turning the ſcales, becauſe the reſiſtance of the medium doth ſomewhat hinder grauity,and that with leſſe reſiſtance, the heauy body mooueth faſter; it muſt follo, that ſince there is no propoition, betixt the medium and imaginary ſpace; there muſt neither be any proportion betwixt the time in which a heauy body shall paſſe thiough a certaine quantity of the medium, and the time in which it shall paſſe through as much imaginary ſpace: wherefore, it muſt paſſe ouer ſo much imaginary ſpace in an inſtant. Which is the argument that Ariſtotle is ſo much laughed att for preſſng. Andin a word, nothing is mote euident, then that, for this eſſect which Galileo attributeth to grauiy, it is vnreaſonable to putt a diuiſible quality, ſince the effct is indiuiſibl. And therefore, as euident it is that in his doctrine ſuch aqualty, as intrinſecall grauity is conceiued to be, ou ht notto be putt: ſince euery power shuuld be fitted to the effect. or end for which itis putt. An other argument of Galileo is a: bad as this, when he endeauoureth to prooue thatallbodies goe of a like velocity, becauſe it happeneth that a lighter body in ſome caſe, goeth faſter thena heauyer body in an other caſe:as for example, in two pendanis, whereof the lighteris in the beginning of its motion, and the heauyer towardes the end of its or if the lighter hangeth att a longer ſtring, and the heauyerattahorter; we ſee that the lighter will goe faſter then the heauyer. But this concludeth no more, then if a manshould prooue thata lighter goeth faſter then a heauyer, becauſe a greater force can make it goe faſter; forit is manifeſt that in a violent motion, the force whi- h moouetha body in the end of its courſe, is weaker then that which mooueth it in the beginning: and the like is, of the to ſtringes. But here it is not amiſſe to ſolue a Probleme he putteth, which belongeth to our preſent ſubiect. He findeth by experience, that if two The bodies deſcend att the ſame time from the ſame point, and do gocto the my ſame point, the one by the inferiour quai ter of hecercle: the other, by qun the chord to thatarch or by any other lines which are chordes to partes ſic of that arch: he findeth (Iſay) that the mooueable goeth faſter by the ãſer arch, then byany of the chordes. And the reaſon ĩs euident, if we àrh conſider that the neerer any motion doth come vnto a perpendicular by t one downewardes, the greater velocity it muſt haue: and that in the arch Fit of ſucha quadrant, euery particular part of itinclineth to the perpendicular of the place where it is, more then the part of the chord anſwerable vnto it doth. ——— THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER An anſere to obiections againſt the cauſes of naturall motion, auowed in the former chapter; anda refutation of the contrary opinion. X55 Vt to returne to the thridde of our doctrine; there may 5 peraduenture be obiected againſt it, that if the violence ofa  bodies deſcent towardes the center, did proceede onely from the denſity of it  which giueth it an aptitude, ihe better to cutt the medium) and from the multitude of litle atomes deſcending that ſtrike vponiit, and preſſe it the way they goe; whichis downewardes: then it would not import whether the inner part of that body were as ſolide as the outward partes; for it cutteth with onely the outward, and is ſmitten onely vpon the outward. And yet experience, sheeth vs the contrary: for a great bullet of lead, that is ſolide and lead throughour; deſcenderh faſter then if three quarters of the diameter were hollow within; and ſucha one falling vpon any reſiſting ſubſtance, workerh a greater effet thena hollow one. Anda ball of braſſe that hath buta thinne outſide of mettall vill ſwimme vpon the water, when a maſſie one ſinketh reſently. Whereby it appeareth, that it is rather ſome other quali Belonging to the very bulke of the metall in it ſelfe; and not thel outard cauſes, that occaſion grauity. But this difficulty is eaſily ouercome, if you conſider how ſubtile thoſe atomes are which deſcending downewardes and ſtnking vpon a body in their way, do cauſe its motion hkewiſe downeardes: for you may remember how we haue shewed them to be the ſubtileſt and the minuteſt diuiſions that light, the ſubtileſt and sharpeſt diuider in nature, can make. Itis then eaſye to conceiue that theſe extreme ſubtile bodies do penetrate all others, as light doth glaſſe; and do runne through them, as ſand doth through a ſmall ſieue, or as water through a ſpunge i ſo that they ſtrike, not onely vpon the ſupeificies, but aſwell in euery moſt interiour part of the whole body;: running quite through itall, by the pores of it. And then, it muſt needes followthat the ſolider it is;and the more partes it hath withinſas well as withour) to be rucken vpon; the faſter it muſt goe,and the greater effect it muſt worke in what it falleth vpon: whereas if three quarters of the diameter of it within, should be Hiea vith nothing but withayre ; the atomes would fiy without any conſiderable effect through all that ſpace ,by reaſon ofhe rarity and ceſſibility of it. lll And that theſe atomes are thus ſubtile; is manifeſ by ſcuerall effects which we ſee in nature. Diuers Authors that write of Egypt, do aſſure vs that though their houſes be built of ſtrong ſtone; neuertheleſſe, a clodde of earth layed in ihe inmoſt roomes, and shutt vp from all appearing appearing communication with ayre, will encreaſeits weight ſo notably, as thereby they can iudge the change of weather, which will shortly enſue. Which can proceede from no other cauſe, but from a multitude of litle atomes of ſaltpeter; hich floating inthe ayre, do penetrate through the ſtrongeſt walls, and allihe maſſie defences in their way, and do ſertle in the clodde of earth as ſoone as they meete with ir; becauſe it is of a temper ſitt to entertaine and to conſerue, and to embody them. Delights haue shewed vs the way, how to make the ſpirits or atomes of ſnow and ſaltpeter paſſe through a glaſſe veſſell; which Alchimiſts hold to be the moſt impenetrable of all they can findto worke with. In our owne bodies; the aches which feeble partes do fetle before change of weather, and the heauyneſſe of our heades and shoulders, if we remaine in the open ayre preſently after ſunneſett; do aboundantly teſtify, that euen the groſſer of theſe atomes ( which are the firſt that fall) do vehemently penetrate our bodies: ſo as, ſenſe will make vs beleeue, what reaſon peraduenture could not. But beſides all this, there is yet a more conuincing realon, why the deſcending atomes should mooue the whole denſity of a body; euen though it were ſo denſe that they could not penetrate it, and gert into the bowels of it; but muſt be content to ſtrike barely vpon the outſide of it. For nature hath ſo ordered the matter, that when denſe partes ſticke cloſetogether, and make the length compoſed of them to be very ſtiffe; one can not be mooued but that all the reſt(which are inthat line) muſt likewiſe be thereby mooued: ſo that if all the world wery compoſed of atomes, cloſe ſticking together, the leaſt motion imaginable, muſt driue on all that were in a ſtraight line, to the very end of the world. This you ſee is euident in reaſon. And experience confirmeth it, vhen b a litle knocke giuen att the end of a long beame, the shaking ſ hicl maketh ſound )reacheth ſenſibly to the other end. The blind man that gouerneth his ſteppes by fecling , in defect of eyes, receiueth aduertiſements of remote thinges, through a ftaſfe which he holderh in his handes, peraduenture more barticutuly then his eyes could haue directed him. And the like is of a deafe man that heareth the ſound of an inſtrument, by holding one end of a ſticke in his mouth, whiles the other end reſteth vpõ the inſtrumẽt. And ſomeare of opinis (and they, not of the ranke of vulgar Philoſophers) that if a ſtate were as long as to reach from the ſunne to vs, it would haue the ſame effect in a moment of time. Although for my part I am hard to beleeue that we could receiue an aduertiſement ſo farre, vnleſſe the ſtaſfe were of ſuch a thickneſſe as being proportionable to the length might keepe it from facile bending: for if it should be very plyant it would do vs no ſeruice: as we experience in a thridde, which reaching from our hand to the ground, if it knocke againſt any thing, maketh no ſenſible impreſſion in our hand. the leſſe the atomes should penetrate into a moouing body, by reaſon of the extreme denſity of it,the more efficaciouſly they would worke, and the greater celerity they would cauſe in its motion. And hence we may giue the fulleſt ſolurion to the obiection aboue, which was to this eſfect: that ſeeing, diuiſion is made onely by the ſuperſicies or exteriour part of the dnſe bodysand that the vertue whereby a denſe body doth worke, is onely its reſiſtance to diuiſioniwhich makethit apt to diuide: it would follow that a hollow boule of braſſe or iron should be as heauy as a ſolide one. For we may anſere, that ſecing the atomes muſt ſtricke through the body; and that a ceſſible body doth not receiue iheir ſtroakes ſo ſirmely as a ſtiffe oneinor can conuey them ſo farre: ifvnto a ſtiffe ſuperficies there ſucceedea yielding inſide, the ſtroakes muſt of neceſſity looſe much of their force; and conſequently, can not mooue a body full of ayre, with ſo much celerity, or with ſo much efficacy, as they may a ſolide one. But then, you may peraduenture ſay, that if theſe ſtroakes of the deſcending atomes vpon a denſe body, were the cauſe of its motion downeardes, ve muſt allow the atomes to mooue faſter then the denſe body;that ſo, h-y may ſtill ouertake it, and driue it along, and enter into it: Whereas, if they should mooue ſlowerthenit, none of them could come in theirturneto giue ita ſtroake, but it would be paſt them, and out of their reach before they could ſtrike it. Butit is euident (ſay you) out of theſe prerended cauſes of this motion, that ſuchatomes can not mooue ſo ſwifrly downewardes, as a great denſe body, ſince their litleneſſe and their rarity, are both of them hindering to their motion: and therefore, this can not be the cauſe ofthat effect which we call grauity. To this I reply i that to haue the atomes giuetheſe blowes to a deſcending denſe body, doth notrequire that their naturall and ordinary motion should be ſifter then the deſcent of ſuch a denſe body: but the very deſcent of it, occaſioneth their ſtriking it, for as it fallethand maketh it ſelfe a way through them, they diuide themſelues before it, and ſwell on the ſides and a litle aboue it, and preſently cloſe againe behind it and ouerit as ſoone as it is paſt. Now that cloſng , to hinder vacuity of ſpace, is a ſuddaine one; and thereby attaineih great velocity; which would carry the atomes in that degree of velocity, further then the deſcending body, if they did not encounter withiitin their way to retarde them: which encounter andretarding, implyeth ſuch ſtroakes, vpon the denſe body, as we ſuppoſe to cauſe this motion. And the like we ſee in water; into which letting a ſtone fall; preſently the water that as diuided by the ſtone and swelleth on the ſides higher, then it was before, cloſeth vpon the backe of the deſcending ſtone, and followeth jt ſo violently, that fora while aſter, it leauetha purling hole in the place where the ſtone went done till by the repoſeofthe ſtone, the water returneth likewiſeto its quiet;and ſo, its ſuperſicies becometh euen. Inthe third place, an enquiry occurreth emergent out of this doctrine; of the cauſe ofbodies moouing vpwardes and downewardes. Which 3 is; whether there would be any naturall motion decpe in the earth, —— beyond the actiuity of the ſunnes beames? For out of theſe nãccidea. principles, it followeth that there would not: and conſequently, there muſt be a vaſt orbe in which there would be no motion of grauity or of leuity: for ſuppoſe that the ſunne beames might pierce a thouſand miles deepe into the body of the earth; yet there would ſtill remaine a maſſe, whoſe diameter would be neere ;000 miles, in which there would be no grauitation nor the contrary motionn. For my part, Ishall make no difficulty to grant the inference, as farre as concerneth motion cauſed by our ſunne: for what inconuen?enœe would follow out of it? But I will not offeratt determining whether there may not be encloſed within that great ſphere of earth, ſome other fire, (ſuch as the Chymiſtes talke of) an Archeus; a Demogorgon; ſeated in the center, like the hart in animals, vhich may raiſe vp vapours, and boyle an ayre out of them, and diuide groſſe bodies into atomes; And accordingly giue them motions, anſwerable to ours, but in different lincs fom ours, according as that fire or ſunne is ſituated: ſince the farre- ſearching Author of the Dialogues de Mundo, hath left that ſpeculation vndecided, after he ad touched vponitin the 2: knott of his firſt Dialogue. lll Fourthly,it may be obiected that if ſuch deſcending atomes, às 4 ve haue deſcribed, were the cauſe of a bodies grauity, and The ſounh deſcending towardes the center; the ſame body would att diuers anered; æhy times deſcend more and leſſe ſiftly : for example after midnight tæe geſcont of vhen the atomes begin to deſcend more ſloly, then likeviſe, the bodies is qu ſame body would deſcend more ſlowly in a like proportion, and not in ſo great weigh ſo much as it did in the heate of the day. The ſame may be ſaid of ſummerand winter: for in vintertime, the atomes ſeemè to be vhich cauſe it. more groſſe; and conſequently, to ſtrike more ſtrongly vpon the bolies they meete with in their way as they deſcend: yet on the other ſide, 'hey ſeeme in the ſummer to be more numerous, as alſo to deſcend from a greater height ; both which circumſtances will be cauſe of a ſtronger ſtroake and more vigourous impulſe vpon the body they hitt. And the like may be obiected of diuers partes of the vorſd, for in the torride zone it will alwayes happen as in ſummer in places of the temperate zone; and in the polarclimes, as in deepeſt vinter: ſo that no where, there would be any ſtandard or certainty in the weight of bodies, if it depended vpon ſo mutable a cauſe. And it maketh to the ſame effect, that a body which lyeth vndera thicke rocke, orany othervery denſe body, thatcan not be penetrated by any great ſtore of atomes: should not be ſo heauy as it would be in the open and free ayre, where the atomes in their complete numbers haue their full ſtroakes. For anſuere to theſe and ſuch like inſtances; we are to note firſt, that it is not ſo much the number, or the violence of ihe percuſſion, of the ſtriking atomes, as the denſity of the thing ſtrucken which giueth the meaſure to the deſcending of a weighty body: and the chiefe thing which the ſtroake of the atomes giueth vnto a denſe body, is a determination of the way which a enſe body is to cutt vnto ĩt ſelfe: therefore, multiplicationor leſſening of the atomes, vill not make any ſenſible difference betwixt the weight of one denſe body, where many atomes do ſtrike, and an other body of the ſame denſi vhere but few do ſtrike; ſo that, the ſtroake downevardes of the deſcending atomes, be greater then the ſtroake vpwardes of the aſcending atomes; and thereby determineth it to weigh to the centervardes, and not riſe floating vpwardes, which is all the ſenſible eſfect we can perceiue. Nest, ve may obſerue, that the ſirſt particulars of the obiection, do not reach home to enfeeble our doctrine in this patticular, although we admitt them to be in ſuch ſort as they are propoſed: for they do vithall implye ſuch a perpetuall variation of cauſes, euer fauourable to our poſition, that nothing can be inferred out of them to repugne againſ it. As thus: when there are many atomes deſcending in the ayre; the ſame generallcauſe which maketh them be many, maketh them alſo be light, in proportion to their multitude. And ſo, vhen they are few, they are heauy, likeviſe, when the atomes are light, the ayre is rarifyed and thinne; and when they are heauy, the ayre is thicke: and ſo vpon the whole matter it is euident that we can not make ſuch a preciſe and exact iudgment of the variety of citcumſtances, asto be able to Jeermine when there is abſolurely more cauſc of eight, and vhen leſſe. And as we find not weight enough in either ſide of theſe oppoſite circumſtances to tune the ſcales in our diſcourſe, ſo likewiſe we find the ſame indifference in experience it ſelfe: for the weights we vſe, do weigh equally in myſty weather and in cleare: and yet in rigour of diſcourſe, we can not doubt burthat in truth they do not grauitate or weigh ſo much (though the difference be imperceptible to ſenſe) hen the ayre is thicke and foggy, as when it is pure and rarifyed: hich thickeneſſe ofthe medium, when it arriueth toa very notable degree, as for example to vater, maketh then a great diſference of a heauy bobies grauitation in it; and accordingly, we ſce a great difference betweene heauy bodies deſcending in watet and in ayre, though betweene to kindes of ayre, none is to be obſerued, their difference is ſo ſmall in reſpect of the denſity of the body that deſcendeth in thẽe. And therefore, ſeeing that an aſſured and certaine difference in circumſtances maketh no ſenſible inequality in the effeũt; we can not expect any from ſuch circumſtances, as we may reaſonably doubt whether there be any inequality among the or no. Be ſides that, if in any of the propoſcd caſes, a heauy body should grauitate more, and be heauyer one time then an other; yet by weighing it, ve could not diſcerne it; ſince that the counterpoiſe (which is to determine its weight) muſt likewiſe be in the ſame proportion heauyer then it was. And beſides weighing, no other meanes remaineth to diſcouer its greater grauitation, but to compare itto time in its deſcent: and I belecue that in all ſuch diſtances as we can try ĩt in, its inequalities will be no whirt leſſe difficult to be obſcrued that way, then any other. Laſtly, to bend our diſcourſe particularly to that inſtance of the obiection; where it is conceiued that if grauity or deſcending Tte downevwardes of bodies, proceeded from atomes ſtriking vpon them o æ as they mooue downevardes; it would follow that a ſtone or other bod; denſc body lying vnder shelterof a thicke, hard, and impenetrable ſ adamantine rocke, vould haue no impulſe downevardes, and æhic conſcquently would not weigh theree We may note that no body whatſocuer, compacted by phyſicall cauſes and agents, can be v denſe and imporous, but that ſuch atomes, as theſe we ſpeake of, muſt be in them, and in euery partof them, and euery where paſſe through and through them; as water doth through a ſeeue or through a ſpunge:and this vniuerſallmaxime muſt extend as farre as the ſunne, oras any other heate communicating with the ſunne, doth reach and is found. Thereaſon whereof, is, becauſc theſe atomes are no other thing, but ſuch extreme litle bodies as are reſolued by heate; out of the maine ſtocke of thoſe maſſy bodies vpon which the ſunne and heate do vorke. Now then, it being certaine, out of what we haue heretofore ſaid, that all mixt bodies haue their temper and conſiſtence, and generation from the mingling of fire with the reſt of the Elements that compoſe them; and from the concoction or digeſtion which fire maketh in thoſe bodies: it is euident, that no mixt body whatſoeuer, nor any ſenſible part of a mixt body, can be voyde of pores capable of ſuch atomes, nor can be without ſuch atomes, paſſing through thoſe pores, which atomes by mediation of the ayre (that likewiſe hath its share in ſuch pores) muſt haue communication vith the reſt of the great ſea of ayre, and with the motions that paſſe in it. And conſcquently, inalland in euery ſenſible part,of any ſuch extreme denſe, and pretended impenetrable body, (to the notice whereof we can arriue this percuſſion of atomes muſt be found, and they will haue no difficulty in running throughi nor, by meanes of it, in ſtriking any other body lying vnder the shelter of ir; and thus both in, and from, that hard body, there muſt be ſtill an vninterrupted continuation of grauity or of deſcending tovardes the centerVnto which we may adde, that the ſtone or denſe body can not lye ſo cloſe to the rocke that coucreth it, but that ſome ayre muſt be betweene, (for if nothing were betweene, they would be vnited, and become one continued bodys Jand in that ære(which is a creeke of the great ocean of ayre ſpread ouer the world, that is euery where beſtreed with moouing atomes; and whichis continually fed, like a running ſtreame, with new ayre that driueth on the ayre it ouertaketh) there isno doubt but there are deſcending atomes, as well as in all the reſt of its maine body: and theſe deſcending atomes meeting with the ſtone, muſt needes giue ſome ſtroake vponit; and that ſtroake (be it neuer ſo litle) can not chooſe but woike ſome effect, in making the ſtone remooue a litle that way they goe;and that motion, Whereby the ſpace is enlarged, betweene the ſtone and the sheltering rocke, muſt drawin a greater quantity of ayreand atomes to ſtrike vpon it. And thus, by litle and litle, the ſtone paſſeth through all the degrees of tardity by vhicha deſcending body parteth from reſt: which is by ſo much the more ſpeedily done, by how much the body is more eminent in denſity. But this difference of time, in regard of the atomes ſtroakes onely; and abſtracting from the bodies denſity, will be inſenſibleto vs; ſeeing ſas we haue ſuid) no more is required of them, but to giuea determination downewardes. And out of this, we clearely ſce the reaſon why the ſimeatomes, ſtriking vpon one body lying vpon the water, do make t ſinke; and vpon an other, they do not. As for example, if you lay vpon the ſuperficies of ſome vater,a piece of iron, and a piece ofcorke, of equall biggeneſſeand of the ſame figure; the iron will be beaten downe to the borcome,and the corke will floate att the toppe. The reaſon whereof is, the different proportions of the compariſon of their denſities with the denſity of water: for (as we haue ſaid the efficacy, and force of deſcẽding, is to be meaſured by that. So then, the ſtroakes of the atomes, being more eſficacious vpon water then vpon corke, becauſe the denſity of water is greater then the denſity of corke conſidering the aboundance of ayre that is harboured in the large pores of it3 it followeth that the atomes vill make the water goe downe more forcibly then they will coike. But the denſity of iron exceeding the denſity of water; the ſame ſtroakes will make the iron deſcend faſter then the water; and conſequently the iron muſt ſinke in the water, and the coike ill ſvimme vpon ĩt. And this ſame is the cauſe, why if a piece of corke be held by force att the bottome of the water; it will riſe vp to the toppe of the water, a: ſooneas the violence is taken away that kept it downe: for the aromes ſtroakes hauing more force vpon the water then vpon the corke; they make the water ſinke and ſlide vnder it firſt, a litle thinne plate of water; and then an other, a litle thicker, and ſo by degrees more and more, till it hath lifted the corke quite vp to the toppe. Fiſthly it may be obiected, that theſe atomes do not deſcend alwayſe perpendicularly, but ſometimes ſloapingly; and in that caſe, if their ſtroa kes be the cauſe of denſe bodies mouing, they should moue ſloaping, and not downeward. Now that theſe atomes deſcend ſometimes ſloapingly, is euidentas when (for example) they meete with a ſtreime of water, or witha ſtrong wind, or euen with any other litle mortion of the ayre, ſuch as carryeth feathers vp and downe hither and thither; which muſt needes waft the atomes in ſome meaſure along with them their way; ſeeing then that ſuch a gentle motion of the ayre is able to putt a feather out of its way, notuith ſtanding the percuſſions of the atomes vpon it; why shall it not likewiſe putt a piece of iron out of its way downeardes, ſince the iron hath nothing from the atomes but a determination to its way? But much more, why should not a ſtrong vind, ora current of water, do it; ſince the atomes themſelues that giue the iron its determination, muſt needes be hurryed along with them? To this we anſwere, that we muſt conſider, how any vind or vater which runneth in that ſort, is it ſelfe originally full of ſuch atomes;which continually, and euery where, preſſe into itand cutt through it, in purſuing their conſtant perpetuall courſe of deſcęnding; in ſuch ſort, às we haue shewed in their running, through any hard rocke, or other denſeſt body. And theſe atomes, do make the wind or the water primarily tend downewides; though orher accidentall cauſes impell them ſecondarily to a ſ=oaping motion. Andſtill, their primary naturall motion will be in truth ſtrongeſt;though their not hauing ſcqpe to obey that, but their hauing enough, to obey the violent motion, maketh this become the more obſeruable. Which appearethi euidently our of this; that if there be a hole in the bottome of the pipe that conuejeth water ſloapingly, be the pipe neuer ſo long, and conſequently the ſloaping motion neuer ſo forcible; yet the water willrunne out att that hole to obey its more powerfull impulſe to the centerwardes, rather then continue the violent motion, in which it had arriued to a great degree of celerity. Vhich being ſo, it is eaſy to conceiue that the atomes in the wind or water which mooue perpendicularly downewardes, will ſtill continue the irons motion downewardes, notwithſtanding the mediums ſloaping motion: ſince the prenailing force determineth, both the iron, and. the medium downewardes; and the iron hath a ſuperproportion of denſity to cutt its way, according as the preualent motion determine hit. But if the deſcending atomes, be in part carryed along done the ſtreame by the current of wind or water; yet ſtill the current bringeth ith it, new atomes into the place of thoſethat are carryed away: and theſe atomes, in euery point of place whereſoeuer they are, do of themſelues tend perpendicularly downewardes; howbeit they are forced from the complete effect of their tendance, by the violence of the current: ſo that in this caſe they are mooued by a declining motion, compounded of their owne naturall motion, and of the forced motion, vithwhichthe ſtreame carryeth them. Now then if adenſe body, do fall into ſuch a current where theſe different motions giue their ſeuerall impulſes, it will be carryed ( in ſuch ſort as we ſay of e atomes; but in an otherproportion) not in a perpendicular but in a mixt declining line, compounded of the ſeuerall impulſes, which the aromes and the current do giue itſin which alſo it is to beremembred, ho the current giueth an impulſe downewardes, as well as ſloapingand peraduenture the ſtrongeſt downewardes: ) and the declination ill be more or leſſe; according, as the violent impulſe preuayleth more or leſſe againſt the naturall motion. But this is not all that is to be conſidered in eſtimating the declination of a denſe bodies motion when it is ſinking ina current of wind or vater; you muſt remember that the denſe body it ſelfe, hath a particular vertue of its owne ſ namely its denſity) by which it receiueth and proſecuteth more fully its determination downewardes; and therefore the force of that body in cutting its way through the medium, is alſo to be conſidered in this caſe, as well as aboue, in calculating its declining from the perpendicular, and out of all theſe cauſes will reſult a middle declination, cõpounded of the motiõ of the water or wind both wayſe, and of its owne motion by the perpendicular line. And ſince of theſe three cauſes of a denſe bodies motion, its owne vertue in proſecuting by its denſiry the determination ĩt requireth, is the moſt efficacious by much after it hath once receiued a determination from without; ĩts declination will be but litleif it be very denſe and heauy. But if it recede much from denſity, ſo as to haue, ſome neere proportion to the denſity of the medium, the declination will be great. And ina word, according as the body is heauyer or lighter, the declination willbe more or leſſe, in the ſame current though not exactly according to the proportion of the diminishing of its denſity,as long as there is a ſuperproportion of iis denſity to the medium: ſince that cha loperproportion (as we haue declared heretofore) maketh the mediums operation vpon the denſe body ſcarce conſiderable. l And hence you ſee why a ſtone or piece of iron, ĩs not carried out of its way as well as a feather; becauſe the ſtones motion downewardes, is eater and ſtronger, then the motion of a feather downewardes. And y conſequence, the force that can deturne a feather from its courſe downewardes, is not able to deturne a ſtone. Andif it bereplyed, thatit may be ſo ordered that the ſtone shall haue no motion, before it be in the ſtreame of ariuer,and notithſtanding it will ſtill mooue downewardes; we may anſwere, that conſidering the litle decliuity of the bed of ſucha ſtreame, the ſtrongeſt motion of the partes of the ſtreame, muſt neceſſarily be downewardes; and conſequently, they will beate the ſtone downewardes. And if they do not the like to a featheror other light body; it is becauſe other partes of the ſtreame, do gett vnder the light body; and beate it vpwardes, which they haue not power enough to do Sixthly, it may be obiected, that if Elements do hot weigh in their owne ſpheres; then their grauity and deſcending muſt proceede from ſome other cauſe and not from this percuſſion of ihe atomes we attribute it to; which percuſſion we haue ſecermined goeth through all bodies whatſocuer, and beateth vpon euery ſenſible part of them. Bur that Elements weigh not in theirowne ſpheres, appeareth out of the experience of a phonſor though one legge of the ſyphon, be ſuncke neuer ſo much deeper into the body of the water, then the other legge reacheth below the ſuperficies of the water: neuertheleſſe, if once the outward legge become full of water, ĩt will draw it out of the other longer legge: which it should not do, if the partes of water that are compriſed within theirwhole bu'ke, did weigh; ſeeing that the bulke of water is much greater, inthe ſunke legge then in the other: and therefore theſe should rather draw backe the other water into the ciſterne, then be themſclues drawne out of it into the ayre. To this we anſwere that it is euident the Elements do weigh in their owne ſpheres, att leaſt, as farre as we can reach to their ſpheres: for e ſee that a ballone ſtuffed hard with ayre is heauyer then an empty one. Againe more water would not be heãuyer then leſſe if the inward partes of it did not weigh: and if a hole were digged in the bortome of the ſea, the water would not runne into it and fillit, if it did not grauitate ouer it. Laſtly, there are thoſe ho vndertake to diſtinguish in a deepe water, the diuers weights which ſeuerall partes of it haue, as they grow ſtill heauyerand heauyer towardes the bortome : and thty are ſo cunning in this art, that they profeſſe to make inſtruments which by their equality of their weight toa determinũãte part of the water, shall ſtand iuſt in that part, and neyther riſe nor fall higher orlower: but if it be putt lower, it shillaſcend to its exact equally weighing orbe of the water; and if it be putt higher, it shall deſcend vntillit cometh to reſt preciſely in that place. Vhenceit is euident, that partes of water do weigh within the bulke, of their maine body; and of the like we haue no reaſon to doubt, in the other two weighty Elements. 3ill As for the oppoſition of the ſyphon, we referre 1hat point to where we shall haue occaſion to declare the nature of that engine, of ſeti purpoſe. And there we shall hew, rhat it could not ſueceede in its operation, vnleſſe the partes of water did grauitate in their maine bulke, into which one legge of the ſyphonis ſunke. Laſtly, i may be obiected, that if there were ſuch a courſe of atomes as we ſayi and that their ſtroakes were the cauſe of ſo notable an æffect, as the grauity of heauy bodies: we should feele it palpably in our owne bodies, Which experience shewerh vs we do not. To this we anſwere firſt: that their is no neceſſity we should feele this courſe of atomes, ſince by their ſubtility they penetrate all bodies; and conſequently, do not giue ſuch ſtroakesas are ſenſible. Secondly, if we o6 A TRE ATISE cauſing any ſenſe in vs; much more we may cõceiue that atomes (which are infinitely more ſubtile and light) can not caulẽ in vs any feeling of them. Thirdly, we ſee that what is continuall with vs,and mingled in all thinges doth not make vs take any eſpeciall notice of it: and this is the caſe of the ſmiting of atomes. Neuertheleſſe, peraduenture we feele them in truth, as oſten as we feele hoat and cold weather, and in all catarres or other ſuch changes, which doas it were ſinke into our body vithout our perceiuing any ſenſible cauſe of them: forno queſtion but theſe atomes are the immediate cauſes of all good and bad qualities in the ayre. Laſtly, when we conſider that we can not long together hold out our arme att length, or our foote from the ground, and reflect vpon ſuch Iike impotencies of our reſiſting the grauity of our owne body: e can not doubt, but that in theſe caſes we feele the effect of theſe atomes, working vpon thoſe partes; although we can not by our ſenſe diſcerne mmediitty that theſeare the cauſes of it. But nowit is time to draw our Reader out of a difficulty, which may eraduenture haue perplexed him in the greateſt part of what he hath Rthero gone ouer. In our inueſtigation of the Elements, we tooke for a principle therevnto: that grauity, is ſometimes more, ſometimes leſſe, then the denſity of the body in which it is. But in our explication of rarity and denſity;and againe in our explication of grauity ; we ſeeme to putt, that grauity and denſity is allone. This thorne Iappre hend, may in allthis diſtance, haue putt ſome to paine: but it wasim poſſible for mee to remedyit; becauſe I had not yet deliuered the manner of grauitation. Here then Ivill do my beſt, to aſſwage their greeſe, by reconciling theſe appearing repugnancies. . Ve are therefore to conſider, that denſity ſinit ſelfe) doth ſignify a difficultie to haue the partes of its ſubiect in vhich it is, ſeperated one from an other; and that grauity ſ likeiſe in it ſelfe) doth ſignifya quality, by which a heauy body doth deſcend towardes the center; or (which is conſequent therevnto) a force to make an other body deſcend. Now this power, we haue shewed, doth belong vnto denſiry, ſo farre forthas a denſe body being ſtrucken by an other, doth not yield by ſuffering its partes to be diuided; but, ith its whole bulke ſtriketh the next before it,and diuideth it, if it be more diuiſible then it ſelfe is. So that you ſee, denſity hath the name of denſity, in conſideration of a paſſiue quality or rather of an impaſſibility, hich it hath; and the ſame denſity is called grauity, in reſpect of an actiue quality it hath which followeth this impaſſibility. And both of them are eſtimated by the different reſpects which the ſame body or ſubiect, in hich they are, haue vnto diſferent bodies that are the termes whereunto it is compareq; for the actiue quality or grauity of a denſe body, is eſteemed b its reſpect to the body it ſtriketh vpon; whereas its denſity, includeth a reſpect ſingly to the body that ſtrikethit. Now it isno wonder that this change of compariſon, worketh a diſparity in the denominations: and that thereby, the ſame body, may be conceiued to be more or leſſe impartible, then it is actiue or hæav. As for example, lett vs, of a denſe Element, take any one leaſt part, which muſtof neceſſty be in its owne nature and kind abſolutely impartible: and yet it is euident, thit the grauity of this part muſt he exceeding litle, by reaſon of the litleneſſe of its quantity ſo that thus you ſee an extremity of the effect of denſity, ioyned toget her in one body (by the accident of the litleneſſe of it) with a contrary extremity of the effct of grauity, (orrather with the want of itieach of them within the limits of the ſame ſpecies. In hike manner it happeneth, that the ſame body in one circumſtance is more weighryiin an other(orrather in the contrary) is more partible: ſo water when it is in a payle, becauſe itis thereby hindered frõ ſpreading abroad, hath the effect of grauity predominating in it; but if it be poured out, it hath the effect of partibility more. And thus it hippeneth that meerely by rhe gradation of rarity and denſity, one denſe body may be apt, out of 1he generall courſe of naturall cauſes, to be more diuiſible, thẽ to be a diuidersthough, according to the nature of the degrees conſidered abſolutely in thẽſelues, what is more poverfull to diuide, is alſo more reſiſtẽt and harder to be diuided. And this atriueth in thu degree which makerh water; for ithe falling and beating of the atomes vpon water, hath the power, both to diuideit and to mak: it deſcendi but ſo, that by making it deſcend it diuideth it. And therefore we ſuy that it hth more grautty then denſity, though it be the very denſity of it, which is the cauſe that maketh it partible, by the vorking of one part vpon an othær: forifthe atomesdid not find thæ bocy, ſo denſe as it is, they could not by their beating vpon one part mãke an orher be diuided. lil lil So that, a denſe body to he more heauy then denſe, ſigniſyeth nothing elſe, but that it is in ſucha degree of denſiry, ihat ſome of its owne partes, by their being aſſiſted ànd ſett on wuike bya genenll cauſe, (which isthe fallof the atomes) are powerfullenough to diuide, otheradioyning partes of the ſame denſity with them, one froman othær: in ſuch ſortas we ſee, rhit water poured out of an eaer intoa baſen where there is already orher water, hath the power to diuide the ater in the baſen by the aſſiſtance of the celerity wh ch it getteth in deſcending. And now I hope the reader is fully ſatisfyed that there is no contradiction in putting Denſity and Grauity to be the ſame thing materially; and that neuertheleſſe the ſame thing, may be more heauy then denſc, or more denſe then heauy, as we tookeit to our ſcuerall purpoſes in the inueſtigation of the Elements. Hauing, thus layed an intelligible ground to diſcouer how theſe motions that are generall to all bodies, and are naturall in chiefe, are contriued by nature: we vill now endeauour to shew that the contrary poſition is not onely voluntary, but alſo impoſſible. Lett vs therefore ſuppoſe that a body hatha quality to mooue it downevardes. And ſirſt wee shall aske what downewardes ſignifyeth: for eyther it ſignifyerh towardes a fixed point of imaginary ſpace; or towardes a fixed point of the vniuerſe; or towardes ſome mooueable point. As for ihe firſt, who would maintaine it muſt haue more imagination thæn iudgment to thir ke that a naturall quality could haue an eſſence determined bv a nothing: becauſe we can frame a conceit of that nothing. As for the ſecond, it is very vncertaine, whether any ſuch point be in nature: for, as forthe center of the earth itiscleare that if the earth, be cariyed about, the center of it can not bea fixed point. Againe, ifthe center ſignifyetha determinate point in the earth that is the medium of grauity or of quantity, it is changed as often as any duſt lighteth vnequally vpon any one ſide of the earth, which would moke that ſide bigger then it was: and I doubta qualitycan not haue morall conſiderations to thinke that ſo litle doth no harme. As for the third poſition, likewiſe it is not intelligible how a quality should change its inclination or eſſence, according to the change that should light to make now one point, noW an other, be the center vnto which it chould tend. Againe, lett vs conſider that a quality hath a determinate eſſence. Then ſecing its power is to mooue, and to moue, ſignifyeth to cutt th- mediũ it is mooued in; it belongeth vnto it of its nature, to cutt ſo much of ſuch a medium in ſucha time. So that, if no orher cauſe be added but that you take preciſely and in abſtracto,thit quality, that medium, and that time; this effect will follow, that ſo much motion is made. And if this efſcct should not follow, it is cleare, that the being able to cutt ſo much of ſuch a medium in ſucha time, is not the eſſence of this quality, as it was ſuppoſed to be. Diuiding thn the time, and the medium, halfe the motion should de made in halfe the time, a quarter of the motion in a uarter of the time, and ſo without end, as farre as you can diuide. But huis demonſtratiuely impoſſible, fſithhence it is demonſtrated that a mooueable coming from reſt, muſt of neceſſity paſſe throughall degrees of tardity; and therefore by the demonſtration cited out of Galileus, we may take a part in which this grauity can not mooue its body in a proportionate part of time, hrough a proportionate part of the mediũ. But becauſc in naturall Theorems, expeiiences are naturally requiredi lett vs ſee whether nature giueth vs any teſtimony of this verity. To that purpoſe we may conſidera plummet, hanged 'n a ſmall ſtring from a beame, whic h being lifted vp gentlely on the one ſide att the extent of the ſtring, and permitted to fallmeerely by the power of grauity, it will aſcend very neere as high on the contrary ſide, as the place it was held in from whence it fell. In this experiment we may note iwo thinges: the firſt,that if grauity be a quality, it woiketh againſt its owne nature, in lifting vpthe plumett, ſeing its nature is onely to carry it downe. For though it may be anſwered that it is not the grauity; but an other quality, called vis impreſſa which carrieth it vVp: neuertheleſſe it can not be denyed, but that grauity is either the immediate or at leaſt the mediate contrary to the nature of grauity; it is abſurd to make grauity the cauſe of it: thatis, the cauſe of an eſſcnce, whoſe nature is contrary toits owne. And the ſame argument, vill proceede, though you putt not Vi impreſſa,but ſuppoſe ſome other thingto be the cauſe of the plummets remounting, as long as grauity is ſaid to be a quality: forſtill grauity muſt be the cauſe of an eſfect contrary to its owne inclination by ſetring on foote the immediate cauſe to produce it. The ſecond thing w: are to note in this experiment of the plummets aſcent isthit if grauity be a quality, there muſt bee as much reſiſtance ro its going vp,as there was force to its coming downe. Therefore, there muſt be twice as much force to make it aſcend, as there was to makeit deſcend: that is to ſay, there muſt be tice as much force, as the naturall force of the grauity is: for there muſt be once as much, to equaliſe the reſiſt nee of the grauity ; and then an othertime as much, to carry it as faste through the ſame mædium in rhe ſlme time. But it is impoſſible that any cauſe should produce an effect greater then it ſelfe. Againe; the grauity muſt needes be ina determinate degree: and the vertue that maketh the plummett remount (Whatſocuer it be ) may be putt as litle as we pleaſe. and conſequently, not able to ouerſway the grauity alone if it be an intrinſecall quality and yet the plummet will remount: in which caſe you putt an effect, without a cauſe. An other experience we may take from the force of ſucking, for take the barrell of a long gunne perfectly bored, and ſertit vpright, with the breech vpon the ground, and take a bullett that is exactly fitt for it, but ſo as it ſicke not any where (both the barrell, and it, being perfectl polished;) and then if you ſucke att the mouth of the barrell (though neuer ſo gently)the bullett will come vp ſo forcibly, that it uill hazard the ſtriking out of your teeth. Now lett vs conſider, what force were neceſſary to ſucke the bullett vp, and how very ſlowly it would aſcend, if in the barrell it had as much reſiſtance to aſcend as in the free ayre it hath inclination to goe downe. But if it had a quality of grauity naturall to it, it muſt of neceſſity haue ſuch reſiſtance: whereas in our experiment e ſee ic cometh as eaſily as the very ayre. So that in this example as well as in the other nature teacheth vs that grauity is no quality. I Andall, or moſt of the arguments which we haue vrged againſt the quality of grauity in that explication, we haue conſidered it in: haue force likewiſe againſt it, although it be ſaid to be an inclination of its ſubiect to mooue it ſelfe vnto vnity with the maine ſtocke of its owne nature, as diuers witty men do putt it: for this ſuppoſition doth but chãge the intention orend of grauity: and is but to make it an other Xind of intellectuall or knowing Entity, that determineth it ſelfe to an other end: which is as impoſſible for a naturall quality to do, asto determine it ſelfe to the former endes. And thus much, the arguments we haue propoſed, do conuince euidently, if they be applyed againſt this opinion. THE TVELTH CHAPTER. Of Violent Motion. Aò Nd thus, we haue giuen a short ſcãtling, whereby to vaderſtand & in ſome meaſure, the cauſes of that motion, which we call  naturall, by reaſon it hath its birth from the vniuerſall occonomy of nature here among vs; thatis from the generall working of the ſunne, whereby all naturall thinges haue their courfe: and by reaſon that the cauſe of itis att all times, and inall places, conſtantly the ſame. Next vnto which the order of diſcourſe leadeth vs to take a ſuruay of thoſe forced motions, whoſe ſirſt cauſes the more apparent they are the more obſcuiity they lcaue vs in, to determine by what meanes they are continued. When a tennis ballis ſtrucken by a rackett, or anarrow is shott from a bow, we plainely ſee the cauſes of their motion: namely, the ſtringes; vhich firſt yielding,and then returning with a greater celerity, do cauſe the miſſiues to ſpeed ſo faſt towardes their appoynted homes. Experience informeth vs what qualities the miſſiues muſt be endued withall to mooue faſt and ſteadily. They muſt be ſo heauy that the ayre may not breake their courſe; and yet ſo light, that they may be within the command of the ſtroake, which giueth them motion; the ſtiiker muſt be denſe,and in its beſt velocity: the angle whic h the miſſiue is to mount byũif we willhaue it goetoſts furtheſt randome) muſt be the halfe of a right one: and laſtly, the figure of the miſſiue muſt be ſuch, as may giue ſcope vnto the ayre to beare it vp,and yet not hinder its courſe by takin too much hold of it. All this we ſee; but when withall wee ſee that the moouer, deſerteth the moueable as ſoone as he hath giuen the blow; wee are att a ſtand, and know not where to ſecke for that which afcerwardes maketh it ſlye: for motion being a tranſient, not a permanent thing; as ſoone as the cauſe ceaſeth that Begot it, in that very point it muſt be att an end; and as long as the motion continueth, there muſt be ſome permanent cauſe to make it do ſo: ſo that as ſoone as the rackett, or bowſtring,goe backe and leaue the ball orarrow; why should not they preſently fall ſtraight downe to the ground: Ariſtorle and his followers, haue attributed the cauſe hereof to the ayre: but Galileo relisheth not this conception. His arguments againſt it,  are ſas  remember) to this tenor: firſt; ayre by reaſon of its rarity and . diuſſibility, ſeemeth not apt to conſerue motion: next; we ſec that light thinges are beſt carried by the ayre; and it hath no power ouer eighty ones: laſtly ĩt is euident that ayre taketh moſt hold of the broadeſt ſu perficies; and therefore an arrow would ſlye faſter broadwayes then longwayes, if this were true. Neuertheleſſe, ſince euery effect muſt haue a proportionable cauſe from whence it immediately floweth; and that a body, muſt haue an other body to thruſtit on, as long as it mooueth lett vs examine what bodies do toucha moueable whileſt it is in motion: as the onely meanes to find an iſſue out of this difficulty; for, to haue recourſe vnto a quality or impreſſed force, for deliuerance out of this ſtraight, is a shift that will not ſerue the turne in this way of diſcourſe we vſe. In this Philoſophy, no knott admitteth ſucha ſolution. ll If then we enquire what body it is that immediately toucheth the ball or arrow whiles it flyeth; we shall find, that none other doth ſo, but the ayre and the atomes init, after the ſtringes haue giuen their ſtroake, and are parted from the miſſiue. And although we haue Galileos authority, and arguments to diſcourage vs from belceuing that the ayre can worke this effect; yet ſince there isno other body beſides itleſt for vs to conſider in this caſelett vs attthe leaſt examine howthæ ayre beherh it ſelfe, after the ſtroake is giuen by the ſtringes. Firſt then, it is euident, that as ſooneas the rackett or bowſtring shrinketh backe from the miſſiue, and leaueth a ſpace betweenethe miſſiue and it  as it is cleare, it doth, as ſoone as it hath ſtrucken the reſiſting body ) the ayre muſt needes clappe in with as much velocity as they retire, and with ſome what more; becauſe the miſſiue goeth forward att the ſume time, and therefore, the ayre muſt haſten to ouertake it, leaſt any vacuity should be left betweene the ſtring and the arro. It is certaine likewiſe, that the ayre on the ſides doth alſo vpon the diuiſion of it, ſlide backe and helpe to fill that ſpace which the departed arrow leaueth voyde. Now this forcible clooſing of the ayre att the nocke of the arrow muſt needes giue an impulſe or blow vpon ĩt: if it ſeeme to be but a litle one, you may conſider how it is yet much greater, then whit thæayre and the bodies ſwimming in it, doatt the firſt giue vntoa ſtone falſing frò highi and howatt the laſt, thoſe litle atomes that driuea ſtone in its naturall motion, do with their litle blowes force it peraduenture more violenty and ſiſtly then any impelling Agent we are acquainted with, can do. So that the impulſe which they make vpon the arro, preſſing violently vpon iĩt, after ſucha vehement concuſſion , and with a great velociry, muſt needes cauſe a powerfull effect in that vhich of itſelfe is indifferent to any motion any wayBut vnleſſe this motion of the ayre do continue to beate ſtill vpon the arrow, it will ſoone fall to the ground, for want of a cauſe to driue it forward; and becauſe the naturall motion of the ayre, ( being then the onely one) will determine it downewardes. Lett Vs conſider then, how this violent rending of the ayre by the blow that the bowſtiing giueth vnto the arro; muſt needes diſorder the litle atomes thit ſnimme too and frio in it, and thatſ being heauyer then theayre) are continually deſcending downewardes. This diſorder, mokerh ſome of the heauyer partes of them, gett aboue orthers that are lighter then they; which they not abiding, do preſſe vpon thoſe that are next them, and they vpon their fellowes: ſothat there is a great commorion and vndulation ta in the whole maſſe of ayre round about the arrow: which muſt continue ſome time before it can be ſcttled: and it being determined by the motion of the arro that way that it ſlideth, it followeth that all this commotion and vndulation of the ayre, ſerueth to continue the arrow in its flight. And thus, faſter then any part behind can be ſertled, new ones before are ſtirred, till the reſiſtance of the medium do grow ſtronger then the impulſe of the mooucrs. Beſides this the arrow preſſing vpon the ayre before it, witha greater velocity then the ayre(which is a liquide rare body) can admitt, to moue all of a piece without breaking: it muſt of neceſſity happen that the partes of the ayre immediately before the arrow, be driuen vpon others further of, before theſe can be moued to giue place vnto th:m; ſo that in ſome places the ayre becometh condenſed, and conſequently, in others rarifyed. Which alſo the wind that we make in walkinz, twhich willsh ke a paper pinned looſcly, att the wall of a chimber te ardes which we walke) and the cooling ayre cauſed by fanning when we ar. hoat, do euidently conſirme. So that it can not be doubted, hut thit condenſation and rarefaction of the ayre, muſt neceſſarily follow the motion of any ſolide body: which being admirted itiseuident that a great diſorder, and for ſome remai kable time, muſt neceſſarily be in the ayre; ſince it can not brooke to continue in more rarity or denſity then is naturall vnto it. Nor can weighty and light partes agree to reſt in an equal height or lowneſſe; whichthe violence of the arrowes motion forceth them vnto for the preſent. Therefore it can not be denyed, but that though the arrow ſlide away, neuertheleſſe there ſtill remaineth behind itſ by this condenſuation and confuſion cf partes inthæ ayre)motion enough to giue impulſe vnto the arrow, ſo as to make it continue its motionafter th? bowſtring huth leftit. But here will ariſe a difficulty: which is, how this clapping in, and vndulation of the ayre, should haue ſtrengrh and efficacy enough, to cauſe the continuance of ſo ſmart a motion;as is an arrowes shott, froma bo. To this Ineede no other argument for an anſwere, then to produce Galileos teſtimony how great a body, one ſingle mans breathalone, can in due circumſtances giue a rapide motion vnto: and withall, lert vs conſider howthe arrow, and the ayre about itare already in a certaine degree of velocity ; that is to ſay, the obſtacle that would hinder it, from moouing that (namely, the reſiſtance of the ayre) is taken away; and the cauſes that are to produce it  namely the detcrmining of the ayres, and of the atomes motion that way) are hightened. And then e may ſafely conclude that the arrow which of it ſelfe is indifferent to be mooued vpwardes or downeardes, or forwardes, muſt needes obey that motion which is cauſed in it by the atomes, and the ayres preſſing vpon ĩt; either according to the impulſe of the ſtring; or (when the ſtring beginneth to flagge) according tothe beatinges that follow the generall conſtitution of nature; or in a mixt manner according to the proportions that theſe two hold to one an othær. Which proportions Galilcus in his 44 Dialogue of motion, haih atrempted to explicate very ingeniouſly: but hauing miſſed in one of his ſuppoſitions; to itt, that forced motion vpon an horizontall line, is throughout vnitorme; his great labours therein, haue taken litle eſſect towardes thæ aduancing the knowledge of nature,; as he pretended: for his concluſions ſucceede not in experience, as Merſenius aſſureth vs aſter very exact trialsi nor can they in their reaſons be fitted to nature So that, to conclude this point; I find no difficulty in allowing this motion of the ayre ſtrength enough to force the mooueable onvardes; for ſome time after the firſt moouer is ſeuered from it; (and long after; e ſee no motions of this nature do endure: )ſo that we neede ſceke no further cauſe for the continuance of it: but may reſt ſatisfyed vpon the whole matter, that ſince the cauſes and circumſtances our reaſor ſuggeſteth vnto vs, are after mature and particular examinatiori proportionable to the effects we ſee, the doctrine we deliuer muſt be ſound and true For the eſtablishing whereof, we neede not ( conſidering what we haue already ſaid) ſpend much time in ſoluing Galileos arguments againſt it: ſceing that, out of what e haue ſett downe, the anſweres to them appeate plaine enought for firſt, we haue aſigned cauſes hoW rhe ayre may continue its motion long enough to giut as much impreſſiori as is needefull vnto the arrow, to make it goe on às it doth:. Which motion is not requſſite to be neere ſo great in the ayre behind the arroW (tht driueth it on) as what the arrow cauſcihi in the ayre before it: for by reaſon of ithe denſity of it, it muſt needes make a greater impreſſion in the ayre it cutteth, then the ajre, that cauſeth its motion, would do of it ſelfe without the mediation of the arrow As.hien the force of a hand giueth metion vntoa knife to cuti a loafe of bread, the knife, by reaſon of the denſity and of the figure it hath, maketh a greater impreſſion in the loafe, th-n the hand alone would do. And this is the ſume that we declared in th- naturãll motion of a h:auy thing, downewardes, vnto which we aſſigned two cauſes; namely, the beating of the atomes in theayre, falling downe in their naturall courſe, to determine ? the way itis to goe3 and the denſity of the hody, thit cutting more powerfully then thoſe atomes can do; giueth ſ together with their belre ) a greater velocity vnio the mooueable, th:nrhe atomes of themſelues can giue. Nor doth it import th it ourreſolution is againſt the generall nature of rare and denſe bodies, in regard of conſetuing motion; as Galileo ol ſecterh for the reaſon why denſe bodies do conſerue mution longer then rare bodies, is, becauſt in repard oftheir diniding vertue, they gett in equall rimes a greater velocity Wherefore ſeeing that velocity is equall vnto grauity; it followeth thit reſiſtance work:th not ſo much vpon motion ſo eaſily as it doth rare bodies. This is the generallreaſon for the conſeruation of motion in denſe bodies. But becauſt in our caſe, there ĩs a continuall cauſe which conſerueth motion in the ayre, the ayre may continue its motion longer then of ĩt ſelfe it would do: nor; in the ſame part of ayre which Galileus (as it ſeemeth) did ayme att: but in diuers aartes, in which the mooueable ſucceſſiuely is. Vhich being concluded, lert vs ſee how the forced motion cometh to decreaſe and to be ended. To which purpoſe we may obſerue, that the impreſſion vhich the arrow receiueth om the ayre that driucth it forwaides, being weaker then that which it receiued att the firſt from the ſtring, (by reasõ, that the ayre is not ſo dẽſe, and therefore cà not ſtrike ſo great a blow) the arrow doth not in this ſecond meaſure of time, (herein ve cõſider the impulſe giuen by the ayre onely) cutt ſo ſtrongly the ayre Before it, nor preſſe ſo violently vponit, as in the firſt meaſure When the ſtring parting from it did beate it forwardes: for till then, the velocity encrealeth in the arrow,as it dothin the ſtring that carryeih it along, which proceedeth from reſtatt the fingers looſe from it, to ĩts higheſt degree of velocity; whichis; when it arriueth to the vtmoſt extent of its ierke, where it quitteth the arrow. And therefore, the ayre now doth not ſo ſviftly, nor ſo much of it, rebound backe from before, and clappe it ſelfe behind the arro, to fillthe ſpace that elſe would be left voyde by the arrowes moouing forward: and conſequently, the blow it giuerth in the third meaſure, to driue the arrow on, can not be ſo great as the blow was immediately after the ſtringes parting from it; which was in the ſecond meaſure of time: and therefore, the arrow muſt needes mooue ſlower in the third meaſure then iĩt did in the ſecond as formerly it mooued ſloer in the ſecond (which was the ayres ſirſt ſtroake) then it did in the firſt, hen the ſtring droue it forwardes. And thus, ſucce ſſiuely in euery moment oftime,as the cauſes grow weakerand weaker by the encreaſe of reſiſtance in the ayre before, and by the decreaſe of force in the ſubſequent ayre ſo, the motion muſt be ſlower and ſloer, till it come to pure ceſſation. As for Galileus ſecond argument, that the ayre hath litle power ouer heauy thinges; and therefore he vill not allo it to be the cauſe of continuing forced motions in denſe bodies: I wish he could as well haue made experience what velocity of motion a mans breath might produce ina heauy bullett lying vpon aneuen, hard, and ſlippery plaine, ſ for a table would be too short)as he did, how admirable great a one it produced in pendants hanging in the ayre: and, I doubt not but he would haue granted it as power ull in cauſing horizontall motions, as he found it in the vndulations of his pendantes. Which neuertheleſſe, do ſufficiently conuince how greata power ayre hath ouer heauy bodies. As Iikewiſe the experience of windgunnes aſſureth vs that ayre duly applyed is able to giue greater motion vnto heauy bodies then vnto li ht ones. For how can a ſtrav or feather be imagined poſſibly to fly vith lfethe violence as a bullett of lead doth out of one of thoſe engines? And when a man ſucketh a bullett vpwardes in a perfectly bored barrell of a gunne, which the bullctt fitteth exactly (as we haue mentioned before) with whata violence doth it follow the breath and aſcend to the mouth of the barrell?I remember to haue ſeene a man that was vncautious and ſucked ſtrongly that had his foreteeth beaten out by the blow of the bullett aſcending. ll This experiment ſif well looked into) may peraduenture make good a greate part of this doctrine we now deliuer. Fol, the ayre preſſing in behind the bullett att the touchhole, giueth it its impulſevpwardes; vnto vhich the denſity of the bullett being added, you hous the cauſe of its ſvifineſſe, and violence; ( for a bulletr of wood or corke, would not aſcend ſo faſt and ſo ſtrongly) and the ſucking away of the ayre before it,taketh away that reſiſtance which otherwiſe it would encounter with; by the ayre lying in the way of it: and its following the breath with ſo great eaſe, shewethſas we touched before)that of it ſelfe it is indifferent to any motion, when nothing preſſeth vpon it to determine it a certaine way. Nov to Galileos laſt atgument; that an arrow should ſly faſter broadwayes, then longwayes, if the ayre were cauſe of its motion: there needeth no more to be ſaide, but that the reſiſtance of the ayre before, hindereth it as much as the impulſe of the ajre behind helpeth it on; ſo that nothing is gained in that regard; but much is loſt , in reſpect of the figure; which maketh the arrow vnapt to cutt the ayre fo well when it flyeth broadwayes, as when it is shott longwayes: and therefore the ayre being weakely cutt ſo much of it can not clappe in behind the arrowand driue it on, againſt the reſiſtance before, which is much greater. T hus farre, with due reſpect, and with acknowled ging remembrance of the many admirable myſteries of natute which that great man hath taught the world, we haue taken liberty to diſpute againſt him: becauſe this difficulty ſeemeth to haue driuen him againſt his Genius, to beleeue that in ſuch motions there muſt be alloweda quality imprinted into the mooued body to cauſe them: which our whole ſcope both in thisand in all other occaſions where like qualities are vrged, is to prooue ſuperſluous and ill grounded in nature; and to be but meere termes to confound and leaue in the darke whoſocueris forced to fly vnto them. THE THERTEENTH CHAPTER. Of ihree ſories of violent motion, Reflexion, V ndulation, and Refraction. M He motion we haue laſt ſpoken of, becauſe it is ordinarily 5 I3 either in part or wholy contrary to grauity (whichis accounted D7~ the naturall motion of moſt bodies) vſeth to be called violent or forced. And thus, you haue deliuered vnto you the natures and cauſes, both of naturall and of forced motion; yet it remaineth that we aduertiſe you of ſome particular kindes of this forced motion, which ſeeme to be differentfromit, but indeed are not. As firſt, the motion of reſlexion: which if we do but conſider how forced motiòn is made; we shall find that it is nothing elſe buta forced motion, whoſe line wherevpon itis made,is as it were ſnapped in two by the encounter of a hard body. For euen as we ſee in a ſpoute of water that is ſtrongly shott againſt a wall,the water following driueth the precedent partes firſt to the wall,and afterwardes coming themſelues to the wall, forceth them againe an other way from the all: right ſo, the latter partes of the torrent of ayre, which is cauſed by the force that occaſioneth the forced motion, driueth the former partes, firſt vpon the reſiſtent body, and aſterwardes againe from it. But this is more eminent in light then in any other body, becauſe light doth leſſe riſſent grauity ;and ſ obſerueth the pure courſe of the ſtroake, better then any other body; from which, orhers do for the moſt part decline ſome way by reaſon of their weight. NoV the particular law of reflexionis, that the line incident, and the line of reflexion muſt make equallangles, with that line of the reſiſtent ſuperficies which is inthe m ſuperficies with themſelues. The demonſtration whereof, that great witt Renatus Des Cartes hath excellently ſett downe in his booke of Dioptrikes by the example of a ball ſtrucken by a rackett againſt the earth, or any reſiſting body: the ſubſtance where of isas followeth. In the Retangle Parallelogramme 2 , F AE , lett CE be the ſopea fcie of the l earth: A, the point from which the rackett C 5  HG, ſtriketh the ball by the line AB, to 3 the point B in the ſuperſicies of the eanth: and lett vs conſider C, to be on the left hand, and E on the right. Now we are to shew that the ball will rebound by the line BE, to the point F, in the ſame time in whichit went from A to Biand ſo make the angle ABC equalltothe angle F BE. For the effecting whereof, we muſt abſtract, according to the mannerof mathematicians, from all Phyſicall inequalities, and ſuppoſe the ſuperficiesCE, to be mathematically plaine, and the force of the rackett to continue equally ſtrong in Basit is in A: for although in truth, neyther of theſe be rigorouſly ſo; neuertheleſſe, becauſe there is no ſenſible defect in any operation that dependeth on them, it is the ſame to our purpoſe as if they were mathematically ſo. Ve ſee then that the rackett H G, doth ina certaine time driue the ball from A to B;ht is to ſay, from the lefehand to the right, as farre as from Cto Biand from aboue to downevardes, as farre as from A to C. Wee ſee againe, that the ſuperficies CE, is not contrary vnto this motion of the ball,as it goeth from the left hand to rhe right; forthe line CE lyeth likeiſe that way: but itis contrary vnto it, as it goeth from aboue downevardes; A⸗ r for in ſa courſe the ſuperficies CE 4 encountereth and putteth a periode to the line AC. And erefore he motion of B B the ball when it meeteth with the ſuperficies C E, muſt be changed from the line A C, ſo much asthe ſuperſicies CE is contrary vnto ĩt; that is quite bac kwards as farre as it dependeth of that oppoſition. Therefore, vhen the ballis come to B, it muſt go from thence in the ſame proportion of left hand to right hand, and from below vpwardes, as it came before from lefc hand to right hand, and from aboue downewardes, when it came from A to B. And conſequently, it muſtin equall time haue paſſed an other line from left hand to right hand, as long as the line CB; and likewiſe, it muſt att the ſame time haue paſſed an other line from below vpwardes as long as A C: which ill of neceſſity make it hitt in the point F, att the end of ſo much more time as it ſpent in going from A to B; and ſo, make rhe two angles A B C,and F BE equallias euery one knoweth that hath but ſalured Euclide. The motion which we call vndulation needeth no further explication: for it is manifeſt, that ſince a pendant, when it is remooued from its perpendicular, will reſtore it ſelfe therevnto by the naturall force of grauity,and that in ſo doing it gaineth a velocity, (and therefore can not ceaſe on a ſuddaine, ) it muſt needes be carried, out of the force of that motion, directly the cõtrary way: vntill the force ofgrauity, ouercoming the velocity, it muſt be broug ht backe againe to the perpẽdicular: which being done likewiſe with velocity, it muſt ſend it againe tovardes the place from which it fell att the firſt. And in this courſe of motion it muſt cõtinue for a while, euery vndulation being weaker then other, vntill ate laſt it quite ceaſeth, by the courſe of nature ſettling the ayre in its due ſituatiò according to the naturall cauſes that worke vpon it. And in this very manner alſo is performed that vndulation which we ſee in water, whenitis ſtirred from the naturall ſituation of its ſphericall ſuperficies. Galileo hath noted that the time in which the vndulations are made which follow one an other of their owne accord, isthe ſame in euery one of them;and that as much time preciſely is taken vp in a pendants going a veryshort arch towardes the end of its vibration, as was in its going of the greateſt arch att the beginning of its motion. The reaſon whereof ſeemeth ſtrange to him, and he thinkethit to be anuccident naturallto the body out of its grauity:and that this effect conuinceth, it is not the ayre which mooueth ſuch bodies. Whereas in truth, it is clearcly the ayre vhich cauſeth this efect. Becauſe the ayre ſtriuing att each end (Where it is turtheſt from the force of the fotion) to quiett it ſelfe, getteth ate euery bout ſomewhat vpon the ſpace; and ſo, contracteih that into a shorter arch. But itis a great wonder to me, that Galileo should make a wonder of thiseffect; to the reaſon of which, he hath layed ſo faire a fundation vpon an other occaſion ; had he but reflected vpon it. For in his fourth Dialogue of motion he hath demonſtrated that a naturall mooueable deſcending in the quarter of acircle, from what part ſo:uer it beginneth, ſpendeth equall time to come to the loweſt point, as if it came from any other part: ſo that a pendãt being brought vpto any height by the force of a former motion downewardes, it will be ſure to ſpend as much time in going downe from thence to the perpendicular, as it did att the firſt when it was lett fall from the greateſt height. Now I ſubſume, that the pendants aſcending, being the effect ofthe velocity of its metion gained in deſcending immediately before; the ſaid velocity muſt be able tò carnry it in the ſame time to a height, thatis proportionate to that hię ht vnro which the velocity, gained in the firſt fall did cauſe the pendant to mount. As for example: if the pendants firſt A C deſcent, were from A to E, the ſecond from Cto D E; becauſe the time of thoſe two, is the ſame, ſas Galileus hath demonſtrated) it folluw. th ihut their velocities gained in deſcending muſt of neceſſity be in the proportion of the line AE to the line CE: therefore, their eſfcts alſo muſt be proportionable. Lett vs then putt the line E D in that proportion to the line CE, which CE hathto AE; and then the velocity gained in CE ill carry the pendant vp from E to D, in the ſame time in which the deſcent A E did carry it vp the other way from E to C: wherefore, ſeeing that the times of its deſcent from A to E, and from C to E are equall hkewiſe, theto vibiations from A to C and from C to D vill be done in equall times. But that which made Galileo not ſee the force of the conſequence, was that he did not acknowledge violent motion to be made in the ſame proportions, and for the ſame reaſons which are found in naturall 4. motion: vhich we haue aboue shewed to be ſo, here we diſcourſed of Reſtaction at that matter. theeneane:That motion alſo which we call Refraction, and is manifeſt to ſenſe, reſl. &tent body onely in light: (though peraduenture hereaſter more diligent ſearc hers is tovardes ihe of nãture, may likewiſe ſind it in ſuch oſher bodies as are called qualities; perpendicular;, . Ji . . 2 the going as in cold or heate, &c.) is but a kind of Reflexion: for there being outitis fromis; certaine bodies, in which the paſſages are ſo well ordered with their vhen the ſccõd :i ſupericios is Teſiſtances, that allthe partes of th-m ſeeme to permitt light to paſſe parallel to the through them, and yet all partes of them ſeeme to reflect it; when light paſſeth through ſuch bodies, it findeth att the very entrance of them, ſuch reſiſtances, where it paſſeth, as ſerue it for areflectent body; and yet ſuch a reflectent body,as hindereth not the paſſage through; but onely hindereth the paſſage from being in a ſtraight line with the line incident. Vherefore the lig ht muſt needes take a plye as beaten from thoſe partes towardes a line drawne from the illuminant, and falling perpendicularly vpon the reſiſting ſuperficies; and therefore is termed by  hemmicians,to be refracted or broken towardes the Perpendicular. Nov at the very going out againe of the light, the ſecond ſuperficies ſ if it be parallel to the former) muſt needes vpon a contrary cauſe, ſtrike it the contrary way: which is termed from the Perpendicular. As for example: if the ray AB. lighteth vpon the ſuperficies E BF; and A x findeth entrance; it is not now the ſuperficies EF, that reſiſteth or reflecteth it: but it is that part of the E inſide ſas : may ſay) of the pore B, which is towirdes F; and is a Phyſicall body,; not a Mathematicall point. The reſdexion therefore muſt be made, as if the reflectent hody were 1B K: but itiseuident that if AB, did ſtrike vpon IK, it would reſlect towardes A G. But becauſe we know not the inclination of the ſuperficies IK, whetherit be truly a perpendiculat or no, therefore we can not tell the quantity of the inclination which this reflexion muſt makei but onely we know that it muſt be towardes But bef.re we wade any deeper into this diſficulty, e can not omitt a word of the manner of explicating refraction which Monſieur Des Cartes vſeth, ſo witty.a one as Iam ſorry it wanteth ſucceſſe. He thereſore following the demonſtration aboue giuen of reflexions ſuppoſeth the ſuperficies whicha ball lighte: h vpon, to be a thinne linnen eloth, or ſome other ſuch matter as will breake cleanely by the force of the ball ſtriking ſmartly vpon it. And becauſe that ſuperſicies reſiſteth onely one way, therefore he inferreth that the velocity of the ball is leſſened onely one way and not the other: ſo that the velocity of its motion that way in which it findeth no reſiſtance, muſt be ſ after the balles paſſage throu hthe linnen) in a greater proportion to the velocity which ĩt huththe other way where it findeth reſiſtance, then it was before. And therefore the hall vill in leſſe time arriue to its periode on the one ſide then on the orhær: and conſequently, it will leane towardes that ſide, vnto vhich the courſe wherein it findeth no oppoſition, doth carry it. But how much he is miſtaken vpon the whole matter, a little figure vill she: lett vs theræfore putt a Rectangle Parallelogramme as before AE, vhich I double and make the whole Parallelogramme AL, O ij and drav out the line AB, tillit cometh to L. Now we muſt imagine that CE, is the cloth or paſſable A D ſuperficies which Monſicur Des Cartes putteth; and B L the line it would goe in, if there were no p reſiſtance. Next we muſt ſec ke the perpendicular, which according to L our explication, is AC: for that, falleth from A the illuminant, perpendicularly vpon CE; although, ſome who defend Monſicur Des Cartes, ſeeme to make another line the perpendicular; againſt the conception of all thoſe that write of Optikes. But, not to trouble our ſelues with termes the queſtion is, whether the ball that paſſeth, the cloth, muſt(after its paſſage through)deſlect from the line BL, (which it would haue kept, had there beene no reſiſtance) towardes E; or elſe deſlect from that line towardes C. And both experience and reaſon do aſſure vs, that it muſt turne towardes C: but Monſieur Des Cartes ſayth towirdes E. Vhichto shew howit is contrary vnto his one principle; lett vs conceiue the cloth CE to be of ſome thic keneſſe, and ſo draw the line OP to determine that thickneſſe. And lett vs make from B vpon AL, an other Parallelogramme like the Parallelogramme AL, whoſe diameter shallbe B Q. And it muſt neceſſirilly follow that the motion from B to Q if there were no reſiſtance, were in the ſame proportion as from A to B. But the proportion of the motion from A to B, is the proportion of CB to CA; that is, it goeth in the ſame time faſter towardes D, then it doth towardes M, in the proportion which CB hath to CA. By which account, the reſiſtance it hath in the vay towardes D, muſt alſo be greater then the reſiſtance it hath in the vay towardes M, in the proportion which CB hathto CA; and therefore the more tardity muſt be in the way to D, and not in the way to Miand conſequently,t he declination muſt be from Ewardes, and to Mwardes. For where there is moſt reſiſtance, that way likewiſe muſt the tardity be greateſt,and the declination muſt be from that way: but which way the thickeneſſe, to be paſſed in the ſame time, is moſt, that way the reſiſtance is greateſt : and the thickeneſſe is clearely greater towardes E, then towardes M; therefore, the reſiſtance muſt be greateſt towardes E; and conſequently the declination from the line B L muſt be towardes M, and not tovardes E. But the truthis, that in his doctrine the ball would goe in a ſtraight line as if there were no reſiſtance; vnleſſe peraduenture towardes the contrary ſide of the cloth, att which it goeth out into the free ayre: foras the reſiſtance of the cloth is greater in the way towardes D, then in the wæy towardesM, (becauſeit paſſeth a longer line in the ſame time, as alſo it did formerly in the ayre) ſo likewiſe is the force that mooueth it that way, greater then the force which mooueth it the other. And therefore the ſame proportionsthat were inthe motion, before it came to the reſiſting paſſage, will remainealſoin it: att the leaſt vntill comin neere the ſide att which it goeth out, the reſiſtance be weakned by the thinneneſſe of the reſiſtent there: which becauſe it muſt needes happen on the ſide, that hath leaſt thickneſſe, the ball muſt conſequently, turne the other way, where it findeth greateſt yielding: and ſo att its getting out into the free ayre, it will bend from the greater reſiſtance, in ſuch manner as we haue ſaid aboue. Neither do the examples brought by Monſieur Des Cartes, and others in maintenance of this doctrine any thing auayle them: for when a canon bullett shott into a riuer, hurteth the people on the other ſide; it is not cauſed by refraction, but by reflexion, as Monſieur Des Cartes himſele acknowledgeth: and therefore, hath no force to prooue any thing in refraction; whoſe lawes are diuers from t hoſe of pure reflexion. And the ſame anſwere ſerueth againſt the inſtance of a muskett bullett shott att a marke vnder vater: which perpetually lighteth hię her then the maike, though it be exactly iuſt aymed att. For ve knovinthat itis the nature of water, by ſinking in one place toriſe round about, it muſt of neceſſity follow that the bullett whichin entring hath preſſed downe the ſirſt partes of the water, harh withall thereby putt others further off in a motion of riſing: and therefore the bullet in its goeing on muſt meere with ſome water ſelling vpwardes, and muſt from it receiue a ply thaitwa y: which can not faile of carrying it aboue the marke it was leuelſed att. And ſo we ſee this effect proceedeth, from reſlection or the bounding of the water, and not from refraction. Beſides that it may iuſtly be ſuſpected, the shooter tooke his ayme too high, by reaſon of the markes appearing in the water higher then in tiuth it is: vnleſſe ſuch falſe ayming were duly preuented. Neither is Monſicur Des Cartes his excuſe to be admitted, when he ſayth that light goeth orherwiſe, thena ball would do, becauſe that ina laſſe or in water, the etheriall ſubſtance, which he ſuppoſeth to runne through all bodies is more efficaciouſly mooued rhen in ayre: and that therefore, light muſt 2o faſter in the glaſſe then in theayre, and ſo turne on that ſide of the ſtraięht line which is contrary to the ſide that the ball taketh, becauſe the ball goeth not ſo wiftly. For, ſ(not to diſpute of the verity of this propoſition)the effect he pretendeth,  impoſible : for if the etheriall ſubſtance in the ayre before the glaſſe, be ſlowly mooued the motion of which, he calleth light)it is impoſſible that the etheriall ſubſtance in the glaſſe orin the water should be more ſmartly mooued then it. V-ll it may be leſſe; but without all doubt, the impulſe of the etheriall ſubſtance in the glaſſe can not be greater then its adequate cauſe which is the motion of the other partes that are in theayre precedent to the glaſſe. line vith the line that it made in the ayre precedent to the glſe: ſeeing that the ſubſequent ayre muſt take off iuſt as much; (and no more) as the glaſe did adde: the contrary whereof experience sheweth vss Thirdly, inthis explicaionis would alwayes go one way in the ayre, and an other way in the glaſſe: Whereas all experience teſtifyeth, that ina glaſſe conuexe on both ſides, it ſtill gocth in the ayre aſter its going out, to the ſame ſide as it did in the glaſſe; but more. And the like happeneth in glaſſes on both ſides concaue. Whereforeitis euident, that it is the ſuperſicies of the glaſſe, that is the worker on both ſides: and not the ſubſtance of the ayre on the one ſide, and of the glaſſe on the other. And laſtly; his anſwere doth no wayes ſolue our obiection, which prooueth that the reſiſtance both wayes is proportionate to the force that mooueth, and by conſequence that the thing moued muſt go ſtraight. As we may imagine would happen, ifa bullett were shott ſloaping through a greene mudde wall, in which there were many round ſtickes, ſo thinne Bu that the bullett mighr paſſe with eaſe through them:; foras long as the bullett touched none of themwhich expreſſerh his caſe) it would go ſtraight; but if it touched any of them (Which reſemblethours, as by and by villappeare) it would glance according to the quality of the touch, and mooue from the ſticke in an orher line Some peraduenture may anſwere for Monſieur Des Cartes that this ſubtile body hich he ſuppoſeth to runne through all thinges is ſtifſe and no wayes plyable. But that, 15 ſo repugnant to the nature of rarity and ſo many inſuperable inconueniencies do follow out of it; as I can not imagine he will owne it: and therefore I will not ſpend any time in replying therevnto. Ve muſt therefore ſeeke ſome other cauſe of the refraction of light vhich is made att the entrance of it into a diaphanous body. Which is lainely (as we ſaid before)becauſe the ray ſtriking againſt the inſide of æ bodyit can not penetrate, turneth by reſlexion towardes that ſide on which the illuminant ſtandeth: and if it findeth cleare paſſage through the whole reſiſtent, it followeth the courſe it fisſt taketh; if not then it is loſt by many reflexions teo and fro. And that this doctrine is true, the accidents or Phoenomens euidently declare vnto vs; for experience teacheth vs that vpona plaine ſuperficies the refraction is made towardes the perpendicular drawne om the illuminant to the ſuperſicies; as we haue ſaid. No att the going out ſif the ſurfaces be parallels) we ſee that the ray turneth from that perpendicular; which alſo is neceſſary: for going through a pore bigger then it ſelfe, oratt the Jeaſt as bigge; and finding it full of ayre; it muſt needes be crouded there. But in a croude, he preſſerth you moſt, whom you preſſe moſt vpon: ſo then that ſide of the pore which is next to the ſlight as it paſſeth, muſt preſſe moſt vpon it: but the angle which is Chap. XIII. n3 towardes the perpendicular, to witt the angle B CI, is the eſſeri and by conſequence, the ray is neerer that ſide of the pore which is towardes I, then the other ſide of it vhich is towardes H; wherefore it muſt takeits ply from that ſide. ButE that ſide Itriketh it from the A x D F perpendicular: and therefore, it 7ẽ H muſt ihere refract from the perpendicular. D This very ſame doctrine for the reaſonof re fraction is confirmed by what happeneth in crooked ſuperſicieſes. Asif EF, be a Lens ora glaſſe on both ſides conuexe; and CB, the axis of it; AD, the ray falling from the illuminant A; AB, the perpendicular falling from the ſame illuminant A: it will be plaine by the former diſcourſe, that the ray AD, muſt att the entry be refracted rowardes AB, as being repulſed from that part of the inſide of the pore D, vwhich is towardes Fi becauſe that ſide is moſt oppoſed vnto the ray. Now the ray being once turned that way; when att the end of its iorney through the glaſſe, it is come to the other ſuperficies E GF, c A D E F G B jt makeih the leſſer angle towardes Fi and therefore it muſt by the rule giuen aboue, be refracted againe att its parting from the glaſſe, towardes the ſame perpendicular; and it will meete ſome where wirh the axis CB; all which experience sheweth vs to be true. And taking a body of concaue ſurfaces we shall ( according to this doctrine of ours) find the cauſes of refraction iuſt contrary; and accordingly, experience likewiſe sheweth vs, the effects to be ſo too. And therefore ſince experiencea reeth exactly with our rules, we can not doubt but that the principles vpon which we goe, are well layd. But becauſe crooked ſurfaces may haue many irregularities; it will not be amiſſe to giuea rule by which all of them may be brought vnto a certainety. And this that are made from ſuch plaine ſuperficieſes, as are tangents to the crooked ones in that point from whence the reflexions are made. Which principall the Maſters of Optikes do take out of a Mathematicall ſuppoſition of the vnity of the reflecting point, in borh the ſurfaces; the crooked and the plaine. But we take it out of the inſenſibility, of the diſference of ſo litle a part in the two different ſurfaces, as ſerueth to reflect a ray of light: for where the difference is inſenſible in the cauſes; there likewiſe the difference is ſo litle in the effects as ſenſe can not iudge of them: which is as muchas is requiſite to our purpoſe. Now ſeeing that in the Mathematicall ſuppoſition, the point where the reflexion is made is indifferent to bòth the ſurfaces; it followeth that it importeth not whether ſuperficies you take to know the quality of reſlexion by. This principle then being ſettled, that the reſlexion muſt follow the nature of the tangent ſurfaces;and it being prooued, that in plaine ſurfaces it will happen in ſuch ſort as we haue explicated, it folloeth that in any crooked ſuperficies of what ſigure ſoeuer, the ſame alſo ill happen. Now ſceing we haue formerly declared, that refractions are but a certaine kind of reflexions, what we haue ſaid here of reflexions, may be applyed to refractions. But there remaineth yet vntouched, one affection more of refractions: which, is, that ſome diaphanous bodies do in their inward partes reflect more then others (Which is, that which we call refraction) as experience sheweth vs. Concerning which effect, we are to conſider that diaphanous bodies, may in their compoſition haue two differences: for pi are compoſed of greater partes and greater pores; others of leſſer partes and leſſer pores. It is true, there may be other combinations of pores and partes, yet by theſe two, the reſt may be eſteemed. As, for the fiſt combination, we ſee that becauſe the pores are greater, a greater multitude of partes of light may paſſe toget her through one pore; and becauſethe partes are greater, likewiſe a greater multitude of rayes may reſlect from the ſame part, and may find the ſame paſſage quite throughout the diaphanous body. On the contrary ſide, in the ſecond combination where both the pores and the partes of the diaphanous body are litle, the light muſt be but litle that findeth the ſame paſſage. : No, that refraction is greater or leſſer, happeneth two wayes; for itis, eyther when one diaphanous body reflecteth light att more angles then an other, and by conſequence in a greaterextent of the ſuperſicies; or elſe, when one body reflecteth light from the ſame point of incidence in a shorter line and ina greater angle, then an other doth. In both theſe wayes it is apparant, thata body compoſcd of greater partes and greater pores, exceedeth bodies of the oppoſite kind: for by reaſon that in the firſt kind, more light may beate againſt one part a body in which that happeneth, will make an appearance from a further part of its ſuperficies: whereas ina body of the other ſort; the light that beateth againſt one of the litle partes of it, will be ſo litle, as it will preſently vanish. Againe, becauſe in the firſt, the part att the incidence is greater the ſurface from which the reſlexion is made inwardes, hath more of a plaine and ſtraight ſuperſicies:and conſequently dothreſlect att a greater angle, then that, whoſe ſuperſicies hath more of inclining. But we muſt not paſſe from this queſtion, wichout looking a litle into the nature of thoſe bodies in which refraction is made: for if they as well 10. cõfirmation of the former as the if mediate cauſes of refraction, do likewiſe fauourvs; it will not a doctrine, out of litle aduance the certainety of our determination. To this purpoſe we the nature of bodies that may call to mind, how experience sheeth vs that great refractions are rſaẽ light, made in ſmoake, and in miſtes, and in glaſſes, and in thicke bodied waters; and Monſicur Des Cartes, addeth certaine oyles, and ſpirits or ſtrong waters. Now moſt of theſe we ſee ate compoſed of litle conſiſtent bodies, ſwimming in an other liquide body. As is plaine in ſmoake and miſtes: for the litſe bubbles vhich tiſe in the water before they gett out of it; and that are ſmoake when they gett into the ayre; do aſſure vs that ſmoake is nothing elſe, but a company of litle round bodies, ſvimming in the ayre: and the round conſiſtence of water vpon herbes, leafes, and tigges ina rynde or dew, giueth vs alſo to vnderſtand that a miſt is likewiſe a company of litle round bodies that ſometimes ſtand, ſometimes floate in theayre, as the wind driueth them. Our very eyes beare wittneſſe tovs, that the thicker ſort of waters are full of litle bodies, which is the cauſe of their not being cleare. A; for glaſſe, the blowing of it conuinceth, that the litle dartes of fire hich pierce it euery way, do naturally in the melting of it conuert it into litle round hollow bodies, which in their coolin g muſt ſettle into partes of the like figure. Then for cryſtall and other tranſparent ſtones vhich are found in cold places; it can not be otherviſe, but that the nature of cold piercing into the maine body, and contracting euery litle pare in it ſelfe; this contraction muſt needes leaue vacant pores betweene part and part. And that ſuch tranſparent ſtones as are made by heate, haue the like effect and property, may be iudged out of what we ſee in brickes and tiles, which are "ẽ full of holes by the operation of the fire. And I haue ſeene in bones that haue layne a long rime in the ſunne, a multitude of ſenſible litle pores cloſe to one an other, as if they had beene formerly ſtucke all ouer with ſubtile sharpe needles as cloſe as they could be thruſt in by one other. The Chymicall oyles and ſpirits which Monſieur Des Cartes ſpeaketh of, are likely to be of the ſume compoſition; ſince that ſuch vſe to be extracted by violent fires: for a violent fire is made by the coniunction of many rayes together; and that muſt necdes cauſe great pores in the body it worketh vpon; and the ſticking nature of theſe ſpirits, is copible of conſeruing them. D0ut of all theſe obſeruations it followeth, that the bodies in which greateſt refractions do happen, are compounded ſ as we haue ſaid) of great partes, and great pores. A nd therefore , by onely taking light to be ſuch a body, as we haue deſcribed it to be , where we treated of the nature of it; it is euident, that the effect which we haue expreſſed, muſt neceſſarily follow by vay of reſlexion: and that refraction is nothing clſe but a certaine kind of reflexion. Vhich Iaſt aſſertion, is likewiſe conuinced out of this; that the ſame eſfects proceede from reſlexion as from refraction: for by reſlexion a thing may be ſeene greater then itis;in a different place from rhe ttue one where it is: colours may be made by reflexion, as alſo, gloating light; and fire likewiſe; and peraduenture all other effects which are cauſed by refraction, may as well as theſe, be performed by reflexion. And therefore it is euident, they muſt be of the ſame nature; ſeing that children are the reſemblances of their parents. . THE FOVRETEENTH CHAPTER. Of ihe compoſiiion , qualities, and generation of Mixtd bodies. Mũ5% Auing now declared the vertues by which fire and earth c voike vpon one an other, and vpon the reſt of the elements? SES vhich is, by light, and by the motions we haue diſcourſed of. Our taske shall be in this chapter firſt to obſerue what will reſult out of ſuch action of theirs: and next to ſearchinto the wayes and manner of compaſſing and performing it. Which latter we shall the more eaſily attaine vnto, when we firſt know the end that their operation leuelleth att. In this purſute we shall find that the effect of the Elements combinations, by meanes of the motions that happen among them: isa long pedigree of compounded qualities and bodies: wherein, the firſt combimtions ( like marriages) are the breeders of the next more compoſed ſubſtances: and they againe are the parents of others in greater variety: and ſo are multiplyed ithout end; for the further this worke proceedeth, the more ſubiects it maketh fornew buſineſſe of the like kind. To deſcend in particular vnto all theſe, is impoſſible. And to looke further then the generall heades of them, were h perfluous and troubleſome in this diſcourſe; wherein I ayme onely att: hewing what ſorts of thinges, in common, may de done by bodies: that if hereafter, we meete with thinges of an other nature and ſtraine, we may be ſure, they are not the ofspring of bodies and of quantity; which is, the maine ſcope of what I haue deſigned here. And to do this with confidence and certainety, requireth of neceſſity this leiſurely and orderly proceeding that hitherto we haue vſed, and shall continue to the end: for, walking thus ſoftly, we haue alwayes one foote vpon the ground; ſo as the other may be ſure of firme footing before it ſettlee. Whereas, they that for more haſt will Ieape ouer rugged paſſages and broken ground; when both their feete are in the ayre, can not helpe themſclues, but muſt light as chance throweth them. llll To this purpoſe then we may conſider, that the qualities of bodies in common are of three ſortes: for they are belonging, cither to the conſtitution of a compounded body, or elſe, to the operation of it; and the operation of a body, is of two kindes; the one, vpon other bodies, the other, vpon ſenſe. The laſt of theſe three ſortes of qualities, shall be handled in a peculiar chapter by themſelues. Thoſe of the ſecond ſort; vhereby they worke vpon other bodies, haue beene partly declared in theformer chapters, and will be further diſcourſed of in the reſt of this ſirſt treatiſc: ſo as that which remaineth for the preſent, is to fall vpon the diſcourſe of ſuch qualities as concurre to the conſtitution of bodies; with anayme to diſcouer, whether(or no)they may be effected by the ſeuerall mixtures of rarity and denſity, in ſuch ſort as is already declared. To which end, we are to conſider in what manner theſe two primary differences of bodies may be ioyned together: and what effects ſuch coniunction will produce. As for their coniunction: to deliuer the nature of it entirely, we muſt begin from the very roote of it, and conſider ho the Vniuerſe being finite  which Mt. White hath demonſtrated in the ſecond knott of his firſt Dialogue)there can not be an infinite number of bodies iniit: for Geometricians shew vs how the leaſt quantity that is; may be repeated ſo often as would exceede any the greateſt determinate quantity whatſoeuer. Out of which it followeth, that although all the other bodies of the world were no bigger then the leaſt quantity that can be deſigned; yet they being infinite in number, would be greater then the whole Vniuerſe that containeth them. And thereſore, of neceſſity there muſt be ſome leaſt body, or rather, ſome leaſt ciſe of bodies: which in compounded bodies, is not to be expected: for, their leaſt partes being compounded, muſt needes include compouning partes leſſe then themſelues We muſt then looke for this leaſt ciſe of bodies in the Elements; whichof all bodies are the ſimpleſt. And among them, we muſt pitch vpon that, wherein is greateſt diniſibility, and which conſcquently is diuided into leaſt partes; that ĩs, fire: ſo as we may conclude that among all the bodiesin the world, that whichof its owne nature hath an aptitude to be leaſt, muſt be fire. No, the leaſt body of fire, be it neuer ſo litle, is yet diuiſible into leſſe: Vhatis it then that maketh it be one? To determine this; we muſt reſort vnto the nature of Quaniity : whoſe formall notion and eſſence is; To be diuiſible, which ſignifyeth, that many may be made, of it; but thar of which many may be made, is not yet manity, out of this very reaſon; that many may be made of it. But, what is not many, is one. Therefore what hath quantity; is, by meere hauing quantity, actually and formally, as well one, as it hath the poſſibility of being made many. And conſequently, the leaſt body of fire, by hauing quantity, hath thoſe partes vhich might be many, actually one. And this is the firſt coniunction of partes that is to be conſidered in the compoſition of bodies: which though it be not an actuall ioyning of actuall partes yet it is a formall coniunction of what may be many. In the next place we may conſider; how ſecing the leaſt bodies that are,be of fire;it muſt needes follow, that the leaſt partes of the other Elements muſt be bigger then they. And conſequently, the poſſible partes of thoſe leaſt partes of the other Elements muſt haue ſomething to conſerue them together, more then is found in fire. And this, becauſe Elements are purely diſtinguished by rarity and denſity is ſtraight concluded to be denſity. And thus, ve haue found, that as quantity is the caue of the poſſible partes being one, ſo denſity is the cauſe of the like partes ſticking together: which appeareth in the very definition of it,for, to be leſſe diuiſible,  which is the notion of denſity) ſpeaketh a reſiſtance to diuiſion, ora ſicking together. : Now lett vs examine how two partes of different Elements are ioyned together, to make a compound. In this coniunction e find both the effects we haue already touched: for, two ſuch partes muſt make ones and moreouer, they muſt haue ſome reſiſtance to diuiſibility. The firſt of theſe effects we haue already aſſigned vnto the nature of quantity. Andiit being the formall effect of quantity; it can not (whereſoeuer it is found ) haue any other formall cauſe then quantity: and therefore, eyther the two litle partes of different Elements, do not become one body: orif they doe, we muſt agree that it is by the nature of quantity, which worketh as much in heterogeneall partes, as it doth in homogeneallones. And it muſt needes do ſo: becauſe Rarity and Dẽſity ( which are the proper differencies of Quantity) can not change the common nature of Quantity, that is their Genus: which by being ſo to them, muſt be vniuocally in them both. And this effect cometh preciſely from the pure notion of the Genus: and conſequently, muſt be ſeene as wellin two partes of different natures, as in two partes of the ſame nature: but in partes of the ſame nature, which once were two, and afterwardes become one; there can be no other reaſon why they are one, then the very ſame for which thoſe partes that were neuer ſeperated ( but that may be ſeperated) are likewiſe one: and this, moſt euidently, is the nature of quantity. . Experience ſeemeth to confirme thus muchi when pouring water out of a baſin, ſome of it will remaine ſticking to the ſides, of the mettall: forif the quantity of the baſin,and of the water, had not beene one and the ſame by its owne nature; the water (conſidering the plyableneſſe of its partes) would certainely haue commen all away, and haue glided from the vneuenneſſe of the baſin, by the attractiue vnity of its whole, and would haue preſerued the vnity of its quantity within it ſelfe, rather then by ſticking to the baſin, haue ſuffered diuiſion in its owne quantity; which we are ſure wasone, whiles the water was altogether in the baſin: but that, both the baſinand the water making but one quantity; and a diuiſion being vnauoydable in that one quantity; it was indifferent, in regard of the quantity conſidered ſingly by it ſelfe, where this diuiſion should be made, whetherin the partes of the baſin, or in the partes of the water:and then, the othercircumſtances determined it in that part of the water which was neereſt to the ioyning of it withthe baſin. The ſecond effect ( which was reſiſtance to diuiſibility ;) we aſſigned vnto denſity. And of that ſame cauſe, muſt alſo depend the like effect in this caſe of the ſticking together of the two partes of diſferent Elements, when they are ioyned to one an otherſor if the two partes, vhereof one is denſe, the other is rare, do not exceede the quantity of ſome other part of one homogeneall rare Element for the diuiding vhereoſ, th a determinate force, and no leſſe can ſuſfice: then, ſeeing that the whole compoſed of theſe two partes is not ſo diuiſible as the hole conſiſting oſ that one part; the aſſigned force vill not be able to diuide them. Wherefore it is Hlaine that if the rare part had beene ioyned to an other rare part in ſteed of the denſe one it is ioyned vnto; it had beene more eaſily diuidable from that, then now it is from the denſe part. And by conſequence it ſtic keth more cloſely to the denſe part, then it would to an other of its owne nature. Out of what we haue ſaid,a ſteppe is made vs to vnderſtand why ſoft and liqnid bodies do eaſily ioyne and incorporate into one continued body but hard and dry bodies ſo difficultly, as by experience we find to be true. Water with water, or wine eyther with other wine or with ater, ſo vniteth, that it is very hard to part them: but ſand or ſtones can not be made to ſticke together without very great force and induſtry. The reaſons;whereof; muſt neceſſarily depend of what we haue ſaid aboue. To vitt that two bodies can not touch one an other, without becoming one: and, that iftwo bodies of one degree of denſity do touch, they muit ſticke together according to the force of that degree of denſity. Out of vhich two, is manifeſtly inferred, that if two hard thinges, should come to touch, they muſt needes be more difficultly ſeperated then two liquid thinges. And conſequently, they can not come to touch, vithout as much difficulty, as that whereby they are made one. But to deduce this more particulatly; lett vs conſider, thatall the litle ſurfaces, by which one hard body may be conceiued to touchan other (as for example, when a ſtone lyeth vpon a ſtone) muſt of neceſſity be eyther plane, or concaue, or conuexe. Nov if a plane ſuperficies should be ſuppoſed to touchan other plane one coming perpendicularly toit; it muſt of neceſſity be granted to touch it as ſoone in ii middle as on the ſides. Wherefore, if there were any ayre ſas of neceſſity there muſt be) betwixt the to ſurfaces before they touched: it will followthat the ayre which was in the middle, muſt haue fled quite out from betweene the ſoone as the ayre which was beteene the vtmoſt edges of the ſurfaces did fly out; and by conſequence it muſt haue moued in an inſtant. But if a plane ſurface be ſaid to touch a conuexe ſurface; it toucheth it onely bya line, (as Mathematicans demonſtrate) or onely by a point. But, to touch by a line ora point, is in truth, not to touch by the forme or notion of Quantity, ( which requireth diuiſibility in all that belongeth vnto ĩt;) and dy conſequence among bodies it is not to touch and ſo, one ſuch ſurface doth not touch the other. Nov, for a plaine ſurface to touch a concaue; euery man ſeeth is impoſſible. Likewife, for two cõuexe ſurfaces torouch one an other, they muſt be allowed to touch eyther ina line or in a point, which we haue shewed not to be a phyſicall touching. And if a conuexe ſurface should bee ſaid to toucha concaue; they muſt touch all att onceas ve ſaid of plane ſurfaces;and therefore the ſame impoſſibility will ariſe therein: ſo that it is euident, that no to ſurfaces, mouing perpendicularly towardes one an other, can come to touch one an other, if neyther of them yieldeth,and changeth its hew. Nov then, if it be ſuppoſed that they come ſlidingly one oueran other in the ſame line; whereby, firſt the very tippes of the edges come to touchone an other; and ſtillas you shooue the vpermoſt on forwardes, and that it ſlideth ouer more of the nether ſurface, it gaineth to touch more of it. I ſay that neither in this caſe do they touch immediately one an other: foras ſoone as the two ſirſt partes should meete, if they did touch, and that there were no ayre betweene them; they muſt preſently become one quantity or body, as we haue declared; and muſt ſticke firmely together, according to their degree of denſity; and cõſequently, could not be moued on, without ſtillbreaking a sũderatt euery impulſe, as much ofthe maſſy body, as were already made one by their touc hing. And if youshould ſay they did not become one; and yet allow them to touch immediately one an other without hauing any ayre or ſluide body beteene them: then if you ſuppoſc them to moue onwardes vpon theſe termes; they would be changed locally, without any intrinſecall change: which in the booke De Mundo ſas we haue formerly alleadged)is demonſtrated to be impoſſible. E There remayneth onely a third way for two hard ſurfaces to come together; Which is, that firſt they should reſt ſloaping one vpon an other, and makean angle where they meete (as two lines, that cutt one an other, do in their point of their inrerſection)and ſo containe as it were a wedge of ayre betweene them, which wedge they should leſſen by litle and litle, through their mouing towardes one an otheratt their moſt diſtant edges (hiles the touching edges, are like immoueable centers that the others turne vpon) till att length they shuttout allthe ayre, and cloſe together, like the two legges ofa compaſſe. But neitheris it poſſible that this way they should touch, for after their firſt touch by one line(which neytheris in effect a touching, as we haue shewed)no other partes of them can touch, though ſtill they approach neerer and neerer, vntilltheir whole ſurfaces do entirely touch att once: and therefore, the ayre muſt in this caſe leapout in an inſtanta greater ſpace, then if the ſurfaces came perpendicularly to one an othen ſor here it muſt ſly from one extremity tothe other: whereas, in the former caſe, it was to goe but from the middle to each ſide. Andſthusit is euident, that no two bodies can arriue to touch one an other, vnleſſe one of thematt the leaſt, haue a ſuperſicies plyable to the ſuperficies of the other; that is, vnleſſe one of them be ſoft, which is, to be liquide in ſome degree. Seeing then, that by touching, bodies do become one; and that liquidity, is the cauſe and meanes whereby bodies arriue to touch; we may boldly conclude that to liquide bodies do moſt eaſily and readily become one; and next to two ſuch, a liquide and a hard body, are ſooneſt vnited: but two hard ones moſt difficultly. To proceede then vith our reſlections vpon the compoſition of bodies, and vpon what reſulteth out of the ioyning and mixture of their firſt differences Rarity and Denſity, we ſee, how if a liquide ſubſtance happeneth to touch a dry body it ſticketh eaſily therevnto: Then conſider, that there may be ſosmall a quantity of ſucha liquide body, as it may be almoſt impoſſible for any naturall agent to diuide it further into any leſſe partes; and ſuppoſe that ſucha liquide part is betweene two dry partes of a denſe body, and ſticking to them both, becometh in the nature of a glew to hold them together: will it not follow out of what wee haue ſaid, that theſe two denſe partes willbe as hard to be ſcuered from one an other, as the ſmall liquide part by which they ſticke togetheris to be diuided: So that, when the viſcous ligaments which in a body do hold together the denſe partes, are ſo ſmall and ſubtile, as no force we can apply vnto them can diuide them, the adheſion of the partes muſt needes grow then inſeparable. And therefore, we vſe to moyſten dry bodies, to make them the more eaſily be diuided; whereas thoſe that are ouermoyſt, are of themſelues ready to fallin pieces. And thus you ſee how in generall, bodies are framed. Out of which diſcourſe, we may ballance the degrees of ſolidity in bodies, for all bodies being compoſed of humide and dry partes, we may conceiue either kind of thoſe partes, to be bigger or leſſer, or to be more rare or more denſe. Nov if the dry partes of any body, be extreme litle and denſe;and the moyſt partes that ioyne the dry ones together, be very great and rare; then that body will be very eaſy to be diſſolued. But if the moyſt partes hich glew together ſuch extreme litle and denſe dry partes, be eyther leſſer in bulke or not ſorare; then the body compoſed of them vill be in a ſtronger degree of conſiſtence. And if the moyſt partes which ſerue for this eſfect; be in an exceſſe of littleneſſe and withall denſe; then, the body they compoſe will be in the higheſt degree of conſiſtence that nature can frame. moderately denſe and great, by the admixtionof humide partes that are of the leaſt ciſe in bulke, and denſe withall; then the conſiſtence will decreaſe from the height of it by how much the partes are greater, and the denſity leſſe. Butif vnto dry partes of the greateſt ciſe, and in thæ greateſt remiſſeneſſe of denſity, you adde humide partes that are both very great and very rare, then the compoſed body vill proue the moſt eaſily diſſolucable of allthit nature affordeth. . After this, caſting our eyes a litle further towardes the compoſition of particular bodies; ee shall find ſtill greater mixtures, the further we goe; for as the firſt and ſimpleſt compounded bodies, are made of the foure E lements; ſo, others are made of theſe; and againe a third ſort of them: and ſo, onwardes, according as by motion, the partes of euery one are broken in ſunder, and mingled with others. Thoſe of the firſt order, muſt be of various tempers according to the proportions of the Elements,; whereof they are immediately made. As r example, ſucha proportion of fireto the orher three Elements, will make one kind of ſimple body, and an other proportion will make an other kind: and ſo throughout, by various combinations and proportions among all the Elements. In the effecting of which worke, it will not be amiſſe to looke a litle vpon nature ; and obſerue how she mingleth and tempereth different bodies one with an other, whereby she begetteth that great variety of creatures which we ſee in the world. But becauſe the degrees of compoſition are infinite, according to the encreaſe of number, we will containe our ſelues within the common notions of exceſſe in the foure primary components, for if e should deſcend once to ſpecify any determinate proportions, ve should endanger looſing our ſelues in a wood of particular natures, which belong not to vs att preſent 1o examine. Then taking the foure Elements as materials to worke vpon: lett vs firſt conſider how they may be varyed, that diſfering compoſitions may reſult out of their mixtures. I conceiue that all the wayes of varying the Elements in this regard, may be reduced to the ſeuerall ciſes of bigneſſe, of the partes of each Element, that enter into the compoſition of any body, and to the number of thoſe partes: for certainely no other can be imagined, vnleſſe it ere variety of figureBut that can not be admitted to belong in any conſtant manner to thoſe leaſt particles where of bodies are framed; as though determinate figures were in euery degree of quantity dueto the natures of Elements, and therefore, the Elements would conſerue themſelues in thoſc figures, as well in their leaſt atomes, as in maſſye bulke: for ſeeing how theſe litle partes are shufled together withoutany order;and thatall liquids eaſily ioyne,and take the figures which the denſe ones giue them; and that thæ againe, iuſtling one an other, do crush themſelues into new shapes, which their mixture with the liquide ones, maketh them yield the more eaſily vnto: it is impoſſible that the Elements should haue any other naturall figure in theſe their leaſt partes, then ſuch as chance giueth them. But that one part muſt be bigger then an other is euident ; for the nature of rarity and denſity giueth it: the firſt of them, cauſing diuiſibility into litle partes, and the latter, hindering ir. ll Hauing then ſettled in what manner the Elements may be varied in the compoſition of bodies: lett vs now beginne our mixture. In which, our ground to worke vpon muſt be earth and water; for onely theſe two are the baſis of permanent bodies, that ſuſfer our ſenſes to take hold oſ them, and that ſubmitt themſelues to tryall: whereas, if e should make the predominant Element to be ayre or fire, and bring in the other two ſolide ones vnder their iuriſdiction to make vp the mixture, the compound reſulting out of them, would be eyther in continuall conſumption, (as ordinary fire is) or elſe imperceptible to our eyes or touch,and therefore, not a fitt ſubiect for vs to diſcourſe of, ſince the other two afford vs enough to ſpeculate vpon. Peraduenture our ſmell migh take ſome cogniſance of a body ſo compoſed, or the effect of it taken in by reſpiration, might in time shew it ſelfe vpon our health: but it concerneth not vs now to look ſo farre; our àebęnt requireth more maniable ſubſtances. lll S Of which, lett water be the firſt; and with it we will mingle the other three Elements, in exceſſe ouer one an other by turnes; but ſtill, all of them ouerſwayed bya predominant quantity of water: and then, lett vs ſee what kind of bodies will reſult out of ſuch proportions. Fitſt, if earth preuayle aboue fire and ayre, and arriue next in proportion to the water, a body of ſuch a compoſition, muſt needes prooue hardly liquide, and not eaſy to lett its partes runne a ſunder, by reaſon of the great proportion of ſo denſea body as earth that holdeth it together. Yet ſome inclination it will haue to fluidneſſe, by reaſon the vater is predominant ouer all; which alſo will make t be eaſily diuiſible, and giue very litlereſiſtarice to any hard thing that shall be applyed to make way through it. Ina word, this mixture maketh the conſtitution of mudde, durt, honey, butterand ſuch like thinges where the maine partes are great ones. And ſuch, are the partes of earth and ater in themſelues. I Lett the next proportion of exceſſe in a watry compound. be of ayre, which when it preuayleth, it incorporateth it ſelfe chiefely with Earth, for the other Elements would not ſo well retaine it. Now, becauſe its partes are ſubtile(by reaſon of the rarity it hath) and ſticking, ( becauſe of its humidity)it driueth the Earthand water likewiſe into leſſer partes. The reſult of ſuch a mixture is,that the partes of a boby compounded byit are cloſe, catching, flowing ſloly, glibbe, and generally it will burne, and be eaſily conuerted into flame. Of this kind, are thoſe which we call oyly or vnctuous bodies whoſe great partes are eaſily ſeparated, (that is, they are eaſily diuiſible in bulke, ) but the ſmall ones very hardly. Next the ſmallneſſe, and ell woiking of the partes, by meanes of the ayres penermting euery denſe one, and ſtlicking cloſe to euery one of them,and conſequently, ioyning them without any vneuenneſſe; cauſeth that there can be no ruggedneſſe in it;and therefore, it is glibbe in Iike manner as we ſee plaſter or ſtarch become ſmooth when they are ell wrought. Then, the humidity of it cauſeth it to be catcking, and the shorteneſſe of euery part, maketh that vhere it ſticketh, it is not eaſily parted thence. Now, the rarity of ayre next vnto fire, ad mitteth it to be(of all the other Elements) moſt eaſily, brought to the height of fire, by the operation of fire vpon it. And therefore, oyles are the proper foode of that Element. And accordingly we ſee,that if a droppe of oyle be ſpilled vpona sheete of paper, and the paper be ſett on fire att a corner; as the fire cometh neere the oyle, the oyle villdiſperſe and ſpread it ſelfe vpon the paper toa broader compaſſe then it had; which is,becauſe the heat rarifyeth it; and ſo, in oyle it ſelfe the fire rarifying the ayre, maketh it penetrate the earthy partesadioyned vnto it, more then it did;and ſo ſubtiliſeth them, till they be reduced to ſucha height as they are ithin the power of fire to communicate his owne nature vnto rhem: and thus, he turneth them into fire, and carrieth them vp in his flume. But if ſire be predominant ouer earth and ayre ina watry compou nd; rit maketh the body ſo proportioned, to be ſubtile,rare, penetratiue, hoat  in operation , light in weight, and ſubicct to burne. Of this kind are all  ſortes of wines, and diſtilled ſpirits, commonly called ſtrong waters or Aquauites; in latine Aquæ ardentes. Theſe vill looſe their vertues meerely by remaining vncouered in the ayre; for fire doth not incorporate ſtrongly with vater; but, if it find meanes, rayſeth it ſelfe into he ayre;as we te in the ſmoake of boyling water which is nothin elſe but ſitle bodies of fire, that entring into the vater, do ity ſome partes of it; but haue no inclination to ſtay there and therefore as faſt as they can gett out, they fly away; but the humide partes of the ater, hich they haue rarifyed (being of a ſlicking nature) do ioyne themſelues vntò them,and aſcend in the ayre as high asthe ſiery atomes haue ſtrength to carry them: which when it faileth them, that ſmooke falleth downe in a dew, and ſo becometh water againeasit was. All which one may eaſily diſcerne in a glaſſe veſſell of water ſett ouer the ſire; in which one may obſerue the ſire come in att thæ bortome, and preſently ſwimme vꝑ to the toppe like a litle bubble, and immediately riſe from thence in ſmoake:and that, willatt laſt conuert it ſelfe into droppes and ſcttle vpon ſome ſolide ſubſtance thereabouts. OF theſe fyry ſpirits, ſome are ſo ſubtile, as of themſelues they ill vanish,and leaue noreſidue of a body behind them; and Alchymiſtes prof. ſſe to make them ſo etherialland volatile, that being poured out of a glaſſe from ſome reaſonable height, they shall neuer reach the ground: but that before they come thither, they will be ſo rarifyed by that litle motion, as they 3hall grow inuiſible like the ayie, and diſpeiſing themſelues allabout in it, they will fill the chamber with the ſimell of that body which can no longer be ſeene. The laſt exceſſe in watry bodies, muſt be of water it ſelſe, which is, when ſo litle a proportion of anyof the other is mingled with it, as is hardly perceptible: out of this compoſition do ariſe all thoſe ſeuerall ſortes iuices or liquors, which we commonly call waters: whichby their mixture with the other three Elements, haue peculiar properties beyond ſimple Elementall water. The generall qualities whereof, we shall not neede any further to expreſſe, becauſe, by what we haue already ſaid of water in common, they are ſufficiently knowne. In our next ſuruay, ve ill take earth for our ground to worke vpon, as hitherto we haue done water: which if in any body, it be in the vemoſt exceſſe of it beyond all the other three; then, rockes and ſtones will grow out of it; Whoſe dryeneſſead hardneſſe may aſſure vs, that Earth ſwayeth in their compoſition, with the leaſt allay that may be. Nor doth their lightneſſcin reſpect of ſome other Earthy compoſitions) impeach this reſolution; for that proceedeth from the greatneſſe and multiplicity of pores; Wherewith their dryeneſſe cauſeth hem to abound and hindereth not, but that their reall ſolide partes may be very heauy. Nov if we mingle a conſiderable proportion of water with eartli; ſo, as to exceede the fire and ayre, but ſtill inferior to the earth; we shall produce mettalls: whoſe great weight?, with their ductility and malleability, plainely telleth vs, that the Imalleſt of waters groſſe partes, are the glew hat holdeth the earthy denſe ones together: ſuch weight, belonging to earth, and that eaſye changing of partes, being moſt rroper to water. Quickeſiluer ( that is the generall matter, whereof all he mettalls are immediately cõpoſed) giucth vs euidence hereof; for fire woiketh vpon it with the ſame efſect as vpon water. And the calcination of moſt of the mettalls, proueth that fire can eaſily part and conſume the glewby which they were cloſed and held together: which therefore, muſt be rather of a watry then of an ayry ſubſtance. Like wiſe the glibbeneſſe of Mercury,and of melted mettalls, ithout catching or ſticking to other ſubſtances, giueth vs to vnderſtand that this great temper of a moyſt Element vith Earth,is water, and not ayre; and that the watry partes are compriſed, and as it wereshutt vꝑ within the earthy ones: for ayre catchethand ſticketh notably to all thinges it toucheth, and willnot be impriſoned; the diuiſibity of it being exceeding great, though in neuer ſo short partes. li Nov if ayre mingleth it ſelfe with earth, and be predominant ouer water and fire; it maketh ſuch an oyly and fatt ſoile, as husbandmen account their beſt mould; which receiuing a betterment from the ſunne and temperate heat, aſſureth vs of the concurſe of the ayre: for whereſocuer ſuch heate ĩs,ayre can not faile of accompanying it, or of being effected b it: and the richeſt of ſuch earth, ſas pott earth and matle) will with much fire grow more compacted, and ſticke cloſer together then it did;as we ſee in baking them into pottes or fine brices. Vhereas, if water were the glew betweene the denſe partes fire ould conſume it and crumble them a ſunder, as it doth in thoſe bodies it calcineth And exceſſe of fire will bring them to vitrification; which ſtill confirmeth that ayre aboundeth in them; for itisthe nature of ayre to ſticke ſo cloſe where once it is kneaded in, as it can not be ſeperated without extreme difficulty. And to this purpoſe, the viſcous holding togetherof the partes of glaſſe when it is melted, sheweth euidently that ayre aboundeth in vitrifyed bodies. The laſt mixture weare to meddle vith, is of fire with earth, in an ouerruling proportion ouer ayre and water. And this I conceiue produceth thoſe ſubſtances, which we may terme coagulated iuices, and which the latines do call Surci concreti : whoſe firſt origine, ſeemeth to haue beene liquors; that haue beene a fterwardes dryed by the force eyther of heate, or i cold. Of this nature are all kind of ſaltes, niters ſulfuis, and diuers ſortes of bitumens. All which, eaſily bewray the relikes an deffects of fire left in them; ſome more, ſome leſſe, according to their degrees. And thus, we haue in generall, deduced from their cauſes, the complexions of thoſe bodies, whereof the bulke. of the world ſubiected to our vſe, conſiſteth; and which ſerue for the production and nourishment of liuing creatures, both animall and vegetable. Not ſo exactly (I confeſſe) nor ſo particulatly, as the matter in it ſelfe, or as a treatiſe confined to that ſubiect, would require: yet ſufficiently for our intent. In the performance whereof, if more accurate ſearchers of nature shall find that we haue peraduenture beene miſtaken in the minute deliuering of ſome particular bodies complexion; their very correction(I dare boldly ſay)will iuſtify our principall ſcope: which is, to shew that all the great variety e ſee among bodies, ariſeth out of the cõmixtion of the firſt qualities and of the Elements: for they will not be able to correct vs, vpon any other groundes then thoſe we haue la yed. As may eaſily be perceiued, if e caſt a ſummary view vpon the qualities of compoſed bodies. Allwhich we shall find to ſpring out of rarity,and denſity,and to ſauour of their origine: for the moſt manifeſt qualities of bodies may be reduced to certaine paires oppoſite to one an other. As namely ſome are liquide and flowing, others are conſiſtent; ſome are ſoft others hard; ſome are fatty, viſcous, and ſmooth; others leane, gritty, and roughs ſome groſſe, othert ſubtile; ſome tough, others brittle: and the like. Of which the liquide, the ſoft, the fatt and the viſcous, are ſo manifeſtly deriued from rarity, that we neede not take an further paines to trace out their origine: and the like is of their contraries, from the contrary cauſe; to witt of thoſe bodies that are conſiſtent, hord, leane, and gritty, all which do evidently ſpring from denſity. As for ſmoothneſſe, we haue already :hewed how that proceedeth from an ayry oroyly nature; and by conſequence, from a certaine degree of rarity. And therefore roughneſſe ſ the contrary of it) muſt proceede from a proportionable degree of denſity. Toughneſſe, is alſo a kind of ductility, which we haue reduced to watryneſſe, that is, to an other degree of rarity; and conſequently brittleneſſe muſt ariſe from the contrary degree of denſity. Laſtly, groſſeneſſe and ſubtileneſſe do conſiſt in a difficulty or facility to he diuided into ſmall partes, Which appeareth to be nothing elſe, but a certaine determination of rarity and denſity. And thus, we ſee; how the ſeuerall complexions of bodies, are reduced to the foure Elements that compound them: and the qualities of thoſe bo ies, to the two primary differencies of quantatie thinges by which the Elements are diuerſifyed. l And out of this diſcourſe it will be cuident, that theſe complexions lll and qualities, though in diuerſe degiees, muſt of neceſſity be found Ttæ in ũæ whereſocuer there is any variation in bodies: for ſeeing there can be no D there is variation ſn bodies, but by rarity and denſity; and that the pure degrees a like vasier of : : mixed bodies of rarity and denſity, do make heate, cold, moiſture, and dryneſſe, and ſſẽab; light (ina word) the foure Elements: it is euident, that whereſoeuer the is as here vpon variety of bodies, there muſt be the foure Elements; though Earthperaduenture farre vnlike theſe mixed bodies which we call Elements. And againe, becauſc theſe Elements can not conſiſt without motion; and becauſe by motion they do of neceſſity, produce mixed bodies, and forge out thoſe qualities, which we come Læ explicating; it muſt by like neceſſity, follow, that whereſoeuer there is any variety of actiue and paſſine bodies, there mixed bodies likewiſe muſt reſide of the ſame kindes, and be endewed with qualities of the like natures, as thoſe we haue treated of: though peraduenture, ſuch as are in other places of the world remote from vs, may be in a degree farre different from ours. Since then, it can not be denyed, but that there muſt be notable variety of actiue and paſſiue bodies whereſocuer there is light : neyther can it be denyed, but that in all thoſe great bodies from which lightis reflected vnto vs, there muſt be a like variery of complexions and of qualities,and of bodies tempered by them, as we ſind here in the orbe e liue in. Which ſyſteme; how di fferent it is from that which Ariſtotle and the moſt of the ſchoole haue deliuered vs, as well in the euidencies of the proofes for its being ſo; as in the poſition and modell of it; I leaue vnto the prudent readers to conſider and iudge. lll li Out o what hath beene already ſaid, itis not hard to diſcouer in vhatv 22. mannerthe compoſition of bodies is made. In effecting of whichs the h maner maine hinge hereon that motion depẽdeth, is fire or heate: us it likeiſe doæoike vpon is,in all other motions whatſoeuer. Now becauſe the compoſiion of a —— mixed, body proceedeth fiom the action of one ſimple body orelement o mixea vpon the orhers: t will not be amiſſe to declare by ſome exampſe how this boſtes: anò In worke paſſeth: for that purpoſe, lett vs examine ho fire or heate 'lęns th worketh vpon his fellowes. lill moſtactiue. By what wc haue formerly deliuered; it is cleare that fire ſtreaming circumference ofa larger circle, i muſt needes follow, that the beames of it are moſt condenſed and compacted together neere the center; and the further they ſtreame from the center, the more thinne and rarifyed they muſt grow: yet this is ith ſuch moderation, as we can not any where diſcernethat one beame doth not touch an other; and therefore, the diſtances muſt be very ſmall. Now lett vs ſuppoſc that fire happeneth to be ina viſcous and tenacious body;and then conſider what vill ha ppen in this caſe: of one ſide, the fire ſpreadethit ſelfe abroad; on the orher ſide, the partes of the tenacious body being moiſt ( as we haue formerly determined ) their edges on all handes vill ſticke faſt to the dry beames of the fire that paſſe betweene them. Then they ſtretching wider and vider from onean other muſt needes draw with them the partes of that tenacious body which ſticke vnto them; and ſtertch them intoa greater videneſſe or largeneſſe then they enioyed before, frõ whẽce it followerh, that ſ ſeeing there is no other body neere thereaboutes, but they two) eyther there muſt be a vacuity left, orelfe the tenacious body muſt hold and filla greater ſpace then it did before;and conſequently be more rare. Contrarywiſe, if any of the other Elements be ſtronger then ſire, the denſer Elements breake oſf, from their continued ſtreame, the little partes of ſire, which were gotten into their greater partes: and ſticking on all ſides about them, they do ſo encloſe them that they haue no more ſemblance of fire: and if afterwardes by any accident there cometh a great com preſſion, they force them to looſe their naturall rarity, and to Become ſome other Element. Thus it fareth with fire, both in actin and in ſuffering. And the ſame courſe, e haue in both theſe regardes expreſſed of it, paſſeth likeiſe in the reſt of the Elements to the proportion of their contrarieties. Hence it followeth, that when ſire meeteth with humidity in any body, it diuideth and ſubtiliſerh it, and diſperſeth it gently, and in a kind of equall manner through the whole body it is in, ſif the operation of it be a naturall and a gentle oneland ſo driueth it into other partes, which att the ſame time it prepareth to receiue ĩt by ſubtiliſing likewiſe thoſe partes. And thus moderate fire, naketh humour in very ſmall partes to incorporate it ſelfe in an euen or vniforme mannet with the dry partes it meeteth withall: which being done whether the heate doth aſterwardes continue, or that cold ſucceedethin licu of it, the effect muſt ofneceſſity be, that the body thus compoſed, be bound vp and faſtened, more or leſſe according to the proportion of the matter it is made of, and of the Agents that worke vpon it, and of the time they employ about it. This is euery day ſeene, in the ripening of fiuites and in other frequent workes, as well of art as of nature, and is ſo obuions: and ſenſible to any reaſonable obſeruation that it is needeleſſe to enlarge my ſelfe much vpon this ſubiect. ĩill Ontely, it will not be amiſſe, for examples ſike, to conſiderthe progreſſe of it in the compoſing or augmenting of mettalls, or of earths of diuers ſorts: firſt heateſas we haue ſuid) draweth humour out of all the bodies it worketh vpon: then if the extracted humour be in quantity and the ſteames of it do happen to come together in ſome hollow place fitt to aſſemble them into greater partes; they are condenſed and they fall downe in a liquide and running body. Theſe ſteames being thus corporifyed, the body, reſulting out of them, makethit ſel fe in the earth a channell to runne in: and if there be any looſe partes in the channell, they mingle themſclues with the running liquor: and though there be none ſuch, yet in time the liquor it ſelfe looſeneth the channell allabout, and imbibeth into its owne ſubſtãce the partes it raiſeth. And thus, all of them compacted together, do roulealong till they tumble into ſome low place, out of which they can not ſo eaſily gett to wander further. When they are thus ſcttled, they do the more eaſily receiue into them, and retaine ſuch heate as is euery where to be mett withall, becauſe it is diffuſed more or leſſe through the earth. This heate, if it be ſufficient, digeſteth it into a ſolide body: the temper of cold likewiſe concurring in its meaſure to this effect. And according to the variety of the ſubſtances whereof the firſt liquour was made, and which it afterwardes drew along vith it;the body that reſulteth out of them is diuerſifyed. In confirmation of all which, they that deale in mines, tell vs they vſe to find mettalls oftentimes mingled with ſtones; as alſo, coagulated juices with both;and earths of diuers natures, with all three; and they vith it,and one with an other among themſelues. And that ſometimes they find the mines not yet conſolidated and digeſted throughly into mettall; when by their experience knowing after how many yeares they vill be ripe, they shutt them vp acainetillthen. Nov if the hollow place wherein the body ſtayed (which att the firſt was liquid and rouling) be not att once filled by it, butit tketh vp onely part of it; and the ſame liquor continueth afterwardes to flou thither: then this body isaugmented, and groweth bigger and bigger. And although the liquors should come att ſeuerall times; yet, they become not therefore two ſeuerall bodies, but both liquors do grow into one bodyi for the wett parts of the aduentitious liquor, do mollify the ſides of the body already baked; and both of them being of a like temperand cognation, they eaſily ſticke and grow together. Out of this diſcours it followeth euidently, that in all ſortes of compounded bodies whatſocuer, there muſt of neceſſity, be actually compriſed ſundry partes of diuers natures: forotherwiſe, they would be but r many purè degrees of rarity and denſitys that is, they would be but ſo many pure Elements, and each of them haue but one determinate THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. of ihe diſſolution of Mixed bodics.  Hus much for compoſition of bodies. Their diſſolution is 4'i made three wayes: eyther by fire, or by water, or by ſome ZP& outward violence. We vill beginne with examining how this laſt is done. To which end we may conſider, that the vnity o on body conſiſting in the connexion of its partes it is euident that the force of motion, if it be exerciſed vpon them, muſt of neceſſity ſeparate them, as we ſee in breaking, cutting, filing, drawing a ſunder, andthe like. Alltheſe motions, becauſe they are done by groſſe bodies, do require great partes to worke vpon, andaare caſily diſcerned how they worke: ſo that it is not dificult to find the reaſon why ſome hard bodies breake eaſily, and others with much adoe. The firſt of which are called brittle, the others tough. For if you maike it, all breaking requireth that bẽ ding hould precede: which on the one ſide compreſſeth the partes of the bended body,and condenſeth them into a leſſer roome then they poſſeſſed before;and on the other ſide ſtretcheth them out, and maketh them take vp more place. This requireth ſome fluide or moueable ſubſtance to be within the body; elſe, it could not be done; for without ſuch helpe, the partes could not remoue. Therefore ſuch hard bodies as haue moſt fluide partes in them, are moſt flexible, that is are tougheſt. And thoſe which haue feweſt, though they become thereby hardeſt to haue impreſſion made vpon them, yet if the force be able to do it, they rather yield to breake then to bendiand thence, are called brittle. Out of this we may inferre, that ſome bodies may be ſo ſoddainely bent as that thereby they breake aſunder; whereas if they were leiſurely and gently dealed withall, they would take what ply one deſireth. And likeviſe that there is no bodyſbe it neuer ſo brittleand hard) but that it vill bend a litle ſ and indeed more then one would expect) if it be wrought vpon with time and dexterityi for there is none but cõtaineth in it ſome liquide partes, more or leſſe: euen glaſſe and bricke. Vpon which occaſion I remember, how once in a great ſtorme of ind, I ſaw the high ſlender bricke chimnyes of the Kinges houſe att St Iames ( one vinter when ( the ourt lay there) bend from the wind like bowes, and sharke exceedingly,and totter. And at other times I haue ſeen ſome very high, and pointy ſpire ſteeples do the like. And Ihaue beene aſſured the Ike of the whole pile of a high caſtle, ſtanding in a gullert in the courſe of the windi ( namely the caſtle of Wardour) by thoſe who haue often ſeene it shake notablyin a fierce wind. The reaſon of all which may be deduced out of what we haue ſaid aboue: for ſering that the bending of a body, maketh the ſpirits or humors that are withinit, to ſally forth; it is cleare that if the violence which forcethit, be not ſo ſoddaine, nor the motion it receiueth, be not ſo quicke, but that the moiſture may ooſe gently out; the body will bend, ſtill more and more, astheir abſence giueth it leaue. But if the motion that is wrought in it be too quicke; en the ſpirits not hauing time allowed them to goe leiſurely and gently out, do hor their priſon, and breake out witha violence; and ſo the body is ſnapped into two. Here peraduenture ſome remembring what we haue ſaid in an other place; namely, that it is the shorteneſſe and littleneſſe of the humide partes in a body, which maketh it ſticke together; and that this shorteneſſe may be in ſo higha degree, as nothing can come betweene the partes they gle togetherto diuide them; may aske howa very denſe body of ſucha ſtraine, can be broken or diuided? But the diſficulty is not great, for ſecing that the humide partes, in whatſoeuer degree of shorteneſſe they be, muſt neceſſarily haue ſtill ſome latitude; it can not be doubted, but there may be ſome force aſſigned, greater then their reſiſtance can be. All the queſtionis, how to apply it to worke its effect vpon ſo cloſe a compacted body, in which peraduenture the continuity, of the humide partes that bind rthe orhers toget her, may be ſo ſmall, as no other body whatſocuer ( no, not fire) can goe betweene them, in ſuch ſort as to ſeparate part from part. Att the worſt, it can not be doubted bur that the force may be ſo applyed att the outſide of that body, as to make the partes of it preſſe, and fight one againſt an other, and att the length, by multiplication of the ſorce, contttaine it to yield and ſuffer diuiſion. And this I conceiue to be the condition of gold and of ſome pretious ſtones: in which the Elements are vnited by ſuch little partes, as nothing buta ciuill warre within themſclues ( ſtirred vp by ſome ſubtile outward enemy, whereby they are made to teare their owne bowels) could bring to paſſe their deſtruction. But this way of diſſoluing ſuch bodies, more properly belongeth to the next way of working vpon them by fire: yet the ſame is done when ſome extcrior violence preſſing vpon thoſe partesit tour heth, maketh them cutt a way berweene their next neig hbours: and ſo continuing the force, diuide the whole body. As when the chiſcll, or euen the hammer with beating, breakerh gold a ſunder: for it is neyther the chiſell, nor the hammer that doth that eſfect immediately; but they make thoſe partes they touch, cutt the others that they are forced ypon. In ſuch ſort as I remember happened to a gentleman that ſtood by me ſin a ſea fight I as in) with a coate of maile vpon his body, when a bullett coming againſt a bony part in him, made a great wound, and shattered all the bones neere where it ſtrucke: and yet the coate of maile was whole: it ſeemeth the little linkes of the maile yielding to the bullets force made their way into the flesh andto the bone. But now it is time to come tothe other two inſtruments of ſeparation of bodies; fire and watet; and to examine how they diſſolue compounds. Of theſe two; the way of woiking of fire, is the eaſieſt and moſt apparant to be diſcerned. We may readily obſerue how it proceedeth, if we but ſett a piece of wood on fire ; in which it maketh little holes as if with bodkins it piercedèit. So that the manner of its operation, in common, being plaine, wee neede but reflect a lirtle vpon the ſeuerall particular degrees of it. Some bodies it ſeemetſ not to touch; as clothes made of Asbeſtus; which are onely purifyed by it. Others, it melteth, but conſumeth not; as gold. Others it turneth into pouder ſuddainely diſſoluing their bodyias lead, and ſuch mettalls as are calcined by pure fire. Others againe, it ſeperateth into a greater number of differing partes; as into ſpirits, waters, oyles, ſalts, earth and glaſſe: of vhich ranke areall vegetables. And laſtly, others it conuerteth into pure fire, as ſtrong waters, or Aquauites ( called aquæ ardenres) and ſome pure oyles: for the ſmoake that is made by their ſetting on fire, and peraduenture their ſalt, ĩs ſo little las is ſcarce diſcernable. Theſc are in Rm the diuiſions which fire maketh vpon bodies, according to the nature of them, and to the due application of it vnto ithem: for by the helppe and mediation of orher thinges, it may peraduenture woi ke other eſfects. Nov to examinea little in particular, how the ſame ſire, in diſfering ſubiects produceth ſuch deſferent effects: Limus vt hic dureſcit, & hac vt cera liqueſcit, Vno eodemque igni Ve vill conſider the nature of euery one of the ſubiects apart by it ſelfe. Firſt, forthe Asbeſtus:it is cleare, that it is of a very dry ſubſtancè; ſo that to looke vpon it, vhenit is broken into very little pieces, hey ſeeme to be little bundles of short haires, the liquidity within, being ſo litile as it afforderhęhe partes neyther length nor breadth: and therefore, fire meeteth with litle there, that it can dilate. But what it can not dilate, it can not ſeparate; nor carry away any thing of it, but what is accidentally adherẽt vnto the outſides of it. And ſo it ſeemeth onely to paſſe through t he pores, and to cleãſe the litle thriddes of it: but bringeth no detriment att all to the ſubſtance of it. Inthis I ſpeake onely ofan ordinary ſire: for I doubt not but ſuch a one it might beæ would perfectly calcine it. The next body we ſpoke of is gold. This aboundeth ſo much in liquidity, that it ſticketh to the fire, if duely applyed: but its humidity i; ſo well vnited to its earthy partes, and is ſo perfectly incorporated with thẽ; as it can not cany aay one, without likewiſe carrying away both: but both, are too heauy a weight for the litle agile partes of fire to remoue. Thus, it is able to mae gold ſell; as we ſee in melting it: in which, the gold receiueth the fire into its bowels and retaineth it a 167 time with it: butat its departure, it permitterh the fire to carry nothing away vpon its winges: as is apparant, by the goldes no whirt decay of weight,aſter neuer ſo long fuſion. And therefore, to haue fire make any ſeparation in gold; requireth the aſſiſtance of ſome other moyſt body, that an the one ſide may ſlicke cloſely to the gold, vhen the fire driueth it into it, and on the other ſide may be capable of dilatation, by the action of the fire vpon it. ſubicct for the ſireto dilate, who, by the aſſiſtance offire, mingling themſelues cloſcly with litle partes of the gold, do pull them away from their whole ſubſtãce, and do force them to beare them cõpany in their iourny vpwardes, in which, multitudes of litle partes of fire, do concurre to preſſe thẽ on and haſſẽ thẽ:and ſo, the weight ofgold being att Iegih ouercome by theſe two powerfull Agents (whereof one ſupplyeth, what the other wanteth) the whole ſubſtance of the metall, is in litle atomes diſfuſed through the whole body of the water But this is not truly a diſſolution ora ſeparation of the ſubſtantiall partes of gold, one from an other: it is onely a corroſion, which bringeth it into a ſubtile pouder, (when the water and ſaltes are ſeperated from it) much like what ſiling ſ though farre ſmaller) or grinding of leafe gold vpon a porphyre ſtone, may reduce it into: for neyther the partes of the water, nor of the fire that make themſelues a way into the body of the gold; are ſmall and ſubtile enough to gert betweene the partes that compoſe the eſſence of it: and therefore, allihæy can attaine vnto, is to diuide it onely in his quantity or bulkei not in the compoſition of its nature. Yet l intend not to deny, but that this is poſſible to be arriued vnto, cyther by pure fire duly applyed; or by ſome other aſſiſtance; as peraduenture, by ſome kind of Mercury: which being of a neerer cognation vnto mettalls, then any orher liquor is; may happily haue a more powerfull ingreſſion into gold, then any other body whatſoeuer; and being withill very ſubiect to rarefaction, it mayſſter it is entered) ſo perfectly penctrate the gold, as it may ſeperate euery leaſt part of it, and ſo reduceit into an abſolute calx. But in this place I explicate no more then what ordinarily paſſeth; leauing the myſteries of this art to thoſe who profeſſe ir. To goe on then with what we haue in hand: lead hath aboundance of water ouermingled with its earth, as appeareth by itseaſy yielding to be bent any way, and by its quiet ſtanding bent in the ſame poſition that the force which bowed it leaueth it in. And therefore, the liquide partes of lead, are eaſily ſeparated from its dry and earthy ones: and when it is meleed, thæ very shaking of it, cauſerh the groſſe partes to deſcend, and many liquid ones to ſly away with rhe fire: ſo that, ſuddainely it is thus conuerted into pouder. But this pouder is groſſe, in reſpect of other mettalls; vnleſſe this operation be often reiterated, or the fire more powerfully applyed, thæn what is iuſt enough to bring the body of the lead into pouder. The next conſideration of bodies that ſire worketh vpon; is of ſuch as it dliuideth into ſpirits, ſltes, oyles, waters, or phlegmes, and æarth. Now theſe are not pure and ſimple partes of the diſſòlued body, but new cõpounded bodies, made of the ſirſt by the operation of heat. As ſmoake is not pure water, but water and fire together: and therefore becomerh not water, but by cooling, that is, by the fire ſlying avay from it. So lewiſe thoſe ſpirits, ſults, oyles, and the reſt; are but degrees of thinges, which fire maketh of diuers partes of the diſſolued body, by ſeperatin them one from an other,and incorporating it ſelfewith them. And ſo, they areall of them compounded of the foure Elementsiand are further reſoluable into them. Yet l intend not to ſay that there are not originally in the body before its diſſolution, ſome looſe partes which haue the properties of theſe bodies that are made by the fire in the diſſoluing oſ it: for ſeeing that nature worketh by the like inſtruments as art vſeth; she muſt needes, in her exceſſes and defects, produce like bodies to what art doth in diſſolution ; which operation of art is but a kind of exceſſe in the progreſſe of nature: but my meaning is, that in ſuch diſſolurion, there are more oſ theſe partes made by the working of fire, then were in the body before. E ; Now becauſe this is the naturall and moſt ordinary diſſolution of thinges; lett vs ſee in particular howit is done: ſuppoſe then that ſire were in a conuenient manner applyed, to a body that hathall ſortes of partes in it; and our oWne diſcourſe will tell vs, that the firſt effect it worketh ill be, that as the ſubtile partes of fire do diuide, and paſſe through that body, they willadhere to the moſt ſubtile partes in i; which being moſt agile, and leaſt bound, and incorporated to the bowels of the body, and lying ſas it were) looſely ſcattered in it, the fire will carry them away with it. Th ſe will be the ſirſt that are ſeperated from the maine body; wh ch being retained in a fitt receiuer, will by the coldeneſſe of the eircumdant ayre grow outwardly coole themſelues, and become fitſta dewv pon the ſides of the glaſſe,and rhen ſtill as they grow cooler, condenſe more and more;till att the lengrh they fall downe congealed into a palpable liquor; which is compoſed ( as you ſee) of the hoateſt partes of the body, mingled ith the fire that carridd them out: and therefore this liquor, is very inlammable, and eaſily turned into actuall fire; as you ſeeall ſ; pirits and Aquæ ardentes of vegetables are. The hoat and looſe partes being extracted; and the fire continuing and encreaſing; thoſe that will follow next are ſuch, as though they be not of themſelues looſe; yet are aſyeſt to be made ſo; and are therefore moſt ſeparable. Theſe muſt be humide; and thoſe little diy partes which are incorporated with the ouerſlowing humide ones in them ( for no partes that we can arriue vnto, are of one pure, ſimple nature; but all are mixed and compoſed of the 4 Elements in ſome proportion) muſt be held together with ſuch groſſe glew, as the fire may eaſily penetrate and ſeparate them. And then th: humide partes diuided into little atomes do ſticke to the leſſer ones of the fire: which by their multitude of number and velocity of motion, ſupplying what they want of them in bulke; do cany thm away withthem. Andthus theſe phlegmeticke partes fly vp vith the fire and are afterwardes congealed into an inſipide water: vhich if it haue any ſavour, is, becauſe the firſt ardent ſpirits are not totally ſe paratæd ſrom it: but ſome few of them remaine in it, and giue ſome little life to the whole body of that otherviſe flatt liquor. Now thoſe gunes which the fire ſeparateth next from the remainin g. body, after the firy and watry ones are carryed away, muſt be ſuch asũt can worke vponi and therefore muſt abound in humidity. But ſince they ſtirre not till thewatry ones are gone, it is enident, that they are compoſed of many dry partes ſtrongly incorporated, and very ſubtilely mixed with the moiſt onesiand that both of them are exceeding ſmall, and are ſo cloſely and finely knitt together, that the fire hath much adoe to gett betweene them and cutt the thriddes that tye them together: and therefore, they require a very great force of fireto carry them vp. Now the compoſition of theſe,shewerh them to be aerſall: and ſ togetherwith the fire that is mingled with them) they congeale into that conſiſtence which we calloyle. Laſtly, it can not be otherwiſe but that the ſire, in all this while of continuallapplication to the body it thus anatomiſeth, hath hardned and as it were roſted ſome partes into ſuch greatneſſe and dryneſſe as they will not ſly,nor can be carried vp with any moderate heate. But, reate quantity of fire being mingled with the ſubtiler partes of his ſ, ked earth maketh them very pungent, and acrimonious in taſt: ſo, that they are of the nature of ordinary ſalt, and are ſo called; and by the helpe of water may eaſily be ſeparated, from the more groſſe partes, which then remaine a dead and vſeleſſe carth. By this diſcourſe it is apparant, that fire hath been the inſtrument which hath wrought all theſe partes of an entire body into the formes they are in; for whiles, it carryed away the fiery partes it ſelled the watry ones:and whiles it lifted vp them it digeſted the aeriall partes, and whiles it droue vp the oyles, it baked the earth and ſalt. Againe, all theſe retaining hrhe moſt part, the proper nature of the ſubſtance from whence they are extracted; it is euident, that the ſubſtance is not diſſoluedifor ſo, the nature of the whole would be diſſolued ànd quite deſtroyed, and extinguished in euery part) but that onely ſome partes containing the whole ſubſtance, or rather the nature of the whole ſubſtance in them, are ſeparated from other partes that haue likewiſe the ſame nature in them. Thethird inſtrument, for the ſeparation and diſſolution of bodies, is water. Vhoſe proper matter to worke vpon, is ſalt. And it ſerueth to ſupply what the fire could not performe, which is the ſeparation of the ſilt from the earth in calcined bodies. Allthe other partes fire was able to ſcuer. But in theſe, he hath ſo baked the little humidity he hath left in them with their much earthis he can not diuide them any further. And ſo, though he incorporateth him ſelfe with them, yet he can carry nothing away withhim. If then puie ater be putt vpon that chalke, the ſubtileſt dry partes of it, do eaſily ioyne to the ſuperuenient moyſture; and ſticking cloſe to it do dra it downe to them but becauſe they are boate to it: ſo, theſe aſcend in the water as they diſſolue. And the water, more and more penetrating them, and by addition of its partes, making the humidity which gleweth their earthy partes together greater and greater; doth make a wider and wider ſeparation betweene thoſe little tarth partes. And ſo imbueth the whole body of the ater with thẽ; into hichbhey are diſperſed in little atomes. Thoſe that are ofbiggeſt bulke, remaine loeſt in the water. And in the ſame meaſure as their quantities diſſolue into leſſe and leſſe they aſcend higher and higher in the water: till att the length, the water is Ally replenished with them, and they are diffuſed through the whole body of it: whiles the more groſſe and heauy earthy partes ( hauing nothing in them to make a preſent combination betweene them and the water) do fall downe to the bottome, and ſettle vnder the water in duſt. In which becauſe earth alone doth predominate in a very great exceſſe, we can expect no other vertue to be init, but that which is proper to meere earth: to witt, dryneſſe and weightt. Which ordinary Alchymiſtes looke not after: and iherefore call it Terra damnata: but others, find a fixing quality in it, by which they performe very admirable operations. Nowif you powre the impregnated water from the Terra damnata, and then euaporate it; you ill find a pure white ſubſtance remaining. Which by its bulke, sheeth it ſelfe to be very carthy; and by its pricking, and corroſiue taſt, will informe you much fireis in it, and by its eaſy diſſolution in a moiſt placs, that water had a great share in the production ofit. And thus the ſaltes of bodies are made and extracted. Now as vater doth diſſolue ſalt, ſo by the incorporation and vertue of that corroſiue ſubſtance it doth more then ſalt it ſelſe can doe: for hauing gotten acrimony, and more weight by the mixture and diſſolution of ſalt init, it maketh it ſelfe a way into ſolide bodies, euen into mettals; as we ſee in braſſeand iron; which are eaſily ruſted by ſalt diſoluing vpon them. And according as the ſaltes are ſtronger, ſo this corroſiuẽ vertue encreaſeth in them, euen ſo much, as neyther ſyluer nor gold, are free from their eating quality. But they, as well as the reſt, are diuided into moſt ſmall partes, and are made to ſvimme in water, in ſuch ſort as we hauctx plicated aboue, and whereof euery ordinary Alchymiſt teacheth the practiſe. But this is not all; ſalts do helpe as well to melt hard bodies and mettalls, as to corrode them: for ſome fuſible ſalts flowing vpon them by the heate of the fire, and others diſſolued by the ſteame of the mettall that incorporateth with themias ſoone as they are in fluxe, they mingle vith the naturall iuice of the mettall, and penetrate them deeper, then without them the fire could doe, and ſivell them and make them fitt to runne. Theſe are the principall wayes of the two laſt inſtruments in diſſoluing of bodies: taking each of them by it ſelfe. But therè remaineth one more of very great importance, as ell in the workes of nature as of art; in which, both the former are ioyned and do concure: and that is putrefraction. Whoſe way of working is by gentle heate and moiſture to wett and pierce the body it vorketh vpons whereby, it is made to ſwell: and the hoat partes of it, being looſened, they are att length druncke vp and drowned in the moiſt ones ( from vhence, by fire they are ſly ſeparated as we haue already declared;) and thoſe moiſt partes, afterwardes leauing it, the ſubſtance remaineth dry, and falleth in pieces, for want of the glew that held it together. THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER An explication of certaine Maximes tonching the operations, and qualities af bodies: and wheiher ihe lements be found pure in any part of the world. & Vt of what we haue determined, concerning the naturall ) actions of bodies, in their making and deſtroying one an 2FAS other; it is eaſy to vnderſtand the right meaning of ſome termes, and the true reaſon of ſome maximes much vſed in the ſchooles. As firſt; when Philoſophers attribute vnto all ſortes of corporeall Agents,a Sphere of Actiuity. The ſenſe of that manner of ex ſſon in fire appeareth plainely, by hat we haue already declared of the nature and manner of operation of that Element. And in like manner, if we conſider howthe force of cold conſiſteth in a compreſſion of rhe body that is made cold, e may preceiue that if in the cooled body there be any ſubtile partes which can breake forth from the reſt, ſuch compreſſion will make them do ſo. Eſpecially, if the compreſſion be of little partes of the compreſſed body within themſelues, as well as of the outard bulke of the whole body round about: for at firſt the compreſſion of ſuch cauſeth in the body, where they are, little holes or pores in the places they are compreſſed and driuen from; which pores, they filled vp when they were dilated att their owne naturall liberry. But being thus forcibly shrunke vp into leſſe roome, afterwardes, they ſqueeſe againe out of their croude all ſuch very looſe and ſubtile partes(reſiding till then with them) as can ſind their way out from among them. And theſe ſubtile partes, that thus are deliuered from the colds compreſſion, gett firſt into the pores that we haue shewed vere made by this compreſſion. But they can not long ſtay there; for the atomes of aduenient cold that obſeſſe the compreſſed body, do likewiſe with all their force, throng into thoſe pores, and ſoone driue out the ſubtile gueſtes they find there, becauſe they are more in number, bigger in bulke, and more violent in their courſe then they. Who therefore muſt yield vnto them the little channels, and capacities they formerly tooke v). Out of which they are thruſt with ſuch an impetuoſity, that they ſpinne from them with a vehemence, as quickeſiluer doth through leather, when to prit it, or to bring an Amalgame to a due conſiſtence, it is ſtrainedt rough the ſides of it. Now theſe shoures or ſtreames of atomes iſſuing from the compreſſed body, are on all ſides round about it att exceeding little diſtances: becauſe the pores, out of which they are driuen, are ſo Iikewiſe. And conſequently there they remaine round about beſieging it, as though they would returne to their originall homes, as ſoone as the vſurping ſtrãgers that were too powerfull for thẽ, will giue thẽ leaue. And according to the multitude of thẽ, and to the force with which they are driuen out; the compaſſe th.y take vp round about the cõpreſſed body, is greater or leſſer. Which beſieging atomesare not ſo ſoone carried away by any exterior and accidentall cauſes, but they are ſupplyed by new emanations ſucceeding them out of the ſaid compreſſed body. Now this which we haue declared by the example of cold cõpreſſing a particular body, happeneth in all bodies whereſoeuer they be in the orld: for this being the vnauoydable effect of heate and of cold, whereſoeuer thy reſides (which are the actiue qualities, by whoſe meanes not onely fire and water and ihic other to Elements; but allother mixed bodies compoſed of ihe Elements, haue their actiuity)and they being in all bodies whatſocuer(as we haue proued aboue)it followeth euidently, that there is nota body in the world, but hath about it ſelfe an orbe of emanations of the ſame nature which that body is of. Within the compaſſe of which orbe, whenany other body cometh that receiueth an immutation by the little atomes whereof that orbeis compoſed, the aduenient body ſeemeth to be aſfected and as it were replenished with the qualities of the body from wh-ence they iſſue. Which is then ſaid to woi ke vpon the body that imbibeth the emanations that ſlow from it. And becauſe this orbeſregularly ſpeaking)is in the forme ofa ſ; here, the paſſiue bodyis ſaid to be within the ſphere of the others actiuity. Secondly, when Philoſophers pronounce, that No corporeall nature can operari in diſtans; that is, that no body can worke vpon an other remote from it, without woiking firſt vpon the body that lyeth betweene them, which muſt continue and piece vp the operation ſom the Agent to the patient. The reaſon and truth of this maxime is in our Philoſophy euident: for we hauing sheed that actton among bodies is eiformed forthe moſt part, by the emiſſion of little partes out of one Pody into an other: as alſo, that ſuch little partes can not ſtreame from the body that is their fountaine, and ſettle vpon a remote body, without paſſing through the interiacent bodies; which muſt furnish them, as it were, with channelsand pipes to conuey them whither they aretogoe; It followeth manifeſtly, that the actiue emiſſaries of the vorking body, can neuer reach dei diſtant marke, vnleſſe they be ſucceſſinely ferryed ouer the medium, that lyeth betweene them in which, they muſt needes leaue impreſſions of their hauing beene there, and ſo worke vpon it in their paſſage, and leaue in it their qualities and complexionsias a payment for their waftage ouer. But peraduenture ſome may contend, that theſc inuiſible ſerieants and woikmen are too feeble and impotent to performe thoſe viſible great eſfects we dayly ſee. As when fire att the length burneth a board that hath beene a great while oppoſed to it, though it touch not the body of the fire; or when a loadeſtone draweth vnto it a great weight of iron that is diſtant from it. ll Vnto whom we shall reply, that if he vill not grant theſe ſubtile emanations from the agent body, to be the immediate workers of theſe eſfects, he muſt allott that efficacy vnto the whole corpulency of all the Agent voiking in bulkeſforbeſides thewhole, and the partes there is no third thing to be conſidered in bodies ſince they are conſtituted by quantity ;) but the whole, can not worke otherwiſe then by locall motion: which in this caſe it can not doe, becauſe by the ſuppoſition, it is determined to keepe its diſtance from the paſſiue body, and not to moue toardes it. Therefore, this is impoſſible; whereas the other can appeare but diſſicult att the worſt, and therefore muſt be admitted, when no better and more intelligible ſolution can be found. But withall we muſt note that itis not our intention to ſay, but that it may in lome circumſtances happen that ſome particular action or effect may be wrought in a remote part or body. which shall not be the ſame in th intermediate body that lyeth between the Agent and the paticnt,and that conueyeth the Agents working atomes to the others body. As forexample when tinder or Naphtha is by fire made to burne arr a varde diſtance from it, when the interiacent ayre is but warmed by that ſire. Or whenthe ſunne, by meanes of a burning glaſſe or of ſome other reſlexion, ſetteth ſome bodies on fire, and yet onely enlighteneth the glaſſe and the ayre that are in the way. The reaſon of which is manifeſt to be the diuers diſpoſitions of the different ſubiects in regard of the Agent: and therefore it is no wonder that diuers effects should be produced according to thoſe diuers diſpoſitions. A third poſition among Philoſophers is,that all bodies which worke vpon others, do likewiſe at the ſame time, wherein they worke; ſuſſer from thoſe they worke vpon: and contrariiſe that all bodies which ſuſfer from others, do att the ſame time woike backeagaine vpon them. For the better vnderſtanding vhereof, lett vs conſider that all action among hodies is eyther purely locall motion, orelſe locall motion with certaine particulurities which giue it a particular name. As when we expreſe the locall motion of little atomes of fire, or of earth, or ater vpon and inro other bodies by the wordes of heating or coolingi and ſo of the like. Now if the action be pure locall motion, and conſequently the effect produced by that action be meerely change of place; we muſt call to mind how two denſe bodies mouing one againſt the other, do eac h of them beare before them ſome little quantity of a rarer body immediately ioyned vnto them: and conſequently, theſe more rare bodies muſt be the ſirſt to feele the power of the denſe bodies and to recciue impreſſions from rheir motions; each of them, by the oppoſite rare body, which like an huiſſier goeth before to make way for his following maſter that obligeth him to this ſeruice. Now when theſe rare' vshers haue ſtruggled a while like the firſt lightly armed rankes of two armies in the interiacent field between their maine battalies, that follow them cloſe att the hecles; they muſt att the length yield, when they are ouerborne by a greater weight then they can ſuſtaine; and then they recoyle backe, as it ere to ſaue themſelues by getting inamong the files of the denſe bodies that droue them on: which not opening to admitt them, and yet they ſtill flying violently from the maſtering force that purſueth them they preſſe ſo hard vpon what att the firſt preſſed them on, as notwithſtanding their denſity and ſtrengrh they force them toretire backe: for vnleſſe they do ſo, they are not of the number of thoſe that worke vpon onean other. An d thistetiring, is eyther on bothſides, or but of one ſide. If both; then it is euident how each of them is an Agent, and each of them a ſuſferer; each of them ouercoming his oppoſit in ſuch ſort, as himſelfe likewiſe receiueth blowes and loſſe. But if onely one of the denſe bodies be ſo shocked as to recoyle backe, then that onely ſuffereth inits body, and the other ſufereth onely inits vertuę; that is, in the ayre or other rare body it ſendeth before it; which it driueth with ſuch a violence, that it maſtereth and quelleththe oppoſition of the other bedy, before it can reach to shake the denſe bodv, before which it runneth. Yet that rare body muſt be preſſed and broken into, in ſome meaſure, by the encounter of the other(which though neuer ſo weake yet maketh ſome reſi ſtance) but much more when it cometh to grapple with the denſe body it ſelſe: and ſo between them, it is wounded and enfeebled, like thoſe ſouldiers that firſt enter a breach in a owne; from whence when they haue driuen the enemy, they purſue him to the cittadell, and force him from thence too: and ſo how maym ed ſoeuer they proue, they makea free and eaſy way without reſiſtance for the whole body of their army to follow them, and take quiett poſſeſſion of that which did coſt them ſo muc htò winne. And thus we ſee how it may happen that one of theſe mouing bodies doth not ſuffer ſo much as to be ſtayed in its iourney; much leſſe, to be driuen backe. And yet the other body att the ſame time vorke in ſome meaſure vpon it, by working vpon what is next to it; which recoylingagainſt it muſt needes make ſome impre ſion vpon it, ſinee there can be no oppoſition but muſt haue ſome effect. Now this impreſſion or effectthough it be not perceptible by cauſing a contrary motion, yet it muſt needes enfeeble the vertue of theconquering Agenr, OF BODIES, Chap. XVL 141 Agent, and deaden the celerity of its motion. And thus it is eũident, that in all pure locallmotions of corporeall Agents, euery one of them muſt in ſome proportion ſuffer inacting, and in ſuſfering muſt ãct. And what we haue ſaid of this kind ofaction, may eaſily beapplyed5 to the other where the effect of locall motionis deſigned by a particular Thę former name, as it is in the exãples we gaue of heating and cooling. And in that, applycdt the proceeding vill appeare to be the very ſame as in this; for if fire doth vther loœll heate water, the water reacteth againe, eyther vpõthe fireand cooleth it, ĩeſgned by if it be immediate vnto it; or elſe vpon the interiacent ayre, if it be atta partcular diſtance from the fire. And ſo the ayre is, in ſome meaſure cooled, by the 'ut  fnd cold atomes that iſſue from the water, whoſe compaſſe or ſi phere of argument is of actiuity being leſſer then the fires, they can not coole ſo farre oſf, as the n ſtree othẽts can heate: but where they do arriue, they giue their proportion of  of cold, in the very middeſt of the others army of fiery atomes, decttine. notvithſtanding their multitude and violence. According to which doctrine, our countryman Suiſſeth his argument, that in the ſchooles is held inſoluble, hath not ſo much as any ſemblance of the leaſt difficulty: for it is euident that ſuch atomes of fre and of water as we determine heate and cold to be, may paſſe and croude by one an other into the ſubiects they are ſent vnto by diuers little ſtreames without hindering one an other ſ as we haue declared of ayre and light) and each of them be receiued in their owne nature and temper by the ſame ſublect; though ſenſe can iudge onely according to which of them is predominant, and according to the proportion of its ſuperiority. Vpon which occaſion we can not chooſe but note, how the doctrine of qualities is not onely vnable to giue account of the ordinary and plaine effects of nature; but alſo vſerth to endin cleere impoſſibilities and contradictions if it be driuen farre:as this argument of Suiſſeth sheweth, and many othersof the like nature. / A fourth poſition among Philoſopheſs is, that ſome notions do admitt vhy ſome the denominations of Intenſion and Remiſſion, but that others do not. notions do The reaſon of which we shall cleerely ſee, if we but conſider how theſe ſæẽ f termes of intenſion and remiſiion, do but expreſſe more or leſſe, of the Remiſion; and thing that is faid to be intended or remitted: for the nature of more and others do not leſſe, doth imply a latitude and diuiſibility; and therefore can not agree with the nature of ſuch thinges as conſiſt in an indiuiſible being. As for example to bea whole, or to be an equall, can not be ſometimes more, ſometimes leſſe; for they conſiſt in ſuch a rigorous indiuiſible being, that if the leaſt part imaginable be wanting it is no longer a vhole, and if there be the leaſt exceſſe between to thinges, they are no longer equall, butare in ſome other proportion then of equality in regard of one an other. And hence it is that Ariſtotle teacheth vs that ſilltane and the ſpecies of Quantity, do not admitt of intenſion and remiſſion; but that Quality doth. For firſtin ſubſtance, we know that the ſigniſication of this word is, that which maketha thing be what itis, as is euident by ourgiuing it foran anſwere to the queſtion what a thing is. And therefore, if there ere any diuſſibility in ſubſtance, it would be in what the thing is; and conſcquently, euery diuiſion following that diuiſibility, would make the thing an other what, that is an other thing. And ſo the ſubſtanct that is pretended to be changed by intenſion or remiſſion, would not be diuided, as is ſuppoſed, but would ceaſe to be, and an other ſubſtance would ſucceede in the roome of it. Whereby you ſee that cuery mutation in ſubſtance, maketh a new thing: and that more and leſſe in Quiddity can not be pronounced of the ſame thing Likewiſe in Quantity, it is cleere that its Specieſes do conſiſt inan mdiuiſible: for as in numbers, tenne lions (for example) ortenne Elephants are no more in regard of multitude then tenne fleas or tenne moutes in the ſunne;and if you adde ortake any thing from tenne, it is no more tenne, but ſome other number: ſo likewiſe in continued extenſion,a ſpanne,an elle, an ounce, or any other meaſure whatſocuer, ceaſeth to be a ſpanne and the reſt, if you adde to it or diminish from it the leaſt quantity imaginable. And peraduenture, the ſame is alſo of figures,as of a ſphere,a cube,a circle, a ſquare, &c. though they be in the ranke of Qualities. But if we conſider ſuch qualities as heat, cold, moyſture, dryneſſe, ſoftneſſe, hardneſſe, weight, lightneſſe, and the like ; we shall find that they may be in any body ſometimes more, ſometimes leſſe, (according as the exceſſe of any Element or mixture is greater in it, att one time then att an other) and yet the body in which theſe qualities are intended or remitted, remaine ſtill with the ſame denomination. As when durt continueth ſtill ſote, though ſometimes it be leſſe ſofte, other whiles O ſoſter; and waxe remaineth figurable, whether it be melted or congealeds and wood is ſtill hoat though it looſe or gaine ſome degree of heate. But ſuch intenſion in any ſubiect Whatſoeuer hath its determinate limits that it can not paſſe; for when more of that quality that e ſay is intended (that is, more of the atomes of the actiue body) is brought into the Body that ſuffereth the intenſion, then its complexion can brooke;it reſignerhits nature to their violence and becometh a newthing; ſuch an onc as they are pleaſed to make it. As when wood, with extremity of heating (thatis, with bringing into it ſo many atomes of fire, that the fire is ſtrongerin it then its owne nature) is conuerted into fire, ſmoake, 7. ater, and ashes; and nothing remaineth of the natureœf wood. That in euer;? But before we end this chapter, we may remember how in the cloſe of purt of on the fourth we remitted a queſtion concerning the exiſtence of the vora; atl the Elements; (that iss whether in any places of the world there were any ſous Elemẽts pure Elements, eyther in bulke or in little partes3 ) as being not ready to c ſunſ pute eſolue it, till we had declared the manner of woiking of bodies one atomes; but vpOonan other. Here then vill be a fitt place to determine that, out of not in ⸗ r . . . ꝑreat bub? what we haue diſcourſed concerning the actions, whereby bodies are made and corrupted: for conſidering the vniuerſall action of fire that runneth through all the bodies we haue commerce withall, by reaſon of the ſunnes influence into them and operation vpon them with his light and beames which reacheth farre and neere; and looking vpon the effects which we haue shewed do follow thence: it is manifeſt, there can not be any great quantity of any body whatſoeuer, in which fire is not intrinſccally mixed. And on the other ſide, we ſeet hat where fire is once mixed. it is very hard to ſeperate it totally from thence. Againe we ſee it is impoſſible that pure fire should be conſerued, without being adioyned to ſome other bodys both becauſe of its violent natiuity, ſtill ſtreaming forth with a great impetuoſity;as alſo, becauſe it is ſo eaſily ouercome by any obſident body when it is dilated. And therefore ve may ſafely conclude that no ſimple Element can conſiſt in any great quantity in this courſe of nature which we liue in and take a ſuruay of. Neyther doth it appeare to what purpoſe nature should haue placed any ſuch ſtorehouſes of ſimples, ſeeing she can make all needc full complexions by the diſſolutions of mixed bodies into other mixed bodics ſauouring of the nature of the Elements, without needing their purity to beginne vpon. But on the other ſide, it is as cuident that the Elements muſt remaine pure in euery compounded body in ſuch extreme ſmall partes as we vſe to call atomes: for if they did not, the variety of bodies would be nothing elſe, but ſo many degrees of rarity and denſity, or ſo many pure homogeneall Elements, and not bodies compoſed of heterogeneall partes: and conſequently, would not be able to shew that variety of partes which we ſee in bodies, nor could produce the complicated eſfects which proceede from them. And accordingly we are ſure that the leaſt partes which our ſenſes can arriue to diſcouer haue many varictics in them: euen ſo much that a whole liuing creature (Whoſe organicall partes muſt needes be of exceeding different natures) may be ſo litle, as vnto our eyes to ſeeme indiuiſible; we not diſtinguishing any difference of partes in it without the helpe of a multiplying glaſſe: as in the leaſt kind of mites, and in wormes picked out of Childrens handes we dayly experience. Soasit is euident that no ſenſible part can be vnmingled. But then againe, when we call to mind how we haue shewed that the qualities which we find in bodies do reſult out of the compoſition, and mixtion of the Elements, we muſt needes conclude that they muſt of neceſſity remaine in their owne eſſences in the mixed body. And ſo out of the whole diſcourſe, determine that they are not there in any viſible uantity, but in thoſe leaſt atomes, that are too ſubtile for our ſenſes to diſcerne. Which poſition we do not vnderſtand ſo Metaphyſically as to ſay that their ſubſtantiall formes remaine actually in the mixed bodyi but onely, that their accidentall qualities are found in the compound,; remitting that other queſtion vnto Metaphyſicians ( thoſe ſpirituall THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER. Of Rarefacſion and (ondenſation the iwo firſt motions of particular bodies. 41 Vrintention in this diſcourſe, concerning the natures and 320 motions of bodies, ayming no further then att the 7]Jl diſcouery of what is ormay be done by corporeall Agentsi &~ thereby to determine what is the worke of immateriall and ſpirituall ſubſtances; it can not be expected att our handes that we should deliuer here an entire and complete body of naturall Philoſophy. But onely that we should take ſo much of it in our way,as is needfull to carry vs with truth and euidence to our iourneys end. It belongeth not then to vs to meddle with thoſe ſublime contemplations vhich ſearch into the nature of the vaſt Vniuerſe, and that determine the vnity and limitation of it; and that shew by what ſtringes, and vpon what pinnes, and wheeles, and hinges, the whole world moueth: and that from thence do aſcend vnto an awfull acknowledgment and humble admiration of the primary cauſe; from vhence,and of which, boththe being of it, and the beginning of the ſirſt motion, and the conrinuance of all others doth proceed and depend. Nor in deede would it be to the purpoſe for anyman to ſayle in this Ocean,and to beginne a ne voyage of nauigation vpon it: vnleſſe he ere aſſured, he had ballaſt enough in his shippe to make her ſinke deepe into the water and to carry her ſteadily through thoſevnruly waues; and that he were furnished withskill and prouiſion ſufficient to go through, without eyther looſing his courſe by ſteering after a wrong compaſſe, or being forced backe againe with shorte and obſcure relations of diſcoueries: ſince others that went out before him, are returned with a large account to ſuch as are able to vnderſtand and ſumme it vp. Which ſurely our learned countryman, and my beſt and moſt honoured frend, and to hom of all men ſiuing Iam moſt obliged(forto him I owe that litle which Iknow; and what I haue, and shall ſett downe in all this diſcourſe, is but a few sparkes kindled by me att his greate fire)hath both profoundly, and acutely, and in euery regard iudiciouſly performed in his Dialogues of the world. Ourtaske then (in a lower ſtraine; and more proportionate to ſo weake shoulders) is to looke no further then among thoſe bodies we conuerſe withall. Of which, hauing declared by what courſe and engines nature goucrneth their common motions, that are found euen in the Elements, and from thence are deriued to all bodies compoſed of them; we intend now to conſider ſuch motions as accompany diuers particular bodies, and are much admired by whoſoeuer vnderſtandeth not the cauſes of them. To beginne from the eaſieſt and moſt connexed with the actions of the Elements, the handſell of our labour ill light vpon the motions of Rarefaction and Condenſation, as they are the paſſions of mixed bodies. And firſt for Rarefaction; we may remember how it proceedeth originally from fire,and dependeth of heate as is declared in the former chapter:and whereſoeuer we find Rarefaction, we may be confident the body which ſuffereth it, is not without fire working vpon it. Fromhence we may gather, that when the ayre impriſoned in a baloone orbladder, ſwelleth againſt what cõtainethit; and ſtretcheth its caſe, and ſeeketh to breake out; this effect muſt proceed from fire or heate ſ though we ſee not the fire) working eyther within the very bowels of the ayre; or without, by preſſing vpon what containeth it,and ſo making it ſelfe a way vnto it. And that this latter way is able to worke this effect; may be conuinced by the contrary effect from a contrary cauſe: for take a bladder ſtretched out vnto its greateſt extent by ayre shutt vp vithin it; and hangit in a cold place;and you will ſee it preſently contract it ſelfe into a leſſe roome; and the bladder vill grow wrinckeled and become too bigge for the ayre vithinit. But for immediate proofe of this poſition, we ſee that the addition of a very ſmall degree of heate, rarifyeth the ayre ina weatherglaſſe, ſthe ayre receiuing the impreſſion of heate, ſooner then water) and ſo maketh it extend it ſelfe into a greater place, and conſequently;it preſſeth vpon the water; and Rorceth it downe into a leſſe me then formerly it poſſeſſed. And likewiſe we ſee quic keſyluer and other liquons if they be shutt vp in glaſſes cloſe ſtopped and ſcrt in ſuficient heate (anda little is ſufficient for this effect) they will ſwell and fill their glaſſes.and att the laſt breake them, ratherthen not find a way to giue themſelues more roome; which is then growne too ſtraight in the glaſſe, by reaſon of the rarefaction of the liquors by the fire working vpon them. Now againe; that this efſect may be wrought by the inward heate, that is encloſed in the bowels of the ſubſtance thus shutt vp; both rcaſon, and experience do aſſire vs: for, they teach vsthat ifa body which is not extremely compacted, but that by its looſeneſſe is eaſily diuiſible into little partes ſ ſuch a one as wine, or other ſpirittfull liquors) be encloſed in a veſſell; the littlea tomes that perpetually moue vp and downe in euery ſpace of the whole world, making their way through euery body, villſett on worke the little partes, in the wine for example, to play their game: ſo that the hoat and light partes ũif they be many)not enduring to be compreſſed and kept in by the heauy and cold ones, do ſeeke to breake out with force and tillthey can free themſclues from the denſe ones that would impriſon them they carry them along with them, and make them to ſellout as well  themſcues Nov if they be kept in by the veſſell, ſo that they haue not play enough; they diiue the denſe ones ſ like ſo many little hammens or vedges) againſt the ſides of it,and att the length do breake it, and ſo do make themſelues way, to a larger roome. But if they haue vent; the more fiery hoat ſpirits fly away, and leaue the other groſſer partes quiett and att reſt. On he other ſide if the hoat and light partes in a liquor be not many nor very actiue, and the veſſell be ſo full that the partes haue not free ſop to remoue and make way for one an other, there vill not follow any great efſect in this kind: as weſee in bottled beere or ale, that voiketh little, vnleſſe there be ſome ſpace left empty, in the bottle. And againe; if the veſſell be very much too bigge forthe liquorinit, the fiery partes find roome, firſt to ſell vp the heauy ones; and att the lengthto gett out from them, though the veſſell be cloſe ſtopped; for they haue ſcope enough to floate vp and downe between the ſurface of the liquor,and the roofe of the veſſell. And thisis the reaſon that if a little beere or ſmall wine be left long in a great caske, be it neuer ſo cloſe ſiopped, it will in time grow dead. And then, if att the opening of the bunge (after the ca:ke Rath beene long vnſtirred) you hold a candle cloſe to it, you shall att the inſtant ſee a flash of flame enuironing the vent. Which is no other thing, but the ſubtile ſpirits that parting from the beere or wine, haue leſt it dead; and flying brood as ſoone as they are permitted, are ſett on fire by the flame that they meete ith in their ioumey, as being more combuſtible (becauſe more ſubtile)then that ſpiritt of wine which is kept in forme of liquor:and yet that likewiſe (hovgh much groſſer) is ſett on fire by the touch of flame. And this happeneth not onely to wine, and beere, or ale, but euen to water. As dayly experience sheweth in the eaſt Indian shippes, that hauing beene 5. or 6, yeares att ſea, hen the yopen ſome of their caskes of Thames water in their returne homewardes ſ for they keepethat vater till the laſt; as being their beſt and moſt durable; and that groweth lighter and purer, by the often putiifyinges through violent motions in ſtormes, euery one of which maketh new groſſe and carthy partes fall downe to the botrome, and other volatile ones aſcend to the toppe; )a flame is ſeene about their bunges if a candle be neere, as we ſuid before of wine. j And to proceed, with confirming this doctrine by further experience; we dayly ſee that the litile partes of heate being agitated and brought into motiò in any body; they enter and pierce into other partes, and incorporate themſelues ith them, and ſett them on fire if they be capable hereot : as we ſee in wett hay or flaxe layed togerher in great quantity. And if they be not capable of taking fire, then they canry them with them to the outſide; and when they can tranſport them no further, part fiyeth away, and orher part ſtayeth with them: as we ſee in new beere orale, and in muſt of wine; in which, a ſubſtance vſually called the mother, is wrought vptothe toppe. Vhich in vine, will att the laſt be conuerted into Tartar; vhen the ſpirits that are very volatile, are ſ=lowne away; and do leaue thoſe partes om whence they haue euaporated, more groſſe and earthy then the others, where the groſſer and ſubtiler partes continue ſtill mixed. But in beere or rather in ale; this mother, which in them we call barme, vill continue longer in the ſame conſiſtence, and with the ſame qualities; for the ſpirits of ĩt are not ſo firy that they muſt preſently leaue the body they Pue incorporated themſelues withall; norare hoat enoughto bake jt into a hard conſiſtence. And therefore, bakers make vſe of it to raiſe their bread; which neytherit ill do, vnleſſe it be kept from cold; both which, are euident ſignes that it worketh in force of heate; and conſequently, that it continueth ſtilla hoat and light ſubſtance. And againe we ſee that after wine or beere hath wrought once, a violent motion vill make it orke anew. As is dayly ſeene in great lightninges and in thunder, and by much rocking of them for ſuch motion rarifyeth, and conſequently heateth them: partly by ſeparating the little partes of the liquor, which were before as gleed together, and therefore lay quietly ; but now, by their pulling aſunder, and by the liquors growing thereby more looſe then it was, they haue freedome to play vpand downe: and partly by bea ng one part againſt an other; which breaketh and diuideth them into leſſer atomes, and ſo bringeth ſome of them into the ſtate of fire; which you may remember, is nothing elſe buta body brought into ſuch a degree of littleneſſe and rarity of its partes. And this is the reaſon why ſuch hard and dry bodies as haue an vnctuous ſubſtance in them, are by motion eythereaſily ſett on fire, or att the leaſt, fire is eaſily gotten out of them. As happeneth in flintes, and in diuers other ſtones, which yield fire when they are ſtrucken; and if reſently after you ſmell vnto them, you shall perceiue an odour of ſrimſtone and of burning which is a certaine ſigne that the motion did conuert into fire the naturall brimſtone that was mingled with the ſlint, and whoſe denſer partes were growne cold, and ſo ſfucke to the ſtone. And in like manner, the iuyywood and diuers others, as alſo the Indian canes(Which from thence are called firecanes) being rubbed with ſome other ſticke of the ſame nature; if they be firſt very dry, will of themſelues ſett on fire: and the like ill happen to coach wheeles in ſummer if they be ouerheated with motion. To conclude our diſcourſe of rarefaction, we may looke alittle into the power and efficacity of it, whichis no where to be ſeerte ſo clearl as in fire. And as fire is the generall cauſe of rarefaction, ſo is it of al bodies, that whichis moſt rarifyed. And therefore it is no maruayle if its eſffects be the greateſt that are in nature, ſeeingit is the proper operatiò of the moſt actiue Element. The wonderfull force of it we dayly ſee in thunder, in gunnes, in granados, and in mines; of which, continuall experience, as well as ſeuerall hiſtoryes wittneſſeth litle leſſe then miracles. Leauing them to the remarkes of curious Perſons, we ill onely looke into the way by which ſo maine effects do proceed from cauſes that appeare ſo ſlender. It is euident that fire  as we haue ſaid before) dilateth it ſelſę ſpherically; as nature sheweth vs manifeſtly in bubbles of boyling water, and of mike, and generally of ſuch ſubſtances as are of a viſcous compoſition ; for ſor bubbles being round, do aſſure va that the cauſe which made them, did equally dilate them from the center vnto all partes. Now then remembring the infinite multiplication which is in fire, we may conceiue that whena graine of gunne pouder is turned thereinto, there are ſo many little bubbles of a viſcous ſubſtance one backing an other with great celerity, as there are partes of fire more then there were of gunnepouder. And if we make a computation of the number and of the celerity of theſe bubbles; we shall find that although euery one of them ſingle do ſeeme to be of an inconſiderable force, yet the whole number of them together, will exceed the reſiſtance of the body moued or broken by them: eſpecially, if we note, that when hard ſubſtances haue not timeallowed them to yield, they break the ſooner. And then we shall not ſo much admire the extremities e ſee acted by theſe meanes. Thus hing lovked into the nature of rarefaction, and traced the progreſſe of it from the motionof the ſunneand fire : in the next place we are to examine the nature of condenſatic n. And weshall oftentimes find it Lkeiſe an effect of the ſame cauſe otherwiſe woiking: for there being two different wayes to diy any wett thing;the one, by taking away that iuice which maketh a body liquid; the orher, by putting more drought to the wett body, that it may imbibe the moiſture; this latter ay doth as wellas the former, condenſe a body: for by the cloſe ſticking of wett to dry, the moſt part of condenſation is effected in compounded bodies. The firſt of theſe wayes, doth properly and immediately proceed from heate; for heate entering into a body, incorporateth it ſelfe with the moiſtand viſcous partes it findeth there: as purging medicines do ith the humors they woike vpon  which when the ſtomacke can no longer entertaine ( by reaſon of their vnruly motions in wreſtling together) they are both eiected grappling with one an other; and the place of their contention is thus, by ithe ſuperuenience of a gneſt of a contrary nature ( that will not ſtay long there) purged from the ſuperaboundance of the former ones that annoyed it. Eden ſo the fire that is greedily drunke vp by the watry and viſcous partes of a compounded body ; and whoſe actiuity and reſtleſſe nature will not endure to be long empriſoned there, quickly piercerh quite through the body it entereth into, and after a hile ſtreameth out att the oppoſite ſide, as faſt asit entered on the ſide next toit, and carryeth away with it thoſe glewy partes it is incorporated wirh:and by their abſence , leaueth the body they part frm, dryer then att the firſt it was. Vhich courſe we may obſerue in ſirupes that are boyled to a conſiſtencè, and in brothes that are conſumed vnto a gelly: ouer which, whiles they are making by the fire vnder them, you i a great ſteame: which is, the watry partes that being incorporated with ſire, fly away in ſmoake. Likewiſe when the ſea water is condenſed into ſalt, you ſee it is an eſfect: of the ſunne or fire that exhaleth or boyleth away all the palpable moiſture. And ſo when wett clothes are hanged eyther in the ſunne or att the fire, we ſee a ſmoake about the clothes, and heate ithin them: which being alldrawne out from them, they become dry. And this deſerueth a particular note, that although they should be not quite dry, when you take them from the fire; yet by then they are coole, they will be dry: for the fire that is in them when they are remoued from the maine ſtocke of fire, flying away carryeth with it the moiſture that was incorporated with it:and therefore whiles they were hoat, that is, whiles the fire was in them, they muſtalſo be moiſt; becauſe the fire and the moiſture were growne to be one body: and could not become through dry vith that meaſure of fire, ( for more would haue dryed them, euen whiles they were hoat) vntill they were alſo growne through cold. And in like manner, ſirupes, hydromels, gellies, and the like, grow much thickeraſter they are taken off from thefirt;then they were vpon the fire,and much of their humidity, ſlyethaway with the fire, in their cooling, whereby they leſſen much of their quantity, euen after the outward fire hath ceaſed from working vpon them. Nov if the moiſt partes, that remaine after the drying, be by the heate well incorporated in the dry partes; and ſo do occaſion the dry parẽẽs to ſticke cloſe together; then that body is condenſed, and ill (to the proportion of it)be heauyer in a leſſe bulkeias we ſee that mettalls are heauyer then ſtones. I Allthough this effect be in theſe examples wrought by heate, yet generally ſpeaking it is more proper to cold: which is the ſecond way of drying a moiſt body. Aswhen in Greeneland, the extreme cold freeſeth the whaleſis hers beere into yce, ſo that the ſteardes diuide it with axes and wedges, and deliuer their portions of drinke to their shippes company, and their shallopes gings, in their bare handes: but in the innermoſt part of the butte, they find ſome quantity of very ſtrong liquor, not inferior to moderate ſpiritt of wine. Att the ſirſt, before cuſtome had made it familiar vnto them, they wondered that euery time they drew att the tappe, when fitſt it came from their shippes to the shore ( for the heate of the hold would not lettit freeſe) no liquor would come, vnleſſe they new tapped it witha longer gimlett: but they thought that paines well recompenced, by finding it in the taſt to grow ſtronger and ſrongen till att the laſt, their longeſt gimlets would bring nothing out;and yet the veſſell not a quarter drawne off; hich obliged them then to ſtaue the caske, that ſo they might make vſe of the ſubſtance that remained. The reaſon of this, is euident: that cold ſeeking to condenſe the beere by mingling its dry and cold partes vith it, thoſe that would endure this mixture, were imbibed and shrunke vp by them. But the other rare and hoat partes that were ſqueeſed out by the denſe ones which entered to congeale the beere, and ere forced into the middle of the veſſell ( hich was the furtheſt part for them to retire vnto, from their enuironing ehemies) did conſerue themſelues in their liquid forme, in defyance of the aſſaulting cold; whiles their felloes, remaining by their departure more groſſe and earthy then they were before, yiclded to the conqueron,ihe; could not shift away from, and fo were dryed and condenſed into yce: which when the mariners thawed, they found it like faire water, without any ſpirits in it or comforting heate to the ſtomacke. This mãner of condenſation, which we haue deſcribed in the freeſing of beere, is the way moſt practiſed by nature; I meane, forimmediate condenſation(for cõdentſation is ſecondanily, whereſocuer there is rarefaction which we haue determined to be an effect of heate.) And the courſe of it is: that a multitude of earthy and dry bodies being driuen againſt any liquor, they eaſily diuide it, by meanes of their denſity, their dryneſſe, and their littleneſſeall hich in this caſe do accompany one an other, and are by vs determined to be powerfull diuiders:) and when they are gotten into ĩt, they partly ſucke into their owne pores the wett and diffuſed partes of the liquide body;and partly they make them ( when themſelues are full) ſticke faſt to their dry ſides, and become as a glew to hold themſelues ſtrongly together. And thus they dry vp the liquon and by the naturall preſſing of grauity they contract it into a leſſer roome. No otheriſe then when we force much wind or water into a bottle; and by preſſing it more and more, make it lye cloſer then of its ovne nature it would do. Orrather, as when ashes being mingled with ater; borh thoſe ſubſtances do ſticke ſo cloſe to one an other, that they take vp leſſe roome then they did each apart. This is the methode of froſtes, and of ſnow, and of yce, both naturalland artificcall; for in naturall freeſing, ordinarily the north or northeaſt wind by its force bringeth and driueth into our liquors, ſuch earthy bodies as it hath gathered from rockes couered with ſnow; which being mixed ith the light vapors whereof the wind is made, do eaſily find way into the liquors,and thẽ they dry thẽ into that conſiſtẽce which e call yce. Which in token of the wind it hath in it, ſiuimmeth vpon the water, and in the veſſel where it is made,, riſeth higher then the water did vhereofit is cõpoſed: and ordinarily it breaketh frõ the ſides ofthe veſſell ſo giuing way to more wind to come in, and freeſe deeper and thicker. But becauſe Galileus Nel diſcorſo intorno alle coſe che ſtanno in ſu ſacqua pag. 4. was of opinion that yce was water rarifyed, and not condenſed; we muſt not paſſe ouer this verity, ithout maintaining it againſt the oppoſition of ſo powerfull an aduerſary. His argumentsare; firſt that yce taketh vp more place, then the water did of whichit was made; which is againſt the nature of condenſation. Secondly, that quantity for quantity, yce is lighter then water; whereas thinges that are more denſe, are pro ortionally more heauy. And laſtly, that yce ſwimmeth in therens we haue often taught, that the more denſe deſcendeth in the more rare. Nou to reply to theſe arguments, e ſay firſt, that we would gladly know ho he did to meaſure the quantity of the yce, vith the quantity of ithe water of which it was made; and then when he hath shewed it, ands hewed withallthat yce holdeth more place then water; we muſt tell him that his experiment concludeth nothing againſt our doctrine, becauſe there is an addition of other bodies mingled with the water to make yce of it as we touched abouei and therefore that compound may vell take vpa greater place then the water alone did, and yet be denſer then iti and the wateralſo be denſer, then it was. And that other bodies do come into the water and are mingled with it, iseuident, out of the exceeding coldneſſe of the ayre, or ſome very cold windi one of which two neuer miſſeth to raigne vhenſoeuer the vater freeſeth: and both of them do argue great ſtore of little earthy dry bodies abounding in them, which ſweeping ouer all thoſe that lye in their way and courſe, muſt of neceſſity be mixed with ſuch as giue them admittance; hich water doth very eaſily. And accordingly we ſee that when in the freeſing of water, the yce groweth any thing deepe, it eyther shrinketh about the borders or att the leaſt lyeth very looſe; b as we can not doubt but that there is a free paſſage for more of ſuch ſubtile bodies to gett ſtill to the water, and freeſe it deeper. To his ſecond argument, we aske how he knowerh that yce quantity for quantity, is lighter then water? For although, of à ſpunge that is full of vater, it be eaſy to know what the ſpunge weigheth, and vhat the water, that was ſoaked into it, becauſe we can part the one of them from the other,and keepe each apart, to examine their weights: yet todo the like between yce and water, if yce be throughout full of ayre ſ(asf neceſſity it muſt be) we beleeue impoſſible. And therefore, it may be lighter in the bulke theri ater, by reaſon of the great pores cauſed in it, through the shrinking vp of the partes of water together (which pores muſ then neceſſarily be filled with ayre) and yet euery partby it ſelfe (in which no ayre is)be heauyer then ſo much vater. And by this it appeareth that his laſt argument, (grounded vpon the ſwimming of yce in water) hath no more force then if he would proue that an iron or an earthen dish , were lighter, and conſequently more rare, then water; becauſe it ſwimmeth vponit vhich is an effect of the ayres being contained in the belly of it (as it isinyce) not a ſigne of the mettalls being more rare then water. Vhereas on the contrary ſide, the proofe is poſitiue and cleare forvs; bodies more denſe then it, muſt of neceſſity make the compound and alſo the water it ſelfe become more denſe then it was alone. And accordingly we ſee, that yce halfe thawed ( for then, much of the ayre is driuen out, and the water beginneth to fill the pores wherem the ayre reſided beforelſinketh to the bortome: as an iron dizh with holes in it (hereby the water might gett intoit) would do. And beſides, we ſee that water is more diaphanous rthen yce, and yce more conſiſtent then water. Therefore hope we shall be excuſed, if in this particular we be of a contrary opinion to this great perſonage. But to returne vnto the thridde of our diſcourſe. The ſame that paſſeth here before vs; paſſethalſo in the skye with ſnow, huile, raine, and e wind. Which that we may the better vnderſtand; lett vs conſider how à windes are made: for they haue a maine influence into all the reſt. Vhen the ſunne by ſome particular occurrent, rayſeth great multitudes of atomes, from ſome one place; and they eyther by the attraction of the ſunne, orby ſome other occaſion, do take their courſe a certaine way; this motion of thoſe atomes we call a wind: which according to the continuance of the matter from whence theſe atomes riſe , endureth a longer or a shorter time, and goeth a farther or a shorter vay; like a riuer, or rather, like thoſe eruptions of waters, which in the Notherne partes of England they call Gypſies: the which do breake out att vncertaine times, and vpon vncertaine caulſes, and flow likeiſe with an vncertaine duration. So theſe windes, being compoſed of bodies in a determinate ioponion heauyerthen the ayre, do runne their courſe from their hight to the ground, where they are ſupported (as water is by the floore of its channell) whiles they performe their carrire; thatis, vntill they be waſted, eyther by th- drawing of the ſunne, or by their ſticking and incorporating into groſſer badies. Some of theſe windes according to the complexion of the body ont of which they are extracted, are dry  as thoſe which come fiom barren mountaines couered with ſnow: others are moiſti as thoſe that come out of mari:hy, or watry places: others, haue other qualities: as of heate or cold, of wholeſomeneſſe, orvnwholeſomeneſſe, and the like: partly from the ſource, and partly frõ the bodies they are mingled ith in their way. Such then being the nature and origine of windes; if a cold one do meete in the ayre with that moiſt body whereof otherwiſe raine would haue been made, it changeth that moiſt body into ſnow or into haile ; if a diy wind meete with a wett body it maketh it more dry, and ſo hindereth the raine that was likely to be: but if the wett body ouercome the dry wind, it bringeth the wind downe along withit; as we ſee when a shoure of raine allayeth a great wind. Andthat all this is ſo, experience illin ſome particulars inſtruct vs as ell as reaſon, from whence the reſt may be euidently inferred. For we ſee that thoſe who in imitation of nature would conuert water into yce, do take ſnow or yce, and mingle it with ſome actiue di y body, that may force the cold parte; of the ſnow from it; and then they ſett the water (in ſome fitt veſſell) in the way that thoſe little bodies are to take, which by that meanes entering into it, do ſtraight incorporate themſelues therewith, and of a ſoddaine do conuert ĩt inro yce. Which proceſſe you may eaſily trye,by mingling ſalt armoniake with the ſnow; bur much more poverfully, by ſerting the ſnow ouer the fire, v hiles the glaſſe of water to be congealed ſtandeth in it after the manner of an egg in ſalt. And thus, fire it ſelfe, though it be the enemy and deſtroyer of allcold, is made ihe inſtrument of freeſing. And the ſame reaſon holdeth, in the cooling of wine with ſnow or yce, when after it hath beene a competent time in the ſnow, they Whoſe charge itis, do vſe œ giue the veſſell that containeth the wine, three or foure tumes in the ſnow: ſo to mingle through the whole body of the wine, the cold receiued firſt but in the outward partes of it, and by preſſing, to make that without, haue a more forcible ingreſſion: lil But the whole doctrine of Meteores, is ſo amply, ſo ingeniouſly, anà ſo exactely performed by that neuer enough prayſed Gentleman Monſicur Des Cartes in his Meteorologicall diſcourſes; as I: hould vrong my ſelfe, and my Reader, if I dwelled any longer vpon this ſubicct. And whoſe Phyſicall diſcourſes, had they beene diuulged before I had entered vpon this woike, I am perſuaded would haue excuſed the greateſt part of my paines in deliuering the nature of bodies. 1t were a fault to paſſe from treating of condenſation, without noting ſo ordinary an effect of it as is the ioyning togerher of partes of the ſame body, or of diuers bodies. In which we ſee for the moſt part that the ſolide bodies which are to be ioyned together, are firſt cyther heated or moiſtened, that is,they are rarifyed: and then they are Iefi to cold ayre, or to other cold bodies, to thicken and condenſe as aboue, we mentioned of ſyrupes and gellies;) and ſo they are brought to ſticke firmely together. In the like manner we ſee that when two mettalls are heated till they be almoſt brought to runninge, and then are preſſed together by the hammer, they become one continued bedy. The lke we ſee in glaſſe, the like in waxe, and in diuers other thinges. On the contrary ſide; when a broken ſtone is to be pieced together, the pieces of it muſt be wetted, and the ciment muſt be like wiſe moiſtened, and then ioyning them aptly, and drying them, they ſticke faſt together. Glewis moiſtened, that it may by drying afterwardes, hold pieces of wood together. And the ſpectaclemakers haue a compoſition which muſt be both heated and moiſtened, to ioyne vnto handles of wood the glaſes which theyare togrinde. And broken glaſſesare cimented with cheeſe and chalke or with gãilike. All theſe efſects our ſenſe euidently sheweth vs, ariſe out of condẽſation; but to our reasò it belõgeth to examine particularly by what ſteppes they are performed Friſt then we know that heate doth ſubriliſe the little bodies which are in the pores of the heated body; and partly alſo, it openeth the pores of the body ũt ſelfe, if it be of a nature that permitteth itĩ as it ſeemeth thoſe bodies are, vhich by heate are mollifyed orare liquefactible. Againe, we know that moyſture is more ſubtile to enter into ſmall creekes, then dry bodies are eſpecially when it ĩs preſſed: for then it will be diuided into very little partes, and willfill vp cuery little chinke; and neuertheſſe if it be of agroſſe and viſcous natuie, allthe partes of it will ſticke togerher. Out of theſe two properties we haue, that ſince euery body hatha kind of orbe of its owne ex halations, or vapors round about it ſelfe (as is before declared,) the vapors which are hou one of the bodies, will more ſtrongly and ſolidely ( that is in more aboundant and greater partes) enter into the pores of the other body againſt which itis preſſed, when they are opened and dilated: and thus they becoming common to both bodies, by flowing from the one, and ſtrcaming into the other, and ſticking to them both will make them ſticke to one an orher. And then as they grow cold and dry, theſe litle parres shrinke on both ſides; and by their shrinking draw the bodies together; and withall, do leaue greater ors by their being compreſſæl together, then were there, when by heate and moyſture they were dilated; into which pores the circumſtant cold partes do enter, and thæreby doas it were vedge in the others; and conſequently, do make them hold firmely together thebodies, which they ioyne. But if art or nature : hould apply to this imcture any liquor or vapour, which had the nature and power to inſinuate it ſelfe more efficaciouſly to one of theſe bodies, then the glew which was between them did; of neceſſity, in this caſe, theſe bodies mulſt fall in pieces. And ſo it happeneth in the ſeparation of mettalls by corroſiue aters; as alſo in the precipitation of mettalls or of ſaltes when they are diſſolued in ſuch corroſiue waters, by meanes of other mettalls or ſaltes of a different nature: in both which caſes ithe enrerance of a latter body that penetrateth more ſtrongly, and vniteth it ſelſe to one of the ioyned bodies but not to the other, teareth them aſunder, and that which the piercing body reiectetl, falleth into little pieces; and if formerly ĩt were ioyned with the liquor, it is then precipitated downe ſrom it in a duſt. Out of which diſcourſe we may reſolue the queſtion of that learned and ingenious man Petrus Gaſſendus; who, by experience found, that water impregnated to fullneſſe vith ordinary ſalt, would yet receiue a quantity of other ſalt; ind when it would imbibe no more ofthat, ould  neuertheleſſe take into it a proportion of a third; and ſo of ſeuerall kindes i of ſaltes one after an other: which effect, he attributed to vacuites or porous ſpaces of diuers figures, that he conceiued to be inthe water; vhereof, ſome were fitt for the figure of one ſalt, and ſoine, for the figure of an other. Very ingeniouſly; yct if I miſſe not my marke, moſt aſſuredly he hath miſſed his. ſor ſiſt, how could he attribute diuers ſortes of vacuites to water, ithout giuing it diuers figures? And this would be againſt his owne diſcourſe, by which, euery body should haue one determinate naturall figure. - Secondly; Iwould aske him, if he meaſured his water after euery ſalting? And if he did, whether he did not find the quantity greater; then before that ſalt was diſſolued in it?Which if he did (as without doubt he muſt)then he might ſafely conclude, that his ſaltes were not receiued in vacuities; but that the very ſubſtance of the water gaue them place, and ſo encreaſed by the receiuing of them. Thirdly, ſeeing that in his doctrine, euery ſubſtance hath a particular figure; ve muſt allow a ſtrange multitude of different shapes or vacuities to be naturally in water if we vill haue euery diſferent ſubſtance wherewith it may be impregnated( by making decoctions, extractions, ſolutions, and the like) to finda fitt vacuity in the waterto lodgr it ſelfe in.hata difforme nette with a ſtrãge variety of mashes would this be: And indeed how extremely. vncapable muſt it be of the quantity of cuery various kind of vacuity that you will find muſt be in it; if in euery ſolution of one particular ſubſtante, you calculate the proportion between it and the water that diſſoluethit, and then multiply ;t according to the number of ſeuerall kindes of ſubſtances that may be diſſolued in water ? By this proceeding, you vill find the vacuities to exceed infinitely the whole body of the water; euen ſo much that it could not afford ſubtile thriddes enough to hold it ſelfe together. Fourthly, if this doctrine were true it would neuer happen that one body or ſalts hould precipitate downe to the bortome of the vater, by the ſolution of an other in it, which euery Alchymiſt knoweth, neuer fiyleth in due circumſtances: for ſeeing that the body which precipitateth, and the other which remayneth diſſolued in the vater, are of difſerent figures, and therefore do require different vacuities, they might both of them haue kept their places in the water, without thruſting onean other out of it. Laſtly, this doctrine giueth no account why one part of ſalt is ſeparated ſrom an other by being putt in the ater, and why the partes are there kept ſo ſeparated, which is the whole eſfect of that motion which we call diſſolution. The true reaſon there fore of this eſfect, is (as I conceiue) that one ſalt maketh the water apt to receiue an other; for the lighter ſalt being incorporated with the water, maketh the water more properto ſticke vnto an heauyer,and by diuiding the ſmall partes of it to beare them vp, that otherwiſe would haue ſunke in it. The truth and reaſon of which vill appeare more plaine , if atteuery ioynt, we obſerue the particular ſteppes of euery ſaltes ſolution. As ſoone as you putt the firſt ſult into the vater, it falleth downe preſently to the bortome of it; and as the warer doth by its humidity p ierce by degrees the little ioyntes of this ſalt, ſo the ſmall partes of itare by little and litile ſeparated from one an other, and vnited to partes of water. And ſo infuſing more and more ſal, this progreſſe will continue, vntilleuery part of water is incorporated vith ſome part of ſalt:and then, the water can no longer worke of it ſelfe but in coniunction to the ſalt with which it is vnited. After which, if more ſalt of the ſume kind be putt into the water; that water ſo impregnated, vill not beable to diuide it; becauſe it hath not any ſo ſubtile paites leſt, os are able to enter between the ioyntes of a ſalt ſo cloſely compacted: but may be compared to that ſalt, as a thing of equall dryneſſe with it; and therefore is vnapt to moyſten and to picrce it. ; But if you putt vnto this compound of ſalt and vater, an other kind of ſaltthat is of a ſtrongerand a dryer nature then the former, and whoſe partes are more groſſely vnited; then the firſt ſalt diſſolued in the water, ill be able to gett in betixt the ioyntes of the groſſerſalt, and will diuide it into little partes; and vill incorporate his already compoſed partes of ſalt and water, into a decompound of two ſaltes and water: vntillall his partes be anew impregnated with the ſecond groſſer ſalt; as before, the pure water was with the firſt ſubtiler ſalt. And ſo it will proceed on, if proportionate bodies be ioyned, vntill the diſſoluing compoſition do grov into athicke body. Vnto which diſcourſe we may adde, that when the water is ſo fully impregnated viththe firſt ſalt, as it will receiue no more, remayning in the temper it is insyet if it be heated, ĩt will then afresh diſſolue more of the ſame kind. hich sheweth, that the reaſon of its giuing ouer 1o diſſolue, is for want of hauing the water diuided into partes little enough to ſticke vnto more ſale: which, as in this caſe the fire doth; To peraduenture in the other, the acrimoniouſneſſe of the ſalt doth it. And this is ſufficient to giue curious ittes occaſion by making further experiments, to ſearch out the truth of this matter. Onely we may note what happeneth in moſt of the experiencios we haue mentionedi to witt that thinges of the ſame nature do ioyne better and more eaſily then others that are more eſtranged from one an other. Vhichis very agreeable to reaſoni ſeeing that if nature do intend to haue thinges conſiſt long together, she muſt fitt them for ſuch conſiſtence. Vohich ſeemethto proceed out of their agreement in foure qualities: firſt, in weight for bobies of diuers degrees in weight, if they be att liberty, do ſeeke diuers places; and conſequently, ſubſtances of like weight, muſt of neceſſity End one an otherout, and croud together; as ve fue shewed, it is the natute of heate to make them do: now it is apparent that thinges of one nature, muſt in equall partes haue the ſame or a necre proportion of weight, ſeeing that in their compoſition, they muſt haue the ſame proportion of Elements. The ſecond reaſon of the conſiſtence of bodies together, that are of the ſame nature is, the agreement of their liquid partes, in the ſame degree of rarityand denſity: ſr as it is the nature of quantity in common to male all partes be one quantity; ſo it is the nature of the degrees of quantity, vhen two partes do meete that are of the ſame degree, to make them one in that degree of quantity; which is, to make them ſlick together in that degree of ſticking, which the degree of denſity that is common to them both, maketh of its owne nature. Vhereas, paites of different denſities, can not haue this reaſon of ſticking: though, peraduenture they may vpon ſome other ground, haue ſome more efficacious one. And in this manner, the like humide partes of tuo bodies, becoming one, the holes or receptacles in which thoſe humide partes are contained muſtalſo needes be vnited. The third reaſon is the agreeable proportion, which their ſeuerall ſigures haue in reſpect of one an other: for if any humidity be extracted out of a mixed body, eſpecially, by the vertue of fire; it muſt haue left pores of ſuch figures, as the humidity that is drawne out of them.is apt to be cutt into(for cuery humide body not being abſolutely humide, but hauing certaine dry partes mixed with it, is more apt for one kind of figure and greatneſſe, then for an other;) and by conſequence, whenſoeuer that humidity shall meete againe with the body it was ſeuered from; it will eaſily runne through and into it all, and vill fill exactly the cauities and pores it poſſeſſed before. The laſt quality, in which bodies that are to conſiſt long together, do agree, is the biggneſſe of the humide and dry partes of the ſame body: forif the humide partes be too bigge for the dry ones, itĩs cleare that the dry ones muſt needes han⸗ looſely together by them; becauſe their glew is in too greatea quantity. But if the humide partes bee too little for the dry ones, then of neceſſity ſome portion of euery little dry part muſt be vnfurnished of gle, by meanes whereof to ſticke vnto his fellow: and ſothe ſticking partes not being conueniently proportioned to one an other, theiradheſion can not be ſo ſolide as if each of them were exactly fitted to his fello. THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. Of an oiher motion belonging to particular bodies, called Aitraction; and of certaine operations, termed Magicall. Auing thus ended the two motions of rarefaction and of condenſation; the next that offer themſelues, are the locall, Zrd motions which ſome bodies haue vnto others. Theſe are is ſometimes performed by a plaine force in the body towardes which the ;l motion is: and other whiles, by a hidden cauſe, which is not ſo eaſily diſcerned. T he firſt, is chiefely that which is ordinarily ſaid to be done by the force of nature to hinder Vacuum, and is much practiſed by nature: as in draving our breath, in ſucking, and in many other naturall operations, which are imitated by art in making of pumpes, ſyphons, and ſuch other inſtruments;and in that admirable experiment of taking vp a heauy marble ſtone meerely by an other lying flatt and ſmoothly vpon it, without any other connexion of the two ſtones together, as alſo by that ſport of boyes, when they ſpread a thinne moyſtned leather vpona ſmooth broad ſtone, and preſſe it all ouer cloſe to it, and then by pulling of a ſtring faſtened att the middle of the leather, they draw vp ſikeile the heauy ſtone. In all which, the firſt cauſe of the motion, proceedeth from that body towardes which the motionis made. And therefore, is properly called Attraction. For the better vnderſtanding and declaring of which, lett vs ſuppoſe two marble ſtones, very broad and exceeding ſmoothly polished, to be laid one ſlatt vpon the other: and lett there be a ring faſtened att the backe part of the vppermoſt ſtone; and exactly in the middle of it. Then, by that ring, pullit vp perpendicularly and ſteadily, and the vndermoſt illfollo ſticking faſt to the ouermoſt; and though they ere not very perfectly polished, yet the nethermoſt would follow for awhile, if the ring be ſuddainely plucked vp3 but thenĩt ill ſoone fall downe againe. Now this plainely sheweth that the cauſe of their ſticking ſo ſtrongly together, vhen both the ſtonesare very well polished, ĩs for that nothing can well enter between them to part them; and ſo, itis reduced to the shortneſſe of the ayre that is betixt them: which not being capable of ſo great an expanſion, nor admitting to be dinided thickewayes ſo much as is neceſſary to fill the firſt growing diſtance, between the to ſtones tũl new ayre findeth a courſe thither, (that ſo, the ſwelling of the one, may hinder vacuity, till the other come in to the reſcue;) the two ſtones muſt needes ſticke together to certaine limns; which limits will depend of the proportion that is between the weight, and the continuity of the nethermoſt ſtone. And when we haue examined this, we shall vnderſtand in what ſenſe itis meaned that Nature abliorreih from Vacuity ; and what meanes she vſeth to auoyde it. For, to putt it as an enemy that nature fighteth againſt; or to diſcourſe of effects that would follow from it, in caſe it were admitted, is a great miſtake, anda loſt labour; ſeeing itis nothing; and therefore; can do nothing: but is meerely a forme of expreſſion ro declaæ in short nothing elſe but that ĩ is a contradiction, or implication in termes, and an impoſſibility in nature, for vacuity to haue, or to be ſuppoſed to haue a Being Thus then. ſince in our caſe,afcer we haue caſt allabout, e can pitch vpon nothing to be conſidered, but that the to ſtones do touch one an other, and that they are weighty; we muſt apply our ſclues onely to reflect vpon the effects proceeding from theſe two cauſes, their contiguity and their heãuyneſſe; and we shall find that as the one of them, namely the weight hindereth the vndermoſt from following the vppermoſt, ſo, contiguity obligeth it vnto that courle; and according as the one ouercometh the other, ſo will this action be continued or interrupted. l No that contiguity of ſubſtances do make one follow an other, is euident by what our Maſters in Metaphyſickes teach vs; When they shew that without this effect no motion att all could be made in the world, nor no reaſon could be giuen, for thoſe motions we dayly ſee. For ſince the nature of quantity is ſuch, that whenſocuer there is nothing between two partes of it, they muſt needes touch and adhere and ioyne to one an othet, (for how should they be kept aſunder when there is nothing betweene them to part them?) if you pull one part away, eyther lome new ſubſtance muſt come to de cloſe vnto that which remouet hior elſe the other which was formerly cloſe to it, muſt ſtill be cloſe to it,and ſo follow it: for if nothing do come between, it is ſtill cloſe to it. Thus then, it being neceſary that ſomething muſt be ioyned cloſe to euery thing, vacuity, Which is nothing)is excluded from hauing any being in nature. lli And when we ſay that ene body muſt follow an other to auoyde vacuity;the meaning is, that vnder the neceſſity of a contradiction they muſt follow one an other, and that they can not do otherwiſe. For it would be a contradiction to ſay that nothing were between two thinges and yet that they are not ioyned cloſe to one an other. And therefore if you should ſay it, you would in other wordes ſay, they are cloſe together, and they are not cloſe together. In like manner, to ſay tha vacuity is any where, is a pure contradictions for vacuity being nothing, hath no Bring attall: and yet by thoſe wordes it is ſaid to be in ſucha place; ſo that they aſfirme it to be and not 10 be;att the ſame timee. But nov lett vs examine if there be no meanes to auoyde this contradiction and vacuity, other then by the adheſion, and following of one body vpon the motion of an other, that is cloſely ioyned to it and eucry Where contiguous. For ſenſe is not eaſily quieted with ſuch Metaphyſicall contemplations, that ſeeme to repugne againſt her dictamens; and therefore for het ſatisfaction we can do no leſſe then giue her leaue to range about,and caſt all wayes in hope of finding ſome one that may better content her: which when she findeth that she can not, she will the leſſe repine to yield heraſſent to the rigourous ſequeles and proofes of reaſon. In this difficulty then, after turning on euery ſide, Ifor my part can diſcerne no pretence of probability, in any other meanes then in pulling downe the loer ſtone by one corner; that ſo there may be a gaping between the to ſtones, to lett inayre by little and little. And in this cale you may ſay that by ihe interuention of ayre, vacuity is hindered, aud yett the lower ſtone is left att liberty to follow its owne naturall inclination, and be gouerned by its weight. But indeed, if you conſider the matter well; you will find that the doing this, requireth a much not gape ina ſtraight line, to lett in ayre; ſince in that poſien , it muſt open at the bortome where the angle is made, at the ſame time that it openeth at the mouth: and then ayre requiring time to paſſe from the edoes to the hottome, it muſt in the meane while fall into the contradiction of vacuity. So that if it should open to lett n ayre; the ſtone, to compaſſe that effect, muſt bend, in ſuch ſort as wood doth when a wedge is putt into it to cleaue it. Iudge hen what force it muſt be that should make hard marble ofa reat ihickneſſe bend like a wand; and whether it would not rather Breake and ſlide off, then do ſo: you vill allow thata much leſſe, wil raiſe vp the lower ſtone togerher with the vppermoſt. It muſt then of neceſſity fallout, that it will follow it, if it be moued perpendiculaily vpwardes. And the like effect will be though, it should be rayſed at blique angles, ſo that the lowermoſt edge do reſt allthe way vpon ſome thing that may hinder the inſerior ſtone from ſliding aſide from the vppermoſt. lll And this is the very caſe of all thoſe other experiments of art and nature, which we haue mentioned aboue: for the reaſon holdeth as wellin vater and in liquide thinges; as in ſolide bodies; vntill the weight of the liquide body ouercometh the continuity of it: for then, the thridde breaketh, and it willaſcend no higher. Vhich height, Galileo telleth vs from the woikmen in the Arſenall of Venice, is neere 40. footeiif the water be drawne vp ina cloſe pipe, in which the aduantage of the ſides helpeth the aſcenr. But others ſay that the inuention is enlarged, and that water may be drawne to what height one pleaſeth. Howſoeuer, the force which nature applyeth to maintaine the continuity of quantity, can haue no limitt, ſeeing ĩt is grounded vpon contradiction. And therefore Galileo was much miſtaken, when he throught to mae an inſtrument whereby to diſcouer the limits of this force. ] VWe may then conclude that the breaking of the water muſt depend from the ſtrength of other cauſes. As for example when the grauity is ſo great by encreaſing the bulke of the water, that it will eyther ouercome the ſtrength of the pipe, or elſe make the ſucker of the pumpe rather yield way toayre, then draw vp ſo great a weight: for which defects, if remedies be found, the art may ſurely be enlarged without end. This is particular in a ſyphon; that when, that arme of it which hangeth out of the wateris loer then the ſuperficies of the water;then, it will runne of it ſelfe;after it is once ſett on running by ſucking. The reaſon whereof is, becauſethe weight which is in the water pendant, is greater then the weight of the aſcending water; and thereby ſupplyeth the want of a continuall ſucker. But if the noſe of that arme that hangeth out of the water, be but euen with the water; then the water vill ſtand ſtillin both pipes, or armes of the ſyphon, aſter they are filled with ſucking. But if by the running outof the water, the outward pipe do grow shorter then to reach as low as the ſuperficies of the water in the ſountaine from whence it runnethiin this caſe, the water in each aorme of the ſyphon, will runne backe into the fountaine. Vithall,it isto be noted, that though the arme vhich is out of the water be neuer ſo long, yet if it reach not lower then the ſuperficies of the fountaine; the ouerquantity and weight of the waterthere, more then in the other arme, helpeth it norhing to make it runne out. Vhich is, becauſe the decliuity of the other arme, ouerrccompenceth this ouerweight. Not that the weight in the shorter pipe, hath ſo much force as the weight in the longer pipe : but becauſe it hath more force then the greater weight doth exerciſe there in its running for the greateſt part of its force, tendeth an other way then to the end of the pipe;to witt, perpendicularly towardes the center. And ſo is hindered from effect, by the great ſloaping or little decliuity of the pipe vpon vhich it leaneth. But ſome conſidering how the waterthat is in the longer arme of the ſyphon is more in quantity then the water that is in the other arme of it whereat it runneth out, do admire why the greater quantity bf water doth not draw backe the leſſe into the ciſterne, but ſuffereth it ſelfe to be lifted vp,and drayned avay as if it runne ſteeply downewardes. And they imagine , that hence may be deduced, that the partes of water in the ciſterne doe not weigh as long as they are within the orbe of their owne body. Vnto whomve anſwere; that they should conſider how that to haue the greater quantity of vater, whichis in the longer arme of the ſyphon (which arme is immerſed in the water of the ciſterne) to draw backe into the ciſterne the water which is in the other arme of the ſyphon that hangeth out in the ayre; t muſt, borh raiſe as much of the vater of the ciſterne as its owne bulke is,aboue the leuell which att preſent the whole bulke of water hathand withall it muſt att the ſame time pull vp the water which is in the other arme. Nov it is manifeſt, that theſe two quantities of water together, are heauyer then the water in the ſunke arme of the ſyphoniſince one of them ſingle, isequall vnto it. And by conſequence, the more water in the ſunke arme, can not weigh backe the leſſe water in the hanging arme; ſince that, to do that, it muſtattthe ſame time weigh vp ouer and aboue, as much more in the ciſterne as it ſclfe weigheth. But turning the argument; Iſay, that if once the arme of the ſyphon that is in the ayre, be ſuppoſed to draw any water, be it neuer ſo little, out of the ciſterne (whether occaſioned by ſucking or by whatſocuer other meanes)it followeth that as much wateras is drawne vp, aboue the leuell of the whole bulke in the ciſterne, muſt needes preſſe into the ſuncken arme from the next adiacent partes, i hatis, from the bortome,) to ſupply its emptying; and as much muſt of it ſelfe preſſe downe from aboue (according to its naturall courſe, when nothing violenteth it) to reſt in the place, that the aſcending water  which is Iower then it) leaueth att liberty for it to take poſſeſſion of. And thenit can not be doubted but that, this deſcending water, hauing all its weight in preſſing downe, applyed to driue vpthe riſing water in the ſunke arme of the ſyphon; and the vater in the other arme of the ſyphon without, hauingall its eight in running out applyedatt the ſame time to drav vp the ſame vaterin the ſunke arme; this ſingle reſiſtant muſt yield to their double and maſtering force: And conſequently, the water in the arme of the ſyphon that is in thè ayre, muſt needes draw the water that is in the other immerſed arme as long as the end of its pipe reacheth lower then the Ieuell of the ater in the ciſterne ; for ſo long it appeareth by what we haue ſaid, it muſt needes be more weig hty; ſince part of the tiſing ater in the ſunke arme of the ſyphon, is counterpoyſed by as much deſcending water in the ciſterne: EE And thus it is euident, that out of this experiment it can not be inferred that partes of water do not weigh ithin the orbe of their owne vhole: but onely, that two equall partes of water in their owne orbe (namely that which riſeth in the ſunken arme, and that which preſſeth downe from the whole bulke in the ciſterne Jare of equall weight and do ballance one an othet. So that neuer ſo little oddes between the two counterpoyſing parcells of vater which are in the ayre muſt needes make the water runne out att that end of the ſyphon, where the ouerweight of wateris. Theattraction whoſe cauſe next to this is moſt manifeſt, is that which is made by the force of heate or of fire; for we ſee that fire, euer draweth ayre vntũ it; ſo notably, that if in a cloe roome there be a good fire, a man that ſtandethatt the dore or att the window (eſpecially without)shall heare ſuch a noiſe that he will thinke there is a great wind within the chamber. The reaſon of this attraction is, that fire rarifying the ayre which is next vnto ĩt; and withall ſpending it ſelfe perpetually, cauſeth the ayre and his owne body mingled together, to fly vp through the chimney or by ſome other paſſage. Whence it followeth of neceſity that the next body muſt ſucceed into the place of the body that is ſlowne away. This next body generally is ayre, whoſe mobility and ſluidity beyondall other bodies, maketh it of all others the fitteſt to be drawne;and the more of it that is drawne the more muſt needes follow. Now if there be floating in this ayre any other atomes ſubiect to the current which the ayre taketh; they muſt alſo come with it - the fire, and by it, muſt be rarifyed, and be exported out of that little orbe. Hence it is, that men(with very good reaſon) do hold that fire ayreth. achamber,as we terme it, that is, purifyeth it; both becauſeit purifyeth it as wind doth by drawing a current of ayre into ĩt that ſee peth through it, or by makingit purify it ſelfe by motion,as a ſtreame of ater doth by runnings; as alſo, becauſe thoſẽ vapours which approachthe fire, are burned and diſſolued. So that the ayre being noyſome and vnwholeſome by reaſon of its groſſeneſſe, proceeding from its ſtanding vnmoued like a ſtagnation of dead water, in a marish place) the fire taketh aay that cauſe of annoyance. By this very rule we learne that other hoat thinges, which participatQa 3 the nature of fire, muſt likewiſe (in other reſpects) haue a reſemblance in Concerning this quality. And accordingly wee ſee that hoat loafes in a bakers practe i; shoppe newly drawne out of the ouen, are accounted to draw vnto them bat bodies any infection which is in the ayre. The like we ſay of onyons, and other smulen st. ſtrong breathing ſubſtances; which by their ſmellshew much heate in them. In like mannerit is conceiued that pigeons, and rabets, and catts eaſily take infection, by reaſon of their extraordinary warmth which they haue in themſclues. And this is conſirmed by the practiſe of Phyſitians, who vſe to lay warme pigeons newly killed to the feete, wriſtes, or heades of ſicke perſons; and young puppies to their ſtomakes, and ſometimes certaine hoat gummes to their nauels; to draw out ſuch vapors or hamors an infeſt the body: for the ſame reaſon they hang amuletes cf arſenike, ſublimate, dryed toades or ſpiders, about their patients neckes, to draw vnto them venimous qualities from their bodies. Hencę alloit is, that if a man be ſtrucken by a viper òra ſcorpion, they vſe to breake the body of the beaſt it ſelfe that ſtung himũif hey can gettit) vpon the wound: but ifthat beaſt be cravled out of their finding, they do the like by ſome other venimous creature; as I haue ſeene a bruiſed toad loyed to the biting of a viper. And they manifeſtly perceiue the applyed body, to ſell With the poyſon ſucked out from the wound, and the patient to be relicued and haue leſſe poyſons in the ſame manner as b curping glaſſcs,the poyſon is likewiſe drawne out from the wound: lo thar you may ſee, the reaſon of both, is the very ſume;or att the leaſt very Ike one an other. Onely, we are to note, that the proper body of the bealt out of which the venome vas driuen into the wound, is more eſficacious then any orher to ſucke it our. And thelikeis to be obſerued in all other kindes, that ſuch vapors as are to be drawne, do come betterand incorporate faſter in bodies of like nature, then in thoſe which hiue onely the common conditionsof heate and dryneſſe; the one of which ſerueth to attract; the other to faſten and incorporate into ĩt ſelfe the moiſture which the firſt draweth vnto it. So we ſee t hat water ſoaketh into a diy body, whence it was extracted, allmoſt inſeparably,and is hidden in it3 as when it raineth ſirſtafter hoat eather, the groundis preſently dryed after the shoure. Likewiſe we ſee that in moſt ciments, you muſt mingle a duſt ofthe nature ofthethinges The nũtun which are to be cimented, if you will haue them bind ſtrongly. te. ſon giuen Out of this diſcourſe, we may yield a reaſon for thoſe magicall bpcratan operations, which ſome attribute to the Diuels aſſiſtance; peraduenture èſteemed by Becauſe mans wickedneſſe hath beene more ingenious then his good ſaſſſ villiand ſo hath found more meanes to hurt then to helpe; nay when he hath arriued ſome way to hel r , thoſe very helpes haue vndergone the ſame calumny; becauſe of the likeneſſe which their operations haue to the otheis. Without doubt very vniuſtly,if there be truthin the effects. For where haue we any ſuch good ſuggeſtions of the enemy of mar kind opoſed vnto vs, that we may with reaſon beleeue he would duly, ſtkd ly,and conſtantly concurre to the helpe and ſeruice of all thoſe he ſo much hateth,as he muſt needes do if he be the Authorof ſuch effects? Or is it not a wrong toalmighty God, and to his carefull inſtruments; natherto impute vnto the Diuell the aydes which to ſome may ſeeme ſupernaturall, then vnto them of whom we may iuſtly beleeue and expect ſuch good officies and aſſiſtances: I meane, thoſe operations, borh good and bad, which ordinarily are called Magnericall, though peraduenture wrongſully, as not hauing that property hich denominateth the loadeſtone. One thing I may aſſure, that if the reportes be true, they haue the perfect imitation of nature in them. As for example that the weapons ſalue, or the ſympathenke pouder doth require in the vſing it, to be conſerued in an equall and moderate temper: and that the wea ponvhich made th- wound, orthe cloth vpon which the blood remaineth that iſſued from it, be orderly and frequentlò dreſſed; or elſe the wounded perſon willnot be cured: likewiſe the ſteame or ſpirits, which art the giuing of the wound did enter into the pores of the weapon, muſt not be driuen out of it. (Which ill be done by fire; and ſo when it is heated by holding ouer coales, you may ſce a moy ſture ſweate out of the blade art the oppoſite ſide to the fire, as farre as it entered into the wounded perſons body; which being once all ſweated out, you: hall ſce no more the lke ſteame vpon rhe ſword) neyther muſi the blood be wa hed out of the bloody clothi for in thæſe caſes, the pouder, or ſilue, vill woke nothing. Likeviſe, if there be any exceſſe eyther of heate or of cold in keeping the medicated weapon or cloth; the patient fceleth that, as he would do, if the like exceſſe were in any remedy ihat were applyed to the vound it ſelfe: likewiſe if the medicated weapon or bloody cloth, be kept too cloſe, no effect followeth: likewiſe, the natures of the thinges vſed in theſe cures are of themſelues ſoueraigne ſor healing the like griefes though peraduenture too violent if they were applyed in body without muchattenuation. And tiuly if we will deny all effects of this kind, we muſt ina manner renounce all humane fayih: men of all ſortes and qualities (and many of th-m ſuch in my owne knovledge, as I can not queſtion their prudence in obſ eruing or their ſincerity in relating) hauing very frequently made experience of ſuch medicines,and all aſfirming after one fa: hion to haue found the ſame eſſects. A dde to theſe, the multitude of orher like effects, appearing or conceited to appeare in oſ herthinges. In ſome countries it is a familiar diſeaſe vith kine to haue a ſwelling in the ſoales of  heir feete: and the ordinary cure is, to cutt a turfe vpon which they haue troden with their ſore foote, and to hang it vpon a hedge; and as that dryeth away, ſo vill their ſore amend. Inother partes they obſerue, that if inilke newly comefrom the cowe, do in the boyling runne ouer into the fire; and that this do happen often, and neere together to the ſame coves milke; that cowe will haue her vdder ſore and inflamed: and the reuention is to caſt ſalt immediately into the fire vpon the milke. The ſebe Perſicaria if it be wellrubbed vpon wartes, and then be layed in ſome ſitt place to putrify, cauſeth the artes to weare away as ĩt rotteth: ſome ſay the like of fresh beefe. Many examples alſo there are of hurting liuing creatures by the like meanes; which Iſett not downe for feare of doing more harme by the euill inclination of ſome perſons into whoſe handes they may fall; then profitt by their knowing them, vnto vhom l intend this worke. But to make theſe operations of nature, not incredibles lett vs remember how we haue determined that euery body whatſocuer, doth yicld lome ſteame, or vent a kind of vapour from it ſelfe; and conſider, how they muſt needes do ſo moſt of all, that are hoat and moyſt, as blood and milke are, and as all voundes and ſores generally are. Ve ſee that the foote of a hare or deere leaueth ſuch an impreſſion where the beaſt hath paſſed, as a dog can diſcerne it a long time after: and a foxe breatheth out ſo ſtrong a vapour, that the hunters themſelues can wind ita great way of,and a good while after he is parted from the place. Now ioyning thi, to the experiences we haue already allowed of, concerning the attraction of heate; wee may conclude that if any of theſe vapours do light vpon a ſolide warme body, which hath the nature of a ſource vinto them, they will naturally congregate and incorporate there; and if thoſe vapors be ioyned with any medicatiue quality or body, they vill apply that medicament better then any ſurgeon can apply it. Then, if the ſteame of blood and ſpirits, do carry with ĩt from the weapon or cloth, the balſamike qualities of the ſalue or pouder, and with them do ſertle vpon the wound; what can follow but a bettering in it? Likewiſe, if the ſteame of the corruption that is vpon the clodde, do carry the dryin g quality of the wind which ſeepeth ouer it when it hangeth high in the ayre, vnto the ſore part of the cowes foote; why is it not poſſible that it shnuld dry the corruption there, as well asit dryeth it vpon the hedge? Andif the ſteame of burned milke cãhurt by carrying fire to the dugge; why should not ſalt caſt vpon it, be a preſeruatiue againſt it? Or rather, why should not ſalt hinder the fire from being carryed thither: Since the nature of ſalt, alwayes hindereth and ſuppreſſeth the actiuity of fire: as we ſee by experience when we throw ſalt into the fire below, to hinder the flaming of ſoutein the toppe of a chimney: which preſently ceaſcth, when new fire from beneath doth not continue it. And thus we might proceed in ſundry othereſfects, to declare the reaſon and the poſſibility of them; were we certaine of the truth of them: therefore ve remiit THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER. j Of three oiher motions belonging to particular bodies Filtration, Reſtitution, and Electricall atiraction.  familiaramong Alchymiſtes; nhich they call Filtration. It is effected by putting one end cf a tungue, or labell of flannen, or of corton, or of ſlaxe, intoa veſſellof w. ter,an l letting the other end hang ouer the brimme of it. And it will by litile and little draw all the water out of that veſſell (ſo that ithe end which hangeih out be lower then the ſuperſicies of ihe water)and will make it all come ouer into any lower veſſell you will reſerue it in. TThe end of this operation is, hen any water is mingled with greſſe and muddy partes (not diſſolued in the water) to ſeparate the pure and light ones from ih: impure. By which we are taught that the lighter partes of the water, are thoſe which moſt eaſily do catch. And if we will examine in particular, how it is hikely this buſineſſe paſſerhs wee may conceiue that the body or linguet by which the witer aſcendeth, being a dry one, ſome lighter partes of the water, whoſe chance it is to be neere the clymbing body of ſlaxe, do beginne to ſticke faſt vnto it: and then, th y require nothing neere ſo great foree, nor ſo much preſſing, to make them clymbe vp along the flaxe, as they would do to m.ke them mount in the pure ayre. As you may ſee, if you hold a ſicke in running water, sh luing againſt the ſtreame: the water ill runne vp along the ſticke, much hig her then it could be forced vp in the open ?yre withour any ſupport, though the Agent were much ſtronge: then the current of the ſtreame. And a hall will vpon a rebound, runne much higher vp a sheluing board, then it would if noi hing touc hed it. And I hue beene told that if aneggeshell filled with dewbee ſett art 1h- foore ofa hollow ſlicke, the ſunne vill draw it to the toppe of the sheluing ſticke, whereas viihout a proppe, it will not ſtirre it. V ih much more reaſon then, we may conceiue that water finding as it were little ſteppes in the cotton to facilitate its iourney vpwardes, muſt aſcend more eaſily then thoſe orther thinges doi ſo as it once receiue any impulſe to driue it vpwardes: for the grauity borh of that warer which is vpon th- corton, as alſo, of ſo many of ihe confining partes of water as can reach the cotton; is exceedingly allayed, eyther by ſtic king vnto the cotton, and ſo weighing in one bulke with hat dry body ; or elle, by not tending done ſtraight to the center, but reſling as ſt ere vpon a ſtee pe plaine laccording to what we ſaid of the arme of a ſyphon that hangeth very ſloaping out of the water, and therefore drawẽth not aſter it a leſſe proportion of water in the other aime that is more ina dircct  Fter theſe, lett vs caſt oureye vpon an other motion, very direct line to the center:) by which meanes the water, as ſoone as it beginneth to clymbe, cometh to ſtand in a kind of cone; nether breaking from the water below, ſits bulke, being bigge enough to reach vnto it)nor yet falling downe vnto it. But our chiefe labour muſt be, to find a cauſe that may make the vater beginne toaſcend. To which purpoſe, conſider how water, of its owne nature, compreſſethit ſelfe together, to exclude any other body lighter then it is. Now in reſpect of the whole maſſe of the vater, thoſe partes which ſticke to the cotton, are to be accounted much lighter then water; not, becauſe in their owne nature they are ſo; but for the circumſtances which accompany them, and do giue them a greater diſpoſition to receiue a motion vpwardes then much lighter bodies, vhiles they are deſtitute of ſuch helpes. Wherefore, as the bulke ofwater veighing and ſtriuing downewardes; it folloeth that if there were any ayre mingled with it, it would, to poſſeſſe a leſſer place, driue out the ayre: ſo here in this caſe, the water that is att the foote of the ladder of cotton, ready to clymbe vith a very ſmall impulſe, may be after ſome ſort compared in reſpeſt of the water) to ayre by reaſon of the lightneſſe of it: and conſequently, is forced vp by the compreſſing of the reſt of the water round about it. Which no faſter getteth vp, but other partes att the foote of the ladder do follow the firſt, and driue them ſtill vpwardes along the towe; and new ones driue the ſecond, and others the third, and ſo forth. So that with eaſe they clymbe vp to the toppe of the filter, ſtill driuing one an other forwardes, asyou may doa fine towel through a muskett barrell: which though it be too limber to be thruſt ſtraight through; yet cramming ſtill new partes into it att the Iength you vill driue the firſt quite through. And thus, when theſe partes of water are gott vp to the toppe of the veſſell on which the filter hangeth, and ouer it on the other ſide by ſticking ſtillto the towe, and by their naturall grauity, againſt which nothing preſſeth on this ſide the labells they fall downe againe by little and t , and by droppes breake againe into water in the veſſell ſett to receiue them. But now if you aske why, it vill not droppe vnleſſe the end of the labell that hangeth, be lower then the water. I conceiue it is becauſe the water which is all along vpon the flannen, is one continued body hanging together, as it vere a thridde of wyre; and is ſubiect to like accidents as ſuch a continued body is. Now ſuppoſe you lay a wyre vpon the edge of the baſin, which the ſilter reſteth vpon;and ſo make that edge the center to ballance it vpon: if the end that is outermoſt be heauyeſt, it ill weigh downe he other; otherviſe, not. So fareth it with this thridde of water: if the end of it that hangeth out of the pott, that is to be filtred be longer, and conſequently heauyer, then that which riſeth; it muſt needes raiſe the other, implyeth lifting more water from the ciſterne, and the ſliding of it ſelfe furiher downewardes, is the cauſe of its conuerting into droppes. So that the water in the ciſterne ſerueth like the flaxe vpon a diſtaſfe,and is ſpunne into a thridde of water, ſtill as it commeth to the flannen by the draving it vp, occaſioned by the ouerweight of the thridde on rhe other ſide of the center. Vhich to expieſſ better by a ſimilitude ina ſolide bod y: Itemẽbes I haue oftẽtimes ſeene in aMercers shoppe, a great heap of maſſi y goldlace lye vpontheir ſtall; and a little way aboue ita round ſmooth pinne of wood, ouer hich they vſe to hale their lace when they wind it into bottomes. Now ouer this pinne, I haue putt one end of the lace; and as long as it hung no lower thẽ the board vpõ which the reſt of the lace did lye, it ſtirred not, foras the weight of the looſe end catried it one way, ſo the weight of the other ſide where the whole was, drew it the other way, and in this manner kept it in equilibrity. But as ſoone as I drewon the hãging end to be heauyer thẽ the clymbing ſide ( for no more weigheih thẽ is in the ayre, that which lyeth vpon the board, hauing an other cẽter) then it began to roule to the ground; ànd ſtill drew v p new partes of that which lay vpon the board, vntill all was tumbled downe vpon the ſloore. In the ſame manner it happeneth to the water; in which, the thridde of it vpon the filter is to be compared fittly vnto that part of the lace which hung vpon the pinne: and the whole quantity in the ciſterne, is ike the bulke of lace vponthe shoppeboard; foras faſt as the filter draweth it vp, it is conuerted into a thridde like that which is already vpon the filter: in like manner as the wheele conuerteth the flaxe into yarne, as faſt as it draweth it out from the diſtaſſe. Our next conſideration, will very aptly fall vpon the motion oſ thoſe thinges, which being bent, do leape with violence to their former figure: whereas others returne but a little; and others do ſtand in that ply, wherein the bending of them hath ſett them. For finding the reaſon of vhich effects, our firſt reflection may be to note, that a ſuperſicies which is more long then broad, containeth a leſſe floore then that whoſe ſides are equall, or neerer being equall: and that of thoſe ſurfaces whoſe lines and angles are all equall, that which hath moſt ſides and angles, containeth ſtill the greater floore. Whence it is that Mathematicians concludea circle to be the moſt capacious of all figures: and what they ſay of lines in reſpect of a ſuperficies; the ſame, with proportionthey ſay of ſurfaces inreſpect of the boò; contained. And accordingly we ſee by conſequence, that in the making a bagge of a long napkin, if the napkin be ſowed together lon wiſe, it holdetha great deale leſſe then if it be ſowed togerher brosduit. By this we ſee plainely, that ifany body which is in a thicke and: hort ſigure, be forced into a thinner ſ which by becoming thinner, muſt likewiſe become eyther lon ger or broader; for what it looſeth one way it muſt gett an other)then that ſuperfieies muſt needes be ſtrerched,; which in our caſe, is a Phyſicall outſide, or materiall part of a ſolide body, nota Mathematicall conſideration of an indiuiſible Entity. We ſeealſo that this change of figures happeneth in the bending of allthoſe bodiæs: whereof we are now enquiring the reaſon why ſome of them reſtore themſelues to their originall figures, and others ſtand as they are bent. Then to begin with the latter ſort, we find that they are of a moiſt nature; as among mettalls, lead, and tinne, and among other bodies, thoſe which we account ſoft. And we may determine that this eſfect proceedeth, partly from the humidity of the body that ſtandeth bent⸗ and partly ſom a dryneſſe peculiar to it that comprehendeth and fixeth the humidity of it. For by the firſt, they are rendred capable of being driuen into any figure, hich nature or art deſireth: and by the ſecond, they are preſerued from hauing their grauity putt them out of vhat figure they haue once receiued. But becauſe theſe two conditions, are common to all ſolide bodies, we may conclude, that if no other circumſtance concurred, the effect ariſing out of them would likewiſe be common to all ſuch: and hercte , where we find it otherwiſe, we muſt ſecke further fora cauſe of that tranſgreſſion. As for example, if you bend the bodies of young trees, or the branches of others, they will returne to their due figure. It is true, they ill ſometime leane towardes that way they haue beene bent: as may be ſeene, euen in greartrees after viulent tempeſtes; and generally the heades of trees, and the eares of corne, and the growne hedgerowes, vill all bend one way in ſome countries, where ſome one vind hatha maine predominance and raigneth moſt continually, as neere the ſeashore vpon the weſterne coaſt of England (where the ſouthweſt wind bloweih conſtantly the greateſt part of the yeare) may be obſerued: but this effect proceeding from a particular and extraordinary cauſe, concerneth not our matter in hand. WVe are to examine the reaſon of the motion of Reſtitution, which ve generally ſee in yong trees, and branches of others, as we ſaid before. In - ſee that the carthy part which maketh them ſtiffe ſ or rather, ſta ke)aboundeth more in them then in the others that ſtand as they are bent:att the leaſt in proportion totheir natures; but I conceiue this is not the cauſe of the eflect we enquire abouts but that it is a ſubtile ſpirit which hath a great proportion of fire init. For as in rarefaction, we found that fire, which was eyther within or ithout the body to be rarifyed, did cauſe the rarefaction, eyther by entering into it, or by working ithin it: ſo ſeeing here the queltion is, fora body to goe out of a leſſer ſuperficies into a greater  which is the progreſſe of rarefaction; and happeneth in the motion of reſtitution; the worke muſt needes be done by the force of heate. And becauſe, this effect proceedeth euidently, out of the nature of the thing in which it is wrought, and not from any outward cauſe, ve may conclude it hath its origine from a heate that is outard partes of it,and would ſinke into it againe. As for example, whena yong treeis bended; borh euery mans conceite is,and the nature of the thing maketh vs beleeue, that the force which bringeth the tree backe againe to its ſigure, comeih from the inner ſide that is bent; which is compreſſed together, as being shrunke into a circular figure from a ſtraight one: for when ſolide bodies that were plaine on bothſides, are bent ſo as on cach ſide to make a portion of a circle, the conuexe ſuperficie vill be longer then it was before, vhen it was plaine, but the concaue vill be shorter. And therefore we may concelue that the ſpirits which are in the contracted part, (being there ſqueezed into leſſe roome, then their nature well brooketh) do worke themſelues into a greater ſpace; or elſe, that the ſpirits which are crushed out of the conuexe ſide by the extenſion of it, but do remaine beſieging it, and do ſtriue to gett in againe, ſin ſuch manner as we haue declared when we ſpoke of attraction, wherein we shewed how the emitted ſpirits of any body will moue to their owne ſource, and ſettle againe init, if they be within a conuenient compaſſe;) and accordingly do bring backe the extended partes to their former ſituation; or rather that both theſe cauſes do in their kindes concurre to driue the tree into its naturall figure. But as we ſee whena ſticke is broken, it is very hard to replace all the ſplinters, euery one in its proper ſituation; ſo it muſt of neceſſity fall out in this bending, that certaine inſenſible partes both inward and outward are thereby diſplaced, and can hardly be perfectly reioynted Whence it followeth that as you ſee the ſplinters of a halfe broken ſticke, meetin vith one an orther do hold the ſticke ſomewhat crooked; ſo hel inuiſible partes do the like in ſuch bodies as after bending ſtand a little that way. But becauſe they are very little ones, the tree or the branch that hath beene neuer ſo much bended, may (ſo nothing be broken init) be ſctt ſtraight againe by paines, without any notable detriment of its ſtrength. And thus you ſeethe reaſon of ſome bodies returning in part to theit natunall figure, after the force leaueth them that did bend them. Out of which you may proceed to thoſe bodies that reſtore themſclues entirely:whereof ſteele is the moſt eminent. And of it, we kno that there is a fiery ſpirit in it, hich may be extracted out of it, not only by the long operations of calcining, digeſting and diſtilling it; but cuen by groſſe heating it, and then extinguishing it in wine and orher conuenient liquors, as Phyſitians vſe to do. Whichis alſo confirmed by the burning of ſteele duſſ in the ſlame of a candle, before it hath beene thus wrought vpon, which afterwardes it ill not do: whereby we are taught that originally there are ſtore of ſpirits in ſteele, till they are ſucked out. Being then aſſured, that in ſteele there is ſuch aboundance of ſpisits; and knowing that it is the nature of ſpirits to giue a quicke motion; and ſceing that duller ſpirits in trees do make this motion of Reſtitution; we neede ſeeke no further, what it is that doethit in ſteele, or in any other thinges that haue the like nature: which through the multitude of ſpirits that abound in them (eſpecially ſteele) do returne backe with ſo ſtronga ierke, that their whole body vill tremble a great while after, by the force of its owne motion. By what is ſaid, the nature of thoſe bodies which do shrinke and ſtretch, may eaſily be vnderſtood: for they are generally compoſed of ſtringy partes, vnto which, if humidity happen to arriue, they grow thereby thicker and shorter. As we ſee that droppes of water getting into a ne roape of a welle, or into a new cable, will ſwell it mueh thicker, and by conſequence, make it shorter. Galileus noteth ſuch wetting to be of ſo great eſficacy, that it willshrinke a new cable, and shorten it notably; notwithſtanding, the violence of a tempeſtand the weight and ierkes of a loaden shippe, do ſtraine it what is poſſible for them to ſtretch it. Of this nature, leather ſeemeth to be, and parchment, and diuers other thinges, which if they be proportionably moyſtned, (and no exterior force be applyed to extend them) vill shrinke vps but if they be ouerwetted, they will become flaccide. Againe, if they be ſoddainely dryed, they vill shriuell vp; but if they be fairely dryed after moderate wetting, they vill extend themſelues againe to their firſt length. The way hauing been opened by what we haue diſcourſed, before we came to the motion of Reſtitution, towardes the diſcouery of the manner how heauy bodies may be forced vpwardes contrary to their naturall motion, by very ſmall meanes in outward appearance; lett vs now examine (vpon the ſame groundes) if like motions to this of water, may not be done in ſome other bodies in a ſubtiler manner. In which, more or leſſe, needeth not trouble vs; ſince we know, that neyther quantity, nor the operations of it, do conſiſt in an indiuiſible, or are limited to determined periodes they may not paſſe. It is enough for vs to find a ground for the poſſibility of the operation: and then the perfectinglof itand the reducing it to ſucha height as att the firſt might ſeeme impoſſible and incredibile, ve may leaue to the oecconomy of wiſe nature. He that learneth toread, write, or to play on the lute, is in the beginning, ready to looſe hart att euery ſteppe; when he conſidereth with what labour, difficulty and ſlowneſſe, he ioyneth the letters, ſpelleth ſyllabes, formeth characters, fitteth and breaketh his fingers ſ as hongh they were vpon theracke) to ſtoppe the right frettes and to touch the right ſtringes. And yet you ſee how ſtrange a dexterity is gained in all theſe by induſtry and practiſe; and a readineſſe beyond what we could imagine poſſible, if we ſaw not dayly the eſfects. If then we can but arriue to decypher the firſt characters of the hidden Alphabet we are now taking in hand, and can but ſpellingly reade the firſt ſyllabes of it; we neede not doubt, but that the wiſe Author of nature in the maſterpiece of the creature ( which as to expreſſe the excellency of the workeman) would with excellent cunning and art diſpoſeall circumſtances ſo aptly, as to ſpeake readily a com plete language riſing from thoſe Elements; and that should haueas large an extent in practiſeand expreſſion, beyond thoſe firſt principles, which we like children onely liſpe out; as the vaſt diſcoutſes of wiſeſt and moſ© learned men, are beyond the ſpellinges of infantes: and yet thoſe diſcourſes ſpring from the ſame roote, as the others ſpellinges doe, and are but a rayſing of them to a greater height; as the admired muſike of the beſt player of a lute or harpe, that euer was, is deriued from the harsh twanges of courſe boweſtringes, which are compoſed together, and refined, tillatt lengththey arriue to that onderfull perfection. And ſo vithout ſcruple, we may in the buſineſſe we are next falling vpon, conclude that the admirable and almoſt miraculous effects we ſee, are but the eleuating to a wonderfullheight thoſe very actions and motions which we shall produce as cauſes and principles of them. Letrvs then ſuppoſe, that there is a ſolide hard body, of an vnctuous nature; Whoſe partes are ſo ſubtile and fiery, that with a litile agitation theyare much rarifyed, and do breathi out in ſteames, (though they be too ſubtile for our eyes to diſcerne; like vnto the ſteame that iſſueth from ſweating men or horſes, or like the ſteame that flyeth from a candle when itis putt out: but that thele ſteames, as ſoone as they come into the cold ayre, are by that cold ſoddainely rondenſed againe; and by bein condenſed, doshorten themſelues, and by little and little do retire, tũl they ſettle themſelues vpon the body from whence they ſprung: in ſuch manner as you may obſerue, the little tender hornes of ſnailes vſe to shrinke backe if any thing touch them, till they ſettle in little lumpes vpon their heades If Iſay theſe ſtringes of bituminous vapour should in their way outwardes meete with any light and ſpungie body, they would pierce intoit,and ſettle in it; and if it were of a competent biggeneſſe for them to wield, they would carry it with them which way ſoeuer they goe; ſothat if they shrinke backe againe to the fountaine from whence they came, they muſt needes carry backe with them the light ſpungy body they haue fixed their dartes in. Conſider then, that how much heate rarifyeth, ſo much cold cõdenſeth:and therefore ſuch partes as by agitatiò were ſpũne out intoa ſubtile thridde of an inch long forexãple, as they coole, do grow bigger and bigger,and conſequently shorter and shorter, till att length, they gather thẽſelues backe into their maine body;and there they ſettle againe in cold bitumen as they were att the firſti and the light body that they ſticke vnto, is drawne backe with them, and conſequently ſticketh to the ſuperficies of the bitumen. As if ſomething were tyed att one end of a luteſtring extended to ĩts vtmoſt capacity, and the other end were faſtened to ſome pinne; as theſtring shrinketh vp, ſo that which is tyed att it, muſt needes moue neerer and neerer the pinne: which artifice of nature iugglers do imitate, when by meanesof an vnſeene haire, they draw light bodies to them. No if all this operation be done, without your ſeeing the little thriddes which cauſe it; the matter appeareth wonderfull and ſtrange. But when you conſider this progreſſe that we haue ſett downe, you vill iudge it poſſible. And this ſeemeth to be the caſe of thoſe bodies which we call Electricall ; as yellow amber, iett, and the like. All which, are ofa bituminous vnctuous nature, asappeareth by their eaſy combuſtibility and ſmell, hen they are burned. And if ſome do not ſoapparently shew this vnctuous nature, it is becauſe eytherthey are too hard, or elſe they haue a high degree of aqueous humidiry ioyned with their vnctuoſity: and in them the operation villbe duller in that proportion; for as we ſee that vnctuous ſubſtances are more odoriferous then others,and do ſend their ſteames further off, and more eſficaciouſly; ſo we can not doubt but that ſuch bodies as conſiſt ina moiſt nature do accordingly ſend forth their emanations in a feebler proportion. Yet that proportion vill net be ſo feeble, but that they may haue an Electricall effect, as well as the more eſficacious Electricall bodies, vhich may be perceptible, if exact experience be made by an inſtrument like the mariners needle; as our learned countryman Doctor Gilbert teacheth. But that in thoſe eminent agents, the ſpirits, hereby they attract, are vnctuous, is plaine, becauſe the fire conſumeth them;and ſo if thea gents be ouerheated they can not worke; but moderate heate euen of ſire encreaſeth their operation. Againe, they are clogged by myſty ayre, or by wetting: and likewiſe, are pierced through and cutt aſunder by ſpirite of wine or aquæ ardentes; but oyle doth not hurt them. Likewiſe, they yield more ſpirits in the ſunne then in the shade; and they continue longer, when the ayre is cleared by North or by Eaſterne windes. They require to be polished, eyther becauſe the rubbing which polisheth them, doth take off from their ſurfaces the former emanations, which returning backe do ſticke vpon them, and ſo do hinder the paſſage of thoſe that are within; or elſe, becauſe their outſides may be foule; or laſtly, becauſe the pores may be dilated by that ſmoothing Now that hardneſſe and ſolidity is required; doth argue that theſe ſpirits muſt be quicke ones, that they may returne ſmartly,and not be loſt through their languishing in the ayre. Likewiſe, that all bodies whichare not eyther exceeding rare, or elſe ſett on fire, may be drawne by theſe vnctuous thriddes; concludeth that the quality by which they doit, isa common one that hath no particular contrarieties; ſuch a one as we ſee is in greaſe or in pitch to ſticke to any thing; from which, in like manner nothing is exempted but fire and ayre. And laſtly, that they worke moſt efficaciouſly, hen they are heated by rubbing , rather then by fire, sheweth that their ſpirits are excitated by motion, and are thereby made to flye abroad in ſuch manner as e ſee in pomanders, and in other perfumes, which muſt be heated if you will haue them communicate their ſent: and alike effect as in them, agitation doth in iett, yellow amber,and ſuch other Electricall bodies: for if vpon rubbing them, you putt them preſently to your noſe, you vill diſcerne a ſtrong bituminous ſmell in them; all which circumſtances do shew that this E lectricall vertue, conſiſteth in a certaine degree of rarity or denſity of the bodies vnctuous emanations. Nov if theſc reſined and viſcous thiiddes of iett or amber, doin their ſtreaming abroad meete itha piece of ſtrav, or of hay, or of a dryed leafe, or ſome ſuch light and ſpungy body, it is no maruayle if they glew themſelues vntoit like birdlime; and that in their shrinking backe (by being condenſed againe and repulſed, through the coldneſſe of the ayre) they carry it along with them to their entire body. Which they that onely ſce the effect, and can not penetrate into a poſſibility of a naturall cauſe thereof, are much troubled withall. And this ſeemeth vnto me to beare a fairer ſemblance of truth, then what Cabeus deliuereth for caule of Electricall attractions. Vhoſe ſpeculation herein, though Ican not allow for ſolide, yet I muſt for ingenious. And certainely euen errors are to be commended, when they are witty ones,and do proceed from a caſting further about, then the beaten tracke of verball leaning, orrather termes which explicate not the nature of the thing in queſtion. He ſayth that the coming of ſtrawes and ſuch other light bodies vnto amber, iett, and the like, proceedeth from a wind rayſed by the forcible breaking out of ſubtile emanations from the Electricall bodies into the ayre, which bringeth thoſe light bodies along with it to the Electricall ones. But this diſcourſe can not hold: for firſt, it is not the nature of vnctuous emanations  Genèrally ſpeaking) to cauſe ſmart motions ſingly of themſelues. Secondly, although they should rayſe a wind, I do not comprehend how this wind should driue bodies directly backe to the ſource that rayſed it; but rather any other way; and ſo conſequently,should driue the light bodies it meeteth with in its way, rather from, then towardes the Electricall body. Thirdly, if them should be ſuch a wind rayſed, and it should bring light bodies to the Electricall onesiyet it could not make them ſticke therevnto, which we ſee they do, turne them which way you will, as though they were glewed together. Neyther do his experiences conuince any thing; for what he ſayth that ſe light bodies are ſometimes brought to the Electricall body with ſucha violence, that they rebound backe from it, and then retume againe toit, maketh rather againſt him: for if wind were the cauſe of their motion, they would not returne againe,after they had leaped backe from the Electricall body; no more then we can imagine that the wind it ſclfe doth. The like is of his other experience, when he obſerued that ſome little graines of ſawduſt hanging att an Electricall body, the furthermoſt of them not onely fellof, but ſeemed to be driuen away forcibly: for they did not fall directly downe, but ſide wayes;and beſides did ſly away with a violence and ſmartneſſe that argued ſome ſtrong impulſe. The reaſon whereof might be, that new emanations might ſmite them, which not ſticking and faſtening vpon them, wherebyto draw them neerer, muſt needes push them further: or it might be that the emanations vnto which hey vere glewed, shrinking Backe vnto their maine body, the latter graines were shouldered of by others that already beſieged the ſuperſicies; and then the emanations retiring iſily the graines muſt breake of witha force: or elſe, we may conceiue it was the force of the ayre that bore them vpa little, which made an appearance of their being driuen away; as we ſce feathers and other light thinges deſcend not ſtraight downe. -] THE TVENTIETH CHAPTER. Of the Loadſtones generation ; and its particular motions.  Here is yet remaining, the great my ſtery of the Loadſtone to ; diſcourſe of. Which all Authors, both auntient and moderne, & haue agreed vponas an vndenyable example and euidence, of the shorteneſſc of mans reach in comprehending, and of the impoſſibility of his reaſon in penetrating into, and explicating ſuch ſecrets, as nature hath a mind to hide from vs. Wherefore ourreader(Iam ſure) will not in this ſubiect expect cleare ſatisfaction or plaine demonſtrations, att our handes: but will iugde we haue fairely acquitted our ſelues, if what we ſay be any whitt plauſible. Therefore, to vſe our beſt endeauours to content him; lett vs reſlect vpon the diſpoſition of partes of this habitable globe, whereof we are tenants for liues. And we shall find that the ſunne by his conſtant courſe vnder the zodiake, heateth a great part of it vnmeaſurably more then he doth the reſt. And conſequently, that this zodiake being in the middeſt betweene two (as it were) endes, which we call the Poles, theſe poles muſt neceſſarily be extremely cold, in reſpect of the torride zone; for ſo we call that part of the earth which lyeth vnder the zodiake. Nov looking into the conſequence of this; we find that the ſunne, or the ſunnes heate which reſlecteth from the earth in the torride zone, muſt rarify the ayre extremely,and according to the nature of all heate and fire, muſt needes carry away from thence, many partes of the ayre and of the earth ſticking to that heate, in ſuch ſort as we haue formerly declared. Vhence it followeth, that other ayre muſt neceſſarily come from the regions towardes both the poles, to ſupply what is carryed away from eſpecially cõſidering, that the ayre which cometh from the Jolevardes is heauyer then the ayre of the torride zone; and therefore, muſt naturally preſſe to be ſtillneerer the earth;and ſo, as it were shouldereth vp the ayre of the torride zone towardes the circumference, by rouling intoits place: and this,in great quantities; and conſequently, the polar ayre muſt drav a great trayne afterit. WVhich if we conſider the great extent of the torride zone, we shall eaſily perſuade our ſelues, that it muſt reach on each ſide, to the very pole: for taking from Archimedes, that the sphericall ſuperficies of a portion of a ſi hercs to the ſuperſicies of the whole ſphere, according as the part of the axis of that ſphere compriſed within the ſaid portion, is to the whole axis:and conſidering that ſin ourcaſe) the part of the axis compriſed within the torride zone, is to the whole axis of the earth, in about the proportion of 4. to io; it muſt of neceſſity follow that a fire or great heate raigning in ſo vaſt an extent, will drav ayre very powerfully from the reſt of the world. Neyther lett any man apprehend that this courſe of the ſunnes eleuating ſo great quantities of atomes in the torride zone, should hinder the eourſe of grauity there: for firſt the medium is much rarer in the torride zone then in other partes of the earth;and therefore the force of the deſcending atomes, needeth not to be ſo great there as in other places, to make bodies deſcend there as faſt as they do elſe where. Secondly, there beinga perpetuall ſupply of fresh ayre from the polar partes, ſtreaming continually into the torridezone; it muſt of neceſſity happen that in the ayre there come atomes to the torride zone, of that groſſeneſſe that they can not ſoddainely be ſo much rarifyed as the ſubtiler partes of ayre that are there: and therefore, the more thoſe ſubtiler partes are rarifyed, and thereby happen to be carried vp, the ſtronger and the thicker the heauyer atomes muſt deſcend. And thus this concurſe of ayre from the polar partes, mainetayneth grauity vnder the zodiake; where orherwiſe all would be turned into fire, and To haue no grauity. Now, who cõſidereth the two hemiſpheres which by the æquator are diuided; will find that they are not altogether of equall complexions: but that our hemiſphere, in which the Northpole is compriſed, is much dryer thenthe other, by reaſon of the greater cõtinent of land in this,and the vaſter tract of ſea in the other; and therefore the ſupply which cometh frõ the diuers hemiſpheres, muſt needes be of differẽt natures; that which cometh from towardes the Southpole, being compared to that which cometh frõ towardes theNorth, as the more vett to the more dry. Yet of how different cõplexions ſoeuer they be, you ſee they are the emanations of one and the ſame body. Not vnſike vnto what nature hath inſtituted in the ranke of animals: among whom, the male and the female are ſo diſtinguished by heate and cold , moyſture and drought; that neuertheleſſe all belongeth, but to one nature; and that, in degrees though manifeſtly different, yet ſo neere together that the body of one is in a mannerthe ſame thing, as the body of the orther. Euen ſo, the complexions of the to hemiſpheres are in ſuch ſort diſferent in the ſame qualities, that neuertheleſſe they are of the ſume nature, and are vnequall partes of the ſame body which we call the earth. Now Alchymiſtes aſſure vs, that if two extractions of one body do meete together they will incorporate one with the other; eſpecilly, if there be ſome little difference in the complexion of the extractions. Vhence it followeth that theſe two ſtreames of ayre, making vp one32 continuate floud of various currents, from one end of the world to the B themeeting other; each ſtreame that cometh to theequator from its owne Pole, by tꝶether bor the extraction of the ſunne, and that is ſtill ſupplyed with new matter theſe ſireame flowing from its owne pule to the æquator, before the ſunne can Equator diuers ſufficiently rarify and lift vp the atomes that came ſirſt perpendicularly riuolets of Vnder its beames (as it vſeth to happen in the eſfects of Phyſicall cauſcs, ĩole of ach which can not be rigorouſly aiuſted, but muſt haue ſome latitude; in continuated which, nature inclineth euer rather to aboundance then to defect,) will ſiom one Dol aſſe, euen to the other pole, by the conduct of his fellow, in caſe he] be 5 ſome occaſion driuen backe homewardes. For as we ſee inũ boule or mile full of vater, or rather in a pipe; through which the waterrunneth alongi if there be a little hole att the bottome or ſide of it, the water will wriggle and change its courſe to creepe out att that pipe; eſpecially if there be a lirtle ſpigort, or quill att the outſide of the hole, that by the narrow lengih of it helpeth in ſome ſort (as it were) to ſucke it. So if any of the files ofthe army or flould of atomes ſukvd from one of the Poles to the æquator, do there ſind any gappes,or chinkes, or lanes of retiring files in the front of the other poles batalia of atomes, they will preſſe in there: in ſuch manner as we haue aboue declared that water doth by the helpe ofa labell of corton, and as is ccemplyſied in all the attractions of venime by venimous bodies whereof we haue giuen many examples aboue: and they vill go along viththem the courſe they goe. Foras when a thicke short guilded ingort of ſiluer is drawne out into a long ſubtile wyre; the wyre continuing ſtill perfectly guilded all ouer, doih manifeſtly shew that the outſide and the inſide of the ingott, do ſtrangely meete together, and intermixe in the drawing out: ſo this little ſtreame which(likean eddy current) runnetli bac ke ſrom the æquator towardes its owne Pole, ill continue to the end ſtill tincted with the mixture of the other Poles atumes, it was incorporated with att its coming to the æquator. Now that ſome litile riuolets of ayre and atomes should runne backe to their owne Pole, contrary to the courſe of their maine ſtreame ill be. eaſily enough to conceiue; f we but conſider that att certaine times of the yeare windes do blow more violently and ſtrongly from ſome determinate part or Rombe ofthe world, then they do att othertimes and from orher partes. As for example; our Eaſt India Marines tell vs of the famous Monfones they find in thoſe partes whichare ſtrong windes that raigne conſtantly ſix monthes of the yeare from one polewardes, and the j ſix monthes, from the orher pole, and beginne preciſely about the ſunnes entering into ſuch a ſigne or degree of the zodiake, and continue till about its entrance into the oppoſite degree. And in our partes of the world certaine ſmart Eaſterly or Northeaſterly windes do raigne about the end of March and beginning of Aprill; when it ſeemeth that ſome ſnowes are melted by the ſpring heates of the ſunne. And other windes haue their cougſes in other ſeaſons, vpon other cauſes. All which do cuidently conuſnce, that the courſe of the ayre, and of vapors from the poles to thæ equator, can not be ſo regular and vniforme, but that many impediments and croſſes, do light in the way, to make breaches init; and thereby to force it in ſome places to an oppoſite courſe. In ſuch ſortas we ſee happeneth in eddy waters, and in the courſe of a tide, wherein the ſtreame running ſwiftly in the middle, beateththe edges of the water to the shore, and thereby maketh it runne backe att the shore. And hence we may conclude, that although the maine courſe of ayre and atomes (fore xample from northto ſouth, in our heiniſphere) can neuer fuile of going on towardes the æquator, conſtantly at? the ſame rate, in groſſe; neuerthleſſe, in ſeuerall paiticular little partes of it (and eſpecially att the edges of thoſe ſtrcames that are driuen on faſter then the reſt, by an extraordinary and accidentall violent cauſe) it is variouſly interrupted, and ſometimes entirely ſtopped, and other times euen driuen backe to the northwardes. And if peraduenture any man should thinke that this will not fall out, becauſe cach ſtreame ſeemeth to be alwayes coming from his owne Pole to the æquator, and therefore will oppoſe and driue backe any bodies that with leſſe force should ſtriue to ſWimme againſtĩt; or if they ſtic ke vnto them, will carry them backe to the æquator. We anſwere, that we muſt not conceiue that the whole ayre in body doth euery where equally encroach from the polewardes vpon the torride zone: but, as it were in certaine brookes or riuolets, according as the contingency of all cauſes purt together dorh make it fall out. No then out of what we haue ſuid it will follow; that ſince all the ayre in this our hemiſphere is as it were ſtrewed ouer and ſowed with aboundance of northerne atomes, and that ſome brookes of them are in ſtation, others in a motion of retrogradation backe to their owne north pole; the ſoutherne atomes ſ hich coming vpon thematt the equator do not onely preſſe in among them, whereſocuer they can find admittance, but do alſo go on fowardes to the north pole in ſeuerall files by themſclues, being driuen that way by the ſame accidentall cauſes, which make the orhers retire backe) ſeiſing in their way vpon the northerne ones in ſuch manneras we deſcribed in filtration; and thereb creeping along by them whereſoeuer they ſind them ſtanding ſtill, and going along with them, whereſoeuer they find them going backe; muſt llũl lES of neceſſity of neceſſity find paſſage in great quantities towardes, and æuen to the north pole; though ſome partes of them ill euer and anone be checked in this their iourney, by the maine current preuayling ouer ſome accidentall one, and ſo be carried backe againe to the æquator, whoſe line they had croſſed. And this effect can not chooſe but be more er leſſe according to the ſeaſons of the yeare: for when the ſunne is in the Tropike of Capricorne, the ſoutherne atomes will flow in much more aboundance, and vith farre greater ſpeede, into the torride æone, then the northerne atomes can;by reaſon of the ſunnes approximation to the ſouth, and his diſtance from the noith pole; ſince he worketh fainteſt, where he is furtheſt off: and therebore from the north no more emanations or atomes will be drawne, but ſuch as are moſt ſubtiliſed, and duly prepared for that courſe. And ſince onely theſe ſelected bandes do now march towardes the æquator, their files muſt needes be thinner, then when the ſunnes being in the æquator or Tropike of Cancer wakeneth and muſtereth vp all their forces. And conſequently, the quiett partes of ayre betweene their ſiles (in which like atomes are alſo ſcattered) are the greater: whereby the aduenient ſoutherne atomes haue the larger ſilter to clymbe vp by. And the like haprenerh in the other hemiſphere, vhen the ſunne is in th: Tropike of Cancer; as who vill beſtow the paines to compare them, will preſently ſee. Novthen vs conſider what theſe two ſtreame:: hus incorporated muſt of neceſſity do in the ſurface or vpper partes of the earth. Firſt it is euident they muſt needes penetrate a pretty depth into the earths for ſo freeſing perſuaderhvs, and much more, the ſubtile penetration of diuers more ſpirituall bodies, of which e haue ſuſEciently diſcourſed aboue. Nov lett vs conceiue that theſe ſteames, do ſind a body of a conuęnient denſity to incorporate themſelues in, in the way of denſity, as we ſee that fire doth in iron, and in other denſe bodies: and this not for an houre or two as happeneth in fire; but foryeares: as I haue beene told that in the extreme cold hilles in the Peake in Darbyshire happeneth to the diy atomes of cold, which are permanently incorporated in water by long continuall freeſing and ſo make a kind of chryſtall. In this caſe, certainely it muſt come to paſſe that this body will become in a mãner wholy of the nature of theſe ſteames: which becauſe they are drawne from the Poles that abound in cold and dryneſſe, ſfor others that haue nottheſe qualities, do not contribute to the intended effeci) the body isapteſt to become a ſtone: for ſo we ſee that cold and dron ght, turneth the ſuperſiciall partes of the earth into ſtones and rockes: and accordingly, whereſoeuer cold and dry windes raigne powerfully, all ſuch countries are mainely rocky. Nov then lett vs ſuppoſe, this ſtone to be taken out of the earth and hanged in the ayre, or ſett conueniently vpon ſome little pinne, or otherviſe putt in liberty, ſo as a ſmall impulſe may eaſily tume it any way: it will in this caſe certainely follow that the end of the ſtone which in the earth lay towardes the north pole, willnow in the ayre conuert it ſelfe in the ſame manner towardes the ſame point; and the otherend which lay cowardes the ſouth, turne by conſequence to the ſouth. I ſpeake of theſe countries which lye betweene the æquator and the Northsin hich it can not chooſe but that the ſtreame going from the north to the æquator, muſt be ſtronger then the oppoſite one. No to explicate, ho this is done; ſuppoſe the ſtone hanged eaſt and weſt freely in the ayre; the ſtreame which is drawne from the north pole of the earth rangethalong by it in its courſe to the æquator; and finding in the ſtone the ſouth ſteame,  which is growne innateto it) very ſtrong, it muſt needes incorporate it ſelfe with it; and moſt, by thoſe partes of the ſteame in the ſtone which are ſtrongeſt: which are they that come directly from the North of the ſtone; by which I meane that part of the ſtone that lay northward in the earth, and that ſtill looketh to the north pole of the earth now it is in the ayre. And therefore the great flood of atomes coming from the north pole of ihe earth will incorporate it ſelfe moſt ſtrongly, by the north end of the ſtone with the little lood of ſoutherne atomes it findeth in the ſtone: for that end ſerueth for the coming out of the ſoutherne atomes, and ſendeth them abroad;as the ſouth end doth the northerne ſteame, ſince the ſteames do come in att one end, and do go outatt the oppoſite end. From hence we may gather, that this ſtone vill ioyne and cleaue to its attractiue, whenſocuer it happeneth to be within the ſphere of its actiuity. Beſides if by ſome accident it should happen ithat the atomes or ſteames which are drawne by the ſunne from the Polevardes to the æquator, should come ſtronger from ſome part of the earth, which is on the ſide hand of the Pole, then from the very Pole it ſelfe; in this caſe the ſtone vill turne from the Pole towardes that ſide. Laſtly, whatſoeuer this ſtone will do towardes the Pole of the carth; the very ſame a leſſer ſtone of the ſame kind will do towardes a greater. And iher be any kind of other ſubſtance that hath participation of the nature of this ſtone, ſuch a ſubſtance will behaue it ſelfe towardes this ſtone, in the ſame manner, as ſuch a ſtone behaueth it ſelfe towardesthe earth: all the Phenomens whereof, may be the more plainely obſerued, if the ſtone be cutt into the forme of the earth. And thus, we haue found a perfect delineation of the loadeſtone from its cauſes: for there is no man ſo ignomnt of the nature of a loadeſtone, but he knoweth that the properties of it are to tend tovardes the North3 to vary ſometimes; to ioyne with an other loadeſtone; to draw iron vnto it; and ſuch like, whoſe cauſes you ſee deliuered. But to come to experimentall proofes and obſeruations vpon the loadeſtone by which it willappeare, that theſe cauſes are well eſteemed nature of the loadeſtone Doctor Gilbert; by meanes of whom and of Doctor Haruey, our Natiò may claime euen in this latterage as deſerued a crowne for ſolide Philoſophicall learning, as for many ages together it hath done formerly for acute and ſubtile ſpeculations in Diuinity. But before I fallto particulars, I thinke it worth warning my Reader, how this great man arriued to diſcouer ſo muchof Magneticall Philoſophy that he likeiſe, it he be deſirous to ſearch into nature, may by imitation aduance his thoughts and knovledge that way. In short then, all the knowledge he gott of this ſubiect, was by forming a litile loadeſtone into the shape oF the earrth. By which meanes he compaſſed a wonderfull deſigne, which was, to makæ the whole globe of the earth maniable: for he found the properties of the whole carth, in that little body; which he therefore called a Terrella, or little earth; and which he could manage and trye experiences vpon, att his will. And in like manner, any man that hah an ayme to aduance much in naturall ſciencies, muſt endeauour to draw the matter he enquireth of, into ſome ſmall modell, or into ſome kind of manageable met hode,; which he may turne and vind as he pleaſerh. And then lett him be ſure, if he hatha competent vnderſtanding, that he villnot miſſe of his marke. But toour intent; the ſirſt thing we are to proue is, that the loadeſtone is generated in ſuch ſort as we haue deſcribed: for proofe whereof, the firſt ground we will lay,shall be to conſider how in diuers other effects it is manifeſt, that the differences of being expoſed to the north or to the ſouth, do cauſe very great variery in the ſame thing: as hereaſter, we shall haue occaſion to touch, in the baikes and graines of trees, and the like. Next, e ſind by experience, thut this vertue of the loadeſtone is recciued into other bodies that reſemble its nature, by heatinges and coolinges: for ſo it paſſeth in iron barres, which being throughly heated,and then layed to coole north and ſouth, are thereby imbued vith a Magnetike vertue; heate opening their bodies, and diſpoſing them to ſucke in, ſuch atomes as are conuenient to their nature, that flow vnto them whiles they are cooling. So that we can not boubt, but that conuenient matter ſermenting in its warme bed vnder the earth, becometh a loadeſtone by th: like ſucking in of affluent ſtreames of a like complexion to the former. lll And it fareth in like manner wii h thoſe fiery inſtrumentsſas fireforkes, tonges, shouels, and the like) which do ſtand conſtantly vpwardes and downewardes; for they, by being often heated and cooled againe, do gainea very ſtronę verticity, or turning to the Pole: and indecde, they can not ſtand vpardes and downewardes ſo little a while, but that they willin thit short ſpace gaine a maniſeſt verticity;and change it att euery turning. Now ſince the force and vigour of this verticity, is in the end that ſtandeth downewardes; it is euident that this eſfect proceedeth out Z iij of an influence receiued from the earth. And becauſe in a loadeſtone(made into a globe, or conſidered ſo, to the end you may reckon hemiſpheres in it, as in the great earth) eyther hemiſphere giueth vntoa needle touched vpon it, not onely the vertue of that hemiſphere where it is touched, but likewiſe the vertue of the contrary hemiſphere; we may boldly conclude that the vertue which a loadeſtone is impregnated with in the wombe or bed of the earth, vhere itis formed and groweth, proceedeth as well from rhe contrary hemiſphere of the earth,as from that wherein it lyeth; in ſuch ſort, as we haue aboue deſcribed. And as we feele oftentimes in our owne bodies, that ſome cold we catch remaineth in vs a long while after the taking it, and that ſometimes it ſcemeth euen to change the nature of ſome part of our body into which it is chicfely entered, and hath taken particular poſſeſſion of; ſo that vwhenſoeuer new atomes of the like nature, do againe range about in the circumſtant ayre, that part ſo deepely affected with the former ones of kinne to theſe, doth in a particular manner ſceme to riſſent them, and to attract themtoit,and to haue its gueſtes vithin it (as it were) wakened and rouſed vp by the ſtroakes of the aduenient ones that knocke att their dores. Euen ſo (but much more ſtrongly;by reaſon of the longer time and leſſe hinderances) we may conceiue that the two vertues or atomes proceeding from the two different hemiſpheres, do conſtitute a certaine permanent and conſtant nature in the ſtonę that imbibeth them: which then, we call a loadeſtone; and is exceeding ſenſible(as we shall hereafter declare) of the aduenience to it of newaromes, alike in nature and complexion to thoſe that it is impregnated with. And this vertue, conſiſting ina kind of ſofterand tenderer ſubſtance then the reſt of the ſtone, becometh thereby ſubiect to be conſumed by fire. From whence we may gather the reaſon why a loadeſtone neuer recouereth its magnetike vertue, after it hath once loſt it; though iron doth: for the humidity of iron, is inſeparable from its ſubſtance; but the humiility of a loadeſtone which makethit capable of this effect, may be quite conſumed by fire, and ſo the ſtone be left too dry, for euer being capable of imbibing any new influence from the earth, vnleſſe it be bya kind of new makingit. In the next place we are to proue that the loadeſtone doth worke in that manner as we haue shewed, for which end lett vs conſider how the atomes, thatare drawne from each Pole and hemiſphere of the earth to the æquator, making vp their courſe by a manuduction of one an other, the hindermoſt can not chooſe but ſtill follow on after the foremoſt. And as it hppeneth in filtration by a cotton cloth; if ſome one part of the cotton, haue its diſhoſition to the aſcent of the warer, more perfect and ready then the other partes haue; the water vill aſſuredly aſcend faſter in that part, then in any of the reſt: ſo, if the atomes do ſind a greater diſpoſition for their paſſage, in any one paſt of the medium OF BODIES, Chap. XX. 183 they range through, then in an other, they ill certainely, not faile of taking that way, in greater aboundance, and ith more vigour and ſtrength, thenany other. EEE But it is cuident, that when they meete with ſuch a ſtone as we haue deſcribed, the helpes by which they aduance in their iourney,are notably encreaſed by the floud of atomes which they meete coming out of that ſtone; which being of the nature of their oppoſite pole, they ſciſe greedily vpon them, and thereby do plucke themſelues faſter on: like a ferryman that draweth on his boate the ſwiftlyer, the more vigourouſly he tuggeth and pulleth att the rope that lyeth thwart the riuer for him to hale himſelfe ouer by. And thereſore we can not doubt but that this floud of atomes ſtreaming from the pole of the earth, muſt needes paſſe rhrough that ſtone with more ſpeed and vigour then they can do any other way. And as we ſce in the running of water that if it meeteth with any lower cranies then the wide channell it ſtreameth in; it will turne out of its ſtraight way, to glide along there where it findeth an eaſier and more decliue bed to tumble in: ſo theſe atomes vill infallibly deturne themſelues from their direct courſe, to paſſe through ſucha ſtone as farrè as their greater conueniency leadeth them. : And what we haue ſaid of theſe atomes which from the Poles do range through the vaſt ſea of ayre to the æquator; ĩs likeiſe to be applyed vnto thoſe atomes which iſſue out of the ſtone: ſo that we may conclude, that ifthey meete with any helpe which may conuey them on with more ſpeede and vigour, then Whiles they ſtreame directly forwardes ; they will likewiſe deturne them ſclues from directly forwardes, to take that courſe. And if the ſtone ĩ ſelfe be hanged ſo nicely, th:ta leſſe force isable to turne itabout then is requiſite to turne aviy out of its courſe the continued ſtreame of atomes which iſſueth from the ſtone: in rhiscaſc, the ſtone it ſelfe muſt needes turne rtowardes that ſtreame which clymbing and filtring it ſelfe along the ſtones ſtreame, draweth it out of its courſe; in ſuch ſort as the noſe of a weathercocke butteth it ſelfe into the wind. Now theniit being knowne, that the ſtrongeſt ſtreame comet h directly, from the north in the great earth,and that the ſouththerne ſtreame of the Terrella or loadeſlone proportioned duely by nature to incorporate with the north ſtreame of the earth, iſſueth out cf the north end of the ſtone; it followeth plainely rhat when a loadeſtone is ſituated att liberty, its north end muſt neceſſarily turne towardes the north pole of the world. lll And it ill likewiſe follow, that whenſocuer ſuch a ſtone meetethwith an other of the ſame nature and kind; they muſt comport themſelues to one an other in like ſort: that is, if both of them be free and equall, they muſt turne themſelues to, or from, one an other; according as they are ſituated in reſpect of one an other. So that if theit axes be parallele, and the ſouth pole of the one, and the north of thie agreeing ſtreames to one an other fiom their whole bodies, that will readily mingle and incorporate with one an other, without turning out of their vay or ſee king any shorter courſe or changing their reſpects to oneanother. llll But if the poles of the ſame denorination do looke the ſame vay, and the loadeſtones do not lye in ſuch ſort as to haue their axes paralleſt, but that they encline toonean other: then they vill worke themſelues about, vntillthey grow by their oppoſite poles into a ſtraight lines for the ſame reaſon as we haue shewed of a loadeſtones turning to the pole of the earth. But if onely one of the loadeſtones be free and the other be fixed, and that they lye inclined, as in the former caſe;sthen, the free ſtone vill worke himſelfe vntill his pole be oppoſite to that part of the fixed ſtone from whence the ſtreame which agreeth with him, iſſueth ſtrongeſt: for that ſtreame is to the free loadeſtone, as the noitheine ſtreame of ihe earth, is to a loadeſtone compared vnto the earth. But withall, we muiſt take notice that in this our diſcourſe, we abſtract from other accidents: and particularly from the influence of the carthes ſtreames into rhe loadeſtones: which will cauſe great vaiiety in theſe caſes, if they lye not due north and ſouth, when they beginne to worke. And as loadeſtones and other magnetike bodies, do thus of neceſſity turne toone an other when they are both free; and if one of them be faſtened, the other turneth to iti ſo likeiſe, if they be free to progreſſiue motion, they muſt bya like neceſſity and for the ſame reaſon, come together and ioyne themſelues to onean other. Andif only one of them be free,that muſt remoue it ſelfe to the other: for, the ſame vertue that maketh them tume, (whichĩs, the ſtrength oſ the ſteame) vill likewiſe (in due circumſtances) make them come together; by reaſon that the ſteames which clymbe vp onean other by the way of ſiltration, and do thereby turne the bodies of the ſtones vpon their centers When they are only free to turne, muſt likewiſe, draw the whole bodies of the ſtones entirely out of their places, and make them ioyne, when ſuch a torall motion of the body isan eſfect that requireth no more force, then the force of conueying vigorouſly the ſtreames of both the Magnetiko bodies into one an orher; that is, when there is no ſuch impediment ſtanding in the way of the Magnetike bodies motion, bur that the celerity of the atomes motion, mingling with one an other, is able to ouercome t: for then, it muſt needes do ſo;and the magnetike body by naturall coherence vnto the ſteame of atomes in which it is inuolued, followeth the courſe of the ſteame: in ſuch ſort as in the example we haue heretofore vpon an other occaſion giuen of an eggeshell filled with deaw; the ſunnebeames conuerting the deaw into ſmoske, and raiſing vp that ſmoakeor ſleame, the cg”es el is likewiſe raiſcd vp for company with the ſteame that iſſueth fromit. BE And forthe ſame reaſon it ĩs, that the loadeſtone draeth iron: for iron being of a nature apt to receiue and harbour the ſteames of ]loadeſtone; it becometh a veake loadeſtone; and worketh tovardes a loadeſtone, in ſuch ſort as a weaker loadeſtone would do: and ſo moueth, towardes a loadeſtone by the meanes we haue now deſcribed. And that this conformity between iron and the loadeſtone, is the true reaſon of the loadeſtones drawing of iron, is cleare out of this; that a loadeſtone villtake vp a greater weight of pure iron, then it vill of impure or droſſy iron; or of iron and ſome other mettall ioyned togethen and that jt will dra further through a ſlender long iron, then in the free open ayre:all hich, are manifeſt ſignes shor iron cooporateth with the force, which the loadeſtone grafteth init. And the alon why iron cometh to a loadeſtone more efficaciouſly then an other loadeſtone doth, is, becauſe loadeſtones generally are more impure then iron ĩs ( as being a kind of oore or mine of iron) and haue other extraneous and heterogeneall natures mixed vith them: Whereas iron receiueth the loadeſtones operation in its whole ſubſtance. THE ONE AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER. Doſitions drawne out of ihe former doclrine, and confirmed by experimenrall proofes.  He firſt poſition is, that the working of the loadeſtone, being 7 throughout according to the tenour of the operation of A & bodies, may be done by bodies, and conſequently is not done by occult or ſecret qualities. Which is euident out of this, that a greater Ioadeſtone hath more effect then a leſſer:and that if you cutt away part of a loadeſtone, part of his vertue is likeiſe taken from him: and if the punes be ioyned againe;, the whole becometh as ſtrong as it was efore. Againe; if a loadeſtone touch a longer iron, it giueth it leſſe force then ĩf it touch a shorter iron: nay, the vertue in any part, is ſenſily leſſer, according as it is furiher from the touched part. Againe; the longer an iron is in touching, the greater vertue it getteth, and the more conſtant. And both an ironand a loadeſtone may looſe their vertue, by long lying out of their due order and ſituation, eyther to the earth orto an other loadeſtone. : : Beſides;if a loadeſtone do toucha long iron in the middle of it, he diſfuſeth his vertue equally towardes both endes; and if it be a round plare, he diffuſeth his vertue equally to allſides. lll And laſtly, the vertue of a loadeſtone, as alſo of an iron touched, is loſt by buming it in the fire. Allwhich ſymptomes agreeing exactly with the rules of bodies, do make it vndenyable that the vertue of the loadeſtone is a reall and ſolide body. Againſt this poſition, Cabeus obiecteth that little atomes would not be able to penerrate all ſortes of bodies; as we ſee the vertue of the loadeſtone doth. And vrgeth, that although they should be allowed to do ſo, et they could not be imagined to penetiate thicke and ſolide bodies ſo ſoddainely, asthey would do thinne ones;and would certainely shew then ſome ſigne of facility or dificulty of paſſing, in the interpoſition and in the taking avay of bodies putt betweene the loadeſtone and the body it orketh vpon. Secondly he obiecteth that atomes being lirtle bodies, they can not moue in an inſtant; as the woiking of the loadeſtone ſeemethto do. And laſily; that the loadeſtone, by ſuch aboundance of continuall cnaporations, would quickely be conſlumed. To the firſt, ve anſere; that atomes whoſe nature it is to pierce iron, can not reaſonably be ſuſpected of inability to penetrate any orher body: and that atomes can penetrate iron, is euident in the melting of it by fire. And indeed this obiection cometh no too late, after e haue ſo largely declared the diuiſibility of quantity, and the ſubtility of nature in reducing all thinges into extreme ſmall partes: for this difficulty hath no other auow, then the tardity of our imaginations in ſubtiliſing ſufficiently the quantitatiue partes that iſſue out of the loadeſtone. As for any tardity that may be expected by the interpoſition of a thicke or denſe body; there is no appearance of ſuch, ſince e ſee light paſſe through thicke glaſſes without giuing any ſigne of meeting with the leaſt oppoſition in ĩts paſſage, (as we haue aboue declared att large:) and magneticall emanations haue the aduantage of light in this, that they are not obliged to ſtraight lines, as light is. Laſtly, as for loadeſtones ſpending of themſelues by ſtill venting their emanations; odoriferous bodies furnish vs with a full anſWere to that obiection: for they do continue many yeares palpably ſpending of themſelues, and yet keepe their odour in vigour; whereas a loadeſtone, if it be layed in a wrong poſition vill not continue halfe ſo long. The reaſon of the duration of both which, maketh the matter manifeſt and taketh away all diſficulty: which is, that as in a roote of a vegetable, there is a power to change the aduenient iuice into its nature; ſo is there in ſuch like thinges as theſe, a power to change the ambient ayre into their owne ſubſtance: as euident experierce shewerh in the Hermetike ſalt, (as ſome moderne writers call it) which is found to be rapayred, and encreaſed in its weight, by lying in the ayre; and the like happeneth to ſaltpeter. And in our preſent ſubiect, experience informethvs, that a loadeſtone vill grow ſtronger by lying in due poſition eyiher to the earth,or toa ſtronger loadeſtone, whereby it may be better im pregnated, and as it were feed it ſelfe with the emanatiòs iſſuing out of them into it. DOurnext poſition is, that this vertue cometh toa magnetike body, froman other body;as the nature of bodies is, to require a being moued, that they may moue. Andthis is enident in iron; which by the touch, or by ſtanding in due poſition neere the loadeſtone gaineth the pover of the loadeſtone. Againe, if a ſmith in beating his iron into a rodde, do obſerue to lay it northand ſouths it getteth a direction to the north, by the very beating of it. Likewiſe if an iron rodde be made red hoat in the fire,and be kept therea good while together, and when it is taken out, be layed to coole iuſt north and ſouthsit ill acquire the ſame direction towardes the north. And this is true, not only of iron, but alſo of all other ſortes of bodies whatſoeuer that endure ſuch ignition: particularly, of pottearthes, which if they be moulded in a long forme, and when they are taken out of the kilne be layed (as we ſayd of the iron) to coole north and ſourh, will haue the ſame effeõt wrought in them. And iron, though it hath not beene heatedi but only hath cõtinued long vnmoued in the ſame ſituation of north and ſouth, in a building; yet ĩit villhaue the ſame effect. So as it can not be denyed, but thatthis vertue cometh vnto iron ſfiõ other bodies: whereof one muſt be a ſecret inſluẽce from the north. And this is confirmed, by a loadeſtones looſing its vertue ſ as we ſaid before) by lying a long time vnduly diſpoſed, eyther towardes the earth, ortovardes a ſtronger loadeſtone; whereby inſteed of the former, it gaineth a new vertue according to that ſituation. And this happeneth, not only in the vertue which is reſident and permanent in a loadeſtone or a touched iron but likeiſe, in the actuall motion or operation of them. As may be experienced, ſirſt, in this, that the ſame loadeſtone or touched irõ in the ſouth hemiſphere of the world hath its operatiò ſtrongeſt att that end of it which tendethto the norths and in the north hemiſphere, att the end whic h iẽdeth to the ſouth: each pole communicating a vigour proportionable to its owne ſtrẽęth in the climate here it is receiued. Secondly, in this, that an iron ioyned to a loadeſtone, or within the ſphere of the loadeſtones working, vill take vpan other piece of iron greater then the loadeſtone of ĩt ſelfe can holds and as ſoone asthe holding iron is remoued out of the ſphere of ihe loadeſtones actiuity, it preſently letteth fall the iron it formerly held vp: and this is ſotrue; thata leſſer loadeſtone may be placed in ſuch ſort vithin the sphere of a greater loadeſtones operation, as to take awaya iece of iron from the greater loadeſtones; and this, in vertue of the hime greater loadeſtone from which it plucketh it : for, but remoue the leſſer out of the sphere of the greater; and then it can no longer doit. So thatit is euident, that in theſe caſes, the very actuall operation of the leſſer loadeſtone or of the iron; proceedeth from the actuall inſluence of the greater loadeſtone vpon and into them. And hence we may vnderſtand, that whenſoeuer a Magnetike body doth worke, it hath an excitation from without, which doth make it iſſue out and Tend its ſtreames abroad; in ſuch ſortasit is the nature of allbodics to doi and as we haue giuen examples of the like done by heate, hen ve diſcourſed of Rarefaction. But to explicate this point more clearely by entering more particularly intoit; if a magnetike body lyeth north and ſouth, it is eaſy and obuious to conceiue that the ſtreames coming from north and ſouth of the ' A a ij li vorld, and paſſing through the ſtone muſt needes excitate the vertue vhichisinit, and carrya ſtreame of it along with them that way, they goe. But if it lyeth Eaſt and Weſt, then the ſteames of north and ſourh of the carth, ſtreaming along by the two Poles of rhe ſtone, are ſucked in by them much more weakely : yet neuertheleſſe ſuſſiciently to giue an excitation to the innate ſteames which are in the body of the ſtone, to make them moue on in their ordinarie courſe. The third poſition is, that the vertue of the loadeſtone isa doubleand not one ſimple vertue. Vhich is manifeſt in an iron touched by a loadeſtone, for if you touch it only with one pole of the ſtone, it will not be ſo ſtrong and full of the magnetike vertue, as if you touch one end of it with one pole, and the other end of it with the other pole of the ſtone. Againei if you touch borh endes of an iron, with the ſame pole of the ſtone, the iron gaineth its vertue att that end which was laſt touched;and changeth its vertue from end to end, as often as it is rubbed att contrary endes. Againe; one end of the loadeſtone or of iron touched, ill haue more force on the one ſide of thelæquator, and the other end on the other ſide of it. Againe; the variation on the one ſide of the æquator,and the variation on the other ſide of it, haue different lawes according to the different endes of the loadeſtone, or of the needle, which looketh to thoſe Poles. li 3ll Vherefore, it is euident, that therẽ is a double vertue in the loadeſtone, the one more powerfull att the one end of it; the other more powerſull att the other end. Yet theſe two vertues are found in euery ſenſible part of the ſtone: for cutting itatt eyther end ,the vertue att the contrary end is alſo diminished. And the whole loadeſtone that is left, hath both the ſame vertues, in proportion to its biggneſſe. Beſides cutt the loadeſtone how you vill, ſtill the two poles remaine in that line, which lay vnder the meridian when it as in the earth. And rhe like is of the touched iron whoſe vertue ſtill lyeth along the line, which goeth ſtraight (according to the line of the axis) from the point where it was touched, and att the oppoſite end, conſtituteth the contrary pole. The fourth poſition is, that though he vertue of the loadeſtone be in the whole body;neueitheleſe, its vertue is more ſeene in the poles then in any other partes. For by experience it is found that a loadeſtone ofequall bulke, worketh better and more efficaciouſly if it be in a long forme; then if it be in any other. And from ihe middle line berwixt the two poles,there cometh no vertue, if an iron be touched there: but any part towardes the pole; the neerer it is to the pole, the grcater vertue it imparteth. Laſtly, the declination teacheth vs the ſame: which is ſo much the ſtronger by how muchit is neerer the pole. The fſift poſition is, that in the loadeſtone there are emanations which do iſſue not only att the poles and about them, but alſo ſpherically,round about the whole body,and in an orbe from all partes of the ſuperficies of it; in ſuch ſort as happeneth in all other bodies vhatſoeuer. Ard that theſe ſphericall emanations, are of tto kindes: proportionableto the two polar emanations. And that the grcazeſt force of each ſort of them is in that hemiſphere where the pole is, att which they make their chiefe iſſue. The reaſon of the firſt part of this poſitionis, becauſe no particular body can be exempt from the lawes of all bodies: and we haue aboue declared that euery phyſicall body muſt of neceſſity haue an orbe of fluours or a ſphere of actiuity about it. The reaſon of the ſecond part is, that ſeeing theſe uours do proceed out of the very ſubſtance and nature of the loadeſtone, they can not chooſe but be found of both ſortes, in euery part how little ſoeuer it be, where the nature 'of the loadeſtone reſideth. The reaſon of the third part is, that becauſe the: polar emanations do tend wholy towardes the poles (each of them to their proper pole) iĩt folloeth that in euery hemiſphere both thoſe which come from the contrary hemiſphere, and thoſe which are bred in the hemiſſ here they go out att, are all aſſembled in that hemiſphere: and therefore, of neceſſity it muſt be ſtronger in that kind of fluours, then the oppoſite end is. All Which appeareth true in experience: for if a long iron toucheth any part of that hemiſphere of a loadeſtone which tendeth to the northsit gaineth att that end a vertue of tending likewiſe to the north: and the ſame ill be if an iron but hang cloſe ouer it. And this may be confirmed by a like experience, of an iron barre in reſpect of the earth which hãging downewardes in any part of our hemiſphere, is imbued with the like inclination of drawing towardes the north. 7. The ſixt poſition is,that although euery part of one loadeſtone do in Dutting to it ſelfe agree with euery part of an other loadeſtone (that is, if each of loadeſtones theſe partes were diuided from their wholes, and each of them made a ſphere of n vhole by it ſclfe,they might be ſo ioyned together as they would agree) an other, enery neuertheleſſe, when the partes are in their two holes, they do not all of ſ2ſ aof one them agree together: but of two loadeſtones, only the poles of the one doth not agree doagree with the whole body of the other; that is, each pole with any vph nery bpart of the contrary hemiſphere of the other loadeſtone. loadeſtone. The reaſon of this is, becauſe the fluours which iſſue out of the ſtones, are in certaine different degrees in ſeuerall partes of the entire loadeſtones; Whereby it happeneth that one loadeſtone can worke by a determinate part of it ſelfe moſt powerfully vpon the other, if ſome determinate part of that otherdo lye next vnto iti and not ſo well, if any other part lyeth towardes it. And accordingly experience sheweth that if you putt the pole of a loadeſtone towardes the middle of a needle thatis touched att the point, the middle part of the needle vill turne away, and the end oſ it will conuert it ſelfe to ihe pole of the 8. loadeſtone. Cocerning the The ſeuenth poſitionis, that if a touched needle anda loadeſtone do aetipaiienand come together , and touch one an orher in their agreeing partes of a neodte; (whtſoeuer partes of them thoſe be) the line of the necdles length will tonaidss the - Inm adeſtonè It bend towardes the pole of the ſtone ( excepting, if they touch by the œquator ofthe ſtone,and the middle of the needle: yet not ſo that if you draw out the line of the needles length, it ill go through the pole of the ſtone; vnleſſe they touch by the end of the one, and the pole of the other. But if they touch by the æquator of the one and the middle of the other;then the needle will lye parallele to the axis of the ſtore. And the reaſon of this is manifeſt, for in that caſe the two poles being equidiſtant to the needle they draw it equally: and by conſequence the needle muſt remaine parallele to the axis of the ſtone. Nor doth it import that the inequality of the two poles of the ſtone is materially or quantitatiuely greater then the inequality of the two poles of the needle; out of which it may att the fiſt ſight ſeeme to follow, that the ſtronger pole of the ſtone should drav the weaker pole of the needle neerer vnto ĩt ſelfe; then the weaker pole of the ſtone can be able to draw the ſtronger pole of the needle: and by conſequence that the needle should not lye parallele to theaxis of the ſtone, but should incline ſomewhat to the ſtronger pole of it. Forafter you haue well conſidered the matter, you will find that the ſtrength of the pole of the ſtone, can not worke according to its materiall greatneſſe, but is conũned to worke only according to the ſuſceptibility of the needle: the which, being a ſlender and thinne body, can not receiue ſo much as a thicker body may. Vherefore, ſecing that the ſtrongeſt pole of the ſtone giueth moſt ſtrength to that pole of the needle, which lyeth furtheſt from it it may vell happen that this ſuperiority of ſtrengih in the pole of ihe needle that is applyed to the weaker ſoL of the ſtone, may counterpoiſe the exceſſe of the ſtronger pole of the ſtone, ouer its oppoſite weaker pole; though not in greatneſſe and quantity, yet in reſpect of the vertue vhich is communicable to the poles of the needle ; whereby its comportment to the poles of the ſtone, is determined. And indeed the needles lying parallele to the axis of the ſtone when the middle of it ſticketh to the æquator of the ſtone, conuinceth that vpon rhe whole matter, there is no exceſſe in the eſficacious working f eyther of the ſtones poles: but that their exceſſe ouer one an other in regard of themſelues, is balanced by the needles receiuingit. But if the needle happeneth to touch ihe loadeſtone in ſome part neererone pole then the otheriin this caſeit is manifeſt that the force of the ſtone is greater on the one ſide of the necdles touch, then on the other ſide; becauſe there is a greater quantity of the ſtone on the one ſide of the needle then on the other: and by conſequence the needle will incline that way which the greater force draveth it, ſo farre forth as the orher part doth not hinder it. Now we know that if the greater part were diuided fromthe reſt, and ſo were an entire loadeſtone by it ſelfe (thats, if the loadeſtone were cutt of where the needle toucheth it)then the needle would ioyne it ſelfe to the pole, that is to the end, of that part:and by conſequence, would be tending to it, in ſuch ſortas a ping is ſucked tendeth towardes the ſucker againſt the motion or force vhich cometh from the leſſer part: and on the other ſide the leſſer part of ihe ſtone which is on the other ſide of the point which the needle toucheth, muſt hinder this inclination of the needle according to the roportion of its ſtrength; and ſo it folloeth that the needle will hang b its end, not directly fett to the end of the greater part, but as mucli inclining towardes it as the leſſer part dęth not hinder by ſtriuing to pull it the other way. Out of which we gather the true caufe of the necdles declination, to witt the proportion of working of the two vnequall partes of ihe ſtone, beteene which it toucheth and is ioyned to the ſtone. And we likewiſe diſcouer their errour who iudge that the part which draeth iron is the next pole vnto the iron. Forit is rather the contrary pole which attracteth; or to ſpeake more properly it is the whole body of the ſtone as ſtreaming in lines almoſt parallele to the axis, from the furthermoſt end, to the orther end Which is next to the iron: and (in our caſe) it is rhat part of the ſtone which beginneth from the contrary pole and reacheth to the needle. For beſides the light which this diſcourſe gaue vs, experience aſſureth vs that a loadeſtone, hoſe poles lye broadwayes, not longwayes the ſtone, is more imperfect, and draweth more weakely then if the poles lay longwayes; which would not be if the fluours did ſtreame from all partes of the ſtone directly to the pole: for then, howſocuer the ſtone were caſt the whole vertue of it would be in the poles. Moreouer, if a needle were drawne freely, vpon the ſame meridian frõ one pole to the other,; as ſoone as it were paſſed the æquator it would leape ſoddainely att the very ſirſt remooue off of the æquator, where it is parallele with the axis of the loadeſtone, from being ſo parallele, to make an angle with the axis greater then a halfe right one, to the end that it might looke vpon the pole which is ſuppoſed to be the only attractiue that draweth the needle: which great change, wrought all att once, nature neuer cauſeth nor admitreth, but in all actions or motions, vſcth to paſſe through all the mediums whenſoeuer it goeth from one extreme to an other. Beſides: there would be no variation of the needles aſpect towardes the north end of the ſtone: for if euery part did ſend its vertue immediately to the poles, it were impoſſible that any other part whatſocuer should be ſtron p then the polar part, ſeeing that the polar part, had the vertue euen of that particular part, and of all the other partes of the ſtone beſides, ioyned init ſelfe. This therefore is euident; that the vertue of the loadeſtone goeth from end to end in pallele lines; vnleſſe it be in fuch ſtones as haue their polar partes narrower then the reſt of the body of the ſtone: for in them, tlie ſtreame vill tend with ſome little declination towardes the pole, as it were by way of refaction; becauſe without the ſtone, the fluours from the pole of the carth do coarct themſelues,and ſo do ſenſibleofany emanations fromit, that being ſ as we haue ſaid before) theirreadyeſt way to paſſe along: and within the ſtone, the ſtreame doth the like to meete the aduenient ſtreame where it is ſtrongeſt and thickeſt; which is, att that narrow part of the ſtones end, which is moſt prominent out. And by this diſcourſe we diſcouer likewiſe an other errour of them, that imagine the loadeſtone hath a ſphere of actiuity round about i, equall on all ſidesi that is, perfectly ſphericall, if the ſtone be ſphericall. Vhich cleerely is a miſtaken ſpeculation: ſor nature hauing ſo ordered allher agents that where the ſtrength is greateſt, there the action muſt (generally ſpeaking) extend it ſelfe furtheſt off; and it being acknovledged that the loadeſtone hath greateſt ſtrengih in its poles and leaſt in the æquator; it muſt of neceſſity follow, that it worketh further by its poles then by its æquator. And conſequently, it is impoſſible that its ſphere of actiuity should be perfectly ſphericall. Nor doth Cabeus his experience moue vs to conceiue the loadeſtone hatha greater ſtrength to retaynean iron layed vponit by its æquator, then by its poles: for to iuſtify his aſſertion, he :hould haue tried it in an iron wyre that were ſo short, as the poles could not haue any notable operation vpon the endes of it ſiince otherwiſe, the force of retayning it, will be attributed to the poles (according to what we haue aboue delinered) and not to the æquator. The eighth poſition is; that the intention cf nature in all ithe operations of the loadeſtone, is to make an vnion betwixt the attractiue and the attracted bodies. Which is euident out of the ſticking of them together: as alſo out of the violence wherewith iron cometh to a loadeſtone; which when it is drawne by a powerfull one, is ſo great, that through the force of the blow hitting the ſtone, it will rebound backe againe, and then fallagaine to the ſtone: and in like manner a needle vpona pinne, if a loadeſtone be ſett neere it, turneth with ſo greata force towardes the pole of the ſtone, that it goeth beyond it, and coming backe againe, the celerity wherewith it moueth maketh'it retire it ſelfe too farre on the other ſide;and ſo by many vndulations, att the laſt it cometh to reſt directly oppoſite to ihe pole. Likeviſe, by the declination; by meanes of which, the iron to the ſtone, orthe ſtone to the earth, approacheth in ſucha diſpoſition as is moſt conuenient to ioyne the due endes together. And laſtly, out of the flying avay of the contrary endes from one an other: Which clearely is to no other purpoſe, but that the due endes may come together. And in generalls there is no doubt but ones going to an other, is inſtituted by the order of nature for their coming together,and for their being together, which is but a perſeuerance of their coming together. The nineth poſition is, that the nature of a loadeſtone doth not ſinke deeply into the maine body of the earth, as to haue the ſubſtance of its whole body, be magneticall; but only remayneth neere the ſurface of it. And this is euident by the inequality in vertue of the two endes; for if this magnetike vertue were the nature of the whole body, borth endes ould be equally ſtrong. Nor would the diſpoſition of one of the endes, be different from the diſpoſition of the other. Againe, there could be no variation of the tending towardes the north: for the bulke of the whole body would haue a ſtrengih ſo eminently greater, then the rominences and diſparities of hils or ſeas;as the varieties of theſe would b. abſolutely inſenſible. Againe; if the motion of the loadeſtone came from the body of the carth, it would be perpetually from the center, and not from the poles; and ſo, there could be no declination, more in one part of the earth,then in an other. Nor would the loadeſtone tend from north to ſouth, but from the center to the circumference; or rather from the circumſference to the center. And ſo we may learne the diſference between the loadeſtone and the earth in their attractiue operationss towitt, that the earth doth not receiue its influence from an other body, nor doth its magnetike vertue depend of an other magnetike agent, that impreſſeth it into it: which neuertheleſſe, is the moſt remarkable condition of a loadeſtone. A gaine the ſtrongeſt vertue of the loadeſtone, is from pole to pole: but the ſtrongeſt vertue of the earth, is from the center vpwardes, asappeareth by fireforkes gaining a much greater magnetike ſtrength in a short time, thena loadeſtone in a longer: Neyther can it be thence obiected, that the loadeſtone should therefore receiue the earthes influences more ſtrongly from the centervardes, then from the poles of the earth, hich by its operation, and what we haue diſcourſed of it, is certaine it doth not;) ſince the beds where loadeſtones lye and are formed be towardes the bottome of that part or baike ofthe earth which is imbued with magnetike vertue. Againe, this vertue which e ſee in a loadeſtone, is ſubſtantiall to it; Whereas the like vertue is but accidentall to the earth, by meanes of the ſunnes drawing the northerne and ſouththerne exhalations to the æquator. The laſt poſitiõ is,hat the loadeſtone muſt be found ouerallthe earth, and in euery countiy. And ſo we ſee it is: both becauſe iron mines are found(in ſome meaſure) almoſt in allcountries: and becauſe, att the leaſt other ſortes of earth ſ(as we haue declared of pottearths) can not be vanting inany large extent of country; which when they are baked and cooled in due poſitions, haue this effect of the loadeſtone, and are of the nature of it. And Docteur Gilbert sheweth, that the loadeſtone is nothing elſe but the oore of ſteele or of perfecteſtirons and that it is to be found of all colours, and fashions, and almoſt of all conſiſtences. So that we may eaſily conceiue, that the emanations of the loadeſtone being euery where, as well as the cauſes of grauity; the two motions of magnetike thinges and of weighty thinges, do both of them deriue their origine from the ſame ſource; I meane, from the very ſame emanations this effect in the loadeſtone, and that other in weighty thinges. And who knoweth but that a like ſucking to this which we haue :hewed in magnetike thinges, paſſeth alſo in the motion of grauity? In a wold, grauity beareth a faire teſtimony in the be halfe of the magnetike force; and the loadeſtones working, returneth no meane verdict for the cauſes of grauity,according to what we haue deliuered of them. THE TVO AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER. A ſolution of certaine Problemes conterning ihe loadeſione, and as hort ſumme of the whole doctrine touching it. V Vt of what is ſaid vpon this ſubiect, we may proceed to the ĩ3 JJ ſolution of certaine queſtions or problemes, which are or may b —& be made in this matter. And ſirſt, of that which Doctour Gilbert diſputeth againſt all former writers of the loadeſtone to witt which is the North, and which the South pole ofa ſtone? Which ſeemerh vnto me, to be only a queſtion of the name: for if by the name of north and ſouth, vevnderſtãd that end ofthe ſtone which hath that vertue that the north or ſouth pole of the earth hauei then it is certaine, that the end of the ſtone which looketh to the ſouth pole of ihe carth, is to be called the north pole of the loadeſtone; and conrrariwiſe, that which locketh to the north, is to be called the ſouth pole of it. But if by the names of northand ſouth pole of the ſtone, you meane thoſe endes of it, that lye and point to the north and to the ſouth poles of the earthithen you muſt reckon their poles contrariwiſe to the former account. So that the termes being once defined, there will remaine no further controuerſye abour this point. Doctor Gilbert ſeemeth alſo to haue an other controuerſy with all writers; to witt wherher any bodies beſides magneticall ones, be attractiue; Which he ſeemeth to denyiall others to aſfirme. But this alſo being fairely putt, will peraduenture proue no controuerſy: for the queſtion is eyther in common, of attractionior elſe in particular, of ſuch anattraction as is made by the loadeſtone. Of the ſirſt part, there can be no doubr;as we haue declared aboue; and as is manifeſt betwixt gold and quickeſiluer, hen a man holding gold in his mouth, it draweth vnto it the quickeſiluer that is in his body. But for the attractiue to drawa body vnto it ſelfe, not wholy, but one determinate part of the body drawne, vnto one determinate part of the draver; is an attraction which for my part I can not exemplify in any other bodies but magneticall ones. A third queſtion is, whether an iron that ſlandeth long time vhen vnmoued ina window, orany other partof a building, perpendicularly iron placed . to the earth, doth contracl a magneticall vertue of drawing or pointing perpediculorly tovardes the north in that end which looketh downewardes. For catth doth qœr Cabeus  who wrote ſince Gilbert) aſfirmeth it out of experience: but⸗ ma gr eticall eyther his experiment or his expreſſion was defectiue. For aſſuredly if the -.iron ſtandeth ſo, in the northerne hemiſphere, it will turne to the nòrth; the norh, or and if in the ſoutherne hemiſphere; it will turne to the ſouth: for ſeeing ſonarde; ile the vertue of the loadeſtone proceedeth from the earth, and that the end that lyeth carth hath different tempers towardes the nort h,and towardes the ſouth dorne⸗ærdes. pole (as hath beene alieady declared) the vertue which cometh out of the earth in the northerne hemiſphere, willgiue vnto the end of the iron next it an inclination to the north pole; and the caith of the ſoutherne hemiſphere ill yield the contrary diſpoſition vnto the end which is neereſtit. ll lill The next queſtion is, hya loadeſtone ſeemeth to loue iron better then it doth an other loadeſtone? The anſere is, becauſe iron is indiſſerent in why Inaceſtoall its partes to receiue the impreſſion of a loadeſtone; hereas an other ſes aẽt ion loadeſtone receiueth it only in a determinate part: and therefore a beuer :hen one Joadeſtone draveth iron more eaſily then it can an other loadeſtone: becauſe it findeth repugnance in the partes of an other loadeſtone, vnleſſe it be exactly rd in a right poſition. Beſides, iron ſeemeth to be compared to a loadeſtone, like as a more humide body to a dryer of the ſame nature: and the difference of male and female ſexes in animals do manifeſtly shew the great appetence of coniunction between moyſture and dryneſſe, when they belong to bodies of the ſame Tpecies. ; An other queſtion, is that great one; why a loadeſtone capped with Giberũs reaſon ſteele, taketh vp more iron then it would do if it were without that reſuted toucapping? An other concluſion like vnto this, is that if by a loadeſtone ſhinga c-pped you take e an iron, and by that irona ſecond iron, and then you pull tkethvp more away the ſecond iron; the firſt iron ſ in ſome poſition) ill leaue the on then ſ loadeſtone to ſticke vnto the ſecond iron, as long as the ſecond iron is ana within the ſphere ofthe loadeſtones actiuity: but if you remoue the inpregnated ſccond out of that ſphere, then the firſt iron remaining withinit, though thas n ſom⸗ the other be out of it, will leaue the ſecond, and ſeape backe to the more ſrongly loadeſtone. To the ſame purpoſe, is this other concluſion; that the ſnæn the ſtone reater the iron is, which is entirely within the compaſſe of the  adcſtones vertue, the more ſtrongly the loadeſtone vill be moued vnto it; and the more forcibly it will ſticke to i The reaſons of all theſe three, ee muſt giue att once: for they hang all vpon one ſtring. And in my conceite neyther Gilbert nor Galileo haue hitt vpon the right. As for Gilberti he thinkerh that in iron there is originally the vertue of the loadeſtone; but that it is as it were a ſleepe vntill by the touch of the loadeſtone it be awaked and ſett o worke: and therefore the vertue of both ioyned together, is greater then the vertue of the loadeſtone alone. But if this vere the reaſon, the vertue of rhe iron would be greater in euery regard, and not only in ſlicking or in taking vp: Whereas himiſelfe confeſſcth, that a capped ſtone draweth no further, then a naked ſtone, nor hardly ſo farre. Beſides, it ould continue its vertue out of the ſphere of actiuity of the loadeſtone, which it doth not. Againe; ſeeing that if you compare them ſcuerally, the vertue of ihe loadeſtone is greater, then the vertue of the iron: Why should not the middle iron ſticke cloſer to the ſtone then to the further iron which muſt of neceſſity hane leſſe vertue? I J Galileo yieldeth the cauſe of this effect, that when an iron toucheih an iron, there are more partes which touch onean other, then vhena loadeſtone toucheth the iron: both becauſe the loadeſtone, hath generally much impurity in it, and therefore diuers partes of it haue no vertue; whereas iron, by being melted hath all its paites pure: and ſecondly, becauſe iron can be ſinoothed and polisked more then a loadeſtone can be: and thercfore ĩts ſupeiſicies toucheth in a manner vith all its partes; whereas diuers partes of the ſtones ſupeificies can not touch, by reaſon of its ruggedneſſe. And he conſirmeth his opinion by experience: for if you putt the head of a needle toa bare ſtone, and the point of it toan iioni and then plucke away the iron; the needle will leaue the iron, and ſticke to the ſtone: but if you turne the needſe the other way, ĩt will leaue the ſtone and ſticke to the iron. Out of which he inferreth that itis the multitudæ of partes, which cauſeth the cloſe and ſtrong ſticking. And it ſeemerb he found the ſame in the capping of his loadeſtones: for he vſed ſlatt irons for that puipoſe; which by their whole plane did take vp other irons: whereas Gilbert capped his with cõuexe irons; which not applying themſelues to other iron, ſo ſtrongly orvith ſo many partes as Galileos did, ould not by much take vꝑ ſo great weightesas his. Neuertheleſſe, jt ſcemeth not to me that his anſiere is ſuſſicient, or that his reaſons conuince; for we are to conſider that the vertue which he uttethin the iron muſt ſaccording to his owne ſuppoſition) proceed Eom the loadeſtone: and then, what importeth it, whether the ſuperficies of the iron which touchethan orheriron, be ſo exactly plaine or no: Or that the partes of it be more ſolide thenthe partes of the ſtone? Forall this conduceth nothing to make the vertue greater then it was: ſince no more vertue can go from one iron to the oiher, then gocth from the loadeſtone tothe firſtiron: and if this vertue can not tye the ſiſt iron to the loadeſtone; it can not proceed out of this vertue that the ſecond iron be tyed to the firſt. Againe if a paper be putt berwixt the cappe and an other iron, it doth not hinder the magneticall vertue from paſſing through it to the iron;but the vertue of taking vp more weight rhen the naked ſtone as ableto do, is thereby rendered quite vſleſſ. Therefore it is euident, that this vertue muſt be putt in ſomething elſe, and not in the applicarion of the magneticall vertue. And to examine his reaſons particulaily, it may very well fallout that whatſoeuer the cauſe be, the point of a necdle may be too little to make an exact experience in; and thereſore a new doctrine ought not lightly be grounded vpon vhat appeareth in the application of that. And likewiſe, the greatneſſe of the ſurfaces of the two irons, may be a condition helpefullto the cauſe vhatſoeuer it be: for greater and leſſer, are the common conditions of all bodies, and therefore do auayle all Eindes of corporeall cauſesi ſo that, no one cauſe can be affirmed more then an other, meerely out of this that great doth more, and litile doth leſſe. : llli To come then to our owne ſolution:  haue conſidered, how fire hath in a manner the ſame efſect in iron,as the vertue of the loadeſtone hath by meanes of the cappe: for I find that fire coming thiough iron ied glowing hoat, vill bne more ſtrongly, then iſ it should come immediately through the ayre; as alſo we ſee that in pittecoale the ſire is ſtronger then in charcoale. And neuertheleſſe, the ſire will heat further if it come immediately from the ſource of it, then if it come through a red iron that burneth more violently where it toucheth; and likeniſe charcoale vill heat further then pittcoale, that neere hand burneth more ſiercely. In the ſame manner, the loadeſtone vill draw further without a cappe then with one; but witha cappe it ſlicketh faſter then vithout one. Whence I ſee that it is not purely the vertue of ihe Ioadeſtone; but the vertue of it being in iron; Which cauſeth this eſſect. li Nov this modification, may proceed eyther from the multitude of partes which come out of the loadeſtone, and are as it were ſtopped in the iron; and ſo the ſphere of their actinity becometh shorter but ſtronger: or elſe from ſome quality of the iron ioyned to the inſluence of the loadeſtone. The ſirſt ſcemeth not to giue a good account of the eſſecti for why should a little paper take it away, ſeeing we are ſure that it ſtoppeth not the paſſage of the loadeſtones influence ? Againe, the influence of the loadeſtone, ſeemeth in its motion to be of the nature of light, which goeth in an inſenſible time as fame as it can reach: and therefore, were it multiplyed in the iron, it would reach further then without it; and from it, the vertue of the loadeſtone would beginne a ne ſphere of actiuity. Therefore, we more villingly cleaue to the latter part of our determination. E And there vpon enquiring what quality thete is in iron, whenee this effect may follow; we find that it is diſtinguished from a lòadeſtone, as amettall is from a ſtone. Now we know that mettalls haue generally more humidity then ſtones; and we haue diſcourſed aboò], thai humidity is the cauſe of ſticking:eſpecially when it is little and Venſe. Theſe qualities muſt needes be in the humidity of ien p which of àll mettalls is the moſt terreſtriall: and ſuch humidity as is able to ſlicke to the influence of the loadeſtone, as it paſſeth through, the body of the iron, muſt be exceeding ſubtile and ſmall; and it ſeemeth neceſſary that ſach humidity should ſticke to the inſluence of the loadeſtone, when t meeteth with it, conſidering that the inſluence is of it ſelfe dry and that the nature of iron is akinne to the loadeſtone: wherefore, the humidity of the one,and the drought of the other, will not fuile of incorporating together. Now then, if two irons, well polished and plaine, be vnited by ſuch a glew as reſulteth out of this compoſition, there is a manifeſt appearance of much reaſon forthem to ſticke ſtrongly togerher. This is confirmed by the nature of ironin very cold countries and very cold weather: for the very humidiry of theayre in times of froſt, will make vpon iron, ſooner then vpon other thinges, ſucha ſticking glew as vill pull off the skinne of a mans hand that toucheth it hardd& i And by this diſcourſe, you will perceiue that Galileos arguments do confirme our opinion as well as his owne; and that according to our doctrine, all circumſtances muſt fall out iuſt as they do in his experiences. And the realon is cleare why the interpoſition of an orher body, hindereth the ſtrong ſticking of iron to the cappe of the loadeſtone; for it maketh the mediation between them greater, which we haue shewed to be the generall reaſon why thinges are eaſily parted. Lett vs then proceed to the teſolurion of the other caſes propoſed. The ſecond is already reſolued: for if this glew be made of the inſſuence of the loadeſtone, it can not haue force further then the loadeſtone it ſelfe hath: and ſo farre, it muſt haue more force, then the bare influence of the loadeſtone. Orrather the humidity of two irons maketh the glew of a fitter temper to hold, then thac which is berweene a dry loadeſfone and iron;and the glew entereth better when both ſides are moiſt, then when only one is è lilil B. But this reſolution though it be in part good, yet it doth not euacuate The reass æhy the whole difficulty, ſince the ſame caſe happeneth betweene a ſtronger in ſhe forme? and a weaker loadeſtone, as betweene a loadeſtone and iron: for the loadeſtone weaker loadeſtone, whilſt itis, Within the ſphere of actiuiry of the greater doth drav the ſo, deſtone, draveth away aniron ſert betwixt them as well as a ſecond intetiacent ird . ll tò the greater. iron doth. For the reaſon therefore of the litile loadeſtones drawing away the iron, we may conſider that the greater loadeſtone. hath two eſfects vpon the iron, which is betwixt it and a leſſer loadeſtone, and a third eſfect vpon the little loadeſtone ĩt ſelfee. The firſt is that it impregnateth the iron, and giueth it a permanent vertue by which it worketh like a weake loadeſtone. The ſecond is, that as it maketh the iron worke towardes the leſſer loadeſtone by its permanen: vertue; ſo alſo it accompanyerh the ſteame that goerh from the iron owardes the little loadeſtone with its owne ſteame, which goeth the ſame way: ſo that both theſe ſteames do in company clymbe vp the ſteame of the little loadeſtone which meeteth them; and that ſteame cly vbethvp the enlarged one of both theirs together. The third effect which the greater loadeſtone worketh, is that it maketh the ſteame of the little loadeſtone become ſtronger by augmenting its innate vertue in ſome degree. Nov then, the going of the iron to eyther of the loadeſtones, muſt follow the greaterand quicker coniunction of the two meeting ſteames, and not the greatneſſe of one alone. So that if the coniunòtion of the two ſteames between the iron and the little loadeſtone be greater and quicker then the coniunction of the two ſteames which meete between the greater loadeſtone and the iron, the iron muſt ſticke to the leſſer loadeſtone. And this muſt happen more often then otherviſe: for the ſteame which goeth from the iron to the greater loadeſtone will for the moſt part be leſſe then the ſteame which goeth from the leſſer loadeſtone to the iron. And though the other ſteame be neuer fo great yet it can not draw more then according to the proportion of its Antagoniſts coming from the iron. Whercfore ſeeing the two ſteames betwixt the iron and the little loadeſtone, are more roportionable to one an other, and the ſteame coming out ſi the little loadeſtone is notably greater, then the ſteame going from the iron to the greater loadeſtone; the coniunction muſt be made for the moſt part to the little loadeſtone. And if this diſcourſe doth not hold in the former part of the Probleme betwixt a ſecond iron and a loadeſtone, it is ſupplyed by the former reaſon which we gaue for that particular purpo C. The third caſe dependeth alſo of this ſolutioniforthe bigger an iron is, ſo many more partes it hath to ſucke vp the influence of the loadeſtone;and conſequently, doth it thereby the more greedily: and therefore the loadeſtone muſt be carried to it more violently, and when they are iovned, ſticke more ſtrongly. The ſixt queſtion is, hy the variations of the needle from the true north, in the northerne hemiſphere, are greater, the neerer you go to the Pole, and Ieſſer the neerer you approach to the æquator. The reaſon whereof is plaine in our doctrine; for, conſidering that the magnetike vertue of the earth, ſtreameth from the north towardes the æquator,; it followerh of neceſſity, that if there be two ſtreames of magnetike fluours iſſuing flom the north, one of them, preciſely from the pole, and the other froma part of the earth neere the pole; and that the ſtreame coming from the point by ſide the pole, be buta little the ſtronger of the two; there willappeare very little differencies in their ſeuerall operations, after they haue had a long ſpace to mingle their emanations together; which thereby do ioyne,and grow as it were into one ſtreame. Vhereas the neerer you come to the pole, the more you vill find them ſeuered, and exch of them working by its owne vertue. And very neere the point which cauſcth the variation, each ſtreame worketh ſingly by it carry the needle ſtrongly vnto his courſe from the due north, if his ſtreame be neuer ſo little more efficacious then the other. Againeia line drawne froma point of the carth wyde of the pole, to a point of the meridian neere the æquator, maketh a leſſe angle, then a line dravne from the ſame point of the carth to a point of the ſame meridian neerer the pole: wherefore, the variation being eſteemed by the quantities of the ſaid angles, it muſt needes be greater neere the ole, then neere the æquator, though the cauſe be the ſame. Vhich a little figure ill preſently explicate. Lett the point A, be the pole;and the line A B, the meridian; and the point B B, the interſection of it, with a parallele neere the æquator; and the point C, the interſection of the meridian with the Tropike; and D, a point in the earth C neere the pole, vnto which in the ſoid interſection the needle tendeth, in ſteed of looking directly to the pole, whereby it maketh variation from due north. I ſay then, A Dthar the variation of a needle neere the æquator in the point B, looking vpon the point D, can not be ſo great and ſenſible, as the variation of a needle in the Tropike C, looking vpon the ſame point; ſince the angle D B A, vhich is made by the variation of the firſt, is leſſe then the angle D CA, which is made by the variation of the latter needle, neerer the pole. But becauſe it may happen, that in the partes neere the æquator, the variation may proceed from ſome piece of land, not much more northerly then where the needle is; but that beareth rather eaſterly or weſterly from it; and yet Gilberts aſſertion goeth vniuerſally, when he ſayth the variations in ſoutherne regions are leſſe, then in northerne ones: ve muſt examine what may be the reaſon thereof. And preſently the generation of the loadeſtone sheetli it plainely : for ſeeing the nature of the loadeſtone proceedeth out of this,that the ſunne woiketh more vpon the torride zone, then vpon the poles; and that his too ſtrong operation, is contrary to the loadeſtone, as being of the nature of fire it followerh euidently that the landes of ihe tornde zone can not be ſo magneticall(generally ſpeaking) as the polar landes are; and by conſequence that a leſſer land neere the pole, will haue a greater eſfect, then a larger continent neere the æquator: and likeiſe a land further off towardes the pole, willworke more ſtrongly then a neerer land which 10.lyeth towardes the æquator. mn the The ſeuenth queſtion is, whether in the ſame part of the world a the æorlaa touched needle may att one time vary more from the true north point, touched nee dle , nd att an other time leſſe? In which Gilbert was reſolute for the negamay att one time vaty more tiue part: but our latter Mathematiciens are of an other mind. Three ſtò the north, experiences were made neere London in three diuers yeares. The two inaai an other ſirſt, 42 yeares diſtant from one an other;and the third i12 yeares diſtant fromthe ſecond. And by them it ĩs found that in the ſpace of 54 yeares, 2 he loadeſtone hath att London diminished his variation from the north, the quantity of 7 degrees and more. But ſo that in the latter yeares the diminution hath ſenſibly gone faſter then in the former. T heſc obſeruations peraduenture are but little credited by ſtrangers; but we who know the worth of the men that made them, can not miſtruſt any notable errour in them: for they were very able mathematicians, and they made their obſeruations with very greate xactneſſe;and there were ſeuerall iuditious wittneſſes att the making of them; as may be ſeene in M. Gillebrand his print concerning this ſubiect. And diuers other particular perſons do confirme the ſame; whoſe creditt, though each ſingle might peraduenture be ſlighted, yet all in body make a great acceſſion. Ve muſt therefore caſt about to ſind what may be the cauſe of an eſfect ſo paradoxe to the reſt of the doctrine of the loadeſtone: for ſeeing that no one place, can ſtand otherviſe to the north of the earth att one time then att an other; how is it poſſible that the needle should receiue any new variation, ſince all variation proceedeth out of the inequality of the earth? But when we conſider that this effect proceedeth not out of the maine body of the earth but only out of the tm; it; and that its barke, may haue diuers tempers not as yet diſcouered vnto vs; and that out of the variety of theſe tempers, the inſluence of the earthy partes may be diuers in reſpect of one certaine places it is not impoſſible but tht ſuch variation may be; eſpecially in England: which Iland lying open tothe north, by a great and vaſt ocean may receiue more particularly then other places, thæ ſpeciall influences and variation of the weather, that happen in thoſe norrheaſterne countries from whence this influence cometh vnto vs. If therefore there: hould be any courſe of weather, whoſe periode were a hundred yearesſ for example) or more or leſſe,and ſo might eaſily paſſe vnmarked; this variation might grow out of ſuch a courſe. But in ſo obſcure a thing, we haue already hazarded to gueſſe too much. And vpon the whole matter of the loadeſtone, it ſerueth our turne, if we haue proued (as we conceiue we haue done fully) that its motions which appeare ſoadmirable, do not proceed from an occult uality; but that the cauſes of them may be reduced vnto locall motion; and that all they may be performed by ſuch corporeall inſtruments and meanes ſ though peraduenture more intricately ciſgoſed) as all other eſfects are among bodies. Whoſe ordering and diſpoſing and particular progreſſe, there is no reaſon to deſpaire of finding out; would but men careſully apply themſelues to that worke, vpon ſolide principles and vith diligent experiences. But becauſe this matter hath beene very long, and ſcatteringly diffuſed in many ſeuerall branches; peraduenture it villnot be diſpleaſing to the Reader to ſee the whole nature of the loadeſtone ſummed vp in short. Lett him then caſt his eyes vpon one eſſect of it, that is very eaſy to be tryed and is acknowledged by all riters; though we haue not as yet mentioned it. And itis, that a knife drawne from the pole of a loadeſtone towardes the ęquator, if you hold the point towardes the pole, it gaineth a reſpect to one of the poles: but contraviſe, if the point of the knife be held towardes the æquator, and be thruſt the ſame way it was drawne beſore(that is,towardes the æquator) it gaincth a reſpect towardes the contrary pole. It is euident out of this experience, that the vertue of the loadeſtone is communicated by way of ſtreames; and that init, there are two cnntrary ſtreames: for otherwiſe the motion of the knife this way or that vay, could not change the efficacity of the ſame partes of the loadeſtone. It is lkeiſe euident, that theſe contrary ſtreames, do come from rthe conrrary endes of the loadeſtone. As alſo, that the veriues, of them both,are in euery part of the ſtone. Likewiſe that one loadeſtone, muſt of neceſſity turne certaine partes of it ſelfe, to certaine partes of an other loadeſtone; nay that it muſt goe and ioyne to it, according to the lawes of attraction which we haue aboue deliuered: and conſequently that they muſt turne their diſagreeing partes away from one an other; and ſo, one loadeſtone ſeeme to ſly from an other, if they be ſo applyed that their diſagreeing partes be kept ſtill next to one an other: for in this caſe, the diſagrecing and the agreeing partes of the ſame loadeſtone, being in the ſame ſtraight linei one loadeſtone ſecking to dra his agreeing part neere to that part of the other loadeſtone whichagreeth with him, muſt of neceſſity turme away his diſagreeing paites to giue way vnto his agreeing part to approach nceerer. l And thus you ſce that the ſlying from one an other of two endes of two loadeſtones, which are both of the ſame denomination ( as for example the two ſouth endes, or the two noith endes) doth not proceed from a pretended antipathy between thoſe two endes, but from the artraction of the agreeing endes. Furthermore, the earth, hauing to a loadeſtone the nature of a loadeſtone; it followeth that a loadeſtone muſt neceſſarily tume it ſelfe to the poles of the earth by the ſame lawes. And conſequently, muſt tend to the north, muſt vary from the north, muſt incline towardes the center, and muſt be affected withallſuch accidents as we haue deduced of the loadeſtone. And laſtlyiſeeing that iron is to a loadeſtone, a fitt matter for it to impreſſe ils nature in, and eaſily retaineth that magnet ke vertue; the ſame effects that follow betweẽ two loadeſtones, muſt neceſſarily follow between a loadeſtone,and a peece of iron fittly proportionated in their degrees: excepting ſome litle particularities, which proceed out of the naturalneſſe of the magnetike vertue toa loadeſtone, more then to iron. And thus you ſee the nature of the loadeſtone ſummed vp in groſſe; the particular ioyntes and cauſes whereof, you may find treated att large in the maine diſcourſe. Wherein we haue gouerned our ſelues chiefely by the experiencesthat are recorded by Gilbert and Cabeus: to whom, We remitt our reader for a more ample declaration of particulars. THE THREE AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER. A deſcription of ihe ruo ſortes of liuing creatures; Plants, and Animalsi and hop they are framed in common io performe vitall motion. thridde, all ſuch effects as we haue mett with among bodies, Theconnexion of Itherto we haue endeauoured to follow by a continuall and to trace thẽ inall their vindinges, and to driue them vp to ving Chapters their very roore and originall ſource: for thie nature of our ſubiect hauing ænb the precebeene yet very common, hath not exceeded the compaſſe and power of deat ones. our ſearch and enquiry, to: deſcend vnto the chiefe circumſtances and particulars belonging vnto it. And indeede, many of the conucyances whereby the operatiors we haue diſcourſed of, are performed, be ſo ſecret and abſtruſe, as they that looke into them with leſſe heedefullneſſe and iudgment then ſuch a matter requireth, are too apt to impute them to myſterious cauſes aboue the reach oſ humane nature to comprehẽd, ond to calumniate them of being wrought by occult and Pecit⸗ I qualities; whereof no more reaſon could be giuen, then if the effects were infuſed by Angelicall handes without aſſiſtance of inferiour bodies: which vſeth to be the laſt refuge of ignorant men, who not knowing what to ſay, and yet preſuming to ſay ſomething, do fall ofien vpon ſuch expreſſiòs, as neyther themſelues nor their hearers vnderſtand,; and that if they be well ſcanned, do imply contradictions There fore we deemed it a kind of neceſſity to ſtraine ourſclues to proſecute moſt of ſuch effects, euen to their notionall connexions with rarity and denſity. And th: rather becauſe it hath not been our lucke yet to meet with any that hath hid the like deſigne, or hath done any conſiderable matter to caſe our paines. Which can not but make the readers iourney ſomewhat tedious vnto him to follow all our ſtepps, by reaſon of the ruggedneſſe, and vntrodeneſſe of the pathes we haue valked in. But now the effects we shall hence forward meedle withall, do grow ſo particular, and do ſarme into ſucha vaſt multitude of ſeuerall little ioyntes, and wreathy labyrinthes of nature, as were impoſſible in ſo ſummary a treatiſe, as we intend, to deliuer the cauſes of cuery one of them exactly;which would require, both large diſcourſes and aboun-dance of experiences to acquitt our ſelues as we ought of ſuch a ta: ke. Nor is there a like neede of doing it as formerly, for as much as concerneth our deſigne; ſince the cauſes of them are palpably materiall, and the admirable artifice of them, conſiſteth only in the Dædalean and vunderfull ingenious ordering and ranging them one withan other. Veshall therefore entreat our Reader from this time forwardes to expect only the common ſequele of thoſe particular effects, out of the principles already layed. And when ſome shall occurre, that may peraduenture ſeeme att the firſt ſight to be enacted immediately by à vertue ſpirituall, and that proceedeth indiuiſibly, in a different ſtraine from the ordinary proceſſes which we ſee in bodies and in bodily thinges ( that is by the vertues of rarity and denſity, woi king by locall motion) we hope he vill be ſatisfyed att our handes, if we lay downe a method⸗, and trace outa courſe, hereby ſuch euents and operations may follow out of the principles we haue layed. Though peraduenture we shall not abſolutely conuince that euery effect is done iuſt as we ſett it downe in euery particular, and that it may not as ell be done by ſome other diſpoſing of partes, vnder the ſame generall ſcope: for it is enough for our turne if we shew that ſucheſf cts may be performed by corporeall agents, working as other bodies do without confining ourſelues to an exactneſſein euery linke of the long chaine that muſt be wound vp in the performance of them. To come then to the matter; the next thing we are to employ ourſelues about, now that we haue explicated the natures of thoſe motions by meanes whereof bodies are made and deſlroyeds and in which they are to be conſidered chicfely as paſſiue, whiles ſome exteriour agent woiking vpon them couſeth ſuch alterations in them, and bringeth them to ſuch paſſe as wee ſee in the changes that are dayly wrought among ſubſtances;is, totake a ſuruay of thoſe motions which ſome bodies haue, wherein they ſeeme to be not ſo much patients as agents; and do containe with in themſelues the principle of their owne motion; and haue no relation toany outward obiect, more then to ſtirre vp that principle of motion, and ſett it on woike: which when it is once in act, hath as it were within the limits of its owne kingdome, and ſcuered from commerce vith all orth.r bodies whatſoeuer, many other ſubalterne motions ouer which it preſideth. To which purpoſe we may conſider that among the compounded bodies whoſe natures we haue explicateds there ate ſome, in whom the partes of different complexions are ſo ſmall and ſo well mingled together, that they make a compound, which to our ſenſe ſeemeth to be allof it quite through, of one homogeneous nature;and howſoeuer it be diuided, each part retaineth the entire and cõplete nature of the whole. Others againe there are, in which it is eaſy to diſcerne that the whole is made vp of ſeuerall great partes of very differing natures and tẽpers. And ; theſe, there are two kindes: the one, of ſuch, as their differing partes ſeeme to haue no relation to one an other, or correſpondence together to performe any particular woike, in which all of them are neceſſary; but rather they ſeeme to be made what they are, by chance and by accident; and if one part be ſeuered froman other, each is an entire thing by it ſelfe, of the ſame nature as it was in the whole : and no harmony is deſtroyed by ſuch diuiſion. As may be obſerued in ſome bodies dig ged out of mines, in which one may ſee lãpes of mettall, oore, ſtone, and glaſſe, and ſuch diſferent ſubſtances, in their ſeuerall diſtinct ſituations, perfectly compacted into one continuate body; whichif you diuide, the glaſſec remaineth what it was before, the Emerald is ſtill an Emerald, ithe ſyluer is good ſyluer,and the like of the orher ſubſtãces: the cauſes of which. may be eaſily deduced out of what we haue formerly ſaid. But there are other bodies in which this manifeſt and notable diſference of partes, carrieth ith it ſucha ſubordinatiõ of one of them vnto an other. as we can not doubt but that nature made ſuch engines ſif ſo moy call them)by deſigne;and intended that this variety should be in one thing; whoſe vnity and being what it is, should depend of the harmony of the ſeuerall differing partes, and should be deſtroyed by their ſeperation. As we ſce in liuing creatures;whoſe particular partes and members being once ſeuered there is no longer a liuing creature to be found among them. No of this kind of bodies, there are two ſortes. The firſt is of thoſe T-. that ſeeme to be one continuate ſubſtance, wherein we may obſerue one liuin and the ſame conſtant progreſſe throughout, from the loweſt vnto the high⸗ſt part of iti ſo that, the operation of one part is not att all different fromthut of an other: but the whole body ſeemeth to be the courſe and throughfare of one conſtant action, varying it ſelfe in diuers occaſions, and occurrences, according to the diſpoſition of the ſubiect. : The bodies of the ſecõd ſort, haue their partes ſo notably ſeperated one frò the other; and each of them haue ſucha peculiar motion proper vnto thæm, that one might conceiue they were euety one of thema complete diſtinct totall thing by it ſelfe,and that all of them were artificially tyed togetheri were it not, that the ſubordination of theſe partes to one an other is ſo great,and rhe correſpondence betweene them ſo ſtrict, (the one not being able to ſubſiſt without the other, from whom he deriueth what js needefull for him3 and againe being ſo vſefull vnto that other and hauing its action and morion ſo fitting and neceſſary for it, as without it that other can not bei) as plainely conumesth that the compound of all theſe ſenerall partes muſt needes be one indiuiduall thing. I H emember that when I travailed in ſpaine, I ſaw there two engines that in fome ſort do expreſſe the natures of theſe two kindes of bodiess The one att Toledo, the orher att Segouia: borh of An⸗ them ſett on worke by the current of the riuer, in which the ſ'ò foundation of their machine was layed. That att Toledo, was to force liuing vp vater a great hieght from the riuer Tagus to the Alcazar ( the ſeKing his pallace) that ſtandeth vpon a high ſteepe hill or rocke, almoſt perpendicular ouer the riuer. In the bortome, there was an indented wheele, which tuming round with the ſtreame, gaue motion att the ſame time to the whole engine: which conſiſted it a multitude Ce ij of little troughes or ſquare ladles ſett one ouer an other, in two parallele rowes ouer againſt one another, from the bottome to the toppe, and vpon two ſeuerall diuided frames of tymber. Theſe troughes were cloſed att one end witha trauerſe bord to retaine the water from running out there; which end being bigger then the reſt of the trough, made ĩt ſomewhat like a ladle: and the reſt of it, ſeemed to be the handle with a channell init, the little end of which channell or trough was open to lett the ater paſſe freely away. And theſe troughes were faſtened by an axeltree in the middle of them, to the frame of tymber that went from the bottome vp to the toppe: ſo that they could vpon that center moue att liberty eyther the shutt end downewardes, or the open end like the beame of a ballance. No atta certaine poſition of the roote wheeleſif ſo I may call it)all one ſide of the machine ſunke downea litile lower towardes the water, and the other was raiſed a little higher. Which motion was changed, as ſoone as the ground wheele had ended the remnant of his reuolution: forthen, the ſide that was loweſt before, ſprung vp, and the other ſunke downe. And thus, the two ſides of the machine, were like two legges that by turnes trode the waterias in the vintage, men preſſe grapes in a watte. Now the troughes that were faſtened to the tymber which deſcended, turned that part of them downewardes which was like a boxe shutt to hold the water:and conſequently, the open end was v pin the ayre, like thearme of the ballance vnto which the lighteſt ſcale is faſtened: and in the meane time, the troughes vpon the aſcẽJin g timber, were moued by a contrary motion; keeping their boxe endes aloſt, and letting the open endes incline downewardes: ſo thatif any water were in them, it would lett it runne out; whereas the others retained any that came into them. Vhen you haue made an image of this machine in your fantaſe, cõſider what will follow out of its motion. You vill perceiue that when one legge ſinketh downe towardes the water, that trough which is next to the ſuperficies of it, putting downe his boxe end, and dipping it a little in the water; muſt needes bring vp as much as it can retaine, when that legge aſcendeth: which when it is att its height, the trough moueth vpon his owne center; and the boxe end, which was loweſt, becometh now higheſt, and ſo the water runneth out of it. Now the other legge deſcending att the ſame time; it falleth out that the trough on its ſide, hich would be a ſteppe aboue that which hath the water in it, if they ſtood in equilibrity, becometh now a ſteppe lower then it: and is ſo placed, that the water which runneth out of that which is aloſt, falleth into the head or boxe of it; which no ſooner hath receiued it, but that legge on which itis faſtened, ſpringeth vp,and the other deſcendeth: ſo that the ater of the ſecond legge, runneth now into the boxe of the firſt legge, that is next aboue that which firſt laded the water out of the riuer. And thus, the troughes of the to legges deliuer their water by turnes from one ſide to the other; and att euery remooue, itgetteth a ſteppe vpwardes till it cometh to the toppe; whiles att euery aſcent and deſcent of the whole ſide, the loweſt ladle or trough taketh new water from the riuer, hich ladefull followeth immediately in its aſcent, that which was taken vp the time before. And thus, in a little while, all the troughes from hebottome to the toppe are full; vnleſſe there happen to be ſome tailing in ſome ladle: and in that caſe the water breaketh out there; and all the ladles aboue that, are dry. The other engine, or rather multitude of ſeuerall engines, to performe ſundry different operations,all conducing to one worke (Whereas, that of Toledo, is but one tenour of motion, from the firſttothe laſt;) is in the minte at Segouia. Which is ſo artificially made, that one part ofit, diſtendeth an ingott of ſiluer or gold into that breadth and thickneſſe as is requiſite to make coyne f WVhich being done, it deliuereth the plate it hath wrought, vnto an other that printeth the figure of the coyne vpon it. And from thence it is turned ouerto an other that cutteth it according to the print, into due shape and weight. And laſtly, the ſeuerall peeces fall intoa reſerue, inan other roome: vhere the oſficer, whoſe charge it is, findeth treaſure ready coyned; without any thing there, to informe him of the ſeuerall different motions that the ſiluer or the gold paſſed before they came to that ſtate. But if he goe on the other ſide of the wall, into the roume where the other machines ſtand and are att orke, he willthen diſcerne that euery one of them, which conſidered by it lelfe might ſeeme a diſtinct complete engine, is but a ſeruing part of the whole; whoſe office is,to make money: and that for this woike, any one of them ſeperated from the reſt, ceaſeth to be the part of a minte, and the whole is maymed and deſtroyed. Now lett vs apply the conſideration of theſe different kindes of engines, to the natures of the bodies we treate of. Which I doubt not, would fitt much better, were they liuely and exactly deſcribed. But itis ſo long ſince I ſaw them, and I was then ſo very young, that I retaine but a confufed and clowdy remembrance of them:eſpecially of the minte att Segouia, in the which there are many more particulars then 1 haue touched as conueniency for refining the oore or mertalliand then caſting it into ingots; and driuing them into roddes: and ſuch like: vnto all hich, there is little helpe of handes requiſite, more then to apply the matter duly att the firſt. But vhat I hate ſaid of them, is enough to illuſtrate what I ayme att: and though Ishould erre in the particulars, it is no great matter for I intend not to deliver the hiſtory of them: but only out of the remembrance of ſuch note full and artificiall Maſterpeeces, to frame a modell in their fancies that shall reade this, of ſomething ike them; whereby they may with more eaſe, make a right conception of what we are handling. Thus then all ſortes of plants, bothgreat and ſmall, may be compared motion we can diſcerne, isof one part tranſmitting vntothe next to it, the iuice whichit receiued from at immediately before it: ſo that it hath one conſtant courſe from the roote (which ſucketh it from the carth ) vnto the toppe of the higheſt ſprigge: in which, if it should be intercepted and ſtopped by any mayming of the barke ſthe channellit aſcendeth by) it would there breake out and turne into droppes, or gumme, or ſome ſuch other ſubſtance as the nature of the plant requireth: and all that part of it vnto which none of this iuice can aſcend would drye and wither and grow dead. But ſenſible liuing creatures, we may fittly compare to the ſecond machine of the minte att Segouia. For in them, though euery part and member, be as it were a complete thing of it ſelfe, yet euery one, requireth to be directed and putt oniin its motion by an othern; and they muſt all of them ( though of very dierent natures and indes of motion) conſpire together to effect any thing that may be, for the vſe and ſeruice of the whole. And thus we ſind in them perfectly the nature of a mouer and a moueable; each of them mouing differently from one an other, and framing to themſelues their owne motions, in ſuch ſortas is moſt agreeable to their nature, when that part which ſetteth them on woike hath ſtirred them vp. And nov becauſe theſe partes ( the mouers, and the moued) are partes of one whole; we call the entire thing Automaium or ſe mouens; ora liuing creature. Which alſo may be fittly compared to a ioyner, ora painter, or other crafteſman, that had his tooles ſo exactly fitied about him, as when he had occaſion to do any thing in his trade, his toole for that action were already in the ſitteſt poſitiò forit, to be made vſe of ſo as vithout remouing himſelfe frõ the oher where he might ſitt enuironed with his tooles, he might, by only pulling of ſome litile chordes, eytherapply the matter to any remote toole, or any of his tooles to the matter he would worke vpon, according as he findeth the one or the other more conuenient for performance of the action he intendeth. Vhereas in the other, there is no variety of motions; but one and the ſame, goeth quite through the body frò one end of it to the other. And the ſgeoſ the moyſture throughit, ſrom one part to an other next Which is all the motion it hath) is in a manner but like the riſing of ater in a ſtille, which by heate is made to creepe vp by the ſides of the laſſe;and from thence runneth through the noſe of the limbeke, and è leth into the receiuer. So that, if e will ſay that a plant liueth, or that the whole moueth it ſelfe, and euery part moueth other; it is to be vnderſtood in a farre more imperfect manner, then when we ſpeake of an animall: and the ſame wordes are attributed to both, ina kind of æquiuocall ſenſe. But by the way I muſt note, that vnder the title of plants I include not z00phytes or plantanimals: that is ſuch creatures as though they goe not from place to place, and ſo cauſea locall motion of their whole ſubſtance, yet in their partes, they haue a diſtinct and articulate But to leaue compariſons, and come to the proper nature of the thinges: lett vs frame a conception, that not farre vnderthe ſ uperficies of the earth, there were gathered together diuers partes of litile mixed bodies, which in the whole ſumme were yet but little: and that this little maſſe had ſome exceſſe of fire in ir, ſuchas we ſce in wett hay, or in muſtè of wine, or in woorr of beere:and that withall the drought of it were in ſo high a degree, as this heate should not find meanes (being too much compreſſed) to play his game: and that, lying there in the boſome of the earth, it should after ſome little time receiue its expected and deſired drinke through the beneuolence of the heauen; by which it being moyſtened, and thereby made more pliable, and render and eaſy to be wrought vpon, the little partes of fire should breake looſe; and they finding this moyſture a fitt ſubiect to worke vpon, should driue it into all the parres of the little maſſe,and digeſting it there should make the maſſe ſwell. Vhich action, taking vp ſnꝶ time for performance of it, in reſpect of the ſmall encreaſe of bulke made in the maſſe by the ſwelling of it; could not be hindered by the preſſing of the earth, though lying neuer ſo weightily vpon it: according to the maxime we haue aboue deliuered, that any little force, be it neuer ſo little; is able to ouercome any great reſiſtance, be it neuer ſo powerfull if the force do multiply the time it orketh in, ſufficiently to equaliſe the proportions of the agent and the reſiſtant. This encreaſe of bulke and ſwelling of the litle maſſe, vill of its owne nature be towardes all ſides, by reaſon of the fire and heate that occaſioneth it(Whoſe motion is on euery ſide, from the center to the circumſference: )but it will be moſt efficacious vpwardes, towardes the ayre, becauſe the reſiſtance is leaſt that way; both by reaſon of the litlethickneſſe of the earth ouer it; asalſo by reaſon that the vpper part of the earth lyeth very looſe and is exceeding porous, through the continuall operation of the ſunne and falling of raine vporit. It can not chooſe therefore but mount to the ayre;and the ſame caule that makerth it do ſo, preſſeth att rhe ſame time the lower partes of the maſſe, downewardes. But what aſcendeth to the ayre, muſt be of the hoater and more moiſt partes of the fermenting maſſe; and what goeth downewardes muſt be of his harder and dryer partes proportionate to the contrary motiòs of fire and of earth, which predominate in theſe two kindes of partes. Now this that is pushed vpwardes, coming aboue ground, and being there expoſed to ſunne and wind, contracteth thereby a hard and rough skinne on its outſide; but ithin is more tenderi in this ſort it defendeth it ſelfe from outward iniuries of weather whiles it mounteth: and by thruſting other partes downe into the earth, it holdeth it ſelfe ſteadfaſt, that although the wind may shake it, yet it can not ouerthrow it. The greater this plant groweth, the more iuice is dayly accrewed vnto it,and the heate is encreaſed; and conſequently, the greater aboundance of humos is continually ſent vp. Vich when it beginneth to clogge att the toppe, new humour preſſing vpwardes, forceth a breach ©n the skinne; and ſo a new piece, like the maine ſtemme, is thruſt out and beginneth on the ſides, which we calla branch. Thusis our plãt amplifyed, till nature not being able ſtill to breede ſuch ſtrong iſſues, falleth to workes of leſſe labour, and pusheth forth the moſt elaborate part of the plants iuice into more tender ſubſtances: but eſpecially,att the endes of the branches: where, aboundant humour, but attehe ſirſt, not well concocted, groweth into the shape of a buttoni and more and better concocted humour ſucceding, it groweth ſofter and ſofter (the ſunne drawing the ſubtileſt partes outwardes) ex cepting what the coldneſſe of the ayre and the roughneſſe of the wind do harden into an outward skinne. So then the next partes to the skinne, are tender; but the very middle of this button muſt be hard and dry, by reaſon that the ſunne from ithout, and the naturall heate within, drawing and driuing out the moyſture and extending it from the center, muſt needes leaue the more earthy partes much shrũcke vp and hardened by their euaporating out from them: which hardening, being an effect of fire within and vithout, that baketh this hard ſubſtance, incorporateth much of it ſelfe ith it, as we haue formerly declared in the making of ſalt by force of ſire. This button, thus dilated, and brought to this paſſe, we call the ſruite of the plant: whoſe harderpart, encloſeth oftentimes, an other not ſo hard as dry. The reaſon whereof is becauſe the outward hardeneſſe permitteth no moyſture to ſoake in any aboundance through it; and then, that which isenclſed init, muſt needes be much dryeds though not ſo much, but that it ſtillreraineth the common nature of the plant. This drought, maketh theſc inner partes to be like a kind of duſt; oratt the leaſt, ſuch as may be eaſily dryed into duſt, when they are bruſed out of the huske that encloſeth them. And in euery parcell of this duſt, the nature of the whole reſidethtas it were contracted into a ſmall quantity; for the iuice which was firſt in the burton, and had paſſed from the roote through the manifold varieties of the diuers partes of the plant, and had ſuffered much concoction, partly fiom the ſunne and partly from the inward heate impriſoned in that harder part of the foto is by theſe paſſages, ſtraining s,and concoctions, become att the length to be like a tincture extracted out of the whole plant; and is att the laſt dryed vp into a kind of magiſtery. Thiswe call the ſeede: which is, of a fitt nature, by being buried in the earth and diſſolued with humour, to renew and reciprocate the operation we haue thus deſcribed. Andthus, you haue the formation of a Plant. But a ſenſiue creature, being compared to a plant, asa plant istoa mixed body;you can not but conceiue that he muſt be compounded as it were of many plantes, in like ſort as a plant is of many mixed bodies. But ſo,that allthe plants which concurre to make one animal,are of one kind of nature and cognation: and beſides; the matter, of which ſuch diuerſity is to be made, muſt of neceſſity be more humid and figurable, then thãt of an ordinary plant: and the artificer which woiketh and mouldeth ir, muſt be more actiue. Wherefore we muſt ſuppoſe that the maſſe, of which an animal is to be made, muſt be actually liquid: and the firethat woiketh vpon it, muſt be ſo powerfull that of its owne nature, it may be ableto conuert this liquide matter into ſuch breathes and ſteames, as we ſce do vſe to riſe from water, when the ſunne or fire worketh vpon it. Yet if the maſſe werealtogether as liquide as water, it would vanish away by heate boyling it, and be dryed vp: therefore it muſt be of ſuch a conuenient temper, that although in ſome of its partes it be ſluide and apt to runne; yet by others it muſt be held together, as we ſce that vnctuous thinges for the moſt part are, which ill ell by heate, but not ſlye avay. So then if we imagine a great heate to be impriſoned in ſuch a liquour; and that it ſeeketh By boyling, to breake out; but that the ſolideneſſe and viſcouſneſſe of the ſubſtance ill not permitt it to euaporate: it can not chooſe but comport it ſelfe in ſome ſuch ſort as we ſee butter or oyle in a frying panne ouer the fire, when it riſeth in bubbles: but much more efficaciouſly; for their body is not ſtron enough to keepe in the heate; and therefore thoſe bubbles fall againe; whereas if it were, thoſe bubbles would riſe higher and higher, and ſtretch themſelues longer and longerſas when the ſoape boylers do boyle a ſtrong vnctuous lye into ſoape;) and euery one of them would be as it were a litle brooke, whereof the channell would be the encloſing ſubſtance;and the inward ſmoake that extendeth it, might be compared to the water of it:as when a glaſſe is blowne out by fire and ayre into a long figure. No we may remember, how we haue ſaid, where we treated of the roduction and reſolution of mixed bodies, that there are two ſortes of fquide ſubſtantiall partes, which by the operation of fire are ſent out of the body it worketh vpon; the watry, and the oyly partes. For though there appeare ſome times ſome very ſubtile and æthereall partes of a third kind (which are the aquæ ardentes, or burning ſpirits;) yet in ſuch a cloſe diſtilling of circulation as this is, they are not ſeuered by themſelues, but do accompagny the reſt:and eſpecially the watry partes: which are of a nature, that the riſing Ethereall ſpirits eaſily mingle with, and extend themſelues in it; Whereby the water becometh more efficacious,and the ſpirits leſſe fugitiue. Of teſe lnuide partes hich the fire ſendeth avay, the watry ones are the firſt, as being the eaſieſt to be rayſed: the oyly partes, riſe more diſficultly; and therefore do come laſt. And in the ſame manner it happeneth in this emiſſion of brookes, the watry and oyly ſteames wiſl cach of them ſlye into different reſerues; and if there arriue vnto them, aboundance of their owne quality, each of them muſt make a ſubſtance of its one nature by ſcttling in a conuenient place, and by due concoction. Which ſubſtance after it is made and confirmed, if more humidity and heate do preſſe it, willagaine break forth into other litle channels. But when the watry and oyly partes are boyled avay, there remaine yet behind other more ſolide and fixed partes, and more ſtrongly incorporated with fire then cytherof theſe: which yet can not drye vp into a fiery ſalt, becauſe a continuall acceſſiò of humour keepeth them alwayes flowing: and ſo they become like a couldron of boyling fire. Which muſt propagate it ſelfe as wide as eyther of the others; ſince theactiuity of it muſt needes be greater then theirs (as being the ſource of motion vnto them) and that there wanteth not humidity for it to extend it ſelfe by. And thus you ſce three rootes of three diuers phins, all in the ſame plant, proceeding by naturall reſolution from one primitiue ſource. Vhereof that which is moſt watry, is fitteſt to fabricate the body and common outſide of the triformed plant ſince water is the moſt figurable principle that is in nature, and the moſt ſuſceptible of multiplication; and by its cold is eaſyeſt to be hardened, and therefore fitteſt to reſiſt the iuiuries of enemy bodies that may infeſt it. The oyly partes, are fitteſt for the continuance and ſolidity of the plant: for we ſee that viſcoſity and oylineſſe, hold together the partes where they aboundiand they are ſlowly waſted by fire, but do conſerue and are an aliment to the fire that conſumeth them. The partes of the third kind, are fitteſt for the conſeruation of heate: which though in them it be too PY . : Violent; yet it is necoſſary for working vpon other parts, and for mainetaining a due temper in them. And thus we haue armed our plant vith three ſortes of riuers or brookes to runne through him, with as many different ſtreames; the one of a gentle balſamike oyle; an other, of ſtreaming fire;and the third of a connaturalland cooler water to irrigate and tem per him. The ſtreames of ater, (as we haue ſaid) muſt runne through the whole fabrike of this triformed plant: and becauſe it is not a ſimple water, but warme in a good degree,and as it were a middle ſubſtance betwixt water and avre (by reaſon of theardent volatile ſpiritt that is with it)it is of a fitt nature to ſwell as ayre doth; and yet withall to reſiſt violence in a conuenient degree, as water doth. Therefore, if from its ſource, nature ſendeth aboundance into any one part; that part muſt ſwell and grow thicker and shorter; and ſo, muſt Ibe contracted that way hih nature hath ordered it. Whence we perceiue a meanes, by which nature may drawany part of the outward fabrike, which way ſocuer she is pleaſed by ſert inſtruments for ſuch an effect. But when there i no motion , or but litle in theſe pipes, the ſtanding ſtreame that is in a very litle, though long channell, nuſt needes be troubled in its whole body, if any one part of it be preſſed vpon, ſo as to receiue thereby any impreſſion: and therefore, whatſoeuer is done vpon it, though att the very furtheſt end of it; maketh a commotion and ſendeth an impreſſion vp to its very ſource. Vhich appearing by our former diſcourſe to be the origine of particular and occaſionall motions; it is obuious to conceiue howit is apt to be moued and wrought by ſuch an impreſſion to ſett on foote the beginning of any motioni which by natures prouidence is conuenient ſor the plant, when ſuch an impreſſion is made vponiit. And thus you ſee this plant hath the vertue both of ſenſe or feeling; that is,of being moued and affected by externe obiects, lightly ſtriking vponit;as alſo,of mouing it ſelfe, to or from ſuch an obiect; according as nature shall haue ordained. Which in ſumme is; that this plant is a ſenſitiue creature, compoſed of three ſources: the heart, the bi aine, and the liuer: Whoſe offspringes are the arteries, the nerues, and the veines; which are filled with vitall ſpirits, with animal ſpirits, and with blood: and by theſc, the animal is heated, nourished, and made partaker of ſenſe and motion. Nov referring the particular motions of liuing creatures, to an orher time: we may obſerue that both kindes of them, as well vegetables as animals do agree in the nature of ſuſtaining themſelues in the three common actions of generation, nutrition, and augmentation; which are the beginning, the progreſſe, and the conſeruing of life. Vnto vhich ihree we may adde the not ſo much action as paſſion of death; and of ſickneſſeor decay, which is the way to death. THE FOVRE AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER. A more particular ſuruay of ihe generation of Animals; in which is diſcouered what part of ihe animal is firſt generated. & O beginne then ith examining how liuing creatures are b ingendered: our maine queſtion shall be, whether they be &S ſramed entirely att once; or ſucceſſiuely, one part after an other? And if this later way; which part firſt? Vpon the diſcuſſion of which, all that concerneth generation vill be explicated, as much as concerneth our purpoſe in hand. To deduce this from its origine: we may remember how our Maſters tell vs, that when any liuing creature is paſſed the heate of its angmentation or growing; the ſuperſiuous nouri hment ſettleth it ſelfe in ſome appoynted place of the body to ſerue for the production of ſome other. Now it is euident that this ſuperſuity cometh from all partes of the body, and may be ſaid to containe in it, after ſome ſort, the perfection of the whole liuing creature. Be it how it will, it is manifeſt that the liuing creature is made, of this ſuperſiuous moyſture of the parent: which according to the opinion of ſome, being compounded of ſeuerall partes deriued flom the ſeuerall limbes of th- parent ; thoſe partes when they come to be fermented in conuenient heate and moyſture, do take thei poſture, and ſituation, according tothe poſture and diſpoſition of partes that the liuing creature had, from whence they iſſued: and then they growing dayly greater and ſolider, ( the effects of moyſture and of heate;)do ant the ſength become ſucha creature as that was, from whence they had their origine. Vhich,an accident that Iremember, ſeemeth much to conſirme. It was of a catt that had its tayle curt of when it was very yong: which catt happening afterwardes to haue yong ones, halfe the kirtlinges proued without tayles, and the other halfe had them in an ordinary manner; as if nature could ſupply but on the partners ſide, not on both. And an other particular that Iſaw when I was att Argiers, maketh to this purpoſe, hich was, of a oman that hauing two thumbes vpon the left hand; foure daugthers that she had, did all reſemble her in the ſame accident, and ſo did a litle child, a girle of hereldeſt daugthers; but none of her ſonnes. Whiles I was there Ihad a particular curioſity to ſee them all: and though it be not eaſily permitted vnto Chriſtians to ſpeake familiarly with Mahometan women yet the condition I was in there, and the ciuility of the Baſtha, gaue me the opportunity of full view and diſcourſe with them: and the old woman told me, that her mother and Grandmother had beene in the ſame manner. But for them, it reſteth vpon her creditt: the others I ſaw my ſelf. But the opinion which theſe accidents ſeeme to ſupport; though att the ſirſt view it ſeemeth ſmoothly to ſatisfy our inquiry, and fairely to compaſſe the making of a liuing creature: yet looking further into it, we shall find it fall exceeding short of its promiſing; and meete with ſuch dificulties, as it can not ouercome. For firſt, lett vs caſt about how this compound of ſeuerall partes, that ſerueth for the generation of a new liuing creature, can be gathered from euery part and member of the arent: ſo to carry withit in ſitle the complete nature of it. The meaning hercof muſt be, that this ſuperſluous aliment, eyther paſſeth through all and euery litle part and particle of the parents body, and in its paſſage receiueth ſomet hing from them: or elſe, that it receiueth only from all ſimilar and great partes. The former ſeemeth impoſſible, for how can one imagine that ſuch iuice should circulate the whole body of an animall, and viſit euery atome of it,and retire to the reſerue where iris kept for generatiò; and no part of it remaine abſolutely hehind, ſticking to the ſlesh orbones that it bedeaweths but that ſtill ſome part returneth backe from euery part of the animall? Beſides; conſider how thoſe partes that are moſt remote from the channels which conuey this uice; when they are fuller of nourishment then they neede, the iuice vhich ouerfloweth from them, cometh to the next part, and ſettling there and ſeruing it for its due nourishment,driueth backe into the channell, that which was berwixt the channell and it ſelfe: ſo that here, there is no returne att all from ſome of the remoto pattes; and much of that iuice which is reiected, neuer went farre from the channell it ſelfe. We may therefore ſafely conclude, that it is impoſſible, euery litle part of the whole body should remitt ſomething impregnated and imbued with the nature of it. But then you may peraduenture ſay that euery ſimilar part doth.If ſo I would aske, how it is poſſible that by fermentation only, euery part should regularly goe toa determinate place, to make that kind of animal, in which, cuery ſimilar part is diffuſedto ſo greatan extent : Howshould the nature of ſlesh, here become broad, there round, and take iuſt the figure of the part it isto couer? How should a bone, here be hollov, there be blady,and in an other part take the forme of a ribbe, and thoſe many figures which we ſee of bones? And the like we might aske of euery other ſimilarpart, as of the veinesand the reſt. Againe; ſeeing it muſt of neceſſity happen, that att one time more is remitted from one part then from an other; how cometh it to paſſe, that in the collection rhe due proportion of natureis ſo punctually obſerued? Shall we ſay that this is done by ſome cunning artificer whoſe worke it is to ſert all theſe partes in their due poſture ; which Ariſtotele attributeth to the ſeede of the Male: But this is impoſſible: for al lthis diuerſity of worke, is to be done att one time, and in the ſame occaſions: which can no more be effected by oneagent, then multiplicity can immediately proceed from vnity. But beſides that there can be no Agent to diſpoſe of the partes when they are gathered it is euident that a ſenſitiue creature may be made without any ſuch gathering of partes beforehand froman other of the ſame kind: for elſe how could vermine breed out of liuing bodies, orout of corruption?How could ratts come to fill shippes, into which neuer any were brought: How could froggs be ingendred in the ayre? Ecles of deewy turſes, or of mudde: Toades of duckes: Fish, of hernes? And the like. To the ſame purpoſe; when one ſpecies or kind of animal is changed into an otherias when a catarpiller ora ſilkeworme becometha ſlye it is manifeſt that there can be no ſuch precedent collection of partes. And therefore, there is no remedy; but we muſt ſeeke out ſome other meanes and courſe of eneration.the this. Vnto which we may be ledd, by conſidering how a liuing creature is nourished and augmented: for whyshould not the partes be made in generation of a matter like to that which maketh thẽ in nutritiò? If they be augmẽted by one kind ofiuice that after ſeuerall changes, turnethatt tle length into fleshand bone; and into euery ſort of mixed body or ſimilar part, whereof the ſenſitiue creature is compounded; and that ioynethit ſelfe to what it findeth already made,why should not the ſame iuice, with the ſame progreſſe of heate and moyiture, and other due temperamẽts; be conuerted att the firſt into flesh and bone though none be formerly there to ioyne it ſelfe vnto?, Lett vs then concludethat the iuice which ſerueth for nourishmẽt of the animal, being more then is requiſite for that ſeruice; the ſuperſluous part of it, is drained from the reſt, and is reſerued in a place fitt for it: and ſpirits to it ſelfe, and becometh an homogeneall body, ſuch as othe: ſimple compoundes are; which by otherdegrees of heate and moyſture, is changed into an other kind of ſubſtance: and that againe; by othe: temperaments, into an other. And thus; by the courſe of nature, and by paſling ſucceſſiuely many degrees of temper, and by receiuing a totall change in euery one of them; att the length an animal is made of ſuch iuice as afterwardes ſerueth to nourish him. But to bring this to paſſe a shorter way, and with greater facility, ſome haue beene of opimon, that all ſimilar thinges of whatſocuer ſubſtance, are vndiſcernably mixed in euery thing thatis: and that to the making of any body out of any thingi there is no more required but to gather together thoſe partes which are of that kind, and to ſeperate, and caſt away from them, all thoſe which are of a nature differing from them. But this ſpeculation will appeare a very ayry and needeleſſe one, if we conſider into how many ſeuerall ſubſtances the ſame ſpecis of a thing may be immediately changed or rather, how many ſeuerall ſubſtances may be encreaſed immediately from ſeuerall equall indiuiduals of the ſame thing;and then take an account how much of each indiuiduall is gone into each ſubſtance which it hath ſo encreaſed. For if wee ſumme vp the quantities that in the ſeuerall ſubſtances are thereby encreaſed; we shall find that they do very much exceed the whole quantity of any one of the indiuiduals: Whichhould not be if the ſu bpoſtion were true; for euery indiuiduall shonld be but one totall made vp of the ſeuerall different ſimilar partes, which encreaſe the ſeuerall ſubſtances, that extract out of them what is of their owne nature. This ill be better vnderſtood by an example: ſuppoſe that a man, a horſe, a cowe, a sheepe, and 5300 more ſeuerall ſpecies of liuing creatures, should make a meale of lettuce: to auoyde all perplexity in conceiuing the argument, lett vs allo that euery one did e a pound and lett vs conceiue an other pound of this herbe to be burned; as much to be putrifyed vndera Cabage roote; and the like vnder 500 plantes more of diuers ſpecies. Then caſt how much of euery pound of lettuce is turned into the ſubſtances that are made of them, or thatare encreaſed by them; as, how much ashes, one pound hath made; how much vater hath beene diſtilled out of an other pound; how much a man hath beene encreaſed by a third; how much a horſe by a fourth;how much earth by the putrefaction ofa fifth pound, how much a cabage hath beene encreaſcd by a ſixth: and ſo goe ouer all the poundes that haue beene turned into ſubſtances of different ſpecieſes (hich may be multiplyed as muchas you pleaſe.) And when you haue ſummed vp all theſe ſeuerall quantities, you vill ſind them farre to exceed the quantity of one pound: which it would not do, if euery pound of lettuce were made vp of ſeuerall different ſimilar partes actually init, that are extracted by different ſubſtances of the natures of thoſe partes; and that no ſubſtance could be encreaſed by it, vnleſſe On the other ſide, if we but caſt our eye backe vpon the principles we haue layed where we diſcourſe of the compoſition of bodies, we shall diſcerne how this woike of changing one ithing into an other eytherin nutrition, in augmentation, or in generation; vill appeare not only poſſible, but eaſy to be effected. For out of them, it is made euident how the ſeuerall varieties of ſolide and liquide bodies; all differences of naturall qualities, all conſiſtences, and whatſoeuer elſe belongeth to ſimilar bodies; reſulteth out of the pure and ſingle mixture of rarity and denſity; ſo that to makeall ſuch varieties as are neceſſary, there is no neede of mingling, or of ſeperating any other kindes of partes: but only an art or power to minule in due manner , plaine rare and denſe bodies one vith an orher. Which very action and none other ( but with excellent methode and order, ſuch as becometh the great Architect that hath deſigned it)is performed in the generation of a liuing creature: which is made of a ſubſtance, att the firſt, farre vnlike what it afſterwardes groeth to be. If we looke vpon this change in groſſe, and conſider but the two extremesſto witt, the firſt ſubſtance, o? whicha liuing creature is made; and it ſelfe in its full perfection) I confeſſe, it may well ſeeme incredible how ſo excellent a creature can deriue its origine from ſo meane a principle, and ſo farre remote and differing from What it groweth to be. Bur if we examine it in retayle, and go along anatomiſing it in euery ſteppe and degree that it cangeth by: we shall find, that euery immediate chinge is ſo neere, and ſo palpably to be made by the concurrent cauſes of the matter prepared; as we muſt conclude, it can not poſſibly become any other thing then iuſt what it doth become. DTTake a beane, orany other ſeede, and puttit into the carth, and lett water fallvponit; canit then chooſe but that the beane muſt ſwell The beane ſwelling, can it chooſe but breake the: kinne? The :kinne broken can it chooſe (by reaſon of the heate that is in it) but puih out more matter, and do that action which we may call germinating? Can theſe germes chnoſe bur pierce the earth in ſmall ſtringes, as thy are able to make their way? Can theſe ſtringes chooſe but be hirdened, by the compreſſion of the earth, and by their owne nature, they being the heauyeſt partes of the fermented beane? And can all this be any thing elſe but a roore? Afterwardes the heate that is in the roote, mingling it ſelfe with more moyſture, and according to its nature , ſpringing vpwardes; willit not follow neceſſarily, that a tender greene ſubſtance twhich we call a budd, or leafe) muſt appearea litle aboue the earthiſince ſ(enderneſſe, greeneneſſe, and aſcent, are the effects of thoſe two principles, heate and moyſture ? And muſt not this greene ſubſtance change from what it was att the firſt, by the ſunne and ayre workin vpon it,as it groweth highenitillatt the iengih it hardeneth into a ſtalke? All this while, th heate in the roore ſublimeth vp more moyſture, ũhich muketh the italke att the firſt gro ranke and encreaſe in length. But when the more volatile part of that warme iuice, is ſuſficiently depured and ſublimed, willit not atrempt to thruſt it ſelfe out beyond the ſtale with much vigour and ſmartneſſe? And as ſoone as it meeteth with the cold ayre in its eruption, vill it not be ſtopped and thickned: And new partes flocking ſtill from the roote muſt they not clogge ithat iſſuc, and grow into a button, which will bea budd? This budde being hardened att the ſides, by the ſame cauſes hich hardened the ſtalke,and allthe while the inward heate ſtill ſtreaming vꝑ, and not enduring to be long encloſed, (eſpecially when by its being ſtopped, it multiplyeth it ſelfe)ill it not follow neceſſarily that the tender budde muſt cleaue, and giue way to that ſpirituall iuice; Which being purer then the reſt( through its great ſublimation) shewerh it ſelfe in a purer and nobler ſubſtance then any thatis yet made;and ſo becometh a flower ?From hence, if we proceed as we haue begunne, and do weigh all circumſtances; we shall ſee euidently, that an other ſubſtance muſt needes ſucceed the flover, which muſt be hollowand containe a fruite in it: and that this fruite muſt grow bigger and harder. And ſo, to the laſt periode of the generation of nevbeanes. Thus by draing the thridde carefully along through your fingers, and ſtaying att euery knott to examine howitis tyed; you ſce that this difficult progreſſe of the generation of liuing ereatures, is obuious enough to be comprehended; and that the ſteppes of it are poſſible to be ſett downe; if onæ would bur take the paines and afſord the time that is neceſſary ( leſſe then that Philoſopher, who for ſo many yeares gaue himſelfe wholy vp tothe ſingle bleraing of the nature of bees) to nore diligently all the circumſtances in euery change of it. In euery one of which the thing that was, becometh abſolutely a new things and is” endewed with new properties and qualities different from thoſe it had before, as Phyſitians from their certaine experience, do aſſure vs. And yet euery change is ſuch, as in the ordinary and generall courſe of nature (wherein nothing is to be conſidered, but the neceſſary effects followin g out of ſuch Agents working vpon ſuch patients, in ſuch circumſtances itis impoſſible that any orther thing should be made of the precedent, but that which is immediately, ſubſequent vntoſ. Nov if allthis orderly ſucceſſion of mutations be neceſſarily made in a beane, by force of ſundry eircumſtances and externall accidents; why may it not be conceiued that the like is allo done in ſenſible creatures; but in a more perfect manner, they being perfecter ſubſtances: Surely the progreſſe we houc ſert downe is much more reaſonable, then to conceiue that in the meale of the beane, are contained in litle, ſcueral ſimilat ſubſtances; as, of a roore, of a leaſe , a ſtalke, a flower, a codde, fruite,and the reſt; and that cuery one of theſe, being from the fiſt ſtil the ſame that they shall be afterwardes, do but ſucke in, more movſture from the earth, to ſwell and enlarge themſelues in unity. Or, a in the ſeede of the male, there is already in act, the ſubſtance of flesh, of bone, of ſinees, of veines, and the reſt of thoſe ſeuerall ſimilar partes which are found in the body of an animall; and that they are but extended to their due magnitude, by the humidity drawne from the mother, without receiuing any ſubſtantiall mutation from what they were originally in the ſeede. Lettvs then confidently conclude, that all generation is made of a fitting, but remote, homogeneall compounded ſubſtance: vpon hich, outward Agents working inthe due courſe of nature, do change it into an other ſubſtance, quite different from the fiſt, and do make it leſſe homogeneall then the firſt was. And other circumſtances and agents, do change this ſecond into a thirde: that thirde, into a fourth; and ſo onvardes, by ſucceſſiue mutations ( that ſtill make euery new thing become leſſe homogeneall, then the former was, according to the nature of heate, mingling more and more different bodies together) vntill that ſubſtance be produced, which we conſider in the periode o alltheſe mutations. And this, is euident out of many experiences: as for example in trees; the barke which is oppoſed to the onh vind, is harderand thicker then the contrary ſide which is oppoſed to the ſouth, anda great difference villappeare in the graine of the wood; euen ſo much, that silfull people, vill by feeling and ſeeing a round piece of the wood after the tree is felled, tell you in what ſituation it grew,and which way eachſide of that peece looked. And loſcphus Acoſta writeth of a tree in America, that on the one ſide being ſituated towardes pea: hills, and on the other being expoſed to the hoat ſunne;the one halfe of it flourisheth att one time of the yeare, and the other halfe att the oppoſite ſeaſon. And ſome ſuch like may be the cauſe of the ſiãge effects we ſometimes ſee of trees, flouris hing or bearing leafes att an ?nſeaſonable time of the yeare; as in particular, in the famous onke in the Newforeſt; and in ſome others in our Iland: in which peraduenture the ſoyle they grow in, may do the ſame effect, as the windes and ſunne did in the tree that Acoſta maketh mention of. For we dayly ſee how ſome ſoyles are ſo power full ouer ſome ind of corne, that they will change the very nature of iti ſo that, you shall reape oates orrye, after you haue ſowen wheate there. Vhich sheweth euidently that ſince the outward circumſtances can make the partes or the whole of any ſubſtance, become different from what they were att the ſirſt; generation is not made by aggregation of like partes to preſuppoſed like ones: nor by a ſpecificall worker within; but by the compounding of a ſeminary matter, with the iuice which accrewerh to it from without, and with the ſteames of circumſtant bodies: hich by an ordinary couſe of nature, are regularly imbibed in it by degreesiand whichatt euery degree, do change it into a diſferent thing, ſuch an oneas is capable to reſult out of the preſent compound, (as We haue ſaid before) vnrillitarriue toits full perfection. Vhich yetis notthe vtmoſt periode of natures changes; for from that; for example, from corne or an animal, it carryeth it on ( ſlill changing it)to be meale ora cadauer: from thence to be bread or durte: afterthat to be bloud or graſſe. And ſo, ſtill turning about her wheele (which ſuffereth nothing to remaine long in the ſtate it is in) she changeth all ſubſtances from one into an other. And by reiterated reuolutions, maketh in time euery thing of euery thing: as when of mudde she maketh tadpoles, and frogges, of them and afterwardes, mudde againe of the frogges: or when she runneth a like progreſſe; from earth to wormes;and from them, to flyes; and the like: ſo changing oncanimal into ſuch an ortheras in the next precedent ſteppe, the matter in thoſe circumſtances is capable of being changed into; or rather(to ſay bettenmuſt neceſſarily be changed into. To confirme this by experiences I haue beene aſſured, by one who was very exact in noting ſuch thinges: that he once obſerued in Spaine, inthe ſpring ſeaſon, howa ſticke lying in a moyſt place , grewin tract of time to be moſt of it a rotten durty matter;and that att the durty end of the ſticke, there began a rude head to be formed of it by litle and litle; and aftera while ſome litle legges began to diſcouer themſelues neere this vnpolished head, which dayly grew more and more diſtinctly shaped. Andthen, fora pretty whileſ forit was in a place where he had the conueniencye, to obſerue dayly the progreſſe of it, and no body came neere to ſtirre it in the whole courſe of it) he could diſcerne where it ceaſed to be a body of a liuing creature, and where it began tobe dead ſtiche or durti all in one continuate quantity or body. But euery day the body grew longer and longer,and more legges appeared, till att the length, when he ſaw the animalalmoſt finished, and neere ſeperating it ſelfe from the reſt of the ſticke, he ſtayed then by it,and ſaw it creepe away ina catarpillar, leauing the ſticke and durt, as much wanting of its firſt length, as the vormes body tooke vp. Peraduenture the greateſt part of ſuch creatures maketh their way by ſuch ſteppes into the orld. But to be able to obſerue their progreſſe thus diſtinctly as this Gentleman did, happeneth not frequently. Therefore, to ſatisſy our ſelues herein it ere well we made our remarkes in ſome creatures that might be continually in our pover to obſerue in them the courſe of nature euery day and houre. Sir Ihon Heydon, the Lieutenant of his Maieſties ordinance ( that generous and knoving Gentleman; and conſummate ſouldier both in theory and practiſe) was the firſt that inſtructed me how to do this, by meanes of a furnace ſo made as to imitate the warmeth of a ſitting henne. In hich you may lay ſeuerall egges to hatch; and by breaking them at ſeuerall ages you may diſtinctly obſerue euery hourely mutation in them, if you pleaſc. The firſt willbee, that on one ſide you shall find a great reſplendent clearneſſe in the white. Aftera while, a litle ſport of red matter like bload, vill appeare in the middeſt of that clearneſſe faſtened to the yolke: which vill haue a motion of opening and shutting ; ſo as ſometimes you ill ſee it, and ſtraight againe it ill vanish from your ſight; and indeede atr the firſt it is ſo litle, that you can not ſeeit, but by the motion of &t; for att euery pulſe, as it openeth, you may ſee it,and immediately againe, it shutteth in ſuch ſortas itis not to be diſcerned. Frò this red ſpecke, aſter a while there will ſtreame our,a number of litle(almoſt imperceptible)red veines. Att the end of ſome of which, in time there will be gathered together,a knotte of matter whicli by litle and litle, will take the forme of a head; and you vill ere long beginne to diſcerne eyes and a beake in it. All this while the firſt red ſpott of blood, groweth bigger and ſolider: tillatt the length, it becometha fleshy ſubſtance;and by its figure, may eaſily be diſcerned to be the hart: whichas yet hath no other encloſure but the ſubſtance of the egge. But by litle and litle the reſt of the body of an animal is framed out of thoſ red veines which ſtreame out all aboute from the hart. And in proceſſe of time, that body incloſeth the heart within it by the cheſt, vhich growet h ouer on both ſides, and in the end meeteth, and cloſethit ſelfe faſt togerher. After which this litle creature ſoone filleth the :hell, by conuerting into ſcuerall partes of it ſelfeall the ſubſtance of the egęe. And then growing weary of ſo ſtraight an habitation, it breaketh priſon,and cometh out,a perfectly formed chicken. In like manner: in other creatures; which in latin are called Viuipara (becauſe their yong ones are quicke in their mothers wombe) we haue, by the relation of that leamed and exact ſearcher into nature, Doctor Haruey: that the ſeede of the male after his accoupling with the female, doth not remaine in her wombe in any ſenſible bulke: bur(as it ſeemeth) euaporateth and incorporateth it ſelfe, eyther into the body of the wombe, or rather into ſome more interior part, as into the ſeminary veſſells. hich being a ſolide ſubſtance, much reſembling the nature of the females ſeede, is likely to ſucke vp, by the mediation of the females ſeede, the male ſeede incorporated with it,and by incorporation, turned ( as it were) into a vapour: in ſuch ſort as we haue formerly explicated how the body of a ſcorpion or viper, draweth the poyſon out of a wound. And after a certaine time(Doctor Haruey noted the ſpace of ſixe weckes or two months in does or hindes) theſe ſeedes diſtill againe into the wombeiand by litle and litle do clarify in the middeſt, and a litle red ſpecke appeareth in the center of the bright clearneſſe: as e ſaid before of the egge. 3 But we should be too blame to leaue our Reader without clearing From hence that difficulty, vhich can not, chooſe but haue ſprung vp in his it happeneth thoughts, by occaſion of the relations we madè att the entrance into o uoòthis point concerning the catte whoſe kittlinges were halfe with rayles, exereſcences and halfe without: and the vomans daughters att Argires, that had as of àbe harems wellas their mother excreſcences vpon their left thumbes, imitating an ſcent in thei other leſſer thumbe: and the like effects whenſocuer they happen, ehilaren. which they do frequently enough. Lett him therefore remember, how we haue determined that generationis made of the bloud, which being diſperſed into all the partes of the body to irrigate euery one of them; and to conuẽy fitting ſi pirits into them ſrò their ſource or shoppe where they are forged; ſo much of it as is ſuperaboundant to the nourishing of thoſe partes is. ſent backe againe to the hart to recouer the warmeth and ſpirits it hath loſt by ſo 1ong a iourney. By which perpetuall courſe of a continued circulation, it is euident that the bloud in running thus through allthe partes of the body muſt needes receiue ſome particular concoction or impreſſion from euery one of them. And by conſequence, if there be any ſi pecificall vertue in one part vhich is not in an other, then the bloud returning from thence muſt be endewed with the vertue of that part. And the pureſt part of this bloud, being extracted likea quinteſſence out of the whole maſſe, is reſerued in conuenient receptacles or veſſels till there be vſe of it: and is the matter or ſeede, of which a new animalis to be made; in whom, willappeare the effect of allthe ſpecificall vertues drawne by the bloud in ĩts iterated courſes, by its circular motion, through all the ſeuerall partes of the parents body. Whence it followeth, thatif any part be wanting in the body whereof this ſeede is made, or be ſuperaboundant in it; whoſe vertue is not in the reſt of the body, or whoſe ſuperaboundanceis not allayed by the reſt of the body,; the vertue of that part, can not be in the bloud, or will be too ſtrong in the blood, and by conſequence, it can not be at all, or it vill be, too much in the ſeede. And the efect proceeding from the ſecde, that is, the yong animal vill come into the world ſauouring of that origine; vnleſſe the mothers ſeede, do ſupply or temper, what e fathers vas defectiue or ſuperaboundant in; or contrariwiſe the fathers do correct the errors of the motheęrs. But peraduenture the Reader vill tell vs, that ſucha ſi pecificall vertue can not be gotten by concoction of the bloud, or by any pretended impreſſion init ; vnleſſe ſome litle particles of the nouti: hed part do remaine in the bloud, and returne backe with it according to that maxime of Geber: Quod non ingreditur, non immutat; no body can change an other, vnleſſe it enter into it, and mixing it ſelfe withit do become one with it. And that ſo in effect, by this explication we ſall backe into the opinion which we reiected. To this I anſuere, that the difference is very great betweene that opinion and ours; as ill appeare euidently, if you obſerue the two following aſſertions of theiis Firſt, they aſirme that a liuing creature is made meerely by the aſſembling together of ſimilar partes, Which were hidden in thoſe bodies from whence they are extracted in gencration: whereas we ſay that bloud coming to a part to irrigate it, is by its paſſage throughit, and ſome litle ſtay in it, and by its frequent returnes thither, att the length tranſmuted into the naturẽ of that part: and thereby the ſpecificall vertues of euery part, do grow greater, and are more diffuſed Secondly, they ſay that the embryon is actually formed in the ſeede, though in ſuchlitle partes as it can not be diſcemed, vntill each part haue enlarged and encreaſed it ſelfe, by drawing vnto it from the circumſtant bodies more ſubſtance of their owne nature. But we ſay, that there is one homogeneall ſubſtance, made of the bloud, which hath beene in all partes of the body;and thisis the ſeede: which containeth not init, any figure of the animal from which it is refined, or of the animai into which it hath a capacity to be turned ( by the addition of other ſubſtances) though it haue in it the vertues of all the partes it hath often tunne through. By which terme of ſpecifike vertues, I hope we haue ſaid enough in ſundry places of this diſcourſe to keepe men from conceiuing that we do meaneany ſuch vnconceiucable quality, as moderne Philoſophers too frequently talke of, when they know not what they ſay or think, nor can giue any account of. But that it is ſuch degrees and ſuch numbers, of rare and denſe partes mingled together, as conſtitute a mixed body of ſuch a temperand nature: hich degrees and proportions of rare and denſe partes and their mixture together, and incorporating into one homogeneall ſubſtance, is the effect reſulting from the operations of the exteriour agent, that cutteth, imbibeth, kneadeth, and boylethitto ſucha temper: which exteriour agent in this caſe, is each ſeuerall part of the anin als body, that this iuice or bloud runneth throughiand rhat hatha particular temper belonging to it, reſulting out of ſucha proportion of rare and denſe partes, as we haue euen now ſpoken of; and can no more be withheld from commuuicating its temper to the bloud that firſt ſosketh into it, and ſoone after drayneth away againe from it (according as other ſucceeding partes of bloud driue it ons) then a minerall channell can chooſe, but communicate its vertue vnto a ſtreame of water that runneth through it, and is continually grating of ſome of the ſubſtance of the minerallearth, and diſſoluing it into it ſelfe. But to goe on with our intended diſcourſe. The ſeede, thus imbued Io: with the ſpecificall vertues of all the ſeuerall partes of the parents body, i hon sbe han meeting in a fitt receptacle the other partners ſeede; and being there duly the Jenerall concocted, becometh firſta hart: which hart in this tender beginning of Ipesi ke a new animal containeth the ſeuerall vertues of all the partes that æhole body; afterwardes will grow out of it, and be in the future animals in the ſame ?heteby 4 manner as the hart of a complete animal containeth in it the ſpecifie àotine of the vertues of all the ſcuerall partes of its owne body, by reaſon of the ? former bloudes continuallreſorting toit in a cirele from all punss of its body, paragraphes. and its being nouri:hed by that iuice to ſupply the continuall conſumption which the extreme heate ol it muſt needes continually occaſion in its owne ſubſtance : whereby the hart becometh in a manner the compendium or abridgement of the whole animal. as on the one ſide it ſtreamerh out its hoat partes; ſo on the other, it ſucker h oyle or fewellto nourish it ſelfe out of the adiacent moiſt partes: which matter aggregated vnto it, being ſentabroad together with the other hoat partes that ſteame from it both of them together, do ſtay and ſettle as ſoone as they are out of the reach of that violent heate that would not permitt them to thicken or toreſt. And there they gro into ſucha ſubſtance as is capable to be made of ſuch a mixture, and are linked to the hart by ſome of thoſe ſtringes that ſteame out from it (for thoſe ſteames do likewiſe harden, as we shewed more particularly whenwe diſcourſed of the tender ſtalkes of plantes) and ina word, this becometh ſome other part of the animal. Which thus encreaſeth by order, one part being made aſter an other, vntill the whole liuing creature be completely framed. : So that no you ſee; how mainely their opinion differeth from ours; ſince they ſay that there is actually in the ſeede, a complete liuing creature: for what elſe is a liuing creature, but bones in ſuch partes, nerues in ſuch others, bloud and humors contained in ſuch and ſuch places all, as in a liuing creature?All which they ſay. But we make the ſee to be nothing elſe, but one mixed body, of one homogeneall nature ſroughout,conſiting of ſucha multiplicity of rare and denſe partes; ſo ballanced and proportioned, in number and in magnitude of thoſe partes; which are euenly shuffied, and alike mingled in euery litle parcell of the whole ſubſtance: in ſuch ſort, that the operation of nature vpon this ſeede, may in a long time and with a dew proceſſe, bring out ſuch figures, ſituation, and qualities, ſas fluidity, conſiſtence, dryneſſe, and the like)which by much mixtion and conſequent alteration, may in the end become ſuch as conſtitutea liuing creature of ſucha kind. And ihus it ap careth that althoug h other ſubſtances, and liquours, and ſteames re from timeto time mingled with the ſeede, and then with the hart, and afterwardes with the other fones they grow on and encreaſe; yet the maine vertue of the enſuing animal, is firſt in the ſecde and afterwardes in the hart. Vhence thereaſon is euident, vhy both defects and excreſcences, do aſſe ſometimes from the parents to the children; to witt, when nothing ſupplyeth the defect or correcteth the exorbitancy. Rather after ihis which we haue ſaid, the difficulty vill appeare greater, in that ſuch accidents are not alwayes hereditary from the parents; but happen only nowand then, ſome rare times. But the ſame groundes we ſclyed will likewiſe ſolue this obiection: for ſeeing that the hart of the animal, from whence the ſeede receiuei h its proper nature ſas we haue declared) is impregnated vith the ſpecifike vertue of each ſeuerall part of the bodys; t can not be doubted but that the hart ill ſupply for any defect happened in any part,afterit hath been imbued vih that vertue, and is orowne to a firmeneſſe, and vigorous conſiſtence with that vertuc moulded, and deepely imbibed into the very ſubſtance of it. And althoughthe hart should be tincted from its firſt origine withan vndew vertue from ſome part(as it ſeemeth to haue been in the motherof thoſe daugthers that had two thumbes vpon one hand: ) yet it is not neceſſary that allthe offspring of that parent should be formed aſter that modeli; for the other partners ſeede may he more efficacious, and predominate in the geniture, ouer the faulty ſeede of the other parent; and then it vill ſupply for,and correct, the others deuiation from the generall ruleof nature. Which ſeemeth to be the caſe of that vomans male children; for in them, the fathers ſeede being ſtrongeſt, all their fingers imitated the regularity of their fathers: whereas the daughters (whoſe ſexe implycth that the fathers ſeede was leſſe actiue) carried vrOn ſome of theirs, the reſemblance of their mothers irregularity. And in confirmation of this doctrine, we dayly ſee that the children of parents, who haue any of their noble partes much and lon diſtempered, whereby there muſt be a great diſtemper in ithe blovi (hich is made and concocted by their aſſiſtance) do ſeldome faile of hauing ſtrong inclinations to the diſtempers and diſcaſes that eyther of their parents were violently ſubiect vnto. Scarce any father or mother dyeth of the conſumption of the lunges, but their children inheritethat diſeaſe in ſome meaſure:: the like is of the ſtone; the like of the gowte: the like of diſeaſes of the braine, and of ſundry others; when they infeſted the parents with any notable eminency. For the bloud coming continually tothe hart from ſuch ill affected partes by its circulation through he whole body muſt needes in proceſſe of time alter, and change the temper of the hart: and theniboth the hart giueth a tainted impreſſion to the bloud that muſt be boyled into ſeede; and the partes themſelucs do communicate their debilities, and diſtem pers vnto it: ſo that it is no wonder, if the ſeede do partake of ſuch depraued qualities; ſince it is a maxime among Phyſitians, that ſubſequent concoctions, can neuer amend or repaire rhe faultes of the precedent ones. Hauing waded thus farre into this matter and all experience agreeing that th whole animal is not formed att once: I conceiue there can be no j great difficulty in determining what parte of itis firſt generated: which is ih we haue already ſnid to be the hart; but peraduenture the reader may ſeœ: expect ſome more particular and immediate proofe of it. It is euident us that all the motions and changes, which we haue obſerued in the egge and in the Doe, do proceed from heate: and it is as certaine that heate is reateſt in th- center of it: from whence t diſperſethit ſelfe to leſſe and Rſ ſ muſt then neceſſarily follow, that the part in which heate doth moſt abound:and whichis the interiour fountaine of it, from whence (as from a ſtock⸗ of their ownelall the other partes deriue theirs muſt be formed firſt and the others ſucceſſiuely after it, according as they partake more or leſſe, of this heate; whichis the Architect that mouldeth and frameth them all. Vndoubtedly this can be none other, but the twinckling of the firſtred ſpotte(which isthe firſt change) in the egęe, and in the firſt matter of other liuing creatures. Yet I do not intend to ſay, that the hartis perfectly framed, and completely made vp, with all its artes and inſtruments, before any other part be hegunne to be made: hut only the moſt vertuous part;and as it were the marrow of it; which ſerueth as a shoppe ora hoat forge, tomould ſpirits in: from whenee they are diſperſed abroad to forme and nourish other partes that ſtand. in neede of them to that eſfect. j The shootings or litle red ſtringes that ſtreame out from it, muſt ſurely be arteries; through which, the bloud iſſuing from the hart, and there made and imbued with the nature of the ſeede, doth runne; till encountring with fitt matter, it engroſſeth it ſelfeinto braine, liuer, lightes &c.From the braine cheifely groweth the marrow, and by conſequent the bones containing it, (Which ſeeme to be originally, but the ourward part of the marrow, baked and hardened into a ſtrong cruſte by the great heate that iskept in:) as alſo the ſinnewes; which are the next rincipall bodies of ſtrength , after the bones. The marrow being Vety ſoat dryesn the bones; and yet with its actuall moyſture, it humecteth and nourisheth them too, in ſome ſort. The ſpirits that are ſent from the braine, do the like to the ſinewes. And laſtly;the artenes and veines by their bloud to cherish and bede w the flesh. And thus, the whole liuing creature is begunne, framed,and made vp. THE FIVE AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER Eow a Plant or Animal cometh to that figure it haih. Vt before we goeany further, and ſearch into the operations of æIæ this animall,a wonderfull effect calleth our conſideration vnto & it: which is ho a plant or animal, cometh by the figure it hath, both in the whole and in euery part of it? Ariſtotleafter he had beaten his thoughts as farre as he could vpon this queſtion, pronunced that this eſfect could not poſſibly be wrought by the vertue of the firſt qualites; but that it ſprung from a more diuine origine. And moſt of the contemplators r nature ſince him, do ſeeme to agree that no cauſe can be rendered of it; but that it is to be referred meerely to the ſpecificall nature of the thing. Neyther do we intend to derogate from eyther of theſe cauſes; ſince that both diuine prouidence is eminently shewne in contriuing all circumſtances neceſſary for this worke; and likewiſe the firſt temperament that is in the ſeede, muſt needes be the principall immediate cauſe of this admirable effect. This latter then being ſuppoſed; our labour and endeauour vill be, to vnfoldſas farreas ſo weake and dimme eyes can reach)the excellency and exactneſſe of Gods prouidence, which can not be enough adored, Whe it is reflected vpon,and marked in the apt laying of adequate cauſes to produce ſucha figure out of ſuch a mitture firſt layed. From them ſo artiſicially ranged, we shall ſee this miracle of nature to proceed; and not from an immediate working of God or nature without conuenient and ordinary inſtruments to mediate and effect this configuration, through the force and vertue of their owne particular natures. Such a neceſſity to intereſtihe cheife workeman att euety tumne, in particular effects, ould argue him of want of skill and prouidence, in the firſt laying of the Bundorions of his deſigned machine: he were an improuident cloc kemaker, that should haue caſt his worke ſo, as when it were wound vp and going, it would require the maſters hand att euery houre to make the hammer ſtrike vpon the bell. Lett vs not then too familiarly,and irreuerently ingage he Almighty Architect his immediate handy wor ke in euery particular effect of nature; Tali non eſt dignus vindice nodus. But lett vs take principles within our owne kenning; and conſider how a body hath of its owne nature three dimenſions, (as Mathematicians vſe to demonſtrate:) and that the variety which we ſee of figures in bodies, proceedeth out of the defect of ſome of theſe dimenſions in proportion to the reſt. As for example;that a thing be in the forme ofa ſquare tablette; is, for that the cauſe which gaue it length and breadth, could not alſo giue it thickeneſſe in the ſame proportion: for had it beene able to giue profundity as well as the other two, it had made a cube inſtead of atablette. In like manner, the forme of a lamine, or very long ſquare is occaſioned by ſome accident hich hindereth the cauſe from giuing breadth and thickeneſſe proportionable to the length. And ſo, other ſigures are made, by reaſon that their cauſes are ſomewayes bound to giue more of ſome dimenſion to one part then to an orher. As for example; when water falleth out of the skye, it hath allthe litle corners or extancies of its body grated of by the ayre as it rouleth and tumbleth downe in iti ſo that it becometh round; and continueth in that forme, vntill that ſettling vpon ſome flatt body, as graſſe ora leaſe, it receiuetha litle plaineneſſe, to the proportion of its weight maſtering the continuity of it. And therefore, if the droppe be great vpon that plaine body, it ſeemeth to be halfe a ſphere, or ſome leſſe portion of one: but if it bea litle droppe then the flatt part of it (which is that next vnto the graſſe)is very litle and vndiſcernable: becauſe it hath not weight enoug to preſſe it much and ſpread it broad vpon the graſſe; and ſo the whole, ſeemeth in a manner obe a ſphere: but if the externe cauſes had preſſed vpon this droppe, only broadwayes and thickewayes ( as when a turner maketh a round pillar of a ſquare one)then it would haue proued a cylinder, nothing working vponit to grate off any of its length, but only the corners of the breadth and thickeneſſe of it. : And thus you ſeę, how the fundamentallſigures (vpon whichallthe 1eſt are grounded) are contriued by nature; not by the norks of any particular Agent that immediately imprinteth a determinate figure into a particular body,as though it wroughtit there att once,according to a foreconceiued deſigne or intelligent ayme of producing ſuch a figure in ſucha body: but by the concurrence of ſeuerall accidentall cauſes, that do all of them ioyne in bringing the body they file and worke vpon, into ſucha shape. Only we had like to haue forgotten the reaſon and cauſe of the concaue figure in ſome partes of plantes: which in the ordinary courſe of nature we shall find to grow from hence; thata round ourſide being filled with ſome liquor which maketh it grow higher and higher, ũ happeneth that the ſucceeding cauſes do contract this liquor, and do harden the outſide: and then, of neceſſity there muſt be a hollow cylinder remayning in lieu of the iuice which before did fill it. As we ſee cuery day in corne,and in reedes, and in canes, and in the ſalkes of many herbes: which whilſt they are tender and in their firſt groweth, are full of iuice;and become afterwardes hollowand drye. But hecauſe this diſcourſe, may peraduenture ſeeme too much in common: it will not be amiſſe toapply it to ſome particulars that ſeeme very ſtrange. And firſt, lett vs examine how the rocking of concrete iuices ( which ſeemeth to be ſuch an admirable myſtery of nature) is performed. Alume falleth done in lumpes, ſaltpeter in long ycic kies, and common ſalt in ſquares:and this, not once, or ſometimes now and then but alwayes conſtantly in the ſame order. The reaſon of theſe effects ill eaſily be deduced out of what we haue ſaid, for if all three be diſſolued in rhe ſame vater, alume being the groſſeſt falleth firſtand faſteſt: and being of an vnctuous nature, the firſt part which falleth doth not harden, till the ſecond cometh to iti vhereby this ſecond ſticketh to the firſt and crusheth it downes and this is ſerued in the ſame manner by the third; and ſo goeth on, one part ſqueezing an other, till vhat is vndermoſt grow hard enough to reſiſt the weight of ne falling partes; or rather till no more do fall, but the liquor they were diſſolued in, is deliuered of them all; and then they harden in that figure they were compreſſed into. As for ſalt, which deſcendeth in the ſecond place: that ſivimmæth firſt vpon the water; and there, getteth its Fqureuhich muſt be equally long and broad, becauſe the water is indifferent to thoſe two poſitions bur its thickeneſſe is not equall to its other two dimenſions, by reaſon that before it can attaine to that thickneſſe, it groweth too heauy to ſimme any longer;and after it isencreaſed toa certaine bulke, the weight of it carrieth it downe to the bottome of the water, and conſequently it can encreaſe no more: for it encreaſeth by the ioyning of litle partes vnto it as it ſvimmeth on the toppe of the water. The ſaltpeter falleth laſt: which being more diſficult to be figured then the other two, becauſe it is more dry then eyther of them (as conſiſting chiefely of earthy and of fyry partes,) is not equally encreaſed, neyther inall three, nor in two dimenſions, but hath its length exteeding both its breadth and thickeneſſe: and its lightneſſe, maketh it fall laſt, becauſe it requireth leaſt water to ſuſtaine it. To giue the cauſes of the figures of diuers mixtes,and particulatly of ſome pretious ſtones, ( which ſeeme to be caſt by nature in exacteſt mouldes)would oblige vs to enter into the particular manner of their generation: which were exceeding hard,if not impoſſible, for vs to do, by reaſon that Authors haue not left vs the circumſtances vpon which we might ground our iudgement concerning them, ſo particularly deſcribed as were neceſſary; nor our ſelues haue mett with the commodity of making ſuch experiences, and of ſearching ſo into their beds as were requiſite, to determine ſolidely the reaſons ofthem. And indeede I conceiue that oftentimes the relations which others haue recorded of their generation, would rather miſſeleade then aſſiſt vs: ſince it is very familiar in many men, to magnify the exacteneſſe of nature in framing efſects they fanſye to themſelues, when to make their wonder appeare more iuſt; they will not fayle to ſett of their ſtory, with all aduantageous circumſtances, and helpe out what wantetha litle or cometh but neere the marke. But to come cloſer to our purpoſe; that is, to the figures of liuing thinęes; e ſee that rores in the earth, are all of them figured almoſt in the fime fashion: for the heate reſiding in the middeſt tthem, pusheth euery way, and therevpon, ſome of them do become round ,but others more long then round, according to the temper of the ground, orto the ſcaſon of the yeare, or to the weather that happeneth: and this, not only in diuers kindes of rootes, but euẽ in ſeuerall of the ſame kinde. That part of the plant which mounteth vpwardes, is for the moſt part round and long; the cauſe whereof is euident, for the iuice whichis in the middle of it working vpwardes (becauſe the hardeneſſe of the barke will not Iett it out att the ſides) and coming in more and more aboundance (for the reaſons we haue aboue deliuered) encreaſeth that part equally euery way but vpvardes; and therefore, it muſt be equally hicke and broad, and conſequently round: but the length will exceed eyther of the other dimenſions, becauſe the iuice is driuen vp with a greater force and in more quantiry then it is tothe ſides. Yet the broadneſſeand thickeneſſe are not ſo exactly vniforme, but that they exceede a litile more att the bottome then att the toppe; which is occaſioned partly by the contracting ofthe iuice into a narrower circuite the furthesit is from the ſource; and partly by reaſon of the branches; which shooting forth, do conuey away a great part of the iuice from the maine ſtocke. Nov if we conſider the matter well; we shall find, that what is done in 4 The ſame ctrine ap] to Plants 5. the whole tree the very ſame is likewiſe done in euery litle leafe of it; for The ſan a leaſe conſiſteth of litle branches shooting out from one preates n lcaſ cõ are treęs. branch, whichis inthe middle: and againe, other leſſer branc deriued from thoſe ſecond branches: and ſo ſtill leſſer and leſſer, tillthey Ff ijj weaue themſelues into a cloſe worke, as thicke as that which we ſee women vſe to ſill vp ith ſilke or crewell, when in tenteworke they embroader leafes or flowers vpon canneuas: and this againe; is couered and as it were glewed ouer, by the humour which ſticking to theſe litle thriddes, ſtoppeth vp euery litle vacuity, and by the ayre is hardened into ſuch askinne as we ſee a leafe conſiſteth of. And thus it appeareth how an account may be giuen of the figure of the leafes, as wellas of the figure of the maine body of the whole tree: the litle branches of the leafe, being proportionate in figure to the branches of the tree it ſelfeſſo that each leafe ſeemeth to be the tree in litle; )and the figure of the leafe depending of the courſe of theſe litle branches, ſo rhat if the greateſt branch of the tree be much longer then the others, the leafe will be a long one: but if the leſſer branches ſpread broad wayes; the leafe will likewiſe bea broad one; ſo farre, as euen to be notched att the outſides, round abourt it, in great or litle notches, according to the proportion of the trees branches. Theſe leafes, when they firſt breake out, are foulded inwardes, in ſuch ſort as the ſmallneſſe and roundneſſe of the paſſage in the wood through which they iſſue, conſtrayneth them to be; where neuertheleſſe the dryneſſe of their partes, keepe them aſunder: ſo that one leafe doth not incorporate it ſelfe with an other: but as ſoone as they feele the heate of the ſunne (after they are broken out into liberty) their tender branches by litle and litle grow more ſtraight; the concaue partes of them drawing more towardes the ſunne, becauſe he extracteth and ſucketh their moyſture from their hinder partes into their former, that are more ex poſed to his beames;and thereby the hinder partes are contracted and grow shorter, and thoſe before grow longer. Which if it be in exceſſe, maketh the leafe become crooked the contrary way i as we ſee in diuers flowers, and in ſundry leafes during the ſummers heate: itteneſſe, the yuy, roſes full blowne, tulipes, and all floers in forme of bells; and indeede all kindes of flowers what ſoener; when the ſunne hath wrought vpon themto that degree we ſpeake of,and that their ioyning to their ſtalke, and the next partes thereunto, allow them ſcope to obey the impulſe of thoſe outward cauſes. And when any do vary ſom this rule; we shall as plainely ſee other manifeſt cauſes producing thoſe different effects, as now we do theſe working in this manner. As for fruites though we ſee that when they grow att liberty vpon the tree, they ſeeme to houea particular figure alloted them by nature: yet in truth, it is the ordered ſeries of naturall cauſes and not an intrinſecall formatiue vertue which breedeth this effect, as is euident by the great power which art hath to change their figures att pleaſure; whereof you may ſee examples enough in Campanella; and euery curious gardner can furnish you ith ſtore. Out of theſe, and ſuch like principles a man that would make it his ſtudy with leſſe trouble or tediouſneſſe, then that patient contemplator of one of natures litle workes (the Bees) whom we mentioned a while agone, might without alldoubt trace the cauſes in the 8toving of an Embryon, till he diſcouered the reaſon of euery bones figure; of euery notable hole or paſſage that is in them; of the ligaments by which they are tyed together; of the membranes that couer them; and of all the other partes of the body. How, out of a firſt maſſe, that was ſoft, and had no ſuch partes diſtinguishable in it, euery one of thẽ came to be formed, by contracting that maſſe in one placè, by dilating it in an other ,by moyſtening it ina third, by drying it here, hardening it there; Vi his exordia primis, : Omnia, & ipſe tener hominis concreuerit orbis. till in the end this admirable machine and frame of mans body, was compoſed and fashioned vp by ſuch litle and àlmoſt inſenſible ſteppes and degrees. Which when it is looked vpon in bulke, and entirely formed, ſeemeth impoſſible to haue beene made, and to haue ſprung meerely out of theſe principle, without an Intelligence immediately woiking and moulding it att euery turne, from the beginning to the end. But withall, we can not chooſe but breake out into an extaſye of admiration and hymnes of prayſe (as great Galen did vpon ihe like occaſion)when we reuerently conſider the infinite wiſedome; and deepe farrelooking prouidence of the allſeeing Creator and orderer of the world, in ſo punctually adapting ſuch a multitude and ſvarme of cauſes to produce by ſo long a progreſſe ſo onderfull an effect: in the whole courſe of which, if any one, the very leaſt of themall, went neuer ſo litle awry, the whole fabrike would be diſcompoſed and changed from the nature it is deſigned vnto. Out of ourshort ſuruay of which (anſwerable to our weaketalents, and ſlender experience) I perſuade my ſelfe it appeareth euident enough, that toeſfect this worke of generation, there needeth not be ſu ppoſeda forming vertue or Vis formatrix of an vnknowne power and operation, asthoſe tht conſider thinges ſoddainely and but in groſſe, do vſe to putt. Yet, in diſ courſe, for conueniency and shorteneſſe of expreſſion we ghill not quite banish that terme from all commerce with vsi ſo that whit we meane by it, be rightly vnderſtood; which is, the complexe, aſſemblement, or chayne of all the cauſes, that concurre to produce this eſfect:as they are ſett on foote, to this end by the great Architect and Moderator of them, God almighty, whoſeinſtrument natures: that is, the ſame thing, or rather the ſame thinges ſo ordered as we haue declared, THE SIX AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER. How motion beginneth in liuing creatures. And of the motion of the harti circulation of the bloud; Nutrition; Augmentation; and corruption or death. L Vt we muſt not take our leaue of this ſubiect, vntill we haue examined, how motion beginneth in liuin g thinges; as well plants as ſenſitiue creatures. We can readily pitch 4 vpon the part we are to make our obſeruations in , for retriuing the origine of this primary motion: for hauin g concluded that the rootes of plants, and the harts of animals are the partes of them, which are ſirſt made, and from which the forming vertue is deriued to all the reſt, it were vnreaſonable to ſeeke for their fitt motion any vhereelſe. But in what manner,and by hat meanes, doth it beginne there:? For rootes, the difficulty is not great, for the moyſture of the earth, preſſing vponthe ſeede, and ſoaking into it; the hoat partes of it which were impriſoned in cold and dry ones, are thereby ſtirred vp and ſett on orke: then they mingling themſelues with that moyſture, do ferment and diſtend the whole ſeede;till making it open, and ſex the skinne more iuice cometh in: which incorporating it ſelfe with the heate, thoſe hoat and now moyſt partes will not 5e contained in ſo narrowa roome as att the firſt; but ſtruggling to gett out on all ſides, and ſtriuin g toenlarge thẽſelues; they thruſt forth litle partes: which, if they ſtayin the do earth, grow white and make the roote: but thoſe whichaſcẽd; and make their way into the ayre, being leſſe compreſſed, and more full of heate and moyſture, do turne greene: and as faſtas they growvD, new moyſture coming to the roote, is ſent vp through the pores of it: and this faith not, vntill the heate of the roote it ſelfe doth fuile. For it being the nature of heate to rarify and eleuate, there muſt of neceſſity be cauſed in the earth a kind of ſucking in of moyſture into the roote ſrõ the next partes vnto it to fill thoſe capacities Which the dilating heate hath made thar elſe would be empty, and to ſupply the roomes of thoſe which the heate continually ſendeth vpwardes: for the moyſture of the roote, hath a continuity with that in the earth, and thereſore, they adhere together (as in a pumpe;orrather, as in filtration) and do follow one an other when any of themare in motion,and ſtill the next muſt needes come in, and Rillthe roome, where it findethan empty ſpace immediateto it. The, like of which happeneth to the ayre when we breath; for our lunges being like a bladder; when we open them the ayre muſt needes come in , to fill that capacity which elſe would be empty: and vhen we shutt them againe;as in a paire of bellowes we putt it ut. This may ſuffic], concerning the primary motion of rootes: but in rthat of the hart; we shall find the matter not altogether ſo plaine Monſieur des Cartes following herein the ſteppes of the learned and ingenious Haruey, who hath inuented and teacheth that curious and excellent doctrine of the circulation of the bloud: ſ as indeede, what ſecret of nature can be hidden from ſo sharpea witt, when he applyeth himſelfe to penerrate into the bottome of it:) explicateth the matter much after this ſort. That the hart, within, in the ſubſtance ofit, is like a hollow cauerne; in whoſe bortome, were an hoat ſtone; on Which should droppe as much liquour as the fiery ſtone could blow into ſmoakei;and this ſmoake or ſteame, should be more then the caue could containe; here fore it muſt breake out; which to do, ĩt preſſeth on all ſides togett an iſſue or dore to lett it out: it findeth of two ſortes; but only, one kind of them, will ſerue it for this purpoſe, for the one ſort of theſe dores, openeth inwardes, the other, outwardes: which is the cauſe that the more it ſtriueth to gett out, the faſter it shurteth the doores of the firſt kinde; but by the ſame meanes, it beateth backe the other dores; and ſo getteth out. lil Now vhen it is gone quite out of this cauerne; and conſequently leaueth it to its naturall diſpoſition; whereas before it violently ſtretched it outiand by doing ſo kept cloſe the dores that open inwardes: then all the partes of it beginne to ſlacken; and thoſe dores giue way vnto new liquourto droppe in anew; which the heate in the bottome of the hart, rarif yeth againe into ſmoake as before. And thus he conceiueth the motion of thæ hart to be made, taking the ſubſtance of it to be(as I may ſiy) lice vnto limber leather, which vpon the filling of it with bloud and ſteame, openeth and dilateth it ſelfe; and att the going of it out, ĩt shrinketh together like a bladder. li But Idoubt, this explication will not go through the diſficulty, for ſirſt both Galen and Doctor Haruey do she w, that as ſoone as the blouã is come into the hart, it contracteth it ſelfe: which agreeth not ith Monſieur des Cartes his ſuppoſition; for in his doctrine, there appeareth no cauſe why it should contract it ſelfe whenit is full: but contrasviſe, it should goe on dilating it ſelfe, vntill enough of the bloud which droppeth into the hart, were conuerted into ſteame, to force the dores open; that ſo, t may gainean iſſue thence, and a paſſage intò the body. Next; Monſieur des Cartes ſuppoſeth that the ſubſtance of the hart is like a bladder, which hath no motion of iĩt ſelfe; but openeth and shutteth, according as what is within it, ſtretcheth it out, or permittethit to shrinke and fall together againe. Whereas, Doctor Haruey prooueth that when it is full, it compreſſethit ſelfe by a quicke and ſtrong motion, to expell that whichis inĩt: and that when it is empty, it returneth to its naturall dilatation, figure and ſituation, by the ceaſing of that agents working, which cauſed its motion. Whereby it appeareth to be of ſucha fibrous ſubſtance, as hatha proper motion of its owne. Thirdly;  ſee not how this motion can be proportionall: for the hart muſt needes open and be dilated, much faſter then it can be shutt and shrinke togetherthere being no cauſe putt to shutt it and to bring it to its vemoſt periode of shrinking; other then the going out of the vapour, whereby it becometh empty: whichvapour not being forced by any thing but by its owne inclinationiit may peraduenture,att the firſt when there is aboundance of it, ſwell and ſtretch the hart forcibly out; but after the ſięſt impulſe and breach of ſome part of it out of the cauerne that encloſed it; there is nothing to driue out the reſt, which muſt therefore ſteame very leiſurely out. Fourthly; what should hinder the bloud from comingin, before the hart be quite empty and shrunke to its loweſt pitch ? For as ſoone as the vapour ycildeth within, new bloud may fall in from without; and ſo keepe the hare continually dilated, without euer ſuffering it to be erfectly and completelyshurt. Fifthly, the hart of a viper layed vpon a plate in a warme place will beate 24 houres; and much longer, i it be carefully taken out of its body, and the weather be warme and moyſt: andit iscleare, that this is vit hout ſucceſſiò of bloud to cauſe the pulſes of it. L kewiſe, the ſeuered mẽbers cf liuing creatures, vill ſtirre for ſome time aſter they are parted from their bodies: and in them, we can ſuſpect no ſuch cauſe of motion. Sixthly, in Monſieur des Cartes his opinion, the hart should be hardeſt when itis fulleſt; and the eruption of the ſteame out of ir, should be ſtrongeſt att the beginning: whereas experſence sheweth, that it is ſofteſt whenit is att the point of being fulland hardeſt when itis att the point of being emptyand the motion ſtrongeſt, towrdes the end. Seuent hly; in Monſieur des Cartes his way, there is no agent or force ſtrong enough to make bloud gush out of the hart: for if it be the ſteame only that openeth the dores, nothing but it will goe out; and the bloud will ſtill remaine behind, ſince ĩt lyeth lower then the ſteame, and further from the iſue that letteth it out: but Doctor Haruey findeth by experience ( and teacheth how to make this experience) that when a wound is made in the hart, bloud ill gush out by ſpurtes att euery shooting of the hart. And ſaſtly: if Monſieur des Cartes his ſuppoſition were true, the arteries wouſd receiue nothing but ſteames; whereas it is euident that the chiefe filler of them is bloud. Therefore we muſt enquire aſter an other cauſe of this primary motion of a ſenſitiue creature, in the beatings of its hart. Wherein, we hall not be obliged to looke farre; for ſeeing we find this motion and : theſe pulſations, in the hart when it is ſeperated from the body: we ma boldely and ſofely conclude, that it muſt of neceſſity be cauſed by ſomething that is within the hart it ſelfe. And what can that be elſe, but heate or ſpitits impriſoned in a tough viſcous bloudi which it can not ſo preſently breake thuough to gett outiand yet can ſtirre within it, and The lie of which motion may be obſerued, in the heauing vp, and ſinking downe againe of looſe moulde throwne into a pitte, into which much ordure hath been emptied. The ſame cauſe, of heate in the earth, maketh mountaines and ſandes to be caſt vp in the very ſea: ſo, in frying, vhen the panne is full of meate, the bubbles riſe and fall att the edges: treacle, and ſuch ſtrong compounded ſubſtances; whiles they ferment, do lift themſclues vp,and ſinke downe againe, after the ſame manner as the vipers hart doth: as alſo do the bubbles of barme, and muſte of vine:and : hort endes of lute ſtringes baked in a iuicy pye, ill att the opening of it mooue in ſuch ſort, as they who are ignorant of the feate villthinke there are magots in it: and a hoat loafe, in which quickeſyluer is encloſed, will not only moue thus:but ill alſo leape about, and skippe from one place to an other, like the head or limbe of an animal (very fullof ſpirits newly cutt off from its whole body. And that this is the true cauſe of the harts motion, appeareth euidently. Firſt, becauſe this vertue of mouing, is in euery part of the hart; as you vill plainely ſee if you cutt into ſcuerall pieces a hart, that conſerueth its motion longaſter it is out of the animals belly: for euery iece will moue; as Doctor Haruey aſſureth vs by experience, arid I m] Eſẽ haue often ſcene, vpon occaſion of making the greate antidote, ii which vipers harts is a principall ingredient. Secondly the ſame is ſeene in the auricles and the reſt of the hart; whoſe motions are ſeuerall; though ſo neere together, that they can hardly be diſtinguished. Thirdly, Doctor Haruey ſcemeth to afſirme that the bloud which is in the earesof the hart, hath ſuch a motion of it ſelfe, precedent to the motion of the earesitis in: and that this vertue remaineth in it for a litle ſpace after the eares are dead. Fourthly; in touching a hart which had newly left mouing, with his fingar wetted with warme ſpittle, it began to moue againe, as teſtify ing that hee and moyſture, made this motion. Fifthly;if you touch the vipers hart ouer with vinegar, ith ſpiritt of vine, with sharpe hite wine, or with any piercing liquour; it preſently dyeih: for the acureneſſe of ſuch ſubſtances, pierceth through the viſcous bloud, and maketh way for the heate to gett out. But this ſirſt mouer of an animal, muſt haue ſomething from without to ſtirre it vpielſe, the heate would lye in it, as if it were dead; and in time would become abſolutely ſo. In egges, you ſee this exteriour mouer, is the warmeth of the henne hatching thẽ. And in Embryòs; it is the warmeth of the mothers vombe. But when in either of them, the hart is cõpletely formed, and is encloſed in the breſt; much heate is likewiſe encloſed there, in all the partes neere about the hart; partly made by the hart it ſelfe; and partly cauſed by the outward heate, which helped alſo to make that in the hart: and then although the warmeth of the henne or of the mot hers vombe, do forſake the Rart;yer this ſtirreth vp the natiue heate vithin the hart and keepeth it in motion, and maketh it feede ſtillvpon now feell,as faſt as that which it worketh vpon decayeth. But to expreſſe more particulatly how this motion is efſected; we are tò note, that the hart hath inthe ventricles of it, three ſortes of fibers: the ſirſt go long wayes or are ſtraight ones, on the ſides of the ventricles from the thicke baſis of the hart, towardes the litle tippe or cone of it: the ſecond, go croſſe or roundwayes about the ventricles within the hart: and the third, are tranſuerſall or thwart ones. Next we are to remember, that the hart is fixed to the body by its baſe; and hangeth looſeatt the cone. Now then, the fibers being of the nature of ſuch thinges as will ſwell and grow thicker by Being moiſtened, and conſequently shrinke vp in length and grow shorter, in proportion to their ſelling thicker (as you may obſerue in a looſewrought hempen roape) it muſt of neceſſity follow, that when the bloud falleth into the hart (hich is of a kind of ſpungye ſubſtance) the fibers being therewith moyſtened, they will preſently ſwell in roundneſſe and shrinke in length. Next we are to note, that there is a double motion in the hart: the one of opening, whichis called, Diaſtole;the other, of shutting , which is termed Syſtole. And although Doctor Haruey ſeemeth to allow the opening of the hart to be no motion; but rather a relenting from motion; neuertheleſſe ( me thinketh) it is manifeſt, that it is not only a eõplete motion, but ina manner the greater motion of the two, though indeede the leſſe ſenſible; becauſe it is performed by litle and litle; forin it the hart is drawne by violence frò its naturall poſitiò:which muſt beſas it is of all heauy thinges) that by which it approacheth moſt to the cẽter of grauity;and ſucha poſition we ſeæ it gaineth by the shutting of it. Nov to declare how both theſe motions are effected, we are to conſider how att the end of the ſyſtolethe hart is voyded and cleanſed of allthe bloud that was init; whence it followeth, rhat the weight of the bloud whichis in the auricles, preſſing vpon the Valuulas or dores that open inwardes, maketh its way by litle and litle into the ventricles of the hart where it muſt neceſſarily, ſwell the fibers; and they being ſwelled muſt needes draw the hart into a roundish and ca pacious figure; which the moreit is done, the more bloud comethin; and with greater violence. The following effect of which muſt be, that the weight of the bloud ioyned to the weight of the hart it ſelfe, and particularly of the conis or tippe ( vhich is more ſolide and heavy in proportion to its quentity, then the reſt of the hart) muſt neceſſarily ſett the hart into the naturall motion of deſcending according to its grauity: the which conſequently, is performed by a liuely ierke, hereby it cometh to paſe that the tippe o our hart, doth as it were ſpring . towardes our breſt: and the bloud is ſpurted out by other Valuslæ ſthat open outwardes) which are aptly diſpoſed to be opened vpon ſuch a motion, and do conuey it to the arteries. In the courſe of which motion, ve may note how the figure of our hart contributeth to its ſpringing vp towardes our breſt; for the line of diſtance which is betweene the baſis and the tippe being longer on that ſide which is towardes the backe, then on the other which is towardes ihe breſt, ;it muſt happen that when the hartshutteth and ſtraighteneth jt ſelfe,and thereby extendeth it ſelfe to its length, the tippe vill butte sut forewardes towardes the breſt. Againſt this doctrine of the motion, and of the ſyſtole and diaſtole 6. of the hart,it may be obiected, that beaſts harts do not hang like a Aſ obioai mans hart, Itraight downewardes; but rather horizontally; and agint therefore this motion of grauity can hot haue place in them: forme: doc nenertheleſſe, we are ſure they beate, and do open and shutt, regularly. Beſides, if there were no other cauſe butthis  - for the motion of a mans hart, it wauld follow that one who were ſett vpon his head or hung by his heeles, could not haue the motion of his hart: which, poſture neuertheleſſe, we ſce men remaine in fora pretty hile, without any extreme preiudice. But theſe difficulties are eaſily anſwered; forwhether beaſts harts do lye directly horizontally, or whether, the baſis be faſtened ſome what Righer then the tippe reacheth, and ſo maketh their hart hang inclining downewardes ſtill the motion of grauity hath its effect in them. As wee may perceiue inthe hart of a viper lying vpona plate, and in any other thing that of it ſelfe ſwelleth vp, and ſtrai b againe ſinketh downe: in which we can not doubt, but that the grauity fighting againſt the heate, maketh the eleuated partes to fall, asthe heate maketh them riſe. And as for the latterit is euident that men can not ſtay long in that oſture vit hout violent actidents; and in any litle while we ſee that the Pioud cometh into their face and other partes which naturally are ſituated higher) but by this poſition become lower thenthe hart: and much time is not equhedto haue them quite diſorderedand ſuffocated; the bloud paſſing through the hart with too much quickeneſſe, and not receiuing due concoclion there ; and falling thence in too great aboundance into places that can not with conueniency entertayne ĩr. But you will inſiſt, and aske, whether in that poſture the hart doth moue or no,and how? And to ſpeake by gueſſe in a thing I haue not yet made experiences enough to be throughly informed in; I conceiue vithout any great ſcrupule that it doth moue. And that it happeneih thus;that the hart hanging ſomwhat looſe, muſt needes tũble ouer, and thetippe of it leane downewardes ſome way or other; and ſo lye in part lcethe hart of a beaſt; though not ſo conuenientlyaccommodated: and then the heate which maketh the viſcous bloud that is in the ſubſtance of ihe hart to ferment will not faile of raiſing it vp: wherevpon, the weight of that ſide of the hart, that is lifted vp, vill preſently preſſe it downe againe: And thus, by the alternatiue operations of rheſe cauſes; the hart will be made to open, and hutt it ſelfe, as muchasis neceſſary for admitting and thruſting out, that litle and diſorderly coming bloud, which maketh its courſe through it, for that litle ſpace wherein the man continueth in that poſition. Nov from theſe effects wrought in the hart by the moyſtening of the ſibers; two other effects do proceed: the one s, that the bloud is plished out of euery corner of the hart with an impetuouſneſſe or velocity. The other is, that by this motion the ſpirits, which are in the ventricles of the hart, and in the bloud that is euen then heated there, are more and deeper preſſed into the ſubſtance of the hart; ſo that you ſee, the hart imbibech fresh vigour,and is ſtrengthned with new ſpirits, hiles it ſeemeth to reiect that which should ſtrengihenit. Againe, two other cſfects follow this violent eicction of the bloud out of the hart. The oneis, that for the preſent, uhe hart is entirly cleanſed of allremainders of bloud none being permitted to fall backe toannoy it. The other is, that the hart ſinding it ſelfe dry; the fibers do relent preſently into their naturall poſitiõand extenſiõ, and the valuulæ that open inwardes, fall flatt to he ſides of the ventricles, and conſequently, new bloud dropperh in. So that in concluſiõ, we ſce, the motion of the hart, dependeth originally of its fibers irrigated by the bloud: and not from the force of the vapour as Monſieur des Cartes ſuppoſeth. This motion of the hart, driueth the bloud (which is warmed and ſpiritualiſed, by being boyled in this furnace) through due paſſages into the arteries, Which frò thẽ runneth into the veines, and isa maine cauſe of making and nourishing other partesias the liuer, the lũgs, the braines, and vhatſoeuer elſe dependeth of thoſe veines and arteries through which the bloud goeth. Which being euer freshly heated, and receiuing the tincture ofthe harts nature by paſſing through the hart; Where ſocuer it ſtayeth and curdleth, it groweth into a ſubſtance of a nature conformable to the hart, though euery one of ſuch ſubſtances, be of exceeding different conditions in themſclues, the very groſſeſt excrements, not being excluded from ſome participation of that nature. Butif you deſire to follow the bloud all along euery ſteppe, in its progreſſe from the hart round about the body, till it returne backe againe to ſts center, Doctor Haruey who moſt acutely teacheth this doctrine, muſt be your guide. He will shew you how it iſſueth from the hart by the arteries, from whence it goeth on warming the flesh, vntill it arriue to ſome of the extremities of the body: and by then itis growne ſo coole (by long abſence from the fountaine of its heate; and by euaporating its one ſtocke of ſpirits, without any new ſupply) that it hath neede of being warmed a new; it findeth it ſelfe returned backe againe to the heart, and is there heated againe, which returne is made by the veines,as its going forwardes, is performed only by the arteries. And were it not for this continuallcirculation of the bloud and this new heating it in its proper cauldron, the hart; it could not be auoyded, but that the extreme partes of the body would ſoone grow cold and dye. For ſlesh, being of it ſelfe of a cold nature (as is apparent in dead flesh) and being kept warme, meerely by the bloud that bedeweth ĩt; and the bloud likewiſe being of a nature that ſoone groweth cold, and congealeath, vnleſſe. it be preſerued in due temper by actuall heate working vpon it: how can we imagine that they two ſingly, without any otheraſſiſtance, should keepe one an other warme (eſpecially in thoſe partes, that are farre diſtant from the hart)by õnly being together Surely, we muſt allow the bloud, (which isa ſubſtance fitt B motion) to haue recourſe backe tothe hart, ( where only it can be ſupplyed with ne heate and ſpirits) and from thence be driuen out againe b its pulſes or ſtroakes; which are his shuttinges. And as faſt as it flyeth out, ſlike a reeking thicke ſteame, which riſeth from perfamed water falling vpona heated panne) that which is next before it, muſt fly yet further on, to make way for it; and new arteriall blould ſtill iſſuing forth att euery pulſe, it muſt ſtill driuæ on what iſſued thence the laſt precedent pulſe, and that part muſt preſſe on what is next before it. Ani thus it fareth with the whole maſſe of blould; Which hauing no other courſe, but in the body, it muſt att length runne round, and by new veſels (which are the veines) returne backe vno the place from whence it iſſued firſt: and by that time it cometh thither, it is growne coole and thicke, and needeth a vigorous reſtauration of ſi pirits and a new rarifying that then, it may warme the ſlesh, it paſſeth againe through: without which it would ſoddainely grow ſtone cold; as is manifeſt, if by tying or cutting the arteries,you intercet the blould, which is to nourish any part: for then that part, groweth preſently cold and benummed. But referring the particulars of this doctrine vnto Doctor Harue who hath both inuented and perfected it)our taske in hand calleth vpon vs to declare in common the reſidue of motions that all liuing creatures agree in. Ho generation is performed, we haue derermined in the paſt diſcourſe. Our next conſideration then ought to be of Nutrition and Augmentation. Betweene which there is very litle diſference in the nature of their action and the difference of their names is grounded more vpon the diſſerent reſult in the periode of them, then vpon the thing it ſclfe: as will by and by appeare. Thus then is the progreſſe of this matter: as ſoone as a liuing creature is formed, it endeauoureth ſtraight to augment it ſelfe; and employeth it ſelfe only about that; the partes of it being yet too ſos and tender, to performe the other functions which nature hath' produced them for. That is to ſay; the liuing creature, att ĩts firſt production, is in ſuch a ſtate and condition as it is able to do nothing elſe, but (by meanes of the greate heate thatis in it)to turne into its owne ſubſtance the aboundance of moyſture that ouerſloweth it. They whoare curious in this matter, do tell vs that the performance of this worke conſiſteth in fiue actions; which they call, Attraction, Adheſion, Concoction, Aſſimilation and Vnitionn. The nature of attraction, we haue already declared when we explicated, ho the hart and the roote ſendeth iuice into the other partes of the animal or plant: for they abounding in themſelues with inward heate, and beſides that, much other circumſtant heate working likewiſe vpon them: it can not be otherwiſe, but thit they muſt needes ſucke and draw into them, the moyſture that isabout them. j As for adheſion, the nature of that is likewiſe explicated, when ve shewed, how ſuch partes as are moyſt, but eſpecially aereall or oyly ones (ſuch asare made b the operation of a ſoft and continuall heate) are catching and do eaſily ſticke vnto any body they happen to touch: and howa litle part of moyſture beteene two dry partes, ioyneth them rogether. Vpon which occaſion, it is to be noted thar partes of the ſame kind do ioyne beſt together: and therefore the pouder of glaſſe is vſed to cimẽt broken glaſſe with all ſas we haue touched ſome where aboue:) and rhe pouder of marble to ciment marble with; and ſo of other bodies: in like manner, Alchymiſtes find no berter expedient to extracta ſimall proportion of ſiluer mixed witha great one of gold, then to putt more ſiluer to it: nor any more effectuall way to gett out the hart, or tincture, or ſpirits of any thing they diſtill or make an extract of, then to infuſe its owne ſlegme upon it, and to water it ith that. Now whether the reaſon of this be, that continuity, becauſe it is an vnity, muſt be firmeſt betweene parts that are moſt conformable to one an other, and conſequently, are moſt one among themſelues; or whetherit be forſome other hidden cauſe, belongeth not to this place to diſcourſe:but in fine ſo it is. And the adheſion is ſtrongeſt of ſuch partes as are moſt conformable to that which needeth encreaſe and nourishment; and thatis made vp by the other three actions. Of which, concoction is nothing elſe but a thickening of that iuice which already ſticketh to any part of the animals body, by the good digeſtion that heate maketh init. And aſſimilation, is the eſſect of concoction: forthis iuice being vſed in the ſame manner, as the fitſt iuice was, that made the part, vherevnto this is to be ioyned; it can not chooſe but become like vnto it in ſubſtance. And then, there bting no other ſubſtance betweene, it is of ĩt ſelfe vnited vnto it without any further helpe. llll Hitherto, this action belongeth to nutrition. But if on the one ſide, the heate and ſpirituality of the bloud; and on the otherſide the due temper and diſpoſition of the part be ſuch, as the bloud is greedily ſucked into the part, which thereby ſelleth to make roome for it, and vill not lett it go away, but rurnethitinto a like ſubſtance as it ſelfe is; and in greater quantity then whatis conſumed and decayeth continually by tranſpiration: then this action is called Lkewiſe augmentation. Vhich Galen explicateth by a ſport the boyes of Ionia vſed; who were accuſtomed to ſilla bladder withwind: and when they could force no more into it,they would rubbe the bladder,and after rubbing of it, they OF BODIES, Chay. XXVI. 2a1 on, vntill their bladder wereas full as by vſe they knewit could be made. Now(ſaith he) nature doth the like, by filling our flesh, and otherpartes vith bloud; that is to ſay, it ſtretcheth the fibers: but she hath ouer and aboue a power which the boyes had not; namely to make the fibers as ſtrong afcer theyare ſtretched to their vemoſt extenſion, as they were before they were extended: whence it happeneth that she can extend them againe, as well as att the firſt; and this without end, as farre as concerneth that part. The reaſon whereoſ is, becauſe she extendeth them by meanes ofa liquour which is of the ſame nãture, as that whereofthey were made att the firſt: and from thence it followeth, that by concoction that liquour ſettleth in the partes ofthe fibers which haue moſt neede; and ſo makerh thoſe partes as great in the length they are extended vnto, as they were in their shortneſſe, before they were drawne out. Whereby the whole part of the animal, wherein this happeneth, groweth greater: and the lie being done in euery part, as vl as in any one ſingle one, the whole animal becometh bigger, and is in ſuch ſort augmented. Out of all which diſcourſe, ve may collect that in the eſſentiall compoſition of liuing creatures, there may prraduente be a phyſicall poſſibility for them to continue alwayes without decay, and ſo, become immortall, euen in their bodies, if all hurtfull accidents coming from vithout might be preuented. Forſeeing that a man, beſides the encreaſe which he maketh of himſelfe, can alſo impart vnto his children a vertue, by which they are able to do the like, and to giue againe vnto theirs as much as they recelued from their fathers: it is cleare, that what maketh him dye, is no more the want of any radicall power in him, to encreaſe or nourish himſelfe; then in fire, it is the want of power to burne, which maketh it goe out. But it muſt be ſome accidentall want, which Galen attributeth chiefely to the dryneſſe of our bones, and ſinewes &c. as you may in him ſee more att large: for dryneſſe, with denſity, alloweth not eaſy admittance vnto moyſture: and therefore, it cauſeth the heate whichis in the dry body, eyther to enaporate or to be extinguished: and vant of heate, is that, from whence the failing of life proceedeth: which he thinketh can not be preuented by any art orinduſtry. And herein, God hath expreſſed his great merey and goodneſſe towardes vs: for ſecing that by the corruption of our owne nature, we are ſo immerſed in flesh and bloud as we should for euer delight to allow in their myre without myſing our thoughts att any time aboue that low and brutall condition: he hath engaged vs bya happy neceſſity, to thinke of and to prouide for a nobler and farre more excellent ſtate of liuing that will neuer change or end. lllll In purſuance of which incuitable ordinance; man ſ as if he were growne weary and out of loue withthislife; and ſcorned any terme in his farme here, ſince he can not purchaſe the fee ſimple of it) haſteneth bloud: and then, his infected bloud paſſing through his whole body, muſt needes in like manner, taynt it all att once. For the redreſſe of which miſchicſe, the aſſiſtance of Phyſike is made vſe of: and that, paſſing likewiſe the ſame way purifyeth the bloud, and 'recouereth the corruption occaſioned by the peccant humour; or other whiles gathering it togethen, it thruſteth and carryeth out that euill gueſt by the paſſages contriued by nature to bisburden the body of vnproſitable or hurtfull ſuperſluities. THE SEVEN AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER Of the motions of ſenſe ; and of the ſenſible qualuies in generall ; and in particular of thoſe which belong 1 Touch, Taſt, : and Smelling. li 2i Auing thus brought on the courſe of natureas high us liuing 7E creatures ( whole chiefe ſpecieſes or diuiſion, isthoſe that haue ſenſe)and hauing declared the operations which are common to the whole tribe of them, which includeth both plants and animals: it is now time we take a particular view of thoſe, hoſe action, and paſſion, is the reaſon why that chiefe portion of life is termed ſenſitiue; ſ meane the ſenſes, and the qualities, by vhich the outward world cometh into the liuing creature, through his ſenſes. Which when we shall haue gone through, we shall ſcarcely haue left any qualities among bodies, to leade for a ſpirituall manner of being or working; that is, for a Rſ: entity, and inſtantaneous operation: which kind of thinges and properte; , vulgar Philoſophy is very earneſt to attribute vnto our ſenſes: wirth what reaſon], and vpon what ground lett vs now conſider. Theſe qualities are reduced to fiue ſeuerall heades: anſwerable to ſo. many diſferent wayes, whereby we receiue notice of the bodies that are without vs. And accordingly, they conſtitute a like number of diſferent ſenſes: of euery one of which, we will diſcourſe particularly, when we haue examined the natures of the qualities that effect them. But nov, all the conſideration we shall need to haue of them, is only this; that it is manifeſt the organes in vs by which ſenſible qualities do worke vponvs, are corporeall, and are made of the like ingredients as the reſt of our body is: and therefore, muſt of neceſſity be Iyable to ſuffer enill and t receiue good ſ in ſuch ſort as all other bodies do) from thoſe actiue qualities which make and marre all thinges within the limits of nature. BY which termes of Euill and Good; I meane, thoſe eſfects that are auerſe or conformable ro the particular nature of any thing:and thereby do tend to the preſeruation or deſtruction, of that Indiuiduall Novwe receiuing from our ſenſes, the knowledge that e haue of thinges without vs do giue names vnto them àccording tothe aſſions and aſfections, which thoſe thinges cauſe in our ſenſes: which being the ſame in all mankind (as long as they are conſidered in cõmon, and that their effects are looked vpon in groſſe) all the world agreeth in one notion and in one name oſthe ſame thing; for euery man liuing is aſfected byit, iuſt as his neighbour is, and as all men elſe in the world are. As for example; heate or cold worketh the ſame feeling in euery man compoſcd of flesh and bloud; and therefore, whoſoeuer should be asked of them, would returne the ſame anſwere,that they cauſe ſuch and ſuch eſfects in his ſenſe, pleaſing or diſpleaſing to him, according to their degrees,and as they tend to the good or euillof his wh. le body. Butif we deſcend to Jepiculn , we shall find, that ſeuerall men of differing conſtitutjons, do frame different notions of the ſame thinges, according as they are conformable or diſagreeing to their natures: and accordingly they giue them different names. As when the ſame liquor is ſeete to ſome mens taſte; which toan orhers appeareth bitter: one man taketh that fora purfume; whichto an other, is an offenſiue ſmell: in the Turkesh bathes; ( where there are many degrees of heate in diuers roomes, through allwhich the ſame perſon n to paſſe, and to ſtay a vhile in euery one of them, borh att his entrance and going out, to ſeaſon his body by degrees, for the contrary exceſſe he his going vnto that ſeemerh chilly cold att hisreturne; which appeared melting hoat att his going in;as I my ſelfe haue often made experience in thoſe countries: beauty and louelineſſe willshine to one man, in the ſame face, that will iue auerſion to an other. All which proclaymeth, that the ſenſible qualities of bodies, are not any poſitiue reall thing, conſiſting in an indiuiſible, and diſtinct from the body it ſelfe; butare meerely he very body, as it affecteth our ſenſes: Which to diſcouer how they doit, muſt be our labour here. Lett vs therefore beginne, with conſidering the difference, that is betweene ſenſible and inſenſible creatures. Theſe latter, do lye expoſed the mercy of all outward agents that frò time to time (by the cõtinuall motion whichall thinges are in) do come ithin diſtance of working vponthem: and they haue no power to romoue themſelues from what is auerſe to their nature; nor to approach neerer vnto what com forteth it. But the others hauing within ſemſelues principle of motion ſas we haue already declared) whenſoeuer ſuch eſfects are wrought vpon them, as vpon the othersitheyare able, vpon their owne account and by their owne action, to remoue themſelues fiom what beginneth to annoy them, and to come neerer vnto what they find a beginning of good by. Theſe impreſſions, are made vpon thoſe partes of vs, which we call the organes of our ſenſes; and by them, do giue vs ſeaſonable aduertiſſements and knowledges whercby we may gouerne and order to the beſt aduantage, our litle chsrge iũ a body, according to the tune or varninges of change in the great circumſtant body of the woild, as farre as it may concerne ours. Which how it is done, and by what ſteppes it proceedeth, shall be in the following diſcourſe layed open. OFf this great machine that enuironneth vs, we who are but a ſmall parcell,are not immediately concerned in euery part of it. It importeth not vs, forthe conſeruation of our body, to haue knovledg of orher partes then ſuch as are within the diſtance of working vpon vs: thoſe only within whoſe ſphere of actiuity we are planted, can offend or aduantage vs: and of them; ſome are neere vs; others, further from vus. Thoſe that are next vnto vs; e diſcerneſaccording as they are qualifyed) eyther by our touch, or by our taſt, or by our melling ; which three ſenſes, do manifeſtly appeare to conſiſt in a meere gradation of more or leſſe groſſe; and their operations are leuelled tothe three Elements that reſſe vpon vs; earth, water, and ayre. B our other two ſenſes ( our hearing and our ſeeing) we haue notice of thinges further oſf: and the agents which worke vpon them, are of a more refined nature. But we muſt treat of them all in particular: and that which we vill beginne with,shall be the touch, as being the groſſeſt of them, and that vhich conuerſeth with none, but the moſt materiall and maſſye obiects. Ve ſee it dealeth with heauy conſiſtent bodies;and iudgeth of them by coniunction vnto them, and by immediate reception of ſomething from them. And according to the diuers impreſſions they make in it; it diſtinguisheth them by diuers names; which (as we ſaid of the qualities of mixed bodies) are generally reduced to certaine payres; as hoat and cold, wett and drye, ſoſt and hard, ſmooth and rough. thicke and thinne, and ſome others of the like nature; which were nee deleſſe to enumerate, ſince we pretend not to deliuer the ſcience of them, but only to shew that they and their actions, are all corporeall. And this is ſufficiently euident, by meere repeating but their very names ; for it is plaine, by what we haue already ſaid; that they are nothingelſe but certaine affections of quantity, ariſing out of diſferent degrees of rarity and denſity compounded together. And it is manifeſt by experience, that our ſenſe receiueth the very ſame impreſſions from them, which an other body doth; for our body, or our ſenſe ill be heated by fire;and will alſo be burned by it, if the heate be too great, as well as wood: it will be conſtipated by cold water, moyſtened by humide thinges, and dryed by dry bodies, in the ſame manner as any other body whatſoeuer; likewiſe, it may in ſuch ſortas they, be wounded and haue its continuity broken by hard thinges, be pleaſed and polished, by thoſe that are ſoft and ſmooth;be preſſed by thoſe that are  i and heauyi and be rubbed by thoſe that are rugged c. So that thoſe maſters, who willteach vs that the impreſſions vpon ſenſe are made by ſpirituall or ſpiritelike thinges or qualities; which æ call intentionall ſpecieſes, muſt labour att two workes: the one to make ĩt appeare that there are in nature ſuch thinges as they would perſuade vs; the other to proue that theſe materiall actions we ſpeake of are not able to performe thoſe effects, for hich the ſenſes are giuen vnto liuing creatures. And vntill they haue done that, I conceiue we should be much too blame to admitt ſuch thinges, as we neyther haue ground for in reafon, nor can vnderſtand uhat they are. And therefore, we muſt reſolueto reſt in this beliefe, Which experience breedeth invs: that theſe bodies worke vpon our ſenſes no other wayes then by a corporeall operation ; and that ſuch a one is ſufficient for all the effects we ſee proceede from them: as in the proceſſe of this diſcourſe we shall more amply declare. The element immediately next to earthin groſſeneſſe, is water. And &; _y and initis the exerciſe of our taſt, our mouth being perpetually wett within: its qualities: by meanes of which moyſture, our tongue receiueth into it, ſome litle tha;they a partes of the ſubſtance which we chewe in our teeth, and which paſſet ouerit. You may obſerue how, if we tae any herbe or fruiteand hauing chopped or beatẽ it ſinall, we thẽ putt it into a wooden dish of water and do ſqueeſe it a litle, the iuice, communicating and mingling it ſelfe with; the watern, infecteth it with the taſt of it ſelfe, and remaming a while in the bowle ſinketh by litle and litle into the very pores of the wood: asis manifeſt, by its retaining a long time after, the taſt and ſmell of that herbe. In like manner, nature hath taught vs, by chewing our meate, and by turning it into our mouthes and preſſing it a litle (that we may the more eaſily ſwallow it) to imbue our ſpittle with ſuch litle partes as eaſily diffuſe themſelues in water. And then our ſpittle being continuate to the moyſture, which is within our tongue, (in heh ſort as we declared of the moyſturę of the earth, that ſoaketh into the roote of a plant) and particularly in thæ ſinewes of it; muſt of neceſſity affect thoſe litle ſenſible ſtringes with the qualities hich theſe petty bodies, mixed euery where with the moyſture, are themſelues imbued withall. Andif you aske what motions or qualities theſe be: Phyſitians(vnto vwhom it belongeth moſt particularly to looke into them) willtell you, that ſome dilate the tongue more, and ſome leſſe; as if ſome of theſe lile bodies had an aereall,and others a watry diſpoſition: and theſe two, they expreſſe by the names of ſweeteand fatty. That ſome, do contract and drav the tongue together; as choaky and rough thinges do moſt; and next to them, crabby and immature sharpeneſſe. That ſome do corrode and pierce the tongueias ſalt and ſoure thinges. That bitter thinges do ſearch the outſide of it,as if they ſwept it:and that other thinges, do as it were pricke it; as ſpices and hoat drinkes. Now all theſe are ſenſible materiall thinges; which admitt to be explicated clearely, bythe varieties of rarity and denſity concurring to their compoſitions: and are ſo proportionable to ſuch materiall inſtruments as we can not doubt but that they may be throughly declared by our former principles. The next element aboue water, is ayre; which our noſethrilles, being our inſtrument to ſucke in, we can not doubt but What affecteth a man That the ſmell : im i : ſin and its qualities receiueth groſſer and eightier partes; ſo thoſe which are more ſubtile and light,do riſe vp into the ayre: and theſe e knov attaine vnto this lightneſſe, by the commixtion of fire, which is hoat and dry. And threrefore, we can not doubt, but that the nature of ſmellis more or leſſe tending to heate and drought: which is the cauſe that their commixtion ith the braine, proueth comfortable vnto it; becauſe of its owne diſpoſition itis vſually ſubiect to be too moyſt and too cold. Vhether there be any immediate inſtrument of this ſenſe, to recciue the paſſion or effect, which by it, other bodies make vpon vs; or whether the ſenſe it ſelfe, be nothing but a paſſage of theſe exhalations and litle bodies vnto the braine, fittly accommodated to diſcerne, what is good, or hurtfull for it,and accordingly to moue the body to admitt or reiect thems importeth not vs att preſent to determine: lett Phyſitians and Anatomiſtes reſolue that queſtion; whiles it ſuſficeth vs to vnderſtand, that the operations of bodies by odours vpon our ſenſe, are performed by reall and ſolide partes of the whole ſubſtance; which are truly materiall, though very litle, bodies; and not by imaginary qualities. And thoſe bodies, vhen they proceed out of the ſame thinges that yield alſo taſtiue particles, ( although without ſuch materiall violence, and in a more ſubtile manner) muſt of neceſſity haue in them the ſame nature, which thoſe haue ithat affect the taſte; and they muſt both of them, affect a man much alike, by his taſteand by his ſmell: and ſo, are very proportionate to one an other; excepting in thoſe properties which require more cold or liquidity, then can well ſtand with the nature ofa ſmell. And accordingly, the very names which men haue impoſed, to expreſſe the aſfections of both do many times agree: as ſauour, which is common both to the ſmell and to the taſte; and ſweete likewiſe: the ſtrongeſt of which, we ſee ofientimes do make themſclues knowne, as vell by the one as by the other ſenſc: and eyther of them in exceſſe, will turne a mans ſtomake. And the Phyſitians that write of theſe ſenſes find them very conformable: and therefore it happeneth that the looſing of one of them, is the loſſe alſo of the other. And experience teacheth vs in all beaſtes, that the ſmell is giuen vnto liuing creatures, to know what meates are good for them, and what are not. And accordingly, we ſee them ſtill ſmell for the moſt part, att any vnknowne meate r they touch it; which ſeldome ſayleth of informing them rightly: nature hauing prouided this remedy againſt the gluttony, which could not chooſe but follow the conuenient diſpoſition and temper of their partes and humors; through vhich they often ſwallow their meate greedily and ſoddainely without expecting to trye it firſt by theirtaſte. Beſides that many meates are ſo ſtrong, that their very taſting them after their vſuall manner, would poyſon oratt the leaſt greately annoy them: and thereſfore nature hath prouided this ſenſe to preuent their taſte; which being farre more ſubrile then their taſte; the ſmall atomes by which it is performed, are not ſo very noxious to the health of the animal, as the other groſſer atomes are. And doubtleſſely, the like vſe men would make of this ſenſe, had they not on the one ſide better meanes then it to know the qualities of meates: and therefore, this is not much reflected vpon. And on the other ſide, were they not continually ſtuffed and clogged wiih groſſe vapours of ſteamy meates, which are dayly recking from the table and their ſtomakes. and permitt not purer atomes of bodies, to bę diſcerned: which require cleare and vninfected organes to take notice of them. As e ſee it fire with dogges: who haue not ſo true and ſenſible noſes, when they are high fed, and lye in the kitchin amiddeſt the ſteames of meate; as when they are kept in their kennell, with a more ſpare diett fitt for hunting. One full example, this age aſſordethvs in this kind, of a man whoſe extremity of feare, weought vpon him to giue vs this experiment. He as borne in ſome village of the countrſbt Liege:and thereſfore among ſtrangers, he is knowne by the name of Iohn of Liege. I haue beene infomed of this ſtory by ſeuerall (whom I dare confidently beleeue) that haue had it from his owne mouthi and haue queſtioned him with great curioſity, particularly abouti. lll Vhen he was a litle boy, there being warres in the country (as that State is ſeldome without moleſtations from abroad. when they haue no diſtempers att home, which is an vnſeparable eſfect of a countries ſituation vpon the frontiers of powerfull nei bouring Princes tht are att variance)the village of whence he was, had notice of ſome vnruly ſcattered troopes that were coming to pillage th. m: which made all the people of the village fly haſtily with what they could carry wi h them, to hide themſelues in the woods: which were ſpacious enouę h to aſford them shelter, for they ioyned vpon the foreſt of Ardenne. There they lay, till ſome of their ſcoutes brought them word, that the ſouldiers of whom they were in ſuch apprehenſion, had fired their towne and quittedit. Then all of them returned home , excepting rhis boy; who, it ſeemeth, being of a very timorous nature, had images oſ f are ſo ſtrong in his fanſie; hat firſt, he ranne furtherinto the wood thn any of the reſt: and afterwardes apprehended that euery body he ſaw through the thickets, and euery voyce he heard was the ſouldiers: and ſo hidd himſelfe from his parents, thit were in much diſtreſſe ſe: king him all abour, and calling his name as loud as they could. When they had ſpent a day ortw) in vaine, they returned home without him, and he liued many yeares in the woods, feeding vpon rootes, and vild fiuites,and maſte. He ſaid that aſter h- hd beene ſome time in this wild habitation, he and that he could att a great diſtance wind by his noſe, where vholeſome fruites or rootes did grow. In this ſtate he continued ( ſtill shunning men withas great feare as when he firſt ranne away; ſo ſtrong the impreſſion was,and ſo litle could his litle reaſon maſter it) vntill ina very sharpe inter, that many beaſtes of the foreſt perished for vant of foode; neceſſity brought him to ſo much confidence, that leauing the vild places of the foreſt, remote from all peoples dwellinges, he would in the eueninges ſteale among cattle that vere fothered; eſpecially the ſine,and among them, gleane that which ſerued to ſuſtaine wretchedly his miſerable life. He could not do this ſo cunningly, but that returning often to it, he was vpona time eſpyed: and they who ſaw a beaſt of ſo ſtrange a shape (for ſuch they tooke him to be; he being naked and all ouer growne with haire) beleeuing him to be a ſutyre, or ſome ſuch prodigious creature as the recounters of rare accidents tell vs of; layed wayte to apprehend him. But he that winded them as farre off, as any beaſt could do, ſtill auoyded them, tillatt the length, they layed ſnares for him; and tooke the vind ſo duantagiouſly of him, that they caught him: and then, ſoone perceiued he was a man; though he had quite forgotten the vſe of all language: but by his geſtures and cryes, he expreſſed the greateſt affrightedneſſe that might be. Which aſte; ardes, he ſuid(when Re had learned anewto ſpeake) was becauſe he thought, thoſe were the ſouldiers he had hidden himſelfe to auoyde, when he firſt betooke himſelfe to the wood; and were alwayes liuely in his fanſie, through his feares continually reducing them thither. This man within a litle while after he came to good keeping and full feeding, quite loſt that acuteneſſe of ſmelling which formerly gouerned him in histaſte;and gre to be in that particular as other ordinary men were. But att his ſirſt liuing with orher peo le, a woman that had compaſſion of him to ſee a man ſo neere like a beats and that had no language to call for what he wished or needed to haue; tooke particular care of him;and was alwayes very ſollicitous to ſee him furnished with what he wanted: which made him ſo apply himſelfe vnto her in all his occurrents, that whenſocuer he ſtood in neede of ought, if she were out of the way, and were gone abroad into the ſieldes, or to any other village neere by be would hunt her out preſently by his ſent, in ſuch ſort as with vs thoſe dogges vſe to do which are taught to draw diy foote. I imagine he his yet aliue to tella better ſtory of himſelfe then Ihaue done; and to confirme what I hue here ſaid of him: forI haue from them vho ſav him but fe yeares agone, that he was an ableſtrong man, and likely to. laſt yet a good while longer. And of an other man, I can ſpeake aſſuredly my ſelfe, ho being of a verv temperate or rather ſpare diett, could likewiſe perfectly diſcerne by his ſmell the qualities of whatſocuer was afterwardes to paſſe the examination of his taſte, euen to his bread and beere. Vhereſore to conclude it is euident both by reaſon, and by experience, that the obiects of our touch, our taſte, and our ſmell, are materiall and corporeall thin ges, deriued from the diuiſion of quantity, into more rare and more denſe partes; and may vith eaſe, be reſolued into their heades and ſpringes ſufficiently to content any iuditious and rationall man. Who if he be curious to haue further ſatisfaction in this particular ( as farre as concerneth odours and ſauours) may looke ouer what Ioannes Brauus (that iuditious, though vnpolished Phyſitian of Salamanca) hath written thereof. THE EIGHT AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER Of the ſenſe of hearing, and of the ſenſible quality ſouna: Sꝶ Vt to proceede with the reſt of the ſenſes: becauſe natur ſ ſaw that ſome thinges came ſoddainely vpon a liuing  creature; which might do it hurt, if they ere not perceiued ſ75 a farre off: and that otherthinges vere placed att diſtance from it, which would greatly helpe it, if it could come neere vnto them; she found a meanes to giue vs two ſenſes more, for the diſcouery of remote thinges. The one principally and particularly to deſcry their motion. The other to marke their bulke and ſituation. And ſo to beginne Xith the former of theſe; ve muſt needes acknowledgeſafter due examination of the matter) that the thing which we call ſound, is purely motion. And if it be obiected that many motions are made without any diſcernable ſound. We shall not make dificulty to grant it; conſidering that many motions dye, before they come to touch the eare; or elſe are ſo weake, that they are drowned by other ſtronger motions, Which round about beſiege our eares in ſuch manner, that notice is not taken of theſe: forſo it fareth in what dependeth meerely of quantity,eſpecially, concerning our ſenſes, that rſot euery thing of the Rind, but a determinate quantity or multitude of parts of it, maketh an obiect ſenſible. But to come cloſ to the point; we ſee that ſound, for the moſt part, is made in the ayre;and that to produceit, there is required a quicke and ſmart motion of that Element, which, of all the reſt, is the moſt moueable. And in motion, velocity or quickeneſſe, is proportionate to denſity in magnitude (as we haue att lage declared. ) Which maketh quantity become perceptible in bulke, as this doth in motion. And as the one conſiſteth ina greaterproportion of ſubſtance to the ſame quantity; ſo the other doth in the paſſage of more partes of the medium in the ſametime. And in the moderating of this, ſuch of the liberall artes are em ployed, is which belong to the cultiuating mans voyce;as Rhetorike, meetering, and ſinging. It is admirable how finely Galileo hath deliuered vs the conſonances of muſike towardes the end of his firſt Dialogue of e motſon;from the 55 page forward on: and how he hath shewed that matter clearely vnto the ſight( ſo making the eye, as well as the eare iudge of it)in motions of the water, in pendants hanging looſe in the ayre, and in permanent notes or races made vpon Ierton. To the moderation of the ſame, many other mechanicall artes are applyed; as the trade of bellfounders; and of all makers of muſicall inſtruments by vind, or by water, or by ſtrings. Neyther can Iſlippe ouer without mentioning the two curious artes of Ecchoing and of whiſpering. The ſirſt of which, teacheth to iterate voyces ſeuerall times; and is frequently putt in practiſe by thoſe that are delighted with rarities in their gardens. And the other, sheweth howto gather into a narrow roome the motions of the ayre, that are diſfuſed in a greatextent; whereby, one that shall putt his eare to that place, where allthe ſeuerall motions do meete, shall heare what is ſpoken ſo lowe, as no body betweene him, and the ſpeaker, can diſcerne any ſound att all. Of which kind, there are very ſine curioſities in ſome churches of England: and my ſcelfe haue ſeene, in an vpper roome of a capacious round tower vaulted ouerhead, the walles ſo contriued ſby chance, I beleeue) that to men ſtanding att the vimoſt oppoſite poyntes of the Diameter of it, could talke very currently and clearely with one an otheriand yet none that ſtoode in the middle could hearea ſyllable. And if he tumed his face to the wall and ſpoke againſt that ( though neuer ſo ſoftly) the others care, att the oppoſite poynt, would diſcerne euery word. Which putteth me in minde of a note made by one that was no frend to auricular confeſſion: vpon his occaſion of his being with me in achurch thit had been of a Monaſtery; where, in one corner of it, one might ſitt and heare almoſt all that was whiſpered through the whole extent of the church: who would not be perſuaded but that it was on purpoſe contriued ſo by the ſuttlety of the fryars; to the end that the Prior or ſome one of them, might ſitt there and heare whatſocuer the ſcuerall Penitents accuſed themſelues of to their Ghoſtly fathers; ſo to make aduantage by this artifice, of what the confeſſors durſt not of themſelues immediately reueale. He allowed better of the vſe in Rome of making voyces rebound from the roppe of the cupula of ſt: Peters inthe Vatican, downe to the floore of the church; whæn on great dayes they make a quire of muſike goe vp to the very higheſt, part of the arch: whichis into the lanterne, from whence whiles they ſing, the people below iuſt vnder it, are ſurpriſed with the ſmart ſound of their voices, as though they ſtoode cloſe by them, and yet can ſee no body from whom thoſe notes should ptoceede. And in the ſame cupula, if two men ſtand vpon the large cornish or bord, which circleth the bottome of it, they may obſerue the like effect, as that which Iſpoke of aboue in the round tover. In the like manner they that are called ventriloqui, do perſuade ignorant people that the Diuell ſpeaketh from within them deepe in their belly) by their ſucking their breath inwardes in a certaine manner vhiles they ſpeake: whence it followeth that their voice ſeemeth to come, not from them, but from ſomewhat elſe hidden within them,; if (att the leaſtyyou perceiue it cometh out of them: but if you do not, then it ſeemeth to come from a good way off. To this art belongeth the making of ſurabatanes, or trunkes, to helpe the hearingiand of Eccho glaſes, thar multiply ſoundes, as burning glaſſes, do light. All which artes, and ihe rules of them, do follow the ſawes of motioniand euery eſfect of them is to be demonſtrated by the principles and proportons of motion:and therefore, we can not witli reaſon imagine them tobeany thing elſe. Vee ſee likewiſe, that great noiſes, nor only ofſend the hearing, bur euen shake houſes and towers. I haue beene told by inhabitants of Douer; that when the ArchDuke Albertus made his great battery againſt. Calais ( which for the time was a very furious one; for he endeauoured all he could to take the towne before it could be relieued the very houſes were shakẽ, and the glaſſe vindowes were shiuered, with the repoit of his artillery. And I haue beene told by one that was inSeuill, when the gunne pouder houſe of that towneſ which was ſome two miles diſtant from the place where he liued) was blowne vp, that it made the wodden shutters of the Windowes in his houſe, beate and clappe againſt the walles with greate violence, and did ſplitte the very alles of a faire church that ſtanding next it(though atta good diſtance) had noother building betweene to shelter it from the impetuoſity of the ayres ſoddaine violent motion. l And aftera fight I once had with ſome galleaſſes and Galliones in the roade of Scanderone ( which was a very hoat one for the time, anda ſcarce eredible number of pieces of ordinance were shott from my flcete) the English Conſll of that place coming afterwardes aboard my shippe, tould me that the report of ourgunnes, hd, during all the time of the fight, shaken the drinking glaſſes that ſtood vpon shelues in his houſe; and had ſplitte the paper Windowes all about; and had ſpoyled and eracked all the egges that his pigeons were then ſitting vpon: which Ioſſe, he lamented exceedingly, for they were of that kind, which commonly is called Carriers, and ſerue them dayly in their commerce betweene that place and Aleppo. li Andl haue often obſerued att ſea, in ſmooth ater, that the ordinance shott of in a shippe ſome miles diſtant, would violently shake the glaſſe vindowes in an other. And I haue percciued this effect in my owne, more then once,art the report of a ſingle gunne from a shippe ſo farre off, that we could not deſcry her. Iremember how one time, vpon ſuch an occaſion, we altered our courſe and ſteared with the ſound, or rather with the motion att the firſt, obſeruing vpon which poynt of the compaſſe the shaking appearedſforas yet we heard nothing; though ſoone after with much attention and ſilence we could diſcerne a dull clumſy noiſe: and ſuch a motion growethatt the end of ĩt ſo faint that if any ſtrong reſiſting body checke it in its courſe, it is preſently deaded, and vill afterwardes shake nothing beyond that body: and therefore it is perceptible only att the ont ſide of the shippe, if ſome light and very mouecable body do hang looſely on that ſide it cometh, to receiue the impreſſion of it;as this did att the gallery windowes of my cabin vpon the poope, which were of light moſcouia glaſſe or talke:) and by then we had runne ſomewhat more then a watch, with all the ſayles abroad we could make, and in a faire loome gale, we found onr ſalues neere enough to part the fray of two shippes, that in a litle vhile longer fighting would haue ſunke one an other. But beſides the motions of the ayre(which receiueth them eaſily, by reaſon of the fluidity of it) we ſee that cuen ſolide bodies do participate of it. As if you knocke neuer ſo lightly att one end of the longeſt beame you can find, it will be diſtinctly hard att the other end: the trampling of men and horſes in a quiet might, willbe heard ſome miles off, if one lay their eare to the ground; and more ſenſibly if one make a litle hole in the earth,and putt ones eare into the mouth of it; but moſt of all if one ſett a drumme ſmooth vpon the ground, and lay ones eare to the vpper edge of it; for the lower membrane of the drumme, is shaked by the motion of the earth, and then multiplyeth that ſound by the hollow figure of the drumme in the conueying it to the vpper membrane, vpon which your eare leaneth. Not much vnlke the tympane or drumme of the eare; Which being shaked by outward motion, cauſctha ſccond motion on the inſide of ĩt correſpondent to this firſt; and this hauing a free paſſage to the braine, ſtrikerh it immediately and ſo informeth it ho thinges moue wihout: which is all the myſtery of hearing. If thing do breake or ſtoppe this motion; before it shake oureare, it is not heard. And accordingly we ſee that' the ſound of belles or artillery is heard much furtherif it haue the conduct of waters, then through the pure ayre: becauſe in ſuch bodies the great continuity of them maketh that one part can not shake alone, and vpon their ſuperficies, there is no notable vneueneſſe, nor no denſe thing in the way to checke the motion ſas in the ayre, hilles, buildinges, trees and ſuch like:ſo that the ſame haking goeth a great way. And to confirme that this is the true reaſon, I haue ſeuerall times obſerued, that ſtanding bya riuers ſide, I haue heard the ſound of a ring of belles, much more diſtinctly and lowde, then if I went ſome diſtance from the ater, though neerer to the ſteeple from whence the ſound came. Andit is not only the motion of the ayre, that maketh ſound in our eates:but any motion that hath acceſſe to them in ſuch a manner as to 6. shake the quiuering membranous tympane within them, will repreſent That not only vnto vs thoſe motions which are without, and ſo make ſuch a ſound theayre buc al there as if it were conueyed only by the ayre. Which is plainely ſeere, other motions when a man lying a good way vnder water, shall there heare the ſame coming to o: ſoundes, as are made aboue in the ayre: but ina more clumſie manner; ſounds according as the water, by being thicker, and more corpulent is more vnvieldy in its motions. And this I haue tryed often; ſtaying vnder vater as long as the neceſſity of breathing would permitt me. Vhich shewerh that theayre being ſmartly moued, moueth the wateralſo, by meanes of its continuity withit; and that liquid element, being fluide and getting into the care, maketh vibrations vpon the drumme of it like vnto thoſe of ayr. i i But all thisis nothing in reſpect of what I mightin ſome ſort ſy,and 7. yet ſpeake truth. Vhich is that I haue ſeene one, who could diſcerne Hov one ſenſe ſoundes ith his eyes. It is admirable, how one ſenſe will oftentimes may ſupply te ſupply the want of an orher: whereof I haue ſecne an other ſtrange other. amole in a diſerent ſraine from this; of a man that by his groſſer ſenſes had his want of ſight vonderfully made vp. He was ſo throughly blind, that his eyes could not informe him vhen the ſunne shined; for all the cryſtalline humour yvas out in both his eyes: yet his other ſenſes inſtruted him, ſo eſficaciouſly in what was their officeto haue done; as what he wanted in them ſeermed to be ouerpayed in other abilities. To ſay that he would play att cardes and tables as well as moſt men is rather 2 commendation of his memory and fanſye, then of any of his outward Tenſes. But that he should play well att boules and shouelbord, and other ames of ayme, which in other men do require cleare ſight,andan exact al of the hand, according tothe qualities of the earth or table, and to the ſituation and diſtance of the place he was to throw att, ſeemeth to exceede poſſibility: and yet he did all this- l He would walke in a chamberor long alley ina garden (aſterhe had Beene a while vſed to them)as ſtraight, and turne as juſt att the endes, as any ſecing man could do. He would govp and downe euery where ſo confidently,and demeane himſelfe att table ſo regularly, as ſtrangers haue ſitten by him ſcuerall meales, and haue ſcene him alke about the houſe, without euer obſeruing any want of ſeeing in him: which he endeauoured what he could to hide, hy wearing his hatt low vpon his Broes. He would, att the firſt abord of a ſtranger,as ſoone as he ſpoke to him, frame a right apprehenſion of his ſtature, blke and manner of making. And which is more, when he taught his ſchollers to declame for h] was ſchoolemaſter to my ſonnes, and liued in my houſe) or to repreſent ſome of Senecas Tragedies,or the like,he would by their voice Eno their geſture,and the ſituation they putt their bodies in: ſothat he would be able,asſooneas they ſpoke, to iud ꝶ whether they ſtood or ſate, or in What poſture they were; which made them demeans themſclues as decently, before him whiles they ſpoke, as if he had ſeene them perfectly. Though allthis be very ſtrange, yet me thinkes his diſcerning oflight is beyond it all. He would feele in his body, and chiefely in his braine ſ as he hath often told me) a certaine effect by which he did know when the ſunne was vpiand would diſcerne exactly a cleare from a cloudy day. This I haue knowne him frequently do without miſſing, when for tiiall ſake he hath beene lodged in a cloſe chamber, wherevnto the cleare light or ſunne could not arriue to giue him any notice by its actuall varmeth; nor any body could come to him, ro giue him priuate warninges of the changes of the weather. Butthis is not the relation Iintended, vhen I mentioned one that could heare by his eyes: (if that expreſſion may be permitted me) I then reſlected vpon a noble man of great quality that I knew in Spaine, the yonger brother of the Conſtable of Caſtile. But the r ftection of his ſeeing of words, called into my remembrance the other that felt light:in whom I haue often remaiked ſo many ſtrange paſſages, ith amazement and delight; that I haue aduentured vpon the Readers patience to recorde ſome of them, conceiuing they may be of ſome vſe in our courſe of doctiine. But the ſpanish lord, was borne deafe; ſo deaſe, that if a gumne were shott off cloſe by his eare, he could not heare it: and conſequently,he vas dumbe; for not being able to heare the ſound of words; he could neither imitate nor vnderſtand them. The louelineſſe of his face and eſpecially the exceeding life and ſpiritefulneſſe of his eyes, and the comelineſſe of his perſon and whole compoſure of his body throughout, were pregnant ſignes of a well tempered mind within. And therefore all that knew him, lamented much the want of meanes to cultiuate it, and to imbue it with the notions which it ſeemed to be capable of in regard of its ſelfe; had it not been ſo croſſecd by this vnhappy accident. Which to remedy Phyſitians and Chirurgions had longim ployed their skill, but all in vaine. Att the laſt, there wasa prieſt who vndertooke the teaching him to vnderſtand others when they ſpoke, and to ſpeake himſelfe that others might vnderſtand him: What att the firſt he was laught att for; made him after ſome yeares be looked vpon as if he had wrought a miracle. In a word; after ſtrange patience, conſtancy and paines; he brought the yong Lord to ſpeake as diſtinctly as any man whoſoeuer; and to vnderſtand ſo perfectly what others ſaid that he would not looſe a word in a whole dayes conuerſation. They who haue a curioſity to fe by what ſteppes the maſter roceeded in teaching him, may ſatisfy it by a booke hſn he himſelfe ti ritt in Spanish vpon that ſubiect, to inſtruct others howro teach deafe and dumbe perſons to ſpeake. Which when he shall haue looked heedetully ouer; and shall haue conſidered what a great diſtance there is betweene the ſimplicity and nokedneſſe of his firſt principles; and the ſtrange readineſſe and vaſt extent of ſpeech reſulting in proceſſe of time out of them; he vill forbeare pronuncing an impoſſibility in their pedigree, whiles he wondereth att the numerous efſects reſulting in bodies out of rarity and denſity, ingeniouſly mingled together byan all knowing Architect, for the production of various qualities among mixtes, of ſtrange motions in particular bodies, and of admirable operations of life and ſenſe among vegetables and animals. All which, are ſo many ſeuerall wordes of the myſticall language, which the great maſter harh taught his otherwiſe dumbe ſchollers ( the creatures) to proclayme his infinite art, wiſedome, pei fections,and excellency in. The prieſt who by his booke and art, occaſioned this diſcourſe, Iam told is ſtill aliue,and in the ſeruice of the Prince of Carignan, where he continueth (ith ſome that haue neede of his paines ) the ſame employment as he did with the Conſtables Brother: with whom I haue often diſcourſed, whiles I ayted vpon the Prince of Vales (now our atious Soueraigne) in Spaine. And I doubt not hut his maieſty Temembreth all Ihaue ſaid ii him and much more: for his maieſty wæ very curious to obſerue and enquire into the vemoſt of it. It is true, one great misbecomingneſſe he was apt to fall into, whiles he ſpoke: which Was an vncertainty in the tone of his voyce for not hearing the ſound he made wh-n he ſpok:, he could not ſteedily gouerne the pitch of his yoyce; but it would be ſometimes higher ſometimes lower; though for th moſt part, what he deliuered together, he ended in the ſame key as he begunne it. But when he had onee ſuſfered the paſſages of his voyce to cloſe, att the opening them againe, chance, or the meaſure of his carneſtneſſe to ſpeake orto reply, gaue him his tone: which he was not capable of moderating by ſuch an artifice, as is recorded Caius Gracchus vſed, when paſſion, in his orations to the people, droue out his voyce with too great a vehemence or shrilleneſſe. He could diſcerne in an other, whether he spoke shrill or lowe: and he would repeate afterany body,any hrd word whatſoeuer. Vhichthe Prince tryed often; not onlyin English, but by making ſome Velchmen that ſerued his Highneſſe, ſpe: ke wordes of their language. Which he ſo erfectly ecchoed, that I confeſſel wondered more att that, then att all the reſt. A nd his Maſter himſelfe would acknowledge, that the rules of his art, reached not to produce that effect vith any certainety. And therefore coneluded, this in him muſt ſpring from other rules he had fcamed vnto himſelfe, out of his owne attentiue obſeruation: which, the aduantage that nature had iuſtly giuen him in the sharpeneſſe of his other ſenſes, to ſupply the want of this; endowed him with an ability and ſagacity to do, beyond any other man that had his hearing. He expreſſed it (ſurely) ina hh meaſure, by his ſo exact imitation of the welch pronunciation: for thit tongue(like the Hebrew) em loyeth much the gutturall letters: and the motions of that part which frameth them, can may hap ely make by conſent in the other partes of the mouth, expoſed to vie: for the knowledge he had of what they ſaid, ſprung from his obſeruing the motions they madei ſo that he could conuerſe currently in the light, though they he talked ith, whiſpered neuer ſo ſofil v. AndI haue ſeene him att the diſtance of a large chambers breadth, ſay wordes after one, that I ſtanding cloſe by the ſpeaker could not heare a ſyllable of. But if he were in the darke, or if one turned his face out of his ſight, he was capable of nothing one ſaid. li But it is time that we returne to our theame, from whence my blind 3 ſchoolemaſter, and this deafe Prince(Whoſe defects were ouerpayed an g other way) haue carryed vs with ſo long a digreſſion. Which yet will not : be altogether vſeleſſe (no more then the former, of the wilde man of Liege)if we make due reſlections vpon them: for when we shall conſider, that odors may be taſted; that the relish of meates may be ſmelled; that magnitude and figure may be heardi that light may be felt; and that ſoundes may be ſeene; (all whichis true in ſome ſenſe) we may by this chãging the offices ofthe ſenſes, and by looking into the cauſcs thereof, come to diſcerne that theſe effects are nort wrought by ihe interuention of ayery qualities: but by reall and materiall applications of bodies to bodies; which in different manners do mke the ſame reſulis vithinvs. But when I ſuffered my penne to be ſteered by my fanſie, that pleaſed it ſelfe, and rioted in the remembrance of theſe two norable perſons: I vas ſpeaking, how the ſtrong continuity of the partes of a thing thatis moued, draweth on the motion, and conſequently the ſound, much further then where that which is moued ſuſſereth breaches, or the rarity of it cccaſioneth that one part may be moued without an orther; for to the proportion of the shaking, the noyſe cõtinueth. As we ſce in tiẽbling belles,that humme a great while longer ithen others, after the clapper hath ſtrucken them: and the very ſound, ſeemeth to quiuer and shake in our ares, proportionable to the shaking of the bell. And in a luteas long as a ſtring that hath been ſtrucken, shaketh ſenſibly to our eye; ſo long; and to the ſame meaſure, the ſound shaketh in our eare. Vhichs nothing elſe but an vndulation of the ayre, cauſed by the ſmart and thicke vibrations of the corde, and multiplyed in the belly of the inſtrument (which is the reaſon that the concaue figure is affected in moſt)and ſo, When it breaketh out of the inſtrument in greater quantity, then the ſtring immediately did shake; it cauſeth, the ſame vndulations in the whole body of ayre round about, Andthat, ſtriking the drumme of the eare, giueth notice there in what tenour the ſtring moueth: whoſe vibrations if one ſtoppe by laying his fingar vpon ĩt, the Scund is inſtantly att an end, for then there is no cauſe on foote, that continueth the motion of the ayre: which, without a continuation of the impulſe; returneth ſpeedily to quiett; through ihe reſiſtance made vnto it, by other partes of it that are further off. Out of all Which, it is plaine, that motion alone isable to eſfect, and to giue account of all thinges whatſoeuer that are attributed to ſound; and that ſound and motion, do goe hand in hand together, and that whatſoeuer is ſaid of the one, is likewiſe true of the other. Wherefore it can not be denyed but that hearing is nothing elſe but the due perception of motion: and that motion and ſound are in themſelues one and the ſame thing, though expreſſed by different names, and compriſed in our vnderſtanding vnder different notions. Which propoſition ſeemeth to be yet further conuinced, by the ordinary experience of perceiuing muſike by mediation of a ſticke: for howhould a de. fe man he capable of muſike by holding a ſlicke in his teeth, whoſæ orhrend lyæth vpon the vyall or virginals, were it not that the proportionall shak nę of: he ſticke  working a like dauncing in the mans head) did m kea ke motion in his braine, without paſſing through his care? and conſequently, without being otherviſe ſound, then as bare motion is ſound. Or if any man will ſtill perſiſt in hauing ſound be ſome other thing thenas we ſay; and thut it affccteth the ſenſe otheriſe then purely by motion: he muſt neucrtheleſſe acknowledge, that whatſoeuerit be, it hath ney: her cauſe nor effect, nor breeding, nor dying, that we eyther know or can imagine: and then, if he will lett Reaſon ſway, he will conclude it vnreaſonable to ſay or ſuſpect ſo ill grounded a ſurmiſe, againſt ſo cleare and ſolide proofes : which our eares themſelues do not a litle confirme; their whole figure and nature tending to the perfect recciuing, conſeruing, and multiplying the motions of ayre which happen withouta man: as who is curious, may plainely ſee in the Anatomiſtes bookes and diſcouiſes. THE NINE AND TVENTIETH CHAPTER. Of Sight; and Colours. . Here ſs yet leſt, the obiect of ourſight, which we call colour; 115ã to take a ſuruey ofi for as for light, we haue att large diſplayed PP?SS the nature and properties of it: from which whethqr colour be different or no, will be the queſtion we shall next diſcuſſe: forthoſe who are cunning in Optikes. will,by refractions and by reflexions make all ſortes of colours out of pure light: as weſee in Rainebowes, in thoſe triangular glaſſes, or priſmes which ſome do call ſooles P aradiſes, and in other inuentions forthis purpoſe. herefore, in briefe, to shew what colouris, lett vs lay fora ground, that light is of all other thinges in the vorld, the greatelt and e moſt powerfull agent vpon our eye; eyther by it ſelfe, or by what comethin withit: and that, vhere light is not, datkeneſſe is; then conſider, that light being diuerſly to be caſt, but eſpecially,throu gh or from a tranſparent body, into which it ſinketh in art,and in partit doth not: and you villconclude, that it can not chooſe But come out from ſuch a body, in diuers ſortes mingled with darkeneſſe: which if it be in a ſenſible quantity, doth accordingly make diuers appearances: and thoſe appearances muſt of neceſſity haue diuers hues, repreſenting the colours which are middle colours betweene white and blacke; ſince white is the colour of light;and darkeneſſe ſeemeth blacke. Thus, thoſe colours are ingendred, which are called apparent ones. And they eppeuie ſometimes but in ſome one poſitions as in the raynebow; which changeth place as the looker on doth: but att other times, they may be ſcene from any part;as thoſe which light maketh bya double refraction througha triangular glaſſe. And that this is rightly deliuered, may be gathered out of the conditions requiſite to their production: for that cryſtall, or ater, or any refracting body, doth not admitt light in all its partes, is euident, by reaſon of the reflexion that it muketh vhich is exceeding great: and not only from the ſuperſicies, but euen from the middle of the body vithin: as you may ſee plainely, if you putt itina daike place, and enlighten but one part of it: for then, you may perceiue, as it were, a current of light paſſe quite through the body, lihough your eye be not oppoſite to the paſſage: ſo that, manifeſtly it reflecteth to your eye, from i the inward partes which it lighteth vpon. Nowa more oblique reſlexion or ebaction doth more diſperſe the light,and admitteth more priuations of light in its partes, then a leſſe obligue one: as Galileo hath demonſtrated in the firſt Dialogue of his ſyſteme. Vhereforea leſſe oblique reflexion or refraction, may receiue that in quality of light, which a more oblique one maketh appeare mingled with darkeneſſe;and conſequently, the ſame thing vill appeare colour in one, hich sheweth it ſelfe plaine light in the other; for the greater the inclination of an angle is, the greater allo is the diſperſion of the light. And as colours are made in this ſort, by the medium through which light paſſeth, ſo if we conceiue the ſuperficies from which the light reſlecteth, to be diuerſly ordered in reſpect of reflexion it muſt of neceſſity follo that it willhaue a diuers luſter and ſight: as e ſee by experience in the neckes of pigeons,and in certaine poſitions of oureye, in which the light paſſing through our eye browes, maketh an apprarance as though we law diuers colours ſtreaming froma candle we looke vpon. And accordingly ve may obſerue how ſome thinges, or rather moſt, do appeare of a colour more inclining to white, when they are irradiated witha great light, then when they ſtand ina leſſer. And we ſee jainters heighten their colours, and make them appeare lighter by placing dẽepe shadoes by them: euen ſo much, that they will make obiects appeare neerer and further of, meerly by their mixtion of their colours. Becauſe, obiects, the neerer they are, the more ſtrongly and liuely they reſlect light, and therefore, appeare the clearer, as the others do more dusky. l Therefore, if we putt the ſuperſicies of one body to haue a better 2. diſpoſition forthe reſlexion of light, then an other hath; we can nothut Cõcerning t conceiue, that ſuch diſference in the ſuperſicies, muſt needes begett iſ;oſition of variety of permanent colours in the bodies. And according as the ælich produce ſuperſicies of the ſame body, is better, or worſe diipoſd to reſlexion of vhite or blacke light, by polishing, or by compreſſure together, or the lie: ſo, the ſame body, remaining the ſame in ſubſtance, will thew it ſelfe ofa diſferent colour. And it being euident that white ( which is the chiefeſt colour) doth reſlect moſt light : and as euident, that blacke reſlecteth leaſt light, To that it reſlectethshadowes in lieu of colours ſ as the Obſidian ſfone among the Romanes doth vitneſſe.) And iĩt being likewiſe euident, that to be denſe and hard, and of ſmall partes, is the diſpoſition of the obiect which is moſt apt to reſlect light: we can not doubt, but that vhite is that diſpoſition of the ſuperficies. That is to ſay, it is the ſuperficies of a body conſiſting of denſe, of hard, and of ſmall partes: and on the contrary ſide, thit blacke is the diſpoſition of the ſuperficies, which is moſt ſoft and full of greateſt pores: for when light meeteth with ſuch a ſuperſicies, it getteth eaſily into it; and is there, as it were abſorpt and hidden in caues, and cometh not out againe to reſlect towardes our eye. This doctrine of ours of the enetation of colours, agreeth exactly with Ariſtotles principles, and followeth euidently out of R is definitions ;ꝗ àt coulours. 3 formet of light, and of colours And for ſumming vpthe generall ſentiments of med by Automankind in making his Logicall definitions, 1 thinke no body il telt authon⸗, deny his being the greateſt Maſter that euer was. He defineth light to be Lence:. actus Diaphani: which we may thus explicate. It is that thing, whi.h maketh a body that hath an aptitude or capacity of being ſeene quite through it in euery interior part of it, to beactually ſeene quite through, according to that capacity of it. And he defineih colour to be, The terme or ending of a diaphanous hody: the meaning whereof is: that colour isa thing which maketh a diaphanous body to reach no further; or that colour is the cauſe why a body is no further diaphanous, theh vntill where it beginneth; or that colour, is the reaſon, why we can ſee no further thento ſucha degree, through or into ſucha body. Vhich definition fitteth moſt exactly with the thing it plueih vs she ody we ſee, nature of For it is euident, that when we ſee a body, the hindereth vs from ſeeing any orher, that is ina ſtraight line beyond it. And therefore it can not be denyed, but that colour terminateth, and endeth the diaphaneity of a body, by making it ſelfe be ſeene. And all men do agree in conceiuing this, to be the nature of colour; and that it is a certaine diſpoſition of a body, whereby that body cometh to be ſcene. On the other ſide, nothing is more euident, then that to haue vs ſeea body, light muſt reach from that body to our eye. Then adding vnto iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii xe;5 this what Ariſtotle teacheth concerning the production of ſeeing: which he ſayth is made by the action of the ſeene body vpon our ſenſe: it followeth that the obiect muſt worke vpon our ſenſe, eyther by light; or att the leaſt with light; for light rebounding from the obiect round about by ſtraight lines, ſome part of it muſt needes come from the obiect to our eye. Therefore, by how much an obiect ſendeth more light vnto our eye, by ſo much, that obiect worketh more vponiit. Nov ſceing that diuers obiects do ſend light in diuers manners ro our eye, according to the diuers natures of thoſe obiects in regard of hat deneſſe, denſity, and litleneſſe of partes: we muſt agree that ſuch bodies do worke diuerſely, and do make diſferent motions or impreſſiòs vponour eye: and conſequẽtly, the pãſſion of oureye from ſuch obiects muſt be diuers. But there is no orther diuerſity of paſſion inthe eye from the obiect in regard of ſeeing, but that the obiect appeare diuers to vs in point of colour. Therefore we muſt conclude, that diuers bodies ſ I meane diuers or different, in that kind we here talke of) muſt neceſſarily ſeeme to be of diuers colours, meerely by the ſending of light vnto our eye in diuers fashions. Nay, the very ſame obiect muſt appeare of different colours, whenſoener it happeneth that it reflecteth light differently to vs. As we ſee in cloth,if it be gathered together in fouldes, the bottomes of thoſe fouldes shew to be of one kind of colour, and the toppes of them, or where the clothis ſtretched out to the full peicuſſion of lght it appeareth to be of an other much brighter colour. And accordingly painters are faine to vſe almoſt oppoſite colours to expreſſe them In like manner if you looke vpon two pieces of the ſume cloih, or plush, whoſe graines lye contraiſe to one an other, they will likewiſe appeare to be of diſſerent colours. Both which accidents, and many others like vnto them in begetting various repreſentationè of colours; do all oſ them ariſe out of lightes being more or leſſe æſlected from one part then from an other. Thus then you ſee, how colour is nothing elſe, but the diſpoſition of a bodies ſuperſicics, as it is more or leſſe apt to reſlect light; ſithence the reſlexion of light is made from the ſuperſicies of the ſcene body, and the variety oſ its reſlexion begetterth variety of colours. But a ſuperficies is more or leſſe apt to reſlect light, according to the degrees of its being more or leſſe ensible by the force of light ſtriking vpon it; for thoſe rayes of light that gaine no entrance into a body they are darted vpon, muſt of neceſſity fly backe againe from it: But if light doth gett entrance and penetrate into the body:it eyther paſſeth quite through it; or elſe it is ſwallowed vpand loſt in that body. The former, conſlituteth a diaphanous hody; as we haue already determined. And the ſemblarce vhich the latter ill haue in regard of colour, we haue alſo shewed muſt be blacke. But lett vs proceedea little further. We know that two thinges render a body penetrable, or eaſie to admitt an other body into it. Holes, ſſuch as we call pores) and ſoftneſſe or humidity; ſo that dryeneſſe, hrdneſſe, and compactedneſſe, muſt be the properties which render a body impenetrable. And accordingly we ſee, that if a diaphanovs body (ohich ſuffereth light to runne throughiit)be much compreſſed beyond what it was; as when vater is compreſſed into yce; it becometh more viſible, that is, it reflecteth more light: and conſequently, it becometh more white, for white is that,  hic h reſlecteth molſt light. On the cõtrary ſide, ſoftneſſe, vnctuouſneſſe, and viſcouſneſſe, encreaſeth blackneſſe: as you may ex perience in oyling or in greaſing of wood; which before was but browne: forthereby it becometh more blacke:: by reaſon that the vnctuous partes added vnto the other, do more eaſily then they ſingle, admitt into them ihe light that ſiriketh vpon them, and when it is gotten in, it is ſo entangled there (a; though the winges of it were birdlimed ouer) that it can not fly out againe. And thus it is enident, how the originè of all colouss in bodies, is plainely deduced out of the various degrees of rarity and denſity, variouſly mixed and compounded. Like wiſe, out of this diſcourſe, the reaſon is obuious why ſome bodies, are diaphanous, and others are opacous: for ſithence it falleth out in the conſtitution of bodies, that onæ is compoſed of greater partes then an other: it muſt needes happen that light be more hindered in paſſing througha body compoſed of bigger partes, then an other whoſe partes are leſſe. Neyther doth it import that the pores be ſuppoſcd as great as the partes for be they neuer ſo large, the comers of the thicke partes they belong vnto, muſt needes break⸗ the courſc of what will not bowe, but gocthallin traight lines; more then if the partes and pores were both ſeſſer, ſince, for ſo ſubrilea piercer as light, no pores can be too litle to giue it enrſance. It is true ſuch great ones would better admitt a liquid body into them, ſucha one as water or ayre; but the reaſon of that is, becauſe they wil] bowe and take any plye, to creepe into thoſe cauities, if th-y be large enough, wh ch light will not do. 3ill T herefore ĩt is cleare, that freedome of paſſage can happen vnto light, only there, Where there is an extreme great multitude of pores and partes in a very litle quantity or bulke of body (which pores and partes muſt conſequently be extreme litle ones ) for, by reaſon of their multitude, there muſt be great variety in their ſituation: f. om whence it villhappen that many lines muſt be all of pores quitè th-ough; and many others all of purtes; although the moſt, will be mired of both pores and partes. And ſo we ſee that although the light do paſſe quire through in many places, yet ĩt reflecteth from more, not only in the ſuperſicies, but in he very hody it ſelfe of the diaphanous ſubſtance. But in an other ſubſtãce of great partes,and pores there can be but few who le lines of pores, by which the light may paſſe fiom the obiect to make it be ſeene; and conſequently it muſt be opacous; which is the contrary of Diaphinous that admitteth many rayes of light, to paſt through it from the obiect tothe eye, whereby itis ſeene, though the Diaphanous hard body, do interuene betweene them. Novif ve conſider the generation of theſe to colours ſ white and blacke) in bodies; we shall find that likewiſe to iuſtify and ſecond our doctrine: for white thinges are generally cold and dry; and therefore, are by nature ordained to be receptacles, and conſeruers of heat, and of moyſture; as Phyſitians do note. Contrariwiſe, blacke, as alſo greene, (which is necre of kinne to blacke)are groving coloũrs, and are the dye of heate incorporated in aboundance of wett: as we ſee in ſmoake, in pittecoale, in garden ground, and in chymicall putrefactions: all which are blacke; as alſo in yong herbes; which are generally greene as long as they are yong and growing. The other colours, keeping their ſtanding betwixt theſe,are generated by the mixture of them; and according as they partake more or leſſe of eyther of them, are neerer or further oſf fromit. So that after allthis diſcourſe, ve may conclude in short; that the colour of a body, is nothing elſe, but the power which that body hath of reflecting light vnto the eye, in a certaine order and poſition: and conſequently, is nothing elſe but the very ſuperſicies of it, with its aſperity, or ſmoothneſſe; with its pores, or inequalities; with its hardeneſſe, or ſoftneſſe;and ſuch like. The rules and limits whereof, if they were duely obſerued and ordered, the whole nature and ſcience of colours, would eaſily be knowne and be deſcribed But out of this litle which we haue deliuered of this ſubiect, it may be rightly inferred that reall colours do proceed from Rarity and Denſity ( as euen now we touched) and haue their head and ſpring there: and are not ſtrange qualities in the ayre:but are tractable bodies on the earth,as all others are, which as yet we haue found and haue meddled with all: and are indeed, the very bodies themſclues, cauſing ſuch effects vpon our eye by reſlecting of light, which we expreſſe by the names of colours. THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER. Of luminous or apparente Colours. ⸗ S for the luminous colours, vhoſe naturesart hath made Vi more maniable by vs, then thoſe which are called reall l d colours, and are permanent in bodies: their generarion is cleerely to be ſeene in the Priſme or trianguſar glſſe ve òꝶ formely mentioned. The conſidering of which, will confirme our doctrine, that euen the colours of bodies, are but various mixtures of light and shadowes, diuerſly reſected to ur eyes. For the right vnderſtanding of them, we are to nore, that this glaſe maketh apparitions of colous in to ſorts:the one, when looking through it, there there appeare various colours in the obiects you looke vpon (different from hti reall ones) according to the poſition you hold the glaſſ in when you looke vpon them. The other ſort is, when the beames of light that paſſe through the glaſſe, areas it were tincted in their paſſage, and are caſt by the glaſ vpon ſome ſolide obiect, and do appeare there in ſuch and ſuch colours, which do continue ſtill the ſame, in what poſition ſoeuer you ſtand to looke vpon them eyther before, or behind, or on any ſide of the glaſſ. 2 Secondly, we are to note that theſe colours are generally made by The uenl refractionthough ſometimes it may happen otherviſe, as aboue we pais of the haue mentioned:) To diſcouer the reaſon of the firſt ſort of colours, that ebieſt moke appeare by refraction when one looketh through ithe glſſe: lett vs her etancs ſuppoſe two ſeuerall bodies, the one blacke, the other white, lying cloſe ito the prilme. by onean other,and in the ſime horizontall parallele; but ſo, that the blacke be further from vs then the white; then, if we hold the Prilme through which we are to ſce theſe two oppoſitely coloure I bodies lomewhat aboue them; and that ſide of it att which the coloured bodies muſt enter into the glaſſe to come to our eye, parallele vnto thoſe bodies; it is eeident, that the blacke will come into the priſme by leſſer angles thẽ the vhite: I meane that in the line of diſtance ſom that face of the glaſſ att which the colours do come in, a lõger line or part of blacke will ſubtend an angle, no bigger then a leſſer line or part of white doth ſubtend. Thirdly, we are to note, that from the ſame poynt of the obiect, there 3: come various beames of light to that whole ſuperſicies of the glaſſe; ſo ſhereaſn-hy that it may, and ſometimes doth happen, that from the ſame part of ihe ſme obicẽ: obiect, beames may be reſlected to the eye, from ſcuerall partes of that pea-h ſuperficies of the glaſſe att which they enter. And whenſoeuer this n ilEti happeneth, the obiect muſt neceſſarily be ſeene in diuers partes: that is, ?o plces: the picture of it will att the ſame time appeare to ihe eye in diuers places. li And particularly, we maY plainely obſerue two pictures, onea liuely and uely, in the. ſtrong one; the other a faintand dimme one. Of which the dimme cne oher oſtlace villappeare neerer vs,then the liuely one:and is cauſed by a ſccondary es. ray:or rather Ishould ſay, by a longer ray, that ſtiiking necrer to the hither edge of the glaſſes ſupeificies (which is the furtheſt from the obiect] maketh a more acute angle then a shorter ray doth, that ſtriketh vpona part of the glaſſe further from our eyc, but neerer the obiect. And therefore the image which is made by this ſecondary or longer ray, muſt appeare both neerer and more dusky, then the image made by the primary and shorter ray. And the further ſrom the obiect that the glaſſe through which it reflectethis ſituated(keeping ſtillin the ſume parallele to the horizon ) the farther the place where the ſecond dusky picture appeareth, is from the place where the primary ſtrong pictuie appeareth. If any man haue a mindto ſatisfy himſelfe by experience, of the truth couering a table, ſo as the paper may reach within two or three fingers of the edge of the carpet, (vnder which, lett there be nothing to ſucceed the blacke of the carpet, but the empty dusky ayre) and then lett him ſett himſelfe at a conuenient diſtance,  the meaſure of which is, that the paper appeare at his feete, when he looketh through the glaſſe) and Jooke at the paper through his Priſme ſituated in ſuch ſort as we haue aboue determined, and he ill perceiue a whitish or lightſome shadow proceed from the liuely picture that he ſeeth of white, and shoote out neerer towardes him then that liuely picture is. and he will diſcerne that it cometh into the glaſſe througha part of it neerer to his eye or ſace, and further from the obiect then the ſtrong image of the white doih. And further, if he cauſeth the neerer part of the paper to be couered with ſome thinne body of a ſadder colour, this dimme white vanisheth: which it doth not if the further part of the paper be couered. Vhereby it is euident, thatit isa ſeconary image, proceeding from the hither part of the paper. Now then to make vſe of what we haue ſaid, to the finding out of the reaſon why the red and blew and other colours appeare when one looketh through a priſme: lett vs proceede vpon our former example, in which a white paper lyeth vpona blacke carpett (for, the diametrall oppoſition of thoſe colours, maketh then: moſt remaikable)in ſuch ſort that there be a parcell of blacke on the hither ſide of the paper: and therein, lett vs examine according to our groundes, what coſor muſt appeare at both endes of the paper locking vpon them through the triangular glaſſ. To beginne ith the furtheſt end, where the blacke lyeth beyond the white: we may conſider, how there muſt come from the blacke, a ſecondary daike myſty shadow ( beſides the ſtrong blacke that appeareth beyond the paper) which muſt: hoote towardes you (in ſuch ſort as we ſaid of the whitish lightſome shadow) and conſequently, muſt lye ouer the ſtrong picture of the white paper: now in this caſe, a third middling colour muſt reſult out of the mixture of theſe two extremes of blacke and white; ſince they come to the eye, almoſt in the ſame line, at the leaſt in lines that make ſo litle a difference in their angles as ĩt is not diſcernable. The like whereofhappeneth in clothes, or ſtuffes, or ſtockings, that are wouen of diuers coloured but very ſmall thriddes: for if you ſtand ſo farre of from ſucha piece of ſtuſfe, that the litle thriddes of different colours hich lye immediate to one an other may come together as in one line to your eyę; it willappeare of a middling colour, different from both thoſe that it reſulteth from: but if you ſtand ſo necre that each thridde ſendeth rays enough to your eye, and that the baſis of the triãgle which cometh from each thridde to your eye, be long enough to make attthe vertex of it (which is in your eye) an angle bigg enoughto be ſeene ſingly by it ſelfe; then each colour will appeare apart as it truly is. Now the various natures of middling colours we may leame of painters; who compoſe them vpontheir palettes by a like mixture of the extremes. And they tell vs, that if a white colour preuaile ſlrongly ouer a darke colour, reds and yellowes reſult out of that mixture: but ifblacke preuaile ſtrongly ouer white, then, blewes, violets, and ſeagreenes are made. And accordingly, in our caſe, we can not doubt but that rhe primary liuely picture of the white, muſt prenaile ouer the faint dusky ſable mantle with which it cometh mingled to the eye: and duing ſo, it muſt needes make a like appearance as the ſunnes beames do, when reflecting from a blacke cloud, they fiinge the edges of it with red and vith yellow;and the like he doth, when he looketh through a rainy or a vindy cloude: and much like herevnto, we shall ſee this mixture of ſtrong white with a faint shaddow of blacke, make at this brimme of the paper,a faire ledge of red; which ill end and vanish, in a more lightſome one of yellow. i But at the hither edge of the paper, where the ſecondary weake picture of white is mingled with the ſtrong blacke picture, in this mixture, the blacke is preualent, and accordingly ( as we ſaid cf the mixture of the painters colours) there muſt appeare at the bottome of the paper,a lembe of deepe blew: which will grow more and more lightſome, th: higher it goeth:and ſo, paſſing through violet and ſeagreene it villvanishin light, when it reacheih to the maſtering field of primary vhiteneſſe, that ſendeth his ſtronger rayes by direct lines: and this tranſpoſition of the colours at the ſeuerall endes of the paper sheweth the reaſon why they appeare quite contrary, if you put a blacke paper vpon a white carpet. And therefore, we neede not adde any thing particularly concerning that. And likewiſe, out of this ve may vnderſtand, why the colours appeare quite contraryſthat is, red where before blew appeared; and ble, where red)if we looke vpon the ſame obiect through ithe glaſſe in an other poſition or ſituation of it:namely, if werayſe it ſo high, that we muſt looke vpwardes to ſee the obiect; which thereby appeareth aboue vs:whereas in th: former ſituation, it came in through the lower ſuperficies,and we looked downe toit, and it appeared ynder vs: for in this ſecond caſe, the obiects coming into the glaſſe by a ſuperſicies not parallele as before but ſloaping, from the obiectwardes: it followeth, that the neerer the obiect is, thæ leſſer muſt the angle be, which it maketh ith the ſu perficies: contrary to what happened in the former caſe: and likew ſe,th it if from one poynt of the neerer obiect, there fall to rayes vpon the glaſſe, the ray that ſleth vppermoſt, vill make a leſſer angle, then the other that falleth lower: and ſo, by our former diſcourſe, that poynt may come to appeare in the ſame place with a poynt of the further obicct; and hevby make a middling colour. So that in this caſe, the white which is neerer, will mingle his feeble picture with the blackethat is further off: hereas before the blacke that was further off, mingled his feeble shadow vith the ſtrong picture of the neerer white. Wherefore by our rule we borrowed of the painters, there willnowappeare a blew on the furtherend off the paper, where before appeared a reds and by conſequence on the neerer end a red will now appeare, vhere in the former caſe a blew appeared. This caſe we haue choſen, as the plaineſt to shew the nature of ſuch colours: out of which he that is curious, may deriue his knowledge to other caſes, which we omit; becauſe our intent is only to giue a generall doctrine, and not the particulars of the ſcience: and rather to take away admiration, then to inſtruct the Readtr in this matter. As for the various colours, which are made by ſtrayning light through a glaſſe, or through ſome other diaphanous body; to diſcouer the cauſes and variety of them, we muſt examine what thinges they are that do concurre to the making of them: and what accidents may arriue vnto thoſe thinges, to vary their product. ltis cleare, that nothing interueneth er concurreth to the producing of any of theſe colours, beſides the light it ſelfe which is dyed into colour, and the glaſſe or diaphanous body through whichit paſſeth. In them therefore, and in nothing elſe, we are to make our enquiry. To Beginne then, we may obſerue, that light paſſing througha Priſme, and being caſt vpona reflecting obiect, is not alayes coloun but in ſome circumſtances it ſtill continuerh light, and in others it becometh colour. Withall we may obſerue that thoſe beames which continue light, and endure very litle mutation by their paſſage, making as many refractions, do make much greater deſlexions hon the ſtraight lines by which they came into the glaſſe, then thoſe rayes do which tume to colour;as you may pòtcest you oppoſe one ſui face of the glaſſe perpendiculatly to a candle, and ſett a paper ( not irradiated by the candle oppoſite to one cf the other ſides of the glaſſe: for vpon the paper, you shallſee faire light shine without any colour: and you may perceiue, that the line by which the light cometh to the paper, is almoſt perpendicular to that line by which the light cometh to the priſme. But when light becometh colour, it ſtricketh very obliquely vpon one ſide of the glaſſe;and cometh likeiſe, very obliquely out of the other, that ſendeth it in colour vpon a reflectent Loay;ũ that in concluſion, there is nothing left vs wherevpon to ground the generation of ſuch colours, beſidesthe litleneſſe of the angle and the ſloapingneſſe of the line, by which the illuminant ſtriketh one ſide of the ohũ and cometh out at the other, Whem colours proceed from ſucha percuſſion. To this then we muſt wholy apply our ſelues: and knowing that genenally, vhen light falleth vpon a body vith ſo great a ſloaping or inclination, ſo much of it as getteth through, muſt needes be weake and much diſfuſed; it followeth thar the reaſon of ſuch colours, muſt neceſſaryly conſiſt in this diffuſion and weakeneſſe of light; which the more it is diffuſed, the weaker it groweth; and the more lines of darkeneſſe, are berweene the lines of light, and do mingle themſelues with them. To conſfirme this,you may obſerue, how iuſt at the egreſſe from the priſme of that light which going on a litle further becometh colours, no colourat all appeareth vpon a paper oppoſed cloſe to the ſideof the glaſſe; vntill remouing it further off, the colours beginne to shew themſclues vpon the edges: thereby conuincing manifeſtly, that it was the exceſſe of light which hindered them from appearing at the firſt. And in like manner, if you putt a burning glaſſe betweene the light and thæ prime, ſo as to multiply ith. light which gocih through the priſme to ith- raper, you deſtroy much of the colour by conuerting it into light. But on the other ſide, if you thicken the ayre, and make it du:ky vith ſmoake, or with duſt; you will plainely ſee, that vhere the light cou:cth through a conuexe glaſſe ſ perpendicularly oppoſed to the illuminant) the re will appeare colours on the edges of the cones that the light m⸗keth: and peraduenture the whole cones would appeare coloured if the daikening were conueniently made: for if an opacous body, be ſctt within eyther cf the cones, its ſides ill appeare coloured, though the ayre be but moderately thickned: which sheweth that the addition of a litle daikeneſſe, would make that which otherviſe appeareth pure light, be throughly dyed into colours. And thus you haue the true and adequate cauſe of the appearance of ſuch colours. Nov, to vnderſtand what colours,and vpon which ſides, willappeare: ve may conſider, that when light paſſth through a glaſſe, or other diaphanous body, ſo much of it as shineth in the ayre, or vpon ſome reflecting body bigger then itſclf, aſter its paſſage through the glaſſe, muſt of neceſſity haue darkeneſſe on both ſides of it; and ſo be cõpriſed and limited by two darkeneſſes: but if ſome opacous body, that is leſſe then the light, be putt in the way of the light, then it may happen contrarywiſe,that there be darkeneſſe (or the shadow of that opacous body)betweene two lights. lEl Againe, we muſt conſider, that when light falleth ſo vpon a priſme as to make colours,the two outward rayes which proceed from the light to the two ſides of the ſuperſicies at which the light entereth, are ſo refracted thatat their coming out againe through the other ſuperſicies, that ray which made the leſſe angle with the outward ſuperficſes of the glaſſe, going in, maketh the greater angle with the outſide of the orher ſuperſicies, coming out:and contraryviſe, that ray which made the greaterangle, going in, makeththe leſſer,at its coming out: and the two internall angles, made by thoſe two rayes, and the outſide of the ſuperficies they iſſue at, are greater then two right angles: and ſo weſee that the light dilateth it ſelfe at its coming out. l No, becauſe rayes that iſſue through a ſuperficies, the neerer they are to be perpeniſiculars vnto that ſuperſicies, ſo much the thicker they are: it followeth, that this dilatation of light at its coming out of the glaſſe, muſt be made and muſt encreaſe fiõ that ſide where the angle wa: ſeaſt at the going in,and greateſt at the coming out: ſo that, the neerer to the contrary ſide you takea part of light, the thinner the light muſt be ther⸗and contrariwiſe,the thicker it muſt be, the neererit is vnto the ſide where the angle at the rayes coming out is the greater. Vherefore, the ſtrongeſt light, that is, the place Where the light is leaſt mixed itli darkeneſſe muſt be neerer that ſide then theother. Conſcquently herevnto, if by an opacous body you make a shadow com prehended within this light, that shadow muſt alſo haue its ſtrongeſt part, neerer vnto one of the lights betwixt which it is compriſed, then vnto the other: for, shadow being nothing elſe, but the vant of light, hindered by ſome opacous bodyiit muſt of neceſſity lye auerſed from the illuminant, iu as the light would haue layen if it had not beene hindered. Vherefore, ſecing ha the ſtronger ſide of light, doth more impeach the dai keneſſe, then the feebler ſide doths the deepeſt darke muſt incline to that ſide, where the light is weakeſt; that is, towardes that ſide on which the shadow appeareth, in reſpect of the opacous body or of the illuminanr, and ſo, be a cauſe of deepeneſſe of colour on that ſide, if it ha ppen to be fringed with colour. THE ONE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER. The cauſes of certaine appearances in luminous Colours ; with a concluſion of ihe diſcourſe touching ihe ſenſes and ihe ſenſible qualities. ũ3 Vt of theſe groundes, ve are to ſecke the reſolurion of all i ſuch ſymptomes as appeare vnto vs in this kind of colours. æ ſ1 Firſt therefore calling to mind, how we haue already à declared, that the red colour is made by a greater proportion of light mingled with dai keneſſe, and the blew witha leſſe proportion: it muſt follow, that when light paſſeih through a glaſſe in ſuch ſort as to make colours; the mixture of the light and daikeneſſe on that ſide where the light is ſtrongeſt will incline to a red: and their mixture on the other ſide, Where the lightis weakeſt, ill make a violet or blew: and this we ſee to fall out accordingly, in the light which is tincted by going througha priſme; fora red colour appeareth on that ſide from which e light doth dilate or decreaſe, and a blew is on that ſide towardes which it decreaſeth. Nov, if a darke body be placed within this light, ſo as to haue the light come on both ſides f it: we shall ſee the contrary happen about the boxers of the picture or shadow of the darke body: ihat is to ſay, the red eolour willbe on that ide of the picture which i towardes or ouer agaiaſt the blew colour that is made by the glaſſe: and the blew of the picture, will be on that ſide which is toward; the red that is made by the glaſſc,as you may experience if you place a ſtender opacous body a Iong the priſme in the way of the light, eyther before or behind the priſme. The reaſon whereoſ is; that the opacous body ſtanding in the middle, enuironned by light, diuideth the light, and makerh two lights of that which was but one;each of which lights, is compriſed berweene two darkeneſſes, to witt, berweene each border of shidow that ioynerh to each extreme of the light that cometh from the glaſſe, and each ſide of the opacous bodies shadow. Wherefore, in ch of theſe lights; or rath-rin each of their commixtions with darkeneſſe, there muſt be red on the one ſide, and blew on the orther, according to the courſe of light which we haue explicated. And thus it falleth out agreable to the rule we haue giuen, that blew cometh to be on that ſide of the opicous bodies :hadow, on which the glaſſe caſteth red, and red on that ſide of it on which the glaſſe eaſteth blew: likewiſe when light going th ough a conuexe glaſſe maketh two cones, the cdges of the cone betwit the glaſſe and the point of concurſe will appeare red, it the roome be daike enough: and the edges of the further cone, will appeare blew, both forthe reaſon giuen: for in this caſe the point of concurſe is the ſtrong light betixt the two cones: of which, thur betwixt the glaſe and the point, is the ſtronger, that beyond the puint, the weaker:and for this very reaſon, an opacous body be put in the axis of th ſe two cones, borh the ſides of its picture will be red, if it be held in th- firſt cone which is next to the laſſe; ind both will be blew if the body be ſituated in the ſurther cone; E⸗ both ſi-des being equally ſituated to the courſe of the light, within its owne cone, there is nothing to vary the colours, but only the ſtrengih and the weakeneſſe of thætwo lights of the cones, on this ſide,and on that ſide the point of concurſe: which point, being in this caſe the ſtrong and cleare light whereof we made generall mention in our precedent note, the cone tow rdes the glaſſe and the illuminant, is the ſtronger ſide,and the cone from the glaſſe , is the weaker. In thoſe caſes, where this reaſon is not conr erned, we shall ſee the victory carried in the queſtion of colours, by the shady ſide of the opacous body: that is,the blc colour will ſtill appeare, on that ſide of the opacous bodies shidow that is firiheſt f. om the illuminant. But where both cauſes do concurre and contraſt for precedence, there the courſe of the light cariyerh u: that is to ſay, the red will be on that ſide of the opacous bodies sh  dow, where it is thicker and daiker, and blew on the other ſide where he shadowis not ſo ſtrong: alihough the shadow be caſt that way that the red appeareth: as is to be ſeeiie, when a ſlender body is placed betwixt th- piiſme and th re flectent body, vpon which the liu ht and colours are caſt th-ough ihe priſme: andit is euident, that this cauſe of rhe courſe of the shadow is in it ſelfe a weaker cauſe, then the other of the courſeoſ light, and muſt giue way vnto 2 ſtuphss iij they encounterſas it can not be expected, but that in all circumſtances, shadowes shoulil to light) becauſe the colours which the glaſſe caſteth in this caſe, are much more faintand du:ky then in the orher. Foreffects of this larer cauſe, we ſee that when. an opacous body lyeth croſſe the priſme, whiles it ſtandeth endwayes, the red or blew colour, will appeare on the vpperor lower ſide of its picture, according as the illuminant is higher or lower thẽ the tranſuei ſe opacous body: the blew euer keeping to that ſide of the picture, that is Rirthen fom the body,and the illuminant that make it:and the red the contrarys likewiſe if an opacous body be placed out of the axis, in eyther of the cones we haue explicated before, the blew will appeare on that ſide of the picture which is furtheſt aduanced in the way that the shadow is caſt: and the red, on the contiary:and ſo, if the opacous body be placed in the ſitſt cone ( beſide the axis)the red vill appeare on that ſide of the picture in the baſis of the ſecond cone, which is next to the circumference; and the blew, on that ſide which is next the axis: but if it be placed on one ſide of the axis in the ſecond cone, then the blew will appeare on that ſide the picture which is next the circumference;and the red, on that ſide which is next the center of the baſis of the cone. There remayneth yet ore difficulty of moment to be determined: vhich is why, when through a glaſſe, two colours (namely blew and red)are caſt froma candle vpon a paper or all, if you put your eye in the place of one of the colours that shineth vpon the wall, and ſo that colour cometh to shine vpon your eye, in nch ſort that an orher man who locketh vpon ũt, vill ſee that colour plainely vrOn your eye, neuertheleſſe, you shall ſee the other colour in the glaſſe?2As for example, if on your eye there shineth a red, you : hall ſeœ a blew in the glſſe; and if a blewshineth vpon your eye, youshall ſee a red. The reaſon hereof is, that the colours which appeare in the glaſſe, are of the nature of thoſe luminous colours which we ſirſt explicated, that ariſe from looking vpon white and blacke bordering together: for a candle ſtanding in the ayre, isas it were a white ſituated betweene two blackes: the circumſtant dusky ayre, hauing the nature of a blacke: ſo then, that ſide of the candle lẽh is ſcene through the thicker part of the glaſſe, appeareth red; and that which ĩs ſeene through the ſime, appeareth ble: in the ſame manneras when we looke throughthe glaſſe: whereas, the colours shine cõtrary wiſe vpon a paper or reſlecting obieũt, as we haue already declared, together with the reaſons of both theſe appearances; each fitted to ĩts proper caſe, of looking throu gh the ghſſe vpon the luminous obiect ſerrownded with darkeneſſe, in the one; and of obſeruing the effect wrought by the ſame luminous obiect in ſome medium or vpon ſome reſlectent ſuperſicies, in the other. Andto confirme this, if a white paper be ſett ſtanding hollow before the glaſſe ſ hice halfe a hollow pillar, whoſe ſlatt ſtandeth edgewayes towardes the glaſſe, ſo as both the edges may be ſeene through it) the further edge will ſeeme blew and the neerer will be red; and the like will happen, if the paper be held in the free ayre parallele to the lower ſuperſicies of the glſſe, without any blacke carpet to limit both endes of i(which ſerueth to make the colours the ſmarter) ſo that in both caſes, the ayre ſerueth manifeſtly fora blacke; in the firſt, betweene the two white edgesiand in the ſecond, limiting the two white endes: and by conſequence, the ayre about the candle muſt likewiſe ſerue for two blackes, including the light candle betweene them. Seuerall other delightfull experiments of luminous colours Imight produce, to confirme the groundes l haue layed, for the nature and making of them. But I conceiue that theſe I haue mentioned, are aboundantly enough for the end I propoſe vnto my ſelfe: therefore I vill take my leaue of this ſupple and nice ſubiect; referring my Reader (if he be curious to entertaine himſelfe with a full variety of ſuch shining wonders) to our ingenious countryman and my vorthy frend, M.:. Hall: ho at my laſt being at Liege, shewed me there moſt of the experiences l haue mentioned; together with ſeuerall other very fine and remarkable curioſities concerning light; which he promiſed me he wouldshortly publish ina worke, that he had already caſt and almoſt finished vpon that ſubiect: and in it, Idoubt not but he ill giue entire ſatisfaction toall the doubts and Problemes that may occurre in this ſubiect: whereas my litle exerciſe former'y, in making experiments of this kind, and my leſſe conueniency of attempting any now, maketh me content my ſelfe with thus ſpinning of a courſe thridde frõ wooll carded me by others, that may runne through the whole doctrine of colours, whoſe cauſes haue hitherto beene ſo much admired: and that it vill do ſo, Iam ſtrõgly perſuaded, both becauſe ifI looke vpõ the cauſes whichl haue aſſigned æ priori, me thinkes they appeare very agreeable to nature and to reaſon;and if I apply them to the ſeuerall Phoenomẽs which Mt. Hallshewed me, and to as many others, as I haue otherwiſe mett with, I find they agree exactly with them, and rendera fullaccount of them. And thus, you haue the whole nature of luminous colours, reſolued into the mixtion of light and darkeneſſe: by the due ordering of which, who hathskill therein, may produce any middle colour he pleaſeth: as I my ſelfe haue ſeene the experience of infinite changes in ſuch ſort made; ſo that it ſcemeth vnto me, nothing can be more manifeſt, then that luminous colcurs are generated in the way that is here deliuered. Of vhich how that gentle and obedient Philoſophy of Qualities (readily obedient rto what hard taske ſoeuer you aſſigne it) will render a rationall account; and what diſcreet vertue, it will giue the ſame thinges to roduce different colours, and to make different appearances, meerely b ſuch nice changes of ſituation, I do not well vnderſtand: but peraduenture the Patrones of it, may ſay that euery ſuch circumſtance is a Conditio ſine qua non: and therewith ſ no doubt) their Auditors and of the colours that haue their origine from it. The Rainebow, for whoſe ſake moſt men handle this matter of luminous colours, is generated in the firſt of the to wayes we haue deliuered for the production of ſuch colours:and hath its origine from refraclion, when the eye being at a conuenient diſtance from the refracting body, looketh vponiit to diſcerne what appeareth in it. The ſpeculation of which may be found in that excellent diſcourſe of Monſieur des Cartes, whichis the ſixt of his Meteors; where he hath vith great acurateneſſe deliuered a moſt ingenious doctrine of this myſtery: had not his bad chance of miſſing in a former principle (as I conceiue )ſomewhat obſcured it. For he there giueth the cauſe r neate, and ſo iuſtly calculated to the appearances, as no man can doubt but that he hath found out the true reaſon of this vonder of nature, which hath perplexed ſo many great witts: as may almoſt be ſeene ith our very eyesi when looking vpon the fresh dea in a ſunneshiny morning, we may in due poſitions perceiue the raynebow colours, not three yardes diſtant from vs: in which we may diſtinguish euen ſingle droppes with their effects. But he hauing determined the nature of light to conſiſt in motion, and proceeding conſequently, he concludeth colours to be but certaine kindes of motion: by which I feare it is impoſſible that any good account hould be giuen of the experiences we ſee. But what we haue already ſaid in that point, I conceiue is ſuſficient to giue the reader ſatisfaction therein: and to ſecure him, that the generation of the colours in the rainebow, as well as allother coulours, is likewiſe reduced to the mingling of lightand daikeneſſe: which is our principall intent to proue: addingtherevnto by way of aduertiſſement, for sthers whoſe leiſure may permitt them to make vſe thereof, that who shall ballance the proportions of luminous colours, may peraduenture make himſelfe a ſſeppe to iudge of the natures of thoſe bodies, which really and conſtantly do weare like dyesfor, the figures of the leaſt partes of ſuch bodies, ioyntly with the connexion or mingling of them with pores, muſt of neceſſity be that which maketh them reflect light vnto our eyes, in ſuch proportions,as the luminous colours of theirtincture and ſemblance do. For to thinges are to be conſidered in bodies, in order to reſlecting of light: eyther the extancies and cauities of them; or their hardeneſe and ſofteneſſe. As for the firſt; the proportions of light mingled with darkeneſſe will be varied, actording as the extancies or the cauities do exceed, and as each of them is great or ſmall: ſince cauities haue the nature of darkeneſſe, in reſpect of extancies, as our moderne Aſtronomers do shew, when they giue account of the face ſas ſome call it)in the orbe of the moone. Likewiſe in regard of ſoft or of reſiſtent partes, light will be reſlected by them, more or leſſe ſtrongly, thatis, more or leſſe mingled ith darkeneſſe; for whereas it reboundeth ſmartly backe, if it ſtriketh vpon a hard and a reſiſtent body, and accordingly willshew it ſelſe in a bright colour:it muſt of neceſſity not reſlect at all, or but very feebly, if it penetrateth into a body of much humidity, or if it looſeth it ſelfe in the pores of ir;and that litle which cometh ſo weakely from it, muſt conſequently appeare of a dusky dye:and theſe two, being all the cauſes of thæ great variety of colours we ſee in bodies, according to the quality of the body, in hich the reall colour appeareth, it may eaſily be determined from which of them it proceedeth: and then, by the colour, you may iud⸗e of the compoſition and mixture of thę rare and denſe partes, hich by reſlecting light begetteth it. In ſine, out of all we haue hitherto ſiid in this Chapter, ve may 4. conclude the primary intent of our ſo long diſcourſe; which is, that Tht al i as well the ſenſes of liuing creatures, as the ſenſible qualities in bodies, are e ble ſul. made by the mixtion of rarity and denſity, as well as the naturall reſulung out qualities we ſpoke of in their place: for it can not be denyed but thar of ſnenall heate and cold, and the other couples or payres, which beate vpon our rant; and den touch, are the very ſame as we ſce in other bodies: the qualities which in:moue our taſt and ſmell, are manifeſtly a kinne and ioyned with them: light we haue concluded to be fire: and of motion (Which aſfecteth our care)it is not diſputable: ſo that itis euident, how all ſenſible qualites, are as truly bodies, as thoſe other qualities which we call naturall. To thiswe may adde, that the proprieties of theſe ſenſible qualities, are ſuch as proceed euidently from rarity and denſity; for (to omitt thoſe which our touch taketh notice of, as too pline to be queſtioned) Phyſitians iudge and determine the naturall qualities of meates, and of medecines, and of ſimples, by their taſtes and ſinels: by thoſe qualities they find out powers in them to doe materiall operatiòs; and ſuch as our inſtrumẽt for cutting, ſiling, brushing,and the like, doe vnto ruder and groſſer bodiess All which vertues, being in theſe inſtruments by the different tempers of rarity and denſity,isa conuincing argument, that it muſt be the ſame cauſes, Which muſt produce eſfects of the ſame kind in their ſmels an d taſtes: and as for light, it is knowne how corporeally it worketh vpon our eyes. lll Againe, if we looke pa rticularly into the compoſition of the organes of our ſenſes; we shall meet ith nothing but ſuch qualities as we ſind in the compoſition of all other naturall bodies. If Ve bareh into our eye, we shall diſcouer in it nothing but diaphaneity, ſofteneſſe, diuers colours, and conſiſtencies; which all Anatomiſtes, to explicate, doe parallele in other bodies: the like is of our tongue, our noſcthrilles,and our eares. As for our touch; that is ſo materiall a ſenſe, and ſo difſuſed ouer the whole body, ve can haue no diſficulty about it. Seeing then that allthe qualities we can diſcouer in the organes of our ſenſes,are made by the various minglings of ratity with denſity, how can we doubt, but that the actiue powers ouer theſe patients, muſl be of the ſame nature and kind. Againe, ſeing that the examples aboue brought, doe conuince, thatthe obiccts of une ſenſc, may be knowne by an other; who can doubt of a kind? As e ſee that the touch, is the groundwo ke of all the reſt; and conſequently, that being euidently corporeall, and conſiſting in a temper of niity and denſity, vhy should we make difficulty in allowing the like of the reſt? Beſides, lett vs compoſc of rarity and denſity, ſuch tempers as we find in our sẽſes;and lett vs againe com poſe ofrarity and denſity, ſuch actors, as we haue determined e qualities, which we call ſenſible, to be; and will it not manifeſtly follow, that theſe two applyed to one an other , muſt produce ſuch eſfects, as we aſfirme our ſenſes haue? that is, to paſſe the outward obiects, by different degrees, vnto an inward receiuer. i  unes Againe,lett vs caſt our eyes vpon the naturall reſolution of bodies, are only fiue in and how they moue vs, and we :hall ihereby diſcouer, Eorth vhat the numbai nith a ſenſes are,and why they areiuſt ſo many,and that they can not be more. ęſũon of Foran outward body may moue vs,eyther in its owne bulke or quantity, docine con- oras it worketh vpon an òther. The fſſt is done by the touch the ſecond cerning them. by the eare, hena body mouing the ayre, maketh vs take notice of his motion. Now in reſolution, fereare ihree actiue partes proceedin froma body, hic h haue poer to moue vs. The fer part; which you ſee woiketh vpon our eyes, by the vertue of light. T eayry part; which we know moueth our noſethrilles, by bein g ſucked in with the ayre. And laſtly theſale; which diſſolueth in vater, and ſo moueth our vatry ſenſe; vhich is our taſte. ] And theſe being all the actiue partes, that shew themſelues in the reſolution of a body; how can we imagine there should be any more ſenſes to be wrought vpon: for what the ſtable body shewerh of ĩt ſelfe, will be reduced to the touch: what as it moueth, to hearing: what the reſolutions of it,according to the nature of the reſolued atœmes that ſiy abroadevill concerne the other ihree ſenſes , as we haue declared. And more wayes of vorking, or of actiue partes, we can not conceiue to ſpring out of the nature oſ a body. Finally, if we caſt our eyes vpon the intention of nature: to what purpoſe are our ſenſes, butto bring vs into knowledge of the natures of the ſubſtances we conuerſe with all2ſurely, to effect this, there can not be inuented a better, or more reaſonable expedient, then to bring vnto ouriudgement ſeate the likeneſſes or extractes of thoſe ſu bſtances, in ſo delicate a modell, that they may not be ofenſiue or cu mberſome; like ſo many patternes preſented vnto vs, to know by them, what the whole piece is. for all ſimilitude, isa communication betweene two thinges in that quality, wherein there likeneſſe conſiſteth:and therefore we can not doubt, but that nature hath giuen vs, by the meanes we haue explicated, an eſſay of all the thinges in the world, that fall vnder our commerce, whereby to iudge whether they be proſitable or nociue vnto vs: and yet in ſo delicate and ſubtilea quantity, as may in no wayes be offenſiue to vs, Whiles we take our meaſures to attract what Is good, and auoyde what is noxious. ll THE THE TVO AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER. Of ſenſation, or the motion whereby ſenſe is properly exerciſed. q Vt of the conſiderations which we haue deliuered in N theſe laſt Chapters, the Reader may gather the vnreaſonableneſſe of vulgar Phyloſophers, who to explicate life and ſenſe,are not content to giue vs termes without explicating them; but will force vs to beleeue contradictions: telling vs, that life conſiſteth in this, that the ſame thing hath a powerto worke vponit ſelfe: and that ſenſation, is a working of the u part of the ſame ſenſe, vpon its paſſiue part; and yet will admitt no partes in it: but vill haue the ſame indiuiſible power worke vpon it ſelfe. And this, with ſuch violence and downebearing of all oppoſition, that they deeme him not conſiderable in the ſchooles, who shall offer only to doubt of what they teach him hereabouti but brand him with the cenſure of one ho knoweth not, and contradicteth the very firſt principles of Phyloſophy. And therefore, it is requiſite we should looke ſomewhat more particularly into the manner hov ſenſation is made. Monſieur des Cartes(who by his great and heroyke attempts,and by shewing mankinde how to ſteere and husband their realon to beſt aduantage, hath left vs no excuſe for being ignorant of any thing worth the knowinglexplicating the nature of ſenſe, is of opinion, that the bodies without vs, in certaine circumſtances, do giue a blow vpon our exterior organes: from whence, by the continuity of the partes, that blow or motion is continued, till it come to our braine and ſeate of knowledge; vpon vhich it giuetha ſtroke anſerable to that, whichthe outward ſenſe firſt receiued: and there this knocke cauſing a particular eſfect, according to the particular nature of the motion ſ which dependeth oſf the nature of the obiect that produced it) our ſoule and mind hath notice, by this meanes, of euery thing that knocketh at our gates:and bythe great variety of knockes or motions that our braine feeleth(which ariſeth from as great a variety of natures in the obiects that cauſe them)we are enabled, to iudge of the nature and conditions of euery thing we conuerſe withall. As for example: he conceiueth light to be nothing elſe but a percuſſion made by the illuminant vpon the ayre, or vpon the ethereall ſubſtance, which he putteth to be mixed with, and to runne through all bodies: which being a continuate medium betweene the illuminant and our 5 : : ſenſe; the percuſſion vpon that, ſtriketh alſo our ſenſe; which he calleth the nerue that reacheth from the place ſtrucken (to witt, from the hottome of oureye)vnto the braine. Now, by reaſon of the continuity of this ſtring or nerue, he conceiueth that the blow which is made vpon the outward end of it by the ether, is conueyed by the other end of it to the braine; that end, ſtriking the braine in the ſame meaſure as the ether ſtrucke the other end ofit: like the iacke of a virginall, which ſtricketh the ſounding corde, according as the muſitians hand preſſeth vpon the ſtoppe. The part of the braine which is thus ſtruken , he ſuppoſethto be the fantaſie, Where he deemeth the ſoule doth reſid e; and theieby taketh notice of the motion and obiect that are without. And what is ſaid thus of ſight, is to be applyed proportionably to the reſt of the ſenſes. This then is the ſumme of Monſieur des Cartes his opinion, which he hath very finely expreſſed, with all the aduantages that oppoſite examples, ſignificant wordes, and cleare methode can giue vntoa witty diſcourſe. Whichyet is bura part of the commendations he deſeruetli, for what he hath done onthis particular. He is, ouer and aboue all this, the firſt that I haue euer mett with, who hath published any con ce ptions of this nature, whereby to make the operations of ſenſe intelligible. Certainely, this prayſe will euer belong vnto him, that he hath giuen the firſt hinte of ſpea king groundedly, and to the purpoſe vpon this ſubiect: and whoſocuer shall carry it any furtherſ=as what im portant myſtery was euer borne and perſected at once?) muſtacknowledge to haue deriued his light from him. For my part, Ishall ſo farre agree with him, as to allow motion alore to be ſufficient to worke ſenſation in vs: and not only to allow it ſufficient, but alſo to profeſſe,that not only this, but that no other effect whatſoeuer can be wrought in vs, but motion, and by meanes of motion. Which is euident out of what we haue already deliuered, ſpeaking of bodies in generall; that all action among them, eyther is locall motion, or elſe followeth it: and no leſſe euident, out of what we haue declared in particular, concerning the operations of the outward ſenſes, and the obiects that worke vpon them: and thereſore, whoſoeuer shall in this matter, require any thing further then a difference of motion, he muſt firſt ſeeke other inſtruments in obiects to cauſe it. For, examining from their very origine, the natures of allthe bodies we conuerſe withall; we can not find any ground to beleeue they haue power or meanes to woike any thing beyond motion. But Ishall craue leaue to differ from him, in determining what is the ſubiect of this motion, whereby the braine iudgeth of the nature of the thing that cauſerh it. He will allow no locall change of any thing in a man, furtherthen certaine vibrations of ſtringes, which he giueth the obiects to play vpon from the very ſenſe vp tothe braine: and by their different manners of shaking the braine, he will haue it know, what kind of thing itis, that ſtriketh the outward ſenſe, without remouing any thing ithin our body from one place to an other. But I:hall goe the more common way; and make the ſpirits to be the porters of all newes to the braine: only adding therevnto that theſe nees which they carry thither,are materiall participations of the bodies, that worke vpon the outward organes of the ſenſes; and paſſing through them, do mingle themſelues with the ſpirits, and ſo do goe whither they carry them, that is to the brainei vnto which, from all partes of the body, they haue immediate reſorte, and a perpetuall communication vith it. So that, to exerciſe ſenſe (Which the latines do call, ſentire, but in English we haue no one word common to our ſeuerall particular notions of diuers perceptions by ſenſe) is, Our braine to receiue an impreſiion from ihe externe obiect by ihe operation or mediation of an organicall part made for ihat purpoſi, and ſome one of thoſe which we terme an externe ſenſe; from which impreſiion, vſually floweth ſome motion proper to the liuing creature. And thus you ſee that the outward ſenſes,are not truly ſenſcs,as if the power of ſenſation were in them: but in an other meaning, to witt, ſo farre as they are inſtruments of qualifying or conueying the obiect to the braine. Nov, that the ſpirits are the inſtruments of this cõueyance, is euidẽt, by what we dayly ſee, that ifa mã be very atiẽtiue to ſome one externe obiect (as to the hearing or ſeeing of ſomething that much delighteth or diſleaſeth him ) he neyther heareth or ſeeth any thing but what his mindis bent vpò; thoughall that while, his eyes and eares be open, and ſeuerall of their obiects be preſent, whch at other times would aſfſect him. For what can be the reaſon of this, but that the braine employing the greateſt part of his ſtore of ſpirits about that one obiect, which ſo powerfully entertayneth him, the others ſind very few free for them to imbue vith their tincture? And thereſore, they haue not ſtrength enough to giue the braine a ſufficient taſte of themſelues, to make it be obſerued: norto bring themſelues into a place where they may be diſtinctly diſcerned: bur ſtriuing to gett vnto it, they looſe themſelues in the throng of the others, who for that time do beſiege the 'braine cloſely. Whereas, in Monſieur des Cartes his way (in which no ſpirits are required) the apprehenſion muſt of neceſſity be carried preciſely according to the force of the motion of the externe obiect. This argument I confeſſe, is not ſo conuincing a one againſt his opinion, but that the neceſſity of the conſequence may be auoydediand an other reaſon be giuen for this effect, in Monſieur des Cartes his doctrine: for he may ſay, that the affection being vehemently bent vpon ſome one obiect, may cauſe the motion to be ſo violent by the addition of inward percuſſions, that the other coming from the outward ſenſe, being weaker, may be drowned by itias leſſer ſoundes are by greater, which do forcibly carry our eares their way, and do fill them ſo entirely, that the others can not gett in to be heard: oras the drawing of one man that pulleth backewardes, is not felt when a hundred draw forwardes. Yet this is hard to conceiue, conſidering the great eminency which the preſent obiect hath ouer an abſent one, to make it ſelfe be fel: vhence it followeth, that the multiplication of motion muſt bè extremely encrealed within, to ouertoppe and beare downe the motion, cauſed by a preſent obiect actually working vithout. But that which indeed conuinceth me to belecue l goe not wrong in this courſe, which I haue ſett downe for externe bodies working vpon our ſenſe and knowledęde: is ſirſt, the conuenience, and agreeableneſſe to nature, both in the obiects and in vs, that it should be done inthat manner: and next, a difficulty in Monſicur des Cartes his way, which me thinketh, maketh it impoſſible that his should be true. And then, his being abſolutely the beſt of any Ihaue hitherto mett withall, and mine ſupplying what his falleth short in, and being ſufficient to performe the æ we ſee: l shallnotthinke I doamiſſe in beleeuing my owne to be true, till ſome body elſe shew a better. Lett vs examine theſe conſiderations one afteran other. It is maniſeſt by what wee haue already eſtablished, that there is a perpetuall fluxe of litle partes or atomes out of all ſenſible bodies, that are compoſed oſ the foure Elements, and are here in the ſphere of continuall motion by action and paſſion:and ſuchitis,ihat in all probability ih-ſe litle partès can not chooſe but gett in at the dores of our bodies, and mingle themſelues with the ſpirits that are in our nerues. Which if thy doe, it is vnauoydable, but that of neceſſity they muſt m:ke ſome motion in the braine  as by the explication we haue made of our outward ſenſes, is manifeſt: and the braine being the ſource and origine of all ſuch motion in the animal, as is termed voluntary; this ſtroke of the obiect, will haue the powerto cauſe ſome variation in its motions thatare of that nature: and by conſequence, muſt bea ſenſation, for, that change which being made in the braine by the obiect, is cauſe of voluntary motion in the animal, is that, which we call ſenſation. But we : hall haue beſt ſutisfaction, by conſidering howit fateth with cuery ſenſe in particular. It is plaine, that ourtouchor feeling is afſected by the litle bodies of heate, or cold, or the like, which are ſqueeſed or euaporated from the obiect: and do gett into our flesh, and cõſequently, do mingle themſelues with our ſpirits: and accordingly, our hand is hæated with the floud of ſubtile fire, which from a great one without, ſtreameth into it: and is benummed with multitudes of litle bodies of cold, hat ſettle in it. All whichlitle bodies, of heate, or ofcold, or of what kind ſoeuer they be, when they are once gott in, muſt needes mingle themſelues with the ſpirits they meet with in the nerue: and conſequently, muſt goe along with them vp to the braine: for the channell of the nerue being ſo litle, that the moſt acurate inſpectours of nature can not diſtinguish any litle cauity or hole running along the ſubſtance of it: and the ſpirits which ebbe and ſ=lowe in thoſe channels, being ſo inſinitely ſubtile,and in ſo ſmalla quantity, as ſlach chãnels can containe: it is euident, that an aton e of inſenſible biggeneſſe, is ſufficient to imbue the whole length and quantity of ſpirit thatis inone nerue: and that atome, by reaſon of the ſubtility of the liquor it is immerſed in, is preſently and as it were inſtantly, diſfuſed through the whole ſubſtance of it: the ſource therefore of that liquor being in the braine, it can not be doubted, but that the force of the externe obiect, muſt needes aſſect the braine according to the quality of the ſuid atome: that i5, g lue a motion, or knocke, conformable to its owne nature. As forour taſte, it is as plaine, that the litle partes expreſſed out of the body which affecteth it, do mingle themſelues with the liquour that being in the tongue, is continuate to theſſ pirits:and then, by our former argument itis euidẽt, they muſt reach vnto the braine. And for our ſmelling, there is nothing can hinder odours from hauing immediate paſſage vp to our braine, when by our noſe, they are once gotten into our head. In our hearing, there is a litle more diſficulty: for ſound being nothing but a motionof theayre, which ſtriketh our eare; it may ſeeme more then needeth, to ſend any corporeall ſubſtance into the braine: and that jt is ſuſficient, that the vibrations of the ourward ayre, shaking the drumme of the eare, do giue a like motion to the ayre within the eare, that on the inſide toucheth the ty mpane:and ſo this ayre, thus moued, shaketh and beateth vpon the braine. But this, l conceiue, will not ſerue the turne, for if there were no more, but an actuall motion, in the making of hearing; I do not ſee, how ſoundes could be conſerued in the memory: ſince of neceſſity, motion muſt alwayes reſide in ſome body; which argument, we hill preſſe 2none, againſt Monſieur des Cartes his opinion for the reſt of the ſenſcs. Out of this difficulty, the very inſpection of the partes within the eare. ſcemeth to leade vs: for had there been nothing neceſſary beſides motion, the very ſtriking of the outward ayre againſt the tympanum, would hiue been ſufficient without any other particular and extraordinary organization, to haue produced ſoundes, and to haue carried their motions vp to the braine: as we ſee the head of a drumme bringeth the motions i the earth vnto our eare, When we lay it therevnto, as we haue formeily deliuered. But Anatomiſtes, find othertooles and inſtruments, that ſeeme fitt to worke and forge bodies withall; which we can not imagine. nature made in vaine. There is a hammer and an anuile: whereof the hammer, ſtricking vpon the anuile, muſt of neceſſity beate oſf ſuch litle partes of the brainy ſteames, as ſlying about do light and ſticke vpon the toppe of the anuile: theſe by the trembling of the ayre ſollowing its courſe, can not miſſe of being carried vp to that part of the braine, wherevnto the ayre within the eare is driuen by the impulſc of the ſound: and as ſoone as they haue giuen their knocke, they rebound backe againe into the celles of the braine, ſitted for harbours to ſuch winged meſſenger: where they remaine lodęed in quietneſſe,till they be called for againe, to renew the effect which the ſound did make at the ſirſt: and the various blowes which the hammer ſtriketh, according to the various vibrations of the tympanum (vnto which the hammet is faſtened; and therefore is gouerned by its motiõs muſt needes make great differẽce of biggeneſſes, and couſe great variety of ſmartneſſes of motion, in the litle bodies which they forge The laſt ſenſe is of ſeeing; whoſe action we can not doubt.is performed by the reflexion of light vnto our eye, from the bodies which e ſee:and this light, cometh impregnated with a tincture drawne from the ſuperficies of the obiect itis reflected froms that is, it bringeth alonę vithiit, ſeuerall of the litle atomes, which of themſelues do ſtreame, and jt cutteth from the body it ſtrucke vpon and reboundeth from; and they, mingling themſelues with the light, do in com pany of it gett into the eye: whoſe fabrike, is fitt to gather and vnite thoſe ſpecies, as you may ſee by the anatomy of it: and from the eye, their iourney is buta short one to the braine: in which, we can not ſuſpect that they should looſe their force; conſidering, how others that come from organes further oſf, do conſerue theirs: and likewiſe conſidering the nature of the optike ſpirits, which are conceiued to be the moſt refined of all that are in mans body. : Nov, that light is mingled with ſuch litle atomes iſſuing out of the bodies from whichit is reflected; appeareth euidently enough, out of whit wee haue Sayed, of the nature and operations of fire and light: and it ſeemeth to be confirmed, by what I haue often obſerued in ſome chambers where people ſeldome come: which hauing their windoes to the ſouth, ſo as the ſunne lyeth vpon them a great pant of the day in his greateſt ſtrengih, and their curtaines being continually drawne ouer them, the glaſſe becometh dyed very deepe of the ſame colour the curtaine is of: which can proceed from no other cauſe, but that the beames which:hoote through the glaſſe, being reſlected backe from the courtaine, do take ſomething along with them from the ſuperſicies of it; which being of a more ſolide corpulence then they, is lefi behind (as it were in the ſtrainer) when they come to preſſe themſelues through paſſages and pores, too litle forit to accompany them in: and ſo thoſe atomes of colour, do ſticke vpon the glaſſe which they can not penetrat. An other conſirmation of it is, that in certaine poſitions, the ſunne reſlecting from ſtrong colours, will caſt that very colour vpon ſome other place; as I haue often experienced in liuely ſcarlet, and cloth of othet ſmart colours: and this, not in that gloating wiſe, as it maketh colours of pure light, but like a true reall dye; and ſo, as the colour will appeare the ſame to a man, whereſoeuer he ſtandeth. lillil Hauing thus shewed in all our ſenſes, the conueniency and t agreeableneſſe of ouropinion with nature; (which hath been deduced, ? out of the nature of the obiects, the nature of our fpirits, the nature and ſituation of our nerues, and laſtly from the property of our braine:) our next conſideration shall be, of the diſficulty that occurreth in M⸗. des Cartes his opinion. Firſt we know not how to reconcile the repugnãcies oppearing in his poſition of the motion of the Ether; eſpecially in light: for that F thereall ſubſtance being extreme rare, muſt perforce be eyther extreme liquid, or extreme brittle: if the firſt ; it can not chooſe but bowe and be preſſed into fouldes, and bodies of vnequall motions, ſimming euery where in itand ſo it is impoſſible, that it should bring vnto the eye any conſtant apparition of the fiiſt mouer. But lett vs ſuppole there were no ſuch generall interruptions, euery where encountring, and diſtuibirg the conueyance of the firſt ſimple motion:yer, how can we conceiue that a puh, giuen ſo farre off, in ſo liquid an element, can continue its fice ſo firre? We ſee that the greareſt thunders and concuſſions, which at any time happen among vs, can not d iue and impart thir impulſe the ten thouſandeth part of the vaſt diſtance, which the ſurn- is remoued from our eve; and can we imaine, that a little touch of that luminous body, sh uld m: ke an impieſſion vpon vs, by mouing an orher ſo extremely liquid and ſubrie, 15 thæ Ether is ſuppoſed; which lke an immenſe Ocean, toſſcd vith all varieties of motion, lyeth betwæene it and vs. Bur admitt there were no diſficulty nor repugnance in the medium; to conuey vnto vsa ſtroke, made vponitly he lunnes motion: lett vs at the leaſt examine, what kind of motions we muſt allow in the ſunne, to cauſæ this effect. Certainely, it muſt needes be a motion tow irdes vs, or elſe it can not ſtrickæ and driue the medium forward, to m⸗ ke it ſtiicke vpon us. And if it be ſo, yther the ſunne muſt perpetual'y be coming necerer and neerer to vs; or elſe it muſt euer and anone be receding bac kw irdes,as wæll as mouing forwardes. Both which, are too chymericall for ſo gre ta witt to conceite. Now, if th- Eth r be brittle, it muſt needes reflect vpon euery rubbe it meeteth wi h in its way, and muſt be br ken and iuered by euery body thet moueih acroſſe it: and ther fore, muſt alwayes make an vncernine and moſt diſorderly percuſſion vpon the eye. Th n againe after it is arriued to the ſenſe, it is no wayes likely it sh : ld be conneyed from thence to th- braine, or that nature intended ſuchi kind e f inſtrument as a nerue, to continue a preciſe determinate motion: for if you conſider howa lute ſtring, orany oiher ſuch medium conueytth a motion made in it; you will find, that to do it well and clearely, it muſt be ſtretc hed throughoutto its full extent, wih. kind of ſtiffeneſſe: whereas our nerues are not ſtraight, but lye crocked in our bodys; ind ate very lither, till vpon occaſion ſpirits coming into them, do ſwell: hæm out. Beſides, they are bound to fle: h, and to other partes of th: body: which being ceſſible, muſt needes dull the ſtroake, and not permitt it to be carried farre. And laſtly, the nerues are ſubicct to be at euery turne contracted and dilated, vpon their owne account, without any relation to the ſlronkes beating vpon them from an exteme agent: which is by no meanes, a conuenient diſpoſition for a body, thatis to be the porter of any ſimple motion; Which should alwayes lye watching in Nn great quierneſſe, to obſerue ſcru pulouſly,and exactly the arrant he is to carry: ſo that for my part, I can not conceiue, naturẽ intended any ſuch effect, by mediation of the ſinnewes. But Monſicur des Cartes endeauoureth ro confime his opinion, by what vſeth to fall out in palſies, when a man looſeth the ſtrength of mouing his handes, or other members, and neveriheleũſe retaincth his feeling: which he imputeth to the remaining intire of the ſtringes of the nerues, whiles the ſpirits are ſomeway def.ctiue To this we may anſwere, by producing examples of ihe contrary in ſome men, vho haue had the motion of th:ir limbes intire and no wayes preiudiced, but haue had no feeling atãll, quite ouer their whole caſe of skinne and fesh: as particularly a ſeruant in the colledge of Phyſitians in London, whom the learned Haruey ( one of his Maſters) hath told me, was exceeding ſtrong to labour, and very able to carry any neceſſary burthen, and to remoue thinges dexterouſly, according to the occaſion: and yet he was ſo voyde of feeling that he vſed to grind his handes againſt the walles, and againſt courſe lumber, when he was employed to rummage any; in ſo much, that thcy would runne with bloud, through grating of the skinne, withnut his fceling of whit occaſioned it. Inour wry, he reaſon Cf both: heſe conditions of people, ſthe parali: tike,and th: inſenſible)is caſy tę be rendered: forthey proceed out of the diuers diſpoſition of the animal ſpirits in thæſe partes: which if they thicken too much, and become very groſſe, they are not capable of tranſmitting the ſubtile meſſengers of the outward world , vnto the tribunall of the braine, to iudge of them. On the other ſide, if they be too ſubtile, they neyther haue, nor giue power to ſwell the skinne, and ſo to draw the muſcles to their heads And ſurely Monſieur des Cartes taketh the wrong w.y, in the reaſon he giueth of the palſie: for it proceedeth out of aboundance of humors: which clogging the nerues, rendreth them washy, and maketh them looſe their dryneſſe, and become lither, and conſequently, vnfitt and vnable, in his opinion, for ſenſation(which requireth ſtiffeneſſe Jas well as for motion. Yet beſides all theſe, one difficulty more remayneth againſt this doctiine, more inſuperable ( if I miſtake not) then any thing, or all together we haue yet ſaid: whichis, how the memory shotld conſerue any thing in it,and repreſent bodies to vs, when our fanſie calleth for them, if nothing but motions do come into the braine. For it is impoſſible, that in ſo diuiſible a ſubiect as the ſpirits, motion should be conſerued any long time: as we ſee enidently in the ayre; through which mouea flaming taper neuer ſo ſwiftly,and as ſoone às you ſett it downe, almoſt in the very inſtant,jhe ſlame of it leaueth being driuen or shaken on one ſide,and goeth quietly and euenly vp ts ordinary courſe: thereby shewing, that the motion of the ayre, which forthe time as violent, is all of a ſoddaine quieted and at reſt: for otherviſe, the flame of the taper would blaze that way the ayre were moued. Aſſuredly, the bodies that haue power to conſerue motion long, muſt be dry and hard ones. Nor yet can ſuch, conſcrue it very long, after the cauſe which madeĩt, ceaſcrh from its operation. How then can we imagine, that ſuch a muliitude of pure motions,as the memory muſt be ſtòred withall for the vſe ond ſeruice of a man, can be kept on foote in his braine, without confuſioniand for ſo long a time as his memory is able to extend vnto? Conſider a leſſen played vpon the lute or virginals; and thirk with your ſelfe, vhat power ihereis, or can be in nature, to conſcrue this leſſon euer continually playing: and reflect, that if ithe impreſſions vpon the common ſenſe are nohng elſe but ſuch thiuges, then they muſt be actually conſcrued, alwayes actually mouing in our head, to the end they be immediately produced, whenſocuer it pleaſeth our will to call for them. And if peraduenture it should be replyed, that itis not neceſſary the motions themſelues should alwayes be conſerued in actuall being; but that ĩt is ſufficient there be certaine cauſes kept on foote in our heades, which are apr to reduce theſe motions into act, vhenſocuer 1hæræe is occaſion of them:all Ishall ſay herevnto is, that this is meerely a voluntary poſition,and that th re appeareth no ground, for theſe motions to make and conſtitute luch cauſes; ſince we neyther meete with any inſtruments, nor diſcouer any ſignes, whereby we may be induced to beleeue or vnderſtand any ſuch operat.on. It may be vigæd, thut diuers lonndes are by diſeaſes oftentimes made in our cares, and appearances of colours in uur fantaſie. But firſt, theſe colours and ſoundes, are not artificiallones, and diſpoſed and ordered by choice and indgement; for no ſtory h:th mentioned, thit by a diſeaſe any man euer heard twenry verſes of Vircil, or an ode of Horace in his cares: or that euerany man ſi fuire pictures in his fanſve, by meanes ofa blow giuen him vpon his eye And ſccondly , luch colours and ſundes as are obiected, are norhing elſe, but ſin ithe fitſt caſe) the motion of humours in a mans eye by a blow vpon it; which humours haue the vertue of making light, in ſuch ſort as we ſce ſea watei hath, vhen it is cla:h⸗d togeiher : and ſin the ſecond caſea cold vapour in certaine partes of the braine, whch cauſeth beatinges or motion there: vhenc] proceedeth hę iniitation of ſoundes: lo that theſe examples do nothing aduantage thar party, thence to inferre that the ſimilitudes of obiccts, may be made in the common ſenſe, without any reall bodies reſerued for rhatend. Yet I intend not to exclude motion from any commerce with the memory no more then haue donce from ſenſation. For I will not only raunt, Tht all our remembring is performed by the meanes of motion; El illalſo acknowledge, that ſin men) it is, for the moſt part, of nothing e ſe but of morion. For what are wordes, but motion? And wordes are the chiefeſt obic cts of our remembrance. Itis true, we can, if we will,remember thinges in their owne shapes, as well as by the wordes that expreſſe them; but experience telleth vs, that in our familiar conuerſation,and in the ordinary exerciſe of our memory, we remember and make vſe of the wordes, tather then of the thinges themſelues. Beſides, the impreſſions which are made vpon all our other ſenſes, as well as vpon our hearing, are likewiſe for the moſt part of rhinges in motion:as if we haue occaſion to makea conception of a man, or of a horſe, we ordinarily conceiue him walking, or ſpeaking,or eating, or vſing ſome motion in time: and as theſe impreſſions are ſucceſſiuely made vpon the ourward organes; ſo are they ſucceſſiuely carried into the fantaſie, and by like ſucceſſion, are deliuered ouer into the memory: from whence, when they are called backe againe into the fantaſie, they moue likeviſe ſucceſſiuely; ſo that in truth,allour memory illbe of motion; or at the leaſt, of bodies in motion: yet it is not chieſly of motion, but of the thinges that are moued; vnleſſe it be, when we remember wordes: and how thoſe motions, do frame bodies which moue in the braine, we haue already touched. THE THREE AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of Memory. &. Vthoware theſe thinges conſerued in the braine? And how do they reuiue in the fantaſie, the ſame motions by which they came inthitherat the ſirſt? Monſieur des Cartes hath &è puttvs in hope of an explication: and werel ſo happy,as to Eaue ſeene that worke of his, which the world of learned men ſo much longeth for; Iaſſure my ſelfe, 1: hould herein receiue great helpe and furtherance by it. Although withall, I muſt profeſſe, I can not vnderſtand howit is poſſible, that any determinate motion should long be preſerued vntaynted in the braine ; where there muſt be ſucha multitude of other motions in the way, to mingle withit, and bring all into confuſion. One day I hope this iewell will be expoſed to publike view, both to do the Author right, and to inſtruct the world. lll Inthe meane time, lett vs ſee what our owne principles aſford vs. Ve haue reſolued, that ſenſation is not a pure driuing of the animal ſpirits, or of ſome penetrable body in which they ſvimme, againſt that part of the braine, where knowledge reſideth: but that it is indeed the driuinæ thither of ſolide materiall bodies ſexceeding litle ones) that come from the obiects thẽſelues. Which poſition, if it be true, it followerh that theſe bodies muſt rebound from thence vpon other partes of the braine; vhere at the lengih, they find ſome vacant cell, in which the eepe their rankes and ſiles, in great quiett and order: all ſuch ſtickinę together, and keeping company with one an other, that entered in OF B ODIE S, Chap. XXXII. a8; together: and there they lye ſtilland areat reſt, vntill they be ſtirred vp, eyther by the naturall appetire, (Which is the ordinary courſe of beaſtes) or by chance,or by the vill of the man in whom they are, vpon the occaſions he meeteth with of ſearching into them. Any of het three cauſes rayſeth them vp,and giueth them the motion that is proper to them; whichis the ſame with that, whereby they came in at the fitſt: for (as Galilæus teacheth vs)euery body hatha particular motion peculiarly proper to it, hen nothing diuerteth it: and then they ſlide ſucceſſiuely, throughthe fantaſie in the ſame manner, as when they preſented themſelues to it the firſt time. After which, if it require them no more; they returnè gently to their quiett habitation in ſome other part ofthe braine, from whence they were called and ſummoned by the fantaſies meſſengers, the ſpirits: but if it haue longer vſe of them, and would view them better then once paſſing through permitteꝗithen they are turned backe againe,and lead a new ouer their colrſe, as often as is requiſite: likæ a horſe, that a rider paceth ſundry times along by him hat he sheweth him to; whiles he is attentiue to mai ke euery part and motioh in him. But lett vs examine a litle more particularly, how the cauſes we haue aſigned, do raiſe theſe bodies thatreſt in the memory, and do bring them tothe fantaſie. The middlemoſt of them(namely chance) needeth no looking into, becauſe the principles that gouerne it are vncertaine ones. But the firſt, and the laſt (Which are, the appetite, and the vill) haue a power (which we will explicate hereafter) of mouing the braine and the nerues depending of it, conueniently and agreably to their diſpoſition. Out of which it followeth, that the litle ſimilitudes, which are in the caues of the braine wheeling and ſWimming about (almoſt in ſuch ſort, as you ſee in the washing of currantes or of riſe, by the winding about and circular turning of the cookes hand) diuers ſortes of bodies do go their courſes fora pretty while; ſo that the moſt ordinary obiects, can not chooſe but preſent themſclues quickely,becauſa there are many of them, and are euery where ſcattered about: but others that are feer, are longer ere they come in view: much like as in a paire of beades, that containing more litle ones then great ones, if you plucke to you the ſtring they all hang vpon, you shall meete with many more of one ſort, then of the ocherhbo. Now, as ſoone as the braine hath lighted on any ofthoſe it ſeeeth for, it putteth as it werea ſtoppe vpon the motion of that; or at the leaſt, it moueth it ſo, that it goeth not farre away, andis reuocable at vill: and ſcemerh like a haite to draw into the fantaſie others belonging vnto the ſamething, eyſ her throu pn ſimilitude of nature, or by their connexion in the impreſſion: and by this meanes hindereth other obiects, not pertinent to the worke the fanſie hath in hand, from offering themſelues vnſeaſonably in the multitudes that otherwiſe they would do. But if the fanſie should haue miſtaken one obiect for an other, by reaſon of ſome reſemblance they haue betweene themſelues, then it shaketh againe the liquid medium they all floate in, and rooſcth euery ſpecies luiking in remoteſt corners, and runneth ouer the whole beaderoule of them: and continueth this inquiſition and motion, till eyther it be ſatisfyed with retriuing at length what it required, or that ©t be growne weary vith toſſingabout the multitude of litle inhabitants in its numerous empire, and ſo giueth ouer the ſcarch, vnvillingly and diſpleaſedly. Nov, that theſe thinges be as we haue declared, willappeare out of the following conſiderations; firſt, we ſee that thinges of quite difſerent natures,if they come in together, are remembred together: vpon which principle the whole art of memory dependeth: ſuch thinges, can not any vay be compriſed vnder certaine heades, nor be linked toget her by order and conſequence, or by any reſemblance to one an orher: and therefore all their connexion muſt be, that as they came in together inro the fantaſie, ſo they remaine together in the ſame place in the memory: and their ſirſt coupling, muſt proceed from the action that bound them together, in driuing them in together. Next, we may obſerue, that when a man ſceketh and tumbleth in his memory forany thing he would retriue, he hath firſt ſome common and confuſed notion of it: and ſometimes he hath a kind of flaskimg or fadeing likeneſſe of it; muchwhat, as when in ſtriuing ro remembera name, men vſe to ſay, itis at their tongues end:and this sheweth, that he attracteth thoſe thinges he deſirerh, and hath vſe of, by the lkeneſſe of ſomething belonging to them. In lIike manner, when hunger maketh one think of meat, or thirſt naketh one dreame of drinke, or in other ſuch occaſions, wherein the naturall appetite ſtirrerh obiects in the memory and bringeththẽ to the fantaſie; it is maniſeſt, that the ſpirits informing the braine of the defect and paine, which ſeuerall partes of the body do endure, for want of their due nourishment; it ginerh a motion to the hart, which ſendeth other ſpirits vp to ſupply the braine, for what ſeruice it will order them: by which, the braine being fortifycd, it followeth the purſuite of what the liuing creature is in want of; vntill the diſtem pered partes be reduced into their due ſtate, by a more ſolide enioying of it. Nov, vhy obiects that are drawne out of the memory, do vſe to appeare in the fantaſie, with all the ſame circumſtances which accompanyed them at the time when the ſenſe did ſend them thither, (as when in the remembrance of a frend, we conſider him in ſome place, andat a certaine time, and doing ſome determinate action) the ealon is, that the ſame body, being in the ſame medium, muſt neceſſatily haue the ſame kind of motion; and ſo conſequently, muſt make the ſame impreſſion vpon the ſame ſubiect. The medium which theſe bodies moue in ſthat is, the memory) is a liquid vaporous ſubſtance, in which they floate and ſWimme at liberty. Nov, in ſucha kind of medium, all the bodies that are of one nature, vill eaſily gather togei her, if nothing diſturbe them: foras when a tuned lute ſtring is ſtrucken, that ſtring by communicating a determinate ſpecies of vibration to the ayre round about it, shakerh other ſtringes, vithin the compaſſe of the moued ayre not all, of what extent ſoeuer, but only ſuch,as by their naturall motion, would cauſe like curlinges, and fouldes in the ayre, as the other doth; according to what Galilcus hath at large declared: euen ſo, when ſome atome in the braine is moucd, allthe reſt there about, which are apt to be wafted wicha like vndulation, muſt needes be moued in chicefe: and ſo they mouing, whiles the others of different motions, that hauing not hing to rayſe them, do eyther lye quiett or moue very litle in reſpect of the former;it is no wonder if they aſſemble together;and (by the proper courſe of the braine) do meete at the common rendez-vous of the fantaſie. And therefore the more impreſſions, that are made from the ſame obiect vpon the ſenſe: the more participations of it, ill be gathered together in the memory: and the ſtronger impreſſions, it will vpon occaſion make in the fantaſie: and themſelues will be the ſtrõgerto reſiſt any cauſe that shall ſtriue to deface them. For we ſee that multitude of obiects, ouerwhelmeth the memoiy; and putteth out, or atthe leaſt, maketh vnproſitable, thoſe that are ſeldomſt thought on. The reaſon of which is, that they being litle in quantity, becauſe there are but few ſpecies of them;they can neuer ſtrike the ſeate of knowledge, but in company of orhers; which being more and greater, do make the impreſſion follow their nature againſt the leſſer: and in tract of time, thinges ſeldome thoug ht of, do gro to haue buta maimed and cõfuſed shape in the memory; and at length are quite forgotten. Which happeneth, becauſe in the liquid medium, i- are apt to moulder away, if they be not ofren repaired: which mouldring and defacing, is helped on by the shockes they receiue from other bodies: like as in a magaſin,a thing that were not regarded, but were careleſſely tumbled vp and downe, to make roome for others, and all thinges were promiſcuouſly throwne vpon it: it would ſoone be bruſed and crushed into a miſeshapen forme, and in the end be broken all in pieces. No, the repairing of any thing in the memory, is done, by receiuing new impreſſions from the obiect; or in its abſence, by thinking ſtrongly of it: which is an aſſembling, and due peecing together of the ſeuerall articles of bodies, appertayning to the ſame matter. But ſometimes it - when the right one can not be found intire, nor all the orderly pieces of it, be retriued with their iuſt correſpondance to one an other: the fanſie maketh vp a ne one in the place of it: which afterwardes, vpon preſence of e obiect, appeareth to haue been miſtaken: and yet the memory, tillthen, keepeth quietly and vnqueſſionedly for the true obiect, what either, the thought, or chance, mingling ſeuerall partes, had patched vp together. E And from hence, ve may diſcerne, how, the looſing or confounding of ones memory, may happen eyther by ſickneſſe, that diſtemper the the head, whereby a man is aſtonied, and all thinges ſeeme to turãẽ round with him. Of all Which effects, the caules are eaſly to be found in theſe uppoſitions we haue layed. THE FOVRE AND THERTIETH CHAPTER Of ævoluntary motion: Naturall fa. ulties: and paſiions. 1 Itherto we haue laboured to convey rhe obiect into the ſ braine: but when itis there, lett vs ſee what furiher eſi ts ĩt  ſ cauſcth: an how ithut action, which we call Voluntary  motion, doth proceed from the braine For the dicouery whereof, we are to note, rthat the biaine is a ſubſlance compoſed of watry partes mingled wih eaithy ones: which kind of ſubſtances we ſce are vſually f. ll of ſtringes: and ſo in ſrong haiò beere, and in vinegar,and in orher liquors of the Ike nature, we lee (f they be expoſed to the ſunne)lirtle long ſl. kes, which make an appearance of wormes or magates ſloating about. The reaſon whereofis, that ſome drye artes of ſuch ſiquors, are of themſelues as it were hnity o: ſleaſy, thatis, hote leledon; partes, ſuch as you ſce vpon the leg ges cf flies, or vpon caterpillars, or in little lockes of wooll; by which they eaſily catch and ſtick- to orher little partes of the hke nature, 1hat come neere vnto them: and if the liquor be moued, ſas itis in the boyling of beere, or making of vinegar by the heate of the ſunne)ihey become long ſtringes; becauſe the liquor breaketh the ties whic hare croſſe to its motion: but ſuch as lye along the ſtreame, or ratherthe bublirg vp,do maintaine th mſelues in vnity, and peraduenture grow ſtronger, by the winding or foulding of ih- end of one part with an orher: and in their tum bling and roulin; ſtillin th- ſame courſe, h: downy hiires are cru:hed m, and the body groweth long and round, as happeneth to a lumpe of dough, or waxe, or wooll, rouled a while in one vniforme courſe. And ſo, coming to our purpole, w- ſee that the braine, and all that is made of it, is ſtiingyi witteneſſe,he membranes the fle:h, the bones, &c. But of all ihe reſt, thoſe whic h be called fibers, are moſt ſtringy: and the nerues ſeeme to be but an aſſembly of them: for although the nerues be but a great multitude of ſinges lying in a cluſter; neuertheleſſe, by the conſent of Phyſitians and Anatomiſtes, hey are held to be of ihe very ſubſtance of thæ braine, dryed to a firmer conſiſtence thenit is in the head. T his heape of ſtringes ſas we may callit) is encloſed in an outſide made of membranes; whoſe frame, we neede not here diſplay: only we may note, that it is very apt and fitt to ſtretchiand alter ſtretchin g, to returne againe to ĩis owne iuſt lengih. Next, we are to conſider, how ithe braine is of a nature apt to ſvell and to ſinke againe: euen ſo much, that Fallopius seporteth, it doth ſwell according to the encreaſe of the moone, » eh whether it be true or nos there can be no doubt, butthat it being of a ſubſtance which is full of skinnes and ſtringes, is capable of being ſtretched, and of ſwelling vpon light occaſions; and of falling or ſinking againe vpon as light: as being eaſily penetrable by vapours and by liquors, whoſe nature it is, to ſ&ell and to extend that which they enter into. Out of whichit followeth, that it muſt be the nature of the nerues to do the like:and indeed, ſo much the more, by how much more drie they are then the braine: for we ſee that ſ to a certaine meaſure) drier thinges are more capable of extenſion by the ingreſſion of wert, then moiſt thinges are; becauſe theſe are not capable of receiuing much more wett into them. Theſe thinges being premiſed; lett vs imagine that the braine being firſt ſvelled, it doth afterwardes contract it ſelſe; and it muſt of neceſſity follow, that ſceing the nerues areallopen towardes the braine (though their concauities can not be diſcerned) the ſpirits and moyſture which are in the braine, muſt needes be preſſed into the nerues: which bein allready ſtored ith ſpirits, ſufficiently to the proportion of their skinnes: this addition will make them ſwell and grow hard, asa balloone doth, which being competently fullof ayre, hath neuertheleſſe more ayre preſſed intoit. Since therefore, the maſters of Anatomy do teach vs, that in euery muſcle there is a nerue, which is ſpread into a number of litle branches along that muſcle; it muſt follow, that if theſe litle branches be ſollen, the flesh likewiſe of that muſcle, muſt alſo needes be ſollen. Now the muſcle hauing both its endes faſtened, the one in a greater bone, the other in a leſſtr; and there being leaſt reſiſtance on that part, where the bone is leſſer, and more moueable; the ſielling of the muſcle can not chooſe, but draw the litle bone towardes the great onei and by conſequence, moue that litle bone: and this is that, which Philoſophers vſually call Voluntary motion: for ſince our knowledge remaineth in the braine, whatſoeueris done by knowledge, muſt be done by the braine; and moſt of what the braine worketh for the common ſeruice of the liuing creature, proceedeth alſo from knowledge; thatis, from the motion of the fanſy, which we haue expreſſed. This matter being thus farre declared, we may now enter vpon rthe explication of certaine eſfects ; which peraduenture might haue challenged roome, in the precedent Chapter; but indecd, could not well be handled without firſt ſuppoſing this laſt diſcourſe:and itis, what is meaned by thoſe powers, that are called naturall faculties: the which houſocuer in their particulars they be manifold in a liuing creature, yet whenſocuer any one of them is reſolued, it appeareth to be compounded of ſome of theſe fiue; to itt, the attractiue, the retentiue, the ſecretiue the concoctiue, and ithe expulſiue faculty. Of which, the attractiue, the ſecretiue, and the concoctiue do not ſeeme to belong vnto the netues, for although we may conceiue that the part of the animal doth tume it ſelfe towardes the thing which it attracteth; neuertheleſſe, that very turning ſeemeth not to be done by vertue of the muſcles, and of the nerues, but rather in a naturall way, as the motion of the hart is performed, in ſuch ſort as we haue formerly declared: as for example, if the ſtomacke whenitis greedy of meare, draweth it ſelfe vp towardes the throate, it ſeemeth rather to bea kind of dryneſſe and of warping, ſuch as we ſee in bladders or in learher eyther by fire orby cold, which make them shriuell vp and grow hard; then that it isa true faculty of the liuing creature to Eekeatie meate. Nor need we extend our diſcourſe any further about theſe three faculties ; ſeeing that we haue already declared in common, how attraction, drying, and mixture of actiue bodies with paſſiue o nes, is performed ; which needeth but applying vnto th:ſe particulars, to explicate fully their natures: as for exam ple ; if the kidneyes draw the matter of vrine vnto thm out of thæ veines, it may be by any of the following three manners, to witt, eyther by draught, wett, or by ſteame. For if the ſerous partes that are in the bloud vhich runneth in the veines, do touch ſome drie partes conformable to their nature, tending towardes the kidneyes; they will infallibly adhere more to thoſe drie partes, then to the reſt of the bloud. hich if they do in ſo great a quantity, that they reach to other further partes mere drie then theſe, they will leaue the firſt partes to goe to the teond : and thus by litle,and litle, will draw a line of vrine from the bloud, if the bloud do abound with it:and the neerer it cometh to the kidneyes, the ſtronger ſtill the attraction will be. The like will happen, if the ſeroſity whichis in the bloud, do touch ſome part wetted witha like ſeroſity, or where ſuch hath lately paſſed; foras we ſee that water vill runne more eaſily vpon a wett part ofa board or a ſtone then vpona drie one; ſo you can not doubt, but that if the ſerous part, which is mixed with the bloud, do light vpon a current of its owne nature, it willſticke more to that, then to the current of the bloud;and ſo pait from the bloud, to goe that way vhich the current of its owne nature goeth. lil Beſides, it can not be doubted, but that from the kidneyes, and iom the paſſages betweene the kidneyes and the veines, in whichthe bloudis conueyed, there ariſeth a feame: whoſe natureis, to incorporate it ſelſe vith ſerous matter, out of whoſe body it hath been extracted. This ſteame therefore, flying ſtill to the ſerous bloud which paſſeth by, muſt of neceſſity precipitate ſas I may ſay) the ſerous partes of that bloudior rather muſt filter them out of their maine ſtocke; and ſo will make them runne in that currẽt, from which it ſelfe doth ſ=low. And thus you ſee how Attraction and Secretion are made: for the drawinœ of the ſeroſity ithout drawing the bloud, is the parting of the vrine fom the bloud. And this example, of the kidneyes operation, may beapplyed to the attractions of all the other partes. Nov, the concoctiue faculty (which is the laſt of thethree we tocketogether) conſiſtethof two partes: the one is, as it were a drying of ihe Geneming humour, which is to be concocted; the orher is,a mingling the ſubſtance æcul;,. . of the veſſell in which the humour is concocted, with the humour it ſelfe: for as if you boyle diuers kindes of liquors in buſſe pannes, the pannes will taynt the liquor with the quality of the braſſe: and therefore Phyſitians forbid the vſe of ſuch, in he boyling of ſeuerall medicines: ſo much more ina liuing creatures body, there can be nodoubt, but that the veſſell in which any humour is concocted, doth giue a tincture therevnto. Now concoction conſiſting in theſe two, it is euident, what the concoctiue vertue is;to witt, heate, and i he ſpecificall property of the veſſell which by heate is mingled with the humour. There remaine yet, the retentiue and the expulſiue faculties to be s. diſcourſed of. hereof one kind, is manif:ſtly belonging to the Goneeming voluntary motion which we hatæ declared: namely that retention, and nd crpulũos that expulſion, vhich ve ordinaiily make of the groſſe excrements facultes eyther of meate, or of diinke, or of other humours, eyther from our hcad, or from our ſtomacke, or from our lungs; for it is maniſeſtly done, partly by taking in of winde, and partly by compreſſing of ſome partes and opening of others: as Galensheweth in his curious booke àvſu partium, An other kind of retentionand expulſion, in which we haue no ſenſe when itis made, (orif we haue, it isofa thing done in vs without our vill though peraduenture we mãy voluntarily aduance it) is made by the ſuelling of fibers in certaine partes, hrough the conſluence of humours to them, (as in our ſtomacke it happeneth, by the drinke and the iuice of the meate thatis in irywhich ſwelling, cloſeth vp ihe paſages by which the contained ſubſſance should goe out (as the moyſtering of the ſtringes, and mouthofa purſe, almoſt shutteth it) vntill in ſome ( for example the ſtomacke, after a meale) the humour being attenuated by little and litrle, getteth out ſubtilely; and ſo leauing leſſe weight in the ſtomacke, the bag which weighth downe loer, then the nearher orifice at which the digeſted meate iſſueth, riſ etha little: and this riſing of it,is alſo furthered by the wrinkling vpand shortning of the vpper part of the ſtomac ke;which ſtill retumeth into its naturall corrugation, as the maſſe of liquid meate leaueth ſoaking it(Whichit dorh by degrees, ſtill as more nd more goeth out; and ſo what remaincth ſilleth leſſe place, and reacheth not ſo highof the ſtomacke: Jand thus at legth, the reſidue and thicker ſubſtance of the meate, after the thinneſt is gott out in ſteame, and the middling part is boyled ouer in liquor, cometh to preſſe and grauitate wholy vpò the orifice of the ſtomacke; Which being then helped by the figure and lying ofthe reſt ofthe ſtomacke,and its ſtringes and mouth relaxing, by hauing the inice which ſwelled them, ſqueezed out of themiit openeth it ſelfe,and giueth way vnto rhat which lay ſo heauy vpon it, to tumble out. In others (for exam ple , in a woman with childe)the encloſed ſubſtãce, ſretained firſt by ſuch a courſe of nature as . - Oo ij we haue ſett downe) breaketh it ſelfe a paſſage by force, and openeth the oriſice at which it is to goe out by violence, When all circumſtances are ripe according to natures inſtitution. 7DButyet there is the expulſion which is made by phyſicke, that requireth Conesrning i ion. Itis of fiue kindes: vomiting, puręing by ſtoole, b expulſion nude à litile declaration. It is of ſiue kin o g, purging by ſtoole, by by PhyGeke. vrine, ſweating, and ſaliuation. Euery onef which, ſeemeth to conſiſt of two partes, nainely the diſpoſition of ihe thing to be purged, and the motion of the nerues or fibers for the expulſion:as for example, wh. n the Phyſitian giueth a purge, it woikeih two thinges: the one is, to make ſome cetaine humour more liquid and purgeable thẽ the reſt; the other is,to make the ſtomacke or belly, ſucke or vent this humour. For the firſt,the property of the purge muſt be, to precipitate that humour out of the reſt of the bloud; or t be thicke, to diſſolueit that it may runne eaſily. For the ſecond, it ordinarily heateth the ſtomacke and by that meanes, it cauſeth the ſtomacke to ſucke out of the veines, and ſo to draw from all partes of the body. Beſides this, it ordinarily filleth the belly with winde, hich occaſioneth thoſe gripings men feele when they take phyſicke; and is cauſe of the guttes diſcharging thoſe humours, vhich orherwiſe they would retaine. The lie of this happenerhin ſaliuation, for the humours are by the ſame meanes brought to the ſtomacke, and thence ſublimed vp tobe ſpitten out: as we pl in thoſe, who tking Mercury into their body, eyther in ſubſtance or in ſmo⸗ke, or by applicatiã, do vent cold humours from any part; the Mercury riſing from allthe body vp to the mouth of the patient, as to the helme of a ſublimatory: and the like ſome ſay of Tobaceo. As for vomiting, itisina manner wholy the operation of the fibers, prouoked by thæ feeling of ſome inconuenient body, which moketh the ſtomaske wrincle it ſelfe, and woike and ſtriue to caſt out what offendethit. Sweating ſeemeth to be cauſed, by the heating of ſome introus body by the ſtomake hich being of ſubtile partes, is by heate diſperfed from the middle to the circumference; and carrieth with ĩt light humours, which turne into water as they come out into the ayre. And thus you ſee in generall, and as much as concerneth vs to declare, what the naturall faculties are: and this, according to Galen his owne mind: who affirmeth, that theſe faculties do follow the complexion, or the temper of the partes of a mans body. li ll . Hauing explicated how voluntary motion proceederh from the Mox the braine braine: our next conſideration ought to be, to examine what it s, that is moued ſuch an obiect, as we brought, by meanes of the ſenſes; into the braine tay motion. from witſout, doth contribute to make the braine apply it ſelfe to worke iiil ſuch voluntary motion. To which purpoſe, we will goe a ſteppe or to backe, to meete the obiect at ĩts entrance into rthe ſenſe; and from thence accompany it inall its iourney and motions onwardes, The obiect which E:] O F BODIES, Chap. XXXIV. 2a53 ſtriketh at the ſenſes dore, and getting in, mingleth it ſelfe wihthe ſpirits it findeth thereiis eyther cõtorme and agreeable to the nature and temper of thoſe ſpirits, orit is not: that is to lay in short, it is eyther pleaſing or diſpleaſing to the liuing creaturœor it may be of a third kind, which being neyther of theſe, we may terme indiſferent. In which ſort ſoeuer the obiect affect the ſenſe, the ſpirits carry it immediately to the braine; vnleſſe ſome diſtemper or ſtrong thought, or other accident hinder them. No,if the obieòt be of the third kindithat is, be indifferenrias ſoone as it hath ſtrucken the braine, it reboundeth to the circle ofthe memory: and there, being ſpeedily ioyned to others of its owne nature, it findeth them annexed to ſome pleaſing or diſpleaſing thing, or it dorh not: if not, in beaſtes it ſerueth ro little vſe:and in men, it remayneth ihere vntill itbe called for. But if, eyiher in its owne nature, it be pleaſing or diſpleaſingi or afterwardes, in the memory it became ioyned to ſome pleaſing orannoying fellowshipp: pre ſently, the haitis lenſible of it: for the hart being ioyned to the brame by ſtraiZht and large nemues, full of ſtrong ſpirits whichaſcend from the hartiit is impoſſible, but that it muſt haue ſome communication with thoſe motions, which paſſe in the braine: vpon which the hart, or rather the ſpirits about it, is eyther dilated or compreſſed. And theſe motions, may be eythertotally of one kind, or moderated, and allayed by the mixture of its contraty: if of thæ: former ſorti one of them we call ioy, the orher griefe; which do continue about the hartſ(and peraduenture do oppreſſeit if th ybe in thæ vtmoſt extremity) without ending any due proportion of ſpirits to the braine vntill they ſertle a little, and grow more moderate. Nov, when theſe motions are moderate; they immediately ſend vp ſome aboundance of ſpiiits to the braine: whichf they be in a conuenient proportion, they are by the braine thruſt into ſuchnerues as are fitt to receiue them: and ſwelling them, thæy giue motion to the muſcles and tendons that are faſtened to them: and they do moue the whole body,or what part of it is vnder command ofthoſe nerues, that are thus filled and ſwelled with ſpirits by the braine. If the obiect was conformable to the liuing creature, then the braine ſendeth ſpirits into ſuch nerues, as can s the body to it: but if otheriſe, it cauſeth a motiò of auerſion or flight from it. To the cauſe of this latter, we giue the name of Feare: and the other, that carrieth one to the purſuite of the obiect, we call Hope. Anger, or 4udaciy, is mixed of both theſe ; for it ſeeketh to auoyde an euill by embracing and ouercoming it: and proceedeth out of aboundance of ſpirits. No, if the proportion of ſpirits ſent from the hart, be too great for the braine; it hindereth or peruerteth the due operation both in man and beaſt. Allvhich it will not be amiſſeto open a litle more particulaly: and firſt; why painefull or diſpleaſing obiects, do contract the ſpirits, and gratefull ones, do contraryviſe, dilate them? It is, becauſe the good of the Rart conſiſteth in life, that is in heate and moyſture:and it is the nature of heate, to dilate it ſelfe in uroyſture; whereas cold and drie thinges, do contract the bodies they woike vpon: and ſuch are enemyes to the nature of men and beaſts:and accordingly experience, as well as reaſon, teacheth vs, that all obiects, which be naturally good, are ſuchas be hoat and moyſt in the due proportion to the creature that is affected and leaſed with them. No, the liuing creature being compoſed of the ſame principles as the world round about him is;and the hart being an abridgement of ihe vholeſenſible creature; and being moreouer full of bloud, and that very hoat; it cometh to paſſe, that if any of theſe little extracts of the outward world, do arriue to the hoat bloud about the hart, it woiketh in this bloud ſuch like an effect, as we ſee a droppe of water falling into a ghſe of wine; which is preſently diſperſed into a competent compaſſe of the wine: ſo that any little obiect, muſt needes make a notable motion in the bloud about the hart. This motion, according to the nature of the obiect, will be eyther conformable or contrary; vnleſſe it be ſo little a one, as no eſfect will follow of it; and then, it is of that kind, which aboue we called indifferent. If the enſuing effct, be connaturall to the hart, there riſetha motion of a certaine fume about the hart3 which motion we call pleaſure; and it neuer fayleth of accompanying all thoſe motions hich are good, as Ioy, Loue, Hope and the like: but if the motion be diſpleaſings there is I kewiſe a common ſenſe of a heauyneſſe about the hart, which we call griefe; and it is common to ſorrow, feare, hate, and the like. Nov it is manifeſt by experience, that the ſe motions are all of them diſferent ones, and do ſtrike againſt diuers of thoſe partes of our body which encompaſſe the hart: out of which ſtriking followeth that the ſpirits ſent from the hart, do aſfect the braine diuerſly; and are by it, conueyed into diuers nerues, and ſo do ſett diuers membeis in action. WVhence followeth, that certaine membeis are generally moued vpon the motion of ſuch a paſſion in the hant, eſpecially in beaſtes, ho hauea more determinate courſe of working, then man hath: and if ſometimes we ſee variety, euen in beaſts, vpon knowledęe of the circumſtances, we may eaſily gueſſe at the cauſcs of that variety: the particularities of all vhich motions, weremitt to Phyſitians and to Anatomiſtes: aduertiſing only, that the fume of pleaſure, and the heauineſſe of griefe, do plhinely shew, that the firſt motions do participate of dilatation. and the latter of compreſſion. j lii IE Thus you ſee, how by the ſenſes, a liuing creature becomeih iudge of what is good, and of what is bad for him: Which operation, is performed more perfectly in beaſts; and eſpecially in thoſe, who liue in the free ayre, lii remote remote from humane conuerſation, ( for their ſenſes are fresh and vntaynted, as nature made them) then in men. Yet without doubt nature hath beene as fauourable in this particularto men, as vnto them; were it not, that with diſorder and exceſſe, we corruptand oppreſſe our ſenſes: as appeareth euidently by the ſtory we haue recorded of Iohn of Liege: as alſo by the ordinary practiſe of ſome Hermites in the deſerts, who by their taſt or ſmell, would preſently be informed whether the herbes, and rootes, and fruits they mett withall, were good or hurtfull for them, though they neuer before had had triall of them. Of which excellency of the ſenſes,there remainethin vs only ſome dimme ſparkes, in thoſe qualities which we call ſympathus and antipathies: whereof the reaſons are plaine, out of our late dilcourſe:and are nothing elle, but a conformity or oppoſition of a liuing creature, by ſome indiuiduall property of it, vinæo ſome body withoutit: in ſuch ſort, as its conformity or oppoſition vnto thinges by its ſpecificall qualities, is termed naturall oragainſt nature. But of this we shall diſcourſe more at large hereafter. ] Thus it appeareth, how the ſenſes are ſeated in vs, principally for the end of mouing vs to, or fiom obiects, that are good for vs,or hurtfull to vs. Butthough our Reader be content toallow ihis intent of nature, in our three inferiour ſenſes: yet he may peraduenture not be ſatisfyed, how the to more noble ones (the hearing and th- ſecing). do cauſe ſuch motions to, or from obiects, as are uſte to be in liuing creatures for the preſeruation of thæm: for (may he ſay))how cana man by only ſeeing an obiect, or by h:armg the ſound of it, tell what qualities it is embued withall?Or what morion of liking er diſliking, can be eauſed in his hant, by his meere receiuing the viſible ſpecies of an obicct at his eyes, or by his eares hearing ſome noyſe it maketh? And if there be no ſuch motion there, what should occaſion him, to proſecute or auoyd that obiect? Vhen he taſteth, or ſmelleth, ortouchetha thing, he findeth it ſeet, or bitter, or ſtincking, or host; or cold; and is thæreiih eyther pleaſed or diſpleaſed: but when he only ſeeth or heareth it, What liking or diſliking can he hue of it, in order to the preſeruation of his nature: The ſolution of this diſficulty, may in part appeare out of whar we haue already ſaid. But for the moſt part, the obiects of th-ſe two nobler ſenſes, do moue vs, by being icyned in the memory wih ſome orher thing that did eyther pleaſe or diſpleaſe ſome of the orher three ſenſes. And fromthence it is, that the motion of gning to embrace the obiect, or auerſion from it, doth immediately proceed: as when a doggi ſeeth a man that vſeth to giue him meate, the ſpecies of the man coming into his fanſie, calleth out of his memory the others which are of the ſame nature, ind are former participations of that man, as well as this fie: h one is: but theſe are ioyned with ſpecieſes of meate; becauſe at other times, they did vſeto comein together: and thei efore the meate being a tovardes it;it will follow that the dogg ill preſently moue towardes that man, and expreſſe a contentedneſſe in being with him. And thisis the ground of all aſſuefaction in beaſts, and of making them capable of receiuing any inſtructions. . THE FIVE AND THERTIETH CHAPTER: Of the materiall inſiruments of Knovledge and Paſiion; of the ſeuerall effects of Paſiions; of Paine and Pleaſure; and how the vitall ſirits are ſent from the braine into the intended partes of ihe body, without miſtaking their way. rZoꝶ O concludethis great buſineſſe, which concerneth all the 5d ſ&a . . : mutations and motions, that are made by outward Agents in J2 a liuing creature, it will not be amiſſe, to take a short and &llꝗ generall ſuruay of the materiall inſtruments, which concurre to this effect. Whereof the braine being the principall, or at leaſt, the firſt and next of the principalles; we may take notice that it containeth, towardes the middle of its ſubſtance, foure concauities, as ſome do count them: but in truth, theſe foure, are but one great concauity, in which, foure, as it were, diuers roomes, may be diſtinguished. The neather part of theſe concauities, is very vnequall, hauing ioyned vnto it, a kind of nett, wrought by the entan ling of certaine litle arteries, and of ſmall emanations from a sinus, whichare interwouen together. Beſides this, it is full of kernels, which do make it yet more vneuen. Nov, two roomes of this great concauity, are dinided by a litle body, ſomewhat like a skinne, (though more fryable)ywhich of it ſelfe is cleere; but thereiit is ſomewhat dimmed, by reaſon that hanging a litle ſlacke, it ſomewhat shriueleth together: and this, Anatomiſtes do call Septum Lucidum, or ſpeculum; and isa different body from allthe reſt that are in the braine. This tranſparẽt body, hangeth as it were ſtraightwardes, from the forehead towards the hinder part of the head: and diuideth the hollow of the braine, as farre as it reacheth, into the right and the Ieſt ventricles. This part ſeemeth to me, (after weighing all circumſtances, and conſidering allthe conueniencies, and fitteneſſes) to be that, and only that, in which the fanſie or common ſenſe reſideth: though Monſieur des Cartes hath rather choſen a kernell to place it in. The reaſons of my aſſertions are; firſt, that it is in the middle of the braine, which is the moſt conuenient ſituation to receiuethe meſſages from all our body, that do come by netues, ſome from before, and ſome from behind Secondly, that with its two ſides, it ſeemeth to be conueniently oppoſed toall ſuch of our ſenſes, as are double; the one of them ſending its litle meſſengers oratomes, to giue it aduertiſſements on one ſide, the other on the other ſide;ſo that it is capable of receiuing impreſſion indifferently from both. Againe, by the nature of the body, it ſcemeth more fitt to receiue all differences of motion, then any otlier body neere it. It is alſo moſt cõformable to the nature ofithe eye; which being our principall ourward ſenſe, muſt needes be in the next degree to that, which iseleuated a ſtraine aboue our outward ſenſes. Fiftly, it is of a ſingle and peculiar nature; hereas the kernels are many, and ãll of them ofthe ſame condition; quality, and appearance. Sixtly, it is ſeated in the very hollow of the braine; which of neceſſity muſt be the place and receptacle where the ſpecieſes and ſimilitudes of thinges do reſide;and where they are moued and tumbled vpand downe, when we thinke of many thinges. and laſtly; the ſituation we putt our head in, vhen we thinke earneſtly of any thing, fauoureth this opinion: for then we hang our head forwards, as it vere forcing the ſpecieſes to ſettle towardes our forehead, that from thence they may rebotind, and worke vpon this diaphanous ſubſtance. This then ſuppoſed, lett vs conſider, that the atomes or likeneſſes of 3: bodies; hauing giuen their touch vpon this Septum or Speculum, do vhar u““ thence retire backe into the concauities, and do ſticke (asby chance it not only che happeneth)in ſome of the inequalities they encounter vith there. But if ghias æ ſelfe ſome wind or forcible ſteame, should breake into theſe caues, and ã5 it væ nu were brush and ſweepe them ouer; it muſt follow, that theſe litle bodies thoughtoſ it will looſen themſelues, and beginne to play in the vapour which filleth this hollow place: and ſo floting vp and ldowne, come a new to ſtrike and worke vpou the Speculum or fantaſy: which being alſo a ſoluble body, many times theſe atomes ſtriking vpon it, do carry ſome litle corporeall ſubſtance from it ſticking vpon them: whence enſuerh, that they returning againe with thoſe tinctures or participations of the very ſubſtance of the fantaſy; do make vs remember, not only the chiccts themſelues, but alſo that we haue thought of them before. Further we are to know, that all the nerues of the braine, haue theit 3. beginnings not farre of from this ſpeculum: of which we shall take a Ho- the momore particular conſideration of two, that are called the ſixt paire or anseſ the couple: which paire hathi this ſingularity, that it beginneth in a great fiued to thi many litle branches, that preſently grow togethet, and make two great inte ones contained within one skinne. Now this being the property of a ſenſe(which requireth to haue many fibers in it, to the end that it may be eaſily and vigorouſly ſtrucken, by many partes of the obiect lighting vpon many partes of thoſe little fibers) it giueth vs to vnderſtand, that this ſixt couple hatha particular nature, conformable to the nature of an externe ſenſe;and that the Architect who placed it there, intended by the ſcuerall conduites of it, to giue notice vnto ſome part theĩ goe vnto, of what paſſeth in the braine: and accordingly one branch of this nerue, reacheth to the hart; not only to the Pericardium, as Galen thought, but euen to the very ſubſtance of the hart it ſelle, as later Anatomiſtes haue diſcouered: by which we plainely ſee how the motion which the ſenſes do make in the Speculum, may be deriued downe to the hart. ll Nowtherefore lett vs conſider, what effects the motions ſo conueyed from the braine, will woike in the hart. Firſt remembring how all that moueth the hart, is eyther puine orpleaſure (though we do not vſe to call it paine, but grieſe, hen the euillof ſenſe moueth vs only by memory, and not by being actually in the ſenſe) and then calling to mind,how paine (as Naturaliſtes teach vs) conſiſteth in ſome diuiſion of a nerue, (which they call Solutio continui: and muſt be in a nerue: for that no ſolution can be the cauſe of paine, without ſenſe, nor ſenſe be withoutr nerues; and therefore this ſolution muſt needes be in nerues, to haue it proue painefull, we may conclude, that the eſfect which we call paine, is nothing elſe but a compreſſion: foralthough this ſolution of continuity may ſeeme to be a dilatation; yet in truth, itisa compreſſion, in the part where the euillis, which happeneth vnto it in the ſame manner as we shewed (When we ſpoke ofthe motion of reſtitution) it doth to ſtife bodies, that by violence are compreſſed and drawne intõ a leſſe capacious figure, then their nature affecteth, and returne into theirowne ſſate as ſoone as the maſtering violence leaueth them at liberty. Pleaſure there fore, muſt be contrary to this,and conſiſtin a moderate dilatation foran immoderate one, would cauſe a compreſſion in ſome adherent partes; and there would become paine. And conformable to this, we experience, that generally they are hard thinges which breed paine vnto vs; and that theſe which breed pleaſure, are oyly and ſoft; as meates, and odours, which are ſweete to the taſte and ſmell; and ſoft ſubſtances, which are gratcfull to the touch: the exceſſe of all which proueth offenſiue and painefulli ſo that from the extremity of pleaſure, one entereth preſently vpon ihe conſines of paine. Now then ſe vs conſider, how the little ſimilitudes of bodies, which from without do come into the fantaſy, muſt of neceſſity woike there, according to their little power, effects proportionable to what they wrought firſt in the outward ſenſes, from whence, they ere conueyed tothe braine: for the ſenſesſthat is the nerues ) and the Septum Lucidum, hauing both of them their origine from the very ſubſtancę of the braine,and diſfering only in degrees of purity and reſinement, the ſame obiect muſt needes workelike effects in borl compreſſing or dilating them proportionably to one an other: which compreſſion or dilatation. is not paine or pleaſure, as it is in the outward ſenſc; bo: as it is reportedto the hartand that, being the ſeate of all paines or pleaſures wrought in other partes, and that (as it were)dyeth them into thoſe qualities, is not capable of feeling eytherit ſelfe: ſo that the ſtroakes of any little ſimilitudes vpon the fantaſy, do make only compreſſions or cilatations there, not paines or pleaſures. l Now their bodies or ſimilitudes, if they be reuerberated from the fantaſy or ſeptum Lucidum, vpon the little rootes of the nerues of the ſixt couple, which goe to the hart, they muſt needes worke there a proportionable impreſſion to hat th-y wrought vpon the fanſy, eythe compreſſing or dilating it; and the hut being extremely paſſiue, by realon of its exceeding tenderneſſe and heate; can not chooſe but change its motion, at the leaſt in part, if not in whole: and this with relation ro two cauſes: the one hæ diſpoſition of the hurtit ſelfe;the other, the vehemency of rhe ſtroake. This chinge of motion and different beating cf the hart, is that which properly is called paſſion:and is euer accompanyed with plealure or with griefe,according to the nature of the impreſſion, that eyther contracteth or dilateth the hart and the ſpiiirs about it:and is di'couered by the beating of the arteries and ofthe pulſe. Conformable h:revnto, Phyſitians do tellvs, hat euery paſſion hah a diſtinct pulſe. Theſe pulſes are diuided in common, byaboundance, or by want of ſpirits: yet in both kinds, they may haue common diſferencies: for in Of ou ndance, the pulſe may be quic ke or ſlo, regular or irregular, equall b or vnequall: and ſe like may happen in defect of ſpirts; according to the motions of the hart, which are thæir cauſes. Againe, the obicc ly being preſent or abſent, neerer or fuither oſf, m? k-th rhe ſtroake greater or leſſer: and atcordingly, varyeth the motion ot ihe hart. Lettvs then call to mind, how we haue formerly declared thit life conſiſteth in heate and humidity; and that theſe two ioyned toget her, do m.ke a thing great: and we may conclude, that of neceſſitv th- morion which is moſt liuely, muſt hauea great, fill, and large ſtrouk- lik: the euẽ rolling waues of a wyde and ſmooth ſea; and not too quicke or Ilmart, like the breaches of a narrow Fretum, -gitated by tempeſtuous windes. From this, other motions may vary eyther by exceſſe,or by deſiciency:. the firſt maketh the ſtroake become ſmart, violent, and thick:: the orher ſlackenethit, and màketh it grow little, ſlow, weake, and thinne, or ſeldome. Andif we looke into the motions of our hart, we shall ſee theſe three differencies of them, fallow three ſeuerall chiefe paſſions. The firſt, followeth: h- paſſion of ioy:the ſecond, the paſſion of anger: and the third the paſſion of griefe. Nor neede we looke any furiher into the cauſes of theſe ſeuerall motions: for we ſee that ioy and grie fe, following the ſtroake of ſenſe, the one of thm muſt conſiſt in an oyly dilatation: that is, the ſpirits about the hart, muſt be dilated by a gentle, large, great, and ſeete motion, in a moderation berween vẽlocity and ſlowneſſe: the other contrayiſe, following the ſtroake of ſenſe in paine,as the firſt did in pleaſure, muſt contract the ſpirits; and conſequently make their mortionor ſtro ke become little, and deficient from all the properties we huiueaboue ſett downe. As for anger, the motion following that paſſion,is, when the aboundance of ſpirits in the hart ĩs a little checked by the contrary ſtroake of ſenſe, but preſently ouercometh that oppoſition: and then,as we ſee a hindered water, or a man, that ſuddainely or forcibly breake through what withſtood their motion, go on with a greater violence then they did, and as it were precipitately: ſo the hart, hauing ouercome the contraction, which the ſenſe madeinit, dilateth it ſelfe witha fury, and maketh its motion ſmart and ve hement. Vhence alſo it followeth, that the ſpirits grow hoater then they wererand accordingly, itis often ſeene, that in the ſcoulding of a woman, and in the inritation of a dogg, if euer now and then, one thwart them, and interpoſea little oppoſition, their fury will be ſo sharpened and heightened, that the woman vill be tranſported beyond all limits of reaſon, and the dogg vill be made madde with nothing elſe done to him, but angring him at conuenient times: and ſome men lik-wiſe, haue by ſleight oppoſitions, iterated ſpeedily vpon them, before their ſpirits could relent their vehement motion (and therefore, muſt ſtill encreaſe it) beene angred into feauers. This paſſion of anger, ſeemeth almoſt to be ſolitary on the ſide of exceſſe beyond ioy: which is, as it were the ſtandard and perfection of all paſſions;as light or whiteneſſe, is of all colours: but on the other ſide, of deficiency, there are ſeuerall middle paſſhions, which participate more or leſſe of ioy and griefe: as particularly thoſe two famous ones, which gouerne mans life, Hope and Feare. Concerning which, Phyſitians tell vs,that the pulſe or beating of feare, is quicke, hard, and vnequall: vnto which I conceiue we may ſafely adde, that it muſt alſo be ſmall and feeble; the perfection of ioy, decreaſing in it on one ſide, to vitt, from greatneſſe and largeneſſe; but not intirely; ſo that a kind of quickneſſe ſupplyeth in part the other defect. Hope on the other ſide, is in ſuch ſort defectiue from ioy, that neuert heleſſe it hath a kind of conſtancy,and moderate quantity,and regularity in its motion: and therefore ĩs accounted to be the leaſt hurtfull of all the paſſions, and that which moſt prolongeth mans life. And thus you ſec how thoſe motions, which we call paſſions, are engendred in the hart, and what they are. Lett vsthen in the next place conſider, what will follow in the reſt of the body, out of theſe varieties of paſſions, once rayſed in the hart and ſentinto the braine. Itis enidẽt, that according to the nature and quality of theſe motions, the hart muſt needes in euery one of them, voyde out  of it ſelfe into the arteries, a greater or leſſer quanrity of bloud, and that in diuers fa:hions: and the arteries vhich lye fitteſt to receiue theſe ſuddaine egeſtions of bloud, are thoſe which goe into the braine: whoſe courſe being directly vpwardes, we can not doubt, but that it is the hoateſt and ſubtileſt part of the bloud, and the fulleſt of ſpirits, that flyeth that way. T heſe ſpirits then running a log and perplexed iourney vp and downe in the braine, by various meanders and anfractuoſities, are there mingled with the humide ſteame of the braine it ſelfe, and are therewith cooled; and do come at the laſt, to ſmoake at liberty in the hollow ventricles of the braine, by reeking out of the little arteriall branches, that do weaue the plexus choroides, or nette we ſpoke of ere while: and they being now growne heauy, do fall ( by their naturall courſe) into that part or proceſſe of the braine, which is called medulla ſpinalis, or the marrow of the backe bone: which being all beſett by the nerues that runne through the body, it can not happen otherviſe, but that theſe thickened and deſcending ſpirits, muſt eyther fall themſelues into thoſe nerues, or elſe preſſe into them other ſpirits which are before them, that without ſuch new force to driue them violently forwardes, would haue ſlided downe more leiſurely. Now, this motion being downewardes, and meeting with no obſtacle till it arriue vnto its vtmoſt periode that way, the loeſt nerues are thoſe, whic h naturally do feele the communication of theſe ſpirits firſt. But itis true, if the floving tide of them be great and plentifull, all the other nerues will alſo be ſo ſuddainely filled, vpon the ſilling of the lowermoſt, that the ſucceſſion of their ſWellings, ill hardly be perceptible:as a fuddaine and violent inundation of water, ſeemeth to riſe on the ſides of the channell, asit doth at the milldamme: though reaſon aſſureth vs it muſt beginne there, becauſe there it is fiſt ſtopped. Onthe contrary ſide, if the ſpirits be fe, they may be in lucha proportion, as to fill only the lower nerues, and to cõmunicate little of ſẽtſe to any of the othæs. And this is the caſe in the paſiion of feare: which being ſtored with feer ſpitits, thẽ any other paſſiò that cauſetha motiò in the body, it moueth the legges moſt;and ſo carrycth the animal that is affrayd, with violence from the obiect that aſfrighteth im. Although in truth, itis a faint hope of eſcaping, mingled with feare, which begetteth this motion: for when feare is ſingle, and at its height, it ſtoppethall motion by contracting the ſpirits,and thence is called ſtupor; as well as griefe, for the ſame reaſon:and accordingly we ſee extreme cowardes in the extremity of their feare, he not the courage to runne away, no more then to defend or helpe themſelues by any other motions. But if there be more aboundance of ſpirits;then the vpper partes are alſo moued, as well as the legges: whoſe motion contributeth to dèfenſe: but the braine it ſelfe,and the ſenſes which are in the head, being the firſt in the courſe of this ſ=lood of ſpirits, that is ſent from the hart to the head it is impoſſible, but that ſome part of them, should be preſſed into the nerues of thoſe ſenſes, and ſo will make the animal vigilant and attentiue to the cauſe of its feare orgrief. Butif the feare be ſo great, that it contracteth all the ſpirits, and quite hindereth their motion, ſas in the caſe we touched aboue )then it leaueth alſo the nerues of the ſenſes deſtitute of ſpirits; and ſo by too ſtrong ap rehenſion of a danger, the animall neyther ſeeth nor apprehendeth but as eaſily precipitateth it ſelfe into it, as it happeneth to auoyde it; being meerely gouerned by chance; and may peraduenture ſeeme valiant, through extremity of feare. l And thus you ſee in common, ho all the naturall operations of the body, do follow by natunll conſequence out of the paſſions of the beaſtes to performe them. Although at the firſt ſight, ſome of them may appeare vnto thoſe that looke not into their principles and true cauſes, to flo from a ſource of intelligence: whereas ĩt is euident by what wee haue layed open, they all proceed from the due ranging and ordering of quantitatiue partes, ſo or ſo proportioned by rarity and denſity. And there is no doubt, but who would follow this ſearch deepely, might certainly retriue the reaſons of all thoſe externall motions, which wee ſee vſe to accompany the ſeuerall paſſions in men and Beaſtes. But for our intent wee haue ſaid enough, to shew by what ind of order and courſe of nature, they may be effected (without conſining our ſelues ouer ſcrupulouſly to euery circumſtance that we haue touched )and to giue a hinte, whereby others that will make this inquiry their taske, may compile an intire, and well grounded and intelligible doctrine of this maotter. Only we vill adde one aduertiſſement more; which is, that theſe externall motions cauſed by paſſion, are of two kindes: for ſome of them are as it were the beginnings of the actions, which nature intendeth to haue follow out of the paſſions that cauſe them: but others are only bare ſignes of the paſſions that produce them, and are made by the cõnexion of partes vnneceſſary orthe maine action that is to follow out of the paſſion, with orher partes that by the paſſion are neceſſarily moued: as for example, when an hungry mans mouth watereth at the ſight of good meate; itis a kind of beginning of eating, or of preparation for eating: for when we eate, nature drawerh a moyſture into our mouth, to humectate our meate, and to conuey the taſt of it into the nerues of the tongue, hich are to make report of it vnto the braine: bur when we laugh, the motion of our face aymeth at no further end, and followeth only by the connexion of thoſe muſcles, which draw the face in ſuch a ſort, vnto ſome inward partes, that are moued by the paſſion, out of which laughing proceedeth. But we muſt not leaue this ſubiect without ſome mention of the diaphragma: into which the otherbranch of thoſe nerues, that are called of the ſixt coniugation, dothcome: for the firſt branch we haue ſaid ocethinto the hart, and carryeth thither the obiects that come into the i this, we shall find, carryeth backe to the braine the paſſion or motion, which by the obiect is rayſed in the hart. Concerning this put of our body, you are to note, that it is a muſculous membrane, which in the middle of it hath a ſinnewy circle; herevnto is faſtened the caſe of the hart, called the Pericardium. This Diaphragma is very ſenſible, receiuing its vertue of feeling from the aboue mentioned branch of the ſixt couple of nerues:and being of a trembling nature, is by our reſpiration kept in continuall motion: and flappeth vpon all occaſions, as a drumme head would do, if it were ſlacke and moyſt; or as a ſayle would do, that were brought into the ind. Out of this deſcription of it, it is obuious to conceiue, that all the changes of motion in the hart, muſt needes be expreſſed in the Diaphragma: For the hart beating vpon the Pericardium, and the Pericardium being ioyned to the Diaphragma; ſuch iogges and vibrations muſt needes be imprinted and ecchoed there, asare formed in the hait: which from thence, can not chooſe but be cariyed to the braine by the ſixt couple of nerues. And thus it cometh about, that we feele and haue ſenſation of all the paſions, that are moued in our hart. Vhich peraduenture is the reaſon, Why the Greekes do callthis part œ/æ; and fromit deriue the verbe ?uũ, that in latine ſignifyeth Sapere, with vs, to ſauour or to like: for by this part of our body, we haue a liking of any obiect, or a motion of inclination towardes it: from whence owęis deriued, by compoſition of eęn , with uœ: for a rudent man is he, that liketh, and is moued to compaſſe wholeſome and good thinges. hich Etymology of the word, ſeemeth vnto me more naturall, then from the phreneſy, from whence ſome deriue it; becauſe a mreas diſtemper or inflammation in the Diaphragma, often cauſeth that diſeaſe. Nov, becauſe the obiect is cõueyed frõ the braine to the hart ſome part of its ay, by the lame paſſage, as the motion of the hart is reconueyed backe to the braine; it muſt of neceſiity follow, that who is more attẽtiue to outward ſenſc, doth leſſe conſider or reflect vpò his paſiioniand who is more attentiue to obſerue, and be gouuerned by what paſſeth in his hart, is leſſe wrought vpon by externall thinges. For if his fantaſy draweth ſtrongly vnto it, the emanations from outward agents vpon the ſenſes, the ſtreame of thoſe emanations wll deſcend ſo ſtrongly from the ouerſilled fantaſy into the hart, that ĩt will hinder the aſcent of any feer and weaker ſpirits by the ſame pipe. But if the current do ſert ſtrongeſt vpwardes, from th hart by the Diphragm torhe braine, then it will ſo ſill the pipe by which it aſcendeth, that little of a weakertyqe, can makea contrary eddy water in the ſime channell. : And by this meanes, nature effecteth a ſecond pleaſure or paine in a liuing creature, which moueth it (oftentimes very powerfully)in abſence of the primary obiect: as we may obſerue, when thinking ofany pleaſing or diſpleaſing action, we find about our hart a motion which enticeth vsto it, orauerteth vs from it: for as the firſt pleaſure was occaſioned by the ſtroake, which the obiect applyed to the outward ſenſe, made vpon the fantaſy, (hich can iudge of nothing without being ſtrucken by it) ſo the ſecond pleaſure ſpringeth from the ſpirits moued in the harr, by meſſengers from the braine, which by the Diaphragma do rebound a ſtroake backe againe vpon the fantaſy. And from hence it proceedeth, that. memory delighteth or aſſlicteth vs'3 and rhat we think of paſt thinges with ſweeteneſſe or with remorſe: and thereby aſſuefact ion is wrought in beaſtes, as farre as the appetitiue part doth contribute therevnto, to perfect what was begunne in hei fantaſy, in order to the ſame effect, as we haue touched befare. But nov lett vs examine, how ſo ſmalla quantity of a body,as cometh from an obiect into our ſenſe, can be the cauſe of ſc great a motion about our hart. To which purpoſe we are to remember, that this motion is performed in the moſt ſubtile and thinne ſubſtance, that can be imagined: they are the vitall ſpitits,that do all this woike; which are ſo ſubtile, ſo agile, and ſo hoat, that they may in ſome ſort be termed ſire. Nov if we reflect how violent ſire is, we neede not wonder at the ſaddaine and great motion of theſe paſſions. But we muſt further take notice, that they are not in the greateſt exceſſe, but where the liuing creature hath beene long inured and exerciſed vnto them, eyther directly or indirectly: ſo that they ariiue not to that pitch ſo much out of the power of the agent, as out of the preporation and diſpoſition of the patient; as when cold water hath beene often heated by extinguishing red hoat irons init, after ſome repetitions a few quenchinges will reduce it from cold to boyling, that at the firſt would ſcarce haue made it lukewarme: and accordingly we ſee a hart, that for a long time hath loued, and vehemently hath deſired enioying, is tranſported in a high degree, at the leaſt ſight and renuance of ſtroakes from its beloued eẽ ;, and is as much deiected, vpon any the leaſt depriuation of it: for to ſuch an obiect, the liuing creature is hurried avay by a force much reſembling the grauity or celerity of a denſe body, that is ſctt on running downe a ſteepe hill; vnto which, the only taking avay of a weake lett or the leaſt ſtoppe, giuetha precipitate courſe; not out o the force of what is done to it, but out of the force which was formerly in the thing, though for the preſent it lay there vndiſcouered: and ſo likewiſe in theſe caſes, the obiect rather giueth the occaſion of the violent motion, then the force or power toit. Theſe thinges being thus determined, ſome peraduenture may aske, how it cometh to paſſe, that the ſpirits whic h cauſe motion, being ſent on their arrant by the braine, do alwayes hitt the right way, and light duely into thoſe very ſinne wes, which moue the liuing creature according as is requiſite for its nature? Since all the paſſages are open, what is it that gouerneth them, ſo as they neuer miſtake, and the animal isneuer driuen towardes harme, inſteed of flying from it? Who is their guide in theſe obſcure pathes: But it were to impute ignorance to the maker, to think that he Famed all the paſſages alike, and ſo enery one of them, promiſcuouſly apt to receiue into them, all ſorts of ſpirits howſocuer they be moued:and therefore, we may aſſure ourſelues, that ſince in theſe diuerſities of occaſions, there are likewiſe diuers kinds of motions from the hartjeyther there is proportionable vnto them, diueis indes of paſſages fitt to receiue and entertaine the ſpirits;according tothe condition they are in, ſo as the paſſages whichare aiuſted to one kind of ſpirits, willnot admitt any an orher nature: or elſe, the firſt motions of ] king or diſliking in the hart, which (as we haue ſaid) do cauſe a ſelling or a contraction of it againſt thisor that parti doth ſtoppe and hinder the the enræance of the ſpirits into ſome ſinewes, and doth open othes, and driueth the ſpirits into them: ſo as in the end, by a reſult ofa chaine of ſwellinges and contractions of ſeue rall partes ſucceſiuely oneg.inſt an other, the due motions of proſecution or auerſion ae Licught abou. As for example; an obiect that aſfecteth the hart vith Iking, by dilating the ſpirits about the hart, ſendeth ſome into the optik- nerues, and maketh the liuing creature turne his eye towardes it and keepe, ĩt ſteady vpon what he deſireth: as contrariwiſe, if he diſtike and feare it, he naturally turneth his eye and head from it. Now, of this moj3on ofthe eye and head, may depend the running to thething in one ar ,and the running fromit in the other: for the turning of the necke one way, may open a paſſage for the ſpirits into thoſe ſinewes, Which carry the reſt of the body towardes the obiect: and the turning of it to the erher ſide, may open other ſinewes, whichs hall worke a contrary effect, and carry the animal fcom the obiect: and the mouing of thoſe ſinewes, Which at the firſt do turne the necke, doth proceed from ihe quality and number of the ſpirits that aſcend from the hart, and from the region of thæ hart from whencerhey are ſent: according to the variety whereof, there are diuers ſinees fitted to receiue them. To make vp which diſcourſe, e may call to mind, what we haue ſaid a litle aboue, concerning the motions cauſed in the externall partes of the body, by paſion mouing within: as when feare mingled with hope, iueth a motion to the legges, anger to the armes and handes, and all the reſt of the hbody,aswell as to the leggess and all of th-m, an attentionin the outward ſenſes; hich neuertheleſſe peruerteth euery one of their functions, if the paſion be in extremity. And thei ſurely, we inay ſatisfy our ſelues, that eyther this, or ſome woy like it (Which I leaue vnto the curious in Anatomy to ſettle Wii hexacteneſſe; for it is enough for my intent, to shew in groſſe how theſc operations may be done, without calling in ſome incomprehenſible qualities to our ayde) is the courſe of nature in motions, vhere no other cauſæ interueneth, beſides the ohicc? workinę vpon the ſenſe: Which allthe vhile it doth, it is the office of the eye of fintaſy or of common ſenſe, to lye euer open ſtl watching to obſerue what warninges the outward ſenſes do ſend vnto him; that accordingly he may direct and change, the motions of the hart and of the whole body. lll But if theobiect do make violent impreſsions vpon the ſenſe; and. . - Ho» the hait, being then vehemently moued, do there vpon ſend aboũdance biina of ſpirits vp to the braine; this multitude of ſpirits thronging vpon the Pa© common ſenſe, oppreſſerh it(as we haue already ſaid) in ſuch ſort, that the notice which th? ſenſe giueth of particular circumſtances, can not reuayle to any effect in the braine: and thus bythe miſguidance of ihe Rarshe vorke of nature is diſordered: which when it happeneth, we expreſſe in short, by ſaying that paſſion blindeth the creature, in hom ſuch violent and diſorderly motions haue courſe, for paſſion is nothing elſe, but a motion of the bloud and ſpirits about the hart; and is the preparation or beginning of the animals working; as we haue aboue particularly diſplayed. And thus you ſee in common, how the circuite is made from the obicct to the ſenſe;and from it by the common ſenſe and fantaſy, to the hart; and from the hart backe againe to the braine; which then ſetteth on worke thoſe organes or partes the animal is to make vſe of in that occaſion:and they eyther bring himto, or carry him from the obiect, that at the firſt cauſed all this motion, and in the entſ becometh the periode of it. THE SIX AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of ſome actions of heaſtes, that ſeeme to be formall actes of reaſon, as doubting, reſoluing, inuenting.  N the laſt Chapter the foundations are layed, and the way is ĩ opened, for the diſcouering how all operations which & proceed from nature and paſiion, are performed among liuing creatures: and therefore, I concciue I haue thereby y complyed ith the obligation of my intention: which is bur to expreſſe and shew in common, howall the actions of ſenſible bodies may be reduced to locall motion, and to materiall application of one body vnto an other, ina like manner (though in a different degree) as thoſe motions which we ſee in liuelieſt bodies. Yet becauſe among ſuch animals as paſſe for irrationall, there happen ſome operations of ſo admirable a ſtraine, as reſemble very much the higheſt eſfects which proceed from a man: I thinke it not amiſſe, to giue ſome further light, by extending my diſcourſe to ſome more particulars then hitherto I haue done; whereby the courſe and way ho they are performed, may be more clearely and eaſily looked into: and the hes becuſt I haue mette vith ſome men, who eyther wanting patience to beſtow on thoughts of this kind ſo much time as is neceſſary for the due ſcanning of them; or elſe through a promptitude of nature, ſiing ſwiſtly from the eſfect they looke vpon in groſſe, to the moſt obuious ſeeming cauſe; do ſuddainely and ſtrongly reſolue, that beaſtes vſe diſcourſe vpon occaſions, and are endewed with reaſon. This Iintend not to doe quite in particular, for that were to write the hiſtory of euery particular animal: but will content my ſelfe with touching the cauſes in common; yet in ſuch ſort, that the indifferent Reader may be ſatisfyed of a poſibility, that theſe effects may proceed from materiall cauſes: and that Ihaue poynæd out the way, to thoſe who are more curious, and haue the patience and leiſure to obſerue diligently what paſſeth among beaſtes, how they may trace theſe effects from ſteppe to ſteppe, vntill at lengihthey dilcouer their true cauſes. To beginne then; I conceiue we may reduce all thoſe actions of bealles, Which ſceme admirable, and aboue the reach of an irrationall animal, vnto three or foure ſeuerall heades. The firſt may be of ſuch, as ſeeme to be the very practiſe of reaſon, as doubting, reſoluing, inuentin g and the like. The next shill be of ſuch, as by docility or practiſe beaſtes do oftentimes arriue vntò. In the third place, we will conſider certaine continuate actions oſa long tract of time, ſo orderly performed by them, as that diſcourſe and rationall novledge ſeeme clearely to shine throughthem. And laſtly we vill caſt oureye vpon ſome others, which ſeeme to be euen aboue the reaſon that is in man himſelfe,as the knoving of thinges which the ſenſe neuer had impreſiion of before, a preſcience of fature euents, prouidences,and the like. As for ithæ ſirſt: the doubting of beaſts, and their long wauering ;n ſomtrimes berweene obiccts that draw them ſcuerall ayes, and at the procredeth the laſt their reſoluing; vpon ſome one of them, and their ſteady purſuance ſorbng of of ihut afterwardes; will not be matter of hard digeſtion to him, that alſsh ill haue well relished and meditated vpon the contents of the laſt Chapter: forit is euident, that if ſcuerall obiects of different natures do at the ſame rime preſent the ſelues vnto a liuing creature, they muſt of neccſity mæ e diuers impreſsions in the hart of it, proportionable vnto the cauſes from whence they proceed: ſothat if one of them be a motion of hpe, and the other be of feare; it can not chooſe but follow thence, that what one of them beginneth, the other will preſently brẽake oſf: by which meanes it will come to paſſe, that in the beaſtes hart there muit needes be ſuch wauinges,as we may obſcrue in the ſea, when at the beginning of a tide of flood, it meeteth with a banke that checketh the coming in of the waues, and for a while, beateth them bàcke as faſt as they preſſe vpon it they oſfer at getting ouer it, and by and by retire bac ke againe from the ſteepeneſſe of it, as though they were apprehẽſiue of ſme danger on the other ſide; and then agiine attempt it a fresh: and thus continue labouring, one while one way, an other while an others vnti lat the length the ſlood encreaſing, the wæer ſeemeth to grow bolder,and breaketh a maine ouer the banke, and then floweth on,tillit meeteth with an other, that reſiſteth it, as the firſt did: and thus you ſee, how the ſea can doubt and reſolue, without any diſcourſing. In the like manner it fareth with the hart of a beaſttwhoſe motions do ſfeere the reſt of his body, when it beateth betwixt hope and feare, or berween any other two contrary paſsions, without requiring any other principles from whence to deduce it, then thoſe we haue already explicated. ; But now to ſpeake of their inuentions I muſt confeſe, that among Concerning ſcuerall of them, there appeareth ſo much cunning in laying of their the inumton plots ( which when they haue compaſſed, they ſeeme to grow careleſſe of soues snd and to vnbend their attention, as hauing obtained what with earneſtneſſe they deſired)that one might thinke they wrought by deſigne,and had a diſtinct view of an end for the eſfecting of which, they vſed diſcourſe to chooſe the likelieſt meanes. To this purpoſe the ſubtilities of the foxe are of moſt note. They ſuy he vſethto lyeas if he were dead: thereby to make hennes and duckes come boldly to him. That in the night, vhẽ his body is vnſeene, he will fixe his eyes vpon poultry,and ſo make them come downe to him from their rooſte. That ro ridde himſelfe of the ſleas that aſllict him in the ſummer, he vill ſinke his body by litle and litle into the water, while the ſleas creepe vp to his head (ro ſaue themſelues from drowning) and from thence to a bough hæ holdeth in his mouth; and will then ſvimme away, leauing them there. That to coſen the badger of his earth, he ill piſſe in itas knowing that the ranke ſmell of his vrine, will driue the other cleanelier beaſt to quitt it. That when dogęs aẽ cloſe vpon him, and catching at him, he will piſe vpon his tayle, and by fiking that vp and downe, ill endeauour you may beleeue) to make their eyes ſmarte,and ſo retarde their purſuite, that he may eſcape from them. And there are particular ſtories, that expreſſe yet more cunning then allth- ſeas of a foxe, that. being ſore hunted, hanged himſlfe by the teeth among dead vermine ina warren; vntill the dgęes were paſſed by him, and had loſt him. Of an other, that in the like diſtreſſe, vould take into his mouth a broome bush growing vpon a ſteepe cliffe on the ſide harid neere his denne ( which had an other way to it, eaſy enough of acceſſe)and by helpe of that, would ſecurely caſt himſelfe into his hole; whiles the doggs that followed him haſtily, and were ignorant of the danger, would breake their neckes downe the rockes. It is ſaid, that in Thracia, the courtry people ſo know whether the riuess that arè frozen in the winter, will beare them or no, by mai king whether the foxes venture boldely ouer them, or retire after they haue layed their eares tothe yce, to liſten whether orno ithey can heare the noyſe of the water running vnder it: from whence you may imagine they collect, that if they heare the current of the ſtreame, the yce muſt needes be thinne; and conſequently dangerous to truſt ti veight vnto it. And to buſye my ſelfe no longer with their ſuttleties, I will conclude with a famous tale of one of theſe crafty animals; that hauing killed a gooſe on the other ſide of the riuer,and being deſiious to ſwimme ouer vithit, to carry it to his denne, before he would attempt it ſleaſt his prey might proue too heauy for him to ſvimme withall, and ſo he might looſeit) he firſt weighed the gooſc with a piece of wood, and then tryed to carry that ouer the tiuer, whiles he left his gooſe behind in a ſafe placr; which when he perceiued he was able to do with eaſe, he then came backe againe, and ventured ouer vith his heauy birde. They ſayit isthe nature of the Iacatray to hide it ſelfe,and imitate the voyce of ſuch beaſts, as it vſeth to prey vpon; which maketh them come to him, as to one of their owne fellowes; and then he ſeiſcth vpon them and deuoureth them. The Inccall,that hatha ſubtile ſent, hunteth after beaſts; and in the chice, by his barking guideth the lyon, (hoſe noſe is not ſo good) till they ouertake what they hunt; which peraduenture would be too ſlrong forthe Iaccall; but the lyon killeth the quarry, and hauing firſt fed himſele, leaueth the Iaccall his share:and ſo between them both, by the ones dexterity, and by the others ſtrengih, thy gett meate for nourihment of them both. Like ſtoryes are recorded of ſome fishes. And euery day we ſee the inuentions of beaſts to ſaue themſclues from catching: as hares, vhen they are hunted, ſeeke alwayes to confound the ſent; ſometimes by taking hædges, other whiles aters ; ſometimes running among sheepe and other beaſts of ſtronger ſents; ſometimes making doubles, aud treading the ſume path ouerand ouer; and ſometimes leaping with great iumpes hither and thither, before they betake themſclues to their reſts that ſo the cõtinuateneſſe of the ſent may not lead doggs to thrir forme. No, to penetrate into the cauſes of theſe and of ſuch like actions; we may remember, how we sheed in the laſt Chapter, that the beating of or æ*: h the hart worketh two thinges: the one is, h it turneth about the exch hennes ſpecieſes, or litle corporeities ( ſtreaming from outward obiects) which ſ lying videI remaine in the memory: the otheris, that it is alwayes preſſing on to bygngupon ſome motion or other: out of which it happeneth, that when the ordinary them. wayes of getting victuals, or of eſcaping from enemies, do falle a creature whoſe conſtitution is actiuei it lighterh ſometimes ( though eraduenture very ſeldome) vpon doing ſomething, out of which he deſired eſſct followethias it can not chooſe but fallout now and then, although chance only do gouerne their actions: and when their action prouet ſucceſſ full, it leaueth ſuch an impreſſion in the memory, that whenſocuer the hike occaſion occurreth, that animal will follow rhe ſame merhnde: for the ſame ſpecieſes do come together from the memory into the fantaſy. But the many attẽpts that miſcarry, and the inefſc ctuall motions which ſtraightes do caſt beaſts vpon, aæ neuer obſcued, nor are there any ſtories recorded of them: no more then in the temple of Neptune, were kept vpon the regiſtres, the relations cfihoſe vi fortunate wretches, vho making vowes vnto that god in their diſtreſſe, were neuertheleſſe drowned. Thus peraduenture, when the foxe ſeeth his labour in chaceing the hennes, to be to no purpoſe; and that by his purſuire of them, he driueth them further out of his reach; he layeth himſelfe downe to eſt, witha w tehſull eve,and perceiuing thoſe ſilly animals to ꝗrow bolder and bolder, by theirnot ſeing him ſtirre, he continueih his lying ſtill, vntill ſpringeth vp and catcheth her: or peraduenture ſome poultry might haue ſtrayed within his reach whiles he was aſleepe, and haue then vakened him with ſome noiſe they made;and ſo he happen to ſeiſe vpon one of them, without eyther deſigne or paines taking before hand: by ſuch degrees he might chance to catch one the firſt time:and they being ſettled in his memory, together with the eſſecti it happened that an other time whæn hunger preſſed him, and ſent vpto his braine like Ipirits vnto thoſe which aſcended thither whiles he lay watching the heines; theſe ſpirits brought the other fiom his memory into his fantaſy ſ in ſuch ſort as ve haue shewed in the laſt Chapter) and ſo droue him to the ſame courſe, vntill by frequent repetitions, it became ordinary and familiar with him:and then they that looke only vpon the performance of ihe artifice, are apt to inferre diſcourſe and a deſigne cf reaſon, out of the orderly conduct of it. But how can we conceiue the foxe hath iudgement to know when the henne is come ithin his leape, and accordingly offereth notatt her till then; vnleſſe we reſort to ſome other principle, then what is yet declared? The anſwere vnto this obiection I thinke will not be hard to findifor if the motion, which the preſence of the obiect maketh in the hart, be proportioned out by natureas there is no doubt but it is) it will not be ſo great and poverfull, as to make the foxe leape att it, vntillit be atriued ſo neere him, that by his nimbleneſſe he can reach it; and ſo without any ayme, further then by the meere ſlure of his paſſion conueniently rayſed, he doth the feate: butif his paſſion be too violent, it maketh him miſſe his ayme; as we may frequently obſerue borh in men and beaſls: and particuluily, when feare preſſeth eyther of them to leapeouera ditch, which being too broad, he lighteth in the middeſt of it. The ſame varchfullneſſe and deſire to haue the poulen, that ſitt vpon a tree out of his reach, maketh him fixe his eyes vpon them, hen they are att rooſte: and att length, eyther the brightneſſe and ſparkling of them, dazeleth the birdes,and maketh them come downe to them, (as ſlyes do in the night about the lame of a candle; oras fishes do toa light in a boates headsJor elſe they are affiaid ; and their feare encreaſing, their ſpirits returne tq, the hart, which thereby is oppreſſed, and their outward partes are bereaued of ſtrength and motions from whenceit followeth neceſſarily, that their footing looſeth their hold faſt, and they tumble downe halfe dead with feare; which happeneth alſo frequently to catts, when they looke wiſtly vpon litle birdes that ſitt quictly. Or peraduenture, their feare maketh them giddy; as when ſome man looking downea precipice from a dangerous ſtanding, he falleth by the turning of his braine, though nothing be behind him to thruſt him forewardes. Or it may be, ſome ſteame cometh from the foxe, which draweth ſuch ereatures to him; as it is reported that a great and very poyſonous toade will do a weaſell, who vill runne abour the toade r a great while, and ſtill make his circle leſſer and leſſer, till at length he crisheth in the center, where his foe ſitteth ſtill, and drawerh him to ho which he doth in ſuch ſort,as animated Mercury vill draw leaſe gold duely prepared, or as the loadeſtone attracteth iron: and yet ĩt is apparent, the weaſell comethi not with his good ill; but that there are ſome powerfull chaines, ſteaming from the body of the toade, which lucke him thither againſt his liking; forby his motinns and running, he vill expreſſethe greateſt feare that can be. : Th methode which foxes do practiſe, to ridde themſelues of their fleas (if it be true) is obuious enough for them to fall vpon, for in oceaur ſummer, their fleas together with their thicke furred coate, can not foxes inuentiò chooſe but cauſe an excecding great itching and heate in their bodies; }2ſide which vill readily inuite them to go into the ater to coole themſelues; ãcas. us the marchantes at the Iſles of Zante and of Cephalonia told me (when I was there)it as the cuſtome of our English doggs (who were habituated vnto a colder clyme) to runne into the ſea in the heate of ſummer,and lye there moſt part of the day, with only their noſes out of the water, that they might draw breath, and ould ſleepe there with their heads layed vpon ſome ſtone, which rayſed them vp, whiles their bodies were coucred with the ſea:and thoſe doggs vhich did not thus, would in one ſummer vſually be killed ith heate and fleas. li Now when the foxe feeleth the eaſe that the cooleneſſe of the water affordeth that part of him which ſitteth in it, he goeth further and further; yet would not putt himſelfe to ſvimme, which is a labour, and would heate him, and therefore he auoydeth iĩt; ſo that whiles he thus cooleth himſelfe in lome shady placeſforit is naturall vnto him, in ſuch an occaſion, to relort vnto the coole shade, rather then to lye in the ſunne-n in ſuch there being for the moſt part ſome boughes hanging ouer thæ water, it happeneth naturally enough, that he taketh ſome of the loweſt in his mouth, to ſupport him, and ſaue him the l: bour of ſwimming, whiles he lyeth at h eaſt, ſoaking and cooling him: ſclſe m the riuer. By which meanes it cometh to paſſe, that the ſleas ſinding no art of him free from water, do creepe vp to the bough to reſcue themRlues from drowning: and ſo, vhen he is cooled enough, he goeth avay : and leaueth them there. In all which finding a beneſitt and ſutisfaction, whenſocuer the like occaſion bringeth hoſe ſpecieſes, from his memory into his fantaſy, he betaketh himſelfe to the ſume courſe, and therein finding his remedy,at length it groweth familiar to him. In the like manner, Thales his mule, that vas heauily loaden with ſalt, happening to ſtumble, andto fall in a iiuer she was going ouer, the ſalt melted by the water ſoaking into the ſackes, and ſo the was caſed of her burthen; which ſucceſſe made her, whenſocuer she came to a riuer, and was troubled with her loading, she would lye downe in the water; and could not be reclaymed from it, iill they charged ſuckes of wooll vpon her backe, which growing heauier by 32 A TREATISE vhich it is apparent, that it was memory and not iudgement, which made her fora while behaue her ſelfe ſo ſubtlely. Forihe foxes driuing the badger from his earth, you vill not thinke An exphication ir1 eedefull to allow hima forecaſt and deſione in piſſing in it: but as it oſf to other n : muenuens of is naturall for him, to reſt in a place that he meeteth with fitt for that foxes. 7 Concerning Mountagues argument to prooue that doggẽ:s make ſyliogiſines. purpoſc; ſois it for him to piſſein it, if the liſte take him whiles he is there; which in all likelyhood it will,if he ſtay any time there, and giue a relaxarion toallhis partes by ſleepee. ilit And when he piſſeth in his taile, and shaketh ĩt in the dogges eyes, it is euident that feare, not eraft cauſeth this eſfect ſor it auayleth him litle, and therefore is not likely to proceed fiõ iudgement. And of the other, it isa naturall effect in all beaſts(when it is violent) to contract their tailẽs betweene their legges, and to make their vrine come from them, (by compreſſing the ſpirits in their hart, which should ſupport their outwarã partes,and ſtengthen their ſplincter muſcle)which their being ſnapped at and ſciſed vpon by the dogges, shaketh from their buſshy tailes ſfitt to retay ne itJand then lighting in the dogges eyes, the acrimony of it hurteth them,and maketh them shutt their liddes. li The ſtoryſif it be true) of the foxe, that to ſaue himſclfe from the dogges that he heard following him in full erye, did hang by his teeth among dead vermine in a warren, isa very ſtrange one I confeſſe: but it is conceiuable, how feare and wearineſſe might cauſe him to ſecke a shelter to hide himſelfe:and in ſo plaine a tract of ground as warrens vſe to be in, without any bush or hill to haue recourſe vnto ſor reliefe, there appearing nothing but a gallowes hanged full of vermine; his firtoſ e might be moued  he being able to runne no further) to thruſt himſl among thoſe dead bodies, that he ſaw reſted quietly: and hauing no way to mingle himſelfe ith them, but hanging by his teeth; he might continue in that poſture, till the doggs not luſpecting him in the ayre, might runne vnder him, and ouershoote the ſent: which whiles they caſt about to recouer, by running to beate the next wood or shelter in view las is there cuſtome in loſſes of their chace; vnto which they are brought by iheir maſters hunting them in that methode at the firſt) the wyly animal ſtealeth an other way, and recouereth himſelfe. This ouerrunning of the ſent by dogges inthe earneſtneſſe of their chace, putteth me in mind of Montagues argument, out of which he will nerre that dogges vſe diſcourſe,and do make ſyllogiſmes in their hunting: for (ſayth he) when they haue followed their chace downea lane, that at length diuiderh it ſelfe into three others; they will carefully ſmellat the ſirſt and at the ſecond, and not finding that it hathgonein eythær of thoſe, they boldly runne vpon the third, without euer laying l noſes to the ground; as being aſſured by their diſcourſe and reaſon, that ſince it went not in the two ſirſt, and ler being but one remayning it muſt of neceſſity haue gone there. llll But this needeth no other cauſt, then that their eagerneſſe of hunting hauing made them ouershoote the ſent, (hich fora while remayneth in their noſes, after they are parted from the obiect that cauſed it) they caſt backe againeſas they are accuſtomed to be made to do in like occaſions by the hunters that trayne them vp) and with their noſes they try the ground all the way they goe; till coming neere where the chace went indeede, the ſent ſtriketh their noſes (that by this time are growne empty of it) before they come at the place: and then they runne amaine in purſuite of it, with their heads held vp, (which is their conuenienteſt poſture for runningland all the way, the ſent filleth them at that diſtance vithout their needing to ſmell vpon the earth, to fetch it from ihence. Fhat foxe which vſedto caſt himſelfe by the aduantage of a boush, into his denne, was ſo cloſely purſued by the doggs the firſt time, he A aechration ventured vpon this feate, that he had not time to goe into his earth (his ho ſme ordinary retreate, hen hes neere it)by the eaſy and acceſſible way : but ſſichs are peron the one ſide, to gett thither being ſtrong in his fantaſy, and on the ſ⸗, vhich other ſide, the preeipics which he had oftẽ ſeene, coming l kewiſe thither ſome lo aie from his memory;: theſe two concurring could not chooſe but n⸗ kæ him ilcour-: e warily thither:and in ſo dangerous a leape, it is naturall for him, to Relpe himſclfe by any thing in the way that can aduantage him: which happening to be by catching in his mouth a bough rhat hung ouer his denne, (the only ſuddaine meanes he hath to take hold of any thing) and from thence taking as it were a new riſe fora lecond leape, he findeth himſclfe in ſecurity: whiles the doggs vnacquainted with rhe place, runne violently on, as in the reſt of their chace: and ſo are vpon the brimme of the precipice, before thæy perceiue it; and then it is too late for them to ſtoppe their courſe;and conſequently, they breake their neckes. Which miſchiefe to them the foxe needeth not haue in his deſigne, and accordingly tolle them that way; but chance begetting this deliurance of him at the firſt, when he was ſo hard preſſed, his memory teacheth him to follow the ſame courſe, vhenſoeuer th: like occaſion occurreth. But how many fores doe there peiish in attemps, which if they had ſucceeded, would hue beene accounted by ſlight iudgers, to be notable ſubtilities; but miſcarrying are eſteemed tumultuary motions without deſigne, cauſed by that animals fantaſy and ſpirits, when he is in extremity: l remember how vpon a time, when I was hunting one, he being hord ſett,and but litle bebre the doggs and the hunters, caught in his mouth the bough of a croked ashetree he runne vpa pretty way; which being in a hædge, h- thereby hung downe a long the ſide of the hedge, and when we ſtruckæ him ouer the ribbes with our poles, he would not quitte his hold, ſo ſtrongly the feare of the dogęs wroug ht in his fantaſy) till greater blowes knocked him on the head. Which sheweth euidently that this action, was the effect of chance preſſing his fantaſy to doſomething; and not any reaſon or diſcourſe prouiding for his ſafety: as we haue already ſaid vpon occaſion of the others hanging among the dead vermine in the warren. Thoſe in Thracia, that will not goe ouera frozen riuer, when the yce istoo thinne to beare them, are by their memory, not by their iudgment taught to retire; forat other times they haue beene wetted, when they haue hard the noiſe of the ſtreame running vnder the yce: or the very running of the water, calleth the ſpecieſes of ſimming out from their memory,along vithit into their fantaſy(neytherof whichis pleaſant to them in the winter)and ſo diſliking the noiſe for the orh-reffects ſake, that vſed to accompany it, they auoyde that which begeiterh it, and ſo retire focom the riuer. And the reaſon of their liſtening to the noiſe, proceedeth from the ſpirits,that their paſſion vpon appichenſion of a danger preſſeth into the nerues of their ſenſes, as well as into the other nerues of their braine; which accordingly maketh them ſo vigilant, and attentiue then to outward obiects and motions. That the Iaccatray or Hyæna, when he is hungry, should haue his fantaſy callout from his memory, the images of thoſe beaſts, hich vſe to ſerue him in that occaſion, isthe ordinary courſe of nature: and that together ith thofe images, there should likewiſe come along thẽ actions and ſoundes which vſed toaccompany them, and are lodged together vith them in the memory, is alſo naturall;then, as litle ſtrange it is,that b his owne voice he should imitate thaſe ſoundes, which at that time do ſo poverfully poſſeſſe his imagination: and hauinga great docility in thoſe orgines which forme the voice, like a parrat he epreſenteth them ſo liuely, that the deceiued beaſts flocke to ſm , and ſoare cau ght by him: which at the firſt happeneth by chance, but afterwardes by memory, and groweth familiarto him. Nor ean we imagine, that the Iaccall hath a deſigne of ſeruinę the lyon; but his naturè being  lke a dogg) to barke when he fecleth the ſent hoat (which he purſueth for hisowne ſuke)the lyon that dwelleth in the ſame woods with him, meeteth with the noiſe, and followethit; and eraduenture would kill the Iaccal himſclfe, as well as what he hunteih, if he could ouertake him: but he being too nimble for the lyon, keepeth out of his reach; till hauing wearied the beaſt he chaceth, the lyon that followeth by the cye, cometh in when he is at abbęy, and ſoone teareth in pieces what the other had not trengih enough ſo ſuddainely to maſter, and feedeth himſelfe vpon the quarry till he be full. All this while the Iaccall dareth not come neere the lyon, but ſtandeth ata diſtance with feare wayting till he haue done, and then after he is gone aa , he taketh his tume to feede vpon what his ſurly maſter hath left. The like reaſons it is probable we might find out among thoſe fishes that ſerue one an other, if we had the conueniency of obſeruing particularly how they behaue themſelues; as when the Whale hath ſeruice from his little guide of the report be true ; which is a neceſſary circumſtance to be inſerted in euery ſuch tale Jand others of the like ſtraine. The ſuttlety of the Torpedo (who hideth himſelfe in the mudde to benumme ſishes, that may afrerwards ſerue him to feede vpon) will not require to haue its origine from reaſon, and be done by deſigne; when you shall conſider it is naturall for ſuch cold creatures to emmudde themſelues: and then the fi;hes that ſvimme within the reach of- his benumming faculty, will be ſtayd and frozen there: which becauſc they ſce him nor, they apprehend no, till it be too late for them to auoyde it: and then, when the Torpedo cometh out, he feedeth vpon what he findeth lying ready in his way. And in like manner, ihe ſcuttle fish, when he is in ſtraights of being taken by th- fi: herman, caſteth out a black-neſſe that is within him, and ſo making the water become like it ke, he oſtentimes eſcapeth their handes in the darkened Element: which ariſe: h from no dilcourſe of his, but feare maketh him voyde this liquor that is in himſas it made rhe foxe voyde his vrine) and in conſquenes therevnio, the eſfest followeth. Laſtly, vhen hares do vſe thoſe meanes we haue mentioned to confound the ſent, and to ſaue themſelues from the dogęs that hunt them, we may obſerue, that they take therein the readieſt wayes, and th⸗ moſt obuious vnto ſenſe, to auoyde the euill they flye from. For what can be more dire&: to that eſſect, then to hide themſclues in hedęe Bbottomes, or in woods? Or to ſwimme ouer a riuer, when that is he moſt immediate way to runne from the dogges? And when they are ina plaine, where there is no other shelter but flockes of sheepe or hrardes of deere, what can be more naturall, then for them to hide themſclues amòg them, and runnea long with them, tillthe crye ofihe approaching houndes fright them away, whiles thole tamer beaſts abyde it neeren? ll Their doublings backward and foreward, may proceede from thrir feare, that diuerteth them ſtill from the way thev are in at preſent, till the doggs coming neere, do putt the hare out cf ihoſe wauerings, and do make her runne ſtraight away.: for th/y neuer double bur when they are a great way before the dogęs, and do not heare the. Or elſe it may be, that not hearing or ſeeing the doggs, their frare may be almoſt paſſed; ind then the agitation which their ſpirits are in, gouuerneth the motions of their bodie, and will not lett them reſt vntill th-y be more appeaſed, ſ as you ſee weary people, that at their firſt ceaſing from running, can not ſitt ſtill: the like of which happenethalſo frequently in the motions of ioy or of anger )and ſo it maeth them wa'e backwards and forewardes, in a pace proportionate to the agitation of the ſpirits vithin: and ſometimes thoſe moued ſpirits do make them bound and leape too and fro ( like the loafe with quickeſiluer, we haue heretofore ſpoken of) as they iſſue from the hart by pulſes and ſtroakes ; which happeneth when they beginne to ſetile towardes reſt. Orelſe peraduẽture their formeis ſo framed, that if they should gett into it otherwiſe then by a iumpe, they would diſorder ſome part of it,and ſo be vnfenced and acold, ororheriſe at vneaſe during their repoſe: and therefore their iumping tooand froe,before they leape plump in, is to take their ayme; not much vnlike to doggs, turming about ſeuerall times before they lye downe: for harefinders (ho vſe to watch them) ſay they vill do thus, though they be not puiſued. And thus theſe actiohs which are imputed tocraſt, thereby to confound the dogãs, or to iſedome, to walke themſelues vntillthey be growne intoa fitting temperto ſitt ſlill; may all of them be reduced to thoſe materiall and corporeall cauſes, which make them do their otherordinary motions, wherein we ſind no difficulty. If that of the foxes weię hing his gooſe, before he would venture to carry it ouer the riuer, were plainely tiue as it is ſert downe; I auowe I should be hard ſett to find the principles from whence that diſcretion in him proceeded: but I conceiue this tale may be paired ith that, ?hich telleth vs of an other foxe who hauing his prey taken from him by an eagle, brought the next daya new prize into the ſame place, hauing firſt rolled it in the fire, ſo that ſome burning coales ſtucke vpon it; which the eagle coming againe and ſnatching from him, carried to her neſt, which was thereby ſett on fire;and the yong ones falling downe, became the foxes share, inſteede of what their damme had robbed him of. Such ſtories ſo quaintly contriued, are fitter for a morall then fora naturall Philoſopher: æſope may entertaine himſelfe and his diſciples with them; whiles all the reſlection I shallmake vpon them, is, that when I heare any ſuch ſinely ordered tales, I can not doubt but they are well amended in the relation, by thoſe that tell them: it being the inclination and cuſtome of moſt men, (partly through a deſire of hauing ſtrange thinges come from them; and partly out of a care that what they ſay may appeare like truth, and ſo be the eaſilier beleeued ) to adde circumſtances beyond the truth of the matter:Which encreaſing at euery new mans relation of the ſame accident ſfor this humour aigneth very generally) at the lengih, ſo hanſome, and yet ſo ſtrange a tale ĩs com poſed ;that the firſtauthour orteller of it, wondereth at it as well as others, and can not diſcerne that his ſtory begott this latter. Therefore, when one of theſe fine tales is propoſed to ſpeculate vpon, and that I hiue no light to guide me in determining what part of hem to allow,and what to reiecti Ithinke it better to exſpect an authentike record of ir, then be too haſty at gueſſes: leauing ſuch as pretend ability in reading of riddles, to deſcant of the wayes how ſuch actions may be efſected: but for others, that haue a ſemblance of truth, or do happen ordinarily, be they at the firſt ſight neuer ſo like the operatiòs of reaſon, Idoubt not but thæt the cauſes ofthem, may be reduced to the principles we haue already eſtablished; and the w-yes of performing them, may be pitched vpon by ſuch diſcourſes about them, as we haue made about thoſe examples we haue aboue produced. Eſpecially if the actions themſelues, were obſerued by one that could iudge of them, and were reported with a deſirè of expreſſing the truth nakedly as in ĩt ſelſe it lyeths for diuers times it happeneth, that men ſaying nothing but truth, do expreſſe it in ſuch a manner, and with ſuch termes, that the ignorant hearer conceiueth the thing quite an other way, then indeed it is, meerely for the too emphaticall expreſſion: eſpecially if the relatour himſelfe miſſeth in conceiuing the true cauſes of What he reporteth, and ſo expreſſeihit proportionable to thoſe which he apprehendeth. To conclude then this firſt branch, we ſee how the doubting, the reſoluing, the ayming, the inuenting, and the like, which we experience in beaſts, may by the veſtigies we haue traced out, be followed vnto their roote, as farre as the diuiſion of rarity and denſity; without needing to repaire vnto any higher principle, ſuuing the wiſedome cſ the orderer and Architect of nature, in ſo admirably diſpoſing and mingling theſe materiall, groſſe, and lifeleſſe bodies, that ſtrange effects and incomprehenſible vnto them, who vill not looke into their ſeuerall ioyntes, may follow out of them, forthe gQood of the creature in whoſe behalfe they are ſo ordered. But before we goe to the next poynt, we can not forbeare mentioning their vanity as well as ignorance, who to purchaſe the eſtimation of deeper knowers of nature, would haue it beleeued, that beaſts haue compleate languages as men haue to diſcourſe with one an other in: which they vaunted they had the intelligence of. It is true, that in vs ſpeaking or talking isan operation of realon, not becauſeit is in reaſon; but becauſe it is the worke of reaſon, by an other inſtrument; and is no where to be found without reaſon: which thoſe irrationall Philoſophers, that pretended to vnderſtand the language of beaſtes, allowed them, as vellas the ability of talking to one an other: hut it was becauſe they had more pride then knovledge. Of which ranke one of the chicfe was Apollonius, ſurnamed from Thyanai for if he had knowne how to looke into the nature of beaſts, he would haue perceiued the reaſon of the diuers voyces which the ſame beaſt in diuers occaſions formerh. Thisis euident, that an animals lunges and cheſt, lying ſo neere as they doe vnto his harti and all voyce being made by the breathes coming out of his mouth, and through his windpipe; it muſt neceſſarily follow, that by the diuers ordering of theſe inſtruments, his voyce will become diuers; and theſe inſtruments will be diuerſly ordered in him, according to the diuers motions of his hart: thatis, by diuers paſſionsiin him ( for ſo we may obſerue in our ſelues, that our breath is much changed by our being in paſſion; Jand conſequently,as a beaſt isagitated by various paſſions, he muſt needes vtter variety of voyces; which cã not chooſe, but make diuers impreſſiòs in other beaſts, 1hat haue commerce with him; whether they be of the ſame kind as he is, or of a different: and ſo e ſee, that if a dogy ſetteth vpon a hogg, the bitten hogges crye maketh an impreſſiò in the other hogges, to come to their fellowes rekew, and in other dogges to runne after the erying hogg: in like manner anger ina dogge maketh ſnarling or barking, peine , Whinin gi rii; deſire, an other kind of barking; and his ioy of ſeeing a perſon that he vſeth to receiue good by, will breake out in an other kind of whining. So in a henne, her diuers paſſions worke diuers kindes of clocking; as when she ſeetha ite, she hath one voice; when she meeteth with meate, an other; When she deſireth to gather her chickins vnder her winges, a third: and ſo, vpon diuers occaſions, a diuers ſound; according to the diuers ordering of hervocallinſtruments, by the paſſion which preſſeth her hart. So that who would looke curiouſly into the motions of the diſpoſitions of a beaſtes vocal inſtruments,and into the motions of the ſpirits about his hart(Which motion we haue shewed is paſſion) would be ableto giue account, vhy euery voyce of that beaſt was ſuch a one, and what motion about the hart it were that cauſcd it. And as much may be obſerued in men, who in paines and griefes,and other paſſions, do vſe to breake out into thoſe voyces, which we call interiections, and which ſignifyeth nothing in the vnderſtanding of them that forme them, but to the hearer are ſignes of the paſſion from whence they proceed: whichif a man do heedefully mai ke in himſelfe, he will perceiue, that they are nothing elſe, but the ſuddaine eruptions of a great deale of breath together, cauſed by ſome compreſſion made within him, by the paine heis in. Vhichis the reaſon that the ſtriuin againſt groanings in certaine occaſions, doth ſicke perſons moch harmei for it diſordereth the naturall motions of ſome principall partes within him, that are already too much agitated; and the countermotion by which they are checked, putterth them further into a more violent agitation. In the obſeruation of theſe naturall eruptions of mens breath, cauſed by Paſſion, our fore fathers of old were ſo induſtrious, as to transferre the imitation of nature in this particular into Muſke, ſo that their kindes of muſike, were diſtinguished according to the diuiſion of mens paſſionsiand by ſimilitude would raiſe them in the hearers. Outof this diſconrſe alſo reaſon may be giuen, why birdes are more muſicall then other creatures; to witt, becauſæ they are of a hoater complexioniand therefore, to their biggeneſſe, do require more breath and ayre to coole them; and conſequently do make more noiſe, and more variety of it. Likewiſe, among beaſts, doggs are the moſt vocall of any that conuerſe with vs;who by their ready anger appeare to be the hoateſt. Among men, thoſe that are merry, or ſloone become heated vitha litle wine, are giuen totalking and ſinging: and ſo are children, and women likewiſe; not ſo much through aboundance of heare, as becauſe their heate doth eaſily vent. llll And thusitis euident, that there is no true language among beaſtes: their voices not being tckens of diuers thinges or conceptions, but meerely the effects oſ diuers breathings, cauſed by diuers paſſions. Vherefore, ſince borh breathingand paſſion, are eaſily reduced to the common principles of rarity and denſity ; wee neede not trouble our ſelues any further, to ſec ke into the origine of this vocall faculty of THE SEVEN AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of the docility of ſome irrationall animals; and of certaine continuate actions of a long tract of ume ſo orderly performed by them, that they ſeeme to argue knowledge in ihem. um S for docility, (which is out ſecond head ) Apes and AvV Elephantes are moſt fimed. Though peraduenture, the s cunning and obedience of our hawkes and doggs, is no æſ3 whitt inferiour to what is reported of them; and would be as uu: h admired, were it not ſo common. I haue by ſundry perſons who haue ſcene him, becne told of a baboone, that would play certaine leſſons vpon a guitarre. The indian hiſtories ma ke mention of A pes, that will goe ro the tauerne and fetch wine for their Maſters as Lipſius his dogg would bring his Maſter as much meate from the market, as he carried money to his butcher to pay for. Of Elephants likewiſe, ſtrange thinges are told: but becauſe we can not eaſily iudge how to vnderſtand reportes, vhereof we haue not ſeene the experience; nor how farre to belieue them, I intend not to inſiſt vpon the eramining of them; forby looking into the nature and art of our houndes that followa ſuite of bloud, or that draw dry foote; and of our hawkes, eſpecially of the decoy duckes and Cormorants; a ſcantling may be giuen at all the reſt. And although theſe thinges told at randome, may iuſtly ſeeme very admirable to any man the ſirſt time he heareth f them, yet to him that vnderſtandeth how they are taught, there is no one paſſage but willappeare plaine enough. The firſt degree is to tame the hawke by watching her from ſleepe, and to acquaint her with the man, by continually carrying her vpon his fiſt, and vſing herto take her meate quietly, as she ſitteth vpon his hind. Then he maketh her hoppea litle way to it ina paire of cranes:and after a hile, kill a ſeeled pigeon; from which he taketh her when she is growne ſteady in her leſſon ſo farre, and feedeth her vp with other meate: and thus in time he bringeth her to ſly at what he will haue her, and to be content witha ſmall reward, leauing her quarry to her Maſter,; ſo thar a ſpectatour, vho vnderſtandeth not the myſtery, nor euer ſaw hhing before, may well admire to ſee a bird ſo dutifully and exactly obey a mans command: and may conceiue she hath a reaſonable ſoule, wherebyto vnderſtand him,and diſcourſe of the meanes to bring his purpoſe to effect. Whereas indeed all this is no more, then to make her do for you and when you pleaſe, the ſame which she doth by nature to feede her ſelſe. The cunning of doggs is begotten in the ſame way. Coyduckes are bæaren and whipped ro what they are taught, like ſerting doggs. fish they catch, but be cõſtrained to bring it to the manthatem ployeth them; ſothat looking along ſteppe by ſteppe, you shall meete with nothing but what is plaine, and eaſ y to be taught, and to be performed by t and memory3; ithout needing to attribute any diſcourſe or reaſoning viro beaſtes. Apes are likewiſe taught as dogges may be, to cany thinges to a certaine houle; where receiuing whatis giuen them, they retune home vithit: and you may be conſident, this ſeruiceableneſſe of the A pe,grew out of his being carried ſirſt to the tauerne by the maide or boy, who there gaue him ſomewhat that pleaſed him; and then being made to carry the pott along by the boys and afterwardes being made to carry money in one hand, and the pott in an other; whereof ſome drawer diſcharged him of the one, and filled the other, and withall gaue him a reward; which alſo was repeated to him at his returne home with his full pott:till at the laſt, when he was ſuſficiently vſed to this exerciſe, he would of himſelfe goe ſtraight thither, as ſoone as he was harneſſed in ſuch ſort as he vſed to be for this ſeruice. Which appeareth to be aſſuefa&tion and cuſtome, not iudgement, by his recciuing indiſferently whatſoeuer is put into his pott. And by thetale of Lipſius his dogg, from whom orher leſſe doggs. ſnarching as he trotted along, part of what hung out of his basket (which he carried in his mourh) he ſert it downe to verry one of them; vhiles in the meane time, the others fdde at berty and at eaſe vpon the meate that lay there vnguarded; till he comſng backe toĩt, droue them away, and himſelfe made an end of eating it vp. Vhereby we may conceiue, that the ſpecies of carrying his ba:ket to his Maſter ( which cuſtome had ſettled in his memory) was diſordered, and thruſt out of his fantaſy, by a ſtron ger of ſightin g for his meate with the other curres: after which it followed naturally in his fintaſy, to eate what he had fought for. And that ſending then ſpirits into his nerues, agreeable to the nature of it, and gouerning the partes depending of the braine,a motion and action enſewed, hich as ſutable to the obiect in the fantaſ yiand this could be none other, but of cating what the fantaſy found conformable vnto its nature. The baboone we haue mentioned, might be taught ſome leſſons made on purpoſe with very few ſtoppes, and vpon an inſtrument whereon all the ſtringes may be ſtrucken with one blow, and but one frette to be vſed at a time, and that frette to be ſtopped with one finger: of which, much labour and time might beget a habit in him: and then, imitation of the ſound, might make him play in due meaſure. And if we will marke it in our ſelues, we shall ſee, that although in the firſt learning of a leſſon vpon the lute, we employ our reaſon and diſcourſe about it; yet when we haue it very perfect, our fingers (guided by a ſlight fantaſ do fall by cuſtome, withòut any reflexion at ali, to play it as well as if we thought neuer ſo carefully vpõ it. And there is no compariſon, betweene I haue beene told, that at the Duke of Florence his marriage, there was a dance of horſes, in which they kept exact time of muſike. The meanes vſed for bringing them to it, is ſuid to haue beene, by tying and hampering their legges in ſucha ſort, that they could lift them vp but in a determinate way: and then ſetting them vpon a pauement, that was heated vnũlerneath ſo hott, as they could not endure to ſtand ſtill, vhiles ſuch muſicallayres were played to them, as ſitted their motions. Allwhich being often repeated, the horſes tooke a habitt, that in hearing thoſe ayres, hey would lift vp their legges in that fashion;and ſo danced to the tune they had beene taught. | OFf the Elephantes, it is ſaid that they may be taught to rite; and that o, 3 urely vpon wordes and commanding them, they will do what they are teaching Biſdemmã that they are able to kecpe account, and will leaue workin Elephates at a preciſe number of reuolutions of the ſame action, which meaſth o dite: out their taske vnto them. All whichſas I ſaid before) if it were plainely uicks and litterally true, ould require very great conſideration: but becauts the teachers of beaſtes, haue certaine ſecrets in their art, which ſtanders by do not reach vnto; we are not able(vpon ſuch ſcanty relations as ve hãue of them)to make ſufficient indgement how ſuch thinges are done; vnleſſe we had the managing of thoſe creatures, whereby to try them in ſeueralloccaſions, and to obſerue what cauſe produceth euery operation they doe; and by what ſteppes they attayne vnto their inſtructions and ſeruiceableneſſe. It is true, the vncontrolled reports of them, oblige vs to beleeue ſome extraordinary matter of their docility,and of ſtrange thinges done by them: but withall, the example of other taught beaſtes among vs, and of the ſtrange iudgements that are made of them by perſons, who do not penetrate into their cauſes, may inſtruct vs how ealy it is to miſtake the matter;and aſſure vs, that the relations which are made vs, do not alwayes punctually agree vith the trurh of whar paſſed. He th:t should tellan Indian, what feates Bankes his horſe would do; how he would reſtore a gloue to the due owner,after his maſter had whiſpered that mans name in his eare; how he would tell the iuſt number of pence in any piece of ſiluer coyne barely shewed him by his maſter; and euen obey preſently his command, in diſcharging himſelfe of his exerements whenſoeuer he bad him ſ So greata power art may haue ouer nature:) would make him I beleeue, admire more at this learned beaſt, then we do at their docile Elephantes, vpon the relations we haue of them. Vhereas cuery one of vs knoeth, by what meanes his painefull tutor broughte him to do all histrickes: and theyare no whitte more extraordinary, then a fiwkæners manning of a hake, and trayning her to ill partridges, and ro ſly at the retriue: but do all of them (both theſe, and all other iuggling artificies of beaſtes) depend vpon the ſame, or like principles; and are knowne to be but directions of nature, ordered by one that compoſcth and leuelleth her operations to an end further o (in thoſe actions) then she of her ſelfe would ayme at. The particulars of which; we neede not trouble ourſelues to meddle with. Butit is time that we come to the third ſort of actions performed by beaſtes, which we pron. iſed to diſcourſe of. Theſe ſceme to be more admitable, then any we haue yet touched: and are chiefely concerning the breeding of theiryong ones. Aboue all others, the orderly courſe of birds in this aſfaire, is moſt remarkable. After they haue coupled they make their neſt, they line it vith moſſe, ſtraw, and feathers; they lay their egges, they ſett vpon them, they hatch them, they feede their yong ones, and they teach them to flye: all Which they do with ſo continuate and regular a methode, as no man can direct or imagine a better. But as for the regularity, orderlineſſe, and continuance of theſe actions, the matter is eaſy enough to be conceiued: for ſeeing that the operation of the male, maketh a change in the female ; and that this change beginning from the very fiſt, groweth by time into diuers proportions; it is no wonder that it breedeth diuers diſpoſitionsin the female, hich cauſe her to do different actions, correſpondent to thoſe diuers diſpoſitions. Now, thoſe actions muſt of neceſſity be conſtant and orderly, becauſe the cauſes whence they proceed, are ſuch. But to determine in particular, how it cometh to paſſe, that euery change in the female, diſpoſeth herto ſuch and ſuch actions, ithere is the difficulty; and it is no ſmall one: as well, for that there are no carefull and due obſeruations, made of the effects and circumſtances, which should guide vs to iudge of their cauſes; as becauſe theſe actions, are the moſt refined ones of ſenſitiue creatures; and do flo from the toppe and perfection of their nature;and are the laſt ſtraine of their vimoſt vigour, vnto which all orhers are ſubordinate. As in our enquiry into the motionsand operations of the bodies of a lower orbe then theſe, we mett with ſome (namely the loadeſtone, and ſuch like) of whichit is very hard to giue an exact and plaine account; the Author of them reſeruing ſomething from our cleare and diſtinct knowledge ; and ſuffering vs to looke vpon it but through a miſte: in like manner e can not but expect, that in the depth of this other perfecter nature, there muſt be ſomewhat whereof we can haue but a glimmering and imperfect notion. But as in the other, it ſerued our turne totrace outa way, how thoſe operations might be effected by bodies, and by locall motion (though peraduenture, we did not in euery circumſtance hitt exactly vpon the right) thereby to defend ourſelues from admirting thoſe chy mericall qualities, which we had already condemned, vpon all other occaſions. So I conceiue, it will be ſufficient for vs in this, to shew how rheſe actions may be done by the ſenſes,and by the motion of corporeall ſpirits, and by materiall impreſſions vpon them ; without being conſtrained to reſort vnto an immatreriall principle, which muſt furnish birdes with reaſon and diſcourſe: in which, it is not neceſſary for my purpoſe, to determine preciſely euery ſteppe, by which theſe actions are performed, and to ſertle the rigorous truth of them: but leauing that vnto thoſe, Who shall take paines to deliuer the hiſtory of their nature, I vill content my ſelfe with the poſſibility and probability of my cõiectures. The firſt of which qualities, Iam obliged to make plaine, but the later concerneth this eatie no more, then it would do a man to enquire anxiouſly into the particulars of whatit is thata beaſt is doing, whiles looking vpon it, at a great diſtance, he perceiueth plainely that ĩt moueth it ſelfe: and his arrant is, but to be aſſured whether it be aliue or dead: which the mouing of it ſelfe in common, doth ſufficiently demonſtrate, without deltending intoa particular ſearch, of what his motions are. But lett vs come to the matter: ſirſt I conceiue no man vill make any diſficulty in allowing, that itis the temper of the bloud and ſpirits in birdes ( brought therevnto by the quality of their foode, and by ihe ſeaſon of the yeare) which maketh them àccouple with one an other; and not any ayme or deſire of hauing yong ones, that occaſioneth this action in thẽ. Then it followeth that the hennes egges will encreaſe in her belly:and whẽ they grow bigge, they can not chooſe but be troubleſome vnto heriand thereſcre, muſt of neceſſity breede in heran inclination to reſt in ſome ſoft place,and to be ridde of them. Andas we ſce a dogg ora catt preſſed by nature, ſearcheth about to find a conuenient place to diſburthen themſelues in, not only of their yong ones, but euen of their excrements; ſo do birdes, whoſe egges within them, making them heauy and vnſirt to ſlye, they beginne to ſitt much, and are pleaſed ina ſoft and warme place: and therevpon, they are delighted with ſtrawes and moſſe, and other gentle ſubſtances; and ſo carry them to their ſitting place: which that they do not by deſigne, is euident by the manner ot it: for when they haue mette witha ſtraw or other fitt materiall, they ſly not ith it directly to their neſt, but firſt toa bough of ſome tree, orto the toppe of a houſe;and there they hoppe and dance a while with it in their beakesiand from thence skippe to an orher place, where they entertaine themſelues in like manner:and at the laſt, they gett to their neſt: where if the ſtrawes should lye confuſedly, their endes would pricke and hurt them: and thereforè they turne and alter their poſitions till they lye ſmooth: whic hwe that looke vponthe effect, and compare them with our performing of like actionsif we had occaſion) may call a iuditious ordering of them, whereas in them, it is nothing but remouing ſuch thingesas preſſe vpon their ſenſe, vntillthey cauſe them no more paine or vnquietneſſe. Their plaſtering of their neſtes,may be atitributed to the great heat raigning in them at thattime: which maketh them ſtill be dabbling in moiſt clay, and in water, and in grauell, (without which, all birdes will ſoone grow ſicke, blind, and at length dye ( which for the cęòleneſe of, it, they bring home to their neſtes in their beakes and vpon their feete; and when it groweth dry, and conſequently troubleſome to them, they vipe it off, and rubbe their durty partes vpon the place where they vſe to ſitt; and then ſlye for more toreſresh themſelues withull. Out of all Which actions(ſett on foote by the wile orderer of nature, to compaſſe a remote end, quite different from the immediate end that euery one of them is done for) there reſulteth a fitt and conuenient place for theſe litle builders ( that know not what they do, whiles they build themſelues houſes) tolye in, and to lay their egges in. Which the next yeare, when the like occaſion occurreth, they build againe; peraduenture then, as much through memory of the former, as vpon their temper and other circumſtances, mouing their fantaſy in ſuch ſort as we haue ſett downe. In like manner, that whiles the Halcyon layeth and hatcheth her egges,the ſea is calme, need eth no more be attributed to the wiſedome and prouidence of that bird, in chooſing a fitt ſeaſon, thento any good nature or diſcourſe in that rouling and mercileſſe Element as though it had a pious care of preſeruing the egges committed to histruſt: no ſuch ſupplements are requiſite to be added vnto the diſtributions of nature, vho hath ſert materiall cauſes on foote, to produce a coniuncture of both thoſe eſſccts at the ſame periode of time, for the propagation of this animals ſpecies. In fine, both the time and the place of the Halcyons breeding, and the manner, and order, and ſealon of all birdes making their neſtes, proceedeth from ſecret motions, which da require great obſeruing and attention to vnderſtand them; and do ſerue for directions vnto euery bird,according to her kind, to make her neſte fitteſt for her vſe. Which ſecret motions, we can not doubt but are materiall ones, and do ariſe out of the conſtitution and temper of their bodies and ſpirits; which in like circumſtances are alike in themall: for all the birdes of one kind, do make their neſtes exactly alike; which they would not do, if this worke proceeded from reaſon in them, and were gouerned by their owne election and deſigne: as we ſee it happen amg men vpon all occaſions, eytherof building houſes, or of makingclothes, or of what action ſocuer is guided by their reaſon gouerning their fantaſy; in all which we ſce ſo greatvariety and inconſtancy. And thercfore this invariability in the birdes operations, muſt proceed froma higher intellect, that hath determinately and preciſely ordered a complexe or aſembly of ſundry cauſes, to meete infaillibly and by neceſſity, for the production of an effect that he hath deſigned: and ſo, the birdes are but materiall inſtruments to performe without their knowledge orreſlection, a ſuperiour reaſons counſelles: euen as ina clocke, that is compoſed of ſeuerall pieces and wheeles, all the partes of it, do conſpire to giue notice of the ſeuerall efſluxes and periodes of time, which the maker hath ordered it for. And although this bea worle of reaſon and diſcourſe in him, that did ſctt it together;yet the inſtrumentall performance of it, dependeth meerely of Iocall motion, and of the reuolutions of bodies, ſo orderly proportioned to one an other, that their effects can not faile when once the engine is wound vp:in like manner then, the bird is the engine of the Artificer, infinitely more perfect, and knowing, and dextercus thena poore clockemaker; and the plummets which do make it goe, are the rowe and order of cauſes chained together, which by the deſigne of the ſupreme workeman, do bring to paſſe ſuch effects,as we ſee in the building of their neſtes,and in doing ſuch other actions, as may be compared to the ſtrickings of the clocke, and the ringing ofthe allarum at due times. And as that king of China, vpon his firſt ſeeing a watch, thought it a liuing and iuditious creature, becauſe it moued ſo regularly of it ſelfe; and beleeued it to be dead, when it was runne out; till the opening of it and the winding it vp, diſcouered vnto him the artifice of it: ſo any man may be excuſed, that looking vpon theſe ſtrange actions, and this admirable oeconomy of ſome liuing creatures, should beleeue them endewed with reaſon, vntill he haue well reflected vpon euery particular circumſtance of their nature and operations: ſ then he vill diſcerne how theſe are bur materiall inſtruments of a rationall Agent working by them from whoſe orderly preſcriptions, they haue not power to ſwarue in the leaſt circumſtance that is. Euery oue of which conſidered ſingly by it ſelfe, hatha face of no more diſficulty, then that (for example) an ingenier should ſo nrder his matters, that a mine should be ready to play exactly at ſuch an houre, by leauing ſuch a proportion of kindled match hanging out of one of the barrels of pouder, whiles in the reane time, he eytherſleepeth, orattenderh to ſomething elſe. And when you haue once gayned thus much of your ſelfe,to gree vnto an orderly courſe and generation of any ſingle cſfect, by the powe:r of a materiall cauſe working it; raiſe but your diſcourſe a ſtraine higher, and looke with reuerence and duty vpon the immenſity of that prouident Architeqt, out of whoſe handes theſe maſterpieces iſſue, and vnto whom it is as eaſy to make a chaine of cauſes of a thouſand or of a million of linkes, as to make one linke alone: and then you vill no longer ſticke at allowing the whole oeconomy of thoſe actions, to be nothing elſe, but a production of materiall effects, by a due ranging and ordering of materiall cauſes. But letts returne to our theame: as we ſee that milke coming into the breſtes of liuebearing female creatures, vhenth y grow wery bigęe, heateth and maketh them ſeeke the mouthes of their yong ones, to diſburthen and coole them: ſo the carriage and biggeneſſe of the egges, heateth exceedingly the breſtes and bodies of the birdes: and this cauſeth them to be ſtill rubbing of their breſtes, againſt the ſides of their neſtes (here vnto their vnvicldineſſe then, eonſns them very much) and with their beakes to be ſlill picking their feathers; whichi being thenapt to falloff and mewe ſas we ſee the haire of women with childe, is apt to shedde) it happeneth that by then they are ready to ly their egges they hauea ſoft bed of their owne feathers, made in their neſtes, ouer their courſer mattraſſe of ſtraves they firſt brought thither: and then, the egges powerfull attracting of the annoying heate from the hennes breſt(Whoſe imbibing of the warmeth, and ſtonelike shell, can not chooſe but coole her muchinuiteth her toſit conſtantly vpon them, vntill ſitting hatcheththemsand it is euidẽt, that ihis ſitting muſt proceed from their temperat that time, or from ſome other immediate cauſe, which worketh that effect;and not from a iudgement that doth jt for a remote end: for houſevifes tell vs, that at ſuch a ſeaſon, their hennes will be ſitting in euery conuenient place they come vnto, as though they had egges to hatch, when neuera one is vnder them: ſoas it ſeemeth that at ſuch time, there is ſome inconuenience in their bodies, vhich by ſirtingis eaſed. l Vhen the chickens are hatched, what wõder is it, if the litle erying of tender creatures, of a like nature and lãguage with their dãmes, do moue thoſe affectiòs or paſſions in her boſome, which cauſeth herto feẽde ithẽ, and to defend, and breede them, till they be able toshifi for hemſelues? For all this there needeth no diſcourſe or reaſon, but only the motion of the bloud about the hart (Which we haue determined to Le paſſiò) ſtirred by the yong ores chirpinges, in ſuch ſort, as may carry them vnto thoſe actions which by nature ſ the ſupreme intellect) are ordered for their preſeruation. Wherein the birdesſas we haue already ſaid)are but paſſiue inſtruments,and knownot why they do thoſe actions: but do them they muſt, whenſoeuer ſuch and ſuch obiects ( which infaillibly woike in their due times)do make ſuch and ſuch impreſſions vpon their fantaſies, like the allarum that neceſſarilly ſtiiketh, when the hand of the dyall cometh to ſucha point; or the gunnepouder that neceſſarily maketh a ruine and breach in the wall, when the burning of the match reacheth to it. Nov this loue in the damme, growing by litle and litle weariſome and troubleſome to her;and at laſt, fading quite awayiand she not being able to ſupply their encreaſed needes, which they grow euery day ſtronger to prouide for of themſelues; the ſtraight commerce beginneth to dye on both ſides: and by theſe degrees the damme Ieaueth her yong ones, to their owne conduct. And thus you ſee how this long ſeries of actions, may haue orderly cauſes, made and chained together, by him that knew what was fitting for the worke he went about. Of which, though it is likely I haue miſſed of the right ones(asit can not chooſe but happen in all diſquiſitions, where one is the firſt to breakethe yce, and is ſo ſlenderly informed of the particular circumſtances of the matter in queſtion, as I profeſſe tobe in this)yet I conceiue this diſcourſe doth plainely shew, that he who hath done more then we are able to comprehend and vnderſtand, may haue ſett cauſes ſufficient for all theſc effects, in a better order, and in compleater rankes, then thoſe hich we haue here expreſſed: and yet in them ſo courſcly hewed out, appearetha poſibility of hauing the worke done by corporeall agents. Surely it were very well worth the while, for ſome curious and iuditious perſon, to obſerue carefully and often, the ſeuerall ſteppes of nature in this progreſſe: for Iam ſtrongly perſuaded, that by ſuchinduſtry, we might in time arriue to very particular knowledge of the immediate and preciſe cauſes, that woike all theſe effects. And I cõceiue, that ſuch obleruation needeth not be very troubleſome; as not requiring any great variety of creatures to inſtitute it vponi for by mai king carefully all that paſſeth among our homebred hennes, I beleeue it were eaſy to gueſſe very neerely at all the reſt. THE EIGHT AND THERTIETH CHAPTER. Of preſcience of future euentes, prouidencies, ihe knowing of thinges neuer ſeene b fore; and ſuch other actions, obſerued in ſome lining creatures ; which ſceme æo be euem aboue the reaſon that isinman himſilfe. 22 He fourth and laſt kind of actions, which we may with aſtonishment obſerue among beaſtes, I conceiue will auayle æ litle to inferre out of them, that the creatures which do A 5 them, are endewed with reaſon and vnderſtanding: for ſuch they are, as if we should admitt that, yet we should ſtill be as farre to ſeeke for the cauſes whence they proceed. What should moue a lambe to tremble at the firſt ſight of a wolfe? or a henne, at a kite neuer before ſceneaneither the grimmeſt maſtife, or the biggeſt ole, will at all affiighe them. That which in the ordinary courſe of nature, cauſeth beaſtes to be aſfraide of men, or of other beaſtes, is the hurt and ihe euill they receiue f. om them: which coming into their fantaſie, together with the Idæa of him that did it, is alſo lodged together with it in the memory: from whence they come linked or glewed together, whenſoeuer the ſtroake of any new obiect calleth eyther of them backe into the fantaſie. This is confirmed by the tameneſſe of the birdes and beaſtes, which the firſt diſcouerers of lſlandes not inhabitated by men, did find in thoſe they mett withall there. Their ſtories tell vs, that at their firſt arriuall vpon thoſe coaſtes, where it ſeemeth men had neuer beene; the birdes would not ſlye away, but ſuffered the marriners to take them in their handes: nor the beaſtes, which with vs are wilde, would runne from them: but their diſcourteous gueſtes vſed them ſo hardely, as they ſoone changed their confidence into diſtruſt and auerſion; and by litle they grew, by d 5] Hov ſome qualities cauſed at 228 A TREATISE their commerce with men, and by receiuing iniuries from them, to be ai vilde, as any of the like kind in our partes. From the dammes and ſires,thisapprehenſion and feare at the ſight of men, ſo deepely rooted in them, is doubtleſſely tranſmitted to their yong ones: for it proceedeth out of the diſpoſition of the body, and out of the paſſion which isimmediately made in the hart; and that is as truly a materiall motion, as any whatſocuer can be; and muſt haue ſettled materiall inſtruments fitted to©t, if it be conſtant, as well as any other naturall operation whatſoeuer:and this paſſion of the hart, proceedeth againe froma perpetualltonnex ion, of the two obiects in the memory: which being a perpetually conſtant thing, is as true a quality of that beaſtes braine in whome ĩtis, as the being of a quicke or dull apprehenſion, orthe being apt to know one ind of meate from an other Whichis natural to ſe whole ſpecies) or any other quality whatſoeuer, reſiding in that beaſt. Vherefore it is no wonder, that it paſſeth by generation to the offspring: vhich is a thing ſo common, euen in mankinde, as there can be no doubt it by chance of it:and is at the firſt, made bya violent cauſe, that greatly altereth the in beats, may body:and conſequently, their ſeede muſt be imbewed with a like diſi popaſſe by »& ſaion t0 the ſition; and ſo it paſſeth together with the nature of ihe ſire, or of whole offspring. the damme, into the broode. From hence proceedeth that children do loue the ſame meates, and exerciſes, that their fathers and mothers were affected with, and feare the like harmes. This is the reaſon, whya grandchildeof my Lord of Dorſet(whoſe honoured name muſt neuer be mentioned by me, without a particular reſpect,and humble acknowledęement of the noble and ſteady frendshippe, he hath euer beene pleaſed to honour we with) as alwayes extremely ſicke, if but the nurſe did eateany ca pes (againſt which my Lords antipathy is famous) whiles she gaue ſucke to that pretty infant. The children of great Mathematicians, vho haue beene vſed to buſye their fantaſies continually with figures and proportions, haue beene oftentimes obſerued, to haue a naturall bent vnto thoſe ſciences. And we may note, that euen in particular geſtures, and in litle ſingularities in familiar conuerſation, children will oftentimes reſemble their parents, as well as in the lineaments of their faces. The yong ones of excellent ſerting dog⸗s, will haue a notable aptitude to that exerciſe ; and may be taught with halfe the paines, that their ſire or damme vas, if they were choſen out of a race of ſpaniels not trained to ſctiing. All hich eſfects can proceed from no other cauſe, but ſ as we haue touched already)rhat the fantaſy of the parent, altereth the temper and the diſpoſition of his body and ſeede, according as it ſelfe is tempered and diſpoſed: and conſequently, ſuch a creature muſt be made of it , as retaineth the ſame qualities in ſuch ſort as it is ſaid that ſoſicient tartar putt at the roote of a tree, will make the fruite haue a winy taſt But nothing doth conſirme this ſo much,as certaine notableacciden ts, Whereofthough euery one in particular would ſeeme incredible, yet the number of them, and the weight of the reporters, who are the witneſſes, can not chooſe but purchaſe a generall creditt to the kind of them. Theſe accidents are,that out of ſome ſtrong imagination of the parents, but eſpecially of ithe mothers, in the time of conception , the children draw ſuch maine diſferences,as were incredible, if the teſtifying authority were not ſo great: but being true, they conuince beyond all queſtion the truth w. haue propoſed, of the parents imagination working vpon, and making an impreſſion in the ſeede, vhereoſ children oryong oncsof their kind are made. Some children of white parents are reported to haue beene blackæ, vpon occaſion of a blacke moores picture roo much in the mothers eye. O: hers are ſaid to haue beene borne with theirskinnesall hairy, out of the ſight of St. Iohn Baptiſtes picture as he was in the deſert, or of ſome other hairy iniage. An other childe is famed to haue beene borne deformed, in ſuch ſort as diucls are yainted, becauſe the father as in a diuels habitt when he gort the childe. There was a Lady a kinſwoman of mine, who vſed much to weære black- patches vpon her faceſas wasthe fashion among yong women which Ito putt her from, vſed to tellherinicſt, that the next childe: her should go wirh, whiles th ſollicitude and care of thoſe patches was ſo ſtrong in her fantaſy, would come into the world with a great blacke ſpott in the middeſt of its forehead: and this apprehenſion was ſo liuelyin her imagination at the time she proued with childe, that her daughter was borne mai ed iuſt as the mother had fanſied, wlich there are at hand witneſſs enough to confirme; but none more pregnant, then the yong Lady herſclfe, vpon whom the maike is yet remaining. Amon other creatures, it is ſaid that a henne hitched a chicken withã kites bill becauſe shæ w.s frighted witha kite, whiles the cocke was treading her. The ſtory of Iacobs: hæepe is knowne toall:and ſome do write, that the painting of beautifall coloured pigeons in a douehouſe, will make the following race become like them: and in Authons ſtore of ſuch examples may be found. V To giue a reaſonable and fully ſatisfying cauſe of this great effect, I confeſſe is very diſficulti ſeeing that for the moſt part, the parents ſeede is made long time before the accoupling of the male and female: and though it were not, we should be mainely to ſecke fora rationall ground to diſcourſe in particular vponiit. Yet not to leaue our Reader wichout a hinte which way to driue his inouiſition, we ill note thus much, thac Ariſtotele and other naturall Philoſó hers and Phyſitians do aſfirme, thut in ſome perſons the paſſiò is ſo great in the time of thæiraccoupling, th it forthe preſent it quite bereaueth them of the vſe of re⸗ ſoniand that they are for the while, ina kind of short fitt of an epylepſie. By which it is maniſeſt, that aboundance ef animal ſpirits do then part from the head,and deſcend into thoſe partes which are the inſtruments of generation. Wherefore, if there be aboundance of ſpecieſes of one kind ll ill t of obiect then ſtrong in the imagination, it muſt of neceſſity be carryed downe together irh the ſpirits into the ſeede: and by conſequence, when the ſeede infected with this nature, beginneth to ſeperate and diſtribute it ſelfe, to the forming of the ſeuerall partes of the Embryon, the ſpirits which do reſort into the braine of the child (as to their proper Element) and from thence do ſinish all the outward caſt of its body ſin ſuch ſort as we haue aboue deſcribed) do ſometimes happen to ſll certaine places of the childes body, with the infection and tincture of this obiectiand that according to the impreſſion with which they were in the mothers fataſy: for ſo we haue ſaid, that rhinges which come together into th: fantaſy, do naturally ſticke together in the animall ſpirits The hairyneſſe therefore, will be occaſioned in thoſe partes, Where the mother fanſyed it to be: the colour likewiſe, and ſuch extancies or defects, as may any way proceed from ſucha cauſe, will ha ppeu to be in thoſe partes, in which they were fanſyed. And this is as farre, as is fiet to wade into this point, for ſo generall a diſcourſe as ours isand more thẽ was neceſſary for our turne: torh- ſeruing whereof, the verity of the fact only,and not the knowledge of the cauſe, was required: for we were to shew no more, but that the apprehenſionsof the parents, may deſcend to the children. Out of this diſcourſe, the reaſon appeareth, why beaſtes haue an auerſion from thoſe, who vſe to do them harme: and why this auerſion deſcendeth fromthe old ones to their broode; though it should neuer haue happened that they had formerly encountred with, what atthe firſt ſight thry fiye from and auoyãe. But yet the reaſon appearerh not, whyfor exam pleja sheepe in Englãd (Where there are no wolues bred, nor haue beene theſe many ages) should be afftaide, and tremble at ſight of a wole, ſince neyther he, nor his damme orſire, nor theirs in multitudes of generations, euer ſaw a wolfe, or receiued hurt by any. In like manner, how should a tame eaſell brought into England from Ireland (where there are no poyſonous creatures) be aſfraide of a toade as ſoone as h- ſeeth one? Neythẽr he, nor any of his race, euer had any impreſſions following harme, made vpon theſr fantaſies: and as litle cana lyon receiue hurt from a houſchold coc ke: therefore we muſt ſeeke the reaſons of theſe and ſuch like antipathies,a litle further, and we shall find them hanging vpon the ſame ſtring, with ſympathies proportionable ro th-m. Lett vs goe by degrees: we dayly ſee that dogges, will haue an averſion from glouers, that make their ware of dogges skinnes: they willbai ke at them, and be churlish to them, and not endure to come neere them, although they neuer ſaw thẽ before. The like hatred they ill expreſſeto the dogge killers in the time of the plague, and to thoſe that flea dogges. I haue knowne of a man that vſed to be employed in ſuch affaires, Who aſſing ſometimes ouer the groundes neere my mothers houſe ſ for he delled ata village not farre oſf the dogges would winde him at a very great diſtance, and would all tunne furiouſly out the way he vas, and fiercely fall vpon him; which made him goe alwayes well prouided for them: and yet he hath beene ſometimes hard put toit, by the fierce maſtifes there, had it not beene for ſome of the ſeruantes coming in to his reskew; who by the frequent happening of ſuch accidents, were warned to looke out hen they obſerued ſo great commotion and fury in the dogges, and yet perceiued no preſent cauſe for i Varreners obſerue, that vermine illhardly come into a trappe, wherein an orher of their kind hath beene lately killed: and the like happenerh in mouſetrappes, into which no mouſe will come to tak- the bayte, if a mouſe or two haue already beene illed in it; vnleſſe it be made very cleane, ſo that no ſent of thm remaine vpon the trappe: which can hardly be done on the ſuddaine otherwiſe then by fire. Itis euident, that theſeeſſects are to be referred, to an actiuity of the obiect vpon the ſenſe; for ſome ſmell of the : kinnes, or of the dead dogges, or of the vermine, or of the mice, can not chooſe but remaine vpOn the men and vpon the tra ppes; which being altered fſrom their due nature and temper, muſt needes offend them. Their conformity on the one ſide (for ſomething of the canine nature remaineth) maketh them haue eaſy ingreſſion into them, and ſo they preſently make a deepe impreſſion: but onthe other ſide, their diſtemper from what they should be, maketh the impreſſion repugnant to their nature, and be diſliked by them, and to aſfect them woiſe, then if they were of other creatures, thar hd no conformity with them: as we may obſerue, that ſtinkes oſend vs more, when they are accompanied with ſome weake perfume, th-n if they ſett vpon vs ſingle, for the perfume getreth the ſtinke eaſyer admittance into our ſenſe:and in like manner, it is ſiid that poiſons are more dangerous, when thy are mingled witha cordiallthat is not able to reſiſt th-m: ſor it ſerueth to conuey them tothe hart, though it be not able to ouercome their malignity. Erom hænce then it folloeth, that if any beaſt or bird do prey vpon ſome of an other kind, there will be ſome ſmell about them, exceedingly noyſome to all othærs of that kind: and not only to beaſtes of that ſame kind bur(for the ſame reaſon)euen to others likewiſe, that hauea correſpondence and agreement of temperand conſtitution vith that kind of beaſt, whoſe hurt is the originall cauſe of this auerſion. Which being aſſented vnto, the ſame reaſon holdeth to make thoſe creatures, whoſe conſtitutions and tempers do conſiſt of thinges repugnant and odious to one an other, be at perpetuall enmity, and flye from one an other at the firſt ſight, orat the leaſt, the ſufferer from the more actiue creature: as we ſee among thoſe men, whoſe vnhappy trade and continuall exerciſes it is to empty iakeſes, ſuch horride ſtinkes are by time growne ſo conformable to their nature, as a ſtrong perfume ill as much offend them,and make them as ſicke, as ſuch ſtinks would do an other man bred vpamong perfumes: and a cordiallto their ſpirits, is ſome noyſome ſmell,that wouſd almoſt poyſone an other man. And thus, if in the quality offenſiue to the lambeſas it may very well be, where there is ſo reat a contrariety of natures)it is not ſtrange, that at the firſt ſi ght and approach of him, he should be cictem pered and ſly from him as one fighting cocke willdo from an other, that hath eaten garlike: and the ſame happeneth between the weaſell and the toade, the lyon and the cocke, the toade and the ſpider, and ſeuerall other creatures, of whom like enmities are reported. AllwWhich are cauſed in them, not by ſecret inſtincts, and anti pathies, and ſympathies, whereof we can giue no account; ( with the bare ſound of which wordes, moſt men do pay themſelues, without examining vhat they meane;) but by downe right materiall qualities, that are of contrary natures (as fire and water are Jand are eyther begotten in them in their originall conſtitution, or are implanted in them afterwardes by their continuall foode, which nourishing them, changeth their conſtitution to its cõplexion. And I am perſuaded this ould goe ſo farre, that if one man were nourished continually with ſuch meate (and greedily affected it) which an other had auerſion from, there would naturally follow much diſlike betweene them; vnleſſe ſome ſuperiour regard, should maſter this auerſion of the ſenſe. And I remember to haue ſeene two notable examples of it: the one in Spaine, of a Gentleman that had a horrour to garlike, whoſthough he was very ſubiect to the impreſſions of beaury)could neuer weane himſelfe from an auerſion he had ſettled him to a very handſome woman, that vſed to eate much garlike, though to winne him, she forebore the vſe of that meate, which to her was the moſt ſauory of all othets. And ithe like Ikne in Englãd betweene two, whereof the one did extremely loue cheeſe, and the otheras much hated it, and would fall into a ſtrange agony, and be reduced ſ one would thinke)to the point of death, if by inaduertence or others tryall of him, he had ſalloWed neuer ſo litle, of what the other would haue quittedall meates elſe to liue vpor. And not only ſuch auerſions, as ſpring from differences of complexions in the conſtiturions of ſeuerall animals, do cauſe theſe eſfects of feare, and of trembling, and of ſlying from thoſe that do make ſuch impreſſions; but euen the ſeeing themangry and in fury doth the like: for ſuch paſſions doalter the ſpirits; and they iſſuing from the body of the animal in paſſion, can not chooſe but be receiued by an orher in a diſferent manner, then if they were of an other temper Then if the one kind be agreeable to their nature, the other muſt needes be diſpleaſing. And this may be the reaſon why bees neuer ſting ſuch as are of a milde and gentle diſpoſition; and wiil neuer agree vith others, that are of a froward and angry nature. And ithe ſame one may obſerue among dogges: and peraduenture, a mans fantaſy may be raiſed to ſucha height of fury, that the fierceſt beaſtes may be aſfraide to looke vpon himiand can not endure that thoſe maſtering ſpirits, which ſtreame out of the mans eyes should come into his; ſo much they diſtemper his fantaſy:and therefore he ill tume away from the man, and auoyde him. Which diſcourſe may be cõfirmed by ſundry examples of lyons and beares, that haue runne from angry and confident men, and the like. Since then,a man that in his naturall he giueth no diſtaſt, doth ſo much affright fierceſt beaſtes, when he putteth on his threatning lookes; it is no wonder, that beaſtes of a milder and ſofter nature, should haue feare of him ſettled in them, when they neuer ſaw him otherviſe then angry,and working miſchiefe to them. And ſince their brood do receiue from their parents, a nature eaſily moued vnto feare or anger, by the ſight of what moued them, it is not ſtrange, that at the firſt ſight, they should tremble or ſwell, according as the inward motion of the ſpirits aſfordeth. Nov if this hath rendered the birdes in the ilde Iſlandes affraide of men, who otherwiſe would be indifferent to them, it is no maruayle to ſee more violent effects in the lambes auerſion from the wolfe, or in the larkes from the hobbey ; ſince they peraduenture haue ouer and aboue the hurt they vſe to do them, a difformity in their conſtitutions: and therefore, thougha larke vill ſlye as well from a man as from a hobbey, yet becauſe there is one cauſe more for his diſlike againſt the hobbey, then againſt the man (namely the difformity of their conſtitutions) Ii vill flye into the mans hand, to auoyde the hawkes talons. Vnto ſome of theſe cauſes all antipaihies may be reduced: and the like reaſon may be giuen for the lympathies we ſee betweene ſome creatures. The litle corporeities which iſſue from the one, haue ſuch.a conformity with the temper of the other, that it is thereby moued to ioyne it ſelfe vnto the body from whence they flow,and affecteth vnion vith it in that way, as it receiueth the impreſſion. If the ſmell do pleaſe it, the beaſt will alwayes be ſmelling at it: if the taſt, nothing shall hinder it from feeding vpon it when it can reach it. The fishermen vpon the banke ouer againſt newfound land, do report that there ſlocketh about them a kind of bird, ſo greedy of the fishes liuers which they take there, as that to come at them and feede vpon them, they will ſuffer the men to take them in their handes: and vill not fiy away,as long as any of their deſired meate is in theireye: whence the French men that fish there, do call them  appe fo es. The like power, a certaine worme hath with nigthingales. Andthus you ſce, how they are ſtrong impreſſions vpon ſenſe, and not any diſcourſe of reaſon, that do gouerne beaſtes in their actions: for if their auoyding men, did proceed from any ſo guciy in their nature, ſurely they would exerciſe it, vhen they ſee that fora bitte of meate they incurre their deſtruction: and yet neyther the examples of their felloes Eilled before their eyes in the ſame purſuite, nor the blowes which themſelues do ſeele; can ſerue them for warning, where the ſenſe is ſo ſtrongly aſſete d: but as ſoone as the blo that remoued them is paſſed, (if it miũe That the Antipathy of beaſts tovards one an other, may be taken avay by aſſucſaction. 3. A TREATISE killing or laming them) and they be gotten onwing gaino they wil returne to their prey as eagerly and as conſidently, as nothing were there to hinder them. This then being the true reaſon of all ſympathy and antipathy, we can not admitt that any beaſtes should loue or hate one on other, for any other cauſe, then ſome of thoſe we haue touched. All which are reduced to locall motion, and to materiall application of bodies of one nature, to bodies of an other; and are as vat tranſmitted to their yong ones, as begotten in themſclues: and as the ſatisfying of their ſenſe, is more preualent in the Happe foyes, then the feare which from other groundes is begotten in their fantaſy;and ſo maketh them approach to what the other ould driue them from. In like manner, any auerſion of the fantaſyy may be maſtered not only bya more pomerful agent vpon the preſent ſenſe, but alſo byaſſue. faction, and by bringing intò the fantaſy ith pleaſing circumſtances that obiect which before was diſpleaſing and aſſrightfull toĩt: as we ſee that all ſortes of beaſtes or birdes,if they be taken yong may be tamed and vill liue quietly together. Dogges that are vſed to hunt and ill deere, will liue frendly with onethat is bred with them; and that fawne which orherwiſe would haue beene aſſraide of them, by ſuch education roweth conſident and playeth boldely with them. Of which we can no Poge remaine in doubt, if we will beleeue the ſtory of a tygar (accounted the cruelleſt beaſte of all others) who being shutt vp with a deere, that had beene bred ith him froma kidde, and from his being a whelpe;and no meate giuen him, vſed meanes to breake priſon, when was halfe ſtarued, rather then he would hurt his familiar frend. You will not ſuſpect, that it was a morall cõſideration, which made him ſo kinde: but the deere had neuer come into his fantaſy accompained with other circumſtances, then of play or of warmth:and thereſore hunger( which calleth only the ſpecies of meate out of the memoiy into the fantaſy) would neuer bring the deere thither, for remedy of that paſſion. And that hich often happeneth to thoſe men, m whom the ſantaſyy only worketh, is not much vnlike to this: among whom I haue ſeene ſome frenetike perſons,that if they be perſuaded they are tyed, and can not ſtirre from the place where they are;they vill lye ſtill, and make u complaintes for their impriſonnement; and not goea ſteepe, to reachany meate or drinke, that should lye in ſight neere them, although they were neuer ſo much preſſed with hunger or with thirſte. The reaſon is euident, forthe apprehenſion of being tyed, is ſo ſtrong in their fantaſy, that their fantaſy can ſend no ſpirits into other partes of their body, whereby to cauſe motion. And thus the deere was beholding to the tygars fantaſy, not to his diſcourſe of morall honeſty, for his life. The like of this tygarand deere, is to be ſeene euery day inthe tower of London; herea litſe dogge, that Yas bred with a lyon from his birth, is ſo familiar and bold with them, that they not only ſleepe together, but ſometimes the dogge will be angry with him,and ill bite im; uhich the lyon neuer reſſenteth from him, though any other dogge that is putt to him, he preſently teareth in ieces. E And thus we plainely ſee, how it cometh about, that beaſtes may haue ſtrange auerſions from thinges, which are of anannoyng or deſtructiue natureto them, enen at the fitſt ſight of them: and againe, may haue great likings of other thinges, in a manner contrary to their nature, without needing to allow them reaſon, vhereby to diſcourſe and iudge vhat is hurtfullto them, or to inſtruct the tygar we haue ſpoken of,or Androdus his lyon, the duties of frendshippe and of —— The longing mai kes hich ar often times ſeene in children, and do remaine withthem all their life, ſeeme to be an offspring of the ſaręe4 roote or cauſe: but intruth, they proceed from an other, although of i Einne to this: for the operation of the ſeede is paſſed, when theſe longing mai kes are imprinted; the child being then already formed and uic kened; and they ſeeme to be made ſuddainely, as by the print of a eale Thereforeto render the cauſe of rhem, lert vs conſider an orher ſympathy whichis more plaine and common. We ſee that the laughing of one man vill ſett an otheron laughing that ſeeth him lou gh hough he know not the cauſe why he firſt man laugheth:and the like we ſee in yawning and ſtretching, which breedeth alike eſfect in the locker on. I haue heard of a man, that ſeing a roſted pigge, aſter our English fashion with the mouth gaping, could not shutt his owne mouth as long as he locked vpon the pigges and of an other, that when he ſaw any man make a certaine motion with his hand, could not chooſe but he muſt make the ſame: ſo that, being a tyler by histrade, and hauing one hand imployed with holding his tooles, whiles he held himſelfe with the other vpon the eaues of a houſe he was mending, a man ſtanding below on the ground, made that ſigne or motion to him; wherevpon he quittd ſ⸗ holdfaſt to imitate that motion, and fell downe, in danger of bieaking his necke. Alltheſe effects, do proceed out of the action of the ſcene obicct vpon the fantaſy of the looker on: which making the picture or likeneſſe of its owne action in the others fantaſy, maketh his ſpirits runne to the ſame partes; and conſ: quently, moue the ſame members, that is, do the ſame actions. And hence it is, that when we heare one ſpenke with Ioue and tenderneſſe of an abſent perlon, we are allo inclined to loue that perſon, though we neuer ſaw him, nor hcard of him before: and that whatſocuera good oratour deliuereth well, ſthat is, with a ſemblance of paſſion agreeable to his wordes) rayſeth of its owne nature, like affection in the hearers: and that generally men learne and imitate ( without deſigne) the cuſtomes and manners of the company they much haunr. childe in the mothers wõbe, can neyther ſee nor heare what the mother doth; neuertheleſſe there can not paſſe any great or violent motion in thæ morhe body, hereof ſome effect doth not reach vnto the childe, whichis ihen, one continuate piece with her: and the proper effect of motion or of trembling in one body, being to producea like motion or a trembliing inan other, ſas we ſee in that ordinary example of tuned ſtrii ges, hereof the one is moued at the ſtriking of the other, by reaſon of ihe ſtron ke giuen to the ayre, which finding a moueable eaſily moued wi: ha motion of the ſame tenour, communicaterth motion vnto it) it followeth that the fantaſy of the childe, being as it were well tuned to the fantaſy of the mother, and the mothers fantaſy makin ga ſpeciall and a very quicke motion in her owne whole body, ſas we ſee that ſuddaine paſſions doe ) this motion or trembling of the mother, muſt needes cauſe tRe like motion and trembling in the childe, euen to the very ſwiftneſſe f the moth-rs motion. Nowas we lee when one blusheth, the bloud come hinto his face, ſo the bloud runneth in the mother to a certaine lace, where she is ſtrucken by the thing longed for: and the like ſ ppening to the childe, ihe violence of that ſuddaine motion, dyeih the ma: ke or print of the thing in the tenderskinne f it: the bloud in ſome meaſure piereing the: kinne, and not returning wholy into its natunall courſe: which effect is not permanent in the mother, becauſe her kinne being harder, doth not receiue the bloud into it, but ſendeth it backe againe, without receiuir g a tincturè fromit. Farre more e⸗ſy is it, to diſcouer the ſecret cauſe of many antirathies or ſympa hues, which are ſeene in children, and endure with ithem the greateſt part, if not the whole terme cf iheir hfe, without any apparent ground for them: as, ſome do noòt loue cheeſe, others garlike, others duckes, others diuers other kindes of meate, which their parents loued well;and yet in tcken that this aueiſion is naturall vnto them, and not ariſing from ſome diſie accidentally taken and imprinted in their fintaſy, they will be much harmed if they chance to eate any. ſurh meate; though by the much dſguiſing it, they neither know, nor ſo much as ſuſpect thy haue done ſo. The ſtory of the Lady Hẽnage(who ws of the bedchamber to the late Queene Elizabeth) that had her checke bliſtered by laying a roſe vpon it whilesshe was a ſleepe, to try if her antipathy againſt that floer, were ſo great as she Vſed to pretend, is famous in the Court of England. A kinſman of mine, whiles he wasa childe, had like to haue dyed of diought, before his nurſe came to vnderſtand, thar he had an antipathy againſt beere or wine; vntill the tender nature in him, bifore ſe coulã ſpeake, taught him to moke earneſt ſignes for water, that by accident he ſaw; the greedy drinking of which, cured preſently his long languishing and pining ſickeneſſe: and ſuch examples are very frequent. ili l The cauſe of theſe eſfects many timesis, that their mothers, vpon their firſt ſuppreſſion of their vſuall euacuations, ſ by reaſon of their OF BODIES, Chap. XXXVIII. 35 being with child) toke ſome ſtrong diſlike to ſuch thinges, their ſtomackes being then oppreſſed by vnnaturall humours, which ouerflow their bodies vpon ſuchretentions; and which make them oftentimes ſicke and prone to vomiting, (eſpecially in the mornings , whiles theyare faſting) and ſſometimes to deſire eareſtly ( which they call longing) to feede vpon ſome vnwholeſome, as well as ſome particular wholeſome thinges: and otherhiles, to take auerſion againſt meates, which at other ſeaſons they affected well. Now the child being nourished by the ſoimbued bloud of the mother, no wonder if it reb aſfections or diſikes, conformable to thoſe which at that preſent raigne in the mother: the which for the moſt part vſed to be purged away, or are ouerwhelmed by the maſtering qualities of bettera liments ſucceding: but if by ſome miſchance, they become too much grafted in the childes ſtomacke, or in ſome other part, through whichthe maſſe of bloud muſt paſſe, then the child getteth an auerſion from thoſe meates: and we often ſee, that people retaine a ſtrong conuerſion to ſuch meates or drin. kes, as thæir mothers aſfected much or longed for, whiles they bred child of them. And thus we will leaue this particular; adding only one note, why there are more persõs geneally, ho haueantipathy againſt cheeſe, thẽ acainſt any one of meate beſides whatſoeuer. A principal reaſon of which ſymptome (where th- prece dens one hath not place) I eõceiue to be, that their nurſes proued with child, whiles they gaue them ſucke. for Ihaue by experience Bunò it to haue beene ſo, in as many as I hiue made inquiry into. And it is very conformable to reaſon; for the nurſes milke, curdling in her breſt vpon her breeding of child, and becoming very offenſiue to the childes tender ſtomac kæ, (whoſe being ſicke obligeth the parents to change he nurſe,though peraduenture they know nothing of the true reaſon that makeih her milke vnnaturall) he hath a diſſike of cheeſe (whichis ſftrong curdled milke) euer after ſertled in him; as people rhat haue once ſurfeted violently of any meate, ſeldome arriue to brooke it againe.  No as concerning thoſe animals who ly vp in ſtore for winter, and ſeeme therein to exerciſe a rationall rouidence; who ſeeth not, that itis the ſame humour, which moueth n miſers to heape vp wealth, euen at their laſt 3aſpe, when they haue no child norf end to giue it to, nor think of making any body their heires?Which actions becauſe they haue no reaſon in them, are to be imputed to the -aſton or motion of the materiall appetite. In the doing of them, theſe ſteppes may be obſeruedi firſt the obiect preſcnting it ſelfe to the eye, prouoketh loue and deſire of iteſpecially if it be ioyned with the memoy of former want: then, this deſire ſtirreth vp the animal (after he hath fedde himſelfe) to gather into the place oſ his chiefe reſidence, as much of that deſired obiect as he meeteth withalliand whenſoeuer his hunger retuming, bringeth backe into his fantaſy the memory of his meate, it being ioyned viththe memory of that place if he be abſent fromit) he preſently repaireth thither, for reliefe of what preſſetch him: (and thus dogges when they are hungry, do rake for bones they had hidden when iheir bellies were full. Nov if this foode, gathered by ſuch prouidence (which is noihing elſe, but the conformity of it, vorking vpon him by his ſenſe) and layed vpinthe place, where the ownerof it reſideth, ſas the corne is, which the auntes gather in ſummer) be eaſily portable, he vill carry it abroad with him the firſt time he ſtirreth after a long keeping in; for then nothing woi keth ſo powerfully in his fantaſy, as his ſtore; and he will not eaſiſy part from it, though other circumſtances inuite him abroad. From hence it proceedeth, that when a faire day cometh after long foule weather, the auntes, who all that while kept cloſe in their dennes with their corne lying by them, do then come abroad into the ſunne, and do carry their graine along with them: or peraduenture it happeneth, becauſe the precedent wett weai her, hath made it grow hoat, or muſty, or otheriſe offenſiue within: and there fore they carry it out, as ſoone as themſclues dare peepe abroad; which is, when the faire weather, and heate of the day, inuiteth them out into the open ayre: and before night that they returne into their holes, the offenſiue vapours of the corne are exhaled and dryed vp, and moue their fantaſies no longer to auerſion: wherevpon they carry it backe againe; hauing then nothing but their long contracted loue vnto ĩt to woike vpon them. The like whereof men doing by diſcourſe, to ayre their corne, and to keepe it ſweete, and the ſame effect following herein, they vill preſently haue it, that this is done by the auntes, for the ſame reaſon, and by deſigne. Then the moy ſture of the earth ſwelling thegraine, and conſequently, making it beginne to shoote at the endes ſas we declared, when we ſpcke of the generation of plantes;and as we ſee in the moyſtening of come to make malt of it)thoſe litle creatures, finding that part of it more tender and iuicy then the reſt, do nibble vponiit fime. and do feede themſelues ſirſt ith that, which conſequently hindereth the groweth ofthe corne. And here againe, men will contend that this muſt be done by prouidence and diſcourſe, to preuent that their ſtore should not grow out of theirreach, and changing nature, become vſeleſſe to them in theirneede. To conclude, the forcknowing of beaſtes is nothing elſe, but their timely receiuing impreſſions, from the ſirſt degrees of mutation in ,. thinges ithout them; which degrees are almoſt imperceptible to vs, becauſe our fantaſies and fpirits, haue otherwiſe ſuch violent agitations, more then theirs, which hinder them from diſcerning gentle impreſſiòs vpon them. If you be at ſea, after along calme, a E before a gaile bloweth to fill your ſailes, or to be diſcernable by your ſenſe in quality of ind, you shall perceiue the ſea beginne to wrinkle his ſmooth face that way the wind will come; which is ſo infaillible a ſigne that a gaile will come from that coaſt, as marriners immediately full to trimming their ſailes accordingly;and vſually, beſore they can haue done, the wind is with them: shall we therefore ſay that the ſea hatha prouidence to foreſee which way the wird will blow? Or that the cornes vpon our toes, or calluſcs, or broken bones, or ioyntes that haue beene diſlocated, haue diſcourſe, and can foretell the weather? It is nothing elſe, but that the vind riſing by degrees, the ſmooth ſea is capable of a change by it, before we can feele it: and that the ayre, being changed by the forerunners of worſe weather, or keth vpon the craſieſt partes of our body, when the others fecle not ſo ſmall a change: ſo beaſtes are more ſenſible then weſfor they haue leſſe to diſtract hem) of the firſt degrees of a changing weather: and that mutation of the ayre without em moketh ſome change within them, which they expreſſe , by ſome outvard actions or geſtures. Now they who obſerue, how ſuch mutations and actions are conſtantly in them, before ſuch or ſuch weather, do thinke they know beforchand, that raine (for example) or wind, or drought is coming, according to the ſeuerall ſignes the) haue maiked in them: which proceedeth out of the narrowneſſe of their diſcourſe, that maketh them reſort to the ſame cauſes, whenſoeuer they meete vith Ike effects: and ſo they conceiue, that thinges muſt needes paſſe in beaſtes, aſter the ſame tenour as they do in mẽ. And this isa generall,and maine errour, runvirꝶ through all the conceptions of mankind, vnleſſe great heede be taken to preuent it,that what ſubiect ſoeuer they ſpeculate vpon, hetherit be of ſubſtances, that haue a ſuperiour nature to theirs, or whether it be of creatures inferiour to them, they are ſtillapt to bring them to their owne ſtandard,and to frame ſuch conceptions of them, as they would do of them ſclues: as when they will haue Angels diſcourſe, and moue, and be in a place, in ſuch ſort as is naturall to men ; or when they vill haue beaſtes rationate and vnderſtand, vpon their obſeruing ſome orderly actions performed by them, which in men would proceed from diſcourſe and reaſon. And this dangerous rocke (againſt which many fine conceptions do ſuffer shipperacks) whoſocuer ſtudyeth truth, muſt haue a maine cautionto auoyde. Sed noi immenſum ſpatijs confecimus aquor: Et iam tempus equum fumantia ſcluere colla. THE CONCLVSION OF THE FIRST, TR E AT IS E.  Hus at the laſt (by Gods aſſiſtance) we are clymbed vp to à the toppe of the hill; from whence looking downe ouer ihe  Whole region of bodies, we may delight our ſelues, with ſ-s& ſeeing what a height the eary ſteppes we aſcended by, hiue brought vs vnto. It is true, the path we haue walked in, is of late ſo vntrodden, and ſo ouergrowne with bryars; as it hath not beene withont much labour, that we haue made our way through. And peraduenture,it may leeme toyleſome vnto others to follow vs, eſpecially ſuchas are not much enured to like iourneyes: but I hope, the fiuite which both we and they are now arriued to gather of our paines, in this genenall view we haue taken of the empire of matter, and of corporeall agents, is ſuch, as none of vs hath reaſon tobe ill latisfyed with the employing ofihem. For what can more powerfully delight, ormore nobly enrertaine an vnderſtanding ſoule, then the ſearch and diſcouery of thoſe woi kes of nature, which being in their effects ſo plainely expoled to oureyes, are in their cauſes ſo abſtruſe and hidden from our comprchenſion, as ( through deſpaire of ſucceſſe) they deterre moſt men from inquiring into them? And Iam perſuaded, that by this ſummary diſcourſe (short indeede in regard of ſo large a ſcope, how cuer my lame expreſſions may peraduenture make it appeare tedious)it appeareth euidently, that none of natures greateſt ſecrets, whereof our ſenſes giue vs notice in the effects, are ſo ouershaded with an impenetrable veyle, but that the diligent, and wary hand of reaſon, might vnma: ke them, and shew them to vs in their naked and genuine formes, and delight vs with the contemplation of their natiue beauties; if we had as much care and conſtancy in the purſuite of them, as we dayly ſee men haue in heaping vp of ealth or in ſtriuing to ſatisfy their boundeleſſe ambitions; or in making their ſenſes ſvimme in the muddy lake of baſe and contemptible pleaſures. For who shall througly conſider and weigh what we haue hitherto ſaid, will plainely ſee a continuall and orderly progreſſe, from rhe ſimpleſt, heigheſt, and moſt common conception, that we frame ofa body in generall, vnto the furtheſt and moſt abſtruſe effects, that in particular are to be found in any body whatſoeuer: I meane, any that is meerely corporeall, without mixture of a nobler natures for hitherto we haue not moued, nor ſo much as looked out of that oibe. He shall find one continued thridde, ſpunne out from the beginning to the end. He Villſce, that the various tviſting of the two ſpecieſes of Bedies, Rare, and Denſe, do make the yame, of which all thinges and actions ithin the sphere of matter, are wouen. And although peraduenture, in the drawing out of the thridde, there may be ſome litle brackes, or the ſtuſfe made f it, be not euery where ſo cloſe wrought, as a better workeman, at more lciſure might haue donei yet truly,  beleeue, that the very conſent of thinges throughout is ſuch, as demonſtrateth, that the maine contexture of the doctrine I haue here touched, is beyond quarrelling at. It may well be that in ſundry particulars, I haue not lighted vpon exact truth: and I am ſo farre from maintaining peremptorily uy thing I haue here ſaid, as I shall moſt readily haiken to whatlocuers hall be obiected againſt it; and be as ready vpon cauſe, to deſert my owne opinions,and to yield vnto better reaſon. But withall, I conceiue, that as the fayling of a bricke here and there in the rearing of ihe walles of a houſe, doth nothing at all preiudice the ſtrength and ſecurity of the fabrike; no more ſI hope) vill the ſlight eſcapes, which ſo difficult a ta:ke as this is ſubiect vnto, endaniagre or weakn the maiſie body of what 1 haue here deliuered. I haue not yet ſcene any piece vpon this ſubiect, made vp with this methodei beginning from the ſimpleſt and plaineſt notions, and compoſing them orderly, till allhe principall variety which their nature is capable of, be gone through: ind therefore it can not be expected, bur that the firſt modell of this kind (and moulded by one diſtracted with continuall thoughts of a much different ſtraine; and whoſe exerciſe, as well as prof: ſſion, hath allowed him but litle commerce with bookes and ſtudy) muſt needes be very rough hewed, and require a great deale of polishing. Which Vhoſossers ali do, and be as exact and orderly in treating of Phyloſophy and Theology,as Mathematicians are in deliuering their ſciencies, l do aſſure my ſclfe, that Demonſtrations might be made, and would proceed in them as currently, and the concluſions be as certaine and as Eſas in the Mathematikes themſclues. But that is not all: theſe demonſtrations would haue the oddes exceedingly of the other, and be tovs, ineſtimably more aduantagious: for ounoſf them, do ſpiring much higher and nobler effects, for mans vſe and life, then out of any Mathematicall ones; eſpecially when they extend themſelues to the gouuernement of Man as he is Man: which isanart, as farre beyond all the rules of Phyſike, or other gouuernement of our body, or temporall goodes, as the end is beyond the meanes we employ to gaine it; forall the orhers, do but ſerue inſtrumentally to this end, That we may liue well: whereas theſe do immediately teachiit. Theſe are the fiuites in generall, that I hope may in ſome meaſure, grow out of this diſcourſe, in the handes ofequall and iuditious Readers: but the particular ayme of it, is to shew what actions can proeeed fiom a body, and what can not. In the conduct whereof, one of our chiefe endeauours hath beene to she, that thoſeactions which ſeeme to draw ſtrongly into the order of bodies, the vnknowne na of ceraine Vu ij entities named Qualities; eyther do or may proceed, from the ſame canſos, which produce thoſe knowne effects, that all ſides agree, do not ſtand in neede of any ſuch myſticall Philoſophy. And ithi being the maine hinge, vpon vhich hangeth and moueth, the full and cleare ſeſol ng ot our maine, and great queſtion, Of ihe Immortality of ihe Soule; Iaſſure my ſelfe, the paines I haue taken in this particular, will not be deemed ſuperfluous or tedicus: and withall, Ihope Ihue employed them with ſo good ſucceſſe, as hence foreward, we shall not be any more troubled, with obiections drawne from their hidden and incom prehenſible nature: and that we ſtand vpon euen ground, wrh : hoſe of the contrary opinion: for ſince we haue shewed, how all actions may be performed amon ; bodies, wit hout hauing any recourſe to ſuch Entities and Qualities as they pretend and paint out to vs3 it is now ih:ir part ( if they will hae them admitted) to proue that in nature there are ſuch. Hauing then brought the Philoſophy of bodies vnto heſe termes; thar hich remaineth for vs to performe, is toshew ih-rth ſe actions of our ſoule, for which we call hera ſpiritt, are of ſuch a natuie, as they can not be reduced into thoſe principles, by which all corporeall actions are eſſected For the proofe o our originall intent, no more thenthis, can be exacted at our handesi ſo that if our poſitiue proofes, s hall carry vs yet beyond this, it can not be denyed, but that we giue ouermeaſure, and do illuſtrate with a grearer light, hat is 2lready ſufficiently diſcemed. In our proceedinę, we haue the precedency of nature: for laying for our ground, the naturall conceptions hich mankind maketh of quantity; we ſind that a body isa meere paſſiũe thing, conſiſting of diuers partes, which by motion may be diuerſly ordered ; and conſequently, that itis capable f no orher change or operation, then ſuch as motion may produce, by various ordering the diuers partes of it:and then, ſeeing that Rare and Denſe, is the primary and adequate diuiſion of Bodies; it followerh euidently, that what can not be effected by the various diſpoſition of rare and denſe parès, can not proceed or be effected by a pure body: and conſequently, it will be ſuſficient for vs to shew, that the motions of our ſoules are ſuch: and they who will not agree to this concluſion, muſt take vpon them rto shew, that our firſt premiũſe is defectiue; by prouing that other vrknowne wayes are neceſſary, for bodies to be wrought vpon orto woi ke by: and that the motion, and various ordering of rare and denſe parres in them, is not cauſe ſufficient for the eſfc cts we ſee among them. Which whoſoeuer shall attempt to do, muſt remember that he hath this diſaduantage before he beginneth, that whatſocuer haih beene hitherto diſcouered in the ſcience of bodies, by the helpe, cy: herof Mathematikes or Phyſickes, it hath all becne reſolued and hath fillen, into this way which we declare. Here Ihould ſctra periode to all further diſcourſe concernirg this ſirſft Treatie of bodies, did I not apprehend, that the preiudice of Ariſtotles authority, may diſpoſe many to a harsh conceite of the draught we haue made. Butif they knew ho litle reaſon they haue to vrge that againſt vs, they would not erye vs downe for eontradicting thut oracle of nature: not only becauſe he himſelfe, both by word, and by example, ex horteth vs, when veriry leadeth vs an other way, to forſake the trac kes, which our forefathers haue beaten for vs, ſo we do it with due reſpect and gratitude for the much they haue left vs: nor yet becauſe Chriſtian Religion, as it will not heare of any man ( purely a man) free from ſinne, ſoĩt inclineth to perſuade vs,that no man can be exempt from errouriand therefore it ſauoureth not well, to defend peremptorily any mans ſayirgs ( eſpecially if they be many) as being vncontrolable; how beit I intend not to preiudice any perſon, that to defend a worthy authors honour, shal endeæuour to vindicate him from abſurdities and groſſe errors: nor laſtly becauſe it hath euer beene the common ractſ: of all graue Peripatetikes and Thomiſtes, to leauet heir Maſters, ſome in one article, ſome in an other: but indeede, becauſe the very truth is,that the way we take, is directly the ſame ſolide ay, which Ariſtorle walked in before vs: and they who are ſcandaliſed at vs for leauing him, are exceedingly miſtaken in the matter: and out of the ſound of his wordes (not rightly vnderſtood) do frame a wrong ſenſ of the doctrine he hath left vs, which generally we follow. Lett any vnpartiall Ariſtotelian anſwere, whether the conceptions we haue deliuered of Quãtity, of Rarity and D\ſity, of the foure firſt Qualities, of the combinations of the Zlements, of the repugnance of vacuities, be not exactly and rigorouſly Ariſtotles? Whether motion of weighty and light thinges, ind of ſuchas are forced, be not by him, as wellas by vs, atttibuted to externe cauſes? In which all the differẽce betweene vs is, that we enlarge ourſelues to more particulars then he hath done. Lett any man reade his bockes of Generation and Corruption, and ſay whether he doth not expreſſely teach, that mixtion (which he àchuerert to be the eneration or making of a mixt body)is done per minima that is in our Pinguag⸗ and in one word, by atomes; and ſignifyeth, that all the qualities, whichare naturall qualities following the compoſirion of the Elements, are made by the mingling of the leaſt partes or atomes of the ſaid Elements; whichis in effect to ſay, that all the nature of bodies, their qualities, and their operations,are com paſſed by the mingling ofatomes: the shewing and explicating ofwhich, hath beene our labour in this vhole Treatiſe. Lett him reade his bookes of Meteores, and iudge whether he doth not giue the cauſes of all the effects he treateth of there, by mingling and ſeperating of great and litle, groſſe and ſubtile, fiery and watry,aery and earthy partes, iuſt as we do. The ſame he doth in his Problemes, and in his Parua naturalia, and in all other places, where. ſoeuer he hath occaſion to render Phyſically, the cauſes of Phyſicall eſfects. The ſame do Hippocrates and Galen: the ſame, their Maſter Alſchymiſtes, with their Maſter Geber; whoſe maxime to this purpoſe; we cited aboue: the ſame do all naturall Philoſophers, eyther auncient commentatours of Aiiſtotle, or elſe moderne inquirers into naturall eſfects, in a lenſible and vnderſtandable way: as who will take the paines to locke into them, vill eaſily perceiue. Wherefore, lett any iuditious Reader that hath looked further into Ariſtotle then only vpon his Logicalland Metaphyſicall workes, iudge whether in bulke our doctrine be not conformable to the courſe of his, and of all the beſt Philoſophers that hie beene and are; though in detaile or particulars, we ſometimes mingle thereith, our owne priuate iudgements: as euery one of them, hath likewiſe shewed vs the way to do, by the liberty themſelues haue taken to diſſent in ſome pointes from their predeceſſours. And were it our turne, to declare and ach Log ke and Metaphikſies, e should be forced to goe the way, of matter, and of formes, and of priuations, in ſuch ſqrt as Ariſtotle hath trodden it out to vs, in his woikes of that ſtraine. But this is not our taske for the preſent; for no man that contemplateth nature as he aught, can chooſe but ſee that theſe notions are no more neceſſary, when we conſider the framing of the clements, then when we examine the making of compounded bodies: and therefore, theſe are to be ſett apart, as higher principles, and of an other ſtraine, then neede be made vſe of for the actuall compoſition of compounded thinges, and for the reſolution of them into their materiall ingredients, or to cauſe their particular motions: which are the ſubiects we now diſeourſe of. Vponthis occaſion, I thinke it not amiſſe to touch, how the latter ſectatours, or rather pretenders of Ariſtotle, (for truly they haue not his vay) haue introduced a modell of doctrine ( or rather of ignorance) out of his wordes, which he neuer ſo muchas dieamed ofi howbeit they alleage textes out of him to confirme whatthey ſay, as Heretikes do out of ſcripture to prooue their aſſertions: for whereas he called certaine collections or poſitions of thinges, by certaine common names ſ as the art of Logike requireth)terming ſome of them Qualities, others actions, others places, or habites, or relatiues, or the like: theſe his latter folloers, haue conceited that theſe names did not deſigne a concurrence of ſundry thinges, ora diuers diſpoſition of the partes of any thing, out of vhich ſome effect reſulted : which the vnderſtanding conſidering all together, hath expreſſed the notion of it by one name: but haue imagined, that euery one of theſe names had correſpondent vnto it, ſome reall poſitiue entity or thing, ſeperated (in its owne nature) from the maine thing or ſubſtance in which it was, and indiſferent to any other ſubſtance; but in all vnto which it is linked, woi king ſtill that eſfect, which is to be expected from thenature of ſucha quality, oraction, &c. And thus, to the very negatiues of thinges, as to the names of pointes, lines, inſtantes, and the lie, they haue imagined poſitiue Entities to correſpond: likeiſe, to the names of actions, places, aud the like, they haue framed other Entities: as alſo to the names of colours, ſoundes, taſtes, ſmels, touches, and the reſt of the ſenſible qual:ities, they haue vnto eucry one of them, allotted ſpeciall Entities; and genenlly to all qualities whatſoeuer. Whereas nothing is more euidẽt, then that Ariſtotle meaned by qualities no other thing, but that diſpoſition of partes, whichis proper to one body,and is not found in all: as you will plainely ſee, if you but examine, what beauty, health, agility, ſcience, and ſuch other qualities arei (for by that name he calleth themiand by ſuch examples, giueth vs to vnderſtand what he meaneth by the word Quality) the firſt of which is nothing elſe, but a compoſition of ſeuerall partes and colours, in due proportion to one an other: the next, buta due temper of the humours, and the being of euery part of the body, in the ſtate it should be: the third, burt a due proportion of the ſpirits and ſtrength of the ſinnewes: and the laſt, but ordered Phantaſmes. Now when theſe peruerters of Ariſtotle haue framed ſuch Entities, vnder that conception Which nature hath attributed to ſubſtances, they do immediately vpon the nicke, with the ſame breath that deſcribed them as ſubſtances, deny themto be ſubſtances: and thus they confound the firſt apprehenſions of nature, by ſeeking learned and ſtrained definitions for plaine thinges. After which, they are faine to looke for glew and paſte, to ioyne theſe entities vnto the ſubſtance they accompany: vhich they find vith the ſame facility, by imagining a new Entity, whoſe nature it is to do that which they haue neede of. And this is the generall courſe of their Philoſophy; whoſe great ſubtility,and queint ſpeculations in enquiring how thinges do come to paſſe afford no better ſatisfaction then to ſay vpon euery occaſion, that there is an Entity which maketh it be ſo. As if you a:ke them, how æ4 vall is white,or blacke ? They willtell you, there is an Entity or Quality, whoſe eſſence is to be whiteneſſe or blackeneſſe, diffuſed through the wall. If you continue to a:ke, how doth whiteneſſe ſticke to the wall: They reply, thatit is by meanes of an Entity called Vnion, whoſe nature it is actually to ioyne whiteneſſe and the walltogether. And then if you enquire how it comethi to paſſe, that one white is like an other? They vill as readily anſwere, that this is wrought by an cther Entity, whoſe nature is to be likeneſſe,and it maketh one thing like an other. The conſideration of which doctrine, maketh me remember a ridiculous tale of a trewant ſchoolcboyes latine: who vpon a time when he came home to ſec his frendes, being asked by his father, what was latine for bread? anſered breadibus; and for beere ? beeribus; and the like of all other thinges he asked him, adding only a termination in Bus,to the plaine English ord of euery one of them: which his father perceiuing and (though ignorant of Latine) yet preſently apprehending, that the myſteries his ſonne had learned, deſerued not the expence of keeping him at ſchoole, bad him immediately putt of his hoſilus and shooſibus, and fall to his old trade of treading &tſorteribus. In like manner, theſe great Clerkes do as readily find a pretty Quality or moode, whereby te render the nature or cauſes of any effect in their eaſy Philoſophy, as this Boy did a Bus to ſtampe vpon any English word, and coyne it into hi mockelatine. But to be ſerious, as the weight of the matter requireth, lett theſe ſo peremptory pretenders of Ariſtotle, shew me but one text in him, where he admitteth any middle diſtinction (ſuch as thoſe moderne Philoſophers do, and muſt needes admitt, who maintaine the qualities we haue reiected) betwixt that which he calleth Numericall, and that which he calleth of Reaſon, or of Notion, or of Definition,  the firſt of which we may terme to be of, or in thinges;the other to be in our heades, or diſcourſes: or thæ one Naturall, the other Logicall:) and I will yield that they haue reaſon, and that I haue groſſely miſtaken what he hath written, and that I do not reach the depth of his ſenſe. But this they will neuer be able to do. Beſides, the whole ſcope of his doctrine, and all his diſcourſes and intentions, are carryed throughout, and are built vpon the ſame foundations, that we haue layed for ours. Which being ſo, no body can quarrell with vs for Ariſtotles ſake; who as he was the greateſt Logician, and Metaphyſitian, and Vniuerſall ſcholler peraduenture that euer liueds and was ſo highly eſteemed, that the good turne which S)lla did the world in ſauing his workes, was thought to recompence his many outrogious cruelties and tyranny; ſo his name muſt neuer be mentioned among ſchollers, but with reuerence, for his vnparalleled worth; and vith gratitude for the large ſtocke of knowledge he hath enriched vs with. Yet withall we are to conſider, that ſince his raigne was but at the beginning of ſciences, he could not choſe but haue ſome defects and ECOND TREATIS DECLARING, T HE NATVRE AND PERATIONS OF MANS SOV OVT OF WH ICH, THE IMMORTALITY OF REASONABLE SOVLES, IS CONVINCE D : other leafe of our accounts: or peraduenture may ũ ul more properly ſay,to ſall to the peruſall of our owne S5 Lccountes: for litherto, our time and paines haue beene taten vp, in examiningand caſtin g the accountes o f others: to the end, thatfrom the foore and tolall of them;e may driue on our one the more ſnoothly. In ours then , ve shall meete vith a nev Capitall ; ve shall diſcouer a nem vorld , of a quite different ſrraine and nature from that vhich all this vhile ve haue employed ourſelues about. Ve nill enter into them, with tatinga ſuruay of the great Master of all that large family,ve haue ſo ſummarily vieved: Imeane of Man, as he is Man rhat i,not as he is ſubiect to thoſe laves, whereby other bodies are gouerned ( for therein he hath no præeminence, to raiſe him out of theirthrong: )but as he exccedeth the resto f creatures, which are ſubiect to his managing.and as he ruleth ouer nature herſelfe, making her ſerue lis deſignes and ſubiectin g her noblest povers, to his laves; and as he i distinguished from all other creatures vhatſoeuer. To the end ve may di ſcoucr, hether thar principle in him, ſrom whence thoſe actions do proceede vhich are properly his,be but ſome refined compoſition, of the ſame ind ve haue already treated ofi or whether it deriueth its ſource and origine, from ſome higher ſtringand ſtocke, and le of a quite diffe ront nature. Hauingihen by our former Treatiſe maſtered the oppoſitions, vhich elſe would hauc taken armes againſt vs, vhen ve should haue beene in the middeſt of our ædificeand hauing cleared the obiections which lay in our vay, from the peruerſe Qualities 0 the ſoules neighbours, the ſctuerall common vealthes of Bodies: ve muſt no beginne vith Dauid to gather to gether our Materialls ;and to tatea ſuruay of our ovne prouiſions: that ſo ve may proceed vith Salomon, to the ſacred building of Gods temple But before ve goe about it, itmillnot be amiſſe, that ne shew the reaſon, vhy we haue made our porch ſo greai and haue added ſo longanentry,that the houſe is not likely io haue therevnto a correſpondentbule: and hen the neceſiit of my doin ſo,shall appeare, Thope my paines will meete with a fauourable cenſure,and receiue a faire admittance. Ve propoſed vnto our ſelues to shew that our ſoules are immortall: wherevpon, casting about io find the groundes of immortality, and diſcerning it to be a negatiue, ve conceiued thatwe ought to beginne our ſearch,vith enquiring What Mortality is st the cauſes of it. Vhichwhen ve should haue diſcouered,and haue brought the ſoule to their teſte, if ne found they trèched notvpon her, norany way concerned her condition, ve might ſafely conclude, that of neceſiity she mustbe immortall. Looking then into the cauſes of mortality, we ſav that all bodies round aboutvs were mortall: whence perceiuing that mortality extended it ſelfe as farre as corportity, we found our ſeluts obliged,if ewould free the ſoule from thatlav,to shew thatshe is not corporeall. Thiscould not be done vithout enquiring what corporeitymas. Nov it beinga rule among Logitians,thata defnition can notbe good, vnleſſe it comprehend and reach to euery particular of thatwhichis defined ; ve perceiued it impoſiible 1o now compleatly, vhat a Body is, without tatinga generall view of all thoſe thinges,, hieh we compriſec vnder the name and meaning of Bodies. Thisis the cauſe, we ſpeni ſo much time in the firſt Treatiſe:and Ihope to good purpoſe for therewe found, that the nature of a Bod), onſied in beingmade of partes: that all the differencies of bodies, are reduced to hauing more or leſſe partes, incompariſon to their ſubstance, thus and thus ordered: and laſily, thallall their operations, are nothing elſe but locall motion,which followeth naturally out of hauing partes. So a it appearetheuidenily from hence, that ifany thing haue a being, and yet haue no partes;itis nota body,buta ſul tanc of an other quality and condition : and conſequently, if ne can find the ſcules Being to be withoutpartes,and that her operations, are no locall tranſlationyve euidently conclude her to be an immateriall or ſpirituall ſubſtance E lii Peraduenture it may be obiected, that all this might haue beene done a much shorterway then we haue taten ; and that ve needed not haue branched our diſcourſe, into ſo many particulars, nor haue driuen them ſo home, as we haue done: but that ve might haue taken our firſt riſe from this ground, (vhichis as euident, as light of Reaſon can mate it) that ſeeing we know biggeneſſcand a Body, to be one and the ſame, as uell in the notion as in the thin g i itmustof neceſiity follow, thathat hath notpartes, norworketh,noris vrought vpon by diuiſion, is not a body. conseſſe this obiection appeareth very reaſonable, and the conſideration of it neighed ſo much vith me, as, vere all men of a free iudgement, and not imbued vith artificiall errours, Tnould forits ſahe, haue ſaued my ſelfe agreat deale of paines: but J find (as in the former Treatiſe I haue frequenily complained of) that there is crept into the norld a fanſy ſo contraryo thispregnanttruth, and that it is ſo deepely ſetiled in many mens minds (and not of the meaneſt note, ) as all ue haue ſaid, is peradueniue too litle to roote it out. If any that heing ſatisfyed vith the rationall maxime ve euen now mentioned, and therefore hath notdeemed it needefull, to employ histime in reading the former Treatiſe, should wish to know how this is come to paſſe, I shall here repreſent vnto him,the ſumme of what I haue more at large ſcattered in ſeueral places of the former Treatiſe ; and shallentreate him to conſider, how nature teacheth vs tocall the proprieties of thinges whereby one is distinguished from an other, the Qualities of thoſe thinges sandthataccordingto the varieties of them, they haue diucrs names ſuted out to diuers of them ; ſome being called Habites, others Povers; and others by other names. Now vhat Ariſtotle, and the learned Grecians did meant by theſe thinges, iscleere by the examples they giue of them: they terme Beauty and Health, Habites: the diſpoſitions of our bodies to our bodily motions, Povers ; as ſirength ( which is the good temper of the ſinewes) a Pover ; likewiſe Agility, a Pover ſo they vſe the names of the concoctiue, the nutritiue, the retentiue, tlẽ excretiue, Pover; the health of the eyes, the eares, the noſethrills, &c: they call the Powers of ſeeing, of hearing, of ſmelling, & c: and the lite of many others. But later Pliloſophers, being very diſputatiue, and deſiring to ſeeme ignorant of nothing(or rather, to ſeeme to kno more then any ihat are gone before them and io refine their conceptions Yhaue taken the notions, which by our firſt Maſters ere ſett for for conueniency ana ſuccincteneſſe of diſiourſe) to he truly and really particular Entities, or thinges of themſelues: and ſo haue filled their booles, and the ſchooles, with vnexplicable opinions, out of which no account of nature can be giuen: and vhich is worſe, the vay of ſearching on, is harred to others; and a miſchieuous érror is groune into mens belieſes, that nothing can be knowne. By this meanes they haue choaled the most plaine and euident definition of a body; bringing ſo many instances against it, that vwwary men are forced to veſt and deny the very sſ notions of nature and reaſon: for in truth, they turne all bodies into ſpirits, maling ( for example) hiare, or cold, to be of it ſelfe indiuiſible, a thing by it ſelfe, vhoſe nature is not conceiuable ; nor the diſpoſition or proportion of the partes of that body which is ſaid 1 be hoat or cold ; but a reall thing, that hath a proper Being and nature peculiar 10 it ſelfe ; vhereof can render you no account: and ſo, may as vell be against the notion of a body as not: for if light, the vertue of the loadeſtone, the pover of ſcing, feeling &c, be thingẽs that orke without time, iu an inſtant; if they be not ?he diſpoſitions of partes as partes, ( whoſe nature is, 10 he more or leſſe, to be next or farre off, &c:) ho can it be truly ſaid, that the notion of a body, is to be of partes? For if this be a true definition of a body, it followeth that all corporeall qualities and actions muſt likeviſe be ſome diſ poſition and order of paries as partes: and that vhat is not ſo, is no body, nor bodiy quality or propriety. This then was it that obliged me to go ſo farre about, and to shew in common, how all thoſe fidi vhich are ſo much admired in bodies, are, or may be made and continued by the ſole order of quantitatiue partes and locall motion: this hath forced vs to anatomiſe nature, and & beginne our diſſection, with what ſrt occurreth vnto our ſenſe from a hody. In doing which, out of ihe firit and moſt ſimple notion of Biggeneſſ=e or Quantity, ve found out the prime diuiſion of Bodies, into Rare and Denſe: then fſinding them io he the Qualities of diuiding and of being diuided ( thai is, of locall motion) e gained from the combination of theſe, we retriued the foure firſt Qualities: and by them, the Elements. Vhen ve had agreed how the Elements were made, wee examined how their action and com poſition, raiſeth thoſ lecond qualities, which are ſeene in all mixt bodies, and doe male their diuiſions. Thence, proceeding into the operations of life, ve reſolued, tbey are compoſed and ordered meerely by the varieties of ihe former: nay, ihat ſenſc and fantaſy ( the higheſt thinges we can diſcerne out of man ) haue no other ſource, butare ſlemn the laves of partes, andof Rarityand Denſity; ſothat in theend we became aſſured of this important Maxime: That nothing vhatſocuer we knov to be a Body, can be exempted from the declared lawes, and orderly motions, of Bodies: vnto vhich, lett vs adde tvo other peſitions, which fellalſo within our diſcouery: the firit thatit isconſtanily found in nature, that none of ihe bodies we know, do moue themſelues; but their motion muſt be founded in ſome thing vithout them: rhe ſecond, that no body moutth an other, vnleſſe it ſelfe be alſo moued: anã ir vill folloeuidently out of them, (if they be of neseſsit and notpreuaricable) that ſome other Principle beyond bodies, is required to be the roote and firſt ground of motion in them: as Mr.Vhite hath moſt acutely aud ſolidely demonſtrated, in that D excellentvorke, Ihaue ſo ofiencitedin my  ſmer Treatiſe. But itistime we should fall to ourintended diſcourſe, leauing this point ſettled by whatve haue already ſaid, that if ve shew our ſoule, and her operat ons, to be not compoſed of partes, ne alſo therein conclude, that she is a ſpirituall ſubſlance, and not a body. Vhich isour deſigne and intention in this Treatiſe. And forthis intent, we muſt looke vpon thoſe actionsof man, vhich are peculiarly his: and vpon thoſe thinges which reſult outof them, and are called, Opera or labores hominum; 6 houſes, Tovnes, Tillage, Hanaicraſis, Armes, shippes, Commonvealthes, Armies, Bookes, and the like ; in which great mens lifes and thoughts haue becue ſpent. In all theſe e nd one generall thridde, io runne quite through them; and that all of them are compoſed of the ſame ſtuffe, and. are built vpon the ſame foundation : which is; a long chaine of diſcourſes, whereof euery litile part or linte is that which ſchollers do call a yllogiſme: and Syllogiſmes ve know are framed of enuntiations; and they of ſingle or vncompoſed apprehenſions. All which are actions nrought by the vuderſtanding of a man. But beyond theſe, ve can not proceede to anyfurther ſubdiuiſion of partes, and containe our ſelues within the orbe ot humane Actions; for ſimple apprehenſions, can not be furtherreſclued into other partes, beyond the degree of apprehenſions, and yet ſtill remaine actions peculiar to a man: ſo that ve may be ſure, ve shall haue left nothing out of enquiry, concerning Mans actions as he is Man, if e beginne vithanatomiẽing his firſthare apprehenſions ; and ſo goe on by degrees, compounding them, tillve come to faddome t oſegreat and admirable machines of booes and wortes, which he as I may ſay) veauethoutof his owne bovels ; and the lite of which, is done by no other creature whatſeuer, vpon the face of our contemptible Earth. Theſe then ( which are all compriſed vnder the names of Apprehenſions, of Enuntiations or Iudgements, and of Diſcourſes) shallbe the ſubiect of this ſecond Treatiſe: and in it, ve nill first conſider theſe operations in themſelues ; vhich being done, e nill endeauour io proue out of the nature and manner of performing them, that the ſoules vnto whom they THE NATVRE AND OPERATIONS OF MANS SOVLE TH E FIRS T C H APTER Of ſimple Apprebenſons. Mz/aræ.æ l i Næ1 HAT We may duely vnderſtand, what a right Appre“u 2W - æll]X⸗ henſion is, lett vs conſider the preeminence that a man who 3 ) P B 3 3 apprehendeth a thing rightly, hath ouer him who miſſeth V of doing ſo. This latter can but roue vildely at the nature of the thing he apprendeth; and ill neuer be able to draw any operation into act, out of the apprehienſion he hath framed of it. As for example: if a man be to woike vpon gold, and by reaſon of its reſemblance vnto braſſe, hath formed an apprehenſion of braſſe, inſteed of an apprehenſion of gold, and then(knoving that the action of fire, will reſolue braſſe into its leaſt partes, and ſeuer its moiſt from its dryæ ones) will go about to calcine gold in the ſame manner ash would do braſſe; he vill ſoone ſind that he looſeth his labour;and that ordinary fire is not an adequate Agent to deſtroy the homogeneall nature, and to ſeuer the minute partes of that fired mettall: all which happeneth, out of the wrong appre henſion he hath made of gold. Whercas on the other ſi.le, he that apprehendeth a thing rigthly, if he pleaſcth to diſcourſe of what he apprehendeth, findeth in his apprehenſion all the partes and qualities, which are in the thing he diſcourſcth of: forexample, if he apprehendeth rightly a knife, or a bectle, or a ſiuue, orany other thing whatſoeuer; in the knife he will find haſie and blade; the blade of iron, thicke on the backe,and thinne on the edge; tempered to be hard and  rough thus . v 1) : I Vhat is apprehe 365 A TREATISEE beaten, ſo ground, in ſuch manner ſoftened, thus quenched, and whatſoeuer elſc concerneth the Being or the making of a knife: and all this he draweth out of his notion orapprehenſion of a knife: hich is , that it is an inſtrument ſited to cutt ſuch and ſuch thinges, in ſuch a manner: for hence he findeth,that it hath an haſt, firt to hold it by in ones hand , to the end it may nor hurt the hand, whiles it preſſerh vpon ithe knife; and that the blade is apt to flide in betwixt the partes of the thing which is to be cutt, by the motion of being preſſed or dra vne by the hand: and ſo he proceedeth on, deſcending to the qualities of both partes; and how they are to be ioyned, and held fult together. In the Ike manner, he diſcourſeth of a beetle, of a ſiuue, or of whatſoeuer elſe cometh in his way. And he doth this, not only in ſuch manuſactures as are of mans inuentioni bur(if he be capable)he doth the like in beaſtes, in birdes, in trees, in herbes, in ſishes, in foſſiles,and in whar creature ſocuer he meeteth ithall, within the whole extent of nature. He findeth vhat they are made for:and hauing diſcouered natures ayme in their production, he can inſtruct others, what partes and manner of generation they haue, or ought to haue: and if he that in this manner apprehendeth any thing rig htly, hath a minde to worke vpon it, eyther to make it, or to vſe and order it to ſome end of his owne: he is able by his right apprehenſion, to compate it vnto other thinges to prepare What is any way fitting for the moking of itito apply it vnto what it will worke its effæct vpon; and to conſerue it from what may wrong or deſtroy it: ſo, if he haue frameda right apprehenſior of a ſiuue, he will not em ployit in draving water; if of a beetle, he willnot go about to cutt with ĩt: neyther vill he oſfer, if he haue a due appre h:nſion of a kniſe, to cutt ſtone or ſteele with it, but wdod, or what is ſofter. He knowerh what will hette and maintaine the edge of it; and vnderſtandeth what wil blunt or breake it: In fine, he vſcthiit in ſuch ſort, as the knife it ſclfe(hadit knowledge and vill) would ish to be vſed; and moueth it in ſuch a manner, as it it had power of motion, it would moue it ſelfe: he goeth about the making it, euen as nature would do, were it one of her plantes: and in a ord, the kniſe in this apprehenſion made in the man, hath thoſe cauſes, proprieties, and effects which àre naturall vnto it;and which nature would giue it, if it were made by her;and which are proportionable to thoſe partes, cauſes, proprieties, and eſfects, that nature beſtoweth on her children and creatures, according to their ſeuerall eſſences. 2. u Vhat then can we imagine, but that the very nature of a thin xnr i r apprehended, is truly in the man, who doth apprehend it? And that o in his vnder- 250r hend ought, is to haue the nature of that thing within ones ſelfe? ſa, And that man, by apprehending, doth become the : ing apprehended: heãcih i. not by change of his nature vnto ir, but by aſſumption of ĩt vnro his: Here peraduenture ſome will reply, that we preſſe our inference to farre:and wi'l perempronly deny the thinges reall being in our minde when we make a true and fulla pprehenſion of itiaccounting it ſuſfcient MANS SOVLE, Chap. I. 35 for our purpoſc, that ſome likeneſſe, or image of ihe thing be there; out of which, we may draw all iheſe, whether contemplations, or woikes, or diſpoſals of the thing. But by that time this obiection is throughly Iooked into, and that ſo much as they allow is duely examined, I beleeue e shall find our quarrell to be only about the word, not abour the matter : and that indeede, both of vs, do meane the ſame, howbeiit diuerſly conceiued: and that in ſubſtance their expreſlion, in what they graunt, importeth the ſame as ours doth: which, it istrue, they ſirſt deny in wordes; but that may be, becauſe the thing is not by them rightly vnderſtood. Lett vs then diſcuſſe the matter particularly. What is likeneſſe, but an imperfect vnity betweene a thing, and that which ĩt is ſaid to be like vnto? Ifthe likeneſſe be impeifect, it is more vnlike then it is like vnto it: and the lker itis, the more it is one with it vntill at lengrh, the growing likeneſſe may arriue to ſuch a perfection, and to ſuch a vniry with the thing it is like vnto, that then, it shall no longer be like, but is become wholy the ſame, with what formerly it had bur a reſemblance of. For example, lert vs conſider, in what conſiſteth the likeneſſe vnto a man, of a picture drawne inblacke and white repreſenting a man: and wshall find, it is only in the proportions of the limbes and features; for the colours, the bulke, and all thinges elſe are vnlike; but the proportions are the very ſame, in a man and in à picture;yer that picture is but a likeneſſe, becauſe it wanteth biggeneſſe and colour: giue it themiand neueitheleſſe it will yet be but a likeneſſe, becauſe it wanteth all the dimenſions of corporeity or bulke, which are in a mans body: adde alſo thoſe to it; and ſtill it will be but a likeneſſe or repreſentation of a man, becauſe it wanteth the warmeth, the lofteneſſe, and the other qualities of à liuing body, which belong to a man: but if you giue it all theſẽ, then ſti no tonge a likeneſſe or image of a liuing creature, buta liuing creature indeede; and if peraduenture this living creature do continue ſtillto be but the likeneſſe of a man, itis becauſe ſt wanteth ſome perfections or proprieties belonging tõ a man: and ſo in ithat regard, is vnlike a man: but if you allow it all thoſe, ſo that in nothing it be vnlike, then your taking away allvnlikeneſſe, taketh away likeneſſe too: and as before of dead, it became a liuing crearure, ſo now of an orher liuing creature, it becometh a man, and is no longer like a mã. You ſee then plainely the reaſon, why that, which we call a ſike thing, is not the ſame; for in ſome part it is diſlike: but if the likeneſſe were complete in euery regard ,then it were no longer to be called like, but the very thingit ſclfand therefore we may conclude, that if the likeneſſe of a thing, which the obiection alloweth to be in our knowledge, do containe all that is in the thing knowne, then ĩt is in truth, no more a lieneſſe,but the very knowne thingit ſelfe: and ſo what they graunt, amounteth to as much as we require;though att the ſitſt they go about to excludv it, Hauing thus concluded, that when we apprehend any thing, that very thing is in vs; lett vs in the next place examine, how it cometh thither,and what it is there. Which we shall beſt do, by anatomiſing,and louking narrowly into ihe nature of ſuch apprehenſions, as we dayly make of thinges. Itis true we ſaid euen now, that we can not duide the actions of mans mind, further then into apprehenſions; and there fore e called them ſimple and vncompoſed: and with good reaſon forif we reflect vpon the operations of our mind, we shalleuidently perceiue, that our bare apprehenſions, and only they, are ſuch: but ehal ve muſt acknovledge, that all the apprehenſions we make of thinges coming vnto vs by our ſenſes,are compoſed of other more ſingleapprehenſions, and may be reſolued into them: all which are as it ere the limbes and partes, that make vp and conſtitute ihe other totall one. Lett vs make vſe of our former example, and diſſect the apprehenſion e make of a nife:  find in my vnderſtanding that it is a thing ſo long, ſo broade, ſo sharpe, ſo heauy, of ſucha colour, ſo moulded, ſo tempered &c, as is fitt to cutt withall. In this totall apprehenſion, I diſcouer three kindes of particular apprehenſions, euery one more ſimple and refined then the other. The higheſt of them, and the foundation vpon which the others are built, is the notion of Being: which is of ſo high, and of ſo abſtracted a nature, that we can not retriue wordes to expreſſe in what manner ve conceiue it; but are faine to content our ſelues with the outward ſound of a word, by which, without diſcribin g our ovne, ve ſtirre vpa like conception in an other: and that is the word Is; by which we intimate the Being of the thing we apprehend. And this notion can be in our minde, without inferring any other: and therefore is the ſimpleſt of all others: which of neceſſity, muſt imply it, and can not be vithout it, although it can be without them. Our next apprehenſion is of that whichhih Being: and is expreſſed by the word Thing. This is not ſo ſimple as the former; forit is compoſed of it,and of what receiueth it; of Being,and of what hath Being: yet it is much ſimpler then the next degree of apprehenſions, which is cauſed in out mind by the great variety of thinges, that come thither through our ſenſcs; and can be conceiued without any of them, though none of them con without it; for I can haue in me the notion of a thing, abſtracting from all accidents whatſoeuer;as of magnitude, of figure, of colour,of reſemblance, or the like: but I can not conceiue it to be long, or sharpe, or blew, &c, without allowingit ſirſt to be ſomewhat or ſomeihing, that is in ſuch ſort affected: ſothat the apprehenſion of a thing, or of that which hath Being, is the baſis of all our other ſubſequent apprehenſions; as theapprehenſion of Being, is the baſis of the apprehenſion of a thing: forhad it not Being,it were not a thingiand were it not a rhing, jt could not be ſaid to be a longthing or a sharpe thing; nor indeede thatĩt were long or sharpe: for to be ſo, doth include Being; and what hath Being, isa Thing. And thus we may obſerue, ho the bulke ofour apprehenſions E : S: is compoſed is compoſcd of ſomething aduentitious, and of ſomething formerly ithin vs, which is of a very diſferent nature from allthe others; and yet ſo ſitted and neceſſary to them, that none of them can be without it, although it not only can be, butis beſt conceiued without relation to any of them. Veshall eaſily diſcerne, of how diſferenta ſtraine this conception of Being, is from all others, that enter by our ſenſcs, ſas from the conceptions j G. The apprehenon of thingi of colours,of ſoundes, and the like)if we but reſlect vpon that act in vs, novne to Vs which makethit; and then compareit with the others: for we shall find, y our ſenſes, oth conſiſt in that all they do conſiſt in, or of certaine reſpects betwixt two thinges; ceraine whereas this of Being, is an abſolute and ſimple conception of ĩt Ielfe, without any relation to ought elſe; and can not be aelcrib vi hother wordes, or by comparing it to any other thing: only we are ſure, we vnderſtand and know what itis. But to make this point the clearer, it will not be amiſſe to shew more particularly, wherein the other ſort of apprehenſions are different from this of Being; and how they conſiſtin certaine reſpects betweene diſferẽt thinges,andare knowne only bythoſe reſj pects: whereas this is knowne only in It ſelfe; abſtracting from all other thinges whatſocuer. An example will do it beſt: when Iapprehend the whiteneſſe in the wall, I may conſider how that white, isa thing which maketh ſuch an impreſſion vpon my fantaſy;and ſo accordingly, I know or expreſſe the nature of vhite, by a reſpect or proportion of the wall, to worke vpon my fantaſy. In like manner, if we take a notion that ariſeth out of what entereth immediately by our ſenſes, (for by ioyning ſuch alſo to the notion of Being, we make ordinary apprehenſions) we shall find the ſame nature: as when I conſider how this white wall, is lie to an other white wall, the apprehenſion of lileneſſe that Ihaue in my mind, is nothing elſe, but a notion ariſing out of the impreſſion, which both thoſe walles together, do make vpon my fantaſy; ſo that, this apprehenſionisas the former a certaine kind of reſpect or proportion of the two walles to my imagination: not as they make their impreſſions immediately vpon it, but as an orther notion ariſeth, out of comparing the ſeuerall im preſſions, which thoſe two white walles made init. Lett vs proceede a litle further, and examine what kind of thing that is, which we call reſpect or proportion, and where it reſideth. We shall find reſpects betwixt too ed or expreſſed things. 7Reſpect orre-  Iation hath not that there is a very great difference, betweene what itis in it ſelfe, or in its really any forowne eſſence,and what it is in the thinges that are reſpectiue: for in them, m⸗llbeing, bur itis nothine elſe but the thinges, being plainely and bluntly what they ſ in the itis nothing elſe but the thinges, being plainely and bluntly what they a 3ſehenũon are really in themſelues: as for example, two white alles to be like, isin of man. them nothing elſe, buteach ofthem to be white: and two quantitiesto be halfe and whole, is in them nothing elſe, but each quantity to be iuſt what itis. But a reſpect in its owne nature, is a ind of tye, compariſon, tending, or order,of one of thoſe thinges to an other; and is no where to therefore it can not be deſcribed by any ſimilitude, nor be expreſſed by anv meanes butlike Being) by the ſound of a word, which we are ag reed vpon to ſtirre vp in vs ſuch a notion; for in the thinges, it is not ſuch a thing as our notion of it is: (Which notion is that, which we vſe to expreſſe by prepoſitions and coniunctions, and which Ariſtotle and Logitians expreſſe in common. by the ord æe:, or ad ) and therefore there is norhing out of vs, to paint itby: as I could do white, or ſquare, or round, o1 the like; becauſe theſe haue] being in the thinges that are white, or ſquare &c, and conſequently they may be expreſſed by others of the like nature: but the likeneſſe that one white hath to an other, or the reſpect that eyther of them hath to mans imagination, is only in Man; vho by comparing them, giueth birth to the nature and Being of reſpect. Out of this diſcourſe, we may collect two ſingularities of man; which vill much import vs, to take paiticular notice of. the one s, that Being or a thing(the formall notion of both which is meerely Being) is the proper aſfection of mani for euery particular thing is in him, by being (as I may ſay)grafted vpon the ſtocke of Exiſtence or of Being: and accordingly we ſce, that whatſoeuer we ſpeake of, we ſay it is ſomething: and whatſoęuer we conceiue, we giue it the nature of a thing;as when we haue ſuid, the wall is white, we fame whiteneſſe as a thing: ſo did e immediately before ſpeaking of Reſject, we tooke reſpect as it ere a thing and enquired, vhere it is: ſo that it is euident, thatallthe negotiation of our vnderſtanding, tradeth in all that is apprehended by it, as if they were thinges. The other ſingularity we may obſerue in man is, that he is a comparing pover; for all his particular knovledges, are nothing elſe but reſpects or compariſons betweene particular thinges: as for example, for a man to know heate, or cold &c, is to know, what effects fire or water &c, can woike vpon ſuch or ſuch bodies. Out of the firſt of theſe proprieties it followeth, that what affecteth a man, or maketh impreſſion vpon his vnderſtanding, doth not thereby looſe itsoWne peculiar nature, nor is it modifyed to the recipient; the contrary of hich,e ſee happeneth perpetually in bodies: obſerue the ſuſtenance we take; which that it may be once part of our body, is firſt changed intoa ſubſtance like our body, and ceaſeth being what it was: whẽ water or any liquid body is receiued into a veſſell, it looſeth its owne figure, and putteth on the figure of the veſſell it is in: if heate enfereth into a body that is already hoat, that heate becometh thereby more heate; if into a cold body, it is conuerted into warmeth: and in like manner,all other corporeall thinges are accommodated to the qualities of the tecipientand in it, they looſe their owne proper termes and conſiſtences: but what cometh into the vaderſtanding of a man, is in ſuch ſort receiued by him or ioyned to him, that it ſtill retaineth its owne proper limitations and particular nature: notwithſtanding the aſ;iũption of it vnto him: for Being is ioyned to euery thing there: ſince ſas we haue ſaid) it is by Being that any thing cometh thither: and conſequently this ſtocke of Being, maketh euery graft that is inoculated into it, Be what of its owne nature it is; for Being ioyned- to an other notion, doth not change that notion, but maketh it be what it was before; ſithence if it should be changed, Being were not added toĩt: as for example, adde Biing to the notion of uife, and it maketh a læſe, or that notion, to Bea lniſe: and if after the æd.lition, it doth not remaine a bnife, it was not DBeing, tnt was added toa lnife. Out of the later of the ſingularities properto man, it followeth, that A multitude of thinges may be vnited in him, vithout ſuſfering any of confuſion among themſclues: but euery one of them, will remaine with be its propiieties,and diſtinct limitations: for ſo of neceſſity it muſt be, when pt that which vniteth them to him, is the comparing of them to ſome- b thing beſirles themſclues: which woi ke could not be performed, vnleſſe jil what is tn be compared, do retaine exactly its owne nature, Whereby the compariſon may be made: no more then one can weigh two quantities oneagamſtan other, vnleſſe he keepe alunder what is in each ſcale, and eepe all other weights from mingling with them: and accordingly we ſee, that we can not compare blacke to white, ora horſe to an oxe, vnleſſe we take together, the properties by which blac ke diſfereth from white, or an oxe from a horſe:and conſequently, they muſt remaine vnmingled and without confuſion, preciſely what in themſelues they are, and be diffqrent in the ſight of comparer. : But indeede, if we lookewellinto the matter, ve shall find, that ſetting a ſide the notion of Exiſtence or of Being, all our other notions are nothing elſe, but compariſons and reſpects: and that by the mediation of reſpects, thæ natures of all thinges are in vs: and that by the varying of them, we multiply our notions: Which in their ſirſt diuiſion, that reduceih their ſeuerall kindes into genenll heades, do encreaſe into the tenne famous tribes, that Logitians call Predicaments: and they do comprehend vnder them, all the particular notions that man hatli, or can haue, according to the courſe of knowledge in this life. Of which Predicamenis the ſeuen laſt are ſo manifeſtly reſpectiue, that all men acknovledge them to be ſo. Sulſlance ve haue already shewed to haue a reſpect vnto Being. Quantity e proued in the fitſt Chapter of the former Treatiſe of the natũie and of the operation of Bodies, to conſiſt in a reſpect vnto partes. Quality is diuided into foure branc hes: Whereof Pouer is clearely a reſpect to that ouer which it hath power, or from which it may ſuſfer. Hatite isa reſpect to the ſubſtance whereinit is; as being the property by which it is well or ill, conueniently or inconueniently aſfected, in regard of its owne nature; as you may obſerue in health, or ſickneſſe, or the like. The paſiible Qualities are thoſe which we haue explicated, in diſcourſing of the Elements and of Mixtes; and whoſe natures we haue there shewed do conſiſt in reſpects of acting or of ſuſferinę. Figure or hape (which is the laſt branch of the diuiſion of the Predicament of Quility) is nothing elſe, but a certaine diſpoſition of one part of a body tò an orher. And ſo you ſee, how all the tenne Predicaments do conſiſt purely in diuerſity of Reſpects:and by conſequence, all our conceites and notions (excepting that of Being, whichis the ſtocke, v pon which allthe reſtare grafted) are nothing elſe, but various reſpects ſince all of them vhatſoeuer, are compriſed vnder thoſe generall heades. Concerning which, we shall not neede to dilate ourſelues any furthers ſecing they are to be foundin Ariſtotle, and in his Commentatus, largely diſcourſed of. llt In the next place, lett vs obſerue, how our vnderſtanding behaueth it ſclfe, in conſidering and in apprehending theſe reſpects. We haue already declared, that the variety of our notions, doth ariſe out of the reſpects which diuers thinges haue to one an other: hence will follow, that of the ſame thing, we may haue various notions: for comparing it to different thinges, we shallmeete wirh different reſpects berweene them and conſequently, we shall conſider the ſame thing, vnder diſferent notions: as : n when we conſider an apple, vnder the notions of greencneſſe, of ſueetneſſe, of roundeneſſe, of mellowneſſe &c: in ſuch ſort,as we haue amply declared in the firſt Treariſe, and therefore neede not here enlarge ourſelues any further vpon this particular. Now theſe notions are ſo abſolutely ſeuered one from an orher, and euery one of them hath ſuch a completeneſſe within it ſelfe, that we may vſe any one of them, without meddling at all with any of the others. And ihis we do two ſeuerall wayes: the onc, when our mãner of apprehenſion determineth vs to one preciſe notion, which is ſo ſummed vp within it ſelfe, as it not only abſtracteth from all other notions, but alſo quite excludeth them, and admitteth no ſociety with them. The other way is, vhen we conſider a thing vnder a dererminate notion, yet we doit in ſuch a manner, that although we abſtract from all orher notions, neuertheleſſe ve do ſo, rather by neglecting then by excluding them: and euen in the manner of our expreſſion of it, we inſinuate that there are other notions(without ſpecifying what)belonging vnto it. OF the fiſt kind of notions, are whiteneſſe, weight, heate, and ſuch like, (Whoſe names are called abſtracted termes) which although they ariſe out of our comparing of the thinges thatare white, heauy, hoat, &c: to our fantaſy, or to orher thinges; yet theſe notions are ſo preciſe, and shutt vpwithin themſelues, that they abſolutely exclude all others, (as of long, short, ſquare, roug h, sharpe, or whatſocuerelſe which may in the thinges accompany the whiteneſſe, veight, heate, &c, that our conſideration is then buſied only withall OF the ſecond kind of abſtracted notions, are white, heauy, hoat &c (Whoſe names, expreſſing rhem, are called conerete termes: ) which although they cauſe in vs no other apprehenſions then of whiteneſſe, of eight,of heate &c⸗ yet they are not ſo rigorouſly paled in, as the others are, from admitting ſociety with any ĩiill beſides: beſides; but do imply tacitely, that the thing which is hite, heauy, hoat &c: hath beſides that, ſome orher conſideration belonging vnto it (whatſoeuer it be)whichis not expreſſed. Nov in this later abſtraction, it happeneth ſometimes, that the notion expreſſed, hath but anaccidentall connexion with the other notions, that are in the thing vnexpreſſed: as for examplesit is meerely accidentallto the white wall asit is white, to be highor lowe, of ſtone, of plaſter, or the like. But otherwhiles, the expreſſed notion is ſo eſſentiallto the concealed ones, that they can not be without it: as When we apprehend a clouen foote; although this apprehenſion do abſtract from all other notions beſides clouenfootedneſſeũif ſo I may ſoy Jyer Ca aboue we haue declared)it is in ſuch a manner, that it implyeth other conſiderations, not yet expreſſed, in that clouen foote: among which, ſome may be of that nature, that they can not haue a Being without preſuppoſing clouenfootedneſſe; but others may be meerely accidentall to that notion: as (for inſtance ſake) lett one be, that the foote is clouen into three partes; and lett an other be, that it is blacke or hairy; of theſe, this later notion of blacke or hairy, is of the firſt kind of abſtractions, which we ſaid had but an accidentall connexion with that which comprehended them without expreſſing them: for other thinges beſides the clouen foote, may be blacke or hairy; in ſuch ſort as height or lowneſſe, to be of ſtone or of laſler, may belong vnto other ſtructures beſides the white wall: bur to Ee clouen footed into three partes, doth ſo neceſſarily depend of being clonen footed in generall, ( which implyeth this particular) and ſo directly includeth it,as it can not ſubſiſt without clouenfootedneſſe: for though we mæy conceiue a foote to be clouen, without determining in our apprehen ion, into how many toes it is clouen; yet we can not conceiue it to haue three, foure, or fiue toes, without apprehending it to be clouen: ſo that in ſuch like apprehenſions, the notion which is expreſſeq, is ſo eſſentiall to the notion that is concealed and added vnto it, asthe concealed one can not be conceiued without the expreſſed one; and whenſocuer it is mentioned, the other is neceſſarily alſo brought in, and aſfirmed withit. Nov, ſome of theſe later kindes of notions, ſin which what is expreſſed is eſſentiall to what is concealed) may be of ſucha nature, as to be capable of receiuing the addition of ſundry other notions, ſo repugnãt vnto one an other hæ they can not agree togetherin one ſubiects and yet that generall notion, without determining any of the others, be indifferent to the contrary additions that include it,and belong as much toany one, as to any other of them:and ſo conſequently, whatſoeuer may be aſffirmed, and is true, of the primary notion, may as well be affirmed, and is as true, of the ſeuerall particulais, ariſing out of the repugnant additions. Sucha notion, Logitians terme an Vniuerſal one: that is, one that reacheth indiſferently and equally to all the particulars compriſed vnder it. As for example: to thenotion of a liuing creature, may be added the notions of expreſſed, it determineth no one of the two ſecondary notions, more then it doth the other;but is alike indifferent to eyther; and vhatſoeuer belongeth toa liuing ereature, belongethentirely both to a man and to a beaſſ: yet no one thing, can be both reaſonableand vnreaſonable. In like manner when l ſay, a man is a diſcurſiue creature; vnder this ord man, there lyeth a notion, by which may be ſignifyed any particular man, as Thomas, Iohn, Villiam, &c: though of it ſelfe, it determine no one man whatſoeuer: and conſequently, euery one of theſe particular men, muſt be allowed to bea diſcurſiue creature, becauſe the being ſuch, belongeth vnto the notion of man, and that notion vnto alſthe particulars of Thomas, lohn, Villian, &c: and yet no particular man can be both Thomas and Iohn, or lohn and Villian, &c. In this kinde of notion, ve may obſerue yet one propriety more: which is,that of it ſelfe,and in its common terme, it doth not cauſe ones thought to range vnto ſeuerallobiects; nor dothit imply that there are many particulars compriſed vnder it: yet if there be neuer ſo many, that conceite will fitt them euery one; and if there be but ore, ſtillit will be no leſſe accommodated to that one As for example: He that maketh a right apprchenſion of a ſunne, doth not by that conception determine, vhether there be many ſunnes or but one: and if euery one of the ſtarres which we call ſixed) be ſunnes to other earthes, it ſitteth themall; and if here be no other ſunne, then that which shineth to vs, it is ſatisfyed and taken vp with that: ſo likewiſe; before the production of Eue, the notion of a man was as fully taken vp by Adam alone, as it is now by his numerous progeny that filleth the world: nor doth our vnderſtanding, when that terme is pronuneed, conſider (out of the force of the terme) whether there be many men, or only one. -Another propriety in mans apprehenſion not much vnlike to this, iis, that he isable to compriſe a multitude in one indiuiſible notion; and  yet, that notion expreſſe the multiplicity of what it containeth: as we ſee in numbers, where the indiuiſible conception of ienne, a hundred, a ihouſand, &c,doth plainely expreſſe the ſubiet to be many; and yet that notion of the nũber bindeth thẽ vp ſas I may ſay) into one bundle, that in it ſelfe admitreth no diuiſion, nor vill permitt that the leaſt part be taken from it; for if it be, the whole bundle is deſtroyed and vanisheth: as when Itake renne, if one be diminished fromiit, it is no longer tenne, but nine. It fareth in like manner with the conceptions we frame of Ali,and Euery one,as it doth with numbers; for if but one be deficient, it is but a part, and not all, or euery one: ſo that theſe notions do indiuiſibily terminate a multitude. And like to this notion, is the name or terme whole, in reſpect of thinges which as yet haue not diuiſion, but are capable of being diuided: foritis ſo rigorous, that if the leaſt atome or thought be wanting, it is no longer the whole,but only a part. And this is as much as at preſent apptareth vnto me needefull to be ſiid, concerning ſingle apprehenſions: vnleſſe I be permitted to adde for a concluſion, this litle note  which peraduenture might haue beene more properly ſert downe in an other place where we diſcourſed of Being but, that it occurred not then to me) that apprehenſion being rooted in the nature of Being, the power of it ſpreadeth it ſelfe as farre as the extent of Being: and conſequently reacheth to all thinges whatſoeuer for, Whatſoeuer is a thing; hath Being and that vnto which Bring doth not reach, is nothing: nay, it is not limited there, but graſpeth euen at nothing,and aymeth to make a notion of it, and planteth its generation, by multiplying it ſelfe by negations of whatſoeuer is. Hence we haue the notions of deafeneſſe, of dumbeneſſe, of blindneſſe, of lameneſſe, of baldeneſſe, of death, of ſinne, and of all cuills whatſocuer, by the want of ſuch goods, asare ſenſible vnto vs. ———————N§N§NY§§§§§-—sLo—=—->&]&—&&"VZTHE SECOND CHAPTER. Of thinking and knowing. æ20 Auing thus declared the nature of ſingle apprehenſions, l the methode we haue preſcribed ourſelues, requireth that ? we examine in the next place, what effect the ioyning of J them together may haue; for from thence do ſpring Enunciations or Iudgements ; Which are in the next ranke after ſimple apprehenſions, and are the materials vhereof diſcourſes re im mediately framed: as when of the two apprehenſions of kniſe and of sharpe, ve make this enunciation, the knife is sharpe. In this enquiry the firſt thing that occurreth vntovs, ĩs to conſider, in what manner two diſfering ſimple apprehenſions, do become ioyned to one an other: and we shall find, that they are not tyed together like ſeuerall diſtinct thinges in one bundie, or like ſtones ina heape, where all that are cõpriſed vnder one multitude, are yet circumſcribed vithin their owne limits, and thereby are wholy diſtinguished from eachother; but that they are as it were grafted vpon one ſtocke; which being commonto both, giueth the ſame life to both;and ſo becoming one vith each of them, maketh them be one and the ſame thing betweene themſelues. And this is the notion of Being or Exiſtence, in the ſubiect we ſpeake of: which (as we haue already shewed) is the Baſis and foundation of all other apprehenſions:and by being common and indifferent toall, is the fitteſt glewto vnite thoſe that are capable of ſuch coniunction: and accordingly we ſce, that moſt of our ſpeech runneth vpon this ſtraine, that this is that, or doth that (which is as much to ſay as is doing that) that Socrates is a man, or that Socrates runneth, ( which ſignifyeth, is unning) and the like: and ſince our ſpeech proceedeth from the conceptions of our mind; it is cleare, that as the wordes which expreſſe Being or Exiſience, do ioyne together the orther wordes that we vſe, ſor at leaſt, the greateſt part of them)ſo likewiſe in our mind the apprehenſion of Being, is the glew that ioyneth our apprehenſions correſponding to our wordes: AllWhich will appeare to be ſaid with great reaſon, if we reſlect vpon it; for when diueiſe apprehenſions may be thus ioyned together, it is indeed, that one and the ſame thing afſecting vs ſeuerall wayes and under diſferent conſiderations; thoſe different impreſſions do begett different apprehenſions in vs:and ſo, tillwe examine the matter, euery one of them ſcemeth to be a different thing: but when we trace theſe ſtreames vp to the fountaine head, we diſcerne that all of them do belong to one and the ſame thing; and that by being in that thing, they are among themſelues the very ſame thing, howeuer they affect vs variouſly;and therefore may truly be ſaid to be one, as indeed they are: and conſequently, nothing is more ſitt to ioyne together in our mind thoſe different apprehenſions, then the apprehenſion of Being; which maketh vs apprehend as one thing, thoſe notions which really, and in the thing it ſelfe, are but one; as we haue often touched, both in the former Treatiſe, and lately in this: for this is the way to ioyne thinges in the mind intelligently, and according to the proper nature of the mind; which receiuing impreſſions from thinges exiſtent, ought to conſider thoſe impreſſions as they flow from the very thinges, and not as they are in the mind ĩt ſelfe; and by mediation of thoſe impreſſions, muſt take a ſuruay of the thinges themſclues and not ſtay at the intellectuallimpreſſions they make in her:and conſequently, muſt apprehend thoſe thinges to be one in themſelues, (although in vs they be not ſo) according to the courſe of our originall and legitimate apprehenſions of thinges; which is, as they are exiſtent; that is, as they are in their owne nature, and in themſclues; and not according to the diſcourſes and ſecondary apprehenſions we make of the images we find of them in our mind. And thus thinges are rightly ioyned by apprehenſion, without caution in which particular, we shall runne into great errors in our diſcourſe: for if we be not very carefull herein, we are apt to miſtake the vſe of the impreſſions we receiue from thinges, and to ground our iudgements concerning them, according to what we find of them in our mind, and not according to what they are in themſelues: whichtwo ſeuerall conſiderations, haue quite diſferent faces; although (it is true) thoſe impreſſions are made by the thinges, and are the only meanes by which we may rightly iudge of them: prouided, that we conſider them as they are in the thinges, and not as they are invs. Now this coniunction of apprehenſions, by the mediation and the gle of Being,is the moſt naturalland fitting, not only in regard of the thinges, but cuen in regard of vs: ſorſas we haue already shewed) it is of allothers the moſt common and vniuerſall, the moſt ſimple or vncompoſed, and the moſt naturalland deepeſt rocted in man: out of all which, it is euident, that this vnion of apprehenſions by the meanes of Being, is intrurh an Identiſication of them: for Vnity being a negation of multiplicity, it followeth, that what is one, is the ſame: and this identiſication is truly and naturally expreſſed by ſaying, that ihe one is the other. But inſiſting a litle further vpon this conſideration, how different apprehenſions become ioyned and vnited together, by the notion of Beingiwe may obſcrue that this happeneth, not only to two ſingle ones, but to more;according as more then two, may belong vnto one thing: and it may ſo fall out, that more then one, be on eyther ſide the common ligament. Thus when we ſuy, A Mdan is a diſcourſiue creature ; or a Rationall ſoule, is an immurtall ſubſtance, the two apprehenſions , of diſcourſiue,and of ereature,are ioyned together in a third of Adan, by the tye of one Being: and the two pprehenũions of Immortall, and of Subſtance, are vnited to the two others of Rationall and of Soule, likeviſe by the ligment of one ſingle Being. Euident it ĩs then, that the extremes are vnired by one Being: but how the two apprehenſions ihat are ranked togerher on the ſame ſide of the ligament ſas in our former examples, the apprehenſions of diſcourſiue and of creature, of rationall and of Soule, of Immortall and of ſubſance) are betweene themſelues ioyned to one an other, is not ſo eaſy to expreſe. It iscleare, that itis not done by meere conglobation for we may obſerue, that they do belong, orate apprehended to belong, vnto the ſame thing;and the very wordes that expreſſc them, do intimate ſo much, by one of them being an adiectiue; hich sheweth, they are not to thinges: for ifthey ere, they vould require two ſubſtantiues to deſcribe them: and conſequently it followeth that one of them muſt needes apperesine tothe other: and ſo borh of them make but one thing. And there is no doubt, but in the invard apprehenſion, there is a variety correſpondent to the variety of wordes which expreſſe ir; ſince all variety of wordes that is made by intention, reſulteth out of ſome ſuchvariety of apprehenſions. Therefore, ſince the wordes do import, that the thinges haue a dependance the one of the other, we can not doubt, but that our apprehenſions haue ſo too: which willbe conceiued beſt,by looking into the act of our mind, when it frameth ſuch variety of apprehenſions belonging to one thing, eonſi pondent to the variety in wordes of an adiectiue glewed vnto his ſabſtantiue; and attending heedſully to what we meane, when we ſpeake ſo. The Hebrewes do expreſſe this vnion, or compriſing of two different apprehenſions vnder one notion, by putting in the genitiue caſe, the word which expreſſeth one of them,  much like the rule in Lillies grammar, that when two ſubſtantiues come together, if they belong to the ſame thing, the one is putt in the genitiue caſe. ) As when in the ſcripture we meete ith theſe wordes, the iudge of roniuſtiue the ſpence of wickedmeſſe, the man of ſinne,or of deatly which in our phraſe of ſpeaking, do ſignify an vniuſt iudge, a vicked ſpence,and a ſinnefull or dead man. In whichit is euident, that as theſe notions te belong vntoone thing that is, to haue both of them; onc and the ſame Exiſtence, although there interuene not the formall expreſſion of their being one. Thus we ſce, how one Being ſerueth to different wayes to ioyne and vnite ſeuerallapprehenſions: and if we ill examine all the negotiations of our vnderſtanding, we shall hardly find any notions ſo farte diſtant, but may be brought together, eyther by the one of theſe wayes, or by the other. But this compoſition and ioyning of ſeuerall apprehenſions by the glew of Bring, is not ſufficient to make vs deeme a thing to bereally Tuch, as their vnion painteth in the mind, or as the wordes ſo tyed together do expreſſe in ſpeach. Well may it cauſe vs to thinke of the thing: but to thinke, or to deeme it ſuch an one ( which word of deeming, we shall be obliged henceforward to vſe frequently, becauſe the word ihinking is ſubiect to equiuocation) requireth the addition ofſomething more, then barely this compoſition of apprehenſions : which vnleſſe they be kept ſtraight by ſome leuell, may as well ſvarue from the ſubiect, as make a true picture of it. Here then we are to examine, what it is that makerh vsthinke any thing to be ſuch as e apprehend it: this we are ſure of, that when we do ſo, our actions which proceede vpon reaſon, and which haue relation to that thing, are gouerned and ſteered in euery circumſtance, iuſt as if the thing were truly ſo: as for example, ifa man do really deeme the weather to be cold, orthat his body is diſtempered, he putteth on warmer clothes, or taketh phyſike; although peraduenture he is miſtaken in both: for his deeming them to be ſo, maketh him demeane himſelfe in ſuch ſort, as if really they were ſo. It is then cuident, that by ſuch thinking or deeming, the nature conceiued, is made an actiue principle in vs: vnto whichif we adde, tharall the knowledge we haue of our ſoule, is no more, but that it is an actiue force invs, it ſcometh, that a thing, by hauing apprehenſions made of it in our mind, and by being really thought to be agreable to ſuch apprehenſions, becometh (as ĩt vere) a part or aſfection of our ſoule, and one thing vith it. And this eraduenture is the cauſe, hy an vnderſtanding man can not eaſily ſue an opinion once deepely rooted in him; but doth wreſtle and ſtriue againſt allarguments that would force him from it, as if a part of his ſoule or vnderſtanding were to be torne from him: in ſuch manner as a beaſt il cry and ſtruggle to ſaue his body, from hauing any of his limbes diſioynted or pulled in pieces. But this obſeruing the effect which followeth of our deeming a e thing to be thus or ſo, is not ſuſficient to informe vs, what it is that cauſcth that deeming. We muſt therefore take the mattera litle higher,  and looke into itsimmediate principles: and there we shall ſind, that it is the knowing of what we ſay to h. true, and the aſſurance, that the thinges are as we deeme them, which quieteth our ſoule, and maketli it conſent vnto them, and proceede to action vpon that conſent. Now this knovledge, is the moſt eminent pait of deeming; and of all our acquiſitions, is the moſt inſeparable ſ:om and indeed in rigour, it is abſolutely inſeparable by direct meanes; howeuer peraduenture by indirect meanes it may be ſeperated Let vs then conſider how we attaine vnto it, and how ſometimes we faile in the purchaſe of itiand what degrees of aſſurance or of probability there are betweene it and errour. To this intent, we may obſerue that the greateſt aſſurance, and the moſt eminent knowledge we can haue of any thing, is of ſuch Propoſitions, as in the ſchooles are called Identicall ; as if one should ſay, Iohn is lohn, or a man is a man: for the truth of theſe propoſitions is ſo euident and cleare, as it is impoſſible any man should doubt of them, if he vnderſtand what he hiith: and if we should meete with one that were not ſatisfyed of the verity of them, we would not go about to proue them to him, but would only apply ourſelues to make him reflect vpon the wordes he ſpeaketh, without vſing any further induſtry to gaine his aſſent therevnto: whichlis a maniſeſt ſigne, that in ſuch propoſitions, the apprehending or vnderſtanding them, is the ſame thing as to know them and to conſent vnto them: or at the leaſt, that they are ſo neceſſarily corioyned, as the one followeth immediately out of the other, without needing any other cauſes to promore this effect, more then that a man be diſpoſed, and æilling to ſee the truth: ſo as we may conclude, that to vnderſtand a propoſition which openly carrieth its cuidence wi hit, is to knew it. And by the ſame reaſon, although the euidence of a propoſition, should not at the ſirſt ſight be preſently obuious vnto vs, yet with vnfolding and explicating of it, we come at length to diſcerne it;then likeiſe the pprehending of it, is the knowing of it. V. muſt therefore enquire, what it isthat cauſeth this euidence: and to that purpoſe, reflecting vpon thoſe inſtances we haue giuen of ldentitall propoſitions, we may in them obſerue, that euidence ariſeth out of the plaine Identification of the extremes that are affirmed ofone an other; ſo that, in what propoſition ſocuer, the Identification of the extremes is plaine, the truth of itis enident vnto vs, and our mindè is ſatisfyed and at quiet; as being aſſured thatit knoweth it ro be ſo as the wordes ſay it. Now all afirmatiue propoſitions do by the forme of them import an Identification of their extremes, (for they all agree in ſaying This is that) yet they are not all alike in the enidence of their ldentification: for in ſome it sheweth it ſelfe plainely, without needing any further helpe to dilcouer it; ind thoſe are without any more adoe knowne of themſelues, as ſuch ldenticall ſvyings, we euen nov gaue for examples: others require a iourney ſomewht farther abour to shew their Identification; which if it be not ſo hidden, but that it may in the end be diſcouered and brought to light,as looneas that is done, the knoledge ſettled by them in the ſoule, is certaine and ſatisfactory as well as the other: but if it be ſo obſcure, that we can not diſplay the Identification of it, then our mind ſuſpendeth his aſſent, and is v nquiet about it, and doubteth of the truth of it:in ſome propoſitions, whiles he ſearcheth and enquireth after the Identification o their extremes; peraduenture he diſcerneth, that itis impoſſible there should be any betweene them; and then on the other ſide, he is ſatisfyed of the falſity of them: for if a propoſition be affirmatiue, it muſt neceſſarily be a falſe one, if there be no Identification betweene the extremesof it. By this diſcourſe, we haue found two ſortes of propoſitions, which begett knowledge in vs. The one, where the Identification of the extremes, is of it ſelfe ſo manifeſt, that when they are but explicated, it needeth no further proofe. The other, where though in truth they be Identified, yet the Identiſication appeareth not ſo cſeare, but that ſome diſcourſe is required to ſatisfy the vnderſtanding therein. Of the firſt kind, are ſuch propoſitions as do make one of the extremes the definition of the other whereof it is aſirmed: as when we ſay, a man isa reaſonable creature; which is ſo euident, if we underſtand what is meaned bya Man, and what by a reaſonable creature, as it needeth no further proofe to make vs know it:and knowledge is begotten in vs, not only by a perfect ldentification of the extremes, but as well by an imperfect one: as when what is ſaid of an orher, is but part of its deſinition; for example, if one should ſay, aman is a ereature, no body that knowerh him to be a rationall creature, (which is his complete definition) could doubit of his being a creature; becauſe that the being a creature, is partly identifyed to being a rationall creature. In like manner, this obuious euidence of u , appeareth as well where a complete diuiſion of a thing is affirmed of the cther extreme, as where that aſfirmation is made by the totall or partiall deſinition of it: as when we ſay, number is euen or odde: an enuntiation is true or falſe, and the like: where, becauſe what is ſaid, compriſeth the differences of the thing whereof it is ſaid, it is plaine that one of them muſt needes be that whereof we ſpeake. Peraduenture ſome may expect, that we should giue ldenticall propoſitions(among others) for examples of this plaine euidence: but becauſe they bring no acquiſition of new knowledge vnto the ſoule, ſthe doing of whieli, and the reflecting vpon the manner, is the ſcope of this Chapter) I lett them paſſe tbou any further mention, vpon this occaſion hauing produced them once before, only to shewby an vndenyable example, what it is that maketh our ſoule conſent vnto an enuntiation, and how knowledge is begotten in her, that we might aſterwardes apply the force of itto orher propoſitions. Lett vs therefore proceed to the ſecond ſort of propoſitions, which require ſome diſcourſe, to proue the ldentification t their extremes. Now the ſcope of ſuch diſcourſe is, by comparing them vnto ſome other third thing, to shew their Identification between themſelues: for it sheweth, that each of thema part is identifyed with that new ſubiect it bringeth in: and then our vnderſtanding is ſatisfyed of ther identity, and our ſoule is ſecure of that knowledge it thus acquireth, as well as it is of that which reſulteth out of thoſe propoi ſitions, which beare their euidence in their fiſtaſpect. T his negotiation of the vnderſlanding to diſcouer the truth of propoſitions, when itis ſomewhat hidden, (which we call diseouſe as it is one ofthe chiefeſt and nobleſt actions ofthe ſoule, ſo dothit challenge a very heedefull inſpection into it: and therefore we will allowit a peculiar Chapter by it ſelfe, to explicate the nature and particularities of it. But this litle we now haue ſaid concerning it, is ſufficient for this place; where all we ayme at is to proue (and I conceiue we haue done it very fully)that vhen Identity betweene to or more thinges, preſenteth it ſelfe to our vnderſtanding, it maketh and forceth knovledge in our ſoule. Vhence it is manifeſt, that the ſame poveror ioule, which in a ſingle apprehenſion is poſſeſla vith the Zntity or Vnity of it, is that very power or ſoule, vhich applyed to an Enunciation, knoweth or deemeths ſince knowing 1s nothing elſe, but the apprehending of manifeſt ldentity in the extremes of a propoſition, or an effect immediately conſequent out of it, in the ſoule that applyeth it ſelfe to apprehend that Identity. Which apprehenſion is made, eyther by the force of the extremes, applyed immediately to one an other, orelſe by the application of them to ſome orher thing: which peraduenture may require yet a further application vnto ne apprehenſions, to make the Identity betweene the fitſt extremes appeare euidently. llli Now, as when Identuy truly appeareth, it maketh euidence to our vnderſtanding, and begetteth aſſured knowledgęe in our ſoule; ſo, when there is only an apparent Identity, but not a reallone, it happeneth that, the vnderſtanding is quieted without euidence; and our ſoule is fraught vith a wrong or ſight beliefe, inſteed of certaine knowledge: as for example, it is forthe moſt part true, that what wiſe men affirme, is ſo as they ſay; but becauſc wiſe men are but men ſand conſequently not infaillible) ic may hippen that in ſome one thing, the wiſeſt men that are may miſſe, hough in moſt and generally ſpeaking, they hitt right. Now if any body in a particular occaſion, should (without examining the matrer)take this propoſitiò rigorouſly and peremptorily, that what wiſe men affirme istrue ; and should there vpon ſubſume with euidence, ihat viſe men ſuyſuch a particular thing, and should there vpon proceede to belceue it; in this caſe he may be deceiued, becauſe the firſt propoſition is not verily, but only ſcemingly euident. And this isthe manner how that kind of deeming, which is eyther oppoſed, or inferiour to knovledge, is bred invs: to witt, when eyther through temerity, in ſuch caſes where we may, and it is iuſt we should examineall particularſſo carefully, that no equiuocation or miſtake in any partof them, be admitted to paſſe vpon vs fora truth,and yet we do not: orelſe, through the limitedneſſe and imperfection of our nature, when the minuteneſſe and variety of petty circumſtances in a buſineſſe is ſuch, as we can nor enter into an exact examination of all that belongeth to that matter, ſfor if we should exactly diſcuſſe euery ſlight articular, we :hould neuer gett through any thing of moment) we Fertle our vnderſtanding vpon groundes, that are not ſufficient to moue and determine it: Now in ſome of theſe caſes, ſand particularly in the later) it may happen, that the vnderſtanding it ſelfe is aware, that it neyther hath diſcouered, nor can diſcouer euidence enough, to ſerile its aſent with abſolute aſſurance: and then it iudgeth the beliefe it aſfordeth vnto ſuch a propoſition, to be but probable; and inſteed of knowledge, hath but opinion concerning it. Which opinion appeareth tõ it more or leſſe probable, according as the motiues it elycih on, are ſtronger or weaker. Hon æ . There remaineth yetan other kind of deeming for vs to ſpeake of; begotten in the which though it euer faile of euidence, yet ſometimes it is better then vidsrſanding. opinion, for ſometimes it bringeth certitude ith it. This we call faithi and it is bred in this ſort: when we meete with a man, vho knoweth ſomething which we do not, if withall we be perſuaded that he doth not, nor will not tella lye; we then beleeue what he ſaithof that thing to be true:now according to the perſuaſion we haue of his knowledge and veracity, our beliefe is ſtrong, or mingled with doubt: ſo that if we haue abſolute aſſurance and certainety, that he knoweth the truth and vill not lye, then we may be aſſured, that the faith which we yield to what he ſayth, is certaine as well as euident knowledge is certaine, and admitteth no compariſon with opinion, be it neuer ſo probable: but ſo it may happen, that we may be certainely aſſured that a man doth know the truth of what he ſpeaketh of, and that he vill not lye in reporting it to - vs: for ſeeing no man is wicked withouta cauſe;and that to tella lye in a ſerious matter, is a great wic kedneſſe; if once we come to be certaine that he hath no cauſe, ſas it may fall out we may,)then it followeth, that we are aſſured of the thing which he reporteth to vs. Yet ſtill ſuch faith falleth short of the euidence of knowledge in this regard, that its euidence ſticketh one gegree on this ſide the thing it ſelfe: and at the push, in ſuch a caſe we ſee but with an others eyes; and conſequentiy.f: any oppoſition doariſe againſt our thought thereabout, it is not the beames, and light of the thing it flfe, which ſtrengthen vs againſt ſuch oppoſition, but the goodneſſe of the party vpon whom we 8 rely. ll viy ruth is Before I go any further, Imuſt needes remember one thing, that our the perfetion Maſters teach vs: which is, that truth and falſehood are firſt found in of a Ieaſonble ſayings or Enuntiations; and that although ſingle apprehenſions are in it ĩsmot founs our mind before theſe iudgements, yet are they not true or falſe themin Gmpleſelues, nor is the vnderſtanding ſo by them. To cdmprehend the reaſon a; prehenſiom of this maxime, lett vs conſider what truth and falſchood are: ſurely Enuutiation. truth is nothing elſe, but the conſirmity of our vnderſtanding, with the thinges that make impreſſion vpon it: and conſequently, fallehood is a diſagrecing betweene our mind and thoſe thinges: if the exiſtence which ſelues: then our vnderſtanding is true; otherviſe it is falſee Now the naturall perfection of our Soule or vnderſtanding, is to be fraughevight the reſt of the whole world, that is haue the knovledge of all thinges that are; the knowledge of their eſſences, of their natures, of their proprieties, of their operations , and of whatſocuer elſe belongeth to them allin generall,and to euery one of them in particular: bur our ſoule can not be ſtored or fraught with any thing, by other meanes then by her aſſent or deeming: wherevpon it followeth, that she can not haue her perfection, vntill her deemings or iudgements be perfect; which is, that they be agreeable vnto the thinges in the world: vhen they are ſo, then are they true. Andthisis the reaſon why truth is the ayme and perfection of the ſoule. Now then, truth reſiding only in theaſſents and iudgements of the ſoule, (Which are the trafficke whereby she enricheth her ſelfe ith the reſt of the world) and they being framed by her diſcerning an identity betweene two thinges : which she expreſſeth by & ming one of them of the other: it followeth, that nothing can be true or fulſe, but where there is a compoſition of two extremes, made by the ones being affirmed of the other; which is done only in Enuntiations or iudgements: whiles ſingle apprehenſions aſſent to nothing,and therefore ſertle no knowledge in the ſoule; and conſequently are not capable of verity or falſity, bu are like pictures made at Anſy ſme one of which may happen to be like ſome Perſon, but can not be ſaid to be the picture of him, becauſe it was not drawne from him: ſo theſe bare apprehenſions, becauſe there is not in the man vnion of the ſouleto the outward world, orto the Exiſtence which actuateth its obiect, therefore they make not the ſoule to be the image of the thinges exiſtent: but the iudgement, which ſllltaketh a thing exiſtent, oras exiſtent, in the ſubiect of the propoſition, draweth its picture from the thing it ſelfe: and therefore it maketh the ſoule to be well or ill painted, in reſpect of the thing that is true or falſe. And this is the reaſon, why in one ſenſe doubtfull propoſitions, which the vnderſtandinæ ( not being yet reſolued) maketh inquiringly to informe it ſelfe of the truthof them, can not be ſaid to be true or falſe; for all that while, the ſoule yieldeth noaſſent vnto them, eyther one way or other; yet inan other ſenſe they may, whichis, taking themas ſubiects rhat the vnderſtanding determineth vnto it ſelfe to treate of: for there being two extremes in them, and the propoſition conſiſting in this, whether theſe extremes be identifyed or no, it followeth, that ſinceone part muſt of neceſſity be, ſuch a propoſition ſpoen at randome, or ritten by chance without deſigne, is of neceſſity eyther true or falſe: according as the extremes of it,are orare not one thing. There occurreth no more vnto my conſideration to be ſaid in this place, concerning the aſſents and iudgements of the mind: vnleſſeit be, to explicate ina word or two, the ſeuerall qualities of them, vwhich are found in ſeueral Perſons:and to point at the reaſon why they are called Aaa iz] vhai iudge vhat by thoſe names, ?hich they are vniuerſally knowne by. To which purpoſe we may obſerue, that iudgement or dreming, being a quieting of the mind, it tolloweth that the mind muſt needes be in diſquiet and at vnreſt, before it cometh to iudge: ſo that we may conclude, that iudgement or thinking, is a ~ood attained by a former motion. Now according to the quality of this motion, the iudgement or aſſent, is qualiſyed and denominated. Ve muſt therefore conſider what belongeth to motion; which when we haue done, we shall in iudgements find ſomething proportionable therevnto. Ve knov there is a beginning and an ending in motion; and that there are partes by which it is drawne out in length: all which muſt be particularly conſidered, in our com paring of motions vnto iudgemẽts. Now th-n, as he that would knov preciſely the nature of any motion, muſt not beginne his ſuruay of it, after it hath beene ſome time in fluxe; nor muſt giue ouer his obſeruing it, before it haue arriued vnto its vtmoſt periode; but ought to carry his attention along from its fitſt origine, and paſſe with it through all its partes, vntill it ceaſing, giue him Ieaue to do ſo too(for otherwiſe, it may happen that the courſe of it be differing in thoſe partes he hath not obſerued, from thoſe that he hath, and accordingly, the picture he shall make of it by that impefect ſc ntling, will proue an erroneous one;)ſo in like manner, when a man is tomake a iudgement of any matter in queſtion, to giuea good account o fit, he muſt beginne at the roote, and follow ſucceſſiuely all the branches it diuideth it ſclfe into, and driue euery one of them to their vimoſt extremity and periode: and according as in iudging he beheaueth himſelfe well or ill, in the ſeuerall circumſtances that are proportionable to the beginning, ending, and partes of motion; ſo his iudgement is qualifyed with the names of ſeuerall vertues agreeing therevnto, or of theiroppoſite defects. If he beginne his conſiderations very lowe, and from the very bottome and roote of the aſfaire, which is from the firſt and all comprehending principles of the queſtion, and proceede on orderly taking all before him; his indgement is accounted deepe, profound, and ſolide: for he that caſteth ſo farre, as to leaue behind him no part of the matter he is inquiring about, and then driueth his courſe ſteadily and ſmoothly forwardes, without any leapes ouer rugged paſſages, or interruptions, or looſe breaches; muſt of neceſſity make a well grounded iudgement; and ſuch anone, as can not eaſily be ouerthrowne, or he be caſily remoued fromit. : And this is indeede the full reaſon, of what a litle aboue we only glanced att: namely, why vnderſtanding men are vſually accounted obſtinate in their tenets, and are hard to be remoued from their opinions once ſettled in their minds: for when other men oppoſe them, they vrge nothingſ for the moſt part ) againſt theſe iuditious mens reſolutions or beliefes, but what they haue already throughly foreſeene: but theſe on the other ſide, do ſce a great deale, that their oppoſers reach not vnto: ſo that notwithſtanding all ſuch oppoſition, they continue ſtill vnsh. ken in their iudgements: for which, the others hich ſee not as much as they, do thinke them obſtinate, and not ledde by reaſon, becauſe they follow not that short reaſon, beyond which themſelues can not reach. The contrary vice to this, is called a ſlight iudgement: and conſiſteth herein, that a man out of a few,and an inſufficient number of circumſtances, reſolueth the whole caſe: hich temerity and short ſi htedneſſe of iudgement, is ſignificantly taxed in our English brouie, that 4 fooles Ei is ſoone shott. Thus much for the beginning ofa iudgement: the next conſide- what is an 10. ration may be concerning the end of it; in regard whereof, if it reach to acute iudgothe vimoſt extent and periode of what is conſiderable in a hard queſtion ropoſed, it gaineth thetitle of sharpe, or of ſubtile, and acute; for the ſnencũ of the matter that perplexeth ones iudgement, conſiſteth in the inuolution of thinges, which looked vpon in groſſe, do ſeeme to haue no diſtinction or oppoſition among themſelues; and yet are in truth f very different and contrary natures. Now a good iudgement diuideth and cutteth through them, and allotteth vnto euery particular thuig its proper limits and boundes: wherefore, as in corporeall ſubſtances, the vertue of diuiding is sharpeneſſeand edge, by tranſlation from thence, ſuch a iudgement as pierceth neately and ſmartly betweene contradictories that lye cloſe together, is called sharpe and acute. In like manner, ſubtility is a vertue, whereby a liquor or other body ſearcheth euery litle hole and part of what it worketh vpon, tillit gett through it; and fromthence, it is vſed in iudgements to ſignify the ſame: whoſe oppoſite vice is called dulleneſſe. In the laſt place we are to examine, what proportion a ludgement holdeth with the partes of motion: in theſe, two ges are to be conſidered, namely the quantity or multitude of thoſe partes, and the order of them. As for the quantity in a motion, it belongeth eyther to long or short, or to quicke and ſlow: now, where the beginning and ending are already knowne and determined, and conſequently where the lengthis determined, and dependeth not at all of theiudge to alterit. (for he muſt take it as the matter giueth it) there a iudgement can acquire no denomination of perfection or deficiency, from length or from shortneſſe; for they belong originally to the matter of the iudgement; and the judgement muſt accordingly fitt it ſelfe to that; and therefore is lyable neyther to commendations nor to reproach, for being long or short: it remaineth then, that the vertue in iudging anſwerable to the quantity of motion, muſt conſiſt in quickeneſſe and celerity; and the contrary vice, in ſlowneſſe and heauyneſſe. As fororder in the ſeuerall partes of motion, we know that if they be well ordered, they are diſtinct and eaſily diſcernable. Which vertue, in our ſubiect, is called cleereneſſe of iudgement; as the contrary vice is gonfuſion. ment, and vhat a dull one. i Inwhat conſiſteth quic kneſſe and Clearenelſo of iudgement: and thete THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of Diſcourſing. a 5ꝶ Nthe laſt Chapter we haue shewed, how two apprehenſions M ar à ioyned together do make a iudgement: no in this our I5E. ſ firſt employment will be, to shew how rhree of theſe N 2 thoughts or iudgements, well choſen and duely ordered, do * compoſe the ſirſt and moſt ſimple of perfect diſcourſes; which Logitians call a ſyllogiſme: whoſe end and effect is to gaine the knowledge of ſomething, before hidden and vnknowne. The meanes whereby this is compaſſed, is thus. By the two firſt iudgements, we ioyne the extremes of the propoſition we deſire to know, vnto ſome third thingi and then, by ſeeing that they both are one third thing, and that one can be but one, we come to diſcerne, that tiuly one of them is the other; which before we ſiw not: ſo that, the identity which firſt made an identicall propoſition be knowne and agreed vnto, and afterwardes cauſed the like aſſent to be yiclded vnto thoſe maximes, whoſc identiſication preſently shewed it ſelfe, now bya litle circuit and bringing in of a third terme, makerh the two firſt ( whoſe identification was hidden and obſcure, whiles we locked vpon the termes themſelues) appeare to be in very truth but one thing. The various mingling and diſpoſing of theſe hree termes in the two ſirſt propoſitions, begetteth a variety in tht ſyllogiſmes that are compoſed of them: and it conſiſterh in this, that the aſſumed terme vnto which the othertwoare interchangeably ioyned, is eyther ſuid of them, or they are ſaid of it: and from hence ſpring three diſferent kindes of ſyllogiſmes; for eyther the aſſumed or middle terme, is ſaid of both the other two;or both they are ſuid of it:or it is ſaid of one of them, and the otheris ſaid of it: neyther is there any deeper myſtery then this, in the three ſigurẽs, our great Clei kes ta ke ſo much of: which being brought into rules, to helpe our memory in the ready vſe of this tranſpoſition of the termes; if we ſpinne our thoughts vpon them into ouer ſmall thriddes, and thereof weaue too intricate webbes ( meane while not reſlecting vpon the ſolide ground within ourſelues, where on theſe rules are built, nor conſidering the true end why;) we may ſpend our time in triuiall and vſeleſſe ſubtilities: and at length, confound and miſapply the right vſe of our naturall diſcourſe, with a multitude of precepts drawne from artificiall logike. l But to returne to our matter in hand; vnder this primary three fold variety, is an other of greater extent, groing out of the diuers compoſition of thethree termes,as they are qualifyed by aſſirmation ot negation, and by Vvniuerſality or particulariiy: for that vnity, which the two termes, whoſe identification is enquired after, muſt haue by being ioyned with the third, becometh much varied by ſuch diuers application: and from hence shooteth vp that multitude of kindes of ſyllogiſmes, which our Logitians eall moodes. All which I haue thus particularly expreſſed, 0 the end we may obſerue how this great varicty han geth vpon the ſole ſtring of identity. Now theſe Syllogiſmes, being as it were interlaced and wouen one within an other, (ſo that many of them do make a long chaine, whereof each of them isa linke) do breede, orrather are all the variety of mans life: they are the ſtepps by which we walke in all our conuerſations and in allour buſineſſes: man as he is man, doth nothing elſe but weaue ſuch cRaines: whatſocuer he doth, ſwaruing from this worke, he doth as deficient from the nature of man: and if he do ought beyond this, by breaking out into diuers ſortes of exteriour actions, he findeth neuertheleſſe in this linked ſequele of ſimple diſconrſes, the art, the cauſe, the rule, the boundes, and the modell of it. Lett vs take a ſummary view of the vaſt extent of it, and in what an immẽſe Ocean one may ſecurely ſayle, by that neuer varying compaſſe, when the needle is rightly touc hed, and ſitted to a well moulded boxei making ſtillnew diſcoueries of regions, farre out of the ſight and beliefe of them, who ſtand vpon the hiher shore. Humane operations are compriſed vnder the rwo generall heades of knowledge and of action: if we looke but in groſſe, vpon what an infinity of diuiſions theſe branch themſelues into, ve shall become giddy, our braines will turne, our eyes will grow weary and dimme, with ayming only att a ſuddaine and rouing meaſure of the moſt conſpicuous among them, in the way of knowledge. We ſee what mighty workes men haue extended their labours vntonot only by wild diſcourſes, of which hge volumes are cõpoſed, but euen in the rigorous methode of Geometry, Arithmetike, and Algebra; in which, an Euclide, an Apollonius,an Archimedes, a Diophantus,and their followers, haue reached ſuch admirable heights, and ſor wound vp ſuch vaſt bottomes, ſometimes shewing by effects, that the thing propoſed muſt needes be as they haue ſert downe, and can not poſſibly be any otherwiſe; otherwhiles, appaying the vnderſtanding (whichis neuer truly at reſt, tillit hath found the cauſes of the eſfects it ſeeth) by expoſing how it cometh to be: ſo that the reader calling to mind, ho ſuch a thing was taught him before, and now findingan other vnexpectedly conuinced vpon him, eaſily ſeeth that theſe to put together, do make and force that third to be, whereof he was before in admirarion ho it could be effected: which two wayes of diſcourſe, are ordinatily knowne by the names of Demonſirations; the one called a Priori, the other a Poſteriori. Now f we looke into the extent of the deductions out of theſe, we shall find no end. In the heauẽs, we may perceiue Aſtronomy Dieaſurin g whatſoeuer we can imagine; and ordering thoſe glorious lights, which our Creator hath hanged out for vs;and shewing them their wayes, and pricking out their pathes, and preſcribing them ſfor as many ages as he pleaſeth before hand)the various motions they may not ſwarue from in thæ leaſt circumſtance. Nor want there ſublime ſoules, that tell vs what mettall they are made of, what figures they haue, vpon what pillars they are ſixed, and vpon what gimals they moue and performe their various periodes: wittneſſe that excellent and admirable worke, I haue ſo ofren mentioned in my former Treatiſe. If we looke vpon the earth, we shall meete with thoſe, that will tell vs how thickeit is, and how much roome it taketh vp: they will shew vs how men and beaſtes are hanged vnto it by the m the water and ayre do couer it; what force and power fire hath vpon them all; what working is in the depths of it; and of what compoſition the maine body of itis framed: where neyther our eyes can reach, nor any of our ſenſes can ſend its meſſengers to gather and biing back any relations of it. Yet are not our Maſters contented with all this: the whole world of bodies is not enough to ſatisfy them: the knowledge of all corporeall thinges, and of this vaſt machine of heauen and earth, vith all that they encloſe, can not quench the vnlimited thirſt of a noble minde, once ſett on fire with the beauty and loue of truth. Aſtuat infæelix, anguſto limite mundi, Vt Gyaræ clauſis ſcopulis, parulque ſeripho. But ſuch heroike ſpirits, caſt their ſubtile nertes into an other world, after the winged inhabitans of the heauens; and find meanes to bring them alſo into account, and to ſerue them ( how imperceptible ſoeuer they be to the ſenſes) as daynties at the ſoules table. They enquire after a maker of the world we ſee, and are ourſelues a maine part of; and hauing found him, they conclude him(out of the force of eontradiction)to be æternall, infinite, omnipotent, omniſcient , immurable, and a thouſand otheradmirable qualities they determine of him. They ſearch after his tooles and inſtruments, wherewith he built this vaſt and admirable pallace, and ſecke to grow acquainted vith the officiers and ſtewardes, that vnder him gouerne this orderly and numerous family. They find them to be inuiſible creatures, exalted aboue vs more then we can eſtimate, yet infinitely further short of theirand our maker, then we are of them.If this do occaſion them, to caſt their thoug hts vpon man himſelfe, they finda nature in himſit is true) much inferiourto theſe admirable Intelligences, yet ſuch an one, as they hope may one day arriue vnto the likeneſſe of ſem : and thateuen at the preſent, is of ſo noble a moulde, as nothing is too higge foritto faddome, nor any thing too ſmallforit to diſcerne. lli Thus we ſee knowledgæ hath no limits; nothing eſcapeth the toyles of ſcience;all that euer was, that is, or can euer be, is by them circled in; their extent is ſo vaſt, that our very thoughts and ambitiòs are too weake and too poore to hope for, or to ayme at What by them may be cõpaſſed. And if any man, that is not invred to raiſe his thoughts aboue the pitch of the outward obiects he cõuerſeth dayly with, should ſuſpect that what Ihaue nov ſaid, is rather like the longing dreames of paſſionate louers, whoſe deſires feede them with impoſſibilities, then that ĩt is any reall truthi orshould imagine that it is but a pocetike Idea of ſcience, that neuer was or will be in act: or if any other, that hath his diſcouiſing ſaculty vitiated and peruerted, by hauing beene imbued in the ſchooles with vnſound and vmbratile principles, should perſuade himſelfe, that howſocuer the pretendeis vnto learning and ſcience, may talke loude of all thinges, and make a noiſe with ſcholaſtike termes, and perſuade their ignorant hearers that they ſpeake and vnfould deepe myſteries, yet in very truth, nothing at all can be knowne: I shall beſeech them both, to ſuſpend their coniectures or belicfes herein, and to reſerue their cenſure of me, whether orno I haue ſtrained too farre, vntillthe learned author of the Dialogues of the world, haue enriched it with the worke he hath compoſed of Metaphyſikes: in which, going orderly and rigorouſly by continued propoſitions, in ſuch ſort as Mathematicians demonſtrate their vndertakinges, he hath left no ſcope for wrangling braines to make the leaſt cauill againſt his doctrine: and caſting his sharpe ſighted thoughts ouer the whole extent of nature, and driuing them vp to the Almighty Authour of it, he hathi left nothing out of the verge of thoſe rules, and allcomprehending principles he giueth of true ſcience. And then Idoubt not, but they willthrougly abſolue me frõ hauing vſed my ampliſication, in ayming at the reach of this allgraſping power. For my part,the beſt expreſſion that Iam able to make of this admirable piece, I muſt borrow ſom witty Galileus, when he ſpeaketh of Archimedes his long miſſed booke of glaſſes; and profeſſ, that hauing ſome of the Elements or bockes of it entruſted in my handes by the Authour, Iread them ouer with extreme amazement, as wellas delight, for the wonderfull ſubtility,and ſolideneſſe of them. T hus much for knowledge. Now lett vs caſt an eye vpon humane actions All that we do (if we do it as we should do, and like men)is L. gouerned and ſteired by two ſortes of qualities: the one of which, we th call Artes; the other Prudences. Anart, is a collection of generall rules, ẽ comprc hending ſome one ſubiect, vpon which we often worke. The matters we worke vponſout of which the particular ſubiects of artes do ſpring) are of three kindes: our ſelues, our neighbours, and ſuch dumbe orinſenſible thinges, as compoſe the reſt of the world. Ouractions vpon our ſclues are the higheſt and the nobleſt of all the reſt,and thoſe by which we liue and worke as men: or to expreſſe my ſelſe better, they are thoſe by which we perfect that part of vs, which maketh vs men, and by which we direct and leuell all we do, according to the rule of reaſon; not ſuſfering our actions to ſarue from what she dictateth vnto vs. This is done, by multiplying and heightning the thoughts of thoſe thinges, which maintaine vs in reaſon; whether the moties be morall, as the examples of worthy perſons, and the precepts and perſuaſions of wiſe men,and the like; or Whetherthey be naturall, as the conſideration of the ſweete and contented life, hich vertue giueth ve here, by good conuerſation, honour, proſit, quiet, pleaſure, and what elſe ſoeuer groweth out of ſo excellent a roote: as alſo, of the beatitude and hippy ſtate it bringeth vs to in the next; and of the contrary efects vhich ſpring from vice. Againe, by obſeruing the motiues and wayes of our aſtons and animall deſires, we learne how to preuent them; how to teniify them; and how to weare them gently away by litle and litle, through ſometimes giuing them diuerſions, through otherwhiles reſtraining them with modertion, and through oftentimes cutting of the occaſions, and abridging them of their naturall encreaſings. All theſe thinges are brought intoatt and rule; whoſe leſſons, were men but as careſull and induſtrious to ſtudie, as they areto become Maſters in vaine and triuial thinges, they would enioy happy lifess In the next place, weare to conſider the actions whereby ve worke vpon our neighbours. They are chiefely gouuernement and negotiation: both which are of one kind;and haue but this difference, that the ones done in common, the other is performed n particular. The meanes by which we command, are rewards and punishments; which who hath in his handes, may aſſuredly by iſe vſing them, bring to paſſe wharſoeuer he hath a mind vnto. Vpon occaſion of mentioning theſe two poweifull motiues, which haue ſo maine an inſluence in mens actions, ve may note by the way, that many of them, and that worke moſt forcibly vpon mens mindes, are thinges whoſe ſubſiſtence we know not where to ſind; as honour, praiſe, glory, commund, ſingularity, eminency, shame, infamy, ſubiection, reproach, and the like; vnto any of which, none of our ſenſes can reach; and yet they goucme mans life, in a manner vholy and perfectly. In negotiation, we propoſe to ſingle men their owne intereſts and profits not ſuch as the propoſer can, or willeffect; but ſuch as are likely to ariſe out of the action we endeauour to draw him vnto with whom vwetreate. Inboth theſe, the vſuall Iabour is, to make our neighbours villing to leaue ſome preſent good, in hope of a greater to comes or to be content to vndergoe ſome preſent harme, for feare of a greater to enſueThe gencrall inſtrument which they vſe, is diſiourſing; whoſe vertue conſiſteth partlyin our owne mind, and partly in deliuering our mind to others for firſt we muſt know what we should ſay, and next in what manner weshould ſayitt. IEEEEE i The art which directeth our owne minde,and teacheth vs what to ay,is Logile: whoſe partes are to: according as the aſſaires falling into diſcourſe, are lice wiſc of a twofold nature:the one inſtructeth vs how to manage and order our reaſon, when it dealeth with ſuch ſubiects as we may attaine to certainety in. And here the rules of Demonſtration take place; teaching vs to deſine, to diuide, and to cõclude. The other inſtrueteth vs how to behaue ourſelues, when we meete with ſuch ſubiects, as a good and probable gucſſe is the fartheſt we can reach vnto towardes the knowledge of them: and for theſe, the Topicall part of Logike ſerueths the which, taking a view of all the accidents belonging to any thing propounded, shewerh how to drav probubilities from euery one of them. ll Ourdiſcourſing to others, is eyther to open our mindes barely vnro themor to perſuade them of ſomewhat ourſclues beleeue; or to winne Of them to ſomewhat we would haue them do. For the bare deliuery of our mindes to others, we haue Grammar; the ſcope of which art, conſiſteth firſt, in teaching vs to deliuer our conceptions plainely and clearely, (which is the maine intent of ſpeaking) next, in making, our diſcourſe be ſuccinct and brieſe, (hich is the meaſure of our ſpeaking, both for ourſelues and others; )and laſtly, in ſorting our wordes, ſo as what we ſay, may be accompanied with ſeeteneſſe; borth in commò, in regard of the eare, by auoyding ſuch harsh ſoundes as may offend it; and in particular, in regard of the cuſtome of the language wherein we ſpeake, and of the perſonsto whom we ſpeake. lt lll I Theart whereby we may perſuade others, and inne them to aſſent vnto what we would haue them, is Rheterite. Her rules inſtruct vs how to ò diſpoſc and order with beſt aduantage, in regard of the Auditors diſpoſition, borh the reaſons which Logike aſfordeth vs,and the wordes which Grammar ſtoreth vs ith: as alſo, how to giue life and motion to what we ſay,by our action and geſture; that ſo we may perſuade our Auditory, ſuch paſſions raigne in vs,as we ſeeke to ſtirre vp in them: foras we may obſcrue, that one who yawneth, maketh an other likeviſe yawne; andas our ſecing others laugh, prouoketh laughing alſo in vs(the reaſlons whereof we haue touched in the former Treatiſe;) after the ſame manner, what paſſion ſoeuer we exhibite in ourſelues, the ſame ſtealerh inſenſibly vpon thoſe we ſpeake vnto; whiles their mind attending to the wordes they heare, is not aare of the ſubtile ſpirits motions, that b a kind of contagion riſe and ſwell in their hartes: according to vhidt naturall inclination in all men, the Maſter of Poets and excellent obſeruer of mens humours ſuid paſſing well: ll Si vis me flere, dolendum est Primim ipltrili. p Fence grow thoſe encreaſes by metaphores, hyperboles, and other tropes and figures: hence thoſe feruors by interrogations, exclamations, apoſtrophes, and the like; which when they are fittely placed, they carry the Auditor euen againſt his will. lltl Poctry, is not a gouernour of our Aclions, but by aduantagious expreſſing ſome eminent ones, it becometh an vſeſull directour to vs; and therefore challengeth a place here. The deſi gne of it is, by repreſenting humane actions in a more auguſt and admirable hew, them in themſelues they vſually haue: to frame ſpecious Ideas, in hich the people may ſee, what is well done, vhat amiſſe, vhat should be done, and what by errour is wont to be done: and to imptint in mens mindes a deepe conceite of the goods and euils, that follow their vertuous or vitious comportement in their lifes. If thoſc who aſſume the title of Poets, did aymeat this end, and would hold themſelues ſtrictly to it, they would proue as profitable inſtrumẽts as any the commò&wealth had: forthe delightfullneſſe and blitheneſſe of their compoſitions, inuiteth moſt men to be frequently conuerſunt with themi (eyther in ſongs, or vpon the ſtage, or in other Pocmes) whiles the ſober aſpect and ſeuerity of bare precepts, 'deturneth many from lending a pleaſed eare to their wholeſome doctrine; and what men ſallow with delight, is conuerteth into nourishmẽt: ſo that, if their diiſt were to ſettle in mens mindes a due valuation of vertue, and a deteſtation of vice, noart would do it more vniuerſally, nor moreefectually: and by it, mens hartes would be ſett on fire to the purſuite of the onc, and be shrunke vp with diſlike and horrour againſtthe other. But vnto ſuch a Poet as would ayme at thoſe noble effects, no knowledge of Moraliuy, nor of the nature and courſe of humane actions and accidents muſt be wanting: he muſt be well verſed in Hiſtory:he muſt be acquainted ith the progreſſe of nature, in what she biingeth to paſſe; he muſt be deficient in no part of Logilæ, Rhetorile, or Grammar: in a word, he muſt be conſummate in all artes and ſciencies, if he will be excellent in his way. But whiles we thus entertaine ourſelues ith thoſe artes, which ſerue vs in diſcourſing vith others, it ere a great ouerſight to forgett that faculty, hichis the baſis and groundworke of all thoſe:and that is, the power of ſpeech, which nature hath beſtowed vpon vs. It conſiſteth in twoactions: the one outward, the other inward: the outward, is the gluing of various ſoundes to our breath, as it paſſeth through our mouth, 5 diuers coniunctions of our tongue, teeth,and lippes, to themſelues, or to diuers parts of our mouth, or by their ſeparations from them: in which, ve ſee that birdes are able to imitate vs, and I am perſuaded, the like might be eſſected by inſenſible creatures, ifa dexterous man ould employ his time, in contriuing and making an inſtrument to expreſſe thoſe different ſoundes; which, not hauing more then ſeuen ſubſtantiall difſerences beſides the vowels (as ſome who haue carefully noted them, do aſfirme) it would peraduenture be no hard matter to compoſe ſuch an engine. The inward action of locution, is the framing of conuenient anſweres to what is a:ked; of fitt re plies to what is ſaid; and in a word, to ſpeake appoſitely, and to the purpoſe: Wherevnto, neyther beaſt nor dead inſtrument can be brought, vuleſſe the artiſicier be able to endue it with vnderſtanding. Allotherartes, inſtiuct vs how to worke orderly vpon beaſtes and or II. . . i i arts th inſenſible bodies: by ſome of them, we cultiuate liuing creatures;as when concerne husband men nourt h sheepe, oxen, foule, and the like, for ſlaughter: by dunbe and otheis, we diſeipline them, as when we teach horſes, dogges,apes, hawkes, inſonſple parrats, and ſome kind of ſishes, to hunt, to play, and in a word, to do ſomewhat eyther for our profit, or for our pleaſure: and againe, by others we vſe their natures to our endes; as vhen we lay baites to catch them; when ve ſett egges vndei hennes, to haue the chickens, and the like: by other artes, we worke as powerfully vpon inſenſible creatures; among which, by knowing the natures of diuers trees, herbes, minerals, &c: we are able to bring any of them to what vſe ſocuer we find moſt expedient for our ſeruice: from hence growall thoſe artes and trades, in which we ſee men dayly ſpend their whole lifes; ſo as it is needeleſſe to inſiſt vpon the particulars of them, ſince townes and the cirties are compoſcd of the ſeuerall tribes of perſons that profeſſe them and liue by them. But wæ muſt not leaue this ſubiect, without noting how admirably mans wirt turnethit ſelfe to ſo different ſortes, and to ſuch an infinite varicry of thinges. For what man is there, (if he be a man) but might haue become Maſter in any of theſe ſo differing trades, in caſe he had applyed himſelf- as conſtantly to that, as he hath done to ſume other he is perfect in? Againe, lett vs conſider how it happencth often, that he doth not the ſame thing twice the ſame way, but according to his owne, or an other mans fanſie, changeth his orke at will, now doing it after one fashion, now afteran orherias hauing no law or determination from nature, but bein g wholy left to his owne direction. There ſtill remaineth oneart, not yet ſpoken of; which knoweth nor. Iwhere to challenge a place, whether among the moderatours f our Ohiehu owne actions, oramong thoſe whereby we gouerne thinges: and that is Arithmetile: which ſeemeth to belong vnto thinges,and yet it meddleth not with them: and againe, it ſeemeth to be a maine directour of vur internall actions, and yet belongeth neyther to Morals, nor to Logile. Whereſoeuer its due be to place it, Iam ſure it is not to be forgottẽ; ſeeing iris ſo principallan one, as our life can hardly conſiſt without it. It woreth vpon notions that are no wh re: for euery thing thatis in the world, is but one;and to be, or to make a number, can not happen without an vnderſtanding: the aſfections likewiſe of them, are as the ſubiect, all inuiſible:as to be cuen or odde, to be cubes, ſquares, rootes, & c: and yet ho great the power and extent of thisart is, none can rightly vnderſtand or beleeue, but he that hath the knowledge of it, or hath ſcene the vertue and efficacity of it. n thoſe qualities, hereby we ſaid humane actions are gouerned, to apply themto thir particular matter: and that is Prudence; which we may define to be, a quality or power, by whoſe aſſiſtance ve apply vnto the matter we are to woi ke vpon, ſuch inſtruments, as in our preſent iudge. ment appeare fitteſt to bring it to that paſſe, hich ſerueth beſt for our intentions, when by our ſenſes, or by ohu gueſſes, we know the particular diſpoſitions of the matter, and of the inſtruments wherewith we are to ch inge it. Now howbeit this occurreth generally in all artes,yet its ſpeciall place and neceſſity, is in gnuerning and moderating our owne or other mens Morall actions; and accordingly, its name is eſpecially addicted therevnto: and that man is ſaid to be prudent or diſcreete, who gouerneth himſelfe and others well. This quality of Morall Prudence in generall, is diuided into three particular ones: the ſirſt of which, belongethtoa gouernour in a ſtate or commonwealt h: he next may be aſſigned to him that is skilifull in the lawes: and the third concerneth the managing and conduct of military actions. The reaſon of this long receiued diſtribution peraduenture is, becou'e in theſe occurrences, our paſſion ſwaycth vs generally more then in any others: and the operation and eſfect of Trudence, (whoſe prouince isto curbe and moderate our paſſions by reaſon) is greateſt, and appeareth moſt in thoſe ſubiects, where paſſion raigneth vſually vith greateſt impetuoſity. Thus haue wæ runne ouer the maine partes of diſcourſe, and ihe g-nerall heades of mans action as man: which peraduenture /ay through their numerouſneſſe, appeare to be as it were but looſtly ſcattered from our penne; ( as happeneth vntoall materials, that muſt ſcrue forafter buildinges; and that till they be employed, require no more but ſorting,and laying together in ſeuerall heapes, to the end they may be ready for vſe: Jand therefore before we goany further,it will not be amiſſe to make reſlexions vpon what we haue ſaid; and to draw it neerer our intended ſcope; and to ſquare out and giue ſome figure and polishing to theſe ſtones, here where we digge them out of the quarry, vhereby they may hereaſter with leſſe adoe, fitt the places we hue aſſigned them, in the ſtructure we intend: and ſo, a litle trouble here, vhiles our tooles are ſtill in our handes, and our matter lyeth ready for our ſtroakes, and our thoughts are warmeth with woiking vpon them, may ſaue vsa great deale there, where our maine employment will be, to lay artificially,and to ioyne cloſely, what now we but hew out: and therefore will require finer inſtruments, and a sharper edge, then what at preſent ſerueth our turne. : Lett vs then bring backe to account all we haue ſaid in this Chapter: and when we haue well reſlected vpon euery particular, we shall find they allagree in this, that th y are nothing elſe, but a due ordering of one thing with an orher: a ſyllogiſme, is an ordering of ſome few notions:a ſcience is an ordering of ſyllogiſmes, in ſuch ſort, as a new propoſition may follow out of thoſe which went before: and as we le that when by our thoughts diuers ſyllogiſmes are well ordered, hidden thinges come to be diſcloſed in our vnderſtanding; euen ſo among bodies, if thinges whoſe proprieties are knowne, be likewiſe ordered and put together, thoſe very eſfects, which were diſcouered by the ordering of notions in our head, will ſpring forth in nature: as for example, if by knoving the natures of ſire and of towe, our diſcourſe ſindeth that towe put to fire will preſently become ſire, the ſame will happen in nature, if we put materiall towe, or ſome other body rhat hath rhe qualities of it, to reall fire, or to ſme oſ her ſubſtance that is endewed ith the vertues of fire: in like manner, if by knowing that colours are nothing elſe, but various mixtures of light and of daikeneſſe in bodies, our diſcourſe aſſureth vs, that by ſeuerall compoundings of theſe extremes, reds, blewes, yellowes, greenes, and all other intermediate colours may be generated accordingly we shallfind in effect, thot by the ſeuerall minglings of blacke and white bodies (becauſe they reſlect or drowne light moſt poweifully) or by interweauing ſtreames of pure light and of shadowes one vith an other, we may procreate ne colours in bodies, and begert new luminous appearances to our eyes: lo that hence it appeareth clearely, that the ſame nature is in our vnderſtanding, and in the thinges: and that the ſame ordering, which in the one maketh ſcience, in the other cauſeth naturall tranſmurations. Anotherreſlexion, which willbe fitt forvsto make vpon theſe long diſcourſes, is this, that of neceſſity there muſt be a ioyning of ſome thinges now actually in ourknovledge, vnto other thinges we thiuke not of: for it is manifeſt, that we can not at the ſame time actually thinke of a whole booke of Euclide and yet to the due knowled e of ſome of the laſt propoſirions,the knowledge of almoſtall the former is required: ikewiſe th impoſſible we should at the ſame time thinke of all the multitude of rules belonging to any art, as of Grammar, of Metering, of Architecture; and yet when we write in Lating, make a poeme, or lay the deſigne of a houſe, we practiſe them whiles we thii ke not of them, and are aſſured we goe not againſt them, howeuer ve. remember them not. Nay, euen before we knowa thing, we ſeeme to knowit ; forſince ve can haue a deſire of nothing, but of what we know how could we deſire to know ſuch or ſuch a thing, vnleſſe we know bothit, and the knowledge of it? And for the moſt part we ſee a horſe, orman, or herbe, or workemanshippe, and by our ſenſe haue knowledge that ſuch a thing itis, before we know what, or who, or ho, itis: that groweth aſterwardes out of the diligent obſeruation of what we ſee which is thit, whereby learned men differ from the vnlearned, for what ſtiikerh the ſenſe, is Icnownea like by them both: but then hre is the diſference betweene them, the later ſort ſitteth nill with thoſe notions, that are made at the firſt, by the beating of our ſenſe vpon vs, without driuing them any further:and thoſe that are learned ,do reſolue ſuch com pounded notions, into otheis made by more conmon beatinges, and therefore more ſimple:and this is all the oddes in regard of kuovledge, that a Icholler huhi of an vnlettered man. One obſeruation mo e we willdraw out of what we haue ſuid, and thæn end this Chapter:it is, howa man dothr ftentimes en quire amon hisowne thoughts, and turneth vp and dowee the ima ges he hath in his head, and beateth his braines, to call ſuch thinges into his minde, as are vſefull vnto him,and are for the preſent out of his me mory: which, as we ſce it ſo neceſſary, that wihout it no matter of importance can be performed in the way of diſcourſe ( whereof I my ſelfe haue too frequent experience in the writing of this Treatiſe) ſo on the orher ſide, we can not perceiue that any creature beſides man, doth it of ſett purpoſe and formally as man doth. THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. How a man proceedeth to Action. 1 2œrẽ Auing thus taken a ſammary view of the principall Qualiſ5ra ſſ ties a man isendewed withall, 4pprehending, luduing, and uã ſi Diſcourſing;and h ing shewed how he is enriched in and by them with the natures of all thinges in the world; it remaineth for our laſt wo: ke in this part, to conſider in what manner he mak:th vſe of ithi treaſure in his ordinary actions: vhichitis enident are of two different kindes, and conſequently hue two ſeuerall principles, vnderſtanding and ſenſe; theſe ſway by turnes, and ſometimes ioyne together, to produce a mixed action of borh. If only ſer.ſ: were the fountaine from whence his actions ſpring, we should ohſerue no other ſtraine in any of them, then meerely that according ro which beaſtes performe ihirs: they would proceede euer  more ina conſtant vnuaryable tenour, according to the la of materiall things, one body wo.king vpon an oiher, in ſuch ſort as we haue declared in the former Treatiſe. On rhe other ſide, if a man were all vnderſtanding, and had not this brighi lampe encloſed in a pitcherof clay, the beames of it would shine without any allay of dimmeneſſe, th: ough all hæ did; and he could do nothing contrary to reaſon, in purſuite õf the higheſt end he had prefixed vnto himſelfe; for he neyiher would, nor could do any thing whatſ euer, vntill he had firſt conſidered allthe particular circumſiãces, that had relation to his action in hind; and had then concluded, that vpon the whole matter, at this time, and in this place, to attaine this end, it is fitting and beſt to do thus or thus: which concluſion could be no ſqoner made, but that the action would without any further diſpoſition OF MANS SOVLE, Chap. IV. 587 on his ſide, immediately enſue, agreeable to the principles it ſ pringeth from. Both partes of this aſſertion are manifeſt: for the firſt, it is euident, that whenſocuer an Agent woiketh by knowledge, he is vnreſolued whether he shall woi ke or not worke, asallo of his manner of working, vntill his knowledęe(that ought to direct and gouerne his working) be perfect and complete: but that can not be, as long as any circumiſtance not as yet conſidered, may make it ſeeme ſitt or vnſitt ro proceede: and therefore, ſuch actions as are done without exact conſideration of euery particular circumſtance, do not ſlow froma pure nderſtanding: From whence it followeth. that when an vnderſtanding is not ſatis fyed of euery particular circumſtance, and conſequently can not determine what he muſt immediately do, but apprehendeth that ſome of the circumſtances not as yet conſidered, may ſor rather muſt) chang: ſome part of hisaction, it muſt of neceſſity be vndetermined in reſpect of the immediate action; and conſequently, it muſt refraine abſolutely fiom working. The other partis cleare; to witt, that whe n the vnderſtandin g vpon conſideration of all circumſtances, knoweth abſolutely what is beſt, the act:on followeth immediately ( as farre as dependeth ofthe vnderſtanding)wii hout any further diſpoſition on his behalfe: for ſceing that norhing but knowledge belongeth to the vnderſtanding, he who ſuppoſeth allknowledge in it, alloweth all that is requiſite or poſſible for it to woike by: now ſll be put, nothing is wanring that should cauſe it to worke: but where no cauſe is wanting, but all requiſite cauſes are actually being, the e ſſect muſt alſo actually be, and follow immediately out of rhem: and conſequently, theaction is done, ( in as much as concerne h the vnderſtanding, and indeede abſolutely, valeſſe ſome other cauſe do fail )as ſoone as the vnderſtanding knoweth all the circumſtances belongingto it: ſoas ĩt is manifeſt out of this whole diſcourſe, thut if a man wrought only by his vndei ſt:nding, all his actions would be diſcreete and rationall, in reſpect of the end he had propoſed ro himſclfe;and till he were aſſured what were beſt, he would keepe himſelfe in ſuſpenſe and do nothing; and as ſoone as he were ſo, he would admite of no delayes, but would ar the inſtant proceede to action according to his knowledge: the contrary of allwhich, we dayly ſee by experience in euery man. Ve may then ſufely conclude, that in humane nature there are tvo 2: different centers, from whence croſſe actions do ſlow: the one he hath Hoæ oue j . : . generall common with beaſts,and whoſe principles and lawes we deliuered in the 2ndinbrea former Treatiſe, where we diſcourſed of life, and the motions of life mtimes doe and of paſſions: the orher is the ſubiect of our preſent enquiry; which in amane aòæ this place, ex ecteth at our handes. that we should conſider ho it demeaneth it Elfe. and vhat it dorh in vs, when by its guidance ve proceede to any action. Experience muſt be our informer in genenall: after which, our diſcourſe shall anatomiſe what that preſenteth vs in bulke. She giueth vs notice of three eſpeciall effects of our vnderſtãding: firſt,that it ordereth a right thoſe conceptions which are brought vnto it: ſecondly, that when they appeare to be not ſufficient for the intended woike, it caſteth about and ſeeketh out orhers: and thirdly, that it ſtrengthneth thoſe actions which ſpring from ir; and keepeth them regular and firme and conſtant to their beginnings and principles. Vnto which laſt ſeemerh to belong, that it ſometimes ch: cketh its owne thoughts, and bringeth backe thoſe it would haue, and appeareth to Lkeepe as it were a watrch ouer its owne wayes.3. That the rules and maximes of arts doe rorke poſitiuely in vs thongh we As for the ordering of the preſent notions, it is cleare that it is done by a ſecret dependance from the rules of diſcourſe, and from the maximes of humaneaction: Icall this dependance a ſecret one, becauſe a man in his ordinary courſe, m k th vſe of ihoſc rules and maximes which ſerue his turne as thoug h they were inſtilled into him by nature, withour ſo much as euer thu king of them, orreſlecting vpon them to ſquare out his actions by them: nay, ſome f them ſo farre out of the reach of moſt men, as they can not thi: ke of them, though they would; for they Enow them not:as in particular, the rules of diſcourſe; the vſe of which is ſo neceſſary, as wihut it no man can conuerſe with an other, nor do any thing likea man, thit is, reaſonably. From whence then can this proceede, that ſo familiarly and radily a man maketh vſe of what he is not conſcious to himſelfe that he hath any acquaintance withall? It can be north'ng elſe, but thit the ſoule, being in her owne nature ordered to do the ſame thing, hich ſchollers with much diſficulty arriue to know vhat it is by reflection and ſtudy, and then frame rules of that afterWardes carry their diſcourſe to a higher pitch, she by an inborne vertue maketh a man do it orderly, conſtantly, and certainely. The like may be obſerued in the dayly vſe men make of the maximes of humane action: whichare certaine knowledges that formerly they haue gotten, but that tiry vſually thinke not f, whiles they worke agreeable to thems yet it ſeemeth they woike by them; for if their action should iarre againſt any of them, they would preſently reſlect vpon their thinke not of 2745me,and by it correct what they were about: for example, one ho them. should worke euen poſitiuely in vs; for we know that is skilled in the rules of Grammar, or of accenting his ſpeech, or hath his care vſed to Maſike, whiles he heareth true conſtruction, or euen verſe, or conſonant ſong, neuer reflecteth how it is made; orat moſt doth but conſider in groſſe, that it is right: but if a ſoleciſme, or falſe quantity, or diſcorde interuene, he preſently is aware, not only that it is amiſſe, but remembreththe very particular preciſe rule ,againſt which the breach is made. This atthe firſt ſi; ht might occaſion vs to imagine, that the mles by whichany compoſition is made, lo wa ke only negatiuely in vs, vhiles we are buſic about ir: that is, that they contribute nothing to the making of the thing, but only hinder vs from committing errors: bur if we conſider the matter well, we shall find iĩt impoſſible, but tha: they when ve firſt MANS SOVLE, Chap. IV. 5 learne any of theſe thinges, we looke induſtriouſly for ſuch a gender, or numbet, or caſe, or tenſe, for ſuch a foote or quantity, ſuch a note, or conſonancei and weare ſure, that vſe and practile of the ſame thing, dor h not change, but only facilitate the woike: therefore it followeth of neceſſiry, that we ſtill vſe thoſe very inſtructions, by hichat the firſt we could but ſlowly creepe, but now manage them with luch celerity, as our fanſy can not keepe pace with what we do. And this is the reasõ why we do not percẽiue that we thinke of them, but may peraduenture at the ſame time thinke of a quite different matter,as when a muſithn playeth voluntary diniſion vpon a ground he neuer ſav before, and yet hath all the while ſome other thought in his head: or when a painter draweiha picture, and all the while diſcourſeth witha by ſtander. This truth may be conuinced by an other argument: as thus; it can not be doubted, but that a verſe or ſong is made by the power of making ſuch compoſitions: but that powe is the art ot them; and that art is nothing elſe but the rules whereby they are made: and accordingly we ſee, that whn huh not the art, can not make ſuch compoſitions: but who hath, can whqn h- pleaſeth:and ifany man would be able to make them, he preſently ſtudy:th the art: ſo that it can not be doubted, but that artificiall thinæes are alwayes made by the vſe of thoſe rules which teach the m. king of them although for the moſt part we are not able to perceiue how ſuchrules are vſed:and beſides this, we are ſure that we do not only make vſe cf thoſe rules we learned att he firſt, but when we are arriued to Maiſtery inany art, we make vſe of them in a quite different manner then we did in the beginning, and then we do in any other thing, wherein we find paine and difficulty. In the ſecond effect that we experience of our vnderſtanding, ( which is, our caſting about for new conceptions, when thoſe it already hath, appeare not ſufficient to direc? what it hath in hand) the force and woiking of it, is very euident: for this eſfect proceedeth out of a want of ſatisfaction:and this belongeth properly to the vnderſtandingi forif euidence and ſatisfaction be qualities of it, then of neceſſity the priuation of theſe qualities, muſt likewiſe belong vnto it; as alſo to diſcerne that priuation, and to vſe meanes to auoyde it: and in the very caſting about, we ſee a choice made;and that thinges are not taken promiſcuouſly as they come of a rowe, but that ſome of them a ſett aſide, and others aduanced for vſe: which argueth plainely the knowleIge and gouernement of the vnderſtanding. But the third operation, is that which giueth cleareſt euidence ofthe peculiarand diſtinct working of the vnderſtanding: for if we ma: ke the conteſtation and ſtrife within vs, betweene our ſenſuall part and his antagoniſt which mainteneth the reſolution ſett by reaſon, and obſerue ho exceedingly their courſes and proceedings diſfer from one an other; w- shall more plinely diſcerne the nature, and power, and efficac of both of them. We may perceiue that the motions aga: nſt Reaſon, i vpturbulently, as it ere in billowes, and like a hill of boyling water( as truly Paſiion isa conglobation of Ipitits) do putt vs into an vnquiet and diſtempered heate and confuſion: on the other ſide, Reaſon endeauourerh to keepe vs in our due temper, by ſometimes commanding downe this growing ſea; otherwhiles, by contenting in ſome meaſure the deſires of it, and ſo diuerting an other way its vnruly force: ſometimes she terrifyeth it, by the propoſall of offenſiue thinges ioyned vnto thoſe it i;ſo earneſt to enioy: againe, ſomeumes :he preuenteth it, by cutting orall the cauſes and helpes that promote on its impotent deſires, and by engaging before hand the power of it in other thinges, and the ikAll which do euidently conuince, that as Reaſon hatha great ſtren gth and power in oppoſition of ſenſe, ſo it muſt be a quite diſferent thing, and of a contrary nature vnto it: we may adde, that the wai k- of Reaſon can neuer be well performed, but in'a great quiet and tranquillity; whereas the motions of Paſiion, are alw-yes accompanyed with diſorder and perturbation: ſo as it appeareth manifeſtly, that the force of Reaſon, is not purely the force of its inſtruments, but the force of its inſtruments as th-y are guided, and as the quantities of them are propor. tioned by it: and rhis force of Reaſin, is different from the force of its inſtruments in themſelues, in ſuch ſort as the force of a ſong, is different from the firce of the ſame ſoundes, whereof it is compoſed, taken without that order which the muſitian putteth in them: for otheiwiſe the more ſpirits that are rayſcd by any thought ( which ſpirits are the inſtruments whereby Reaſon pei formeth all her operations in vs) the more ſtrongly Reaſon should woike: the contrary of which is euident, for we ſee that too great aboundance of ſpirits confoundeth Reaſin. This isas much as at preſent I intend to inſiſt vpon, for proofe that l our vnderſtanding hath its properand diſtinct operations, and woiketh ina peculiar manner, and in a quite diſſerent ſtraine from allthat is done by our ſenſes. P. raduenture ſome may conceiue, that the warchfulneſſe and recalling of our 1houghts backe to their enioyned woike, when th-y bre: ke looſe and runne aſtray, and our not letting them range abroad at randome, doth alſo conuince this aſſertion: but I confeſſe ingeniouſly, the teſlimony of it ſeemeth not cleare to me; and therefore 4rarke it not with thoſe, thit I would haue ( if it may be) ſolidely weiu hry, and vndenyable to who shall conſider maturely the bortome and full efficaciouſneſſe of them. Of ſuch, a few, or any one, is enoughto ſertle ones mind in the belicfe of atrurh:and hope, that this which we haue laboured for in this Chapter, isſo ſufficiently proued,as we neede not make vp oureuidence with number of teſtimoniess But to shw the exceptions I tike againſt this argument, lett vs examine, how this act wihin vs which we call watchſfullneũſe, is performed: truly, me thinke h it appeareth to be nothing elſe, but the promptitude and recourſe of ſome ſpirits, that are proper for this eſſct, which by a mans earneſtneſſe in his reſolutiò, do takea ſtrõg impreſſion, and ſo are ſtill ready to knocke fiequently at the dore of our vnderſtãding, and thereby enable it with powerto recall our ſtrayed thougths. Nay, rhe very reſlexion it ſelfe, which we m ke vpon our thoughts, ſeemeth vnro me to be only this, that the obiect bearing vpon the fanſic, carryeth backe with it at its retiring from thence, ſome litle particle or atome of the braine or Seprum Lucidum, againſt wh.ch it beareth, ſticking vpon it; in like manner as vpon an other occaſion, we inſtanced in a ballrebounding from a greene mudde wall, vnto which ſore of the matter of the wall muſt needes adhere: now this obiect, together wrhthe addition it getteth by its ſtroake vpon the fanſie, reboundin thẽce, and hiuing no more to do there at preſent, betakæth it ſelfe to reſt quietly in ſme cellit is diſpoſed into in the braine, as we haue deliuered at large in nur former Treatiſe, where we diſcourſed of Ademory: but vwhenſocuer it is called for againe by the fanſie, or vpon any other occaſion returneth thither, it cometh as it were capped with this addi tional piece it acquired formerly in the fanſic;and ſo maketh a repreſentation of itsowne hauing beene formerly there. Yet, be theſe actions performed how ihey will, it can not be denyed, but th. t borth of themare ſuch, asare not ſirt, nor would be any wayes vſefull to ereatures, that haue not the power of ordering their owne th ughts and fanſics, but are gouerned throlighout meerely by an vniforme courſe of nature: which ordering of thoughts, being an operation feaſible only by iationall creatures, and I.y none others, theſe tw., actions(which would be in vaine, where ſuch ordering is not vſed) ſeeme to be ſpecially ordained by nature, for the ſeruice of Reaſon and of the Vnderſtandingialthough peraduenture a preciſe proper woiking of the vnderſtanding, do not cleerely shine in it. Much leſſe can we by experience find among all the actions we haue hitherto ſpeken of, that our Reaſon or Vnderſianding woiketh ſingly and alone by it ſclfe, withour the aſſiſtance and conſortshippe of the fantaſie: and as litle can Itellh,wg-o about to ſeeke any experience of it. But what Reaſon may do in this particular, we shall hereafter enquire: and end this Chapter, with collecting out of what is ſaid, how it fareth vith vs,wh-n we do any thing aganſt Reaſon , or againſt our owne Enowledge. If this happen by ſurpriſe, it is plaine that the watch of Reaſon was not ſo ſtrong as it hould haue beene, to preuent the admirtance or continuance of thoſe thoughts, which worke that ttanſgreſſion. Agiine, if it be occaſioned by Paſiion,it is euident that in this cale, the multitude and violence of thoſe ſpirits which Paſiion ſendeth boyling vp to th- fintaſie, is ſo great,as the other ſpirits, which are in the iuriſdiction and gouernement of Reaſon, are not able for the preſent to ballance them and ſtay their impetuoſity, whiles she makæth truth appeare. Sometimes we mav obſerue, that Reaſon hath waming  attaile, the aſault of ſome concupiſcence, that ſendeth his vnruly bandes to take poſſeſſion of the fanſie, and conſtraine it to ſerue their deſires, and by it to bring Reaſon to their bente. Now if in this pitched field she looſe the bridle,and be carryed away againſt her owne reſolutions, and be forced like a captiue to obey the others lawes, it is cleare that her ſtrength was not ſo great as the contrary factions. The cauſe of which is euident; for we know that: he can do nothing, but by the aſſiſtance of the ſpirits which inhabite the braine: now thenũt folloeth, that if she haue not the command of thoſe ſ; pirits which flocke thither, she muſt of neceſſity be carryed alõg by the ſtreame of the greater and ſtronger multitude; which in our caſe, is the throng of thoſe that are ſent vp into the braine by the deſired obiects and they come thither ſo thicke and ſo forcibly, that they diſplace the others which fought vnder Reaſons ſtandard: which if they do totally, and excluding reaſons party, do entirely poſſeſſe the fanſie with their troupes, (as in maddeneſſe and in extremity of ſuddaine paſſion it happeneth) then muſt Reaſon wholy follow their ſway, without any Hor girg at all againſt it; for whatſoeuer beateth on the fanſie, occaſioneth her to woi ke;and therefore when nothing beateth there but the meſſengers of ſome ſenſuall obiect, she can make no reſiſtance to what they impoſe: but if it bappen that theſe tumultuary ones, be not the only ſpirits which beate there, but that Reaſon hath likeviſe ſome vnder her iuriſdiction, which keepe poſſeſſion for her, though they be too weake to turne the others out of dores;then itis true, she can ſtill direct fairely, how in that caſe a man should gouerne himſelſe, but when he cometh to execute; he findeth his ſinees already poſſeſſed, and ſelled with the contrary ſpirits:and they keeping out the ſmaller and wesker number, which reaſon hath ranked in order, and would furnish thoſe partes withall,he is drawne euen againſt his iudgement and Reaſon, to obey their a petites, and to moue himſelfe in proſecution of what they propoſe; in ſuch ſort as the Poet expreſſeth that Medea found in her ſelfe, when she complained and bemoaned her ſelfe in theſe wordes; Video meliora proboque, Deteriora ſequor: and in this eaſe, a man foreſeeth his miſery all the way he rouleth towardes it, and leapeth into the precipice with his eyes open: which sheeth that the army of thoughts on Reaſons ſide, should be encreaſed in number, to haue her ſtrong enough rto wage battaile with the rebellious aduerſary: orelſe, that her aduerſary should be ſo much weakened, that she, though not growne ſtronger in her ſelfe, yet might, through rhe others enfeebling, be able to make her party good; (and hence is the vſe of corporeall mortifications, to ſubiect our Paſiions to the beheaſt of Reaſon ) euen as when we ſee, that when we are in health, our armes, and legges, and all our limbes, obey our will, reaching what we command them, and carrying vs whither we deſire, becauſe the ſpirits which are ſent into them from our braine, are ſtrong enough to raiſe and moue them as they are directed: but if our ſinees be ſo ſteeped in ſome cold and watry humour, that the ſpirits coming downe, find not meanes to ſwell and harden them; well we may wish and ſtriue, but all in vaine: for we shall not be able to make them performe ther due functions. In like manner, if reaſon do ſend her emiſſaiies into the ſime arme or legge or other member, and no other ſpirits do there ſtriue againſt them, then that limbe is moued and gouerned abſolutely according to her directions: but if at the ſame time, a greater multitude of others, do hinder Reaſons ſeruants from coming thither, or flocking into other ſinees, do carry that limbe a contrary way; in vaine dot Reaſon ſtriue to moue them to her byas: for thoſe obeyng partes muſt obſerue the rules which the violent conquerour preſcribeth. THE FIFT CHAPTER Containing proofes out of our ſingle apprehenſions, that our ſoule s incorporeall. S in our firſt Treatiſe we diſſected nature, and shewed, how l out of the notion and fitſt diuiſion of Quantity,ariſeth hat vaſt multiplicity of thinges, which filling this world, fallerh SI& nder the conſideration of our ſenſes: ſo in the beginning of this ſecond Treatiſe, we haue ſearc hed into thoſe operations of a man (attributed to his ſoule) by which he is conceiued to excell all orher liuing creaturs: and thære diſcouered, that thæ admirable, and vnlimited variery of workes, which is ſeene in mens writinges and actions, doth all flow from the ſource of ſingle apprehenſions: and euen from one hare notion of Being: which is the roote and principle, from whence all others deriue their origineiand into which all may be reſolued ; woikes proceeding from reſolutions, they from diſ couſis , Theſe being compoſed of iudgements, and iudgements of ſingle appr henſions. This part we muſt now reuiew, and enquire what we can find in mans operation, aręuing th- Quality of his Soule, whether it be corporeall or no. For if theſe ſingle apprehenſions, and the proceſſes compounded of them, may be performed by the ordering of rare and denſe partes ſ as the other workes of nature are)then they will be corporeall,and of the ſame kind wih thoſe, which we opened in the firſt Treatiſe: but if we shall proue, that they can not poſſibly be deduced from multiplicity, and order of Quantitatiue partes, then we may confidently reſolue ourſclues, that in thæ cauſe from which they ſlow, is a nature wholy diſcrepant from that which reſideth amonę bodies, and among corporeall thinges. Thi, we shall here labour to do: and to that end, wæ will beginne our worke with reſlecting vpon what we haue deliuered of a ſingle apprehenſion, in the firſt Chapterof this ſecond Treatiſe: whoſe nature we there firſt explicated in common and thencæ proceeded to ſome partiD cularapprehenſions; and laſtly shewed the extent they comprehended. Theſe then muſt be the ſubiect of our preſent ſpeculation. As for their nature, we may remember, how we reſolued three thinges: ſirſt,that by apprehenſion, the very thing apprehended is by it ſelfe in our ſoule: next, that the notion of Being, is the firſt of allnotions, and is reſumed inallothers: and thirdly, that what is added to the notion oſ Being, is but reſpects to otherthinges. Now then lett vs conſider, what kind of engines they muſt be, that may haue the poer to make thinges themſelues to be in our ſoule, if they were to be there materially? How shall the place, or the time paſſed, be remoued, and be putt in an other place, and in an other time ? Howshallthe quãtity of the heauẽs, of the vhole world, nay of biggeneſſe exceeding all that by millions of proportionall encreaſes, be shutt vp in the litle circuite of mans braine:? And yet ifwe examine our ſelues ſtrictly, e shall find nothing wanting; allis there. How shall the ſame thing, be corporeally in two, nay in two thouſand places, at the ſame time? And yet, in ſo many is the ſunne, vhen two thouſand men thinke of it at once. We muſt then allow, that thinges are there immaterially,; and conſequently, that what receiueth them, is immateriall: ſince euery thing is receiued according to the meaſure and nature of what receiuethit. But Ieaſily conceiue, that the ſtrangeneſſe and incredibility of our poſition, may counterballance the force of it: for who can perſuade himſelfe,that the very thing he apprehendeth, is in his minde? Iacknowledge, that if its being there, were to be vnderſtood corporeally, it were impoſſible: but on the other ſide, who shall conſider, that he knoweth the thing he rightly apprehendeth, that it vorkethin him, and maketh him vorke agreeable to its nature, and that all the properties and ſingularities of it my be diſplayed by what is in him, and are as it were vnfoulded in his mind, he can neyther deny nor doubt, but that it is there in an admirable and ſpirituall manner. If you aske me how this cometh to paſſe? And by what artifice, bodies are thus ſpiritualized? I cõfeſſe Ishall not be able to ſatisfy you: but muſt anſwere, that it is done, lknow not how, by the power of the ſoule: shew mea ſoule, and I will tell you how it worketh: but as we are ſure there is a ſoule,  that is to ſay, aPrinciple from Whẽce theſe operatiòs ſpring) though we can not ſee it: ſo we may,and do certainely Ftiow, that this myſtery is as we ſay ; though becauſe we vnderſtand not the true and complete nature of a ſoule, we canas litle expreſſe the manner, howit is done V a ſoule. Yet, before we take our leaue of this matter of Apprehenſions, we vill in due place endeauour to ſay ſomething towardes the clearing of this obſcure point. Our ſecond conſideration vpon the nature of Apprehenſion, was, that our primary and maine notion, is of Being. This diſcouereth ſome litle glympſe of the nature of the ſoule: for itis manifeſt that she applyeth this notion, as well to no partes, as to partes: which we proued in the firſt Tieatiſe, hen we shewe.d that we hauea particular notion of ſubſlanee, diſtinct from the notion of Quantityi for quantity and Partes being the ſame, it followeth that if there be a notion luppoſed by quantity, (as in ſubſtance there is) it muſt of neceſſiry abſtract from partes: and conſequently, ve may conclude, that the notion of Being, which is indifferentlyapplyable eyther to quantity or to ſubſtance , doth of its oWne nature wholy abſtract eyther ſrom Partes, or from no Partes.  then inferre: that ſince this notion of Being, is the very ſirſt and virgin notion our ſoule is imbued with or is capable of, and that it is the roote of all other notions, and into which she reſolueth euery orh-r notion, in ſuch ſort, as hen we haue ſifted and ſearſed the eſſence f any notion whatſoeuer, we can diſcouer nothing that is deeper then this, or precedentto it,and thut it agreeth ſo completely wirh our ſoule, as she emeth to be nothing elſe but acapacity fitted to Being it can not be denyed, but that our ſoule muſt needes haue a very neere affinity and resẽblance of nature vithit: but it is euident, thar Being hath not of it ſelfe any partes in it, nor of it ſelfe is capable of diuiſion: and there fore it is as euident, thit ihe ſoule, whichis framedſas it were)by rhat patterne and Idea, and is fitted for Beingas for its end, muſt alſo of it ſelfe be voyde of partes, and be incapable of diuiſiõ. For how can partes be fitted toan indiu iſiblething? And how can two luch different natures euer meete porportionably? IF it be obiected, that the very notion of Eeimg, hom whence we eſtimate the nature of the ſoule, is accommodable to partes: as for example, we ſee that ſubſtance is endewed with quantity. We anſwere, that cuen this doth corroborate our proofe: for leing that the ſubſtances, vhich ourſenſes are acquainted withall, haue paites, and can not be without partes;and yet neuertheleſſe in our ſoule, the notion cf ſuch ſubſtance is found without partes; it is cleare, that ſurh ſubſiance hath this meerely from our ſoule: and becauſe it hath ithis indiſibility from our ſoule, it followeth that our ſoule hath a power and nature to beſtow indiuiſibility vpon what cometh into her. And ſince it can not be denyed, but thatif any ſubſtance were once exiſtent wii hout artes, it could neuer after haue partes; it is euident, that the nature of the houl is incapable of partes; becauſe inis exiſtent without partes. And that it is in ſuch ſort exiſtent, is cleare: for this effect of the ſoules giuing indiuiſibility vnto what she receiueth into her, proceedeth from her as she is exiſtent. No ſince this notion of Being, is of all others the ſirſt and originall notion that is in the ſoule, i muſt needes aboue all others, ſauour moſt of the proper and genuine nature of the ſoule: in which, and by which, it is what it is, and hath its indiuiſibility. If then it be preſſed; how can ſubſtance ſin reality or in thinges) be accommodated vnto Quantity, ſeing thut of it ſelfe it is indiuiſible We anſwere, that ſuch ſubſtance, as is the ſubiect of Quantity, and that hath Quantity, is not indiuiſible; for ſuch ſubſtance can not be ſubſiſtent without Quantity, and when we frame a notion of it,as being indiniſible, jt is an effect of the force of our ſoule, that is able to draw a notion out of a thing that hath partes, without drawing the notion of the partes: vhichsheweth manifeſtly, that in her there isa power aboue hauing of partes: which being in her, argueth her exiſtence to be ſuch. Our laſt conſideration vpon the nature of apprehenſion, was, how allthatis added to the notion of Being, is nothing efe but reſpects of one thing to an other; and how by theſe reſpects, all the thinges of the world come to be in our ſoule. The euidẽce we may draw from hence of our ſoules immateriality, will be not a whitt leſſe, then eyther of the two former: for lett vs caſt our lookes ouer all that cometh into our ſenſes, and ſce if from one end to an other, we can meete with ſuch a thing as e call a reſpect: it hath neyther figure, nor colour, nor ſmell, nor motion, nor raſt, nor touch it hath no ſimilitude to be drawne out of by meanes of our ſenſes: to be like, to be halfe, to be cauſe, or effect, what is it? The thinges ſ(indeed) that are ſo, haue their reſemblances and pictures; but which way should a painter go about to drawa likeneſſe? Or to paint a halfe, ora cauſe, or an eſſect ? If we haue any vnderſtanding, we can not chooſe but vnderſtand, that theſe notions are extremely different, from whatſoeuer cometh in vnto vs by the mediation of our ſcnſes:and then if we reſlect, how the whole negotiation of our vaderſtanding is in, and by reſpects; muſt it not follow neceſſarily, that our ſoule is of an extreme different nature from our ſenſes, and from our Imagination? Nay, if we looke wellinto this argument, wehall ſce, that whereas Ariſtotle pretendeth, that Nihil eſt in intellectu quod non prius fait in ſinſu; this Maxime is ſo farre from being true, ſin rigour of the wordes)rhat the quite contrary folloeth vndenyably outof it; to witt, that Nibil eſt in intellectu quod fuit prius in ſenſa. Which I do not ſay to contradict Ariſtotle(for his ordesare true in the nieaning he ſpoke them;) but to shew, how thinges are ſo much changed by coming into the vnderſtanding and into the ſoule, that alilhough on the one ſide, they be the very ſame thinges,yet on the other ſide there remaineth no likeneſſe at all Between them in themſelues as they are in the vnderſtanding, which is a moſt euident proofe, (hen the weight of itis duely conſidered that the nature of our ſoule, is mainely different fromthe nature of all corporeall thinges, that come into our ſenſc. By this which we now come from declaring, the admiration, how corporeall thinges can be in the ſoule, and how they are fpiritualized by their being ſo, will in part be taen away: for reflecting that allthe notiãs of the ſoule, are nothing but the generall notion of a ſubſtance, or ofa thing ioyned with ſome particular reſpect; if then we conſider, that the reſpects may be ſo ordered, that one reſpect may be included in an other, we shall ſee, that there may be ſome one reſpect, which may include all thoſe reſpects that explicate the nature of ſome one thing: and in this caſe, the generall notion oſ a thing coupled with this reſpect, will containe all whatſoeuer is in the thing: as for exam ple, the notion of a knife,that it is a thing to cuts ithall, Includeth ſas we haue formerly declared) allthat belongeth vnto a knife. And thus you ſee, how that my ſticall phraſe, of corporeall thinges being ſpiritualized in the ſoule, ſignifyeth no more, but that the ſimilitudes which are of them in the ſoule, are Reſpects. Thus hauing collected out of the nature of Apprehenſion in common, as much as we conceiue needeſull in this place to proue our aſſertion, our next worke muſt be, to try if we can do the lik⸗,by reſlecting vpon particular apprehenſions. We conſidered them of two ſortes, calling one kind, vniuerſall ones; and the other, collectiue ones: in the vnuerſall ones, we tooke notice of two conditions, the abſtraction, and the vniuerſality of them: no truly if we had no other euidence, but whut willriſe from the firſtof theſe, that alone would conuince and cairy the concluſion: for though among corporeall thinges, the ſame may be now in one place, now in an other, or ſometimes haue one figure, ſometimes an other, and ſtill be the ſame thinges, as for example waxe or watenyet, it is impoſſible to imagine any bodily thing whatſoeuer, to be at any time vithout all kind of figure, or without any place at all, or indifferent to this or to thor:and neuertheleſſe, all thinges whatſoeuer, When they are vniuerſally apprehended by he ſoule, haue this condition in her by reaſon of their abſtraction there, whichin themſelues is impoſſible vnto them. When we ſay water, fire, gold, ſiluer, bread &c: do we meane or expreſſe any determinate ſi rure: ſf we do, none but that preciſe figure, will ſerue or content vs: but it is euident, that of a hundred different ones, any and euery one dotha like entirely ſatisfy vs: when we call for money, if we reflect vpon our fanſy, peraduenture we shall find there a purſe of ctownes: neuertheleſſe, if our meſſenger bringes vsa purſe of piſtoles, we shall not except againſt it,as not being what we intended in our mind, becauſe it is not that which was painted in our fanſie: it is thereſore euident, that our meaning and our fanſie were different; for otherviſe, nothing vould haue ſatistyed vs, but that which was in our fanſy. Likeviſæ, inthe very word (which is the picture of our notion) we ſee an indifferency for no dictionary willtell vs, that this word Aoney doth not ſignify as well piſtoles as crownes:and accordingly e ſee, that if our meaning had beene preciſely of crownes, e should haue blamed ourſelues for not hauing named crownes, and not him that brought vs piſtoles, when e ſpoke to him by the name of money: and therefore it is moſt cleare, that our vnderſtanding or meaning is not fixed or determined to any one particular; but is equally indifferent to all: and conſequently, that it can not be like any thing Which entereth by the ſenſes: and therefore not corporeall. The ſecond cõdition of Pniuerſall Apprehenſions, is their vniurſality: Whichaddeth vntotheir abſtractiõ, one admirable particularity,and it is, , thatthey abſtract in ſuch ſort, as 1o expreſſe at the ſame time euen the ⸗ very thing they abſtract fiom. How is it poſſible, that the ſame thing, ĩ can be,and not be in the ſame notion? Yet lett a man conſider vhat he meaneth when he ſaith, Euery man hath two èyes; and he shallſee that he expreſſeth nothing, herebyany one man is diſtinguished from an other: and yet the force of this word Euery, doth expreſſe that euery man is diſtinguished from an orher;ſo that in truth, he expreſſeth particularity it ſelfe in common. No, lett our ſmarteſt and ingeniouſeil aduerſary, shew or imagine if he can, how this may be done in a picture, or in a ſtatue, or in any reſemblance of a body or bodily thing: but if he can not, lett him acknowledge an eminent, and ſingular propriety in the ſoule, that is able to do it: 4uGV Let vs reſlect, that particularity in a body, is a collection of diuerſe qualities and circumſtances; as that it is white, of ſucho figure, in ſuch a lace, in ſuch a time, and an infinitude of ſuch like conditions, con gloPated together: then, if our ſoule be a body, the expreſſion of the paricularity of a body in the ſoule, muſt be a participation in her of ſuch a conglobation,or of ſuch thinges conglobated. Now lett vs imagine if we can, how ſuch a participation hould be in common, and thould abſtract from all colour, all place, and all thoſe thinges of which the conglobation conſiſteth:and yet we ſce, that in the ſoule this is donc;and he who ſai hEuery man, doth not expreſſe any colour, place, ortime;and neuertheleſſe he doth by ſoying ſo expreſſe, that in euery man there is a conglobation of colour, place, and time: for it could not be Euery one, vnleſſe there were ſuch conglebations to make ẽ ueryone, one: and if any conglobation were expreſſed in this terme Euery one, it ould nor be Eutry one, but only one alone. Now if any coordination of partes, can vnfould and lay open this riddle, I vill renounce all Philoſophy and vnder ſtanding. : lll Collectiue apprehenſions will afford vs no meaner teſtimony then the other two, forth: ſpirituality of our ſoule: for although it may ſeeme vnto vs, before we reſlect throughly on the matter, that we ſee, or otherviſè diſcerne by our ſenſc, the numbers of thinges; as that the men in the next roome,are three; that the chaires there, are tenne; and the like of other thinges; yet after due conſideration, we shall find, that our eye, or ſenſc telleth vs but ſingly of each one, that it is one; and ſo runneth ouer euery one of thæm: keeping them ſtill each by themſclues, vnder their ovne ſeuerall vnities:but then the vnderſtanding cometh, and ioyneth vnder one notion, What the ſenſ kept a ſunder in ſo many ſeueraliones, asthere are thinges. The notion of three, or of tẽne, is not in the thinges,but in our mind for why rhree rathærthen fiue, or tẽne rather then twelue, if the matter of which we ſpeake were not determined ? and ſuch determination of the matter, is an eſfect of the vnderſtanding. IFI had ſpoken of thinges,as I did of men, orof chaires, there had beene more then three or tenne:ĩt is : hen enident, that what determined my ſpeech, made the number be three or tenne. : Againe, we ſce that the notion c f renne, is but one notioni for as the name of tenne, is but one ſigne, ſo it argueth, that there is but one notion, notion, by which it is the ſigne of tenne thinges. Beſides, we ſee that Arithmetitians do find out the proprieties and particular nature of any determinate number: and therefore we may conclude, that euery number hatha definition, and a peculiar nature of its owne, as it is a number. If then this definition, or nature, or notion of tenne, be a corporeallone, it is a corporeall ſimilitude of the obicct. But is it ike to any one of the thinges, or is it like to all the tenne? If to any one, then that one will be tenneiif it be like to the whole made of tenne, then that vwhole being but one, tenne vill be iuſt one, and not tenne thinges. Beſides, tobe renne, doth expreſſely imply to be not one: how then can that be a materiall thing.»hich by being onerepreſenteth many? Seeing that in materiall thinges, one and many are oppoſt ,and exclude one an other from the ſame ſubiect: And yet, this notion could not repreſent manv together, but by being one. Againe, if it be a materiall notion or ſimilitude, it is eyther in an indiuiſible of the braine, orit is ina diuiſible part of it: Imeane, that the whole eſſence of the notion be in cuery part neuer ſo litle of the braine, or that one part of the eſſence, be in one part of the braine, and that an other part of the eſſence, be in an other part of the braine. If you ſay, that the whole eſſence is in euery part of the braine, though neuer ſo litle:you make it impoſſible that it should bea body; foryou make it the likeneſſe of tenne determinate bodies, in an indiuiſible mãner, ſecing that what by diuiſion groweth not leſſe, hath the nature of an indiuiſible: but if you ſay, that diuers partes of the eſſence, are in diuers partes of the braine, then you make it impoſſible that the notion of tenne, should be indiuiſible: ſince it ſelfe is compoſcd of ſeuerall partes. Ina word, tenne thinges can not be repreſented materially, but by tenne other thinges:and therefore it is moſt euident, thatthe ſoule which repreſenteth tenne by one thing or notion, doth not repreſent the tenne materially: and conſequently, that her ſelfe is immateriall. W hat we haue now ſaid, will be confirmed by conſidering the termes, All and whole: forit is cleare, that theſe termes alſo, are of the nature of numbers; but withall,do expreſſe particularly that no part is wanting. If then the notion of Allor whole, be ſaid to be materiall and quantitatiue, it muſt be diuiſible: but if you diuide it, no part remayneth All orwhole: it is not therefore diuiſible;and conſequently it is not materiall. And as this argument, is manifeſtly applyable to numbers, ſo if we looke into the arguments concerning numbers, you vill find all them likewiſe applyable to theſe termes, All and whole. Out of what hath beene hitherto diſcouered, we may gatherthis note: The ope that it is the nature of the ſoule, to draw from diuiſibility, to indiuiſibi- of the ſo . ſa lity: from multitude, to vnity; from indeterminateneſſe and confuſion, æ.;: òm to a clarity and determination: as appeareth euidently in this laſt ticũde tov collectiue termes, wee ſee that throughout their natures do conũſt in ſuch a perfect indiuiſibility, as no part can be ſeperated without deſtroying the eſſence of the notion: nay, thinges which in themſelues are many and conſiſt in partes, do in the mind gett an impaitible nature; for tenne, is no longer tenne, if it be diuided: nor all, is all, if any thing be taken away. In the ſame manner, though Philoſophy teach Vs, there be neyther pointes in biggeneſſe, nor inſtantes in motion or time, yet nature maketh vs expreile all biggeneſſe by pointes, and all time by inſtantes;the ſoule euer fixing it ſelfe vpon indiuiſibility. And thisis the reaſon, why we attribute the nature of ſubſtance to all our notions: if we ſeea thing white, or blacke, or doe, or ſuffer, or be in a place, or in time; preſently in ourapprehẽnſion we conceiue theſe modifications of the ſing ſke ſubſtances;and accordingly we call them by ſubſtantiue names, Vhiteneſſe, Action, Vl bication, Duration, & c: nowrhe realon of thisis, becauſe a ſubſtance, ſthat is terminated withm it ſelfe) is a fitt and a ſteady ground for the loule to fixe it ſelfe vpon, whereas 1heſe orher Appendixes of ſubſtance, would not afford her eaſy fooring to build her ſtructures vpon, if: he conſidered them as truly they ate in themſelues: and thereſore in her notion, she giuerh them the qualities of ſubſtance: but withall it happeneth many times, that Ey her doing thus, if she be not very wary, she is deceiued and falleth into groſſe errours. One thing more we muſt remember to take notice of.and it is. that if we vill compare the notions in our vnderſtanding, vith the ſignes which beating in our fanſie do begert thoſe notions; we shall find, that theſe are but barely ſignes ; and do not in their owne nature ex preſſe, eyther the notions they raiſe, or the thinges they are ſignes of. This is euident in the images of the ſoundes we callwordes: for itis cleare, they haue no likeneſſe eyther with the thinges they ſigniſy, or with the thoughts they begett in vs: and we shall find it no leſſe true of other images; forexample, in the exteriour impreſſions of ſenſible qualities, which ſeeme by themſelues to be in the vnderſtanding for if we conſider the matter well, we shall perceiue that we vnderſtand nothing more by them, then we do by meere wordes; and that to wo ke, or to diſcourſe out of them, we muſt ſeeke into the obiects, and their definitions; whereof e learne nothing by thoſe firſt impreſſions: for it ſeemeth, that(for exãple)hoat, or red, or ſweete, to a man that firſt ſeeth, or feeleth, or taſteth them, ſignifyeth nothing elſe, but a thing which maketh ſuch an apprehenſion in his ſoule, or ſuch a phantaſme in his interiour sẽſe;and neuertheleſſe, as yet the mã knoweth not that he hath a ſoule, oran interiour ſenſc; nor doth reſlect ſo farre as to conſider, that this motion paſſeth by his exteriour ſenſe; buc his apprehenſion is immediately carried to the thing without him; and he imagineth that the impreſſion he feeleth, is in che thing he feelethsand ſo hethat should feele himſelfe heated by a butning glaſſe, and were not acquainted vith the vertue of ſuch a glaſſe, would thinke the glaſſe were hoat: yet certainely, his firſt apprehenſion is of the motion made in his fanſie, though he imaginethit elſehere) which he conceiueth to be the nature of the thing that makethit. And thus we ſee that the conuerſion of the ſoule, is immediate to a thing without the man: which alſo is the effect of her being fixed to Exiſlence, for by reaſon of that, she ſtill apprehendeth euery impreſſion asa thing. lli But no, whether her apprehenſion doth include the very impreſſion, which is in the ſenſe orin the fanſie, lo that by its owne likeneſſe it be in the ſoule, or whether the impreſſion in the fanſie maketh a change in the ſoule, which we can nor ſiberms init ſelfe, but conceiue it to be the impreſſion hich is in thefanſie, becauſe that impreſſion is at the ſirſt continually preſent atthe ſaid mutation, is more obſcure and hard to diſcouer. But when we reſſect that aſter ſome time, wordes do ſucceed in licu of this impreſſion, and do performe the ſame effect as the originall impreſſion, in what language ſocuer they be vttered, ſo they be vnderſtoodi we may conclude out of this euident ſigne, that the impreſſion isin the vnderſtanding not in its owne likeneſſe, but in an other shape, which we do not diſcouer, and which is excitated, as well by the name, as by the impreſſion, ina man that is vſed to the names. Againe, in a man that learneth thinges by himſelfe,theſe impreſſions ſerue for wordes, and not for thinges; for ſuch a man neuer looketh into his fanſie to diſcourſe vpon any thing, but only vpon the mutation he conceiueth is made in the externe ſenſe: out of which he gathereth by litle and litle, the nature of the thing, whoſe notion was madeat ſirſt in him by this impreſſion. Out of which it is manifeſt, that our knowledge isas diſſcrent a thing, from the Phantaſmes which beate at the ſoules dore, as the thing ſignifycd is ftom the ſound of the word, oras the wine in the cellar is from the bush: and therefore, it is im poſſible that the ſoule (in which that knowledge reſideth, and which indeede is that knowledge) should be a corporeall or bodily thing: ſince of all bodily thinges, the motions that are made by the ſenſible qualities, arriue neereſt toa ſpirituall nature. It remayneth now, that we should argue for the immateriality of the ſoule, out of the extent of our apprehenſion: which ſeemeth to be ſo exceſſiue, as not to be comprehenſible by the limitations of bodies; and therefore can not belong vntoa body: but becauſe all thar needeth to be ſiid in this particular, folloeth plainely out of groundes already vrged, and that this point containeth not any notable particularity deſeruing mention herei we will not enlarge ourſelues any further vponit: but ill paſſe on to the next line of operations proper vnto our mind. Only we may not omitt tuking notſte of the expreſſions which our mind maketh of nothing, or as Logitians terme it, of Negations and Priuations: which do argue an admirable power in the ſoule, and of a quite different ſtiaine from all corporeall thinges; and do euidently conuince the immateriality of it: forit can not be doubted, But that the ſoule knoweth what she meaneth, when she diſcourſeth of Nothing, Now if allher knowledge, were nothing elſe but corporeall phantaſmes, or pictures made by corporeall thinges, how hould she come to hauea notion of Nothing? for ſince it is moſt cleare, that ſomething can not be like Nothing, and that there can not be a participation of, what is not; how can we conceiue that there should be a ſimilitude made of Nothing? The vay therefore thit the ſoule takerh in this operation, is, that comparing twn thinães together, and finding that the one of them is not the other; che reflecteth vpon her owne action, and diuiding in it the thing ſaid, from the ſayig, : he taketh the thing ſai fora quality, or property, or predicate (as Logitians call it) of rhat thing which she denyeth to be the other thing; and then she giueth it a poſitiue name, after she hath firſt made a poſitiue notion, vnto which the name may agree: as for example. when the ſoule couſidererth a man that hath not the power to ſce, as ſoone as h- hath ro her lelfe pronunced, that he hath not ſuch a power, she takh the not power io ſee, for a quality of that mani and then giueth th- name of blindeneſſe to that not power of ſeeing; Whi h though of ir ſelſe it be nothing, yet by being that which ſatisfyeth her act, Whẽ she ſayeth that he hath not the powerof ſeeing, it ſeemeth to be ranked among thoſe thinges, vnto which names are due: for it hith a notion; and the hauing a notion, is the clayme, or merire; or dignity, in vertue whereof thinges are preferred to names. Nowthen, lert vs enquire how the power of rarity and denſity, or the multiplication and order of partes, can be raiſed and refined to the ſtate of being like nothing, or of heg rhe ſimilitude of a negation; or what operation of rarity ad denſity, can forge out this notion of blindeniſſe, hi. hw. h e explicared: and when we ſind, it is beyond their reach to compaſſe, we muſt acknowleii-ae, that the ſoule isan other kind of engine, then all thoſe which are in the ſtorehouſe of bodies. THE SIXT CHAPTER. Containing proofes out of our ſoules operations in lenowing or deeming any thing, that she is of a ſpirituall nature. : : : 7 Vr next conſideration shall be to ſee what teſtimony our t manner of Iudging, doth yield vs of the nature of the 'nule: concerning which, three thinges offer themſclues, Læẽ vorthy the reflectting on; which are, our manner of o thinking) the oppoſition which frequently occurreth in . ourthoughts;and the nature of trurhand of falſlehood. As for the firſt, v may regember how ve haue :h wed, that all iudgement or deeming is but an apprehenſion of identiſication, or ſomething immediately following out of it: and that a ſettled iudgement or aſſent of the mind is as it were a limbe, or branch, or graſt in ourſoule; ſo that we find that our perceiuing of identification between two thinges, or our ſeeing that the one is the other, is that by which our ſoule encreaſeth. Now, becauſe vhen two thinges are identifyed, the one reacheth not further then the other, it is cleare that this encreaſe of the ſoule is not made by partes, which being added one to an other do cauſe it to be greater: and therefore, ſince this latter courſe is the only meanes of encreaſe in bodies and in quantity, it is as cleare that the nature of the ſoule, is quite different from the nature of all cor poreallor Quantitatiue thinges. Againe, it is againſt the natũre of entifcation to be of partes; and therefore, they who take quantity to be one thing, and not many thinges tyed together, do acknowledge that truly there are no partes in it:and this is ſo rigorouſly true, that although we ſpeake of two thinges that in reality are identifyed one with an other, yet if our wordes be ſuch, as imply that our vnderſtanding conſidereth them as diſtinct panes and by abſtraction giueth them the nature of partes; then they are no longer identifyed, but in good Logike, we ought in this caſe to deny the one of the other. As for example: though the hand and the foote be the ſame thing, ſas we haue declared in our firſt Treatiſe) yet becauſe in the name hand, there is a ſecret excluſion of any thing that isnot in the definition of a handsit followeth that in our ſpeech we muſt ſay, thara hand is nota foote. Likewiſe though it be confeſſed, that the thing which is rationality is alſo riſibility; neuertheleſſe, it is a ſoleciſme in Logike, to ſay that rationality is riſibility;becauſe it is the nature of theleabſtracted names, to conſine their ſignifycations to one definition; and the definitions of theſe two termes are diuers. Out of this conſideration it followeth clearely, that ſeeing the nature of partes, is contrary to the nature of identity;and that the ſoule in her iudgements worketh alltogethe: by identity, it is impoſſible that her operations should conſiſt of partes, or inany ſort reſemble any proceeding of Quantitatiue thinges. The like will be conuinced out of the oppoſition we find in our thoughts. In it we may conſider two thinges: firſt the generation of it: next, the incompoſſibility of oppoſites in the ſoule. To beginne with the firſt: we ſee that in our ſpeaking, oppoſition is produced by the addirion of this ord Not: as when we ſay, not a man, not a penny, not a word; and therefore it followeth, that in our ſoule there is a notion of it, correſpondent ro the word that expreſſeth it. Now, ſecing that a notion is a thing and thatit is the likeneſſe of its obiect, or rather the ſame with the obiect; lett vs caſt about, how we should of partes and of Quantity, make a nothing, or an identification to net: and when we findthat it is ridirulous and abſurd to gò about it, lett vs conclude, that the manner of v kin? which our ſoule vſeth, is farre diſferent from that which is vſedia hndiæ, and among materiall thinges. : Andif you obiect, that not only a body, but euen any other ſubſtance llE Ece ij vhatſocuerſſuppoſe it as ſpirituall as you will] can not be eyther like, or identifyed to norhing; and therefore thisargument villas well proue that the ſoule is not a thing or ſubſtance, as that it is not a body: we anſwere, that it is euident out of what we haue already ſuid, that the vnderſtanding is not the obiects it vnderſtandeth, by way of ſimilitude, but by a higher meanesi which we haue shewed to be by way of Reſpects. Now then, the reſpect whicha thing hath to an other thing, by not hauing ſuch a reſpect vnto it,asa third thing formerly conſidered hath rherævnto, may be expreſſed in way of Reſpects, hough it can not in way of ſimilitude: and ſo our vnderſtanding is able to expreſſe, hat neyther our fanſy, nor any corporeall thing can arriue to the expreſſion of: as when firſt we find, that one man hath a reſpect to the wall, which we call the power of ſecing, it if afterwardes we find that an other man hath a reſpect vnto the wall of impotence, that he can nor ſee it, this ſecond relbect the vhderſtanding hath a poer to expreſſe as wellas the ſirſt: as we haue touched aboue. lli As for the oppoſition that occurreth in our thoughts, we may conſider it of two kindes: the one is of the thinges orobiects that come into our thougths or into our ſoule: and this is not properly an oppoſition in the ſoule, for allhough the thinges be oppoſiteby her owne nature in themſelues, yet they iã not exercile their oppoſition in the ſoule: nay, though the oppoſitiõ be euen in the ſoule it ſelfe, if the ſoule with this opp ſitiò, be conſidered as an obiect, it maleth no oppoſition in the ſoule; for ſo you may conſider your ſoule learned and vnlearned, ignorant and knowing, good and bad, and the likæ:all whichare oppoſitions ina ſoule ſuppoſcd to be ſo qualifyed, but are no oppoſitions ina ſoule ihat conſidereth them: no more then fire and water, heauy thinges and light, white and blacke, being and not being, an affirmatiue propoſition and its negatine,and the liketall which are in themſelues ſo contrary and oppoſite to one an other, that they can not conſiſt together in one ſubiect; they haue an incompoſſibility among themſelues, whereſoeuer the one of them is, by its very entrance it driueth out its oppoſite: and yet in the ſoule they agree together without reluctarice: she knowerh and conſidereth and veigheth both ſides of the ſcale at the ſametime, and ballanceth them euenly one againſt an other: for vnleſſe both the oppoſites were in the ſame inſtant in the ſame comparing power, that power could not by one act whoſe beginning implyeth its ending, iudge the diſference and oppoſition of them: as when we ſay blache is contrary to white, or darkeneſſe is the want of light, we pronounce one common not being of both exrremes. lll 3lli Ve may then boldely conclude, that ſince no body whatſoener can entertaine at the ſame time, and in the ſame place, theſe quarrelling A ntagoniſtes, but that by their conflict, they preſently deſtroy one an other, and peraduenture the body 1oo, into which they preſſe for entrance, and the entire poſſeſſlon of which each of them ſtriueth for;  thoſe of them I meane, that are proportioned to the reception of bodies) and that the ſoule imbibeth them together vithout any difficulty or contraſt,and preſerueth them allwayes frendes euen in the face of one an other, and lodgeth them together in the ſame bed;and that (in a word) theſe oppoſite thinges do enioy an admirable and vnknowne manner of Bemg in the ſoule, and which hath no parallele nor argument in bodily thinges: we may (I ſay) boldely conclude, that the ſoult it ſelfe, in which all theſe are, is of a nature, and hath a manner of Being altogether vnlike the nature of bodies,and their manner of Being. E-EE Out of this agreeing of all obiects in the ſouls, and their hauing no oppoſition there, euen whiles she knoweth the oppoſition that is betweene them in themſelues, there followeth an other conſideration, ; of no leſſe importance: which is, that the amplitude of our ſoule in iũ reſpect of knowledãe,is abſolutely infinite;thatis to ſay, she is capable of knowing at the ſame time obiects without end or meaſure. For the explicaring whereof, we are to cõſider, that the latter concluſions, which tlie ſoule gainerh knowledge of, dohang to the former by identificatiò, or by the ſoules leeing that two notions are identifyed, becauſe they are identifyed toa third,as is before expreſſed; and the firſt principles which ſeeme to be immediately ioyned vnto the ſoule, haue the identity of their termes plaine and euident, cuen in the very termes themſelues. Nay, if we ii ſiſt further, we shall ſind that the firſt truthes muſt haue an identification to the very ſoule it ſelfe; for it being etident that truth or falich ode, is not in the ſoule but ſo farre forth, as she doth apply her ſelfe ro the externall obiect, or to the exiſtence of thinges in themſclues; and that w- find that the ſoules knowing with euidence thit any thing is or hath being,implyeth her knowing that her ſelfe is; (for she can nor novthata thing ſtemeth ſo to her, or maketh ſuch an impreſſion in her, without knowing that her ſelfe à;though peraduenture she may nor know what her ſelfe is, but taketh her ſelfe to be no other thing then the body of the manin which she is) it is cuident that the ſiiſt truthes which enter into the ſoule, to witt, that this orthat ſeemcth ſo or ſo vnro her, ſ(and theſe truthes no ſceptike euer doubted of) arę identifyed with the ſoule it ſelfe; ſeeing that an obiects leeming to be ſuch or ſuch, is nothing elſe, bur the ſouleſ qualifyed. And by this we ſind, that the certainty of the ſirſt Principles, as for example of this Propnſtion, That the whole is bigger then the Part, will depend in a particular ſoule of her certainty of her owne Bring: for although this propoſition would haue a neceſſity in the very connexion of the termes, norwithſtanding there were not in nature any whole or Partiyet this neceſity would not be a neceſſity of Zæiſlence or of Being' in the obiect, but a neceſſity of connexion, as it were of two partes of the ſoule:and ſo, if verity and falſity be not peifectly in the ſoule, but in compariſon to actuall exiſtence, the ſoule would not be peifeltly true,or (toſay more properly)would not haue the perfection of truth in her, by hauing or knowing this propoſition, vnleſſe withall she were certaine, that there were exiltẽt,an obiect of this Propoſitiõ: of which(as we haue ſaid): he can not be certaine, without being certaine of her owne Beingi ſo that in eſfect, the identiſication of other inge among themſelues, by which ſuch thinges are knowne, doth come at the laſt ro be retriued in the exiſtence of the ſoule it ſelfe,and to be in the ſoule, by the identification of thoſe other thinges vnto her ſclfe. No then to proceed to the proofe of our propoſed concluſion, it is cleare, that the adding of one hing to an other, doth out of the force of this addition, perfect the thing vnto which the addition is made, if the aduenient thing be added in ſuch way, as the former is apt to receiue ĩt: but it is euident, that the ſoule is made ſitt by former propoſitions, to be identifyed to later ones for we ſee that the former ones draw on, and inferre the later ones: and therefore it followeth, that the more is added to the ſoule, the greater is her aptitude to haue more, or to be more encreaſed: and conſequently, that the more is added vnto her, the more may ſlillbe added;and the more capable and more earneſt she is, to haue more. Vhere fore it can not be denyed, but that ſince in the nature of the obiccts there is no impediment to hinder their being trgether in i1he ſoule, (as e haue proueda litle aboue) and that in her by receiuing new obiects into her, there is a continuall encreaſe of capacity to recriue more; the hath an amplitude to knowledge abſolutely infinite, in ſucha manner as we hie abou- expreſſed. No to apply to our purpoſe what we haue gathered by this diſcourſe, it is cleare, that theſe two condirions. of one thing not driuing out an other, and of inſinity of accsſions do openly diſclayme from quantity, and fom matter; for we ſee that what hath Quantity, or is a Body, can not admitt a newthing into it, vnleſſe ſome orher thing do firſt go out of it, to make roome for the aduenient one: and as for infinitude, it breedeth a ſea of contradictions, if it be but thought of in Quantity: and therefore we may conclude, that the ſoule, vnto whon theſe two conditions do belong, is not quantitatiue or corporeall, but immateriall, and of a ſpirituall nature. The ſecond kind of oppoſirion, that occurreth in our thoughts, orin our ſoule, is of Coniradiciu> Propoſitions: it hath is origine in the oppoſition of Being to not Bring:and is when a ihing is identifyed vnto the  ſoule, in ſuch ſort as e haue ſaid, that a Iudgement or Deeming maketh the obiect become as it were a limbe, or part of the ſoule: and becauſe the conſlict of two ſuch propoſitions, if they were together in the ſoule, would make her be ſomething contrary to the nature of Bring ſ if any thing can be contrary to Being) which in the ſchooles they call ens & non ens; the impoſſibility of her admitting into her ſelfe two ſuch propoſitions together, doth teſtify her firme cleauing and her fixedneſſe to Bteing: and ſo doth confirme and bring new cuidence to that argument for the ſoules ſpirituality, which in the firſt Chapter of this part, we drew from the nature of Bemg. As for truth and falſehood, they ſpring from the ſame roote as the laſt;as being qualities conſequent to the oppoſition of affirmatiue and negatiue ropoſitions; Whereof if the one be true, the other muſt neceſſarily be hiſ :and therefore, we neede not ſpen l time in ſetting downe any particular conſiderations of theſe; ſince what we haue ſaid of the other, is applyable vnto them: but it is ſufficient, that we thus note them, to giue the Reader occaſion to reflect vpon them. Among propoſitions, there are ſome wh ch Logitians do terme of Eternall truth: and out of theſe, there are ingenious men, who imagine that the Immortality of the ſoule may be immediately deduced. Herein they roue not quite from the maike; though withall I mulſt needes ſay, they do not directly hitt it. To vnderſtand the vtmoſt that may be inferred out of ſuch propoſitions, we may note two conditions in them: the firſt is, that generally theſe propoſitions are vnuerſall ones; and thereby haue that force to conuince the ſpirituality f the ſoule, which we haue explicated and shewed to belong vnto vniuerſall termes: the ſecond is, that in theſe propoſitions , there is a neceſſity of connexion between their termes: ſuchan one, or ar the leaſt very like therevnto, as we explicated in thoſe propoſitions, hich beare iheir euidence plaine in their very termes. And out of this we may draw an other argument for the ſpirituality of the ſoule: for we ſee that all corporeall agents and patients,are defectible and contingentithat is to ſay, ſometimes, or ſif you ill) moſt times, they attaine their effect: but withall,ſometimes(be it neuer ſo ſeldome)they miſſe of it:and accordingly, it happeneth ſlometimes that our eyes, our eares, our touch, and the reſt of our ſenſes are deceiued; though for the moſt part, they giue vs true informations of what they conuerſe with: but theſe propoſitions of etemall verity do neuer faile: they haue in themſelues an indefectibility inſuperalle; and conſequently, they giue euidence that the ſoules nature is of a hi: her degree of conſtancy and certainty, then what filleth within the compaſſe of bodies: and is of a nobler and different ſtraine, from all corporeall thinges: for this certainty is entayled vpon ſuch propoſitions by the force of Being; whichis the properobiect of the ſoule: and they haue their Being,as limbes and partes of the ſoule. Asfor the terme of Eternall verity, itis not to be taken poſitiucly, as if theſe propoſitions, or their obiccts, had any true eternity or perſeuerance, without beginning or ending: but only negatiuely; that is,that there can be no time; in which they are falſe: and therefore, we can not out of their hauing ſucha kind of Eternity belonging to them, arguea capacity of inſinite time or duration in our ſoule that compre hendeth THE SEVENTH CHAP TER That our diſeourſing doth proue our ſoule to be incorporeall. diſthe E: Auing thus runne ouer thoſe proofes for the immateriality of our ſoule, which ariſe out of her manner oſ working when she iudgeth, in the next place, we are to enquire what others, her manner of iſcourſing will afford vs, We are ſure, that ſince our diſcourſe is compoſed of iudgements, and of ſingle apprehenſions, it can not chooſe but furnish vs with allthoſe pregnant arguments, that we drew from them. But that will not ſerue our turne: we loke after new cuidence; and we hallſee it will giue it vs with full handes. It conſiſterth in this: that when we diſcourſe, ve may caſily perceiue there is more at one time in our minde, then we can diſcouer to be in our fantaſy ; for we find, that in our fantaſy, as one propoſition cometh, an other is gene: and although they that are gone, ſeme to be ready at a call,yet they are not in preſence;as being thinges which conſiſt in motion, and that require place; and therefore the one iuſtleth the other out of the place it poſſeſſed. But if it fared in like manner in our inward ſoule, we could neuer attaine vnto knowledge: for it is manifeſt, that our ſoule is not aſſured of a concluſion, but by her ſeeing the premiſſes- if then the premiſſes be taken away, the concluſion that reſteth v pon them, falleth to the ground: but they are taken away, if they be out of our mind: therefore, when our vnderſtanding yieldeth its aſſent to a concluſion, it muſt of neceſſity haue the premiſſes ſtillinit. But we muſt not reſt here; this conſideration will carry vs on a wondrous deale further: we know, thar who ſo goeth to frame a new demonſtration in any ſubiect, muſt be certaine he taketh nothing contrary to what he hath learned in many bookes: likeiſe, that who ill makea latine verſe, or readetha Poeme, knoweth there is nothing in all that Pocme contrary to his Proſodia: do we not then manifeſtly percciue a certaine remainder of alltheſe in his ſoule ? The Iike is in all artes:in which he that gocth about any voi ke according toart, heweth he hath in his head all the rules of thar art, though he do not diſtinctly remember them, or callthem to mind whiles he worketh: forif he haue them not, how dorh he woile by them ?Since then it is cleere that he thinketh not of them at that time, it is as cleere, that more is in his ſoule at one time, then is in his fantaſy, or then can be there by materiall bodies, (Which we haue shewed is the way, whereby all thinges come into the fantaſy ) although it be the nimbleſt and the ſubtileſt Agent of all corporeall thinges whatſocuer. Another conſideraticn whereby to euince the immateriality of the 2: ſoule, concerneth the proceeding of ſyllogiſmes by linkes, faſtened one Tpu the natur e to an other: whence we may take notice, that euery one of them is a doi preone ſteppe to an other:and conſequently, it is manifeſt that according to the the fo. Ie ro be nature of the ſoule, they muſt be all together in her: ſince, if any one nũ Ee were abſent, allthe reſt that followed and depended vpon that one, leòę:, and would haue no grounding, nor fixedneſſe in the ſoule: Now if to this we be lmẽen / adde, that what ĩs tc be knowne, is abſolutely and liquidly infinite, there can not be brought orexpected a more pregnant and home witteneſſe of our ſoules ſpirituality: it following out of theſe groundes, that the ſoule by its nature, is not only capable of, but is expreſſely ordered to an infinite knowledge of infinite obiects all together: for theſe two, ſinite and inſiniie ſcience, are ſo vaſtly difſerent from one an other, that if rhe ſame ſubiect be capable of both, it muſt of neceſſity be ordered to inſinite,as to its chiefeſt act and end: and thus out of capacity in this ſubiect, its being ordered is wellinferred; though in other marters peraducnture the conſequence may not be good. And nccordingly uho ooketh into Geometry, Arithmetile, Logike, or euen natureit ſelfe, will euidently ſee that the obiects of knowledge, are euery way, and in euery ſcience, muliiplyable ithout end. Neyther ought this to be neglected, that a great part of the ſoules : obiccts, and indeed of thoſe th itare moſt naturallto her, is aboue the Thæ the mon capacity, and out of the reach of materiall thinges. All Metaphyſikes llobieq, abſtract fiõ quantity:the inueſtigation of Ged, of Angels,of the ſoule it ſmmaterialt ſelfe, ey ther concludeth immateriality, or at the leaſt worketh about it. and conſeVhat shall  ſay of Logicall notions, of thoſe which are called the ſeconà o æ intentions ; about which there is fo much buſineſſe, both in the ſchooles is ſuch. and in the world? Itis ſuſficient that we haue already expreſſed, how all our notions are reſpectiue. But in particular the motiues of humane actions are very abſtracted conſiderations: as for example, hope of thinges to come, memory of thinges paſſed, vertue, vice, honour, shame, and the likæ. To theſe lett vs adde, that when we teach or explicate any thing to ignorant perſons, we muſt frame our owne apprehenſions t their capacity,and we muſt ſpeake ſuch thinges as they may comprehend: which capacity or extent of comprehenſion we can not ſee nor perceiue by any ſenſe, but we iudge it meerely by our Reaſon, and by our vnderſtanding. Wherefore, ſeeing that our operation is mainely and chiefcly on and by ſuch motiues, as are not lyable to materiall principles an I compoſitions,it is euident, that the ſpringhead from whence ſuch an operation ſlowæth, muſt alſo be immateriall and incorporeall. li Iamnot gnorant, that this argument vſeth to be anſvered b vrging, that the ſoule likewiſe knoweth Deafeneſſe, Dumbeneſſe, Blindeneſſe, and ſuch oth-r notions of Mothinges; and Vet is not from thence inferred to be nothing: it conceiueth God and Eternity; and yet it is may know incorporeall thinges, and yet nor be therefore it ſelfe incorporeall. To this Ireply, firſt with wishing them not to miſtake me, but to giue my argument its full forceand weight: for there is a very great difference betweene the knowing of a thing, in a ſtrained , toyleſome, and confuled manner, and rhe hauing a ithing for ns ordinary matter and ſubiect of negotiation: this argueth connaturality between the ſoule and what it is in ſuch ſort conuerſant about; but that doth not. Nov, what is inferred out of whole ſciences and artes, concerneth a maine ſtocke of the ſoules buſineſſe, and not ſome extraordinary vertue or power she hath. But to come vp cloſe to the anſere: I ſay, that if we bein throughlyacquainted with materiall thinges, can find that it is not in the poſſibility of any ſuchto be the likerieſſe of an immateriall thir gi and from thence do inferre that our ſoule, for being fraught with immateriallnotions, is nnt materiall; our concli ſion is well collected ,and a very good oneifor the premiſſes out of which we do gather ir, are within our kenning; and therefore if there were ? ny deſect in ihe conſequence, e should eaſily perceiue it. Whence it appeareth clearely, thnt there is no parity between the deduction of our concluſion, and that other which the obiection vrgeth, that our ſoule, hecauſe it can know eternall thinges,is alſo eternall; for eternity isa thing beyond our comprehẽſion: and therefore it ought not be expeed at cur handes, thar we should he able to giuean account where the bracke is. And to ſay the tuth, if knowledge be r ken properly, we do not kno erernity; h weuer by ſupernaturall helpes we may come to know it: but in thot caſe, the helpes are lkly to be proportionable to the effect. Ney: her are negations properly knowne, ſeeing there is nothing to be knowne of them. And thus e ſce that theſe obiections do proceed from the æquivocation of the word knowledge ; ſometimes vſed properly, othertimes applyed abuſiuely. THE EIGHT CHAPTER Containing proofes out of our manner of proceeding to action, that our ſoule is incorporeall. 55ĩ⸗ Doubt not but what we haue already ſaid, hath ſuffciently : à conuinced our ſoules being immateriall, vnto whomſosuer is able to penetrate the force of the arguments we haue 2 brought E proofe thereof, and vill take the paines to conſider them duely: (which muſt be done, by ſerious and continuæd reflection, and not by curſary reading, or by interrupted attempts) yet ſince we haue ſtill a whole field of proofes vntouched,and that in ſo important a matter, no euidence can be too cleare, nor any paines be accounted loſt, that may redouble the light, although it shine already bright enoughto diſcerne what we ſecke : we will make vp the concert of vnanimous teſtimonies to this already eſtablished truth, by adding thoſe arguments we shall collect out of the manner of our ſoules proceeding to action, vnto the orhers we haue drawne from our obſeruations vpon her apprehenſions, her iudgements, and her diſcourſes. Looking then into this matter: the ſirſt conſideration we meere vithall is, that our vnderſtanding is in his owne nature an orderer; and that his proper woike ĩs to ranke and putt thinges in order: for if we reſlect vpon the wo. kes and artes of men, as, a good life, a commonwealth, an army, a houſe, a garden, all artefactes; what are thy, but compoſitions of well ordered partes?And in euery kind, we ſee that he is the Maſter, and the Architect, and is accoũted the viſeſt, and to haue the beſt vnderſtanding, ?ho can beſt, or moſt, or further then his fellowes, ſett thir g-s in order. If then to this we ioyne, that quantity is a thing whoſe nature conſiſterh ina capacy of hauing partes and multitude, and conſequently is the ſubiect of ordering and ranking; doth ir not euidently fllow, that our ſoule, compared to the whole maſſe of bodies,and torhe very nature of corporeity or quantity, is as a proper ag nt ſo its proper matter to vorke vpon?Which ifit be, it muſt neceſſari'y be of a nobler ſtraine, and of a different and higher nature then iti an I conſequently.can not be a body, or be compoſcd of Quantir.: for the had matter init ſelfe, what it expectethand requireth from the agent, it would not ncede the agents helpe, but of it ſelfe it weie fitt to be an. Agent Vherefore if the nature of corporeity, or of body, in iĩts full latitude, be to be ordered, it followeth that the thing whoſe nature is to be an orderer, muſtas it is ſuch, be not a body, but of a ſuperiour nature, and exceeding a Body: which we expreſſe by calling it a ſpirituall thing. 3 Vell then, if the ſoule be an orderer, to thinges belong neceſſarlly 2. vnto her:he one is, that she haue this order within her ſclfe, the orher is, That the oules that she haue power to communicate it vnto ſuch thinges, as are to be being able to mooue . ithout ordered. The firſt she hath by ſcience, of which enough alrea'y hath being mocueq, beene ſaid towardes proouing our inrent. Next, that her natuse is ſorb prosue communicatiue of this order,is euident æut of her action and manner imm of woi king. But Wht ther of her ſclfeshe be thus communicatiue, or be ſo by her coniunction to the body she informeth, a ppeareth rot from thence. Bur where experiẽce falleth hort, reaſon ſupplyerh, andsheweth vs that of her owne nature she is communicatiue of order; for ſeeirg thai heraction is an ordeing,and that in this line there are bur two ſortes of thinges in the world, namely, ſuchas do order, and luch as are to be ordered: it is manifeſt,that ihe action muſt Ey nature and in the vniuerſall conſideration of it, beginne fiom he orderer (in Whom order hath its lifeand lubſiſtence) and not from that which is to receiue it: then, iit to be ſithence ordering is motion, ĩt followeth enidently, that the ſoule isa moouer and a beginnerof motion. llll ll But ſince we may conceiue two ſortes of moouers; the one vhenthe agent is mooued to mooue; the other, whenoſ it ſelfe it beginneth th: motion without being mooued; we are to enquire, vnto which of theſe two the ſoule belongeth But to apprchend the queſtion rightly, we will illuſtrate it by an exaniple: lett vs ſuppoſe that ſome action is fitt to beginne at tenne of ihe clocke: now we may imagine an agent ro be” inne this action in two different mannerss the one, that the clocke ſtriking tenne, breedeth or ſtirreth ſomewhat in him, from whence this action followerh. he other manneris, that the agent may of his owne nature, haue luch an actuall comprehenſion or decurrence of time wihin himſe'fe, as that without receiuing any waming from abroad, bur as hough he moued and ordered the clocke as well as his owne inſtruments, he may of himſelfe be fitt and reacy, iuſt at that houre ro beginne that action not as if the clocke rold him what houre it ĩs, but as if he by gouerning th: clock⸗, made that h ure to be, as well as he cauſeth b actionto begi neatthit houre. In th- fitſt of theſe manners, theagent is mooued ro mooue: but in th: lecond, he mnoueth of himſelfe, ithout being mooued hy any thing elle. And in this ſecond way, our ſoule cf her owne nature communicareth her ſelfe to quantitatiue thinges, and giueth thm morion: whic h follo weth out of what we haue already prooued; that a ſoule, in her c wne nature, is the ſubiect of an infinite knowledge, and therefore is capable of hauing ſuch a generall compre henſion, as well of rime, and of the courſe of all orther thinges, as of the puticularaction: heis to doe; and conſequently, ſtandeth not in neede of a Monitor withuut her, to direct her when to beginne. If then it be ah impreuaricable law with all bodies, that none whatſoeuer can mooue vnleſſe it be mooued by an other; it followeth, thar the ſoule which mooueth, without being ſtired or excitated by any thing elſe, is f a high riace then they; and conſequently is immateriall and voyde cf Quantity. Bur lett me not be miſikrn in whar I come from ſayingias though my meaning were, that the ſoule exerciſcih this way of mouing her ſelfe,and of ordering her actiuns whilis he it in rhe body: for ho can she; ſeeing she is neuer endeed with complete knovledge requiſite for any action, neuer faly comprehending all the circum ſtances of it? But what l intend, is that 1he nature of ihe ſoule, conſidered in it ſclfe, is ſuch,as hath a capacity and may reach to this manner of working, ( whence l inferre that she is not à body hur a ſpirit) without determin ing, hether: he woike thus in the body,or cut of it: that enquiry belorg: th notto this place; t willfollow Eyanã hy.  But furthe preſent, hating corſidered vnto what kind of werking, an the nature of the ſoule in abiinct, is capable of attainir gs we will conN elude this Chapter vith reſlecting vpon thoſe actions ſ hers. wh}h Le ſall dayly voder our remai ke, as being exerciſed in the body. In all of li EE them them we may obſerue, that she proceedeth with a certaine vniuerſality and indifferency, beyond the practiſe of all other creatures whatſoeuer: for example, if a man be ſpoken to, or asked of a hundred ſeuerall thinges that he ncuerthou .ht of before in all his life, he willimmediately shape pertinent replyes, to all that is ſaid, and returne fitting anſweres to euery queſtion:as, Whither ſuch a man goeth ? How long this ſlaſſe is: Vhat colour that mans elothes are of ? &c to allwhich, and to as many thinges more as you ill (ſo they be within the compaſſe of his knowledge) he ſtraight anſereth differently,and to the purpoſe. Wheince itis manifeſt, that his anſWeres do not proceed vpon ſett gimals or ſtringes, whereof one being ſtrucke, it moueth the reſt in a ſett order,  which we haue shewed, is the courſe in allactions done by beaſtes) but nut of a principle within him, which of it ſelfe is indifferent to all thinges: and therefore can readily apply it ſelfe to the anſwere, according as by the queſtion it is moued: and the like may be obſerued in his actions; which he varyeth according tothe occaſions preſented. I remember how Sir Philip Sidney ( the Phœnix of the age he liued in, and the glory of our nation, and the patterne to poſterity of a complete, a gallant, and a perfect gentleman) aptly calleth our hindes, the inſtruments of inſtruments; from Ariſtotle, Who termeth ithem Organa organorum, or vniuerſall inſtruments, fittly moulded 1o be employed in any ſeruice; whereas nature hath to all other creatures appropriated their inſtruments to determinate actions, but tomũn, she hath ſin theſe) giuen ſuch, as might be applyed to any kind of woike whatſoeuer: and accordingly we ſee, that the ſame kind of bird, ſtill buildeth her neaſt and breedeth her young ones, in the ſame wuy, vithout any the leaſt variance at all: but men do build their houſcs as they pleaſe, ſometimes vpon hils, ſometimes in vales, ſometimes vnder the earth, and ſometimes vpon the toppes of trees: and the manners of breeding or inſtructing thæir children, are as diuers,as the cuſtomes of nations and townes:and in all other actions, our Maſters note it for a property peculiar to man, that he vſerth to aniue vnto the ſame end by diuers meanes; as to tranſport ourſelues to ſome place we would goe vnto, eyther by water, or by horſe, or by coach, or by lirter, as we pleaſ: whereas we ſee no ſuch variety in like actions of other liuing creatures. Allwhich being ſo, we may conclude, that the ſoules proceeding eytherto anſweres, orto action, argueth cleerely that she hath vithin her ſelfe ſuchan indiſferency, as is ioyned with a meanes to determine this indifferency: he contrary whereof we ſee in all corporeall enginess; forthey haue euery ſteppe in the whole courſe of their wayes, chilked out vnto them, by their very framing, (as hath beene amply declared in the ſirſt Treatiſe) and haue the determination of their woike, from end to end ſett downe, and giuen them by their artiſicier and maker: and therefore it is moſt euident, that the ſoule can not be a thing con po ed or framed of mateiiall and quantitatiue partes, ſeeirg she hath n0t her wayes ſett downe vnto her, but frameth them of her ſelfe, accordin gi6 the accidents that occurre. The ſame nature of the ſoule, diſcouereth it ſelfe in the quiet proceeding of Reaſon , when it worketh with greateſt ſtrength and vigour; as ell knowing, that its efficaciouſneſſe conſiſteth not in the multitude of partes, hich Paſiion breedeth, butin the well ordering of thoſe it already hath vnder its command. Whereas the ſtrength of Quantity, and the encreaſe of its ſtrength, conſiſteth in the multitude of its partes: as will euidently appeare to whom shall conſider this point deepely. T hus we haue in a ſummary manner gone throu : allthe operations of the ſoule, which inthe beginning of this latter Treatiſe, we heaped togetheras materials, wherewith to rayſe an immateriall and ſpirituall building. Neyther, I hope, will our Reader be offended with vs, for being more ſuccinct and conciſe in all our diſcourſe concerning our ſoule, then where we deliuered the doctrine of Bodies: for the difficultneſſe of this ſubiect, and the nicety required to the expreſſing our conceptions concerning it, wherein=asthe Prouerbe is)a haire is to Be clouen , would not allow vs that liberty of ranging about,as when we treated of Bodies: Vhat occurreth among them, may be illuſtrated by examples within their owne orbe, and of their owne pitch; but to deſplay the operations of aſoule, we can find no inſtances that are able to reach them ; they would rather embroile and darken them: for the exact propriety of wordes, muſt be ſtrictly and rigorouſly obſerued in them: and the Reader shall penetrate more into the nature and depth of them, by ſerious meditation and reſlection vpon the hintes we haue here giuen, (eſfcacious enough, I hope, to excite thoſe thoughits he should haue for this purpoſe, and to ſteere them the right vay) then by much and voluminous reading, or by hearing long and poli: hed diſcouiſes of this ſubiect. For my part, if what I haue here ſid, should to any man appeare not ſufficient to conuince that our ſoule is of a ſpirituall and farre different nature, from all ſuch thinges as in our firſt Treatiſe we haue diſcourſed vpò, and taken for the heades and moſt generall Kindes of Bodies, (vnto vhich allother particular ones, and their motions may be reduced) I shall become a ſuitor to him, in entreating him to take this ſubiect into his handling, where it beginneth to be vnwicldy for mine, and to declare vnto vs,vpon the principles we haue ſcrtled in the firſt Treatiſe, and vpon conſidering the nature of a body (which is the firſt of all our notions)how theſc particulars we haue reſlected vpon in mans actions, can be drawne out of them; for I can find no poſſible meanes ro linke them together: a vaſt and im enetrable Ocean, lyeth betweene the diſcouerics ve haue made on cach ſide of itsshores; which forbidderh all commerce between them: atthe leaſt, on the daike hodies ſide, which hath not winges to ſoare into the region of Intellectuall light. By thoſe principles,we haue traced out the courſeand progreſſe of all operations belonging to ſenſe; and how beaſtes do or may performe all their actions, euen to their moſt refined and ſubtileſt operations: but beynnd thẽ, we haue not beene able to carry theſe groundes, northey vs. Lett him then take the paines to shew vs,by what figures, by what firſt qualities, by vhat mixtion of rare and denſe partes, an vniuerſall appiehenſion, an euident iudgement, a legitimate conſequence is made: and ſo of the likei as, of a mans determination of himſelfe toanſere pertinently any que ſtion; of his chooſing this way before thats &c. Which if he can doeſas I am ſure he can not) : hall allow it tobe reasõ, and not obſtinacy, that worketh in his mind, and carryeth him againſt our doctrine: but if he can not, and that there is no apparence nor poſſibility (as indeede thereis not)that theſeactions can be eſfected by the ordering of materiall partes, ind yet he will be ſtill vnſatisfyed, without being able to æll vhy, ſ ſor he vill be vnvilling to acknowledge, that theſe abſtracted ſpeculations, do not ſinke into him, and that nothing can conuince him, but what his ſenſes may be iudges of,and that he may handle, and turne on euery ſide like a bricke or a tile) and vill beſtill importune with cauillous ſcrupules,and vilde doubrs, that in truth, and at the bottome do ſigniſy nothing, ve vill leaue him to meditate at his leiſure vpon what we haue ſaid ; hiles we proceed on to what followeth out of this great principle , That our ſoule is incorporeall and ſpirituall. THE NINTH CHAPTER. That our ſoule is a Subſtance, and Immortall. ? Auing concluded that our ſoule is immateriall and } indiuiſible;to proceed one ſteppe further, it can not be A denyed, but that itis eythera ſubſtance oran accident;  if the later, t muſt be of the nature of the ſubſtance  whoſe accident it is ſor ſo we ſee all accidents are: but sæin man when his ſoule is excluded, there is no ſpirituall ſubſtance at all, vhereof we haue any notice: and therefore if it be an accident, it muſt be a corporeall accident, or ſome accident of a body; as ſome figure, temperature, harmony, or the like: and conſequently, it muſt be diuiſible: but this is contrary to whet is proued in the foſmer Chapters:and therefore it can not bea corporeallaccident. Neyther can it be a ſpirituall accident: for vnto what ſpirituall ſubſtance should it belong, when as nothing in man can be ſuſpected to be ſpirituall, but it ſelfe.Seeing then thatit can be noaccident, a ſubſtance it muſt be, and muſt haue its Exiſtence or Being in it ſelfe. Here we haue paſſed the Rubicon of experimentall knowledge: we are now out of the boundesthat experience hath any iuriſdiction ouer: and from henceforth, we muſt inall our ſearches and concluſions rely only vpon the ſingle euidence of Reaſon. And euen this laſt concluſion we haue beene faine to deduce out of the force of abſtracted reaſoning vpon what we had gathered before; not by immediate reflection vpon ſome action we obſerue proceeding from a man: yet withall, nature flasheth out by a direct beame, ſome litle glimmering of the verity of it, to the eye of Reaſon that is within vs: foras whẽ we ſce a clocke mooue, ora mill, or anything that goeth by many wheeles, if we marke that there are to contrary motions, in two diuers partes of it, we can not think that thoſe contrary motions, do belong to one and the ſame cõntiaued body, but shall preſently conclude, that there muſt be in that engine two ſeuerall bodies compacted together ſo in man, though his body be the firſt moouer that appeareth vnto us, yet ſeeing that in his aũtions, ſome effects do shew themſelues, which it is impoſſibleshould roceed froma body, it is euident, that in him there is ſome other thin beſidœ that one which we ſee: and conſequently we may conclude, that he is compoſed of a body and of ſomewhat elſe that is not a body: which ſomewhat elſe, being the ſpring from whence thoſe actions flo, that are of a diſferent ſtraine from them that are deriued from the body, muſt neceſſarily be a ſpirituall ſubſtance. But whiles e are examining, how farre our preſent conſiderations; and short diſcourſes may catry vs,as it were experimentally to confirme this truth, we muſt not omitt what Auicenna in his bookẽ de Anima & Almahad, and Monſieur des Cartes in his Methode, do preſſe vpon the ſame eccaſion. Thus they ſay,or to like purpoſe: if Icaſt with my ſelfe, who Iam that walke, or ſpeake, or think; ororder any thing; my reaſon villanſere me, that although my legges or tõgue were gone, and that I could no longer walke or ſpeake, yet were not I gone, and I should know and ſee with my vnderſtanding, that I were ſlill the very ſame thing, the ſame Ego às befoſe. The ſame as of my tongue or legges, would reaſon tell me of my eyes, my eares, my ſmelling, taſtin nd feeling, eyther all of them together, oreuery one of them ſingle, that were they all gone, ſtillshould ſ remaine: As when in a dreame, ſwhere I vſe none of alltheſe)] both am, and know my ſelfe to be. Reaſon willtell me alſo, that although I were not nourished, ſo Iwere not waſted, ( hich for the drift of the argument may be ſuppoſed) yet ſtill I should continue in Being. Whence it would appeare, that my hart, liuer, Inges, kidneyes, ſtomac ke, mouth, and what other partes of me ſoeuer, that ſerue for the nourishment of my body, might be ſeuered from me, and yet I remaine what lam. Nay, if all the beautifulland ayry fantaſmes, which fiy about ſo nimbly in our braine, be nothing elſe but ſignes vnto in our ſoule, of what is without vsiit is euident, that though peraduenture she would not vithout their ſeruice, exerciſe that which by errour we miſſename Thinking;yet the very ſame ſoule and thinker might be without them all: and conlequently, without braine alſ o3ſeeing that our braine is but the playhouſ and ſcene, where alltheſe faery maskes are acted: ſo that in concluſion ſion Reaſon aſſureth vs,that when all body is abſtracted in vs, there ſtill remaineth a ſubſtãce a thinker,an Ego,or 1,that in it ſelfe is no whitt diminished, by beingſas I may ſoy) tripped out of the caſe it was encloſed in. And now I hope the intelligẽt Reader vill conceiue I haue performed. 4my promiſe, and haue sheved the ſoule of man to be an Immortall m— ubſtance : for ſince it is a ſubſtance, it hath a Brings and ſince it is an prooue the immateriall ſubſtance, t hath a Being of its owne force; without needing à& ſ- pona conſort body, to helpe it to ſuſtaine its Exiſtence: for to bea ſubſtance, negatuis tobe the b| of Exiſtence;and conſequently,to be an immateriall ſubſtance, is tobe a ſubiect capable of Exiſtence, without the helpe of matter or of Quantiry. It can not therefore be required of me, to vſe any further induſtry, to prouc ſuch a ſoule to be immortall: but who vill contradict her being ſo, is obliged to shew that she is mortall: for it followeth in reaſon, thats he will keepe her being, vnleſe by ſome force she be bereaued of it;it being a rule, that whoſoeuer putteth a thing to be, is not bound, forthe continuation of that thinges being, to proue that it is not changed: but on the other ſide, he that auerreth it is changed, is bound to bring in his euidence of a ſufficient cauſe to change it: for to haue a thing remaine, is natures owne dictamen, and followeth out of the cauſes which gaue it being : but to make an alteration, ſuppoſeth a change in the cauſesiand therefore the obligation of proofe Iyerh on that ſide. Neuertheleſſe, to giue ſatistaction to thoſe, hoare carneſtto ſee euery 3. article poſitiuely prooued, ve will make that part too our Prouince. Lett The ſame is Vs then remember, that Immortality ſignifyeth a negation, or a not hauing of Mortality:and thata poſitiue terme, is required to expreſſe a the ſoule ca change by;ſince nature teacheth vs, that whai ſoeuer is, will remaine with oũ tthe Beingit hath.vnleſſeiit be forced out of it: if then we :hew, that Mans cauſe of ſoule hath not thoſe groundes in her, which maketh all thinges we ſee, mortality. to be mortall; we muſt be allowed to haue acquirted ourſelues of the charge, of prouing her Immortall. For this end, lett vs looke round about vs,and enquire of allthe thinges we meete vith, by what meanes theyare u come toa periode , and are no more. The pure elements will tell you,that they haue their change, by rarefaction and condenſation, and no otherwiſe: mixed bodies, by alteration of their mixture: ſmall bodies, by the actiuity of the Elements working vpon themiand by the meanes of rarefaction and condenſation,entering into their very conſtitution, and breeding an other temperament, by ſeperation of ſome of their partes, and in their ſteade mingling orhers. Plantes, and trees, and other liuing creatures will tell you, that their nourishment, being inſinuated through their vhole bodies, by ſubtile pores,and blinde paſſages, f they either be ſtopped by any accident, or elſe be filled with had nourishment, the mixture of ihe whole faileth of it elfe, and they come to dye. Thoſec thinges which are violentlydeſtroyed, e ſee are made avay, forthe moſt part by diuiſions ſo ſire by proousccauſe diuiſion deſtroyeth all that cometh in its way; ſo liuing creatures are deſtroyed, by their paning cf their bloud from their ſlesh, or of one member from an other, or by the euaporation or extinction of their naturall heate. In fine, we are ſure that all thinges, which within our knovledge looſe the ir Bing, do ſo by reaſon of their Quantiry; which by diuiſion, or by rarefaction, and compreſſion, gaineth ſome new temperature, that doth not conſiſt with their former temper. Afrer theſe premiſſes, Incede ſay no more: the concluſion diſplayeth it ſelfe readily and plainely, vithout any further trouble; for if our labour hath beene hitherto, to shew that our ſoule is indiuiſible, and that her operations are ſuch as admitt not quantitatiue partes in hen it is cleare, that she ean not be mortall, by any of thoſe wayes, hereby we ſee thinges round abour vs to perish. The like arsument we may fiame out of locall motion; for ſeein that all the alteratiue actions we are acquainted vithall, be performed by locall motion, ſas is deliuered, both in groſſe, and by detaile, in our firſt Treatiſc)and that Ariſtotle, andall viderſtanding Philoſop hers do agree, there can be no locallmotion in an indiuiſible thing, ſthe reaſon whereof is euident, to whomſoeuer reſecteth vponthe nature of Place, and of locall motion ) it is manifeſt, thatthere can be no motion to hun the ſoule, ſinceshe is concluded to be induaſible. The common argument likewiſe vſed in this matter , amounteth to the ſame effect: to witt, that ſince thinges are deſtroyed only by their contraries; that thing which hath no contrary, is not ſubiect to dœſtruction: (Which Principle both Reaſon and experience, do euery where confirme:) but a humane ſoule is nor ſubiect 1o contrariety: and therefore ſuch an one can not be deſtroyed. The truth of the aſſumption, may be knowne two vayes: firſt, becauſe all the contrarieties that are found wiihin our cogniſance, do ariſe our of the primary oppoſition of Rarity and. Denſity; from which the ſoule being abſolutely free, she likeiſe is ſo, from all that groweth out of that roore: and ſccondly, we may be ſure that our 5ꝶ can receiue no harme from contrarietysſince all contraries are ſo farre from hurting her, as contraryviſe, the one helperh herin the contemplation of the orher: and as for contradiction in thoughts, which att different times our ſoule is capable of admitting, experience teachethvs, that ſuch thoughts do change in her, without any preiudice to her ſubſtance; they being accidents, and hauing their contrariety only betwixt themſelues within her, but no oppoſitionatallto her; which only is the contrariety thar may haue power to harme her: and therefore, whether ſoeuer of ſuch contrary thoughts be in theſ oule, pertaineth no more to her ſubſiſtence , then it doth to the ſubſiſtence ofa body, whether iſ be here or there, onthe right hand, or on the leſt. lll Andthus Iconceiue my taske is performed; and that Iam diſcharged of my vndenakirg to shew the ſoules Immortality, hich importeth no more, then to she, that the cauſes of other thinges mortality, do not reach her. Yet being well perſuaded, that my reader will not be offended vith the addition of anyne light, inthis darke ſubiect; I will ſtriue to diſcouer (if it be poſſible) ſome poſitiue proofe, or gueſſe, out of the property and nature of the ſoule it ſelfe, why she muſt remaine, and snioy an other life after this. To this end, lett vs caſt our eye backe, vpon what hath beene already ſaid, concerning her nature. We found that truth is the naturall perfection of Mans ſoule; and that she can not be aſſured of truth naturally, otherwiſe then by euidence: and therefore it is manifeſt, that euidence of truth, is the full complete perfection, at vhich the ſoule doth ayme. We found alſo, that the ſoule is capable of an abſolute infinity of truth oreuidẽce. To theſe to, we willadde only one thing more, hich of it ſelfe is paſt queſtion, and therefore needeth no roofe;and then we vill deduce our concluſion:and this is, that in a man ſil ſoule isa farre nobler,and perfecter part of him, then his body: and therefore, by the rules of nature and of wiſedome, his body was made for his ſoule, and not his ſoule finally for his body. i Theſe groundes being thus layed, lett vs examine, whether our ſoule dorh in this life arriue to the end she was ordained for, or no: and if she do not then it muſt follow of neceſſity, that our body was made but for a paſſage, by hich our ſoule should be ferried oucr into that ſtate, where she is to attaine vnto that end, for which her nature is framed and fitred: the great kill,and artifice of nature, shewing and aſſuring vs, that she neuer faileth of compaſſing her end, euen in her meaneſt workes: and therefore without doubt would not breake her courſc in her greateſt: whereof man is abſolutely the head and chiefe, among all thoſe that we are acqainted with. Now, what the end is, vnto which our ſoule doth ayme, is cuidenti ſince the perfection of euery thing, is the end forwhich it is made: the perfection then,and enã of the ſoule being euidence; and she being capable of infinite euidence; lett vs enquire, whether in this life she may compaſſe it or no. To determine this queſtion, lett vs compare infinitè euidence, to that euidence, which the greateſt and moſt knowing man that euer liued, hath acquired by the worke of naturealone: or to that cuidence, which by aime we may imagine is poſſible euer to happen vnto any one man to arriue vnto: and balancing them well together, lett vs iudge whether all that any man can know here, is not in reſpect of what a mans ſoule is capable of, to be ſtiled as nothing, and deerueth not thæ? name of euidence, nor to be accounted of that nature: and if our ſentence do eonclude vpon this, lett vs acknowledge that our ſou'e arriueth not to her perfection, nor enioyeth her end, in this world; and therefore, muſt haue infaillibly an orther habitation in the next world, vnto which nature doth intend her. Experience teacheth vs, that ve can not fully comprehend any one of natures workes: and thoſe Phi'oſophers, who ina diſciplinable way ſearch into nature, (and therefore are called Mathematicians)aſter they haue written large volumes of ſome very ſlender ſubiect, do euer find, that he y hau- leſt vntouched, an endleſſe abiſſe of knowledge, forwhomſocuershall pleaſe to build vper their foundations:and that they can neuer arriue neere ſayirg all ihat may be ſaid of that ſubiect, though they haue ſiid neuer ſo much of it. Ve may not then make difficulty to beleeue, that rhe wiſeſt and learnedeſt men in the world, haue reaſon to profeſſe ith the father of Philoſophers, that indeede they know nothing. Andif ſo, how farre are they from thar happineſſe and perfection, which conſiſteth in knowing all thinges? Of which full ſea, we neuertheleſſe find euen in this low ebbe, that our ſoule is a channell capableiand is framed a fitt veſſelland inſtrument to receiue it, when the tide shall come in vpon it: which e are ſure it can not do, vntillthe bankes of our body ich hinder it, be broken downe. This laſt conſideration, without doubt, hath added no ſmall corroboration to our former proofes; hich are ſo numerous and ſo cleare, as peraduenture it may appeare ſuperſluous, to ſay any more to this point: ſince one conuincing argument eſtablisheth the verity of a concluſion, as eſficaciouſly as a hundred:and therefore Mathematicians vſe but one ſingle proofe, in all their propoſitions; after which other ſopernumerary ones, would be but tedious Neuertheleſſe, ſinceall the ſeuerall wayes, by which we may looke into the nature of our ſoule ( the importanteſt ſubiect we can buſy our thoughts vpon)can not faile of being pleaſi g and delight full to vs, ve muſt not omitt to reflcct a litle vpon that great property of our ſoule, by which she is able to mooue and to woike, wirhout her ſelfe being mooued or touched. Vnto which adding, that all life conſiſteth in motion, and that all motion of bodies comerh fiom ſome other thing without them; we may euidently conclude, that our ſoule, Who can mooue without receiuing her motiò from abread, hath in her ſelfe a ſpring of life: for the whichshe is not bcholding ſas bodies are) to ſome extrinſecall cauſe, of a nature like vnto her;l utonly to h'm, who gaue her to B- what she is. But if she haue ſuch a ſpring of life within her, it were vnreaſonable to imagine, that she dyed vpon the occaſion of the death of an orther thing ſ exerciſeth no action of L.fe, but as it is cauſed by an othe. N yiher may we neglect that ordinary conſideration, which taketh notice, that our ſoule maketh vſe of propoſitions of eternall truth; which we haue aboue produced, among our proofes for her being of a ſpirituall nature;and: allnow employ it for the prouing her Immortall: by conſidering, that the notion of Being, which ſettleth theſe propoſitions ſo,as they feare no mutation or: h king by time, is the very roote of the ſoule; and that which giueth her her nature; and which: hewerh it ſclfe in all her operations: ſo that, if from Being,arriueth vnto theſe propoſitions, to Rare no time; the hke muſt of neceſſity betide alſo the ſubſtãce of the ſoule. And thus we ſee, that her nature is out of the reach of time: that she can comprchend time, and ſcuit limits: and that she can think of thinges beyond it, and caſt about for them. All which are cleare teſlimonies, that she is fiee and ſecure from the alldeuouring and deſtroying tyranny of that Saturniall Conquerour of the whole world of matter and of Bodies, whoſe ſeruant is death. After all theſe proofes drawne from the nature of the ſoule it ſelfe, euery one of them of force to conuince her immortality, I muſt craue lcaue to adde one conſideration more, though it ſeemerh to belong vnto an others harueſt, namely to the ſcience of Morals: and it is, that the poſition of Mortality in the ſoule, taketh away all monlity, and changeth men into beaſtes; by taking away the ground of all difference in thoſe thinges, which are to gouerne our actions. For ſu poſing that the ſoule dyeth with the bodyi and ſeemg that man hath a comprehenſion or notion of time without end; it is euident, that the ſ panne of this life, muſt needes appeare contemptible vnto him, that well conſidereth and weigheth it againſt the other infinite duration: and by conſequence, all the goods, and euils which are partes ofthis life, muſt needes become as deſpicable and inconſiderable: ſo that better or worſe in this lite, hath not any appearance of difference betweene them at the leaſt, not enough to make him labour with paine to compaſſe the one, and elchew the other, and for that end, to croſſe his preſent inclination in any thing,and engage himſelfe in any the leaſt difficult taske: and ſo it would enſue, that if to an vnderſtanding man, ſome courſe or action were propoſed vnto him, as better then that he were going about, or for the inſtant had a mind vnto, he would relish it, as a great marchant, or a Banquier would do, who dealing for Millions, one should preſſe him vith earneſtneſſe,to make him change his reſolued courſe, for the gaine of a farthing more this w.y then the other; which being inconſiderable, he would not trouble his head withit, nor ſtoppe at what he was in hand vith. In like manner, Whnſocuer is perſuaded, that foran inſinity of time he shall be norhing, and without ſenſe of all thinges, he ſcorneth for this litle tinckling of his life, to take any preſent paines, to be in the nxt moment well, or to auoyde being illi ſince in ſ caſe,dying is a ſecure remedy to any preſent cuilliand he is as eſ⸗ dye nov, as a hundred cares hẽce; nor can he eſtime the loſſe of a hũdred yeares, to be a matter of moment: and therefore he will, without any further guidance or diſcourſe, betake himſelfe to do whatſoeuer his preſent inclination beareth him to with moſt facility; vpò this reſ olotiò.chat ifany thing croſſe him, he vill presẽtly forgoe his life, as a trifle not worth the keeping:and thus, neyther vertue, nor honour, nor more pleaſure then what at the preſent tickleth him, doth fall into his account: which is the ouerthrowef ihe vhole body of Morality,that is of mans action and nature. Butall they who looke into ſciences, do croſſe that for an erroneous and abſurd poſition, which taketh away the Principles of any ſcience: and conſequently, the poſition of ihe ſoules Mortality, is to be eſteemed ſuch. There remaineth yet one conſi-deration more,and peraduenture more important,thn any we haue yet mentioned, to conuince the ſoules immo: tality: which is, that ſpirituall thinges are in a ſtate of Being. But we shall not be able to declare this, vntill we haue proceeded a litle further. THE TENTH CHAPTER Declaring what the ſoule of a man, ſeperated from his tody , i : and of j her knowledge and manner of orking. 2æ Nhappy man: how long vilt thou be inquiſitiue and æ curious to thine owne perill? Haſt thou not already : payed too deare, for thy knowing more then thy share? A Or haſt thou not heard, that who vill prye into maieſty, : shall be oppreſſed by the glory of it ? Some are ſo curiousshall I ſay)or ſo ignorant, as to demaund, what a humane ſoule vill be, aftersheis deliuered from her body: and vnleſſe they may ſee a picture of her,and haue whereby to fanſie her, they will not be perſuaded, but that all are dreames, which our former diſcourſes haue concluded: as if he, who findeth himſelfe dazeled with locking vpon the ſunne, had reaſon to complaine of that glorious body,and not of his owne weake eyes, that can not entertaine ſo reſplendent a light. Vherefore to frame ſome conceit of a ſeperated ſoule, I will endeauour for their Grisfaction, to ſay ſome what of her future ſtate. Lett vs then firſt conſider what a Thought is. (1 do not meane, that corporeall ſpiritt, which beateth at our common ſenſe; but that whichũs wichin, in the inward ſoule, Whoſe nature we find by diſcouiſe and effects. though we can not ſee it inĩt ſelfe.) To this purpoſe we may obſerue, that if we are to diſcourſe, or to do any thing, we are guided the right way in that ſubiect we haue in hand, by a multitude of particular thoughts; which are all of them terminated in that diſcourſe oraction: and conſequently, euery act of our mind, is as it were an actualltule or direction, for ſome part of ſuch diſcourſe or action: ſo that we may conceiue a complete thought ( compounded of many particular ones) to be a thing, that ordereth one entire diſcourſe or action of ourlife. Athought being thus deſeribed, lett vs in the next place trye, if we can m: ke an apprehenſion, what a ſcience or an art is: as, what the ſcience of Aſtronomy is; or what the art of playing on the Organes is, when the Aſtronomer thinketh not of the motions of the heauens, nor the Organiſt of playing on his inſtrument: which ſcienco and art, do neuertheleſſe euen then reſide in the Aſtronomer,and in the Organiſt: and we find, that theſe are but the reſultes of many former complete thouglis;as being thoſe very thoughts in remainder; whatſoruer this muov ſign fy. ſ Laſtly, lett vs conceiue ſif we can)a power or eapacity to Being: vnto which capacity, if any Bring be hrought, that it is vnſeperably gleed and riueted vnto it, by its very being a Bring: and if any to thinges be brought vnto it,by the vertue of one Being, common to both thoſe thinges, that both of them, by this one being, do become one betwixt themſelues, and with this capatity; and that ſo there is no end or periode of ihis addition of thinges.b the mediation of Bæng:but that by linkes and ringes, all the thinges a: are in the world, may hang togethet betwixt themſelues, and to this Power; if all of them may be brought vntoũt by the glew and vertue of being: in ſuch ſort as we haue formerly declared, paſſeth in the ſoule. No lett vs putt this together, and make vp ſucha thing, as groweth out of the capacity to Being, thus actuated and cleauing to all thinges that any way haue beingiand we shall ſee, that it becometh a whole entire vorld, ordered and clinging together with as great ſtrengrh and neceſſity,as can proceede from the nature of Bemg, and of contradiction: and our reaſon will tell vs, that ſuch a thing, if it be actiue, can frame a world, ſuchan one as we liue in, and are a ſmall parcell of, if it haue matter to woike vpon; and can order Whatſoeuer hath Aeing, any way that itis capable of being ordered, to do by it,and to make of it, whatſoeuer can be done by,and made of ſuch matter. llill Alltheſe conceptions ( eſpecially by the aſſiſtance of the laſt) may ſeruea litle to shadow out a perfect ſoule: which is, a knowledge, an art, a rule,a direction,of allihinges:and allthis by being allthinges, in a degree and ſtraine, proper and peculiar to it ſelfe: and an vnperfect ſoule, is a participation of this Idea:that is,a kn wledge,a rule,and a direction, for as much asit is,and as it attaineth vnto. Now as in our thoughts, it is the corporeall part nnly which maketha noiſe, and a shew outwardly, but the ſpirituall thought, is no otheriſe perceiued then in its eſfect, in ordering the bodily acts; in like ſorr, ve muſt not conceiue this knowlecge to be a morion;but meerely to bea thing or Being, out of which ithe ordering and mouing of orher thinges doth ſlowiit ſelfe remaining fixed and immoueable:and becauſe allthat is ioyned vnto it, is there riueted by Being,or identifcation;and that when one thing is an other, the other is againe it; it is impoſſible that one should exceed the orher, and be any thing that is not it: and therefore, in the ſoule there can be no partes, no accidents, no additions, no appendances, nothing that ſticketh to itand is not it: but whatſoeueris in her, is ſoule:and the ſoule, is allthat which is within heri ſo that all that is of her,and all that belongeih vnto her, is nothing but one pure ſimple ſubſtance, peraduenture Metaphyſically, or formally diuiſible: ſin ſuchſort as we haue explicated in the firſt Treatiſe, of the diuiſibility betweene quantity and ſubſtance)but not quantit:tiuely, as bodies are diuiſible. In fine, ſubſtance it is, and nerthing but ſuſtance; allthat isin it, being ioyned and imped into it, by the very nature of Being, which maketh ſubſtance. This then, is the ſubſtantill conceite of a hamane ſoule ſtripped of her body. : lett vs reſlect vpon the notions we frame of thinges, when ve conſider them in common: as when we think of a man, of bread, of ſome particular vertue, of a vice,or of whatſoeuer elſe;and lett vs note, how in ſuch, our diſcourſe determineth no place, nor time: nay, if it should, it would marre the diſcou ſe; as Logitians shew, when they teach vs, that ſcientificall ſyllogiſmes can not be made without vniuerſall propoſitions: ſo that we ſee, vnleſſe theſe thinges be ſtripped from Place and Time, they are not according to our meaning:and yet neuertheleſſe, we giue them hoth the name, ind the nature of a Thing, or of a ſubſiance, or of a liuing Thing, or of whatſocuer elſe may by our manner of conceiuing or cndeauours, be freed from the ſubiection of iime and P lace. Thus then we plainely ſee, that itisa very different thing, to be, and to be in a Place: nd thereſore, out of a Thinges Leing in no Place, it can not be inferred, That it is not; or that it is no ſubſtance: nor contrariviſe, out of its being, canit be inferred, that it is in à Place: there is no man but of himſclfe perceiueth the falſe conſequence of thisargument, a thing is, theiefore it is hoat, orit is cold: and the reaſon is, becauſe hoat and cold, are particular accidents of a body ; and therefore a body can be without eyther of hem. The lie proportion is betweene Being in generall, and Being a Body,or Bring in a Body: for both theſe, are particulars in reſpect of Being: but ro be in a Place, is nothing elſe, but r0 be in a circumſtant Body: and ſo, what is not ina Body, is not in a Place: therefore, as it were an abſurd illation to ſay, it is, therefore itis in a Body: no leſſeis itto ſay, itis, therefore it is ſomewhere;which is equiualent to, in ſome Body: and ſo a great Maſter ( Peraduenture one of the greateſt, and iudiciouſeſt that euer haue beenetelleth vs plainely, that of it ſelfe it is cuident, to thoſe who are truly learned, that incorporeall ſubſtances are not in Place: and Ariſtotle teacheth vs,that the Vuiuerſe is not in Place. But now to make vſe of this diſcourſe, ve muſt intimate vhat it is we ſeuell at in it: we direct it to two endes; firſt, to lead on our thoughts, and 10 helpe our apprehenſion, in framing ſome conception of a ſpirituall bſeœ u'h ũ reſidence in Place;and to preuẽt our fanſies checking at ſuch abſtraction ſince we ſee that we vſe it in our ordinary ſpeech, Vhen e thinke not on it, nor labour forit, in all vniuerſall and indefinite termes: next, ro trace out an eminent propriety of a ſeperated ſoule: namely, that she is no where;and yet (vpon the matter) that she is euery where:that she is bound to no Pſace,and yet remote from none: that she is able to woike vpon all, without shifting from one to an other, or coming neere any:and that shes free from all, without remoouing or parting fſrom any one. A ſecond propriety, not much vnlike this firt, we shall diſcouer in a æ ſeperated ſoule if we compare her with rime. We haue heretofore expli-  cated, how Time is the motion of the heauens; which giueth vs our © motion; Which meaſureth all particular motions; and vhich comprehendethall bodies, and maketh them awayte his leiſure. From the la ge empire of this proud com mander, a ſeparated ſoule is free: for although She do conſiſt with time, (that is to ſay, she is,whiles time is;) yet is che not in time; nor doth she in any of her actions, ex ect time; but she is able to frame time, to ſpinne or weaue it out of her Rlfe and to maſter it. All which will appeare manifeſtly, if we conſider what it is to be in time. Anſto tle sheweth vs; that, to be comprehended vnder time, orto be in time, is, to be one of thoſe mooueables, whoſe being conſiſting in motion,t akethvp but a part of Time and hath its termes, before, and behind, intime;and is meaſured by Time;and muſt expect the flowing of Time,both for Being,and tor Action. Now all this maniteſtly belongeth vnto Bodies, whoſe both action and heing,is ſubiect 1ò a perpetuall locall motion and alteration: and conſequently, a ſeparated ſoule, vho is totally a Being, and hath her whole operation all together (as being nothing but her lelfe when we ſpeake i her perfectiue operation )can not be ſiid tobe in time, but is Lſolutely free from it; though time do glide by her, asit doth by other thinges: and ſo, allthat: h: knowerhor can do, she doeth and Enoweth at once, ith one act of the vnderſtanding or rather, she is, lindeede and really ) all that: and therefore, she doth not require time to manage or order her thoughts, nor do they ſucceed onean other, by ſuch viciſirudes as men are forced to thinke of thinges by, becauſe theit fanſie, and the images in ĩt which beate vpon the ſouleto make her thinke, whiles she is in the body, are corporeall,and therefore, do require time to mooue in, and to giue way to one and other:but: he thinkæth of all the thinges in the world, and of allthat she can thinke of,together and at once;as hereafter we intend to shew. A third propriery we may conceiue to be in a ſeparated ſoule, bY4: apprehending her to be an Attiuity; which that we may rightly Tna: a vnderſtand, lett vs compare her, in regard of working, with a body: i: an reſlecting then vpon the nature of bodies, we shall find, that not anyof ſibſſ them iil do the functions they are framed for, vnleſſe ſome otherthing ute iil do ſtirre them vp,and cauſe them ſoto do. As fot examples a kn fe, if it bethruſt or preſſed, will cutt, otheruiſe, it willlye ſtill and haue no effecr: and as it fareth witha cnife, ſo it doth in the ſame manner vith thoſe bodies, which ſeeme moſt to mooue themſcluesi as vpon a litle conſideration, will appeare plainely. A beaſt ſcemeth to mooue it ſelfe: bur if we call to minde , what we haue deliuered vpon this ſubiect in the ſirſt Treatiſe, we shall find that whenſoeuer he beginnerh to mooue, he eyther perceiueth ſomething by his ſenſe, which cauſeth his motion, or elſe he remembreth ſ/mething that is in his braine, which woiketh the like effect. Now it ſenſe preſenteth him an obiect that cauſeth his motion, we ſee manifeſtly, thatit is an externall cauſe which maketh him mooue: but if memory do it, we shall find that ſtirred by ſome other partĩ as by the ſtomacke, or by the heart, whichis l empty,or heated, or hath receiued ſome other impreſſion from an orher / body, ſo that, ſooner orlater, we s hall diſcouer an outward moouer. The lie is in naturall motions;as, in heauy thinges, their eaſy following ſif they be ſucked) an other way then downewardes, teſtifyeth that their motion downewardes hath an extrinſecall motor, as is before declared: and not only in theſe, but throu ghout, in all other corporeall thinges.s o that in a word, all bodies are of this nature, that vnleſſe ſome other thin g reſſe them and alter them, when they are quiett, they remaine ſo; and hace no actiuity, otherwiſe then from an extrinſecall moouer: but of the ſoule, we haue declared the contraryand that, by its nature, motion may proceed fromit, without any mutation in it, or without its receiuing any order, direction, or impulſe, from an extrinſecall cauſe. So that, now ſumming vp together, all we haue ſaid vpon this occaſion, we find a ſoule exempted from the body, to be; An indiuiſible ſubſtance, exempted from place and time, yet preſent to both: an actuall and preſent knowledge of all thinges that may be knowne: and a still or rule, euen by what it ſelfe is, to all thinges whatſocuer. This she is, if she be perfect: but if she be imperfect then, is she all this to the proportion of her groweth, (if ſo I may ſay) and she is powerfull according to the meaſure of her knowledge, and of her vill. So that in fine, a ſeperated ſoule, is of a nature to haue, and to know, and to gouerne all thinges. I may reaſonably ſuſpect, that my ſaying how imperfect ſoules are rules to th proportion of their groweth, may haue occaſioned great reflexion, and may haue bredd ſome trouble in the curious and heede full : reader. I confeſſe this expreſſion was deliuered by me, only to free my  ſelfe for the preſent from the labour of shewing what knowledge euery ſeperated ſoule hath: but vpon ſecond thoughts, Ifind that ſuch ſliding ouer this difficult point will not ſerue my turne, nor ſaue me the paines of vntying this knott: for vnleſſe Iexplicate what I meane by that Ipeech I shall leaue my Readerin great doubt and anxiety; which to free him from, I muſt wade a litle further in this queſtion of the extent of a ſeperated ſoules lnowledge, into which, I haue thus, vpon the by, engaged my ſelfe:but lett him fitſt be aduertiſed, that Ido not here meddle, with what a ſeperated ſoule may know by reuelation, 'or by ſupernaturall meanes: but that I do only tracke out her naturall pathes; and do gueſſe at what she is, or knoweth, by that light which her conuerſation in her body affordeth vs. Ourentrance into this matter muſt be, to conſider what mutation in reſpect of knowledge, a ſoules ſirſt change out of her body, maketh in her; forit is not vnlikely, but that nature may ſome way enlighten vs ſo farre, as to lett vs vnderſtand what muſt follow out of the negation of the bodies conſorteshippe,added vnto what we knov of her and orher workes in this world. This then firſt occurreth that ſurely :he can not chooſe but ſtill know in that ſtate, all that she did know whiles she was in the body; ſince we are certaine that the body hath no part in that which is true knowledge: as is aboue declared, when we sheed fitſt, that all true knovledge is reſpectiue; ſecondly, that the firſt impreſſions of the fanſie, do not reach to the interiour ſoule;and laſtly, that she woiketh by much more, then what hath any actuall correſpondence in the fanſie, and that all thing esare vnited to her by the force of Being: from which laſt, it followeth that all thinges she knoweth, are her ſelfe:and she, is, all that she knoweth: wherefore, if she keepeth her ſelfe and her owne Being, she muſt needes keepe the knowledge of all that she knew in this world. Next, she muſt vndoubtedly know then ſomewhat more, then she knew in the body; for ſeeing that out of the thirges he d] already knoweth, others ill follow by the meere orderiig and ſouſs;ſ connexion of them; and that the ſoules proper woike, is to order æhichihe ſoule thinges : we ean not doubt, but that, both the thinges: he knoweth 3ẽſ4: in in this world, muſt of neceſſity be ordered in her to th belt aduan- arie one thing tage; and likewiſe, that all that, will be knowne, which wanterh no oih Stuſe sn other cauſe forthe knowing of it, but the ordering of theſe thinges: is ſentineà: for if the nature of a thing, were order, who can doubt but what Were frem hei bodie putt into that thing, were putt intoorder? Now, that the nature of ihe p- of ſoule is ſuch, we collect eaſilyi for ſeeing thatall order proceedeth from all thing. Whather, it muſt be acknowledęed that orderis firſt in her: but what is in her, ſocuer is her nature: her nature then, isorder: and what is in her, is ordered. In ſaying of which, I do not meane that there is ſuch an order betweene the notions of a ſeperated ſoule,as is betweene materiall thinges, that are ordered by the ſoule whiles she isin the bodyi for ſeeing that the ſouleis adæquate cauſe of ſuch order; ſthat is to ſay,a cauſe which can make any an ſuch, and the whole kind of iti)it followeth, that ſuch order is not in her; forif it were, ;he would be cauſe of herſelfe, or of her owne parres. Order therefore, in her, muſt ſignify a thing more eminẽt, thẽ ſuch inferiour order, in which reſideth the power of making that inferiour orderi and this is norhinę elſe, but the cõnexion of her norions by the neceſſity of Bringiwhich we haue oftẽ explicated. And out of this eminẽt orſi Lperiour kind of order, our concluſion followerh no leſſe then if the inferiour order which weſee in our fanſies, whiles our ſoule is in cur Body, did reſide in our interiour ſoule; for, it is the neceſſity of identification, which doth the effect, and maketh the ſoule know; and the order of fantaſmes, is but a precedent condition in the badily Agent, that it may worke vpon the ſoule; and if more fantaſmes then one could be together, this order would not be neceſſary. Out of this, a notable and a vaſt concluſion, manifeſtly followeth:to vitt,that if a ſoule, can know any one thing more when she is out the body, then what she did know whiles he was in the body; without any mannerof doubt, she knoweth all that can be drawne, and forced ou”3of thoſe knowledges, which she had in her body. How much this is, and how farre it willteach, Iam affraide to ſpeake: only I entreate Mathematicians, and ſuch as are acquainted with the manner how ſciences proceed; to conſider ho ſome of their deſinitions 0 made: to witt by compoſing together ſundry knowne termes, and giuing a new name to the compound that reſulteth out of them: wherefore cleare it is, that out of fewer notions had at the firſt, the ſoule can make many more:and the more she hath, or maketh, the more she can multiply. Againe, the maximes, which are neceſſary to be added vnto the definitions Ifor gaining of knowledge, we ſee are alſo compounded of ordinary and Enowne termes; ſo that a ſeperated ſoule, can want neyther the Definitions, nor th: Maximes, out of which the bookes of ſciences are compoſed: and therefore, neyther can the ſciences themſelues be wantin g vnto her. Nowiſ we conſider, that in the ſame fashion as demonſtrations are made, and knovledge is acquired in one ſcience, by the ſame meanes, there is a tranſcendence from ſcience to ſcience: and that there is a connexion among all the ſciences, which fall into the conſideration of man, and indeede among all, at the leaſt corporeall thinges; ( for of ſ pirituall thinges, we can not ſoaſſuredly affirme it:although their pei fection may perſuade vs, that there is rather a greater connexion among them, then among corporeall thinges) it will follow, that a ſoule which hath but any indifferent knowledge in this world, shall be replenished withall knowledãe in the next. But how much is this indifferent knowledge, that for this purpoſe is required m this world? Vpon mature conſideration of this point, it is true, l find it abſolutely neceſſary, that the ſoule muſt haue here ſo much knowledge, as to be able to determine that ſome one thing, which haih connerion with all the reſt, is in ſuch a time: but then, why out of rhis very conception, she should not be able to clymbe v pby degrees, to the knowledge of allother thinges whatſoeuer (ſince therẽ is a connexion betweene that, and allthe reſt, and no vntranſible gappe, or Chaos to ſever them) l profeſſe I do not ſee. Whichifit be ſo, thenthe ſoule of an abortiue in his mothers vombe, if he once arriue to haue ſenſe, and from it, to receiue any impreſſion in his ſoule, may for ought I kinow, or can ſuſpect to the contrary, be endewed in the next vorld with as much knowledge, as the ſoule of the greateſt Clerke that euer liued: and if an abortiue do not arriue ſo farre, as to the knowledge of ſome one thing,  know no reaſon, why we should belieue it ariiued to the nature of man. ll Vhence it followeth, that this amplitude of knowledge, is common to allhumane ſoules, (of what pitch ſocuer they ſeeme to bee here) when they are ſeperated from their bodies:as alſo, that if any errour haue crept into a mans iudgement, during this life, whether it be of Iome vniuerſãll concluſion, or of ſome particular thing, all ſuch will be abolished then, byul he truth appearing on the oppoſite ſide; ſithence two contradid ory ludgemenss, can not poſſeſſe our ſoule together: as euen in this world, as well experience, as reaſon teacheth vs. li But vnavares I haue engulſed my ſelfe into a ſea of contradiction, from no mean: aduerſaii: s: for Alexander A phrodiſeus, Pomponatius, and the learnedeſt of the Peripatetike Ichoole, will all of them riſe vp in maine oppoſition againſt this doctrine of mine: shewing how in the body allour ſoules knowledge is made, by the woiking of our fanſie; and that there is no act of our ſoule, without ſpeculation of fantaſmes reſiding in our memory: therefore, ſceing that when our body is gone,all thoſe litle bodies of fantaſmes are gone with it; What ſigne is there, that any operation can remaine? And hence they inferre, that ſeeing euery ſubſtance hath its Being for its operations ſlike,and by conſequence were vaine and ſuperfluous in the world, if it could not enioy and exerciſe its operation; there is no neceſſity or end, why the ſoule of a man should ſuruiue hisbody: and conſequently, there is no reaſon to imagine other, th n ihat it perisheth when the man dyeth. This is the ſubſtance of ther argument; which indeede is nothing elſe, but to guſſe without ground, or ratheragainſi all ground: but howſoeuer, his comſort I haue, that I haue to do with Peripatetikes; men that will heare and anſwere realon and ro ſuch Iaddreſſe my ſpeech. To ioyne iſſue then with them, and to encounter them with itheir owne weapons, lett vs call to minde, what Aiiſtotle holdeth light to be. He ſaith,that ut is a ſuddaine and momentary emanation of what it is, following the precedent motion of ſ me hody, but withour motion in it ſelfq. As for example:when the ſunne cometh into our horizon, (ſaith hæthe illumination of the horizon, is an eſfect inan inſtant, following from the motion which the ſunne had, ſince his ſetring in ithe other hemi'phere, vntill he appeare there againe: ſo that (according to him)ihe wyof m-king this light, is the ſunnes locall motion; but the effect or the being enlightencd, is a thing of a very difſerent nature, done without beginning, and continuing vntill the ſunne departe againe from our horizon. And as he explicateth this action of illumination, in the ſume manner, doth he the actions of ſenſe and of vnderſtanding. Vpon all which I vrge, hat no Peripatetike ill deny me, but that as in euery particular ſenſation or thinking, there precedeth a corporeall motion, out of whichit enſueth, ſo this generall motion, which we call ihe life of Man, precedeth thit twinkle or moment, in whihshe becometh an abſolute ſpiritt, or inhbitant f the next world Wherefore it can not be ſaid, that we introduce a doctiine aliene from the Peripatetike way of Philoſophiſing, f we putta momentary efſect or motionſaccording to theirſ hraſe of ſpeaking) to follow our of the courſe of mans life; ſince they putt diuers ſuch effects, to followout of particular partes of it. No, this momentary chinge, or what they plesſe to call it, is that which makerh at one blow,ull hi knovledge we ſpeake of: for, if we remember that knowledge is not a doing or a motion, buta Being; as is agreed betweene the Peripatetikes and vs; th y can not, for the continuing it, require inſtruments and motors: for they are neceſſary only for change, not for Being. Now, all this mighty change, which is made at the ſoules deliuery, ve concciue followeth preciſely out of the change of her Beingifor ſeeingit is ſoppoſed, that ber Being was before in a body, but is now out of a body; it muſt of neceſſiy follow, that all impediments, which grew out of her being in a body, muſt be taken away by her being freed from it. Among which impediments, one is, that time is then required betwixt her knowledge of one thing, and her knovledge of an other thing; and ſo her capacity, that of it ſelfe is infinite, becometh confined to that ſmall multitude of obiects, which the diuiſion and ſtraightneſſe of time giueth way vnto. Nov that, hich length of time could in por worke inthe body, the ſame is entirely done ina moment, by the changing of her manner of Being: for by taking away the bondes, by which she was enthralled in the body,and was kept in, to apprehend but according to the meaſure of the body, and as conſtrained to be, and to enioy her ſelfeſas it were) but at the budies permiſſions she is putt in free poſſeſſion of her ſelfe, and of allthat is in her. And this is norhing elſe, but to haue that large knowledge, we haue ſpoken ofi for her knowing all that, is no other thing but her being her ſelfe perfectly. Which vill appeare euident, if we conſider that her nature is, to be a Xnower,and that knovledge is nothing elſe but a Being of the obiect in the Xnower; for thence it followeth, thatto know, allthinges is naught elſethen to be allthinges: ſince then, we concluded by our former diſcourſe, that all thinges were to be gathered our of any one; itis clearethat to be perfectly her ſelfe, and any one thing, is in _ to knowall thinges. And thus we ſee, that for the ſoules enioying allthis knowledęe when she is out of the body, she needeth no obiects without her, no phantaſmes, no inſtruments, no helpes; but that all that is requiſite, is cõtained abſolutely in her being her ſelfe perfectly. And ſo we retort our Aduerſaries obiection on themſelues: by repreſenting to them, that ſince in their owne doctrine, they require no body nor inſtruments, for that preciſe action which they call vnderſtanding: it is without allground, for them to require bodies and inſtruments in the next life, that the ſoule may there be that, which, they acnovledge she is in her body without any ſuch helpes. And as br that axiome or experience, that the ſoule doth not vnderſtand, conleſſe she ſpeculate phantaſmes: as on the one ſide Iyield toit, and confeſſe the experience, after the beſt and ſeriouſeſt tryall I could make of it; ſo onthe other ſide, when Iexamine the matter to the bottome, I find that it cometh not home to our aduerſaries intention. Foras when we looke vpon a thing, we conceiue we worke vpon that thing, whereas in truth we do but ſett our ſelues in ſuch a poſition that the thing ſeene may woike vpon vs: in like manner our leoking vpon the phantaſmes in our braine, is nòt our ſoules action vpon them, but it is our letting them beate at our common ſenſe; that is, our letting them worke vpon our ſoule. The eſfect whereof is, that eyther ourſoule is bettered in her ſelfe,as hen we ſtudy and contemplate: orelſe, that she bettereth ſomething without vs,as when by this thinking, we order any action. But, if they willhaue this Axiome auayle them, they should shew that the ſoule is not of her ſclfe a knowledge; which if they be able to do, euen then when to our thinking, she ſeemeth not ſo much as to thinke, we will yield they haue reaſon: but that will be impoſſible to them to do; for she is alwayes, of her ſelfe,a knowledge, though in the body she neuer expreſſeth ſo much, but whenshe is putttoit. Or elſe they should shev, that this knowledge which the ſoule is of her ſelfe, will not by changing the manner of her Zxiſlence, become an actuall knovledge, inſteed of the habituall knowledge which now appeareth in her. But as theſe Ariſtotelians embrace and ſticke to one 4xiome of their Patrone; ſo they forgoe and preuaricate againſt an other: for as it is Ariſtotles doctrine, that a ſubſtance is for its operation, and were in vaine and ſuperſluous if it could not practiſe it; ſo likewiſe is it his confeſſed doctrine, that Matter is forits forme, and not the forme, for the matter. And yet theſe men pretend that the ſoule, ſerueth for nothing but the gouerning of the body: whereas contrawiſe, both all Ariſtotles doctrine, and common ſenſe conuinceth, that the body muſt be for the ſoule. Which if it be, nothing can be more conſentaneous to Reæſon, then to conceiue thit the durance which the ſoule hath in the body, is aſſizned her, to worke and moulde in her the future ſtate, which she is to haue after this life:and that no more operations are to be expected from heraſter this life, but inſteed of them,a ſettled ſtate of Being; ſecing that, euen in this lif-according to Ariſtotles doctrine, the proper operations of the ſouleare but certaine Brings: ſo that we may conclude, that if a ſoule were growne to the perfection, which her nature is capable of, she would be nothing elſe but a conſtant Being, neuer changing ſrom the happeneſſe of thebeſt Bring. And although the texts of Ariſtotle which remaine vnto vs, be vncertaine (peraduenture, not ſo much becauſe they were originally ſuch, in themſelues, as through the mingling of ſome comments into the body of the text; )yet if we had his booke which he wrote of the ſoule vpon the death of his frend Eudemus, it is very likely we should there ſce his euident aſſertion of her Immortality; ſince it had beene very impertinent to take occaſion vpona frends death to write of the ſoule, it he intended to conclude, that of a dead man there were no ſoule. Out of this diſcourſe it appeareth. how thoſe actions which we exerciſe in this life,are to be vnderſtood, when we heare them attributed to the next: for to think that they are to be taken in their direct plaine meaning and in that way, in which they are performed in this world; were a great ſimplicity, and were to imaginea likeneſſe betweene bodies and ſpirits. Ve muſt therefore eleuate our mindes, when we would peretrate into the true meaning of ſuch expreſions, and conſider howall the actions ludgementsdiſcourſes,reſlections,talings together, and all other ſuch actions of ours, when they are attributed to ſeparated ſoules, are but inadæquate names and repreſentations of their inſtantaneall ſight of all thinges, for, in that, they can not chooſe, but ſee others mindes, which is that we calltalking: and likewiſe their owne, which we call reflexion: the reſtare plaine partes,and are plainely contained in knowledge; diſcourſe being but the falling into it; iudgement the principles of it; and ſingle apprehenſions the cõponents of iudgements: then for ſuch actions as are ſ beginning of operatiò, there can be no doubt but that they are likewiſe to be}found, and are reſumed, in the ſame Vniueiſality; as, loue of good, conſultation, reſolution, prudentiall election, and the firſt motion; for who knowethall thinges, can not chooſe but know what is good,and that good, is to be proſecuted: and who ſeeth completely allthe meanes ofeſfecting and attaining to his intended good: hathalready conſulted and reſolued of the beſt? and who vnderſtandeth perfectly the matter he is to worke vpon, hath already made his prudentiall election: ſo that there remaineth nothing more to be done, but to giue the firſt im pulſe. And thus you ſee, that this vniuerſality of knowledge in the ſoule, comprehendethall is all, performeth all; and no imaginable good or happineſſe, is out of herreach. A noble creature, and not to be caſt away vpon ſuch trash as moſt men employ their thoughts in. Vpon whomit is now time to reſlect; and to conſider, hat effects the diuers manners of liuing in this world, do woike vpon her in the next if firſt we acquitt ourſelues ofa promiſe we made at the end ofthe laſt Chapter. For it being nov amply declared, that the ſtate of a ſoule exempted from her body, is a ſtate or pure beingi it followeth manifeſtly,that there is neyther Action nor Paſion in that ſtate: which being ſo, it is beyond all oppoſition that the ſoule can not dye: for it is euident that all corruption, muſt come from the action of an other thing, vpon that which is corrupted; and therefore that thing muſt be capable of being made better and of being made worſe. Now then, a ſeparated ſoule be in a finall ſtate, vhere she can neyther be bettered, or worſened, ( as she muſt be, if she be ſuch a thing, as we haue declared) it followeth that she can not poſſibly looſe the Being which she hath:and ſithence her paſſage out of the body, doth not change her nature, but only her ſtates itis cleare, that she is of the ſame nature, euen in the body: though in this her durance, she be ſubiect to be forged ſas it were) by the hammers of corporeall obiects beating vpon her; yet ſo, that of herſelfe she ſtill is what she B. And therefore as ſoone as she is out of the paſſible oore, in which she ſuffereth by reaſon of that oore, she preſently becometh impaſsible, as being purely of her owne nature,a fixed ſubſtance, that is, a pure Being. Both which ſtates of the ſoule, may in ſome ſort be adũbrated by what we ſee paſſeth in the coppelling of a fixed mettall; for as longas any lead, or droſſe, or allay remaineth with it, it continueth melted, flowin g,and in motion vnder the muſſle: but as ſoone as they are parted from it, and that it is become pure, without any mixture, and ſingly it ſelfe, it contracteth it ſelfe to a narroer roome, and at that very inſtant, ceaſeth from all motion, groweth hard, permanent, reſiſtent vnto all operations of fire, and ſuſfereth no change or diminution in its ſubſtance by any outward violence we can vſe vntoĩt. THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER Sheing what eſfects, the diuirs manners of liuing in this world, do cauſe in a ſoule, aſter she i ſeparated from her hody. Al Ne thing, may peraduenture ſeeme of hard digeſtion ĩ] in our paſt diſcourſe;and it is,that out of the groundes à haue an equality: ſince we haue contluded, that theſ J Zreateſt shall ſee or knowno more then the leaſt: and æ noble creature, should lye impriſoned in the obſcure dungeon of noyſome flesh;it in the firſt inſtant,in whichit hath its firſt knowledgt, it hath then already gained all whatſoeuer it is capable of gaining in tꝶ whole progreſſeof a long life afterwardes. Truly, the Platonike Philoſophers(who are perſuaded that a humane ſoule doth not profitt in this it, nor that she acquired any knowledge here; as being of her ſelfo completely perfect:and that all ourdiſcourſes, are but herremembringes of what she had forgotten) will find themſelues ill beſtedd to rendera Philoſophicalland ſufficent cauſe of her being locked into a body: for to putt forgettfulneſſe in a pure ſpiritt; ſo pl pable an effect of corporeity, and ſo great a corruption, in reſpect of a creature whoſe nature is, ro know of it ſelfe, is an vnſufferable errour. Beſides, hen they tell vs,that she can not be changed, becauſe all change would pr-mudies the ſpirituall nature, which they attribute to her; butthat well she may be varned and excitated by being in a body; they meerely trifle: for eyther there is ſome true mutation made in her by that which they call a warning, orthere is not; if there be not, how becometh it a warning to her? Or what is it more to herthen if a ſtraw were wagged at the Antipodes? But if there be ſome mutation ſ be it neuer ſo litle) made in her by a corporeall motion; what: hould hinder, why she may not by meanes of her body, attaine vnto ſcience she neuer had as wellas by it receiue any the leaſt intrinſecall mutation whatſoeuer ? For if once we admitt any mutability in her from any corporeall motion, it is farre more conformable vnto reaſon to ſuppoſe it in regard of that which is her natunall perfection, and of that, which by her operations we ſee she hah immediately afrer ſuch corporeall motions, and vhereof before them there appeared in her no maikes i all; then to ii we haue layed, it ſeemeth to follow that all ſoules will ſubieœ? 1o ſuppoſc it in regard of a darke intimation, of which we neyther know, it is, nor how it is pei formed. Surely, no Rationall Philoſopher ſecing a thing, whoſe nature is to know, haue a being, whereas formesly it exiſted not; and obſeruing, how that thing by little and little giueth ſignes of more and mere kno ledge, can doubt but thut asshe could be changed ſrom not heing to beingi ſo, may she likewiſe be changed from Ieſſe knowing.to more knowing. This th-n being irrefiagably ſettled, that in the body she dorh encreaſt in knowledge: lett vs come to our difficulty and examine what this encreaſe in the body auaileth her; ſeeing ithat as ſoone as the parteth from it, she shall of her owne nature enioy, and be replenished with the knowledge of all thinges: why shonld she laboriouſly ſtiiue to anticipate the getring of a few droppes, which but encreaſe her thirſt and anxicty; when hauing but a litle patience, she :hill at one full and euerlaſting draught drinke vp the whole ſea of it?We know that the loule is a thing, made proportionably to the making of its bodyiſceing, itis the bodies com partener: and we haue conclude-, that whiles it is in the body, it acquireth perfection in thut way, which the nature of itis capable e f; hat is, in knowledge: as the body acquireth perfection it: way; whichiis, in ſtrẽgth andagility Now then, lett vs cõpare the proceedn ges of the one, with thoſe of the other ſubſtance;and peraduenture we may gaine ſome light, to diſcerne what aduantage it may proue vntoa ſoule, to remaine long in its body, if it make right vſe of its delling ithere Lett vs cẽſidei the body of a man, well and exactly shaped in all his members; vet, if he neuer vſe care, nor paines to exerciſe thoſe well framed limbes of his; he willwant much of thoſe corporeall perfections, which others willhue, who employ them ſedulouſly. Though his legges, armes, and handes, be of an exact ſymmetry; yet he will not be able ro runne, to wreſtle, or to throw a dart, with thoſe who labour to perfect themſelues in ſuch exerciſes: hough his fingers be neuer ſo neately moulded or compoſed toalladuantages of quicke and ſmart motion; yet if he neuer learned and practiſed on the lure, he ill not be able ith them to make any muſike vpon that inſtrument, euen after he ſeeth plainely, and comprehendeth fully all that thæ cunningeſt Luteniſt doth; nether will he be able to playe,as he doth wih his fingers, which of themſelues are p raduenture leſſe apt for thoſe voluble motions then his are. That which maketh a man dexterous in any of theſc artes, or in any other opeations proper to any of the partes or limbes of his body,is the often repetitions of the ſame actes; which do amend, and pertect thoſe limbes in their motions,and which make them ſitt and ready for the actions they are deſigned vnto. In the ſame manner it fareth with ihe ſoule; vhole eſſence is that which she knoweth: her ſcueiall kncwledges may be compared, to armes, handes, fingeis : legges. thighes, &c, ina body:and all her knowledges taken together, do con pole ſas I may ſay)and make her vp, what sheis Now, thoſe limbes of hers, though they be, when they are at the worſt,entire, and ell shaped in bulkeſto vſe the compariſon of bodies;) yt they are ſuſceprible of further perfection, as our corporeall limbes ac,by often and orderly vſage of them. When we iterate our acts of our vndẽrſtanding any obiect, the ſecond actis of the ſame nature, as che firſt, the third, as the ſecond, and ſo, of the reſt: euery one of which perfecteth the vnderſtanding of that thing, and of all that dependeth vpon the knovle dgeof it, and maketh it become more Vigorous and ſtrongi euen the often throwing of a boule at the ſame maike, begetteth ſtill more and more ſtrength and iuſtneſſe in the arme that deliuereth it: for, it can not be denyed but that the ſame cauſe which maketh any thing, muſt of neceſſity perfect and ſtrengthen it, by repeating its force and ſtroakes. Ve may then conclude that the knowledge of our ſoule, whichis indeed her ſelfe will be in the next life more perfect and ſtrong, or more ſlacke and weake, according as in this life she hath often and vigorouſly, or faintly and ſeldome, buſied her ſelfe about thoſe thinges whic h begett ſuch knovledge. Now ſoſũ thinges which men beſtow theirpaines to know, we ſee 3. are of t, pr ſe for lome thirſ afterthe knowledge of nature, and of That theſonle, the variety of thinges, hich eyther their ſenſes, or their diſcourſe, tell  —_-— them of: but others looke no higher then to haue an inſight into theyhucd hete humane action. or to gaine sill in ſome art, whereby they may acquire meanes to Theſe hiter curioſities, are but of particulars; that is, of ?ord ihen the ſome one, or fe ſpecies, or indes, whoſe common that comprehendeth ſoule⸗ of unlethem, fallerh within the reach of euery vulgar capacity, and conſequently, the thinges vhich depend vpon them, are low, meane, and contemptible: whereas, the beauty, vaſtneſſe, and excelleney of the others, is ſo much beyond them, as they can be brought into no proportionto onean other. Now ihen, if we conſider, what aduantage the one ſort of theſe men, vill in the next world haue ouer the orher; we shall find, that they who ſpend their life here in the ſtudy and contemplation of the firſt noble obiects, will, in the next, haue their vniuerſall knowledge ſ thatis their ſoule) ſtrong and perfect: vhiles the others, that played away their thoughts and time vpon triſles, and ſeldome rayſed their, mindes aboue the pitch of ſenſe, will be fainte through their former hizineſſe, lke bodies benummed vith the palſey, and ſickely through their ill dyett; as when a well shaped virgin, that hauing fed vpon trash inſteed of nourishing meates, languisheth vnder a weariſome Burthen of the greene ſickeneſſe. l To make this point yet more cleare, we may conſider how the thinges.. which we gaine Enouha eof,do aſfect vs vnder the title of good and ſoseè nòich conurnient, in two veraſt mannes The one is, when the appearance of tmbice vertus g00d, in the abſtracted nature of it,and after examination vi all circum- iſve "⸗ ſtances, carryeth our hart to the deſire of the thing, that appeareth ſo perteò&t in he vnto vs:h other is when the ſemblance of good to our owne particular nexs and ihoſ perſons without caſting any further, or queſtioning harber any other ri.æ mo mſe. regard may not make it preiudiciall, doth cauſein vs a longing for the thing wherein ſuch ſemblance shineth. No, for the moſt part the knowledges which ſpring out c f the later obiects, are more cultiuated by vs, then thoſe which ariſe out of the other; partly by reaſon of their frequẽt occurring, eyther through neceſſity, or ſrout iudgement; and partly, by theaddition which paſiion giueth to the impreſsions they make vpon vs: for paſsion multiplyeth the thoughts of ſuch thinges, more then of any others, if reaſon do not croſſe and ſuppreſſe her tumultuary motions, which in moſt men, she doth not. The ſoules then of ſuch perſons, as giuing way to thei paſiion, do in this life buſie themſelues about ſuch thinges as appeare good to theirowne perſons, and caſt no further, muſt needes decede from their bodies, vnequally builded, ſif that expreſion may be permitted me;)and will be like a lame vnvieldy body, in which the principall limbes are not able to gouerne and moue the others; be cauſe thoſe principall ones are fainte, through want of ſpirits and exerciſe; and he others are ouergrowne with hidropicall and nociue humours. The reaſon whereof is that in ſuch ſoules their iudgements vill be diſproportioned to one an other, one of them being vnduely ſtronger then the other. What effect this worketh in regard of knowledge, we haue already declared, and no leſſe will it haue in reſpect of action: for ſuppoſe two iudgements to be vnequall, and ſuch, as in the action one contradicteth the other; for example, lett one of my iudgements be, that it is good for me to eate becauſe l am hungry; and lett the other be, that it is good for me to ſtudy, becauſe Iam hortly to giue an account of my ſelfe: if the one iudgement be ſtronger then the oiher, as if that of eating be ſtronger then that of ſtudying; it importeth not that there be more reaſon (all circumſtances conſidered) for ſtudying: becauſe, reaſons, do moue to action accordingto th] meaſure in which the reſolution that is raken vpon them, is ſtrong or weake; and therefore, my action vill follow the ſtrongeſt iudgement, and I shall leaue my booke to goe to my dinner. Now, to apply this to the ſtate of a ſeparated ſoule: we are to remember howthe ſpirituall indgements, whichshe collected in the body, do remaine in her aſter she is diueſted of it:and likewiſe, we are to conſider, how all her proceeding in that ſtate, is built, not vpon paſiion, or any bodily cauſes or diſpoſitions; but meerely vpon the quality and force of thoſe ſpirituall indgements: and then, it euidently followeth, that if there were any ſuchaction in the next life, the pure ſoule would apply ĩ ſelfe therevnto, according to the proportion of her iudgements, andas they are graduated and qualifyed. It is true, there is no ſuch action remaining in the next ife: yet neuertheleſſe there remaineth in the ſcule a diſpoſition and a promptitude to ſuch action: and if we will frame a right apprehenſion of a ſeparated ſoule, e muſt conceite her ro be of ſuch a naturefor then all is nature wih her, as hereaſter we hall diſcou ſe,)as if she ere a thing made for action in that proportion and efficacity, hich the quartering of her by this variety of iudgements doth affords that is that she is, ſo much the more fitt for one action ithen foran other, (wer she to proceed to action, ) as the iudgement of ihe goudneſſe of one of theſe actions is tronger in her, then the iudgement of the others goodneſſe, hich is in eſfect, by how much the one is more cultiuated then the other. And out of this we may conclude, that what motions do follow in a man, out of diſcourſe, the like will in a ſeparated ſoule, follow out of her ſpirituall iudgements. So that as he is ioyed. if he do poſſeſſe his deſired goodiand is diſcontented and diſpleaſed, if he miſſe cf it; and ſeizeth greedily vponit when it is preſent to him, and then cleaueth foſt vnto it,and whiles he wanteth it, no orher good affecteth him, but heis ſtill longing after that Maſterwic h of his heart: the like in euery regard, but much more vehemently, befalleth vnto a ſeparated ſoule. So that in fineshæ willbe happy, or milerable, according as she hrh built vp her ſelfe, by her ſpirituall iudgements and affections in this life. If knowledge, and intellectuall obiects be the goods she thirſterh after. what can be happier then she, when she poſſeiſeth the fullneſſe of aſl that can be deſired in that kind? But if in this world a man ſettleth his hart cõſtantly vpon any tranſitoy endi as vpon wealth, corporeall delights, honour, ower,and the like. (Which are too shoit breathed attendants to follow im ſo long a iountya- intothe next; )then, allthe powers of his ſoule, euen after she hath lefCher body, will be ſtill longing after that deare Idoll of her affection; and for the want of it,she will not value the great Enovledge she shall then be inibued withall, nor care for any orher good :he poſſeſſeth likea man who being ſorrounded, witha full ſea,and ſwolne tide of all ſpecious obiects that may pleaſeand delight him, hath by vnluckly chance luffered his violent affections, and his impotent deſires to be entangled in ſome meane loue, that eyrher neglech him, or he is hindered from enioying; and thereby, that litle droppe of gall, orrather that priuation of a meane contentment (Which truly init ſelfe, isnothing) nbeòre and poiſoneth the whole draught of happyneſſe that but for this, would ſell him vp tothe height of his wishes. But no compariſons of ſorrowes giiefes, or angui:hes in this life (where our earthy dwelling doth ſo clogue, and allay, and dull the ſenſe of our ſoule, which only feeleth and relisheth eyther delig ht or woe) can arriue to shado out the miſery of a ſeparated ſoule ſo affected ; whoſe ſtraines are ſo exceſſiuely vehement, and whoſe nature isa pure actiuity, and her ſelfe, all ſenſe,all knowledge. It is true, I confeſſe that ina man, ſuch motions do in part proceed from paſſion:and therefore, I willallow, that ſo much of them, as haue their origine meerely and only fromth-nce, shall dye with the body, nd shall not haue made any impreſſion in the leparated ſoule: but beſiddes the ſtreame of paſſion we may in ſuch motions obſeruealſo, the orke of realon, forshe, both approueth and employeth her powers, to compaſſe and gaine what the other preſenteth;and by legitimate diſcourſe, draweth conſequences out of that principle or iudgement, which maketh the byas, it then leaneth ynto:and theſe,are vndenyable efſccts of a ſpirituall iudgement ſettled in the ſoule. And therefore, as farre as theſe motions proceed from ſpirituall iudgements, ſo farre, it is cleare they muſt remaine in the ſeparated ſoule. Peraduenture, what I haue ſaid, may be lyable to a miſtake; as though I conceiued that theſe ſpirituall iudgements are made in the ſoule according to right reaſon, and to legitimate diſcourſe: whereas, I meane nothing leſſe; but eſteeming an ouerſtrong iudgement in the ſeperated ſoule, to be proportionable vnto a paſſion in the body; I conceite that as paſſion ſettleth reaſon on woike to find out meanes, vhereby she may arriue vnto her endes: ſo in like manner, may rhis iudgement ſett reaſon on floate, with thoſe actes which follow conſe. quently vpon it(though inconſequent to the whole body of reaſon:) becauſe the diſorder there, is, in the exceſſe of this iudgemẽt ouer others, whoſe force(according to naturelought to be greaterthenit. So that, if we would frame a conception of a diſordered ſoule, when itis out of the body; we may imagine it correſpondent to a body, whoſe one part were bigger then could ſtand in proportion with an other: as, if the hond (to vſe the example we brought before) were greater then the arme could manage, or the foote were larger and heauyer, then the legge and thigh could wield: vnto which adde that euery part were actiue and working of it ſelfe; ſo as,though it could not be gouerned, yet would it conrinually haue its owne operation, which would be contrary to the operation of the arme, or of the legge, and conſequently, it would euer be tending to incompoſſible operations: and by that meanes, both one member would alwayes diſagree from the other, and neyther cf them attaine any effect at alli not vnlike to the fanſie of the Poets, who fained a monſter, which they termed Scylla, whoſe inferiour partes, were a company of dogges, cuer ſnarling and quarrelling among themſelues;and yet were vnſeuerable from one an other, as being compartes of the ſame ſubſtance. But to declare this important doctrine more dogmatically; lett vs conſider that of neceſsity a diſordered ſoule hath theſe following iudgements ſettled in her. Namely, that she is not well; that she can not be well without her deſired good that it is impoſsible for her to compaſſe that good;and laſily, that this ſtate she is in, is by all meanes Doſible to be auoyded; not, by changing her iudgement (forthat is her ſclfe)but by procuring the fatisfaction she deſireth; and this with all the power,and totall inclination of her actiuity and poſibility. This then, being the temper of a diſordered ſeparated ſoule, it is eaſy to concciue, whata ſad condition ſuch an one remaineth then in; which is infinitely more, then any afliction that can happen to a man in this woild: for ſince, euen here, all our ioyes,and grieſes, do proceed from our ſoule; ve muſt needes allow, that when she shall be free from the burthen of her body (which doth exceedingly impeach, and limitt her operations, and actiuity)all her actions ill be then farre greaterand more efficacious. But becauſe this point is of higheſt conſequence, we may not ſlightly c. aſſe it ouer; but we will endeauour, if we can, to diſcouer the wonderfull The funau eſficacity and force of a ſeparated ſoules operations that from thence as æell ha we may the better collect, how great her happeneſſe or miſery will be in nelte as mi the next life. Lett vs then conſider, howan act or iudgement of the ſoule,  ene may be more forcible,eyther by it ſclfe, or by the ſaultiplication of ſuch helpes, as do concurre with it. To beginne with conſidering the act init Ielfe, we know that the certaineſt way to meaſure the ſtrength of it, is to take a ſuruey of the force whichsheethit ſelfe in its effect: for they being relatiues to one an other, each of them diſcouereth the others nature. Now, this we vill do after our ordinary manner, by compariitg the ſpirituall effects iſſuing from a iudgement in the ſoule, to materiall eſfects proceeding from the operations and motions of bodies. In theſe we may obſerue three thinges, by which we may eſtimate their efficaciouſneſſe: ſome actions dure a longer time ; others, take vp a greater place;and others againe, worke the Ike effect ina greater place, and ina shorter time: which laſt ſort, of all others, do proceed Eom the moſt powerfull,and moſt forcible agents. If then in ſeũ conſiderations, we compare a ſeparated ſouleto a body; what an infinity of ſtrength and eſficacity, will the meaneſt of thoſe pure ſubſtances haue, beyond the moſt powe fulland actiue body that can be imagined in nature? For ve haue already : hewed, how a ſeparated ſoule comprehendethat once, all place, and all times. ſo that, her actiuity requireth no application to place ortime; but, she is, of her ſclfe itſ of both, comprehending all quantity whitſocuer, in an indiuiſi bleapprehenſion:and ranking allthe partes of motion, in their complete order;and knowing at once, what is to happen in euery one of them. On the other ſide; an incorporated uleby reaſon of her being conſined to the vſe of her ſenſes, ean looke vpon but one ſingle definite place, or time,at once; and needeth a long chaine of many diſcourſes,to comprehend all the circumſtances of any one action:and yet aſterall, how short she is of comprehending all? So that comparing the one of theſe with the other, it is enident, that in reſpect of time and placeind in reſpect of any one ſingular action; the proportion of a ſeparated ſoule, to one in the body, is as all time, orall place, in reſpect of any one piece,or leaſt porcell of themior as the entire abſolute comprehender of all time and all place, is to the diſcouerer of a ſmall meaſure of them. For whatſocuer a buls villeth in that ſtate, she. willeth it for the whole extent of her duration; becauſe she is then out of the ſtate or capacity of changing: and wisheth for whatſocuer she visheth,as for her abſolute good; and there fore employeth the whole force of her iudgement, vpon euery particular vish. Likeviſe the employed vpon euery particulor wish of hers; ſince in that ſtate there is no varietyof place lefe vnto her,to ish for ſuch good in one place, and to refuſe it in an other; as, whiles she is in the body happeneth to euery thing she deſireth. Vherefore, whatſoeuer she then wisheth for, she isheth for it according to her compariſon vnto place: that is to ſoyi that as ſuch a ſoule hatha pover to orke at the ſame time in all place b the abſolute comprehenſion, which she hath of place in abſtract: ſo euery wish of that ſoule, if it were concerning a thing to be made in placẽ, were able to make it in all places; through the exceſſiue force and eſficacy which she employeth vpon euery particular wish. The third eſfect by which among bodies we gather the vigour, and energy of the cauſc that producethit, ſto vitt, the doing of the like action, in a leſſer time, and ina larger extent, )is but a combination of the to former:and therefore, it requireth no further particular inſiſtance vpon it, to shew, that likeviſe in this, the proportion of a ſeparated to an incorporated ſoule, muſt needes be the ſiꝶ ſame asin the others; ſeeing that a ſeparated ſoules actiuity, is vpon all place in an indiuiſible of time. Therefore, to shutt vp this poine; there remaineth only forvs ro conſider, what addition may be made vnto the efficacity of a iud gement, by the concurrence of otherextrinſecall helpes. We ſee that when an vnderſtanding man vill ſettle any iudgement, or coneluſion in his mind, he weigheth throughly all tha Elloneh out of ſucha iudgement;and conſidereth - all the antecedents that lead um vnto it: and if aſter due reſlection, and examination, of whatſoeuer concerneth that concluſion, which he is eſtablishing in his mind, he findeth nothing to croſſcit, but that euery particular and circumſtance goeth ſmoothly along withit,ànd ſtren gthensſ ſnbeis then ſatisfyed, and quictt iri his thoughts, and yieldetha full aſſent therevnto: which aſſent is the ſtronger, by how many the more concurent teſtimonyes he hath fo;it. And although he should haue a perfect demonſtration or ſight of the thing in it R yet euery one of the other extrinſecall proofes, being as it werea new perſuaſion, hath in it a further vigour to ſtrengthen and content his mind in the forehad demonſtration: for, if euery one of theſe be in it ſelfe ſufficient to make the thing euident; it can not happen thatany one of them, should hinder the others: but contrariwiſe, euery one of them, muſt needes coucurre with all the reſt, to the effectuall quieting of his vndetrſtanding, in its aſſent, to that iudgement. Now then,according to this rate, lett vs calculate, ſif we can) vhũt concurrence of proofes and wittneſſes a ſeparated ſoule will haue to ſettle and ſtrengthen ſe in euery oneof heriudgemẽts. We know,that all verities are ſamedand connected one toan other; and that there is no true concluſion ſo farre remote from any other, but may by more, or Ieſſe conſequences and diſcourſes, be deduced euidently out of it: ĩt followeth then that in the abſtracted ſoule, where all ſuch conſequences are ready drawne,and ſeene in themſelues without extenſion of time, or employing of pãines to collect them; eucry particular verity, beareth teſtimony to any other: ſo that euery one of them is belecued, and worketh in the force and vertue of all. Out of which it is manifeſt, that euery iudgement in ſuch a ſeparated ſoule, hathan infinite ſtrength and eſſicacity ouer any made by an embodyed one. To ſummeall vp ina fewwordes: we find three rootes of infinity in euery action of a ſeparated ſoule, ii reſpect of one in the body: firſt, the frecdome of her nceor ſubſtance in it ſelfe: next, that quality of hers, by which she comprehendeth place and time; that is, all permanent and ſucceſſiue quantity: and laſtly, the concurrence of infinite knowledges to euery action of hers. Hauing then this meaſure in our handes, lett vs apply it toa well ordered, and to a diſordered ſoule paſſing out of this world: lett vs conſider the one of them, ſett vpon thoſe goodes, which she shall there haue preſent and shall fully enioy: the other, languishing after, and pining away for thoſe, which are impoſſible for her euer to obtaine. What ioy, what content, what exultation of mind, in any liuing man, can be conceiued ſo great, as to be com pared vith the happineſſe of one of theſe ſoules? And what grieſe, what diſcontent, what miſery, can be like the others: Thele are the different effects, which the diuers manners of liuing in this world, do cauſe in ſoules after they are deliuered from their bodies: The out of which, and out of the diſcourſe that hath diſcouered theſe effects man vnto vs, we ſee a cleate reſolution of that ſo maine and agitated queſtion among the Philoſophers, vhy a rationall ſoule is impriſoned in a groſſe toli body of flesh and bloud: In truth, the queſtion is anillegitimate one; as ſſſ ſuppoſing a falſe ground: for, the ſoules beingin the body, is notan impriſonnement of a thing that was exiſtent before the ſoule and body mett together; but her being there, is the naturall courſe of beginning thit, which can no other way come into the liſtes of nature: for shoulda ſoule, by the couiſe of nature, obtaine her firſt being withouta body, eyther she would in the ſirſt inſtant of her being, be perfect in knowledge, or she would not: if she were, then wouldshe be a perfect and complete immateriall ſubſtance, not a ſoule; whoſe nature is to bea compartner to the body,and toacquire her perfection by the mediation and ſeruice of corporeallſenſes: but if she were not perfect in ſcience, but were onlya capacity therevnto, and like vnto white paper, in which nothing were yetw tten; then, vnleſſe she were putt in a body, she could neuer arriue to know any thing, becauſe motion and alteration are efſects peculiar to bodies: therefore, it muſt be agreed, that she is naturally deſigned to be ina body: but her being in æ body, is her being one thing with the body,she is ſaid to be in: and ſo she is one part of a whole, which from its weaker partis determined to bea body. Agiine, ſceing that the matter of any thing, is to be prepared, before the end is prepared, for vhich that matter is to ſerue; according to that Axiome, Quod eſt jrimum in intentione, eſt Vliimum in executione: 442 A TREATISE we may not deny, but that the body is in being, ſome time before the ſoule: orat the leaſt, that it exiſteth as ſoone as she doth: and therefore, it appeareth wholy vnreaſonable, to ſay, that the ſoule was firſt made out of tũ body,and was afterwardes thruſt into it; ſeeing that the body was repared for the ſoule before, or at the leaſt, as ſooneas she had any Deęionin :and ſo we may conclude, that of neceſſitythe ſoule muſt be begunne hyed, hached and erfected in the body. i And althoughiit betrue, that ſuch ſoules, as are ſeparated from their bodies, in the firſt inſtant of their being there, are notwithſtandin imbued with the knowledge of all thinges; yet is nottheir longer abode there in vaine: not only, becauſe thereby the ſpecies is multiphyed ;  for nature is not content with barely doing that, without addition of ſome good to the ſoule it ſelfe) but as well for the wonderfull, and I may ſay infinite aduantage, that may thereby accrewto the ſoule, if she make right vſe of it: for,as any act of the abſtracted ſoule is infinite, in compariſon of the acts which men exereiſe in this life, ( according to what we haue already shewed) ſo by conſequence, muſt any encreaſe of it, be likewiſe infinite: and therefore we may conclude, that a long life well ſpent, is the greateſt and moſt excellent guift, which nature can beſtow vpona man. E The vnwary reader may perhapps haue difficulty, at our ofter repeating of the infelicity of a miſerable ſoule; ſincẽ we ſay, that it proceedeth out of the iudgements, she had formerly made in this life; which without all doubt were falſe ones: and neuertheleſſe, it is euident, that no falſe iudgements, can remaine in a ſoule, after she is ſeparated from her body⸗ as we haue aboue determined. How then can a ſoules iudgements, be the cauſe of her miſery? But the more heedeſull reader, will haue noted, that the miſery which we putt in a ſoule, proceedeth out of the inequality, not out of the falſity, of her iudgements: forif a man be inclined to a leſſer good, more then to a reater, he will in action betake himſelfe to the leſſer good, and deſert the greater, (herein, neyther iudgemet is falſe, nor eyther inclination is naught ) meerely out of the improportion of the two inclinations or iudgements to their obiects: for that a ſoule may be duely ordered, and in a ſtate of being well, she muſt hauea leſſer inclination toa leſſe ęood,and a greater inclination to a greater good: and in pure ſpirits, thel inclinations are nothing elſe, but the ſtrength of their iudgements: which iudgements in ſoules, whiles they are in their bodies, are made by the repetition of more acts from ſtronger cauſes, or in more fauourable circumſtances. And ſo it appeareth, how without any fulſity in any iudgement, a ſoule may become miſerable, by her conuerſation in this world; whereall her inclinations generally are good, vnleſſe the diſproportion of them, do make them bad.. n THE TVELFTH CHAPTER j of the perſeuerance of a ſule, in the ſtate she ſindeih her ſlfe in; l at her firſt ſeparation from her body. H us we haue brought mans ſoule, out of the body shè I ) liued in here, and by which she conuerſed, and had The ex;lià c commerce with the other partes of this world: and we 4 she may :  remaineth only for vs to conſider, what shall betide her aſterwardes; and wherher any change may happen to her, and be made in her,after the firſt inſtant of her being a pure ſpiritt, ſeparated from all conſort: hippe with materiall ſubſtances. To determine this point the more clearely, lett vs call tominde, an axiome that Ariſtotle giueth vs in his logike ; which teacheth vs, That as it istrue, ifihe effect be ,there is a cauſe; ſo likewiſe it is moſt true, that if ihe cauſe be in act, or cauſing, the efſect muſt alſo be. Which axiome may be vaderſtood two wayes:the one, that if the cauſe hathiits effect, then the effect alſois: and this is no great myſteryior forit, areany thankes due to the teacher: it being buta repetition, and ſaying ouer againe of the ſame thing. The orther way is, that if the cauſe be perfect in the nature of being àa cauſe, then the effect is: which ĩs as much as to ſay, that if nothing be wãting to the cauſe, abſtracling preciſely from the effect; then neyther isthe heò wanting. And this is the meaninę of Ariſtorles Axiome: of the truthand euidence whereof inthis ſenſec, if any manshould make the leaſt doubt, it were eaſy to euince it: as thus;if nothing be wanting but the efect, and yer the effect doth not immediately follow, it muſt needes be, that it can not follow at allifor if it can, and doth not, then ſomething more muſt be done to make it follow:whichis againſt the ſuppoſition, that nothing was wanting but the effect: for that which is to be done, was wanting. To ſay, it will follow without any change, is ſenſeleſſe: forif it follow without change, it followeth out of this, Which isalready putt: but if it do follo out of this whichis preciſely putt, then it followeth, againſt the ſuppoſition, which was, that it did not follow although this were putt. This then being euident, lett vs apply it to our purpoſe; and lett u cation, and ; j tooſe of that haue aſſgnd her, her firſt artay and ſtole, with which Fime , that, e ſeene in the next vorld: ſo that now there i ihæsauſe be in aũt, the efeſt muſt alſi bi. putt three or more thinges,namely A. B. C. and D: whereof none can The eſcã oſ orke otherwiſe, then inan inſtant or indiniſibly: and Iſay, that what- allſuchagesa i : vor inſtanſocuer theſe foure thinges are able to do, without reſpect to any other vorke ,n thing beſides them, is completely done in the ſirſt inſtant of their bein g complete in the putt: and if they remayne for all eternity, without communication or firſt inſtant that the genti reſpect to any other thing, there shall neuer be any innouation in any areput. of them, orany further working among them: but they ill alwayes remayne immutable, in the ſamt ſtate they were in, arthe very firſt inſtant of their being purt: foravhatſoeuer A can doe, in the firſt inſtant, is in that firſt inſtant actually done; becauſe he woi keth indiuiſibly: and what can be done preciſely by A, and by his action ioyned to B doth reciſely follow our of A,and hisaction, and out of B, and his action, if B ſiue any action independent of A: and becauſe all theſeare in the ſame inſtant, whatſocuer followeth preciſely out of theſe, and out of an thing elſe that is in the ſame inſtant,and that woiketh indiuiſibly as they do is neceſſarily done in that very inſtant: but all he actions of C and D, and of whatſoeuer by reflection from them may be done by A and B, being allof them indiuiſible, and following preciſely out of ſome of the forenamed actions; they do follow out of th'nges being in this inſtant:and becauſc they are indiuiſible, they may be in this inſſant: and therefore, all is done in this inſtant. Now, ſuppoſingall to be done that can be done by them in this inſtant; and that nothing can follo from them, vnleſſeit follow preciſely out of what is in this inſtant and that it is all indiuiſible: it followerh clearely, that whatſocuer (concerning them) is not in this inſtant, can neuer be. Theſe two concluſions being thus demonſtrated; lett vs in the next place determine, how all actions of pure ſpirits, which haue no reſpect to bodies, muſt of neceſſity be indiuiſible; that is,muſt include no continuate ſucceſſion: by which, I meane ſuch a ſucceſſion, as may be denided into partes without end: for ifwe looke well into it, we shall ind, that a continuate lucceſſion can not be athing, which hath in it ſelfe a Being: and the realonis, becauſe the eſſence of ſuch a ſuce: ſſion, conſiſtcth in hauing ſome of its partes alieady paſſed, and orthers of them yet to come: but on the other ſide, it is euident, that no ſuch thing can be, whoſe eſſentiall ingredients are not it ſelfe: and therefore it followerh euidently, that ſuch a thing as we call ſucceſſion, can haue no being in it ſclfe: ſecing that one eſſentiall part of it, neuer is with the other: therefore, ſuchã ſucceſiion, muſt haue its being in ſome permanent thing, which muſt be diuiſible; forthat is eſſentially required in ſucceſsion: but permanent diuiſibility is that which we call Biggeneſſe or Quantity, from which pure ſpirits are fiee:and therfore, it is moſt euident, that all theiractions in reſpect of themſelues, are abſolutely indiuiſible. Now, to make vſe of this doctrine to our intent: we ſay, that ſince our ſoule, when it is ſeparated from our body, is a pure ſpiritt or vnderſtanding; and that all her actions are indiuiſible; and that all actiòs of other ſpirits vyõ her muſt likewiſe be ſuchiand by cõſequence, that there can be no continuate ſuccelsion of action among them: we muſt of neceſsity conclude, that according to the priuate nature of the ſoule, and according to the common notion of ſpirituall thinges; there can be no change made in her, after the firſt inſtant of her parting from hei body: but, what happineſſe or miſery betideth her in that inſtant, comtinucth ith her for all eternity. Yet is it not my mind to ſuv, that by che courſe of the vniuerſall reſolutions, from which she is not wholy exempt, and from ſupernaturall adminiſtration of corporeall thinges, there may not reſult ſome change in her. But the conſideration of that matter, I remitt to thoſe treatiſes, vnto which it belongeth; as not depending, nor enſuing from the particular nature of the ſoule: and therefore, not falling vnder our diſcuſsion in this place. This ſame concluſion may be proued by an other argument, beſides this which we haue now vſed: and it is this. Whatſoeuer worketh purely by vnderſtanding and minde, can not be changed in its operations, vnleſſe its vnderſtanding or minde be altered: but this can not happen, vnleſſe eytherit learne ſomewhat, it knew not before; or forgetting a foreknowne truth, it beginne afterwardes to thinke a falſity. This ſecond part, isimpoſsible, as we haue already shewed, when we proued that fallehood could haue no admittance intoa ſeparated ſoule: and the former is asimpoſiiblesit being likewiſe proued, thatat her firſt inſtant of her ſeparation, she knoweth all thinges: wherefore, we may hence conſidently conclude, that no change of minde, (that is no change at all)lcan happen to an abſtracted ſoule. And thus, by diſcourſe, we may arriue, to quitt ourſclues eaſily of that famous obiection, ſo much peſtering Chriſtian Religion; how God, can in iuſtice impoſe eternall paines vpon a ſoule, for one ſinne, acted ina short ſpace of time. For we ſee, it followeth by the neceſſary courſe of e nature, that if a man dye in a diſorderly affection toany thing, as to his chiefe good, he eternally remaineth by the neceſity of his owne nature, in the ſame affection: and there is no imparity, that to eternall ſinne, there should be impoſed eternall punishment. EæLn...E S  -S S  2 .RSSS: THE CONCLVSION.  ND nov I hope, I may confidently ſay, I haue beene as Al good as my word: and I doubt not, but my Reader will ſinde it ſo, ifhe ſpend but halfe as muchtime in peruſing theſe two treatiſes, as the compoſing them hath coit : me. They are too nice (and indeede, vnreaſonable) who expect to attaine ithout paines, vnto that, hich hath coſt orhers ycares of toyle. Lett them remember the wordes of holy Iob, that viſedome is not found in the land of ihoſe, that liue at their eaſe. Lett them caſt their eyes on every ſide round about them, and then tell me, if they meete with any employment, that may be compared to the attaining vnto theſe, and ſuch like principleswhereby a man is enabled to gonerne himſelfe vnderſtandingly and knowingly, towards the happineſſe, both of the next life and of this; and to comprehend the wiemans theme; what i good for a man in the dayes of his vanity, whiles he playeth ihe ranger onder the ſunne Lett vs feare Gods Iudgements. Lett vs careſully urſue the hidden bounties, he hath treaſured vp for vs. Lett vs thar ke ſn for the knowledge he hath giuen vs: and admire the excellency of Chriſtian Religion; which ſo plainely teacheth vs that, vrito whichſtis ſo extreme hard to arriue by natural meanes. Lett vs bleſſc him, that we are borne vnto it. And lert vs ſiig to him; That it is he, who preacheth his doctrine to lacob, and giueth his tawes to Iſradl He hath not done the like to all nations; nor haih he maniſeſted his ſecras truthes nto them. / VrT before I cutt ofthis thridde, vhich hath coſt me ſo much BYs to ſpinne out to this Length; I muſt craue my Readers leaue, to make Emc vſe of it, for my owne behocfe. Hitherto my diſcourſe hath beene directed to him: no Ishall entreate his patience, that I may reſlect it in a ord or two vpon my ſelfe And as I am ſure I haue profited my ſelfe not a litle, by talking all this while to him, that obliging me to polish my conceptions with more care, and to range them into better order, then whiles they were but rude meditations with in my owne breſt, ſo I hope, thata litle, conuerſition with my ſelfe vpon this important ſubiect, (which is to be ſtudied for vſe, and practiſe; nor for ſpeculatiue ſcience) may prooue aduantagious vnto him; if his warmed thoughts haue tuned his ſoule to ſuch a key, as Iam ſure theſe conſiderations haue wound vp mine vnto. To thee then my ſoule, I now addreſſe my ſpeech. For ſince by long debate, and toyleſome rowing againſt the impetuous tydes of ignorance, and falſe apprehentions, which oueiſlow thy bankes, and hurry thee headlong downe the ſtreame, whileſt thou art impriſoned in thy clayie manſion; wee haue with muchadoe arriued toayme att ſome litſe atome ofthy vaſt greatneſſe; and with the hard and tough blowes of ſtrict and wary reaſoning, we haue ſtrucken out ſome few ſpaik:s of that glorious light, which inuironeth and ſelleth thee, orrather, which is thee: it is high time, I should retire my ſelfe out of the turbulent and ſlippery field of eager ſtrife and litigious diſputation, to make my accounts with thee; where no outward noiſe may diſtract vs, nor any way intermeddle betweene vs, excepting only that eternall verity, which by thee shineth vpon my faint and gloomy eyes iand in which I ſee, whatſoeuer doth or can content thee in me. I haue diſcouered, that thou (my ſoule) wilſt ſuruiue me: and ſo ſuruiue me, as thou willt alſo ſuruiue the mortality, and changes which belong to mei and whichare but accidentary to thee, meerely becauſe thou art in me. Th n shall the viciſſitude of time, and the inequality of diſpoſitions in thee, be turned into the conſtancy of immortality; and into the euenneſſe of one being, neuer to end, and neuer to receiue a change, or ſucceſſion to better or worſe. Vhen my eye of contemplation, hath beene fired vpon this bright ſunne, as long as ĩt is able to endure the radiant beames of it; whoſe redundant light veyleth the looker on, with a daike miſt: let: me turne it fora litle ſpace, vpon the ſtraight paſſage,and narrow gullet, through which rhou ſtriueſt ( my ſoule) with faint and weary ſteppes, during thy hazirdous voyage vpon the earth, ro make thy ſelfea ay: and lett me examine, what compariſon there is, betweene thy two conditions: the reſent one, wherein thou now ſindeſt thy ſclfe immerſed in fle:h and loud; and the future ſtate that will betide thee, when thou shalſt be melted out of this groſſe oore, and refined from this meane alloy. Lett my terme of life, be of a thouſand long yeares longer then euer happened to our aged forefathers, vho ſtored the earth with their numerous progeny, by out liuing their skill to number the diffuſed multitudes, that ſvarmed from their loines: lett me, during this lon ſpace, be ſole Emperour and abſolute Lord, of all the huge globe of land and water, encompaſſed with Adams offspring: lett all my ſubiects lye proſtrate at my feete, with obedience and awe, diſtilling th-ir actiueſt thoughts, in ſtudying day and night to inuent new pleaſures and dili ſæ for me: lett nature conſpire with them, to giue me a conſtant a vigorous health; a perpetuall ſpring ofyouth, that may to the full, relish whatſoeuer good all they can fancy: lett graueſt Prelates, and greateſt Princes, ſerue inſteed of ſlatterers to highten my ioyes; and yer thoſe ioyes, be rayſed aboue their power of ſlattery: lett the wiſemen of this vaſt family (hoſe ſentiments, are maximes and oracles, to gouerne the worldes beliefes and actions) eſteeme, reuerence, and adore me in the ſecreteſt, and the moſt recluſe withdrawings of their hartes: lett all the wealth, which to this very day, hath euer beene torne out of the bowels of the earthi and all the treaſures, which the ſea hideth from the view of greedy men, ſwell round about me; whileſt all the world beſides, lyeth gaping to receiue the crummes, that fall neglected by me, from my l den table: lett my imagination be as vaſt, as the vnfathomed Vniuerſe;and lett my felicity be as accomplished, as my imagination can reach vnto; ſo that wallowing in leature , l bee not able to think how to increaſe it, or what to wish for more, then that whichI poſſeſſe and enioy. Thus when my thoughts are at a ſtand, and can raiſe my preſent happineſſe no higher;; lett me call to minde, how this long leaſe of pleaſant dayes, will in time come toan end: this bottome of a thouſand ioyfull yeares, will att length be vnwound, and nothing remaine of it: and then (my ſoule)thy inſinitely longerliued Immortality will ſucceed; thy neuer ending date, will beginne a new account, impoſſible to be ſummed vp, and beyond all proportion inſinitely exceeding the happineſſe, we haue rudely aymed to expreſſe: ſo that no compariſon can be admitted betweene them. For, ſuppoſe ſirſt that ſuch it were, as the leaſt and shorteſt cf thoſe manifold ioyes, which ſuell it to that height we haue fancyed, were equall toall the contentment thou shalſt enioy in a whole million of yeares yet millions of yeares may be ſo often multiplyed, as att lengih, the ſlenderand limited contentments ſuppoſed in them, may equalyſe, and outgoe the whole heape of ouerſlanis g bliſſe, rayſed ſo high, in the large extent of theſe thouhind happy yeares. Which when they are caſt into a totall ſumme; and that Icompare it, with the vnmeaſurable eternity, which only meaſureth thee then Iſee, that allthis huge product of Algebraicall multiplication, appeareth as nothing, in hò of thy remayning, and neuer ending ſuruiuance; and is leſſe, then the leaſt point in regard of the immenſe Vniuerſe. But then, ifit be true ſas it is moſt true) that thy leaſt ſpaike and moment of reall happineſſe, in that bleſſed eternity thou hopeſt for, is infinitely greater, and nobler, then the whole maſſe of fancyed ioyes, of my thouſand yeares life here on earthi how infinitely will the valew of thy duration, exceed all proportion, in regard of the felicity,  had imagined my ſelfe? And ſeing there is no proportion betweene them, lett me ſudly reſlect vpon my owne preſent condition: lett me examine what it is,  ſo buſily, and anxiouſly, employ my thoughts and pretious time vpon: lett me conſider my owne courſes, and whitherthey leade me: lett me take a ſuruay of the liues, and actions, of the greateſt part of the world, which make ſo loude a noiſe about my earssand then mayl iuſtly ſigh out from the botrome of my anguished hart ; to what purpoſe haue I hitherto liued? To what purpoſe are alltheſe millions oftoileſome auntes, that liue and labour about me? To what purpoſe were Ceſars and Alexanders? To what purpoſe Ariſtotles and A rehimede ſ ? How miſerably foolish are thoſe conquering tyrants, that diuide the world with their lavleſſe ſuords: What sẽſeleſſe idiots thoſe acute Philoſophers, who teare mens vittes in pieces, by their diſſerent wayes, and ſubtile Logicke ſtriuing to shew men beatitudes in this vorld, and ſeeking for that, which if they had found, were but a nothing of a nothing in reſpect of true beatitude? He only is truly wiſe, who neglecting allthat ſlesh and bloud deſireth, endeauoreth to purchaſe att any rate this felicity, which thy ſuruiuance promiſeth: the leaſt degree of which, ſo farre ſurmounteth all the heapes, which the gyants of the earth are able to raiſe, by throwing hils vpon hils, and ſtriwing in vaine to ſcale and reach thoſe eternities, which reſide aboue the skyes. Alas, how fondly doth mankinde ſuffer it ſelfe to be deluded ? How true itis, that the only thing neceſſary, proueththe only thing that is neglected ? Looke vp my ſoule, and fixe thine eye vpon that truth, hich eternall light maketh ſo cleere vnto thee, shining vpon thy face with ſo great euidence, as defyeth the noonetyde ſunne, in its greateſt brightneſſe. And thisit is, that euery action of thine, be it neuer ſo ſlight, is mainely miſchieuous; or be it neuer ſo bedeckt, with thoſe ſpecious conſiderations, which the wiſe men of the world iudge important, is foolish, abſurd, and vnworthy of a man ; and vnworthy of one that vnderſtandeth, and acknowledgeth thy dignitys if in it there be any ſpeckes or if through it, there appeare any ſparke of thoſe meane and ſlatte motiues, which with a fallebyas, draw any way aſide, from attaining that happineſſe, we expect in thee. That happineſſe, ought to be the end, and maike we leuell att: that, the rule and model of all our actions: that, the meaſure of euery circumſtance, of euery atome, of whatſoeuer we beſtow ſo pretious a thing vpon, as the employment ofthee is. But we muſt not ſo ſlightly paſſe ouer the intenſeneſſe and vehemence of that felicity, which thou ſ my ſoule) shalt enioy, when thou art ſeuered from thy benumming compartner. I ſee euidently, that thou doſt not ſuruiue, a ſimple and dull eſſence; but art replenished with a vaſt and incomprehenſible extent of riches and delight within thy ſelfe. I ſee that golden chayne, which here by long diſcourſes, filleth huge volumes of bookes, and diueth into the hidden natures of ſeuerall bodies; in thee reſumed into one circle or linke, which containeth in iĩt ſclfe the large ſcope of whatſoeuer ſcrewing diſcourſe can reach vnto. Iſee it comprehend, and maſter the whole world of bodies. I ſee euety particular nature, as it were emboſſed out to the life, inthy celeſtiall garment. Iſee cuery ſolitary ſubſtance ranked inits due place and order, not crushed or thronged by the multitude of its fellowes but each of them inits fullextent, in the full propriety of euery part and effect of it; and diſtinguished into more dtuiton then euer nature ſeuered it into. In thee Iſee an infinite multitude enioy place enough I ſee, that neither hight, nor profundity, nor longitude, nor latitude, are able to exempt themſelues from thy diffuſed powers: they faddome all; they comprehendalli they maſter alli they enriche thee whh the ſtock ofall; and thou thy ſelfe art all, and ſomewhat more thenall; and ſi now but one of all. I ſee, that eueryone ofthis all, inthee encreaſeththe ſtrength, by which thou knoweſt any other of the ſame all: and all,encreaſetli 1he Enovledge ofall, bya multiplication beyond ihe skill of Arithmetike; being ſinits kind) abſolutely infinite; by hauing a nature, that is incapable of being eyther infinite orſinite. I ſee againe, thatthoſe thinges which haue not knowledge, are ſituated in the loweſt, and meaneſt ranke of creatures; and are in no wiſe comparable to thoſe which Enow. Iſee, there is no pleaſure att all, no happineſſe, no felicity, but by knovledge ,and in knowledge. Experience teacheth me, how the purer, and nobler race of mankind, adoreth in iheir hartes, this idole of knowledge, and ſcorneth what euer elſe thæy ſeeme to court, and to be fond of. And I ſee, that this exceſſe of ſea of knowledge which is in the, groweth not by the ſucceſſion of one thought after an orher; butis like a full ſwolne ocean, neuer ebbing on any coaſt, butequally pushing att all its boundes, and tumbling out its ſlowing ues on euery ſyde, and into euery creche: ſo that euery where it maketh high tide. Or lke a pure ſunne, which from all partes of it, shooteth its radiant beames with a like extremity of violence. And I ſee likewiſe, that this admirable knovledge, is nct begotten and conſerned in thee, by the accidentaiy helpe of defectiue cauſes; but is rooted in thy ſelfe; is fteeped in thy owne eſſence, like an vnextinguishable ſourſe ofa perpetually ſtreaming fire; or like the liuing head ofan euerrunning ſpring⸗ beholn to none, out of thy ſelfe, ſauing only to thy Almighty Creatour; and begging of none but being in ũ ſelfe allthat of hich thou shouldeſt begge. This then ſmy ſoule) being thy lotte; and ſucha hieght of pleaſure being reſerued for thee; and ſuch an extremity of felicity, with in a short ſpace attending thee  can any degencrate thought, euer gaine ſtrength enough; tò shake the enidence which theſe conſid rations implant and riett in thee? Can any dull obliuion deface this ſo liuely and ſo beautifull image? Or can any lengih of time, draw in thy memory a veyle betweene it, and thy preſent attention? Can any perueiſity, ſo diſtort thy ſtraight eyes, that thou shouldeſt not looke allwayes ſixed vpon this mai ke and leuell thy ayme directly at this white? How is it poſſible, that thou canſt brooke to liue, and not expite preſently, thereby to ingulfe thy ſclfe,and be throughly in. bibed with ſuchan ouerflowing bliſſe?Why doſt thou not breake the walles and chaynes ofthy fle:h and bloud, and leape into this glorious liberty ? Here Stoickes, you are to vſe your ſwords. Vpon theſe conſiderations, you may iuſtifie the letting out the bloud, which by your diſcourſes, you ſeeme ſo prodigall of. To dye vpon theſe termes, is notto part with that, which you fondly call a happy life; feeding your ſelues, and flattering your hearers with empty words: but rather it is, to plunge jourſelues into a felicity, you were neuer able to imagine, or to frame in your miſguided thoughts any ſeantling of. But nature pulleth me by the care, and warneth me from being ſo vrongfullto her, as to conceiue, that ſo wiſe a gouerneſſe should to no aduantage, condemne mankinde to ſo long a bannishment, as the ordinary extent of his dull life, and weariſome pilgrimage here vnder the ſunne reacheth vnto. Can we imagine, she would allow him ſo much layſie time, to effect nothing in? Or can wee ſuſpect, that she intended him no further aduantage, then what an abortiue child arriueth vnto in his mothers vombe? For whitſoeuer the nettes and toyles of diſcourſe can circle in all that he, who but once knoweth that himſelfe is, can attaine vnto as fully, as he that is enriched with the ſcience of allthings in the world. For, the connexion of things, is ſo linked together, that proceeding from any one, you reach the knowledge of many; and from many, you cannot faile of attaining vnto all: ſothata ſeparated ſoule, hich doth but know herſclfe, can not chooſe but know her body too; and from her body, she cannot miſſe in proceeding from the cauſes of them both, as farre as immediate cauſes do proceede from others ouer them: and as litle can she be ignorant, of all the efſects of thoſe cauſes she reacheth vnto. And thus, all that huge maſſe of knovledęe, and happineſſe, which we haue cõſidered in our laſt reflexion, amounteth to no more, then the ſeelieſt ſoule buried in warme blood, can and will infallibly attaine vnto, when its time cometh. Wee moy then aſſure our ſelues, that iuſt nature hatl prouided and deſigned a greater meaſure of ſuch felicity for longer liuers: and ſo much greater, as may well be worth the paines and hazards, of ſo miſerable and tedious a paſſage, as here ( my ſoule) thou ſtruggleſt through. For certainely, if the dull percuſſion, which by natures inſtitution, hammereth out a ſpirituall ſoule from groſſe flesh and bloud, can atcheiue ſo wondrous an effect, by ſuch blunt inſtruments,us are vſed in the contriuing of a man: how can it be imagined, but that fifty or a hundred yeares beating vpon farre more ſubtile elements, refined in ſo long a time, as a child is becoming a man, and arriuing to his perfect diſcourſe, muſt neceſſarily forge out in ſuch a ſoule, a ſtrange and admirable excellency,aboue the vniicked forme of an abortiue embryon? Surely, thoſe innumerable ſtrokes (euery one of which maketh a ſtrong impreſſion in the ſoule, vpon whom they beate) cannot chooſe but worke a mighty difference, inthe ſubiect that receiueth them, changing it ſtrangely from the condition it asin, before they begunne to new mould it. What if I should ſay, the oddes betweene two ſuch ſoules, may peraduenture be not vnlike the difference, betweene the wittes and iudgements of the ſubtileſt Philoſopher that euer was, an lofthe dulleſt child or idiote liuing. But this compariſon falleth too :hort by farre: euen ſo much, that there is no reſemblance or proportion betweene the thinges compared: for as the exceſſe of great numbers ouer one an other, drowneth the exceſſe of ſmall ones, and maketh it not conſiderable, in reſpect of theirs, although they should be in the ſame proportions ſo the aduantages of there, and by its making right vſe of that pretious time allowed it; muſt needes, ( in poſitiue valew, though not in geometricall proportion) infinitely exceed, when it shall be deliuered out of priſon, the aduantages, which the newly hatched ſoule of an abortiue infant shall acquire, att the breaking of its chaines. In this caſe, I beleeue no man would be of Ceſars mind; when he wished to be rather the firſt man in a contem ptible oore village, he paſſed through among the deſert mountains, then the ſeond man in Rome. Lett vs ſuppoſe, the wealth ofthe richeſt man in that barren habitation, to be one hundred Crownes; and that the next to him in ſubſtance, had but halfe as much as he: in like manner, in that opulent citty, the head of the world, where millions were as familiar as pence in other places, lett the exceſſe of the richeſt mans wealth, be but (as in the former) double ouer his, that cometh next vnto him; and there you shall find, that if the pooreſt of the two, be worth fifty millions, the other hath fifty millions more then he: whereas the formers petty treaſure, exceedeth his neighbours but by fifty crownes. What proportion is there, in the common eſtimation of affaires, betweene that triuiall ſumme, and fifty millions? Much leſſe is there, betweene the excellency of a ſeparated ſoule, firſt perfected in its body, and an other that is ſett looſe into complete liberty, before its body arriued in a naturall courſe, to be deliuered into this world, and by its eyes to enioy the light of it. The change ofeuery ſouleatt its ſeparation from the body, to a degree of perfectiò, aboue what it enioyed inthe body, is ina manner infinite: and by a like infinite proportion, euery degree of perfection it had in the body, is alſo then multiplyed: what a vaſt product then of infinity, muſt neceſſurily be rayſed, by this multiplying inſtãt ofthe ſoules attaining liberty, in a well moulded ſoule; infiniteſy beyond that perfection, which the ſoule of an infant dying before it be borne, arriueth vnto? And yet we haue determined that to be a in manner infinite. Here our skill of Arithmetike and proportions fayleth vs. Here wee find infinite exceſſe, ouer what we alſo knowto be infinite. How this can be, the feeble eyes ofour limited vnderſtanding, are too dullto penetrate into: but thatit is ſo, we are ſure: the rigour of diſcourſe, conuinceth and neceſſarily concludeth it. That aſſureth vs, that ſince euery impreſſion vpon the ſoule, whiles itis in its body, maketh a changein it; were there no others made, but meerely the iterating of thoſe actes, which brought it from ignorance to knowledge; that ſoule, vpon which a hundred of thoſe actes had wrought, muſt haue a hundred degrees of aduantage ouer an other, vpon which only one had beaten; though by that one, it had acquired perfect knowledge of that thing: and then in the ſeparation, theſe hundred degrees, being each of them infinitely muliiplyed, ho infinitely muſt ſuch a ſoule exceed in that particular,  though we know nothow) the knowledge of the other ſoule; which though it be perfect in its kind, yet had but one act to forge it out? When wee arriue to vnderſtand the difference of knovledge, berweene the ſuperiour and inferiour rankes of intelligences ; among whome, the loweſt knoweth as muchas the higheſt; and yet the knovledge of tho higheſt, is infinitely more perfect and admirable, then the knovledge of his inferiours: then, and not before, ve shallthroughly comprehend this myſtery. In the meane time, it is enough for vs, that weare ſure, that thus it faireth with ſoules: and that by how much the eXcellency and perfection of an allknoving and all comprehending ſoule, deliuered out ofthe body ofa wretched embryon, is abouethe vileneſſe of that heauy lumpe of flesh, it lately quitted in his mothers wombe; euen by ſo much, and according to the ſame proportion, muſt the excellency of a complete ſoule ſ completed in its body) be in a pitch aboue the adorable maieſty, wiſedome, and auguſtneſſe, of the greateſt and moſt admired oracle in the world, liuing embodyed in flesh and bloud. Which as it is in a height, and eminency ouer ſuch an excellent and admirable man, infinitely beyond the exceſſe of ſuch a man, ouer that ſeely lumpe of flesh, which compoſeth the moſt contemptible idiote or embryon; ſo likeiſe, is the exceſſe of it, ouerthe ſoule of an abortiue embryon, (though by the ſeparation, growne neuer ſo knoving, and neuer ſo perfect) infinitely reater, then the dignity and wiſedome of ſuch a man, is aboue the Rebleneſſt and miſery of an ne animated child. Therefore haue patience my ſoule: repine not at thy longer ſtay here in this vale of miſery, where thou art banished from thoſ vſpeakable ioyes thou ſeeſt att hand before thee from which nothing but the frile alles of rotten flesh ſeuereth thee. Thou shalſt haue an ouerflowing reward forthy enduring and patienting in this thy darkeſome priſon. Deptiue not thy ſelfe: through miſchicuous haſt, ofſhe great hopes and admirable felicity that attend thee, canſt thou but with due temper ſtay for it. Be content to Iett thy ſtocke lye out awhile at intereſt; thy profits will come in vaſt proportions; and euery yeare, euery day, euery houre, will pay thee intereſt vpon intereſt: and the longer it runneth on, the more it multiplyeth: and in the actount thou shalſt find, if thou proceedeſt as thou shouldeſt, that one moment oftentimes bringeth in a greater encreaſe vnto thy ſtocke of treaſure, then the many yeares thou didſt liue and trade before: and the longer thou liueſt, the thicker will theſe moments arriue vnto thee. In like manneras in Arithmetical numeration, euery addition of the leaſt figure, multiplyeth the whole ſumme it findeth. Here thou wilſt proue how true that rich man ſayed, who of his gaines pronounced, that he had gotten litle with great labour, and great ſummes vith litle: ſo if thou beſtoweſt ell thy time, thy latter ſummes vill Bring thee in huge accountes of gaine, vpon ſmall expence of paines or employments; whercas thy firſt beginnings are toyleſome and full of paine, and bring in but ſlender profitt. By this time, my ſoule, Tan ſure thou artſatisfied, that the exceſſe of novledge and of pleaſure, which in the næxt life thou shalt enioy, i» Mmm vaſtly beyond any thou art capable of here. But how may wee eſtimate the iuſt proportion they haue to one on other? Or rather is not the leaſure ofa ſeparated ſoule, ſo infinitely beyond all that can be relished b one embodied here in clay, that there is no proportion betweene them? At the leaſt, though wee are not able to meaſure the one, lett vs do our beſt to ayme and gueſſe at the improportion betweene them; and reioyce when wee find that it is beyond our reach to conceiue or imagine any thing, nigh the truth and the huge exceſſe of thy good ſmy ſoule) ouer the moſt Iam capable of in this world. It is agreed, that the vehemence and intenſeneſſe of any pleaſure, is proportionable to the actiuity, power, and energy of the ſubiect, which is aſfected with ſuch pleaſure; and to the grauitation, bent, and greatneſſe, that ſucha ſubicct hath to the obiect that delighteth it. Now to roue at the force and actiuity, wherewith a ſeparated ſoule weigheth and ſtriueth to ioyne jt ſelfe, to what ĩts nature carrieth it vnto; lett vs beginne with conſidering the proportions of celerity and forcibleneſſe, wherewith heauy bodies moue downewards. I ſee a pound weight in one ſcale of the ballance, weigheth vp the other empty one withgreat celerity. But if in to that you imagine a million of poundes to be put, you may well conceiue, that this great exceſſe, would carry vpthe ſh pound weight vith ſo much violence and ſpeede, as would hardly afford your eye liberty to obſerue the velocity of the motion. Lett me multiply this million of poundes, by the whole globe of the earth: by the vaſt extent of the great orbe, made by the fime or earthes motion about the center of the world; by the incomprehenſibility of that immenſe ſtorehouſe of matter and of bodies, which is deſigned in lumpe by the name of the Vniuerſe; of which we know no more, but that it is beyond all hope of being knowne, during this mortall lifee. Thus when I haue heaped together a bulke of weighht, equall to this vnwieldy machine; lett me multiply the ſtrength of its velocity, and preſſure ouer the leaſt atome imaginable in nature, as farre beyond the limits of grauity,as the ingenious skill, herewith Archimedes numbred the lealt graines of ſand that would fill the world, can carry it: and when I haue thus wearied my ſelfe,and exhauſted the power of Arithmetike,and of Alebra, I find there is ſtill a proportion betweene that atome and rhis vnutterable weight: Iſee it isall quantitatiue; it is all finite: and all this exceſſe vannisheth to nothing, and becommeth inuiſibleſlike tinklinę ſtarres, at the riſing of the much brighter ſunne) as ſooneas the loeſt and the meaneſt ſubſtance shineth out of that orbe, where they reſide that ſcorne diuiſibilility, and are out of the reach of quantity and matter. How vehement then muſt the actiuity and energy be, wherewith ſo puiſſant a ſubſtance shooteth it ſelfe to its deſired obiect? and when it enioyeth it, how violent muſt the extaſy and tranſport be, wherevith it is delighted? How is it poſſible then for my narrow hart, to frame an apprehenſion of the infinite exceſſe of thy pleaſure (my ſoule) ouer all pleaſure this limited world can afford, which is all meaſured by ſuch petty proportions ? How should I ſtampe a ſigure of thy immenſe reatneſſe, into my materiall imagination? Here I looſe my power of Bking. becauſe I haue too much to ſpeake of: I muſt become ſilent and dumbe, becauſe all the words and language I can vſe ,expreſſe not the thouſandeth, nor the millioneth part, of what Ieuidently ſee to be treu. All Ican ſayis, that whatſoeuer I thinke or imagine, it is not that: and that itis not like any ofthoſe things vnto ſome of which vnleſſe it be like, it is impoſſible for me to make any proportion or ſimilitude vnto it. What hen shall I do, but lay my ſelfe downe in mine owne shado, and there reioyce that thou art a light ſo great, as I am not able to endure the dazeling ſplendour of thy rayes: that thy pleaſure is ſo exceſſiue, as no part of it can enter into my circumſcri ed hart, without dilating it ſo wide, that it muſt breake in ſunder: and that thy happineſſe is ſo infinite, as the higheſt pitch I can hope for to glutt my ſelfe withall, during this dai ke night of my tedious pilgrimage here on carth, is to ſee euidently, that it is impoſſible for me in this life, to frame any ſcantling ofiti much leſſe, to know how great it is. Shall Ithen once againe preſume to breake out into impatience, at my delãy of ſo ſias bliſſe, and erye out, that I am content with the meaneſt share of this exuberant felicity ? Icare not for the exaggerations which a longer life may heape vp vnto it. Iam ſure here is ſufficient to ſwell my hart beyond it ſelfe, to ſatisfie my thirſty ſoule, to diſſolue and melt all my povers and to transforme me totally into a ſelfebleſſed creature. Away, away all tedious hopes, not only of this life, but euen of all encreaſe in the next. I will leape bouldly into that fountaine of bliſſe, and caſt my ſelfe headlong into that ſea of felicity: where I can neither apprehend shallow waters, nor feare Ihallbe ſo litle immerſed and drowned, as to meete vith any shelfe or diy ground, to moderate and ſtinte my happineſſe. A ſelfe actiuity, and vnbounded extent, and eſſence free from time and place, aſſure me ſuſficiently, that I necde deſire no more. Which way ſocuer Ilooke, Ilooſe my ſight, in ſeeing an infinity round about me. Length without pointes: Breadth without Lines: Depth without any ſurface. All content, all pleaſure, all reſtleſſe reſt, all an vnquietneſſe and tranſport of delight, all an extaſy of fruition. Happy forgetfulneſſe, how deepely am I obliged to thee, for making roome for this ſoule rauishing contemplation, by rembuing this whiles all other images ofthings farre from me? Iwould to God thou mighteſt endure, whiles I endure; that ſo I might be drowned in this preſent thought, and neuer wake againe, but into the enioying, and accompletion of my preſent enflamed deſires. But alas, that may not be. The eternal light whom my ſoule and I haue choſen for Arbiter, to determine vnto vs what is moſt expedient for vs, ill not permit it. We muſt returne; and that into feares and miſeries: For as a good life breedeth encreaſe of happineſſe, ſo doth an euell one, heape vp lliades of woe. Firſt (my ſoule) before Iventure, we should be certaine, that thy parting from this life, waft thee ouer to aſſured happineſſe: For thou well knoweſt, that there are noxious actions, which depraue and infect the ſoule, whiles it is forging and moulding hereit its body, and tempering for its future being: and if thou shouldeſt ſally hence in ſucha peruerſe diſpoſition, vnhappineſſe would beryde thee inſteed of thy preſumed bliſſe. I ſec ſome men ſo rauenous after thoſe pleaſures, which cannot be enioyed out of the body, that if thoſe impotent deſires accompany their ſoules into eternity, Ican not doubt of their enduring an eternity of miſery: I can not doubt of their being tormented with ſuch a dire extremity, of vnſatisfyable deſire and violent greife, as were able to teare all this vorld into pieces, were it conuerted into one hart; and to riue in ſunder, any thing leſſe then the neceſſity of contradiction. How high the bliſſe of a well gouerned ſoule is aboue all pover of quantity, ſo extreme muſt the rauenous inclemency, and vulturelike cruelty, be of ſuch an vncompaſſable deſire gnawing eternally vpon the ſoule; for the ſame reaſon holdeth in borh: and whichway ſoeuer the grauitation and deſires ofa ſeparated ſoule do cany it, it is hurried on with a like impetuoſity and vnlimited actiuity. Lett me then caſt an heedfull and wary eye, vpon the actions of the generality of mankind, from whence I ma gueſſe at the weale or woe, of their future ſtate: and if I find that the greateſt number weigheth downe in the ſcale of miſery, haue I not reaſon to feare leaſt my lott should prooue among theirs ? For itht greateſt part ſweepeth along ithit euery particular, that harh not ſome particular reaſon to exempt it from the generall la. Inſteede then ofa few that wiſely ſettle their hartes on legitimate deſires, what multitudes of wretched men do I ſee; ſome hungry after flesh and bloud; otheas gaping after the empty vind of honour and vanity; otheis breathing nothing but ambitious thoughts; others graſping all, and groueling vpon heapes of melted earth? So that they put me all in a horrour, and make me feare, leaſt very few they be, that are exempted from the dreadfull fate of this incomprehenſible miſery, to which I ſee, and grieue to ſee, the whole face of mankind deſperately tumed. May it not then be my ſad chance, to be one oftheirvnhappy number: Be content then, fond man, to liue. Liue yet, till thou haſt firſt ſecured the paſſage vhich thou art but once to venture on. Be ſure before thou throweſt thy ſelfe into it, to put thy ſoule into the ſcales: ballance all thy thougths; examine all thy inclinations; put thy ſelfe to the teſte, try what droſe, what pure gold is in thy ſelfe: and what thou findeſt wanting, be ſure to ſupply, before nature calleth thee to thy dreadfull account. It is ſoone done, if thou beeſt what thy nature dictateth thee to be Follow but euident reaſon and knowledge, and thy wantes are ſupplyed, thy accountes are made vp. The ſame euershining truth, which maketh iſite ſee that two and two are foure, will shew thee without any contradiction, how all theſe baſeallurements are vaine and idle; and that there is no com pariſon betweene the higheſt of them, and the meaneſt of what thoumayeſt hope for, haſt thou but ſtrength to ſcrtle thy hart by the ſteerage of this moſt euident ſcience; in this very moment, thou mayſt be ſecure. But the hazard is great,in miſſing to examine thy ſelfe truly and throughly. And ifthou miſcarry there, thou art loſt for euer. Apply therefore allthy care, all thy induſtry to that. Lett that be thy continuallſtudy, and thy perpetuall entertainement. Thinke nothing elſe worth the knowing, nothing elſe worththe doing, but ſcrewing vp thy ſoule vnto this hight, but directing it by this leuell, by this rule. Then feare not, nor admit the leaſt doubt of thy being happy, when thy time shall come; and that time shall haue no more power ouer thee. In the meane ſeaſon, ſpare no paines, forbeare no diligence, employ all exactneſſe, burne in ummer, freeſe in winter, watch by night, and labour by day, ioyne monthes to monthes, and entayle yeares vpon yeares. Thinke nothing ſufficient to preuent ſo maine a hazard; and deeme nothing long or tedious in this life, to purchace ſo happy an eternity. The ſirſt diſcoueres ofthe Indies, caſt themſelues among ſwarmes of maneaters; they fou ght and ſtrugled with vnknowne vaues; ſo horiid ones, that oftentimes they perſwaded themſelues they climbed vp mountaines of waters, and ſtraight againe were precipitated headlong downe betweene the clouen ſea, vpon the foaming ſand, from whence they could not hope for a reſource: hunger was their foode; ſnakes and ſerpents were their daynties; ſword and fire were their dayly exerciſe: and all this, only to be maſters of a litle gold, which after a short poſſeſſion was to quitt them for euer. Our ſearchers after the Northeme paſſage, haue cutt their way through mountaines of yce, more affright full and horrid, then the Symplegades. They haue impriſoned themſelues in halfe yeare nights: they haue chayned themſelues in perpetuall ſtonecleauing coldes: ſome haue beene found cloſely embracing one an other, to conſerue as long as they were able,a litle feell in their freeſing harts, at lenght petrifyed by the hardneſſe ofthat vnmercifull winter: others haue beene made the prey of vnhumane men, more ſauage then the vildeſt beaſts: others haue beene neuer found nor heard of, ſo that ſurely they haue proued the foode of the vgly monſters of that vaſt ycy ſea: and thele haue beene able and vnderſtanding men. What motiues, hit hopes had theſe daring men? What gaines could they promiſe themſelues, to counteruaile their deſperate attempts? They aymed not ſo much as at the purchaſe of any treaſure for themſelues, but meerely to ſecond the deſires of thoſe that ſett them on worke; or to fillthe mourhes of others, from whence ſome few crummes might fall to them. What is required at thy hands (my ſoule) like this? And yet the hazard thou art to auoyde, and the wealth thou art to attaine vnto, incomparably ouerſetteth all that they could hope for. Liue thenand be glad of long and numerous yeares; that like ripe fruite,hou mayſt droppe ſecurely into that paſſage, which duely entered into, shall deliuer thee into an eternity of bliſſe, and of vnperishable happineſſe. And yet(my ſoule) be thou not too ſoare agaſt, with the ap rehenſion of the dreadfull hazard thouart in. Lett not a tormenting feare of the dangers that ſurround thee, make thy whole life here bitter and vncomfortable to thee. Lett the ſerious and due conſideration ofthem, arme thee with caution and with wiſedome, to preuent miſcarriage by hem. But to looke vpon them with horrour and aſſrightedneſſe, would freeſe thy ſpirits, and benumme thy actions, 2nd peraduchture engulfe thee through puſillanimity in as great miſcheifes, as thou ſeckeſt to auoyde. Tis true, the harme which would acrue from miſgouerning thy paſſage out of this life, is vnſpeakable, is vnimaginable. But why shouldeſt thou take ſo deepe thought of the hazard thou runneſt therein, as thoughthe difficulty of auoyding it were ſo extremie, as might amounte to an impoſſibility. Iallow, the thoughts that arme thee with viſe caution to ſecure thy ſelfe, cannot be toodeepe nor too ſerious; but vhen thou haſt prouidently ſtored thy ſelfe with ſuch, call thy ſpirits manfully about thee: and to incourage thee to fight confidently, or rather to ſecure thee of victory, ſo thou wilt not forſake thy ſelfe, turne thine eyes round about thee, and conſider how wiſe nature, that hath preſcribed an end and periode vntoall her plantes, hath furnished them all with due and orderly meanes to attaine thereunto: and though particulars ſometimes miſcarry in their iourney(ſince contingence is entayled to all created things) yet in the generality, and for the moſt part, they all arriue vnto the ſcope she leuelleth them at. Why then should we imagine, that ſo iudicious and farre looking an Architect, whom ve ſee ſo accurate in his meaner workes, should haue framed this Maſterpiece of the world, to perish by the way, and neuer to attaine vnto thar great end, for which he made it; euen after he is prepared and armed with all aduantagiouſe circumſtances agreeable to his nature. That artificer, we knov, deſerueth the ſtyle of ſeely, who frameth ſuch tooles, as fayle in there performance, whenthey are applyed to the action for which they vere intended. Ve ſee all ſortes of trees for the moſt part beare their fruite in the due ſeaſon; which is the end they are deſigned vnto, and the laſt and higheſt emolument they are made to afford vs. Few beaſts we ſee there are, but contribute to our ſeruice what we looke for at their hands. The ſwine affordeth good ſlesh, the sheepe good wooll, the cow good milke, the ſable warme and ſoft furre, the oxe bendeth his ſturdy necke to the yoke, the ſpiritfull horſe duryfully beareth the ſoldier, and the ſinewy mule and ſtronger camel conuey weighty marchandiſe. Vhy then shall euen the better ſort of mankind, the chiefe, the toppe, the head, of all the workes of nature, be apprehended to miſcarry flom his end in ſo vaſt a proportion, as that it should be deemed in a manner impoſſible, euen for thoſe few (for ſo theyare in reſpect of the orther numerous multitude of the worſer ſort) to attaine vnto that felicity which is naturall vnto them? Thou (my ſoule) art the forme, and that ſupreme part of me, which giueth being both to me and to my body: who then can doubt, but that all the reſt ofme, is framed ſitting and ſeruiceable for thee ? For what reaſon were there, that thou shouldeſt be implanted in a ſoyle, which can not beare thy fruite? The forme ofa hogge, I ſee, is engrafted in a body fitt and appropriated for a ſwines operations: the forme of a horſe, ofa lyon, ofa olte, all of them haue their organes proportioned to the maſtering picce within them, their ſoule. Andisit credible, that only man, should haue his inferiour partes raiſed ſo highly in rebellion againſt his ſoule, the greateſt Miſtreſſe (beyond proportion Jamong all formes, as that it shall be impoſſible for her to ſuppreſſe their mutinies, though she puide her ſclfe neuer ſo eractly by the preſcripts ofthat rule, which is borne with her? Can it be ſuſpected, that ſi forme, which is infinitely mounted aboue the power of matter, should through the very neceſſity and principles of its owne nature, be more lyable to contingency, then thoſe that are engulfed and drowned in it; ſince we know, that contingency, defectibility, and change, are the lame children of groſſe and miſshapen matter?Alas it is too true, that nature is in vs vnhappily wreſted from her originall and due courſe. We find by ſad experience, that although her de/rauation be not ſo totall, as to blind entirely the eye of Reaſon she ſcethby, yetit is ſo great, as to carry vehemently our aſfections quite croſſe to what she propoſeth vs as beſt. Howſocuer, lett the incentiues of flesh and bloud be neuer ſo violent, to tumble humane nature downe the hill, yet if a contrary force, more efficacious then they withall their tuibulent and miſty ſteames, do impell itan other way, it muſt needes obey that ſtronger power. Lett vs then examine whoſe motiues, the ſoules, or the nſes, in their owne nature, worke moſt efficaciouſly in. man. We are ſure, that what pleaſure he receiueth, he receiueth by meanes of his ſoule; euen all corporeall pleaſure: for, be the working obiect neuer ſo agreeable and pleaſing vnto him, he reapeth thence ſmall delight, ifin the meane time his ſoules attention be carried an other way frim it.Certainely then, thoſe thinges muſt affect the ſoule moſt poverfully, which are connaturall vnto her, and which she ſeſſeth vpon and relisheth immediately; rather then thoſe impure ones, which come ſoſiſticated to her, through the muddy channels of the ſenſes. And accordingly, allexperience teacheth vs, that her pleaſures, when they are fully ſauored, are much ſtronger then the pleaſures of our ſenſe. Obſerue but the different comportements ofan ambitious, and ofa ſenſuall man: and you villeuidently perceiue farre ſtronger motions, and more vehement ſtraines in the former, Who hath his deſires bent to the ſatisfaction of his mind; then in the òther, who aimeth but att the pleaſures of his body. Lett vs looke vpon the common face of mankind; and we shall ſee the moſt illu~Rrious and noble part, taken ith learning, with power, with honour;and the orher part, which maketh ſenſe their idole, moueth them. Since then humane nature is ofit ſelfe more enclined to the contentments of the actiue mind, then of the dull ſenſe; who can doubt but that the way ofthoſe pure contentments, muſt be farre ſwecter then the groſſeand troubled ſtreames of ſenſuall pleaſures: which if it be, certainely man in his owne nature, is more apt to follow that: and when he chanceth to wander out of that ſmooth and eaſy roade, his ſteppes are paincfull and weariſome ones: and if he do not preſently pereciue them ſuch, itis, becauſe it fareth with him, as with hoe that valke in their ſleepe, and ſtray into rough and ſtony paſſages, or among thiſtle; and bryars; whiles peraduenture ſome illuding dreame bewitcheth their fanſycs, and perſwadeth them they are in ſome pleaſant garden; till vaking ſifatt leaſt they wake before they fall into a deadly precipice) they finde their feete all gored, and their bodies all ſcratched and torne. Ifany ſenſuall man should doubt of this great truth, and find it hard to perſwade. himſelfe, that ifitellectuall pleaſures ( which to his depraued taſte, ſeeme cold and flatt ones) should be more actiue and interſe, then thoſe feculent ones, which ſo violently tranſporte him lett him but exerciſe himſelfe a while in thoſe entertainements which delight ihe mind, taking leaue, during that ſpace, of thoſe vnruly ones, hich⸗ gitate the body, and continue doing thus, till by long practiſe, he hath made them eaſy and habituated himſelfe vnto them: and IWill engage my word, that he will find this change ſoaduantageous to him, euen in contentment and delight, that he will not eaſily be brought backe to his former courſe of life. Experience sheweth vs, that whatſocuer is long cuſtomary tovs, turneth into our nature; ſo much, that euen diſeaſes and poiſons by diuturne vſe, do mould and temper to themſelues thoſe bodies, hich are habituated to them in ſuch ſort, that thoſe peſtes of nature muſt be kept on foote, and fed vpon for our ſubſiſtence. HoW much more then muſt the moſt connaturall exerciſe of menrall pleaſure, turne ſo ſubſtantially into our being, that after ſome good practice init, we shall not be able, with out great ſtruggling and reluctation, to liue vithout it? i The violence of fruition in thoſe foule puddles of ſlesh and bloud, preſently glutteth with ſatiety, and is attended with annoy and with diſlike: and the often vſing and repeating it, weareth away ihat edge of leaſure, which only maketh it ſweete and valuable, euen to them that ſx their hartes vponit; and nothing heighteneth it, but an initation by a conuenient hunger and abſtinence. Contrarywiſe, in the ſoule, the greater and more violent the pleaſure is, the more intenſe and vehement the fruition is; and the ofiner it is repeated, ſo much the greater appetite and deſire e haue, to returne vnto the ſame; and nothing prouoketh vs more, then the entire and abſolute fruition of it. Ifa ſuddaine change from one extreme of flesh and bloud, to the other oppoſite pole of ſpirituall delights and entertainements, ſceme harsh him , whoſe thoughts by long aſſuefaction, are glewed to corporeall corporeall obiects lett him beginne with gently brideling in his inferiour motions vnder a faire rule of gouernement: If he can not preſently ſuppreſſe and totally mortify their clamorous deſires, lett him att the leaſt moderate and ſteere them according to the bent of reaſon. If we vill but follow this courſe which nature teacheth vs, to heighten euen our ſenſuall delights and pleaſures, by reaſonable moderation o fthem to their owne aduantage; we shall find her ſo kinda mothertovs, that of her ſelfe she willat length quelle and diſincomber vs ofall our enemies. If wee but temperately attend her worke, she vill quietly waſt vs ouer to our deſired end, to our beloued happineſſe. Ina a yeares, by boyling away our vnruly heate, she vill abate, and in the end quite weare away the ſenſe ofthole tranſporting pleaſures, we vſed to take ſo much delight in the fruition of. With in a while, rheumes will ſo clogge our tongue and palates, that we shall but flatly relish the moſt poinant meates. Our dulled eares will no longer deuoure with delight ,the rauishing ſound of ſweete harmonies. Our dimme eyes vill carry to our heauy fanſie but confuſed newes of any beautifulland pleaſing obiects. Our ſtopped noſethriles will aſford no paſſage for ſpiritefull perfumes, to varme and recreate our moyſt and drowſie braine. In a word, nature will ere long, varne vs to take a long farewell ofall thoſe contentments and delights, which require a ſtrong, vigorous,and athletike habite of body to enioy. S he will shew vs, by ſerting our graues befora our eyes, how vaine this glittering fanſie of honouris: how vnprofitable the ſtaffeof power to vnderproppe our falling being: how more burthenſome then helpefull are thoſe maſſie heapes of gold and ſiluer, which when we haue, the greateſt vſe we make of them, is but to looke vpon them, and court them with our daz⸗led eyes; whiles they encompaſſe vs with armies of traytours and of hungy wolues, to teare them from vs, and vs in pieces for theit ſake. Thus will nature of her ſelfe in a short time, dull thoſe weapons that offend vs, and deſtroy the enimies of thoſe verities that hone vpon vs. Conſge then, my Soule, and neyther feare to liue, nor yet deſire to dy:. Ifthou continueſt in thy body, it is eaſy for thee, and ſee te and contentſome, to heape vp treaſures for eternity. And if thou parteſt fromit, thy hopes are great and faire, that the iourney thou art going, is toa world of vnknowne felicity. Take hart then, and march on witha ſecure diligence, and expect the hand of bounteous nature, to diſpoſe of thee, according as she hath wiſely and benignely prouided for thee. And feare not but that if thou haſt kept a realonable amity vith her, she vill paſſe thee to where thou shalleſt neuer more be in danger of iarring ith her nor of feeling within thy ſelfe the vnkind blowes of contrary powers fighting in thee, whiles thou bleedeſt with the woundes that each ſide giueth; nor of changing thy once gained happineſſe into a contrary condition, according to the viciſſitudes of all humane afſaires. But shalleſt For euer, be ſwelled to the vemoſt extent ofthy inſinite nature, with this torrent, with this abiſſe of ioy , pleaſure, But here ( my Soule) well mayeſt thou ſtand amazed att this great ord Foreuer. What vill this be, when fleeting time shall be conuerted into permanent eternity? Sharpen thy ſight to looke into this vaſt profundity. Suppoſe that halfe an houre, were reſumed into one inſtant or indiuiſible of time: what a ſtrange kind of durance would that be: I ſee that halfe an houre, is diuiſible without end, into halfes, and halſes of halfes, and quarters of quarters; and after myriades of diuiſions, no parcell is ſo litle, but thar it hath an infinite ſuperproportion to an indiuiſible inſtant. What a prodigious thing then muſt it be, to haue an inſtant equaliſe halfe an houre ? Were it but ſome ordinary notion or quiddity, as of magnitude, of place, of actiuity, or the like, in which this excellency of an indiuiſibles equaliſing a large extent, were conſidereds my fantaſy would offer to wreſtle with it; and peraduenture, by ſtrong abſtraction, and by deepe retirement into the cloſet of iudgement, I might hazard to frame ſome likeneſſe of it. But that wherein this multiplication is, is the nobleſt, the higheſt, and the roote of all other notions, it is Being and Exiſtence it ſelfe. I my ſclfe, whiles I am, haue my exiſtence determined but to one poore inſtant of time; and beyond that, I am aſſured of nothing. My ſlender thridde of Being may breake a ſunder, as neere to that inſtant, as I can ſuppoſe any thing to be neere vnto it: and when I shall haue ſuppoſcd, Aere it may breake, I ſtill find that it may lyeake neerer and neerer: and that I can neuer arriue to ſettle the nerel point where it may ſnapp in two. But when time shall be no more; or att the leaſt, shall in reſpect of me, be turned into Eternity ; then this fraile Exiſtence of mine, will be ſtretched, out beyond the extent of all conquering time. What ſtrange thing then, is this admirable multiplication ofexiſtence? or how may I be able to comprehend it? Exiſtence is that which comprehendeth all thinges: and if God be not comprehended in It, thereby it is, that he is incomprehenſible of vs: and he is not comprchended in it, becauſe himſelfe is it. He is Exiſtence: and by being ſo, he equaleth, not comprehendeth it. From hence then Imay gather the excellency and waſt empire of exiſtence, in its owne nature: and ſo conclude how admirable a change and betterment that muſt be, which encreaſeth, and muliiplyeth ſo inſinitely the exiſtence I now enioy: for be it neuer ſo ſpecious; be it neuer ſo glorious; be it what ĩt is, exiſtence, the toppę, the flower, the perfection of all created thinges; ſtillthere is a flaw, there isa defect, a shorteneſſe, a limitationin it: for now, my ſoule, thou art but a part of me; and doeſt exiſt in ſuch a manner by ſucceſſion, that the ſecurity and poſſeſſion of it, is of leſſe then of any thing whatſoeuer in the world; for it is of nothing more, then of an indiuiſible ; which being ſuch, in truh is nothing. But when the walles shall be broken downe, that here confine thee to ſucha nothing of exiſtence, (whichyet is infinitely more noble, then all other degrees of notions) then thou shalleſt ſumme vp time in formall being, and not be limited, as nowthou art, to this ſo diuided a ſucceſſion. Thou shalleſt be an houre ithout diuĩſibility: and if an houre, a yeare: ifſo, an age: and if an age, then for euer, for al erernity. But whither art thou flowne, my ſoule? to what a dazeling height art thou mounted ? Thou art now ſoared to ſucha leſſening pitch, as my faint eyes are no longer able to follow thy touring flight: my head groweth giddy, with gazing vp: whiles thou lookeſt downe, to ſce time runne an infinite diſtance beneath thee; wafting the exiſtences of all corporeall thinges from nothing to nothing, in a perpetuall ſtreame: and thou ſccure, and out of the reach of its venimous and alldeſtroying tooth. Lett me call to minde, all the violent pleaſures of my heady youth: lett me ſumme vp their extent according to thoſe deceatfull meaſures I then rated happineſſe by: lett me in my fancy chew ouer againe the exceſſiue good, I then fondly imagined in them: and to all this, lett me adde as much more ioy and felicity, as in my weake thoughts, Iamable to faddome or but ayme att: and then lett me ſay ſ(and vith rigorous truth I shall ſay it) all this exceſſe of bliſſe, ill be reſumed, vill be enioyed to the full, in one indiuiſible moment: lett me thinke with my ſelfe, if then, when pleaſure was the Idole I ſacriſiced all my thoughts vnto, I might in one quarter of an houre haue enioyed a pleaſure, or att the leaſt, haue hoped for one, that should haue equaliſed att once all thoſe, that in my life Ieuer taſted: what would not I haue beene content to giue in purchaſe of that ſingle quarter of an houre? And inſteed of this pleaſant dreame, I now ſee that one reall moment, will truly and ſolidely giue to thee and me, the quinteſſence, the Elixir of content and happineſſe; not drawne out of ſuch 40 yeares, as I haue ſtruggled through the world in various fortunes; but out ofages and ages of pleaſure, greater farre then can be conceiued by a hart of flesh; and multiplyed beyond the Arithmetike of intelligences. And this happy moment, shall not be of their ſoddaine fleeting and expiring natureathat are aſſigned to time: but shall endure beyond the extent of that time, which ſurpaſſeth all multiplication. I ſee plainely that I muſt multiply eternity by etemity, to frame a ſcantling of that bliſſe, which a well paſſed life in this world, shall bring me to in the next. And yet it will be as farre short, and as much beneath the ſelfebleſſedneſſe of him that giueth one this, as nothing is short ofall that is. For my bliſſe shall haue a beginnings and though it neuer shill haueend, yet that belongeth not to it for its owne ſake, but proceedeth meerely from the bounteous hand of the nothing annihilating ſelfe eſſence: from whom there is no more feare of the fayling of his liberall ſupereſfluence of Beingvpon me, then there is of his owne deſiciency from being ſelfe Being. But how can theſe thinges ſtand together? That indiuiſibly I shall poſſeſſe a tenure beyond all poſſible time? and neuertheleſſe poſiibly, not withſtanding my poſſeſſion, I may be bereſt of what Ienioy ? who can reade this riddle? who can diue into this abiſſe? who can shoote light into this infinite pitte of darkeneſſe? It is the aboundance and exceſſe of light that here ſtriketh vs blind. Who can ſtrengthen our eyes to endure eaglevile this glorious and reſplendent ſunne? Nothing ſurely in this world; vnleſſe it be ſilẽce and ſolitude. To theſe therefore lett vs conſecrate the reuerend contemplation ofthis aweſull myſtery: which is but profaned, ifit be expoſed to vulgar eyes; andto ſuch nightowles and battes as we are, whiles the troubled fantaſies of reeking ſenſe and wordly occupations, do ouercloud our myſty thoughts. Now then ifnature by short and thicke ſteppes att the beginning, and by larger paces in the progreſſe, hath deliuered vs ouer inroa night of pure light, where we can ſee nothing, becauſe euery thing is too vſſible; ſo that we are faine to veyle our eyes, and are conſtrayned to retire ourſelues to medicate and arme them, before we expoſe them to ſo ſtrong and glorious beames: how should we dare to looke vpon thoſe admirable heights (infinitely ſurpaſſing all theſe) with which the ouerconuering Grace hathi crowned and ſwelled vp the extent of nature? What ſęn: is sharpe enough to penetrate into the myſterious eſſence, ſ; prouting into different perſons? Who can looke vponthe ſelfe multiplyed vnity, vpon the incomprehenſible circuminceſſion, vpon thoſe wondrous proceſſions, and idiomes reſerued for Angels eyes? OFf theſe,  my ſoule) whoſe shootinges reach in finitely higher beyond all that we haue ſaid, then what we haue ſayd is beyond the dull and muddy motions of this life; thou art not capable now of receiuing any inſtructions: lett firſt the myſtagogicall illuminations of the great Areopagite; and the Aſcetike diſcipſine ofthe Anachoreticall inhabitants of the wilderneſſe, purify thy eye, before thou attempteſt to ſpeake, or to ayme att the diſcouery of theſeabiſming depths. By them thou muſt be firſt irrigated with the ſweere shoures of morninges and eueninges, with the gentle deaes, and mannadroppes, which fall aboundantly from ihoſe bounteous fauours that reſide in a higher ſphere then nature; and that poure out, vnknowne and vnconceiuable bleſſinges vpon prepared hartes: which fructify into that true bliſſe, in compariſon where of,all that we haue hitherto declared, is but shaddow, vanity, and nothing. MDIEV ROY DE FRANCE S]ET DE NAVARRE, A nos 4] amez & feaux les gens tenans nos Cours de Parlemens, Baillifs, Seneſchaux, Preuoſts, leurs Lieutenans, & tous autres nos Iuſticiers & Officiers quil appartiendra, Salut, Le Sieur Xenelme Dighy Cheualier Anglois, nous a fait remonſtrer qu'ila compost vn Liure en langue Anqloiſe, contenant deux Traitex, lun de la nature du corps, arm de la nature des ames, auec vne recherche de limmortalitt de celles qui ſont raiſonnables. Lequel il deſireròit mettre en lumiere & ſaire imrimer, s'il auoit nos lettres à ce neceſſaires: leſquelſ nous faiſant ſupplier luy vouloir octroyer. A ces cauſes luy auons permis & accordè, permettons & accordons par ces preſentes faire imprimer & debiter ledit Liure pendant ſix ans. Durant leſquels nous faiſons deffenſes à tous Libraires & Imprimeurs de noſtredit Royaume, de Ilimprimer vendre, ny debiter, ſoit ſous quelque marque de dèguiſement ou traduction que ce ſoit, ſans le conſentement dudit ſieur Digby, à peine de trois mille liures damende, confiſcation des exemplaires qui sen trouueront, & de tous deſpens dommages & intereſts enuers luy. Sivous mandons & à chacun de vous enioignons tenir la main à lexecution des preſentes, leſquelles voulons eſtre tenuẽs pour deuẽment. ſignifices, en mettant copie dicelles au commencement ou2 la fin de chacun deſdits Liures. A la charge de mettre ledit ſieur Digby vne exemplaire dudit Liure en noſtre Biblioteque, & vne autre en celle de noſtre tres-cher & feal Chancelier, à peine de nullitè deſdites preſentes. Car tel eſt noſtre plaiſir, nonobſtant oppoſitions ou appellations quelconques, clameur de Elaro, chartre Normande, & lettres à ce contraires. Donnè à Fontainebleau le vingt- ſixieſme iour de Septembre, Ian de grace mil ſix cens quarantequatre, & de noſtre Regne le deuxieſme. Par le Roy en ſon Conſcil, 