General L A WVS Nature and Motion; WVITH THEIR Application toMechanicks. ALSO THE Doctrine of the Centripetal Forces, a6axxn Velocities of Bodies, Deſcribing any of the Conick Sections. Being a Part of the Great Mr. Newton's Principles. T H E Whole Illuſtrated with Variety of Uſeful THEORE MS and PROBLEMS, AND Accommodated to the Uſe of the Younger MATHEMATICIANS. By HUMPHRY DITTON. ſ l LON DON: Printed by T. Mead, for Jer. Seller and Cha. Frice, at the HermitageStairs; and Jobn Seneæ, next Door to the Fleece- Tavern, in Cornhill: Where you may be Furniſd with all Sorts oſ Mathematical The Very INGENIOUS Charles Du- Boi, Ea OF THE city- of Lovnox S IR, A Perſon who comes upon the Account that I do; to return Thanks for Kindneſſes out of the common Road; ; to have anſwer'd his Deſign the more effectualy, ſhou'd have found ſome other Way fort than this. A Man ſeems but poorly to expreſs his Sence of Favours that are altogether extraordinary; when the MeA thod he takes to do it in, has the little Character of being a vulgar and cuſtomary One. Such is a Dedieation: AThing written every Day; by every Pen; and to every Perſon: The ſtanding Compliment, that paſſes upon all Occaſions; and that which inſolvent Debtors (thoſe that woud be juſt) have ever made a Trade of Offering, inſtead of Payment. One therefore that is conſcious of ſo great a Debt (as I wor'd be thought to own by this Addreſs) muſt neceſſarily lie under a mighty Diſadvantage. For neither great Obligations on the one Hand, nor the Acknowledgments of a grateful Mind on the other, can (by any Painting here) ever appear to be what they are. A Man may deſcribe the Favours of a generous Friend, and his own juſt Sence and Reſentments of them too: But after all; be they ever ſo great in themſelves, they leſſem by coming down into this Way of Repreſentatim Notwithſftanding this, the Great Law of Gratitude urges me to obey it: And I have concluded, tis better to do it with ſome Diſadvantages ; than to incur the Guilt of a total Neglect. Be pleaſed then (8æ) to let this ſtand as the Monument of a Gratitude that wou'd have been great: A ſmall and trivial Acknowledgment Iconfeſs: But yet the genuine Product of that, which is allowd to àdd a Value to the moſt deſpicable Things: For ſuch is a ſfincere good Will. Had there been no  Reaſons on my pait; and ſhad Epiſtle Dedicatory. conſiderd only thoſe that are to be drawn from your ſelf; this Book had been inſcribed to You of eourſe, Every Subject that's fine and curious does of Right belong to You: But Philoſophical Matters are peculiarly Tours. In the Midſt of all Your weighty Buſineſſes, Vou find Time to converſe with Nature, to ſo good Purpoſe; that thoſe that know You ſo well, astis my Happineſs to do, are ſenſible Shes fond of Your Acquaintance; and does by very particular Favours bribe You to continuę it. And tho the Liberty I take in aſſerting the Truth may give ſome Umbrage to a Vertue (hich at preſent ſhall be Nameleſs) yet ſo much do I confide in the Protection of Your Temper, that I date venture to enſl flame the Reckoning: Tll confeſq the Crime to be voluntary and preſumptuous, and that Iknew beforehand, how nice and tender You were in this Point. If You (81ꝶ) think fit to carry on ſuch a Deſign, as that of hiding Beauties, which ought to be expoſed to the World: You muſt pardon thoſe People that act ſo good a Part, as to diſcover the Contrivance, and ſo are free as to ſay, tis the only Peice of Injuſtice You can be guilty of. Whatever Vices, Addreſſes of this nature are commonly chargeable with; mine to You, has Two Vertues to recommend it, Truth and Innocence. For tis true in the higheſt Degree, that You have made me Your Debtor; as You do the Reſt of Mankind Your Admirers. Epigie Dedicatory. Nor is it leſs true, that I do with the greateſt Pleaſure ſubſeribe my ſelf, s1n Tour moſt Obliged Friend, And very Humble Servant, VN this little Treatiſe I have endeavourã I to explain that Part of Mr. Newtons Principia, which is Fundamental to the Reſt of the Divine Book; and particularly to the Syſtem of the World. Aud I have all along taken Care to render Things ſo fur plain and eaſie, that they may he underſtood hy all thoſe that will beſlow ſome Application upon them, anà have a competent Share of the neceſſary Furniture, numely Algebra and Conick Sections. Tis entirely oving to the ſtupendious Genius and Sagacity of this Author, that we have any ſuch Theorems now extant in the World, as thoſe which his incomparable Book contaius,. The Difficulties in the Theories of the Heavenly Bodies might have continued a laſting Reproach to the Mathematicks of our Earth, if ſuch a Mind as his had not undertaken to vanquiſh and remove them. The Materials that this Boot is compoſed of, are ſo abſolutely Mr. Newtons Property, that I dare hardly pretend to call amy thiag The PRE FACE. mine. The Principles moſt certainly are all his ovn: And if I have attemptea any here to mae any Uſes of them, or to draw amy Conſequences from them; yet the indiſputable Right that he has to the Former, gives him a liile to the Latter alſo, here they are juſt and gosd. ĩ his is certain, that his Inventions are new and compleat; and equally exclude all the Additions and Claims 7 thoſe that come after. But that I may not be imagind to throv my Miſtates Gf I have committed amy) upon the Great Author, and by ſaying all is his, either be thought to reflect on him, or to deſign to ſcreen, and ſbelter my ſelf: Whatſoever is amiſs and faulty, Itate it entirely upon my ſelf, and declare it not to be the Effect of the Principles that ſhou'a have guided me, but of my ovn Inadvertensy too, and not being guided by them. And as I ought not to have omitted (or ſaid leſs than) this, upon this Head; ſo the ſtricteſt Juſtice, and the Rules of good Manners, as I apprehend the Matter, did both oblige me to ſay what Intereſt he had in this Book, and how many Ways tis his ovn: For tho' there's no manner of Danger in not ovning Mr. Newton's Theorems; and his inventions, in what Hand ſoever they are, will eaſily diſcover and point to their true Author; yet it ſeems at leaſt handſome and deſcent for a Man to tell the Worla plainly when he tates any ſuch Liberties., As for the Reception this Undertaking is like to meet with in the World, I have no Uneaſineſi at all about the Matter. Some People cry down all Rooks of courſe, that are not writ by themſelves, or thoſe 7 their ovn Faction: As others do out of pure Spleen, hecauſe the ill-naturd Subject wou't ſtoop to their Underſtandings. Some People again naturally love to find Fault; their Genius prompts them to ſuarle and cenſure, and they take the ſame Pleaſure and Satisfaction in that, that others do in the very beſt Employments of their Miuds. In a Word, every Man that writes, and every thing thats ritten, runs the Riſque of a Thouſand Cenſures: As many at leaſt, as there are Prejudices, Humours and Fancies to be met with. The Fates of good and bad Books are very often lie thoſe of good and had Men in this World: So uncertain and confuſed, that the true Characters of cither are often not to be known. In Writing as well as in Manners, he that does ill maychance to be commended for't, and he that does ell without a juſt Recompence, ought to remember that many a good Thing has been ſervd ſo before. If any Perſon thinks this Work woi"'d have become his ovn Hand better than mine; Pll eaſily yield that Point to him, For tho a The P RE F ACE. great many that make a Noiſe and a Buſile, can do litile elſe but that: Tet there are ſome that will boaſt and perform too; ſo unlucy a Lodging have their good Qualities gotten I deſire only it may be minded; that my Deſign here, is not to entertain thoſe that are of an advanced Standing in this noble Philoſophy, but to introduce thoſe that od be acquainted mith it, and have as much Mathematichs as is neceſſary to qualifie them for it. And therefore upon ſuch an Acount a Man is obliged to deſcend to a Multitude of little Things, that othermiſc wo”d not le neceſſary, and may ſeem to tate off from th Elegancy of what he does. Toud be an eaſie Matter, either b omitting at firſt, or afterwards taing off, v veral uſeful Superſluities brought in for the Sate of Beginners, to mate Things of this Kind appear, in a more pleaſing Dreſi, eveu to Judges. IEEES ll Farther, To render what I have done more univerſally ſerviceable here at Home, I choſe to make it appear in Engliſh rather than Latin. For if it he granted that Mr. Newtons Diſcoveries are but barely uſeful, theres no Reaſon why a Multitude of very capable Minds ſboud be debarrd from them meerly for want of a Language. But if it be granted (as it will be by all that know them) that they are the fineſt Pieces of Human Knomledge ſtrong, why they ſbowd be put in ſuch a Language as they underſtand. Again, a Man is bound to believe that the Illuſtrions Author deſig d, what he was pleaſed to publiſb, ſboud be enown ; and that not to a few Perſons only who fortunately had the Advantage of an Education ; but to all whom Nature had qualified with good Reaſon, and their ovn Induſtry ith Still in Mathematichs. To think leſs than this, is to ſuppoſe him capable of envying a Part of Mankind the Knonledqe of his Diſcoveries, which wod be no ſmall Affront to a Soul much leſs than hiss Non if there be any that ſvo'd ſuy, tis to leſſin and depretiate theſe ſublime Pieces of Philoſophy to expoſe them to the Vulgar by a Publication in Engliſh: That they ought to be entruſted only with thoſe that have Still and udgmem to mae a right Uſe of them: And lin a Word) that others, by going avay with crude persect Notions; will do themſelves ao Kindneſs, and diſparage the Things they talt of into the Bargain. Thus indeed, I confeſs, do ſome People argue for keeping the Sacred Books in an unknown Tongue : But ve pretend to a Proteſtant Liberty, at leaſt with reſpect to our Philoſophy. And methinks both in the one and the other Caſe;tis unreaſonable that thoſe that woud male a good Improvement; ſho'd be ept in Darſneſs, for the Sake of them, that wou'd abuſe their Light. If a curious Treatiſe ſho”d not appear in the vulgar Tongue of a Country, for fear ſome People ſhou d play the Fool with it, and mate an impertinent Uſe of what it diſcovers: Tuill be very hard to find what Language it ought to be printed in. For tis no unlikely thing that there ſhod be Fools of all Nations and Languages, and is Ten to One but ſome of theſe, do meet with an Author, which ſoever of them all he chuſes. We vainly flatter our ſelves, no doubt, to thint we have ſecured a fine Thing from vulgar Under ſtandings, by putting it into Latin. For we ought to believe that there are Mechanics in Learning, as well as in Traue, and ſome vulgar People that drudge ith Boots, as vell as others with Spades and Hammers. Tnere well if all Men cowd get Still in Languages; but good Senſe and this Sill are very often no Friends to each other, and wor't live together in the ſame Head. And when they are apart, methins, tis no hard Point to determine on which Side the vulgar Underſtanding lies. But.to anſer them that wor't otherwiſe be anſerd; let them conſider in what Language our moſt celebrated Geometry Profeſor, Capt. Halley, has condeſoended to publiſb a good part of his invaluable tons Book of Light and Colours, where ihe rich Treaſures lie exposd alſo in our ovn Tongue. And nov I have done with that Matter: I ſball only add as to 1he Book it ſelf, that, I hope, the Peruſal of it ill neither be unpleaſant nor unprofitable to the ingenious ell qualified Reader. And when he comes to perceive the Uſe and Advantage of theſe I hings, and how they tend to lead him into the moſt profound and pleaſing Speculations of Nature, let him then return his Thanks to the great Genius to whom all this is owing; and if he thinks it fit to allov my Pains any litile Share of his Acknowledgment, he'll make me his Debtor iherehy, and bind me to farther Endeavours for his Service. But th Ihave treſpaſs'd upon the Reader's Patience thus long, I muſt heg his Pardon, if I deſire the Continuance of it yet a litile longer. The Laws deliverd in this Treatiſe relating to the Motions, Forces and Velocities of Bodies, are but very particular and narrov Things, in reſpect of that great and univerſal Law of ihe World, that Motion is eſſential to Matter. The Perſon that advances this ſand paſſes his Word for the Truth oi) is Mr. Toland, who has ritten a large Letter about it, hich may be ſeen in his Boot, entituled; Letters to Serena. And a4 all the great Laws of Nature are capable of many excellent ana profitable Applications; ſo the Uſes of this Principle are ( if e dare believe him) both very many and very great. It's a Clue that mill faithfully guide a Man thro ſome of the moſt perplexd Difficulties in Nature, and enable him to give ſuch Solutions, as cannot be given any other Way. Mr. Toland ſays as much as this amounts to of it; which is the ſume Thing, as if he had ſaid in other Words, That till conduce to the mating Fhiloſophy as little myſterious 4 Chriſtianity ĩt ſelf. How littlè that is, he, perhaps, very well lnows; and hov little Darkneſs this Notion leaves in one particular Point in Phyſics, without any thing of a Perhaps, I am ſure I do knon. For to give a clear and ſatisfactory Account of the Vis Motrix and the Vis Impreſſa; he ſays, That the Vis Motrix is the general and eſſential Action of Matter; and the Vis Impreſſa the particular Determination of that gener al Action. Now, this m ites all the Myſtery of the Buſineſs vaniſhy at once, and the Philoſophers need torture their Heads about it no longer. In a Word, other People may think as they pleaſe, but Imuſt be excuſed, if I pretend to believe, that Mr. Toland is in Jest, and acts a Part. Tis much more civil to ſuppoſe this, I am ſure, than to believe him to be in Earneſt. por when a Man appears to he arm and ſerious in the Management of a Subject, talts a vaſſ deal upon it, ſpeaks witis the laſt Degree of Aſſurance, and, after all, ſays nothing to the Purpoſe: To ſay, He believes mhat he ſays, is to give him the ill Name of a Fool, ana to call him ſenſleſs and ſtupid; which are Terms I woud uſe to no Man. But to iake that Part which I do, is ai moſt but to mate him a little Trickiſbly diſpoſed, and to love ũin a merry Way) to put upon Peoples Under ſtanaings; which Character, perhaps, may ſeem leſs. olipleaſing and diſagreeable io0 Mr. Toland, than ihe former. In Conſidence of this, Iendeavour to juſtific m Surmiſe by the folloving Reaſons. I. Becauſe he tates particular Care to uſe no Argument, but ſuch as he is ſure not to conclude with : And if he does. pretend i0 prove his Point, tis in  suib a Manner as can never poſſibly perſvade the Reader to be aof his Mind. nY ll 2. When he takes Notice of any thing that may be an Objection in his Way, he deals with it in a very Gentleman like Manner; ſoſtly and tenderly, without mating any rude Aſſauli, or offering the leaſt Violence to it. aa :  t & / 4 : l ' : - I u9 r r J - r:  ⸗ / - - 3 ſ l He is no leſi certain to bault his Reader's Expectation, than he is careful to raiſe it: And after he has made very liberal Promiſes, does neither perform them, nor ash Pardon for the Omiſfion. 4. He oppoſes very groundleſs precarious Notions to ſm hæ p u proved, and lays his ovn Opinions without any Reaſons, in the Ballance with Truths that are capable of Demonſtration. j Auid when a Man does ſuch Things a theſe, tis not unreaſonable to ſuſpect, that he is either in Jeſt, or out of his Wits: But the firſt Suppoſition is the more good-naturd and gentile of the Two, and therefore Irather make that than the other. Ellsis Let us nov briefly attempt the Vuſtification of theſe Reaſons alledged. And in order to the first, e may obſerve, that this Gentleman expreſſes his Mind about Motios heing eſſential to Matter with the utmoſt Plainneſs and Perſpicuity; ſo thattis impoſſible to doubt of or miſtate his true Meaning. I hold, (ſays, he Pag. 159.) that Motion is eſſential to Matter; that is to ſay, as inſoparable from its Nature as Impenetrability or Extenſion, and that it ought to mahs a Part of ĩts Deſinition. 4nd (Pag. 161) My only Buſineſs is to prove Matter neceſſarily active, as well as extended. And, to quote no more, he tells us ſPag. 168.) He maintains, that Matter can be no more conceivd without Motion, than without Extenſion, and that the one is as inſeparable from it as the orther. Now, afier he has (in Letter V.) ſpent ſeveral Pagis in diſcourſing upon the uncertain and changeublè State of Vatter every where in the Univerſe; ſhewing, that the Parts of it undergo a Thouſand Viciſſitudes and Alterations, and this in Bodies of all Forms and Textures, even thoſe which. we ſuſpect the leaſt liable to ſuch Changes. Having done this, he comes to gather up all into a Concluſion; and infers after this manner Pag. 202) I think, after all that has been ſaid, I ma}? now venture to conclude, that Ation is eſſential to Matter; ſince it muſt be the real Subject of all thoſo Modifications, Which are calld Local Motions, Changes, Differences or Diverſities: And principally, becauſe abſolute Repoſe (on whieh tho Inactivity. or Lumpiſhneſs of Matter was built is entirely deſtroy’d, and provũ no where to exiſt. No all this is ſo perfectly Foreign to Mr. Tolands Purpoſe, thur vit vf i000 People that ſhodd grant him the Truthof his Premiſes, bv99 at leaſt wo"'d demy that his Concluſion followa from it. Grant that the Parts of Matter every where throughout the Univerſe h? his Proofs do not pretend to reach ſo far) vere in this State of continual Flux and Change. Grant that they undergo all the Removes and Shiftings of Place and Form that he ſpeaks of, and Ten Thouſand more. Let it be taken as a Truth, that there is no abſolute Repoſe, but Motion in all Syſtems of Matter, hoth greater and leſs: And after all, I ſuy, Quid Colligis inde? Will it follo, that this Action is ſ the Eſſence of Matter, and that Matter cat be Matter without it? By no Means in the World. Mr. Toland cant but lnow, that tis no good Arguing to ſuy, this Thing is ſo in Fact, therefore tis naturally, neceſſarily, eſſentially ſo, and impoſſible to be otherwiſe. I find this Thing may be predicated of this Subject, and therefore the Subject ca't exiſt, cav't be defivd, can't be conceivd uf without it. If this ere allovable, a Man might infer a Multitude of Things that are notoriouſly falſe and abſurd, and which all Mantinã will grant to be ſo, at the firſt Hearing. And therefore I noud hope I need not quæſion but he mas avare of it, and took this Methou of provingouly to ſhew, that, however hae was. pleaſed to banter, he did not believe hãt he ſuid to be true. v .:xyD ? l ll -r a 5 n. f . In In the next Place, as to his Way of treating Objections, we ſball find him ever curiouſly obſerving the Motions of a Difficulty towards him, and by prudent and ell contrivd Steps getting out of the Reach ont. For Inſtance, The Buſineſs oſ the different Specifick Gravities of Bodies equal in Bulk, heing urged to prove a Vacuum, from whence the Inactivity of Matter wou'a be fairly inferPd. Mr. Toand rates Notice of it Pag. 183.) and as it deſerves a Reply, ſo he beſtm an Anſer of Two whole Pages upon it. He returns, That a Man that urges this, muſt ſuppoſe Levity and Gravity not to be meer Relations; the Compariſons of certain Situations and external Preſſures: But that they are real Beings, and abſolute inherent Qualities, which is now by every Body exploded, and contrary to the Rules of Mechanicks. Here now is the Solutions: From whence he diverges immediately as far as the original Chaos it ſelf, where he ſus, That there cod be no Gravity or Levity; and, That theſe Qualities wholly dend on the Conſtitution and Fabrick of the Univerſe. 4s for the Chaos it ſelf, he affirms, The Notion of it is as confuſed and monſtrous, as the Import of the Name; and built in every Step on Suppoſitions that are not only arbitrary, but utterly falſe and chimerical. Nor that he woi'd he thought to affront Moſes, or derogate am thing from the Scripture, which ſpeaks of a Chaos expreſly; but only coming thus far, to be at the greater Diſtance from à Vacum, he added this by, vay of Ecucidation and Enlargement. Now, had he had any real Spite at the Argument, he wou'd not have gone to telling a Tale of this, and that, and the other Thing that a Man muſt ſurpaſe that urged it; for tha?s meer Trifling: But preſently endeavour d to have ſbewn, how this Fact, which is plain and undeniabte, viz. That Rodies of equal Magnitude have different Specifict Gravities; how this, I ſuy, either had not been ſufficient to infer a Vacuity; or elſe how his Dactrine of the Eſſential Activity of Matter might notwithſtanaing have been maintain'd. This had heen fair and cloſe to the Purpoſe, whereas what he does is very remote and far from it. Tis not a Jot to the Matter in Hand (as to the main Reſult) what Gravity is, or what it depends upon; if it he true and certain in Nature and in Fait, that Bodies of equal Bull are thus unequally heavy. For this will manifeſtly infer, that the Quantity of Matter iu the One cannot be ſo great as that in the Other; neither is the Conſequence to be avoided, but by running away fromt, as he does. 2 '  aib ; The PRE F ACE. Again; As to the old Argument for Vacuity, that without this a Body mov'd by anether wou'd find no Place nor Room to betake it ſelf intoo. To this he anſuers (with his wonted Moderation towards all Objections;) For you, (ſ4s he to the Opponent, Pag.178) to ſpeak in this Manner, is not only to have the ſame groſs Conceptions with your Farmers, but alſo to ſuppoſe the Points B and C, and all, or moſt of the Points about them, to be really fixX'd and in abſolute Repoſe. But then the main Spirit of the Anſer is bebind ; for he tells him, That if he ſucceeds in proviug the natural, eſſential, intrinſick and neceſſary Motion of Matter, then all ihoſe Difficulties will m and appear to be nothing. Whicly is as muh as to ſay, He ll let the Argument alore for this time, but the next time he takes it in hand he intends it ſpall not come off upon. ſo eaſie Terms. So that he fairly diſcharges it for the preſent, and bids it expect ihe Reſult of his having prov'a Motion eſſential to Matter. And perhapy this is more Civility than cod have been expected from any Man but Mr. Toland. Another Perſon that had confrouted an Objection in this Manner wou'd hardly have parted with it without making one Attack at leaſt; whereas he contents himſelf with beſtowing a ſmal Threatui ng upon it, and ſo lets ĩt go without any farther Harmm. But farther yet: Tis worth taking Notice how little Deſign to ſatisfie, there appears, in his Method of illuſtrating Difficulties, as well as anſering Objections. Now his Way of doing this is, to mate the very Expedient that is to remove one Difficulty, involve Two or Three more thaut are equally puzæeling. For Inſtance ſPag. 176.) he tells us, That to believe the Activity of Matter will clear up all dark and doubtful Points about Avacuum. For ſſays he) as thoſe particular or limited Quantities which we call ſuch or ſuch Bodies, are but ſeveral Modifications of the general Extenſion of Matter in which they are all contain'd, and which they neither increaſe nor diminiſh; ſo all the particular Local Motions of Matter are but the ſeveral Determinations of its general Action, directing it this or that Way, by theſe or thoſe Cauiſcs, in this or that Manner, without giving it any Augmentation or Diminution. Nov were Mr. Toland very ſerious, an intelligent Reader wou'd think he deſigd to affront his Underſtanding by ‘em ſuch a Thing as this to him for the Solution of a Difficulty And who co”d do leſi, to ſte a Man cunningly top a Notion upon him (while he pretends to inform him) that is ſo abſolutely precarious and obſcure, as his tions? They are the Modifications of the general Extenſion, and the general Action of Matter. But how is this made out ? Why My. Toland ſays tis ſo: But if Mr. Toland ſbod ſwear tis ſo, and curſe all Mankind into the Bargain that won't believe him, till never paſs for a Truth, for all that, amongſt People that are guided by Reaſon. Ought not he to have put it paſt Diſpute, that particular Bodies ere no more than ſo many Modifications of the general Extenſion of the Univerſe, before he had aſlumã it to ſolve a Difficulty wiihal ? Or if hè had done it any where aftervards, it wou'd have been ſufficient.  But never to do it, and yet to ſuppoſe it, is to beg his Point in the moſt ſordid Manner imaginable, and to trifle with his Reader unpardonably, if he were not in VeſtI now ell enough that the Notion of Infinite Matter is a Darling with him, anũ that he may poſlibly truſt to this, for the Proof of this Definition of particular Bodies. But I alſo lnow well enough ihat the Notion b Infinite Matter may be infinitely falſe and abſurd, for amy thing he has u to prove the Contrary. And whereas he ſeems to be trying at it ſPag. 213, &.) tis evident to any one (that can ſee when a Man preſſes on an Argument with Courage, and when he does it timorouſlty) by the Doubtfulneſs of his Prollll -Q 9 & > >  4/~ The PRE FA CE. ceeding, how much he ſuſpected ihe Infirmity of. bis Reqſoning upon that Head. However, there needs no more to he ſaid; for (Page 215.) he ſets the Infiniteneſs of Matter upon the ſame Foot with the Eſſential Activity of it, and he before too Care to offer no more than a Paralogiſim for the Proof of that Doctrine. In the next Place; What Performances he gives his Reader Encouragement to expect from him, may he ſeen at Pag. 159. where he ſpeaks of no leſs Things, than accounting for. the ſame Quantity of Matter in the Univerſe, proving that there can he no Vacuum, ſolving all the Difficulties ahout the Vis Motrix, mith a great many more beſides theſe. And all this from the Principle of the Eſſential Activity of Matter: Nay more than that, he affirms that this Principle alone can do it. But if. any impartial Reader can find, that he has either eviuced the Eſſeutial Activity of Matter; or that he has fairly accounted for theſe Difficulties, or any One of the whole Number; or that he has (much more) ſbewn that no other Principle can do it, but that alone; Ill then heg his Pardon for aſſerting that he has not. In the mean time, I can't tranſcribe his whole Book, but every Reader that will take the Pains may ſee whether I am in the Right or no. ll Laſtly, He mates no Scr uple of ſeiting any of his ovn unprovd precirious Opinions, in Competition ith Things that have convining Proof and Evidence of their ſide, and are univerſullyown to be ſuch. Tis a Point that Mr. Newton has ſet paſt all Diſpute, that the Weights or Gravitating Forces of Bodies at equal Diſtances from the Center, are proportional to the Quantity of Matter in them. But with Mr. Toland this is yet a Controver ſie---Leaſt I engage my ſelf in a Diſpute ſſ4-5 he) about the Nature of Gravity, as whether the Weight of Bodies be proportional to the Quantity of Matter, &. Pag. 207. Again; Tis a Truih ſufficiently clear, that ihe external Preſſures of the Atmoſtphere and Ether, have nothing to do, as cauſes either iu whole or in part of ſuch an Effect as Gravity in Bodies; therefore external Preſſures can be of no Setm to the Producing ſuch an Effect as the different Specificl Gravities of Eodies. But he is pleaſed to declare his Opinion to he othermiſe, and allov Preſſure a Share in that Phenomenon.---Tho their Specifick Gravities (ſpeaking of Corſ, Lead, Gold, and the litey be ſo diſferent from each orher; proceeding partly from external Preſſures, and partly ſrom thoſe internmal Strũctures and Modifications, which give their common Matter thoſe various u Forms Forms that conſtitute their Species, &c Ibidl. This (ſays he) is my own Opinion, whatever be my Reaſons ſor it. Which is admirably well ſaid; and perhaps he knen mell enough why he ſboid keep his Reaſons to himſelfl. But however; this very Paſſage alone is enough to juſlifie my Surmiſe, that Mr. Toland woad he thought to banter. For to offer an Opinion that tharis a Matter of Demonſtration, and ſ4y, I believe thus and thus whatever be my Reaſous for't, is almoſi the ſume Thing as to ſay, I am in Jeſt. In ſhort, Mr. Toland appears to me, to manage the Point much after the ſame Manner with Lord Peter in the Tale oſ a Tub. The One calls a brovn Cruſt, Mutton and Claret; as the Other does Fancy and Paralogiſm, Reaſon and ſound Philoſophy. Both appear grave and ſerious in what they. do and ſay, and agree iu acling an impoſi _v apon the Sences, i ornt§æ on the Underſtandings of thoſe they talt to, The Difference is, that One ſears to the Truth of what he ſays, and the Other is ſo modeſt as to pavn his Word forPt,. Tho there's no queſtion but Peter might have ſome Reaſons too lying by him, to prove what he ſaid to be true: Only (like this Gentleman) he was not pleaſed to produce them. Tuas ſufficient for himto ſay, Tis myReſolution, that sa which looks like a brown Cruſt, is really hat I have told you, whatever be my Reaſons for't. But Peter's Mutton and Claret as certainly never more like a Piece of a brovn Loaf, than Mr. Tolands Philoſophy is like Paralogiſm. The Reſemblance is ſuch, that I doubt not, he has or will ſind, tis univer ally taen for the very ſame Thing in the World. I ſball ſay no more; but only that I hear, ſome Queſtions ill ſbortly be propoſed to him upon the Buſineſi of Real Space. For my own Part I have nothing to do with that Point, and as much as I value the Yudgments of ſome that defend it, in other Matters, cannot ſubſcribe to them in this. I do believe, as mell as Mr. Toland, that many of thoſe Gentlemen firmly believ'd the Exiſtence of a Deity. But I ſ0 velieve too, that Infinite neceſſarily- ſlf-moving Matter æa ſerve to entertain an Atheiſt, as well as Aſmighty Space. It remains only now, for me to return my humble Thants to the Reader, and bid him, Farewell. E the Lemma (at Pag.138.) and take the wholc Proceſs *for the Inveſtigation of the following Theor. 4.) thus. Uſing all the Symbols as in the Lemma, from the Nature of the Circletis YY=2 RX—XX, and yy=2ræ xx; alſo D=2RX, and ar. But at leat D and d are coincident with A and ⸗, and X, æ withx, æ; ſo that then we haxe A =2r%, and æ = 2ræ, therefore x: A 2r 27 Reader may come to the Theorem, without the Aſiſtance of the Lemma, which gives the laſt Ratio of the Subtenſe of the Angle of Contact to the conterminal ArchThò the Lemma it ſelf too be containd in the Proceſs; for ſince A=2ꝶxX, and à =2x, therefore if 2R=27, then X: æ:: A: à as Directions are given ꝑri the Reading of i i in the Errata. . Q. E. I. Inthis manner, ſay, the ALL Bodies will gurſbvore; in their State of Reſt, or uniform direct Motion, unleſs they are compeld to change that State by m Force impreſyq upon them. LAW II. The Alteration of Motion is ever proportional to the impreſ”d Force (that cauſes it,) and the Direction of it is in the ſame Right Line with that, according to which the Force is impreſd. La IIi Reaction is ever equal and contrary to Action; or the Actions of Two Bodies upon one another are always equal, and have contrary Directions. From theſe Laws the Illuſtrious Author deduces the following Corollaries. VFirſt CoROL LARY to the Lous of Motion. Body will deſcribe the Diagonal of a Parallelogram by Two ſeveral Forces combid, in the ſame Time that it would deſcribe the one or the other of thoſe Sides by the one or the other of thoſe Forces ſeparately D E MO NSTR AF ION Suppoſe a Body cou'd deſcribe the Line AB (FIG. I) in the Time T, With the uniform Motion M; and in the ſame Time, the Line AC, with he uniform Motion N. Compleat the Parallelogram, and draw the Diagonal AD. The Diagonal AD ſhall be deſcribed by theſe Two Forces thus combind in the ſame Fimeè T: For the Force N acting with the Direẽtion AC, parallel to BD, cannot change the Velocity of the Motion towards: BD, the Body therefore will be carryld 10 the Line BD in the ſame Time T,; whether the Force N be impreſũ or no; thereſorè at the End of the Time T it will be found ſomewherè in the Line BD. In like manner, the Force M acting with the Direction AB, parallel to CD, cannot change the Velocity of the Motion towards CD: Therefore the Body will be carryd to the Line CD, in the ſame Time T, whether the Force M be impreſ”'d or no; conſequently at the End of the Time T it will be found ſomewhere in the Line CD. Therefore ſince at the End of that Time it will be found in both theſe Lines BD and CD, it will certainly be found in D their Interſection, that is in the Diagonal QE. D. From hence ariſe the following T heorems T H E O R. I. The Forces by which the Sides and Diagonal of a Parallelogram are deſcribed, are proportional to, and may conſequently be expounded by thoſe Sides, and that Diagonal reſpectively. For the Motions being uniform by the Hypotheſis, and the Times of the Deſcription (both of the Sides and Diagonal) being provò to be the ſame by the foregoing Demonſtration, the Spaces deſcribed ſhall be as the Velocities by Law II. or as the Forces to which theſe Velocities are proportional reſpe&tively. Therefore (putting the Force in AD=G) it will be G. M:: AD. AB and G. N:: AD. AC hii G. Mꝶ : AD. ABVAC. T u E O R. II. 1If a Body with a Force proportional to AD deſcribes the Right Line AD, the Motion, and Direction of that Motion will be the ſame as if the Body had at firſt been impel'd by Two Forces, acting according to the Directions AB and AC, and proportional to thoſe Lines. Therefore any Motion, tho in it ſelf ever ſo ſimple, ma?? be conſidered as compounded of others, aud (from this Principle) may be reſolved in10 them. T u æ o 8. III Suppoſe the Parallelogram as before, and a Body to be held immovable in the Place A by Two equal Forces acting with contrary Diręctions; the one tending from A to D, and the other from A to L. I ſaytis the ſame thing as if it were held by Three Forces acting with the Directions from A to L, from A to B, and from A to C. For the Force AD (by Theor. II.) is equivalent to the Forces AB and AC. Therefore, if the Body be held immovable by the Forces, whoſe Directions are AD and AL, it will be held by the Forces acting with the Diręctions AL, AB and AC. T H E O R. v A Body being thus held immovable by Three Powers; thoſe Powers are one to another directly as the Lines that are drawn parallel to their reſpective Directions, and terminated at the Point of their mutual Concourſe. For ;y Theor. I.J the Powers acting with the Directions AD, AB, AC are in Proportion as thoſe Lines AD, AB, AC reſpectively taken; that is, as the Lines parallel to the Directions, and terminated at their common Interſection. Tn E O R.V, T herefore any Two of theſe Powers are to one another reciprocally as the Sines of the Angles which their Lines of Direction make with the Line of Direction of the Third Pover. Thus the Power M (Whoſe Direction ] is AB) is to Power N (whoſe Direction is AC) as AB to AC or BD, that is (becauſe in any Triangle the Sides are proportional to the Sines of the oppoſite Angles) as the Sine of the Angle ADB or CAD, to the Sine of the Angle DAB. Now CAD is the Angle which the Line of Direction of the Power N makes with AD the Line of Direction of the Third Power; and DAB is the Angle which the Line of Direction of the Power M makes with the ſame Line AD: Therefore tne Powers are as the Sines of thoſe Angles reciprocally. Thus alſo the Power G (hoſe Direction is AD) is to the Power M; as the Sine of the Angle BAC, is to the Sine of the Angle DAC, that i is, as the Sine of the Angle ACQ, or the Sine of the Angle ACD C(the Complement of the Former to the Two Right Angles) is to the Sine of the Angle pac; b 3s, as AD to D. i General COROLLARIES. C O Re I. A PForce acting with any given Birection may be ſiewn to be equivalent to an infinite Number of Forces acting with different Directions. For one and the ſame Line may be the Diagonal of an infinite Number of Parallelograms. Thus the Force in AD in the Paraln lelogram (FIG. II.) ABCD is equivalent to the Forces in ABand AC, and in the Parallelogram AGDH the ſame Force is equivalent to the Forces in AG and GD, and ſo of infinite others. Alſo ſince the Sides of the Parallelogram ABCD may be made the Diagonals of an infinite Number of others, the Force in CB may be ſnown to be equivalent to an infinite Number of other Forces. For Example; Make the Side AC the Diagonal of the Parallelogram FAEC, and then the Force acting according to the Direction CB will be equivalent to the Forees acting according to the Directions CF, CE and CD; and if CD be made the Diagonal of the Parallelogram CEDI, the ſame Force in CB will be equivalent to the Forces acting in CE, ClI, and double the Force according to the Direction CE, and ſo continuing to make the Sides of theſe laſt Parallelograms the Diagonals of others, and ſo on infinitely, the Force in CB may be ſhown to be equivalent to an infinite Number of Forces acting with different Directions. C o r. II. Let M, N expreſs the Sides of one Parallelogram, and A, B the Forces reſpectively, of which thoſe Sides are the Directions, and by which they are deſcribed: Let m, æ expreſs the Sides of another Parallelogram, and ⸗, b the Forces. Alſo let the Diagonal common to both be D, and the Force whoſe Direction is in that Line be F. Then (by Theor. L. A-l B. F: MN. D, and 4Vh. F:: mn. D. Therefore AB B: ab:: MN: mn. That is, the Sums of the Forces i in the Sides of thę Two Parallelograms, are directly as the Sums of the Sides.Likewiſe (from the forementiond Theovem, becauſe A: F:: M: D, and B: F:: N: D. and  conſequently AXD=FxM, and BD=FV, therefore AxD BXD = FXM—FxN; that is AB: F:: MN: D. And ſo for the other Parallelogram, it may be ſhewn, that 2_4bV F:: m-n: D. Therefore (by Equality of Proportion) AB: ab:: MN: mu. That is, the Diſferences of the Forces in the Sides of the Two Parallelograms, are directly ⸗ ãs the Differences of the Sides. lll C o rR. IIL Let the former Symbols ſtand as before: only let m, n, now expreſs the Sides of a Parallelogram, whoſe Diagonal is unequal to that of the former; and let this Diagonal be put =d, and the Force by whichtis deſcribed be put =f. Alſo let it be D: à:: F: f. Then (by Theor. .) AB: F:: M-N: D, and aVb: fi: mtn: a; therefore Al B: æl b:: N. mn. It - alſo be proved in like mamnes, as in Cor. II. that AB: 2mb:: M—N: m So that tho the Parallelograms have mmequ Diagonals, yet thoſe Diagonals being deſcribed by uniform Forces proportional to the Lengths of them; the Sums or Diſferences of the Forces, that deſcribe the Sides of thoſe Parallelograms, ſhall be directly proportional to the Sums or Differences of the Sides themſelves. C o r. IV. ſn every Rectangular Parallelogram, the Force in the Diagonal is equal in Power to the Forces in the Sides. This is Theor. II. of Galileu?s 4th Mechanich Dialoguè. The following Problems relating to this Matter may here not improperly be ſubjoind. P æ O I To find Parallelograms having a common Diagonal, in which the Sums or Diſferences of the Forces (by which the Sides are deſcribd) ſhall ſtill be equal to one another, or be expreſs'd by a ſtanding Quantity. According to the Tenour of C. Il. let the Quantity M-N be the Tranſverſe Ax of any Ellipſe, and D be equal to the double Excentricity, or to the Diſtance of the Foci from one another. Alſo Iet M, N be Two Lines drawn from the Foci to any one and the ſame Point in the Curve, and m, n Lines drawn from the Foci to any other Point in the Curve. I ſay, that the Lines M, N, and m, n, are the Sidę;s, and that D is the common Diagonal of Two ſuch Parallelograms as are required. For from the Nature of the Ellipſe, M--N is =mn perpetually; and therefore A-B=4Vb ever alſo, by Cor. II. Q E. I. If the Differences of the Forces were required to be a ſtanding Quantity, and ſuch Parallelograms were to bè determin'd. Then let MN = the Tranſverſe Ax of any Hyperbola, and D= the Diſtance of the Foci. Then from the Nature of this Curve, MN ſhall /=mn, and conſequently A-B= aVb perpetually. P R o3. II. To find Parallelograms having unequal Diagonals, in which the Sums or Differences of the Forces, with which the Sides are deſcribed, ſmall ſtill be equal, or T be expreſvd by a ſtanding Quantity. According to the Tenour of Coroll. III. let MN be the common Tranſverſe Ax of any Two Ellipſes, in which D and 4 are the Diſtances of the Foci; D for one Ellipſe, and 4 for the otherr. Then if M, N, and m, n expreſs Lines drawn from the Foci to any Points in the Two Curves (that is, M, N from the Foci of the one Ellipſe to any Point in that Curve, and m, n from the Foci of the other Ellipſe to any Point in that Curve) I ſay, that theſc are the Sides, and the Focal Diſtances the Diagonals of ſuch Parallelograms as are required. For ſince M-N is æmxn perpetually (from the Nature of the Ellipſe) therefore alſo, according =a1b. QE: I. So if M—N were the common Tranſverſe of Two Hyperbola’s, in which the Diſtances of the Foci were D and 4, then M, N, and m, n being Lines from the Foci, as before; the Parallelograms will be ſuch as is —-— And MN being ever=mmu from the Genius of the Hyperbola, A—B ſhall=a4/V, that is, the Diſferences of the Forces ſhall be al ways equal. Pæ o B. II. To find Parallelograms jviug cither equal or unequal Diagonals, in which the Sums or Diſferences of the Forces with which the Sides arè deſcribd, ſnhall ſtill be in any Ratio aſſign'd. Let the Ratio aſign'd be that of ꝓ. 4. C AS5 E I. Let the Parallelograms be requird to have equal Diagonalss Put the Tranſverſe Ax of any Ellipſe or Hyperbola—T, the Parameter=L, the Tranſverſe Ax of any other Ellipſe or Hyperbola=t, and the Parameter =Il. Tis manifeſt, that in order to the ſatisfying the Demands of the Problem, the Ellipſes or Hyperbolas muſt be ſo proportion'd to each other, that their Tranſverſe Axes may be in the Ratio aſignd, and their Focal Diſtances equal. One Ellipſe or Hyperbola therefore being given, whoſe Tranſverſe and Parameter, Tand L, are known:  ſay, that anotherſ Ellipſe whoſe Tranſverſe Axr is 2 Tq, and its Parameter Im , _v r j T Ly ; or another Hyperbola, ? nhoſe Term T g4 and i its Parameter r T Ly m ſã 5 theſt 2 Elipſs or theſe r ar Hiperbola 5 ſal pave he Conditions required, and the: Parallelograms (whoſe Diagonals are the Diſtances of the Foci, and whoſe Sides are the Lines drawn from the Foci to any Points in the Curves) ſhall be ſuch as will anſwer the Demands of the Problem. The Demonſtration of which is eaſie: For ſince the Square of the Diſtance of the Focus from the Center, is in the Ellipſe = =to the Difference, and in the Hyperbola = to the Sum of the Squares of the Semitranſverſe and Semiconjugate; therefore in the Two Ellipſes or Hyperbola's, if the Diſtances of the Focus from the Center in one be put equal o that in another, we have this Equation TLT=rI1 for the Ellipſes, and TV LT=r 11t for the Hyperbolas. From whence L and T being given in the one, and alſo t in the other, the Parameter ſ of that other may be found, and the Value of it will be ſuch as is determined above. For becauſe tis 5 q, and conſequently Given; therefore the Value of I will be expreſęd all in the Terms of the Given Quantities L, T, p, 4. Laſtly; Becauſe the Tranſverſe Axes are in the Given Raãtio of ) toq, by the Hypotheſis; and the Sums or Differences of the Lines from the Focito the Curves are equal to the Tranfverfe Axes from the Nature of theſe Sections, and therefore ever in the ſame Ratio of : q; and becauſe by Cor. II) the Sums or Differences of the Forces are ever proportional to the Sums or Difſerences of the Sides (which are the Lines drawn from the Foci to the Curves:) Therefore the Sums or Differerces of the Forces ſiall always be i in the Given Ratio of ?:  q Q: E: D. c A5 E I. Let the Diagonals be required to be unequal. If T be the Tranſverſe of one Ellipſe or Hyperbola, then Tq ſhall be that of the other. And if the Diſtance of the Foci in one Ellipſe or Hyperbola be D, and that in the other be à theſe being the Diagonals, and the Lines drawn from the Foci to the Curves being the Sides of the Parallelograms: If the Diagonals be deſcribd by Forces proportional to their Lengths, the Porallelograms thus made ſhall be ſuch as are requiredl. The 3d Corollary (with thoſe ſo often mentiond Properties of the Conic Sections) demonſtrate this without any further Trouble. The Points A, B, F, D, 6. m being given, tis required to determine the Point Cin the Right Line HB &iven in Poſition;) ſo that compleating the Rectangular Parallelograms ABCI, DCFE, the Time of deſcribing the Oblique Path ACF (which is the Sum of the Diagonals) may be the leaſt poſſible; or (we may propoſe it thus) that the Sum of the Forces with which the Diagonals AC and CF are deſcribed, may be the leaſt poſſible. Here I ſuppoſe the Sides IC and CK to lie in a Right Line: Alſo that the Body, by ſome Cauſe or other, does at the Point C receive another, and difęrent Direction of its Motion, and a Change of its Volocity. In a Word, that whereas before it came to the Point C, it movd in the Diagonal AG, i it aſterwards moves in the Diagonal CF, making an Angle as GCF with the former. Put ACæ. CFv. BCx. AB=d. FD=b. DB=c. Therefore DCcx. Note, That the Points A and B are given; therefore ABis a given Quantity. So becauſe F and D are given, the Line FD is ever the ſame; and likewiſe DB is invariable. As for all the reſt Ctis evident) they are flowing Quantities. Let m be the Time in which ACis deſcribed, and r the Velocity in the ſame, n the Time in which CF is deſcribed, and s the Velocity; which Velocities I ſuppoſe to be the ſame in all the Points of the Lines AC and CF reſpectively, and conſequently the Quantities 7 and s to be ſtanding ones. From the common Principles oF Mechanicks, tis evident, that m. n:: æxs. rxv. That is, the Times are in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratio of the Spaces, and reciprocal Ratio of the Velocities. Alſo, if m, n, expreſsd Forces, and r, 5, Reſiſtances, then the Forces woud be in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratio of the Spaces, and the direct Ratio of the Reſiſtances. Therefore if s denotes the Reſiſtance in AC or æ, and r that in CF or v; then one and the ſame Expreſſion ſhall ſerve with Reſpect to both theſe Ways of propoſing the Problem. Therefore (in one Suppoſition) the Time in which the whole Space ACF is deſcribed (or the Sum of the Forces in the other) will be as æ-. BUt from the Rectangular Triangles we have =x7xVda t andv/hc 2cVææ 33 Ther , Therefore the Expreſſion comes to this æxxddt x Tca2cæVææ?; which Expreſſion is to be determind to a Minimum: Therefore working by the admirable Method of Hluxions, v we ſhall find s xxæ?2V7 x axx ædat : æ+ ũi than is, s x x = r x. From whence xcxx:: v I z, sæ " Therefore if the Points A and F be ſuppoſed to lie in the Circumference of a Circle of which C is the Center; that is, if ACæCF, then it will be x. æ:: r. s. And conſequently if the Line DB be divided in C, To that BC: DC, as the Velocities in the Diagonals AC, CF directly, or as the Reſiſtances reciprocally; that is, if the Sines of the Inclinations of the Diagonals AC, CF to the perpendicular ICK, are in either of theſe Ratio;, then the inflex'd Path ACF ſhall be deſcribed in the leaſt Time, of all that are in like manner comprehended between any Two Lines drawn from the Points A, F, to any Point in the Line DB, or (with Reſpect to the other Way of propoſing the Problem) the Sum of the Forces with which the Two Diagonals AC, CF are deſcribed, ſhall be he leaſt Poſſile. QE. I Tocarry this on a little farther; If 71, that is, if (the Body meeting with nothing at C to retard its Motion) the Velocities in AC and CF be the ſame; then æ. æ:: æ. v. In which Caſe EC will be coincident With LC, which makes one Right Line with ACC. Alſo LH being perpendicular to BD produced, the Point D becomes now coincident with H. The Triangles ABGC, LCH therefore are ſimilar. For BC being=x (as before) CH is now a, and BHZ=c. But tis found, that . æ:: æ. v. that is; BC. CH:: AC. CL, and the Angles ACB and LCH are equal; therefore, &c. From hence making HE  LH, the Triangle HEC will be equãl and ſimilar to HLC, and alſo ſimilIar to ACB. Now if the Body (moving in the Direction AC) inſtead of paſſing on in the Right Line CL, were reflected at the Point C, then ſince the Velocity continues ſtill the ſame (the Direction only being changed) in the ſame time that it would deſcribe CL, if it went on directly, it will deſcribe a Right Line æto CL in its reflexd Motion. But from the Equality and Similarity of the Triangles HLC and HEC the Line CE is = CL, therefore it will deſcribe CE.. But the Angle HCE is / (HCL=) ACB; therefore the Body will be refiected ſo, that the Angles. of Incidence and Reflection ACI and ECD ſhall be equai. N. B. Iabſtract here from all the Imperfecti ons of Matter, and ſuppoſe the Body perfectl; Elaſtick, and the Obex firm. IS CH OL If AC were ſuppoſed to be a Ray of Light, the Theorems found would be thoſe Two celebrated ones in Dioptrichs and Catoptrichs, upon which thoſe Sciences are built. And DS, CB, which are the Sines of the Inclinations of the Diagonals FC, AC, to the perpendicular ICK, would be the Sine of the refracted Angle, and the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, if DCB ere the Surface of a different Medium From whence thoſe Sines would be as the Velocities in the Two Medium:, by what was found above, and as Mr. Newton has ſown Prop. 95. Lib. 2. But this only in Tranſitu. The general Principle concerniug the Compoſition of Forces ſhall now be apply d to ſeveral Problems in Mechanichs /4 Figa tuæ P æ OB I. To allign the Proportion of a Stroke made with any oblique Direction upon a Plane, to one made with a perpendicular Direction, the Body moving in both Directions with the ſaume Degree of Velocity. Sips the Bodys Direction (FſG. I.) to be in the Right Line AD, and that it ſtruck upon the Plane DF at the Point D. Let fall AF perpendicular to FD, and compleat the Parallelogram FDAG. The Motion of the Body in the Line DA is equivalent to Two other Motions whoſe Directions are AF and AG, by Theor. II. But the Motion whoſe Direction is AG is of no Significancy as to the Stroke upon the Plane DF, for GA being parallel to DF, the Body moving with that Direction would never meet the Plane. Therefore the Force by which the Body moves in AD, being as AD; that by which it ſtrikes upon the Plane, is as AF. But if it moved in a perpendicular Direction, and with a Force proportional to DA, the Quantity of that Stroke would be expounded by that Line DA. Therefore the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke is to the Magnitude of the perpendicular one, as FA: DA, that is (making DA Radius) a Radius to the Sine of the Angle FAD. /v t ~  i ' à Cox The Angles of Obliquity upon the Planes being equal, the oblique Strokes are direẽtly proportional to the perpendicular ones, how unequal ſoever the Velocities (with which the perpendicular Strokes are made) be. Thus in the Rightangled Triangle ACB(FIG. IV.) the perpendicular CD being let fall; ſinco ABC/ ACD, therefore the oblique Stroke with the Direction AB upon the Plane BC, is to the perpendicular Stroke made with the ſame Velocity, as the oblique Stroke with the Direction AC upon the Plane CD, to the perpendicular Stroke made with the ſame Velocity with this oblique one. For (by the Prop.) the oblique Strokes are to their reſpective perpendicular ones, as CA: AB, and as AD: CA; but (from the Elements) AD: CA:: CA: AB, therefore the oblique and perpendicular Strokes are directly The oblique Stroke made upon the Sides of any Rectangle, with equal Velocities, and with the Direction of the Diagonal, do anſwer reciprocally to the Forces that deſcribe thoſe Sides, and by the Compoſition of which the Diagonal is deſcribd. For (FſG. I.) the Quantity of the perpendicular Stroke upon the Sides AF, AG, being expounded by the Diagonal DA, the oblique ones made upon the ſame Sides with the ſame Velocity, and the Direction DA, ſhall be as FD and DG. The Force by which the Diagonal is deſcribed being expounded by DA, the Forces in the Sides AF, AG ſnhall be as DG and FD. So that the Magnitudes of the Strokes, and the Forces do anſwer reciprocally to ons , anotherhr. . Bũ A ; / u l O li | \ Hſ.. iæi BS | ilũ TEE ) aI2u4 lili i 2 EXI Co xæ m A Bod moving with equal Velocities 1 in n Lines of Direction of equal Length, but unequally enclind to Two Planes;, the Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes ſiall be directly as the perpendicular Altitudes of the Lines of Direction. Thus (IG. IV.) if KCæKL, the Strokes with theſe Directions upon t the Vlanes CD, LE, ſhall be as KD and KE. For the oblique Stroke upon CD, is to the perpendicular one, as KD: KC; and the oblique Stroke upon LE, is to the perpondicular one, as KE: KL. But the perpendicular: Strokes (being made with the ſame Velocity) are equal, and KC7EL by the Hypotheſis; therefore the Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes, upon thoſe Planes, are as KD and KE directly, which are the Altitudes of the Lines of Direction. A Body moving with the ſame velocity in one and the ſame Line of Diredtion, which is unequally enclid to Two Planes (meeting at the ſame Point) the oblique Strokes made upon theſe Two Planes ſnall be directly as the perpendicular Altitudes of the Line of Direction. The Line of Direction being KG, FIG. IV.) lIet the Line GH be drawn, maEing the Angle AGH, with the Line AG; alſo let KA, KH be perpendicular to the Lines AG, HG. The Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes made with the Direction KG, upon the Planes AG and HG, ſhall be as KA, KH directly; which is eaſily deduced from what has been ſaid. \ Lines of Direction of unequal Length, and Inclinations to a Plane, but equally high; the Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes are reciprocally, as the Lengths of the Lines of Direction The Lines of Direction being KG, KIPſG. IV.) let HG be drawn, ſo that the Angle AGH may be=IKG, and Iet fall the Perpendiculars KA, KH as beforee ?Tis evident, that the Angle KGH is  the Angle KIA. Therefore (by Cor. I.) ſince the Angles KGH and KIA are equal, the oblique Strokes made with the Directions KG and KI, upon the Planes HG and Al ſnall be directly proportional to their reſpective perpendicular Strokes. Conſequently, if the Body moves with the ſame Velocity, and ſo the perpendicular Strokes be equal, the oblique ones upon the Planes HG and AI, with the Directions KG, KI, ſhall be equal. But by the laſt Cor.) the oblique Strokes made in the Direction KG, upon the Planes GH and GA, are directly as HK: AE, that is (from the Similarity of the Triangles HKG, AKI) as EG: KI. Therefore the oblique Strokes made with the Directions KI and KG upon the ſame Plane AG, are alſo as KG: KI; that is reciprocally as the Lengths of the Lines of Direction. C o r. VI. Therefore univerſally oining the Accounts of Cor. III. and V. together) any oblique Strokes made by Lines of Direction neither of equal Lengths, nor equal Altitudes, are in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratio of the perpendicular Altitudes, and the reciprocal Ratio of the Lengths of the Lines of Direction; Ex. 2.  ———cer——— L 27] the oblique Stroke upon the Plane CD, with the: Direction KC, is to that upon the Plane AI with the Direction KI, as DEæIK: AKXKC. And from hence I infer, that (univerſally ſpeaking) the Magnitudes ofany Two oblique Strokes made with the ſame Velocities, are in Proportion directly as the Declivities of the Lines of Direction. For the Declivities of any Two Lines are univerſælly as the Altitudes directly, andthe Lengths reciprocally. By Prop. a cha 2. of Dr: hudbi Michaiisti liuait C o r. VII. If a Circle: were carrigd thro the Points A, C, B,  IG. IV.) the oblique Strokes made upon the Planes CD, NV, with the Directions of the Chords AC, AN, woud be- directly as the Squares of the reſpective perpendicular Strokes upon the ſame Planes. For, with reſpect to the Plane CD, the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke, is to the Magnitude of the Perpendicular, as AD: AC. Likewiſt with reſpect to the Plane NM, the Proportion of the Strokes is as AM: AN. But from the Nature of the Circle, AD: AM:: ACl: ANY. There: fore, &c. With reſpect to the Planes CD and BC,; the oblique Strokes made upon them, with the Directions AC, AB reſpectively, woud be directly proportional to. their correſpondent perpendicular Ones. For the Triangles ACD, ABC are ſimilar, and the Angles ACD, ABC (Which the Lines of Direction make with the Planes) are equal: Therefore this Proportion of the Strokes holds all over the Circle. With reſpect to the Planes AN and BC, the oblique Strokes made with the Directions AO, and BO, are alſo directly proportional to their correſpondent perpendicular Ones. For the ſame Reaſon as the laſt. A C o r. VIII. If a Body ſetting out from the Point A (FIG. V.) moved in the Directions AF and AD, with an equal Degree of Velocity; the Proportion of the oblique and perpendicular Strokes woud be as before; viæ. as AF: AD. Let fall the perpendicular FC from the Point F to the Line AD. If the Body moving with a Velocity, as AD; ànd in a perpendicular Direction, ſtruct the Plane at the Point D, the Magnitude of the direẽt Stroke at that Point, woud be expounded by AD, and that of the oblique Stroke in the Direction AD, woud be expounded by AF. Likewiſe, if the Body moving with a Velocity, as AF, and in a perpendicular Direction, ſtruck the Plane at D, the Magnitude of the direct Stroke at. that Point would be expounded by AF, and that of the oblique one in the Direction AD, would be expounded by ACby Cor, I.) for AD: AF :: AF:AG. But the Magnitude of the direct Stroke i is the ſame, whether it be given at the Point D with a Velocity as AF, or at the Point F with a Velocity as AF. T herefore the Proportion of the Stroke; remains the ſame. The oblique Stroke (FIG. V.) made in the Direction AD, is equal to a direct Stroke (made with a Velocity as much Ieſs than that which the Body moves in AD; as AF is leſs than AD.) For the oblique Stroke is to the dirett one made with the ſame Velocity as AF: AD. Now any Two direct Strokes made by the ſame Body are one to another, as the Velocities with which the ſtriking Body moves Therefore if theſe Velocities be as the Lines AF and AD, then the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke ith a Velocity as AD, is equal the Magnitude of the direct Stroke with a V elocity as AF: Or, which is all one, the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke with a Velocity as AF,is cqual the Magnitude of the direct Stroke witha Velocity as AC. LE M M A. If a Body, deſcending by the Force of its Gravity, ſtrikes upon a Plane; let the Line of Direction be either oblique or perpendicular to that Plane; the Magnitude of the Stroke is the ſame, as if the Body had moved all along in that ſame Direction, with a Degree of Velocity, equal to that which is gotten b the acelerated Motion, at the Point where the Line of Direction meets the Plane. l OR moving BoOy and the Line of Direction; being each the ſame, nothing but a diferent Velocity in ſtriking upon the Plane can make any Alteration in the Magnitude of the Stroke. But whether the Body moves with an equable or with an accelerated Motion, the Velocity with which it ſtrikes upon the Plane is the ſame, if the Velocity of the uniform Motion be equal to that gotten by the accelerated, at the Point where the Line of Direction meets the Plane. Therefore, &c. Q: E: D. THEOR. æ T H E O R. I. r]à ie Body mves in the Directions an, AF, from the Point A, by the Force of its Gravity, FIG. V.) the Meagnitude of the Stroke made with the oblique Direction AD, ſball be to that made ie with the DiP75 a æ àF: aD. OR (by the foregoing Lemay the Strokes made with the oblique and perpendicular Directions, are the ſame as if the Body had moved uniformly all along, with a Degree of Velocity equal to that gotten by the accelerated Motions, at the Points where the Lines of Direction meet the Plane. But the Velocities gotten by the Deſcents) at the Points F and D, where the Lines of Direction meet the Plane, are equal (by what is ſiewn in Galilau?s 3 Mechanick Dialogue. Therefore the Strokes are the ſame, as if they were made in thoſe Directions, with equal Veolcities in uniform Motions. And therefore (by what has been already ſiewn) the Stroke by AD, is to that by AF, as AF: AD. OE: D. C o r. Therefore where the Body deſcending in the perpendicular Direction AF, acquires a Degree of Velocity, as much leſs than that which it acquires by the Deſcent thro the whole Line AF, (or which is all one, by the Deſcent thro AD) as AF is leſs than AD; Iſay, where it acquines ſuch a Degree of Velocity, ; there the diret Stroke made upon a Plane dràwn thro' that Point, arall}èl to FD, ſnall be equal. to the oblique Stroke mãde in the Direction AD upon the Plane FD; the Body in both Caſes moving freely by⸗the Force of its Gravity, as was ſuppoſed in the Theorem This is demonſtrated i in all Reſ pedts like the 9th Carol. of the e ſoregoing Problem. From hence we may eaſily ſolre the ſollowing Problem v iſ v A Body moving by the Force of its Graviy in the Direction AD #IG. V.) tis required todetermine the Point i in the perpendidular Direction AF; ſo that the Magnitude of the direct Stroke made upon the DPlane H, by the Deſcent thrò the Line AK, ſhall equal the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke upon the Plane FD, by the Deſcent thro AD. Ake AEZAC, and cut the Line AF ſo in T the Point H, that AF, AE, AH, may be continual Proportionals. The Point H ſhall be that required. Let v æ the Velocity acquired by the Deſcent thr AH, and V=that acquired by the Deſcent thro the oblique Line AD; and W that acqtired by tbe Deſeot thro' AE.By ihe Conſtruction AF: AE:: AE: AH, therefore AFà: AE:: AF: AH, and AF. AE:: VAF: v AH, that is ſſince AE = AC) AF: AC:: VAE: / AH. Now (b7 what Galileus has demonſtated Thior.2, Dial. 30 W. u:: 3AE: VAH, that ĩs, the Velocities are in the ſubduplicate Ratio of, the Spaces run, by Equality of Proportion, therefore W : v::1AF: AC. But the Velocities g9tten by ſhè Deſcents. thro the Lines AF and AD are equal, by a Propoſition of Galilauss quoted already) that is WV, therefore V: v:: AF: AG; bnt AD: AF:: AF: AC, therefore V: u:: AD: AF. That is, the Velpcity gotten by the Deſcent throo AD, is as much greater than the Velocity gotten by the Deſcent thro' AH, as AD is bigger, than⸗AF. Therefore (by the forgoing Corolar; the Magnitude of the direct Stroke made with the Velocity gotten by the Deſcent thto' AH upon the Plane CH, ſhall be equal to the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke made with the Velocity gotten by the Deſcent th1o? AD upon the Plane FD. Q& E: D.  Gomg back by theſe ſĩmę Stens; onè may thus determine the Point H: That the Poſnt H maybe ſuchas is requirted,/nũ ſ It muſt be V: v:: ADAF 4B the forenmeũll vrViv: AF AC- Stioã Corollaty. From the Lav But it isW: v:: / AF: V AH of Gravity. And v is / W  Demntruim Thereſore it is alſo V: v:: VAF: V AH Therefore it muſt be VVAF: V AH:: AF: AC That is, it muſt be AF: AH:: AF: ACq or ũif AEEAC) it muſt be AF; AH:: AFa: AE Therefore putting AEZAC, the Line AF muſt be divided ſo, that AF, AE and AH may be connui⸗ Proportionals QC:E: . : v. a Bo&y deſcending by ihe Force of its Grvity n any Direction, whether perpendiasular or oblique) ſtrites upon parallel Planes, 2ithe Magnitudes of the Strokes ( whether ii Vrect or oblique) ſbal he directl proportional to the Times of the Body S Deſcent in v a Directions.  LET the Body deſcend in the Direction AF IG, V.) perpendicular to the Horizontal Lines HC, FD.  The Strokes made upon the Plangs ſlõ; FD, after the Deſcents thro AH, Dæ arę ãus the Veinaties with which they are nade; that is, as the Velocities gotten by thoſe Deſcents. But the Velocities (from the Nat ure of uniformly accelerated Motion) are proportional to the Times: Therefore, &c. Q: E: D. C AS E II. Let the Body deſcend in the oblique Direction AD. The Strokes made upon the Planes HC, FD, after the Deſcents throo AC, AD, are to the former dire Strokes upon the ſame Planes as AH, AF, to AC, AD, by the foregoing Theorem. Therefore the oblique Strokes are directly proportional to the diręct ones, ſince (from the ſimilar Triangſes) AH: AF:: AC: AD, Therefore they are alſo as the Times of the perpendicular Deſcents, by the former Caſe. But (by Theor. llI. of Galilauss 3 Mechanict Dial.) the Times of Deſcent thrò AC, AD, are to the Times of Deſcent throAH, AF; as the Lines AC, AD, to the Limes AH, AF. Therefore the oblique Strokes upon the Planes HC, FD, are alſo directly proportional to the Times of the Deſcent of the Podxi in the Directions Ac, AD, Q E: D : / C ò x. H The Strokes either oblique e or : direẽt, made upon the the Planes H:, FD, are as A/ AH, and  AF, or as V AC, and V AaD, or, which is all one, they are as the Ordinates (of a Parobola) Belonging i; the Atſeiſſ- AH, AF reA B deſeending by the Force f its  Grivin in Lines of Direction of equal Length, but unequally enclin'd to Two Planes; the Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes ſall be to one another directly as the ſquare Roots of the Cubes. of the perpenaicular Altitudes a the Lines f Directionn. T ri ET (FIG. vL) KCKL, and a Body deſcending in thoſe Directions, ſtrike upon the Horizontal Planes CD, LE. Draw KDE perpendicular to the Horizon, and conſequently ſo to each of thoſe Plaues. Let D expreſs the Magnitde of the direct Stroke made upon the Plane LE, O the Magnitude of the oblique one, à the direct Stroke upon the Plane CD, and o the correſpondent oblique one. Then à: o:: KC: KD And D: O:: KL: KE But : D:: V: ED: V: KE ſt of 3BY Theor. I. Therefore o: O: ED/æD.  KEXV KE, KC K L. But KL=KC, by the Suppoſition, Therefore o: O::  KDE. KEE, that is directly as the ſquare Roots of the Cubes of the Altitudes. of the Lines of Direction.  vrt 2i T H E O R. IV. ll 4 Boiy dening ty the Fors o ts Graviys in a Line of Direction, hich is unequally enclind to Two Planes (meeting the ſame Point) the Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes given upon theſe Planes, ſnall he directly as the perpendicular Altitudes of the Line ] of Direction. ET (?IG. VII) the Body deſcend in the L Direction KG, and ſo ſtrike upon the Næ GA, GH, making the Angle AGH. Let A be perpendicular to the Horizontal Line GA; and KH be perpendicular to the enclind Line GH. The Strokes made by any accelerated Motions are the ſame as if they were made by equable Motions in the ſame Directions, ten by the accelerated Motions, at the Points where the Lines of Direction meet the Planes (by the foregoing Lemma?7 But ſince the Planes AG, HG, meet the Line of Direction KG in the ſame Point G; the Body falls upon both Planes with the ſame Degree of Velocity, viz. that which is acquired by the Deſcent through KG. Therefore the Strokes made on the Planes AG, HG, after the Deſcent, are the ſame as if they were made in the ſame Direction, and upon the ſame Planes, with one and the ſame Degree of Velocity, in equable Motions. But if they were made with the ſame Velocities in equable Motions, the Stroke upon AG would be to that upou HG, asKA: KH (by Cor- IV. Prob. ILO Therefore the Strokes a are in the ſame Proportion now; that is, directly as the Altitudes of the Line of Direction abgrę the hli Planes. n E; D. i . a Body doſeonding y the Forue f its Grauityin Lines of Direction of unequal Length auniInclinations to a Plane, but equally high; the Magnitudes of the oblique Stroes ſhall be reciprocally as the Lengis of the Lines of Direction. I LE the Body (T6. VIL) deſcend i in the Directions KG, KI, and let the Angle AGH=IKG; then ſhall the Angle KGH=KIA. Now becauſe the Velocity gotten by Deſcent thro KI, is equal the Velocity gotten by Deſcent thr KG, (by a forementiond Theor. of Galilauss) and becauſe the Angle KIA is æ KGH; therefore the Stroke with the Direction KIupon GA, is equal the Stroke with the rection make the ſame Angles with the Planes, and the Bodj falls upon them with the ſame Degree of Velocity. But (by Theor. IV.) the Stroke with the Direction KG upon GA, is to the Stroke with the ſame Direction G upon GH, as KA to KH; that is (becauſe of the ũmilar Triangles HEG, AKI) as KIto KG. Therefore alſo the Stroke with the Direction KG upon GA, is to that with the Direction KI upon GA, as KI to KG; that is reciprocally as the Lengths of the Lines of Direftion - & E: D T H E o x. vI Univerſily A To cligu Site; given 4vby a Body, deſtending by the Force of its Gravity, are in the Ratio compounded of of the direct Ratio of the ſquare Roots of ctmhe C ubes of the Altitudes, and the reciprocal Ratio of the Lengibs o i Hi im of Direction. i This is demonttated yu the Third m Hiũ Theorems. N. B. In like : mainer we may demonſtrate Theorems for the Quantities of Strokes, when the Motions are performd according to any other Law of Acceleration; as when the Velocities are in the Duplicate, riplicate, or any pther Mnliplicate or Sub-multiplicatèe æario of the Times: Concerning which ſee Dr. Walivs Prop. . Cap. 10. De Motii Projectorum. But ſuch Motions as theſe not being any where found i in Natore, e i paſs over that Speculation. l s C H O IL The Proportions eliting u to the Buſ neſs of Percuſſion, already provd in the Corollaries of Prob. l. may be aptly enough computed by a general Calculus, afeer this Manner. Let D. à expreſs any direct or perpendicular Strokes. V. v. the Velocities with which they are made reſpectively. O. o. the correſpondent obliqie Strokes, made ith the ſame Velocities as the perpendicular ones. H. h. the Hypothenuſa or longer Sides that expound the direct Strokes. P. ). the ſorter Sides or Perpendiculars (from the Lines of the obſique Directions to the Planes upon which the Strokes are made) which expound the oblique Strokes. M. m. the Magnitudes or Bulks of the ſtriking Bodies, which we ſuppoſe to be Homogeneal. And Iet it be obſervd (Which I mention here once for all) that all the Quantities ęxpreſſd by the great Letters do belong to one another, and ſo likewiſe thoſe expreſ'd by the little ones. Thus d expreſſes the direct Stroke made by the Body whoſe Magnitude is m, its Velocity v, the hiique Strohe made by the ſame o, the Line that expounds that direct Stroke h, that which expounds the oblique; 7. And ſo of the others. It's obvious, that if M=m, then D: 4at: V: v; and if V=v, then D: 4:: M: m; ſo that univerſally D: d:: MxV: mxv; the  Magnitudes of any Two direct Strokes are in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratios of the Magnitudes, and the Velocities of the moving Bodies. Therefore if D=4d, then MxV= mxv, and M: m:: v: V; if the Magni tudes of the Bodies be reciprocally ãs the Velocities, the direct Strokes hai be equal. Again, D: O: H: P, and à: o:: h: P, (by the ę5nerd Thofound at Prob. l Sbui univerſally D: à:: MxV: ma, therefore MxV: O:: H: B and mxv:  h Iẽ and conſequently O: o:: MxVXP: 4] m univerũly. That is, the Magnitudes f: any oblique Stroes are in the Rario compounded of the direct: Rario of the perpendienlar Strokes, the direct Ratio of the Aaltitudes, ànd the reciprocal Ratio of the Lengths of the Lines of Direction. Therefore if MxV=mxv, ithat is if D 4, thenO: 5 EE pxb piH, that is,the oblique Strokes are in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratio of the Altitudes, and the Reciprocal of the Lengths of the Lines of Direction; as was demonſtrated at Cor. VI. If = tn ò: o: ibit H, which vas Ihewn at or. V. If HEæbh, then O:o:: P: , which was provd at or. In æſæ r  that is if P: ?i:  H: h, that is, if the Rectngula Triangles be ſ milar (and ſo the Angſes of the Lines of pr upon the Planes be equal) then O: :: (Mxv: mxv::) D: à, as was demonſtrated at C. I. and cxemplified in ſome particular Inſtances at Cor. VII. Laſtly, To find an oblique Stroke equal to a direct one made witha Ieſs Degree of Velocity, that i is, the oblique Stroke O equal to the direct Stroke d. Tis clear, that 99,.I D  but and D Mx V, thereſore Mv ; conſemxu H mv _ O: ài: ritlſ HAm*v univerſſy. Therefore ifiit be the ſame Body, that is; if MZm, then O: à:: PxV: Hxv; conſeq́iuently, if O=4, then PxVæ Hxv, or P: H: :9:V. That is an oblique Stroke is æ toa direct /one, made with a Velocity as much leſs than thut with which the Body moves in the oblique Direction; as the Perpendicular P is leſs than the Eyptmꝶ H, hichi is Cori IX. To carry this on to Strokes made by Motions uniformly acclerated: Let us reaſſume the univerſal Analogy before laid down, viz. D: d:. MxV: mxv. Where it needs only be noted, that the Quantities V. v. which before expreſę'd the uniform Velocities in equable Motions, do how expreſs the Velocities gotten by the Deſcents ũin accelerated Motions) at the Points wherè the Lines of Direction meet the Plane. By Theor. I. theſe Analogies' hold good in the Caſe of accelerated Motions too; uiz. D: O:: H: P, and à: o:: h: p. And thereſore (as was ſiewn in the Caſe of equable Motions in the foregoing Calculus) MXV: O:: H: P, and mxv: o:: bæp. But rom the known Law of Gravity) tis V: æt 7* he Velocitiès are in the Subduplicate Ratio of the Lines of: Deſcents) therefore MxPE: O:  H ?P, and mt Lo: hp Therer fore O: o: Mæ. t  univerãlly- That is, the Magnitudes of any  o oblique Strokes are in the Ratio compounded, of the direct Ratio of the Bodies, the direòt Ratio of the ; Powers of the Altitudes; and the reciprocal Ratio of the Lengths of the Lines of Direction. Therefore 2 p?4 if M/m, then O:enꝗſi i ' ; which was the Sixth Thsrem forgoing It P=P; then o: v t . l SEA as was demonſtrated at Theor. V. If H æb, then O: o:: Pè: , as vas ſiewn at Theor. III. iæ/t, that is, if P: ꝓ:: H: h (that is if the Rectangular Triangles be ſimilar, and conſequently the Angles of the Lines of Direction upon the Plane be equal) then it will be O: o :Ph p8, or O: o:: H: :hæwhich was the Coroll. of Thear. II. Alſo becauſe V: u.: P3: , therefore O: o:- V:v9 but (putting T,t,the Times of Deſcent) ’tisV: v:: T: t (from the Nature of uniformly acclerated Motion) therefore O: o:: T: , which was Caſe II. of Theor. ll. and the firſt Caſe will be as eaſily deduced in like manner. Laſtly; To find an oblique Stroke equal to a direẽ one made with a leſs Degree of Velocity, I proceed altogether as in the Calculus for the like Caſe, in the Hypotheſis of uniform Motions, and ſo come in general Terms to this Concluſion (there inveſtigated) that O=d, when Px V=Hxv; that is, when P: H:: u: V. And this is the Corollary to Theor: I. about Motions uniformly acclerated. And why I may by the very ſame Steps advance towards the Concluſion, in the Caſe of acclerated Motions, that Idid in the Caſe of equable Motions, Idare preſume is evident to any one, that conſiders but the foregoing Leinma, and the Theorem that immediatety ſucceeds it. But now to work more particularly and directly to determine whereabouts a heavy Body in its perpendicular Deſcent ſhall acquire ſuch a Degree of Velocity, as to make a direct Stroke equal to an obliqne one; that is, where O ſnall æd. Its plain, ò5 but (by Theor.1.) o P D H already) and .  & the Law of Gravity) and Dæ what hæ been hewn ſ pDpPi Therefore O 2 h 55 . conſequently O: à:: Pb. Hxp:. Therefore when O=. then PlHxpt, and ſo P: H::)?: P2. Thereſore if FIG. V.) we put AFmP, and AD=H, then) (AH the Length in the Perpendicular that is ſought) muſt be ſuch, that AF: AD:: VAH: VAF. But AF: AD:: AC: AF, therefore AH or  muſt be ſuch, that AC: AF:: V AH. V/ AF. That is (puttiig AEEAC) we muſt have AEĩ: AF:: AH: AF, or AE = AFxAH, and ſo the Lines AF. AE. AH muſt be continued Proportionals; which was the Conſtruction before proposd. And the Amount of it is no more than to Iet fall the Perpendicular CH from the Point C, which determines the Point H that was ſought; ſince'tis certain (from the ſimilar Triangles) that AF: AG:: AC: (or AE) AHI Q E: I. S C H O L. Il. Having at Theor. Il. made ſome Comparim between the Times of a heavy Body's Deſcent, and the Magnitudes of the Strokes made upon a Plane after thoſe Deſcents; ,it may not be amiſs to purſue that Matter a little further, All the Symbols ſtanding as in the foregoing Scholium; let T, t, expre ſs Timesof hiiiis in the e oblion Lim H. h, Tis certain, that vhe then O: o:'h: H mn cor- 5But alſo when I P= n then By Theor. 3. T:t: Hi  Gialil. 3d Bial. Therefore in this Cae the Quantities of the oblique Strokes are reciprogally as the Time: o uc uũ l&t i1r/ a. 5n- ten O 0:: p * Theor:3. Bu alſo uhen H=l, then T Ix By Theor. 4 Thereſore i in ihis cal; e Qantities of the obliqne Stroes are reciprocally as the Cubes o the Times of Deſcent., i 3. When neither H=l, then univerſally O: v:  opt im yThen: s But tis alſo ; mverly T liit 5Hæps: npE Galil. So that the Magnitudes of the oblique Strokes are uni verſally in the Ratio compounded, of the Reciprocal, and the Triplicate Reciprocal Rat io of the Times of Deſcent; that is, Reciprocally as the Biquadrates of them. And this Rule may be laid down as an univernl one to expreſ Ihe Proportion in ines, viz. The Quintitie; of Strokes madę: ubon Curves, may be comptited as well |s thore upbn right Lines. For the stroke upon hiy Point of a Curve is the ſame: with that' upon a Fangent at the ſame Point: Since the Declivity of a Curve ãnd its Tangent are the ſamè at the Poin of Conta&. Prop. 15. c4.⸗ oF DY. wati thanichs. ũpon this Heat therefore I thi x T à 20x VII. In ac ircle, the oblique Strote made upon the Curve at any Point s E (FIG. VIII.) ith the Direction of the Ordinate to that Point FE; is to a direct Stroke made at the ſame Poim, and with the ſume V elocity (which I every where lunste ) as the or dinate FE to the Radius EA. Etting fall FH perpendicular from F to the Tangent ME;tis plain by what has been ſewn, that the oblique Stroke upon the Plain ME, with the Direction FE, is to the direct one as FH: FE. But the Stroke upon the Tangent, and the Curve is all one at the Point of Contact E; the oblique and diret Strokes therefore upon the Curve are as FH and FE. But the Triangles FHE, AFE are ſimilar; and FH: FE:: FE: EA. Therefore, &c. Q E: D. C o r, I The oblique Stroke upon the Curve at E, with the Direction FE, is to the direct Stroke at the ſame Point; as the oblique Stroke upon the Plain at A, vith the Direction EA, is to the diret Stroke at the ſame Point A. For both Proportions are that of FE: AE. C o r. ũl The oblique Strokes made with the ſame Velocity upon the ſeveral Points of the Curve, and with the Directions of the Ordinates; are one to another directly as thoſe Ordinates, or as the Sines of the coreſpondent Arches. Thus the oblique Stroke at E, is to that at C, as the Sine of the Arch LE, » the Sine of the Arch LC. 3Et The oblique s Strotes made an Curve. T à pParabola, vith ihe Direſtions of the Din meters of that Parabola; are ever in the Subduplicate Ratio of the direct Strokes. Et GE be any Diameter of the Parabola BGH IG. IX.) whoſe Axe is BL, Vertex B, Focus D. Conceive a Stroke made in the Direction EG, upon the Curve at G, or which is all one, upon the Tangent GA at that Eoint. Draw DC perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent; likewiſe EF perpendicular to the ſame from the Point E. By what has beęn hitherto ſiewn, the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke at G is to the Magnitude of the direct one, as FE: GE. But from the Nature of the Parabola, the Angle FGE is always = CGD, and thoſe at F and D are right ones by the Conſtruction; therefore the Triangles FGE; and CGD are always ſimilar. Therefore ſince FE: GE: : CD: DũG, the Magnitude of the oblique Stroke, is to that of the direct always as CD: DG. But from the Nature of the Parabola DG is ever as. CDI, that is the Diſtance of any Point in the Curve from the Focus, is e ver as the Square of the Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent at that ſame Point ( which Property our Celtbrated Author demonſtrates at Lem. 14. Sect. 3. Lib. 1. and which we ſhall afterwards give the Inveſtigation ofi) Therefore the oblique Strokes are ever in the Subduplicate Ratio  of the direct ones. Q: E: D. t C o æ. I. Tis maniſeſt that the ſame Proportion holds with reſpect to the oblique Strokes made vith the Directions of Lines, drawn out of the fo. C o r. II. x the dire& Strokes be made with the ſame Velocity and ſo be equal, the oblique ones ſhall be equal all over the Parabola. For they are ſtill in the à Ratio of the direct ones; and to be ever in any certain Ratio of Equals; is to be always qual. T a æ o æ IX. If the Curve in FIG. IX. nere either of the other Conick Sections, one of whoſe Foci were D, as before, and the other Focus were at the Point E (falling either ithin or without the Section) the Proportion of the direct and oblique Strokes made upon the Curve wou'd be as before, viz. as the Diſtance from either Focus to any Point in the Curve is to a perpendicular from the ſume Focus, let fall upon ihe Tangent. at that Point. Ts needs no Demonſtration But then, as in the Ellipſes, the Perpendicular from the Focus to a Tangent at any Point is ſtill in leſs, and in the Hyperbola ſtill in more, than the à Ratio of the Diſtance of that Point from the Focus (of which we may have Occaſion to ſpeak more hereaſter) ſo in the former Curve will the oblique Strokes (made with the Directions of Lines drawn from the Focus) be ſtill in leſs, and in the Hyperbola ſtill in more, than the à Ratio of the direct ones. But I ſnall iow proceed to the Rrglionim⸗ of the Mechanich Powers. Fig 10.,. 5°5 i BSE PR O3. I A Bo&y being ſuſtain d V a Poner atting with any given Direction) upon an enclind Plane; tis required to fiud the Proportion ii the Power to the Weight of the Body. ET the Weight A (FIG. x.) be held upon the enclid Plane HF, by a Power acting with the Direction AB. Let AE be perpendicular from A (the Center of the Body) to the enclin'd Plane, and produce it to C in the Horizontal Line HG. Draw CB (perpendicular to HG, or parallel to FG) to cut the Le of Direction in B: And Laſtly, (to conmpleat the Paraliclogram) draw the Lines CD and AD, parallel to AB and BC reſpectivelyThe Body now is to be conceivã as ſuſtaind by Three Powers (one of whichi is equivalènt to the other Two) one, the Power, whoſe Direction is AB; the other, the Force of Gravity, whoſe Direſion i is AD; and (in he Room of) the third, the Reſiſtance or Contranitence of the Plane, whoſe Direction is AC perpendicular to itt. Therefore (by the third general Theor. after the Lams of Motion) the Power at B is to the Force of Gravity, as the Sine of the Angle CAD, to the Sine of the Angle ACD; that is, as CD: DA. GE: I. C o R. I. I i If the Line of Diretion AB were parallel to the enclind Plane HF; then the Angle CAB would be a Kight one, for AC is perpendicular to HF. Conſoquently the Rectangiilar Triangle CAB, will be ſimilar to the Rectangular Triangle FGH. From thence AB: BC:: (that is, CD: DX::) FG: FH; ſo that the Power is to the Force of the Weight, as tſe Sine of the Angle of Elevation (FHG) to the Radius. ll rection) as CD: DA, by what has been ſhewn. But the Power ſuſtains, (and therefore is equal to) the Force by which it endeavours to deſcend upon the enclin'd Plane. Therefore theſe Forces of the Body are alſo in the ſame Ratio. C o ?. V. From the ſame Principles we may computę the Proportions of the Power to the Gravity of the Weight; when the Inclination of the Plane (upon which the Weight is ſuſtainq) is continually changing; that is, when we imaginę the Body to be held ſucceſſively upon the ſeveral Points of any Curve Surface; in which Caſe the Tangents to thoſe Points, are the changing enclin'd Planes that we are to conſder. Thus we may conceive the Line HF (FIG. X.) to be the Tangent of ſome Curve (whoſe Vertex is in ſome Point between F and G) FG the Subtangent, and HG an Ordinate from the Point of Contact H. Tis evident, that to ſuſtain the Weight A continually upon the Curve, there muſt be a different Power for every different Point where it reſts And the Proportion of the Power to the Gravity of the Weight; for every diſferent Point will be as the Subtangent to the Tangent, in the Caſe of Cor. I. or as the Subtangent to the Ordinate, in the Caſe of Cor II. Therefore applying the Subtangents and the Tangents, or the Subtanli geuts, and the Ordinates, to ſome common Axe; the Curvilineal Figures thence ariſing, will give the Summatory Ratio of the Powers to the Force of Gravity, for all the Points of Application thro the Curve, the Fordu reſts upon. Ex. g. If FH were the Tangent of a Parabola, whoſe Parameter: r, and Abſciſfe . The Subtangent than will be  2, and the Tangent æ Am 75, or taking the Halfs of both, we have æ, and +xx xtæs, for the Ordinates of Two Curves. Applying theſe continually therefore to the Abſciſſe ) of the Parabola, we ſhall have an Iſoſceles Triangle, and an equilateral Hyperbola; fortis plain that VV-  ntæx is the Expreſion of the Ordinate of an  equilateral Hyperbola, vhoſe Tranſvęrſe, Conjugate or Parameter are either of them equal to If the Line of Direction were parallel to ihe Baſe HG, which is the Ordinate; then the Curve being ſuppoſed a Parabola, as before, the Two emerging Areas, would be an Iſoſceles Triangle, and that very ſame Parabola, both having the ſame Abſciſſe (x.) And in either Suppoſition the Areas thus made expreſs the Ratio Totalis of the ſuſtaining P Powers to the Force of Gravity. I ſnall add one or two Problems upon this Head of the ęnclivd Plan, and ſo Ieave itt. P r o B. li A Body heing Ii utaini y à Porer up an enclind Plane, tiz required i to ſnd what Proportior, - Bod- muſt bear to it, mhoſe abſolute Momentum or Force of deſtcending in a P expendicular, ſball be equal to thę Momentum of the, othe Boi upon the enclina Plane. lil I take the Line of Direẽtion here, parallel to the Plane; and conſequently uſe the Symbols In the foregoing sehot. that miatè t10 Cor. . Let M expreſs the Magnitnde of the held upon the enclind Plane (at Fl G. X.) and m the Magnitude of the BOdy ſought; and ſet their abſolute Gravities be G. ꝗ. reſpeciivly. Tis clear from corolls. 1ſt and 4h, that the Expreſion' of the Force by which the Body endeavours to deſcend upon the enclind Plane, is& æa Put this equal to the abſolute Mor mentum, or Force of Perpsaũea Deſcent in the Body ſonght. Then Aſ and GAæ mogeneal Bodies are proportional to their Magnitudes or Bulks) therefore Mx A=mxL, and ſoM: m:: L: A. That is, a Body as much leſs than the Body propoſed, as the Height of the enclid Plane is leſs than the Length c of it, will be that requird. Q E:I. If the Momentum of a Body held upon an enclind Plane were not to be equal, but in any Ratio aſign'd, to the abſolute Aomentum of another Body, Exæ. gr. in the Ratio of ꝑ: ? Then it woud be OxA, 9::: and 10 sl, ii i mxp= MA4 from whence M: m: 2A :: Læp: That is, the Bodies muſt be in he Ratio compounded of the direẽt Ratio of L to A, and i Dirett of ꝑ to q. Ex. gr. Suppoſe ꝑ: :: G: GXA cthat is, as the abſolute Momentum of ne Body M, to its Momentum upon the enclind Plane. Then A gnõ: ſſ, imt is, : ꝗ4, &A which the Momentum of ta Body M upon the enclind Plane, comes to be a mean Propotional between its own abſolute Momentum and the abſolute Momentum of the Body m. Therefore Gxg æ GæA L: , that is, g22L=Gx A, or by equivalent Subſtitution; mxL'=MxA; from whence M: m:: L': A That is, if the Body M be to the Body m, as the Square of the Length of the Pſane, to the Square of the Height; then the Momentum of the Body M upon the enclin'd Plane ſhall be a mean Proportional, between its own abſolute Momentum, and the abſolute Momentum of the Body m; or Vice Verſ. Fię. 1. P r O B. II. A Globe reſting upon Two enclin d ptus which cut one anot her at Right Angles; requird to find hat Proportion of the bnt ſure, or Burden each Plane ſuſtains. ET the Globe H reſt upon the Two enclid Planes F IG. XI.) AC and CD; and let the Angle ACD be a Right one. Uſing the Symbols as in the foregoing Schol. Iet G exF preſs the abſolute Gravity, or total Momentum of the Globe, which is ſared betwixt the Two Planes (each of which bears ĩts Part) but in what Proportion, we are now to determine. Let ACEL, AB=A: DC=1I, DEZ 4,according to the Intent of the Schol. The Angle ACD made by the Two Planes, being a Right one by the Hypotheſis, tis evident, that the Quadrilateral Figure GHFC is a perfect Square; or, which is all one, that the Lines IHF, KGH, which are the Lines of the Direction of the Globes perpendiculãr Preſſure uponeach Plane, arè paraltel to thoſe Planes reſpectively viz. IHF parallel to AC, and KHD paralel to DC. And that this ou”d not be, were the Angle ACD an acute or an obtuſe one, is obvipus to any pne that conſiders the Matter. E ron hence thenlit follows, that'each Plane performs to the other, the Oſfice of a Power acting witha Direction parallel to the Plane. Thus the Plane AC ſuſtains all that. Force of the Globe, by which it endeavours to deſcend upon the enelid Plane Dc, and hich Force, if the Plane AC were taken away, or Powers (acting with the Direction KG parallel to the ?lune BC) woud. ſuſtainn So likewiſe the Plane DG, ſuſtains the Momentum of the Globe upon the Plane AC, which Momentum word be hallancd bja Power acring with the Direction It patallelac Ir tht Plane bc were removd.- But boãtli ſides nrrr ſides theſe Preſures, each Planę is burſend with one of another kind; and thai isſthel Diferencẽ between thã totãl abſolute Momentum. of thę Globe and that relative or Vartial Momentum with which the Globe edeavours to deſcenã ũ ũ on that Plane. For if either of the Panes were tãken avay, and a Power was ſubſtitited ] in tſę room of it; then tho that power ſiſtaũ ad thè Burden which preſſd upon the Plane before; yet the Body ſtill reſting opon the other Plane, that Plane is preſ)d by it; and* the Quuntities of that Momenium by Which the Blànẽeſ preſſa is evidently what was juſt noW aſ'rted. To ſtate theſe Propotions therefore, tis certam that the Himentum by which the Clobe endeavours o deſcend upon the Plane DE  is s=4, ; this the Plane AC ſuſtains. And the Momenturm by Whieh the Globe endearòſ5 rs to aeſcend upon the Plane AC, is, ,a; , this the Plane C ſuſtains. But the Plane DC ſuſtains alſo the 2omentum f, and the Plane AC ſuſtains alſo the Momentum G ò Therefore the whole Momentum, with which the Plane DC is burdend, Isæ L and the whole Momentum with which the plane AC i is burderd, is 5 &⸗ G⸗ Sbmsus And the Sum of theſe TWo Aggregates of Momenta (with which both the Planes are burdend) caſting oſf Contradictories, will be õrbiLt ouL, 2 GZ to twice the abſolute omentum of the Globe; which is abſurd and impoſſible. For the abſolute Momentnm of the Globe is parted between the Two Planes; and what they ſuſtain cannot poſſibly exceed that. We are therefore (as the excellent Mr. Leibnit?. ſnews Act. Lipſ for Novemb- 16835.) to take the Halfs of theſe Sums of Momenta, or (Which amounts to the ſame) an Arithmetical Mean betwixt them. And then they will be , m Gxaæ GxL GxA 2l 2 L the abſolute —- of the Globe. The Momentum of the Globe then, with reſpect to each Plane, is determind. GCE: F. , the Sum of which is =G, P R OB. m Tuo Povers ſu uſtaining rach other n- aVi si, tis requird to find e Proportion of one to the other. ET BC be a Vegiis ; G. xn. ) whoſe Full. L ciment is D, and let the Powers K and I, acting with the Directions KB, IC, ſuſtain each others Forces, or bę in Equilibrio about the Fulciment D. Produce the Lines of Direction till they meet in A, and draw AD: Likewiſe draw DE, DH parallel to the Lines of Direction, and DF, DG perpendicular to them. The Fulciment, or fix'd Point D, is here in the ſtead of a Third Power, and its Line of Direction is Dã, drawn from D to A, the Concourſe of the Lines of Direction of the other Two Powers I and K. The Vectis therefore being held ſteady by thefe Three Powers; Two of them (which drav it with the Directions from A to B, and from A to C) deſtroy the Efeœ of the Tir, which is to be imagined to draw it witha Dirẽction from Dto A. For the Reſiſtance of the Fulciment D (as the Vectis is preſ”]d down upon it by the other Two Powers) i is as much as another Power drawing it upwards, with a Direction from D to A, the Concourſe of the other TWo Directions. Therefore (by Cor. Il. of Theor. llL Power I: Power K:: Sine Angle HAD: Sine Angie EAD (or: HDA) that is, as HD: ED. But now the Iriangles HDG, EDEF are ſimilar, forthe Angles at & and F are Right ones bythe Conſtruction, and. bęcauſe of the Paralielogrãm, AED=AHD, and conſequently FED=GHED, therefore the Triangles are ſimilar. Therefore HD: EB :'GD: ED, and conſe>uneutly, Powęr I: Power K:: GD: FD; that is; thePowers aſe reciprocally asthe Diſtances of their Lines of ſpiinsstion suiiss h⸗ Fulciment. Q E: I. r the ſino? of Direction B and c were to cach other, and perpendicular to the Horſzon, ſ then GD and DF would be coincident vith DB and D:. Thereſore then the Powers would be reciprocally as the Diſtances (of the Points of Application) from the Fulciment. When ihe Lines of Direction of the Powers are parallel in the Vectis, then if inſtead of Two Powers, there wereT wo Weights alpended to the Roints B, G, the Machine woul ;become a,mmon Libra, the Law of which would bę as in the foregoing Corollary, Vii. The Pondera (being in Equilibrio) are reciprocally as their Diſtances from the Center or: the without any further Trouble, deduce the Property of the Wheel, or the Axis in Peritrochio, For if DG be the Radius of the Axis to which a Pondus is, applied in C; and DB the æædius of the Whegęl, or, outer Cirele it ſclf, to which a POWer isapplied in BThe Line CB then mãy be conſiderd as a Vectis, of which the Fulciment is. D;, and the ROWer ballancing the Weignt, that is, the Machine being held perfectly ſteady and immovable, the Proporti- n of the Power to the Weight wil be ⸗l na;s as the Diſtances of the Lines of Direction from the Fulciment D, reciprocally; , that is, a as DB, CD reciprocally, or, which is all one thoſe Diſtances being the Radij, thev will be ãs the Peripheries of the Whee l and tho Ax reciprocally. Q:E: . the Powers of thoſe Vulgar Machines, Sciſſars, Pinchers, Sheers, Forcipes, the Crane, the Gimblet, the Hammer (as uſed and applied to the drawing out of a Nail) with various others. The Four firſt are manifeſtly a Pair of Vectes, placed croſs-wiſe, and interſecting each other in their common Fulcrum. Thus if ab CDE repreſfented a Machine of that kind, where ba is the Obex or Body to be cut or compreſ'd, then DC and EC being imagin'd to be produced directly to a and b, we have here Two Vectes in a croſ' Poſition, viæ. DCæ, and ECh, the common Faulcrum of which is C (the Center of the Rivet) and the moving Powers being applied at D and E, the other Extremities æ, b, are applied to the Obſtaclee. From whence the Power of this ſort of Machine is eaſily eſtimated. The Body and the moving Powers will ſuſtain one another, when the Power is, to the Difficulty or Reſiſtance of the Obſtacle, as the Diſtance of each reciprocally from C. As for the latter Machines, they are more immediately reducible to the Axis in Peritrochio, tho ultimately reſolvd into the Vectis: The Power of the Hammer is, perhaps, qually explicable either Way. Figas A ui Thus the Power (FIG. XV.) being applied in A, the Extremity of the Handle, and the Obſtacle to be removd or drawn out in B, then the End Cis the Falcrum or Center of Motion. And the Power moving in a Circumference, whoſe Radius is CA and the Obſtacle (when movd) in another, whoſe Radiusis CB. Hence if the Forces (of the Power, and of the Reſiſ*tance of the Obſtacle) are reciprocally, as thoſe Peripheries, or their reſpective Radij (which are the Diſtances from the Fulciment) they will ſuſtain one another, and be in Eqpi-  librio. The Vectis ofthe ſirſt ſort has been hitherto explaind; and that partly in it ſelf, and partly the Machines, that are nearly related to it. For ſuch are allthoſe that have been mentiond under this Head; unleſs any one thinks it more proper tò reduce the Hammer (applied to the Uſes juſt now mentiond) to the Principle of the recurvd Vectiss However, be it which wayit will, the Explication of the other kinds of Vectes will not be i improper nor unuſeful. Fig. I 6. à E Let (FIG. XVI.) D be the Fulciment of the Vectis BCD, and the Powers at Kand H, whoſe Lines of Direction are CB and HG, be conceivd to ſuſtain one another upon it. Produce the Line KB till it cuts HGC in the Point A, and draw DE parallel to CA, till it meets the Line KBA produc'd in the Point E. Compleat the Parallelogram AEDH, and draw the Diagonal AD. Laſtly, From the Point D, let fall DG, DF perpendicular to the Lines of Directions EBA and ACH. It will be provd allitogether in the ſame Manner as in the Caſe of the former Vectis; that the Power at H, is to the Power at K, as ED: DH; that is (becauſe the Rectangular Triangles DGE, DFH, are ſimilar) as DG: : DE. Therefore when the Lines oF Direction AK, AC are parallel, and to the Perpendiculars. DG, DF oincide with DB, DC; then the Power will be reciprocally as thoſe Lines; that is, reciprocally ãs the Diſtances of the Points of Application from the Fulciment D. Fig. 17. It nteò of eitheroſihe ; a we ]md the incurvd Vectis BDC F1G. XVIL) propoſed, in which the Fulciment is at the Point D, and the Powers applied at B and C (acting with the Directions BI, CF) ſuſtain onę an-ther; ſhie Property of this Machine will be found as eaſly from the ſame prussal. Princi pu VFor produj cing the Lines of Direction till they interſeò in A, and then compleatiug the Parallelogram HADE, whoſe Diagonal is AD: And, Laſtly, Letting ſall the Perpendiculars DG, DF, upon the Lines of Direction, twill be provd, that the Powers are as thoſe Perpendiculars reciprocally. Conſequently when the Lines of Direction are parallel, the Powers will be reciprocally, as the Diſtances of the Points of Application from the Fulciment D, taken in a Line parallel to the Horizon. P æ o IV. Tuo Powers acting ith given Directions ſuſtaining one another upon a Trochlea; it is requird io find the Proportion of thoſe Powers. uippore the Trochlea (16. XVIII) firmly fix'd by its Center E to ſome Body that ſupports it, without any Motion. And let the Powers at F and C, whoſe Directions are FD, CB, ſuſtain one another upon it. Produce the Lines of Direction till they meet in A,and compleat the ParallelogramADEB, and let fallthe Perpendiculars EG, EH to the Lines of Direction, which being Tangents at H and G, theſe Perpendiculars will be Radij, from the Nature of the Circle. Therefore now (by Cor. II. of Theor. llI.) Power at C: to Power at F:: as Sine Angle AEB: to Sine Angle BAE; that is,as AB: EB, that is, as ED: EB. But the Triangles EGB, EHD are ſimilar (for the Angles at G and H are Right ones, and EBG = EDH, becauſe of the Parallelogram) therefore ED: EB:: HE: GE; and conſequently Power CPower F. Q E: I. U&Cor. If the Lines of Direction were parallel, the Law would be the ſame, as alſo in this latter Caſe, if a Weight were ſubſtituted in the room of either of the Powers. S C H O L Becauſe the Tangent AH, AG, are equal from the Nature of the Circle, therefore Angle HAE GAE; and ſo tis preſently to be concluded that Power C is = Power F. But to uſe the perpendiculars r R OB. v. 3i ſmo Powers acting with given Directions. ſuſtaining a Weight by a Trochlea; tis requira to find the Proportion of either of thoſe Powers to the Weight. ET the rom (FIG. XIX.) at A and B (or the Power at A, and ſome Obſtacle well fixed at B) ſuſtain the Pondus by the Rope AEDB. The Line of Direction of the Pondus CF paſſes thro C, the Center of the Trochlea; and thoſe of the Powers,; which are AB and DB being produced, concur in F. Then by Cor. II. Theor lIL Power A: to the expended Weight A:: Sing Angle CFD: Sine Angle EFD; But AE and BD being Tangents;twill eaſily be prov, that the Angles EFC and DFC are equal. SO that the Power is to the Weight, as the Sine of 5 the Angle made by the Lines of Direction to the Sine of that Angle] jt sat hi E:. C æ When the Lines of Direction EF, DVF, are parallel, then EC and CD, the Perpendiculars x t0 them. will ſie in one Right Line. And tiis will be reducible to a Ve lis of the ſecond sort, where one Power is aſplied between the Fulc ment and the other Power. Conſequentſy the Power I . ltl v a a  - l  rrr Power at A ill be to the Weight, as the æ-dius t0 the Diameter; that ĩs, as 1: 2. P R O B. VI. Tuo Povers acting with given Directions, ſuſtaining a Weight ithout a Trochlea) tis requird to find what Proportion they bear to one another. ET the Powers (PſG. XX.) at I and K, whoſe Directions are KD, and ID, ſuſtain the Pondus D. Produce the Lines of Direction till they meet in the Center D. Compleat the Parallelogram AEDC. Then by Cor. II. Theor. IIL. the Power at K, is to the Power at I:: as Sine Angle CAD: Sine EDA:: AC: CD, or AE. or which is all one, they are as Al: AK; the Lines AE, and Al being Perpendiculars from A to the Lines of Direction. C O R. From hence one may eaſily compute the Powers of theſe Rhombs, which the famd Borelli conſiders, in order to the Eſtimation of the Forces of the Muſcles; and that, whether ſi ngle or combind together in Chains, accõrding to all the Varieties mention'd in ſeveral rro; tions in his excellent- Book, De Motu Animũlium. For the Proportion of thePowers not only to one onother,, but alſo to the Gravity of the Weight, is eaſily deduced fiom that Third General Theorem that has been ſ often quoted already upon theſe Occaſionss ⸗ As for the Powers of the Wedge and the Screw, tho they are not ſo immediately and direcily oxplaind, from the general Principſe of the. Compoſition of Forces, as thoſ õthèſs that we have conſider'd; vet they are included in it, being to be reduced to ſome oſnè Headror other that is immediately demonſtrated fſom thence. Thus ſome People have refor?ũ:both theſe Faculties to that of the enclidœlant, whileothers (whatever they do withĩHiè Screw) have reduced the Wedge to a òublè Viectis. But Iam ſatisfied I cant do better in fhis Maòter, than to give Mr. Nentons own Account of them, and. refer the Explicationof⸗tliæ Wesige 1o. o uu: of she Body præſng upon Tw| æ nqtiiãl Planes making an Angle with one another, and make the Screw no. other. than a Wedge impel'd by a Vectis The celebrated Dr. Waliis deduces thę Properties of theſe (as of the ret) from his general Prop. which is Prop. 5. Chap. 2of his Tract, De Motu. But from w hich ſoever of theſe Principles a Man wod explaæin the Powers of theſe Machines, he will come to the ſame Concluſions; viæ. For the Wedge; that when the impelling Force is to the Reſiſtance of the Obſtacle, as the Thickneſs of the Wedge, to the Height of the ſame: And for the Screw; that when the Force that turns the Screw is to the Reſiſtance of the Obitacle, as the Interval of the Two immediately ſucceeding Turnings of the Spiral, to the Circumference deſcribed by the Power in one Converſion of the Screw: I ſay, that when it is ſo, the Powers (in theſe Machines) will be equivalent to the Reſiſtances of the Obſtacles, or ſif one may ſo expreſs it) there vill be an Equilibrium of Forces and Reſiſtances. Or, as our Great Authour æxpreſſes it, when the Force by which the Wedge urges the two Sides of the cleft Bodies is to the Force of the Mallet upon the Wedge, as the Progreſ of the Wedge according to the Determination of the Force impreſſ'd upon it, to the Vælocity with which the Parts of the Body givue way to the Wedge in Lines perpendicular to thę Sides of the Wedꝶe; or when the Force of the Sorew to preſs the Body, is to the Force of the Hand that turns it round, as the circular Velocity of the Handle, to the progreſſive Velosity of the Screw towards the compreſs'd Body; then there will be an E uilibrium, or the contrary Forces and Reſiſtances will ſuſtain o one another. But this holds true in all Machines hatſoever, that any Agent and Patient, Force and Reſiſtance, or contrary Force and Force, are then equivalent to, and will ſuſtain one another, when they are reciprocally as their reſpective Velocities, eſtimated according to thie proper Directions and Determinations of thoſe Forces. For the Action of any Agent being eſtimated by its Force and Velocity conjunctly, and the Re-action oſ the Patient or reſiſting Body, eſtimated alſo by the Velocities and the Forces of Reſiſtance in the ſeveral Parts (ariſing from their mutual Attrition, Cohæſi; ion, Weight or Acceleration) then Action and Re-a tion maſl be equal to one another throughout all the Machines imaginable; ; or, in other Words, there ill be an æquilibrium. The whole puineſs of Mechanics may thereſore he brought intoa very narrow Compaſs, and ſie Powers of all Inſtruments whatſoever arę included i in this one general Analogy that follovs. Let ) r. expreſs any Powers, moving Forces, or Forces 25d Reſiſtances ; Iet the Velocity of ? he ę ẽ) iꝶ , bym, and that of r. by n. Thenifp: r::n:m, the contrary FEorces will ſuſtain one another, becauſe: Cupon this Suppoſition) pm= = rXa. Thereſore if pm rxn; that is, if . then the Forcę p. Thall overcome the Force or Reſiſtance 7. Hence in any Machine the Problem may be ſolyed, To move a given Weight (or to overcome a given Reſi ſance J mith a given Force, / And this one Application alone were  ſurficient to mev, how true and certain, how general and extenſive that Third Lav of Motion is, which tells us, that Re-action is ever equal to Action, &. But this is but one Inſtance of the Uſe of ĩt neither; there are ſeveral others beſides of no Ieſs Conſequence and Importance than this, which the Great Author himſelf has conſiderd, and his, and ſeveral other Examples relating to thoſe Matters, have been very well and largely explaivd by Mr. Xeil; upon which Account I ſhall ſay the Ieſs to them. The ſame ingenious Perſon laſt mentiond has alſo in a late Book (his Introduction to the true Phyſi ĩchs) made uſe of the Second Lav of Motion as a Principle to eſtabliſ ſome important Theorems upon, relating to Accelerated Motion; and the ſame Law will be of as great Uſe in demonſtrating all the common Theorems about equable Motions. But we aie now to proceed with the Corollaries of thoſe Lan-. Second dies B and b to ſtrike one another, and Iet the Action ofB upon b be put = m, the Re-action of b upon B=n, then after the Colliſion the Motion of B=BxV-5, and the Motion of bbxvm, and conſequently the Sum or Difference (mS or D) is  BXV-&n + - bxv-Fm, i in which Expreſſion the Quantities m and n muſt be affected ith diferent Signs; that is, if m be poſitive, n will be nęgative, and if n be poſitive, m will be negative, becauſe the Directions of the Action and Re-action are contrary. But (by the Third Law of Motion) Action is ever equal tò Re-action;: that is; the Quantity mæn, or næ—m Conſequently, ſubſtitutingnm in the room of m, andm in the room of æ, they willde ſtroy one another, and there will remain BXV-ſ ixu=5, and MxV—mv=D, the ſamẽ Values as beſore. So that the Sum or Difference of the Motions is the ſame after the Colliſioſ that it was before. i From hence the Laus of the Colliſion and Motion of Bodies may be eaſily and univerſally computed. FEirst, In reãl; hard Bodies; , in order to hichit's neceſary that we premiſe this ; : . 5 L EM M L i a bard Boiy ſtrites drecti upon another, : wheiber that upon which the Stroke is made tbe quieſient, or moves more ſloly towards the ſame Quarter; or, Laſtly, towards the ontrary Part (with æa leſs Motion) after the Strote they sẽssin both n move witli the ſame Degree f V elocity. ] ET the Body B ſtrike aire; upo⸗ b. Then Gã the Second Lan of Motion) the Body b hall move according to the Direction of the Force impreſy'd upon ĩt by the Body B; the Action and Influence of all circumjacent Bodies being ſuppoſed to be removd. But b cannot move ſlower than B, becauſe of B following it; nor can it move faſter, fince (by the H 7potheſis) we remove all other Cauſes of ĩts Motion, beſides the impelling Bodv B. Therefore the Bodies B and b ſhall move both with the ſame Velocity aſter their Colliſion. Frum hence therefore to find true the Value of thàt common Velocity, with which the Body ſall move after the Stroke: Let this common Velocity be put =2?. Then SBV-I bxv, and D=BxVbxv, before the Stroke; and alſo (by Cor. II. to the Laws of Motion) the Values of S ang D continue the ſame bęfore and after the Stroke. But after the Stroke S=Bxæ-bxæ, and D=BxX7b*æ. Therefore B z, the common Velocity for the Sum of the Motions made towards the ſame Part; and EſEꝶ : u =x, the common Velocity for the Difference of the Motions made towards contrary Parts. Hence if the Body b were quieſcent, then that i is, Viæ:: B+b: B; the Velocity before the Stro ke is to that aſter it, as the Sum of the Two Bodies to the moving Body. Therefore if B2b, then V: æ: 2:1; that is, if the Bodies are equal, the Velocity a after the Stroke will be half the Velocity of the Body, that was ſuppoſed in Motion, before the Stroke. If v and V be both of ſome real Value, and alſo if B=b, then (for the Caſe of the Sum of Motions towards the ſame Part) we have BV-'B V- ] B 5, ora(=; that is, the Velociv=o, and fo 3 ty after the Stroke is the Sum of the Velocities before the Stroke. For the Caſe of the Difference of Motions towards contrary Parts, we have np =Z, Or æ = væ in which Caſe the Velocity after the Stroke is  the Diferens of the Velocities before it. But univerſælly, let the the Bodies be in any Ratio whatſoever, the Value of æ will be deturi mind. Suppoſe B: b: : q. then b = bx which Value ſbſtitutedi in Equation above, will give the Value of æ in this —— Suppoſitionn. For then we ſhall find 7 æ ãã Bo Cfor the Caſe of the Sum of Moti2BVqBo ons tovards the ũame Part) and 5 rB1 4B (or the Caſe of the Diſferences of Motions towards contrary Parts.) And if we ſuppoſe b quieſcent (as before) and conſeqently v=4, BV thea  ſ and V: z: æu In the Caſe of the Diſſerence of Morions towards contrary Parts, if we put ææo; that is, if the Bodies, after their mutual Caolliſion, have no Velocity at |li, or the contrary Motions have deſtroyd one another, then _ =o, and pV=g or (becauſe of p2q: B: b) BX Væxv; that is, B: b:: u: V. Soſthat the Bodies Dbeing reciprocally as their Velocities hich makes the contrary Momenta equal) after the Stroke they will loſe all their Motion. And having thus determind what the Velocity muſt be after the Colliſion of any hard Bodies, there will be no Diſficulty in finding the Momenta. or Quantities of Motion in each of the ſtriking Bodies, after they have thus ſtruck one another; for there is no more to be done, but to multiply the common Velocity into thè Magnitude of each Body. And from hence we may eaſily determine the Magnitudes of the Strokes made by the Colliſion of one hard Body with another, and ſo ærrive at thoſe Theorems which the celebrated Dr. Waliis has given us relating to this Matter, in the Chap. of Percuſſion, which is the 11th of his admirable Tract, De Motu. For (according to the Accounts of that excellent Perſon) the Magnitude of any Stroke is equivalent to twice the Momentum, loſt from the ſtronger of the Two Bodies that make the Shock (that is, ſuppoſing one to have more Force than the other.) But by the Rules above deliverd we can find univerſally what the Momentum of any hard Body is after it has ſtruck another, and theę ſmentum beſore the Stroke being known Ilikewiſe; tis plain, that we can find the Difſerence between the latter and the former of theſe Momenta; and twice that Difference is determind (Prop. 5. of the forementiond Chap.) to be equivalent to the Magiitude of the Stroke. For the Doctor brings into the Account of the Stroke, not only what the ſtriking Body loſes but alſo what the Body that is ſtruck receives: Both theſe (he ſays) are the Effects of the Stroke, and conſequently the Magnitudo of it is: to be eſtimated from both together. Here therefore I will from this Principle deduce Two of his moſt general Theorems, from whence the Reader may very eaſily diay the reſt himſelf. Uſing the Symbols as before; Iet the Bodies B. b. whether equal or unequal, move withany Velocities towards the ſame Parts; and let the Body b. gQo before, and the Body B. come after with a Velocity V. greater: than v. the Velocity of the former. The common Velocity after the Stroke ¢viz. 2) = _. . therefore the Momentum of Bafter the Stroke, is æ æ à but its Momentum before the Stroke was= BV, therefore the Body B has loſt the Momenium vBEVꝶE RBIV—BBut the Body has acquired juſt as p for its Momentum before the Stroke was= =hv, and afterwards tis/ pvup, ; thereſore it has gotten the Momentum bv Psa Conſequently, m. BI isthe Magnitude of the Stroke. 2 Bſ Buttis evident, that 2BV2 Bl2 BVG—Bv: 2b: B+b; that is, the Magn itude of the Strore, is to the Momentum of the following Body ®) carried with the Diſference of the Velocities, as twice the antecedent- Body ũl to the Aggregate of both the Bodies Inlike manner, if the Bodies nova towards contrary Parts,it will be found, that  tahtBV-Bu:: 2b: BHV, that is, the Magnitude of the Stroke, woud be to the Momentuin of either of the Bodies (Eæ. gr B) carriedwith- the Sum of the Velocities, as twice the other Body vir. b) to the Aggregate of buth the Bodies. And from theſe Two Theorems one may deduce any of the reſt, according to the Nature of the ie Suppoſition made. Coæ I. Joiin the Reſult of borh there- Andlogies together, it ſollons, that aBiv- Bæ Bbv. B = BBo: BV-rBO: Vo Vv; that is, the Magnitude of the Stroke in the Caſe of Motions made towards the ſame Parts, is to the Magnitude of the Stroke in the Caſe of Motions towards contrary Parts, as the Difference of the Velocities in the former Suppoſition, to the Sum of the Velocitiy in the Iatter; that is, as the relative Velocities of the Bodies in both i after the æl on. C Oo R. II. In either Caſe conſiderd apart by it ſelf, tis plain, that whatever the Velocities are in themſelves, vet if the Difference, or the Sum of them continues ſtill the ſame, the Magnitude of the Stroke ſall ſtiſ be the ſame alſo. And thereſore it follos, that the Magitnde of the Stroke is ever proportional to the Diſference or the Sum of the Velocities; that is, to the relative Velocity of the Bodies; by which they come towards one another. From the Lans of Motion in percas hard Bodies, we come to conſider. 2. In perſeẽtly Elaſtick Boen; and nere tis neceſiary to bromiſe this LEæuna That q Two Bodies perfectly Elaſt r mit one another, their relative Velocity continues the ſume after the Strole, that it wis before. OR the Nature ofa Body perſetly Elaſtick is to reſtore it ſelf with a Force equal to that by which it was compreſy d. But (in thie Hypotſ eſis of the preſent Lemina) the ComDreſſve Force is m other than the Forceof the Stroke, by which one of the Elaſtick Bodies ſhocks the other. li Now the Magnitude of the Stroke (by the Second Cor. foregoing) ariſes from the relative ſlau of the Bodies, and is proportional to Conſequently the compreſſive Force is probortiomI to that Velocity. But the reſtitutive Force being equal to the compreſſive, acting upon the ſame Bodies, ſall produce a relative Velocity that bears the ſame Proportion to it, that the relative Velocity before the Stroe bore to the compreſſi ve Force; therefore it ſhall produce: a relative Velocity qual to the former. And therefore the Bodys after Colliſion ſhall depart from each other with the ſame Velocity that they came towards one another ith beforee. Q: E: D. Ii From hence now to determine the Velocities of Elaſtick Bodies after the Stroke. Al the other Symbols ſtanding as before, let the Velocity of the Body B aſter the Colliſion he put =x. When the Bodies B. b. move towards the ſame Parts, then their relative Velocity is 25Vv; and when towards contrary Parts, tis/ V-v. Therefore (by the foregoing Lemma) in the former Caſe, the Velocity of the Body b. aſter the Stroke ſhall J]æ1V—v3 and in the latter Caſe it ſall = V-væ. But (by Cor. II. to the Lams of Motion) the Sums of the Motions towards the ſame Parts, or the Difcr ences I / œ ferences towards contrary Parts are equal, both before and after the Stroke. Therefore BVbv æ B2-l bæ-] 5Vbv, in one Caſe, and BVbvB26V--bvo-rbæ, in the other. Therefeee æ : in one Caſe, 2 b and æ?æ in the other And putting the Velocity of the Body b after the S Stroke 3 we have y (ærV—) æ2 BV- bo2EBv T > in one Caſe; and ) Gæv- v)æ = in the other Caſe. o that we have theſe 2 general Analogies, viz. æ: y:: BV 250bV: 2 BV--bu—Bv, when the Bodies B. and b. move towards the ſame Parts; and æ: y:: BV—2bv V: 2 BV- Bbv, when the Motions are made towards contrary Parts. And theſe Values of æ and y do giye us Dr. Walliss /th and 10th Props. Chap. 13. Mechan. And from theſe general Expreſſions thus found, all the particular Laws are eaſly determind. Ex. gr. Suppoſe the Body b u quieſcent; then v=o, and conſequently æ . zv and ꝶ T/ = : V: : Bb: BVb; that is, the Velocity of the moving Body B, aſter the Stroke, is Io the Velocity it had before, as :he Diſference of the Fwo Bodies tothe Sum of them. Again, (uſing the ſame Suppoſition) y ; , and æ V:: 2 B: B+b; that is, the Velocity of the quieſcent Body b after the Stroke is to the Velocity of the ſtriking Body, B before the Stroke, as twice the ſtriking Body, to the Sum of hoth Bodies. If B=b, thenb, ſuppoſed quieſcent as before, æ will 26; that is, the Body B after the Stroke will loſe allits Motion. And all this Dr. Wallis lhews Prop. 8. Chap. 13. concerning Elaſtick Force and Reflection. Suppoſe B=b, and that the Bodies mo?d towards contrary Parts. l Then æ =0 r hi 2BV, ym5 but _ B=, neior 5 . Et S50 thãt alur the Stroke, the BoJS dies ſnall mutually interchęnge their Velocities. the Body B moving with the Velocity of b before the Stroke, and the Body b with the Velocity of B before the Stroke. And that they ſhall move towards contrary Parts is manifeſtly enough ſignified by the Diſference of the Signs, for it isV, andv. And 4his ĩs brop 7 of the foremention'd Char. Suppoſe again B= , and that they mova towards the ſame Parts, the Body b going before ming after with a greater Velocity, viz. V. Then æ/ ĩ and y m i Therefore after the Stroke, the Bodies ſhall move with the Velocities they had before the Stroke, alternately taken, as it was in the Caſe foregoing, only with this Difference, that there they movd towards contrary Parts, and here towards the ſame Parts, as is plain from the ldentity of the of the Signs. And this is Prop6: If B=b, but the Body b be ſupposd quieſcent; then 2=o, (for in this Caſe v=0, and hvo, and becauſe /8, then BAbVæyp, and ſo the whole Value of æ70) but y =  3- vVvV. So that after the Stroke the Body B at firſt in Motion ſall quieſce, and the Body b at firſt quieſcent ſhall move, with a Velocity /V, the Velocity of B before the Stroke. And this is Prop. s. If B were =4, and alſo V=v, and the Bodies movd towards contrary Parts, then tis plain, that æ?mv, and y — 9; that is, the Velocity of each Body after the Stroke is the very ſame it had before, or they are reflected each with thoſe Velocities with which they meet together. Here alſo the Difference of the Signs diſcovers, that the reflected Motions are made towards contrary Parts; and the Nature of an Elaſtick Body (which ever reſtores it ſelf in the ſame Direction according to which it was compreſt) as plainly ſiews, that the Bodies will move in the very ſame Right Lines after the Stroke, that they did before. Again, if neither B|6b, nor _ yet if the the Bodies be reciprocally as their Velocities; that is, if B: b:: u: V; in this Caſe alſo afterthe Stroke they ſhall move towards contrary Parts with the ſame Velocities they had before. For ſince ſby the Suppoſition) Bx V=bv, therefore he Motions being made towards contrary Parts) æ ſhall m . and y ſhall æ I BY i æ4 But alſo  va na BV-'B ? æ _-  percſon the Bodies ſhall move ;i the ſame Velocities reſpectively towards contrary Parts after their Colliſion. And this is Prop. 3. of the forementiond ChaP. Having now conſiderd theſe particular Laws of Motion, I proceed to Third COR OL L ARY to the general Las of Motion or Nature The lommon Center of Gravity alters not its State of Motion or Reſt by the Actions of Bodies upon one anoiher; and ihereſore (ſetting aſide all external Actions aud Impedimenis) the common Center of Gravity of all Bodies acting mutually upon one another, either is at Reft, or is movu uniformly in a Rectilineal Path. H E common Center of Gravity of Two LBnodies, is the Center or fixd Point of an imaginary Libra, about which the Bodies are ſn Equilibrio. This Libra is a Line conceivd to paſs thro the Center of Gravity of each Body or to be continued from one Bodys Center of Gravity to that of the other. Then the Fulciment or fixd Point (found by taking the Diſtances of the Centers of Gravity of the Bodies from that Point, reciprocally proportional to the Mugnitudes of the Bodies themſelves) is what we call the common Center of Gravity of the Two Bodies. So likewiſe we may. make an Eſtimate of the common Center of Gravity of any Number or Syſtem of Bodies, according to this Principle The Demonſtration of this Coroll. will be clear, upon the making out of theſe Two Proportions. 1. That Bodies moving uniformly, either towards the ſame, or towards contrary Parts; before they meet and ſtrike one another, their common Center of Gravity will either quieſce, or move uniformly in a Right Line. Fig. 21. l da A e Ch f B Let the Bodies FIG. XXLL) be A. B. their common Center of Gravity C. the Diſtances of their Center of Gravity from that Poĩnt, AC and CB reſpectively. And let the ſmall Letters denote different Places of the ſame Bodies, and of their common Center of Gravity. From the Nature of the common Center of Gravity, tis plain that A: B:: BC: AC, from whence AxXAC=BXBC. Now if the Bodies movd into the Places à. g. or e. f- and it were ſo that A: B:: gC: 4C, orA: B:: fC: C; then the Motions with reſpect to the ſame Point C, woud ſtill be equal, becauſe Axàd CBX, or Axe CB4fC) and the common Center of Gravity C woud quieſcee So that in equal Motions towards contrary Parts, whether the Bodies go from, or come towards one another, the common Center of Gravity is ſtill at reſt But if the Motions were ſo adjuſted to each other, that A: B C: àaC, orA: B C: eC, that is, Axd C BXgC, or AxeC BXſC, then ſome Point as ? between e or à and C, may. be taken ſo, that Axah may =Bxgh; and then tis plain, that the Point æ is the common Center of Gravity. Therefore in this Caſe, the common Center of Gravity has movd from thę Point C to the Point 2:. So likewiſe it might be ſhown, that if Axa C< BXgC, or Axe C BXſſ cC, then the common Center of Gravity woud be in ſome Point as h between ę or ſ and C, and ſo, to have movd the Space C h. So thattis moſ: clear, that in unequal Motions towards contrary Parts, the common Center of Gravity moves in the ſame Right Line together with the Bogies themſelves. Again, if the Bodies move towards the ſame Parts with any Motions hatſoever, j it is maniſeſt, that the common Center of Gravity, muſt move alſo. Let the Bodies A /nd B whoſe common Center of Gravity is C , movæ from the the Places A and B, into the Places e and g 2l ſay, the common Center of Gravity c cannot he now in the Point C. For iſ it. were, then it word be A: B:: ZC: eC, the Bodies being in e and g. But itis A: B:: BC: ACæ the Bodies being in A and B. Therefore it woud be ęC: eC:: BC;  AG, that isg C: BC:: e C: AC, which H 3 is is impoſſible. Thereſore the common Center of Gravity is not in C, but into ſome Point as h taken ſo, that it may be gh: eh:: BC: AC, or 7h: BC:: eh: AC. And that it muſt neceſſarily be in ſome Point, as h between C and B, is too plain to need any Proof. And further, tis evident enough, that the Motion of the common Center of Gravity (whenever it moves, in any of theſe Caſes) is uniform, or that it deſcribes, equal Spaces in equal Times. For the Motion of the Bodies is uniform (by the Suppoſition) and the common Center of Gravity divides the Diſtance between the Bodies ever in the ſame Ratio; there fore as the Spaces deſcribed by the Bodies themſelves in equal Times, will be equal, ſo alſo will thoſe deſcribd by th the o common Center of Gravity. Hitherto we have conſiderd the Bodies onIy as moving in one and the ſame Right Line. But if they move in different Right Line ceither paraltel, or enclin d to one another) the Motion of the common Center of Gravity may ſti be ewn to be perſor mdin a Right Line, and to be uniform; for the Demonſtrotion of which I refer the Reader to Mr. Xeils forementiond Book. So alſo if the Bodies mov in different Planes, and it were ever ſo great a Number of Bũes, the Motion of hoſe common Cenerof Onafity as s conſderd. rſi 2.The next Thing to be cleard, is, That when Two Bodies move either towards the ſame or towards contrary Parts, the Sum or Difference of their Motions is the ſame as if they were both carried with the Velocity of their common Center of Gravity. This Prop. may be eaſily demonſtrated, but I will at preſent give an Inveſtigation of it. And the doing it in one Caſe alone, when the Bodies move towards the ſame Parts, will be Direction enough to the induſtrious Reader to do it in the other Caſe himſelf. In F6. XXI.) Let the Bodies A and B move from the Places A and B into the Places e and g, and their common Center of Gravity from C into h, at the ſame time. Let AB=b, ACc. Then BCVc. Let Ch/n. Ae=ud. Then Bb=bc and e C cad. and ehcdn. When the Bodies are in e and ⸗, the Value of ꝗb will be fouattedt-rdet bnefrom the Nature of the common Center of Gravity, ii  dcnbad L Thereſore B; (2h8 iyæſæ 5it ihe Sum of the Motions of the Bodies is 5AXA - Bxdh BB”, that is, Axã-F nemæ /] LB:n-Bx And the Motion of both carried vith the Velocity of the common Center of Gravity is/ AxC h-1BXCh, that is, Axn-BXn And (multipling both Parts by c) we ſhall find AxacBxnc=Axd c Bd cBXn BXd b (becauſe AxcæBxb—Bxr, from the Nature of the common Center of Gravity, and conſequently Axn c=Bxn Bxnc, and AxdcBxàd Bxdc. The Reſult therefore is that the Motions are the ſame, as if both Bodies were carried with the Velocity of the common Center of Gravity. Q: E: . And now from both theſe Props. together ariſesa Demonſtration of the Truth of this Third Cor. For (by. the Second Cor. the Sum of the Motions towards the ſame Quarter remains the ſame, aſter the Bodies have ſtruck one another, that it was before. But it has been ſhewn, that the Sum of the Motions either before or aſter the Stroke is the ſame as if the Bodies had been carried with the Velocity of the common Center of Gravity. From whence it may certainly be inferrd, that the Velocity of the common Center of Gravity, is the ſame before as after the Colliſion of the Bodiess But if the common Center of Gravity moves at all before the Bodies meet and ſtrike, it moves uniformly in a right Line, therefore after the Bodies have met and ſtruck, it will move uniformly in a right Line alſo: As on the other Hand, if it be at reſt before the Stroke it will eaſily be ſlewn to be at reſt afterwards. Therefore the common Center of Gravity does not change neal Direction by any Action of Bodies upon one another. Q E: D. And thus much for the Iliuſtration of the Coroll. But before Ipaſs to the next, (being now upon this Head) Ill add Two or Three Propsrelating to the Motion of the common Center of Gravity. rr I. y Too Bodies equal in Magnitude, move in the Sides of a Parallelogram with Velocities proportional to thoſe Sides reſpectively; their common Center of Gravity ſball ſil be found in the Diagonal. ET the Bodies (FIG. XXII.) move in the Lines FA, BA, from the Points F and B towards A. Draw the Diagonals AE, BF, cutting each other in H, and any other Line as CD parallel to the Diagonal BF, interſecting the Diagonal AE in the Point 2 When the Bodiès are in the Points B, F, tis plain, that their common Center of Gratity is in H; for the Bodies are equal by the Hypotheſis, and BH is=HF (from the Elements of the common Geometry.) Likewiſe becauſe the Velocities of deſcribing the Sides of the Parallelogram are ſuppos'd proportional to thoſe Sides reſpectively, therefore (CD being parallel to BF) when one of the Bodies is in D, the other will be in C, for CB: DF:: AB: AF; conſequently BC and DF ill be diſcribd in the ſame time. Therefore (becauſe Caæ D) the common Center of Gravity will be in the Point 4, thati is, in the Diagonal. The ſame may be iewn whereſoęver the Bodies are. Thertfore, &c. U: E: D. lEEEE If the Bodies were upequal i in Magnitude; the Velocitios with which they move heing as the Sides of the Parallelogrom reſpectively; the DPath of the common Center of Gravity mhich will not he the - Disgonal) is eaſ ily determin d. ET the Ratio of the vgaitate of the Bodies be what it will; then from A ; I G. XXII. )draw the Line A c, to cut the Diogonal BF in the Point  in ſuch a Manner, that the Segments Be, and c F may he reciprocally as the Magnitudes of the Bodies placd in B and F. Tis evident, that the common Center of Gravity ſnall deſcribe the Path A, while the Bodies themſelves deſcribe the Sides of the Parallelogram, BA and FA. For any Line as CD paraliel to BF, is cut by the Line A c ſo, that the Segment Ce, e D arę ever in the ſame Ratio of B and c F. Therefore, &. Q: E: D. 7/ T u E o R. III  t and one Body be at reſt in the Point of Contact, while another moves in the Periphery of the outer Circle; then if the Sum of the Tno Bodies be to the moving Body, as the Diameter of the outer Circle, to the Diameter of the innermoſt, the common Center of Gravity ſhall deſeribe the Periphery of the innermoſt Circle. ET IG. XXIIl.) the quieſcent Body be fixX'd at A, the Point of Contact of the Two in the outer and greater Circle. And Iet theſe Bodies be called A and B reſpectively. Then by the Hypotheſistis A-B: B:: AB: AC. Therefore (by Diviſion) A: B:: BC: AC; conſequently when the moving Body is in B, the common Center of Gravity is in C. But (from the Nature of the Circle) AB: AC:: AD: AE ſbecauſe the Angles at D and E are right, and that at A is common, and to the Triangles ADB and AEC are Similar) alſotis BC: AC:: DE: AE. But BC: AC:: A: B, therefore DE: AE:: A: B. Therefore when the moving Body is in D, the common Center of Gravity is in E the Periphery of the inner Circle, and ſo it will be always found in the ſame. QU: E: Du T aæ o x v If Three Circles touchd one another in the ſime Point A, (FIG. xXXIII.) it might be ſhewn, that if the Body A mova in the Periphery AFG, and the Bolly B in the Periphery ADB, and the Sum of the Two Bodies were to the Body B, as the Difference of the Diameter of the outer and inner Circles, to the Difference of the Diameters of the midle and inner Circles. Alſo if the Velocities of the Bodies ere to one another directly as the Peripheries which they deſcribe; I ſuy then, tiat the common Center of Gravity ſpall deſcribe the Periphery of the middle Circle, viz. AEG. OR if the Velocities be as the Peripheries, they are alſo as any Two ſimilar Arches FG and DB cnt off by any right Line AFD drawn at Pleaſure; therefore in the ſame Time that one Body deſcribes the Arch BD, the other will deſcribe the Arch FG, that is, when one is in D, the other willbe in F in the ſame right Line AFD. Alſo becauſe (by the Hypotheſis) tis A-B: B:: BG: GC, by diviſion tis A: B:: BC: GC. But rom the Nature of the Circle and the Similarity of the Triangles) tis BC: GC:: DE: EF, therefore A:B:: DE: FF. And therefore the common Center of Gravity is in the Point Eof the middle Circle. Co x Hence if the Velocities of the ; were reciprocally proportional to their Magnitudes, then AB the Diameter of the outer Circle, woud be divided Harmonically, in the Points, A,G, C, and B, and Vice Verſi. IF the Lines BC, GC, AB, AG be in muſical Proportion, then the Vedocities of the Bodies are reciprocally proportional to their Magnitudes. Let the Velocity of the Body B be put =V, and that of the Body A be put mu. Then (by the Hypotheſis of the Theorem) tis V : v:: AB: AG, for the Velocities which are as the Peripheries, are alſo as the Diameters. But (becauſe of the common Center of Gravity)tis A: B:: BC: GC. Therefore if it be V:u:: A: B, (that is, if the Magnitudes of the Bodies are reciprocally as their Velocities) then it follows, that AB: AG:: BC: GC, and conſequently ABGC=AGxBG, which is the Property of a Line cut in muſical proportion. The Line AB therefore will be divided Harmonically. T H E O R. V. Suppoſing all as in Theor. 4. Iſay, that Tuo Bodies moving uniformly in Circles, the Sum of their Motions is the ſame, as if both were carried with the Velocity of the common Center of Gravity. Hile the Bodies B and A (F ſG. XXIIL.) Setting out from the Points B and G, deſcribe the Arches BO and GF; the common Center of Gravity deſcribes the Arch CE, as has been already demonſtrated. The Sum of the Motions of bòth therefore; carried each ith their own Velocities, is2B BD-FAXFG; and the Sum of the Motions, iſ both were carried with the VelocitV of the common Center of Gravity, wod æAxEC B EC. Nov I ſay, that AXECH BEC- B BD- AxFG. For (from the Nature of the common Center of Gravity) tisA: B:: BC: GC, or (becaue BCABAC, and GCACAG) A: B:: AB-AC: ACAG, From whence AxACAXAGBxABDBAC; and AXAC- BAC= BXABAAG. But becauſe the Arches DB, EC, FG are limilar, they are porportional to their reſpective Diameters. Therefore AXEC BAECS  BæDb rAXS Q: E: D. Fig, 2. T u E O R. VI. If a Body moves in the Curve of a Conick Section, whilſt another moves in the Ax of the ſame, anà their Motions be adju ſted ſo, that while one deſeribes any Portion of the Curve, the other deſeribes the correſpondent Abſciſi, their common Center of Gravity ſball alvays deſcribe one of the Conick Sections. B li C AS E I. S Uppoſe the Curve ABE FIG. XXIV.) d vere a Circle, whoſe Rædius is AG. Let one Body be imagind to deſcribe ABor AG in the Ax, while the other deſcribes AB or AE ũ the Circumference; and in the Radius EG, let ſome Point as F be taken, dividing the Line EG, in the Ratio of the Magnitudes of the Bodies. Iſay, that an Ellipſe, whoſe Tranſverſe Ax is equal to the Diameter of the Circle, and whoſe Semi-conjugate is equal to FG (that is, ſuppoſing EGA a Right Angle) ſhall be the Path deſcribXd by the common Center of Gravity. For, conceive an Ellipſe paſſing thro the Points A, F, H; and draw the Ordinate BC, c⸗, &r. cutting an Ellipſe in D, n, &c. Then (from the Nature of the Circle EGi2AGAGH, and BCIACXCH. And from the Nature of the Ellipſe, FGũ: DCa:: AGXGH: ACXCH. From whence EGũ: FGũ:: BCà: DCI; and EG: FG:: BC: DC, and (by Diviſion) EF: FG:: BD: D:C, and ſo,the Curve of the Ellipſe will divide all the Ordinates of the Circle in the ſame ſtanding Ratio of EF to FG. Therefore ifEF: FG:: as the Body in G: to the Body in E, then their common Center of Gravity willbe inF, and when the Bodies are in B and C, twill be inD; when they are in cande, twill be inr. Therefore the common Center of Gravity will deſcribe the Curveof this Ellipſe. : E: D. C 438 E l. If the Curve OAH were an Ellipſe, haying the Tranſverſe Ax AH; ĩt might he. ſewn, that the common Center of Gravity would deI ſcribe another Ellipſe, as ADF, having the ſame Trænſverſe with the former. For (from the Nature of theſe Gurves) OF: FG:: p D: ECG. So that a Body moving in the Ellipſe AOH, while another moves in the Ax; dividing the Semi-conjugate. in the Point F, in the Ratio of the Magnitudes of the Bodies; the common Center of Gravity ſnall deſeribe the Eipſ AFH. Q2383 A S E II. Ifo one Body deſcribd the Circle AEH, and another the Ellipſe AFE; then dividing the Line EF in the Point O, n the Ratio of the Magnitudes of the Bodies; it may be prov/] after the ſame Manner, that the common Center of Gravity ſhall deſcribe the Ellipſe AOH, paſſing thro the Point O, and having the ſame Tranſverſe Ax AH. For it may be demonſtrated as above, that EF: FG:: BD: DC. And that OF: FG:: D: DC. Therefore EF: OF:: BD: 2 D; and (by Diviſion) EO: OF:: Bp: ? D. So that if when the Bodies are in E and F, the common Center of Gravity be in the Point O; then when they are in B and D, it ſhall be in the Point 2. Therefore the common Center of Gravity ſhall deſcribe the Ellipſe AOHE. C AS E IV. If the Curve ABE verea Parabola, whoſe Ax is AG, and Ordinate EG, it may be demonſtrated ſtrated, that the common Center of Gravity mall deſcribe another Parabola (G ADF, or Ap O) having the ſame common Ax. For (from the Nature of theſe Curves)tis EGd: BCa: : AG: AC. And FGĩ: DCa: AG DC, therefore EGY: BCa:: FG: DC, and EG: BC: : FG: DC, and alternately EG: FG:: BC: Dq, and (by Diviſion) EF: FG:: BD: DC, and ſotis every where. Conſequently if EG be divided in F in the Ratio of the Magnitudes of the Bodies, the common Center of Gravity ſhall deſcribe the Parabola ADF, or (hich is all one) if upon the Ax AG and with a Parameteræ FC AG the Path of the common Center of Gravity. & ye deſcribe a Parabola, this Curve ſhall be  & A8E V. In like manuer it might be ſen, that if tho Three Curves ABE, Ap O, ADF were Parabolas; the Bodies deſcribing the outer and thę inner Parabolæs, the common Center of Gravity woud deſcribe the middle oue, viz. Ap O; that is, ſuppoſing their Motions tobe ſo adjuſted as was mention'd in the Theorem, and the lnterval EF to be divided in the Point O, in the ”æaætio of the Magnitudes. For ſin theſe Cury⸗s alſo) EO: OF:; B): pD. ait C AS E. VI. And, Laſtly, If the Curve ABE were an Equilateral Hyperbola, having the Tranſverſe AL, and Ordinate EG; it may be demonſtrated, that the common Center of Gravity ſhall deſcribe another (but not an Equilateral) Hyperbola, having the ſame Tranſrerſe AL with the former; or, which is all one, that ſuch on Hyperbola as this ſhall be the Track of the common Center of Gravity, as the Bodies move one in the Curve, and the other in the Ax, according to the Intent of the Theorem. For in the Equilateral Hyperbola EGa æLGXAG, and BCI=ZLCXAG,; and in the other Hype, bola rom the Conich Elements) tis FGI: DCũ: LGXAG: LCXAG. So that in theſe Curves alſo twill be concluded, that EF: FG:: BD: DC; and from thence the Conſequence (ſo often repeated) with Reference to the common Center of Gravity, is plain and clear. And the ſame may be ſiewn here of Three Hyperbolas, as was before of Three Parahola s, or of Tyo Ellipſes and a Circle. There are ſome oſ the Mechanich Curves, in which I con'd apply this Matter yet farther; but I muſt obſerve juſt Bounds, and ſas tis non rime) leave this Subject: ]0 C o x. Tis evident from theſe ſeveral Caſes, that the common Center of Gravity deſcribes àa Conick Section of the ſame Family with that which the Bodies themſelves deſcribe; if at leaſt (as to the ſirſt Caſe) one may be allowd to make the Circle and Ellipſe akin to one another, and ſay, that a Circle isan Ellipſis, whoſe Tranſverſe and Parameter are equal to one another. Fourth CoROLL ARY t0 the general Lav of Motion. The Motions of Bodies (included in any given Space) are the ſame with reſpect to one another, whether that Space be at Reſt, or hether it moves uniformly in a Right Line, without any circular Motions. HIS is eaſily demonſtrated from the Second Corollary to the General Laws of Motion; and particularly from the Deduction made from thence, about the relative Velocity being ever proportional to the Magnitude of the Stroke. If the relative Velocities continue ever the ſame (as they do, whether the Space, in which they are containd, moves, or is at reſt then the Magnitudes of the Strokes which the Bodies. make upon one another, are the ſame ſtill, and ſo their Motions are the ſame with reſpect to one another. Fifth COROLLARY to the general Lows of Motion. If Bodies are movd any how amongſt themſelves, and are urgã by equal accelerating Forces, that act with parallel Directions, their Motions will proceed in all Reſpects, as if they mere not influen?d at all by thoſe acelerating Forces. lElESS OR thoſe Forces acting equally(with reſpect to the Quantities of the Bodies to be moved) and in parallel Directions alſo; they will (by the Second general La of Motion) as to the Point of Velocity, equally move the ſeveral Bodies, and conſequently never alter their Motions and Poſitions with Reſpect to one another. i : —5 ' Having thus endeavourd to make ſome Aꝑplications of thoſe moſt uſeful and comprehenſive Lams of Nature laid down by the Great and Illuſtrious Author; I ſnall go on to his Doctrine of Centripetal Forces, and explain ſome of the wonderful Theorems he has diſcover'd upon that Head. a. ———— ————— O F TH E Centripetal Forces, a Velocities of Bodies,, Voving in li Curvilincal Figures. LDlti . v DEF INITI o N I Cemripetal Force is that, by which a Body is draiwn, or impelbd, or by any other Means onſoever) made to tend to a certain Point, as à Center. li s F this kind is the Force of Gravity, by O which a Body tends to the Center of the Earth; the Magnetick Force by which a Body tends to the Center of the Loadſtone; and that Force (whatever it be) by which the Planets are continually with- held from going on in Right Lines, and forced to move in Curves, DE F I N I T  ON II. The abſolute Quantity of the Centripetal Force, is the Meaſure of it, greater or leſs, in Proportion to the Efficacy of the Cauſe, propagating it a Centro ad circumferentiam. Hus in one attractive Body, the Power of Attraction is ſtronger and greater than jn another. The Magnetick Vertue is more vigorous and forcible in one Load-ſtone, than in another. And ũn the greater Syſtems of Matter) that Force, by which the ſame Bodies, at the ſame Diſtance from the Centers of the Planets, is urged towards them, is ſtronger in one Planet than another. Thus (as we ſhall ſee afterwards) the Weight of the ſame Body at any Diſtance from the Center of the Sun is greater than its Weight at the ſame Diſtance from the Center of Jupiter; and this greater than that, at the ſame Diſtance from the Center of Saturn; and this greater than that, at the ſame Diſtance from the Center of the D E F I N I TI ON III. The accelerating Quantity of the Vis Centripeta, is the Meaſure of it, ith reſpect to the Velocity which it generates in a given Time. X. gr. The Vertue of the ſame Magnet is greater at a leſs Diſtance, and leſs at a greater Diſtancee The gravitating Force of Bodies, is greater in the Valleys and depreſ'd Places of the Earth, than upon the Tops of high Hills and Mountains; and is yet greater in theſe elevated Places, upon the Surface, than at greater Diſtances from it. But in equal Diſtances from the Earth, tis every where the ſame; for all deſcending Bodies, be they more neavy or light, greater or ſmaller, abating the Reſiſtance of the Air, are equally accelerated. The manifold Experiments made upon Pendulums have ſufficiently provd theſe Things to be true in Fact. DE F I N I TI ON III. The Quantitas Motrix of rhe Centripetal Force, is the Meaſure of it, , proportional to the Motion which it generates in n ę ven Time. Uchii is morę or greater Weight in a greater Body, and a leſũ in a leſ Body; and greate; Weight in the ſame Body near the Earth, and leſs at a farther Removal upwards. This Force is the Centripetentia, or Propenſion of a Body towards a Center, or (as one may properly enough ſay) the Pondus of it; and tis always. Enown (that is, the Magnitude of it is meaſured or found) by that of an equal and contrary Force, ſuch as is ſuſficient to hinder the Defeput of the Body. I EX? L 1C AT Ioæ. Theſe Quantities of the Centripetal Force Mr. Nemton calls by theſe Names, and, for Diſtinctions ſake, conſiders them as referring to Bodies, to the Places of Bodies, and to a Center of Forces. Namely, the Vis Motriæ relates to Bodies themſelves, as the Endeavour and Propenſion of the whole (compounded of the Propenſions of all the Parts) towards a Center. The Vis Acceleratrix reſpects the Place of a Body, as a certain Force or Efficacy (ropagated from. a Center, and diſfuſed thro all the circumjacent Regions) to move Bodies that are in thoſe Placess The Vis Abſolutæ reſpẽcts the Center it ſelf, asſome way or other a Cauſe, without which the Vires Motrices are mot ꝑropagated thro' the Regions about it. What the Cauſe and Origin of Centripetal Force Is, is not neceſſar? to be determin'd here; tis ſuſficient ters of pure Phyſical Conſideration (ſuchas are the Cauſes and Subjects of theſe Forces) twas Foreign to our Author's Purpoſe and Peſign o enter upon any Diſcuſſion of them in this Plãce. But here we may take Notice of an uſeful Compariſon between the Vis Acceleratrix, and what we call Velocity. For the Vis Acceleratriæ beats the ſame Relation to the is Motriæ, that Velocity does to Motion; and as the Quantity of Motion ariſes from the Multiplication of the Velocity into the Quantity of Matter, ſo doès the Vis Motriæ from the Multiplication of the Vis Acceleratrix into the Quantity of Matter. For the Sum of the Actions of the Vis Acceleratriæ upon all the particles of a Body, is the Vis Motrix of the whole; as the Sum of the Momenta, ariſing from the Multiplication of the Velocity into all the Particles of a Body, is the compleat Momentum, or Quantity of Motionof the whole: So that, as in Bodies of different Magnitudes, when the Velocity is the ſame in all of them, the Quantities of Motion are proportional to the Magnitudes or Bulks; ſo in all Bodies, when the accelerating Gravity is the ſame (that is, neãr the Surface of the Earth) the Gravitas Motriæ, or the Pondui, ĩs proportional to the Quantities of Matter, that is in Homogeneal Bodies) to the Magnitudes of them. But then, aſcending higher into the Regions where the accelerating Gravity is leſs, o Pondus of the Body is leſſend in proportion tò that, even as the Momentum or Gravity of Motion in a Body is ſaid to be leſs, in proportion to the Diminution of the Velocity with which it moves. But univerſally, as in one Caſe the Momenta are as the Velocities multiplied into the Quantities of Matter; ſo in the other, the Vires or Gravitates Motrices, or Pondera are as the accelerating Gravities into the Quantities of Matter. Thus if the accelerating Gravity in the Region be twice leſs than it was in the Region A, then the Pondus of the ſame Body M ſhall be in the Region B, but half what it was in the Region A; but if the Body N be twice or thrice leſs than the Body 44, then the Weignht of & will be 4 or 6 times leſs in the Region B, then it was in 4. Suppoſe G = the accelerating Gravity of the Body M in the Region A, and, the Qnantity)? denoting either an Integer or a Fraction, G? ſhall expreſs the acclerating Gravity of M in the Region B, according as it is greater or leſ there then in the Region A. And becauſe the acclerating Gravities of all Bodies in the ſame Places or at the ſame diſtances, are equal; therefore theſe Quantities G and Gy ſhall expreſ the acclerating Gravities of the Body N, Poſited at the ſame Diſtances, in the Regions A and B, with the Body M. Therefore MXG is the Pondus of the Body M in the Region A, and NYXGp is the Pondus of the Body N in the Region B, univerſally. Now Suppoſe M: N:: 2: I. and æ3; then MXG: NG):: MxG: I Mx: G:: 1:] to that the Pondus of M in the Region A is quadruple the Pondus of N (a Body half as big) in the Region B, where the accelerating Gravity is: of that in the Region A. Suppoſe M: N:: 3: . then MXG: NXG) :: MxG: , Mx G:: i:5, in which Caſe the Weight of N in the Region B, is 6 times leſs than that of M in the Region A; and the like in other Caſes. The Areas which revolving Bodies deſcirbe & Rays dravn to an immovable Center of Force) do lie in immovable Planes, and are proportionabce to the Times in which they are deſcriba. ET SABCDEFS be (IG. I.) any Polygon, and the Lines AS, BS, &c. drawn to the fix'd Point S. Produce the ſides AB, BC, CD, DE, EF to the the Point c, 4, e, f, in ſuch a Manner that AB may=Bc, BCCd, CD=De, DEZEſ. From the Point C draw CR to cut BS in R, and let it be parallel to c B, and Cc parallel toBS; ſo likewiſe draw D4 parallel to SC, and Ee to SD, and Ffto SE. The Triangles SBC, SBC tween the ſame Parallel's SB and Cc. Alſò ſince ABBc, the Triangles ASB, BS c are equal, therefore ASB2BSC. So in like manner twill be prov'd, that the Triangle CSD is CSã heing upon the ſame Baſe CS, and between the ſame Parallel’s CS, Dà; but becauſe BCC4, the Triangle BSC=CS à, therefore BSCCSD, and conſequently ASBCSD; and by the ſame way of arguing we ſnall conclude all the Triangles of the Polygon to be equal to one another, viz. ASB=BSC=CS D=DSE=ESF, &c. Now I mall demonſtrate that in equal Times, a Body (urgd by a centripetal Force tending to the CenterS) will deſcribe theſe equal Area's. For let T expreſs any Portionof Time divided into ſeveral equal Parts expreſd by A. B. C. D. E. &and let us imagine a Body placd in the Line AB at the Point A, and to bo carried by ſucha Force that in the firſt part of time A it.voud deſcribe the Line AB. It's plain (by the firſt Law of Motion) that if the Body were not otherwiſe hinderd in the 2d part of Time B, it woud deſcribe the Line Bc=AB, and ſo the Areas ASB, BS c wou'd be equal. But when it is come to the Point B imagine the centripetal Force to exert it ſelf and begin to cauſe the Body to tend towards the Center S (Which we will ſuppoſe to be the Center of Forces) and let this centripetal Force be ſuch, that if the Body were entirely acted by that, it woud make it deſcribe the Linè RB in the Time B. Here then the Body at the Point Bis drawn by two Forces, the one its innate Force whoſe Direction is from B to c, the other the Centripetal, whoſe Direction is from B to R. Therefore (by Corol. I. of the Laws of Motion) the Body will move in tht Line BC the Diagonal of the Parallelogram RBCe; and at the end of the Time B it will be found in the Point C, ever in the ſame Plane with the Triangle ASB. In like manner in the 3d part of Time C the Body will deſcribe the Line CD the Diagonal of the Parallelogram of which the Triangle CDã is the:: And in the 4th part of Time twill deſcribe the Diagonal DE, and ſo of the reſt: So that by the Conjunction of theſe two Forces it will deſcribe the Periphery of the Poligone ABCDEF. Now the Triangles ASB, BSC, CSD, &c. were proved to be equal; but they are deſcribò in the equal times A, B, G, &c. therefore equal Are⸗'s are deſcribe in equal Times; and conſequently Time A: Time A+B :: Area ASB:: Area ASBTBSC, and Time A: Time A BVC: : Area ASB: Area ASBBSCBSD, and ſo on; that, is the Areæ deſcribd are as the Times of Deſcription Now if the Lines AB, BC, CD, &r. the Caſes of the Triangles be diminiſd, and their Number augmented infinitely, the Parameter of the Poligone willbecome a Curve Line, and ſo the Centripetal Force (by which the Body is drawn out of the Tangents) will act inceſſantly, and without Intermiſſionn. And any Ares deſcribd (which in the former Caſe were ſiewn to be proportional to the Times of Deſcription) will ſtill continue proportional to the ſame Time in this Caſe alſo. Q: E: D. C o . I. In Mediums whero a Body meets with no Reſiſtance, if the Area’s are not proportional to the Times, the Forces do not tend to the common Concourſe of the Rays. Iſay, in non-reſiſting Mediums: For in Mediums where a Body meets with Reliſtance, and ſo is any way hinderd in its Motion, the Areas may poſſibly not be proportional to the Times, and yvet, the Forces may tend to the common Concourſe of the Rays. Ex. gr. Suppoſe in FIG. I.) the Body to have deſcribd the Line AB in the Timet, and whereas (if not otherwiſe hinderd) it woud deſcribe Bo=AB in the next equal Portion of Time, imagine it to meet with ſome Reſiſtance; ſo aãsto deſcribe no more than Bæ in the ſame Time; then the Triangle SB n=SB m will be leſs than SBA; ſo that the centripetal Force acting as before in the Caſe where we ſuppoęd no Reſiſtance, the Area's will not now be proportional to the Times, and yet the Forces tend to the Point  the common Interſection of the Rays. h al Mediums whatſoever, if the Deſcription ofthe. Areã s be accelerated (that is, if an equal Area be deſcri&d in a leſs Portion of Time, orãa greater Area in an equal Time) then the Forces do not tend to the common Concourſe of the Rays, but decline from thence in Conſequentia (that is, to thę Frts Fqpuis w hich the Body i is moving. ⸗, I. n ) AB heing =B- c, the Areas ASBBS taken about the ſame Point s, will ever hoęqual- But if we took a Point as P between Ba1bA; the. Aea's ASB word be greater than itheiAte” BP c. On the other Hand, if we take ã Point 25 Qon the other Side of S, the Area BQæ ill: he gę ãtor than ASB. TTherefore if when in the firſt Portion of Time the Alrea ASB was deſcribd, in the 2d Time. a greater Area, as BOL GBQ?) be deſcrid;tis certain, that the centripetal Force muſt have acted with a Direction, as LC parallel to Bo Q,: that is, that the Forces now tend to the PointQ The: ſame may be ſnewn for any other Point taken in the ſame Right Line beyond Q; if the Direction of the Areæ's be accelerated, the Tendency of the Forces will ſta be in Con ſequentiau c  550 3] ſeoniliveo T 2 E o RIL. H 77; n Eve, Body moving in u Cu urve, and ſ by Rajs dr avn toa certain Point, iilel inmovable, or going on iformly in a  Right Lin Motion) deſribing Areas about, that Point proportional to the Times;  is inged byia Ceutripetal Force tending to that ſame Point. ſ See FI G. Sli c A s E ſũ 3 ſ OR every Body moving in a Corve, is carL ried out of ĩts Kight Iine Coutſe by ſone Force acting uponit, by the firſt' Lais  Motion. And that Force by which the Body is mãde to deflect from its Rectiline Courſe, and to dèſcribe the little equal Triangies SAB; SBũ, SCD, in equal Times, about the immovabſe Point s, muſt “aſtin the Point B with a Dil rection parallel to the Line Cc, by the Second Lav of Motion: That is, it acts with the Direction BS. So in the Point C it acts according to a Line parallel to D4, that is, by the Line CS, for the ſame Reaſon: And ſotis every where. Therefore it always acts according to Lines that tend to the immovable Point S. GE. D. C AS E II If the Plane in whichi the Body deſcribes a Curvilineal Figureſand conſequently the Center or Point to which the Forces tend) moves uniformly in a Right-line Direction;tis all one as to the Effect (by Coroll. 4. to the general Lavs of Motion) whether it does ſo, carrying the Body and All along with it, or whether it be abſolutely at reſt. So that either way the Truth of the Propoſition is manifeſt. Q E. D. S C H O L. Tis poſſible that a Body may be urgd by a Centripetal Forte, compounded of ſeveral other Forces; about which Compoſition of Forces we have ſpoke ſuſficiently already in the firſt Pages of this BBox. Now always in ſuch Caſes as this, the Senſe of the foregoing Theorem, is, that the Force which is compounded of all the reſt, is that which tends to the Center. Ex. gr. Suppoſe in FIG. II. Pag. 7. where the Force acting with the Direction CB is ſiewn to be equivalent to the Forces acting with the Directions CD, CE, CF. We are to conceive the compound Force, whoſe Direction is CB to tend to the Center; ſo that the Center of the Forces, where all the Rays meet, is ſomewhere or other in the Line CB (produced at leaſt. Tis further to be noted, that if there be any Force that acts with a Direction perpendicular to the Superficies deſcribd by the Body, that this Force may be altogether left out of the Account of the Compoſition of the Forces. For tho it makes the Body to decline from the Plane of its Motion, yet it tends no way to alter the Magoitude of the Surface deſcribd, neither as to the encreaſing or leſſening of i it, and may therefore be neglected. T H E O R. III. Every Body (which by a Ray drawn to the Center of another Body (howſoever mov'd) deſcribes Area's about that Center proportional to the Times) is urged with a Forcæ compounded of the Centripetal Force tending to that other Body, and of all the accelerating Fore with which that other Bodj it ſelf is urgã. ET the Body M deſcribe Areas proportional to the Times, about the Center of the Rody N; and let the Body N he urged with an accelerating Force, as -IPA.: Suppoſẽ now both Bodies to he drawn. ina parallel Direction by a ngw Forcę equal and contraty to the former, whioh put /A. Then, notwithſtanding, the Bõy M will defcribe Areas proportional to the Times, as it did before the Action of this new Force, with reſpect to N, (by Cor. 5. to4he Lavs of Motion;) but the Force —A vill deſtroy. the ForœA in the Body? N (which will now therefore either quieſce, or move uniformly in a Right Line by the firſt Lav af Mationſ)) But àlſo becauſe the Body M is influenced by this new ForceA; therefore the Force by which it at ſirſt tended to the Body N heing call'd G, the Force by which it is now urged ſhall? GA; which Force (by Theor. II.) ſhall ſtill tend to the Center of the Body N, becaufe we have ſewn, that the Areãls, uith reſpect to that. Center, are ſtill Eſæ to the Timęs: SO that every Boov ſt u5ꝶD Lqu c o E. I Hence i one Boq , with a Ray dran to another, deſcribes Areas proportional to the Times; and if from the whole Force (Whether a ſimple or compounded one) with which the former Body is urged, we ſubſtract the whole accelerating Force with which the latter Body is urged'; all the remaining Force by which the former Body is urged willtend tò thè latrer Body, as its Center. This is plain from that Demonſtration; for the reſulting Forcę is'æ C o r. II. IF the Areas he Dot accurately, but only nearly propoſtional to the ſimes, then the remaining Force will not ãccurately, but ncarly tend t0 the other Body, And the Converſe of this is true  If a Body with a Ray drawn to another Body deſcribes Area's,, which compard with the Times; are very unequal 5 and that other Body is either quieſcent, or moves uniformſy: in' a Right Line: Then, either there is nò Action of the Centripetal Force: tending to that other Body ãs its Center, orælſe its mixXd and compounded. with fome very ſtrong Actiots of other Forces: And the whole Force(compounded of all, if there are many) is directed to another Center, either a movable or an immovable one, about which the Deſcription of the Areæs ĩs equable and regular- And the ſame holds, when that other Body is moved even with any ſort of Motion; provided the Centripetal Force (that which we here ſay is directed to another Center) be taken for the Remainder, fter the Subſtraction (of the whole accelerating Force that acts upon the latter Body) from the real Centripetal Force of the former Body. The Reaſon of all which is eaſily deducible from the Second Theorem (foregoing) in Conjunction with this Third. For where the Area's deſcribd are proportional to the Times, there the Action of the Centripetal Force tends to a Center, that is, either quieſcent or moves uniformly in a Right Line: This is plain from Theor. II, Therefore if that Center be either quieſcent, or moves uniformly in a Right Line; and the Area's deſcribd be not proportional to the Times, tis a ſure Proof that either the Action of the Centripetal Force does not tend to that Center at all, or elſe thattis confounded and diſturbd by the powerful Actions of other Forcess. And if according to the Tenour of Theor. lll. the Center heęre ſpoken of be another Body, the Reaſon of the preſent Corollary will be ſuſiienly clear and manifeſtt t AB he any Arch of a Curve, (FIG. III) ihe Right Line AB its Subtenſi, and AD its Tangent equal and parallel to the Ordinate CB. When the Points A and D come infinitely near together, the Arch AB, the Subtenſe AB and the Tangent AD will be equal tq one another; or in the Newtonean Style, the laſt Ratio of the Arch, the Chord and Tangent will he 4 Ratio of Equality, Each one of theſe Lines therefore may be uſed or taten for the other in all Argumentatious about ultimate Ratios; thas is, when theſe Quantities are conſiderd as vaniſbing upin the infinitely near Approach of the Poiuts A This Lemma appears to be ſo clear and evident, that I have forbore to demonſtrate it upon that Account. E II. P R O ⸗. The Lines DB, db vimg puralll to AC, and corſiquently Perpendicular to AD; iraning the Lines BG, bęg alſo Perpendiculur to the Subtenſes AB, ab; Let it be required to find the ultimate Ratio of DB, db (the Subtenſes of the Angle of Contact) to the conterminal Arohess AB, a b; becauſe of ahe Right Anglés Abg, ABG, n.Girle paſi. thrœX. ihe Points; Abg,  as 4- vii c irle trat the Boints aB G, A ntt⸗ ET te Arch E A, = AG K, à A/ aæ. ACX, Acæx. BCSYV. = AB= D and Abæà. Now becauſe of the Circles we have theſe Equations Yvæ =2 RXXX, ànd DD 52Ræ; yy=20m and dd 2æ3 and dividing by 2R and 27 (hich are each of them æ ſtandſng Quantity) DD will always be as X, and dà as æ. But when the Points A,B, and A,b approach infinitely near, the Quantity X hecomes %, and æ becomes æ, and are the Subtenſes of their reſpective Angles of Contat, alſo the Chord pi is in this Caſe coincident with the Arch A, and the Chord à coincident with the Arch 4; therefore 2RX is A and A is as &, likewiſe 272 = aa, and aa is as æ, ſo that the Subtenſes of the Angles of Contact are as the Squares of their conterminal Arches. Q. E. I. S C H O L. We have only here conſider'd ab and DB (the Subtenſes of the evaneſcent Angles of Contact) as Perpẽndiculars to the Tangent AD; but it will be the ſame thing if we ſuppoſe them t6be inclined, for let AD and BD make any given Angle, then the mtimate Ratio of BD to hã will be the famt às before, and conſequently the ſame with that of AB⸗ to albq; If the Angle D be nov givęr; vet the. Angles D,à will always converge to, and come nearer an Equality, than by any Diſerence aſigiable, and conſequently will at laſt be equal; herefore the Lines BD, hæ are i the ſame Rutiv 0 T u æ O R IV. Bodies deſiribing different Circles ith an equable Motion; their Centripetal Forces tend to the Centers of thoſe Circles; and to the Law of thoſe Forces may alſo be diſ coverd. (FIG. IV.) 1. HAT the Centripetal Forces tend to L the Centers of theſe Circles, is moſt evident. For ſince the Motion in the Peripheries is ſuppoſed equable, therefore from the common Principles of Mechanicks, the Arches run will be as the Times in which they are run. But the Sectors (or Areàs taken from the Centers of the Circles) are in Proportion as the Arches upon which they ſtand. Therefore thoſe Area's are as the Times; and therefore (by Theor. IL.) the Centripetal Forces tend to the 2. Imagine the Bodies to deſcribe the Arches BD, bd in the ſame time, and let CD, cãà be drawn parallel to SBS, that is, perpendicular to the reſpective Tangents BC, le. Now ſince tis by the Centripetal Forces that the Bodies are drawn out of the Tangents into the Circumferences, tis plain that thoſe Lineola CD, cà (conſiderd not as of any finite Length) will repreſent the Centripetal Forces: For they are the genuine Effects of thoſe Forces, produced in the ſame time, and therefore are proportional to them. Again, becauſe they are Lineolæ Naſcentes, they will not differ from others that tend to the Centers of the Circles, whither the Centripetal Forces ought to be directed, by the former Part of this Prop. III. 3.Now to diſcover the Law of theſe Forces, let S=R.SB=r. bdiA, BD=a. ci=x (Subtenſe of the Angle of Contact, in the greater Circle) CD=% (Subtenſe of the Angle of Contact) in the leſs. BY Lem. II. we have 2R X 2AA. and 2ræ = aa, ſo that A: 4:: 2RX: 27 æ, conſequently X: æ: A 5 That is this Tu æ o R. ViZ. The Centripetal Forces are as the Squares of the Arches eſcribd in the ſame Time) divided by the reſpective Radii. Q.: E: I. In order to the Inveſtigation of the many noble Corollaries that flow from this Theorem, we are obliged to introduce theſ Symbolss C Centripetal Force:. TZ/Time. Væ  Velocity in the outer Circle bà; and c;, t, v; to expreſs, the like Quantities in the inner Circle BD. By thę a Theorem tis C: ci ꝶ : but becauſe the Arches A, a, ate deſcribd in the ſame Time, therefore, by the Principles of Mechanicks, the Velocities are as the Spaces, that is, the Ascho: run; thereſore V: un A: a, therefore a V C: : c: : , that I is COoR. I The Centripetal Forces a the s Squares of the Velocities, divided by the Radii. This is the Law for the Centripetal Forces, in the Caſe of infinitely ſmall Arches deſcribXd in the ſame Time. Let T, t, expreſs now the whole Periodick Times of deſcribing the Girdles, and let the PeripheTy of the outer Circle =P, and that of the inner =), and all the reſt as before: From Mechanichs, the Times of deſcribing the Peripheries P, p, are in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratio of thoſe Peripheries (or the Space, run) and the Reciprocal of the Velocities, that is, T: t:: PXu: )XV; but P: :: Rin€ (the Peripheries are ãs the Radii) therefore T: i: RXv: rxV, but alſo V: u:: A: à ;che Velocities in the equãble circular-Motions are eternally as the Arches deſcribd in the ſame Time) therefore T: ?:: R}æ: æA, and Tr AærR4, and ſſquating TrAæ rR a®, therefore all one,C: c: R? urT, that is Cox II. The Centripetal Forces are in the Ratio compounded of the direct Ratio of the Radii, and the reciprõcal Ratio of the Squares of the Periodick Timęs. Which is the Law for the Centripetal Forces, when we conſider the whole Periodick Times: Now, from theſe general Laws all the others; relating either to Centripetal Forces or Velocities, are eaſily deduced, making any Suppoſition what ſoever. For, whatever the Periodick Times be, we have got à general Theorem for the Centripetal Forces in this laſt Corollary: And as for the Velocities, they are ever as thie Arches A; ã, deſcribd in the ſame Time, and confequently ui be found- by æ è Proportioũof thoſe Arches. Eæ. gr. 1. Letus ſoppoſe T l Now ſince (by: Cor; IL.) ltis G: c”: , hili =T by Hypoiheſis thereſore C: c: b :R: v. ThatisT nEO: 5 the Berioiex Times are equal, the Centripetal Forces are directly as the Rays: Eor the Velocities. ſTisC: q: Y by C. I.) and C: : ”: rũa this Caſe of equal Times) Therefore V à a :: R: . from whence V: u:: R: r. T The Velocities are directly as the Rays, when the Periodick Times are equal. 3 L suu ?t: R:7. Therefore ſince C: c⸗: z & Cor. IL.) tis plain, that Cæc. Theor. r If - Squares of the Periodick Times be directly as the Rays, the Centripetal Forces are equal. For the Velocities. Tis C: c: æ æ (by Cor. I.) and Cæc (in this Caſe ;) thererefore p v , from whence V-: :: R: 7, and V: v:: RE- 3. Theor. The Velocities are directly in the ſubduplicate Ratio of the Rays, when the Squares of the Periodick Times are as the Rays. 3. E T: ?:: R: ?. Thereſore ſince C: c:: ?? Vu E Cor. II.) Tis clear, that C: c:: : RT - If the Squares of the Periodick Times be as the Squares of the Rays directly, the Centripetal Forces ſhall beas the Rays pot proally. For the Velocities. Tis C: c: xi2 : n and C: c:: 7: R un Caſe) therefore : Z:: riR, from whence V:=v, and V=u. THEOR. If the Squares of the Periodick Times are as the Squares of the Rays, the Velocities are equal. 4. Let T: t7:: Rè : rP. Therefore ſince C: c nt : y (by Cor. II.) tis plain, that C:c:: 7: R. TuEOR. H the Squares of the Periodick Times be as the Cubes of the Rays, the Centripetal Forces ſhall be reciprocally as the Squares of the Rays. For the Velocities. V: 2 ĩlr Tis C: Hg by Cor. L) and C: c:: æ1 DV 4: R (in this preſent Caſe) therefore ]: 7u r: R, from whence we have VR = vr, and Viu:: f- RE TH E O R. When the Squares of the Periodick Times are as the Cubes of the Rays, the Velocities are reciprocally in the Subduplicate Ratio of the Rays. 5.Let T': ? :: ”'. univerſally. Therefore ſince C: c:: : x (by Cor. II.] and T, :: an, x 0 : ũ i ?:: R  7qby the Conſequence of this l n an Suppoſition) therefore C: :: 7æ: Ra, that r lũl SS SSE  EI ~ L 146] n—m . R 228 a l m is, C: c:: r . For the Veloi 3il . V?  à cities. We have C: c:: R : (from Cor. I) , 2€m 2€$m V and C: c:: 7 : R , therefore 4: x : nm R v 2”m=-m 2n—m j v rir R it from whence (by juſt Operation with the Exponents) we ſhall have nm nm Vioi:r:: R So that if the Exponent of the Periodick Times be m, and that of the Rays be =7; then the Exponent of the Cen2 and that of the m tripetal Forces ſall 2 nm Velocities hall =m/ : Q E I Fig. s.  P P R o . I. To determine the Space the Centripetal Force moid carry a Body throo, in the ſame Time that it deſcribes any given Arch of a Circle, in which tis ſuppoyã to move uniformty. Jeen the Body at the Point B (F IG. V.) to be acted entirely by the Centripetal Force, and ſo drawn on by it in the Diameter BQ towards the CenterS. Now, if this Force be ſuppos'd to remain ſtill the ſame, without any manner of Alteration, and to act upon the Body by continual repeated Impulſes; then the Body will be carryd by it after the ſame manner, and according to the ſame Law, that it woud be by the Force of Gravity. And therefore the Body (thus acted upon by the Centripetal Force) woud deſcribe Spaces in the Duplicate Ratio of the Times: For that is the Lam of Gravity (by Theor. ll. Galil. Dial. lII.) This premi'd; Let the infinitely ſmall Arch BD æ 4, and the Particle of Time tis deſcribd in be put /r; alſo Iet the given Arch (intended in the Problem, be BE)  A, and the Time tis deſcribd in be /T. Then becauſe the Motion in the Circle is ſupposd equable, tis t: T:: a: A, and: T:: a, A, rom what Galileus has demonſtrated about equable Motions.) Alſo (putting the Diameter of the Circle= D) tis æ a: a therefore :7 T::  5 æ But it was ſnewn before, that the Spaces which the Body (acted by the Centripetal Force) deſcribes, are as the Squares of the Times; and there. a fore thoſe Spaces are as the Quantities 5 and But in the Timer, while the little Arch ⸗ o :i i3 deſcribd, the Centripetal Force carries the Body through the little space & (by Art II. Theor. IV.) thereſore in the Time T, while the Arch A is deſcribJd, it woud (if the Body were ſolely acted by it) carry it thro the Space From whence ariſes this THE OR. That in what Time a Body revolving in a Circle deſcribes any given Arch BE, in the ſame Time, if it were carried by the Centripetal Force in a Rectilineal Courſe, it woud deſcribe a Space BEI BQ Arch divided by the Diameter. Q E. I. equal to—that is, to the Square of that C o æ. I. Bodies deſcribing different Circles with equable Motions; the Spaces (they wowd be carried thro' by the Centripetal Forces in thoſe Circles, in the ſame Time) are directly proportional to the Centripetal Forces themſelves. Ex. gr. Let D. 4. be the Diameters of Two Circles, having their Center common; a. b. Two infinitely ſmall Arches deſcribd in theſe Circles in the ſame Particle of Time=t. A. B. any Two Arches oſ a finite Length deſcribd, the one in one Circle, and the other in the other, in the ſame Time T. Then from what was ſiewn before t: T:5: 5 for one Circle; and alſo  T : E  B for the other Circle. There-  A B a fore (by _—- 5 5  40 and D b a A 7 B I But the little Atls a and b being deſcribd in the ſame Time (by the HypO. ] llVE theſis) the Quantities 5, ; expreſs the Proportion of the — Forces in thoſe Cir( At lll. Theor. IV.) Alſo the Quantities 5 è are the Spaces the Bodies are carryd thro' by the Centripetal Forces in thoſe Circles in the Time T (by the Suppoſition) Therefore the Conſequence is clear. C o rR. II. Suppoſing all as before; the Spaces that the Bodies woud be carryd thro' by the Centripetal Forces, in unequal Times, are in the Ratio compounded of the Squares of the Times, and the Centripetal Forces. All the other Symbols ſtanding, let the Arch B be deſcribd in the Time ò; the infinitely ſmall Arks æ and b being ſuppoſed to be deſcribd in the ſame Particle : a:A of Time:, as before Then??: Tq:: 5' : 5 for one Circle, and ?. ò:: æ for the a : : other Circle. Therefore (equalling theſe Two Values of r°, and making the Aniogii from thence) we have & 3 æ T5 ò But the Two former Terms of the Analogy are the Spaces the Bodies woud be carryd thro by the Centripetal Forces in the Time Tand à; and the Two latter Terms are compounded of the Squares of thoſe Times, and the Centripetal Forces in the Two Circles. Therefore, &r. ò O K. II. If the Symbols A and B, inſtead of Arches, denote the whole Circumferences of the Circles, and conſequently Tand ò be the whole Periodick Times of the Deſcription of thoſe Circumferences; then tis evident, that the Quantities - 5 will be to one anotheras D: 4, that ĩs, the Spaces (the Centripetal Forces woud car ry the Bodies thrò in the Times that the Circumferences are deſcribd) woud be in Proportion as the Diameters, or the Circumferences. For A: B:: D: à (that is, the Peripheries are as the Diameters) and ſo æ. 4 .a D: a And theres no need of any Proof that this muſt be true univerſally, whatever bè the Ratio of the Periodick Times, or in what unequal Times ſoever the Circumferences of the Circles are imagined to be deſcribd by the Two Bodies However, if there were, the young Student for his Exerciſę might eaſily clear it, from the general Analogy in the laſt Corollary. For there twas ſewn; that 5 7 : : b, b  x T D  x 7 : Now, the Quantities, 7 expreſſing the Centripetal Forces in theſe Circles, 1 let us uſe the Symbols C. c. for them, and L 4 then then the Analogy ſtands thus, viz. a : ; : TxC: x c. Now, here let the Periodick Times be in what Ratio of the Rays we pleaſe, ve mal æill ĩnd B B D: 4Eæ & Let the Periodick Times be equal, that is TZ, then will C: c:: D: à (by what as ſiewn above at the Corollaries of Theor. IV.) and nd conſequenty ſ :: D: 4. hęn, let T: è:: D: 4, then vill Cæc, and nẽ: ſ :: D:ã. Let T::: D: dò, hen will CLen: d: D?, and conſequently y. æ. :Dx4r: dxD:: D: d. And ſo proportionably in any other Suppoſition that may be made. C o R, IV. From what is found in this Problem, we may eaſily compare Centripetal Forces with any other known Eorce, ſuch as that of Gravity (Eæ. gr) which ſhall be the Buſineſs of the following Problem. P R O 3. II. To find the Proportion of the Centripetal Force to that of Gravity. Sing the ſame Symbols as in Prob. I. ſuppoſe in the Particle of Time t, while the little Ark BDaæ is deſcribd, ( IG. V.) the Body by the Force of its Gravity deſcribd the little Space BP, which put =p. Then in the Time T, while the Arch BE2A is deſcribd, the Body will have deſcended through a Space L&æ s or 12: T:: ꝑ: to the pace deſcribd in the Time T, by the Lav of Gravity) æ BR (Exg™. JBut T P= A, becauſe of the eqpstie Motion in the Circle) So that BR y Aæ = the Space deſcribd by ax  (nce: T:: a: the Gravity in ine Time T. But in the ſame Time, the Centripetal 1 Fors woud carry the Body thro a Space 2/ what was ſiewn at Prob. L.) Therefore ;- Spaces to one another as æ thet i is, a as E B or as Dxp: a2. And conſequently the pliu of Gravity, and the Centripetal Force, making the Body to deſcribe theſe Spaces in the ſame Time, are one to another in the ſame Ratio Q E. I. But becauſe the Terms ? and a are infinitely ſmall, therefore to expreſs this Proportion in finite Quantities, e may proceed thus. Let it be 22: T:: ꝑ: E; then ? is the Space deſcribd by the deſcending Body in the Time T. But Grom the Uniform Motion in the Circle) ??: T:: æ: A, therefore (by Equality) æ: A::p: h, and a: p:: A: , and conſequently inſtead of the Terms) and æ, putting in : and A, which are proportional to them, the Proportion will. be as D}xE: Ae. 50 that we have this Theorem, The Force of Gravity is to the Centripetal Force (of a Body revolving uniformly in a Circle) as the Rectangle under he Diameter of the Circle, and the Line describ'd by a deſcending Body in any given Time, to the Square of the Arch deſcribd by the revolving Body in the ſame Time. QE. F. C oO R. When DxE=A?, then thoſe Two Forces are equal; that is, hen æ or the Space a Body deſcribes by the Force of Gravity, is equal to that it would be carried thro by the Centripetal Force in the ſame Time. T u E o R.V. A Body revolving in the Circumference of a Circle, the Centripetal anda Centrifugl Forces are equal to one another. OR while the little Arch GIG. V.) BD &Exæ. gr.) is deſcribd, the Centripetal Force has carried the Body towards the Center by the Space CD. And if the Centripetal Force were away, the Body, inſtead of deſcribing the Arch BD, woud go on in the Tangent, and deſcribe in the ſame Time the Lineola BC (Which by Lemma I. is= the little Arch BD.) In which Caſe it woud be carried off from the Curve of the Circle, by the Diſtance of the ſame Lineola CD; and this is the Effect of the Centrifugal Force. Therefore the Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces producing an Effect of the ſame Magnitude in the ſame Time, are equal to one another. Q. E. D. C O l li ] All the Theorems relating to Centripetal Forces, which were deduced in the Corollaries of Theor. IV. are applicable to ? Centrifugal PForces alſo. C o r. II. And, according to the Tenour of the laſt Problem, the Centrifugal Force ſhall be to that of Gravity, as A: DxE; and conſequently equal to it, when A=Dx. But to explain here a little what I intend by the Centrifugal Force being equal to that of Gravity, let us conceive a Body revolving in a Circle to be held by a Thread, produced out of the Center of the Circle it deſcribes, ſo that by the Means of this Thread it keeps always exactly in the Circumference of the Circle Tis certain, that as the Body revolves with a greater or leſi Degree of Velocity, ſo the Thread that holds it will be ſtretch’d more or leſs violently. For the Endeavour to recede from the Center of its Motion will be greater or leſs, as the Velocity with which it moves is either greater or leſ; and that greater or leſs Endeavour of receding will produce a greater or leſs Tenſion of the Thread. This ſtretching of the Thread by the Body, as it moves in this manner circularly, is the Eſfect of the Centrifugal Force, as that Tenſion of it by the meer Weight of the Body, where it is freely ſuſpended by the ſame, without the Intervention of any ſort of Motion or Impediment, is the compleat Effect of the Force of Gravity. And as the Degrees of Velocity (with which a Body may move circularly) are infinite, and conſequently there may be as many Degrees of Tenſion of the Thread that detains it in its Path in that Motion; ſo when ſuch a Degree of Velocity is pitcd upon, that the Tenſion of the Thread ariſing from thence, is equal to that which is the Reſult of the free Suſpenſion; we ſay then, that the Centrifugal Force is equal to that of Gravity, becauſe they both produce the ſame Effects upon the Thread; or whatever Proportion the Tenſions bear to one another, we may ſay, the Forces (the Cauſes of them) bear the ſame. Now, to enquire a little into this Matter. The revolving Body moving uniformly in the Circle, we will conſider the Velocity of that Motion, as ſome one or other of thoſe Velocities, which would be acquird by it in a free perpendicular Deſcent, Ex. gr. in the Diameter of the Circlee. Now, whatever Space the Body deſcribes by the Force of Gravity in its Deſcent, if it afterwards moves equably with the greateſt Velocity gotten by that Deſcent, it's a known Theorem, That the Space deſcribd by the uniform Motion ſhall be double that deſcribd by the uniformly Accelerate, in the ſame Time. Let the Body therefore in the Time T deſcend thro the Space &, and if with the Velocity otten by this Deſcent it afterwards moves equably in the Circle, and does in the ſame Time T deſcribe the Arch A; then ſhall A2 Now, let /mD univerſally, where m denotes either an Integer, or a Fraction. Then is A=2mD, ãand : (the Spacę the Centrifugal Force would carry the Body thrò in the Time T)/4 mmD. Therefore the Space deſcribed by the Centrifugal Force, is to that deſcribed by the Gravity in the ſame Time T, as 4.mmD: m D, that is, as 4m: 1, and conſequently theſe Forces are in the ſame Ratio. Hence in particular Caſes the Proportion of the Forces is eaſily known. Ex. g. If m=;, then 4. m=1, and ſo the Centrifugal Force in that Caſe is equal to the Gravity. If m=;, then 4 m=2, and ſo the Proportion of the Forces is as 2. 1. Ifm, then the Proportion is as 3. 1. If mæ1, then tis as 4. I. and in like manner for any other ſort of Suppoſition. The Senſe of all which may be expreſsd in this Theorem, That if a Body revolves in a Circle, with a Velocity equal to that acquird by a Deſcent thro a Space, that is to the Diameter of the Circle, as m to Unity; that then the Centrifugal Force ſhall be to that of Gravity, as 4m to Unity. 5 C H O L El Having hinted a certain Mechanich Theorem before concerning the Proportion of the Spaces deſcribd by an equable and an uniformly accelerated Motion, in the ſame Time, I think it not improper to ſubjoin a ſhort Illuſtration of it. Let the Quantity æ expreſs Time, y Velocity, the greateſt Time à, the greateſt Velocity b; the Two former Quantities being flowing ones, and the latter ſtanding. From the Nature of the uniformly acclerate Motion, the Velocities are proportional tothe Times. Therefore x: y: : d: b, and æ and x = Alſo in all Motions whatſoever, the Spaces deſcribed are as the Rectangles under the Velocities and the Times. Therefore the Fluxion of the Space for the accelerate Motion, is æ yx, and that for the equable Motion is =bæ. But the Fluent of bæx is = bx=bd, and the Fluent of yx c y⸗ 1s 5 2ęta ba Therefore the Space etiã by the equable Motion in the Time à with the ſtanding Velocity b, is double the Space deſcribd by the uniformly Accelerate, in the ſame Time à, with a flowing Velocity, the greateſt of which is equal to b qthe Velocity of the uniform Motion.) And from hence to determine the Proportion of the Spaces, deſcribd by an equable Motion with the Velocityb, and in the Time à, Ex. gr. and an uniformly accelerated one in the Time n4, where n denotes any whole or broken Number. It is (from the Nature of uniformly accelerated Motion, in which the Spaces are as the Squares of the Times) à: nd':: : -⸗ Sæs the Space deſcribd by the accelerate Motion in the Time nà; the Space deſcribd by it in the Time à being by what was ſnewn hefore. So that the Proportion required is that of bã: that is, of i: or of 2: nn univerſlly; which may be exempliſied in particular Caſes at Liberty. S C H O L. II. Now, to apply this to the former Compariſon between the Centrifugal Force and that of Gravity. Let the Arch A be deſcribed by the Body revolving in a Circle with an uniform Motion, in the Time 4, and the Line æ deſcribed by its Deſcent with an uniformly accelerate Motion in the Time nà; according to the latter part of the foregoing Seholium. Then is univerſally A: ::: 2: m, and A= from n whence : (the Space deſcribd by the Centriu4hth t a) is s2 fugal Force in the Time à) is B Suppoſe 40F 4mmDD DADn q4mmD imu and conſequently the Proportion of (as before at Cor. IL.) l md, then the Spaces deſcribd by the Centrifugal Force in the Time 4, and by the Gravity in the Time : minD nd, is as an n : mD, that Is as 2. I, Or as 4m: . OF which more - Proportion, that at Cor. II. is but a particular Caſe, viæ. when the Times are equal, or when æ is equal LEM M a. If the Right Line AE IG. VI.) and the Curve AC, given in Poſition, cut one another in the given Angle A; and if ihe Right Lines DB, EC be ordinately applyd to the Line AE (in another given Angle) meeting the Curve in the Points in B, C; Then ſuppoſing the Points B, C, to come to the Points A, the Curvilineal Triangles ADB, AEC, ſball be at laſt in the duplicate Ratio of their Homologous Sides. For drawing the Tangent AFG; upon the Approach of the Points B, C, to A, the Ratio of the Tangents AG, AF, the-Chords AC, AB, and the Arches AC, AB is a Ratio of Equality (by Lemma I Therefore the Curvilineal Triangles ADB, AEC are at laſt coinel dent with the Rectilineal Triangles ADB, AEG; but theſe being ſimilar (by the Aypotbeſis) are in a duplicate Ratio of their Homologous Sides by the Elements;) therefore the Curvilineal ones are ſo too. C o Rr. It is evident, that the Spaces which a Body (urged by any regular Force) deſcribes, are in the Beginning of the Motion as the Squares of the Times: For if the Times be expreſd by the Lines AD, AE, and the Velocities in thoſe Times by BD, EC, then (from Mechanics) the Spaces ſhall be as the Areas ADB, AEC; that is, in the Beginning of the Motion, as the Squares of the Times AD, AE. r a BA revolves  IG. VII.) dou a certain Center S, and deſcribes a Curve APQ; then if zPr touches the Curve in P, and from any other Points Q be drawn QR parallel to SP, and QU perpendicular to the ſame ; the Centripetal Force ſhall be reciproSPax GT⸗ cally as the ſolid ; taking the Value of it, not where the Points P and Qare at amy finite Diſtance, but at laſt when they come together. UT C for Centripetal Force, and T for Time. Now, in the indeſinitely ſmall Figure QRPT, the Lineola QR, being the genuine ven Time proportional to the Force, (by the Second General Law of Motion.) But if the Force it ſelf were given, the Lineola QR would be as the Square of the Time (by the foregoing Lemma) for the Force which draws the Body towards the Center S is a regular one, and the Space here intended is Lot a Finite, but a Naſcent Quantity; which are the Conditions that Lemma requires: So that to expreſs it in the ſorteſt Terms; if T be given, then QR is as C; and if Cbe given, then QR is as T; therefore neither T nor C being given, QR ĩs in the Ratio compounded of both, that is, QR is / as C}T?, and conſequently C is as But the Time is as the Area (by Theor. I) that is, T is as à SP X QT & the Area SPQ) and à QR SPXQ is as SPXQſ; ſo that C is rT P©XQT°u directly, that is as SPTã Reciprocally. QE. D. QR C o Er. Hence if any Curve be given, and withiniĩt a Point, to which (asa Center) the Ceatripetal Force is direted; we may find the Law of the Centripetal Force, which makes the Body to revolve in the Periphery of that Curve. In order to this, we are to compute the Value of this PXQTY &? Curve: Some Examples of which follow. ſolid according to the Nature of the Fig. S. P R O B. III A Body revolving in the Circumference of a Circle, tis requirã to find the Lav oſ the Centripetal Force tending to a Given Point in the Circumference. ET P ſG. VII) be the Place of the Body in the Periphery SQPA, Q the next Place into which it moves, and S the Center to which the Forces are directed. Let PK be perpendicular from P to the Diameter SA, QT perpendicular from Q to SP, LQR parallel to SP, RP a Tangent at P meeting Q, produced in Z. In the Firſt place here, the Triangles ZQR, ZTP, SPA are ſimilar. That the Triangles ZQR, ZTP are ſimilar is plain, becauſe OR is parallel to the Line SP by the Conſtru&ion. Again, that the Triangles ZTP, SPA are ſimilar, is evident, for the Angle SPA is a Right one from the Nature of the Circle, and the Angle ZTP is a Right one by the Conſtruction; alſo ZP being a Tangent, and SP a Chord, cutting the Circle at P, the Point of Contact, the Angle ZPT is = Angle SAP tanding upon the Arch SQP) from the Elements. Therefore the Angle TZP=Angle PSA, and conſequently the Triangles are ſimilar. From whence ZPà: ZT:: SAq: SP, and ZPa: ZTa:: RPa: QT (becauſe of the proportional Section of the Sides ZP and ZT by the Parallel QR;) therefore RPa: Qĩ:: SAd: SPI. But RP being a Tangent, and RQL a Secant, cutting it in R, and the Circle in q, therefore (from the Elements) RPY —the Rectangle QRXRL, therefore the Analogy ſtands thus QRXRL: QTã:: SAã: SPq; from whence  i _ And becauſe when the Points Qand P come together, the Line RL becomes=SP, therefore putting SP for RL, we RXSP: have QT= -  Now (by Theor. VL.) the - . Pqx Ta Centripetal Force is reciprocally as and we have found the Value of QTũ in the proper Terms of the Curve, therefore multiM plying this Valus of QT⸗ by u we have which is Reciprocally as the Centripetal Force in this Caſe; that is, becauſe SA, the Diameter, isa given Quantity, the Centripetal Force reciprocally as SP% that is the Square-Cube of the Diſtance from the Center S. QE. I. lill lEblt VFig. ~ Pæ o 3. IV. A Body revolving in the Cirele PQA( Pig. 9:) tis requird to ſind the Lam of the Centripetal Force tending to a Point S ſo far diſtant that all the Lines, as PS, RS, &c. dravn to ihat Point, may be eſteemd as parallel. Fq. M the Center C draw CA, cutting the -Parallels PS, RS, at Right Angles; join L. Here ZP is a Tangent, as before, and the Line ZTL at Right Angles to the Parallels PS and RS. Now, the Triangles ZRQ ZPT, CPM are ſimilor For ZT cutting the Parallels PS, RS at Right Angles, tis plain, that the Triangles ZRQ, ZPT are ſimilar. Alſo, becauſe the Angle ZPC is a Right one, and the Line PT a Perpendicular from the Right Angle to the Baſe ZL; therefore the Triangle ZPT is ſimilar to the Triangle PTL, and ſince the Triangle PTL is ſimilar to PMC, therefore ZPT and PMC are ſimilar. Therefore ZPa: ZTa:: CPa: PMY; but ZPa: ZTĩ:: RPa: Qſ (from the proportional Section of the Sides ZP and ZT by the Parallel RQ;) therefore RPq: Qa.:7 CPà: PM. But (from the Nature of the Circle RP being a Tangent, and RQD a Secant, cutting it in the Point R, and the Gircle inO) RP1 ORXOR; from whence qr RPY x _N i⸗ OR- ”Rx B But u GPſ.. when the pot P and Qmeet together, OR becomes =PF 3PM, therefore putting 2PM 2PM3 -Qt Cri u For mula ;ſ is equal rp; Now, the Point S being at an infinite Diſtance SP is a ſtanding Quantity, and ſo is CP the Ra dius ; ſo that dividing by the ſtanding Quantity for OR, ve ave u *⸗ , the Expreſion amounts to P?. Therefore the Centripetal Force is reciprocally as tho Cube ofthe Ordinate PM. Q. E. I. Fig. i0. R Tòp P R O B.V. A Body revolving in the Logarithmict or Proportional Spiral, tis requird to find the Lam of the Centripetal Force tending to the C enter of the Spiral. HE Nature of this Curve ſõ.X.) is ſuch, T that all the Angles,as SPQ SQL, SLO, &o (which the Rays make with the Curve or Tangents at thoſe Points) are ſtill of the ſame Magnitude. From whence it follows, that taing all the indeſinitely ſmall Angles about the Center S continually equal, that is PSOQ5L= LSO, &. the Triangles PSQ QsL, LSO, &. are ſimilar, and therefore PS: QS:: Q: SL:: SL: SO, &c. Conſequently the Rays PS, QS, SL, &. are in the continual Geometrick Proportion. Therefore ſince SP: SQ:: SQ: SL, tis alfo SP: SPSQ : SQ: SQ/SL, that is (deſcribing the indefinitely little Arches Qa, Lb, Oc, upon the Center S) we have SP: Pæ:: SQ: Qb or (which amounts to the ſame, letting fall the Perpendiculars QT, LN, OM) tis SP: PT:: SQ: QN. So that the Lincola PT, and QN, are always as their reſpective Rays SP and OS. Laſtly, becauſe the indeſinitely ſmall Triangles PQT, QLN, &c. are always ſimilar (for the Angles at P and Q are equal from the Nature of the Curve, and thoſe at T and N are Right ones) therefore PT: QP:: QN: LN, and ſo PT and QN are always proportional to Q7 and LN. But before twas ſiewn, that PT and QN were always as their reſpective Rays SP and QS5; therefore alſo the Lineolæ Q and LN are ever as thoſe Rays SP and. QS1 thonght this little Explication of the moſt common Properties of the Gurve, neceſſary to be premisd, in order to the underſtanding our Great Authors Proceſs in the Invention of the Law of the Centripetal Forcee. Now, let the indeſinitely ſmall Angle PsQ be given or ſuppoſed always of the ſame Bigneſs; then in the Triangle SPR, ſince the Angle at s isalways the ſame, and that at P alſo ever the ſame rom the Nature of the Curve) therefore the Angle at R, viz. SRP, is ever the ſame. So in the Triangle SQT, ſince the Angle at T is ever a Right one, the Angle SQT ſhall al ways be the ſame. From hence therefore in the indefinitely ſmall Figure RQUP, the Angles at P, T and R are ſtanding, and ſince the Angle SQT was ſiewn to be ſo, then RQU, the Complement of SQT to Two Right Angles, ſhall be of a ſtanding Magnitude too. Therefore all the Angles of the Figure RQTP, are of a ſtanding Magnitude, and conſequently the Species of the Figure it ſelf is ſtanding, or always given. Therefore the Ratio of the Sides QT, QR, viæ. is. a anding Quanity, and ſo & may be always as I. Conſequentl; if b be as 1, then multi;lying both by . J& ſnall be always as QT. But (as was ſiewn fore) from the Nature of the Curve, Q is às SP3 therefore alſo  tall bę as SP, therefore QTxSPq petal Force) ſall be as S?. Therefore the Centripetal Force in this Curve is Reciprocally as the Cube of the Diſtance from the Center s. GE I (which is reciprocally as the CentriP A Body revoluing in an Ellipſe uis; requird to find the Lav of the Centripetal Force of a Body rndin to the Center of that EL Iipſe. ET CA, CB, FI-. x be the Semiaxes of the Ellipſe; GP, DK conjugate Diameters; PF, Qr Perpendiculars to thoſe Diameters; Quv an ordinate Applicate to the Diameter GP, and compleat the Parallelogram QVvRP: The Triangles Qt v, PCF are ſimilar, for the Angles at ? and F are Right ones by the Hypot heſis; but Qv being parallel to CF the Angle Qur=FCP; therefore Qz1: :: PFũ: PCs, and Qrq æm . But (frrom Conick Sect.) Qu: P}G:: CDũ: CPY,; therefore Pu but Pu=OR, therefore we have this Value of QR. Thereſore in the general Expreſſion for the Centripetal Force, viæ. 5 we ſhall have (by ſubſtituting the Values of Qtv and QR, but now found) this Value, viæ. Conichs) all Parallelograms circumſcribd about an Ellipſe are equal to one another; therefore CDXPF= BCXCA, and CDxPFI= BCix CAS, and ſubſtituting BCI x CAY in the Room of But when the Points P and Q come together, then vG is=2PC, ſo that then the Expreſſion amounts to this, viæ BOX CALx2PC But 2BCIXCA is a ſtanding Sanits therefore . Bu t (from CDaxPFo. the Expreſſioncomes to the Expreſſion comes to õ e. & e. 5 C  ſo that the Centripetal Force is reciprocally as i. e. directly as PC, the Diſance from the Centerr. QE. I C o r. I. Hence it follos, that the Centripetal Force is greateſt at the greateſt Diſtance from the Center. Tis greater (x.gr.) in the Extremity of the longer Axe, than in any other Point in the Curve of the Ellipſe, between that and the Extremity of the ſhorter Axe. C o æ II. At equal Diſtances from either of the principal Vertices, the Centripetal Forces are equal. For the Diameters or Diſtances from the Center (from the Nature of the Bie æ are h in this Caſe. Ii C o æ. m. Any Two equal Diameters being taken thus, one of one Side the principal Vertex, and the other of the other Side; the Conjugates of theſe equal Diameters being equal alſo, its evident, that the Sum of the Centripetal Forces in the Extremities of one of theſe Diameters, and jts Conjugate, ſiall be equal to the Sum of the Forces in the Extremities of the other Diameter, and its Conjugate. Eæ. gr. Let A be any Diameter, a its Conjugate; B a Diameter taEen on the other Side at an equal Diſtance from the principal Vertex, and conſequently equal to A; and b its Conjugate, which is therefore equal to - Let F æ the Centripetal Force in A, fæ Force in a, =Force in B, and æ/Force in  Now I ſay, that becauſe A2B5, therefore F. For (by the Law of the Centripetal Force found in the laſt Problem.) Tis F: fi: A:a, and o: 7æ:: B: b, from whence ſince A-ra=BVb, alſo Ff ſall = æ, that is, the Sums of the Centripetal Forces in the Extremities of each Pair of theſe Conjugate Diameters ſall be equal. C o r. IV. Therefore alſo F—, or TF is/æf, or , that is, the Difference of the Forces in the Extremities of the Diameters A and B, is equal to the Diſference of the Forces in the Extremities C o æ.V/ In Ellipſes that have the longer Axe common, rawing any Diameter, as AC I6. XII.) cutting the Curves in C and à; the Centripetal Force in à ſiall be tqthe Cenitipetal Force in C, ãs Ad: AC. Let the Force inB he put F, Force in dæf, Force in CJHœ: Then the Ratio of the Force in à to the Force in Cjs compounded of the Rationes of the Forcè in à to that in B, and of the Force in Bo that' in C. Thatis LL.Epu ſ & =5 5 (from the Law of the Centripetal Force f Ad AB AZ in each Elip; thereſore 77B AC A . ſo that f:o:  Ad: AC. n Two Ellipſes therefore that _ the ſame Tranſverſe Axe, the GCentripetal Force (Which tends to their common Center) is greateſt in the exterior Ellipſe. And in the Extremities of the ſorter Axes viz. in the Points L, O, the Centripetal ForceQ vill be as thoſe Axes, viz. as AL: AO; or (which is all one) drawing any Ordinate as E-N cutting the Ellipſes in E and 4, the Forces in the Two Ellipſes will be as ⸗ N. EN; fortis AL: AO:: 4N: EN, from the Nature of the Ellipſe. C o R. VI. Suppoſing all as in the laſt Corollary (with its Fig.) from the Point C in the exterior Ellipſe, draw the Ordinate CP. Then ſhall the Ratio of the Forces in the Points O and I, be to the Ratio of the Forces in the Points C and à, as VõN B: VGF?B. For the Ratio of the AO EN AL7ãN By what was ſiewn at the latter End of the preceding Eorollary. Alſo the Ratio of the Forces Forces in the Points O and L is = inC and d is -ac by what was ſewn in the former Part of the foregoing Corollary. But becauſe 2N and CP are perpendicular to GB (by the Hypitheſi ũs) therefore from the fimilor TriAC angles ACP, AdN, we have VE from uhence ẽi is SS the Ratio of the Forces in the Points C and à Therefore the Ratio of the Forces in the Points O and L, is to the Ratio of EN CP the Forces in the Points C and , as N N EN CP But E7R uH : EN: CP, and ENU: CPu:: GNXNB: GP*PB (trom: the Nature of the Elll ligſe; conſequeutly EN: CP:: Vi GNNE: VGP x PB, from whence the Aſſertion is clear. S C H O L. The Great Author has briefly ſ7newn how this Matter may be carried from the Ellipſe to the Hyperbola and Parabola, and how the Law of the Forces with Reſpect to thoſe Curves may be alſo diſcoverd. And here by his neat Application of it to the Parabola, he brings out a celebrated Theorem of Galilaus. But becauſe the young Beginners in theſe Things may poſſbly deſire a more particular Explication of it; upon their Account I ſall make the Application to theſe P/ æ x O B. vI. r a  Bo moves in , the Curve of an Hyperbola, tis requird to find the Lav of the Force tending to the Center of the Hyperbola. IS evident here in the Firſt place, that the Force tending to the Center, is moſt properly a Centrifugal Force, for the Body ſtill goes farther and farther from that Point to which the Forces are directed. Let (FIG6. XIII.) C be the Center of the Hyperbola, CP: a Diameter, CD its Conjugate, RP a Tangent at P, Qu an Ordinate to CP, Qr and PF Perpendiculars to the Diameters CP and CD reſpectively, and RQ parallel to Pu. In a Word, as all the Lines drawn here are Analogous to thoſe in the lipſe; ſo ſrom the Nature of theſe Curves ill all the Reaſonings here proceed aſter the ſame Manner as there.. For here the Triangles PCF and Qut are ſimilar, becauſe the Angles at F and ? are Right Ones by the Hypotheſis, and the Angle Qv rPCF, becauſe Q is parallel to QuæPF, the Conjugate DC. From hence Qra acr H as before. Alũ (from Conicks ) Quã: GoxPv:: CDu: CPs. thereſore Pu v q. From whence by Subſtitution of theſe Values of Qrà and QR in the general Expreſſion, viz. x dxV r it comes o Pjl at õ , altogether as in the Elipſ. Then ſubſtituting BCq x CA for PFa x CDu (becauſe BC X CAæ CD7PF, from contchs) and 2PC for vG, (when the Points P and Q come together;) Laſtly, Dividing by the ſtanding Quity 3BCOx CA, the Expreſion comes to Therefore the Force, mith reſpect to the Point C, is reciprocally as c thati is, directly as PC; the Diſance fro thè Center. 5 Eq.  t a a Bois moves in a Curve of à Parabola, u⸗ requirã to find the Lav of the Centripetal Force nding toa Point t infuitl diſtant. 223 mm ĩlET AB FIG- xv) be the Axe of the Parabola, RP a Tangent at P meeting the Axe in C, PM an Ordinate to the Axe, Os and PC Lines tending to ſthe infinitely diſtant Center, and therefore parallel, and conſequently Diameters of the Parabola; Q an Ordinate to Ps, Qr Perpendiculas to pS. Laſtly, Let QS be produced to meet the Tangent in R. Now, becauſe of the ſimilar Triangles PCM, Qut, tis PC: PM:;  Qu: Q, and ſo Qnæ æęæ Let the Parameter belonging to the Vertex P be put=R. and the Parameter of the Axè r, the Abſciſs AM =4 Then, from the Nature of tſe Parãbola, we have theſe following Equalities; viZ. Qui = RxPv, PMimræ, CMim4, PCræ+4xxæ (becauſe of the Rectangular Triangle PCM) R= rH4x (that is, the Parameter of the Vertex P is  the Parameter of the Axe F Quadruple the Abſciſs AM:) Theſe Things are plain from the Conich Elementss Now ſubſtituting theſe Values in the Expreſſion of Qra, we find ſo that Q=P Therefore the general Expreſſion of the Centripetal Fors viz. comes to EB which i is Checauſs QrR æ = Pv from Parallels)=PCaxr. But r, the Parameter of the Axe, is a ſtanding Quantity, and becauſe PCi is infinite, therefore PCi is ever a ſtanding Quantity, and conſequently the whole fore the Centripgtal Force (which is reciprocally as PCr) is in this Caſe equable. Ani this I IS Galilaus's Theorem Q E. I. Before we proceed to conſider the Law of the Centripetal Force, when it tends to the Foci of the Conich Sections,tis proper to ſubjoin thoſę other Propoſitions that relate to, and depend upon this preſent Lav, in miighi the Forcę tends to the Center. Fi n. Lænnaanm Hp a FIB, GOD, 5IG. xvV.) having a common Center 4, t the Tranfverſe Axes FB, GD, ying in the ſame l R ight Line; the C entripetal Forces (tending to the —u Center A) ſball be in the Poins F and G, as the Diſtances of thoſe Points from the Cemter, viz. s FA: GA, that is, as the Semitranſverſe Axes. ĩ oR upon the ſame Tronſverſe FB of the A outward Ellipſe, one may ſtill deſcribe AH ſnall he equal to AG, the Semitranſverſe of the inward Ellipſec Now in the Ellipſe FH, the Force in Fis to that in H, as FA: HA (by what has been ſewn) Alſo the Points H and G being equally diſtant from the Center A, the Forces in H and G are equal; therefore the Force in F in the Ellipſe FH, is to the Force in G in the Ellipſe GO, as FG: AG (which is =AH;) But the Force in F in the Ellipſe FH, is equal to the Force in F in the Ellipſe FI, ſince the Point F is common to them hoth. Therefore the Force in F in the Ellipſe FI, is to the Force in G in the Ellipſe GO, as Fõ: AG. Q. E. DL.. T n E a æ- vVII. In all ſimilar Ellipſes, the Times ſ the Periodick Revolutions ( performa about the ſame Center) are equal. ET the Elipſes FIB, GOD, CI-. xv. foregoing) be conceiv d to be fimilar; then drawing any Diameter as AG, cutting the interior Ellipſe in E, it might eaſily be demonſtrated (from the fuppoſed Similarity of the Figures) that AD: AE:: AB: AC, orthat AO: AE:: Al: AC; and ſo that any other coireſpondent Diameters are ſtillĩn the Proportition of u Axes at⸗ (the Gentripetal Forces in both Elſipfes tending to the common Center A) the Force in B ſall be to that in D, as AB: AD (by the foregoing Lemma:) Therefore alſo the Force in C ſall be to that in E, as AC: AE, that is, as AB: AD; and ſo draving any other Diameter; the Centripetal Forces in the Two ENipſes ſhall ſtill be in the ſame conſtant Ratio of the Semiaxes. But if Two Circles were deſcribd upon the Center A with the Radii AB, AD, the Periodick Times in thoſe Circles wou'd be equal; for the Times are equal(as was lnewn in the Corollaries of Theor. IV.) when the Centripetal Forces are directly as the Rays, as here they aree And therefore ſince the Forces are in the ſame Ratio of theſe Radii ABand AD, every where in the Two Ellipſes, the Periodick Times in n ſhall alſo be æ equal. Q E. D. n s C H O L. lIn the Demonſtration foregoing, twas aſſerted, that the Centripetal Force in C is to that in E, as ACto AE; which is thus hewn. The Force in Cis tothe Force in B, as AC: AB, and the Force in E to that in D, as AE: AD *rom the general Law diſcoverã at Proh. VI.) But, from the Similarity of the Figures, tis AC: AB:: AE: AD, therefore Force jn C to Force in B, as Force in E to Force in D; and alternately, Force i in C to Force i in E, as Force in æuua I sũ ng all as in the foregoing Lemma, (for the C entripetal Force tending to the Center of the Elipſe ) I ſay, that the Area deſcriba in a giver Particle of Time, ſpall he expreſòàby this hunding & I*x 4 Fo R by the preoxing Lenima, Lgæ therefore Q?xPC/LXQRXCA. But ina given Time, the Lineola QR is as the generating Centripetal Force (by the Second General Lam of Motion ) that is ſin this Caſe) as PC, the Diſtance from the Center. Therefore ſince QR is as PC, then Qra X EC: ſhall be as LYPCXCA, and (ividing by. PC) Qrax PC~ ſnhall be æ LXCA;, and Qæ XPC as LixCAS. But QrXPC js as the Area deſribd i in a given Time. Therefore this Area is as the Ayaiity l5 x CA*  E D. A Putting L, 2, the Parameters, and 2D, 24, the Conjugate or ſorter Axes of Two Ellipſes that have the ſame common Tranſverſe 2CA; then the Areàs deſcribd in theſe Ellipſes in a given Time will be as the Conjugates. For the Area's will be as LixCAE: : I'uCat, that is (dividing by CA) as L:XCAE: IEXCAS, that is, as 2 D: 2 4; for (from Conichs ) LXCA=z and 2 aD, hCA=2ã. li T u; o x n The Times ſ ihe Periodick Rovolutions ſ sor: formd about the ſume Center) are equal in all Ellipſes that have the ſume Vrisſvas: Aæ. l ET A be the drea of o one Elpſ T he Periodick Time, D the ſorter Axe, Nãa Particle of the Area deſcribd in a given Time. Let a be the Area of another Ellipſe, ? the Periodick Time, à the ſorter Axe; n a Particle of the Area deſcribd in the ſame given Time; and Iet B be the common Tranſverſe Axe in both theſe Ellipſess. Now, the Area's of Two Ellipſes are in the Ratio compounded of the Periodick Times, and the Particles of the Areàs deſcribd together in a given Time. For the Periodick Time being the compleat Number of thoſe Particſes of the Area, that altogether compoſe the whole Areæa of the Figure; hence if thoſe Particles are equal, the Area's would be as the Periodick Times, or if the Times were equal, the Areæ's would be as thoſe L 190] fore, univerſally ſpeaking, the Areà's are in the Ratio compounded of both. That is in Symbols, A: a:: TXN: ixn; therefore T:: : Axn: axN,; that is, the Periodick Times are as the Areas direttly. and the Particles deſcribd together inverſly. But the Ellipſes. having their longer Axe common, the Areas of them are directly as the ſiorter Axes (which is evident from Conich Sections) that i is, A: a:: D: 4; ſo that now we have T: i:: DXa: 2N. But it was ſiewn at Cor. of Lemma Il. foregoing, that in Ellipſes having a common Tranſverſe Axe, the Particles of the Areæ5 deſcribed in a given Time were alſo as the ſiorter Axes directly; that is, n: N:: à: D. Therefore T: r:: Dæà : dx D, which is a Ratio of Equality, ſo that TZt, or the Periodick Times i in theſe Ellipſes are equal. Q: E. D. T H E O R. IX. The Times of the Periodick Revolutions q formd about the ſame Center)y are equal in all Ellipſes whatſorver. OR by Theor. VII. the Times are equal in all ſimilar Ellipſes; and by Theor. VII. in all that have the ſame Tranſverſe Axe. Therefore any Two Ellipſes being given; how diſſimilar ſoever they are, and how unequal ſoever  i91] their Tranſverſe Axes be, yet it may preſently be demonſtrated, that the Periodick Times in them are equal. For (FIG. XV.) Suppoſe the Ellipſes FH and GO were propoſed; then A being their common Genter, upon that ſame Center 4, we may deſcribe another Ellipſe, as FI, that ſhall be ſimilar to the Ellipſe GO, and have the ſame Tranſverſe with the Ellipſe FH. Then the Periodick Times in GO and FI ſall be equal, becauſe they are ſimilar, and the Times in FH and FI ſhall be equal, becauſe they have the ſame Tranſverſe Axe; therefore the Times in the Ellipſes GO and FH ſhall alſo be equal: §o that the Periodick Times in all T H E O R. X. If a Body revolves in an Ellipſe, and the Centripetal Force tends to the Center of the ſame; the Velocity in any Point s P. FIG. XV, Prob.) ſball he expreſ?d by this QuanLixcat tity PF o (which is all l it ſball be in the Subduplicate Ratio of the Quantity Reciprocally (the Line PF being perpendicular from P, to ihe Diame ter CF, which is a Canjugate to PC.) OR the Velocity in a given Time ſhall be expreſſ'd by the little Arch PQ deſcribd in that Time; that is (ſince the little Arch and its Tangent are at laſt coincident) by the Tangent PC, or becauſe of the Parallelogram QRPV) by the Lineola Qv. But the Triangles Qut, PCF being ſimilar, the Leneola Qu rox, alſo PCXQ is as the Area deſcribd in a given Time. But (by Lemma II.) the Area deſcribd in a given Time is expreſ>'d by Ltcat L:XCAS, therefore Qv is as 7 that is, . Velocit is in the ſubduplicate Ratio L Ahe Corolarie may be more eaſily apprehended, I ſhall premiſe ſome preparatory Interpretations of this geueral Expreſſion of the Velocity. In order to which, Iet 2 D. 24 be the ſhorter Axes, L. I. the Parameters (of the longer Axes of any Two Ellipſes) P. ꝓ. the Perpendiculars from the Centers to the Tangents; or, which is all one, the Lines PF, mentiond juſt now: The general Expreſſion now, LæB LixBA viz./JS7 in theſe more conpenion LB lixtt Terms comes to ;or ,for one and the other Ellipſe. And to determine this to par ticular Points of the Curve (Eæ.gr.) inthe Extremities of the longer and ſorterAxes, we need only conſider, that in thoſe Extremities the Perpendiculars P. ꝑ. are coincident with the half longer and ſhorter Axes themſelves. Therefore, In the Extremity of the ſorter Axe, ihe Expreſon comes to v 2xB. For in this Caſe P is/D= to half the Ihorter Axe LB ,. , as is plain from the Nature of the 2 LEBt LEi x H: 7? D )is Ellipſe. Therefore 1 x 2 x LxB75]5F 2XB. LX Bè v 2. In the Extremity of the longer Axe, the Expreſſion comes to LxBE. For here in this Caſe, P is = B= to half the longer Axe. 3. For a Circle whoſe Radius is 3 the ſorter Axe (putting R the Radius) the Expreſſion of the Velocity comes to v 2XR in the Terms of the Circle; and to Li B* in the Terms of the Ellipſec. The former part is clear: For in the Circle L is=/2R, BæR, L:ꝶ D is vaxR The latter part appears, in that R is =D by the AExmE & i and ſo R}av'2æ LixBS in the Terms of the Ellipſe. and P=R, therefore potheſis, that is, R 4. For a Circle whoſe Rad ius is à the longer Axe, the Expreſſion of the Velocity comes (as before) to /2xR in the Terms of the Circle; and to V2:Bin the Terms of the Ellipſe. For in this Caſe R is =B, ànd ſo //22R is =v2B. Now from hence the following Corollaries will appear to be very clear. In ſimilar Ellipſes, and in Points ſimilarly poſited to the principal Vertexes, the Velocities are every where in ſome ſtanding Ratio of the longer or ſhorter Axes, or the Parameters. C o r. IL In Ellipſes that have the ſame Tranſverſe Axe, the Velocities are as the ſquare Roois of the Parameters directly, and the Perpendiculars from the common Center to the Tangents ] EM inverſly. For the Expreſſions are ru and ⸗ therefore if Bb, the Velocities in any i Two ſuch Ellipſes are as 5: C o r. III. The Tranſverſe Axe being common, the Velocities in the Two Ellipſes in the Extremity of the Tranſverſe Axe, are as the ſorter Axes directly For in this Caſe B is = b, and the grpendiculars P. ꝓ. do both coincide with B or b; therefore the Velocities are as r: A. But becauſe B=b, therefore Lè:  bæB: ſxbt, which Exppreſſions are as the ſhorter Axes; therefore, &c. E Cò x IV. Suppoſing all a[ before, the Velocities i in the Extremities of the ſorter Axes are equal: For P and ꝓ are here coincident with D and 4, alſo, by the Aypotheſis, B is=b, therefore the Exprsſion of the Velocities in the Two Ellipte amount to u 5. na& , that is (putting  vẽ nthe Valnes of D and à to ve” and 9 Ir li b* ſ ib , which a are equl, hecauſe B=b Co- v. In one and the ſame Ellipſe, the Velocities are Reciprocally as the Perpendiculars from the Center, to the Tangents at any Points where the iu is ſuppoſed to be. 5 cthe Numerator beFor the Expreſion ing a ſtanding Quantity, and conſequently madè equal to Unity) comes to V So that the Velocity in the Extremity of the ſhorter Axe is to the Velocity in the Extremity of the longer Axe, as the longer Axe is to the ſhorter. C o r. VI. The Velocity in the Extremity of the ſnorter Axe, is to the Velocity in a Circle at the ſame Diſtance, as the longer Axe is to the ſorter. For (by the ſirſt Preliminary foregoing) the Expreſſion of the Velocity for the Extremity of the ſorter Axe is v 2xB; and (by Prelim. IlI.) that for a Circle whoſe Radius is = : the ſhorter — is Viũʒ But VaB: /æE LxB:: B: V&s 35 which Proportion is manifeſt, and the Tro latter Terms are the halt longer and ſhorter Axes. Therefore, &c. C o r VII. The Velocity: in the Extremities of the longer Axe, is to the Velocity in a Circle at the ſame Diſtance, as the ſorter Axe is to the longer. For & the 2d Prelim) the Expreſſion for the Extremijty of the longer Axe is Viũã LB, and (bV Prelin. v. ) that for a Circle whoſe Radius is = half the longer Axe, comes to v 2}B, the former of which Expreſſions is evident, ly to the latter, as the orter Axe to bi longer. li illil C o r. VIII. Comparing the Accounts of the Two laſt Corollaries, it will be found, that the Expreſſions of the Velocities in the Ellipſe at the Extremity of the ſhorter Axe, and in a Circle whoſe Radius is = half the longer Axe, are the ſame; ; and likewiſe of the Velocity in the Ellipſe at the Extremity of the longer Axe, and that in a Circle whoſe Radius is = half the ſorter Axe, are the ſame, viæ. for the Two former V2xB, and for the Two latter Tũ B; ſo that the Velocities in theſe Circles, and theſe Points of the Ellipſe are equal. C o r. IX Two Ellipſes having a common Center, and their longer Axes lying in the ſame Right Line; if they are ſo proportiond to each other, that the Parameters of the longer Axes be reciprocally as thoſe Axes, then the Velocities in the Extremity of the ſnorter Axe ſiall be in each Ellipſe, as the longer Axes directly. It muſt be obſervd here, that theſe Ellipſes thus proportiond to one anot her ſall have the ſorter Axe common to them both. For, by the Suppoſition, tis L: ::h: B, from whence LxB æ Ixb, and ſo LxB æ5 or D=d. Now the Expreſſions of the Velocities in the Extremity of the ſhorter Axe, for each l i E n? rExt? Ellipſe are , and VE that is (utting in the Value of D and à) v/ 2xB, and v 2b, which are as B and b. Therefore, &c. C O R. X, Suppoſing all as in the laſt Corollary, the Velocities in the Extremities of the longer Axes are equal to one another: For in this Caſe the Li5?tſPuit Expreſſions amount to ut and that is, to LxBi, and Ixbi, or // I}B and VXb;. but theſe Expreſſions are equal, becauſe LxB is = IXb, as was ſnewn in the laſt Corollary, Therefore, &c. C o rR. XI. Comparing Corolls. the 3d and 4th with Corolls, the 9th and 1oth, we may obſerve a Parallel not unworthy Conſideration. For (by Cor. III.) the longer Axe being common, the Velocities in the Extremities of the longer Axe are as the ſhorter Axes directly; and (by Cor. IX.) the ſnorter Axe being common, the Velocities in the Extremity of the ſorter Axe are as the Jonger Axes directly. Again, (by Cor. IV.) ſupO poſing what was ſuppoſed in Cor. lſI. the VeIncities in the Extremitięs of the ſhorter Axe; are equal; and (by Cor. X.) ſuppoſing what was ſuppoſed in Cor. IX. the Velocities in the Extremities of the longer Axes are alſo equal to onc another. C o R. XII. If Two Ellipſes be ſo proportiond to one another, that the ſhorter Axe of the one be equal to the longer Axe oſ the other, then the Velocity in the Extremity of the longer Axe of the one Ellipſe ſhall be equal to the Velocity in the Extremity of the ſorter Axe of the other. For the Expreſſion of the Velocity in the , of the longer Axe of one LxB'; and that for the Velocity in > Extremity of the ſorter Axe of the other, ] is  L.: xt =+ſ2xb. Ellipſe i nt Nov, if L B= 2hb or" T}B=V26, or v)æ; (the Semi- conjugate of the one) be = b ( he Semi- tranſverſe of the other) then tis plain, that theſ® Expreſions of the Velocities are equal. Or we may ſay it will be ſo, if it be L: 2b:: b:B; if the Parameter of one Ellipſe be to the Tranſverſe of the other, as the Semi- tranſverſe of that other to the Semitranſverſe of the firſt. C o R. XIII If the Center of the Ellipſe C be imagin'd to remove to an infinite Diſtance, and ſo the Ellipſe to change into a Parabola, a Body ſhall move in the =ame with an equable Velocity. For in this Caſe all the Quantities that enter the general Expreſſion, viæ. L 3 are ſtanding ones, the Quantities B and P being both infinite, and L being the Parameter of the Axe. And here alſo (mutatis mutandis) one may apply what has been ſaid in the Corollaries foregoing of the true Ellipſe to the Parabola, or Ellipſe whoſe Center is at an infinite Diſtance. C o R. XIV. And if this Parabola (by changing the Inclination of the Plane cutting the Cone) degenerates into an Hyperbola, the Body ſhall move in the ſame with a Velocity, which ſhall be reciprocally as the Perpendicular from the Center to the Tangent, as was fniewn for the Ellipſe at Cor. V. I proceed now to the Conſderation of the Law of the Centripetal Forces and Velociie⸗ of Bodies, when thoſe Forces are directed to the Foci of the Conick Settions P R O B. IX. A Body revolving in an Ellipſe, (FIG. XI.) 'tis requir d to find the Lav of the Centripetal Force tending to the Focus. TERE the Lineola QR is ſuppoſed to be Parallel to Sp, ſo that QRæP is a Parallelogram; alſo the Lineola QT is a Perpendicular to SP, PF perpendicular to the ConJugate DK; the Points S and H are the Foci, and all the reſt as at Prob. VI. before. It muſt be premiſed before we proceed to the Inveſtigation with the admirable Author, that EP (cut off by CD, the Conjugate to PG) is equal to AC, half the longer Axe For drawing IH from vhe other Focus H parallel to DC, we have SC=CH from the Natnre of the Foci. and ES EI, becãuſe of the Parallels EC and IH, Again, ſince S? IPaEI, and conſequently IPEI (that is E?) =SPEI; 'tis plain, that SPEI IPEI æn EP/V59F 2 Cmich Scctiom, the Angles HPZ, IPR, are equal, and therefore their Alternates PHI, PIH are equal alſo (for IH parallel to DE, by the Hypothefis, is parallel alſo to the Tangent PZ j at at the Point P of the Diameter PC, Conjugate to DE.) Therefore PI=PH, and conſequentSE EP r  i 2c Conich - is equal to CA, which i is half the longer Axe of the Ellipſe. This premiſed, we proceed to the Inveſtigation of the Law of the Centripetal Force. The Triangles Qſæ, PFE are ſimi lar (for the Angles T and F are Right ones, and Angle x = Angle E, becauſe of the Parallels Qæ and DF) ſo that QT⸗ _- PFa and from the ſimilar Triangles Pv, PEC, tis QR (Pæ) PVXPEPv X AC  5 , becauſe EP=CA. Therefore by Subſtitution - tc But, from Conic Sections,PCI: CD: : Gvãx P. Q1, conſeqnently Qua  s alſo when the Points P and Q come together, Qx= Q, therefore inſtead of Qæ⸗v, putting in this Value of & in the foregoing Expreſion, it PSux Gv X PuX CDIXPFax PC POXCA? x PC SP9Gox CDIXPF?SPIX20D X PFIL lil CAXPC llil CA i cauſe when the Points Pand Q come together, OCGuæc. which (from Gv =2 PC. But from Conicks 2CDq x PFq 2BCIX CAY, therefore the Expreſſion ;; to  S PIxX2BCIXCAI SPax2BC this, viæ. C& ©C' 7SPxL a : (becauſe L cas ſo that the Centripetal Force, which comes to this Expreſion SPIXL, dividing by L, a ſtanding Quantity, being the Parameter of the Axe) is reciprocally as SPa that is, as the Square of the Diſtance from the Focuss. Q E. I. Fig. 16 ? R O B. IX: a4 B revoluing in an Hyperboli, tis requind to find the Law of the Centripetal Vorce tending to the Focus. TERE AC and CB FIG. XVI.) be the Semiaxes, PG, ED Two Diameters con_ to each other, Q? and PF Perpendeculars to thoſe Diameters reſpectively, Qv an Ordinate to PGq-The Points S and H are the Foci, and from S is drawn SP, cutting the Diameter DE in E, and the Ordinate Qu in x, and the Figure QRPæ is ſuppoſed to be a Parallelogram. All the reſt as before in the Ellipſe, and other Figures drawn for the ſame Purpoſe. Now, it muſt be premiſed here alſo, that the Line EP (cut off by KD, the Conjugate to PG) is 2 AC, the Semi-tranſverſe Axe: For drawing HI from the other Focus H, parallel to DC, we have SCCH from the Nature of the Foci; alſo ES is EI, becauſe of the Parallels EC and IH. Farther, ſince 2EI æ SPIP, and EI-SP EP) æ IPEI; tis eviIP EIEISPIP—SP. 2 2 But now, from Conich Sections, the Angles IPZ and HPR are equal, and conſequently their Alternates HIP, IHP are equal alſo (for IH parallel rallel to the Diameter DK, by the Hypotheſis, is parallel alſo to the Tangent PZ at the P of the Diameter PC, Conjugate to DK.) Therefore PH PI, and ſo Ep-PSP, is = PH SP 2 , which (from Conic Sections) is Enown to be equal to CA, which is the Semi-tranſverſe Axe This premiſed, all the Steps of the following Proceſs are ſo perfectly the ſame with theſe in the Ellipſe, both as to the Subſtitutions, and the Order and Depenpendance of one Step upon another, that I need not make the tedious Repetition, but Ieave the induſt rious Reader to draw it out himſel?f, which he cannot miſs of doing, underſtanding but the eaſie Proceſ; in the foregoing Problem. And the Concluſion here will be, as there, that the Centripetal Force is Reciprocally, as SPq, that is the Square of the Diſtance from the Focus. QGE.. LE MM A. In the Parabola, any Vertex (or Point thro which the Diameter paſſes) being given, to find the Proportion ihe Parameter belonging to that Vertex bears to the Diſtance of the ſame Vertex from the Focus. ET IG. XVIL) AO be the Axe of the Parabola, PO an Ordinate, S the Focus, from which is drawn SP to the Point P, and thro the ſame the Diameter YPG. Let PM touch the Curve at P, and AG be drawn parallel to PM. Let AO=x. AG=s. SP=2. AS=/m. Parameter of the Axe =). Parameter of the Diameter PGZFP. The Figure AMPG is a Parallelogram, for PG is a Diameter, and thereſore parallel to AO, and AG is, by the Hypotheſis, parallel to PM. Therefore ſince MA is 2/ AO (from the Nature of the Parahola) PG, which is= MA (from Parallels) is alſlo=AO; ſo that PG=x; alſo PM (from Parallels) is= s. And becauſe tis a known Property of this Curve, that AS or m is/ p, therefore SO2). Now, from the Rectangular Triangle PMO we have  /4 ſyy=q4x pæ=Px (for AG is an Ordinate to  the Diameter PG) ſfrom whence PqxV). Again, from the Rectangular Triangle SPO, we have ?/yy vxIpæ V5 a— ing in for , its nVæx+ i (putting in foryy its VaIue )x) conſequently x; p. But P was found 4xP, therefore P4æ. That is, the Parameter belonging to Diemeter PG, is Quadruple of PS, the Diſtance from the Vertex to the Focuss. Q E. I. The Reſult will be found the ſame, if the Ordinate PO be taken on the other Side the Focus S ; ſo that SO inſtead of  ꝑ, becomes x. Allll C o r. It is plain, that PS is=MS, for each is =nx;; and therefore alſo the Parameter P s Quadruple of MS. In the Figure e Line SN being a Perpendicular from the Focus S 1o the Tangem PM, tis riquiv d to find the Proportion of SP (the Diſtance from the Focus to the Point qſ C ontact P ) to the Perpendicular ALL the other Symbois handinga as before, let SN=. BY the Corollary of the foregoing Lemma, it appears, that PSMS, from whence it follows that PNMN, or PN|PM, or PNa PMY=2 pxx. Therefore from the Rectansular Trinele SNP, we have fæ that xV . p:ſ: fil :à ꝓ, that is, f - Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent) is a mean Proprotional between the Quantities -2 p and ; ꝓ, that is between the Diſtances of the Point, of Contact; and of the principal Vertex from the Focus; or in other Terms, that AS C o r. Hence becauſe of 4 : p, or AS a ſtlanding Quantity, ſ, or SNo, is ãlways as æ4 ꝓ, or SB: That is, the Diſtance from the Focus PS is ever as the Squãre of the Perpendicilar from the Focus tO the  Tangent. 3æ bP æo xi A BO3 revolving in a Paraboli uis requira t0 find iſe Lim of the Comripi Foret tindiing 1o ihe Focus. lilll H v re of the Ctroin remaining al in the foregoſig Levmã, let QR be Parallel to §15 Qſ perperãicular to the ſame; Q paralel to the Tangent PM, cutting SP in u, and YPG in v. Beforel proceed to the Inveſtigation, tis neceſſary to premiſe, that P⸗ is P, which ĩs thus provd:The Angle PMS & MPY, as being Alternates) is & Angſe Pox; becauſe of the Parallels MS aid PG; ãlſõ the Angle uPx is æ/ PSM; becauſe of Parãrlels. Therefore the Triaigles MPS atid P*v are ſimilar, and ſo MSæ SP ſ?Pæ: Pv; but by Cor. of Lemma I. foregoing, PS is/ MS; therefore Px=Pv. This premiſed, let the Parameter F the Diameter PG bè calld L. Then Coxe OLAR IES to ihe pre-ing ProBL E MS concerning the Lav df the Centripiu Force tending to ihe Foci i hin : Xuq- Sections. ° l Eã Co R. I It ſoliows that if a- Body m moves r any Place, as P, and is drawn by a Centripetal Force Reciprocally, proportional to the Square of. the Diſtance from the Center to. which thoſe Forces are directed; that then it moves in a Conick Section,, whoſe Focus is eniisiom: with that Center. c o E. II. And iſ the velosity with which the Bod goes out of the Place P be ſuch, that while the Lineola PR is deſcribed by it, the Centripetal Force carries it thr the Lineola QR in the ſame Time, then it moves in a Conict q sestion, whoſe Parameter is = -&&& nhen the Ql Points P and Q come together. j FE And, with reſpet to the particular Sectim:, from the Law found we may infer, That if To Ellipſes as FBA, ECA FI G. 18.) have their Vertex A, and. one Focus (@s the Point D) common to them both, that then the Centripetal Force in C ſnall be to that in B (the Focus D being the Center of the Forces) as BDa: DCI. For putting the Force in AF, that in Cæf, that in B =ę́ tis plain, that Trotthe TwWo Ellipſes ĩ may be ſich as lis Iequird, the Lines FD, ED muſt be in the duplicate Ratio of the ſorter hies the Mention mn the Parabola, the — Foregs re m as the Squares of the Parameter of the Axe eicreaſed by Quadrupie. the aoris taen in the Axè) for any Point of the Curve. That is ſin the Terms of Lemma l. foregoing) the Centripetal Forces are Reciprocally as 16xx-8pæ75. Which is manifeſt, becauſe by the Law found, the Centripetal Force is Reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance from the Focus; but by the forementiond Lemma) the Expreſ ion of any Diſtance from the Focus is æ4 j, Thereſore; &c. Tis alſo equally true, that the Centripe tal Forces are Eeciprocallj as the Squares of the Parameters belonging to the ſeveral Vertices, or Points wherè the Hodyv Is. yor thoſe Parameters are Quadtuple ́l  reſpciie Diſtances from the Focus. TThe ILaw p te Contripetal Force tending to the Focus of the Ellipſe being difcoverd, the Application mayeaſly be made J ſhe reſt of the Conich Sections without ã ꝑmartigylar InveTtigation, as the celebrated Ae ip obſerves.  If the Focus S of the Elp® t 1 whic the Centripetal Force tends, continues together with the Vertex' B, while the other Focus H removes to an n infinitę Diſtance, the Ellipſe now is converted ſ imò a : Parabola, buit the Body will stilſ movę into à Pormeter oF ii Curve, and he  Law oF the c Centripetal Forcę  Jending to the Focus  continues what it was before; viæ. Reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance from S. Suppoſ ing all as before, iſ the Focus H moves backwards, ſo as to come behind the Vertex B, both the Vertices A and B, lying now between the Foci S and H, the Ellipſe becomes an Hyperbola, and the Body moving in the Perimeter of this Curve, the Law of the Force tendiog to the Eæ S continues ſeme as at firſt. L 5n  æaan.] ueny©: Uf the Focus H and voniex A be — fixd, and ; to which the Forces tend, removes m infinite. Diſtance, the Ellipſe pi changed into a Parabola, and the Forces tending to a Point infinitely diſtant are all equal. He Focus H and Vertex A continſng, Lif ; Focus S, A0 which the Forncos tend, noſes backnards,  incaſe ll. then we have an HyprbOla again, in the Periphery of which the Body ſtall ſtilil move, but with a Centrifugal : Force Cinſtead of a a Centripqtal) which ſhall.be according to the ęſtabliv Lav, RBeciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance fromss. If the Two Fui s, H come together, the olipſe becomꝶ ã I Circle, and the Force tending to she Centar isæquabls. L o eomſ iboſioĩ 9ſ© to gu°% oſ bu I P 4 If the FociS, H coincide with the Vertices B, A, the Ellipſe degenerates into a Right Line; in which Caſe there's no Centripetal Force tening * to an; Point without the Line it it ſelf. li T, H E O E. x Boiies revalui stout a common c enter, and the Centripetal Force being in a Re aiprol duplicate Ratio of 1he Diſtances from the Center; then the Latera Recta of the Orbs deſc vitd ſhall be in the duplicate Ratio of the Areas which the Bodies deſiribe. in the ſume Time, h Ræ a dram t0 this Cntis arnm / j Tor R & c. Il. of rob XI , Læ : ; but QR in a given Time is as the Centripetal Foree by the Second Lav of Motion) that is, as SPq Reciprocally ;y Proh. x ) Thereſore is as QTxSPI, that i is, Lis as QTasP1; but the Avrea ĩs as xs) Engo, &. qQ E D Co x. The whole Areqs of Enipes are in ſie Ratio compounded of the è Raio of the Latera Recta, and the Rurie of the Pęriodick Times For thoſe Area's are in the Ratio compounded of the Ratio of the Portions deſcribdd in the ſame Time, and that of the Periodick Times: But by this Prop. thoſe Portions arè in the ſubduplicate Ratio of the Latera Recta. Therefore, &c. And ſinte (5 Prop. 191. of Gregory St. Vin incent) the Areas of Ellipſes arè as the Rectangles under their Axes, its certain, that thoſe Rectangles are alſo ĩ in the ſame Jun l THE o R xn Sumſ i all as before, the Periodick Times in Ellipſes are in the  he Seſquiplicate ) Ratio of the Trapſverſe Axes. OR reaſſuming the Symbols as in Theor, 8. e ſind that T: ?::  a ææ: axN; but A: a:DxB: à&xb * rhe forementiond Theor of St. Vi nnt) therefore T rã: DxBXn: axbN. But D: à:  Ix B:: A bt, trom Conichs; and n: N: ſ LE, by the foregaing. Thiorem, therefore T vtæ i? B'⸗B xt; Batx Lt, that is ividing by Lit ) T::: B': i The Periodick Times in Ellipſes arę in the SeſquiPlicate æ Auũ it of the Tranfyerie Axes. ò . ctalizmd ;m ã ]-|jam d 5 rnT Now then; the Expreſſion of the Velocity in a Li rt Section mcr any Diſtance as ot is 7 ii is, v is ever as ãſ Likewiſe the Expreſſion of the Velocity in a Circle at the Di2 ſtance æ wou'd be For. the Radius being m æ, then L in the Circle is =22, or the Diameter; and y the Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent, being i in the Circle m the Radius, iin is æ xæ: Hence i in the Terms of the Circle - v is E, Varet Yæ s0 that hen wi is as the Expreſion v or v⸗ TL Non for the Corollaries themſcives Co&⸗ I HEEREHESE  BESESEEEERE: S  Becauſæ] V. is. as, therefore L* is as vy, ad L is às V*.. That is, the Parameters of the Orbs are in the Rario compoundeęd of the duplicate Ræio of the Velocities, and the duplicate Ratio of the Perpendiculars from the Focus to the Tangents. C  R. II. When the Quantity  (in the Expreſſion of the Velocity) becomes coincident with the: greateſt or leaſt Diſtance from the Forus; tis. manifeſt then, that in thoſe Points of greateſt or leàſt Diſtance, the Velocities are as thoſe Diſtances inverſly, and the ſquare Roots of the Parameters directly. i I Coæ. Il. i Becuoſe Vis as .5 and W as V v) thereſore i y mæ (which cannot be but — æ denotes the greateſt or leaſt Diſtance) then the Expreſ 5 ons are ? and væ ; which (multiplying both by æ h comes to L. and v 2x25, Or Vi, L, and V27; ſo that V: W:: AL: V2z. That is, the Velocity in a Conich Section, at the greateſt or leaſt Diſtance from the Focus, is to the Velocity in a Circle at the ſame Diſtance, in the ſubduplicate Ratioof the Parameter to that Diſtance doubled the Conich Sectiom, or or greater or less than it) r L; that the Velocities are as 7 æ ũ  that is, ãs Læę: vVax, or av V&t  v5 that is, as VTũã Lxæ: y. Now V. Lxæ is a mean Proportional between the Parameter of the c. nic Section, and- æth Radius or Diſtance in the Circlee So that this general Concluſion is to bæ inferſd; that the Velocity in a- Conich Section at any Diſtance from the æul, is to the Vælocity in a Circle at any othir Diftance (or whoſe Radius is = to any other Diſtance from the' Focusy as a mean Proportional between that other Diſtance or Radius; and half the Parameter, is to a Perpendicular drawa from the Focus to the Tangent at the Point of Diſtance in the Cynish Section.. That is, æ being the Diſtance in (or Radius of) a Circle, in which the Velocity is expreſs'd by m, and V heing the Velocity in a Conict Section at any Diſtance, equal or unequal to the former; the Concluſion in our Symbols ſtands thus,V: m: Aſ eræ y. Now, from this general Concluſion, all that relates to the Proportion of the Velocitięs in Conick Sections aud Circles, may eaſily and naturally be inferrd. t . As, I. If æ, or the Radius of the Circle, be equal to the Diſtance (from the Focus) in the Conich Section; then it follows, that the Velocity in a Conich Section is to the Velocity in a Circle at the ſame Diſtance, as a mean Proportional between that ſame Diſtance or Radius) and à the Parameter, to a Perpendicular from the Focus, to the Tangent at the Point of Diſtance in the Conich Section. This holds in all the Conic Sections. But the reſt that follow, all except one, referring particularly to the Parabola, I note here, that in this Curve the Expreſſion of the Diſtance from the Focus to any Point in the Curve is = à L ( being the correſpondent Abſciſs;) as alſo, that the Quantity y, the Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent at any Point, is ': 4 L-3Læ , both which are plain from the Calculus in the 2d Lemma to Prob. XI. Therefore to proceed, 2. In the Parabola, if we put æ 2L+æ, then Læ =2 LLæ; but 5 LFà Læ, therefore in this Caſe Læ=4y, and à Læ: y:: 2:1, and /ſTZ: yuſæ:, orV: m:: Va: 1. That ĩs, the Velocity in a Parabola at any Diſtance from the Focus, is to the Velocity in a Circle at the ſame Diſtance, as v 2: 1. Note, I ſay, at the ſame Diſtance in the Parabola for here à L-Iæ is put =to æ, the Radius of the Cirele- ll If in the Parabola we put 2/y= L: Then / PLæ: 5: :/ 2: 1, and conſequently V: n: Vi 2:1, in this Caſe alſo. That is, the Velocity ina Parabola at the least Diſtance from the Focus is to the Velocity in a Circle at the ſame Diſtance, as v/ 2: 1. Note again here, I ſay, the leaſt Diſtance; becauſe tis put  to3; of the Parameter, or becanſe the Diſtance is ſuppoſed to be coincident with the Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent, which cannot be but when tis the leat. Alſo æ, the Radius of the Circle, is here ſuppoſed equal to the Diſtance in the Section. 4 In any Conich Section, if we put 7=3L: Then ViLæ 5 : L; conſequently æ Læ: y: EL:, orV: m: ſ L:y That is, the Veloc ty any where in a Conich Section, is to the Velocity in a Circle at the Diſtance of; the Parameter, as the Parameter is to a Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangentat the Point of Diſtance in the Conick Sectionn. This is general for all the Conick Sections, there being nothing ſuppoſed in the Calculus that does reſtrain or limit the Property to any one Particular. 5. If in the Parabola we ſuppoſe æ ſLà. Then Lſ L4Læ, and conſequently à L L4Læ, which is yy (as we hinted hefore.) Therefore /ſLæ , and therefore Væn That is, the Velocity in a Parabola is tvery wheꝶ equal to the Velocity in a Circle at à the Diſtance, or in a Circle whoſe Radius is : the Diſtance from the Focus, in the Parabola. Note, I ſay, whoſe Radius is=to4 the Diſtance in the Parabola; for the Diſtance being univerſlly expreſſed byà Læ, I here put the Radius æ= L-ſ àx. And univerſally, i we we make æ: Læ:: a n: 1, and ſo æ æ u Then will Vææ nL nLæ 5 —/  . and conſequently univerſullyV: : y. That is, the Velocity in the Parabola il be to the Velocity in a Circle (whoſe Radius is n times the Diſtance in the nlæx Parabola) as vu ũ v ull 5. From whence particular Caſes m be deduced at Pleaſure. And thus much for this admirable Theorem relating to the Velocities of Bodies, togęther with its Corollaries. P R O B. XII. Any Point being taen at Liberty in the Axe of an Ellipſe, tis requi?rd to ſind the Lan of the Centripetal Force tending to the ſ=ame. ſSeę FIG. XIX. after the Preface.) E T the Pointss. s. be taken of either Sidæ the Focus of the Ellipſe, which I make to be S. Then let the Line sP be d rawn, and Qr let fall Perpendicular to it, and Qæ parallel to the Tangent PR, interſecting sP in the Point æ. Laſily, Let QR be parallel tos P, and the Interſection of s P with the Conjugate DC, he in the Point O. This being ſuppoſed with all the reſt, asat rob. IX. we have here the Triangſes QTæ and PPO, ſimilar to one another, as there the Triangles Qæ and FPE were ſimilar. So the q ſ Qſais m œm3 But the laſt Ratio of Qx to the Ordinate Qv, is a Ratio of Equality; conſequently inſtead of Qĩwe may putQuũ, and ſoĩ⸗  L GxPuxCD⸗ (by ſubſtituting the Value ofQui= ll PFIx P“*oGXCDũ : from Conichs) villæ Again, the Triangles Pxv and POC are ſimilar; therefore Pæ| LſO , conſequently QR, which is  Pæ from Parallels, is to be expreſ'd. by this Value.. Therefore the Centripetal xQTI Force, which is Reciprocally as P ©| isas SPax p x PFĩX Pv X võ x CDax PC And putting PL X PO X PCũ BCIXCA (Which isa ſtanding Quantity) inſtead of PFxCD, and inſtead of v putting 2PC. by due Reduction the Expreſſion comes to which gives the Law of the Centripetal Force, vix. thattis Reciprocally, as the Square of the Diſtance from the Point 5, divided by the Cube of the Line PO, intercepted between the Tangen t PR and the Line DC, which is Conjugate to PC. From hence, C o r. I. If the Points coincide with S, the Focus of the Ellipſe; then the Line PO Will alſo be coincident with PE, which is eqnal to AC, the : 5s PO Semi- tranſverſe Axee And therefore 5 will SP in this Caſe come to ar or becauſe of CA, a ſtanding Quantity, it will be reduced to SP. So that the Law of the Centripetal Force tending to the Focus, is this, that tis Reciprocally as the Square of vhe Diſtance from the Focus C o . II. If the Point s coincide with C, the Center oſ the Ellipſe; then s P and PO alſo do both coincide with the Line PC, which is the SemiDiameter for the Point . Therefore the Ex5 Pq PC preſion; 5ò comes in this Caſe to 5& that I is, to ;= So that the Law of the CentripePC tal Force tending to the Center of the Ellipſe, is this, that tis directly as the Diſtance from the Center. And hoth theſe Laws are the ſame with thoſe found by particular Proceſſes before. L 230 lI need not ſay, that this done for the Ellipſe may eaſly (nutatis mut andis, according to the Nature of the Curve) be applied to the Hypèrbola; ſo that there's no Need of another Operation for that. But becauſe the Application to the Parabola may not be quite ſo obvious, I think it proper to do that by it ſelf. P R O B. XIII Any Point being taten at Liberty in the Axe of a Parabola, tis requird io fſind the Lan of the Centripetal Force tending to that Point. LC&ce FIG. XX. aſter the Preface.) ET the Point S. be taken any where in the i Axe AS; thro which Point  Iet SO be drawn parallel to the Tangent PR, PO parallel to the AxeAS, and conſequently a Diameter for the Point . Qu an Ordinate to PO, and conſequently parallel to PR, meeting alſo SP in æ, and PO in v. Laſtly, Let QR be parallel to SP, and the Lines QT and PF Perpendiculars from the Points Qand P, to the Lines SP and SO. This premiſed, the Triangles QTæ and q PSF are ſimilar. Therefore QT & But the laſt Ratio of Qæ to Qu (that is, when the P and Qcome together) is a Rario of Equality; ſo that then QTa S.a And if L be the Parameter belonging to the Vertex ſ 231 xPvxPF P, then LXPv —Qq, and ſo QTũ S ilii l But QR is 2/ Pæ (from Par allels) = l rrom the ſimilar Triangles Pt and PSO.) TL Therefore LLapeꝶo , and conſequently Tqa ; : J hich is Reciprocally as the Centripetal Force) is alſo as the Quantity br pE xPO. And this is the Lam of the Centripetal Force tending to the Point S taken any where in the Axe. C o x. Therefore iſ the Point S coincide with the Focus of the Parabola, PS will bePO; for in that Caſe PS will  SG from the Nature of the Parabola, but SG is = PO from Parallels, thereq fore PS/PG. So that the Expreſſion LxPELPO comes in this Caſc to LXPFa. But SL being a Perpendicular from the Focus to the Tangent, PF is equal to it, from Parallels; and therefore PF is ever as SP, from the Naturęof a Parabola. So that LXPFq is ſtill as LSP. But alſo from the Nature of the Parabola, L is&/ 45P; therefore LXSP is ever as SP4. So that the Centripetal PForce (tending to the Focus) is ever as the Square of the Diſtance from it, Reciprocally. Iam aware that that there may be more general Inveſtigations of the Lawsoſthe Centripetal Force than theſ, aud I am acquainted with ſome of them; but what I have here ſaid is ſufficient for my Purpoſe. b E R R ATA. The Authors long Abſence from the Town (occaſiond by his Indi ſpoſition) has made it neceſſary to trou e the Reader with ſomething more of this Correcting Vork, than otherwiſe ſould have been thrown upon his Hands. Tis deſired, that he would candidly paſi over the following Errata, or any other that occur, which have eſcap'd Notice. Age ii. line 26. read m. ꝑ. 17. l. 3. T. sxxxadqt ꝑ.20. l. ult. r. Angle ADF. N. B. ꝑ. 28, & 32. The Figure ſhould be as tis at ꝑ. 30, & 32. the Points C and  coinciding. D- 34- l. 4. r. Point H. Ibid. l. 7. r. Plane CH. 1bid. l. 8. r. Line AH. P. 36. l. uit. r. All and AF. ꝑ. 62. l. 12. r. axL. ꝑ. 74. l. 13. ſ. KB. ꝑ. 88. l. 1, 2. I. after the Stroke, the Sum of the Momenta is= 8?b7. Therefore, G. P 95: L 5. T. Therefore. ꝑ. 112.l. 13. T. AC. ꝑ. 115. L.5. r. AG: DC. P. 126. l. 4. Proportional. ꝑ. 128. I. 28. T. Perimeter. N. B. D. 138. The iatter Period is falſly put on the Lemma it ſelf, hereas it begins what follims afier it. Ibid. l. 20. t. d =2rx, and D: à';: 20X: 2rx. ꝑ. 139. IL. 2. r. 2RE  A, and 222a; ſo that A2: a:: 2R: 2/73 and when the Points G, g coincide, or 2R=2,thentis A: a;:; X: æ. Sothat th], &c. ꝑ. 159. L. I9. T. ,3æ. ꝑ: 172.1.20. a. as SP; and becauſe, however the Angle of Contact is changed, the Subtenſe QR is changed alſo in the ſubduplicate ”Rutio of RP or QT, therefore i ſhall ever be in the SP}XOTꝗ K ſame Ratio of SP, and thereſore , &e. p. 202 L. 19 ſ. ES=EL ꝑ. 205. L. I. I. prob. X. Ibid. l. 20. r.ES is =EI. ꝑ. 182, l. 9. I. and PS. Itid. I. 20. I. _ N. B. Ever afier in ihat Problem read PS inſtead of PC. P. 203. I. 15. I. GuxPvV. ꝑ. 173.