Ehyſco.Mechanicol L E C I U R E S. OR AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT IS Explain'd and Demonſtrated IN TH E COURS E Mechanical and Experimental PHILOSOPHY: ll GIVEN BY lil ꝗ. T. Deſaguliers, M. A. F. R. S. Wherein the Principles of Mechanies, Hy drostatics and Oprics, are demonſtrated and explain'd y a great Number of Experiments. Deſign'd for the Uſe of all ſuch as have ſeen, or may ſee Courſes of Experimental Philoſophy. . . LONDON: . Piinted for the Author, and Sold by him at his Houſe ix Channel-Row, Weſtminſter, by Richard Bridger, at the uppei End of Hind Court in Fleet-ſtreet.; and William Vream, with in Two Doors of the Royal Oak in Eari-ſtreet near the Sever Dials, 1717. αQοcCλα TO THE READER ; H E following Papers being only Minutes of my Lectures, T &3ò for the Uſe of ſuch Gentlemen è cxmtλt as have been my Auditors, RteRù were printed at their Defire; to ſouave the trouble of Writing them over for every Perſon. Therefore I beg all ſuch Readers, as have not ſeem my Courſe of Exeriments, to pardon my want of Method and hort Hints; and deſire them not to expect a full Account of all the Experiments made in the Courſe, and mention'd in the Catalogues: For I have only taken Notice of ſo many as prove every Propoſition; that this little Bool may ſerve as a Memorandum. MWaen I have more leiſure, I ſhall publiſh the Lectures in full, in a large Volume, with above 60 Copper Plates; wherein I ſhall endeavour to make my ſelf underſtood, to ſuch as are al together unskill'd in Mathematics; but at the ſame time by Marginal Notes refer to the Au. thors, where each Truth that I ſhall lay down is mathematically demonſtrated. I A 2 E R- . Line 23. read Mercury, when nus 9à l à r , P. 10. L. 25. r. Powdæe? too great for thbe Earth's Attraction. to bring it docon neaser to the Earth, it would. p. 11. l.2 1. that dreu it. p. 12. l. 4. r. one Inch in a ſecond of ima) laſt l. dele in a ſecond ef Time. p. I6. I II. r. falſly imagine, L. 15. . d Planes. 20. ſierult: t. the Blous, Aiand B ovill. ꝑp. 2 L. 16. r. which bears. p. 6. l. 13. r. cg uſtaei h  ẽ r. &. , L. 29. r. at ſhe iop, I. ibid. dele, after Water: Ii qrt I. . qiad Huien l. 20. n. encreasd, in Proportion as t ie 1; not narrower thau; I. ult. r. an Hole on the ſaid teſare Ein 13. r. no higher. pæ 30. l.3. 1. Lungs and the, l. 20. r. communicates with. ꝑ 33. penu. 1. the Square Feet eontain'd. p. 36. l. 3. r. the Baromiter; il. æan. ; 37. l. II. 1. fall witb a Vibrain Motioni p. 40. L. 19. ĩ. in thae Wind-Gun- ꝑ. à1. l. 2. r. HeP 46. l. antepenult. ĩ. the Sine of the Angle of, p. 47. l1. nl 5. dele When the; &c. quite to the Emd of ibat Paraapb. p. 49. l. 28. r. Tuch Rse theseſone. P.5d. l. 29. 1. divorging fom o ouch Point, auill. P59. l. 12. r. ſo greas ai. p. 63. l. 7. r. aberaby an. ꝑ. 71. l. 6 §. vohich is . Bſustâ à q Didesiſastũttſâ &i &tò õ8  õſβi & A C O u R S E Experimental Philoſophy. ERRRο Lo LoR lo o t to ſo o lo o roaere MECHANICS L E C T U R E I. ATTEOR is what has Extenll ſion and Reſiſtance; which are Properties of all kinds of Bodies. 2. Beſides theſe, Gravity is an ĩllllll univerſal Prineiple in Matter; ùù that is, all Bodies tend to one another, according to the Quantity of ſolid Matter in each Body. As for Example : The Sun attracts the Earth, and the Earth the Sun; ; the Earth the Moon, the Moon the Earth : And in ſhort, all heavenl Bodies have a Gravitation or Attractio, - Altraction towards one another; as is fully Demonſtrated by Sir Iſaac Nemwton. . 3. By the Experiment of the Light of the Candle paſſing thrò a Hole in the Paper, was ſhewn the Law of that Gravity, or general Attraction; which decreaſes as you recede from the Center of the attracting Body, juſt as the Square of the Diſtances encreaſes. As for Example: If we were twice as far remov'd from the Sun as we are, we ſhould be attracted by it four times more weakly; if 3 times as far, the Attraction would be ꝑ times leſs. i Note, That Light, Heat, and all Qualities propagated from a Center, every mayobſerve the ſame Laws. 4. There is another kind of Attraction, namely, that of Cohœæſion; which is called the Electrical Attraction unexcited,; which is very ſtrong when the Parts of Bodies touch one another, but decreaſes (when the Parts of Bodies are at any ſenſible Diſtance) much faſter than Gravity, ſo as to become almoſt inſenſible then. This Attraction is prov'd by the Experiments made on the Drop of Oil of Oranges; on the Mercury, in the Caſe where little Cylinders of Glaſs and Iron lye at the bottom of it; on the red Water and Blood riſing in ſmall Tubes, the Hyperbola of ting'd Water riſing between the two Glaſs Planes, and the Mercury rifine in a clean'd Braſs Tube with a concave Surace. S. The repelling Force in Bodies, and the Electrical Attraction excited, appears from the Experiments made with the large Glaſs Tube rubb'd with the Hand, which firſt attracts, and then repells ſeveral (or indeed all) Bodies; as appear'd in the Experiments made upon Cork, Lead, Glaſi, Iron, Feathers, Leaſ-Gold, &ec. N. B. A Feather, or any other light Body, when once attracted by te rubb rnbb'd Tube, ſo as to touch it, mill alvays be repell'd from it, till it has touch'd ſome other Body. 6. Bodies are compounded of ſeveral Combinations of the firſt ſolid Particles of Matter; thoſe Bodies that have moſt Compoſitions, having leaſt Matter, or moſt Vacuity. Each Compoſition affording new Pores, larger than thoſe of the laſt Compoſition before. 155xλè tſλcõõν*òασxòσtõσοσλtõcõõõòõσõαc λ L E C T U R E II. I. OTION is that Force by which a ſa Body 2 stii changes its place: the ſ M't Quantity of it is known by multiplyTπα ing the Quantity of Matter into the Velocity; ſo that a little Body may have as much Motion as a great one, if it has as much more Velocity as it has leſs Matter. The Thing was prov'd by a Spring ſhooting forwards two unequal Leads with the ſame Force. 2. ADown Feather and a Guinea, fall equally faſt in a Glaſs from which the Air is dravn; from this, and the former Experiment may be deduc'd, that Gravity towards the Earth (or the Force by which Bodies fall) is always equal to the Quantity of Matter in Bodies: Whence it follows, That if two equal Bodies (as the Cube of Iron, and that of Wood) weigh unequally, there muſt be Vacuities interſpers'd in that which weighs leaſt. ; 3. Another Proof of a Vacuum is thus deduc'd from the laſt Experiment. Mercury weighs 14 times more than Water; and accordingly it reſiſts to a Body moving in it, 14 times more than Wal, B 2 ter. ter. Water weighs and reſiſts 850 times more than Air; whence it follows, that the Reſiſtance of a Medium, is proportionable to its Quantity of Matter. Therefore, as the Feather falling in the exhauſted Receiver, meets with no ſenſible Reſiſtance,, as it does when it falls in the Air, there muſt be no ſenſible Quantity oſf Matter in the ſaid Receiver; and conſequently a Vacuity muſt be interſpers'd all over it. If all the World was full of Matter, tho' ne'er ſo ſubtile, Bodies moving in ſuch a Fluid, would be more reſiſted than if they mov'd in Quick-Silver. 4. The Materia ſubtilis Caccording to the Carteſians) impells heavy Bodies downwards, therefore it muſt have Reſiſtance; but it makes no Reſiſtance in the exhauſted Receiver, therefore it is not there. If there was any Matter without Reſiſtance, it would no longer be Matter: Its being divided into fine Parts not taking away the Reſiſtance; for a Pound of Gold weighs as much when in Duſt, as in a ſolid Lump. S . Light has a Velocity 1ooooo times greater than a Cannon-Ball; if therefore a Duck-Shot had the Velocity of Light, it would ſtrike any thing as ftrongly as a Cannon-Ball 100000 times bigger, moving with all the Swiftneſs that it receives from the Powder. N. B. Light comes from the Sun in about eight Minutes, and from the fixed Stars, in about Six Months; mhereas a Cannon-Ball mould be 25 Tears in going the firſt, and 50000 Tears in going the laſt Journey. ; 6. The whole Effect of mechanical Engines, to ſuſtain great Weights with a ſmall Power, is produc'd by diminiſhing the Velocity of the Weight to be rais'd, and increaſing that of the Power in a reciprocal Proportion, of the two Weights, and their Velocities; that is, by giving as much more li ll l Velocity Velocity to the Power, as it weighs leſs (or has leſs Matter) than the Weight; that the Quantity of Matter fixd at each end of a Machine ( for Example of a Steel- Vard) being multiplied by its Velocity, may ſhew that there is an equal Quantity of Motion at each end; but equal Motions acting with contrary Directions, deſtroy one another, and ſo cauſe an Æquilibrium. If you give the Power a little more than the above-mention'd Velocity, it will over-poiſe, or raiſe the Weight. Magnitude 7. Three Centers; that orsadti ſ in Bodies. . &ravity 8. The Center of Magnitude is the Middle. 9. The Center of Motion, is a fix'd Point, round which a Body turns, or endeavours to turn. 10. The Center of Gravity, is that Point by which if a Body is ſuſpended, it will remain in any given Poſition. 11. If the Center of Gravity be not in the Center of Motion, it will deſcend till it goes under the Center of Motion, unleſs it be perpendicular ly over it. This Truth gives us a Method for finding the Center of Gravity of the moſt irregular Bodies, by ſuſpending them ſucceſſively by different Sides, and marking where a Plumb- Line let fall from the Center of Suſpenſion, touches the Body in each Caſe; obſerve where thoſe Lines interſect, and at that Interſection the Center of Gravity will be. 12. The Center of Gravity is in the middle of a regular and homogeneous Body; but not in the Center of Bodies that are not ſo; as appears from the Experiments of the round Biece of Wood with Lead on one ſide, and of the Tobacco-Pipe broken at its Center of Gravity, and then weigh'd. 13. Bodies inclin'd, cannot fall, if their Line of Directious falls within their Baſes, otherviſt ey they muſt fall. It is upon that Principle that we keep ourſelves from falling, as we walk. That the double Conic ſolid, ſeems to riſe of it ſelf upon the Glaſs Tube, tho it really deſcends : And that a Stick, which of it ſelf would fall from the Table, is kept from falling, by hanging a Pail of Water to it; becauſe the Center of Gravity of the Stick, which cou'd deſcend at firſi, alters its place, and cannot deſcend when the Pail is hung on; no Body being able to deſcend, unleſs its Center of Gravity can fall. L E C T U R E III. I. H E. Reciprocal Proportion between two S5 counter-Laſancingr desghts. and their Q Q Velocities holds good in all the meS/7. chanical Powers. Theſe Powers are Six. I. The Balance. 2. The Leaver. 3. The Pulley. 4. The Axis in Peritrochio. 5. The Wedge. And 6. The Screm. Tho the Screw being only a Wedge carried round a Cylinder, a great many count but Five mechanical Poverss. I. A Balance has either equal Brachia ( as in the common Scales) or unequal ones, as in the Statera Romana. To have the Balance Horizontal, when in Æquilibrio, the Center of Motion muſt be a little above that of Gravity. The falſe BaIance is a common pair of Scalès, whoſe Beam is unequally divided, o it is not eaſily perceivd: But changing the Scales diſcovers the Cheat. 1 o To find the Center of Gravity of tuo Weights apply'd to a Balance of known length, take this Analogy. As the Sum of the Weights: To the leaſt Weight :: So the Length of the Balance : To the diſtance of the great Weight from the Center of Gravitp This Analogy not giving the Place of the Center oſ Gravity exactly for Practiſe, by reaſon of theWeight of the Beam of the Balance, hang a Weight F equal to the two others, at their common Center of Gravity, and a Weight G equal to the Beam oſ the Balance, at the Center of Oravity of the Balance, and ſay, Aſs the Sum of the Weights F and G: To the leſſer Weight G:: So the Diſtance C I of rheſe tmo nem Weights. To the Diſtance of the Weight F, from rhe trus Center of Gravity K. 2. There are four Sorts of Leavers. The Leaver of the 1ſt kind, has the Weight at one end and the Power at the other, with the Center of Motion between. The Leaver of the 2d kind, has the Center of Motion at one end, and the Power at the other, with the Weight between. The Leaver of the 3d kind, has the Center of Motion at one end, and the Weight at the other, with the Power beueen e The Leaver of the a1b kind, is only a bended Leaver of the firſt kind. i A compound Leaver is more uſeful than a ſimple One of the ſame Length. . 38. An upper Pulley adds nothing to the Power, but a lower One doubles its Force. In compound Pullies, the above- mention'd reciprocal Proportion, determines their Force. 4. As the Circumference of the Wheel to that of the Axis that receives the Rope, ſo is the Force gain'd by an Avæis in Peritrochio. 5. The great FEriction of the Wedge is overcome by a ſmart Blow. This Friction is of uſe in the Screw, which adds a vaſt Force to the Power, but raiſes the Weight but a little way. 6. If you apply the Screw ( caltd in that caſe an endleſs Screv) to the Skew- Teeth of a Wheel, you make a compound Engine of great uſe. 7. Let compound Engines be made in any Form, to know their Strength, obſerve how much the firſt Mover goes faſter than the laſt Mover; and ſo much as the Effect of the Engine falls ſhort of cthat Proportion, that is the Friction. All the mechanical Powers may be reduc'd to the Leaver. Ulii What any Engine gains in Strength, it loſes in Time. . 12ſοσßνßνλννλινλννλνõfiσλονμλòõάrλλαῦ LECTVRE LECTUR E IV. . S&& H E firſt Lamw of Motion is this. All Bodies endeavour to remain in their τ& State of Reſt or Motion, and that is fQpq. calPd the Vis inertiæ of Matter. Air ; reſiſts a Projectile, and Gravity brings it to the Ground. ll If a Body is acted upon by two Forces, it will go in the Diagonal of the Parallelogram, that repreſents the quantity and direction of thoſe Forces. As if a Body be acted upon in the B D Direction A B, and AG, it will go in the Diagonal Line A D, and that in the ſame time that it wou'd A C deſcribe A Bor A C. From this Principle, a Cannon-Ball deſcribes a Parabola, by a mixture of the Projectile force of the Powder and the Gravity; the whole Curve being as it were made up of a great Number of very ſmall Diagonals. 2. ACentrifugal Force, is that by which any Body moving in a Curve, (as a Stone in a Sling) endeavours to eſcape out of the Curve, and fiie off in a right line Tangent, to the ſaid Curve. The String drawing to the Center, and keeping the Stone from fiying off, ſhews what is meant by a Centripetal Force, which is juſt the Reverſe of the other. By the Centrifugal Force, a whirPd Veſſel will not ſpill its Water, becauſe the Gravity of it is leſ than that Force. . . 3. The Bullet tied to the Center of the whirl'd Table, endeavour'd at firſt to remain at reſt, whilſt the Table went from under it, 'till the roughneſs of the Table carried it along; which fhew'd, that it 4 C ęen- 10 endeavour'd co continue at reſt; but when onee in motion, it went on, tho the Table was ſtopp'd, which ſhew'd the endeavour of a Body to continue in motion, and the ſtretching of the String ſhew'd the Centrifugal Force 4. That ſuch a Force, is ſometimes greater than Gravity, was ſhewn, when the Bullet hung off of the Table, and was rais'd by turning the Table; and alſo when Mercury, Lead and Cork, were carried upward, in their reſpective Tubes, as the Table went round. 5. That Cork in Water, and Oil in Water, went towards the Center, was owing to the greater Centrifugal Force of theWater; becauſe Water weighed more than thoſe Bodies, and had the ſame Velocity; therefore the Water's greater Motion, muſt make them loſe their Places, and force them towards the Center. That the Motion of the aforeſaid Bodies in the Tubes, was in a Spiral, was ſhown by the Spiral, drawn with Chalk, by endeavouring to draw a Semidiameter, whilſt the Table was in motion. 6. If a Cannon-Ball was ſhot Horiontally (or upon the Level) from a Mountain, with a Force of Powder equal to the Earth's attraction, it wou'd conſtantly go round, and never come to the Ground; like a Planet. The Projectile Motion, or Centrifugal Force ariſing from it, wou'd keep it from falling to the Earth, and the Attraction of the Earth, wou'd keep it from flying out of its Orbit, and quitting the Earth by moving oſf in the Tangent. The Moon is juſt ſo affected, but at the diſtance of c6o Semidiameters of the Earth, from the Center of the Earth, and acted upon by an Attraction, about 3600 times leſs than the Attraction or Gravity at the Surſace of the Earth; becauſe 3600 is the Square of co. t77. The 7. The Glaſs Body being whirld about on the Table, raisd Weights that drove it towards the Center, in proportion to the Velocity that was given it, ſo as to encreaſe its centrifugal Horce, when it was drawn by the greater Weights: This ſhew'd how Planets are kept from falling into the attracting Sun. t 8. The Two Wooden Balls whirld about in the Trough, ſhew'd, that when two Bodies are acted upon only by each other, their common Center of Gravity will be at reſt, and they will deſcribe ſimilar Figures round about it. E U οſοſſοõſsοſοſſ SοſοſοπιD LECTU R EV. I. H E Second Lam of Motion, is, that the ſæss Change, Encreaſe, or Diminution of & 7 & Motion, is as the Force impreſs'd, and ùa the Direction of that Force. . 2. The Acceleration of Bodies in their Fall, is owing to Gravity, and the firſt Law of Motion. Gravity gives the Motion downwards at ſirſt; the firſt Law continues it, and Gravity ſtill ſuperadds, till the reſiſtance of the Air is equal to what Gravity is able to ſuperadd, then the Motion becomes uniform, without any more Acce leration. 3. The more a Body is ſpecifically light, the ſooner it comes to that uniform Motion. Cork immediately comes to it, but Lead is a great vhile firſt; and the bigger the Lump of Lead is, the longer it falls before it comes to this uniform Motion; becauſe its Weight then bears a great Proportion to its Surface, the reſiſtance of the Air depending upon the latter. . C2 4 The C( 12 4. The Spaces which Bodies fall thro, are as the Squares of the Times, as is ſhewn by Galilæo's Scheme of Triangles, where you ſee, that if a Body falls one Space, (or 16 Feet and one Inch) it will fall four Spaces in 2 Seconds, 9 in 3, 16 in four, &c. 5. Where there is no Air, Bodies always accelerate their Motion, in the above given Proportion. Hence it is, That Comets and Planets in their Ellipſes, move from the Aphelion (or greateſt diſtance from the Sun) to the Peribelion, Cor neareſt diſtance from the Sun) with an accelerated Motion; and from the Perihelion to the Aphelion, with a Motion uniformly diminiſh'd: The Attraction of the Sun, firſt accelerates the Motion, by conſpiring with its Direction, then retards it, by drawing counter to it. ll 6 . The Reaſon why a Planet, or Comet, does not fall into the Sun, when neareſt to it, is, that the Centrifugal Force encreaſes in proportion to the Square of the acquird Velocity; and the Reaſon that a Planet, or Comet does not go off, and leave the Sun, when at its Aphelion it is leaſt attracted, is, that the Centrifugal Force diminiſhes in proportion to the Square of the diminiſæd Velocit . 7. The Orbits of Planets are almoſt Circular; but thoſe of Comets are very long Ellipſes; ſo that they muſt, from the Laws of Gravity, move a great deal faſter than Planets at the Aphelion, and much ſlower at the Perihelion: And that they actually do ſo, is plain from Obſervation; for by a Ray drawn by thought from the Sun to them, they ſweep thro' equal Areas in equal Times; and it has been prov'd, that when a Body revolves about another, if it deicribes equal Areas in equal Times, it is acted upon by a Centripetal Force, towards that Central Body. 8. That the Centripetal Force and Gravity, is the ſame thing in a Second of Time, appears from the lũlllillũũſù Con- Conſideration, that a Projectile round the Earth, at the Moon's diſtance, vou'd move juſt as theMoon does, except ſome Errors in the Moon's Motion, which are owing to the Suns Attraction, that diſturbs the Motion of the Moon, ſo as to make it ieſs Regular. 9. Comets receive ſuch a degree of Heat, when they come near the Sun, as to ſend out a vaſt quantity of Vapour, which being ſhin'd upon by the Sun, cauſes the blaxing Tails, which we ſee of various Shapes, according to our poſition in reſpect of them. As the Comets receed from the Sun, they cool, and their Vapour (conſequently their Tail) diminiſhes. 10. If a Comet ſhou'd come ſo near the Sun, as to go within its Atmoſphere, the reſiſtance of that Medium, woud take off ſo much of its projectile Motion, as to make it fall into the Sun in a few Revolutions. II. Thoſe Planets which are neareſt the Sun move faſteſt, to avoid being drawn into the Sun; and thoſe which are fartheſt, move ſloweſt, that they may not fly out of their Orbits, as being leſs attracted. The Planets that are near the Sun are ſmall, that they may not make the Sun move about a Point far from its own Center; the common Center oſ Gravity of ſuch a Planet, and the Sun being very near the Sun's Center. (OEmmλν MUω 4ſνσνλμννν);ασνκσcνκα; LECTURE L EC T U R E VI. I. Æ* & Y the Light of the Lantern thrown upon the White Ball, was ſhevn how & B the Light of the Sun falls upon all the PCU Parts of the Moon ſucceſſively. The Phaſes of the Moon were alſo ſhewn by it  The Full Mocn, when being between the Sun and Moon, the Inhabitants of the Earth ſee all the enlighten'd part of the Moon. Nęem Moon, when the Moon being between us and the Sun, its enlighten'd part is turnd from us. Half Moon, when it being in the Quadratures, we ſee but half the enlightend Part. ; 2. An Eclipſe of the Sun, is, when the Moon being between us and the Sun, the Shadow of the Moon is thrown on ſome Place of the Earth; but as the Moon is leſs than the Earth, and its Conic Shadow much leſs at the Diſtance that we are from it, the Shadow only runs over a ſmall Tract of the Earth, the Inhabitants of which have a total Eclipſe; their Neighbours have a partial one, becauſe to them the Moon only hides part of the Sun's Body; and all thoſe that are farther remov'd, have no Eclipſe at all. 3. The Moon's Eclipſe is, when the Shadow of the Earth falls upon the Moon, and is ſeen by one half of the Earth at the ſame time, viz. that Hemiſphere which is turn'd from the Sun. If the Moon is all cover'd with the Shadow, it is a toral Eclipſe; if not, a partial one: If it paſſes thro' the middle of the Shadow, the Eclipſe is Total and Central, and of the longeſt Duration. 4. The Reaſon why we have not Eclipſes evory New and Full Moon, is, that the Moon's Orbit bemg ing variable, it is not always in the ſame Plane (or Level) with the Earth, at Full and New Moon, its Orbit dipping below, and riſing above the Ecliptic, or way of the Earth: But when the Nodes (or Places where the Moon's Orbit cuts the Plane of the Earth's Orbit) lie in a Line with the Sun and Earth, there is then an Eclipſe, as alſo when the Moon is very near the Nodes; becauſe the Earth being of ſome Breadth, in reſpect of the Moon's Orbit, may receive the Moons Shadow, tho' it is not juſt in the Node: Likewiſe the Earth's Shadow, even at the diſtance of the Moon, being of a conſiderable breadth, will eclipſe the Moon, when it is not in the Node; but the Earth's Shadow there, being much ſmaller than the Earth it ſelf, is the reaſon why the Solar Eclipſes are more frequent than the Lunar. 5. The Tides are owing to the Moons and Sun's Attractions. The Moon by its Attraction, will cauſe the Water to riſe under it ſelf, and alſo at the oppoſite ſide of the Earth; becauſe at the ſide towards the Moon, the Water being nearer, is more attracted than the Center of the Earth; but on the other ſide, the Water being more diſtant, is leſs attracted than the Center of the Earth. So that the Water makes a Spheroid or Egg-form, whoſe longeſt Diameter tends to the Moon. The Sun by its attraction, does the ſame, only its great diſtance cauſes his Spheroid to be ſhorter. When therefore, the Sun, Moon and Earth are in a Line, as at New and Full Moon; the Sun and Moon making their Spheroids in the ſame Line, we have Spring Tides; but when the Moon appears Halv'd, or in Quadrature with the Sun, then che Directions of the Sun's and Moon's Forces being at right Angles to each other, the Sun raiſes the Water where the Moon depreſſes it; but not ſo muc bl much as the Moon depreſſes it; ſo that tho we have ſome Tides, they are hut low or Neap Tides. 6. By Mr. Graham's, the Clock-Makers Planetary Machine, was ſnewn the Motion of the Earth and Moon about the Sun, and theirs and the Sun's Motion about their oun Axes; as alſo the Inclination of the Earth's Axis, always the ſame. N. B. The Moon turns about its Axis, juſt in the ſame time that it makes one Revolution about the Earth; mhence it alvays ſhems the ſame Face to the Earth. This has made ſome fafly imagin, that it did not turn about its Axis. L EC T U R E VII. I. F a Body rolls down ſeveral inclin'd ùd Places, whoſe loweſt Part are in the i & ſame Level, it will have the ſame VeffRꝶ locity at the End of them all; tho' it will be longer in falling along the longeſt Plain, or that which is fartheſt from the Perpendicular. As for Example, a Body falling from A, will have the en el ſame force at E, D and G, and alſo at B, when it falls down perpendicularly. If a Body falling along the Plane G H, be turned up agnin, it will go as high up the Plane H I, allowing for the reſiſtance n4 of the Air, and friction of the Plain. If a Body falls in the Lines deſcribd in the Circle here drawn, they will from G, B, A, D and E, come to F at the ſame time. Hence is deduc'd the Rea on ſon why a Pendulum makes all its Vibrations, whe. ther long or ſhort, nearly in the ſame time. In the Cycloid, the unequal Vibrations wou'd be exactly in the ſame time, which is not only Mathematically Demonſtrated, but deduc'd from a Conſideration oſ the Attraction of the Earth, being proportionable to its quantity of Matter, and a Corollary from it; by which it appears, that if ſeveral Bodies begun to fallat the ſame time, from the Surface of the Harth, or any Point within the Earth, (ſuppoſing it penetrable) they wou'd come to the Center at the ſame time2. Pendulums of the ſame length, let the Ball be of Wood or Lead, &c. will make their Vibrations in the ſame time; but the heavieſt Ball will ſwing longeſt. li 3. The longer a Pendulum is, the ſlower it vibrates: A Pendulum of almoſt 40 Inches, makes a Vibration in a Second of Time, and one of almoſt 1o Inches, ſwings twice in the ſame time, and ſo on; the Time of Swings of Pendulums being Reciprocally, as the Square Roots of their Lengths. The Wire that the Pendulum in Clocks, hangs by, lenthens by Heat, and ſhortens by Cold, as was ſhewn by the Steel Bar, lengthen'd by Heat; ſo that the Pendulums of Clocks muſt be regulated by a Screw. Long Pendulum Clocks go beſt, becauſe the Pendulums deſcribing ſhort Ares, with a long Radius, make Vibrations very little differing from Cycloidal ones; but at Sea ſuch Clocks cannot be uſeful, becauſe the Motion of the Ship will ſome times make the Pendulum ſwing too long Ares, which will more deviate from a Cycloid, and ſo be leſs Regular. 4. The Waves of the Sea oſcillate in the ſame time that a Pendulum does, whoſe length is equal to half the Diſtance, between the top of one Wave, ind the top of the next. This was ſhewn by Mercury D i vibrating vibrating in a recurved Tube, in the ſame time that a Pendulum of half the length of the Mercury did vibrate. Here folloms ſeveral Phænomena of the Load-Stone. I. It will attract Iron with one Pole, and repell it with another. 2. It gives a Needle a Verticity, or a Tendency to North and South. 3. It is ſtrongeſt when arm'd with Steel Plates. 4. Acts thro any Body but Iron. 5. Makes Steel-Duſt form it ſelf into Needlelike Figures, which turn over Head, as you turn different Poles of the Stone to them. 6. Steel-duſt let fall upon a Paper, held over a Load-ſtone, places it ſelf in Lines, which ſhew the Direction of the Virtue propagated from one Pole to another. 7. Steel Bodies, by being drawn over the Poles of a Stone, acquire the Power of attracting Iron and Steel; but loſe it, by being drawn over the ſame Pole of the Stone the contrary way. 8. It will, when unarm'd, give Power to a great Key, todraw away a little Key from the Stone it ſelf Nem Phænomena of it. I. AWire touch'd at one End by a Load-Stone, will have ſeveral Magnetick Points ſucceſſively, call'd Conſequential Points; which will alternately be attracted by the North and South Pole, of a touch'd Needle. 2. A Load-Stone has more Magnetic Points or Poles, than was imagin'd; but all the North Poles are on one ſide, and all the South Poles on the other; ſo that arming the Stone with Steel Plates, collects the Torce of all the Points on one ſide together, and ſo adds to the Power of the Stone. 3. The Upper End of a Steel Bar, attracts the North End of a Needle, and the lower end of it the ; Sou South End, let what end ſoever of the Bar be uppermoſt. 4. The Variation is what the Direction of a touch'd Needle differs from a North and South Direction; becauſe the Poles of the Earth are not the Magnetic Poles of it, there being two of them near the North Pole, and two near the South Pole of cthe Earth. Gò os tſſsiũò ſſſ tſſſſſſeſſα: L E C T U R E VIII. 1. 8as Laſticity, or the spring of Bodies, ĩs e SλN ù that orce by which they reſtore Qr EQ* themſelves to their Figure, when it è&σr ò has been alterd by a Blow; and this αceaαh properly, does not conſiſt ſo much in the Bodies yielding to the Stroke, but in its being perfectly reſtor'd, what ever alteration of Figure it receives. 2. The Stretch'd Cat-gut, which after a Stroke, returnd to its Place with a Sound, ſhew'd what Elaſticity is, and the more tingling the Sound is, the greater the Elaſticittu 3. Glaſs is the moſt Elaſtic of Bodies, as you may know from its Sound, and by letting a Ball of Glaſs fall upon a flat Glaſs Painted over; for then that Glaſs Ball, being flatten'd in the Stroke, receives a Circular Spot of Paint, which is very large in proportion to the Spot which it wou'd have receiv'd, if ghe Ball had been only preſſ'd againſt the flat Glaſs. 4. If there was no Vacuum in Bodies, the Surface of a Glaſs-Ball cou'd never be dented in after the Manner above mentiond; and as there are void D à Places Places in all Bodies, we can have no Body which is perfectly hard, or which is not dented by a Stroke ; nevertheleſs, we may by Experiment ſhew, what are the Laws oſ the Congreſs of hard Bodies; for if we make uſe of Balls of very ſoft Clay, which cannot reſtore themſelves after they are dented by a Stroke, they will have the ſame Property in regard to their Congreſs, as Bodies perfectly hard; becauſe in the Congreſs of the Bodies, not to be dented at all, is the ſume as to be dented, and not reſtor'd to the firſt Figure, which happens to Bodies perfect ly Soft; upon which are made the following Experiments, which are true of all Bodies that have no Elaſticity, whether they be perfectly Hard, or perfectly Soſt. . v. 8. a b Fig. . 4 O - O OoOv mD. 4. ?m. 4. ?. 8. v. 8. a b Fig. 2. O Byv. 4. OOvV ?m.4. ?w.4. .8. v. 20. æ v. 8. a b Fig. 3 4 O SO? OOuo ?w. 4. ?. 4. ?§. 8. f 8. v. O. v. 8. Fig. 4. 4 OÆæ OO , O. . ?. 4. mv. 8. ; ?. 4. 5. If the Bodies A and B in all the four Figures, are ſuppoſed to weigh equally, as for Example, four Pound each, it will happen, that if A has 8 Degrees of Velocity, and ſtrikes B which is at reſt, after the Blow A and B, will go together tovards C, with half the Velocity of A, Fig. 1. where n ll ; 31.. ; - . 1 i t bl the Weight of the Bodies, as it does alſo in all the other Figures. 6. If Ahas 8 Degrees of Velocity, and B 4, after the Shock both Bodies will move towards C, with half the Sum of the Velocities, that is with 6 Degrees, Fig. 3. 7. If A moves towards C, with 20 Degrees of Velocity, and B towards A, with 8 Degrees of Velocity, both Bodies will go together towards C, where there is moſt Motion, with half the difference of their Velocities, that is, with 6 Degrees ofſ Velocity, Fig. 3. 8. If Aand B meet each other with equal Velocities, they will loſe all cheir Motion aſter the Stroke, ſee Fig. 4. ; 9. Laſtly, If the Bodies are unequal, and move towards the ſame Parts, you muſt add together their Quantity of Motion, which dividing by the Sum of the Weight of the Bodies, you will have the UVelocity, with which they will go on together after the Stroke: But if the tuo Bodies have contrary Motions, they will go after the Stroke, towards the way where there is moſt Motion; and ſubtracting the leaſt quantity of Motion from the Greateſt, divide the remainder by the Weight of both Bodies, and you will have their Velocity. 10. If from the Center of a Quadrant, two Elaſtic Bodies of equal Weight hang by Threads, when you raiſe each of them up to an equal Number of Degrees from the Bottom, they will meet at the bottom, and return to the height from whence they came. By the Stroke they loſe all their Motion; but as they are dented in proportion to the Force oſ the Stroke, in reſtoring themſelves, they will drive each other back with the ſame Velocity, that they had before the Stroke. l llil 11. By 1I. By the ſame Principle, if an Elaſtic Body in Motion, ſtrikes another Elaſtic Body equal to it, which is at reſt, the Firſt will remain at reſt in the Place of the Second, and the Second will go on with all the Velocity of the Firſt. 12. If two Elaſtic Bodies ſtrike each other, having different Velocities, whether they meet, or overtake each other, they will interchange Velocities at every Stroke. The latter Part of this Lecture mas concerning the Strength of our Bodies, well applied. One Man with a ſtrong Girdle round him, a little below his Hips, (that is juſt reſting on the two Trochant ers of the Thigh-Bones) and ſitting upon a Plane, riſing a little above the Horizon juſt at his Feet, which bear againſt a fix'd Vertical Plane, will be able to maintain his poſition againſt ten Men, or two torſes, which pull him by means of a ſtrong Rope fix'd to the Iron Hook of his Girdle; becauſe the Legs and Thighs lying in a right Line upon the Plane, the Horſes muſt draw at a very acute Angle; and it has already been demonſtrated, that when a Power acts at a very acute Angle, it draws with great Difficulty. The other Experiments of Strength that vere ſhemn, depend upon the ſame Principles. 1265365..953. 9 λEνλλοσσκνv Eμλλcννλλνσ LECTURE RUſοRſ oaν να HYDROSTATICKS. 665:5529. 95355295319555. ſõλxσ λνονλννσλνασι, L E Cc T U R E IX. I. Fluid is a Body that yields to any ù& Force Impreſsſ'd, and ſo recedes moſt ài A & from the Greateſt Preſſure. DRπ 2. That a Fluid weighs in its own Element, was ſhewn by Water's weighing in Water, and Air in Air, as appeared by Experiment. 3. A Drop of Water, on a Table, preſs'd by the Finger, not only acts againſt the Table, and Finger, but alſo ſpreads laterally every way. From theſe Propoſitions is deduced, 1ſt. That all the Parts of Fluids are heavy. 2dly, That the Upper preſs upon the Lower. 3dly, That the Higher the Fluid is, the more the bottom of the Veſſel is preſs'd with it. 4thly, That the Preſſure of the Fluid, againſt any Part of the Side of the Veſſel, is according to the Height of the Fluid above that Part. 5thly, That all the Parts of an Homogeneous Fluid are at reſt; each Part being as low as it can be. 6thly, That not only the upper Surface, but everv Imaginary Surface, (or Surface ſuppoſed in any Part of a Veſſel) muſt be equally preſs'd in all its Parts; which makes the Upper Surface be always level; becauſe otherwiſe an Imaginary Surace face in the Fluid, wou'd be unequally preſs'd; but the Parts more preſs'd than the reſt, muſt yield and ſink down, and the Parts leſs preſs'd than the reſt. be forced upwards. 4. One Body is Specifically heavier than another, vwhen it has more Matter with the ſame Bulh, or as much Matter with a leſs Bulk. 5. A Pillar f Water in a Tube, was ſuſtained in a Veſſel of Oil; but ſtood lower in the Tube, than the Surface of the Oil; becauſe it preſsſ'd but juſt as much upon the Imaginary Surface, as the like Pillars of Oil round about it, being as much ſhorter than them, as Water is Speciſically heavier than Oil; if the Water was brought up to the Surface of the Oil, it wou'd ſink, ſome Drops coming out at the bottom of the Tube: Again, if the Tube was put down, ſo as to ſink the Water lower, below the above-ſaid Proportion, the Water wou'd riſe, and the Surface reſt at the firſt Place. In like manner, Pillars of Oil in Tubes, will ſtand higher than the Surface of the Water, in which they are Immerſed, and riſe, if the Tube be plunged deeper; but deſcend, (ſome Drops falling out at the bottom of it) if the Tube be raiſed, ſo as to make the Pillar of Oil too long in Proportion to the Counterpoiſing Pillars of Water, that preſs on the Imaginary Surface, at the bottom of the Tube. 6. By ſuch kind of Experiments, vith Red Water in Tubes of various Shapes, it appeared, that Fluids preſs upwards, downwards, ſidewiſe, and in any Direction according to their Height 7. A Body Specifically heavier than Water, will ſink in Water; becauſe where ever you put it, it weighs more than the Water, whoſe Room it takes up, and ſo the Surface immediately under it, being more preſs'd in that Part which ſhou'd ſuſtain the ſaid Body, than any where elſe, yields, and lets ſe a fall thro: But a Body ſpecifically lighter than Water will riſe, becauſe it preſſes an Imaginary Surface leſs than the Water, in whoſe Room it is ſubſtituted; and therefore muſt be forced upwards. 8. APiece of Lead ſwims in Water, by keeping the Water from preſſing upon the Lead, and plunging it near twelve times its Thickneſs under Water before you let it go; but it will fall down, when you raiſe the Veſſel to which it is apply'd, ſo as not to let the ſaid Lead be ſo deep under the Surface of the Water, as twelve times its thickneſs. The Rule to make any Metal ſwim in that manner, is, to plunge it ſo much deeper than its oun thickneſs under Water, as that Metal is ſpecifically heavier than Water, always keeping the Water from getting above it. As Gold muſt be above nineteen times its thickneſs under Water to ſuim, becauſe tis nineteen times heavier than Water, &vc. 9. A Body ſpecifically lighter than a Fluid, may be kept down at the bottom of a Fluid, if the bottom of the Veſſel be ſmooth, and the Body being likewiſe ſmooth, lies ſo cloſe to it, that none of the Fluid gets betwéen; but if the leaſt paſſage be made for the Eluid, it will quickly infinuate it ſelf between the Body and the bottom of the Veſſel, and make the Body riſe to the top of the Fluid: The Experiment was ſhewn b a Piece of flat Glaſs lying at the ſmooth Bottom of a Jar of Mercury. E LERC- I. Body ſpecifically heavier than Water, ſ loſes of its Weight in Water, as much f A& as the Weight of an equal Bulk of SEBTU Water; and what the heavy Body loſes, the Water gains; as appear'd bythe Experiment of the Lead, weigh'd firſt in Air, then in Water. 32. The different ſpecifick Gravity of Fluids, may be known by weighing a piece of Lead (or any Body ſpecifically heavier than the ſaid Fluids) ſucceſſively in all of them; that being lighteſt, in which it loſes moſt of its Weight. 3. The ſpecifick Gravity of ſolid Bodies heavier than Water, may be found, by weighing them ſucceſſively in Water; that being ſpeciſically heavier, which loſes leaſt of its weight in Water. Pure Gold Ioſes only a ir9th part of its Weight in Water. N. B. On theſe Principles depends the Hydroſtatical Balance. 4. If a Lump of Lead, and a Lump of Braſs, be equipois'd in Air, the Lead will preponderate, when they are both weigh'd in Water; and thus you may Lknow a bad Guinea from a good one. 5. As the Weight of a heavy Body in Air, to its of loſs Weight in Water; ſo is the ſpecifick Gravity of the Body, to the ſpecifick Gravity of the Water. 6. A Body ſpecifically lighter than a Fluid, will ſwim a top; and in ſuch a Caſe, a Bulk of Water, equal to the immers'd Part of the Body, will weigh as much as the whole Body; which muſt needs be, otherwiſe the Imaginary Surface under the Body, wou'd not be equally preſs'd in all Parts. This mas ſnemn by the Experiment of the double Cone of Wood weigh'd againſt Water. 7. Bodies 7. Bodies that ſwim in Water, hàve their ſpecifick Gravity in reſpect to each other, as their Parts immers'd in the Uater. 8. A Body ſpecifically lighter than any Fluid, ſinks deepeſt in the lighteſt Fluids; and hence it is, that cthe Flydrometer (or Water-poiſe) ſhews the different ſpecifick Gravity of Rluidss. ililũl 9. A Body of the ſame ſpecifick Gravity as Water, will reſt in any place of a Veſſel of Water. 10. The Preſſure of a Fluid, upon the bottom of any Veſſel, (be the top Wide or Narrow) is as much as the Weight of a Pillar of that Fluid, of the Hoight of the Fluid, and of the Bigneſs of the Baſe all the way; which was ſhewn by ſeveral Exper iments, eſpecially one, by which a Pint of Water in the Tube of thè Water-Bellons, ſuſtain'd the whole weight of a Man. If you blow into the ſaid Machine, your Breath will raiſe a Man ſtanding upon it; becauſe the Force of the Blaſt is encreas'd in proportion, as the Surface on which a Man ſtands, is greater than the Hole which you blow in at; provided that Hole be not wider than the Section of the Wind- Pipe. I I. Water brought from a Reſervatory, will riſe ashigh in Pipes, as the Surface of the Water in the Reſervatory; but not ſo high in Jettos, on account of the Reſiſtance of the Air, and Friction of the ages. 1 Eπ lower you tap a Veſſel, the further the Liquor will ſpout; becauſe the Preſſure being according to the Height, it is then forcd out with the greateſt Velocity. l But if a Plane intercepts the ſpouting Liquor, a Hole being made in the Veſſel, exactly in the middle, between the Surface of the Liquor and the ſaid Plane, the Water will ſpout fartheſi from ſuch an Hole. u . 2 13. ùi à 13. If equal Holes be made in a Veſſel, at different heights, the Expence of the Water will be as the Square Roots of the different Heights of the Surface of the Water above the Holes. t e ti tt 2e ſt ſ t ſt 2t ſe ſn ie fh rſeα L E Cc T U R E XI. 1. H EN a Bubble of Glaſi, with the oſqn n Mouth hanging downwards, is ſo w & har fil'd with Water, as but juſt to ft ſurim at top of a long Glaſs Veſſel full of Water, if you puſh it down to the bottom of the Veſſel it will not riſe again; and if afterwards you lift it up to the top, it will not ſink again; becauſe, tho the Air that was in the Bubble (when at top) hinder'd the Atmoſphere from preſfing any more Water into it; (to make it ſpecifically heavier than Water, and ſo ſink) yet when the Bubble was puſn'd to the bottom, the Atmoſphere, help'd by all the height of Water in the Veſſel, compreſs'd che Air within the Bubble into a leſs room, ſo that the Water coming in, made the Bubble ſpecifically heavier than Water, and therefore it kept at bottom; but when the Bubble was brought to the top of the Water, the Air in it being no longer compreſs'dſby the additional Weight of the Water in the Veſſel, expanded to its former tenour, and ſo forcing out the additional Water that was got into the Bubble, the Bubble was made ſpecifically lighter than the Water, and remain'd at top. As there was a certain height from which the Bubble wou'd emerge, beyond which it wou'd always fall; this Experiment is a farther Proof, that Water preſſes according to its Height. liill It It is upon this Principle, that Glaſs Images riſe and fall in Water; but with this Exception, that they are too light to be made ſpecically eautes than Water, by the Weight of the Water in the Veſſel only; and therefore a Bladder being tied over the Surface of the Water, the Hand which preſſes upon the Bladder, forces Water into the Images, and makes them ſink; but upon the Removal of that Preſſure, the Air in the Images forces out the Water by its expanſion, and they riſe again. 2. In a recurv'd Tube, with the Holes upwards, one Inch of Mercury. will keep in Æquilibrio 14 Inches of Water, as being 14 times heavier. 38. That Water riſes in any Tube above its Level, as in ſuction by the Mouth, or by a Pump, is owing to the Weight of the Atmoſphere, which preſſes more upon the Surface of the Water in all theother Parts, than in the Middle, where the Air is rarified, or taken away; as was ſhewn by a Sucking-Pump. N. B. In all Pumps, all the Valves or Clacks open upmards, that the riſing Water may not fall back again. 4. Taking the Air out of a Crane or Syphon, whoſe ſhorteſt Leg is in a Veſſel of Water; the Water will riſe, and continue to run out at the longeſt Leg; becauſe the Air which preſſes upon the Water in the Veſſel, and makes it riſe in the ſhort Leg, has leſs weight to ſuſtain, than the Air which acts upwards, againſt the Water running out at the longeſt Leg; and therefore, the firſt Air overcoming the laſt, makes the Water conſtantly run5S. If a Bolt- Head full, or nearly full of Water, be inverted into a Glaſs of Wine, the Wine and Water will change Places; becauſe the Water is ſpecifically heavier than the Wine. 6. Mercury will run from one Veſſel to another by a Syphon, as well as Water; but the Bend of ſma yæ Syphon muſt not he more than 31 Inches above the Surface of the Mercury; as in Water-Syphons, the Bend muſt not be above 35 Feet above the Surface of the Water: For the Atmoſphere, which cauſes the Fluid to riſe, can ſuſtain no more than 31 Inches of Mercury, and 35 Feet of Water in height at moſt. So the Water in Sucking-Pumps, can riſe no higher than 35 Feet ſtrictly ſpeaking; tho' in Practiſe it is ſeldom ſuclk'd above 28. lil Tnis ſhems, that in Suction there is no ſuch thing as Xature's abhorrence of a Vacuum, to cauſe the Aſcent of Liquors. LEcC T U R E XII. I. &coſh os Steam or Vapour of water exT cited by Fire, is made uſe of to raiſe Water in Captain Savery's Hydraulick aqpπũ Engine, in dhe following manner. By opening a Cock, chrow the Steam of the Water boiling in the Globular- Copper or Aclipile, into the Receiver or ſueking Veſſel, which will drive the Air out of it, thrꝰ the Valve in the Pipe of Conduct: then having ſhut the aforeſaid Cock; by a ſmall Cock in a little Pipe from a Ciſtern of cold Water, let in a jet of cold Water into the Receiver to cool it, and condenſe the Steam, which being turn'd into a ſmall quantity o Water, leaves all the reſt of the Receiver quite empty; ſo that the Atmoſphere eaſily forces up the Water into it, thro the Valve of the ſucking Pipe. Shut the Jet, and let in the Steam to drive up the Water, then ſtopping the Steam, condenſe itby the Jet, and the Amoſphet vi will puſh up the Water from the Well below, as before in the Receiver, which may again be driven up by the Steam, &c. Tmo Receivers may be mvorQ'd in the ſume manner. Hli 2. Air is a Fluid conſiſting of Parts that drive each other avay from their reſpective Centers; becauſe it has been found by Experiments, that its Denſity is equal to its Compreſſion, and Sir J. Newton has demonſtrated, that ſuch a Fluid muſt conſiſt of Parts that have a Centrifugal Horrae. 3. The Air near the Earth, is in a compreſs'd Stute, by reaſon of the great Weight of the Air above it; the Atmoſphere is no highter ſenſible, than about 45 Miles, as is ſhewun Æ conſidering how high the Mercury muſt ſtand in che Barometer, at different heights above the Surfuce of the Earth. illl tr4. The Air always endeavours to continue of the ſame Tenour; if it be any where condens', or rarified in one Pluce, when left to it ſelf it will return to its former denſity. It is on this Principle, that Artificial Fountains are filPd and play. As for Example, let the Glaſs Bottle in this Figure h have a Tube cemented to its Mouth, ſo as to have no paſſage left for the Air into the Ball, or out oſ it, but thro' the Holes at its Ends a and ò: if you fuck at a, ſo as to rarifie the Air in the Ball, and having ſtopp'd a with your Ringer, you immerge that Part of the Tube under Water, the Water by the preſſure oſ the Atmoſphere will riſe into the Ball thro' the Tube, till the Air that was lefo in the Ball is condent'd to its firſt Tenour: Then iſ you blow hard into the Ball thrò a, the Air which you condenſe into the upper Part of the Ball, having no way to come out directly, will dilate it ſelf, 'till it comes to its firſft Tenour, aiid in ſo doing, force the Water out in à Jet, in proportion to the room that it expands it ſelf into. i . S . Ali 5. All Fountains, into which the Air or Water is injected by a Syringe, which ſpout 30 or 40 Foot high, are actuated by this Principle. 6. The Artificial Lungs, made of a hollow Glaſi Hemiſphere and two Bladders, ſhew'd the manner of Breathing; for as the Air in the Cavity of the Thorax, betwixt the Lungs, and the Pleura is expanded, and ſo rarified, when that Cavity is encreas'd by the raiſing of the Ribs, and ſinking of the Diaphragm, che external Air will ruſh into the Lungs, and raiſe them up, 'till they contract the enlarg'd Cavity of the Thorax, ſo as to render the Air in it of the ſame tenour as before, and this is call'd Inſpiration. iration is thus perform'd; by the Muſcles of the Belly, the Inteſtines are rais'd up, ſo as to make the Diaphragm come upwards, by puſhing up againſt it; then the Ribs alſo ſubſiding, the Air in the Thorax is condens'd, and ſo being made ſtronger than the Air in the Lungs, which is of the ſame Tenour as (and communicates) with the external Air, the Lungs are depreſs'a, and made to diſcharge their Air, till the Air in the Thorax has expanded to its firſt Tenour. 7. Upon this Principle are made Hero's Fountains, as the Fountain of Command; the Fountain by Attraction; the Fountain by the Compreſſion of Air, by the Falt of Water, to imitate a perpetual Motion, &c. 8. If a Cupping-Glaſs be held over the Flame of a Lamp, then immediately apply'd to any part of the Body, ſo as to touch the Skin in all Parts of the Mouth of the Glaſs, the Fleſh will riſe within the Glaſs; becauſe the rarified Air in the Glaſs, having leſs Force than the Spring of the Air in the Fleſh, muſt ſuffer the Fleſh to riſe by the Expanſion of the Air witnin it. For this Reaſon, when you haye thrown a flaming piece of Paper in a Glaſi Jar, if you immediately invert l invert it in a Baſon of Water, upon the going out of the Fire, which made the Air in the Jar continue in a ftate of Rarefaction, the Atmoſphere will force up the Water into the Jar, 'till the Air is reduc'd into ſuch a ſmall Space, as to become of its firſt Denſity or Tenour. Water will not run out of an inverted ſmall Tube, or out of a narrow Mouth-Bottle, becauſe the Air acts upwards againſt it, without being able to ſlip by the ſide of the Water, to get. to the top of the Water to preſs it down. 9. If to the Blank Screw, with which you ſhut up the Hole of a very tight Syringe, whoſe Bore is equal to a Square Inch, you hang a Scale with ſo much weight in it, that the whole amounts to r4 Pounds and an Ounce, Averdupoiſe, the Weight of the Atmoſphere, that keeps the Piſton cloſe to the bottom of the Syringe, will hinder that Weight from drawing them aſunder, when the Mercury in the Barometer ſtands at 28 inches; but a little more Weight will bring down the Syringe from the Piſton: If the Mercury ſtands at 31 Inches, the Syringe will not be drawn down with leſs than 15 Pounds and 1r Ounces, and a little more. From this Experiment may be known, what weight of Air preſſes upon a Surface, equal to a Square Inch, at any height of the Barometer, or ſtate of the Atmoſphere; and the Syringe it ſelf, in this Caſe, becomes a Barometer. 10. If we know how much Surface a Man's Body has, we may know how much Air preſſes upon our Bodies at any time; as for Example: Suppoſe a Man's Skin has 15 ſquare Feet of Surface; then fince 15 Pounds and 1 1 Ounces preſſes upon an Inch, if that be multiplied firſt by 144, the Inches in a Square Foot, then by 15, the Feet contain'd in the Skin, we ſhall have 33905 Pound and a half, for E the the Air preſſing upon the Body, when the Mercury ſtands at 31 Inches, or when the Air is heavieſt, and if 14 Pounds and an Ounce be multiplied by the above-ſaid Numbers, we ſhall have 306 24 Pounds, or the Weight of the Air upon the Body, when the Mercury ſtands at 28 Inches, or the Air is lighteſt. Qeſtſſſt ßſ;ιπα?βſſſſõhſ ſètõ L EC T U R E XIII. 1. à H E. beſt Method of Diving is by the & Bell, which is a Wooden toshime & & ſhap'd like a Bell, and hung at the UTUR Bottom with heavy weights of Lead to make it ſink; the Air in it keeps out the Water, ſo that Men that ſit in it, may be Iet down to the bottom of the Sea without danger; but as the Air in the Bell is compreſsd by the Water in proportion to the Height of the Water above the Bell, the Water will riſe in the bottom of the Bell in that proportion; ſo that at the depth of ſix Fathom, the Air being condens'd into half the Space which it had at firſt, will ſuſfer the Water to fſill half the Bell; at the depth of twelve Fathom, two Thirds of the Bell, &c. So that at great depths there wou'd be but little room in the Bell; but Dr. Halley found a Means to take in Air let down in Barrels, which had a Contrivance to let the Water into the Barrel at bottom, whilſt the Air of the Barrel went into the Bell, and this being often repeated at any depth, the Water of the Sea wou'd be hinder'd from coming above an lnch or two in the bottom of the Beſl: But as Air often breath'd will be effoete, and unſit for reſpiration, he found a means to let pu . that that Air by a Cock at the top of the Bell, changing it for the freſher Air, which he took in at bottom from the Barrels, and that was done without diſficulty, becauſe when Air has been rariſied by paſſing thro the Lungs, it will by its lightneſs get to the top of the Bell. As for the coming in of the Water, it cou'd only be at bottom, whilſt ſome Air was let out at top; becauſe the Pillars of Water puſhing in at the bottom of the Bell, were longer, and conſequently heavier than the Pillar preſſing upon the Top, where the Air came out thro ſo narrow a Paſſage, that the Water cou'd not ſlip by at the ſume time. Another thing to be taken care of is, not to be let down ſuddenly to any great Depth, becauſe the Air in our Fleſh, being only a Balance for the common Air, wou'd not be able to ſuſtain the encreas'd Preſſure; but if a Man be let down by degrees, he will breath the compreſs'd Air, which circulating with the Blood, will enable the Body to ſuſtain the great Preſſure at the bottom of the Sea, as eaſily as we ſuſtain the Weight of the Atmoſphere above ground; to keep this Ballance of the Air within, and the Air without, care muſt alſo be taken, that the Bell be not pul'd up from a great Depth fuddenly to the top of the Water. See Dr. Halley's omwn account of it, in the Phil. Tranſactions, Num. 349. 2. From the Preſſure of Water, encreaſing in proportion to its depth, it is evident, that ſuch Divers as breathe the Air from above the Water, by a Pipe fixd at the top of the Armour over their Heads, cannot go down to great depths, ſince they breath only an Air, whoſe ſpring in their Fleſh is but able to ſuſtain the common weight of the Atmoſphere. 3. Weather-Glaſſes are lnſtruments made uſe of to determine the State of the Air at any time. Its weight is determin'd by the Baromoter; its Heat or P2 Cold Cold by the Thermometer, and its Moiſture and Dryneſs by the Hygrometer. 4. To make the Barometer fill a Glaſs Tube oſ about a quarter of an Inch Diameter, three Foot and a half long., and hermetically ſeald at one end, (that is clos'd with the Glaſs it ſelf melted) and having fild it with very fine Mercury, and got the Bubbles of Air out from the Mercury in the Tube, hold your Finger herd upon the open end, and having inverted the Tube thus fill'd, into a Glaſſ Ciſtern of Mercury, ſo that your Finger that ſtops the Tube may be under the Surface of the ſtagnant Mercury, then taking away your Finger, the Mercury will fall from the top of the Tube, and reſt at the Height of between 28 and 31 Inches above the Surface of the Mercury in the Ciſtern; it will ſtand higheſt when the Air is heavieſt, and loweſt when the Air is lighteſt. The Height of the Mercury in the Tube will be the ſame, whether the Tube be upright or inclin'd, large or ſmall; becauſe all Fluids preſs according to their Height. If therefore, Degrees are mark'd upon the Frame of the Barometer, great care muſt be taken, that the Barometer be ſuſpended perpendicularlyv. ltũili 5. The Reaſon why, when the Mercury in the Barometer ſtands high, it is fair Weather, is, that upon an additional quantity, or accumulation of Air over any Place, the lower Air being more compreſs'd, becomes ſpeciſcally heavier than before, and the Clouds which ſwam in it, being made by that means, ſpecifically lighter than the Medium in which they are, muſt riſe till they come to an Air of the ſame tenour with chemſelves. This happens either when two contrary Winds blow towards any Place, or one Wind is check'd by a Ridge of Mountains, ſo as to make an Accumulation of Air over the Pla ce where the Barometer is. EISEBEUUIE 6. When 6. When contrary Winds blow from the ſame Place, the Air at top being carried away, preſſes leſs upon the lower Air than before, and the Clouds deicend to come into an Air of the ſame ſpecifick Gravity: Now if this change of Gravity be conſiderable, the Clouds will fall quick, and by the reſiſtance of the Air, be condens'd into Rain; and thus the deſcent of the Mercury in the Barometer, ſhewing the diminiſ'd Weight of the Atmoſphere, which is the Cauſe of Rain, foretells foul Weather. 7. In Storms the Mercury falls, as was ſhewn by the Artificial Wind made to blow over the Ciſtern of a Barometer The Experiment cal'd Monſieur Auxout's, with a double Barometer and two Ciſterns, plainly ſhews, that the Mercury in the Barometer, is only ſuſtain'd by the Air: It is alſo plain, from the Barometer's being put into a Receiver upon the Air-Pump; for when you draw out all the Air, the Mercury in the Tube comes quite down, and riſes again to. its uſual height, upon the readmiſſion of the Air. . 8. The Thermometer is made of a Glaſs Tube, with a hollow Ball at one end of it, and the other hermetically ſeal'd, with Spirit of Wine in the Ball and part of the Tube, the reſt of the Tube having no Air in it; ſo that the Spirit of Wine may without hindrance, be rarified by Heat, and condens'd by Cold, which will appear by its riſing or ſinking in the Tube. . 9. Air- Thermometers are Tubes with Balls at top, and open at bottom, which having the Tube half full of Water, ting'd with ſomething to colour it, ſtand in a Ciſtern of the ſame Liquor, that riſes and falls in the Tube, according to the rarefaction, or condenſation of the Air in the Ball; but ſuch Machines are not juſt Thermometers, becauſe as they have a Communication with the outward Air. ; liliili ll they they muſt be affected with its encreas'd or diminiſh'd Gravity, which will cauſe the Liquor ſometimes to riſe or fall more than it ſhou'd do, and ſometimes not enough: But as this Error is owing to no other Cauſe, than the Alteration of the Air's Gravity; from this kind of Thermometer, and the SpiritThermometer compar'd together, we may at any time know the Gravity of the Air, as well as by the Mercurial Barometer, for the difference of the riſe or fall of the Liquor in the tvo Thermometers compar'd, will always be proportionable to it. Upon this Principle, was invented an Inſtrument, mado by the Combination of theſe tuo Therometers, cal'd a Marine- Barometer, which is uſed at Sea; becauſe the ſhake of the Ship, which gives ſuch Vibrations to the Mercury in the common Barometer, as to render it uſeleſs, cannot affect this. 10. The Hygrometer meaſures the Moiſture and Dryneſs of the Weather, and is made ſeveral ways. Take a twiſted ſmall Cord, and hang it looſsly upon two Nails, ſo that it makes a Curve, and by a Graduated Perpendicular, find how much the String riſes as it ſhortens by moiſture, or ſinks as it lengthens by dryneſs. A Beard of a Wild Oat will twiſi and untwiſi by Dryneſs and Moiſture, ſo that an Index being fix'd to it, will render it a good Hygrometer. N. B. For the moſt part Animal Subſtances, as Parchment, Leather, &c. ſurten in dry Weather, and lengthen in met Weather. . L E C- LEC TU R E XIV. 1. βꝶù2564 H AT the Spring of the Air is equal 5Rcq β to its Weight, is ſhewn by the Ex2õT/ periment of the Mercury rais'd in Eòꝗ oc 2c the open Tube ſcrew'd into a Bottle, 1βùſiù when by exhauſting the Air-PumpReceiver, the Spring of the Air in the Bottle, forcd up the Mercury from the bottom of the Bottle into the Tube, to as great a height as it ſtands in the Barometer. The other Experiments upon the Air-Pump, (which are deſcribd at large in the little Book written by the maker of the Pump, that gives the Deſcription of it) ſhew, 1ſt, That there is Air in our Fleſh and in all Liquors: 2dly, That the Air near the Earth is capable of a very great Expanſion. 3dly, That Air isthe Vehicle of Sound, the Sound ceaſing where there is no Air4thly, That Air is the Food of common Fire. sthly, That Phoſphorus and Electrical Light, is help'd by the Abſence of the Air. 6thly, That Air is not neceſſary for the Aſcent of Liquors in ſmall Tubes. nthly, That the Reſiſtance of the Air is the cauſe of the Exploſion of Gun-Powder, which only fires Corn by Corn, in a Vacuum. . S8thly, That what was attributed to Nature's Abhorrence of a Vacuum, is only owing to the Airs Preſſure; a Syringe not ſucking up Liquors in Vacuo, and Exhauſted Hemiſpheres, or Poliſh'd Plates oſ Marble (which ſtuck together in the open Air) drop ping aſunder in Vacuo. ll i ꝑthly. othly, That Air becomes poiſonous in paſſing thro the lame of Charcoal or Spirit of. Wine, and thro' red hot Braſs; but not thro red hot Iron or Copper. 10thly, That Heat and Cold will be communicated to Bodies in a Vacuum. I1thly, That Square Glaſs Bottles are not able to ſuſtain the Airs Preſſure, tho round Glaſſes are; becauſe the Corners of Square Bottles, being ſtronger than the other Parts, the Air's Preſſure is leſs reſiſted by the Sides, which have only their mutual coherence to hold by; whereas in a round Glaſs, all the Parts, as in an Arch, ſuſtain one another, and the Preſſure upon them is uniform. οοοοsElſsſοt LECTU RE XV. I. IR Condens'd will expand it ſelf with & the ſame Force with chich it was com& A & preſs'd, and in ſo doing, it will drive PPR a Body ĩtrongly, as in the Caſe of the Vind.- Gun, which will throw a Bullet thro' an Inch Board. 2. When the Air is drawn from between two Hemiſpheres of thiee Inches and a half Diameter, it requires a Force equal to 140 Pounds, to draw thHem aſunder. Now if the ſaid Hemiſpheres, without drawing the Air from between them, be put together in the condenſing Glaſs, upon injecting ſo much Air, as to double the Denſity of the Air in the Glaſs, (as may be known by the included Gage) it will require the ſame weight of 140 Pounds to draw them aſunder, which ſhews, that no Imaginary . Power Powuer of Suction, but the Preſſure of the Air keeps the Hemiſphere together.  If the Hemiſphere be exhauſted before they are put into the Condenſing Glaſs, when by stjectin the Air in the Glaſs is doubled in denfity, æ Weight of 280 Pounds will be required to draw them aſunder. So that it appears, t doubled Air has the ſame advantage over ſingio Air, as ſingle Air has over a Vacuum. ſi horus will be put out by injecting Air upon it; the Vibrations of its Parts, (which throw luminous Effluvia) not being able to overcome the additional Preſſure of the Air; muoch leſs Air chan what doubles its denſity will produce this Effect, and exhauſting the Glãſi will add to the brightneſs of the Light. 4. In the Braſs condenfing Engine, a Bell will ſound louder, by condenſing the Air about it, and a round Bottle will be broken by the injected Ait, cho' it will bear being exhauſted by the Air-Pump. Few Animals will die in this Engine, becauſe tle Air being injected by degrees, they breath che Air as it is condens'd, and it cireulates with their Blood, ſo as to enable the Animal to ſuſtain the encreast Preſſure. & o O PTIc n crnsceescocacn ass cacensocet pt 2 lllimmn-.niurt-. LEC TU R E XVI. 1. H AT Light is à Body, appears from da its. Reflection, Refraction, Compoſition, T & Diviſion, and moving in Time; but efQlæqaãt ſpecially from its being propagated in ùnrright Lines, and being ſtopp'd by an Obſtacle, Chow thin ſoever, if not tranſparent) which ſhews, that it cannot be an Action upon the Medium, which wou'd be communicated beyond an Obſtacle, as in the caſe of Sounæ. l 2. Lucid Bodies emit. Light, tranſparent Bodies (cal'd alſo the Medium) tranſmit it, and opaque Bodies reflect it. .l 3. Since an opaque Body reflects Light, ſo as to ſend it from all its Points every way, as a lucid Body does, (tho' not ſo copiouſly) ié may be call'd a Radiant, as well as a lucid Object, and projects its Image in the Eye in the ſame manner. 4. Every Surface has the Images of all Objects, that can ſend Rays to it, painted upon it; but the Mixture of them all, hinders us from diſtinguiſtiing any one. To prove this, if you hold a Paper over-ægainſt the Hole of a dark Room, the external Objects will paint their Images upon it ſo that they will be ſeen diſtinctly, becauſe by darkning the Room, you cut off all the Rays which wou'd come from the Objects on the ſides to make a Confuſion. 5. The * b S. The Pupil of the Eye, is inſtead of the Hole of the dark Window, to hinder a Confuſion, by the reception of too many Rays. ch 6. When, of thoſe Rays, which diverge from onè Point, thoſe that fall upon a double convex Glaſs, or any tranſparent Body of the ſame kind and figure, will after paſſing the Glaſs, be refracted ſo as to meet in a Point on the other ſide of the Glaſs, and make two Cones of Rays, whoſe Baſes joyn at the Glaſs. Such a Parcel of Rays is call'd a Pencil of Rays. 7. If diverging Rays fall upon a concave Looking-Glaſs, they will be reflected fo as to meet on the ſame ſide of che Glaſs, and the reflected Cone will either coincide with the other, or elſe meet nearer to the Glaſs, or farther from it than the Point of Divergence. We ſhall alſo call this a Penecil of Rays. u1: ee d 8. In Catoptrics, or Viſion by Refiection, there is only one Principle, which if well underſtood, and conſider'd in all its Caſes, comprehends the whole Doctrine; and that is, That the Angle of Incidence is equal to that of Reſtection; by etuch is meant the Angle made by the incident Ray and a Line perpendicular to the reflecting Surface falling upon it at the Point of Incidence, and the Angle made by the reflectùd Ray and the ſaid Perpendicular. 9When diverging Rays fall upon the Eye, ſo as to paint the Image of any Point of an Object; if by Thought you produce back thoſe Rays till they meet in a Point, that Point will be the Place where the above- ſaid Point of the Object is ſeen, whether that be the real Place of the Object or no. Hence it is, that an Object appears to be behind a LookingGlaſs, tho it really is before it; becauſe the Rays, after reflection, fall upon the Eye in the ſume manner, as if they came directly from a Point hehind G 2? o- che Glaſs. The Boint where the Rays meet is call'd the Focus of thoſe Rays. 2,t 1o. The ſame poſition that an Object has in reſpect of a Mirrour or Looking-Glaſs, the ſume has its Imaga. l ; I11. An Image (as if it was an Object) will projact another Image of it ſelf; whence we ſee a great Number of Images of one Candle, reflected backwards and forwards, by means of twuo Mirrours. One Candle will alſo give a row of lmages, by means of one Mirrour, when you look Obliquely; the two Surſaces of the Glaſs performing the Office of cwo.Mirrours. 2. 12. In a ConvexMirrour, the Object ſeen by Reflection, appears ſmaller, and. nearer behind the Glaſs , becauſe aſter Reſlection, the Rays diverge more than from a plain Mirrour; ſo that the Focus of every Parcel of reſlected Rays, which came from evory Point of the Object, is nearer to the Glaſs behind it, and therefore all thoſe Foci are nearer to each other, and conſequently an Object thus ſeen, appears leſi. 13. In a Concave-Mirrour, the reflected Rays diverge loſs than they wou'd from a plane one; therefore the Object appears magnified, and farther behind the Glaſſ. Henoe may it be known at any time, whether Poliſd Metal or Glaſs be truly flat, by obſerving whecther the Image of the Face, ſeen by Reflection, is neithes magnified nor diminiſh'd: SO by obſerving the Image from the tuo Convex Surfaces of a Lens, you may know which fide is moſt convex, by its reflocting a leſs Image than the other. 14, If Parallel Rays (as for Example, the Sun's Rays) fall upon a Concave Mirrour, aſter Reflecti they will meet before the Glaſs, at the diſtance o half a Semidiameter of its Concavity, and there burn . any ll any Body held in that Place, which is calld the Rocua of Parallel Rays; or ſimply the Focus of the G 15. Hence it follows, that if an Object be held in the Focus of the Glaſs, its Rays, aſter Reſlection, will go parallel, and ſo project no image of the Object: But if che Object be held nearer than the Center of the Convexity of the Glaſs, and not ſo near as its Focus, there will be an Image in the Air, further from the Glaſs than its Conter, and bigger than the Object, as may be ſeen by receiving it unon a Sheet of white Paper; but if che Object be held in the Place of the Image, the Image will be projected in the Place where the Object was, and he Ieſs than the Object, and in both Caſes inverted becauſe the Rays croſs at the Center of the Glaſs. 16. APoliſt'd Cylinder will make a Picture, optically deform'd, to appear in true Proportion, when ſeen by Reflection from it. The Picture is made only upon this Principle, that the Angle of Incidence is equal to that of Resettim. A ſhort Candle ſtanding in a hollow Poliſ'd Cy. linder; will appear rais'd up by Reſlection, upon the above-ſaid Principle. 17. A Convex Lens reſlects tuo Images; an erect one from the Convex Surface towards you, and an Inverted one from the Surface on the other ſide; becauſe it is eoncave towards you. 18. The Reaſon why a Picture is a Repreſentation of an Object, is, becauſe the Paint is laid on in ſuch manner, that the Light which falls upon it, will after Reflection enter the Eye, juſt as if it was reflected from the real Objects, ſuppos'd behind the Picture, imagin'd to be tranſparent. L EC- l EC T U R E XVII. r. à H EN a Ray of Light goes out of one &αꝶ Medium into another, ſo as to come & & obliquely againſt the Surface of the ù Second Medium, it is at its entrance s into it, turnd out of its way, ſo as to go on in another right Line, than that in which it mov'd before.  And this is call'd the Refraction of a Ray of Light. ili 2. If a Ray of Light goes out of a rare Medium into a denſer, it is refracted tomards the Perpendicular; if from a denſe into a rare Medium, it is refracted from the Perpendicular. . illl The Phyſical Cauſe of the Refraction, is the Greater or LeſsXttraction of the new Medium,;, as for Example, when the Refraction is made towards the Perpendicular, in the Caſe of a Ray of Light going obliquely out of Air into Glaſs, juſt as the Ray enters the Glaſs, it is acted upon by two Forces, viz. The Motion that it has already in the Direction with which it comes upon the Glaſs, and the Attraction of the Glaſs, which acts upon it, along a Perpendicular, to the Surface of the Glaſs at the Point of Incidence; and therefore, by the Laws of Mechanics, that Ray muſt move in the Diagonal of the Parallelogram, whoſe Sides repreſent thoſe two Forces, which conſequently is nearer the Perpendicular: And as that Diagonal is deſcribed in the ſame time, as either of the Sides wou'd be deſcrib'd by eĩther of the Forces alone, a Ray of light moves faſter in a denſe Medium, than in a rare, in the ſame proportion that the Angle of Refraction is leſs than the Angle of Incidence. On the contrary, when a Ray of Light comes out of a denſer Medium into a rare. b3 rare, as out of a Glaſs into Air, it is retarded as: ĩb comes out of the Glaſs, becauſe the Attraction of the Glaſs draws counter to the direction of the Ray, and ſo both turns it from the Perpendicular; and retards its Motion. When the Object and its Image are of equal bigneſs, they are alſo equally diſtant from the Lens, the Diſtance of each being equal to twice the Glaſs's focal Diſtance. . . From hence it follows, that Light muſt paſs more eaſily thro tranſparent Bodies; than thro a Vacuum. 3. An ſehance of the Attraction of the Glaſſ influencing the Ray of Light, may be ſeen in the following Experiment. Hold one of the Surfaces of a Priſm in an Horizontal Poſition, with the Angle oppoſite to it upward, and looking very obliquey at it, the Light of a Candle ſeen by Reflection, will ſtrike the Eye very vividly, ſeeming to be reflected from the Air contiguous to the Glaſſ; tho the true Reafon is, that the Rays of Light which come out under the Priſm, make ſo ſmall an Angle with the Plane of Emerſion, that the Attraction of the Glaſs makes the Rays deſcribe a Curve, and reenter the Glaſs, ſo as to fall upon the Eye, after this Reflection from an imaginary Surface very nean to that of the Priſm. If the Incident Rays makoe a great Angle with this Plane, only the moſt refrangible, or blewiſh Rays, will be reflected, or brought back up again to the Eye, the others at their Emerfion from the under part of the Glaſs, making too great an Angle for the Attraction of the Glaſs to turn them up again into its Body. If you take another Priſm, and preſs one of its Planes againſt the Iower Plane of the Priſm above-mention'd, the Light will no longer be reflected by the lower Surface oſ the firſt Priſm; but being attracted by the Second, paſs thro' it, and that only in the Place where the two Priſms touch, becauſe that kind of Attraction is inſeriſible, unleſs at a very ſmall diſtance. a. The Experiment of the Piece of Money, which in the Baſon of Water appeard about one fourth part higher than it was, ſhew'd what Refraction is, and that out of Water into Air, the Refraction is made from the Perpendicular. 5. It appear'd by Experiment, that when Light puſſes obliquely thro Plates of Glaſs, whoſe Surfaces are parallel, the Refraction of the Ray of Light going into the Glaſs, is ſo taken off by the Refraction of the Ray going out of the Glaſs, that the Object ſeems not out of its Place, when view?d obliquely thro' ſuch a Plate, when its thickneſs is imeonſiderable, as in common Window. Glaſs; but ic appears a little remov'd, cho' not alter d in Shape, when the Plate of Glaſs is of a eonſiderable thickneſs. 6. An Object viewd thro' a Piece of Glaſs, whoſe Surfaces are not parallel, is never ſeen in its true place, as appear'd by the Priſin, which makes the Objects appear eonfiderably higher or lower than they are, according as the refracting Angle of the Priſm is held, upwards or downwards. The Colours ſeen thro' the Priſim, are owing to the different refrangĩbilit of the Rays, which will be explain'd in another Lecture. 7. A Multiplying-Glaſs ſnews the Object in ſeveral Places at once, by reaſon of the different Inclination of the ſeveral plane Surfaces on one ſide of the Glaſs, to the ſingle flat Surſace which makes che other Side, none bein parallel to it, but thae Middle one, thro' which the Object always appears in its proper Place. The Object is mulciplied in proportion to the Number of the Planes, and the Eye muſt be placd where the Rays of Light whiclr corne from the Object meet by the Refraction u the evera ſeveral Planes, after they have paſs'd the Glaſe That Point may be calſd the Focus of the Multiplying-Glaſs; and if the Object be but one lucid Point, the Rays from the Object to the Glaſs, and from the Glaſs to the Eye, will be a Pencil of Rays. 8. If we look upon a Plano-Convex Lens, as a Multiplying-Glaſs, whoſe Convexity is made up of an infinite Number of infinitely ſmall Flats, a Candle ſeen thro' it muſt appear in an infinite Number of Places; that is, muſt fill the whole Glaſs, which is juſt the Caſe wlien you look at the Candle, from the Focus of the Rays, which meet on the other fide of the Glaſs. A double Convex Lens, may be thus compar'd to a double Multiplying Glaſs. 9. If an Object be at a vaſt diſtance from a Convex Lens, or a diſtance very great in proportion to the Radius of the Convexity of the Glaſs, the Image of that Object will be projected in the Focus of the Glaſs, which is call'd its Focus of Parallel Rays. If the Glaſs be expoſed to the Sun's Rays, it will unite them at the ſaid Focus, and burn any Object held in it. On the contrary, if a Radiant be held in the Glaſę's Focus, the Rays (after Refraction) will project no lmage of the Object, but go on parallel; if the Radiant be held nearer to the Glaſs, the Rays after paſſing the Glaſs will diverge, tho' not ſo much as they did before they enter'd the Glaſſ: The Focus of ſuch Rays, therefore will be found, by producing them back again to a Point before the Glaſs where they will meet, which will be farther from the Glaſs than the Radiant; an Eye therefore to ſee this Image in the above-ſaid Focus, muſt be on the other ſide of the Glaſs. N. B. Hence may be ùnonn the Reaſon why an Object ſeen thro a Convex Lens, held nearer it than its Focus of parallel Rays, appears farther from the Claſo than it is. , ro. 10. If the Object be held farther from the Lens than its Focus of Parallel Rays, it will project an inverted lmage of it ſelf on the other ſide of the Glaſs, with this Rule That, the nearer the Object is to the Glaſs, the farther is its Image behind it, and the bigger; the farther the Object, the nearer the lmage, and the leſs. When the Object and its Image are of equal bigneſs, they are alſo equally diſtant from the Lens; the Diſtance of each being twice the Glaſs's focal Diſtance. E2 RRbs 2 & Q2uſs RtEVEREIIH Ts s Cs 9t L E C T U R E XIIII. oge H EN by means of a Convex Lens, 36 Æʒ the lmage of theCandle, or any other I. 30 q caù-94 gsop & W&Ær Object is projected, each Point of the &255ꝶ Object is repreſented in the Image, *iꝶiiù 2 by means of a Pencil of Rays proceeding from that Point. The Axis of the Pencil is the middle Ray of the Pencil, which paſſing thro' the middle of the Glaſs, is unrefracted, or not ſenſibly refracted. Hence it happens, that the Rays which proceed from the top of the Candle, or any other Radiant, and fall diverging upon the Lens, will be united again on the other ſide of it, upon their Axis at the bottom of the Image: Likewiſe the lower Point of the Object will (by means of the Pencil of Rays from it) be repreſented in the upper part of the Image; and ſo of all the other Points, according as they are above or below the middle oſ the Object. This is the Reaſon why the Images of erect Objects are inverted. l 2. If a Room, whoſe Window looks towards Objects enlighten'd by the Sun, be darken'd all but one Hole, in which you ſx a double Convex Lens; you cal f 9 I gu S you may in the Focus of that Lens, receive upon a white Sheet very lively Images of che external Objects in their proper Colours, but inverted. A Box made in the manner of ſuch a Room, is calld the Portable Camera obſcura; with this difference only, that, (by means of a reflecting plane Looking-Glaſs, fix'd at an Angle of 45 Degrees, with the Axis of the Lens) the Objects are painted erect, upon a rough flat Glaſs laid Horiontally over the End of the Box, ſo as to receive the Rays that have paſs'd thro' the Lens by Reflection. 3. The Eye is like the dark Chamber, the Pupil being as the Hole in the Window ſhut, the Humours of the Bye as the Lens in the Hole, and the Retina as the Sheet of Paper, held in the Focus of the Glaſs, which receives the inverted Images of erect Objects. To prove this, cut an Hole in the back part of a freſh Sheeps Eye, taking away all the other Coats, and leaving only the Retina in the Hole, ſo that the Vitreous Humour be not bruis'd; then holding a Candle before the forepart of the Eye, you will ſee the inverted Image of the Cand le upon the Retina in the back part of the Eye, beheld thro the Hole. Here folloms a ſhort Deſcription of the Eye. I. H E Coat which encloſes the whole. Eye, is calPd the Sclerotica, from its Hardneſs, whoſe forepart being tranſparent like Horn, is cal'd the Cornea : Under the Cornea, is the Aqueous or Watry Humour. The Coat that immediately lines the Sclerotica, is calPd the Choroides, one part of which of a whitiſh Green, is call'd the Uvea: This Coat, when it is come to the Cornea, is doubled to make the Iris of the Eye, whoſe Colour gives Colour to cthe Eye: The Fiole of the Iris, cal'd the Pupil, may be contracted or dilated; that the Eye may not receive too much Light, from a very bright, or a lill ll H 2 very very near Object; or too little Light, from a diſtant, or too dark Object, The Iris having the aqueous Humour both before and behind it, is ſaid to ſwim in it. Next is the Chryſtalline Humour, ſhap'd like a Convex Lens of Glaſs, inclosd in a very thin Membrane, call'd the Aranea, whoſe Circumference is ſixd to the Ligamentum ciliare, ſa black Ligament made of the black Threads of the Choroides, lying like Radii, that tend to the Center of the Chryſtalline) which ſerves to bring backward and forward the Chryſtalline, or as ſome ſay, to make it more or leſs flat, in order to render the Eye more or leſs convex, according as we look at a nearer or more diſtant Object. Beyond the Chryftalline, is the Vitreous Humour, which fills up all the reſt of the Eye: Its weight is ſix times more than the Chryſtalline, and twelve times more than the Aqueous Humour. The Retina, which encloſes all this Humour, lining the Eye as far as the Ligamentum ciliare, is the Part on which Viſion is perform'd; that is, it receives the Images of external Objects, by means of the Rays, which coming from every Point of the Object, are by the Refraction of theſe Humours, (whoſe Figures are given by their Coats) brought to meet in correſpondent Points of the Retina; every Pencil of Rays, by which we ſee Objects, having one Cone without the Eye, and the other Cone within it. The Retina is made of the Threads of the Optic Nerves, which paſſes quite thro' the Sclerotica and Choroides; and receiving the Impulſe of the united Rays, that ſtrike it ſo as to give Vibrations to the ſeveral Nervous Fibres, carries the Senſation to the common Senſorium, where (by Means yet unknown to us) the Soul is affected with it. 2. If the Eye was not made of flexible Coats, and yielding Humours, we ſhou'd be able to ſee no on je jects diſtinctly, but ſuch as are at one certain diſtance from the Eye; for the Rays from a too diſtant Object, wou'd have their Focus (or come to a Point) in the Eye ſhort of the Retina; and the Rays from a too near Object, wou'd be intercepted by the Retina, before they came to a Point; but when the Object is near, the Ligamentum ciliare pulling forward the Chryſtalline, preſſes the Aqueous Humour hard againſt the Cornea, ſo as to render it more Convex, and by that means make thoſe Rays which wou'd have had their Focus beyond the Retina, to unite upon it; and when the Object is diſtant, the ſame Ligament pulling back the Chryſtalline, cauſes the Eye to become flatter, and ſo makes thoſe Rays to unite upon the Retina, whoſe Focus before was ſhort of it. ĩllii 3. An Eye naturally too convex to flatten it ſelſ enough for the diſtinct beholding of diſtant Objects, is a Short-ſighted Eye; and an Eye too filat to be made convex encugh for the diſtant Viſion of near Objects, is an old Eye. Thoſe that have the former defect, are cal'd Myopes, and ſuch as have the latter Presbytæ. lli To illuſtrate this farther, the follobing Experiments are made. 4. Holding a Convex Lens between a Candle and a white Paper ſo as to project a diſtinct Image of the Candle upon it, let the Candle be remov'd a little farther, and the lmage will no longer be diſftinct upon the Paper, unleſs you bring it nearer; but if keeping the Paper at the firſt diſtance, you make uſe of a Lens, which is not ſo convex as the former, you will project upon the Paper a diſtinct Image of the now more diſtant Candle: This ſhews the Reaſon, why the Eye is flatten'd when we look at diſtant Objects. If the Candle be brought nearer to the Glaſs, the Image will alſo be indiſtinct upon che Paper, 'till you ſubſtitute a more Convex Lens, whoſe ſhorter Focus will juſt fall upon the Paper, and ſo render the Ilmage caſt upon it very diſtinct; ſo the Eye is made more convex to look at near Objects. But if the Candle be brought ſo near the Glaſ as is its Focal Diſtance, or nearer, the Rays after paſſing the Glaſs will go on parallel or diverging, and ſo project no Image of the Candle upon the Paper; which ſhes, that there is a diſtance from the Eye, which is too near for diſtinct Viſion, namely, any diftance ſhorter than the Eye's focal diſtance: And if a Candle be at a vaſt diſtance, its Image projected upon the Paper will be extreamly ſmalſ; ſo when we look at a very diſtant Object, its Image is ſo ſmall upon the Retina, that unleſs it be a very bright Object, we can hardly perceive it. LEc TU R E XIX. Læ Well- made Eye unites Parallel Rays Suù (or Rays which come from a Point at a great Diſtance) upon its Retina; Qè & but an old Eye muſt have the Rays ii converge a little, when they fall upon its Cornea, and a ſhort- ſighted Eye muſt receive them diverging, in order to have them come to à Boint upon the Retina. ; 2. When therefore an old Eye brings a ſmall Object (as Writing in a Book) near enough to have a large Image upon the Retina; the Rays in that caſe diverging, will have their Focus beyond the Retina; hecauſe the old Eye cannot make it ſelf convex enough; but by applying a convex Lens, or Spectacle heſore it, the diverging Rays, aſter their Reſraction thro' the Glaſs, will be made to converge as they enter the Cornea, and ſo unite in Points upon the Retina, correſpondent to thoſe Points of the Object from whence they come, and by that means reſtore the diſtinct Viſion which was loſt by the too near approach of the Object. 3. When a diſtant Object cannot be brought near enough to a ſhort-ſighted Eye, (which cannot make it ſelf flat enough) then a Concave Lens muſt be held before it, which will make the Parallel Rays diverge before they come upon the Cornea: Then thoſe Rays which wou'd have had their Focus ſhort of the Retina, will unite upon it, and make the Eye thus arm'd, ſee the Object with the ſame diſtinctneſs as if it was brought nearer. To llluſtrate this farther, take a convex Lens, and project the Image of a diſtant Candle upon a Paper, as has been before mention'd, then having remov'd the Paper back, till the Image is confus'd, (as it happens in the too diſtant Retina of a ſhort-ſighted Eye, looking at a diſtant Object) apply a Concave Lens before the Convex one, and the Image of the Candle will fall diſtinctly upon the Paper. li 4. If the Candle be brought ſo near the Convex Lens, as to throw its Image beyond the Paper; you may by applying a Spectacle, or another Convex Lens before it, bring the Image which was confus'd upon the Paper, to become diſtinct; juſt in the manner that old Eyes are help'd. . 5. When parallel Rays fall upon a Plano- Concave, or a Double concave Lens, their Refraction in paſſing thro the Glaſs, will make them go afterwards diverging; but if you produce thoſe Rays back to that Side of theGlaſs, from whence they came, they will unite there in a Point call'd the Focus, or virtual Focus of the concave Lens. u If a Short-Sighted Eye can ſee diſtinctly but at the Diſtance of five inches, then it will be able to ſee diſtant Objects by help of a Concave Lens, whoſe virtual Focus is at five Inches from the Glaſs. 6. When a Lens is but little convex, or concave, ſo as to have its Focus at a great diſtance, and to appear flat to the Touch, the way to know whether it be Ground Convex, or Concave, is to look full upon any Object, holding the Glaſs between your Eye and the Object: Then if by ſhaking the Glaſ, the Object appears to dance, the Glaſs is a Lens, (or a Glaſs which is convex or concave) becauſe the Rays fall with a different Inclination upon different parts of the Glaſs; but no ſuch dancing will happen if the Glaſs be quite flat. 7. There are ſeveral Ways of finding the Focus of a Lens; of which the two beſt are as follomr Hold a Lens to the Sun, and the Focus will be where the Sun's Rays unite and burn; or elſe put the Lens into the Hole of a dark Room, and obſerve the diſtance, where a Paper held will receive the diſtinct Image of diſtant Objects, and that will be the focal Diſtance. 8. If a convex Lens has its thickeſt part in the Middle, it is ſaid to be truly Center'd, and a Line paſſing thro' that thicker Part, and the Foci of the Glaſs on each ſide, is cal'd the Axis of the Glaſ. Now as in Glaſſes of long Foci, one cannot ſee where the Glaſs is thickeſt, the following Experiment will determine whether the Glaſs be truly center'd. Hold the Lens to the Sun, and throwing the Suns Light by Reflection againſt ſome dark Body, you will ſee a large white Circle, and a ſmall white circular Spot within it, brighter than the other. If the bright Spot be juſt in the Middle of the other, the Glaſs is truly center'd, otherwiſe not. 9. 2. If from the tvo Ends of the Object, bè drawn Lines to the Middle of the Pupil of the Eye, (which are the Axes of the Pencils from each end- of the Object) the Angle which thoſe two Lines make at the Eye, is the Viſual Angle, or the Angle under ꝑhich Objects are ſaid tõ be ſeen. An Object appears large or ſmall, aceording  to the Angle under which it is ſeen; becauſe thoſe Rays or Lines which make the above-ſaid Angle; after their eroſſing, go to thè Retina of the Eye, where they determine the Magnitude of the image upon the Retina. Hence, if an Object that was at two Foot from the Eye, be brought to the diſtance of one Foot, it will be ſeen under an Angle, twice as big, and appear to have a Diameter as big again; the lmage of it upon the Retina being twice larger than before. PFor this Reaſon, when an Object is very ſmall, it muſt be brought nearer the Eye, in order to ſee it under a great Angle: But if to make it appear large enough, it be brought very near the Eye, the Rays will diverge ſo much from every Point of it, as to have their Focus beyond the Retina, ſo that a very convex Lens muſt be interpos'd between the Object and che Eye, to correct the divergence of thoſe Rays, in the ſame manner that a Spectacle helps an old Eye; then the Iimage will be diſtinct upon the Retina, without being diminiſh'd. Such a Lens is the Single Microſcopèe, and the more convex it is, the more is the Object magnified by means of it; as being allow'd to be brought very near, when the Lens is made of Segments of a ſmall Sphere, or is it ſelf a, little ſpherule of Glaſs, ſome of which are ſo ſmall, as to need anothér Microſcope to ſee them. . lꝶ s. 1O. To know how much a Microſcope magnifies, take a round piece of Paper, and ſticking it to a Pane of Glaſs, look with gne Eye at the ſaid Paper iilii un and with the other at the Objeẽt in the Mieroſcope till you fee the Object in the Microſcope ſeem ju as big as the Paper on the Glaſs; then, As the Diſtanee of the Papor from the Eye, is to the Diſtance of the Object from the Lens of the Microſcope; ſo is the apparent Diameter of the Object ſeen by the Microſcope, to the apparent Diameter of it ſeen by the nakhed Eye; or in other Words -Ttie Object, or the Part of it ſeen by the Microſcope, is magnified in proportion to the Difference of the above-ſaid diſtances. 1ſ1. If you prick a ſmall Hole in a Card, and thro' it look at a ſmall Object brought nearer to the Eye than the Limits. of diſtinct Viſion do allow of, you will ſee it magnified as you wou'd by means of a ſmall Microſcope:; bub it will appear dark. The Reaſon of it is, chat tho' the Rays from every Point of ſuch an Object diverge too much when they fill the uhole Rupil, yet the Card ſuffers only ſuch of them to paſs as are very near the Axis of each Pencil, which diverge but juſt enough to have their Focusupon the Retina; but the Rays that paſs thro' ſuch an Hole are ſo few, that the Object appears dark, and therefore ſuch a Microſcope is of little uſee. V. B. When we look at a near Object, we contract our Pupil, as well not to take in the too divergent Rays, as not to take in too much Light: This contrivance of the Card is no other, than a farther contraction of the Pupil. Uacaa t ũt 2 cittẽna ũe cotãttrustecoctt L E c L E Cc T U R E XX. I. è Compound Mioroſcope is commonly u. ſed to look at opaque Objects, as the A && Single one is chieſty usd to lool at Qãũ tranſparent ones: Tfie double one tales in a great deal of an Object at a time; which it ſees inverted, and ſeldom magnifies ſo much as a good ſingle one. The Deſcription of it is as follovs.  DThe ſmall Object to he view'd; being expos'd to a ſmull Lens of a deep eonvexity at a diftance ſomething greater than its focal diſtance; but not ſo great at twice that diftance, projects ũ large inverted lmage oſ it ſelf on the dther ſide of the Glaſs; which magniſied lmage the Eye looks aẽ with another convex Lens, or ſometimes tuò õſ them together, (whieli take ià more chun a ſingle one, becauſe they are broader than a ſingle one that will make the Rays converge as much as both oſ them combin'd) ſo as to ſee this Image magniſied, or under a great Angle, the Eye-Glaſſes allowing the Eye to be brought pretty near the ſaid Imãage, which in this Caſe is view'd in the ſame manner, as if it was the principal Radiant or Object. We are to obſerve, that the Eye in the Focus of the EyeGlaſs, ſees the projected Image (and wou'd ſee an Object) under the ſume Angle as if it was in the Place of the Eye-Glaſs; but as it wou'd ſee it confuſedly, tho' large in that Place, we are oblig'd to uſe an Eye-Glaſs, ũn order to recover diſtinct Viſion, as in the caſe of a fingle Microſcope: And as a welſr made Eye unites upon its Retina ſuch Parcels of Rays as are parallel to each other when they enter the Cornea; the Eye-Glaſs for ſuch aini Eye ro make uſe of, muſt be placed at its focal diftance from the I 2 Image Image projected by the Object- Glaſs, that the Rays divergiug from every Point of the Image, may after paſſing the Eye-G laſs, be parallel to their reſpective Axes: Now as the Angle made at the Eye by the Axes of the Pencils of Rays coming from each end of the Object, is the Angle under which we ſee it, the Eye muſt be in the Focus of thoſe Axes, (and indeed the common Focus of the Axes of all the Pencils) which will be ſomething farther from the Eye-G laſs than its Focus of parallel Rays, becauſe thoſe Axes are a little diverging when they fall upon it; for when they come from the principal Radiant, they eroſs'd at the Object- Lens, from which point of croſſing they diverge to fall upon the Eye- Glaſs, not being turn'd out of their direction till they come to it, cho' the lmage is projected between the ObjectGlaſs and the Eye-Glaſs. If therefore we wou'd knov in what direction the Rays enter the Eye in this Caſę, we ſhall find both a Paralleliſm and a Convergency. The Rays belonging to each Pencil, which eomes from each Point of the Object are Parallel to their reſpective Axes, and therefore (being refracted in paſſing thro' the Humours of the Eye, ſoas to unite upon correſpondent Points of the Retina) give diſtinct Viſion; but all the Pencils coming each from a different Point of the Object, after paſſing the laſt Eye-Glaſs, converge at the Pupil of the Eye, and hy the Angle which their reſpective Axes make, give the apparent diſtance of every Point of the Object from each other, and conſequently the apparent Magnitude of istststs. 2. As the Microſcope is of uſe to look at Objects ſo ſmall, that they project too little an Image of themſelves, vhen they are not too near the Eye to be out of the Limits of diſtinct Viſion: So the Teleſcope ſerves to enlarge the Angle under which a diſtant Pbject (ſwhich we cannot approach to) is ſeen i and ili i a35 lilli Dlν that ill ----  2  61) crat is done with a convex Object Glaſs, and one or more eonvex EyeGlaſſes, as in the Microſcope, only with this difference, that the Object-Glaſs i is leſs convex than the Eye-Glaſs, whereas i in the Microſcope it is more Conuvex. There is indeed a Teleſcope invented by Galilæo, whoſe Eye-Glaſs is concave; but we ſhall firſt deſeribe the ſtronomic Teleſcope, (ſo call'd from its being now ehieſly uσd to look at Celeſtial Bodies) which conſiſts only of two eonvex Glàffess. 3. We have ſhewn before, that the flatter æ convex Lens was, the more diſtant was its Focus, or diſtinct Baſe in which it projects the Image of diſtant Objects, we have alſo made it appear, thac the farther the lmage was projected on the other fide of a convex Lens, the larger it wou'd be No& as we cannot bring the Object riear the Lens, to project a large lmage of it by that means, we muſt make uſe of a Lens of a ſmall Convexity, (or a Segment of a large Sphere) which for the above-ſaid Reaſons will project a large inverted lmage of the Object in ĩts Focus, which lmage is beheld by the Eye, arm'd with an Eye-Glaſs of a ſhort Focus, and ſeen under the Angle, which two Lines from the Extremity of the Image, make at the Eye- Lens. 4. The uſe of the Eye-Glaſs is the ſame as in the double Microſcope; but care muſt be taken here as well as there, that the Eye-Glaſs be not too convex in proportion to the Object-Glaſs; becauſe the Object wou'd then appear coloured. The longeſt Obiject-Glaſſes (or thoſe of the greateſt focal diſtance) require the longeſt Eye-Glaſſes; but of two Object Glaſſes of the ſame eonvexity, the beſt will bear the greateſt Charge, or ſhorteſt Eye-G laſs. 5. A Short-Sighted Man may uſe a Telescope without an Eye-Gluſs, except it be n Teleſcope ſo ſiort, chat that che Fooal diſtance of its æ RyeGloſ i c much ſhorter than the Diſtance at which the StontSighted-Man ſeos diſtinctly. As for Examnle, If ſych à Man ſees diftinctly at the diſtance of four Inches, he may uſe a Teleſcope (whoſe Eye-Gilaſ is of four Inches Focus) without the Eye-G laſs; becauſe then the Rays ſrom every Roiot of the lmage to his Eye will diverge no morę. than they wou'd fro ſnbie at thet diſtance, and he ſhall ſee the li magniſiect as much as orhers that uſe the Eyelaſs, becauſe he ſues it under the ſume Angle. If the Eocal diſtaneę of she Bye:Glaſs be greater than thę Shorẽ. Sightod. Man's diſtanqe of diſtinct Viſion, he ia ſee the Ohject moro magniſied than when it is ſagn with the ahoue-ſaid Eye-Glas: RBut if the focal Diſtauce of the Ee-Glaſs he ſhorter than the Short Sighted.Man's diſtance of diſtinct Viſion, he will not ſee the Objct ſo much magnified without the e,ſlaſ; s with it ; becanſe his Eye is:not convex enough to be brought asmear the lmage as the EyerGlaſs was, without loſing diſtinẽt Viſion. 6 DUhe diſſerenoe betweeri a Short Sighted- Man uſing à Teleſcape without: an. EerG laſs, and another uſing an RyeGlàſs equivalent:to the ton great Conveęxity of the Short-Sighted-Man's Eve, is, that a great deal more may be taken in with the EyeGlaſs, than without it, and that in ſome proportion of the Bigneſs oſ the Eve-Glaſs to the bigneſs of che Pupil; beſides it willbe difficult to uſe a Mierometer without an Eye-Glaſs; but then on the other hand, a ſhort- ſighted fiye will ſee much more diſtinctly than one cau with an Eye-Glaſs, and can take in all the Parts of she Object fucceſſively. Hl DU.nhis way of agplying a Teleſcope ta a Short-SiglitedEye, I found vegy uſeſul in loohing at. Saturnis Ring; is mahing tlùe Experi ment, I waſ able io takè iman Lx af qhrqi sesimt qone a fiftaen Foor Teleſcore;. vd Iſam ints iter axmo eMgmuq- o nul nà- 7. The n. The above. mentiond' Aſtionòmic Teĩefeoꝑpe inverting the Objects, (which is nõ inconvenieney int looking at Spherical Bodĩes; fuch as tHe Celeſtral ones, eſpecially when we have the Advantage of ſeeing them thro æ ſmall thickneſs of Claſs) tvo Glalfes more are apply'd, when we Iook'at Objects upbn Earth; where by an erect Image ofcſie ſ irk inu elſer one is projected between ctheſe two laſt Eye-Glaſſes; ſo chãt the Eye armd vith' the third Eye-G1ass, ſees àn erect lmage of an inverted Image of the erect Objest; aisconſcuestty thie ftige on dhe Retinæ is inverted, and therefore che Object ſppeato erect: One Glaſs might do ĩnſtead of che tuò ſaſt; that is; two Eye-Gſaſſes and tfiè Objectaõ luss ie ſtiew the Object erect; but therẽ wou'd be ah hę the conveniency of fitting all iess hiy only cliruſtĩng in, or pulling out the Drawerſiii wifich thet Fhteo Eye-Giluſſes are fix'd, and always keep the faie diſfarice from eaoſ other, withi the ſame diſtirictnëſs; but when the three Eye-Gluſſes are thruſt a little nearer to the Object-Glaſs for a Short-Sighted: Ege, the Rays of eachi Pencil will diverge from their Axis, juſt in'the ſame manner, as'if a ſihgle Eye.G laſc had been put a little neâãrer to tHe Focus of the Object-Glaſs than its focal Diſtance: Likewiſe, if the ſaid three Glaſſes be drawn out farther from che Object-Glaſs, to fit an old Eye, the Rays of eàch Pencil will converge towards their Axis, in the ſame manner, as if the ſingle- Glaſs was drawn out a little in the Aſtronomic Teleſcope. Now if there were only two Eye-Glaſſes, not only the diſtance of both from the Object-Glaſs, but their diftance from each other alſo muſt be alter'd for different Sights, or very little of the Objeſt wou'd be taken in. 8. Galilæo's Teleſcope is made of a Convex ObjectGlaſs, and concave Eye-Glaſs, combin'd in the following manner. Take a concave Lens, whoſe virtual Focus cus (deſcribed in Lecture 19.) is as much ſhorter than the Focus of the Object- Glaſs, as you wou'd have the Object magnified, and fix it ſo much nearer to cthe Object-Glaſs than its Focus, that the Focus of the Object- Glaſs may fall beyond the Eye-Gilaſs, juſt at the virtual Focus of che Eye-Glaſs. Then the Eye being apply'd juſt behind the concave Glaſs, will receive thoſe Rays parallel to each other, which otherwiſe wou'd haye converg'd. This TeIeſcope magnifies much; but it takes in but a little, and cannot be of uſe for a Micrometer, becauſe by it we do riot look at the lmagè of the Object; but at the Object it ſelf; whereas in the Aſtronomic Teleſcope, the Image of the Object being projected in the common Focus of the Object-Glaſs, and Eye-Glaſs, a Micrometer or croſs Hairs in that place, appear to be upon the Object it ſelf. . Ihave found old Eyes ſo flat, as to be able to male uſe of Galilæo' Teleſerr without an Eye-Glaſs, vhere the Concavity of it is but ſmall. lllilll 9. As the Focal diſtance of the Object-Glaſs to the Focal Diſtance of the Eye-Glaſ; ſo isS the apparent Diameter of an Object ſeen thro' a Teleſcope, to the apparent Diameter of the Object ſeen with the naked Eye. . ll . This Proporticn will hold as well in Galilæoꝰs Teleſcope, as in the Aſtronomic Teleſcope. lalſſananm,;oon,., L E Cc T U R E XXI. I. FE we ſuppoſe a Line drawn thro' the Soriſe middle of the Eye, ſo as to paſs thro' the Centers of æll the Coats and Humours of the Eye; ſuch a Line is calPd the Optic Axis. 2. When we look full at any Point of an Object, we make the Optic Axes of both Eyes meet at that Point of the Object, and always ſee that Point ſingle. But whilſt we are looking at that Point, other Objects that are not directly before us do paint themſelves alſo upon the Refina : Such Objects we ſee without looting at them; and if they happen to be either beyond this Point where the Optic Axes meet, or ſhort of it, they will appear double: And therefore the difference between Looking and Seeing is this; that when we Look at an Object, we always ſee it plaineſt and ſingle, but when we ſee an Object without looking at it, it always appears duller, and ſometimes double. 3. This appear'd the Experiment upon two Gandles in aline; ſ looking at the neareſt, the fartheſt appear'd double; and looking at the fartheſt, the neareſt appear'd double. The reaſon of cthis Phænomenon is, that when one Candle paints its Image upon the middle of the Retina in each Eye, the Fibres of the middle of the Ret ina Of each Eye joyn together in the Head where the Optic Nerves meet, before they come to dhe Brain or common Senſorium, and ſo give but the Senſation oſ one Image; but when the other Candle (ſuppoſe it nearer) paints its Image upon the K Retina Retina of each Eye farther from the Noſe than the middle of the Eye, the Fibres of the exterior Part of the Retina of one Eye, not communicating with the Fibres of the exterior Part of the Retina of the other Eye, we have the Senſation of two Images: Likewiſe there being no Communication between the interior Parts of the Rętina of each Eye (where the lmages are painted, when the Candle ſeen is beyond the Candle looed at) we ſhall then alſo have a Senſation of two lmages. ; 4. That the Fibres on the right Hand ſide of the Retina of the right Eye, communicate with their correſpondent Fibres on the right Hand ſide of the Retina Oof the left Eye; and thoſe on the left in one Eye with thoſe on the left in the other was ſhewn by the Experiment of the tuo Candles (each equally diſtant from each Eye, with a vertical Plane betwixt them) which appeard but as one, when they were ſeen without being look'd at; for then each projecting an Image of it ſelf reſpectively on the left Part of the Retina of each Eye, and thoſe Images being ſimilar and equal (becauſe the Candles were of the ſame bigneſs and height, and at the ſame diſtance from the Eyes, each from each) the correſponding Fibres which receive them by communicating together, repreſent them to the common Senſorium, as Images from one Object, or as one Image in one Eye. Upon theſe Principles it was, that the Two Candles Gin another Experiment, where they either were look'd at, or ſeen thro' an Hole in a Board held before them) appeard ſingle, when the Hole was look'd at; and double, with the Hole alſo double, when they were ſeen by looking at thoſe Parts of the Board that were againſt the Candles. For if A and B are the two Candles, and O the Hole in the the Board, when the Eyes at C and D are ſo turn'd as to have A B their Axes meet at O, the Cand le A paints it ſelf in the middle of S E the Retina of the Eye at D, and F- π/ſũ the Candle B in the middle & the Retina of the Eye at C, juſt C D as one Candle at O would do, but if the Optic Axes are turn'd to the Points of the ſolid Board at Fand G, the Candle A together with the Hole will paint it ſelf on the exterior, or right Part of the Retina of the Eye at D; and the Cand le at B together with the Hole will paint it ſelf on the exterior or left Part of the Eye at C, and therefore theſe lmages not communicating, you will for the Reaſons above given ſee two Holes and two Candles. S. The Reaſon why ſome People ſee double when they are drunk, is, that thro' the hurry of their Blood and Spirits they have a trembling in the Muſcles of the Eye, and ſo cannot direct both their Optic Axes to one Point; but if they ſhut one Eye they will not ſee double. 6. If we look at a Candle with one or both Eyes almoſt ſhut, we ſhall ſee Beams of Light darting upwards and downwards from the Candie, which uiſ vaniſh when the Eyes are fully open. What is remarkable in this Phænomenon is this; that if by bringing up your Finger between your Eye and the Candle, you endeavour to hide the lower Beams or Rays, you vwill only deſtroy the upper; and when by bringing down your Finger, you wou'd intercept cthe upper Beams or Rays, you will only hide the lover. To explain this we muſt conſlder, that when our Eye- lids are almoſt cloſe, they are in ſuch a Poſition, that the Rays which come from the upper Part oſ the Candle, firiking upon the moiſt or lli 2 wet wet Surface of the lower Eye-lid, will be reſlected into the Eye, as if they came from the lower Part of the Candle; and the Rays which come from the lower Part of the Candle, ſtriking upon the upper Eye-lid, are reflected into the Eye, as if they came from the upper Part: When then by your Finger you hide the lower Part of the Candle, the Rays which came to the upper Eye-lid being intercepted, vou muſt of Conſequence loſe the upper Beams. The Reaſon why inftead of Beams above and be low, we have not two inverted and one upright Candie, is, that the Eye-lids are but imperfect or irregular Specula made up of ſeveral different Surfaces: Juſt as when we endeavour to ſee the Moon by Refiection in Water that has ſmall Waves, we ſhall not ſee the Moon ſingle, but a Row of Moons touching one another, ſo as to make a long Beam of Light. 7. If we invert a drinking Glaſs over a piece of Money in a Plate or Diſh, ſo as to have Water over the piece of Money of the height of about an Inch, we ſhall ſee the piece of Money double, as if one piece was a quarter of an Inch over the other; the Iowéer Piece will appear. magnified, but not the upper: So that if the Piece of Money be a Shilling, it will look like a half Crown with a Shilling over it. That the Shilling appears rais'd, is owing to cthe Refraction of the Rays coming from the Shilling, as they emerge out of the plane ſurface of the Water, juſt as in the Experiment of the piece of Money in the Baſon (Lect. 2.-) for tho the Rays paſs thro the drinking Glaſs afterwards, their Direction is not ſenfibly alter'd, becauſe the Concave and Convex Surfacès of the Glaſs are parallel. Thro' the Conic Convex Surface of the Water (to which the Glaũs gives that Figure) the Shilling appears magnified; pecauſe the Rays which came from the ſides of eii Shil- sShilling to the Eye, ſo as to make the Angle under vhich it muſt be ſeen (if there was no Water in the Glaſs) do decuſſate or croſs before they come to the Eye by their Refraction from the Perpendicular, in coming out of the convex Surface of the Water ; and two other Rays from the ſame Points of the Shilling, but more diſtant from each other at their Emerſion from the Glaſs, are by the ſaid Refraction brought to the Eye ſo as to make a larger Angle at it, and ſhew the Shilling bigger in Proportion to the convexity of the drinking Glaſſ. The larger the drinking Glaſs the leſs the Shilling is magnified, and if the Glaſs was ſquare, ſo as to have à ſlat ſide hetueen the Eye and the sShilling, it would not be ſenſibly magnified. 7. If you prick an Hole in a black Card, and hold the Point of a Pin betwixt your Eye and the Hole in the Card (all the while looking towards the Candle behind the Card, you will ſee the Pin magnified and inverted) huat dark: And if there be ſeveral Holes, you will likewiſe ſee the Pin multiplied; this Mr. Stephen Gray firſt obſerv'd and communicated it to the Royal Society, calling it an Aerial Speculum. ; There is no real lmage of the Pin upon the Retiua, becauſe it is much too near the Eye; but the Rays of Light which come from the lower Part of the Candle, thro' the Hole of the Card, cannot all enter the Eye, becauſe the Point of the Pin is in the way, and therefore the ſhadow of the Point is caſt upon the upper Part of the Retina, when the Pin's Point is held upward; and the Rays of Light coming from the upper Part of the Candle thro' the Hole, caſt the ſhadow of the thick part of the Pin upon the lower part of the Retina, or do not fall upon the part of the Retina which is behind the Pin If cherefore chis ſbadow or dark Image upon t Rrtina is erect, it muſt (from what has been ſaid before) make the Object appear inverted. 8. The Rays which come to us from the fix'd Stars, Planets, or any other Celeſtial Phænomenon which is not in our Zenith, (or directly over our Heads) by the Refraction toward the PerpendicuIar, as they come thro' our Atmoſphere, make the Phænomenon appear higher than really it is That the Air does really produce ſuch an Eſfect, appears from the Experiment of the Object ſeen thro' the Teleſcope and exhauſted Priſm; for the Object appears higher, when the Air is let into the Priſm; and ſtill higher, when the Air is condens'd in the Priſm. i Eοſo ts oRHoſoσor ſoονò LECTURE XXII. I. WWXU Isht conſiſts of Rays of different Kinds M,&&.  chich are difsctencly refrangible and B L & differently colour'd. V 2. When theſe different Rays are all mix'd together, they make White, which will never be perfect, without a mixture ofallof them in due Proportion. Some of the Experiments made to prove this Truth follow. 3. With a Triangular Glaſs Priſm refract the Sun-Beam, which comes thro the Hole of the Window of a darken'd Room, and inſtead of only throwing the Circular White Image of the Sunm out of its Place, that Image will become oblong, and be chang'd into a Spectrum of the following Co. . lours, iocurs, viz. Red, Orange, Telloo, Green, Blue, Purple and Violet. If, by heding the Frult, Qniani the Priſm downwards, the lmage is throun upwa the Red will be loweſt, as being leaſt refracted, the Orange next, and ſo of the reſt in order, the Violet which it moſt refracted being higheſt. If the refracting Angle of the Priſm was held upwards, ſo as to depreſs the lmage, the Colours wou'd be in an inverted Order. 4. If this colour'd Image or Spectrum falls upon a convex Lens, the different colour'd Rays will be ſo united, as to make a Spot perfectly White in cheir Focus, as will appear by receiving them upon a Paper held in the ſaid Focus: The Spot being colour'd either ſhort of or beyond the Focus; but after meeting they go on in an inverted Orer. 5. If you intercept any one of theſe Colours before they fall upon the Lens, the Union of the reſt of the Colours will make but an imperfect White; reddiſh if the Blue be abſent, and bluiſh if the Red be abſent, &c. If you intercept them ſucceſſively, but very quick, the Spot in the Focus will be ſtill perfectly White, becauſe an Impreſſion is made by the laſt Colour upori the Retina, before that which was made by the firſt be quito extinguiſ'd. Thus a fir'd Charcoal mov'd circularly very ſuift, appears like a Circle of Fire. 6. If a piece of red Cloth or Silk, or a red Flower be held ſucceſſively in the differently colourd Rays, it will be of that Colour in which it is held, and never appear Red till it be held in the Red Rays; but then the Colour of it will be moſt vivid; it will be dulleſt in the Blue, which is the Colour moſt remov'd in order from the Red. A piece of blue Sille will be ſucceſſively of every Colour in which whieli it is held, but of a bright Blue when hetld in the Blue, and of a dull Red in the red Ray. Objects of any Colour will be ſucceſſively of every Colour in which they are held, but more intenſly of theit own Colour. Hence it appears, that an Object of any Colour reflects all manner of Rays, but more copiouiſly thoſe of that Colour, of which it is ſaid to be: The Eye therefore beirig more affected with thoſe Rays than the reſt, which are more ſparingly reflected, will perceive ſuch an Object, as if it reflected only one ſort of Rays. 7. A white Body reflects all ſorts of Rays plentifully, and abſorbs all ſorts of Rays ſparingly; but a black Body does juſt the reverſe; therefore æ black Body will be ſooner heated in the Sun, and retain its Heat longer than a white one. 8. The different Refrangibility of Rays is ſhewn by the folloming Experiment. Having by one Priſm near the Hole of the Window of your dark Room, opend a Sun-Beam into the colour'd Spectrum above mentiond: Behind a fmall Hole made in a Stand, which the Spectrum is to be thrown upon, fix a Priſm in ſuch manner, that if the red Rays fall thro the Hole of the Stand, they will be refracted by that ſecond Priſm, and after that Refraction fall upon another Stand, ſtill retaining their Colour. If the Violet Rays be thrown thro' the ſaid Hole, they will after the Refraction thro' the ſecond Priſm fall unchangid upon the ſecond Stand making a Violot Spot,. but much higher than the red Spot was; becauſe the Violet being more refrangible than the Red, muſt be thrown higher by the ſecond Priſin, whoſe refracting Angle in that Caſe is doumwards: The Orange will by the ſume means be throun a lit. tle ù ſ i tle highor chan the Red; ; the Veliow d little higher; the Green ſtill higher, and ſo of all the Colours in thoir Order. This is what Sir Ijade Nemton call the Experimentum Crucis in his Optics, where he hag given the whole Theory of Light ancl Colours ; and the mauner of makingi all the iſcperiment uliibu to if a long piece of Paper about ſix lnchẽs lor and half an inch brond be divided. into two gort by a Line Perpendicular to the long Sides of is; gnd one Half be painted Red, and the other Blue or Purple, the Paper ſeen thro a Priſm will appeatr divided; the Red half appearing lower than thę Blue half, or higher, àccording as you hold the recting Angle of the Priſin upwards or downwards. it if inſtead of Painterꝰ Coloars cthe Red of one Priſm, and the Blue of another, be throvn upou the White Paper, the eolour'd Parts of it ſeen thro à third Priſin, viſi appear ſo much fdrther aſunder, is theſe Colours are more vivid and porfect than thoſe. If the Red from one Priſm and Violet from another be throum upon the ſaid Paper, vi Parts of the Paper will appear fartheſt from eachother: If the Red from edch Priſim be thrown upon the tuo Parts oſ the Papor, they will no way appear divided; but they willbegin to ſeparate a little, if they. receive one the Red, and the other the Orange; miore, if the Vellow; and ſtill more if the Graen, and ſo on, according to the Order of the Colourss. If the homogeneal Colours ( which when alt tnited make up White) are well ſeparated; how many Priſms ſoever they are made to aſs thro', however reſltected, or howe ver lnfected chey aro, chey never change their Colour or appear mix'd: and if they are thrown upon the Writing in a Book, the tirex wil not appear erooRe3 wheu lookd at thro a ( a Priſm, as it always happens when the white Light falls upon it, upon Account of the different Refrangibility of thoſe Rays, of which the White is compounded. 9. That all other Lucid Bodies, as well as the Sun, emit Rays differently refrangible, was ſhewn by the Experiment of the Rays of the Candle; which entring obliquely into æ bezelld LookingGlaſs Bar, are refracted, then fdll upon the Quickſilverd Surface, and aſter their Refiection from it; are refracted a ſecond Time, as they come out of the oblique Surface of the ſaid Bar: For then the homogeneal Rays (or the Rays that make each CoIour) are ſo far ſeparated from one another, that if che Violet Rays falls upon one Eye of any Per. ſon looking at the ſaid Bar, the Red will fall: upon the other Byes if the Perſon looking be farther remov'd from :the Bar, then cone Eye will receive he Blue, whilſt the ocher receives the Red, and ſo on; the Colours, or Colour-making Rays beinẽ farther aſunder at a greater Diftance from the Glaſs. 20ſ1 have in the Philoſophicul τ ranſuctions, Numb. as) g given a particular Adenunt of theſe laſt Experiments, and eaſie Directions for mating them; as alſo Puch of Sir Iſaac Newtonws: Experiments, as l. made before the Royal Society byhis Order ; becauſe ſome Gentlemen in France having tried them wit hout Succeſs, imagin the Theory oſ Light and Colours to be ſalſe. Each Circumſtance is there mentitn'ds nd explain d by proper Figures. ro. That the Colouræ of the Rain-Bov, are only owing. to the Refraction of the differently refrangible Rays, in their coming out of. drops of falling Water, after one or more Reflestions in the ſaid Drops, appear'd by the Experiments: made upon the bollow biue Spheres filè'a with Water and by the Experiment periment of the artificial Rain- Bov; when having the Sun behind, and a dark Place before, the Eye ſees the Colours in the falling Drops of the ſpouted Water from the Fountain, placd between the Eye and the ſaid dark Place. ſꝶοſò ſfſſνσοκοανſνſpſκονũ/ν) MISCELLANEOUS EXPERIMENTS: ciſhσnamæ ſuch Experiments as are ſometimes made QõxX SQβE in the Courſe, and ſometimes not ; be-  O cauſe what ever they may ſerve to prove, MEE is fully evincd from other Experiments, &iẽ mbleb are cte made as ſet doon in the Lectures. But theſe are generally perform'd the laſt Day, or aæfter the Twenty Tuwo above written Lectures (which are ſo many Propoſitions depending upon each other) are ended : Eſpecially when the Auditors deſire it. . 1. Muſcular Motion is attempted to be explain'd by a Chain of Bladders raiſing a Weight, the Machine being ſo contriv'd, that a ſmall Quantity of Air blown into a Chain of ſmall Bladders, raiſes as great a Weight as a greater Quantity in the Chain of larger Bladders. . 2. The compreſs'd Air weigh'd in the Copper Ball ſhews, that when the Denſity of the Air is doubled; its Weight is alſo doubled. ll 3. The Wind-gun throwing out a Bullet ſtrongly, ſhews that the Spring of the Air is encreasd in roportion to itæ Compreſſion; or when a great deal of it is crouded ĩinto a ſmall Space. r.. La 4- The 4. The Gage for diſcovering how much Air iq crouded into an opaque Veſſel, ſwhich conſiſts of à ſtrong Glaſs Tube with a ſmall Bore, hermetically Seald at one end, and hàving the other end cover'd with the Mercury that is in the cloſe Braſi Ciſtern) helps to ſhew, that the Denſity of the Air is as its Compreſſion. S. By a right Conſideration oſf what Effects the Elaſticity of Bodies muſt produce, the Reaſon apears why, in this fifth Experiment, when one ſhort piſii Cylinder ſtrikes the firſt of a row of other Iyory Cylinders that touch one another, it ſhall only make the laſt fly off; whether it ſtrikes the firſt with a great or ſmall Velocity: But if two Cylinders are made to ſtrike the Row, then the two laſi Cy linders will be ſeparated; as alſo the Three laſt, if the firſt is ſtruck by three Cylinders, &e. Tha ſaume is true of lvory Balls, or Glaſs Balls, or Object ſſlaſſes of Teleſcopes, if the Edges of them be not Convex. i . 6. The Force of the Steam of the heated Wator, and the Centrifugal Force of a Body turning upon its Axis, together with the Reafon of the rifing of a Rocket into the Air; are ſhewn by the Experiments on the Æolipile. a. The Blectrical Attraction of a Glaſs Glohe rubbd with the Hand, whilſt it is whir'd round by a Wheel, is ſnhewn by the ſeveral Directions that ic gives the Threads, when its Efluvia are excited: And chat theſe Effluvia are luminous, and always ſhoot themſelves where there is the leaſt Reſiſtance, appears from the other Glaſs Globe exhauſted of its ir, which gives a fſine Purple Light within, when whirl'dd round and rubb'd with the hand; an interrupted Light in Elaſhes, when a little Air is let in; and all the Light outwardly, when the Air is wholly let into che Globe. 8. Two 8. Two Glaſs Bubbles (of which one lies at ton, and the other at the bottom of a Glaſſ Jar half fuli of Water) are made to change Places by ſilling up the Jar with Water; which Phænemenon, tho' it appears ſtrange, is eaſily ſolv'd, when it is known, that the Water in the Jar was Salt, but that which was pour'd in warm and freſh; ſo the whole Medium or Fluid becoming ſpecifically lighter, is no longer able to ſuſtain the upper Bubble, which was hermetically Seald, when it had been made light enough to ſwim in very ſalt Water, tho' not in freſher; and the Water becoming warmer, expands the Air in the lower Bubble, whoſe Neck was open'd, and by that means part of the Water is driven out, and the Bubble becoming lighter, emerges. . 9. This ninth Experiment is to confute Monſ. Leibnitæ's Notion, who in a Letter to the Abbot Bignon (printed in the Hiſtory of the Royal Academy at Raris) affirm'd, That a Body does not weigh at all in a Fluid whilſt it is falling, but only when it is ſuſtain'd 3 and endeavour'd to account for the Variation of the Mercury in cthe Barometer, by ſaying, That the Clouds, as they fall in raing Weather, eaſe the Air of all their Weight, which is falſe; for it appears by this Experiment, that when the String that holds the Lead in the Tube of Water faſten'd to the Beam of the Balance is cut, the weight of the Water is encreasd from the beginning of the fall of the Lead. See a full Account of this in the Philoſ. Tranſ. Numb. OO 10. A Water-Clock, to ſhew, that the Surface of the Fluid in a Veſſel tapp'd at bottom, falls by a Motion uniformly diminiſh'd. 1I. An Artiſicial Vortex in a Tin Bowl, to ſhew, that Planets ſpecifically lighter chan the Parts of the Sun's Vortex (if there was one) wou'd full ſolt into the Sun in a Spiral; and thoſe chat be denfor wou'd fly off from the Sun in a And alſo to ſhew the difference betwee lute and relative Motion. 12. Two Experiments to remove an Ol againſt the Motion of the Earth a 3.. The Einſeed Oil Thermometer me the heat of Boiling Wator, and melted Meta 4. A Thermometer rifing by Heat ( Light) in VWacuo, almoſt as much as ano Pleno. a 5. Models of Mechanical Engne: for Water, or ocher uſes 9) l 25 11 What follous ſumP have begum the Sixth Lecture. 1 a e a æ A farqo H E Third Lam of Motion; is this. Actis 3§5 &è on and Re-action are ulways equal, anũ 8 8 contrary in their Directions; thate is, iacoi. by Actibin und Re-action, cqul Changæ: : πβ of Motion, are produc'd in Bodies. Thus two Bodies aëcracting or'repeling elich other, will advance cowards or rẽcede from eachr other with equal Motions, tho the Velocities will not be equal, unleſs the Bodies be ſo too. As a Stone falls to the Earth, the Earth riſes up with the ſame Motion as the Stone falls; but the Earth being inſinitely greater than the Stone, its Motion will produce a Velocity infinitely leſs, and therefore inſenſible. So a ſmall Boat dravn by a Rope to a great Ship will ſeem to have all the Motion, the Ship being at reſt; cho the Ship has really as much Motion as. the. Bont, but that Motion diſtributed to all the Parts of the Ship can give the Ship but an inſenſible Velocity. When a Cannon is fir'd in a great Ship, the force of the Powder does equally act againſt the Ball before it, and the Cannon behind, which wou'd recoil back with the ſume Motion as the Ball goes forward, if it was not faſten'd to the Ship; but inſtead of the Gun, the whole Ship recoils, which Motion in that Caſe amounts only to a ſnake ofithe Ship, upon account of the great quantity of Matter to be mov'd. The Air alſo re-acts a gainſt the Ball, but its Parts being eaſily ſeparated upon account of its Fluidity, we are not ſo ſenſible of its Motion, unleſs the Bali paſſes very near uã. The ( 8o Tnte Re:action of the Water againſt the Oars cauſes a Boat to move along  that Re-action againſt the Hands and Feet, cauſes a Man to advancè in ſuimming- and by the Re-action of the Air Birds ſiim in the Air , that is, do spnm. As much as the Earth attracts the Moon, ſo muchi the Moon attract the Earth, and all its Parts; ſince the whole coheres and moves together, we àre not ſenſible of this Motion, except on the Waters; which being Fluid, riſe in Proportion, as their T or Gravitation towards the Earth is diminiſi'd, as we ſhall ſhew, in explaining the Phænoimenen of the Ebbing and Ælowing of the Sea. O F Mechanical and Experimental PH I LO SOPH YY COVR S de PHILOSOPHIEL Mecanique & Experimentale. ν  dnάsũſ A COURS E of Mechanical and Experimental PHILOSOPHVY. Whereby any one, altho unstill'a ĩn Mathematical Sciences, may be able to underſtand all thoſe Phænomena of Nature, which have been diſcovered by Geometrical Principles, or accounted for h Experiments; and Mathematicians may be diverted in ſeeing thoſe Machines us'a, and Phyſical Operations perform'd, concerning mwhich they have read. Given by Jo un-T HEO PH ILU S DESAGuULTE ÆES, LL. D Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Chandos, and F R. S. at his Houſe in Channel- Row, Weſtminſter. i ÆMb ſiſts of Four Parts. πæNI &ù In the Firſt are & ſt and Laws of Motion, and the ſeveral Operations of Engines ſhe wn. In the Second, the Nature of F LUI D S is explain'd, the Laws of Hydroſtatics are rationally demonſtrated, and its Paradoxes or moſt ſurprizing Phæuomena, ſhewn, and experimentally accounesd for. The à q S at s COVURS de PHILOSOPHIE, Mecanique & Experimentale. Par lequel, ſans ètre verſé dans les Mathematiques, on peut comprendre tous les Phænomenes de la Nature, qui ont EQtè decouverts par des Principes Geometriques, ou expliquez par des Exporiences; & ol les Mathematiciens pourront s amuſer à voir les Machines miſes en jeu, & les DOperations Phyſiques executées, dont ils ont veu des deſcriptions dans des livres. Expliquè par J E AN-T H E oPH ILE DESAGULIE ÆS, Dr. en Droit, Chapelain du Duc de Chandos, & Membre de la Societè Royale, chez-lui en Channel- Rov à Weſtminſter. TùRBSÆE Cours eſtcompoſe de 2ã : 2 Quatre Parties. ) Dans la Prémierd, h laid down the Sõl UEPSSS nprè avoir poſe les Principles of Qſ ùλI Principes de M EMECHANICS, SBUũSSS CANIQU E, & les . du Mouvement, on montre differentes Operations des Duiſſances Mecaniques ou Machines. Dans la Seconde, on explique la nature des CORPS FLUIDES, on rend ruiſon des Loix d' Hy droſtatique, dont on montre & explique par des Experiences, les Phẽnomenes les plus ſurprenans. A a Dans 4 The Third Part takes in the Dan la Troifiéme on explique lei Properties of AIR, and all the Proprietex de PAIR, & tous lei Phænomena which depend upon Phẽnomenes qui dependent de ſu its Preſſure and Elaſticity; its Preſion, & de ſon Reſſort, ou ElaCondenſation and Rarefaction ſticite; comment il et condenſe & by Engines; the manner how rarifid par des Iuſtrumens; comit is vitiated, and how purified; ment il ſe corrompt & ſe purifie, with great Variety of Experi- outre unẽ grande varietè d Experiments upon the Air- Pump. ences faites avec la machine Pneumatique. The Fourth Part treats of Dans la Quatriéme cerie on O PTIC S; conſidering. 1ſt, traite de  OPTI QUE; & Direct Viſion or Perſpective. premirement de la Viſion directe, the Nature and Affections of & de la perſpective, de la Nature Light: adly, Catoptrics, or re- & desAffections de la Lumiere: Seflex Viſion 34ly, Dioptrics, or condement, de la Catoptrique, ou refracted Viſion; in which the de la viſion reftechie : en troiſidme Matke of the Eye is conſider'd ; lien, de la Dioptrique, ou de la with the Faults of and Helps viſion rempiie; ou l'on examine la for bad Eyes. Laſtly, Sir Iſuac fabrique de P'Oeuil, ſes defauts, & Nemton's Theory of Light and les moyens de remedier à une mauColours, prov'd by his Expe- waiſe viie: & enfin on verifie la riments, and confirm'd by ſome Theorie de la Lumiere & des Cunew ones, which may be done leurs de Monſieur le Chevalier even by Candle-light. Newton, par les Experiences qu'il lili a donndes lui. méme, & on la confirme par d'autres toutes nouvelles, qu'on peut faire à la lumiere de le Chandelle. N B The Method of this Courſe N. B. La methode qu'on obis wholy Mathematical, viz. a ſerve dans ce Cours, eſt entiChain of Propoſitions proving enchb erement Mathematique, ie orher; but inſtead of Definitions, veux dire, que c'eſt un enAxioms, and Poſtulata, purels chainement de Propoſitions Geometrical. the Experiments qui ſervent de preuve Iune à made at the Firſt Lecture, prove I'autre. Mais au lieu de Defthe Precepts given at the Second, nitions, à' Axiomes, & de Poſtulaund ſo on: Things mhich othermiſe ta purement Geometriques, les mould be merely ſpeculatiue, being Experiences qu'on fait dans la by this means render'd Object: of prémiere leson prouvent les ĩhe Senſes. and better underſiood in Preceptes avancer dans la ſe a Month or ſix Weocks, than in a conde, & ainſi de ſuite; de Trar's cloſe application to Books ſorte que des choſes qui autre only. ment ne ſeroient que ſpeculæ tives, deviennent par cette me thode les objèts des ſens, & ſont mieux entendiies en cinq ou fix ſemaines, qu'on ne les entendroit en s'appliquant une an ontière à laſimple lecture des livres qui en traitent expreſſement C A T A 5 A CATALOGU E of the CATALOOGUE des Ex Experiments made uſe of Periences, quoon fait dan; in the foregoing Courſe, to prove the Precepts. ME C H A N IC S. COncerning Matter, its ExS tenſion and Diviſibility, c. Of Vacuum Experiments to prove a Vacuum The univerſal Law of Gravitation explained. The Law of Coheſion, or the Attraction of the ſmall Parts of Bodies, deduced from the Aſcent of Fluids in ſmall Tubes, and between Gtlaſs Plates; with Variety of other Experiments. Boch theſe diſtinguiſh'd from electrical Attraction. Experiments relating to electrical Attraction and Repulſion. The electrical Phoſphorus. Meccurial Phoſphorus. Liquid Phoſphorus. Solid Phoſphorus. The Light of Phoſphorus augmented in Vacuo, and diminiſhed in compreſs d Air. Concerning Motion in general. Experiments to diſtinguiſh Motion from Velocity. Of abſolute and relative Gravi Uiperiments to explain the Nature of, and to find the Center of Gravity in all Bodies, and to diſfinguiſh it from the Center of Magnitude and Center of Motion. The Ile Cours mentionnẽ cydeſſus, afin den prouver la Doctrine. Leſons de M ECANIQUE. E la Matiere, ſon Entendue, ſa Diviſibiliteæ, &c. Du Vuide. Experiences qui prouvent le Vuide. Explication de la loy univerſelle de la Gravitæ. La loy de Coheſion, ou P Attraction des potites parties des corps, prouvee par les Phénomenes des Fluides qui montent d'eux- mèmes dans de petits Tuyaux, & entre des plaques de Verre, & par pluſiurs autres Experiences. L' Attraction electrique diſtinguce de ces deux vertus. Experiences de I' ttraction & de la Repulſion lectrique. Ll Le Phoſphore electrique. Le Phoſphore de Mercure. Le Phoſphore liquide. Le Phoſphore ſolide. La Lumiere du Phoſphore augmentee dans le Vuide & diminuee dans lI' Air comprime. Du Mouvement en general. Experiences pour diſtinguer le Mouvement d'avec la Viteſſe. De la Graviie abſoliie, & relative. Ce que ceſt que le Centre de Gravitè des Corps; avec des Experiences pour trouver ce Centre & pour le diſtinguer du Centre di Grandeur & du Centre Mouvement A 3 L Ex- c 6 The Experiment of the dou) L'Experience du Puſeau, qui ble Cone rolling upwards, by roule de bas en haut par ſa propre its own Gravity. A Cylinder rolling upwards Iin the ſame manner, and a rolling Lamp. A heavy Body, which of it ſelf would fall from a Table, Gravitè. LeGCylinire montant de la méme maniere; & la Lampe roulantè. Experience d'um Corps peſant. qui de ſos méme tomberoit d'une Table; muis qu'on empèche de le hinder'd from falling, by add- faire en γ joiguont un corps plus ing a heavier Body to it. Experiments about the Falling, Sliding, and Rolling, of heavy Bodies. Concerning the Diſtance and Line of Direction of a Weight and Power. Experiments to ſhew the whole Myſtery of the Feats done by Sampſons, or ſtrong M A en. Of ſimple Machines. Of Balances, which are either Scales or Still-yards. O  the ſeveral Kinds of Levers. . Of Pullies ſingle and comin'd. Of che Wheel and Axle. Of che Wedge. Of the Screw. Sails of Ships, Wind-mills. Watermills, &c. explain'd on cheſe Principles. Experiments to ſhew how Men or Horſes of unequal Strength may be made to carry, or draw, a Burden, in proportion to cheir Scrength. A compound Engine, made up of all the ſimple Machines. Experiments to ſhew the Advantage of great and ſmall peſant. Experiences des corps qui tombent, qui gliſſent, ou qui roulent. De la Diſtance, & de la Ligni de Direction d'un Poidi, & d'une Puiſſance. Experiences qui decouvrent Ilart de ceux veulent paſſer pour Hommes furts, & qui appellent des Sanſons. Des Machines ſimples. Des Balances, ou on conſidere les Balances a Baſſins, & les Stateres. Des differentes ſortes de Leviers. Des Poulies, ſimples & combinæes. De la Roiie par ſon Aiſſieu. Du Coin. De la Vis. Explication de la force des Voiles des Navires : des Moulins a Eau, par les principes ſuſdits. Expericnces pour faire voir comment des Hommes ou des Chevaux de force inegale doivent appli quer leur forces pour trainer ou porter un Fardeau, en proportion de cette difference de force. Machine compoſce de toutes let Machines ſimples. Experiences pour faire voir quand il faut ſe ſervir de petites ou de Wheels according to different grandes Roies aux Caroſſes, ChaCircumſtances, Cars, &c. in Coaches, riots ou Charettes, &c. Demon- Sir Iſuas Newton's firſt Law of Motion demonſtrated. Experiments to ſhew that the Compoſition of Forces in ſeveral Directions, not contrary to each other, produces a new Direction in a Diagonal Line. ll Some curious Experiments, made by a new Machine, for explaining the Compoſition of Forces. An Experiment to ſhev chat the Line of the Relative Aſcent and Deſcent of a projected Body is the ſame, whether the Place from whence 'tis thrown be continually at reſt, or in continual uniform Motion. Obijections againſt the Motion of the Earth, ſolv'd from this Principle. ; The centripetal and centrifugal Forces of ſolid and fluid Bodies in Motion, exploin'd and demonſtrated by Experiments; with ſome ſurprizing Phænomena ariſing from thoſe Forces. Monſ. Des Cartess Vortices exploded. Introduction to the Theory of Prujectiles, and Motion of the heavenly Bodies. How a Body will move when its projectile Force either yields to, overcomes, or exactly balances that of Gravity. Sir lIſaac Newton's ſecond Law of Motion demonſtrated. An Experiment to ſhew, that the Velocity of Falling Bodies is as the Times, and the Spaces gone Demonſtration de la premiere Lay de Mouvement de Monſieur le Chevalier Newton. Exporiences pour fatre volr que la compoſition des Forces en differentes directions qui ne ſont pas opẽ poſets, produit une nouvelle Direction en Ligne diagonale. Experiences curleuſes d'une nouvelle Machine pour expliquer la Compoſition des Forces. N Experience pour faire voir que la Ligne, dans la quelle un corps monte ou deſcent relativement, ne change pas; ſoit que Iendroit duquel on jette le corps ſoſt toujours en repos, ou qu'il ait un Mouvement uniforme continiiè. Reponſe aux Objections contre le mouvement de la Terre, ſur le méème principe. . Explication & Demonſtration des forces centripetes & centrifuges des corps ſolides & ſtuides en mouvement par Experiences : avec quelques Phenoménes ſuprenants qui en reſultent. Inconſiſtence des Tourbillons de Monſ. Des Cartes. Introduction a la Theorie des Corps jettex, & du Mouvement des Corps celeſtes. Mouvement d'un corps, quand ſa force projective cede a la force de la Gravitæ, ou la ſurmonte, ou lui reſiſte autant qu'il faut pour faire Equilibre. Demonſtration de la ſeconde Loy de Mouvement de Monſ. Newton. Experience pour faire voir que la Viteſſe des Corpr qui tombent eſi comme les Temps, & que les Eſpace. A 4 parcouru. gone through, as the Squares of the Times of Falling The Force of reſiſting Mediums conſider'd. A curious Experiment to explain the Foundation of the Art of Gunnery. The Nature of Fortification, explain'd from a large and curious Plan. The Moon's Motion, exlain'd from the Doctrine of rojectiles. The Motion of the Planets and Comets, deduc'd from the ſame Principle. . The ſolar Syſtem explain'd. The Phaſes of the Moon, Tides, and Eclipſes, demonſtrated. Experiments with the Loadone. ; New Properties and Experments of the ſame. ; Experiments concerning the Deſcent of Bodies on inclin'd Planes. being an Introduction to the Theory of Pendulums. Experiments concerning Tendulums. . Center of Oſcillation explain'd. ACyeloid deſcrib'd. Cycloidal Checks for PenduIums. The Motion of Pendulums alter'd by Heat and Cold. Experiments to ſhew, that the Motion of Waves in the Sea anſwer to the Motion of a Pendulum A curious Piece of Clockwork, which meaſures Time to the 16th Part of a Second, parcourus ſont comme le quarre det Temps de la Chũùte. . Laæ force de la Reſiſtance des Milieux. ili Experience curieuſe pour expliquer I Art de jotter les Bomber. Plan curicux pour faire voir ce que ceſt que la Fortification. Explication du mouvement de la Lune, par la doctrine des corps jettesm. lliliil Explicotion du mouvement der Planẽtes & des Cométes, ſur le mémae principe. Explication du Syſteme Solaire. Phaſes de la Lune, cauſe des Marées, & Eclipſes demontres. Experiences de I' Aimont. Nouvelles proprietes & Experiences de I Aimant. Experiences de la deſcente des Corpi ſur des Plans enclinex, pour introduire la doctrine des Pendules. Experiences des Pendules. Explicat ion du Centre d'Oſcillation. . Deſcription de la Cycloide. Machine pour faire que les Pendules ſe meuvent dans une Cycloide. Mouvement des Pendules change par le Froid, & le Chaud. Experiences pour faire voir que le mouvement des Ondes de la Merrepond au mouvement d'um Pendule. lli Machine a roies curieuſe, qui meſure le Temps a une ſeixieme de seconde pres, fort utile pour les Obvery uſeſul in aſtronomical ſervations aſtronomiques. Obſervations. Sir . Demonſtration Sir Iſuae Nenton's third Law Demonſtration de la troiſieme of Moction demonſtrated. Loy du Mouvement de Monſ. Newton. Flying and Swimming ac- Explication de la Nage, & du counted for. Vaiol des Oiſeaux. How to deſtroy the Elaſtici- Maniere de detruire I Elaſticitâ ty of ſome Metals. des Metaux. A curious Experiment con-Experience curicuſe du tremblecerning the tremulous Morion ment des corps ſonores. of ſounding Bodies. Experiments concerning the Experiences des Lolx de la comLaws of the Communication of munication du mouvement dans les Motion in hard and elaſtick corps durs, & dans les corps eloBodies. ſtiques. HVYD ROSTATICS. H Y D ROSTAT IQU E. Oncerning Fluids in gene. De corps fluides en general. ral. Experiments to prove, that RExæperiences pour prouver que les Fluids gravitate upon Fiuids Fluides peſent dans les Huides de of the ſame Kind. mème eſpece. That Fluids of different Que ler Fluides de differente Kinds gravitate upon ecach eſpete preſſent les uns ſur les auother. tres. That Fluids preſs in all Que les Fluides preſſent en mème Manner of Directions at the tems en toutes ſortas de directions. ſame Time. That the Quantity of that Que dans toutes ſortes de HluPreſſure, in all Fluids, is pro- ides, la Preſſion eſt proportionſe a rtional to the perpendicular la hauteur perpendiculaire du Fluhicigue of the Fluid, in all ide en tous les endroits du VaiſParts of the containing Veſſel. ſcau qui le contient. . That a Pint of Water may be Qune Pinte d' Eau peut preſſer made to preſs with as great a antant que cent Pintes. Force as ſeveral Gallons. To raiſe any given Weight Maniere de ſolever quolque by the Force of a Man's Lungs Poids que ce ſoit par la force des only, provided he blows podùmons ſeulement, pourveu que lo through a Hole proportiona- irou dans lequel on ſouffie ſoii probly ſmall- portionellement petit. An Experiment of lifting aExporience d'un Poids ſolleve en Weight by a Chain of inflated ſouſiant dans une Chaine de Veſſies; Bladders, applied to muſcular pour expliquer l: mouvement des Motion. Muſcles. Several other Experiments Pluſieurs Experiences pour expli. to explain the Hydraſtatical quer le Paradox: hydroſtatique. Paradox. Ex- Experienco. Experiments to ſhew how high, and why Water will riſe in Fountains and oblique Jets, and the beſt Way of making Spouting Pipes. . Several Sorts of curious Fountains. The Expence of Water ſpouting from equal Holes at any given Depth below the Surface computed, and ſhewn to be as the ſquare Roots of thoſe Depths. The working of Syphons; ſucking, forcing. and lifting Pumps, explain'd. Experiments to ſhew the Fulminating of Water, rarify'd by Fire. A Model of the Engine for raiſing Water by Fire. Experiments to ſhew, that Bodies heavier than Water, when weigh'd in Water, loſe as much of their Weight, as is equal to their Bulk in Water; and Bodies lighter than Water, will ſo ſwim in it, that a Quantity of Water, equal in Bulk to the Part immers'd, will be equal in Weight to the whole Body. That upon theſe Principles Lead, or any Metal, may be made to ſwim in Water, and ceven be rais'd up by it. That a Body lighter than a Fiuid will be kept down, and even depreſs'd by it. The Hydrometer, or Water Poiſe. The hydroſtatical Balance, co determine the Specifick Gravity of all Solids and Fluids. The Experiencesr pour fuire oo juſques a quelle hauteur, & pourquoy IEau monte dans les Fontaines, & dans les jets I Eau obliques; avec la meilleure maniere die faire les Ajutuges. Pluſieurs Fontaines curienſer. Depenſe de I' Eau jailliſunte par des trous egaux, a quelque diſtance qu'ou prenne au deſſous de Iu ſurface de Eau: avec les experiences qui prouvent qu'elle eſt comme la racine quarrẽe de ces diſtances ou profondeurs. Experiences des Syphons; des Pompes aſpirantes, foulantes, & aſpirantes & foulantes. Experience de la Fulmination de I Eau echauffee. Modelle de la Machine pour èlerer I Eau par Feu. Experiences pour faire voir que les corps qui ſont plus peſants que I'Eau ètant peſés dans I Eau, perdent autant de leur poids que le poids d'um volume d'Eau qui leur eſt egal: & que les corps plus legers que I Eau y nagent de telle maniere qu'un volume d'Eau egal a la partie ſummergee peſe autant que les dits corps. Que ſur ces principes on peut faire nager le Plomb ou quelque autre Metal que ce ſoit ; & meme faire que PEau le ſodléve. Qu'on peut faire qu'un corps plui leger qu'un Hluide, ſolt retenu ui fonds du dit Fluide & mèẽ me com primè contre le fond du Vaiſſeau. L'Hydrometre, ou PÆſe eau. Balance hydroſtatique pour de terminer la Gravite ſpecifiquæ d toutes ſortes de Solides ou Fluides. Expli The Riſing and Falling of Images and Glaſs Bubbles accounted for. PN E U M A T I C S. Exceriment concerning the Nature of Air in general. That the Denſity and Spring of the Air is as the Force that compreſſes it. That the Preſſure of the Air decreaſes, according to its Diſtance from the Surface of the Earth. Cupping Glaſſes. Artificial Lungs. How to find what Quantity. of Air preſſes upon our Bodies at any time. . The diving Bell. The Riſing and Falling of the Quickſilver in the Weacher-Glaſs explain'd and accounted for. ; The different Sorts of Barometers. : Thermometers and Hygrometers of ſeveral Kinds. The Effect of high Windson the Barometer, ſhewn by an arcificial Storm. The Air- Pump, and manner of its working, explain d. Several Experiments, which directly prove the Preſſure, and Spring of the Air, by breaking Glaſs Viols, by the Senſe of Feeling, the Phænomena of Bladders, Glaſs Bubbles, &c. Fountains in Vacuo. Barometers in Vacuo. Experiments made in a condenſing Engine. An /2 Weight, Explicationde la raiſon pourquoy les Images de Verre & les Bulles montent & deſcendent dans I Eau. PN E U M A T I QU E. Xperiences pour faire voir la  nature de I' Air en general. Que la Denſitæ & le Reſſort de I' Air ſont comme la force qui le comprime. e Que la preſſion de I àir diminiie a meſure qu'on s eloigne de la ſurface de la Terre. . Verres de Ventouſes. Poùmons artificiels. Manier de trouver combien d Air preſſe ſur nos Corps en touts temps. Cloche de Plongeur. , Explication de la raiſon pourquoy le Mercure, monte & deſcent dans le Barometre. Barometres, Thermometres, Hygrometres de differuntes eſpeces. Efféts des grunds Vents ſur le Barometre, expliquees par un Vent artificiel. aep Pompe d Air, t- ſon jeu expliquex. Pluſieurs Expengences qui prou. vent directement la Preſſion & le Reſſort de I' Air, en caſſant des Bouteilles de Verre , en faiſant ſentir a la main ſes proprietes; & par les Phenomenes des Veſſies, Bulles de Verre, &c. Fontaines dans le Vuide. Barometres dans le Vuide. Experiences dans la Machine ã condenſer. Experienot us great Weight is requir d to draw two Braſs Hemiſpheres aſunder, when the Denſity of the Air on the outſide of them is doubled, (tho' che Aic between them be of the ſame Tenor with the common Air) as when there is a Vacuum made bet ween them. Another Experiment, ſhewĩng that if the Air in the Veſſel containing the ſaid Hemiſpheres, be made three times more denſe than the Air betrween them, they will require twice as much Weight to draw them aſunder. A Bottle broken by condenſing the Air on the outſide of it. Experiments to prove, that Sound can't be convey'd without Air; and that tis increas'd or diminiſh'd, according as the Air is rorify'd, or condens'd. The ſurprizing Motion of ſeveral ſorts of Liquors in Vac . That Fire and Flame are fed by the Air. That Gunpowder is fir'd in acuo without any Exploſion. The Eſfects of rarify'd, condens'd, and burnt Air, upon che Life of Animals. With ſeveral other curious Experiments by the Air- Pump. O P T I C 8. COncerning the Nature and Motion of Light. Of Viſion in general. How a Picture is the Repreπ.ntation of Objects. Expec 12) Experience curieuſe pour faire woir qu'il faut autant de poids pous séparer deux Hemiſpheres de Cuùvri quand on a donblé la denſitẽ de I Air qui les environne (quoyque P Air d'entre deux ſoit de la mème denſitæ que I Air commun) que quand on a pompe tour l' Air d entre les dites Hemiſpheres. Autre Experience, qui falt voir que ſi on rend l Air dans le vaiſſeau qui les environne trois fois plus denſe que celui qu'elles contiennent; il faudra diux fois plus de poids pour les ſeparer. . Bouteille caſſee en condenſant PAir qui l'environne. Experiences qui prouvent que le Son ne ſe communique que par I' air; & qu'il eſt augmeni ou diminiiè, ſelon que I' ir eſt rarefic, ou condenſe. Mouvement ſurprenant de pluſieurs ſortes de Liqueurs dans le vuide. Preuve que I Air nourrit le Feu la Flamime. Que la Poudre a Canon ne fait point d exploſion dans le Vuide. Efféts de I Air rarefic, & condenſe, & brulè, ſur les animoux. Pluſicurs nutres Expertences curieuſes de la Pompe d'Air. OPT I QuE. E la nature & mouvement di la Lumiore. De la Viſion en general. Ce qui fait qu'un Portrait repre. ſente les Objats. Expe-  13 Experiments proving the great Principle of Catoptricks, vizæ- That when Rays of Light are reflected, the Angle of Incidence is equal to that of Reion. Of Plane Mirrors. The ſeveral Reſlections from thé two Surfaces of Lookingglaſſes conſider'd. Of concave and convex Mirrors. A concave cylindric Mirror. A Picture, optically deformed, ſeen in juſt proportion by Reflection from a cylindric Mirror. The Cauſe and Law of Refraction explained by Experiments. How to meaſure the Refraction of any ſort of Liquors. Multiplying Glaſſes. Experiments to ſhew the Nature of Convex and Concave Glaſſes, and the manner of the Rays of Light paſſing through them, and uniting their Focus's. . How to find the Focus of a Lens, and whether it be truly center'd. ; Water made to burn, by colExperiences qui prouvent le grand Principe de la Catoptrique; aſuviir que quand les Rayons de Lumiere ſont reflechis, Angle æ Incidence eſt egal a celui de Reſtection. Der Miroirs plans. Les differentes Reftections des deux Surfaces des Miroirs. Des Miroirs convexes, & des Miroirs concaves. Miroir cylindrique concarue. Portrait difforme, qui paroit en proportion juſte quand on le regardi par reflection dans un Cylindre poli. La Cauſe & la Loy de la Refraction, eupliquee par Experiences. Maniere de meſurer la Refraction de pluſieurs Liqueurs. Miroirs a facettes qui multiplient I'Objer. Experiences pour expliquer les efets des Lent i lles convexes & concaver; & pour faire votr comment les Rayons de Lumire les traverſent, & s uniſſent dans leur Fuy ers. Maniere de trouver le Foyor d'une Lentille, & de voir ſi elle ſt bicn centree. Maniere de bruler en faiſant aſlecting the Sun's Rays into a ſembler les Rayons du Soleil dans Focus. The Camera Obſcura. The Magick Lantern. The Diſſection of the Eye. An Inſtrument to ſhew the Manner of Viſion. The ſaults of Viſion ſhew'd by an Inſtrument. Experiments to ſhew how the ſhort-ſighted and old Eyes may be help d. Expeun Foyer, quoy qu'ils paſſent an cravers d un Verre plein d Eau. Chambre obſcure. Lanterne magique. Diſſection de I' Oeil. Machine pour faire volr comment ſe fait la Viſion. Inſtrument qui fait voir les defauts de la Viſion. Experiences pour falre voir comment on peut aider a ceux qui ont la Viie courte; & aux yeux des Vielliards. Expe- Experiments to ſhew the Difference bet ween Looking and Steinte hy Beams ſeem to dart from a Candle. To make two Candles ſeem one. ; To ſhew why both Eyes ſee things only ſingle. An aerial Speculum. .The Nature, Uſe, and ſeveral Experiences pour expliquer li difference entre regarder & voir. Ce qui fait voir un Rayonne ment autour d'une Chandelle. Maniere de faire que deux Chan delles paroiſſent n'en ctre qu' une. Dou vient que les deux Teua ne voyent pas les Objets donbles. Miroir d' Air La fabrique, 'uſage, & les difKinds of Microſcopes and Te- ferentes ſortes de Microſcopes & di leſcopes. A new and moſt curious Experiment to ſhew the Circulation of the Blood in the Lungs of a Frog. An Experiment to meaſure the Refraction of the Air. Sir Iſaac Nevton's Theory of Light and Colours, prov'd by ſur la Lumiere prouvee par Experiences. Experiments. Experiments to ſhew the Cauſe of the Rain-bow. Teleſcopes. Experience nouvelle & fort curieuſe pour faire voir la Circulation du Sang dans les Poùmons d'une Grenouille. Exporience pour meſurer la Refraction de I' AirTheorie de Moſtcar Newton, les Couleurs, Experiences pour faire voir la cauſe de I' Arc en Ciel. T H E Charge of going thro' this Courſe is Two Guineas and a half; but any Set of Gentlemen that deſire a private Courſe, are to pay Three Guineas each: Or if the Lectures be in French, the Price is likewiſe Three Guineas. O N paye Trois Guinces pour &ètre preſent à ce Cours, quand les Legons ſunt en Franęis; donnant une Guince quand on ſouſcrit, & le reſte le premier jour du Cours. N. B. One Guinea is to be paid at the time of Subſcription, . and the Remainder the firſt Day of the Courſe. PHILOSOPHY. Whereby any one, although unskill'd in Mathematical Sciences, may be able to underſtand all thoſe Phænomena of Nature, whicli have been diſcovered by Geometrical Principiles, or accounted for by Experiments , and fechon 2nqum may be diverted in ſeeing cthoſe Machines uſed, and Phyſical Operations perform'd, concerning which they have read. By J OPH EUS DESAGULIERS, QLL. D. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Chandos, and F. R. S. at his Houſe in Channel- Row, Weſtminſter. LONDON Printed in the Y E A R I 7 2 5. This Courſe conſiſts of Two Parts. IN the Firſt are laid down the Principles of MECHANICS, and Laws of ũũ Motion, and the ſeveral Operations of U Engines ſhewn. IN the Second, the Nature ot F L UTS is explained, the Laws of Hydroſtatics are rationally demonſtrated, and its Paradoxes, or moſt ſurpriſing Phæncuena, ſhewn, and experimentally accounted for. The Third Part takes in the Properties of A I R, and all the Phænomena which depend upon its Preſſure and Elaſticity; its Condenſation and Rarefaction by Engines; tho Manner how it is vitiated, and how purified; with great Variety of Experiments upon the Air-Pump. The Fourth Part treats of O P TIC S; conſidering, iſt, Direct Viſion or Perſpective, the Nature and Affections of Light. adly, Catoptrics, or Reflex Vifion. 3dly, Dioptrics, or Refracted Viſion; in which the Make of the Eye is confider'd; with the Faults of and Helps for bad Eyes. Laſtly, Sir Iſuac Newt1oms Theory of Light and Colours, prov'd by his Experiments, and confirm'd by ſome new ones, which may be done even by Candle-light. N. B. The Method of this Courſe is wholly Mathematical, vVigz. a Chain of Propoſitions proving each other; but inſtead of Definitions, Axioms, and Poſtulata purely Geometrical, the Experiments made at ihe Firſt Lecture, prove the Precepts given at the Second, and ſo on : Things which otherwiſe would be merely ſpeculative, being by this means rendered Objects of the Senſes, and better underſtood in a Month or ſix Weels, than in a Tear's cloſe Application to Books only. A Catalogue of the EXP E RI MEN T S made uſe of in the foregoing Courſe, to prove the Precepts. M E C H A N IC S. C ONC E R N I NG Matter, its Extenſion and Diviſibility, &c. . Of a Vacuum. Experiments to prove a Vacuum. The The univerſal Law of Gravitation explained The Law of Coheſion, or the Attraction of th ſmall Parts of Bodies, deduced from the Aſcent c Fluids in ſmall Tubes, and between Glaſs Plates with Variety of other Experiments. : Both theſe diſtinguiſh'd from Electrical Attraction Experiments relating to Electrical Attraction anc Repulſion. he Electrical Phoſphorus. Mercurial Phoſphorus. Liquid Phoſphorus. Solid Phoſphorus. The Light of Phoſphorus augmented in Vacuo, and diminiſh'd in compreſs'd Air. . Concerning Motion in general. Experiments to diſtinguiſh Motion from Velocity. Of Abſolute and Relative Gravity. Experiments to explain the Nature of, and to find the Center of Gravity in all Bodies, and to diſtinguiſh it from the Center of Magnitude and Center of Motion. The Experiment of the Double Cone rolling upwards by its oun Gravity. A Cylinder rolling upwards in the ſame manner, and a rolling Lamp. A heavy Body, which of it ſelf would fall from a Table, hinder'd from falling, by adding a heavier Body to it. Experiments about the Falling, Sliding and Rolling of heavy Bodies. Concerning the Diſtance and Line of Direction of a Weight and Power. Experiments to ſhew the whole Myſtery of the Feats done b Sampſons, or ſtrong Men. Of ſimple Machines. . Of Balances, which are either Scales or Still-yards. Of the ſeveral Kinds of Levers. Of Pulleys, ſingle and combined. Of the Wheel and Axle. . Of the Wedge. Of the Screw. llil Sails of Ships, Wind-mills, Water-mills, &c. exolained on theſe Principles. Experiments to ſhew how Men or Horſes of unequal ſtrength may be made to carry, or draw a Burden, in rtion to their Strength. nop compound Engine.made up of all the fimple Machines. . Experiments to ſhew the Advantage of great and ſmall Wheels, according to different Circumſtances, in Coaches, Cars, &ſc. Sir Iſauc Newton's firſt Law of Motion demonſtrated. Experiments to ſhew that the Compoſition of Forces in ſeveral Directions, not contrary to each other, produces a new Direction in a Diagonal Line. Some curious Experiments, made by a new Machine, for explaining the Compoſition of Forces. An Experiment to ſnew that the Line of the Re lative Aſcent and Deſcent of a projected Body is the ſame, whether the Place from whence 'tis thrown be continually at reſt, or in continual uniform Motion. Objections againſt tfhe Motion of the Earth, ſolv'd from this Principle. The centripetal and centrifugal Forces of ſolid and fluid Bodies in Motion, explained and demonſtrated by Experiments; with ſome ſurprizing Pænomena ariſing from thoſe Forrees. Monſ. Des Cartes's Vortices exploded. Introduction to the Theory of Progctites, and Motion of the Heavenly Bodies. How a Body will move when its projectile Force either yields to, overcomes, or exactly balances that of Gravity. i Sir Iſ. Netton's ſecond Law of Motion demonſtrated. An Experiment to ſhew that the Velocity of Falling Bodies is as the Times, and the Spaces gone through, as the Squares of the Times of Falling. The Force of reſiſting Mediums conſidered. A curious Experiment to explain the Foundation of the Art of Gunnery. The Nature of Fortification, explain'd from large and curious Models. The Moon's Motion, explain'd from the Doctrine of Projectiles. The Motion of the Planets and Comets, deduced from rhe ſame Principle. . The Solar Syſtem explain'd. The Phaſes of the Moon, Tides and Eclipſes, demonſtrated. Experiments with the Loæa d-ſtone. New Experiments concerning the Deſcent of Bodies on inclined Planes; being an Introduction to the Theory of Pendulums. Experiments concerning Pendulums. Center of Oſcillation explain'd. ACycloid deſcrib'd. Cycloidal Checks for Pendulums. The Motion of Pendulums alter'd by Heat and Cold. Experiments to ſhew that the Motion of Waves in the Sea anſwers to the Motion of a Pendulum. A curious Piece of Clock-work, which meaſures Time to the r6th Part of a Second; very uſeful in Aſtronomical Obſervations. Sir II. Newton's Third Law of Motion demonſtrated. Elying and Swimming accounted for. How to deſtroy the Elaſticity of ſome Metals. A curious Experiment concerning the trem ulous Motion of ſounding Bodies. Experiments concerning the Laws of the Communication of Motion, in hard and elaſtick Bodies. HPDTODRO ST AT IC S. C ONC E R N I NG Fluids in general. Experiments to prove, that Fluids gravitate upon Fluids of the ſame Kind. ;That Fluids of different Kinds gravitate upon each other. That Fluids preſs in all Manner of Directions at the ſame time. That the Quantity of that Preſſure, in all Fluids, is proportional to the perpendicular Height of the Fluid, in all Parts of the containing Veſſel. That a Pint of Water may be made to preſs with as great a Force as ſeveral Gallons. . To raiſe any given Weight by the Force of a Man's Lungs only, provided he blows through a Hole proportionably ſma ll. An Experiment of lifting a Weight by a Chain oſ inflated Bladders, applied to Muſcular Motion. Several other Experiments to explain the Hyãdroſtaticai Paradox. Experiments to ſnew how high, and why Watel will riſe in Fountains and oblique Jets, and the beſi Way of making Spouting Pipes. Siveral Several Sorts of curious Fountains. lſ The Expence of Water ſpouting from equal Holes, at any given Depth below the Surface, computed, and ſhewn to be as the Square Roots ofthoſe Depths. The working of Syphons ; ſucking, forcing and lifting Pumps, explain'd. Experiments to ſnhew the Fulminating of Water, rarified by Fire. . A Model of the Engine for raifing Water by Fire. Experiments to ſhew, that Bodies, heavier than Water, when weigh'd in Water, loſe as much of their Weight, as is equal to their Bulk in Water; and Bodies, lighter than Water, will ſo ſwim in it, that a Quantity of Water, equal in Bulk to the Part immers'd; will be equal in Weight to the whole Body. That upon theſe Principles Lead, or any Metal, mat be made to ſwim in Water, and even to be rais'd u it. ſi a Body, lighter than a Fluid, will be kept down, and even depreſs'd by it. The Hydrometer, or Water Poiſe. The Hydroſtatical Balance, to determine the ſpecifick Gravity of all Solids and Fluids. The Riſing and Falling of Images and Glaſs Bubbles accounted for. PNEUM AT IC S. E X P E RIM E N T S concerning the Nature of Ait in general. i That the Denſity and Spring of the Air is as the Forcè that compreſſes it. That the Preſſure of the Air decreaſes, according to its Diſtance from the Surface of the Earth. Qupping Glaſſes. Artificial Lungs. Houm to find what Quantity of Air preſſes upon our Bodies at any time. The Diving Bell. The Riſing and Falling of the Quickſilver in the Weather-Glaſs, explain'd and accounted for. . The different Sorts of Barometers. Thermometers and Hygrometers of ſeveral Kinds. The Effect of high Winds on the Barometer, ſhewn by an artificial Storm. H q  n] The Air-Pump, and Manner of its Working, explain'd. Several Experiments, which directly prove the Weight, Preſſure and Spring of the Air, by breaking Glaſs Phials by the Senſe of Feeling, the Phænomena of Bladders, Glaſs Bubbles, &c. Fountains in Vacuo. Barometers in Vacuo. Experiments made in a condenſing Engine. An Experiment to ſhew, that as great Weight is required to draw two Braſs Hemiſpheres aſunder, when the Denſity of the Air on the Outſide of them is doubled (though the Air between them be of tlie ſame Tenor with the common Air) as when there is a Vacuum made between them. 23 Another Experimerit, ſhéwing that if the Air, in the Veſſel containing the ſaid Hemiſpheres, he made three times more denſe than the Aif between them, they will require twice as much Weight to draw them aſunder. . 4 2S.. liiii A Bottle broken by condenſing the Air on the Qutſide of it. llii . Experiments to prove that Sound can't be convey'd without Air; and that tis increaſed or diminiſhed according as the Air ĩs rarified or condenſed. ; The ſurpriſing Motion of ſeveral ſorts of Liquors in Vacuo. lli . ãllli That Fire and Flame are fed by the Air. That Gunpowder is fired in Vacuo, without any Exploſion. lli Phe Effects of rarified, condenſed, and burnt Air, upon the Life of Animals. With ſeveral other curious Experiments by the AirPump t c O V T I C S. -A C ONC E E N I N C the Nature and Motion of Light. Of Viſion in general. il How a Picture is the Repreſentation of Objects. Experiments proving the great Principle of Catoptrics, vuiæ. That when Rays of Light are reflectod, the Angle of Incidence is equal to that of Reflection. Of Plane Mirrors Hlli The ſeveral Reſlections from the two Surfaces oſ Looking glaſſes conſiderd. o Of Concave and Convex Mirrors. A GConcave Cylindric Mirror. A Picture optically deform'd, ſeen in juſt Proporton by Reflection from à Cylindric Mitror. Vſhe Cauſe and Law of .èſraction explain'd by Experiments. How to meaſure the Refraction of a any ſort of Liquorss. Multiplying Glaſſes. Experiments to ſhew the Nature of Convex and Concave Glaſſes, and the Manner of the Rays ofſ Light paſſing through them, and uniting their Focus's. FRiow to ſind the Rocus of a Lens, an whether i it bo truly center'd. r Water made to bum, by collecting the Sun' s Ras into a Focus. The Camera Obſcura. cr The Magick Lanthorn. ina αul The Diſſection of the Eye. An Inſtrument to ſhew che Mariner of Vicon. The Faults of Viſion ſuew'd by an Inſtrument. Experimenis to ſhew how the ſtortfghted and old Eves may be help' d Experiments to fhew the Differonce between Lols ing and Seeing Why Beams ſeem to dart from a Candle. 215 sro make tho Cunalts feem one. i lll Do ſhew w th Eyes ſee things onl ngle. An Ae ial Speculum. q ngo only ſing & ſThe Nature, Uſe, and ſeveral Kinds of Microco es and Teleſcopes. new arnd moſt curious Experiment to ſhew the Circulation of the Blood in the Lungs of a Frog. An Experiment to mea ſure the Refraction of the Gir Iſaac Neoron's Theory of Light and Cobusy proved y Experiments. Experiments to ſhew the Cauſe of the Rainbow. κ Z he Charge of going through this Courſe is Three Guineas; One Guinea, is to be paid at the Time ofſ Subſcriptici, and the Remainder the srſt Dayſ 2ie Courſe. EI N I sS. A Courſe of Mechanical A N D Experimental P H I LO SOP H Y, Conſiſting of Seven Parts. The Principles of Mechanicks, and the Force of the Simple and Compound Machines. The Galilean and Neutonian Philoſophy. . l. The Laws of Hydroſtaticks, or the Effects of the Gravitation of Fluids. L. Pneumaticks; or the peculiar Properties of the Air, and the Pnænomena depending on its Preſſure and Elaſticitp. Several Miſcellaneous Experiments; being an Explan:tion of the Engines and Inventions of Uſe ſor the Accommod ation of Life, and Depending on the Effects of the Mechanical, Hydroſtatical, and Pneumatical Principles, with the Engines themſelves, or Draughts or Models, proper to the Occaſion. I. Opticks, Exp ainine the Nature of Viſion, of Reflecting and Refracting Glaſſes, ano of Light and Colours, accord ing to Sir I S AÆC NEWTONXS Theory. II. Aſtronomy; or the Syſtem of the Univerſe more particularly Explain'd. N B. Theſe Courſes will be Perform'd over the Bedforc Cofſee- Houſe Covent Garden, and at the Academy in Tocver. Street. By Mr. games Stirling, F. R. 8. Mr. Peter Bron Mr. William Watts, and Mr. William Deam, Mathema tical Inſtrument- Maker and by whom the principal In ſtruments oſ the Apparatus were made. To begin over the Redſord Cofſee-Houſe Covent- Garden. To begin at the Academy Tower-Street. Printed in the Vear, 1727. thoſe Things by Experiments that hace been found out by Geometrical Reaſonings, which may be uſeful to. ſuch as are acquainted witb Mathematicks, but will be more particularly ſo to theſe who are not acquainted theremwith, it being very poſſible this vay to give a good Idea of thoſe new Diſcoveries in Nature (which have ſo much taken up the Attention of the Learned) to ſuch as are unshillld in Mathematicks, by which they may come to the Knovwledge of many Things &hich cannot be attain'd any other way, without much Stucy and Application; but theſe who are deſirous to enquire into the Mathematical Demonſtrations, may have Satisfaction therein at proper Hours, and be Taught any Parts of Mathematicks at their own Appartments, by Mr. Stirling, or a the Academy in Tower-Street, by Mr. Brown, &c. A 2 The CQuineas, the Days, Mondays, Wedneſdays and Itridays: But any Number not exceeding Twvelve, and paying for Twelve, may go ihrough the ſame in private, at their own Hours. CATALOGUES are to be had at the Places of Performing, and at Meſſieurs Iloodmanu's and Lyons, Covent-Garden. m Modern Philoſophers in explaining Ph nomena, and making Diſcoveries in N ture. The METHOD Of REASONING uſed in tl ourſe. Mechanicks. T H E Univerſal Properties of Matter. Of the Diviſibility of Matter. Of a Vacuum. Experiments to prove a Vacuum. OFf Motion, Place and Time. . Experiments to diſtinguiſh Motion from Velocity. Of Gravitation in general. Of Abſolute and Relative Gravity. Experiments to explain the Nature of, and to f the Center of Gravity, in all Bodies; and distinguiſh it from the Center of Magnitude. A3 An Experiment making the ſame Body rol down an Aſcent by the Force of Gravity. A heavy Body, which of it ſelf would fal Table, hinder'd from falling, by adding: Body to it. ù Of Friction. The Center of Gravity explain'd by the Sliding and Rolling of Bodies, on an Inclin Experiments concern ng the Diitance and irection of a Weight and Power. Experiments to ſhew the Myſtery and Feats Sampſons and ſtrong Men. Of the Mechanical Powers. OF Balances, which are either Scales Yards. Of falſe Scales, and the way to diſcover then Of the ſeveral kinds of Levers. Of Pullies Single and Combin'd. Of the Wheel and Axle. Of the Inclin'd Plane. Of the Wedge. Of the Screw. A new and curious Engine compounded c Mechanical Powers. Of the Galilean Philoſophy. JE Xreriments to prove Sir Iſaac Newten's threò Laws of Motion, on which all his Philoſophy is founded. Of the Compoſirion and Reſolution of Forces. Experiments to ſhew that the Compoſition of Forces in different, but not contrary, Directions, produces a new Direction in a Diagonal Line. Galilea's Hypotheſis of Gravity explain'd. Of the Perpendicular Aſcent and Deſcent of Boies. An Experiment to prove that the Velocity of a falling Body is proportional to the Time in which it falls, and that the Spaces it goes through are proportional to the Scquare of the Times. An Experiment to ſhew that the Aſcent or Deſcent of a Body is the ſame, whether the Place wherein it moves be at reſt, or in an uniform Motion. Obijections againſt the Motion of the Earth anſwer'd rom this Experiment. ; Experiments concerning the Deſcent of Bodies or Inclin'd Plains. An Introduction to the Theory of Pendulums. The Center of Ocillation and Percuſſion explain'd. Houw a Pendulum regulates the Motion of a Clock. An Experiment to ſhew the Influence of Heat anc Cold on Pendulums. The Oſillation of Pendulums ſhorter or longer, à the Force of Gravity is greater or less. The Doctrine of Projectiles explain'd. A a A An Experiment to ſhew that Projectiles move in Parabola. The Art of Gunnery explain'd. Experiments to explain the Foundation of the Art unnery. Of ihe New tonian Philoſophy. O F the Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces. Gravity is not uniform, as Galileo ſuppos'd it. The Law of Gravity, according to Sir Iſuac Newto All Bodies revolving about a Center are acted on a Centripetal Force, elſe they would run out Strait Lines. The ſume prov'd by ſeveral curious Experiments ſolid and fluid Bodies. Theſe Principles prov'd from the Syſtem of Univerſe. . . The Moon, while it revolves about the Earth kept in its Orbit by the Force of Gravity. The Planets and Comets are kept in their Orbits their Gravitation towards the Sun. The Satellites of Jupiter and Saturn are kept in tl Orbits by their Gravitation towards their Prim Planets. All Bodies gravitate towards one another. Of the Congreſs of Bodies, and the Communicat cf Motion. Of the tremulous Motion of Sounding Bodies. Experiments to ſhew the Law of Vibration oſ a Muſick String. Of the Coheſion of the Parts of Bodies. Several Experiments to prove the Attraction of the Particles of Bodies. Experiments to ſhew Electrical Attraction and Repulſion. Experiments relating to the ſeveral Phoſphori. The Light of Phoſphorus diminiſh'd in compreſs'd Air, and augmented in Vacuo. Several curious Experiments with the Loadſtone. Hydroſtaticks. O F Fluids in general. Experiments to ſnhew, That Fluids of the ſame Kind gravitate upon each other. Tuhat thoſe of different Kinds gravitate upon each other. ſTtnhat Fluids preſs in all manner of Directions at the ſame Time. ; Tnhat the force of that greſſure is proportionable to the particular Height of the Fluid in all Parts of the containing Veſſel. -ſTuhat any given Quantity of Water tho' never ſo ſmall, may be made to preſs with a Force equal to any given Weight, tho' never ſo geat. Tuhat any given Weight may be rais'd by the Forco of a Mans Lungs, by blowing thro' a Tube, proportionably ſmall. Severa Several other Experiments to explain what is call'd the Hydroſtatical Paradox. Experiments to ſhew how high, and why Water will riſe in Fountains and oblique Jets, and thè beſt way of making ſpouting Pipes. The Expence of Water ſpouting from ſmall equal Holes, at any given Diſtance from the Surface, comuted. and ſhewn to be as the ſquare Roots of thoſe iſtances. Experiments to ſhew that Bodies hearier than Water, when weigh'd in Water, loſe as much of their Weight as is equal to that of ſo much Water, and that Bodies lighter than Water will ſo Swim in it, that a Quantity of Water equal in Bulk to the Part immers'd, will be equal in Weight to the whole Body. Tanat on theſe Principles, Lead or any Metal may be made to Swim in Water, and even be rais'd up it. Uſnat a Body Lighter than a Fluid will be kept down, and even depreſs'd by it. Pneumatics. JFxteriments concerning the Nature of the Air in I general. ſFfrhnat the Denſity and Spring of the Air is as the Force that compreſſes it. . unat the Preſſure of the Air decreaſes, according to its Diſtance from the Surface of the Earth. How to find what Quantity of Air preſſes upon our Bodies at any Time. The The Riſing and Falling of the Quickſilver in the Weather Glaſs, explain'd and accounted for. The different Sorts of Barometers. Of Thermometers and Hygrometers of ſeveral Kinds. Of the Effect of High Winds on the Barometer. ù Air Pump and manner of its Working exlain'd. P Experiments which directly prove the Weight, and Spring of the Air, viæ. By the Senſe of Feeling.,  breaking Glaſs-Vials, the Phænomena of Bladders, Glals Bubbles, &c. By Fountains and Barometers, dropping aſunder of Poliſh'd Marbles, and the raiſing great Weights m Vacuo. . By the famous Experiments with the Hemiſpheres. . The ſurpriæing Motion of ſeveral Sorts of Liquori in Vacuo. Exper iments with the Condenſing Engine. Experiments to prove that Sound can't be convey'd without Air, and that 'tis dimini ſn'd or increas'd, according as the Air is rarify'd or condens'd. ſTnhat Fire and Flame are fed by Air. ſThat Gunpowder is fir'd in Vacuo without any Exploſion. Ecxperiments to ſhew the Effects of rarify'd, con dens'd and burnt Air upon the Life of Animals. The force of rarify'd Vapour in raiſing Water b) Fire, &c With ſeveral other curious Experiments on the Air Pump. Miſcellaneou Miſcellaneous Experiments. Ranes and Contri vances for Raiſing great Weights. How Men or Horſes may be made to carry Burthens in Proportion to their Strength. The proper Manner of Loading Carriages, with the Advantages of great or ſmall Wheels, according to the different Circumſtances of Draught Wind and Water Mills Explain'd. Sailing, Flying and Swimming accounted for. Cranes or Syphons for emptying Veſſels, Sucking, Forcing, and Lifting Pumps. The ſeveral other Kinds of Pumps. The Hydrometer, or Water Poiſe. The Hydroſtatical Ballance to determine the ſpecifick Gravity of all Solids and Fluids. Cupping Inſtruments. Diving Engines. A Wind Gun. The ſeveral Kinds of Engines for Raiſing Water for ſupplying Houſes and Reſervoirs, or Emptying Ponds or Mines. The ſeveral Kinds of Engines for Extinguiſhing oſ Fires. The famous Engine for Raiſing Water by Fire Ex plain'd. A Ma A Machine us'd in Holland and Venice, to car Ships from their Docks to the Sea. With ſeveral other curious Contrivances, &c. Opticts. OF the Nature and Motion of Light. Of Viſion in general. How a Picture is the Repreſentation of Objects. Experiments proving this great Principle of Catſ tricks That when the Rays of Light are flected, the Angle of Incidence is equal to thai Reflection. Of Plane Mirrors. The ſeveral Reflections from the two Surfaces Looking-Glaſſes conſider'd. Of Concave and Convex Mirrors. Of Concave and Convex Cylindrick Mirrors. A Picture, Optically deform'd, ſeen in juſt Proj rion, by Reflection from a Cylindrick Mirror. Experiments to ſrore the Law of Refraction. Multiplying Glaſſes. Experiments to ſhew the Nature of Convex and C cave Glaſſes, and the manner of the Rays Light paſſing through them, and uniting in il Focus's. How to find the Focus of a Lens, and whether i truly Center'd. Water made to burn, by collecting the into a Focus. The Camera Obſcura. The M gick Lanthorn. The Diſſection of the Fye. An artificial Eye, repreſenting all the Co mours. The Faults of Viſion ſhew'd by an Inſtr Experiments, to ſhew how the ſhort ſigl Eyes may be helped. The Diſference between Looking and See The Nature and Uſe of Microſcopes and The Circul tion of the Biood. Sii Iſuac Newton's Theory of Light and Cc by Experiments. Experiments to ſhew the Cauſe of the Aſtronomy. T H E Syſtem of the Univerſe more explain'd, as to the Mugnitudes. D Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies. The Annual and Diurnal Morions of the whence is ſhewn the Cauſe of Day and the diſfferent Seaſons. A curious Experiment, to prove the F Earth, from its Diurnal Mction. The ſame confirm'd by Pendulums. Of the Moon and its Phaſes. nd Flux and Reflux of the ier of uſing Teleſcopes and A ts for making Obſervations. eflecting Teleſcope. F I N I S. 