THE PRINCIPLES LOSOPH VE and CONTRACTI O R C E S O R AN O U IT RY INTO TH E f the MODERN PHILOSO THAT IS, INTO THE CHIEF RATIONAL SCIENCE WHICH ARE EXTANT. SEVEN BOOKS ENE, M. A. and Fellow of CL AREH CAMBRIDG E. TH E DUKE oF NE V.CASTLE, One of His MAJES TIES Principal SECRETARIES OF STATE MY LORD, Do here moſt humbly beg Leave to Preſent to your Grace my Principles of the Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, or, my Inquiry into the Modern Philoſophy, and the ſeveral Parts of it, vhich has been the Labour and Study of many Years, and to which no One has ſo Juſt a Title as your Grace, vho formerly Honoured this College with your Reſidence amongſt us, and ſince, with your Patronage and Favour; And it would be no Inconſiderable Rea 2 ward N à œ l gues, I have Undergone ii ace will Pleaſe to Accept ony of that Unfeigned G to your Grace, for the which I have formerly Re iich Iſhall always Retain a ho am, Your GRrRACES moſi Obliged, and my Obedient, Humble ROBERT T is with the utmoſt Pleaſure and Delight, that I am at Length able to I Preſent to the World, after the Labour and Pains of many Tears, my Principles of the Expanfive and Contrattive Forces, or my Inquiry into Philoſophy and the ſeveral Parts of it, which was begim, even hefore the Noble Perſons Admiſſion into the College, I have the Happineſs to he of, to whom theſe Sheets are Addreſſed, and was continued during his Refidence here, to this Time of its Publication ; So far, as the Affairs of the Society, the Buſineſs of my Pupils, and the Studies of my Profeſſion, as a ClergyMan, would permit. I ſrall only here Add in Reſpeſt of my ſelf, in order to Obviate any CaIumnies, which may have been Raiſed againſt me, as to my Affettion to the Preſent Government, That my firſt Oaths were to King William, my ſecond to Queen Ann, and my laſt to his Late Majeſty, and as They are with me of a Religious Nature, ſo I have always Atted Conformably to them, and Avith the utmoſt Duty and Allegiance, in my private Station, to the ſeveral Princes, to whom I had given my Faith, and called God to Witneſs for my Obedience. TIS True, as I have had ſeveral moſt Good and ſincere Friends, who come under the Charatter of Whigs, Tho I could heariily Wiſh thoſe Names of Diſiinttion were entirely Sunk amongſt us, I have alſo had a very Juſt and Deſerved Affection, and Eſteem, for ſeveral of my moſt Worthy Friends, who are under the Denomination of Tories, and particularly, for To Nonjurors in this Univerſity, whom I could Name  Whoſe great Learning, Piety, and Abilities, have claimed and challenged, upon the Account of their oun intrinſich Value and Merit, that Reſpect and Regard from me, and as, upon ſome Letters which paſſed betwixt them and me, before I Publiſed my Demonſiration of the Chriſtian Religion many Tears ago, I was ſure were Conſcientious and Learned Men, and were only Unfortunate in tating of Oaths, from which they could not depart, and for whom I am as certain, that the Worthy Dr. Laughton, Late FelIow of this College, had a very ſmgular Regard too; The One of theſe Learned and Good Men is Dead, and the Other, who Survives him, is Reſpected and Eſteemd b every one in this Univerſity, of ahat Denomination ſoever, who has not loſt all Senſe of Religion and Humanity. But my oun Principles and Perſuaſions have heen ever on the Side of the Oaths, which I have taten, anl Conſequently on the Side of the Glorious and Happy Revolution, and againſt the Maxims of an Hereditary and Indefeiſible Right, as will he ſeen in a Latin Oration, Annexed to this Inquiry into Philoſophy, Spoten by me; me, when Bachelor of Arts of this College, and of ahich the Noble Perſn's Good Tutor, to whom theſe Papers are Inſcrihed, was pleaſed to give thoſe Encomiums and Commendations, which, I am afraid, it did not deſerve. ONE of my firſt Lettures to my Pupils, after his Late Majeſtys Happy Acceſſion io the Throne, was concerning the ſeveral Rights, hy ahich Princes can he any ways ſuppoſed to Govern, which I told them muſt either he, by Conqueſt, or by Primogeniture, or by Election, or by a Recognition of the States of any Kingdom: That the firſt his Majeſty Renounced, as every Engliſb-Man Abhors, that he had a Legal and Juſt Claim upon the Second, ſince Primogeniture was reſtrained by the Laws to thoſe, who were Proteſlants, as liteaiſe upon the Third, ſnce the Voice of the People was ou his Side, and allu upon the Fourth, ſince the States in Parliament had evidently Recogniæd him; That, as to ſrict Primogeniture or Hereditary Right, Half of the Kings upon the Engliſo Throne, or more, ſince the Times of the Conqueror, had ſat there Recognition of Parliament, ho were not the Immediate Heirs to the Croun, ànd that the Conqueror himſelf, ſrom whom they derivd, had ſet aſile Edgat Atheling, the True and Rightful Heir according to the Hereditary Scheme, as Harold hefore him had done; That on the other Hand the Pretender o the Imperial Croum of theſe Kingdoms had not one of theſe Rights 3 His Primogeni ture was not only Diſputed, hut there were great Reaſons to Thint, that in Faſt he was not a Legitimate Prince, nor had he the Voice of the People, or the Recognition of Parliament to ſupport his Pretenſions, and that it was Inpoſſible for him to come in, any other Way, than hy the firſt Title, Namely, that of Conqueſt  hich, as it was Odious in it's ſelf, muſt he alſo Maiutaivd and Aſcertaind thro Seas of Blood, and at length by making all Englis Men, without Diſtinttion, a Prey to Foreign Troops, and Foreign Maſſers, either Germans, Ruſſians, French, or Spaniards, to the Total Ruin and Subverſion of our Religion, our Laws, and our Liberties. IN the Buſineſs of my Proſeſſion, as a Clergy-Man, I have liteuiſe taken all Occaſions, hoth at the Univerſity-Chureh, and in ihoſe of the Pariſes, ahere Iam, or have been, Miniſler, io ſtew the Happineſs, e enjoy under his Late Majeſty s Excellent Adminiſtration, when the Times ere Proper for ſuch Diſcourſes, as upon his Late Majeſtys Happy Aceeſſiou to the Throne ; Nor have I heen wanting in this College, as Dean, and Fellow of it, upon ſuch Publick Solenmities to Mark and Diſtinguiſo them hy Appointing thoſe Orders and Rules to he Obſerved, which ſtould Expreſs a Becoming and Decent Feſtivity and Joy. But I Treſpaſs perhaps too much upon my Reader's Patience, and I rather, having this ſingle and only Opportunity in my Life to do it in ſo Public a Manner, Recount this, to Declare to the Wrld my unreſerv'd Sentiments in theſe Matters, under the Patronage of this Noble Perſon, than to Convince any one of my Loyalty and Affettion to his Preſent, and to his Late moſt Excellent Majeſty, of which every Honeſt and Good Man, I dare ſay, has heen aluays Satisfied. As AS to my Principles of the Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contraſtive Forces, or my Inquiry into the Modern Schemes and Syſtems of Nature, which I have humbly Preſumed to Addeſs to the Nohle Perſon abve Named, They are Principles, which I had Entertaind concerning it very Early, and upon my firſt Application to the Studies of Philoſophy, and even hefore my Aquaintance with Sir lſaac Newtons, which, in many Particulars, rather Vuſifies, than Contradicts, what I Propoſe: and when I was an Under-Graduate in this Univerſity, and could not ſee the Reaſon of the Abſirattions, which Mathematicians and Philoſophers made Uſe of in iheir ſeveral Sciences, 1 Applied my ſelf to the Late Reverend Dr. Laughton, who was then Eminent in thoſe Studies, was in Part my Tutor and m Friend, and who very hindly Endeavour d to Inſtrutt me, ſo far as he could, in thoſe Matters, but without giving me any farther Information, which I have ſince foimd, it was Impoſſible for him ro do  Becauſe thoſe Abfrattions, which are at preſent Eſpousd, are Wrong and Erroneous, and are the only Obſiruttion and Hindrance to a farther Progreſs in Truth, and this tind of Knouledge, which I have Laboured to Remove, by Propoſing a Geometry and Philoſophy, which ſvall he Adequate to, and which ſall reach, the whole Extent of Being. 1 can only Say, that theſe Principles of the Expanſive and Contraſtive Forces have carried me much farther in the Explanations of Nature, and the Phenomenons of it, than I could at firſt have poſibly Imagind  For I at firſt Thought, if I could gine any tolerable Account of Matter, and what the Eſſence of it was, which all others Deſpaired of, I ſbould mate a Notable Advance in that Science  And this was what I originally Iutended ; But Purſuing the ſame Principles, I perceivd they would give an Account not only of That, but of the various Properties and Affettions of it, as Colour, Sound, Taſle, Smell, &c. Sir lſaac Newton's Gravitation, and even of the Surprizing Effects in Chymiſtry, of the Vegetation of Plants, of the Conſtitution and Formation of the Parts of an Human Body, of the Reaſon of the RevoIution of the Planets, of the Capacities and Powers of the Mind, and of the Union of the Material Syſteme vith it 3 Problems, which all Philoſophers have hitherto Reſigned as not to he Solved, and which yet ſeem to he fairly Explained upon the ſame Principles of the Expanſive and Contrattive Forces. My Reader may eaſily Suppoſe, that ſuch Contemplations, as theſe, did there fore Afford me Matter both of Pleaſure and Aſtoni ſvtent, and I do humbly heg Leave to Profeſs to the World, that I believe there is ſcarcely any Phenomenon in Nature, which may not he Accounted for from the ſame Prin ciples. AS to my Reaſonings upon theſe Subjects, I am not much Apprehenſive, thai they are Inferiour to thoſe of the Philoſophers, ahom it is my Misfortune noi to Agree with; But Prejudice and Partiality and a Foudneſs for Great Names, ithout ever Inquiring into Things themſelves, are Hard and Obſtinate Buſi ſimeſſes to Encounter, which yet I would hope might be Diminiſied, if Men would hut Conſider that ſeveral Opinions and Syſtems of Philoſophy were Pa tronixed and Defended in the Free-State of Athens, without any great re proac proach to niy Sect of them, and hy may not the ſame Liberty be Iudulgrd n the FreeState of GreatBrittain? THE Fanous and Celebrated Univerſity of Oxſord at this Time adheres c the Ariſtotelian Scheme, and our oun of Cambridge, which is no leſs Renouned for its Studies and its Learning, and the Great Men it has Produced, ſeems to he too much Addicted to the Carteſian, or, which is much the ſamt as to the Principles of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter, to the Newtonian; On the Contrary, as Ariſtotle Aſſirmed Four Principles, Des-Cartes Thiee, and Sir lſaanc Newton One, which is that of Gravitation or Attrattion, l beg the Favour, under the Patronage and Protettion of the Noble Perſon l have Mentioned, to Intrude my ſelf amongſt theſe Philoſophers, and to Declar there are neither More nor Leſi than Tuo 3 Namely, the Expanſive and Contractive Force. I camot but here Acquaint the World, that the Preſent Philoſophers Derive all their Notions of Nature from Italy and Galileus, or from Des-Cartes and France, Excepting what Kepler a German has done in Reſpect of thoſe Sciences, and from whom Sir Iſaac Newton is ſaid to have taken his Principle of Gravitation, and who is Eſleed to have heen the moſt Learned and Sagacious Man of his Age; But in all other Reſpects, our Philoſophy, as it is now Received and Embraced, is the Produtt of Popiſ Countries, Imported to us from Italy and France, and I xill leave the World to Judge, whether Superſtition and Foppery in Religion in any Nation, ill not mate an Impreſſin of Atheiſm or Deiſm upon the Philoſophy of it, as it moſt certainly has done. ALL therefore, which I Deſign and Intend, is to Propoſe a Philoſophy, which is truly Englih, a Cantabrigian, and a Clarenſian one, as it was Born and Educated and Studied in thoſe Places, and which it is not Impoſſible may be as Juſl in its Reaſonings, and as Good in its Religion, as That which is brought over to us from Countries, which abound either in Superſlition or in Atheiſin  And as my Name is not much Worſe in the Letters, which bhelong to it; than thoſe of Galileus, or Des-Cartes, and for Reaſous Alledged at the End of this Philoſophy, by which it is Evident, there are only Four Ways of Explaining Nature, One of which I have Taken, and no One elſe has done, I ſtall Venture to call the GREENIAN. THE Original Occaſion of my Purſuing theſe Inquiries with rhat Vehe mence and Application, which I have Uſed, was upon the Account of my Dear and Good Pupils, whom I Love, and whom, I thought, 1 was to Inſorm, as ell as I could, and not to Indulge them in Errors, which Icould not Subſcrihe to; and which, if they are ſuch, as Philoſophy is the Parent of Phyſict, muſi have coſt Millions of Lives in the Practice of it, upon Corpuſcularian or Atonical Principles, or, which is the ſume, upou thoſe oſ a Similar aud Homogeneous Matter3 Beſides, the Impreſſion ſuch Notions have made upon Chriſſi nity it ſelf, to its great Prejudice, as may he ſeen in the followiug Sheets, vill Suficiently Juſtify me in the Oppoſing of them. lf IF theve ari any Miſtates in this Scheme of Philoſophy, as Perhaps there nay be many, forit is a moſi difficult Thing to Explain, what Exiſlence or Being is, I may yet Say, that I have uſed all the Integrity, Diligence and Capacity, which it is Poſſible for me to do, and that it is much Eaſier to Unrſtand an Hundrèd Volumes in the Greek or Latin Authors, than That ſingle One of Nature. I muſt however beg Leave to Plead in Excuſe to the World, if Iam Miſtaten in the Main, as I believe, and am pretty well Aſſured, I am not, That this Inquiry, as Large as it is, has heen amidſt ſeveral other Studies, Buſineſſes and Employs, which have had a Relation to the College, to my Pupils, or my Pariſves, all of whom I moſi Exceedingly Love, Value, and Eſteem; And, if it had not heen upon their Accounts, and for the Charge and Expenſe of Printing, and Creating too great a Fatigue and Trouble to my Reader, I could have Extended theſe Inquiries to five Times the Num her of Sheets, which I here Preſent to the World, and ahich any One aill See and Perceive upon a Curſory Peruſal of them only. I have one farther Apology to mate to the World, that many of theſe Papers were Written ſeveral Tears ago, even hefore the Priuting of my laſt Book of Philoſophy in 1712, to which the Noble Perſon, Ihave ſo ofren Referred to, gave me the tind Encouragement of his Subſcription, and which has not been Confuted, nor can be, by any of our Modern Reaſoners, however Great their Names may he, and however High their Reputations may Stand, in the Philoſophick or Mathematick World. On the Contrary, the Celebrated Sir Iſaac Newton, ĩn ſome Meaſure, falls into my Notions, and now Confeſſes a Plenum, or ſomething Ilite it, who had in the Edition of his Principles Propoſed to Demonſirate, rhat there muſt of Neceſſity be a Vacuum, againſt which I Argued in the ſaid Boo, and of which I did my ſelf the Honour to mate a Preſent to him upon the first Publication of it. But I ſvall Tire my Reader with theſe Preſiminary Explanations, and would only Humbly heg ?he Favour of him at his LeiſureHours, that he vill Pleaſe to Inquire with me, whether the Philoſofhers are True or not, in their Solutions of the ſeveral Problems in Nature, ahich, I thin, I may punctually Affirm, they are not; and I am Satisfied, that whenever any One of Common Sagacity and Penetration vill tae that Province upon himſelf, he ill find all the Reaſons in the World to enter into the ſame Sentiments ; That is, if he firſt Reads thoſe Authors in Philoſophy, whom I quote, and then Sits doum to Conſider of them; I only ſiall Add, that I Eſteem and Look upon this, together with my Philoſophy of i1712, as my Second Demonſiration of the Chriſlian Religion, by ſheing the Fallacies of thoſe Reaſonings in a Philoſophy, which ſeems to Oppoſe it, or to have very little Regard for it  My farther Demonſtrations of the ſame Excellent Religion aill he, with his Allowance and Permiſſion, Addreſſed to the Good Marqueſi of Blandford, ſor hom, during his Reſidence here, as I Received fron him ihe moſt Signal Kindneſſes and Condeſcenſions, and as his Piety, Charity, Himility, and Goodneſs, were heyond Example, I camot but aluays have th higheſt Eſteem and Veneration; Which Demonſlrations of the Chriſtian Religio Lie Written by me, and are ready, in ſome ſrort Time, if he ill Pleaſ to Allow them that Honour, for his Lord ſvips Patronage. b TH] PRINCIPLES P H ILOS OP HY ExPANS IVE and CONTRACTIVE F O RC E S Book I. ONCERNING the Principles of the Mechanical Philoſophy ol Galileus, Chriſlian Hugens, Sir Iſaac Neton, and Dr. eill. Book II. Concerning Thoſe of the Phyſical Aſtronomy of Kepler, Sir Iſaac Nevton, and Dr. Gregory. Book III. Concerning the Principles of Anatomy, Chymiſtry, Pneumaticks, and Hydroſtaticks, of Dr. Gibſon, Dr. Keill, Dr. Drake, Tauvry, Blancard, and Alphonſus Borellus 3 OF Lemery, Mr. Boyle, and Dr. Freind ; and of Dr. Wallis, Dr. Halley, and Others. : Book IV. Concerning Thoſe of the Opticks, Dioptricks, and Catoptricks, ol Des-Cartes, Rohault, Molyneux, Dr. Gregory, and Hugens. . Book V. Concerning the Principles of the Metaphyſicks and Logicks, or ol the Eſſay upon Human Underſtanding, of Mr. Locte. Book VI. Concerning Thoſe of the Ethicks, or the Natural Religion, of the ſuid Eſſay, and of DesCartes's Meditations, of Dr. Clarte, and Mr. Wollaſlon Book VII. Concerning the Principles of Mathematicks, Fluxions, the Infinite Series, ind Algebra. n all which Sciences, Compared with the ſeveral Demonſtrations of the Cbriſlian Religion, is Shewn, That the Evidences for Revelation are Exceedingly Superior to Thoſe of Philoſophy and Reaſon, Being, Together with the Inquiry iuto the Principles of Natural Philoſophy, Publiſhed ætuno Domini 1712, the Second Demonllration of the Truth of the Chriſlian Religion, The Firſt being Publihed Aumo Domini 1711. TH E Concerning the PRINCIPLES of the MECHANICAL PHILOSOPHY. CHAP. I. ONCERNING Similar Matter, a Vacuum, and the New Theory of Light and Colours, and of Sounds, with a Solution o the Rainbow. erning ih] Matual Conourſe of Bodles Hard, Sofi, or Elaſtict. CHæv. VI-. Concerning the Deſcent of Heavy Bodies in Inclia Planes, anã The Oſcillation of Pendulum. BOO I. Concerning the Principles of the Phyſical Aſtronomy. CHAP. I. Concerniug the Laws of Nature and Motion. Cuæv. IU Concerning ihe Concourſe of Bodies and ihe Laws Relating ihereto, a1 alſcoſ The Compoſition of Forcẽs Crav, IIL Concerning the Method of Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſons. HAP. . Concerniug the Fundameil ropòſitions of ihis Philoſo;hy, and the Application Concerning the chief Properties of Matter, as alſlo Concerning the Principſes of Chymiſt , ton , Pneumaticks and H oſs Cnav. I. Concerning ih Chief Properties of Material Beings. . II. Coucerning the Princizal Phænomenons Obſervable in Ch miſtr . he Common and Proper b 2 Cuar. IV. Mouth and Palate. CHæ?. V. Concerning the Liver, ihe Gall-Bladder, the yneen and the Pancreas. Cuae. VI. Concerning the Meſentery, the Receptacle of the Chyle, the Thoracick Duct, anà the Via Lactea, or the Paſſage of the Chyle into the Blood. Cua?. VII. Concerning the Thorax, Diaphragm, Pleura, and Mediaſtinum. Concerning Opticks, Dioptricks, and Catoptricks. Cua?. I. Concerning the Doctrine of Reſlection, as Propoſed ly Deſcartes ſrom Impulſe and Reſiſtence. CHA?. IL. Concerning Sir Iſaac Newtons Hypotheſis of Reſlection from Impulſe and Attraction. CuæP. Illl. Comcerning Dr. Wallis's Hypotheſis of Reflection from Impulſe and Elaſticity. CuAP. IV. Coucerning the ſeveral Hypotheſes of Reſraction. CHAP. V. Coucerning the Fundamental Principles of Opticis. Cras. VI Concerning 7he Propęſitions in vptits ſt Relate io Glaſſes, which are either double Convex, or Plano-Convex Oncs. CuaP, VII. Concerning vective and Vertual Focuss of Glaſſes. CHAv. XI. Concerning orher Propoſitions, the Object and ihe Eje. CHAP. XII. Concerning the Properiies of Concave Glaſſes, Placed betwixt the Object ana CuAP. XIIL Concerning the Propoſitions, which Relate to Tele ſcopes and Mieroſcopes. HAP. . Cuncerning the Propoſitions Relating to Catoptricls. BOOK V. Concerning the Metaphyſicks and Logiels, or the Syſteme of Ideas ol Which Relate to Convex Glaſes, Interposd betwixt CHAP. I. Concerning the Deſign and Intention of the E ſay on Human Underſtanding. CHAP. II. Concerning no lunate Ideas, and the Mind's being a Raſa Tabula. HAP. III. Concerning Simple Ideas. CHAXu. IV. Cnceruing Perception. CHAP. V. Concerning Retention, and of Diſcerning, Comparing, aud Compounding, om idesn. CHAP. VI. Of Complex Ideas, and Firſt, of Simple Modesiſsp ace and Duration. HAP. . Concerning the Complex Ideas of Numter, Infinity, Motion, Colour, Taſle, ans uman.. CHAP. VIIL. Of the Modes of Thinting;3 OF Pleaſure and Pain 3 Of Pouer; OF Mixea ſtances; OF RelaOrher Relations; OF Cleai and Obſcure, Diſlinct and Confuſed Ideas; OF Real and Fantaſlich Ideas; OF Idea;s 4dcquate or Inadequate; Of Trucand Falle ſcas; and Of ilMſſcciaticof Ideas CHa?, IX. “Har. IX. Of Words or Language in General ; Of the Signification of Words; OF General Terms; Of 7he Names of Simple Tdcas; Of ihc Names of q q i OF ihe Names of Subſtances; OF Pariicles; OF ãAbjſim d Concrete Terms; Of 1 perſection of Words; OF the ãbuſe of Words; OF ihe Remedies of the Foregoing Impereclions an uſes. CHAP. X. Of Knouledge in General; Of the Degrees of our Knoledge ; Of ihe Extent o Human Knovlcãge; OF 7he Reality of our Knouledęe; OF Truth in General; OF Univerſa Propoſitions 1heir Truih d Certainty; OF Maxims; Of Trif Propoſitions 3 O] cur Knouleage of Exiſlence; OF our Knowledge of ihe Exiſtence o ur Knowcqqe oſ the Exiſtence of orher Things ; Oſ The Imprœvement of our Knowledge  Some Fariher  iderations Concerning Knoule &e 5 OF adcment ; OF Probatbilit; O 7be Degrees of Aſſeut; OF Reaſon; OF Faiih and Reaſon, their Diſtinct Provincẽs; OF Enthuſiaſm; Oſ Wionglſent, or Error; Of ?he Diviſion ꝗf Vhe Sciences BOOK VI Concerning the Ethicks, or Natural Religion, of Des-Cartes's Meditations, Mr. Loce's Eſſay, of Dr. Clarke, and Mr. Wollaſion. CHAP. I. Concerning the Little Importance of Natural Religion, afier the Revelation o the Chriſtian. CHAP. II. Concerning the Evidences the Mind Perfecily Immaterial. CuAP. VIII. Concerning Identity and Diverſity. Cuapr, IX. Coucerning Enthuſiaſm. BOOK VIL Concerning Algebra. CHAP. I. Concerning Notation, Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, Diviſjon, and Exi traction of the Rooĩs. CHP. II OF ĩhe Redaction of Fractions and Radicals to the Leaſt Terms, or to the Same Denomination, as alſo of Radicals to more Simple Radicals by the Extraction of the Roots 3 And liteiſe, Of the Form of Equations, ihe Diſpoſition of Them, and the Extermination of the Untnown Quantities out of Them. CuaP. lll. Concerning the Solution of Problems, and Reducing them to Eq CHa?. IV. OF Aſfected Quadratict Equations, and the CHAP, V. Of the ſeveral Ways of Managing Equations of HE 7he Roois of ihem, by Stevim, Harrot, Vieta, Kerſey, Cardan, o Sci alſo by Des Cartes, Sir Iſaac Newton, Dr. Halley, and Mr. Raphſon. CuAP. VI. Which is Miſcellaneous, Namely, Concerning the Infinite Series, the Square of and Extracting 7õ FCrreũus, ãi w; Of the Veqetable Statichs 3 4 Juſt Ridicule oſ the co⸗ tularian Schem?, ov Thã oF Stmũlar  Homqgenecu;s Matter; Concluſion, by Shewing, how many Hypothẽſes ih/: are, by which it is Poſſble ſfor Nature to be Explained by Philoſophers. MISCELLANEA MISCELLANEA QUADAM PHILOSOPHICA. I. Diſſertatio ae Nova Infinitarum Serierum Doctrina, prout a Newiono Aliiſque Affir mantur. II. De Alia Cireuli Quadratura, præler Eam, quam in Geometria Solidorum Attulimus Item, de Problemate Deliaco, ſive Cubi Duplicatione. Ill. De Conicis Sectionibus Clariſſimi Viri facoli Milueſii. IV. Imperſecta Quadam de Longitudine, nec niſi Solummodo Iuchoata. V. De rhiloſophorum Argumentis ad Vacuum Probandum, deque eorum Calumuia & Infirmitate. VI. De Mſotu, Gravitatione, & Cohaſione Materia, Eaque ex Immediata Dei Actione Profluere. ] VII. De Rationibus Geometricis, Eaſque Animo periude Competere, qua Percipienti, ac Ma. teria, qua Extenſaæ. VIII. Mcdicinaæ Collaudatio, ſive Oratio Habita ante primam Amiciſſimi mihi Viri Thomæ Hewett A. M. Diſputationem pro Gradu Doctoratus in Meaicina, Jun. 28. 1707. IX. Collaudatio Juris-Civilis, ſive oratio habita in Scholis Baccalaureorum Cantalrigiæ Jun 25. 1707. cum Thomas Paske A. M. Vir mihi Amiciſſimus diſputavit primo pre Gradu Doctoratus in JureCivili. X. Gratulatio ad Epiſcopum Elienſem Johannem Moore, S. T. P. Patrouum quondam Chariſſimi Amici Caroli Morgan A. M. Magiſtri hujus Aulæ Optimi, & quadantenus Patronum Meum. XI. Oratio Panegyrica in Divum Gulielmum, apud Nonas Novembris 1701, ad Pranobilem Virum, mihi autem & Amico meo Humaniſſimum Patronum Thomam Holles, Ducem Pracellentiſſimum de Novo-Caſtello. ERRATA Pag. 56. Line Penultim. dele and, Pag. 104. Title to §. 34. Lege in the æquinoctial Syzygia than in the Solſtitial Pag. 109. Line Penultim, Lege Ee?l Pag. 111. arulti . 8o7. Lege Injure, Pag. 824. Line 35. Lege n uill be Said not; If Pag. 904. Lege . 7. The Reaſon of this Procedure, §. 7. Pag. 974 Læge wrmæ. THE PRINCIPLES O F TH E PHILOSOPHY O F TH E Ex?PANS IVE and CONTRACTIVE F O R C E S B O O  I. Concerning the Principles of the MECHANICAL PHILOSOPHY. INT ROD U CTI ON. B O OK I. C H AP. I Concerning Similar Matter, a Vacuum, and the New Theory of Light, and Colours, and of Sounds, æith a Solution of the Rainbou. 5. 1. EFORE we Proceed to an Inquiry into, and an Explanation of the Tæ D Principles of the Aechanical Philoſophy, and the Phyſical Aſtrmomy, biſũ it ill be neceſſary to clear our Way to it, by Conſidering what has rbilaſis been alledgd againſt us in Relation to our Principles of Natural Philoſorby ; in Which our Principal Affirmations were, that there is no ſuch Thing as a Vacuum in Nature, that Matter is not Similar and Homogeneous, but that Light is ſo; that the Qualities or Properties of Matter, which occaſion the denſations in us of Taſting, Srmelling, Feeling, Hearing, and Seeing, are not deriv'd from diſcient Modificarions of the ſame Homogeneous Matter, nor from any Figures of the Corpuſcles of it, or Actions in it; but from certain innate Forces which are Inherent therein, which Forces we propos'd to Explain: On the contrary the preſent Philoſophy informs us. that there is a Vacuum, that Matter is Similar and Homogencous, bur that Light is not, that the Properties of Matter, by which one Portion of it is diſtinguiſnd from Another, are owing to the particular Figure of it's Parts, and to it's Variety of Pores, and to the Motions of ſuch Parts one amongſt another. . õ. 2. As to a Vacuum, ve ſaid, that the Proofs of it turn'd upon a Suppoſition, Coxm that all Matter was Homogeneous, which was the very Thing in Queſtion, for if all ſ2uun Matter was alike, and the World was full of it, it vas own'd, there could be no æ/́ Specifick Gravity, but that all Matter was alike, was diſputed and in Terms denyd, æ ſſi and this Subjec? we proſecuted thro' our whole fifth Chapter of the Principles of ſæn Natural Philoſophy, and §. 43. ve ſiew'd the Inconcluſiveneſs of the Argument loſophy drawn from Specifick Gravity to evince a Vacuum: On the contrary the preſent l : Philoſophy in it's firſt Edition had affirmd from thence rhe Neceſſity of a Vacuum, ę it hich whether convincd by what I had offerd in Contradiction t0 that Demon- Priocip. ſtration, or upon a farther Canvaſſing and Conſidering the Matter, it, in the ſecond b. Con Edition, alterd to this Aſſertion, that, all Spaces were not equally full, if by that isſ5h meant, that ſome Spaces are not full, but on the Contrary are void of all Marter, tis the ſame as the former Propoſition, that rhere is a Vacuum, and all the Advantage there is in the Change, is, that it is more doubtfully and ambiguouſly, and therefore more oraculouſly Expreſ'd; if by it is meant, that all Spaces are full of Matter, tut not equally ſo, the ſirſt Proſelyte we have had to our Reaſoning and Arguments, is the Perſon, whoſc Reaſoning and Arguments we opposd, ſince that is what we maintain, that there is a Plenum, but that Matrer being Various and Diſſimilar, Spaces are nor ſull oſ the ſame Matter, but are replenid vith diſferent Sorts and A Kinds Kinds of it, and therefore are not equally full; but this is an Honour ſo mean a Perſon, as I, cannot expect. Tuar this Philoſophy yet has ſome Inclinations to embrace this Opinion which I have defended, is maniſeſt likewiſe from a new Edition of it's Light and Colours, and the Optical Queries annext to it, vhere an Ethereal Medium is introducd, which may have little or no Reſiſtance to the Motions of the Planets and Comets, vhich may be the Occaſion of the Refractions and Reflections of Light, and by whoſc Vibrations Light may communicate Heat to Bodies, and be put into Fits oſ caſy Reflection, and eaſy Tranſmiſſion; and by whoſe Elaſticity Gravity is thought 1o be accounted for: Theſe are all Notions which tend to the Confirming of what I originally advancd, that there is an ſEthereal Plenum, and which the Great and Divine Dr. Barro has long ſince patroni?d and aſſerted, and the Learned and Judicious Dr, Pearſun adopted into his own Perſuaſions and Opinions. Bur notvithſtanding theſe Conceſſions, this Philoſophy ſtill relapſes into its old Doctrine of a Vacuum, and a Similar Matter in the 28/h Query, and eſteems all Hyporheſes to be Erroneous in which Light is ſuppos'd to conſũt in Preſſion or Motion propagated thro' a Fluid Medium, and all that is argud in that Query concerning the Rarity and Denſity of a Medium is upon the Suppoſition, that there is no other Rarity or Denſity, but what proceeds from the Minuteneſs or Groſsneſs oſ the Parts of the ſame Similar Matter, and the leſs or greater Number of them in the ſame Space, from whence it concludes, that a Plenum or a Denſc Fluid can be of no uſe for explaining the Phænomena of Nature, and therefore may be juſtly rejected; for the doing of which, it is ſaid, we have the Authority of the oldeſt and moſt eminent Philoſophers of Greece and Phanicia, who made a Vacuum and Atoms. and the Gravity of Atoms, the firſt Principles of their Philoſophy: It is farther here told us, that the main Buſineſs of Natural Philoſophy is to argue from Phænomena withour feigning Hyporheſes; and to deduce Cauſes from Effects, till we come to the fir?t Cauſe, which certainly is not Mechanical, and not only to unfold the Mechaniſm of rhe World, but chicfly to reſolve theſe and ſuch like Queſtions; What is there in Places Empty of Matter, and whence is it that the Sun and Planets gravitate towards one another without denſe Matter between them? Whence is it that Nature doth nothing in vain? And Whence ariſes all that Order and Beauty which we ſeæ in the World? To vhat end are Comets, and whence is it that Planets move all one and the ſame way in Orbs Concentrick, while Comets move all manner of ways in Orbs very Excentrick; and what hinders the fixt Stars from falling upon one another, &. for we ſall take notice of no more Queſtions here, becauſe the following relate to the Animal and Intelligent World, which do's not come under our preſent Conſideration. S. 3. FRoM Whence it is evident, that this Philoſophy ſcarcely knows what to aſſert, ſometimes it ſeems to think there is a Plenum, but that all Spaces are not equally full, that there is an æthereal Medium ſpread and diffusd thr the whole Solar Syſteme, which may occaſion the Refractions and Reflections of Light, and the Fits of eaſy Refletion and eaſy Tranſmiſſion, by whoſe Vibrations Light may communicate Heat 1o Bodies, and Gravity be poſſibly ſolvd by it's Elaſticity; at other Times it is ſaid, a Plenum can be of no uſe for explaining the Phænomena of Nature, and is therefore to be rejected, and for the doing of which we have the Authority of the ancienreſt and beſt Philoſophers of Greece and Phanicia. To clear up this Matter a little therefore to the preſent Philoſophy, we muſt takę the Liberty to inform it, that however glad we might be to have ſo great an Authority to juſtify our Reaſonings upon this Subject, it cannot come into the acknowledgement of a Plenum, without Diſcarding and Diſavowing it's own Principles, and therefore it might as well have retain'd it's Aſſertion of the Neceſſity of a Vacuum, according to ihe firſt Edition of them, as alterd it to another, that all Spaces are nat equally full, which is done in the ſecond; for tho one who maintains a Diſſimilar and Heterogeneous Matter in it's on Nature, may agreeably and conſiſtently with ſuch a Notion affirm a Plenum of a thin and ſubtle æEther, which is as much and as ſubſtantially Matter as the groſeſt we can Name, yet the Caſe is not the ſame vith thoſe, vho define Matter to be one Similar, Paſſive, Solid, Extended and Invariable Thing, ſince if Spaces are full of ſuch a Matter, it is evident it will be all ono one, as if it vas full of the groſeſt, for Inſtance of Lead or Gold, ſeeing there is no Difference in Matter, as it is ſuch, and conſequently it is truly and juſtly concluded, that there would be no Specifick Gravity, and Bodies would no more deſcend in Air, than they do in Gold. 5. 4. SINCE then a Vacuum is what the preſent Philoſophy muſt defend, however it may appear to moderate and qualify it's Aſertions concerning it; we ſhall firſt conſider ſome farther Arguments alledg'd for the Proof of it, vhich we did not particularly inquire into, tho' they were in General anſwerd in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and afterwards examine into the pretended Authority of the Philoſophers of Greece and Phanicia for the rejecting a Plenum, and eſpouſing a Vacuum, and it's Atoms and the Gravity of them. As to the firſt, one principal Objection againſt. a Vacuum and a Similar Marter, for they muſt ſtand and fall together, is, that in the infinite Rarity of the Air, according to this Doctrine, where there is nothing but Similar Matter or Pores and Vacuities, there would be ſo much Vacuum, and ſo little Matter in Proportion, which would be only diſpersd in Particles here and there at very conſiderable Diſtances from each other, that it would be the ſame to all Intents and Purpoſes, as if we walk't and breath'd in an exhauſted Receiver, every one knows, that no Animals can live in ſuch a State of Exhauſtion, and by Conſequence it vou'd be impoſſible for us to do it; if we were to exiſt and breath in a Medium, which has a thouſand Vacuities for one Portion of Matter. IF we now turn to the preſent Philoſophy, it frankly owns, that Bodies are much more Rare and Porous than is commonly believd, Water is nineteen Times lighter than Gold, and conſequently nineteen Times Rarer, and Gold is ſo rare; as very readily, and without the lea©t Oppoſition to tranſmit the magnetick Effluvia, and caſily to admit Quick-ſilver into it's Pores, and to let Water paſs thro' it, when compreſ'd in a Concave Sphere of it, upon the outſide of which it ſtands in Drops like Dew, without burſting or cracking the Body of Gold, from all which we may conclude, that Gold has more Pores than ſolid Parts, and therefore that Water has above forty Times more Pores than Parts, and he that ſhall find out an Hypotheſis by which Water may be ſo Rare, and yet be not capable of Compreſſion by Force, may doubtleſs by the ſame Hypotheſis make Gold and Water, and all other Bodies as much Rarer as he pleaſes, ſo that Light may find a paſſage thro tranſparent Subſtances: The magnet Acts upon Iron thro' all denſe Bodies, not magnetick nor red Hot without any Diminution of it's Vertue, as for inſtance, thro' Gold, Silver, Lead, Glaſs, Water; the Gravitating Power of the Sun is tranſmitted thro' the vaſt Bodies of the Planets without any Diminution, ſo as to att upon all their Parts to their very Centers with the ſame Force, and according to the ſame Laws, as if the Part upon which it Acts were not ſurrounded with the Body of the Planet; the Rays of Light, whether they be very ſmall Bodies projected, or only Motion or Force propagated, are movd in Right Lines, and whenever a Ray of Light is by any obſtacle turn'd out of it's Rectilinear Way, it will never return into the ſame Rectilinear Way, unleſs perhaps by very great Accident, and yet Light is tranſmitted thr Pellucid ſolid Bodies in Right Lines to very great Diſtancess. HoW Bodies can have a ſufficient Quantity of Pores for producing theſe Effects is very difficult to conceive, but perhaps not altogether Impoſſible: For the Colours of Bodies ariſe from the Magnitudes of the Particles, which reflect them, as was explaid above; now if we conceive theſc Particles of Bodies to be ſo diſposd amongſt themſelves, that the Intervals or empty Spaces between them may be equal in Magnitude to them All, and that theſe Particles may be composd of other Particles much ſmaller, which have as much empty Space between them, as Equals all the Magnitudes of theſe ſmaller Particles, and that in like manner, theſe ſmaller Particles are again composd of Others much ſmaller, all which together are equal to all the Pores or empty Spaces between them, and ſo on Perpetually till you come to the ſolid Particles, ſuch as have no Pores or empty Spaces within them. TWhy if ſo, what then? truly nothing at all, for this Philoſophy here, as in what follows, is ſo Wiſe as to leave us without a Concluſion:] And if in any groſs Body, there be for Inſtance, three ſuch Degrees of Particles, the leat of which are Solid, this Body will have ſeven Times more Pores than ſolid Parts: But if there be four ſuch Degrees of Particles, the leat o A2 - hic which are Solid, the Body will have fifteen Times more Pores than ſolid Parts; if there be five Degrees, the Body will have one and thirty Times more Porcs than ſolid Parts; if ſix Degrees, the Body will have ſixty and three Times more Pores than ſolid Parts, and ſo on perpetually; and there are other ways oſ conceiving how Bodies may be exceeding Porous, but what is really their inward Frame is not yet known to us. Tnus in Reſpect of the Calculation above, let a4 bęà repreſent the Square Section of a Cubical Particle oſ Matter, divided firſt into four Square Areolæ, and Iet one be Matter, and the other Vacuity alternately; Then Iet af gf be divided into four other Square Areolæ, the one Matter, and the other Vacuity alternately, and let the ſame be done by the other Particle of Matter in the firſt Diviſion: Aſterwards let ke mn be divided into four other Square Arcolæ, the one Matter, and the other Vocuity alternately; and let the ſame be done by every of the Particles of Matter in the ſecond Diviſion; The Matter in this third Diviſion will be to the Vacuities or Pores as I to 7, becauſe the Matter in e mn vill be to the x . Vacuity, as I, Matter, to 1, Va- à Pu. cuity; and a lmo vill be 2, Va- ſ r cuity; and therefore the Matter LE ũ in æe mn will be to the Vacuity : El in ke mn, and æ l mo as 1, Mat- ſ ter, to3, Vacuity; and the ſame &— It n may be ſaid of the reſt of the Matter in a egf to it's Vacuity, that it will be, as 1, Matter, to3, Vacuity, which conſiſts ſ therefore of four Parts, but eęhi vill conſiſt likeviſe of four Parts, all of which will be Vacuity, and conſequently the Portion of Matter in the Space abif, ill be to the Vacuity in the ſame Space, as 1 to 7, and the ſame may be ſaid of all the other Tortions of Matter and Vacuity 4 in the Space a bed: Let now the leaſt Part of Matter in ke mn, viz. erst be divided into four other Square Areolæ, the one Matter, the other Vacuity; the leaſt Part of Matter therefore in æe mn will be divided into Two, one oſ which will be Matter, and the other Vacuity, and the Ieaſt Part of Vacuity will likeviſe conſiſt of two Parts, and the Matter in the leaſt Particle of it in æ mn will be to Vacuity as 1 to3, and the ſame may be ſaid of all the Particles of Matter and Vacuity in æe m n, which conſequently will conſiſt of four Parts, one of which will be Matter, and the other three Vacuity, therefore a æm o will conſit of four Parts, which will be all Vacuity, and the Portion of Matter in æ e n o will be to it's Vacuity as I to 7, and the ſame may be ſaid of the reſt of the Parts of Matter, and Vacuity in a e g f, which therefore conſiſs of eight Parts, one of which will be Mat. ter, and ſeven Vacuity, but e big ( to aegſ) which will be all Vacuity, conſiſts oſ eight Parts, and therefore there will be in æ bif 1, Matter, and 15, Vacuity, and the ſame may be ſaid of all the other Square Arcolæ in 4 bcàd; and by the ſame Method ve may proceed to a fiſth or ſixth Diviſion, from whence we ſhall perceive that the Body vill have 31 or 63 Times more Pores than ſolid Parts, as may be ſhewn by taking  qle, uxye for the Ieaſt of ſuch Parts. S. s. TuIs is a true Pattern or Delincation of that Matter, which is now embrac'd and receivd for Authentick in Nature, which therefore in this Scheme we have deſcrib'd, and which explains the utmoſt Stretch of Genius, which the preſent Philoſophy makes uſe of, to get quit of a Difficulty ſo uneaſy to it, that is, to find out a ſubtle Matter, whilſt it afſfirms all Matter to be alike, which ſall be contind in it's Parts, and yet infinitely Rare and Porous, for if that is not done, if Air, for inſtance, inſtance, has one Part only of Matter for a thouſand Vacuities, and thoſe Parts oſ Matter are ſeparated and at a Diſtance from each other, for one Part of Matter ve breath in, we ſhall meet with a Thouſand of Vacuum; and how it would be poſſible for us to breath at all in ſuch a Medium, any more than in an exhauſted Receiver, is not, nor can be accounted for: To evince therefore how a continud Subſtance, as Air, or Water, or Glaſs, or Gold, may have an infinite Number of Pores in it, ſo that the Space they take up ſhall be infinitely Greater than the ſolid Parts of Matter in them, this Calculation is contrivd, which with what Succeſs it anſwers the Intention of it, we ſhall now Examine. AxD firſt, it is manifeſt, that in the Square æ beã the Parts of Matter are disjoind from each other by the intermediate Areolæ of Space or Vacuum, and that the Areolæ of Marter in the firſt Diviſion touch each other only in four ſingle Points, in i, g& h, and c, ſuppoſing this Alternation of Space and Matter to be continud to ſixteen Square Areolæ, in which the Reaſoning above will be the ſame. SECOND, it is maniſeſt, that in the ſecond Diviſion, the Areolæ of Matter recede farther from each other, and have more Vacuity betwixt them, and that they do not touch excepting in two Points, and many of them in one Point only. THIED, it is manifeſt, that in the third Diviſion the Areolæ of Matter ſtill farther recede from each other, and ſtill have more Vacuity betwixt them, and that their Points of Contact are fewer and rarer than in the Former. FrROM Vhence it is plain, that the farther the Diviſion is carryd on, the ſmaller is the ſolid Part of Matrter, which is ſuppos'd to be without any Vacuity, and the greater is the Vacuum round it, by which it is more remov'd from a Contact with any other Matter, that is, you diminiſh the Matter and increaſe the Vacuum, or Space about it; and is not this a worthy and very extraordinary Solution of the Difficulty, which it in Fact confirms? We ſay it is a great Difficulty againſt a Vacuum and a Similar Matter, that there ſould be ſo much void Space and ſo little Matter in Proportion, becauſe it do's not ſeem probable we could breath in ſuch a Medium; This Philoſophy anſwers that Difficulty by ſnewing, that there is ſo much void Space, and ſo little Matrter in Proportion, and demonſtrates at the ſame Time, that theſe ſmall Parts of Matter in an infinitely rare Medium, may be infinitely removd from each other, for tho' the whole Square abcã ſould be infinitely ſmall, yet ſince the Particles of Matter in it are infinitely ſmaller, there will be the ſame Proportion betwixt Matter and Vacuity: And this is to ſolve Waters, not being compreſ”'d in a Concave Sphere of Gold, and its paſſing, as well as Quick-ſilver, thro' the Pores of it; This is to ſiew us how Light may be tranſmitted thro Glaſs, how the Magnet may att upon Iron thro' all denſe Bodies, nor Magnetick nor red Hot, as Gold, Silver, Lead, Glaſs, Water, without any Diminution of it's Vertue: And laſtly, how the gravitating Power of the Sun may be tranſmitted thro the vaſt Bodies of the Planets vithout any Diminution, ſo as to act upon all their Parts to their very Centers with the ſame Force, and according to the ſame Laws, as if the Part, upon which it acted, were not ſurrounded vith the Body of the Planet; Namely, becauſe all Bodies are more Porous than we imagine, and becauſe even in Gold it ſelf, there are more Pores and Vacuities than there is Matter, which Pores and Vacuities are before explaind, and their Proportion to the ſolid Parts in Bodies, by the preceding Calculation. AND nov I ask could any Authority, beſides that of the preſent Philoſophy, ever ſupport ſo abſurd an Aſſertion as this, that Gold and conſcquently all other denſe Subſtances here mention'd have more Pores than ſolid Parts? Why, we muſt bid adieu to our Senſes, and to all our Notices communicated from thence, i we muſt acknowledge this for a Truth, and affirm that Solidity, Plain, Viſible, and palpablc Solidity is nothing but mere Space, this is a Philoſophical Tranſubſtantiation, which requires as much Faith to believe it, and as much Infallibility to maintain it, as the Popiſ or Religious one; iſ there was ſo much more Space and Vacuity in denſc Subſtances than Matter, as this Philoſophy repreſents, vod it not be as maniſeſt, a ve find it to be in the foregoing Scheme, which is made uſe of to eſtabliſ thi: Doctrine ? Should we not perceive little Parcels of Matter diſpersd with vaſt Space: ſurrounding them, and not ſmall Spaces and Vacuities, and almoſt inviſible ſurrounded vith vaſt Tortions of Matter? And voud not ſuch a Matter as the preſcnt Figur exhibit exhibits to us be eaſily compreſt'd, and the Particles oſ ĩt ſoon cruſYd and conſlpate into a cloſer Connexion? Woud Water ſweat out in ſmall Drops like Dew, or pou out in large and handſome Streams? Woud not ſuch a Coniſtiturion oſr Matrer be as leaky and perſiuous as a Sieve, and do's it not give us the Piture of one? Theſ Queſtions carry theit own Anſers ith them, which is, that they need none; bui we have argu'd againſt this kind of porous Matter in our Priuciples of Natural Philo ſophy, when we conſiderd this very Experiment of the Impoſlibility or Compreſing ãter in a Concave Sphere oſ Silver, an Experiment made by the Academy Del cimento. As to the Magnet, it is ſomething ſtrange when there are ſuch large Pore: contrivd ſor the Paſage of it's Force, that it cannot get thro, if the ſolid Body is Magnetick, or Heated one voud be apt to imagine there miZht be Room enough for it, if nothing elſe was neceſſary, but Vacuum, to it's Tranſmiſiion, but the Caſe is otherwiſe, as we ſhall afterards ſhew. As to the gravitating Power of the Sun acting upon every Particle of Matter in the vaſt Bodies of the Planets to their very Centers without any Diminution, it will be afterwards provd, that ſuch an Action is nor certain in Fact, and is only a Creature formd in a great Meaſure from the Principles of this Philoſophy, into which ve are now inquiring. 5. 6. ON the Contrary ſuppoſing a Plenum and an Heterogencous Marter, moſ of theſe Difſficulties obtain an eaſy Solution. FinsT, Water and even Air cannot be compreſ'd, the firſt little or not at all, and the laſt, excepting to a certain Degree, becauſe all Spaces according to the Philoſophy we propoſe are full, tho' not equally ſo, or rather, becauſe the Action oſ Water is Homogeneous in it ſclf, and Heterogeneous to all others, and thercfore ſupports it ſelf in this Caſe of Compreſſion againſt any external Force, as much as any ſolid Body or Action will do, but if there is any Weaker or Heterogeneous Action as that of Air intermixt with that of Water, it may be compreſ'd, till the Action of the included Air becomes equal to that of Water; and thus the Subſtance or Action of Air, being intermingled with Heterogencous Subſtances or Actions, may be compreſ”'d till thoſe Heterogeneous Subſtances or Actions become equal to that of Air, but when any Subſtance or Action is Homogeneous it will be as impoſſible to Compreſs it, be it weaker or ſtronger in it's own Nature, as to muke it hat it is not; ſince iſ you afterwards Compreſs it, it being equally balanc'd in all it's Parts, it cannot admit of any Preponderancy, Alteration, or Motion in them, as is evidently prov}d in this Philoſophy, where it is ſaid, that, the Parts of an Homogeneous, and unmoVd Fluid, which is inclos'd in an unmovd Veſſel, and is compreũ&“d on all Hands (ſetting aſide the Conſideration of Condenſation, Gravity, and all Centripetal Forces) are preſſ'd equally on every ſide, and without any kind oſ Motion ariſing from that Preſſion, remain and continue in their own Places. SECOND, Gold or Silver, upon the Compreſſion of the Water included, may give a Paſſage to it, without cither of them having any Pores, in the ſame Way and Manner, as Paper or Parchment to a Needle, that is, here the Force impreſſ'd is Superior to the reſiſing; thus tho' the Subſtance or Action of Gold or Silver is ſuperior to that of Water, yet ſince there is an additional Force by Compreſſion to Water, which, as we have ſaid, can have no eſfect to diſorder it, which is equally Balancd and Homogeneous, that additional Force makes the Water recoll upon the Heterogencous Action or Subſtance of Gold or of Silver, and being made by that means Superior to it, it over-balances and penetrates thro' it, and forms, and points out a Paſſage to it ſelf, vhich was not made beſore by any imaginary Pores or Vacuities. THIRD, Quick-ſilver enters into the Subſtance or Action of Gold by it's ovn innate Force and Volatility, by which it's Action is Superior to it, in the ſame manner, as Water into Salt, or Water compreſ”'d into Gold, or Aqua fortis into Iron, that is, it makes it's own way into the Subſtance or Action of it, without being beholden to any Pores or Vacuities for it's Ingreſs; and the ſame may be ſaid of Light in it's Tranſmiſſion thro Glaſs, or of the magnetick Force thro' the denſtſ©t Bodies, and the Reaſon, that the magnetick Force will not have the ſame eſſect upon DBodies which have a magnetick Force, and which are heated red Hot, is, becauſe thoſe Forces are more than a Balance to it, and repel it, by a ſuperior Degree oſ the Expanſive, which will be aſtervards Explaind. 5.7. As 5. 7. As to what is ſaid concerning the Authority of the Grecian and Phanrician c Philoſophers in the preſent Caſe, the Ancienteſt and moſt Eminent of whom made 1 Vacuum and Atoms, and the Gravity of them, the firſt Principles of their Philo-ſophy, and rejected a Plenum, this is ſo far from being True, that the Contrary isCertain and Evident., and vhat ve aſſirmd, True, Princip. Philoſ. Pref. õ. 5. i Plutarch in his Account of the Opinions of Philoſophers in five Books, Chap. I8. I Book the firſt, aſures us, that all the Natural Philoſophers ſfrom Thales to Plato rejected a Vacuum, and that Empedocles allowd of no Vacuity in Nature; that Lucippus, Democritus, Demetrius, Metrodorus, and Epicurus aſfirm'd an infinite Number oſ Atoms, and that a Vacuum was infinite in it's Extenſion, that Ariſtotle and alſo the Stoicks acknowledg'd a Vacuum beyond the World, but that all was a Plenum vithin it, Zaertius alſo is a full and unconteſted Witneſs to the ſame Thing. S. 8. Diogenes Laertius in his Lives of the Philoſophers Lib. I. Segm. 116. Menagiuss Edition, in the Liſe of Pherecydes the Syrian or Phanician, tells us, that Theopompus aſfirms this Pherecydes was the firſt who writ concerning Nature and the Gods, in reſpect of which we are informd ſrom another Author, that tho' he did not ſacrifice to any, yet he usd to ſay, that he led as pure and vertuous a Liſe, as if he had ſacrificd Hecatombs, and that there was a ſmall Book extant of his, vhen Diogenes vrit of which he juſt mentions the Beginning, h] alſo gives us an Epiſtle, which he ſent to Thales, and this is the Chief of what we have of Pherecydes, excepting that Thales the Author of the ſonict Sect in Philoſophy, and Pythagoras of the Italic were both of them his Auditors and Scholars, from Whom therefore ve may poſſibly be inſtructed in the Sentiments of the Maſter. IN the Life of Thales, Lib. I. Scgm. 22. of the ſame Edition, it is ſaid that he was a Phaniciqn by Family, and that he apply'd himſelf to the Studies of Nature, and follow'd them chiefly in t as Plutarch writes, but left no Monument of his Parts, or his Sagacity in theſe Matters behind him, as ſome affirm, and that according to Callimachus he was the firt vho obſerv'd the leſſer Bear; but others think he writ concerning the Tropicks, and the Equinoxes, and moſt are of Opinion, if Eademus may be credired in his Hiſtory of Aſtrology, that he was the firſt, vho ſearc'd into the Secrets of that Science, and vho ſoretold the Eclipſes of the Sun, and the Changes of the Air, that Xenophanes and Herodotus ,admird him for it, and Heraclitus and Democritus atteſted the ſame, that ſome alledg'd he was likewiſc the ſirſt, who Taught, that the Soul was Immorral, that the Sun's Courſc was from Tropick 10 Tropick, and thar the Lunar Orb was the ſcyen hundred and twentieth Part of the ſ Magnitude, that according to Ariſtotle and Higpias he attributed Souls 10 inanimate Beings, from what he obſervd of the Attractions of the Load-ſtone, and of Amber, that he learnd the Precepts of Geometry in æę”t, and vas the ſirſt, who formd a Rectangle Triangle by deſcribing it in a Semicircle, whoſc Baſis was the Diamerer, and the Angle in the Circumfcrence, as likewiſe who advanc'd the Doctrine of Triangles and Rectilineal Deſcriptions, tho' Callimachus aſcribes it in his Iambicks to Euphorbus the Phrygian, that he was a ſincere Promoter of the Intereſts of his Country, and preſervd it from Ruin by diſſuading the Miletians from joining with Cræſus againſt Cyrus, that he lov'd a private and retird Life, preferd Celibacy to Marriage, and contemn'd Riches, and planting of Olive-yards, ſaying, that Water was the Principle of all Things, and ihat ihe World was animate and of that Animation, or of Spirits, that is by what forego's concerning the Magnet and Amber, of Forces which were unaccountable, or of Matter ſuppoſing it to conſiſt of ſuch Forces. s. 9. In the Life of Anaximander, who as Thales, was alſo a Mileſian, and of the Ionich Sect, vas Contemporary with him, and his Acquaintance Lib. 2. Segm. I. of the ſame Edition, ve are informd, that his Opinion was, that the Principle and Element of all Things was immenſe, and infinite, and therefore that it was ſull, not yet determining whether it was Air, or Water, or any Thing elſe, however, he eſteemd it to be Changeable in ir's Parts, tho Immutable in the Whole, that the Earth was placd in the midſt and Center of this inſinite Plenum, and that it vas Globular and Round, that the Moon was an opake Body, and derivd it's Light from the Sun, and that the Sun was at Ieaſt as big as the Earth, and conſiſled of the pureſt, and ſubtleſt, and moſt reſin'd Fire; He firſt found out the Gnomon, and placd it according to Phavorinus in the Dials at Lacedamn, in order to obſerve the 4quinoxes and Solſices Solſtices, and was the firſt Perſon who meaſurd the Ambitus of the Earth, and who made a Sphere. Anaximenes, Lib. 2. Segm. 3. of the ſame Edition, vas a Mileſian likewiſe, the Scholar of Anaximander, and a Correſpondent of Pythagoras, there being extant two Letters of his to him, in one of which he highly extols Thales, gives an Account of his falling down a Precipice, vhen he went out one Morning with his Maid. as his Cuſtom was, to make Obſervations in the Heavens, not minding the Situation of the Place, which was the Occaſion of his Death, according to the Mileſians, ſays, he acquieſces in his Doctrine, and believes him to have found out the Principle of the Univerſe; in the other he complains of the Tyrannical Government amongſt the Aileſians, and that they were in a continual Fear of an Invaſion from the Medes, upon which account he had but little Heart for Aſtronomical Obſervations, vho was under conſtant Apprehenſions of Death or of Slavery, and he commends ?rhagoras's Prudence for removing in ſuch hazardous Times from Samos to Croten and Italy, where he was regarded and eſteem'd. This Perſon taught that Air va: te Principle of all Things, that it was Infinite, and that therefore Space was ſull oſ it, and that the Stars did not move over the Earth, but about it. §. 10. Anaxagoras, Lib. 2. Segm. 6. was oſ Clazomene in Ionia on the ſame Continent with ariletus, and the Scholar of Anaximenes, and whereas all before liumm had aſfirmd Matter or the ſam to be the firſt Principle, that is the Infinite or the Plenum, he added an Intelligence and a Mind to it, and was therefore calld the Mind or the Intelligence, and he begins his Philoſophy thus; all Things exiſted together, and ar once, that is, there was an Univerſal Plenum of Being, which exiſted of it ſelf, and together, and in one time, or alvays, and afterwards the Mind or Intelligence diſposd it into Beauty, and order, and form'd, and conſtituted the World; he is ſaid to have been Noble by his Family, and Rich in his Poſſeſſions, but particularly eminent for the Greatneſs of his Mind, in quitting his whole Patrimony and reſigning it to his Relations, his farther Opinions were, that the Sun vas a red hot Iron, heated quite thro, and Greater than the Peloponneſus, that the Moon was Inhabited, and had its Hills and its Valleys, àxãs àt Tàs cuoouięias, xæm p ix vũ nſuami rp>~ſ;m Th xp oveœa; olms ie æ bucopeꝶã© u]ãr cuudm T 7ã@ ovſuneleòæ, namely, that the Principles of Bodies, of which they conſiſt, vere Homogeneous to the whole, that is, that the Parts were of a like Nature with the Bodies which they composd, as Gold is made up of the ſmall Raſures or Fileings into which it may be divided, and in like manner, that the whole Univerſe was made up of Bodies Homogeneous to the vhole, which conſiſts of them, and into which it may be likewiſe divided, and as to Motion, that the Mind or Intelligence was the Origine of it; that heavy Rodies tended downwards, as Earth, and that light ones, as Fire, aſcended upwards, but that Water and Air affected a middle Situation, for thus Water lies above the Earth, and is eaſily converted into Vapours by the Sun; that the Pole was originally in the Vertex, or directly over our Heads, and the Stars were carryd round it's Axis, but that it aſterwards receivd it's Inclination, that the Galaxy or Via Lactea was owing to a Reſlection of the Sun's Light, and not to innumerable Stars ſhining and diſpersd in it, rò dt nuhms choſ æ ũ; ò7 bæs àouhm, rùs n alããoms; cln còĩ; am 7ũ àis& Smæàrrq;, that the Comets were the Congreſſion or Concourſe of wandering Stars, vhich emitted Flames, and that theſe Emications, like the Twinkling in the Stars, were ſtruck by the Vibrations of the Air, that Winds were cauſcd from the Rarcfaction of the Air by the Sun, that Thunder aroſe from the Dahing together and the Colliſion of Clouds, and that Lightenings were derivd from the Attrition of them; that Earth-quakes were made by the Airs being included in the Cavities of it, and endeavouring to return to the Exterior Parts, and to the Air above them; that Animals were firſt producd from Moiſture and Heat, but aſtervards from Male and Female; that all the Heavens were formd of Stones, and that by their Revolution they were kept in their Orbit, which otherwiſe woud fall ſfrom thence, ſwhich poſſibly might be no more than that the Planets were ſolid and heavy Bodies, and were revolv'd in their Orbits, and that they word ſink to the Center, if not kept up by ſuch a Revolution, and it is not improbable, that the Story of his foretelling a Stone ſalling down from the Heavens or the Sun about the River æę™05 was nothing more than a Fiction of ſome, who did not underſtand his Principle) This This is however certain, that his Philoſophy was charged with Impiety, that he wa: accus'd by Cleon for aſſerting, that the Sun was a red hot Iron, and defended by hi: Scholar Pericles the famous Athenian, that he was notwithſtanding find five Talent: and condemn'd to Baniſhment, and afterwards, as a Betrayer of his Country, ſen: tencd to Death, all which he bore with an invincible Patience and Conſtancy. lrehelaus, Lib. 2. Segm. 16. was alſo a Mileſian, the Scholar of Anaxagoras, and the Maſter of Socrates, and the firſt who introduc'd Natural Philoſophy into Athem from Ionia (ſo that Anaxagoras do's not ſeem by this to have publickly taught it in Athens) and it is ſaid to have ended with him, by Socratess advancing Morality and Ethicks in it's Room, the Foundations and Principles of which he is thought to have Iearn'd from this Philoſopher, who reaſon'd in his Lectures, concerning Laws, and what was Vertuous and Commendable, and vhat was Juſt; His Opinions were, that there were two Cauſes of Productions or Generarions, Hot and Cold, that Animals and Men alſo vere formd from a Mud or ſlimy Matter, that Law and Preſcriprion, and not Nature vas the Meaſure of what was Juſt, or Baſe and Diſhoneſt, that Voice and Sound was from the Percuſſion of the Air, that the Sea ſtood in a Concave Baſon, and the Water ouZd thro' the Earth into it, that the greateſt of the Stars was the Sun, and that the 7 æã or the Univerſe, or the 's, (for we hitherto find no Mention of Space) was InfiniteS. 11. Socrates turn'd all his Philoſophy upon Morality, but no doubt had ſome Opinions and Notions concerning Nature, and as he was a Diſciple of the Ionich Sect, and his Maſter Archelaus, vho all aſfirmd a Plenum, and as Plato, vho was Socrate?ss Auditor at twenty Years old, and join'd the Morality of his Maſter with the Philoſophy of Anaxagoras and Thales, aſfirmd the ſame Doctrine, it is reaſonable to think that Socrates acquieſcet in it, tho' his Genius and Studies led him to inquire more into the Mind and Intelligence of Anaxagoras, and the Vertue and Vice of Arehelaus, than into their Diſputes concerning Matter, and the Conſtitution of the Univerſe. FROM Socrates we have a long Series of Philoſophers, namely, Xenophon, æſchines, Ariſtippus, Phadon, Euclides, Diodorus, Stilpo, Crito, Simon, Glaucon, Simmias, Cebes the Author of the Table, and Menedemus, till we come to Plato, who all buſyd themſelves in Ethicks, Logicks, Oeconomicks, or Politicks, and which we may juſtly ſuppoſe vere only Efforts towards a Reformation of Government, and Manners againſt Polytheiſm and Paganiſm, in Which Cauſc Pherecydes firſt appear'd, a Syrian or Phanician, inſtructed, it is likely, by the ægyptians or the Books of ſoſes, and after him Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes, and naxagoras by aſſerting Philoſophy and one infinite Being, in Oppoſition to all the Vanities of the Heathens, and their Plurality of Gods, in the Courſe of which Doctrines, and the aſſerting of them, Anaxagoras and Socrates loſt their Lives. Plato, Lib. 3. Segm. 69. àto my mirm &nbęon àmãàs bely 5 bm  æęca2bu 5 alnò, di dt T INu àocnudnmm & duum, iE ĩs viuòu rà œſe]luæla, amxrus ſ mn abtn xmublu, iub T' œn ònb is ia caxbiæ ©m, /En àmẽſas 2ãlaa nmsaubu, re;m& st T ioln mibrn is riãlaeæ œrũa, nũ; lu;, àla, v, iẽ &y abu m T xboun 5 rà &* abvã' vœãQu, That ĩs, Plato held, and it was his Doctrine, that there were two Principles of all Things, God and Matter, vhom he alſo call'd the Mind or Intelligence, and the Cauſe; that Matter was without any Form and Infinite, and from it the ſeveral Concretions, and particular Bodies or Subſtances of it were made, that originally there were Motions in this Matter but very Diſorderly and Irregular, and that by God it was reduc'd into one Place, (thar is, according to the Account given us by Moſes, each Portion of Matter ſeparated to it's own Kind or Species) God, or the Mind or Intelligence, preferring Beauty and Order to the Contrary, and therefore that this Eſence, or Subſtance, or Plenum was converted into four Elements, Fire, Water, Air and Earth, of which Elements the Vorld, and all Things in it vere formd and made: As to the Character of Plato and his Writings, they are ſo vell known, that there is no occaſion for me to tranſcribe his other Opinions, but it is very maniſeſt and plain, that he exactly agrees Vith Anaxagoras in his Matter, and his Mind or Intelligence, and the Diſpoſition of the Former, by the Latter, into the Frame of the World in which we now ſee it, and therefore it is very reaſonable to believe, that Socrates, ho was a Diſciple of B Archelaus, Archelaus, the Scholar of Auvaxagoras, and Who was the Maſter of ſlato, enterd in10 the ſame Notions. FrOM Plato Lib. 4. there runs on an Order of Names, Speuſispus, Xenocrates, Polemo, Crates the Athenian, and Scholar of Polemo, Crantor, Arecſilaus, Bion, Lacydes, Carneades, Clitomachus, till ve come to Ariſtotle, who ſpent their Time in vriting of Commentaries and Dialogues on Ethical Subjects moſtly, in Diſputing, and in Elouence, vithout any great Advantage to the knowledge of Nature, in which we may ſproũ they held much the ſame Tenets ith A4naxaoras and Plato. Aviſtotle, Lib. 5. Segm. I. was of Stagira on the Strymoniav Bay, and the Scholar of Plato, Segm. 32. he held that God was Incorporeal, as Plato before him, that his Providence extended to the Heavens, and that he was Immoveable, he aſfirmd four Elements, Air, Earth, Fire, and Water, that the Heavens, and the Heavenly Bodies conſiſted of a Matter different from all theſe, which was his Quinta ſſentia, and that it had a peculiar Motion belonging to it, namely, an Orbicular one, from vhence it is Evident, that as Anaxagoras and Plato, ſo he aſſerted a Plenum of Marter, and a Mind or Intelligence which agitated and movd it, beſides it is conſeſ”'d on all Hands, that he maintaind the Material World was Inſinite and, Eternal, and conſequently, that it was full, excepting that Plutarch denies it, vho it is evident was much more Converſant in the Actions and Sayings of Eminent Men, than Wiſe or Judicious in the Sentiments and Opinions of Philoſophers. Theophraſtus was the Scholar of Plato firſt, and afterwards of Ariſlotle, Lib. 5. Segm. 36. and therefore it may be reaſonably preſumd that his Opinion was the ſame in this Point, in which he found both his Maſters to agree, he writ an immenſe Number of Books upon all Subjccts, tho we have nothing remaining of him excepting a ſmall Manual of Characters, and his Volumes are ſaid to conrain in the vhor two Hundred and thirty Thouſand eight Hundred and eight Verſcs or Diſiinctions. . After him, Lib. 5. Segm. 58, &. come Strato, Lycon, Demetrius, Heraclides, and Lib. 6. Segm. 1, &c. Antiſthenes, Diogenes, Monimus, Oneficritus, Crates the Theban and Scholar of Diogenes, Metrocles, Menippus, Menedemus, amongſt whom ve ſind no mention of a Vacuum, but it is very probable they acquieſcet in 1he Doctrine of a Plenum, ſuitable to what had been taught by Anaxagoras, Plato, and Ariſiotle, ſrom vhom they derivd their Philoſophy. S. 12. Zeno, Lib. 7. Segm. 1. was of Cittium in C;prus a ſmall Greet Town, and inhabited by a Colony of Phænicians, and from thence was calld a Phanician, and by ſome an fptian for the ſame Reaſon, he was the Father of the Stoiet Philoſophy, as Plato of the Academict, Ariſtotle of the Peripatetict, and Diogenes of the ”nick, and his addicting his Mind to the Studies of Philoſophy, vas from his bringing ſome Merchandize in a Ship from Phanicia to Athens, where he loſt all by a Wreck which he ſufferd at the Piraus, he was thirty Years old when he came into Athens, and ſiring down in a Bookſcllers Shop, and Reading the ſecond Book of Xenophos Commentaries, he was ſo much pleasd with it, that he inquird vhere he might meet with ſuch Men, Crates the Cynict, ho had been Diogeness Scholar, accidentally paſſing hy at that Time, the Bookſeller pointed to him, and bid him follow him, which he accordingly did, and became for ſome rime his Audiror, vhom afterwards he left, and for Twenty ycars from thence was a Diſciple of Stilpo, Xenocrates, and Polemo, and ſrom this Philoſopher it is, and his Followers, that we firſi hear of a Vacuum amongſt thoſe of the ſnict Seũt, and it is not impoſſible, but this may be one of the Phaniciauss whom the preſent Philoſophy intends, when it mentions them as Patrons of that Dodtrine; If it were ſo, there woud be no great advantage of Authority to this Philoſophy from a Sect of Men, as the Stoicks; Who were ſo far from explaining Nature, that they went farther from it, and embrac'd more Romantick and Extravagant Notions concerning it, than any other Denomination of Philoſophers; Thus their making the World a real Animal, and aſſerting that there was no Evil in Pain, are ſuſficient Evidences of it. BUT it is alſo to be conſiderd, that the Vacuum they contended for was nothing like that, which the preſent Philoſophy eſpouſcs, and ſcems to be little more than an Ethercal Matrer, and the Quinteſſlence of Ariſtotle. For Segm. I34. to I4I. ue find, that there are two Principles oſ all Things affirmd, r æũ » mn the Eſſicient, Eſficient, and the Patient; That which is Paſſive is the ꝗnn o? Matter, àu:⸗ gola, a Subſtance in general without any particular Quality or Property, ſo that it is not Gold, or Air, or Water, or Earth, or Fire, but an univerſal Matter, or the Prima Materia of the Logicians, out of which the Materia Secunda was formd; And that which is Active is the Wiſdom and Reaſon obſcrvable in it, hich diſpoſes it into Order, and to ſeveral Uſes and Ends, which Wiſdom and Reaſon is God; Now this ſeems to be the very Doctrine of Anaxagoras and Plato, who affirm'd a Plenum, and a Mind or Intelligence belonging and annext to it; This will farther appear from vhat follows in this Segment, where it is ſaid, that there is a Difference berwixt the Principles and Elements of Things, ſince the firſt, the àoxal are àylmm 5 àęb-rmi; they are unproduc'd and incorruptible, the laſt, the qũ⸗, 1rà r ixæſ/uor œbe⸗ſ], that is, by the Influences of the Sun, Water is raisd into Vapours, the Earth is parci'd, the Air heated, and Elementary Fire extinguiſd; and therefore theſe Elements are Corruptible, but God and Matter are unproduc'd and Incorruptible, if Matter therefore is unproduc'd and Incorruptible, as God himſelf, how is it poſſible, in the Notion of the stoick Philoſophy, that it ſiould not be Infinite, and Eternal, and therefore that the World ſhould not be ſull of it? Another Diſtinction, which is ſaid to be betwixt Principles and Elements, is quxũæ còuaõ& ihæ ò uupãææ3, ras àpxàs acuud tus è àubppou, that the Elements, as Air, Water, Earth, and Fire are Bodies, and have a certain Form affixt to them, by which they become ſuch a Kind of Matter, and of a definite Shape and Subſtance, but that the Principles, as God and Matter, are Incorporeal, and without Form or any definite Shape or Subſtance; If therefore Matter is Incorporeal, it is plain the Vacuum of the Sticks was Matter, tho not ſuch as Corporeal Beings, or any Syſtems or Maſſes of groſs Matter, conſiſt of; it was the Quinta Eſſentia of Ariſtorle, or the Prima Materia of the Logicians, as we before obſerv'd; If farther this Matter was àuoppc, undefin'd, without any particular Shape or Subſtance: it muſt be Infinite, and by Conſequence the Sricks muſt have held a Plenum of a moſt ſubtle, confus'd, and undiſtinguiſ'd Matter, out of which the Mind or God, they afterwards tell us, producd the four Elements above-mentiond; they likewiſe taught, that the World was properly a Quality of the univerſal Subſtance, iœ xbouss  lòlus æ; Tũ vũ ĩra &olas, that the World was finite, ruld and govern'd by the Providence of God, that it was one, and of a Globular Figure; &r St T xlouę undi iu u, ax° nũaſ; aetrti, and that in it there was no Vacuum; but all Things in it were united and cemented together, but that beyond it, there was an immenſe Vacuum, which was Incorporeal, and that Incorporeal was what containd Bodies, but not contain'd by them, from whence it is evidem, that they allowd no Vacuum in the World, which yet the preſent Philoſophy aſſerts, but thought the Fire, which they plac'd in the Heavens, that is in the uppermoſt Region, Air, which they diſposd immediately under it, Water, which was the next, and Earth, vhich was the loweſt, were united and connected together, ſo as to make one contind tho' Difform and Diſſimilar Plenum, as conſiſting of Heterogencous Matters and Subſtances; nor is it manifeſt, that the Vacuum beyond this World was meer Space, only an univerſal Subſtance, out of which the particular Ones of the World vere made, it was Incorporeal, that is, had none of the Bodies or diſtinct Syſtemes of Matter in it, vhich were found in the World, and it was what contain'd Bodies as ſurrounding and inveſting them, but was not contain'd by them, becauſe it was dups and Immenſc. Cleanthes, famous for his indefatigable Labout and his Study, was a Scholar of Zem, Lib. 7. Segm. 168, &c. and was entirely attach't to his Doctrines. Spharus ſeems to have been an Auditor of Zeno firſt, and after of Cleanthes; and Chryſippus, tho an Auditor of each, diſſented ſrom both in many Particulars, he was a celebrated Logician and Diſputant, but it do's not appear, that he made any great Advances in Nature and Philoſophy, and here ends the Ionick Sect, who it is very plain were unanimouſly for a Plenum, and even Zeno in the World, and in the Senſc which I have explain'd, beyond it: We ſhall now proceed to the Italic Sect vhich was another Branch of the Syrian or Phænician Philoſophy taught by Phere cydes, of vhich his Scholar Pythagoras was the Chief, as Thales, and after hin Anaxagoras of the Inict. BC 5 13.79 S. 13. Pythagoras, Lib. 8. Segm. I,2,3, &. v hether a Srian, Samian, or a Tuſcan, is a Queſtion, was the Scholar of Pherecydes, and aſter his Death, of Hermodæs at Sæmos; when he was young, out of a great Afſection and Inclination to Know ledge, and the being informd, he leſt his native Country, and was initiated almoſt in all the Myſteries of the Greels and Barbarians, at length he came to ę”t, and learnd their Language, and from thence into Chaldea, where ſome aſſirm hie had Zcroaſires ſor his Maſter, he aſterwards returnd to Samos, and finding his Country oppreſſd by the Tyranny of Poljerates, he went to Croton in Italy. where he vas Celebrated for his Number of Scholars, and the Wiſdom of his Laws, which he gave to the Iralians, he had Brothers, Funomus and Tjrrhenus, his Father, Atue ſarchus, and a Servant, whilſt he continwd at samos, named Zamolxis, ho being releas'd from his Servitude, taught the Immortality of the Soul amongſt his Country. men the Geræ, and was worſhipd by em as a God; Segm. 25. his Doctrine was, ànc uir 7ũ ànm uiãlæ, i s Tũ todd05, àeaq svã su ds dr ſnlus © unàh aino lm mœæu, ix àt T; u⸗dbes, ꝶ àTu suddes, Tis à]lbuus, in 8i  à]æduãn Tò ouda, ix ſi Thm, Tàs ve uuds iũr Tò immſæ ochua ũ, tæ à: Tũ imuisus Tà ” ochuaũ, ix di rdũ à ꝶ”;? cbnaũ, à ę rà ;xũa cu riũæeeæ, mũſ, tupn vm àieæ,  uũ—àda ài i rri æY⸗ 5 nmn 8 vin i& abm xbouo, iulux-, nghi, oęauòã; uolu æ.ilxnũ 5 vm 2 abrn oœaas? i a.onsubu, that the Principle of all Things was one, that is, that the Univerſe was one individual Thing, which contain'd every Thing in Nature, rthat this one Nature vas divided into TWo, into Matter, and into the Intelligence or the Mind the Author of it, and that this Duality, God and Matter, were Interminate, or Infinite, and from this Duality aroſe Numbers, from thence Points, and from thence Lines, and from thence Surſaces, and from Surfaces, Solids, according to the Mathematick Way of Generation, from Solids, Bodies, or Corporcal Subſtances, and from them the four Elements, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air, which poſc©k'd and paſ'd thro' all Things, that is, which, one or other, were every where diſpersd thro' the vaſt Immenſum, and conſtituted the World, which had a Soul, and a Mind, or Underſtanding belonging to it, was Globular, containd the Earth in the middle of it, which was it ſelf Globular and Inhabited all round, ſo as to have Antipodes; Plutarch likeviſe affirms this to be the Notion of Pythagoras, and Aldobrand and Menage very truly Remark that all Philoſophers, as well as Pyrhagoras, maintain'd that the World was animated, and had an Intelligence annexd to it, excepting Democritus and Epicurus; ſo that all the Philoſophers, who affirmd a Plenum, acknowledged an infinite Mind and Intelligence, which actuated it, and the two Philoſophers, and their Fol Iowers, vho denyd this Plenum, and aſſerted a Vacuum, were thoſe, vho denyd ſicch a Mind or Intelligence; and we may obſerve that theſ were Men ſtrict in their Leaſon, & ſerious in their Philoſophy, Vertuous in their Lives, and Pious towards God, and the Pythagoreans in particular are celebrated for their Precepts of Piety, Morality and Vertue; and in this ſtrain went Philoſophy, till Laugh and Grimace Irreligion and Atheiſm began to be ſubſtituted in it's Room, by Democritus and Epicurus, the firſt Promoters of Atoms and a Vacuum. I ſail only jut mention the Names of the Philoſophers, vho came aſter ryihæ gas and then proceed to the Sentiments of Democritus. Empedocles, Lib. 8. Segm. 54. was the Auditor of Pyrhagoras, and Seæm. 56. of Par menides, at the ſame Time as Zeno, he aſterwards was a Scholar of Anavagoras, and Pythagoras, and proposd the Gravity of Liſe, and of Habit of the firſt, and the Rea ſõnings upon Nature of the laſt for his Imitation, and according to Ariſlotle, he va: the firſt Inventor of Rhetorick or Oratory, as Zeno was of Logicks or Dialecticks. Epicharmus of Coos, Segm. 78. was an Auditor of Pythagoras, and Archytas the Geomerer mentiond by Horace, Se;m. 79. was a Pythazoreau, and had an Intercourſt vith Plato, by Letter, as is there recited, and the Letters betwixt them ſet down ai large. Alemaon of Croton, Scęm. 83. was alſo an Auditor of Pyihaqoras; and Higpaſus ol Metapontium, and Philolaus of Croton, Segm. 84. were Pythagoreans ; Fudxus, Se;m. 86 learn'd his Geometry ſrom Archytas, and was an Auditor of Plato. Heraclitus, Lib. 9. Segm. 1. was of Epheſus, it is nor ſiid of what Sect he vahe blamd many Things, but did not advance much, he had ſome Sayings, and ſmall Stories are told oſ him, vhich is the Caſe oſ the other Philoſophers, in which theũ Hiſtory Hiſtory many Times chiefly conſiſts, according to Laertius; from him follow Lib. o. Scęm. 18, &c. Xenophanes, Parmenides, Meliſſus, another Zeno, Leucippus an Auditor of the Stoick, till ve come to Democritus. §. 14. Democritus, Lib. 9. Segm. 34, &c. vas oſ Abdera in Thrace, on the Shore of the Agean, betwixt the Rivers Neſſus and Hebrus, as ſome, and as others, of Miletus,, it is ſaid he learn'd Theology and Aſtrology of the Chaldeans, when a Boy, and aftervards join'd himſelf to Leucippus and Anaxagoras, being younger than the latter about forty Years; he usd to ſay, that what Anaxagoras had writ of the Sun and Moon was old, that his Opinions concerning them vere not his own, but ſtoſn and purloind ſrom Philoſophers, that were much ancienter; he likewiſe endeavourũd to detract from his Philoſophy in Relation to his Compoſition of the World, and his Mind or Intelligence annext to it, being implacably bent againſt, and an adverſary to him, becauſe he vou'd not ſuffer him to continue in the Number of his Scholars; it is ſaid, that he went into ægpt to the Prieſts there to learn Geometry, and into Perſia to the Chaldeans, and as far as the Red-Sea, and that he had an Interview and Conference with the Gymnoſophiſts in India, he was the younger Brother of Three, and vhen a Diviſion was made of their Father's Subſtance into three Portions, he took the Icat, which conſiſted all of Money, for which he ſou'd have occaſion in his Travels, which was eſteem'd by his Brothers to have been a piece of Art and Craſt in him, he vas very much addicted to his Studies, and ſhut himſelf up in a ſmall Cell in a Houſe encompai'd with a Garden to proſecute them with more Vigour and leſs Interruption, he came to Athens, but was not villing to be known out of Modeſty, and a contempt of Glory, ſo that he knew Socrates tho' unknown by him, yet ſome affirm he never came to Athens; he was perſcctly vers'd in àll Natural, Moral, and Mathematick Knovledge, and in the Liberal Arts and Sciences, Thraſjllus relates, that he was a Follower of the Pythagoreans, and a great Admirer of Pyrhagoras; he Iivd in a very retird and ſolitary Manner, and usd to be frequently amongſt the Sepulchers, which he might almoſt ſeem to inhabit; After his Return from his Travels, he appear'd in a very mean Condition, having ſquanderd away his whole Patrimony, till he foretold certain Matters, whoſe Event verify'd his Predictions, for which by ſeveral he was thought worthy of divine Honours, and to avoid the Ignominy of wanting a Grave, which by the Laws he was deprivd of, for ſpending his Patrimony, he recited his Diacoſm, which was much the Beſt of all his Works, and for which he was honourd vith a reward of five Hundred Talents, and with Images of Braſs erected to him, he livd to his Hundred and ninth Year, and dyd with great Complacency of Mind, and vith little Pain; Ariſtoxenus, in his Hiſtorical Commentaries, ſays, that Plato wou'd have burnt what Writings he cowd meet with of Democrituss, which he collected for that Purpoſe, but that he was hinderd by Amyclas and clinias who were Pythagoreans, and who told him, that it woud ſignify little, ſince Copies of them were preſervd in ſeveral Hands; his Doctrines were, à xàs eh⸗ r inen antuus à br ?æ  àna mim moul Su ſtbdttòæ],; àndi/m n du xouus ꝗ vorro. i tharrds uisirn ix T u bros vhiòu, uòt d@5 æ ul t œbduòu, à ms axuus 31 àmel;m5 dvg nœV ubycyos i æ ; òlgiòu j ino sovi~ias, à olm mi& m oſ]uaũ nnãr, æt, lbup, àteæ, vir dq 7æ? i mv; i' àrnu mãò ovęruæaũ, àm diy ànmòũ ⸗ àraxlom 2lãt ?” œ;imũ. That the Principles of all Things were Atoms and a Vacuum, and that all other Things reſted in Opinion only, that there vere innumerable Worlds, vhich were form'd and diſſolv'd by the Concourſe or Diſunion of theſe Atoms, that nothing could be produc'd from that which was not in Being, nor diſolvd into that which never had an Exiſtencè, that therefore every Thing was made from Atoms or ſmall Particles of Matter, which always exiſted, and vas ultimately reſolv'd into them, that theſe Atoms were infinite both in their Number and their Magnitude, or in the Extenſion of them all together, and that they were carryd and whirſd about in the Univerſe one amongſt another, from whenct ſeveral Concretions of them were diſposd into Fire, Water, Air, and Earth, and that many Syſtiemes which were compounded of certain of theſc Atoms or Particle: oſ Matter, were cemented ſo ſirongly, and conſiſted of ſuch ſolid Atoms and Par ticles, that they were not liable to Corruption, or vere in the leaſt affected by an) External Impreſſions upon them; he farther taught, that the Sun and Moon ver: formd from the Motion, and at length the Concretion oſ theſe ſolid and obſtinai ſ ſarticle: Particles of Matte?, or Atoms, and that the Soul, by which the Pody or the Uni verſe was animated, as ſo likewiſe, and the Mind or Intelligence of Anaxagoras he took to be no other, and that Viſion vas causd by the Images of Things being im preſ”è upon our Eyes; alſo, that all Things were neceſſarily tormd and made by thi Concourſe of Atoms without any voluntary or intelligent Agent; and that the End, vhich every one ſhould propoſe to himſelf, ſould be a quiet and ſerene State ol Mind, not as ſome have interpreted him Pleaſure, but a Mind continually happy in a perſect Tranquillity and Conſtancy of it's Thoughts, and not diſturb'd by any Fear or Superſtition, or any other Paſſion which may create it's Diſorder. And this is the firſt Syſteme of Atoms, and a Vacuum, and of all Things being producd by Neceſſity, and of a World without an Intelligence, which we find amongſt the Philoſophy of the Ancients, and from Whence it is manifeſt, that Atheiſm, and Atoms, and a Vacuum had their Riſe and their Birth together. Protagoras, Lib. 9. Segm. 50, &. was of Abdera, and an Auditor of Democritus ; he affirmd his Principles in a very confusd Manner, that Man was the Meaſure of all Things, that the Soul was nothing but Senſation, and that whether there were any Gods or not, he could not determine, for which Aſſertions he was baniſvd Athens, and his Books publickly burnt in the Forum, the Praco or Cryer making Proclamation thereupon, and ſearch was every where orderd ſor them in what Hands ſocver they ſould be found; he was a mercenary Philoſopher, and ridiculous Stories are told of him upon that Account. Anaxarehus, Lib. 9. Segm. 58, &. vas likewiſc of Albdera, whoſe chic? Doctrine was, that he knew, that he knew nothing, which might not be improbable. THE next is Pyrrho, Lib. 9. Segm. 61. the famous Sceptical Philoſlopher, he was at firſt a Painter, and afterwards was the Auditor of Dryſo, the Son of Stilps, and then of Anaxarchus, to vhom he adherd in all his Notions, ſo that he vent to the Gymnoſophiſts in India, and to the Magi in Perſia, with whom he onferd; his Doctrine was, that he cod not make a peremptory Deciſion upon any Thing whatſoever, nor was there any Thing which we could fully Comprehend, that there was no ſuch Thing as Commendable or Baſe, or Juſt or Unjuſt, that Truth was a meer Chimæra, and that the Rules by which Men judgd and acted were thoſec of Law and Cuſtom, which vere the Meaſure of Virtue and Vice, of Right and Wrong, and that there was not any one Thing which was really preferable, or one ſhould ſooner chuſe than another; agrecably to theſe Sentiments he formd his Life and Manners, avoiding nothing which came in his way, whether Chariots, or Carriages, or Dogs, or Precipices, becauſe his Opinion as, that you ſhould not truſt your Senſes, and therefore not reſign your ſelf to the Conduct of em, and he was oſten preſerv'd from great Dangers and Inconveniences, to which he was expos'd upon this Account, by his Friends, that followd him; he vas mighty deſirous of being, or being thought to be a good Man, and he livd to the Age of Ninety, and he usd to ſay, that it was very hard to put off the Man, but Endeavours were to be made to doit to the utmoſt of our Power, in our Actions, and if that could not be, by our Reaſon even againſt Things, as they might appear to us. AFTER him come Timon, and Sextus Empyricus, Lib. o. Segm. 109. and ſrom them ve are brought to Epicurus. Epicurus, Lib. 10. Segm. I, &. was an Athenian, had his Education in Samos amongrſt a Colony of his Country-men ſent thither, and return'd to Arhens, when he was about eightcen Years old, at the time that Xenocrates preſided over the Academy, and Ariſotle had formd a School in Chalcis, he at fir©t philoſophid in Common With others, but afterwards eſtabliſ'd a Sect apart from the reſt, and calld it aſter his ovn Name, he began to ſtudy Philoſophy when he vas no more than twelve or fourteen Years of Age, he inveigh'd againſt the Grammarians for not being able to explain what Heſiod meant by his Chaos, for he taught Grammar firſt, but reading the Books of Democritus, he tur'd his Mind to Philoſophy, from vhom he is ſaid to have derivd all his Opinions concerning Nature; The Stoicks were his great Adverſaries, and handcd about no Ieſ than fifty Epiſtles writ in a looſe and laſcivious Strain, hich they affirm'd to be his, he made a Pathick of one of his Brothers, and kept Leoutium as a Miſs, he was guilty of very baſc and ſcrvile Flatteries in his Epiſiles to Lſimachus, 3iving him the Appellations of Pæean, and King, he practicd the ſame mean Arts tovards wards Idomeneus, Herodotus, and Timosrates, and in his Epiſtles to Leontium hèe mukes uſe of the ſqme Titles of Pæan, and King, and writing to Pythocles, a beautiful young Man, he ſays, he will ſtay there, in Expectation of his moſt lovely and divine Preſence, nor vas Leontium his only Miſs, for he writ to ſeveral others; and in his Book æẽ rixus or, ãe fine, that is concerning the Summum Bonum, or, the chie? Gobd which a Man ſhould purſue, his Words are; For I truly have no Notion of what is Good, if we take aay all the Pleaſures of Taſt, and the Enjoyments of Luſt, the Delicacies of Sounds and of Muſick, and the Satisfaction which ariſes from beholding Comelineſs and Beauty, oò vãr inr ixu æl wiou r7æ]V, usbh il æs olę xã ĩmas àraęir di i ms N agphoon & rà5 N hupauæe, ò ràs alò uãs. Epictetus alſo reprehends him ſor his laſcivious Way of Diſcourſing, and has many very ſevere Expreſſions againſt him, not much to the Honour of his Character; Timocrates, the Brother oſ Aſetrodorus, the great Admirer of Epicurus, and once one of his Scholars, bur Ieſt him, relates, that he uyd to vomit twice a day from his exceſſve Luxury, and that he himſelſ had much ado to eſcape theſe nocturnal Cuſtoms, and rheſe ſecrer Convęntions of Riot and Philoſophy, that Epicurus was very Ignorant in his Language, and his Converſation, but more ſo, us to the Conduũt of Life, and rhe Knowledge of the World, that he was grievouſly afflicted with Diſtempers in his Body, ſo that he could not riſc from his Seat for many Years, and yet rhat he ſpent ar the ſame Time a Mina, or above three Pounds every day in Eating and Drinking, vhich is alſo acknovledgd by him in his Epiſtle to Leontium, and the Philoſophers of Mitylene ; in his Epiſtles concerning Nauſiphanes his ovn Maſter, and the Scholar of Pyrrbo, he reviles him vith the Names of Lungs, or the ſenſcleſs Prater, an Iliiterate, an Impoſtor, and a Whore-Maſter; he calls the Followers of Plato the Flatterers of Dionyſius, and Plato himſelf was, for his Pride, or his Riches, or his Politeneſs, and Elegance of Language, which æpicurus condemn'd, termd the Golden s Ariſtorle, he ſays, was a Spendthrift, and went for a Soldier upon the conſuming of his Patrimony, and ſold Drugs for his Support, or perhaps turn'd Mountebani ; Protagoras was a Porter, writ for Democritus, and became a poor Retailer of Learning in the Trivia, and the common Streets; Heraclitus was a Puzler, and a Diſturber, and Confounder of Philoſophy, without knowing any Thing certainly and clearly; Democritus was capable of Judging of Triſles; and Antidorus was a fooliſh and inſignificant Flatterer; the Cyzicenes were Enemies of Greece, and the Logicians were a ſet of Men full of Malice and Envy, and Pyrho vas one, ho had neither Learning nor Education; The Hiſtorian yet tells us, that theſe were Strange and Romantick Stories ſorg'd of him, that there were a great many, vho atteſted his Extraordinary and Incredible Candor tovards all, and that the Statues of Braſs, which were erected by the Athenians in Honour of him, vere a Proof of it; that he had ſo many Friends, that whole Cities could not contain them, that all his Diſciples were ſo fully attachr to his Doctrine, that none of rhem ever left him excepting Metrodorus of Stratonice, who went over to Carueades, and that there was a perpetual Succeſſion of Diſciples in his School, which contin'd wvhen all Others fail'd, he had likewiſe the greateſt Regard for, and profeſ'd the utmoſt Duty to his Parents, expreſs'd the moſt intimate Love and Affection for his Brothers, and usd all the Lenity and Mildneſs, which vas poſſible towards his Servants, and to comprehend the Sum of his Character in one ſhort Deſcription, he was a Perſon of the moſt exceeding Humanity, and of an univerſal Benevolence, he was a devout Worſhipper of the Gods, whom therefore he did not deny, but only the God of Auaxagoras, and Plato, that is the Mind and Intelligence of the other Philoſophers, and an hearty and ſincere Lover of his Country, he usd to live with his Followers and Friends in a Garden, and according to Dioeles, upon very plain and ordinary Meats, a little Wine, and with Water for their common Drinking, he was not willing that all Things ſiould be common a his Diſciples, which Pyrhagoras preſcribd amongſt his, becauſe he thought that ew'd a diſtruft of each other, which ought to be baniſ'd all real Friendſhip, which he vas deſirous to eſtabliſ amongſt thoſe vho retaind to him; As to his living upon Water, and Bread, and ſuch Kind of Food, he is his ovn Witneſs in his Epiſtles, in which he likeviſe deſires a little Cheeſe may be ſent to him, that hẽe may, if he has a mind to it, make a more ſumptuous Banquet, than he generally allows himſelf; of the ancient Philoſophers he had the higheſt Opinion of Anaxagoras, tho he contra- contradicted him in ſome Things, and of Archelaus the Maſter of Socrates; he was very ſimple and plain in his Diction and Stile, and in his Book of Oratory he adviſes that nothing elſe ſould be regarded, but how to expreſs your ſel? with Clearneſs and Perſpicuity, and in his Epiſtles where others us'd to write xæſren, ſtho' the Epiſtles mention'd in his Life, to Herodotus, Pythocles, and Menaceus do all begin with xalpe] he choſe the Form of èò æę5 lu, and it was his Notion that to live Vertuouſly vas the beſt Thing one covd do; he began to ſtudy Philoſophy when he wa: twelve Years old, and was at the Head oſ a School which he inſtituted and form'd at Thirty, he was born ſeven Years aſter Plato dy'd, he taught at Mitylene and Lampſacus for the firſt five Years, and then removd to Athens, where he contind to his Death, which was in his two and ſeventieth Year, and was causd by a Stone in the Bladder, from whence a Stoppage of Urine enſud, he labourd under this Calamity for fourteen Days, and being worn out with Pain, he went into a hot Bath, deſird a draught of ſtrong Wine to be given him, advis'd his Followers and Friends to remember the Inſtructions, and the Precepts he had taught them, and ſo expired. I have been more Particular in the Life of this Philoſopher, becauſe it is ſo variouſly Reported, and it is not Impoſſible, but he might be a better Man than his Enemies, and a vorſe Man than his Friends, repreſcnted him; it is plain, however, that his Doctrines tended to Vice, and to Atheiſm; to Vice, by the Paſlage beſore alledgd, and to Atheiſm, by thoſe which follow; His Doctrines Segm. 29. were comprehended in three Epiſtles, the firſt to Herodotus, concerning Natural Philoſophy, the ſecond to Pythocles, concerning the Celeſtial Bodies, or Aſtronomy, and the third to Menaceus, concerning Morality and the Conduct of Life, and what in it we ought to chuſe or avoid. IN that to Herodotus he tells us, Segm. 37. and 38. æã/ 8 ” 7à æAũ ſuba is otine  inębha, &. that the firſt Thing we are to do in Philoſophy, is to conſider, and to aſcertain, what Ideas are annext to the Words ve make uſe of, ſo that our Diſputes ſould not be about Names or Words, but about the Things expreſ'd by them. Segm. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. 44. he tells us, àn àdi vſilu ix 7 un ſ;⸗ X u è © æũ àax nũ ” oln ib in, ꝗ àe m;°’ i7au, ꝶo æ””r isn ds  uũ-õàn⸗ me⸗ yà, ? æã &9u iq, ds't di d” alvi vn usæcon miouſlo, v æã- in ua, 2 i uò ò aby, à xbem 5 ànòꝶ ęlov souàoun ix di dx m cbuaũ iav u ꝗꝶ ” ĩuũm, me⸗æ st mtra 696 olm invonòĩ⸗ ralls, æ quuà m Tà 1ò in ſiglous, m & i5 & ai ſrlous mæonla, mvm ſ ion drmua 5 àuem€la;, dæ3; ” W"nu æla ds 7 5 u Vlaghœòu, àn lclnm æputiu, i mis Aor æ ovſœlou, nxtn T ęlov trm, i ũx ixo& òm à iaus alg€ioſla, de: ràs àmãs artus;s àæ”a- dbx cuu” T ꝑbos, anã ui à; T nãr daugh in Tã æ”òu Tũr cœu”]m, i ẽ uæviòu T xuũ, mels m rèms m àrua rẽ cuuætm, à uꝶ, i' ĩi à ai oelous vholl ꝶ ds è 2l7eæ, àmeln mlã in i oſę œmã ãi ęnmudite, uni mimũ mà /œ æ. ràs àmuus dous æ”NV ochuales & uaviòus  ẽàqu Namely, that Nothing can be producd from what is not in Being, and that the Univerſe always was ſuch as it nov is, and always will be, ſince there is not any Thing, into Which it can be transformd or changd, for beſides the Univerſe there is nothing, which entering into it, can cauſe ſuch Alteration or Change, this Univerſe is Corporeal or Body, and if there was not vhat we call Vacuum, or Space, or a Nature which is not Solid, Bodies would neither have a Place to exiſt in, nor Room to move in; of more than theſe, that is than of Space and Bodies, we can have no Apprehenſion or Notion, and of Bodies there are two Sorts, either they are Compoſitions and Concretions, or they are ſuch of which thoſe Compoſitions or Concretions are made, the latter of which are Atoms, or the leaſt Portions of Marter, of which Bodies conſiſt, which Atoms are immutable, for if they could be diſſolvd, or changd, they would be diſſolv}d into nothing, which is impoſſible, ſince as ſomething cannot be produc'd out oſ nothing, ſo neither can it be reſolv|d into it, theſe Atoms therefore are ſirm, and ſtable, and full of their own Subſlance, without any Vacuity, and cannot, upon the Diſolution of Compoſitions or Concretions, be themſclves diſſolv'd by any Force without them, or vithin them, ſo that the firſt Principles oſ all Things are theſe ſolid, conſiſtent Atoms, ſince all Things are Corporeal; moreover the Univerſe is ſaid to be infinite in the Multitude of Bodies, or of Atoms the Compounders of them, and in the largeneſs and extent of the Vacuum, theſc Atoms are likeviſe aſfirmd to be incomprehenſible, prehenſible, and infinite in the Difference of their Figures, and to have nò Quality belonging to them, excepting that of Figure, Magnitude, and Gravity. s. 15. AND thus we have a ſhort Epitome oſ the preſent Philoſophy of a Similar Matter, and a Vacuum from the famous and renown'd Epicurus, and all that it has wiſely and prudently done, is to annex the Mind or Intelligence of Anaxagoras to that Syſteme, which diſcarded and renounc'd it, but whatever prudential Reaſons it might have for ſuch a Conduct, which are Evident, it will be proper to conſider the Philoſophy of ſuch a Procedure. ANY one, who aſfirms an infinite Vacuum, and an infinite Number of Atoms unchangeable in their Nature, which were always ſuch, and always will be ſuch, by whoſe Concourſes and Concretions all Things are and were form'd, and excludes à God, or a Mind and Intelligence from the Univerſe, propoſes Things which are conſſtent; for as Almighty God is an infinite Agent, what Exertion of Power or Action is there in an infinite Vacuum? An infinite Space without any Thing in it entirely deſtroys an infinite Agency; but is well enough ſuited for the Rambling of Atoms about in it in order to form their own Productions; Beſides, what Influence can there be ſuppos'd from Almighty God, or an infinite Mind, or Intelligence, in the making or conſtituting of ſolid Atoms of Matter, which always were and ever vill be the ſame:? They are Principles of Nature independent of any Creating Power, and therefore it is abſutd to annex an Infinite and Superintending Being t ſuch a Syſteme. Pherecydes, Thales, Anaximenes, Anaximander, Anaxaqoras, Plato, Ariſtotle, Zeno; and Pythagoras on the Contrary, who affirmd a Plenum, might juſtly and conſiſtently affirm a God, a Mind, and an infinite Intelligence, from whom all that Plenitude and Fullneſs of Being was derivd, who actuated and informd the Whole, and diverſifyd the 7 æã: according to his own Will and Pleaſure, without being obligã to a neceſſary and infinite Vacium, and an infinite Number of neceſſary and ſolid Atoms to be the Inſtruments of his Productions, which are nothing more than the Machinery of the Philoſopherss. To take therefore the Mind or Intelligence of the one Sect of Philoſophers, and the Vacuum and Atoms of the other, is a great want of Underſtanding in the Principles of the ancient Philoſophy, and ſews no leſs an Ignorance in the Nature of Things. Wuar Side the beſt and wiſeſt æomans took in this Controverſy of the Philofophers eoncerning Anaxagoras, and Plato's, and Zens Scheme of the Univerſe, and Demoeritus, and Epicuruss is not unknown, Cato, and Tully, and Brutus; and all the ſober Part of Rome, and the Patrons of the Commonvealth, and of the ancient Conſtitution amongſt them, eſpousd the former, and Catiline, Cæſar, and Anthony, and the Followers of them, the Licentious and Vicious, the Advancers of Tyranny and Arbitrary Power, and the Over-turners of that celebrated and noble Polity, contended for the latter. s. 16. Ocellus Lucanus, who is affirmd to have been Contemporary vith Moſes, fays thus, &iril- ſ nã 5 &alniym drag- ꝶ &maimm, ãl t;s Tũ xbou, &ra ſalu ꝶ è Tãà uien abŕ ouæ”́, i àel xlmm San ub i p è 5 x tuQm, ovixu Th xbcu ;umſa, mbrns ſ' alms ? õs, ſfrom Whence ĩt is maniſeſt, that he with Anaxagoras, and Plato, affirmd an Eternity and Infinity of the World, and therefore that there was a Plenum in it, but that it vas animated and raisd into an Energy by the infinite Mind and Intelligence, vho was the Aurhor of the Beauty, Order, and Harmony ve obſerve thrò the hole Expanſe of Nature. Sanchoniatho, in his Collections of the moſt ancient Hſſtories of the Phænicians, and vho himſelf vas a Phaenician, the Priet of Belus or Baal, and not much later than Moſes, according to Philo Bybliuts Verſion of him, has this Account of the World's Origine. ouſx Seor7iæ Th Tſi ſx;m àp- ævſidu à hter oqbon 5 muuarẽs⸗, A nh &ips æpbius, 5 xãos Soni ipeũ§òs, ĩm 5 chus dnuta, 4 al m” aiũm u ix- mpps, àm 5, 9do, i r &i mũu- ũ iòlav à àpxũn 5 iyinm olſiexo5 n mon Enbn æxim; mos5 alm E amh xrioms drlmn, abrb t x Eriram ™ aiŕ xlov, è i  abru uæ©; iſ mubualis è iyinm Min, m mis Paon rn, oi t ſurũòi; EiE|s bu 5 ix ralri ivbun mãa om}“ xn|;s ; vinois ?ũ; ixœ. That is, the Phanician Theology ſupposd a dark and ſpirituous and active Air, or the breathing or blaſt of a dark Air, and a tumultuous ànd dark Chaos, t be the Principle ⸗ and 3 rigine Origine of all Things, and that theſe were Infinite, and for a long Tract of Time without Bounds or Limits, but vhen the Wind or Spirit was in Love with it's own Principles, and a Mixture of the one vith the other enſud, this Union and Conjunction of them was call'd, Appetite, or Inclination, by which Bodies became endud with certain Propenſities, which was the Principle of the Formation of all Things, but the Spirit ĩt ſel? knew no Cauſe of it's Production; from the Concourſe of this Spirit with, and it's Influences upon the Chaos, Màr or the ials or Mud, or a Mixture of Water and Earth aroſe, from whence vere derivd the Seeds of every created Being, and of all Things whatſocver. IN Which Account we have evidently contain'd an infinite and paſſive Subſtance, and of a Chaos, vhich fill'd the Univerſe, or of a Plenum and of an active and intelligent Principle, which diſposd every Thing into the Order we now ſee, which was Selſexiſtent and Eternal. S. 17. AND this ſo exactly Correſponds with what ſoſes relates in the ſacred Writings, of God's creating the Heaven and the Earth, of the Earth's being without Form, and Void, and of Darkneſs being upon the Face of the Deep, and of the Spirit of God moving upon the Face of the Waters, and his dividing Light ſrom Darkneſs, and ſeparating the Waters, Earth, Sun, Moon, and Stars to their ſeveral Places, his Creating Animals, and the Herbs of the Field, that we may juſtly think and imagine Sanchoniatho's, and the Phanician Philoſophy was deducd from that of Aſoſes, and conſequently that the Moſaick do's ſuppoſe an univerſal Plenum, or Chaos actuated and influencd into Order by the Energy and Influence of the divine Intelligence, eſpecially ſince Waters, and Darkneſs, and the Deep, are all affirmd by him to exiſt before this Creation, and thereforce we may reaſonably conclude that the moſt ancient and current Philoſophy amongſt the æę”ptians likewiſe, in whoſe Learning Moſes was ſo particularly converſant, was in the ſame Strain, as well as that all the Eaſtern Nations, that Abrabam, and Melchiſedec, or Sem, and conſequently that the Antediluvian Patriarchs taught the ſame Doctrine till we come to Adam himſelf; and this is the more probable ſince Pherecydes, vho as a Syrian, or Phanician, Thales, Anaxagoras, Plato, and Pyihagoras, ſome of whom traveld into æq”p1, ſtill brought from thence the ſame Opinions of the World's Production, and conſtantly proposd an infinite Plenum of undigeſted Matter, and an infinite Mind or Intelligence, which acted upon ĩt for their Principles of all Things, till Democritus, and Epicurus firſt invented their Neceſſary and Self-exiſtent Vacuum, and Atoms, aud the Gravity of them, without any wiſc or intelligent Cauſe to direct or guide them; and for the ſame Reaſon, I do not doubt, but the Aſtronomy of Thales, Anaxagoras, and Pyihagoras, which is now the Copernican, was profeſ'd by the Antediluvians up to our firſt Parents, and the beginning of the World. AND as to the Chriſtian Philoſophy, we find Juſtin 2tartyr in his firſt Apology for the Chriſtians propoſing their Sentiments concerning Nature exactly conſormable to thoſe which Aſoſes had taught, i mæ Th àt⸗ àyæò li; uuvyyu aith iẽ àu”vans N &òpæus sal5u ſusæ 5. 18. NOTWITHSTANDING Matters ſtand thus in Relation to a Plenum and a Vacuum, that all the moſt ancient and celebrated Philoſophers aſert the firſt, and reject the laſt, yet the preſent Philoſophy is ſo fond of the latter, that it has contrivd another Solution of the Difficulty before-mentiond, which lies againſt a Vacuum, that in an exceeding rare Medium as the Air, there mut be ſo much Vacuity, whilſt we affirm Matter to be Similar, that it woud be as impoſſible for us to breath in it, as in an exhauſtcd Receiver, Water likewiſe might be compreſòd, &. IN order to evade this ſort of Arguments, it is endeavourd by the obtaining Philoſophy to attenuate and ſubtilize Marter as far as poſſible, when it do's not ar the ſame time conſider, that, let us diminiſh the Parts of a Similar Matter as much, and a Infinitely as we pleaſc, all thoſe Parts will take up no more Space than the Whole out of which they were divided. Tnus it is premisd by way of Lemma, that any Quantity of Marter being given, out of it, or any Part of it may be formd a Concave Sphere, whoſe Semidiamete: is equal to a right Line given. Let the Particle of Matter be a3, and the right Linc given b, let the Ratio of the Periphery of the Circle be to the Radius as ꝓ to r Iet the Semidiameter of the Concavity be æ, and the Thickneſ" of the ſmall skir encom encompaſſing the Concavity of the Sphere will be x, and the Cylinder circum 3 ſcrid to the Sphere, whoſe Radius is 4, ill be æ from whence the Sphere in l ſcribd in the Cylinder ill be - 4 2x pxò 3 , and by the ſame Reaſoning the Sphere, whoſe Radius is æ, will be namely 2?  3nm vill be equal to the Spherical Lamella or to rhe Particle oſ 3r7 Matter given a3, that is, u x b1 x1 = a3, and by the common Reduction of Equa, andthe Diſference of theſe two Spheres, 3rat :i 3rai tions byx and x  bs 2 7 and x=vV3. h , and conſequent; 7 ly the Thickneſs of the Spherical Lamella or bx will be =6bv;. bs AND by the ſame Method of arguing from a given Quantity of Matter concave Cubes, and concave Cylinders, or Bodies of any other concave Figure may be form'd, whoſe Sides are equal to a right Line given; Tis very well, therefore according to this Demonſtration, the ſmalleſt Particle of Matter may be formd into the largeſt Cube, or Sphere, or Cylinder, whoſc Concavity may be infinitely great, and the Thickneſs of the Lamella which æncompaſſes it infinitely ſmall, it is ovnd and acknowledg'd, but will it from thence follow that Space is more filld than beſore? Will not there be ſtill the ſame Proportion betwixt Matter and Vacuum, as there was? And can it be imagin'd that a Matter blown up into the Bubbles of a School-Boy cannot be compreſd? Water is not in it ſelf compreſſible or very little, nor even Air to any extraordinary Degree, but if either the one or the other conſitcd of ſuch Globes, whoſe Concavity vas great, and the Film which encompaſſ'd ĩt infinitely ſmall, voud they not be more eaſily broken and diſolvd by the extreme Force of Screws, and other Violences usd to deſtroy their Dimenſions, than the Bubbles we nam'd by the Force of the Air? There is nothing can be more certain. HOWEVER, this Philoſophy goes on to tell us, in its firſt Theorem conſequent up on the preceding Lemma, that any Quantity o? Matter, however ſmall being given, and any Space which is finite, however large, being alſo given, which Space for Inſtance, is ſupposd to be a Cube circumſcribd to the Sphere of Saturn, ĩi is poſſible that ſuch a little Grain of Matter ſhould be diffusd thr all that Space, and ſhoud fill it ſo, that there ſhould be no Pore or Vacuity in it, whoſẽ Diameter ſhould exceed a right Line given, that is, it is proposd to prove that the leaſt Particle of Matter may fill the greateſt Space without any ſenſible Interſtices in ſuch a Repletion. Let the given Space be a Cube, whoſe ſide is 4 B equal to the Diameter of Saturn's Orbit, let the Particle of Matter given be b*, and the Diameter of the Pores D, which is in the preſent Caſc ſuppos'd exceeding ſmall; Let 4B be imagin'd to be divided into Parts equal to the right Line D, whoſe Number therefore ill be Finite, ſince neither 4 B is ſupposd to be infinitely great, not yet D infinitely ſmall, let that Number be n, and conſequently, nD =a58 and n DI =TEB?; Let us now conccive the given Space to be divided into Cubes, the ſides of each of which are equal to D, and the Number of the Cubes will be n3, and let theſe Cubes be expreſ'd by E, F, G, H in the Figure; Farther, let the Particle of Matter b3 be conceivd to be divided into Parts, whoſe Number is n? and in every Cubical Space, Ilet one of theſe Taris be placed, by which means the Particle o Matter b vill be diffusd into all that Space, every Particle likewiſe of ſt being diſposd into the little Cell belonging i C æ m to it, may be formũd into a concave Sphere, whoſe Diameter is equal to the righ Line given D, ſrom Whence it will come to paſ, that every Sphiere will touch tha vhich is next ĩt, and a given Particle of Matter, however ſmall, as 43, will ſill æ Space given however large, ſo that there ſall be no Pore in it, Whoſe Diamcrer ſinl exceed the right Line D, which is ſuppos'd extremly, tho' not inſinitely ſmall. To which we again anſwer, that ſuppoſing the Particle of Matter, whilſt we con ſider it as Similar, is b3 or 1, and imagining the Space to be Eſ or 10 Million: of Millions of Millions &e. and let the Number oſ Cubes oſ this Space be æ3, anc the Number of Parts into which b is divided be alſo æ?, we ſay every Part of the Particle of Matter 6 will be to every Part of Space TE, as 1 to 10 Millions ol Millions of Millions, &e. and conſcquently every Particle oſ Matter, iſ formvd into a Sphere, voud cither ſurround, or be ſurrounded, by 10 Millions of Millions oſ Millons, &e. oſ Space, agrecable to what ve have aſſirmd in our Priuciples of Naural Philoſophy, Chap. 7. S. 8. Part 1. againſt which this Theorem ſeems to be leveſd, This therefore cannot but be an odd vay oſ ſilling Space with Matter, which Icaves it to be compreſi'd by the ſmalleſt Force into a 10 Millionth oſ Millonth oſ Millionth, &. of the Dimenſions into which this Philoſophy endeavours to extend it. BESIDES, it is ſomething Marvellous and Strange, that it ſnould endeavour with ſuch Labour and Pains to ſubtilize Matter into a Plenum, vhich it is ſo unvilling to own, and can be no otherviſe accounted for excepting ĩt's being Conſcious, that a kind of Plenum, or what was approaching to it, was neceſſary in Nature, both for the Explanation of the ſmall Compreſſion of Water or Air, and of the way by uhich we live and breath: And what is more extraordinary ſtill, this Philoſophy oſ Similar Matter is here filling up all the Interſtices it can in the rareſt Bodies, ſo that there ſhould be no Vacuum, or a very inſenſible one, whereas beſore it was lubouring to prove, that there was more Vacuum than ſolid Parts, not only in the rareſt, but even in the groſeſt and denſcſ. NOTWITHSTANDING Which, it proceeds to a ſecond Theorem, which ĩs, that two Bodies may be equal in Bulk, whoſe Quantities of Matter are unequal, and which obtain a given Reaſon to cach orher, and yet the Sums oſ their Pores, or the void Spaces betixt them come near to a Reaſon of Equality, or in Deſcartes's Stile, all the Space which is poſſeſt by the ſubtle Matter, within the Pores of one Body, may be almoſt equal to the Space which is poſſeſ by the like Marter within another Body, altho' the proper Matter of one Body is Ten or an Hundred Thouſand Times more than the proper Matter of the other Body, and the Bodies are in Bulk equal. For example, a Cubical Inch of Gold, and a Cubical Inch of Common-Air not condens'd; Tis certain, that the Quantity of Matter in the Gold is Twenty Thouſand Times more than the Qaniity of Matter in the Air, and yet it is not Impoſſible, that the Spaces in the Gold, either abſolutely Empty, or Replere with a ſubtle Matter, may be equal to the Spaces in the Air, either Empty, or Replete with the ſame ſubtle Matter. Let 4 and B be two Bodies equal in Magnitude, that is, let each of them be a Cube of one Inch, and let the Body 4 be Ten Thouſand Times heavier than the Body B, and conſequently, include Ten Thouſand Times more Matter; Let us now ſuppoſe the Quantity of Matter in 4 to be reducd into a Space abſolutely full, which let it be the Hundred Thouſandth Part of a Cubical Inch, for that may be done by the Corollary of the preceding Theorem, which is, that a Body may be given, whoſe Matter, if reduc'd to an abſolute Plenum, that Plenum may be any Part given of the former Maznitude; ſrom whence, ſince the Matter in 4 is Ten Thouſand Times more than the Matter in , the Matin B, if compreſy'd into an abſolute Plenum, vill poſſeſs only _ 1000000000 Ten Thouſandth Hundred Thouſandth Part of a Cubical Inch, and therefore the remaining 999999999 Parts Will be either abſolute Vacuum, or Space replete with ſubtle Matter; farther, ſince the Quantity of Matter in 4v ſills only the Hundred Thouſandih , Or onc ſandth Part of an Inch, the remaining 99999 Hundred Thouſandth Parts will be cither abſolute Vacuum, or Space replete with the ſame ſubtle Matter, that is, by reducing the Fraction to the Denomination of the former, the void Spaces in 4 will be 999990000, Ten Thouſand Hundred Thouſandth Parts, and conſequently, the Vacuities in 4 will be to the Vacuities in B, as 999990000 to 999999999, or nearly in a Reaſon of Equality; But this whole Reaſoning depends upon the Corollary of the precedeing Theorem, that a Body may be given, whoſe Matter, if reducd to an abſolute Plenum, that Plenum may be any Part given of the former Magnitude, for if ſo, there is no Queſtion we may make Choice of ſuch a Part, which ſhall Ieave juſt as much Vacuity, in one Body as the other, and in a Cubical Inch oſ Gold, as in a Cubical Inch of Common-Air; If therefore this Corollary is not true, nor the Theorem from whence it is deduc'd, which ve have ſiewn, the preſens Theorem, and the Demonſtration of it ill be alike Inconcluſive. BESIDES Which, let us conſider the very abſurdity of the Propoſition, which is endeavourd to be provd, that tho' there are Twenty Thouſand more Parts of Matter in a Cubical Inch of Gold, than in a Cubical Inch of Common-Air, yet there are as many Vacuities in the one as in the orher, ſuppoſing then, there are 20000 Parts of Matter, and 1 of Vacuity in Gold, there will be 1 of Matter, and 20000 of Vacuity in Common-Air, and yev by the Strength and Force of the foregoing Mathematicks, either 20000 Vacuities are provd cqual to 1, or Matter is transformd into Space, and Space into Matter, which is a Faculty hitherto unknown to that Science, and ſeems to explain an Artifice and Sophiſtry which is unworthy of it. As to what is ſaid farther in this Place, that all Bodies are exceeding Rare, and that they contain very little Matter in Proportion to their Bulks, and that this is manifeſt from Diaphanous Bodies, and the Tranſmiſſion of the Rays of Light thro' Glas or Water as vell as Air every way in right Lines, and therefore that there are Rectilineal Pores in all Directions thro' thoſe Bodies, by which the Light paſſes, and that this woud be impoſſible, if the Matter oſ the Diaphanous or Tranſparent Body was not inconſiderable in Reſpect of it's Bulk, which perhaps may be no more than a Grain of Sand to the vhole Earth, and that thereſfore Gold, which is eight Times denſer than Glaſs, bears a very ſmall Proportion of it's Matter to its Buik, and thar upon this infinite Porouſneſs of Bodies the Magnetick Eſfluvia may be accounted for in their Paſſing as eaſily thro' denſe Gold as the thinneſt Air; all theſc are Notions equally abſurd with the foregoing Demonſtrations, and are derivd from, and connected vith them, they procecd from a great Inclination which this Philoſophy has to a Similar Matter, to Pores, and a Vacuum, and which Propenſity to them makes it afſert very manifeſt and palpable Contradictions; Thus, beſides what we have before expreſiũ, Glaſs and Water are hcavier than Air, and therefore, according to this Philoſophy, has more Matter in an equal Bulk of them, and yet they are equally Porous, becauſc they equally tranſmit the Rays of Light, that is, they have more Matter and Ieſs Vacuities, and they have more Matter and equal Vacuities, which is in Terms a Contradiction; ſo likewſe Gold is eight Times denſer than Glaſs, and Twenty Thouſand Times denſer than Common-Air, and yet the Magnetick Eſfluvia paſs as eaſily thro' Gold as Air, and therefore the one, according to this Doctrine, muſt be as Porous as the other, and conſequently muſt have as little Matter, and as much Vacuity, vhen it is confeſdd that it has Twenty Thouſand Times more Matter, and Twenty Thouſnd Times leſs Vacuity. On the Contrary if we allow a Plenum, and a diſſimilar Matter, with various and differing Forces belonging to them, all theſe Diſficulties are eaſily ſolvd, Diaphanou: Bodies eaſily tranſmit the Rays of Light, becauſe they have an expanſive Force ap pertaining to them, which concurs with the Expanſive of Light, and permits a Li berty to it's Action, whereas opake Bodies being endu'd vith a greater Contractive than expanſive Force, reſit and repel the Rays which are Incident on them, Golc admits oſ the Magnetick Force being of a Contractive Nature, but repels it, wher heated, by the Expanſive. Tuis Philoſophy yet thinks, from this infinite and imaginary Porouſneſ”s of Bodies and ſrom the vaſ Celerity of Light, it can give an Account, why the Rays oſ Ligh proceeding from ſeveral Objects, and tranſmitted thro a ſmall Foramen, do not hin der cach other's Progreſs but preſcrve their Motion in a direct Tine, which is ſaĩ can cannot be explaind by an Impulſe upon a fluid Plenum, ſince any Body, as a Plenum having Impreſſions made upon it by ſeveral Forces in diſferent Directions, receives and admitts of one certain and determinate Direction only, compounded and made up of all of them. THERE are therefore two Things here to be conſider'd, the Velocity of Light, and the Tranſmiſſion of it thro' the Foramen in diſferent Directions. As to the Velocity of Light this Philoſophy ſeems to entertain a wrong Opinion of it, whilſt it makes it to come from the Sun to us in ſeven or eight Minutes oſ Time, by an actual Motion oſ Particles of Matter emitted from thence, and which I think has been in another Place conſiderd, what I ſhall here ſay is, that if the Emiſſions of Particles from the Sun are according to what this Philoſophy repreſents, or thoſe of Light from a Lamp or a Candle, thoſe luminous Particles muſt fill all the Space round them, which is Incredible, and the Aſertion of ſuch a Doctrine is only owing to the Imagination, that one Particle of Similar and Homogeneous Matter may fill Ten Millions oſ Space, which is Impoſſible and Inconceiveable as we have already ſhiewn. AND yet again, if we will but acknowledge that Matter is Diſſimilar, and that all the World is full of it, and that Diſſimilar Matter has Diſſimilar Forces, the Propagations of Light from the Sun, from a Lamp, or a Candle, is readily ſolv'd, by the expanſive Force of the Sun, of a Lamp, or a Candle, diffuſing it's Action, and not emitting it's Particles thro' the ambient Medium, which receives their Impreſſions, not barely from a Communication of them, but as the Medium has an expanſive Force agreeable to the Expanſive impreſs'd, which it Promotes and Advances. As to the next Thing, that the Tranſmiſſion of Light thro' the Foramen in diferent Directions is eaſily accounted for by the Rectilineal Pores every way, but not by bare Impulſes of Light upon a Plenum for the Reaſon above-mentiond, we anſwer. FirsT, To ſuppoſc the Rays oſ Light tranſmitted every way thro' Rectilineal Pores, is to require us to imagine a very hard Thing, namely, that the Diaphanous Body, whether Glaſs or Air, is Omniporous, or which is the ſame, that it conſiſts altogether of Pores, or Vacuity, for in that infinite Croſſing of Pores at all the minuteſl Angles, which is here preſunvd, there muſt be of neceſſity a Deſtruction of all Matter in the Body, and nothing left but mere Space and Vacuum, and conſequently. the Diaphanous Body vill not only be deprivd of it's Solidity, but even of the Configuration of it's Pores too, by being reſolv'd into one continu'd Vacuity, and this Solution will meet with the Difficulty it objects to the other, ſince the Actions of Light by this means will be blended together, which the Pores were to ſeparate, and conſequently compound an Action of them all united into one. SECOND, Granting theſe Rectilineal Pores tranſverſe to each other in an infinite Number of Angles, and the Rays of Light to paſs thro them, wou'd not theſe Rays meet and interfere with each other in a Thouſand different Directions, and vould not ſuch mutual Occourſes and Impactions of them as much interrupt and hinder their Progreſs in Directum, as if they were to meet each other in the Foramen, vithout ſuch Rectilineal Pores to defend and aſſiſt their Progreſſion? TuHmRD, But what is more in this Doctrine, it is preſumd, that the Action of Bodies, as the Rays of Light, is beſt promoted by contriving Pores and Vacuities for them, and the ſame is aſfirmd in reſpect of the Magnetick Force, and therefore Vacuities are aſſign'd for its paſſing thro Gold; whereas it is wonderful that we ſhould want Vacuities and Pores here for the Propagation of the Action of Light, vhen to propagate the Action of other Bodies, Bodies not Vacuities are requird; Thus Fire and Flame is not propagated in Vacuum, but in Bodies, which are inflameable, Motion is not communicated to Vacuum but to Bodies, vhich are moveable, the Action of Sound is not propagated thro' Vacuum, but thro Bodies which are Springy and Elaſtick, and why therefore ſio'd we not think that Light is not promoted thro' Pores and Vacuum, but thro' Bodies which partake of the Nature oſ Light, as Diaphanous or Tranſparent Bodies, that is, which have, as Light, an expanſive Force appertaining to them? ON the other hand, there is no Diſſiculty in apprehending, how a Medium, as Air or Glaſ, ſiould tranſimit an Action, as that oſ Light, in the ſame Direction, in which it is impreſ'd, without a Compoſition oſ thoſe diffcrent Forces into one, ſince that that Medium, whatever it is, is equally balanc'd in it's Action of it's Parts one amongnt another, if therefore a foreign Action, as that of Light, invades it in one Direction, it muſt ſubmit to that Action, that is, there muſt be a Preponderancy, if we may call it ſo, that way, and if a Second, or a Third, or Fourth, &r. Aſaults it in di?ferent Directions, it muſt likewiſe ſubmit to thoſe Actions, and in thoſe Directions and accordingly tranſmit them, ſince it holds it ſelf indifferently to all, and therefore muſt tranſmit them all in the ſame Directions, in which they are incident, allowing ſtill for the Difference of Action in Light, and in the Body, thro which it is tranſmitted, and from whence the Refractions of it ariſe; and the ſame may be ſaid of the Magnetick Force, and of Gold, or any other Body thro which it paſes. HAVING therefore now ſaid what we intended concerning a Vacuum, ve ſhall proceed to inquire into ſome farther Arguments made uſe of for a Similas Matter and Pores, which we did not conſider in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy. s. 19. IT is ſaid in Axioms, the 141h, 15h, and I61h, that Matter is every whereof the ſame Nature, and has the ſame Eſſential Attributes, whether in the Heavens? or in the Earth, whether it appears under the Form of a Fluid, Hard, or any orher ſ Body; that is, the Matter of any Body, of Wood for Example, do's not Eſſentially differ from the Matter of Iron, or a Stone, but that the different Forms and Appear-4 ances of Bodies are only different Modifications of the ſame Matter, and ariſe from⸗ the Various Magnitude, Figure, Texture, Situation, &æ. of the Particles, which com- / poſe thoſe Bodies, and that the Qualities, or Actions, or Powers of any Bodies up-⸗ on others, depend only upon the foregoing Modifications of Matter in Conjunction vith the Motion of ſuch Particles. : TuESE are calld Axioms or Selfevident Principles in Philoſophy, which yet with me are ſo far from being Selfevident, that I think the contrary to all this is manifeſt and certain, that Matter is not Homogeneous in it's own Nature, and that it's apparent Difference dos not ariſe from the Difference of the Situation, Figure, and Magnitude of it's Parts, and that it's Powers and Qualities are not derivd from them in Conjunction with Motion, but from the peculiar Expanſive and Contractive Forces of it; by an Expanſive Force I mean, that which tends from a Centre of Action, and by a Contractive, that which tends towards one. NoTwITHSTANDING Which Axioms or Selfevident Principles o Philoſophy, it thinks good to prove the Truth of them, and from that Endeavour ſiews, that thoſe Principles are not Selfevident ones. BUT how is this endeavourd? It is by giving us an Hiſtory of the Tranſmutation of Sea-Water into Clouds and Vapours, from thence into Rain, aſter that into Plants and Trees, according to the Nature of the different Seeds, in which it Lodges, which alſo conſiſt of Various and Heterogeneous Parts, as the Root, Stalk, Fibres, Flowers, &e. for Inſtance, let us take Flax or Hemp, this beaten or pounded is ſpun into Thread, then wove into Cloth, the Shreds of which ſteept in Water, reducd to a Pulp by vooden Peſiles, and ſpread upon Wires and dry'd, is what we call Paper, this thrown into the Fire vaniſhes into Smoke and Aſhes, all which Phænomenons are aſfirmd to proceed from a Change in the Texture, Situation, Figure, and Magnitude of the Parts of Sea-Water. Thus Metals are fus'd by the force of Fire, and by a change of Situation in the Parts are diſſolvd from their Coheſion into a Fluid Subſtancee. The Diſſolution of Salts and Metals in their proper Menſtruums ariſes from a Separation of Parts by Fermentation, and from a Diviſion of them into the Ieaſt Atoms, and an Agitation of them by Motion, from Whence they become Fluid; and from the Figures and the other Modifications of the Parts of Bodies, diverſe Qualities, which are peculiar to them, are caus'd, which are deſtroyd, if that Conſtitution of Parts is alterd. IN like Manner from the ſame Matter, that is, Iron, Keys, Knives, Files, Saws, and an hundred other Iuſtruments are made, whoſe Qualities depend only upon their Figures: Keys have the power of a Lever to remove the Obſtacle, and Knives of a Wedge to ſeparate the Parts of Matter to which they are applyd, and it is provd by the Writers in Mechanicks, that theit Moment or Force is owing to their make: Clocks derive their Powers and Motions from their Wheels, and the Machines, which produce ſuch ſtupendous Eſfects ve Experience, obtain thoſe Faculties from their Compoſition and Fabrick: The Roughneſs in the Surfaces of Bodies is the occaſion o 6f Light's being reſlected every way in various and diſſerent Angles, and conſequently it's Reflection is owing to the Conſiguration of the Parts oſ ſuch Bodics, this is confirmd ſrom Ice or Glaſs, vhich when whole, and ſimooth, and poliſhd, is not endu'd vith any Colour, but when Ground and broken into Pieces, and by that means acquiring a rough and angular Surface, appears White, and it is the ſame in Water when workd and fermented into a Froth. In order to juſtify this Philoſophy of Similar Matter ſlill farther, Sir Iſanc Newton's Doctrine of Light and Colours is alledg'd, of which we ſhall ſay no more here, and even Opticks and the Phænomenons from Plane, Concave, and Convex Speculums are introduc'd to prove the Truth of the Corpuſcular Syſteme, Which are all ſaid to proceed from a Change of Diſtance or Situation. TuEr Earth is revolv'd about the Sun vith it's Axis inclind to the plane of the Ecliptick in an Angle of 665 Degrees, but alvays carry'd Parallel to it ſclf, from whence in it's Period, firſt one of it's Poles is obverted to the Sun, and then another, by which all the different Seaſons of the Year are occaſiond, and the various Productions of them, which are only effects conſequent upon a Change of Situation; What therefore may not Situation, Diſtance, Magnitude, Figure, and the Structure of Parts, and the infinite Combinations of all theſe perform joind with the Motion and Subtlety of Effluviums? The magnetick Attractions are owing to the Structure of the Parts, for if the Magnet reccives a good ſtrong Blow from an Hammer, it changes it's Poles, and if thrown into the Fire, looſes it's Vertue, which muſt be from an Alteration in the Conſtitution and Poſition of the internal Parts, but how and in what Manner the Magnet operates is a myſtery not yet explain'd by Philoſophers, tho endeavourd by ſeveral; This is a ſhort Account of this new Defence of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter. FIRsT, As to Sca-Water being transſormd into Clouds and Vapours by rareſying the Marter and enlargeing the Pores, that is much better accounted for by the expanſive Force of the Sun changing the Action of the Sea-Water, by which from a Salt, Heavy, and Contractive Body, it becomes a Sweet, Volatile, Light, and Expanſive one, afterards by the contractive Force of Cold theſe Clouds and Vapours coagulate into Rain, and fall in Shovers, or into Snow and Hail and deſcend in that Form, which is not done by altering the Poſition of the Parts, but changing the intrinſick Force of them, namely, from an Expanſive into various Degrees of the Contractive; Rain moiſtening the Seeds of the Earth, and thereby exerciſing a kind of expanſive Force upon the ſolid Matrixes vhich receive it, and the Sun aftervards ſupervening with a ſtronger and more vigorous Expanſive, Vegetation is caus'd, and the Seeds, thus impregnated with the Expanſive of the Sun and the Rain, ſoot forth into Plants and Trees, which do's not proceed from an Alteration of the Figure and Texture of the Parts, for that is only conſequent, but from new Forces impreſs'd and induc'd upon them, by which from a contractive Nature they riſe into a Degree of the Expanſive from the Rain and Sun; The Parts of Plants and Trees are Root, Stalk, Fibres, and Flowers, that is, more or leſs Solid, as they have a greater or leſ Proportion of the Contractive, and a leſs or greater of the Expanſive; amongſt the Plants, becauſe it admits of moſt Variations, let us, as in the Inſtance before, take Flax or Hemp, vhich when beaten or pounded, that is, from an Expanſive Force ir becomes diſſipated and diffusd into a ſilky and pliant Subſtance, by a Contractive of the Fingers it is ſpun into Thread, and vove into a cloſe Contexture by that of the Loom, it is by the Expanſive Force reduc'd into Shreds and a Pulp, and then from the Contractive of the Air, and from the Diſſipation oſ the Expanſive of Warer, which is equal to a Contractive, cemented into Paper, and laſtly by the Expanſive of Fire it is diſſiolvd into Smoke, and a Light, and Volarile Aſhes, from whence it ĩs apparent, that theſe different Effects are produc'd from diſferent Forces, and that the Effects, which are producd, conſtantly partake of the Nature of the Forces, which produce them, and that the Alterations of the Poſition of Parts are not the Cauſes of theſe Effects, nor are the Effects themſelves, but the Forces acting are the Cauſcs, and the Forces impreſ'd are the Effects, and the Changes of Situation in the Parts of theſc Bodies do only follow, and are conſequent upon ſuch Eſſccts, and ſuch Actions producing themTim TuE Fuſion of Mctals is the next Example, which this Philoſophy alledges to prove the different Situation of Parts is the cauſe of the diſferent Forms of Bodies, which is an Argument for the Doctrine we have advancd of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, for Metals are Solid, and have their Coheſion from the Contractive Force in them, and they becomæ Fluid by the Expanſive Force of Fire, which if in an equal Balance with the Contractive, the Parts of the fluid Metal are Quieſcent, and there is no change in the Situation of them, but if in this Equilibrium we put an Iron-ſpatula into the fus'd Metal, the Force, which we give to it, vill be imparted to the Fluid, and vill agitate it which way we pleaſe; ir the Expanſive Force of the Fire is likeviſe increasd, by which it becomes Superior to the Contractive of the Metal, it will boil up, and the Situation of the Parts will be changd, but this is not Eſſential to the Fluidity, but to the Morion of it. . And thus ve may imagine that where the Expanſive Force of the Sun or the am: bient Medium and the Contractive of any Matter are in an equal Balance, Water is produc'd, which tho' Fluid in it ſelf is perfectly Quieſcent in a Stagnation of it, and which we find the leſs Power the Sun has upon it, as in Winter, the more ir's Con⸗ mactive prevails, ſo far as at certain Seaſons it is changũ into a perfect Solid; Theſe Phænomenons are not therefore owing to a difference of Situation in the Parts, but to a different Force, which is inducd upon them, and if what we have ſaid is true in Reſpect of Water, it is no more impoſſible that it ſhould be producd in Perennial Fountains, vhere the Expanſive Force of the Sun, and ambient Medium are equally balanc'd with the Contractive of an Earthy Matter, than that Subterraneous Fires ſiou'd be caus'd by the Expanſive of the Sun being Superior to the inflammable Matter it ſcts a-Burning, and vhich may continue for ever in that State. TuE Diſolution of Salts and Metals in their proper Menſtruums, is another Inſtance made uſe of by this Philoſophy to juſtify it's Aſſertions oſ Bodies, owing their particular Forms to the different Situation and Poſition of their Parts, whereas Diſſolutions are more rationally ſolv'd by an Expanſive Force in the Menſtruum acting upon the Contractive of the Salts or Metals; beſides it is abſurd to ſay, that a DiſoIution is cauſed by a various Situation of Parts, ſince that is cauſcd by a Diſiolution, and it is ridiculous to ſay, that a Diſiolution is causd by an Agitation, that is a Diſſolution of Parts, without aſſigning the Cauſe of ſuch an Agitation or Dit ſolution. As to the Inſtance of Keys, Knives, Files, Saws, and various other Inſtrumenss made out of the ſame Matter, Iron, which obtain their particular Effects from the Peculiarity and Diſtinction of their Figures, and of Mechanical Engins deriving their Povers from their ſeveral Structures, even their Effects we have ſiewn in the following Shects are owing tò the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, without which theit different Configurations wou'd ſignify no more than the drawing Lines and Figures upon a plain piece of Paper; tis the Force and Energy with which they are endu'd, and not the mere Figure of the Parts, which gives them that Importance of Action, and that Ability to produce the Effects we experience from them; what voud a Key perform, which, as we have ſaid, has the Nature of a Lever to remove the Obſtacle, Vhich oppoſes it, without the Expanſive Force applyd to it, in order to ſurmount the Contractive of the Obſtacle? Or a Knife, which has the nature of a Wedge, vithout a like Expanſive Force actuating and envigorating it againſt the Contractive it is deſign'd to ſubdue? Woud a File or a Saw by it's Parts and the Diſpoſition oſ them, without the Expanſive Force of the Mind, and the Hand, which obeys irs Directions, diſolve the Contractive of Matter? Or woud the Teeth of eiĩther ol them ſigniſy much without the Reciprocation? THAT the Reſiections of Light, and that Colours, and particularly White, are oving to the Roughneſs of the Surſacc, on vhich it is Impingent, and conſcquently  the Diſpoſtion and Situation of it's Parts is not maniſeſ, ſince Claſs or Watẽi may be Colourleſs or Tranſparent ſrom their Expanſive Force aſliſting and promorin⸗ the Progreſs or Tranſmiſſion of Light, which has alſo an Expanſive Force, thro' them ſtom a kind of Similarity and Congruency of Action, thus the Expanſive of Firc paſſ more caſily thro Air or Water, or a Body heated, which are Expanſive, thar thirò' Glaũi, or Solid, or cold Bodies, which are of a Contractive Nature, but wher D rhi this Expanſive Force of Glas or Water is interrupted and broken, the Light is ol Courſe obſtructed and ſtop'd, and where it do's not find a Paſſage, returns 's Force upon the ambient Plenum, which cauſes the Senſation of White in us, that is, it is not reflected in Rays to the Eye, but reſts Glowing in a pale and languid Flame on the Surface, where the Impaction is made, and by that means affects the Medium which ſurrounds it, with that Action, which produces the above-mention'd Senſation in us. SIR Iſna Newtou's Doctrine of Light and Colours we have in another Place con ſiderd, and ſhall add ſomething farther concerning it in the following Section, and therefore will here only ſay, that it is not from thence provd, that Coloun depend upon the different Figures and Poſitions of the Parts oſ Bodies, ſince thoſe Colours obtain a truer Solution from ſuppoſing there are various Compoſitions oſ the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Bodies, upon which, when the ſame Similai and Homogeneous Light is incident, it reccives different Impreſſions and Actions which communicated to the ambient Plenum ſtrike us with that Variety of Colours we behold in them; and from theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Bodies it is, that we feel as well as ſee them, and that in various Ways and Manners as vill afterwards appear. OpTICKS are alſo alledg'd to ſew, that diverſe Effects are produc'd from a change of Diſtance and Figure, as in plain, concave, and convex Speculums, ve ſhall have occaſion to examine into the Foundations of this Science in another Place, and ſhall here only anfwer, that the Expanſive Force of Light, the Expanſive and Contractive of Glaſ' and Quick-ſilver have no Inconſiderable, becauſe the chief Inſluence in the Production of theſe Phænomenons, without which, Figure and Diſtance would ſigniſy juſt nothing. As to the Revolution of the Earth about the Sun with it's Axis parallel to it ſelſ, and inclin'd to the Plane of the Ecliptick, by which all the Seaſons of the Year are produc'd, and the ſeveral Effects ariſing from them causũ, they ſo maniſeſtly depend upon the various Degrees of the Suns Expanſive Force, and of the Earth's Contractive, that it woud be trifling to confute this Pretence for a Similar Matter, and the Parts, and Pores of it, with their different Situations and Textures, betwixt which, and the Inclination and Paralleliſm of the Earth's Axis, there is no imaginable Connexion. Tur lat Argument to prove this Doctrine is drawn from the magnetick Atractions, which are alter'd by the Blow of an Hammer, and by the Heat of the Fire are annihilated and deſtroy'd, vhich will be a very good one, when it can be evinc'd, that there is no Expanſive Force in Percuſſion or in Fire, till then thoſe Forces ill aſſume to themſelves the Prerogative of the Cauſe, and any change in the Situation of the internal Parts, if there is any, will be only an humble and paſſive Effect, derivd from it. 5. 20. IN Relation to the new Doctrine of Light and Colours, which was the laſt Thing I proposd to ſpeak to, in the beginning of this Chapter, ve ſaid in our Principles of Natural Philoſephy, Part 2. Chap. 3. Sect. 40. That the next Sort of Experiments, to prove the Rays of Light are differently refrangible Originally and before their primary Refraction, are ſuch as at the moſt demonſtrate them only to be ſo afterwards, &e. I ſhall thercfore now, as a Supplement to what I have before offerd on this Subject, go thro' the ſeveral Experiments, and ſew that what I have there alledgd is true. ExPERIMENTS the 1ſf, 24, and 3d. we have already conſiderd in thoſe Principles, and ſhall now proceed to the 47h, it will be too Tedious for me to recount all the Experiments, and deſcribe them in Order, I ſhall thereſore for the moſt Part only refer to them, with their Schemes, as they are deliverd and explaind to us by this Philoſophy, and reaſon and argue upon them ſrom thence ExPERE ExPERIMENT the 47h. Fig. 13. which is by Iooking at the Foramen  in the Win dow-ſhut thro' the Priſm 4BC is confeſ'd to be of the ſame Nature with the third it ſiews the refracted Image of the Foramen to be Oblong, and not Circular, which the common and receivd Laws of Opticks woud require, and therefore, that, in equal Incidences of the Rays, there is a conſiderable Inequality of Refractions, but whence this Inequality ariſes do's not yet appear, and conſequently it is thus far acknovledgd, that ſuch Inequality may be as well causd, by an Alteration of Li by the Priſm into variouſly colourd Shadows, that is, by an Enervation and Diffuſion of the Rays in different Degrees, as by a Separation of Rays differently refrangible in their ovn Nature before their Tranſmiſſion thro' it. ExPERIMENT the sth. Fig. 14. S is the Sun, F the Foramen of the Window-ſhut, A BC the firſt Priſm, D H the ſecond, ?T the oblong Image of the Sun made by the firſt Priſm when the ſecond is taken avay, 21 the Image made by the Croſ Refractions of both Priſms together, and T the Image of the Sun made withour any Priſm, or any Refraction at all; if thereſore ſit is ſaid) the orbicular Light 7 is by the Refraction of the firſt Priſm drawn out and dilated into a long Image PT by a Diſfuſion of Rays, the Light ? , vhich is ſupposd to take up a Space of the ſame Lengih and Breadth with the Light 7, ought to be, by the Refraction of the ſecond Priſm, dilated and drawn out into the long Image æ ꝗ, and the Light XQRL, G into the long Image q7i, and the Lights Læ SM, MSVN, NVT, into ſo many other long Images Irsm, msvn, nvt, and all theſe long Images wou'd compoſe the four Square Image æ7, for the ſecond Refraction woud ſpread the Rays one vay, as much as the firft doth another, and ſo dilate the Image in Breadth, as much is the firſt doth in Length; But the event is otherwiſe, for the Image was not made broader by the ſecond Refraction, only became more Oblique, as repreſented at ꝓ⸗, its upper end ? being, by the ſecond Refraction, tranſlated to a greater Diſtance n its lower end T; ſo then the Light, which went towards the upper end ? of the Image, was, at equal Incidences, more refracted in the ſecond Priſm, than the Light, Vhich tended tovaãrds the lower end 7, that is the Blue and Violet; than the Red mnd Yellow, and therefore was more refrangible; The ſame I.ight was, by the Refraction of the firſt Priſm, tranſlated farther from the place 7, to whichit tended before Refraction, and therefore ſufferd as well in the firſt Priſm, as in the ſecond, a greater Refraction, than the Reſt of Light, and by conſequence was more RefranD 2 giblę gible than the reſt even before i's Incidence on the firſt Priſm, and the ſame was tryd by a third and fourth Priſm, but the Rays, which were more refracted than the reſt in the firt Priſm, were alſo more refracted in all the reſt, and that ithour any Dilatation of the Image ſide-vays. THE Argument ſtands thus; becauſe QP X, the Violet, is more removd from than ?TN, the Red, by the firſt Reiraction, and becauſe 2 is more removd from ? in the ſecond Refraction than ? from 7, and conſequentſy, becauſe theſe Rays are differently Refrangible, therefore I, which is not removd from it's Place at all, nor any of ir's Rays, conſiſts of Rays, which are differently Refrangible, that is, becauſe there are evident Proofs, that the colourd Image after Refraction, is formd of Rays of various Forces, Colo or Degrees of Action or Refrangibility, therefore it is evident, that the yellow Image of the Sun, which has not thoſe Colours, yet conſicts of them even before Refraction; This is the very Point in Queſtion, it is punctually denyd, and it is provd no other way but by aſfirming it. For what Connexion is there betwixt QPK, VTN, and ſo of the reſt being removd from their Places, and 7 and it's Parts continuing in the ſame Place? berwixt PT being painted with Variety of Colours, and 7 and irs Parts repreſenting only one? Is it not morè natural ro conclude from thence, that therefore ?T is compos'd of different Sorts oF Rays, and differently Refrangible, and that ? is not? Beſidos what Connexion is there berwixt P X, being more rem&vd from 7 than ?TN, and ꝓ bing more removd from P, than ? from T? In the firſt Caſe two different Colours, Vioſer and Red, arè produc'd, in the ſecond the ſame Colours are only preſervq, ãnd thereforè there cannot be the ſame Argument from ꝓ and ? to ? and T, as from P and T to T. l I is plain, the ſame Colours are preſerv'd thrtõ' two, three, or more Priſms, and by conſequence their different Degrees of Refrangibility, but the Impreſſion upon Light is made by the firſt Priſm, and the Contorſion of the Image by the ſecond, without any Alteration of the Colours or different Actions of Light producd by the firſt; For this ſeems to be a general Law in Nature, that when once the Actions Betwixt any two different Bodies are balanc'd and adjuſted, ſo as to produce a certain ect, àn addition of ihie ſame Kind of Action on one hand or another do's not ange the Phænòmenon as to the Nature of it, tho it may as to the Degree, or Direction, or ſorhè other Circumſtance; Thus one, or two, or three Concave or Convex Glaſſes will have the ſame Effect to diſperſe or collect Light, and Speculums to reflect it, Water will preſerve an Equilibrium of it's Parts in a greater or leſs Quantity, the ſame will diſſolve Salts, and Menſtruums Metals, Fire will fuſc them, the Magner attract Iron, &e. tho we uſc more or fower of theſe Subſtances; they vill contribute to the ſame kind of Effects in Nature, albeit there may be ſome Circumſtantial Differences as tothe Degree or Direction of them. War we have hitherto ſaid is in reſpect of the Length of the Image ?T; As to the Breadth of it, the Argument alledgſd is thus, that ſince 7 is diffusd and dilated into the Image P7, if this Image was made by a Dilatation of the Rays from a Change of them into a larger Surface by Refraction, and not by ſplitting and ſeparating of them by it, which were Immutably and Originally the ſame before Refraction, it woud follow, that PK in the firſt Refraction woud be diffusd into æ»  in the ſecond, and that KRL, RLS M; S MVN, VNT, in the firſt Refraction, vou'd be reſpectively dif'd into qkrl, rlsm smvn, vntæ, in the ſecond. In anſwer to which ve muſt ſay, that altho there is a Diſfuſion of  or unrefracted Light into P7, the refracted thro' a Priſm, it is not from thence conſequent, that there ſould be a Diffuſion of refracted Light or ? T thro' a ſecond Priſm into x r, for the Reaſons before offerd. i Farther, if QP, ?7TN, and the reſt are to obſerve the ſame Laws as ſ, in their Reſraction, Violet and Red are ſuppos'd to have the ſame Properties as the pure Rays of the Sun, and æpqt, vnt r, ought not only to be of the ſame Length, but of the ſame Colours with ?T, which wou'd be very abſurd to argue; we on the contrary, vho affirm- a Dilatation of the Image 7 into PT, by an Alteration of the Pro perties of the Sun's Rays into Colours, deny, when they are thus alter'd, that they vill obtain the ſame Eſfects of Dilatation or Change, becauſe Violet, Red, &e. are not ihe ſame as the Sun's Rays, but Shadows and Enervations of them. o : N ON: the other hand,, woud: not this, Objection be very Inconvenient to eſent Hypotheſis of. Diſfimilar Rays being ſplit and ſeparatęd by ito Suęꝶg; VTN, and the reſ, each of them arẽ blended with a thouſund different Xiuũ of Rays, tho' Violet. and Red are the. prevailing, and conſequently, they, ought 10 bę ſeparated and dilated into the Spaces æ  vnt r, which yet is not ã oſE. ience. peo; is this Difficulty ſolvd by ſaying, as this Philoſophy do's, that the oblong Image PT conſiſts of innumerable circular ones of different Colours, each of them repreſenting the Sun's Diſque, for if the Diſque 7 is ſeparated by the firſt Refraction into the Diſques QPX, LERL, RLS M, SMVN, VNT, and each of theſe are formd and made up of innumerable others, which is acknowledg'd, they certainly ought by a ſecond Refraction to be ſeparated and dilated into æꝓ q qrl, rlsm, &e. But which is more, theſe circular æ Diſques ſeem to be perfectly Chi. : merical, and owe their Riſe to the b Breadth of the Image anſwering to the Sun's apparent Diameter, and to t Image being rerminaid by, Semi: circular Ends, which are very, un cortain and precarions Proofs o ir, eſpecially ſince Experimęnt the 1174, \ pa thels Imgn of a3 Olon and Triangular Form, ubæ⸗ thę Figure of. the Foramen; The chomę Annext expreſſes the Imagin'd Fahion of the Circular Diſques. As to caſting the Image 7, by placing a Lens at the Foramen, without a Penumbra, from Whence the Penumbra of the Images PT, p? wod likewiſe diſappear, that will equally agree with what we affirm, that the Refractions are perform'd exactly and regularly thro' the firſt Priſm, and continwd and, preſervd thro a Second, or a Third; nor do Figures the 161h, where the ſecond Prſm is removd to ſome Diſtance from the firft, and 171h, where two Images are painted upon the Wall i a direct Line by two diſtinct Priſms, and transferd from thence to an oblique Situa tion by the Interpoſition of a Third, evince any more than hat ve have alread conſiderd and confuted. l ExPERI ExPERIMENT the 61h. Fig. 13. only ſews, that red Light paſſing thro a ſecond Priſm acb, is alvays refracted to a lower place 4, in the oppoſite Wall, and Purple or Violet, paſſing thro' the ſame Priſm, and in the ſame Situation, is always efracted to an upper æ, and the intermediate Colours to intermediate Places berwixt M and N, vhich is a Conviction, that red Light is leſs Refrangible, and Violet more, and ſo of the reſt, which we acknowledge, but this is no Argument, that the Suns Light conſits of Rays differently Refrangible before Refraction, becauſe after Refraction different Lights or Colours obtain various Degrees of Refrangibility, ſuitable to the Nature and Action of thoſe Lights or Colours. EXPERIMENT the 71h. Fig. 17. 19, 20. is only to ſhew, that Red and Violet Lights producd by two Priſms, and view'd thro' a Third, are differently refracted by it, that is, tho' the red and violet Images are continud to each other, yet by Refraction they a I vr rP a g are ſeparated and divided, which is what we readily own; for without this Experiment, it is Impoſſible that two diſferent Colours causd in our Senſations, ſhou'd not proceed from different Actions, and it is Impoſſible that diſferent Actions, iſ Refrangible thro Glaſs at all, ſou'd not be differently Reſrangible, but this is no Proof that the Solar Light conſits of Rays differently Refrangible, previous to their Refraction thro' a Priſm, which yet is the Propoſition to be provd. EXPERIMENT the 81h, is of the ſame kind with the Former, namely, to ſew that the violet priſmatick Light tranſmitted thro a Lens, converges ſooner and nearer to the Lens, by about two Inches and an half than red Light, and conſcquently is more refracted, which is not denyd; bur that this evinces that the ſolar Light conſiisol red and violet Rays, becauſe the priſmatick red and violer Lights are diſferently Refrangible, we take the Liberty and do preſume to deny. EXPERIMENT the orh. Fig. 21. ABC is te firſt Priſm, BC the Baſe,  and C it's equal ; Angles at the Baſe, each of 45 Degrees, 4 it's rectangular Vertex, F 4 a Beam of the Suns Light let into a dark Room thro a Hole F, one third Part of an Inch broad, 4 it's Incidence on the Baſe of the Priſm, VG a leſs refracted Ray, 2H a more refradtedd Ray, MN the Beam of Light reftected from the Baſe, ? XT the ſecond Priſm, by vhicin this Beam, in paſſing thro' it, is refracted, Nf H the leſ refracted Light of this Beam, and &§¢ ũ the more refracted Part of it; When the firſt Priſm 4 8C is turn'd about irs Axis according to the Order of the Letters 4, B, C, the Rays H emerge more and more obliquely out of that Priſm, and at Length after their moſt oblique Emergence are reflected towards , and going on to ꝓ do increaſe the Number of the Rays Mp;3 afterwards by continuing the Motion of the firſt Priſm, the Rays G are alſo reflected to N, and increaſe the Number of the Rays r, and therefore the Light uN admits imo it's Compoſition, firſt the more refrangible Rays, and then the leſs refrangible Rays, and yet, aſter this Compoſition, is of the ſame Nature with the Sun's immediate Light F 47, the Reflection of the ſpecular Baſe BC cauſing no Alteration therein. Tnis Experiment therefore is an Argument for what we ſtill confeſs, that 476 and MH are differently Refrangible and differently Reflexible, becauſe Violet and Red being different Colours have different Actions, and conſequently their Effects muſt be different in their Refraction thro Glaſs, or their Reflexion from it, but it is no Argument that the Beam of reſracted and reſlected Light 47N, is the ſame with the Solar or Incident FR, ſuppoſing it is the ſame with F Mr, ſince the Solar Beam F æ in its Tranſmiſſion thro 2 M is changd into the Colours G, H, and then indeed the Baſe C makes no Alteration by it's Reflexion; this therefore is no more convincing than any other of the Experiments to prove, that the Solar Light conſiſts of different Colours, ſecing it only ſiews, that the Solar Light, when refracted by a Priſm, admits of them, and that thoſe Lights, when reflected from 7 to N, and tranſmited thro' a ſecond Priſm, will preſerve their Degrees of Refrangibility, and the purple Light proceed to , and the red to r, nothing of which is conteſted, bur aſfirmd, at the ſame Time, that we cannot allow Fæ to be the ſame Light as R or MH, MG, or M N, and ſo to ꝓ and ; for if it were ſo, any Glaſs Baſis, as well as B C the Baſis of the Priſm, ſhould have the ſame Effect, and reflet  H, MG in the ſame manner to N, and from thence thro' the Priſm to ꝓ and 4, if MH, Mũ were originally in Fæ, before it's Ingreſòs into the Priſm 4 BC. EXPERIMENT the i1orh. Fig. 22. 4 3C and BCD are to Priſms ty'd together in the Form of a Parallelepiped, their ides BC and CB being Contiguous, and their ſides A4 B and CD parallel; HIX is a third Priſm, by which the Suns Light propagateà thro' the hole ? into the dark Chamber, and there paſſing thrò' thoſe o of the Priſms 4B, BC, CB and CD is refracted at O to the white Paper PT7, falling there partly upon ?P by a greater Refraction, partly upon T by a leſs Refraction, and partly upon æ and other intermediate Places by intermediate Refractions; by turning the Parallelepiped 4BCD about it's Axis according to the Order of Letters 4, , D, B, at length When the contiguous Planes BC and CB become ſufficiently oblique to the Rays  a7, which are incident upon them at A4, there will vaniſh ttally out of the refracted Light O P7, firſt of all the moſt refracted Rays OP, (the reſt õ æ and OT remaining as before) then the Rays OR and other intermediate ones, and laſtly the leaſt refracted Rays 0T; For when the Plane BC becomes ſufficiently Oblique to the Rays incident upon it, thoſe Rays will begin to be totally reflected by it towards N, and firſt the moſt Refrangible Rays will be totally reflected (as was explaind in the preceding Experiment) and by conſequence muſt firſt diſappear at ?, and aſterwards the reſt as they are in order totally reflected to N, they muſt diſappear in the ſame order at æ and 7; ſo then the Rays, which at O ſuffer the greateſt Refraction, may be taken out of the Light 70, whilſt the reſt of the Rays remain in it, and therefore that Light A70 is compounded of Rays differently Refrangible, and becauſe the Planes 4 B and CD are parallel, and therefore by equal and contrary Refractions deſtroy one another's Effects, the incident Light  27 muſt be of the ſame Kind and Nature vith the emergent Light 70 anc G and thereſore doth alſo conſi*t of Rays differently Refranzible; Theſe two Lights F M and MM0, before the moſt refrangible Rays are ſeparated out oſ the emergent Light 470, agree in Colour and in all other Properties ſo far as the Obſervarion oĩ this Philoſophy reaches, and thereſore are deſcrvedly reputed of the ſame Nature and Conſtitution, and by conſequence the one is compounded as well as the other: But after the moſt refrangible Rays begin to be totally rerlected, and thereby ſeparated out of the emergent Light 0, that Light changes its Colour ſfrom White to a dilute and faint Yellow, a pretty good Orange, a very full Red ſucceſſively, and then totally Vaniſhes; For after the moſt refrangible Rays which paint the Paper at ? with a purple Colour are, by a total Reſlexion, taken out oſ the Beam oſ Light 470, the reſt oſ the Colours, which appear on the Paper at æ and 7, being mixt in the Light 210, compound there a faint Yellow, and aſter the Blue and part of the Green which appear on the Paper between ? and æ, are taken away, the reſt, which appear between æ and T ſthat is the Yellow, Orange, Red, and a little Green) being mix in the Beam 470 compound there an Orange, and when all the Rays are by Reflexion taken out of the Beam 470, except the leaſt Refrangible, which at 7 appear of a ſull Red, their Colour is the ſame in that Becam 470 as aſtervards at 7, the Refraction of the Priſm HIK ſerving only to ſeparate the differently refrangible Rays vithout making any. Alteration in their Colours, as is ſaid will be more fully provd hereaſter; The Reaſoning in the Scholium which ſollows is of a like Kind, and therefore we ſhall not here ſubjoin it. IN anſwer to the vay of arguing upon this Experiment ſſor the Experiment we do not deny, nor any other oſ this Philoſophy) we ſay, that this is much the ſame Caſe vith the Former, and that altho' the Beam LA7 may be of the ſame compounded Light with a70, as having been tranſmitted thro' the Priſm AæC, it is n; manifeſt, that L the incident and unreſracted Beam is thus compoundled before ſuch Tranſmiſſion; and a moſt convincing Argument, that it is not, is, that if it were, by the turning about oſ the ſide 48 oſ the Priſm, when the blue Rays of the Beam F L come to ſall with a certain Obliquity, they ought to be refiected from rhence, and after them the Green, Yellow, Orange, and Red Iucce ſlively, in like Manner, as the Rays of the Beam L M or M0 are reflected to V, and by that means transferd from P, R, and T t0 ꝑ, 7, and 1, one aſter another, but this do's not happen, from whence it is evident to a Demonſtration, that  L the incident Beam is not of the ſame compounded Nature vith the refracted La7, or A705 as to LAſ, the Red, as ve have ſiewn in our ſrinciples of Natural Philoſoph, ought to lye next to à the refracting Angle oſ the Priſm, and the Purple next to CA4 the Baſis oſ it, which we find in fact, ſince 07 is the Red, and OP the Purple; but that the Colours are not alterd by a Tranſmiſſion thro' a ſecond or third Priſm, we have already acknowledgũu; It is ſaid, that 458, CD being parallel, the Efect of the ſirſt Priſm is deſtroyd by the ſecond, which we deny, ſince the ſecond Priſm continues and preſerves the Eſſcũ oſ the firſt, as is plain ſfrom this very Experiment, ſceing the Beam L7 is oſ the ſame Kind and Nature vith that of 0; that 270 has the ſame appearance ith F L is not Material, ſince we have evinc'd, that in reality they are not the ſame, beſides it is not certain, that 270 do's not cauſe a pale and vhite Image on the Paper Whereas  L paints on it a ſtrong and vivid Yellow. EXPERIMENT the 117h. Teaches us how to ſcparate the Heterogeneous Rays ol compound Light into Circles, Parallelograms or Triangles, according to the Figure of the Foramen, which tranſmitts it, and therefore alledges no ſreſh Proof in Con firmation of the foregoing Doctrine. EXPERIMENTS the 120h, 131h, and 141h ſew, that if ve look thro' a Priſm upon a Circular Object illuminated by the Sun's Light, it appears oblong, confusd, and indiſtinct, but if ve look thro a Priſm on the ſame Object illuminated vith Red, Green, Blue or any other Homogeneal Light, it appears circular and perſectly defind but this is no more than in other Terms to tell us, what we are inſormd of in the third Experiment, that the Sun's Light by a Priſm is reſracted into various Colours but that Homogencal Light, or Colours producd by Reſraction are not, this is ne Argument therefore that ſuch Colours are originally in the Sun's Light, or tha they are not made and producd by Reſraction, tho aſter iheir Production they be come unalterable, and are never ſrom thence Metamorpho;d or Changd Axorme ANOTHER Series of Experiments is to prove, that the Phænomena of Colours, ir refracted or reflected Light, are not causd by new Modifications of the Light vari ouſly impreſ'd according to the various Terminations of the Light and Shadov, which is to demonſtrate the Fallhood of the Carteſian Hypotheſis, and ſignifies nothinę to the evincing the Point in Queſtion, namely, that the Solar Light conſiſts of dirſ ſimilar and differently colourd Rays. THERE are again other Experiments to ſhev, that all Homogeneal Light has it' proper Colour anſwering to it's Degree of Reſrangibility, and that Colour cannot be chang'd by Reflexions and Refractions; that is Homogencal Red, Green, or Blue Light, for Inſtance, after they are producd by the Priſm, are unchangeable, and each ha: it's peculiar Action belonging to it, or it's proper Degree of Refrangibility; but this is no Proof, that the Solar Light conſiſts of ſuch various Homogeneal Lights, only that the Priſm is capable of producing them, and which when producd, that there is no Alteration of Them. As to vhat is ſaid, that Colours may be producd by Compoſition, which ſhall be like to the Colours of Homogeneal Light, as to the Appearance of Colour, but not as to the Immutability of Colour and Conſtitution of Light, and that thoſe Colours by how much they are more compounded by ſo much are they leſs full and intenſc, and that by too much Compoſition they may be diluted and weakend, till they ceaſe, and the Mixture becomes White or Grey, that alſo whiteneſs and all grey Colours may be compounded of Colours, and that the whiteneſs of the Sun's Light is compounded of all the primary Colours mixt in a due Proportion; a great Part of this is ovnd, that the Lights producd by the Priſm may be variouſly mixt and blended, from Whence new Lights will ariſe, which may be again ſeparated and diſtinguiſd, alſo that theſe colourd Lights, producd by the Priſm, will conſtiture a White or Grey, which White or Grey is agaln reſolvible into thoſe colour'd Lights, of vhich they are formd; but that the Solar Beam is either White or Grey, which is plainly Yellow, or that it is made up of differently colourd and Homogeneal Lights is denyd, and what is alledgd in theſe two Propoſitions do's in Part confirm it; for it is ſaid, that the Colours, by how much they are more compounded, by ſo much are they leſs full and intenſe, and by too much Compoſition they may be diIuted and weakend till they ceaſe, and the Mixture becomes White or Grey, therefore the White or Grey proceeds from a Weakneſs or Dilution of the Colours, whereas the Colours themſelves proceed from a Weakneſs and Dilution of the Suns Rays, unleſs any one will ſay the colourd Image is ſtronger than the Suns Beam unrefracted, and conſequently if the Colours are an Enervation of the Suns unrefracted Beam, and White or Grey is an Enervation of the Colours, I hope it will not be ſaid, that White or Grey is the ſame as a Beam of the Sun acting in it's full Strength and Vigour. AND Experiments the orh, 1oth, 1 1th, &. only hew, that, when the Colours of the Priſm are blended together, they produce a white Image, and that if any of thoſe Colours are taken out, the remaining repreſent the Colour of the Compoſition, as alſo that by making the Rays fall unequally upon the Paper, which receives the Rays, Colours are produc'd, nothing of which is contradicted by us; but that the Caſe of this white Beam of Light after Reſraction is not the ſame vith the Solar before it's Refraction is evident, becauſe the Solar Beam cannot be ſo manag'd, nor can Colours be produc'd from it by any Inclination of the Paper to it, and there is the ſame Diſtinction betwixt the refracted and unrefracted Beam, as there was before evidencd to be in Experiment the orh and rorh, Part the firſt. THERE is nothing more offerd in this Theory of Light and Colours to prove the Truth of it, and it's fundamental Propoſition, namely, that the Solar Light conſiſts of differently colourd Rays originally to its Reſraction thro the Priſm, unleſs what ve have already conſiderd in our Priuciples of Natural Philoſophy, and our Inquiry here, into this Doctrine, ſo that till this is anſwerd we may be juſtly excusd any farther trouble on this Head. s. 21. I ſall only here add, that the Colours of the Priſim ſcem to ariſe from vhat I there mentiond in thoſe Principles, namely ~Red ſrom a Tranſmiſſion thro' the thinneſt Part of the Priſm or the very Edges of it, by which it's Colour is neareſt to the Suns, and it's Rays the moſt vigorous and liveſy, and therefore the leat Refrani gible; gible; Orange, Yellov, Green, Blue and Violet paſs thro' thicker Portions of the Priſm, by which they loſe of their Action, become leſs and leſs vigorous, and therefore are more Refrangible and Weak, and depart more from the Life and Activity of the vivid Beams of the Sun, and accordingly impreſs upon our Senſations Colours, which are darker and more gloomy; for the Rays of Light, when they impinge upon the Body of the Priſm, will yet, it is probable, be tranſmitted thro' the Edges of it, where there is the leaſt Reſiſtance; Tuar the ſame is the Caſe of thin Plates of Glaſs, Air, or Water, which, when thin, repreſent theſe various Colours to us from a certain Proportion requiſite betwixt the Action of the Sun's Rays, and of Glaſi, Air, or Water thro' which they are tranſmitted; l TuAT the Action of the Sun's Rays is of a moſt ſubtle and expanſive Nature, and rhat it cannot have any Effect to produce Colours by Tranſmiſſion, unleſs it is incident upon Bodies, which are very Minute and Thin, which have ſome Degree of the Expanſive to aſſiſt it's Tranſmiſſion, and but a ſmall Degree of the Contractive to impreſs an Alteration and change upon the Expanſive of the Sun's Rays, which is the Caſe of ſuch thin Plates; TuAT other groſſer Bodies, as colourd Fluids and Solids, derive thoſe Colours from the Impreſſions, which they give to the Sun's Light diſpers'd thro' the Plenum from theit own proper Expanſive and Contractive Forces, by which it receives a new Action, and thereby communicates to us thoſe Senſations of Colours; That therefore a Lamp or a Candle, enlightening the ſaid Plenum, cauſes the Colours of Natural Bodies, vhoſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces are the ſame, to appear much the ſame, yet with ſome little Diſtinction ariſing from the different Nature of the Light of the Sun and a Lamp, which illuminate the ſame Plenum; THAT the Experiment of Dr. Halley at ſeveral Fathoms deep in the Sea, where the upper part of his Hand was illuminated with Red, and the Iover with Green, is a Conviction, that the Sun's Rays were only weaken'd to a Red in the firſt Caſe, and by penetrating deeper and being reflected, to a Green; TuAT the various Colours of the Rainbow ariſe from a diſferent Enervation of the Sun's Rays by thin Plates of a watry Medium of different Thickneſſes or Conſtipations, the uppermoſt being the thinneſt, cauſe the leaſt Enervation, and the loweſt being the groſeſt, occaſion the greateſ, from Whence Red in the firſt caſe is produc'd, and Violet in the laſt, and ſo the intermediate Degrees of Colours in the intermediate Spaces; TuaT vhen the watry Medium is too Thin, as above the Red, the Rays paſs without any Alteration, and when it is too Groſ5, as below the Violet, there is no due Proportion of Action betwixt the Sun's Light and the Medium by which an Alteration can be produc'd, and therefore ve only ſee the plain vatrj Medium, in the ſame Manner, as it is in the Priſm, which when we come to a certain Thickneſs of it no Colonrs are produc'd, and we only perceive the Tranſparency of the Priſm it ſelf; or elſe, which I rather believe, it is becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Sun is too great for the Contractive of the watry Medium, and by that means diſſipates ànd ſurmounts it; TuAT the Eye is made ſenſible of theſe Alterations in the Suns Rays, incurring upon different Mediums, not by the imaginary Reſractions a d Reſections of Light, propos'd by Deſcartes, but by thoſe different Actions communicated to the Plenum, which conveighs theſe Notices to us, and by the Inrervertion of which, and ou Union vith it, ve are informd of all the various Clianges ve obſerve in Nature, which When differently affected we are ſo too, not only in our Sight, but in o Hearing, Smelling, and Feeling, which Impreſſions yet were never thought to be imparted to us by ſuch fancyd Reflections and Refractions; To explain this Theory ſtill farther, It is known and confeſd, that a Rainbow never appears, but when the Air is moiſt and dewy, aſter Rain, and when the Sun ſnines out directly oppoſite to it, in this Situation of the Sun, the Centre of Action is from thence, which by it's Expanſive Force, to a large Circuit round it, overcome: and diſſipates any counter Action againſt it ſrom the Dew or Vapors, but the dewy or vatry Medium preſſing and contracting againſt this Expanſive Force, at lengrh, When the Rays of the Sun become more Oblique, is capable of making ſome Re ſiſtance to it, and the greateſt Preſſure or Reluctance to the Expanſive Force of the Sun Sun being from the innermoſt Circle, becauſe it do's not only preſs it ſelf agãinſt it, but is back'd and enforc'd by all the ambient Circles which ſurround it, and vhoſe Preſſure tends the ſame way, the innermoſt Circle for that Reaſon will be the groſſeſ, from whence the Expanſive Force of the Sun being there moſt reſiſted, i's Rays become of a blackiſh or purple Colour; TuE next Circle being leſs conſtipated, and denſe, and preſſing leſs againſt the ſamc Expanſive Force of the Sun's Rays, becauſe it has fewer ambient Circles to ſtrengthen it's Preſſure, changes the Suns Rays to a Blue, the next to a Green, and the ſubſequent ones to Yellow and Orange, till at length where the outermoſt Circle becomes the weakeſt in it's Preſſure, Reſiſtance and Contraction by the dewy Medium being now Rarer, and having fewer ambient Circles to ſupport it, the Rays of the Sun and the Expanſive Force of them being leaſt reſiſted are formd into a Red, vhich compoſcs the Primary Iris; After which the Expanſive Force of the Sun's Rays meeting vith no conſiderable Oppoſition, they paſs on without any remarkable Thænomenon from them for ſome Space, till now becoming more oblique, and more weak, the Rarity of the dewy Medium is capable of making a new Impreſſion upon them by changing them into Red tho' a-fainter one than before, becauſe the Action on borh Hands, both of the Sun and of the Medium, is more languid, after which the Rays of the Sun and their Expanſive Force growing ſtill more oblique and weaker and the dewy Medium being much the ſame, as being now upon it's Termination, the Suns Light is varyd into Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, and Purple by ſo many Degrees of Enervation, till the dewy Medium being ended the Rays of the Sun take their Progreſs as uſual without any Impediment or Oppoſition to them, hich ſeems 10 be the true Reaſon of the Secondary Iris; i AND from hence may be given a full Account for the different Heighths of the Iris from 41 to 45 Degrees, which is not done in any other Hypotheſis, with many Phænomenons of it beſides, which have not been hitherto explain'd, It alſo appears at ſuch a certain Depth of the Atmoſphere, and at ſuch a Diſtance from the Sun, and on the oppoſite Side to it, becauſe the Rays ſurmount all Oppoſition upon their firſt Ingreſs into the watry Medium, but aſterwards penetrating farther, and growing veaker, they are changd by the Contractive Force of the ambient Dew into the CoIours, and in the Manner we have mentiond; THAT the Expanſive Force of the Sun acts ini the Manner I have recounted is not diſficult to apprehend, and I believe will be readily ownd, but that the dewy Medium ioud act by a Contractive Force againſt it, will not be ſo ſoon imagind, till we come to be convincd, which will be ſiewn in the following Sheets, that all Nature conſifis of theſe two Forces, and that all the Phænomenons in it ariſe from their mutual Conteſts and Conſlicts with each other; TnrE Account of the Rainbow above-mentiond is farther confirmd by what every one may obſerve of a Candle burning in the Dark, and in an open and moiſt Air, which if you look upon at ſome Diſtance is encompaſs'd with an illuminated Medium, and afterwards with Purple, Blue, Green, Yellow, Orange, and Red Circles, repreſenting the Colours of the Rainbow, which can be no otherways ſolvd than upon the foregoing Hypotheſis. As to the Doctrine of Sounds, which we had in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy argu'd againſt, the Preſent has been ſo complaiſant to thoſc Reaſonings and to the Lonãdin and Paris Experiments, as to alter it's Calculations from betwixt 920 and 1085 Feet, which Sound performs in a ſecond, according to it's firſt Edition, to II42 in its ſccond Edition; ſo eaſy it is for this Philoſophy to change and vary it's Principles, as new Matters of Fact ariſe, t0 which it as readily accommodates it ſclf, as the Chamæleon to the Air it breaths in; but beſides the Velocity of Sound, which in Eccho's is exceeding great and impoſſible to be aſcertain'd, from Which yet theſe Calculations are framd, the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of Bodies are ſo infinitely various, from which Sounds are really and in Nature produc'd, which will be ãſierwards ſiewn, that it is Vain and Idle to imagine they can be exacted to any Mathematical Rule of their Progreſſion. ſ. 22. Having therefore thus far conſiderd the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, or the Philoſophy of Similar and Homogeneous Matter, and the Atoms of it, which I call the French iiloſophy being taught indeed originally by æpicurus, but reviv'd by Deſcartes, and paioE 2 ni7 niZd by Gaſſendus, vho vrit the Liſe of that Philoſopher very much in favour ol him; and having likewiſe conſiderd the Improvements upon it ſrom our own Nation, who have added a Vacuum to it, which Deſcartes ſnod have done, it beiny Impoſſible to maintain a Plenum, and a Similar and Homogeneous Matter together, I ſhall now take my final leave of it, and proceed to what may be juſtly termd the Italick Philoſophy, or the Aſechanical, being principally derivd ſrom Gælilcus, taken up by &orellus, and eſpousd by epler, Chriſiian Hugens, and Sit Iſ. Newion, and which Philoſophy likewiſe agrees ſo far with the former, as to aſſirm a Similar Matter, and the Atoms of ir, to which they have, with ſome kind of Senſe and Conſiſtency vith themſclves, annext a Vacuum, by which it becomes the entire Syſieme and Docttine of Epicurus; but then again, they have with ſome Abſurdisy joind a Deity to this Similar Matter, Atoms, and Vacuum, which their Maſter more truly, tho perhaps not more prudently rejected ſrom it, and leſt his Similar Matter very honcſly, and the Atoms or Particles of it, to their own Actions, aſter he had contrivd Space and Room enough for them, in vhich they were at Liberty to perſorm their random Motions and Vagarics. HOWEVER this Philoſlophy has been ſ Indulgent to what we had mentiond in our Principles, Chap. 1. 5. 16. That we ſhould make the Demonſtration oſ æzeligion the End and Concluſion as well as Deſign oſ all our Specularions, as to annex an Explication of what it means by a God, tho not a Demonſtration of one, at the End oſ its ſccond Edition, which was wanting in the firſt; but it's Atums, which were Immutable, and its Vacuum, which was Infinite, Eternal and Unproducd, vou'd not allow it to acknovledge, that the Intellizence was an Anima Mundi, or had any Connexion vith Nature, or any Union with it, or was in any Senſe a ſource ſrom which ĩt was derivd, only that it vas a Being, which was an Imperaior Univerſalis, or Lord Paramount to theſe Atoms, and guided and conducted them as he pleasd; which is ſaying nothing at all in the Proof of a God, but forming a Creature of our own Fancies, vhich we ſet at the Head of our imaginary Atoms, and is, in Reality and Truth, a Fineneſs, vhich Zpicurus had not the Wit, or too great a Simplicity in his Notions, to think of; for when he had made all to depend upon Atoms, and the Gravity of them, and upon a Vacuum, he juſtly concluded, that he had eſſœctually diſcarded Auaxagorass Mind or Intelligence out oſ the World, and therefore, for which the Aihenians valu'd him, that he had nothing remaining to proſeſs of Religion, but to expreſs himſclſ hearty for the Gods of his Country, without having any real Eſteem for them, and which is pretty evidently the Caſe oſ ſome of our Modern Philoſophers. l Ir any one ſhall now asik me, whether therefore we maintain the Plenum of the Ancients, and that God and Matter are the Principles of all Things, and that Matter, in Conſequence, is Eternal and Unproduc'd; WE anſwer firſt, That we are under no Obligation from what we have hitherto alledgd to aſſert any ſuch Doctrine, all that we have endeavourd to ſiew and evince is, that the current Opinions of the oldeſt and moſt Celebrated Philoſophers of Greezæ and Phauicia were on the Side, not of a Vacuum, but a Plenum, and that the Wireſt and Beſt Men eſpous'd the Latter, whilſt the Former was deſended by none but by the Atheiſtical and the Vicious. SECOND, Dut to ſatisfy this Qu ſion more directly, ve anſwer, That with the Ancients ve aſſirm a Plenitude of Corporeal Being or Matter, which yer ve ſuy and ſnall prove, is not a Self-exiſtent Principle, but is derivd from and created and form'd by God, and that it could not ſubſi”t one Moment without him; hether this Production of the 7 7æ%, or the Univerſe, or the Material Plenum was in Time or from Eternity, Reaſon cannot determine, and therefore muſt be ſubmitted to Revelation, becauſe in an Eternal Succeſſion of Ages, there is no point oſ Time, in vhich the Inſinite Mind was not equally capable of exerting i's Almighty Faculties into Creation, and conſcquently what admitted of no Limitation from his Power, muſt receive it from his Will, which it is Impoſſible for us to know without ſuch Revelation. C H AP. C H AP. II. Concerning the Principles of the Mechanical Philoſophy, and the Matter and Motion aſſerted in it, as alſo of Space, Place, Time or Duration, and Celerity. 5.1. HAT has hitherto engag'd our Enquiries has been the certainty oſ an Ts Buts is exiſting Nature in general, the Opinions concerning a Vacuum and a Enisi Plenum, and the Philoſophy oſ Matter with the ſeveral Properties of it, it's being auſ ibe AũiExtended, Solid, and Impenetrable, Diviſible, Moveable, &e. Cold, Heat, Hardneſs, iha ſormur s and Soſtneſs, as alſo the Sounds, Taſts, Smells, Colour and the like, which we in 2,ſiereſ, an fact Experience reſult from it, and the Theory of the Rainbow, which concluded iæ ſti is the firſt Part of our Examination into the Principles of natural Knovledge; we have afrom thence proceeded in the Courſe of our Studies, to ſiew the Infirmities and Weak- of Light, and neſs in the various Hypotheſes of the Reſlection and Refraction of Bodies, and in Opib, æu conſequence, of that of Light, which carryd our Scarches into the Principles of àuim Opticks, and the Solutions they give of Viſion, of concave and convex Glaſſes, the Conſtruction of Microſcopes and Teleſcopes, and the numerous Phænomenons in that Science, all which we ſhall at preſent omit, and ve ſhall now therefore go on to conſider, the Philoſophy of Matter with that of Motion, and the Laws and Hypotheſes which have been rais'd to account for them, and as Opticks was one Part of vhat may be term'd the active Philoſophy in oppoſition to the Corpuſcular, ſo this is another. 5. 2. IN the Theory of Mechaniſm or Motion, there are therefore four Things to n iæ Tiæ be conſiderd; Firſt, what Motion is, Second, the Nature of that which is movd, ſ tecimæ Third, the Place which that which is movd poſſeſſcs, as well as the Space thro' Tſn n & which it moves, and laſtly, the time which it takes up in it's Motion; Conſequently corſidered. to determine the Motion of Body, and what Laws it obſerves, we are to inquire in general; Firſt, what Motion is, Second, what Body or Matter is, Third, the Meaning of Place, and what real Space is, and Fourth, the Notion of Time. s. 3. As to what reſpects Motion it will not I am apt to think be neceſſary to Moions as tlai prove there is ſuch an appearance in Nature, becauſe it is as plain and maniſeſt as and e- eni ⸗ any thing in it, and thoſe who have raisd Diſficulties againſt it, as Diodorus or Zeno, —in or vhocver elſe, argue againſt it upon a Suppoſition of Space and Body exiſting, Bua vhich are no more demonſtrable or apparent than Motion it ſelf is, for it is only sat Int. by our Senſes that we know there is Space or Body, and by the ſame we are con- ad Ver. Phy vincd, that there is Motion likeviſe. ſicam ꝑ. 575. .. WHAT Motion is therefore we are next to examine; if it is a Tranſlation of Netibe ih Body out of the Vicinity of a certain Similar Homogeneous Matter, which ſurrounds Carteſian nor it, into another, be it ſubtle or otherwiſe, whilſt the Notion of Matter continues the priri ſame, tis a Tranſlarion or Motion of Body out of it ſclf into it ſelf, which is im- /⸗ agreeũ poſſible, unleſs it be allowd that a Penetration of Dimenſions is not ſo, or it is the ſ Mamre ſame as to ſay, that Gold can move in it's own Subſtance; if Motion is aſfirmd ro be a Tranſlation of Matter out of one Part of Vacuum into another, then it is evident a Vacuum is taken for granted as before a Similar and Homogencous Plenum was, ncither of which are provd according to what has been alledgd in the firſt part of i our Examination into the preſent Philoſophy, that there is Motion is evident, bur that it is in a Vacuum or a Similar and Homogeneous Plenum is not ſo evident, till the one or the other is demonſtrated, which as we have ſiewn cannot be done. S. 5. FROM What has been ſaid in the foregoing Section, it is plain that the De- ꝑæ.6ẽ i finition of Motion in general, is ſuited to the ſcveral Hyporheſes of a Vacuum, or nieſ⸗ H  : : . . :i num and t a Similar and Homogencous Plenum, neither of which are true in the Senſe which Newen: the Modern Philoſophers aſſirm, as we have in the ſirſt Part of this Philoſophy en- Veem aæ deavourd to evince, namely, that the Vacuum of Sir Iſaac Newſor, and the Plenum ſ//u of Deſcartes are equally Chimerical and Abſurd. G. 5, REAI s. 6. REAL Motrion is not therefore to be ſolv'd or defin'd in general by rthe Hypotheſes of a Similar and Homogeneous Plenum or a Vacuum, but by conſidering the ſeveral Particulars which enter into our complex Senſation of it, which are recounted in §. 2. as Matter, Space, Place, and Time. 5. 7. As for Motion abſtracted from all it's Circumſtances, it cannot be better defid than by naming it a continual Alteration or Change of Diſtance, altho any Defſinition of it is in ſome Meaſure improper, for the ſame Reaſon, as one of Sound or Colour voud be, our Senſes inform us of Motion ſas they do of Sound and Colour,) and we cannot deſcribe it by any other Characters than ſuch as we receive from our Senſes, and therefore the Explanation will be no clearer than the Idea vhich is endeavourd to be explain'd; This is very evident, which ſince it is ſo, ſome may be apt to vonder upon what account Philoſophers have taken ſuch Pains in deſining Motion; But the Admiration will ſoon ceaſe, if we obſerve that under that pretence they lay a Foundation for their ovn Hypotheſes, Thus where one Sect has eſpousd the Notion of a Similar Plenum, there Motion is a Tranſlation of Body out of the Vicinity of the Corpuſcles which ſurround it, into the Vicinity of others, that is, in ſhort, Motion is the moving of a Body in a Similar Plenum; On the contrary where another Sect has embrac'd the oppoſite Opinion of a Vacuum, with them Motion is a change of a Body's, Primary Place, that is, Motion is the moving of a Body in an abſtracted Space or a Vacuum, and ſince Diſtance is alike, whether there is a Vacuum or a Plenum, they have not thought fit ta make uſe of that Term, becauſe it vod be of no Service to the promoting their particular Doctrines, ſo that what we gain by ſuch Deſinitions is nor a diſtincter Apprehenſion of Motion, bur the advantage only of knowing what Opinion the Philolopher is of, who propoſes them, and how careſul he is to make us believe his own Hypotheſis is neceſſary to a right Conception of it. s 8. SETTING aſide therefore the ſeveral Hypotheſes introduc'd not to explain Motion, but to be aſfixt and made Eſſcntial to it, we ſhall conſider what real Motion is, and what is requiſite to the perſect underſtanding of it; The firſt thing requiſite (ſince we only at preſent enquire into external Nature, and not that of our Minds in which there is a Kind or Species of Motion obſervable, tho' diſerent from that into which we now examine,) The ſirſt thing requiſite is Matter, for in real Motion there is always ſome material Being which is movd, the Definition of which, if not truly given, is one Argument againſt all the Reaſonings made uſe of in the preſent PhiloIophy of Motion; It is deſin'd to be a Subſtance, Extended, Solid and Impenetrable, Indifferent either to be movd or not to be movd, that is, it is entirely Sluggiſ and Paſſive, as well as ſuſceptible of any Motion, Figure or Form, Which is conſequent upon it's being Paſſive. s. 9. Tis very certain ſuch a Deſinition oſ Matter, as this, is extremly vell adapted to the Purpoſcs oſ Philoſophers, which are that they may uſe it as they pleaſe, that they may divide, mangle, and ſhape it, as they ſhall find occaſion, which is done in the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, or ſubmit it to what Laws of Motion they ſhall think ſit or agreeable to their Explanations of Nature, which is done in the Mechanical; on the other Hand, Matter is not ſo Tame and Submiſſive a Being, as they are willing to apprehend it; for firſi, ve have beſore prov  that it's Subſtance, as they term it, vhich is the Baſis and Foundation of the other Properties of it, is unexplain'd, and yer is as neceſſary to a real Knovledge of Matter, as any thing elſe which belongs to it, being that which connects and cements the ſeveral Qualities of it together, and from hich they all reſult; Second, in reſpect of it's Extenſion, Solidity, Impenetrability, theſe have all been before conſiderd, and ſhiewn to be different from What this Philoſophy imagines or conceives. S. 10. THE next Property aſfirmd in this Definition is the Inertia of Matter, in Relation to it's being movd or not, and that it is perfectly indifferent to Motion or Reſt in it's ovn Nature, than which nothing can be more falſe, ſince if we take any ſolid, conſiſient, and heavy Body, as Lead, it has not that Indifference, becauſe tis very manifeſt it makes a Reſiſtance to Motion, whereas on the contrary in other Matter, as Fire, there is a Reſiſtance made to Reſt, ſo that Matter is ſo far from being in general Indifferent either to Motion or Reſt, that ſome Parts of it do moſ violently aſfect the one, and others the direct oppoſite, inſomuch as very diſſiculty to he be pur out of that State of Activity or Quieſcence which they have enmbracd, as is notorious to any one vho knows how hard a thing it is to extinguih an outrageous Fire, or to move a Weight of ſeveral Millions of Tuns. õ. 11. Ir it is ſaid the Reaſon, why, in the laſt caſe, Matter, which is in its ſelf Paſſive, makes a Reſiſtance to any Impreſſion which is ſtruck upon it, is, becauſe it has a Force of Gravitation; that Force is cither in the Matter which Gravitates, or in that to vhich it Gravitates, if in the former, Matter is Active at the ſame time that it is ſupposd to be Paſſive, if in the latter, ſince that is Matter too, the Argument is ſtill Valid, If the gravitating Force is neither in the Matter which Gravitates, nor in that to which it Gravitates, it has a gravitating Force, and it has not, which is a Contradiction, for ve do not now enquire what is the Cauſe of Gravitation, but whether there is not ſuch a Property or Effect in Matter, which is as plain and evident to our Senſes, as Extenſion or Solidity is. ꝗ. 122. WE cannot but here farther obſerve one thing more in this Philoſophy, which ſeems to be very Strange and Surprizing, that whercas in the beginning of it, it ſuppoſes Matter to be perfectly Sluggiſh and Unactive, by that time it comes to the Concluſion, Matter is left with a Force and Activity able to keep the whole Planetary Syſtem within the Bounds of it's Orbits, by it's immenſe and prodigious Gravitation; from whence it is manifeſt, that however it might be neceſſary to make Matter an uſeles and paſſive Thing in order to turn it about, and project it this way or the other at Pleaſure, yet Truth wou'd prevail, and in the Proceſs of theſe Philoſophers arguings upon Nature, they were obligũd to introduce a Force into Matrer, which they woud not at firſt acknowledge, and own at the laſt that it was endued vith a Power of Gravitation; So that if we compare the original Hypotheſis of this Philoſophy with the Concluſions of it, the one ſeems to be little leſs than a Confutation of the other, Matter is ſupposd to be entirely Paſſive, The Sum of all the Mathematick Reaſoning upon that Hypotheſis, is, that it has in every Part of it a Force of Gravitation, that is, that it is entirely Active, and if ſuch a Concluſion is not a Contradiction to ſuch an Hypotheſis, I cannot tell what is. s. 13. ALLOWING however the Reſiſtance of Matter to Motion cod be aceountcd for by Gravitation, ſo as Matter ſnoud, notwithſlanding that, be ſtill Paſſive, we ſhall yet want a freſ Solution for the oppoſite Quality obſervable in Fire, or in the Rays of the Sun, which do not make a Reſiſtance to Motion, but to Reſt; iſ this is done by any Ethereal Particles aſembling together, ſince thoſe thereal Particles are ſuppos'd to be Matter, Matter will ſtill be Active; Whence that Action proceeds is nor now the Queſtion, only whether there is ſuch an Action, which it is very certain there is, and vhich we can with no greater Reaſon deny to belong to the real Nature of that Matter, than Brightneſs or Heat, or Extenſion, or any other lity which we obſerve in it. If any one ſhou'd argue vith us, thar Fire, which is endu'd with Motion, is Matter, and Lead, which is at Reſt, is Matter, and therefore Matter is Indifferent to Motion or Reſt, or has a perfect Inertia, the Sophiſtry is caſily anſwerd, by ſaying that Fire is Matter, and yet is not Indifferent to Reſt, and Lead is Matter, and yert is not Indifferent to Motion, and therefore Matter is not Indifferent to Motion or Reſt, the Caſe is, THey who argue thus, ſpeak of a General, Fancyd, and Abſtracted Matter, but we of a True and a Real. 5. 14. ANOTHER Property which is ſaid to enter into the Definition of Matter is, that it is ſuſceptible of any Figure or Form which we can imagine; This likewiſe is well contrivd by Philoſophers, to make Matter obedient to their Carving and Cut ting it out into what Shapes or Figures they judge convenient to their ſeveral Purpoſes, but that Matter will yield to them in this is not ſo very certain, becauſc tho we can by Superior Forces apply'd give what Impre ſion we think fit to Gold or a Diamond, yet we are not able to ſubduc Flame, and put it into what Figures we are deſirons it ſioud receive; The Reaſon oſ which is, that quieſcent Bodies may be conquerd by an active Force, but Fire and Flame cant, and therefore to form a Notion of Matters being ſuſceptible of any Figure, from our being capable of imparting it to ſome Portions of ĩt, is dt the beſt only a Partial deſining of it, and even in ſolid Bodies this Property is not true, excepting where the Force is ſuperior to the Reſiſtance; as to any other Form of Matter beſides the Figute of it, we have no occaſion occaſion to conſider it, ſince, in this Philoſophy, the various Forms of Matter are owing to the various Figures and Textures of ĩt's Parts. s. 15. Ir it is not upon the foregoing account that we ſuppoſe Matter to be ſuſceptible oſ any Figure, that is, becauſe we actually experience we can divide it at our pleaſure, which as we have ſaid is not true, it muſt be upon this, namely, becauſe ve can conceive Matter to be ſo divided; but if, becauſe we can mentally divide Matter into any Figures, it is therefore really diviſible into them, it will follow, becauſe we can mentally imagine Matter not to be divided, but one continued Subſtance, therefore it is really from ſuch a Conception not diviſible into any; and in general, if Things exiſt according to our Imaginations, there needs nothing more to the Explaining of Nature, than for the Mind to imagine Nature is ſo, and from thence to conclude that it is. 5. 16. MOREOVER We have ſufficiently conſider'd the Definition of Matter in the firſt Part of our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and endeavourd to ew the Notion, which all the Philoſophy, that has been hitherto proposd, has entertain'd of it, is nothing elſe than a Creature of the Mind, and not any ways conſormable to the real Nature of that Subſtance; which, if true, whatever is advanc'd concerning the Laws of Motion is falſe, if by that we mean real Motion, into which the Nature of Matter, or of the Being which is mov'd muſt be computed; if abſtracted Motion is intended, thoſe Laws, which are form'd from it, may indeed furniſh us with Principles to argue and build Theorems upon, as Extenſion do's in Geometry, but can ſignify nothing to the Explaining of real Motion, no more than the proving the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two Right ones, or the Square of the Hypotenuſec of a Right-angled Triangle is equal to the Squares of the Sides, is of any Service to the informing us what real Extenſion is in Water, or Gold, or the peculiar Properties oſ it, as it exiſts in Material Beings, S. 17. LastLy, if the whole Theory o?f Motion was Rational and Exact, as it is apply'd to conſiſtent Bodies, which are movd in Pendulums, or made to meet each other by a mutual Concourſe, ſuch a Theory could not explain the Action of Fire or Flame, ſince it is impoſſible to reduce it to a Pendulum, or to any Concourſe of hard and reſiſting Bodies, unleſs it can be provd, as we before obſerv'd, that a Reſiſtance to Motion, as in heavy Bodies, and a Reſiſtance to Reſt, as in Fire, are the ſame. s. 138. HAVING examin'd into the Idea of Matter, as it reſpects the Mechanical Philoſophy, the next Thing to be conſiderd, is the Space, which the Body, which is movũ|, either deſcribes, or poſſeſes, the firſt is term'd Space, the latter Place, both which are diſtinguiſ'd into Abſolute and Relative; Abſolute Place or Space is call'd Primary, and ſupposd to be Similar and Immoveable, which continues one fixt and unalterable Expanſion, and do's not depend upon any Reſerences to certain Points, by which we judge of the Motion or Reſt of Body; Relative Space or Place on the contrary is determin'd by ſuch Reſerences. Thus, if we are in a Ship under Sail, vhilſt we continue in the ſame Situation to all the Tarts of it, there is a Relative Reſt to thoſe Parts, tho' there is an Abſolute Motion in Reſpect of there being a Change of Abſolute Space or Place, tho' not of the Relative, by the Ship's Moving. s. 19. FROM Whence it follows that, in actual Motion, or in a true Philoſophy of it, Relative Place or Space is of no Conſideration, ĩt being only a Reſerence made by the Mind without any Reſpect to the Reality of Things; however one Advantage may be made from this Diſtinction of Abſolute and Relative Quantities, to wit, of Place and Space, and conſequently of Motion, that it gives a full Account of thoſe Paſſages in Holy Scripture which Philoſophy ſeems to contradict, as that the Earth ſlands ſtill, and the Sun moves round us, hich tho' it may not poſſibly be true in an Abſolute Senſe, yet is ſo in a Relative, and it is more agreeable to think that the Scriptures ſpeak in a Common, rather than in a Philoſophick or a Mathematick Stile, ſince the Sun may with as great a Propriety of Speech be ſaid to move, if it only do's ſo Relatively, as if it Really did. . 20. As to vhat concerns thereſore Abſolute Space or Place, which is requiſite to real Motion, ve have beſore ſiewn that Primary or Abſolute Place or Space, or Vacuum which is the ſame, is nothing but an abſtracted Idea of the Mind, and do's not ſurniſ us with any real Know lcdge of the Nature oſ that Space which exiſis, ſrom ſrom Whence our abſtracted Notion of it is formd by a partial Conſideration only aſſiraũæ Nooſ Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, and neglecting the other Properties, which belong,. m “ to it; and therefore upon this account likewiſe the preſent Doctrine of Mechanicks Naiur. propoſcs to us nothing more than a Theory or Contemplation of abſtracted Motion, which by s. 16. will be far from Informing us in any thing that is Real, and which is found in fact Exiſting. S. 21. THE laſt Thing to be conſidered in Relation to Motion is the Time, Tme abwhich it takes up in it's Progreſs, which is in like manner, as Space, diſtinguiſd in- Ingredin of to Abſolute and Relative; the firſt is ſaid to flow uniformly without any Alteration, n- . and the ſecond to depend upon the Meaſure we make uſe of to determine it, as b æ4ulute the Motion of the Sun and Moon, Which this Philoſophy takes notice of, or the èææ Siſ Ii Newt. Succeſſion of Ideas, vhich is alledg'd by another, which we may call the Meta- Prnc. jtitti phyſical ẽẽ In s. 22. As to what Reſpects Abſolute Time, which is Uniform, and paſes one Mi- 0a:d ver. nute after another without the leaſt Acceleration or being Retarded, it is manifeſt, as Phyſcam. in Abſolute Space, that this is alſo a Notrion formd by the Mind, and not agrecable n Locke. 1o Nature ĩt ſclf; for how is it poſſible for us to know hat Time or Duration is ſ ohue 1 v in Experience and Fact, that is, what it Really is, and as it Exiſts, excepting by the /u Punooʒ; Obſervation of that External Motion, as of the Sun or Moon, which is without us, m———— or that Internal one, which we perceive in our own Minds? for ſuppoſing Time to iini a; a6ſlow uniformly without any Experience on our Part, that it do's, it is the ſame as to ſilue  ſriſuppoſc an uniform, uninterrupted Space, without any ſuch Experience that it really? ste ll Exiſts; and therefore, as the Larter has only it's Exiſtence in the Mind, ſo ve may reaſonably think the Former only has; beſides which, we have before ſniewn, that our Conception of Matter's being diviſible is no Proof that it is, and for the ſame Reaſon, unleſs it is juſtify'd by Experience, our Conception of Time being uniformly continu'd, is no Proof of it's being ſo; What I mean in general, and which may be concluded from what has been ſaid, is, that ve muſt form our Notions of Time, as vell as of Space, not from any arbitrary Abſtractions of the Mind, but from our real Experience and Obſervations, and our juſt and plain Reaſonings upon them. S. 23. FROM What has been ſaid it is evident, that, as in Space, the Abſolute or The Netm Trimary, which is an abſtracted Idea, was only conſidered, in this Philoſophy's Account sima ur Dun i of Motion, ſo in Time or Duration, the Abſolute or Abſtracted, not the Real, is o dentæ fru Iikeviſe aſumd, and is ſupposd to flow uniformly by a continual Succeſſion of Mo- &evaiin ments or Inſtants without any Change or Variation, which we affirm to be a Crea- um ture of the Mind, and that real Time or Duration, and our Notion of it muſt be er Atſraci derivd from ſomething, which falls under our Experience and Obſervation, as exiſting in Nature; for if we our Selves did not exiſt, nor any Thing elſe beſides us, Time or Duration voud not, But as ve can have no Idea or Imagination of Nothing, and as Time or Duration is neceſarily connected with Being, ſo we can have no Conception of no Time or no Duration. ſ. 24. SINCE therefore our Notion of Time or Duration muſt be derivd from Time or Duri Exiſtence, which it always accompanies, and from Which it is never ſeparated, it muſt ſæ - T be ſrom thence, and from our Obſervations upon it, and from the Nature of it, Tus Thing that we are to fix and ſettle our Apprehenſions of real Time and Duration, both as to it's Being, and as to it's Meaſure; in reſpect of the firſt of which, we are ſufficiently informd of it from our own Exiſtence, and from the Succeſſion of our Ideas in our Minds, as likewiſe from all the Beings, whether Quieſcent or in Motion, which exiſt without us; the principal and only Enquiry therefore is, what is the real Meaſure of Time or Duration, and vhether it flows uniformly and by a Succeſſion of certain and determin'd Inſtants and Moments or not. 5. 25. IN order to examine into this, the juſteſt way for us is to conſider the ſe- The Mexũur veral Beings in Nature, which come under our Senſes or Obſervations, and from⸗ Duranen thence to know, whether any of them can afford us a Solution of vhat is requird, ranã ſrom that ĩs, can give us a Standard or Meaſure oſ Time or Duration; and here we are ſoubdun⸗ 5 no at firſt ro take it for granted, that Time or Duration do's flow uniformly by a ælũ eꝶm' Succeſſion of determind Moments or Inſtants, but to enquire whether it dos ſo, and heœ ſor either from vhat we obſerve in Bodies, which are Quieſcent, or which are in Mo-ſu.ſi. tion, or fiom the Succeſſion of Ideas in our own Minds; and if we cannot prove m⸗. F ſuch ſuch a Time or Duration in fact from Beings, hich exiſt, it is plain and evident, that it is a Creature of the Underſtanding, formd and made by it without any Aſfirmation from Nature, or from Things as they really Exiſt. s. 26. BUT before we come to enquire what Beings, as they really Exiſt, do pre ſcribe to us to think, in reſpect of the Mcaſure or Standard oſ Duration, it will be neceſſary for us to ſhew, in Order to obviate the Prejudices, which have been hitherto receivd, that a Succeſſion of certain and determind Inſtants of Time or Duration is a mere Chimæra, and a thing of Imagination only, for there is not any real Being which do's actually meaſure out Time or Duration in that Manner; Bodies which are Quieſcent, as this Table or Paper, on Which I write, do exiſt Moment aſter Moment, but they do not inform us, by their Quieſcence, what Duration that Moment has, or what the Meaſure of it is, or whether one Moment or Inſtant of Time may not be different ſrom another, they only aſſure us, that they do exiſt, and that by Conſequence they have Time and Duration in general belonging to them; Bodies which are in Motion, tho we ſhou'd know the preciſe Moments, in which they move, as of the Earth and Moon in their ſeveral Orbits, ſo as from thence to be able to calculate the Solar and Lunar Eclipſes to a Minute, Theſe cannot yet aſiure us, that Time or Duration flows any more according to the uniform Inſtants, which are proportionate to their Revolutions, Namely of the Earth about it's Axis in 24 Hours, and about the Sun in 365 Days, and of the Moon about the Earth in 27 Days and 7 Hours, than according to any other uniform Inſtants, which may be computed and eſtimated from any different Revolutions; For ſuppoſing the Earth had Revolvi round it's Axis, in half the Time, in which it now do's, and we vere to divide thar Duration into 24 cqual Parts, and were to name them Hours, as we have done the 241h Parts of the Preſent Revolution, every Hour voud be in ſuch a Caſe as ſviſt, that is, as ſort again, as what ve now Experience, and conſequently every Minute, or the ſmalleſt Inſtant of ſuch a Duration, wou'd be Proportionably Accelerated. Thus, if the Computations of Aſtronomers are true, Venus performs it's Rotation round it's Axis in 23 Hours, Mars in 24 Hours and 40 Minutes, and Yupiter in 9 Hours and 56 Minutes, and if thoſe Planets ſowd receive any Inhabitants, and they ſmoud divide the Time of theſe ſeveral Gyrations into 24 cqual Parts, and ſhoud likewiſe call thoſc Parts Hours, it is manifeſt that in the firſt Inſtance, ſuch Hours wvou'd be quicker and ſhorter than ours, and in the third, that they woud be more than as ſhort again, and in the ſecond Inſtance, that they wo'd be ſomething longer, and ſlower than thoſc by which we meaſure Duration, and the ſeveral Moments and Inſtants of ſuch Time vou'd be therefore in Proportion vary'd; and yet, it is as evident, that there is no more reaſon to aſſert the Equability of the flux of Time, from the Revolution of the Earth round it's Axis, than from that of Venus, or Mars, or upiter about Theirs; from Whence it is plain, that real Time or Duration may be Quicker or Slower, according to the Greater or Leſs Celerity of the Moving Body, which we take to compute it by. AxorHER kind of Moving Bodies, by which we meaſure Time or Duration, are thoſe of Pendulums, whoſe Motions are computed by the Hours or Minutes, which they move in, and which Hours or Minutes are determin'd by the Earth's Revolution about it's Axis. S. 27. As to the Succeſſion of Ideas in our own Minds, that can never give us the Ieaſt Notion of a uniform Duration at all, much leſs of a uniform Duration, which conſiſts of certain and determind Inſtants, becauſe ſometimes we have no ſenſible Succe ſſion of our Ideas, as in a Revery, in a Sleep without Dreaming, or when our Minds are fixt upon an Object intently without paſſing to any other; and when the Succeſſion of our Ideas is in the fullet Rapidity of them, as in Pleaſure, or in the utmoſt Languor of them as in Pain, ve are far from thinking that Time flows Uniſormly, ſince the Duration of an Hour in the laſt Caſe is ten Times longer than vhat we Experience and Imagine it to be in the firſt; It muſt be alſo acknovledę'd, that the Paces of our Ideas are Different in different Perſons, and in the ſame Perſons at different Times; Thus one of à quick and ready Apprehenſion vill find his Ideas to move vith more Life and Celerity than another, who perceives a kind of Torpor and Dullneſs, which clogs and lies heavy upon his Underſtanding, ſo likeviſe, the ſame Perſon, upon different Circumſtances of his Mind, as he is more Chearfu ful or Debonair; or more Dejected, vill proportionably find his Ideas to move with 1 more or leſs Intenſe Velocity; Beſides hich, ſuppoſing a continual and uniform Velocity of our Ideas, ſince yet there is a Succeſſion of them, which is not contind and uninterrupted, as Time and Duration is, it will- be Impoſſible for diſtinct and ſeparate Ideas, let them follow one another as uniformly, as they will, to give us a Notion of that Time or Duration, which intercedes their Succeſſion. FROM all which it is very Evident, that the Succeſſion of our Ideas has nothing to do with the Meaſure of Time or Duration, that it can only inform us, that there is Time or Duration in general, ſand which is no more than what Bodies, which are Quieſcent, do) and that ĩt is longer or ſhorter, as it's Ideas move vith a greater or Ieſs Celerity, correſpondent to vhat we find from Bodies, which are in Motion. s. 28. HAVING therefore conſiderd all the Beings, which can poſſibly give us any sine ile uiNotion or Apprehenſion of a Duration or Time, Which conſiſts of an uniform Pro-ſom ræ greſſion of certain and determin'd Inſtants, and ſince there are no Beings that canſiæ do it, and ſince we can have no Notion or Apprehenſion of Time or Duration, un- mæã Iyſa leſs from ſome Being, which exiſts, according to §. 23 and 24. it is manifeſt, that a -sunp uniform Progreſſion of certain, and fixt, and determin'd Inſtants of Time, is nothing i a Crrain elſe than an abſtracted Idea, and as much ſo, as univerſal and abſtracted Space is, and & ih Mini. that therefore thoſe Philoſophers, who proceed upon ſuch Abſtractions, as the preſenr Mechanical Philoſophy dos, are not juſtify'd in fueh Abſtractions, by what we find and Experience in Nature. 5. 29. SINCE therefore the Meaſure of Time and Duration is ſo little underſtood I æ hav n by the preſent Philoſophers, even in reſpect of a temporary or finite Duration, and rninDa ſince they all of them think in the abſtracted Way of a uniform Progreſſion of cer- arm much tain, fixt and determin'd Inſtants of Time, for which they have no Proof from any lſi hav. æ thing in Being, it is a linile ſurprizing, that ſome Men ſiou'd ſpeak or write ſo po- ſo Infnin ſitively about an Infinity of Duration, when they know nothing of a Finite one, unleſs of an Abſtracted, which, as we have before ſewn, is not in fact exiſting, and therefore is a Creature of the Imagination only. 5. 30. IT is now Incumbent upon us to ſew, what the real Meaſure of Time or næ  ſi Duration is, which is ſome real Motion or other, which we obſerve in Nature; For our Moquns thus we Argue, that if there is any certain Body, which will perform it's Motion in õ7æ. one determin'd Portion of Time, the ſame Body will, ve conclude, with all irs Circumſtances continuing the ſame, perform a like Motion in another equal Portion of it, becauſe the Principle and Cauſe ſtill ſubſiſfing, without any Variation, mut of Neceſſity produce the ſame Effect in the ſame Time; from hence it is, that ſince we ſee no Reaſon, why the Earth, in it's Revolution about it's Axis, ſno'd not be Uniform and Conſtant, and it's ſeveral Revolutions therefore equal to one another, becauſe we do not ſee or know any thing, which ſod diſturb it's Periodical Gyrations, from thence it is, that we take ſuch Revolutions, for our Meaſures of Days, and Hours, and Minutes, and conſequently of Time and Duration, which, whether we Sleep or Wake, and whether our Ideas ſucceed or not, vill ſtill be the ſame and unvary'd and from the Determination of theſe Days, and Hours, and Minutes, we determine the Equation of Time, and know how many of ſuch Minutes are ſpent in the Earths revolving round in the Ecliptick, that is, how many of them belong to the  n Year; And according to this Meaſure of Duration, a Pendulum, which has 39 Inches of Natural and ; in Length, compleats it's Oſcillation, made up of it's Progreſs and Return, in Phioſ. p. 22 two Seconds of Time, or in two 60rh Parts of a Minute, which is the 60rh Part of an Hour, and vhich is the 247h Part of the Earths Revolution about it's Axis. ON the contrary, ve might take the Oſcillations of Pendulums, upon the Maxim in Philoſophy before mention'd, that Bodies which are in Motion will have equal Effects in equal Times, where the Circumſtances are the ſame, and ſuppoſing the Circumſtances to be the ſame, for a Meaſure of the Earth's Diurnal Revolution. BuT yet, in both Caſes, if the Revolutions of the one, or the Oſcillations of the oher are not Uniform and Conſtant, our Days, and Hours, and Minutes may be Double or Triple, or in any other Proportion of what we account and eſteem them io be, that is Uniſorm and Equable, and by conſequence all the Moments and Inſants of ſuch a Meaſure of Time or Duration vou'd be Double or Triple, or in any other Proportion of what we reckon them. F THU Tnus, ſuppoſing the Earth, in it's Revolution about it's Axis, ſiou'd, in one Part of it, quicken it's Motion, from ſome Cauſes, which are unknown to us, as it certainly do's in it's Revolurion about the Sun ſrom Cauſcs, which are imagin'd to be known to us, ve have divided it's Revolution indeed about it's Axis into 24 equal Hours, upon the Suppoſition of ir's Equable Motion, but if that Motion is not Equable, it is plain that the Duration of one Hour is not equal to that of another, but that one may be much longer or ſhorter than another. AND the ſame may be ſaid in the Oſcillations of Pendulums, in Clocks or Watches, that if the Weight or Spring, by which they move, do's not keep the ſame conſtant Tenor, (which it is impoſſible it ſioud do, when it is wound up to the Height, and therefore is more Vigorous and Strong, and when it has not the ſame urmoſt Elaſtick Force, and therefore is more Weak and Languid, and which is ſenſible from the Vibrations, which in the former Caſe are Quicker and Smarter, and in the latter, more Faint and Duller) the Meaſures of Duration, from ſuch Pendulums, will be uncqual, and one Minute or Inſtant of it will be different from anorher, and the ſame, in ſome degree, may be affirmd of Common Pendulums, which are made to Swing from a Center of Suſpenſion only, Becauſc the Body, which is placd in the Center of Oſcillation, cannot have exactly the ſame Force of Gravitation in all the Points of it's Periods, nor the ſame Relation to the Center of Suſpenſion. FrOM all which it is apparent, that Time or Duration muſt be eſteemd to be quicker or ſlover, as the Body which moves, and which we take for a Meaſure of Duration, is ſo in it's Motion; and ſince the Motion of Pendulums is uncertain, which are the Contrivances of Men, and the Revolution of the Earth about it's Axis, which is the Effect of a Superior Agent, is not ſo, which is confirmd from the Calculations made of Eclipſes to a Minute, upon the Suppoſition of the Middle or Aſtronomical Days, Hours, and Minutes, which we make uſe of in ſuch Calculations, being Equable, ĩt is likewiſe evident that ſuch a Revolution is only the proper Meaſure of Time or Duration, to which all others will be the moſt juſtly and truly Exacted. WHAT yet ve maintain, is, that the Meaſure of Time or Duration muſt be had from the Motion and Celerity of the Body, which moves, and which we take for the Meaſure of Duration; the Revolution of the Earth round it's Axis is that, by which we compute, and i we had been placd in Venus, in Mars, or in Jupiter, ſuppoſing thoſe Plancts to be inhabited, and had, as we do here, divided their RevoIutions about their Axes into 24 Parts, and had namd them Hours, they woud, as ve before obſervd, have been ſhorter or longer than thoſe ve now make uſe of, and ve might have reduc'd the Revolution of the Earth about it's Axis to ſuch Days, Hours, and Minutes, which thoſe Revolutions preſcribe, with as much Reaſon and Juſtice, as ve do now their Revolutions to the Days, Hours, and Minutes, which the Revolution of our Earth has preſcribd to them; That is, we take the Revolution of the Earth round it's Axis for the Meaſure of Time or Duration, as being ſuppos'd to be Uniform and Equable in it's Motion, but then the Inſtants and Moments of this Meaſure are no more the proper, peculiar and diſtinguiſing Meaſure of the Flux of Time or Duration, than any quicker or ſlower Moments or Inſtants are, and if ve proceed any farther to abſtract the Moments or Inſtants of Time or Duration from any Celerity, with which they flow, or from the Revolutions of Bodies round their Axes, be they One or Another, we depart from Nature and real Exiſtence, which can only give us a Notion of Duration, and come to Fancies and Chimæra's of our own Minds. 5. 31. THUS, 10 ſpeak in general, Real Time or Duration, and not an Abſtracted one, is to be meaſurd by real Motion, for if the ſame Body moves twice as far, as before, vith the ſame Degree of Motion or Force, the Time will be double, in which it moves, if the ſame Body moves as far, as before, with double the Force, it ill be in half the time, that is, the Time or Duration, vill be as quick and ſhort again in the laſt Caſe, as in the former; and therefore to compute real Time or Duration, as it exiſis in Nature, and according to our Obſervations, without which we cou'd have no Apprehenſion or Notion of it at all, the knowledge of ſome uniform Motion or orher muſt be neceſary to our meaſuring of it, to which uniform Force, which ve conſider, whether quicker or ſlover, the Flux of Real Time and Duration, and not an Abſtracted will be Correſpondent, and accordingly Accelerãted or Retarded. FroMm FrROM Whence it again follows, that the Succeſſion of our Ideas can give us no Eind of Meaſure of Duration or Time, unleſi their Force, with which they move or their Celerity is known, and that ſuch Force or Celerity of their Motion, or Succeſſion is Equable and Uniform; and for the ſame Reaſon, the Revolution of the Earth about the Sun in the Ecliptick, or of the Moon about the Earth in the Zodiack, can be no Meaſure of Time or Duration, becauſe they Move unequally in their Orbits, and have different Celerities in different Parts of their Periods, and which Revolurions are therefore reduc'd to Days, and Hours, and Minutes, computed from rhe Revolution of the Earth round it's Axis, and which co'd not be known to be unequal, unleſs it was preſumd that ſuch Days, and Hours, and Minutes were Uniform and Equal; as is Evident from the Doctrine of the Equation of Time before Cired. s. 32. FROM the foregoing Sections it is conſequent, that in all the Arguments or Demonſtrations concerning Motion, where an Abſtracted Time is us'd, upon ſuch an Account likewiſe, the Reaſonings will be Abſtracted, and therefore not Anſwerable to Nature, ſince the Meaſure of Time or Duration is originally and previouſly to be aſcertain'd by the Force and Degree of ſome Real, Equable, and Uniform Motion, which is aſſlumd, in order for us to judge of the Periods of Time, and of the Moments or Inſtants, which belong to it. So likewiſe, if the Time or Duration (hich is Correſpondent to, and is the Reſult of one uniform Motion or Celerity) is confounded with that, which anſwers to another, before the one is reduc'd to the other by comparing them together, the Reaſoning, from ſuch a Confuſion of Time into one and the ſame uniform and abſtracted Time, will be wrong and inconcluſive, as if we take the Revolution of the Forth about it's Axis, and divide it's Time or Duration into 24 Parts or Hours, and 2qin the Revolution of Venus, Mars, or Jupiter, about their Axes, and divide their Time or Duration into 24 Parts or Hours, we cannot argue or reaſon upon theſe Times or the Inſlants of them alike, becauſe they are apart Equable, ſince, compard h one another, they will be extreamly different, and we muſt reduce the one to 1ſæ other, beforc we can ſpeak with any certainty of the Meaſure of Time or Du1 rirn, that is, we muſt exact our Notions of Time or Duration to ſome fixt Standard i of it, to which all others are to ſubmit; and yct that Standard may be the ur Duration of the Revolution, of one Planet, or another, about it's Axis diLui into the ſame Number of Parts, namely of Hours, Minutes, and Moments, uch may have diſferent Degrees of Celerity, according to the various Celerities of ſuch Revolutions. AND thus it is in Space, the abſtracted Idea of it is that of one uniform Extenſion, which a Foot, or a Yard, or any other ſtated Length may Meaſure, whereas the Meaſure of Real, and not Abſtracted Space, is the intrinſick or native Force of that Body, vhich poſſeſſes it, according to what we have ſhewn, in our Geometry of Solids, or of Matter, and in our Principles of Philoſophy; and conſequently, as Time or Duration is meaſurd by the Force or Celerity of that, which ve make our Standard, when that Force or Celerity is finite, be it quicker or ſlower, the Time or Duration is accordingly finite, and is ſhorter or longer; if therefore there is a Being, which has an Infinite Force and Agency, it's Force and Agency muſt be the Meaſure of it's own Duration (thro' all Time) which muſt be likewiſe Infinite, and can be no more adjuſted with a finite Duration, than one finite Duration, whoſe Meaſure is a finite Cclerity, can be that of another finite Duration, vhoſe Meaſure is a different finite Celerity; What we ſay is, that Time or Space, in the Abſtract, are undefin'd, and are capable oſ all Quantities, which can be aſſign'd to them. FroM what has been hitherto alledgd from §. 2. to the preſent Section, it enſues, that the firſt Definition in the Mechanical Philoſophy, of Motions being a continual and ſucceſſive Change of Place, is not true, becauſe it do's not conſider all the Ingredients, which Appertain to Motion, that is, neither what real Motion is, nor vhai Lody or Matter is, nor what real Space or Place is, nor yet what Time or Duration is, all which yet are neceſſary to give us an Idea of a Motion in Nature, and there fore ve may conclude, that the ſirſt Deſinition oſ Motion is only a Thing of Ab ſtrection, and a mere Creature and Imogination of the Mind. s. 33.Tm 5. 33. THE Second Definition is that of Celerity, which is ſaid to be an Affectior of Motion by which the Body, which is movd, paſes thro' a given Space in a giver Time, againſt which there are two Objections. FinsT, that Motion is introducd into this Deſinition, which was not juſtly defin'd before, according to §. 32. and the preceding ones. SECOND, that a given Time is ſuppos'd, whereas Time or Duration, by what fore goes, is to be meaſur'd by ſome uniform Motion or Celerity, and therefore Motion or Celerity is not to be meaſurd by Time, thus the Motion or Celerity of the Earths Revolution about it's Axis is the Mcaſure of Time or Duration to us, and therefore that preciſe Time or Duration is aſcertaind by that Celerity and Motion, and Time is not previouſly aumd, but determind by it; if therefore now there was no RevoIution of the Earth about it's Axis, nor any other fixt Meaſure or Standard of Time, the firſt thing, we cou'd do, vou'd be to take a Body, as a Pendulum for Inſtance or any other Body, which from it's Nature we might conclude wou'd, as much as poſ ſible, deſcribe the Spaces it paſ'd thro' regularly, and with Uniſormity; from it's Mo. tion thro a double Space, ve ſhoud infer there was a double Time, thro' a triple Space, a triple one, and ſo on, and the Time voud flow in Proportion to the Morion or Celerity of ſuch a Body; if again we ſiod make uſe of a Pendulum, or any other moving Body, which deſcribd twice the Space, whilſt the former deſcribd only one half of the ſame Space, and we made this latter Celerity our Standard of Duration, it is plain, ſince Time woud ſlow in Proportion to this latter Celerity, it wvou'd flow as quick again, as in the former Inſtance, and ſince we might, as it happen'd, make uſe of a quicker, or ſlower Body, in ſuch a Caſe, for our Mcaſure of Duration, our Time or Duration woud accordingly move quicker, or ſlover. AND this ve more particularly find in Muſick, where the Time is accounted quicker or ſlower, as the Celerity of the Notes is ſo, and the Time, which is kept, and to which they are adjuſted, is meaſurd by an equable and uniform Pulſation, which yet is no more a proper Meaſure of Time, than any other quicker, or ſlover Pulſation is, than what is usd on thoſc Occaſions; from all which, and from what has been before ſaid, it appears plain and evident, that a Duration, conſiſing of uniſorm, certain, and determin'd Inſtants, is an abſtracted Idea, and that the Meaſure of all Duration to us is Celerity and Motion, and which as it is diſferent, Time and Duration is different to us; and the ſame we obſerve in the Succeſſion of our Ideas, for as they move ſvifter or ſlower, Time or Duration agpears to us cither ſhorter or longer. but yet for the Reaſons above, and upon the Account of what is here ſaid, ſuch a Succe ſſion cannot be a fixt Standard of Duration. 5. 34. SINCE therefore the Celerity of the moving Body is the Meaſuire of Time in real Nature, ſo far as our Apprehenſions or Notions of Nature can ꝶo, it may be enquird, what is the Meaſure oſ Celerity, which cannot be a uniform or abſtracted Time or Duration, becauſe it ſelf is meaſurd by ſome certain Celerity or other, whether greater or ſ=ower is not determind, but by a Celerity, whatever it is, vhich is yet Certain and Uniform; in this Perplexity, what is the Mind's Procedure? namely, to aſſume one kind of Celerity, or Motion, as that of the Revolution of the Earth about it's Axis, which Meaſures out ſo much Time and Duration, which it takes up in the Performance of it's Circuit, and from thence to determine by comparing other Celerities with it, hat Proportion of Time or Duration belongs to them, without declaring or knowing, what Time or Duration the Revolution of the Earth round it's Axis takes up, beſides that which it's own Celerity meaſures and aſcertains, and which Time woud have a different Fluxion to us, if meaſurd by a different Celerity, as that of Venus, Mars, or Jupiters Revolution about their Axes. s. 35. As to an infinite Time or Duration therefore, which proceeds from an abſtracted Notion of it, from all moving Bodies or Celerities whatſoever in Nature, tis a pure Metaphyſical Buſineſs, and has no Foundation in the Reality of Things, and all the Arguments, hich are formd upon ſuch an Abſtraction, are Creatures and Fancies of the Mind, in which Philoſophers may, if they pleaſe, indulge themſclves, but without any Advantage to Truth or to Reaſon; for if there were no Being or Exiſince in the World, there cou'd be no Time or Duration, and if there were no Motion in it, there co'd be no Meaſure of ſuch Duration, and where that Motion once once vas not, there was to us no Meaſure of Time, and whatever Meaſure of Time or Duration, we extend beyond it, it is a Supplement made by our own Minds to fill up the vaſt Chaſm, which lies betwixt Eternity and the World's Creating, and thus the Vulian Period extends it ſel? 730 Years beyond that Time, which can bè nothing elſe than a mere Chimæra as to the Meaſure of Time, if there was nothing then Exiſting; it is an Imagination, which can carry it ſelf into Time and Duration, which was not, if there was then no Exiſtence, ſince we have already ſhewn, that Time and Duration is neceſarily connected with Exiſtence, and cannot be or ſubſiſt in Nature vithout it. ] ON the contrary we have ſaid, that Exiſtence and Duration go together, ànd cãnnot be ſeparated the one from the other, that an abſtracted Notion of Time or Duration procceding in uniform Inſtants, which are not meaſurd by ſome real and moving, and therefore exiſting Force, or other, is a Fancy of the Philoſopher, and not a Thing in Nature, and that all the Arguments upon ſuch Abſtractions are not nor can be juſtificd or defended. AND therefore as to infinite Duration, ve muſt firſt prove there is an infinite Being, which when we have done from the Works of Nature, and from what we obſerve in the World, ſas there is no other way of Proof, excepting that which reſults from a Conviction of the Truth of our Religion) we are from thence to ſiew the Infinity of Duration, that is, from the Infinite Force, Power, and Agency of the Supreme Mover, we are to prove the Infinity of Duration and Time, and not prepoſterouſly from the Infinity of Time or Duration, which lies in our own Romantick Eſtimations and Opinions of it, to prove the Infinite Duration ànd Eternity of the Supreme Mover; The firſt way is that of a true Philoſophy, and the laſt that of Metaphyſicks and Trifling in the Knowledge of Nature; what we mean is, that a God and Selfexiſting Being, that is a Neceſſary one, muſt be firſt evinc'd, which is caſily done from a Conſideration of Nature, and then Eternity will follow ſuch a Conviction, but Eternity is not firſt to be preſum'd, and then an Eternal Exiſtence inferd from it. THE Definition oſf Reſt is, that it is the Continuance of any Body in the ſame Place, againſt which the ſame Objections Iye, as againſt Motion, of it's being only an abſtracted Idea; The remaining Definitions in this Philoſophy, unleſs thoſe which depend upon what we have already examin'd, ſeem to concern only the Explanation of Words, which therefore we omit and ſhall proceed to the Axioms alledgd. s. 36. THE firſt Axiom we ſhall take notice of is, that any Change, ſuperinducd to a Natural Body, proceeds from an External Agent, ſince all Matter is unactive, and can produce no Alteration in it ſelf; this therefore depends upon the Inertia of Matter, which has been already conſiderd and refuted. S. 37. THE next, which we ſnall mention is, that all Matter is of the ſame Nature and has the ſame Eſſential Attributes, whether fluid or hard, & TuE laſt, that the different Forms of Bodies are only diſferent Modifications of the ſame Matter, and depend on the Various Figure, Texture, Poſition, &. of their Parts; both which Axioms have likewiſe been ſufficiently confuted, in the firſt Pan of our Principles of the Modern Philoſophy examin'd, and in the Introduction to the Preſent. C H A? C H AD. II Concerning the Principal Theorems of the Mechanical Philoſophy, with a Propoſal of a new Syſteme of Mechanichs. s. I.— ROM what has been ſaid concerning the Definitions and Axioms, made uſe of in the Modern Philoſophy, it follows, that if all of them were acEnovledgd and admitted, Since they are abſtracted Ideas, they woud be of no greater Service to the Explaining of Nature, and a real Philoſophy, than the Elements oſ Euclid, to the Informing us, what real Extenſion is, as it exiſts in Bodies; for, as in the laſt, if we knew never ſo perfectly, that the Diagonal of a Square is incommenſurate with it's Sides, or that Parallelograms of equal Heights and Baſes are Equal, we ſior'd not from thence be told, what the Extenſion of Wood was, in Diſtinction to that of Ivory, or Gold, ſo, if, in the firſt, we cou'd demonſtrate a Hundred Theorems concerning Motion, ve ſoud not, by that, be let into the Knowledge of the real Properties of Motion, in Fire, Air, Water, or perhaps in Mechanicks themſelves, as they are found in Nature, which we ſhall now however more particularly conſider upon the Principles, which have been laid down. 5. 2. The Firſt Theorem is, That in comparing the Motions of Bodies, if the Quantities of Matter, in the Bodies which are movd, are Equal, the Moments or Quantitiecs of their Morions will be as their Celerities; The Demonſtration of which, without the Ambages here us'd, as in the following Theorems, in ſhort is; Let A and B be two Bodies, which have equal Quantities of Matter, and let their Celerities be C and f, the whole Quantity of Motion in 4 is to that in B, as C to ſ; becauſe, if 4 is  to B ac C AC. Bc:: C. ę, or 57 i e. C.c:: C.c, and from C c whence this Corollary is derivd, if 4C. Bc:: C. c, 4 is = to B. S. 3. THE foregoing Propoſition, and the Demonſtration of it, is true only upon this Suppoſition, that all Matter is Similar and alike, and that there is nothing in ſuch Similar Matter, excepting it's Magnitude and the mere Number of Parts, ſor il cither Matter is varions and different in it's own Nature, or if it has any Propertic: belonging to it, as Gravity or any other Force whatſoever, tho ve take equal Por tions of it, the Moments or Quantities oſ theirt Motions will not be, as the Velocities, which are Impreſ'd; But whoever knew any Matter in the whole Univerſe, vhich only conſi*ted in mere Magnitude and the Number of it's Parts? and we might as vell take Number and Extenſion, and demonſtrate this Theorem concerning them, ſuppoſing the Units or Parts to be movd, as ſuch a Matter, which, what it woud ſigniſy to the Explaining Matter, as it really exiſts in Nature, cannot be eaſily Imagind. §. 4. THE Second Theorem is, That in the Compariſon of Motions, if the Celerities are Equal, the Quantities of the Motions ill be, as the Quantities of Matter in the Bodies, which are mov, or, if the Bodies, which are mov, are Homogencous, as their Magnitudes; Let 4 and B be uncqual, if CCe, AC. Bc:: 4. B, or x 7 ie. 4.B:: 4.B; or if  and m are the Magnitudes, and A4. B:: M. m, it will be MC. mc:: M. m, and the Corollary is, if AC. Bc:: 4. B, Cc. This Demonſtration proceeds, as beſore, upon the Suppoſition, Firſt, of Matter and a certain Sum oſ Units or Parts being the ſame, ſo that nothing elſe is conſiderd in Matter, but the Number of Parts or Units in it, Second, that each Part of both Bodies moves no farther, the one than the other, Third, that Homogencous Bodies and Heterogencous ones conſiſt of the ſame kind of Matter, tho' differently modifyd. As to the Firſt Suppoſition, it has been conſiderd in the preceding Theorem; Second, as 1o cach Part oſ the Body being movũ|, the one as far as the other, that is impoſible, unleſs we imagine the whole Body as a Point, and then the Quantities of Motion vill not be diſferent, but the ſame as their Celerities; if we do not imagine the the Bodies, as Points; then the Sum of the Celerities will not be, as thie Bodies, which are accelerated, ſince ſuch Celerities will be different, becauſe one Part is really carried farther than another, and therefore it is movd with a greater Celerity; ſo that, in the preſent Caſe, it is manifeſt this Philoſophy conſiders not the actual Motions of Bodies, but the Sums of abſtracted Celerities, Independent of the Bodies, which are movd, which is an abſtracted Reaſoning, and is of no uſe to the Explaining of Nature, ſeeing the Sums of the Celerities, and of the Parts of Body, are both abſtracted Ideas; Laſtly, as to Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Bodies being the ſame in their Matter, that has been already ſuſficiently confuted; not to mention; that where the Sums of the Parts or Units in Body are only conſidered, there can be no real Diſtinction betwixt the Magnitude of a Body, and the Sum of the Parts of that Body, or the Quantity of Matter in it, which yet, in this Theorem, are diſtinguiſirò. s. 5. FRoM Whence it is apparent, that in this Propoſition, and the Demonſtration Tee ſoregoini of it, There are three Things requird, the firſt of which is a Suppoſition, which can- Teurm nnot be granted; the ſecond is an Impoſſibility in Nature; and the laſt an Abſurdity, lim emtæ which is That of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, in which all Matter is preſumd to be y tho ſame. rama. 5. 6. A Third Theorem is, That, in the Compariſon of the Motions of Bodies, T⸗ Ttird the Ratio or Proportion of their Moments to cach other, is compounded of the ſu Ratios or Reſpects of their Quantities of Matter and their Celerities. Let A and B txami'd; the Bodies which are moved be equal or unequal, the Celerities C and æ; the Moment ſæ ih: Ruis i he Momenti of 4 will be=A, and the Moment of BS Bc, or M, m; therefore M. m: : AC. Be, and ſtdt: is MMMAca C compounded of = x. the Rativ's of m B B their QuanſiFroM which Theorem, the two former àre only Corollaries, for i? 4 B, then tiu, of Mou. .. AC cC AC A ;M :  plerities. I vill be = ; if C=c; then F vill be =Fmn alſo it follos, that if  cm ut : j  ad Ver. M=m, A. B::c. C ot ACS Bę, that is, if the Quantities of Matter in the Bodies, nt La ; which are moved, are reciprocally Proportionãl t0 theit Celerities, their Moments Dr. walis de will be equal.  ili IN all which Demonſtrations, ſince the Sums of the Celerities, and thoſec of the Parti. Vol r Parts of Matter are only conſiderd, as Sums of Homogeneous Units, multiplyd into each other, it is little more than proving, that 3x 4 is = 12, or 4x 55 20, which Theorems in Arithmetick cannot but be of very conſiderable Importance to the Knowledge of Nature. j S. 7. TuE Fourth Theorem is of the like kind with the former, That, in the Com- Tte Fuurit pariſon of Motions, the Ratio of the Celerities is compounded of the Direct Reaſon Tſæm .or Proportion of the Moments, or Quantities of Motion, and of the Reciprocal Reã- Lmn4, ſon or Proportion of the Quantities of Matter. That ibi Rati AaAc B C : of ihe CleriTuAT is,  43 vhich is manifeſt upon the Principles before preſumq, unded of ib and vhich are here again denyd, and for the Reaſons alledg'd. The Corollaries of this ſiſummu nd of ibt Ræ Thcorem are, that ac , and E That is, that the Moments of Bodies, di- ⸗ dqi a B uantities vided by their Matter, are as their Celerities; It may be likewiſe ſaid, by the ſame Mauæ. vay of Reaſoning, that the Ratio of the Quantities of Marter is compounded of the ſ &qſ : L: Intr. ad Ver. Direct Reaſon or Proportion of the Moments or Quantitics of Motion, and of the Phyſ Loa : : , AC aA Dr. wallis à Reciprocal Reaſon or Proportion of the Celeriries, that is,  c alſo qe ac Parti. Vol: B i T46 and z =3, or the Quantities of Matter are, as the Moments of Bodies diTheorem ihe tided by their Celerities; all which Demonſtrations admit of the ſame anſfwers as Eſib explain and examin'd vere before given. That, if ihe S5. 8. THE Fifth Theorem is. That if the Celeritĩes of the Bodies, which are moved, cræriiin f are equal, the Spaces, deſcribd by them, will be in a Direct Reaſon or Proportion of Budies e the Times, in which they are performd. Let q, ę, repreſent the Celerities, L,, the era nill Lengrhs or Spaces, and T ? the Times, if Cc, L. l::T.1, and the Corollary b, .n a ſin it L.1::T.5 cæc Tomes of ihi ; Tuus Deſei3æ Tns Itt the Body, which is moved, be carried thro the Space 4 8, in the Time 7, æd thro' the Space CD, in the Time ſ, with the ſame Celerity, the Linè 4B vill be 1 the Line CD, as Tto ?; becauſe, if the Time T is double or triplt of the Time æ A B T C D t it may be divided into 2 or 3 Parts, each of which will be equal to 4, and there fore each of the Spaces, which are deſcribd in theſe equal Parts of Time, and vith the ſame Celerity, will be equal to the Space deſcrib'd in the Time , and conſequently 4 B will be to CD, as æ or 3. to I, as T7 is double or triple of s. 35.9. ò this Demoriſtration the Matter, which is movd, is ſuppos'd to have a perfect Inertia, which we have before refuted; the Celerities are preſum'd Equal, which perhaps in Reality cannot be ſaid of any two actual Motions in the Univerſe; the Spaces likewiſe deſcribd are nòthing elſe but an abſtracted Idea upon all which A coſints, ſucha Reaſoning can be of no Service or Import to the Science of Nature: but that which we are at preſent to take notice of is, that the Times of theſe equal Celeritics are ſuppoſed Proportional to the Spaces, which ſuch Celerities deſcribe, which was the Thing to be provd; for to evidence this, it is ſaid, that if T is the double of 4 it will be equal to 21, and whatever Space is deſcrib'd in , there will be a Double deſcribd in 21; tis true, if 17 has 1 Length, 2 ? will have 2 Lengths, or Vice versã, becauſc it is a plain Axiom, but this is ſuppoſing and not proving, for how is it maniFeſt, that 17 will have 1 Certãin and Determin'd Length? if it is anſwerd, becauſe æ⸗ vill have 2 Lengths, that is impoſſible, becauſe æ ? has 2 Lengths upon the Account, ihiat 1 has 1 Length; if it is told us 17 has 1 Certain Length, becauſe 17 has I Certain Lerigih, that is aſfirming What was to be ewn; this I ſay, becauſe ? may not only have 1 Determind Length, but 2, 3, or a 100 Various Lengths, where the Cclerities are the ſame, that is, if the Denſities of the Spaces are different. S. 10. Ir it is farther alledg'd, that 17 muſt have ſome Length or other belonging 19 it, and 27 will have double of that Length, the ſame Celerity continuing, it is ſtill Tuppoſing Time to be a Meaſure of the Celerity, and the Space deſcribd by it, that is, it is a Notional Time, which therefore reſts entirely in our own Minds, and is not oconformable to Nature, ſince Real Time is the ſame, in it's Meaſure, as the Celerity or the Space deſcribd by it, and therefore the Times will be as the Spaces deſcrib'd, àand the Spaces deſcribd, as the Celerities, or T. 7:: L. l:: C. c; for the Real Times, in which any Spaces are performd, are commenſurate to thoſe Spaces which are perform'd, but the Spaces which are performd, are not commenſurate to an abſtracted Idea of Time, which is made up of Uniform and Unvary'd Points or Moments ofit; That is, the Times in which the Celerities are perform'd, are to be meafurd by the Celerities which are perform'd, and not the Celerities by the Times (Which reſult from them, and are conſequent on them) unleſs that, which is Meaſur'd, can Meaſure; What we Intend is, that Time do's not Conſiſt of any Certain and Determind Iriſtants, vhich yet are here ſuppos'd, and have been before Conſuted. But that Which is ſtill more is, that there may be Celerities ſo perfectly different from what this Philoſophy conſiders, that where the Celerities are Equal, and the Lengths or Spaces Different, the Times may be the ſame, that is, tho' Cæ, and L greater than ſ, yet T/1, For ſuppoſing 4 B and CD not to be mere abſtracted Lengths or “Ipaces, but to be Real ones, and the Firſt to be a more Thin or Diluted, and the Laſt to be more Conſtipated and Denſe, the ſame Celerity or Force ill deſcribe the one no ſooner than the other; and in this way of conſidering Extenſion, where C/©r. L may be to ſ::1.T, vhich is quite the reverſe of the Proportion aſſign'd by the preſent Theorem, that is, if the Space or Extenſion of C D is ſo much Rarer than it was before, as the Time ? is leſs than that of T; ſince in ſuch a Caſe, and upon ſuch a Suppoſition, TL=rl; For the ſame Force will deſcribe a leſs Denſe Space in-a leſs Time, as it will a more Denſc Space in a Greater. A D AxD the Advantage of conſidering Extenſion in this Manner, I have already ewn n the Geometry of Solids or of aatter, and in which it was propos'd from hence to reduce all Material Beings to Mathemaricks, in as full a Senſe, as mere Extenſion now is, nor can it be juſtly denyd, that ve may not as well conſider Lines to be more Denſe or Diluted, as Imagine them to have one Uniform and Abſtracted Extenſion; Eſpecially, if we ſuppoſec thoſe Lines to conſiſt in a more diffus'd or a more compacted Action, which is the Caſe in Nature. S. 11. TuE Sixth Theorem is, That in the Comparing of Motions, if the Times of the Motions are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be as the Celeritiess That is, if T7=t, L. l:: C. c, and the Corollary is, if L. l::C. ę, T&/t. TuE ſame Anſwer may be given to this Theorem, as to the Former, and farther, that there may be Celerities ſo entirely Different from what this Philoſophy conſiders, that where T1, and C greater than ę, yet L may be equal to b that is, if CD is ſo much Rarer than A4 B, as the Celerity c is leſs than C; and conſequently L may be. I:: æ. , which is the Reverſe of the Proportion aſſign'd in this Theorem, that is, if CD is ſo much Rarer than it was before, as the Celerity æ is leſs than that of C. s. 12. The Scventh Theorem is, That the Lengths or Spaces perform'd by the Motions of Bodies are in a Ratio compounded of the Ratio's of their Times and their Celerities. That is, L. l:: TC. tc, becauſe the Effects Z, I will be proportionable to theix Cauſes T7C, re. But æ g4 whichi was the thing to be provd. FrOM this Theorem, the to Former may be derivd, as plain and manifeſt Col LTC c rollaries from it; for ſince Viui4 i or L.l::C.c. Alſo, if L=I, TCt5, or C. c::t.7, that is, if the Spaces or Lengths performd are Equal, the Celerities will be reciprocally as the Times. ALL which Proportions, or Theorems, depend upon the ſame Principles of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter, which is perfectly Paſſive and Unactive, and, in which, nothing elſe is conſiderd, excepting it's Parts, which are imagind not to be different from ſo many Abſtracted Units, ſo that Moving Numbers, vou'd as well ſerve the Turn of theſe Demonſtrations, as Moving Bodies. S. 13. THE Eighth Theorem is, in Comparing of Motions, the Ratio of the Times is Compounded of the Dire?t Reaſon of the Lengths, and the Reciprocal of the T ; L , If CæC§s, E=L orL.l:: T.1; IrT=/1° Celerities. For, by the preceding Theorem, L jæ multiply both into c and l LeTCceaeT L ⸗ b dubvtdui tub &ir⸗ And by the ſame way of Reaſoning it may be ſiewn that the Celerities are in a Direct Reaſon of the Spaces or Lengths, and a Reci L TIC procal of the Times; For 7T by the preceding Theorem, multiply both in0L ma E TCC& L f md I7  ſ7F 7I7 FroM whence alſo ſt follows, if Eæ Firt, that 2æE, and T.iẽ. Namely, the Time is, as the Space perſorm'd, divided by the Celerity; Second, that rLl g æ or C. :7 that is, the Celerity is, as the Space performd, divided by r V the Time; All which Theorems and Proporrions terminate, as before, in the ſamx Principles, and do not need to be farther conſiderd here. S. 14. I have thus far given a ſhorter Demonſtration of theſe Theorems, than I any where Extant, and farther ſhall here ſubjoin a Doctrine of Mechanicks, whici hs not been yet proposd by auy Philoſophy, and which is Infinitely more Extenſive than the Preſent, as it is alſo more Agrecable to Nature. THEOREM the Firſt is, That the Ratio of Moments in Bodies Elaſtick, that is, ſc far as they have an Expanſive Force, is compounded of the Reaſons of the Intrinſich or Expanſive Forces of Matter, of the Quantities of thoſe Intrinſick Forces, and, i put into Motion, of their Velocities. Let A and B be Two Bodies, 47, m the Mo G 2 ment⸗ ments, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces æ and e, the Quantities or Sums of thoſe Force 4, B, the Velocities 7, v. It will be, ar. m: : AEV. Bev, or pæAæv a E r m BevV B  v For in any Two Bodies, which have an Expanſive Force or a Propenſity to Motion the Moment of the one muſt be Greater than that of the other, as thè Velocity o the one, the Expanſive Force, or Propenſity to Motion, and the Bulk or Magnitude is Greater than That of the other; and therefore, if we Multiply the Expanſive Force into the Magnitude, and both into the Velocity, we ſeem to have the whole Mo ment of ſuch Bodies in their Motions. Corol. 1. IF therefore A7 B, That is, if the Sums or Quantities of the Forces are Equal, the Moments vill be, as the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, multiplyd into the Velocities, or in  Ratio compounded of them, or M.m:: EV. ev, o1 E V X m c v Corol. 2. I? EZe, vhich is the Caſe of the Mechanical Philoſophy, in which the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, that is, none at all, the Moments vill be in a Ratio compounded of the Quantities, and the Velocities, or 4. m:: AV. B®, Mma r or= F B v Corol. 3. I§ V=v, That is, if the Velocities are Equal, the Moments vill be in a Ratio, compounded of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Quantities of them, or M.m:: AE. Be, or Mæa x E m B c i Corol. 4. IF A=B and E=ce, That is, if the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and their Quantities are Equal, the Moments will be as their Velocities, or 4. m:: V. v, or a = z This likewiſe is a Theorem in the Mechanical Philoſophy. Corol. 5. I? AZB and V=v, That is, if the Sums or Quantities of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Velocities are Equal, the Moments will be as the InMME l trinſick or Expanſive Forces, or M. m:: E. è, Or -7 Corol. 6. I E=c and V=vu, That is, if the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and Velocities are Equal, the Moments vill be, as the Sums or Quantities, of the InrMa trinſick or Expanſive Forces, or Aſ. m:: 4. B, or = Vi Which is alſo a Proportion affirmd in the Mechanical Philoſophy. Corol. 7. IF M m, AEV=Bev, and V.v:: Be. AE, i. e. If the Moments are Equal, the Velocities will be in a Reaſon compounded of a Reciprocal, of the Intrinfick, or Expanſive Forces, and the Quantities of them. Corol. 83. IF Mm, AEV=Bev, and E. e:: Bv. AV, i. c. If the Moments are Equal, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, will be in a Reaſon compounded of a Reciprocal of the Velocities, and the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces. Corol. 9. IV MJm, AEV=DBev, and A. B: : ev. EV, i. e. If the Moments are Equal, the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, will be in a Reaſon compounded of a Reciprocal one of the Velocity, and Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces. Corol. 10. IF M=m, and 4=D2B, E. e:: v. V, and EV=ev, That is, if the Sums or Quantities of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Firſt Body, is to that of the Second Reciprocally, as the Velocity of the Second, is to that of the Firſt, and the Moments on both Sides will be Equal. . 11. I Mm, and E=e, 4. B:: v. V, and AV=B5, That is, if the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Quantities of them are Reciprocally, as their Velocities, and the Moments on both Sides will be Equal, which is another Caſe in the Mechanical Philoſophy. l Corol. 12. IF M=m, and V=v, A4. B: : e. E, and 4E= Be, That is, if the Velocities are Equal, the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Reciprocally, 13 the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Moments vill be Equal. s So So that in all the Caſes, vhich we have mention'd, there are only Four, which the Mechanical Philoſophy conſiders, The Second, Fourth, Sixth, and Eleventh, and thèſe only upon the Suppoſition, that æ and æ are nothing, when they are Equal; As for theſe Intrinſick Forces, ve ſhall Reſerve them for a Farther Explanation, and ſhall only at preſent in general name them the Expanſive and Contractive, by the Former of which, Bodies are previouſly diſpos'd to Motion, and are more caſily put into it by any Impreſſion made, and by the Larter, are oppoſite and averſe to it, and by conſequence, more difficultly obey the like Impreſſions; of the Firſt Kind, are all Elaſtick Bodies, and of the Laſt, all the Groſs and Heavy ones: And hen I ſpeak of Forces in Matter, I muſt here declare ſo far againſt the Inertia of it, that I do take upon me to Pronounce Action to be the Subſtratum, and the very Eſſence of it; The denial of which has been the Occaſion of all the Abſurdities in the Corpuſcular Syſtem; and the Reaſon of making ſo ſmall a Progreſs in the accounting for the Phænomenons in Nature The Expanſive Forces, by which Bodies are more or leſs diſpos'd 10 Motion, and a Deſcription of Space, are only conſiderd in this Theorem: S. 15. THEOREM the Second is, That the Ratio of the Velocities is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Moments, and of a Reciprocal of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Sums or Quantities of them. For by the preceding Theorem, if æ M EV : M, . l and m are the Moments, sæt multiply 5 into Be, and divide it by 4E, and  x x From whence by forming other Equations, other Theorems, or Corollaries may be deduc'd, as in the foregoing. S. 16. THEOREM the Third is, That the Ratio of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Moments, and of a Reciprocal of the VeIocities, and of the Quantities or Sums of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forcess. For MAEV M _ EMBVM 5Jeò muluply 7 into Bv, and divide it by 4V, and 35 7avn x E.x aVv S. 17. THEOREM the Fourth is, That the Ratio of the Quantities, or Sums of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Moments, and of a Reciprocal of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and of the Velocities. MAEV M aM©Mev For S75 multiply  nto ev, and divide it by EV, and J75F M e zæx 7 And from theſe a Thouſand Caſes may be offerd, and Equation: m formd upon them, and a great part of Material Nature, in Conjunction ith the following Theorems, explain'd by them, if we carefully examine what theſc Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are, which I ſhall reſerve, as was before ſaid to a farthe Expoſition. . s. 18. THEOREM the Fiſth is, That the Spaces deſcrib'd by Two Bodies, which are movã, are in a Ratio compounded of the Reaſons of th] Times, the Velocities, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities of the Spacess Let S, s repreſent the Spaces, T, ? the Times, E, e the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, D, à the Denſities of the Spaces, 7, v the Velocitie. The Theorem vill be, S. s:: TVED. tve à, ol Ss TVED T, ,ED For one Space deſcrib'd muſt be Greater than ano s tvedt  4da ther, as the Time and Velocity, and the Diſpoſition to Motion, or the Expanſive Force, and the Denſity of the Space, which is deſcribd, is Greater. Cnl. 1. Is T|t©, S. s:: VED. ved, or æz x z x z That is, if the Times are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Velocities, of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities of thoſe Spaces. Corol s TED T E D Corol. 2. I V=v. S. 3:: TED. ted, - —/4x 4æ, That is, if thè s tedt e a Velocities are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Times the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities of thoſe Spaces. 5 D Corol. 3. I E=Ee, 5.3::TVD. tvd, o xx, That is, iſ the s tvaia t vd Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Spaces deſcrib'd ill be in a Direct Reaſon of the Times, the Velocities, and the Denſities of thoſe Spaces. TVET V E i; =xnm, That is, iſ the tve t v c Denſities of the Spaces are Equal, the Spaces deſcrib'd will be in a Direct Reaſon o the Times, the Velocities, and Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces. 5 Corol. 4. IF D=d., S. s:: TVE. tve, or Vii S EDE D Corol. 5. Is T=/¢, and V=vu, 5.5:: ED. ed, or TBãE7 7B That is, ĩi l both the Times, and the Velocities are Equal, the Spaces deſcrib'd are in a DireReaſon of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities of thoſe õpaces. s VD V D : . Corol. 6. IF TS1, and Eæe, S.5:: VD. vd, o2&J54x, That is, © s vdan qd the Times, and the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Spaces deſcrib'a will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Velocities, and the Denſities oſ thoſe Spaces. s VrE v Corol. 7. IF?T=/t1t, and D/d, S. s:: VE . ve, or TE T=7 , That is, if the vVen eæ Times, and the Denſities of the Spaces are Equal, the Spaces de crid vill be in a Direct Reaſon of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Velocities. D Corol. 8. IP V=nu, and EZve, S.5:: 7D. td, r2Zx 7 That is, ii s the Velocities, and the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd vill be in a Direct Reaſon of the Times, and the Denſities of thoſe Spaces. 5 : E Corol. 9. IP V=n, and D=d, S.s:: TE. te, or 2r That is, if the Velocities and the Denſities are Equal, the Spaces deſcrib'd will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Times, and the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces. s TIVv r corol. 10. Ir E=e, and D=d4, S. 5:: TV. tv, or 77 t That is, iſ v the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd ill be in a Direct Reaſon of the Times, and the Velocities; which is the only Caſe, which the Preſent Mechanical Philoſophy conſiders, and is the Proportion of Theorem the Seventh in it, which is nothing more than one Corollary of the Ten, already derivd from this Fifth Theorem. Corol. 11. I? T|t1, V=u, and E=e, 5.5::D. , That is, if the Times, the Velocities, and Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be as the Denſities. corol. 12. In T9 t, V2v, D=d, 5.5:: E. e, That is, if the Times, the Velocities, and Denſities are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be as the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces. Corol. 13. In T]t. E=, D=4, 5. 3:: V. v, That is, if the Times, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and Denſities are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be as the Velocities. Corol. 14. IF V=v, E=e, D=d, S. 5:: T. t, That is, if the Velocities, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities are Equal, the Spaces deſcribd will be as the Times. Theſe Two laſt Corollaries are the Fiſth and Sixth Theorems of the Mechanical Philoſophy. Corol. 15. IF S&æ5, TVED Ztved, or TV. tv:: ed. ED, That is, the Time and Velocity of the Firſt, will be to the Time and Velocity of the Second, as the Inurinſick or Expanſive Force, and Denſity of Space of the Second, is to the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force, and Denſity of Space of the Firft, and the Spaces deſcribd on ; both borh Hands ill be Equal. As alſo T.?;: ved. VED, and V.v:: tæd. TED, and E.e:  và. TYD, and D. à: : tve. TVE. r Corol. 16. IV T/t, VE. ve: : d. &, That is, if the Times are Equal, ihe Volocity and Intrinfick or Expanſive Force of the Firſt, will be to the Velocity and Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Second, as the Denſity of Space of the Second. is to the Denſity of Space of the Firſt, and the Spaces deſcribd on both Hands will be Equal. l 17. I V=n, TE. te:: d. D, That is, if the Velocities are Equal, the Time ad Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Fir©t, will be to the Time arid Intrinſick or anſive Force of the Second, as the Denſity of Space of the Second, is to the Denſity of Space of the Firſt, and the Spaces deſcribd on both Hands vill be ual. Eaut 13. Is E=e, TV. tv:: d. D, That is, iſ the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Time and Velocity of the Firſt, will be to the Time and Velocity of the Second, as the Denſity of Space of the Second, is to the Benſity of Space of the Firſt, and the Spaces on both Hands will be Equal. Corol. 19. Ir D=d, TV. tv:: e. E, That is, if the Denſitics of the Spaces are Equal, the Time and Velocity of the Firſt, will be to the Time and Velocity of the Second, as the Intrinſi ck or Expanſi e Force of the Second, is to the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of he Firſ3, and the Spaces deſcribd on both Hands will be EqualCvrol. 20. IF T7/t1, and V=qv, E. æ: :d. D, That Is, if the Times and Velocities are Equal, the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Firſt, ill be to the Intrinſi ck or Expanſive Force of the Second, as the Denſity of Space of the Second, is to the Denſity of Space of; the Firſt, and the Spaces deſcribd on both Hands Equa. Corol. 21. Is T/1, and E=e, V.v:: d. D, That is, if the Times, and Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal,the Velocity of the Firſt, will be to the Velocity of Second, as the Denſity of Space of the Second, is to the Denſity of Space of the Firſt, and the Spacęs deſcrid on both Hands will be Equal. Corol. 22. It T/1, and D=4, V. u:: e. E, That is, if the Times and Denſities are Equal, the Velocity of the Firſt, will be. to the Velocity of the Second, as the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Second, to the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Firſt, and the Spaces. on borh Hands Equal. Corol. 23. Is V/u, and E=e, T. t:: d. D, That is, if the Velocities, and. Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces are Equal, the Time of rhe Firſt, will be to the Time of the Second, as the Denſity of Space of the Second, is to the Denſity of Space of the Firſt, and the Spaces on both Hands i be Equal. Corol. 24. l? ?=2, and D=d, T. t: :0 E, That is, if the Velocities and Denſities ure Equal, the Time of the- Firſt, will be to the Time of the Second, as the Intrinſick or Expanſive Force of the Second, is to the Intrinſick or Expanſive of the Firſt, and the Spaces on both Hands Equal. Corol. 25. Ir 2¢t, and. D/d, T.t::v,V, That is, if the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, and Denſities are Equal, the Time of the Firſ, will be to the Time of the Second, as the Velocity. of the Second, is to that oſ the Firſt, and the Spaces describ'd on both Hands will be: Equal, which is the only Caſc, which the Preſent Mechanicks, conſiders. 5. 19. THEOREM the SixthIs, That the Ratio of the Times is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Spaces, and of a Reciprocal one of the Velocities, of the Inarinſick or Expanſive: Forces, and the Denſii ties of thoſe Spaces. For, by the foregoEl VvVE ing Theorem, -Ees⸗ multiply- Z into ved, and divide it by VED, anc Tisued s V  d v7ruvia §. 20THEOREM the Seventh is; That the Ratio oſ the Velocities is compoundec - of a Direct Reaſon of the Spaces, and of a Reciprocal one of the Times, of the In trinſick or Expanſive Forces, and the Denſities of thoſe Spaces. For, by Iinny th v a Fiſth, 7 multiply- - imto ted, and divide it by TED, ma - ?  sL5 ed STEI j e d m l  æ — r; s 7r5 T: . .q l li lll 5.21 5. 21. THEOREM the Eighth is, That the Ratio of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Spaces, and of a Reciprocal one of the Times, of the Velocities, and the Denſities of thoſe Spaces. For, by; Theorem rhe : S TVED : 5 E Stvod Fiſth, 57ca- multiply 7 ino tvã, and divide it by T7VD, and diu 77D 5 t v d = xX  x  x — s T V D 5. 22. THEOREM the Ninth is, That the Ratio of the Denſities of the Spaces is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Spaces, and of a Reciprocal one of the Times, the Velocities, and the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forcess. For, by Theorem the S TVED 5 D Stve i - i  into rve, and divide it by TVE, and  & Fifth, 7 c-] multiply 7 into rve, a vid y , and 7 —42 -l5 x z x hi x 5 Upon which Equations a Multitude of others might be form'd, but I forbear now to Enlarge, and Proceed to thoſe Theorems and Corollaries, which reſpect the Contractive Forces. WE have here made uſe of Time and Velocity in the ſame way, as has been hitherto done, but as Time is different in it's Flux, according to the Meaſure we make uſe of, and as there may be a Velocity in an Infiniteſimal Space, Equal to a Velocity, which ſnall deſcribe an Infinite one, in a Time given, ſo we, at preſent, abſtract ſrom them, which, if we were to take into the Preſent Theorems, there wou'd be another Compoſition of Forces, namely, by making T and 7 to Repreſent the Intrinſick and Real Fluxes of Time, and q, ? to Repreſent the Intrinſick Forces of Velocity; Thus, tho we make uſe oſ Portions of Time, which flow Equably, yet we do not now determine according to what Meaſure of Celerity they Flow, and tho we take VeIocities, which are meaſurd by the longer or ſhorter Spaces, vhich they deſcribe in the ſame Time, we do not conſider thoſe which are different in the ſare Time, and in the ſame Points, or in the ſame Spaces, which they deſcribe, ſor Example, if all that Force of Velocity, which is ſpent in deſcribing Three Foot, was contracted vithin the Compaſs of one, every Part of ſuch a Velocity voud be very different, from that which we now conſider; IF ſuch Times and Velocities therefore were taken into the Computation, THE Firſt Theorem woud be x = arc Jeu] That is, the Moments of Moving Bodies, vou'd be as their Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, the Sums of thoſe Forces, their Velocities meaſurd by the Lengths, which they deſcribe in the ſame Times, and as the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces of rhoſe Velocities, in every Point of the Lengths deſcribd by them, STæVrcED TuE Fifth Theorem wouvd be V2 , s tITvcedd be compounded of the Times Directly, and the particular Flux or Celerities of thoſe Times Reciprocally, of the Velocities meaſurd by the Lengths, which they deſcribe in the ſame Time, and the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces of thoſe Velocities, in every Point of the Lengths deſcribd by them, of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces of Matter, and the Denſities of the Space perform'd, Directly. Hitherto we have ſpoke of thoſe Intrinſick Forces only, which we nam'd the Expanſive, we are now come 1 conſider the Contractive, concerning which the following Theorem may be ormd. j That is, the Spaces deſcribd woud s. 23. THEOREM the Tenth is, That the Ratio of Moments of the Expanſive Forces, in Heavy Bodies, is compounded of the Direct Reaſons of the Velocities, and of àa Reciprocal of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, and of the Sums of thoſe Forces Eet A4 and B be two Heavy Bodies, 44, m the Moments, the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, C, ;, the Quantities, or Sums of thoſc Forcess 4 and B, the Velocities MM VVe B vV  B : f v; M.m: : Ve B. vCA, and  Lq riVã That is, one Body wil m vca v  be Quicker and more Expanſive, and in it's Motion, than another, as it's Velocity i Greater, and it's Contractive Force, and the Sum or Quantity of it is Leſs. Corol. 1 Corol. 1. IF therefore A2, x , and 44. m:: Ve. vq;, That is, if the Sums or Quantities of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces are Equal, the Moments will be in a Ratio, compounded of a Direct one of their Velocities, and a Reciprocal of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. M VB Corol. 2. IF Cæc, 5 = 7 and M. m: : VB. vA, That is, if the Intrinſick or Contradtive Forces are Equal, the Moments will be in a Ratio compounded of a Direct one of their Velocities, and a Reciprocal one of the Sums or Quantiries of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. M B rol. 3. IFs V=n, 7 æ & and M.m:: cB. CA, That is, if the Velocities are Equal, the Moments will be in a Ratio compounded of a Reciprocal one, both of their Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, and the Quantities of them. ;M il. 4. Ie 493, and c=4, æ æ L and M. m:: V. v, That is, if the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, and the Quantities of them are Equal, the Moments will be in a Diret Reaſon of the Velocities. a corol. 5. IF AZ B, and V=nq, 7 =c d M. m:: e. C, That is, if the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, and the Velocities are Equal, the Moments vill be in a Reciprocal Reaſon of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. E i cril. 6. Ie C=¢, and ?=u1 xæ% and . m:: B. 4, That is, if the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, and the Velocities are Equal, the Moments will be in a Reciprocal Reaſon of the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. Corol. 7. Is M=m, Vc B=vCA, and V. v:: CA. c B, That ĩs, if the Moments arc Equal, the Velocities will be in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one, both of the Intrinſick Forces, and the Quantities of them. Corol. 82. I? MMmUm, VcB=uvCA, and C. c:: V B. vA, That is, if the Moments are Equal, the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces will be in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one of the Velocities, and of a Reciprocal of the Quantities of thoſe Forces. Corol. 9. I? M=m, Vc B=vCA, and 4. B:: Ve. vC, That is, if the Moments are Equal, the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, will be in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one of the Velocities, and of a Reciprocal of thoſe Forces. Corol. 10. IF M=Dm, and A=B, Ve=vc, and V. u:: C. c, That is, if the Moments and the Quantities of the Forces are Equal, the Velocities ill be in a Direct Reaſon of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. Corol. 11. IF M=m, and CZc, VE=vA, and V. v:: 4. B, That is, if the Moments and the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces are Equal, the Velocities will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. Corol. 12. I =m, and V=u, c BE=CA, and C. c:: B. A, That is, if the Mo ments and the Velocities are Equal, the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces will be in ⸗ Reciprocal Reaſon of their Quantities. S. 24. THEOREM the Eleventh is, That the Ratio of the Velocities is compounde: of a Direct Reaſon of the Moments, the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, and th : M VeB Quantities of thoſe Forces. For, by the preceding Theorem, lu L therefor v m6caaa c4a : . -_2 =—xx. From vhence by Forming other Equations, othe v me B m c B Theorems, or Corollaries may be deducd, as in the Former. H s. 25. TꝶC 5. 25. THEOREM the Twelſth is, That the Ratio of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces, is compounded of a Direct Reaſon of the Velocities, and of a Reciprocal one of the Moments, and oſ the Quntities o ſuch Intrinſick Forces. For, by he Tenth X€tL I'e B thereſore CVrnm raum B - nt iti Ic = = x X — Theorem the Tenth, m va Fàaau5c7T 1iã 5. 26. THEOREM the Thirteenth is, That the Ratio of the Quantities of the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces is compounded of a Direct one of the Velocities, and of a Reciprocal oſ the Moments and Intrinſick or Contractive Forcess For M Ve B l q aA Vme rm c = ereſore =xfQx m ca there 5 vMsC Bf c s. 27. THEOREM the Fourteenth is, That the Moments of the Contractive Forces in Bodies, vhich are Heavy, are in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one oſ their Intrinſick or Contractive Forces and oſ the Quantities of them, and of a Reciprocal f their Velocities, viæ Ma/cavc, a4,æ ſuppoſing C and f, as beſore, to of their , nF srF 5 P EE , , be the Intrinſick or Contractive Forces. FroM whence the ſame Number of Corollaries may be drawn, as in the preceding Theorems oſ Expanſive Forces, 1. If Cc, M. m:: Av. BV. 2. It A=EB, M. m:: Cv. cV. 3. If vv, M. m:: CA. cB. 4. If Ccc, and 4E8, M. m:: v.V. 5.If Cc, and v/v, M. m:: 4. B. 6. If A=DB, and Vv, M.m:: C. c. 7.15 MMm, C. c:: BV. Av. 8. If Ar/m, 4. B: : c V. Cv. 9. It s=/m, V.v:: CA. e B. 10. If 2r/m, and Cc, 4. B:: V. v. 11. If Ar/m, and A238, C. c:: '.n. 12. It /m, and V=q1, C. c:: B. 4. 5. 28. THEOREM the Fiſteenth is, That the Moments of the Contractive Forces in Bodies, which are Elaſtick or Expanſive, are in a Reaſon compounded of a Recipro cal one of the Intrinſick or Expanſive Forces, oſ the Quantitics of them, and thei M DEev B e v :i iti =2S5xx— From vhence may be derivd as man Velocities, or nEBEſE?E I 5 y ) Corollaries as beſore, which I here omit, ſince the Way is ſiewn, and it is caſily done. 5. 29. THEOREM the Sixteenth is, That in General, the Moments of Dodies, where the Expanſive Forces are only conſiderd, may be Varied according to the ſollowing a a E U5Vr a6E v B E r al tox x , orx Method, for  may be Equal to 7 T 5 08 7 A B :i Viẽd c r a & u I c I a c rv vill be as follows,  xx , or x , or  x Orx x-, m B c 1 c i E c v B c lã A c v B C c. invhici or 7x f ſ or ĩ x œ x , or æx &6 , or  x /x 7. inv hich Caſes M is not ſupposd Greater than m, as in the Former, but They are leſt at large to Expreſs the Moments, as they ſhall be determind by the Forces, Quantities, and Velocities which compound them, each of which Equations woud make a diſtinct Theo rem, vith a like Number of Corollaries with the Former. HITHERTO We have conſiderd the Expanſive and Contractive Forces ſeparately, bui as they may be, and really are united together in all Material Beings whatſoever the Moments of them Will admit of Various and Diſfering Theorems. 5. 30. THEOREM the Seventeenth is, That the Moments of Bodies, in which tht Intrinſick Forces conſiſt of the Expanſive and Contractive, and which are in Motion as they have hitherto been ſupposd, muſt be computed ſrom their Intrinſick Ex panſive and Contractive Forces, ſrom the Quantities of them; and from their Ve Iocities. TuERT \ THEREFPORE Bodies endu'd with ſuch Forces, have their Moments compounded o : E ; all or them That iss à may be Equal t£o EVP V, AEC Be cv B e c v  Jæ/ꝶ aE C »v AEcvV a E  V Aecva  C Vr u  un - xr  or S5  x x x  Oor //Z5 x  xx, 5 l c Vv Be Cv 5 e cC v BEcv B E2 UO BECV B E cC Vv AE cv a E c v AecvV a4a e& or =xx x , or—ZX—xx x , or =n Aecv A c c v BECV B e CV BECV B E ce I or BeCV £ f CI Ae cv a e c 5 xx =  x xx = x x /x c7  IEcouI E  7  FEr 5 5 95 Becv B . c ⸗ c tã or Becv B c i c v Be Cv B ec  x x x  x  x x = x æ TEcuaã E T 5  IEcrEFT 75  IErvFITE c, on B220  2 .2 , L. BECVBEB E C VU Each xx =xx x =x x x — 7  Z]r]I ] 7 p r-7 I 7 5&æ Ea of theſe Equations is a diſtinct Theorem, and has a like Number of Corollaries with Theorem the Fifth; Which is a manifeſt Conviction of the wonderful Extenſiveneſs of this Doctrine. AND here again likewiſe 4 is not ſupposd Greater than m, but they are meant to Expreſs the Compoſition of Forces, in their Compariſon with one another, whatever ſuch Compoſition may bee. Whenever e find the Quantities Inverted, the Theorems and Corollaries are much the ſame. S. 31. THEOREM the Eighteenth is, That the Ratio of Spaces deſcribd by Bodies, which have an Expanſive and Contractive Force, may be differently compounded oſ the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, of their Velocities, of the Times, and the Denſities of Spaces; Each of which will obtain an Influence in Determining the Proportion of them: Thus æ ECYDT ECVD: ECVdT or EcvDT  EVDT l s ecvdi? Jva voDdv evaãr ecvãd?y , ecvDr or ECvdt ECvdT o EcuDT o ecvDT i ECvdt or or Tvai??t nr 7D vàai7° Ecvart 7n7/ EcvdT ecvDT ecvãdt ecvdT eCvDtecvaT ecvdT rpr E7ra? Epr  Er5? Evar 5cop?  Ecvò? ecuDr Ecvdti ecvdt :i : 537aæ  rE7 E/ B7 &c. That is, by all the Various Ways, by which theſe Forces, Times, Velocities, and Denſities can be poſſibly combin'd, there will be different Spaces, and 5, 5, will be greater or leſs, according to ſuch Combinations; each of theſe will alſo ſupply us with ſo many new Theorems, and the Corollaries conſequent upon them; and wherever we find the Quantities Inverted, the Theorems and Corollaries will be much the ſame. WEe have thus far ſuppos'd theſe Intrinſick Forces, and the Quantities of them to be in Motion, and endu'd with a certain Velocity, to ſiew the preſent Mechanical Philoſophy, how Short and Defective it is in giving us an Account of the Real Motions of Bodies, and at the ſame time, to explain in ſome Sort, the Notion we have of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, in Compariſon with Velocity, the Former of which we make to concur with Velocity, and the Latter to act Counter to it, and vith Gravity; So that, As Impreſ'd Velocity is a Force directly contrary to Gravity, as is not only manifeſt, from projecting a Body Perpendicularly upwards, from the Horizon or Parallel to it, or in any other Inclination, but even Perpendicularly downwards, Since, by how much, it is accelerated by the Velocity impreſyd, by ſo much it is hindred from producing it's own proper Effect; So Poſitive Reſt, which is oppoſite to Velocity, is Poſitive Gravitation; Suitable to theſe Forces of Velocity and Gravitation, which are Obſervable in Material Beings, which Gravitate and Move, are thoſe which I call the Intrinſick Expanſive, and Contractive Forces, in Bodies, Diſtinct from ſuch Velocity or Gravitation, by which in their own Nature vith hich they were originally endowd, they obtain theſc two Qualities of Expanſion, or as much as poſſible dilating themſclves, and by which they icw a conſtant Conatus of Receding from the Centres of their Actions, whilſt, by another Force of Contraction, they are Compreſs'd and Condensd towards them; And ſrom a various Mixture of a H a greater greater or leũ Proportion of theſe Forces, all the Qualities of Bodies ariſe, as we ſnall ſiew in the Preſent and following Chapters, and that they woud preſerve theſe Forces, tho' they were ſet in the midſt of an Infinite Space, without any orher Bodies as the Earth or Sun to affect them; Inſomuch, that if the Earth, or any other Planet, vere plac'd at an Immenſe Diſtance from all other Bodies, it wou'd remain fixt and immoveable, and if Put into Motion, it voud not continue that Morion in Infinitum, but vou'd return to it's Reſt by it's own Contractive Force, vhen that Impreſd Velocity was ſpent; as the Sun continues in it's Station by it's Expanſive. SINCE therefore we reckon ſo much depends upon theſe Intrinſick Forces, in accounting for Nature, ve ſhall now give the Theory of them ſeparate from Velocity, in Conjunction with which they were before conſiderd. S. 32. THEOREM the Nineteenth is, That the Moments of Bodies, a-part from the Quantities or Velocities of them, conſiſt of their Expanſive and Contractive Forces MEC Ec eC ec æ—, or, or—, or. m ec e EEC caſi 1. If 2x- 4æ i. e. If the Moments of Bodies are Equal to a Direct Reaſon of the Expanſive Force, to the Expanſive, and of the Contractive, to the Contractive, i. e. If they are as the greateſt Expanſive Force, into the greateſt Contractive Force, to the leaſt Expanſive Force, into the leaſt Contractive, it will probably be the Caſe of Gold, which has the greateſt Contractive by it's Weight, and the grcateſ Expanſive by it's Colour, which comes the neareſt to that of the Suns, which has an entirely Expanſive Force, as that of Fire and Flame has, and of black Aſhes or Dirt, which has the leat Contractive and Expanſive, by it's Weight and it's Colour: And from this Theorem, ſeveral Years ago, I had an Opinion, that if to the Weight of uick- Silver or Mercury, there cou'd be communicated by Fire the Expanſion of it, Gold might be made; But whilſt you endeavour to impart the Expanſiveneſs of Fire or Flame, to the Weight or Contractive Force of Mercury, you diſſipate the one without communicating the other; On the contrary, this is Effectually done in Nature by the Suns, or the Subterraneous Hcats continual Influence upon the ſame Mineral, where the Expanſive Force of the Former, is not ſo violent, as to diſolve the Contractive oſ the Latter, but adds it's Expanſive to it. I try'd, at that Time, to obviate this Diſficulty, and, as it appeard to me, by Rational Methods enough, namely, by encloſing the Mercury, ſo as it ſiod not, if poſſible, be able to evaporate, to wit, in a Strong Thick, Iron Shell, and putting all thoſe Ingredients to it, which might, as I imagin'd, contribute to the Effect deſird, and which was placd in a large Fire, and made Red-Hot; upon opening the Iron Shell the Mercury had forcd it's Way thro;, but had left a ruddy Dew or Powder upon the outmoſt Sides of it; and Iyet do not Queſtion, but Gold might be made, if ve cou'd communicate Gradually the Expanſive Force of Fire to the Weight of Mercury, which by ſo many Degrees, as it was communicated, woud likewiſe by ſo many Degrees increaſe the Weight or Contractive Force of it, becauſe, as it ſeems, no Expanſive Force can prevail, the Contractive continuing, till it has made Room for it ſelf, that is, by condenſing the Contractive or Exciting it to Exert it's own Force in Oppoſition to it, and thereby Making it unite the Cloſer; and which in all Probability is the Reaſon, why ſeveral Heavy Bodies, as Lead, receive an Addition to their Weight by being Calcin'd, whilſt others, as Bones, Wood, Coal, &. which are of a Lighter Nature, and have a more Expanſive Force find a Diminution of it, becauſc the Contractive is increas'd, in the former Caſe, by being Excited, and the Expanſive, not being able to Diſſipate it, lodges it ſelf in it, which gives the Red-Colour, vhich is again changd to a White by a Contractive Force, as Vinegar; and, in the latter, the Expanſive is increasd by a Diſſolution of the Contractive, and an Addition to the Expanſive. TuE Experiment I have mention'd, I ſuppoſe, is ſomething Dangerous to be try'd, in Caſe the Shell ſiowd burſt, by the Expanſion of the Quick-Silver, tho' I did not find any ſuch Effect; But if it were made by a more Gradual, and by a Quick and Conſtant Fire, as that of Charcoal, and not too Violent, or by a Sand-Heat, it is not mpoſſible but it might ſucceed better. As to the preſent Theorem, it extends to all other other Bodies, which have intermediate Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, tixt the Greatoſt and Leaſt, and which are in the Direct Proportion here aſignd of the Expanſive to the Expanſive, and of the Contractive to the Contractive. j I ſnall here add, vhat I find Written, many Years ago, in ſome Looſe Papers, but vill not Vouch the Certainty oſ the Experiment, becauſe I have not ſince then try'd it, and perhaps there may be ſome Miſtake in it, but this I find, that on Friday the 167h of October, the Year is not namd, I pourd out two or three Drops of QuickSilver into a Copper Veſſel, and laid upon it thrice the Quantity of Antimony Povderd, then pourd upon it ſome Lime-Water, with a little Lime, and coverd it with ſmall Gravel Stones infus'd in Brine, and there ris a Yellow Ductile Metal not unlike Gold; Ialſo made ſeveral other Experiments, as I perceive by thoſe Papers, with the ſame Intention of Imparting the Expanſive Force of Fire, or Flame, or Heat to Quck silve and of fixing, and increaſing it's Contractive, and tho' I did not Succeed, I had the Pleaſure of Thinking, it was not Impoſſible but I might, and little elſe, as I vell Remember, ran in my Thoughts for ſome Time, but Building of Theaters, and Raiſing of Colleges and Chappels, and other Noble and Magnificent Structures, till the Golden Dream at length vaniſd, and left me juſt as Rich, as it found me. Corol. 1. If E=e, M. m:: C. ę, i. e. The Moment of one Body will be to that of another, as the Contractive Force of the one is to that of the other, which is the Caſc of Heavy Bodies, and whoſe Expanſive or Contrary Force is Equal; Thus if Quick-Silver and Water have an Equal Degree of being thrown into Fumes or Expanſiveneſs, Velocity or Volatility, they will be as their Contractive Forces, which are Analogous to their Forces of poſitive Reſt or Gravitation; and the ſame may be ſaid of all other Bodies, where their Inclinations and Propenſities to Expanſion are Equal, and their Inclinations and Propenſities to poſitive Reſt or Gravitation diſt ferent. Corol. 2. If Cæc, M. m:: E. è, i. c. If the Contractive Forces are Equal, the Moments of Bodies will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Expanſive Forces; The Bodies, which have the leat Contractive Force, and the greateſt Expanſive, are thoſe of the Sun, and of Common Fire and Flame, which if their Contractive Forces are Equal, will be in a Direct Reaſon of their Expanſive, and one will be ſo much Hotter, and more Vivid and Strong in it's Action than the other, as it's Expanſive Force is greater; All lively and volatile Bodies, ſo far as they are ſo, come under this Corollary, as all Groſſer and more Heavy ones, ſo far as they are ſuch, under the Former. l Corol. 3. If =m, ECec, and E. e:: è. , I. e. as the Expanſive Force of one Body is to that of the other, ſo the Contractive of the Latter, is to that of the Former, or a greater Expanſive Force into a leſſer Contractive, will be Equal to a leſſer Expanſive Force into a greater Contractive. TnS Gun-Powder, which has a vaſt Expanſive Force, and but a ſmall Contractive one, is Equal in i's Moment to vhole Tuns in Weight, which have a great Degree of the Contractive Force, and but a ſmall one of the Expanſive. E Coſ. 2. 1 2 %, The Momenss of Bodies, in Reſpeãt oſ theit Inrinſik Forcs vill be in a Dire;t one of the Expanſive, and a Reciprocal of the Contractive; i. e M.m:: Ec. eC, or the Moments of the Intrinſick Forces, in ſuch a Caſe, are as the greateſt Expanſive Force multiply'd into the leat Contractive, to the leaſt Expanſive into the greateſt Contractive, and ſo of any intermediate Degrees of theſe Forces, Vhere they hold the ſame Reciprocal Proportion, that is, as the Moment of Fire to that of Lead, or of Air to Earth, &e. Corol. 1. I E=e, M. m:: c. C, i. e. The Moments of Bodies will be Reciprocally as their Contractive Forces, or a leſſer Moment into a greater Contractive Force, is Equal to a greater Moment into a leſs Contractive; Thus a leſſer Portion of Lead, Wvill be Equal in it's Moment, to a greater of Iron. Corol. 2. If Cc, M. m:: E. e, i. . The Moments will be in a Direct Reaſon oſ the Expanſive Forces, according to Corol. 2. Caſ. 1. Corol. 3 I M=m, Ec 7eC or E. e:: C. c, i. æ. The Expanſive Force of the firſt Body will be to the Expanſive of the Second, as the Contractive of the Second, to the Con tractive of the Firſt, which may be the Caſe of Gun-Powder and Heavy Bodies, for if we multiply multiply the greateſt Expanſive Force into the leaſt Contractive, it will be Equal te the greatet Contractive into the leaſt Expanſive, which is the Caſe before, in Corol. ; Caſ. 1. of Gun-Powder and Hcavy Bodics. caſ. 3. If x E æ The Moments will be in a Direct Reaſon of the Contractivc - c Forces, and in a Reciprocal one of the Expanſive, or a7. m: : eC. Ec, which is tha of Lead to Fire, or Earth to Air, &e. The Corollaries are much the ſame with the Former. Caſ. 4. If æ = 7 The Moments will be in a Reciprocal Reaſon of the Ex panſive and Contractive Forces, that is, as the leaſt Expanſive to the greateſt Expanſive, and the leaſt Contractive to the greateſt Contractive, which may be the Caſe ol Black Dirt or Aſhes to Gold. AND the Corollaries are much the ſame with thoſe of caſ. 1. ſo that all theſc Four Caſes are ultimately Reducible to the Firſt and Second, and Bodics, compard vith one another, will be either thoſe which have a greater Expanſive or Contractive Force, in Reſpect of others, which have a leſs; or elſe thoſc, which have a greater Expanſive, and a leſs Contractive, in Reſpect of others, which have a leſs Expanſive, and a greater Contractive. : FROM the Various and Infinite Mixtures and Combinations of theſe Forces in differing Proportions, all the ſeveral Forms and Species of Material Beings ſeem to ariſe, and which will much better ſolve, as we ſhall afterwards ſhew, the apparent Properties and Qualities of Bodies, than the Imaginary Figures and Textures of Parts, introduc'd by the Corpuſcular Syſtem, for that Purpoſe and End; That there are ſuch Forces in Material Beings is very Evident, ſince ſome have a greater Diſpoſition to Motion, Velocity, and Expanſion, which I call the Expanſive Force, and orhers to Reſt, and to what is Contrary to Action or Motion, Velocity and Expanſion, which I call the Contractive: The firſt is ſeen in Fiery, Luminous, Volatile, Light, and Elaſtick Bodies; and the Iaſt in Groſs, Heavy, Viſcous, Torpid and Dull ones. TuHAT theſc Forces likewiſe Exiſt together, and in Conjunction, is manifeſt from all the firſt ind, having Gravity, and from all the laſt, having Colour, and a Capacity of being movd, which we ſhall farther Explain in the following Chapter; After having Premis'd, that we make all the World to be full of an Ethereal Matter, Quick, Subtle, and Elaſtick, which is capable of communicating the leaſt Impreſions or Actions of Bodies to our Organs of Senſation, and by which our Souls, from the Mediation of thoſe Organs, become united to all the Beings Which ſurround us. Tuar a Vacuum has not been prov'd by any Philoſophers, I have already evinc'd, from their ſuppoſing Matter to be Similar and Homogeneous, in Order to ſuch a Demonſtration; I have alſo ſiewn, that ſuch a Similar and Homogencous Matter is a mere Hypotheſis of the Mind, and wholly Incapable of ſolving any one Appearance we can name, or any one Quality of that Matter, which it is aſſum'd and taken to Account for; On the contrary, ve propoſc from theſe Intrinſick Forces in Matter, and from an Univerſal Action in all Nature, thro' the vaſt Expanſe of it, and which Forces and Action we can Evidence, muſt be derivd from an Infinite and All-wiſe Agent, we propoſe, I ſay, from them to Explain, the Various Phænomenons which occur to us, and vhich we are fully ſatisfied may be better and more Rationally done, than from fanciful and humorous Abſtractions of a void Space, of a mere Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, and of an Hypothetick, Extended, Solid, Diviſible, and Moveable Matter, without one Real Force belonging to it. IN the foregoing Theorems, we have made the Compoſition of Forces to conſiſt in the Multipſication of Them into each Other, tho Nature may poſſibly, in uniteing of various Forces together, draw out other Effects from ſuch Compoſitions, than vhat will reſult from a bare Multiplication of Them, to aſcertain which, the Genius ind Temper of the Expanſive and Contractive are to be Inquir'd into, and what llows from their Mixture or Union. C H AP. C H ADP. IV. Concerning the Five Mechanical Pouers, and the Denonſrations of Them. s. I. AVING conſiderd Matter as an Unactive Being, and the Theory from thence of Motion, and the ſcveral Circumſtances, which enter into it, as Space, Time, and Celerity, we are now to Examine into another Property of Matter, namely, it's Gravity or Weight; the Laws of which this Philoſophy endeavours to eſtabliſh, and from them to account for the Mechanick Powers, which are imagind 1o be ſolv}d by them: The firſt Theorem in this Doctrine is, that the Wei⸗hts of all ſenſible Bodies, near the Superficies of the Earth, are Proportional to the Quantities of Matter contaid in them. 5. 2. WE have abundantly, as we hope, confuted this Notion in our ſirſt Part of the Modern Philoſophy examind, and therefore it might be needleſs to give a particular Anſwer to it's being aſſerted here; however, ſince the only Reaſon aſſign'd for the Truth of this Theorem is, that the Bodies by the Force of their Gravitation ſalling downwards (if we take off or allow ſor the Reſiſtance of the Air) deſcribe Equal Spaces in the ſame Times, which is ſaid to be Evident from ſeveral Experiments made vith Pendulums, ſince this is the only Reaſon aſſign'd, we ſhall not think much to conſider the Validity of it. S. 3. THAT therefore this is no good Argument is evident, becauſe near the Earth it is impoſſible Bodies ſiou'd Gravitate according to their own Intrinſick Force of Gravitation, but, according to the Immenſe Force of Attraction in the Earth, in Reſpect of whoſe Inſinite Moment or Weight, all Bodies, which deſcend to it, muſt obtain a very Inconſiderable one, and that which is altogether Inſenſible; juſt as in a Balance, an Ounce or a Pound Equally aſcends, where a Million Weight or a Tun is put into the oppoſite Part of the Beam againſt it, and Which performs the ſame Province in ſuch a Caſe, with that of the Eart's Attraction in the Former;3 As to the Experiments of Pendulums, they have been fully conſiderd in the ſirſt Part of the Priaciples of Natural Philoſophy, and as to the Chief Experiment, beſides, oſ a Piece of Cold, and a Feather falling down in Vacuo at once, it is not yet provã, that ſuch a Heavy Body, as Gold, and ſo Light a one, as a Feather, may not have the ſame Effcct, vhen ſet together, as all other Bodies have, of being Obedient to, and following the Action of the Stronger; it is not yet ſiewn, that the Gravity of the Gold may not carry the Feather along with it, by it's Superior Inſluence and Action; or if not, it is not yet evinc'd, nor ever will be, rthat the Matter is of the ſame Sort in the Gold, as in the Feather, if it is not, Matter will not be proportional to its Weight, but different Kinds of Matter will Gravitate alike, and thereſore the ſame Kind of Marter will Gravitate diſferently, contrary to this Hypotheſis. ꝗ. 4. THE next Thing proposd in this Philoſophy is, to find the Velocity, with vhich a Body given is to be movd, ſo that it may have a Moment, or Quantity oſ Motion, Equal to any Moment given. Let the Body given be 4, whoſc Moment, or vhole Quantity of Motion, ought to be Equal to the Moment of B, movd vith the Celerity æ5 let it therefore be, 4. B3:: the Celerity ę, to another Celerity , which will be the Velocity enquird or ſought, JS——— namely, that, with which C c if 4 is movd, its Moment will be Equal to the Mo ment of B, as is evident ſrom what goes beſore; ſince the Moments of Bodies arc Equal, if their Celerities are Reciprocally Proportional to thoſe Bodies; but by the Hypothcſis c. C:: 4. B, ſfrom whence the Moment of 4 will be Z to the Momeni of , or CAZc B, which was ro be found. 5.5. Buæ s. 5. BUT it is evident, that this Demonſtration proceeds upon Matter's being perfectly unactive, excepting as Motion or Celerity is impreſ™'d upon it, that Matter, conſiderd in its ſelf, is nothing but Bulk or Magnitude, without any other Properties belonging to it, and therefore, the Moment of a Body is no other than a Sum of Celerities, which are counted up and computed by the Number of Points in the Magnitude, and if ſo, ve may throw Matter entirely out of the Queſtion, and only conſider a Globe of Space, according to whoſe Dimenſions wve may aſcertain the Moment of the Celerities; for ſince this Philoſophy takes Matter to be nothing in it's ſelf, the Demonſtration vill amount to this, that 100 Equal Celerities, for Inſtance, are the ſame as 1 Celerity, which is 100 Times greater than the Former, hich abſtracted Axiom, ſuppoſing it to be one, can be of no more Importance, in the Explaining of Nature, than that of 100 Lines, which are plac'd Parallel to each other, as in the firſt Caſe, being  to 100 of the ſame Lines plac'd in Directum, as in the Latter, or that of roo being Equal to it's ſelf; but can any one argue, that, becauſe 3 is 5 3, Or 100 to I00, in the Abſtract, therefore the Body or Corporeal Subſtance 4x C the Celerity is Equal to  the other Material Subſtance  c the Celerity, which Matter and which Celerity are Real, and not Abſtracted, as they exiſt in Nature? 5. . E have in the laſt Section conſiderd the Notion, which this Philoſophy aſſerts of Matter, and which will as well agree to Abſtracted Spaces, or Abſtracted Numbers, and inſtead of Matter, ve may as juſtly take either the one or the other, in order to aſcertain the Moment of the Celerities; Iet us now examine the Celerities themſelves, and we ſhall find it difficult to prove, that they are Reciprocal to their Sums or Bulks to make their Moments Equal; for if the Celerity is the ſame, the Moments of Celerity will be as the Sums or Aggregates of it, if the Celerity is diſferent, 100 of the ſame Celerities will hardly be Evidenc'd to be Equal to one Celerity, which is 100 Times greater; for altho' a Hundred of the ſame Celerities, deſcribe a 100 certain and determin'd Lines, yet one Celerity, which is 100 Times greater, do's not deſcribe a Hundred of the ſame Lines, but 10000 of Them; and the Moment or Force of ſuch Celerities cannot be the ſame, becauſe the actual Force of cach will always keep the ſame Proportion of Difference to each other, in a longer or a ſhorter Line, namely, that of 1 to 100, ſo that the Force which Equably deſcribes 100 Lines, will never amount to that 100 Times greater Force, which deſcribes 10000: Since the Progreſs of the ſame Motion cannot give any Addition to it, ſo as to change it into a Greater; that is, from 100 into 10000, no more than 1 can riſe to 100; that is, if 4 is 100, and B is 1, and it is as 4. B:: c. the Celcrity of  will be 100 Times greater than that of C, and where C deſcribes 1 Space, c will deſcribe 100; if thereſore, 4C deſcribes 100 Spaces, and Bc 100 with a Celerity 100 Times as great, the Celerity, in every Point of the laſt Line, ill be 100 Times greater than in every Point of the Firſt, and the laſt Line, or Force of vhich it is the Effect, will be to the Firſt, as 10000 to 100, or 100 to 13 If è and C are only Sums of the ſame Celerities, the Proportion vill hold of 4. B: : . C, that is, as the Sum of the Parts of 4, to the Sum of the Parts of B, ſo the Sum of the ſame Celerities , to thoſe of C; or if 4 and  have contranitent Forces to c and c, as thoſe of Gravity are to thoſe of Velocity, and 4. B:: c. C, A4C ill be = Bc, but this will not be by conſidering 4 and B as mere Magnitudes, but as conſiſting of certain Gravitating Forces. 5. 7. NOTWITHSTANDING Which, it is aſirmd from this Propoſition, that the ſmalleſt Body may have a Moment Equal to the Greateſt, which is movd with any given Velocity; but by what ſoregoes, that ill not be certain, till the Notion ol Matter and Celerity is a little better determind. S. 8. Ir is farther from this Principle, that all the Mechanical Forces are explaind, which are made uſe of, or contrivd to Draw or to Raiſe Heavy Bodies, namely, ii the Machines are ſo adjuſted, that the Celerity of the Power is to the Celerity ol the Weight, as the Weight is to the Pover, or ſince, if æ. C:: 4. B, ACS Bę, ſup poſing C is the Celerity of the Power, and c is the Celerity of the Weight, or Gravity to be movd, P the Power, and G the Weight or Gravity, if C. ?:: G. P, Cx P=eæ G and in ſuch a Caſe the Power ill ſuſtain the Weight; or, which is the ſame, the vhol vhole Moment of the one will be Equal to the whole Moment of the other, and this is endeavour'd to be exemplified by the Five Mechanical Powers. Waics ve ſhall conſider, after ve have made one ſhort Digreſſion to what has been lately Aſſerted in Proof of this Doctrine; Namely, that the Quantity of the Force of l moving Bodies is to be Eſtimated, by multiplying the Maſs of the Bodies by their Velocity, and not by the Square of it, as it ſcems, Fohn Bernoulli, Wolfius, Hermannus, and Polenus of Padus have affirm'd, in Defence of Monſicur Leibuitæ, who firſt advanc'd this Opinion, vhich we are far from Maintaining, and do believe it to be more Abſurd than what is Avowd and Patroniæd by the Preſent Mechanicks; that is, the Principles of Nature, which we contend for, do reject both as Chimerical, and which have only their Riſe in the Mind and Fancy of the Philoſopher; The Firſt Opinion, hich we ſhall only think it worth our Time to Examine into, and which if not True, it is Impoſſible the other ow'd be, becauſe our Arguments equally obtain againſt Determining the Moments of Bodies, by multiplying the Maſs of them into their Velocities, or the Square of their Velocities, or any other Power, Degree, or Proportion of Them Whatſoever, ſince we ſay their own Intrinſick Forces are to be taken into the Computation, The Firſt Opinion is thus Defended; IF a Man, it is ſaid, with a certain Force, can Move a Weight of Fiſty Pounds, thro a Space of Four Feet in a determinate Time, it is certain he muſt employ twice that Force to Move one Hundred Pounds Weight, thro' the ſame Space in the ſame Time; But if he uſes but the ſame Force, he will Move the one Hundred Pounds Weight, but Two Fect in the ſame Time; and hence we are told it appears, that the Force is Proportionable to the Maſs multiply'd into the Velocity: And is it not Plain, that Matter is conſiderd, as Similar and Homogencous, in this Demonſtration, and that there is nothing Imagin'd in it but Gravity or Weight? On the contrary, ſuppoſing we do not take Different Weights of the ſame Matter, but Different Portions of Different Matters, as for Inſtance, of Lead and Copper, or Wood, vill it be affirmd, that, if a Man vith a certain Force, can Move Fiſty Parts of Lead, thro a Space of Four Feet, in a determinate Time, it is Evident, he muſt employ twice that Force tO Move a Hundred Parts of Copper or Wood, thro' the ſame Space, in the ſame Time, and if he uſes the ſame Force, that he will Move the one Hundred Parts of Copper or Wood, but Two Feet in the ſame Time? If it is affirmd, all the Experience in the World contradicts the Affirmation; If not, what becomes of this Argument to prove, that the Moments of all Bodies are Eſtimated, by multiplying their Velocities into their Parts or their Maſſes? IF it is ſaid, that the ultimate Parts of Lead are the ſame, and have the ſame Weight, as the ultimate Parts of Copper, or Wood, that is vhat we have ever deny'd, and of which we ſtill require a Proof, vhich IT am aſſurd neither This, nor any other Philoſophy can give. OF the ſame Nature is the Argument made uſe of from the Balance, which ſews, that if the Brachium or Arm, on onc Side the Fulcrum, is one Fourth of That on the other, a Weight of onc Hundred Pounds, ſuſpended at the Extremity of the Former, vill be Equal to Twenty Five Pounds, ſuſpended at the Extremity of the Latter, becauſe the Velocity of the Latter, if it were to Move, woud be four Times Greater than the Velocity of the Former, and therefore, ſince 1 Velocity, into 1oo Weight, is & to 4 Velocity, into 25 Weight, the Moments of Bodies are to be Compurted, from Multiplying their Maſſes into their Velocities, and not into the Squares oſ Them, for, if ſo, the Weight 25 ſo'd be ſuſpended at half the Diſtance, ſince then the Square of 24, multiplyd into 25, voud be  to 1”o. LET us allow this therefore to be a juſt Argument againſt Leibnitæ, and his Followers, do's it yet Prove, what it voud Evince, that the Moments of Bodies are to be Eſtimated, by multiplying their Maſſes into their Velocities? Nothing leſs; it Proves it indeed, ſuppoſing Matter is Similar, and every Portion of it has the ſame Weight; but let us, as before, take Parts of Different Matter, and not the Weights of them, and the Fallacy will ſoon appear, For 100 Parts of Lead, ſuſpended at the Extremity of the ſiorter Arm of the Balance, will not be Equal, in their Moment, t0 25 Parts of Copper or Wood, placd at the Extremity of the Longer. Nor Ao the orther Experiments of a Weight in a Scale at one End of the Beam, being rai'd by the Shock or Blow given by a Weight ſalling on the other, differ from what ſorego's, for if inſtcad of Weights, ve were to make uſe of ſan ol . I Diſferent Difſerent Matter, all this Reaſoning, as above, vou'd be of no Force to Prove, that the Moments oſ Bodies are to be Eſtimated from multiplying their Mailes into their Velocities, but woud, ith the Weight it alledges, fall to the Ground, ſince an Hundred, or a Thouſand Parts of Cork, or a Feather, will not by their Shock or their Blow raiſe 10 Parts of Lead, unleſs we again ſuppoſc, that the ultimate Parts of the one are the ſame, and have the ſame Gravity with thoſe of the other, which we humbly beg Leave once more to proſeſs our Diſſent to, till we are ſo happy as to Meet with a farther Conviction of it; And now we ſhall Return to vhat we have many Years ago writ, and proceed to the Mechanical Põwers. 5. 9. THE Firſt is that of the Vectis, and in Order to give an Account of it, AB is ſupposd to be ſuch a one, whoſe Fulcrum is C, on which it moves; if ſo, it is ſaid, that the Space, which is deſcribd by each Point in it's Revolving, vill be as it's Diſtance from C. Caſ. 1. For let the Vectis be movd from its Situation 4C B, to that of aCò, the Point 4 vill deſcribe the Periphery Aa, and B the Periphery Bb, but the Sectors 4Ca, B Ch, being Similar, it vill be, as 4a. Bb:: 4C. BC, that is, the Spaces deſcrib'd by the Points, 4 and i B, vill be as their Diſtances from the v Fulcrum C. Caſ. 2. IF to the Points, 4 and B, the Povers are affixt ſo, as to drav the Arms of the Vectis perpendicularly, the Spaces deſcribd will be as a F, b E, and ſinc: the Triangles aCF, bCE are Similar, it will be as a F. bE:: ac= AC. bC = EC. Caſ. 3. Ir the Direction of the Power is not a Right Line, which is Perpendiculai to the Vectis, but is inclin'd, as A4F to C 4, drav Cõ Perpendicular to the Line A of Direction, and the Space deſcribd by the Pover, as in Caſe the 24, vill be proportional to the Diſtance from the Fulcrum C for it Is the ſame Thing B c whether the Thread 4G, by which the L Power acts, is aſfixt to 4, G, or D; from vhence it follows, that in all theſe D Three Caſes, the Space deſcrib'd by any Power, according to it's proper Direction, is Proportional to the Diſtance F of ihe Line oſ Direction from the Fulcrum. s. 10. ALL therefore, which is Demonſtrated in this Theorem, is only this, that if the Line A4CB, Fig. 1, is ſupposd to be movd on it's Center C, 4 vill arrive at ⸗, at the ſame time, that B comes to b, which is no more than to ſay, that in the Line C ſ B, where Cſ is Equal to 4, f will come to 4, at the ſame time, as B will to b, that is, in Con centrical Circles, Similar Archs of them will be performd in the ſame Time, and be in the ſame Proportion with the Radius's of them; for ſince the Motion of the Line a4C B is only conſider'd, and what the Conſequence of ſuch a Morion vill be, all that we can ſay in General is, that whether on this Side the Center C, or the other, A a or ã f vill have the ſame Proportion to B4, as AC or Cf to C8, but what it vill ſigniy to explain the Mechanical Power of the Vectis, io ſay à f is to Bb, as Cſ to CB, we cannot readily apprehend; for CA is no more determind to deſcend, than CF to riſe, that is, neither the one nor the other voud do it, excepting by ſuppoſing it, and the Line 4 CB vill in Reality keep it's Situation, for all that has been yet Demonſtrated in this Theorem. 5. 11. WE conſequently acknowledge, that iſ the Line 4Cæ is movd round it's Center G, it vill deſcribe 4a, à f, and Bb, at the ſame Time, for the like Reaſon, hat in deſcribing a Circle, all the Concentrical Peripheries will be perſormd by the l ſame ſame Motion of the Radius; But which way are we from thence made to underſtaihd my more; how Ch ſou'd actually, and not in Suppoſition only deſcend, for inſtance 1o CB, at the ſame Time, that Ca riſes to CA, than how CàZb ſoud deſcend to CſB in fact, by ſuppoſing an imaginary Motion only, which preſumes in the Deſcription of Concentrical Circles, that C may aſcend, or Càb deſcend, and therefore, that there is no real Inclination to move one way more than another? S. 12. BESIDES, if ACB is an Abſtracted and Mathematick Line, which has nò i m, Equal Weight, nor no Dimenſions, except that of Length, CB will weigh no more than  , Magnitudu: and therefore, notwithſtanding this Geometrick Reaſoning,  CB will continue in the . ſ ſame Poſture, without any Propenſity to Move one way or other, if it is Movd by æ ib velli, Suppoſition, there can be nothing more collected from thence than that Concen: conſilnid onby trical Circles are deſcribd in the ſame Time, and that the Celerities of theit De- Line nothing ſcription, or their Spaces, are Proportional to their Diſtances from their Center; but æ ſifrom ibn this is no Explanation how the Power and the Weight perform ſuch Spaces, ſince, u. altho 4a. Bb: : AC. BC in this Figure, here B and A4 are indiviſible Points, and AC and B C Geometrick Lines, yet, other Things being the ſame, as in the preſent Scheme, if two Bodies of Equal Matter and Bulk are aſſixt to B, and 4, theſe Spaces vill not be deſcribd by them, becauſe  and 4 being Equal, and the Scheme continuing the ſame, there will no real Motion enſue; and whatever Motion is inrroduc'd, muſt be, as before, by Suppoſition, unleſs  and A4, when conſiderd as Equal Points, are different from B and 4, when conſiderd as Equal Congeries of the ſame kind of Points, vhich is impoſſible, for all Equal Parts, cqually multiplyd, will have the ſame Relation to each other, as their Simples. 5. 13. IP the Parcels of Matter affixt to the Extremities of the Vectis are Unequal, f im tnequsl ſo are likeviſe the Lines A C, CB, which yet will continue in the Poſition 4CB, p-ſ unleſs they are ſuppos'd to be movd; if therefore  and 4 (Which, tho' Portions of ibi Grmerid Matter, are nothing more than Portions of Abſtracted Space in this Philoſophy, by Limjuub s. 5.) are unequal Portions of Space (as 4C and CB are), there can be no Rea- ;um ſm ſon aſig'd, vhy ſuch unequal Portions of Space ſhoud any more cauſe a Mo- ihn tion in the Vectis, than why 4 C and CB ſoud, which are unequal Portions of Abſtracted Space, and therefore 4CB notwithſtanding theſe Appendages of Abſtracted Matter, at the Extremities of the Vectis, will not be put into Motion, without a Suppoſition of it. l 5. 14. FARTHER, if B is of the ſame Sort of Matter with 4, and it's Bulk is Re- If rb Magnlciprocal to it's Diſtance from C, with that of 4 from C, for the ſame Reaſon, as in -— the former Section, 4 CB, with theſe Reciprocal Appendages of their Diſtance from Diſa from c, vill yet ſtill be unable to move out of the Situation 4 CB, to that of a Ch, with- ih Cenir, a out a Suppoſition of Motion to aſſiſt irs Inactivity, for if Unactive and an Abſtracted 2ũiat Matter is aſfixt to an Abſtracted and Unactive Line, it is impoſſible any Action Motion or In: ſiod reſult ſrom it. eluuim i» i. S. 15. IF, moreover, B is not of the ſame kind of Matter with 4, and they have If Mat hu different Forces, it is a Contradiction to the fundamental Hypotheſis of this Philo- yu u ſophy, which ſuppoſes all Matter to be the ſame; and if ſuch an Hypotheſis is not ſue in ihm true, as ve have endeavourd to prove it is not, The Motion of 4 and B, as it is ſiluns, ihis i propos'd in this Philoſophy, will be much leſs aſerted by the preſent Theorem than,, ũ ææ. beſore, as will be evident, if Lead is placd at one End of the Vectis, and Fire or Light, or even an Equal Portion of Wood or Cork, at the other; But this Arg-ment ve have urgd more at Large, §. s. j S. 16. SUPPOSING Vet all Matter to be the ſame, and ſome kind of Action, as If aim i Gravity, is introduc'd into it, which we will likewiſe preſume Proportionable to the /. æ Fru o Matter which Gravitates, the contrary to which we have notwithſtanding provã, both in Graitanon this Part of our Principles of Philoſophy, and more particularly in the Fir©t; let now the ſ; ſſuu Gravitation of 4 be Equãl to that of B, if ſo, for ought, that has been hitherto De- æhid: orax monſtrated, it do's not appear, that 4CB vill change it's Situation by this Acceſſion — of a perpendicular Action or Gravity, for, if the Abſiracted Diſtance of CB and CA can ſignify nothing to make 2 or 4 incline one vay or the other, as has been beſore ewn, the Addition of Equal Weights cannot be of any great Importance o the Depreſſing the one Part of the Vectis, or Raiſing the other. ] & 17. For 5. 17. For the Reaſon, which is alledgd in the foregoing Section, iſ the Weight of A is Greater than that oſ B, or the contrary, and they are in a Reciprocal Proportion to their Diſtances ſfrom the Fulcrum, it will not be neceſſary, that the Moment of 4 oud be Equal to that of 8, becauſe, if, where 4 and B are Equal Weights, or have an Equal Force of Gravitation, the Line or Vectis 4CB is unmovã, it vill follow, that where 4 and B are unequal Weights, and in a Reciprocal Proportion to their Diſtances from the Fulcrum, they will not be Equally pois'd, ſince the Diſtances CA and CB have no Influence or Moment ſas they are Abſtracted Lines) in the aſſiſting the Gravitation of the one Body or the other. 5. 18. LastLY, if we do not conſider the Diſtances, 4C and BC, from the Fulcrum, as Abſtracted Lines, but as one Gravitating continued Line, the Caſe will be ſtill more perplext in Reſpecti of the Weights, 4 and B, which have been hitherto imagind to excrt their Gravitation or Action at the Extremities of the Abſtracted Line 4CB, ſince, if now the Abſtracted Line 4CB is ſuppos'd to conſiſt of Real Matter, which Gravitates, all the Parts of it will be as ſo many Gravitating Bodies, 4 and B, in their ſeveral Diſtances from the Fulrum, and therefore, in this Abſtracted Reaſoning, vill be of no greater Significance to the Weighing down the one Part oſ the Vectis than the other. s. 19. IN fine, what is wanting in the whole Demonſiration is to ſiev, that ſuppoſing C. ſ, E, and B, to be four Gravitating Points, acting Downwards in a Perpendicular, with an Equal Force of Gravitation, and yet detaind by the Point C from Receding from thence, what the Spaces will be which they deſcribe, which at C can be none, at ſ, E, and B, will be ſo many Quadrants, made by the Radiuss Cf, CE, and CB, Which Vill each of them Coincide with Cõ at the ſame Time, upon this Suppoſition, that at f;, E, and B, thè Celerities will be Greater, the farther thoſe Points are from the Center of their Detention q, tho' their Perpendicular Gravities are ſupposd to be the ſame, which is nothing more than a Reaſonable Preſumption, if it is not an Axiom; becauſe, if, at C, the Gravitation is entirely hindred from Exerting it's Action into the Deſcribing any Space, and only preſſes in a Point, the Action of a Similar Gravity, which is here ſuppos'd, will ſuitably obtain i's own Force in Proportion more fully, and ſtrongly, the farther it is removd from that Point, where it's Effect in Celerity was Equal to nothing, that iss was wholly Obſtructed; and by Conſequence ſuch an Equal Action, as that of Gravitation, will be more forcible, and be carried with a greater Celerity in a greater Diſtance, from the Center of it's Detention, than in a Leſſer; and if ſo, one Gravitating Point at B, may be Equal in it's Force to Ten at 4, or f; but of This we ſhall ſay more at the End of this Philoſophy of the Mechanical Powers. S. 20. THE next Theorem, which is founded upon the foregoing Principles, is, that in a Vectis, the Vis Motrix, or Pover, as ?, which has the ſame Proportion to the Weight , which the Diſtance of the Line of Direction of the Weight from the Fulcrum, namely, C, has to the Diſtance of the Direction of the Power from the Fulcrum, to vit, A 5& C 4, vill ſuſtain the Weight; that ) is, if P. L:CQCA4, LuC”L  will be =Px CA, or the Power of P, in ſuch a Circumſtance of its r Diſtance from C, will be Equal to the Weight Q, conſiderd at the Diſtance of CQ5 becauſe the Ratio of the Moment: of any Body is compounded of the Ratios of the Quantities of Matter, and oſ the Celerities, that is for Example, 3 Portions of Diſtance into 4 of Matter ate Equal to3 of Matter into 4 of Diſtance, and in the preſent Caſe, ſince the Celerities are Proportional to the Diſtances, 3 Portions of Celerity intt 4 of Matter are Equa to3 of Matter into 4 of Celerity, that is, 1 Portion of Celerity, and, by Conſcquence of Diſtance in the Vectis, is always to be computed to have the ſame Force a 1 Portion of Matter, and ſo on the Contrary, or, let C be the Celerity oſ th Boy⸗ c of the Weight, ? the Power, G the Gravity or Weight, it will be, P. G: : c. C and PCc6ve. 5 21. I: S. 21. I Anſwer to which ve may ſay, that Firſt, according to what we have T already ſien, it is not neceſſary to ſuppoſe Matter alike, and to be no other than a Congeries of ſo many Points of Abſtracted Space or Number, which ſerve only to Count up the particular Ingredient Celerities, that make up the whole Moment or Quantity of Motion: Second, That if Matter was this Similar Being, which ſoud only conſiſt of ſo many Points, by which we ſiod reckon the Sum of the whole Motion, yet it is not Evident that a Sum of the ſame kind of Celerities, is Equal to any Sum of Celerities, which are of a different Nature and Activity, as ſuppoſing, is 4, and P is3, and the Celerity of  is 3, and that of ? is 4, it is no more provq, that theſe Moments are Equal, than that a double Celerity has the ſame Force, that two Equable ones have; thus let Two a b Points, a, , move in the ſame Time to b, b, the Force a b or Activity of ſuch a Celerity ill be expreſ>d by cither of theſe Lines, which ill never riſe to the Force of a double Celerity, which deſcribes a  in half the Time, or twice b in the ſame Time, ſince 4, , moving together in the ſame Time, is, as if a ſnow'd move twice the Length of æ in double the Time, but 4 moving, where the Celerity is double, thro ab in half the Time, or thr twice ab in the ſame Time, cannot be Equal to æ4 moving thro a  in the ſame Time, or twice ab in double the Time: Third, If Matter was the Abſtracted Being, which it is repreſented to us, and Unequal Celerities had Equal Forces, or Moments with the Sums of the ſame Celerities, yet, by what has been ſaid concerning the Vectis, it wou'd not be Equally pois'd by ſuch a Reciprocal Matter and Celerity;any more than it woud by an Equal Marter affixt at both the Extremities of it, which we have Evidenc'd, §. 16 and 17, vill be as entirely in an ZAEquilibrium, as any Reciprocal Matters or Portions of it, which we can name, and therefore deſtroys this Reaſoning, which ſuppoſes the Reciprocal Diſtances neceſſary to the Equal Balance; For it is ſewn in thoſe Sections, and in others Preceding, that there will be no Motion of 4 C.Q in any Caſc, unleſs upon a Suppoſition of it that is, to make theſe Celerities Reciprocal, the Vectis is put into Morion by the Mind, which Motion is not provd or deduc'd from any Principles alledg'd in this Philoſophy. ] S. 22, Tis true the Roman, or according to Dr. wallis the Romman, Balance is made ; uſe of, as an Inſtance, to juſtify this Reaſoning, where C is the Fulcrum, CA the Diſtance of the Pondus to be examin'd, PC is the other Part of the Beam, which is diſtinguiſd into 8 ſeveral Portions or more, as there ſhall be occaſion, ? is a Weight (ſuppoſing a Pound) already known, if therefore at P, vhere the Beam is 8 Times longer than C4, P is in an Equal Balance vith Q, Q is 8 Pounds, as ? is 1, that is, the Weights are in a Reciprocal Proportion of their Diſtances from the Fulcrum C. 5. 23. ON the contrary, this Example of the Roman Balance is ſo far from confirming the former Reaſoning, that the former Reaſoning ſeems to be contrivd to Account for this Balance, the Principles of which, ſince they are not Capable of Explaining the Propoſitions, which are deſign'd to be Preparatory to it's Solution, cannot be any ways ſignificant to an Expoſition of it. S. 24. BESIDES Which, if all, that has been hitherto confuted, was true in Reſpect of the Balance not moving at all, unleſs by Suppoſition, it wou'd not prove, that ſ and Z, in the preſent Circumſtance of their Diſtances from the Fulcrum being Reciprocal to their Weights, vou'd be in an Equal Poiſe with each other: Firſt, Becauſe the Weights of the Bodies ?, , are here ſubſtituted inſtcad of the Celerities, Vhereas it is not maniſeſi, from this Philoſophy, that Forces, which Equally deſcend and are only diſtingniſd by the different Sums or Aggregates of them, are Anſwer able or Analogous to different Forces of Celerity, according to Argument the ſecond 5.21 Second, Becauſc, if that was allow'd, the Point , and that at ?, voud be in an Equal Poiſe vithont any Appendage of Reciprocal Portions oſ Matter to theĩ their Diſtance from the Fulcrum; ſince i? Q moves with 1 Ccſerity, and ? move: vith 8, and ſince at the ſame Time, that 2 moves with ĩts Celerity about thæ Fulcrum c, ? vill obtain it's own Celerity likewiſe, it will be impoſſible for  o P to Preponderate, from Vhence it follows, that the Point  and the Point P, vith out the Addition of the Weight  on the one Hand, or ? on the other vill bt in an Aquilibrium; if thereſore, the Weight  is added to one Extremity, and ? æ the other, the firſt of which is ſupposd 8 Times Greater, in it's Force or Gravitation than the Iaſt, the Preponderancy will be on the Side of ꝗ, according to ithis Rea ſoning, which, by Experiment, do's not Preponderate at all. FroM all vhich it is manifeſt, that, inſtead of proceeding in this Abſtracted Way, the Preſent Philoſophy, according to s. 19, ſowd have provd, that, where Forces arc ſuppos'd to Gravitate Equally, and in a Perpendicular, and at the ſame Time are detain'd ſo, as not to recede from the Fulcrum C, thoſe Forces are increasd the farther they are removd from that Fulcrum, or the Centre oſ their Detention, and in Proportion to their Removal from it; which will ſolve the Properties of the Vectis, and the Roman Balance, and will anſwer the Difficulties, which I have raisd againũ the Preſent Reaſoning, becauſe, in ſuch a Caſe, 4P is not conſiderd as an Abſtracted Line, and the Celerities are not conſiderd as Abſtracted ones, but Different in themſelves, and ſuch as may Balance a contrary Force of Gravitation opposd to them, for by that Means ? will have a Force of Percuſſion or Celerity Impreſ'd upon it, which will be Equal to the Gravitating Force in Q. ꝗ.25. THE next Mechanical Pover after the Vectis, which we are to enquire into, is the Axis in Peritrochio, the Axis is the Cylinder ſupported by two Fulcrums at the Extremities oſ it, and the Peritrochium is the Circular Body aſfixt to the Axis, to which ſeveral Scytalæ, or Handles, are ſuppos'd to be join'd, and by a Force applyd to one oſ theſe Scytalæ, the Pondus ? is to be raisd. This is the Deſcription of the preſent Mechanical Power, and the Theorem, which is formd upon it, ve ſhall explain in the following Section. S. 26. THE Theorem to Explain this Second Power is, that, in the Axis with the Peritrochium, the Vis Motrix, which has the ſame Proportion to the Weight to be ſuſtain'd, which the Perimeter of the Axis, to which the Weight is Applyd, has to the Perimeter of the ourmoſt Ambitus or Orbit, to which the Vis Motrix is Applyd, will be Equal to the Weight; if therefore ſuch a Vis Motrix is never ſo little augmented, it vill be ſuſfficient to raiſe the Weight, to which it vas before Equal; For the Weight Pis dravn up in Proportion, as the Line, from vhich it depends, wraps about the Axis, and therefore in one Revolution of the Axis, the Weight will be anſwerably raisd the Length of the Axis's Anibitus, and at the ſame Time the Power, or Vis Motrix, applyd to the Scytala, or Handle of the Peritrochium, will deſcribe the Circumference made by the entire Revolution of it, that is, the ourmoſt Orbit, or Ambitus performd by the Vis Motrix; from whence it follows, that the Celerities of the Power, and the Weight, which are as the Spaces they deſcribe, will be as the Perimeter of the ourmoſt Orbit to the Perimeter of the Axis, wherefore, it the Weight is to the Pover, as the Perimerer of the outmoſt Orbit to the Perimeter of the Axis, the Celerity of the Pover will be to that of the Weight Reciprocally, as the Weight to the Power, which, by what foregoes, is the Condition requiſite to make the Power and the Weight in an Equal Balance; that is, let C be the Celerity of the Power, c of the Weight, ? the Power, and G the Gravity or Weight, it will be as P.G:: c. C, and PCæQcc. 5. 27. IF we conſider the Circumferences of the Axis 4B, and of the Scytalæ D to be dravn from the ſame Center æ or F, and whilſt T moves ſrom thence to ne 4 to deſcribe an Oppoſire Arch, from thence to B, the ſame, as that of Fig. i. §. 9. vhere CB vill repreſent EC in and 4C that of 4F, ſo that there is nothing more to be al Power than that any equally Gravitating Point has a greater 1it's Removal from the Center of it's Detention. 5. 28. THE Third Mechanicãl Power is that of the Trochleã, Polyſpaſt, or Pully, which is accounted for by the following Theorem, That the Force, vhich is to the Weight, as 1 to the Number of Lines by which the Weight is ſuſpended, will be ſufficient to bear up thiat Weight, and if increasd, will ſurmount it; Let there be a Line, one of whoſe Extremities is affixt to the Uncus B, in the Fold or Doubling of Which let the Pully be placd with the Weight annext to it, and thie other Extremity to P; in order to raiſe the Weight 2 one Foot from C to A, there will be two Foot of the Lines BF, P G carry'd upwards at the ſame Time, namely, from F to D, and from G to E, ſuppoſing the Diameter of the Pully FCũ to be inconſiderable; or, which is the ſame, the Uncus remãining fixt, hilſt ? is movd upwards, to cauſe C to aſcend to D, D and C vill be Coincident, ſo that DCE or DFGE vill have movd twice as far as C4, that is, by that Time C arrives at 4, D vill come to E, and E vill riſe as far above P, as G is below E, in both which Caſes, the Line of the Force or Power vill deſcribe Double the Space of what the Weight dos; from vhence it follows, that the Celerity of the Power will be Double the Celerity of the Weight, and conſequently, if the Power is to the Weight, as I to 2, it's Moment vill be Equil to that of the Weight, and therefore will ſuſtain it. 2. Ir, as in the 2 Figure, Three Lines are usd to raiſe the Weight one Foot, the Space, which the Power deſcribes, vill be to that, which the Weight dos, as 3 to 1, and thero fore the Power ought to be to the Weight, as 1 to;. 3. IF, as in the 3 Figure, Four Lines are us'd, the Space deſcribd by the Power, to that deſcribd by the Weight, will be as 4 to I, and therefore the Power muſt be to the Weight in order to Poiſc it, as I to 4, and ſo on in Infinitum. 5. 29. ALL the Diſficulties beſore alled9'd againſt the Preſent Explanation of the Mechanical Powers, are alike Valid againſt the Account, which is given of this, namely, that the Matter to be raisd is conſiderd as Similar and Homogencous, that Gravity is likewiſc the ſame in all Bodies, &e. What we have to ſay here, in particular, is, that the Center of Detention is B, Fig. 1. of the foregoing Section, and if P is ſuppos'd to be a fixt Point, it Will be another Center of Detention likewiſe, which will together ſuſtain the Body Q, Whether the Lines are Longer or Shorter, or whether  has a Greater or Leſs Weight; and Iet the Line or Space, which ? is ſupposd to deſcribe to Balance the Weight, be what it will, ĩt ſignifies nothing to the Support of it, i ? is not ſupposd to be a Center of Detention, and if the Power lies in the Space to be deſcribd, without an Actual Force in P, Equal to thãt in B, to ſupport the deſcending Body, ſince it will certainly deſcend, notwithſtanding any Imaginary Lines or Spaces, which are deſcrib'd in the Fancy to ſuſtain it; For a double Line, which is to be deſcribdd by the Power in P, can never ſupport à double Weight in Q, it muſt be an actual Force in , which together with the Uncus s, wil be Equivalent to the Weighi ” in Q, and not a Space to be deſcribd by , which vill be capable of obraining that Effect; the Trochlea thercfore in this Scheme is nothing elſe but a Vectis, which has a Fulcrum at each Extremity, with this Difference, that the Trochlca has it's Diſtances from the Fulcrums Perpendicular to the Horizon, whereas thoſe of the Vectis are Parallel to it. Morcover DFG E are not Lines Double of 4C, and, whilſt C moves to A, there will be more than Double that Space deſcrib'd by the Line round the Pully, in order to Elevate the Weight to that Height. 5. 30. WE muſt farther obſerve, that the Length of the Lines is conſider'd in this Explanation, to make the Spaces deſcrib'd by the Power, Double of thoſe deſcribd by the Weight, that is, 4 Cis half of D F+ G E, Fig. 1, and yet in the Theorem it ſclf, the Number of Lines is only conſiderd; on the other Hand, in Fig. 24, and 34. the Length of the Lines is not conſider'd, nor the Number of them; the Length is not, unleſs ?N is Equal to ST/TR, nor the Number, if 3 is not Equal to 4, or NVASTHTR S to NVASTHTRrVP, for, in the 24 Figure, to which we Refer, the Power is to the Weight, as 1 to3, becauſc the Spaces, deſcrib'd by the 3 Lines of the Power, are to the Elevation of the Weight in one Line, as 3 to 1, when the Lines are neither Equal, nor have an Equal Direction, nor are turn'd about Equal Pullies, all which are at leaſt neceſſary to make the Spaces deſcribd by the Power 3 Times as much, and no more, than that deſcribd by the Weight; If this yet were true, ſince 7P is alſo added, it will be Impoſſible to explain how the Action of 4 Lines, ſhod have the ſame Effect as3, which are only ſupposd in deſcribing 3 Times the Space, which 1 Line do's, unleſs we can truly and juſtly aſſirm that 3 is Equal to 4; and it is manifeſt there are only 2 Lines made uſe of to deſcribe a double Space in Fię. 1. But we ſtill Inſiſt, that tho' in the Vectis, the farther any Gravitating Point is Diſtant from the Center of Detention, the greater Force oſ Velocity it has, and thereſore will deſcribe a greater Space in the ſame Time, yet a greater Velocity to be deſcribd, is no Argument, that there is that Force at Hand to deſcribe it, till ſuch Force is provd, which is not done in the preſent Mechanical Pover, but aſſumd, becauſe a greater Velocity is Requiſite to be deſcrib'd in order to Elevate the Weight. S. 31. THE Trochlea or Pully therefore is that Mechanical Power, which conſiſt: of ſeveral Centers of Detention, and which obſerves the ſame Laws with the Vectis vith Two Fulcrums at the Extremities of it. TnUS let BO repreſent a compound Vectis, divided into it's ſeveral Diſlinctions, B,  D, E, F, G, H, I, X, &IN the firſt Part oſ it, PE expreſſes a Vectis, hoſe Fulcrums are plac'd at the Extremities of it in E, and B, vith an Oppoſite one at D. It is manifeſt by the Laws of the Vectis, and it's Forces, which, according to what we have beſore ſewn, are jncreas'd in Proportion to their Diſtance from the Center of Detention, which here is the Fulerum E, that 1 Weight in B, is Equal to 2 Weights in D, becauſe, as the Diſtance ED =1, from the Center of Detention E, is to the Diſtance DBEZ/2, from the Center of Detention D, ſo the Weight I at B, is to the Weight 2 at D, that is, ED. DB: : ?V1. W2, and WVi æa DBSW2 x ED. It muſt be obſervid, that we, at preſent, ſuppoſe the oppoſite Fulerum D, not to hinder the Elevation of rhe Weight 2, and ſo of the other oppoſite Fulcrums, which only obtain in the Pully, and are the Occaſion of the Slideing Motion in it, ſince, where the Fulerums are oppoſite to each other, it is Impoſſible Motion ſio'd be performd any other Way. LET now the Vectis be ſuppos'd to looſe it's Rigor and Stifſneſs, and to become Pliant and Vielding to the Weights, and the Fulcrums annext to it, the Points æ, D, q, B, A Vill retain the ſame Forces, as before, in Reſpect of the Weights and the Fulerums, and will only change their Horizontal to a Perpendicular Situation. Tuvs THUS ED 2CBAI, in Fig. 1. will fall into ED 2 CBA I, Fig. 2. in which the Lengths of the Perpendicular Lines are of no Conſideration, and only the Relation, which they have to their Fulcrums. is Regarded; B A1 is nothing, ECD=2, and DEZI. TuE ſecond Portion of the Vectis Fig. 1. is EH, Let ED2 be turnd round a Pully in E, by the Former Vectis, or Pully, 2W in D, = W in B, therefore the whole Weight or Power, in the Former Vectis or Pully, will be  to 2 in E; and for the ſame Reaſon, as before, the Weight 2 in E, will be Equal to the Weight 4 in G, becauſe HG=æ1, the Diſtance from the Center of Detention H, is to GE=2, the Diſtance from the Center of Detention G, as the Weight 2 to the Weight 4, that is, HG. GE: : W2. W4, and HG x W4 GExW2, but W2 in D, or E, /WI in B, or 4, and therefore w in B. or 4,=W4 in G. TuE third Diviſion of this Compound Veſtis is HL, in which let G 4 be thrown round a Pully in H, and the Weight 4 in H will be Equal to the Weight 6 in X, for the whole Moment or Weight of the Two former Vectes or Pullies were 1 W in B, or A, æ2W in D, =4W inõ, and all of them æ3 W inH, but LK=1. KH=2:: 3V in H. 6 in ; or 1W in 4, or B,6 W in X. TuE laſt Part of this Compound Vectis is LO, in which 1 Win 4, or B, =2W in D, 4W inG, = 6 W inX, and all of them 4 W in L, but ONS I. NL=2::W4 in L. 8 in N, and I Diſtance x 8 W=2 Diſtance  4 W. LEr the whole Vectis, vhich may be contind in Infinitum, become Limber and Pliant to the Weights, which depend from it, and the Three laſt Diſtinctions of it, as vell as the Firſt, will Sink into Pullies, and  FG4 H, in the 1ſ? Figure, will fall into  FG4 H, in the 2d, HIK6 L into HIKG6L, and LMNS0 into LMNSO. 5. 32. IF therefore ve now make uſe of the Number of Pullies themſelves, and not of the Lines, which encompaſs them, for a Solution of the Properties of thisè Mechanical Power, we ſhall eſcape all the Difficulties, which we have urg'd againſt ? the preſent Account, and ſhall find here the Forces, which are wanting there, to explain thoſe Properties; Thus with 2 Pullies 2 and D, and a Fulcrum E, 1 vill ſuſtain 2W; with 4 Pullies B, D, E, G, and a Fulcrum H, 4W; with 6 Pullies B, D. E, G, H, X, and a Fulcrum L, 6 ; with 8 Pullies B, D, E, G, H, X, L, N, and a Fulcrum 0, 38W, &c. From hence alſo it is manifeſt, that in Pullies, which are not connected with one another, but are ſuſtaind by ſeveral Diſtinct Fulcrums, the Force of the 2à vill be Double of that of the i1ſ, that of the 3 Double of that of the; 2d, and that of the 47h Double of that of the 34, &c. as alſo, that 1 W will ſuſtain 5 W vith five Pullies connected with one another without any Diſtin&t Fulcrums; From hence it is farther Evident and Plain, that every Center of Detention weakens the Force of Gravitation, as in the other Mechanical Powers, every Removal from it, Increaſes it, that is in General, according to the Notion before Explain'd of Expanſive and Contractive Forces, the Center of Detention has in this Caſe a Contractive Force, and hinders Expanſion and Velocity, and the Gravitating Force in Reſpect of ſuch a Center is an Expanſive one, tho' in other Reſpects and Relations, as in Fire or Flame, tis a Contractivee So in the Trochlea or Pully, nothing can he more certain than, i ve hang tvo Equal Weights upon it, they will be detain'd by it from Deſcending, and there will be one Center of Detention, if we make uſe of 2 Pullies, there will be æ Centers of Detention, if of 3, there will be3 Centers of Detention, &e. according to the Figures preceding. AND to ſiew that this Account of the Trochlea, is the moſt Rational of any, which has been yet given, it ſupplies us with a Reaſon, why this Mechanical Fouper K eviO : 0 T  TCIEI Eſ (ũ, © 2 Deviates from the Others in it's Proportions, for whilſt the Othert àre as the Diſtances ſrom the ſame Center of Detention, this is as the Number of ithe Difcrent Centers oſ it. Morcover it is maniſeſt from the 1ſ Figure, where the ſrochlea Reſembles a Veũtis, that if the oppoſite Fulcrums D, õ, X, and J, were taken avay, the Weights voud be raisd ar thoſe Points by the Power Acting at æ; if thereſore, as in the Pully, Fig. the 24, thoſc Fulcrums are replac'd in the Points above, and the Vectis is changd into a Cord, the Action muſt be performd by a Slideing of it, ſince the Fulcrums ſorbid ir's Aſcent; Which is a Phænomenon not Accounted for by the Preſent Mechanickss We ſhall therefore conclude in Relation to this Pover, that what ve have to do vith Reſpect to it, and the foregoing, is only ro Determine at the End of theſe Mechanical Powers, what are the Forces of Material Beings at the ſcveral Diſtances ſrom the ſame Center of Detention. s. 33. THE Fourth Mechanical Power is that of the Cochlea or Screw, the Interior has it's Spiral Indenrations filld up by the Prominent Parts of the Exterior Screw, which are j made Spiral likewiſe, and exactly correſpond to the Indentations of the Invard; or, which is the ſme in Eſfect, the Spiral Convexities of the Inwvard Screv anſver to the Spiral Concavities of the Outvard, and either the Outward Screw is fixt, and the Inward paſſes thiò the ſeveral Spirals of it, or elſe the Inward is ſixt, and the Outward moves upon the Spirals of the Inward. S5. 34. THE Theorem Introduc'd to Explain this Power is, that if the Ambitus, which the Force or Power apply'd Deſcribes in one Entire Circuit or Circumvolution oſ the Screw, is to the Interval of the two next Spirals, which Interval is to be computed according to the Length of the Screv, as the Weight or Reſiſtance to the Power, the Power and Weight vill be Equally pois'd, and if there is the leat Addition to ſuch a Power, it vill be capable of Moving the Weight; Let c4 be the Interior Screw, DE and 4I the Exterior ones, thro which the Intetior is ford by the Scytala or Handle CB, to Wwhich the Power is Applyd, and by the Rotation of vhich the Weight ? is raisd; it is manifeſt. by Obſcrving the Motion of the Screw, that in. one Revolution of it, the Weight is ſo much Elevated, as the Interval of the Two firſt Spirals, Expreſsd by æI, Meaſures in a Perpendicular Length, and: that the Powen deſcribes. at the ſame Time a Space Equal to the Ambitus, which it Delincates in onę Revolution; that is, the Way or Space deſcribd by the Weight, is to that deſcribd by the Pover, as the Interval of the Two Spirals, to the Ambitus of the Pover, and conſequently, if the Poer is to the Weight, as the Interval of the Spirals to the, Ambitus ofi the Power, the Power and Weight ill be Equal in their Forces, and if an Addition be made to the Power, it will be Superior to the Weight; thar is, as, beſore,, if ? is the Power, G the Weight,  the Velocity of the Pover, v of the Weight, PV=c , or, . G:: v.V. i S: 35. THE, Whole Reaſoning of the preceding Section depends upon this, rhat vhilſt Cæ performs it's Revolution, the Two Spirals IH appcar above the Exterior Screw Ia4; Two Things thereſore, will be neceſſary to be provd to make this Demonſtrarion Juſt Firſt, that To Spirals of the Interior Screw, will always in their Elevation bẽ exactly Correſpondent to the Ambitus, deſcribd by C  which do's nor ſeem t0 be certain, ſince, if the Spirals are made Cloſer to, or more Remote from ach other, whilſt the Ambitus of the Scytala Cæ continues the ſame, thoy cannop have the ſame Relation to it; for Inſtance, if inſtcad of 8 Spirals betwixt 4 and E, there ou'd be Double the Number, as 16, or half, as 4, it do's not appear to be Probable, that whilſt Cæ perform'd ir's Ambitus, there ſiowd be only Two Spirals. as HI raisd abovę the Exterior Screw, whether the Nnmber of the Spirals in the Screw are 3, as in the Preſent Caſe, or 4 or 16, as in thoſe. which are ſupposd. a ] 5 36. SECOND, s. 36. SECOND, if this were Certain, that all Spirals were alike in their Proportion of Two of them to the Ambitus made by the Power, that is, that the Interval of Two Spirals only, be that Interval Greater or Leſs, was to be barely conſiderd, yet, ſince the Intervals wou'd be Diſferent, as the Spirals were Cloſer or Wider, HI wou'd not have a certain and determin'd Proportion to the Ambitus of the Power, but voud be varied in a Thouſand Inſtances, and if ſo, the Ambitus of B continuing the ſame, and the Interval I being Different, we cannot be from thence informd what Power will be ſufficient to raiſe the Weight ,, when there is no ſertled Proportion betwixt the Ambitus of the Power, and the Interval of the Spirals. Nay, which is ſtill more, the ſame Power, performing the ſame Ambitus, vou'd be capable of raiſing Different Weights, for if the Ambitus of  is to HI, as 20. 2, and the Power of B, as 1, it will be 2. 1:: 20. 10 the Weight, if the Ambitus à is to HI, as 20. 4, and the Powver of B, I, it will be 4. I:: 20. 5 the Weight, by which Means the ſame Power and Ambitus of it, will be able to Raiſe 10 or 5, or any other Number of Weights, which is Impoſſible. Beſides, 7I is not the Way, or Space, which is deſcrib'd in Raiſing the Weight, but that which is performd by the Circumvolution of the Two Spirals, and therefore it cannot be, B. P:: H I. Ambitus of , which this Doctrine ſuppoſes. S. 37. FARTHER, it ſeems to be very Manifeſt, whatever the Proportion is betixt the Ambitus of the Power, and the Interval of the Spirals, that whether there is a Weight, as P, plac'd at the Top of the Screw or not, upon one Revolution there vill be the ſame Interval of the Spirals, and conſequently, that the Phænomenon of Raiſing the Weight do's not depend upon the Spaces deſcribd, but the Forces applyd at B, which, if e likeiſe conſider, it will be impoſſible to adjuſt any Proportion betwixt them, and the Weight which is movd, unleſs ve know what Proportion of a Man's Strength is Equal to ſo much Weight or Gravity. S. 38. THE ncaret to this Mechanical Power, if it may be termd One, is the Axis in Peritrochio, excepting that the Circumvolutions are Spiral and Horizon tal, and by the Screws not Retiring backward from the Nature of Heavy Bodies Moving within one another, that ſuch Circumvolutions may be ſtopt and advanc'd at Pleaſure, and are not performd by Weights, but by Human Force and Strength. Waeneas the Gyrations of the Axis in Peritrochio are Circular, and Perpendicular to the Horizon, and Return back upon any Remiſſion of the Force applyd to it, and tho Human Strength is ſometimes us'd in this Mechanical Pover, yet it may be Balanc'd by mere Weight and Gravity, as has been ſiewn in Reducing it to the Vectiss. On the Contrary, let the Cochlea or Screw be plac'd in an Horizontal Poſition, vhat Weight or Weights will turn it round with any kind of Conformity to the Axis in Peritrochio, vhich Mechanical Power yet it moſt Reſembles? There is the Reſiſtance of Wood, or Iron, or Steel, Moving within it ſelf to be ſubdud, the Revolution not Circular but Spiral, and mere Gravity can only act in a Direct Line, which will be ſo far from Promoting the Revolution of a Spiral, that it will be an Impediment to it's Revolving. FrROM all which it ſeems to be Evident to me, that the Cochlea, or Screw, is to be Exterminated from the Number of Mechanical Powers, and that it is not Reducible to any of them; for let us now replace it in it's Proper Situation, that is, in a Perpendicular one to the Horizon, it is plain no Mechanical Force of Gravity, or any other Natural Power, beſides what is Imported from the Will and Strength of the Mind, can have any Effect upon it; but what the World has generally Eſteemd Mechanical Pover, is that which lies in Matter, Motion and Gravity, without any Interpoſition of an Animal or Arbitrary Agency. THE Notion and Opinion therefore, which we may juſtly have of the Cochleã, or Screv, is this, that it is ſo far a Mechanical Power, as it has a Center of Detention vith the Reſt, which is the Center oſ the Ambitus of the Scytala, but the Power made uſe of to the Moving of the Scręw, is not Mechanical, unleſs a Human Foree, of which there is no Eſtimation or Meaſure, may be accounted ſuch; ſo likewiſe the Paſſing of the Interior Screw, thro' the Exterior, meets with a Various Reſiſtance ariſing from the Nature of the Matter, thro which it is Carry'd, and the Compreſſion made by it Differs, as the Human Force Applyd, or the Renitency oſ the K 2 Matter Matter compreſ'd, Changes, Nothing of which has any Thing to do vith Gravity or Mechaniſm, or is Reducible to any Laws of it. j AxD as for the Screw it ſelf, it has no Power at all, excepting that of being movd Upwards or Downwards, by the means of the Scytala, and according to the Way, vhich lies open for it's Motion in a Spiral, and of ſuſtaining any Weight or Preſſure aſter it has acquird it's Poſition, by the Application of Human Force; the Reaſon of vhich is, becauſe the Gravity or Preſſure Acting in a Perpendicular upon the Screw, which can only move in a Spiral, faſtens and cloſcs the Indentations of it, inſtcad of putting them into Motion: But, if the Firſt entitles it to the Being a Mechanical Pover, that is, it's Capacity of Moving Upwards and Downwards in a Way, vhich is Carvd out on Purpoſc for it, a Cord drawn up and down thro a Hole made for it's Motion, may be as well calld a Mechanical Pover; If the Laſt, that is, it's Capacity of ſuſtaining any Weight or Preſſure, after a Poſition acquird by the Application of Human Force, any Hard or Conſiſtent Body may be Termd a Mechanical Pover, which, vhen any Weight is laid upon it by the Application of Human Force, will ſuſtain it's urmoſt Preſſure, as fully as the Teeth of a Screw vill do. So that we can ſee nothing more in the Cochlea, than a Center of Detention at one End of the Scytala, or Vectis, and the Application of a Human Force at the Other, by which the Screw will neceſſarily Riſe, and which therefore is all, which we need to conſider in this Power, or according to the Notion of Expanſive and Contractive Forces, there will be a Center of Detention or Contraction at the one Extremity of the Vectis, and an Expanſive Force at the Other. 5. 39. TuE lat Mechanical Power to be Reſolvd is, that of the Cuncus, or Wedge. The Theorem made uſe of to unfold this Power is, that the Pover perpendicularly Applyd to the Back of the Wedge, which ſhall be to the Reſiſtance to be ſurmounted by the Wedge, as the Thickneſs of the Wedge, to it's Heighth, vill be of Equal Force with that of the Reſiſtance, and if ſuch a Power is increas'd, it vill be Superior to, or am Over-balance for the Reſiſtance. For let the Reſiſtance to be over-comn by the Wedge, be the Firmneſs or Tenaciousneſ of the Wood, or any other Body, whilſt the Wedge is Drove in as far as 4, the Length, which the Power deſcribes is 4, and DC is the Space deſcrib'd by the Impediment, which is vanquiſ't and made to yield to the Force of the Power; for the ſame Reaſon alſo, vhilſt the whole Length of the Wedge F4, penetrates to E, and deſcribes BE, the whole Breadth of it GH, deſcribes 7 in the Impediment, and proportionally in it's Progreſs, as we take a greater or leſſer Part of the Cuneus, which is Evidemt from the Nature of the Triangle GA H, from whence the foregoing Theorem is ſuppos'd to be Manifeſt. s. 40. IN Anſwer to which we muſt affirm, that F 4 to GH, is ſaid, in the Theorem, 10 be as the Reſiftance to the Power, when the Power and Reſiſtance are in an Equal Poiſe; whereas, this is provd, by ſuppoſing the Power to be Superior to the Reſiſtance, which is a Contradiction; for, if the Reſiſtance is Equal to the Power, it is altogether Impoſſible, that the Wedge ſou'd ever Penetrate to 4, or ſo much as enter the Impediment, altho the preſent Demonſtration proceeds upon a Suppoſition, that it has enterd the Impediments if it be ſaid the Wedge may enter the Impediment, and after it is fixt in a certain Situation there, ve are then to con ſider it in an Equal Poiſe with the Reſiftance, ve muſt ask which vay it came into that Situation, if by a Power Superior to the Reſiſtance, then the Power and Reſiſt ance are not Equal. If it is farther told us, that the Power is ſupposd to be Aug j mentec mented ſomething above the foregoing Proportion, to cauſe the Cuneus to move againſt the Impediment, that can have no Conſideration here, ſince the Forces, in the preſent Situation of the Wedge, are ſuppos'd to be Equal, having the Proportion aſſign'd by the Theorem, and yet this Situation of the Wedge, we ſay, coud not be, unleſs the Power was Superior to the Reſiſtance. 5. 41. MOREOVER, if we admit the Cuneus to be placd in the Poſition we now ſee it, if ? and æ repreſent the Power and Reſiſtance ?. æ:: CD. BA, but P and ? by Suppoſition are Equal, therefore 24 and CD are ſo likewiſe, which is Impoſſible in the preſent Figure, where the Height of the Triangle is not Equal to the Baſis; or which is the ſame to make ? Z R, they are to be as CD. B4, that is, one Leſs than the other; but if the Reſiſtance it ſelf is Greater than the Power, I dont ſee how the Way of the one or the other, will help the Latter. ò. 42. ANOTHER Objection againſt this Reaſoning is, that the Proportion of P. R:: CD. B A is not Explain'd, that is, that the Power is to the Reſiſtance Reciprocally, as the Way of the Reſiſtance to that of the Power, for as we have juſt nov ſaid, if the Power is Leſs than rhe Reſiſtance, it ſeems Inconceivable, how the longer the Way, which the Power is to g0, ſou'd make it Equal in it's Force to a greater Reſiſtance, which proceeds thro' a leſs Space; The Power and Reſiſtance will ſtill be, the one leſs than the orher, and not Equal, ſo far as I am able to Imagine. If this Proportion is Aſſerted, becauſe it is preſumd to be provd in the other Mechanical Powers, and particularly in the Vectis (for there is Nothing offerd to explain it from the Power it ſelf), we firſt ſay, it is only Preſum'd, and not Provd, and in the ſecond Place, that if it were Provd in the Vectis, ſince there is no Analogy betwixt it and rhe preſent Power, it woud not be Conſequent, that ſuch a Reciprocal Proportion obtain'd here. s. 43. Ir æhere is a Similitude betwixt the Vectis and the Cuneus, the Center betwixt the Power and Reſiſtance deſerves to be fixt, and then the Reciprocal Proportion of Diſiance from ſuch a Cenrer, which is ſo Intricate a Problem, as will Require a more accurate Reaſoning, than is here made uſe of, to ſolve. S. 44. BESIDES the Three Firſt Powers are thoſe, which conſider the Forces, which Gravitate againſt them, but in the Preſent, not the Gravitation, burt the Reſiſtance of a Body is to be overcomn; if therefore, by the ſame Fundamental Maxim of the Velocity of the Power being to the Velocity of the Weight, as the Weight to the Pover, Reſiſtance is alſo to be Explain'd, and the Velocity of the Power is to the Velocity of the Reſiſtance, if we may ſo call it, as the Reſiſtance is to the Pover, The Forces of Gravitation and Reſiſtance are the ſame, which no one has hitherto aſfirmd, who do's not declare the Hardneſs of Marble, and its Weight, to be Equivalent Terms. / 5. 45. LastLy, it is Notorious in Fact, that Bodies, which are Cleft by a Wedge, by their own Force and Elaſticity, will ſometimes throw it out, when it has Penetrated to ſome Depth as 4, and thereſore, tho' the Wedge is Forc'd thither, after it has conquer'd it's Reſiſtance, and conſequently ſio'd be in an æquilibrium with it by his Demonſtration, yet is not, but is repuls'd by the Elaſtick Power of the Body; Onthe other Hand, where a Force is usd to make the Wedge penetrate into other Bodics, as in ſoſt or brittle Ones, it ſhall go farther into them by it's own Greater, or by the Leſs of the Bodies, which it Penetrates, than in Proportion to what was impreſd upon it; And laſtly, ſometimes Bodies will Cling to the Wedge with that Cloſeneſs, that the Reſiſtance will be Superior to the Power which forcd it in; ſo little is there to depend upon ſuch Abſtracted Reaſonings, as theſe, to Explicate the full Powers of Nature. AN Example of Each of theſe Phænomenons in Bodies we have, of the Firſt, in Metals, of the Second, in Clay, of the Third, in Wood, which eaſily ſeparates, and of the Fourth, in That, which has a more than ordinary Toughneſ. 5. 46. VE have hitherto conſiderd the Cimeus, as a Mechanical Power, but this, as the Cochlea, or Screv, ſeems not properly to fall under that Denomination, and con ſequently, that, truly ſpeaking, there are only Three, the Vectis, the Axis in Perirrochio, and the Trochlea. FOR, as the Cochlea or Screw, the Cunens likewiſe depends upon Forces, which 7c not Mechanical, and cannot be reduc'd to them, as the Human Force, and the Force Force of Reſiſ*tance in Various Bodies; All therefore that can be ſaid, in Reſpect o this Power, ſo far as it can be thought to be Mechanical, is, that if a Force is applyd Perpendicularly to F, or the Dorſum of the Wedge, õ, H, and 4, vill obtain a greate: Effect, the farther they are from F, againſt any Reſiſtance; ſo that in this Caſe,  is to be conſiderd as the Center of Detention, and G, H, and 4, as the ſeveral Re movals from that Center, which therefore will act with a Greater Force, as they are more Diſtant from it; and in this Property it agrees with the Vectis, which is the Standard of all Mechanical Powers; Thus, if 4 repreſented a Lever, the farther the Power F is from A, the greater Moment it woud have, and if FH, or FG, repre ſented a Vectis of Protruſion, or a Lever Protruding inſtead of Elevating, the more Removd G and H are from F, their Influences and Forces voud be the Greater, as the Line FA, on the contrary, voud have Little or None, being in this Reſpect a Line of Quieſcence, Contraction, or Detention. Tnus far the Cuneus may be conſiderd as a Mechanical Power, but then it is not a Mechanical Power, that Gives an Action to the Cuneus, which is, what we Eſteem Eſſential to ſuch a Power; no Gravity, no Mechanical Force, or Action, has any Effect in the Wedge, and it's Power is wholly owing to a Human, Animal, and Expanſive Force. Wuaar thereſore muſt be determin'd in Reſpect of this Mechanical Power is, that it is an Expanſive Force, acting in a Center of Detention or Contraction F, which Force of Expanſion, the Farther it is ſrom the Center of Contraction, the Greater Influence and Power it has, conformable to what was before ſiewn in the Cochlea, or Screw. THis Pover, conſequently, has not ſo great a Force, as the Former, becauſe, the one Acts in the very Center of Contraction, by which it is Enervated and Weakend, and the other at ſome Diſtance from it, by which it is more Vigorous and Strong. S. 47. FroM the preſent Doctrine of Mechanicks is alſo Inferd the Reaſon, why in the Inflected Syphon, whoſec Canals, or Arms, are of Unequal Capacities, the Water ſtands at an Equal Height, becauſe, if the Cylinder of Water AILD Deſcends, there muſt be an Equal Cylinder of Water Aſcend in the contrary Tube, as AFGN, but by the 15 Prop. El. 12. Euclid. the Baſes and Altitudes of Equal Cylinders are in a Reciprocal Proportion to each Other, that is, as Fa1. 4 I: Orifice A4D. Orifice M N, but F M is to 41, as the Velocity of the Waters Aſcent in the Leſſer Tube, is to the Velocity of the Water's Deſcent in the Larger, and the Orifice 4D is to the Orifice 77N, as the Water in the Cylinder 4CD to that in F XHG, Becauſe Cylinders of Equal Heights are as their Baſes; from whence it follows, that the Velocity of the Aſcending Water F, vill be to that of the Deſcending 4I, as the Water in the Canal 4 CD to that in F KHG, that is, the Velocities of the Waters in Each will be Reciprocally Proportional to their Quantities, and therefore their Moments Equal, but their Moments are Contrary, and therefore will produce an  quilibrium, or Quieſcence. S. 48. BUuT in the firſt Place we have no Account, vhy the Water Stagnates in COX H, which is ſupposd to have no Part or Share in the Preſent Demonſtration, and yet CO may be as vell preſumd to riſe to HP, as AI to FM, whereas it is not thought neceſſary to prove, that the Water in COX H vill be otherwiſe than in an Equilibrium, and conſcquently there is the ſame Reaſon, vhy 47 ſou'd not want any ſuch Proof; for if it is maniſeſt, that CO Will not riſe to HP an Equal Cylinder, it is as Evident, that 4 vill not riſe to FM an Equal Cylinder, or, which is the ſame, if the Surface or infinitely ſmall Cylinder C will not riſe in XH, it is as plain, that 4D the Baſis of the Cylinder 4I, or an infinitely ſmall Portion of it, will not riſe in FG, ſince 4D is ſupposd to move at once, and by one uniſorm Depreſſion towards 7Z, and vill therefore keep it's Station, as well as FG; a. as therefore the true Cauſe, why the Surface C do's not Deſcend, nor XH Aſcend, is, that the Parts of Water are in an Equal Balance with one another, and obtain no Force or Moment in Relation to each, ſo the ſame Reaſon is Valid with Reſpect to the Surface 4D, which will not Deſcend,. not becauſe FG is, in ſuch a Caſe, to Aſcend to 44N, but becãuſe the Surface 4D has really no Moment or Force, cither in Reſpect of it's Parts with one another, or of any Subjacent oncs, where 4 D and ?G have their lat Adjuſtments of their Gravities to the Earth by their Equal Diſtance from it. i 5. 49. SECOND, the Aſcent and Deſcent of the Water is ſuppos'd to be Equal in this Demonſtration to the Surface, or ſmall Cylinder, 4 D, vhereas, if one Part or Portion of 4D coud he ſupposd to Deſcend, the Cylinders of Reciprocal Heights and Baſes wou'd be deſtroyd, and the Reaſoning upon them, for th 4D coud not Deſcend; by this Demonſtration, it woud not be from thence Evinc'd, that no Part of it cod; but the Suppoſition, which keeps one Part of the Cylinder 4D from Deſcending, unleſs the Whole do's, namely, becauſe one Part or Portion has not a greater Power or Force of Deſcending than another, will keep the Whole from Deſcending in Reſpect of the other Surfaces, which are in an quilibrium ith it, and conſcquently, i AD do's not Deſcend, it is Manifeſt, that G will nor only not Aſcend to 4N, but that it will not Aſcend at all; We may here add, that ſuppoſing the Velocities of the Parts in the Cylinders 4 CD, F HG were Reciprocal to the Quantities of Matter in them, and therefore theit Moments Equal, they woudã not yet be Contrary, unleſs FX HG was carryd in an Oppoſite Velocity to A CD, whereas ĩt is ſupposd to have none, but vhat is Communicated from 4D, and thereſore, it AD is movd, muſt Tend the ſame Way. : ſ. 50. THmD, lct the Canals be never ſo Irregular, and let us contrive all the Imaginable, and moſt Diſagreeing and Different Shapes for them vhich we can, the Water in all the Canals will ſtand at the ſame Height, where it is permitted to do it, and yet it will be Impoſſible to reduce ſuch Figures to the Cylinders of Euclid, and the Reciprocal Proportions of thoſe that are Equal, upon vhich this Demonſtration depends, and which can be only accounted for from the Equal Moment, which the Parts of Water have amongſt onc another; ſo little is there in ſuch Kind of Reaſonings, which yet carry with them the Appearance of Demonſtrations, becauſe certain Propoſitions in the Mathematicks are introduc'd to ſupport them, which ſtand mugh better in the Elements, from Whence they are taken, than in the Philoſophy to which they are often, with too much Haſt, and too little Deliberation Applyd. As to Water or any other Fluid's paſſing from a Larger Channel, into a Smaller, with a Greater Celerity, that proceeds frcom a known Lav in Mechanicks, that, where Woater flos vith a certain Force in a Larger Channel, if that Force is compreſ"'d into a Narrower Space, it will be increasd; and from Which Law Sir Iſ. Newton wgues againſt tho oriics of Des-Caries, according to what we have before ſiewn in our Principles of Philoſophy. l ] C H AP. V. Concerning the Expanſive and Contraſtive Forces, Atling in a Center of Detention, or in any Diſtances or Removals from it. 5. 1. AVING now gone thro the Mechanical Powers, and ſiewn, that the Two Firſt, the Vectis and Axis in Peritrochio, are to be Eſtimated from their Diſftance from their Center of Detention, that is, that their Powers will be the Greater, the farther they are Removd from it, that the Third, which is the Trochlea or Pully, conſiſts of ſeveral Centers of Detention, by which the Force of that Power is weaken'd, that the Fourth and Fifth are not properly Mechanical Poers, but ſo far as they are, that the Cochlea or Screw conſiſts of a Center of Detention, with an Expanſive Force at Different Removals from it, and the Cuneus or Wedge of a Center of Detention or Contraction with an Expanſive Force Acting in that Center; We ſhall proceed, more particularly, to conſider theſe Centers of Detention, with the Various Diſtances from them, and the Expanſive and Contractive Forces placd in thoſe Diſtances, as alſo, what will reſult from a Complication of theſe Centers of Detention at Different Diſtances, with the Expanſive or Contractive Forces Acting in, or at a Diſtance from them. Ler 48 be an Inflexible, ungravitating Line, and capable of being movd on the Center C, if any Weight, or other Force, is apply'd to 4 or B, it is manifeſt a Motion will be produc'd round the Point C, which I call the Center of Detention, becauſc it is not a Center of Gravity, on which Forces are Equally pois'd, which is M only one Caſe oſ the Center of Detention, but a Center, by which the Forces depending at 4 or B, are kept and detain'd from Receding from it, and which, if the Forces at A and B, computing their Diſtances, arc Equal, vill be, what is call'd a Center of Gravity. Caſ. 1. I; thereſore any Point, or little Body, as a Minute Globe of Similar and Homogeneous Matter, which has a certain Force of Gravitation, be placd in the Center , it will be hinderd from Deſcending, and will remain Quicſcent in the Point of Detention; Let the ſame Gravitating Point, or Force, be removd one Point or Line towards 4 or B, ſuppoſing to G or H, it will then Deſcend, but ſince it cannot Recede from the Center of Detention C, it will deſcribe the Arch of a Circlc round it, which Arch will be Greater or Leſs, according to the Force of Gravitation; thus, if it has the Force of C, it will Deſcend from G to ĩ, if of CX, or doublt the Force of the Former, ſince it cannot Deſcend to X, it will ſpend the Remainde: of its Force IK, above that of CI, in Riſing towards H, and Deſcending from thence n and then Riſing towards G, till it's Force IX is conſumã in Reciprocal Oſcil tions. Ir the Gravitating Force is CL, or Triple of the Former, or C4, which is Quæ druple of it, the Oſcillations will riſe higher towards æ and G, and if this Gravitating Forc: Force is ſtill increas'd to a Centuple or Millecuple Proportion of the Former, tht Oſcillations will be chang'd into entire Revolutions, which will not Ceaſe about the Center of Detention, till the whole Gravitating Force is Conſumd and Exhauſted, and if ſuch Gravitating Force is Permanent and Conſtant, the Revolutions vill be Uninterrupted and Continual, from whence it is Evident, that there is nothing more Requiſite to ſuch Revolutions, than the Gravitating Force only, without any Projectile one, That is, than an Expanſive, which the Gravitating here Repreſents, and a Contractive, which Exerts it ſelf in the Center of Detention; or Vice Versã. Caſ. 2. IF now the Gravitating Point, or Little Body, of Similar Matter, ſon'd be removd from the Center of Detention, TWo, Three, Four, or a Hundred, or a Thouſand, or a Million of Points, or ſmall Lines, from the Center of Detention, all Things voud happen as before, in Reſpect of the Oſcillations or Revolutions of it; excepting that the Force of it woud be increas'd, the farther it retird from ſuch a Center, in which it's Force was entirely Hinderd and perfectly Quieſcent; For, if the ſame Gravitating Force, which in the Center of Detention is Quieſcent, is applyd to one Diſtance from it, it is Reaſonable to think, that it will have one Effect more than it had before, which was none, that, at Two Diſtances, it will have a double Eſfect, and ſo on; that is, any certain Gravitating Force will be increas'd in its Energy or Expanſive, in Proportion, as it departs from the Center of Detention or Contraction, which prohibits any Effect of it; and we may the more eaſily acquieſce in this Reaſoning, becauſe it is confirmd by Experience, and by the Preſent Mechanicks, for if the ſame Force of Gravitation is Greater at 4, than it is at B, in Proportion to their Diſtances from the Center of Detention, it will neceſſarily follow, that the ſame Gravitating Force at the Diſtance 4C, will be Equal to that at the Diſtance CF, or BC, ſuppoſing the Sum of the ſame Gravitating Forces at B, to that of 4, is as the Diſtance of 4 from the Center of Detention C to that of the Diſtance of F or B from the ſame Center. Caſ. 3. Ir now an Expanſive Force, which is impreſy'd, for hitherto we have only conſiderd the Gravitating or Contractive, is ſupposd to Act in the ſame Point C. which is a Center of Detention, as if we ſtrike with a Violent Force upon it, its Effect will be Greater than that of a Gravitating, and may ſpread and diffuſe it's Action towards H and G, ſince it's Progreſs is ſtopt in C, by it's being ſupposd a Center of Detention, tho without any actual Motion of the Line 4 B;3 Let the Force of Percuſſion be ſtill increasd in the Point of Detention C and the Action wvill be the Greater, which is communicated along the Lines CF, CB, but yet without any Motion of them. l LET now the Force of Percuſſion or Expanſion exert it ſelf, one Remove from the Center of Detention, in G or H, upon the Gravitating Point, and it will give an Additional Force to it, and aſſiſt to the producing Greater Oſcillations, or Entire Revolutions, and let the Force of Percuſſion be ſtill Increas'd, and the Effect will be ſtill the Greater; For the Contractive Force or the Gravitating, in Reſpect of C the Center of Detention, is an Expanſive one, by which it Endeavours to retire from the ſaid Center, and conſequently, the Force of Percuſſion acts, in this Caſe, in Conjunction with it, being likewiſe an Expanſive one Impreſs'd, and therefore promotes and advances the ſame Effect, and is the Projectile of this Philoſophy. Caſ. 4. Ir the ſame Expanſive Force impreſs'd, or Force of Percuſſion is removd, Two, Three, Four, or a Hundred, or a Thouſand, or a Million of Points, Lines, or Diſtances from the Center of Detention , it will be in Proportion augmented, and for the ſame Reaſon, as the Gravitating or Contractive, which in the preſent Circumſtance has the Naturo of an Expanſivee We here call the Force of Percuſſion an Expanſive Impreſs'd, to diſtinguiſh it from the Intrinſick Expanſive, which we ſhall aſterwards Conſider, for of the Two Intrinſick Forces of Matter, the Contractive or Gravitating is here only alledgd. FrROM vhat foregoes it is Evident, that the Forces, or Moments, or Powers oſ Bodics, which have a Contractive or Gravitating Force, and one of Percuſſion, and which Act from a Center of Detention are Greater, the Greater that Gravitating Force is, the Greater the Sum or Quantity of it is, the farther it is removd from the Center of Detention, and the Greater the Expanſive Force which is Impreſ'd ind the ſarther its Diſtance is from the ſame Center. If therefore, 4, m are madi lil lill L Ic to reprefent the Moments of ſuch Bodies acting upon a Center of Detention; G the Contractive or Gravitating Forces; 4,  the Sums or Quantities of them; æ, F the Diſtances or Removals from the Center; and P, » the Percuſſions or Expanſive Forces Impreſ”"'d; the following Theorems will be certain. S. 2. THEOREM the Firſt is, That the Moments of Bodies, which have a Force of Contraction or Gravitation, and Percuſſion, and which Act from a Center of Detention, are in a Direct Reaſon of the Forces of Gravitation or Contraction, of the Quantities or Sums of thoſe Forces, of the Forces of Percuſſion, and of the Diſtances i  M ACPRA4 C P RIR from the Center of Detention, that iss= =xx x T From EIEZEEE c» vhence it Enſues. Gorol. 1. ? A=B. /u5 r x 3 or M. m:: CPR. cpr, or, if the Quantities of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces are Equal, the Moments of ſuch Bodies vill be as the Forces, the Percuſſions, and the Diſtances or Removals from the Center of Detention. M APR . i ſ Corol. 2. I C=ECf, 7F 55 or, if the Gravitating or Contractive Forces arę Equal, the Moments of ſuch Bodies will be as the Sums or Quantities of the Forces] the Percuſſions, and the Diſtances or Removals from the Center. Corol. 3. IF Pp, 2yæ a or, if the Percuſſions are Equal, the Moments of theſe Bodies will be as the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, the Sums of them, and their Removals from the Center. MACP : : Corol. 4. IF RN, 7F m or, if the Diſtances from the Center are Equal, the Moments of the preſent Bodies, will be as the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, the Sums or Quantities of them, and the Percuſſions. MMPR : an3 : Corol. 5. I8 AZ B, and Cc, nF7; on if the Gravitating or Contractive Forces are Equal, and the Sums or Quantities of them, the Moments of theſe Bodies vill be as the Percuſſions, and their Removals from the Center. MCE : Corol. 6. Is A= B, and Pæp, =, or, iſ the Quantities or Sums of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, and the Percuſſions are Equal. the Moments of ſuch Bodies will be as the Gravitating Forces, and their Removals from the Center; and if C. c:: R. ?r, M. m:: R*. r. ſec Corol. 8. Coril. 7. If A=B, and R=V acr or, if the Sums or Quantities of the m c Eorces, and the Removals from the Center are Equal, the Moments of the Bodies vill be as the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, and the Percuſſions. MM AR Corol. 8. IF C=€(, and r=p, ? ] i? the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, and the Percuſſions are Equal, the Moments of the Bodies will be as the Sums of thoſe Forces, and their Removal from the Center, which is the Caſc of the Vectis, and of the Mechanical Powers, ſo far as they are Reducible to it, and which from what has been ſaid are but illy Explain'd, and Accounted for, by an Abſtradted Reaſoning, and without the Real Forces here aſerted And if 4 and B, as in Corol. 6. are Equal, and the Forces of Gravity are increasd in Proportion to their Diſtance : M from the Center of Detention, 5 or the Gravitating Forces will be as the Squares of the Diſtances from the Center of Detention, and therefore, ſince they they have the Nature of an Expanſive from it, their Forces towards that Center will be Reciprocally, as the Squares of the ſaid Diſtances, which is a Celebrated Prop ition ſition in the preſent Phyſical Aſtronomy, and which is affirmd to be the Law, by which the Plancts Gravitate towards the Sun. Mmd4a Corol. 9. IF Cc, and RJ7, 7 = F7 on if the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, and their Removals from the Center are Equal, the Moments of the Bodie: vill be as the Sums or Quantities of thoſe Forces, and as the Percuſſions. Mac6 Corol. 10. Iæ P=/p, and RJ, 7F F on if the Percuſſions and the Removali from the Center are Equal, the Moments of the Bodies will be as the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, and the Sums or Quantities of them. r Corol. 11. I? AB, C=, and PZ), z- 7 on if the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, the Sums or Quantities of them, and the Percuſſions are Equal, the Moments of the Bodies will be as the Diſtances or Removals from the Center. rol. 12. I? A=B, Cc, and R\, z⸗ r or, if the Gravitating or Con: tractive Forces, the Sums or Quantities of them, and their Removals from the Center are Equal, the Moments of the Bodies will be as the Percuſſions. Crol. 13. Ir Cæc, PJp, and REm, æ = z or, if the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, the Percuſſions, and the Removals from the Center are Equal, the Moments of the Bodies will be as the Sums or Quantities of thoſe Forces. c Grol. 14. IV A B, P=p, and RæY, æc or, if the Sums or Quantities of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, the Percuſſions, and the Removals from the Center are Equal, the Moments oſ the Bodies ill be as the Gravitating or Contractive Forces. Corol. 15. I? M=m, ACPR= Bepr, and A4. B: : cpr. CPR, or, if the Moments of the Bodies are Equal, the Sum or Quantity of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces vill be in a Reciprocal Proportion of thoſe Forces, of the Percuſſions, and the Removals from the Center. Corol. 16. I? =m, ACPR=/ Bepr, and C. c:: Bpr. APR, or, if the Moments of the Todies are Equal, the Contractive or Gravitating Forces will be in a Reciprocal Proportion of the Sums or Quantities of ſuch Forces, of the Percuſſions, and Removals from the Center. Corol. 17. IV M=m, ACPR=Bcpr, and P. p:: Bcr. ACR, or, if the Moments are Equal, the Percuſſions will be in a Reciprocãl Proportion of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, of the Quantities or Sums of them, and of their Removals from the Center. Corol. 18. Is ſ=m, ACPR=Bcpr, and R. r:: Bep. ACP, or, if the Moments are Equal, the Diſtances or Removals from the Center are in a Reciprocal Proporton of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces, the Sums of them, and the Percuſſions. Corol. 19. Is M=Dpm, that is, ACPREBepr; AC. Bc: : pr. PR, and AP. Bp: : r. CR, and A4R. Br:: cp. CP. Corol. 20. IF i=m, and A=B, CPR=cpr, and C. æ:: pr. PE, or P. p:: cr. CE, or R.r:cp. CP; That is, if the Moments are Equal, and the Sums of the Gravitating or Contractive Forces are ſo too; The Forces will be in a Reciprocal Proportion of their Removals from the Center, and of the Percuſſions; The Percuſſions, in a Reciprocal one of the Forces, and of their Removals from the Center; and the Removals from the Center, in a Reciprocal one of the Percuſſions, and of the Forces. Corol. 21. IV =m, and C=c, APR=DBpr, andA4.B:: pr. PR, and P.ꝓ:: Br. AR, ad æ. r:: Bp. A4P. Corol. 22. I Ar/m, and R=r, ACP=Ecp, and 4. B:  cp. CP, and C. c:: Bp. AP, and ?P. p:: Bc. AC. Corol. 23. IV AſImm, A=DB, C=c, PR=pr, and ?. p:: r. R, or, if the Moments re Fqual, the Sums of the Contractive Forces, and the Forces, the Percuſſions will bc in a Reciprocal Proportion of their Diſtances from the Conter. L: Corol. 24 corol. 24. IF M=m, A=EB, PJp, CR=cr, and C. c::r. R, or, if the Moments are Equal, the Sums of the Contractive Forces, and the Percuſſions, the Forces vill be in a Reciprocal Proportion of their Diſtances from the Center. Tuus a Globe of pure Lead, Iron, Wood, or Wool, without any Pores or Vacuities, will be Equal in it's Moment and Weight to a Globe oſ Gold of the ſame Diameter, without any Pores or Vacuities, i ſo much, as the Gold is Heavier, by ſo much farther the Globe of Lead, Iron, Wood, or Wool, be Removd from the Center of Detention; Thus alſo the Planets, the Nearer they are to the Sun, the Denſer they are, and the Farther they are Remov'd from it, the Rarer; TJupiter is Denſcr than Saturn, the Earth than Jupiter, the àſoon than the Earih, and Mereury than Either; but this Denſity ſuppoſes all Matter to have the ſame Gravitating Forcẽ, and only the Parts of it to be more Conſtipated, whereas the preſent Corollary ſuppoſes the Gravitating Forces to be Different, and that the Matter of Yupiter is intrinſically Heavier than that of Sarurn, that of the Earth than that of Yupiter, and that of Mercury than that of the Earth, or the ſoon, by which, according to this Corollary, theit Moments vill be Equal, and the Equilibrium of the Planetary Syſtem will be preſervid. Crol. 25. In M=m, A5B, R=Vr, CP=cp, and C. æ:: p. P, or, if the Moments are Equal, the Sums of the Forces, and the Diſtances from the Center, the Forces vill be in a Reciprocal Proportion of the Percuſſions. Corol. 26. Is M=m, C=c, and P=p, AR= Br, and 4. B:: r. R, or, if the Moments are Equal, the Forces, and the Percuſſions, the Sums or Quantities of the Forces will be in a Reciprocal Proportion of the Diſtances or Removals ſrom the Center, which is the Caſe of the Vectis, when the Weights are in an Equal Balance, that is, 1. of Lead at 5 Removes from the Center, will be Equal to 5 at 1 Remove from it; And if we take in the Intrinſick Forces Themſelves, that is, it M=m, Pæp, ACE Vill be  Ber, according to which it is not Impoſſible, but ĩt may have pleasd Almighty God to adjuſt the Situations and Poſitions of the Heavenly Bodies, ſo that the Intrinſick, Innate, and Different Gravities oſ Mercury, Venus, the Earth, of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn into their Diſtances and Bulks, ſoud be Equal, by which there voud be a perſect Balance amongſt them, and iſ the leaſt Increas on the one Hand, or ihe other, there woud be a Preponderancy, and conſcquently, a Revolution; but of this we ſhall ſay more at the End of theſe Corollaries. Corol. 277. In ſ/m, C=c, and RæV, 4P=EBjp, and 4. B::p. I, or, iſ the Moments are Equal, the Contractive Forces, and the Removals ſrom the Center, the Sums of the Forces will be in a Reciprocal Proportion of the Percuſſions. Corol. 28. IV M=um, ?P =/p, R=Vr, ACS Be, and 4. B:: c. C, or, if the Moments are Equal, the Percuſſions, and the Removals from the Center, the Sums or Quantities of the Forces will be Reciprocally as the Forces; thus, if Gold is 19 Times Heavier than Water, 19 Parts of Water vill be Equal, in their Moment, to I of Gold, ſuppoſing no Pores or Vacuities in them; and thus, if the Planets revolvd at Equal Diſtances from the Sun, and their Moments were Equal, theit Gravitating Forces woud be Reciprocally, as their Quantities or Sums. 5. 3. I have hitherto conſiderd the Laws of Percuſſion, in Conjunction with the Force of Gravitation, in Obedience to the Preſent Philoſophy, Which unites a Projectile with it, which indeed it found neceſſary to do, becauſe, it was by Means of the Projectile, that the Gravitating Force was ſuſtaind from ſalling to the Center, and by the Gravitating Force, that the Projectile was detaind from ſlying oſf in a Tangent; The Projectile therefore ſeems to have been a mere Invention only, to keep the Gravitating Forces in Action, which otherwiſe wou'd have immediately Tumbled to the Center, and to ſupport the whole Syſtem, Which voud have been Ruin'd at once, rather than any Force, which is Obſervable in Nature, or has its Foundation in the Exiſtence of Things. S. 4. ON the Contrary, in the Way, which we go, of Conſidering Bodies, Acting vith a Force of Gravitation, round a Center of Detention, we have no Occaſion ſor ſuch Projectile Forces, or of any Percuſſions, which, as ve have ſhewn, onl; Tend to promote and increaſe the Effect of Gravitation, and which we ſhall there fore now Diſmiſs, nor do ve make uſe of any other Forces, than what, on al Hands tlands, are acknowledg'd, and are apparent in every Common Vectis or Pendulum, j all that we require is, that, if there are Gravitating Forces, which are Capable of deſcribing Oſcillations round a Center of Detention, there may be ſuch a Proportion of ⸗ thoſe Forces in themſelves, and by their Removal from the Center of Detention, which ⸗ ſhall carry the Body round in Entire Revolutions; The Tendency of all Bodies to the Earth hinders this in the Vectis, and in Pendulums; But let us now ſuppoſc a Body, which has a Contractive or Gravitating Force in it ſelf and which it voud exert if it approach'd near to other Bodies, Plac'd at an Immenſe Diſtance from all Material Beings whatſoever; It cou'd not Deſcend, nor coud it Aſcend, nor Move onc Way or Another, becauſe there is nothing to determine it to any Side or Part of Space, and it wou'd remain perſectly Quieſcent in the vaſt Expanſe, Immoveable in it ſelf, and obey the Power of it's own Contractive and Reſiſting Force to Motion; If any Projectile Force ſou'd be Communicated to it, the Effect vou'd be, that it wou'd Roll on in Space that Way, to which the Projectile Force determind it, and when that Impreſs'd Force was ſpent, woud be again Quieſcent; which woud be the Caſe of the Earth and Planets, Acted by a Temporary, Finite, and a Projectile Force, and as for an Infinite one, we ſhall afterwards ſiew there is no ſuch Affirm'd, vhen we come to Inquire into the Phyſical Aſtronomy. YET let this Contractive, Quieſcent, and Gravitating Force be plac'd at the End oſ an Inflexible Line or Balance, namely, at A4 in the preceding Figure, and another Equal to it at B, at Different Diſtances from the Center of Detention C, the Firſt woud Preponderate the Laſt, and deſcend to D, whilſt the other ris' to æ, upon the very Account that they have Moments and Forces at Different Diſtances from the ſame Center, and ſince there is no Tendency to the Earth, or any other Body to hinder this Motion, it woud continue for Ever in a Conſtant Revolution, For D has the ſame Preponderancy to , in this Situation, as 4 had to B, in the Former, having the ſame Relation to the Point or Center of Detention , as before. Ir therefore now the Force at  and E is taken off, 4 and D vill ſtill have a Greater Force of Revolving round the ſame Center, there being nothing to prohibit or retard it's Motion, either from B or E, or from the Earth, or any other Body, it being only conſiderd with Relation to it's Center of Detention, from vhich by it's own proper Gravitating Force it wou'd Recede, but is confin'd to it, by the imagin'd and inflexible Line 4C; It muſt be farther obſerv'd, that as the Forces at 4 and B, are the ſame in reſpect to their Center of Detention, whether they act from 4 or B, or from P and 2, in a Common Balance, where the Force acts Perpendicularly to the Earth, that is, at the ſame Diſtances from that Center, ſo is it in Reſpect of the Celeſtial one, for the Forces will be the ſame in every Part of the ſeveral Orbits, where they are Equidiſtant from it. S. 5. LET H repreſent Mercury, N, Venus, and B, the Earth, on one Side of the Balance, , Mars, O, Jupiter, aud A, Saturn, on the other, and let C, the Center of Detention, repreſent the sun. Ir is Maniſeſt, if theſe Planets are with their Diſtances from the Center, and their Innate Forces in an Equilibrium, at 4, 0, R, H, N, B, they will be ſo in every other the ſame Diſtance from C, and therefore voud be Quieſcent, but ſince they are not Quieſcent, the Planets at 4, O, and R, that is, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, do Preponderate thoſe at B3, N, and H, namely, the Earth with it's àdoon, Venus and Mercury, and by Conſcquence, all of them revolve the ſame Way, from Weſt to Eaſt, that is, from 4 to D, and from B to E, a Phænomenon, which has not been yer ſolvã, no more than that of their Revolutions. TuAT Revolutions ſhod be performd, and that they ſiow'd be perform'd the ſame Way, is Manifeſt from this Doctrine, as alſo that a Revolution may be performd by one Gravitating Body only about a Center of Detention, as that of the ſom about the æar1h, which therefore is a Conviction of the Truth of ſuch a Doctrine, that we ſind it ſo in Fact, and of the Comprehenſiveneſs of it, that it ſolves thoſe Phænomenons, an Account of which has been hitherto ſo much Deſpaird of, that it has ſcarcely been Attempted, and which yet we ſhall now Propoſe another Way. 5. 6. Ir 4 Preſes, Acts, or Gravitates towards B, with a Force or Moment, vhich is compenſated by an Equal Action, Gravitation, or Preſſure oſf B tovards 4, 4 anc æ will remain Quieſcent, theirt Mutual and Equal Moments being ſupported anc balanct balance't by each other; But, if 4 Acts or Preſſes with a Greater Force or Momeni tovards B, than B towards 4, the Exceſs of the one Force above the orher, will cauſe a Conatus, or endeavour in 4 to approach towards B, which ſince it cannot be Effected in the Direct Line 4 B, which is ſuppos'd Inflexible, it will ſas all other Actions of Bodies vent themſclves that Way, where there is the Ieat Reſiftance to them) Exert it felf Side-ways, for Inſtance, towards D, hilſt B recedes to E, ſo as to preſerve the ſame Diſtance from C, which Action ſtill Continuing the Effect vill be Continu'd, and Revolutions Performd by it; And if B is taken avay, 4 Preſſing or Acting towards C, and not finding a Paſſage for it's Action, will Exert ĩt ſelf Side-ways to D, and by that Means revolve round the Center, which it Endeavours to approach. Tnis cannot obtain in Bodies which Gravitate to the Earth, ſo as, being ſtopt at the Surface, they ſhowd revolve round it, by an Exertion of their Action Side-ways, becauſe they have not an Exceſs of Gravity above other Bodies, but are nearly in an Equal Balance with them, and therefore muſt be Quieſcent, however, that there is ſome Action Side-ways upon their being ſtopt at the Surface, is Evident from almoſt all Bodies dropt Perpendicularly to it, which, more or leſ; are thrown, from the Place where they fall, into a Lateral Direction. As alſo the Surface of the Earth it ſclf ſand the ſame may be ſaid of the other Plancts) recedes Laterally by this Side- Action or Preſſure, where the Direct cannot obrain, and by that Mcans it and all the Planets are Revolvd about their Axes the ſame Way, and upon the ſame Principles, as their ſeveral Gyrations in their Orbits are Perform'd, which is another Phænomenon, not in the leaſt Explain'd, by the Phyſical, or any other Aſtronomy. S5. 7. FROM hence likewiſe it is Manifeſt, That the Orbits of the Planets will be Elliptical, and that they are deſcribd in the Periheliums with a Greater, and in the Apheliums with a Leſs Velocity; For the Force or Gravitation at 4, ſtill Preſſing more and more tovards C, ſuppoſing the Line 4 C not to be wholly Inflexible, becomes continually ſhorter, till the Planet arrives at the Perihelium B, where it obtains it's urmoſt Preſſure and Approach tovards , and from thence is again Weaken'd and Diminiſt't to it's Return in 4, and conſequently, where the Force is Stronger, it will be carry'd with a more Intenſe, and where Diminiſtt and Weaker vith a more Remiſs and Languid Velocity. Tnus, if inſtcad of the Inflexible Line, we ſubſtitute an Expanſive or Repulſive Force in the Sun, vhich may be as juſtly allow'd, from the Planets not falling Directly to it by their proper Gravitation, as that there is a Gravitating Force in Bodies to cach other, tho' at ſeveral Thouſand Miles Diſtance, and from the very Nature of that Body, which Exerts it ſelf in an Expanſive Force of Light and Heat, the Repulſive or Expanſive Force from C, falling directly upon 4, prohibits any nearer Approach to it, which therefore Preſſing tovards D, and meeting with an Obliquity of the Expanſive Force from C, and vhich is thereby weaken'd, it Approaches nearer to the Center, till at Length, by it's utmoſt Efforts, it arrives at B, the Neareſt it can to C, but there being a Direct Action from C, the Contractive or Gravitating removes to a Weaker, and more Oblique of the Expanſive E, and ſo Revolves to 4. The Center of this Expanſive Force is the Center of Detention, by the Endeavours of the Gravitating to Approach to it. HE Who will Impartially weigh, and conſider what I have writ, and compare it with Xepler's Phyſical Account of theſe Matters, will perhaps find the Principles, I have proposd, are more Rational, and leſs Romantick than his, vho yet was the firſt Author of this Doctrine, into which we now Examine, nay, I may farther add, are juſtify'd by Nature, and by Fact, and a fair and ſincere Reaſoning upon them. Bur if What I have offerd may be more liable to Exception, upon the Expanſive Force introduc'd in this Account, to ſupply the Place of a Vectis or Inflexible Line, it will come to the ſame, If we ſuppoſe a Force of Attraction in the Sun, or in the Center of Detention in a Vectis, and a Centrifugal one in 4, by Endeavouring to depart from that Center, by it's Proper Force of Contraction and Gravitation, which Terms, perhaps, will be more Eaſily admitted, according to the preſent Current Opinions in Philoſophy, tho', in Truth and Reality, they are not Diſferent from vhat vhat I have mention'd. Having therefore given an Account, as far as we coud ĩii ſo ſort a Compaſs, of the Cauſes of the Revolutions of the Planets, under the Direction and Providence of God, who Eſtabliſes his ovn Laws, by which all Narure ſall Move and be Acted, We now Return to our Proportions of theſe Forces. S. 8. THE Proportions of theſe Forces are, what we are next to Determine, in thè. Computing of which we conſider C to be a Center of Detention, and the Moments; M ACR l oſ the Planets to be æ J and ſto be =m, and therefore 4CRZ Ber. See Gorol. 8. 24. 26. preced. Theorem. i Tnus, ſuppoſe the Diſtances of Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Sæturn, from the Sun to be, as 4. 7. IO. I5. 52. 95. and their Diameters to be, as 3. 5. 8. 3. 52. 44. Which yet are Uncertain, Diſferent Aſtronomers giving very Different Calculations of them, Mercury in it's Balance voud be Equal to Venus, if the Bulk of Mercury 23 7 3x35 275A, æ45R the Diſtance, x 1 DC the Gravitating or Contractive Force, that is, i ACR= 108 is Equal to 55 5x5I255 the Bulk of Venus, x7 r the Diſtance, n= the Force, that is, if Bcr 375x or, if the Contractive or Gravitating Force of Mercury is to that of Venus, as 1 to4, or thereabout; But Penus is near Twice the Diſtance ſrom the Sun, that Mercury is, and ſince the proper Forces are Increas'd, the farther they are Removd from the Center of Detention, ve muſt take half of the Force in Venus for it's proper Conrractive one, and therefore the Real Contractive Force in Mercury, to that in Venus, vill be as 16 to 1: And when we conſider the near Approach, which Aſercury makes to the Sun, we need not wonder, that it's Conſtitution has ſo great a Proportion of rhe Phlegmatick and Contractive in it, ſince otherwiſe, in all Likelihood, it voud be Diſſipated into Fumes and Vapours; Bur theſe Diſtances muſt be Alter'd, if what follows, s. 9. is True. BY the ſame Way of Reaſoning, the Moment of the Earth = to that of vill be, ſuppoſing /=to the Contractive or Gravitating Force of the Earth, 5 1202 108, and the Contractive Force at the Earæb's Diſtance from the sSun == 755% 7 or thereabout; therefore, ſince the Diſtance of the Earth from the Sun, is to that o Mercury from the Sun, as 10 to 4, or as 24, or, ſuppoſing, 3 to I, the proper Contractivè Force of the Zarih, in Compariſon vith that of Mercur;, will be - of à5 or 45, or the Contractive Force of Mercury will be 153 Times Greater at of the Earths. Tuus alſo Marss Moment vwill be 405= 108 the Moment of Mercury, and = 3 =, or thereabout, but the Diſtance of Mars from the Sun is to that of Mercury ſrom the Sunm, as 15 or 16 to 4, or as 4 to I, the proper Contractive or Gravitating Force, thereſore, of Mars in Compariſon with that of Mercury, will be 4 of3, or or the Contractive Force of Mercury will be 16 Times Greater than that of arars. LicEWISE the Moment of Jupiter will be = 73116162 108, the Moment of Mercury, and æ34375 OC 7575, Or thereabout; But Fupiter's Diſtance from the Sun is to that of Mercury from it, as 52 to 4, or 13 to I, therefore5 of 4æ3 is Equal to the proper Gravitating or Contractive Force of Jupiter in Compariſon with that of Mercury, or the Contractive Force of Mercury is to that of upiter, as 950508 to I. j LastLy, The Moment of Saturn is Equal to 82926802 108 the Moment of Afercury, or æ 5337 v575 O thereabout; But the Diſtance of Satura from the Sun is to that of Mercury Hom it, as 95 to 4, or, as 24 to I nearly, therefore the proper Force of Gravitation or Contraction of Saturn will be, in it's Compariſon vith that of Mercury, 77 of 7475 or the Contractive or Gravitating Force of Mercury will be to that of Saturn, as 2000224 to 1. And the ſame Kind of Calculation may be Extended to the aſom, and the Secondary Planets; which Calculus of the Forces of the Planets, Idare Afſfirm and can Prove, requires no more Precarious Things than what are Demanded by Sir Iſ. Newton in his Determining the Denſities of Them. eu S. o. IF therefore Mercury by it's Fòrce, accõrdĩng to thie Method we have before Expland, is capable of Rẽvolving round the sun, all the Planets at their ſeveral Diſtances, and whoſe Moments are ſupposd Equal to that of aſercury, will admit ol Revo Revolutions at thoſe Diſtances; Mercury Performs it's Period in about 3 Months, 7æ nus in 73, or 8 Months, the Earih in 12, Mars in 24, Supiter in 144, and Satur in 360. Conſequently, If the Moments of the Planets are Equal, as there is all the Reaſon in the World to think they are, in their Revolutions about the Su becauſe there can be no Imaginable Account given, why, if Mercury, for Inſtance, revolves round it, by a certain Moment made up of it's particular Force, the Quantity of that Force, and the Diſtance, Venus ſiou'd not do it by an Equal Moment, made up of it's particular Force, the Quantity of that Force, and ir's Diſtance; ſince, whatever the Action is betwixt theſe Bodies and the Sun, the Relative Moment, which they have to each other, muſt be the ſame, unleſs we ſuppoſe the Sun, or theſe Bodies can Exert themſclves Differently, all Circumſtances continuing the ſame, or alike and in the ſame Manner, when the Circumſtances of em, as thoſe of the Moments oſ Force, Quantity, and Diſtance, are alter'd; which is as much as to aſfirm, that the sus can Burn up the Farth, at the Diſtance of Mercury, and yet be no Hotter than it is with us, at the ſame Diſtance. If then the Moments of the Planets are Equal, and Aſercur; at the Diſtance of 3, and with it's proper Force, and the Bulk or Quantity of it, deſcribes it's Period or Circle, which will likewiſe be as 3, in 3 Months, Venus at the Diſtance of 75 or 8, will perform it's Period, which will be as 7: or 8, in 7:01 38 Months, the Earih at the Diſtance of 12, it's Period, which will likewiſe be as I2, in 12 Months, Mars at the Diſtance of 24, in 24 Months, Jupiter at the Diſtance of 144, in 144 Months, Saturn at the Diſtance of 360, in 360 Monthss But theſe are not the Diſtances Aſſign'd by Aſtronomers, which are of Mercury, as 4, hich is 1 More than theſe Periods and theſe Equal Moments require, of Venus, as 7 or 8, which is Agrecable and Correſpondent to them, of the Earth, as 10, which is æ Leſs, of Mars, as 15, which is 9 Leſs, of Fupiter, as 52, which is not half ſo much, of Saturn, as 92, which is not one Third ſo much, as theſe Periods and theſe Equal Moments aſſert. Is it therefore Juſt and Reaſonable for us to aſcertain the Diſtances by the Periods, and Equal Moments, or the Periods by the Diſtances? If the Former, we proceed according to Fair and Rational Deductions, if the Latter, we ſtand by very Fallible, and very Uncertain Obſervations. As to the Periodick Times, They are Determin'd, by finding Two Heliocentrick Places of a Superior Planet, from Two Oppoſitions of it with the sSun, and of an Inferior, from Two Conjunctions with it, or from it's Greateſt Elongations, for the Arch, betwixt thoſe Places, will be to the Circumference, as the Time, in which it is deſcribd, to the Periodick Time; or elſe by the Planet's being Twice in the ſame Node, for the Time betwixt the To Obſervations is the Periodick Time; ſuppoſing then the Equal Moments of the Planets, if one Planet, with a Certain Moment, deſcribes one Certain Space in one Time, Another, with an an Equal Moment, vill deſcribe Twice the Space in Double that Time, and Thrice the Space in Treble the Time, &. and conſcquently, ſince the Circles are Proportional to their Radius's, or the Orbits of the Planets to their Diſtances from the Sun, the Radiuss vill be Determin'd from the Circles, or the Diſtances from the Revolutions, but not the Contrary. i S. 10. For, on the Contrary, in the firſt Place, the Diſtances in Fact are Variouſly recounted by Aſtronomers, ſome making the Earth to be 12000 of it's Diameters Removd from the Sun, others 10000, and the Lateſt, and, it is ſaid, the moſt Exact, only 5000, and this va©t and immenſe Difference ariſes from the great Difficulty and Labour of Determining the Su's Parallax; If therefore the Diſtance of the Earth from the Sun is thus unſettled, we cannot ſuppoſe that thoſe of the other Planets are much better aſcertaind. And even thoſe, who pretend to compute them, from the Squares of the Periodick Times being as the Cubes of the Diſtances, which Diſtances yet are thus Precarious, make them Differ from what is ſaid to be found by Obſervation. The Middle Diſtances of the Planets and the Earth from the Sun, Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. The Earth. Venus. Mercury. According to Kepler, 951000. 519650. IS2350. IO0000. 72400. 38806. Bullialdus, 954198. 522520. I52350. IOOC00. 72398. 38585. The Periodick Times, 953806. 3201I6. I52399. I0000. 72333- smN IN which the Diſtances, Calculated from the Periodick Times, are Different, from what are affirmd by Aſtronomers, ſeveral Hundred Parts, and ſometimes more than a Thouſand, cach of which Parts is one Hundred Thouſandth Part of the æarih's Diſtance from the Sun, which, according to the moſt moderate Computation, will bè 54 Millions of Miles, and thereſore one of thoſe Parts will be Equal to 545 Miles, md a Thouſand of them to 530 Thouſand Miles, which is above Twice as far, as the Moon is from us, and therefore no Minutia in Nature. BESIDES Which, let us now Examine into the Way and Method, by which theſe Dr. Grego Diſtances are Computed, which is, by firſt finding the Parallax of the Phænomenon — or Planet, vhoſe Diſtance is Requird, and then it will be, as the Sine of the Paral- Lin. 2. lax, to the Sine of the Apparent Diſtance of the Phænomenon or Planet from the ſt: Kelll Vertex, ſo the Semidiameter of the Earth, to the Diſtance of the Phænomenon or Le|œ. 22 Planct from the Earth's Center. But this Obſervation of the Parallax is acknowledgũd Dr. Grege to be a very ſlippery and uncertain one, and the Propoſitions, which are afterwards ——b. made uſc of, to make it leſs liable to Error, depend upon the Theory oſ the Plancts Lib 3. beſorę deliverd and the Ratio of their Diſtances to one another, whereas their Diſtances, and their Ratio to one another are ſirſt to be determin'd by Previous Obſervations, and from thence the Theory of the Planets is to be formd and derivd, and not aſlumd to aſcertain the Parallax, and from it the Diſtances. In the foregoing Proportion therefore, there are Two Things, which render the Diſtance very Precarious, which is Concluded from it, Firſt the Semidiameter of the æarth, and Second the Parallax. As to the Firſt, ſome make the whole Diameter to contain 8202 Miles, and others only 7935, in which there is a Difference of above 200 Miles; but that which Contributes the moſt to this Uncertainty, is the Parallax, where the Angles are ſo Minute, that the leaſt Error in Obſervation, which is eaſily committed, will occaſion a great Diſproportion in the Diſtances aſerted ſfrom them. And this is ſo entirely ꝑ. gæſ: ownd, in Reſpect of the fixt Stars, that ĩt is thought their Diſtances can be no ways Atronom determin'd, for if the Parallax of the Orbis Magnus, which, according to Mr. Flam- Le& b. & ſteed, is 42', ou'd be 25' more than it Really is, which is an Error, in taking ſuch ſmall Angles, which can ſcarcely be avoided, the Diſtance of the fixt Stars voud be Double of what is affirmd from Obſervation. And in the Planets, if any Phæno menon is farther Diſtant than 15000 Semidiameters of the Earth from it's Center, which the Sun is ſaid to be, even it's HoriZzontal Parallax becomes Inſenſible. Tnus alſo it is aſerted, that, in cach of the Superior Planets, Mars, Jupiter, and Dr. Keilſ Saturn, the Parallax of the Orbis Magnus is as the Angle, under which the Semi- apnæ diameter of that Orb, paſſing thro' the Earth, is ſcen from the Planet, and by how ꝑ ai7. much Nearer the Planet is to the Earth, and to the Sun, by ſo much wiil that Angle be Greater, the Parallax therefore of the Orbis Magnus being given in every Planet, it's Diſtance from the Sun, it is ſaid, will be Determin'd, in Reſpect oſ the Earth's Diſtance from it; For the Elongation of the Planet from the sun is known by Obſervation, or by a Calculus, And, as the Sine of the Parallax of the Orbis Magnus, is to the Sine of the Elongation of the Planet from the Sun, ſo is the Diſtance of the Earth from the Sun to that of the Planet from it. BUT here again are the Two Recurring Diſſiculties, how the Parallax of the Orbis Magnus ſrom each Planet, and the Diſtance oſ the Eærih from the Sun, ſall be accurately and ſuſficiently defin'd, the laſt as we have ſiewn is not done, becauſe the Parallax of the sun cannot be, Fupiter and Saturn are ſtill farther Diſtant from it, and thereſore their Parallaxes will be more Minute, Venus is the neareſt to it, and therefore it's Parallax the moſt ſenſible and the beſt determin'd, and conſequently we find s. 9. its Diſtance, and it's Periodick Time to Agree, and that of the æarth and Mercury not much to Differ, Mars ſomething more, and Jupiter and Saturn the moſt of all. Beſides onc Fundamental Maxim in this Reaſoning about the Diſtances of the nr. æei Planets is, that the Apparent Diameters of them are increas'd in Proportion to their Aſt-onon Approximation to ns, which is falſe by what we Experience in other Objects, and is ꝑ unprovd in Theſe; Alſo the Heights of any Phænomenons are ſo hard to be determind, that I have known very 2ood Obſervers miſtake One or TWo Yards in Fiſty, which vill be no Wonder to thoſe who underſtand, how Nice and Critical Trigonometry is in the Practice, and conſequently the Error in the Meaſure of many Millions of Millions cannot be Inconſiderable. i M Wuar m Whuar therefore ve wou'd Infer from hence is, that ſince it is ſo difficult a Matter to fix the Diſtances of the Planets from the Parallaxes, and the Obſervations of them, and ſince, where the Parallaxes are the moſt ſenſible, the Periodick Times come the neareſt to a Proportion with their Diſtances, we may juſtly attribute their Recedeing from that Proportion to the fallibleneſs and uncertainty oſ Obſcrvations, and may therefore Conclude, that the Squares of the Periodick Times are not as the Cubes of the Diſtances, or, which is the ſame, that the Periodick Times are not as the SquareRoots of thoſe Cubes, or in a Seſquiplicate Proportion, but as the Cube-Roots of thoſe Cubes, that is, as their Diſtances. S. 11. IF this is ſo, which I only Propoſe, and leave to the Inquiries of Orhers. the Moments of the Planets, with reſpect to the Sun, will be the ſame, and their Forces ſuch as I have before mention'd, §. 8. and it will be from thence morcover Con ſequent. I. THAT the Nearer or Farther any Planet is from the Sun, it's proper Contractive or Gravitating Force will be Greater or Leſs, excepting in Mars and Venus, which have the ſame, and are compenſated by the greater Bulk or Quantity of rhe one near the Sun, as in Venus, and by the Leſs in the other, which is more Remote from it, as in Mars. 2. THAT the Matter therefore in Mercury is very near, as Intrinſically Diſferent from that of Venus or Mars, as Gold with us is from Water, and that it is very near ſo much Heavier and Denſer; that the Matter of Mercury, in Reſpect of that of rhe Earth, is 8 Times Heavier and Denſer than Gold is in Reſpect of Water with us, &c. j 3. THAT the Matter of Jupiter is above 6000, and that of Sarurn above 10000 Times leſs Denſe and Heavy than that of the æaril'ss, which will not therefore, according to the Notions of the preſent Philoſophy of Similar Matter, be Infinitely Porous, but will be of a Thinner and more Diluted Nature, will fill the ſame Dimenſional Spaces, but the Forces will be Diſferent, leſs Contractive, and more eaſily excited into Action by the sSus Rays, ſo that the Nature of it may be as juſtly proportion'd to all the Influences of the sm at that Diſtance, as that of the Earih is to them at it's Diſtance, or Mercury in it's particular Proximity to it. If any one objects other Calculations of the Denſities of the Planets, or the Proportions of them, they proceed upon a Suppoſition of Matter's being Homogeneous and Similar, which we here again Deny, as having been already Confuted. 4. THAT hence it is Maniſeſt, how Different Matters, and their having in themſelves Different Forces and Moments, may at various Diſtances proceed in an Equable Motion; If the Matter of Saturn was the ſame, as that of Mercury, at ſuch an Immenſe Diſtance from the Suæ it's Center of Detention, it wou'd be carryd with an infinitely Greater Velocity, but i's Force being leſs, and it's Diſtance greater, and the Quantity of thoſe Forces greater, ſd as to be in an Equal Moment with Mercury, it will deſcribe the ſame Space in the ſame Time, and therefore its Periodick Time will be in a Proportion to it's Diſtance; the Preſent Aſtronomers ſay, that it is in the Ratio of the Square of the Time to the Cube of the Diſtance, or as the Periodick Time to the Square-Root of that Cube, which, if we vill allow for the uncertainties of Obſervation, may poſſibly be reducd to the Cube-Root of that Cube, or the Periodick Time will be as the Diſtance, which we here Account for, but how it ſoud be ſo nearly in that Proportion, as the Square-Root of the Cube, is not in the leat Explain'd by the Phyſical Aſtronomy, and by that Similar and Homoge neous Matter, which it has thought fit to adopt. S. 12. THEOREM the Second is, That the Sums or Quantities of the Contractive or Gravitating Forces are in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one of the Mo ments, and of a Reciprocal of the Forces, the Percuſſions, and the Removals from : : MAcr the Center of Detention; For, by the Preceding Theorem, a= æ , therefore a M1cpr  mMC?Pæ? 5. 13. THEO S. 13. THEOREM the Third is, That the Contractive or Gravitating Forces are in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one of the Moments, and of a Reciprocal of the Sums or Quantities of the Forces, of the Percuſſions, and the Removals from M ACP the Center of Detention; For, by the Firſt Theorem,  v æ4 therefore cCMEBr Tmarr? s. 14. THEOREM the Fourth is, That the Percuſſions are in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one of the Moments, and of a Reciprocal of the Forces, the Quantities of the Forces, and the Removals from the Center of Detention; For, by the Firſt aAcPæ therefore r z MB:? Fepr- maãacæ 5. 15. THEOREM the Fifth is, That the Removals from the Center of Detention are in a Reaſon compounded of a Direct one of the Moments, and of a Reciprocal of the Forces, the Quantities or Sums of the Forces, and of the Percuſſions; For, by the Firſt Theorem, x , therefore H 5. 16. THEOREM the Sixth is, That the Spaces perform'd by Bodies, which obtain a Contractive or Gravitating Force, and a Force of Percuſſion, and which Act round a Center of Detention, are in a Direct Reaſon of the Forces, the Percuſſions, and their Diſtances from the Center of Detention, where ſuch Forces and Percuſſions act in Conjunction, and ſpend their Moment forwards, and do not return back in Oſcillations, as alſo of the Times and the Denſities of the Spaces performd, That 5CPRTD VIZ Percuſſion and Gravitation, by which at the Diſtance C6, it woud be carryd round its Orbit in a Day's Time, a Gravitation and Percuſſion of a Hundręd Times the Force at G woud deſcribe a Space a Hundred Times Greater, that is, an Orbit whoſe Semidiameter woud be à Hundred Times Longer than Cõ; and if the Diſtance C4 is a Hundred Times Greater than that of C6, the Force at A woud be ſo much Increas'd, and conſequently by that Means wou'd deſcribe 100 of thoſe Spaces, or Orbits, in a Day's Time, and in 100 Days 10000 of them; and ſuppoſing the Spaces, thr which theſe Revolutions are made, are a Hundred Times Denſer than the others, they will be Equal to 1000000 of the former Revolutions in which the Spaces were a Hundred Times Thinner and more Diluted Where we ſpeak of the Denſities of Spaces, ve do not conſider the Reſiſftances or Actions of them, but only their Cloſer or more Conſtipated Space and Extenſion; If therefore likewiſe the Actions of theſe Spaces were Included in the preſent or former Reaſoning about Space; there woud ſtill other Proportions ariſe to the Moments of Bodies, Moving in Them, than what we have mentiond We ſhall not at Preſent conſider, what Effet Different Percuſſions voud have, for the Reaſons alledgd above, nor yet, what woud be the Caſe of differing Denſities, which, with their proper Forces and Actions, yet, in Real Space, and not an Abſtracted and Imaginary one, we may juſtly think will obtain ſome Moment in the Motions of Bodies, and cven in the Revolutions oſ the Planets. M Theorem, m is, Thus ſuppoſing a Point at G, Fig. preced. has a certain Force oſ s5 r Corel. 1. Iæ therefore P=», and D=4d, 7 E i That is, one Space, which is perſormd, will be Greater than another, in Proportion, as the Gravitating or Contractive Force, the Removal from the Center of Detention, and the Time is Greater, in which the Greater Force Acts. Ss RT 3 Corol. 2. IF nov C¢1, 575 o the Spaces performd will be Greater, if the Forces are Equal, as the Diſtances from the Center, and the Times, in which Equal Forces Act, are Greater. M 2 Corol. 3 5s c : Corol. 3. IF rRE,, , 7 , or, if the Diſtances from the Center are Equal, the Spaces performd viit be Greater, as the Forces, and the Times, in which Greate Forces Act, are Greater. 5 CRr Corol. 4. Ir T/|1, 5 7 on if the Times, in which the Forces Act, are Equal the Spaces performd are Greater, as the Forces and the Diſtances from the Cente of Detention are Greater. j 5 T Corol. 5. Ip C42, and Rær, or cræ=,: 75 5 or if the Forces and Diſtance: from the Center, or the Moments of them ꝶether are Equal, the Spaces performd vill be as the Times, in which thoſe Equal Forces Act. 5 Rr Corol. 6. Is Ce, and T1, 5 7 or if the Forces and Times are Equal, the Spaces perform'd will be as the Diſtances from the Center, ſince therefore, where the Forces 'or Moments of themm computed with their Diſtances are Equal, the Spaces which they deſcribe, will be as the Times, by Corol. 5. in ſuch a Caſe t or the Periodick Times will be as the Diſtances; and conſequently, we may uai conclude that this is the Circumſtance of the Heavenly Bodies, ſince that of their Periodick Times being in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of their Diſtances is not juſtifyd by any Lavs of Mechanicks, as we ſhall aftervards ſew. 5 C : : qrel.- 7. Ir RrREI and T7J1, 7 5 - or if the Diſtances from the Center, and the Times are ſgual. the Spaces performa vill be as the Forces. Cirol. 8. I 5, CRTIZcrt, and C. c:: rt. RT, or R. r:: ct. CT, &. for we ſhall go no farther, ſince the Remaining Corollaries may be eaſily deriv'd from the preſent Equation. l i 5 CRTD C srt zr t S. 17. THEOREM the Seventh is, If æ= rid = Sctã : ertd c SETD 5CT T Ser D t u E 2ibi and 7 = El 7 on vhich we ſhall not Enlarge, but go on to the Expanſive. 5. 18. WE ſnall now proceed to a Conſi deration of the Expanſive Force, and the Theorems vhichi reſult from it, and th ve made Percuſſion, as well as the Contractive or Grãyitating Forcè to be an Expanſive in Reſpect of the Center of Detention c;, Fig. preccd. becauſc it endeavourd t0 recede from it, yet the proper Expanſive Forc is nat- hich acts directly Contrary to ihe Contractive, ſò that as the Contractive, iF́ lacã n ie Ceniter of Detention C, voud ſtrongly unite it ſclf to it, and preſs oWarãs it, and the farther it retird from it the more Languidly and Faintly, or, Vhich ĩs the ſamc, more Vigorouſly recede from it; On the Contrary, the Expanſvẽ in he Poiũt C vill act the moſ ſorcibly to the Diſſipation of the Contractive, or, any õther Force of Detention, which obſtruòts it's Action, and more Languidly and Faintly Vhe ſarther ſuch Force is from the Center of its Action, or, which is the ſame, Ieſs violently recede from it. And as to the Laws of the Former or Contractive Force, all Gravitating and Heavy Bodies, ſo far as they are ſo, Cold, Poſitive Reſt, Attraction, Chryſalization, Coagulation, are to be reduc'd, ſo Fire and Flame, Heat, Vegetation, Fluidity, and Softneſs, Taſt, Smell, and Sound, Light and Colours, Morion, Eſticit; , Ebullition upon the Mixture of an Acid and Altali, as they are termd, will nãtũmlly fãllunder rhe Laws of the Larter or the Expanſive, as alſo all Animal Force and Action, tho' in all theſc there is a Mixture in Different Proportions of both theſc Forces The Two Great Principles therefore, which we take to be in Nature, ſo far as it is Material, are thoſe of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, vhich A&t directly oppoſire to one another, and which are the moſt fully exerted in he utmoſt Heat or Fire, as that oſ the Sun, and in the urmoſt Cold, as Froſt, and ravitation it ſclf is no other than a Mixture of the Contractive and Expanſive, in vhich hich the Contractive prevails; but ſince we have no exact Meaſures of theſe Forces we have hitherto made uſe of Heavy Bodies to explain in ſome Degree the Contractive Force from a Center of Detention, and as for the Expanſive, it do's not ſeem to be capable of being reduc'd to any, for there is no Balance of Fire and Flame; we ſnall therefore omit any farther Proſecution of the Centers of Detention and proceed to the Centers of Expanſion and Contraction. s. 19. THEOREM the Eighth is, That the Moments of Bodies, which hæve a Force of Expanſion, and which Act ſrom a Center of it, are in a Reaſon compounded of a Direẽt of the Expanſive Forces, of the Sums or Quantities of them, and of a Reciprocal of the Diſtances; And if we ſuppoſe a Force acting towards a Center, as the Contractive, and not from a Center of Detention, as before, The Moments of Bodies, which have a Force of Contraction, and which Act tovards a Center of it, will be in a Reaſon compounded after the ſame Manner. LET us therefore put F, f for the Expanſive or Contractive Forces, and the Moments of Bodies, thus Acting, will be That is, the Forces will be Greater as they are Intrinſically ſo, as the Quantities or Sums of them are Greater, and as the Diſtances of their Actions from the Center of them are Leſs; Thus we find iĩt in Fire and Heat, in the Action of the Sun, Percuſſion, Vegetation, and other Expanſive Forces; Thus in Gravitation and Attraction, in Froſt and Cold, which arc weaken'd the farther they are from the Center of Contraction, and in other the Contractive Forces. Corol. 1. In AZB, M. m: : Fr. ſR. Corol. 2. Is Fæſf, M. m:: Ar. BR. Corol. 3 Is R=E?7, M. m:: AF. Bf. Corol. 4. Iv A=B, and Fæ1f, M. m::. E. Grol. 5. I A=B, and R=v, M. m:: F. f. Corol. 6. I] F=f, and R=r, M. m:: 4. B. Corol. 7. In MJum, AFrEBfR, and 4.B: fR. Fr, or F. f:: 8R. Ar, o R.r:: AF. Bf. l Corol. 8. IV M=m; and AB, F. ſ:: R. r. Corol. o. I M=m, and Ff, A. B:: R. r. Cor. 10. I]s M/Dm, and RmVr, 4. B:: f. F. Corol. t1. A. B:: MfR. mFr, and F. f:: MBR. mAr, and r. R:: MBf. mAVF, or R.7:: mAF. MBf, &. . 20. WE ſhall Firſt therefore conſider the Proportions of Expanſion, the Quantities and Diſtances of it aſſerted in this Theorem, from Whence all the Corollaries which follow it, are derivd, and afterwards thoſe of Contraction. Thus in Reſpec oſ Expanſion it is aſfirmd, that is Force is Greater, as it is Intrinſically ſo, as it's Quantity is Greater, and as it's Diſtance is Leſ. IN Reſpect of the Intrinſick Forces of Expanſion, there is no one will deny, but that the Intrinſick Force of the Flame of Wine, when Burnt, or any other Spirituous Liquor, is leſs in it's Force, than that of the Flame of a Lamp, or a Candle, or any other Oleous Body; that the Flame of an Oleous Body is leſs in it's Force, than that of Common Fire, where a Groſſer Matter is Inflam'd; that Common Fire is ſtill leſs in it's Force, than that of the Immenſe Heat and Fire of the Sun; all Operations in Chymiſtry, where Flame or Ebullitions are producd, come under this Head of Expanſive Forcess In Reſpect of the Quantities of theſe Forces, every one knows, that a Spark of the ſame kind of Fire or Flame is leſs in it's Force than a whole Maſs of it, and thas one Ray of the Sun is of leſs Power than a Thouſand, or a Million of them Collected together. In Reſpect of the Diſtances, ĩt is alſo Notorinus, that the nearer an Approach is made to a Flame, to a Fire, or the Sun, the more violent the Action is, and the more ſenſible is the Heat, and the Expanſive Force of it; and if the Earth was placd at the Diſtance of Mercury, it woud in all Probability repel it to the Station, in which it now is, in which it exerts a Gentler and more Moderate Action upon it, to Warm it only into Vegetation, and to keep it in it's Period; and if Mercury was vhere the Earth is, it woud ſink to i's own Station by the Exceſs of it's Contractive, above the Expanſive of the Sun, and ſo of the other Planets. : . Tnus alſo in Animal Action, as That which exerts it ſelf in the Force of Percuſſion, the Stronger that Action is, the Greater the Quantity of the ſame Force oſ Percuſſion is, and the Nearer it is t the Center of Percuſſion, that is to the Point, where vhere the Stroke is made, upon all theſe Accounts, the Expanſive Force will be Increas'd, and upon the Contrary Diminiſd. LixEWISE in Vegetation, in which there is a Principle oſ Expanſion contrary to that of Contraction or Gravitation, by which the Stronger it is in it ſelf, and the Greater Quantity there is of the ſame Force, and the Nearer it is to the Center of it's Exertion, the more Power and Moment it will have. For there is more Expanſive Force in one Plant, than there is in Another, as one Riſes higher than another, and this is but a weak Expanſion, and a ſmall Degree of it in all of them; The Force or Principle of Expanſion is ſtill Greater in Shrubs, and the Greateſt in Trees, ſuppoſing the Contractive Force is Equal. And as the Quantities or Sums of theſe Forces are Increasd, the Moment of them is Greater, thus the Moment of the Expanſive Force in an Oak, is Greater than that in a Walnut or a Willow, in a Walnut or a Willow, than in a Thorn or a Haſle, and in them, than in Plants and in Moſſes; and in the ſame Tree it is Greater in the Root and Trunk, than in the Shoots of the Root or in the Branches, Greater in the Shoots, than in the Strings and Fibres of them, and Greater in the Branches than in the Leavess. Thus alſo the Expanſive Force in Vegetation is Greater in leſs Diſtances from the Center of it's Action, and Leſs in greater Diſtances from it, from whence it is, that in the Root or Center, where this Expanſive Force is the Greateſt, the Colour is ſometimes Rediſh, or a Kind of Orange, or Yellow, or a Yellowiſn White, whereas in the Foliage, or in the Extremities, or greateſt Diſtances of it's Action from the Center, the Colour is generally Green; but, from what we have ſaid in the Doctrine of Light and Colours, Red, Orange, and Yellow are produc'd in us by the Stronger Actions of the Sur's Rays, and Green by the Weaker, Suitably theſe Expanſive Forces, ſtrikeing upon the Ethereal Plenum, with a Greater Percuſſion in the firſt Caſc, give us the Senſations of Red, or Orange, or Yellowiſh, or Pale Yellow, and in the lat with a Weaker, the Senſations of Various Greens; and the Colours of Flowers proceed from Different Proportions of the ſame Expanſive: Fluidity, and Softneſs, and Taſt and ſome other Qualities in Bodies have a Degree of Expanſion, but we ſhall not con ſider them here, becauſe the Inſtances we ſhall at Preſent make uſe of, ſhall be only of thoſc Expanſive Forces, which diſplay themſelves the moſt ſenſibly, that we may thereby the better judge of the Nature and Manner of their Action. SMELL is the next we ſhall Select, which is accounted for, by ſuppoſing, that ſeveral Eſfluviums are ſent out from the Odorous Body to a certain determin'd Sphere round it, which yet ſeems to be nothing more than this Expanſive Force, Acting upon the Ethereal Plenum, which environs it, to a certain Diſtance;3 And the Odour is Stronger, as the Expanſive Force is Greater, or as the Quantity of it is Greater, and the Diſtance from the Center of it's Action is Leſs. ANOTHER Expanſive Force we ſhall mention is, that of Sound, which is Greater, as the Expanſive Force is Greater, as the Quantity of it is ſo, and as the Diſtance is Leſs; a quicker and a more lively Expanſion ſtrikes upon the Ethereal Plenum, and conſequently, the Ear with a ſtronger Percuſſion, all other Things being Equal, than a Flatter, and a Duller, and a Shrill Sound pierces more than a Grave or an Hoarſe one. A Greater Quantity of this Force adds likewiſe to the Moment of it, and a Shrill Bell will make a Greater Impreſſion upon us, than the String of a like Note in a Harp, or a Violin, and a Larger Bell than a Smaller. A leſs Diſtance alſo from the Sonorous Body Increaſes the Sound, and a farther Removal from it Diminiſhes it. TuE Sixth kind of Expanſive Force we ſhall Name, ſhall be that of Colour, which by what we have ſiewn in our Philoſophy of Light and Colours, conſiſts of Diſferent Intrinſick and Expanſive Forces, Red has the greateſt, Orange the next, Vellow is aſter Orange, Green, Blue, and Violet ſucceed the Yellow, and deep Violet has the lcaſt Expanſive Force of all, in the Sun's Rays tranſmitted and alterd thro' a Priſim. And the ſame we may aſſert in Reſpect of Colourd Bodies, ſtrikeing upon the Ethereal Plenum, with their particular and diſtinct Forces of Expanſion, that Red Bodies have the greateſt Force of Expanſion, Orange the next, and ſo Yellov, Green, Blue, and Violet, and deep Violet in order have a Weaker. And all theſe Diſfering Colours are more eaſily ſeen, the Larger and Greater the Quantity is of them, a colourd Point is not ſo readily dũtinguiſh't, as a colourd Body, the Mind is more l Dubiou Dubious to what Colour to aſſign a ſmall Atom of Matter, than a whole Maſ of it, and ſtill the Larger that Maſs is, and the Greater the Uniformity of the Impreſſion upon the Senſes, the Mind is left leſs to doubt of the Certainty of the Colour exhibited to it; This perhaps may not be ſo fully apprehended, unleſs after a juſt and perfect Conſideration of it. We may farther ſay, that the Nearer we approach to Tſ. nſ”m any colourd Body, the more Fully and Diſtinctly we perceive it's Colour, and the Farther we are remove from it, it is more confuſed and undetermin'd, and thereſore it's Expanſive Force Weaker. THE Seventh Sort of Expanſive Force we ſhall conſider, is that of Motion, which nnta ; is the Second Inſtance of the Expanſive Force in Animal Action, Thus it is mani- mi imfeſt, ve can ſtrike or throw a Ball with a Greater or Leſs Force, and the Moment Of The Inrinſici it will accordingly be ſo. If we uſe a Finger to communicate this Expanſive Force, ſo t will be Leſs, if a Hand, Greater, and if we exert the whole Moment of all the Ruauiy Muſcles ſubſervient to that End, it will be the Greateſt of all, that is, if the Quantity of the Expanſive Force is the Greateſt. And ſuch a Motion Communicated Will be Tie Diſanc diminiſ'd (as all other Forces are) the Farther it is from the Center of i's Action. AxorHER Force of Expanſion is that of Elaſticity;, which has been ſufficiently nſanæ s. exemplify'd in that of Sonorous Bodies. TuE laſt Intance, we ſhall make uſc of, is that Expanſive Force, which is obſer- Inas 9. vable in Animal Bodies, hich ĩs the Third Inſtance in Animal Action, The Expan- stm ſive Force is Greater in the Animal Syſtem of an Eſtrich or an Elephant, than that ĩàr mnrinſic of an Inſeẽ&t or a Fly, in a Greater Brure, than in a Leſſer, in a Man, than in a Chilq, fræand in one of a Greater, than in one of a Leſſer Stature, all other Things being Equal. The Quantity of the Intrinſick Forces may be exemplifyd the ſame vay, Th Quan for in the foregoing Inſtances, as the Intrinſick Forces are Greater in the one than the other, ſo are likewiſe the Quantities of them. And in all theſe Caſes, the Ex- The Diſtana panſive Forces are the ſtrongeſt at the Centers, and the weakeſt at the Extremities of the Syſtems, there is more Expanſive Force in the Heart, than there is in the Finger, more in the Blood than in the Veſſcls, which contain it, more in the Muſcles, than there is in the Skin, but to fix the preciſe Center of this Expanſive Force, willperhaps be difficult to do, and if we take the Heart, it may be as Probable a one, as any orher Point in the Animal Frame, but that we ſiall not now Determine, having given Inſtances enough of the Expanſive Force to the purpoſe of the preſent Theorem, and vhen we come to our Inquiry into the Principles of Anatomy, we ſhall more fully Explain our ſelves upon that Subject. 5. 21. THE Expanſive Force we make to be that, Which retires by it's own Energy Infim⸗: i from a Center, and which therefore is adapted to the Diſpelling and Diſcuſſing of Jeoſ il Bodies, which lye in t's Way, on the other Hand the Contractive Force Tends and Fææ Acts towards a Center, and thereſore Cements, Unites, and Precipitates them to each orher, of vhich laſt Force we ſhall give the following Inſtances. Tnæ Contractive Force of Common Salt imparts a Coldneſs to Water, which has Iuſanæ I. fome Degree of the Expanſive in it from it's Fluidity, and it is known to have this Iistius Effect, viz. to Cement a Pewter Veſſel, in which the Salt and Water is contain'd, Fo. 10 a Piece of Wood, on which it ſtands; TuE Salts, which mix with the Aqueous Particles in the Air, are ſtill ſtronger by nſax æ Cementing the Particles of Warer it ſelf into Snow and Hail; the Salts, hich are uinfusd into Water in Froſt, obtain a Greater Foree, by which they change it into a Solid and Conſiſtent Body, Ice; TuE Stupendous Globe of Solid and Compacted Salt, the Moon, is yet ſtronger mſtue ;3 in it's Efficacy and Force, and has it's Infiuences at 650 Semidiameters of the Earth, au smi or about 226000 Miles from us, ſo that as the Dicrent Kinds of Fire and Flame phich ſums amongſt us, are derivd from that Immenſe Source of it, the Sun, by it's Actions up- Gſte of ke on our Planet, ve may with the ſame and equal Juſtice think, that all Cold and nthe Various Salts, which are Productive oſ it, are dẽrivd from the Moon, and which Reaũ. thereſore is placd by the Infinite Wiſdom of Almighty God, at that Diſtance from the Earth, both to Reflect Light to us, and to be a Principle of the Contractive Foree, as the Sun is of the Expanſive, which are ſo Evident and Manifeſt in all the Beings we converſe with: That the Moon has this Influence of Cold, is as Evident, as the Sun has that of Heat, ſince in Winter, vhen the Sun has the leat Pover by r it's Expanſive Force to Obſiruct the Contractive of the Moon, and vhen the Air i From Lnie in clear from Vapours, and the Moon obtains it's full Contractive Force, the Nights arc a'.: always the Sharpeſt and the Froſieſl, and it has the very ſame Effect in Reſpect o Nihti ihæ Cold, as the Sun has in Reſpect of Heat, if we compare the Circumſtances of the Froftesi one vith the other; And all Nights are more Cold, when the Moon, as all Day: more Hot, vhen the Sun Prevails. From henee iWnAT farther conſirms this Aſſertion is, that the nearer we approach to the Exſius Cold Northern Pole, and the leſs Effect the Expanſive Force of the Sun has, and the Ihm Clmum. Greater the Contractive of the Moon, the Colder thoſc Parts are, being oppreſd vith a continual Froſt and Snow, vhich cannot proceed from any Diſferent Intrinſick Force of the Earth it ſelf, and therefore muſt be owing to a Foreign Imreſſion. From J_ Ir may be alſo alledg'd in Reſpect of the Higheſt Mountains, and the Higheſt Parts Highit  Monmof the Atmoſpere, all other Things being Equal, that the Higher they are, the Colder Hightſi Pari they are, which can be attributed to nothing elſe than their nearer Approximation of ih am to the Moon, which will have a much Greater Infiluence upon them, by ſuch an 4m h Elcvation than the Sun can have, becauſe the Sun is, at the leat Computation, 54 Millions of Miles from us, whereas the Moon's Diſtance is only 240 Thouſand at the moſt, a ſmall Approximation therefore towards the Moon, vill have a conſiderable Effect in Compariſon with that towards the Sun, which will have Little or None at all. Erom hinee iheaA farther Argument, which we have for the Truth of this, is, That, in fact, Salts uaræm] Reflect Light with a Greater Force than Earth do's, and which thereſore we may Nton derta. ſuppoſe to be the Caſe of the Moon, hich, as all other Contractive Bodies, has a contrary Action to the Expanſive of the Sun, and therefore will more Vigorouſly repel it; Salts do likewiſc reflect a Pale and Silver Light, which is the known Property of this Luminary; Nothing of which ſo ſully Agrees with a Refiection of it from an Earthy or Graſſy Surface. Erm hinet il AND laſtly, in the Old or Nev Moon immediately before or preſently aſter its on nlistod Conjunction with the Sun, the Solar Rays which are reflected from it, are not much not capitle of diverted from a Rectilinear Progreſs to the Earth, and yet are ſo far from having taing Cullutid the Heat and Warmth of the Direct ones, that they can by no Means, nor by any Feun Glaſſes be Collected to an Inflammatory Focus, which can ariſe from nothing elſc, but from the Impreſſions of Cold, which they receive from the Moon, and Which they tranſmit with them to the Earth, and for the ſame Reaſon, as the Earth is a Cold and Contractive Body, the Sun's Rays are ſuitably weakend by the Reſlections from it; There is alſo obſervable a Glowing Brightneſs in the Moon, which is the Property of Light ſtrongly Reſlected from Bright, Hard and Icy, or Metalline Bodies, but not from Earth and Graſ. FROM all which we may Rationally believe and think, that the Moon is a Vaſt Globe or Craggy Rock of Solid and Compacted Salt, Chryſtal, or Metallick Ice, Infinitely Colder and Stronger than that which is producd here, by it's Influence only, at ſo many Thouſand Miles Diſtance, that it is Deſolate and Uninhabited, without Atmoſphere, as is Evident from the ſudden Immerſion of Stars into, and their Emerſion from behind it, and plac'd in the Heavens, as the Scriptures inform us, to Govern the Night, that is, to Communicate Light and Cold ro us. The Face of the Moon is variouſly diſtinguiſd into Parts, ſome of which are Brighter, and the others more Obſcure, the Former of which are compar'd by Philoſophers to Rocks of Adamant, and large Prominences of Pcarl and Chryſtal, and tho' ſome have br. Keil's fancyd the Obſcurer Parts to be Seas and Lakes and Marſhes ſcatterd about upon pnnmirs Surface, as in our Earth, yet, by the better Kind of Teleſcopes, they are found ng 117. to be Huge Caverns, and void Cavities with the Shadows falling within them, both which Accounts perfectly agree with that Cold, Solid, Icy, and Chryſtal Nature, and the Prerupt and Cragęed Figure, vhich we have aſſign'd it. And it is not certain but the Planets may be of the ſame Species, or at Ieaſt the Secondary ones. a ſr- s. 22. FroM the Contractive Force of the Moon ariſes the Flux and Reflux of ĩ 7lux an the Sea, which, by draving the Waters towards it, makes them Lift and Heave from tufiux of ihe the Bortom, and from thence, by their proper Gravity, or the Contractive Fotce oſ " the Earth, they fall dovnvards, and roll in Waves and Surges to the Shores, or l deſcend deſcend into ſuch Rivers, which Communicate with the Ocean, and by the Moon's receding, and the Contractive Force being thereby diminiſi'd, the Waters ſink to their former Ebb; by which means the Flux and Reflux of them is Performd. Thus, let S Repreſent the Sun, 4 BCD the Moon in it's Orbit, æ the Earth, which we at preſent ſuppoſe to be Quieſcent; When the Moon is in 4, g,  are under the perpendicular or ſtrongeſt Influence of it's Contractive Force in 4, and the Waters vill accordingly ſwell to the urmoſt Height in G, and L; When the Moon is in B, n, i, will riſe to the urmoſt Height in æ, I; vhen in C, from I, , again to L,G; and when in D from i, n to I, N; in all which Caſes, vhen the Waters are raid in G, thęy will by their own Gravity, or the Contractive Force of the Earth. A ſ deſcend towards the Parts F and H, in N tovards F and M, in L towards and X, and in I tovards  and H, vhich makes the whole Flux of the Waters, by which the Ocean is fil'd to the Shores of it, to the Height of ſeveral Feet, which may be eaſily conceiv'd, if we make the Parts lying above H and F, F and M, M and X, X and H to repreſent thoſe Shores; But as the Moon recedes from A to B, by which it's Contractive Force, becoming more Oblique to the Waters in G, will be continually Diminiſ'd and in B Inſenſible, the Waters in F GH ill continually ſubſide by the Contractive Force of the Earth, till they fall to Fę H, where they vill be in their uimoſt Ebb, which is, what is call'd, the Reſlux of them; and the ſame vill happen to the Waters in , when the Moon is in , to the Waters in L, when the Moon is in D, and to thoſe in  hen the Moon is in 4. FROM what has been ſaid it is Manifeſt, that in the Moon's Revolution there will be Two Fluxes, and as many Refluxes to the ſame Part of the Earth, that is, Two Fluxes from g& to G, vhen the Moon is in 4 or in C, and TWo Refluxes, hen in B and D; TWo Fluxes from n to N, when the Moon is in B or in D, and as many Refluxes, when it is in C or 43 Two Fluxes from I to L, when the Moon is in C or in 4, and as many Refluxes, vhen in D and B; and laſtly, Two Fluxes from à to I, when the Moon is in D or in B, and as many Reſluxes When in 4 and in C. Conſequently, every New and Full Moon, when, as in B and D, the Moon is in Conjunction vith or in Oppoſition to the Sun, there will be Spring-Tides, or a Flux of the Sea from æ to N, and when it is in it's Quadratures with it, the Tides will be Niepe, or upon the Reflux from N to n, which is aſfiirm'd by thoſe, who are Coaſters upon the Sea, and have conſtantly obſerv'd them. And what has been ſaid of n, may be ſaid of g, i, and I, &. vhen by their Diurnal Rotation they come to the ſame Syzygiæ. ] S. 23. THUS at WorthingPoint in Suſſex, in the Pariſn of Broadater, where the Ocean lies Free and Open, and the Shore is one continw'd Flat for ſeveral Mile: together, the Greateſt Flux or Full Sea is at 11 of the Clock in the Morning every Nev and Full Moon, and the Greateſt Ebb or Reſlux 6 Ilours after, namely, at 5⸗ Clock in the Aſternoon; it is Full Sca every Day  oſ an Hour and 4 a Quartel later, namely, The firſt Day aſter New or Full Moon } and 4 a Quarter after 11 i N Cloc Clock in the Morning, The ſecond Day 1 Hour and à after 11, and ſo on, ſo tha in ſeven Days aſter New and Full Moon, Full Sea is about 6 Hours later than it is at the New or Full Moon, or 6 Hours and 7 And in the Quadratures or Quarters f the Moon, or the Middle Time betwixt the New and Full Moon, the Greateſt Ebb is at 11 a Clock in the Morning, and the Greateſt Flow or Full Sea is at 5 in the Afternoon, and the Greateſt Ebb and the Greateſt Flow are always at 6 Hours Diſtance from one another. : Anx ShorehamFerry, which is upon the ſame Coaſt, but is an Inlet from the Sea into the Land, the Flow of the Sea is ſaid to be 4 Hours, and the Ebb 8, ſo that it is Full Sea at 17 a Clock in the Morning, every New and Full Moon, as before, and 8 Hours after, the Greateſt Ebb, or at 7 a Clock at Night, and 4 Hours after, Full Water again, that is, at 11 at Night, and Loweſt Ebb at 7 in the Morning, and Full Water at 1I. Ir is farther obſervd by theſe Coaſters, That the Spring-Tides at Worthing-Point are Three Days before and Three Days after the New and Full Moon, that they begin to Riſe or Lifſt, as they call it, the Third Day before the New and Full Moon, and continually encreaſe to the Third Day after the ſaid New or Full Moon, when the Greateſt Spring is, and when the Water is 10 Feet perpendicularly Higher than in the loveſt Niepe; Alſo that in theſe Lo or Niepe Tides, which fall betixt Spring-Tide and Spring-Tide, the Water continually Decreaſes from the higheſt SpringTide, and is halſ Niepe-Tide at the Moon's Quarters, from thence it ſtill Decreaſcs, till it is the loweſt NiepeTide, the Day before the Spring-Tide begins to Lift, that is, the Fourth Day before the New or Full Moon; That likewiſe, the Spring-Tides move Faſter and Quicker, and the Niepe more Languidly and Slowly; And that, Laſtly, the SpringTides are Equal at the New and Full Moon, for, in both Caſes, the Water is 10 Feet Higher than in the loweſt Niepe. S. 24. LET the Earth, which has been hitherto chieſly conſiderd as Quieſcent, be now revolv'd about it's Axis from g to n, and /, and when the Moon is in 4, as beſore, the Waters will Riſe to G and L, and thoſe at , and 7 vill ſubſide to æ and i, Let i by it's Revolution arrive at g, under the perpendicular Influence of the Moon in 4, and the Waters vill Riſe or Flow in T and N, and thoſe at G and L vill ſubſide tò g and , and ſo of the Reſt; From whence it will follow, that in the ſame Place there will be every Day Two Fluxes and Two Refluxes of the Waters, namely, when g is directly under 4, and in Conjunction with it, and when ę& comes to 4, and is in Oppoſition to it, there vill be a Flux of them, to G and Z, and Vhen 2 comes to æ or to i, in it's Revolution, there will be a Reflux, to wit, when the Moon is in the Meridian above or below the Horizon of the Place, that is, in a perpendicular Situation to it, there will be the Greateſt Flow, and vhen it is in the Eaſt or Weſt, that is, in the Horizon, or in a Quadrate Situation with the Place, there vill be the Greateſt Reſlux. ] And thus according to the Account, which the Coaſters give at the above-mentlond Point, Wnhen the Moon is North and South, as they Term it, that iss when it is in the Mcridian below the Horizon, or in the Meridian above it, 'tis always High Water; when it is Eat or Weſt, that is, vhen it Riſes or Sets, it ĩs always Low Water; When the Moon Riſes it is Lov Water, which continually Increaſes till it comes to the Meridian, when it is High Water, and from thence Decreaſes till the Moon Sets, and then it is Lov Water, after which it Increaſes till the Moon is in the Meridian below the Horizon, vhen it is again High Water, and from thence Decreaſes to the Riſing of the Moon, when ©t is Lov Water; And the Musst is equally High, vhen the Moon is in the Meridian Above or Below the orizon. S5. 25. THE Main and Principal Diſficulty here is to aſſign a Reaſon, why the Water Riſes to the ſame Height, when the Moon is in the Meridian above the Horizon, or in that Below it, by the ſame Contractive Force, that is, how it comes to paſs that whether the Moon is in 4 or C, the Water in the Diurnal-Tides always Riſes from ę to G, ſince onc voud think, that the ſame Contractive Force, which in A4 draws the Water from g to G, in C woud drav it from G to g; So likeviſe in the Spring or Monthly Tides, the ſame Effect is obſervable, when the Moon is in Conjunction with the Sun, or in Oppoſition to it, that is, vhen it is in  or in D, name- D, namely, on the ſame Side of the Earth with the Waters, which are rais'd, or on the Oppoſite to them. TuE Solution of which can be no other than this, That when the Moon is in 4 in the Diurnal, or in B in the Monthly Tides, the Contractive Force of the Moon acting againſt the Contractive Force of the Earth, each of them Endeavours to drav the Waters to them, but by how much more the Contractive Force of the Moon is Superior to that of the Earth, by ſo much do's it prevail againſt it, and Elevates and Raiſes the Waters above that Situation or Poſition, which the Contractive Force ol the Earth voud give them, and if the Moon and the Earth were to remain Quieſcent in 4 or B, and in E, the Waters wou'd continually ſtand at the Height of G or V; by the Superior Force of the Moon's Contraction, but as the Moon in 2 moves toards C in it's Monthly Revolution, and the Point g of the Earth towards n in its Diurnal, the Contractive Force of the Moon is diminiſi't by ceaſing to be Perpendicular, and becoming Oblique, and the Contractive Force of the Earth prevails, upon which the Waters begin to flow from their Height, and to fill the Places below them, and at length to ſubſide; and this Struggle betwixt the Moon and the Earth continues quite round the Orbit of the one, and the Rotation upon it's Axis of the other. For the ſame Reaſon, vhen the Waters Iye on the oppoſite Side of the Earth to the Moon, ſince the Earth and Moon preſerve the ſame Diſtance from each orher, the Dierence of their Contractive Forces will be ſtill the ſame, namely, that of the Moon vill be in the ſame Proportion Superior to that of the Earth, but as theſe Forces act Contrary to one another, the Superior Force, which was Attractive on this Side the Earth; will be Repulſive on the other; For if the Earth and the Moon, in this Poſition of the Waters, attracted them the ſame Way, they woud not be Actions contrary to each other, which by the former Phænomenon it is Evident they are, whilſt therefore the Earth attracts the Waters to it's Center, the Moon for the ſame Reaſon, by its prevailing Force, will repel them from it on the other Side the Earth, to an Equal Height, as it drew them from it on this; for if theſe Two Actions are contrary to each other, it will be the ſame, whether the Earth draws the Waters one Way, and the Moon another, which is the firſt Caſe, or whether the Earth draws them the ſame Way, as the Moon did before, and the Moon the Contrary, that is, Repels them, which is the Second. For thus, in any Two Equal Forces acting with contrary Directions, it will be the ſame, whether the Firſt Acts towards the Right Hand, and the Second towards the Left, or the Firſt to the Leſt, and the Second A—>/V/"//&—-—-&S56 to the Right, for it is the ſame, whether 4 preſſes C to the Right Hand upon the Point C, and B to the Left on the ſame Point, or whether 4 acts towards the Leſt, and B to the Right by Attracting the Point C Diſferent Ways with Equal Forces, ſ0 that TWo Contractive Forces, as thoſe of the Moon and Earth, Acting againſt cach orher, may be Repreſented by Two Forces Attracting one another with contrary Dircctions, as when the Moon is in 4, and the Waters in g, or by Two Forces propelling each other with contrary Directions, as when the Moon is in 4, and the Waters in ſ, or, which is ſtill the ſame, the Moons Force may be conſiderd as a Propelling or Expanſive one ſfrom the Center æ in the Earth, and the Eartlvs as a Gravitating or Contractive one tovards the ſame Center, for one Contractive Force Acting in a contrary Direction to another, is the ſame as an Expanſive one in Reſpect of that Contractive. 5. 26. HAVING conſiderd the Moon in it's Revolution about the Earth, and the Earth's Revolution about it's Axis, and what Eſfect they have upon the Flux nd Reſiux of the Sca, it is Neceſſary to know whether the Sun has any Influence in theſe Tides, becauſe in the Conjunction and Oppoſition of the Moon vith it, that is, when the Moon is in B or in D, the Spring or Monthly Tides or Fluxes arce the Greateſt, and in the Quadratures of the Moon vith the Sun, the Tides are Nicpe, and vhich it is Certain it has for that very Reaſon, ſince this Increaſe of the Tides cannot proceed ſfrom the Moon's being in  or in D, that is in Conjunction or Oppoſition with the Waters, which are Rais'd, which it is every Day in the Diurnal ones, and yet no Spring-Tides are conſequent ſrom thence; it muſt be thereſore aſſirm'd, that the Sun has a Force and Eſficacy in Raiſing the Waters, both N2 vher when the Moon is in Conjunction, and when in Oppoſition with it, or rather that it is Aſiſting to and Concurrs with the Force of the Moon in Raiſing of them, by whoſe Power that Effect is principally and properly produc'd. Tue Solution of which Phænomenon ſcems to be this, That as the Sun has Evidently a Great Expanſive Force, which always acis Contrary to the Contractive, ſo ſuppoſing the Moon in B, Whilſt it by it's Contrary and Superior Contractive Force to that of the Earth Raiſes the Waters to N, the Expanſive Force from the Sun in s, Acting upon the the ſame Waters, Diminiſhes their Contractive Force, tho' it is impreſũ'd vith the ſame Direction, that is, Tends towards E, the ſame Way as the Contractive Force of the Earth or Waters do's, but notwithſtanding it's Tendency of Exertion is the ſame Way, yet ſince it's Force is of a Different Nature, it will weaken that Force which is of a Contrary one; thus tho we ſtrike a Ball to the Earth, and the Force of Percuſſion acts the ſame Way with that of Gravitation, yet the Effect of Gravitation obtains Leſs, as the Force of Percuſſion is Greater, becauſe Percuſſion is an Expanſive Force Different from that of Contraction or Gravitation; ſo likewiſe in Fire, which exerts it ſelf all Ways, and conſequently Downwards, that is the ſame Way vhich Bodies Gravitate, the Force of Gravitation or Contraction is yet weaken'd by it, as Solid and Heavy Bodies are by it changd into a Light Cinder. Tur Expanſive Force therefore of the Sun concurrs with the Moon's Contrary and Contractive Force to the Earth, which, as has been ſhewn, may be conſiderd as a kind of Expanſive, in Raiſing the Waters and Diminiſhing the Force of the Eartl's Contractive, That is, an Expanſive Force, as of the Sun, Acting upon a Conrractive, as of the Earth, the ſame Way, and in the ſame Direction of it's Force, may be eſtcem'd a Repulſive or Expanſive one from the Center æ, in Compariſon of the Earth's Contractive, which Tends and Preſſes towards it. AnD for the ſame Reaſon, when the Moon is in D, or in Oppoſition vith the Sun, the Effect will be ſtill the ſame, the Sun continuing in the ſame Situation as before, in Reſpect of the Waters in n, and it has been already provũ, that the Moons Power will be alike in D or in B. LastLy, when the Moon is in D, and the Waters are rais'd at I, the Expanſive Force of the Sun will have the ſame Effect, whether it Acts in the ſame Tendency and Direction with the Eart's Contractive Force, that is, from n to æ, or in a Contrary one to it, that is, from E to i, for they will be both Repulſive of the Earth's Contraction, the firſt will be repreſented by a Percuſſion to the Center E, and the other by a Percuſſion from it, and borh equally Deſtructive of the Influence and Power of Gravitation, or that Force, which is of an oppoſite Nature to the Expanſive, for by this it is, that Waters are raisd into Clouds and Vapours. AND from What we have ſaid, we may lay down theſe General Rules in Reſpect of the Expanſive or Contractive Forces. 1. THAT a Contractive Acting in Oppoſition to a Contractive, is the ſame, as an Expanſive Force Acting from a Center, and a Contractive Acting towards one. 2. THAT an Expanſive Force Acdting the ſame Way with or in an Oppoſite to a Contractive, is the ſame as a Contractive Acting in Oppoſition to a Contractive, or an Expanſive Force Acting ſfrom a Center, and a Contractive Acting towards one. 3. THAT an Expanſive Force Acting in Oppoſition to an Expanſive Force, is the ſame, as a Contractive Acting againſt a Contractive, or as an Expanſive Force Acting from a Center, and a Contractive towards one. 4. THAT an Expanſive Force Acting the ſame Way with another Expanſive Force, or a Contractive the ſame Way with another Contractive, is the ſame, as Increaſing the Expanſive Force from the ſame Center, or Increaſing the Contractive towardi one. 35. 27. WHAT Remains now is to ſiew, how this Theory of the Suns Expanſivc , and the Moons Contractive Force is anſwerable to the Obſervations in Fact, before recounted; And firſt it is from hence Evident, that on every Full and Nev Moon the Tides will be the Greateſt, that is, when the Moon is in Conjunction or Op poſition vith the Sun, and that they will be Niepe or not up, when it is in the Quadratures with it; They will alſo be at the Greatet Ebb, 6 Hours aſter they arc a it the Fulleſt, by the Earth's Revolution about it's Axis, for if the Waters are at heir Height in  or in I, when n by it's Revolution comes to ſ, or ĩ to 5, vhich will be in 6 Hours, and, when the Sun and Moon vill have the Ieaſt Inſluence to raiſe them by their Oblique Actions, they will accordingly ſubſide to the loweſ Standard; It will likewiſe be Full Sea ; of an Hour and  a Quartcr later every Day from the Full or New Moon, ſo as in 7 Days aſter, it is 6 Hours or 6 Hours 5 later than in the Full or New Moon; HENCE it is, that the Monthly and Diurnal Tides do agree, for as Full Sea is at æ, vhen the Moon is in B or in D at thoſe Tides, ſo it is at the loweſt Ebb 6 Hours after, that is, when by the Revolution of the Earth about it's Axis n arrives at /, or ĩ at ę. And thus it is in the Spring and Niepe or Monthly Fluxes and Refluxes, for in the Conjunction of 2 with the Sun or in the New Moon, and it's Oppoſition at D or in the Full, the Spring-Tides are obſervd, and 7 Days after the half Niepe, which is nearly the ſame in the Moons Revolution about and Receſs from the Sun, as 6 Hours in the Diurnal Revolution of the Earth about it's Axis, and the Receſs of the Parts of the Earth from the Moon; that is, in both Caſes, the Moon is Perpendicular to the Earth in the Greateſt Diurnal Tides, and in4 Part of the Earth's Revolution about it's Axis, that is, in 6 Hours, the loweſt Ebb is, and in the Monthly or Spring and Niepe- Tides, the greateſt Spring Flow is, When the Waters are under the perpendicular Influence of the Sun and Moon, and the leaſt Spring Flow or half Niepe, in  Part of the Moons Revolution in it's Orbit or Receſꝶ from the Sun, which is in 7 Days nearly, it being 29 Days and  in paſſing from the Sun to it's following Conjunction with it; from thence they fall Gradually, till they are at the loweſt Niepe the fourth Day before the New or Full Moon, and, the Day after, the Spring-Tides begin to riſe. TuAT the Full Tide is à and  of an Hour later every Day after the Full or New Moon, ſcems to be from hence, that, the Moon paſſing about 2 and ; of an Hour every Day from Weſt to Eaſt in i's Menſtrual Revolution, it poſſcſes a Meridian, which is 2 and  of an Hour Eaſtward of the former, and thereſore, whilſt the Earth is carry'd Round upon it's Axis from Weſt to Eaſt likewiſe, it will be 2 and ; of an Hour later, before the ſame Part of the Earth comes to the Moon's Meridian, and thus in 7 Days Full Sca is about 6 Hours later than in the Full and New Moon, for 7æ2+45 6 Hours 3 The Moon farther Proceeds 130 to the Eaſt every Day, vhich Reſolvd into Time, Meaſurd by the Earth's Revolution about it's Axis, which Performs 150 in an Hour, is 73 of an Hour /;7 divided by 4 52 +7 nearly. Tuar at shorehamFerry the Sea Flows 4 Hours and Ebbs 8, is, becauſe the Waters there, which Deſcend into the Sea, lie Higher than the Ocean, ſo that Two Hours are ſpent in raiſing the Ocean to a Level with them, which from thence begins to Flow and Deſcend upon them for the Remaining 4 Hours of it's Flux; On the Contrary, the Waters at the Ferry will Return more ſlowly than thoſe in the Ocean, becauſe, when rais'd by the Flux, they do not ſtand ſo High and Steep above their Natural Situation, as the Waters of the Ocean, and therefore will not Precipitate ſo faſt, and likewiſe, becauſe they are met in their Regreſs by the Sea, which is now a ſecond Time upon it's Flow to reduce it ſelf to a Level with them; And this will give a Solution of all the like Phænomenons obſervable in the Fluxes and Refluxes of Rivers Different from thoſe of the Ocean. ſi FroM hence it is alſo manifeſt, vhy the Waters begin to Riſe or Lift three Days before the Full or New Moon, and are continually Increas'd to the third Day after, when they are at the utmoſt Height, becauſe the Actions of the Sun and Moon are too oblique to obtain any conſiderable Influence till that Time, and their Force is Increasd even after they are the moſt Perpendicular, that is, in the Full or New Moon, becauſe thoſe Impreſſions ſtill remain, to which are added the Subſequen ones; Thus the Sun's Force in Summer, is more ſenſible ſome Time aſter it has been in the Tropick, than when it is in the Tropick it ſelf. For the ſame Reaſon, as the Moon recedes from that Perpendicular Influence, o from three Days afrer the Full or New Moon, the Waters will continually Fall, anc when the Moon is in it's Quadratures, or in the Middle way betwixt Full and Ne Moon, they vill be half Nicpe, and rhe loweſt Niepe vill be the Day precedin: the third Day before the Full or New Moon, that is, the fourth Day beſore it, ſee in; ing the Sun and Moon have little or no Effect till they are nearly in Conjunctior vith or Oppoſition to one another, not becauſe they deſtroy cach others Eſſcũts ſince they concur in theit Actions, but becauſe the Sun has little Power to raiſd the Waters unleſs in Concurrence with the Moon; And that the SpringTides wil be Equal at the New or Full Moon has been already ſiewn, becauſe their Expanſive and Contractive Forces will be in both Caſes Equal. LastLy, the Waters move Faſter in the Spring than in the Niepe-Tides, becauſ the Forces of the Sun and Moon, vhich Actuate them are Greater, by whicli they are raisd Higher and Quicker, and deſcend with more Violence from ſuch Elevation to the Shoress. What has been ſaid here, in Reſpect of the Tides at Iiorihiug: Point and Shoreham, will be Applicable to any other, allowing for the Diſferent Circumſtances of the Place or Occan. Thus far we had Writ, beſore we had ſcen Si Iſ. Neaton on this Head. 5. 28. FROM the Doctrine of Tides before deliverd, and which is conſirmd by  the conſtant Obſervation of the Coaſters upon the Sea, which aſhes the Shores oſ Suſſex, ve may be enabled in ſome Meaſure to Judge of what is proposd to us ſrom the preſent Celebrated Philoſophy, which very much ſupports our Opinion. AnD firſt it is plain from hence, which ĩs there Aſfirmd, that the Sea, every Lunar and Solar Day, or every Revolution oſ any Part of the Earth ſfrom the Moon or Sun to the ſame Luminaries, ought to have and really has Two Fluxes and Two Reſluxes, but then ve muſt farther add, that ſo it woud have, if the Moon was only conſider'd in this Revolution, tho they wou'd not be altogether ſo Great, the Sun only Aſſiſting by it's Expanſive Force, what is principally performd by the Moons Contractive, according to what has been already Explain'd, and if that Expanſive Force oſ the Sun was Abſent, the Contractive of the Moon woud raiſe the Waters to ncarly the ſame Height, ſince the Expanſive Force of the Sun only FaciIitates the Moon's Operation. SECOND, It is not yet ſo Evident, what the preſent Philoſophy likewiſc Aſcrts, that the Greateſt Height of the Waters in Seas, which are Free and Open and Deep, ſollows upon the Appulſe of the Luminaries to the Meridian of the Place in Leſs than 6 Hours, and that in the Atlantict, the æthiopict, and Pacifiel Ocean, the Greateſt Tides or Fluxes at the Shores are about the Third Hour after ſuch Appulſe, Reckoning an Hour to be the 2416 Part of the Moon's Apparent Revolution from to the ſame Meridian. BECAUSE We take the Diurnal Tides, according to the Account foregoing, to proceed from the Appulſe of the Moon to the Meridian, and that they are then or thereabout the Greateſt, that is a Little after ſuch Appulſe, that 3 Hours aſter they Decline, and in 6 Hours entirely Sink, as is plain in Fact from what is aſlirmd on the Coaſls of suſſex, and for which there has been a Reaſon given. Tuis cannot be attributed ſo the Streightneſs of the one Sea in Reſpect of the others mentiond, ſince tho' it is not ſo Large, it is yet as unreſtraind and unconfind as any other can be, it lies within it's Chanel to a great Diſtance from the Shore, and has a Plain, Flat, and Even Strand for ſeveral Miles together, it do's not Riſe or Move, but as the Moon comes to the Meridian of the Place above or below the HorZon, and do's not owe the Flux of i's Waters to any others pouring in upon it. 5. 29. ON the other Hand, what can be ſaid, when it is as Punctually maintain'd, that upon the Shores of thie Arlantict, the Athiopict, and the Pacifick Ocean, the Greateſt Tides or Fluxes are about the Third Hour, after the Appulſe of the Moon to the Meridian, that is, hen it is in the Mid-way betwixt the Meridian and Horizon? The Reaſon of which is Probably this, that the Greateſt Height of the Waters in the Ocean is ro be diſtinguiſY'd from the Greateſt Height of them at the Shores, the ſirſt procecding from the Appulſc of the Moon to the Meridian, and the laſ from their Flowing down from that Height by their proper Gravity to the Shores below them, the Elevation of the Waters, in the former Caſe, is Common to the Ocean every where, which is conſtantly raisd to the utmoſt Height upon the Moon's Appulſe to the Meridian, or preſently after, but the Elevation of the Waters, in the ſecond Caſe, is owing to the Deſcent of them from that Height, and being yet in Part ſuſaind by the Moons Contractive Force, which Deſcent will be in a Greater or or Leſs Time, as the Shores are Nearer or Farther Remov'd from the above-mention'd Height; And this will give an Account why the utmoſt Tides and Fluxes in Rivers, which communicate with the Ocean, may be at Different Times after the Elevation of the Waters by ſuch an Appulſe. This Philoſophy ſcems only to conſider the Former, namely, the Riſe of the Waters in the Ocean, and not to make any Diſtinction of it from the Latter, or the Riſe of them at the Shores, whereas they proceed from very Difſferent and Contrary Cauſcs, the firſt from the Moons Contraction, and the laſt from the Earth'ss It may be added, that as the Sun's Expanſive Force is Greateſt betwixt the Tropicks, ſo is the Contractive of the Moom u⸗ - wiand about 57 beyond Them, under which Tract of the Heavens the aforeſaid Oceans m ar jlie, for our Winters ſeem to be causd by frequent Returns of the Moon to our ducd ſium ile Tropick, whilſt the Sun Retires to the other; and therefore, the Waters, being Furer of ibe ſuſpended by a Greater Contractive Force of the Moon, are not permitted to De- Menm a &a ſcend to the Shores, till that Force is Impaird ſome Time aſter the Departure of Fu⸗ũ⸗ of the Moon ſrom the Meridian, that is, at ſome Diſtance from it.  ihè Sun. 5. 30. THE ſecond Thing aſſerted in this Philoſophy is, That the Two Motions, r1. aũim f which are Excited by theſe Two Luminaries, are not ſeparately Diſcernible, but pro- ſò sus inconduce a certain mixt Motion, and that in the Conjunction or Oppoſition of them, urau n or their Syzygiæ, theit Effects will be join'd and united by which the Greateſt Flux Tie in Reand Reſlux will be Caus'd, which has been already ſufficiently explaind from the ſut ſ ibui ꝗ Expanſive Force of the Sun, and the Contractive of the Moon, and that the Former Si Iſ. Nevt. is Inconſiderable compar'd with the Latter; and ſo it is likewiſe in Reſpe&t of i's JrineipHeat, which is not able to diſſolve, with all it's Force, the Ice and Snow, which lie in ſt? the Northern Seas and on the Tops of the higheſt Mountains, produc'd, as was beforę ſhevn, by the Moon's Influence. S. 31. THE third Aſſertion is ſomething Extraordinary, and which is found in both 74, 2/uim the Editions of this Philoſophy, that in the Quadratures the Sun will Raiſe the Wa-  ihe waiens ter, where the Moon Depreſſęs it, and will Depreſs it, where the Sun Raiſes it. and  ibe æ;⸗ from the Difference of their Effects, the leat Flux and Reflux will ariſe; which, in /ſun of then a Grammatical Conſtruction, is as much as to ſay, that the Sun will Raiſe the Watei, ſ is Ruawhere the Moon Depreſſes it, and the Sun will Depreſs it, where the Sun Raiſes it, h— which is a Contradiction, or elſe in a leſs Grammatical one, the Sun vill Raiſe the i/k Modera Water, where the Moon Depreſſes it, and the Moon vill Depreſs it, where the Sun àſiutæ: Raiſes it, which is a Tautology. PrincipWuar I ſuppoſe is meant, is this, that as the Greateſt Flux and Reſlux is in the r/ " Syzygiæ, ſo the Leaſt is in the Quadratures, and that, where each of theſe Lumi- Ei æ a naries Act perpendicularly, they will have the Greateſt Force to Raiſe the Waters, either jointly, as in the Syzygiaæ, or ſeparately, as in the Quadratures, and where the moſt Obliquely the Leaſt, as the Sun in Reſpect of the Waters, which lie under the Moon in it's Quadrature, and the Moon in Reſpect of the Waters, which lie under the Sun in that Quadrate Situation, which is a perfect Axiom, and has been before Accounted for. As to what is farther alledg'd concerning the Forces of theſe Luminaries, betwixt the Syzygiæ and the Quadratures, it do's not need to be here conſider'd, ſince it entirely Depends upon what foregoes. Wiy ihe àxu S. 32. AND the Reaſon, vhy the àxuh of the Waters is later in Rivers, which V ji ſain Communicate with the Sea, than in the Shores of it, do's not ſo much proceed from L.,, æhich their Shallows, nor from the Streightneſs of ſuch Paſſages, thr which the Waters Communicaie are convey'd, as from the Diſtance they have from the Height of the Waters rais'd nuh ih buq in the Ocean by the Appulſe of the Moon to the Meridian, and from the Height si of it of thoſe Rivers in Reſpect of the Ocean, which being Different, the Times from the ii Appulſe of the Moon to the Meridian, ill be Various, in hich the Warers of the ro;. 24. Occan deſcend into the vers, in order to produce berwixt them one uniform Lib 3 Level firſt, and aſter, a Flux of the one upon the other. The Greae 5.33. TIs true the Efſects of theſe Luminaries do alſo depend upon their Diſtances uu ju è from the Earth, ſo that in leſer Diſtances their Effccts are Greater, and in Greater ſminari⸗ Leſi, but perhaps not in that Reaſon and Proportion, which is here aſſign'd, that is, in thury2t in a Triplicate one of the Apparent Diameters, ſince we have before iewn what ꝗm7 little Reaſon there is to depend upon a Computation from ſuch Diſtances, where the Sir iſ. Nen Diſtances themſclves are ſo Precarious and Uncertain, however ve may in General u i ay, Lb.3 ſay, that in Winter, when the Sun is in it's Perigeum, it produces Greater Effects and makes the Tides riſe Higher, tho' very little, than in Summer, becauſe of ith ſmall Expanſive Force in Reſpect of the great Contractive one of the Moon; as alſo that the Moon every Month, in it's Perigeum, excites Greater Tides than fifteen Days before and after, when it is in it's Apogeum; From Whence it comes to paſs, that the Two Greateſt Tides or Fluxes of all, cannot follow one another in any Two ſubſequent Syzygiæ: For ſuppoſing the Sun and Moon to be in their Perigeums, vhen they are in their Syzygiæ, the Greateſt Aſtus or Tide will enſue, but in the next Syzygiæ it is plain, that borh of them will not be in their Perigeums, nor in the Syzygiæ following the former, and ſo on; that is, the Greateſt Tides will be, when the Sun and Moon are in their Syzygiæ, and when borh of Them are in their Perigeums, and not otherwiſe. 5. 34. IF the Moon, whoſe Effect is Chiefly and Principally to be conſiderd, werc placd in the Pole, and without any Motion, it is certain, by what we have alledg'd in the Doctrine of Tides, that by it's Contractive Force, which is Superior to that of the Earth's, it vou'd drawv the Waters towards it, and they wou'd not Deſcend at all, and conſequently, there wou'd be no Reciprocation in the Motion of the Waters, or any Flux or Reflux of them; But, when this is confeſ'd by the preſent PhiIoſophy, it muſt likewiſe acknowledge, which we contend for, that the Contractive Force of the Earth and the Motion of the Moon from the Meridian are the Cauſe of the Flux of the Waters to the Shores, by the firſt of which they are made to Deſcend from the Height, to which the Moon in it's Meridian had rais'd them, and by the lat the Perpendicular and Contractive Force of the Moon is veaken'd and diminiſd ſo far, as to allow the Waters to Deſcend from their Height, and to give the Contractive Force of the Earth the Prevalence; and when the Moon is ſtill farther removd from the Meridian, the Waters Sink from the Shores and return to the Ocean by the Contractive Force of the Earth ſtill more Prevailing; and the Reciprocation of the Waters proceeds from the Mutual and Reciprocal Attraction, by the Moon and Earth, of the Waters from the Earth and Shores towards the Moon, and from the Moon tovards the Earth and Shores. Ir is, notwithſtanding, but illy inferd from a Suppoſition of the Moon's being fixt in the Pole, and obtaining no Reciprocation of the Waters there, that it's Effe&t and the Sun's is diminiſYd, the farther they Decline from the quator, and the nearer they Approach to the Pole, and therefore, that the Tides are leſs in the Solſtitial than in the æquinoctial Syzygiæ; For it woud be the ſame, if the Moon was ſuppos'd to remain Immoveable in the Aquator, and the Earth not to be Revolvd, that is, there wou'd be no Fluxes or Tides, but the Water wou'd continue ſuſpended vithout any Reciprocation or Motion; It vouũd yet be a hard Inſerence from thence to affirm, that the Flow of the Waters woud be the Greater, the farther the Moon as Diſtant from the æquator, and therefore, that the Tides are Greater in the Solſtices than in the quinoxes; notwithſtanding which, this may be as well Infer'd as the other, ſince we may as vell ſuppoſe the Moon to ſtand ſtill in the Equator, and the Earth to be Quieſcent upon it's Axis, as Imagine the Moon to be fixt in the Pole. IN Truth, there is no Connexion at all betwixt the Suppoſition and the Inference, betwixt the Waters being ſuſpended, and their being ſuſpended to a Higher Degree (which they muſt be in Greater Fluxes) the farther they are from ſuch a Suſpenſion; For vhere is the Force of this Concluſion? The Waters will be ſuſpended, if the Moon is ſupposd to be in the Pole, therefore they will be ſuſpended Higher in the Solſtices, and yet Higher in the Aquator; The Waters are Quicſcent, where the Moon is ſo in the Pole, therefore the Fluxes will be Leſs in the Solſtices, and Greater in the quator, becauſe the Moon is not there Quieſcent; HoW are the Degrees of the Fluxes aſcertaind from the Moon's not Moving at all in the Pole, and Moving in the Equator? THE Reaſon therefore, why the Tides are Greater about the æquinoxes than the Solſtices, is; FIrsT, Becauſe when the Earth or Sun is in the Plane of the quator, the Moon and it's Orbit will more nearly Coincide with that Plane, than when the Earth and it's Moon is in the Greateſt Declination from it, that is in the Solſtices, md conſequently in the firſt Caſe, the Moon vill be in a more Exact Conjunction nd Oppoſition with the Sun, than in the Laſt, by which the Waters will be propori tionably Chap. V. Acting from or towards a Center of Them. IO5 ionably rais'd, in like Manner, as they are in the Monthly Syzygiæ; or the Lumi1aries, Adting more perpendicularly in the Equator than in the Solſtices, will produce 1 Greater Effect upon the Waters in the one Circumſtance than in the other. SECOND, Becauſe the Waters at the Equinoxes are in the fitteſt Temper and Diſpoſition to be rais'd, as being then in the utmoſt Fluidity; In Winter they are Dull and Torpid, and in ſome Scas to that Degree, as to be Frozen into Ice, and as Ice cannot be raisd into a Flux by the Moon, ſo any Approaches of the Waters to that Phlegmatick State will render them in ſome Meaſure Averſe and Reluctant to the Impreſſions of it; In Summer (ſince the Moon can no more raiſe Fire than Ice into a Flux) they are too Heated and Fiery, and by that Means likeviſe are leſs Obedient to the ſame Contractive Impreſſions; but in Spring and Autumn both theſe Obſtructions are Removd, and they in Conſequence riſe with Greater Freedom and Eaſc upon the Application of the Moon's Force to them. 5. 35. ON the Contrary, the Tides are Greater in the Solſtitial Quadratures uũy ih Tile: than in the Equinoctial ones, becauſe in the Solſtitial Quadratures, the Sun is in ſ3: C_ ĩ the Tropicks, and the Moon in the quator, by which the Former will have uadratures the Leaſt, and the Latter the Greateſt Influence, and in the æquinoctial Quadra- ſa in iha tures, the Sun vill be in the quator, and the Moon in the Tropicks, by Equinostin which the Former will have the Greateſt Influence, and the Latter the Leaſt, and Sir Iſ. Newt. thereſore ſince the Moons Contractive Force has the Greateſt Effect in Raiſing the po; Waters, the Tides will be the Greateſt in the Solſtitial Quadratures, and the Leaſt in Lin.3. the Equinoctial ones: The Sum of All is, The Tides are the Greateſt in the Equinoctial Syzygiæ, becauſe the Sun and Moon are then in the Equator, or the neareſt to it, and Leſs in the Solſtitial Syzygiæ, becauſe they are then in the Tropicks, in which they have the leaſt Force; and the Tides are Greateſt in the Solſtitial Quadratures. becauſc the Sun is in the Tropicks, and the Moon in the Equator, and Leſs in the ZEquinoctial Quadratures, becauſe the Sun is in the æquator, and the Moon in the Tropicks; which exactly Correſponds and Agrees with what we have before affirm'd, and is a full Convidtion of our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. From vhence it follows, as is aſſerted in this Philoſophy, that the Greateſt Tides fall on the Syzygiæ, and the Leaſt on the Quadratures about the Times of the æquinoxes, and that the Greateſt Tides in the Syzygiæ are follow'd by the Leaſt in the Quadratures, which is alſo found by Experience. ò. 36. THAT the Greateſt and Leat Tides oftner precede the Vernal quinox Wy ib -ru than follow it, and oſtner follow the Autumnal than precede it, is not owing ſo ſim much to the leſs Diſtance of the Sun from the Earth in Winter than in Summer, peæ: iev which has an Inconſiderable Effect in Raiſing the Waters, and is only Concurring æl- rjuas and Aſſiſting to the great Action of the Moon, as firſt to the fuller Power and 7 s Force, vhich the Moon has in Winter than in Summer, by which it Harden's and loœ ibe 4-Contracts Seas into Ice, which ſiews a Greater Force than Raiſing of them in the h— Flux; and ſecond, becauſe the Waters are more diſposd to be Elevated in the Colder Si Ii: Newi than in the Hotter Seaſons of the Year, which is the Reaſon that there is more Rain ſincipin Winter, and in Spring, and Autumn, than in the Summer, that is, they are more ?ropaFluid, excepting in Froſt, than in the Summer, when their Parts are rather in a Tumult and Ferment and heated into a Degree of Fire, than paſſive and yielding to any Force which ſnall be impreſsd upon them; And it is not impoſſible or unlikely but rather certain, that the Quantities of Waters raisd, and which fall in the Year, are not only to be Attributed to the Sun's, but to the Moons Action, by which it is capable of Raiſing whole Mountains of them in the Ocean, and that the Expanſive Force of the Sun, by diſolving the Contractive of the Moon, or the Moons Contracting what the Sun has Diſſipated and Exhal'd, is the Occaſion of their Falling, and vhich may be the Reaſon, why there is the Greateſt Plenty of Showres in Spring and Autumn. As to the ſecond Cauſe alledg'd for heightening the Waters in the ZE.quinoxes, namely, the Temper and Diſpoſition of them, that do's not obtain in the Solſtitial Quadratures, becauſe the Waters may be made too Fiery and Expanſive from the Solſtice for an Elevation by the Moons Contractive. S. 37. THE Doctrine ve have proposd concerning the Contractive Power of the iſ iæ Mæ Moon and the Expanſive oſ the Sun, if careſully conſiderd, may be applyd to &uræ ⸗ vhat follows in this Philoſophy, and by Uhich we may judge, where it Deviates Foreæ: æu ſrom from the Truth, and where it Agrees with it; As to the Calculations of the Suns and Moons Force in Raiſing the Waters, they depend upon Principles, which ſeem to be falſe in themſelves, and rherefore I ſnall not particularly conſider them, that is, of an univerſal Attraction of Bodies to each other, which, if true, if the Sun artracted the Earth, and the Earth the Sun, if the Moon attracted the Earth, and rhe Earth the Moon, as is ſupposd in this Philoſophy, what ſou'd hinder the Moon Deſcending to the Earth, and the Earth to the Sun? what ſiou'd obſtruct all the Planets falling together, and uniting in one Body with it, unleſs we introduce an Imaginary and Projectile Force to keep them up from ſuch a Tendency? On the Contrary, the Sun has an Expanſive and Diſſipating Force, as is Evident in Fact, the Earth has a Contractive, as is Evident from Gravitation, and the Moon has a Contractive, but which acts in a quite contrary Direction to that of the Earth, as is maniſeſt from the Tides producd by their Contranitent Forces. s. 38. As thereſore we plainly find, that a Motion or Revolution of Waters is effected by Two contrary Forces contending with each other, and as the Waters obey the Contractive Force oſ the Moon or the Earth, as the one or the other becomes Superior, ſo it is neceſſary that the Moon it ſelf, as it's Contractive Force is Superior, ſoud either draw the Earth to it, or Revolve round it, for that Superiority of Force muſt be ſpent ſome Way, and ſince it cannot attract the Earth to it, it muſt therefore move about it; thus in any Two contrary Forces, as that of a Sling thrown round upon a Center, if the Centrifugal Force, which proceeds from the Expanſive of the Mind, is Greater than the Centripetal of the Stone, a Revolution will be performd about the Center which detains it, and we have ſhewn, that Two Contractive Forces Acting in Oppoſition to cach other are the ſame as a Centrifugal and a Centripetal. For the ſame Reaſon the Planets will Revolve round the Sun, the one having an Expanſive Force and the other a Contractive, that is To contrary ones, if the Contractive is Superior to the Expanſive; from Whence ariſes that Equal Poiſe we before aſerted amongſt the Heavenly Bodies of the Moon with the Earth, and the Plancts with the Sun, the Exceſs of their Forces being ſpent in their Revo Iutionss. And from Whence is Evident, the Infinite Wiſdom of the Almighty Diſpoſcr, vho weighs the Heavens as in a Balance, and Adjuſts Millions of Syſtems, beſides our own, according to the ſtricteſt Laws of Proportion and Reaſon. 5. 39. FRoM the Contractive Force of the Moon an Account may likewiſe be given, why Rivers are not Elevated in Fluxes, but yet may be Frozen by it; They cannot be raisd in Tides or Fluxes for TWo Reaſons, becauſe the Contractive Force of the Earth encloſcs them too nearly, and becauſe the Vivacity and Spring of thoſe Running Waters, by which they Approach nearer to a Fiery or Expanſive Force, makes it, that they are leſs Obedient to, or capable of the Impreſſions from the Contractive Force of the Moon, whereas the Ocean lies at large from the Shores, and is of a Saltiſn and Contractive Nature, and is therefore more liable to the Actions oſ a Body, as the Moon, to vhoſe Nature it more Approaches; For this muſt be acEknowledęd as an univerſal Principle, that the nearer any Bodies Approach to each other in the Quality of their Forces, the more Ready they are to Unite, and rhe more Contrary thoſe Forces are, as the Expanſive and Contractive, the more Averſe they are to ſuch an Union, as may be provd by a Thouſand Inſtances. 5. 40. FRoM the Contractive Force of the Moon it is alſo Evident, why Rivers are raisd and ſwell'd by being Frozen, that is, vhy Ice is Lighter and takes up a Greater Space than Water, becauſe the Influence and Contractive Force of the Moon being Superior to that of the Earth, in the utmoſt Efforts of it in Froſt, both Contracts the Water from the Banks of Rivers, or the Shores of Seas, which are Frozen, and Heightens and Raiſes them from the Earth; and it is not Impoſſible but very Probable, that the Moon in it's Libration or &quiponderance vith the Earth, ſometimes comes much nearer to us than vhat is allowd by the Calculations of Aſtronomers, Who do not nor have conſtantly obſerv'd it's Motions, in which Caſes harder and ſharper Winters will be producd. 5. 41. FroM the ſame Contractive Force of the Moon it is, that Melancholy Perſons are more liable to it's Influences than thoſe whoſe Animal Spirits act with Greater Fire, Liſe, and Vivacity; the Dull and Languid of the one being more capadle of being Aſected by the Moon than the Brisk, Fiery, and Expanſive ones o . the the other; and thus no one ever knew a Man Diſtracted with Joy and with Chearfulneſs, vhere the Spirits and Blood move Briskly, but a Thouſand have been with Grief and vith Sorrow, where their Force has more of the Contractive than the Expanſive; Which ſeems to be the Caſe alſo of the HydrophobiaS. 42. HAVING thus far confirm'd the Contractive Force of the Moon from ſeveral Inſtances, it will be now neceſſary to proceed to other Contractive Forces; That of the Earth is leſs than that of the Moon, as ve have already evinc'd from the Tides occaſion'd by their Mutual Conſlicts; the Contractive Force of one Planet we may reaſonably conclude is Greater than that of another; the Contractive Force of Snow is Greater than that of Rain, of Hail than that of Snow, of ſharp Froſt than that of Hail; the Contractive Force of Gold is Greater than that of Silver, of Silver Greater than that of Copper or of Iron, ſuppoſing the Expanſive Equal; and if theſe Bodies were plac'd at any Diſtance from each other, without the Earth's Intervention, they woud for the ſame Reaſon ſhew and exert their Particular Forces of Contraction, as much as we Experience the Earth and Moon do; and if their Contractive Forces act with a contrary Direction, they will revolve about each other, if in the ſame, they will mutually attract each other, and unite and cloſe together, which is the moſt likely, as they all Gravitate to the Earth, and therefore have the ſame Contractive Force vith it. THE Greater Quantity of any Contractive Force there is, the Force will by ſo much be Increasd; a Ball of Snow has a Greater Contractive Force, and is Colder than a ſmall Plume, Flower, or Icecle of it; a large Heap or Congeries has a Greater Contractive Force than a Ball of it; a Mountain or Ocean of Ice has a Greater Contractive Force than a little Chryſtal of it; a Globe of Gold, Lead, Iron, &. of 10, 20, or 100, or 1000 Inches Diameter has a Greater Contractive Force than one of 2, 3, or of 55 The Earth has a Greater Contractive Force than any Greater or Leſs Portion of it; and every Planet has a Greater Contractive Force than it's Half or any other Part. As to the Diſtances of theſe Contractive Forces, the Forces are Greater the Neare: they are from the Centers of their Action; the Nearer the Moon comes to the Earth, the Greater Effects it has in Freezing Waters into Ice, or Raiſing them into Tides, ſo that if the Earth was ſome Miles nearer to it, it woud be Coverd with an univerſal Froſt, and the vhole Seas drawn into Vaſt and Stupendous Mountain: from the Boſom of the Ocean; if we touch Ice or Snov, it is Colder than if we are at ſome Diſtance from it, if we are in the Coldeſt Countries, as in Greenland, Norway, or Ruſſia, ve are more ſenſible of is Effects, than if we are in more Diſtant Regions from them; the Ncarer any Plancts approach to each other, the Greatẽr is theit Force of Contraction, that is, they more obſtinately and ſtrongly maintain their own Particular Forces of Drawing and Attracting Bodies to their ovn Centers, thus alſo the Nearer any Gravitating Body is to the Earth, it is more ſorcibly drawn and impell'd by it. AIr, which is the fartheſt from the Center of the Earth's Contraction, has a leſi Contractive Force than Water or Earth; Water and Earth, which are upon the Surface, than Mar], Clay, Stones, Minerals, and Metals, which lie within the Bowels of it; and ſtill Nearer to the Center, there may be a Matter for all we know, which is ſtill Denſer, Groſſer, and more Impenetrable than any we meet with here. TunE Contractive Force of Plants and Trees, which are farther from the Center, is leſs than that of Earth or Water, by which Wood becomes Lighter than it, tis Jels in the Leaves than in the Boughs, in the Branches than in the Trunk, and in the Trunk than at the Root the Particular Center of ſuch Contractive Forces. Ir may be farther obſerv'd, in Reſpect of Vegetation, that the Moon likewiſe in all Probability, as well as the Sun; has here it's Influence, the Sun by it's Expanſive, and the Moon by i's Contractive Force, both Conſpiring as to raiſe the Tides, ſo to drav forth Plants and Trees from the Earth; From whence it will follow, thar as the Fluxes in ſuch certain Ciroumſtances are Elevated only to a determin'd Height, ſo Plants and Frees, according to their ſeveral peculiar Expanſive and Contractive Forces, acting from and tovards the Root and aſſiſted by the Expanſive and Contractive of the Sun and Moon, have their ſtinted Growth, and do not riſe in Infinitum, but agreeably to the Strength and Proportion of the Acting Forces; and as ſhe . O Sun Sun and Moon are the Two Grand Sources of the Expanſive and Contractive, ſo ſuitably we find all Earthly Bodies, under whoſe Influences they are, are compounded of Them. ODOROUS Bodies have alſo a Contractive Force, by which they are hinder'd ſrom being diſſipated by their Expanſive, and which therefore only Exert themſelves in one contin'd Pulſe upon the Ethereal or Airy Plenum, which ſurrounds them; This Contractive Force is the Greateſt at the Center, and Leſ”™ in any Removals from ir, which is the Reaſon, that the Flowers and Leaves of Trees Smell more than the Branches, the Stock, or the Root. BobiES likewiſe, which are Sonorous, have a Contractive Force, which is the Greateſt at the Center, and Leſs at various Diſtances from it, thus the String of a Harp or a Violin, is more Sonorous in the Middle of it than in the Center of it's Contraction or Tenſion; A Bell is more Sonorous towards the Extremities than in the Center of it's Suſpenſion or Contraction. CoLourD Bodies have a Contractive Force, by which their Parts are kept and detain'd together, and the Nearer thoſe Parts are to cach other, their Contractive Force is the Greater, all other Things being Equal, and the more ſirmly they cohere. LastLy, The Animal Syſtem has a Contractive, as well as an Expanſive Force belonging to it, as is Evident from the Syſtole and Diaſtole of the Heart, from the Pulſe or Contraction and Dilatation of the Arteries, and from the Expanſion and Contraction of the Muſcles. The Source of Expanſion ſeems to be that of the Mind, by which the Body is transferd from onc Place to another, and all it's Actions are perform'd according to the Direction of the Will, and the Source oſ Contraction that of Matter, in Reſpect of the Mind; and as the Expanſive and Contractive Forces are united, according to what we have ſiewn, in all Material Beings, ſo the Expanſive Force of the Mind, may be united with the Contractive of Matter; but yet, as the Expanſive Force of the Sun is perſectly Contrary to and Diſferent ſfrom the Contractive of the Earth, or the Moon, or the Planets, ſo likewiſe the Nature of the Mind, which is Expanſive, is entirely Different from that of Matter, which is Contractive; and Iaſtly, as the Expanſive Force, as that of the Sun, can ſubſiſt of it ſeli vithout the Contractive, ſo likewiſe can the Mind, which is of an Expanſive Nature, vithout Matter, tho' at preſent it is united to it; which, if duly artended to, will give an Account, how the Mind may be united as it really is to the Body, and hov it may yet Exiſt in a State of Separation from it. S 43. Ir it be now Inquird, what is the Cauſe of theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces, of which all Material Nature conſiſts, and what is the Reaſon of the Difference and Variety of them? The laſt Queſtion may be ecaſily anſwerd, that they proceed from the Different and Various Combinations of their Forces, Quantities, and Diſtances alledg'd in the Preſent Theorem; Thus, ſuppoſing the Sun to have it's particular Expanſive Force, the Moon to have it's Particular Contractive, and the Earth another Contractive peculiar to it ſelf, and contrary to the Former, and each of them their ſeveral determin'd and certain Quantities and Diſtances, we may eaſily conceive what Effects will ariſe from Differently Combining them. Let us firſt take the Sun and it's Expanſive Force, at an Infinitely ſmall Diſtance from it, the Intrinſick Force, by which it Heats, Diſſipates, and Repels, conſider'd together vith the vaſt Quantity of it, will be Prodigious and Immenſe, ſo that if any Planet were to approach near it, it woud not only Heat and Diſſipatc the Parts of it to an Inexpreſſible Degree, but woud Repel it with the urmoſt Force and Violence; and which may be a Reaſon, why the Planets move vith a Greater Velocity in their Periheliums than in their Apheliums, as their Contractive Forces may be another, which have been before Explaind. Tuis vaſt Expanſive Force to us, vho are in the Northern Climates, at the Diſtance of our Earth and in our Tropick, Heats, and in the Winter Solſtice only Warms, and to thoſe, vho are under the Equinox, it Scorehes and Burns, and it's Diſſipating and Repulſive Power is accordingly leſs or more Forcible, by which it drives us into Shades, raiſes Water into Vapours, and propels all Things from it, which are too Weak for it's Action; and a Million of Intermediate Degrees of ⸗ paſive panſive Force lie at Various Diſtances betwixt us and the Sun, as here it is Diffetent in Different Climates, that is, at Different Diſtances from it; It is alſo varyd at the ſame Diſtance, by taking Different Proportions and Quantities of it; It is diminiſd by being Reſlected and Diſſipated, and incrcasd by being Collected in Greater Plenty to a Focus, the Firſt ariſing from the Superiority of the Contractive Force in the Glaſs, above that of the Expanſive in the and the Laſt from the Superiority of the Expanſive in the Rays, above the Contractive in the Glaſs. This Expanſive Force mixing in Various Proportions with Earthly Bodies, or which have a Contractive Force, cauſes Different Eſfects, and in all of them has a Warming, Diſſipating, and Repulſive Quality; Where a great Proportion of it is joind with a light and leſi Contractive Force, as with Wood or Hay, or any other Combuſtible Matrer, it produces Fire and Flame, which has Heat by it's Warming of us, has a Force oſ Diſſipation by it's throwing Fuel into Smoke, and Water into Vapours, and Metals into Fuſion, and has a Repulſive Power, by it's Power of Diſſipation, as alſo by making us retire from it, vhen it's Action is too Violent, and by Raiſing Liquors into Waves and Ebullitions in the Boiling of them; The ſame Expanſive Force mixing ſtill in leſs Proportions with Bodies, which have a like Contractive Force, or in like Proportions vith Bodies, which have a Greater, do's not Riſe into Flame, but Sinks into Taſt, Smell, Colour, Sound, Vegetation, &e. which all, as has been ſiewn, have a Degrec of the Expanſive, by which they Exert themſelves againſt the Contractive, and Endeavour to Diſſipate and Repel it's Force; This conſtant Conatus of the Expanſive ſtrikes as conſtantly upon the Medium, which ſurrounds it, by which means thoſe Senſations are conveyd to us, which alſo have a kind of Life and Warmth in them by the Vivacity and Chearfulneſs which they impart to us, and is another Property oſ the Expanſive. As ve have ſiewn therefore, that the Expanſive Force of the Sun may be Infinitely diverſify'd, by it's Quantity and Diſtance, and by the Nature of the Contractive with which it Mixes, ſo likewiſe it voud be eaſy to Explain how the Contractive Forces of the Moon and Earth, which are Contrary in themſelves to each orher, by their Various Diſtances and Quantities, may compound Variety of SoIid, Cold, Heavy, and Contractive Bodies, which, mingling and blending their Forces with the Expanſive ones of the Sun, are the Occaſion of the numberleſs Appearances, which occur to us in this Earth or Planet; in which we may juſtly ſuppoſe there is no ſuch Thing as a Central Fire, as has been Imagin'd by ſome, but rather that the Nearer we come to the Center, the Solid and Contractive Force vill be the Greater, without any Expanſive at all, which we Originally and Principally Derive from the Sun, and which it is not unlikely is the Central Fire, meant and intended by Philoſophers, as being the Center, tho' not of the Earth, yet of the Eartl's Syſtem. S. 44. THUS ve ſay it is eaſy to Anſwer the ſecond Queſtion, viæ. from Whence proceeds the Variety of Expanſive and Contractive Forces obſervable in Nature, and perhaps this is as far, as ĩt is poſſible for Human Minds to reach in Philoſophy, but as to the Firſt, what is the Cauſe of them, we can ſay no more than that they muſt be either Self-Exiſting, and no Cauſe can be aſſign'd of them, or elſe, that they muſt be derivd from the Will and Pleaſure of God; To imagine or think the Firſt is Abſurd, for whatever Exiſts of it ſelf, will have a neceſſary, certain, and unvary'd Principle of ir's Exiſting, becauſe there is nothing, which can change the Nature of a Neceſſary-Exiſtence, but here are a Thouſand and a Million of Expanſive Forces, Dif ferent in themſclves, and Acting contrary to each other, and from Different Centers; ſor what we have alledg'd of the Sun will be equally Applicable to the ſeveral fixt Stars in the Univerſe, which may be juſtly deemd to be ſo many Suns, Acting with Various Expanſive Forces, Inrrinſically Different in themſelves, and of Various Quantities and Magnitudes, and which Actuate and Inform ſo many Syſtems round them: Beſides which, the Contradtive Forces of the Earth, the Moon, and Planets, which Conſtiture this Solar Syſtem are Forces contrary to the Expanſive, and Act with ⸗ contrary Direction amongſt one another, and are Intrinſically Different in the Nature and Degree of them; Add to this, that the Contractive Forces of Planets, which be long to a Million of orher Solar Syſtems diſperd thro' the Grand and Univerſal Ex panſe, and vhich lie ſo Deep in it as perfectly ro eſcape our Sight and Obſervation ma; may be Infinitely Different from thoſe which appertain to This, Which Variety ol Forces cannot agree with one certain Sclf-Exiſting Principle of all their Actions, unleſs a Directing and Intelligent one. Moreover, where we obſerve Expanſive and Contractive Forces Acting all Manner of Ways, and in all Kinds of Direction, and which are ſo adjuſted as to produce Regular and Uniform Syſtems, we always find an Intelligent and Thinking Being annext to them, or is the Cauſe of them, thus it is in the Human and Animal Frame, and thus it is in thoſc Various Pieces of Mechaniſm and Art, contrivd by the Invention and Sagacity of Men; when rherefore we perceive the ſame in Nature, excepting in a more Infinite Degree, it is Realonable and Juſt to ſuppoſc, that there is an Infinite Mind affixt 1o it, and that it Proportions all the Actions and Forces of it, ſo as to produce thoſe Regular and Orderly Syſtems we ſo conſtantly behold; If a Balance was hung up, and Different Portions oſ Matter placd in it, by which there voud be an Equal Poiſe of them, it woud be Madneſs not to believe, and think this was done by ſome Intelligent Being; And is it poſſible for us, when we ſee whole Worlds, and their Various Forces, and the Quantities of them, Calculated with that Exactneſs, and plac'd at ſuch Diſtances, which ſhall Conſerve the Order, Poiſe, and Balance of them, ſhall Perpetuate their ReioIutions for Ages together, and be the Occaſion of the Numberleſs Productions of Metals, Plants, and Trees, and the other Phænomenons oſ Material Beings, not to acknowledge the All-wiſe and Intelligent Contriver, Orderer, and Diſpoſer oſ them? Tuis to me is the chief and only Prooſ of the Being oſ a God, to vit, the Works of Nature; and when we have Found what Nature is, we are then the beſt Capable of Judging of the Author of ir, not by Metaphyſical Notions and Fancies of our own Inventing, but by conſidering what really Exiſts, and from thence Inferring and ColIecting the neceſſary Cauſe of ſuch an Exiſtence; We have in Conſequence oſ this ſhewn, that all Nature conſiſis of an Infinite Number of Actions Different in their Forces, and Contrary in their Directions, that ſuch cannot be SelfExiſtent, and therefore muſt neceſſarily lcad us to ſome Agent; that theſe Actions are Infinite, and Infinitely vary'd, that they are Extended thro' Infinite Space, and therefore this Agent muſt be Infinite and Almighty; that they are adjuſted and diſposd according to the Exacteſt Calculations of their Intrinſick Force, their Quantities and their Diſtance, and therefore this Infinite and Almighty Agent muſt be All-wiſe and Inſinitely Intelligent; that theſe Calculations are made to produce that Exact, Beautiful, and Excellent Order and Diſpoſition of Things we at Preſent ſee, and for the Uſe and Servico of his Creatures, and thereſore he muſt be Infinitely Juſt and Good; From hence alſo, ve are Informd of the Way and Manner, by which all Matter and the whole World was Created, and may be Annihilated, for ſince all Matter and the vhole World conſiſts of certain Actions or Forces, it is eaſy to Comprehend how an Infinite Agent, by the Energy of his Power, may produce ſuch Forces into Being, and vhen he Surceaſes his Action, may Reduce them to Nothing. S. 45. IF any one ſnall object againſt this Philoſophy, that we are at lengrh obligd to recur to the Will and Pleaſure of the Infinite and All-wiſe Diſpoſcr for a Solution of all, ve ſhall only in Anſwer to ſuch an Objection ſiew the Difference, which lies betwixt what others have proposd in Philoſophy, and what ve have done in this, and demonſtrate that we have advanc'd ſeveral Steps beyond any of them, and have more Effectually prov| that the ultimate Principle of all is God. As to what is call'd the Corpuſc”hrian, it is known, that after, as we have ſhewn, it had given a Lame and Imperſect. Account of the Accidental Properties of Matter, as Heat, Cold, Colour, Sound, Taſt, Smell, &e. upon the Suppoſition of 's being Similar and Homogeneous, it did not pretend to Explain the Primary Qualities of it, Extenſion, Solidity, Impenetrability, and the like, which it own'd were Properties not to be medled with, they conſtituted the firſt Eſenee of Matter, arid which was no farther to be conſiderd than as ſuch, which Almighty God had Created, or which Exiſted ſo of it ſelf without any orher Cauſe; and yet we have gone farther, and given a Reaſon and Explanation of thoſe Properties. As to the Preſent Mechanical, it reſolves all ultimately into Gravitation, but did not at Firſt offer at any Solution of Gravitation it ſelf, but cither ſupposd it vas nherent in Matter or Impreſ”'d by God, and leſt it to the Piery and Reaſon of it's i Followers Followers to conclude the one or the other, and afterwards in it's Queries, at th⸗ End oſ the Light and Colours, when it had Invented an Imaginary and Elaſtick Fluic to account for that Force, it was obligd to ſtop there, and we were as much tc ſeek from whence that Elaſticity was deriv'd, as the Gravitation aſerted before, and all that cod be Inferd from this New Addition to that Philoſophy, was only this, that it appeard to aſfirm a Plenum, which it had ſormerly denyd, and in ſo many Terms recanted it's Demonſtration of a Vacuum; and yet notwithſtanding rhis, we have endeavourd to give a Reaſon of Gravitation and of Elaſticity both, the laſ Proceeding from an Expanſive or Repulſive, and the firſt from a Contractive Force whoſe Laws and Proportions of Action we have aſſign'd, and by them ſicwn how Nature may be in a great Meaſure accounted for; but if after this ve woud ſtill proceed farther without a Supreme and Superintending Agent, we ſhall be miſtaken; and it will not be poſſible, I believe I may foretel it, for all the Great Wits and Genius's in the Preſent or any Future Ages, to extend their Enquiries beyond theſe Two Principles of Expanſion and Contraction; there we muſt Stand, and there we muſt Acknovledge, that as they cannot ſubſiſft of themſclves without an Agent, ſo we muſt Confeſs, that Almighty God is that Agent. 5. 46. AND ſince ve are Enterd into the Aſſertion of Religion, which was one Deſign and Intention of this Philoſophy, as the other was to Enquire into what va: Truth and Reaſon, I ſhall here add, that in Reſpect of the Happineſs promis'd to the Good and Vertuous in another Life, and the Torments and Miſeries Threaten'd to the Wicked and the Vicious, we have Nothing in Nature to contradict or to weaken thoſe Perſuaſions, but on the Contrary have abundant Arguments to confirm them. Everlaſting Fire is Threatend to a Diſobedience to Religion, if thereſore, we coud find and obſerve no ſuch Thing in Nature, it might make us leſs Apprehenſive of the Threat, but when we perceive not only that Immenſe Fire, the Sun, but a Thouſand and a Million of others, as we may juſtly believe in the vaſt Expanſe of the Univerſe, ready Lighted up, and Prepard for what uſe the Infinite and Great Creator ſhall pleaſe to aſlign them, it vou'd make any Conſideratc Man very careſul how he provokd the Diſpleaſure of a Being who Created all of them, and for more Intents and Purpoſes than ſome Fond and Fooli Men may be apt to Imagine; it woud make him at Icaſt Inquire with Seriouſneſs, whether that Chriſtian Religion, vhich is ſaid to be a Revelation from him, is, or is not ſo; and if it is, as there are a Thouſand Arguments for it's being ſo, it vou'd make him very Cautious how he offends againſt iĩt, cither in Reſpect of it's Doctrines or it's Morals. ON the other Hand, Everlaſting Happineſs is promis'd to the Believing and to the Obedient, and here we may likewiſe ſay, if ſuch a Thing appeard to be Impoſſible in Nature, ve might reject the offer perhaps with Indignation, and look upon it as a Paradice propo?d to the Fooliſh and the Credulous, that is, if there were not ſuſſicient Reaſons to aſſure us of the Truth of Chriſtianity; But when in Conjunction vith thoſe Reaſons, ve ſind in Nature nothing but what is agrecable to, and juſtifies ſuch Piopoſals of Happineſs to us, this likewiſe wou'd make us Careful, how we Deſpiſe and Contemn ſuch a Religion. WE obſcrve in our own Earth, that ve are here Mortal, but tho we are ſo, we Experience a great Deal of Pleaſure and Satisfaction, whillt ve Live, from that Diſpoſition of the Sun and Moon, hich obtains with us, and from the Various Productions, which they Cauſe in Nature, of Plants and Herbs and Trees, ofſ Minerals and Metals, and the other Material Beings, vhichſurround us. Suppoſing now, as in Yupiter and Saturn, ſeveral Moons were to revolve about our Earth, with Various Situations and Diſpoſitions, vou'd it not Increaſe our Pleaſure, hy the vonderſul Varicty oſ ſuch Luminaries, and their Different Forces and Situations to us? And as the Conſtitution oſ Things is entirely Diſſcrent in other Planets ſrom that of our own, vhy may we not think, that there may be Rational and Intelligent Agents in them, whoſe Bodies are of a Different Make and Conſtitution from ours, and who Iive ſeveral Years or Ages longer than we do? Eſpecially, when in our own Planet, wę are fully Informd, that in the Times beſore the Deluge, and preſently after, Men were more Gigantick in their Stature, and more Strong and Laſting in their Stamen than what vas Experienc'd in aſter Times, or is in the Preſent; The Reaſon oſ which can be no other than the Elevation oſ the Antediluvian Earth Earth towards the Sun and Moon above our own, before the falling of the Cruſt or Surface of it, by which means the Expanſive Force of the one, and the Contractive oſ the other, voud have a Greater Influence and Power, ſo as to raiſe both the Animal and Vegetable World to a Greater Height than what we at preſent find, and as their Forces were Stronger, their Effects wou'd be more Permanent and Laſting. LET us now paſs to other Syſtems, ſuch, Which lie the Deepeſt in the vaſt Expanſe and the Remoteſt from us, and of vhich we have no Knowledge; Who yet with all his Reaſon and Philoſophy can ſay, that there may not be ſuch contrivd by the Infinite Wiſdom and Goodneſs of God, which ſhall be fitted and adapted to gloriſyd Spirits and Bodies, by which their Pleaſure ſhall be Immenſe, and their Duration Eternal, and which he has deſtin'd to be the Seats and Manſions of the Bleſſed? And Who can contradict, what our Saviour affirms, that in his Father's Houſe, in the Great and Spacious Palace of the Univerſe, there are many of them? Let us Imagine then this farther, that as there are even in our Syſtem Reaſons to think, that there may be a Thouſand Occaſions of Delight to us, more than what we at preſent Experience, ſo in the Innumerable Syſtems, which there are in the Great Expanſe, we may find, vhen we are Immortal, and when the Expanſive Force of our Souls is ſeparated from that of the Contractive of the Body, an Incredible and Everlaſting Pleaſure, by Removing to and Contemplating every Syſtem, according to the Direction and Pleaſure of the Mind. This I only mention to ſiew, that there is nothing in Nature, vhich Contradicts our Religion, but which ſtrongly Enforces it, and that therefore our firſt Wiſdom is to be Good and Real Chriſtians, and in the next Place to underſtand as much of Reaſon and Philoſophy, as the Preſent Attainments in it or our own Studies will allow us to do. C H AP. VI. Concerning the Mutual Con. ourſe of Bodies, Hard, Soft, or Elaſiict. 5.1. E ſhall now Proceed to the Doctrine of the Mutual Concourſe oſ Bodies, whether Hard, Soft, or Elaſtick, by Explaining the Whole oſ it, as proposd by the Preſent Mechanical Philoſophers, and then Giving a particular Anſver to it. Tut Firſt Propoſition therefore, in Order to furniſh us vith a Solution of theſe Matters, is, That if TWo or More Bodies are carryd with an Equable Motion to the ſame or contrary Sides or Parts, theit Common Center of Gravity before their Mutual Occourſe vill be cither Quieſcent, or ill be movd Uniformly in Directum. Caſ. 1. SuPPOSING TWO Bodies are movd to Contrary Parts, that is, let 4 and B be movd towards C, or from q, ſince the Nature of the Center of Gravity is, that A. B:: BC. AC, or that the Bodies, in their Weights, ſio'd be Reciprocal to their Diſtances from their Center C, upon vhich they are Pois'd, and A % B are in an Equal Balance ith cach other, it follows, i 4 and B are movd tovards q, or from it, ſo as to preſerve the ſame Reciprocal Proportion of thei Diſtances from C to their Matter, that they will ſtill be in an quilibrium, which vill be Effected, if their Velocities are as BC to 4C, or as 4 to B, that is, if thei Motions are Equal, for if 4 the Matter. 2 the Matter:: BC the Velocity. 4C the Velocity, the Motion 4x 4C is = Bxæ BC; and conſequently, 4 and 2 may be carry'd from C in Inſinitum or meet in C if carry'd tovards it, whilſt the Centei of Gravity will be always Quieſcent in C. ] Caſ. 2. IP now the Two Bodies 4 and B are carryd to the ſame Side with a like Motion as before, or to Contrary Sides with an unequal one, their common Cen ter of Gravity will be movd in Directum, becauſe the Velocities 4 C, CB ill be Reciprocal to the Quantities of Matter 4 and B, and thoſe Velocities are as the Diſtances fſrom the Center of Gravity; as therefore 4 and ? move the ſame Way ĩ t is neceſſary that C ſoud do ſo too, that the Proportion of the Velocities and Diſtances from C may be preſervd Reciprocal to 4 and B. ON the other Hand, if 4 and B are carryd to Contrary Sides with an Unequal Motion, ſince the Velocities are not Reciprocal to the Quantities of Matter A and B, nor the Diſtances from the Center of Gravity AC, B C, the Bodies 4 and B will be no longer in an Equal Poiſe upon C, and vhich muſt therefore change it's Situation to make them ſo; that is, C muſt be removd to ſome other Point in the Line 48, vhere 4. B:: BC. AC. Caſ. 3. SUPPOSING Ihe Bodies 4 and B move in Two Lines 4C and 3D inclind to each other, and that in Equal Times they ſeparately perform Equal Spaces, ſo that ACis =CE, and 3D=DF, we ſay. that the Center of Gravity vill be mov'd uniformly in the Line Lę, and that LP vill be Equal to P Let the preſent Figure and Conſtruction be Imagin'd as here Deſcribd, that is, let AC. BD :: 4G. GH, draw the Line 4H, and from C and E, CI and EX Parallel to it; Join alſo 4 and B, C and D, E and F, and to the Line BD let ML, NP, O. be likeviſe Parallel, and in the firſt Situation of 4 and B, let L be the Center of Gravity, and from the Point G thro 4 draw the Right Line GO. FirsT, ? and Q in the Line L2 vill upon the Motion of 4 to C and æ, and of 2 to D and F, be the Centers of Gravity, for by Elem. 6. Prop. 4. Corol. 2. Edit. Tochi AM. MH: : CN. NI:: EO.OK; but by Prop. 2. Elem. 6. 4A M. MH :AL. LB, and CN. NI:: CP. PD, and EO. ox: EQ”LF, therefore AL. LB :CP. PD: : EQ. QF. SECoND, LP=PXL for by the Conſtruttion AC. BD:: AG. GH, by Elem. 6. Prop. 2.:: 4C. HI, therefore 2D HI, add IB to both, and ID =HEB; alſo by the Conſituòtion. CE. DF:: AG. GH, b Elem. 6. Prop. 2.:: CE. IX, nereion D FæIX, add XD to both, and XF= ID, that is, the Baſes of the Three Triangles BAH, DCI, FEK are Equal; But by Elem. 6. Prop. 4. AM. AH:: ML. HB 2:CN. CI:: NP. ID, ſince therefore HB=ID, it vill follow that ArL=NP, and by the ſame way of Reaſoning N?P =0; farther by Elem 6. Prop. 2. Corol. AC. CE:: M N. NO, But 4C CE, therefore M N= NO; and conſequently, ſince a Line dravn from L thro P and Z vill be Parallel to A70, becauſc L, NP, 0 are ſarallel and Equal, L? vill be / to PL ſince N and NO are Equal; and what has been Demonſtrated of ? and 2, may be ſiewn of any other Points in L ER. IP the Bodies are not movd in the ſame Plane, but i in Different ones, their Progreſes, as well as that of the Center of Gravity, are to be reducd to the ſame Plane, by lerting down Perpendiculars to it from each Point of their Progreſs, by which means this Caſe will be brought under the Former, and the Demonſtration will be the ſame. Caſ. 5. SuPPOSING now there are more Bodies than Two, by placing the Center of Gravity of the Two Bodies ſo, as the Diſtance of it from a New Centei of Gravity, ſhall be to the Diſtance of a Third Body from the ſame Center, as the Third Body is to the Sum of the Two, all Things will be in the ſame Circumſtance: as before, excepting that the Two Bodies, poisd upon their Center of Gravity, an nov conſiderd as one; and the like will obtain, if we ſuppoſc Three, Four, Five or a Hundred Bodies all Balanc'd upon a Center of Gravity, for in that Caſe, the; may be conſiderd, in theit Sum and their Weight, as one Body only. r? s5. 2. T 5. 2. THE Second Propoſition in this Doctrine is, That if Two Bodies, however Equal or Unequal. are carry'd to the ſame Side, with Celerities however Equal or Unequal, the Sum of the Motions in both Bodies will be Equal to the Motion  ariſing from Multiplying the Sum of the Bodies into the Celerity of the Common Center of Gravity. Tnus, let A and B, whoſe Common Center of Gravity is C, be movd tovards D, let the Celerity of 4 be Aa, That of B, Bb, and That of the Center c b of Crvity, õ, it is ſaid, hae &Ma-A--o+—G22 bp Ax Aa Bæ Bb is 2/ã  B x CG; . becauſe it muſt be the ſame Thing, and the ſame Moment and Force muſt be requird, whilſt C moves to G, to carry A4 to 4, and B to b, where 4 and b are at the ſame Diſtance from G, as A4 and B were before from C, and upon which Points they remain Equally Poisd, as wou'd be requird, if 4 and B were in , to carry them to G, where they are always Connected with the Center of Gravity, and alike Equally Balanc'd upon it. S.3. THE Third Propoſition is, That if Two Bodies are carry'd to Contrary Sides, the Difference of their Motions to Contrary Sides, or which is the ſame, the Sum of their Motions to the ſame Side, will be Equal to the Motion ariſing from Mul tiplying the Sum of the Bodies into the Celerity of the Common Center of Gravity, by which they are carryd to the ſame Side. Tnus, let 4 and B, vhoſe Common Center of Gravity is C, be movd towards C, and let the Celerity of the firſft be 44, and that of the laſt, B4, as alſo that of the Center of Gravity, CG, it is ſaid, that Ax An2B8x Bb, is 5/ 4+B7CG; a C ſ] b BD becauſe the Difference of their Motions to Contrary Sides, is the ſame as the Sum of their Motions to the ſame Side, which has been before prov'd to be Equal to 4+BxCG; that is, by the Nature of the Center of Gravity BC. AC ::G. aq, and therefore that Force or Moment, which will carry 4 to æ and æ to b, whilſt C moves to G, upon which Points 4 and B are Equally Balanc'd, the ſame Force or Moment vill carry A and B in C, from thence to G, where they are Connected with the Center of Gravity; and from hence it follows, that if the Difference of the Motions to Contrary Sides is Equal to Nothing, that is, if their Motions are Equal, the Center of Gravity is Quieſcent, as is Evident in it ſelf, and from the foregoing Equation, for if 4x AaBx Bb is 5 4+ BxCG, and 4x AaEBx Bb is = o, 4 + BxCG ill be alſo Equal to o, and conſequently CG Nothing, or C will be Quieſcent. S. 4. THE Fourth Propoſition is, That if any Bodies Impinge or Act upon each other, in any Manner whatſoever, the State and Condition of theit Common Center of Gravity, whether it be that of being Quieſcent or Moving uniformly in Directum; is not from thence alterd. For, by what has been prov'd before in Theorems the 187h and 191h of this Philoſophy, and which we have afterwards conſiderd and examin'd, if Bodies Impinge upon each other, the Sum of the Motions, before and after Impaction, will be the ſame, and by what has been now Demonſtrated, the Sum of the Motions, before and after Impaction, will be Equal to the Motion ariſing from Multiplying the Sum of the Bodies into the Celerity of the Common Center of Gravity, therefore the Celerity of the Common Center of Gravity will be the ſame before and after Impaction. S. 5. THE next Thing, which this Philoſophy proceeds to, is the Concourſe of Hard or Soft Bodies, the firſt Propoſition of which is, that if a Hard or a Soft Body Impinges directly upon another Hard or Soft Body, whether That, on which the Impaction is made, is Quieſcent or Moves more ſlowly to the ſame Side, or even to Contrary Sides, and ſuppoſing the Motions are Unequal, both the Bodies after Impaction ill be movd together, and be carry'd along with their Common Center of Gravity. For FORr let 4 Impinge upon B, according to the Conditions above-mentiond, ſince B has no Inipediment from any Bodies, which ſurround it, it will, by the Force Impreſd from 4, be movd toards the ſame Side, to which the Direction of thar Force Tends, and it will be movd together. A c 3 D and in Conjunction vith A4, becauſe it cannot move ſlower than 4, which is behind it, and preſſes it forward, nor can it move faſter than 4, ſeeing it derives all the Force and Celerity, which it has, entirely from it, there being ex Hypotheſi no other Cauſe of this Motion, but the Superior Moment of the Impellent; and as to the Center of Gravity, that muſt Evidently be, where the Bodies are united and move together. S. 6. THE Second Propoſition, in this Doctrine, is to Determine the Motions of Hard and Soft Bodies after a Direct Impaction, which is eaſily done upon the Suppoſition of the Truth of the foregoing Theorem. LET the Bodies 4 and B, whoſe Center of Gravity is C, concurr in D; by the preceding Theorem, they will from thence move together, and will deſcribe after Impaction a Line DE=CD= to a A C B E the Velocity of the Center of Grat D vity before Impaction, becauſe it's 0 A c B Velocity, by what has been already li lil E evincd, is the ſame before and after 7 4 c B D E Impaction, and therefore the Veloæ ji city of 4 before Impaction, will be C 10 it's Velocity aſter, as 4 D to DE, 6 B VV O , A D E B and the Velocity of 2 before ImB a D E 8 paction to it's Velocity after, as BD to DE, ſince 4 and B vill move c à cCc D E oB Vith the Velocity of the Center : of Gravity after Impaction. Corol. I? B Fig. 1. is Quieſcent, the Points B and D will Coincide, and ſince B. A:: AC. BCDE by the Nature of the Center of Gravity, it will be, by Compoſition, A+8. A:: AC BC=AD. BCDE; that is, the Velocity of 4 before Impaction  A4D vill be to it's Velocity after  DE, as A4+5 the Sum of the Bodies to A the Impingent one. Tuus, iſt, If the Impingent 4 is = to the Quieſcent B, A+B. A:: 2. 1. 2d. If A.B::1.9, AB. A:: 10. 1. 3d. It 4. B::0.1, 4AB. A:: 1.0, and ſuitably the Velocity of 4 before Impaction will be to it's Velocity after, in theſe ſeveral Caſes, as 2. I, or 10. I, or I. o, which lat Caſc is That of a Body Incurring upon a Firm and Immoveable Obſtacle, when, after Impaction, the Impingent A4 becomes Quieſcent. AcAN, if the Impingent 4 Fig. 2. is & to B, which is not now Quieſcent, but Moves the ſame way with 4, tho more ſlowly, ſince the Center of Gravity is in the Middle betwixt them, 4 C= BC, and thercfore CD, DE, vill be 4 BEDS areææn =à2322 4 the Velocity aſte: Impaction vill be Equal to half the Sum of the Velocities before Impaction. Ir farther 4 and B Fig. 4. tend to Contrary Sides with Equal Motions, the Points D and C vill Coincide, and CDID E will be =o, that is, after Impaction both the Bodies will be Quieſcent; From whence it is Infer'd, that the Law of the Carteſians is falſe, which , that there is always the ſame Quantity of Motion Preſervd in the Univerſe, ſince, where Unelaſtick Bodies meer, with Equal Motions, thoſe Motions mutually deſtroy each other. LastLv, If Equal Bodies Fig. 5. are carryd to Contrary Sides with Unequal Motions, PE=CD=cBBD2E p2222D AD PP or the Velocity aſter 2 2 Impaction will be Equal to half the Difference oſ the Velocities before Impaction. r s. 7. TH? 5. 7. THE General Calculation of what forego's by Algebra is as follows; Let the Velocity of the Body 4 be C, of B,c; if the Bodies are moVd the ſame Way, the Sum of their Morion vill be 4C + Be, if Contrary Ways 4CBc, but by a Theorem we ſhall ſee afterwards, the Sum of the Motions, to the ſame Side, will continue the ſame before and after Impaction, and therefore will be either 4C+ B, or AC238 aàct B- Bæ or ac6c vill Expreſs the Velocity of the Bodies 4 and 3 £B, andTF T55 P after Impulſe, and conſequently, if the Body B is Quieſcent, that is, if c is Equal to Nothing, the Velocity of the Bodies 4 and B vill be Repreſented by cb s. s. BUT againſt this Account of the Mutual Concourſe of Hard and Soft Bodics, ſo far as to explain any Thing in Nature by it, it is to be Objected. First, That the ſeveral Theorems concerning the Center of Gravity are Demonſtrated upon the Suppoſition, that Matter is in it ſelf Homogeneous and alike, nay farther, that it is Endud with no Active Properties of it's own, for if it is, tho' it ſmou'd be Granted, that it was Similar, the foregoing Demonſtrations voud not ſtand; On the Contrary, ve affirm, that it is not Homogeneous or Similar, and that it is Endwd with Active Properties of it's own, as thoſe in Particular of the Expanſive and Contractive. SECOND, If thereſore Bodies Impinge or Act upon each other, in Nature, whatever they may do, in any one's Fancy, The Sum of their Motions, towards the ſame Side, will not be the ſame before and after Impulſe; nor vill the Sum of the Motions before and after Impulſe be the ſame, as if all the Bodies were carry'd with the Velocity of the Common Center of Gravity; nor ill the Velocity oſ the Common Center of Gravity before and after Impulſe continue the ſame; All which Propoſitions this Philoſophy pretends to Demonſtrate. THIRD, Neither is there any ſuch Hard or Soft Body in the Univerſe, nor can there be Imagind or Conceivd ſuch an one, which is here ſuppos'd, that in is Impaction upon another, which is Quieſcent, ſnall proceed exactly along with it, ſo as to divide it's Incurring Velocity betwixt both; Eſpecially, if there is a Peculiar Action belonging to each, and which if you take away, you deſtroy the Matter or the Body it ſelf, which is, what I take upon me to Pronounce and Defend; and that, where we reſt in ſuch Imaginary Abſtractions as theſe, we may as well Propoſe the Logicks of Burgerſdicius, or the Eſſay of Locte, or the Elements of Euclid, which are all mere Abſtractions of the Mind, for Principles to Explain Nature. FourTH, On the Contrary, all which is here endeavourd to be explaind in the Concourſe of Bodies, and which we find in Fact, may be caſily Accounted for by the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which is, that a Body Incurring upon a firm Obex or Obiſtacle may be Quieſcent after ſuch Impulſe, that is, if the Body, upon which the Impaction is made, has a Contractive Force Superior to the Expanſive, as in Lead or Clay, which therefore will not Repel the Impinging Body; and proportionably as the Contractive Force more or leſs prevails, the Impinging Body will Ieſs or more reſult from it, whether the Body, upon which the Impaction is made, is Quieſcent or Moves more ſlowly ro the ſame Side; but This we have more fully Diſcoursd of in another Place. 5. 9. IN order to Account for the Concourſe of Elaſtick Bodies, it is firſt Preſumd, that if a Body, which is movd, directly Impinges upon another, which is cither Movd or Quieſcent, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion vill be Proportional to the Moment, which is loſt upon their Mutual Occourſe; for the Greatneſs of the Stroke will be Equal to the Force, which is Impre'd from the Percutient on the Body, which receives the Percuſſion, but the Force vhich is Impreſs'd ũpon the Body, which receives the Percuſſion, is loſt to the Percutient, by Law the Third of Re-action being Contrary and Equal to Action, and therefore the Motion. which is loſt to the Percutient, will be Proportional to the Force, vhich is Impreſs'd upon the Body, which receives the Percuſſion, that is, to the Greatneſs of ſuch Stroke or Percuſſion. FARTHER, If a Body, which is Given, directly Impinges upon another Quieſcent Body, which is Given, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion will be alvay: Propor Proportional to the Velocity of the Impinging Body; This ſcarcely vants any other Demonſtration upon the Preſent Principles, than Saying, that if the Body is the ſame, which Incurrs upon another, which is Quieſcent, the Greater the Force or Velocity is, with which it Incurss, the Greater muſt be the Stroke or the Percuſſion receivd by the Body, vhich is Quieſcent; Or, on the Contrary, if the Body, which was before ſupposd Quieſcent, Incurrs upon that, which before was ſuppos'd the Incurrent one, and it loſes the ſame Motion, which the Incurrent one loſt before, the Magnitude or Greatneſs of the Stroke or the Percuſfion vill be the ſame. AcaN, It is told us, that if one Body Impinges directly upon another, which is carryd more ſlovly to the ſame Side, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion vill be the ſame, as if the Preceding Body were Quieſcent, and the Incurring vere carry'd upon it with the Difference of their Velocities; Becauſe, by how much more Velocity the Preceding Body is movd with to the ſame Side with the Incurring, by ſo much more it declines or avoids it's Stroke or Percuſſion, by which means an Equal Portion of Velocity in the Incurrent will be ſpent without any Effect, and conſequently it will be the ſame, if we ſubſtract an Equal Portion of Velocity from each; from whence the Preceding Body will be Quieſcent, and will now ſtand the Shock of the Incurring, and the Incurring ill be carryd with the Difference of their Velocities; If therefore the Difference of the Velocities continues the ſame, that is, if the Reſpective Velocity do's, with which Two Bodies approach each other, hoſoever their Sums are Increasd or Diminiſ'd, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion will be the ſame. LastLy, If Two Bodies are carry'd in Contrary or Oppoſite Motions to cach other, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion will be the ſame, as if one of them was Quieſcent, and the other Imping'd upon it with the Sum of their Velocities; For th]e Force of Percuſſion muſt be Evidently the ſame, whether each Body ſtrikes againſt the other with a ſingle Velocity, or one ſtrikes againſt the other, which is Quieſcent, with a Double one, and ſo it vill be the ſame, whether they Incurr againſt each other, with Velocities, which are as 2 and 3, 5 and 7, 6 and 9, &. or whether the one Impinges upon the other, which is Quieſcent, with a Velocity of 5, I2, or 15; and therefore, if the Sum of the Velocities continues the ſame, that is, the Reſpective Velocity, with which the Bodies approach each other, whatſoever is the Difference of the Velocities, or however the Velocity is divided betwixt the Two Concurring Bodies, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion will be the ſame; Alſo conſequently in Bodies, which are Given, the Greatneſs of the Stroke or Percuſſion will be Proportional to their Reſpective Velocity. s. 10. AFTER the Premiſing theſe ſeveral Propoſitions concerning the Force oſ⸗ Percuſſion upon the Mutual Impulſe of Bodies, This Philoſophy proceeds to explain ⸗ what is meant by Elaſticity. : AxD Firſi, it is ſaid, that there are very few Bodies, in which there is not a ſmall ſ Degree of it; for Clay, Wax, and the Like, contain certain Particles of Air in them, } by vhich they become in ſome Meaſure Elaſtick, and from thence it is, that Bodies 1 after Impulſe do not move together, but reſult from each other, and ſometimes are carryd to the ſame Side, and ſometimes to Contrary ones, with a Diſferent and Vari-; ous Velocity. ] I SECOND, The Cauſe and Manner of Elaſticity or Reſilition is hus Illuſtrated; Let 43 be a String fixt at the Extremities 4 and B, after it is dravn to the utmoſt Stretch, and then let the middle Point D be forc'd, from its Situation there, to C, and from thence permitted and reſignd to is own Activity; it is Plain the String will not continue in 4 C B, but ill endeavour to reſtore ĩt ſelf to it's former Situation in D, and having acquird a Velocity by the continual Action of the Vis Reſtitutiva, it will not reſt in 4D B, but be carryd forvards 10 E, till the Vis Reſtitutiva, vhich acts contrary to this acquird Velocity, and ar length is Equal to it, brings it back from E to D, which by the acquird Velocity is again carry'd tovards C, till the Vis Reſtitutiva becomes Equal to it, and reduces it again to D, but by the Velocity acquird is promoted tovards E, till the Vis Reſtitutiva again becomes Equal ro to it, and forces it back to D, &. by which means the ſucceſſive Vibrations of the String are producd, till it becomes Quieſcent. Let us now imagine the Body F to Incurt upon the ſame String; by the Force in the Incurrent Body F, the Point D in the String will be carryd toq;, together with the Body F, which Motion vill be contin?d, till the Vis Reſtitutiva, Acting contrary to the Motion of the Body F, is Equal to it, for then all the Motion towards C will be deſtroyd, and the Vis Reſitutiva vill reduce the String to it's firſt Situation in D, and F vill be brought back with the ſame Velocity with which the String returns; But upon the Account of the Extreme Tenſion of the String, it will reſtore it ſelf with the ſame Force, with Vhich it as Infiected to , and the Force, with which it was Inflected to C, i Equal to the whole Moment of the Inpinging Body, vhich is ſuppos'd to be en tirely ſpent upon the Flexion of the String; conſequently, the String will Recom municate to the Body the Force, vhich was Imparted to it from it, and the Body vill return with the ſame Velocity, with which it Incurrd, and thus Reſlexion is perform'd. j LET us nov farther, inſtead of a String, ſuppoſec ſome Elaſtick Body 4 B, and in the firſt Place, that it is Fixt and Immoveable, and let it's Surface 4DB be compreſ'd Invards by the Force of the Incurring Body F; As ſoon as the Force, which Compreſſes, that is, as ſoon as the Motion of the Body F ceaſes, the Vis Reſtitutiva will exert it ſelf, and reſtore the Body compreſ'd to it's Priſtine Figure, and urge and repel the Body F towards E; and if either of the Bodies is perſectly Elaſtick, the Vis æeſtitutiva of that Body, which is Elaſtick, will be Equal to the Force, vhich compreſſes it, that is, to the Moment of the Body F, and therefore Re-acting upon the Body vith that Force, it will oblige it to Retire with the ſame Velocity, with which it Impingd: If the Body ADBC is not Fixt, but Moveable, the Elaſtick Force vill act Equally in both Bodies, and produce Equal Changes of the Motions; For ii the Body 4D B urges the Body F towards E, it likewiſe will be Equally urg]d to the Contrary Side by the Body F, and the Bodies will be mutually Reflected from each other; and thus, it is ſaid, an Account is given, how Bodies after Impulſe are not jointly Quieſcent or Movd, but by Reſulting from each other with Diſferent Velocities, ſometimes take Contrary Ways and ſometimes the ſame. TuinD, The Carteſians aſfirm, that the Reflexion of Bodies is deriv'd from a Continuation of Motion, which cannot be deſtroy'd, the Direction of it being only alterd, vhich is endeavourd to be Refuted by this Philoſophy. FourTH, To prove there is ſuch an Elaſticity in Bodies here contended for, by which the Surface of the Elaſtick Body is compreſd Inwards by the Incurring Force, and then reſtores it ſelf to it's former Situation, and repels the Incurrent, an Experiment is alledgd of Two Glaſs or Ivory Globes; of Which let one be Quieſcent, and Painted with Ink or any Colour, and the other Impinge upon it, the Impingent, inſtead of being Tingd in one Point of it's Surface only, which it ought to be, by the Nature of Spherical Bodies, which touch each other in a ſingle Point, vill have a Broad Black or Colourd Spot Impreſ'd upon it, and Which is thought cannot poſſibly proceed from any Thing elſe, but the Depreſſion of it's Surface upon Impaction, and which is not afterwards perceivd, becauſe it's Elaſticity has reſtord it to it's firſt Figure. s. 11. UpoN theſe Principles the Rules of Motion for Elaſtick Bodies are CalcuIated and Deſin'd, and the Twenty-Ninth Theorem is Proposd; That if Two Bodies perfectly Elaſtick Impinge upon each other, their Relative Velocity ill remain the ſame before and after Impaction, that is, they will retire from each other after Impaction with the ſame Celerity, with which they Impingd; For by What has been ſhewn, the Compreſſive Force, or the Greatneſs of the Percuſſion in Bodies, which are Given, that is, which are the Same, ariſes from the Relative Velocity of the Bodies, and is proportional to it, namely to the Difference of the Velocities if they proceed the ſame Way, and to the Sum of them if Contrary ones, and in Bodies perſectly Elaſtick the Vis Reſtitutiva is Equal to the Compreſſive, and therefore to the he Relative Velocity or that Force, with which the Bodies were carsy'd to each other before Impaction, But by the ſaid Vis Reſtitutiva the Bodies are forcd to depart from ecach other, and conſequently it's Acting upon them vill produce that Relative Velocity in their Return, which they had upon their Acceſs, or, which is all one, vill cauſe them to Retire with the ſame Velocity, with which they Impingd; From whence it is Inferd by way of Corollary, that if we take Equal Times before and after Impaction, the Diſtances of the Bodies from each other will be Equal, and by conſequence in the ſaid Times, the Diſtances of the Bodies from the Common Center of Gravity will be Equal. 5. 12. FROM the preceding Corollary are the Rules of Congreſs in Bodies, which are perſectly Elaſtick, determin'd. Let 4 and B be Two Bodies perfectly Elaſtick, whoſe Common Center of Gravity is C, and let the Bodies be ſupposd to meet in D, let CE be made Equal to CD, it is affirm'd; That after Impaction EA vill repreſent or expreſs the Velocity of the Body c A, from E tovards 4, and E B -4& the Velocity of the Body B, 2 E o x from E towards B; for the Com»146LDBE..] a D mon Center of Gravity, by what =E9 c 23t has been ſiewn, before and after A B l Impulſe, proceeds uniformly with 4 õX... 1r2x the ſame Velocity, and there3 rAæ an x fore, ſince CD is the Velocity N ' - of the Center of Gravity before c c D .. X Impulſe, being deſcribd by C in a the ſame Time as 4D is by 4, H DX, which is made Equal to A E? P x B CD, vill be the Velocity of the . Ju ilil æ Center of Gravity after Impulſe; 90 —-— but, by the Corollary juſt now - n 5 explain'd, in Equal Times before 0 A and after Impulſe the Diſtances uE à c B x of the Bodies from the Common Center of Gravity are Equal, and conſcquently, if Xa is made Equal to AC, the Body 4 vill be in æ after Impulſe, and is Velocity Da; Farther, as a is  AC and XD=EC, XaKD= Da vill be Equal to ACECT EA, that is, the Velocity of the Body 4 after Impulſe, will be = Da from D to a=EA from E to 4; Alſo the Relative Velocity of the Bodies being the ſame before and after Impulſe, and E4 being the Velocity of 4, the Velocity oſ B after Impulſe will be ZB from E to B; becauſe whether 4 and B move the ſame Way, or Contrary ones, the Relative Velocity will be as the Differences, or as the Sums of the Velocities of both the Bodies, or ſuppoſing the Quieſcence of one of them, as the Velocity of the other. 2E. D. Corol. 1. FROM this Demonſtration it is Inferd, Corollary the Firſt, that if the Body B is Quieſcent, D and B will be Coincident, as in the Three firſt Figures, and ſince B. A:: 4C. CB by the Center of Gravity, by Compounding, B+ 4. 4 :1: ACCE=AB. CB, and by doubling the Conſequents, B+4. 24:: 4B. 20BEB, or the Sum of the Bodies will be to Twice the Impinging Body, as the Celerity of the Impinging Body before Impaction, to the Celerity of the Quieſcent Body after it. ] Corol. 2, THEREFORE if A5 B, Fig. 1. A +B= 24, and E B the Celerity of B after Impaction  4æ the Celerity of 4 before it, and therefore 4 and æ Coinciding, AE the Celerity of 4 after Impaction = o. Corol. 3. Iv A B, Fig, 4. and they are carryd to the ſame Side, they will after Impaction be carryd to the ſame Side, and exchange Celerities with cach other; For ſince CE=CD by Conſtruction, and 4C=CcB by the Center of Gravity, CEACEEAZæCD CB=BD, and thereſore EA the Celerity of 4 after Impaction = B D the Celerityof B before it; Farther, ſince ZA= BD, EB= A D, becuſe the Relative Celerity, both before and afrer Impaction, continues the Au. and mherę- thereſore E B the Celerity of 2 aſter Impaction vill be Equal to 4D the Celerity of 4 before it. Corol. 4. 8 A=B, Fig. 8. and they are carry'd to Contrary Sides, aſter Impaction they will recede to Contrary Sides and exchange their Celerities; For ſince 4C=Ccà by the Center of Gravity, and 2CCD by Conſtruction, ACEC=AEæCB CD=BD, and thereſore EA the Celerity of 4 aſter Impaction = BD the Celerity of B before it; Farther, ſince 2A= BD, AD= E B, becauſe, the Relative Celerity beſore and aſter Impaction continues the ſame, that is, æ B the Celerity of æ after Impaction will be Equal to 4D the Celerity of 4 before it. s. 13. THis Doctrine Algebraically is thus Demonſtrated. I. LET us ſirſt ſuppoſe the Bodies 4 and B, whoſe Bulks are known, to be carry'd to the ſame Side, and let C a Quantity known, be the Velocity oſ the Impinging Body A4, and æ, alſo a Quantity which is known, that oſ the preceding Body B, upon hich the Impaction is made, the Relative Velocity will be Cc a Quantity likewiſe known, and the Sum of their Motions tovards the ſame Side will be 4C + Bc, which is thereſore known; let the Velocity of 4 after Impaction, towards the ſame Side as before, be calld x, being a Quantity unknown, and which we are to find C out, and ſince the Relative Velocity before and after Impaction is the ſame, the Velocity of  will be x+Crf; becauſe the Relative Velocity of Bodies, which are movd the ſame Way, vill be Equal to the Exceſs of the Sviſter Velocity above the Slower =Cc; if therefore the Velocity of the one is æ, the other muſt be x+C c, for the Relative Velocity before and after Impaction continues the ſame, as was ſaid; Conſequently the Motion of 4 after Impaction is 5 4 x, and of B=Bx+BCBc, and the Sum of theſe Motions aſter Impaction is Equal to the Sum of them before it, or Ax+Bx+BCBc=ACH B. and by leaving the unknown Quantity on one Side of the Equation, and ſubſtracting BC from and adding Bc to both Sides of it, Ax+BxX=ACBC+28], and by dividing cach by 4+ 5, =15csctas. = = to the Velocity of 4 after ACBCH2E8 ã53 Impaction; but the Velocity of B is 5æ Cc aſter Impaction = ACEBCH 2 c AC BCAcBc24CAc+Bæ cs-2°/c17 FCt 75 - 5 If therefore ACEBCH 2BC C is Greater than 4C+28¢, x or vill be a Negative Quantity, F B and conſcquently, the Velocity of the Body 4 will be towards the Contrary Side, and it's Motion towards D vill be Negative, that is, from it. If B is Quieſcent, j a4C BC or c /o, the Velocity of 4 after Impaction is 7 , cither forwards or backvards, as + or prevails. 2. LET us now ſuppoſe 4 and B to be carry'd with the Velocities C and  to contrary Sides, the Sum of their Motions to the ſame Side will be 4CB, and theũi Relative Velocity, where they meet each other, C+75 Iet the Velocity of 4 aftei Impaction be æ, and it's Motion, towaids the ſame Side as beſore, will be 4 æ, the Velocity alſo of 2 after Impaction will be æ+C+, becauſe the Relative Velocity C+c continues the ſame after Impaction, and the Motion of B towards D will be BX+ BCH BC, and the Sum of the Motions tovards the ſame Side 4x+ Bx +B C + B c aſter Impaction =A4 CB¢⸗ the Sum of 'em before it, and therefore 4x+ Bxæ ACBC28 =ACBC28c, and x E the Velocity of the Body 4 after Imã78 : ACBC28¢ ACBC28c  ACHAc+BCHB: paction, and x+CH+c 77 tcte A-3/7/ q7 = 2Aac 2xaCcH+a4cB: - av B Greater than 4c, æ vill be a Negative Quantity, or 4 after Impaction will be carry'd backwards and retire from D; The Expreſſions above of the Velocities of 4 and B aſter Impaction are exactly Analogous to vhat we find in Sir Iſaac Newton's Algebra, Problem. 12. Pag. 91. and in my worthy Friend the Reverend Mr. ſorgan's Comments upon Rohault; and in theſe Laws of perfectly Elaſtick Bodies, both; Chriſtian Hugens and Sir Chriſtopher Wren did alſo agree, tho' calculated ſeparately and diſtinctly by them; and no vonder, ſince they all depend upon the ſame Principle of a perfect Elaſticity, a Notion originally derivd from Dr. Wallis, and which many Years ago l particularly examind, and wrote ſeveral Papers in Confutation of it, which are ſome vhere by me, but not occurring, I ſhall here repeat that Trouble. s. 14. I once vas in Hopes, that from theſe Laws of Elaſtick Bodies I ſou'dhave receivd ſome Aſſiſtance in explaining the Laws of Nature; for having been long ſince, and I may ſay almoſt from my Infancy in this Univerſity and from my firt Study of Philoſophy, poſſeſd, by a Conſideration of Material Beings, with aPerſuaſion, that all Matter was Active, and that it's Forces might be reſolvd into the Expanſive and Contractive; I immediately concluded, that when I came to ſcarch ſtrictly into the Laws of Elaſticity, which ſeemd to have ſome Reſemblance of the Expanſive I contended for, I ſiow'd there find ſomething pertinent to my Enquiries, and at leaſt I ſou'd receive ſome Light and Information from thence of the ſecret Workings of Nature; But to my great Diſappointment, when I came to look more narrowly into them, I perceivd they were nothing elſe but Abſtracted and Mathematick Reaſonings upon Principles and Suppoſitions, which vere Imaginary and Chimerical, and which had no Foundation in the Reallity and Exiſtence oſ Things. Tunus, As to the Doctrine of Percuſſion, in which it is affirmd, that the Force or Greatneſs of it is Equal to the Relative Velocity, that is, to the Difference of the Velocities, where the Bodies proceed the ſame Way, and to the Sum of them, vhere contrary Ways, and that, the Bodies being given, the Force or Greatneſs of Percuſſion vill be proportional to ſuch Relative Velocity, We ſay, that the Demonſtrations of This depend upon a Suppoſition, that there is nothing to be conſiderd in Matter but the Force of it's Velocity, that it is Similar and has no peculiar Forces of it's own, for if it had, theſe Computations of the Force of Percuſſion, from the Difference or Sum of the Velocities of the Incurring Bodies, vou'd be quite diſorderd and confounded, and it wou'd be Impoſſible for us ever to know, what the Force of Percuſſion woud be, without underſtanding the Nature of thoſe Forces, which reſide in the Bodies themſelves; For Inſtance, let Fire and Water meet, I ſuppoſe the Force of Percuſſion vill not be readily determin'd by the Rule of Relative Velocity, and ſomething more muſt be firſt Explain'd, that is, the Nature of the Force of theſe Two Bodies, before we can pronounce, what vwill be the Reſult and Effect of their Congreſ. s 15. As to Elaſticity, in the Beginning of the Tenth Section it is confeſſd, that there are few, if any Bodies, which are not endud with ſome Degree of it, as even Clay and Wax have ſome; from whence it is plain, that the Doctrine, Deliverd before, concerning Bodies, which are perfectly Hard or Soſt, is acknowledgd to be a Creature of the Mind, without any ſuch Bodies Exiſting in Nature; and therefore it is ſaid, that aſter Impulſe they do not move together, but reſult from each other with varying Velocities; whereas this Elaſticity yet is aſcribd to Particles of Air Inſinuating themſelves into, and reſting in the Pores of theſe Bodies, it ſeems to be a mere Fiction, and ve may as vell attribute the Tranſparency of Glaſs to Tranſparent Particles oſ Air diſpersd in it's Pores, as the Elaſticity of Bodies to Elaſtick Particles of Air lodg'd in Them; For vhy may not Bodies be in themſelves, in ſome Degree or other, Elaſtick, as well as Air is, unleſs becauſe the Preſent Philoſophy of Paſſive Matter cannot account for it's Elaſticity without Introducing ſuch extrancous Par ticles?2 Which is no Objection to us, vho aſſert an Active Marter, and that all Mat ter has a Proportion and Degree of the Expanſive; Beſides, this Fancy of the Elaſticity of Bodies, being derivd from Elaſtick Particles of Air mixt with them, is Q Contrar; the Velocity of  after Impaction. If therefore BC+ 28c is Contrary to the following Explanation of it, which reſigns it to the Iĩs reſitutiva in Bodies themſelves. 5. 16. THAT there is ſuch a Phænomenon or Effect in Nature, as Elaſticity, or a Force of Reſilition, by which Bodies are Driven and do Recoil from each other, is beyond Diſpute, being conſirmd by daily Experience, but that the Vis ~eſtitutiva is not an adequate Cauſe of ſuch an Effect, I ſall now Evince. For there is no Satisſaction given us, how this Vis ſeſlitutiva comes to be inherent in ſome Bodics, and not in Others, or at leaſt not in the ſame Degree, whence ĩi is derivd to, and how it ſubſits in them; there is nothing Explicitly ſaid of it, which ſiow'd make us not conclude it a Fictitious Force, and to have it's Being in the Imagination only; which is not the Caſe of the Expanſive and Contractive we Defend, which we have already ſiewn to Exiſt in all Nature in Various and Diſſerent Proportions, and have explaid the mediate Sources, from whence they are deriv'd, tho' ultimately from God himſelf. BESIDES, that the Vis Reſſitutiva is an Imaginary Force invented by Philoſophers, on purpoſe to account for this particular Diſficulty in Nature, is Evident from hence, that it is not made uſe of upon any other Occaſion, nor is it connected with the Explanation of any other Phænomenon vhatſoever; whereas the ſame Expanſive and Contractive Forces, vhich we alledge ſor the Solution of this, are connected with and extended to all other Appearances, we can name, of Solidity and Fluidity, Hardneſd and Soſtneſi, Gravity and Levity, Cold and Heat, Opacity and Tranſparency, &⸗. FARTEHER, the Explication, which is given oſ the 7is Reſtitutiva, ſiews it 1o be an Imaginary Force, a mere Invention of the Philoſopher, without any Ground or Foundation in Nature or Reaſon; ſince, altho' this ?is æeſtitutiva ſoud be allowd to the String 4D B, vhen dravn A by an External Force to 4 CB; by which it might reduce it ES to it's former Situation in 4 D B, how the ſame Vis Reſlitutiva E ſoud propel and carry it ſrom thence to 4EB is incon- c m E ceivable, unleſs the Force, which reſtores it to it's firſt Situa- tion, has the Power to repel it from that Situation, that is, li unleſs the is Reſtitutiva to a certain Situation, is a 7ĩs Re- v pulſiva from ir, which is a Contradiction; and for the ſame B Reaſon, granting it Poſſble for the Vis Reſtituiiva to propel the String ſrtom 4D B to AE B, how the ſame Vis Re;litutiva ſiowd bring it back from ALB to ADB cannot be Imagind, and ſo it may be argud in 's Second Progreſs to A4CB, and Regreſs to 4D B, or is Second Progreſ to 4 æ B, and Regreſs 10 4D B, or in its Third, Fourth, Fiſth, &. Tnis Philoſophy ſcems to have been avare of the foregoing Difficulty, and therefore aſcribes the Progreſes to the Velocity acquird from the Motion of the String, and the Regreſts to the Vis ſeſlitutiva; But can there be any Velocity acquir'd, which is nor owing to ſome Cauſe? And is there any Cauſe aſſign'd excepting that oſ the Vis reſtituriva? And can a Velocity acquird from the Vis Reſtitutiva act againſt and in Oppoſition to the Vis Reſtitutiva from whence it is derivd? It is altogether abſurd to ſuppoſe it; and we may as vell aſfirm, that if ve Impel a Body one Way, it vill move a Contrary onc from that Impulſe without any other Direction. l s. 17. ON the other Hand, the Expanſive and Contractive Forces give a plain Account of this Phunomenon, for 4 and B being TWo fixt Points, upon Vhich the Tenſion of the String is made, they are Two Cenrers o Contraction, towards which the Intermediate Parts of the String are urgd, and betwixt which they are Attracted and Drawn; Again, the Parts about D, which are the fartheſt from the Centers of Contraction, will be the leaſt Affected by their Inſluences, and conſequently will have leſs of the Contractive and more of the Expanſive Force, to which it ve add the Expanſive Force of the Finger drawing the String from it's Conrractive Situation, or the Expanſive Force of the Velocity of the Incurring Body F, here will be TWo Contrary Forces, the Contractive and Expanſive, Acting againſt each other, by which means a Conteſt vill be raisd and continud betwixt them, ill the one or the other prevails, and mutual Reciprocations excited, till the String xxcomes Quieſcent. Tuus, Tunus, vhen the String is in C, the Expanſive Force, tho Inferior to the Contractive, ſtruggles and acts againſt it, and if it ſou'd be Increas'd ſo far as to break it, the Expanſive wod then prevail and be Superior, and the Contractive Force from A4 and B woud obtain no farther Effect; but the Expanſive at C being Inferior to the Contractive in 4 and B, it is ford to yield to the Contractive, which reduces the String to 4D B, notwithſtanding which, a Portion of the Expanſive ſtill ſubſiſting in the String, and being not Entirely vanquiſd and ſubdud by the Contractive, it now exerts it ſelf towards æ, ſtill in Oppoſition to the Contractive in A and B, to vhich it is always Contrary, till it is again made to yeild to the Contractive, and the String is brought back to D; and thus the Progreſſes and Regreſſes are performd, the firſt by the Power of the Expanſive Force, and the laſt by that of the Contractive, till the impreſ'd Inferior Expanſive is ſpent and ſuccumbs, and the Contractive prevails, and therewith the String obeys the Superior Force, and at Iength becomes Quieſcent betwixt the Two Centers of Contraction 4 and B. So likeviſe, for the Caſe is much the ſame, ſuppoſing Two Bodies, which are in an Equal Balance with each other, to be ſuſpended upon their Common Center of Gravity, which being the Point, by which they are detain'd in their æEquilibrium, is a Center of Contraction, and that Force, which is Impreſs'd upon them from the Eartl's Contraction, is a Force of Expanſion, by which they tend from their Center of Gravity towards the Earth; if therefore by Impulſe a new Expanſive Force is Communicated to the Balance, the Bodies will riſe and fall by Turns from this Expanſive, till the Force is ſpent and the Contractive prevails, whereby the Bodies become Quieſcent; that is, D, by an Expanſive Force, Oſcillating upon 4 and B the Contractive ones, will not be much Different (as to the Manner of theſe Forces acting) from 4 and B, by an Expanſive Force, Oſcillating upon D a Contractive; In both Inſtances, the Expanſive Force will carry the String or the Balance out of the Linc 4D B, and the Contractive will reduce them to it, till the Expanſive is overpover'd and over-comn, and in the End ſubmits to the Contractive. S. 18. THE Expanſive and Contractive Forces are not only capable of ſolving rhe preſent Phænomenon, which the Vis Reſtitutiva cannot do, but alſo, as will be ſiewn afterwards, all the Properties of Matter whether Eſſential or Accidental, and upon which Account we m Action or Force, which is divided into an Expanſive and Contractive one, to be the very Eſſence of Matter; What I mean, is, that Matter is Action or Force it ſelf, and not the Support, Subſtratum, or Seat of it; but thi: we ſnall perhaps have another Opportunity of ſpeaking more largely to. WuaT ve ſnall take Notice of at Preſent, by way of Anticipation, is, that this Doctrine makes only Two Principles in Nature, the Expanſive and Contractive, both Contrary to each other, and both reſolvible into one Principle of Action; which, in Reſpect of the Being of a God, is agreeable to our Notions of one Supreme and Superintending Agent, and indeed is an Evident Proof of one, and alſo explains the Reaſon, why ſome have imagin'd To Gods, the one the Author of Good, and the other of Evil, in Compliance with theſe Two diſtint and oppoſite Forces; And in Reſpect of Nature, what is more Evident than that the Whole of it, as to the Material or Immaterial Part, is diſtinguiſd into Effects, which are either Contrary to each other, or mixt and compounded of ſuch as are? Tnus, as to the Material Part, there are Light, Heat, Tranſparency, Fluidity, Levity, Elaſticity; and in Relation to Colours, Red, Orange, Yellow; to Taſts, Sweet and Luſcious; to Smells, Fragrant; to Sounds, Harmonious and Soft, which fall under the Expanſive, in which yet there is ſome Mixture of the Contractive; vhilſt the Contrary Qualities, as Darkneſs, from the Earth's Contraction of the Medium which the Sun Expands, Cold, Opacity, Solidity, Gravity, Unelaſtickneſs; and in Relation to Colours, Blue, Violet, and Black, (for Green Lies Intermediate to both the Orders);3 to Taſts, Acid and Sower; to Smells, Fœtid; to Sounds, Harſh and Dull, ſeem to derive their Origin chiefly from the Contractive, th not withom Iome Degree of the Expanſive in their Compolition. ALso, as to the Immaterial World, and that Thinking Subſtance, wlich Animate: and Informs us, tho' it is Different and Diſtinct from Matter, yet has it's Expanſive and Contractive Forces;3 Thus Gaiety, Wit, Memory, and Recollection, Levity Courage, Rahneſs, and Fool-Hardineſs, Fierceneſs, Hatred, Haughtineſs, and InſoQq: lence lence, Anger, Revenge, Ill-Nature, and Covetouſneſs, Appear to be derivd from the Expanſive Force of our Minds, by which we Repel orhers from us; On the Contrary, Gravity and Judgment and Reaſoning, a Generoſity and Fear of Offending others and a Love of them, Dejection of Spirit, Clemency and Compaſſion, and the Like, are from the Contractive Force of them, by which we Draw and Attract others to us; and all the Various Paſſions and Affections of our Minds have a Greater or Leſi Degree and Proportion of the Expanſive or Contractive Force in them, or are compounded of them; And by this Means, by the Mind and Matter agreeing in theſe Forces, we ſuppoſe their Union is effected, tho' Thought and the Mind it ſelf is manifeſtly Different from theſe Forces, and in the ſame Manner, as Almighty God is diſtinct ſrom the Univerſe, which yet he has been pleas'd to Fill and Actuate with them. 5. 19. BUT tO leave theſe Diſquiſitions at Preſent, which we may perhaps ſome other Time reſume, ſince ve only intended to ſiew in General here the Extenſiveneſs of theſe Principles of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, we ſhall farther obſcrve ſrom this Explanation of Elaſticity by them, that a Continuance of Motion is produc'd, ſo long as there is a Conteſt maintain'd betwixt the Two oppoſite Forces, the Expanſive and Contractive, but when the one or the other entirely Prevails, the Effect of the other Ceaſes; thus if, in the Tenſion of a String, the Expanſive Force is leſs than the Contractive, there is a Reciprocation of the Progreſes and Regreſſes of it, till the Expanſive is Subdu'd and the Contractive is Predominant, by Reducing it at length to a Quieſcence in D B; if therefore now the Expanſive Force, Acting tovards C, was Conſtant and Regular, and Equal to the Contractive from 4 and B, there wou'd be an endleſs Reciprocation of Motion, and the Progreſſcs and Regreſſes vou'd be contind for ever, from whence a Perpetual Morion woud ariſe; but if the Expanſive ſhoud be Superior to the Contractive, the String voud Break and be Diſſolvd, and the Effects of, the Contractive Forces from a and B wvou'd be Deſtroyd. S. 20. FROM hence therefore ve may lay down this for a Law of Nature, that where Two Forces are Equal, and are Contrary in their Genius and Temper, and Act againſt each other, as the Expanſive and Contractive, there will be a erpetual Motion and Conteſt betwixt them, ncither Prevailing againſt the other; bur iſ the one or the other Prevails, the Effect of the oppoſite Force will be Superſcded, and Vacated in ſome Degree, tho' not entirely Deſtroyd and Annull'd. Tnus alſo, if 4DB is conſiderd as a Balance, in which the Bodies 4 and B are Equally Pois'd upon D, if the Expanſive Force, from Impulſe upon 4 or B, is Leſs than the Contractive in D, there will be a Reciprocation of Motion till the Balance reſts in 4D B, and ſubmits to the Contractive in D; On the Contrary, if the Expanſive Force, from Impulſe upon 4 or B, is Greater than the Contractive in D, it vill ſtrike oſf the Body 4 or B, and free it from its Center of Contraction in D; But if the Expanſive Force in 4 or B is Equal to the Contractive in D, ſuch a Body muſt be Perpetually movd backwards and forwards about it's Center D, by Continual Oſcillations, without being ever Quieſcent in the Line 4D B; and if 4 or B is now taken oſf, which is an Equal Poiſe to the orher, the Remaining Body muſt be carryd in a Continual Revolution round the Center of Contraction; For ſince neither the Contractive nor Expanſive Force are ſupposd to Prevail, but are Equal, there muſt a Perpetual Motion enſue, and ſince it cannot be to the Contractive Force nor from it, for then the one or the other voud Prevail, nor yet backwards and forwards by Way of Oſcillation, becauſe one of the Bodies is now taken off from the Equilibrium which caus'd ſuch Oſcillation, it muſt be in an Orbit round it. TuaT this Law of Nature obtains in all Material Beings, is Evident; Thus in the Contractive Force of Fuel and the Expanſive of Fire, there is a Motion producd and contin'd ſo long, as there is a Contention betwixt thoſe Two Forces; If the Expanſive of the Fire is Superior, the Contractive is ſubdu'd, and the Fuel reduc'd to a Light and Expanſive Aſhes, with little or no Contraction belonging to them; If the Contractive Prevails, the Expanſive Ceaſes, and the Fire is Extinguiſ'd; And if an Equal Balance is kept up betwixt the Expanſive of the Fire and Contractive of the Fuel, by a continual Addition of the Latter, in a juſt Proportion to the Former, the Motion and the Fire becomes Perpetual, the Air, which is s always neceſſary to the Being of Fire, having the Nature of the Expanſive, and Concurring with it. s. 21. FROM What foregoes, the Reaſon, why a Perpetual Motion cannot be l æ Perpofound out in our Earth is, becauſe the Contractive Force of the Earth and the simaot be frund Bodies which belong to it, is Infinitely Superior to the Expanſive, derivd from the ou, mà æſy Sun, or from any Subterraneous Fires; Which, in all Probability, were originally ſ Inioving to ſome Accenſion of Inflammable Matter, and that Accenſion to the Sun, or ve. to the Artificial Methods we have of Producing Fire, by the Means and Aſſiſtance of it; and therefore all the Interior Parts of the Earth, ve may Reaſonably think, are of a Strong and Contractive Force, and that, the Nearer we come to the Center of it, the Matter is the more Compact and Denſer. ON the Contrary, the Reaſon, why we have a Perpetual Motion in the Heavens. is, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Sun and the Contractive of the Planets are in their ſeveral Diſtances nearly Equal, and from Which Continual Struggle and Conteſt betwixt the Sun and them, the Conſtant Periods, which they keep, do Ariſe. And, as theſe Forces of the Sun and Planets vary, They come Nearer to, or retire Farther from it. ò. 22. THis Law of Nature is likewiſe manifeſt from the Mixture of what the Th ſoregoing Chymiſis call Acid and Altali, which ve have more particularly Diſcoursd of in Eam firiher another Place, and ſhall here only conſider them, ſo far as they juſtify the Preſent Lav; for, whilſt neither the Expanſive nor the Contractive Force prevail, there is an Efferveſcence and an Ebullition producd, but ſo ſoon as the Contractive has the Aſcendant, a Coagulum or a Precipitation is caus'd, and when the Expanſive of Spirit oſ Nitre, a Bright and Tranſparent Fluid ſucceeds; Thus alſo Winds, Tempeſts, and uꝶ; winis Hurricans in the Air, Follow from a Contention betwixt the Expanſive of the a⸗ Tempeſi Sun, and the Contrative of the Earth and Cold, which therefore with us Generally Sriu- an happen betwixt Summer and Winter, that is, in Spring or Autumn, Vhen the Ex- iums, iban i panſive and Contractive Forces are the neareſt to an  quilibrium, and before the sym— or Expanſive is Predominant in Summer, and the Contractive in Winter. i FARTHER. in Natural Bodies, which are all of them produc'd by a Preceding Fer- heæ Liquid mentation, as Liquids from Fruits, which are evidently Raisd from the Expanſive ſma Force of the Sun, and from the Contractive of the Earth and Soil in which they Grow, there is firt a Motion and Vegetation ariſes from theſe TWo Contending Powers, this Conteſt is aſterwards contin'd by Fermentation, which is owing to the Mixture of the Expanſive and Contractive Force, till at length the Expanſive prevails and ſettles in a Fluid, in which the Contractive has it's Effect, which is Evident ſrom it's Continuity and Gravitation, but is Inferior to the Expanſive by ir's Fluidity, Lightneſs, and Tranſparency. ON the other Hand in the Formation of Solid Bodies, as Wood and Metals, there Hm Selid B is a Fermentation from the Expanſive and Contractive Force, till at length the Con- 4is a Mx tractive prevails, and makes the Body, like the Coagulum beſore mention'd in Chymiſtry, Opake, Solid, and Heavy, but yet not ſo, as entirely to Deſtroy or Annull the Expanſive, which Shows and Exerts it ſelf in Elaſticity, Colour, and in a Greater or Leſs Degree of Levity, as the Expanſive is leſs or more ſubdud by the Contractive. 5. 23. AND from hence we may have a juſt Account of what Earth, Fire, and Water Wha: Eat is, the Former being that Matter, in which the Contractive moſt prevails, and the Latter ſu, a in which the Expanſive; that is, here the Expanſive Force of the Sun has juſt ſo much anà Plesum Power, as to Raiſe the Contractive Force of our Planet into a Fluidity, it becomes anà h re Water, where into an Inflammability, it becomes Fire, where into Fermentation, it dne r hii becomes a Vegetable or a Metal, and where into none of theſe, it becomes Earth; ſo Sir ĩſ. Neihat all theſe Phænomenons in Nature ſeem only to be Derivd ſrom the Various Pro- Jrincin. portions, Mixtures, and Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which Exiſting colla m Separate and Diſtinct Portions conſtitute all the Bodies we behold, and in one Ge- Lib. 3. Edit neral and Unlimited Diſfuſion, that Plenum we contend for, by which all the Material x Bcings in the Univerſe are Connected into one contin'd Active Subſtance, Originally Derivd and Producd from one Infinite and Almighty Agent, the Supreme Orderer and Governor of all Things, God; From whence it will Appear, that tho' Space is Full, yet that ĩt is not Equally ſo, there being Different Forces and Actions, ſome Thicker Thicker and Denſer, and Others more Feeble, Diluted, and Languid, as thoſe of Gold on the one Hand, and Water or Air, or æther on the other, in the ſame or Equal Portions of the ſaid Space: This was firſt Affirmd by us in the Philoſophy, which ve ſome Years ago Publiſvd in Oppoſition to a Vacuum, which has been ſince Subſcribd to by the Modern Philoſophy, but without Explaining how Space is not æqually full, which we have here done. From hence alſo is Deriv'd a True and Proper Geometry ol Matter hitherto unknown to Philoſophers, becauſe where they make Matter an Ab. ſtracted and Homogeneous Subſtance, it is Impoſſible it's Nature ſho'd admit oſ Quantities and Proportions; On the Contrary, ve who affirm Matter to conſiſt oſ Various Degrees of Forces in the ſame Space, it is no Wonder, that we may be allow'd to Diſcourſe of the Mathematicks and Quantities of it. 5. 24. BUT to proceed upon the Preſent Lav of Nature, which is alſo Confirm'd from the Immaterial and Thinking Part of it; We plainly Experience, that all Quarrels and Diſſenſions, which are properly the Motions and Agitations of Men's Minds, Ariſe from Oppoſite and Different Qualities in them, that is, from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces which belong toem; Thus Wit, Gaiety, and Mirth, are conſtantly at Variance vith Judgment, Sedateneſs, and Gravity; Vice Combats with Vertue; Inſolence and Pride with Modeſty and Humility; Cruelty with Clemency and Com paſſion; Extravagance and Licentiouſneſs with Sobriety and Goodneſs; and Covetouſ neſs and Ill-Nature with Generoſity 3 and as theſe Principles of our Minds are Diametrically Contrary to each other, and as the Firſt ſeem to be of the Expanſive Sort, or the Repulſive, by which others are Alienated from us, and the Laſt of the Contractive, by which They are Allur'd or Drawn tovards us, ſo where-ever we find Men of theſe Tempers, which are Reluctant to each other, we as certainly find they Diſagree, and that the Contention laſis till the one Force or the other, the Expanſive or Contractive, Prevails, and then all is Quiet and Composd, th the Force which ſubmits to the other is not entirely Deſtroy/d or Annulld. 5. 25. AND ſince, as we have before ſiewn, the Expanſive Force on the Earth is but Small and Inconſiderable in Reſpect of the Contractive, therefore, tho' the Expanſive may ſometimes prevail, yet Generally ſpeaking, and at length the Contractive will; and conſequently from hence it is Evident, that tho Wit, Gaiety, and Mirth may have it's Proſelytes, and Vice, Pride, Cruelty, Extravagance and Licentiouſneſs, Covetouſ neſ and Ill-Nature may prevail for a Time, yet Judgment, Gravity, Sedateneſs and Seriouſneſs, Modeſty, Humility, Clemency and Compaſſion, Sobriety, Goodneſs and Generoſity will have the Strongeſt Force, and be in the End too hard for the other; and thus it was, in part, that the Chriſian Morals became Superior to all the IllQualities and Aſfections oſ Men, Which Exerted themſclves in Oppoſition to them, and thus the Vertues of Human Society have been ſtill maintain'd and preſervd to it, notwithſtanding the Continual Struggles of the Vices of Men to Extirpate and to Eradicate them. s. 26. IF now we come to the Minds of ſingle Perſons, without Comparing them with thoſe of others, there are alvays Two Forces obſervable in them, the Expanſive and Contractive, by which the ſame Perſon ſeems Contrary to himſelf in a Thouſand Qualities, and is really Different as the one or the orher Prevails; and whilſt there is a kind of Equal Balance berwixt them, there is a continual Conteſt, Agitation or Struggle in a Man's own Breaſt, till the one or the other, is ſubdud; Thus every Man has the Seeds in his ovn Nature oſ Vertue and Vice, and of all the oppoſite Qualities and Aſfections we can Imagine, but they are in ſuch an quilibrium, and ſo ordain'd by the Almighty and All-wiſe Agent, that it is in every ones Vill and Power to determine the Balance on the one Side or the other, that is, to the Expanſive or Contractive; Whilſt this Conteſt Iaſts, the Mind is in a Ferment and Uncaſy, that is, in its Paſſage from the Vitious Qualities of the Mind to the Vertuous, or on the Contrary from the Vertuous to the Vitious, but vhen Either of them Prevails, the Mind is in a State of Compoſure and Quieſcence, and Satisfaction in the firſt Caſe, and in the Laſt in a State, vhich may be Agreeable for a Time; but when the Contractive renews the Conteſt, as it will do, when the Expanſive s Weakend, as in Sickneſs or near Death, there is a Reluctance and Uncaſineſs, a Motion, a Ferment and Agitation in the Mind, which cauſes the Greateſt Pains, which zan Appertain to it; And from hence, that is, from the Different Degrees and Proportions portions of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Mens Minds are their Natures and ldentities aſcertain'd, and therefore the Powers and Faculties of it are as much Reducible to Mathematicks and Proportions, or a Pſycheometria, as any other Quantities bm hmna vhatſoever, The Elements of which I promis'd in the Priuciples of Philoſophy. jiiiiiiiii Tnis vill alſo give us an Account of what Morality is, and what the Foundation Fom hæ i of it, ſince Almighty God has been pleas'd to Implant thoſe Original Principles in us, —-— by which we are Diſposd to acquire all our Good or Ill-Qualities from the Con- ĩiæ Reaũu of tractive and Expanſive, and at the ſame Time has Endu'd us with a Faculty and ſeſgin Pover to determine our ſelves to the one or the other; but leſt this Faculty and Pover ſmoud be Ill-Imployd by us, that is, leſt the Principles of Natural Religion ſou'd not Sway and Incline us to that which is Good, he has alſo given us a Reveal'd one, vhoſe Doctrines and Precepts tend the ſame Way with the Contractive Force of our own Minds, which is to Incline them to all the Vertuous Affections and Properties of our Natures, which are Contrary to the Expanſive and Repulſive of them, and which fall in with Love and Benevolence, Charity and Goodneſs, and all the Contractive Forces which belong to them. S. 27. LET us farther Conſider, what theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces of uiy sobrirs the Mind are Abſtracted from Morality, or the Vertuous and Vitious Inclinations it oſ Thoughi au Poſſeſſes, and we ſhall ſtill find the ſame Law of Nature obtains; Thus Memory, ;-rai azan Recollection, Wit, and a Quickneſ"s of Thought and Apprehenſion is derivd from Gaiey sidii the Expanſive Force of the Mind, as Perception, Judgment, Reaſoning, and Solidity is owing to the Contractive Force of it; for in the firſt, we may obſerve a ind of Elaſticity in the Production of our Ideas, and a Volatility as ell as Incoherence of them, and in the ſecond a Contraction by their Cloſeneſs, Connexion, and Gravity; and as in the other Caſes, ſo in this, the Mind, when it is Agitated betwixt theſe Two Forces, is in a ſort of Conteſt with it ſelf, and uneaſy, till it is ſettled in the Contractive. WE may farther take Notice here, that as we have made the Vitious Propenſities æã am of of our Minds to be chieſly derivd from the Expanſive Force, and the Vertuous from ui areIncl the Contractive, and Memory, Wit, Quickneſs and Gaiety of Thought to be the t bud Reſult oſ the Former Force, and Judgment or Reaſoning the Effect of the Latter, men io Verin ſo we likewiſe in Fact and Experience find, that thoſe who are the Wittieſt and the Gaicſt are generally the moſt Iikely to be carry'd into Vice, and thoſe who are oſ the beſt Reaſon and Judgment to be determin'd to Vertue, and in Conſcquence of it to Religion, which is the Grand Promotor and Aſſertor of it. 5. 28. I woud not be here thought to make the Nature of the Mind to conſiſt Hoœ ihe Mi in the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, or Action in General, ſince That we have ĩ uined i ſaid is rſhe Eſence of Matter, and which vill ſolve all the Phænomenons and Sen-,æ Dlinã ſations we perceive from it, but Action ill not give a Solution of Thought and ſrom it Intelligence; ve therefore aſſirm the Mind to be a Thinking Immaterial Subſtance, to which yet there are a certain Kind of Expanſive and Contractive Forces belonging, and which are Indications and Characteriſticks of the Genius and Temper of the Mind, in which they Reſide, and by the Intervention oſ which Forces it ſeems Probable, that it is united with Matter. S. 29. To Which, if we now Extend this Law, that is, to the Union of the Mind æ ie sin vith the Body, we ſhall find it ſtill the ſame; for thus whilt the Mind and Body æ⸗m Laæ are in their Natural State, the Contractive Force of the Mind joins it with the Con-4 tractive of Matter, and the Expanſive of the Mind, being in an Equilibrium with Tnin of itæ the ſame Contractive of Matter, continually keeps the Fluids in Motion, and Circu- 3ſn⸗ æul lates the Blood and Spirits, and all other the Juices, which arc Requiſite to the i Animal Occonomy. Bur Firſt, If the Contractive of Matter is too Powerſul for the Expanſive of 7 cauũ the Mind, the ZEquilibrium is broken, and the Expanſive of the Mind ſinks be- Lethargus, neath the Contractive of the Body, as in Lethargies, Comas, Jaundice, and CDropſies, and the other Diſtempers, which proceed from a Viſcidity, Flaccidneſ, æe Thickneſs or Languor oſ the Blood and Serum, or too Great a Quantity of them, whilſt yet the Contractive of the Mind remains, by which it can Reaſon, Perceive, and Judge as at other Times; ſo that the very ſame Principle, namely an Equilibrium betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive Force. which ſolves the Revolutions in th- he Heavenly Syſtem, accounts likewiſe for the Circulation of the Blood and the other Fluids in a Human one, excepting that there it is the Expanſive and Contractive Force of Matter, whereas here it is the Expanſive of the Mind or of the Juices of the Body, which is Analogous to it, and the Contractive of Matter; SECOND, If the Expanſive of Matter is too Powerful for the Expanſive of the Mind, the Contractive of the Mind ſtill continues, ſo far as to preſerve its Union vith the Body, but is diſturbd by the Superior Expanſive of Matter joining vith the Expanſive of the Mind, from whence an Extreme Volatility and Diſſipation of Thought ariſes, an Incoherence of Ideas, and a ſurprizing Quickneſs in their Motion, as in Drinking Spirituous Liquors, in Fevers, and in a Phrenzy: And in both theſe Caſcs, vhen the Contractive Force of Matter in the Firſt is too Great, and the Expanſive Force in the Laſt, the Mind Reſults from the Body, a Diſſolution of the Union Enſues, and it Departs with it's own proper Expanſive and Contractive Forces from the Body, which it had hitherto Actuated and Inform'd; TuirD, If the Contractive Force of the Mind by any Ways or Mcans is ſo far Increas'd, as to break the ſEquilibrium betwixt the Forces of the Mind and of Matter, as by Great and Intenſe Study, by an Extreme Concern for the Good of others, by Aſictions in the Cauſe of Religion and Vertue, or too Mighty a Zeal, Concern, and Sollicitude for them, which we have ſhewn are all of a Contractive Nature, the Mind may be caſt into a Depth of Melancholy, and tho' it's Reaſoning and Judgment is ſtill Preſervd, the Body may be brought into an Ill and Languid State, and the Mind grow Heavy, Dull, and Unactive. LastLy, If the Expanſive Force of the Mind is likewiſe Increas'd beyond an ZEquilibrium with the Forces of Matter in the Body, by too Exceſſive a Pride, Covetouſneſs, Ambition, Revenge or Cruelty, which are of an Expanſive and Repulſive Force, or by any other Vices of the like Selfiſn Complexion, a too Great Expanſion ariſes in the Mind, and by Conſequence a Madneſs and Diſtraction, by vhich the Ideas of it are Interrupted and Incoherent, Acquire an Exceeding Swifſtneſs and Velocity, and the Fluids of the Body are put into a Wild Ferment, and the Whole Maſs and Compoſition into the Higheſt Diſorder, and from hence Anger and Fury, which oves its Origine to theſe Expanſive Qualities of the Mind, has been juſtly Term'd and Eſteend a ſhort Madneſ. IN theſe Two laſt Caſes, if the Diſturbance is very Great, the Union betwixt the Mind and Body is Diſiolvd, and Melancholy or Madneſs Equally deſtroy the Harmony betwixt both, whilſt the Mind departs Composd and Satisfy'd in the Firſt Caſe, and in the Laſt, Roid and Uneaſy, Full of Wretchedneſs, Pain, Anxiety, and Miſery. But whilſt the Mind and Matter continue United, it is more Diſficult to Cure the Former Diſturbance of the quilibrium than the Latter, becauſe it is harder to Raiſe a Contractive Force into an Expanſive, than to Depreſs an Expanſive to a Contractive, ſince, all the Expanſive Forces, of what kind ſoever in the Earth we Inhabit, bear a very ſmall Proportion to the Contractive, and for which Reaſon ve ſaid, tho' there might be a Perpetual Quieſcence, there couw'd not be a Perpetual Motion; thus likeviſe all Animate Beings are but few in Proportion to the Inanimate, and the Aſſiſtances in Nature to the Raiſing the Contractive Force into the Expanſive, are much Fewer than thoſe which ve have to Depreſs the Expanſive to the Contractive; And from hence, it is much Eaſier to Extinguiſh a ſmall Fire, than to Throw into Fumes and Vapour a like Quantity of Water. s. 30. FRoM vhat we have alledg]d, it may be eaſily Inferd, that, in theſe Fou Caſcs, there are Different Ways in Phyſick to be purſd to Reſtore the Equilibrium, and that the Forces of the Mind, in all Preſcriptions in that Science, ought te be as Careſully, and Punctually Examin'd and Attended to, as thoſe of the Blood o of the Fluids of the Body; IN the Firſt, the Chief Intention ought to be to Raiſe the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood and Animal Juices, by Spirituous Liquors moderately us'q, or by Exerciſe, or by a Diminution of the Quantity of them by Abſtinence, or by all of them together; IN the Second, the Principal Intention ſowd be to Depreſs the Expanſive Forc of them, by Cooling and Contractive Medicines, and by a Regular and Thin Diet and all other Methods, which are Fitted to Allay the Heat and Efferveſcence o the Blood and Animal Juices; I IN the Third, Medicines will be of little Force, but Action, Mirth, and Compũny, nd all the Innocent Diverſions of Muſick, and the Agrecable Entertainments of Wir nd Gaiety, will prove the moſt Effectual to raiſe the Contractive Force of the Mind into a juſt Expanſive; and Riding and Travelling into Diſtant and New Scencs is nor a little Conducive to the ſame End. IN the Laſt, Precepts of Vertue and Religion, and the Impreſſions of Reaſon, Sobriety, and Judgment, and Exerciſing the Mind in that Way, vill in all Probability have more Influence, than all the Drugs which can poſſibly be Invented or Preſcribd; and I have ſometimes thought, that the Chriſtian Religion, which, as we have ſewn, is of a Contractive Nature, may probably have as Real and Neceſſary an Effect in Curing Demoniacks, or in theſe larter Ages Madmen, as it has had in Reducing Men from Vice, Immorality, lll-Nature, and Extravagance, which likewiſe, as Madneſs, are of an Expanſive Nature, to Sobriety, Vertue and Goodneſs, which are of a Contractive one. FROM all which we may reaſonably Conclude, that as there are theſe ſeveral Maladies Incident to our Natures, which have Diſtinct Origins, ſo that the Mind is a Subſtance Different from the Body, and which ill Survive it; ſince, according to this Law, which we have Evincd to be a General one in Nature, where one Force prevails againſ another, the Force, which ſubmits, is not Deſtroy'd or Annulld, bur ſtill continues; and as it is Evident, that an Expanſive and Contractive Force of Matter is preſerv'd even to the Body diſſolvd from the Mind, ſo it is Equally Rational to think, that the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Mind is Conſtant and Permanent upon its Diſſolution from the Body; beſides which, the Contractive Force of the Mind, it's Reaſoning and Judgment, is not much Affected by the Contractive Force of the Body being too Great, as in the firſt Caſe; in the Second, it is, by the Expanſive Force being ſo, of which therefore when it is acquitted by a Diſſolution from it, it muſt be unaffected by it; in the third Caſe, the Contractive of the Mind is Increas'd, and in the laſt, the Expanſive; from whence it is Manifeſt, that the Forces of the Mind in any of theſe Caſes are not, nor can be Diminiſd, much leſs Annihilated by it's Separation and Diſſolution from the Matter, with which it is United. lllt IN the Union of the Mind with the Body, we ſhall only farther Inſtance in Dreams, that in a Natural State, where the Forces of the Mind and of Marter are in an quilibrium, the Blood and Fluids circulate Regularly, and Various Ideas are Exhibited to the Mind, according to the Various Temper, Craſis, or Action of ſuch Fluids, as they paſs thro' the Brain, the Place of the Mind's Reſidence; but if the Contractive Force of the Blood and Juices is Increasd beyond the Natural State, if they become Colder and Chiller than ordinary, Repreſentations of Water are produc'd, as in ſome ſmaller Degrees of Melancholy, if the Expanſive is Increas'd, as in Fevers, they Change into thoſe of Fire; In the firſt Caſe, the Mind is more Composd, and in the laſt, more Diſturb'd and Uneaſy, and the Images in the Mind carry an Analogy with the Expanſive or Contractive Forces of the Blood and Fluids, which Impreſs them; and our not Dreaming ſomerimes at all ſeems to ariſe from the Contractive Force of the Blood and Fluids being too Powerful for the Forces of the Mind, ſo long as it is united with them, as in an Exceſs of Eating, or from too Great a Quantity of the Expanſive, as in taking in too Much of Spirituous Liquors, both which Oppreſs and Over-turn the Forces of the Mind for the Time, that is, During the Union of the Mind vith Matter; and if the Exceſs is carryd to too Great a Degree, the Mind, when it cannot over-come, Reſults and Rebounds from theſe Forces, by which it is Diſtnited and Separated from them. ] s. 31. IF we now conſider the Body it ſelf, we ſhall find it Incident to thoſe Diſtempers, which cou'd not be otherwiſe Accounted for, than upon this Law and the Forces of it; for how comes it to paſs that Fevers, Colds, and Agues are the Common Ailments in theſe Climates, whilſt in Hotter ones Plagues and the moſl Peſtilential Diſtempers are the Produce of them? And why is the Small Pox in Particular almoſt every where Allotted to our Natures, unleſs in Countries of the moſ Exceſſive Heats? Fevers are Evidently from too Great an Expanſive Force in oui Blood and Juices, and Colds from too Great a Contractive one, and in Ague: there is a Reciprocation of and a Conteſt betwixt both; and it is no Wonder in ou Rr Climatæ Climate, where theſe Principles of the Expanſive and Contractive prevail in their Turns, in Summer and Winter, that they ſiou'd Induce the ſame Qualities and Properties into the Blood and Fluids, and by Conſequence Excite Fevers, or Impreſs a Chillneſs, a Damp and Cold upon them; and as in Spring and Autumn, the Expanſive and Contractive are in a kind of Conſlict by the Winds and Tempeſis wve obſcrve at thoſle Times, ſo it is not ſtrange that ſuch an Effect is Propagated to the Fluids oſ the Body, and that Agues are caus'd, in which the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the Blood and Juices Reciprocally Triumph and Vield; But that which occaſions the Original Diſturbance and Diſorder, in this laſt Diſtemper, is the Contractive, as Agues proceed from Cold, and the Burning Fit, Experiencet in them, ariſes from the Exaſperation of the Expanſive by the Oppoſition of the Contractive, which we have Evidenc'd is the Law oſ theſc Forces, and thereſore the Hot Paroxy ſm ſucceeds the Cold one, as is known. Tut Way thereſore to Prevent or to Cure ſuch Aguiſh Diſtempers is to Aſſiſt the Expanſive cither to Repel the Contractive before it's Admiſſion into the Blood and Juices, or to Drive it out aſterwards, which is done by Riding and Excrciſe, by Hot Vegetables, Roots, and Herbs, by Bitters, and eſpecially by the Bark of Peru, or othei Barks of a like Nature, and by a Moderate uſe of the moſt Spirituous Liquors, all vhich have an Expanſive Force, and tend to the ſubduing oſ the Contractive; and this ſcems to be the real Method, by which the ſaid Bark Operates, which, if ſo, ill be a Confutation of a Thouſand Fancies concerning it, and it's Power of Locking up Pores, or Abſorbing the Febriſick Matter, and of doing Many more Feats oſ Activity, which no one ever Dream't of, Except the Phyſician or the Philoſopher; but above all, an Employment of the Mind in all the Senſations and Faculties of it, and Raiſing it's Expanſive by Study, or by Wit and Diverſion, or any Way, which is the moſt Agrecable to it, ſeems to Carry the Greateſt Force tovards the ſubduing the Contractive of the Blood and Fluids of this Diſtemper. FrOM hence it is alſo Evident, that theſe Remedies are not to be apply'd in the Paroxyſm it ſelf, becauſe, vhen the Contractive is in it's full Power, the Expanſive ill only add to it's Triumphs, and render it more Pertinacious and Obſtinate to be Over-comn according to the preſent Law; that is, the Conteſt will be the Greater by an Addition of the Expanſive, in like Manner, as the more Expanſive Force we give to the String or ſiretch'd Wire, whilſt the Contractive Force continues fixt at the Centers oſ the Tenſion, the ſtronger will be the Vibrations betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive; Beſides which, ſince the Expanſive Force is the Cauſe of Digeſtion, and ſince any Aliments, which we take in, are in ſome Meaſure of a Contractive Nature, that is ſuch, as want to be Digeſted, and ſince the Expanſive Force alvays Acts in Oppoſition to the Contractive, the Expanſive Force in the Animal Occonomy is weakend, and taken off from ſubduing the Contractive of the Blood and Juices, by Exerting it ſelf in the Digeſtiion of the Aliment or Medicine Receivd. : WE muſt likewiſe ſay, from hence it may be Inſerd, which, as the Phænomenons before, no Philoſophy has yet Accounted for, that an Ague, vhich conſits in a Conteſt betwixt theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces, is more eaſily Cur'd, when it begins in the Spring than in the Autumn; becauſe the Expanſive Forcc in the Summer, Experience't from the Sun's Rays, very much Contributes to the ſubduing of the Contractive Force, whereas the Contractive Force of the Winter: Colds ſupports and continues that of the Blood and Juices, and conſequently falls on the Side of the Force, which wants to be Vanquiſ'd and Subdud. i Tunus alſo in Colds and Catarrhs the Contractive Force Prevails in the Blood and Fluids, and Requires the Expanſive of Riding and Exerciſe, and a Moderate uſe of Spirituous and Warm Liquors to Diſſipate and Diſſolve it; and if, notwithſtanding, the Contractive Increaſes, a Conſumption many Times enſues, and a Languor and Inactivity is Induc'd upon the Blood and Juices; Nature ſinks and droops, by means of the Contractive, and a Hectick, or ſlow and ſilent Fever accompanies the Diſorder; becauſe there is a continual Conteſt berwixt the Contractive, which ſpreads it ſel? all over the Body, and the Expanſive of the Blood and Fluids, by which they Circulate; and conſequently Soſt and Warm Liquors, as Aſſes Milk, which are Nouriſhing and Contribute to the Expanſive, as allo Gentle Riding and Exerciſe, are alike Bencfſicial, 15 in Colds. Ir Im muſt here be Obſerv'd, that when the Intention is to Conquer and Surmounr the Contractive, the Expanſive muſt be Proportiond in ſome Meaſure to it, and the ſame may be ſaid of the Contractive, vhen the Expanſive is to be Curb'd and Allayd, and herein ſeems to conſiſt the chief Skill in Phyſick, Namely, Firſt, to know of what Nature and Degree the Expanſive or Contractive Force is, hich is to be Reducd into Order, which requires the Sagacity and Penetration of one well versd in the ſeveral Diagnoſticks of Diſtempers Incident to the Human Frame and Compages; and Second, to be fully Acquainted with the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of Medicines, and to be Able to Determine what Degree of the Expanſive or Contractive Force is Proper to be Apply'd upon the Preſent Emergence. THUS in Agues, where the Contractive Force is Great, as is Evident by it's Shaking the whole Animal Syſtem, and Obtaining the ſame Eſfect in the Blood and Fluids, as an Extreme Cold in the outward Parts of the Body, Strong Bitters, and Spirituous Liquors are found Neceſlary, which, in a Conſumprion, vou'd be Prejudicial, where the Contractive being leſs is to be prevail'd upon by more Gentle Expanſives and Milder Applications; for ſo a vaſt Weight is to be Removd by a Prodigious Degree of Velocity, which, if Apply'd to a Smaller, vou'd produce an Exceſſive Velocity likewiſe, and, in the Animal Syſtem, ſo Great a one, as might Endanger the Diſſolution of it, as much as the Contractive will, if not ſubdud, Depreſs and Sink it. ON the Contrary, Fevers and Peſtilential Diſtempers ariſe from the Prevalence of the Expanſive, and are the Natives of Hot Seaſons and Countries, and thereſore it is Reaſonable to Think, that Cold and Contractive Medicines are what we ſhoud have Principally Recourſe to in ſuch Caſes, as Water, Lemmons, &e. but this is to be done vith ſome Prudence and Caution, becauſe, if a Contractive Force is added to the Blood from ſuch Applications, the Fever may be Increasd by Exciting and Exaſperating the Expanſive, which always acts in Oppoſition to the Conrractive, and conſequently it may not be Improper to Infuſe theſe Contractive Forces into the Blood with a Mixture of the Expanſive. And ſince the Writing of this I find, that Aromatick Acids were of the Greateſt Service at the Plague of aſarſcilles. THE Small-Pox manifeſtly is derivd from a Prevalence of the Contractive, and conſequently, Cordials and Spirituous Liquors, which are of an Expanſive Force, if Nature cannot do it, are Aſſiſtant to the Expelling of it; Every one is Subject to this Diſtemper, becauſe Every one has more of the Contractive than the Expanſive, in his Blood, excepting in Exceeding Hot Countries, where the Expanſive prevails, and for the ſame Reaſon Some never have Them. 5. 32. LET us now Deſcend to the Creatures, which are below us, and amongſt thoſe, whoſe Senſes have moſt of the Expanſive Force, we may reckon the Volatile Kind, and amongſt thoſc, vhoſe Senſes have moſt of the Contractive, the Aquatick; the one Inhabiting that Elaſtick Medium, the Air, and the other the Phlegmatick one of Water, from each of which their Senſitive Faculties derive their ſeveral Tinctures, and from whence we find the utmoſt Life, Quickneſs, and Vivacity, and almoſt even Wit and Humour in the Former, and in the Latter, an Eminent Torpor and Dullneſs; in the Land- Animals likewiſe, which partake of Earth, Air, and Water, we ſce a Degree of Senſc ſomething Intermediate to them both; And by the ſame Method we might Diſtinguiſh all the Sundry Species of Animals from cach other, by their Expanſive and Contractive Forces, but it is at preſent ſuſficient for us to ſhicw, that theſe Forces obtain and prevail in all Nature, and that the Law of 'em before mention'd is Eſtabliſd in the ſeveral Beings of it. 5. 33. WHAT therefore we ſnall ſarther ſay here is only This, that the Gieat Diſinction berwixt Human Minds and the Senſitive Faculties of Animals is, that the Firſt have a Contractive Force by which they Reaſon and Judge, whereas the Laſt, at the Moſt, have only an Expanſive in the Compariſon; that &s, their Faculties are ſuch, from which Ideas are ſtruck out by the Expanſiveneſs or Elaſticity of them, and by the ſame Force rememberd, but are not ſtrong enough to Retain thoſe Ideas, ſc as to Reaſon, Conſider, and Judge of Them; The Mind therefore has a Force Infinitely Superior to theſe Small and Momentany Vibrations of the Faculties of orher Ani mals, and conſcquently Inſinitely more Durable and Laſting, as the Vibrations o the Heavenly Bodies upon their Center, that is, their Revolutions round it, are mor Permanent than the Oſcillations of the Wire of a Virginal, or as the Solid Strokes o R 2 th the Expanſive of Marble ot Gold upon the ſEthercal and Elaſtick Plenuin are of a more Eternal Nature, (for, unleſs thoſe Subſtances are Annihilated, thoſe Pulſes will always Remain and Continue), than the Temporary Glances of the Expanſive Force of a Glow-Worm, or of the Flaſhes of Lightt ning; and it is from theſt Grand and Noble, theſe Strong, Sublime, and Magnificent Forces of the Mind, tliat is, from the Contractive, by which it is Capable of Reaſon, Morality, Vertue, and Religion, of which no other Beings are, that we may juſtly Conclude it's Immortality, whili it's Expanſive is Common to it, in ſome Meaſure and Degree, with orher Animate and Senſitive Creatures. S. 34. HAVING thus Finiſ'd vhat we Intended at preſent to propoſe concerning this Law of Nature and of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, ve ſhall Return to our Examination of the Modern Doctrine of Elaſticity; in Order to Explain which in Natural Bodies, the Surface 4D B is ſuppos'd to be Compreſò'd, by the Incurring Body F, Inwards to CB, and by the Vis Eeſtitutiva to be Reſtor'd to it's Firſt Situation in D, vith the ſame Celerity with which it is Compreſyd, if the Bodies are perfectly Elaſtick; But we ſnall ſee nov the Shortneſs and Defectiveneſs of ſuch Principles, as well as the Falſood and Untruth of them; FORr Firſt, the Vis Reſlitutiva, as we have ſiewn, is an Imaginary Thing, and has no Foundation in Na- ture for it's Support, ſince the Inſtance of the String or a Wire, Stretch'd betwixt two Fixt and Immoveable Points, is no Proof or Eviction of it; SECOND, Granting this Vis Reſlitutiva, by the foregoing Explanation of it from a ſtretc'd Wire or String, the Surface 4 DB ought to be Compreſ'd to 4CB, by the Incurring Body F, the Vis Reſtitutiva ought likewiſe to reſtore the Compreſd Surface to it's Former Situation in D, and by the Velocity acquird to go beyond it towards æ, then the Vis Reſtitutiva is to draw it back from thence to D, and by the Velocity acquird, the Surface is again to be carryd towards C, and ſo Alternately the Progreſſes and Regreſſes of the Surface are to be performd, till it becomes Quicſcent in D; Which if ſo, ſuppoſing any other Body, after the Repulſion of F to E, is Applyd to the Surface AD B thus agitated, and ſuppoſing ſuch Body is barely Apply d to it, without any Incurring Velocity, it muſt be in ſome Degree Repelld from it tovards E, and nearly with the ſame Force as F is, vhich is Contrary to all Fact and Experience; TnimRD, Granting likewiſe this Imaginary Vis Reſtitutiva, by which the Surface AD B, vhen Compreſy'd by the Incurring Velocity to 4CB, Reſults with the ſame from C to D, vhat vord be the Conſequence of ir? not the Repulſion of  from D to E, but from C to D, which wod prove a very ſlender Account of the Reſflection oſ Bodies at ſeveral Diſtances from the Surfaces, on which they Incurr'd, vhen, by this, they vou'd not recede one Tittle from them; FOURTH, As to the Experiment, which is made uſe of to Confirm this Compreſſion of the Surfaces of Bodies and the Reſtitution of them to their Firſt Situation, namely, that if you take Two Globes of Glaſs or Ivory, and Paint the Quieſcent one vith Ink or any other Colour, and let the Impingent one fall upon it, the Impingent Globe will be Colourd in a Broad Spot, tho', according to the Nature of Spherical Figures, It ought only to be Ting'd or Colourd in a Single Point; The Reaſon of which Broad Spot upon the Impingent Globe is thought therefore to be this, that the Surface of the Quieſcent Body is Compreſsd upon Impaction, and conſcquently, that the Impingent is by that means Colourd in a larger Circuit, than otherviſe it voud be, but ſince ve ſind the Body, upon which the Impaction is made, ſlill Spherical aſter ſuch Concourſe and Compreſſion, it muſt have Reſtor'd its Surſace to its ſormer Situation; As to This Experiment We ſay; Tuar It by no means proves the Vis Reſitutiva, or the Compreſſion of the Surſace, for which it is alledg'd; Becauſe it is not Evincd, that this Broad Spor of Ink, vhich is Impreſd upon the Impinging Globe, may not be causd by an Electricity or Arrraction of the Impingent to a certain Circuit, or bY a Repulſive Force in the Globe upon vhich the Impaction is made, which Qualities may be Excited Excited in the one or the other by the mutual Action betwixt them; it being moreover a known Fact, that a Body falling upon a Fluid, as the Ink here is ſupposd to be, Daſhes ĩt in a Circuit upwards, and makes it Riſe towards the Body which is the Aggreſſot, and ſeems to be owing to the Law before mention'd, vhere the Contractive of the Ink acts in Oppoſition and Contrary to the Expanſive of the Incurring Velocity. i . Ir may yet be Diſputed, whether this Experiment will ſucceed in all Elaſick Bodies, for by what Trials I have made, it do's not betwixt Two Globes of Marble; and conſequently, if ſo, there may be an Elaſticity; where there is no Alteration of the Surface, and therefore no Vis Reſtitutiua in it; and which can be no other vays accounted for, than by the Expanſive Forces Reſident in Bodies. in Various Proportions and Degrees, according to what we have already Mention'd and Explaind. FirTH, As to what is urgd againſt the Carteſians, vho make Elaſticity or the Reflection of Bodies to conſit in the Continuation of the ſame Motion, tho in an oppoſite Direction, it is a ſuſficient Confutation of ſuch a Fancy to hew them, that according to them, all Bodies upon Impaction ought to be Reſlected, whereas in Fact and Experience ſome Bodies are not, as thoſe which are Eſteemd to be Unelaſtick; but at the ſame Time it is no Confirmation of the Preſent Doctrine, which Introduces a Compreſſior of Surfaces and a Vis Reſtituriva of them, as much unknown in Nature, and which has as little Foundation in it, as the Continuation of Motion, where no Motion is Continu'd. SixTH, From hence therefore all which is ſaid, in Theorem the 29rh, That if Two, Bodies perfectly Elaſtick Impinge upon cach orher, their Relative Velocity beſore and after Impaction will remain the ſame, that is, aſter Concourſe, that they ill retire from each other vith the ſame Celerity with which they approach'd, is without any Grounds in Nature and Fact, it is an Abſtracting Rcaſoning, and all the Rules of Congreſs determin'd from thence, in Problem the 3, and the Algebraick Calculations formd thereupon, arc mere Notions and Chimeras, as are alſo Theorem 31, 32. and Problem 4. S. 35. THE next Doctrine we ſhall Enquire into in this Philoſophy, is concerning the Forces and Powers of Bodies, which act againſt each other, ſo as to produce an quilibrium in them. Let 2 be a Weight ſupported by Two Powers æ and 5, vhich drav it, by the Mediation of Two Strings, according to the Right Lines 4 ? and 45; The Point 4 is conſequently urg by Three Powers, TWo of vhich act in the Direction of R and 45, and the Third is the Force of Gravity in B, Tending in the Right Line 48 Perpendicular to the Earth; The Power ?” on the Left Hand vill be to the Force of Gravity, as 4C to 4D, or, as the Sine of the Angle DAE on the Right Hand to the Sine of the Angle C4 E, comprehended betwixt both the Forces, and  to A B the Repreſentation of the whole Force; and the Power S on the Right Hand will be to the Force of Gravity, as EA to 4D, or, as the Sine of the Angle CA4D on the Left Hand, to the Sine of the Angle C4E, comprehended betwixt both the Forces, /4 3 the Repreſentation of the whole Force; and the Power of æ on the Left Hand, vill be to the Power of S on the Right Hand Reciprocally, as the Sine of the Anglt EAD on the Right Hand, is to the Sine of the Angle C4D on the Left; And this is ſaid to be the Foundation of the New Mechanicks Publiſd by Varignion from which moſt of the Mechanical Theorems, containd in Borelluss Treatiſe de ſot: Animalium, are Conſequent, and by which the Forces and Powers of the Muſcle may be Eſtimated and Computed. li TH Tur Demonſtration of which Theorem is upon this Suppoſition, that 4D, Acting from A to D, is Equal to the Force of Gravity in B, and which is Repreſented by AB, and that 4D the Diagonal Force is Reſolv'd into the Lateral 4 õ, CD, but ſince, in every Triangle, the Sides are as the Sines of the Angles opposd to thoſe Sides, AC. CD=AE:: Sine of the Angle ADC=DAE. Sine of the Angle D A4C; from whence it follows, that any TWo Powers will be to each other Reciprocally as the Sines of the Angles, which the Lines of the Directions contain with the Line of Direction of the Third Power; Moreover 4D. AC:: Sine of the Angle DCA, or its Complement DCR=CAE. Sine oſ the Angle COA=DAE; and in like Manner, the Power Acting according to the Right Line 48AaD. AE:: Sinc of the Angle CAE. Sine of the Angle ADE=CAD. L E. D. APTER this comes Theorem the 347h, which affirms, That if a Heavy Body B is Incumbent upon an Inclind Plane, and is ſupported and kept ſfrom Deſcending by a Pover ”, vhich acts Parallel to the ſaid Plane, the Power æ vill be to the Weight of the Body B, as the Sine of the Angle of Inclination to the Radius, or R. B: : AD. AC. For B is acted or urgd by Three Powers, from B towards E by it's Gravity, from B tovards 4 by the Power æ, and from B towards H by Re-action, ſince  Preſſe: on the Plane 4C tovards F, and is therefore by Re-action Repreſd tovards & in a Line Perpendicular to the Plane; Conſequently, if ve Drav the Line 05, ve ſhall r have the Caſe of the Preceding Theorem, cauſe FG and B0 are Parallel, alſlo FG is the Sine of the Angle GBF, which is a l S : Right one = to the Angle HBæ, But by E v 8. Elem. 6. BG. FG:: FG. GC, by 4. Elem. 6, ::4D. AC, and therefore æ. 3:: AD. 4C.. LE. D. Hence it ſollows, That there may be ſuch an Inclination of the Plane aſſignd. that, upon it, the lea Power Imaginable ſhall be ſufficient to ſuſtain or even to raiſe the Greateſt Weight whatſoever. S. 36. THE ſoregoing Demonſtrations preſume, that 4D, Fig. 1. §. 35. AQting from A to D, is Equal to 48, or to a Force Acting from 4 to B, and that, conſider'd as a Diagonal, it is Reſolvible into the Lateral Forces 4C, CD. Bur we ſhall aſterwards ſiew, that ſuch a Reſolution of Forces is unprovd in Reaſon, and unjuſtifyd by Experience, and what is here ſaid concerning Varignion's New Mechanicks, and Sorelluss Account of Muſcular Motion, will not at all Confirm it, till it is Evinc'd, that the Doctrine of Mechanicks, as Proposd by Philoſophers, is ſomething Real in Nature, and not an Abſtracted Science, and that there is Nothing more to be Conſiderd in the Muſcles, than the Structure, Poſition and Contraction of the Fibres on the one Hand, and the Paſſiveneſ' and Mobility of the Tendons on the Other, and that there are not Certain Powers and Forces of the Expanſive and Contractive in the Mind, which are Reducible to no Laws of Mechaniſm hitherto Known, Which have their Influence and Effect in the Moving of Them. We ſhall however poſſibly take another Occaſion to Examine more Critically into the Reaſonings of that Author, and only add, as to the Second Demonſtration here alledg'd, that beſides the Reſolution of Forces, vhich is here again aſumd, to make  conſiſt of Three Powers, a very Plcaſant one is Introduc'd, namely B H, which is ſuppoyd to be derivd from Re-action, which Re-action is an Imaginary Thing, and wants a Prooſ of it's Exiſting any where in Nature, in the Senſc of this Philoſophy; for farther, is it not very abſurd to Conclude, that, becauſc B Preſſes from B to F, therewhere Three Powers act againſt each other ſo, as to produce a Quieſcence or an Aquilibrium in B; and æ the Power on the Right Hand is to  the wvhole Force or Sum of 0 ſ the Forces, as the Sine of the Angle on the G Left Hand HB0 is to the Sine of the Angle Comprehended betwixt both the Forces B R, that is, as BG to GF; for BG is the Sine of the Angle B FGC= to the Angle H BO, bel A D thereſore, and for that Reaſon it Preſſcs from B to H, a Way which is the Direũt Contrary? Not to Inſiſ, that it is altogether Inconceivable how  ſhou'd Preſs perpendicularly upon the Plane in the Direction BF, when by Conſeſſion it Preſes Obliquely upon it in the Direction BE; Since, if it's Force and Tendency is ſrom B to E, I cannot have any Apprehenſion, how it's Force and Tendency ſod be ſrom B to F, and yet upon this Contradiction the Re-action BH depends. BESIDES, If this Proportion is True, that æ. B:: AD. Aq, if 4D is = o, or Infinitely Small, that is, if 4 C approaches Infinitely near to CD, the Force æ vill likeviſe be Infinitely Small, and thereſore will be able to Support the Weight in B, and preſerve iĩt in an quilibrium, and conſequently the leaſt Addition of Force vill Move B tovards R, or Elevate it, which is Impoſſible; for let æ be a Hundred Pounds Weight of Lead, it can neither be ſtaid from Deſcending, if there is any Deſcent at all, by an Infinitely Small Force, nor much leſs can it be Raisd towards æ, but by a very Great one; which ſnews, that this Demonſtration is a Thing oſ mere Abſtraction, and B muſt not be conſiderd to have any Forces in it ſelf, but ſuch as æ may Conquer in the Proportion of 4 D to AC, which is ſaying juſt Nothing at all, for by the Inſtance alledgd it is Manifeſt, that vhen 4D is Infinitely Small, and æ is ſo, yet  ſhall Remain unaffected by it, and can neither be kept in an Equilibrium nor be Elevated towards æ. BUT to Enquire a little farther into Varignion's New Mechanicks, Let us conſider, that, Granting the Force 4 D, which acts in Oppoſition to 4 B, may be reſolvd into Ac, CD, and conſequently, that every Diagonal Force may be reſolvd into it's Lateral ones, it is True, that according to this Reaſoning, Fig. 1. 5. 35. the Force AC. Force AE:: Sine of the Angle DAE. Sine of the Angle D A4C; and if the Force to be ſupported in B is ſtill Greater, and 4F is an Oppoſite one Equal to it, AR. AG:: Sine of the Angle D AE. Sine of the Angle D AC; and therefore, AC. AE: : AR. AG, or AC. CD:: 4R. RF, vhich is certain, by Elem. 6 But 4G, AR, Ating at a Greater Diſtance from their Center 4, than AE, AC, and in the ſame Inclination to 4D, vill be leſs Forces and will ſupport a leſs Weight in B, tho' they are here made the Repreſentations of Greater Forces, as AF is Greater than 4D. Tuus it will be Harder to Raiſe the Body  to A at the Diſtance of 4 L, by a Force applyd in L, than at the Diſtance 4X, by a Force applyd in X; that is, the Force of Raiſing Bodies is Increasd in Proportion, as the Center of Action approaches Them, as the Force of Depreſſing Bodies in a Lever or Balance is Increas'd the farther ve Remove from it; and conſequently A4E, AC are Stronger Forces, and have a Power to Raiſe a Greater Weight in 4, than 4G and 4æ have, and yet 4G and AR are the Repreſentatives of the Stronger Forces. S5UPPOSING now the Force 4F to be Reſolv'd into 4C, CF, or AC, 41, it is Manifeſt, that ſince AF is the ſame, 4”, 4G ought to be Equivalent to 4C, A I, which is Impoſſible; for AC is a Greater Force than 4R, becauſe the Inclinations to AF are the ſame, and R acts at a Greater Diſtance from 4 than C do's, which Weakens and Enervates it; On the other Hand, AT is a Greater Force than 46 is, becauſe, at much the ſame Diſtance of I and G ſrom 4, it acts ncarer to A4F, that is, in a perfect Oppoſition to B, for thus it is much Eaſier, that is, a Force has more Power, to Raiſe a Weight in 4 when it is applyd Directly, than when Obliquely to it; if therefore AC is a Greater Force than 4R, and A than A4G, it is Plain, that A4C, AI cannot be Equal to 4Rr, A4G, and yet by this Doctrine they ought to be, being borh Equal to AF. FARTHER, AE. AC:: Sine of the Angle CA4D. Sine of the Angle D AE, and AI. A4C:: Sine of the Angle CAD. Sine of the Angle I4F; As therefore the Sine of the Angle IAF is Leſs in Compariſon with the Sine of the Angle C4 D, than the Sine of the Angle DAE is, ſo ought 4C to be Leſs in Compariſon with 41 than vith 4E, that is, AT will be Greater than AE; and by the ſame Reaſoning and Enlarging the Angle F A4, till it comes to F AG, any Line betwixt A7 and 46 will Repreſent a Force Greater than 4E, whereas we have ſhevn 4E to be Greater in it's Force than 4G6, and yet 4G, or the next Line to it, by what foregoes, will be in its Force Greater than 4E, vhich is Abſurd. Lastiy LastLv, If we conſider only the Fundamental Proportion of this Doctrine, that AE. AC:: Sine of the Angle CA4D. Sine of the Angle DAE, it will be liable to Objections; ſor as the Sine of the Angle CA4 D is Greater than the Sine of the Angle DAE, ſo 4E muſt be Greater in it's Force than 4C, which is not Evident; becauſe, tho 4C is more Oblique than 4E in it's Action and therefore Weaker, yet Reciprocally C acts nearer to 4, than E do's, and thereſore upon that Account is Stronger; and conſequently 4C and 4E may be ſo diſpos'd in Reſpect of 4D, if not in this Scheme, yet in an Aſſignable one, where the Obliquity of 4C may be Compenſated by the Length of 4E, in which Caſe, the Forces 4 C, 4E may be Equal, notvithſtanding the Sine of the Angle DA4 E may be Leſs than the Sine oi the Angle C a4 D. C H A P. ViII. Concerning the Deſcent of Heavy Bodies in Inclivd Planes, and the Oſcillation of Pendulums. 5. I. T N Order to Explain and Aſcertain this Doctrine, it is Suppos'd and Preſumd, that the Force of Gravity is every where the Same and Alike, altho in Different Diſtances from the Center of the Earth, it is ſaid to be Reciprocally Proportional to the Squares of the Diſtances; the Reaſon of which Suppoſition is, becauſe the Differences of the ſeveral Diſtances of Projectiles from the Center of the Earth are very Small and Inconſiderable in Compariſon with their Diſtances from the ſaid Center, and therefore may be Eſtcem'd as Nothing. It is farther told us, that the Motion of Heavy Bodies is here ſupposd to be Performd, either in Planes Inclind to the Horizon, or in Curve Superſicies, ſuch as Spherical and Cycloidical ones, and in Spaces perſectly Free and Unreſiſting. AND the Firſt Theorem in this Doctrine is, That the Deſcent of an Heavy Body upon any Inclin'd Planc is a Morion Equably Accelerated; Alſo, That the Velocity, vhich an Heavy Body, Falling down from it's Reſt upon an Inclin'd Plane, in any Given Time Acquires, is to the Velocity Acquird in the ſame Time, by an Heavy Body falling Perpendicularly, as the Height of the Plane to the Length of it. Let the Inclind Plane be 4 B, upon which let the Heavy Body D Deſcend; FirsT, by Corol. I. Theorem 34, the Force, with which a Body endeavours to Deſcend upon any Inclin'd Plane, is to the Abſolute Force of Gravity, with which it woud Deſcend A in a Perpendicular, in a Conſtant Reaſon of the Sine of the Inclination of the Plane ro the Radius, or as the Height of the Plane c to it's Length; and Conſcquently, ſince the Abſolute Force of Gravity of the Body D continues the Same and Unalterd, the Force vill Remain the ſame, with which it En- l deavours to Deſcend upon the Plane 4B, That Force therefore will always act vith the ſame Uniformity upon the Heavy Body B C D, and, by Law the Second, will continually ſuperadd Equal Increments of Velocities, in the ſame Manner, as is done in Heavy Bodies falling in a Perpendicular. From whence it follows, that the Deſcent of Heavy Bodies in an Inclin'd Planc is a Motion Uniformly or Equably Accelerated-  E. D. : SECOND, The Increments oſ the Velocities of Heavy Bodics, falling in a Perpendicular, and in an Inclin'd Plane, which are produc'd in the ſame Indefinitely ſmall Time, are to each other, as the Forces, by which they are produc'd, But the Forces are in a Conſtant Reaſon, namely, as the Length of the Planc 4B to it's Height AC, and therefore the Increments of the Velocities, ariſing from thence, will be in the ſame Reaſon, and by 12. Elem. 5. the Sum alſo of the Increments of the one will be to the Sum of the Increments of the other, in the ſame Reaſon; that is, the the Velocity of the Heavy Body falling in a Perpendicular is to the Velocity of an Heavy Body Deſcending, in the mean Time, upon an Inclind Plane, as the Length of the Plane to the Height of it. E. D. ] Corol. 1. THE Velocities of an Heavy Body falling in an Inclin'd Planc are as the Times, in which they are Acquird. Corol. 2. VHATEVER has been Demonſtrated in Theorem 17. concerning a Motion uniformly Accelerated will be likewiſe True concerning the Deſcent of Bodies in Inclind Planes; Namely, That the Space deſcrib'd by an Heavy Body falling in an Inclin'd Plane in a given Time, Computed from the Beginning of it's Motion, villl be the half of That, which is deſcrib'd by it, in the ſame Time, with the Velocity Iaſt Acquird; Likewiſe, That the Spaces, deſcribd and computed from the Beginning of the Motion, are in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Times or the Velocities, and the Velocities and Times in a Subduplicate Reaſon of the ſaid Spaces. Corol. 3. HENCE the Aſcent of an Heavy Body up any Incſin'd Plane is a Motion uniformly Retarded, in like Manner, as in the Aſcent of a Body in a Perpendicular, and it is accompanyd with the ſame Properties and Symptoms. Schol. IF we have Recourſe to Experiments, we ſhall find them Conformable to the foregoing Reaſonings, which it will be Eaſy to Try in Planes, which are not very much Inclind; ſince the Motions, being performd with a leſs Degree of Velocity, may be Exactly and Critically Meaſurd, which do's not happen in Perpendicular Deſcents, here the Exceeding Swiftneſs of the Motion leaves no Room for any Accurate Obſervations. It is here to be Noted, that the Planes are ſupposd to be perfectly Poliſ'd, and that the Motion is not Obſtructed by any Uneveneſs or Roughneſs of the Surface. .2. AND from hence, Theorem ;61h, It is Demonſtrated, Fig. 5. 1. That the Time, in which the Inclin'd Plane 4 B is deſcribd, is to the Time, in which the Perpendicular 4C is deſcrib'd, as 43 the Length of the Plane to 4C the Length of the Perpendicular; : TuE 371h, Fig. 5. 1. That the Celerities of Heavy Bodies, upon any Inclind Plane, and in a Perpendicular, are Equal, when the Heavy Bodies, falling from the ſame Height, come to the ſame Horizontal Line, that is, from 4 to B and C. TuE 381h, That if a Body Deſcends in à contind Motion from the ſame Height, thro any Contiguous Inclin'd Planes, 45, BG CD, or GC, CD, or ED, it vill always - Acquire the ſame Velocity at the End u A G E in D, which is Equal to That, which is j ? ũ Acquird by it's falling Perpendicularly from a like Height, or ſfrom  to F; From Vhence it is Infer'd, that, if a Body Deſcends thro' the Circumference of a æ Circle, or thro' any Curve Lines, which = li are ſupposd to Conſiſt of an Infinite r- Number of Strait ones, it alvays Acr quires the ſame Velocity, as if it had Deſcended in a Perpendicular from the ſame Height; and if, after it's Deſcent thro the Inclin'd Planes, or thro' any Curve, or the Circumference of a Circle, it Changes it's Motion upwards thro' the ſame Inclin'd Planes, or Curve, or the Circumference of a Circle, it willRiſe to the ſame Height from Which it Fell; becauſe, ſince Gravity always acts with the ſame Force in the ſame Plane, whether the Body Aſcends or Deſcends, it's Efficacy will be the ſame to Diminiſh the Velocity of the Body in it's Aſcent, as to Increaſe ĩt in it's Deſcent, thro' the ſame Line or Space, and in Points of an Equal Height the Velocity of the Body will be the ſame; But the Velocity, in the Beginning of the Deſcent, was nothing, and therefore, in it's Aſcent, when ĩt comes to the ſame Height, the Velocity will be o, or nought, which Point will be the Limit or Term, to which the Body Aſcends; and conſequently, if a Body Deſcend: thro' the Arc of a Circle, or a Curve, to the loweſt Point of that Arc, and afterards, by the Velocity there Acquird, Aſcends thro' an Equal Arc, it will Aſcend and Deſcend thro Equal Arcs or Spaces in Equal Times; s ;— v Tur TuE 397h, That, if a Circle is plac'd Perpendicular to the Horizon, and from the Higheſt and Loweſt Point of it Two Inclind Planes, A, BC be Drawn to the ſame Point of the Circumſerence, the Times of the Deſcents thro' either of the ſaid Planes will be Equal to the Time, in which any Heavy Bodies fall Perpendicularly throo the Diameter 4B; and thereſore all Planes, which are Terminated by the Upper or Lover Point oſ the Diameter and by the Circumference of a Circle, however Inclin'd, are deſcrib'd in the ſame Time; As AC, BC, BF, BG, B H, &c. TuE 40h, That, i? Two Heavy Bodies Deſcend upon Two or More Planes, GABC, HDEF, that are Similarly Inclind and are Proportional, The Times, ſpent in Deſcribing of em, are in a Subduplicate Reaſon of the Lengths of the Planes; And the ſame may be ſaid of Two Curve Superficies, 4B, DE, vhich are Similar, and have a Similar Poſition, conſiderd as conſiſing of an Infinite Number of Inclind Planes, namely, that the Times, ſpent in Deſcribing of them, are as the Roots of the Curves or Lengths. . 3. TuESE ſcveral Theorems being povd by a Geometrick Reaſoning, and epending upon the Principles above, in the Deſinition preceding the 41ſ Theorem they are apply'd to the Pendulum, or any Heavy Body Swinging by a ſmall Thread upon à fixt Center, ] vhich is here given as the Definirion of one; If therefore ſuch a Pendulum Oſcillates about ſuch a Center, and deſcribes the Arc of à Circle by that OſcilIation, there vill the ſ~ame Motion Arrive to a Bod thus Oſcillating, and it will be ihe ſame Caſe, as if a Body oud be Mov in a Spherical Surface perfeẽtly Hard and Poliid; Becaue a Motion is ſuppos'd about the Center entirely Free and Abſtracted from the Airs Reſiſtance, vhich in Heavy Pendulums is very Small and Inconſiderable; If therefore the Pendulum is now drawn to C from it's Perpendicular Situation in 4 B and permitted to Swing, ĩt will deſcribe an Arc of a Circle in it's Fall or Deſcent to that Situation, and there Acquire a Velocity, which woud Carry it off in a Tangent from B, but being Retaind in a Circle by the Thread, it Riſes in an Arc to the ſame Height in D, from which it fell, according to the ſoregoing Theorems, where, Ioſing all i's Velocity, it again Deſcends by it's Gravity to it's Perpendicular Situation, l l and by the Velocity there Acquird mounts to its firſt Height in ꝗ, and ſo, by Aſcending and Deſcending, it's continual Vibrations are performd in the Circumference of ; Circle; and if the Motion oſ Pendulums was not Obſtructed by the Air, and by the Friction in the Center of Rotation, theſe Vibrations vou'd lat for Ever, but upon theſe Accounts thie Ares deſcribd Grov Shorter and Shorter, till they Diſappear, and the PenduIum becomes Quieſcent. S. 4. AFTER Which it is affirmd, Theorem the 41ſ, That the ſmall Vibration: of the ſame Pendulum, however Unequal they ate, very Nearly, and t Senſe, are per performd in the ſame Time, or, which is the ſame, the Oſcillations in Unequal 4 pArcs, if the Arcs are not too Large; becauſe, in ſuch a Caſe, the Ares and Sub-ſæua tenſes do not much Differ, but, by the foregoing Theorems, the Subtenſes, drawn Timſrom any Point of the Circumſference to the Bottom of the Diameter, are perform'd t. Keit in Equal Times; And this Theorem is ſaid to be juſtify'd by Experience, for if Two Phyſ. TheoPendulums of an Equal Length are ſet a-Swinging, ſo that the one ſhall Deſcribe reò 4much Greater Arcs than the orher, the Times of the Oſcillations ſhall be almoſ Equal, for in an Hundred Oſcillations there will ſcarcely be the Difference of the Time of One. 5. 5. THE 42d Tells us, That the Times or Durations of the Oſcillations of TWO r7. ſim Pendulums, which deſcribe Similar Arcs, 2F, GH, are in a Subduplicate Reaſon of Duratun ę the Lengths of the Pendulums 4 B, CD; Becauſe, by the foregoing Theorems, ſiſſince the Arcs are Similar, the Time of the Deſcent thro E B will be to the in a sutuaTime of Deſcent thro GD, in a Subduplicate Reaſon of æ B to GD; that is, Huase Lean half the Times of the Oſcillations will be in a Subduplicate Reaſon of halfſſi ſ.the Arcs, and therefore the Times of the whole Oſcillations will be in a Sub- ſm duplicate Reaſon of Them; but the Arcs or halP Ares being Similar are as the Pr. se e Semidiameters, vhich deſcribe them, or as the Lengths of the Pendulums, and con- Theorem 4' ſequently the Durations or Times of the whole Oſcillations will be u . in a Subduplicate Reaſon of thoſe ] Semidiameters or Lengths; From vhence it follows, that, on the ConG u trary, the Lengths of the Pendulums are in a Duplicate Reaſon of D the Times or Durations, in which the Oſcillations are Performd; And E 5 ſince the Durations or Times of the Vibrations are Reciprocally, as the B Number of Vibrations performd in the ſame Time, it will be Eaſy, from the Number of Vibrations Given, which are made by one Pendulum P of a known Length in a Time Given, to Determine the Number of Vibrations, which are made in the ſame Time by another Pendulum ꝓ of a known Length; for as P,  Repreſent the Lengths of the PenduIums, Let N, n Expreſs the Numbers of the Vibrations of the ſaid Pendulums, and T, t the Times; N thereforc is here Given, and n is the Number to be found; BY the Preſent Theorem T. t:: / P. &/ p, and by what has been now alledgſd, T. ?:: n. N, conſequently, n. N::  P. VP, OF Vp. V P:: N. n, but VP, Vp, and V, being known, n likewiſe vill be Aſcertaind; On the Contrary, from the Number of Vibrations Given, N, n, which are performd by the Two Pendulums in the ſame Time, and from the Given Length of one of Them P, ꝓ the Length of the other may be Defin'd, for P  T.0:0. , by what foregos, therefore n*. N* : : P.». S. 6. THE 43d Informs us, That the Velocity Tiæ væioſ a Pendulum, in it's Loweſt Point B, is as the à ſſ/xæ Subtenſe of the Arc, which it Deſcribes in it's rom, a Deſcent; Which Depends upon the Truth of the s⸗ſm⸗ o/ preceding Theorems; if therefore, from the õ.ĩẽ⸗ i ſaid Loweſt Point, ſuch Arcs be taken upon the bſe. Circumference of a Circle, deſcribd by the ſt ſeꝶ Pendulum, that their Subtenſes ſhall be, as Theorem 1, 2, 3, &c. Reſpectively, and ſome Acting Force Impels the Pendulum upwards, thro' the Firſt, Second, or Third Arc, &e. the Velocities of the Pendulum, movd by theſe Forces, vill, in the Loweſt Point, be as I, 2,3, &⸗. Reſpectively; by which means, ve may Impart Different Velocities to a Pendulous Body in any Reaſon aſſign'd, and thoſe, which are .e S 2 Fivl rivd from the Percuſſion of another Body, may be compard with one another, as well as ith others, which are Originally Given. Tnus, if Two Pendulums of the ſame Length, DF, EG, hang Cloſe together, ſo that the Pendulous Bodies touch, and the one is drawvn from it's Perpendi- A cular to the Point 5 in one Arc, and the other to the Point3 in the Oppoſite, and are then let Looſe; by the Theorems above, they will come to the Perpendicular at the ſame Time, and the Velocities with which they ſtrike each other will be as 5 and 35 and if, aſter Percuſſion, the Firſt Riſes to3, and the Laſt tos, their Velocities will be Exchangd, and will be as3 and D 5 to Contrary Sides; And by a like a _ H Method, the Rules of Motion, both i ãll in Hard and Elaſtick Bodies, before /ſ ræ 555 Explaind, may be Redued and Sub-B mitted to Experience; The Demonſtrations oſ theſe ſeveral Theorems are Celebrated and nown, and therefore I purpoſely omit them, being underſtood by any one, Who knows the Common Principles of Geometry. S. 7. Tuus far we are got in the Abſtracted and Mathematick Way of Reaſoning upon Pendulums, and now we are carry'd by this Philoſophy to an Hiſtorical Account of Them; That the leaſt Vibrations of the ſame Pendulum are nearly of an Equal Time or Duration, altho' the Arcs, which are Deſcribd by it, are Unequal; That Chriſtian Hugens, from hence, ew'd the Great Advantage of Pendulums in Regu Iating the Motions of Automatons, in his Horologium Oſcillatorium ; That Galileus indeed, the firſt Author and Inventor of this Science, had before made uſe of Pendulums in his Obſervations in Aſtronomy and Nature, which require an Exact Mcaſure ol Time; That Hugens, notwithſtanding, was the Firſt, vho Introduc'd Automatons with Pendulums, and Provd them, by Experiments, far to Exceed thoſe, which before Obtain'd, vhoſe Librators were Horizontal; That ſfrom thence Theſc Automatons were generally Receiv'd, ſome of which have becn ſo Artificially made, as to give a Mea ſure of Time, much Juſter and more Exact than the Morion of the Sun, which ſhews the Apparent or Relative Time only, but not the Real and Abſolute; From vhence it comes to Paſs, that Pendulums, at Certain Times, ſiew the Hour Difſcrent from the Apparent one, and ſomerimes Fiſteen or Sixteen Minutes more or above what is Pointed out by the Sun-Dial, and at orhers, ſo many Leſs, and it is nor, Excepting Four Times in a Year, that ithe Pendulum and the Sun Agree; It is farther ſaid in this Hiſtory of Pendulums, that, altho' the Vibrations of the ſame Pendulum, where the Ares deſcribd by it are Unequal, are Nearly, and to Senſe, of an Equal Time and Duration, yet, ſince they are not Geometrically and ſtrictly ſ5, but the Greater Vibrations are fomething Longer, in their being Perform'd, than the Leſs, and by that means Differ, it is maniſcſt, that from all theſe Small Diſferences taken together, at Length a very Conſiderable one vill Enſue, which is Matter of Fact, and what we find by Experience; For if the Wheels are Aſfected with a Kind of Stiſneſs, as in Cold Weather, ſo as to Impel the Pendulum ith a Leſs Force, the Oſcillations being Shorter will alſo be Quicker than uſual; If the Wneels have too Great a Lubricouſneſs, and they thereby make the Pendulum move in Larger Arcs, the Oſcillations are of a Longer Duration, and the Time ſicwn by the Pendulum proceeds Slower; It is alſo moreover alledgſd, that, by ſome late Evperiments in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, it is Plain, that the Pendulum of an Automaton, Performing its Vibrations in Vacuo, upon the Taking oſf oſ the Reſiſtance of the Air, deſeribd Greater Arcs, and was a Longer Time in cach of it's Oſcilations; To Remedy this Inaccuracy of Pendulums, and to Reduce the Unequal Recirocations of them to Equal Times, Hugens Invented a Way, by which the Pendulous lous Body ſoud be carry'd in the Arc of a Cyclois, but, by the Nature and Properties of that Figure, the Times of the Deſcents of Heavy Bodies, thro' any Arcs to the Loweſt Point or Vertex of it, are Equal, and therefore, if the Pendulous Body always Moves in the Arc of a Cyclois, the Times oſ it's Oſcillations will be exactly Equal, whether the Pendulum Vibrates in Greater or Leſs Arcs. s. 8. IN order therefore to Demonſtrate this Property oſ the Cyclois, Theorem ĩ the 451h. it is propos'd to be Provd, That, if a Body is urg'd in a Right Line to-] ards a Center, by Forces which are Proportional to the Diſtances ſrom the ſaid. Center, Let it fall from any Height, It will always come to the Center in the ſame Time; and that Time is to the Time, in which the Body can Deſcribe the ſame Pathh vith a uniform Velocity and Equal to That, which is Acquird at the End of ir's Fall, as the Semiperiphery of a Circle to it's Diameter. : THE 461h Shews, That, in a Cyclois, whoſe Axis ſtlands Perpendicular to the Hori- I zon, and whoſe Vertex is Inverted, the Times, in which a Body, urgd by the Force of Gravity and let fall from any Point in the ſaid Cyclois, arrives at the Vertex, are. Equal, and, to the Time of it's Perpendicular Deſcent thro' the Axis, are in the Pro-l portion of the Semiperiphery of a Circle to it's Diameter. Thus let 4CD be a; Cyclois, vhoſe Axis is CE and it's Generating Circle 2CG; ſince the Tangent in any Point  is Parallel to the Chord CT drawn in the Generating Circle Form'd about the Axis EC, by the Writers upon this Figure it is manifeſt, that the Bod in it's Deſcent is Accelerared with the ſame Force in H, as if it had Deſcended thro' the Right Line GC; h But the Force, with which it is Accelerated in GC, is to the Force oſ Gravity, as 2C to GC, by what foregoes, and MC. GC: : GC. CE, by Elem. 6. Prop. 8. Therefore the Force, vith vhich the Body is Accelerated in H, is to the Force of Gravity, as GC to CE; by the ſame Reaſoning, the Force of Gravity is to the Force, with which the Body is Accelerated in any other Point K, as CE to CL, and conſcquently, ex ſæquo, the Force, with which the Body is Accelerated in H, is to the Force, with vhich ĩt is Accelerated in X, as GC to LC, or as the Double of GC to the Double of LC, that is, by the Writers upon this Figure, as the Curve of the Cyclois HC to the Curve XC; The Forces therefore, with which a Body is Accelerated in it's Deſcent upon a Cyclois, are as the Lengths of the Curve to be Deſcribd; Let us now ſuppoſe the Right Line æ Equal to the Length of the Curve Aę, and let a Body be Cornceivd to be urg]ũd vith the ſame Forces in the Right Line æc tovards 5, vith which the Body is urg'd in ir's Deſcent thro' the Curve 4C; But the Forces, with which the Body is urgd in any of the Points of the Cyclois  and K, are as the Lengths HC, X, or he, ke, that is, the Forces in any Places, are as the Diſtances of thoſe Places from the Point ;, and therefore, by the Preceding Theorem, the Times of the Deſcents from any Height are Equal. MOREOVER, the Time of the Deſcent from 4 to c is to the Time, in which ac or 2EC is Deſcribd with the Velocity Acquird at the End of the Fall, as the Semiperiphery oſ a Circle is to the Diameter, by the Preceding Theorem; but rhe Time, in which 22C is Deſcrib/d with the ſame Velocity, is Equal to the Time, in which the Body falling by it's own Gravity Deſcends thro' EC the Axis of the Cyclois; from vhence the Time of the Deſcent thrò' æ, or AC is to the Time, in vhich the Body Deſcends thro' the Axis of the Cyclois, as the Semiperiphery of the Circle to the Diameter; Conſequently, the Time, in which the Body Deſcends in the Cyclois thro' the Arc a4c, and Aſcends thrò that of CD, that is, the Time of the Motion thro the whole Cyclois 4 CD is to the Time of the Perpendicular Deſcent thrò' the Axis oſ the Cyclois, as the whole Periphery of the Circle to it's Diameter. 5.9. Is s. 9. Ir therefore a Pendulous Body Vibrates in a Cyclois, whether it Perſorms Greater or Leſſer Arcs, the Oſcillations will be always made in Equal Times; but how to Effect, that a Pendulous Body ſhod Vibrate in a Cyclois, is the Diſficulty, which Hugens has ſnewn the Way to Surmount, in his Horologium Oſcillatorium, Part the Third. TnS, a Curve is to be found, by whoſe Evolution the Curve Given is Deſcrib, and Two Plates are to be Bent into the ſame Curvature, betwixt which the PenduIous Body, Hanging by Threads of a Certain and Determin'd Length, do's not Deſcribe a Circle, but ſome other Curve; Let TWo Plates, 4CB, A E D, be Bent into Similar and Equal Figures, and from the Point 4 let the Thread of the Pendulum be ſuſpended, which, whilit the PenduIum Oſcillates, Wras it ſel? Round the / Plates, 4 C B, AED, to which it always A Adheres and Adapts it ſelſ3 by this Application of the Thread to the Plates, V. the Motion of the Pendulum in a Circle l EN is continually Interrupted and Hinderd, BP j ] E and the Pendulous Body is carry'd thro 3 l l the Curve BPF D; the Curve a4 CB or N l AE D is calld the Evolute, and the N l v Curve B?F D is ſaid to be Deſcrib'd by l Evolution; If the Curves, 4CB, A ED, are two Semicyclois's, vhoſe Axes or Diameters oſ the Generating Circles are Equal to FG or 4G, namely, to half the Length of the Pendulum, the Curve PF D, thr which the Pendulous Body is carry'd, becomes an entire Cyclois, whoſe Axis is FG, half the Length oſ the Pendulum, according to what has been Demonſtrated by Hugens and Others. S. 10. FURTHERMORE, Since the Portion of a Cyclois, near the Vertex F, is Deſcribd by the Morion of a Thread, whoſe Length is 4F, and the Circle, from the Center 4 at the Interval AF, is Deſcrib'd by the ſame Motion of the Thread, the Circle, Paſſing thr F, will nearly Coincide with the Portion of the Cyclois, which is next to the Vertex , and is nearly of an Equal Curvity with it, and thereſore the Pendulous Body is carry'd in the ſame Time to  thro' a ſmall Arc of the Circle, as thro' an Arc of the Cyclois; From whence it again follows, that the Oſcillations of a Pendulum, thro' the ſmall Ares of a Circle, will be performd in Equal Times, ſince thoſe in a Cyclois, with which they nearly Coincide, ate ſo. Tui Time thereſore, in which a Pendulum performs the Ieaſt Oſcillation in a Cirele, is Equal to the Time, in which an Oſcillation is performd thro' the Arc ol a Cyclois, vhoſe Axis is half the Length of the Pendulum; But the Time, in vhich the Oſcillation in a Cyclois is performd, is to the Time of the Perpendicular Deſcent thro' the Axis of the Cyclois, that is, thro' half the Length of the Pendulum, as the Periphery of the Circle to the Diameter; and from hence it is Conſequent, that the Time of Every the leaſt Oſcillation is, to the Time oſ the Deſcent thro the Length of the Pendulum, in a Conſtant and Certain Proporrion of the Periphery oſ the Circle to the Diameter oſ it, Multiplyd into the Square-Root oſm Two. s. 11. Ir, in Diſferent Climates and Regions oſ the Earth, the ſame Pendulum perſorms its Oſcillations in Unequal Times, the Times of the Deſcents thro' the Length of the Pendulum in theſe Different Climates will be likewiſe Unequal, and vhere the Oſcillations Proceed Slower, the Body will Deſcend Slower in a Perpendicular, and in a Given Time will Deſcribe a leſs Space in ĩt's Fall; but it is Certain by Experiment, that in thoſe Regions, which are Neareſt to the Equator, the Oſcillations of the ſame Pendulum are Slower than in other Places, whoſe Latitude is Greater, and thereſore Heavy Bodies, in thoſe Countries, Deſcribe in their Fall a leſs Space in a Given Time, and are leſs Accelerated in theit Motion than in Ours, vhich is farther Removd from the Equator; ſo that by Experiments it is Evinc'd, that the Action of Gravity is Leſs in thoſe Places, whoſe Latitudes are Leſũs, than in Places, which are Nearer to the Pole: WHiICH Whuicn Decreaſe of Gravity is ſaid to ariſe from the Centrifugal Force, derivd from the Earth's Rotation about it's Axis, which is Greater, as the Circuits of the Bodies Revolving are ſo, and is always therefore as the Sine of the Diſtance of the Place from the Pole, which under the æEquator is Greateſt, and under the Pole nonc; and conſequently, the Force of Gravity, in the æquator, is the Leaſt, and, in the Pole, the Greateſt. This is a full and ſuccindt Account of the Doctrine of Pendulums, and of the Deſcent of Heavy Bodies in Inclind Planes, into borh of which we ſhall nov Inquire. s. 12. As to the Deſcent of Heavy Bodies in Inclin'd Planes, 5. 1, ve muſt obſerve, that, in Order to juſtify this Reaſoning, the Force of Gravity being Reciprocally Proportional to the Squares of the Diſtances, a Favorite Notion of the Preſent Philoſophy, is Diſcarded, which is it's Firſt Abſtraction, and tho', upon the Account there mention'd, where the Difference of the Diſtances is very Small, the Difference of the Force of Gravity may not be Conſiderable, yet it is ſomething, and takes from the Geometrick Exactneſs of theſe Demonſtrations, but this we Paſs over; And the next and moſt Material Objection againſt this Doctrine is, that it ſuppoſes Matter to be Similar and Homogeneous, to have no Intrinſick Forces of i's own, ncither Expanſive nor Contractive, to be entirely Paſſive in it ſelf, and only Acted with one uniform Force of Gravity, and that this Force of Gravity urges it by Continual and Succeſſive Impulſes, by which it is Equably Accelerated; On the Contrary, we have, in our firſt Part of the Principles of Philoſophy, endeavourd to confute this Opinion of Matter being Similar and Paſſive, and being Acted upon by uniform Impulſes of Gravity, and we there ſaid, e woud give a Solution of Matter's being Acelerated in it's Deſcent, without any ſuch Suppoſitions; We therefore affirm, that Matter conſiſts of Various Degrees of Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which will be ſuſficient to ſolve the Different Appearances we find in it; that Fire dos not Deſcend at all, upon the Account of its vaſt Expanſive Force, which is oppoſite to the Earth's Contractive; that Light and Volatile Bodies Deſcend leſs than others, which are Heavier, upon Account of the ſame Expanſive Force being more ſenſible in them; and that the Groſſeſt Bodies Deſcend the moſt, as being endu'd with a Greater Degree of the Contractive, and conſequently with a Force, which is not Op poſite to, but Concurrs and Agrees with the Contractive of the Earth, to which they therefore Unite and Deſcend; They are likeviſe Accelerated, the Nearer they come to the Earth, and have a leſs Tendency to it, the Farther they are ſrom it, for the ſame Reaſon, that the Expanſiye Force of Fire obtains a Greater Effect upon Inflammable or Expanſive Matter, vhen Near, than when at a Diſtance, and for the ſame Reaſon, that all other Forces are ſtronger, in their Actions upon each other, when leſs Retird, than when more ſo; And from hence it is manifeſt, that Various Bodies are more or leſs Accelerated to the Earth, according to the Different Degrees, which they have, of the Contractive or Expanſive, and that the ſame Bodies are Accelerated toards it, if of a Conrractive Nature, rather in a Reciprocal, than in a Reciprocally Duplicate, Proportion to their Diſtances; for thoſc of an Expanſive Retire actually from it, as Fire, or Endeavour, in ſome Meaſure, to do it, as Light and Volatile Bodies. As to what is here ſaid of Experiments, It is Confeſ'd, that the Perpendicular Deſcents of Bodies cannot be Determin'd by Them, and Thoſe in Inclind Planes are own'd not to Agree Exactly with the Doctrine Aſſerted from Abſtraction and Reaſon, which therefore may be as well Aſcrid'd to ſomething in the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, as to the Uncveneſs of the Surface, on which the Experiments are made. Farther, it is not Evident, that Bodies arc more Accelerated, Treciſely, as They come Nearer to the Earth, and Leſs, as they Retire from it, ſince Forces do not always Exert themſclves more or leſs, as we Approach to them, or Recede from them; many Times they Exert themſelves to a Great Degrec in a near Approximation to'em, and not at all at ſome farther Diſtance from them, as in Fire, which is of an Expanſive Nature, and in Snow, which is of a Contractive one; and thus it may be, in Reſpect of the Earth, that tho Heavy Bodies, near it, are vehemently Urgd and Accelerated tovards it, yet, at a Greater Diſtance from it, they may not be Gradually Diminiſ'd in ſuch their Acceleration; meleration; but this we have Diſcoursd of in another Place, where we conſiderd the Propagation of Action from a Center. §. 13. THE ſeveral Theorems, in s. 2, Depending upon theſe Principles of a Similar and Paſſive Matter, without any Intrinſick Forces belonging to it, and upon uniſorm Impulſes ſfrom Gravity, which are all of them Chimerical Fancies and Mere Suppoſitions, all the Demonſtrations, which belong to them, will be only a Mathematick and Abſtracted Reaſoning upon Properties and Things, which have no where an Exiſtence, but in the Mind, which Creates them; Beſides which, in the;87h Theorem, mentiond in the ſame Section the 24, It cannot be Conceiv'd, how a Body mou'd Aſcend, thro ſeveral Inclind Planes or thr a Curve, to the ſame Height, from which it ſell, by the ſame Action and Impulſe of Gravity, and then Deſcend, and ſo alternately in continual Vibrations; becauſe, tho', ſuppoſing the Body to be Accelerated and to Acquire a conſiderable Velocity by a large Deſcent, that Velocity wou'd be Gradually Diminiſ'd in the Bodies Aſcent in a Spherical Surſace, till it was Deſtroyd, when it came to the ſame Height from which it ſell, and then it voud again Deſcend and be Accelerated, the Contrary Way, by the Perpetual Action and Impulſe of Gravity, if Matter was at the ſame Time Paſſive, and had no Internal Force of it's own, vet this is not Fact; ſince a Globe of Lead will not riſt to near the Height ſfrom which it fell, nor is it Reaſonable it ſioud, if it has in it ſelf a Force, Reluctant to a Velocity Impreſs'd, which it has, by being of a Contractive Nature, vhereas other Bodies, which are of a more Expanſive and Elaſtick, will riſe to a Greater Height by their concurring with the Force of Velocity Acquird, which is likewile of an Expanſive one: Moreover, where the Deſcent oſ Heavy Bodies is Small and Inconſiderable, which is the Caſe of Pendulums, we cannot Imagine, that there is any ſenſible Acceleration, ſo as by a Velocity Acquird it ſoud Alcend at all, or at moſt, to a very little Height; We think, that they are rather carry'd down by their Gravity ith a moſt Minute Velocity imparted to them, and therefore, that they are ſlop't and hinderd from Riſing far by the ſame Force, by which they Deſcend. This therefore appears to be the Real Theory of Deſcending Bodies in a Spherical Surface, and that the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which Reſide in them, Enter into the Account, and are the Reaſon of their Riſing to a Greater or Leſs Height, aſter their Deſcent, which will but Illy Agree with their Riſing to the ſame Height, from which they fell, by the Paſſiveneſs of Matter and the uniform Impulſes and Action of Gravity; and hence will be ſcen the Vanity of that Proportion, that the Times, ſpent in Deſcribing Similar Curves or Planes Similarly Inclin'd, are in a Subduplicate Reaſon of the Curves or Lengths. S. 14. FROM the Deſcent of Bodies, in Curves or Inclind Planes, we are Led to the Vibrations of a Pendulum, for which the preceding Doctrine was Principally Contrivd; and the firſt Step, which is made, is to let us know, s. 3, that the Caſe of Deſcending Bodies, in Curves or Inclin'd Planes, is the ſame vith that of the Oſcillations in a Pendulum; that the Center of Suſpenſion, from which the Pendulum Oſcillates, performs the ſame Oſfice, in Retaining the Body in it's Circular Vibrations in the one Circumſtance, as the Spherical Surſace do's in the other; that rhey are alike Accelerated by Gravity and Deſcend by it, and Aſcend by the Velocity Acquird, till that Velocity is Loſt by the Action of Gravity, when they again Dẽſcend, &r. But here is the Diſtinction, that, in Bodies Deſcending in Inclin'd Planes, the Gravity of them, and the Velocity ariſing from thence, and the Determination of their Motion from the Inclination of the Pſanes, are only to be Conſiderd; whereas, in the Pendulum, the Two Former do not only Enter into the Account, and the Latter from the Detention of them in a Circle, but alſo the Center of Suſpenſion has an Effect peculiar to it, and to which there is nothing Analogous in the mere Deſcent of Bodies throo Inclin'd Planes, and conſcquently, the Demonſtrations oſ the one cannot be Reaſonably Extended to the Properties of the orher; for it is not the ſame Thing for a Body to be carryd Round in a Sling, where there is a Perpetual Centrifugal Force Exerted, and for a Body to Roll upon a Table, vhether Plane or Concave, vithout any Center, from which it Endeavours to Recede. THr TuE Nature of Pendulums and of their Vibrations therefore ſeems to be this, which Th Nature of vill ſufficiently Diſtinguiſ them from the Deſcent of Bodies only upon Inclina ſ́ſu-m Planes, that, vhen any Heavy Body hangs, by a String, from the Center of Suſpen- ſm of ibir ſion, there are TWo Contrary Forces, which act againſt cach other, the one in the ſſll-u ſaid Center, which is a Force of Contraction, by which it Endeavours to bring the Pendulous Body towards it, the other an Expanſive Force in Reſpect of that Center, by which it Endeavours to Recede ſrom it, by it's Gravitation to the Earth, Theſe, Acting againſt cach orher and the Contractive prevailing, a Quieſcence enſues; but, if to the Expanſive Force of the Pendulous Body is added the Expanſive of Percuſſion by the Hand or by any other Inſtrument, or of a Greater Weight and Gravity, ſo as to Exceed the Contractive of the Center, the Thread is Broken and the Body Deſcends to the Earth; If by this Percuſſion the Expanſive do's not Excced the Contractive, there is a Conteſt betwixt the one and the other, by which the Oſcillations are Produc'd; for the Pendulous Body cannot Recede from the Center, and it is leſs from Approaching tovards it, than before this Nev Addition of the Ex panſive; and conſequently, the Force muſt be ſpent in Circulating Backwards and Forwards, till at length by the Prevalence of the Contractive in the Center, it becomes again Quieſcent. AND FIRST, From hence it is manifeſt, that Heavier Pendulums vill Oſillate longer iy Hivæthan Lighter ones, becauſe the Expanſive Force in Heavier Bodies, in Reſpect to the Center of Detention, is Greater than that of Lighter ones, and if there is an Addition ſ;, ibm of the Expanſive Force by Percuſſion, it will be longer before the Contracdtive Force Lihiæ ou. of the Center prevails in the one Caſe, than the orther; which is Contrary to the Deſcent of Bodies in Inclind Planes, where Lighter and more Elaſtick ones will Aſcend and Deſcend to a longer Time than Lead will, which is ſoon Quieſcent. ON the other Hand, this Paænomenon is Explaind by the Diſference of the Air's Reſiſtance, which is leſs in Proportion to Heavier Bodies than to Lighter, but if that is a true Solution, it ſiod be told us, why the Reſiſtance of the Air has not the ſame Effet in the Deſcent of Heavier Bodies thro' Inclin'd Planes, which it Apparently has not, and therefore the Solution I have given ſeems to be the moſt Rational. SECOND, From hence likewiſe is Evident, the Reaſon, why the leat Vibrations ius, i hus of the ſame Pendulum are nearly of an Equal Time or Duration, but yet that it Viéraios èvill Deſcribe longer Arcs, in ſomething a longer Time, than ſorter ones; becauſe lA, ſam ſa the Expanſive Force of the Pendulum, which Acts againt the Contractive of the aarly of a Center of Detention, is chiefly owing to the Gravitation of the Pendulous Body, by E-ual Tun. which it Endeavours to Recede from that Center, but that Force being always the ſame and conſtant, and the Gentle Percuſſion, by Which it is put into Motion, adding Little to it or Equably doing it, and the Arcs being ſmall, it is Plain, that ſuch Unequal Arcs will be nearly Performd in the ſame Time, tho not Exactly ſo, becauſe Really the ſame Force will Deſcribe a longer Arc in a longer Time, and a ſhorter one in a Shorter; for this Phænomenon the preſent Philoſophy gives no Solution, but takes it for Matter of Fact, that the Vibrations are Performd Exactly and Geometrically in the ſame Time, Raiſes Theorems and Proportions upon it, and then Confeſſes, that they are not performd Geometrically in the ſame Time, but that longer Arcs Require a longer Time to Deſcribe them, and the Shorter, a Leſs TnIRD, From hence laſtly is Explain'd, why Pendulums Oſcillate Slower, when nearer ,;; pa. to the Aquator, and Quicker, When nearer to the Poles, becauſe the Expanſive Force of Lm oſll the Sun's Heat Acts contrary to and Enervates the Contractive Force of the Pendu- Slomir, BI lum, by which it Acts leſs againſt the Contractive Force in the Center of Detention, pas Bodies, tur'd into Fire and Flame, Gravitate leſs, and put on the Force of the fuiter æ Expanſive; On the other Hand, the Contractive Force of Froſt and Cold, near the ſm Poles, concurrs with and ſtrengthens the Contractive Force oſ the Pendulum, by vhich it is Envigorated in it's Action againſt the Contractive Force in the Center of Detention, and thereby the Vibrations are Quicken'd; and for the ſame Reaſon, Tendulums Oſcillate Faſter in Winter than in Summer, and in Colder Seaſons than in Hotter; vhereas the Reaſons alledgd for the Solution of theſe Phænomenons, by the Philoſophy before us, are Various and do not Conſirm, but Contradict each other; for for the firſt is ſaid to Proceed from the Earth's Rotation, by which Gravity is Dimini'd more in the Aquator than in the Poles, which can be of no Service to Account ſor Pendulums, vhoſe Oſcillations Differ in the ſame Climate, purely upon Account of the Difference of Heat and Cold; and the laſt is ſaid to Procecd from a Difference of the Air's Temperature, which cannot Explain thoſe Phænomenons, which are aſiirmd to ariſe ſrom a Different Situation to the Pole and the ſEquator. HOvWEVER, notwithſtanding theſe Miſtakes in the Nature of the Pendulum, and this Philoſophys being obligd to own, that the Oſcillations of it are, in Unequal Times, in Unequal Arcs, tho it had hitherto Reaſlon'd upon the Suppoſition, that they vere perſormd, in Equal Times, in Unequal Arcs, it can Paſs all this Over, and thinks to Correct all Irregularities by the Help of the Cyclois, albeit, by ſo many Arguments, as the Cyclois is Introduc'd, by ſo many is the former Doctrine Diſcarded, and yet, which is ſtrange, it Retains and Makes uſe of it; Let us therefore now Conſider, what farther is advanc'd in Relation to that Figure; AxD Firſt, in order to Demonſtrate the Property of the Cyclois, which is Wanting, the ſeveral Abſtractions of a Similar, Paſlive, and Gravitaring Matter are Preſumd, which have been before Diſputed; alſo that Gravity Acts by Conſtant and Uniform Impulſes, which is either Falſe, or remains a Queſtion; and that the Motion of Pendulums is the ſame as, and may be Explain'd by, the mere Gravity and Deſcent of Bodies in Inclind Planes, which is not Granted; Theſe Points, being not Explicite and Clear, hinder us from allowing Hugens to be the moſt Accurate Philoſopher, how much Sagacity and Penetration ſocver ve may be villing to Give to his Geometry. the ſccond Place, if all theſe Abſtractions and Preſumptions were acknowledgũ and ſubmitted to, the Way, which is preſcrib'd for the Oſcillation of a Pendulum betwixt Two Cyclois's, in order to make the Pendulous Body Deſcribe a Third, is Impracticable and Romantick; for whatever Schemes we may Form to our ſclves, or whatever Mathematick Reaſonings ve may Advance, it will be ſtill Certain, that the Oſcillations are Performd very nearly in the Arcs oſ a Circle, ſince, tho' the String of the Pendulum ſio'd Wrap it ſclf about the Cyclois's, betwixt which it Vibrates, the very Inſtant it departs from them, the Body will be found in the Arc of a Circle, from it's ſtretching the String, by it's Gravitation, to a Radius of it, unleſs we can Imagine a Heavy Body to Oſcillate at the End of a String not ſtretchd, but bent into a Curve; hich muſt be the Reaſon, that Artificers, not perceiving the Advantage, from Experiment, of theſe Cyclois's, uſe no ſuch String, but a Stiſf and Inflexible Iron-Rod, at the End of which the Body is affixd, and which therefore can Oſcillate in no other Figure, than that of a Circle; and from hence it is, that Dr. Xeill Labours to ſiev, (for no Curves of a Diſferent Nature vill), that the ſmall Portions of a Circle and Cyclois Coincide, which is as much as to Confeſs, that, after all theſe Fine Demonſirations concerning the Properties of the Cycloiss in the Horologium Oſcillatorium, the Pendulum will do as well without them, by Oſcillating only in the Plain Arcs of a Circle; It is true, there is ſomething ſubſtituted in the Room of the Cyclois, that is, a Flat, Thin, Iron-Plate, Tranſverſe to the Plane of Oſcillation, by the bending of Vhich, in the Vibrating, the Pendulum is Shorten'd, and by which the ſame Effects are ſupposd to be Produc'd, as if the Pendulum had Oſcillated betwixt Two Cyclois's; However this may be found in Practice, no Mathematician can ever Prove, that the ſhortening of the Pendulum, by drawing the Flat Plate up into the Arc of a Circle, is the ſame, in a Geometi ick Figure, as the ſhortening of the Pendulum, by ſiriking again©t a Cyclois; and if not, cither this Doctrine of the Cyclois is unneccſſary to the Explanation of the Pendulum, or elſe another ought to be Contrivd, by which it may be Geometrically Evincd, that the Shortening of a Pendulum, by the Contraction of the Plate o the Arc oſ a Circle, is the ſame as a Pendulum, Oſcillating betwixt Two yclois's. S. 15. To conclude this Doctrine of Pendulums, we ſhall conſider, what is alledgd toncerning them, in the preſent Celebrated Philoſophy, to Determine the Figure of he Earth, that is, vhat Proportion it's Axis bears t0 the Diameter, Tranſverſe or Perpendicular to it; Lir Ler the Figure APEp vhoſe Center is C, Repreſent the Earth, ?» it's Axis, AE any Diameter of the quator, Perpendicular to the Axis; Let the Lengths of the Pendulums be Meaſurd, which Oſcillate in the Places 4 and P, in a Cyclois, in a Given Time, and AC, PC, will be Reciprocally as the A L ſaid Lengths of the Pendulum, and therefore in a known Proportion; ſo likewiſc in any Intermediate Place, 4C V/ BC, vill be Reciprocally, as the Lengths of the Penc ſ dulums, vhich Oſcillate in a like Space of Time in the Places 4 and B, and therefore in a known Proportion. i For let ACP be conceivd to be an Inflected Siphon or Canal, full of a Fluid and Homogeneous Matter; from the Quieſcence of the Fluid it is Evident, that it is in E an uilibrium in both the Crura, 4C, PC, the Centri] fugal Force from the Motion of the Earth about it's Axis, and the Greater Diſtance from the Center of the Earth, Raiſing and Supporting the Fluid, in the Crus C4, to a Greater Height, than in that of CP; from whence any Portion of the Fluid in C4 is in an æquilibrium, or is Equally Heavy, with a like Portion, and alike Situated, of the Fluid in CP, which therefore is True of any other Homo&geneous Bodies, tho they are not Fluid; The uppermoſt Points 4 and P of the Crura are alike Situated, and conſequently the Homogẽneous Bodies, in 4 and P, which are as 4C, PC, have an Equal Gravity towards the Center of the Earth; But the Gravity of a Body in 4, which is as Pq, is to the Gravity of another Body in A, that is Homogeneous to the Former, and Which is as 4C, as PC to A4C, that is, the Weights of Homogeneous Bodies, in a near Situation to each other, are as the Bodies or the Bulks of them, and therefore the Gravities of Homogeneous Bodies, which are Equal and Situate in 4, and P, are as PC to AC, that is Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Center; for ſuppoſing 4C. PC:: 100. I, ſince A4C, PC, or 4 and P, Gravitate Equally, a Part of 4C Equal to PC, or a Part of 4 Equal to P, vill Gravitate a Hundred Times leſs, or it's Gravity in Reſpect of P, will be as 1 to 100; By a like Reaſoning it may be ſhewn, that the Gravity of a Body in B, is to the Gravity of an Equal and Homogeneous one in ?, as CP to CB; from whence ex æquo the Gravities of Equal and Homogeneous Bodies, whereſoever they are on the Superficies of the Earth, are Reciprocally, as their Diſtances from the Center; But the Accelerating Gravity of a Body is, as it's Abſolute Gravity divided by it's Bulk, and therefore the Accelerating Gravities of Bodies on the Earth's Surface are as the Diſtances of the Places from the Center Inverſely, becauſe the Bulks were ſuppos'd Equal; which may be thus CompriZd in ſhort; Let 4 and ? be Similar Portions of 4C;, PC, ſince ACZ PC in Gravity,  P in Gravity, but the Bulks :: AC. PC in the Places 4 and P, (and what is ſaid of Homogeneous Fluids obtains likewiſe in Homogeneous Solids;] On the other Hand in the ſame Place 4, . 4 in Gravity :: PC. AC, namely, the Weights are as the Bulks, if therefore, J/P in Bulk, in the Places 4 and P, 4. P in Gravity :: PC. AC; for Inſtance, if 100 Parts in 4,1 in ?, in Gravity, 1 Part in 4 will Gravitate 100 Times leſs than 1 in P; and ſeeing the Bulks are ſuppos'd Equal, the Accelerating Forces, in A and P, vill be as the Gravities, and therefore:: PC. AC, or Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Center. J : FARTHER, Since the Oſcillation of the Pendulous Body at 4, in a Cyclois, is ſupposd, from Obſervation, to be performd in the ſame Time with the Oſcillation of another Body at P, in a Cyclois, and by Prop. 25. Part 2. Horolog. Oſcillator. The Time of the Deſcent, thro' the Axis of the Cyclois, is in a Given Proportion to the Time of Oſcillation in the ſaid Cyclois, namely, as the Diameter of a Circle to it's Circumſerence, and by Prop. 6, 7. Part 3. The Axis of the Cyclois, which the Pendulous Body Deſcribes, is in a Given Proportion to the Length of the Pendulum, Namely, as I to 2, and therefore the Time oſ the Deſcent, thro the Axis of the Cyclois, is in a Given Proportion to the Time of the Deſcent, thro' the Length of rthe Pendulum, that is, in a Subduplicate Reaſon of the Former, the Times or Celeritics of Deſcent being in a Subduplicate Reaſon of the Spaces Deſcribd; It will be Conſequent, that the Time of Deſcent, thro' the Length of the Pendulum at 4 T vl vill be Equal to the Time of Deſcent, thro' the Length of the Pendulum at ?, ſince the Times of Oſcillation in both the Pendulums are Equal, and they have, both oſ them, the ſame Given Reaſons to the Times of Deſcent thro' the Lengths oſ 'em. BuT the Spaces performd at A and ? in Equal Times are, as the Accelerating Forces or Gravities in the ſaid Places, or the Eſfects are, as the Cauſes, which produce them, and the ſaid Accelerating Forces or Gravities have been ſhewn to be Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from Ihe Center, and therefore the Length of the PenduIum at 4, is to the Length of the Pendulum at ?, Oſcillating in an Equal Time, as PC to AC, or Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Center; and the like may be Demonſtrated of any other Point as B, and therefore in General, the Lengths of Pendulums, Oſcillating in Equal Times, are Reciprocally, as the Diſtances of the Places from the Center of the Earth; Since therefore the Reaſon of 4C to any other Diſtance BC, and the Inclination of C to A, or the Latitude of the Place, and the Reaſon of 4C to PcC, in Particular, are found out and known, the Nature of the Figure 4?Ep is Determin'd, to vit, the Section of the Earth with the Plane of the Meridian, which Revolvd upon the Axis Pp vill produce the Earths Figure. we have a Mind to Determine the Figure of the Earth by the foregoing Method, it is not neceſſary to have a Meaſurd Length of a Pendulum, Oſcillating in a Given Time, at the very Pole it ſelf P, becauſe, by ſeveral Lengths obſervd in Diſ ferent Latitudes, it may be ſafely concluded, what the Length of the Pendulum will be, which Oſcillates in the ſame Given Time at the Pole; Again, in order to ſolve this Problem, it is not neceſſary in Different Places ſo to adjuſt the Pendulum, that it ſoud perform it's Oſcillations in the ſame Time; tis enough to take a Pendulum, and adjuſt it ſo to one Place, that it ſhall perform it's Oſcillations in a Time Given, and then Transſer it into other Places, and Mark how much the Clock, to which the ſaid Pendulum is affix't for a Balance, is Retarded or Accelerated in the Time of one Revolution of a fixt Star to the ſame Place, as the Places, into which it is Transferd, are nearer to the Equator or the Pole, than that to which the Automaton or Clock is adjuſted, and from that Retardation or Acceleration to compute what Length of the Pendulum is Requiſite to perform the Oſcillations in the ſame Time, in which they were perform'd in the Place, to which the Pendulum was originally Adapted. FROM vhat is above Demonſtrated, it is Collected, ſuppoſing all Things, as before, and 46 E F to be a Circle drawn Round the preceding Figure, that DB is, as the Increment of the Accelerating Gravity, as we Remove from the ſEquator tovards cither of the Poles, or, as the Increment in the Place B above the Length of the Pendulum, which Oſcillates at the ZEquator in a Given Time; for 4C Repreſents the Accelerating Gravity, or the Length of the Pendulum, at the Pole ?, and CP the Accelerating Gravity, or the Length of the Pendulum, Oſcillating in an Equal Time, at the Equator 4, and therefore ? F vill Repreſent the Increment of the Accelerating Gravity, or of the Length of the ſaid Pendulum, at the Pole P; In like Manner, CB Repreſents the Accelerating Gravity, or Length of the Pendulum, at 4, and A4C= DC, the Accelerating Gravity, or Length of the Pendulum, at B; and conſequently, DB vill Repreſent the Increment of the Accelerating Gravity, or of the Length of the Pendulum, at B, above the Accelerating Gravity, or Length of the Pendulum Oſcillating in the ſame Time at 4. AD from hence, by a Geometrick Reaſoning, it is Prov|d, that ſuppoſing 4 PEꝓ, a Section oſ the Earth with the Plane of the Meridian, to be an Ellipſis, the Increments of the Accelerating Gravity, in Different Places of the Earth's Surface, above the Accelerating Gravity, or the Length of the Pendulum, at the Aquator, is very neatly in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Right Sines of the Latitudes of thoſe Places, that is, ſor Inſtance, ?F is to 3D in a Duplicate Reaſon of CF to MD, ot PIED: : CF q. uDq;, and the ſame may be ſiewn of any other Points or Places, o or Latitudes, as well as of ? and B The Demonſtration is toõ Tedious here to Inſert, but is eaſily Apprehended by Mathematicians. ] IT muſt be yet Obſerv'd, that what foregoes is True upon the Suppoſition, and ex H;porheſi, that the Earth conſiſts of an Equally Denſe and Uniform Matter, ſince the Fluid, with which the Canals, 4 CP, BCP, Fig.I. were Repleniſh'd, was preſumd to be Uniform and Homogeneous; but if the Matter, of which the Earth conſiſts, is Denſer towards the Center, than nearer to it's Surſace, the aforeſaid Increments of the Diſtances from the Center, by Retiring from the Poles to the Aquator, and Proportional to theſe Diſtances the Increments of the Accelerating Gravity, and the Length of the Pendulum, Oſcillating in a Given Time, by Retiring from the quator to the Poles, will be Greater, than what is Aſſerted in the above- mention'd Computation, and the Axis of the Earth ill be Leſs, in Reſpect of the Diameters Perpendicular to it; for, if that Matter towards the Center, by which the Earth is there Denſer, is taken away and conſiderd apart, ſo that the Remaining Matter ſod be Equally Denſe, it is Evident, by what has been alledg'd, that the Accelerating Gravity in Different Places of this Equally-Denſe Earth's Surface is Reciprocally Proportional to the Diſtance from the Center; But the ſaid Accelerating Gravity is farther Increasd by the Addition of the Redundant Matter about the Center, and very nearly, by what has been before Demonſtrated in this Philoſophy, in a Reciprocal Duplicate Proportion of the Diſtance from it. SINCE therefore, where we ſuppoſe the Earth Uniformly Denſe, it's Surface is Elevated towards the Aquator, and Depreſs'd towards the Pole, and ſince the Accelerating Gravity at the Aquator, is Leſs than at the Pole, in Proportion of the Diſtance of the Pole from the Center to the Semidiameter of the Equator, and moreover, ſince the Accelerating Gravity to the Redundant Matter about the Center is Leſs at the Equator than at the Pole, in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance of the Pole from the Center to the Semidiameter of the £quator, which is Leſs than the Former ſimple Reaſon, being a Reaſon of a leſs Inequality, it follows, that, where ve ſuppoſe the Earth Denſer towards the Center, the Accelerating Gravity, compounded of both the Former, is Leſs at the Equator than at the Pole, in a leũ Reaſon, than that of the Diſiance of the Pole from the Center to the Semidiameter of the quator; and conſequently, from this leſs Accelerating Gravity at the quator, in Reſpect of that at the Poles, the Earth will be more Elevated at the quator, than hat the preceding Doctrine of an Earth Equally Denſe wou'd Require, hich, by the Calculations of this Philoſophy, and ſuppoſing a Mile conſiſts of 5000 Feet, vou'd be 175 Miles, but if the Earth is Denſer towards the Center, 31;, and therefore the Earth will be nearly Spherical, but Properly and Truly a Spheroeid; The ſame likewiſe obtains in the Length of a Pendulum, Oſcillating in a Given Time, vhich has been ſhewn to be Proportional to the Accelerating Gravity; namely, vhere the Earth is ſuppos'd to be Denier towards the Center, the Length of the Pendulum Oſcillating in a Given Time, is Leſs at the Equator than at the Pole, in a leſs Reaſon, than that of the Diſtance of the Pole from the Center to the Semidiameter oſ the Equator. 5. 16. AND from hence this Philoſophy proceeds to Determine the Proportion, which the Axis of the Sun or any Given Planet has to the Diameters, which are Perpendicular to it. l FirsT of all let the Proportion be found of the Centrifugal Force in the Middle Circle, betwixt the Poles of the Sun or the Planet Given, to the Centrifugal Force in the Aquator of the Earth, which is done by this Propoſition, that the Centripetal or Centriſugal Forces are Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Periodick Times divided by the Radius's of the Circles; But the Proportion betwixt the Centrifugal Force in the quator of the Earth, to the Gravity on the Earth's Surface, is Given, vhich is, as the Exceſs of the Earth's Diameter at the Equator to it's Axis, ſince by the preceding Propoſition, that Exceſs ariſes from the Centrifugal Force alone and therefore is Proportional to it; and the Proportion of Gravity on the Earth's Surface to the Gravity on the Sun's Surface, or of the Planet Given, is known by thai Propoſition, which aſcertains the Proportion of the Quantity of Matter in the Sun to the Quantity of Matter in any Primary Planct; that is, if the Matter of Twe Globes, Gravitating to cach other, is Homogeneous in Places Equidiſtant from the Centers Centers, the Weight of one Globe to the Other will be Reciprocally, as the Square of the Diſtance betwixt the Centers, ſuppoſin them to be Removd ar Variou: Diſtances ſrom each other; and conſcquently, the Proportion, which is Compounded of theſe Given ones, will be likewiſe Given, to wit, the Proportion, which the Centrifugal Force in the Middle Circle betwixt the Poles of the Sun or Planet Given, has to the Gravity on it's Surface, and is the ſame, as the Exceſs of the Diameter of the quator of the Sun or Planet above it's Axis, to the ſaid Axis, and therefore the Proportion betwixt the Sun's or Planet's Axis, and it's Diameter Perpendicular to that Axis, will be Determin'd. AND in General it is formd into a Propoſition, that the Axes of the Planets are Leſs than the Diameters, hich are Perpendicular to them; Becauſe, tho' the Planets ought to be of a Spherical Figure, Abſtracting from their Circular Motion Round their Axes, upon the Account of the Equal Gravitation of the Parts on all Hands to the Center, yet by that Circular Motion it comes to Paſs, that the Parts Retiring from the Axes, endeavour to Aſcend tovards the Equators, and therefore the Matter, if it is Fluid, by ſuch Aſcent will Increaſe the Diameters, at the Equators, and by it's Deſcent Diminiſi them at the Poles; Thus the Diameter of Jupiter, by the Agreement of the Obſervations of Aſtronomers, is found to be Shorter betwixt the Poles, than rom Ea©t to Weſt; and by the ſame Argument, unleſs our Earth was Higher at the Equator than under the Poles, the Seas woud ſubſide at the Poles and Aſcend tovards the A2quator, and there Cauſe an Univerſal Inundation, namely, by the Eart's Revolution, and by the Parts of it thereupon Retiring from it's Axis tovards the Equator. S. 17. FURTHERMORE, in Reſpect oſ Pendulums, Oſcillating in a Second of Time, a Table is Calculated of the ſeveral Lengths of them in Various and Different Latitudes, from no Degrees Latitude under the ſEquator to 90 under the Poles, upon the foregoing Hypotheſis, that the Earth is uniformly Denſc, and from the Reaſonings upon that Hypotheſis, which have been before Explaind, and particularly from this Theorem, that the Increment of Gravity, by Proceeding from the quator to the Poles, is as the Square of the Right Sine of the Latitude very nearly, as alſo, that the Lengths of Synchronal Pendulums, that is, which Oſcillate, in Equal Times, in Different Places or Latitudes, are as the Accelerating Gravities in thoſe Places or Latitudes; From whence the Following Table is Computed, in which a Line is the 121h Part of an Inch. Latitude of ] Length of the ] Latitude of] Length of the the Place. Pendulum. the Place. Pendulum. Degrees. ] Feet. Lines. Degrees.] Feet. Lines. o | 3 . 7,468 | 46 3. 8461 5 37482 47 3. 3,494 I 3 .7,526 48 3. 8,528 Ij 3.7,596 49 3.8,561 20 1. 7.692 50 3. 8,594 25 3.7,81I 55 3. 8,756 30 3 . 7,948 60 3. 8,907 35 | 3. 8,099 65 3. 9,044 40 3.. 8,261I 70 3 . 9,162 41 3. 8,294 75 3. 9258 42 3. 8,327 ; 80 3 .9,329 43 3. 8,361 85  3 .9,372 4 3. 8,394 90 3. 9387 45 3 . 8,428 FroM this Table it is ſaid to be maniſeſt, that in Geographical Matters the Earth may be Eſteemd as Spherical, and that the Inequality of it's Diameters, which is but ſmali, may be more Eaſily and Certainly found out, and Determin'd by the Experiments of Pendulums than by the Eclipſes of the Moon or any other Way. It is likewiſe Conſtructed upon the Hypotheſis, that the Earth is uniformly Denſe, i but but iſ i's Matter is Denſer nearer the Center than at the Surface, for the Reaſons alledgd above the Differences of the Pendulums will be ſomething Greater, than what are Expreſi'd in the foregoing Table; becauſe, tho' Gravity is Reciprocally, as the Diſtance of the Weight from the Center, where the Earth is uniformly Denſe, it will yet be compounded of another Proportion, which will be Reciprocally, as the Square of the Diſtance from the Redundant Matter, and therefore Gravity under the quator is leſs to that Redundant Matter, than in the preceding Computation, and the Earth vill riſe Higher, and it's Surface be more Elevated, by this Defect of Gravity, and the Exceſs of the Lengths of the Pendulums at the Poles will be Greater, than vhat is before Defin'd. 5. 18. THUS far is Reaſon'd and Hypotheſes are Invented, and to Confirm this from Experience, it is told us, that certain Aſtronomers, vho have been ſent into Forcign Parts, on purpoſe to make Aſtronomical Obſervations, have found, that the PenduIums of Clocks move Slower, nearer the ſEquator, than the Poles, and that the firſt Perſon, who took Notice oſ this, vas Mr. Richer in the Year 1672, and in the INand Cayenne, for, whilſt he obſerv'd the Paſſage of the fixt Stars by the Meridian, in the Month of Auguſt, he found the Pendulum of his Clock to move Slower, than according to the Middle Motion of the Sun, vith a Difference of 2'. 23' every Day; he aſterwards made a Single Pendulum, which ſhoud Oſcillate in a Second of Time, by the Beſt Pendulum Clock that cou'd be had, and markt the Length of this Single Pendulum, and this he did frequently every Week for Ten Months together; Then Returning to France, he compard the Length of this Pendulum with the Length of an Ilochronal Pendulum at Paris, vhich was Three Paris Feet, and Eight Lines, with Three Fiſth Parts of a Line, and found it Shorter with the Difference oſ one Line, and one Fourth of a Line; But by the Slowneſs of the Pendulum-Clock in Ca;enne, the Difference of the Pendulums is Inſerd by Computation to be onc Line and an Half. Dr. Halley in the Year 1677, at the Iſand of St. Helen's, found his PendulumClock to move Slower than at London, but did not obſerve the Difference, he yet made his Pendulum Shorter by more than an Eighth Part of an Inch, or one Linc and an Halſ. IN the Year 1682, Mr. Variu and Mr. Des Hajes found the Length of the PenduIum, Oſcillating in a Second of Time, to be, in the Royal Obſervatory at Paris, 3 Feet and 8% Lines, andin the Inand of Goreè, by the ſame Method, they found the Length of a Synchronal Pendulum to be 3 Feet and 6 Lines, and the Difference oſ the Lengths therefore 2 Lines; And in the ſame Year, at the Iands Guadaloupe and Martinico, they found the Lengrh of a Synchronal Pendulum to be 3 Feet and & Lines. APTERVARDS in the Year 1697, in the Month of uly, Mr. Couplet the Son Adjuſted his Pendulum-Clock to the Middle Motion of the Sun in the Royal Obſervatory at Paris, in that Manner, that the Clock Exactly Agreed with the Sun's Motion for a long Space of Time: Then Sailing to Lisbon, he found, in November æ lowing, that his Clock vent Slower than before, the Difference being 2'. 13/ 24 Hours, and, in the Monrh of Mareh aſter, Sailing to Paraiba, he there found ni Clock went Slover, than at Paris, 4. 12', in 24 Houn; and he Affirms, that the Pendulum, Oſcillating in Seconds of Time, vas at Lisbon 24, and at Paraiba 32 Lines Shorter than at Paris tho it is ſaid, he ſod Rather have made the Differences of the Lengths of the Pendulum 3 and 25, Lines, as berter ,Correſponding vith the Differences of the Times of Oſciſlation, 2. 13" and 4. 12, But, it is told us, theſe Obſervations are too Groſs to be Relyd on. IN the Vears 1699 and 1700, Mr. Des Hajes, Sailing again to America, Determin'd the Length of the Pendulum, Oſcillating in Seconds of Time, in the Iſlands of CHyenn ” and Granada to be ſomething Leſs than 3 Feet and 6 Lines, in the Iſland of St Chriſtophers to be 3 Feet and 64 Lines, and in the Inand of St. Domiuick 3 Feet and 7 Lines. IN the Year 1704, Feuellè found the Length of the Pendulum, Oſcillatinæ in Se conds of Time, in Portobel in America, to be 3 Paris Feet and only55 Lines, that is, 3 Lines Shorter than at Paris, but there was an Error in ilie Obſervation, ſo aſtervard aftervards Sailing to the Iſand Aartinico, he found the Length of an Iſochronal Pendulum to be only 3 Paris Feet and 543 Lines. BuT the Latitudes of the Places above-mentiond are as follow, of Paraiba . 38 Southern, of Portobel 90. 33', and of the Iſlands Cajenne, Gore?, Guadaluſe, Martinico, Granada, St. Chriſtopher's, St. Dominick's, Reſpectively 49. 55, 140. 40, 14. 0, 14. 44, 127. 6, 17. 19, and 19. 48 Northern, and ve may add Lisbon about 40. : TuE Exceſſes of the Length of the Pendulum at Paris above the Lengths of Iſochronal Pendulums, obſerv'd in theſe ſeveral Latitudes, are ſomething Greater than according to the foregoing Table, and therefore the Earth is ſomewhat Higher under the æquator, than that Calculation makes it, which proceeds upon the Earth's being uniformly Denſe; and conſequently, the Earth is Denſer towards the Center, than nearer to the Surface, unleſs the Heats in the Torrid Zone may give ſome Addition to the Length of the Pendulums. FOR Mr. Picart obſervd, that the Iron-Rod of the Pendulum, which, in WinterTime and Froſty Weather, vas in Length one Foot, being Warmd and Heated at the Fire, became one Foot and one fourth of a Line. AND Mr. De la Hire aſterwards obſerv'd, that an Iron-Rod, which, in Winter-Time and Froſty Weather, was ſix Feet in Length, when Exposd to the Sun's Heat, was ſix Feet and two Thirds of a Line: In the Former Caſe, the Heat was Greater than in the Latter, and in the Latter, Greater than the Heat of the External Parts of an Human Body; For Metals grow exceeding Warm by the Sun's Heat in Summer; But the Pendulum of a Clock is never vont to be Exposd to the Heat of the Summers Sun, and therefore never admits of an Heat, Equal to that of the External Parts of an Human Body, and conſequently, the Rod of a Pendulum, in a Clock, three Foot Long, will be ſomething Longer in Summer than in Winter, tho' the Exceſs will &arcely be more than one fourth Part of a Line; from whence it is ſuppos'd to Follov, that the whole Difference of the Length of Iſochronal PenduIums, in Various Latitudes, cannot be Aſcribd to a Difference of Heat; Nor can this Difference be Attributed to the Errors of theſe Aſtronomers in their Obſervations; for albeit, they do not perfectly Agree, yet the Errors are ſo Minute, that they may be juſtly Neglected and Slighted; and in this they Entirely Conſent, that Iſochronal Pendulums are Shorter under the quator than at the Royal Obſervatory in Paris, the Difference being about Two Lines or the ſixth Part of an Inch; By the Obſervations of Mr. Richer in Cajenne, the Diſference was one Line and àa Half, the Error of Half a Line is eaſily Committed; Mr. Des Hayes, by his Obſervations in the ſame Iſland, Corrected that Error and found the Diſference to be 247 Lines; Morcover by the Obſervations made in the Iſlands of Goreè, Guadaliupe, Martinico, Granada, St. Chriſtopher's, and St. Dominick, and Reduc'd to the æquator, the Difference was not Leſs than 149 Line, nor Greater than 22 Lines, and the Middle Quantity betwixt theſe Two Limits is 2% Lines, Take avay the ;% of a Line on Account of the Heats in the Torrid Zone, and there will Remain the Difference of 2 Lines. WuEREFORE, ſince that Difference by the Preceding Table, which is CalcuIated upon the Suppoſition of the Earth's being uniformly Denſe, is only 182- Line, the Exceſs of the Earth's Height at the Equator above that at the Poles, which was 175 Miles, being now Increas'd by an Increaſe of the Differences of the Lengths oſ the Pendulums, vill be 3 Miles; for the Slowneſs of the Pendulum under the Zquator Evinces and Proves a Defect of Gravity, and by hov much Lighter the Matter of the Earth is, by ſo much Greater ought to be it's Height, that it may ſupport by it's Weight the Matter under the Poles in an æquilibrium; And from hence the Figure of the Earth's Shadow, Determin'd by the Eclipſes of the Moon vill not be exactly Circular, but it's Diameter ſrom Eat to Weſt will be Greater than that from North to South, by an Exceſs of about 55, and the Greateſt Parallax oſ the Moon in Longitude will be ſomething Greater than is Greateſt Parallax in Latitude, and the Greateſt Semidiameter oſ the Earth will be 19767630 Paris Feet, the Leaſt 19609820, and the Middle 19688725 Nearly. WEæ WEe ſhall here ſubjoin a Table of the Differences of the Lengths of Iſochronal endulums, according to what they were found by the foregoing Obſervations, and E pare them vith the Preceding Table, which was formd from Calculation, have Inquird into the Hyporheſe and Principles, upon which it was Made ContivãNorthern Latitude. Length of the Pendulum in Feet and Lines. - Richer. Newton. Des Hayes: Cayenne 4. 55 t 3:7 375 3. 64. ſomething Leſ: 37,350. 3.7,100. 3. 6, 500. South. i Couplet Groſs Obſerver. Newton. atitude.  Paraiba 6.38 33 Lines Leſs than at Paris, 25 Lines Leſ. Feuellè. Portobel EEEE t 35 3:5.583. Des Huyes. 3.64 ſomething Leſs. . 6, 500. Granada 12. 6 t Varin, Des Hajes. Guadaloupe 14. o tæ 3 ꝶ Des Hajes. lũ 14. 40 gm; 33 s5 . V Varin, Des Hayes. Feuello. 3-55  0 35,833. South. i : n St. Hele?ss 15 o s uũꝶ t Tine Leũ than at Londor. Martinico 4-44 Des Hayes. St. Chriſtophtr's 17- 19 3.63. 3.6,750. St. DominicR 19:48 g bes sines i Couplet Groſs Obſerver. Newton. Lisho 40- o 2% Lines Leſs than at Paris, 13 Line. Richer. Varin, Des Hus cupler Paris 48:45 3.8. 3.85. 23 Lines More than at Lishon, 3. 3600. 3- 85 55. 35 More than a Paraiba. Halley. London 51.30 17 Line More than at St. Helen's. s. 19. IN Anſwer to all this Doctrine of Meaſuring the Diameters of the Earth by the Lengths of the Pendulum, and thereby Determining the Figure of the Earth; We muſt Firt ſay, that the Principles are Wrong and Falſe upon which this Philoſophy Proceeds, and Then the Concluſions ſrom the Experiments brought to Confirm them; And Firſt, the Demonſtration, that the Lengths of Pendulums Oſcillating in Equal Times are Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Earth's Center, is by no Means rationally Evinc'd; Becauſe Firſt, it is ſuppos'd, that the Earth Conſiſts of an Ho mogeneous Matter, which is not Prov'd; And Second, that whatever is ſhewn of an Homogencous Fluid, Equally obtains in Homogeneous Solids, in the Preſent Caſe hich is likewiſe far from being Evident; And Third, that the Preſent Doctrine ol Hydroſtaticks is Unqueſtionable, which again is not Maniſeſt. As 1o the Firſt, if the Matter of Mold, Clay, Stone, Metals, and a Thouſanc Bodies more, of which the Earth Conſiſis, is Various in it's Proper and Interna Forces Forces. anꝗ gannot be Conſiderd as a Similar and Uniform Subſtance, all this Reaſoning falls to ſie Groũnd, and till that Point is Cleard, remains Diſputable and Doubtfuſ; Since, if Matter is Diferent in irs Forces, ihe Weſghts of Bodies will not b], as the BũI& of them, nor the Grayities of Bodies, hich aje Equal and Situatè in 4 and ?, as PC to 4c, that is Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Center, upon which Maxim yet this Whole Demonſiration Depends. li As to the Second, That Fluids and Solids come under ong Denomination in the preſcnt Caſc, becauſe ſhey Gravitate a-ſike to the Center of the Earth, and therefore, that a Canal of Solid Matter Extended to the Center, or one half Fluid and the othet half Solid, is the ſame, as a Canal of Fluid Matter Extended to tha Center, is to aſſume a great Deal. withour any Proof or Eviction of the Thing; becauſe, tho all Matter was Homogeneous and had an Equal Force of Gravitation in it ſelf, hich is not True, yer it muſt be Conſeſ"'d, that there is a wide Diſference betwixt Matter's being leſt at Liberty to Exert that Force, as ſn Fluids, and being Reſtrain'd from doing it by a firm Adheſion of Parts, as in Solids; For whoever Imagin'd beſore, that a Column of Solid Matter might be Balanc'd by a Column of Fluid, in the Way, and according to the Laws of Hydroſtaticks? When it is Plain, that a Column ol Solid Matter, dravn from the Surſace of the Earth to the Center, beſides is Force of Gravitation, has alſo a Force of Coheſion, whigh can be Reducd to no Rules of a Balance, ariſing from mere Gravitation, which is the Caſe of Fluids, and which, it is ſuppos'd, may be ſo Reducd. -] . As to the Third, That the Common Hydroſtaticks are Preſumd to be Demonſtrated, we muſt ſay, that neither is That in fact True; becauſe the Laws and Rules of Hydroſtaticks are Provd upon the Suppoſition, that Nothing is to be Conſider'd in Fluids, excepting their Specifick Gravities, whereas it is Certain, that there are ſome Fluids, which are Specifically Heavier than others, and which yet, by the Spirituouſ neſs or the Expanſive Force of them, will Riſe in thoſe, which are Speciſically Lighter; Beſides which, ve muſt affirm, that, in all Fluids, their Proper Expanſive and Contractive Forces are to be Conſiderd, and not their Specifick Gravities only. MORrREOVER Fourthly, Granting every Thing, which this Philoſophy Requires or Demands, it is ſomething Extraordinary, that it ſiod here Endeavour to Demonſtrate, that the Accelerating Gravities are Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Earth's Center, whereas Accelerating Gravity in General, and ęvery other Action, is ſewn to be Reciprocally, as the Squares of thoſe Diſtances, by this Philoſophy, and is a Truth afterwards aſum'd, as Provd, in this very Propoſition, vhen it comes to Treat of the Redundant Matter, ſuppoſing the Earth not to be uniformly Denſe; upon all which Accounts it is not Provd, that the Accelerating Gravity in 4 is to that in ?, as PC to AC. l Aca, It now we take Two Bodies and place them in 4, it is ſaid, P. 4:: PC. AC, that is, the Gravities will be as the Bulks; which, as before, ſuppoſes, that in Matter nothing is to he Conſider'd, excepting an uniform Gravity, and the Number of Parts in each Body, which are Accelerated by it, and conſequently, that Matter has no peculiar Expanſive or Contractive Forces, which is once morẽ Deny'd, and till it is Provd, it has not, This Demonſtration is, for that Reaſon, as we have already Declard, Imperſect and Defective. THE next Part of this Demonſtration concerns the Nature of Pendulums, which we have before particularly Examin'd, and therefore the Objections, which lie againſt the Explanation of that Doctrine, are Equally Valid againſt the Truth of the Preſent Propoſition; Namely, that it is nothing more than an Abſtracted Reaſoning, is not juſlity'd by Fact and Experiment, and that, what is ſo, Admits of a Diſferent Solution, from what is Given by theſe Principles; what we ſhall farther obſerve here is this, that the Lengths of thie Pendulums are aſirmd to be, as the Accelerating Forces or Gravities, which are made to be Reciprocally, as the Diſtances from the Earth's Center; ve havẽ ſicwn, there is a Difference betwixt Bodies Deſcending by Gravity, and Oſcilſating in a Pendulum, and conſequently, this alſo is a Notion not Provũ, but Aſlumd; As to what Follows, it ſo entirely depends upon what foregoes, that therè is no Occaſion to take any particular Norice of it, Namely, that the Increments of the Accelerating Gravity, in Diſferent Places of the Earth's Surface, above he Accẽlerating Gravity, or the Longth oſ the Pendulum at the quator, are very ſieeœcãtm;ms Vianty, or tę Lensmn l t the 4aqu ear nearly in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Right Sines of the Latitudes of thoſe Places, becauſe it ſiows more of the Sill of the Geometer, than the Sagacity or the Truth of the Philoſopher; I ſall only add, that, as any one vod be Aſtoniſ'd to Think, how it was poſſible to contrive a Way, to find out the Diameters of the Earth, by the Oſcillations of a Pendulum, ſo he may leave oſf that Admiration, when he ſces the Strange and Unaccountable Methods taken to do it; he vill rather Wonder, that Men ſou'd enter into ſuch Conceits, than be ſurprizd at the Greatneſi of the Perſormance; as will yet farther Appear in the Progreſs of this Examination. 5. 20. TnS ſar is ſaid to be Demonſirated, ſuppoſing the Earth is uniformly Denſe, but if it be not ſo, and it is Denſer near the Center, and Rarer at the Surſace, as is Generally Concciv'd, the foregoing Proportion muſt be Alter'd, and the Accelerating Gravities, and the Lengths of the Pendulums, Analogous to Them, at the quator, and Poles, vill be in a leſs Reaſon, than that of the Diſtance of the Pole from the Center to the Semidiameter of the quator, and this leſs Reaſon is Thought more Accurately to agree with the Experiments upon Pendulums than the Former and Greater: Let us then now ſec how rhe Caſe ſtlands; Canals of Homogeneous Matrer vere Invented, in which Fluids and Solids ſloud be all one; Gravity was aſſirmd to be Reciprocally, as its Diſtance from the Center; Pendulums were made to Oſcillate according to the Will and Pleaſure of the Geometer, without any Proof that they did ſo; and the Earth was Imagin'd to be Equally Denſe, in order to Reduce the Diameters of it to ſome Proportion with the Lengths of the other; but all this not Availing, the Earth is now ſuppos'd not to be Equally Denſc, and to Compenſate for that Inequality, a Certain Maſs of Redundant Matter is Thruſt and Rammd to the Center, the Gravitation to which is pronounc'd to be Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Diſtances, whereas before Gravity was Reciprocally as the Diſtances: On the other Hand, that the Earth is Denſer at the Center than Nearer the Surſace, whatever we may Surmiſe, is as much Unprovd, as that it is Equally Denſe, or the Matter of it Homogeneous; ſome have affirmd a Central Fire, and produc'd Arguments for it, and for what this Philoſophy Alledges, which is Nothing but it's owvn Authority, it may ſtill Remain a Queſtion; Allowing yet this Earth was Originally a Fluid, by which it might be Imagin'd, that Bodies ſubſided to the Center, according to their Specifick Gravities, and that the Earth therefore became Gradually Denſei from the Surface to the Center, Nothing ſtill of this is Certain or Demonſtrable; we find Bodies Promiſcuouſly plac'd, the Heavier above the Lighter, as well as the Lighter above the Heavier; and it is not Plain, that they may not be ſo Mixt and Confoundcd together, that there may be more Lighter Bodies, towards the Center, than Heavier, by mutual Coalitions and Coagmentations with one another, from Whence their Natural Speciſick Gravities might be Impeded in their Action; It is not ſarther Certain, taking all of Them together, the Gravity of the one with the Levity of the orher, that they may not Conſtitute a Force of Gravitation, which may be pretty much Uniformly the ſame thro' the Whole; Likewiſe it is not prov|, ſuppoſing a Gradual Increaſe of Denſity towards the Center, that a Maũ of Matter heapt about it, will have the ſame Effects as ſuch a Gradual Increment; and laſtly, there is Nothing allow'd to the Peculiar Forces of Matter in it's Expanſion and Contraction, vhich wou'd entirely Diſturb and Annull every Part of this Calculation, and yet, amidſt this vat Uncertainty of Things, a Matter uniformly Denſe or Increaſing in it's Denſity, in it's Approach to the Center, is Aſlum'd, as an Evident and Irreſitible Truth, and is accordingly made uſe of in this Demonſtration. 5. 21. HAVING from theſc Principles, however Precarious, Determin'd the Diameters of the Earth, and conſequently the Figure of it, This Doctrine goes on to Define the Figures and Diameters of the Sun or of any Planet Given. FirsT, By Finding the Proportion of the Centrifugal Force in the Middle Circle, betwixt the Poles of the Sun or the Planet Given, to the Centrifugal Force in the Equator of the Earth, from this Propoſition, that the Centripetal or Centrifugal Forces are Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Periodick Times divided by the Radius's of the Circles, which Propoſition we have aſterwards Examind and Conſiderd, and ſhewn, it can be no Foundation, to build any certain Reaſonings in Nature upon. vVa SECOND, SecoNn, By Aſfirming, that the Proportion betwixt the Centriſugal Force, in the Aquator of the Earth, to the Gravity on the Eartls Surface, is Given, and that it is, as the Exceſs of the Eart's Diamerer at the quator to it's Axis, ſince, by the preceding Demonſtration, that Exceſs is Produc'd from the Centrifugal Force alone, and therefore is Proportional to it; But ſeeing that Demonſtration is not Juſt, as ve have now ſewn, the Inference will be Equally Invalid. TuirD, By Aſitrting, that the Proportion of Gravity on the Earths Surface, to the Gravity on the Sun's Surface, or of the Planet Given, is known, by a Propoſition, which Aſcertains the Proportion of the Quantity of Matter in the Sun, to the Quantity of Matter in any Primary Planet, which is, if the Matter of Two Globes, Gravitating to each other, is Homogencous in Places quidiſtant from the Centers, the Weight of one Globe to the Other will be Reciprocally, as the Square of the Diſtance betwixt the Centers, ſuppoſing them to be Removd at Various Diſtances from each other;3 which thereſore depends upon this Preſumption, that all the Matter of the Earth, Sun, and Planets is Homogencous and Similar, a Notion, which ve have abundantly Conſuted, in our Inquity into the Principles oſ the Corpuſcular Syſtem, and in our Aſertion of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of Matter; and, for the ſame Reaſon, we cannot but Reject all the Subtle and Delicate Calculations of the ſcveral Denſities of the Sun and Planets, which are formd upon that Hypotheſis, without any Demonſirations, in Fact and Experience, of any oſ theſe Matters. s. 22. FRoM hence, notwithſtanding, it is Concluded, that the Axes of the Sun, the Earth, and the Planets are Leſs than the Diameters, which are Perpendicular to them, and conſequently, that their Figures are not Spherical, but Spherocidical; it is farther ſaid, that this Proceeds from the Revolution of their Bodies about their Axes, by Which the Matter of them is made to Recede from the Poles and Aſcend to the ſfquator; that in Particular, the Earth is Higher in the Latter Place than in the Former, by 315 Miles, and that, if it were not Higher, there wou'd be an Inundarion of all the Parts and Regions under the quator, by an Aſcent of the Water upon them, in it's Retiring ſrom the Poles; that the Slowneſs of the Pendulum under the Aquator Evinces this, for that proves a Defect of Gravity, and by how much Lighter the Matter of the Earth is, by ſo much Greater ought to be it's Height, that it may ſupport, by is Weight, the Mattet under the Poles, in an Aquilibrium; that the Figure therefore of the Earth's Shadow, Determind by the Eclipſes of the Moon, will not be exactly Circular, but it's Diameter from Eaſt to Weſt vill be Greater than that from North to South, by an Exceſs of about 55', and the Greateſt Parallax oſ the Moon in Longitude will be ſomething Greater than it's Greateſt Parallax in Latitude, and the Greateſt Semidiameter of the Earth will be 19767630 Paris Feet, the Leaſt 19605820, and the Middle 19688725 nearly; and to juſtify this Doctrine, it is farther alledgſd, that all Aſtronomers agree in their Obſervations, that the Diameter of Yupiter is Shorter betwist the Poles than from Eaſt to Weſt. BUT FirsT, That the Axes of the Sun, the Earth, and the Planets are not provd to be Shorter than the Diameters Perpendicular to them, by the Preceding Demonſtrations, we have alrcady ſiewn. SECOND, To Evidence this to be Matter of Fact, there are only Two Inſtances pretended to, that of the Earih and of Yupiter; Granting which, is it neceſary that Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Saturn ſnod obtain the ſame Figure, and that the Sun in Particular oud? If it is ſaid they all Conſiſt of the ſame Homogeneous and Similar Matter, and are exactly in the ſame Circumſtances, it is Denyd, and vants to be Provd; We aſfirm on the Contrary, that the sSuæ conſiſts of an Expanſive Force, with ſome Contractive; and the Others oſ a Various Contractive, Mixt and Blended with a Varicus and Different Expanſive, as the Planets are more or leſ's Removd from the suTHmmD, But hov is it Provd, that Jupiters Diameter is Shorter betwixt the Pole: than from Eaſt to Weſt? It is ſaid by the Agreement in the Obſervations of Aſtronomers;3 And co'd not the ſame Aſtronomers obſerve the ſame in the Aſon, in ſMavs, in Mereury, in Venus, or in Saturn, or the Sun? If not, Why ioud the Obſerva tions upon Topiter be a Standard for the Reſt? If they coud or did, why are not thoſt Obſervations here Expreſi'd? It is too Evident, that in this, as in all other Part: of the preſent Celebrated Syſtem, Nature is not Endeavourd to be Explaind by it bui ut ſubmitted and ſubjected to it; beſides which, we have given Reaſons, why the Obſervations of Aſtronomers are not too much to be Relyd on, upon Account of he Fewneſs of Obſervers, and the Uncertainty and Difficulty of Obſerving. FourTH, HoW farther is it yet Provd, that the Earth's Diameter is Shorter betwixt T the Poles than from Eaſt to Weſt, or in the Equator? Namely, by a Calculation, I which makes the Earth Higher in the one Caſe than the other, by 35 Miles; but u, ſince that Calculation depends upon a Precarious Propoſition, which is not allowd, it can be of no Service to our Conviction: Nor is that Argument more Valid, 7, vhich is dran from the Revolution of the Earth round it's own Axis, by which⸗ i's Parts are ſaid to recede from the Poles to the quator; becauſc, this will be Impoſſible, excepting the Earth was once a Fluid, and the ſame may be ſaid of the other Planets, but whatever our Faith, in the Aſoſaic Hiſtories, may Induce us to believe of the Earth, and may Juſtly requirc of us, it is not Philoſophically Evinc'd, which, in a Matter of mere Reaſoning, is always Expected; Granting yet, that the Earth and the Planets were originally in a Fluid State, it is not Demonſtrated, that they were at that Time Circulated about their Axes; And laſtly, ſuppoſing they were, a Spherical Fluid, Revolvd upon an Axis, vou'd not produce a Spherocid, ſince the Centriſugal Force do's not, in ſuch a Caſc, exert it ſelf in any Manner from the Poles towards the Equator, but in Tangents to the ſeveral Revolving Circles of the Globe; and conſequently, if the Parts of the Fluid were not by theirt Gravity Retain'd in thoſe Circles, they wou'd not fly up tovards the ſEquator, but fiy off in Tangents, or in ſome Lines or other Parallel to it, ſo little Reaſon is there to Amuſe us vith Imaginary Inundations at the Equator, if the Earth was not Higher there than at the Poles, Eſpecially, as the Earth is now Conſtituted, unleſs we coud ſuppoſe Mountains of Ice, Rolling from thence, ſio'd overflow the Regions betwixt the Tropicks; Beſides, ſince the Equator is the Largeſt Circle, and it's Parallels are continually Diminiſd, as they Approach to the Poles, and ſince their Circuits are performd at once, the Parts under the Equator will be carryd Round vith a Greater Velocity, and by conſequence will obtain a Greater Centrifugal Force than the Parts, hich are ncarer the Poles, ſo that it dos not appear at all Reaſonable to Think, that a Leſs Centrifugal Force, nearer the Poles, ſnoud Prevail over and Surmount a Greater, nearer the Equator, which yet theſe Fictitious Inundations muſt Suppoſc and Preſume. TnE next Endeavour to Prove, that the Earth is Higher under the Aquator than under the Poles, is from the Slowneſs of the Pendulum in the Former Place, which is' ſaid to Argue a Defect of Gravity, and by hov much Lighter the Matter of the; Earth is, by ſo much Greater ought to be ir's Height, that it may ſupport, by it's Weight, the Matter under the Poles, in an quilibrium. But, if the Slowneſs of the Pendulum ariſes from the Heat under the quator, as we have before ſiewn, and ſhall farther prove, this Argument is of no Force; Moreover, tho Matter or the Pendulum and Pendulous Body, Heated by the Expanſive Force, Impreſ'd at the æquator, may Weigh leſs than at the Poles, and therefore Deſcend Slower, that Defect of Gravity will not be owing to the one being farther Remov'd from the Center of the Earth than the other, till the foregoing Propoſition of the Lengths of the Pendulums and the Accelerating Gravities, being Reciprocally Proportional to the Diſtances from the Earth's Center, is Provd, but we have Evidenc'd, that there is no Demonſtration of ſuch a Propoſition; Nor yet can it be juſtly affirmd, if the Matter is Lighter at the quator than at the Poles, ſuppoſing by the Expanſive Force of Heat, or any other Cauſe, ſexcept that of Reciprocal Diſtances, which is taking for Granted, what is to be Provã,) that therefore by how much Lighter the Matter of the Earth is, by ſo much Greater ought to be it's Height, that it may ſupport, by it's Weight, the Matter under the Poles, in an Aquilibrium; unleſs we will allow, that the Solid Matter, under the ZE.quator, and the Poles, is to be conſiderd as a Fluid, and that it is Reducible to the Common Laws of Hydroſtaticks, vhich we have already ſuſficiently Conſuted; for, if Heat and Cold have a Force to produce theſe Eſfects of making the Pendulous Matter Lighter at the quator and Heavier at the Poles, there will be no Reaſon, I hope, from thence to make the Column of Solid Matter from the Surface to the Center Center Longer at the Equator than at the Poles, becauſe there is no kind of Connexion in ſuch a Reaſoning. Axb yet upon theſe Unprovd and Uncertain Premiſes it is Concluded, that therefore the Figure of the Earth's Shadow, Determin'd by the Eclipſes of the Moon, vill not be exacdtly Circular, but it's Diameter from Eaſt to Weſt will be Greater than that ſrom North to South, by an Exceſs of about 55'; Whereas this ſo Minute Obſervation is not True in Fact, for, according to Aſtronomers, that Shadow cannot be Determin'd vithin 12 at leaſt; that the Greateſt Parallax of the Moon in Longitude will be ſomething Greater than it's Greateſt Parallax in Latitude, which alſois ſomething Minute; and that the Greateſt Semidiameter of the Earth will be 19767630 Paris Feet, and the Leaſt 19609320; all which is aſſirmd, upon it's being ſuppord to be Prov, that the Earth is3177 Miles Higher at the Equator than at the Poles, which is Determining Things again to a vonderſul Minuteneſs; ſo happy is this Philoſophy in Explaining Minutiæ, vhich never were in Nature, as it is very Singular in Negſecting others, as the Expanſive Forces, which certainly aree. s. 23. AND upon this Foundation it is, that it Accounts for the Regreſſion oſ the Equinoctial Points, and for the Axis oſ the Earth, every Annual Revolution, Changing it's Inclination to the Ecliptick twice, and twice Returning to the ſame Inclination; Becauſe it has been already provũ, if this Philoſophy is True, that if a Body, as the Moon, Revolves about the Earth, there will be a Regreſſion of the Nodes, or a Motion oſ them in Anteceqentia, and that the Inclination of it's Orbit to the Plane oſ the Ecliptick will be Chang'd twice in the Moon's Revolution, and vill twice Recover it's Priſtine Poſition; Let therefore ſeveral Podies be thus Movd round the Earth, and they will obtain Iike Laws with thoſe of the Moon; Let theſe ſeveral Bodies be Multiply'd in Iufinitum, and there will be a Ring producd, which will be Subject to the ſame Changes of Inclination to the Planc of the Ecliptick, and to a Regreſſion of the Nodes; Let now the Globe of the Earth Swell and Extend it ſelf to this Ring; In the Flux and Reſlux of the Sea, the ſaid Ring is ſuppos'd to be Fluid, and the Water to lie in an Hollow Channel, within the Surface of the Earth, but in the Preſent Solution the Ring is Imagin'd to become Solid, and to riſe above the ſame Surface, or, which is all one, the Fluid Ring is ſupposd to become Solid, and the Globe of the Earth to be diminiſ'd and fall beIov it; vhich is ſaid to be the Caſe of the Earth, Conſiderd as a Spheroeid, which has the Nature and Figure of a Sphere ith a Circle or Ring of Redundant Matrer round it, and adhering to it, and which therefore, having the ſame Axis with the Earth, vill Oſcillate together with it, and the Nodes Retire in Antecedentia; That the Globe of the Earth will Oſcillate with the Ring is aſterwards ſiewn, but take the Ring apart from ſuch Globe, and it's Greateſt Angle of Inclination will be, when the Nodes are in the Syzygiæ; From thence, as the Nodes proceed to the Quadratures, the Ring Endeavours to diminiſh it's Inclination, and Impreſſts the ſame Conatus upon the whole Globe; The Globe Retains this Motion Impreſd, till the Rinz by a Contrary Conatus Deſtroys it, and Impreſies a New one to a Contrary Side, by which Means, the Greateſt Motion oſ the Decreaſing Inclination is in the Quadratures of the Nodes, and the leat Angle oſ Inclination in the Octants aſter the Quadratures, becauſc the Motion Impreſ”d is ſtill Retaind, till a Contrary Conatus alters it, which is in thoſe Octants; Then the Greateſt Motion of Reclination or Increaſing Inclination is in the Syzygiæ, and the Greatet Angle of Inclination in the Octants following, for the ſame Reaſon; And the Caſe is the ſame of a Globe, vhich has no Ring, which is ſomething Higher at the quator than the Poles, or which Conſiſts of ſomething a Denſer Matter; for that Exceſs of Matter at the ſEquator ſupplies the Place of a Ring, and altho, the Centripetal Force oſ this Globe being Increas'd, all it's Parts may be ſupposd to Tend downwards, in ihe Manner of Gravitating Parts of the Earth, yer there will be little Alteration ſrom thence in the foregoing Reaſoning. AND from hence it is ſaid, by the ſame Reaſon, that the Redundant Matter of the Globe, at the æEquator, cauſcs, that the Nodes ſiou'd have a Regreſſion, and herefore, that ſuch a Regreſſion od be Increasd by an Increment of ſuch Matter, ind Diminid by a Diminution of it, and Deſtroyd by an Ablation of it, if more Matter be taken away than the Redundant, that ĩs, if the Globe is more Depreſũ, i or or Rarer at the æquator than at the Poles, the Motion of the Noũes will be Propeſſive, or in Conſequentia. ALSO, on the Contrary, from the Motion of the Nodes, ve may Determine the Conſtitution and Nature of the Globe; Namely, if the Globe always Preſcrves the ſame Poles, and the Motion is in Antecedentia, the Matter at the quator will be Redundant, if in Conſequentia, it will be Deficient; Suppoſe an uniform Globe, and made perfectly Round, to be firſt Quieſcent in Unreſiſting Spaces, and then, by ſome Oblique Force Acting upon its Surface, to be Propell'd forwards, and to Admit of a Motion from thence, partly Circular, and partly in Directum; but, ſince the Globe is Indifferently Affected towards all it's Axes, and has not a Greater Propenſity to one Axis, or one Situation of the Axis, than to another, it is manifeſt, that it will never, by any Power of it's own, Change it's Axis, or the Inclination of it; Let there be now a Second or Third Oblique Impulſe Communicated to the ſame Globe, and at the ſame Part of its Surface, as before, that is, in the ſEquator of it's Motion, and the like Motion will be produc'd without any Alteration of the Axis, or it's Inclination; An Homogencous and Perfect Globe thereſore do's not Retain ſeveral Diſtinct Morions, but Compounds them all, and Reduces them to one, and, as to it ſclf, is alays Revolv'd in a Simple and Uniſorm Motion about one Axis only; which is Invariable in it's Inclination; nor can the Centripetal Force change the Inclination of the Axis, or the Velocity of the Revolution Round it; for, if a Globè is conceivd to be divided into TWo Hemiſpheres by any Plane, which paſſes thro' it's Center, and the Center, to which the Centripetal Force Tends, that Force vill Equally urge both Hemiſpheres, and therefore will not Incline the Globe to either Side in Reſpect of it's Revolution; But now, if any Freſh Matter is heapt up, like a Mountain, in any Place betwixt the Pole and the æquator, it will Diſturb the Motion of the Globe, and Cauſe it's Poles to Shift their Place and Wander upon it's Surface, and to Deſcribe Circles about ſuch Pole, and i's Oppoſite Point, by the Perpetual Conatus, hich there is in this New Matter of Receding from the Center of it's Motion, in like Manner, as is done by the Poles of the Ecliptick about the Poles of the quator; if this Mountain of New and Acceſſory Matter is Situate in cither of the Poles, the Nodes of the quator will be Progreſſive, as has been already obſervd, if in the æEquator, Regreſſive; if the Mountain of this Freſh Matter is placd on one Side of the Equator, and another Maſs of New Matter is placd on the other, ſo that there is a Kind of Libration betwixt them, the Nodes will be Progreſſive or Regreſſive, as theſe Maſſes are Nearer to the Pole or the Equator, becauſe they may be conſiderd in the Nature of one Maſi, which in the Poles will cauſe a Progreſſion of the Nodes, and in the quator a Regreſſion of Them. AND this is the Sum of the preſent Doctrine concerning the Regreſſion of the Equinoctial Points, and it's proving the Figure of the Earth to be a Spheroeid. 5. 24. IN Anſwer to which, we ſhall FirsT ſay, That this Philoſophy, as we have aſterwards ſiewn, Book 2, has not given an Account of the Errors and Irregularities of the Moon, nor of the Preceſſion of the Nodes of it's Orbit, to which this Ring of Redundant and Elevated Earth is Compar'd, and Made Analogous. SECOND, Tho' ſeveral Diſtinct and Single Bodies, Anſwerable to the Moon, woud be ſubject to the ſame Laws of Revolving vith it, yet United together and Compacted into one Solid Ring, it is not ſo Plin and Evident, that they woud; becauſe in a. Solitary or Single Body, and ſo in ſeveral, they Paſs ſucceſſively thro' the Syzygiæ, Octants, and Quadratures, nd every Point of their Orbit, and receive Impulſes from the Sun's Action, ſuitable to the Places, where they are; but when theſc ſeveral Diſtinct Bodies are Cemented into one Solid Ring, the Sun Acts upon Bodies, Vhich Communicate with each other, and are at once in the Syzygiæ, Octants, and Quadratures, and all the Parts of the Orbit, in which a Solitary, or ſeveral Solitary Bodies, which do not Communicate with each other, ſucceſſively Revolve; and conſequently, the Effects of ſuch Action of the Sun muſt be Extremely Diſferent in the Firſt Caſe, from what it is in the Laſt. THRD, But that which will Puzzle and Embarraſs this Analogy betwixt a Solitary or ſeveral Single Bodies, and a Solid Ring the more, is, that there is nothing, exceptring the Action of the Sun, to diſturb the Revolution of the Former, but in the Latter, ſincę it is ſupposd immediately to Encompaſs the Earth, the Sun and Mooav have, each of them, their Particular Influences, and alſo very Oppoſite ones; ſceing the Sun may be in one Syzygia of the Ring, when the Moon is in the Other, oi in Different Quadratures or Octants, which muſt neceſſarily produce Impreſſions up on the Ring, not any vays Conſonant or Agrecable to what are made upon: Single, or ſeveral Single and Diſtinct Dodies. FourTH, We are farther to take Notice, that the Earth Revolves about the Sun, and conſcquently, the Solid Ring with it, whilſt the Moon Revolves about the Earth, and thereſore about the ſame Solid Ring, and that the Axis of the Earth and o the Ring is carryd alvays Parallel to it ſelf in it's Annual Circuit; which likewiſe vill occaſion a Material Difference betwixt this Caſe, and a Body's being only Revolvd about the Earth and Sun, without it's being Carryd with an Axis Parallel to it ſel? about the Sun, but in very Irregular and Enormous Motions about the Earth, as the Moon is. . FirTH, Another Inſtance, in which the Solid Ring, and a Single or ſeveral Single Bodies Diſagree is, that the one Adheres to the Earth, whereas the other Circulates In Free and Unreſiſting Spaces Round it; For, if it is the ſame Thing, let one Body of the ſeveral be aſfixt to the Earth, and it will be Subject to the ſame Lavs of it's Revolving, as if it performd it's Revolution at a certain Diſtance from it, but the whole Solid Ring is ſaid to be Subject to the ſame Laws; thereſore the Earth will Revolve in the ſame Manner, if one Maſs of Matter, or a large Mountain is placd under the æquator, as if a Ring of Elevated Matter, or a Circle of Mountains were Contin'd under it, which is too Groſs for this Philoſophy to Aſfirm. SIxTH, But farther it is not Evident, nor is it Provd, that the Sun at that Immenſe Diſtance, which it has from the Earth, ſou'd cauſc by it's Action any Particular Alteration by it's Impreſſions upon a Matter, which at the moſt, and by the higheſt Calculation in this Philoſophy, is only 3 1 Miles Elevated above the Reſt of is Surface; Can there be much Difference in the Action of the Sun, which is above 50 Millions of Miles, and others make it 30, Removd from us, upon Two Portions of Matter, which are only Diſtant from cach other about 31 Miles? And yet ſall the whole Diameter of the Earth's Orbit about the Sun be conſider'd, as a Point in Reſpect of the fixt Stars, and the whole Earth it ſelf in Reſpect of ir's Diſtance from the Sun? This ſiews, how Conſiderable the preſent Philoſophy makes it's own Miuutiæ, and how fondly it Advances them above thoſe, which it AcknowIedges in Nature, and which are yet much more Signiſicant and Important. SEVENTH, Granting, notvithſtanding, that the Sun do's obtain a Diſtinguiſhing Eſfect upon Portions of Matter, which are at ſo ſort a Diſtance from cach other, it cannot vell be Imagin'd, that the Coheſion and firm Union of the Parts of the Earth ſioud not hinder any Impreſſions, which cou'd be made by vay of Attraction, more upon one Part than another; at leaſt it is not likely, that they vou'd ove their Oſcillation to a ſmall Prominence or Protuberancy, and not be Determin'd from an Impreſſion upon the whole Globe; and therefore the Ring ſiou'd rather obey the Action of the Sun upon the vhole Globe, vhich is not Pretended to produce any Oſcillation, than the Globe obey the Action of the Sun upon the Ring, which is ſuppos'd to do it. EiGHTH, Beſides, tho' this Philoſophy ſays, that the Globe holds it ſelf Indifſerently to all it's Axes, and therefore Conforms it ſelf to the Oſcillations of the Ring, yet a Weighty and Ponderous one, as Indifferent as it may be to it's Axes, will not he Roll'd any Way, which we Pleaſe, by the Application of a Feather; it is therefore to be ſiewn, that the Action of the Sun upon the Ring, in Diſtinction from the Reſt of the Globe, is any more to it. NintH, This is all Argud upon the Suppoſition of an Attractive Force in the Sun to drav the Earth tovards it, but, iſ that Attractive Force ſhoud prove to be an Expanſive one, by which the Earth is Repell'd ſrom it, and which we have, Book 2, Endeavour'd to Evince, the Caſe vill be alter'd, and this Philoſophy muſt have ſome New Contrivance to make ſuch a Force Square with it's preſent Reaſonings. TENTH, But what is ſtill Worſe than all this, is, that the Earth, neither by what forego's, nor by what follows concerning Pendulums, is prov'd to be a Spheroeid, upon which yet the whole Argument Depends, and the Solution oſ the Preceſſion of the Equinoctial Points. LastiLv, LastLy, The ſaid Preceſſion may be Accounted for, by the Sun's Expanſive Force, n which the Earth continually Revolving, and being continually Repelld by it, Moves thro a Force, which Retards in ſome Meaſure it's Motion, by which it will, every Annual Revolution, be carry'd or forc'd, in ſome ſmall Degree, in Antecedentia, and conſequently, the Interſections of the quator with the Ecliptick ill be ſo too. S3. 25. Ir vill be yet ſaid, that it may be ſufficiently Demonſtrated, that the Figure ã of the Earth is that of a Spheroeid, from the Different Lengths of Pendulums in Various Climates and Latitudes, into which we ſhall now Particularly Inquire; in order: to do which, it will be neceſſary for us to Examine and Compare the Two pre-' ceding Tables, the One made from a Calculation upon the Principles of this Philoſophy, the Other from Experiments. : AND in the Firſt Place, in the Table of Experiments, §. 18, there are only Thirteen: Latitudes of Places mention'd in all, which, ſou'd the Lengths of the Pendulums, in each of them, have been Agreeable to what was found by Calculation, §. 17, it had given us a Preſumption, but not a Demonſtration that the Hypotheſis was True, namely, that the Lengths of Iſochronal Pendulums are Reciprocally, as the Semidiameters of the Earth, where they Oſcillate; But when of theſe Thirteen Latitudes, there are Two, namely, London and St. Helen's, to which there is no Length of the Pendulum Aſſign'd, excepting in Groſs, that at St. Helen's, the Pendulum is 14 Line Shorter than at London, obſerv'd by Dr. Halley; when farther there are TWo more, Paraiba and Lishon, to which alſo there is no Length of the Pendulum Aſſign'd, excepting in Groſs, that at the firſt Place it is 33 Lines, and at the Laſt 24 Lines Shorter than at Paris, according to the Obſervations of Couplet, which are Condemn'd and Corrected by Sir Iſ. Newton to 2, and 14 Lines; when likeviſe there are Three others, that is, Cæyenne, Martinico, and Paris, to which Different Lengths of the Pendulum are Aſſignd by Different Obſervers, namely, by Richer and Des Hajes at Cayenne, which Obſervations yet Sir Iſaac Newton Condemns and Corrects, by Varin or Des Hayes and Feuellè at Martinico, and by Richer and Varin or Des Hayes at Paris; when moreover there are only Two Obſervers, Varin and Des Hayes, vho Agree in the Lengths of the Pendulums, and in only Thiee Latitudes, which are near to each other, and do not differ a Single Degree, namely, Guadaloupe, Goreè, and Martinico; and when laſtly there are Four Latitudes, Poriobel, Granada, St. Chriſtopher's, and St. Dominic, where there is only one Obſerver of the Lengths of the Pendulum, to vir, Feuellè or Des Hayes; If we conſider the ſmall Number of Latitudes obſerv'd, the Paucity of Obſervers, the Variety and Diſſonance in their Obſervations, it will be hard for us to Imagine, how any Theory or Hypotheſis can be juſtify'd from hence, and eſpecially how the Diameters of the Earth ſou'd be aſcertaind from ſuch Obſervations of the Lengths of the Pendulums in Different Latitudes; ſince, at the moſt, there are only Six Latitudes of the whole Number, the Lengths of whoſe Pendulums are Unconteſted, Portobel Obſerv'd by Feuellè; Granada, by Des Hayes ; Guadaloupe, by Varin and Des Hayes; Goreè, by the ſame; St. Chriſtopher's and St. Dominict, by Des Hayes; and of theſe Six, Four of them have only one Obſerver, which, if others were to try the ſame Experiments apart, it may be Reaſonably thought woud Diſagree as much as the Former. BESIDES Which, let us ſuppoſe theſc Obſervations True and Exact, even thoſe, which Diſa the Lengths of the Pendulums Gradually Increaſe, as they are carryd from the Equtor to the Poles, in the Table formd from Calculation; whereas in the Succeeding one, made from Experiments, the Length of the Pendulum at Cayenne, according to Richer, Des Hayes, and Sir Iſ. Newion, which is only 49. 5 5' Latitude, is Greater than, according to Feuellè, at Portobel, which is 90. 33' Latitude, and Equal, according to Des Hayes, to the Length of it at Granada, which is 120. 6 Latitude, but Greater according to Richer and Sir Iſ. Newion, alſo Equal, according to Varin and Des Hayes, to the Length of it at Guadaloupe, which is 149 Latitude, but Greater according to Richer and Sir Iſ. Newton, again almoſt Equal, according to Varin and Des Hayes, to the Length of it at Gore?, which is 140. 40 Latitude, but Greater according to Richer and Sir Tſ. Newton, Farther, exactly Equal, according to Varin and Dei Hayes, to the Length of it at Martinico, which is 14. 44' Latitude, but Greater according tO Richer, Sir Iſ. Newton, and Feuellè; And yet on the Contrary, if theſe Experiments any vay Correſponded with the aboveſaid Calculations, the Length of the Pendulum at x Ca;ennt I : , Cayenne ought to be Leſs than at Portobel, Granada, Guadaloupe, Goreè, and Martinico tho' they unanimouſly Agree to make it Equal or Greater: Thus likewiſe the Length of the Pendulum moud be Leſs at Granada than Guadaloupe, and at Guadaloupe than Martinico, albeit Varia and Des Hayes make them Equal; Nay, which is ſtill more Extraordinary, Richer, and Sir Iſ. Newton's Correction upon him, makes the Length of the Pendulum Greater at Cajenne, which is only 4. 55 Latitude, than at St Chriſtopher's, which is 170. 19' Latitude, or at St. Dominic, which is 199. 48' Latitude. MorEOVER, According to the Table of Calculations, the Greateſt Difference betwixt the Length of the Pendulum at the quator, and at the Poles, namely, betvixt 3. 7,468, and 3. 9,387 Feet and Lines, is 1,919 Line, that is, not quite a Lines, but as thoſe Calculations were made upon the Suppoſition of the Earth's being uniformly Denſe, if it's Matter is Denſer nearer the Center than at the Surface, the Difference of the Pendulums will be ſomething Greater, and thereſore, in the preſent Caſe, let that Difference be a little more than 2 Lines. BUT Couplet at raraiba, which is 60, 38' Latitude, obſervd the Length oſ the Pendulum to be 35 Lines leſs than at Paris, which is 480. 4 5 Latitude, and which Sir ſſ. Newton, upon a Correction of this Groſs Obſervation, as he Eſteems it, makes 25 Lines leſs, Either of which will be a Confeſſion, that the Difference of the Lengths of the Pendulums is Greater, or about as Great, at the Diſtance of 42°. 7, as of 50°, which is Impoſſible; Eſpecially, when according to the Table of Calculations, the Difference betwixt the Lengths of the Pendulums at 50 Latitude and 48, which comes the neareſt to the preſent Caſe, namely, the Difference betwixt 3. 7,482 Feet and Lines, and 3. 8,528, is only I,046, that is, ſomething more than a Line, and not 13 of a Line, allowing for a Greater Difference upon Account of the Earths being Denſer at the Center than at the Surface. AT Lishon, which is 20° Latitude, the ſame Couplet found the Length of the Pendulum 24 Lines leſs than at Pris, which is 48°. 45' Latitude, and according to Sir Iſ. Newton's Correction it is 15, but the Difference betwixt 400 and 43° 45 is 80. 45, S0 that here is a Difference of the Lengths of the Pendulums, within 3 of a Line, almoſt Equal to what belongs to a Difference of 90° Latitude, which is Impoſſible; Eſpecially, when we farther conſider, that the Difference of the Length of the PenduIum, which belongs to 40° Latitude, which is 3. 8,261 Feet and Lines, and of that, which belongs to 43° Latitude, which is 3. 8,528 Feet and Lines, is no more than 1,267, or not much above 2 of a Line in the Table of Calculations. ' Dr. Halley obſervd at St. Helen's, which is 15° Latitude, that the Length of the Pendulum Was 1£ Line leſs than at London, which is 51°. 30 Latitude, ſo that, according to this Experiment, the Difference of only 36°. 30 Latitude will require almoſt as Great a Difference in the Lengths of the Pendulums, as the Difference of 90° Latitude, which is again Impoſſible; Eſpecially, vhen we farther conſider, that the Difference of the Length of the Pendulum, vhich is over againſt 15° Latitude in the Table of Calculations, and of that, which ſtands oppoſite to 50° Latitude in the ſame Table, Namely, of 3.7,596 and 3. 8,594 Feet and Lines, is no more than , 9598 of a Line, that is, not one entire Line. ] ACCORDING to Des Hajes, the Length of the Pendulum at Guadaloupe and Martinico, which are 14° and 14°. 44 Latitude, is 2 a Line leſs than at St. Dominict, which is 19°. 48' Latitude, which is the Difference of 4 a Line for a Difference of a little more than 5° Latitude, and yer there is but about 2 Lines Difference for a Difference of 90° Latitude; and in the Table of Calculations, the Length of the Pendulum at 15° is 3.7,596, and at 20°,3. 7,692, ſfrom Whence the Difference of the Lengths, for a Difference of 5°, will be only, o96 oſ a Line, which vill fall very much ſort of, 5005 4 of a Line, and cannot be repaird by ſuppoſing the Earth Denſer at the Center. AcGAIN, - according to Richer, the Lengih of the Pendulum at Cayenne, which is .55 Latitude, is 13 Line leſ;s than at Paris, which is 43°. 45 Latitude, but ac cording to Des Hayes 275, and by the Table of Calculations the Lengih of the Pendulum at 5° Latitude is 3. 7,482, and at 48° Latitude 3. 8,528, from whence he Difference will be 1,046, which is much Leſ's than cither 135 I,250, according O Richer, or than 27 according to Des Hayes; and neither of em bear any Proportion : Chap. VII. and the Oſcillation of Pendulums. tion to the Difference of the Pendulums Lengths for the Diſference of 90° Latitude ſince the Difference, in the Preſent Caſe, is 43°. 50 Latitude, to which Des Haye aſſigns a Difference of the Length of the Pendulum almoſt Equal to that, which belongs to a Difference of 90, Richer is ſomething too High, and both Diſagrec very much with what the Calculation makes it. AND by the ſame Method of Examining we ſhall find, that the few Remaining Experiments bear no Analogy, in the Differences of the Lengths of the Pendulum: at any Intermediate Latitudes, with that ſupposd Difference, which is betwixt them under the Equator and Poles; nor yet, that they in any Meaſure Correſpond with the Differences of the Lengths, aſcertain'd in the Table of Calculations; hich cannot but be a full Confutation of the preſent Theory of Pendulums, and the Computed Lengths of them, in Various Latitudes, deriv'd from it. 5. 26. BUT to ſtrike at the Foundation of all this Reaſoning we farther affirm, that the Shortneſs of Synchronal Pendulums at the quator, and the Increaſe of their Lengths towards the Poles, do's not ariſe from the Elevation of the Earth in the one Place, and the Depreſſion of it towards the others, but from the Various Temperature of the Air and Climate, and particularly with Relation to the Heat and Cold Experienc'd in them, which from Different Cauſes may be Different in the the ſame Climates or Regions, and nearly the ſame in Different ones; ſince we do not find all Countries Equally Hot or Cold, which are in the ſame Latitude, nor Differently Hot or Cold, which are in Different ones; And from hence there may be ſome Account given of the Variety and Diſagreement of Obſervations in the ſame Latitudes, as alſo of the Length of the Pendulum not being Increasd or Diminiſd in Proportion to it's Removal from the quator or Approach to it. TnUS at Cayenne, the Reaſon, why the Length of the Pendulum was leſs according to Des Haye's Obſervations, by ſomething more than - a Line, than according to Richers Obſervations, might probably be, that the Experiments of the Former were made in an Hotter or Dryer Seaſon or Air, and thoſe of the Latter in a Colder or Moiſter; for it is known, that bet wixt the Tropicks their Rain is their Winter. TuE Length of the Pendulum at Paraiba, according to Couplet, was 33 Lines leſi than at Paris, becauſe the Temperature of the Air is much Hotter in the one Place than the other. Feuellè obſervd the Length of the Pendulum to be Ieſs at Portobel, which is 90. 33' Latitude, than Richer or Des Hayes did at Cayenne, which is only 40. 5 s' Latitude, becauſe the Heats were Greater, it is likely, at Portobel than at Cayenne, vhen thoſe Obſervations were made, or the Weather and Scaſon Dryer at the firſt Place, and Moiſter at the Laſt. IN like Manner, the Length oſ the Pendulum, according to Varin and Des Hayes, was much the ſame at Granada, Guadaloupe, Gore?, and Martinico, vhoſe Latitudes are 12°. 6, 145.9, 14°. 40, 14°. 44, becauſe we may juſtly Imagine, the Heats of thoſe Places are nearly the ſame, or the Seaſons of the Year, in which the Obſervations were made, were ſo far Different, as to Compenſate for the Difference of the Climates, and Render the Temperature of the Air very much Equal; and Feuellè's Pendulum at Martinico was Shorter than Varin's and Des Hajes's, becauſe he obſervd in an Hotter or Dryer Scaſon. Dr. Halleys Pendulum at St. Helen's was Shorter than at London, becauſe the Heats vere more Extraordinary at 15° Latitude than at 510. 30. Des Hayes's was Shorter at St. Chriſtopher's than at St. Dominick's, Coupler's at Lisbon, and Des FHajes's at Cayenne, than at Paris, for the ſame Reaſon. AND laſtly, Varins and Des Hayes's was Shorter at Paris than Richer's by 27 of a Line, becauſe the Firſt obſerv'd in an Hotter or Dryer Scaſon, and the Laſt in a Colder and Moiſter. Tnis Account therefore depends upon the Suppoſition, that the Lengths of the Pendulum are to be Diminiſd in an Hotter or Dryer Climate and Temperature of the Air, and to be Increasd in a Colder or Moiſter. But it is Matter of Fact and Experiment, and ſo acknowledgd by this Philoſophy, that Pendulums move Slower n the ſame Climate, in Summer than in Winter, in an Hotter than a Colder Craſis or Temperature of the Air; and, as Dryneſs ariſes from Heat and Moiſture from xX 2 Cold, Cold, there is the ſame Reaſon to affirm, that in ſome Degrec, a Pendulum moves Slower in a Dry, if ſomething Hot, than in a Moiſt Seaſon, if Cold, and ve have Endeavourd from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces to give a Solution of this Phænomenon; For it is Plain, that an Expanſive Force makes a Pendulous Body Lighter, and to Deſcend Slower, and a Contractive Heavier, and to Deſcend Quicker; It is therefore Maniſeſt, that if a Pendulum moves Slower in an Hotter or Dryer Craſis or Temperature of the Air than in a Colder or Moiſter, to make it Oſcillate in the ſame Time, that is, in the Second oſ a Minute for Inſtance, the Pendulum muſt be ſhorten'd in the firt Caſe, and lengthend in the Laſt; becauſe, if the Force of the Pendulous Body is Diminiſd, ſo that it moves Sloer, it muſt be carryd Nearer to the Center of Suſpenſion, that it may Deſcribe a Similar Arc of a leſs Circle in it's Oſcillation in the ſame Time, that a Greater Force Deſcribes a Similar one of a Larger; and on the Contrary, if the Force of the Pendulous Body is Increasd, ſo that it moves Faſter, it muſt be carryd to a farther Diſtance from the Center of Suſpenſion, that it may Deſcribe a Similar Arc of a larger Circle in the ſame Time, that a Leſſer Force Deſcribes a Similar Arc of a Leſs. BESIDES Which, ſince the Oſcillations of a Pendulum, which we have beſore ſiewn, Proceed from the Conteſt, which there is betwixt the Expanſive Force of the Pendulous Body and the Contractive Force of the Center of Suſpenſion; As the Expanſive Force of the Pendulous Body, that is, in the Preſent Caſe, it's Gravitating, is Diminiſ'd by the Expanſive of Heat, it muſt approach Nearer to the Contractive Force of the Center of Suſpenſion or Rotation, and as the ſame Expanſive Force of the Pendulous Body, that is, it's Gravitating, is Increasd, it muſt Retire farther from the Contractive Force of the Center of Suſpenſion, to Produce the ſame Effect, that is, to Meaſure the ſame Time; becauſe the Nearer any Force is to a Contrary, the more it Partakes of and Communicates with that Force, and is Govern'd by it, and the farther it is from it, it is the leſs Affected with it, whilſt both Exert their Effects in the ſame Time; Thus in the Common Deſcription of a Circle, the Expanſive Force is Slower, the Nearer it is to the Center, which is Quicicent, and Quicker the more it is Removd from it, in Order to produce Two Concentrical Circles, vhoſe Times of Deſcription are notwithſtanding the ſame. 5. 27. BUT it is objected to this Explanation of the Lengthening and Shortening of Pendulums from Heat and Cold, that, from the Obſervations of Picart, the IronRod of the Pendulum, vhich in Froſty-Weather was one Foot Long, being heated at the Fire, vas only one Foot and of a Line, and that, from the Obſervations of De la Hire, the Iron-Rod, vhich in the like Froſty-Weather was Six Feet Long, in the Summer-Heats was only Six Feet and ; of a Line, that indeed the Summer's Sun do's make Metals exceeding Warm, vhich are Exposd to it, but that the Rod of a Pendulum in a Clock is never Exposd to the Heat of the Summers Sun, and never has an Heat Equal to that of the External Parts of an Human Body, becauſe, the Pendulum vill always be perceivd Cold to them; and therefore the Rod of a Pendulum, which is Three Feet Long, will be ſomething Longer in Summer-Time than in Winter, by an Exceſs of little more than 2 of a Line, and conſequently can be ſortend no more, which cannot poſſibly give an Account, why the Pendulum ſhou'd be ſhorten'd at the quator, 2 Lines or more; from whence it is Infer'd, that the whole Difference of the Length of Pendulums, which in Various Climates are Iſochronal, cannot be aſcribd to the Different Hear of thoſe Climates, nor yet to the Errors of the Obſervers, which are Small and Inconſiderable; and in this they all Agree, that the Iſochronal Pendulums are Shorter under the Aquator, than at the Royal Obſervatory at Paris, by a Difference of about 2 Lines. IN Anſwer to vhich we ſay, that, becauſe the Length of the Pendulum is only Increas'd about 2 of a Line by Heat, and therefore can be ſhorten'd no more upor that Account, is no Argument, that it may not be ſlill orten'd upon the Accouni of it's Slowneſs, and that ſuch Slowneſs is not owing to Heat; Since the Expanſive Force of Heat Diminiſhes the Contractive, or the Weight, of the Pendulum, and vhat is Lighter Deſcends Slower; The Obſervations thereſore of Picart and De Ia Hire do not Overthrov what we have ſaid, but Confirm it, and Evince, that the Pendulum is to be ſhorten'd, by Reaſon of Heat's Svelling and Increaſing the Length ol of it by it's Expanſive, and we add, that it is likewiſe to be ſorten'd, becauſc Heat 5 it's Expanſive Increaſes the Slowneſs of it. Tri5 alſo acknowledgã, that Metals do admit of a Great Degree of Heat or Warmth from the Rays of the Sun in Summer, and tho' the Pendulum is not Exposd to the open Violence of it, it partakes of the Effects, which are Communicated to the vhole Air, by which it becomes of a Sultry Temper and Diſpoſition, even in Places, which are not Obnoxious to the Impreſſions of the Dire& Rays from the Solar Subſtance; and albeit the Heat of the Pendulum may not Exceed the Heat of the External Parts of an Human Body, yer conſidering, that the Heat of thoſe External Parts is mightly Increasd in Summer, in Reſpect of what they have in Winter, the Heat of the Pendulum will receive a Proportionable Augmentation, compard vith what it has in Froſty Weather, and ſuch a one as may be ſufficient to produce it's apparent Slowneſs. As to the Errors of Obſervers, we do not Charge any upon them, but have Endeavourd to ſiew, that the Variety of Obſervations, even in the ſame Region and Climate, may be juſtly Accounted for in the Way we have Proposd; On the Contrary, Couplet is made to be a Groſs Obſerver, and other Obſervations are Eſtcem'd Erroneous by rhis Philoſophy, becauſe they do not ſo exactly Square and Agree with it's Suppoſuions, and the Calculations upon them; Which is a very unfair Method of Judging and Determining concerning the Truth of Experiments, and is really Endeavouring to make Nature ſubmit to our Speculations and Fancies, whereas our Reaſonings and Imaginations about it ought to be Accommodate and Conformable to Nature; but this is not the only Inſtance of this Way of Proceeding in the Preſent Philoſophy, I have ſiewn in my Principles of Natural Philoſophy, that it takes the ſame Courſe in Accounting for the Propagation of Sounds, and that it has done the like in Aſtronomy I have alſo Evinc'd, which was the chie? Reaſon, or elſe I am Miſinform'd, of the Complaints of Mr. Flamſteed, and his Burning the Copies of his Aſtronomical Obſervations, which were Printed under other Men's Directions, becauſe they had Alterd and Mangled them, and made them Different from what he obſervd, on Purpoſe to Confirm the New Notions Introducd in the Phyſical Aſtronomy. For in the Preſent Caſe, vhy ſio'd one Obſerver be Preferd to Another, why ſmoud Couplet be a Groſs one, and Varin and Des Hayes more Accurate? Is there any Thing alledg'd in the Genius of the Men, or in the Pendulums which they usd, vhich ſou'd make the one more to be Depended upon, than the other:? Coupler's Obſervation is Corrected; but how? Namely, by ſuppoſing the Principles of this Philoſophy True, upon which it Calculates, whereas thoſe Principles ought to be provd True by thoſe Experiments it Preſumes to Correct; Either we muſt fix the Certainty of Experiments, or elſe entirely Diſcard them, and if thoſc Experiments ſeem to Clah and Interfere with each other, ve muſt find out Principles, which will Anſwer thoſe ſeeming Contradictions, or Reject the Whole as a Fallacious Buſineſs; bur to take ſome Experiments, which Agree with our Hypotheſes, and to Slight and Diſregard, or Tamper with others, which do not, is a Cunning and Artiſicial Procedure, but not an Honet and a True one, and is more ſuitable to the Character of a Sophiſter and Jugler in Reaſon, than of a Philoſopher. As to the Agreement of Obſervers in this, that Iſochronal Pendulums are Shorter under the ſEquator than at the Royal Obſervatory at Paris, there is an Evident Reaſon for it, if Heat and Cold are the Grand and Principal Regulators of them, as we have hitherto Endeavourd to Shew and to Demonſtrate. s. 28. I Shall Conclude this Doctrine of Pendulums with Obſerving, that in my Principles of Natural Philoſophy, which, upon the Publiſiing of them, I immediatel ſent to Siſ Iſ. Newton, Chapt. 5. §. 16. I had Aſfirmq, that the Reaſon, why Pendulums did not Oſcillate Equably in Different Climates, was the Difference of the Medium, in which the Oſcillations were made, what that Difference of the Mediun was, I had no occaſion then to Conſider; I added, Referring to Sir Iſaac Neuton: Princip. Prop. 20. Lib. 3. and Dr. Gregory's Aſtronom. Prop. 52. Lib. 3. That we cor'd not Reaſonably Attribute this Inequality of the Motion of the Pendulum tc an Alreration in the Figure of the Earth in Various Parts of it, however Ingenion ſom ſome Calculations might be in order to Prove it; Upon a Second Edition of hi: Principles, this Point was Labour'd with much more Accuracy than in the For mer, but whether he has Prov'd what I there Deny'd, I now leave Others to Judge and vhether I had not ſome Grounds to Affirm, that it was an Ingenious Calculation only. As to the Doctrine of Projectiles, which follows in this Philoſophy, and that the Line Deſcribd by them is a Parabolick Curve, we have already taken Notice of it in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and ſien, that it entirely Depends upon the Suppoſition of Matter's being Similar and Homogeneous, and that it is Acted by uniform Impulſes of Gravity, neither of which Hypotheſes we Can or are Willing to Allov. ALL that we ſhall farther ſay is, that Bodies, vhen Projected, perform Various and Diſferent Figures, according to the Greater or Leſs Reſiſtance of the Medium, and the ſeveral Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, with which they are Endud, as alſo according to the Proportion of the Expanſive Force, which is Communicated to them from the Projection, and of the Contractive Force of Gravitation, by which they are Impell'd to the Earth; and Caſes, diſtinctly put in Reſpect to each of theſe Forces, ou'd ſupply us with many New Theorems unknown to the Preſent Doctrine, which only conſiders one Caſe, namely, where the Matter is the ſame, and a-like, and where the Force of Gravitation is ſo too, and Acts by Continual and Invariable Percuſſions upon ir, by which it is Accelerated towards the Earth's Center. TFH E PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE F O R C E S B O O K II CONCERNING THE PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY. Digitizeò by Google PRINCIPLES of the PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE FORCES. B O OK II. Concerning the PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY. C H ADP. I Concerning the Laws of Nature and Motion. s. 1. E have in ſome Chapters of our Former Book Examind into the Principles, by which the Mechanical Powers have hitherto been Accounted for; We might now Proceed to the New Hypotheſis raisd to Explain them, but ſince That is derivd from a Lav of Motion, concerning the Compoſition of Forces, aſſcrted in the Preſent Philoſophy, it vill be Neceſſary for us to defer the Conſideration of it, till we come to Enquire into the Law it ſelf, and the Foundations and Reaſons, on which it is Eſtabli'd; In Order to vhich we ſhall conſider the Laws of Nature in the Method they are Proposd to us, and which, together with the Opinions concerning Matter and Motion, which ĩt Eſpouſes, and were before Conſiderd, are the Baſis of all the ſucceeding Philoſophy. it 2. THE Firſt Lav of Nature or Motion affirmd is, that every Body perſiſts in it's State oſ Motion or Reſt Uniformly in Directum, unleſs ſo far as it is oblig'd to change that State by ſome Force or other Impreſſ'd upon it; Thus, it is ſaid, Projectiles continue in their Motion, unleſs ſo far as they are Retarded by the Reſiſtance of the Air, or Thrown to the Ground by the Force of Gravitation; A Globe or Cylinder, which Revolves upon it's own Axis, continues to Move, till it is made to Ceaſc, by ſome External Renitency to it; And the Large ànd Immenſc Bodies of the Planets and Comets preſerve their Progreſſive and Circular Motions to an unlimited Time, becauſe their Spaces have lititle or a very Inſenſible Reſiſtance in them. 5. 3. WE ſhall not conſider the Reaſon, at preſent, of a Stone Falling to the Ground, or a Body Revolving upon it's Axis, or the Planets and Comets Preſcrving their ſtated Periods, or whether Comets are MovJd at all in a Circuit, or not; vhat ve ſnhall obſerve is, that for a Proof of the Lav of Nature, it is ſuppos'd, that Nothing hinders a Projectile from Moving on for ever, excepting the Ar, and it's own Proper Gravitation; That Nothing reduces a Body Revolv'd round it's Axis to⸗ Quieſcence, excepting the Air, &⸗; That Nothing obſiructs the Circumgyration v . Y rhe Concerning the Laws of Book II. he Planets, unleſs an Infinitely ſmall Reſiſing Medium, and therefore they may move on to Innumerable Ages; And laſtly, That Planets and Comets are carry'd Round in a Circular and Progreſſive Motion, that is, in a Motion which is Compounded of a Direct, and a Centripetal; All which are Problems in Philoſophy, vhich require an Accurate, and Juſt Solution, and thereſore are Improperly brought to juſtify the Firſt Law of Naturẽ, before it is more certain than ſrom an Hypotheſis only, that Motion is Stopt or Continued from theſe Cauſes; Since, for all that is yet Provd, Bodies may Ceaſe to Move after they are put into Motion by their own Innate and Contractive Forces, according to what has been before Explain'd, and others may continue to Move longer than in Proportion to the Force Impreſ”d by their own Proper Expanſive. 5. 4. SixcE therefore theſe Inſtances of Fact can ſignify norhing to the Aſcertaining the preſent Law of Nature or Motion, till they are Evidenc'd to proceed from the Cauſes aſſign'd to them, hich cannot be done, in Reſpect oſ the Motion of Projectiles in particular and of the Planets, excepting upon the Suppoſition or this Law of Nature, it is manifeſt there is no Proof of t to be expected ſrom them; The next Thing we ſhall conſequently inquire into, is, whether ſuch a Law of Nature or Motion can be derivd from a Truc Idea of Matter and Motion, or even from that, which this Philoſophy Propoſes. s.5. TuaT it cannot from a True Conception oſ Matter, as ĩt really Exiſts, is Evident, ſince we find ſome Matter to Gravitate, as Lead, and other to Aſcend, as Fire, whereas this Law ſuppoſes a perſect Inertia in Matter, conſider'd in it ſelf, without any other Force belonging to it; for i? Matter, as was juſt now mentiond, has an Innate Force of Gravitation and Contraction, or of Aſcenſion and Expanſion, tho' a Motion is Impreſc'd upon it, it will not be neceſſary, that it ſiou'd Continue in that Motion, till ſome External Force puts a Stop to it, ſince it's own Innate Force of Gravitation may give a Check, or it's Expanſive, as in Flame, an Addirion to it. S. 6. THE Idea of Matter, which this Philoſophy aſſerts, is, that ĩt is Endu'd with a Perfect Inertia, and therefore, if it is in Reſt or in Motion, it muſt continue ſo, unleſs we ſuppoſe it can Move it ſelf, when at Reſt, or Stop it ſelf, vhen in Motion; But if there is an Abſolute Inertia in Matter, ſo that it has no Force or Activity of it's own, it will be conſequent, that the Leaſt Impreſ'd Force will be capble of Moving the Greateſt Body Equally with the moſt Minute; for whilſt Marter is Nothing elſe but a Maſs of Something, which neither Acts nor Reſiſts, i? we take a Greater or a Leſſer Portion of it, it ill be the ſame; And for a Parallel Reaſon, that 3 Nothings are Equal to 5 or 100, ſince a Sum or Aggregate of 3 Portions oſ Inaction in Reſpect of Motion, ill be all one with 5 or I00. S. 7. THE Trtuth is, as we have beſore obſerv'd, Matter without any kind of Force, whether of Activity or Reſiſtance, that is, vhen we make it no more than an Extended and Impenetrable Subſtance, is not any thing elſe than an Abſtracted Idea, it is a Notion of the Mind, and ve may as vell aſfirm a Mathematical Surface, or Solid to perſiſt in its State of Motion or Reſi, as Matter to do it, whilſt we conſider Nothing in Matter but Space, and without any kind of Force belonging to it; and ĩt vill be eaſy for us to band a Thought about of our own Forming, as ve pleaſe, tho it will be ſcarcely a Queſtion, whether an Abſtracted Idea, any more than Space which is onc, is capable of any Real Motion at all, becauſe it certainly is nor. s. 8. IF the foregoing Sections are True, it will be farther Diſficult to account for another Property, which is aſerted concerning the Inertia, that it is an Innate Force, by which Matter is very hardly, and with Reluctance, made to change its State oſ Reſt into Motion, or the Contrary, and indeed ſo Diſficult, as will require a Sagacity capable to Reconcile Contradictions; for Matter, by the ſoregoing Property of it's Inertia, will continue in the Motion or Reſt Impreſ”'d upon it, becauſc it has no Force of it's own, but in this Second Property it will be hard to put it out of the State in which it is, becauſe it has a Force of it's own; that theſc Phi Ioſophers may therefore be conſiſtent with themſelves, we muſt tell them, that thei Notion of Matter is well Adapted to ſolve both, being an Abſtracted one, whict may, on that Account, be with or without Force, according to the Humour they ar in, of making an Inſigniſicant and Triſling, or a very Weighty and Important Buſineſ of it́ 5.9.1c r j Chap. I. Naturi and Motion S. 9. To Conclude, all that can be ſaid for the Inertia of Matter is, That it ĩ Repugnant to our Notions of it, that Lead ſou'd Move it ſelf, when in Reſt, or that Fire ſod Determine it ſelf to Reſt, vhen in Motion, but this does not Evince, that Matter may not have ſome kind of Active Principle in it, becauſe it is ſuppos'd to have none in both theſe Caſes, but the Contrary; for therefore Lead vill Determine it ſelf to Reſt, hen put into Motion, for this Reaſon only, that it as Difficult to put it into Motion, and Fire vou'd Determine it ſclf to Motion, tho' an External Force was usd to Quench it, the Firſt from it's Innate Contractive Force, and the Laſt from it's Innate Expanſive. That is, the Contractive Force is Reluctant to the Expanſive, and the Expanſive to the Contractive, but this is not an Inertia, but Force or Action. 5. 10. A Second Lav of Nature affirmũ is, that all Motion in it ſelf is Rectilincar, or directed from one Point to another in a ſtrait Line, which is ſupposd to follow from the Nature of Motion, ſince it cannot be conceivd without ſome Determination from the Point, from which it Commences, and according to the Former Lav it muſt Perſevere in that Determination, till it is Chang'd by ſome Foreign Impreſſion; from whence it follows, that where any Body is Movd in a Curve, it is made to do it from the Direction and Influence of an External Force, and where ſuch External Force Ceaſes, it will Relinquiſ the Curve, and Proceed again in a ſtrait Line, which is a Tangent to it, at the Point of the External Force's Ceaſing: Thus a Stone whirl'd Round in a Sling deſcribes a Circle, whereas, when it is once quit of it, it flies off in a Tangent. S. 11. THAT Morion of what kind ſoever muſt have ſome Determination or othet is manifeſt, but that a Rectilinear is more Natural to it than a Circular, we deny, ſince it is only offerd to be Provd by the preceding Lav of Bodies Perſevering in that Form or Condition of Motion; which is firſt Impreſ'd; Since rherefore, that Lav is either Uncertain or Falſe, it will be Impoſſible for us with any Saſety to depend upon what is Concluded from it; The Motion of Fire Acts in all Kind of Directions, as is Evident from the Undulations of the Flamt of it; Water Spilt upon the Ground makes a Thouſand Irregular Forms, &e. and ſo it is in Hard Bodies Dropt upon it, vhich acquire Various Determinations, according to their Different Nature and Action. S. 12. BUT that which is more Unfortunate to this Philoſophy is, that a Motion from a Perſeverance of it in one and the ſame Direction, in which it firſt begins, is no more Provd to be naturally Rectilincar than Circular, if there may be a Circular Determination, as well as a Rectilincar; and that there in Fact is, is Evident from the very Generation of a Circle, which does not nor can conſiſt of an Infinite Number of ſtrait Lines, as is generally Imagin'd, but the firſt Progreſs it makes is in a Curve; ſince TWo Points in a Circle, which are Equidiſtant from a Third, muſt neceſſarily lie in a Curve, according to Euclid, and if they approach Infinitely near to each other, will make an Infinitely Small Convexity; But in Deſcribing a Circle there is nothing more to be obſerv'd than the Flux of the Point of the moveable Extremity of the Radius, as in Deſcribing a Right Line the ſame Point is to be obſerv'd, vhilſt the whole Radius is carry'd Parallel to it ſelf, which Motions are Expreſi'd in the Figure annext; which if Impartially conſiderd, we ſhall find B the Curve 48 to be as Natural a Determination, where C is fixt, and 4 is movd, as the Right Line 4 B, where 4 and C are both Equably Movd. Nor, in this Deſcription, is AB in 4CB any more Retain'd in a Curve, and kept from performing a Strait Line, c by a Force in C, than 48 in 4 BCC is preſervd in a Direct Line, and kept from performing a Curve, by a Force in CC; that ĩs, it is AB not more Natural, that C ſhod be moved at the ſame Time that A is, than that C ſhou'd be fixt whilt  is movd, or, which is all one, a Parallelogram is nor a more Natural Figure than a Circle. c T s. 13. Ir is very plain in Mathematicks, that the Circle, the Parabola, Hyperbola, Ellipſiss the Cyclois, and the whole Order of Curves, are as much deſcribd by Determinations peculiar and diſtinct to themſelves, as a Strait Line is, and if we begin in any one of thoſe Determinations, ve Y2 always alvays end with it; why therefore a Rectilinear Determination ſou'd be more Proper to Motion than any other will not be eaſily Comprehended, unleſs by entering into the Deſign of Aſirming it, which is to Introduce the Neceſſity oſ a Projectile and a Gravitating Force in the Elliptick Orbits, which are deſcribd by the Heavenly Bodies according to this Philoſophy; That Projectile and Gravitating Force therefore is to be provd to Confirm this Law, whereas this Law is on the Contrary Eſtabli?Yd to prove ſuch a Gravitating and Projectile Force. S. 14. BESIDES even according to a Law of Motion, which is aſterwards alledgſ in the Preſent Philoſophy, where it is ſaid the Diagonal Force is Equal to that of the Sides of a Parallelogram, it is not Neceſſary, that a Body, which deſcribes a Curve, ſhou'd be drawn from the Tangent, or it's firſt Rectilinear Determination, towards the Center of it's Motion; ſince HE the G Diagonal, vhich is ſuppos'd to be an Infinitely Small and Strait Line, that is, an Infiniteſima of the Circle, may as well be Expreſ'd by GE and HG a Secant, as by FE and HF a Tangent. A E s. 15. THAT this Projectile or Tangent, and Centripetal Motion is therefore a Creature of the Mind, whil©t it is ſupposd neceſſary to Form a Curve, is Evident, ſince, as in §. 12, 4 and 3 C may as juſtly be Imagin'd to Tend to C and C in the ſecond Figure, which yet will not be acknowledg'd, as 4 and B to C in the Firſt, which conſequently is not prov'd; On the other Hand, H may be as Agreeably preſum'd, when the Centripetal Force Ceaſes, to go off in a Secant HG, as in a Tangent HF, acording to the Preceding Section. 5. 16. FARTHER it is confeſsd in the Preſent Philoſophy, according to s. I4, that a Rectilinear Motion is Reſolvible into Ten Millions of Determinations, why there fore that ſou'd be of a Simpler and Plainer Nature than a Motion in a Curve, which cannot well be Reſolv'd into More, is unaccountable; But what is more ſo is, That this Law ſuppoſes a Body to Relinquiſ the Curve, and to Move again in a ſtrait Line, when the External Force Ceaſes, which is to make it Perſiſt in a Rectilincar Motion according to a Force Impreſ'd, but not in a Curvilincar, or to give it an Inertia in the one Caſe, and to take it away in the other; for the Impreſſion is Made, tho' the Force is Diſcontinud. S. 17. THE Inſtance in Fact to prove this Law, is that of a Stone or any other Body movd in a Sling, which, when it's Reſtraint is taken off, is ſaid to Proceed in a Tangent, which is ſo far from being true in Reality, that I believe no one ever Found or Experienc'd a Stone to be Slung in a Tangent; For let CEE L be the Circle, in which the Sling is Revolv'd from C t0 B, E, and L, if the Projectile goes oſf in a Tangent, It muſt do it, if we take the chief Points in the Circle, either at q, B, E, or L; in the Firſt and Third Caſe, it will be therefore Projected Perpendicular from or to the Horizon; and in the Second and Fourth, Parallel to it, with contrary Directions; whereas in the Second Caſe it is Notorious, that it Proceeds in a Curve not below the g Tangent 4 B, which might be ſolvd by the Gravity of the Projectile, from Which it is Determin'd into a Parabolick Circuit, but above it, and by the Force of the bare Projection; and the ſame is very Probable in the other Caſes, in ſome Meaſure and Proportion. S. 18. Ir ſcems 1o be very plain, that, in this Circular Motion of the Sling, the Body detaind in it Recedes from the Center by it's Tenſion of it, but how it ſoud in every Point retire from the Center, in the ſame Direction with the Radius, and yet depart from it, in a Line Perpendicular to the Radius, is Inconceivable, unleſs it can be aſfirm'd, that it's Conatus to a Motion in the Tangent, and ir's Conatus to a Motion in a Direct Line from the Center, is the ſame Thing; and yei the Conatus to Motion in a Tangent is term'd the Centrifugal Force. s5. 19. Ws S. 19. WE cannot but farther ſay, that the Motion of the Sling is to be judg'd The àerim a of by it's own proper Determination, that is, a Circular, which is no more Reſolvi- ſqins nlu⸗ ble into any other more Simple ones, as of a Tangent and a Direct Force to the a Reductle Center, than a Rectilinear Force is, which is ſaid, when conſiderd as a Diagonal, lo ay Rocui to be Reſolv'd into the Sides of a Parallelogram, of which it is the Diagonal, concerning which we ſhall ſay more aſterwards; The Curve of a Parabola is not to be Meaſurd by any Portion of it's Diameter, it is not Reducible to any Strait Lines, nor is the Circle or rather the Perimeter of it; and as the Curves are Inexpreſſible by any Right Lines, ſo are the Forces likewiſe, ſince the Cauſes and Effects muſt be Proportional; from whence it Enſues, that all Determinations of Curves are in their Motion Peculiar to themſelves, and can be no more Expreſ'd by Right Lines, than Right Lines can be Expreſsd by them. 5. 20. Ir is alſo very much to be Queſtion'd, how a Centrifugal Force, as in the The CariſoSling, oud be anſwerable to a Centripetal in the Real Effects of it, and yet the sſneiuCentrifugal of the Sling is brought to explain the Centripetal of the Plancts; for apſ a, net pro tho' ſo much as it endeavours to Recede from, ſo much it is ept to the Center, ſ ſe Exan yet the Actual Force is not the ſame, whether it Retires from or Tends to the Cen- al v iie ter, ſince the one is in a Contrary Direction to the other. If thereſore a Body in the Haui midſt of it's Motion is ſet looſe from the Reſtraint it lies under from the Sling, it will not find it ſelf in the ſame Conditions (ſetting aſide the Tangent or Projectile Force) as if it really Tended to the Center, ſeeing the one in an Abſtracted Reaſoning, without conſidering any Foreign or External Action, wou'd make it fall below the Tangent, and the other carry it above it; Not to mention the Peculiar Forces, by which Different Plancts tend Differently to their Centers, which cannot be Expounded by the Abſtracted one of a Sling. ] S. 21. LasTLY, a Rectilinear Motion is ſupposd 1o be the moſt Natural, becauſe Manæ iſu Marter is preſumd to be perfectly Paſſive and Obedient to the Impreſſions made ſj Paſsive npon it, and the moſt Simple Impreſſion is Imagind to be that of a Right Line; n uraer i but if Matter is not entirely Paſſive, which has been Provid, or if a Curve Line is ſuts on as much a Single Determination (as it is Peculiar to it ſelf) as a Right Line is, ætih sup which has been likewiſe Evidenc'd, or laſtly, if a Right Line is or may be Com- ſinn ru pounded of ſeveral Determinations, as well as a Curve, which this Philoſophy l aſfirms, it is far from being True or Demonſtrable, that Motion is in it ſelf RectiIinear, and conſequently is no more a Law of Nature or Motion, than if we ſoud aſlert that Motion in it ſelf is always performd in a Curve. s. 22. A Third Lav of Nature or Motion is, That all Bodics, which are Revolvd T Thiri L upon a Center of Motion, endeavour to Recede from that Center, and the Quicker ſiiu the Circumvolution is, the More they ſtrive to Retire from it; for ſince Bodies in planà. themſelves affect a Rectilinear Motion, they woud proceed in a Tangent of the Mſ: ſbit Curve, which they Deſcribe, if they were not drawn from thence by the Centripetal Pæla. 5 Force, which Attracts them; Which therefore is Contrary and Equal to the Projectile, At3. or the Force Expreſd by the Tangent; And conſequently, if the Gyration or Revolution in the Curve is Swifter, that is, if the Central Force, by which it is Retaind in the Curve, is ſo, the Projectile Force or that, which is Expreſ”'d by the Tangent and Repreſents the Centrifugal, muſt be Swifter likewiſe, ſeeing it is exactly Equal to the Former. 5. 23. As to what concerns Bodies in themſelves Proceeding in a Strait Line, we carvu an have in an Abſtracted Reaſoning conſiderd, what Arguments there are to Evince it, ſrna oh and the Inſtance of the Sling made uſe of to Explain it; and from the Whole we v b. coud not find any juſt Conviction of the Law of Nature, which was proposd upon Cuuniſugal that Principle, and upon the ſame Account alſo, this Third Law is Precarious and atim Uncertain; we ſhall omit all that has been ſaid before, and at preſent Examine, what is farther Advancd in this Law, more than that, which has been already Confuted; for tho Abſtracted Determinations, ſuch as a Curve Line might be Reſolvd into by the Mind, were before only modeſtly Introducd, we are now plainly told, that they are Actual Forces, which Deſcribe theſe Curves, without any other Proof or Demonſtration of it, excepting that of Pronouncing it. s. 24. SINCE s. 24. SINCE therefore the Motion in a Curve is Actually ſaid to conſi©t in a Centripetal and a Centrifugal Force, which are Equal, the one of which is Expreſs'd by a Direction to the Center, and the other by that of the Tangent to the Curve, we muſt Inquire by what Methods this Law is Provd; It is not by conſidering the Curve in an Abſtracted Senſe, as a Mathematical Figure, by what has been before alledgd; If it is by Real Forces in Nature, thoſe ought to be ſirſt Prov'd, before they are Aſſum'd, or otherwiſe we cannot but think they are ſuch, which the Philoſopher is pleas'd Arbitrarily to Contrive and make Uſe of, as ſhall beſt Serve his own Purpoſes; For the Attraction to the Center in Bodies, which Revolve in a Curve, is far from being Provd by this Law, becauſe this Law, and thoſe, on which this Depends, are Introducd to Prove an Attraction, or a Force, which draws the Body from a Tangent into a Curve, that ĩs, towards the Center; and on the other Hand, a Real Projectile or a Rectilinear Force is Equally Unprovd, becauſe it is Aſlumd to ſiew, how Curves are deſcribd by a Gravitating Force, which ĩs not as yet Demonſtrated. 5. 25. IN Reſpect of theſe Projectile and Gravitating Forces, it will alſo be juſtly Inquird, why the Projectile Force, in the Tangent, ſhoud be the Natural one, and the Centripetal, in the Curve, ſioud be the Impreſ'/d; for altho a Rectilinear Motion ere obſerv'd by Bodies left to themſelves after they are once deprivd of their Reſt, it is yet plain, that they muſt be put into Motion by an External Impulſe, and conſcquently, the Eſſect which Reſults from it, according to the Direction oſ the Tangent, is as much owing to a Foreign Cauſe, as their being Drawn from that Determination into a Circular or Elliptical, the only Difference being, that the Effect from Impulſe is continued, when the Cauſe Ceaſes, but that from Attraction is Conſtant, as well as the Cauſe which produces it, which can make no Alteration, as to the Forces being Equally Unnatural, and Extrancous to the Bodies which are Movd by them; If therefore both the Projectile and Centripetal Force is Impreſs'd upon Bodies movd in a Curve, it is well if it is not a Contrivance in the Philoſopher, rather than of Nature, to Project firſt and then Attract the Bodies, whoſe Revolutions are endeavourd to be Explain'd; eſpecially, ſince they are borh Occult Qualities, and no Account is given of them, how they come to Reſide in the Bodies, which they Agitate, and by which they are ſupposd to be Retain'd and Continu'd in their Orbits. 5. 26. We muſt likewiſe add, that the only Inſtance of a Body's being kept in it's Orbit by a Centripetal Force is that of a Sling, which Really is a Centrifugal, and, as ve in part before obſerv'd, cannot be Compounded of a Tangent or Projectile Force, and a Centripetal, ſince the Projectile is ſaid to be Natural to a Body once put into Motion, and conſequently that Force, namely the Centripetal, which draws the Body from a Tangent into a Curve, and therefore is Superior to the Projectile, iou'd be ſenſible to the Hand, which Revolves the Sling, whereas it perceives no ſuch Force, but the Contrary, that is, a Conatus of the Body to Recede from the Center; This is alſo conſirmd by the Revolution of a Globe round its own Axis, which, if in the Interim of it's Motion any Liquid is pourd upon it, will not throw it off in Tangents, bnt diſperſes it cvery Way, and, inſtead of caſling it in Horizontal Lines, makes ſome parts of it Aſcend into the Alr it ſel?, vhich is an Evident Argument, that the Circular Motion oſ a Body is neither Centripetal, whilſt it has an Oppoſite Direction, nor Projects in a Tangenr, whilſt it Repells what comes in it's Way in a Perpendicular Direction, as well as an Horizontal, and in all other Intermediate ones. s. 27. Ir it is ſaid, that the Force of Retiring from the Center is the ſame, as that of Tending to it, upon the Account of Action and Re-action being Equal, whatever that Lav is, which we ſhall afterwards Conſider, no Law in the World or in Nature can make Two oppoſite Directions of Motion from a Point and to a ſoint to be the ſame. 5. 28. THERE is another Thing aſfirmd in this Lav of Nature or Motion, which is, that the Centripetal or Attractive Force to the Center is exactly Equal to that of the Centriſugal or Projectile; If ſo, it vou'd be Impoſſible there ſould be any Motion in a Curve at all; For if the Projectile Force endeavours to Proceed ſrom the Point of Contact oſ the Tangent vith the Curve with the ſame Energy or Action Action, with which the Attractive Force inclines to the Center, the Attractive vannot draw the Body, which is in a Projectile Motion, from that Point, becauſc it is not Superior to it, and all that can follow will be only a perfect Quieſcence; Since if contrary Forces, which Diſfer in nothing excepting in their Direction, are in an Equal Balance, the Reſult muſt be that of no Motion at all. 5. 29. THAT Which makes this Doctrine more Unaccountable is, that the Centrifugal and Centripetal Forces, which in Deſcribing a Curve are ſupposd to be in an' quilibrium, and which it is Impoſſible they ſiou'd Deſcribe, if they were in an ZEquilibrium, according to the Preceding Section, that we ſay, which makes it more Unaccountable is, that the Centrifugal and Centripetal Forces are not in a Direct Oppoſition to each other, but in a Right Angle, the Projectile going off in a Tangent, and the Centripetal or Attractive Tending to the Center in a Radius Perpendicular to it; for where Forces are Oppoſite or Contrary, it is caſy to Imagine an Equal Balance betwixt them, if the Forces are Equal, but where they are in a Right Angle the one to the other, it is not, nor can be Provũd, that they are in an Equal Balance; Becauſe if the Projectile Force is Equal to the Attractive, according to the Suppoſition of this Philoſophy, and that Equality is had and found in Forces which are Contrary to cach other, it is Impoſſible it ſio'd be in Forces, which are not Contrary to each other, and are in a Right Angle only in their Mutual Direction; If an Equality of Forces may be affirn'd without Contrary Directions, it will lie upon this Philoſophy to Prove, what Proportion of the Projectile Force will be exactly Agreeable and Analogous to the Attractive, which it has not done; ſince it Aſſumes both of them, and after that does not Inform us, hat Quantity of Motion there is in the Projectile or Attractive to make them Equal, where their Directions are at Right Angles. s. 30. THE Circular Motion of a Stone in a Sling Ariſes therefore, not from a Centripetal Force, by which it tends to the Center of it's Revolution, and from a Centriſugal, which Acts in the Direction of a Tangent, but from a Centriſugal or Expanſive, Communicated to it by the Expanſive Force of the Hand's Motion, which is Diametrically Oppoſite to the Centripetal of the Stone, and by which it is overcome, and made to Revolve in the Orbit preſcrib'd to it by ſuch Expanſive Force. TuE Stone in this Caſe, tho' it is Endud with a Power of Gravity, or of Deſcending to the Earth, yet finds that Inclination and Propenſity actually Deſtroyd by the Contrary Force of the Expanſive Impreſs'd upon it, as if a Body is Projected Perpendicularly from the Earth with a certain Velocity, the Force of Gravitation or Deſcending downwards Ceaſes, till the Velocity is Spent; and if the Expanſive Force by the Revolution of the Hand is imparted in a Circle, for the ſame Reaſon the Stone vill not actually Deſcend, nor will have any Inclination to it, ſo long as that Force Continues, and ſo far is it from being True, that the Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces are Equal, that the Centripetal Force is ſuperſeded and ſurmounted by the Centrifugal. Tnus in any Two Forces acting Contrary to each other, whilſt the one Prevails, the other Submits; If a Body is carryd by a Superior Velocity one way of +12, and another is carry'd with a Contrary, but vith a leſs Force of /3, the contrary Force wvill be Deſtroyd, and there will be an Exceſs of the Superior Velocity of +7, and if there were an Equilibrium of Two oppoſite Forces, there wou'd not be a Revolution, as in the Sling, or a Motion, as in contrary Velocities, but a perfect Quieſcence. LicEwISE, the Centrifugal or Expanſive Force has not it's Direction in a Tangent, but as the Centripetal Force is entirely Vanquiſ'd and Subdud, and the Stone is only Detain'd by the Obſtacle of the Sling from Retiring from the Expanſive Force Imparted by the Motion of the Hand, ſo the Expanſive Force, which it acquires from thence, is Directed by the ſame Circular Motion, and is therefore Circular, and we may as vell affirm, that the Hand Moves in a Tangent, as that he Stone in the Sling aſccts ſuch a Morion, ve have ſiewn thar the Srone in : Sling Sling has no ſenſible Centripetal Force, and we may add, that if it had one to the Earth, it. can with no Manner of Reaſon be ſupposd to obtain one to the Center of the Slings Motion, but if it has neither of theſe Centripetal Forces, what ſnoud give the Centrifugal the Direction of the Tangent? Effects are not producd vithout their Cauſes, and there is no Imaginable Cauſe of the Expanſive or Centrifugal Acting in that Direction, unleſs ve ill ſuppoſe the Hand acts in a Tangent; when it acts in a Circle, and that a Tangent and a Circle are the ſame; Tis known from whence all this Doctrine proceeds, in Reſpect of the preſent Philoſophy, Namely, ſrom its eſpouſing Projectile and Centripetal Forces, and the firſt Hint, which vas given of Reaſoning in this way of Tangents to a Circle, was from Des-Caries whoſe other Notions have been either Deſpis'd or Confuted by this very Philoſophy, but the Preſent retaind for the Valuable Conſideration we have mention'd. S. 31. LET us nov apply this to the Revolution of the Planets Round the Sun, and if what we have before proposd upon that Subject is not Satisfactory and Convincing, vhere we alledgd the Balance for an Explanation of it, and made the Sun to be the Center of Detention, and the Plancts to have a Greater Force oſ Expanſion and Velocity, the farther they removd from it, perhaps what we here offer may be a farther Confirmation of ſuch a Doctrine. IT is acknovledgũ therefore, that the Sun has an Immenſe Expanſive Force, by vhich it diffuſes it's Light and Heat to a Prodigious Diſtance, much beyond our Earth and to the very Orb of Saturu; we have ſaid, that the Reaſon why the Solar Heat is not ſo Intenſe here, ſeems to proceed from the Moon's being placd ſo near us, which we take to be a vaſtly Cold and Contractive Body, and therefore qualifies that Exceſſive Heat, which wou'd otherwiſe Burn up the whole Globe; and thereſore, notvithſtanding the Moderate Heats, which are perceiv'd in this Earth, in Reſpect of the Sun's Immenſe Expanſive Force, ſuch Force may yet be propagated with a ſufficient Degree of Heat, as it is of Light, to Saturn. Tis alſo confeſs'd, that the Sun is Revolvd about it's Axis, and that the Earth and the Planets, in Reſpect of the Sun as their Center, are but as ſo many Points; If therefore the Expanſive Force of the Sun is ſo Great, and the Earth and Plancts are but as Points to the Body of it, we may juſtly think, that they are carryd Round it, like a Stone in a Sling, and that their Contractive or Cravitating Forces are obligd to obſerve the Directions of the Suns Expanſive, by wlich mcans they will all Revolve the ſame Way, and Perform their Gyrations according to the Proportion, which there is betwixt the Expanſive of the Sun and the Gravitating or Contractive of the Planets, vhich are Revolv'd, and that the Infinite and Almighty Agent, by Impreſſing this Force upon the Sun, Directs and Guides the Motion of the whole Solar Syſtem; That this Expanſive Force of the Sun Diffuſes and Diſperſes it ſelf thro' the whole Ambient Plenum, as far as saturn, and Affects it in like Manner, as it ſelf is Affected, not only in Reſpect of it's Light and irs Heat, which is Evident and Conſeſidd, but in Reſpect of it's Revolution, by which all the Planets will Revolve round their ovn Axes the ſame Way, and at the ſame Time Deſcribe their Periods about the Sun. Tuus alſo it is acknowledg'd, that the Atmoſphere is Revolv'd with the Earth; that all Bodies obey the Motions of their Syſtems; that Contractive Bodies are diſſolvd in a Syſtem of the Expanſive Force, as Metals and Minerals in Spirit of Nitre; and Expanſive Bodies reduc'd to a Syſtem of the Contractive Force, as in Chryſtallizations, and in the Gravitation of all Bodies to the Earth, tho' they are never ſo Light and Expanſive. 5. 32. THE Sun is obſervd to Revolve ſfrom Weſũt to Eaſt about it's Axis, from the Rotation of it's Maculæ in 25 or 27 Days,. which Axis is inclin'd to the Plane of the Eartl's Orbit, in an Angle of about 7 Degrees, If thereſore the Sun Attracted the Planets, it vould make them Revolve from Eaſt to Weſt contrary to Experience. Ihus in the Figure annext, If 4H, 4D, FD, F H, and GCq, and all the Intermediate Lines ſoud Repreſent the Sun's Attractions in S of the Earth or any other Planet n q, ſuppoſing nov the Sun to be Revolvd round it's Axis ſrom Weſt to Eaſt, or rom F to A, the Attiaction of D to 4 vord immediately Ceaſe, or be continually Diminiſhd, )iminiſd, but there woud ſtill remain that of H to 4, and H to F, vhich, as 4 movd tovards L, and F tovards G, vou'd Drav ĩ and Impell H towards D; and ſince the ſame woud happen in the next Point to H tovards E, and to all the following ones from H to æ and D, and ſo round the Earth's Circumference, it is maniſeſt, that the Earth or Planet wou'd be Revolvd from H to I and D, and from D to E and H, or in a contrary Direction to that of the Sun, which is ſuppos'd to be carry'd from F to G, and from to 4; for if it was carryd in the ſame Direction, it would move from H to E, and from E to D. ON the other Hand, if ve ſuppoſe the Sun to be endu'd with an Expanſive or a Repulſive Force, it will cauſe the Planets to Revolve round their Axes the ſame Way, that is, from Weſt to EaſtThus, as before, whilſt the Repulſive Force oſ the Sun is movd from 4 towards L, it's Effect Ceaſcs, or is Diminiſd in the Repelling of D, bur Continues and Exerts it ſelf from 4 to H, by vhich H is Thruſt and Protruded towards ?; The Repulſive Force from F to D is more Oblique than that from F to H, and therefore Weaker, and moreover is continually Diminiſd, as F comes to õ, and conſequently the Repulſive from F to H, vill ſtill Forward and Promote the Revolution of H towards E; and ſince, in the Motion of F tovards H D G or 4, the ſame will happen to any Point next 1o H tovards I and D, it is plain, that the RevoE lution of the Planet will be from  to E, and from thence to D and ſ, and ſo to H, that is, from Wet to Eaſt, and in the ſame Direction with the Suns Gyration about it's Axis, which is a Problem, that has not been hitherto ſolv'd; and particularly, Venus is Revolvd round it's Axis in 23 Hours from Weſt to Eaſt, the Earih in 24 Hours, ſars in 24 Hours 40 Minutes, and Jupiter in 9 Hours 56 Minutes, ereury's and Saturn's Revolutions are not aſcertaind, the one being too near the Sun, and the orher too diſtant from us, for an Obſervation of it's Maculæ, whilſt the Sun is 25 or 27 Days in Revolving; The Reaſon of which is, becauſe the Sun may Propell HE DI quite round it Axis, which is but a ſmall Body in Compariſon of it, whilſt the Sun ſnall perform only 4 of i's Revolution, as in Venus, the Earth, and Mars, and not half ſo much, as in Jupiter, if Caſſin's Obſervations are True, which perhaps may be Uncerrain. BUT beſides, this Expanſive Force of the Sun, by which it throws the Planets round upon their Axes in the ſame Way and Direction, in which it is Revolv'd about it's own, vill alſo carry the whole Planet round the ſame Way, in which it is Movd, for if all the Lines FH, F D, GC, AH, 4D are ſupposd to be carryd together in a Revolution from F to 4, and from thence to L, the Planet HE D I. which is in the midſt of ſuch a Moving or Revolving Action, will be Determind the ſame Way, like a Stone in a Sling, as ve before mentiond, and which has been the Inſtance, made uſe of by Philoſophers, to Explain the Imaginary Projectile and Centriſugal Force of the Heavenly Bodiess. Here is thereſore an Account given, vhy the Planets Revolve about their Axes and in their Orbits the ſame Way, which will agree with what we have already offer'd concerning them. §. 33. THE only Difficulty, which remains to be ſol?d, is, why their Periods about rheir Axes and in their Orbits are Different, and why thoſe Orbits are Excentrical and Elliptical, and not Circular; As to the Firſt, Aſercury Revolves about the Sun in 3 Months, Venus in ſomething more than Eight, and the arib in Twelve or one Year AMars in 2 Years, Jupiter in 12, and Saturn in 305 in Reſpect of vhich it is Evident rhat the Nearer the Planets are in General to the Sun, the Quicker is their Revolurion, and the Farther they are Removd from it, the Slower, which perfectly Corre q ſponũ: v ſponds with what we affirm, that the Expanſive Force is Stronger, nearer to the Sun, and Weaker, at greater Diſtances from it; ſo that the Sun ſhall Revolve more than three Times round its Axis, before Mercury ſhall be carryd about it's Orbit once by a Continual, Conſtant, and Uniform Impulſe of the Circulating Expanſive F H D 4, and more than Eight Times, beſore Venus is, and more than Twelve Times, before the Earih is, and ſo on of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; and which Difference oſ Revolution does not only proceed from the Expanſive Force being Stronger, nearer the Sun, and Weaker, the farther it Acts ſrom it, but likewiſe from the Innate and Various Contractive Forces of the Planets, which are Revolv'd, by which they are in ſeveral Degrees Renitent and Reluctant to the Expanſive, as well as from their Leſs or Greater Diſtances from the Sun, by which their proper Contractive Force is Increas'd or Diminiſvd;Tis alſo the ſame Expanſive Force of the Sun, which by it's Repulſion keeps the Planets from Gravitating to it by their Innate Contractive; And that Fire and Flame Obrain this Expanſive and Repulſive Force is Evident by holding a Feather over the Flame of a Lamp or a Candle, which we ſhall ſenſibly perceive to be Agitated and Repelld by it, and by Letting any Light Body, as a ſmall Picce oſ Paper, fall Perpendicularly over it, which yet will always be Diverted ſrom the Perpendicular by this Repulſion; But the Planets, which are as Points in Reſpect of the Sun, vill not be much more to it, than a Feather to a Lamp or a Candle. As to the Second, theſe Orbits of the Planets wou'd be Circular, if the Sun's Axis, on which it is Revolv'd, was perpendicular to the Plane of thoſe Orbits, but being Inclind, what otherwiſe wou'd have been Circular muſt be Chang'd into an Ellipſis; In the Focus or Umbilicus of which the Sun will be plac'd, and the Aphelium of the Orbit will be in that Part of it, which is the moſt Diſtant from rhe Sun's Horizon, and the Perihelium, where it is the leaſt Removd from it, and ſince the Expanſive Force is Greater in the Latter Caſe than in the Former, the Planet will move Faſter in the Perihelium than in the Aphelium. Thus in the Oblique Situation and Rotation of the Globe, the ſEquator, and it's Parallels, Repreſents the Suns Revolution about it's Axis, together with that of the Ambient Expanſive Force about the Sun, the Ecliptick expreſes the Inclin'd Orbit of the Planet; Let us now take one Point of it, namely Capricorn, and place it under the Meridian, which wou'd be carry'd round in the Diurnal Circle belonging to that Tropick, by the Revolution oſ the Suns Expanſive, if the Planet was not obligd to perform it's Orbit in a Plane about the Sun, vhich the Tropical Circle is not, from whence the Oblique Diurnal Circle Projected on the Vertical Circle, which ſtands at Right Angles with the Mcridian, or any other Circle Parallel to it, becomes an Ellipſis, whoſe Perihelium is in Capricorn, as being neareſt to the Sun's Horizon, and whoſe Aphelium is in the Point oppoſite to it, and which is the fartheſt from the ſame Horizon, ſuppoſing the Tropick of Capricorn is brought to the Meridian; On the Contrary, the Tropical Circle of Cancer, Projected on the aforeſaid Vertical, Forms an Ellipſis, vhoſe Aphelium is in Cancer, and the Perihelium in the Point oppos'd to it, and ſince all the Intermediate Diurnal Circles are to be Projected on the ſame Vertical, they will be Elliptical, and the Earih's Orbit or the Ecliptick will be an Ellipſis, whoſe Perihelium is in Capricorn, and the Aphelium in Cancer, according to what is Experiencd by Aſtronomers. The Revolutions of the Secondary Planets about their Axes, and in their Orbits round the Primary, as the Moon and the Satellites of Jupiter and Saturn, may be accounted for the ſame Way, excepring, that here Contractive Forces, which Act oppoſite to each orher, are to be Aſſumd inſtead of the Expanſive of the Sun and the Contractive of the Planets; For an oppoſite Contractive has the Force of an Expanſive, as we have already ſhewn. S. 34. THE Fourth Law is, that the Change of Motion is Proportional to the Force of Motion, which is Impreſs'd, and is made according to the Right Line, by which the Force is Communicated; Thus if any Motion is Generated by a given Force, a double Motion will be producd by a double Force, and a Triple by a Triple, &. whether ſuch Force is Impreſyd at once, or Succeſſively, and by Degrees; and ſince Motion is determin'd to that Part, towards which the Force directs it, if a Body is in Motion before, the Force Impreſ'd, and which conſpires with it, will make an Addition to the Former, or, if it is contrary, ill make a Subſtraction from it, and in the firſt Caſc vill Increaſe the Motion, and in the la©t Diminiſh it; if therefore the Force more more or leſs Conſpires with or Acts contrary to the former Motion, in different Degrees of Obliquity it will more or leſs Increaſe or Diminiſh it, and, if they are Oppos'd at Right Angles, there will be no Increaſe or Diminution of it. S. 35. THAT this is ſo, is far from being True, for we plainly find in Experience, oſnãmn i that the Motion Excited in Fire is not Equal or Proportional to the Force, which m uuut is Impreſs'd from the Air, either Naturally or by any Artificial Methods, by which it iæ Mein ef is Inflamd Unleſs the Force of Air, Impreſꝶ'd upon the Hand, has the ſame Effect fre i u r . (making Allowances for the Original Motion of the Fire) with the Diſference tt of dn of Motion produc'd by the ſame Force of Air Impreſi'd upon Fire, and aſter ſuch Imprſiã. Impreſſion perceivd by the Hand, that is, Unleſs a certain Degree of Coolneſs is Equal or Proportional to a certain Degree of Heat, and therefore the Force of the Air Equal or Proportional to the Motion or Force produc'd in the Fire by it. , 5. 36. IT is alſo maniſcſt, that, in Fire and Flame, it ſo little obſerves the Direction ob/ĩim iſ: of the Force, which is Impreſ'd upon it from the Air, Naturally or by any Artii-ſſ;ſ ſla cial Methods, that it ſcems to be Reluctant to and to oppoſe it, where it is not too ? i a leſn Strong and Vigorous in it's Action, and where it is, to Die and Langniſ under it, Fimoſ u inſtead of being Increas'd by it; And thus we find ſmall Sparks, by a Gentle Fanning, ſũ a creat to be raisd into a Flame, and, on the Contrary, by an Exceſs of Force in the Ar e bmuſa. Impreſs'd, to be Extinguiſi'd. S. 37. Ir ſuch an Inſtance, as that of Fire, which we have mention'd, is Rejected as The Mitim ⸗ Abſurd, becauſe we know nothing of the Philoſophy of it, we muſt at leaſt ſay, nau that it is a Part of Nature and Deſerves as much to be Explain'd and Taken into the is a ue PhiLavs of it, as any other Material Being Whatſoever; For it will, in Spite of all our æuſ, a æ Hypotheſes contrivd to ſolve the Grand Appearances of the Revolutions of the Hea- Hra: Bodie venly Bodies, be an Invincible Objection againſt them, if they cannot Account for æhi it sus Efects in Nature, which are Near us, which are Conſtantly under our Eyes, and are à- h . Open and Plain to Every one's Obſervation; It will only be Evident, that ſuch Laws b- i of Nature are Mere Hypotheſcs and Suppoſitions, Invented in Order and with a Deſign to explicate, if poſſible, ſome Mighty Phænomenons, which the Philoſopher has in View, without Regarding, and in Contempt of thoſe others, and as he is pleasd to Think Meaner, with which we are daily Converſant, and perhaps, for that Reaſon, becauſe they are ſo vulgarly known. S. 38. ALBEIT the Deſign and Intention of the preſent Law of Nature is really mnnial Eadin nothing elſe, than what we have Declard in the foregoing Section, and Fire or injy tiuia Flame is excluded from Nature, becauſe in Reality it is too Active for a Dull and ,4. Phlegmatick Philoſophy to Explain, whilſt other Inertial Bodies are only Conſiderd, Which it is Preſumd we can Manage and Put into Motion as we pleaſc, I ſay, notwithſtanding this, we ſhall Enquire farther, whether this Law is Expreſily Applicable to any other Matter Diſferent ſrom Fire, which we can Name, and which may, perhaps, ſeem more Tractable and Obedient to the Laws, which Philoſophers ſall Think fit to Impoſe. S. 39. IF we take an Elaſtick Body, or a Hard, or a Soft, or a Viſcous, which is iſ Bin Ia Endued vith ſome particular Force or other of it's own, it is Inpoſſible the Change  ſns of of Motion ſnou'd be Proportional to the Force, which is Impreſy'd, becauſe that Oc- _ _ cult and Unknown Force, at leaſt in the Preſent Philoſophy, by which a Body be- a' all Elaſiul comes Elaſtick, or Hard, or Soft, or Viſcous, &. will have à Pover of making ſome ſ17ſ / Alteration or other in the Force, Which is Impreſ'd, if ſo, then, altho a ſingle Force ſav, i ũ produces a certain Motion, a Double will not produce the Double of it, ſince that ſæ⸗ Inpæi⸗ Alteration, which is made in the Force Impreſd by the peculiar Power of the Na-;n⸗/ſi i: tural Body, ill unavoidably cauſe the Motion not to be Proportional to the Force; Mena EaFor let thè Single Force be 2, and the Double 4, and the Alteration made in the Forcesby the Pover of the Body it ſelf 1, The Eſfect or Motion, in the ſirſt Caſe, vill be as 1, and, in the Second as 3, vhich evidently are not as 2 to 435 When we ſay the Alteration is as 1, and Subſtract it from the Force Impreſ'd, ve only put it as an Inſtance, for let the Alteration be what it ill, it muſt be Expreſi'd by ſome Quantity, vhich is either to be Added to or Subſtracted from the Forces Impreſvd, ſo as to make a real Alteration in them, ànd ler this be done any Way, the Reaſoning is zZ2 the] he ſame againſt Motion being Proportional in Natural Bodies to the Forces, which re Impreſꝗ'd. 5. 40. LastLy, If we ſuppoſe Matter or Body to be Anſwerable to the Abſiracted Idea of a Solid and Extended Subſtance, which we have Examin'd in the Fir«;t and this Second Part of our Philoſophy, and ſicwn the Abſurdity and Falſity of ſuch a Notion, that is, if we conſider Marter to be an Idle and Inſigniſicant Being, which ve can Toſs about and Generate juſt as much Motion in it, as we judge convenient to Impreſs, tis true, Motion vill be Proportional to the Vis Motrix which produces it; becauſe this is nothing more than an Identical Propoſition, that the Force which produces any Motion vill be Equal to it ſelf, ſince the Effect or the Motion Produc'ã, is Equal to the Force or Cauſe which Produces; But of what Service can ſuch an Identical Propoſition be to the true Knovledge of Things, where inſtead of Matter ve may as vell take a Cypher, and aſſirm, the Cauſe and Effect being Reciprocal, that TWo Acting upon Nothing, the Reſult will be Nothing but the Action of Two? which is vonderſully Sagacious and Penetrating, as well as very Philoſophical and Inſtructive. S. 41. MOREOVER, Granting even this Abſtracted Idea of Motion ſeparate from all Real, the Lawv of which, as it is here Eſtabliſhd, being found in no Material Being, which can be mention'd, yet, vhich is extreamly Unfortunate, this Philoſophy does not account for the Oblique Directions of the Force Impreſò'd, and the Motions, vhich Reſult from them, altho no Active Matter is introduc'd to diſturb them, for 5. 34. it is ſaid, that if any Motion proceeds in a Direct Line, and a Force ac's upon it at Right Angles, there will be no Diminution or Increaſe of the Motion, thar in an oppoſite Direction there will be a Diminution of it, and where the Direction of the Force and the Motion Conſpire, an Increaſe, and ſuitably, in all the Intermediate Degrees of Obliquity, the Force and the Motion are variouſly compounded of the Concurring and the Oppoſite. 5. 42. BUuT in Relation to the foregoing Section muſt we not ask, how all this & Provd? It is Plain, if C Acts in 4 with the Force C4 Equal to the Motion A4F, it will make an Addition oſ C 4 to 4F, if they Conſpire, or if they are Oppoſite, F there will be a Quieſcence in 4; if thereſore C Acts in or upon 4 vith the Force C4 Equal to the Motion E AB or 46, ſuppoſing the Motion on both Hands to proceed from 4 to B or G at Right Angles, the Force vill have an Equal Influence, that is, ſo far as not to determine the Motion from 4 to B, or G, notwithftanding which, it wod be Ridiculous to Affirm, that D an Action in or upon 4, from C to 4, makes no Al- C teration in the Motion, from 4 to B or G, no more than if 4 ſioud proceed to B or G by it's Motion without any Impreſſion upon ĩt in A4, which yet this Philoſophy does Affirm. 5. 43. WE are conſcquently farther to take Notice, that C4 the Force may be Oppoſite to FA4 the Motion or in the ſame Direction with AF, a contrary Motion to the Former, in the firt Caſe there is an abſolute Privation oſ Motion, and in the Second it is made Double of what it was before, it will therefore be Impoſſible to ſay with any Reaſon or Truth, that the Force from C Acting on 4 is the ſame, whether 4 moves to B, or B to 4, that is, 4 to G; For if there is this Difference, that whilſt C Acts on 4 and 4 moves to F, there is a double Force or Motion, whereas on the Contrary, vhere F moves tovards 4 there is a perfect Quieſcence, vhy C Acting towards 4 (hether 2 moves to 4 or 4 to B) ſhoud produce no In fluence at all upon ſuch oppoſite Forces, as thoſe from 4 to B, and B to 4, or 4 to G, vhere it obtain'd ſo conſiderable a one before, is Inconceivable; And the ſame Reaſoning will hold in the Oblique Force of C4 in Reſpect of the Motion 4 or A4D. TuE Caſc is, if F moves to 4 and C to 4, they will deſtroy each other, ſuppoſing their Forces Equal; If CA moves againſt æ A4, it vill be Superior to it, if againſt 4, it will be ſtill more ſo, if againſt D4, it will be Increas'd, till at length a doubie Force unites in C4 by an Infinitely ſmall Obliquity of 4D to 4C; The Contrary oſ which vhich vill happen, if C moves to 4 and 4 to F, which will make a double Force, and, in the Infinite Obliquity of 4 D, 4 vill move to D, whilſt C moves or acts to 4, by Which means both their Motions or Forces will be deſiroy'd; ſo that, in the firſt Caſe, there are all the Intermediate Degrees of Motion according to the Various Obliquity of the Forces from o to 2, and in the laſt, from 2 to o. 5. 44. A Fifth Law is, that Re-action is always Equal and Contrary to Action, that Th is, the Actions of Two Bodies, betwixt one another, whether they are Actions ofꝗ; Impulſe or Attraction, are alvays Equal, and have contrary Directions; Thus what- -ia ever Preſſes or Draws a Thing, it is ſo much Preſ'd or Dravn back by that Thing: JFor Firſt, If any one Preſſes a Stone with his Finger, there is an Equal Repreſſure of pl, the Stone upon the Finger. Second, If a Horſe Draws a Stone by the Mediation of : a Cord, the Stone Draws Back the Horſe with the ſame Force, ſince the Cord, being n ſtretc'd on both Hands, will Equally Urge the Horſe towards the Stone, as the Stone Il tovards the Horſe, and will hinder the Horſe from going any farther, than the Stone is movd forward. Third, If any Body is carry'd againſt another, and induces upon it a ?⸗ Change of it's Motion, the ſame Change in like manner will alſo be Impreſdd back L⸗ upon the Incurring Body, which cauſes the Alteration, and in a contrary Direction, upon the Account of the preſent Law of Action being Equal and Contrary to Re-action; that is, the Repulſe of the Body, whoſe Motion is Chang'd, is Equal to the Impulſe of the Body, which Changes it. Ir is in this Philoſophy annext by Way of Caution, that ve do not confound Velocity with Motion, for tho' by this Law the Changes of the Motions in Bodies are Equal, thoſe of the Velocities are not, which will be in a Reciprocal Proportion to their Bodies; becauſe the Changes of Motion are Equal, and any Motion is Equal to another, where 10 of Velocity for Inſtance into3 of Matter is on one Hand Equal to 10 of Matter into3 of Velocity on the other, and thereſore, altho' the Motions are Equal, the Velocities may be as 3 to 1o. 5. 45. As to the firſt Inſtance, it can ſignify nothing to the Proof of ſuch a Lav, æ for altho vhen I Preſs my Finger upon a Stone, which Reſiſts it, there is a Repreſ- B⸗ ſure at leaſt Equal to it, it is not certain there is not a Greater, unleſs, becauſe n Preſs with a certain Force, it is taken for Granted, that the ſame Force is Returnd ænpon that Preſſure; for in Fact it is Evident, that I can Preſs with my Finger, with a Greater or Leſs Force upon a Reſiſting Body, as a Stone; if thereſore the Force of u Repreſſure is Equal to it, the Stone will have a Power in it ſclf of Repreſſing in & Proportion to the Preſſure of my Finger, or not; if it has, it's Proper Reſiſtance is m not certain, but varies, as the Action or Impulſe of my Will varies, which is Impoſſible; if it has not, then the Preſſure, which is derivd from my Mind, is not always Equal to the Repreſſure of the Body, upon which my Finger by the Direction of it Acts; if it is neither the one, nor the other, but an Abſtracted Idea of Action and Re-action, that ſo much as IAqt, ſo much is the Effect of that Action in Reſpect of that, which Acts, and therefore the Cauſe muſt be ſenſible of the Effect, as well as the Effect of the Cauſe, ſuch an Action and Re-action is a Creature of the Mind, and is of no Importance to the Solution of Real Nature; becauſe it only comes to this, that if one Thing has an Influence upon another, that Thing, which is Influenc'd, muſt always have an Influence upon, or a neceſſary Connexion with and Relation to that, which Influences; which is true thus far, that vhen we Feel we Re-feel, if it may be call'd ſo, that is, hen the Mind Acts upon a Body by it's Organs of Senſation, it Perccives what it does, that is, Body Re-acts upon the Mind; when we Preſs a Finger upon a Stone, ve feel that Preſſure ſfrom vithout, that is, the Stone Repreſſes, but this Information from without tells us no more, than that we Feel, and not at all, vhat the Real Action of that Body is, vhich we Feel; if therefore we take only ſo much Action of the Body, which we Perceive by our Preſſure upon it, ve make the Real Nature of Bodies to conſiſt in the Perceptions of our Minds, which is again to aſſirm External Nature to be a Creature of the Mind, or our own Fancies; for it is Impoſſible, moreover, to ſuppoſe, that the Action of the Finger, directed by the Mind, ſiou'd be the ſame, or have the ſame Effect, in the Return of the Action to the Mind, whether the Preſſure be made by it, upon a Stone, or upon Water, or on Fire; Since it ĩs altogether Abſurd to think, that the Action of the Finger is Fqual to m’mar that, which Reſi~ſts it, as in a Stone, or which Yields to it, as in Water, or whic Reacts, as in Fire, with a Power Superior to the Preſſure. 5. 46. THE Sccond Inſtance is; that of a Horſe Drawing a Stone by an Intermediatc Cord betwixt them, by which the Equality of Action and Re-action ĩs ſupposd te be Prov'd; but who does not ſce, that, if the Stone is Drawn by the Horſe, the Actior of the Horſe is Superior to the Re-action of the Stone, or, on the Contrary, if the Stone is not Dravn by the Horſe, the Re-action of the Stone is Superior to the Action of the Horſe? IF it is ſaid, that the Horſe and Stone move together, and thai iſ the Horſe does not move, the Stone does not, and if the Stone does not move the Horſe does not, it is a triſling Way of Proving, that Action and Re-action ar Equal, If the Force of the Horſe is Greater than that of the Stone, when he Draws it ſorwards, or that oſ the Stone is Greater than that oſ the Horſe, when it is Impoſſible for him to ſiir it; for, as in the former Caſe of Preſſure in the Finger and epreſure ſfrom the Body, it is no more than to ſay, we Feel, what ve Feel, ſo in the Preſent, iſ we ſet aſide the Real Forces of the Horſe and the Stone, it is nothing more than to aſlirm, that the Horſe Draws, when the Stone is Drawn. S. 47. TuE Third Inſtance to Juſtiſy this Law of Action and Re-action being Equal, is, that of Motion being Equal in the Change of it in Bodies, in their Mutual Concourſe, according to §. 45. whereas in any Material Beings, ve can mention, it iĩs not certain, and is far from being Provd by any Experience, that they obſerve this Lav; It is not obſervd in the Concourſe of Fluids and Solids, as in Water and Marble, not in Fluids with Fluids, as in Fire and Water, nor yet in Solids compard vith Solids, as in Steel with Lead, or Wood with Stone; If we will allow theſe ſeveral Bodies to have any Diſtinct and Peculiar Forces of their ovn. AND from hence it is, that the Quantity of Motion is not alwãys the ſame, betwixt Two Bodies in their Mutual Concourſe, but Motion may be got or loſũ, and is more apt to be loſt than got, and is always upon the decay; for Bodies, which are cither abſolutely Hard, or ſo Soſt, as to be void of Elaſticity, ill not Rebound from one another; if the Pendulums be of Lead or Soft Clay, they vill loſe all, or almoſt all, theit Motions, if of Elaſtick Bodies, they will loſe all, but what they recover from their Elaſticity. ] TnE Doctrine of Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which I have Aſfirmd, gives an Account of this Phænomenon, which is here proposd from Experience and Obſervation, that Motion is more apt to be loſt than got, and is always upon the Decay, (Which will not be ſolvd by the Inertia of Matter or by Gravitation,) becauſe, as the Expanſive Force in Bodies is much leſs than the Contractive, the Latter will be continually prevailing againſt the Former, and the Elaſtick Bodies will loſe all their Moson, but what they Recover from their Elaſticity, that is, from their Expanſive. 5. 48. Ir Matter is an Abſtracted Subſtance, which only conſiſis of Bulk or Magnitude, and ſerves by the Parts, of which it is made up, to Number the ſeveral Velocities, or to give the Sum of them in each Motion, it is the ſame as to ſay, that if 5 Velocities, for Inſtance, are carryd againſt 1 Velocity, which is Five Times Greater than one of the Former, they will be Equal in their Moments, and whatever Change is made by ſuch a Concourſc, it will be Equal in both the Bodies, which Concurr, computing  of the Greater Velocity to be anſwerable to 1 of the Leſer, vhich, if true, yet ſuppoſes Matter to be nothing but Bulk and Magnitude, Which is a falſe and a wrong Notion of it. S. 49. ON the Contrary, that 7'h of a Greater Velocity is Equal to 1 Velocity of a diſferent Kind, ve have already ſiewn there is ſome Reaſon to Conteſt, which ve ſhall here farther Exemplify in the Caſe of Sounds; where ſuppoſing by one Kind of Vibration a Baſe Sound to be producd, and by another, that is ; Times Quicker, a Treble, and the String of the Harp in the Former to be 5 Times Groſſer than that of the Larter; can any one Imagine, that 2 of the Vibration of a Treble will be Equal to 1 of the Baſe, or, if the Treble deſcribes never ſo ſmall a Vibration, and the Iaſe never ſo large, that the Velocity or the Sound of the one, vill ever be made Equal to that of the other? It ſeems to be Impoſſible, and in General it is abſurd to believe, that 1 Velocity, which is Performd in 1 Time, can be Equal to 7 oſ anorher Velocity, which Velocſty is Performd in the ſame Time, unleſs 1is Equal o 10 4t: The Caſe therefore is this, that a Force or Velocity, Exerting it ſelf in a Point or a Line, may be 5 Times Greater than another, and vill not be Reducible to it, nor vill be Equal to the Sum of 5 Forces, cach of which are 5 Times leſ, becauſe a Force or Velocity, which is Greater than any one of them, will be likeviſe Greater than all their Velocities put together in their Real Force or Velocity, Thus alſo Fire by the ſame Force, that it ſubdues one Quantity of Force againſt it, is ſuſficient to overcome Two, Three, or a Hundred Times of the ſame kind of Force Acting againſt it, and tho Spaces, deſcrib'd by Bodies which Move, are, according to Mechanicks, compounded of the Times and the Celerities of their Deſcription, and 1 Time into 5 Degrees of Celerity is Equal to 5 Times into 1 Degree of Celerity in the Production of Lines Equal in Length, yet the Intrinſick Value of thoſe Lines will not be Equal, the one being deſcrib'd by a s Times Greater Celerity than the orher. 5. 50. BUT, that the Changes of Motion are Equal in both Bodies, is leſs Explaind; for, as in the former Section, if the Velocities are Unequal in the Bodies or Magnitudes, which we will now ſuppoſe Equal, ſince a Unit in one Velocity is not Equal to a Unit in another, and ſince, by what has been ſaid, they are not really Reducible to each other, it will follow, that, upon their Mutual Concourſe, the Changes in each cannot be Equal; if the Velocities are Equal, and the Magnitudes, by which their Sums are Computed, are ſo too, Two Equal Forces, in their contrary Action, vill produce Nothing, or, which is the ſame, a Mutual Deſtruction of each other, and therefore there will be no Equal Changes of Motion; if the Magnitudes are Unequal, and the Velocities the ſame in their Degree or their Force, 5 Equal Velocities ill be Superior to 1 by 4, and therefore there will not be an Equal Change in the Motions, but 1 will be deſtroyd and the other 4 proceed without Oppoſition, in all which here is nothing of Action and Re-action, but a Mutual Oppoſition of Forces and no Equal Change of Motion. IF any Thing more is conſiderd than Velocity either Equal or Unequal, and Magnitude or the Sums of ſuch Velocitics, that is, if Reſiſtance or Elaſticity, or any orher Quality in Matter is, ve muſt have Recourſe to the 47t Section, to anſwer the Proof of this Law of Action and Re-action, ſince it is plain from thence, it doe: not obtain, where Matter is taken in Groſs, and vith all i's Qualities; and by the 48, 49,. 50, it is as Evident, that it does not, where taken in the moſt Abſtracted Senſe we can Propoſe, Solidity, by Part the firſt of this Philoſophy, being only an Excluſion of one Portion of Matter out of that Space, which another Poſſeſcs, vhich is alſo ſupposd in Magnitude. WE have hitherto endeavourd to ſhew, that the Real and Abſolute Re-action ol Bodies is not always Equal to the Action of them, and if they are not in their Real and Abſolute Forces, they are only ſo in Abſtraction, which thereſore is nothing elſe than a Creature and a Chimæra of the Mindc. We muſt likewiſe add, that in the Real Forces of Bodies, as Re-action is not always Equal to Action, ſo that neither are they always Contrary; for the Expanſive Force Acts with the Expanſive, and the Contractive with the Contractive, Fire promotes the Expanſive Force of Bodies, vhich are Inflammable, and Lead the Contractive of Bodies, which are Heavy, by being Laid upon them, and yet neither the one nor the orher are Imagind to Loſe as much Force, as they Communicate, but Increaſe it in other Bodies, whilſt they Retain it in their own. s. 51. As for this Law Obtaining in Attractions, Attraction ĩs the very Property in Matter to be Provd from it, and therefore to alledge it as an Inſtance for the Proof of that Law, by which it ſelſ is to be Prov}d, as it is not done by the Great and Learned Author oſ the Preſent Philoſophy Sir Iſ. Newton, ſo it is no diſtinguiſhing Mark of the Judgment or Penetration of thoſe, who wou'd ſeem to ſupply the ſuppos'd Deficiency of the Perſon they undertake to Explain; we ſhall not therefore enter into the Reaſoning made uſc of by them in Reference to this Phænomenon, Which at the beſt depends upon Law the Firſt, and which has been already conſiderd, but proceed to the Experiment, produc'd from the aforeſaid Author, of the Load-ſtone and Iron, which being plac'd in Veſſels peculiar to cach, fill'd with Water and touching one another, floated on the Stagnating Fluid, neither of them Propelling the other, but by the Equality of their Attraction kept in and reſtrain'd their Mutual Endeavours to unite, and at length being reduc'd 1o a perſect Equilibrium they became Abſolutely Quicſcent. 5 52 RtU” S. 52. BUT if the Iron and Load-ſione, placd in Water, are in an æquilibrium, ind therefore fheir Mutual Actions upon each other Equal, when the ſame Bodies are plac'd in Air and come together by their Mutual Actions, thoſe Actions for the ſame Reaſon cannot be Equal; But why a Law of Action and Re-action, and of Nature in General, ſno'd be formed upon theſe Bodies plac'd in W ater, rather than in Air, will be Impoſſible to determine, ſince they are only both of them particular Phænomenons of it, which Reſult from different Circumſtances of the ſame Bodies, and conſequently have neither of them a Right in Preference to the other, to Preſcribe to the Actions of all Nature, no more, than, becauſe Fire Burns in Air, and is Extinguiſvd in Water, we have therefore juſt Reaſon to Conclude, that the proper Nature of Fire is not to Burn, but to be ExtinguiſiY'd; It were eaſy to ſiew the FalIacy of Reaſoning from this Experiment more particularly, but we have not Time at Preſent to Enlarge, unleſs to take notice, that both this Experiment, and another, vhich is Analogous to it, only prove, that the Iron and the Load ſtone have, each of them, Diſtinct Forces of Action belonging to them, by which they in ſome Caſes Attract each other, and in ſome become Quieſcent, but do not Evidence, that the one is only a Re-action upon the other, Reſulting from the Action of the Former; Thus Fire and Water have Peculiar Forces appertaining to them, and it is not neceſary, that Water ſiou'd Re-act in the ſame Proportion as Fire Acts, in the Application of the one to the other, only, that Water ſou'd obtain it's Proper Force, which is independent of the Fire, and Reſiſt or Submit to it, as the Proportion of Action is berwixt them; Which Actions, and the Proportion or Quantity of them, it is the Buſineſ of Philoſophy to Enquire into, and Aſcertain. C H AP. II Concerning the Mutual Concourſe of Bodies, and the Laws Relating thereto, as alſo of the Compoſition of Forces. 5. 1. FTE R Examining into the General Laws of Nature, we are to Inquire into thoſe, which concern the Motion of Bodies in their Mutual Concourſe; the Firſt of which is, that of Two Equal Bodies, which are wholly void of Elaſticity, If the one is movd and carry'd againſt the other, which is perfectly Quieſcent, in the Occurſe they will proceed together to the ſame Side and in the ſame Direction, cach with half the Velocity of the Body, which is movd; becauſe the Body, vhich is in Motion, will Impell and Accelerate the other, till it can do it no farther, that is, when the Motion of the Quieſcent becomes Equal to that of the Moving Body, and conſcquently, when the whole Motion is divided between them both. 5. 2. AGAINST Which there will be this Objection, That Matter, as before, is ſupposd to be an Abſtracted Subſtance, without any Property, excepting it's Magnitude, and Preſerving inviolably it's own Dimenſions, and in that Senſe only, Solid or Impenetrable, it is not Hard nor Reſiſting, but merely Paſſive, that is, has no other Action, but the Motion Impreſi'd; This therefore, in the Real Actions of Bodies one amongſt another, is far from being a Lawv of Nature, ſuch a Law will neither account for the Motion in the Concourſc of Equal Quantities, of Fire and Water, oſ Oil of Vitriol and Tartar, of Marble with Lead, or common Wood vith Clay, or any other Bodies, even of the ſame Kind, as Fire with Fire, or Lead with Lead, &e. S. 3. IT is not much more happy in proving it's Truth, even upon the Suppoſition of the Preſent Abſtraction; for if a Magnitude is endu'd with a certain Force of Velocity, and is carry'd againſt an Equal Magnitude, which is Quieſcent, that is, where no Powers or Faculties of Matter are conſiderd on either Hand, and no vays Interfere with this Velocity and Quieſcence, the Abſtraction will be the ſame, as ii ve ſuppos'd 1 Velocity Acting againſt 1 Inertia; but if I Velocity can excite 1 Inertũa into  a Velocity, there is the ſame Reaſon it ſiou'd excite it into 1 Velocity, and by conſequence expend it's whole Force upon it, and become it ſelf r Inertia; unleſ an an Inertia is mote Capable of being Excited out of it's Inertia than an Inertia, which already is Excited, is Capable of being more Excited out of its Inertia. 5. 2. MoREOVER, how a Mere Velocity can Act upon a Mere Inertia, or onc Abſtracted Magnitude or Quantity upon another, any more than Action upon no Action, or a Mathematick Figure upon a Mathematick Figure, or Space upon Space in the Abſtract, is as yet Unexplaind, to which and no more the Preſent Lawv Amounts. s. 5. LastLy, if Re-action is not Equal to Action, it will be Impoſſible, that : Velocity ſiod not move I Inertia with the ſame Velocity, which it brings, withou Ioſing any of it's own; that is, if there is no Return or Repulſe of the Inertia upon the Velocity, it will preſerve it's own Force, and carry on the Inertia with the ſame; but if Re-action is Equal to Action, that Re-action ſhoud ſubſiſt or be Imagind to be in an Inertia, or Non-action, is altogether Abſurd and a diret Contradiction. If therefore this is not a Lav of Real Matter according to §. 2, nor of Abſtracted Matter according to the following Sections, of what Matter it is a Law, will be difficult to Affirm; This certainly muſt be ſaid, that what is the Real Reſult from the Concourſe of Bodies can be no otherwiſe determin'd, than from knowing the Peculiar Forces of ſuch Concurring Bodies, which the Preſent Philoſophy ſeems to be little Acquainted with. 5. 6. A Second Law in Relation to the Mutual Concourſe of Unelaſtick Bodies is, that if Two ſuch Bodies, which are Equal, are carryd againſt each other with the ſame Velocity, after their Colliſion they will be both Quieſcent, for the ſame Reaſon, that +æa in the Literal Arithmetick is Equal to o; For where one Force or Quantity Affirms it ſelf, and another is Negative of it, the Reſult muſt be the Deſtruction or Annihilation of both: It is plain, Oppoſite and Equal Forces ill be in an Equal Balance, and ſince neither of them can poſſibly Prevail a Quieſcence muſt ſucceed. 5. 7. THiSs thereſore is an Axiom, that Two Equal Forces, Acting in oppoſite Directions, will produce nothing in Reſpect of ſuch Forces, becauſe they Deſtroy each other, that is, their Mutual Progreſs will be abſolutely Hindred; But how, or which way, is ſuch an Axiom a Law of Nature, any more than, 2 Subſtracted from 2 leaving Nothing, is a Lav of it? Will Either of theſe Axioms Aſiſt us in the Laws of Motion, betwixt the Parts of Flame, of a Fluid, or any other Body whatſoever, or berwixt a Fluid and a Solid, or betwixt a Solid and a Solid? We may as juſtly ſay, that, becauſe 2 +2 is Equal to 4, or 2-2 is Equal to o, therefore the Fire Burns, or Nature Acts, in all Reſpects, Agreeably to what we Obſerve in the ſeveral Circumſtances of it. s. 3. BuT hich is more, tho one Force, Acting againſt another, Produces no Progreſſive Force on ecither Hands, yet how will this be Reconciled with the Law of Action and Re-action, vhere the Change of Motion is Equal, ſince, in the Preſent Caſe, there is no Motion at all? For it ſeems to be plain, that if one abſolute Action A, carryd againſt another abſolute Action B, is Equal, according to the Law which we now conſider, the ſame abſolute Action  cannot be Equal to the Re-action of B; becauſe B is only Equal to 4, when it is carry'd with a Poſitive Force againſt it, and therefore cannot be Equal to it by a mere Re-action only, that is, when it is Quieſcent, and is not carry'd with ſuch a Force againſt it. S. 9. BESIDES, as this Law of Motion, in the Concourſe of Bodies, little Agrees vith the Fundamental one of Action and Re-action, ſo does it as little with the Firſt, juſt now mention'd; For if a Velocity, Acting upon an Inertia, gives that Inertia hailf of it's own Action, one Velocity with one Inertia Acting upon another Velocity, vhich is contrary to it, ith the ſame Inertia, ſhou'd cauſe - a Velocity on contrary Sides or Directions; For if one Velocity, on one Hand, will give an Inertia 2 its Velocity, the other Velocity, on the other Hand, vill give the contrary Inertia 7 of its Velocity, and the Remainder of the Velocities, on both Hands, will be in an quilibrium; Whereas, according to this preſent Law, the whole of the Velocities will be Mutually transferd to each other, and from thence vill ariſe a Deſtruction of both. s. 10. THE Third Lav is, that if Two Unequal Bodies, which are not Elaſtick, ſoud meet each other with ſuch a Velocity, that as much as the one Body exceeds the other in Magnitude, ſo much the other ſiou'd excecd the Former in Velocity, A a or or, vhich is the ſame, if the Velocities are Reciprocal to the BEodies, after their Mutual Concourſe ſuch Bodies will be Quieſcent; Becauſe the Quantities oſ Motion vill be on both Sides Equal, and being Contrary will Deſtroy each other. . 11. TuE Foundations of this Law have been already Examin'd and Conſiderd, and Firſt in Reſpect of Equal Quantities of Motion, being calculated by making Five Degrees of Velocity, for Inſtance, Equal to the Sum of Five Equal Velocities, which this Lav ſuppoſes, and is not provd. Second, in Reſpect of Equal Forces deſtroying cach other, which is an Axiom, but of little Service to the Explaining oſ Nature, according to what has been alledgũ in the forezoing Sections. s. 12. TuE Fourth Lav concerning Unclaſtick Bodies is, that if a Body, which is movd, is carry'd againſt another, which is Quicſcent, however Unequal in their Bulk or their Quantity oſ Matter, both of them after their Colliſion vill proceed with a Common Velocity to the ſame Parts, as in Law the Firſt, and the Common Velocity will be ſo much Diminiſ'd, as both the Bodies taken together are Greater than the Body, which was originally mov'd. Thus, if 48 is movd againſt , which is Quieſcent, with a Certain Velocity, that is, Two Particles of Matter againſt one, the vhole Velocity, which appertain'd to 4 B, vill aſter Colliſion be diſiributed A and divided into the whole Maſs 4 BC, and therefore, B Oc ſince the Moments muſt be the ſame, as before Colliſion, the vhole Velocity muſt be Diminiſ'd in Proportion, as the whole Maſs is Increas'd. FrROM whence it is Evident, that this Lawv depends upon the Truth of the Firſi, vhich has been already Examin'd, and thereſore the Preſent does not want any particular Confutation here; unleſs ve farther add, that even upon the Suppoſition oſ the Truth of that Lav, if 4 one Particle oſ Matter is carryd againſt C, it communicates - it's Velocity to it, and ſo it muſt be ſaid of B, another Particle of it; how therefore, when they are movd together againſt C, they ſoud ſtop, beſore they have each of them communicated 4 their Velocity to it, is no otherwiſe to be Explaind, but by Curbing and Reſtraining the Communication of Velocity at Pleaſure, in order to make the whole 4B C to Proceed with one and the ſame Celerity; which therefore ſiou'd have been Provd, namely, that the Quieſcent Body can never have a Greater Force Impreſ'd upon it from the Action of Two Bodies, or Particles of Matter 4 and B, than from that of one as 4; Iſ it can, ſince, in the Action of A upon , they are ſupposd to proceed together, in the Action of 4 and æ upon q they vill not, but C will proceed with a Greater Velocity than 4B; that is, if 4 communicates à it's Velocity to the Quieſcent Body C, B vill likewiſe do it, from whence C will have 1 Velocity, whilſt 4 and B Retain only I betwixt them, that is, C will be carryd with a Greater Velocity than 4B, and therefore not with a Common one to Both. 5. 13. THE Fiſth Law is, that if Two Unelaſtick Bodies, which are Unequal, are movd vith an Equal Velocity againſt cach other, the Quantity of Motion in both, aſter Colliſion, will be the Difference of their Motions, beſore their Mutual Concourſe; becauſe, i 4B and C are carry'd againſt each other, the Equal Moments of both vill be deſtroy'd, and there will only Remain the Diſference of them, which is to be Impended or Spent upon the whole Maſs, 4 BC; in which Lav, Firſt, the Mutual Deſtruction of Equal Moments is not accounted for, by what foregoes; nor Second, according to the laſt Section, the whole Maſs proceeding with one and the ſame Velocity after Colliſion; and in Reality, this Philoſophy of the Mutual Concourſe of Bodies is no more, than Moving 4 B and C backvards and ſorwards with a Uniform Velocity, juſt as we pleaſe, and taking it for granted, that aſter Colliſion A B and C muſt certainly, one way or other, move together. S. 14. THE Sixth Law is, that if Two Unclaſtick Bodies, being Equal, are movd with an Unequal Velocity to the ſame Side, after their Colliſion the Quantity or Sum of Motion vill continue the ſame, but the Common Velocity will be the half ofſ the Velocity of both taken together; Thus, i? 4 or 2 moves with 4 Velocity, and C vith 2 tovards the ſame Side, aſter 4 or B arrives at , they ill both procecd with 3 Velocity cach, ſo as to make ihe Sum of Motion the ſame with the Former, aud the Common Velocity the half of the whole Motion. 5. 15. THIS s. 15. THIS Lav therefore; and the Explanation of it, is as Inconceivable as the: Former; ſince, if 4 or B, vhen carryd againſt C conſiderd as Quieſcent, ſpends 4 it's, Velocity upon it, according to Law the Firſt, why it ſiou'd communicate none to it, if the Velocities are Equal, and C is in Motion, is altogether Inexplicable; But this it muſt not do, if the Preſent Doctrine is True, becauſe after Colliſion they are to obtain one Common Velocity, that is, 4 or B and C are to have one Common Velocity, which is 2 after Colliſion, therefore 4 or B communicates no Velocity to  tho in Motion, and yet, by Law the Firſt, it woud Impart 4 of it's Velocity to it, if it were Quieſcent, which is Abſurd: Or we may put it in this Way, 4 or B, by Lav the Firſt, will Impart ; it's Velocity to q, if it were Quieſcent, therefore an Unequal Velocity, / to TWo Equal Velocities of 4 and B, will, according to that Law, communicate ; of the Velocity of 4, and 4 of the Velocity of B to C, when Quicſcent, that is, 2 Velocity, whereas, according to the Preſent Lav, it will have only 1 Velocity communicated to it, vhen in Motion, which is alſo Abſurd: s. 16. ANOTHER Objection againſt this Law is, that, whereas  is ſupposd to have an Unequal Velocity with C, yet, vhen they come together, they have the ſame VeIocity, if 4 or B has 4, and C has 2, it ſeems, by an amicable Compoſition of the Matter, they will each of them proceed with the Velocity of 35 On the Contrary, if the Degrees of Velocity are Really Different, ſo that one is tice as Swiſt as the other, or as 4 to 2, it will be Impoſſible to ſay, how, upon their Meeting, they ſoud obtain the ſame Velocity, according to the Preſent Lav; for if a Swifter VeIocity, as of 4 or B, is Reſtraind by a Slower, as of q, it ſo far deſtroys that Velocity, and therefore their Sums cannot be the ſame befſore, as after their Colliſion, vhich is affirmd; if the Degrees of Velocity are not Different, but Equal, that is, if the Velocity of one Body, is not Swifter than that of the other, and 4 or  has only the Sum of 4 Velocities, each of which is Equal to one of thoſe, of which C has 2, there vill be different Sums of Velocities, where the Sums or Quantities of Matter are Equal, by which the Sums of the Velocities are Computed; which is again Impoſſible. : 5 17. THE laſt Law of Unelaſtick Bodies is, that, if of Two Unequal ones, which are moved the ſame Way, the Greater Impinges upon the Leſs, the Common Velocity after Colliſion will be Greater than half of the Sum of the Velocities; On the Contrary, if the Leſs overtakes the Greater, the Common Velocity will be Leſs after Colliſion, than that half of the Sum of the afore-mentioned Velocities. For Example, if 4B has 6 Velocities, and C has 2, the Common Velocity after Colliſion vill be more than 4; becauſe, by the preceding Law, if the Bodies were Equal, 4 and C woud proceed together with the Common Velocity of 4, but 48 being Greater than 4, and conſcquently than q, it will ſpend more of it's Velocity upon , than 4 did, before they come to an æEquilibrium, and therefore the Common Velocity, with which 4 B C proceeds, will be Greater than 4; and for a Contrary Reaſon, if C incurrs upon 4 B, the Common Velocity will be Leſs than 4. Tuis Law therefore is Examin'd in the Former;, and does not require àany farther Arguments, or Convictions of it's Uncertainty or Fallhood, The Solution of all this Buſineſs is, that Bodies, vhich have a Contractive Force Unite, and Adhere to each other by that Force, or Move together, upon their Velocities, which are of an Expanſive one, Deſtroying their Particular Contractive Forces or Gravitation to the Earth. S. 18. BUT, before I leave this Subject of the Impaction and Concourſe of Bodies, I ſnall ſubjoin the following Theorem from a Celebrated Philoſopher; That the Quantity of Motion, which is computed by taking the Sum of the Motions, which are carricd to the ſame Side, or the Difference of them carry'd to Contrary ones, is not Chang'd by the Action of Bodies amongſt one another. Which Theorem has Furniſ'd an Occaſion to another Excellent and Ingenious Philoſopher, in the Preſent Mechanicks, to Form the Two Subſequent ones, of which I ſhall Give the following Demonſtrations. THEOREM the Firſt is, If one Body Impinges upon Another, which is Quiceſcent, or which is Moved Slower to the ſame Side, or in the ſame Direction, the Sum ol the Motions in both Bodies, to the ſame Side, will remain the ſame after their Impaction or Colliſion, as before; Let the Body 4 be moved according to the Direction of CD, ſrom C to D, and let it Impinge or Fall upon another Body B, which is ſupAa 2 posd pog'd cither to be Quieſcent, or to be moved more ſlowly in the ſame Direction; It is Affirmd, that the Sum of the Motions in both Bodies towards the ſame Side. that is, from C to D, will, before and aſter their Impulſe, Impaction, or Colliſion, Remain the ſame. LET therefore CD, the Motion of the Body 4, be =a, EF, the Motion of the Body B to the ſame Side, be =1b, the Sum of their Motions will conſequently be CDA EF=a+b; Let FG repreſent the Motion, vhich is Impreſd from A B 4 on B, vhich we will ſuppoſc æc; o /M——-- —}—2 O4HADp739A 2 Since therefore Action and exũtion C x D E F are Equal and Contrary, B by Reacting upon 4 vill take ſo much from 4, as is Imparted to it; thereſore let XD be Equal to FG=c, and the Motion of 4 aſter the Impaction will be 2/ 4⸗ and the Motion of 3b+c, but 2—c +b+c=a +b, the Sum of their Motion before ſuch Impaction. Corol. 1. IF FG=CD, or ca, C and X vill Coincide, and CK=a c =o, and A after Impaction vill remain Quieſcent, and  will proceed vith the Motion of b+c; that is, it ac=o, b+c aſter Impaction 4 +, or the Sum of their Motions before it. Corol. 2. IP FG is Greater than CD, the Point X vill fall to the Left Hand of and the Motion of 4 vill be Negative, or to a contrary Side; that is, if c is Greater than a, let à be the Difference, therefore a c 4, and the Sum of their Motions after Impaction vill be 2d c +bcd+b+c, that issa vill belong to 4, vhich will be therefore Negative, and b +c to 83 andàd+b4ca+4, becauſe cd=a. THEOREM the Second is, If Two Bodies Move to Contrary Sides, and Meet Each other, the Sum of their Motions to the ſame Side, which is the Difference of thei Morions to Contrary Sides, both before and after their Concourſe will Continue the ſame towards the ſame Side. Let 4 Repreſent the Motion of 4, and 4 the Motion of B to a Contrary Side the Sum of their Motions to the ſame Side, which is the Difference of their Motions to Contrary Sides, will be æ6, Iet  farther be  to the Motion èommuni cated to the ſame Side; therefore æ/c  to the Motion of 4 after their Concourſe, and the Motrion of B after it will be b+c; but 2cd4c after Con courſe Z b the Motion of theſe Bodies before it.  r- j rol. 1. I? bc =a, ab—t the Motion of 4 after Concourſe =o, and 4 vill be Quieſcent after ſuch Concourſe, and ? the Motion of B after Concourſe =a⸗ i the Sum of both their Motions to the ſame Side, or the Difference of them to Contrary oness, i ill i ] riæ⸗ 2. IF bcis Greater than 4, and à'is the Difference, then b+c=a +4, and b+ca=d, and abcæ4; that is, 2bc, the Motion of 4 after Concourſe, vill be Negative, and to a Contrary Side, and the Motion of B Will be +¢, but à+7¢a bc+c, the Motion of the Bodies after Concourſc, = b, the Motion of them beſore it. 5. 19. N Reſpect therefore of theſe Two Theorems, whatever we have alledg'd againſt Action and Re-action being Equal and Contrary, as alſo concerning the Communication of Motion, and Matter being conſidered only as Conſiſting of mere Bulk and Magnitude, is Equally Valid here; And particularly, e is ſuppoſed to be the Motion communicated to B, and loſt to 4, if ſo, it is maniſſt, that the Quantity of Motion after Contact, or Impaction, or Impulſe vill be the ſane as before it; But hov is this Provò, that c is Loſt to 4 and Gain'd to B Not fſom the Nature of Matter, which is ſupposd to have nothing, but Bulk or Magnitude, vhich can neither At or Re-act; If ir is ſaid this Force of Re-action is ſupposd, then that very Thing is ſuppos'd, which is to be Provd; and the foregoing Theorem, which is Reſolv'd into the Two Succeeding ones, is Demonſtrated by Preſuming that to be True, which it proposd to Evince to be ſo; that is, a+b=ac+b+c, becauſe a Loſt  and b Gain'd it, and æ Loſt æ and b Gain'd it, becauſc they are ſuppos'd to do it. If there is any Keal Force in Matter, by which this is Provd, it ſiould be ſiewn us, and how it is derivd from mere Bulk and Magnitude, and how it is a Conſtant and Unvary'd Force Force in all Material Beings, in Bodies Elaſtick and Unelaſtick, in Fire, Water, Wood Stone, Metals, and Minerals; for till then, as we have before ſaid, ve can conclude it to be no orher than a Creature of the Mind, and a Force, which Reſts in the Imagination, without Reſiding in any Part of Nature; and yet, which is ſomething Wonderful, this Property or Theorem of Motion is brought to Prove Action and Reaction to be Equal and Contrary, which Theorem is notwithſtanding Provd from ſuppoſing Action and Re-action Equal and Contrary; On the orther Hand, ve ſhall in this Chapter Give the Laws of the Mutual Congreſs of Bodies from Real Forces in Nature, the Expanſive and Contractive. 5. 20. AFTER the Laws of Unelaſtick Bodies follow thoſe of Elaſtick, that is, oſ Bodies, which Reſtore themſelves with the ſame Force, with which they are Compreſ'd; The Firſt is, That in Bodies perfectly Elaſtick and Equal, if the one is Movd againſt the other, which is Quieſcent, upon their Impaction that, which is Movd, vill be Quieſcent, and the Quieſcent will Proceed with the ſame Celerity, which was originally in the Impellent: Becauſe, by the firſt Law of Unelaſtick Bodies, or of Mere Impulſe, it will communicate halſ its Celerity, but the Elaſtick Force is Equal to that Celerity, which upon Impulſe the one Body Gains, and the other Loſcs, and Acts Contrary ways, ſo as to be Added to the Motion of the Body Impell'd, and Subſtracted from the Impellent; from Whence it vill follov, that ſince halt is Communicated by Simple Impulſe, and the other half by the Elaſtick Force, the whole vill be Transfer'd from the Impellent to the Body Impælld, and the Former will remain Quieſcent, ſeeing the firſt half is loſt by Communication, and rhe laſt by Reaction; Thus, if 4 is 4 Velocity, and B o Velocity, aſter Impulſe A is 2, and B 2, and the Elaſticity Adds 2 more to 8, and Gives 2 leſs to 4, ſo that, in the Reſult, A vill be o, and B 4 in Velocity. : S. 21. AGAINST this Doctrine and Hypotheſis ve are thereſore Firſt to Obſerve, that That of Simple Impulſe is neceſary to This, vhich has been Conſider'd, and Which, if not true, Involves the Preſent in the ſame Error; Second, That, tho' this Lav of Elaſticity, and the others, which depend upon it, were certãin, and did obtain in Nature, they are yet ſar from being any General Laws of it, ſince Heat and Cold, Hardneſs and Fluidity, &e. are not Reducible to them. l l l S. 22. To Omit what we have ſaid in the foregoing Section, the very Hypotheſis of this Kind of Elaſticity (for Simple Impulſe is a ſort of one by it's Action and Re-action) is, in the firſt Place, the moſt Arbitrary, that can be poſſibly Imagin'd, and in the Second, is not Anſwerable to it ſelf: It is Arbitrary, for why the Elaſticity ſhould be 2, in the Inſtance above, rather than 4 or 8, or any other Number, is not determin'd, by which means 4 woud be 2 and B 6 Velocity, or 4 6 and B 10 Velocity, and Laws might be form'd, and Calculations made, upon ſuch Hypotheſes as well as that, which is propoſed to us; and ſo on the Contrary, inſtead of 4 and 8 ve might likewiſe ſubſtitute 1, or 4, or any Fraction whatſoever, and in the firſt Caſe, 4 voud be 1, and 3, and in the Second, 4 vod be 14 and B 24; which vou'd give an abundant Scope to theſe Abſtradted Reaſoners to Compure the Laws and Rules of ſuch a ſuppos'd Elaſticity, whenever They ſhall be at Leiure. : S. 23. THAT this Proportion or Degree of Elaſticity is farther Arbitrarily aſum, is Evident, ſince to the Nature of Elaſticity it is only required, that the Repreſſure oud be Equal to the Force, which Compreſies, vhich is as well obſerved in4+4, or 4+3, as in2+2, vhere the Velocities of both Bodies are before ſupposd, by Law the firſt, to be Equal; for if one Body Impinges upon another, and aſter Contact they proceed with the ſame Celerity, any Force ſuperinduc'd of Acting and Re-acting may be Equally calld an Elaſtick, as that which is Commenſurate to the Force, which one Body Gains, and the other Loſes, in ſimple Impulſe; becauſe there may be ſuch an Innate Elaſtick Force preſumd in Bodies, which does not depend upon Impulſe. l S. 24. BESIDES Which, if the Preſſure and Repreſſure of Bodies were to be Meaſured by the Compreſſion Reſulting from Impulſe, what wo'd that be? Not what is here ſuppoſed, the ſame, Which one Body Gains by Impulſe and the other Loſes, becauſe it is Impoſſible, that the Celerity Communicated ſiod Re-act with the ſame Force, with which it is Progreſſive on the one Hand, or that the Celerity on the other, which which remains and is not Communicated, ſould Act with a Progreſſive Force, which it has loſt by the Preceding Communication; Thus, if 4 is 4, and B o, in their Velocities, and upon Colliſion let 4 be 2, and B 2, there is no Reaſon from thence ro Affirm, that by Introducing Action and Re-action, 4 ſhall Communicate 2 more oſ Velocity, becauſc it has loſt 2, or, that B ſhall Re-act with the Force of 2, becauſe it has Acquird the Force of 2 in Progreſſion; It is farther altogether Unaccountable, how Elaſticity, which conſiſts in Re-action, ſiou'd promote a Propagation of Motion, as vill be aſterwards Explain'd. 5. 25. MOREOVER, If this could be Granted, that by Impulſe 2 Velocity was Communicated from 4 to B, and by the Elaſtick Force 2 more, ſo that the Whole ſould be Transferd to B, yet this will not be eaſily accounted for, vhy 4 ſould be Quieſcent, unleſs upon this Suppoſition, that a bare Communication of Motion, and à Re-action againſt it, ſall have Equal Effects in deſtroying it in the Impellent A, vhich is Impoſſible, unleſs to Communicate is to Re-act, or a mere Tranſlation of it from one Body to another is the ſame, as to Hinder and Reſi*t it's Communication; if therefore 2 Velocity was Communicated by Impulſe from 4 to B, and another 2 Velocity from 4 to B by Elaſticity, it wou'd not follow, that 4 ſoud be Quieſcent; becauſe if Impulſe Communicates 2 Velocity, and is Quieſcent in Reſpect of that Velocity, which it Communicates, if Elaſticity Communicates 2 VeloIocity, it's Re-action ſou'd give an Impreſſion upon the Impellent, ſo as to make it Retire with 2 Velocity, or otherwiſe Elaſticity will be the ſame as Simple Impulſe, which yet are here DiſtinguiſY*d; Nor farther is it Evident, that by Simple Impulſe, what Velocity one Body Gains, the other Loſes, becauſe, if one Body Acts upon another, which has no Force of Re-action, it may Impreſs it's ovn Action upon that other Body without Diminiſhing it ſelf, as in the Caſe of Fire Acting upon Fuel, or Motion Acting upon Non-Reſiſtance in the Abſtract. 5. 26. ANOTHER Thing, which we muſt obſerve, is, that this Hypotheſis does not Agree with the Definition of an Elaſtick Body, which is ſaid to be ſuch, when the Preſſure and Repreſſure are exactly Equal, which if they were, it would be altogether Impoſſible, that any thing clſe ſhould Reſult from them, but a Perſect Quieſcenc in both Forces; for if 4, Abſtracted from Impulſc, ſhould Preſs upon B, and there is a Force of Re-action Equal to that Preſſure, 4 cannot Move B forwards, becauſe B Preſſes backwards, nor B Move 4 backwards, becauſc 4 Preſſes forwards with a Force on both Hands, which is ZEquipollent; if it is ſaid, the Force of Repreſſure is ſuppoſcd to be ſuch, as can actually Reſtore it ſel? upon any Preſſure made upon it, then Repreſſure is Superior to the Compreſſion, Contrary to the Definition of a Perſect Elaſticity, and would be ſo far from Promoting of Motion forwards, that it would Repell the Incurrent Preſſure to the Oppoſite Side, and give it a Direction that Way. S. 27. WE are farther to take Notice, that if Impulſe is made one Part of the Account in the Action of 4 upon B, yet even then this Law will not be True; ſince A 4 Velocity, and B o Velocity, if the Elaſticity of B is Equal to the whole Impulſe and Elaſticity of 4, will upon their Congreſs deſtroy each other; if  is Equal to the Impulſe only of 4, it will deſtroy that and leave the Elaſticity of 4 to exert it ſelſ ith it's Proper Force; if B is Equal to the Elaſticity of 4, 4 and B will be in an Equilibrium in reſpect of their Elaſticity, and conſequently, the Impulſe vill not Prevail, which will be ſpent upon Both, if Law the Firſt of Unelaſtick Bodies is true, that is, they will both proceed ith the Velocity of 2, Contrary to the preſcnt Aſſertion of 4 Transſerring it's Whole Velocity to B; for by Elaſticity I here mean the Expanſive Force, or the Force of Repulſion, and which is the only truc Notion of it, as will be afterwards ſhewn. s. 28. BESIDES how 4 4 Velocity ſowd transfer, by its Elaſticity, 2 Velocity to B, and deſtroy 2 in the Impellent 4, is Inconceivable, iſ Compreſſion and Repreſſure are Equal; becauſe 2 Velocity, Communicated forward from 4, is not a Forc Equal to no Motion or Velocity at all, Impreſs'd from B, and therefore, if the Ef fects are not Equal, the Cauſes cannot be; that is, Preſſure and Repreſſure are not ſo. but there is no Re-action Impreſi'd from B, but vhat is ſupposd to Ariſc from 4 Which can be None, becauſe it's Tendency is ſorwards. v 5.20. W 5. 290. VE muſt Addq, it is ſtill leſs Anſwerable to the Deſinition of perſectly Elaſtick Bodies, that, what one Body Gains and the other Loſes by Impulſe, is the Meaſure of this Elaſticity, becauſe in Equal Bodies 4 may have 4, or 6, or 10 Velocity, vhen B is Quieſcent; and conſequently, the Meaſure of Elaſticity may be 2, or;, or, or any other Number, whilſt Elaſtick Bodies, conſider'd in their Innate Force of Repulſion or Expanſion, may not be Proportional to ſuch Numbers. 5. 30. IF, what one Body Gains and the other Loſes, was the Meaſure of Elaſticity, it wou'd not yet be Agrecable to the Definition of it's Nature, or of Compreſſion being Equal to Repreſſure; ſince Velocity of Impulſe, and the Communication of it, has no Connection vith Acting and Re-acting, unleſs becauſe 4, which has 4 Velocity Communicates 2 to B, which has none, therefore 4 Acts with the Velocity of a by its Elaſtick Force, and B Re-acts with the ſame, betwixt which Two Propoſitions, it is Impoſſible, there ſould be any Dependence in Reaſon. 5. 31. IF all this was true, againſt which we have been Diſputing, theſe Laws of Elaſtick Bodies, as well as thoſe others of Unelaſtick, voud be far from giving us any juſt Notions of Things, as they Exiſt; for, tho' they were Adapted to the Solution of ſome kind of Material Beings, as of certain Solid Bodies in theit Mutual Concourſe, yet, ſince they would not Comprehend all, nor one Millionth Part of them, of vhat Importance or Significance can ſuch Laws be to the Explaining of Nature, vhere ſo ſmall a Part of it is conſiderd? For, if theſe Laws could give an Account of the Mutual Congreſs of certain Hard Bodies, which they cannot do, as thoſc of Bowls meeting each other, which are of the ſame Matter and Force, they can ſtill Ieſs Inform us of the Properties, which Reſult from the Mutual Congreſs of Marble and Lead, of Steel and Marble, or in General of Stone, or Wood, or Metals, and the various Kinds of them in their Concourſe with each other; and if theſe Laws cannot do this, they can ſtill leſõ furniſh us with a Solution of Heat or Cold, of Hardneſs or Fluidity, of Coagulation or Chryſtalizing, All which are entirely unaccountable by ſuch Laws as theſec, which therefore are to be Rejected from a True Philoſophy. 5. 32. NOTWITHSTANDING, for the ſeveral Reaſons before Alledgd, we cannot but be of Opinion, that theſe Laws of Elaſtick Bodies do not ſerve us in the Explanation of Nature, ve muſt yet confeſs, that the Demonſtrations formd upon the Preſent Hypotheſis of Simple Impulſe and Elaſticity are ſuch, as ought to give us a Due Value and Eſteem for the Contrivers of them, as they advance our Abſtracted and Mathematick Reaſoning, amongſt whom none appear to have treated this Subject with Greater Clearneſs and Brevity than the Famous Sir Iſ. Newion, and my Loving Friend the Reverend and Learned Mr. Morgan before- Mentiond. BuT having already Conſider'd the Two Principles, upon Which theſe Computations depend, I ſhall now Propoſe the Laws of the Mutual Congreſi of Bodies, deriv'd from their Innate Expanſive and Contractive Forces, after having obſerv'd upon the Great Philoſopher and Geometer here Referd to, that, when he comes to give us an Account of Bodies, which meet each other, he Tells us, by Changing the Sign of b, the Celerities l : : aAaB28B 2AVbAabB of 4 and B after Reflection will be Tuu; and a45 which is Evident, becauſe, vhen æ tends one way, and b another, if the one is Expreſ'd by +a, the other vill be Expreſ'd byb, and 4x, and Bb+xæ Vill be the MoAa tion after Concourſe; The Celerities therefore will be EitE and Bb+æ DBbH+x 4a+xæ 5 q4 Bur Za+b anda8B2ABbA AxV Bx=Aa Ba  4B, 2xABàa248h Aa 2A8Ba2ABLbAaEBa28 and = 75 ; Therefore VEVT = a5 2AB 248Bb 2 Aa +AbEBb = the AB BB a+E3 = to the Celerity of 4; Likewiſe , Celerity of B. Bur then, Firſt, vhen we come to Inſtances and Examples of this Doctrine Bodies are ſuppoſed, as alſo in the Calculation, to be Homogeneous in their Matter and the Moments of Them to Conſi*t of Mcre Bulk and Celerity, vhici i cny Deny; And Second, ſometimes 4 is Imagind to Incurr with a Negative Force which ſhews it is nothing, but an Abſtracted Reaſoning; Thus, Let 4, a, B, b, be; Bulk, 8 Celerity, 9 Bulk, 2 Celerity, Reſpectively; If 4 and B Proceed the ſame A—a BH2bE8 Way, the Celerity of 4 after Refiection is graastt., that o a+EB B mraaZtæri =5; that is, the Whole Moment of 4 is 3 Bulk x 3 Celerity, of B, o Bulk æ 2 Celerity before Reflection; but 29 Bulk Acquires 3 Celerity after Reſection, and thereſore there muſt have been 9 73 Celerity Communicated to it from 4, vhich yet had only 8æ3 Celerity, but how 4 ſhould Communicate 1x3 Celerity more than it had, and by that Mcans Return vith the Celerity of r1, is ſomething Inconceivable, unleſs in ſuch an Abſtracted Reaſoning. BuT to proceed to the Laws of the Congreſs of Bodies in a Real Philoſophy. 5. 33. LET 4 Repreſent the Quantity of Matter, or the Number of it's Parts, in one Body, and B the Quantity of Matter, or the Number of its Parts, in the other; Let æ and C Denote the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the Former, and æ and c thoſe of the Latter; And let 7 and v Exprels the Velocities in Each. TuEOREM the Firſt; The whole Moment of 4 will be thereſore 4æ CV, and that of B, Becv, and if they tend the ſame Way, the whole Moment may be Expreſs'd by 4 ECV+ Be cv aſter Concourſe; in which we ſuppoſe, that 4 and B are only the Numerators oſ the Forces ECV, ecv, and theſe the Denominators of the Degrees oſ them; that the Innate Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the ſame Dodies, E and C in the Firſt, or æ and  in the Laſt, Act contrary to each other, and that, in Diſferent Bodies, ? Acts to the ſame Part vith ę, and C with e, but that æ and æ the Expanſive Act contrary to each other, as alſo C and ⸗ the Contractive; that likewiſc the Velocities Impreſs'd ? and v in the ſame Bodies Promote and Act with the Expanſive againſt the Contractive, tho' not in the ſame Proportion, as the Expanſive againſt the Contractive, the one being an Expanſive Force and a Stronger deriv'd from the Mind, and the other from Matter only, that is, that  Advances and Promotes the Force of æ againſt C, and v that of æ againſt c; and laſtly, that in Different Bodies the Velocity of ? Acts contrary to the Velocity of v, by how much the Laſt is lover than the Former, and likewiſc 7 Acts with c againſt ,, and v with C againſt E. TuroREM the Second; If they Act in Contrary Directions, which is the Caſe of the Moment 4ECVEBecv, 4 and B, as before, are conſidered only, as the Numerators of theſec Forces, which are ſuppos'd to ſubſiſt in every Part of Matter, which they Number; The Innate Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the ſame Bodies, æ and C in the Firſt, or e and  in the Laſt, Act likeviſe, as before, Contrary to each other, and in Difſerent Bodies ? Acts to the ſame Part with ę, and C with e, but æ and the Expanſive Act Contrary to each other, as alſo C and  the Contractive; Farther, the Velocitics 7 and v, in the ſame Bodies, Promote and Act with the Expanſive againſt the Contractive, tho' not in the ſame Proportion, as the Expanſive againſt the Contractive, and for the Reaſon Alledg'd above, that is, 7 Promotes and Advances the Force oſ æ againſt C, and v that of æ againſt /; and laſtly, in Different Bodies V Acts againſt v and vith ę, and 4 againſt 7 and with C; alſo V Acts againſt e, and v againſt Z And in both theſe Theorems + and  are not Marks or Signs of Addition and Subſtraction, but of the Moments Acting the ſame, or contrary Ways. FroM vhence it follows, that theſe Two Theorems only differ in+ or, but that the Acting Forces fall exactly under the ſame Laws, and which, before we proceed, we ſhall Endeavour to Explain. FinsT, As ſor 4 and B, they being only the Quantities of the Acting Forces, there is no ſarther Occaſion to ſpeak oſ them. SECOND, E and q, or æ and f, being the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the ſame Bodies, Act contrary to each other; the Firſt Acting from a Center, or by Repulſion; and the Laſt tovards one, or by Contraction. TH®RD, In Diſferent Bodies æ is Expanſive or Repells the ſame Way from it's Center, as  is Contractive or Tends towards it's Center, and e is Expanſive or Repells the ſame Way ſrom it's Center, as C is Contractive. or Tends towards it's Center; and nd therefore E Aũs with c in another Body, againſt C in it's own, and, vice veriã, ? Acts with C in another Body, and againſt  in it's own; Thus likewiſe æ the Expanſive or Repulſive Force in one Body Acts Contrary to æ the Expanſive in another, they Acting by Expanſion or Repulſion from different Centers; and for the ſame Reaſon, C the Contractive in one Body Acdts Counter to  the Contractive in another, becauſe they Tend to Different Centers. i FourTH, The Velocities V and v in the ſame Bodies, 7V in ACEV, and v in Becv, At with E and æ againſt C and ę, becauſe C and  Tend to a Center, and conſequently to Quieſcence and Reſt, which is oppoſite to Velocity; whereas Velocity has an Expanſive Force, as Tending from the Center of its Communication, which Center is yet Different from the Center of the Body's Expanſive. FirTH, The Velocities V and v in different Bodies At againſt each other, or not at all upon each other; for, if they are Equal, and proceed the ſame Way, there is no Impaction; if they are Superior the one to the other, ſo much as the Difference is betwixt them, ſo far they are Contrary to each other; and, if they Act in Oppoſite Directions, the Caſe is Manifeſt. : SiIxTH, Laſtly the Velocity ? Acts with è, and v with q, in different Bodies; becauſe V Acts with E, and v with e, againſt C and  in the ſame Bodies, by Art. 4, and E Acts with c, and æ with q, in different Bodies, according to 4rt. 33 Therefore V Adts with f, and v with C, in different Ones; In like Manner, V Acts againſt C, and 2 againſt ⸗, in the ſame Bodies, by 4r. 4, but C Acts with è, and  with , in different Ones, according to 4rt. 3 Therefore ?7 Acts againſt e, and v againſt æ, in different Ones. : l IT muſt be obſervd, that7  are Notes, or Signs of Greater or Leſs, in the following Caſes; Being the ſame, which are made uſe of by Dr. allis in his Limits of quations. ; S. 33. LET us therefore now ſuppoſe the Quantities of the Forces, or the Numerators of them, 4 and B, to be Equal, as likewiſe the Velocities, with which they Incurr upon each other, which therefore muſt be the Caſe of the Second Theorem AECVDBe cv, that is, where theſe Forces are directed to Contrary Sides; Becauſe otherwiſe, having the ſame Velocities, they could not meet, nor would there be any Concourſe or Impaction: And this we at preſent ſuppoſc, that ve may Enquire, what 1he Real Forces of Bodies are. ltũ i j Caſ. 1. Is EæC, and e=c, in the ſame Bodies, and EZ=, and C=, in different Ones; that is, if the Expanſive is Equal to the Contractive in the ſame Body, and the Expanſive is Equal to the Expanſive, and the Contractive to the Contractive in different Ones, and the Sums or Quantities of the Forces, and the Velocities in both, are the ſame, a perfect Quieſcence will follow in both Bodies upon their Mutual Concourſe; Becauſe, in the ſame Bodies, the Expanſive and Contractive Forces are in an Equal Balance, being Equal in their Forces, and Acting Contrary to cach other; and in different Ones, æ, which Propells one Way, is  to æ, which Propells another, and C, which Contracts one Way, and Acts with æ, is=æ, which Contracts another, and Acdts with E: And this may poſſibly be the Caſe of Two Globes of Lead, or other Matter of the like Nature, where the Expanſive, or Reſilient, or Elaſtick Force is ſo Balanc'd by the Contractive, that little or no Reſiliency Enſues, but a Perfect Quieſcence is Causd upon their Mutual Impaction; If the Velocity is Greater in the one than the other, they will proceed to the Side, from which the Weaker Velocity Acts, with the Exceſs of the Greater above the Leſs divided berwixt them; for the Body, which is Acted with the Greater Velocity, cannot move Faſter, than that, which was Acted with the Slower, becauſe this Latter lies before it, and it cannot move Slower, becauſe all the Velocity lies on the Side of the Former, therefore they will move Equably and together, and conſequently, the Exceſs of the Greater Velocity vill be divided Equally betwixt them; Nor will this be altered, if 4 or the Sum of the Velocities is Greater than that of ; But, if 4 is leſs than B, ſo that, tho the Velocity is Great, the Moment is too Small to move B, the Velocity of 4 vill be Spent, cither Backwards or Sideways. And the Preſent Caſe vill be a Poſſible one, becauſe E=c, and C=e, and are not Equations, which Contradict each other. Caſ.2. IF ESC, and e=c, in the ſame Bodies, and Z=c, and e =C, in diſferent Ones, that ĩs, if the Expanſive is Equal to the Contractive, in the ſame Bodies B b and nd, in Diffcrent Bodies; the Expanſive of one is Equal to the Contractive of the other, and the Expanſive of the Latter Equal to the Comtractive of rhe Former, the Velocities, and the Quantities of the Forces continuing; as in Caſe the Firſt, Equal, there vill likewiſe Ariſe a perfect Quieſcence from ſuch a Concourſ of Forees: Becauſe, ſince E=c in different Bodies, and e=c in the ſame Bodies, 2=@tc; and ſince e =C in different Bodies, and e =c in the ſame, CJæ; and therefore, all the Forces being Equally Balanc'd, as before, this Caſe vill be Reſolvd into the Former, tho' it is differently Expreſsd; and it will be a Poſſible one; becauſe all the Aquations are Conſiſtent with each other. l caſ. 3. Is ESCq, and e /c, in the ſame Bodies, and E =e, and Crc, in different Oncs, it will be an Impoſſible Caſe, and cannot obtain in Nature; for Eæe, and ?/4c, therefore Eæc; likewiſe E=&e, and E=C, therefore e=C; but C, and  &c9, therefore Ce; and Cc, and EæC, therefore 2=c; that is, ? =c, and æ =c, e =C, and Ce, vhich is Impoſſible. Caſ. 4. I? E=C, and e =4c, in the ſame Bodies, and ?e, and CæCc, in different Ones, it will be alſo an Impoſſible Caſe; becauſe Z=r, and yet c, and C/r, and yet =e, by a like Reaſoning with the foregoing. Caſ. 5. It E=G and e =c, in the ſame Bodies, and 2=&t, and ?e C, in different Ones, this likewiſe will be an Impoſſible Caſe; becauſe ææ E, aiid E, and  c, and C, by the foregoing Reaſoning, which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 6.  EæC, and æ=c, in the ſame Bodies, and ? c, and f æC, in different Ones, the Caſe, as before, will be Impoſſible. caſ. 7. IF E=C, and e=¢, in the ſame Bodies, and in different Ones Ee, and c2, this will be a Poſſible one; becauſc ?=e, and ? =c, and Cc and E=c, therefore on both Hands ?Zc; On the Contrary 2ef, and Eæc, and Cc, and f=¢c, therefore on both Hands Cef; that is, 4 being = B, and ?7=v, E vill Repell æ with a Greater Force to a contrary Side or Direction, than e vill Repell  to a contrary One, if nothing elſe was to be conſider'd; but C Acting againſt ? with a Force Equal to it, it's Repulſive Force is Balanc'd with the Contractive, as likeviſe e with c, and th' E? Acts with ę, yet Calſo AQing vith e, there is nothing can En ſue from the Concourſe of ſuch Forces, but the Quieſcence of them, which ĩs the Caſe of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, yet whoſc Intrinſick Forces differ from each other, as probably of Two Equal Globes of Pure and Unmixt Gold, (which is Soſt and Unelaſtick) and of Lead, or of Lead, and Clay, and the like. It muſt alſo be obſerved of Unelaſtick Bodies, as Lead, that, if one is Quieſcent, and the other is made to Deſcend upon it, it Will not Rebound from it, but if the Velocity of TFwo Leaden Bodies, Mceting cach other, is Increas'd, there will be a Repulſion; which proceeds from the Expanfive of the Velocity being Greater than the Contractive of the Lead, by which means they Propell each other to Contrary Directions, and yet if one Leaden Body Deſcends upon another, which is Quieſcent, and the Velocity is Increas'd, it will not Rebound, becauſe the Expanſive of the Velocity Acts with the Contractive of the Quieſcent Body, and Tends the ſame Way, and there is no Expanſive of the Quieſcent to Repell it. Caſ. 3. In E=G and e =c in the ſame Bodies, and Zc, and eC, in different Ones; therefore Cc, and yet c æC, as alſo Z-e, and yet e&E, which is again an Impoſſible One. Caſ. 9. Is E=C, and e=c, in the ſame Bodies, and æ=æe, and C&, in different Ones; therefore Ce, and e, E=c, and , which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 10. IF E=G and f=t⸗; in the ſame Bodies, and E<, and C, in different Ones; therefore E6, and ę, Cæf, and e, vhich is Impoſſible. caſ. 11. IF ESC, and e=, in the ſame Bodies, and E=1, and e , in different Ones; therefore e=E, and E, ? =C, and C, which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 12. IF EæC, and e=& in the ſame Bodies, and E¢ and ?e =q, in different Ones; therefore E=&f?, and e, C⸗c, and æ, which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 13. Iæ E=G, and æ=& in the ſame Bodies, and Ep, and C, in different Ones; thereſore E/c, and Ce, vhich is a Poſſible Caſe, and will exactly Correſpond vith Caſ. 7. Excepting, that the Greater Forces will be in Becv, and the Leſſer in 4ECV, whereas the Greater Forces, in that Caſe, were in AECV, and the Leſſer in Becv. Caſ. 14. Caſ. 14. ? E=C, and æ=5, in the ſame Bodies, and Ece, and ? C; in diffeent Ones; therefore Z2e, and ?  E, as alſo C<c, and C, which is Imſſible. ro 15. IF E9C, and ?⸗, in the ſame Bodies, and Zæe, and C4, in different Ones; therefore Z=c, and c, and e C, and C, which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 16. I? E=C, and? r, in the ſame Bodies, and 2æc, and e =C, in diſferent Ones; therefore e=E, and  E, Cæc, and , Which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 17. Is EC, and ?c, in the ſame Bodies, and Z =, and Ct, in diſferent Ones; therefore ?=c, and C=e, which is a Poſſible Caſe; That is, if the Expanſive Force in one Body is Equal to it's Contractive Force, and the Expanſive Force in the other Greater than it's Contractive, and in different Bodies, if the Expanſive Forces are Equal, and the Contractive Force of the Firſt Body is Greater than the Contractive of the Laſt, It will frcom thence follow, that the Expanſive of the Firſt is Greater than the Contractive of the Laſt, and the Contractive of the Firſt Equal to the Expanſive of the Laſt. Tnis vill be the Caſe therefore of an Unelaſtick Body æ C, whoſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces are in an Equal Balance, as ſuppoſing Lead, and of an Elaſtick Body f⸗, whoſe Expanſive is Equal to the Expanſive of the Former, but Greater than the Contractive of the Latter, and therefore Elaſtick, as ſuppoſing Marble is ſo, and which will have theſe Properties, which are found in Experience, and are Accounted for, by theſe Forces, as the Concourſe of Lead with Lead, or Gold with Lead, was, by Caſ. 1, 2, and 7. I. THAT a Globe of Lead, Dropt upon a Marble or Stone Pavement, will be Repulsd or Rebound from it, or, which is the ſame, a Globe of Lead, Incurring upon a Quieſcent, and Fixt Globe of Marble, will be Reflectod from thence; becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Marble, which is Greater than it's Contractive Force, Acts Counter to the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Lead, which are ſupposd to be Equally Balancd, and therefore Repelis it, but as this Expanſive Force is Weak, and the Contractive of the Lead is Great, the Repulſion is Small; and it is not Impoſſible, but rhe Contractive Force of the Lead may be Greater than it's Expanſive, which will contribute ſtill more to the making the Repulſion from the Marble Leſs. 2. Tuar a Ball or Globe of Marble, on the Contrary, Dropt upon a Pavement ol Lead, or Incurring upon a Quicſcent, and Fixt Globe of it, is not Refleũted, but rather ſocms to Tend downwards, if there is any thing below ſuch a Pavement, to which it can Tend, as in the firſ?t Caſe, or in the Second, Endeavours to Cloſe, and Unite vith ſfuch Globe; becauſe in this Caſe the Expanſive Force of the Marble Ads the ſamc Way with the Contractive of the Lead, and therefore they rather Tend to an Union vith, than a Separation from each other. 3. Ir ncither of them are Quieſcent, the Globe of Lead, Meeting with a Globe of Marble with an Equal Velocity, and being Equal in their Bulk and Dimenſions, will Repell it, and Carry it to the ſame Side, to which it ſelf Moves; becauſe the Globe of Lead Acts with the Expanſive Force of it's Velocity, which is Equal to that of the Velocity of the Globe of Marble, but the Contractive Force of the Lead being Greater than that of Marble, for in the Preſent Caſe Cc, the Moment of ſuch Expanſive Foroe of the Velocity of Lead muſt be Greater than that of Marble, and therefore muſt Repell it to the ſame Side, ſince the Expanſive Forces æ and æ are Equal, but the Marble will not Rebound from the Lead, and will therefore proceed along with it, for the Reaſon alledgd in A4r. 2. Namely, becauſe ? the Expanſive Force of the Marble Acts the ſame Way with C the Contractive of the Lead We only bring theſe TWo Bodies of Lead and Marble, as Inftances of Unelaſtick and Elaſtick Bodigs in General, th perhaps they may not have exactly the Conditions of this Caſe, that is, probably the Expanſive Force of the Lead may not be preciſely Equal to the Contractive of it, but much leſs, nor to the Expanſive of the Marble, for Silver, or Steel, or Iron, or other Metallick Subſtances, may perhaps come nearer to ſuch an Equality of the Expanſive in Lead, than Marble do's. Caſ. 18. Ir E=C, and ec, in the ſame Bodies, and ?Ze, and Cæj⸗ in different Ones; E=t, and c, and Cæ, and e=C, vhich is Impoſſible. B b aà caſſ io Caſ. 19. I§ EEC, and e4; in the ſame Bodies, and E? c, and ? , in diſferent Ones; therefore ?E, and C=c, which is a Poſſible Caſe, and will be that of an Unelaſtick and an Elaſtick Body, as in Caſ. 17; but, as there the Expanſive of the Firſt was Equal to the Expanſive of the Second, and the Contractive of the Firſi Greater than the Contractive of the Second, ſo here the Expanſive of the Firſt is Equal to the Contractive of the Second, and the Expanſive of the Second Greater than the Contractive of the Firſt; which may Poſſibly be very nearly the Caſe of an Unelaſtick and Elaſtick Body, which have the ſame Weights, where eE, but C/¢, But in this Caſe, ſomething Different from what was Obſerv'd on Caſ. 17, 1. THE Unelaſtick Body, Impinging upon a Quieſcent, and Fixt Elaſtick, will Rebound or be Repell'd from it. l 2. THE Elaſtick Body, Impinging upon a Quieſcent, and Fixt Unelaſtick one, will not Rebound or be Repell'd from thence; And both theſe are Aſſirm'd, for the Reaſons, before Alledg'd, in Caſ. 17. 3. IF they meet each other with an Equal Velocity, the Elaſtick will not Rebound from the Unelaſtick, but the Unelaſtick from it; becauſc, their Velocities being not only Equal, but the Moments of them, the Greateſt Force will lie on the Side ol the Expanſive æ againſt æC, whoſe Forces are in an Equal Balance; And This may be rthe Caſe of Marble and Dry'd Clay; ſince Z= C in the Clay, and ec in the Marble; likewiſe Z in the Clay =c in the Marble, and æ in the Marble = C in the Clay; and therefore e in the Marble E in the Clay, and C in the Clay =c in the Marble, from vhence it is neceſſary, that e in the Marble ſhould Prevail, and Propell the Clay from it. Caſ. 20. IF E=C, and ec, in the ſame Bodics, and ?⸗, and e C, in diſferent Ones; therefore E=e, and C%; in different Ones; which likewiſe is a Poſſible Caſe, where the Unelaſtick Body is EC, whoſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces are in an Equal Balance, and the Elaſtick er, in which e is Greater than c, as in all the foregoing Caſes, from Caſ. 15 And here Ee, and C⸗, as alſo ?c, and e=q makes it Exactly the ſame with Caſ. 17. Caſ. 21. IF E=Cc, and ?e, in the ſame Bodies, and ?=e, and Ccf, in diſferent Oncs; therefore E=c, and C=%<ece; if CZ=be; it is an Impoſſible Caſe; if Ce, it will be a Poſſible One: EC, as before, is the Unelaſtick Body, and e c the Elaſtick, but the Expanſive of the Firſt is Greater than the Expanſive of the Second, and the Contractive of the Firſt, than the Contractive of the Second; likewiſe the Expanſive of the Firſt is Greater than the Contractive of the Second, and the Contractive of the Firſt, than the Expanſive of the Second; which may be the Caſe of Lead and Glaſs, where the Firſt is more Expanſive, but is Balanc'd by it's Greater Contractive, and the Laſt is Leſs Expanſive and Leſs Contractive, but the Expanſive is Greater than the Contractive: Upon the Concourſc therefore of theſe To Bodies, 1. THE Unelaſtick Body, Impinging upon a Quieſcent, and Fixt Elaſtick, will not Rebound, or be Repell'd from it; becauſe the Expanſive of the Elaſtick is too Weak to Produce that Effect, and the Moment of the Expanſive and Contractive in the Lead too Strong to admit of ſuch a Repulſion. 2. THE Elaſtick Body, Impinging upon a Quieſcent, and Fixt Unelaſtick, will not Rebound, or be Repelld from thence, for the Reaſons, before Alledg, in Caſ.17. Art. æ. 3. IF they meet each orther with an Equal Velocity, the Elaſtick Body will not Repell the Unelaſtick, but the Moment of the Unelaſtick, being Greater, will carry the Elaſtick to the ſame Side with it. caſ. 22. IF E=C, and e, in the ſame Bodies, and ?ct, and eC, in diſferent Ones; therefore C c, and C=c, and e E, and Ee; which Caſe likeviſe vill be Poſſible, i? C⸗ and ?E on both Hands, and may probably be that oſ Lead and Fire; Since the Contractive Force of Lead is Greater than the Contractive of Fire, and the Expanſive Force of the Fire is Greater than that of Lead, as alſo, the Expanſive Force of the Lead is Greater than the Contractive of the Fire, and the Expanſive of the Fire Greater than the Contractive of the Lead; From whence it comes to Paſs, that the Expanſive Force of the Fire, being Greater han that of Lead, Repells it, by which it's Ebullition is cauſed upon the Fuſion of t, and being Greater than the Contractive Force of Lead Fuſes it, for they Act the ame Way; and æ being c and Cf, that is, the Expanſive Force oſ the Lead, being being Greater than the Contractive of the Fire, and the Contractive of the Lead Greater than the Contractive of the Fire, will have no Effect, becauſe æ and C are in an Equal Balance with each other, and as E Acts with ?, C Acts againſt it. And this is, ſuppoſing Lead is Quieſcent, and Fire Acts upon it. For, as to Velocity in this Caſe, the Expanſive Force of the Fire is ſo Great, that no Communication oſ the Expanſive Force, as that of Velocity, can give any Moment to it, by which means it will At upon Lead with it's own Expanſive, which is Peculiar to it ſelf, and by it Diſſolve Firſt. and then Repell it, as has been before ſaid; And if Lead is carry'd againſt it with a certain Velocity, the whole Moment of the Expanſive of the Lead, join'd with it's Great Contractive, ill be ſo much Superior to the Expanſive of the Fire, which has but a Small Contractive belonging to it, that it ill Paſs through it; vith Little or No Oppoſitionn. And here we muſt obſerve in General, in Reſpect of theſe Concourſes, that Groſſer Expanſive Bodies Require a Velocity to Diſplay their Particular Actions, by ſuſpending their Gravitation, which Hinders and Suppreſſes Them; But it is not ſo in Fire, whoſe Vaſt Expanſive Force ſurmounts all Oppoſition to it from the Earth's Attraction. Caſ. 23. IF E=G and e , in the ſame Bodies, and E=e, and C/c, in diſferent Ones; therefore 2Z, and , and æ =C; and =C, which is Impoſſible. Caſ. 24. I§ EæC, and ec, in the ſame Bodies, and ?ce, and C/c, In different Ones; therefore Z=t, and Z2c, and C e, ſo that ſuppoſing ?=ct, and Ce; this will likewiſe be a Poſſible Caſe. TuE Remaining Caſes I ſhall only jut Mention, and leave to others to Inquire, which are Poſſible, and which not, and to what Kind of Elaſtick, and Unelaſtick Bodies they are Applicable, hich is eaſily done by Proceeding in the Method be: ſore ſet down. Caſ. 25. E=C,.e c Caſ. 26. E=C, ecſ Caſ. 27. EC, ec) Caſ. 28. E=C, ec Caſ. 29. E=C, ec Caſ. 30 E=C, ec cſ. 31. E=q, ec Caſ. 32. E=C, ec. Ee, C/c caſ. 33. E=C, ecC. : =c, eCC... . E=C, e in the ſame Bodies; and 3, c Cin diſferent Ones CcCaſ.35. EæC, ec Ee, Cc Caſ. 36. E=C, ec E&c, eC caſ. 37. E5C, et 1Eæe, Cc Caſ. 38. E=C, ec Ee, C/c Caſ. 39. E=C, ec j E=c, eC Caſ. 430. E=C; ec Ec, e=C 7 Caſ. 41. E=C, ec EZe, cc Caſ. 42. E= C, ec EZc, eC In the ſame Bodies. ; In different Ones: l ESC, e¢ Ee, C/c Ec, e/C i E=e, Cc EDC, e=c E&e, Cc : E=c, eC Each of the Diviſions ; EZG eeò in the Firit Column may ;52 E56 ſb onbi vith Every 350 ò one of the Diviſions in ⸗, Ee, C¢c the Second: Ee C: Ect, eC Ec, eC ii ESæ c&ZcEG e=c.) Ei, eC EC, ec EC, e=c FrOM FroM whence will Ariſe 84 Caſes more, which Added to 42, before Set down, ill Make 126, Poſſible and Impoſſible Ones, ſo that here cannot but be a ſuſficient Latitude for the Explaining of the Mutual Concourſe of all Bodies; Eſpecially, when we likewiſe Conſider, that theſc Forces may be Equal, Greater or Leſs than cach other in an Infinite Number of Degrees, thus 35 3, 4 4, 100= 100, &r. 107, or3, or 3, or any Number below it, and s  10, or 50, or 1000, or any Number above it; from whence it will follow, that if the Pèculiar Expanſive and Contractive Forces of Bodies are varyd to Infinity, as it is Reaſonable to think they ate, which muſt cauſe Effects very Diſferent upon their Meeting each other, the foregoing Theory will Account for all of them; Whereas the Modern and Receivd Explication of ſuch Concourſe will be Infinitely Defective and Imperfect, which ſuppoſes no Innate Forces in Bodies, but that they are Similar and Homogeneous, and are only Acted by Two Imaginary Ones, Simple Impulſe and Elaſticity. Waar has been hitherto ſaid is upon the Suppoſition of the Velocities being Equal, but, if they are Various, there will be new Combinations Produc'd, and a Series of Caſes ſtill Different from the Former. S. 35. WEN we have gone thro' this Theory of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and have Determin'd all the Poſſible Caſes, it will be then eaſy for us to Reſolve the following Problems. I. WHAT Vill be the Effect of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, one falling upon the other, which is Quieſcent, and Fixt, with a Certain, a Greater, or a Leſs Velocity. 2. WaT vill be rh] Effe| of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, one falling upon the other, which is not Fixt, but is Quicſcent in a Certain, a Greater, or Læſs Degree, with a Certain, a Greater, or a Leſs Velocity. 3. WHAT Vill be the Efiedt of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, one falling upon the other, which is in a Centain, a Greater, or Leſs Motion the ſame Way, with a Certain, a Greater, or Leſs Velocity. 4. WaT Will be the Efcò of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, one falling upon the other, which is in a Cemain, a Greater, or Leſs Motion the Contrary Way, with a Certain, a Greater, or a Leſs Velocity. 5. WHAT Will be the Eect of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, falling the onc upon the other, whoſc Undaſticity is Greater, or Leſs than the Former, with their ſeveral Vaæ/ riations of Quieſcence, and Velocity, mentiond above. S. Wuar will be the Effet of Two Bodies, the one falling upon the other, the one Elaſtick, and rhe other Unelaſtick, in Equal or Different Degrees of thoſe Forces, vith their ſeveral Variations of Quieſcence, and Velocity, mention'd above. 7. WHAT vill be the Efe? of Two Elaſtick Bodies, in Equal or Different Degrees of thoſe Forces, the one falling upon the other, with their ſcveral Variations of Quieſcence, and Velocity, mention'd above. 5. 36. IN Relation to all theſ Problems, I ſhall only take Notice ſand which we have in Part already done) of Two Unelaſtick Bodies, Two, which are Elaſtick, and Two, one of which is Elatick, and the other Unelaſtick, and where one falls upon the other, which is Lieſom: and Fixt; becauſe all the other Caſes are only Differencd by the ſoveral inations of theſe. AND Firſt, if an Unelaſtick Body falls upon another (Which is Equally Unelaſtic, and is Quieſcent and Fixt) with a Certain Velocity Ariſing from it's Gravitation, it vill Seem to Cloſe and Unite vith it; becauſe there is an Expanſive Force in the Velocity, which Acts the ſame Way vith the Contractive of the Quieſcent, and is Superior to the Contractive of the falling Body, as the Contractive Force of the Earth is Superior to the Comtradtive Force of ſuch Body, and which, Acting contrary to it, has the Nature of the Expanfive; from whence ĩt is, that a Bullet of Lead, Dropt upon a flat Picce of it, does not Rebound from it, but Endeavours to Cement and Join with iĩt. AND iſ there is a Greater Expanſive Force or Velocity, Communicated to the Bullet by the Hand, ĩt ſtill leſs Rebounds, but makes Impre ſſions into it, and Indentations in it, or Tends to a Situation below the Lead, on which it falls; becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Lead falling, is Increaſed, and ſtill Aſts with the Contractive of the Quieſcent, and in the ſamę Direction: If the Lead is not Fixt, as in Pendul lums, lums, or is in Motion the Same, or the Contrary Way, vith the falling Bullet, tho Allowances are to be made for the Expanſive Force of Velocity in the Lead, on which the Impaction is made, yet what foregoes holds true, when we have made thoſe Allowances; Thus TWo Equal Leaden Bullets, Meeting with an Equal Velocity, vill loſe their Motion, becauſe the Contractive Force of each, Acting tovards it's own Center cauſes no Repulſion, and the Equal Expanſive Forces oſ the Velocities deſtroy each other. l Ir muſt be alſo obſervd, that as the Unelaſtick Force of Lead is Different from Sir iſ. Newt that of Clay, ſo the Effect of one Piece of Clay falling upon another, which is Optic. Queri Quieſcent and Fixt, will be likewiſe in Degree Different, but the Solution of the Adheſion of one to the other, will be the ſame as before; And the like may be ſaid of Lead and Clay in their Mutual Concourſe. SECOND, If an Elaſtick Body falls upon another, which is Elaſtick, with a Certain sen, uiy Velocity Ariſing from it's Gravitation, as a Ball of Marble upon a Picce of Marble, Batiut nett which is Quieſcent and Fixt, it will be Repelld from thence; becauſe the Expanſive ſn ach Force of the Marble, which falls, Acts with the Expanſive Force or Velocity proceed- eibæ. ing from Gravitation, but the Expanſive Force of the Marble, on which the Impaction is made, Acts Contrary to the Former Force, and being not only Quieſcent, but Fixt, the Superior Incurring and Expanſive Force, not being able to ſpend it ſelf that Way, muſt neceſſarily Reſult from it, to which the Repulſive Force of the Fixt Marble vill alſo Contribute. Ir this Expanſive Force is Increasd by an Acceſſion of Velocity Impred from the Hand, the Impinging Marble will Rebound the Higher; If Two Balls of Marble Meet each other, they will mutually Repell each other from their Expanſive Force Acting Contrary Ways, and derivd from their Elaſticity and Velocity; and if the Velocity is Increas'd, the Repulſe will be the Stronger: Farther, if a Marble is let fall upon a Elint Glaſs, which is a more Elaſtick Body than Marble, it will Rebound more, than when it fell upon Marble, becauſe the Reſiliency is Greater from the Greater Expanſive Force of the Glaſi; and if Two Glaſs Balls Meet, they will be more forcibly Repell'd than Two Balls of Marble; or, if the Glaſs Balls Mcer cach other vith a Greater Velocity, they will be more ſtrongly Repell'd, than if they met with a Leſs; becauſe on both Hands the Expanſive Force is Increasd. I ſhall only here add, that upon the ſame Principles are ſolvd the Experiments, Mr.Haſib] made by the moſt Judicious and Ingenious Mr. Haulsbee upon the Preſent Subjoct of ꝑrpeinæx Repulſion, even in Reſpect of Different Mediums, (Which yet is the leat Thing to 3 be Conſiderd in rhe Rebounding of Different Bodies, where their Innate and Intrinſick Forces are to be Examin'd) for a Thicker Medium, being more Contractive, hinders the Expanfive, by which Reſilition is Perform'd, and a Thinner Medium, being leſs Contractive or more Expanſive, Promotes it. TuirD, If an Unelaſtick Body falls upon an Elaſtick, which is Quieſcent and Fixt, #ũy a uvith a Certain Velocity, Ariſing from it's Gravitation, it will be Repuls'd from æſi 3ò thence, thus a Ball of Lead, falling upon Marble, will Rebound from it; On the a Eſſich i Contrary, If an Elaſtick Body falls upon an Unelaſtick, as a Ball of Marble upon htrLead, there is no ſuch Repulſion, but the Marble Endeavours to Cloſe and Unite Enpic+ ſull vith the Lead, and ſtrikes off in a Lateral Direction. u-/ m THE Reaſon of which is, becauſe in the Former Caſe, the Contractive of the Lead, s and the Expanſive of the Marble Act Upwards, and in the Latter Downvards Ueires æiih i in the ſame Direction; For the Contractive of the Lead Acts towards it ſelf, and ſriæ æ the Expanſive of the Marble from it ſelf, in the Firſt Inſtance, that is, the ſame Way Upwards; and in the Second, the Expanſive of the Marble Acts from it ſelf, and the Contractive of the Lead towards it ſelf, that is, the ſame Way Downvards. . AxD in the Firſt Caſe, if the Velocity is Increas'd, the Repulſion is likewiſe; becauſe Acting againt the Expanſive of the Marble, and it's Progreſs being there ſtopt, it is Returnd backwards in the Direction of the Expanſive, and the Contractive of the Lead has Leſs Force, by how much the Expanſive of the Velocity is Greater. BUT in the Second, If the Velocity is Increas'd, the Marble Tends with a Greater Force towards an Union vith the Lead, on which it Impinges, and is ſtill farther from from Reboundings; becauſe the Velocity Acts the ſame Way with the Expanſive ol the Marble, and with the Contractive of the Lead, that is, Downwards. I might here farther Enlarge, but ſhall Ieave the Remaining Particulars in this Doctrine, to be Traced out and Examin'd by others, who ſhall think it worth thei Leiſure and their Inquiry, being Satisſied in having Pointed out the way ſor Greater Advances and Improvements in this kind of Knowledge, than has been hitherto At tempted by any of the Mechanick Philoſophers: I ſhall only here Add, that, ſincc Hydroſtaticks are the Laws, which Ariſe from the Concourſe of Solid and Fluid Bodies, They likewiſe are Explicable by theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces, as we ſhall ſew, vhen ve come to Treat of Them. 5. 37. HAvIG conſiderd Action and Re-action, and the ſeveral Laws of Unela ſlick and Elaſtick Bodies, ve are next to Inquire into the Compoſition of Forces; in Reſpect of which, the Diagonal Force is ſaid to be Equal to that of the Sides ol a Parallelogram, drawn from the ſame Point vith it; Thus 4 D is Equal, in it's Joint Force, to 4 B and AC, the Separate Ones: Becauſe 4, in it's Progreſs to B, is not Interrupted by the Force, which Directs it from 4 to C, nor 4 to q, by that, which carries it from A4 to B, ſo that it ſou'd not Proceed ſo far, as B on the one Hand, and as far as C on the Other; that is, both theſe Forces are Conſiſtent, and by Conſequence muſt meet in D; I call theſe Forces Equal, the Diagonal to the Lateral, becauſe the Firſt are Reſolv'd into the Laſt, and the Laſt Compound the Firſt, according to this Philoſophy, in it's uſe of this Compoſition of Forces. s. 38. IN Anſwer to which we muſt Firſt ſay, that, by Euclid, Elem. 1. Prop. 47. Schol. Tacquet, it 4BDC is a Square, 4D is Incommenſurable with the Side 43 or AC, how therefore both together ſiould be Equal to 4D, is not to be Explind, ſince the Forces are as the Spaces, which they Deſcribe in the ſame Time; therefore there muſt be a Thicker and more Compreſ'd Force in a 4 D, and a more Thin and Diluted one in 4B and 4C, and which will be Equal the one to the orher; but this is Impoſſible, according to the Demonſtration Referd to, becauſe theſe Quantities are Incommenſurable, and have no Common Meaſure, by which their Equality, or any other Proportion betwixt them, can be Aſſerted; I muſt own this may be, that a Thicker and a more Conſtipated, or a Stronger Force, may be Reſolvd into Two Thinner, and more Diluted or Weaker, and that they may be Expreſ'd by theſe Lines, ſuppoſing 4D a more Conſtipated one, and 4 B, AC leſs ſo; but this is what, neither the Preſent Mathematicks, nor the Preſent Philoſophy, or Compoſition of Forces conſiders; and therefore, I argue againſt this Abſtracted Reaſoning in the Compoſition of Forces, from another Abſtracted Reaſoning in the Demonſtrations of Geometry, which I ſay are Inconſiſtent, as Abſtracted Reaſonings, which are the Mere Creatures of Men's Minds will generally be found to be; and not only in theſe, but in all other Studies, as in Logicks, Metaphyſicks, and even in Critique, and the Explanations of Authors, in which there are very Singular Inſtancesof Thoſe, vho delight more in Abſtracted Fancies of their ovn Minds, than in any Real and Solid Reaſoning. 5. 39. A Sccond Objection is, that as the Angle BAC is Greater or Leſs, the Velocity of 4 to D will be Leſs or Greater, vhen yet the Velocities given of 4 to B and C are ſupposd to be Unalterd; Becauſe where the Angle is Leſs, as in 74K, the Direction of the Velocities, which were before in 48, 4 C, Tends the ſame Way, but where the Angle is Greater, as in GAF, contrary Ways, and thereſore the Velocity is Increasd in 4 D in the Firſt Caſe, and Diminiſd in the Laſt; This, ve ſay, is a Second Objection againſt the Preſent Compoſition of Forces, ſince, if AD is not certain and determin'd in the Force, which it Expreſſes, and ſince ſeveral Forces are the moſt naturally Repreſented by ſeveral Lines, 4 B and AC in their various Inclinations and their differing Degrees oſ Velocity cannot be truly Expreſi'd by õne and the ſame Diagonal 4D, nor can 4D be juſtly Reſolv}d into them. S. 40. BESIDES. S. 40. BESIDES Which, ſuppoſing the Forces, 4B, AC, cod be Expreſt'/d by the Diagonal 4D, it is yet Evident, that 4D cannot be Reſolvd into the Forces, 4 B, AcC, at Pleaſure, that is, ve may not draw Lines with what Inclination we pleaſe to A4D; or, which is the ſame, altho' the Forces, 4B, A C, being known, their Compound is determin'd by the Diagonal 4D, yet, the Diagonal being known it is not Conſequent, that the Forces, which form it, ſnod be, becauſe there may be a Thouſand Different Sides of a Parallelogram drawn to the ſame Diagonal; notwithſtanding which, there is nothing more Common in the Philoſophy, which this Notion is brought to Eſtabliſh, than the Reſolving the Diagonal into any Lines, which it finds the moſt convenient for i's Purpoſe, as is Evident in the Explanation it give: of the Doctrine of Mechanicks, and in the Solutions it propoſes of the Revolution of the Secondary Planets about their Primary. r: 5. 41. Tuus far we have conſiderd the Force repreſented by the Diagonal, and from thence ſhall Proceed to thoſe of the Sides of the Parallelogram, which vere ſaid to be varyd according to 4B and 4C, more or leſs, oppoſing each other in the Direction of thoſe Forces, that is, as the Angle B4C was Greater or Leſs; but if this will not be Allowed, and if the Velocity from 4 to B is given, and that of 4 to , and it is ſaid, that, in whatever Direction they are, they will continue the ſame, becauſe if 4 Acts towards B with a certain Force, and towards C with anorher certain Force, ſince the Fountain or Source of Action is ſuppoſed to be in 4, vhatever Inclination the Lines, 4 B, AC, have to each other, it can be of no Importance to the Altering of the Velocities propagated from thence, let this Reaſoning then be Allowd; ] IF therefore 4B and AC have their fixt and determin'd Velocities in any Inclination we can mention, it ill be Impoſſible, that 4D the Diagonal ſhould expreſi them; becauſc, if 4E is made Equal to 4B, E D will be one Side of the Parallelogram, to which it is Inconceivable  C ſould be Equal, which is ſuppoſed to be the Expreſſion of it's Velocity, and to be Unalter'd. S. 42. ANOTHER Objection is, that 45 and 4 C muſt, cach of them, Act with the ſame Velocities, in whatever Indinarion they are, or not; If they do, the foregoing Section is Valid in it's Argument againſt the Preſent Compoſition of Forces, if they do not, ſince the Velocities are Diminiſd by Oppoſing cach other, or Increasd by Concurring in differing Inclinations, it will be the ſame, as Contracting or Prolong ing the Sides of the Parallelogram in the ſame Inclination, and conſcquently, the Diagonal 4D vill be ſuitably made Shorter or Enlarg'd, which is far from agreeing with this Doctrine, which ſuppoſes, that the Diagonal may continue the ſame, altho the Sides of the Parallelogram are Infinitely varyd; thus, if 48, 4C are Equal, and recede from each other, till they are perfectly Oppoſite, the Forces, Acting from A in contrary Directions, will mutually hinder each others Progreſ, if they approach each other, till they Coincide, the Velocity will be the Sum of both, and therefore all the intermediate Effects, produced in the ſeveral Inclinations of 4 8, 4C, hould not be Expreſsd by one and the ſame Diagonal Line 4D, but by an Infinite Number of different Lines of various Lengths betwixt o, repreſented by a Point, and AB+ 4C, vhich repreſents the Sum of the Forces. S. 43. THERE is likewiſe a farther Thing to be conſiderd in this Doctrine, namely, that AF, AG, Parallel and Equal to GD, F D, arc conceivd to be the ſame in all Reſpects with 4C and 48, in their Relation to the Diagonal 4D, and all the Parallelograms, drawn to the ſeveral Parts of 4D from the ſeveral Parts of 4C and AB on the one Hand, or from A4F and 4G on the orher, exactly Correſpond in their Diagonal Portions of 4D, from whence it follows, that the Reſult of the Forces on both Hands are Equal, if the ſame Lines or Parts of a Line are Expreſſive of the ſame Forces, which they ought to be; Whereas it is confeſ'd, that, vhen the Forces Concurr, that is, vhen 4B Approaches to 4C, or when they are Oppos'd, as in their Retiring from cach other, the Reſult of the Forces are not Equal, and conſequently cannot be Expreſ'd by the ſame Diagonal Portions; that is, the Preſent Doctrine ſuppoſes the Reſult of the Forces to be Equal, and not Equal at the ſame Time, which is an Abſurdity and a Contradiction. C c 5 42. W⸗ 6. 44. E muſt alſo add, that even the Foundation of this. Doctrine of the Compoſition of Forces is not certain, for if a Force is propagated Two Different and even Contrary Ways from A, it cannot be altered from thence, becauſe Two ſuch Force: vill have no Effe&t or Influence upon cach other, and therefore 48 and 4 C may be both deſcribed without any Diagonal at all, that is, if we conſider only the Action of Two Forces ſrom the ſame Point, and that any thing more is Provd from this Figure is not Certain, ſince the Sides of a Parallelogram may be deſcribed by Two Forces, without ſuppoſing them to be Compounded into a Diagonal; if Two Force: are not ſuppoſcd to Act from the ſame Point, but upon it, vhat has been Alledgſd in . 42 and 43 vill be Valid, if the other, 5. 41 will. S 45. FARTHER, If 4 is Acted by Two Diſferent Forces repreſented by 4 B, Ac, it will not yet follo, that the Compound of them ſhould Proceed in the Diagonal aD; becauſe aſter the Action at A4 they are ſuppoſed to preſerve their Original Velocities, 4 B and 4C, otherviſe they would not meet in the Point D, which is upon the Hypotheſis, that 4 has the Force to carry it to B, and toq, in which the Parallel Lines to them CD and BD Concurr; if therefore 4 preſerves it's Velocity to B and to C, and conſequently it's Direction, for by thoſe Lines and thoſe Directions both the Velocities are Expreſ'd, how they ſoud preſerve them in the Diagonal 4D, where the Direction and the Line is Different, will be Impoſſible to Explain. s. 46. ON the Contrary, If 4B and A q, aſter the Action upon 4, do not preſerve their Velocities, that is, if 4, by being Acted upon, goes in the Line 4D, ſo as the Velocities of 4B and 4 C are Changd, 4 D vill not be neceſſarily the Diagonal of a Parallelogram, becauſe the Sides of it, and the Velocities repreſented by them, will be Deſtroyd; that is, ſuitable to what ve ſaid before, in §. 44, the Sides of the Parallelogram vill continue without a Diagonal, and in this, the Diagonal or rather the Line 4D, vithout any Sides, to which ĩt is Refer'd, and Half, or a Quarter, or any other Part, of 4D may repreſent the Compound of 4 B, AC. S. 47. THE Truth is in any Compoſition of Motion, or of Forces, as of 48, A4C, it goes a Greater or Leſſer Length in 4D, not as 4 B or AC are the Sides of a Parallelogram, but according as the Forces are Greater or Leſs which Act; becauſe if 45 and A4C vere to approach Infinitely near to Each other, 4 woud be carried with the Force of 48 + 4C in a Direct Line, which wou'd be Greater than 4D the Diagonal; and where 4B and AC are as far from Each other as poſſible, the Compoſition of Forces will be much Leſs than the Diagonal, being reduc'd to a Point, and the ſame may be ſaid of all the intermediate Degrees of Compoſition, with the Allowance of Greater and Leſs in Proportion, according to what has been before mentiond. S. 48. IF nothing of what, we hitherto have argu'd, was certain, this is acknowledgſd, that, the Forces being given, the Diagonal is known, but, the Diagonal being Enown, the Forces Expreſ'd by the Sides of the Parallelogram are not, ſince, according to this Doctrine, there may be ſeveral Sides of a Parallelogram drawn to the ſame Diagonal; but if, upon the Diagonal being known, the Sides are yet Latent and Undiſcoverd, this Philoſophy will want it's main Support, both in the Explanation of Mechanicks, and of the Revolutions of the Secondary Planets, in which it takes it ſor granted, that, the Diagonal being known, the Sides arc no Ionger a Secret. S. 29. WE ſmall laſtly ſubjoin, that it is Impoſſible in the preſent Caſe, if the Forces, 4 8, AC, are Compounded into 4 D, but they ſhon'd again be Reſolvd into them in Reſpect of their Length, unleſs D can be ſibrter than 4B and A4C taken together, and yet Expreſs the ſame Force; that is, where Forces are Reduced to Lines, thoſe Lines are Expreſſive of them, or not; if they are, it is abſurd to ſay, that 48AC is = 4D, if they are not, 4 B and AC are not the Expreſſions oſ the Forces, which they are, notwithſtanding, made to repreſent, which is a Contradiction. If it be ſaid, in Reſpect of theſe Two laſt Sections, and of this whole Doctrine, That 4D may be Reſolv'd into 47 and 4X or A4ID, into 4B and 4C or ABD, into AG6 and 4F or 4GD; becauſe they are all the ſame, that is, becauſe they are Forces perfectly Equivalent; and if it be farther ſaid, that theſe Forces are the Same or Equivalent, becauſe, by the Law of Action and Re-action, o Vhich this Compoſition of Forces is made a Corollary, where the Force 4ſ is Leſs Leſs than 4D, the Concurrent Force 4&, in the Inclination 74 X will make it juſt Equal to it, or the Force A7ID =AD, on the Contrary, Vhere the Force 4G is Greater than 4D, by the ſame Lav of Action and Re-action, the Oppoſite Force AF, in the Inclination GAF, will take away ſo much from it, as to make it cxactly Equal to it, or 4GD=AD, and ſo the Nearer 47 and 4 X Approach to Each other, they vill come Nearer to an Equality, that is, 4ID will come Nearer to a Coincidence with 4D, and the farther 4G and AF Retire from Each other, the Longei they will be, that is, their Forces will be the Greater, as their Oppoſition is ſo, in Order to make them Equal to the ſame Force 4D; If this is ſaid, We Anſver, I. THAT it is not Provd, that the Concurrence of 47 with 4 , in the Inclination 7AK, or that the Oppoſition of 4F to 4G, in the Inclination GAF, adds juſt ſo much to the one, and takes off juſt ſo much from the other, as to make them, on both Hands, Equal to 4D; Eſpecially, ſince betwixt 4G, which is Greater than AD, and A B which is Leſs, there muſt be a Line, which is Equal to it, as for Inſtance 4L, and conſequently it's Oppoſite Force, which Acts againſt it, muſt either have no Force at all, and then there is an End of theſe Oppoſite Forces, or if it has; AL together with it will be Leſs than 4D, contrary to what vas proposd to be Demonſtrated. ] 2. THEREFORE, Where 41 or A B are Leſs, and 4G Greater than 4D or A L, their Concurrent or Oppoſite Forces will not make them Equal to 4D. 3. SINCE AT and 4K, AG and AF, are Velocities performd in the ſame Time, they will be in themſelves Different, but how the Addition of Two Different Velocities, which Concurr, or the Subſtraction of Two from Each orher, which are Oppoſite, oud be Equal to one Uniform Velocity in 4D vill be hard to Explain. m GRANTING yet all, hich can be deſird, ſince there may be a Thouſand Diſferent Velocities and Forces in 4D, for it may be deſcrib'd by any Force or Velocity Given, how the ſame Sides of a Parallelogram, as 48, 4C or BD, ſould be Equal to all thoſe Varying Forces, cannot be ſiewn; Thus ſuppoſing 4D to Expreſ the Force of Gravitation of one Body to another, and that 43 and BD vill likeviſe do it, which is Preſumd in the Theory of the Secondary Planets, if, notwithſtanding, there are Different Forces of Gravitation Expreſſible by the ſame Line 4D, A B and BD conſiderd only as Sides of a Parallelogram, of which 4D is the Diagonal, vill not be ſufficient to Repreſent them; that is, this Reaſoning proceeds upon Abſtracted Lengths and Lines, whereas, according to the Geometry of slids; there may be very Different Forces or Quantities in the ſame Abſtracted Lengths, as we have there endeavourd to Evince. 5. 50. APTER conſidering the Foundation, on which this Compoſition of Forces ſtands, ve might next Examine, what uſe is made of it, but if the Foundations of a Doctrine are not True, the Applications of it muſt be Falſe, and therefore we may be juſtly excuſed the Trouble of a farther Inquiry on this Head. HOWEVER to confirm this Law, the Firſt Phænomenons, which are Producd, are thoſe of Mechanicks; the Explanation of which, from the preſcnt Lemma, if any One is deſirous to ſee, will be fully Informd from the Reverend and Ingenious Perfon before Referd to, in his Comments upon Rohault, and from the Celebrated Author of this Compoſition of Forces; It vas indeed my Intention, according to the Method preſcrib'd in the Preface to theſe Philoſophical Tracts, to have gone thro' this, as well as the ſeveral other Parts of the Modern Philoſophy; but if we can have no Satisfaction in theſe Fundamental Maxims of it, there is no Reaſon to Expect the Arguings from them will be more Concluſive; We have likewiſe already conſiderd the Principles of Mechanicks, and ſiewn them to be Precarious or Falſe; and vhat the Preſent Account of them alledges depends upon much the ſame Principles, and all the Sagacity, which is Evident in it, is only thiss Namely, the Collecting of ſeveral Caſes, and Uniting them into one, to wit, the Reſolurion oſ the Diagonal Force into the Lateral; whereas thoſe ſeveral Caſes have been Provd to be wrongly Accounted for, and this Principle of the Reſolution of Forces to be wholl; Chimerical. l C c 2 5 51. Att s. 51. ALL therefore, which we ſhall farther do in the way of Confutation is only this, to conſider the Phyſical Account given of the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, of the Primary and Secondary Planets in their Ellipſes, and the Comets in their Parabolas, as alſo oſ the Flux and Reflux of the Sea;3 we ſhall then Examine into the Doctrine of Hydroſtaticks, and into the Solutions concerning the Barometer, and if any Thing more is deſird of us, we are ready to do what lies in our Pover, to ſatisfy all Impartial Inquirers into Nature, that the Principles, upon Which they Proceed, in any Caſc Propos'd, are Equally inſuſficient to the Explaining of it The next Thing therefore, vhich will Engage our Enquiries, will be the Method o Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſons, which is the Baſis and Foundation of the Phyſical Aſtronomy. C H AP. III Concerning the Method of Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſons. 5. 1. HE Firſt Aſſertion, in the Method of Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſons, by which the whole following Philoſophy is Demonſtrated, is; That Quanti: ties, or the Proportions or Reaſons of them, which in a Time given continually Tend to an Equality, and by that Means are capable of Approaching nearer to each other than according to any Diſſerence Given, at Length become Equal. Ir it is denyd, let their Laſt Difference be D, therefore they cannot come nearer to an Equality, than according to that Given Difference, contrary to the Hypotheſis which ſuppoſes, that they may Approach nearer to each other than in any Given Difference. S. 2. FirsT, In Reply to which we ſay, that, what Quantities are, ſhowd be Determin'd, before we can Afſfirm any thing concerning them, or the Reaſons and Proportions of them; for if by Quantitics arc meant and intended Quantities ir General, this Lemma will not be true; ſince it is thought, at leaſt by the Mathe maticks now receivd, to be Demonſtrated, that, tho' the Curve of an Hyperbola and the Aſymptote of it continually Approach to Each orher, yet they will never Meet; that, in the Extraction of the Root of 2, or of any other Surd or Ineffable Root, there is a Conſtant Approximation to Truth, but no Arriving at it; that, in Two Parallel Lines with a Perpendicular Dropt betwixt them, if Lines are drawn from any one Point, in cither of the Parallel Lines, Tranverſe the Perpendicular, to the Oppoſite Parallel, they will never Exhauſt the Points of the Perpendicular, tho' they continually come nearer to the doing of it; and that the Nature of Quantities in General is, that they are Diviſible to Infinity; which if ſo, this Lomma cannot be true, becauſc it ſuppoſes the Laſt Difference to be nothing, or which is the ſame, that in all Quantities there is a Point, which is Indiviſible. S. 3. SECOND, Another Argument againſt the Univerſal Truth of this Lemma is, that it Preſumes in Quantities it's oWn Abſtractions of them, that is, that all Quantity in Figures is Reſolved into Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs; vhereas in the Geometry of Solids, oo of Matter, and in the Principles of Philoſophy, Chap. 4 S. 11. B. 1. We have Endeavourd to ſhev, that a Line of the ſame Length, or a Surface of the ſame Length and Breadth, or a Solid of the ſame Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, may, and often really do's Expreſs Different Quantities; And yet this Lemma only conſiders the ſame Length, Breadth, or Depth, as Expreſſive of the ſame Quantity. S. 4. THIRD, The Preſent Lemma, by what follows, is meant of Right-Lind Figures, Inſcri'd and Circumſcribd to a Curve, which by diminiſhing of them Inſinitely will be at Length Equal to it; The Contrary of which we have Provũ in the ſaid rriaciples and Geometry, to vit, that no Part of any Right Line, Inſcrib'd or Circumſcribd to a Curve, can ever be a Meaſure of it, and into which we ſhall farther Examine in the Succeeding Sections. s. 5. THE 5. 5. THE Second Lemma or Aſertion in this Philoſophy, Previous to it's De- Th Sumi monſtrations, is; That if In any Figure, as A ac E, there ou'd be Inſcribed as many àææ æParallelograms, as we pleaſe, A5, Be, Cã, &. containd smt Neut 1r under Equal Baſes 4 B, BC, CD, &. and Sides Bb, ſincip 1. Nb Cc, Dã, &. Parallel to the Side of the Figure 463 EX and the Parallelograms aXbl, b Lcm, c Md n, &c. ſmoud be Fill'd up or Compleated, and afterwards the Latitude of theſe Parallelograms ſoud be Diminiſid, and the Number of them Increaſed to Infinity; What o then? It then peremptorily Affirms and Pronounces; That the Lat or Ultimate Reaſons or Proportions, which the Inſcrib'd Figure 4 Xb L Mà D, the Circumſcribdd A4a lbmend oE, and the Curvilinear Aabe d E obrain to cach other, are thoſe of an E: quality. A EF  DP E BECAUSE the Difference of the Figure Inſcrib'd and Circumſcribd is the Sum of the Parallelograms KIALm+ 2Mn  Do, that is, as their Baſes are all Equal, the Rectangle under the Baſis b and the Sum of the Altitudes 4 will be Equal to ſuch Difference. namely, the Rectangle 4 Bla, but this Rectangle is Leſs than any given, by the Latitude 4B being Diminiſ'd to Infinity, and therefore, according to the Firſt Lemma, the Figure Inſcribd and Circumſcribd, and much more the Curvilinear Figure, which is Intermediate to them, vill be at Length Equal. . E. D. s. 6. BUT this Demonſtration fails upon ſeveral Accounts; FIrsr, becauſe the Na- This Demoture of Infinity is not ſo clearly and fully Explaind, that we ſou'd be certain, that ſjyim reè Aal B, upon an Infinite Diminution, will be Equal to Nothing, or that the Laſt i riher ſup Difference will be ſo; for to ſay, according to Lemma the Firſt, that the Laſt Dif- ſo æiui ſerence is Equal to Nothing, becauſe the Quantities are ſuppos'd to Approach nearer ., ũ is ſul to cach other, than in any Given Difference, is either to Aſfirm, that the Laſt Dif- pſe: a Conn ference is Equal to Nothing, becauſe it is ſupposd not to be Something, or elſe it is to Affirm, that the Laſt Difference is Equal to Nothing, becauſe there is no End of any Finite or Given Difference; If the Firſt is Intended, it is Proving a Thing by ſuppoſing the Thing to be Provd; If the Laſt, it is a Contradiction; ſince, if there is no End of the Finite Difference, there cannot be a Laſt Diſference, nor can that Laſt Difference be Equal to Nothing. s. 7. SECOND, As Aa l B is not Evidenc'd to be Equal to Nothing, even upon the Tris DumSuppoſition of the Preſent Abſtractions in Mathematicks, ſo it Will be much leſ ſ/uææ t⸗ Provd, if we ſhow, that the Quantities, hitherto Receiv'd in that Science, and Af- cauſe ilæ al firm'd in this Lemma, are falſly Stated and Defin'd; For, in this Demonſtration, it ſirattiom x is ſupposd, that the Lines, 4E, Aa, whether Apply'd to the Curve 4E, or to the u⸗ v m Parallelograms, vhoſe Baſes are 48, BC, CD, DE, and the Sides Meaſurd by Por- æi, are m tions of the Line æ4, are the ſame; whereas it has been already Demonſtrated in thę ſuPrinciples of Philoſophy, Chap. 4. S. 11. B. 1, and in the Geomerry of Silids, or of Matter, that Lines, which are the ſame in Reſpect of their Length, Receive Different Values, and are Quantities Infinitely Different in their Nature; Thus, if æE is the Curve of a Parabola, a 4 vill be a Line of vhich 4Eæ is as it's Square Root, if of a Cubical Paraboloeid, 4E will be as it's Cube-Root, if of a Biquadratical Paraboloeid, as it's Biſquare-Root, &; And conſcquently, if AE is Multiplyd into æ 4, both of them being conſiderd as Simple Lengths, a Common Parallelogram will Ariſe of the ſame Nature and Conſtitution with thoſe, which are Inſcribd and Circumſcribd to the Curve, where the bare Lengths of the Lines, and the Multiplication of them only Enter into the Compoſition of the Figure; but if 4E is the Ordinate of a Parabola, it will be as the Square- Root of a 4, and Multiplyd into it, a Parallelogram vill Ariſe, which, in Reſpect of the Former, vill be as the Root of æ 4 to 4E, which was before as a 4; If AE is the Ordinate of a Cubical Paraboloeid, it will be as the Cube-Root of 4 4, and Mulriplyd into it, vill form a Parallelogram, which, in Reſpect of the Firſt, will be as the Cube-Root of 4 4 to 4E, which vas originally as a 4, &; From whence it is Evident, that the Reaſoning in this Lemma cannot be juſt, which Imagines, that the Parallelograms Inſcribd or Circumſcrib'd to the Curve are of the ſame Nature and Conſtitution Conſtitution vith thoſe, which are form'd from the Multiplication of the Parts of the Lines, conſiderd not as bare Lengths, but as Abſciſſes and Ordinates of ſuch Curves; From whence it follows, that when the Square of a Curve Figure is Compard with the Area of it, ſuch a Square is to be made uſe of, which is Agrecable and Correſpondent to the Nature of the Figure, which is Propos'd to be Squar'd; Thus in the Parabola the Ordinate is as the Square-Root of the Abſciſs, in a Triangle the Ordinate is as the Abſciſs, and conſequently, the Ordinate of the Triangle Multiplyd into it's Abſciſs, ill Produce a Different Square or Parallelogram from that, vhich is formd from Multiplying the Ordinate of the Parabola into it's Abſciſs, altho', as to Length, the Ordinates and Abſciſſes of the Parabola and Triangle arę Equal. Ve have taken the Liberty to add this, not only in Confutation of the Preſent Lemma, but as we had before done in our Geometry of Matter, ſo again here to ſiew of vhat little Force thoſe Arguments are, which are Alledg'd againſt the Square of the Circle Proposd in that Geometry, and Which depend upon Figures, which are Inſcribd or Circumſcribd to it; ſince, if what we have ſaid is True, and ſince all Figures, vhich are Inſcrib'd or Circumſcribd, are Reſolv'd into Trſangles, whoſe Square ill be that of a Triangle, and farther, ſince the Square of a Curve is not of the ſame Nature or Conſtitution with the Square of a Triangle, it is Maniſeſt, that no Arguments can Affect us, which are derivd from ſuch Ways oſ Reaſoning. 5. 83. THE Third Aſſertion in this Method of Naſcent and Evancſcent Reaſons is, That the ſame Ultimate Reaſons, before-mentiond, are likewiſe thoſe of Equality, even where the Latitudes of the Parallelograms 4 3, BC, CD, DE are Unequal, and vhere they are all Diminiſ'd to Infinity. For let 4F be Equal to the Greateſt Latitude, and the Parallelogram F A4 a f Compleated, This will be Greater than the Difference of the Inſcrib'd and Circumſcrib'd Figurc 4Bla, but it's Latitude 4F being Diminiſ'd to Infinity, it will become Leſs than any Given Rectangle. FROM vhence theſe Corollaries are Dravn; I. THAT the Ultimate Sum of the Evancſcent Parallelograms Coincides with the Curvilincal Figure. 2. AND much more the Rectilincal Figure, which is Comprehended within the Chords oſ the Evancſcent Arcs æb, be, c ãd, at laſt Coincides with the Curvilineal 3. As alſo the Rectilineal Figure, which is Circumſcrib'd by the Tangents of the ſame Arcs. 4. AND therefore theſe Ultimate Figures, as to the Perimeters æc E, are not Rectilineal, but the Curvilincal Limits of Rectilineal Figures. 5. 9. As t0 the Deſign of this Lemma, it ſecms to be nothing more than to make that Univerſal, which was Partially Demonſtrated before, ſince 4E was only conſiderd, as divided into Equal Parts; Let us therefore now ſuppoſe it to be Diſtinguiſd into Unequal, and the Caſe in Reſpect of the Ultimate Reaſons will be the ſame, becauſe, if 4F fa is Greater than 4 Bla, and conſequently, the Difference Kf Greater than X/, which upon an Infinite Diminution Vaniſhes, it is Manifeſt, that any Difference, whoſe Latitude is Equal to or Leſs than 48 or 4F, will allo be Exhauſted by ſuch an Infinite Diminution, and Vice Versi. What thereſore has been Objected againſt the Preceding Lemma will be Equally Valid againſt This; And moreover we may ſay, that, i F 4 upon an Infinite Diminution is reduced to Nothing, as vell as B4, either there are an Equal Number of Parts in each, or elſe Infinity is an Equivocal Term, and is thought able to deſtroy Quantities, whoſe Number of Parts is Different; if yet Infinity is Affirmd to be the ſame Thing, and not an Undetermin'd and Wandering Notion, and if the Number of Parts in 4F and 48 are the ſame, all the Difference, which can be betwixt them, muſt be reſizn'd to the Difſerence of Magnitude in the Parts; If the Firſt is defended, That the Number of Parts is Equal, that is Impoſſible, unleſs the Parts are of a Different Magnitude; If the Second, That Infinity is ſomething Undetermin'd, we don't know what, Any Demonſtrations from it will be as Juſt as the Idea is, that is, will Signiſy Nothing; If the Third is Profeſsd and Maintaind, That the Ultimate Part of 4F is Greater than that of 45, they cannot be both Equal, namely, to Nothing. s. 10. Ir s. 10. Ir therefore the Preccting Lemmas are not Certain or True, the Corollaties from them cannot be. It is, notwithſtanding, ſaid Corol. 4, That the Ultimate Figures ſas to their Perimeters a c E) are not Rectilincal, but Curvilincal Limits of Rectilineal Figures, that is a Z is a Curve Line, and not Compounded of Right ones, or any Number of them. l l VWuERE AS, FIRS T, if ab Infinitely Diminiſ'd is not the Portion of any Right Line, ſince it may be as well conceivd to be a Part of a Circular, as any other Curve, this Lemma, and the Corollary from it, will Equally prove, that the Circumference of a Circle is not a Polygone of an Infinite Number of Sides, and that the Infiniteſima of æ is not a Right Line; upon which, notwithſtanding, all the Methods hitherto receivd of Squareing the Circle, by finding the Proportion betwixt the Diameter and Circumference do depend, and which Methods, we ſhall readily Join with this Lemma, in Refuſing and Condemning. SECOND, If a b Infinitely Diminiſ'd is a Curve, and not any Portion of a RightLind Figure, it is Nothing according to this Reaſoning, for a X, a Diminiſ'd to Infinity are ſuppos'd to be Nothing, what therefore the Point a can be more is not Conccivable; If a is Something, the Queſtion will be, whether it is the Part of a Curve Line, or of a Right one, æX is common to both Figures, that is, to Xa Ib, and Ka b, and therefore at length the Inquiry will be, whether æ is a Part of the Curve 2b, or of the Right Line aſ; if the Laſt, it is Evident, that  in the Curve ab is a certain Portion of the Right Line aſ, which yet is here denyd; If the Firſt, it is Provd by Affirming it, and cannot be made Clearer, or more Demonſtrable, by Lines al or Xb, Circumſcribd or Inſcrib'd to it, which it is own'd do not any ways Belong or Appertain to it, nor are any the leaſt Portion of it. THIED, It is not Evinced, but 4, b, ę, d, &. may be Parts of Right-Lin'd Figures, ſince the Point at 4 is the Concourſe of Two Right Lines Xa, Ia, which Concourſe cannot produce Curveneſs, but may the Rectitude of each Line Expreſ”i'd in the ſame Point, and the like may be Affirmd of b, , à, &; that is, there is no Curvity in the Nature of cach Poini, ſrom the manner of it's Production; But if the Curvity proceeds from the Poſition of the Points in Reſpect of æ 4, that ill not prove the Points themſelves are Curvilineal, or that they may not be of a Rectilineal Conſtitution, we only here Argue with this Philoſophy in it's own Way, becauſe we have ſewn, that the Parts of Curve Lines are Curves, and are not Reſolvible into Right ones. j FourTH, If it co”'d be Provd, that a, b, c, d, &. were Curvilineal Parts of 4E, by this way of Reaſoning; according to the Geometry of Solids, they may be ol the ſame Nature with Rectilineal Parts, ſuppoſing their Velocities to be alike. F17TH, Beſides all which, ſince 4 E may poſſibly be of Different Dimenſions, as to Length, Breadth, and Depth, from the Parallelograms Inſcribd and Circumſcrib'd, the Compariſon betwixt them can ſignify no more to the Demonſtrating any Thing from it, than if we ſio'd compare a Line with a Surface, or that with a Solid, according to the ſame Geometry. LastLy, The Nature of a Curve, vhether of a Circle or any other, when the Abſciſſes and Ordinates are ſuppos'd to Generate it, is Compounded of the Terminations of the Joint Velocities of æ X and X4, as the Diagonal of a Square, or a Parallelogram, is Compounded of the Terminations of the Velocities of the Parts oſ the Side in Conjunction with thoſe of it's Ordinates; Thus, if æ 4 Is the Side of a Square, and æ4æ is ſuppos'd to be the Diagonal of it, whilſt 4 proceeds with the Velocity of 1 to X, X proceeds with the ſame Velocity of 1 to b4, and Lodges or Expreſſes the Firſt Point in the Diagonal, if a X and Xb are Imagind to be Infinitely Small; and in like manner, the Second, Third, Fourth Points, &. from a Velocity i 2 and 2, 3 and ;, 4 and 4, &. are produced in the Diagonal, till the whole is rm'd. FrROM Vhence it is Manifeſt; that each Point in the Diagonal is only the Limit or Termination of borh the Velocities after they are actually Perform'd, and therefore the Diagonal, hich this Philoſophy Propoſes, and which we have Confuted, is not made up of the ſame Forces Conjoin'd, which are ſeparately Deſcribd in the Sides of the Parallelogram, ſince the Diagonal is no other than a Termination of thoſe thoſe Forces, and is not in any Manner or Way of Conſidering an Union or Conjunction of them. SECOND, From this likewiſe it is plain, that the Diagonal is Incommenſurable with the Side of the Square; Becauſe the bare Termination of Forces cannot be Meaſurd by thoſc Forces, or the Contrary; Thus b is the Firſt Point from 4 of the Diagonal, which being only a Termination of the Velocities a X, Xb is no ways Capable of a Compariſon with them, no more than a Quieſcent Point is with an Actual Force, vhich it Bounds and Determines. IN like Manner, if a4 is the Abſciſs of a Parabola, b the Point in the Parabolick Curve vill be the Limit or Termination of the Velocities a X, Xb, and the ſame Reaſoning vill obtain in Reſpect of the Points f, à, &, which will be the Terms or Boundaries of the ſeveral Velocities Expreſsd by the Abſciſſes and Ordinates, and, as beſore was ſaid oſ the Diagonal of the Square, will be Incommenſurable with them. z WE ſall thereſore only farther Add, that ſince in the Triangle, where the Velocities of the Abſciſs and the Ordinate are Equal, or as Equal Velocities, the Diagonal is a Right Line, and ſince in the Parabola and in Paraboloeids, where the Velocity in the Abſciſs is Greater, and in the Ordinates Leſs, the Diagonal is a Curve, which is Concave to the Abſciſs, and ſince in the Complements to the Parabola or Parabolocids a lb, where the Velocity of the Abſciſs is Leſs, and thar of the Ordinate Greater, the Diagonal is a Curve, which is Convex to the Abſciſs, ve may from hence Form a juſt Idea of the Nature of Curves; In which, where the Velocities are Greater in the Abſciſs, and Leſs in the Ordinates, the Curve is Leſs Rerell'd from the Abſciſs, and Approaches or is Attracted towards it, by how much it's Force is Greater, and that of the Ordinate Leſs, which hinders it's Approach; On the Conrrary, where the Force is Leſs in the Abſciſs, and Greater in the Ordinate, the Curve is Thruſt and Protruded from it, or is Leſs Attracted to it, by how much the Force, which Protrudes is Greater, and the Force, which Acts or Directs it, Leſs; Thus a Converges tovards a 4, and Diverges from a. And if we Take any Abſciſs whatſocver, and Divide it According to the Square Numbers I. 4. 9. I6. 25, &⸗. and Place Ordinates at the ſeveral Diviſions, According to the Square-Roots of thoſ Numbers, namely, a Series of Natural ones, I, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. ve ſhall find the Curve of the Parabola, which Connects the Extremities of the Ordinates, to Converge to the Abſciſs, but if, on the Contrary, the Portions of the Abſciſs are 1, 2,3, 45, &, and the Ordinates I. 4. 9. I6. 25, &c. the Curve, which Connects Them, will Diverge from it; The ſame may be ſaid of an Abſciſs Divided Cubically, Biquadratically, &e. and where the Ordinates are as the Roots of thoſe Cubes or Bi-Squares, or where the Portions of the Abſciſs are as the Roots, and the Ordinates as the Cubes or Bi-Squares, for in the Firſt Caſe the Curve of the Parabolocid will Converge to the Abſciſs, and in the Laſt Diverge from it; Hence alſo, if we Compare the Space, Producd by theſe Ordinates, with that of Paraboloeids and the Complements of them, it will Appear, that Different Spaces may be Effected by the ſame Forces, as we before iew'd in the Geometry of Solids, that the ſame Spaces might be Conſtituted from Different ones. FroM this General Theorem it ſeems Plain and Evident, if a æ is the Portion of a Circle, and æ4 the Radius of it, ſince the Curve in this Caſe Converges to the Abſciſs, that it is in the Number of Paraboloeids, and which, in the Geometry of Solids, or of Matter, ve have Endeavourd to ſiew is a Biquadratical one, and which very well agrees with the General Theorem mentiond. For let æa i, and the ſeveral Parts of æ 4, be Repreſented by Numbers in an Arithmetical Progreſſion to Infinity, the Ordinates in the Parabola will be as the Roots of thoſe Numbers, and in the Biquadratical Parabolocid, as the Roots of the Roots of them; from whence it vill follow, that there is a much Greater Protruſion of the Limits of the Velocities from the Abſciſs in the Firſt Caſe than in the Laſt, and conſequently, that the Curve vill Approach nearer to a Convexity in the one Inſtance than the other; which is Maniſeſt, ſince the Parabola comes nearer to a Right Line, than a Circle do's, or, which is the ſame, a Circle is more Concave © the Abſciſs than the Parabola, but a Right Line is Firſt to be Arrivd at, before a Con a Convexity to the Abſciſs can be Produced; Thus the vI, V2, V 3. V 4, &.t vhich are the Ordinates of a Parabola, are in a nearer Proportion to I, 2, 3. 4, & which wou'd make the Ordinates of a Triangle, and the Diagonal a Right Line, than I the vV1, VV 2, /V 3. V4 4, &. which are the Ordinates of a Circle. FROM What has been ſaid it is likewiſe Evident, that the Hyperbola is alſo in the Number of Paraboloeids, but the Proportion, which it has to it's Rectangle, we ſhall Leave to others to Determine, thd we have it Aſcertaind in Writings by us, upon the ſame Principles, by which we have Squar'ã the Circle. s. 11. HAVING thus far Conſiderd the Nature of Curves, in Reſpect to their Ordinates and Abſciſſes, and their being only Limits or Terminations of their Velocities; we ſhall now ſhew, how they may be Conſiderd in another Way, that is, by the Generation of them from their Centers, as in the Circle, or from their Focus's, as in the Elligſis, the Parabola, and Hyperbola. J As to the Circle, it's Geneſis is Manifeſt, by the Revolution of a Line upon a Center; but the Queſtion, which lies in the Doctrine of Velocities, or the Geometry of Solids, is, what the Nature of ſuch a Curve is, vhich cannot be any other than that of a Right Line; For, if we ſuppoſe ſeveral Circles to be drawn from the ſame Center, their Circumferences will be to each orher, as their Radiuss, by the Extremities of which they are Deſcribd; that is, they will be as Right Lines, and differ Nothing from them, but in their being bent into a Poſition, in which all the Points of the Line are Equidiſtant from the Center, whereas a Right one, as the Radius, has it's Points diſpos'd in a Direct Receſſion from it. BESIDES, the Velocities in each Circumference are Equable, without any Acceleration or Retarding of them in the ſame Circumference, which is likewiſe the Nature and Property of a Right Line, which is Producd by the Equable Fluxion of a Point. AND in Different Circumferences, where the Velocities are Greater in Proportion to the Greater Lengths of the Radius, the ſame Tenour of Velocity is Preſerv'd, whilſt a Larger Space is Performd by a Larger Velocity in the ſame Time, that a Leſſer Space is Performd bYy a Leſſer Velocity; For that, which makes an Alteration from a Right Line into a Curve, is a Different Velocity in the ſame Space and the ſame Time, according to the aforeſaid Geometry of Solids. FrOM whence it is Apparent, FIrsT, that the Circumference of a Circle, Conſiderd in this way of Generation, is perfectly Different from that, which is Produced by the Termination of the Forces Expreſd in the Sines and Vers'd Sines of it, (thè Laſt of which are it's Abſciſſes, and the Firſt it's Ordinates) ſince the Circumference in the one Caſe is no more than a Right Line, or one Kind of Force, continually Bent, and in the other a Termination of Forces, which continually Differ. SECOND, The ſame Curve Line to Appearance may therefore in Reality receive very Different Values and Denominations, and be as Diſtint from what it Appears, as any other Quantity whatſoever, and conſequently, the ſame Circle; ſince where the Circumſference of it obtains the Nature of a Right Line, it will be a Plane Figure, and where that of a Curve, or of a Termination of Forces, which continually Vary, it will be a Solid one. Tumœn, If we then Conſider a Circle as a Plane Figure, the Square of it will be as Eaſy, as of any other Plane Figure we can Mention; becauſe there is nothing elſe Requird, than to make the Radius the Perpendicular of a Right-Angled Triangle, and the Circumſference the Baſis of it, which will be half of the Rectangle under the ſame Radius and Baſis, and Equal to the Cirele; nor would there be any Greater Reaſon to find out the Proportion betwixt the Baſis, i. e. the Circumſerence of the Circle, and it's Radius, in order to Obtain the Square of the Circle, than betwixt the Two Sides of any Triangle, in order to Aſcertain the Square of it; for to find the Square of the Circle is to Aſſign a certain Rectilineal Figure, to Which the Area of e Cirele has a Known Proportion, which is done as Above. Ir the Circle is not Conſiderd as a Plane Figure, but a Solid, we have Endeavour'd to Determine it's Proportion to the Square in the Geometry of Solids, or of Matter, namely, that it is as 4 to5, and is no other than a Biquadratical Paraboloeid. D d j As . from E towards B, the other Concerning the Method of Book II As to the Parabola, the Generation of it is Perform'd by ſuppoſing a Rule BC upon which the Square G DO is mov'd, whoſe Side GD is Side of the Square DO has a Line affixt to it, one of whoſe Extremities is faſten'd at o, and the other in ſome Point or other of the Plane, in which it Moves, as F;3 Let a Style be held always at , the Point where the Line TFcars oſf from the Side of the Square DO by it's Mo- xX o tion from F, and it will Deferibe the Parabola 42X; By the ſame Methods 4 7 will be likewiſe Deſcribd by Inverting the Square towards , and Moving it that way from the ſame Focus ; And ſince the Deſcriptions of the Ellipſis and Hyperbola depend upon the Iike Compound Motions, which are Referd in ſome Meaſure or other to their Focuss, as their Centers, it will not be Neceſſary to conſider, in this General Idea of the Nature of Curves, the particular Circumſtances of thoſe Deſcriptions, Eſpecially, as the Cirele and the Parabola are the Figures, which we at preſent are Deſirous to Examine; The Square of the Laſt being Confeſ'd, and Tha? of the Firſt being here Defended. IN this Generation of the Parabola it is therefore Evident, that it Diſfers from that, which Reſults from a bare Termination of the Velocities Expreſd by the Abſcifies and their Ordinates; ſince the Generation of it by a Line, and the Mcdiation of a Square, and the Focus, is by an Actual Velocity, whereas, when it is Produc'd by a Termination of Actual Forces, in the Abſciſcs and Ordinates, ĩt is made up of ſo many Quieſcent Points, as there are Terminations of ſuch Forces; from whence it will follow, that the Parabola, in the one Caſe, is of a Different Nature from that in the other, unleſ Quieſcence and an Actual Velocity are the ſame. SECOND, Suppoſing the Forces were Actual in both the Deſcriptions, yet, ſince AMmX is Deſcribd from the Focus ?, by ? 4, FM, FX, as the Circle from a Center, they ſo far Agree, and all the Difference ſeems ro be, that whilſt the Radius of Beſcription continues Immurable in the Circle, in the Parabola it as conſtantly Varies, from F 4 to FX. Bur the Variation of the Length of the Radius does not hinder the Equableneſ" of i's Motion, or at leaſt it's being Equably Increasd; ſince in Concentrical Circles the Radius's my be of Diſferent Lengths, and the Swifineũs of their Deſcription Different, and yet the Velocities in the ſeveral Circumferences of the ſame Nature vith the Equable ones in Right Lines, according to what has been before obſervd; And that this is the Caſe of the Changing Radiuss of the Parabola from the ſame Focus is Plain. ii i l Fon, if ve ſuppoſc 4P to be the Axis of a Cone, on the Surſace of which the Parabola XAZ is drawn, the Point  in rhe Vertex of it may be Deſcrib'd by ? 4, the Radius of æ Circle Parallel to the Baſis of the Cone, and Whoſe Center is in the Axis of the Cone 4P; and by the ſame Methods ? M, FX, or any other Intermediate Lines from the Focus, may be Repreſented by Radius's of rhe ſame Lengths, vhoſe Circles are Parallel ro the Baſis of the Cone, and hoſc Centers lie in the Axis of it; For if, for Inſtance, ?  is Imagin'd Equal to F 44, it will be the ſame Thing, if we take Different Points ? and F, and make the one the Center of a Circle Parallel to the Baſis of the Cone, ànd the other the Focus of the Parabola, becauſe in both Caſes the Point 7 has the ſame Diſfance from the Axis of the Cone; And conſequently, if we make all the ſeveral Centers ? of the Circles, Parallel to the Baſis of the Cone, unite and fall in with F, and the Circles, vhich were Parallel to the Baſis, Coincide with the Plane of the Parabola, they will then be:ome one Focus, and the Radius's of the Parallel Circles vill be Radius's of the arabola drawn ſrom the ſuid Focus. Ir Ir therefore theſe Parallel Circles are all Preſ>'d into one and the ſame ſln⸗ they will become Concentrical, and the Curve of the Parabola will be Reſolvd a Line of the ſame kind with Circumferences Deſcrib'd by the Radius's of then and conſequently of the ſame Conſtitution with Right Lines, Deſcribd by Equable Velocities; From whence it will Enſue, that the Parabola, by this way of Deſcription, is a Plane Figure, being Reducible to Triangles of Different Heights, as the Circle is to thoſe of the ſame Hecight, and therefore has the Nature of all other Triangles. r the Contrary, if the Forces of the Abſciſs and Ordinates are made uſe of to determine the Parabola, the Curve will not be Conſider'd, as a Right Line, but every Point of it will Vary in it's Velocity, or the Termination of it, according to the Proportion of the Forces in the Abſciſſes and Ordinates, with which they End or are Concluded,; and conſequently both the Curve and the Plane, which it Comprehends, will be of a Different Nature, and of Diſferent Dimenſions, than when the onc is conſiderd as a Right Line, and the other as a Triangle. HAVING mention'd the Reduction of a Parabola to Portions of Concentrical Circles, we ſhall here ſiew, how we may Reduce the Angles of Contact to the Aſymptotes of an Hyperbola, albeit, they have been hitherto Miſtaken by Mathemoaticians for Diſtinẽt Arguments to Prove the Inſinite Diviſibility of Extenſion, whereas they are in Effect the ſame. For all the Circles, which are Deſcrib'd by the Ordinates of the Hyperbola, and which conſtitute the Hyperbolick Cone, ſince they are Parallel to ſo many Circles in the Baſis, may be Expreſsd in the Baſis, and therefore will become Concentrical Circles; and as the Baſis, by ſuch Repeated Expreſſions of Circles in it, will be Equal ro the Cone, that is, a Plane to a Solid, ſo alſo will the Circumſerences be Concentrical, and all lic in a Common and Plance Surface; but every Point in the Aſymptote may be likewiſe Expreſd in the Baſis, at the ſame Diſtance from each Circumference in it, which it obſerves in the Aſymptote from the Circles in the Hyperbolick Cone, and at the ſame Time may Touch each Circle; ſince the Poimt in the Aſymptote is Trajected, by Right or Tangent Lines, thro' each Point of the Hyperbola, vhoſe Circumferences are Deſcrib'd in the Baſis; and the whole Figure, by ſuch a Diſpoſition, will amount to the ſame with a Tangent, and the Various Circles annext to it, by whoſe Intervention the Angles of Contact are made. S. 12. THE Fourth Lemma is, That if, in Two Figures A4acE, Ppr7, there ſoud be Two Series of Parallelograms Inſcrib'd, as before, r and the Number of both ſiou'd be the ſame, and where q the Latitudes arc Diminiſd to Infinity the Ultimate r Reaſons of the Parallelograms in one Figure to the Parallelograms in the other, cach to each, o'd be s the ſame, it is Pronounc'd, That the TWo Figures gact PprT, are to one another in that ſame Reaon. THIS Lemma ſo evidently depends upon the Former, that there is not the leaſt Occaſion to conſider it. y &  S T S5. 13. TuE Fifth Lemma is, That all the Sides of Similar Figures, which Anſer to each other or are Homologous, are Proportional, as well Curvilincal as Rectilineal, and their Areas are in a Duplicate Reaſon of their Sides. TuaT Curvilineal Figures obtain this Property is upon the Suppoſition, that, according to the Preceding Lemmas, Right-Lin'd Figures are Ultimately Reſolv'd into Curvilincal ones, or the Contrary, which has not been Provd; GRANTING yet this, it is not Evident, that the Homologous Sides of Rectilineal Figures are Proportional, unleſs upon the Abſtractions and Demonſtrations of Exclid, in vhich the Length of the Line is only Conſider'd, and ſuppoſed to be one Conſtant and Invariable Idea; Thus, if I perceive TWo Triangles to be Similar, I Judge them to be ſo upon the Equality of the Angles, which Equality is Provd, upon the Hypotheſis of one conſtant Uniform Space Abſtracted by the Mind, whereas if Space is not Uniform, and that Abſtraction is not Juſt, the Demonſtration vill be in Proportion Defective; And ſince we have ſiewn, in the Geometry of Solids, and in the D d 2 Firſi Firſt Part of the Principles of Natural Philoſophy, that ſuch Abſtractions of a Simple and Fixt Space are not Juſt, neither this Propoſition, nor any other in all Eclid, will be Univerſally True. WE do not yet here Aſfirm, that this Propoſition as well as the others, in the Gemeter Mention'd, are Abſolutely Falſc, it is Confeſs'd they are True, and that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right ones, upon the Suppoſition of a Fixt, Abſtracted, and Invariable Space, but ſuch a Space we ſay is Arbirrary, and in Terms deny to Be, or to Exiſt in Nature. Nor by ſuch an Aſcrtion do ve deſtroy Trigonometry, and all the Mathematict Sciences, which are Built upon it; Since Abſtracted Space, which only Conſiſts of Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, is a ſuſficient Meaſure for all the Uſes of Life, vhether in Geometry, properly ſo calld, or in Navigation, Fortiſjing, or Aſtronomy; For, in all theſe Sciences, the Nature of the Meaſure is not Requird, but ſome fixt Standard or other of it; Thus in finding the Area or Contents of a Field, or oſ this Room, in which I write, I can Meaſure it by Walking over the Sides of it, that is, by certain Portions of Space, which I Mark out, or by a Foot of Wood. Braſs, or Iron, or any other Material Being; in which yet I conſider nothing, but the Abſtracted Length of the Meaſure, without Examining into the Nature of it, vhether it be Real Space, Wood, Braſs, or Iron. AND this is the Caſe of Mathematicks in General, which Imagines nothing more than the Abſtracted Lengths, or Breadths, or Depths, of Things without Conſidering the Intrinſick Nature and Conſtitution of them, vhich, notwithſtanding, ought to be a Rule of the Mind's Abſtractions, and not it's own Will and Pleaſure; The Mathematicks therefore, vhich we propoſe of Solids and Aſatter, we cannot but think are Conformable to the Firſt, and what has been hitherto advanced in that Knwoledge nothing, more than the Reſult of the Latter; That iss We in our Mathematick Abſtractions take Nature for our Guide, whereas the Mathematicians, vho have Wrote before Us, make their own Arbitrary Will and Pleaiure their Conductors; And upon this Iſue ve dare put our whole Reaſonings in that Science; For if out Abſtractions are ſuitable to Nature, as that will always Stand, the Wills and Arbitrary Fancies of Men muſt, ſome time or other, ſubmit to it, iſ they are not, we ſnall readily reſign our own Sentiments to thoſe who have Preceded us on theſe Subjects; Secing, what we Intend in theſe Principles, is only to over-turn if Poſſible, and Demoliſi thoſe Structures, which ſome fond Perſons have Raiſed in their own Imaginations, cither in Reſpect of Mathematichs or Aſtronomy, without any Warrant from the Reality of Beings, as they Exiſt; And altho' Pyrhagoràs was the Firſt, vhom we know of, who Introducd theſe Abſtractions amongſt the Grecians, which ve find in the Elements of Euclid, for the 47th Prop. B. 1. of Which, it is ſaid, he Sacrificd an Hecatomb, and altho he Derivd theſe Abſtractions from the Famous Zoroaſires ol Bactria, vhoſe Scholar he is thought to have been, and from the ægptians, whoſe Prince Meres the Philoſopher, the 23V in Deſcent from Meſraim, 941 Years aſter the Flood, and 675 beſore the Firſt olympiad, is Afſirm'd to have Invented the Elements of Geometry, yet neither His Authority nor Theirs in Mathematichs, nor Ariſtoile's in Phyſichs, nor the preſent Philoſiphe?s in Both, hom we are nov Inquiring into, ought ?io Diſcourage or Hinder any Impartial Reſearches after Truth and Reaſon. 5. 14. THE Sixth Lemma is, That if any Arc, which is Given in it's Poſition, as 4 B, be Subtended by the Chord A B, and in ſome Point 4, in the Middle of it's Curvature, ſnou'd be Toucht by a Right Line 4D Produced on both Hands, and aſterwards the Points 4, B, ſo'd come together and Coaleſce, it is Affirmd, That the Angle B4D, containd under the Chord and the Tangent, will be Diminid to Infinity and at Length Vaniſh. FoRr lIet 48 be Producd to b, and 4 D to à, the Points A, B, therefore Coaleſcing, and conſcquently Bb or Ab lying vholly out of the Curve, it is Maniſeſt, that the Right Line Bb or 4b will either Coincide with the Tangent Ad, or will be Dravn betwixt the Tangent and the Curve; the Laſt is Impoſſible, becauſe it is Contrary to the Nature of the Curve, to have more than one Tangent to r 0 the ſame Point, ftom whence it follows, that the Firſt will obtain that is, that Ab or Bb will Coincide with A4, and that the Angle D A4 B will Vaniſh. Whuicn Demonſtration comes to this, that A B is FirsT ſuppos'd to be the Chord of an Arc, that is, a Right Line Subtended to it, and then by the Coalition of the Points 4 and B not to be a Right Line, but the Point of a Curve; Unleſs therefore the Infinite Diminution of a Right Line can be Prov'd to be the Point of a Curve, or, vhich is the ſame, Unleſs the Point of a Right Line can be Evidenc'd to be all one vith the Point of a Curve Line, the Demonſtration is not Valid, which it is Impoſſible this Philoſophy ſou'd do, ſince, as we have ſiewn, it is not Acquainted with what the Nature o?f a Curve or a Right Line is, whilſt it Conſiders Them vithout Diſtinction, tho' they are as Different Quantities, as a Line or a Surface, or that Compard with a Solid; All which it yet hopes to ſolve by Diminiſhing both to Infinity, vhen it Comprehends, what Infinity is, ſtill Leſs, and which by it's ovn Confeſſions is Various, ſo that what is Infinite in one Reſpect may be Nothing in another, which if True, tho the Curve 4 B may be Infinitely Diminiſhd at the ſame time that it's Subtenſe is, it is not Evident, that the Point of the Curve may not be Infinitely Greater than that of the Right Line. SECOND, Morcover whatever has been ſaid, in Relation to Lemma 2 and3, vith the Corollaries, will in like Manner have a Place here. Tumb, If 48 the Chord ĩs no Part of a Right Line, a Curve cannot be Conſiderd, as a Polygone of an Infinite Number of Sides, ſeeing it will be a Part of the Curve it ſelf, which Doctrine of Polygones this Philoſophy yet Eſpouſes; if it is the Part of a Right Line and is Inſcrib'd in the Curve the Angle D 4 8 will not Vaniſh even upon an Infinite Diminution; becauſe it is only the Angle of Contact, which is Equal 10 Nothing, or Leſs than any Right-Lin'd Angle Given. FourTH, That Bb or 4b cannot be a Tangent to a Curve, where 4ã is made to be one, nor Comprehend an Angle with it, is Demonſtrated in Euclid upon the Suppoſition, that a Curve Line cannot Coincide with a Right, excepting in one Point; To prove therefore, that Rb or 4b does not make an Angle with à4, becauſe 4a can only Touch the Curve in the Point 4, which is ſuppos'd, is no other than to Prove by ſuppoſing; for if that is not ſupposd, 4b ox Bb by Coinciding vith the Curve may Conſtitute an Angle b44, nor vill it be necẽſſary, that 4b or BS ſoud fall without the Curve; what I mean is, that a Curve may, for all that is yet Demonſtrated in Exclid, or any where elſe, Coiucide with a Right Line, where the Receſſion of the Tangent from the Center, and the Cncavity of the :Curve to it, is ſo Small, that there ſhall not be the Leat Diſference, as in the Infinitely Large Circles of Saturn's or Jupiters Orbiiss. liũ ii ON the Contrary, if it is not ſuppos'd, but provd from the Nature of a Curve and Right Line, which conſtantly Recede from each other, it cannot yet be Evinc, that the Points 4, in the Tangent and the Curve, Coaleſce or are the Same; ſince, if the Nature of the Curve is Different from that of the Right Line in every Part betwixt Ad and A4, it is neither Rational nor Juſt to think, becauſe they Touch each other in the Point 4, that from that Contact they become of the ſame Nature; the Curvity of the one and the Rectitude of the other will ſtill in all Reaſon and Senſe be Preſervd; Thus, if a Line Touches a Surface or a Solid, it dos not by that Contact change either into a Surface or a Solid; which if true, tho' the Angle à45 ſoud Vaniſh, it voud not be any Proof, that 4, when it Reſpects the Right Line, and when it Reſpects the Curve, voud be the ſame. BUT What is farther to be taken Notice of here ĩs, that all Matters are Clear and Indiſputable concerning the Angle of Contact, according to this Lemma; For if the Angle 34D upon an Infinite Diminution Vaniſhes, or is Equal to Nothing, it is Evident, that the Angle of Contact is not Leſs than any Acute one Given, becauſc the Angle of Contact cannot be Leſs than Nothing, to which an Acute Angle Infinitely Dimini?d is by this Lemma Equal; And yet it is known, that this has been a Controverſy betwixt the moſt Celebrated Geometers, and not as yet finally Determin'd, tho' Dr. Wallis has ſpent no Leſs than near 60 Pages in Folio on that Subject; Clavius and his Advocates Affirming on the one Hand, that the Angle of Contact is an Angle Diviſible in Infinitun by the Peripheries of a Circle, that it is yer Leſs than any Aceute Angle Given, and that the Angle of the Semicircle is Leſt thar than a Right Angle, but Greater than any Acute Angle Given; whereas Peletarius on the other Side Contends, that it is no Angle or Quantity, that the Tangent Coincides with the Curve, and that the Angle of the Semicircle is the ſame with and Equal to a Right one; And notwithſtanding all, which Dr. allis has Argued at Length upon this Occaſion, I do not ſe any better Solution of thoſe Difficulties and Paradoxes, which are Commonly Propoſcd on this Head, than vhat is Derivd from the Doctrine I before Alledg]|d in Relation to Curves, namely, that They are of an Heterogeneous Nature to Right Lines, and conſequently, that Rectilineal Angles and Angles of Contact or Contingence can be no more Compar'd with Each other, than Lines with Surfaces, or Surfaces with Solidss. And this perhaps will give an Account oſ that Diſpute, which we find betwixt the Lord Brouncter and Dr. Wallis concerning the Diameters of Certain Curves or Paraboloeids in the Mathematical Works of the Latter. . 15. THE Seventh Lemma iss That the ſame Things being ſuppoſcd, which were in the Former Lemma, the Ultimate Reaſon of the Arc, Chord, and Tangent to one another, is the Reaſon of Equality; which, ſo Evidently depending upon the Former, there will be no Occaſion to conſider here. TuE Eighth is, That if the Right Lines Given, 4 R, B R, with the Arc 4 B, the Chord 4 B, and the Tangent 4D, conſtitute Three Triangles 4 ſt 3, A R B, ARD, and the Points, 4, B, aſterwards come together; the Ultimate Form of the Evaneſcent Triangles is that of their being Similar, and their Ultimate Reaſon, that oſ Equality; which likewiſe is Demonſtrated upon the Union oſ the Points, 4, B, in the ſame manner, as has been already Examin'd. ] 5. 16. THE Ninth Lemma is, That if the Right Line 4æ and the Curve A4c, Given in their Poſition, mutually Interſect eac other in a Given Angle 4, and BD, EC, which, e z meet the Curve in B and C, are Applyd as Or- r dinates to the Right Line 4æ in Another Given; 7 Angle, and the Points, 3, C, ſiou'd afrerwards Unite or Coaleſce in 43 The Areas of the Triangles, 4D B, AEC, will be at laſt to one anoother in a Duplicate Reaſon of their Sides; Which alſo is Derivd and Concluded ſrom the ſame Kind of Reaſoning. ] AND in all theſe Caſes it is ſuppos'd, that by an Infinite Diminution the Curveis Reſolv'd into a Right Line, and puts on the Properties of it, the Contrary of which ve Affirm, and j have Endeavourd to Evince; If it he ſaid, that in Reality it is Confeſſ'd, the Points of a Curve and of a Right Line are not the ſame, but yet to Appearance they may be Conſiderd as ſuch, becauſe our Senſes cannot Diſtinguiſ betwixt them; We Anſver, FirsT, that, if theſe Principles are not Real, and are only Calculated upon falſe Appearances, it cannot vell be Imagin'd, how they ſiou'd Account for Effects in Nature, which are Real and not to be Conſiderd as falſe Appcarances. SECOND, Suppoſing we ſee a Planet, as one of Yupiter's Satellits for Inſtance, Revolving in a Circle, and we Reduce that Curve to a Tangent and Centripetal Force, of vhich it ſiould prove the Curve does not Conſiſt, it will not be a juſt Explanation of the Real Revolution of that Planet, becauſe the Tangent and the Line, which Expreſſes the Centripetal Force, upon an Infinite Diminution, cannot by our Senſes be Diſtinguid from a Point in the Curve. lE 5. 17. THE Tenth Lemma is, That Spaces, which a Body Deſcribes by any Regular Force Urgeing it, are in the very Beginning of the Motion in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Times. Let the Times be Expreſi'd by the Lines, 4 D, 4E, and the Velocities Produc'd by the Ordinates, D B, EC, and the Spaces Deſcrib'd by theſc Veloci ties will be, as the Arcas, 4BD, ACE, Deſcribd by theſe Ordinates, that is, by Lem. 9, in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Times, 4D, AE, in the very Beginning of the Motion. THIS Lemma, tho' it is Proposd in the General of a Regular Force, and of thai Force Acting upon or Urgeing Body Uniformly, is Primarily meant of Gravity, and that Explication, which by the Mechanick Philoſophers has been Given oſ it In which Account, It is ſuppos'd, that all Matter ĩs Similar and Alike, that it only con conſſts of Extenſion into Length, Breadth, and Depth, that it is Solid or Impenetrable, that it is Moveable and Diviſible, &e. all which are Properties, vhich make ĩt Paſſive in it's Nature, and are Formd in the Mind in Order to uſe ĩt at Pleaſure; And the whole Maſs of Matter, às Philoſophy goes and is now underſtood, is nothing more than an Heap or Congeries of Abſtracted Notions Arbitrarily put together, as we have ſiewn in the Firſt Part of the Principles of Natural Philoſophy. AFTER this is done, it is in the next Place ſvd. that Cravity or the Regulat Force Acts upon this Abſtracted Matter by Continual Impulſes, ſo that in One Inſtant of Time it receives one Stroke from Gravity, in a Second Inſtant of Time Another, and in a Third, the Stroke or Impulſe from Gravity is ſtill Repeated, and ſo on; From whence the Times are Repreſented by one Side of the Triangle, vhich proceeds as 1, 23, 4, &c. and the Impulſes or Strokes from Gravity, or the Velocities, hich are the Effects of them, by the other, which has the ſame Arithmetical Progreſſion; and what ſeems to be Intended in this Lemma, by a Regular Force in General is only any Force, which Acts with the ſame Uniformity, be it Greater or Leſs than Gravity, with which Gravity is thought to do, that is, which Produces Effects Proportional to the Times, in which they are Produced. i BorH theſe Doctrines ve have therefore Conſiderd in the Firſt Part of our Said Principles of Philoſophy, namely, the Homogeneouſneſs of Matter, and the Uniform Impulſes of Gravity, and that which Remains therefore upon this Lemma, to Convince us of, is, that if we reduce, 4D 8, AEC, to Infinitely Small Parts towards 4, they will be the ſame as Rectilincal Triangles in the Beginning of the Motion, that is, upon an Infinite Diminution of the Times and the Forces; Which likewiſe has been already Conſiderd and Refuted in this Doctrine of Naſcents and Evaneſcents. i ] 5. 18. TuE Laſt Lemma is, That the Evaneſcent Subtenſc of the Angle of Contact is Ultimately in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Subtenſe ol the Conterminate Arc; that is, 4B Square is to A4b Square as BD is to bã. : To which we need not Anſwer any more, than that in order to this Demonſitration, there is ſſill Requi'd a Coale ſcence of the Points, D, A, õ, into thoſc of, à,b, ꝗ and all the ] Conſequences of ſuch : Coalition are Affirmd, which have been hitherto Diſprovd. BESIDES, if ſuch a Coalition is Allow'd, it is Plain, that AEB. Ab:: AD. 4d, but AD. 4à:: D Bq. àbq, becauſe 4b5 is a Curve Convex to 4D the Abſciſs, that is, the Forces. according to s. 1, will be Greater in the Ordinates than in the Abſciſs, and therefore it will not be as 4Bq. 46 :: BD. bd, bus, if any Thing, on the Contrary, as 4 . A q. bas li 5. 79. WE ſhall therefore conclude this Inquũiry into the Doctrine of Evaneſcents, with an Examination into the General Deſenſe, which is made of it. l l It is ſaid therefore, that theſe Lemmas are Premis'd, that the Perpſexed Demonſtrations ad Abſurdum oF the Antient Geometcrs might be Avoided; that by the a7thod of Indiviſibles they are indeed rendred more Contracted, but becauſe the Hyporheſis of Indiviſibles is Hari and Leſs Geometrical, the Preſent Aſethod of Naſcent and Evaneſcent ſeaſons, which is ſaid to be Demonſtrated, is Subſtituted in it's Room; That is, the Ulrimate Sums or Reaſons of the Evaneſcent Quantities, and the Firſt of the Naſcent, or the Limits of the Sums or Reaſons are conſiderd in this Method, and not the Quantities themſelves, as Diviſible to Ifinity; And. therefore that, when this Philoſophy ſpeaks of Quantities, as conſiſting of Particles, or makes uſc of ſmall Curve Lines ſor Kight, it vou'd not be underſtood tò mean Indiviſibles, but Evaneſcent Diviſibles, not the Sums or Reaſons of Determinate Parts, but the Limits or Determinations of thoſe Sums or Reaſons. I Ir yet Confeſſes, that there may be Two Objections made againſt this Method, Firſt, that of Evaneſcent Quantities there is no Ultimate Proportion, ſince, before they Vaniſh, it is not the Taſt, and after they Vaniſh, there is None. In IN Anſwer to this ve are told, that by the ſame Argument it may be Conteſted, whether there is any Ultimate Velocity of a Body proceeding to a Certain Fixed Point; for ſuch a Velocity, before it reaches the Point, will not be the Ultimate, and after it has reach'd it, will be no Velocity; The  Anſwer to which is ſaid to be Eaſy, namely, that by the Ultimate Velocity is Meant or Intended, Neither that, with which a Body is carried, before it Arrives at the laſt Point, nor after it has Arrivd to it, but that, which it Poſſeſſes at the very Point of it's Arrival, with which it Reaches the Laſt Point, and with which it's Motion Ceaſes; In like Manner, by the Ultimate Reaſon of Evaneſcent Quantities, is to be underſtood the Reaſon of Quantities, not before they Vaniſh nor after, but with which they Vaniſh. Thus alſo the Prime or Firſt Reaſon of Naſcent Quantities is the Reaſon with which they Riſe; and the Prime and Ultimate Sum is that, with which they Begin and Ceaſc to be, whether to be Increas'd or Diminiſh'd. THERE is farther a Limit or Term, which Velocity in the End of it's Motion can Reach, but not g20 Beyond, this is the Ultimate Velocity; And the ſame Reaſoning obtains in Reſpect of the Limit or Term, which is Fixed to all Quantities and Proportions, that have a Beginning and an End; And ſince this Limit is Certain and Defſinite, it is a Problem truly and really Geometrical, to Determine it; But all Things, which are Geometrical, are juſtly allow'd and made uſe of in the Determining of what elſe is ſo. A Second Objection, which is own'd may be made againſt this Doctrine, is, that, if the Ultimate Reaſons of the Evaneſcent Quantities are Given, there will alſo be Ultimate Magnitudes confeſsd, and ſo every Quantity will conſiſt of ndiviſibles contrary to Euclid's Doctrine of Incommenſurables. Tnis Objection however is ſaid to depend upon a falſe Hypotheſis, for the Ultimate Reaſons, with which Quantities Vaniſh, are not in Truth the Reaſons of Ultimate Quantities, but the Limits, to which the Reaſons of Quantities Decreaſing without End always Approach, and to which they can come nearer than according to any Given Difference, but can never go Beyond, nor Touch or Arrive at, before the Quantities are Diminiſd to Infinity. Tuſs Matter, we are Informd, will be more clearly underſtood in Quantities, which are Infinitely Greatꝗ ſince if Two Quantities, whoſe Difference is Given, are Increasd to Infinity, their Ultimate Reaſon vill be Given, namely, a Reaſon of Equality, and yer the Ultimate or Greateſt Quantities will not be Given, of which that is the Reaſon, namely, of Equality; and the ſame may be ſaid of Infinitely Small Quantities, which are not Given, but are Diminiſ'd without Bounds, and yet the Reaſon of them may be Known and Determind. s. 20. THIS is a Perfec? Account of the Notions, which this Philoſophy has oſ it's Method of Naſcents and Evaneſcents in General, the Particular Propoſitions of which we have before Conſiderd, and we ſhall now moreover Inquire into the Intimate Thoughts, which it has Communicated to us concerning it. Tur whole of which is Reſolvd into This; namely, Firſt, The Reaſons of Quantities; Second, The Quantities of which they are the Reaſons; And Third, Whether we can conſider the One without the Other; Theſe are the Three Things to be Examind into, in the Preſent Doctrine. BEFORE I do which, I muſt obſerve, that the Doctrine of ndiviſibles is own'd to be of the ſame Kind, as it Really is, with that of theſe Naſcenis and Evaneſcents, the Former yet is Diſcarded, as being Contrary to Euclid's Doctrine of Incommenſurables, and for the ſame Reaſon ought this to be, which is as Directly Oppoſite and Repugnant to it, in which Curves and Right Lines of the moſt Different Nature and Conſtitution are ſuppos'd to Coincide in a Point, and thereſore to obtain one Common Meaſure; To omit this notwithſtanding, FirsT, This Philoſophy ſays, it only Conſiders the Reaſons of Quantities, and not the Quantities themſelves; whereas, in the Anſwer to the Firſt Objection, it ſuppoſes, that there is an End of the Velocity, which is made uſe of as a Parallel Inſtance to Quantity, and therefore, that there as an End of the Quantity it ſel, whoſe Evancſcent Reaſon is Conſiderd, and in the Second Objection from Incommenſurables and Quantities Infinitely Great, that there is no End of the Quantity, vhoſe Reaſon is Conſiderd, which is a Contradiction. SECOND, SECOND, It is in the Next Place to be Obſerv'd, that even in the Reaſons of Quantities, if thoſe only were to be Regarded, it does not make any Juſt Concluſions, according to it's own Sentiments; for albeit Quantities are never ſo Different, if they are but ſupposd Infinitely Increasd or Diminiſhd, their Reaſon will be that bf Equality according to this Philoſophy, notwithſtanding, that all the Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſons of Different Quantities are Imagin'd to be Different, hich is again a Contradiction. BuT if Quantities only, which are Equal, upon the Infinite Increaſe or Diminution of them, have their Reaſons of Equality, there is no great Myſtery in the Matter, becauſe, if Quantities are Equal, their Reaſons or Proportions will be ſo too. TuniRD, Aſter what ve have ſaid in Confutation of the Preſent Doctrine of Naſcents and Evaneſcents from it ſelf, ve ſhall only Affirm, that Quantities and the Reaſons of Quantities are the ſame, and that we cannot conſider the One without the Other; that is, the Reaſons of Things are their Quantities, and Viee Versà, Quantities are nothing elſe but the Reaſons of Things. FOR What are Quantities themſelves, unleſs the Reaſons or Relations of Things, vhen compard with one another? Thus a Right Line, or a Curve, or a Rectilineal, or Curve Figure, as a Square and a Circle, are Quantities only, as they are capable of Relation; for if they are barely Conſiderd, as one Uniform and Abſtracted Extenſion without any Properties of what they are in Reſpect to other Lengths or Figures, either contain'd in themſelves, as Portions of them, or Diſtinct from thèm, they cannot be in any Senſe Term'd Quantities; when therefore we Inquire into the Ultimate Reaſons of Reaſons;, if that is a Proper Way of Speaking, which yet is the Real Meaning of this Philoſophy, we muſt know what thoſe Reaſons are, whoſe Ultimate Reaſons ve wou'd Determine, or elſe it will be Impoſſible for us to Demonſtrate with any Degree of being Intelligible; that is, it will be neceſſary for us to Inform our Selves of the Nature of thoſe Lines or Figures, whoſe Ultimate Reaſons are Inveſtigated, before we can Fix or Aſcertain ſuch Ultimate Reaſons. FOURTH, Moreover, according to the Dotrine of Velocities in the Geometry of Solids, one and the ſame Line to Appearance may be capable of a Thouſand Different Valucs, if the Velocities, by which it is Produc'd, are Various; whereas the Preſent Method of Naſcenis and Evaneſcents does only ſuppoſe the ſame Abſtracted Length, as it Lies in the Figure, without Conſidering, with what Velocity it is causd or receives it's Dimenſion, FirTH, Laſtly as Length or Breadth is Accounted one Similar and Invariable Extenſion in this Method, ſo is Infinity Equally Determind to be one Uniform Exhauſtion of Quantity; whereas, if Quantities are Different, one Uniform Infinity cannot Equally Exhaut both, for Inſtance, if One Line in Reſpect of Another, as n the Geometry of Solids, may have the ſame Relation, as that of a Line and a Surface or a Solid, one Uniform Infinity can no more Exhauſt the Points of Each oſ them, than by Infinitely Diminiſhing a Line we can Exhauſt a Surface or a Solid; and the ſame may be ſaid of Two Different Lengths, for Example, let One be the Double of the Other, if Infinity is one Uniform Thing, they cannot be Equally Exhauſted by it, but when one is Exhauſted, there will be only Half of the other Deſtroy'd. IF Infinity is not one Uniform Idea, but puts on Different Qualities and Shapes, it is in Short no more than this, that is, an Univerſal Deſtroyer of Unequal Quantities, which the Mind Employs to Devour and Annihilate all the Excreſcencies or Exorbitancies of them, which it has no Occaſion for in it's Abſtracted Reaſonings, and which, if not taken out of the Way, wou'd be Troubleſome to it; and ſomething like this is the Caſe of Infinity, when Apply'd to Quantities Infinitely Increas'd, vhich let them be what they will, and how Different ſoever Originally, ſhall from thence, it ſeems, become Equal; Infinity Deſtroys the Difference, and makes them all one, which is Impoſſible; for an Infinite Number of Inches cannot be the ſame, as an Infinite Number of Yards, or Miles, or Semidiameters of the ſon, of the æarth or of the Orbits of upiter or Saturn ; unleſs Infinity is ſomething not certain, excepting that it obrains one Quality, which is, of making all Thihgs Equal, which, when Finite, were not ſo. E C H AP. C H AP. V. Concerning the Fundamental Propoſitions of this Philoſophy, and the Application of ihtm to the Solviug the Revolutions of the Planets. 5. I. AVING in the Former Chapter Conſiderd the Docrine of Naſcents and Evanaſcents, we are now come to the Propoſitions and Theorems of this Philõſophy; The Firt of which is, That if a Body is Movd according to the Direction from 4 to 8, and at the ſame Time is Urg'd by a Centripetal Force from A4 to 5, a Curve Line will be Deſcribd, and whilſt the Body Deſcribes that Curve Line, the Arcas vill' be Proportional to the Times of the Body's Revolving in ſuch a Curve; or, which is the ſame, as it is Expreſ"'d in this Philoſophy, The Arcas, which Bodies Deſcribe, when carryd about by Radius's drawn to an Immoveable Center of their Forces, are in Immoveable Planes, and are Proportional to the Times of their Revolving. Tunus, Let the Time be Divided into Equal Parts, and in the Firſt Portion of it, Let the Body Deſcribe by it's Innate Force the Right Linc 4 B, the ſame Body, if nothing were to Hinder or Obiſtruct it, woud proceed to c, and by Lawthe Firſt Deſcribe Bc= to 4B, ſo that by Draving the Lines, 45, BS, 5 to the Center S, there won'd be Equal Areas performd ASB, BSc, but when the Body comes to B, Let the Centripetal Force be ſupposd to Unge it by onc Impulſe, and by that means make it Decline from B¢, and proceed forwards in the Line æC; Let Cf be drawn Parallel to B5, and meet the Linc ECin , If this is ſuppos'd, upon the Completion of the Second Portion of Time, by Corol. 1. of the Laws, the Body will be found in G in the ſame Plane with the Triangle 458; Join 5, C, and the Triangle S BC will be Equal to the Triangle 5Bc = Triangle S4 B, becauſe SBC; S Bc, have the ſame Baſe 5B, and lie within the ſame Parallels, SB, Cc; By a like Method of Arguing SCã, SCD will be Provd Equal, and ſo on; From whence it will follow, that, in Equal Times, Equal Areas are Deſcrib'd in a Plane, which is Unmovd, and by Compounding any Sums of theſe Areas, SADS, SAFS, are to One Another, as the Times of their DeIcription. ] Ter now the Number of the Triangles be Increas'd, and the Latitude of them Diminiſ'd to Infinity, and their Ultimate Perimeter 4 DF, by the 4'h Coroll. to Lem. 3. will be a Curve Line; and therefore the Centripetal Force, by which a Body is perpetually Drawn out of the Tangent of this Curve, will Act Continually and Inceſſantly upon it; And any Arcas, SADS, SAFS, Deſcrib'd Proportional to the Times of Deſcription will be, in this Caſe, Proportional to the ſaid Times, Q. E. D. ; I which Demonſtration we ſhall Conſider; Firſt, The Generation of this Figure upon the Suppoſition of the Preſent Abſtracted Forces; Second, What Alteration Difſerent Magnitudes in the Bodies, which are Movd, wou'd Cauſe; Third, What voud be the Conſequence, i other Forces were Introduc'd, whether Projectile or Attractive in a Different Proportion to each other, from what is here Preſumd; Fourth, What woud follow, if Forces perfectly Diſtinũt from either of theſe ſowd be made uſe of. s. 2. Finst, It is ſupposd, that A4, by it's Innate Force, proceeds from 4 to B in one Portion of Time, and in an Equal Portion of it Deſcribes B Equal to 48 that is, a Perſot Inertia of Matter is Preſumd, and that upon it's Motion it will have a Conſtant and Uniform Progreſs, unleſs it is Interrupted by ſome Externa Agent Agent, but to conſider Matter, as an Unactive Maſs, and only Capable in it ſelf of Receiving that Impulſe, hich we Give it, is Firſt Making it a Creature of the Mind, and then Uſing it at our own Pleaſure; For this we have Provd to be the Senſe of a Similar, Paſſive, or Homogeneous Matter, And What ve Mean and Inrend in theſe Principles is only, with all Submiſſion, to Take it out of the Hands of the Philoſophers, and Reſign it to it's own Nature and the Great Author of it. LET us yet ſuppoſe, that Matter or Body is Similar, Paſſive, or Homogencous, and that it has no Action of it's own; we Ask, Does Almighty God Impart: that Action to it, by which it proceeds Uniformly from 4 to B, or is it done by the Mind of the Philoſopher? If the Firſt, HoW is it known in what Proportion an Infinite Being Ads upon it? Why may not the Impreſſion, ſuitable to the Energy of the Almighty Agent, be ſo Forcible and Strong, that no Centripetal Action Whatſoever ſhall be able to divert it's Progreſs? The Caſe is too Evident and Plain, that, if this Projectile Force was Deriv'd from God, Matter wou'd be as little in the Power of the Philoſophers to Manage and Direct it, as they pleasd, as if they had never ſupposd it Paſſive; and therefore ſuch a Conceſſion vouũ deſtroy the very Intention of making Matter Paſſive and Homogencous, namely, that of Contriving it into what Shapes, Figures, or Motions, ſhould be thought Fit or Convenient for a Preſent Solution. Ir therefore the Progreſs of Matter or Body from 4 to B is under the Will and Direction of the Philoſopher, Let us now Inquire which way that Motion is Produced, when Matter is ſuppos'd to be perfectly Unactive in it ſelf; the Mind cannot by Thinking put it into Motion, nor can our own Imaginations, be they as Vigorous as they will, Actuate a Dead Lump, and Throw it into an Uniform Projection; Since then the Preſent Scheme does not Inform us, how in Unactive Matter a Projectile Force from 4 to B is Impreſ"'d upon it, tho' all, which is here propoſed to be Demonſtrated, were true upon the Suppoſition of ſuch a Projectile Force, yet, vhen applyd to Nature, the Body wou'd be Quieſcent in 4, and there wou'd not be the Lea©t Advance made from 4 to B, and conſequently, the Revolution of the Planets coud not be Explain'd by ſuch a Scheme; If it is again ſaid, that Almighty God Impreſſes this Force upon Bodies, which, being Paſſive of themſelves, vouũ continue that Force in Directum, if not Interrupted by Gravity, which is ſupposd to àx Derivd from him likewiſe, we ſhall ſeem, I'm afraid, to make the Sovereign Diſpoſci of the Univerſe a Capricious Kind of Agent, whilſt he Puſhes the Unactive Maſi One Way and Draws it Another, and Created it Unactive too, that he might be Employd in ſuch a Ludicrous Paſtime; It is told us, that Nature always takes the ſhorteſt Methods to Effect i's own Purpoſes, and it is a Fundamental Maxim of the Preſent Philoſophy; but ſurely then the wiſe Former and Maker of Nature it ſeli woud not Create a Maſs without Action, in order afterards to Impres TWo Different ones upon it, which might be Effected by one; Indeed this Notion has too great a Reſemblance of the Fancies and Artifices of Philoſophers to be Entitled to the being a Divine, which is plainly no more, as we ſhall ſhow, than a Human Contrivance. AFTER having ſaid what foregoes, we ſhall now Proceed to Inquire into the Generation of this Figure, ſuppoſing 4 to be a Body conſiſting of Homogeneous Matter, and that there is a Projectile Motion given to it, which carries it Uniformly from 4 to B, and from thence to f, and ſo on; Either then the Projectile Motion AB is Equal to Bc =Cd = De = Ef, or not, If Equal, vhen the Body Departs fromC to à, it will have the ſame Projectile Force, as when it Proceeds from I to f, or from A to 8, Notwithſtanding, that it is continually Urgd by a Contrary Force, hich Preſſes it tovards s, which is Abſurd and Irrational; unleſs a Projectile Motion can riſe out of its Oppreſſion from Gravity with as much Vigour at , as before that Load was thrown upon it at 4 or B, which will ſhow a Vivacity in Matter ſomething Superior to that Tameneſs and Paſſiveneſs, which this Philoſophy preſcribes to it; Becauſe, if a Force was to Act Contrary to the Projectile, that is, from B to 4, from c to B, or from à to C, the Projectile from 4 to B, from B to f, or from C to à woud be evidently Diminiſd, and if Equal to it, voud be Deſtroy'd, how therefore a Force Acting towards sS, which is in ſome Meaſure Contrary to it, ſiou'd not in the lcaſt Diminiſh the ſame Projectile Force, is Impoſſible to ſay. E c Ir Ir 48, Bc, Cà, De, Ef, ate not Equal; In the Firt Place, that will be Denyd, which is here Affirm'd and Supposd, viz. that 4 B, B æ, Cà, &e. are Equal. Second, There is no more Reaſon to Suppoſe or Affirm, that B7 is Equal to 48, than that Cã is, for vhen the Body Moves from the Point 4 to B, ſuch a Projectile Force is not Clearer from an Attractive one, than Bc is; and therefore, if Cà is not Equal to Be, for the ſamæ Reaſon Bc will not be Equal to 48, which is yet ſuppos'd, and the ſame may be ſaid of the Reſt. Third, If the Projectile Motion 4B is not Equal to Bc Equal to Cã, what is it Equal to? If A4B is Equal 1o æc, and BC t0 Cà, CD to De, &. which is the only Caſe Remaining, it will be Inconceivable, how the Motion of the Body in 48, BC, CD, DE, &c. which is Compounded of a Pro jectile and Gravitating Force, ſhould be Equal to the Motion of it in Bc, C4, De, &c. where the Force is only ſuppos'd 10 be a Projectile one, Abſtracted from a Gravitating. Fourth, IF BC, Cã, &c. are not Equal, the Reaſon of it will be, that æC is a Compound Force, and CZ only a Projectile, But how a Projectile ſhould riſe out of a Compound without being Aſfected with the Gravity, which was Impreſ”'d from B to , that is, how there ſoud ever be a ſingle Projectile Force after ſuch a Compound, is altogether Inexplicable. 5.3. HAVING conſiderd the Projectile Force in the Preſent Scheme, let us now Examine into the Attractive, which may be Expreſs'd by C, àa D, eE, ſF, ſince the Effect is neither Greater nor Leſs than the Cauſes, which produce it; The Effect is the Bodys Revolving in the Diagonal Lines BC, CD, DE, whoſe Projectile Force is B, C4, De, and conſequently, the Gravitating may be Deſcrib'd or Repreſented by Cę, Dã, Ee, according to this Philoſophy. ErruER therefore theſe Attractive Forces, as the Projectile before, are Equal, or not; If they are Equal, ſince B or elſe 2C muſt be Equal to Cà by what Precedes, and ſince the Attractive Quality cannot drav the Body down from one Projectile Force more than another, that is, ſince the Angles æ BC, à CD ill be Equal, it will follow, that thoſe Triangles are likewiſc Equal, and that therefore Bc is Equal to Cã, and BC to CD, or that BC is Equal to Cã, and æ to CD, both which have been already Diſprov. j MorroviR, if 4B8 is the Projectile, wherẽ is the Gravitating Force, vhich belongs to it, that is Equal to Cc the Gravitating Force of the Projectile c? and why does not the Figure begin at B rather than at 4, Unleſs it were for a private Reaſon, becauſe 3C does not look ſo much like a Projectile, which is Compounded of that and Gravity, as 4B does? Ir Cc is not Equal to D4, Equal to æ, that is, if there is not the ſame Attractive Force, which Perverts the Body from the Tangent or Projectile, Matter, vhich is ownd to be perfectly Paſſive, will Aſlume of it ſelf Different Powers of Gravitation, and therefore are ſuch, as cannot be Deriv'd ſrom any other Cauſc than that of the Pleaſure of the Philoſopher. Ir may be farther ſaid, that the Propoſition, upon Which the Preſent depends, namely, that the Force oſ the Diagonal may be Reſolv'd into the Sides of the Parallelogram, has been already Prov'd to be falſe in our Conſideration of the Laws of this Philoſophy, and the Corollaries of them, and therefore 7 and æC are not in Truth Expreſſive of the Force in BC, tho' we have hitherto Acknovledgq it, and Argued againſt the Preſent Theorem upon that Suppoſition. LastLy, We have ſiewn in the Examination into the Doctrine of Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſons, that if the Right Lines B5, Cã, q, à D, were Diminiſd to Infinity, it is not neceſary they ſiou'd form a Curve, which this Propoſtion Affirms; Since the Nature of One or Two Right Lines, as Bæ and æC, tho' Joind and United together, may be Infinitely Different from the Nature of a Curve, which cannot, in ſome Caſes, be Meaſurd by any Right Lines, or any Conjunction of them whatſoever; It is alſo ſomething Extraordinary to make, in this Demonſtration, the Centripetal Forces not Tend to the Center, but Act in Lines Parallel to thoſe, which arc Directed thither; But This ve Omit. S. 4. SECOND, The next Thing to be conſiderd is the Magnitude of the Body, the Revolution of which is Inquir'd, if Matter or Body in General is nothing elſe than an Abſiracted Idea, it has no Qualities beſides thoſe, which the Mind of the Philoſopher gives it, which may Band about it's own Creature, as it pleaſcs, and let the the Bulk of ſuch Matter be Greater or Leſs, it will be the ſame; For if Matter coꝶſits of Extenſion in General, Solidity in General, and the like Abſtracted Properties, 1 Greater or Leſs Magnitude of them will be Equally Obedient to any Impulſes, which ſhall be thought convenient to Impart to it, but then all this will only Rei in the Fancy, and there Determine. ] ON the other Hand, if Matter has any Real Properties and Affections belonging to it, as particulurly that of Gravity, Impreſsd upon it from an Elaſtick Medium, or Innate, which this Philoſophy owns, This Scheme, which lies before us, will be Incapable of Affording us the Leaſt Satisfaction or Demonſtration Concerning the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, for which it is Deſign'd; Since, if 4 is Endued with an Actual Gravity, and ſuch Gravity is Proportional to the Quantity oſ Matter, which is contain'd in any Body, according to this Philoſophy, if the ſame Projectile Force 4 B, or Bę, &. is Communicated to Different Portions or Bulks of Matter, it will have very Diſferent Effects from vhat are Expreſs'd in this Figure, which ſuppoſes that Force to be Uniformly the ſame; Effects ſo Different, that if the Force oſ Gravity is Infinitely Increas'd by the Immenſe Magnitude of the Body, the Projectile may be Nothing in the Compariſon, by which the Body, inſtead of being Revolv'd, will Drop ro the Center, and if the Force of Gravity is Infinitely Diminiſd by the Extreme Smallneſs of the Body, the Projectile may be Infinite in the Compariſon, and Carry it forvard in Directum vithout any Revolution. IF it is ſaid, that according to the Greater Quantity of Matter or the Leſs, the Projectile Force Imparted to ĩt will be Greater or Leſs, but yer Uniform, ſo as to Eeep up the Body from Sinking to rthe Center, or going Forward in Directum ; Who is the kind Perſon, that Moderates and Tempers this Projectile Force with ſo much Beneſicence and Goodneſs, but the Same, Who had the Skill to Contrive and Invent it? I mean the Ingenious Author of this Philoſophy Sir Iſ. Neion, Who, by the ſame Method, may at his Pleaſure Communicate what Impreſſions he will to Matter, and no one ſhall Preſume to Contradict the Humour. j j For the Expreſſions of Gravity e C, à h, æ E, &. will be Various, if the Bulk o Magnitude of the Body is ſo, and therefore cannot be Explain'd by a Uniform Gravity Repreſented by thoſe Lines, but whilſt the Projectile is B, the Gravity may be Ten a Hundred, or a Thouſand Times Greater or Leſs rHah Cę, which, iſ Produc or Leſſend in that Proportion, woud cauſe an Unſpeakable Confuſion in the Preſent Figure, and vo'd in no manner be Capablè of belhg Exacted tò it; Unſeſ it ĩs ſaid, that the Accelerating Force to the Center conrinues the ſame, however Different the Magnitudes are, which are Acceletated, and therefore c will Expreſi ſuch Attractive or Accelerating Force ithout any Alteration; To which it may be Replyd, that this would not be True, if it co'd be even Prov|, that Matter ĩs Similar and Homogencous, or that all Bodies Deſcend Equally, and in Equal Times, to their Center of Attraction, both which Notions we have yet Endeavourd to Confate in the Firſt Pat of the Principles of Philoſophy, which we have ſome Vears ago Publiſvd, and can be only True, if ve conſider Matter as a mere Abſtracted Thing, which is the ſame, whether we take a Greater or Leſę Portion of it, and vhich is likewiſe a Perfect Fancy and Imagination. S. 5. THIRD, The Third Thing proposd was to Examine, vhat vou'd be the Conſcquence, if other Forces were Introduc'd, whether Projectile or Attractive, in a Different Proportion to Each other from vhat is here Preſumd, for, in the Preſent Caſe, at the ſame Time that the Projectile Force voud carry the Body Revolvd from 2 toę, the Attractive voud Drav it from æ to C; If therefore the Projectile Force moud now be Infinitely Increas'd or Diminiſh'd, whilſt the Attractive Draws it from t to C, namely upon the Suppoſition of the Accelerating Force being the ſame, the Attractive Force vou'd be carry'd away in Directum by the Projectile in the Firſt Caſe, and in the Lat Ruſ to the Center; or if the Projectile were to continuc the ſame, and the Artractive Force as Infinitely Diminiſh'd or Increasd in a Body of the ſame Magnitude, the like Eſfects vou'd Follow, and Nothing of this Figure voud Enſue; from Whence it is plain in all Reſpects, that this is Nothing morc than an Abſtracted and Mathematick Reaſoning, which conſiders an Uniform Projectile and Attractive Force vithout Determining what it is, vhich yet is Neceſſary in ⸗ truc Reaſoning. s. 6. FouRTH s. 6. FouRTH, And laſtly, if Forces perſectly Diſtinct from Either of theſe, as thoſe in Fire, Vegetation, &c. or the Expanſive in General, are Introduced into the Figure, it is Maniſeſt, that the Projectile and Attractive vill be ſo much Alter'd, that the Preſent Figure will be entirely Annihilated and Confounded. s. 7. THE Second Propoſition is, That every Body, which, when it is Movd in any Curve Line, and by a Radius Drawn cither to an Immoveable Point, or to a Point that proceeds Uniſormly in a Rectilineal Motion, Deſcribes Areas about that Point, which are Proportional to the Times, is Urg'd by a Centripetal Force Tending to the ſame Point. TuE Demonſtration of this Propoſition ſo evidently depends upon the Former, and the Firſt and Second Laws, which have been already Conſider'd, that there is no Occaſion particularly to Examine into it. 5. 8. TuE Third Propoſition is, That Every Body, which, by a Radius Drawn to the Center of Another Body, however Movd, Deſcribes Areas about that Center Proportional to the Times, is Urgd by a Force Compounded of a Centripetal Tending to the other Body, and of the whole Accelerating one, by which the other Body is Urgſd. Tur Demonſtration likewiſe of this Propoſition is concluded ſrom the 6' Corollary of the Laws, which have been Examin'd, from the Firſt of thoſe Laws, and ſrom the foregoing Propoſition the Second; and therefore it will not be here alſo neceſſary to make any particular Inquiry into the Preſent Reaſoning. WE ſhall notwithſtanding obſerve, that when the Firſt Propoſition had Inform'd us, that the Areas, which Bodies Deſcribe by Radius's Dravn to an Immoveable Center oſ their Forces, were Proportional to their Times, and on the Contrary, the Second had told us, that Bodies, which were ſo Circulated, were Urg'd by a Centripetal Force, both which Propoſitions Reſpect Curves in General, vhoſc Radius's are not Determin'd whether Equal or not, we are yet in the Scholium of this Propoſition Perſuaded to Believe, that an Equable or Uniform Deſcription of Arcas is an Index or Characteriſtick of a Center, whoſe Curve is Circular, and whoſe Radius's are Equal; vhereas, if it were ſo, the Firſt Propoſition woud not be ſo General, as it is Exhibited to us, and if it is ſo General as it is Repreſented, an Equable Deſcription of the Areas can be no more Concluſive of a Circular than of any other Curve in Spatiis Liberis, ſince the Spaces are ſuppos'd to be ſo, in the Firſt Propoſition and the Demonſtration of it; that is,, we cannot be illing to allow any more in a Philoſophy, which pretends to Mathematick Demonſtration, than what is Juſtly and Strictly concluded from ſuch Demonſtration. l 5. 9. THE Fourth Propoſition is, That of Bodies, which Deſcribe Different Circles by an Equable Motion, the Centripetal Forces Tend to the Centers of the ſame Circles, and are to Each other, as the Squares of the Arcs, which are Deſcribd in the ſame Portion of Time, Divided by the Radius's of the Circles. LEr the Bodies, B, b, by Revolving in the Circumferences of the Circles, D, b ã, Deſcribe 1 c & at once the Ares BD, hd, ſince therefore by EBDN their ſole Innate or Projectile Force the Bodies, B, b, vou'd Deſcribe the Tangents BC, he, it is Evident, that the Centripetal Forces are thoſe, d which perpetually Drav the Bodies from the Tangents to the Circumſerences of the Circles, and conſcquently are to One Another in the Firſt Reaſon of the Naſcents, CD, c à, and Tend to the Centers of the Circles, by Prop. 25 becauſe the Areas Deſcrib'd by the Radiuss are ſuppoſed Proportional to the Times; Let the Figure 7b be made Similar to the Figure DCB, and by Lem. s, the Line CD will be to the Line tr, as the Arc BD to the Arc b1, And by Lem. 11. the Naſcent Line  vill be to the Naſcent Line àc, as br square, to bd Square, and ex quo the Naſcent Line l nC Chap. IV. of the Phyſical Aſtronomy. Diameter of the Circle, and the Deſcent of the Body performd vith the ſame Given : . BD hà BD hã i ſam nC. de:: 2 vaq, 5b1 Force, and in the ſame Time, that is, ſince : 5.  m 5 BD therefore 258. BD :: BD.. DG, or pæF and Conſequently, DC is to the Force of Gravity as Al is to the Space, which an Heavy Body Deſcribes by it: Fall in the ſame Time. j WE are alſo Informd from the Preſent Scholium, that this Propoſition may be Demonſtrated another Way; Let a Polygone of what Number of Sides ſoever be Deſcribd in a Circle, and if the Body, by Moving with a Given Velocity in the Sides of the Polygone, od be Reflected from the Circle at each of the Angles The Force, with which it Strikes upon the Circle in each Reqection, vill be as it Velocity, and therefore the Sum of the Forces in a Given Time will be as thai Velocity, and the Number of Reflections conjunctly, that is, ſif any Polygone is Particularly Given) as the Length Deſcrib'd in that Time, and the ſame Length Divided by the Radius of the Circle, or as the Square of that Length Divided by the Radius and conſequently, if the Sides of the Polygone are Diminiſd to Infinity, ſo as to Coincide with the Circle, as the Square of the Arc Deſcrib'd in a Time Given Divided by the Radius; And this is ſaid to be the Force, with which a Body Urges or Preſſes upon the Circle, and to this is Equal the Contrary Force, by which a Circle conſtantly Repells the Body towards the Center. There is likewiſe another Demonſtration of this Propoſition in the Second Edition of theſe Principles, which is Collected and Formd from Prop. 2, and Corol. 2. Prop. 1, as alſo from Corol. 4, ol the ſame Prop. and from Lem. 7, all which have been ſeverally Conſider'd. S. 10. THIS being the Chief Propoſition, on which the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies Depend, as Explaind by this Philoſophy, we ſhall be the more Minute in the Examination of it; It is therefore Firſt ſuppos'd, that TWo Bodies Move in Different Circles, ſo that the Arcs, 5D, bd, ſoud be Performd together, and that thoſe Arcs are as the Velocities, with which they are Deſcrib'd, which we ſhall afterwards conſider, And ſhall only ſay at Preſent, that as the Arcs BD, bã are Performd at once, according to the Propoſition, their Circles, which they Repreſent, ſiould be ſo likeviſe, whereas all the foregoing Proportions in the Corollaries ſuppoſc the Periodical Times Different, Contrary to the Propoſition, which ſuppoſes Them the ſame. S. 11. THE Second Thing Preſumd is, that, by a Sole unate or Projectile Force, the Bodies, B, b, vou'd Deſcribe the Tangents BC, be, and therefore the Centripetal Forces arc thoſe, which perpetually Draw the Bodies from the Tangents. In Anſwer to which, it is Alledgd, that we have already Inquird into the Projectile Force, which from whence it ſou'd be derivd into a Paſſive Matter, as we ſaid, we could not Imagine, unleſs from Almighty God himſclf, or from the Will and Pleaſure of the Philoſopher, both which were Conſider'd, but now it ſcems by one word only Introduced of Innate, the whole Difficulty is ſolvd, if that is meant by Vis Inſita, for there is no other Senſe Remaining of it; If ſo, how is it poſſible to Conceive, that Matter, which is abſolutely Paſſive, ſhould be Naturally Endued with a Projectile, or indeed with any Force? Tis true the Vis Inſita of Matter is Defid to be the Power of Reſiſtance, by which every Body, as much as in it lies, Perſiſts in it's State of Quieſcence, or Motion Uniformly in Directum; Therefore the Vis Inſita at the moſt ĩs only the Perſeverance of a Body in that State, in which it is; But the Queſtion here is, how that State of Motion or Reſt is Produced in Unactive Matter, which is not Accounted for; And in General it may be ſaid, that the Perſeverance in a State cannot be Innate to Matter, unleſs upon a Suppoſition of Reſiſtance or Action in it, and which is Affirm'd in the Explanation of the Preſent Definition to be the Proper Inertia of it, by which it is ſaid, it comes to paſs, that every Body is difficulty Diſturbd from the State in which it is; which is ſomething Singular indeed, that a bare Inertia of Matter, which ſuppoſes no Action at all, and that it is Intirely made up of Solidity, Extenſion, Diviſibility, and ſuch kind of Properties, which Include not the leaſt Activity in them, ſou'd be Endu'd with a Poſitive Action, or a Poſitive Reſt, and in both Caſes with a Reſiſtance to the being pinurb from the State, in which it is; is3 Tho the Perſeverance of each State does not here properly come into the Account, but how that State is Introduced upon it, hich cannot be any Ways conceivd, how it lnou'd be, if Matter is only Solid, Extended, Diviſible, Figurd, and in General conſiſts of ſuch Qualities, which neither Have, nor can Infer, any Action in Them; Beſides which, if Perſeverance is a Reſiſtance to the being Diſturb'd, there is, as we ſaid, an Action in the Reſiſtance, that is, in the Inertia; or Matter is ſuppos'd to be Active and Unactive at the ſame Time. SUPPOSING yet this Projectile Force, it is again Imagin'd, that it procecds in the Tangents, BC, he, but it is not from thence Evident, that it will proceed in a Second Tangent Dravn ſrom D and ; For if the Centripetal Force is Capable of Subducing the Projectile, ſo as to Drav it to D and 4, how the Projectile Force ou'd again Conquer and Subdue the Centripetal, ſo as to make the Projectile proceed in a Second Tangent, is Inconceivable; And the ſame may be ſaid of a Third, or a Fourth Tangent in Infinitum. 5. 12. THE Third Thing Preſumd is, that the Centripetal Forces are to one another in the Firſt Reaſon of the Naſcents, CD, cã, and that they Tend to the Centers of the Circles, by the Second Propoſition, becauſe the Areas Deſcribd by the Radius's are ſuppos'd Proportional to the Times; As to the Naſcent and Evancſcent Reaſons, they have been already Conſidered and Refuted, and that CD, à Tend to the Centers of the Circles is not Evident from the Second Propoſition, Firſt, becauſc that Propoſition is not Provd as we have beſore Obſerv'd, and in the next Place, becauſe the ſame Propoſition only Alledges, that Every Body, which, when it is Movd in any Curve Line and the Radius is Drawn to a Certain Point, Deſcribes Areas about that Point Proportional to the Times, is Urg'd by a Centripetal Force Tending to that Point; Whereas the Centripetal Forces CD, càd Tend to no ſuch Point, but Act in Directions Parallel to 25; Tis true  vhen in D, Approaches ncarer to S the Center, But it is not by a Force, which is Centriperal, for then it woud be Urgſd from C to S, but by an Imaginary one Aſſumd by the Philoſopher, which Preſſes Side-ways and Parallel, becauſe it beſt ſuits the Preſent Scheme and Reaſoning. §. 13. AFTER this it is Deſired, that ?b ſiould be Similar to DCB, and then by Lemma the 5t and 11th the Preſent Propoſition is Concluded. As to vhat Reſpects thoſe Lemmas, they have been before Conſiderd and Examin'd, in the Method of Naſcent and Evaneſcent Reaſous; and as to Similar Figures, where the Curves are Diſferent, which enter into their Compoſition, it is a Poſtulatum, which it is Impoſſible to Grant, ſince, altho the Angle b æ1 ſould be Equal to the Angle BCD, yet b will not be Equal to CBD, unlels we can ſuppoſe, that BD, Drawn by the Radius S B from the Point b, has the ſame Curvity and Direction vith bã, Deſcribd by the Radius Sb from the ſame Point b, which is Contrary to Common Senſe and Experience. ON the other Hand, it is not Provd, that æ1, falling upon any Part of the Circle bi, will make an Angle Equal to that, which is Comprehended betwixt CD and æ D, for where the Curvities of Unequal Circles differ in every Point, it is not Imaginable, nor can it be Conceivd, how Lines Drawn Parallel to the Radius's of thoſe Circles ſhoud ever make Equal Angles. If yet it is ſaid, that B D, bt, are to be Conſiderd as Right Lines in the laſt Reſult, then 2D and b? will Coincide with C and b4, and Conſcequently there will be no Triangles, and therefore no Similar ones. S. 14. WE ſhall now Grant theſe ſeveral Preſumptions, and that DC. àæ:: sag The Corollaries yet, which are Dravn from hence, will deſerve to be , Conſiderd. TnE Firſt of which is, that the Centripetal Forces are as the Squares of the VeloBD V bdq 585 SJ0 In vhich Caſe, the Velocities are ſupposd to be as the Arcs, which are Deſcrib/d; And in General this Doctrine takes it for Granted, and makes it a Fundamental Maxim to it's Reaſonings, that Every Space, which is Deſcribd, is Compounded o the cities, divided by the Radiuss of the Circles, that is, PC. dc:: the Time and the Velocity, which are usd in it's Deſcription, and therefore, the Times in the Preſent Caſe being Equal, the Spaces Deſcribd, or the Arcs, will be as the Velocities; Granting therefore this to be ſo for the Preſent in Right Lines, it is not Neceſſary it ſhould be ſo in Curve ones, at Leaſt according to this Philoſophy; Since BD, ba, tho' Deſcribd in Equal Times, may not be as the Velocities, becauſe the Centripetal Forces CD, cã have their Effect, which will Interrupt, and Deſtroy that Proportion ſo far, that if the Times are the ſame, and the Spaces  D and hà Equal, yet the Velocities may not be; becauſe, where the Centripetal Forcè is Greater in CD than in c4ã, it may Require a Greater Velocity to Perform an Equal Arc in BD than in bã, tho' the Times are Equal; for it muſt want a Greater Forcè to turn a Point, into à Greater Curvity D than into a Leſs bã, from its Rectilineal Motion in BC, he, becauſe D Declines more from C than à from c, or, which is the ſame, the Centripetal Force is Greater in D than in 4, and therefore will demand Proportionably a Greater Degree of Velocity or Force to Actuate and Impell it in the Circle. Tnis is the more Probable, becauſe from hence the Moments, vith which all Concentrical Citcles are Deſcribd, will become Equal, as in all Reaſon and Senſc they ought to be; for how Abſurd is it to Think, that Motions, which begin and end at once, and are carryd on in all the Intermediate Parts Uniformly, ſould not be Generated by Forces, which are quipollent? Which if ſo, the Arcs will not be as the Velocities, but in a Compound Reaſon of rhe Velocities, and the Centripetal Forces, and ſuppoſing BC, bę, to Repreſent the Velocities, and CD, cã the Centripetal Forces, BD. hd:: BCx CD. be æ cà; and in Reſpect of the Velocities and Centripetal Forces in Similar Arcs, BD, bt, it vill be BC. bæ:: kt. CD, ſuppoſing bæ the Velocity, and æ1 the Centripetal Force of b1; So that if we take BD, bã, as Two Equal Arcs, both the Arcs themſelves, and every Point, which Forms them, ill be of very Different Natures, and not Equal in any Particular, excepting that perhaps they are Meaſur'd by the ſame Aperture of the Compaſſes; ſince every Imaginable Equal Portion of the Arcs BD, h4, and the Arcs themſelves, conſiſt of Velocities and Centripetal Forces, which entirely Differ from each other, and we may as well ſay, that an Inch Line is Equal to an Inch Square or Cube, becauſe they ſeem to be ſo in Extent, or by the Meaſure of the Compaſſes, as that D is Equal to bã for that Reaſon; For by what foregoes they are Different in their Nature and Conſtitution, and as much Slower, as the Velocity in BD is, than that in bã, ſo much is it the more Compact and Stronger, and as much Quicker, as the Velocity in bà is, than that in 3D, ſo much is it the more Expanded and Dilated, or Weaken'd; that is, the Points Impell'd in BD are Heavier, and in bã Lighter, the Centripetal Force in the One being Greater than that in the Other: And this is ſaid in Relation to the Deſcription of Circles themſelves, Abſtracted from and without Conſidering Bodies Revolv'd in them, which may poſſibly be the Reaſon, why Leſſer Circles are Deſcrib'd with Greater Diſficulty than Larger from the ſame Center. S. 15. AND This brings me to ſpeak of a Certain Kind of Velocity, even in Right 4 ,.5 in Lines, which this Philoſophy has not ſo much as thought of, and which may be  Fræ Equally Preſumd, as well as the Preſent, which Depends upon its being in a Reci- læ ſ procal Proportion of the Times, in which it is Perform'd, ſuppoſing the Space the Rih Lium ſame, in Which it Adts; that is, a Simple Velocity is Deſcrib'd in a Certain and De- æb my termin'd Time, a Double Velocity in Half that Time, a Triple in a Third Part of — it, &c. On the Contrary, Half ſuch a Velocity will be in Double the Time, and a  Tim 4 Third Part in a Triple of it; whereas from the Geometry of Sulids, it is Evident, that .e ji the Proportions of Velocity or Force may be Infinite in the ſame Time, and the in Dif/m ſame Space, and we may add on the Contrary, that the Proportions of Time and . æ i Space may be Infinite, where there is the ſame Force or Velocity: That is, there ſcmpm may be the Same Line Deſcrib'd, which, tho' in Length it is the Same, ſall be Ca- & Naire. pable of Different Values, Quantities, or Eſtimations, and Different Lines Deſcribdd, which, tho' Different in Length, ſhall be Capable of the Same Values or Denominations, that is, ſuppoſing the Lengths of the Lines to Expreſs the Times, and the Values or Denominations of them the Velocities. F f aæ Tuus Tuvus it uill not be denyd, but that the Line æb may be twice Deſcribd in the Time Expreid by a,, whilſt the ſame Line ab may be only once Deſcribd by a Different and a Slower L Velocity; if thereſore what is Deſcrib'd in Length is  t Conſcrd upon the Force, that is, if there is a Double Force in every Part of ab, where it would have Deſcribd a Double Line for a Single one, in every Part of it, where it would only with a Single Force have Deſcribd a Single one, it will be the ſame, as the Repreſenting to us Different Actions or Forces in the ſame Points of Space, and in the ſame Time; the Eaſineſs of which Conception is Maniſeſt, from Preſſing a Finger upon a Table with Diſferent Degrees of Force, or ſrom the Action of Fire, and of Electricity, or the Magnet, or any other Action, Performd in the ſame Time and Space, which yet are Different in their Natures and Activity; The ſame may be ſaid of Gravity, for if we take a Globe of Lead, and another of Cork, and ſet Them upon a Plane, Nothing can be more Evident, than that the Gravitating Action of the One, and of the Other, is Different in the ſame Time, and in the ſame Space. ON the other Hand, as there may be Lines Deſcribd, which are in Length and Time the ſame, tho' Diſſerent in their Values or Denominations, ſo may there be Lines, which are Different in Length, Deſcribd in the ſame Time, and yet their Values the ſame; For if æb may be Deſcrib'd Twice in the ſame Time by a Double Velocity, whilſt the ſame Line is Deſcri'd Once by a Single one, and the Donble Velocity may be Confer'd upon a Double Force in cach Point of 4b; For the ſame Reaſon the Double Force Compreſ'd in æb will be Equal to the Double Velocity, which repeated a b Twice, and which is Equal to æb, be; All the Difference, which will be, is, that the Action or Force is Compreſ”i'd in the one Caſe into a4, and Diffusd or Dilated in the other, where it Scatters or Diſperſes it's ſelf, as far as æ; Notwithſtanding which, æb in ſuch a Circumſtance will be Equal to æc; and thus it is in the Gravitating Force, where Gold is to Water, as 19 to 1, if therefore e take 19 Times as much Water as Gold, their Gravitating Forces will be Equal, tho their Spaces are Different, and as 19 to I. AND this is in a great Mcaſure what wo Intended in the Geometry of Solids, or ol Matter, in which we Endęavourd to Conform Mathęmaticks to Nature, and not to the Arbitrary Abſtractions of the Mind, Derivd originally from the Italick Sect oſ Philoſophers, vho made all Things to conſiſt in Numbers and Abſtractions, and from the Notions in Logicks oſ Quantity and Extenſion, and from thence Spread into all the Elements of Geometry, as well as into all the Sſems of Philoſophy, which have been Proposd to us from the Times of Pyrhagoras the Geometer, and Ariſtorle the Great Inventor of Logichs, to the Pręſent Age ve Live in. s. 16. AND that the Gęneration of Mathematick Quantitics, by Drawing a Cube into a Line, &e. and from thęnce Forming both Lines, Squates, and Cubes, Each oſ them of Different Dimenſions fcom What are vulgarly Roceiv'd, is Agrecablo to this Reaſoning we have already ſiewn in the ſame Geometry of Solids, or of Matter, and ſhall herę farther Explam ] LET ab be one Conſtant and Detęrmined Line, which is Produced by a Certain and Fixt Degree of Velogity; In the flowing of the Point from æ to b, the only Reaſon of that Line's being Deſcribd is, that æ paſſes throſ every Point of it to 4, Iet the Velocity be what it vill: From which Generarion of ab it muſt be Acknov ledged, thar wherever a Point, as æ, paſts, it Produces Length, and ſor the ſame Reaſon, wherever a Line paſſes Parallel to it's ſelf, it Produces Breadth, and wherever a Surface or Broadth, paſſes Parallel to it's ſelf, it Produces Space or Depth; The Queſtion is, whether a Cube carry'd Parallel 1o, it's ſelf, according to the Direction of the ſame Line, may not Produce a Cube of a Different Value, Depth, or Space, which we Aſfirm it may. Tnus let abd Repreſent the Side of a Cube, it is Evident, that if ab was Conſiderd as the Side of a Square, (hich Square oud follow the Motion of it's Side a b and be Perpendicular to the Plane æb) and ſhoud paſs thro' n æ mn  -732 thro' the ſeveral Ditinctions in æu, ſrom æ to i, h I, m and æ, ſuch à Motion of the Squate of æ5 would Produce the Common Cube or Solid of the Mathematicians; As therefore a b before Repreſented rthe Square of it, Let æo. ſp, ęq, hr c à Repreſont the Squares of which they are the Sides, it is Maniſeſt, if ab7à is nov Movd upvards from a to n, at the ſame Time thar ab has paſed thro' the ſeveral Points of an, and conſequently has Deſeribd a Cube, eo will have paſſed thro' all the ſame Doints, excpting thoſe which lic berwixt m and æ, and conſequently will have Deſcribed another Cube, excepting what Remains to be Accompliſhicd betwixt m and æ, if æ o thereſore Riſes to n it will have Perform'd a Second Cube, as ab had done before, and by the ſame Argument fp, gq; hr, cd, will Perform or Deſcribe a Third, Fourth, Fiſth, or Sixth Cube, when they arrive Reſpectively at n3 From whence it will follow, that the Cube æ bc à multiply'd into the Line 4 ill be a Cube, whoſe Every Square after ſuch a Multiplication ill be as much a Cube, as Every Parallel Superſicies of a Common Cube is a Square, and by the ſame Methods of Generation: And the like Kind of Reaſoning obtains in the Multiplication of this Second Cube into the ſame Line æn, &c. Nor can it be opposd to this Generation of Mathematick Solids, to the 4h, sth, 61h, or 1001h Dimenſion, or to Infinity, that it is only Dęſcribing the ſame Space over-again, without any eonſequent Effeqt, fince, if the Line 4 in it's Motion, according to the Direction of 4n, Produces a real Square, which is Conſtant in that Space, in which it is Produced, for the ſame Reaſon the Lines eo, fe g9, &. vill; that is, if the one has an Effect, which is Conſtant, the other vill, or elſe they will all Equally have none, and the Line 4 Multiply'd into æ n ill not ſo much as Produce a Square. WEe ſall only therefore farther obſerve upon this kind of Geneſis, that the Reaſon of the foregoing Objection ſeems to lic in this, that Men have already formd in their Minds their Idea of Length and Breadth, or of Space in General, as actually Exiſting in Nature, and which becomes Unvariable, whatever paſſes thro' it; Thus, Albeit Ten Thouſand Waves fould ſucceed each other thro the ſame Space, the Space will ftill remain Unalteri, and conſequently it is thought, if a Million of Squares are carry'd Parallel to themſclves thrò the ſame Cube, or ſo many Lines thro the ſame Square, both the Square and the Cube will be ſtill Conſtant and Unvaryd. BuP if we Examine truly into this Sort o? Arguing, the Caſe will appear to be Extreamly Diſferent; for in the Firſt Inſtance, there is a ſtanding Meaſuro of Space originally Fixed in the Mind, and which will be Immutable, whatever paſſes thro' it, but in the Second, namely, in the Generation of Mathematick Quantities, there is nothing ſuppoſed before the Production of thoſe Quantities, not ſo much as Length or Breadth; and conſdcquently, ſince Length is Produced, where there was no Length before, and Breadth, where there was no Breadth, &e. for the ſame Reaſon there may be moe Dimenſions than Three Produced in the ſame Abſtracted Space, which were not there before, namely, by ſuch Actual Productions as are already Deſcrib'd; For Ten Dimenſions may as well Exiſt together as One, ſinco they all of them Exiſt in nothing but Themſclves, that is, Five, Six, or Ten Dimenſions do not Exiſt in Three Dimenſions, no more than Three in Two, but they Exi?t in Themſclves, vhere Nothing of Them before Exiſted. S. 17. orol. v. FROM henco it follows, That as a Drawn into ac Produces a Line, ſo ca on the Contrary, Drawn into the Point 4, ſo- as Every Point of it ſhould paſ Succeſſvely thro' æ vill Produce in it a Quantity Equal to a Line. Cvrol. 2. LixgwisE, if ca is Diawn Succeſſively thr each Point in æn, namely, a i, h l, m, n, and thoſc Points are Infinite, there will be a Line Produced in each Point, and conſequently, a Square Produced in the Line. Corol. 3. ALsO, if ab is carry'd Parallel to it's ſelf, Aceording to the Points 4, i, t, I, m n, it will Produce a Square, and if eo, fp, gqhr, cd, are Succeſſively made to paſs thro the ſamo Points, and Parallel to Themſelves, they will Produce a Cube vithin the ſame Limits; of the Square bn. Corol. 4. THEREFORE ovory Point in ſuch a Cube will be Equal to a Line, every Line Equal to a Square, and every Square Equal to a Comimon Cube or Solid, and the Cube vill be a Dimenſion of the Fourth Power. Corol: 5. IP, after this Cube is Produced, it is again multiply'd into the ſame Line an, ſince ab, which was a Line before, is now a Square, if it is Drawn into an, the Square Square bn will be Equal to a Cube; And ſince eo, ſp, gq, hr, cd are Succeſſively drawn into the ſame Line æn the Square bn will bè Equal to the Dimenſion of the Fourth Pover, and the Cube vill be of the Fiſth, in which Every Point will be Equal to a Square, Every Line Equal to a Common Mathematick Solid, and Every Square Equal to a Dimenſion of the Fourth Power, &. . Corol. 6. FROM which it follows in General, according to what we have Expreſꝶ'ę in the Geometry of Solids, Prop. 1. Corol. 9. Par. 1, that m3, m*, m', mb, m, &. in Inſmitum may be Each of them Compreſſcd into a Cube, which is the ſame, as to Length, Breadth, and Depth, according to the Ordinary and Common Abſtractions. WEe have only however propos'd this, as a Way of Generating Quantities, which are Different in their Dimenſions, whilſt the Abſtracted Spaces continue the ſame: but that there are in Fact ſuch Quantities conſidered in Mathematicks, is Evident from the Lemma Prefixed to the Geometry of Solids, and from Chap. 4. 5. 11. of the Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and Dr. Walliss Arithmetick of Infinites there Cited, hich is the Foundation of the Preſent Celebrated Doctrine of the Infinite Series. FROM Whence, inſtead of the Elements of Geometry; which we poſſeſs, a Thouſand and a Million of Euclids might be Form'd, and the Pomaria of Mathematics Enlarged without Bounds, and made as Univerſal and Comprehenſive as Algebra it ſclf. And that ſuch a Generation of Quantities is Agrecable to Nature is Pſain, in which we find an Immenſe Number of Various and Different Bodies Exiſting in the ſame Space, as Gold, Lead, Marble, Wood, Water, Air, Fire, Light, and Ether, and the ſeveral other Infinite Species and Kinds of Bodies, which lic Intermediate to them, whoſc Different Conſtipations of Action, or whoſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces, may be Repreſented by theſe Different Extenſions, which can never be Reduced to an Unvaryd and Abſtracted one of Mere Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs: If therefore the Preſent Philoſophy is miſtaken in it's Notions of Velocities being always Reciprocal to the Times, and in it's Conception of Space, it's whole Reaſoning in This and the Subſequent Corollaries is Falſe, which ſuppoſes the Common and Vulgar Abſtractions of both. S. 18. THE Second Corollary from this Propoſition is, That the Centripetal Forces are Reciprocally as the Squares of the Periodical Times Divided by the Radius's; which Depends upon this Propoſition, that the Periodical Times are in a Reaſon Compounded of a Reaſon of the Radius's Directly, and of a Reaſon of the Velocities Inverſely, that is, BD, T. bã, T:: E . u , and therefore, ſince it Aſſumes the Receivd Abſtractions of Velocity and Space for certain Maxims, is liable to the ſame Confutation. 5. 19. As the Third Corollary entirely Reſts upon what foregoes, ſo there is no Occaſion for any Conviction of the Untruth of it, and as the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Corollaries Inſiſ*t upon the Proportions of the Third, and are only Affirmations of the ſame Thing, by Multiplying. Dividing, Inverting, and Alternation, according to the Common and Fixed Rules in Mathematick Proportions, it will be unneceſſary to Enter into a more Critical Examination of them. S. 20. AFTER a particular Inquiry into this Propoſition and the Corollaries of it, we ſhall conſider what is offered to us in the Scholium it ſubjoins, Namely, that the Sixth Corollary obtains in the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, even according to what our own Country Men, as it is ſaid, have Collected a-part from each other, to wit, Sir Chriſtopher Wren, Dr. Hook, and Dr. Halley, In Anſwer to which we ſhall ſay; FinsT, That the Proportion of this Corollary is not Prov'd, unleſs upon Abſtractions, which are Arbitrary, Uncertain, or Falſe. SECOND, When this is Apply'd to the Planets, they are Conſiderd or Imagin'd to Conſiſt of a like Homogeneous Matter, whoſe Weight is Proportional to it's Quantity, which Notion has been already Ex amin'd into, whereas by the Nature of all the Matter, which Surrounds us, it is more Reaſonable to think it is Various and has Different Forces of Gravitation Peculiar to it, and conſequently, that Each Planct has, beſides what is Derivd from the Proportion of it's Greater or Leſs Diſtance from the Center. TuiRD, TuHiRD, This Reaſoning is ſaid to be Confirmd by the Obſervations made in the Heavens by Aſtronomers. S. 21. S1NCE Firſt, the Motion of the Secondary Planets Revolving about any æ Primary one is ſo Adjuſted, that the Squares of the Periodick Times are in the ſame/ Reaſon with the Cubes of the Diſtances of the ſaid Plancts from the Center of the Primary. E Tuus in the Satellites of Jupiter, where the Periodick Times of the Innermoſt, ꝗ the Second, the Third, and the Outermoſt, are Reſpectively, as 13, 33, 74, and 1637 nearly, and their Diſtances, as 54, 9,143, and 25 The Square of the Periodick ; Time of the Innermoſt, to wit 3, is to I3 the Square of the Periodick Time of the ſ Second Satelles, as 170 the Cube of the Diſtance of the Innermoſt, to 736 the Cubeſ of the Diſtance of the Second from the ſame Center. : IN like manner 3 is to 51 the Square of the Periodick Time of the Third Satelles, as 1770 to 2890 the Cube of the Diſtance of this Third from the ſame Center of Fupiter. ALSO ; is 10 280 the Square of the Periodick Time of the Outmoſt Satelles, as 170 to 15800 the Cube of the Diſtance of the ſame Outmoſt Satelles; and ex æquo the ſame Reaſon obtains, if any To other Satellites are Compared with One Another, that is, the Second with the Third, or with the Qutermoſt, or the Third with the Outermoſt; And this Reaſon is ſtill more Exact, if the Diſtances and Periodick Times are taken more Accurately. LastLy, it is ſaid the ſame happens in the Satellites of Saruru, if thoſe Numbers are Aſſumed, vhich are Expreſ"'d in the 15th Prop. of this Aſtronomy. S. 22. FinsT, Iſ therefore we Allow theſe Obſervations to be True, which yet may: be Conteſted, as we have ſiewn in another Place, it will only follow, ſince the Principles before are Provd to be Falſe, that this Doctrine is no Other than an Ingenious Contrivance of the Mind to ſolve Phænomenons, which were already known, and that theſe Phænomenons are not derivd from a Strict, and Mathematick Reaſoning, but that an Hypotheſis is Invented and Pretended to be Mathematick by he Lines and Figures, which it draws, and then Adapted to the Solutions it Propoſcs. j i SECoND, In Reſpect of the Numbers, thoſe, which are Expreũ'd in the 150 Propoſition, do indeed Agree ith thoſe, which are mentioned here excepting in the Diſlance of the Ourmoſt Satelles, which is there ſaid to be as 253, whereas here it is only 25, which will cauſe ſome Difference at Leaſt in the Proportion Aſſign'd upon that Diſtance. DBuT that which is more is, it is not Evident, that the Numbers Alledgd obſerve the Proportion Requir'd, for the Square of 1, the Periodical Time of the Inmoũ Satelles is 1V23 I 2t0 I +5+%F 10 425 37; Whereas in the Proportion, it is made to be only 35 Likewiſe the Periodick Time of the Second Satelles is 335 to , and the Square of it = ææ =to 1234, Whereas in the Proportion it is made to be 135 Thus alſo in the Diſtances, 53 is that of the Innermoſt Satelles, the Cube of which is 4æ to 3 = to 18135, which yet the Proportion makes to be 1703 The Diſtance of the Second is ſaid to be 9, the Cube oſ which is 9x 9x 9 & to 729, which notwithſtanding is in the Proportion Expreſ'd by 736; what therefore can we conclude from ſuch a Reaſoning? Unleſs this,: that either 355. 1234:: 18135. 729 is the ſame as 3. 13:: 170. 736, Vhich is Impoſſible, or elſe that the Squares of the Periodick Times are not as the Cubes of the Diſtances, or which is the ſame, that the Periodick Times are nor in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of Them, according to Corol. 6. . WE muſt farther Add, that 3. 13:: 170. 736 is not a Juſt Proportion, unleſ™ 2208 is Equal to 2210, which are the Products from a Multiplication of; into 736, and of 13 into 170. Ir will be unneceſſary to Inquire into the other Proportions having conſidered theſe, fince they admit of the ſame Reaſoning and Compariſon. WEe muſt likewiſe obſerve, that the Inmoſt Satelles of upiter is Diſtant from the Center of it's Planet, according to Caſſini in his Obſervations thr a Teleſcope, 5 Semidiameters of Jupiter only, the Second Satelles 8, the Third 13, and the ou moſ moſt 23; Townley and Flamſtead, by their Obſervations thr a Micrometer, do noi make the Diſtances much more, but Borellus Enlarges them to 54. 83, I4, and 243. in which Obſervations there is the Difference of a Whole Semidiameter, that is, according to ſome, of 40000, and according to others, of 25000 Miles at the Leaſt; which is a ſufficient Evidence of the Great Uncertainty of theſe Obſervations, when they neither Agree in the Number of theſe Semidiameters, nor in the Meaſure ol the Semidiameters themſclves; However to Aſcertain this Matter, Recourſe is had to Calculations of their Diſtances, from obſerving the Eclipſes of theſe Satellites, and yet here they likeviſe differ, for Flamſtead makes them 5. 578, 8. 376, I4. 159, 24. 903, and then the Computation of them, from the Periodick Times, fixed them at 5. 578, 5. 878, I4. 168, 24. 968, but when this Philoſophy rather choſe to take Caſſin?s Obſervations, poſſibly out of ſome Diſguſt to the Former, and when he had Aſligi'd the Diſtances from the Eclipſes of the Satellites to be 53, 9, 143, 25%, vith Great: Facility the Periodick Times were made to Juſtify theſe Obſervations, and accordingly the Diſtances Ariſing from them were found to be 5. 667, 9. o17, I4. 384, 25. 2995 ĩLet us nov therefore take this Lat Improvement, and tho' the Numbers come pretty near Each other, yet if we conſider, what the Difference of an Unit is, which at the moſt is above 40500, and at the Ieaſt above 2 6030 Miles, we ſnall not perhaps ſo readily ſee the Conformity of the Diſtances from the Periodick Times to thoſe which are found by Obſervation; for 5355. 6566 Subſtracted from 5. 667 leaves a Difference of. ooI  one Thouſandth Part of 40000 or 26000 Miles, Namely, a Difference of 40 or 26 Miles more according to the Periodick Times than is found by Obſervation, and 17 Times that Number of Miles, that is, 6580 or 442 more in the one Caſe than the other in the Diſtance of the Second Satelles, and 40 or 26 Miles more in the Diſtance of the Third Satelles, and the ſame in the Fourth; And yet this is Argu'd upon the Utmoſt Conceſſions, which can be made or are deſird by this Philoſophy; For if we take other Obſervations the Difference will be much Greater. TuE Diſtances of Satur's Satellites, Computed by the Periodick Times, ſtill leſs Correſpond with thoſe, which are Affirmd from Obſervation, which, meaſured by Semidiameters of his Ring, are 133,. 25, 32, 8, 243 The Diameter oſ his Ring is the Double Seſquiquartan of the Diameter of Saturn, or  or a4 of it, which, according to ſome, Contains 67870 Miles, or, according to others, only 43925; If the Firſt, 22 of that Number will Amount to 152707 Miles, which alſo is had another Way, namely, by adding to 33935 Miles the Semidiameter of Sæturn, the Diſtance berwixt the Ring and his Body, and the Breadth of the Ring, which are Equal, but the Breadth of the Ring by Obſervation is 2 1209 Miles, and 2 x 2 1209 = 42418, and the Sum of the TWo Numbers will be 76353, the Semidiameter of the Ring, which Doubled Produces the Diameter 152706, the ſame Number nearly as before; If we now take 43925 Miles for the Diameter of Saturn 25 of it is =98831 Miles, the Diameter of the Ring, on the other Hand, add to the Semidiameter of Saturn Twice the Breadth of his Ring, and Double that Number, it ought to Produce 98831 the Diameter of the Ring as before, which it does not, but 128761 Let us however here make uſe of the leat Number, and the Semidiameter of the Ring vill be 49415, that is near 50000 Miles, and in the Former Caſe 76353 Miles, which will be Equal to Unit in the Preſent Calculations. TuE Diſtance of the Firſt or Interior Satelles is not Different by the Periodick Times, from what is found by Obſervation I. 95 being = to 143, likewiſe in the Second Satelles 2. 5 5 to 24 but then in the Third Satelles, the Difference betwixt 3.52 and 34 is 725, or Two Hundredth Parts of an Unit, which is 1526, or at the Loveſt 988 Miles; In the Fourth Satelles the Difference is ſtill more, for betwixt 8. o9 and 38 there are Nine Hundredth Parts, that is, a Difference of 6867, or at leaſt of 4346 Miles. j AND thus far the Exceſs has been on the Side of the Periodick Times, that is, the Diſtances are Greater from Them, than what are Confirmd from Obſervation, but ſo Uncertain and Fallible are theſe Calculations, that in the Fifth Satelles the Diſtance is leſs by Twenty Nine Hundredth Parts from the Periodick Times, than what is obſcrv'd, that is, the Difference betwixt 23.71, and 24 is 7, or Niæ cs, Miles, which is more than the Whole Breadth of Sætu⸗'s Ring, or by thie Leat Computation 14326 Miles, which is near Twice the Earth's Diameter. IF we now Proceed to the Primary Planets, in the firſt Place the Obſervations of Bullialdus and Kepler Differ from one another, and thoſe of Bulliàldus, which are the neareſt to the Computations from the Periodick Times, are yet not Correſpondent to Them. ] Tur Middle Diſtance of the Earth from the Sun is ſuppoſed to conſi*t of 100000 Parts, that is, according to ſome of 81000000, and according to others of 54000000 of Miles; the Reaſon of this Diſſenſion in Opinions Ariſes from the Difficulty of finding the Sun's Parallax, from whence Aſtronomers have Variouſly Reportcd the Earib's Diſtance from it, ſome making it no more than 749 Diameters of the Earth, whilſt others will have it to be 10000 or 12000, and the Neweſt and moſ Accurate Obſervations fix it at about 5000; however let us take 81 or 54 Millions of Miles, as before ſet down, 100000t Part of which will therefore be either 310 Or 540 Miles  to the Unit in theſe Calculations; by Keplers Obſervation: the Diſtance of Satum from the sSun is 951000 of theſe Parts, by Bullialduss 954198, ſo that the Latter has 398 more than the Former, which Amount to 25903 36 Miles in the higheſt Computation, and in the Loweſt to 1726920; and the Periodick Times have 352 Parts leſs than Bullialduss Obſervation, which in the higheſt Computation is 317520 Miles, and in the Loweſt 211680: And in the ſame Way and Method may the Diſtances of Jupuor, Mars, Venus, and Mercury from the Sun be Examin'd and Compared with thoſe, which are Derived from the Periodick Times, wherein we ſhall find the Difference of ſeveral Thouſand Miles conſidered as Minutiæ, vhich are to be neglected and ſignify Nothing. Tis true, when we come to ſuch Large Units of Diſtance, as ſhall Comprehend ſeveral Hundred Miles in them, we may ſeem in our Arithmetical Figures not to vary much from the Obſervations of Aſtronomers, but if thoſe Units have their True Value Aſſign'd them, the Diſagreement will Appear, and we ſhall not be ſo forward to Think, that Thouſands and Millions of Miles are to be look'd upon as a Cypher, in the Real Diſtances of Bodies one ſfrom another, for we are not here ſpeaking of the Apparent Diſtances of Them. ; BESIDES, the Diſtance. of the Earil from the Sun is Unaſcertain'd, by the Parts of which the Diſtances of the other Plancts are Computed; and in the Secondary ones; whoſe Diſtances are Meaſured by the Diameters of the Primary, thoſe Diameters arè as little Determined.. i THEN, vhen we come to the Obſervations of theſe Diſtances, the Method of Taking Them, which we have conſidered in another Place, is Lubricous, Difficult; and Fallible, and the Reſults of Them in Fact, Vary, and Diſagree. Ir, after This, ve Recur to the Periodick Times, They make the Diſtances ſometimes Equal, at other times Greater, and then Leſs, than what is found by the moſt Accurate Obſervations, to which they ſould always Correſpond, or elſe be always in the Exceſs, or alvays in the Defect, ſuppoſing thoſe Obſervations were Juſt and True; and if they are not True, it is not more Certain, that the Periodick Times are Right in fixing the Diſtances, when they Agree with Them, than when they Differ from Them. So that upon the whole we cannot ſec any Demonſtrative Grounds for us to Acquieſce in this Doctrine; we rather think it from hence Appears, that as the Principles of this Philoſophy, which have been Provd to be Falſe, were only Contrivd ro ſolve theſe Phænomenons, ſ0 on the Contrary, that theſe Phænomenons are Fitted by certain Artificial Adjuſtments to Anſwer, as far as Poſſible, ſuch Looſe and Precarious Principles. . WE have alſo ſewn, that it is more Reaſonable to believe, that the Squares of the Periodick Times are not as the Cubes of the Diſtances, or the Periodick Times as the Roots of thoſe Cubes, but that rhey are as the Diſtances. 5. 23. As for the other Demonſtration of this Propoſition from an Inſcrib'd Polygone, it does not ſeem to be much Different from the Former, excepting that what the Tangents Perform in the Firſt Caſe is done by Chords in the Laſt, and as there the Body is Drawn down from the Tangent to the Circumference by the Centripetal Force, and by that means is Continually made to Proceed in a G ” New New Tangent, ſo here the Reſlexive Force Directs it in a New Chord, and which Reflexive Force likewiſe Urges the Body towards the Center, and is alike Arbitrary and Unproved. 5. 24. VE might Proceed to the Remaining Propoſitions of this Second Section, and to thole of the Third, and ſiew in What Reſpect the Particular Principles, upon which they are Demonſtrated, are Falſe, or Uncertain, as well as how they are ſo in Depending upon others, which have been hitherto Examined, but that being wholly unneceſſary, which yet we could Eaſily do, we ſhall at preſent Wave that Confutation, and only Add, that if the Phænomenons or Theories in the Heavens are Anſwerable to what is Demonſtrated in theſe Sections, it is Evident, that theſe Propoſitions were Artfully Contrived to Give a Solution of Them, by Aſſuming what Sort of Abſtractions this Philoſophy thought were the beſt Adapted to that End; but if ſuch Abſtractions are Erroneous, and the Mind of the Philoſopher Takes and Rejects what he pleaſes in order to Form his Solutions, This, however Mathematical it may Appear, will be no better an Account of the Revolutions of the Plancts than Deſcartes's Vortices, or the Striate Particles in Reſpect of the Loadſtone; for where, as in the preſent Caſc, our Reaſonings are Adjuſted to ſerve a Purpoſe we have in Viev, letem be Mixt with Lines and Angles, or not, They will ſignify no more to the Explaining of Nature, if they are in Themſelves Arbitrary or Falſc, than if we ſould Aſſume the Abſtracted Notions of Figure, Matter, and Motion, to do the ſame Feat for us, and ſhould Take upon our-ſclves to Shuffle and Combine them at our Plcaſure; The Abſurdity of which Way of Proccding we have before ſiewn. C H AP. V. Concerning the Theory Propoſed by this Philoſophy for the Solution of the Errors and Irregularities of the Planets. ltl s. 1. FTER having conſidered the General Theory of the Planets, it will be Requiſite to Examine into That, which is brought ro Explain the Errors and Irregularities of Them; The Propoſition Alledg'd is, That. if Three Bodies, whoſ Forces Decreaſe in a Duplicate Reaton of their Diſtances, mutually Artract cach other, and the Acceleratimg Attractions of any Two to a Third are t10 one Another Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Diſtances, and if alo the Leſſer Bodies are Revolved about the Greateſt; upon theſe Suppoſitions it is Aſfirmd and Pronounced, that the Interior Body Revolv'd about the Innermoſt and Greateſt, by Radiuss being Drawn to it, will Deſcribe Arcas more Proportional to the Times, as well as a Figure more nearly Approaching to the Form of an Ellipſis, vhich has it's Umbilicus in the Concourſe of the Radius's, if the Greateſt Body is Agitated and Aſected by theſe Attractions, than if the ſame Greateſt Body ſoud cither be Quieſcent, and not Auractcd by the Two Leſter, or being much Leſs or much More Attracted, ſhould be either much Leſũi or much More Agitated or Affected. Caſ. 1. LET the Leſſer Bodies ? and 5 be Rvolved in the ſame Plane ubout the Greatoſt T5 of which Leſicr Bodies, Let P Deſcribe the Interior Orbit ?P AB, and 5 the Exterior SE; Let SX be the Middle Diſtance of the Bodies ? and , and let the Accelerating Attraction of the Body P Sh S, in that Middle iſtance, be Expounded or Set forth by the ſame Line Sæ; Let SL be SX in a Duplicate Reaon of S to 5P?, and SL will be the Accelerating Ar I uractior of the Body ? towards S in any Diſtance SP; Join PT, and Drav the Parallel L7, which ſnhall Meet ST in 4, and the Attraction SL (by Corol. 2. of the Lavs) vill be Reſolvd into the Attractions SM, LM, by which means the Body ? will be Urg'd by a Threefold Accelerating Force. TuE Firſt is That, which Tends to 7, and Ariſes from the Mutual Attraction of the Bodies 7 and P; If this Force was only to be Conſidered, the Body ? would Deſcribe round the Body T (Whether Unmoved, or Agitated by this Attraction) by the Radius PT Areas Proportional to the Times, and an Ellipſis, vhoſc Umbilicus is in the Center of the Body 7, by Prob. 6. and Corol. 2, 3. Theor. 21. j Tur Second Force, by which the Body P is Urgl, is that of the Attraction La1; which, as being Parallel, ſince it Tends from P to T, if it is Superadded to the Former, vill Coincide with it, and by that means will Cauſe, that the Areas ould be ſtill Proportional to the Times, by Corol. 3. Theor. 21. But, becauſe it is not Reciprocally Proportional to the Square of the Diſtance ?7, it will Compound, together vith the Former Force, a Force which Declines from that Proportion, and the more, by how much Greater the Proportion of this Force is to the Former, if other Things are ſuppoſed Equal; and therefore ſince by Prob. 6. and Corol. 2. Theor. 21. the Force, by which an Ellipſis is Deſcribed about the Umbilicus 7, ought to Tend to that Umbilicus, and to be Reciprocally Proportional to the Square of the Diſtance P7, that Compound Force of ?T and LM by Receding from ſuch Proportion will Cauſe, that the Orbit ? 48 ſould Depart from the Figure of an Ellipſis, which has it's Unmbilicus in 7, and the more, by how much Greater the Deviation is from that Proportion, and therefore, by how much Greater the Proportion of the Second Force LM is to the Firſt PT, if other Things arc Equal. TuE Third Force is that of SM4, which Attracts the Body P according to a Line Parallel to ST, and vill with the other Forces mentioned Compound one, which is no longer Directed from P to T, and which will ſo far Recede from that Determination, as the Proportion of this Third Force to the Former Forces is Greater, it other Things are Equal, and therefore will Cauſe, that the Body P will not by the Radius TP Deſcribe Areas Proportional to the Times, and the Deviation from this Proportion will be ſo much the more ſenſible, as the Proportion of this Third Force to the others is Greater; This Third Force alſo will Increaſe the Deviation of the Orbit ? 4B from the aforeſaid Elliptick Form, upon two Accounts, both becauſe it is not Directed from P to T, and becauſe it is not Proportional to the Square of the Diſtance ?T; From whence it is Evident, that the Areas are then moſt of all Proportional to the Times, vhen the Third Force, the other Forces Remaining, is the Leaſt, and that the Orbit ? 4B then Approaches the neareſt to the aforeſaid Elliptick Form, when as well the Second as the Third Force, but eſpecially the Third, is the Leaſt, the Firſt Force Remaining. LET the Accelerating Attraction of the Body T towards S be Expreſs'd by the Line 5N, and if the Accelerating Attractions, SM, S N, were Equal, Theſe by Drawing or Attracting the Bodies T and ? Equally, and according to Parallel Lines, vould make no Change in their Situation to each orher, The Motions of thoſe Bodies would be the ſame (by Corol. 6. of the Laws) as if theſe Attractions were Abſent or Taken avay; And by a like Reaſon, if the Attraction SN is Leſs than the Attraction 5 47, it will Take away or Deſtroy the Part SN of the Attraction 54, and there will only Remain the Part 7N, by which the Proportionality of the Times, and the Areas, and the Elliptick Form of the Orbit, will be Diſturbed. ALso, If the Attraction S N ſhould be Greater than the Attraction 54, the only Diſturbance to the Proportionality, and the Orbit, would Ariſe from the Difference MN, Thus by the Attraction SN, the Third Attraction SM is always Reducd to the Attraction 2N, The Firſt and Second Attractions of ? T and LM Remaining Unaltered And therefore the Areas and the Times do then moſt of all Approach 10 a Proportionality, and the Orbit ? 4B to the aforeſaid Elliptick Form, when the Attraction 27N is cither None, or as Little as Poſſible, that is, when the Accelerating Attractions of the Bodies ? and 7, Made towards s, come as near as can be to an Equality, to wit, when the Attraction SN is not Nothing, nor yet Leſs than the Leaſt of all the Attractions 547, but a kind oſ Middle Attraction betwixt the G g3 ⸗ Greateſ Greateſt and Leaſt of all the Attractions of 5a4, that is, not much Greater nor much Leſs than the Atraction SX. L: E. D. Caſ. 2. LET nov the Leſſer Bodies P,  be Revolved about the Greateſt T in Diſferent Planes, and the Force LM by Acting according to the Line P7, ſituate in the Plane of the Orbit ? AB, will have the ſame Effeœt as before, nor will it Wreſt or Tum the Body P from the Plane of it's Orbit; but the other Force NM4, by Acting according to the Line, which is Parallel to ST (and therefore, when the Body 5 is Converſant out of the Line of the Nodes, is Inclined to the Plane of the Orbit PAB,) beſides the Diſturbance of the Motion in Reſpect of Longitude, which has been already Explain'd, ill produce a Diſturbance of Motion in Reſpect of Latitude, by Draving the Body ? from the Plane of it's Orbit; and this Diſturbance, in any Given Situation of the Bodies ? and T to each other, will be as that Generating Force MN, and therefore will be the Leaſt, where N is the Leaſt, that is, as before, where the Attraction SN is not much Greater nor much Leſs than the Attraction S X. LE. D. S. 2. Tis Propoſition and the Demonſtration of it is not only the Foundation of the Theory for Explaining the Errors and Irregularities of the Planets, but of That, which is brought to give us an Account of the Flux and Reflux of the Sca, which therefore we ſall Examine in the ſeveral Diſtint Parts of it. IN this Demonſtration it is therefore Firſt ſupꝓo5q, that if ? was only Attracted by 7, it would Deſcribe Areas Proportional to the Times, which Doctrine has been before Conſidered, and does not want here a Second Refutation; And yer all which we have Argued upon that Head muſt be ſhewn to be Falſe, before the Preſent Propoſition can in any Senſe be Allow'd to be True. s. 3. THE other Two Forces Alledg]d are LM and 5M, into which SL is ſuppoſcd to be Reſolved; what therefore has been in General ſaid againſt ſuch a Reſolution of Forces is likewiſe to be Anſwerd, before this Reaſoning can obtãin; Beſides which, L 1 is Preſumd to be Drawn Parallel to ?7, whereas according to that Reſolution of Forces it might be as well in any other Direction, by which means the Line s M would become either Longer or Shorter than what is here Expreſs'd, and conſequently, ſince the Attraction of 5 to T ill be the ſame, to wit, S N, the Force NM may be Different from what is here ſuppoſed, and therefore will produce Diſierent Effects from Thoſe, which are Concluded from it. 5. 4. HOWEVER, ſince this Philoſophy has Choſen the Parallel Direction to PT, becauſc it is the beſt ſuited to it's Deſigns, we ſhall now Conſider it, as Propoſcd to us rin order to Produce which, SL to  X is Taken in a Duplicate Proportion of SX, the Middle Diſtance to s P, which is any Diſtance Aſſign'd of P from s; whereas it is not Evident, why the Middle Diſtance ſould be Aſſumũd in Preference to any other, ſo as to be a Standing Rule, to which the Reſt ſould be Referd or Compared: Since, vhen rhe Body is at the Greateſt or at the Leaſt Diſtance, there is Nothing in the Nature of the Thing, vhich ſiould Exclude it from the ſame Pretenſions ol being the Standard of the others, Excepting that of Greater or Leſs, which Equally obtains againſt the Middle Diſtance, ſeeing it is Leſs than the Greateſt Diſtance, anc Greater than the Leaſt. 5 5. GRANTINC 5. 5. GRANTING yet this Hypotheſis of the Middle Diftance being the Standard, Gra-  which all the Ręſt ſould he Exacted, which is no other than an Arbitrary one, ſ4æ and rthat Lar is one of the Foroes into which SL is Reſolved, it is far from being md Apparent, that a Parallel Force, which is ſuppoſed to At from L to 41, ſhould Act &nn from P ro 7, that is, hat Two Diſforent Points, as M and 7, ſhould be the ſame; ſnn;  LM is on the orher Hand only an Expreſſion of the Force Acting from P to T, L it is ſomething Extraordinary, that a Force, which Acts Directly from P t0 5 accord- ſ ing to this Hyporheſis, frould exert ĩt ſelf in any Part of it from ? o 7, unleſs we can Imagine, which is at preſont Incomprehenſible, that a Force, which is deem'd to At one Way, ſall be Capable in any Degree of Acting a Contrary; For if ? to S ũs a Determined Force, as it is ſuppoſed to be, if it can Act from ? to T, it muſt ibe by Enlargimg the Force from ? to S, and Taking ſo much from it by a Contrary Force ſrom P to T, Which ſnall make it Equal to the Determined one from ? to s, ahich is no more han making the Forue what it was before, and Annexing an Atrbitrary Addition and Subtraction of a Forcign one, which deſtroy each other. If, notwithſtanding, we could Allow of what has been hitherto Diſputed, we ſhould have this Advantage from it, of Confirming that, which we have ſo often Contended for in our Geometry of solids, ant in this Philoſophy, that there may be Various Forces or Velocities Conceivd in the ſame nſtant of Time, and in the ſame Line, Surface, or Solitſ; for thus ? to T is ſuppoſed to Act in the ſame Time and Manner, when that Force is only Conſidered, ass when LMſ is Join'd and United with it, which we mention as an Inſtance of the Conceivableneſs of that Doctrinè, which we have Advanced of Different Forces in the ſame Space, even according to the Notions of the Philoſophy, which now obrains; Since, if a Force may be Vary'd in one Determined Point and Inſtant, it may be ſo likewiſc in a Determined Line, Surface, or Solid, which are only a Continuation of Points, or a Multiplication of Them. 5. 6. MOREOVER, if the Force Expreſsd by PT is that, which is Capable of Re- Th taining the Body ? in its Elliptical Orbit, if there is an Addition of an Undeter- ĩ; mined Force LM, and the Law of its Acting is ſo, It will be Impoſſible to Reduce 1he Body P to any Rule of it's Revolving; ſince ſuch a Force may be ſo Great, that the Projectile may not be Able to keep it from Carrying the Body P to the Center T, or on the Contrary ſo ſmall, that it will not be ſufficient to Retain it in any Orbit, beſides that which the Force PT Preſcribes, and thereſore will be the ſame as if there was none; and in any Intermediate Degrees, the Projectile Force and the Gravitating LM being only General and Abſtracted Terms, there is nothing can be Concluded from them, ſince by putting any particular Caſes, whether of the Projectile or Gravitating Force, and their Definite Proportions to cach other, ſeveral Different Concluſions would Ariſe, which would be little Agreeable to the preſent Abſtracted Philòſophy, becauſe its Reaſoning can be only true upon one Particular Proportion betwixt the Projectile and Gravitating. S. 7. APTER the Force L, we are to Conſider that of 5 44, which is the other 7i Force mto which SL is Reſolved, whoſe Greater Efficacy is ſaid to Conſiſt (and which n⸗ is no longer Directed from P toT) in it's being Greater in Proportion to the TwoFormer, namely, ?7 andt LM, vhere other Things are Equal, that is, as the Force of M to 5 is more Prevalent, it will obtain a Proportional Effect by it's Action from P in a Parallel Line to ST in Draving the Body P from it's Orbit ? 4B. To which it may be Reply'd, FIrsT, That if the Projectile Force is as Strong as that of a15, the Parallel Force from P to T7S5 ill be ſo far from Prevailing againſt the Forces PT, LM, that it may nearly leave the whole Province of Determining ihe Revolution of the Body to Them with little or no Alteration, and conſequently mot Drav it from it's Orbit. SECOND, If the Projectile Force is ſuppoſed to be Balanc'd with the Centripetal PT, ſo as to Deſcribe the Orbit ? A B, It will be neceſſary to Determine their Proportions to each other, that we may be Inform'd what Degree of a Projectile Force in Conjunction with the Gravitating will Deſcribe ſuch an Orbit; For if the Projectile Force in ? may be Different, where the Gravitating Force PT is the ſame, t1he Orbit ? A4B cannot be Deſcribed, unleſs Different Cauſes of the ſame Nature, as thoſe of the Projectile and Gravitating Force, can produce the ſame Effect; if the Irojectile Force is the ſame, vhere the Gravitating Force is Different, as in the ſeveral 7 Concerning the Theory for ihe Solution Book II. ſeveral Parts of an Elliptical Orbit they are ſuppoſed to be, It would not be Amiſ for this Philoſophy to ſiew us, what Proportion of the Projectile Force to the Gravitating would be ſufficient to Retain a Body from Flying off in a Tangent; for if there is not an Exact Balance betwixt the Two Forces, the one or the other vill Prevail, and the Body will either ſink to the Center, or Proceed in a Right Line; if therefore an Equal Balance in the Two Forces is Neceſſary in whatever Point of the Elliptical Orbit that is ſuppoſed, in any other it will be Impoſſible to obtain; becauſe the Gravitating Force is Different, where the Projectile is the ſame. TuirD, It is far from being Manifeſt (Whatever Theories may be Contriv'd of the Reſolution of Forces, which has been ſiewn to be only a Contrivance), that a Body, which Tends from ? to S, ſould Act in any Reſpect in a Line Drawn from ? Parallel to T5, unleſs a Body, which Actually Gravitates according to the Direction of PS, does Actually Gravitate in a Different Direction by the Power and Efficacy of the ſame Force, which Gravitates from P to S, which is Abſurd and a Contræ diction, much Leſs can it Gravitate by the ſame Force from ?P to T, or L to M, as we have before Obſervd. s. 3. ANOTHER Thing Aſerted in this Reaſoning is, that if SN Repreſents the Accelerating Attraction of T to 5, it will be either Equal to S4, or Greater, or Leſs; in the Firſt Caſe ? and T will be Equally Attracted, and in the Second and Third the Difference of them vill be Reſolv'd into Na4. As to the Firſt Supſition of  N and sM beine Equal, ſince that vill be at Equal Diſtances of ? and T from 5, it is certain, that the Attraction will not be Equal, altho the Accelerating Forces are, but the Real Attraction will be Proportional to the Magnitude of the Bodies, where the Accelering Forces are the ſame; and albeit this might perhaps make no Diſturbance in the Orbits, if the Revolution of each of the Bodies , T, was only Conſiderd, becauſe the Different Sums of the Accelerating Forces might poſſibly occaſion no more Difference in the Progreſs of each Body, than Two Different Motions, whoſe Velocities were the Same, would; Yet, notwithſtanding this, where ? and 7 are Referd in their Forces to a Third Body S, the Balances betwixt the Force ofſ P and 5, and T7 and S, vill not be the ſame, unleſs the Two Different Sums of the Accelerating Forces are ſo, which is Impoſſible; if therefore the Sum of the Accelerating Forces in Tis Greater than that in P, it will be either much more Difficult, or much more Eaſy, to Draw the One out of it's Orbit, than the Other, for the ſame Reaſon, that Two Bodies, which are Movd with the ſame Velocities, and vhoſe Motions or Sums of Velocities are Diſferent, will have a Different Effect. vhen Acted upon by the ſame Force. Nor can there be any Thing Objected againſt what foregoes, unleſs it is Deny'd that the Sum of the Accelerating Force in 7, in Reſpect of S, is Greater than that of ?, in Reſpect of the ſame Body, or which is all one, unleſs it is Aſfirm'd, that S has the ſame Influence upon ? and 7, which are ſuppos'd to be Endued with Two Diffcrent Sums of the ſame Accelerating Quality. BESIDES Which, that the Accelerating Forces in ? and T are the ſame, can be no otherwiſe Prov'd or Imagin'd than upon the Suppoſition of an Homogeneous and Abſtracted Matter, the Abſurdity of which has been already ſhewn; For, if there ſoud be as much Difference betwixt the Matter, which Conſtitutes the Planets, as there is betwixt Earth, Water, Fire, and æther; I believe no one will be apt t o Grant their Accelerating Forces to the Center are the Same, tho' the Portions of Matter were Equal S. 9. Ir therefore the Firſt Suppoſition of S& being Equal to 544, at Equal Di-4 ſtances of ? and 7 from 5, is not Certain, the Second of their being Unequal, and of their Difference being Reſolvd into N 44, will be likewiſe Unprovd. l LEr us yer Grant this, and that the Attraction S& is leſs than the Attraction S1, it is not Evident, which yet is Affirm'd, that N would take of ſo much from the Attraction S M, as 5 N Repreſcnts, and conſequently, that there would only Remain the Difference of NM4. . BECAUSE SN, when it Expreſſes the Force from T to 5, is Different ſfrom S N, conſiderd as a Part of SA, which Explains a Force Acting from P Parallel to Sæ, and not Tending to the Point 5, and therefore SN vill not Equally Draw ? and T to the Center 5, nor will  47 be the only Difference betwixt the Forces S N and 5M, which is Aſſerted. Acamn, If this were likewiſc Allowd, namely, that  4 was the Difference betwixt the Forces SN and 5 M, yet there vill be a quite Contrary Reſult from 5 being Greater than 5 A44, or being Leſs than it; in the Firſt Caſe, S will be Dravn from it's Orbir, and in the Sæcond, ? will be Diſturbd in ir, whercas it is ſupposqã, that, in both Caſes, ? will be Affected only in it's Revolution: But this we ſhall Conſider more Particularly in the following Sections, aſter we have Examined into the Second Caſe of the Preſent Propoſition. s. 10. As to the Second Caſe it is now ſuppos'd, that the Leſſer Bodies P and 5 are Revolv'd about the Greateſt T in Different Planes, from Whence it is ſaid to follow, that the Force LM by Acting according to the Line ?7, ſituate in the Plane of the Orbit ? 4B, will have the ſame Effect, as before, nor will it Diſturb the Body P from the Plane of it's Orbit; whereas N, by Acting according to a Line, which is Parallel to TS, Diſturbs the Body , when that of S is Converſant out of the Line of the Nodes, and Induces a Variation in Reſpect of it's Latitude, as well as before in it's Longitude. li l IN Anſwer to vhich, it is Firſt to be obſerv'd, that the Reſolution of the Forœ 5L into LM and SM is upon the Suppoſition of thoſe Lines being Drawn in the ſame Plane, if therefore Two Different Planes are Conſider'd, that is, which are of a certain Inclination to each other, as ? 4B, E SE, the Gravitation of S to P, or the Contrary, vill be Different from what is Expreſ'd by S Z, when P and 5 are Revolvd in the ſame Plane, and conſequently, the Forces L M, 54, into which it is Reſolvd; from whence it is Certain, that the Real Forces LM, S M are not the ſame in the one Caſc, as in the other, and therefore, that both LM and Sa7 may Occaſion by their Real Forces Diſferent Diſturbances of the Orbits, ? 48, ESE, from what is here Confoſ'ũ. SECOND, If 5 and P are Revolv'd in Different Planes, N ill either At Parallel 10 5T, and ST being out of the Plane, in which A4T lies, T75 will be Inclind to that Plane, and with it Conſtitute the Angle S7 4, or elſe N will Act Parallel to AT, in both which Caſcs 7N will fall out of the lane, in which STA7 is in this Figure ſuppos'd to Lye, and conſequently, LM vill in neither Caſes be in the ſame Direction with ?T, which is Preſumd; nor on the other Hand, will A7N in the Firſt Caſe Attract S in a Parallel Line to ST, which is Affirm'd, and in the Second, MN is Imagind to Drav S Parallel to 5T, whereas the Obvious and Real Attraction iĩs in a Line Inclind to it, and Conſtituring an Angle, STA, with it; or, which is the ſame, N is ſupposd to be a Right Line at the ſame Time, that NT or 47 vith T1 form an Angle NTM or ATM, which is Impoſſible. S. 11. HAVING Conſiderd the ropoſition in General, we ſhall now Proceed to the Corollaries of it. Tu Fir?t ve ſnall omit, as it Concerns more Bodies than Two Revolving aboui a Greater, ſince our Intention is to Confine this Inquiry to the Revolutions of the Earth and Moon about the sun, in order to Explain which this Hypotheſis was principally Contriv'd, for if this is not True, neither in it's Principles nor it's Solutions we have no Reaſon to Extend it any Farther. 5. 12. THI ꝗ. 12. THE Second Corollary is, That in a Syſtem of Three Bodies 7, P, S, it the Accelerating Attractions of any Two to a Third are to one another Reciprocally as the Squares of the Diſtances, the Body ? with the Radius ?7 will Deſcribe an Area about the Body 7 with a Greater Celerity near the Conjunction 4 and the Oppo ſition B or near the Syzygiæ, than near the Quadratures C and D; For all the Force by which the Body P is Urg]d, and the Body T is not Urg]d, and which does not At according to the Line ?7, Accelerates or Retards the Deſcription of the Area, as it is Directed in Antecedentia, or in Conſequentia, and ſuch is the Force N; Since This in the Paſlage of the Body P from C to 4 Tends in Antecedentia, and Accelerates the Motion; Then in its Paſſage from 4 to D it is Directed in Conſequentia, and Retards it; From thence to B it Tends in Antecedentia, and again Accelerates the Motion; And laſtly, it Retards it in the Paſſage from B to C in Conſequentia. 5. 13. As to vhat Reſpects the foregoing Corollary, before we Conſider it, we ſmall Examine, how this Scheme is Applicable to the Motion of the Secondary Planets about the Primary ones; ſince here TWo Leſſer Bodies are Imagind to be Revolved about a Greater, that is, S and ? about 7, whereas ? ſhould be Revolv'd about s, vhilſt 5, round which the Revolution is made, is Carry'd about T; But it is Provd in Aſtronomy, that it is the ſame Thing, whether the Sun and Moom, or S and P, are Revolv}d about the Farth or T; or whether the ſon is Revolv'd about the æZarth, and both of them round the sSun, or P about 7, and both about s. HAVING Premisd this, we ſhall now Inquire into the Reaſoning AlIedg'd in §. 12, in which it is ſaid, that the Attraction of 44 N AcceIerates ? in it's Paſſage from C to 4, that is, that the Difference betwixt the Direct Attraction of ? to s, according to the Line 5, and the Direct Attraction of T to S Cauſes this Effect, which Difference muſt be Greater or Leſs than the Attraction of 7 to s, neither of which Suppoſitions will Juſtify the Preſent Reaſoning; for ſince the Accelerating Forces are ſuppos'd to be the ſame both in P and T at Equal Diſtances, or, which is the ſame, ſince the Bulk of each Body do's not come into the Computation of the Forces of them, and ſince the Diſtances from S, which only are Imagind to cauſe a Difference in their Forces, are variable from C to A, ſfor ? when Situate in C will be at a Greater Diſtance from S than 7 is, and at a Leſõs than it when Situate in A4) it vill follow, that, in the one Caſe or the other, ? will not be Accelerated from C to 4; Becauſe, if C or any Intermediate Point betwixt C and A is at a Greater Diſtance from S than T is, it is as Poſſible that SL ſhould fall as much below SX the Middle Diſtance, as it is here ſuppoſed to be Produced beyond it, and conſequently, S47 would fall below ST or 5N. which Repreſents the Attraction of T to 5; which if ſo, 24N would not Accclerate the Motion of P from C to 4, ſince the Difference betwixt the Direct Atuãction of T to 5, and P to 5, would be Leſ” than Nothing. ON the other Hand, if P is Situate in 4, or in any Intermediate Point betwixt 4 and , vhich is at a Leſs Diſtance from S than T is, SL will be Extended beyond SK the Middle Diſtance, and 4N will be a Difference, betwixt the Two Attractions of ?P and T to 5, Greater than Nothing; But then the Queſtion ill be, whether even ſuch a Difference will Accelerate the Motion of P from C to 4; for if 4N Adts by a Superior Force to all others, and according to the Line 45 or a Lino Parallel o it Dravn from P, it ſcems to be Evident, that it will be ſo far from AcceleIating the Motion of P, that it will in Effect Retard it; Becauſe Nothing can Accelerate a Projectile or a Centripetal Motion, of which CP4 is ſupposd to Conſiſ, unleſ" unleſs ſuch a Force, as falls in with the one or the other, to both which, yet, MN is plainly Oppoſite, and neither Concurs in it's Efficacy ith the Tangent oſ the Circle CP 4, nor with the Radius of it; for N, Acting from ? in a Tarallel Direction to 45, both Acts againſt ?T7, and a Tangent Drawn to ?, that is, both againſt the Centripetal Force, and the Projectile; and in the Syzygiæ 4 and B, wherc the Acceleration ſould be the Greateſt, ? will be the moſt Retarded, becauſe 475 vill then Act in a Direct Oppoſition to the Centripetal 47, B7, and ro the Tangents or the Projectile at 4 and B, where N Hangs like a Weight upon the Projectile, and Cloggs and Obſtructs it's Progreſs, or elſe Propells it, in Lines Parallel to B M, from D to B, and by that means Preſſes upon ?, and Endeavours to thruſt it from it's Orbit, eſpecially in the Parts towards B, which cannot but be an Impediment to it's Courſc thro' D B, ſo far from Advancing it; This is ſaid, ſuppoſing sN to be here Repulſive, which yet is not ſiewn, and may be juſtly Queſtiond, and if it is not Repulſive, it has not the leat Pretence to Accelerate the Planet's Motion in that Portion of it's Orbit. ] P is Imagin'd to be Accelerated from C to 4, becauſc ?P is more Attracdted io s, than T is, by the Exceſs of the Force , this Force yet is not ſupposd to Drav P farther from 7 towards 5, ſince, if ſo, it might not ſpend it ſelſ in the Acceleration of P, but in making it Deſcribe a Larger Orbit without any Acceleration at all; On the Contrary, it is ſupposd to Accelerate ?, and to Contract it's Orbit by that Acceleration, ſo that the Syzygiæ? 4 and  Approach ncarer to 7 than the Quadratures C and D, all which is ſaid ithout any Proof or Demonſtration; for why P ſould come nearer to 7 by Gravitating more tovards s than it, or why ? ſhould be Accelerated rather than Deſcribe a Larger Circuit about 7, than it vould have otherwiſe done, is Equally Inconceivable; but when we come to Prove the Repulſive Power of æN, by which ? is Quickned in ĩt's Progreſs ſrom D to B, we are told, that 7, Gravitating more to 5 than , is Attracted more towards it by the Force MN, than P is, and conſequently, that TReceding from P, ſituate betwixt I and B, tovards S is the ſame, as if ? ſhould Recede from T with the ſame Velocity towards M4, and therefore N has here a Repulſive Force; 4N conſequently iĩs allowd to have a Power of Making T Approach towards S, in order to Prove this Repulſive Force, which was not Granted before to it, in Reſpect of P in it's Paſſage from C to 4, which it did not Draw towards S from it's Orbit, but only Accelerated in it, and by that means cauſcd it to Recede from S and Approach towards T; and yet Preſuming all this to be True, which is no more than ſaying Things at Pleaſure, MN, by Driving and Impelling T tovards S, would only Eſſect, that ? ſould De ſcribe DE at a Greater Diſtance from 7, and in the Portion of a Larger Orbit aboui it, hich would not Increaſe but Diminiſh ©t's Apparent Velocity without any Reãl Repulſive Force at all. LET us now Conſider the Progreſs of ? from 4 to D, which is ſaid to be Retarded, but why it ſhould be any more, than from C to 4 is not Evinced; For s4N, which Acts from P, in every Point betwixt 4 and D, Parallel to 415, and againſt rthe Centripetal Force ?T and the Projectile in every Iugividual Tangent to thoſe Points, will have the ſame Effect in the Progreſs of ? from 4 to D, as it had from C to 4; for it makes no Variation, whether ? moves from C to 4, or from 4 to D, whilſt the Centripetal Force PT is the ſame in borh Caſes, and the Projectile Force in the Tangent is on both Hands Loaded with a Gravitating Force, as N, which is Foreign to it, and Deſtructive of it; Thus, ſuppoſing Two Tangents, the one at C and the other at D, which is the moſt favourable Caſe, which can be put for the Preſent PhiIoſophy, and Iet the Projectile Force in the Tangent at C Act the ſame way with th] Gravitating 47N, and at D the Contrary, I ſay the Projectile Force vill be Equally hindered from having it's Proper Effect in the one Caſe, as in the other; For if the Gravitating Force of N in D is Equal to the Contraty Projectile in a Tangent Parallel to Na4, and Acting from N tovards 414, the Projectile will be Deſtroy'd and not able to Proceed in a Second Tangent from D tovards B; and the ſame may be ſaid of a Tangent in q, if the Gravitating Force 7N is Equal to the Projectile in that Tangent, for tho' they Tend the ſame vay of 4 to æ, yet the Gravitating Force continuing ſtill the ſame, the Proiectile will not be able to Proceed in a Second Tangent from C towards A, becauſe it vas Clorg'd with a Weight beforc, H h vhich vhich Equally with the Projectile Urged it out of the Circle; and thereſore it :annot Proceed in a New Tangent Inclind to the Former, and towards the Center7, nd for the ſame Reaſon it will be Obſtructed in Procecding in a Third, Fourth, or my other Tangent. ] j I?r 2N the Gravitating Force in C is Greater than the Projectile in the Tangent, it will ſtill more Obſtruct the Projectile in it's Motion, and if A7N is Leſs, it will Leſ hinder the Projectile, but not Accelerate it; And what has been ſaid in Reſpect of the Tangents and the Projectile Forces, at C and D, vill obtain in Proportion in all the Points betwixt C and 4, and betwixt 4 and D. As t6 P being Accelerated betwixt D and B, and Retarded betwixt B and , ĩt is liable to all the Objections of it's Progreſs berwixt C and A4, and 4 and D, and of MN being Conſidered, as a Repulſive Force in the Planet's Courſe thro' C, as before thro DB; All this is ſtill Argued upon the Suppoſition of a Gravitating and Projectile Force, which Forces have been already Conſidered and Shewn to be Arbitrary, as alſo upon the Suppoſition of Matter being Similar and Homogenceous in it's ſclf, vhich Notion likewiſe has been Refuted, and that the Diagonal Force is Reſolved into the Sides of the Parallelogram, which has not been Proved. S. 14. THE next Corollary is, that by the ſame Reaſoning it is Evident, that the Body P, other Things being Equal, is Moved with a Greater Velocity in it's Conjunction and Oppoſition, than in it's Quadratures. Wharcu in the First Place is not True in this Reaſoning, however it is in Fact, unleſs the foregoing Corollary is -. ſo. -. SECOND, Suppoſing the foregoing Corollary — is True, it is not any e bę - seasn sn nnnM s ; B more Evident, that P is Accelerated in it's Conjunction at A, from bee ing Accelerated from C to 4, than that it is Retarded there, from it's being Retarded in is Progreſs from 4 to D, ànd the like may be ſaid concerning it's being Accelerated in its Oppoſition at B; for why c4, in which ? is Accelerated, rather than 4 D, in vhich it is Retarded, ſhould give the Denomination of P being Accelerated rather than Retarded in the Parts on each Side next adjoining to 4, is as Incomprehenſible as it is Precariouſly and Arbitrarily Aſſerted in this Hypotheſis; or vhy D B, in vhich it is Accelerated, rather than BC, in Which it is Retarded, ſhould give the Denomination of it's being Accelerated, rather than Retarded in the Parts adjoining to B in it's Oppoſitionn. Wuar farther has been Argued, in Reſpect of the Conjunction and Oppoſition of the Revolving Body, againſt it's being Accelerated, Equally obtains in it's Quadratures againſt it's being Retarded, That is, a Point, as 4 or B in the Syzygiæ, or c and D in the Quadratures, vhich lies Intermediate to an Acceleration and Retarda tion, can be no more ſald to be Accelerated than Retarded, and Vice Versi. 5. 15. TE Fourth Corollary is, That the Orbit of the Body P, other Things being Equal, has a Greater Curvity in the Quadratures, than in the Conjunction and Oppoſition: Becauſe Bodies, vhich obtain a Greater Velocity, are Leſs Deflected ſiom a Rectilineal Progreſs, or, which is the ſame, Recede Leſs from a Righ me. BESIDES, The Force KL, or NM, in the Conjunction and Oppoſition, is Con trary to the Force with which the Body T Attracts the Body P, and therefore Di miniſies it; But the Body P will Recede Leſs from a Right Line, where it is Leſ Uiged tovards the Body . FirsT FirsT, As to the Firſt Reaſon Alledged, it Evidently depends on the Truth of the Two preceding Corollaries, for if it cannot be Proved from them, that the Body P is Moved with a Greater Velocity in it's Conjunction and Oppoſition, than in irs Quadratures, it ſignifies Nothing to tell us, that Bodies, which obtain a Greater Velocity, are Leſs Deflected from a Rectilineal Progreſs. GRANTING Which Corollaries, it is not yet Plain, that Bodies, vhich obtain a Greater Velocity, are Leſs Deflected from a Rectilineal Progreſs, unleſs upon this Suppoſition, that the Greater the Force is, hich Adts according to the Direction of the Tangent, the Leſs Power will the Centripetal have to Bend and Incline the Body to the Center, about which it is Revolved. WuEREAS all that, which concerns a Projectile or a Tangent Force and a Centripetal, has been already Evidenced to be a Creature of the Mind, and that the Reſolution of Curves into ſuch Forces is either Diſputable or Groundleſs; Beſides which, N, hich is ſupposd to Increaſe the Velocity of the Revolving Body P, does not At according to the Direction of the Tangent, and therefore cannot be Conſidered as a Force united with the Projectile, from which the Centripetal Draws and Impells the Body, which is Revolved. FARTHER, If this were likewiſe Allow'd, it vill ſollow, that, in the Conjunction and Oppoſition, where the Velocity is Swiſter, the Body ? will Approach nearer to l l li the Center, and in its Quadratures will Retire farQuad. ther from it, ſo as to Deſcribe an Orbit Reſembling an Ellipſis, according to the Figure Annext; for in that Figure only an Orbit has it's Oppoſite Sides in one Caſe more Rectilineal, and in the other of a Greater Curvity; which is Impoſſible mi . upon the Preſent Suppoſition, where the Projectile - O] Force is continually Increaſing and Decreaſing, and the Centripetal Continues the ſame; ſince, if we Imagine any Determined Centripetal Force, by which the Body P is Attracted to the Center, and a Projectile, by whoſe Counter-Action to the CenXua7. tripetal ĩt is kept up in it's Orbit from falling to ſuch Center, if the Projectile is Increaſed; as in the Conjunction and Oppoſition, it will not make the Centripetal Force Greater, but take off and Diminiſh from it's Urgency to the Center, and conſequently, will not cauſe the Body in it's Revolution to Approach nearer to it; On the Contrary, if the Projectile Force in the Quadratures is Diminiſhed, it will not Diminiſh the Gravitating, but rather Increaſe it, by Leaving it more Entirely to it's own proper Tendency, from whence ihe Body will not Recede from, but Approach nearer to the Center of it's Revolution. i lsiẽſi SECOND, As to the Second Reaſon Alledged for the Proof of this Corollary, namely, that the Force 7N, in the Conjunction and Oppoſition, is Contrary to the Force, with which the Body T Attracts the Body P, and therefore Diminiſhes it, from whence the Body P will Recede Leſs from a Right Line, where it is leſs Urged toards the Body T: This Reaſon, we ſay, is Firſt in the General not true in an Orbit, which is ſuppoſed to be Deſcrib'd by a Gravitating, and a Tangent or Projectile Force; Becauſe where a Force, as iN, Acts directly Contrary to a Gravitating, yet ſince the Projectile is joind with the Gravitating, and they are Both in an Aquilibrium, ſo that the Body ? does ſcither Fall towards ihe Center, nor Proceed in a Tangent, it ĩs Evident, that the Force N, vhich Diſturbs it from that æquilibrium, as much Obſtructs it from Going forward in a Tangent, as from Tending to the Center; and conſcquently, the Body ? vill Equally Recede from a Right Line, as it does from the Cenier, and therefore not Leſs, where it is leſs Urged tovards the Body 7, ſince it would be Carry'd nearer io S, and Leave the Tangent in ſome Meaſure as well as the Center. lli l WEe add Secondly, Suppoſing the Force N contrary to the Gravitating Force oi P if it had the Effect of making it Recede Leſs from a Right Linẽ, that is, iſ i Reſignd to the Projectile a Greater Force, it would at the ſame Time at leat make the Gravitating Leſs, and thereſore, iha Part oſ the Orbit, which Recedes Leſs fron i 2 a Rizht 1 Right Line, ſould Recede more from the Center, whereas the Contrary is Affirmd in this Hypotheſis of Forces, to wit, that in the Conjunction and Oppoſition P Approaches nearer to the Center, and in the Quadratures is farthor Retired from it. Tumro, If N Aòs directly Contrary in the Conjunction and Oppoſition to the Gravitating Force of P to 7, That is cither meant in the Points 4 and æ only, or elſe in all the Intermediatc Points betwixt  and 4 in Conjunction. and betvixt D and B in Oppoſirion; if the Firſi, it will ſignify ing to the Rectilineal Progreſs of the Body ? betwixt C and 4, or D and B, ſince this Reaſon obtains only in the Points 4 and B; if the Second, it will not be caſily Conceived, how MN~N Acts Contrary t0 the Gravitating Force from ? to 7, unleſi in an Oblique Direction, which if Allow'd of, it does likewiſe to all the ſeveral Tangents, or the Projectile Forces of the Points in CA, or DB, and conſcquæntly docs not Accelerate the Velocity of P, but Retards it, as was before Obſerved. LastLv. If all was Granted, which has been Diſputed. ſince the Accelerations are ſuppoſed betwixt C and 4, D and B, and the Retardations betwixt 4 and D, B and c; it would follow, that the Greater Curvity of the Orbit would not be in the Quadratures, but in thoſe Parts of it, which lię bętwixt the Conjunctions or Oppoſitions, and the Quadratures, that is, from 4 to D, and à to ; and the more Rectilineal Progreſes F ? would not be in the Conjunẽtions and Oppoſitions, but in the Parts lying botvixt the Quadratures and Them. that is, from C to 4, and D to B. s. 16. THE Fiſth Corollary is, that the Rody P, other Things being Equal, will Recede farther from the Body 7 in the Quadratures, : in iui ition, w Dr—- Conſider'd and Depends upon the former Corollaries. s. 17. THE Sixth Co- ] rollaty is, That ſince the Centripetal Force of the Central Body T, by which the Body P is Retained in it's Orbir, is Increaſed in the Quadratures by the Addition of the Force L1, and Diminiſhed in the Conjunction and Oppoſicion, or in the Syzygiæ, by the Ablation of the Force XL, and by Rean of the Grearneſs of XL is more Diminiſhed than Increaſed, and ſince that Centripetal Force is (by Corol. æ. Prop. 4) in à Reaſon Compounded of the Simple Reaſon of the Radius T? Directly, and of a Duplicate Reaſon of the Petiodical Time Inverſely, it is Maniſeſt, that this Compound Reaſon is Diminiſhed by the Action of the Force XL, and conſequently, the Periodical Time, if the Radius of the Orbit T7? Continugs the ſame, is Increasd, and that in a Dimidiate Reaſon, in which that Centripetal Force is Diminiſhed, it the ſame Radius thereſore is ncreas'd or Diminiſã, it is likewiſc Manifeſt, thar the Periodical Time is more Incread or leſs Diminiſhed than in the Seſquiplicate Reaſon of the ſaid Radius. (by corol 6. Prop. 4.) If that Force of the Central Body ſhould gradually Languiſh and Decreaſe, the Body P, being leſs and leſ Attracted, vould męmpctually Recedæ farther from the Center 7, and on the Contrary, if that Force ſhould be Increasd, it would Approach nearer to it; Thereſore, if the Action of the Remote Body S, by which that Force is Diminiſhed, be Increasd and Diminiſied by Turns, the Radius T7?P will be alſo Increaſcd and Diminiſhed by Turns, and the Periodical Time will be Increaſcd and Diminiſied in a Reaſon Compounded of the Seſquiplicate Reaſon of the Radius and the Dimidiate Reaſon, in which that Centripetal Force of the Central Body T7 is Diminiſhed. or Increaſcd by the Increae or Diminution of the Action of the Remote Rody s. bt Anſuer t0 which, it is Finsr to be Conſiderei, that the Centripetal Forcè of the Body 7 docs not Retain the Bady P in it's Orbit, becauſe there is a Projectile one Equally Requird by this Philoſophy, and becauſe it is not farther Provd, by what foregoes. rhat the Earth or Planets, ſor which the Preſent Hypotheſis is Contrived, are Retained ſin thoirt Orhits by a Cemripetal Force even in Conjunction vith a Pmjectile, but poſſibly may be ſo by an Expanſive one of the Sun. SEOOND, Allowing this, the Centripetal Force of the Body 7 is not Increasd by the Addition of L in the Quadratures, and Diminiſ'd by the Ablation of XL in the Syæygiæ?, unleſ uon tie Suppoſition. that L is Reſolved into the Forces, Za1, S Ar, which has been hofore Conſider'd and Diſproved. GRrRAN?ING which, as SX is ſuppoſed to Repreſent the Artraction of the Middle Diſtance, X L, vhen ĩt falls in with the Line S M, will, if any Thing, in the Conjunction at 4 Diminiſ the Centripetal Force of the Body 7, becauſe the Force Tends from L to , and therofore Dravs 4 from T towards S; and on the Contrary, in rhe Oppoſition at B, LX will Diminiſh the Centripetal Force of the Body 7, by Impelling the Body P Læſs from B towards 7, than T towards S, but then rhe Effeũts will be very Dirferent, ſince the ſame Forœ Læ Aẽts upon P in the Firſt Caſe and 7 in the Laſ; which are Bodies of a very Diſferent Magnitude  Whereas it is Affirmd in this Philoſophy, that the Effets aro Equal and Alike by an Ablation of the Force LX in the Syæygiæ: Beſides, that ZX in the Conjunction at 4 Ads by Attraction towards S, and at B in the Oppoſition by a Repulſion from it, is not ſo Evident as not to want a farther Demonſtration. TuirD, The Centripetal Force is not Proved by Corol. 2. Prop. 4, to be in a Reaſon Compounded of the Simple Reaſon of the Radius TP Directly and of a Du plicate Reaſon of the Periodical Time Inverſely, as is Evident from whar has been Alledgd in the Examination of that Propoſition and the Corollaries of it. LasrtLy, Tho' the Force of the Central Body ſhould, upon it's Increaſo from L æ in the Quadratures, Draw the Body P nearer to 7 by Acting more ſtrongly upon it, it is not Evident, that, upon a Diminution of that Force by XL in the Syzygiæ the Body ? would Retire farther from 7, where the Body P is ſuppoſed to Conſiſ of a Nature wholly Paſſive and Unactive; for tho' an Action ſould Impell it one Way, yet upon the entire Ceaſing of that Action, it would not be Impell'd another, but would remain Quieſcent in Reſpect of that Action, and much Leſs upon the Diminution of an Action, by which it is Impell'd one Way, would it be Impell'a, or Move a Contrary. Nor conſcquently, if the Action of the Remote Body S, by which the Central Force is Diminiſhed, ſhould be Increaſed and Diminiſhed by Turns, will the Radius TP be likewiſe Increaſed and Diminiſhod by Turns; for if by the Action of 5 the Action of T ſhould be ſo far Diminiſhed, às to be in an Equal Balance with it, that is, that by their Contranitent Forces they ſhould Deſtroy cach others Effects towards their own Centers, the Body ? would not lengthion it's Radius T7?P and Retire towards S, but would be perſfectly Quieſcent in Reſpect of both theſe Forces; if therefore the Action of T is only ſo far Diminiſhed, as not to be Entirely Deſtroyed, it will ſtill be mote Impoſſible for 7? to lengthen it's Radius, or for ? to be Impelld a Contrary way to 7, nor is it neceſſary it ſould be ſhortned, only it would then obey the Projectile, and be carry'd Round 7 at the Diſtance ?T; And if the Action from P to T is not only Deftroy'd, but ſurmounted by the Superior one of s, P will Retire towards  and TP vill be Produced, but then T will have loſt it's Influence: and the Body ? vill no longer be Revolved about the Center 7, but Round that of & Bur that, which is ſtill more Unaccountable, is, that Laſ is ſuppoſed to fall in with PT, or the Centripetal Force, and 10 Increaſe it in the Quadratures, and X L to At Counter to ir, and therefore to Diminiſh it in the Syzygiæ, from whence, according to this Doctrine, it ſould follow, that the Radius PT is Diminiſhed in the Firſt Caſe, and Increaſed in the Laſv; whereas we are beſore told, that the Radius PT is Longer in the Firſt Caſe, and Shorter in the Eaſt, that is, Longer in the Quadratures. where there is ſaid to be a Greater Curvity of the Orbit, and Shorter in the Syaygiæ, where there is ſaid to be a Leũ. Wuar WnaT therefore is Reaſoned concerning the Periodical Times being Increaſed or Diminiſed upon theſe Preſumptions, which are Falſe and Groundleſs, muſt be Eually ſoo. . i 5s Tue Seventh Corollary is, That, from what foregoes, it is Conſequent, that the Axisor the Line of the Apſides of an Ellipſis, Deſcribd by the Body P, as to it's Angular Motion, makes it's Progreſs and Regreſs by Turns, but yet it's Progreſſes are Greater, and by Exceſs. of the Progreſſion, in each Revolution of the Body, it is Carryd. in Conſequentia. For e Force, b vhich heBody P is Urged tovards the Body T7 in the Quadratures, where the Force 47N Vaniſhes, is Compounded of. the Force LM, and of the Centripetal Force, by which the Body T Auracts the Body P; The Former Force LM, if the Diſtance PT be Increaſed, is Increasd almoſt in the ſame Reaſon vith this Diſtance, andthe Latter Decreaſes in. that Duplicate Reaſon, and conſequently, the. Sum of theſe Forces Decreaſes in leſs than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance ?T, and upon that Account, by. Grol. L.. Prop. 45, Cauſes the Aux or the Upper Apſis to Return; On the Contrary, in the Conjunction and Oppoſition the Force, by which the Body ? is Urg'd towards the Body T, is the Difference berwixt. the Force, by which the Body T Attracts the Body P, and the Force XI, and that Difference, becauſe the Eorce XL is nearly Increas'd in a Reaſon of the Diſtance PT, Decreaſes in a Greater than a Duplicate. Reaſon of that Diſtance, and therefore, by Corol. I. t : Prop. 45, Cauſes the Aux or the Upper Apſis to. Proceed; In the Places. which lic Intermediate to the Syzygiæ and Quadratures, the Motion of the Aux Depends jointly upon both theſc. Cauſes, ſo that as. the onc or the other Prevails, it Proceeds or Returns; from whence it follows, thai, ſince the Force of KL in the Syzygiæ is almoſt doubly Greater than the Force LMſ in the Quadratures, the Exceſs in the whole Revolution will be on the Side of XL, and will carry the Aux in each Revolution in Conſequentia. To which it may be Firſt Replyd, that in the Quadratures 7N is ſuppoſed to Vaniſh, becauſe then the Body ? is in a Middle Diſtance from 5, which has been before Conſidered; Granting which, LM is Imagined to unite in it's Action with PT, upon the Reſolution- of the Force SL into L M, MS5; which likewiſe has been already Examind. AND yet Finst, Allowing both, it is nor Proved, that LM, upon the Increaſe of PT, is Increaſed almoſt in the ſamo Reaſon, becauſe, ſuppoſing P S and XS not much Different, which will be, when. ? is not far from the Tranſverſe or Conjugate Axis of it's Orbit, Lſ will. be to PT, as LS to PS, and if PT is Lengthened or Increaſed, LM will be to PT in the ſame Proportion of LS to PS, which vill be as, the Square of the Middle Diſtance X5 to the Square of the Diſtance P5, and therefore LM, vill not be Increas'd almoſt in Proportion as PT is, but in Proportion as the Squares of XS and PS. SECOND, It is not moreover Certain, if the Diſtanee PT is Increas'd; that the Centripetal Force is Diminiſhed in a Duplicate Reaſon of ſuch Diſtance, according to what has been before Alledg'd, and therefore Corol. 1. Prop. 45, is Cited to no pur poſe, ſince hy that the Aux or Uppermoſt Apſis is Proved to Return upon the Conceſſion, that the Sum of theſec Forces is Diminiſied in Leſs than a Duplicatc Proportion of. the Diſtance T7, which. is not Affirmed or Evinced; if the one Forcc is not Increas'd nearly as the Radius is, and. the other Diminiſhied in a Duplicatc Reaſon of ſuch Increaſe of the Radius. Not to add, that the Propoſition and the Corol lan, lary here Referd t6 are both of them Argued upon ſuch a Confus'd and Precarious Reaſoning, and upon ſo many Preſumptions of the Truth of Fluxions, and other Principles of this Philoſophy, that it would not be hard to Conteſt almoſt every Part of each; and which Propoſition we ſhall aftervards Examine. IT may be Secondly Replyd on the other Hand, that, in the Conjunction and Oppoſition, the Foree, by Which the Body P is Urged towards the Body 7, is not the Diſference betwixt the Force, by which the Body T Attracts the Body , and the Force KL; for XL in the Conjunction Acts in ? from A to S, and therefore the Force; by which the Body P is Urged towards 7, is ſuppoſed to be Diminiſd ſo far by that Contrary Attraction, whereas, according to what has been before Proved, if the Attraction from A4 to S, and 4 to T were Equal, 4 vould nort therefore Retire from T or to 5, where the Difference betwixt ſuch Forces is Equal to Nothing, that is, if the Projectile is not Conſiderd, for that indeed in ſuch a Caſe would carry the Body in a Tangent from A4, and there would be no Radius ? T at all, and conſequently, if XL is Leſs than the Attractive Force of ? to 7, there may be an Actual Tendency of ? to T at the Diſtance ?7, without a Diminution of it, if XL is Greater, ? vill be Drawn from 4 tovards s, and will have no Tendency to 7, and therefore cannot be Retained in an Orbit by it; ſo that in the Firſt and Laſt Caſe there will be no Radius PT, and therefore no Revolution of the Aux or the Upper Apſis, and in the Second, ſince ?T vill continue the ſame, no Progreſſion or Regreſſion of it; If the Projectile Force is Conſidered, and is Equal to the Centripetal, in the Firſt Caſe, it will Direct the Body ? in a Tangent, as was before ſaid; in the Second, it ill ſurmount the Centripetal, and vill likewiſe promote it in a Tangent, tho with a Leſs Force, unleſs the Projectile is Diminiſhed in Proportion to the Centripetal, and then, as was mentioned before, ?T7 will be the ſame in it's Revolution without any Progreſs or Regreſs of the Apſis; and in the Laſt Caſe, ? will be Revolved round S, if XL is Greater than ?T and the Difference Equal to the Projectile, if Leſs and rhe Projectile Greater, ? will go off in a Tangent; And the ſame may be ſaid in the Oppoſition of P at B, with this Additional Objection, that it is not Certain, that XL Acts in a Contrary Direction to the Centripetal Force, vhen ? is in it's Oppoſition at B, according to what has been before Conſidered, in Relation 10 the Action of æN. BnsiDES Which, it is not Evident, that ſuch a Difference, if it were Granted: would Decreaſc in a Greater than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance ?7, becauſe it is not Proved, that the Force XL is nearly Increasd in a Reaſon of that Diſtance. LastLy, If yet the Difference was Allowed to Decreaſe in a Greater than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance P7T, it is not Certain, that the Propoſition and the Corollary Referd to are true, for the Reaſons above-mentioned. S5. 19. THE Eighth Corollary is, That ſince the Progreſs and Regreſs of the Apſides Depends upon the Decreaſe of the Centripetal Force, made in a Greater or Leſę than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance T7P, in the Body's Paſſage from the Lower Apſis to the Upper, as alſo upon the like Increaſe in it's Return to the Lover, and conſequently, ſince this Progreſs and Regreſs is the Greateſt, where the Proportion of rthe Force in the Upper Apſis to the Force in the Lower Apſis Recedes the moſt from a Reciprocal Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtances, It is maniſeſt, that the Apſides in their Syzygiæ, by the Force XL or NLM being Subſtracted, ill Proceed Swiſter, and in their Quadratures will Recede Slower, by the Addition of the Force LM. BUT Firſt it muſt be Anſwerd, that the Progreſs and Regreſs of the Apſides does not Depend upon the Decreaſe of the Centripetal Force, made in a Greater or Leſi than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance T7P, in the Body's Paſſage from the Lover Apſis to the Upper, and upon a like Increaſe in it's Return to the Lower, Unleſi the Former Corollary is True, which we have ſiewn is not Certain, or rather thai it is in Fact falſe; DBeſides which, we ſhall Secondly add, that in General it is an In conceivable Notion, that an Increaſe or Diminution of the Centripetal Force, accord ing to a certain Proportion, ſould be a Cauſe of the Progreſs or Regreſs of th Body P, or of it's Swifter or Slower Progreſs or Regreſs; ſince, if the Force from I to T is Diminiſied, which before was Equal to the Projectile, ſo ſar as to ”i h Body P in it's Orbit, the Projectile will Direct it in a Tangent, when once it becomes Superior to the Centripetal, and on the Contrary, if the Force from P to 7 is Increasd, it will be Superior to the Projectile, and conſcquently will not be Retained in an Orbit, but will Tend to the Center; and therefore we may very juſtly Diſmiſ this Account of the Progreſſes and Regreſſes of the Apſides, as at the Beſt Precarious and Groundleſs, nevertheleſs at the End of theſe Corollaries we ſmall make a Particular Examination into the Fundamental Propoſitions of this Doctrine, That is, in our following Chapter. S. 20. THE Ninth Corollary is, That if any Body ſiould be Revolved about a Center in an Ellipſis by a Force, that was Reciprocally Proportional to the Square of it's Diſtance from ſuch a Center, and preſently after, in it's Deſcent from the Upper Apſis or Aux to the Lower, that Force ſhould by the perpetual Acceſs of a Nev one be Increasd in more than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance Diminiſhed, it is maniſeſt, that the Body by the Perpetual Acceſs of that New Force, being continually Impelled to the Center, would more Verge or Incline to that Center, than if it was Urged by the Force only Increaſing in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance Diminiſhed, and therefore would Deſcribe an Orbit Interior to the Elliptical, and in the Lower Apſis would Approach nearer to the Center than before, from Whence the Orbit, by the Acceſs of this New Force, vill become more Excentrical; If now the Force, in the Receſs of the Body from the Lower Apſis to the Upper, ſould Decreaſe by the ſame Degrees as it Increaſed before, the Body would Return to the Former Diſtance, and therefore, if the Force ſhould Decreaſe in a Greater Reaſon, the Body being nov Leſs Attracted will Aſcend to a Greater Diſtance, and ſo the Excentricity of the Orbit will be ſtill more Increasd; Therefore, if the Reaſon of the Increment and Decrement of the Centripetal Force be Increas'd in each Revolution, The Excentricity will be Increaſed; B on the Contrary, the ſame Excentricity will be Diminiſd, if that Reaſon ecreaſcs. Tnus in the Syſtem of the Bodies 7, , 5, hen the Apſides of the Orbit ? A4 B are in the Quadratures, that Reaſon of the Increment and Decrement is the Leaſt, and the Greateſt, vhen they are in the Syzygiæ; If the Apſides are placed in rthe Quadratures, the Reaſon near the Apſides is Leſs and neat the Syzygiæ Greater than a Duplicate one of the Diſtances, and from that Greater Reaſon Ariſes the Swiſteſt Motion of the Aux; But if the Reaſon oſ the whole Increment and Decrement in the Progreſs berwixt the Apſides be Conſidered, it is Leſs than a Duplicate one of the Diſtances; The Force in the Lower Apſis is to the Force in the Upper Apſis in Leſs than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtance of the Upper Apſis from the Umbilicus of the Ellipſis to the Diſtance of the Lower Apſis from the ſame Umbilicus; and on the Contrary, vhen the Apſides are placed in the Syzygiæ, The Force in the Lower Apſis is to the Force in the Upper in a Greater than a Duplicate Reaſon of the Diſtances; For the Forces L 4, added in the Quadratures to the Forces of the Body 7, Compound together Forces, which are in à Leſs Reaſon, aud the Forces KI. Subſtracted in the Syzygiæ ſrom the Forces of the Body 7 leave Forces, which arc in a Greater Reaſon;3 The Reaſon therefore of the whole Decrement and Increment in the Paſſage betvixt the Apſides is the Leaſt in the Quadratures, and rhe Greateſt in the Syzygiæ, and conſcquently, in the Paſage of thc Apſides from the Quadratures to the Syzygiæ, it is continually Increaſed, and Increaſes the Excentricity o oi the: Ellighs: æiè in: the: Raſogo: ftum the: Syæygiæ to the Quasiratures; it is. continual ly Diminihæd; and7 Dimiriſhos. the Excentricity: : IN Anſwer to which we ſj, tha i the Body is. more Attraded. in it's Deſcent ſrom the Up;er. Apſisto. the Lower than in a, Duplicate Reaſon of it's. Diſtance Biniſiſeã, by, vhicii In Conjinẽtion ith, the Projetilo it was before Retained in its Orbit, the Centrigẽtal being now Superior to the Projectile, and liaving overme it © ſa, as by. s Exct’to Drav the Body nearer 1o the Center in the Tover Apſs it doꝶ not ſem Reaſonabię fo allov ihe Rrojeſtile any farther Power 16 Raiſe the Body to a Greatet Diſtance fiom. the Center, for if one Eorce has, once heen actually Superior an-thtr, how that ſiould Revive and be Reſtored to. it again, which Vas Loſt, unleſs by the Will and Pleaſure of the Philoſo her, vill not be ſo caſly Imagind; for to ſay the Projetile Force continues to Ruſh and Protude the Eody iom the Center, notwithſtanding it is Surmounted by the Centripetal, ĩs to aſſirm it to be an Innãte, and thereforę a Reviviſcent Foręe, when the Centripetal is taken off, which perfectly contradicts the Notion which this Philoſophy has oſ Matter, that it is. perfectly Paſſive, and continues and perſęveres in à certain State of Motion or Reſ, till it is Diſturbed out of it; But hęre ĩt ſcems, when à Body is Diſturbed our of it's Projectile Motion by a Superior Centripetal, when ihar Superiority of Centriperal Force is taken off, it can Re-aſume its Projectile Vithout any new Inpreſſion; which, what is ĩt elſe but to Aſfm, ihat the Projeftile is an Innate Force in it, when yet all ſuch Innate Forces are actually Diſclaimã by, this Philoſophy? But that which is ſtill more is, that it is no ways to be Appręhende⸗ or Conceived, how the very ſame Cauſe, which before Produced. the Progreſs an Regreſs of the Apſides, hould now Increaſe and Diminiſ the Excentricity of ihe Orbit; one Effece? we might be apt to think a ſufficient Task ſor onę Cauſe 19 Manage, where the Subject is the ſame, and if it ſpends irs Foręę ſn Ac”ęlerating or Retarding the Apſides, it ſoũſd have none left to Employ in Changeing the Ex? centricity, and yet jt is not only ſo, that it has Two Provinces Aſignd, ſ ũ is unlucky, To Contrary and Rępugnant ones, namely, 19 Ingręaſe the Projectile an Centripetal Force 10, the one by Increaſing the Progręſ™ of the Apſidss, the other by Driving the Y nearer to the Center, and Increaſing thę Excentricity. i S. 21. THis Philoſophy, after giving us a Solution from irs Prinsipss of the m Irregularities in the Motion of the Planet, in Reſpect of it's Longitude, leads us, cCorollary the Tenth, into an Information, how the Irregularities may be Accounted ifor, in Reſpect of it's Latitude; To this End we are Deſired t0 Conceiye the Plane si] of the Orbit TSE, as Remaining Immoveable; The Cauſes of any Irregularitics or& Errors, as before Explained, are N M, LM; The Forc}a MI, by Acting always ac Di cording rothe Plane of the Orbit ? A4B, will neyer Diſturb the Motion, in Reſpect Ar of Luttude, nor yet the Forct Na4, where the Nodes are in the Syzygiæ, becauſe it m Aòts according to the Plane of the ſame Orbit, but when the Nodes are in the Quarærures, it chieſty Diſturbs them, ànd by continually Draving ? from the Plane of is Orbit, it Diminiſhes the Inclination of the Plane in the Paſſage of the Body rom the Quadratures to the Syzygiæe, and again Increaſcs the ſame in the Paſage from the Syzygæ to the Quadratures, fiom Whence it comes to paſ, that, whilſt the Body is in the Syzygiæ, the Inclination of rhe Plane is the Leaſſ, and Returns to it's Former Magnitude nearly, when the Body Arrives at the next or ſuceeeding Node; But, if the Nodes are placed in the Octants after fhe Quadratures, that is, betwixt  and 4, and D and B, it will be ſaund ftom vhat has been already Explained, thar, in the Paſãge of ithe Body ? ſiom either of the Nodes to the 90 Degree, the Inclination of the Plane is porpetually Diminiſied, aſterwards in the Paſſage thro' the next 45 Degrees, ſo far as 1 the next Quadrature, the Inclination is Increas'd, and Ihen thro ahe next 45 hegrees to he ſicoœding Node itis Diminiſhed; The Inclinãtion therefore ĩs anore Diminiſed than Increaſed, and for that Reaſon is alwvays Leſ in the Subſquent Note, than in the Preceding; And by the ſame Reaſoning, the Inclination is more Increas'd than Diminiſied, Where the Nodes are in the other Octais, berwixt A and. D, B and O; Therſore ihe Inclination, where the Nodes arein the Syæygiꝶ, is the Greateſt œf àll: In the Paſſage of the Nodes from the ByIygiæ 1o the Quadratures, in iœach of the Appulſes or Arrivals of the Body to the MNodes, the Inclmãtion: is Diminiſ]d, and becomes the] Leaſt, of all,, when the Nodes are In the Quadratures, and the Body in the Syzygiæ; afterwards it Increaſes by the ſame Degrees, by which it before Decreas'd, and, when the Nodes Arrive at the next Syzygiæ, the Inclination Returns to it's firſt Magnitude. In Anſver to which, FinsT, it is not Proved, That, when the Nodes are in the Syzygiæ, the Forces, LM, MN, do not Diſturb the Motion of the Body P, in Reſpect of Latitude, if they do, when the Nodes are placed in the Quadratures; that is, let EST, or ETE, be an Immoveable Plane, and Iet AB be the Line of the Syzygiæ, whilit the Plane ACB is Elevated above the Plane 2TE, and 4D B Depreſſcd below it, it is ſaid, that LM, MN cannot make any Diſturbance in the Orbit, altho' it is Acknowledged they may, when CD is the Line of the Nodes, and CBD, CAD, the Planes, are the one Depre'd below, and the other Elevated above the Immoveable Plane ETE, which ſeems to be Impoſſible; for 7N muſt as much Drav ? towards S, in ſome oblique Poſition or other, from C or D, which are not in the ſame Plane vith 4 B the Line of the Nodes, as N will Drav P from 4 or B towards S in ſome oblique Poſition or other, where the Line of the Nodes is CD, and conſequently, not in the ſame Plane with A or B; That is, ſuppoſing 2ST or ETE to be the Immoveable Plane, when the Nodes are in the Syzygiæ, D and C will be the onc Depreſſed below, and the other Elevated above it, and when they are in the Quadratures,  and 4 vill be ſo, and therefore in both Caſes, there will be a DiſtUrbance from the Force æN, or elſe in neither; for if N Acts Parallel to TS, or thePlane ETE, whichit is ſuppoſed to do, it will Attract Pinc, as well as in A, when Raiſed above it, to a Point nearer to that Plane, than it would by i's own Force have otherwiſe Deſcribed. SECOND, When the Nodes are in the Syzygiæ, that is, vhen C is Raiſed above the Plane ETE, without a Compariſon of them to what they are in the Quadratures, it is not Certain, that the Force N has thoſe Effects, which are ſuppoſed, of Acting both by an Exceſs and a Defect upon the Body P, according to what has been before Argued, that is, by way of Attraction and Repulſion. TuHIRD, The Reſolution of the Force 5L into LM, MS, is likewiſe not Proved, as ve have already ſiewn. FourTH, The Accelerating of the Body P, by the Force æ N, from C to 4 is Inconſiſtent with it's Inclining the Plane BCA towards ETE, ſince the one Draws it according to the Orbit, and the other Draws it down from it. ON the other Hand, when the Nodes are in the Quadratures q, D, there are the following Objections againſt the foregoing Account. FirsT, That 2N cannot, by continually Drawing the Body P from the Plane of it's Orbit, Diminiſh the Inclination of the Plane in the Paſage of the Body from the Quadratures to the Syzygiæ, and again Increaſe the ſame in the Paſſage of it from the Syzygiæ to the Quadratures; Becauſe, ſuppoſing CAD, where the Nodes are C and D, to be Raiſed above the Immoveable Plane æTE, or Depreſ'd below it, for the Caſe is the ſame; The firſt Queſtion will be, when the Body ? is in C or 4, if the Force MN has an Effect to Drav it tovards the Plane æTE, how the Body P will ever Riſe from that Plane, in it's Paſage from A4 to D; For if the Forcce N is Increasd in it's Progreſs from C to 4, it is not ſiewn, why it ſould not as gradually Draw the Body P to the Immoveable Plane, and conſcquently keep it continually ſo Inclind, as it is at 4; for, tho N ſhould be Gradually Diminiſ'd from 4 to D, it would not be Conſequent, that ? ſhould Raiſc it ſel? from the Planc æTE, unleſi nduec Endued with ſome Innate Force, which ſhould thus Aſſiſt it's Elevatior, which is nòt Acknowledged. SECOND, If this could be done, it is not Evident, as was ſaid before, how n ſould Accelerate P in it's Paſage from C to 4, which is Affirmed, and yet Perform the orther Province of Drawing it down from it's Orbit, which Attraction from it's Orbit muſt Retard it's Motion. TnirD, It is not ſewn, how CAD, conſidered as belonging to a Secondaty Planet, is the Part of an Orbit Inclined to ZTE, unleſs by ſuppoſing, that ? Deſcribes an Orbit Inclined to it, which, in Reſpect of the Earth's Orbit about the Sun in Particular, the Moon for Inſtance moſt certainly does; But why it ſhould do it, is far from being Explain'd by this Philoſophy, which Preſumes and Suppoſes the Inclination of the Orbit, and then makes an Arbitrary uſe of the Force 7N to Draw the Body ? out of that Orbit; whereas, if the original Inclination of the Orbit of the Secondary Planet to the Primary was not Suppoſed, all the other Reaſonings upon it would be of no Importance; If it is Suppoſed and not Accounted for from any Principles in this Philoſophy, it's Deviations from it's own Orbit may be as well Suppoſed and as juſtly Accounted for from ſuch a Suppoſition, as it's Grand Deviation from the Orbit of it's Primary Planet is by a mere Suppoſition only. FouRTH, Since MN Acts according to the Plane Z TE, or in a Direction Parall]l to it, and not in any oblique one from 4 to s, when the Body ? is in 4, it cannot Diminiſh the Angle of Inclination, tho' it is there Imagined to have the Greateſt Effect, the Angle of Inclination being there the Leaſt; becauſe , when in 4, Gravitates to S in a Line Parallel to TS, and conſequently, the Force N will only Draw P from its Orbit at an Equal Diſtance from TS, and therefore will not more Incline TA or TP to it, than if there was no ſuch Attraction; for tho' it muſt be Confelſed, that if P at 4 is Drawn out of it's Orbit, in a Parallel Direction to TS, to any Point next A4 tovards S, if a Line is Drawn from 7 to ſuch a Point, it will have a Leſ Inclination to TS, than TA has, yet when ? is in ſuch a Point, if it is Attracted toT in a Parallel Direction to T4, which there is as much Reaſon for, as that it ſhould be Attracted to S in a Parallel Direction to TS, the Angle of Inclination of PT to T5, will be the ſame in both Caſes; for beſides, if ? in 4 is Drawn into another Plane, the Center ſould be Removed into the ſame Plane, otherwiſe there could be no Revolution, according to Prop. 1. of this Philoſophy, which ſuppoſes an Immoveable Plane neceſſary to the Revolution, and thereſorẽ if ? Shiſts from one Plane to another, when the Center is the ſame, the Foundation of all the Preſent Reaſoning is Deſtroyed. Fi?TH, The Reſolution of the Force SL into LM, MS, as before, is Unproved, and whatever has been alledged in Affirmation of theſe Principles. SixTH, In the Paſage of P from A4 to D all the Arguments are the ſame againſt the Plane of the Orbit CA D Increaſing in it's Inclination to æZ TE, which were us'd againſt it's being Diminiſd in the Paſſage of the Body from C to 4. As to the other Progreſſes of the Body from D to B, and B to q, it is not neceſ ſary to conſider them, unleſs upon this Account, that there is one Objection, which lies againſt them in Particular, namely, that it is not certain, that a Defect of the Force N vill have the ſame Effects, as the Exceſs of it. TuERE Will be therefore nothing more to ſay on this Head, Excepting, that when the Nodes are Placed in the Octants, or in any other Poſition, The Reaſoning, ith ſome Circumſtantial Allowances, will be the ſame. S. 22. THE Eleventh Corollary is, That, ſince the Body , when the Nodes are in the Quadratures, is continually Drawn from the Plane of it's Orbit, and that tovards the Part 5 in its Paſſage from the Node , thro' the Conjunction 4, to the Node D, and to the contrary Part, in it's Paſſage from the Node D, thro' the Oppo ſition B, to the Node  it is Evident, that, in i's Morion from the Node C, the Body Perpetually Recedes from the Plane of it's Orbit, till it comes to the Next Node, and conſequently, in this Lat Node paſſes at a Greater Diſtance from the Firſt Plane CD, thro' the Immoveable one ETE, that is, not in the other Node D ol that Plane, but in a Point, which Verges or Inclines from thence towards the Body 5S, and therefore is a New Place of the Node Tending Backwards, that is rather towards 4 than B in Reſpect of D; and by a like way of Reaſoning, the Nodes vil Ii a Recedt Recede from the Places they obtained before, in the Paſſage of the Body from D to C; and therefore the Nodes, when Situate in the Quadratures, have a Continual Regreſs, but vhen in the Syzygiæ, vhere the Motion of ? Receives no Diſiurbance in Reſpect of it's Latitude, the Nodes are Quieſcent; and in the Intermediate Places, they Share in both theſe Influences, and by Conſequence, being either Actually carryd Backwards, or being Actually Stationary in each Revolution, they find a Regreſſion, or are carryd in Antecedentia. liii BUT in the FIrsT Place, we muſt be Allowd to obſerve, that this Corollary Depends upon the Former, ſince, if the Body P is not Drawn from it's Orbit in the ſame Mcthod, which this Philoſophy Preſcribes, as, by what is before Proved, it is not, there can be no Argument from thence for the Regreſſion of the Nodes. SECOND, Tho' that were Granted, namely, that ? was Drawn from it's Orbit in it's Paſage from C to D, it would not follow, that there ſiould be a Regreſſion of the Nodes; Becauſe 4N would only produce this Effect at the moſt, to it, that P, ſuppoſing the Nodes in the Quadratures, would be Attracted to a Plane below CA4 D, and vhich would have a Leſs Inclination to the Planc æ TE, that is, CA4 D would Vibrate upon the Axis CD, and conſequently there would be no Regreſſion oſ the Nodes in the ſame Plane, but they would be Quieſcent, and only the Inclination of CAD to E TE vould be Diminiſhed and Increaſed by Turns. THiRD, This is the more Conſirmd, becauſe it is Inconceiveable, when the Nodes are in the Quadratures C and D, that they ſhould Recede from thoſc Points, if CAD is conſidered as a Planc Inclined to 2TE; fince ?, when it is in C or in D, muſt have the ſame Attraction to S from the Force M N, and therefore, if the Node is in C, notwithſtanding the Attraction of N, it muſt be likewiſe in D, notwithſtanding ſuch Attraction; If yet the Node D is Attracted by AN to a Point on this Side D tovards 4 or S, in like Manner C ought to be, from whence the Line of the Nodes will not be carryd in a Revolution in Antecedentia, but Parallel to CD tovards 4 or S. FourTH, If the Plane CA D Interſects the Plane EZTE on this Side D, it's Inclination to ZTE vill be in a Greater Angle, and therefore Increas'd by the Force 7N, whereas by the Preceding Corollary it was Diminiſhed by the ſame Force, which is a Contradiction. FirrH, All the Objections, which lie againſt the Preceding Corollaries and this Propoſition, are Equally certain here; As to the Twelſth Corollary, which is, that all the Errors, Deſcrib'd in theſe Corollaries, are ſomething Greater in the Conjunction of the Bodies ? and 5, than in their Oppoſition upon Account of their Greater Generating Forces N and LM, we ſall omit the Examination of it, as Depending on the Former, and Proceed to the Thirteenth. l 5. 23. THE Thirteenth Corollary is, That ſince the Reaſons of theſe Corollaries do not Depend upon the Magnitude of the Body S, all, which has been ſaid before, Obtains, where the Magnitude of the Body S is Determined or Suppoſed to be ſuch, that the Syſtem of the Two Bodies T and ? may be Revolved round it; and from the Increaſe of the Body S, and conſequently of it's Centripetal Force, from whicl the Errors of the Body P do Ariſe, all thoſe Errors will become (in Equal Diſtances Greater in this Caſe than in the orher, where the Body 5 is Revolved about the Syſtem of the TWo Bodies ? and T. i Al In IN Reply to which it muſt be Finst ſaid, that nothing of what foregoes is True, and therefore, that which is here Alledged cannot be, ſo far as it is à Conſequence SECOND, This is only an Accommodation of the Preſent Scheme to the Revolution of the Farth and Moom about the Sun, and for that Reaſon does not concern the Argument ve are now Conſidering, Namely, the Merits and Truth of the Preſent Hypotheſis in General; tho' it may be ſaid, that by the Increaſe of the Body s. and it's Centripetal Force, ſomething mote than an Increaſe of the foregoing Errors may be Produced, Whilſt the Projectile Forces Continue the ſame, namely, the Attraction or Detruſion and Compreſſion of the whole Syſtem of P and 7 to the Center S. r As to what Reſpects the 140, 150, 16t, and 17? Corollaries, it will not, after what has been ſaid, be neceſſary to Enter into a Diſquiſition of them, ſince they chiclv Relate to a Calculation of theſe Errors and Irregularities in the Primary and Secondary Planets, but if ſuch Irregularities are not juſtly Accounted for; it will be as Certain, that their Quantities and Proportions are not. S. 24. TuE Eighteenth Corollary is an Application of this Doctrine to the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, in order to ſolve which, it is ſuppoſed, that ſeveral Fluid Bodies are Moved round the Body 7, at Equal Diſtances from it, with the ſame Laws and Conditions, with which the Body ? is Revolved about the ſame Body T, Afterwards from theſe Fluid Bodies becoming Contiguous a Fluid Ring is Conceivd to be formd Round and Concentrical to the Body T; If ſo, the ſeveral Parts of the Ring, by performing all their Motions according to the Laws of the Body P, will Approach nearer to the Body 7, and vill be moved Swifter in the Conjunction and Oppoſition of them and the Body S, than in the Quadratures; and the Nodes of this Ring, or it's Interſections with the Planc of the Orbit of the Body 5 or T, will be Quicſcent in the Syzygiæ, but out of the Syzygiæ they will be Moved in Antecedeniia or vhich is the ſame, will have a Regreſſion, and this Regreſſion will be the Svifteſ in the Quadratures, and Slower in the other Intermediate Places; The Inclination ol the Ring will be alſo Varyd, and its Axis will Oſcillite in each of the Revolutions, and vhen the whole Revolution is Performed, it will, Return to it's former Situation, unleſs ſo far as it is Carry'd Round by the Preceſſion of the Nodes. ArTER this, it is, in Corollary the Nineteenth, ſuppoſed, that the Globe of the Body 7. which conſiſts of a Matter which is not Fluid, is Enlarged and Extended to this Ring, and in a Channel, which is Excavated thro' it's Circuit, contains the Water, and is uniformly Revolved with the ſame Periodical Motion about it's Axis; This Liquid being Accelerated and Retarded by Turns, as in the foregoing Lemma, vill be Swifter in the Syzygiæ and Slower in the Quadratures than the Superficies of the Globe, and conſequently will have a Flux and Refſlux in the Channel after the ſame Manner as the Sea has; The Water by Revolving about the Quieſcent Center of the Globe, if the Attraction 5 is taken avay, will acquire no Motion of a Flux and Reſlux, and the ſame Reaſoning Obtains in a Globe, which Proceeds uniformly in Directum, and in the mean Time Revolves about it's own Center, by the 5th Corol. of the Laws, as alſo in a Globe, which is uniformly Dravn from it's Rectilineal Courſe, by the 6 corol. of the Laws, but let the Body 5 Approach, and the Water vill be immediately Diſturbed by it's Unequal Attraction, for the Attraction of the Water which is Nearer will be Greater, and of that which is Remoter Leſs; But the Force LM vwill Draw the Water Down in the Quadratures, and will make it Deſcend to the Syzygiæ, and the Force XL vill Draw it upwards in the Syzygiæ, and will ſtop the Deſcent of it, and make it to Aſcend as far as the Quadratures. Tuis Account of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea ſo evidently Depends on the ILaws of Motion in the Revolurion of a Secondary Planet about a Primary, that there will be no Occaſion very Particularly to conſider it, aſter a Confutation of thoſc Laws. WE& ſhall only Fiust ſay, That if all thoſe ſuppoſed Laws of Revolution were True, it is not very Conceiveable, how they àre Applicable to the Oceãn, unleſs it made ſuch a Ring in it's Channel about the æarih, and was Inclind in the ſame Manner to the Plane ETE, as the Orbit of the aſon is, neither of which Things are in Fact true, that we know of.- E SECOND, SECOND, If this were ſo, ſince Water in this Philoſophy is ſuppoſcd to be of the ſame Homogeneous Matter with any other Solid Marter, and only Differs in it'i Quantity, which is Proportional to it's Weight, and not in it's Real Nature and Con ſtſtution, ſecing, in it's Revolution about the Center 7, one Kind of Matter, as Water. is Diſturb'd, there is no Reaſon Given, nor can be, why another ſhould not, as Earth or even the whole Surface of the Globe it's ſelf, if it had the ſame Inclination with this Imaginary Ring of Water, unleſs that it in Fact is not. THIRD, Let this be Granted, yet the Action of S would not obtain the Effechi Propoſed, for it could only Diſturb every Parcel of the Fluid Ring, as it Paſſed, ac cording to the Laws Obſerved in the Revolution of ?; the Conſequence of which would be, that in the Paſſage of any Part of the Fluid Ring from the Quadratures to the Syzygiæ, there would be a Quicker Motion, which would again Flag and Languiſh in it's Paſſage from the Syzygiæ to the Quadratures, in Caſe cach Fluid Part preſerved it's Situation, and what Acceleration any Part acquired in it's Paſſage from C to A, or Retardation from 4 to D, would be ſtill Increasd by the Succeeding Revolutions; From whence would Reſult nothing of a Flux or Reſlux, as is Pretended and Imagined, but a Puſhing or Protruding forwards of the ſame Fluid Ring, according tò the Velocities Impreſ”'d from C to 4, and the Retar dations of them from 4 to D; If the Parts of the Fluid Ring do not preſerve the ſame Situation in ſucceeding onc another, but the preceding Parts, as betwixt C and 4, which are movd Swifter, are heaped and thrown upon thoſe which are movd Slower, as betvixt 4 and D, All the Conſequence ill be, that they will now move Slower from 4 to D, than before betwixt C and 4; from whence it will follow, in either Caſes, that the Parts oſ the Fluid Ring will proceed Swifter betwixt C and 4, and Slower betwixt 4 and j D vithout any Imaginable Reflux, which we can at preſent Apprehend, that is, that the Waves, by the Accelerating and Retarding Action of the Moon, will ſtill ſucceed one another in a Swifter or a Slowor Motion, without any Reſlux or Regreſſion of Them. FouRTH, And as to the Waves of the Fluid Ring being Raiſed or Elevated in the Quadratures, and Depreſũd in the Syzygiæ. it will be ſtill Leſs to the purpoſe of Accounting for a Flux and Reflux of them, in this way of Raiſing and Depreſſing them, tho poſſibly Another, which we have already Explained, may be the only one to ſolve this Difficulty; However, ſince the Preſent Elevation and Depreſſion of the Waters is Aſcribed to the Celerity or Slowneſ of their Motion in the Syæygiæ and Quadratures, and ſince that can have no ſuch Effect, namely, to Elevate or Depreſs them, as has been Proved in the Preceding Article, and before in the Examination of that Corollary, which Reſpects the Enlargement of the Orbit of ? in the one Caſe and the Depreſſion of it in the other, ſuch an Explication can be of no Force or Significance. Frrr, Since the Water is Switer in the Syzygiæ and Slower in the Quadratures, it ſould be more Depreſſed in the Syzygiæ, and more Prominent and Convex in the Quadratures, whereas the Contrary is here Affirmed, That it is more Elevated in the Syzygiæ, and more Depreſſcd in the Quadratures; Tis true, the Forces L M in the Quadratures, and XL in the Syzygiæ are called in to Remedy this Defect; But is it not ſomething Strange, that the Two Acceſſory Forces, LM and X L, ſould be able to Effect more than the Main and Principal Force N, by which this vhole Machine is Acted? And it is Evident, that / N, according to this Philoſophy, would would Accelerate the Waters in the Syæygiæ, and Retard them in the Quadratures, and by Conſequence, Depreſs them in the one Caſe and Raiſe them in the other. in Contradiction to Fact and Experience. : SixrH, Tis true LM in the Quadratures Drives the Waters tovards the Center by Adting from P to ꝗ; ànd XL in the Syzygiæ Draws them from it, and both Aſiſt to the Elevation of the Waters in the Syzygiæ, and the Depreſſion of them in the Quadratures, and if we ſuppoſe farther 4N not to Accelerate the Waters in the Syzygiæ, but to Draw and Attract them from the Center, which Effect it is ſaid likewiſe to have, N would alſo Contribute to the Production of the ſame Phænomenon; but here lies an Objection againſt this Account, that th 7N, XE, may be eaſily Imagined to be Attractive of the Waters in the Conjunction 4, and conſequently to Raiſe them, yet how the ſame Forces ſould be Repulſive of them in the Oppoſition B, is not nor can be Explained, as we have before ſewn in the Examination of that Corollary. SEVENTH, The Fluid Ring it ſelf, as was before Intimated, is an Imaginary Buſineſ; and cannot be Juſtified from any Thing which we find in Nature; for how is the Ocean like ſuch a Fluid Ring, vhich Spreads it ſelf like one Vat Pond, Broken and Interrupted with Various Continents of Land, and has no more the Reſemblance of a Fluid Circulating in one continued Courſe about the Center of the Earth, than of any Thing elſc to which it is the moſt unlike: We ſhall not therefore conſider this Account of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea any farther, tho' there are ſeveral other Diſficulties, which lie againſt it, nor yet the Doctrine of the Planets, as it is Compared with what is Obſerved in their Revolutions, albeit we might there likewiſe ſhew, that there are as many Adjuſtments of Calculation and Suppoſitions made to Effect, that the Appearances of Nature ſhould anſwer theſe Hypotheſes in Reaſoning, as we have ſhewn that there are Adjuſtments of Reaſoning, and Suppoſitions made to Anſwer theſe Appearances, and particularly in the Theory of the Moon, ſo much Celebrated in the J3u Philoſophy. But oũr Deſign being only to Inquire into the Principles of Philoſoply, we ſnall not at preſent trouble our ſelves to Examine, how they agree with what is propoſed to be ſolv'd by them, ſince, if the Principles are Falſe, it is Impoſſible the Solutions ſould be True; Thus in the Magnet, if the Striate Particles Of Des Cartes are a Romance and a Ludicrous Fiction, as all will acknowledge them to be, ho know any Thing in theſe Studies, tho they ſhould be pretty well Adapted to the Solution of ſeveral Phænomenons in that Body, no one of Senſe would yet take them to be any thing Real or Exiſting in Nature. S5. 25. FROM an Examination into the Principles, by which the Irregularities of the Plancts are Explained, ve might Proceed to the Doctrine of Comets, as to the Orbits of which it is not fully Determined, whether they are more truly Repreſented by a Parabola, an Hyperbola, or an Ellipſis, and all that is Proved, or Endeavourd to be Proved, is, that a Comet is Moved in ſome Conick Section or another, in one of whoſc Umbilicus's is the Sun; The Parabola is rather choſen, but ithout any certain Proofs of it's being the Trajectory of the Comet. In Truth and Reality, if the Orbits of the Planets are not regularly and truly Adjuſted by this Philoſophy, the Extravagant Deviations of the Comets from ſuch Rules of Motion or Acting muſt be Leſs Accounted for. It will not therefore be neceſſary to Inquire into the Orbits, which the Comets Deſcribe, ſince the Cauſes Aſſign'd of ſuch Revolutions are Precarious or Falſe, all that will be Expedient to do, if any Thing, is to know upon What Reaſons the Caudæ or Tails of them àre Explained, nor vill this be neceſſary, ſince they do not Proceed upon any Mathematick Principles, but upon the Gueſſes and Conjectures of Men, which are Various according to Dr. Gregory, Prop. 4. Lib. 5, and which perhaps we may find ſome other Time to Examine. We ſhall therefore Conclude theſe Corollaries with an Admiration, that thoſe Philoſophers, ho pretend that their Reaſon, not their Religion, is the only Diſtinction of Men from Brutes, ſould fall into Notions, which have no Reaſon to ſupport them, that they ſiould Run themſelves into all the Follies and Abſurdities Imaginable, as is Evident, when they come to be Examined by Common Senſe, and at the ſame Time Think to ſecure themſelves in all theſe, by Drawing of Lines, and Circles, and Angles about them, as a Kind of Fortification and Defence for ſuch Errors. l l C H A PM C H AP. VI. Coniclrning thoſe Propoſitions; which Relatè to ihe particular Forees, by nuhich the Planets are Retaintd in their Orbits s.I. E have in the Two foregoing Chapters Examined into ſeveral Propollil ſitions Reſating to the Phyſical Aſtronomy, but in the Ninth and Tenth Corolſaries of the Former Chapter, where the Apſides and the Excentricity of the Orbits were Conſidered, we were Obliged to take ſome Things for Granted, which were not there Proved, and which we Promiſed to ſubmit tõ a farther Inquiry, which when we have done, there will be ſcarcely any Thing Remaining, which will Require our Labour or Trouble in theſe Matters. j S. 2. TuE Firſt Propoſition, which we ſnall take Notice of is, that if a Body ĩs Projected according to the Direction of any Right Line, and at the ſame Timè i: Uged by a Centripetal Force Tending to the Center 5, ſ0 that, by a Motion Compounded of theſe TWo, it ſould Deſcribe the Cũrve 4Pp, tò Which in any Point ?; Iet Pæ be àa Tangent, ànd from the Point B, which is the next to ?, let BD be Drawn Perperdicular io the Rght Line 5?, ànd Bæ Parallel t0 it, and Ict iſiere be the like Conſtruction madè àt any othir Polnt of the Curve, as ꝓ; It is Afſfitimed in this Propoſirioh, that tic Centriſctal Fore in ? is to vut m ꝑ, 58 ſ- ; ĩ 1 2e⸗, on, that the Cenl , .. uà l I trſpetal Force in ? is Reiproclly, a 2 where ? ? 3D Is Indeſnitely Small. un4.. VFon, Let ihe Force In ?, Which Tends towards the Center S, be called 7, Let e Time in vhich the Iea©t Arc ?B is Performed, r in which the Body by it's Vis inſita alone vould Deſcribe the leat Tangent P R, be called 7, Let the Centripetal Forct, Aœting from the Point ꝓ, be call|d v, and Let the Time, in which 2b is Performeq, õt in vhich the Tangent 2r Would be Deſcribed, be called ?; Let alſo the Arc ?ã bBe Taken, Which the Bòd7 Deſcribes in the ſame Time, in Which it Deſcribes the Arc ꝑb, and Let  be Drawn Parallel to ?S; Theſe Things being ſuppoſcd, the Reaſon of the Small Line BR to that of b7 is Compounded of the Reaſon of B æ to h, and of the Reaſon of 5 to br, or 2 E iitts but, by Lemma 11th of the Method of Naſcents and Evaneſcents, BR ĩs to Bꝑ as PBq to PBq; and theſe Ares PE, Iſt, ſiice they are the Leaſt or the Evaneſcent ones, are ãàs the Triangles ? an Equal Height 25P, BSP, that is, by Pròp. iſh, and 24. of this Philoſophy, as the Tœ mę they ãare Deſcribed by a Radius Dravn to s, or by the Preſent Conſtrũction, as ih Times, in Which the Ares Ih ph are Deſcribed; Again the Small Lſnc ẽ⸗ is to that of br as the Cauſes, hich Produce them, that is, as the Centripetal Force in ? to that in , and therefore the Reaſon of the Small Line Bæ to that of br, is Compęunded of the Duplicate Reaſon of the Times, in which ? 3, ꝑb, are Deſcribed, and of the Reaſon of the Centripetal Force in ? to that in ꝓ, i T: B RæXI DEi thut is, ? E and thereſore Væ8)xt? Diie by Prop. 1, of this Philobr Al vudbræT: Tophy T is to t as the Area SBP is to the Arca Sby, or as the Double of the For mer SPæ BD is to the Double of the Latter Spx bd; If therefore in the Place of the . ] c Spqxbdq vDBESpæbdq : . Reaſon  ve ſubſtitute r7Dq vill be m T75r233D that is, by Dividing viding both by Bæx br, . , and therefore the Cenuipetal Force in ? to 5 is Reciprocally, as the Solid a⸗; 2/E. D. s. 3. IN Anſwer to which, we muſt obſerve, Firſt, That the Body is ſuppoſed ĩo be Projected in the Tangents ?? and ꝓr, or to Proceed by it's Vis Inſita in thoſe Tangents, which Projection or Vis Inſita is wholly Undefined and Undetermined in this Figure, whether it is Conſtant or Mutable, and what Proportion it bears to the Centripetal Force, which Tends towards S; It is only ſaid, in General and at Large, to be ſuch, as, in Conjunction with that Force, will Deſcribe the Curve 4 Pp. We have given our Objections againſt the Projectile Force, or Vis Inſita, and the Gravitating Force or Centripetal already, which need not be here Repeated, upon the Truth of which, yet, all this Reaſoning ſtands; the Propoſitions here quoted for the Support of this Demonſtration have been alſo Examined and Refuted, and we ſhall only ſay farther, that, if the Planets are Revolved round the Sun by it's Expanſive Force Carryd about it's Axis by a Perpetual Gyration, this whole Doctrinc of Projectile and Centripetal Forces will fall to the Ground; and that they are thus Revolved, there are ſome Arguments to make us Believe it, and none, which can perhaps in Fact Diſprove it, and therefore this Imaginary Deſcription of Curves is Falſe or Uncertain, and far from being Mathematically Evinced or an Indiſputable Propoſition of Geometry. S. 4. AcAIN, In the Second Place, if this Vis Inſita or Projectile Force is no more than ſuch, which, with the Centripetal Force here particulary Defined and Expreſſed, is capable of Deſcribing the Curve 4 Pp, this is only Telling us, that we may adjuſt Matters ſo betwixt the Projectile and Centripetal Force, that the Latter ſhall have the Proportion which we Aſſign it, tho we do not Prove, that the Projectile will comply with thoſe Conditions, which we are pleaſed to Preſcribe to it; Thus E& i; x - from which Equation this Propoſition is Concluded. Tuar is, FIRsT, Suppoſing, that PR the Tangent is or would be Deſcribed by the Vis Inſitaalone in the ſame Time T; as the Arc PB is by the Projectile and Cen tripetal Force together, that is, Suppoſing, that the Force ? B conſiſts of the Forces ? à and æ B, and that the Diagonal Force is Reſolvible into the Lateral ones, a Doctrine, which has been before Conſidered and Objected to; Beſides which, the Diagonal here is a Curve, which was there ſuppoſed to be a Right Line, and we have ſhewn, that tho a Curve is Infinitely Diminiſhed, it cannot put on that Form. SECOND, By Aſſuming the Arc Pã, which the Body is to Deſcribe in the ſame Time, as it Deſcribes the Arc »b, and by making the ſaid Aſſlumed Arc Leſs than PB, it ĩs ſuppoſed, that B is not the Leaſt Arc, which yer was before ſuppoſcd to be the Leaſt Arc, and therefore in Order to bring this Demonſtration to it's Concluſion, Two contrary Suppoſitions are Introduced, that P B is the Leaſt Arc, and that it is not the Leaſ Arc, vhich cannot but be a very Convincing Way of Geometrick Reaſoning. TuiRD, By Aſſuming the Arc ? Leſs than the Arc PB, it is ſuppoſed, that the Time, in which the Arc ?B or pb is Deſcribed, is Leſs than the Time in which the Arc ?PB is Deſcribed, as P; is Leſs than PR; for if the Time was Equal or Greater, P) would be Equal to or Greater than P ?, which would not ſuit with this Demonſtration; if therefore ꝓ b is an Arc Equal to ? B, and is Deſcribed in a Leſs Time than PB is, it is Deſcribed with a Greater Velocity, and conſcquently, if ?ẽ is Deſcribed with the ſame Velocity as ? B, the Time P; will be Leſs to make it Anſwerable to the Are pb, which it Repreſents; and from hence it is, in part, Inferd; that a is 5 p; x - that is, by, in part, ſuppoſing it. For it is not Proved; that T or the Time of PR is Greater than ? or the Time of 2r  to the Time of Ṕ or that the Velocity in pb is Greater than the Velocity in ? B, Imagining them to bè the Leaſt Arcs and Equal, unleſs by ſuppoſing it. : IP it is ſaid, that the Point » will Move Faſter in a Mathematical Figure, when it is nearer to S, and the Point P Slower, when it is farther from it, and therefore, that the Firſt will Deſcribe an Equal Arc in a Leſſer Time than the Laſt, That will not be True, becauſe, in Concentrical Circles, the Velocity of the Arcs is Greater, the ſarther you Remove them from the Center, and the Leſ”d the nearer they Approach to it, in the ſame Time. Ir it is farther Alledged, that, ſince it has been alrcady Proved, that the Areas PSB, p Sb are Proportional to the Times, thereſore the Arc ?B at a Greater Diſtance from the Center S muſt be Deſcribed in a Longer Time, and b in a Shorter; That neither has been Proved, as ve have before ſhewn, nor is it Agreeable with Concentrical Circles, nor is it, as yet, made uſe of in this Demonſtration, but is Introduced afterwards, vhen we are Preſcribed to ſubſtitute thoſe Areas inſtead FourtTH, As the Times of the Deſcriptions of the Arcs are Arbitrarily Aſſumcd, ſo are the Forces, with which they are Deſcribed; for if ꝓb is an Arc, which is Deſcribed with a Greater Velocity, and P is one, which is Deſcribed with a Leſs, tho' they are both of them Deſcribed in the ſame Time, yet the one vill not be a juſt Repreſentative of the other, becauſe the Component Forces oſ the Projectile and Centripetal in both will be Entirely Different, and therefore we might as well have made Choice of any other; for P, and ; 2, of which ? is Compounded, are very Diſferent from ꝓ7 and rb, which is the Compoſition of ꝓb as Pſ is Different from ꝓb. hu The Vis Inſita or Projectile Force in P is ſuppoſed Equal to that in » or not; If Equal, 2r will be =P) =PR, and then there will be an End of this Demonſiration, becauſe then likewiſe 7b will be ; 2=D2B, and there will be no Difference in the Centripetal Forces, whoſe particular Reaſons and Proportions are here Endeavoured to be Aſcertain'd; If the Vis Inſita or Projectile Force in ? is not Equal to that in ꝓ, this Philoſophy would do vell to Inform us, how a Vis ſita can be Intended and Remitted, or how one Certain and Immutable Force, with which Bodies would be Carryd in Directum, if not otherwiſe Diverted, can be Altered. For it is not ſufficient to ſay, that the Centripetal Forcœ being Diſferent In Diſſerent Parts oſ the Orbit makes the Projectile Force Diſferent, ſince the Diſference of the Centripetal Forces is Expreſed by Lines Drawn Parallel to the Radius of the Curve, and conſequently, the Projeẽtile Forces, if Equal, ought to he Expreſied in every Part of the Curve by Equal Tangents; or elſe ſome Portion of the Centripetal fores vill Enter into the Compoſition of the Tangent, and æ ? and sr will not be the Full and Entire Expreſſions of it; Which if ſo, it follows, that ?; is not a Juſt Expreſſion of the 7s Inſita or the Projectile Force in P or ꝑ, or that any other is, Excepting P R, becauſe the Projectile Force of every the Lea©t Arc, whether ? 3 or ꝓb, muſt be Equal. T muſt be farther ſaid; that if the Projectile Force, or the Vis oſita, is Equal in Part of the Curve, and Expreſſible by Equal Tangents, it will be ſomething Difficult to Account for the Various Velocities and Accelerations in theſe Curves from the mere Principle of a Force Adting direẽtly rowards the Center, and yer there is no orher to Accòunt for them, eſpecially, how a Body ſould Move fater in ? than in ?, When ĩt is Nearer to the Center than when it ĩs farther from it by a Principle of Gravity only, when the Projectile Force is Acknowledged to be the ſame. On the Contrary, if it Thoutd be again Affirmed, that the Projectile Force is Different in Different Ponts of the Curve, it will be neceſſary to ſiew the Proportions of theſe Projectite Forœs ® each other, before we can prerend to Determine thoſ of the Centripetal, mã we ought as well to Inquire, what Proportion ?æ, P; and ?r obrain among themſelves, as what æ, ẽ3, and br do. SixTH, Afſter the foregoing Suppoſitions, this Demonſtration Proceds to tell us, that the Smaſ Line Bæ is to the Small Line b7r in a Compound Reaton of B æ to èſ, and of B5 to br, that is, 4u and thereſore by the Lemma before Cited from the Method of Naſcents and Evaneſuents, BR. o:: ?BG. PB: T, fince ?B, Põ are the Leaſt Arcs, and are as the Triangles of the ſame Height æ5P, BS P, that is, by the 17? and 24 Propoſitions of this Philoſophy, as the Times 7, ⸗, in which they are Deſcrib'd, or by the Conſtruction, as the ſame Times 7, , in which : the the Ares P B, ?b are Deſcribed; Again, the Small Line L is to the Small Line b7 as the Cauſes, that is, as the Centripetal Forces in ? and ꝓ, which Produce them, or BRBERæB T V as V io v, and therefore  757 7 But, Iſ. As to the Compoſition of Reaſons, æ is to b7 in a Compound Reaſon of BR to PR, and of PR to br, that is, v= as alſo of BR to ?, and P; ©0 br, that is, v=/ as alſo of æ to 2r and of ?r to br, that is, =t1u &c. In the Firſt Caſe, ſince the Projectile Force is as the Time, 2t2 In the sccons, s . In all which Caſes it is Evident, that nothing more is Proved, than that BR is to br, as V to v, or as the Centripetal Force in ? 1o that in » nor can this Demonſtration, if rightly Conſidered, Prove any more or any fari SUPPOSING this Compoſition of Reaſons, which is here Aſſumed, that is, that æ is i it is in the Firſt Place not Evinced, that BR. Bp:: PBꝗ. PB3 3 becauſe the Lemma Alledged is not Provd; And in the next Place, becauſe B æ Bp :: PR. Pꝑ upon Account of Similar Triangles, but P to P; is as one Projectile Force to another, or as one Line to another, and not as the Squares of thoſe Lines. 34. ALLOWING this, That BR. B9:: PBq. PR q, yct that ?Bq. P8q: : T.  hs not Proved, unleſs by ſuppoſing, that PE. P8:: PSB. PSũ, or which is the ſame, that PB is a Right Line, which we deny a Curve to be Reducible to, by any Infinite Diminution of it; Morcover ? SB. PSẽ:: T. 1, by Propoſition the iſt and 2a of this Philoſophy, which Propoſitions have been Examined and Refuted; And from hence it is Concluded, that BR. B2:: T*. 2, and T is Greater than ? only, becauſt it is ſuppoſcd originally to be ſo, that is, the Arc 2b is ſuppoſed to be Deſcribed in a Leſs Time than the Arc ?B. 40, LastLy it is ſaid, that õ,. br:: V. u, but ſince ?B is the Leaſt Arc, vhy BR ſould not be as the Centripetal Force in P is not ſhewn, and conſequently, why BR is not to hr as V. , and therefore BR. ſ2ꝶ in a Proportion of Equality, which berter Agrees with P B, Pſi, being the Leaſt Arcs, that is Equal, from whence the whole Conſtruction at ? vill Vaniſh, and we ſhall be only Informed, what it is to make a Diſtinction withour a Difference; For it ſeems to be Impoſſible, that B R ẽvTI BRæ P?VxtBr : ?; br 7F i/ In the Third Caſe, 22 moud be=ææ 2Z, Z And thus by theſe Demonſirative ſteps we are Led br brv2u j : to the Sum of all, hat 2 is when not one Particular of the whole is Proved. BR. T xr vDBERxr j SEVENTH, If is æit muſt be owned, that is æ by Multiplying the Equation by ??, and Dividing it by 7*. But when it is ſaid, That T. :: SBP. Sby or as the Double of That, to the Double of This, or:: S?x ED. Sp x bã, here the Demonſtration again Fails; Becauſe the Firſt Proportion Depends upon what is not yet Proved, that is, the Firſt Propoſition of this Philoſophy, and the Second upon SP x BD, and 5p  b being Double of the Areas SBP and Sbp, Which is not True, unleſs ?æ and ꝓb, which are the Arcs of a Curve, are the ſame as Right Lines. And it is ſomething Strange and Peculiar in this New Method of Reaſoning, that there ſould be a Difference made in the Leaſt Arcs ? B, Põ, or in the very Point P, for there thoſe Arcs are Naſcent or Evaneſcent, and yet that there ſould be None made betwixt a Right Line and a Curve, or betwixt the Tangent ? R and the Arc PB, as to the Triangle ?P BS, and on the other Hand, that there ſiould be a wide Difference made betwixt them, when we come to Conſider the Centripetal Forces æ and Z,3 This is Saying and Unſaying, making a Diſtinction, and then Rejecting it, and then Aſumi K E 2 ing ing it again, for which there can be no Account given, Excepting that of the Wil and Pleaſure of the Philoſopher, who was Reſolved to Conclude in his ovn Way vhatever became of the Premiſes; for from hence we are Carry'd to the End ol this Demonſtration in a Succe ſſion of Algebraick Equations, which are AcknowIedged and cannot be Conteſted. S. 5. THE next Propoſition, which we ſhall Conſider in this Doctrine, is the Lau of the Centripetal Force Tending to the Focus of an Ellipſis, in which a Body is ſuppoſed to be Revolved; Let 4P M be an Ellipſis, and 5 the Focus or Umbilicus of it, to which the Force Tends, by which a Body is Drawn from a Rectilineal Motion, vhich it would Deſcribe by it's 7is Inſita or Projectile Force, and is made to Circulate in an Elliptical Orbit, This Cen- ſtĩ tripetal Force, and the Lav of it, is here the Inquiry; Draw the Conjugate Axes T4, GTI, which will Croſs each other in the Center C, and thr any Point ? in the Curve of the Ellipſis Draw the Tangent rZ, and the Diameter P M together with it's Conjugate ICK Parallel to the ſaid Tangent, and to ICX let fall the Perpendicular P N; Let the Parallelogram PCIH be Compleated, and the Right Line 7H will be a Tangent to the Ellip- 3 ſis, by Prop. 17. Lib. I. of Conick Sections; Join 5P, which will Interſect IX in E; Thro' the Point B, which is ſuppoſcd to be the next and Immediately Contiguous to P, Draw B R Parallel to PS, and BX 10 ?Z, which will Meet ?5 in X and P in 0, The Centripetal Force Tending to 5 is by the foregoing Propoſition Reciprocally, as the Solid ææ. which, hat it is in the Ellipſis, mut be Computed and Determined from the Nature Oſ it. IN Order to which, let the Principal Latus Rectum of the Ellipſis, or that, which belongs to the Greater Axis T4, be called Z, the Reaſon of Lx BR to BDq is Compounded of the Reaſons of Lx BR to LxPO, and of LxPO to 20x PO, as allo of 40x PO to BOq, of EOq to BXq and of BXq to EDq; that is, L-BR LxXBRYLxXPOX MOX PO BO B X” But, iſt Lx BRBR BD LXPOM0xPOæEBOq:8x08505 T3F5 =XEP Bcant i 1 to 2G=25, For ? E is2 AC by a foregoi = 556 5ꝗ Becauſe XO is Parallel to G æ 5e; or isæ y a foregoing Lemma, vhich there is no occaſion particularly to Conſider here, and which is at PO ; Preſent Granted. 24. Eæ5 is =£ 3d. pmo-r9 by Prop. 21. Lib. 1. of Conick MOx PO MOo BEOꝗ MCP Sections is 2/m 3 h. BOJ I or the One is Equal to the Other, beICq ICq BX I cauſc the Points 3 and ? Coincide or come together, by which means æ0 is = to BX. BX rE sth. u becauſe the Triangles DX, ?P NE are Equiangular, upon the Account oſ the Angles D and  being Right oncs, and B XD, P E N Alternate ones ones from the Parallels  X, E N, but I5 = t Becauſe ? E=C A by the aſoreſaid Lemma; Farther, by Prop. 72. Lib. 4. of Gregory 2 Sancto Vincentio G Cx CA = PCIH  ICXPN, that is, CA. P N:: IC. GC, and therefore CAq. P Nq:: IC” ca4 IC BY .GC1; and conſequently, 9c9 -1 FNq GCq BD : FrOM whence, namely from the ſcveral Steps, thr which we have Gone, ſince , It follows, that of Conic Sections, ACx L= 26Cq; and therefore 5 hq s æc2ox Gq àſò BuT ſince the Point B, in the Preſent Caſe, is Next and Immediately Contiguous to the Point P, O is very little or nothing Diſtant from it, that is, 40 is 5 2 Pq and therefore Lx BR=BD q; Conſequently, ſince the Centripetal Force is, as has been in the Preceding Propoſition Proved, Reciprocally as the Solid ũ i and ſince in the Ellipſis 2 Dq is= Lx BR, the Centripetal Force in the Ellipſis will be Reciprocally, as =SPqxL, and ſince L is a Conſtant and Invari able Quantity, the Centripetal Force in the Ellipſis will be Reciprocally as S Pq; that is, Reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance of the Body Revolved from the Focus or Umbilicus, to which the Centripetal Force Tendss. . E. D. 5. 6. WONDERPUL ſure muſt be the Name or Power of Demonſtration, which can Force the Aſſent without Convincing the Underſtanding, and yet this ſcems to be the Preſent Caſe; For. i i FirsT, That the Centripetal Force Tending to S is Reciprocally, as the Solid 22 2 is far from being ſiewn, we have on the Contrary Evinced, that the Reaſoning, by which that Proportion is Concluded, is Sophiſtical, Deſultory, and Falſe upon ſeveral Accounts, notwithſtanding which, the whole Strength of the Pre ſent Demonſtration Entirely Reſts and Depends upon the Truth and Certainty of that Proportion. SECOND, The next Thing neceſſary to this Demonſtration is to make Lx B R= BD”, ſo that S?q may ſtand by it ſelf; and this is done in ſo Looſe and Arbitrarya Manner, by Begging ſo many Uncertainties for Real Truths, and Subſtituting in the Room of others ſo many Quantities, which are better Fitted for the Purpoſc of Reducing B Dq to Lx BR, and which yet is not Effected, that it may be called any Thing rather than a Mathematick Calculation of the Law of the Centripetal Force oſ a Body Revolving Round the Focus of an Ellipſis. LxBR is ſaid to be zLt: BRæ LxPOX MO x POX BO ꝗx BX9 and ſo it is, becauſe ro o-ro-s09844 is /, which multiplyed into is certainly = to But then we may as well ſay, that—— is& Becauſe XO is Parallel to æC, 7 Becauſe ? E is= AC by the SECOND, Granting yet this Compoſition of Reaſons, L is ſaid to be Equal to Lemma Cited. But ſince, by the Fourth Arricle of the Compoſition of Reaſons in the Preceding Demonſtration B0 is / B X, why 75 ſhould be Equal to = or Lẽ tather than PO S to ?PX cannot be ſiewn, and conſequently, vhy 2 ſhould not be Or on the Contrary, if 735 is not in a Reaſon of Equality, then in the ſaid Fourth Article is not. TuirD, 2 = 55 , becauſe upon Account of the Similar Triangles  D X, P NE, BX. BD:: PE. P N, but if we may Take BO inſtead of 2Y, it will be as BOS BX. BED:: PCPE. PN, from whence ?CAC, and thereſore again, as before, _ = F and A4C and P C Two very Diſferent Semiaxes oſ the ſame Ellipſis, or even 4 C and GC the Semiaxis Principal and Conjugate or Tranſverſc will be Equal, and the Ellipſis changed into a Circle, for the Point ? may be taken, as this Demonſtration is General, in any Part of the Elliptical Curve, or elſe it is not General, and therefore of no Significance or Importance at all. FourtH, Conſcquently, tho PE is / AC by the Lemma Cited, ? C is not, and yet according to what foregoes ? C may be likewiſe =to 4C; Again ca5; Icq becauſe PE is Z CA, but if we take PC in the Room of PE, vill be  to &  And yet this may be Aſirmed, if  is 2 BO. FroM all which it is very Apparent, that this Philoſophy uſes theſe Naſcent or Evaneſcent Quantities juſt as it Pleaſes, ſometimes there ſall be no Diffcrence betwixt them, and at other Times a very Senſible one, then iĩt ſhall again Vaniſh, and aſterwards Riſe into a Reaſon and Proportion, as Regularly and Mathematically, as if there was ſomething more than Notion in it; And upon the Whole, which is a little Admirable, all this Pompous Compoſition of Forces is REæduced to a Proportion of Equality, and 554 æ  After the ſeveral Reaſons, which are Subſtituted in the ſtead of the Former, LæBR, . ACxX LxCPq x BO qxIC BO T Jui d i q 5O4 is / 757 tild io be ?C 20 ICq7BXqGCq and ſince 5æ To BOS BX and ;3 v 7h4 vill be 7C- 2õ-5C; But in the 1ſi Place, if 59Oꝗ 4 = ve have ſiewn that ac may be ꝶ and rq = ac4 and conſequently, B ;  3'-cc7 from whence there could be no farthe Progreſs to a Concluſion of vhat this Demonſtration pretends to Affirm In the In the 3à Placc we muſt likewiſe ſay, that ſince, becauſe BO 5 BXq and ICq to it ſelf, they are Removed out of the Compoſition of Reaſons, it is not Evident , which will not again ſuit with the following Concluſion SIXTH SxTH, At Length afier a great Deal of Artific in Shuffling and Changeing ol LxBR, 2PC Reaſons, it is found, that 5 8  5 but then a new Conceſſion is vanted, and therefore it is Affirmed, that 2 C is 2 70, or, that PO is =o; and ſince . LxBR BX=DBO, ? X=BR is mo, from Whence ſſ is /o, and conſequently, this whole Demonſtration in the laſt Reſult will in Reality and in Truth amount to Nothing SEVENTH, Since Lx BR  BD” is =o, in the Elliphis will be = 5P 5x o = o, and ſo this Demonſtration Ends with telling us, that it has Demonſtrated Nothing at al. Z E. D. S. 7. AND notithſtanding this Appears to be, as I have Repreſented it, ſo fond of late have Philoſophers been of the Cogency and Strength of this Reaſoning that they have Extended it to all Actions of Light, Heat, Cold, Smells, &œ. which are Propagated from a Center, as well as of Attraction or Gravitation, to which it is here only Confined, but not being willing 1o make uſe of a Projectile and a Centripetal Force upon which this Demonſtration Depends, becauſe they Enew of no ſuch Forces in Light, Heat, Cold, or Smells, they have Contrived another Way to Iet us into this Secret, which is, by hewing that the Rays 46, 4F, 4E, in a Sphere, are more Cloſe and Compact nearer the Center, and more Diffuſed and Diſperſed in a farther Removal from it, in that Proportion, which the Spherical Surface GE has to that of DB; and ſince, by Archimedes de Sphara & ulinavo, it is Proved, that Spherical Surfaces are to each other, as the Circles Deſcribd by the ſame Radius's, and ſince thoſe Circles are in a Duplicate Reaſon of the ſaid Radius's, it follows, that the Com paction, Denſity, or Spiſſitude of the Rays in D B, is to the Denſity or Spiſſitude of them in GE, as the Square ol A6 or 4E to the Square of 4D or 4B, and ſince the Intenſion or Force of any Action is in Proportion to the Compaction or Spiſſitude of the Rays, ſuch Force or Intenſion will be Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Diſtances. BUT FinsT, HOW far this Demonſtration is Applicable to Gravity, we have already Conſidered in the Firſt Volume of our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and as there, ſo here likewiſc we cannot but Affirm, that it is an Abſtracted Reaſoning, and ſo far True, as it is Archimedes's, that Spherical Surfaces are in a Duplicate Reaon of their Semidiameters. If yet we are villing to Extend it any farther, what we ſay is Precarious and without a Foundation in Reaſon or in Fact. For S52CcOND, It is not Evincd, that the Spiſſitude of the Rays in DB and GE is Reciprocally, as the Spaces Poſſeſſed by them, and that therefore in Dæ they are more Compact and Denſer, and in GE more Dilated and Diffuſed, becauſe if ſo, it would not only Arrive to Rays of Action, but to thoſc of Space, and the Space D B vould be Thicker and Denſcr than GE, which is not Acknovwledged, tho' it may Perhaps be True. BESIDES, the Spiſſitude of the Rays is Reciprocal to the Spaces, which they Poſſeſs npon the Suppoſition, rhat there is the ſame Number of Rays in D B and G E, as likewiſe in a Similar Arc of rhe Smalleſt Circle Drawn round 4, and conſequently, ſuppoſing D B to be Entirely full of Rays, the ſame Rays can Poſſeſs no more Space in GE then in D B, i therefore a Space is taken out from EG Equal to DB, all the Reſt muſt be Vacuity, to which the Rays do not Rcach; from whence h ollow ſollow, that if GE Repreſents the Earth's Orbit, and the Spherical Surface produced by it, and DB ſuch a Surface, the neareſt we can Imagine to the Sun in 4, as the Spherical Surface of the one is ſeveral Millions of Times Greater than the other, ſo there will be only in the Spherical Surface of the Earths Orbit a Space llluminated Equal to the next Spherical Surface to the Sun, and all the ſeveral Millions and Millions of Space beſides will have no Rays at all to Pervade them: And the ſame may be ſaid of other Actions, that if this Reaſoning vere True, they would not be Diſperſed thro' all Space, Which they are ſuppoſed to be, but at a Conſiderable Diſtance from their Center they would be Perccived at Certain Intervals, and by Interruptions, as at E, F, and G, without any Uniformity of their Diffuſion. FARTHER, Not only the Number of Rays is ſuppoſed to be the ſame in GE and D B to make the Spiſſitude of them Reciprocal to the Spaces, which they Poſſeſs, but the Force and Action of them is ſuppoſed to be as the Spiſſitude of the Rays, that is, the Action of the Ray at G is Equal to the Action of it at D, and it is not Diminiſed by it's Diſtance, for if it were, the Diminution of it's Force need not be Conferred upon the Rarity or Dilatation of the Rays, ſince every Ray would be Diminiſhed in it's Force ſeparately, and by it ſelf, the farther it was Carry'd from the Center of it's Action; Beſides, if every Ray was Diminiſhed in it's Force, the farther it Receded from the Center of it's Action, the Diminution of Force would not be as the Spiſſitude of the Rays was Diminiſhed, which this Demonſtration Affirms, but in a Compound Reaſon of the Diminution of the Force of the Rays, and of the Diminution of the Spiſſitude of them; On the Contrary, if every Single Ray, conſidered by it ſelf, is the ſame in it's Force at a Greater or Leſs Diſtance from the Center of it's Action, which I ſay is here ſuppoſed, That of all Things ſould have been Proved, becauſe it is a Paradox, and will want very Fine and Subtile Arguments to ſupport it. WEe have alſo ſaid, that there is no Foundation in Fact or Experience for this Aſſertion, That Forces are DiminiſYd in Proportion to the Squares of their Diſtances from the Center of their Action; For tho we Evidently perceive, that Forces are Diminiſhed the farther they are from the Center of their Action, yet no Experiments yet have ſiewn in what Proportion they are Diminiſhed, or that all Forces are ſubject to the ſame Laws; The Contrary of which we have all the Reaſon in the World to believe is True; Tis Certain a Man does not grow Cooler, the Nearer he comes to the Fire, nor Warmer for putting his Hands into Snow, he does not Smell Aſſa Faetida Stronger, the farther he Removes it from his Noſtrils, nor vill he Hear a Conſort of Muſick better for being at too great a Diſtance to Diſtinguiſh the Variety of Notes, which Compoſc it; but if we ſay, that all theſe ſeveral Actions are Diminiſhicd in the ſame Proportion of the Square of their Diſtance from rthe Center of them, and that they are all ſubject to the ſame Laws of their Acting, we ſhall Affirm a very great Falſlhood, and only bring in Archimedes to Vouch it, who never ſaid any ſuch Thing. j ALL, which can be ſaid upon this Occaſion, comes into a ſort Compaſs, that every Action is the Strongeſt at the Center of it, that it is afterwards Weaker by Receding from thence, and by being Diffuſed into a Larger Space, each part of which it Repleniſies and Fills, that this is not done by Rectilineal Rays, but by a Diffuſion of the Force, that this Diminution of Action upon both theſc Accounts is Various according to the Nature, Temper, and Genius of the Agent and Patient, which Nature and Temper of the Agent and Patient is to be Determined from the Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive Force, which belongs to them. §. 8. BUT to Return to the Phyſical Aſtronomy, from which we have thus far Digreſſed; As to the Corollaries, which are Derived from the Preceding Propoſition, in Reſpect of the Ellipſis being Changed into a Circle by the Focus's Approaching infinitely near to each other, or into a Right Line by their Approaching infinitely near to the Vertices, as alſo into a Parabola, if one of the Focus's Remains FixXd, and the other Removes to an Infinite Diſtance from it, or into an Hyperbola, ſuppoſing the one is Fixt, and the other is Carry'd to more than an Infinite Diſtance from it, ſc that now the Vertices 4 and 7 ſhould lie betwixt the Foci  and ? with theiũ Curves bent Contrary vays; It is Affirmed, that the ſame Law obtains in all theſc Caſcs, which has been beſore Demonſtrated; That is, in this Doctrine a Right bins ] l a Circle PCircle, a Parabola, and Hyperbola are all to be Reduced to a kind of Ellipſes, tho their Properties are never ſo Different and Various, and all this is Done in Order to bring them under the ſame Law of the Centripetal Force, which is ſaid to be Obſerved in the Ellipſis; againſt which there might be ſeveral Objections Alledged, into which Diſpute there is yet no Occaſion to Enter, ſince the aſorementioned Lav of the Centripetal Force is not proved to Obtain in Ellipſes themſelves. 5. 9. THE next Propoſition, which we ſhall mention is, that if ſeveral Bodies Revolve about a Common Center, and the Centripetal Force is Reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance from the Center, the Squares, it is ſaid, of the Periodical Times in Ellipſes are as the Cubes of the Tranſverſe or Greater Axes, or, which is the ſame, the Periodical Times are in a Seſquiplicate Proportion of the ſaid Axes; vhich Propoſition there is no Occaſion particularly to Conſider, unleſs the Centripetal Force is Reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance from the Center, which is not hitherto Evinced; Beſides which, there are other Things, which may juſtly be Objected againſt this Demonſtration, which we ſhall now Paſs over, till the Way is Cleard and made Plain to the Preſent Concluſion, and for the ſame Reaſon the Corollaries of this Propoſirion concerning the Circle or any orher Orbits are Omitted, for if the Grand Law of the Centripetal Force is not True, it will be in Vain to Expect any Thing of Conviction and Certainty from Reaſonings, which Depend upon a Wrong or a Precarious Foundation. s. 10. UroN the ſame Account, it will not be neceſary to Examine intò the following Propoſition, that, ſuppoſing the ſame Law of the Centripetal Force, as before, the Velocities of Bodies, Revolving about a Common Center, in any Points Given, are in a Reaſon Compounded of a Subduplicate Reaſon of the Principal Latus Rectum's, belonging to the Lines, which they Deſcribe, and of an Inverſe Reaſon of the Perpendiculars, Drawn from the Common Center to the Tangents of the Points, where the Bodies are; Becauſe that Law of the Centripetal Force is Denyd, and all the Concluſions, vhich are made from it; Moreover, ve Affirm, that here likeviſe lic ſome Particular Objections againſt this Demonſtration upon the Ac count of the Velocities, which are Introduced in it, and of which we have Diſcourſed in other Parts of the Preſent Philoſophy. We muſt farther add in Reſpect of the Corollaries here, and of thoſe, which belong to the Former Propoſitions, that ſeveral of them vill be the ſame, tho' the Law of the Centripetal Force was Different from vhat is Pretended to be Demonſtrated; Thũs, tho the Centripetal Force was not Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Diſtances, but as the Cubes or Biſquares, or any other Proportion of them, the Reaſoning would be much the ſame, as to the Circles, Parabolas, or Hyperbolas being Ellipſes, for if any Different Law obtaind in the Ellipſis, the ſame would likewiſe in the Circle, Parabola, or Hyperbola, conſider'd as Ellipſes, according to this Philoſophy. 5. 11. ANOTHER Propoſition, into which we ſhall Inquire, ĩs, that the Primary Plancts and the Comets are Drawn from a Rectilineal or Projectile Motion, and made to Revolve in Elliptical Orbits by Forces, which Tend to the Sun, and are Reciprocally, as the Squares of their Diſtances from it's Center. As to the Planets, the Former Part of the Propoſition is ſaid to be Proved from Phanomenon the 5t, Lib. 3. vhich Informs us, that the Primary Plancts Deſcribe Areas Proportional to the Times by Radius's Drawn not to the Earth, but to the Sun, becauſc, in Reſpect of the Earth, they are ſometimes Progreſſive, then Stationary, and at other Times Retrograde, whereas, in Reſpect of the Sun, they are always Progreſſive, ſo as in Equal Times to Deſcribe Equal Areas; and from Prop. 2. Lib. 1, vhich tells us, that every Body, which is Moved in any Curve Line Deſcribd in a Plane, and by a Radius Drawn to an Immoveable Point, or a Point, which has an Uniſorm Progreſſion, Performs Areas about that Point Proportional to the Times, is Urged and Impelled by a Centripetal Force Tending to ſuch Point. THE Second Part of this Propoſition is Aſfirmed alſo to be Proved ſrom Phanmenon the 4m Lib. 3, vhich Relates, that the Periodical Times oſ the Primary Plancts, and of the Earth Round the Sun, are in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of their Middle Diſtances from it, or which is the ſame, that the Squares of the Periodick Times are as the Cubes of the Diſtances, and from Prop. 4. Lib. 1, which alledges, Corol. o, LI rhat that if the Periodick Times are in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of the Radius's, the Centripetal Forces will be Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Radiuss. ] HOWEVER, This Part of the Propoſirion is reckoned likewie to be ſtrictly De monſtrated from the Quieſcence of the Nodes and the Apſides, Becauſe rhe Leaſt Deviation from the Duplicate Reaſon, by Prep. 45. Lib. 1. Gorol. 1, would produce a very ſenſible Motion of the Apſides in each Revolution, and in ſeveral a very Enormous one. Tuis Part alſo of the Propoſition is ſaid to be Proved from it's being AcknowIedged, that the Planets are Revolved in Ellipſes, and from being before iewn, thæ the Law of Bodies, Revolving in Ellipſes, is, that their Centripetal Forces ould be Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Diſtances. And as to Comets, the ſame is Affirmed of them, becauſe they are ſuppoſed to Deſcribe Ellipſes, which by the Infinite Diſtance of the Focus's are Changed into Parabolas. S. 12. FiRsT, The Pythagorict or Copernican Syſlem is here Suppoſed and not Proved, and the Diſputè betwixt that and the Prolemaick and Tycho Erahe's is leſt vhere it was, and nothing Propoſed in the Phænomenon, but that the Planers are Progreſſive, Stationary and Retrograde to us on the Earrh, which would not appear ſo, if we were in the Sun, which the Aſſertors of all the Syſtems no doubt Equally Enew, and which yet did not hinder, but was indeed the Occaſion of their ſeveral Hypotheſes; and as to the Equable Deſcription of the Areas about the Sun, it is no more an Argument for the Truth of the Co;ernican Theory, than the Unequal Deſcription of the Orbits or Curves ſhould be an Argument againſt it, the Equality of the Deſcription of Areas being of no Advantage, that I know of, to an Hypotheſis, unleſs we could ſiow a Reaſon, why it ſould be ſo, in Preference to an Equal Deſcription of the Curve. Nav, Imagining it to be Fact, that the Areas were Deſcrib'd from the Aphelium to the Perihelium of the Planet in a Double or Triple, a Duplicate or a Triplicate, or in any other Arithmetical or Geometrical Proportion of the Times, it would he to the full as Beautiful to an Hypotheſis, as if they were Deſcrib'd in a Proportion of Equality, tho' I am apt to ſuſpect that this Phænomenon of Equal Arcas being Deſcribed in Equal Times is not exactly True, and that it is only a Fancy or Notion Invented to ſerve ſome Explanations in Aſtronomy, which Xepler began, and whom the Reſt have Followed. Tis true by this Equable Deſcription of the Areas, the Velocity of the Planet in the Perihelium, and it's ſlow Progreſs in the Aphclium is Immediately Inferred, but if thoſc and other Phænomenons may be Accounted for upon Diſferent Suppoſitions, it is not ſo Evident, hy the Equable Deſcription of Arcas about the Sun ſhould Determine us to Prefer the Copernican to any other Hypotheſis; I do not ſay this. that I would be thought rather to Incline to the Prolemaick or Tyeho's than Copernicus's, but only to ſhew, that the Preſent Phyſical Aſtronomy leaves that Controverſy very much, where it found it, and raiſes it's on Structire upon the Conceſſion, that the Copernican Syſtem is True, without Confirming it by any Invincible Demonſtrations, unleſs What may Reſult from it's future Reaſonings. SECOND, Aſter the Phanomenon, ve are Referrd to Prop. 2. Lib. 1, for a Prooſ of the Firſt Part of this Propoſition, vhich has been already Conſidered and Examined, and has been ſiewn to fall ſhort of, what is Prerended, a Demonſtration; Since it cannot be Proved, that a Curve is Deſcribed by thoſe Two Forces, a Projectile and a Centripetal; To which we ſhall add, that it may as well be Performed by an Expanſive Force from the Sun in the Preſent Caſe, as a Centripetal one to it, of which we ſhall afterwards Diſcourſe. TumrD, The Second Part of this Propoſition is as illy Proved, as the Former, becauſe the Phænomenon, that the Squares of the Periodick Times are as the Cubes of the Diſtances, is altogether Uncertain, for tho' the Periodick Times may be well enough Agreed on amongſt Aſtronomers, yet the Diſtances of the ſeveral Planets from the Sun are not ſo, and even that of the Earth from it admits of Variations from the beſt Obſervers; Becauſe we are not capable by any Inſtruments Preciſely and Exactly to Determine them: But the Diſtances of the Plancts from the Sun ve have more particulary Examined into in another Place. GRANTING GRANTING all which, we have ſewn, that Prop. 4. Lib. 1. and Corol. 5, which ſavs, that if the Periodick Times are in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of the Radiuss, the Centripetal Forces will be Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Radius's, as well as all the other Corollaries belonging to the ſame Propoſition, want that Evidence, which might be Expected from a Demonſtration of them, and which therefore we need not here Repeat. But ſtill in Juſtification of this Reaſoning it is ſaid, that the Quieſcence of the Nodes and the Apſides is a full Conviction of the Truth oſ it, ſince the leaſt Deviation from a Duplicate Proportion, by Prop. 45. Lib. 1. Corol. 1, would produce an Evident Motion in them, even in each Single Revolution. THiIS may ſeem to be a very forcible Argument for the Validity of the Preſent Doctrine, but if we Conſider, that the Propoſition here Cited is ſtrictly Connected vith, and Depends upon that, which we have Explained in §. 5. of this Chapter, and which Afſfirms, that the Law, by which a Body Revolves in the Ellipſis, is, that it's Centripetal Force is Reciprocally, as the Square of it's Diſtance, we ſhall eaſily ſee, that it ſignifies no more, than to ſay, that if an Immoveable Ellipſis is Deſcribed by the Duplicate Proportion, a Moveable Ellipſis will not be; but this is no Prooſ, that an Immoveable Ellipſis is Deſcribed by that Duplicate Proportion; a Deviation from a Duplicate Proportion makes the Ellipſis Moveable, upon the Suppoſition, that a Duplicate Proportion belongs to an Immoveable one, but no one will therefore from ſuch a Deviation ever ſurely Prove, that a Duplicate Proportion belongs to an Immoveable one, and yet this is the Strength and Solidity of the preſent Argument. LastLy, As to the Law of the Centripetal Force, by which an Ellipſis is ſaid to be Deſcribed, and which is thought to be Reciprocally, as the Square of the Diſtance, we have fully Examined that Propoſition in s. 6. of this Chapter. So that all the Demonſtration, which we have of this Grand and Magnificent Propoſition in the Phyſical Aſtronomy concerning the Revolution of the Primary Planets, Reſs either upon Phænomenons, vhich cannot be fully Acknovledged, or upon Propoſitions which are not Evinced, or on Deductions from them, which are not Rational and Juſt, and for which we may deſervedly ſuſpend our Aſſent to it, at leaſt till theſe Objections are Anſwerd and Cleared. . S. 13. I ſhall only here add, that it has been for ſome Time a Myſtery to me in this Philoſophy, what ſhould be the Occaſion of Introducing ſo New, and ſo Looſe, and Latitudinarian a Way of Reaſoning in it, and ſo Apparently Forced and Strained, and vhat ſhould be the Spring and Riſe of the Whole being Caſt into the Preſent Model;3 Which upon a farther Conſideration and Inquiry ſeems Obvious and Plain. For, This Philoſophy deſigning Chiefly and Principally to give an Account in a Mecchanical Way of the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, it obſerved, what were acknowledged to be the General Phænomenons or Appearances of them; Namely, 1, THAT the Primary Planets Deſcrib'd Ellipſes about the Sun, which was Placed in one of the Focus's of ſuch Ellipſes. 20, THAT the Secondary Planets Deſcribd Ellipſes about the Primary ones, which ere likewiſe Placed in one of the Focus's of ſuch Ellipſes. 30. THAT the Secondary Planets about Yupiter and Saturn Performed Areas Proportional to the Times of their Deſcription, and that the Squares of their Periodical Times vere as the Cubes of their Diſtances, or which is the ſame, that their Periodick Times were in a Seſquiplicate Proportion of the ſaid Diſtances. 4 THAT the Primary Planets and the Earth about the Sun Perform'd Areas Proportional ro the Times of theit Deſcription, and that the Squares of the Periodical Times were as the Cubes of their Middle Diſtances from the Sun, or, which is the ſame, that their Periodical Times were in a Seſquiplicate Proportion of the ſaid Middle Diſtances. 50. THAT the Moon about the Earth Performs Areas Proportional to the Time: of their Deſcription. FinsT, As to theſe Phænomenons themſelves, tho' Propounded by Kepler, and ſincc Aſented to by moſt Aſtronomerss We ſay, the Uncertainty o? Aſtronomical Ob ſervations in General is ſo Great, that methinks it is but a very ſallible Foundatior to Build a whole Syſtem of Philoſophy upon; For iſ, As ve before Mentioned, howLI a cvel ver known the Periodical Times of the Primary and Secondary Planets are, the Diſtances of the Firt from the Sun, and the Lat from the Primary Planets are Diſputable and Unaſfirmed; Beſides, 2à, there is not ſuch Evidence for the Arcas being Proportional to the Times of their Deſcription in the Revolution of the Primary or Secondary Planets, as makes it Inconteſtable and beyond Contradiction; Nor farther, 30, Does the Proportion of the Periodick Times being in a Seſquiplicate onc of the Diſtances ſo manifeſtly Appear, that it ſould be Aſſumed as a Demonſtrative Truth, for Reaſons before Alledged; And it is ſomething Strange, and looks like a Colluſion in the Beginning of this Philoſophy, that when it Confeſſes this to be the Proportion in the Secondary Planets, becauſe the Orbits are nearly Circular, in the Primary ones it is obliged to take the Middle Diſtances only, becauſe the Orbits are more Elliptical, and this Proportion could not Anſwer all the Diſtances of the Planets Revolving in ſuch Orbits. AxD yet theſe are the Grand Truths, upon which the Whole of this Philoſophy ſtands, and which ſeem to be no more at the Beſt than Aſſertions of Kepler, to which other Aſtronomers have thought fit to Agree, becauſe Two or Three plain Phænomenons, as they were Imagin'd, would better be Explained, than a Thouſand Various and Different ones; But ſurely we ſhould not take our Notions of all Nature ſrom fallible Obſervations in Aſtronomy, and Obſervations Adjuſted and Reduced by Artifice and Contrivance to what are Termed Phænomenons in the Heavens. Nay, ſuppoſing theſe Phænomenons in the Heavenly Bodies to be Accurate and True, and not Framed and Modelled by the Aſtronomer to his own Purpoſes, is it Jun and Reaſonable to Preſcribe Laws to Nature, and all the Beings in it from them, or from vhat ve continually Know and Experience to Dictate to their Actionsi Hovever it is Plain, that upon theſe ſuppoſed Truths or Phænomenons the Preſent Philoſophy is built, and it may be properly ſaid to be an Account or Explanation of them. SECOND, The next Thing therefore, which was to be Atchieved, was to ſhew, what Forces would be Requiſite to Deſcribe a Figure, vhoſe Areas ſhould be Proportional to the Times of their Deſcription, and this Introduced Prop. 1. of this Philoſophy; and the Deſcription of theſe Arcas being to be made about an Immoveable Center, from hence Aroſe the Centripetal Force and the Vis Inſita, and conſcquently, Definitions the 34 and 5h were Eſtabliſied; but the Vis Inſita being only Defined to be a Power in Matter of Reſiſting, by which every Body, as far as in it was, Perſevered in it's State of Reſt or of Motion in Directum or Strait forward, ſuch a Definition could ſignify nothing to the Reality of the Thing, unleſs this Definition was aftervards Advanced into a Law of Nature, which is done Law the Firſt, which ſays, that every Body perſiis in it's State of Reſt, or of Motion in Directum, unleſs it is forced from that State by an External Impreſſion; To Prove this Propoſition likeViſe it was neceſſary to Introduce Corol. 1. of the Laws, that a Body Deſcribes with i's Joint Forces the Diagonal oſ a Parallelogram in the ſame Time, in which the Sidęs of it are Deſcribed by the Separate Forces; Nor yet was this ſuſficient to Evince the Preſent Propoſition, excepting Corollary the 47h Lemma 3à of the Method of Naſcent and Evaueſcent Reaſons was Allowed, which Lemma ve have already Conſidered. : Fæox this one ſuppoſed Phænomenon therefore of the Planets Deſcribing Areas Proportional to the Times of their Deſcription, which is Keplers Aſſertion, is Derived this whole Philoſophy; and this Firſt Propoſition is Proved by ſo many Aſſumed Definitions, Laws, and Lemmas, none of which, as we have ſiewn, are Evinced, that it would give any Rational Man a Diſtaſte and a Thorow Averſion to it. But, which is more, the Definitions, the Laws, and Lemmas of this Philoſophy are Originally made and Contrived from this Propoſition, and then are uſed to Prove it. Tnt Definitions of Names being thus Eſtabliſhed into Things and Realities, the Lavs Allowed, and the Lemmas in a Certain wvay Demonſirated, all which vere neceſſary to Confirm the Preſent Propoſition, it as eaſy from thence to Proceed to the 47h Propoſition, and the 61h Corollary of it; but, how that is made to Appear, I have already Declared, and which is nothing more than a Reaſoning Accommodated to vhat Sir Chriſtopher wren, Dr. Hoote, and Dr. Halley had Embraced, vhich is Equally Wrong and Procceds upon the ſame Unjuſtifiable Abſiractions; which ſhews the the Artifice of this Philoſophy, that it does not ſo much Proceed upon the Reaſon of Things, as caſts about and Conſiders, how it may ſuit it ſelf to the AcknowIedgments and Confeſſions of the Greateſt and moſt Celebrated Men in theſe Studies. For we have Evidently Evinced, that this Sixth Corollary and the Propoſition, from which it is Derived, is Falſe in Reaſon, and therefore cannot be Applicable to any Motions in Naturee The Corollary is, That, if the Periodical Times are in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of the Diſtances, the Centripetal Forces will be Reciprocally, as the Squares of thoſe Diſtances, which this Philoſophy finding to Agree with what Hugens Dr. æe had pretended to Demonſtrate in Reſpect of the Centriſugal Forces, and with what Intr. ad Sir Chriſtopher wren, Dr. Hooke, and Dr. Halley had done, all vas Certain and Sure, Pyſic as to that Point, and it had nothing more to Endeavour than the Third Thing, which nę . was to ſov, that this Reaſoning of the Mechanical Philoſophers exactly Correſponded Creula vith the Revolutions of the Planets in Ellipſes, by which it would at once oblige Aſtronomy, as it was Propoſed by epler and his Followers, and the Mechanical Doctrine, as it vas Propoſed by Hugens. Tnis being the main Intention and Deſign to Reconcile the Mechanical Philoſophy, with the Aſtronomy and Obſervations of Kepler, the next Step, which vas made, was to Prove, ſince Xepler Affirms that the Planets are Revolved in Ellipſes, and the Mechanical Philoſophers Affirm, that if the Periodical Times are in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of the Diſtances, the Centripetal Forces are Reciprocally, as the Squares of ſuch Diſtances, that Bodies Revolved in Ellipſes obſcrve that Reciprocal Duplicate Proportion. THIRD, And from hence this Philoſophy is Carry'd to Propoſition the 11ſ, ꝗ. 3. Sit It.1 Lib. 1. that is, to Inquire into the Law of the Centripetal Force, by which a Body princip, Revolves in an Ellipſis round the Focus or Umbilicus of it, which, by Lemmas or ſ;.' Aſſumptions not ſufficiently Proved, and by Compounding of Reaſons at Pleaſure, and other Arbitrary Methods, at length Concludes, what was before-hand Deſigned. that the Centripetal Force is Reciprocally, as the Square of the Diſtance. AND this is the Occaſion of Prop. 6, 7t, 8th, oſ, and ro, being Premiſed to it, whereas this Propoſition was the Firſt in View, and when there were ſeveral Things necellary to Clear it, thoſe Things were built into Independent Propoſitions of themſclves, as if they had no Relation to any Thing; Albeit they were Originally Con- si\ Ii: : trived and Invented, as the Laws and Definitions before, to ſerve one End and Pur- Princip. poſe, which in the Preſent Caſe was that of making the Centripetal Force in the , ꝗ ſt Ellipſis Reciprocally, as the Squares of the Diſtances; and with this Intent the 6 Lib I. Propoſition in Particular vas Apparently Introduced, and which, as ell as the th, we have at Large Conſidered and Examined, and could eaſily do the other Intermediate ones, if it was worth the Time or the Trouble; but it would be an unneceſary Expence of both after what we have ſaid; and we ſhall only obſerve, that, in General, in this Philoſophy the Firſt Things in it were the Laſt Thought of, and the Laſt Firſt, as may be Evidenced in every Part of this Syſtem. FouRTH, From theſe Thoughts and Notions, and when the Mind was Warmed Si I1EN with them, it was Natural to Proceed to an Inquiry into the Law of the Centripetal ærincip. Force Tending to the Umbilicus of an Hyperbola, ſuppoſing a Body Moved in it, ſop 12 or what the Law of the ſaid Centripetal Force Tending to the Umbilicus of a ſ;; Parabola would be, ſuppoſing a Body was Moved in that Figuree This brought the œ⸗. 7. Preſent Philoſophy into a Train of Ideas and Reaſoning concerning the Conick Sections for many Propoſitions together to s. 7. Lib. 1. which ſiews the Great and Wonderful Art and Skill of the Geometer in Manageing of Proportions and Quantities, but ſeems to be of little Uſe or Advantage to the Knowledge of Nature. FirrH, Scct. 7h. is concerning the Rectilineal Aſcent and Deſcent of Bodies, and 5 1? & ſuppoſing the Centripetal Force is Reciprocally Proportional to the Square of the Princip. Diſtance oſ the Places from the Center, to Determine the Spaces, which a Body 2:: Deſcribes in any Given Times by a Perpendicular Deſcent. The 8t' is Concerning the Invention of Orbits, in which Bodies are Revolved, when Acted by any Centripetal Forces whatſoever, till at Length we come to §. 9. which gives an Account of the Motion oſ the Apſides, which we ſhall nov Conſider. Tuis Tuis is a ſort Explanation of the Riſe, Beginnings, and Structure of the Preſcnt Phyſical Aſtronomy, in which there will upon a ſtrict Examination be found to be more Artifice and Contrivance than Truth, more Quickneſs and Skill in Geometry than Exactneſs in Reaſoning, and more Poſtulatums and Aſſumptions and Arbitrary Abſtractions, than Real Laws of Nature, and Theorems of Philoſophy; It muſt be Conſfcſę'd, that this Reaſoning has onc Advantage on it's Side, ſince it is about Beings ſo Remote ſrom us, that, if an Hypotheſis is prerty well laid together, it will be the Harder to Confute it, becauſe we know not, what the Circumſtances and Conditions of thoſe Beings are, and therefore muſt take them, as they are Explained, unleſs ve can ſiew a Falſity in the Hypotheſis it ſelf; in which it Agrees with the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, Vhich by its Infinitely ſimall Particles puts it out of our Pover of Demonſtrating the Abſurdity of it by our Senſes; For thus the Phyſical Aſtronomy Relates to Bodies, which are ſo Infinitely Removed ſfrom our Inſpection, that we muſt Deſpair of Confuring it's Arguments by Pointing to and Shewing the Bodies themſelves; But as from Realon ve have Evinced the Extreme Folly of ſuch Infinitely ſmall Particles Exiſting in Nature, as the Conſtituents of Bodies, in like Manner ve may by Inquiring into the æationale of this Aſtronomy, make it Evident, that all this Apparatus oſ Lines and Angles, of the Vis Inſita, and the Centripetal Force, is nothing, but mere Pageantry, and has no Subſiſtence or Being in Reality. ꝗ. 14. TuE next Propoſition therefore which we ſhall Examine is that, which is to Inform us, hov a Body may be alike Moved in any Trajectory Revolving about a Center oF Forces, as another Body in a Trajectory, which is Quieſcent. In the Orbit 7PK, which is Given in it's Poſition, Let a Body P be Revolved from V tovards X, from the Center C Let C)pbe always Drawn Equal to CP, and form an Angle ?cp Proportional to the Angle ?CP; The Area, which the Line C? Deſcribes, will be to ?CP the Area, which the Line CP Deſcribes at the ſame Time, as the Velocity of the Deſcribing Line C to the Velocity oſ the Deſcribing Line CP, that is, as the Angle ?Cp to the Angle 7CP, namely, in a Given Reaſon, and therefore Proportional to the Time; Since then the Area, which the Line Cꝓ Deſcribes in an Immoveable Plane is Proportional to the Time, it is Evident, that the Body, by ſome Determinate Centripetal Force Urging it, may be Revolved together with the Toint ꝓ in that Curve Line, which the ſame Point ꝓ in the Reaſon Explained Deſcribes in an Immoveable Plane; Let the Angle ?Cv be made Equal to the Angle ? Cp, and the Line Cv to the Line CV, and the Figure vC  to the Figure ?CP, and the Body, being always in ꝓ, ill be Moved in the Perimeter of the Revolving Figure v Cꝓ, and will Deſcribe an Arc of it vꝓ in the ſame Time, in hich another Body P Deſcribes an Arc 7P Similar and Equal to it in the Quieſcent Figure ? P &: Let therefore the Centripetal Force be Inquired by Corol. 5. Prop. 6, by which a Body may be Revolved in that Curve Line, which the Point  Deſcribes in an Immoveable Plane, and the Problem is Solved. . E. F. BuTr let theſe Philoſophers give me leave to Anſwer, FirsT, That a Body De ſcribing an Area Proportional to the Time is Demonſtrated upon the Suppoſition o an Immoveable Plane, of a Vis Inſita or a Projectile Force Proceeding in a Tangent and of a Centripetal one, by Prop. 1, of this Philoſophy ; and conſequently, if C; in the Moveable Plane 2cv Deſcribes Arcas Proportional to the Times, it will h neceſſary to ſow us, how a Moveable Plane is the ſame as an Immoveable one and vhere and vhat is the Projectile Force in this Caſe, which Acts in a Right Lin or a Tangent, and then we ſhall acknowledge or not, that there is a Centripeta Forc Force too of one Kind or other, by which the Figure Deſcribed by » in the Moveable Plane Cp is Performed. S2COND, Suppoſing T? to be Dravn always Equal to CP, and ꝓ  be in ihe Movng Orbit at the ſame Diſtance from v, as P from 7V in the Quieſcent one, that is, that  in The one Cate Moves exactly as ? in the orher, exeepting that vꝓ is Revlved about T, whilſt 7CP is an Immoveable Plane, by which the Differencè of the Morions  and ? will be Conferred upon 7Cv, or which is the ſame, upon vC Deporting from VC; It is not yet Evident, how ?Cp will be an Angle Proportional 10 VCP; Becauſe, tho' õ; and CP from V ãnd v will Deſcribe Arcas Proportionãl 10 the Times, ſuppoſing VCP and vr to be Quicſcent Planes, according to this Philoſophy, and tho' ?C in it's Progreſs to  C will, according to the ſame Philoſophy, Deſcribe Areas Proportional t the Times, ſuppoſing the ſaid Planes to be Moveable ones, yet it will not follow, that C? Deſcribes Areas Proportional to the Times, when the Plane  Cꝓp is Moveable, ſince the Body ? vill not have the ſame Effect, either in it's Proje-tile or Gravitating Force, when the Plane vCp is Revolved round C, as the Body P has, when 7C?P is Quicſcent, and therefore vill not Deſcribe Arcas Proportional to the Times in the Moveable Plane, if P does in the Quieſcemt one; for we are not to Conſider 2 Revolving in vꝓ in the ſame Manner, as ? in 7P, and make all the Difference of their Revolutions to lie in Cv being Carryd in an Angular Motion from CV; which, notwithſtanding, is the Senſe of this Pr ſition, and which therefore takes for Granted, what is to be Proved, that » Deſcribes Arcas Proportionãl to ehe Times in a Moving Plane, becauſe ? does in a Quieſcent one. THiRD, Suppoſing » did Deſcribe Areas Proportional to the Times, yet ſince it does it under Different Circumſtances, than what wore before Allodged in Propoſition the i1ſ? of this Philoſophy, vhen Figures were made by a Projectile and a Gravitating Force, it would not Enſue, that ꝓ likewiſe was Revolved by ſuch Forees, ſecing the Projectile Force it ſelf is here a Circular one, which before was ſuppoſed alvays to At in a Tangent. FROM Whence we may Conclude, that hert is a new Aſſumption made in the Preſent Philoſophy, and which is no otherwiſe Proved than by the Neceſſity of it to it's Future Explications. S. 15. THE following Propoſition, which we ſnall likewiſe Examine into, is, that the Difference of Forces, by which a Body in a Quieſcent Orbit, and unother Body in the ſame Revolving one, may be Equally Moved, is Inverſely in a Triplicate Reaſon of the Common Altitude. Let vp, ꝓ t the Parts of a Revolving Orbit be Similar and Equal to 7P, PK, the Parts of a Quieſcent one, and let the Diſtance of the Points ?, X, be Imagined to be Infinitely ſmall; From the Point  Draw the Terpendicular ær to the Right Line C, and Produce it to m, ſo that mr may be to Er as the Angle ?Cp to the Angle ?CP; and ſince the Altitudes of the Bodies PC, and ꝓq, XC and C are always Equal, it is Evident, that the Increments or Decrements of the Lines PC and »C are always Equal; and therefore, if each of the Motions of the Bodies, when they are in ? and ꝓ, are Diſtinguiſhed into Two, by Corol. 2, of the Laws, the one of which is Determined towards the Center, or according to the Direction of the Lines ? C and 2C, and the other is Tranſverſe to the Former, and according to Lines Perpendicular to ? C and &C, the Motions towards the Center will be Equal, and the Tranverſe Motion of the Body 2 will be to the Tranſverſe Motion of the Body , as the Angular Motion of the Line ꝓC to the Angular Motion of the Line P that is, as the Angle ?Cp to the Angle vCP; Conſcquently in the ſame Time, in which the Body P with both it's Motions Arrives at the Point X, the Body 2 with an Equal Motion towards the Center will be Equally Moved from » towards C, and upon the Determination and Concluſion ol that Time vill be found ſomewhere in the Line mr, which Drawn thro' the Point E is Perpendicular to 2C, and will by it's Tranſverſe Motion acquire a Diſtance from the Line C, which will be to the Diſtance, which the other Body P acquires from PCG as the Tranſverſe Motion of the Body 2 to the Tranſverſe Motion of the Body P, that is, as the Angle vCP to the Angle ?CP, or as mr to *r, and thereſore the Body 2 at the End of ſuch Time vill be found in m;3 Theſe Things will be ſo, when the Bodies » and P are Moved Equally according to the Lines 2C, and PC and and conſcquently are Urged by Equal Forces according to thoſe Lines; Let now the Angle 2Cn be to the Angle pC, as the Angle 7Cp to the Angle CP, and let nC be Equal to æC, and the Body ꝓ at the End oſ the ſame Time vill be found in n, and ſo is Urged by a Greater Force than the Body P, if the Angle mCꝑ is Greater than the Angle Cp, that is, if the Trajectory or Orbit vpE is Moved in Conſequentia, or if it is Moved in Antecedentia with a Greater Celerity, than the Double of that, with which the Line CP is carryd in Conſequentia; and by a Leſi Force, if the Orbit is Moved Slower in Antecedentia; and the Difference of the Forces ill be, as the Interval of the Places mn thro which the Body ꝓ is Transferred by it's Action, in the aforeſaid Time. From the Center C with the Radius Cæ or CA, Let a Circle be Deſcribed, ſo as to Interſect the Lines m?, mn Produced, in 5 and 1, and the Rectangle m n x mt will be = m  x ms, by the Elements of Euclid, and mu m n and ſince the Triangles 2CE,  Cn are given in their Magnitude, m t7 and mr, and their Diſference m ſ, and theit Sum ms are Reciprocally, as the Altitude ꝓ C; and thereſore the Rectangle mlx ms is Reciprocally, as the Square of the Altitude 2 C; Alſo mt is Dircctly as 2 m1, that is, as the Altitude 2C, and conlex ms ſequently the Naſcent Line mn v is Reciprocally, as the Cube of the Altitude CX. E. D. s. 16. BuT notwithſtanding the Authority of the Propoſer, and the Capital Letters Aſfixt to Show us, or to PerſWade us, that the Propoſition is ſtrictly Proved, we muſt beg the Liberty to Inquire, whether it is ſo or not. AND FrsT, PX and ꝓſ being ſuppoſcd Infinitely Small, all which has been Objected againſt the Method of Naſcent and Evancſcent Reaſons will have a Place here. SECOND, Since mr. r:: VCp. VCP, upon vhich Proportion this whole Reaſoning Procecds, that is likewiſe taken for Granted, vhich ve have Diſproved in the foregoing Propoſition, namely, that the Centripetal Force of the Body t in the Revolving Trajectory is the ſame, as that of ? in the Quicſcent one, ſince the Tranſverſe or Projectile Force will make an Alteration in the one, which is not from the Quiceſcence of the Orbit Induced upon the other; and therefore, tho » C and PC, æC and XC are Equal, the Increments and Decrements of thoſe Lines will not be ſo. Tuirn, The Diſtinguiſhing the Motion of each Body P and ꝓ into To by Corol. 2 of the Laws has been Examined, and the Reaſoning Refuted. FourTH, Granting vhich, the Forces, into which the Motion of each Body ? and ? is Reſolved, are not Juſtly and Truly Aſcertained, ſince in the Quieſcent Trajectory, the Forces, with which ? Revolves, are Confeſſed to be a Centripetal to q, and a Projectile one in a Tangent according to the foregoing Propoſitions in this Philoſophy, whereas here, in order to make them Correſpond with the Compound Forces oſ ꝓ, thoſe of ? are Affirmd to Conſiſt of a Centripetal to C, and a Tranſverſe, Perpendicular to PC; and which is Meaſured by the Angle ?CP, Deſcribed by the Angular Motion of the Line PC, which is very Different from the Vis Inſita Acting in a Tangent, becauſe this Tranſverſe Motion it ſelf, being an Angular one, is made up oſ a Centripetal and a Projectile by this Philoſophy, and therefore cannot be ſubſiituted in the Room of a Simple Projectile; Nor is it ſufficient to ſay, tho' here ſcems to lie the Fallacy, that the Tranſverſe Motion is ſuppoſed to be Perpendicular to Pc, as the Projectile is, and therefore the one may be Aſſumed for the other, this is not ſufficient; Becauſc a Fis Inſita, Proceeding Equably in a Tangent ca tan never be Reduced i0, or Expreſſed by an Angular Motion, which Conſiũs of that, and a Cenriperl onc; Beſides, ſince thè Areas ?CP are Proportional to the Times of their Deſcription, the Angular Motion of CP from VC vill be very Uncqual, and therefore an Improper Repreſentative of the Vis Inſita, which goes on uniformly. Eanneꝶ Which hews this Philoſophy do's Juſt what it Pleaſes, Allowing what has been before Diſputed, the Right Line, which is Perpendicular to PC, does not ſo much as Exhibit this Tranſverſe or Angular Motion, no more than the Sine of any Angle is the Expreſſion of the Angle, that is, the Perpendiculars to ?C are not Proportional to the Angles ?CP, or to the Elongations of PC from ?C. In the Moving Trajectory all theſe Things are ſtill more Embarraſed and Confuſed, for in this Caſe the Tranſverſe Motion is ſaid 1õ be às the Angular of q, or as the Angle 7Cp, againſt which not only all, which has been before Alledged, is Valid, but more, ſt is àltogether Unaccountable, hoW a Perpendicular to ꝓ C, which would Repreſent the Tranſverſe Motion according fo this Propoſition, if the Trajectory was Quieſcent, ſould be màde uſe of to Explãin the Tranſverſe Motion, when the Trajectory is ſuppoſcd io be a Revolving one, and how mæ, which is in the ſame Direction with ær ſiould Exhibit or Expreſs the Tranfverſe Motion of ?Cv, that is, of a Line, which is Parallel to mC, and Inclined in an Angle to mE; or it is Inconceivable, as well as hot Proved, that mr. kr:: Cp. VCP, or as the Tranſverſe Motion of the Body 4, to the Tranſverſe Motion of the Body P, ſince the Tranſ verſe Motion of the Body ꝓ cannot be Reſembled to the Angular one of C from 7C, which Conſiſts of Cꝓ from Cv, and of CvV from CV at the ſame Time, but the Angulat Motion vCp is Compounded of a Centripetal and Projectile Force, vhich thetefore cannot be Expreſed by a Pròjectile, or a Line Perpendicular to æC, and the Angular Motion ?7cv is Compounded likewiſe of a Centripetal and a Projectile, which has a Different Direction from thie Former, being Parallel to cm, and therefore cannot alſo be Expreſſed by the ſame Perpendicular to ꝓC, and conſcquently it is not Evinced, that the Body 72 will be found in m. MoREOVER, if mr. kr:: VCp. VCP, m7r muſt bè Evidently Greatet than ſr, and therefore the Tranſverſe Forcè mr will Carry  out of is Elliptical Orbit from à io m, the Centripetal Forces being Equal, if ſ, and the Tranſverſe Force is Superior to the Centripetal, it cannot be ſiewn, why the ſame Tranſverſe Force hould not Carry the Body forward in the ſame Right Line, without permitting it to Revolve in an Ellipſis, or any other Curve whatſoever; unleſs it can be ſuppoſed, rhat the Centriperal Force has a Greater Power to Recollect it ſelf in m towards , than it had in /, when it was nearer to it; If yet this was not Effected by the Superiority of the Tranſverſe Force, the Ellipſis or Trajectory notwithſtanding would be Spoiled, whereas this Propoſition is Contrived to ſiew us, how and with what Forces a Body may be Moved in a Revolving Ellipſis or Trajectory. FreTH, One would think here were Poſtulatums and Aſſumptions ſufficient already to give an Inquirer enough of the Preſent Demonſtration, and yet it has not donè Asking; the Body » is brought one way or other to the Point m, but this would ſignify nothing, if there was no Difference in the Centripetal Forces, which have hitherto been Imagined to be the ſame in » and ?; in order therefore to make this Difſerence, it is Preſcribed, that the Angle 2 Cn ſhould be made to 2C4, as the Angle VCp to the Angle 7CP, and that the Line n C ſhould be Equal to æũ and ſo the Body ? vill be found in n, and therefore is Urged with a Greater Centripetal Force than the Body P, if the Angle mCp is Greater than the Angle æCp, that is, if the Orbit vpt is Moved in Conſequéntia, and the Difference of the Forces will be mnæ. Bur here alſo it is to be obſerved, that ?CP, 7Cp are ſtill the Meaſure and Standard of the Tranſverſe Forces, which has been already Objected againſt, Granting which, it is now Affirmed, that Cn. PCE: : VCp. VCP, and before : : mr. tr, ſince therefore n ær may be as juſtly the Meaſure of pCn or pCm, as mEr, mh will be Equal to n æ, and m and n will Coincide, and e are got no farther than we were at our Firſt ſctting out in this Demonſtration. Beſides Which, n C is made Equal to q, that the Body  may be at the ſame Diſtance from C in n, as in  and yet without any Apparent Cauſe, the Centripetal Force in n is made Greater than in æ and no vonder, becauſe the Body 4 is as Arbitrarily Removed from m to n, M m as as that Greater Centripetal Force is Arbitrarily Introduced; For if the Diſtances fron C in æ and æ are Equal, what ſould make the Body ꝓ Gravitate more in æ than inki If it is ſaid, That is Neceſſary to bring it ſfrom m (Whither the Tranſverſe Fore would have carryd it) to n, the Neceſſity is Acknovledged, but from whence i ſmould have a Greater Centripetal Force at m, ſo as to Determine it to æ, ĩs the In quiry, eſpecially when the Tranſverſe Force has already Carry'd  out of it's Orbi to m. FARTHER, Suppoſing the Body ꝓ in n, it is yet out of the Moving Ellipſis oi Trajectory, whereas this Propoſition was to give an Account of the Forces neceſſary 1o keep a Body vithin ſuch a Moving Ellipſis or Trajectory, and is accordingly applyd in all the Subſequent Philoſophy. i Sixri, Having at Length with a great Deal of Labour, and with no Small Satis faction to it ſelf, tho with little to any Impartial Conſiderer, Settled the Difference of Forces, which is Propoſed to be mn, this Demonſtration Proceeds by the Elements of Geometry to Aſcertain, what this Force muſt be; A Circle thereſore is Dravn by the Radius nC, or c, the Secants of which are mi1, ms, and the Lines Intercepted betwixt the Point m and the Circle, are mn, mA, and thereſore, by the i P, vhich, by vha I can Perceive, is the only certain Thing in the whole Proceſs of the Preſent Reaſoning. But then, when it goes on again upon it's own Principles and Aſlumptions ve are Loſt and Bewilderd as before, and find Nothing, which is Clear or Concluſive. - i Tnus the Triangles C,  Cn are ſaid to be Given in their Magnitude, but where fore? Becauſe the Angles  CE, pCn are as VCP to VCp, which has been already Conſidered; But ſuppoſing they are ſo, it does not follow, that æ7 and mr are Reciprocally, as the Altitude 2C, ſince in the Triangle  Cn, mr has nothing to do, unIeſs mr and nr are the ſame, and then mn or the Difference of the Forces is Nothing; If therefore æ7 and mr are not Reciprocally, as the Altitude 2C, their Diſference m h, and theit Sum ms, are not in that Reciprocal Proportion of the Altitude ?2G, nor the Rectangle mæ x ms Reciprocally, as the Square of ſuch Altitude. To make mn this Imaginary Diſference of Equal Forces to be Reciprocally, as the Cube of the Altitude ꝓ2q, it is farther Aſſumed, that m? or  mt is in a Direct Proportion, as the Altitude ꝓ C, which is Impoſſible, ſince, if  CE. pCn: : br. mr, m will Be Determincd by that Proportion, and which Determination of m will be ſo Uncertain, that neither mc, nor m1, nor ; mi will be Directly as Pq, and conſequently, mlæms ſaid Elements, mn x mt is Equal to mk æxms, and mn vill not be Reciprocally, as the Cube of the Altitude C, and yet this was the Propoſition to be Demonſtrated. S5. 17. APTER this Point was Confirmed, this Philoſophy had Room to Play and Divert it ſel? with Quantities and Proportions from Corol. the 1ſt to the 67h, which Concludes this Propoſition, and from thence Procecds to Prop. the 451h, and it's Two Corollaries; None of which there is any Occaſion to Examine, unleſs becauſe it Introduces it's Fluxions here, which we ſhall afterwards Conſider, and thus Ends Scction the Ninth, 5. 18. AND now ve are able to give a more Particular Account of the Doctrine of the Revolution of the Apſides in this Philoſophy, which we before Promiſed, and could not ſo vell Explain, till we had made an Examination into the foregoing Propoſitions; For the Direct Conſequence, which follows from the Preceding Demonſtration, and upon which the Doctrine of the Revolution of the Apſides Depends, is, That if from a Centripetal Force, which is Reciprocally, as the Square oſ the Altitude, a Force be Subſtracted, which is Directly as the Altitude, a Force Remains, which in its Receſs ſrom the Center Decreaſcs more, or is Leſs than according to a Duplicate Reaſon of the Altitude Increaſed, or which in it's Acceſs to the Center Increates more, or is Greater than according to a Duplicate Reaſon of the Altitude Diminiſied; in both which Caſes, the Apſides will be Progreſſive, or be Carry'd in Conſequentia ; On the Contrary, if to a Centripetal Force, which is Reciprocally, as the Square oſf the Altitude, be added a Force, which is Directly as the Altitude, a Force Force is Compounded, which in it's Receſs from the Center Decreaſes Leſs, or is Greater than according to a Duplicate Reaſon of the Altitude Increaſed, or which in its Acceſs to the Center Increaſes Leſs, or is Leſs than according to the Duplicate Reaſon of the Altitude Diminiſhed; in both which Caſes, the Apſides will be Regreſſive or be Revolved in Antecedentia ; If now this be Apply'd, which is Deduced from the Demonſtration Premiſed, and particularly from that, which is Alledged in the Middle of it, Concerning the Orbit being Carry'd in Conſequentia or in Antecedentia, as the Centripetal Force is Greater or Leſs than in a Duplicate Proportion, If this be Apply'd to what we have before Produced concerning the Apſides in the Corollaries to the 667h Propoſition of this Philoſophy, which ve have already Examined, the Whole of this Doctrine will be fully Explained; and as we have ſhewn this Demonſtration to be Precarious and Inconcluſive upon ſeveral Accounts, it ſolIows, that this Doctrine of the Revolution of the Apſides ſubſiſts in the Fancy and Imagination only, and has Nothing to ſupport it, but Lines and Figures, Arbitrary Aſſumptions, and Poſtulatums, which cannot be Granted, and thereſore is deſcrvedly Rejected by us. 5. 19. WE ſhall now therefore Endeavour to give an Explanation oſ theſe Phænomenons of the Primary and Secondary Planets from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and ſhall take them in the ſame Order, as they are Propoſed to us Pror. 66. Lib. 1. of this Philoſophy. 1ſ. IN a Syſem of Three Bodies 7, ?, and S, the Lat of which has an Expanſive Force, as the Sun, by which it Repells all Bodies ſrom it, and the other Two a Contractive, by which they Draw all Bodies towards them, as the Earth and Moon, or a Primary and Secondary Planet, or TWo Primary, or Two Secondary ones, for the Caſc is much the ſame, vhen we Conſider them as Endued with the like Contractive Forces, Let E j lit us thereſore take the : Firſt Inſtance of a Primary and Secondary Planet, namely of the Earth and the Moon, ſince the DReſt may be Reduced to it with Certain Allowances, There ſeem to he Two Reaſons, wherefore the Secondary Planet ? in it's Orbit round the Primary 7, is Acce Ierated from C to 4, E Retarded from A4 to D, and again Accelerated from D to B, and again Retarded from B to ũ and conſequently, why the Secondary Planet ? Moves with a Greater Velocity in the Syzygiæ 4 and B, than in the Quadratures C and D, other Things being Equal. FinsT, Becauſe, the Expanſive or Repulſive Force of the Sun Spreading and Diffuſing it ſelf from 5 thr the whole Triangle Cs7, ?, when in C, has all that Force to Surmount in it's Deſcent towards 4, and therefore Moves vith a Leſs Velocity in C, where the Expanſive Force of the Sun Acts very near Equally upon the Primary Planet in 7, and on the Secondary in C, but when the Secondary Planet Arrives at ?, it has a Leſs Expanſive or Repulſive Force Acting in the Triangle P.54 to Subdue, by which means it Moves with a Greater Velocity continuãlly in is Deſcent from C to P, and from thence to 4. IN it's Aſcent ſrom 4, it has all the Expanſive Force 75 D, which Acts ſrom 5, Tending the =ame vay with it's ovn Motion, and therefore is Accelerated in 4, but Leſs in F, becauſc the Triangle S D of the Expanſive or Repulſive Force is Leſ;, from whence it is ſtill Leſs Accelerated in it's Paſage from  to D. LicEwISE from Dto B it is again Accelerated, yet Leſs in D, becauſe in the Triangle T5D the Expanſive Forces from 5 are nearly Equal in 7 and D, but More in G, becauſe the Expanſive Forces GS D, which Tend the ſame vay, are Greater, and the M m 2 Moſ Moſt in B, becauſe the Expanſive Forces B5 D, Tending the ſame way, are then the Greateſt- j AGaN in it's Paſſage from B to C it is Retarded by the Expanſive Force Acting Contrary to it, in B Leſ5, in H More, becauſe H5B is Greater than 5 8, and in C the Moſt, becauſe the Expanſive Forces in the Triangle CS  Acting Contrary vays are then the Greateſt; All this is ſaid upon the Suppoſition, that, of it ſelf, ? Revolves about T uniformly by Certain Forces Adjuſted betwixt them, which are not here Conſidered. SECOND, Anorher Reaſon of this Acceleration and Retardation in the Syzygiæ and Quadratures is, That in the Firſt Caſe the Contractive Forces are Diminiſhed, in Reſpect of each to the other, and in the Laſt not ſo. To Explain this more Particularly; Thus ? Revolves about T by that Exceſs of the Contractive Force, which the one has above the other, whether of T above P, or of ?P above 7, for ſince that Exceſ/ of Force, by which they Draw againſt, and in Oppoſition to each other, cannot bring them Together, it muſt oſ Neceſſity be ſpent Sideways, and by that means occaſion a Revolution; the Greater ſuch Exceſs therefore is, the Quicker will the Revolution be, and the Leſs ſuch Exceſò is, the Slower; For by this very Method it is, that a Stone Revolves in a Sling, the Hand Attracting the String one vay, and the Stone another, the Exceſs of which TWo Forces is conferred upon the Circular Motion Produced from the Conteſt between them; This does not obtain in Two Forces Draving againſt cach orther, and Gravitating to a Third as the Earth, becauſe ſuch Gravitation hinders the Revolution, which, as it is an Argument, that the Earth and Moon and the other Planets do not Gravitate to the Sun, ſo it is a Reaſon, why any Sublunary Forces cannot be Objected againſt this Doctrinc. FROM Whence it comes to paſs, that, when the Secondary Planet is in the Quadratures C or D, the Expanſive Force ſrom S Acting nearly alike upon both, it Proceeds uniformly in it's Orbit, bur when it is in the Syzygiæ 4 or B, in the Firſt Caſe the Expanſive Force from S Acting more upon 4 than upon 7, and in the Laſt upon T than upon B, makes the Difference betwixt the Contractive or Oppoſite Forces Greater, by Diminiſhing the Contractive Force of 4, by which it is Drawn more forcibly towards 7, or by Diminiſhing the Contractive Force of 7, by which it is Drawn more forcibly tovards B, cither of which will make P Revolve Faſter about T, becauſc the Exceſs of Force will be ſpent Laterally in the Circumvolution of the Secondary Planet, where the Effect does not obtain in it's Acceſs to the Primary, and conſequently, ? Will be continually Accelerated from C to 4, and from D to B, and as often Retarded from A4 to D, and from B to C. 2d. FRoM hence is a Plain Account, why, other Things being Equal, the Orbit of the Body ? has a Greater Curvity in the Quadratures than in the Syzygiæ, and therefore is farther Removed from 7 in the Firſt Caſe than in the Laſt. FinsT, Becauſe the Expanſive Force from s, thro' the whole Curvilineal Triangle of it CSD AC, is Stronger towards 4 than towards C and D, by which the Orbit of P is Flattened and Depreſſcd in ? 4F, and made more Prominent in the Quadratures; ſo likewiſc in the Curvilincal Triangle CSD BC, CBD is Depreſſed towards 7, becauſe the Expanſive Force from S Acts Stronger in C and D, and the Parts Adjoining, than in H BG, hich therefore Sinks nearer to 7, or the Secondary Planct P, vhich Deſcribes the Orbit, Approaches to T7, which is the ſame. SECOND, Becauſe the Expanſive Force from S Deſtroys ſome of the Contractive Force oſ ?P in A4, by which it leſs Counter- Acts to 7, and therefore is Drawn nearer ro it, as alſo vhen ? is in B, the ſame Expanſive Force from S Deſtroys ſome ol the Contractive Force in 7. by which it leſs Counter- Acts to the Force of ? in B, and thereſore Approaches nearer to it, which is not done in C and D, vhere the Erpanſive Force Acts nearly alike upon both, and conſequently thoſe Points, and ſuch, vhich are Adjacent to them, are farther Removed from the Body 7; but how theſe Phænomenons are Accounted for by a Gravitating Force, which Dravs 4 to vards s, and Repells B from T is not, as we have Shewn, nor can be Explained This is ſaid Excluſive of the Excentricity of the Orbit, and the Motion of the Apſides, for by that the Body ? may Recede ſarther from 7 in the Syzygiæ thar n re Quadratures, as is Aſſitmed in this Philoſophy. 7d. FROM 3d. FROM the ſame Expanſive and Contractive Forces, it is alſo Evident, that the' Aux or the Summa Apſis  will be Regreſſive or Move towards G, when the Body P is in C, or in it's Quadrature; Becauſe, being there Retarded in it's Motion, if it were to Proceed round i's Orbit with the ſame Diminiſhed Celerity, it would be neceſſary for B, or the Summa Apſis, to be Carry'd tovards G, that it may Arrive at the Point of the Orbit, or the Summa Apſis, from hence it ſet out, in the ſame Periodical Time; On the Contrary, vhen the Body ? is in the Syzygia 4, and is Moved vith a Greater Velocity, the Aux or the Summa Apſis 2 will be Progreſſive tovards ; Becauſe, the Motion of the Body being now Accelerated, if it were Carryd with the ſame Acceleration thro' the Reſt of the Orbit, it would come too ſoon to B, and Which therefore is Removed towards H, that it may ſtill obſerve the ſame Periodical Time in it's Revolution; Alſo for the ſame Reaſon, when the Body P is in D, it's other Quadrature, the Summa Apſis is Carry'd in Antecedentia from B towards G, and when in the Syzygia B, in Conequentia3 And ſince the Acceleration is Greater than the Retardation, the Summa Apſis, in each Revolution of the Body P, is Carry'd in Conſequentia. AND from hence it will likeviſe follo, that, when the Apſides are in the Syæygiæ. they will have a Swiſter Progreſſion, and, when in the Quadratures, a Slower; Becauſe the Body P is more Accelerated in the Syzygiæ, when the Apſides are in the Syzygiæ, than when they are in the Quadratures, ſince the Triangle CST of the Expanſive Force, (by which P is Retarded, when in C, and is Leſs ſo in P, where the Triangle ?ST is Leſs) is Leſs, when the Apſides are in the Syzygiæ, than vhen in the Quadratures; as alſo the I Expanſive Force from S : makes a Greater Difference betwixt the Contractive Forces of 4 and T, and T and B, vhen the Apſides are in the Syzygiæ, than when they ] are in the Quadratures, becauſe in the Firſt Caſe there will be originally a Greater Difference betwixt the Contractive Forces, which Difference the Expanſive from S will Increaſe, and in the Laſt there will be a Leſs Difference betwixt them, and which therefore will not be ſo much Increaſed by the Action of the ſaid Expanſive, but it has been before ſmewn, that the Greater the Difference is berwixt the Contractive Forces, the more Force will be ſpent Sideways, and the Body P thereby Accelerated in it's Revolution. THERE are therefore in this Solution only Two Difficulties Remaining; 1ſſ, HoW the Removal of the Apſis backward or forward to make the ſame Periodick Time of the Body ? in it's Orbit is to be Explained; 24, HoW it can be Proved, that the Acceleration of ? is Greater, in the Whole, than it's Retardation, ſo as to Cauſc a Progreſſion of the Apſides. As to the Firſt it may be ſaid, that at the ſame Time, that the Expanſive Force from 5 Retards the Body ? in C, or the Quadrature, there is likewiſe a Reflection of it from P in C to B, by which the Aux or the Summa Apſis is Protruded from B tovards G, and by which it becomes Regreſſive. ON the other Hand, when P is in P, 4, and F, the Expanſive is Diverted towards G, by which it is Repell'd back towards  and H; When again P is in the Quadrature D, the Expanſive is Reflected towards the Parts  and H, and hinders the Progreſſion of G or B towards H, or rather makes it Regreſſive; and laſtly, when P is in G, B, or H, the Expanſive Force Carrys  ſorwards by a Refiection of it from G to B, and B to H. As As to the Second, that the Acceleration is Greater than the Retardation in the whole Orbit, is manifeſt, becauſe the Retardation of ? Proceeds from the Expanſive Force, as before Explained, and in which the Difference of the Contractive Forces obtains little or no Effect, but the Accleration of it Ariſes from a Double Cauſe from the Expanſive Force leſs Obſtructing it's Morion, and from it's Increaſing the Difference of the Contractive Forces betwixt 7 and P. WHATEVER Objections may be made againſt this Solution, they perhaps would Vaniſh, if ve knew more Perfectly the Laws of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, but whatever they are, as I am ſufficiently aware, what they are or can be, yet as this Solution Depends upon Principles, which are the ſame, as it Connects all theſe Phænomenons together, and makes them to have a Dependance upon each other, ſo it is Preferrable at lcat to the Preſent Account, which Introduces Nev, and Diſtinct, and Independent Propoſitions to ſolve the Motion of the Apſides and perfectly Different from what are uſed to Explain the Acceleration and Retardation of the Body in it's Orbit. Tnus FirsT, It is ſaid, that the Centripetal Force of the Central Body 7, by which the Body ? is Retained in it's Orbit, is Increaſcd in the Quadratures by the Addition of the Force LM, and is Diminiſhed in the Syzygiæ by the Ablation of the Force æL, and by Reaſon of the Greatneſs of the Force XL is more Diminiſhed than Increaſed; conſcquently, if the Centripetal Force of T7, by which P is Retained in it's Orbit, is Leſs in the Syzygiæ than in the Quadratures, ſince beſore by rhe Action of 4N, P in 4 was Dravn tovards S, and in B Repelled from 7, it is Maniſeſt, that from both theſe Cauſes ? muſt Recede from 7 much more in the Syzygiæ than in the Quadratures, and yet this Philoſophy at the ſame Time Teaches us to Believe, that ? is farther Diſtant from 7 in the Quadratures than in the Syzygiæ, and that the Curvity of the Orbit is Greater in C and in D, than in 4 and B. SECOND, This Centripetal Force of the Central Body T is ſaid to be by Corol. 2. Prop. 4. in a Reaſon Compounded of the Simple Reaſon of the Radius 7P Directly, and of a Duplicate Reaſon of the Periodical Time Inverſcly, and therefore, by the firft Article, this Compound Reaſon is Diminiſhed by the Ablation of the Force KL, and conſequently the Periodical Time, if the Radius 7P Remains the ſame; is Increaſed in a Subduplicate Reaſon, in which that Centripetal Force of the Central Body T is Diminiſhcd, and therefore, the Radius being Increaſed or Diminiſhed, the Periodical Time is more Increaſed, or leſs Diminiſhed than in a Seſquiplicate Reaſon of this Radius, by Corol. 6. Prop. 2. In Anſwer to which, Corol. 2. Prop. 4. has been already Examined and Refuted, as likewiſe Corol. 6. Prop. 4. GRANTING Which, if the Periodical Time is Increaſed by rhe Ablation of X Z, which therefore muſt be in the Syzygiæ, the Velocity is Diminiſhed in the Syzygiæ, as the Periodical Time is Increaſed, whereas, before, we were Informed, that the Body ? was Accelerated in the Syæygiæ, and Retarded in the Quadratures, by the Action of MN; and yet now by the Ablation of XL, it ſcoms, it is Retarded in the Syæygiæ, and I ſuppoſe by the Addition of La47 for the ſame Reaſon Accelerated in the Quadratures, tho' theſe Forces Act at the ſame Time, and obtain their Effects together, that is,  N which Accelerates, and X L vhich Retards in the Syzygiæ, as alio, Aſ N which Retards, and L.ar which Accelerates in the Quadratures. Tumn, It is Aſirmed, that in the Quadratures, where N Vaniſhes, the Force, vith which the Body P is Urged towards the Body 7, is Compounded of the Forœ LM, and of the Contripetal Force, with which the Body T Attracts the Body P; the Force LM, if the Diſtance 27 is Increaſod, is likewiſe Increaſod nearly in that Proportion, and the Latter Force Decreaſes in a Duplicate Reaſon of the ſame Diſtance, and therefore the Sum of theſe Forces togother Docrcaſes in a Leſs than a Duplicate Reaſon of the ſaid Diſtance ?P7, and conſequently, by Corol. 1. Prop. 45. it Cauſcs, that the Aux or the Summa Apſis is Regre ſſive, or Moves in Autecedentia. ON the Contrary, In the Syzygiæ, the Force, by which the Body P is Urged towards the Body 7, is the Difference betwixt the Force, with which the Body T Attracts ?, and the Force XL, and becauſe rhe Force KL is Increaſed almoſt in Proportion to the Diſtance ?7, That Diſference Decreaſcs in a Greater than a Duplicare Reaſon of the ſaid Diſtance; and therefore, by Corol. 1, Prop. 45. it Cauſes, that the Aux Aux or the Summa Apſis is Progreſſive, or Moves in Conſequentia, and ſince L is Twice as big in the Syzygiæ, as LM in the Quadratures, the Exceſs in the whole Revolution vill fall on the Side of XZ, which vill Carry the Aux in Conſentia. ltã i i IN Reply to which we have ſiewn, that this 451h Propoſition, and its i1 Corollary is not Proved, that there is no Account given of the Revolution of the Ellipſis, and conſcquently of the Apſides, that this Departure from the Duplicate Proportion being the Reaſon of the Progreſs or Regreſs of them is a Chimæra, and that we may as well take any Thing elſe to ſolve ſuch Progreſſion or Regreſſion, as the aforeſaid Deviation ſfrom the Duplicate Proportion. Beſides which, Granting the moſ, tho' there ſiould be a Receſs from the Duplicate Proportion, ſuppoſing the Apſides or the Ellipſis vere Moved, it is not ſown, that ſuch a Receſs from the Duplicate Proportion is a Cauſe of their Motion, which is Preſumed and Unaccounted for. AND Laſtly, The Revolving of Ellipſes or Orbits at once is a Mathematical Scheme and Projection, but to Imagine there is ſuch a Thing in the Heavens, is bringing us back to the Old and Exploded Epicycles, and Allowing that to the Modern Ellipſes, which we would not Grant to the Circles of the Antients. YET all theſec Various and Independent Matters are to be Confeſſcd and Acknowledged, and Twenty more, in order to Prove this Progreſſion and Regreſſion of the Apſides, which at Length is not Obſerved in any of the Planets, in Reſpect of vhich li i they are Eſteemed Quieſcent, and all Calcula, tions made concerning them, are upon the Suppoſition of their being Iſo Notvirhſtanding vhich, this Doctrine is laid ſo General, as to make us Think and Believe, that even their Apſides are Progreſſive and Regreſſive likeviſc, for what is here Demonſtrated ſeems to Relate not only to the Se] condary Planets, bur the j ] Primary. To blind this Buſineſs of the Apſides ſtill farther, we have a Great ado made about the Seſquiplicate and Duplicate Proportions of the Diſtance ?7, whereas we have before Obſerved, that whatever Solutions ve may give of the Heavenly Bodies, as to their General Appearances, it is nothing Leſs than a Piece of Oſtentation and Vanity to pretend to Aſcertain the Preciſe Diſtances of the Planets from the Sun, or from each other, by any Inſtruments Aſtronomers can make uſe of; And this I am the more Confirmed in, when I have known good Mathematicians, in the Meaſuring the Height of a Turret only, of no more than Fifty Yards, to be Miſtaken in their Calculations, and to Differ from each other TWo or Three Yards, as ſome of this College, where I now Write, may well Remember. 4h. FrRoM the ſame Expanſive and Contractive Forces we may Explain the Increaſe and Decreaſe of the Excentricity of the Orbit CAD, for if the Body ? is ſuppoſed to Deſcend from the Upper to it's Lower Apſis, namely, from B to 4, vhere the Apſides are in the Syzygiæ, it is manifeſt, that the Expanſive Force ſrom 5 vill Cauſe ? to Deſcribe an Orbit Interior to the Elliptick BC4, tovards the Parts C 4, ſo as to make 4 Approach nearer to 7, by which the Excentricity illl be Increaſed. : FirsT, Becauſe the Expanſive Force, Acting againſt ? in it's Deſcent from B to C, and from thence to 4, Repells it in every Step towards 3, and conſequently, HC ſrom T, and CP? 4 tovards it. SECOND, Becauſe the Expanſive Force from 5 Acting more ſtrongly upon 4 than ipon B, the Contractive Force of 4 is thereby Diminiſhed, and conſcquently does not not Attract T ſo forcibly towards it, from whence he Contractive Force of T has a Greater Influence to Draw P in 4 towards ĩt ſclf, and ? in 4 by that means comes nearer to T. j IP therefore ? was to Aſcend from 4 to D and B with the ſame Conditions, as it Deſcended from B t6 C and 4, t would Deſcribe 4D B juſt the ſame ind of Orbit, and Equally Excentrical with CA; But as the Expanſive Force from S Acti now the ſame Way with the Motion of the Body ? in it's Aſcent from 4 to D and B, it Impells the Body æ nearer to 7, in it's Paſſagè from 4 to D than in it's Paſage from C to 4, and Eepells it farther from T in its Paſſage from D to &, than in that from B to q, upon Which Account the Excentricity is again Increaſed, and there is one Part of the Orbit Deſcribed Interior to 4D, and another Exterior to D B. FrROM whence it follows, that the Excentricity of the Body ?, Revolving in an Excentrical Orbit, is twice Changed in every Revolution, and that it is the Greateſt, when ? is in the Syzygiæ, and the Leaſt, when in the Quadratures, and that in it's Paſſage from the Quadratures to the Syzygiæ, it is continually Increaſed, and in irs Paſſage from the Syzygiæ to the Quadratures, it is continually Diminiſhed. SUPPOSING now the Line of the Apſides to be placed in the Line of the Quadratures CD, ſo that the Aux or Summa Apfis ſiould be in , and the Ima Apſis in D, it is Plain for the ſame Reaſons, as before, that the Greateſt Excentricity will be in 4 and B, and the Leaſt in C and D, that is, thie Greateſ will be in the SyZæygiæ, and the Leaſt in the Quadratures; but the Excentricity of the Orbit will be Greater, when the Line of the Apſides is in the Syzygiæ, than when it is in the Quadratures, Becauſe, in the Former Caſe, the Body ? Deſcends from B to 4 in a Curve, Approaching nearer to a Right Line, and therefore more Directly againſt the Expanſive Force, which Acts contrary to it, and more ſtrongly Repells it towards B and 7, and in it's Aſcent from 4 to B, ĩt Paſſes thro' a like Curve, and being Carryd in a more Direct Stream of the Expanſive, which Concurrs with the Motion of the Body P. it is Repulſcd farther from 7, than G and B, towards . ON the Contrary, in the Latter Caſe, when the Line of the Apſides is in the Quadratures, the Body P in it's Motion from B to C, and from thence to 4 is Carryd more Obliquely and Tranſverſely to the Expanſive, and thro' a Greater Curvity oſ the Orbit, by which means it is le'' Repelled by it towards  and 7, and ſo in its Motion from A to D, and from thence to B, the Curvity of the Orbit being Greater, and it's Paſſage thr the Expanſive being Tranſverſe, it is leſs Affected by it, upon both which Accounts the Excentricity is Diminiſhed. FrROM Whence it is conſequent, that, in ſeveral Revolutions of the Body ? compared with cach other, the Excentricity of it's Orbit is the Greateſt, when the Apſides are in the Syzygiæ, that it is from thence Perpetually Diminiſhed in the Paſage oſ the Apſides from the Syzygiæ to the Quadratures, where the Excentricity is the Leaſt, and in the Paſage of the Apſides from the Quadratures to the Syzygiæ, that it is again Increaſcd. l HAVING given our own Explanation of the Varying Excentricity of the Orbit EC AD, and having before Examined into that of the Preſent Philoſophy, it will be ſeen by a Compariſon, which Account is the more Probable. sth. WE ſhall therefore Proceed to thic Etrors in Latitude, which likewiſe are Explicable from theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces; Let ZST be an Immoveable .Plane, and C 4 Kaiſed above, as D A is Depreſſcd beneath ĩt, and conſequently in this Poſition, the Line of the Nodes B A4, in which the Planc C4 D B Interſects the ' Immoveable one EST, is in the Syzygiæ, vhen thè Body ſ therefore is in B or in 4, the Expanſive Force from 5 Acting according to the Direction S4 or 5B can make no Alteration in the Inclination of the Orbit CA to 2ST, but when the Line of the Nodes is in the Quadratures CD, and the Body P is in 4 Elevated above the Immoveable Plane, it is manifeſt, that PWill be Depreſſed towards the ſaid Plane by the Action of the Expanſive Force, for the ſame Reaſon, thar P is Accelerated to 4 in it's Deſcent from the Quadrature to the Syzygia; becauſc there is a Leſs Expanſive Force betwixt ? in 4, and the Immoveable Plane, than there is above it, and when P is in B Depreſſed below the Immoveable Plane, it is by the ſame Exceſs of the Expanſive Force beyond ? made to Approach to the ſaid Plane, for all the Expanwe ſivè Force beyond ihe Immoveabie Plane in either Caſes is to be negleſted, as AG: ing another way, and not Contrary to, or againſt the Inclined one CD or CàD. nOM Henee it therefore follows, that the Inclination of the Orbit of ? to the inmoveable Plane is the Greateſt, When the Nodes are in the Syæygiæ, and the Leaſ When in the Quadrarurès, ãſl other Things being Equal, and rhat tſe ſaid Incſination  Diminiſied ĩn thie Paſlage of ? from the Quãdtatures t tHe Syzygiæ, and is again Inereaſed in æ's Pafage from the Syæygiæ ro the Quadratures, and conſequently, when ? is in the Syzygiæ, the Inclitation of the Planẽs is the Leaſt, which Returns to it's former Magnitude, when P Arrives at the next Node; Alſo in the Paſage oſ rhe Nodes from the Syzygiæ tò the Quadratures, the Inclinãtion of the Plnes is Bitminiicd and ĩ the Feaſt Things being Equal, here the Nodcs are in the Quadratures, then it Ieteaſes by the ſame Degrees by which it before Decreaſed, and Ipon n Actum of thiè Nodes to the Syzygiæ, ſie Inclination of the Planes obtains The Thing to be Accounted ſor is thè Regreſſion of the Nodes: Which ſurely Beperids upon' inè Etpiication, which ũ Given of the Inclination oſ the Orbits being increaſed and Binihed by Turs, S ſes vhat the Adion of Nai ru do mn the Former Caſe, and wiich is Apply'd io te ſatter, the Exve Force fiom s vilt aford as a ſufficient Solũtion of; namely, why the Planes are Differentſy ſoclined in the SyZygia , and in die ſnteſmedũm Places; as thty partake of the Conditions of the Syzygiæ and the Quadratures, are more ſlowIy Regreſſive, and therefore, why the Nodes, being either Retrograde or Stationary, vill be Carryd in Antecedentia. 5. 20. HAVING thus Endeavoured to Explain the Errors and Irregularities of the Body P in it's Orbit by the Expanſive Forces of the Sun and the Contractive of the Planets, and ſiewn what Objections lie againſt the Received Expoſition of theſe Matters, we ſhall only farther in General add, that it ſeems more Agreeable to Nature, Philoſophy, and a juſt Reaſoning, to ſuppoſe, that the Orbit of ? is Affected by ſome Force, which is Univerſal, and which is Spread and Diffuſed round it, by which thoſe Changes and Alterations are Produced in it, than to Imagine they are Derived from the Adtion of Two Simple Lines N and X L, which at the Beſt owe their Origin to a Chimerical Reſolution of Forces, which we have before Conſidered and Examined. Ir it be Alledged, that it is Attributing too Great an Effect to the Expanſive Force of the Sun, to make it Capable of Repelling a whole Planet, vhen we do not find the Rays of it ſufficient to Remove the Smalleſt Pebble. WEeE Anſver, FIRs?T, That the very ſame Argument may be Urged againſt a Planet's being Attracted by the Sun, ſo as to make it Change it's Situation, ſince, if it could Attract a whole Planet, it might, one ſould think, eaſily Attract any Small Part or Portion of it, which lies Looſe and Unconnected with it, and therefore _ it from it's Surface, which we do not yet Experience in the Planct we abit. SECOND, The Reaſon, vhy either the Attractive or the Expanſive Force of the Sun cannot Drav or Repell any looſe Body upon the Surface of the Planet in Diſtinction from the Whole, is Plain, becauſc by the ſame Force, with which any Body Nn i is Drawn or Repelled, every other Body of the ſame Magnitude may be Dravn o Repelled, and conſcquently the whole Planet, which Conſiſts of ſeveral Bodies oſ the ſame Magnitude or Nearly, ſuppoſe that Magnitude, what in Reaſon we will. THIRD, But yet we find very ſenſible Effects of the Sun's Expanſive Force, in it Diſſolution of Bodies, which are Inflammable, and even of Mettals by a Burning Concave, and in it's Diſſipation of Waters and Vapours; On the Contrary, thai the Sun has an Attractive Power, or that any Parcels of Matter on our Earth Gravitatc towards it, ve have not the leaſt Intimation from any Thing we Obſerve. FourRTH, And as to the Contractive Forces, we find the Earth is Endued with ſuch a Force, by which it's Parts are Conſtipated, and Condens'd together, and C mented with each other, and by which all Groſs Bodies Deſcend and Gravitate to it, in order to ſuch Cement and Union, in like Manner, as the Expanſive Force Diſſipates or Repells Bodies, vhich come within it's Sphere of Adtivity; That therefore other Bodies, as the Moon and Planets, which alſo are Opake and Denſe, ſhould be Endued with the ſame Contractive Force is not Improbable, or without a Foundation in Experience and Reaſon, by which their Parts Tend to each other, and by which all External Bodies, that are Groſs and Denſe, are Drawn and Incited to a Conjunction vith Them; If therefore ſeveral Bodies, as the Earth, Moon, and Planets Drav Different Ways by ſuch Contractive Forces, and the Sun Repells Them, the Effect ill not be their Concurrence, or Coalition, but their keeping at certain ſtated Diſtances Agreeable to the Forces, which Cauſe their Divorce and Separation. ON the Contrary, If, according to the Preſent Philoſophy, theſe Bodies Attract and Actually Tend to each other, What ſhould Hinder their Coition or Congreſs? And how can a Paſſive and Unactive Matter Attract? Or from whence Ariſe it's Gravitation? Which are all of Them Difficulties and Problems, which this Philoſophy Wants to have Solved, after it has been, by the Defectiveneſs or Arbitrarineſs of its Principles, the ſole Cauſe and Occaſion of Them; and which Problems we have Juſt now ſewn may be Explained by the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. PRINCIPLES O F THE PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE F O R C E S B O OK III. CONCERNING THE CHIEF PROPERTIES oP MATTER, AS ALSO, CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES or CHYMISTRY, ANATOMY, PNEUMATICKS, AND HYDROSTATICKS. PRINCIPLES of the PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANS IVE and CONTRACTIVE FORCES. B O O K III. Concerning the Chief PROPERTIES of MATTER, as alo, Concerning the PRINCIPLES of CHYMISTRY, ANATOMY, PNEUMATICKS, and HYDROSTATICKS. C H AP. I Concerning the Chief Properties of Material Beings. s. 1. ESIGNING in this Chapter to Treat of the ſeveral Properties we find in Material Beings, I ſhall obſerve in the Firſt Place, that as they are Diverſify'd amongſt onc another into Taſts, Smells, Colours, Sounds, Gravity, Extenſion, &. ſo there are Various and Numberleſs Degrees in the ſame kind of Property; In the Four Firſt this is Acknowledged, but it is not ſo fully Apprehended to obtain in Gravity and Extenſion. Tnus in Taſts we caſily Allow of Acid, Sweet, Bitter, &. and that Each of theſe have a Thouſand Varieties in them; in Smells, of Fragrant and Fœtid, with ſeveral other Intermediate ones, which are likewiſe cach of them Diſtinguiſd into a Multitude of others, vhich Differ in their Impreſſions, bur are the ſame in Kind and Species; Colours Appear under many Particular Forms, and each Form is Divided into New Shades and Complexions; and Sounds Conſiſt of Diverſe Notes, which are likewiſe Capable of Innumerable Modulations; And if it were not for the Prejudices we had Received from ſome Syſtems in Philoſophy, we ſould conclude the ſame of Gravity and Extenſion; In Gravity we Experience an Infinite Numbei of Gradations from Gold, which ĩs the Heavieſt Subſtance we knov, to Fire, vhic is the Lighteſt, and has a quite Contrary Force to that of Gravitation; And in Ex tenſion the Eye is Filled with a Greater or Leſs Conſtipation of Parts, with whicl the ſame Dimenſional Space appears to be Differently Replete, and the Hand is In formed of Various Degrees of Roughneſs or Smoothneſs, of Rare and Denſe, o Solid and Fluid, to an Infinite Diverſity; but, which ĩs the Misfortune, ve have Icarned to ſpeak of Gratity and Extenſion in an Abſtracted Manner, and from thenc l hav have Imagined the one, and the other, to be the Same and Invariable, tho' our Senſes Inform us, and Nature Aſures us, that each of them Admits of as Great a Variety, as the orher aforementioned Properties of Material Beings, ſo caſy it is for our Senſes, our Reaſon and Judgment, to be Corrupted by our Abſtractions and our Fancies. l 5. 2. ANorHER Thing we muſt obſerve in Reſpect to the Properties of Material Beings is, that they are Generally Diſtinguiſd into Eſſential and Accidental; Solidity and Extenſion are in the Number of the Firſt, and Taſt, Smell, Colour, and Sound Appertain to the Laſt, becauſe the Firſt are found in all Kinds of Matter, whereas the other are not; On the Contrary, Matter, when Defined in General, ve have formerly ſnewn to be a Creature of the Mind, as well as it's TWo Eſſential Properties, Solidity and Extenſion, and when we come to any Tarticular Portions of Marter, as they Exi©t in Nature, thoſe, which are Termed Accidental Properties, will be as Eſcntial to thoſe Portions of Matter, in which they Inhere, as any other the moſũ Eſiential Properties of it; Beſides the Dividing the Properties of Matter in this vay is making our Senſations the Standard of the Real Qualities of it; Thus if we Excſude Smell from being Eſential to Matter, becauſe we have no Senſations of it in ſeveral Portions we are Converſant with, in many of thoſe Portions even Dogs and ſeveral other Brutes will Convince us of our Miſtake, and in all, it is not certain, but ſome Animals or Inſects may Receive thoſe Senſations from it, which we find Impoſſible in our ſclves; What therefore we are to do, is to Conſider the Properties of Matter, as they Exiſt In it, without any ſuch Frivolous and Idle Diſtinctions, Formed by our Fancies, and Contrived to ſerve our Particular Hypotheſes, and to Try, whether we can give the Subſtratum or Eſſence of it, and from thence we ſhall know, what Properties are Eſſential to and Immediately Derived from it. j J. 3. THE Subſtratum or Eſſence of Matter therefore I Take, and Think I may Affirm, to be Action or Force, and if I can Produce thoſe Actions and Forces, which vill not only ſolve all the Phænomenons of Matter, which we are Acquainted with by our Senſations from it, but even thoſe, hich may poſſibly Arrive to other Animals of a Diſtinct Nature and Species from us, I hope I ſhall have Given a full Account not only of the Eſſence of Matter, but of it's Real and Eſſential Properties, for l Enow of no other that belongs to it, the Accidental ones being only, as we before ſaid, either Calculated according to our own Senſations in Nature, Abſtracted from thoſc of other Animals, or upon our own Hypotheſes in the Corpuſcular Scheme. Tuar Action or Force in General is the Eſſence or Subſtratum of Matter, is Evident from this Plain Axiom, that it would be Impoſſible for us to have any Sen ſations from Matter, unleſs by ſome Kind of Action or orther Impreſ'd upon our Minds ſrom it, we ſhall Inſtance in thoſc already Mentioned. Tast is Produced by an Immediate Application of the Matter to the Organ oſ Senſe, cither therefore this Senſation muſt be Cauſed by the Action of the Mind without any Influence from Matter, and the Mind would perceive Taſt without ſuch Application of Matter to the Organ, which is Impoſſible, or elſe by the Figure ol the Corpuſcles, which Compoſe this Matter, which has been Confuted in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy in the Chapter of Taſis, or elſe it muſt be by the Agitation and Motion of the Parts of this Matter (Which we here ſuppoſe not to be a Fluid but a Solid and Quieſcent Body) by the Saliva without any Particular Forcc in the Matter, and then all Taſts of Solid and Quieſcent Bodies would be the ſame, or laſtly, by ſome Peculiar Action or Force in the Matter it ſelf, which is what we Aſert and Defend. SMELL is Cauſed cither by Eſuviums from the Odorous Body, if the Corpuſcular Account Prevails, or by Small and Minute Percuſſions, and Infinitely ſhort Vibrations, or Momentany Impreſſions of it, on the Ambient Plenum, Air or æEther, which ve Maintain; if the Laſ, the Caſe is Evident, that there muſt be ſome Force or Action in Matter, from whence theſe Gentle Strokes are Promoted thro' the æEthereal Fluid to our Organs of Senſe, if the Firſt, the Arguments, which we have Alledged againſt ſuch Eſfluviums in the ſame Chapter, and againſt the whole Atomick Syſtem are to be Anſwered, and thereſore want no Repetition here. CoLour Proceeds from the Reflection of the Rays of Light, which is eſither Heterogencous and Diſſimilar in it ſelf, and Conſiſtis of Varions Colours, which are Connatc Connate to it, and Originally in it, which the Preſent Philoſophy Affirms, or it is Homogeneous and Alike, and Receives it's New Forms from the Impreſſions and Minute Percuſſions of Natural Bodies, which we Propoſe; if the Former, our Chapters Writ againſt the Modern Explanations of Light and Colours are to be Reviewd and Refuted, if the Latter, it is again manifeſt, there muſt be ſome Power, Force, or Action in Bodies Peculiar to them, which occaſions thoſe Changes and Alterations in the Luminous Subſtance. SounD is Confeſſed on all Hands, for here the Corpuſcles of Matter and the Atomical Philoſophy are entirely Excluded, to be the Effect of Vibration, Percuſſion, or Elaſticity; and ſince Sounds are Different, where the External Percuſſion is the ſame, the Internal Percuſſions, Vibrations, or Elaſticities of the Sonorous Bodies muſt be Different, and therefore owing to Peculiar Forces, Actions, or Minute Vibrations in the Bodies themſelves. GRAVITY, If Different in the ſame Quantity and Portion of Matter, which is vhat ve Aſert, muſt Ariſe from a Different Innate Force or Action in it, and the like may be ſaid of Solidity and Extenſion, which we ſhall more Particularly Conſider. SoLmITY is only Felt by us, but Extenſion is both Felt and Seen, if therefore ve ſiew, that theſe Senſations could not be had, unleſs from ſome Certain Action in Matter, we ſhall Prove, that thoſe Properties of Matter, vhich are Eſtetmed to be the moſt Eſſential, Derive their being ſo from the Action of it. SoLDITY? is to be Conſidered TWo ways, either as it is Defined in General tò be an Excluſion of all other Bodies out of the Space or Dimenſions, which any Certain Body Poſſeſſes, or as it is an Actual Senſation; In the Firſt Senſe, it is only an Abſtracted Notion, and a Fancy and Creature of the Mind, thus Water, or Air, or Ather, is as Solid as Gold, as there is no Difference in the Impenetrability of them; But does any one Really Feel or Perceive, that there is no Diſtinction betwixt theſe Subſtances? Or that the one Excludes the other from being in the ſame Place? No, we Reaſon and Argue our Selves into ſuch an Opinion, that it is a Thing Impoſſible. becauſe Water or Air cannot be æther, nor ther Gold, which would be, if the one could Poſſeſ” the very ſame Dimenſions, which the other does, that is, was Exactly of the ſame Nature; but that Water, or Air, or æther, may not be Compreſsd vithin the ſame Dimenſional Space, in which Gold Exiſts, can be no more Proved even from Reaſon, tHan that Water, if there were Forces in Nature to Compreſs it to a Nineteen Times Narrower Space than it Poſſeſſes, would not be Gold, or that Gold is not the Reſult of ſuch a Compreſſion by Real Forces Actually Exiſting in Nature; This Solidity therefore we have nothing to do with at Preſent. IN the Second Senſe, Solidity is an Actual Senſation, by which we Perceive, that Gold Reſiſts more to a Penetration into it by our Hand or a Finger than Water does, Water than Air, and Air than Ather; but unleſs there was ſome Force or Action in Body, there could be no Reſiſtance to our Feeling of it, nor could we Feel it at all, and there could be no Difference of Reſiſtance to our Feeling, unleſ™ there were Diſtinct and Peculiar Actions or Forces, which made that Reſiſtance;3 This Appears to be ſo Plain and Evident, that there can be no Grounds to Conteſt ir, and therefore all that we can ſay of Matter, as to the Solidity of it, from our Senſations is only, that it is it ſelf Real Force or Action, and Wholly and Entirely Conſiſts in it. EXTENSION is to be Conſidered Two ways, as Solidity was, either as one Uniform, Invariable Thing, and the ſame in all Bodies, and then it is an Abſtraction and Creature of the Mind, or as an Actual Senſation; The Former will ſerve well enough to Diſcourſe of in Logicks, or in Geometrick Demonſtrations, but can ſignify nothing to Philoſophy, which Inquires into the Real Properties, which Exiſt in Nature, and therefore ve muſt take the Latter; Which, as it is a True and Explicit Senſation, may be Felt and Seen, but how we ſhould Feel Extenſion, any more than Solidiry, without an Impreſſion upon our Organs of Senſe, or how that Impreſſion ſiould be made without Action or Force, is Impoſſible to ſay or Imagine; nor is it Probable, that we could See Extenſion, unleſs the Body, which was Extended, was Endued with ſome Force or Action, for i§F it was Entirely Paſſive, there is no more more Reaſon, vhy the Rays of Light ſould not Flow along it's Surſace, than bt Reſlected ſrom it, but if there is an Adtion or Forct in Body, Which Repells the Rays, there is a juſt Argument for it's being ſeen. : TuE Diffcrent Conſtipation of Parts, which we obſerve in the Extenſion of Woodũ. Stone, Mettals, æ. is a Conviction likewiſe, that this Force or Action is Difſerent in Bodies; and the Various Colours of them Confirm the ſame Opinion, ſince ve have ſiewn in our Priuciples of Natural Philoſophy, and in the Chaprers Relating to Colours, that the Accounts, which have been Given of th/m, by Deſcartes or Sir Iſ. Newion, upon the Hypotheſis of a Similar and Paſſive Matter, are liable to Many and Invincible Objcctions; And till ve find Equal Diſficulties Chargeable upon an Active Matter, ve muſt beg Leave of the Philoſophers to Depart from them into thoſ Sentiments and Perſwaſions. : it 5. 4. SINCE therefore all Matter Depends upon, and Conſiſts in ſome Force or Action, the next Inquiry will be, what that Force or Action is, which we Diſtinguiſh into the Expanſive and Contractive, and which has hitherto led us thro' all the Mazes and Labyrinths oſ Nature; It has been Generally thought, of which Opinion the Preſent Philoſophy Appears to be, that a Double Force or Velocity will Carry a Body in the ſame Time to a Double Length, and a Triple Force or Velocity to a Friple one, likewiſe on the Contrary, that a Body Carry'd with the fame Velocity in Double the Time vill Deſcribe a Double Eength, and in Triple the Time a Triple one; but it ſcoms to have nò Notion of a Double or a Triple, or any òther Multiple Force or Velocity Exiſting in the ſame Space, and in the ſame Time, which the Expanſive and Contractive Forces we Defend, will Exphin, and than which Nothing is more Certain and Evident. i : : For if Two Equal Balls of the ſame Matter and Subſtance are ftiruck with Two Different Forces in the ſame Inſtant of Time, the Forces Communicated muſt be Different in the very Firſt Point of their Velocity or Motion, iſ not, they are Equal, anũ Different Forees ill aſterwards Ariſo from an Equality of them, which is Inpoſſible; if therefore they are Different in the Firſt Pomt oſ Space, thro' which they Paſ, for the ſame Reaſon they will be in a Second, Third, a Hundredth, Two Hundredth, a Thouſandth, ora Miliionth, &æ. Tis true a Body will be Carryd & a Greater Length by a Greater Force, as for Inſtance, to Pouble the Eengrh by Bouble the Forcę, and for that Reaſon, thar there muſt be Double the Force io carry t to Twice the Len it muſt have Double the Force to carry it the ſame Lengrh, the Double Proportion of Effect conrimning undiminiſhd, for otherwiſe it would ſink and dye at the ſame Biſtance from ihe Beginmming of is Velocity and Morion, at which the other does, that is, when' borh the Balls have Deſcribed the fame Length they will be Quieſcent; whereas, ſince the Ball, which has the Double Force, will be Carryd as far again, after the other has Ceaſt it's Motion, it is plain it came vith a Double Force thro' every Point. of their Moving together. ; 5 i I mean, if it had not an Activity and an Energy in the ſane Time, and in the ſame Space, Double to tha of the Other, it could not Produce an Effect oſ Motion, or of Deſcribing a Space Double to rhat, which the other docs; for nothing is a Plainer Axiom thom this, than that the Time continuing the ſame and the Activity 100, the Balis, hic are ſtruck, mufr œaſe their Motion at the ſame Diſtance from their Firſt: Moving, and notling can earry the one to a Double Diſtance of that of the orher, excepting we ſippoſc their Forces Double to each oſher in every Point f Space, in which they Move in Conjunction. Hlit TuHIs Notion òf DifferentVelocities in a Point will be ſtill more nanifeſt in Forces Communicated to Bodies, which are not Actually moved by them, as in Preſſure; Thus vith the Forco of Screws we may lmpart a Different Velocity iã Point, and in the ſume Inſtant of Time, for a Different Velocity in æ Point, I call-  Different Action produced in uiat Point, from a Various Force applyd to the Production of it; And the ſamè may be ſaid of the Preſure of our Hands; or our Fingers, upon a Body, which is Unnmoved, and of the Variety of Impulſes ſrom Percuſſlon upon Bodics, which are Soli and Reſiſting; In all which Caſes, rhcre are Different Actions and Forces ptoduced in the ſame Poim of Space, and in the ſane nſtant of Time, unleſs it can be ũid or affirmed, that there is no Efc& Evident; When yer the Cauſẽ s Apparent and Unconteſted. l aaa. ren ..1 en l Tn= Tue like Inſtances to theſe are ſueh, which Relate to the Revolutions of Bodies round a Center, which according to, the Different Force, with which they are Agitated and Retaiped in their Circles, do acquire a Different Velocity; It is generally AcKnovledged, that a Circular or Periodical Motion is Compounded of a- Centripetal in the Curve, and a Centrifugal in the Tangent or Projectile; it muſ©t he. alſo Confeſs'd, that the Centriſugal is Greater, as the Velocity is Greater, with Which the Bodꝶ is Revolved, and conſequently. in every Point, of the ſame Circle, there may be Diẽ ferent Forces or Velocities produced, which willhave the Effect upon the Ather; which Surrounds it, of Different Kinds of Pręſſure. FroM hence it is, thereſore, that we perccive thoſe Various Senſations from Mat: ter, which we do; All Bodies Solid and Fluid are Compounded of a Centripetal, à Gravitating, or Contractive Force, by which they not only Tend to the Cenrer, but by which they are United and Gemented together, and this Force of Gravitation or Contraction is in the ſame Point of Space, and the ſame Inſtant of Time, Various and Changeable in Different Sorts and Portions of Matter; as alſo of a Centrifugal, Elaſtick, or Expanſive, hich likewiſe in Different Kinds of Matter is Changeable and Various in it's ovn Naturę; Theſe Forces therefore, together with the Infinite Mixtures and Combinations of them, are the Real Subſratums of all Bodies, and upon vhich all the Properties of them; do not, only Depend, but ſrom) which they are Derived. ſrun. T lgeanuiz;  aia date n ;i luinies æn S.5. THUS where æa Body is, Solid and Heavy;s Ductile,: Fuſible, and Yellow, as Gold for Inſtance;,, T3 u a ru:  Lee l ili; ; r Irs Solidity, by. which we cannot Penetrate inio it, is owing to it's Particular Degree oſ Contraction, by which the Parts of it Tend to onæ another, and to the Center, as alſo toir's Expanſive Force, by. which it Repells any Force; which Endeavonrs to enter into the Place, which it Poſuſess v IT's Gravity is owing to it's Principle of Contraction tovards the Earth, which is ſomething: Diminiſi'd by that of it's Expanſion from it; tho' in a Small? Degree. I's Ductile and Fuſible Nature is Derived ſrom its Expanſive, being Aſiſted b the Expanſive Force, of Percuſſion, or that uf Fire, byl which it in ſome Meaſure Surmounts it's Foree of Contraction. P r atu nu. li li Ir's Colour, which is near as Ruddy as Fire, is Derived from irs Expanſive Forcę, which may be probably as Great as that is, but which only Acts withi that Force with in it's own Dimenſions, and ſis only capable of making it's Impreſſions upon the ZEther, which immediately Surrounds it, by Reaſon of irs being held back and detainedby the much Superior Proportion of the Contractive Force, with vhich it is Mixt and Blended. 41, l i ulm i EE AD ſrom whence Appears the Neceſſity of a Plenum, ſince, if there were not ſuch an æther, it vould be Impoſſible for us to have any Senſation of this Force, or indecd of any Colour, or any Viſion in General, namely, unleſs by the Mediation and Interpoſition of it. : uh : 5. 6. ON the Contrary, let us take Fire or Flame, thar ithas a Certam Degree oſ Gravitation or Contraction, is not only Evident from Mr. Bo)le's Experiments, which Evince that Fire or Flame is. Ponderable, but is likewiſe Manifeſt from this Plain Reaſon, that if it were not ſo, it would be Diſſipated at once, no Fire or Flame vould continue together, none would ſubſiſt near this Earth, but if it had an en tirely Centriſugal or Expanſive Force, it would be loſt andwould Vaniſh in  Moment; Beſides Fire or Flame cannot ſubſiſt vithout ſome kind of Fuel, oF other, to ſupport it, which always has a Contractive Force belonging to it, and with which therefore it ĩs as conſtantly United. ; u. a BuT as Gold has the Greateſt Contractive Force, and perhaps the Greateſt Expanſive joined together, by Which it obtains the Properties above-mentioned, ſo Eire or Flame ſcems to have the Greateſt Expanſive Force, and the Leaſt Contractive, of any other Material Being. l 1m7 . ” . r; To it's Contractive Force it is owing, that it is not Diſſipated and Diſperſed, that it Exiſts in a Lamp or a Cinder, and Precipitates to the Earth vith itt To it's Expanſive Force it is oing, that it Dilates and Extends it ſelf to every Part, where there is a Matter, hoſe Contractive Force is not too Great to be overcome, and to be Changed and Transformed into an Expanſive by ir:i O o ] Ell Bæ this alio it Strikes the æther with that Foree and Velocity, which Excites cithor an Heat, or Burning in -it, to our Senſations of Feeling, and Imparts to our Sight, by it's Impre ſſions upon the Organs of that Senſe, the Strong and Vivid Req, and the peculiar Brightneſs and Luſtre, we Receive from it. 5.7. As to Fluids, what is Common to them with other Material Subſtances is derived from the aforementioned Gontractive and Expanfive Forces, and vhat is Peculiar to them, namely, their Fluidity, ariſes from an Equal Balance betwixt thoſ Forces, by which means, tho' the Parts of a Fluid have a Certain Degree of Tendency to each other, yet being endued with an Equal Degree of Foree of Retiring from each other, they accordingly ſeparate upon the leaſt External Application to Divide them, and this ſcoms to be the Nature of a Perfeẽt Fluiti; But by how much more Fluids Reſi*t to a Separation of their Parts, by ſo much is the Contractive Foret more Prevalent than the- Expanſive, or by how much more they are Inclined & Diſpoſed to ſuch a Separation without an Externãl Force, by ſo much is the Expanſive more Prevalent than the Contractive. AN Inſtance of the Firſt Sort of Fluids ſeems to be That of Clear and Limpiũ Water, which by it's Expanſive Force is capable of Reducing ſeveral Kinds of Mattet, as Salts, and Earths, and Minerals, to it's own Expanſive Force, in like manner, a Fire does Combuſtible Subſtances toir's Expanſive; from whence poſſibly pro ceed Perennial Fountains, with their Various Mineral Taſts, which ſeem to be Produced by the Expanſive Force of Water Acting upon theſe Waterable Subſtances, iſ we may ſo call them, and Converting them into it ſelf, juſt a Flame Acts With a Greater Degree of the Expanſive Force upon Subſtances, which are Inftammabie, from mhence Ariſe the Vulcanos, as thoſe of æma and Veſirvius, which have continued Burning for ſo many Ages; Water has an Expanſive Force in Refpect of Wooq, which it Swells and Dilates, and which Froſt Contracts, as is Evident in Doors and the Frames of Saſhes. OF the Second, The more Viſcons and Tenacious ones, a Oils and Gurinom Subſtances, the Latter of which, when Cooled and hid upon Wood, have ſo Great a Contrattive Force, as 1o be Equal, if not Superior, to that of the Wood ſs ſelf; and it is not certain, that when Oils are infuſed berwixt Poliſd Plates or Marbles, but they may have the ſame Contractive Force with Glews, tho' it is Generally ſaid, that they only keep the Air from Entering betwixt the Plates, and the Reaſon of their Adhering ſo firmly together is aſcribed to the Incumbent Preffure of the Atmoſphere; To this kind may be added Metals in their Fuſion, and Mercury. OF the Third, The more Spirituous ones, as all Kinds of Wine and Strong Waters, Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Turpentine, &æ. Alcohol or Rectified Spirit of Wine, which will of it ſelf, if a Small Quantity of it is poured into a Spoon, immediately Evaporate and beoome Iviſibles Alſo Air, æther, Fire, and Flame, ſeem to have likewiſe à Greater Dęgree of the Expanſive Force than of the Contractive, and of the Four Iaſt mentioned, æAther, Fire, and Flame, appear to have ſo little of it, that, inſtead of Giving a Reſiſftance to Material Beings in their Actions, they Actelerate and Conrribute to them. s. 3. ALL the Properties of Matter mentioned in Philoſophy are Derived from hence, whether thoſe which are Termed Accidental, or thoſe which are Called Eſſential; All the Principles in Chymiſtry, and the Operations Obſervable in it, as Fermentation, Precipitation, Coagulation, Chryſtalliation, &e. and all the Phænomenons, which nt themſcives to us from the Animal, the Vegetable, or the Mineral Kingdom, all the Principles of Anatomy, and the Motion of the Lungs, of the Blood, and of the Muſcles, of the Animal Spirits, or the Nervous Juice, and the Union of the Human Syſtem with our Minds, and the Sy/pm, which the one has with the other, are likewiſe Deducible from theſe Forces of Expanſion and Contraction. S. 9. THE Eſſential Properties of Matter, according to the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, are thoſe of Exenſion, Solidity, Figure, Diviſibility, Mobility, and being, in it's own Nature, Unactive, to which we may add, with Sir Iſ. Newtn, Attraction or Gravitation; when theſe Properties, which I call the Philoſophick ones, are only Conſidered in the Abſtract, they are, as I have already ſaid in the Firſt Part of the Prnciples of Natural Philoſophy, Chap. 6. Book 1. Nothing mort than Creatures of the l Mind, Mind, and of thoſe there can be no other Account given, than that the Philoſopher was pleaſed, for his own Purpoſes, which he had in View, and for the Convenience of his Solutions, to make thoſe Abſtractions. BuT let us take theſe Properties, as they really Exiſt in Nature, and we ſhall eaſily find, in the Firſt Place; that Extenſion is Various and Different in Matter, both to our Sight and to our Feeling; That we See or Feel the Extenſion of Matter, I ſay is owing to i's Expanſive Force, by which it Acts, in Fecling, immediately upon the Organs of our Senſe, and, in Seeing, upon ther, and, by it's Intermediation, upon the Eye, the Humors, and the Retina of it; We likewiſe hold that this Action of Extenſion is by a Pulſe or a Velocity Exerting it ſelf in a Point or a Surface, without any Evident Change of it's Space or Situation; that farther, Extenſion ſeems Various to us, that is, Rarer or Denſer to our Sight, according as this Expanſive Force does Act upon more or fewer Points of the ther, and ſo upon the Eye, and to our Fecling, as it more or leſs Affects the Organs, which Tranſmit thoſe Senſations to us. As to Solidity, by which our Finger, or any other Body, is Prohibited from Entering into the Space or Dimenſions, which another Body Poſeſſes, ſo far as it is an Abſtracted Idca, it is a Creature of the Mind, and is of no Significance or Importance to Nature; but if we conſider Solidity, as an Actual Reſiſtance, by which one Body obtains a Force of Excluding orhers from Penetrating or Piercing into it's Space, unleſs by a Superior one; ſuch a Property is entirely Accounted for, both from the Force of Contraction, which keeps Matter United and Cemented together, and from the Force of Expanſion, which Repells or Subdues the Force, which attacks it; and the Various kinds of Solidity are derived from the Various Forces of Expanſion and Contraction. FrOM which it is manifeſi, that altho there cannot be a Penetration of Dimenſions, where Solidity is conſidered and look'd upon as an Abſtracted Idea, yet there may be one in Reality, according to what has been Affirmed in the Firſt Part of the Principles of Philoſophy, that is, there may be Different Forces either of Contraction or Expanſion, or Different Degrees of Action, in the ſame Dimenſional Space; and if Gold, for Inſtance, is 19 Times Heavier than Water, ſctting aſide both their Expanſive Forces, 19 Parts of Water ill be Compreſi'd into the ſame Space with one of Gold, to make that Subſtance; ſuppoſing likewiſe, that the Contractive Force is Equal to the Gravitating, which may not in fact be; ſince the Parts or Portions of Matter may Tend to each other with a Different Force and Inclination from that, with which they do to their Center, unleſs all Matter was Similar and Homogeneous, which it is not; for in that Caſe, it is reaſonable to think, that the Forces oſ Contraction would be exactly Equal and Correſpondent to thoſe of Gravitation, FIGURE is another Eſential Property in the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, for which it does not Account, which is Defined and Deſcribed to our Sight or our Feeling by Diverſe Portions of Matter Exerting their Different Forces of Expanſion within certain Limits and Boundaries, in Diſtinction from the Expanſive Force of the æther, which ſurrounds it. Tnus, becauſe a Globe or a Cube of Gold, of Glaſ, or of Marble, or Wood, or of any other Body Solid or Fluid, Diſplays it ſelf in a Diſferent Expanſive Force upon the ther, or our Organs of Senſe, from the Expanſive Force of æther it ſelf, vithin ſuch ſtated Terms and Limits, therefore it is, that we ſee Bodies, or feel them, to be Endued with ſuch Figures Agreeable to the Extent of their Peculiar Actions. AnorHER Eſſcntial Property of Matter is Diviſibility, which the Corpuſcular Philoſophy knows the Uſe, but not the Cauſe of, and which Ariſes from the Expanſive Force in Matter, for if there was a Contractive Force in it, which was Infinite, and not Moderated and Allay'd by an Expanſive one, it would be Impoſſible ever to Separate one Part of Matter from another; but the Contractive Force of Matter being Finite, or being Tempered with an Expanſive, upon both theſe Accounts it is capable of a Separation; either by the Expanſive Force of Diſſolvents, as Gold by the Spirit of Nitre mixt with Sal Armoniac, and Silver and other Metals by the Spirit of Nitre alone; or elſe, by Attrition, Percuſſion, and other External Violences, which are all ſo many Expreſſions or Conveyances of the Expanſive Force of the Mind Exerted upon Material Beings. j O o 2 A Fiſit A Fifth Eſſential Property of Matter in the Corpuſcular Philoſophy is that of Mobility, which is likewiſe Explained from theſe Forces, For if any Portion of Matter, as beſore in Reſpect of Diviſibility, had an Infinite Force of Contraction, and the Force of Contraction vas Correſpondent to that of Gravitation, or of i*s Con traction to the Earth, it vould be Impoſſible for any Body to be Moved; but a: every Body has only a Finite Tendency of it's Parts ro each orher, and of all of them to the Center, and as it's Parts and it's Whole are Endued vith an Expanſive Force; Upon both theſe Accounts, as beſore Bodies were Diviſible, ſo are They Move able, when there is a Superior Expanfive Force, eithet by Springs, as in Automatons, or by Percuſſion, or by Levers, which ate Derived from a Superior Expanſive Force; or by Weights, which are Derived from a Superior Contractive, and which, in ſuch a Caſe, have the Nature of àan Expanſive. j TnE Sixth Property of Matter, which is that of it's Inertia or being perfectly Unactive, cannot indeed be Accounted for from Forces, which are Active in that Senſe, in which we have Explained them, nor is there ſuch an Inertia of Matter in Nature; For there is no Material Being, which has not ſome Action or other belong ing to it, by which we are made ſenſible of it's Exiſtence, and without Which we could not be furniſ'd with any Senſation at all of it. i ALL the Real Inertia of Matter is, that it is Capable of being Moved, or in General of yielding to a Superior Force, which ſall Act upon it, vhether the Expanſive or Contractive, not that it will continue in a State of Motion or Reſt aſter it is once put into cither; ſince it has an Innate Force in it ſelf Derived from God, which vill Prevail, hen ihie Force, which is Impreſſed upon ĩt, Ceaſes, which ĩt vill do, unleſs that Force is Infinite,, Which is not the Caſe of Percuſſion, or Projection in this Philoſophy. j Tuus in Fire, vhen Water, which in' Reſpect of Fire has a Contractive Force, is apply'd to it, if in a Great Degree, the Contractive Force extinguiſhes the Expanſive, but if in a Leſs, tho' the Fire ſubmirs for a Time to the Contractive of the Water, yet, when that Force is ſpent, it riſes Stronger and Livelier than before. Tnus alſo in Reſpect of rhe Contractive Force, or of any Solid and Heaãvy Body, if it is ſtruck with a Racket, when that Force is ſpent, which is Derived from Percuſſion, it Re-aſſumes it's ovn Contractive Force and Tends to the Center, for the Contractive Force does not only Act, ſo as to Unitę the Parts of Matter amongſ themſclves in any Portion of it, but ſo as to Unſtę all the Portions of the Univerſe together, and the Expanſive Force Acts the Contrary way to Diſpell and Diſunite them; It muſt be farther here obſerved, that it is ſomething Wonderful and Strange, that the Great Prince and Coryphæus of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy Sir I7. Newton, whoſe Nanie ought nor yet to be mentioned without the Greateſt Regard, ſhould aſſert this Inertia of Matter, again©t vhich we Contend, and from rthat Aſſertion, vhich is the Foundation of all his Philoſophy, ſiould endeavour to Prove, that Gravitation or a Centripetal Force is a Quality or Property, which belongs to all Matter in General, which is neither more nor leſs than a Contradiction. Ir it be Enquired, vhat would become of a Contractive or Solid Body upon Percuſſion or Projection, ſuppoſing it was at an Infinite Diſtance from all Matter, ſo as not to Gravitate to any Portion of it, we Anſver, after that External Force. vhich is Communicated to it, is Loſt, or Surmounted by the Contractive of the Body, which would be ãt ſome Finite Diſtance from the Beginning of it's Motion, becauſe the Force, which is Impreſſed upon it, is Finite, It would Ceaſe to Move, and by ir's ovn Contractive Force would remain Quieſcent in æther, there being no External Force to determine it one way more than another, and it's Contractive Force having no other Effect than to make the Parts Tend Inwards, and to reſi*t Percuſſion, or any foreign Violence; The like may be ſaid of an Expanſive Body, and it's Parts Exerting themſelves Outwards; And this Probably may be the Reaſon, why that Stupendous Maſs of Matter the Sun, as alſo, the fixt Stars continue ſuſpended in ther, and why this Earth and the Planets would do the ſame, were they not Agitated by their Actions amongſt one another, and by the Expanſive of the Sun. TuE laſt Philoſophick Property of Matter is Gravitation, which is the ſame kind oſ Contractive Force in Reſpect of Different Bodies, which is Exerted in the Uniteing and and Cementing of the Parts of the ſame Body; but as the Contractive Force, by which the Parts of one Body Tend to each other, may differ in the Degree of it* Velocity in a Point from the Contractive Force of the Parts of a Second, a Third or a Fourth Body, &. ſo alſo the Force of Gravitation, by which Bodies Tend te others, may be likewiſe Different, albcit we may not obſerve that Difference in thei Tendency to the Earth, by Reaſon of the Va©t and Prodigious Contraction it Exerts in Reſpect of all Bodies in General; tho we cannot but think, notwithſanding all the Experiments made uſe of to Prove, that Bodies Deſcend with an Equal Force ro the Earth, that a Rock falling from the Top of the Alpes would be Carryd down to ĩt with a more Aſtoniſhing Violence, than a Pebble dropt from thiat Height; and in Fact, if Hiſtorians are True, The Former once fell with ſo Great a Force, as to over-whelm a Whole Village, which lay beneath, and ſunk to ſuch a Depth into the Ground, as to Produce a conſiderable Lake in the Place, where it made it's Imreſſion. : S. 10. HAVING thus far Gone thro' the Eſſential Properties of Matter Alledged by Philoſophers, and Endeavour'd to give an Explanation of them, we ſhall nov Proceed to thoſe, which are Term'd Accidental ones, ſuch are Hardneſs, Soſtneſꝶs, and Fluidity, Rarity and Denſity, Reſiliency and it's Contrary Quality, Heat and Cold, Smoothneſs and Roughneſs, Brittleneſs and Limberneſs, Taſts and Smells, Sounds, Light and Colours, Opakeneſs and Tranſparency. : As to Hardneſs, it is evidently Explained by a Contractive Force, which the Greater it is, by which any Portion of Matter is Cemented together, the more Diſficult muſt it be to make a Separation in it; Softneſs ariſes from a leſs Degree of ſuch a Contractive Force, and Fluidity from a nearly Equal Mixture of the Expanſive and Contractive, according to what hãs been already mentioned. i Rari7? and Denfity, as was likewiſc ſaid before, Conſiſis in a Leſſer or a Greater Number of Parts, Exerting their Expanſive and Contractive Force, in Conjunction, in rthe ſame Space. ] RESILIENCY is, where the Expanſive Force is Vigorous and Strong, but yet is ſo far Tyd down by the Contractive, as nor to Move conſiderably out of the Space, which the Body Poſeſſes; and the Contrary Quality is, where the Contractive entirel Prevails over the Epun ive, which therefore does not obtain in Nature, fince th is no Body, vhich has not Sound or Colour, borh which are Indications of ſome Degree or other of the Expanſive reſiding in it. l : HEAT is manifeſtly Derived from a Great Degree of the Expanſive, and Cold from a Great Degree of the Contractive. E i SMoOTHNESS and Roughneſs many Times Ariſe from the Parts of Bodies, being leſs or more Prominent from their Surfaces, which is of no Conſideration in Philoſophy, excepting in the Corpuſcular; But we may likewiſe farther obſerve, that Bodies, which are Equally Poliſi'd, and whoſe Surfaces to all Appearance are a-like Levigated and Plane, do ſome of them feel Harſher, and others more Olly and Smooth, as in Steel and Ivory or Water, the Former of which ſeems to be Derived from it's Contractive Force being Greater than that of Ivory or Water, and irs Expanſive Force Joined with that Contractive being in a Greater Proportion to the Contractive in Steel than in the others, upon both which Accounts, there will be more Reſiſtance to the Hand, carryd along the Surface, in the Former Caſe than in the Latter; From hence Planes Rubbed, by which the Expanſive is Excited, Feel Smooth, that is, the Hand Slips off, or is Repelled from them. BRITTLENESS appears to Proceed from the Expanſive Force, Acquired from the Fire, by which an eaſier Separation of Matter is made, as in Steel, Glaſs, Brick; and Limberneſs from the Contractive, by which a Divulſion is more Hardly, and with Greater Difficulty performed, as in Iron, Clay, Leather and Paper, which have burt a Small Degree of the Elaſtick or Expanſive. 5. 11. As to Taſis, they are Derived from the Expanſive Force, from whence Solid and Conſiſtent Bodies, which have but a Small Portion of the Expanſive, and which is kept and detained from Exerting it ſel? out of i's own Space by the much Superior Contractive, have little or no Taſt at all. AND AND Spirituous Bodies, or Fermenting ones, as alſo Vegetables, &e. which have the Greateſt Degree of the Expanſive Force, are Endu'd with a very Lively and Vigorous one, and on the Contrary Water, in which the Contractive and Expanſive ſcem to be in an Equilibrium, the Taſt is Flat, Languid, and Inſipid. ACCORDING to the Various Degrees and Proportions of this Expanſive Force, which is Superior to the Contractive, but yet is Joined with it, are our Taſts Diverſify'd, which may be Diſtinguiſd in General into Sweet, Bitter, Sowre, Harſh, and Smooth, and the ſeveral Degrees, Compoſitions, and Combinations of them. SWEET Ariſes from a Greater Degree of the Expanſive Force, and Sowre from a Greater Degree of the Contractive, and ſeem to have the ſame Relation to our Taſl, as Heat and Cold have to our Feeling; For as what is Sweet and Warm gives a Liſe and Vigour to the Mind, ſo vhat is Sowre and Cold makes it Shudder and Tremble: The Reaſon of which can be no other, than that, as there is an Expanſive Force in the Mind Superior to the Contractive in the Airy, ſo accordingly it is Affected with Pleaſure or Pain, as thoſc Forces Agree, and are Coincident with, or are Oppoſite and Contrary to it's ovn; On the other Hand it muſt be likewiſe Confeſsd, that in the Auſtere there is a Contractive Force in the Mind Superior to the Expanſive, by which it's Thoughts are kept and retained together, and which makes it more delighted with Sowre Taſts than with Sweet, with Cold than with Heat, and with Grave and Serious Things more than with what is Light and Trivial; From too Great a Degree of the Expanſive Ariſes Madneſs and a Diſſipation of Thought, and from too Great a Degree of the Contractive Ariſes Melancholy ; Wit, Jovialneſ, and Debonairneſs, are owing to the Former, and Thought, Study, and Contenplation, to the Latter; The Medium betwixt the Airy and the Auſtere is the Juſteſt. WEN I aſfirm Expanſive and Contractive Forces to belong to the Mind, as well as to Matter, I do not affirm, that the Mind is Matter, no more than, when I aſſert, that Fire and Gold have both theſe Forces, I aſert that Fire and Gold are the ſame; So Extenſion is Neceſſary and Eſſential to Body and to Abſtracted Space, which yet are Eſſentially Different. Beſides which, I have given my Reaſons, wherefore I am aſſurd and perſwaded, that the Mind is a Being entirely Spiritual, as it has Thought, Perception, Memory, and Judgment, nothing of which Matter has, and as it has an Innate Force Diſtinct and Separate from it; All which I affirm is, that it has theſe Contractive and Expanſive Forces, and upon which it's Union with Matter does, in Conjunction with what has been before alledgũ, Depend; For altho' their Subſtances Diſfer, yet ſince they agree in their Forces of Expanſion and Contraction, by thoſe it comes to paſs, that they have a Sympathy or Coalition with each other, and are in that Senſc alſo, as in Another, which was there Mentioned, United and Cemented together. TuAT the Mind has an Expanſive Force, and in Diſferent Degrees, is Evident and Maniſeſt, not only from what has been before ſaid, but from the Different Strength, which it Exerts in Percuſſion, in Walking, Running, and in all the Motions and Actions of the Body; That it has likewiſe a Contractive Force is Plain from its Power of Reſtraining, Curbing, or Contracting thoſe Motions. FrROM hence it is, that in Fevers, or in Drinking Spirituous Liquors to Exceſs, in which there is the Greateſt Expanſive Force of the Blood, Madneſs or a Diſſipation of Thought Enſues; And in a Lethargy or Dropſy, or in the Stone in the Kidneys, when the Serum is ſtopt and circulates back with the Blood, that is, vhen there is the Greateſt Contractive Force in it, and it Approaches neareſt to a Stagnancy, a Flatneſs and Languor of Thought is conſequent, and the Expanſive Force of the Mind being Diminiſvd, it Tends to Sleep and to Slumbers; And nothing is found in Experience to Contribute more to the Real and Conſtant Vigour of the Mind, and of the Body, than a Temperate Diet both in Meats and in Drinks, that is, ſuch which have not too Great an Expanſive, nor too Great a Contractive Force in them, or in other, Terms, which are not too Solid and Heavy, or too Light and Spirituous. THE Queſtion with Phyſicians is, in the Two Extremes afore-mentioned, what is the Proper Cure for them; But, without Entering into their Arguments about Acid and Alkali, In both theſe Caſes of a Fever or Madneſs, or of a Dropſy and Le thargy, (for as to the Stone, unleſs the Obſtruction to the Paſage of the Urine thro the tht Urertrs can be Removeã, * is Incutable, of the Fatality of which Diſtermper, have Formerly lad the moſt Melancholy Intance in the Death o my Dearent Fathèr, ont of thie moſt Excellent and Pious of Men) I ſay, in both theſe Caſes, Tut Firt Method, àceording to this Dodtrine of Expanſive and Contractive Forcẽs, to be uſed, is the utmoſt Temperance and Regularity in Meats ahd Drinks, to ſee if Narure will Return to it ſelf, and i's own Proper and Peculia? Forces of Expanſion and Contrution will Prevail, which in all Tikelihood they ill, if theſe Dintumpers are Induced by any Exorbitaney in the uſe of either the Expanſive or Conmactive Forces in Yhem; If this does not prove Effecual, . Fner, In Mudneſs or in Fevers, ſt ſeems to be Reaſonable to think, thãt the to⸗ Great Expanſive Force in the Blood is to be Diminiſvd and Abãted; Not by Taing Blobd avay, becauſt, that which Remains will have the ſame Temper and Craſs; and there will be a Want of it o ſupply a Nourihment to the Body, ànd Which can very hardly be made by any New Digeſtions, vhen the Stomach, the Entrails, the Lactcals, the Veins and AReries, the Lungs and rhe Heart, are in the utmoſt Diſorder, But by Altering the Expanſive Foree of it, in which Conſiſts the mam Difficulty ; for if we Throv Water upon Fire in a ſmall Quantity, it cauſcs ;t to Bum the Fiercer, ĩſ in a Large, it Extingniſes it, but Ait keeps it in a Conſtant and Equable Tenour. Waar therefore ſcèms to be done in this Caſe is, n the Higheſt and Greateſt Fever, Fir't, vo Take the Air, ſo a the Motion, by Rideing in a Chair or Lirrer, ſiould not Excite or Exaſperare the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood, but keep it in ht ſme Temper, in which it is. l THE ne Thing is to be Regular in Diet, and 10 ũſe Nothing, Which has aũ Apparent Exeſi of the Expanſive Force in it. ] AnD the Third to rake Gradually, and by Times, thoſe Things which have tht Greate’t Contractive Foro: in them, as Water, Cooling Draughts, and the Juice of Lemons with the Rind. : j SBCOND, On the Contraty in a Lethargy ot Dropſy, the Contrattive Force of itht Blood is to be Subdued, and to be Raiſed and Excited by Expanſive Forces into ⸗ ũ Circulation. ⸗ nIcu is to be done, Fusr, By a Ttmptratt and Regular Diet, which has nol 106 Great an Expanſive or Contractive Force ĩn it. llll SECoND, By Taking the Ait, and by the Briskeſt and moſt Lively Exerciſes, eithel by Rideing, or Walking, but èſpecially by the Former, und if poſſible, in the Midiſ of Froſt and Snow. i : Tumb, By Making uſe Gradually, and by Times, of Spirituous and Expanſive Li: quors, to Envigorate and Entich th Blood Tuat this Method in Dropſies is a Juſt, one, I have had Experience of, from thi Eeũt it had upon a Fellow of this College, my Good Frient who dyd of ohe who yet, when he was given over by his Phyſicians, vas wonderfully and to every Body's Admiration Reſtored by theſe Preſcriptions, ſo far as to Survive his Imagind Death Three Years, and which, if they had been Purſued, vould have Prevented ⸗ Relapſe of his Diſttmper, which at Length was too Hard and Diſficult for him to Surmount. And I do not Queſtion, if the Method, which I have mention'd in Fèvers, were Followed, but Phyſicians would Find a much Greater Succeſs in theii Practice upon that Malady; This, which I wrote many Years ago, I Perceive is now Confirmed by Dr. Hmtoct's Felrifisgum Mugnum, which is nothing elſt but Water. All Diſtempers or moſt of them ſie betwixt theſe Two Extremes, à Fever or Phrenæj on the one Hand, and a Dropſy or Lethargy, and Melancholy on the other. BUT c Retum to Taſts, SWeet we havi Aſfirmed t6 be õWing ro the Expanſive Force of Bodies, and Sowre 16 the Contractive; And it is Evident, that the Sweet: neſs of Sack has a more Expanſive Forct upon the Mind, that is, Intoxicates and Diſſiputes it more than the Juice of an Apple or a Lemon, as the Heat oſ Fife Creates a Greater Diſorder in it than the Severity of a Froſn, the Fir?t of which is an Expanſive Force and the Laſt a Contractivec. And from hence, as was ſaid beſore; it is, that Phlegmarick Perſons, or thoſe, who have a Greater Degree of the Conrractive Force in their Conſtitutions, are more Pleaſed with Cold Weathet, and thoſ who are more Sanguine, with Heat and with Fire; which vill alſo give a Reaſon/ vhy vhy the World will be always Divided, ſo long as there are theſe Two Principles in our Natures; The Witty, the Chearful, and Lively, under what Denominations of Religion or Learning ſoever, will be Averſe to the Serious, the Grave, and the Contemplative, and theſe to the Others, From the Difference of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Them. IF thereſore Sweet is Derived ſrom the Expanſi ve, and Sowre fiom the Conmaiv Bitter, which is a Mixture of Both, will Proceed from a Mixture of thoſe Forces; Which is the Reaſon, that Bitters in General are Found and Experimented to be Wholeſome and Salutary to us, eſpecially, that of the Bark of Peru, in Agues and Intermitting Fevers, where the Expanſive and Contractive Forces are in a Perſeœt Struggle, and have in a Manner an Equal Contention with cach other, which is maniſeſt from the Hot and Cold Fits, the Conſtant Attendants of that Diſtemper. TuE Way of Operation thereſore of this Grand Specifick in Medicine ſeems to be by it's Applying both to the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the Blood, and Subduing the Exceſſes oſ both of them by thoſe Innate Forces. of Expanſion and Contraction, of which it is Compounded, the Expanſive Force of the Blood, by the Contractive of the Bitter, and the Contractive Force of the Blood, by the Expanſive of it, But being more Expanſive than Contractive, it's Greateſt Influence is upon the Contrative of the Blood, from whence theſe Diſtempers ſeem to Ariſe. A Smooth Taſt, as that of Oĩl, and a Rigid or an Harh one, as that of a Sloe Ariſe from the ſame kind of Forces, which belong to Bodies which Feel ſo, in like Manner, as Sweet and Sovre are to Taſt, wvhat Warm and Cold are to our other Senſations; and conſcquently, the Harſineſs of Taſt appears to be Derived from a Greater Contractive Force in the Sloe, Compared vith that of Oil, and a Greater Expanfive Force in the Sloe, Compared with the Contractive of it, than in the Oil Compared vith it's Contractive; the Greater Expanſive will make it ſtrike with more Force upon the Palate, and the Greater Contractive will make that Force of a leſs Seet or Fiery Nature, and bring it nearer to a Sowre or a Cold; and that this is the Caſe of Oil and the Juice of Sloes is preuy Evident, ſince the Firſt is Inflammable, and the Laſt the Contrary., 5. 12. THE next Accidental Property of Matter is that of Smells, which likewiſe may be much Better Accounted for, from theſe Contractive and Expanſive Forces, than from any Imaginary Effluviums Whatſoever, the Abſurdity of which in the Firſt Part of the Principles of Philoſophy, I have Endeavoured to ſiew; For if there is an Expanſive Force in Bodies, and that in Various Degrees, where that Expanſive Force is kept down to the Surface or Space, in which it Exiſts, by a Superior Contractive, there will no Smell Enſue, and this is the Caſe of Metals and Minerals. But where the Expanſive Force is Superior to the Contractive, as in Spirituous Bodies or Fermenting ones; and in Vegetables, Smells are Produced; for by their Brisk and Lively Adtion upon the ther, from their Expanſive Force in Conjunction vith their Contractive, they ſpread their Impreſſion round them, without any Dimipution of their Parts by Eſuviums, and are always prepared to Excite the ſame Senſations in us. Thus alſo, where the Contractive is Superior to the Expanſive, if yet the Expanſive is Vigorous and Quick in it's Action, Smells may be Excited in us, as in Odorous Woods, and other Solid Bodies, which ſend a Perfume from them. BuUT in Water, where the Contractive and Expanſive ſeem to be in an Exact ZEquilibrium, and in Fire, where the Expanſive has little and an almoſt Imperceptible Contractive Joſnd vith it, as well as before in Solids, which have little and an almoſt Imperceptible Expanſive, ve do not Experience any Smellss And yer, if by Fermentation an Expanſive Force is added to Water, or to Metals, or to Minerals, or if to Fire a Contractive, Smells are Produced; Thus Stagnant Waters by being Agitated by the Rays of the Sun, and Metals and Minerals, b their Diſſolution in Spirit of Nitre, become Fœtid, and any Thing burnt in the Focus of a Lens does allo Emitt a Smell Agrecable to the Subſtance, which is Inflamed. From all vhich it is manifeſt, that there muſt be a Great Degree of the Expanſive Force, and that it muſt be Joind with a Good Degree of at Contractive to produce the Senſation oſ Smell in us. THE TuE Reaſon of which is Evident, becauſe an Entirely Contractive, it is Plain, cannot do it; nor an Entirely Expanſive, without a ſufficient Force of the Contractive, to Mo: derate and Allay the Violence of it; becauſe otherwiſe it would not. Affect our Organs of Smelling in a Certain Degree Requiſite for that Senſation, but would Confound and Diſorder them by it's Exceeding Expanſiveneſs and Volatility; And an Expanſive and Contractive in an æquilibrium, as in Water, cannot Exert it ſelf enough outwards. li : SMELLS may be Diſtinguiſd into Fragrant and into Fœtid, or Pleaſing and Offenſive, with the ſeveral Intermediate Degrees of them. FRAGRANCY or Perfume is owing to a Greater Degree of the Expanſive Forcẽ, in Conjunction with a Leſ Degree of the Contractive, by which it Acts upon the ZAther, and by it upon our Noſtrils; And from hence it is, that moſt Flovers have an Agrecable Smell to us, and if Bruſhd, by which their Expanſive Force is Gently Raisd and Excited, that Fragrancy becomes Stronger and more Vivid; Thus Steel or the String of an Harp, when ſtruck, is thrown into a Multitude of Vibrations. j FroM hence likeviſe in the Spring, vhen the Graſs and Flowers are Young and Vigorous, and their Expanſive Force Active and Lively, and when the Air is in it's Freſheſt Temper, and it's Elaſticity Strong, by a mutual Acting upon one another, there is a peculiar Fragrancy Raiſed, and the Whole Air ſeems to be Perfumed by it. ; : VEron the ſame Cauſe are produced all thoſe Delightful Smells, vhich we meet vith in the Fields, in the Summer Time, or in the Harveſt, namely, from. the Expanſive Force of the Bloſſoms, of Corn and Fruits, with which we are every where Entertained, and from the Expanſive Force of the æther and the Sun's Rays, eſpe: cially, vhen Attended with ſome Moiſture or a Contractive Force, according tq what has been already Mentionedd i Tnus alſo in Woods and Spices, whichi grow in Hot Countries, ſuch as Cedar, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, and in Fruits, ſuch as Lemons, Oranges, Citrons; and the like there is a Peculiar Fragrancy, upon Account of the Expanſive Force Impreſ'd upon them from the Extraordinary Heat of the Sun in thoſe Climates, with which they continually Act againſt the Contractive Forces in their Sowre Juices, by which they are detained, and upon the leaſt Friction or Rubbing, the Expanſive Force Raiſei and Exerts it ſelf into Action, and thereby Excites the Pleaſing Senſations we Receive from thoſe Bodies. l LastLy, A Purulent Matter, produced from the Beaver, at Firſt has a Fœtid and Diſagrecable Smell, but being for ſome Time Expoſed in the Heat of the Sun Rays, it at length Changes to a Tolerable one, and afterwards is Endued with a moſt Extraordinary Fragrancy, which cannot be owing to any Thing, excepting the Expanſive Force Impreſsd upon it from the Suns Action, and this is what is called Musk, and is of much the ſame kind with Civer. Amber-Greaſe is ſuppoſed to be Formed from the Excrement of the Sea, which it throws off and ſeparates from it ſclſf by it's Exceeding Working and Fermentation, and probably has therefore at Firſt a Stinking and Loathſome Smell, as other Water has upon a like Emergence of it's more Corrupted Parts, but afterwards, by being Envigorated from the Heat of the Suns Rays, it Acquires in all likelihood an Expanſive Force, from whence it's Fragrancy is Derived. j r i AND, as we have made a Fragrancy of Smell to Procecd ſfrom a Greater Degree of the Expanſive Force, Acting with a Leſs Degree of the Contractive, ſo it is Reaſonable to Think, that a Fœtor, or Loathſomeneſs of it, muſt be owing to a Greater Degree of the Contractive Actuated by a Leſs Degree of the Expanſive. TuUSs in the ſeveral Caſes now Recited, if Flowers, or Bloſſoms, or Fruits, which before were Fragrant, or Spices and Odorous Woods, are Bruiſed or Beaten, and Pounded to a Good Degree, by which their Spring and Elaſticity, or Expanſive Force is Diminiſ'd and Broken, and their Contractive more obtains, they loſe their Delicate Perfume, and ſomerimes change into a Smell, which is Diſagrecable and Oſfenſive; And in Musk, whilſt the Contractive Prevails in it's Purulency, and is Excited by a Small Expanſive, the Smell is Stinking and Nauſcous, as is even that of Flowers, as Poppies, when they are of a Soporiſick, Col, and Contractive Nature. r Tni Tis alſo Manifeſt, that Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, which Conſiſt of a Strong Contractive, Excited by an Expanſive, produce a Fœtid Smell, as do likewiſe Metals, Lead, eſpecially, when in Fuſion, the like do Salt-Petre, and Gun-powder, which is made of it, vhen Agitated by the Expanſive, and Glue when Heated, all which in their ovn Nature have a ſufficient Degree of the Contractive Force belonging to them, and ſend forth a moſt Fœtid Smell; And Moſt Solid and Combuſtible Sub ſtances, the more they have of the Contractive, are the more Offenſive in the Smell, which they Emit. TuE Contractive Force of Hair, or of Wool, which are made from thoſe Juices of Animals, which have the utmoſt Phlegm and Tenacity in them, when Excited by the Expanſive Force of Fire, as a Tough Phlegm in General Raiſed into Action the ſame vay, vill create a moſt Nauſeous Smell from the Expanſive Force Communicated to them; Pit-Coal, which has a leſs Contractive Force, will create a lels Nauſcous one, as having more of the Oil, Sulphur, and Inflammable, or Expanſive, and leſs oſ the Phlegm and the Contractive; Wood, as having ſomething of the Expanſive Force oſ the Vegetable, will create a ſtill leſs Nauſeous Smell to us upon it's being Inflamd; and Straw or Stubble, which has ſtill leſs of the Contractive, the Ieaſt of all. THE Smells, which I have hitherto taken Notice of, are ſuch, which all or the Generality Agree to be Fragrant, or Fœtid, and which ſeem, the one to Pleaſe and Rejoyce the Mind, and the other to be Nauſeous and Offenſive to it; Becauſe the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Mind have ſuch a Certain Degree, to which the Firſt are more Suited and Adapted, and the Laſt of too Phlegmatick and Contractive a Temper for it to Reliſh, or Like it's Impreſſions. As to other Smells, which Ariſe from Intermediate Forces of Expanſion and Contraction, they are Approved or Rejected by the Mind, according to the Various Proportions of the Expanſive and Contractive, which belong to it. Tnus, as in Taſts, ſo likewiſe in Smells, and even in Perfumes, thoſe which are Plcaſing to Minds, which have a certain kind of Delicacy from the Expanſive Force of them, ſhall be hateful to others, which have a more Robuſt Expanſive, that is, which Conſiſts of a Greater Degree of the Contractive join'd with a Strong Expanſive, to which more Rancid Smells ſhall be the Better Perfume; which ſeem to be the Two Caſes of an Elegant and a Polite Perſon, and whoſe Parts are Fine and Expanſive, and of a Plain and Hardy Soldier, whoſe Genius is Great, Commanding and Diffuſive, from the Expanſive Force of his Mind, and Solid, and Grave, and Serious from the Contraction of it; The Firſt of which Tempers cannot be better Repreſented than by the Characters we have of the Poliſ'd Age of Auguſtus, and the Laſt than by thoſe of the Firſt and Antient Romans, ho would Prefer a Leek or an Onion to all the Refined Taſts or Smells in the World. ꝗ. 13. FRoM Taſts and Smells we ſhall Proceed to Sounds, which likewiſe may be Explained from theſe Forces of Expanſion and Contraction, and the Various Degrees and Combinations of them: And in this Caſe, the Quickeſt and Livelieſt Sounds are Produced from the Greateſt Expanſive or Elaſtick Force, joind with a Leſs Contractive, and the Dulleſt and Heavieſt from the Greateſt Contractive Force, join'd vith a Leſs Expanſive. LET us Firſt take thoſe Sounds, which are Termed Muſical, and it is very Evident, the Quicker the Vibration of any String in Muſick is, that is, the Stronger the Expanſivè Force, and the Leſs the Contractive, the Acuter and Sharper the Sound is; and on the Contrary, the Heavier and Duller the Vibration is, the Sound is in like manner Graver; The Nature of which Sounds are not to be Aſcertain'd from the Vibrations of the Strings or the Bodies, which are ſupposd to Produce them, but from the Innate Force and, Velocity, which each would have in one Point only; The Quicker or Slower Vibrations are only Conſequences of ſuch Innate Forces, and each of them will occaſion Like and Similar Sounds from the Beginning to the End of their Motion, as Proceeding from the ſame Cauſes, namely, their Peculiar and Diſtinct Forces; As to the Vibrations themſelves, they do no more than continue the Ringing or Repeating the ſame Sound in our Ears, and therefore Sound does not Conſiſt in them, tho the Continuance of the ſame Sound does; tis nothing more than if a Sharp Percuſſion or an Heavier was made upon the ther in a Point, a Line, Line, or a Surface, for the Producing of the Senſation of Differing Sounds in us, and the Tremulous Motion has no other Effect, than that of Repeating the ſame kind of Senſation to our Minds, which will be the ſame, tho this Force were to At in a Point only, or in a Longer or Shorter Vibration, and which will fully Explain that Grand Difficulty in the Theory of Sounds, how it comes to Paſs, that the Sound of the ſame Muſical String continues the ſame thro all it's Vibrations, be they Shorter or Longer. WE may here add the Reaſon, which has not been given in any Philoſophy, why an Elaſtick Force in Bodies is Attended with a Vibration upon Percuſſion, namely, becauſe ſuch a Body is Compounded of an Expanſive and Contractive Force; The Expanſive therefore being Raiſed by the Expanſive of Percuſſion Reſults to the ſtroke, and is Dravn back by the Contractive, which not being able to Retain it, it again Recoils by the Force, which the Percuſſion Excited in it, and is again Drawn back by the Contractive, the Elaſtick Medium aſſiſting in this Vibration, till the whole Force of the Original Percuſſion is ſpent, and the Expanſive and Contractive remain at Reſt in their Firſt Point or Surface. FROM the Muſical Notes upon Strings, if we Proceed to thoſe of Voices, the ſame Expanſive and Contractive Forces will prevail in the Solution of theſe Phænomenons; For the Quicker or Brisker the Air or Ather is ſtruck, not by the Epiglottis, which continues always open, for our Conſtant Breathing, excepting when any Thing is Conveigh'd over it into the Stomach, in which Caſe it Cloſes, but by the Muſcular and Animal, and Elaſtick Motion of the Lungs, and the Aſperia Arteria, Derived from the Expanſive of the Mind, the Shriller and Sharper the Voice is. So ve find it, vhen there is the Extremeſt Emotion in the Mind from any Fright or Ailment, which is brought upon it, and when it's Expanſive Force is Excited in the Greateſt Degree to Repell the Grievance, that it Exerts it ſelf upon the Muſcles, and the Rough Artery, and thoſe by the Elaſtick Force, which is Communicated to them from the Mind, Act upon the Air in the Cavity of the Aſperia Arteria, which occaſions the Shricks and Screams, and the Sharpeſt Noiſes, which we hear upon ſuch Emotions. Tnis Exceeding Expanſive Force of the Mind joined with the Contractive Force of the Muſcles, which it Raiſes and Excites, and from them Strikes upon the Contiguous Air in the Rough Artery, is the Cauſe of the utmoſt Shrillneſs in Sounds, which we Experience: On the Contrary, where the Mind is but dully Affected, and where the Spirits are Sunk and Low, where the Activity of it is not ſo Great, and the Muſcles are not Moved by it with that Quickneſs and Vivacity, the Air, Included in the Lungs and the Aſpera Arteria, finds a more Languid Percuſſion, and conſe quently gives a Graver and Deader Sound to the Ear, which proceeds from the Greater Power of the Contractive. AND this is the Reaſon, vhy Men can Fall and Raiſe their Voices at Pleaſure, and Change them into a Thouſand Different Notes, according as the Mind thinks fit to Exert more or leſs of it's Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which belong to it, and by them Act upon the Muſcles for their Expanſion or Contraction, from Whence Different Velocities are Communicated to the Air, and from it to the Tympanum, by which that Variety of Sounds, which we Perceive, is produced in us. HENCE it is, that Children and Young Perſons, vhoſe Spirits are Brisker and Livelier, and whoſc Expanſive Force of Mind is Gayer and Quicker, as well as that of the Muſcles, and therefore is in a Greater Proportion to the Contractive of them, in their Voices have a Shriller and Sharper Note. Bur in Perſons, vho are Grown up, and are more Advanced in Years, and in whom a Gravity of Thought, and a Greater Contractive Force obtains both in the Mind, and in the Muſcles, in Proportion to the Expanſive, by which Means the Air is ſtruck by the Organs of the Voice with a more Solid, but a leſs Elaſtick Force, a Graver Tone prevails; Another and a Concurrent Cauſe of the Difference in Voices is the Narrowneſs or Wideneſs, that is, the Contraction or Expanſion of the Larynx by the Muſcles of it. For which Reaſons alſlo Women have Voices, vhich are Generally Shriller than Mens are. FrOM the ſame Principles may the Cauſe be Derived, wherefore ſome Sounds are Har and Unplcaſing to us, and others Harmonious and Muſical; For if the Expanſive or Contractive Force, whether in Vocal or Inſtrumental Sounds, is Strained E 0n to an unnatural Degree it Produces Sounds, which are Diſgrecable, bur i? it is Exerted within certain Limits, ſo as not to Proceed from a Violence upon our Natures, nor ſo as to ofſer a Violence to them, ſuch anExpanſive or Contractive Force occaſions Sounds, which are Harmony and Muſick to us. Tnus a Shriek or a Scream, which Proceeds from too Great and Violent an Agiration ſfrom the Expanſive, and an Hoarſeneſs, vhich Proceeds ſrom too Great a Degree of the Contractive, as in Colds, which are owing to an Exceſs oſ the Contractive, Produce Sounds, which are not Pleaſing to us; And the ſame may be ſaid oſ the Strings in Muſick, where the one has a ſqueaking Sound from too Great an Expanſive Excited in it, and the other an Hoarſe Baũs ſfrom too Great a Contractive. Fror the like Merhods of Reaſoning ve alſo knov, that where Perſons have a Greater Contractive Force in their Minds, and in their Muſcles, the Inſtruments oſ their Motion, Fhe Baſs is more Agreeable to them; and thus we find in Experience, that thoſe, who are more Grave and Tragical in their Thoughts, are more Pleaſcd and Delighted with ſuch Muſick; And on the Contrary, thoſe, who are more Brisk and Airy, and have more of the Expanſive in their Minds, like the Quicker and Briker Sounds much Better. We muſt farther Obſerve, that thoſe Sounds are likeviſe Eſtcemd Muſical by us, which Approach the neareſt to Human Voices, or the Modulations oſ them, as being Naturally Delighted moſt with what Agrees with, or Comes neareſt to, our ovn Species, and for the ſame Reaſon, Vocal Muſick has Generally the Preſorence vith us to Inſtrumental; Thus, the Barking of a Dog, or the Roaring oſ a Lion, vas never thonght to be very Harmonious, but the Notes of Birds Extremely ſo. From hence alſo iĩt is Plain, why there is a Sympathy in Uniſons, ſo that upon the Striking of the one, the other Trembles; For upon the Percuſſion of the Uniſon, Ir, by it's Natural and by it's Innate Force of Expanſion joined with the Contractive, vhich it Excites, Reſults to that Percuſſion, by which means there is an Impreſſion made upon the Air or ther, which likeviſe, having a Certain Degree of the Expmnſive and Contractive Force, Reſults or Recoils an the Uniſon, and this Reciprocal Percuſſion of rhe Uniſon upon the Air or æther, and of rhe Air or ther upon the Uniſon, is the Cauſc of that Particular Vibration we Perceive, and which Vibration will continue, till the Original Force Impreſ”'d upon the Uniſon, from the Expanſive Foree oſ the Mind, and of the Muſcles, which it maes uſe of in ſuch a Percuſſion, is ſpent: For, if ve conſider exactly, hov ean it be Imagind, that any other Eſſect ſiould proceed from the Percuſfion of the Uniſon, unleſs the Reſule of it peculiar to that Innate Pegree of Expanſion or Elaſticity, which it has, againſt which the Contractive Force of the String, and of the Centers of the String's Tenſion Re-acts? This Contention betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive Force of tlie Uniſon Raiſes a like Conteſt in the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of rhe Ait or ther abour it, ſince the Air or Ether is ſo Formed and Diſpoſcd, as to be ſuſceptible of any Impre ſſions, from whence it becomes Expanſive by Heat and Contractive by Cold, and according to the Various Actions it Receives and Conveys, Odorons, Coloured; and Sonorous. TuiS thereſore being Allowed, as it ſeems to be Certain, ĩt is Evident, thar when the Ar or /ther around has the ſame Percuſſion given to it by the Uniſon, which is plain ſrom our Hearing the Sound of it every Way, the like Effect will be Produced by the Air's Acting upon another Uniſon, which has the ſame Degree of the Expanſive ard Contractive Force vith that, which it Receives from the Former. But this Reciprocal Percuſlion of the Uniſon and Air or Ether, being of a Peculiar Force, Compounded of one Partieular Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive; From hence it is, that it Aſfects by is Motion no other String, but what has the ſame Expanſive and Contractive Force vith it. WE may likewiſc from theſe Principles give an Account, why in General Sound is Stronger, hen Impreſd upon a Thicker Medium of Air or ther, and Diminiſvd, vhen Impreſſ'd upon a Thinner; Becauſe the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Air or ſther, is in the Former Caſe thereby Increasd, and in the Latter Impaired and Leſſen'd; for in the Former Caſe, the Expanſive Force is Increas'd, by the ncreaſe of iv's Elaſticity, and the Contractive, by it's Compreſſion and Denſity, bur but vhere the ſame Percuſſion is made upon a Greater Expanſive and Contractive Force the Sound vill be the Greater; Thus, if we ſtrike upon a Solid Body with the ſame Fotce, as we do npon Wool or a Feather, the Sound will be much Greater in the Firſt Inſtance, than in the Laſt. FrROM hence farther is Manifeſt, the Reaſon why the Sound is Increas'd in the Speaking Trumpet, as it is in any Inſttument of Vocal Muſick whatſoever; becanſe the Percuſſion of the Voice is made, nor upon mere Air or ther, but upon Bodies, which have a Greater Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive, by which means, the Sound becomes more Solid and Strong; and the more Parts are Affected, and Struck, which will be the Larger the Cavity is, the Greater will be the Sound, that is, it the Cavity is not ſo Large, as that the Force of the Voice cannot reach it with it's full Strength and Vigour. FrROM this Percuſſion of the Voice upon Elaſtick Bodies, Proceeds the Ringing and Ecchoing Noiſes, ve always find in Choirs, eſpecially in Cathedrals, which are Antient, and whoſe very Walls and Rooſs have Acquired from the Air, by a Long Tract of Time, a more Peculiar Rigidneſs and Elaſticity, ſor in New Buildings, we do not Experience the ſame Sonorouſneſs. FARTHER, The Propagation of Sound is likewiſe Explained from this Doctrine, and the Immediate Ceaſing of it, at a Nearer or Greater Diſtance from the Sonorous Body, upon the Vibration of it Ceaſing. Tuu Firſt is Explicated from this Plain Axiom, that where there is a Percuſſion upon Ait ot ſther every way, as there is from the Sonorous Body, which Trembles and Vibrates, not from à Line, or an Axis, but from a Center every vay, that Air or ther will ſtrike that which is Contiguous to it, which likeviſe vill Vibrate every way, and Communicate it's Impreſſions all around, to a certain Diſtance, whete the Force is Spent and Loſt; which Diſtance is More or Leſs, according to the Force and Strength of the Percuſſion, which Depends upon the Proportion, which there is of the Expanſive and Contractive in the Sonorous Body; thus the Sound of àa Bell will be hcard Farther than an Harp or a Violin, becauſe there is a Greater Degree oſ the Expanſive and Contractive, in the Former Caſe, than in the Latter. FroM hence alſo Sound may be Propagated thro' a Solid Body, becauſe Percuſ fion may be, and the ſtriking of one Part upon another, in the ſame Way and Man ner, as in Air or æther. TuE Laſt is alſo Evident, becauſe where Percuſſion, which is the Cauſe of Sound Ceaſes, the Eſſect, which is Sound, will Ceaſe at the ſame Time. Tuus ſfar ve have conſidered Sounds, which are Termd Muſical, and have Endeavoured to ſiew how they are Derived from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of Matter; We ſhall now Proceed to other Sounds, and from them Demonſtrate ftill farther the Truth of this Doctrine. AnD Firſt, where there is a Great Expanſive Force, and a Small Degree of the Contractive, there is no Sound Produced, as in the Rays of the Sun, the Flame of Fire, a Lamp, or a Candle, the Reaſon of which is, becauſe there is no Reſiſtance mde to ſuch Percuſſions, the Air or Ather on the Contrary Joins with, and Aſſiſs and Promotes theſe Actions. ON the other Hand, where there is à Great Degree of the Contractive, as in Solid Bodies no Sound is Conſequent, becauſe the Air or ther has a Preſſure, as ell as an Elaſticity, by which it Concurrs with the Contractive Force of them. Bur if a Contractive Force, as Water, or a Solid Body, as Fuel, is thrown upon Fire, a Sound is Produc'd, becauſe their Actions do not Congurr, but there is a Reciprocal Percuſſion upon each other, and a mutual Reſiſtance. FrOM hence it is, that if ve Move our Hand in Air no Sound Ariſcs, becauſe there is no ſenſible Reſiſtance to the Motion oſ it, but if we Strike the Air or Ether with an Expanſive Force, Joined with a Contractive, to which it Reſiſis, as in the Caſc of a Svitch or a Wand, a Sound Enſues. FroM all which it is Plain, as we have before Aſerted, that there muſt be a cer tain Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive, Acting upon Air or ther, to Pro luce the Senſation of Sound in us. WhicH Whaicu is farther Conſirmed from what is Experienc'd in the Exploſion of GunPowder, which Striking upon the Air or Ether, with the Expanſive Force of Fire Joined with the Contractive of Nitre, is Reſiſted by it, and by that Percuſſion, which always ſuppoſcs a Reſiſance or Re-action to the Percuſſion, the Mind comes to be Informed of the Contraſt there is betwixt them, by the Sound Produced from ſuch Action or Re-action, but the Sound is Small, as the Reſiſftance is ſo, when the Exploſion of Gun-Powder is made in Open Air. ON the Contrary, when the ſame Expanſive and Contractive Force is Included in a Cannon, or a Mortar, or in a Rock, the Prodigious Expanſive Force of the GunPovder, Joined with the Small Contractive oſ it, Striking againſt the Vaſt Contractive and the Small Expanſive Force of the Canon or Mortar, or the Rock, there is the Greateſt Oppoſition, which is Poſſible, betwixt theſe Forces, and conſequently the Greateſt Sound is Produced from them, becauſe the Force of Percuſſion is the Greateſt. MorEOVER the Small and Gentle, tho' Quick and Lively Percuſſions oſ the Strings of an Harp, vould not Produce Sound, unleſs they ſtruck upon the Air or æther in Various Degrees, and were variouſly Reſiſted by ĩt; for if the Air or ſEther vas entirely Obedient to the Impreſſions of theſe Elaſtick Strings, and did not Recoil and Reſult upon them, there could be no more Sound from them, than there is from the Flame of a Lamp or a Candle, Tnus alſo in Hard and Conſiſtent Bodies, what is the Reaſon that we hear a Sound upon the Percuſſion of them? Unleſs that the Expanſive Force of the Percuſſion, Derived from the Expanſive Force of the Mind, Raiſes the Expanſive Force of the Solid Body, which before lay Dormant by the Superior Contractive, which Oppreſ™'d it, and thereby Exerts it ſelf more Strongly and Powerfully upon the Air or Ether, hich again Recoils upon it, and at the ſame time Strikes the Tympanum of the Ear by its Elaſticity, and Informs the Mind from thence of the Struggle or Competition, which it has with the Percuſſion Derived from it; for if the Expanſive Force of the Body only ſtruck the Air or Ather, as it does in Colour, without a Reſiſtance from it, the Cauſe of Sound and Colour vould be much the ſame, which it is plain they are not, ſince there may be a very Lively Colour, as in Flame, where yet there is no Sound hich accompanys it; And that the Expanſive of the Air or ZEther, upon the Percuſſion of the Body, muſt likewiſe Act by it's Elaſtick Force both vays is Evident, becauſe otherwiſe no Impreſſion could be Communicated to the Ear; And this Doctrine is Confirmed in Fact, ſince we find that any Elaſtick Force, as that of the String of an Harp, or the Tone of a Bell, which does Communicate Sound, does Vibrate and Tremble, and Imparts it's Percuſſions all the ways, which arc Imaginable. : FrOM hence it is, that iſ we Strike a more Elaſtick Body, as a Stone, or a Marble, it Will Reſult upon the Air or Ather more ſtrongly from that Percuſſion, and conſcequently cauſc a Brisker or Livelier Sound to us, than if the ſame Force of Per cuſſion is given to a Leſs Elaſtick Body, as Lead, which Produces to us a Flatter and a Deader; Steel upon Percuſſion Recoils more ſtrongly than Iron, Silver than Gold, Metals than Stone, and Stone than Clay or Earth, for the ſame Reaſon; and conſcquently, the one Produce Sounds more Quick and Alert than thoſe of the other; And even in the Animal World, Noiſes are Produced from Mutual Quarrels and Conteſts, and Silence from Acquieſcence. Tnus alſo, if Percuſſions are made with Different Forces upon the ſame Body, the Greater the Expanſive Force of Percuſſion is, the Greater will be the Expanſive of the Body upon Air or ther, it will be ſo much the more Excited and Raiſed into Action, and by Conſequence vill occaſion a ſtronger Sound to our Senſation; For, if we Strike a Stone or a Marble with a Leſs Force of Percuſſion, it will Produce a Leſs Sound, and if with a Greater, a more Intenſce one, and the ſame obtains in Lead, or in any other Dodies. s. 14. FROM Sounds if ve Proceed to Light and Colours, and the Refractions nd Reſſexions of them, we ſniall ſind, that the Expanſive and Contractive do here ſikewiſe Prevail, and that they are Entirely derived from theſe Forces. Lionr, as that of the Sun, of Fire, of the Flame of a Lamp or a Candle, is nanifeſtly owing to the Expanſive Force oſ thoſe Luminous Bodies, which, Striking upon upon Air or æther, Produce the Senſations of a Vivid Yellow, or Orange in ns; BY Air or æther, I here, and all_along, mean a certain ſubtile Medium, which is' ſuſceptible of theſe Various Percuſſions from Bodies, and of vhich all the World is: Full, which is Endued with a Degree of Action and Elaſticity, by which it Communicates the Impreſſions, made upon it, to our Senſations, from the moſ Diſtant Parts of the Univerſe. Tuo this Medium is Alterd and Changed in it's Force by other Forces, which Mix with it, eſpecially near the Sun, or the fixt Stars, the Earth, or the Planets, and the Various Comets, which belong to our or any other Solar Syſtem; which Forces, which mix with it, are Different, according to the Different Expanſive and Contractive Forces, of which the Sun, or the Star, or the Planet, or the Comet, is Compounded; From which Diverſe and Sundry Mixtures their ſeveral Atmoſpheres are Formed. Tuus the Atmoſphere about the Sun muſt be of an Exceeding Expanſive Nature, and that about our Earth, in Compariſon vith it, of a more Sullen, Heavy, and Contræctive, and as 10 the Moon, ir ſeems to have None at all; That Body being in all Probability nothing more than a Vaſt and Stupendous Rock, Mountainous and Cragęy, Placed near the Earth, by the Great and All-wiſe Creator, for the Reſlexion of Light, the Raiſing of Tides, and it's Drawing forth of Plants and Vegetables, by it's Contractive Force in Conjunction with the Expanſive of the Sun, and for a Source of Froſt and Cold, or the Contractive, as the Sun is of Heat and the Expanſive; and vhich ſeems to be the Deſign of the ſame Infinitely Intelligent Being, in Reſpect of Saturn's Ring, and His, and Jupiter's, Satellites, and all thoſe, which are called Secondary Planets, with Regard to their Primary. BUT allowing for the Variety of Atmoſpheres, Ariſing from the Different Natures of the Bodies which they Surround, it is Reaſonable to think, that the whole Univerſe is filled with one Uniform Active Medium, Ordained and Produced by rhe Expanſive Force of the Infinite Mind, which Medium is capable of Tranſmitting the Actions of one Body 10 another, tho' at an Immenſe Diſtance. For how can any one Conceive, that Bodies ſiould Act upon one another by Percuſſion, which is the Preſent Caſe, without any thing to Conduct or Convey the Action? We may as well Affirm, that we can See, or Hear, or Taſt, or Smell, without any Impreſſion made upon our Organs of Senſation, as that any Percuſſion ſhould be Communicated from one Body to another, without a Medium to Tranſmit the Force which is Impreſ'd. IN Anſwer to this it is Affirmed, that Light is a Body, and that it is Emitted from the Sun, and Arrives to us in 7 or 8 Minutes of Time, from Obſervations made upon the Eclipſes of Yupiter's Satellites, and that it always is Propagated in a Direẽt Line, all which are ſuppoſed to be Arguments, that Light does not Proceed from a Tercuſſion upon a Medium, but from an Emanation of it from the Luminous Subſtance; Becauſe, if it was by a Percuſſion upon the Medium, Light, conſidered in it ſelf, would not be a Body, nor would it be Emitted from the Sun, nor, as it is Apprehended, would it come to us in a certain Proportion of Time, but in an Inſtant, nor would it be Propagated in a Direct Line, but would be Diſfuſed into all the Parts of the Medium, upon Vhich the Impreſſion is made; In Refuration of which ve ſay, FirsT, That Light may have ſcveral of the Properties, which belong to Body, if it is Produc'd by a Percuſſion of the Expanſive Force of the Sun upon the Medium, vhich is Spread and Extended thro' the whole Univerſe, is Confeſſed; Becauſe the Medium, vhich is Excited by ſuch an Expanſive Force, is Body, and is Endued vith the Various Properties and Affections of it, and Light in this Caſe is the Medium thus Excited. SECOND, Light is alſo Emitted from the Sun, by it's being Derived from and Oweing to the Percuſſion of it's Expanſive Force upon ſuch a Medium, by which it is Propagated to all the Parts of it's Syſtom; But to ſuppoſc Light to be an Emanation of the Particles of the Sun, thro' a Void Space, and that thoſe Particles are carry'd ith that Exceeding Velocity, as to come from thence to us in 7 or 8 Minutes of Time, is ſomething Incredible, and has many Difficulties Attending it. TFox For Firſt, in ſeveral Thouſand Years, by ſuch a Vaſt and Continual Eſlux oſ Part: in every Minute, it vould be Impoſſible, that the whole Body of the Sun ſould not be entirely Waſted and Conſumed, and if all the Comets in the World were to Fall into it, as no Body knows, that ever any one did, it would not be a ſuſi cient Aliment for ſuch a Prodigious Expence of it's Particles, as ſould every Minure and every Inſtant ſucceſſively Fill the whole Orb of the Solar Syſiem, and perhap: ſeveral Millions of Miles beyond it. BESIDES, What becomes of theſe Particles? Here is in ſome Thouſands of Years, in all Probability as many Particles ſent out from the Sun, as would Conſtiture a Maſs a Million or Ten Hundred Million Times Bigger than the whole Body of it, and yet no one can tell, where they are Lodged; not in the Air or Ether, for there is no ſenſible Increaſe of it's Denſity, nor in the Earth, the Moon, or the Planets, or fixt Stars, which we do not ſind Receive any Material Augmentation to their Bulk; So that in this Way of Philoſophy, there are Millions and Millions of Particles of Matter, and even of whole Suns, are Spent and Exhauſted by Light, and no Mortal can ſay, where they are, or give any more Account of them, than if they had Really and Entirely Vaniſhd. MorEOVER, For any Particles of Matter to be carryd, ſeveral Millions of Miles, by a Local Motion, in 7 or 8 Minutes of Time, is ſo Contrary to all the Phænomenons of Nature, that to mention it only is to Explode it; And ſuch an Aſlerrion only Proceeds ſrom this Philoſophys maintaining a Vacuum, which could never Inſorm us of ſuch a Being, as the Sun, unleſs it ſent it's Emiſſaries ſo many Millions oſ Miles in every Inſtant of Time to Tell us of it; For we do not Experience or know of any ſuch or the like Velocities in Being. And here I muſt ſay, that the Greateſt Effecis in Nature are Produced by Silent and Unheeded Cauſes, and we may, I believe, Affirm, that, in General, the Reaſon, vhy we Underſtand ſo little of Nature is, becauſe we are apt to Attribute every Effect to ſome Extraordinary Violence, made uſe of 10 Produce it, whereas Nature Acts by Gentle Methods, and almoſt, many Times, Undiſcernible and Imperceptible ones to us, and that muſt be the trueſt Philoſophy, whichi Explains it in that Way. . : FARTHER, ſuch a Number of Particles, be they as Small, as this Philoſophy can Imagine them, if yet they are Particles of Matter, Actuated with the ſuppoſed Velocity, would, like a Rapid and Violent Stream, bear down all before them, and ve ſhould not be Heated, but Knockt down by the Rays of the Sun. Tuus even in the Infinitely ſmaller Velocity of a Canon Ball, it is ſaid, if it comes near to us, we are Affected very ſenſibly by the Motion, which it Impreſſes upon the Air, or ther, or Medium, which Surrounds us, and it is very Evident, that we are ſcarcely able to ſtand againſt Violent and Tempeſtuous Winds, As to whoſe Particles, tho' perhaps they may be Groſſer, according to the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, yet their Velocity and Force is not a Millionth-Millionth Part of what is Attributed to the Particles of the Sun by the ſame Philoſophy. TuiRD, But if we only allow, that there is a Percuſſion of the Medium by the Expanſive Force of the Sun, ſuch a Percuſſion may be Communicated by it in 7 or 8 Minutes of Time; Becauſe we in Fact find, that Sound, which is ownd to be from Vibration, and thereſore from Percuſſion, is Propagated with a Great Velocity without any Rapid Motion of Parts, as is Evident in Ecchos, in which we hear the Return of the Sound, almoſt as ſoon as it is Produced by Percuſſion upon the Sonorous Body, vithout any Violent Agitation of Parts in Air or in ther; but the Expanſive Force of Fire or Flame being ſtill Quicker, and to Which there is little or no Reſiſtance given from Air or æther, or from the ſame Medium, thro which Sound is Promoted, to vhich there is a Reſiſtance given, the Percuſſion of it is Commucated thro' it with an Exceeding Greater Velocity, ſo far, that we are ſuppoſed to ſce Light, as ſoon as it is Produced in Lightening or in the Flaſ of Gun-Powder, tho ve hear the Sound of Thunder, or the Report of a Cannon, Later. Bur even this kind of Percuſſion, namely, that of Fire or Flame, may be Different, as in it's Force, ſo in the Propagation of it thro' the ſame Medium, or vhere the Percuſſion has the ſame Force, as that of the Sun, and the Medium is Different, the Propagation oſ it may upon that Account be likewiſe Different; and therefore t is no Unimaginable Thing, that ſuch a Percuſſion, in ſome Caſcs, may be Communicated municated in an Inſtant, where the Expanſive Force of the Luminous Body is extremely Great, the Medium of the ſame Nature, and the Diſtance Small, thro which it is Derived; and in orher Caſes, that the ſame Percuſſion may be Communicated in Various and Different Portions of Time, as in 7 or 8 Minutes, where the Percuſſion is made from an Exceeding Expanſive Force, and is Communicated thro' Different Mediums, and where the Diſtance of the Luminous Object, as that of the Sun, is Large and Great; for if there is any Contractive Mediuni, which Intervenes, as that of the Earth's Atmoſphere, or any other, it will give a Check and Interruption to the Propagation of ſuch a Percuſſion, and the Largeneſs of the Diſtance, thro which the Action is Communicated, vill alſo in ſome Proportion or other Diminiſh the Force of the Action. ON the Contrary, where the Percuſſion is Different, and the Medium and Diſtance of the Luminous Object are the ſame, and much more, where the Diſtance is Different, iĩt is Reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that Light will be Propagated to us in Different Portions and Spaces of Time; It would perhaps be hard to Evince this by Experiments, but this is Evident, that the Flame of a Lamp, or a Candlc, will not Communicate it's Light to ſo Great a Diſtance, as a ſtrong Blaze of Fire, nor vill à Metcor be ſeen ſo far as the Sun, the Reaſon of which can be only, that the Expanſive Force, and the Percuſſion conſequent upon it, is not ſo Vigorous in the one as in the other, and by the ſame Argument it's Propagation ſhould not. FOURTH, As to the Propagation of Light in a Direct Line, this may be acknowIedged, tho' the Propagation of it was by the Percuſſion of the Sun upon the Elaſtick Medium, and not from an Emanation of any Solar Particles; becauſe a Force vill be Directed and Communicated that Way, in which the Impreſſion is made. BuT then on the Contrary, if Light was Produced from an Emanation of the Sun's Particles, it would be Derived in Radius's Drawn from the Sun's Body, by which means there would be a Million of Streams of Light Iſſucing in a Streight Courſc from the Sun, vith as many Intermediate Spaces, to which Light would not Arrive, and by Conſequence, the Open Day would be Checquer'd with Alternate Portions of Light and Darkneſs, which is what we do not Experience. BESIDES Which, upon the Interpoſition of a Cloud, by which theſc Streams ol Light would be Intercepted, or in a Dark Chamber, where it's Ingreſs is only Permitted at a Foramen in the Window-Shut, a Perfect Darkneſs vould Enſue, which again is Contrary to what every one's Obſervation will Inform him of; In all which Caſes it is Evident, that Light does Diffuſe it ſelf out of any Streight Lines Drawn from the Sun; and therefore, if an Emanation of the Suns Particles can give no Account of this Diffuſion of Light, and Percuſſion from the Expanſive Force of it can do it, for that Reaſon alſo the one is Preferrable to the other in an Explanation of Nature, and which may be eaſily done. For the Sun or any other Luminous Body ſtriking by it's Expanſive Force upon the Elaſtick Medium in Direct Lines, and the Medium not Reſiſting, as in Sound, but Communicating and Promoting the Force without Oppoſition, Light is by that mcans Propagated in Directum, but the Medium being Elaſtick, the Percuſſion vill Excite a Vibration Side-ways, ſince Elaſticity or the Expanſive Force always Acts from a Center, as the Contractive does towards one, by which means there will be a Diffuſion of Light to every Part, and it will Spread and Enlarge it ſelf out of the Lincs, thr which the Original Communication is made. AND ſtom hence it is, that Light is more Vivid and Strong, and has a Yellover Complexion in the Direct Rays of the Sun, and is Weaker and has a Paler Colour out of them, or in a Shade, becauſe the Firſt Proceeds from the Direct Percuſſion of the Expanſive Force of the Sun, and the Laſt from the Lateral Percuſſion of the Direct; the Latter oſ which muſt certainly be more Languid than the Former, and is perhaps upon an Equal Ealance nearly with the Contractive oſ the Medium. TuERE Is alſo another Reaſon, why the Light is not ſo Strong in the Shade, whether of a Cloud, or of Trees, or of a Tower, or any other Body, becauſe the Light, vhich is Reflected ſrom them, is Alter'd and Changũ by the Peculiar Expanſive and Contractive Forces of thoſe Bodies; Thus the Shade of a Stone Ediſice is Lighter than that of a Grove, and the Shade of a Cloud is Lighter or Darker, according tò Qq the the Various Compoſition of the Contractive and Expanſive Forces of the Cloud, vhich Cauſes it. aæ . Tuis therefore being the Nature of Light, we may readily Conclude, what Dark? neſs ĩs, that it is Produced, not by a bare Privation of Rays, or of the Expanſive Force, but where there is the Leaſt Expanſive Force Communicated to our Organs of Seeing, and conſequently, where the Contractive moſt Prevails; which Contractive we could not be ſenſible of, unleſs Excited by ſome Small Degree at Icat oſ the Exanſive. p For it is Impoſſible for us to have any Poſitive Idea from a Privative Cauſe, and therefore it is, that we perceive ſeveral Degrees of Darkneſs, which could not be from one Abſolute Privation of Light, but muſt Procced from a Greater Degree of the Contractive in the Medium, and a Leſſer of the Expanſive in ſeveral Proportions; Thus the Night is not ſo Dark, when the Moon or the Stars appear, as otherwiſe. l For which Reaſon Bodies, which have the Greateſt Proportion of the Contractive, and the Leaſt of the Expanſive, are Opake, as Earths, Stones, Metals, and Minerals; and thoſe, which have the Greateſt Proportion of the Expanſive, and the Leaſt of ihe Contractive, or where the Contractive and Expanſive are almoſt Equal, are Tranſparent, as Ture Flame, and Spirituous Liquors and Fluids in General, alſo Water, Air, and Liher, vhere the Contractive and Expanſive are perhaps nearly Equal; Thus likewiſe Glaſũ, vhich acquires an Exceeding Expanſive Force from the Fire, is Tranſparent; Metals, Diſſolved by it, will be Changed into Glaſs, and by Spirit of Nitre into a Tranſparent Fluid, and aſterward into Chryſtals; all which Phænomenons are Evidently derived from the Expanſive Force prevailing over the Contractive, or being Equal to it nearly; for by that means, by theſe ſeveral Bodies, Acting from a Center, and not in ſo Great a Degree, or in an Equal nearly, towards onc, there is a Paſſage permitted to the Rays of other Bodies thro' them; but on the Contrary, where the Contractive Force is Great, that is, where the Bodies A towards a Center, or, which is the ſame, where rhe Forces of them Preſs ogether with more Vehemence, ſuch a Paſſage of the Rays is Interrupted, and the Body thereby becomes Opake. Tuis Doctrine is Confirmed farther from our Fingers, which are, if look'd upon in the Common Light of the Sun, Opake from the Contractive Force of our Fleh and Skin, but if they are oppoſed to the 5trong and Vivid Rays of it, they become in ſome ſort Tranſparent; becauſe the Expanſive Force of rhe Sun, Joining with the Expanſive Force of the Blood, Surmounts the Contractive of the Fleſh and Skin to a certain Degree, and induces that Tranſparency, which we in ſuch a Caſe Ex perience. From this Account of Light and Darkneſs, ve may know the Reaſon, vhy Melancholick Perſons are more pleaſed with a Dark, a Gloomy, or a Shaded Medium, than with a more Light and Enlivend one, and with Graver and Darker Colours, than with the more Flaſhy and Airy, becauſc the Contractive Forces of their Minds are Superior to the Expanſive of them. As to Colours, ve have Endeavourd to ſiew in the firſt Part of our Principles, that they are Various Degrees of the Expanſive Force, occaſioned and produced by the Tranſmiſſion of it thro' the Edges of the Priſm, that is, by the Various Contractive Forces, which it meets with, and by which it is Reſiſfted and Oppoſcd in ſuch a Tranſmiſſion. Tnus the Strongeſt and Livelieſt Colour, and which comes neareſt to the Complexion of the Sun's Rays, but is ſomething Darker, is a Fiery Red, and Proceeds ſrom the Expanſive Force of the Sun being the Ieat Diminiſ'd by the Contractive of the Glaſs, as Paſſing thro' the Thinneſt Part of it, that is, thr the Extremity oſ it's Edges; the Priſmatick Orange is a Weaker Red, and the Priſmatick Yellow a Weaker Orange, Green a Weaker Yellow, and Blue a Weaker Green, and Violet a Weaker Blue, and Deep Violet a Weaker Violet; all which are produced from the Expanſive Force of the Sun's Rays being variouſly Enervated by Paſſing thro' Greater Thickneſſes of the Priſim, and therefore meeting with Different Degrees of the Contractive Force of it, which in like Proportions Weakens and Impairs the Expanſive Force of them. This alſo gives an Account of that Agreeable Diverſity oſ Colours, vhich we many Times obſcrve in the Clouds upon the Riſing and Setting oſ the Sun, Sun, vhich is owing t0 the Different Oppoſition made to the Expanſivè Force of the Solar Beams by the Different Contractive of the Clouds, and the Different Obliquity of the Rays, which Impinge upon them in a Thouſand Various Inclinations; both which Contribute to the Changeing the Expanſive Force into thoſe ſeveral Actions and Enervations of Action, from which we ſuppoſe Colours to Ariſe. FroM this Doctrine it alſo follows, which we find in Fact, that the Fiery Red Rays have the Leat Degree of Refrangibility, that is, the Greateſt Expanſive Force, or the Greateſt Degree of Activity, Orange are the Next Leaſt Refrangible Rays, Yellow aſter Them, Then Green, Blue the Next, and Violet and Deep Violet are the moſt Refrangible, that is, have the Leaſt Proportion of the Expanſive Force, or the Leaſt Degree of Activity, and conſequently, are the moſt Removed from the Complexion of the Sun's Rays, and Approach the neareſt to Darkneſs. AND upon theſe Principles, all the other Phænomenons oſ the Priſmatick Colours may be Explained, in which there are Various Mixtures and Combinations of them, and in which, as the Expanſive or Contractive Force more Prevails, the Colours are Brighter, or Heavier and Duller; Mr. Haustbee's Experiments do alſo abundantly Conſfirm this Doctrine, From Which he aſſerts, That Diſferent Sorts of Bodies afford us remarkably Different Lights, Different in Colour, and Different in Foree and Vigour; which can Proceed from norhing elſe, unleſs their Various and Innate Proportions of the Expanſive and Contractive. HENCE likewiſe, when all of them are mixt together in a due Proportion, a White, not the Solar Light, which is Yellowiſh, is Produced; becauſe, there being an Equal Balance of the Contractive and Expanſive Forces, a Colour, as the Whiteneſs of Light, is Cauſed, which holds it ſelf Indifferently to all Colours; ſo that the Whiteneſs of Light is the ſame to Colour, as Tranſparency is to the Colours, with which Tranſparent Bodies are Tinged, they both Proceeding from nearly an Equal Balance of the Contractive and Expanſive Forces. FROM hence farther it is, that Tranſparent and Colourd Bodies are Fluid, or of a Glaſy Subſtance; becauſe in both thoſe Bodies either the Expanſive Prevails, or is nearly Equal with the Contractive; but where Bodies are Colour'd and Opake, the Contractive Prevails, tho' not to the Suppreſſion of the Expanſive, but to the Detaining it's Action within a Point or a Surface; whereas Spirit of Nitre, which has a Strong Expanſive Force Joined with ſome Degree of the Contractive from its Salts, Exerts it ſelf out of a Point or a Surface, by Corroding and Diſſolving Metals by i's Expanſion, as Fire or Flame does Wood or Fuel, and Converting them into a Fluidity. TuE Colour therefore of Fluid and Tranſparent Bodies Proceeds, not from the Tranſ miſſion of the Colourd Rays, as Sir Iſ. Newton Aſfirms, but from that Particular Degree of the Expanſive Force, which is joind with a Leſſer Degree of the Contractive, in ſuch Bodies, which Acting upon the Elaſtick Medium Produces that Senſation in us; and according as the Colour Approaches nearer to that of the Sun, which has the Greateſt Expanſive Force of any Being we know in Nature, the Greater is the Expanſive Force of ſuch a Fluid, if the Contractive Forces are Equal, which is the Caſe of Fiery Red, Orange, and Yellow. Tnus ve find, that Spirit of Nitre and Oil of Vitriol are of a Yellowiſi Colour, which have the Greateſt Expanſive Force of any Fluids, as is Plain from their Corroſive or Burning Quality; and thoſe, which are called White Wines, and which are of a Yellowiſh Colour, are more Expanſive, that is, are Stronger and more Intoxicating rhan thoſc, which are of a Deep Red or Purple, if other Things are Equal; Alſo, Sacks, Ales, and Brandies kept, are Expanſive and Yellow; On the Contrary, Rheniſh, which comes the neareſt to a White, has the Ieaſt Expanſive or Intoxicating Force of all, as Water likewiſc has. Ir is alſo obſerved, that Red or Purple Wines are generally more liable to Produce the Stone in us, and the Yellowiſ Wines more apt to Diſſolve or to Prevent it; that the Firſt are more Aſtringent, and the Lat in fact Looſening and Diuretick; all which are manifeſt Arguments, that the Firſt kind of Fluids have more of the Contractive, and leſs of the Expanſive Force in them, and the Laſt more of the Expanſive and leſs of the Contractive: Suitable to which, Chymiſis aſſure us, that the Red Abound in Tartar, or a Contractive Subſtance, but the White not. Qq 2 Tis Tis alſo Evident, that the One are Sweeter and Smoother, and the other more Rigid and Harſher, which is likewiſe another Inſtance, according to what we have ſnid concerning Taſts, that the one are more Expanſive, and the other leſs ſo. RED, Orange, or Yellow, on the other Hand, in Solid Bodies, if of the ſame Co lour with the Red, Orange, or Yellow, in Fluids, has the ſame Expanſive Force with the orher, but is kept down and detained by the Superior Contractive to a Point or a Surface, in which it Acts upon the Elaſick Mcdium with an Equal Force ol Velocity, tho Exerted in a Point or a Surface, with which Red, Orange, or Yellow, in a more Spirituous Subſtance, docs. Tnus Clay Burnt acquires a Redneſs, and Lead Calcin'd produces Minium, which have a Great Degree of the Contractive Force, and are Endued from the Fire with a Great Proportion of the Expanſive, which yet cannot Exert it ſelf any farther than a Point or a Surface, by Reaſon of the Vaſ Contractive, which obſtructs it, ſo that from thence we only perceive the Redneſs oſ each Body, without any other conſiderable Effect from it. AxD the ſame may be ſaid of Gold, which by it's Yellowneſs or Orange, lhas the Greateſt Expanſive Force, but as from it's Weight it has the Greareſt Contractive, by that means the Expanſive is Loaded to that Degree, that it cannot Exert it ſelf, without a foreign Force to Excite it, beyond a Point or a Surface, and thereſore it only Acts by it's Expanſive upon the Elaſtick Medium, and thereby Produces the Senſation oſ Orange or Yellow in us; Sound it cannot Impreſs upon us by ſuch an Expanſion, becauſe there is no Reſiſtance made to it, nor Smell, nor Taſl, becauſe it does not Act out oſ a Point or a Surſace, thar is, the Contractive is Superior to the Expanſive, vhereas, in Taſt and Smell, the Expanſive is Superior to the Contractive. AND that Gold has a Great Proportion oſ the Expanſive, is Apparent, not only from it's Colour, but from what is Afſirmd, that the Leaf of it, or any Diſſolution of it, is the beſt Cordial, that is, that it has the Greateſt Expanſive Force Joind with a Contractive, which can be agreeable to our Natures; for there may be an Expanſive Force Joind vith a Contractive ſo Extraordinary, as Spirit of Nitre, or Oil of Virriol, which ſhall Immediately Diſiolve them, and this is the Caſe of Poiſons, which have too Great an Expanſive Force for the Contractive of our Conſtitutions; as there are others, to wit, White Sublimate, Arſenick, &. which have too Great a Contractive for the Expanſive of them; What has been here ſaid of Red, Orange, and Yellov, is alſo Applicable to the Various Colours of other Bodies, making juſt Allowances ſor their Difſcrent Expanſive and Contractive Forces. s. 15. FRoM the Colours of Light we ſhall now paſs on to the Refractions and Reſſections oſ it. TuE Reſiection of Light thereſore Proceeds from the Expanſive Force of it, by which it Diſperſes it ſelf ſrom a Lamp or the Sun, but Mecting with the Contractive Force of a Solid Body, vhich is Superior to it, it is hinderd in it's Progreſs, and would there Ceaſe and Vaniſ, or elſe be Diffuſed upon the Surface of it, like Water or any other Fluid Pour'd upon the ſame Surface; and conſequently, there are Two Reaions, vhich canſe the Return of it's Rays: Firſt, It's ovn Native and Expanſive Energy from the Center of any Body, by which it Recoils from the Contractive, which it cannot ſubdue; Second, The Expanſive Force, which is mixt with the Contractive in every Solid Body, in a certain Proportion and Degree, and which forwards and aſſiſs the Reverberation; And as this Expanſive Force is Greater in Solid Bodies, the Rays of Light are Reſlected and Repuls'd more ſtrongly. Thus Wood or Stune are not ſo Vivid in their Reflections, as Burniſh'd Metals, nor Iron or Lead ſo Active, as Steel, Becauſe they are not ſo Expanſive. Ir cannot thererore be aſlirmed in General, that Light is Reflected in the ſame Angle, in which it is Incident, ſince in Different Circumſtances of the Repelling or Luminous Body, the Reſiections of Light from it may be in Diſrerent Angles; It is notorious in Fact, that we ſee the Colours of Bodies in all Angles of Refiection, tho' the Sun or Candle, which Illuminates them, is in a Perpendicular Situation to them; The Light of the Sun or a Lamp by it's Force of Expanſion Diffuſes it ſelf every way, and by the Joint Contractive and Expanſive Force of the Body is Repell'd cvery way, and at all Angless. From hence it is, that Light is weaken'd by Reſlection, becauſe it meets with the Contrary and Duller Force of Expanſion and Contraction traction in Bodies, which by their Impreſſion Change and Diminiſi the Foree of it. FrOM hence likewiſe it is, that Concave and Burniſvd Metals, or Poliſq Glaſes Refiet Light to a Focus or Point, and Convex ones from one, by which means in the Firſt Caſe it is Stronger and more Collected, and in the Lat Weakend and Diſpersd. BECAUSE the Contractive and Expanſive Force of the Concave Body, being Superior to the Expanſive of the Light, Repells it; and as ir's Parts are in a Situarion, by which it's Actions are made to Tend the ſame Way or to a Point, they accordingly Determine the Reflection of Light to one; on the Contrary in Convex Reſlecting Bodies, the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in them are Superior to the Expanſive of Light, which is Repelld by them, but as their Parts are in a Situation of Convexity, by which they Act Contrary ways, Light is alſo Repell'd to Diſferent Points, and is thereby Diſſipated and Weaken'd. Or elſe, This may be perhaps owing 1o a Superiority of the Light's Expanſive Acting againſt and Reſulting ſrom the Contractive, there of the Concave, and here of the Convex. Tur Conſequence of which is, that Objects, which are Repreſented to us in a Thicker and a more Conſtipated Light, appear Larger, and in a Thinner and more Diluted, Smaller; that the Former becomes Inflammant, and the Latter is leſs than the Natural Heat of the Suns Rays. AND in Plane Bodies, a middle Effect is Producd betwixt Both, and Light is Reflected much the ſame, as what it was when Incident; Objects are not much In creasd or Diminiſd, nor the Heat of the Sun's Light, and there is no Difference betwixt the Incident and Reflected Light, excepting what Ariſes from the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Repelling Body, by which it is in ſome Meaſure Weakened. ON the other Hand, the Refraction of Light Proceeds from the Superiority of the Expanſive Force of Light, above that of the Expanſive and Contractive oſ the Bodies, thro which it is Refracted, by which it Forces it's Paſſage thro', inſtead of being Repell'd by them; And as in Convex ones, the Parts Act towards Different Points the Expanſive of Light Acts in Oppoſition to them, and Collects it ſelf to one by Surmounting their Force of Diſperſing it; and in Concave Bodies, where the Parts Act tovards the ſame Point, the Expanſive of Light Acts with a Contrary Direction and Surmounting that Force of Contraction, Tends and Diſperſes it ſel? towards the Sides of the Concave, and thereby becomes Weaker; or elſe perhaps this may be oving to the Greater Force of the Glaſs, which draws the Light to a Focus in the Convex, and ſrom onc in the Concave; and from hence, as before, Light will be more Denſe and Conſtipated in the Firſt Caſe, and thereby become Inflammant; and Objects will appear Greater in it, and in the Laſt Caſc, it will be Thinner and more Diluted, and Objects appear Diminiſ'd; And in Plane Glaſſes, the Reſracted Light obrains a Middle Effect betwixt both theſe. HAVING gone thro' the ſeveral Eſential and Accidental Properties of Matter, as they are Termed, we ſhall now go on to give an Explanation of the ſeveral Operations and Effects in Chymiſtry from theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces, after we have taken Notice, that if ve Admit of theſe Forces in Bodies, there will be no Occaſion for any Imaginary ſubtile Spirit, vhich is ſuppoſed to Pervade all Groſs Bodies, and which is Latent in them, by which their Parts attract each other, and is the Cauſe of the Coheſion of them, by which alſo Electrical Bodies are ſaid to Act, and to have a Power of Attracting and Repelling Bodies at Greater Diſtances, by which Light is Emitted, Reflected, and Refracted, and all Senſation is Excited, and Animal Motion Performed according to the Direction of the Will, namely, by the Vibrations of this ſubtile Spirit; ſince all theſe are Accounted for by theſe Real Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which are the Eſſence and Subſtratum of Matter, and from which, as we have ſewn, all ĩt's Properties are Derived. s. 16. BuT before we Proceed to Chymiſtry, we ſhall from theſe Principles give a Solution of thoſe Strange and Wonderful Phænomenons, which Ariſe from the Friction of Glaſs. LEr a Glaſs Sphore be Exhauſted of it's Air, and Revolved round upon an Axit by the Motion oſ a Wheel, and let it be Rubbed whilſt Revolving, till it has ac quired a ſuſficient Heat by it's Fridtion; and from a Semicircular Arc, large enoug to Encompaſs the Sphere, Let ſeveral Threads of Varn hanæ Perpendicularly over it aſte after the Glaſs Sphere has acquired a certain Degree of Heat, the Threads will riſe from their Perpendicular Situation, and Point like ſo many Radius's to the Centei of the Sphere; if the Semicircular Arc is placed under the Sphere, or if it is fixt in an Horizontal Poſition, and in both Caſes with the Concave art towards ir, the ſame Effect ill be Conſequent, that is, the Threads will Riſe and Direct themſelves like ſo many Radius's, to the Center of the Sphere. . AND on the Contrary, if the Inward Cavity oſ the Sphere is now ſuppoſed to Communicate with the Air, and there is an Axis Inſerted into it, with a Small Circle aſfixt thereto, and Threads of Yarn are ſaſtened to the Circle; upon the Circumvolution and Friction of the Glaſs Sphere, the Threads will Riſe and Extend themſclves from the Circle, and it's Axis in ſo many Radius's Pointing towards the Spherical Surface; and whilſt the Threads are under the Influence of the Glaſs⸗ Electricity, they may be Moved by the Finger vithout Touching them, and even by the Finger and Breath, thro' the Glaſs it ſelf. IN order to ſolve vhich Phænomenons, it muſt be obſerved, that Gla' has a Great Contractive Force ſrom the Flints and Sands, of which it is Compoſcd, which, tho' not the Heavieſl, are ſome of the Hardeſt and moſt Compact Subſtances; that, by their Fuſion in the Fire, a Great Degree of the Expanſive is acquired to them; that, by the Former of theſe, Glaſs is of a Cloſe and Solid Contexture, and, by the Latter, becomes Fluid in Heat, and Suſceptible of any Impreſſion, and vhen Cold is Brittle, it's Parts eaſily Separated, and is to a Great Degree Elaſtick and Expanſive under the Reſtriction and Conſtraint of it's Contractive; when therefore the Expanſive is Excited by Friction, it Exerts it's ſclf in Radius's from the Center, as the Actions of all Spherical and Convex Bodies do, thro' the Ambient Medium; the Threads of Yarn, which by their hanging Perpendicularly in the ſame Medium, have a Contractive or Gravitating Force, which is contrary to the Expanſive, ſuitably upon this Action of the Expanſive thro' the Medium, hich was before in Aquilibrio, Exerts it's Contractive in an Oppoſite Direction to the ſame Center, from which the Expanſive Acted, to preſerve the Equal Poiſe, which the Expanſive had Diſturb'd and over Balanc'd, and which, by ſuch Tendency of a Contrary Force, is again Reduc'd to an Equilibrium, or as near as theſe TWo Acting Forces can do it. ON the other Hand, if a Circle and the Threads of Yarn affixt to it are placed vithin the Glas Sphere, and the Air Communicates with the Cavity of it, the Threads will Riſe from the Center and Extend themſelves to the Concave of the Glaſs, becauſe the Expanſive Force of it, Excited by Friction, does now Exert it ſelf Inwards, and tovards the Center, as a Spherical and Concave Body does, where ĩt's Action is Determined to the Medium, which lies within it, and by conſequence, Diſturbs the ZEquilibrium of ſuch a Medium; the Contractive Force therefore of the Yarn, having a Contrary one, Diſperſes and Dilates it ſelf from a Center in the Medium ſo Afſected, and obtains the Power of an Expanſive; This kind of Action of the Expanſive and Contractive, in Oppoſition to each other, has been Exemplified in the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, in the Actions betwixt the Moon and the Earth, and in the Reflections and Refractions of Light, and is farther juſtified by theſe Experiments, hich have been hitherro deſervedly Accounted very Surprizing. If what we have ſaid is not ſuſficiently Convincing, perhaps the Suppoſition of an Expanſive Force in Yarn, which it Evidently has from Balls, vhich are made oſ it, vill give us a Solution; if we vill but Allov, that as the Expanſive and Contractive Act in Oppoſition to each other, ſo the Expanſive Forces Unite with and Tend to each other, and therefore the ĩhreads of Yarn vill Tend to the Expanſive oſ the Glaſs Excited by Friction. FROM hence it is Manifeſt, that an Equilibrium of the Air is neceſſary to theſe Phænomenons, for if the Expanſive Force of the Glaſs, and the Contractive of the Yarn vere to Exert theit Actions in Vacuo, where there is little or no quilibrium of Force to be Preſerved, they would each of them ſpend their Forces oſ Expanſion and Contraction by themſclves, without any Effect produced in Relation to cach other. WEe may likewiſe Conclude, that there is a Certain Force and Action Diſpers'd thro' the whole Univerſe, ſince otherwiſe the Expanſive Force of the Sun, and the Contractive oſ the Earth, Moon, and Planets, vould Exert themſelves without any Reſpect Reſpect to, or Influence upon each other, unleſs there was ſuch a Medium, deſtined 10 Communicate their Actions, and very much in an quilibrium with it lſ. TuaT this Refined quilibrium may be eaſily Diſturbed by a Finger, or a Breath, is no Wonder, or even thro' the Glaſs it ſelf, which in this Caſe acquires an Expanſive Force, and is as Permeable as the Air, which Surrounds it, tho not to the Touch, yet as to any Forces, which may Diſturb the æquilibrium, oſ vhich the Glaſs makes up only one Part of the Moment. THAT theſe Efluvia muſt be very ſubtile is very Plain, becauſe they are none at all, all theſe Phænomena only proceeding from the Innate Forces of Bodies compared with onc another, without the leaſt Diminution of their Matter or their Particles. Wuar I have here in General ſaid might perhaps ſatisfy the Excellent Mr. Haulsbee, if he were now alive, in Reſpect to ſeveral Queries, Which he makes, and vhoſe Obſervations and Experiments, and his Judicious Remarks upon them, deſerve ro be in the Hands of all Lovers of Philoſophick Truth, vho will not Reſign their Notions oſ Nature to the Preſent Mathematick and Abſtracted Commenters upon it. ru Electricity oſ Glaſs, or the Tendency of the Threads to the Center, or to the Concave Surface of it's Sphere, requires the Air in the one Caſe or the orher, but to Produce the Phænomenon of Purple Light a quite Contrary Circumſtance is Expected, that is, a Vacuum or rather a Leſſcr Force in the Medium, than in Common Air; The Reaſon of hich is Plain, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Glaſs, vhen Excited by Friction, Acting upon a Leſs Force than that of Common Air, Raiſes it into a kind of Flame, which when a Greater Force is Introducd, as that of Common Air, it's Effect is Diminiſhed, and then Vaniſhes, or is Extinguiſi'd by it, as Common Flame by Water; That this Flame is a Purple one, Proceeds from the Weakneſs of the Expanſive Force of Glaſi, tho Excited to the utmoſt Degree, and from the Contractive Force of it, which hinders it's Expanſion, according to what we have already Alledged concerning that Colour; This Purple Flame darts Invards, as the Air is admitted, by Endeavouring with an Impetus to recede from it, as being of a Contractive Force in Reſpect of it, and for the ſame Reaſon, thai Flame ſtrikes Upward. ] TnE Blue Sparkles, which it Emits, ariſe from the Friction, by which the Expanſive Force of the Glaũ.e is ſo far raiſed, as to be Superior in ſome Minute Par ticles to the Contractive of it, from Whence they fly off, and by the Expanſive being Increas'd the Purple ĩs heightened into a Blue; and the Crackling Noiſe is cauſed by the Contranitency, vhich there is betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive, as in the Expanſive of Flame, and the Contractive of Wood, or the Expanſive of Percuſſion, and rhe Contractive of Glaſs, Stone, or an Anvil, or any other Contranitent Body to the Expanſive. A Glaſs Cylinder, cither Solid or Hollow, by Friction becomes Electrical. This is ſolved by what foregoes, and there is no Occaſion to exhauſt the Air in the laſt Caſe becauſe it's Action is Cloſe and Compact by the Sides of the Figure lying ſo near each other, and thereſore not much Interrupted by the Intervening Air, which rather com plys with it, and makes it the ſame, as if a Solid one was uſed. No other Heat, but that of Friction, ill Produce this Electricity in Glaſs, becauſt by Friction i's ovn Proper Expanſive Force is Raiſed and Excited, whereas any other Heat Procecds from an Expanſive Force, which is Different from it's own, and Acts not in Concurrence vith, but in Oppoſition to it, and therefore rather Weakens and Impairs it. Ir vill Exert it's Expanſive or Electrical Force thro' Glaſs, becauſe it has the ſame kind of Expanſive Force vith it, tho' not Excited, and leſs thro Muſlin, becauſe it is of a more Contractive and Glutinous Nature and obſtructs it's Action; and for the ſame Reaſon, if the Glaſ Cylinder lies betwixt Two Pieces of Wood, it's Electricity ſails, becauſe of theit Clammy, Glutinous, and Contractive Forces in Reſpect of the Quick ard Elaſtick Force of the Glaſs, which is therefore Oppoſcd, Vanquiſ'd, and Dampt by them. LastLy LastLy, It Attracts and Repelis Leaf-Gold, and the like Small and Light Bodies by Turns, and when once they have been fully Repell'd, they cannot be made to Touch it, till they have been Reſlected from ſome other Body. TuE Reaſon of which is, that the Expanſive Force of the Glaſs, being Raiſed and Excited by Friction, is in a kind of Conteſt with it's Contractive; when there ſore the Expanſive Prevails, the Contractive of the Gold is carry'd in Oppoſition to it, as the Threads oſf Yarn were before, to preſerve the Equal Balance of the Medium, vhen the Contractive prevails the Leaf- Gold Reſults from it to the Side oſ the Expanſive, and will not be made to Return upon the Expanſive's Prevailing, that is, by the urmoſt Force oſ Electricity, becauſe it has now acquired an Expanſive Force, and thereſore cannot Act in Oppoſition to it, as before, unleſs it obtains a new Contractive Force, by Touching ſome other Body, which is endued with it, aſter which it will again, upon the Expanſive Force Prevailing, Act with the Contractive and in Oppoſition to the Expanſive, and ſo in Infinitum. Fro? vhich it is Maniſeſt, that there is not only a Contagion in our Minds, from the Company we Converſe with, of Good or Evil, of Mirth or Severity, but that it is a General Law in Nature, and that even Material Subſtances are Infected with the Expanſive or Contractive, as they Act in Concert and in Conjunclion vith thoſe Forces. It vould be eaſy, from theſe Principles of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, to ſolve, I believe, every one oſ the Strange and Surprizing Phænomenons Exhibited to us, from the very Ingenious Experiments of Mr. Haulsbee, I have only given an Inſtance of ſome, and ſhall nov Proceed to the Equally Wonderful ones in Chymiſtry. C H AP. II Concerning the Principal Phænomenons Obſervable in Chymiſry. 5. . TT has been hitherto the Method of Authors and Teachers in this Science to Treat of Chymiſtry, as if they were Giving a Collection of Receipts, for the Compoſition of Drugs and Medicines, for the Trade of Apothecaries, and for the Uſe of the Phyſician, rather than Forming a Syſtem of Experiments for the Satisfaction of the Philoſopher, and the Inquirer into Nature and it's Operations; and from hence it is, ve find them Diſtributing their Analyſis of Bodies into that of the Mineral, the Vegetable, and the Animal Kingdom, and under thoſc ſeveral Heads to furniſ us with the Chymical Reſolution of Gold, Silver, Copper; of Guiacum, the Bark of Peru, Opium; or of Vipers, Urine. Honey, Hartſhorn, and the Like. 5. 2. VnEREAS the Reverſe of ſuch a Procedure is what becomes a Philoſopher, vho is not ſo much concerned to know the Particular and Artificial Manner oſ Analyzing theſc Bodies, as the General Effects, which Reſult from ſuch an Analyſis; the Firſt being the Buſineſs of the Operator and the Mechanick, and the Laſt of the Studious and the Inquiſitive; Conſidering this many Years ago, I had Drawn up ſeveral Papers in order to put this Science into a Different Method, from what had been Practiced by the Proſeſſors of it; Namely, by Ranking and Diſpoſing theit Proceſſs under thoſe General Phænomenons, in which they Terminated, as Spirits, Oills or Sulphurs, Water or Phlegm, Salts and Earth, Calcination, Chryſtallization, Precipitation, Coagulation, Condenſation, Diſſolution, Rarefaction, Pulverization, Inflammation, Diſtillation, Sublimation, Digeſtion, Extraction, and Colour; and tho I have been Prevented in Finiſhing theſe Papers by many other Studies, which have Employed my Inquiries, it is a Satisfaction to Me to find the ſame Method Approved of, by the Learncd and Ingenious Dr. Freind, in his Pralectiones Chymicæ. 5.3. I Shall thereſore go on in the way, which I Originally propoſcd to my ſcll in the Purſuit of Nature, and Firſt conſider the Principles of Chymiſtry, which by moſ are conſeſ''d to be thoſe of Spirit, Oil, Salt, Sulphur, and Earth; which yet, it is Plain are very lmaginary ones, becauſe all Bodies cannot be Reſolved into eſe Principles All of them are found in Animals and Vegetables, but not ſo caſily in Minerals and in Gold and Silver, not ſo much as one of them, of which there can be nc Separation made at all. Axr AND on the Contrary, tho' Glaſs is made of Sand, and Aſhes or Salt, there can be no Salt Extracted from it, from Whence it is Inferred, that Bodies may be Compounded of Principles, into Which they cannot by any Art be Reſolved; which ſcoms altogether Impoſſible; for if there were Spirit, Oil, Sulphur, and Salt of Glaſs, no doubt they would be as much found in it by the Operations of Chymiſiry, as thoſe Principles are Experiencd to be in Animals and Vegetables; but as ve never heard of any of them, ſo it muſt be Confeſ'd, that all of them are Equally wanting in the one, as they abound in the other, and that Glaſs in that Reſpect is of a like Nature vith Gold or Silver; Spirit, Oil, and Sulphur, are not of ſo ſullen a Diſpoſition, as not to obey the Influences of the Qick and Active Motion of the Fire, if any ſuch were Latent in the Subſtances we have Named. . S. 4. Ir yet we allow the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Bodies, vhich Ihave uiy Gloſi m been hitherto Defending, the Caſe is Plain, that as all Bodies conſiſt of theſc Two ſm Meali Forces in Various Degrees of them, ſo where the Expanſive Force is moſt Prevalent, ſ& — as it certainly is in Animals and Vegetables if Compared vith Metals, Spirit, Ol, and Priiple, an Sulphur, which are of an Expanſive Nature, may be Produced and Separated ſ— by the Expanſive Force of Fire, and want only the Aſſiſtance of that Force for their o ie. Formation and Exertion. ON the other Hand, when, as in Glaſi, the utmoſt Expanſive Force of Fire has been uſed in it's Production, no Chymical or Analyzing Force of the Fire can alter it's Conſtitution and Diſpoſition; the Expanſive and Contractive are ſo ſtrongly united, that it Will be Impoſſible to ſeparate them into Diſtinct Principles, and they vill cither unite vith ore another, as far as Poſſible in Fuſion, notwithſtanding a new Expanſive Force endeavours to diſturb them, or by Friction, when the Greareſt Conteũ is Excited betwixt them, as has been before Explained, there will be only Small Glay Perticles Emitted from them. AxD ſince Gold and Silver obtain the ſame Obſtinacy, we may conclude they are orly more Conſtipated Glaſſes, vhoſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces are Greater, and more Cloſely and Firmly united to each other, and that in all Probability they are made and formed in the Earth, by the Exceeding Heat of the Sun, or by Subterraneous Fires Mixing with, and Fuſcing of Certain Earths or Contractive Forces, wLich are proper for ſuch Productions, as Sand or Aſhes are Converted by a like Expanſive Force into Glas; Minerals are not ſo Contractive as Metals, nor ſo Expanſive as Vegetables or Animals, and therefore the Principles of Spirit, Oil, and Sulphur may be Extractcd from them, more caſily than from Metals, and more hardly than from Animals and Vegetables. 5. 5. E have ſiewn in the foregoing Section, why ſome Bodies, which have a The Real Pri Greater Contradtive Force, and where the Expanſive is firmly united vith it, have ĩ*æ o cn none of the Chymical Principles, and where the Expanſive Force more Prevails, that Expinſive an they have all of them; we ſnall now conſider the Principles themſelves, which are o. Evidenti; Reſclved into theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces; Spirit, Phlegm, and ,u MiſOil, 3rccced ſrom the Prevalence of the Expanſive Force, and Salts and Earth from aa Combina. the Contraive, and therefore the one may be called the Active, and the other the tiom  um Poſũve; end tho this Diſtinction is Different from what is maintained by Chymiſts, ?2: ſwho make Sririt, Oil, and Salt to be the Active Principles, and Phlegm and Earth to Nuii Ee the Paſſve cnes, yet the Juſtneſs of it will appear from hence, that even Spirits are acknovledped to be nothing elſe than Salts Diſſolved in Phlegm, and certainly the Diolvent æuſt therefore be the Active Principle, and that which is Diſſolved the Paſlive; Phicęm is Fluid, and Salts not ſo, but when Diſſolved in one; And laſtly, Lemery. Phle:m in Diſiillarion comes before the Spirits, when they are Fixt, and aſter them, Pa3 . V. lien the; ære Volatile, which ſews that it is even more Active than ſome Spirits, E “ctive thon others, and that it may be deſervedly Rank't amongſt the Active Piinciſcs, and thereſore falls under the Expanſive; whereas Salt remains Diſguiſed in the Lorh, ater the other Principles are Extracted, and conſequently belongs to the Contræctive. j S. 6. s to Spirits, they are Subtile, Piercing, and Light Subſtances, and more in he boMotion tran any cther of the Principles, and are of Three Sorts, the Spirit Animals, the Durning Spirit of Vegetables, and the Acid Spitit; the Firſt, as of Aciiniei ſ R Harthorn, b iit Fom Harthorm, is ſaid to be nothing but a Volatile Salt Diſſolved by Phlegm, the Second as Alcohol, or Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Juniper and Roſemary, an Exalted Oil; and the Third, as the Spirit of Vinegar, Tartar, and Vitriol, an Acid Eſſential Sali put into Fuſion, and made Fluid by Fire. TuE Spirit of Animals therefore Proceeds from a ſmall Expanſive Force into a ſmall Contractive one, as Phlegm has but a ſmall Degree of Expanſion, being only Fluid and not Fiery, as rather Raiſed by Fire, than Formed by it; and the Volatile Salt has but a ſmall Degree of Contraction, being made in ſome Reſpect Ex panſive by the Expanſive Force in the Circulations of the Humours in the Animal, from which it is Extracted. TuE Burning Spirit of Vegetables is therefore Compounded of a Greater Degree of the Expanſive, than the Former Spirit, and of almoſt an Equal one of the Contractive, by the Firſt of which it becomes Inflammable, and by the Laſt Oleous and Clammy, and the Parts more ſtrongly Cohere and are more Firmly united to one another, than in Spirit of Animals; and this is Evident from the Different Conſtitution ol Animals and Vegetables, the Former being ſupported by the Proper and Weaker Expanſion of the Circulation of it's ovn Humours, which are of a leſs Contractive Nature, and the Latter by the vaſt Expanſive Force of the Sun, Acting upon a Groſſer, more Contractive, and Earthy Matter. TuE Acid Spirit therefore is Formed from a Great Expanſive Force of Fire into a Great Contractive of Tartar or Vitriol, and is the Reverſe of thoſe Forces, which Enter into the Compoſition of the Spirit of Animals, by the Former of which it becomes a Spirit and Fluid, and by the Latter Acid and Fixt, as to it's Salts, and ĩt is not Inflammable, becauſe the Expanſive is ſufficient to raiſe the Contractive into a Spirit, but not to diſpoſe it to a farther Activity. FroM all which it is Apparent, that the Expanſive Force of the Fire has a Great Influence in Forming and Compounding theſe Spirits, and that they are not properly in Bodies themſelves, but as ſuch Bodies contain thoſe Principles and Diſpoſitions of Force, which render them capable of bting Raiſed and Animated into Spirits by the Application of the Expanſive of Fire. 5. 7. FRoM hence it is, that Spirits may be Drawn from Lead and Copper, becauſc their Natures are more Expanſive than thoſe of other Metals, as is Evident from the eaſy Fuſion, the Pliantneſs and Softneſs of the Firſt, by which it Approaches tovards a Fluid, and from the Quiek and Ready Diſſolution of the Parts of the Latter, even by Warm Water only, and it's Charigeing into Ruſt and Verdegreeſe, by a Drop of Cold; From this Innate Expanfive Force it is, that they abound with Sulphurs, but to Exalt theſe Metals into a Spirit, Three Things are Required, all which Contribute to the raiſing their Innate Expanſive; Firſt, that Lead ſould be Calcin'd intò a Ceruſſc, or Copper Reduc'd to a Ruſt or a Verdegreeſe; Second, that this Ceruſſe or Verdegreeſe ſould be mixt with a Fluid, as Vinegar, by which it Incorporates into a Salt or a Chryſtal; And Third, that it ſould be Excited into the Higheſt Expanſive, of which it is Capable, by Fire and Diſtillation. 5. 3. SPiR1ũ of Salt is made by all the Ways, which can Promote and Advance the Innate Expanſive Force, which belongs to it; It has a Great Degree of the Contractive, by it's Parts being ſo cloſely United, that the utmoſt Force of Fire is not ſufficient to diſengage them, unleſs Porter's Earth is mixt with it, or ſome other the like Subſtance; it is yer not ſo Contractive as Metals, becauſe it is Endued with a Quick and Pungent Taſt, which can only Proceed from it's Expanſive, whereas Metals in General have little or none belongiug to them, and it's Parts are not ſo Solid nor ſo Heavy; it is alſo formed from a Fluid, as Sca-Water or Urine, &e. and conſcquently is leſs Contractive and more Expanſive in it's Nature than Metals are. TuE Firſt Step, taken to Raiſe it's Natural Expanſive Force into an Artificial Spirit, is, to Dry it in the Beams of the Sun, or over the Fire; Second, to Pound and Grind it to a ſmall Powder; Third, to mix Porter's Earth with it, which has an Expanſive by it's having a Deterſive or Corroſive Force; Fourth, to Temper it with Water, which, by it's being capable of Diſſolving it, has likewiſe an Expanſive Force; Fifth, to Dry this Compoſition in the Sun; And Laſtly, to Diſtill it in a Rever beratory Furnace, Firſt, by a Gentle Fire to ſeparate the Phlgm from it, and then, - by by Increaſing it to the utmoſt Degree, when the Spirits will come out in White Clouds, and continuing it in this Condition for 12 or 15 Hours; From all which Procedure it is Manifeſt, that every Gradation Tends to the Exalting the Expanſive Force of the Salt, till it is Formed and Excited into a Spirit, which yet, aſter all theſe Operations, retains a Contractive Force, which is Maniſeſt from it's Acidity: SPIRIT Of Nitre is Drawn much the ſame Way, namely, by Reducing the Salt to àa Powder, then mixing it with Potter's Earth, and afterwards Diſtilling it in a Large Retort, and in a Reverberatory Furnace, by a ſmall Fire till the Phlegm is ſeparated, and from thence Increaſing the Fire by little and little to the Second Degree, when the Spirits will come forth in White Clouds, and fill the whole Receiver; and from ſtill Increaſing the Fire to the Laſt Degree, the Vapours will come Red, and the Operation will end in about 14 Hours. TuE Difference therefore betwixt theſe Two Spirits can only Proceed from the Difference of the Expanſive Forces of the Salts, from which they are Drawn, and from that oſ Nitre being Greater, and having a leſs Contractive Force than that of Common Salt. TuAT Nitre has a Greater Expanſive Force than Common Salt is from hence Evident, becauſe it is Confeſ"d to be more Volatile; it is made from a Fluid, and by the Airs Acting upon that Fluid, both which have an Expanſive Force, and by the Contractive Force of the Cold and Solid Stones, to which it Adheres, as in Cellars and in old Ruined Buildings; whereas Common Salt is Formed by the Evaporation of the Fluid from the Expanſive Force of the Sun's Rays, and leaving a Matter behind, which cannot be Evaporated by it, and which therefore cannot be Separated by the utrmoſt Force of Fire; Nitre is alſo found in the Hotteſt Countries, as in Ag-pt, where the Expanſive Force of the Sun is the ſtrongeſt. FROM whence a Solution follows of the foregoing Experiment, that, with the utmoſt Force of Fire, the Spirituous Vapours of Common Salt will be only White, whereas thoſe of Nitre will be Red; which can only Proceed from the Greater Natural Expanſive Force of the one than of the other; for the Senſation of Orange or Red is Produced in us by a Greater Action upon our Organs, and White with a Leſſer, or by an Equilibrium of the Expanſive and Contractive Blended together. From hence alſo it follows, that what Spirit of Nitre Diſſolves, the Spirit of Salt vill Precipitate, becauſe the whole Moment of Spirit of Nitre has an Expanſive Force, in Reſpect of the whole Moment of the Spirit of Common Salt, which has a Contractive, and therefore the Latter, having a Greater Contractive than the Former an Expanſive, what this Diſſipates and Diſſolves, the other Precipitates and Drives to the Center by a Contrary Action. 5. 9. SpiRIT Of Sal Armoniack is made from a Salt, which has ſtill a more VoIatile and Expanſive Force than Nitre. TuE Natural Sal Armoniack is found in the Hotteſt Countries, as in the Parts of Africt, which are the neareſt to the Torrid Zone, upon Earth, which has Imbibed the Urine of Animals, and which is Sublimed into a Volatile Salt, by the Action or Expanſive Force of the Sun; Artificial Sal Armoniack is made at Venice with Five Parts of Urine, one of Sea Salt, and half a Part of Chimney Soot Boiled together, and Sublimed into a Volatile Salt, in which the Sea Salt cloſely Unites with the Volatile; the Reaſon of which is, becauſe the Contractive Force of the Sea Salt Acting tovards a Center, whilſt the Expanſive of the Volatile Acts from one, they Cling and Faſten to each other, and are thereby ſtrongly Cemented together. IN order to Exalt this Salt into a Spirit, it is mixt with Quick-lime, after they have been both Powderd apart; Water is then Poured upon it; and the Reſt is Performed by Diſtillation, and Increaſing the Fire to the Second Degree only, by Reaſon of it's Exceeding Volatility; all which Methods contribute to the Raiſing and Exciting the Expanſive Force into a Spirituous Subſtance. Aua Regalis is a Solution of Sal Armoniack in Spirit of Nitre; or it may be made vith Equal Portions of Salt-Petre and Sal Gemme, with thrice as much Potter's Earth, Powderd and Diſtill'd in the ſame Manner, as Spirit of Nitre; or it may be made vith Common Sca Salt. R r æ Axt AnD from hence is Maniſeſt, the Reaſon of the following Phænomenons; 1't, Wny Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua Fortis, which is only an Addition of the Spirit of Vitriol to it by a joint Diſtillation of both, will Diſſolve Silver and other Metals, but not Gold, and conſcquently, why Spirit of Nitre will Raiſe a Precipitarion into a Tranſparent Fluid. 20. Wnvy Aqua Regalis will Diſſolve Gold, but not Silver, and Spirit of Salt Diſſolve Leaf of Gold, which Aqua Fortis is not able to do. 33. Wny Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, will Precipitate Gold Diſſolved by Aqua Regalis, and other Metals by Spirit oſ Nitre, as alſo, why Spirit of Salt will Precipitate what Aqua Fortis Diſſolves. 4. Wny in Spirit of Nitre Dulcify'd, or Mixt with Alcohol, or Spirit of Wine Dephlegmd, tho' the one is an Acid, and the other a Sulphur, and not an Alkali, ⸗ Great Heat, and aſterwards a ſtrong Ebullition, Ariſcs, the ſame which is obſerved in the mixing of Oĩl of Vitriol, which is an Acid, and Oĩl of Turpentine, which is an Ethercal one. : 59. Wnv a Mixture of Equal Quantities oſ Spirit of Sal Armoniack and Spirit of Wine vill cauſe a Coagulum. ". Wny Oil oſ Vitriol, which is an Acid, mixt with the Acid Spirit of it or vith Water, Produces many Times a Conſiderable Ebullition. s. 10. As to the Firſt, that Spirit of Nitre or Aqua Fortis Diſſolves Silver, and other Metals, Proceeds ſrom hence, namely, from a Great Contractive Force, as that oſ Salt being Excited into a very Great Expanſive one, as has been obſerved in the Diſtilling and Forming this Spirit; on the other Hand, Metals ſeem to be a Solid, Denſe, and Compacted Salt, into which they are capable of being Reſolved, that is, the Baſis of them is, as before in Spirit of Nitre, a Great Contractive Force, Compreſ'd into a Greater, with a Various Mixture of the Expanſive in a Small Degree, from whence ariſes the Difference oſ their Colours; or, which comes to the ſame the Baſis of them is a Various Degree oſ the Expanſive Condensd and Compreſꝶ'd into a very Great Contractive; when therefore theſe Forces are Placed together, the Expanſive Force of the Spirit being Superior to the Contractive of the Metals, it Diſſipates and Diſſolves them and Reduces them to a Fluid, that is, to as Great an Expanſive as their Contractive Forces will admit of. AND hence it ſcems to be, that Aqua Fortis is a leſs Powerſul Diſſolvent than Good Spirit of Nitre; becauſe Vitriol is leſs Volatile than Nitre is, and the Expanſive Force is thereby weakend, as Spirit of Vitriol is not ſo ſtrong as Spirit of Nitre; for the Moments of their Forces are Compounded of a Contractive and Expanſive, and ii the Contractive oſ both vere Equal, yet if the Expanſive of Nitre is Greater than that of Vitriol, it's Moment will be Proportionably Greater; and which is the Reaſon, that Oil of Vitriol, which is longer in Draving, and Requires a more Intenſe Fire to do it, by which it's Expanſive is Increaſed, is Stronger and has a Greater Moment than the Spirit oſ it; From whence it is found Requiſite in making Salt or Vitriol of Mars, to moderate the Force of Oil oſ Vitriol by a Mixture of Spirit of Wine, which yet ĩs Perſormed by Spirit of Vitriol without any ſuch Mixture. AxD for the ſame Reaſon Spirit of Nitre will raiſe a Precipitation, which has a Contractive Forcc, into a Tranſparent Fluid, in which the Expanſive is Superior to the Contractive, and which is the Occaſion of that Quick and Ready Tranſmiſſion of the ays of Light thro' it, which have likewiſe an Expanſive one. ꝗ. 11. Ox the Contrary, Spirit of Nitre vill not Diſſolve Gold, which is a Meral oſ a Greater Contractive, as well as a Greater Expanſive than the Reſt, the Firſt is Evident by is Weight and it's Compactneſs, and the Laſt, by it's Colour and it's Soſtneſs and Ductility; there muſt therefore be an Addition 10 the Moment oſ the Former Diſolvent, by Diminiſing: the Expanſive, as little as can be, and Increaſing the Contractive, ſo as the Expanſive may Act with a Greater Weight and not a Leſs Energy, which is Performed by a Solution of Sal Armoniack in it, which, tho' Excecding Volatile, is yet below the Expanſive Force of Spirit of Nitre, and by the Contractive Force of Salt, a Weight is added ro the Contractive of it, or elſe by Diſtilling Sal Gemme or Common Salt together with Nitre and Potter's Earth, which will have the ſame Tne, ſince there will be the Contractive Force of Salt, as beſore, and the Volatility tility of it's Spirit by Diſtillation ill be a little Inferior to that of the Spirit of Nitre; For in all theſe Caſes, the Contractive Force is in ſome Meaſure Kepreſented by Weight in Bodies, and the Expanſive by the Velocity of them, the Moment of which is Greater, as the Velocity and the Weight is Greater. AND therefore Aqua Regalis will not Diſiolve Silver, becauſe the Contractive Force being Greater and the Expanſive Leſi, than in Spirit of Nitre or Aqua Fortis, it's Action is too Heavy and Dull, that is, is not Quick and Expanſive enough to cauſe ſuch a Diſſolution. Tnus a Great Weight of Lead may be Moved by an Equal Weight of Lead, with a certain Degree of Velocity or the Expanſive Force annext to it, which the Greateſt Percuſſion of the Rays of the Sun, of Fire, of a Wand, or any other Expanſive Force, vhere the Contractive is Small, ſhall not be able to Stir, and this ſeems to be the Caſe of Aqua Regalis Diſſolving Gold, and the Spirit of Nitre not doing it. ON the Contrary, a Feather, or any other Light, or Expanſive Subſtance, is more caſily Moved with a Breath or by an Expanſive Force, which has the leaſt Degree oſ the Contractive, than by the Motion and Action of Lead, which has a Greater Contractive and Leſs Expanſive, and which inſtead of Moving the Feather, Oppreſſes it's Action by it's Superior Force of the Contractive, and this ſeems to be the Caſe of Spirit of Nitre or Aqua Fortis Diſlolving Silver, and Aqua Regalis not doing it. FrROM hence it is likewiſe Manifeſt, why Spirit of Salt Diſlolves Leaf of Gold, which Aqua Fortis or Spirit of Nitre is not able to do, becauſe Gold, as before, Requires a Greater Contractive and a Les Expanſive to Diſſolve it, and Spirit of Salt has a Greater Contractive Force than Spirit of Nitre, according to what has been already ſaid in Reſpect of each of them; and Why Spirit of Salt can Diſſolve Leaf of Gold, when it cannot a Maſs of it, and which only Aqua Regalis can do, the Reaſon ſeems to be, becauſe there is not ſo Great an Expanſive Force required to Diſſolve the one as the other, as Spirit of Salt has a Leſs Degree of the Expanſive, than Spirit of Nitre mixt with Sal Armoniack has. LastLy, From the ſame Principles, Vinegar Diſſolves Lead, which Aqua Fortis cannot, and Aqua Fortis Quick-ſilver, which Vinegar cannot, becauſe, Lead requires a Leſſer Contractive and a Leſs Expanſive to Move it, which is found in Vinegar, and Quick-ſilver a Greater Expanſive and a Greater Contractive, which is found in Aqua Fortis; the Fir?t Metal having a Leſs Expanſivè from it's Softneſs, Ductility, and Dull Colour, and a Leſs Contractive from it's Weight; and the Laſt a Greater Expanſive from it's Volatility and Bright Colour, and a Greater Contractive from it's Weight. 5 2. SP1”IT Of Sal Armoniack Precipitates Gold, which Aqua Regalis, or Silver, &e. which Spirit of Nitre or Aqua Fortis Diſſolves; becauſe Spirit of Sal Armoniack has a Greater Expanſive Force and a Leſs Contractive than Aqua Regalis or Spirit oſ Nitre, and therefore Weakens and Enervates the Contractive of the Diſſolvents, which was neceſſary to the making an Impreſſion upon thoſe Metals, by which their Moments become too Light and Spirituous to ſupport their Diſſolutions; On the Contrary, Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, which is a Salt, that by Calcination and Fire firſt, and by the Air aſterwards acquires a Dull and Languid Degree of the Expanſive, and retains a Conſiderable one of the Contractive, will cauſe the ſame Precipitations; becauſe here the Contractive is too Powerſul for, and Oppreſſes, the Expanſive of the Diſſolvents, and by a contrary Force Drives to the Bottom, what the Former had Raiſed. Tnus likewiſe Spirit of Salt, which obtains an Expanſive Force from it's Spirit, and a Good Degree of the Contractive from the fixtneſs of it's Salt, Precipitates what Spirit of Nitre Diſſolves, by Acting contrary to, and Loading the Expanſive Force ol it, from whence the Metal ſubſides; for Spirit of Salt has a Leſs Degree of the Expanſive and a Greater of the Contractive than Spirit of Nitre, as is Evident beſore ſrom the Formation and Compoſition of them. 5. 13. In Spirit of Nitre Dulcify'd, that is, vhere Spirit of Nitre is mixt vitl Alcohol, or Spirit of Wine Dephlegm'd, tho' the one is Termed an Acid, and the other is not, what is called an Alkali, but is eſteemed a Sulphur, there is a Grea Etſerveſcence, and aſterwards a Strong Ebullition ariſes. b Bur before we Endeavour at a Solution of this Phænomenon, it will be neceſſary to give an Account, by what Methods and from what Principles the Spirit of Wine is made, as we have already done in Spirit of Nitre; Wine is the Muſte or Juice of Grapes, which by Fermentation is Raiſed into a Spirituous Subſtance, and is more or leſs Groſs, according as it abounds more or leſs with Tartar, which conſiſts oſ Earthy and Saline Parts, which are Drawn from the Earth into the Grape; Muſte is Sweet and not in the leaſt Intoxicating, and Changes into Wine by the Expanſive Force of the Air, hich Ferments it, ſo that the Contractive Force, which is that of Tartar and Salt, is Firſt Raisd and Excited by Vegetation, by which it acquires a Degree of the Expanſive, and is the Cauſc of the Agreeable Taſt in Grapes Compounded of the Expanſive and Contractive, by the Firſt of which they are Sweet, and by the Laſt have a little Acidity and Sharpneſs; upon the Bruiſing and Preſſing of the Grapes, the Expanſive is ſomething Increas'd, and the Contractive ſtill Diminiſhd; and laſtly, by Fermentation, in which the Air Performs the Office of Fire in the Diſtillations of more Contractive Subſtances, the Expanſive is ſtill raiſed to an Higher Degree, by which means it becomes Intoxicating and Spirituous, and the Contractive is farther Diminiſ'd by a Separation of the Tartar from it to the Sides of the Veſſel, or Precipitating to the Lees; ſo that, when it is Wine, e may conſider it, as Conſiting of a Great Degree of the Expanſive, and of a very Small one of the Contractive. Tnis Expanſive Force is ſtill farther raiſed by Diſtillation and a Gentle Fire into Brandy or Aqua Vitæ, when that which is Drawn off into the Receiver becomes Inflammable, and Greater Plenty of Brandy is Extracted from Wines, which are Lighter and more Spirituous, that is, which have a Greater Degree of the Expanſive, and a Leſ”™ of the Contractive, than from ſtronger Wines, which have a Greater Contractive Force in them; Spirit of Wine is the Diſtillation of Brandy in a Vaporous Bath, which ſiews the Exceeding Expanſiveneſs of it; and when it is Dephlegmd, that is, cleared of all i's Contractive Force, as much as Poſſible, it becomes, what is, by the Chymiſis, called Alcohol; which therefore is a Liquor raiſed from a Tartar and Salt in the Earth, which has a Moderate Contractive Force to an Expanſive in Alcohol, which has little or none at all, for take a Spoonful of it, and throw it in the Air, and it will be immediately Diſſipated, without Falling, or Contracting into Drops, as all other Liquors do. Tuis therefore being the Nature of Spirit of Wine Dephlegmd, or of Alcohol, namely, that it obtains the urmoſt Degree of the Expanſive, and the moſt Minute, which can be Imagined of the Contractive, it will not have any Moment to Diſſolve Metals, but Spirit of Nitre, which has a Great Degree of the Expanſive, and a Good Degree of the Contractive, will do it, and in the Operation cauſes an Efferveſcence. ON the Contrary, the ſame Alcohol, or Dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, which has a Great Expanſive Force, and a Small Contractive, will have that Effect upon Spirit of Nitre, which has a Leſs Expanſive Force, and a Greater Contractive, by cauſing an Efferveſcence and Ebullition, and by Diſſolving it's Contractive Force, and Dulcifying it's Acidity, which Spirit of Nitre, which has a Greater Expanſive Force, and a Leſs Contractive than Metals, has upon them, by Producing alſo an Efferveſcence and Diſſolving their Contractive. FrROM whence it follows, that Efferveſcence and Ebullition ariſes from the Conteſt, which there is betwixt Two Contrary Forces, the Expanſive and Contractive; and it is neceſſary it ſould be ſo; for in any Fluid, where the Forces are the ſame, there is a perfect Quieſcence, as in Water, in Spirit of Nitre, Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, &c. hich mixt with others would occaſion the urmoſt Tumult and Diſorder; which can therefore only Proceed from the Difference and Diſparity of ſuch Forces, which Contend with each other, till the one or the other Prevails, which is the Reaſon of their Ebullition, and, whilſt ſuch a Conteſt laſts, the Medium about them is ſuitably Affected, is raiſed into a Ferment, and ſtrikes a Senſation of Heat upon the Organs, which are applyd to it. AND Bodies do not cauſe this Efferveſcence and Ebullition, as they are Acid or Alkali, but as they have Expanſive and Contractive Forces, Acting Contrary and in Oppoſition to cach orher; Thus an Acid Spirit has a Great Expanſive Force, and a Small Small Contractive, as Spirit of Nitre, Oĩl of Vitriol, & in Reſpect of Alkalis or Salts Calcined, whichi have a Great Contractive from the Salt, and a Small Expanſive from the Fire; And from hence it is, that what is an Acid in one Caſe, may be an Al&ali in another, for what hias an Expanſive Force in Reſpect of Metals, may have a Contractive in Reſpect of Liquors, which are moro Spirituous than it; Thus Spirit of Nitre is an Acid, or has an Expanſive Force in Reſpect of Metals, which have a Contractive or Alkalic, but in Reſpect of Alcohol, Spirit of Nitre has a Contractive, and Alcohol an Expanſive; Spirit of Salt, in Reſpect of Leaf Gold, is Expanſive, in Reſpect of Aqua Fortis, is Contractive. l FoRrR the ſame Reaſon it is, that Oll of Vitriol, which has a Great Contractive Force, as is Evident from it's Acidity, and from the Nature of Vitriol, which is a ſtrong Compacted Salt, and Oil of Turpentine, which is a Vegetable and Athereal Oil, and has therefore a Great Degree of the Expanſive, both from the Nature of it, which is a Searching and Penetrating Liquor, that Diſtills in hot Countries, as in Italy, Spain, Cyprus, the Iſle of Chios, Provence and Dauphine, from ſeveral Kinds of Trèes by the Inciſion of them, and from the Diſtillation and Increaſe of the Fire to Produce it; the Heat of the Sun, the Vegetation, and Fire in Diſtilling it, all, Contributing to Raiſe ànd Exalt the Expanſive Force of it; For the ſame Reaſon it is, that theſe Two Oils, by the Oppoſition of thèir Contractive and Expanſive Forces, occaſion an Efferveſcence and Ebullition ; And the ſtrong Ebullition, which ariſes from Pouring Aqua Fortis or Oiĩl of Vitriol upon an Alkali Salt, Proceeds from no other Cauſe, the Oĩl of Vitriol being the ſame or a like Force to the Alxali Sali, as the Oĩl of Turpentine is to the Oĩl of Vitriol; the Former, namely, Ol of Vitriol and Oil of Turpentine, in their ſeveral Reſpects tò the Latter, that is, Alkali and Oil of Vitriol, having a Gteater Expanſive Force and a Leſs Contractive, and the Latter a Greatet Contractive and Leſs Expanſive. uũ I TnUS alſo Spirit of Vitriol mixt with Oil of Vitriol, or Oil of Viriol with Water, vill cauſc a eonſiderable Ebullition, for Oil of Vitriol has a Greater Contractive and a Leſs Expanſive than the Spirit, it being Confeſſ'd by Chyrmiſis, thæ tho one is the more æ Part of the other; Spirit of Vitriol, therefore in this Caſe, will Perform what Oil of Turpentine did in the Former, and having a Greater Expanſive and a Leſs Contractive, than the Oil; will raiſe it into an Bbullition, as Fire doẽs Woater. : i i ON the Contrary, Oil of Vitriol, albeit it has a good Degree of the. Contractive, yet having a Vaſt Expanſive Force likewiſe, tho' Inferior to that of it's Spirit, Expands jt ſel? in Water, which has a Small Expanſive Force, and a Greater Contractive, and thereſorè Oil of Vitriol is to Water, as Spirit of Vitriol to the Oil; Juſt, as before, Oil of Vitriol was to the Alkali Salt, as Spirit of Turpentine to Oĩl oſ Vitriol. OnL of Vitriol is à Fluid Fire o? à Burning Fluid, becauſe it's Expanſive Force is exceeding Great, and it's Contractive very Conſiderable, by which there is a Weigtht and Moment added to the Expanſive, which makes it apptoãch to the Nature of Fire: By the ſame way, all õther Efferveſcences and Ebullitions may bt Expounded, we ſhall therefore now only add ſomething concerning Fire and Flame. S. 14. IP Two Parts of a Spirit, Drawn and Compounded from Oil of Vitriol and Nitre, are Poured upon one Part of Oil of Cloves, or Caraway Seeds, or any Ponderous Oil of Vegerable or Animal Subſtances, or Oil of Turpentine thickened with a little Balſam of Sulphur, there will immediately be Produced a Burning Flame, the Reaſon of which is the ſame, as that of the foregoing Phænomenons, TuE Expanſive Force of Oll of Vitriol is Loaded with too Great a Degree of the Contractive, which Force is therefore corrected by Nitre, which is more Volatile than Vitriol, and made ſtill more Expanſive by it's Diſtillation with the Oll of it. ON the Contrary, Spirit of Nitre would have too Great an Expanſive Force, by which it is capable in Conjunction with it's Contractive to Diſſolve Metals, a Middle Proportion of borh theſe Forces therefore muſt be taken to Diſſolve the Oils above:mentioned. : THE Oils muſt be Ponderous, and Oĩl of Turpentine Thicken'd with Balſam of Sulphur, that they may have a certain Degree of the Contractive to be ſurmounted by that of the Vitriol Actuated by the Expanſive, they muſt be the Oils of Vegetable or ot Animal Subſtances, that they may have a certain Degree of rhe Expanſive, by which they are diſpoſed to riſe into Flame by the Action and Force of the Compound Spirit of Nitre. l ] For the ſame Reaſon it is, that Tin Powderd, by the Extreme Force of Fire in Calcining it, acquires a Degree of the Expanſive, which becomes Inflammable by Mixing a Diſſolution of Silver, Precipitate with Salt Water, and Dry'd; the Spirit of Nitre, made leſs Expanſive by the Diſſolution, obtaining the Effect of the Compound Spirit before, and the Powderd Tin, that of the Ponderous and Vegetable Oil. Tunus alſo Common Fire and Flame Proceeds from the Expanſive Force of Fire and Air, which has a Degree of the Contractive in Reſpect of the Former, Acting upon the Sulphureous or Expanſive Nature of the Fuel, and it's Contractive Force, by which ſuch Bodies become Solid and Heavy; Hence all Vegetables, Wood and other the like Materials Dryd, Coals and Sulphureous Bodies, arc Inſlammable in Various Degrees, from their Expanſive Force, but Stone, Clay, Earth, and Metals, not ſo, by their being too Contractive; Hence likewiſe, Oils ſfrom their Expanſive Force are Inammant, but Salts from their Contractive do not Admit of that Property. IT has been Eſteemed a Problem in Nature hard to be Solved, th' vhat is Juſiſied by Common Experience, why in a Veſſel full of Water, ſet over a Fire, the Water ſould Boil, when the Bortom of the Veſſel is, in Compariſon, Cool, anl ycr the Sides of it ſhall be Extremely Hot; The Reaſon of which is, becauſe the Expnſive Force of the Fire, not being able to ſubdue the Contractive of the Metal, Paſes to the Contractive of the Water, betwixt which and the Fire the Conteſt thereſore lies, and is raiſed into an Ebullition by it; but as the Expanſive Force Aſcends by the Sides of the Veſſel, the Conteſt will be betwixt the Fire and the Conttactive Forceœ of the Metal, from whence the Intenſe Heat of it is cauſed; when the Veſſel is taken off the Fire, the Bottom of it grows Hot by the Expanſive Force, which now Prevails in the Water, Returning upon the Contractive of the Metal, betwixt which Forces now the Conteſt lies : AIr, which in Reſpect of Fire, has a Contractive Force, and which being the Greateſt in Cold and Froſty Weather, makes Fire burn more Fiercely, in Reſpect of Water, has an Expanſive, by which it Ferments and Actuates it, ?d in certuin Caſcs Raiſes it into Vegetation. s. 15. AIR or æther is a Medium known to be Eleſtick, but whencæ ther Elaſticity is Produced, has been little Explained, which Probably Ariſes from it's Expanſive Force, Mixt in a due Proportion vith it's Contractive; the Firſt beinę chieſy Impreſs'd upon it by the Sun's Expanſive Force, and the Moons Contractive, which Acts in Conjunction ith it, and in Oppoſition to the Earth, as has been ſiewn in Tides; and the Laſt from the Earth's Contractive, hich Acts contrary to the other; by which means the Air is a Medium Stretch'd and Pulled betwixt Two Oproſite and Contranitent Forces, from whence it becomes Elaſtick, like a String or Wire under Tenſion from Forces Acting a Diſferent way at the Two Ext:emities of it. Tuis Eloſtickneſs of Air or æther is the Cauſc of it's being ſuſceptible of the leaſt Percuſſions from the Expanſive Force of Bodies, by which we ſee and are made ſenſible of the Various Colours of them; From the ſame Elaſtick and Expanſive Force, Exerting it ſelf Equably on Water dropt in Air, and from the Contractive Force of the Water, by which it's Parts are Equably Drawn to each other, it is, that the Figures of theſe Drops are Spherical PLANTS and Trees, likewiſe in General, have a Cylindrical Form upon the like Account, the proper Expanſive Force in Vegetation, diſplaying it ſel? Round to a certain Degree, is bounded by the Contrary Expanſive or Contractive of the Air, which Acting Equably on all Hands, keeps the Vegetating Force within the Circular Limits it Preſcribes, excepting where it Shoots upwards in the Stock, or downwards from the Root by a Superiority of Force, by which mears the C⸗linder is Framed; when the main Expanſive Force is ſpent, and the Trunk can riſe no I -her, it then Shoots out into Lateral Directions and Branches, which for the Reaſon above are ſtill Cylindrical, but when theſe are Formed, and the Exponſive is Enervated and Weaken'd, it ſinks into Flat Leaves, which yet are gencrally Circular, or Approachmg ing to that Figure by the ſame proper Expanſive Force of Vegetation, and the con trary Expanſive of the Air Acting Equably upon it. TuE laſt Effort in Vegetation is the Expanſive Force ſtriking out into ſharp Points, which is the Cauſe, that moſt Leaves are ſurrounded with little Indentations, and which Proceed from the final Exertion of the Expanſive, in the Plant or the Tree and the Renitency of the Air's Contractive, or Contrary Expanſive; 1 have mentioned thus much of Air here, as Eſtceming it amongſt the Spirits, of which I am now Treating, tho' the moſt Moderate and Gentle, and the beſt Adapted to all the uſes of Animal Life and Vegetation, of any orher Spirit whatſocver. 5. 16. EQUAL Quantities of Spirit of Sal Armoniack and Spirit of Wine will cauſc a Coagulum, becauſe the Moments of their Forces are Equally Balanced and Contrary to cach other; From whence they will Cling together, and mutually Cohere, and Produce a Poſitive or Active Reſt, or Union of their Forces; Spirit of Wine mixt with Spirit of Nitre Cauſes an Ebullition and Diſſolves it's Acidity, as has been before ſiewn, that is, the Expanſive Force of the Spirit of Wine is Superior to the Contractive of Spirit of Nitre; but Spirit of Sal Armoniack is more Volatile and Expanſive than Spirit of Nitre, and therefore comes nearer to the Expanſive Force of Spirit of Wine, and their Forces are Contrary, becauſe Spirit of Wine is an Oleous one, that is, almoſt entirely Conſiſts of an Expanſive, but Spirit of Sal Armoniack has from it's Salts a Contractive; And for the ſame Reaſon, Oil mixt vith a Saline Liquor in a Mortar will form an Unguent called Nuttitum, which can Proceed from nothing but the Expanſive of the Oĩl, which is Inflammable, Acing contrary to the Contractive of the Salt, which Decrepitates in Fire, with nearly Equal Forces, by which they are United and Cemented together in a cloſer Coheſion; And this may give an Account of the Conſiſtency of all Bodies, which ſeem to be little more than ſtronger Coagulums, ariſing from the Mutual and perhaps ncarly Equal Actions of the Expanſive and Contractive, hoſe Forces are yet much Greater than thoſc here alledged of Wine and Sal Armoniack. FrOM hence alſo it is Evident, vhy Spirit of Vitriol, remaining ſome Time upon Iron, reincorporates into Vitriol, and Spirit of Nitre poured upon Salt of Tartar returns into Nitre; Green Engliſh Vitriol, out of which the Spirit is formed, is ſaid to partake of Iron, and Mars or Iron may be Reduced to a Green Vitriol, by Diſſolving it in the Spirit, Filtrating and Evaporating the Solution to a Skin, and ſetting it to Cool; As therefore the Contractive Force of Iron may be Exalted into a Green Tranſparent Chryſtal by the Expanſive Force of the Spirit, vhen made ro Evaporate and Set to Cool, ſo it is no vonder, that the ſame Expanſive Force of the Spirit, remaining for ſome Time upon the Iron, by which means it is Evaporated and Weakened, ſhould be changed into Vitriol by the Contractive of the Iron, and ſo likewiſe, that Spirit of Nitre poured upon Salt of Tartar ſould by the Contractive Force of the Latter, and the Evaporation of the Expanſive of the Former, Coagulate into Nitre; ſince theſe, as thoſe others before of Spirit of Wine and Spirit of Sal Armoniack, ſeem to Act with nearly Equal and Contrary Forces. S. 17. THERE is onc Phænomenon more, which I ſhall take Notice of in Reſpect of the Spirits in Chymiſtry, which is that of the Depart, which is the Parting of Metals, by the Diſſolvent's quitting one Metal, which Precipitates to the Bottom, and betaking it ſelf to another. Thus when Aqua Fortis has Diſſolved Silver, and Copper is put into the Diſſolution, the Silver Precipitates, and the Copper is Diſſolved; Iron Precipitates Copper, Lapis Calaminaris Iron, and the Liquor of fixt Nitre Precipitates Lapis Calaminaris. THE Reaſon of which ſeems to be this, that Silver requires all the Expanſive and Contractive Force of Aqua Fortis or Spirit of Nitre to Diſſolve it; Copper, by an Addition of it's Contractive Force, Acts againſt the Expanſive of the Spirit of Nitre, by which it is ſo far weakened as to be no longer able to ſupport the Silver, which thereſore ſubſides, but the Expanſive thus weakened and retaining ſomething of the Silver, which it has Diſolved, is ſuſficient to ſubdue the Leſs Contractive Force of the Copper; and thus we find even Diſtill'd Vinegar, which has a much leſs Expanſive and Contractive Force than Spirit of Nitre, able to Diſſolve Verdegreeſe, which is only a Copper opencd and reduced to a Ruſt by the Fermenting Spirits of Tartar; vhat therefore Diſtilled Vinegar can Perform upon Copper opened, it is reaſonable 5 :i to to think, that Spirit of Nitre weakened in its Expanſive Force, but increaſed in irs Moment of the Contractive by the Silver, which it ſupports, may Perform in Reſpect of Copper, which is crude and unopened, and not ſo fully prepared ſor a Solution. FoRr the ſame Reaſon, Iron, whoſe Specifick Gravity or Contractive Force is to Copper, as ſomething more than 7 to 9, as Copper is to Silver as about 9 to II, vill Precipitate Copper, whilſt the Spirit of Nitre will ſtill obtain a ſufficient Expanſive Force to Diſſolve the Former; and the ſame may be ſaid of Lapis Calaminaris, and the Liquor of ſixt Nitre, which Decreaſe in their Contractive Forces from the foregoing, as the Expanſive Force of the Spirit of Nitre or Aqua Fortis is Impaired by the Solutions. 5. 18. HAVING therefore gone thr what we intended in Relation to the Spirits in Chymiſtry, ve ſall now Proceed to the next Active Principles in it, which are the Phlegm and the Oil, and which are only ſtill Leſſer Degrees of the Expanſive Formed and Raiſed by the Fire, and are more or leſs Expanſive, according to the Greater or Leſs Expanſive Nature of the Subſtances, from which they are Extracted; Phlegm, as being little more than a Fluid, has but a Small Degree oſ the Expanſive, and Oil, where it is Inflammable, has a Greater; and where it is not, has a Greater Degree of the Contractive, as in Oil of Vitriol, which is not Raiſed but by a very Violent Force of the Expanſive of the Fire, concerning which we have already ſpoken. TuE Principal Difference betwixt the Spirits, Phlegm, and Oil in Chymiſtry, Abſtracting from the Natures, from which they are Drawn, which would diverſiſy them to Infinity, ſeems to be in General this, that Spirit acquires the Greateſt Degree of the Expanſive by the Operation of the Fire, and which it is capable of Exerting upon other Bodies, to which it is Applied; Oil has a Leſs Degree of the Expanſive, and vhich is always joined with a Greater Degree of the Contractive, from Whence it becomes a Thicker and more Glutinous Subſtance than the Spirit, and therefore is not ſo capable oſ Exerting it's Action upon other Bodies, but yet is Prepared, by this Mixture of the Expanſive with the Contractive, to obey the Expanſive Force oſ Fire, and to riſe into a Flame. l PHLEGM acquires but a Small Portion of the Expanſive, and has but little of the Contractive, being nothing clſe than the Moiſture of Bodies, which ſits looſe in them without partaking of the Real Qualities of them, and therefore caſily comes forth in Vapours, and diſfers not much from Common Water, Excepting that it receives ſome Small Impreſſions from the Active Principles, and has thereby a more Deterſive, that is, Expanſive Vertue than Common Water; which is alſo the Caſe oſ Rain and Dew, being Impregnated with, and made more Expanſive by, the Spirit of the Air; we ſnall therefore Say nothing farther of the Phlegm propoſcd to us by Chymiſts, but Proceed more particularly to Speciſy their Oils. ] s. 19. OIL or Sulphur is ſaid to be a Sweet, Subtile, and Unctuous Subſtance, which riſes after the Spirit, and is Inflammable; which Character exactly Agrees with the Forces ve before Aſſigned it, that it has a Leſs Expanſive and a Greater Contractive, than that which belongs to Spirit, tho', like Spirits, it muſt be Different, according as the Nature, from which it is Extracted, is more or leſs Expanſive or Contractive. i Tuus Oil of Roſemary or Lavender will Swim upon Water, whilſt Oil of Box, Guaiacum, or Cloves, Precipitates to the Bottom; which is not a Proof, as Chymiſs Imagine, that theſe Oĩls are drawn Impure, and that the Former are mixt vith Spirits, and that the Latter are filled with Salts; but that Roſemary and Lavender have a more Expanſive and Volatile Nature, which is Evident from the Briskneſs, and Livelineſs of their Smell, and that Box, Guaiacum, and Cloves, have a more Contractive, which likewiſe may be eaſily acknowledged from their Fainter and Duller ones; and therefore the Oils of the one vill be Lighter and more Expanſive and thoſe of the other more Contractive and Heavier. HENCE it is alſo, that ſome Oils may be drawn by Inciſion only into the Root or Trunk of Trees, as that of Turpentine; others by Beating and Preſſing the Fruin: and Sceds, which are Contained in Them, as thoſe of Olives, Almonds, and Nurs; whilſ vhilſt others are not Extracted without the Greateſt Force of Fire, as Oil of Vitriol; the Firſt ſeems to have the Greateſt Degree of the Expanſive, the Second a ſtill Leſ and the Laſt, tho' it has a Great Degree of the Expanſive, yet is joiicd vith a Great Degrec of the Contractive. 5. 20. Ir is Aſfirmed by Chymiſts, that nothing but Oĩl can properly be ſaid to be Inflammable, and that the Oil is ſo much the more ſo, as the Salts, with which it is cloſcly United, have been more or leſs Spiritualized, as if the Salts contributed to their Inflammation. WuEREAS, as we Eſteem Salt to be of a Contractive Nature, and Flame to be of an Expanſive one, it will be hard to conceive, how the one ſhould be Aſſiſtant to the other; eſpecially, when it is acknowledged, that the more Volatile and Expanſive the Salts are, vhich are mixt with the Oil, the readier it is to be Imflamed; and on the Contrary, that ſixt Salt entirely Hinders and Obſtructs Inflammation, as is Evident from Sea Salt throvn into the Fire, which ſerves not to Raiſe and Excite, but to Extinguiſh it. IT muſt thereſore be ſaid, that Spirit of Wine, which is reckoned to be an Oleous one, and Which muſt conſequently be the moſt Perſect Oil, which is Poſſble, is only Salt, or the Contractive Force, Exalted to the Higheſt Degree of the Expanſive; for that all Bodies have Salt, or a Contractive Force, has been ſiewn, and that this Contractive Force is raiſed into the urmoſt Expanſion in Alcohol or Spirit of Wine DeJhiesmas any Oll therefore is nothing more than Salt Volatilized, or the Contractive orce Actuated with a Great Degree of the Expanſive; From whence it Enſues, that it is not the Mixture of Oil with Nitre or any other Volatile Salt, which is the Occaſion of Inflammability, but the Raiſing a Salt, or a Contractive Force, into a ſufficient Degree of Expanſiveneſs to be Acted upon by Fire and thron into a Flame. IF thereſore Salt Petre mixt with any Oily Subſtance makes ſuch Oĩl more eaſily Inflamed, whereas Nitre is not it ſelf Inflammable, it Proceeds from hence, that the Contractive of the Oily Subſtance, or the Salt of it, is more ſixt than that of Nitre, and which, when mixt with it, abates that Contractive Force, and aſſiſts the Expan ſive of the Oil; ſo that if it were Poſſible to draw the more Spirituous Part ſrom ſuch Oil, the Salt or Contractive Force remaining would be leſs Inflammable thar Nitre it ſelf, which is in ſome meaſure Evident from the Dull Salts or Earths, which are left aſter ſuch Olly Extractions are made. Or clſc this muſt be from the Con tractive of the Salt, Exciting the Expanſive of Flame by Oppoſition, as Water or Aii does Fire. s. 21. In is ſaid, that the Oil of Vegetables is the Fat and Unctuous Part of Eartl mixing and inſinuating it ſelf with Salt, and that many Things are improperly called Oils, as Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, Oll of Vitriol, and that of Antimony. As to the Firſt, it may be more truly ſaid, that Vegetable Oil is a more Phlegmaric, that is, a more Contractive Burning Spirit of Vegetable, which has a Leſs Degree of the Expanſive than the Former, but is much of the ſame Nature; And as to the Second, that Oil of Vitriol, and fo of the Reſt, may be as juſlly Termed an Oil, as the Spirit of it may be acknowledged to be ſuch, ſince it is a more Contractive Spirit only of the ſame Mineral; that is, ve cannot but think, that as Spirits are cither thoſe of Animals, Vegetables, or Minerals, and accordingly are either VoIatile, Burning, or Acid, or have a Middle Expanſive and Contractive Force belonging to them, as in the Firſt Caſe, or a Greater Expanſive, with a Little Contractive, as in the Scecond, or a Leſs Expanſive and a Greater Contractive, as in the Third, ſo it is ſuitably in the Oils of them, tho' the Expanſive Force in their Olls is Leſs, and the Contractive Greater, than in their Spirits; and conſequently theſe Oils are ſtill Salts, or the Contractive Force, not raiſed to ſo high a Degree in Them, as in the Spirits; and there may be Volatile, Burning, and Acid Oils, as well as Spirits. To Confirm what I ſay, I ſiall only Inſtance in ſome of the Oils of each Sort alledged in Chymiſtry; in Reſpect oſ the Oll of Mincrals, I ſall take thoſe of Mars, Saturu, Veuus, Antimony, and Vitriol; of Vegetables, thoſe of Tartar, Cloves, Turpentine, and Cinnamon; of Animals, thoſe oſ Vipers and Hartſhorn; in the Firſt of which we ſhall find ſome Marks, or other, oſ a Greater Contractive Force, than what is Experienc'd in the Oils oſ Vegetables or oſ Animals, by their Vertue S s 2 or of Removing Obſtructions, which is the Caſe of the Oil of Aſar;, which Fire and Expanſive Forces cannot do; or by Cleanſing and Cicatrizing oſ Ulcers, and Reſiſting Putrefaction or Expanſion, which is the Caſc of Balſam or Oll oſ Saturn, and oſ the Liquor or Oll of Venus, oſ the Cauſtick Oĩl oſ Antimony, or that Prepared with the Acid Spirit, and Oil of Sugar, tho' it's Effcct ĩs in a lels Degree than the Former; or by their Harhneſi, Acility, and Weight, and their Styptick Quality, which is the Caſc of the Oil oſ Vitriol, and oſ all the others foregoing in Diſferent Degrees, according to the Diſſerent Nature of the Bodies, from which they are Dravn, and the Mcthods of Drawing them; theſe therefore may be properly enough Termed Oils, vhich have a more Contractive Nature, and are not Raiſed into ſo High a Degree oſ the Expanſive Force, as the Olls of Vegetables or of Animals, as the Spirits oſ Minerals are not ſo Expanſive, as thoſe of Vegetables or of Animals: The Oils oſ Animals and Vegetables are leſs Contractive, and more Expanſive, than thoſe ol Mincrals, Evident Marks and Characters of which we may obſcrve ſrom their Smells, which are Greater and Stronger than thoſe of Minerals, and which ſiews they have a Leſs Contractive and a Greater Expanſive Force, from their Vertues, that is, their being Good to Smell to in Hyſterical Vapours, which Proceed from too Great a Contractive Force or Melancholy in the Mind, and ſrom the ſame Exceſs of the Contractive Force in the Humours and Animal Spirits oſ the Body, as alſo their being Good to rub Paralytick Parts vith, and for Cold Pains, borh which Diſtempers Proceed from too Great a Contractive Force in the Animal Syſtem; And this is the Caſe of Fœtid Oll of Tartar by Diſtillation, the Spirit alſo of vhich is approved in the Palſic, Aſthma, and Scurvy, is likewiſe uſcd in Hyſterical Maladies, and ſor the Epilepſie, which are all oſ them Diſorders, that Ariſe ſfrom an Exceſs of the Contractive Force, and it is ſaid to vork by Urine and by Sweat, which are maniſeſt Tokens of the Remedy having the Nature oſ the Expanſive, and that the Oil is of the ſame kind of Force with the Spirit, tho' not ſo Expanſive. TuE Oll oſ Tartar per Deliquium, by it's Compoſition and Formation, being only the fixt Salt of Tartar Calcined and made more Expanſive by Fire, and then Diluted by the Air, muſt be leſs Expanſive and more Contractive than the Fœtid Oil by Diſtillation; and therefore, tho' the Vertue oſ this Oil is Aperitive, and conſequently Expanſive, yet it is given for Obſtructions, as the Oĩl of Aſars is, becauſe of the Good Degree oſ the Contractive, which is joined with the Small Expanſive Force of ir. FroM this Account of the Oil oſ Tartar per Deliquium is Confirmed, what ve beſore mentioned concerning it, which was, that it acquired a Dull and Languid Degree of the Expanſive, from it's Calcination, and retained a Conſiderable one of the Contractive, from it's Salt. THE Oill oſ Cloves is ſtill oſf a more Expanſive and a leſs Contractive Nature than that of Tartar, which is Evident from the Firſt being Odoriferous, and the Laſt Fœtid; ſo Spirit of Wine is more Expanſive than Spirit of Nitre and Vitriol, the Former of vhich is Agrecable both to the Taſt and Smell, the Latter very Abominable and Oſfenſive; It is alſo too Expanſive and too little Contractive to remove Groſſer or more Heavy Obſtructions, which Oll of Tartar can do, but is ſuſficient to Diſſipatc the Cold Humours in the Tooth- Ach, and is ſaid to be Good in Malignant Fevers and the Plague, which thereſore perhaps originally Proceed ſfrom a Contractive Force prevailing in the Blood, as That is the Reaſon, in Intermitting ones, of the Cold Parox; ſins obſervable in them; This Oĩl is allo Drawn with a ſmall Degree of Fire, which ſhiews the Expanſiveneſs of it, and i1s Inflammable by a Compound Spirit of Nitre. OIL of Turpentine Diſtills from an Inciſion only into ſeveral ſorts of Trees, which grow in hot Countries, and is of the Conſiſtency of a Balſam, in Winter, and oſ an Oll in Summer, it is Diuretick, Good for the Stone, the Nephritick Cholick, the Retention of Urine, &. has a Biteing Taſt, and is Inflammable by a Compound Spirit of Nitre; all which ſiew, that it has a Greater Expanſive and a Leſs Contractive than Oll of Tartar, and, if not a Leſs Expanſive, a Greater Contractive than Oll of Cloves, it being more Diſagrecable to the Taſt, and more Capable of Removing Greater Obſtructions, and more Thick, and Conſiſtent, and Ponderous. O1L OIL of Cinnamon is more Expanſive and leſs Contractive than OII of Turpentine or Tartar, it is more Odoriferous, and is of no uſe in Obſtructions, only ſtrengthens the Stomach, and aſſiſts Nature in her Evacuations, which ſhews it has not ſo Great a Moment as the others; the ſame may be ſaid of the Oils of Lavender, Roſes, and Orange Flowers, of Box, Juniper, and Anis-ſeed, All which, with that of Cloves before, cither SWim upon the Water or Precipitate to the Bottom, as they have a Leſs or Greater Contractive Force belonging to them. OIL of Vipers is almoſt of the ſame Nature by it's Vertues with the Fœtid Oil of Tartar, it is ſaid to be Good in the Epilepſie, Palſie, and Hyſterical Caſes, and is Smell is ſo Offenſive as ſcarcely to be Endured, and it ſo far, in ſome Meaſure, Agrees with the Contractive Force of the Oil of Tartar; but then it is more Expanſive by the Volatile Salts, which Vipers contain, none of which are to be found in Tartar, and thereſore it is alſo uſed in Malignant Fevers and Agues, and the Biteings of Venemous Creatures, vhich Proceed from too Great a Contractive Force infuſed into the Blood, and mixing with it, and which Oil of Tartar has too Little an Expanſive Force to Diſſolve, tho' it is capable of Diſſolving a Greater, as in the Epilepſic and Palſic; becauſe it's Expanſive Force joined with the Contractive, which is Greater in Tartar than in Vipers, has a Greater and Stronger Moment than the Expanſive of Vipers joined with it's Contractive; and it is very Reaſonable to think this is ſo, ſince the Contractive Force in Animals, and eſpecially in ſuch a Fiery and Spirituous one as the Viper is, muſt be thought to be much Leſs from the continual Circulations of the Humours in it, than that of a fixt Salt agitated only by a Temporary Fire in Calcineing and Diſtillation. OIL of Harthorn, as well as the Volatile Salt and Spirit of it, is made in the ſame Manner as that of Vipers, it is more Expanſive and leſs Contractive, and therefore is not ſo Powerful and Momentous a Remedy as the other: From all which has been ſaid concerning Oils, it ſeems to be Evident, that they are of the ſame Nature vith the Spirits of the Bodies, from Which they are Extracted, only are more Contractive and leſs Expanſive than they. S. 22. THE Firſt Contractive Principle in Chymiſtry, and the only one, I take to be Salt; and as Spirit Principally conſiſts of the Expanſive, and as Oil is a Duller Spirit, or Expanſive Force, ſo Earth is nothing, but a Duller Salt or Contractive, whoſe Force is Weakened and Impaired by the Expanſive of the Fire, as Common Earth is a Salt, whoſe Contractive Force is Diminiſhed by the continual Action of the Ray: of the Sun; Salt in General is Defined by Chymiſts to be a Principle, which remains Diſguiſed in the Earth after the other Principles are Extracted, that it is a Fixt and Incombuſtible Subſtance, which gives Bodies their Conſiſtence, and preſerves them from Corruption; all which are Evident Tokens of a Force Acting contrary to an Expanſive one, which I all along call a Contractive. Tuar it cauſes a Diverſity of Taſts, according as it is Differently mixt, is not ſo Evident, but on the Contrary, that all Taſts Proceed from the Expanſive Force, and that the Taſts of Salts themſclves are Derived from their having a certain Degree of the Expanſive, tho extremely Small, in Reſpect of their Contractive; for Metals, vhich have ſtill a Greater Contractive Force than Salts, have little or no Taſt at all, and ĩf the Contractive Force of Salts is raiſed into a Higher Expanſive by Fire and Diſtillation, their Taſt is ſtill Stronger; thus alſo, Muſte has a weaker Taſt than Wine, and that, than Brandy, which are only ſeveral Degrees of Exalting Salt or Earth, into the Expanſive, by Vegetation, Fermentation, and Diſtilling with Fire. SaLTs are affirmed to be of Three Sorts, the Fixt, the Volatile, and Eſſential; The Fixt arc Evidently thoſe of a Contractive Force almoſt Entirely; Volatile are the Fixt raiſed into a Degree of the Expanſive by Fire; and Eſſential are ſuch likewiſe raiſed into a certain Degree of the Expanſive by Vegetation; It was our Intention to have Examined particularly into each of theſe, in the ſame Manner, as we have done into the Spirits and Olls of the Chymiſts; as alſo into Calcination, Chryſtallization, Precipitation, Coagulation, Condenſation, Diſſolution, Rareſaction, Pulverization, Inſlammation, Diſtillation, Sublimation, Digeſtion, Extraction, and Colour; and ve have ſome Papers written by us Concerning ſeveral oſ them; We vould alſo have Inquired into the Particular Conſtitution of Gold, Silver, Tin, Copper, Lead Iron Iron, and Mercury, into Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, according to the Chymical vay of Analyzing them; but as the Sheets would Riſc to an Expence too Great, and the Encouragement which is Given to my Proceeding in theſe Matters is too Small, and as I have Propoſed my Notions in General in this Science, hich may he eaſily Purſued thro' all the Particulars Above-mentioned by a Diligent and Laborious Hand, I hall Excuſe my ſclf any farther Trouble on this Head, and Leaving what Remains to thoſe, vho are Willing to take the Pains I have done; Go on to another Science we Propoſcd to Treat of, which was Anatomy. C H AD. III Concerniug the Phæuomenons in Auatomy, and Firſt of the Common and Proper Containing Parts of the Abdomen, rhe Cuticula, 7he Reticulum Mucoſum, the Cutis, 7he Membrana Adipoſa and Carnoſa, the Communis Membrana Muſculorum, ?he Peritonæum and Omentum. 51. NATOMY may be Diſtinguiſied into Three Parts, Enterology, Myology, and Oſicology, to each of which we ſhall Aſſign ſome Chapters, and in our Treating of Them, we ſnall Purſue the ſeveral Parts of an Human Body, ac cording to the Order oſ Diſicction, and Endeavour to Explain them by our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. s. 2. TuE Albdimen is Firſt Diſſcted, as containing the Entrails, which are the moſ liable to Putrefaction and Corruption, the Integuments or Coverings oſ which, as alſo of the whole Body, or moſt of the Parts of it, are the Eæęſouis, the Cuticula, or Scarf-Skin, the Parenchyma, or Reticulum Mucoſum, the Alpua, or Cutis, the àembrana Adipoſa and Caruoſa, and the Common Membrance of the Muſcles. S. 3. TuE Fpidermis or Cuticula Inveſts the whole Body, and is ſaid ro be Raiſed by an hot Iron from the Heel, where it is the Thickeſt, and to be made by the Reticulum Mucoſum, or by a Viſcous and Oleous Vapour of the Blood, Condenſed by the External Air or Cold, or by a Tranſparent Juice Iſuing from the Capillary Nerves, and Coagulating at the Extremitics of them; Others will have it Proceed ſrom a Seminal Principle, becauſe it is found on Infants New-Born, which cannot be owing to a Condenſation from Cold; It is more Compact than the Skin, becauſc the Serous Humour, vhich Paſſes thr the Laſt is ſtopt by the Firſt, as in Puſtules and Bliſters; It is yet full of Pores for Sweat and Perſpiration, wants Nerves and Blood Veſcls, and therefore is void of Senſc, can hardly be Separated from the Skin by a Kniſe, but may caſily by a Veſicatory or Cautery; It Peels off in Scarler or Burning Icvers, and the Small Pox, but a new one Preſently ſucceeds it; It appears by Microſcopes to be made up of ſeveral Lays of Exceeding Small Scales, vhich Cover one another, more or leſs, according to the Diſferent Thickneſs of the Cuticula in the ſcveral Parts of the Body, and in the Lips, where the Scales appear Plaineſt, becauſe the Skin is Thinncſt, they only in a Manner touch one another; Theſe Scales are ſuppoſcd to be either the Excretory Ducts of the Glands of the Skin, as is thought to be Evident in Fiſhes, or elſe theſe Glands have their Pipes opening between the Scales; Lenenhocel reckons, that in one Cuticular Scale, there may be Five Hundred Exeretory Channels, and that a Grain of Sand will Cover Two Hundred and Fiſty Scales, ſo that one Grain of Sand will Cover One Hundred Twenty Five Thouſand Oriſices, thro which we daily Perſpire; He thinks the Curicula to be an Expanſion of the ſaid Excretory Ducts of the Glands of the Cutis, or Skin, and, as is ſaid, with Great Probability 3T7he Humour, which is Separated by thoſe Glands, being Pent in between the Scales, cauſes ſrequent Itchings, to the Removing oſ which, Nature Directs us to Rubbing, Waſhing, or Bathing; It ſticks cloſe to the Surſace of the Skin, to which it ĩs alſo ticd by the Veſels which Nourih it, tho they are ſo Small, as not to be ſeen. IF inſtcad oſ Raiſing it by a Cautery on a Dead Body, we Examine that, which is iſed by Cantharides, or any other Veſicatory, we ſhall find it to Conſiſt of ſeveral embranes exceedingly Thin and Fine, and not deſtitute of Bodies Reſembling Glands, Glands, which in that State are Viſible to the Naked Eye, and therefore, it is Imaginã, muſt have Veſſels belonging to it, tho' not Diſcoverable by Microſcopes. l S. 4. Tuis is a full and ſhort Account, which the Anatomiſis give of the Cuticula, which ſeems to Ariſe from the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits on the one Hand, and the Contrary Expanſive of the Air on the other, which in Reſpect of ihe Former is Contractive; for from hence it follows, that a Denſe, Continued, and Membranous Subſtance will be Produced, as the Epidermis or Cuticula, namely, from Two. Oppoſite Forces, which are nearly Equally Balanced, as the Expanſive and Contractive in this Caſe are, and in the Fætus in the Womb, the Liquor of the Amnion, in which it Swims, ſupplies the Place of the Contractive; For this Reaſon it is, that ſome have Thought the Cuticula to be made by a Viſcous and Olcous Vapour of the Blood, others by a Tranſparent Juice Iſuing from the Capillary Nerves, and both of them, that it is Condenſed by Cold, becauſe it is Actually ſormed by the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits, and the Contractive of the Air Reſiſting and Repelling their Action; If the Expanſive Force on one Side is Increaſed by a Cautery or Veſicatory, or by an Inflammation, or if the Contractive of the Air is on the other Diminiſvd. as in Cupping Glaſſes, the Curicula is Raiſcd and Expanded from the Cutis, and Bliſters and Puſtules are Cauſed; This likewiſe gave an Handle to ſome to Imagine it vas Derived from a Seminal Principle, becauſe the Blood and Spirits are ſuch, and are Different and Peculiar in Men, and by Conſequence, the Cuticula, from vhat they are in Brutes; Lewenhoeck's Notion alſo of it's being an Expanſion of the Excretory Ducts of the Glands of the Skin Receives from hence a Solution; It Peels off in Burning Fevers, and the Small Pox, by an Exceſs of the Expanſive above the Contractive, and is again Renewed by an Equal Poiſe of thoſe Two Forces; It is not Neceſſary, that it ſould be full of Pores for Sweat and Perſpiration, but that it ſould be Separable only by an Incrcaſe of the Expanſive Force, hen the Blòod and Spirits are Excited by Heat or Exerciſe; It is void of Senſe, vhen Divided from the Expanſive Force of the Spirits, as any other Part of the Body would be, but whilſt United with it, as in it's Natural State, it is the Inſtrument of Feeling; It's Surface conſiſts of Innumerable ſmall Aſperities, or little Scales, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits and' the Contractive of the Air do not Aœt agaiſt each other by one Uniform Diffuſion, but in Punctual and Unequal Exertions, as Conimon Fire and Flame does, by which Liquors, in Boiling or Growing Hor, Contract a like Uneveneſs in their Surface THERE is no occaſion for Veſſels to nouriſh it, or Nerves to make it Senſible, all that is Required for both is it's Adherence to the Syſtem of the Expanſive Forces of the Blood and Spirits; It may be Divided into ſcveral Membranes, and may ſeem to have Glands from the Application of Different inds of Expanſive Forces to it, as Woater is Raiſed by Heat into Cuticles and Bubbles; And the Cuticula appears to be nothing elſe than an Animal Fluid Agitated by the Expanfive Force oſ the Blood and Spirits, and Condenſed and Congealed by the Contrary Expanſive or Contractive Force of the Air, and in the Womb by the Liquor of the Amnion; which ſhews the vonderful Providence in Nature, in Preparing ſuch a Liquor, ſince, without it, the Syſtem of the Expanſive Forces in a Fætus would be Diſſipated and Diſſolved, having nothing to Counter-Act to it, from Whence no Production would Enſue, but an Entire Abortion and a Corruption of the whole Fætus. VuERE the Expanſive Force of the Blood or Spirits is the Greateſt, by which it over-balances the Contractive of the Air, there is a Protruſion of the Cuticula into Hair, as near the Brain, the Medulla Spinalis, and the Heart, and in the Armpits, where the Contractive Force of the Air is Diminiſhed by the Continual Adheſion of the Arms to the Body, and where it is the Leaſt, as in the Hands and Feet, there is no ſuch Protruſion, or a very Small one; According to the Different Nature and Degree of theſe Expanſive Forces of the Blood and Spirits, the Colour of theſe Protruſions alter; Red ariſes from an hot Conſtitution, or from the Greatcſt Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits; White from a Cold one, or from the Leaſt Expanſive Force of it, from whence old Men grow Grey, and younger Perſons upon a ſudden Paſſion of Fear, or by Immenſe Care or Study, by which the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits is Weakened and Enervated; and Black or the Deepeſt Red from a Great Degree of the Expanſive, mixt with a Great Degre: gree of the Contractive of the Blood and Spirits; the Firſt are conſequently, Cholericki Brisk, and Lively in their Parts; the Second, Calm, Sedate, and Cool; and the Laſt, Melancholick, Quick, and Vigorous, but Solid, Judicious, and Grave: It is generally Streight in Cold Countries, and Curled and Contorted in Hot, becauſe the Contractive Force of the Air is more Certain, Uniform, and Determined in it's Reſiſtance in the Firſt Caſe, and more Deſultory, Various, and Unequal in the Laſt; and in the ſame Climate, where the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits is leſ Regular and Uniform, the Hair from thence becomes likewiſe Curled and Contorted, and where it is Streight, it is a Sign of a Greater Certainty, Unalterableneſs, and Immutability in their Action; It is Triangular, or Four-ſquare, or Round in ivs Figure, as the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits Exceeds more or leſs, or is Equal to the Contractive of the Air, which ſurrounds it; if more, it Exerts it ſelf in Three Angles, if leſs, in Four, and approaches nearer to a Circle, if Equal, it is Circular. Whaicn alſo will give an Account of the Different Forms of Plants, and the Stalks of Them, which come nearer to a Circle, or depart farther from it, as the Proper Expanſive Forces oſ them, Derived from their Seminal Principle, are nearer to an Equilibrium with the Contractive of the Air, or are more Removed from it; and the Figures will be alvays or moſtly Regular, becauſe the Superiority of Action in the Expanſive above the Contractive of the Air muſt Exert it ſelf alike, and therefore in Three, Four, Five, or an Hundred Equidiſtant Angles from each other. FrROM this Doctrine likewiſe is Determined the Different Stature and Bigneſs of Men in the ſeveral Periods of their Lives, and Compared with onc another, as alſo the Various Proportions of Animals and Inſects; Thus the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits in Inſects being Small, the Syſtem is Extended but a ſort way before the Contractive of the Air becomes an Equal Balance to it; in Birds and the Smaller kind of Animals the Expanſive Force is Increaſed, by which means the Syſtem is Extended farther, before it is weak enough to be Reſiſted and Equi-Poiſed by the Contractive of the Air; and in larger Animals, as the Lion, the Horſe, the Ox, and the Elephant, the Expanſive Force of the Blood and Spirits is ſtill Augmented, from vhence the Syſtem of them is more Dilated before it's Force is Diminiſhed to an Equilibrium with the Contractive; and thus it is in Men, ſo that the Greater Stature any one Acquires, it muſt be from thence Inferred, that the Expanſive Force of his Blood and Spirits is Greater, and that in young Men it is Greater than in Infants and Children, till it obtains it's utmoſt Force in Perſons of Maturity, when there is no farther Growth or Expanſion of the Syſtem, the Extreme Parts of it being in an Equal Balance with the Contractive of the Air, with which it is Encompaſi'd, or in Fiſhes with the Contractive of Water; and the ſame kind of Reaſoning obtains in Plants and Trees, if for that of the Blood and Spirits in Animals, we ſubſlitute the Expanſive Force of the Nutritious Juices and the Vegetating Quality of Them. LastLy, If the Expanſive Force therefore of the Blood and Spirits in Men and in Animals, and of the Nutritious Juices and their Vegetating Quality in Plants and Trecs, in the Antediluvian World, was Greater than in the Preſent, and the Contractive Force of the Air Leſs, hich in a Different Craſis and Temper of Things is not Impoſſible, and particularly, ſuppoſing the Surface of the Earth was much Higher and more Removed from the Center of it, when all Beings would have a Leſs Force oſ Gravitation and Contraction, and a Greater of Expanſion, than in this lower and more Contracted Form, it is not Inconceivable, that Men and Animals, and Plants and Trees, might be much Larger, and more Longæval and Durable, than we now find and Experience them to be, and that for ſome Ages, after the Diſſolution of the Earth's Original Frame by the Flood, ſuch Gigantick Proportions might be in ſome Degree Continued, till they ſunk in Proceſs of Time to the ſettled Standard of Magnitude and Duration, which is agreeable to the Modern Conſtitution of the Earth we Inhabit This we ſay in Anſwer to the Cavills of Irreligious Men, vho Think ſuch Matter: Incredible, which do not agree with the Modern Frame and Structure of Beings. Tnus far ve have conſidered the Cuticula oſ the Anatomiſts, vhich is the utmoſ Term and Boundary of the Animal Syſtem, and how it comes to be Defined by certair Limits from the Nature and Degree of the Expanſive Force of the Blood anũ Spirits, and the Contractive of the Air, which hinder it's Dilatation in Iufinitum. 5.5. Tur 5. 5. THE next Subſtance, which lies Immediately under the Cuticula, and above the Cutis, or Skin, is the Reticulum Mucoſum, or Parenchyma, vhich in the Eurpeans is a White Slime, and in the æſhiopians a Black, ſcraped off from the Inner Side of the Cuticula Raiſed, and which ſerves to fill up the Interſtices made by the Nervous or Pyramidal Papillæ, Jetting out from the Surſace of the Cutis or Skin; OF which there is little more to be ſaid, excepting, that it ſcems to be a Matter Prepared for a ſupply of the Cuticula, upon any Accidental Defect of it, that it is thrown out from the Expanſive Syſtem of the Blood and Spirits, as an Excrement of it, and more particularly from the Nervous Juice, which is of a Contractive Nature, and therefore more eaſily ſubmits to the Contractive Force of the Air, when it is Expoſed to it, which Blood, or Fat, or Spirits; vould not do, and conſequently is Immediately Condenſed by it. ] §. 6. THE Cutis or Skin, beſides its own Proper Subſtance, which is made up of Nervous Fibres very cloſely Intervoven onc with another, and of a Parenchyma, vhich fills up the Inequalities and Interſtices thereof, has it's Nervous or Pyramidal Papilla, which are ſmall Strings ſeen to break oſf by pulling the Curicle ſrom the Cutis, and are thought by aſalphigius to be the Ends of the Nerves Perforating the Skin, and not Raiſed from the Skin's proper Subſtance, but theſe Py7amidal Papillæ cannot be ſeen without Optick Inſtruments, and can hardly be ſiewn by the Common vay of Diſſection; It has alſo, lying betwixt the ſaid Papille, the &landula Miliares, or Sudoriferæ, which Convey the Sveat thro' the Skin, and Separate it for it's Excretion; It has likewiſe certain Bulbs or Protuberances, in which the Roor: of the Hair are fixt, and it's Veſſels are Sanguineous, Nervous, and Secretory; It is Thin in the Forehead and Sides, and under the Heel it is Thickeſt; It is Thinner in Children and Women than in Men, and in thoſe that Live in Hot Countries, than thoſe that Live in Cold; From whence, according to spigelius, thoſe vho are born in Cold Countries, hen they come under the Equinoctial Line, are often taken with Fevers, becauſethe Greàt Heat there Excited in the Body by the External Air cannot Exhale thro' the too Thick Skin; It is Imagimed to be full of Pores, and that thoſe, who Dẽny them, oppoſe not only Reaſon but ocular Demonſtration; the Paſſing of Quick-ſilver thr&' à Sheep-skin, we are Told, Evidences this, and that Mr. Bojle has Tricd the ſfame in a Piece of the Skin of a Man's Arm, and this is ſtill farther Proved,; it is Thought, by the Iſucing out of Freſh Sweat from a Man's Fingers, When the Former is wiped off; It is ſaid fo be of a moſt Exact Temperature, neither too Hot, nor too Cold, that it might judge more Accurately oſ the Temperature of Tangible Things, It's Nervous Part, which is naturally Cold, being ſomething Warmed by the Arterial Blood, for it has many both Capillary Arteries and Veins Diſtributed thro' it, as ãalſo abundance of Nervous Twigs, which Endue it with a moſt Exquiſite Senſe; Each of the Miliary Glands Receives a Nerve and an Artery, and ſends out a Vein or Excretory Veſſel, which lat Paſſes to the Cuticula for the Diſchargeing the Matter of Sweat and Inſenſible Perſpiration, and for the Moiſtening the Cuticula, and the Pyramidal Papilla, that they may not be Dry, which would very much Hurt the Senſe of Touching; The Skin is Six Times Thicker than the Scarſ-Skin, and ſerves for an Emunctory of the whole Body, and it is ſaid, that the Sum of the Particles, ſtrained thro' the Cuticular Glands, is by Sanctorius reckoned to amount to about 50 Ounces a Day, ſo that, ſuppoſe a Mans Body to weigh 160 Pounds, in 51 Days ve Perſpire a Quantity Equal to the Weight of the whole Body, but in vhat Time, or if ever, the whole Subſtance of the Body is Changed, is no Eaſy Matter to Determine. And thus far the Anatomiſis. 5. 7. TuE Expanſive Syſtem of the Blood and Spirits, being now Freed from the Impreſſions and Contractive Force of the External Air, is more at Liberty to Exert it's own Actions. AxD Firſt, the Syſtem of the Spirits or the Nervous Fluid Expanding it ſelf, as far as it can, is ſiopt at the Cuticula by the ſaid Contractive Force of the Air, and from thence Divaricates into a Thouſand Streams Croſſing and Interſecting each other, which Conſtitutes the Subſtance of the Skin, and Forms thoſe Nervous Fibres, of which it Conſiſls, and which are ſo cloſely Interwoven one with another; Hence alſc come the Pyramidal Papille, and the ſmall Nervous Strings, which break oſ by Pulling the Cuticula from the Cutis; On the other Hand, the Syſtem of the Blood T Expand Expanding it's ſelf likewiſe, is ſtopt at the Cuticula and the Contractive Force oſ the Ex ternal Air, and made to Diffuſe its ſel? into Innumerable Rivulets, which Compoſ© the Blood Veſels, and which are Diſperſed by that means thro' the whole Skin, and thus all the Arteries oſ ĩt ſeem to be Formed, in which the Blood Retires from the Heart; This Expanſive Force of the Syſtem of the Blood continuing, and the Blood not being able to Proceed any farther, is by it's ſaid Expanſive Force Returned back and Repelled from the Cuticula, and the Contractive Force of the Air, towards the Hearr, by which the Veins are Produced; But the Nervous Fluid, being of a Cold and Contractive Naturc, Terminates in the Skin, without any Circulation, or Recourſe, or Repulſe ſfrom it. INTERMEDIATE tO the Pyramidal Papilla Lie the Miliary or Sudoriſerous Glands, and the Mouths of the Ducts, which open into them, and which are made by the Sweat; which ariſes ſfrom a Conteſt betwixt the Contractive Force of the Spirits, or the Nervous Syſtem, and the Expanſive of the Blood; ſor tho' they are both oſ rhem taken together of an Expanſive Nature, in Reſpect of the External Air, yet in Compariſon vith each other, the Nervous Syſtem is of a Cold or a Contractive Temperature, and the Blood of an Hot or an Expanſive; and thereſore it is, that all Heat Dinolves and Enſecbles the Nerves and Spirits, and all Cold Contracts and Envigorates them; And on the Contrary, all Heat Excites and Inflames the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood, and all Cold Weakens and Impairs it: When theſe Two Syſtems are Equally Balanced, the whole Human Frame or Compoſition is in Exact Order; but if the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood is too much Increasd by Exerciſc or Heat, or the Contractive Force of the Spirits is too much Diminiſd by Labour or the Depreſſion of them. as in Faintings, or in Sleep, Sweat Enſues; which is neither a Nervous nor a Sanguincous Fluid, but a Nervous Weakened and Diſſolved, by which it becomes more Liquid than the Nervous, but Retains a Degree of it's Contractive by it's Saltneſs, as all Salts are of a Cold and Contractive Temper. AxD from hence it is, that the Sweat can Force it's way thro the Subſtance of the Cuticula, without the Suppoſition of any Pores in it, when the Nervous Fluid and the Blood cannot; becauſe the Nervous Fluid is of too Contractive, Conſiſtent, and Cold a Nature to do it, and the Blood's Expanſive is Reſiſted and Repelled by the Contractive oſ the Air; vhereas the Sweat, being a Contractive Excited by the Expanſive of the Blood, is Leſs oppoſed by the Contractive of the Cuticula and the Air, and, Approaching more to it's ovn Nature, is more caſily Admitted and Received by it. Tuus ſar we have Conſidered the Fluids, which Enter into the Skin, of which the Firſt or the Nervous is ſenſible, and ſcems to be of the like Subſtance with the Brain, and to be ſeveral Proceſſes from it, but the Blood and Sweat do not appear to be Endued with that Pover. TuE next Thing to be Examined and Accounted for is the Solids, which are made up of the Veſſels, which Contain and Circulate, or Sccrete the Fluids, and are Derived ſrom the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid, and the Expanſive oſ the Sanguincous; for as the Cuticula is Formed from the Expanſive Force of the Animal Syſtem and the Contractive of the External Air, which Acts againſt it, ſo by the Expanſive Force of the Blood being Acted againſt by the Contractive of the Nervous Fluid, the Coats oſ the Blood Veſels are Produced, and thoſe of the Nerves by the Expanſive Force of ihe Blood, and the Heat ariſing from it, Acting againſt the Contractive oſ the Nervous Fluid; from which Contractive Force it is, that they and all the Membranes oſ the Body are ſaid to Deduce their Original from the Meniuges, or the ria and Dura Mater of the Brain, and from Whence they come to be Furniſhed with ſuch an Exquiſite Senſe; Thus alſo we ſee, by the Expanſive Force of Fire and the Contractive of Water Acting againſt cach other, a Film or ſmall Membranc is Conſtituted and Framed. To theſe Two Oppoſite and Contending Forces is likewiſe owing the Circulation of the Fluids in the Skin, and thro' the whole Body; and the Revolutions of the Humours in the Anĩmal World are Accounted for in the ſame Manner, and upon the ſame Principles oſ the Expanſive and Contractive, as thoſe of the Heavenly Bodies in the Material; For the Contractive Force in the Nervous Syſtem, to which is annext the Expanſive Force oſ Senſe or Intelligence, Acting continually auainſt the Expanſive in the Sanguineous, vhich vhich in Reſpect of the Mind is Contractive, is the ſame, as the Almighty Intelligence and the Expanſive of the Sun Acting againſt the Contractive of a Planet; for the Action of the Mind or of Senſe being Superior in the Nervous Syſtem, ſince the CounterAction, or Contractive Force, in the Sanguineous cannot prevail againſt it, it muſt Circulate about it, for the ſame Reaſon, as a Planet about the Sun; Thus, The Blood Acts by it's Force againſt the Nervous Coats of the Veſſels, vhich Contain it, and the Nervous Coats Contract themſelves againſt that Force, which, being too Weak to Reſiſt the Contraction, Proceeds forwards in the Arteries, from whence ariſes the Progreſ of the Fluid in it's Proper Channel, and the Pulſation, by which it is Promoted; From hence alſo it is, that every Artery has a Nerve, which Attends it, to fortify and ſtrengthen the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem, in order to Propagate the Motion of the Sanguineous, and the Blood is carry'd back without the Aſſiſtance of ſuch Contraction, by Protruſion only thro the Veins, and by Valves, which hinder it's Regreſs, and therefore has no occaſion of ſuch Nerves to accompany them, nor is there found any Pulſation in Them. Tuus Rivers alſo are Probably made to Circulate about the Earth by an Oppoſition betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; for Water having an Expanſive Force in Reſpect of Earth, which is Evident from it's being caſily Raiſed intõ Exhalations and Vapours, would Exert it's Activity that way, if it were not ſurmounted by the Contractive of the Earth, which therefore ſpends it ſclf Side-ways by a Revolution round it; ſince, if there was nothing, but the Gravitation of it, it ſould Tend tò the Center and be bound down towards it in a Perpetual Stagnation, unleſs ve ſuppoſe a Declivity in the Channel, which is not Evident in a Sphere, as the Earth. TuE Thickneſs or Thinneſs of the Skin depends upon TWo Cauſcs, the External Air, and the Internal Syſtem of the Blood and Spirits; The Greater the Conrractive Force of the Internal Syſtem is in certain Parts, the Thicker will the Skin be, and the Greater the Expanſive, the Thinner; tis Thickeſt therefore in the Head and Back, becauſe it lies next to the Brain, and the Medulla spinalis or Oblongata, which are Cold and Contractive, and under the Heel, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood is Leſs in thoſc Parts; In the Fore-head, Palm of the Hand, and Lips, it is Thin: neſt, becauſe the Contractive Force is Leaſt there from the Brain and Nerves, and the Expanſive the Greateſt from the Blood, as is Evident from the Redneſs and Floridneſs we obſerve in Them; And thus it is Thinner in Children and Women than in Men, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood Prevails moſt in the Firſt, and the Contractive of the Nervous Fluid in the Laſt, as is Manifeſt from the Weakneſs, Beaury, and Sanguine Colour of the one, and the Strength, Robuſtneſs, and the Paler or Duller Complexion of the other; But there is likewiſe another Cauſe of this, vhich we before-mentioned, namely, the External Air, for the more Cold and Contractive the Temper of that is, the Skin will be thereby made Thicker, and the more Warm and Expanſive, the Thinner; Men therefore being more Expoſed to the Cold and the Contractive Force of the Air than Women or Children, their Skin is upon that Account more Denſe and Thicker, and for the ſame Reaſon Theirs who Live in Colder Climates, than Their's who Live in Hot ones; And, that an Expanſive Force of Blood or Heat ſould Diſſolve Continuity, and a Contractive one of the Nervous Juice or Fluid, or of Cold in the External Air, ſould Contribute to it and Increaſe it, is not any ways hard to Imagine. As to the Pores of the Skin there is no occaſion for them, as we have ſhevn there is not in the Cutisula, ſince the Conſiſtency of it is ſuch, as to Permit a Paſſage to any Forces, which it is convenient to Nature ſiould be Tranſmitted thro' it, and It is Confeſſed, that the Famous Dr. Gliſſin denied any ſuch Pores to belong to it; Thus a Pin or a Necdle can make it's way thro àa Solid or a Fluid, wvhen Acted vith a ſuſficient Force, and there is no Greater Difficulty in Apprchending, how any Fluid of the Body ſhould obtain the ſame Effect in Reſpect of the Skin, where it is Expelled by the Expanſive Force of the Animal Syſtem and Protruded thrò' it, vhich is the Caſe of Sweat, and thereſore can be no Proof of ſuch Pores; and as for Quick-ſilver Paſſing thro a Sheep-Skin, or the Skin of a Man's Arm, it is only an Evidence oſ vhat I have been Affirming; Beſides upon ſome Extraordinary Strainings even Blood has Iſſued thro' the Skin, for hich yet it never was ſuppoſcd, that ony Pores vere Formed, and conſequently, its very Subſtance muſt be capable of Yield Tt 2 In; lng to and Allowing the Tranſmiſſion of a Force, which is Superior to it, that is, of an Expanſive Superior to it's Contractive. 5. 3. UNDER the Skin lies the Membrana Adipoſa, in the Cells of which the Fat is Contained, and which is allowed to be of an Olly Subſtance Condenſcd by Cold, with which the Membranous Cells are filled, as the Cells in the Pulp of an Orange are filled with it's Juice; and Dr. Gliſſin ſays, that the Membrana Adipoſa is a Part of the Carnoſa, the outer Part of Which is full of ſuch Membranous Cclls; Aalpighius Informs us, that the Blood Veſſels are Expanded like the Boughs of Trees every where thro the Membrane, that lies under the Fat, and the Membranous Cells, full of Fatty Globules, Veſicles, or Bladders, hang upon their Ends, like Leaves upon the Boughs; The Cells are of almoſt an Oval Figure, and are like the Lobules of which the Lungs are Compoſed, or rather like a Conglomerate Gland; They are Knit to one another by the Membrane, out of which they are Formed; and thro' the ſame Membrane and Cells, not only Capillary Veins and Arteries, but Duſtus Adipoſi alſo Run, which Swell with Fat, eſpecially in an Animal newly Killed; This Fatty Membrane Extends it ſelf all over the Body, except in the Lips, the upper Part of the Ear, the Eye lids, and Fore-head, and ſome few other Places, and the Fat is ſuppoſed to be Bred of an Oily or Sulphureous Portion of the Blood, Sweating, like a Dew, out of the Veins, and aſterwards Concreting; It is Diſferent ſfrom the Suet or Tallow of the omentum or Caul, in this, that Fat is caſily Melted, but not ſo eaſily Congealed, whereas Suet is not eaſily Melted, but is eaſily Congealed, Fat is not Brittle, but Suet is; ſome Reckon the Marrow of the Bones to be a Third ſort of Far. It Defends the Body from the External Air, Preſerves the Natural Heat, Hinders the too Great Diſſipation of Spirits, Fills up the Interſtices of the Muſcles and Wrinkles of the Skin, and thereby Contributes to the caſy Motion of the Former, and to the Beauty of the Latter, and keeps all Parts from Dryneſs and Breaking; It Beſmears the Extremities of the Cartilages, the Jointings of the Grearer Bones, and the Veſels, that they may Paſs ſafely; Malpighius thinks the Principal uſe of it, whilſt it is mixt vith the Blood, is to be a continual Pabulum or Food of the Natural Heat, whereby the Vital Flame is Perpetuated, Alſo to mitigate the Acrimony of the Blood, and unite the Saline Particles of it, ſo as they may become Aſſimilable to the Solid Parts for their Nutriment, ſerving to thoſe Particles, as Oil to Colours in Painting, or Lime to Stones in Building, and that in Caſe of Famine it Paſſes into the Nouriſhment of the Body, ſo that ſome Creatures Live during a whole Winter without any other Food, and an Atrophy never becomes Mortal, till all the Fat is Waſted; In this Membrane are alſo a Number of Little Glands, which are accompany'd with Lymphatick Veſſels, which carry back any Seroſity, that is, Superfluous; In ſome the above-mentioned Veſicles are ſo full, that the Fat is an Inch, or an Inch and half Thick; and in others they are almoſt Flat. MEempBrRANES are Webs of ſeveral Sorts of Fibres Interwoven for the Covering and Wrapping up of ſome Parts; Their Membranous Fibres give them an Elaſticity, whereby they can Contract and cloſely Graſp the Parts they Contain, and their Nervous Fibres give them an Exquiſite Senſe, which is the Cauſe of their Contraction, thereſore they can ſcarcely ſuſfer the Sharpneſs of Medicines, and they are Difſficultly united, where there is a Solution of Continuity, or Loſ's of their Subſtance; In their Texture there are a Number of ſmall Glands, which ſeparate an Humour fit for Moiſtening the Parts, which they Contain; Thoſe that Cover the Solid Parts are properly called Membranes, as the Peritonæum, which Wraps up all that is Contained in the Aldomen, the Pleura, that, which is in the Thorax, the Perioſteum the Bones, and the Pericardium the Heart; Thoſe, which Form the Coats of Veſſels, and which Contain the Humours, as thoſe of the Veins, Arteries, Stomach, Bladder, Inteſtines, &. are called Tunicles or Coats, and thoſe, which Cover and Embrace the Brain, as the Dura and the Pia Mater, are called Meninges; of all theſe Kinds of Membranes ſome are Thin and ſome are Thick, and the ſame Membrane is Thick in ſome Places and Thin in other, as the Membrana Adipoſn which is Thicker in the Neck than in any other Part of the Body; The uſe in General of Membranes is to Cover and Wrap up the Parts, to Strengthen them, to Save them from External Injuries, to Preſerve the Natural Heat, to Join one Part to another, to Suſtain ſmall Veſſels and the Nerves which Run thro' their Duplicatures, to ſtop the Returning of the Humours in in the Veſels, as the Valves ſtop the Returning of the Blood in the Veins and Heart, of the Chyle in the Lacteals and Thoracick Duct, and of the L;mpha in the Lymphatick Veſſels. BY the aſembrana Adipoſa is moſt commonly underſtood that art of it only. which lies next the Fleh, and which contains but little Fat in it's Cells, and therefore Appearing more Membranous than the Reſt is ſaid to be the Baſis of the Cellulæ Adipoſæ, and even ſome Part of this hath been taken by Anatomiſls for the Arembrana Carnoſa upon the Account of it's Redneſs, for here the Blood Veſels lic very Thick, the Veſicles not being Diſtended with Fat. Tue Fat, which is a Groſs Whitiſh Oil, is nothing but the Oily Part of the Aliment ſeparated from the Arterial Blood by the Adipoſe Glands, and carry'd by Peculiar Ducts to the Membranous Cells, from whence it is Tranſmitted to the Blood again by the Veins; In Corpulent Perſons, vho have their Blood too much Charged and all their Organs too much Clogd vith it, Senſation is Dampt, and they are apt to fall into a Drowſy Lethargick Condition, which ſometimes Ends in ſudden Death, and the Abundance of it ſeldom fails of being Attended with Inactivity and Somnolency. ſi- the Mrembrana Adipoſa lies the Membrana Communis Muſculorum or Muſculoſa, and makes a Duplicature with it; It is Spread all over the Body, excœpt the Skull according to ſome; It is Knit by Fibres to the Adipoſe Membrane that lies above it, and to the Proper Membrane of each Muſcle that lies under it; Tis Thin, but Strongtis not Vellow like the Adipoſe, but Whiter and more Tranſparent; and is ſaid by Dr. Havers in his Ofteologia Nova to be every where Glandulous, by which a Mucilaginous Liquor is Diſtilled upon the Muſcles to Lubricate them; Theſe Membranes receive Veins, Arteries, and Nerves from the Parts which are neareſt to them; As to the Mſembrana Carnoſa, which lies in Brutes betwixt the Adipoſa and Muſculoſa, It ſeems to be the Cauſe, by it's Expanſive Force, of that General Protzuſion of Hair thro' the whole Body, according ro the Explanation given §. 4. 5. 9. Tns being a full Account from the Anatomiſts of the Fat and the Membranes, #æ ihi Adep which lie under it, ve ſall now Conſider them one after another; As to the Adeps ot ſæ im Fat, it ſeems to be Formed from the Expanſive Force of the Blood, brought by the Ar- ſiing Prixipiæ teries to the Adipoſe Membrane, according to Malpighius, and there Meeting with the Nerves, which contain a Contractive Subſtance, there being a Duplicature of Membranes alſo, the upper Red, where the Blood Veſſels Run, and the lower White, where the Nervous ones are Spread and Diffuſed, from their Mutual Action upon cach other an Intermediate Liquor is Produced, not ſo Red as Blood, nor ſo White as the Ner vous Fluid, not ſo Hot and Warm as the Former, nor ſo Cold and Phlegmatick as the Latter, from whence a Pale Yellowiſh Oil ſuccecds, and which we have before ſaid appears to be the Nature of Sweat, which is an Exuding of this Oil. TurE Bubbles and Veſicles are made by the Two Contending Forces, as is done by umœ il viſiHeat and Water mixing together, or in the Pulp of an Orange by the Sun's Expanſive de⸗, in nhib Mingleing with the Cold and Contractive Juiœ of the Fruit and Tree; The Expanſive & ſæ i o alſo Exeris it ſelf ſtill in ſome Meaſure in the Oil, and Forms the Contractive into the PrduciBladder or Film, which ſurrounds it, to which the Contractive Force of the External Air, which Penetrates by it's Contrary Expanſive, we may eaſily Imagine, thus far, is Aſſiſtant, and Helps to Conſtitute theſe Veſicles, as it manifeſtly does in the Formation of other Bubbles; and they are like the Lobules, which Compoſe the Lungs, or like a Conglomerate Gland for the ſame Reaſon. THERE is no Fat in the Lips, the upper Part of the Ear, the Eye- lids, and Fore- iYy m Fat head, becauſe in theſe Parts the Contractive Force of the Air, or the Expanſive Force tmn of the Blood is too Great, or the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid too Small ihæ E, &e to Produce a due Mixture ſor Fat, or a Conteſt or Ebullition betwixt thoſe Forces: vhich is Requiſite to the Attemperature of the Oil, and the Raiſing of the Globules and Veſicles; hence alſo there is a Sulphureous Quality in the Fat from the Expanſive Force of the Blood, and a Cold or Condenſing one ſfrom the Contractive of the Nervous Fluid and of the Air. j Tuis likewiſe Agrees with the Account, which we before gave of Chymical Ous, pwhich follow the Spirits, vhich are of an Expanſive Nature, and riſe before the æh æbat æ - hi i⸗ 3 ave before Phlegm, and the other Principles, which are of a Contractive; ſo that it is a Force mmo nter- Intermediate to and Compounded of the Expanſive and Contractive, according to what is here Aſfirmed and Maintained. BESIDES Which, Dr. Gre's Experiment, quoted by Dr. Havers in his Oſeologia Nova and his Diſcourſe therein of the Marrow, Admits from what foregoes of a Solution; which Experiment is to ſiew us, how we may Imitate the Fat of an Animal Body: Take Oĩl Olive, and pour it upon High Spirit of Nitre, then Digeſt them for ſome Days, by Degrees the Oil becomes of the Colour of Marrow, and at laſt is Congealed or Hardened into a White Fat or Butter, which Diſſolveth only by the Fire, as that of Animals, and it hardens moſt upon the Exhalation of ſome of the more Sulphureous Parts of the Spirit of Nitre; from Whence the true Congealing Principle is a Spirit of Nitre, and the Making of Fat is but the durable Congelation of Oil, and Animal Fat, but the Curdling of the Oily Parts of the Blood, either by ſome of it's own Saline Parts, or by the Nitrous Parts of the Air mingled therevith. Tnus far Dr. Grew, in which Experiment we have all the Ingredients, which ve ſuppoſc to be in Animal Fat; for Oil Olive, being a Vegetable Oil, and Convertible into Flame, has Evidently a Sulphureous and Expanſive Nature, whichi ſikeviſe is in a Diſferent Degree in the Blood, Spirit of Nitre from it's Salt and Cold has a Contractive Nature, tho Actuated and Excited by Fire into a Spirit, Anſwerable to the Contractive Temper of the Nervous Fluid, which is alſo of a Cold Complexion, but Raiſed and Animated by the Mind, and to which is joined the Elaſtick and Contractive or Contrary Expanſive of the Air; It Diſſolves by the Fire, becauſe the Expanſive by that means prevails againſt the Contractive, and hardens by an Exhalation of the more Sulphureous or Expanſive Parts of the Spirit of Nitre, becauſe the Contractive then Prevails againſt the Expanſive. FrRON Whence ve may Conclude, that the Common Fat of the Body has more of the Expanſive Force of the Blood in it, and leſs of the Contractive of the Nervous Fluid, and that the Sevum of the Omentum or Caul, has more of the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid in it, and leſs of the Expanſive of the Blood, becauſe the Firſt is hardly Congealed, and the Laſt as difficultly Melted; The Firſt is not Brittle. but Fluid, from the Expanſive Force, the Laſt is, from the Contractive; The Artificial Oill or Fat is Whiter than the Animal, as Oil Olive is much Whiter than Blood, which is a Deep Red, and the Nervous and Nitrous Fluids not extremely Different, or not to ſuch a Degree; Here is therefore no Occaſion to ſuppoſe any Oily Parts of the Blood, nor any Saline Parts of it, but to take the Expanſive or Sulphurcous Force of the Blood it ſelf, and the Saline or Cold and Contractive of the Nervous Fluid to form this Production. Hi7HERTO We have Conſidered the Nature of the Animal Fat, and are now to Examine the Uſes and the Effects of it; It Defends the Body from External Air, for Penetrating thro' the Cuticula and Skin, it is met and oppoſed by the Blood and Spirits, from which very Conteſt or Mixture the Fat and it's Veſicles are Produced, as we before obſerved, and therefore it is not reaſonable to Think it can go much farther, beſides the very Nature of Oil is in ſome Meaſure Reluctant to the Impreſ ſions of Air, the Firſt being Expanſive, and the Laſt Contractive; by being of a Middle Temper betwixt Blood and the Nervous Fluid, that is, by being neither too Hot nor too Cold, it is well Fitted to Lubricate, Supple, and Moiſien the ſeveral Parts; but as to it's being a Pabulum or Food for the Blood, before it's Secretion out of the Maſs of it, is not ſo Evident, becauſe it is not Manifeſt, that it is nor made, as above-mentioned, by a Mixture of the Blood and the Nervous Fluid Principally; After which, as in Famine or an Atrophy, it is not unlikely, but it may be Converted to ſuch a Pabulum, it being caſy to Imagine, that the Oil by Increaſing the Expanſive in Circulation may be Changed into ſuch a Subſtance; That Fat ſhould Incline Men to be Lethargick, and to a Somnolency, is no Wonder, according to the Account ve have Given of it, ſince it Ariſes from the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid, being Diminiſhed by the Expanſive of the Blood, but by how much more the Force of the Spirits is Depreſs'd, by ſo much Greater muſt the Propenſity be to Drowſineſs and Sleep, thus the Expanſive Force of Fire, Wines, and Strong Liquors Acting upon the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid, Produces the ſame Effect. and all Narcoticks, which are of an Hot and Expanſive Nature; and thereſore it is, that ] vhen when we are Warm in our Beds, that is, when the Nervous Fluid and it's Contractive Force is in ſome Meaſure Diſſolved by the Expanſive of Heat, we ſink into Slumbers, which are not ſo readily Induced upon us, when ve are Cold In Them; And on the Contrary, Froſt and Cold Agreeing with and Exciteing the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid, the Mind is Exhilarated and Enlivened by it; By the Firſt the Nerves Tremble and are Enfeebled, and by the Laſt Envigorated and Strengthened. HENCE alſo it is, that where the Veſicles are Flaccid, and where Men are of a Thin and Lean Complexion, the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid is too Strong and Powerful for the Expanſive of the Blood, which therefore is not capable of Diminiſhing it's Force, ſo as to Produce an Oil, or a Fat, or very Little, which is the Reaſon, that Perſons of ſuch a Craſis and Temper are generally more Quick and Lively in their Senſe, than others, who are more Fat and Corpulent. s. 10. AFTER the Fat, we are to Examine into the Adipoſe Membrane, and the other Membranes of the Body, which are formed chiefly by the Cold and Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem, from whence is Derived their Solidity and Continuity; This is Evident from the Web of Nervous Fibres, which Conſtitute them and from their Elaſtick and Contractive Force, ſuch as we Experience in an Elaſtick, Froſtys and Cold Air, as alſo from their Exquiſite Senſe; And as the Expanſive Force contributes to Fluidity, and to a Diſſolution of Parts from each other, when joined together by the Contractive Force, ſo the Contractive Force Cements, Unites, and Continues Them, vhen Diſſolved and made Lax by the Expanſive. Tnis Contractive Force, by which every Part Contracts towards it ſelf, and it's own Center, makes them upon Separation to be difficultly United, whereas the Expanſive Force Tending from it ſelf, and it's own Center, to that of another, Renders the Cement and Union more caſy, becauſe there is an Inclination to it; Hence a Fluid, as Water, readily Unites, but Ice, which has a Contractive Force, do's not; The Contractive Force, which is Endued with an Elaſtick, as Glaſs, or Ice, or the String oſ an Harp or a Violin, Reſults to any Impreſſion from the Expanſive it has Joined to it, by which it Cloſes with any Expanſive Force or Percuſſion, which ĩs Impreſſed, But if the Contractive Force is Broken or Interrupted, it is hard to Unite it upon the Account of it's Contractive Quality; And rhus it is in the Human Syſtem, a Membrane or a Fibre, which has a Contractive Force is not caſy to be Cemented, but a Fleſhy Subſtance, which conſiſts of an Expanſive Force of the Blood, and approaches towards a Fluidity, endeavours at a Re-union; and Bodies, which have a Contractive Force, as Glaſs, Ice, &e. are Cemented only by Introducing an Expanſive, and Melting them again into a Fuſion, but then aſter this Re-union, it is the Cold or Contractive Force, which gives them their Solidity and Tenacity, by which they become leſs Penetrable to any Expanſive Force or Impreſſion made upon them; From whence it follows, that there muſt be a Warmth or Expanſive Force from the Sanguineous Syſtem, to diſpoſe the Parts of a Membrane to a Union with each other, and a Cold and Contractive Force from the Nervous Syſtem, to make them Solid, Senſible, and Tenacious, and which in Fact and Experience is the Frame and Compoſition of a Membrane, which has it's Nerves, it's Fibres, and it's Blood Veſiels, and a Cold and Contractive Force attending the one, and an Expanſive and Warm one, the other. Tuis gives a Solution, as before, why Anatomiſts have Thought, that all the Membranes and Coats, diſperſed thro' the Body, owe their Origine to the Meninges, or the Pia and Dura Mater, ſince it is manifeſt, that the Brain, and the Nervous Syſtem Derived from it, has a Peculiar Efficiency in Forming of Them. WE are likewiſe by this Theory Informed of the Grand Cauſe of all the Motions in an Animal Body, namely, the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem, and the Expanſive of the Sanguineous; for we have before Chap. 6. 5. 20. Book 1. ſhewn it to be an Univerſal Law of Nature, that where Two oppoſite Forces Subſiſt and Act againſi cach other, the Conteſt or Motion will be continued, till the one or the other Prevails, and if the Forces are in an Equal Balance, the Motion will become Perpetual, till that ZEquilibrium is Deſtroyed; Thus the Heart and the Brain are the Two Chief Seats of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and are joined to each other, and to all the Part of the Body by Innumerable Arteries ſent out from the Firſt, and bY Nerves ſron the the Lat; Thee Act againt one another by their Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and Produce the Circulations obſervable in the Human or Animal Frame; and the Expanſive Force of the Blood is too much Increaſcd by Heat or Violent Exerciſe, or High Meats, or Spirituous Liquors, the Contractive Force of the Erain, or the Nervous Syſtiem, Languiſies, and if the Contractive Force oſ the Brain and the Nervous Syſtem is too much Promoted by Cold Applications of Air or Water, and by a Thin and Meagre Diet, Rheums, Catarrhs, Defluctions, and Agues are Cauſed, by which the Expanſive Force of the Blood is Diminiſhed; and nothing Tends more to Health, than the Preſerving both theſe Syſtems in a due and regular Poiſe vith cach other, and in which Conſiſts the whole Art and Science oſ Phyſick, aſter ve have Conſidered the Nature of the Mind. Ir is not farther Improbable, that the Principles o? the Brain in the Fæius arc Derived ſfrom the Semen oſ the Male Parent, which ſecems to be a Matter Endued vith Senſe, as the Brain and the Nervous Fluid is, and has been Obſerved by Lcwenhoeck to be made up of Millions of Animalcules; This thereſore Impregnaring the Ovum of the Female Parent, which we may juſtly ſuppoſc is of a Warm and Expanſive Nature, Firſt cauſes that Beating Red Speck, which Anatomiſts have Imagined to be the Heart; ſrom which TWo Subſtances, mixt in the Ovarium, the Contractive and Expanſive Forces of the Brain and the Heart appear to take their Origine, tho' the Faetus aſtervards receives in the Womb, by the means of the Placenta, an Acceſſion to the Latter oſ theſe Forces, from the Blood Veſtls of the Mother, albeit, others will not allow ſo much as that. Tuis may however give an Account, why a Fætus comes into the World with it's Head foremoſt, ſince the Brain being oſ a Contractive Nature Tends downwards, and the Expanſive Syſtem of the Blood upwards, when loos'd from the Womb, ſuitable to all other Contractive and Expanſive Forces. WE have hitherto only conſidered the Nervous and Sanguineous Syſtems in the Compages and Structure of an Human Body, in which we have made the Firſt to be of a Contractive Force, and the Laſt to be of an Expanſive; but as it is Evident. that the Nervous Syſtem has a Prodigious Force of Action and Expanſion Exerted by the Muſcles in a Quick, Lively, and Nimble Motion and Agitation of all the Limbs, ve muſt ſuppoſe a Power Independent of, and Superior to, the Contractive Force of the foregoing Syſtem, which we call the Mind, and is the Spirit, which Actuates and Informs it. j TuE Circulations of the Humours may be Performed in an Animal Syſtem from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in them, but thoſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces cannot Account for the Free and Arbitrary Motions and Exertions of the whole Frame to one Part of Space or another, without any Previous Determinarion, unleſs from a Voluntary and Intelligent Agency, annext to the Syſtem it ſelf; But if we join a Spirituous or Expanſive Force from the Mind to the Contractive Force oſ the Nervous Syſtem, it may then have an Expanſion Superior even to that of the Blood; for thus Nitre, as all Salts, is of a Contractive Nature, and Wine of an Expanſive, and yer when Nitre is Exalted and Volatilized into a Spirit by Fire, and the Operations of Chymiſtry, it's Force is Mightier and Stronger than Alcohol, or the Fineſt rectiſyd Spirit of Wine, which is Weak and Languid in the Compariſon. THaT the Mind, which Actuates the Nervous Syſtem, is Diſtinct from, tho' Joined and Connccted with it, is maniſeſt from hence, that if it Reſided, as an Active Property in the Brain and Nerves, it would Exert it ſclf alvays, and every where, in the Nervous Syſtem alike, and the Nervous Subſlance would be in it's own Nature Expanſive and nor Contractive, as Spirit of Nitre is, and every Portion oſ that Subſtance vould be Endued with the ſame Degree of Thought, Senſc, Perception, and a Freedom and Liberty of Action; On the Contrary, the Brain, and the Nervous Sub ſtance Derived from it, is in its own Nature Contractive, and is Expanſive only a: the Mind Inſpirits and Envigorates it; nor docs the Active Quality, Communicated te it by the Mind, Exert it ſelſ alike in the Brain and Nerves, but Arbitrarily and ai Plcaſure, ſometimes one Part or Member of the Body being moved by the Expanſive Force of them, and ſometimes another; ncither yet is there the ſame Degree of Senſe, Thought, Perception, and a Frecdom of Acting, in every Portion of the Nervou: Nervous Subſtance; For tho we Feel and Perceive at our Fingers Ends, we dò not Think there, and tho' all the Nervous Matter or Subſtance is furniſhed with Senſe, by which there is a Communication of it with the Mind, yet there is not the Mind, there is not the Reaſon, the Will, and Underſtanding in every Part of ſuch Nervous Subſtance, which reſides in the Brain only; which ſews, that the Mind is not a Property of the Nervous Matter, but a diſtinct Being and Subſtance annext to it. AGAIN, The Mind has both an Expanſive and a Contractive Force in the Properties and Afſfections of it, for it has Qualities belonging to it, as we have beſore ſhewn, which are directly Oppoſite and Contrary to each other; It has the Vertues of Sobriety, Humility, and Goodneſs, of Application and Study, Frugality and Prudence, and Wiſdom, which are Impreſſions upon it of a Cooſer Temperament and Nature, and fall in with the Contractive Force of the Nervous Matter, or Subſtance; vhilſt it is not Incapable of the Warmer and more Vicious Paſlions oſ Intemperance, Pride, Cruelty, Licentiouſneſs of Thought, Extravagance, Indiſcretion and Folly, vhich Ariſe from the Expanſive Force of the Sanguineous; Since therefore the Nervous and Sanguineous Syſtems are perfectly Repugnant and Oppoſite to each other, and cannot Conſiſt together in one, the Mind, which is capable of Receiving and Admitting the Impreſſions of Each, muſt be Diſferent and Diſtinct from Both. MoRrEOVER it is known, That Diſtempers, of a Contractive and of an Expanſive Nature, may both of them begin in the Mind by Paſſions raiſed there; Thus Grief, or Immenſe Study, or a Sudden and Panick Fear, may cauſe Melancholy and an Entire Depreſſion of the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem; and Pride, an Intemperance of Paſſion, and a Vehement Emotion of the Mind, Madneſs and a Violent Fever in the Sanguineous; On the Contrary, if theſe Diſtempers have their Origin from the Animal Syſtem, the Firſt begins in the Nervous, and the Laſt in the Sanguineous; which ſeems to be a Demonſtration, that the Mind is a Subſtance Different ſfrom Both, and Adapted to Either, by it's Union and Conjunction with Them. LastLy, The Mind, tho' Diſorderd, continues Firm and Strong in it's Perceptions in both theſe Caſes, whilſt the ſeveral Syſtems of the Body are Impaird and Weaken'd, and ſeems then only to Affect a Diſſolution from them, when it finds it's ſelf ou of a Capacity, and unable any farther, to Govern the Irregular and Tumultuous State Introduced into Them. Tnus far we have ſpoke of the Membranes in General, and how they are Formed; And as to the uſes of them, there is nothing Alledged on that Head, which is not agrecable to the Account we have Given: We ſhall only therefore farther obſerve, that thoſe Membranes are the Thinneſt, which Encompaſs and Lie neareſt to the Contractive Forces in the Body, as the Meninges, or the Pia and Dura Mater, which Intercede betwixt the Scull and the Brain, the Coats of the Nerves, and the Perioſteum which Inveſts the Bones; and thoſe are Thickeſt, which Encompaſs or Lie neareſt to the Expanſive Forces in the Body, as the Peritoneum, the Pleura, the Pericardium, and the Coats of the Blood Veſſels; Becauſe the Contractive Force Tends Inwards, and therefore Diminiſhes the Thickneſs of the Former, but the Expanſive Force Dilates and Extends it ſelf Ourwards, and by that means Swells and Increaſes the Thickneſs of the Latter; as alſo becauſe the Expanſive Force requires a Greater Contractive to Balance it, and a Contractive a Leſs. ALSO the Adipoſe Membrane is Thicker in the Neck, than in any other Part; ſince we have ſiewn, that the Air is Aſſiſting to the Forming of Fat in Conjunction with the Blood and the Nervous Subſtance, of all which there are Great Quantities; for there is not only the External Air, but that, which Paſſes thro' the Pharyux and Laryux into the Stomach and Lungs; there is likewiſe the Aedulla Spinalis, and the ſeveral Cervical Nerves, which are Derived from thence in the Number of the Contractive Forces; and the Variety of Blood Veſſcls Propagated from the Heart to the Head, which belong to the Expanſive; from which Quantities of the Contending Forces it is Rational to Think, there will be a Greater Portion of Fat Elaborated and Made. OF the Membranes, there is nothing thereſore now Remaining for us to ſpeak to excepting the Aembrana Carnoſa, which lies above the Membrana Communis Muſculo rum, or the àſuſculoſa, and beneath the Adipoſa, and which is not to be found ir vVvV Men Men, and is obſervable in Brutes only; the Reaſon of which ſeems to be, that the Nervous Subſtance or the Contractive Force is more Powerful and Predominant in Men, and the Sanguineous or Expanſive in Brutes, by which, in the Former, the Carnoſe Membrane is Thinner and more Contracted, and in the Latter, more Dilated and Thicker; and upon the ſame Account, as the Mcninges and Perioſteum are Thinner than the Coats of the Blood Veſiels, or the Peritonaum, Pleura, or Pericardium: From this Membrane and the Exceſs of the Expanſive Force ſeems to Ariſe that Great Protruſion of Hair obſervable in Brutes. LastLy, This Theory of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces exactly Correſponds vith what the Beſt and Lateſt Anatomiſts have Affirmed concerning the Compages and Structure of an Human Body, that it conſiſts Entirely of Fluids and Solids, th] Laſt of vhich are ſaid to be Vaſcular; That is, however Solid any Part may Appear, it is yet Aſierted, that ĩt is nothing elſe than a Congeries oſ Hollow Tubes and Veſſels, containing ſome Liquors or other, which are Proper and Peculiar to them; For the Coats and Veſſels we have ſiewn are owing to the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtiem, and poſſibly to the Internal Air of the Body, and the Humours of vhich they are the Conduits, to the Expanſive of the Blood and the Contractive of the Nervous Fluid, or to a Various Mixture of Them. 5. 11. IN Diſſection, next under the Membrana Adipoſa and the Membrana Communis Muſculorum lie the Muſcles, of which there are Five Pair; the Outermoſt are the Obliquely Deſcending, the Next are the Obliquely Aſcending, the Third the recti, the Fourth the Pyramidal, and the Inmoſt, the Tranſverſe; which being Removed, the Peritonaum, or the Inmoſt Coat of the Belly, called the Rim, Appears; It adheres above to the Midriſf, below to the Share- and Flank- or Hip-Bones, in the Fore-Part firmly to the Tranſverſe Muſcles, but chiefly to their Tendons about the Linea Alba, behind to the Fleſhy Heads of theſe Muſcles looſely; It's Figure is Oval, and i's Subſtance Membranous, and it's Origin, according to Fallopius and Dr. Gliſſon, from the Superior and Inſerior Plexus of Nerves of the Abdomen, for from them it cannot be Separated without Tearing; others Derive it from the Ligaments, by which the ?ertebræ of the Loins and of the Os Sacrum are Knit one to another; It is Double every vhere, but appears to be ſo chiefly about the Verrebræ of the Loins, and in the Hym»gaſtrium; For in the Former Place, between it's Membranes, lie the Vena Cava, the Aorta, the Receptacle of the Chyle and the Kidneys, and in the Latter the Bladder, and in Women the Womb. It has Three Perforations Above, where it adheres to the Diaphragm or Midriff; the Firſt on the Right-Side, for the Aſcending Trunk of the Vena Cava; the Second on the Left, for the Gullet to Deſcend by, with the Nerves of the Eighth Pair inſerted into the upper Orifice of the Stomach; and the Third, for the Deſcent of the Aorta and the Intercoſtal Nerve, and for the Aſcent of the Ductus Chyliſerus; Below, It has Paſſages for the Recium, for the Neck of the Bladder, and in Women for the Vagina of the Womb, Alſo for the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, which Proceed down to the Thighs; Before, in a Fætus, for the Umbilical Veſſels; It has likewiſe Two Proceſſes in Men, and TWo in Women, vhich there is no occaſion here particularly to Deſcribe; If it breaks, it Cauſes a Rupture, either in the Groin or Navel: It has Arteries and Veins from the Mammary and Epigaſtrick, and from thoſe ol the Midriſf, and from the Phrenick, and has ſender Threads of Nerves ſfrom the Pairs oſ the Vertcbræ of the Loins, and it's uſe is to aſſiſt the Contraction of the Belly for the Expulſion of the Excrements, and to give an outer Coat to the Inteſiincs. UNDER the Peritonaum, in Diſſection, lies the Epiploon, Omentum, or Caul; It is compoſed of TWo Membranes, betwixt which the Veſſels run, and the Fat and Gland: are placed; They are very Thin, and, where the Fat hinders not, Tranſparent; It ĩ: compared by Dr. Gliſſon to a Womans Apron, when the lower Part of it is Turned up, and Tuck'd under the Girdle; For it conſiſts of Two Leaves, whoſe upper Edge: are Knit to Different Parts, but it's Bottom is Continued, and Reſembles a Pouch or a Satchel; The Fore-Leaſ, beginning at the little Lobe of the Liver, which it Involves Adnheres to the Under or Hollow Side of the ſaid Liver, to the Duodenum or Pylorus ſomewhat towards their Fore-Side, to the Bottom of the Stomach, and to the Suturc oſ the Spleen; The Hinder or Inner Leaſ is Continued from the Former, and, Paſſing ſrom the Spleen backwards, Returns towards the Right-Side again, by the wa; Adhereing Adhereing to the Pancreas, to that Part of the Colon, which runs under the Stomach, to the Back, to the Duodenum, ſomewhat towards it's Back- Side, and at laſt is Joined or Continued to the Fore-Leaf at the aforeſaid little Lobe of the Liver; as for ivs Bottom, it is knit to no Part, but hangs Looſe upon the Inteſtines, Reaching commonly a little below the Navel, and ſometimes to the very Bottom of the Belly; It alſo Cicaves to the Peritonaum, it aboundeth with Veſſels of ſeveral Sorts, which do not Terminate in it, but are carried thro' it to other Parts, namely, Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, which it is not Requiſite here particularly to Deſcribe; Malpighius thinks he has Diſcovered a fourth Sort, which he calls Ductus Adipoſi, but this is very uncertain, and there is nothing but Conjecture and Diſputed Obſervations for them; According to Dr. #harton, in his Adenographia, there are Lacteal Veſſels paſs thro' it from the Stomach to the Common Receptacle of the Chyle; It has likewiſe Glands, hich are ſaid to contain much Fat, and into one of Which, that is joined to the Pylorus, the Lacteals are Inſerted; The Fat is unequally Spread over it, and is gathered chieſly there, where the Veſſels run, the Spaces betwixt being only Membranous; It is Collected in little Membranous Cells, Included betwixt the Two Inveſting Membranes, and its Matter is Derived from the Blood Veſſels, according to the Common Opinion, but according to Malpighius from the Ductus Adipoſi 3 the Fore-Leaf has more Fat than the Hinder, and the upper Part of the Fore-Leaf, that -is knit to the Stomach, is the Farteſt of it: In very Fat Perſons, this Part grows to a Great Bulk, but in Conſumptive, there is little left beſides the Membranes and Veſſels; And Peyerus ſays, that in all Hydropick Perſons, that he ever Diſiccted, the Caul was alWays Extenuated and Putrid. Tne Uſes of it are, To Cheriſ the Heat of the lower Part of the Stomach, and the Inteſtines; To Miniſter Nouriſhment to the Parts, in a long Want of Food, it's Fat being received into the Veins, and mixt with the Blood; To convey Veſſels ſaſely to other Parts; To keep the Inteſtines Moiſt and Glib; And to knit looſely together, the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Colon, and Duodenum. Tnus alſo the Syllabus divides the Peritonaum into the Lamina Exterior and Interior, the Proceſſus, from whence is derived the Tunica Elythroides, or the Vaginalis Teſtium, and the Umbilical Veſiels, that is, the Veins, Arteries, and Urachus, And the Omentum into the Ala Superior and Inferior, the Burſa, the Lamella, the Adeps in Cellulis, and the Veſels, namely, the Arteries, Veins, and Nerves. §. 12. THIS is the Account, which the Anatomiſts give of the Peritonaum and Omentum; We have therefore, in Philoſophy, ſcarcely any Reaſon to add more, than what has been ſaid concerning the Fat and the Membranes; however we ſhall g3o on to ſicw, how theſe Phænomenons of an Human Body Conſiſt and Agree with our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. TuE Muſcles lie under the Adipoſe Membrane, and are entirely Formed, as to the Subſtance of Them, of Nervous Fibres and an Heap of Capillary and Infinitely ſmall Blood Veſſels; For the External Air, being now hinderd by the Fat, and it's Membrane, from Proceeding any farther into the Human Frame, the Syſtems of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Sanguineous and Nervous Matter are at full Liberty to Exert themſelves againſt each other; and by that Means are Spread and Diuſcd into a Thouſand Streams and Rivulets of Blood on the one Hand, whilſt the Nervous and Contractive Matter on the other Surrounds and Inveſts them with Coats, againſt which the Expanſive Force of the Blood Acting ſhapes them into Round and Hollow Canals, and the Contractive Force of the Nervous Matter Repelling ſuch Expanſion, the Blood becomes Progreſſive, and the Canals Tubular; whilſt in the mean Time the Nervous Matter is likewiſe carried in Oppoſition to the Sanguineous into Innumerable Filaments and Threads, vhich have alſo a Force and Power of Con traction. AnD from hence is derived the True and Natural Action of a Muſcle, which i: the ſame, as that of the Heart, or any Artery, namely, that of a Syſtole and a Diaſtole or of a Contraction and Dilatation; the Firſt Ariſing from the Cold or Contractive Force of the Nervous Matter, ànd the Iaſt from the Hot or Expanſive of the San guineous; and it is a wrong Opinion of Anatomiſis, to Imagine, that the Proper Action Of a Muſcle is Contraction only, ſince Dilatation is as Peculiar and Eſſęntial to it VVv a thi the One Proceeding ſiom the Real Contractive Force of the Fibres of the Muſcle and the Coats of the little Blood- Veſſels, that is, from the Contractive oſ the Solids, and the Other from the Expanſive of the Blood, and the Fluids. Tuis Theory of the Muſcles again, ſuitable to what ve have ſaid beſore, gives us a Reaſon, vhy Cold and Froſty Weather makes us more Acive and Lively, as alſo Cold Bathing; when Hot and Sultry Weather, or the Warmth of a Fire, or the uſe of Spirituous Liquors, Renders us more Faint, Languid, and Unactive; Becauſt the Firſt Strengthens and Corroborates the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem, and the Lat Weakens and Diſſolves it. UxDER the Muſcles, vhen Removed, the Peritonaum is Diſcovered, which, being a Membrane, does chicſly conſiſt of a Contractive Force, and is Evident from the Origin, which Anatomiſis aſcribe to it, that is, the Superior and Inferior Plexus ol Nerves of the Abdomen, and the Ligaments, by which the ſerrebræ of the Loins, and of the Os Sacrum are Knit one to another; by it's Adhereing to the Midriſf, and ro the Share- and Hip-Bones, and to the Tendons of the Tranſverſe Muſcles, which are all of a Cold, Solid, and a Contractive Nature; and by it's Looſc Adheſion to the Fley Heads of the ſame Muſcles, which are of a more Sanguineous and Expanſive one; The Action alſo is from hence Contractive, by which it is aſliſting to the Periſtaltick Motion of the Inteſtines, and to the Expulſion of the Excrements from Them: The Contractive Force of the Internal Air, it is Probable, obtains ſome Effect in the Conſtitution and Conſolidation of this Membrane, but being leſs Con tractive than the External Air, and the Expanſive Force of Heat from the Blood being Greater, and the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem being ſpread thro it, It is of a Tenderer Nature than the Cuticula, or outward Skin, as well as of a more Senſible. It is Double, eſpecially about the Verrebræ of the Loins, and the Hypogaſtrium, from a neceſſary Diviſion of it by Superior Forces; in the Former Place, by the Expanſive Force of the Blood in the Aorta, and the Vena Cava, and of the Chyle, in the Receptacle of it, by the Blood alſo in the Emulgent Arteries, and the Expulſion of the Serum by the Kidneys; and in the Latter, by the Deſcent of the Serum into the Bladder, and ſo to it's Excretion from the Human Syſtem. Ir's Perforations are owing to the ſame Cauſe of Superior Forces, the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood in the Aorta and Vena Cava, of the Protruſion of Mcat thro' the Gullet, and of the Chyle thro' the Ductus Chyliferus, of the Expulſion of Excrement thro the Rectum, of the Blood which paſes down thro' the Arteries to the Thighs, and up thro' the Veins from thence, the Nerves by it's Oppoſite and Contractive Force continually Attending them, and laſtly, of the Blood in the Umbilical Veſſels; And by a Superior Force, Ruptures are Cauſed, or an Enlargement of certain Perforations: It gives an outer Coat to the Inteſtines from a Diffuſion of it's Contractive Force, by which thoſe Coats likewiſe obtain their Periſtaltick Motion, as will be ſewn afterwards. TuE Epiploon, omentum, or Caul, lies next under the Peritonaum, and immediately covers the Inteſtines, which conſiſts of Fat and a Membrane, the Lat of which is derived from a Diffuſion or Extenſion of the Coats of the Numerous Veſſels, which Taſs thro' it, which makes it ſo Exceeding Thin, and from the Coats of the Entrails ro vhich it Adheres; The Firſt ſeems to be made, as before, from a Mixture of rhe Expanſive Force of the Blood, and of the Contractive of the Nervous Matter, and of the Internal Air, which is the Reaſon, that it is chieſly gathered there, where the Veſſels Run, and is found in the Greateſt Plenty in the upper Part of the Fore-Leaſ, vhere it is Joined to the Stomach, which Abounds with Veſſels of it's own, and is Repleniſ'd with Air, which Enters with the Aliment; There is little of it in Conſumptive Perſons, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood, and the Contractive of the Nervous Matter, is too much Weakened and Impaird to be capable of Producing it; and it is Groſer, and leſs Oily and Fluid, than the Fat of the Adipoſe Membrane, upon the Account of the Internal Air being more flat and Ieſs Spirituous and Springy than the External, and of the Contractive Force of the Nervous Matter being Greater; from which firſt Cauſe it is, that there are fewer Veſicles or Bladders in This, than in That. C H AP. C H AP. IV. Concerning the Ocſophagus or Gullet, the Ventricle or Stomach, the Inteſtines or Guts; and of the Mouth and Palate. s. I. FTER the Abdomen is laid open, and the Omentum is taken off, the an Aumn Inteſtines appear, which being continued to the Stomach, and That to ſ' ęu.: the Gulſet, it will be neceſſary to Diſcourſe of Them together. of ihi Mou TuE Ocſophagus, Stomachus, Gula, or Gullet, begins at the Root of the Tongue be- u alue hind the Zarynx, which Part of it is called the Pharynx, and Deſcends from thence 5ſabus ẽn between the Wind-pipe and the Veriebræ of the Neck, and the Four Firſt ertebræ ofierlogiæ the Thorax, in a Direct Line; at the Fifth Vertebra it bends a little to the Right-ſide, ſ &ꝶ æ by giving way to the Deſcending Trunk of the Great Artery, which it Accompanies Anony, 10 the Ninth Vertebra, and then Turns a little to the Leſt and Climbs upon the hip. s.1, Artery, and about the Eleventh Vertebra Paſſes thro' the Midriſf a little on the Leſt- b. res ſide of it's Nervous Centre, at a Hole Diſtinct from the Great Artery, and is Inſerted Anatomy, or Continucd unto the Left Orifice of the Ventricle or Stomach, which is Situate immediately under the Midrif; in the Fore-part on the Right-ſide it is Covered with Dr. Drake the Hollow-ſide of the Liver, on the Lefſtſide it is Touched by the Spleen; it's Back- Nubropole ſide upon full Feeding bears againſt the ena Cava and spine, and to its Borrom Length- Chap 910 ways is the Caul knit; the Back-ſide of it's Bottom reſteth on the Pauncreas, and the Book Fore-ſide on the Colon, all which promote its Heat; It is Longih and Pretty Round, auœm⸗ very much Reſembling a Bag-pipc in Shape; It hangs Croſs the Body, and it's TWo Reſormata Orifices, by which the Meat is Received in from the Gullet, and let out into the Eau Guts, ſtand higher up than it's Middle, ſo that it's upper Part makes, as it were, the Rationl A Concave of an Half-Moon. The Cardia, or Left Orifice, hath Orbicular Fibres, that r , it might be exactly ſhut leſt Fumes, and the Heat, ſiould break out to the Hindrance n of Concoction, and Annoyance of the Head. The Pylorus has it's Inmoſt and Nervous Coat full of Wrinkles, and it's Middle or Carnous has TWo Ranks of Fibres, Annular or Tranſverſe, to ſtreighten or ſhut up this Paſſage upon Occaſion, and ſuch as run Length-ways, which draw the reſt of the Stomach towards this Door, for tee Diſtribution of the Chyle into the Duodenum; but if they draw the Contrary vay, Vomiting is Produced, and the Choler and Pancreatick Juice ſometimes pumpt into the Stomach. l TuE Ventricle, or Stomach, is more Capacious on the Left-ſide than on the Right; It's The stoma Left or Upper Orifice is Continued from the Gullet, by means whereof it is knit to the Midriff; and it's Right or Lower Orifice is Continued to the Duoàdenum; It's Bottom, in the whole Length of it, has the upper Edge of the Fore-Leaf of the Caul adhereing to it, by whoſe Mediation it is joined to the Liver, Back, Spleen, Colon and Pancreas; the Upper Oriſice is called Cardia, and the Lower is termed Pylorus. TuE Inteſtines or Guts are Continued ſrom the Pylorus to the Anus, and are knit The Gutogether by the Meſentery; by which, and by the Intervention of the Omentum, part of which Adheres to the Beginning of the Duodenum and the Middle Part of the Colon, they are tied to the Back, and fill the Greater Part of the Cavity of the Abdmen; and the Length of them is about Six Times the Perſon's Length, whoſe they are; They have a Periſtaltick, Vermicular, or Worm-like Motion, which begins at the Leſt Oriſice of the Stomach, and is Promoted quite thro' them. THEY are Divided into TWo Sorts, the Thin or the Small, and the Thick or the Large; the Firſt are placed Above, are Long, Equal, Round, Rolled about in Wreaths, Full of Wrinkles, Interwoven with Innumerable Veins, and Chyle is found in them; On the Contrary, the Thick are placed Below, are Short, Anfractuous, without Twiſting Wreaths, Endued with Fewer Veins, and the Wrinkles or Folds in the Guts are Expanded, and there Reſult from them certain Receſſes or Cells, and the Fæces are found in them; The Thin poſſeſs the Umbilical Region and Hyjpogaſtrium, and are diſtinguiſhed into the Duodenum, Vejunum, and Ileon; The Thick are the Cæcum, Colon, and Rectum, at the Extremity of which is placed the sphincter. The Gullet Tir Tuꝶ Duodenum is ſo called, from being ſuppoſcd by the Antients to be abour Twelve Inches Long, vhich in Sheep is ſo, but in Men not above Four Fingers; It reaches to the Pancreas, and is not knit to the Aeſentery but the Omentum; It is Thicker in i's Membranes, than the Yejunum and Ileum, but it's Paſſge ſiraiter; Tovards it's Lover End it has commonly Two Ducts Leading Into it, the Ducius Choledochus Communis, by which the Bile enters this Gut ſrom the Liver, and a little below the Ductus Pancreaticus, by which the Pancreatick Juice is conveyd into it from the Pancreas or Sweet: Bread; tho' ſometimes theſe To Ducts are joined into one, and open by one Mouth into this Inteſtine. ] Tur Fejunum is ſo called, becauſe it is for the moſt Part empty, both upon the Account oſ the Multitude of Lacteals, which are Inſerted into it, by which the Chyle is carried off from it, and of the Fermentation of the Acrimonious Choler with the Pancreatick Juice, hich are brought into the Inteſtines juſt before it's Beginning; It is about Eight Feet in Length, and begins on the Right-ſide, under the Colon, where the Duodenum Ends, and the Guts begin to be Wreathed, and is Continucd to the leum ; From which it is Diſtinguiied by it's Emptineſs, and by it's Greater Number of Veins and Arteries, ſfrom which it looks Reddiſh; as alſo by the nearneſs of the Folds or Wrinkles of its Inmoſt Coat one to another, which are but about half an Inch Diſtant, whercas in the Ileum they are a whole Inch, or more; and laſtly, by its Coats, which are Thicker than thoſe of the Ileum. TuE Ileum, amb ę ti6Q|, is ſo called from it's many Turnings and Windings, is in Length about Twenty Feet, and is the Narroweſt of all, being about a Finger's Breadth in Diameter; It is Diſtinguiſed from the Cæcum or Colon, hich make one continued or ſtrait Canal, the Lower-ſide of which the Ileon aſcending Pierces, and Enters Tranſverſely to it, and into the Latter whereof it's Inner Coat hangs looſcly the Length oſ hal? an Inch, Forming the Valve it ſelf of the Colon, and is the Limit, that divides the Cæcum from it: When this Inteſiine falls into the Scrotum it Cauſes a Rupture, and vhen there is a Contortion of it, or an Obſtruction in it, or an Intruſion of one Part into another, the Iliack Paſſion, in which the Excrement is voided by the Mouth. TuE Wrinkles in the Inſide of theſe Inteſlines are, what the Modern Anatomiſis Term the Valvula Conniventes, which are made from the Inmoſt Coats being longer than the Two other, and which therefore ſtreighten the Paſage, and detain the Chyle, that the Lacteals may have more Time to Imbibe it; Theſe Wrinkles are neceſſary, thar the Inmoſt Coat may comply with the Outward and Muſcular, upon it's Diſtention and Dilatation, which, when Contracted, Determines it into theſc Plicæ or Folds, the Inner Coat being, like the Outward Sin or Cuticula, without any Senſe or Motion in it ſelf, as having neither Nervous nor Fleſhy Fibres. OF the Thick Guts the Cæcum is the Firſt, being only a Continuation of the Colon, and is called the Blind, becauſe one End of it is Cloſed, and the other is Joined with the Cavity of the Colon by a large Mouth, which opens into it, tho' in Men it is only about as Thick, and half as Long, as a Larger Earth-Worm ſtretched out at Length; It is Bigger in Infants than in Men, and in a Faotus is a Repoſitory for the Faces, and in Sound Perſons is generally Empty; In Four-footed Beaſits it is always full of Excrements, in Apes it is Larger than in Men, in Dogs than in Apes, and in Conies, Squirels, and Rats, Largeſt of all, in Proportion to their Bodies. TuE Colin, ſo called from æũrœ or æĩnœ, becauſe it is the Holloweſt and Wideſt, or àan ꝗ xurvæ, from Detaining the Excrements, begins at the Os Ilium on the Right- ſide, and Aſcending by it's spine, Arrives at the Right Kidney, to which Parts it is joined by a Membranous Connexion; From thence bending Leſt-ways it Creep: under the Liver, by the Gall-Bladder, to the Bottom of the Stomach, to the whole Length of which it is tied by the Mediation oſ the Fore-Leaf of the Caul, as it i: to the Pancreas and Loins by the Mediation of the Hinder-Leaf; Then it comes te the Lower Part of the Spleen, to which it ĩs likewiſe Joined, and afterwards Touch ing and ſirmly Adhereing to the Leſt Kidney by Fibres, it comes to the Left Os llium from which Deſcending by the Left Groin to the Pelvis, it embraceth the Bortor of the Bladder behind on each Side; Then it Aſcends upwards by the Right Groin neat the Place, from whence it Firſt took ir's Riſe, and thence Marching back again tovard: towards the Leſt- ide, and Running it ſelf in betwixt the eum and the Back-Bone, it Reaches to the Top of the Ds Sacrum, and there Unloads it ſelf into the æectum; It is about Seven Feet Long, and goes almoſt quite Round the Abdomen, next to the Muſcles, that it may better be Compreſſcd by Them for Avoidance of the Excrements; It is Furrowed on the Outſide, and Ridged in the Inner, by which it becomes Divided into Cells, which Proceeds from the Inmoſt Coat Exceeding the Outward in Length, but chiefly from the Ligament, which is half an Inch Broad, that Runneth on the Upper and Middle Part of this Gut, and is much ſhorter than the Membranes of it; Theſe Cells hinder the Excrements from ſlowing into one Place, which would Compreſs the Parts Adjacent, and keep the Faces from Deſcending too haſtily, that we may not have a continual Need of going to Stool; On it's Outſide, eſpecially from it's Paſſing by the Spleen to it's Joining to the æecium, it has a Great many Fatty Knots, which ſerve to Moiſten and Lubricate it, that the Fæces may Paſs more caſily; The Rectum has the like for the ſame Realon: The Valve, which, as before Expreſicd, is the Inmoſt Coat of the leum Propending or Hanging out Flagęy into the olon, Cauſes that Flatuoſities cannot Aſcend from this Latter into the Former, much leſs Excrements Regurgitate; but if the Periſtaltick Motion be Inverted, as in the Iliack Paſſion, ſo that the Inmoſt Coat of the sleum be drawn back from it's Depending into the Colon, the Excrements of the Colon, and Clyſters themſelves, may Aſcend up thro the Small Guts into the Stomach, and be throvn up by Vomit. Tut Inteſtinum Rectum, or Strait Gut, begins at the Firſt Vertebra of the Os Sacrum, where the Colon Ends, and Paſſes directly Downwards to the Extremity of the Coccyx; Tis faſt tied, on it's Back-ſide, to both theſe Bones, by Mediation of the Peritonàum, to keep it from Falling out; and on is Fore-ſide in Men it grows to the Neck of the Bladder, from whence, in the Pain of the Stone there, a Teneſmus or a Continual Inclination to go to Stool happens, but there is a Muſculous Subſtance comes between; It is a Foot in Length, not ſo Wide as the Colon, but it's Membrãnes Thicker. THE Sphincter Muſcle is placed at the very Extremity of the Rectum, by which it is cloſe Purſed up to hinder the Continual Exit of the Faces, and is Forced open by a Voluntary Relaxation, and, the Compreſſion of the Guts, and their Contents, by the Contraction of the Abdominal Muſcles; by too much Straining, or by Alocticik Purges, the Rectum ſometimes is ſo far Protruded, as to require an Artificial purting up again. ? is a ſnort Account from Anatomiſis of the Inteſtinal Paſſage from the Pharynx to the Anus, as to the Windings, Turnings, and the Various Situation of it; The next Thing to be Deſcribed is the Subſtance and Contexture of it; And in this all the ſeveral Parts of it Agree, viæ. in being Compoſed of Three Tunicks or Coats, the Common, the Muſcular, and the Nervous or Tendinous, which laſt conſiſis of Blood-Veſſels, Little-Glands, and a Cruſt or a kind of Cuticula, with a ſort of Down or Velvet upon it; beſides which, the Stomach and Inteſtines, in General, have their Blood-Veſſels, their Nerves, and their Secretory Ducts. Tur outmoſt Tunick, or the Common, is very Thin, being only Endued with Membranous Fibres, and thoſe very Slender, and in the Gullet is ſuppoſed to be Derived from the Midriff, or the Pleura, or the Peritonaum, or ſrom the Ligaments of the Vertebræ of the Neck and Breaſt, upon which it Reſteth, or from all of them: In the Stomach, it's Fibres, being Nervous, are Strait, Running from one Orifice to the other, and Encompaſſing both it's Bottom and Sides in their whole Longitude, and they Croſs, at Right Angles, the Carnous ones lying next under: In the Inteſtines it is of the ſame Fibrous and Membranous Texture, and is Derived mediately from the Peritonaum, but immediately from the Membranes of the Omentum, and of rthe Meſentery. TuE Second Tunick, which lies under the Former, is the Carnous or Muſcular, which, In the Gullet, conſiſis of Two Ranks of Fleſhy Fibres, which Aſcend and Deſcend obliquely, Spiral-wiſe, and do mutually Intercuſſate, or Croſs, one another, ſo as that the Fibre, which, before it met with another to Interſect, did lie underneath anorher, Rides upon that which it Interſects, and ſo continues uppermoſt, till ĩt comes to a Second, under vhich it Paſſes again, and ſo on by Turns: In the Stomach mach, it alſo Conſiſts of Two Ranks of Fleſy Fibres; the Outer of which are the more Numerous, and are Tranſverſe, Running Croſs, or Round, the Stomach; the Inner go ſtrait from the Left Orifice to the Right on the Top of the Stomach, and the Remainder of Them tend along cach Side of it, obliquely forwards toward the Bottom, and meet one another there: In the Inteſtines, it likewiſe conſiſls of Two Ranks of Fleſhy and Moving Fibres, the Outer is of ſtrait ones, which reach along the whole Length of the Inteſtines, and cut the Circular ones under them at Right Angles, and their Tendon ſeems to be the ourmoſt Coat, which being wholly Nervous, or as it were Tendinous, is wrapt about the whole Rank of theſe Fibres; the Inner is Annular or Tranſverſe, or, as others, Spiral, which, Encompaſſing the whole Cavity of all the Inteſtines in very cloſe Order, is Inſerted into the Hem or Selvedge of the Meſentery, as into it's Tendon. Tue Third Tunick or Inmoſt is Nervous, Lined with a Velver or Downy Subſtance, and, In the Gullet, the Fibres are ſtrait, according to the Ancients, but according to Dr. ”illis, they are variouſly Interwoven one with another, it is continued the Membrane, which covers the Mouth, Jaws, and Lips, and Deſcends Three Fingers Breadth below the Mouth of the Stomach, from whence Proceeds that Great Conſent among theſe Parts in Vomiting: In the Stomach, it is the ſame, Nervous, Lined with a Downy Cruſt, and it is Endued with all Sorts of Fibres, but the ſtrait are the moſt Numerous; It is beſet with abundance of Small Ringlike Glands, which appear, when the Down is taken off, which is called the Glandulous Coat, and which when Removed, the Nervous one is Diſcovered, along which Abundance of Arteries and Blood-Veſſels Run, that Terminate in it's Inner Superfſicies, hich Adheres to the Glandulous Coat; There is alſo a Parenchyma, which ſome think wholly Glandulous, which is Diſperſed, eſpecially in it's Middle or Muſcular Coat, and is not Sanguineous, but of a Slimy Nature; it fills the Inequalities, which ariſe from the Texture oſ the Fibres, and is ſcraped off from the ſmall Guts in Great Plenty, by thoſe, who make Strings for Muſical Inſtruments; and it is Evident, the Subſtance of the Stomach and Guts is the ſame: In the Inteſtines, the Downy Coat ſerves as a Filtre for the Chyle, before it Enters into the Vena Lacteæ, and hinders Excoriation from ſnarp Humours. ALL theſc, The Gullet, Stomach, and Inteſtines, have Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, Communicated to them from the Adjacent Parts, and which are Spread and Diſperſcd thro' their whole Subſtance. THERE are alſo the Glandules, called the Tonſillæ or Almonds, which lie in the Throat, at the Root of the Tongue, next to the Gullet, and Two more on the Backſide of it, which have their Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, likewiſe belonging to them; The Tonſillæ are ſaid to be of a Yellowiſh Colour, and their Subſtance to be like Concreted Honey, only of a firmer Conſiſtence; They have a Large Duct or Sinus, which opens into the Mouth, and Diſcharges into it the Liquor Separated in Them. IN the Inmoſt Coat of the Inteſtines, Anatomiſts, and Pe;erus in Particular, have Obſerved abundance of Glands, beſides thoſe, which Form the Glandulous Coat of Dr. Willis; They appear like little Teats with a ſmall Pore at the Top towards the Cavity of the Gut, and their Baſes, or Back-ſides, have Blood-Veſſels and Nerves Inſcerted into them, and there Iſues out of the Pore a Clammiſ Humour; There are fev of them in the Duodenum or Jejunum, and they are the moſt Numerous in the Ileum. TE TWo Chief Things obſcrvable in theſc Parts, are the Chylification of the Stomach, and the Periſtaltick Motion of the Inteſtines. This is a ſuccinct Account of the Inteſtinal Paſſage, as to the Situation, Subſtance, and Action of it; but ſince we are to Diſcourſe of Digeſtion, and the Chyle, before we leave this Subject, it vill be Requiſite to ſubjoin here a Deſcription of the Palate and Mouth, to which the ſaid Inteſtinal Paſage is continued, and vhich conſiſts of ſeveral Parts. TuE Teeth and Gums we omit, as commonly known. TuE Palate, or Roof, of the Mouth is Concave like a Vault, and Formed in the Os Sphenoides, which is covered with a peculiar Glandulous Fleſh, and a Thick Tunicle full of little Holes for the saliva, which is ſeparated by the Glands, to Paſ thro' into the the Mouth; There are ſaid to Spring out of it Innumerable ſlender Ducts, whicſ Perforating the Membrane make it like a Sieve. THE Uuvula is a Red, Spongy, and Longiſh Caruncle, which, being ſomewhat Broad at it's Baſis, hangs down from the Middle of the Palate, where the Noſtrils open into the Mouth, with a Small but Bluntiſn End. Tur Tongue has Two Membranes, The Outer, which covers the upper Part only, and is pretty Smooth in Men, but Rough in Brutes with Cartilaginous Pricles riſing out of it, and ſtanding, like the Teeth of Wool-Cards, towards the Root of the Tongue; The Inner covers the whole Tongue, is Thin and Soft, and has many Papilla Protuberating out of it, which in the upper Part Intrude themſelves into the Pores of the Outer; this Inner Malpighius calls a Nervous and Papillar Body: The Subſtance of the Tongue is ſaid by ſome to be That of a Gland, by Others to be Peculiar to it ſelf, and by Dr. Wharton, Spigelius, and Malpighius, to be That of a True and Real Muſcle; the La©t oſ whom Informs us, that immediately under the aforeſaid Membranes, there lie ſtrait Fleſhy Muſcular Fibres, whereby the Tongue is drawn Invards, and Shortened, but that the Center of the Tongue conſiſis. of a manifold Kind of Fibres, Long, Tranſverſe, and Oblique, which, Riding one upon another, are Interwoven like a Mat; and yet Dr. Gibſon thinks it cannot be Properly called a Muſcle, becauſe no Muſcle ſerves to Move it ſelf, but ſome other Part, and becauſe one Muſcle is not Moved by another, as the Tongue is by ſeveral Pair; It is Connected to the Os Hyoides, Larynx, and Fauces, and by a Membranous Ligament to the Parts under it; It has it's Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, derived into it from the Adjacent Places. BEsiIDES the Glands above-mentioned, there are the Parotides, the Conglobate, and Conglomerate, which are both Scated in the Hollow under the Ear, and vere formerly Reputed Emunctories of the Brain; but now the Conglobate are ſuppoſcd to ſeparate the Lympha from the Arterial Blood, and convey it by Lympheducis into the Jugular Veins; the Conglomerate have not only Inſerted into them Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, but there alſo Springs out of each a Salival Duct by many ſmall Roots, which Running along opens into the Cavity of the Mouth, into vhich it Diicharges the Saliva, which it Receives from the Parotis of it's on Side, and ĩs called Ductus Salivalis Stenonianus from it's Inventor Srenoo. TnE Scecond Glands, called, Nuciana from Dr.. Anthony Nuct a Dutch-Man, arc ſcated in the Orbit oſ the Skull, wherein the Eye is placed, their Figure is Various in Diſſerent Perſons, Oblong, Oval, or Triangular, they have Arteries, Veins, and Nerves Inſcrted into them; Each has a Salival Duct, which Deſcending downwards comes to the upper Part of the Gum in the upper Jaw, near to the Second Double Tooth, Reckoning from behind forwardss where it Empties it ſelf very ncar that ofſ Steno's. TuE Third Glands are th] Araxillar, which are External or Internal; The External are ſmall and of little Moment, they are ſeated outwardly about the Middle of the Lower Jaw, vhere an Artery, a Vein, and a Nerve, Aſcend into the Muſcles oſ the Face, they ſeparate a Lympha, and Convey it into the Neighbouring Jugular Veins; The Internal are ſeated immediately within the Lower Jaw, their Hinder-ſide is next to the Parotides and Jugular Glands, and is Thicker, Rounder, and Redder; They grow Thinner by Degrees, and are Extended betwixt the Jaw and the Muſcles of the Tongue, as ſar forward as to the Chin; They are Conglomerate, and have each a proper Salival Duct belonging to them, Which Spring by many Roots out of the Thicker and Hinder Part of the Glands, and run ſtrait forwards to the Middle of the Chin, vhere they End juſt within the Gums, and have a certain Papilla aſfixt to their Oriſice, vhereby they can eaſily Diſcharge themſelves, and yet nothing Return out of the Mouth into them. TuE Laſt Glands are the Sæblingual; They lie underneath the Tongue on each Side and cach of them ſends forth a Salival Duct, which, Running Parallel with thoſe oſ the Internal Maxillar Glands, open in the ſame Papilla, but have a peculiar Oririce ol their own, ſtraiter than that of the other. TuE uſc of all theſe Glands is to ſeparate the saliva, and to convey it into the Mouth by the Salival Ducts; the Origin of the Saliua is ſaid to be moſt Probably derived from the Arterial Blood, the Serous Part of which, the Gland beſtowing a X x ſubacid Concerning the Inteſtinal Paſſage, Book mn ſubacid Quality upon it, is made into Spittle, to the Compoſition Vhereoſ ſome think a Nervous Juice is Contributed, becauſe Larger and more Numerous Twiggs ol Nerves are Communicated to the Glands, than to moſt orher Parts, which yet have a more Exquiſite Senſe than theſe; againt vhich Dr. Nuct alledges, that if the Nerve, that Runs to any Gland be cither hard tied or cut in Sunder, the Secrction of rhe Saliva will not thereupon Ceaſe, but only will proceed more Slowly; The Saliva is eſtcemed to be a Ferment, and by ſome to be an Univerſal one for Meats and Drinks, and it is Thought to have Aclds, Volatile Salts, and Oleous Particles, in it. 5. 2. To Account in Philoſophy and Nature for the Cavity of the Mouth and the Inteſtinal Paſage, ve muſt ſuppoſc, that in a Fætus in the Womb, which has a Brain, or a Nervous Subſtance chieſly from the Semen, or a Nervous Juice, Imparted by the Male Parent, and a Heart or a Red Beating Speck from the ovum of the Female as before Explained, which Acting againſt each other by their Contractive and Expanſive Forces, and Exciteing the Animal Motion in the Syſtem, that is a-Forming, Produces by Degrees thar Syſtem, we muſt I ſay neceſſarily ſuppoſe, that there muſt be an Aliment to ſupport, and Mature the growing Embryo, which making it's vay by it's Expanſive Force, opens a Paſſage to it ſelf, and is the occaſion of that Foramen, we call the Mouth; For there being now Two oppoſite Forces contending in the ovaæ rium the Contractive and Expanſive, and the Contractive being the ſtrongeſt, by which the Ovum is Impregnated and Actuated, and is brought down thro' the Tubæ Fallopianæ into the Womb, and the Human Syſem endeavouring to Preſcrve ir's own Z quilibrium, the Expanſive Force of the Nutritious Juices in the Female Parent is Directed towards the Contractive, which is Derived into it from the Male, in order to Preſerve an Equal Balance betwixt them. For which Reaſon the Head, and the Brain, in the Zmbryo is Exceeding Large in Proportion to the other Parts of the Body, that is, the Contractive Force is much Greater than the Expanſive; but the Expanſive Force oſ the Nutritious Juices of the Female Parent, being ſtill ſent in to Counterpoiſe the Contractive, the Body and ir's ſeveral Members Increaſe, till the Contractive and Expanſive are in æquilibrio, vhen the Infant is come to Maturity, and preſently after is by the Superior Expanſive Force of the ſaid Parent Expelled from the Womb. FROM hence it is Manifeſt, why the Mouth is in the Head, and at that Diſtance from the Fore-head, rather than in it, becauſe the Contractive Force in the Brain is 100 Great to admit the Expanſive Force of the Nutritious Juices from the Mother, but yet the Expanſive Forces of thoſe Juices exert themſclves, as near to the Contractive, as Poſſible, in order to Balancè and Oppoſe it. THE Nutritious Juices, Entering here, lie for ſome Time, and Expand themſelves againſt the Contractive of the Nervous, by which means the Cavity of the Mouth and Palate is Formed; and the Os Sphenoides, being the Boundary of theſe Forces, is Acted upon by both, and is beaten and hardened into a Cartilage, and from thence into a Bone: A way being now made for the Expanſive Force of the Nutritious Juice into the New Syſiem, there is a continual Acceſſion of it, by which the Former is protruded Downwards, and Forms the Tongue, which Acting againſt the Contractive, Adheres to the O3 H;oides, and afterwards by Reverberating againſt the Contractive Force of the Brain, and the Contractive Ating againſt it, gives ĩt that Facility of Motion ve Experience in it, and which is alſo the Reaſon, why the Under Jaw is Expanſive and Moveable, whilſt the Upper is Contractive and Quieſcent; The Nutritious Juices ſtill Conrinuing their Influx to Balance the Contractive Force oſ the Brain, Form the Fle of the Gums and Palate, which are ſtill oppoſed by the Contractive Forces of the Brain, ſrom whence are Produced the Cartilages or Bones under them. AND all theſe Nutritious Juices are ſtill Aſſiſtants, and come in, as Auxiliaries, to the Expanſive Force of the Ovum, and the Red-Beating Speck, the Heart, which is the Scat of the Expanſive, which in the mean Time Exerts it ſelf in Streams or Radius's againſt the Contractive of the Brain, vhilſt that Oppoſcs it, by ſending out Nerves and a Nervous Subſtance againſt it, by which the Nerves, and the Nervous Coats of the Blood-Veſſels betwixt the Heart and Brain are Formed, and the Blood is Incloſcd and Reſtrained within them. TuE TuE Aliment and the Expanſive Force of it Preſſing on, and not being able to Hoœ: Proceed upwards, by Reaſon of the Repulſion of the Contractive Force of the Brain, _] nor forwards, by Reaſon of the Mſedulla Oblongata and Spinal Marrow, which is a mich, Dilatation and Extenſion of the Brain in order to Reſiſt the Expanſive Force from ſm⸗ the Maternal Juices; and the Aliment alſo coming to the Aſſiſtance of the Heart, and it's Blood, and the Expanſive Force oſ them, Tends downwards, and Proceeds tovards the Heart;3 The Contractive Force of the Brain and Nervous Subſtance at the ſame Time is not Idle, but Exerts it ſelf from the Brain, the above-mentioned Medulla Oblongata, and Spinal Marrow, againſt the ſaid Expanſive of the Aliment and Nutritious Juices, and by that Contraction Inveſts and Surrounds them with the Nervous Coat before Deſcribed, or the Inmoſt Coat of the Gullet, Stomach, and Inteſtines. s. 3. AFTERVARDS, When the Infant is Born, and Produced into the open Air, cauthis Coat, being extremely Senſible and Tender, is the occaſion of thoſe frequent ſſox Pukeings and little Vomitings of Children, even upon Receiving only the Milk of ii: the Mother into the Stomach, and of the Convulſions and Inquictudes ſo Common Viſv⸗ to them; but by Degrees from the Contractive Force of the Air, which Enters every ſ, Day vith the Aliment, the Cruſta is Induced upon it, and a kind of Down or ⸗ſilVelvet, from the Shoorings out of the Nervous Subſtance of rhe Coat, which are hardened by the ſaid Contractive Force of the Air inro Small Iceicles, which, together with the Cruſta thus Congealed and Condenſed by the Air, Form a kind of Ccuticula to the Gullet, Stomach, and Inteſtines, which Defends the Nervous Coat from any Internal Injuries, as the Real Cuticula does the Papillæ of the Nerves of the Cutis from External ones; That the Air has ſuch a Contractive, and Congealing or Condenſing, Force is Evident, not only from it's Effects upon the Curicula, but upon Bread, Clay, Mortar, Stone, and a Thouſand other Bodies, which it Reduces from Soſt and Pulpous Subſtances into Hard and Conſiſtent ones, and even Fluid ones into Ice, where, as in Winter, the Contractive Force is Increas'd by an Abſence of the Sun's Expanſive, and the Greater Influence of the Moons Contractive. WE ſuppoſe here the Moon to have a Cold and Contractive Force, not only for Tha the Reaſons Alledged, Boo 1. Chap. 5. S. 21. but becauſe in a Total Eclipſe of the &. Sun, there is an Apparent Coldneſs and Chillneſs Introduced into the Air, which Foræ cannot be ſo well Accounted for by a bare Interception of the Sun's Rays, which xm j we Experience in the Warmeſt and Darkeſt Nights, as by an Actual Impreſſion of àu Cold ſrom the very Body and Subſtance of the Moon, which was very Senſible in Træ that Famous Eclipſe, which was Total at Cambriãqe, where I now Write, and which V' happened on the 22à of April 1715. betwixt  and 10 of the Clock in the Morning; And when, by Looking upon it thro' a Small Teleſcope, without any Smoak't Glaſs, My ſelf, as well as ſeveral Others, in the Garden of this College, Diſcerned the Body of the Moon, as it came under the Sun, to be not of a Flat, but, Manifeſtly and Apparently, of a Globular Figure, which perhaps will be ſcarcely Credited by our Preſent Philoſophers; Tho' there are Arguments enough to Think it ſhould be ſo; Since, when the Side of the Moon, which is Obverted towards us, is ſtrongly Irraciated, there is a Wide Diſtance of it's Extremeſt Parts Obſervable by us, as in the Full Moon; And why it ſhould not be, in the other TWo Sides, where the Rays of the Sun Paſs by them to the Eye, and therefore Receive Impreſſions from them, cannot be eaſily Imagined, or why we ſhould not ſee the Moon Globular, as vell as any orher Nearer and Leſſer Globe would appear ſo, if Interpoſed betwixt us, and a Lamp or a Candle. There was nothing Remarkable here in the Laſt Eclipſe, May the 11th 1724. betwixt 5 and 6 in the Afternoon, by Reaſon of the Clouds, vhich Intervened, unleſ's a Gloomy Darkneſs, like that before Snow, and ſomething of Cold, which ſtill Confirms the Cold and Contractive Force of the Moon. But to Return to Anatomy. TnaT this is ſo, is farther Evident, becauſc, if this Contractive Force in the Cruſta, and the Downy Coat, is Diſſolved by the Expanſive one of ſtrong Liquors, Vomitings in the Stomach, and Diſorders in the Inteſtines, and a Dejection of Appetite Enſte, which cannot be owing to any Thing elſe, excepting to the Inmoſt and Nervous Coat, being ſrom thence made bare, and thereby rendered too Tender 10 adxX x a mit mit the Impreſions of any Expanſive Force, even ſrom the Common Aliments only which we take in for our Suſtenance. SF5. 4. TuE next Tunick, or Coat, which lies Immediately above the Nervout or Inmoſt, is the Carnous or Muſcular, which conſiſis chieſy of a Fleſhy, Sangui  neous, and Expanſive Subſtance, and runs over the Nervous Coat, which is oſ :  Contractive one in order to be a Balance and ſoiſe to it, alter which comes the outer Coat, vhich is of a Nervous and Tendinous, and thereſore oſ a Contractive Nature, and there the Oppoſition Ends; in which the Contractive has the Prevalence or Superiority, which is Derived ſrtom the Brain and from the Male Principle, a: the ovum, the Aliment, the Blood, and the Nutritious Juices, are the Female Principle of our Animal Conſtitutions: And this ſcems to be the Reaſon of this Alternation of Forces; Firſt, there is the Brain from the Semen, and the Heart or Red- Beating Speck from the Ovum, ithe one Contractive, the other Expanſive, which begin the Competition of the Two Forces, by which the Animal Syſtiem is Formed; Aſter which there is the Aliment or Nutritious Juice ſupplied from the Mother, which is Expanſive, to Balance which the Brain or Contractive Force Extends it ſelf into the Nervous and Inmoſt Coat; which is azain Counter- Acted by the Expanſive Force oſ the Carnous and Muſcular Coat; to Lalance which the Nervous and Tendinous, and Outer, is Formed, and then the Equilibrium is Perſcõted; in which, as the Contractive Torce began, ſo it Ends the Conteſt; when the Expanſive has ſuſliciently ſupported it ſelſ againſt it, by a continual Intuſion of New Aliment and Nuriitious TJuices, which are all of an Expanſive Force: The Outer, Nervous, or Tendinous, Coat is very Thin, becauſe the Contractive Force in this Ferment or Contraſt is now Spent and Exhauſted, and therefore is ſparingly Spread upon the Expanſive of the Carnous or Muſcular. 5.5. The Flehy or Muſcular Fibres, which are obſerved in the Second or Carnous Coat, and the Diſferent Direction of them, are alſlo Derived from the Contractive Force of the Nervous Subſtance; upon Which Account Dr. Gliſſou Deſines them in a Muſcle, to be in Figure like a Thread, Slender, Tenacious, Tenſile, and Irritable, and made of Spermatical Matter, which Deſcriptions agree with the Contractive Force of the Nervous Subſtance; and that which is properly Fleſh, is either a Sanguineous Parenchyma, Flowing thro' the Intervals of the Fibres, and Coagulated by their Cold or Contractive Force; or elſe, according to sren, the Fibres are Vaſcular, knit cloſcly together in the Tendon, and hanging more looſcly in the Fleſhy Parts, and ſilled with a Fluid, Iſuppoſe a Sanguineous one; Be it, which it ill, here are Evidently the Foot-ſteps of the Two Contractive and Expanſive Forces Contending vith each other, and the Contractive or Nervous is Conſeſ?'d to be of a Spermatick Nature, as the Expanſive, oſ a Sanguineous, in Fleſhy or Muſcular Fibres: As to the Directions of theſẽ Fibres, the Outer Rank, in the Inteſtines, is of Strait ones, and the Inner of Circular or Spiral, and, in the Gullet and Stomach, they are nearly Analogous to the above-ſaid Directions, cither by Spirals Interſecting each other, as in the Gullet, or by Strait or Oblique ones Interſecting the Circular, as in the Stomach; The Reaſon oſ vhich ſeems to be, that as the Aliment and Nutritious Juice or Blood is Progreſſive Down wards, upon the Account mentioned above, and at the ſame Time, by 's Expanſive Force, Exerts it ſelſ into a Circumſerence from a Center. ſo, accordingly, the Nervous Subſtance by it's Contractive Force, Attending and Oppoſing the Former, is carryd down in Strait Fibres, and caſls ĩt ſelf likewiſe into Circular or Spiral ones to Balance and Poiſe thoſe Strait and Circular, or Spiral, Actions in the Expanſive. ꝗ. 6. As to the Increae of the Contractive Force of the Spermatick or Nervous Subſlance, by which it is Enlarged into the Brain, the Aſedulla Oblongata, the Spinal Marrov, the Nerves and Nervous Coats, that ſeems to be owing to the Allugineous Liquor, that Sweats out oſ the Inmoſt Mcmbrane of the Urerus, which is a Nervous one, and is Imbibed by the Chorion, which is Soſt and Spongy, and from thence Conveyd into the Amuion ; as alſo by the prevailing Force of the Contractive, by vhich it Converts ſome of the Nutritious Juices into it's ovn Nature, as the Contractive Force of Cold, or the Expanſive oſ Heat can do other Subſtances, which is Evident in Froſt and Fire, by which thoſe Forces are Exempliſied. 5 7. ArTER S. 7. ArTER I had gone thus far in Explaining theſc Matters upon my own Printiples, and from what Appeared to Me to be Rational, I was ſurprized to ſee my Reaſonings ſo exactly Conſirmed from the Obſervations of the Great and Celebrated Dr. Harvey, the Firſt Aſſertor of the Circulation oſ the Blood, who, Diſcourſing concerning the Order oſ the Generation of the Parts in a Chicken, Says; There appears at the very Firſt, a Red Leaping Punctum or Speck, a Beating Bladder, and Fibres Drawn from thence containing Blood in them, and, as much as one can Diſcern by Accurate Inſpection, Blood is made before the Leaping Speck is Formed, and the ſame is endued vith Vital Heat, before it is ſtirred by the Pulſe; and becauſe tie Beating Bladder and the Sanguincous Fibres, that are Produced from it, appear Firſt of all, it is Conſentaneous to Reaſon, that the Blood ſould be before it's Receptacles; Namely, the Content before its Container, and that this is made for the ſake of the other; He confeſſes it to be a Paradox, that Blood ſhould be made and moved, and endued vith Vital Spirit, before any Sanguiſying or Motive Organs are in Being, and that the Body ſiould be Increaſed before the Organs appointed for Concodtion; namely, before the Stomach and Bowels are Formed; but neither of theſe are Greater Paradoxes, than that there ſould be Senſe and Motion in the Fætus, beſore the Lrain is Compoſed, and yet he ſays the Fætus Moves, Contracts, and Stretches our it ſclf, when there is nothing Conſpicuous for a Brain, but clear Water; Tis allo owned, that the Mouth, Gullet, Stomach, &. are gradually Formed in a Farus, that the Nutritious Juice enters by the Mouth, that it Receives no Blood ſrom the Mother, nor is nouriſ'd by it; all which agrees Perfectly with what has been before Argued from the Contractive and Expanſive Forces, and which Paradoxes I have Endeavoured to Explain. s. 8. THE next Thing to be Conſidered in the Mouth, Gullet, Stomach, and Inteſtines is their Various Cavities, that of the Palate and Mouth we have already Accounted for; The Aliments or Nutritious Juices, being Repulyd ſrom the Contractive Force of the Brain, and the Medulla Oblongata, and spinal Marrow, Deſcend down towards the Heart, or the Red Beating Speck; and by the Contractive Force Inveſting them, the Coats of the Gullet are Formed, with a Cavity not Conſiderable, by Reaſon of the Perpendicular Deſcent of the Aliment; but when in ĩt's Progreſ it comes near the Heart, ĩt is Detained by the Expanſive Force in ſome Meaſure, by its Inclination and Propenſity towards it, being of a like Nature with ĩt, yet being Repelled by the Contractive, which Attends it, and which ſtill Inveſts it with Coats and Membranes, it in part Circulates about it, and makes the Figure oſ the Stomach Lunar from rthe Cardia to the Pylorus, vith the Concave bending towards the Heart: This Detention of the Aliment in it's Paſage muſt neceſarily Amaſs it together in Greater Quantities, and conſcquently muſt Enlarge the Cavity oſ the Stomach; and for the ſame Reaſon it is more Capacious on the Leſt ſide, which is neareſt the Heart, than on the Right: And that Forces of the ſame Nature, whether Expanſive or Contractive, do Propend and Incline to cach other, is Plain from the Magnet, Electrical Subſtances, and Glaſs, Attracting, and being Attracted by, Bodies of the like Kind; From Fire Draving Flame to it, and the Eaſy Propagation of it thr Hot Bodies, and the more Diſficult thro Cold; as alſo from the Mutual Gravitation oſ Heavy Bodies to each other, which have a Contractive Force, and from the Eaſy Propagation of Froſt and Cold thro Phlezmatick and Groſſer Subſtances, and the more Diſficult thro Hot and, Eiery ones, which have an Expanſive. S. 9. THE Contractive Force now Prevailing, aſter the Expanſive of the Aliment is driven from the Heart, thro' the Stomach, to the rylrus, it Streightens it's Coats Thickens it's Folds and Wrinkles, and Preſſes the Chyle, the more Expanſive Force of the Aliments, thrò' it's Sides, into new Derivations, which being ſtill ſurrounded by the Contractive, the Venæ Lacteæ are Produced, and the Guts become Small in the Duodenum, the Jejunum, and Ileum; And to Fortiſy and Strengthen the Contractive of the Guts, Freſh Auxiliaries are ſent out from the spinal Marrow, vhich Joining to the Contractive Force of the Guts, which is of the ſame Nature vith it, the Meſcutery is Formed and Connected with the Inteſtines; On the Contrary, to Balance in ſome Meaſure theſe Contractive Forces, the Iile, an Hot and Expanſive Liquor, is conveyed into the Duodenum from the Liver, together with the Pancreatick Juice from the Sweet-Bread, which, as Sweet, is of an Expanſive Nature, and Innumerablc Vein: Veins and Arteries from the Heart are Interſpersd in the Ve junn and Illeum, which ſerve to the ſame Purpoſe, all which, in Conjunction with the Aliments, keep the Contractive Force from cloſcing the Guts, and ſhutting up the Inteſinal Paſſage, by theit Oppoſite and Expanſive Forces, which was almoſt done at the End of ihe Ieum, which hangs Lank and Flaccid into the Colon, as beſore Deſcribed. 5. 10. THE Aliments now coming into the colon, aſter the former Conteſt is Ended, being Deprived of their Principal Expanſive Force, the Chyle, are Changed into Faæces, which being of a more Contractive Nature, the Contractive Force of the Coats Acls leſs againſt them, becomes more Compliant, Widens their Paſſage, and Expands their Wrinkles and Folds; and there are Fewer Blood-Veſels, becauſe there is leſs Occaſion to ſupport, ſfrom the Heart, the Expanſive of the Aliment, which is now Fæculent and Groſs, neither fit for the Sanguineous, nor the Nervous Subſtance, and therefore Ready and Prepared ſor Expulſion by them both. BUT it muſt be Obſerved, that the Contractive Force, has from the Firſt to the Laſt, ſfrom the Entering of the Aliment into the Mouth, to the Excretion of the Faces from the ſectum, by it's Inveſling and Incloſeing it, by Repelling it from the Heart, by Contracting it in the Small Guts, and giving a Greater Space and Room to it in the Large, ſtill Prevailed; That is, the Male Principle above the Female, and vhich is Agrecable to what is certain Matter of Fact, that the Solids, which are oſ a Contractive Force, are Greater, in Proportion, than the Fluids in the Animal Syſtem, and that Children, gencrally ſpeaking, more Reſemble the Father in their Features and their Diſpoſitions than their Mother; tho the Albugineous Matter ſcom the Urerus, may, When very Contractive, and the orum ſrom the Mother, when very Expanſive, have a Dierent Eſſcct, and make them carry ſtronger Impreſſions òi the Maternal Qualities, where the Seminal or Male Principle is Weaker. 5. 11. As fſor the Circumvolution of the Small Guts in the Unbilical Reqion and H;pogaſtrium, it is agrceable to the Expanſive Forces ſtill Exerting themiſelves, and the Contractive Forces Acting againſt them, the Firſt of Which, when Reſifted by the Laſt, muſt oſ Courſc find out new Turns and Ambages to avold the Inſults ol the Former. : TuE Colon, which is the Beginning of the Large ones, takes the whole Circuit ol the Albdomen; for the Remaining Parts of the Aliment having ſſill an Expanſive Force, and the Contractive Force being Diminiſd, Tend again towards the Heart, Aſcending up on the Right ſide of the Abdomen, then Bending to the Left, and Running along the BTottom of the Stomach, and being Repelled once more from the Heart, by the Contractive Force of the Coats, they now Deſcend down the Leſt ſide oſ the Aldimen, Paſs ſrom thence to the Right, and preſently after are carryd into the Eectum where they are at Lengih ſinally Excluded from the Human Syſtem by the aboveſaid Contractive Force. s. 12. AND ſuitable to the forezoing Account of the Inteſtinal Paſſage, the Brain ſends it's Nerves to ſupport the Contractive Force, and the Heart it's Arteries and Veins to ſirengthen the Expanſive, thro' the whole Canal. As to the Glands already Deſcribed, the Toæſillæ or Almonds, the Parotides, the Maxillar, and Sullingual, it is Plain they are chicfly of a Contractive Nature, both by their Conglobations and Conglomerations, by their being ſuppoſed to ſcparate the ſerous Matter of the Arterial Blood, and to beſtow an Acid Quality upon it; and by the Large and Numerous Twigs of Nerves, which enter into theirt Compoſition; The Glands thereſore are ſtrong Efforts of the Contractive Force, Derived ſrom the Brain and Nervous Syſtem, and the Arteries found in them are Efforts of the Heart, and the Sanguineous, which are but Small in the Compariſon; and the Liquor, or Fluid, ſcems on that Account to be of a Cold and Contractive Temper, which is Derived from them, and not Separated from the Ilood, Which only Enters them to Oppoſe and Qualify theit Contractive Force, but Made and Diſtilled from the Brain, and Conveyũ into the Mouth to oppoſe the Expanſive of the Aliment there; and ſrom Whence Ariſes the Fermentation ſo much Celebrated, and almoſt univerſally Afiirmed by Anatomiſts, and is the Beginning oſ Chyliſication, which is afterwards Perſected in the Stomach, and the Duodenum; To give an Account of which we ſhall now Proceed. 5.13.n s. 13. IT muſt therefore be Firſt obſerved, that the Aliments, which we take in at our Mouths, are endued with a certain Degree of Force, in Order to become ſuch; If the Expanſive is too Great, as in Fire, or the Contractive, as in Metals or Stones, it is Evident, that Subſtances of this Nature are no ways Adapted to give ũ any Nouriſhment, ſince we can neither Eat Fire, nor Digeſt Gold or Marble. FARTHER, any HOt or Spirituous Liquors on the one Hand, or any Cold and Phlegmatick Juices, as thoſe of Cucumbers, ſome kinds of Melons, c. on the Other, are alſo Prejudicial to the Animal Frame; From whence it is Plain, that Liquids and Solids, of a Middle Temper betwixt both, and which have a due Proportion of each, are the moſt Agrecable ro our Natures and Conſtitutions; And ſo they ought to be, If what ve have before alledg]d is true concerning them, which, we have ſaid, Conſiſt of an Equal Balance of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. Tnus the Fruits of Trees, in our own Climate, are Generally eaſily Digeſted, becauſe, as they Receive a Contractive Force from the Earth, out oſ which they Spring, ſo do they likewiſe an Expanſive one from the Sun, by which they are Raiſed to a certain Elevation above the ſaid Earth; and if ſome of them are of too Contractive and Cold a Nature, they are found to be more Wholeſome, by an Application of the Expanſive Force of Fire to them; Thus alſo Grain, which has a leſs Expanſive Force, and Riſes to a leſs Height ſrom the Earth, wants the Grinding and the Baking, which adds to that Expanſive, before it is thought to be a proper Nutriment for the Body; Tis the ſame in Salads, which are Eſteemed to be of too Cold and Contractive a Temper, unleſs ſomething Warm, as Oil and Muſtard, which are of an Expanſive Force, are oined with them. And in Meats or Fleſh, it is Evident by what foregoes, that they Conſiſt of a Nervous and Sanguineous Subſtance, that is of a Contractive and Expanſive Force, and the Reaſon, why Fire is apply'd to them, in the Boiling or the Roaſting of them, in order to make them more Conſonant and Agreeable to the Animal Occonomy, is to Exalt the Expanſive Force of them, which are too Con tractive from their Nervous Fibres; Roaſted are more Spirituous, Expanſive, or ſoonei Digeſted than Boiled, becauſe the Expanſive of Fire is Greater than that of Hot Wa. ter; Hence alſo it is, that Fiſ, which have a Cold and Contractive Nature, Require the Expanſive of Wine. Tnus alſo in Liquids, Water is Eſteemed of too Cold and Contractive a Temper Strong Ales, Wines, Spirits and Brandies, of too Hot and Expanſive a one, and both of them Prejudicial to our Conſtitutions; whereas Small Beers, and Small Ales, and Cyders, and other Liquors, which are Gently Fermented, that is, which Conſiſt oſ a Small Contractive Force, as Water, and which are Exalted into a Moderate Degree of the Expanſive, by the Infuſion and Fermentation of Grain, or Fruits, vith it, which from Vegetation and the Sun's Influence are Endued vith an Expanſive, are Allowed to be the moſt Wholeſome, and the moſt Friendly to our Natures. AND for the ſame Reaſon, Wines are Preſerrable to Spirits or Brandies, and the Red Wines more Eligible than the White; Becauſe the Former, we ſpeak of Red Wines and White, have a Greater Degree of the Contractive Force mixt with their Expanſive, that is, are Cooler, and Leſs Hot and Expanſive, than the Latter; which may not be only Collected from the Red, having more Tartar than the White, but from the Taſt, which is more Rough and Subacid, and not ſo Sweet, Hot, or Spirituous; from the Colour, which is Deep and Purpleiſ, and is an Indication, all other Things being alike, that the Force is leſs Violent and Active, the White or Yellow, on the other Hand, Explains the Force to be more Fiery and Expanſive; as alſo from the Effects, the Firſt is Coſtive, the Laſt, Diuretick and Laxative, the Firſt drank Soberly occaſions no Diſorders, but comforts the Head and Bowels, the Lat Heats the Blood, makes ſtronger and more laſting Impreſſions on the Brain, and deſtroys the Tone of the Stomach; and both Spirituous Liquors and Wines are always better, hen Mingled, and Qualiſicd, with the more Contractive Force of Water: This thereſore ſeems to be a ſcttled and fixt Rule for the Aliment of the Animal Syſtem, that it ſould be Compounded of a Moderate Contractive Force joined with a Moderate Expanſive; ſo that in every Thing, which we take in for our Suſtenance, there are the Foundations and Principles of Fermentation and Diſſolution, and conſequently, in ſome Mcaſure, of Chylification. AFTER AFPTERWARDS, vhen the Aliment is Received into the Mouth, if Solid, it is Chewed, Comminuted, and Macerated in ſome Mcaſure by the Teeth, and in the Grinding acquires a certain Degree oſ the Expanſive Force, which Promotes and Aſiſis that, which is Innate to it; In Fluids, vhere the Expanſive Force is Greatet, there is no occaſion for ſush Maceration or Comminution; the Expanſive Force in both is likewiſe advancd by the Heat and Expanſive Force in the Mouth, ariſing from the Fle'hy Muſcles of the Tongue, and the Carnous and Sanzuincous Subſtance, vith which the whole Cavity oſ the Mouth is Lined, which is all oſ an Hot and Expanſive Nature3 On the other Hand, from the Brain and the Glands beſore Deſcribed, there is a Juice Imparted thro' the Salival Ducts, and thro' the little Glands of the Palate, which is of a Cold and Contractive Temper, which being Heated and Warmed by the Expanſive above-mentioned cauſcs a Gentle Ebullition and Fermentation, as Warer Ioils vith a Fire, or an Acid Ferments with an Altali, and Raiſes the Saliva into little Bubbles, and a Froth, which mixing with the Aliment, a new Dinolution enſues from the Intimate Fermentation Produced betwixt theſe Two oppoſite Forces, and with which it Proceeds thro' the Gullet into the Stomach. Tnat the Juices, which Diſtill from the Brain and Glands, Which we have iewn to have a Contractive Force, are likewiſe of a Contractive one, is manifeſt from the Saltneſ" and Coldneſs of them, and that Conſiltency, which is Obſervable in the Phlegmatick or Purulent Matter, which is Derived from them, and is Excrered by our Noſtrils, or our Mouths, and which is a certain Prooſ of what ind and Temper thoſe Juices are, oſ which this is the Excrement. THAT theſe Juices, mixt ith the Expanſive Force of the Aliments, have ſo quick and ſudden an Efect in the Diſblution oſ them, Procecds ſrom their being, tho of a Contractive Nature, yet Exalted into a Degree of the Expanſive by the Spirituous Force oſ the Irain, from whence they Flow, and ſfrom whence they become leſꝶ Contractive than Common Water, and put on a more Forcible Quality in Diſnlving the Aliment, vhich ĩs already Expanſive, than Spirit of Nitre hnos in the Solution of Metals, which are vaſtly Contractive; On the Contrary, the Expanſive Force of Heat from the Elood Operates more Eſfectually upon the Aliment to the Fuſeing of it, than Fire can do in the Boiling of Meat in Water, becauſe it's Expanſive Force Ariſing ſrom lood, is more Fitted and Adapted to Diſſolve Elood, or Fle'h, or any other Aliment of the like kind of Expanſive Force, than Fire is, which is too Strong, and too Diſproportioned to it. : FrROM hence ve may be able to give a Reaſon, why Spirituous Liquors, and higl Scaſoned Meats, and Smoaking or Chewing of hot Herbs, are Detrimental to Digeſtion, becauſc they Spoil and Deſtroy the Nervous, Spirituous, and Contractive Juices, which Flow into the Mouth from the Brain, and Raiſe the Expanſive of the Heat and Ilood to too Exorbitant a Degree ſor an Equal and Juſt Fermentation vith the Contractive. HENCE allo we may be Informed, that theſe Juices are not an Univerſul Aſenſtruum, or Diſſolvent, but Adapted only to Aliments, Which have certain Degrees and Proportions of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; Likewiſe, that theſe Juices, being Formed ſrom the Drain, and being of a Gentle, Spirituous, and Contractive Force, and meceting vith the Expanſive, and from thence Producing a Fermentation and Diſſolution of the Aliment, are not to be conſidered, as a Spirit oſ Nitre, ſo that any Injury ſhould Ariſe from them to the Coats oſ the Stomach; Becauſc their Spirituous and Contractive Force cannot be Greater than the Nervous Syſtem, from which they are roduced, and from vhence the Coats oſ the Stomach are alſo made; whercas Spirit of Nitre is a vaſ©t Saline and Contractive Force, Exalted into a Prodigions Degree oſ the Expanſive, and thereby capable of Diſolving Metals, which theſt Juices cannot Stir or Move; Ieſides w hich, the Diſſolution oſ the Aliment i not Perſformed barely by the Diſlolving Forces of theſe Juices, as a Meuſſruum, bui by their Fermenting with the Expanſive Force oſ the Aliment, and the Heat. of the Sanguineous Syſtem. TuE Stomach is now Cloſed up, and the Aliments, which conſiſt of Meats Boilec and Roaſied, that is, oſ a Moderate Expanſive and Contractive Force, Moiſtened with the Fermented Saliva, and Mixt with the Small Beer taken in at our Meals, which has àſo a Gentle Fermentaceous Quality, are leſt to Digeſt in the Cavity of it; The Heat Heat of the Heart above, and of the Inteſtines below, and particularly of the Coln which is filled with a warm Excrement, and which runs along the Bortom of the Stomach, very much Contribute likewiſe to the Maceration and Diſſolurion of the Aliments into a Pulp, and ſo into a Chyle, by their Expanſive Forces; That is, Firſt of all, there is a Principle of Diſſolution in the Solid Aliments themſelves, both from the Contractive Force being Small, and from the Expanſive Force, which is Contained in them; Second, being Received into the Mouth, they are Broken and Comminuted by the Teeth, by which the Saliva Enters into their Subſtance, and again Rends and Tears it by it's Contractive Salts, Actuated by it's Spirit, Moiſture, and Fluidity, which are Expanſive, and thereby Repreſents a Milder Spirit of Nitre, which is alſo a ſtronger Salt, or a Contractive, Raiſed into a ſtronger Spirit and Expanſive by Fire; Third, the Expanſive of the saliva is Increasd by Fermenting vith the Heat of the Mouth and Palate, and the Diſolution of the Solid Aliments is farther thereby Promoted; Fourth, the Liquids Poured into our Stomachs at our Meals, by their Fermentaceous and Expanſive Force, and by their Fluidity, forvard the ſaid Diſſolution, and the Heat of the Stomach, Heart, and Bovels, by their Expanſive, Compleats it, and Turns the Whole into a White Chyle, like Barley Broth, or a Milky Liquor; For all Expanſive Forces Act towards a Diſolution, as all Contractive ones towards a Coagulation; Attrition therefore has nothing to do in rhis whole Proceſs, vhich is only a Creature of that Abſurd Philoſophy, the Atomical or Corpuſcular. TuE Chyle is White and Milky from an Equal Balance betwixt the Expanſive Forces and the Contractive, that is, betwixt the Oily or Expanſive Forces of the Aliments, and the Saline and Contractive of the Nervous Juices, from Whence no Particular Colour enſues, but a White, which is Indifferent to all, as we have ſewn in our Philoſophy of Light and Colours; Thus an High Spirit of Nitre, mixt with Oil-Olive, and digeſted in a Gentle Heat for ſome Days, becomes ol the Colour of Marrow, and afterwards Changes into a White Fat or Butter according to Dr. Gren's Experiment before Recited: The Chyle, being thus Formed in the Stomach, Paſſes thrò' the Pylorus into the Duodenum, at the Bottom of which, and before it's Entrance into the Zejunum and the Lacteal Veſſels, the Bile from the Liver, and the Pancreatick Juice from the Pancreas, or Sweet-Bread, mixes with ir, which are both of an Expanſive Nature, and the Former of them of an Hot and Fiery Temper; the Expanſive Force of the Chyle is therefore ſtill Augmented, with which it Tends to the Common Receptacle of it, and from thence it is carryd thro' the Ductus Thoracicus to the Subclavian Vein, and ſo thro' the Vena Cava to the Heart, where it becomes of the Higheſt Expanſive Nature, and is Transſormed into Arterial Blood to be diſpensd thro' the whole Body. FroM Which it is manifeſt, that as the Contractive Force of the Aliment is Diminiſd, and the Expanſive Increas'd, it gradually Tends to the Common Receptacle, and the Thoracick Duct, and from thence to the Venal Blood, which Raiſing again it's Expanſive Force in the Subclavian, it urges it's way thro' the Cava to the Heart, the Seat oſ the Expanſive; and which is a Confirmation of what we before Alledged, that the Expanſive Force of the Aliment in the Stomach Tended towards the Heart, but was hindered in it's Progreſs to it from the Contractive and Nervous Syſtem, which Formed the Coats of it; The more Expanſive Forces of the Aliment being Directed this way, the more Contractive conſtitute the Fæces vhich remain in the Colon, and are Expelled by the Periſtaltick or Vermicular Motion of the Guts, which ve ſall now Conſider. s. 14. IT has been ſicwn, that the Coats of the Inteſtines are Alternately Muſcular and Fleſhy, or Nervous and Fibrous, that the Flehy are Intervoven with Nervous Fibres, and the Nervous with Flelhy ones, that they are likewiſe Endued beſides with Nerves, and Blood- Veſſels, both Veins and Arteries; from which Temperature and Complexion of them, it is manifeſt, that they conſiſt o? a Sanguincous or an Expanſive Force, and of a Nervous or Contractive, which being nearly in an Equal Balance, and Acting againſt each other from the neceſſity of their own Natures, the Firſt from the Center or towards the Surface of the Body, and the Laſt from the Surſace of the Body or towards the Center, cauſe a Reciprocation of Motion, by I YV vhich which the Cavity of the Inteſtines is Enlarged and Contracted by Turns; from whence in the Firſt Caſe, the Contents are Permitted to Deſcend, or Urge forvards, being Protruded by an Acceſſion of new Aliment behind, and in the Laſt they are Squeezed and Compreſyd, ſo that one Part of them Proceeds, and the other Retires back, which upon a Second Enlargement and Dilatation or Expanſion of the Inteſtines, is again Urged forwards, and ſo thro' the whole Inteſtinal Pipe or Canal; which gives alſo an Account of what Peyerus has obſerved in all his Live Diſſections, that there is a Reciprocation of Motion in the Guts, Upwards and Downvards, and of the acknovledged Undulation of them; The Aliment alſo, and the Fermentations it undergo's, as before Deſcribed, makes this Periſtaltick or Vermicular Motion ſucceſſive from one Part to another, as it is Promoted forwards by i's Expanſive and Fermentaceous Force, and the Protruſion of New. SucH a kind of Motion, as this, is likewiſe Agreeable to what ill be aſterwards ſewn to be that of the Arteries and Muſcles, and the other Parts of the Body; being a Gentle Pulſation, Ariſing from the Action of leſs Expanſive and Contractive Forces, as the other is a more Strong and Violent one, Derived from Greater. TuE Fibres of the Carnous Coat are Circular or Spiral, and Direct or Lincar; Becauſe the Motion of the Guts, being Expanſive and Contractive in Circles, and ſucceſſive, Forms thoſe Intermediate Circles or Spirals ſucce ſſively, and being Progre ſive or Regreſſive the Direct or Linear ones; For the Contractive or Quieſcent Force, of which Nature the Fibres are, muſt poſeſ- the Intermediate Spaces of Action, as in a Ferment, the Parts, vhich are the moſt Groſs and Contractive, are Separated from the Fermentation; or in General, as a Leſs Force ſubmits to a Greater; and it is Evident in the Carnous Coat, where the Sanguineous or Expanſive Force Prevails, the Nervous or Contractive muſt ſubmit in thoſe Directions of Circular or Spiral, or ſtrait Lines, which are Preſcribed to it; And in the ſame Manner, the very Creſts or Lines in our Hands are made by the Contraction and Expanſion of them. From this Doctrine it follows, that the Inteſtinal Paſſage in Various Animals may be Infinitely Vary'd, and that in a Worm or Inſect it may be Strait, without the Stomach, or the Circumvolutions of the Inteſtines, there being nothing more Required than ſuch a Paſſage for the Aliment, or the Expanſive Force, to be Diſtributed to the Syſtem. C H AP. V. Concerning the Liver, the Gall- Bladder, the Spleen, and the Pancreas. s. Tu Liver is Seated in the upper Part of the Abdomen, about a Fingers Breadth Diſtance from under the Diaphragm, or Midriff, which Parts the Abdomen from the Thorax, in the Right Hyjpochonãre under the ſort Ribs, which, being of a Great Bulk, it in a Manner fills, and Reaches from thence towards the Left ſide, a little beyond the Carrilago Enſiformis, or Pit of the Stomach; It's Upper Side is Convex or Round, and Smooth, the Under is Hollow lying on the Right ſide oſ the Stomach and Pylorus, it's lower Edge reaches below the ſhort Ribs on the Right ſide, and very ncar as Low as the Navel before In Dogs, and many other Brutes, it is Divided into Diverſe Lobes, but in Men it is Undivided and Continuous. It has Three Ligaments; Firſt, The Suſpenſorium, which Suſpends or Ties it up to the Diaphragm, and is Broad, Membranous, and Strong, Ariſing from the Peritonaeum, and forming the outer Membrane of the Liver, into vhich it Deſcends, and is ſtrongly Faſtened to the Common Sheath, or Involuerum, of the Vena Cava, there where the Umbilical Vein is continued to it; Sccond, The Unbilicale, or Umbilical Vein, which aſter the Birth Cloſes up, and Hardens into a Ligament; It is Directly oppoſite to the Former, Paſſes out of the Hollow ſide of the Liver by the Poria, and Terminates in the Navel; by this the Liver is kept from Aſcending, upon the Motion of the Diaphragm upwards in Reſpiration; Third, The Latum, by which the Liver adheres to the Cartilago Enſiſormis, it is Thin, and Flaccid, but yet Strong, Broad, and Doubled, Ariſing from the Membrane, wherewith the Liver is Encompaſ'd, and is a Duplicature of it; This hinders the Liver from Fluctuating to the one or the other Side, or tovards the Back. BESIDES BESIDES theſe Three Ligaments, it has ſeveral orher Connexions to the Neighbouring Parts by the Veſſcls, that come into it or go out of it; It's Common Mcmbrane, Which is very Thin, Springs, as has been ſaid, from the Suſpenſorium, and Cleaves firmly to the Subſtance of the Liver, it is ſometimes Separatẽd from it by a Wateriſs Humour, Iſiuing out of the Capillary Veins, or Lymphaticks, whereby Wateriſh Puſtules are Ingendred, and if theſe Break, and the Water Falls into the Cavity of the Belly, it is in ſome Part the occaſion oſ the Dropſy, called Aſcites; It's Proper Tunick or Membrane is that, which Inveſts cach Lobe and Gland, which belongs to it; It's Subſtance, according to Malpighiuss Obſervations by the Microſcope, to which the preſent Anatomiſls Agree, Conſiſts of Innumerable Lobules, which commonly have each of them Six Sides like a Die, and are Formed of ſeveral little Hexangular Glands like the Stones of Grapes, and are each Cloathed with a Proper Circumambient Membrane, and are Joined to one another by Membranes continued from the Circumambient, and Running Tranſverſely, yet ſo, as that certain Rimulæ, or little Chinks, Reſult ſfrom the joining of the Sides of the Lobules together. TuE Whole Liver is made up of theſe Little Grape ſtone-like Glands, and of diverſe Sorts of Veſſels, and thereſore Reaſon concludes it neceſary, that there ſould be a Commerce betwixt theſe Glands and Veſſels, tho' Senſe cannot Diſcern the very ſlender Extream Twigs oſ the Veſſels, that are Inſcrted into the Glands; It is farther Obſerved by the ſame Perſon, that the little Branches of the Porta, Cava, and Porus Bilarius, do run thro' all, even the leaſt Lobules in an Equal Number, that the Porta does the Office of an Artery, and has ſo Great Society with the Porus Bilarius, that both their Twigs are ſtraitly tied together in the ſame Cover; Alſo, that the Shoots of the ſaid Veſſels are not joined by Anaſtomoſes, by which the one opens into the other, but that the Grape-ſtone like Glands are a Medium between the Importing and Exporting Veſſels, ſo that by the Interpoſition of theſc, the Importers Transfuſe their Liquor into the Exporters; From whence he Concludes the Liver to be a Conglomerate Gland Separating the Bile, and becauſc it is uſual for the Conglomerate Glands to have, beſides Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, a proper Excretory Veſſel, as in the Pancreas, Parotides, &c. Diſperſed thro their Subſtance, Receiving and Carrying avay the Humour ſeparated in them, this kind of Veſſel in the Liver is the Porus Bilarius with the Gall-Bladder; and tho ſeveral Lymphatick Veſſcls have been ſaid to Ariſe from the Liver, leſt it ſould have a Double Excretory Veſſel, he thinks, that ſecing in other Places the Lympheducts have not their Origin from Conglomerate, but Conglobate Glands, therefore they do not Spring from the Liver it ſelf, but from thoſe Conſpicuous Conglobate Glands, that are in the Hollow oſ the Liver under the nvolucrum or Capſula, where the Trunks of the Porita and Poru Bilarius Enter into it; for as Steno obſerves, the Lympheducts of the Parotides do noi Spring from them, but from a Conglobate Gland, which is Contiguous to them. Ir hath Two Sorts of Veins, in the upper Part the Vena Cava Entereth into it, and Spreads it ſclf all thro' ĩt in the Lower, as well as Upper Part; into the Lower Side the 7ena rortæ is Inſerted, vhoſe Branches likewiſe Run thro it's whole Parenchyma, and ſerves for an Artery in bringing Blood to it, it's Proper Arteries being very Small and Few. As to the ſena Portæ, or the Porta, ſrom the æ0 where it Enters the Liver, and the Veins in General, the Galeniſts have Aſfirm'd them, and they ſcem, to have their Toot in the Liver, tho' it is more Properly in thoſe Paris, where they Receive thei Blood from the Arteries, than in the Liver or the Heart, whither they Convey it; but in Reſpect of the Porta, ſome Think, that the Vena Umbilicalis ought to be Accounted i's Root or Original, becauſe it is Firſt Formed in the Fætus, and Inſerted into the Porta, but the Umbilical Vein, aſter the Birth, Degenerating into a Ligament, cannot from that Time be Eſteemed the Root or Origin oſ the ſoria; Others therefore think, that, becauſe it's Branches, every where Inſerted into the Inteſtines, bring Blood from thence to the Liver, and not Vice-Versã, thoſe ought to be Accounted it's Roots, and it's Diviſions within the Liver, it's Branches, and ſo, ſtrictly, they ought to be Accounted; As it Enters the Liver, it is Inveſted with another Coat, which is called the Vagina ortæ, or Sheath, the Cpſula or involucrum, or it's Caſe or Cover, and the Cæpſula ommunis, becauſe the Porus Bilarius is Involved in it, as vell as the Poria. Y y æ TH1 Tnis outer Coat it has from the Membrane, that Cloaths the Liver, tho' it ĩs more Denſe and Carnous, vith which all it's Ramifications are Inveſted, upon which Account, of it's having a Double Coat, upon it's Bringing Blood to the Liver for it's Nouriſiment, and upon it's being Endued with an obſcure Pulſation, according to Dr. Gliſſon, ſrom the Arteria Hepatica's Inſertion into the Capſula, it has the Nature of an Artery; A little within the Liver it Forms a Siuus or Heart, by its Smaller Syſtole and Diaſtole belonging to it, and without Which, it is hardly thought, the Blood would paſs out of the Larger Branches of the Porta into the Narrover, and ſo on into the Roots of the Cava; This Sinus is more Conſpicuous in an Fmbro, becauſe the Great Influx of the Nutritious Juics, by the Umbilical Veins, Enlarges ir, as is alſo the Tubulus or Canalis Venoſus, which paſſes Directly out of this Sius into the Cava, almoſt oppoſite to the Mouth of the Umbilical Vein, that opens into the Sinus; This Canal or Pipe is of the ſame Subſtance and Texture vith a Vein, and Enters into the Cava juſt as it Penetrates the Diaphragm, vhere Two other Great Branches out of the Liver are Inſerted into the Cava, and in the ſame Place this Pipe is alſlo knũt to the Suſpenſory Ligament, and after the Birth grows it ſelf into a Lizament There are no Anaſtomoſes of the Capillaries of the Porra into thoſe oſ the cava according to Dr. Gliſſon, in his Book àæ Hepate, but the Blood Ouzes thro' the Glandulous Parenchyma of the Liver out of the Capillaries oſ the Former into thoſe of the Latter; Aſter the Trunk has paſcd the Liver, it is Divided into ſeveral Twirgs and Branches; Namely, the Cyſicæ Gemellæ, the Pylorica or Gaſtrica Dexira, the Splenica, Meſenterica, Ventricularis, & Coronaria, the Epiplois, or Omentalis, Dextra & Poſtica, Gaſiro-Epiplois Siniſtra, Hemorrhoidalis Interna, Inteſtinalis or Duodena, &c. ſo named from the Parts, thro' which they are Carried; Their uſe is to bring back to the Liver, from the Stomach and Guts, that Blood which Remains after their Nutrition, and which was brought to them by the Meſaraick Arteries, to be Circulated back by the Cava to the Heart. THE Vena Cava, from it's Large Cavity is that, into which, as into a River or Common Channel, all the other Veins like Rivulets, excepting the Pulmonaria, Empty themſelves; It's Root may be ſaid to be in the Liver, for by it's Capillaries it Receives the Blood, that is Tranſcolated thro' the Glandulous Parenchyma of the Liver, from the Capillaries of the Porta, and by it's Aſcending Trunk, which forthvith Enters the Diaphragm and Marches up the Thorax, Conveys it to the Right Ventricle of the Heart. j TnE Capillary Branches of the Cava, as thoſe of the Poria, are ſpread thro' the vhole Subſtance of the Liver; and the farther the Capillaries have their Origin in the Liver from the Cava, the Larger their Channel comes to be at their Arrival at it; but they do not all meet together in one Common Trunk within the Liver, as thoſe of the rorta do, but Empty themſelves apart into the Cava without the Liver. TnE Deſcending Trunk of the Cava is ſomething Narrower than the Aſcending, and Paſſing down along vith the Great Artery, or the Aorta, continues undivided till the Fourth Vertebra of the Loins, before which there are ſeveral Branches from it; as, the Venaæ Adipoſa, for the Coat and Fat of the Kidneys, the Emulgents, vhich bring back to the cæva that Blood which the Emulgent Arteries carry'd to the Kidneys with the Serum, the Spermatics or Vaſa Præparantia, and the Lumbhares, for the Membranes of the Spinal Marrow; After which it is Divided into Two Equal Branches, called Iliaci, becauſe they paſs over the O5 Ileon, as they g20 down to the Thighs; juſt about the Diviſion, there Spring Two Veins, the Muſcula Superior for the Peritonaum, the Muſcles of the Loins, and the Abdomen, and Sacra for the Marrow of the Os Sacrum and the Membranes that Cloath it; Aftervards the Iliacal Branches are again Divided into the Interior, from whence ariſe the Muſcula Media for the Muſcles of the Hip and Buttocks, and the Hypoęaſtrica for the Hypogaſtrium, and into the Exterior, ſrom vwhence the Epigaſtrica for the Peritonaum and Muſcles of the Abdomen, the Pudenda for thoſe Parts, and the Muſcula Iuferior for the Buttocks; and then the Branches oſ the caus, being paſſed out of the Abdomen into the Thighs, begin to be called Crural. BESIDES theſe Veins, the Porta and Cava, the Liver has Nerves alſo, but they are Extended only to the Membrane and Veſſels of it, as the Arteries were, ſo that the Parenchyma has but a very Dull Senſe. TuE TuE Lympheducts have not been yet obſerved to be Diſperſed in the ſaid Parenthyma, and Malpighius thinks they are not Derived from the Liver at all, but from' tHe afore-named Conglobate Glands; They carry a moſt Limpid and Pellucid Juice from the Liver along the Meſentery, and open themſclves into the Recepracle oF the le; for in Viviſection make a Ligature about any one or more of them, and ve may preſently ſee them Swell betixt the Ligature and the Liver, but be Empty on the Side towards the Receptacle; Likewiſc there are Valves in them, which open tovards the Receptacle and cloſe towards the Liver, and which hinder any Thing from Returning to it, and therefore are not Lacteals Conveying Chyle to the Liver in order to be Sanguiſy'd, as the Ancients Imagined: Theſe Lympheducts are alſo obſerved to Cover the External Surface of the Stomach, and are Diſcharged into the Receptacle of the Chyle. HIPPOCRATES ſays, the Fountain of Blood is the Heart, the Place of Choler is in the Liver, which is thought to come very near the Truth; But the Greets and Arabs generally held, that the Meſaraick Veins Received the Chyle from the Guts, and brought it to the Liver, by which it was Turned into Blood, which was carry'd from it into all the Parts of the Body by the Veins, but it is Plain, that none of the Vena Lacieæ are Inſerted into the Liver, and conſequently, no Chyle is Imported into it; I's true Action therefore is to Separate the Bile from the Blood, which is brought to it by the Porta, whether by Colature or Fermentation is Undetermined; Ariſtotle and the Ancients thought this Bile to be a mere Excrement, and of no uſe but, by it's Acrimony, to Promote the Excretion of the Guts; Diemerbroect and the Moderns, on the other Hand, Eſtcem it to be more than a mere Excrement, and therefore believe it to be a Ferment for the Blood and Chyle, made from the Blood Flowing into the Liver by the Porta, and Mixing with an Acrimonious, Saltiſ, and Subacid Juice, Formed in the Spleen, of the Arterial Blood Conveyed thither by the Arteries, and of the Animal Spirits by the Nerves, which is brought into the Porta by the Ramus Splenicus; by the means of which Acid Juice, and the Specifick Vertue or Coction of the Liver, the Spirituous Particles, both Sulphureous and Salt, lying hid in the Venous Blood, are Diſſolved, Attenuated, and become alſo a little Acrimonious and Fermenting; the Thinneſt Part whereof, like Clear Water, being Separated by the Conglobate Glands in the Hollow-ſide of the Liver, is carry'd off in the above-mentioned Lymphcducts: But the Fermentaceous Spirits of Greater Acrimony, mixt vith the Thicker and more Viſcid Sulphureous Juices, and more ſtrongly Boiling, when they cannot Enter the Conglobated Glands, and yet thro' their Ebullition are Separated from the Blood, as Yeſt from Beer, become Bitter and are called Bile; which, being Tranſcolated thro' the Grape-ſtone like Glands into the Roots of the Porus Bilarius, and Gall-Bladder, paſſes thro' them by the Ductus Communis into the Duodenum or Jejuuum ; where mixing with the Pancreatick Juice, and the Alimentary Maſs Diſcharged from the Stomach, a Fermentation is Cauſed, by which the Chyle is Forced tovards the Receptacle of it by Innumerable Lacteals in the above-mentioned Inteſtines; but the ſaid Fermentaceous Juice, being palled by Degrees in the following Guts, Chyle is more ſlowly Separated, and the Lacteals are therefore Fewer, and what Remains of this Fermenting Matter mixes with the Fæces in the Thick Guts, and by it's Acrimony Irritates them to Excretion; This farther is certain, that tho' the Liver does not Sanguify, yet it cannot be Eſtcemed to ſeparate Bile as an Excrement only, becauſe it is a very noble Part, ſecing the Diſeaſes oſ it are generally ſo Dangerous, and the Wounds in it are ſo Commonly Mortal; and by conſequence, that Liquor, which it Scparates muſt have ſome noble Uſe, and ſuch as is very Neceſſary to Life. TuE Bilary Veſſcls, belonging to the Liver, are the Kſqs Xoĩdexs, Veſica Fellea or Bilaria, or the Gall-Bladder, the Porus Bilarius or Meatus Hepaticus, the Ducius -ſiHepaticus, and the Ductus Choledochus or Communis. Tnuv Veſica Fellea or Gall-Bladder is about Two Inches in Length, and One in Breadih by it's upper Part it Adheres to the Liver, and the Lower Reſts on the Right ſide ol the Stomach and the Colon; It has Three Membranes or Coats, the outmoſt is Com mon vith the Liver; the Middle is Thick and Strong, and conſiſts of Three Rank of Fibres, the Outermoſt are Tranſverſe, the Middlemoſt Oblique, and the Innermoſ i Streight Streight; The Inmoſt Coat is Nervous or Tendinous, Lined with a Glandulous one, and a Cruſt or Velvet upon it, as in the Stomach and Inteſiines; And the Glands ſeparate a Mucous Humour to Deſend the Veſio ſrom the Acrimony oſ the Bile: It has a Neck and a Bottom; The laſt is the Largeſt, and Contains the Bile or Choler. and is of the ſame Complexion vith it, commonly Yellow, but ſometimes Greeniſh, Blackiſi, &. The Neck, or Meatus ;ſlicus, is the Narroweſt, being about as Wide; as a Gooſe Quill, and about Two Inches Long; betixt this, and the Veſica, there is a Fibrous Ring, which ſtreightens the Paſãge, and hinders the too haſty Depletion oſ the Veſica; the other End oſ the Neck is Joincd to the rorus Bilarius, and they both make the Ductus Communis, which is Inſerted into the Beginning of the Fejunum, or the End of the Duodenum: Tis a Controverſy with Anatomiſts, which way the Bile is Conveyd into the ſeſica; Dr. Cole, with the Ancients, thinks it to be by the Neck from the Porus Bilarius, and to obviate the Objection of a Reciprocation of Humours n the ſame Veſſel, which is thought to be Abſurd, he ſuppoſcs, that the Gall Paſſes out of the ſæſica only upon the Diſiribution of the Chyle, but at other Times it is Received into it ſrom the Porus, and Stored up there againſt the next Occaſion; Dr. Gliſon on the other Hand, and the Moderns, believe that the Bladder is filled by it's Fibrous Roots, that are Diſperſed thro' the Liver, and that the whole Trunk oſ theſe Roots Enters that Part oſ the Bladder, where it is ſircightened by the Fibrous Ring, tho it is hardly to be Found or Diſcerned, which is not Strange, ſince the Inſcrtion of the Ureters into the Urine-Bladder are very diſficultly Diſcovered: The Bile in the Gall-Bladder is Thinner, more Acrimonious and Fermentative, that in the Porus Bilarius, Thicker and Milder: The Ductus Cyſit- Hepaticus was found out by Perrault, vhoſe Numerous Twigs are Diſperſcd thro' the Parenchyma of the Liver, from thence they Aſſemble into Three Roots, and thoſe Unite into one Trunk, which has a Double Implantation, one into the Porus Bilarius, and the other into the Middle of the Veſica. Alphonſus Borellus de Motu Animalium, ſrom the Continual and Speedy Efflux of the Bile by the Ductus Communis into the Duodenum, believes there is a Circulation of it; becauſc in a Day's Time, from a Perſon Faſting, there paſs Thirty Four Pounds of Bilious Juice into the Duodenum by the Common Duct, whereas the whole Maſs of Gall Amounts not to above Two Pounds; ſuch a Quantity he thinks cannot be Produced by way oſ Fermentation in the Liver, but that it is Separated Mechanically by Cribration from the Minute Veſſels of the Porta, thro the Pores of the Glandules of the Liver, as the Urine in the Kidneys, and that this Circulation is Performed thro' the Abdomen by the Venæ Meſaraicæ into the Trunk of the Porta, thence to the Liver, thence thro' the Bilious Veſſcls into the Duodenum, to Return again by the Meſaraick Veins. THE Veſica Fellex hath Two Veins, the Cſtica Gemellæ, which Spring from the Porta, it hath Twigs oſ Arteries from the Right Branch of the Cæliaca, and a Small Thread- like Sprig oſ a Nerve ſrom the Meſenterical Branch of the Intercoſtal: Many Times Stones are Found in this Bladder, which are Lighter and more Spongy than thoſe of the Urinary, and will Swim above Water, which thoſe will not do. Tut Porus Bilarius, or Meatus Hepaticus, which carries the Thicker Sort of Choler, paſſes Directly from the Liver to the Ductus Communis ; within the Liver it's Trunk and Branches are Inveſted with a Double Coat, it's Proper one, which it Retains without the Liver alſo, and it's Common, Derived from the Membrane of the Liver, vhich wraps up the Porus and Porta together, and is called the Capſula Communis; It's Roots within the Liver are Equally Divided with thoſe of the Porta every where, cxcepting where the Roots of the Feſica are Spread, they are more Large and Numerous than thoſe of the Veſiea, Draving Choler ſrom all the Parts of the Liver, ſaving whither the Roots of the Bladder Reach, th? more Thick and Viſcous, and leſs Acrimonious; The Porus is Found in all Creatures, but the Veſica is Wanting in ſcveral, as Haris, Fallow-Deer, the Sea-Calſ, and thoſe vhich have a whole Hooſ, as an Horſc. THE Porus and Meatus ;yſticus Joining Form the Duſtus Communis Choledochus, which, Piercing the outer Coat oſ the Inteſtine, paſes berwixt that and the Middlemoſt, ibout the Twelfth Part oſ an Inch, and then Piercing that marches down farther betwixt betwixt it and the Innermoſt Coat about half an Inch, and at lat opens with a Round Mouth into the Inteſtine; which oblique Inſertion ſerves Inſtead of a Valve to hinder any Thing Regurgitating out of the Gut into the Duct: There are no Anaſtomoſes or Inoſculations of the Roots of the Bilary Veſſels with thoſe of the Porta, they Terminate in the Parenchyma of the Liver, and Imbibe the Choler there Separated from the Blood. l TuE Ductus Communis is ſometimes Inſerted at the Bottom of the Stomach, and then the Party Vomits Choler, and ſometimes at the lower End of the Yejunum, from hence follow Bilious Dejections; The Bile is generally Yellow, but in a Morbid State Degenerates into Pale- Colourd, Eruginous, Porraceous, Vitelline, Reddiſh and Blackiſh, which is the Cauſe of very Violent and Acute Diſcaſes, as the Cholera Morbus, Dyſentery, Cholick, &. HAVING gone thus far in Recounting from Anatomiſis their Notions and Opinions of the Liver, the Porus Bilarius, and the Gall-Bladder; I ſall Excuſe my ſelf the Trouble of Entering at preſent into the Deſcription and Uſe of the Spleen, and the Pancreas, which may be ſeen in the Authors, and the Places of thoſle Authors, whom I have Quoted, and if we can give ſome Solution of theſe Parts, from our Principles oſ the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, the ſame may be Extended to an Explanation of the Others. j 5. 2. To Account for theſe, or any other Parts of the Human Syſtem, it will be Neceſſary for us to look back to the ovarium and the Womb, and the Formation of the Fetus there; Tis therefore known, that aſter the Impregnation of the ovum by the Semen, the Firſt of which we make to be of an Expanſive Force, and the Laſt of a Contractive, the ovum is Inveſted with a White and Albugineous Liquor, and Two Membranes which Incloſe it, the Inner, which is the Amnion, and the Outer, which is the Chorion; the Liquor we ſuppoſe to be of a Contractive Nature, and is Aſſembled by the Semen, to Balance the Expanſive of the ovum, and the Films or Membranes, which Surround them, are Condenſed into thoſe Coats or Tunicks by the Air, which is Included, and is of a Contractive Nature, having a like Effect upon the Albugineous Fluid, as a Colder or a more Contractive has upon Water, when it hardens it into Ice, or as Common Air has upon a Lixivium, vhen it Induces a Film or Cruſt upon it, or as the ſame Air has upon a Tough Phlegm, which it preſently Stiffens into a Skin. The Expanſive Force alſo in the Animal Syſtem Contributes to the ſame Effect, which makes the Contractive Force, if it cannot Diſſipate and Surmount it, to Coaleſce and Unite Cloſer together; That the Albugineous Liquor is likewiſe Contractive, ſeems Evident from the White of an Egę, which Coagulates upon the Application of the Expanſive of Fire or Hot Water to it, an Effect, which does not ſo ſoon obtain in the Yelk. IN the mean Time, by the Glowing Warmth of the Womb, and of the BloodVeſſels diſperſed in it, a ferment of this Albugineous Liquor is Cauſed, that is, by the Expanſive of the one Acting upon the Contractive of the other, from whence a Glandulous Subſtance Ariſes, or a Congeries of Veſicles or Bladders, as in all orther Fermentations, and vhich by Degrees grow into a Parenchyma, which is called the Placenta or Womb Liver; and as the Expanſive Force Prevails in this Fermentation, it is Attracted by, and Joins it ſelf to, the Womb and the Blood Veſſels of it; as all Forces of the ſame ind, whether Expanſive or Contractive, Unite with each other. 5.3. HEN the Placenta is thus Connected with the Womb, the Blood Contained in the Umbilical Veſſels Iues with an Expanſive Force, which is not to be Reſiſted, and is carried thro' the Chorion and Amnion, and the Albugineous Liquoi Included in them, to the Expanſive Force of the Fætus, which is afterwards the Liver, and is Removed at ſome Diſtance from the Contractive of the Brain; In this Paſage the Expanſive Force of the Maternal Blood is Excited by an Oppoſition of the Contractive Force of the Albuzincous Liquor, and becomes more Fiery and Expanſive from ſuch an Oppoſition, as Fire by an Affuſion of Water, or the Ventilation ol Air; and with this Temper it Enters the Fotus, and the Blood is Turned into an Hot Bile or Choler, and from rhence Acquires it's Acrimony, and Yellow Colour which are both Indications of it's Expanſive and Fiery Nature; Such a new Expan ſive Force thereſore Incurring into the Animal Syſtem, in order to Preſerve the qu librium librium of it, the Contractive Force is Increaſed by the Albugineous Fluid from the Amnion, which is conveyed into the Syſtem, and by the Aſlemblage of the Watry or Contractive Humours already in it, which the Brain had Collected for its Support and Maintenance againſt the Expanſive of the Ovm and the Heart, theſe Contrary Forces Meeting, vhere the Umbilical Vein Enters the Fatus, cauſe a Ferment there, and a Stoppage of both Liquors in the Conteſt, till the Liver is Formed, which from this Mutual Oppoſition Riſes into the Grape-like or Hexangular Glands or Veſicles before-mentioned, as Bubbles in a Fermentation, which, by the Air Included in the Syſtem, and by the Methods of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces before Deſcribed are hardened into Veſſels, which Surround and Contain by their Contractive Force the Expanſive of the Bile, which ſtill pouring in by the Umbilical Vein Proceeds towards the Heart, the Sceat of the Expanſive; and being ſtill Reſiſted and Oppoſed by the Contractive Force, it is Inveſted with Coats, by which the Poru: Bilarius, and it's Branches in the Liver, and the Ductus Choledochus Communis are Formed; vhich yield a Paſage to the Expanſive Force of the Bile forwards, but Compreſ and Reſtrain it into Small Currents and Channcls by their Force of Contraction; and which Coats are made from the Contractive, Albugineous, or Watry Humour, Condenſed by the Contractive Force of the Air Included in the Syſtem, and by that of the Nerves, vhich are Diffuſed in them, as alſo by the Contractive Cloſcing upon the Inſults and Action oſ the Expanſive. 5. 4. HENCE likewiſe it is, that the Liver, the Gall Bladder, the Spleen, and the Pancreas, meet with Lympheducts in Great Plenty, being no where found in the Guts or Inteſtines; The Reaſon ofwhich is, becauſe the Bile or Choler, as we before Obſerved, is of a Fiery and Expanſive Nature, and the Pancreatick Juice is Eſteemed by Anatomiſts to Aſſiſt to the ſame End and Purpoſe with the Bile in the Dusdenum or Jejunum; It was therefore neceſſary to Preſerve the æquilibrium of the Human Syſtem, that a Lympha, or Water, ſould be Collected to thoſe Parts, hich is of a Contractive and a Cooler Temper, in order to Rebate the Violence and Fury of the Expanſive in them; Which Equal Balance in the Syſtem is as naturally Maintained without ſuppoſing the Forces to Act by Choice or Inſtinct, as one Column of Water, which is Higher than another, Deſcends to a Lower, in the Caſe of Hydroſtaticks; becauſe the Expanſive and Contractive Forces muſt be Equally Poiſed in the Animal Occonomy, or there will be a Diſſolution of it, and conſequently, if the Expanſive Prevails, as in the Bile, the Contractive, as in the Lympha, muſt of Neceſſity flow to it, to ſupport the æquilibrium; upon the ſame Account we find a Lympha in the Pericardium, vhich Encompaſſes the Heart, and Lymphaticks Attending the Arteria and Vena Pulmonaris in the Lungs, but none in the Reins or Urinary Parts, nor in the Nervous Syſiem. 5.5. As the Choler or Bile paſes ſfrom the Liver into the Yejunum or Duodenum, and mixes with the Chyle, and is carry'd thro' the Lacteals of the Meſentery to the Receptacle of it, ſo the Lympha likewiſe is conveyed by it's Ducts ſrom the ſame Bowel, thro' the ſame Meſentery, and to the ſame Receptacle, to Qualify and Moderate the Heat and Efferveſcence of the Bile, but ſtill to keep up a Ferment, by vhich the Chyle is Prepared, to be Exalted into Blood upon it's Mixture with the Venal Maſs in the Subelavian, and it's Entrance afterwards into the Heart; which ſhews how neceſſary the Liver is to the Human Syſtem, and Explains the Reaſon, vhy Wounds in it are ſo Dangerous and oſten Mortal; for tho' it do's not Sanguiſy, as the Ancients thought, yet it aſſiſts towards Sanguification, by Produceing the Bile, vhich is as Requiſite to the Forming of the Expanſive of the Blood, as the Ch; e is; This Expanſive Force of the Bile alſo is that, which Precipitates, and Gives an Exertion of, the Chyle into the Lacteals with ſo much Activity and Vigour, as to Ieave the Fejunum commonly Empty, and by which the Aliment, and the Chyle Receives a new Impreſſion of Volatility, and becomes ſtill more Fluid and Refined; Which, on the other Hand, Mixing with the Faces; Diſſolves, Stimulates, and Urges them to an Expulſion, and if in too Great a Quantity, cauſes the afore mentioned Bilious Dejections. S. 6. THE Liver being thus Framed in the Ferus, it is maniſeſt it muſt be of an Hot Temperature and Conſtitution, and therefore we ſind it oſ a Yellower Colour than any other Entrail, which Approaching neareſt to the Colour of Fire, which is the the Standard of the utmoſt Expanſive Force, is a certain Mark of ſuch a Force Re ſiding in it; When therefore the Fætus is ſeparated from the Womb, and the Maternal Blood cẽaſes to flow thro' the Umbilical Vein, it is Contracted into the Umbilical Ligament; Becauſe, as we have ſhewn, the Coats of the Vein, or any Blood-Veſſel, have a Contractive Force, by which they Preſs Inwards, and there being no Expanſive Force of the Blood in the Cavity of it to Reſiſt that Contraction; it by Conſequence cloſes; On the Contrary, the Liver being of an Expanſive Force, and Surrounding it by Compreſſing of it, Aſſiſis to it's Contraction, and it is not Evident, that the Suſpenſorium and Latum might not be Originally Conduits, or, in ſome vay or other, upon the Firſt Forming of the Fætus, Receptacles of Blood, and Cloſed and Contracted in the ſame Manner; ſince the Tubulus or Canalis Venoſus, which Paſſes from the Sinus into the Cava, and is of the ſame Subſtance and Texture with a Vein, after the Birth is likewiſc Contracted and Cloſed into a Ligament. 5. 7. HOWEVER this ſeems to be Manifeſt, that, às this Bowel was Firſt made by the Influx of the Venal Blood from the Womb, ſo upon the Stoppage of that Influx and the Separation of the Fætus from it, it was Neceſſary it ſould be ſupplied with ſomething Analogous to that Influx, for the Preſervation of the Animal æquilibrium; which is the Reaſon, that the Blood Flows from the Inteſtines in ſmall Canals, and at length Meeting and Conſtituting the Trunk of the Porta Enters the Liver, ſince the Bilary Veſſels and Lymphaticks carry every Thing from it, and is a Solution, why the Porta does, in this Caſe, tho' a Vein, Perform the Office of an Artery in Conveying Blood to the Liver, tho Veins in all others Conduct it back from rhe Parts, in which they are Implanted, to the Heart: And that Bile will ſtill be Produced is plain, ſecing there is now an Aſemblage of Lympha to this Part, and Lym: phaticks Formed, which Contain it, there is likewiſe an Influx of Venal Blood, and moreover there is the Liver, hich has an Hot and Expanſive Force belonging to it; and conſequently, the ſame Effect will be Obtained, as before from the Maternal Blood Paſſing thro the ZLympha or Liquor of the Chorion and Amnion, at leaſt by the Help and Aſſiſtance of the Natural Expanſive Force and Heat of this Bowel: Alſo the Blood Flows from the Inteſtines upon this Occaſion, where there is the Ieaſt need of it; the Conteſt there lying chiefly betwixt the Expanſive Force of the Aliment, and the Contractive of the Coats of thoſe Inteſtines. S. 8. TuE Situation of the Liver, we have hitherto Explained, and ſiewn, that it muſt be Gathered and Contracted about the Umbilical Vein; The ſame Doctrine vill alſo give us an Account of it's Figure, which on it's upper Side is Smooth, Round, and Convex, and on it's Lower is Hollow and falls into Edges, ſuitable to ſuch Concretions; for whilſt the Liver is Forming from the Coagulation of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and is kept and ſuſtained in the ſame Place, the Parts vill Deſcend from above Downards, and Ieave the upper Surface Convex and Smooth, and ſhape the Edges and Concavity below by their Natural Gravitation; For thus any Soſt or Conſiſtent Subſtance, as Clay or Dough, if Round, and ſupported by the Finger, ill fall into the ſame Figure; and that, if it were not for this Gravitation, and it's Support from the Suſpenſorium, the Liver would be Round, or Globular, may be Concluded from an Equal Balance of Forces nearly, from whence the Coagulation Enſues. ] THE Subſtance of the Liver, ve have likewiſe ſiewn to be Glandulous and Vaſcular, and to be Repleniſ'd with an Hot Bile or Choler, made by the Paſſage of the Venal Blood thro' the Contractive Liquor of the Chorion and Amnion, and afterwards by the Venal Blood, and the Lympha, and the Liver it ſelf, vhich has now Contracted a Bilious, Hot, or Expanſive Force; And as to the Glands being Hexangular, that Proceeds from the Nature and Degree of the Contractive Force, which has beeri upon another occaſion Explained. S. 9. As to what is ſaid by Malpighius, that Reaſon concludes it neceſſary, that there ſiould be a Commerce betwixt the Glands and Veſiels, tho' Senſe cannot diſcern it, that does not appear ſo very certain; becauſe the Glands may be only ſmall Bubbles or Veſicles, Raiſed by the Fermentation, which Conſtitutes the Liver, and the Bile may Run betwixt them, or if it is Contained in them, it may by it's ExZ z panſive panſive Force break thro' the Sides of them, (Which may again cloſe by their Con tractive Force,) and enter into the Veſſels, which convey it to the Fejunum, and ſo to the Lacteals, and from thence to the Heart; It is not therefore Requiſite, that the Shoots of the Porta and Porus Bilarius ſould be joined by Anaſtamoſes, nor tha the Glands ſould be the Medium betwixt the Importing and Exporting Veſſels, ſince nothing of this is Diſcovered by Obſervation, but it is Rational to Think, thai the Bile is Spread thro' the Liver, and betwixt the Veſicles and Glands, as well a: Containcd in them, and that by it's Expanſive Force it from thence Enters into the Branches of the Porus Bilarius, and ſo is carry'd to the Lacteals and the Heart, to whoſe Expanſive Force it Preſſes. IN Relation to the little Branches of the Porta, Cava, and Porus Bilarius, Running in an Equal Number in the Liver, it Agrees with what we have Mentioned; the Cava being the Vein, and the Porta the Artery, and the Porus Bilarius the Condun of the Bile, it has been alſo Explained, how the Porta comes to Perform the Office of an Artery. S. 10. BUT that the Liver is a Conglomerate Gland, is not Evident or Proved any farther than ſuch, as wve have Repreſented it to be; Namely, that it Conſiſi of Glands or Veſicles, and of Innumerable ſmall Veſctls of the Porta, the Cava, and the Bilarius Diſperſed in it; and it is not Improbable but there may be Lymphaticks, tho ſo Small as not to be Diſcovered by Obſervation, ſince a ſmall Affuſion oſ Lympha will Excite the Blood into Choler, and therefore is neceſſary to the Produceing it; and that this is ſo ſeems Maniſeſt, ſince in Livers, which are Diſeaſed, there is not only a Lympha Collected on the outward Surface of it, but there are Bladders, filled with it, ſcattered about in it's Subſtance, which Proceeds from a Watry or Dropſical Conſtitution, when the Zyæpha is Aſembled in too Great a Quantity to the Liver, and the Contractive is Prevalent over the Expanſive. 5. 11. WE alſo conceive, that the ZLmpha is not chieſly carryd to the Liver by the Porta, and mixt with the Blood, and then ſeparated from it to be convey'd oſf by the Lymphaticks, but that it is Originally drawn thither from the Liquor of the Chorion and Amnion, and afterwards ſupplied from the watry Steams of the Abdomen, which Ouze thro and Moiſten the Subſtance of the Liver, and Increaſe the Heat and Ferment of it, and what Remains unuſeful to that Part is ſent in Veſſels to the Receptacle of the Chyle; and conſequently, when, as in an Aſcites, the Abdimen is full of Warer, rhe Liver is Corrupted with too Great an Affluence of it, and not the Abdomen filld with a Diſtillation of the Lympha from the Liver, as is Taught by Anatomiſis; It is plain there is a Lympha in the Abdomen from the Diſtemper we cail the Aſcites, and it is very Rational to believe, that in an Healthful State of the Body, there is ſome conveyd into it, which by the Heat of the Liver is Raiſed and Exhaled tovards it, as Vapours by the Sun, that is, the Expanſive Force of the one is Ris againſt and Oppoſed by the Contractive of the other, which coming to the Liver heightens it's Heat and Ferment, but when the Expanſive Prevails, theſe Steams are ſent of in Rivulets of Lympha, as Vapours fall down in Showers by the Prevalence of the Sun; And from hence it is, that theſe Streams of Lympha Ariſe from thoſe Conſpicuous Conglobate Glands, rthat are in the Hollow or Under-ſide of the Liver, vhere the Trunks of the Porta and Porus Bilarius Enter into it; for the Expanſive Force of the Liver Prevailing, Repells the Aſcent of the ZLympha, and Determines ĩt to a lover Situation at the Bottom of it's Subſtance, where ĩt is carry'd of in Ducts made by it's obeying the Expanſive Force of the Bile and Liver, and the Conrractive Force of the Lympha, and Included Air, and Nervous Syſtem. 5. 12. THE Parenchyma has but a dull Senſe, there being few Nerves but what are Spread upon the Surface and Veſſels; which is Agrecable to the Account we have Given of it's Production from a Coagulum of Bile and Lympha after a mutual Conteſt betwixt the Expanſive of the Venal Blood and the Contractive of the Lympha, vhich are Liquors, that have no Senſc belonging to them; The Nerves by their Contractive Force aſſiſt to the Formation of the Membrane of the Liver, and the Conts oſ it's Veſſcls, as well as to the Imparting a Senſe to them. TuE Porta, vhen it Enters the Liver, is Inveſted with a Second Coat from the Membrane, with which the Liver is Encloſed, by an Adherence of the Contractive Force Force oſ the Membrane to the Firſt Coat of the Porta, as Forces of the ſame Nature always Unite with and Propagate each other; and for the ſame Reaſon, the Portal or Arterial Blood, and the Bile, which are of an Expanſive Nature, join in Separate Channels under one Common Capſula or Involucrum in Oppoſition to the Lympha, and the Venal Blood of the Cava, which are of a more Contractive Temper. 5. Whuar Dr. Gliſſin Obſerves of the Obſcure Pulſation of the Porta is eaſily Accounted for from the Principles we have Alledged for the Solution of the Periſtaltick or Vermicular Motion of the Inteſtines; ſince the Porta is Endued with a Double Coat, a Membranous and a Carnous, the Former of which has a Contractive Force, and the Latter an Expanſive, by which they Mutually and Reciprocally are Contracted and Expanded, which is the very Caſe of Pulſation; tis yet an Obſcurer one, than in the Arteries, becauſe the Blood, which is Aſſiſting to the Expanſive Force of the Carnous Coat, being Venal, has a leſs Degree of Expanſion than the Arterial, as will be afterwards ſhewn, and the Membranous Coat having but a ſmall Number of Nerves, has alſo a leſs Degree of Contraction, by which the Pulſation becomes Leſs Vehement, and Strong; On the Contrary, that this Obſcure Pulſation is owing to the Inſertion of the Hepatick Artery into the Capſula, hich Dr. Gliſſon Thinks, cannot be Imagined, unleſs we can ſuppoſe, that little Twigs of Arteries are capable of Shakeing a whole Trunk, and Producing a Greater Motion in Larger Veſſels, than what is Experienced in Themſelves, which are Smaller. S. 14. THERE are no Anaſtomoſes of the Capillaries of the Portæ into thoſe of the Cava according to Dr. Gliſſon, nor ſhould there be according to the Principles above; ſince the Blood is Diſcharged from the Porta into the Liver to be Turned into Bile, hich could not be, if there was a Continuation of the Capillaries of the Porta to thoſe of the Cava, and the Blood vas carryd on in one Channel; On the Contrary, when there is a ſufficient Quantity of the Influent Blood from the Porta, made into Bile, that is, when the Zympha and the Bilious Quality of the Liver, which it has Contracted by the Methods before Deſcribed, have Converted as much Blood into Bile, as their Forces are capable of Doing, the Blood, ſtill Flowing in by the Porta, is Returned by the Cova and it's Branches, whoſe Mouths lie open in the Liver ready to Receive it, as thoſe Mouths and the Cavity of the Branches were made and formed by the Expanſive Force of the Superfluous Blood, Preſſing tovards the Heart, and the Coats by the Contractive of their Nerves, and of the Included Air; and perhaps the Lympha, being of a Contractive Force likeviſc, may be Aſſiſting to the ſame Effect. 5. 15. THE Root of the Vena Cava, as to it's Aſcending Trunk, it is very Probable, was originally in the Fætus from the Umbilical Vein, which is Continued to it, aud after the Birth is Contracted into a Ligament, from thence the Capillaries of the Vena Cava, which Import the Superfluous Blood from the Porra into it, may be Accounted the Root of it; The Umbilical Blood went in a Current directly to the Cava, and by the Contractive Force of the Nerves had by Degrees a Coat, which Surrounded and Formed that Vein, but afterwards, when the Porta ſupplied the Blood to the Liver from the Inteſtines, and was ſpread in ſeveral Currents thr the Parenchyma of it, the Superfluous Blood by i's Expanſive Force Tended back to the Heart in Various Channels, and conſcquently Entered the Aſcending Trunk of the Cava in Different ones, to which Courſes of the Blood the Contractive Force oſ the Nerves and the Included Air, and poſſibly of the ZLympha, gave their Tunicks, and Shaped them into Veins and Conduits for it's Conveyance; The Aſcending Trunk of the Cava is allo Wider than the Deſcending, becauſe the Firſt was originally Formed by the Umbilical Vein, and by one Current and Influx of Blood made thro the one into the other, whereas the Deſcending Ariſes from ſeveral and various Rivulets Emptying themſelves into it, according to the Diſtinctions of Branches before ſet Down and Deſcribed; which there is no Occaſion here any farther to Conſider, till we come to the Arteries, from whoſe Superſiuous Blood theſc Branches ol the Deſcending Cava are Conſtituted and Formed; in like Manner, as the Branche: oſ the Aſcending are from the Superſluous Blood of the Porta, and in all Probability without any Imaginary Anaſtomoſcs, which we ſhall then more fully Examine into. z r72 f. 12. A 5. 16. As to Diemerbroeck's Account of the Bile, it very much Confirms what we have Propoſed concerning it, that it is made from the Blood of the rortæ; He owns an Acrimonious, Saltiſ, and Subacid Juice Derived from the Spleen, and Formed by the Arterial Blood and Animal Spirits, which is Anſwered by our Contractive Force of the Air, and Lympha, Fermenting with the Expanſive of the Blood; He Confeſſe: a Specifick Vertue and Coction of the Liver, ve a Natural Heat and Expanſive Force of it, as beſore Explained: As to the Sulphureous and Salt Particles lying hid in the Venal Blood, ve Acknowledge no ſuch Latent Qualities, but Think they are Produced, and that the Blood becomes Acrimonious and Fermenting, That is, that the Expanſive Force oſ it is Exalted, and Render'd more Fiery by the Methods above Specified: We likewiſe Imagine, that the Lympha is not only Separated from the Porta, but that it is Collected from the Cavity of the Abdomen, by which the Heat of the Liver is Increas'd above the Natural Temper or Expanſive of the Blood; that the Conglobate Glands do not Separate the Z;mpha ſrom the Blood by way of Colature, but that the Zympha, Paſſing that way and being Excluded and Repelled from the Liver by the Expanſive Force of it, does by it's Contractive Force harden it into a Schirrous Fleh or a Conglobate Gland, which Fle'n would otherwiſe have had ⸗ more Expanſive Force, that is, a Sanguineous one: How the Chyle is Urged tovards the Receptacle of it by the Expanſive Force oſ the Bile, and ſo to the Heart, we have Explained before, which Diemerbroect does not, vho only ſpeaks of an Acrimonious and Fermentaceous Quality, in General, in the Bile, but does not Inform us, how that ſould Protrude and Thruſt the Chyle towards the Recepracle of it: As to the Expanſive Force of the Bile, we Agree with him, that it is Diminiſn'd, the farther it gocs ſrom the Liver, and therefore has a leſs Effect in the Thick Guts, than it has in the Small ones, and by conſequence, that there are fewer Lacteals in the Latter than in the Former, and that it aſſiſts by it's Expanſive Force to the Excretion of the Faces, we alſo acknowledge with him that the Bile is not an Excrement; On the Contrary, we ſay it Sanguifies, tho not in the Liver, yet in Exalting the Expanſive Force of the Chyle upon it's Mixture vith it, by which, and it's Entrance into the Subelavian, it is Transformed into Venal Blood, and by the Contractive Force of the Air in the Lungs, and the Pulſation of the Heart, into Arterial, as will be afterwards more fully Deſcribed. s. 17. As to the Veſica Fellea, or Gall-Bladder, it ſecems to be Evidently ſupplied by it's Fibrous Roots from the Liver, not only from the Abſurdity of the contrary Opinion, but from this, that the Roots of the Porus Bilarius dtaw Choler from all Parts of the Liver, Excepting, whither the Roots of the Bladder Reach, which is a plain Argument, that the Choler there is Convey'd by thoſe Roots to the Veſica; Ecſides there is a Reaſon for this Veſica, namely, the Conglobate Gland, and the Lympha Paſling that way in a Greater Quantity, which being of a Contractive Force, is Equally Balancd by the Expanſive Force of the Bile Paſling towards it in thoſe Small Roots, and which Collecting to an Head is Inveſted by the Contractive Force of the Air, and Lympha, and the Nerves, with it's Mucous and Tendinous Coat, and aſterwards with it's Fibrous, to which the Liver adds it's Membranous; This alſo gives an Account why the moſt Active Part, and therefore the moſt Subtile and Acrimonious, of the Bile is Engaged in this Encounter, and Lodges in the Veſica, whilſt the more Viſcid, and Groſſer, is carry'd ſrom the Liver by the Porus Bilarius to mix with the Chyle. s. 18. I Think there is little more neceſſary to be ſaid in Reſpect of the Liver, the Bile, and its Veſſels, as to Philoſophy, unleſs we conſider Alphonſus orelluss Circulation of it, which we ſiall now Inquire into: His Notion is, that the Glands are certain Faſcieuli of Veſſcls of ſeveral Kinds, of Arteries, Veins, Excretory Ducts, and Nerves; that there are no Anaſtomoſes of Arteries into Veins, becauſe there could be nothing then Separated from the Blood, which would Run in one continued Canal, nor yet oſ Arteries into the Excretory Ducts, becauſe then the Superfluous Blood could not be Received into the Veins; and that therefore it is neceſſary there ould be ſome Repoſitory of the Blood and Juices Difſerent from the Veſſels, which Import or Export them; that the Imported Juices are mixt in theſe Repoſitories, and aſterwards the Veins and Excretory Ducts Receive and Convey off thoſe, which u Suite Suited and Adapted to them; The Queſtion is, whether theſe Repoſitories of the Juices are mere Receptacles of them, or whether they obtain a Fermentative Quality, by which they Change and Alter the Blood Imported to them: Againſt their Raving a Fermentative Quality it is Objected, that Fermentation requires ſome Time to perform it in, and cannot poſſibly be Raiſed and Effected in the Momentany Paſſage of the Blood or Juices thro' them; that, by the Continual Flux of the Blood or Juices into the Glands, ſuch a Fermentative Quality vould by Degrees be Impaired and Weaken'd, and at laſt be wholly Deſtroy'd, as a Vinegar Veſſel by a Continual Affuſion of Water looſes it's Acrimony; On the Contrary it is thought, that a Separation is made of Heterogencous Fluids in the Glands Mechanically, thr the Small Foramina of the Faſciculi of Veſtls, by way of Incuncation or Colature, where the Orifices of the Veſels are Excavated Conformably to the Figure of the Blood or Juices, which they Receive. As to the Bile, that it is made by the Liver is Conſeſſcd by all the Modern Anatomiſis, but whether by Fermentation, or Colature and Incuncation, is Diſputed; For the Firſt Opinion there are Two Reaſons Aſſigned: Firſt, Becauſe the Bilious Particles are very cloſcly Embraced by the Blood of the Vena Portæ, and are not united by ſimple Contact; For in Oximel, the Vinegar, which is mixt with the Honey, by the ſimple Contact of Parts is ſenſible to the Taſt, whereas the Bitter and Bilious Juice, which is mixt with the Blood in the Abdomen, is not, it's Aculei being Entangled in the Glutinous Parts of the ſaid Blood, as Diſtilled Vinegar is Dulcified by Lead, or Powder of Coral; Second, Becauſe the Blood is not carry'd into the Liver with an Impetuous Motion, as it is in the Reins from the Emulgents, but Proceeds by a Gentle Diſtillation from the Porta into it, and conſequently, ſince a firm Connexion of Parts requires Time and Fermentation to ſeparate them, it is not Unlikely, but Nature may have taken that Method in Separating the Bile. TuE Laſt Opinion, that it is done by Incuncation or Colature is thus Deſended; ſince, iſ it was Effected by Fermentation, there ſhould be a Fermentaceous Juice in the Liver, as Bitter as the Bile it ſelf is, or ſuch a Juice ſhould be Convedd to ĩt from other Parts; On the Contrary, the Liver is of a Sweet Taſt, and there are no ſuch Vaſa Deſerentia in Experience or Obſervation; Beſides it ſeems very hard to Imagine, that a Fermentation ſhould be Raiſed in the ſmall Veſſels of the Porta, and in the ſireight Pores of the Hepatick Glands. BuT for the Mechanical Secretion of the Bile by Incuneation or Colature many Things may be ſaid; in the Firſt Place there is a Vis Motiva, namely, the Impulſe of the Blood from the Compreſſion of the Abdomen and the Air drawn in by our Breath; there is alſo a Continued Motion; there are the Small Canals of the Porta, and the Pores of the Glands; and there are TWo Orders and Kinds of Veſſels for the Reception of the Different Fluids, the Venous, and the Bilary. Tuis being Premiſed, in order to Prove the Circulation of the Bile, he goes on to ſew: FirsT, That only one Part of Blood, which is Leſs than the Twenty-Fifth Tart of the whole Sanguineous Maſs, Paſſes thro the Liver in one Circulation; Becauſe there is no other Blood enters into the Vena Portæ, and goes out of it, in the Time that one Circulation of the Blood is performed thro the Heart, beſides that which is ſent into it by the Meſenterick and Cæliack Arteries; but the Diameters oſ thoſe Arteries are but 3th of the Diameter of the Trunk of the Aorta, as it comes out of the Heart, and ſince the Circular Oriſices are in a Duplicate Proportion oſ the Diameters, the Orifices of the Meſenterick Arteries will be 747h of the Trunk of the Aorta Procceding from the Heait; and the Bulk or Quantity of the Fluids, Circulating vith the ſame Velocity, and in the ſame Time, have the ſame Proportion with the Oriſices, thro which they Paſs, that is, the Blood Flows with an uniform Velocity thro' all the Arteries. SECOND, That the Bile, which is Collected by the Bilary Veſſels, does not ſeem to be Separated from the Sanguineous Maſs, out of, or which is Exterior to, the Aldomen 3 For if the whole Sanguineous Maſs, which does not uſually Exceed in Weight 20ſ. vas uniſormly Tinged by the Bilious Juice, which does not commonly Excced 2. That Part of the Sanguineous Maſs, which Paſſes thro' the Liver in one Circulation, can only be Purged of it's Bile, and therefore, by what foregoes, therc can be only 0h Part, or one Ounce of the Bile Separated from the Blood in th Firſ Firſt Circulation, as there is only 1h Part of the whole Maſs of Blood Paſſes thro the Liver in that Circulation; and ſince that Part of the Blood, vhich is Purged ol it's Bile, mixes aſterwards with the whole Maſi, which is ſiill Tinged with it, in the Subſcquent Circulations, there will be ſucceſſively h Part of the Remaining Bile Purged or Separated from it. Ir therefore a Calculation is made in the ſame Manner, as is done in the Excre tion of the Urine, it will Appear, that aſter Six Hours, in the roorh Circulation ol the whole Blood, /47h Part of the whole Bile will be Separated by the Liver, that is, Leſs than 41h Part of an Ounce; and aſter Twelve Hours, in the 2001h Circulation, there is not Separated by the Liver more than 10007h Part of the whole Bile, or the sorh Part of an Ounce; and ſince the Bile is not Repaired, unleſs by taking in new Aliments, and what is Separated in the Liver is continually carryd off by the Porus Bilarius and the Ductus Cyſticus, it would follow, that, aſter a Day's Faſting, thoſe Bilary Veſſels would be entirely Empty, but this is Falſe in Experience; For after ſeveral Days Faſting, nay ſome Months, the Porus Bilarius and Gall-Bladder in Serpents are Found as Full and Turgid, as Before; And thereſore the Bile is not Separated from the Sanguincous Maſi, which is Circulated thro' the Arteries and the Vena Cava, that is out of the Abdomen. TuirD, That the Bile, which is Separated by the Liver, upon Faſting, in the Space of one Day, is Sixteen Times More than that, which is in the Sanguineous Maſs: For the Bilary Veſſels are not like the Arteries or Meſaraick Veins, which End in Capillaries, but rather like the Branches of the ſena Cava, which, as Rivers, Form larger Canals from a Collection oſ ſeveral little Rivulets Falling into them; Thus the Bilary Veſſels, which carry the Bile from the Liver, have their Riſe from Caillaries, and End in Large Orifices in the Duodenum, and are alvays ſull of Bilious uice; They are alſo like the Vena Cava in their Courſe, and in the Velocity with Which the Fluids arc Moved thro both, the Impelling Cauſe of them being the ſame, namely, the Common Compreſſion of the Abdomen, and the Conſtriction of the ſame Circular Fibres; And ſince the Quantities, or the Bulks of the Fluids, which Paſs thr Unequal Canals with the ſame Velocity, and in the ſame Time, obtain the ſame Proportion to each other, which the Oriſices of the Veſſels have, the Eile, which is carry'd thro' the Bilary Veſſels to the Blood, which is carryd thro' the Cava vill have that Proportion; But the Diameter of the Porus Bilarius is not Greater than 51h Part of the Diameter of the Greateſt Trunk of the Vena Cava, and the Diameter of the Ductus Cyſticus is of the ſame Meaſure, and therefore the Diameter of the One, will be to the Sum of the Diameters of the other Two, as 30 to 2, and the Circular Oriſices, as the Squares of thoſe Numbers, or as 900 to 4, that is, the Circular Orifices of the Bilary Veſſels will be /41h Part of the Circular Orifice of the Vena Cava, and the Fluids, which Paſs thro' the ſame Orifices in the ſame Time, vill be in a like Reaſon; And becauſe, in every Circulation of the Blood, 20 Pounds of it are Tranſmitted thro' the ?ena Cava, or 240 Ounces, therefore in the ſame Time, that one Circulation of the whole Sanguineous Maſs is Performed, there will Flow out of the Bilary Ducts 7471h Part of it, that is, ſomething More than one Ounce of Bile; Moreover, ſince in one Hour there are 16 Circulations of the Blood, in 24 Hours there will be Tranſmitted thro' the 7ena Cava 7680 Pounds of it, and at the ſame Time ;45;h Part, or 34 Pounds of Bilious Juice thro the Bilary Veſſels, whereas the whole Bile, which is Contained in the Sanguineous Maſs, does not Exceed 2 Pounds, and thereſore the whole Bile, which is Separated by the Liver upon Faſting, is 17 Times More than that, which is Contained in the Sanguincous Maſs, as 34 is 17 Times Greater than 2. FourTH, That ſo Great a Quantity of Bile, as 34 Pounds, cannot be Generated in an Human Body upon Faſting by Fermentation; For he Thinks it cannot be Imagined, that the Bile ſould be made by a Bilious Quality in the Liver, Changeing and Transſorming the Blood into it, as Wine Turns to Vinegar, if put into a Veſel, Infected and Tinged with that Liquor; Since it would be very Fooliſh and Abſurd in Nature to Corrupt that Blood into a Noxious Excrement, fit to be Separated and Expelled from the Animal Syſtem, Which yet it had before taken ſo much Pains to Elaborate and Increaſe, and thereſore ſuch a Procedure is Unworthy of it, which Acts all Things Wiſely and with Deſirn. FrROM FroM all which it is Iaſtly Concluded, That the ſame Maſs of Bilious Juice, which is Diſcharged from the Liver is brought back, by a Circulation of it, to the Place from whence it began it's Motion, and it is Affirmed, that by the ſame Arguments, by which the Circulation of the Blood was Demonſtrated and Proved by our Celebrated Harvey, the Circulation of the Bile may be Evinced; For, as That is Inferred from the Hear's continually Pouring Blood into the Arteries, and from rhe whole Sangnineous Maſs, which in Men does not Exceed 20 Pounds, being Tranſmitted thro' the Heart in 3 or 4 Minutes of an Hour; ſo This is Aſſerted and Argued, from the whole Bilious Maſs not being Increaſed, where there is no new Acceſs of Aliment, from it's not Exceeding 2 Pounds, from it's conſtantly Floving out of the Bile-Veſſels, and into the Duodenum, as alſo from ſomething Leſò than an Ounce of Bile Paſſing thro' the ſaid Ducts in the Time of one Circulation of the Blood; Since conſequently in the Time, in which 40 Circulations of the Blood are Performed, that is, in 2 Hours and an half, the vhole Maſs of Bile, which does not Exceed æ Pounds, is carryd from the Liver into the Duodenum, that the ſame Effect may be continued from the Liver, it is neceſſary there ſiould be a Circulation of the Dilious Maſs. ArTER this we have Three Propoſitions; Firſt, That it does not ſcem Poſſible, that the Circulation of the Bile ſould be Performed thro' the Heart by a Mixture oſ it vith the Arterial Blood, but thro' the Abdomen only; Second, That there are Ducts, which may be Aſſigned, by which the Circulation of the Bile may be Perſormed thro' the Abdomen, that is, by the Meſaraick Veins; Third, That there is a Neceſſity and Uſe of the foregoing Circulation of the Bile, in Reſpect of which Propoſitions, 1 refer my Self to the moſt Incomparable Author. s. 19. As to the Circulation of the Bile, it is not only Rendered Probable and almoſt Certain from the Arguments above, but alſo from an Original Circulation of Fluids in thoſc Parts in the very Fætus, Diſtint from the Circulation of the Sanguineous Maſs, and Peculiar to them; Thus in the Funiculus or Inteſtinulum, beſides the Urachus, are Comprehended Two Arteries and the Umbilical Vein, by the Latter of which a Nutritious Juice, and ſome Blood, is conveyd from the Placenta Uterina t0 the Vena Portæ, and ſo to the Liver, and by the Former, the Groſſer Part of the Nutritious Juice and Blood is carryd bac, and ſome of it Depoſited in the Amnion, to be Suckt in by the Mouth of the Fætus for it's Nouriſhment that way, and the reſt is Returned to the Placenta; So that in the Firſt Formation of the Human Syſtem, here is a Circulation of Fluids from and towards the Liver, and therefore upon the Birth, when the Navel String is Cut, and that Circulation is Stopt, it is Reaſonable to Think, that Nature finds out a New vay to continue the ſame Motions, or what are nearly Analogous to them, by conveying DBlood to the ?ena Portæ from the Meſaraick Veins, and Returning it from thence, and the Liver, by the Bilary Veſſels. Tuis quick Circulation of the Blood and Nutritious Juices thro' the Liver in the Fetus, will likewiſe Contribute to the Heat and Expanſive Force of it; and conſequently Confirms and Eſtabliſies our Doctrine concerning it, and if the Bile aftervards is ſrequently Tranſmitted thro' the ſame Boel, it Exalts that Expanſive Force and makes it capable of Converting Blood, which has a Leſs Degree of the Expanſive, into it's own Nature and Action. 5. 20. THUS far therefore we Agree with this Celebrated Writer, but when he ſuppoſes, that the Bile is Separated from the Blood by a Colature in the Liver, he Aeems to be far from Truth, and his Arguments are as Weak, by which he Defends his Opinion: He ſays, that Fermentation Requires ſome Time to Perform it in, and annot be Raiſed and Effected in the Momentany Paſſage of the Blood thro' the Liver. i To vhich we ſhall Firſt Anſwer from himſclf, that the Blood is not carry'd into the Liver with an Impetuous Motion, as it is in the Reins from the Emulgents, but Proceeds by a Gentle Diſtillation from the Porta into it, and conſequently, ſince a firm Connexion of Parts Requires Time and Fermentation to ſeparate Them, it is not certain, but Nature may have taken that Method in Scparating the Bile; Second, We Anſver, that to Convert Blood into Bile, it is not neceſſary to Imagine there is any Termentation, but that the Action or Expanſive Force of the Liver ũ immediarel; immediately Impreſs'd upon and Communicated to the Blood, as Fire, or the Exanſive Force of it, to Flax or Gun-Powder, without any ſuch Fermentation: e farther ſays, that by the Continual Flux of the Blood or Juices into the Liver, ſuch a Fermentative Quality would by Degrees be Impaired and Weakened, and at laſt be wholly Deſtroyd, as a Vinegar Veſſel by a Continual Affuſion of Water looſes it's Acrimony; but if we conſider the Liver, as a Gentle Animal Flame, and the Blood, like a kind of Fuel, Convertible into it's Nature, this Objection will be oſ no Weight or Importance. As to vhat is Alledged, that the Bile is Bitter, and therefore the Liver ought to be ſo, if it Made and Fermented, and did not Percolate the Bile, whereas the Liver is Sweet; It may be Anſwered, that Sweet and Bitter are only Various Degrees of the Expanſive Force, Acting upon the Palate and the Tongue; and conſequently, the Expanſive Force of the Liver, Exerting it ſelf upon that of the Influent Blood, may produce a Bitter, tho' the Liver is Sweet; as Fire can render Sweet Things Bitter, by Parching of them, and Impreſſing too Great a Degree of the Expanſive upon them, ſo as to make them Offenſive to the Taſt by their too Violent Action. Ir is likewiſe thought hard to Imagine, that a Fermentation ſhould be Raiſed in the ſmall Veſſels of the Porta, and in the ſtreight Pores of the Hepatick Glands; but this Difficulty will Vaniſh with thoſe, vho do not ſuppoſe the Bile to be Produced by Fermentation, but by an immediate Impreſſion of the Expanſive Force of rhe Liver upon the Blood Imported into it, by which it Changes its Sanguineous Temperament into a Bilious one. ON the other Hand, there is Little urged on the Side of Colature or Incuneation: Excepting, that there is a Vis Motiva from the Compreſſion of the Abdomen, and the Air drawn in by our Breath; that there is a continued Motion; that there are ſmall Canals of the Porta and Pores of the Glands, and TWo Orders of Veſſels for the Reception of the Different Fluids, the Venous and the Bilary; all which will be as neceſſary for the Circulation of the Bile, and carrying off the Superfluous Blood, which is not Converted into it, as for the Separating of it by Colature or Incuneation. S. 21. As to the Pancreas, which Forms a Lymphatick Juice, which we reckon to be of a Contractive Nature, ſince it Contains Abundance of Volatile Salis in it, we may juſtly Eſteem it deſigned for an Equal Balance to the Liver in the Human Syſtem, in Preparing a Liquor of a Contractive Force, which ſhould be a Poiſe to the Expanſive of the Bile; and which it therefore Meets in the Duodenum or Jejunum, and Attends it in ſeveral Ducts to the Thoracick, and to the Receptacle of the Chyle, and from a Mixture of which the Blood may poſſibly owe in a Great Meaſure it's Red Colour, or a Deep Yellow, it's Flame and Heat, and it's Saltneſs and VoIatility. AnD it is not Impoſſible, but the Formation of it may be from another Gentler and Milder Fermentation within the Body of the Included Air, the Nervous Juice, and the Blood, From whence it's Lobuli and Acini Glanduloſi Ariſe; but as the Expanſive Force Prevailed in the Liver by the Great Influx of Blood Heated, ſo in the Pancreas the Contractive by the Nervous Juice and the Aſſemblage of Lympha ; by which means it became capable afterwards of Converting the Fluids Imported into Lympha, as the Liver obtained the Quality of Changeing them into Bile. 5. 22. WE ſnhall only here add in Reſpect of the Spleen, Lien, or Milt, that it ſeems to be a Bowel made by Nature for the Excrement, or Effœte and Languid Part of the Bile, vhen it's Expanſive Force is Worn off and Spent, tho Anatomiſis have hitherto been at a Loſę to aſſign a Uſe for it, vhoſe ſeveral Opinions it will be too Tedious here to Recount, being either Contradicted in Fact or not Supported by Reaſon, as may be ſeen at Large in Dr. Gibſon3 What therefore we are apt to believe is the Truth, is, that the Meſaraick Veins convey ſome Part of the Excre mentitions or Languid Bile to the Spleen, where, when there is too Great a Quantity of it, it Lodges and Grows ſtill more Acid and Vapid; that from thence ĩt is carry'd into the #amus Splenicus, and ſo to the Liver, where it is again Exalted into Bile; And to Enliven the Bilious Excrement and Prepatre it for New Bile, that the Influx of the Nervous Juice, and of the Blood, in ſome Meaſure Contributes; j This This Account of the Spleen Agrees with Borelluss Circulation of this Fluid, and Avoids all the Abſurdities, which are Chargeable, either upon the Hypotheſes of the Ancients, or thoſe of Dr. Gliſſou, Velthuſius, Dr. Majow, Blancard, or Dr. Havers in nis Oſeologia Nova. AND from this Notion of the Spleen ſeveral Phænomenons may be Explained, which otherwiſe could not be; FirsT, That tho' there are Two or Three Spleens, out of each of them a Veſſel Paſſes into the Ramus Splenicus, that is, to convey the Acid or Vapid Bile to the Liver to be again Recocted into New Bile. SECOND, That in Infants New-Born it is of a Red Colour, in thoſe of a Ripe Age ſomevhat Blackiſh, and in Old Men of a Leaden or Livid Complexion; Becauſe the Excrementitious or Languid Part of the Bile in Infants has the Greateſt Expanſive Force, in thoſe of a Ripe Age a Leſier, or a Deeper Red, and in Old Men the Leaſt, or a Leaden and Livid, or Violet; For thus the Bile it ſelf has theſe Different Forces, being in Young Children more Hot and Expanſive, in Grown Perſons leſs ſo, and in Old Men leaſt of all, other Juices and Temperaments of the Animal Occonomy being Equal; And in Conſequence of this, we find Children Hot and Frovard, Men Sedate, and Old-Age Dull. THiRD, From hence it obtains that Aſfinity with the Liver, which made Hippoerates and Ariſiotle Term it the Left, or the Baſtard one. FourTH, This alſo gives a Reaſon, vhy Wounds in it arc commonly Mortal, as in the Liver, becauſe they are both Subſervient to the Forming of the Bile; and Obſtructions in ĩt occaſion Grievous Pains, as it contains an Acid Liquor, which wants to be Raiſed into a Bilious one by Circulating thro' the Liver; the Stoppage of which Circulation, and the Contractiveneſs or Acidity of the Fluid Increaſing by it, muſt neceſarily aſflict the Patient in a ſenſible Manner; And yet if the Spleen is taken wholly avay, there may no Great Inconvenience Enſue, becauſe then the Circulation will be Performed by the Meſaraick Veins, and there will be no Stagnancy of an Acid Fluid in the Cells and Glandules, which Compoſe it. : FirTH, And therefore likewiſe it is, that the Fluids take ſo Tedious a March from the Spleen to the Liver by the Ramus Splenicus, whereas they might have been readily conveyed into the Trunk of the Cava, which lies near it, if the Juices, Elaborated or Lodged in it, had not been for the Service of the Liver. LastLy, Hence it is, that when the Quantity of Choler or Bile is too much Increaſed by an High or Luxurious Diet, or by Wines and Hot or Expanſive Liquors, Eager and Violent Paſſions are many Times Produced in the Mind; which are oſten Attended with a Sinking and Depreſſion of it, from a too Great Quan tity of the Languid, Vapid, and Excrementitious Bile Stagnating in the Spleen, or at leat not Circulating ſo Expeditiouſly, as when there is a Leſs Load or Maſs to be Diſcharged from it thro' the Ramus Splenicus to the Liver; and which therefore cauſes Pains in ſome Meaſure Approaching to thoſe, which Reſult from Obſtructions in the ſame Bowel; which likewiſe, as the Liver and Pancreas, is Formed by the Fermentation or Conteſt betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, the Vaſcula Parts being made by the Contractive, and the Fluids contained, by the Expanſive. To Explain this a little farther; The Expanſive Force Acting from a Center, or Centers, Dilates it ſelf, by which a Fluidity or a Separation of Parts Enſues, the Contractive Force Tends towards a Center, or Centers, from whence a Solidity or Connexion of Parts Ariſes; And when theſc Two Forces meet together, it is neceſ ſary, in certain Circumiſtances, that the Expanſive ſhould Exert it ſelf Outwards in the Contained, and the Contractive Exert it ſelf Inwards in the Container; That is, that the one ſhould be the Fluid, and the other the Veſſel, that the one ſhould Endeavour to Dilate and Expand it ſelf, and the other to Reſtrain and Encloſe ſuch Dilatation or Expanſion;3 And theſe Forces Acting againt each other, the Contractive will ſurround the Expanſive, as being Supcrior in the Animal Syſtem, by what we have before ſniewn. Aaa CH AP C H AP. VI. Concerning the Meſentery, the Receptacle of the chy, the Thoracick Duſl, and the Via Lactea, or the Paſage of the Chyle into the Blood. s. 1. HE next Thing to be Conſidered in the Animal Frame is the Meſentery, i and the Paſſage of the Chyle into the Blood: The Account of which Former is, That it is ſo called from it's being placed in the Midſt of the Inteſtines, that it is a Membranous Part ſituated in the Middle of the Loer Belly, and ſerves both for Conveying Veſſels to and from the Guts, and Tying them together ſo, as they ſhould not be Entangled aud Conſounded; It is not above a Span diſtant from the Center to it's Circumference, and yet in that it Comprehends all the Guts, cxcepting the Duodenum and Part of the Recium, which are about Nine or Ten Yards in Length; It is almoſt of a Circular Figure, which is the moſt Capacious, and tho' it be Narrow and Plain at it's Riſe, it's Circumſerence is Wrinkled and Enlarged into ſo many Folds, as to be Three Ells in Extent; It has a Double Origin, the Higher is at the Firſt, and the Lower at the Third Vertebra of the Loins; It is Compoſed of Two Common Membrancs, vhich arc Propagated or Continued from a Duplicature of the Peritonaum, and betwixt theſe Two it has a Third Membrane, which is Proper, and is Thicker than either of the other, in which the Glands are Scated, and by which the Veſſels are Conducted; It is Stuſſcd with Fat betwixt it's Membranes, tho' in Dogs, Cats, and ſuch like Animals, this Part is very Thin and Tranſparent, in Human Embryos there is None, and in Lean Perſons but Little; It's Common Parts are Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and Lympheducis, and it's Proper are Glands and the Venæ Lacteæ. TuE Veins are called Meſaraicæ, and are Branches of the Vena Portæ, and the Arteries are Branches of the Arteria Meſenterica, and Paſs as the Veins do. THE Nerves are thus Accurately deſcribed by Dr. Willis, in his EPook De Cerebro, Cap. 25. As ſoon as the Intercoſtal Pair is Deſcended as Low, as over againſt the Bottom of the Stomach, it ſends forth on. each Side a large Meſenterick Branch, each of which is again Divided, and makes TWo Plexuss in cach Side; in the Middle of theſe is the Greateſt Plexus of all, which, as he ſays, is like the Sun amongſt the Planets, from which Twigs and Numerous Fibres are Diſperſed into all the Parts of the Meſentery, which accompanying the Sanguiferous Veſſels in their whole Proceſs, do Climb upon, and Twiſt about them; It has likewiſe, according to Spigelius, orher Nerves, which Spring from the Spinalis Medulla between the Firſt, Second, Third, and Fourth Vertebræ of the Loins. Tur Lymphaticks or Lympheducts, according to Tho. Bartholin, a Learned Dane, who Firſt found them out, and that not many Vears ago, are of Figure Long and Hollow like a Vein, but very Small and Knotty, having many Valves, which Permit the Iympha or Water to Paſs to the Chyliferous Veſſels, and to ſome Veins, but hinder it's Return; They are of a Pellucid and Chryſtalline Colour, conſiſting of a Tranſparent and moſt Thin Skin, which being broken, and the Lympha Flowing out, entirely Vaniſhes; They are almoſt Innumerable, and according t0O Malpighius, always have theit Riſe and Proceed from Glands, but according to Steno, they either Riſe from or are Inſerted in them; He ſarther ſays, that there are Three Sorts of Them; Firſt, Such; which from their Origins, but what thoſe are he does not Determinc, are Diſperſed over the Surface of the Firſt Glands they Approach unto; Second, Such, vhich Run from the Hollow Side of one Gland to the Gibbous of another; And Third, Such, which Run ſrom the Hollow Side oſ the ſaid Glands to the Veins, into which they Diſcharge their Lympha  As to their Inſertion, it is Agreed by Anatomiſls, that Thoſe under the Midriſf Diſcharge their Liquor into the Receptacle oſ the Chyle, Thoſe in the Thorax into the Thoracick Duct, and Thoſe oſ the Neck, Arms, &. into the Jugular Vein; It is alſo Aſirmed by Diemerlroect, that they open into many other Veins, and for which he Cites Steno; Frederick Ruyſch likewiſe, his Country Man, Aſſerts, that by Ligature and Structure of the Valves, he has plainly ſeen, that all the Lympheducts in the Lungs do carry theit ZLympha into the Subclavian, Axillar, and Jugular Veins. WVuaai Whaar this Lympha is, is much Diſputed, Bartholin thinks it to be mere Limpid Water, with which is mixed a Thinner Part of the Chyle fit for Nutrition. and that the Former is thrown off by Sweat, and the Latter carry'd on by Circulation; Gliſſom, that it is a Liquor Condenſed from the Halitus of the Blood, like Dev, Driven into theſe Veſſels, and Flowing back with the Vehicle of the Aliment brought by the Nerves; Segerus and Sylvius, that it is the Animal Spirits, or is. made of Them, which being Diſtributed into all Parts by the Nerves, are partly there Diſſipated and Conſumed, and partly Condenſed into this Water; Diemerbroect, that it is a Fermentaceous Liquor, Separated from the Serous Part of the Blood in the Conglobate Glands, yet not Simple, but Impregnated with much Fuſed and Volatile Salt, and alſo vith ſome Sulphureous Particles, which, when ĩt is convey'd to the Vaſa Ch;lifers, makes the Chyle Thinner, and apt to Dilate caſily in the Heart, and vhen to the Veins, Prepares likewiſe the Venous Blood, now grown Thick, for ſuch Dilatation; This is certain, that it Diſfers ſfrom the Serum, for if a Little of it is gathered in a Spoon, and ſuſfered to Stand, without ſerting it over a Fire, it will Turn to a Jelly, which the Seram vill not do; Some oſ the Lympheducts of the Meſentery paſs only thro' it from other Parts, as ſrom the Liver, &. but Many have their Riſe in it. j IT has many little Soſtiſi Glands, fixed in it's Proper Membrane Covered on each Side by the Two Common ones, and beſet ith Fat, out of which, when Cut, may be Squeezed a Whiti'h Liquor; They are Whiter in Young People than in Old; and in Men Fewer and Smaller than in other Creatures; The Biggeſt is at rhe Riſe or Center of the Meſentery, called by Aſellius, thoo Improperly, the Pancreas, into vhich all the Vena Lacteæ are Inſerted; When theſe Glands grow Schirrous and Hard, or are any ways Obſtructed, ſo that the Chyle cannot be Strained thro them, there fol lows a Fluxus Celiacus, or Chyloſus, upon a Continuance of which, an Atrophy en ſues, and the Party dies Tabid; and perhaps, it is ſaid, from the ſamę Obſtruction, by vhich the Courſe of the Zympha is ſtopt, and the Lympheducts by an. over Exten tion burſt, an Aſcites is partly cauſed. i i ĩ il : :æ TuE Vena Lactea, or Mily Veins, ſo called from the White Colour of the Cliyle vhich they carry, were firſt Diſcovered by Caſpar Aſellius in the Year 1622, upoſ Diſtẽting a Live Dog; They are ſſlender Pellucid Veſiels, Having but a Single Coat, Diſperſed in Great Numbers thro' the Meſentery; Their Riſe is from the Inmoſ Membrane of the Inteſtines, where their Mouths are hid under a kind of a Spongj Ciuſt, or Mucus, thr which, by the Preſſion of the Guts; the Chyle is Strained and Received by the Mouths of theſe Veſſels; From whence they Proceed the Readieſ vay to ſuch Glandules of the Meſentery, as are neareſt to Them, but in their Taſſage many Small ones, uniteing to one another, do commonly grov into onc Large Trunk, namely a Pretty vay, before they Inſinuate themſelves into the Gland, but in their very Entrance into it, or a Little before, this Trunk Separates again into New Branches, More and Smaller than the other, and thus far they are called Ra-icales, or Primi Generis; Out of the Gland there Spring again New Capillary oncs, which by and by Meeting together make one Trunk as before, which, keeping its Courſe tovards the Center of the Meſentery, Enters as many Glands as lie in its way, being Divided into New Branches, juſt before it's Entrance into eãch Gland; but whilſt all the Trunks Bend one vay, they alſo, Meeting with onc another, do in theit Proceſs, ſeveral of them, Grow into one, and at Length all thè Trunks Arrive at the Great or Middle Gland of the Meſentery, call'd Improperly the Paucreas by Aſellius, vhich moſt of them Enter into, but ſome of them paſi over it's Surſace, and preſently aſter, They all Empty themſelves into the Great or Common Receptacle of the Chyle, that lies behind the ſaid Gland; Thoſc that werè Inſcrted into it Riſing out of it in like Manner, as they did before out of the Leſſer Glands; As they Run from one Gland to another, they are called Secundi Generis; and from their having paſcd all the Glands to their opening into the Common Receptacle, they are called Tertii Generis. TuE Common Receptacle and the Ductus Thoracicus were Firſt found out in Horſes, by Bariholomaeus Euſtachius, as Appears by a Book he Writ A4nno 1564, but the true Uſts of them were Firſt aſſigned by Pecquet Anno 1651; It is called the Common lllE Aa a 2 Receptacle Receptacle, becauſc it Receives both the Chyle and Lympha Promiſcuouſly, the Latter of vhich continues to Glide into it, after the Former is all Diſtributed, and to Aſcend by the Ductus Chyliſerus Thoracieus, which therefore might as juſtly be Termed Lymphaticus; It is ſeated under the Celiack Artery and Emulgent Veins, abont the Middle Diſtance between the Kidneys, and the Capſulæ Atrabilariæ, upon the Vertebra of the Loins, for the moſt Part rather towards the Left Side; Pecquet and Caſpas Bartholin Affirm, that tis alſo Situate betwixt the Tendons or Appendices of the Diaphragm, by the Motion whereof it is Preſs'd, and the Contents of it Propelled; It is of a Membranous but Thicker Subſtance in Men than in Brutes, but not ſo Capacious, ſeldom being ſo Large, as to admit one's Finger's End. OUT Of it there Springs a Duct, that preſently Aſcends up into the Thorax, be hind the Deſcending Trunk of the Arteria Magna, where it begins to be called Ductus Thoracicus, which, according to sjlvius, might be more fitly called Spinalis, as it runs along the Inſide of the spina Dorſi; This Duct, having paſò'd the Midriff, Marches upvard under the Great Artery, to about the Fifth or Sixth Vertebra of the Thorax, vhere it Turns a little Aſide from under it to the Left Hand, and ſo underneath the Intercoſial Arteries and Veins, and the Gland Thymus, it Aſcends to the Leſi Subclavian Vein, into whoſe Lover Side it opens, juſt there, where the Leſt Jugula: Vein enters into it on the Upper Side, ſo that their Mouths face one anorher; but it opens not into this Vein with any Large Orifice, but by Six or Seven little Ones, which are Covered in the Cavity of the Subclavian with one Broad Valve, looking towards the Cova from the Shoulder, whereby there is Granted to the Chyle and Lympha a free Paſage out oſ the Ductus Chyliſerus into the Subelavian, but their Return out of the Vein into the Duct is Prevented, as well as that of the Blood Contained in the Subclavian; The Dut ending thus in the Subclavian, the Chyle, which it Conveys, Paſſes with the Blood, Returning by the Cauvs, into the Right Ventricle oſ the Heart; This Duct has many Semilunar Valves, that hinder the Aſcending Chyle and Zympha from Deſcending back again, which Valves ate thus Diſcovered, becauſe the Chyle contained in the Duct may eaſily be Preſſed upwards, but by no means downwards. THE Vena Lacteæ differ from the ordinary Meſaraick Veins; FirstT, In Bigneſ́ ſor the Meſaraicks are Bigger. but the Lacteæ are more in Number; which is thought to be neceſſary, becauſe there muſt be more Chyle Conveyed thro' the Latter for the Nouriſhment of the whole Body, than Blood, thro' ihe Former, Remaining from the Nouriſhment of the Inteſtines only. SECOND, In Colour, the Lacteals being White and Clear, and the Meſaraicks of a Dusky and Blackiſs Complexion. TuirD, In their Inſertion, the one Terminating in the Common Receptacle, and the orher in the Liver. BETWIXT the Lacteals and Lympheducts there is not the ſame Diſtinction, and ſome Queſtion, vhether the ſame Veſſels be not in the Meſentery Common Conduits for both Liquors, the Chyle and the Lmpha; This however is obſerved, that during the Time of Digeſtion, there are no Lymphatick Veſſels to be ſeen in the Meſentery, but it Exhibits an infinite Number of Milky ones; and on the Contrary, after Digeſtion, all the Milky Veins Diſappear, and a prodigious Number of Lymphaticks preſent themſelves to our View. e Lacteals have a pretty many Valves, but not ſo many as the Ductus Thoracicus, and which may be Diſcovered the ſame way, as thoſe of the Latter. THE Way, which the Chyle takes in it's Paſage to the Heart, has been hitherto Deſcribed, but what ſhould be the Reaſon or Cauſc of this Motion is to be Inquired; It is thought not to Procced from the Attraction of the Lacteæ, as if they Sucked up the Chyle out of the Guts, for ſuch Elective Attraction has been a long Time Exploded, but the true Reaſon is Imagined to be the Preſſure of the Guts, whereby the Chyle is Squeezed thro' their Spongy Inner Crut or Coat into the Mouths ol the Lactea; Which Preſſure Proceeds partly from that undulating Contraction of the Guts, that is Performed by their own Fibres, which one may plainly obſervè in Conies opened Alive, and partly from their being heaved to and again by the Muũcles of the Abdomen, and the Diaphragm in Reſpiration; Aſter which the whole Progreſs of the Chyle is ſuppoſed to be made by a Continual Protruſion of ie to the Heart; and the Aſcent of it is reckoned to be aſſiſ*ted by æ Mixture of the Lympha Lympha with it in the Receptacie and the Duẽt; not only becauſe the Chyle is thereby Dilated, but more Eſpecially, becauſe a Motion is Impreſſed upon the Lympha from the Pulſation of the Heart, whereby it is made to Circulate by the Lympheduts, as well as the Blood by the Veins: This is the Account, which the Anatomiſtis give of the Chyle, and the Lympha, and the Paſſage of them to the Heart, and of the Ducts, by which they are Conveyced thither; which we ſnall now moreovet Explain by our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces 5. 2. AND Firſt it is to be Obſerved, that ãs there is an Alimentary Duct from iy ibm i the Oeſophagus down thro' the whole Canal of the Inteſtines to the Rectum, by which 2 7 iu an Expanſive Force is conveyed thro' the Body, of which Force our Aliments prin- smſs cipally Conſiſt, as ſikeiſe the Aoria, ©o to Balance theſe there is likewiſe a Con- ſpæææ tractive Force of the Spinal Marrow Propagated from the Cerebellum, and the Medulla i me, mi oblongata, thiò' the Veriebræ to the 0s Sacrum; And as the Chyle Paſſes from the Ali- ſAom æn mentary Duct tovards the Center of the Meſentery, ſo from thence a Contractive ſu,, mà Force is Diffuled, namely, from the Vertebræ of the Loins, to Meet and Oppoſe, and u!'i Veſus ar Counterpoiſe the Expanſive of the Former; the Contractive Force from the Brain, ſpa- and the Medullary Subſtance Derived ſrom it, Inveſiing the Expanſive of the Chylc, Rã: aà oh and Blood, and Lympha with Coats, and Cementing thoſe Coats together with Mem- b st branes, which Form the Meſentery; And it is not Iniprobable, that the Ribs are only i Protruſions of the ſame Contractive Force from the Spinal Marrow; a Membrane, æ Cartilage, and a Bone differing chieiy in their Degrees of Hardneſ, which ſeems to be Induced upon them from their Lying betwixt the Two Contrary Actions of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of thè Nervous and Sanghineous Syſtems, by which they are Conſtipated and Condenſed in the ſame Manner, às Steel by the Expanſive of the Fire and of the Himiner, and the Contractive of Watet and of the Anvil; and the like may be ſaid of the other Bones. li .. THE Meſcntety ĩs Plain and Simple in its Origin at the Veriebræ, as the Con- u3 i. atractive Force is ſo, but Is aſterwards Diſplayed in ſeveral Wreaths and Folds, àſid ſmſuy i sl Enlatged into a Circumſetence; by it's Exertlng it ſelf againt the Rxpuniie from Luithe Alimentary Duct, and the Clyle: and Blood, and Lyhphi Diſperſed Ih the ſald cl in i Meſentery. lll Figuri, md : B a - x the Reaſon o It is not above a Span from its Center, becauſt the Forces on eath Hand hãve of its Fat, that Degree of their Exertion in their mutual Conteſt ith each other; and it is neãrly iNerus, m Circular for ſhie ſame Reaſon, becauſe Equal Forcès, Atting againſt cach other, muſt ſ3,næ: Produce Equal Lines; and being Propagated from the Riſè oF the Meſentery, thoſe Lines muſt be Rãdius's of a Circle Dtawn from a Centtr. ] IT is Compbſed of TWO Common Membranes, Which are Continued from a Duplicature of the Peritonaum, which has alſo in Part it's Origin from the Veriebræ of the Loins; Berwixt theſe Two it has a Propet Membrane, which is Thicker than cither of the other, becauſe the Bl&òd- Veſſels, the Chy liferous, and Lymphatick, have thei?t Courſe tht it, on which Account the Contractive Force is Gathered in Greatet Quantity about the Expanſive in thoſe Veſels, and the Membrane thereby becomes Thicker; And from hence it obtains the Middle Situation; For the Contractive Force Acting againſt the Expanſive, firſt Inveſts the Fluids with Coats, then Strengthens and Unites fhem by Membranes and Glands, which Intercede the Veſſels; and laſily, Encompaſſes the Proper Membrane vith one on each Side, that it may ſufficiently Encloſe the Expanſive Force, againſt which it Oppoſes it ſelf, by Which the Expaiſivè is Obliged and Determined to a Circulation. IT is ſtuſffed with Fat betwixt i's Membranes, which Ariſcs, as has been ſaid, from a Mixture of the Expanſive and Contractive in their Mutual Conteſt, but in Lean Perſons, in Human Embryos, and in Dogs and Cats, and ſuch like Animals, there is little of it, becauſe the Contractive is ſo far Prevalent over the Expanſive, that therè is not a due Mixture of Them; Which is Evident from the Account we gave beforè of Lean Perſons and of a Fætus; ahd Dogs and Cats have from their Fierctneſ”s or the Prevalence of the Nervous Syſiem, and the Defcct of the Muſcular and Sanguineous an Exceſs of the Contractive. TnE Nerves, as Containing a Contractive Force, diſperſe Themſelves in vaſt Numbers thio' the Meſentery, in order to aſſiſt to this Eſfect of Forming theſe Membianes by their Fibres every where Detach'd to Encounter the Expanſive of the Blood L and . E ll - and Alimentary Fluids, as well as that alſo of the Bile, which here Mixes with thenr; Hence thoſe Two Notable Plexuss are made, one of vhich is Compared to the Sun amongſt the Planets, and hence they accompany the Sanguiferous Veſels in their whole Proceſs, and Climb upon. and Twiſt about Them by theit Oppoſition againſt and Counter-Action to Them; And hence laſtly ĩt is not Improbable, that there are other Nerves, according to Spigelius, beſides the Meſenterick, &hich Spring from the Medulla Spinalis, between the Firſt, Second, Third, and Fourth ertebræ of the Loins, which Inue from thence to Curb and Reſiſt the Expanſive in Conjunction with the Foregoing. : s. 4. THE Lymphcducts ſeem to carry a Water, which bears the ſame Proportion of Force to the Animal Syſtem, as Common Warer does to the Mundane, that is, ĩt is in a kind of Middle Proportion betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive; Common Woater is not ſo Contractive, as Salts, Froſt, or Metals, nor ſo Expanſive, as Spirits, Heat, or Fire, but is capable of being eaſily Cemented into Ice, or Reſolved into Vapours, by the Application of one or the other; and conſequently may be Converted in Cold Places, as in Vaults, into a Nutrition for Stones, and in Hotter into one for Plants and Vegetables; Thus likewiſe the Animal Lympha appears to be an Intermediate Fluid betwixt the Nervous and Sanguincous Forces, that is, the Con tractive and Expanſive ones, and thereſore is Expanſive in Compariſon with the Contractive Force, and Contractive, if Compared with the Expanſive; But it is more Spirituous, and has a Greater Expanſive Force than Common Water upon Two Accounts. FirsT, Becauſe all the Fluid and Solid Aliments we take in, Excepting Water, are furniſY‘d with a Moiſture or Watry Humour, but Raiſed into a Degree oſ the Expanſive by Heat or Fermentation, even before they are Received into the Mouth or Stomach, after which that Spirituous or Expanſive Force is again in ſome Meaſure Increaſcd. SECOND, Becauſe the Contractive Forces of the Body themſelves, as the Nervous Juice, Membranes, Cartilages, and even Bones, are Temper'd with a Greater Degree of the Expanſive, by the Continual Circulation of Warm and Expanſive Fluids amongſt them, than the Contractive Forces in the Mundane Syſtem; and therefore the Lympha of the one will be more Spirituous and Expanſive than the mere Water of the other, and this Notion of it will Account for all the Phænomenons of theſc Lymphatickss. : S. 5. THEY are Inveſted with a very Thin Membrane, or Coat, whereas the Veins are vith a much Thicker, and the Arteries with a Double one; Becauſe the Zympha has a much leſs Expanſive Force than the Venal Blood, and ſtill Leſs than the Arterial, and thereſore the Contractive Force from the Nervous Fluid is leſs Aſſembled about the Former, than the Two Latter, and a leſs Quantity ſerves to Incloſe, in order to Balance and Poiſe it: They are Long and Hollow like a Vein for the ſame Reaſon, which was given for the Veins being ſo; Becauſe the Expanſive Force being hindred ſfrom Dilateing it ſelf by the Contractive, which Inveſts it, muſt Exert it ſelf forvards and Form the Cavity of a Canal: They are Small; Becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Lympha is very Minute in Compariſon with the Blood, and thereſore Enlarges it ſelf to a ſmaller Compaſs in it's Ducts, than the other; and are Knotty, becauſe the Contractive Force frequently Prevails againſt the Weakneſs of the Expanſive; to which Cauſe likewiſe it's Valves may be Attributed, which are only an Intruſion of the Contractive Force into the very Courſe and Conduit of the Expanſive, and which muſt be owing to the Prevalence of the Former, and to the Inability oſ the Laſt to Reſiſt it, that is to the Weakneſs of it: Theſe Valves open towards the Common Receptacle, and ſhut the Contrary way; Becauſe tho' the Contractive Force is ſtrong enough to Interrupt the Current of the Lmpha at certain Intervals, yet the Expanſive Force of the Lympha is not ſo Languid, às to be Entirely Obſtructed by ir, but by Preſſing forwards ſtill Removes and Opens the Obſtruction; But iſ it is Endeavoured to be forc'd back again, the Valves cloſe; becauſe ſuch an Impreſſion is Contrary to the Expanſive Force of the Lympha Forwards, vhich thercſore becomes Contractive, and joins with the Contractive of the Valves, by which they both unite againſt the Violence Induced upon them; or, which is the ſame in Efcũt, the Expanſive Force of the Lynpha, which Exerted it ſelf Forvards, having now a Contrary Determination Impreſt, it's Force is Loſt and Deſor an and therefore incapable of opening the Valve Backwards, or Surmounting the Contractive Force, vhich before it was ſuſficient to do. S. 6. THEY, according to Malpighius, Riſe from Glands, and, according to Steno, uiy ibe LymRiſe from them or are Inſerted in them, but neither of them Determine, what thoſe thatic q ihe Glands are, from whence they have their Origin; tho' it ſeems to be Maniſeſt, that eſtmp- i they Begin, as the Lacteals do, from the Alimentary Duct or the Canal of the In- ſrom ili Canal teſtines, and which is expreſly Aſirmed by other Anatomiſis, which is the Reaſon,  ſſ ſntſis that ſometimes we find the very Lacteals filled with Lympha, which could not be, if it vere not Derived into them ſrom the ſaid Alimentary Duct; Beſides it is Natural for us to Think, that the Primary Lmpha, beforc it Arrives at any Glands, is made from the Fitſt Concoction and Leaſt Alteration of our Food, and that it is the Moiſture of it Separated from the Chyle, and Elevated into a Small Degree of the Expanſive by it's Paſſage thro' the Stomach to the Yejunum. 5. 7. AND hence that Remarkable Phænomenon of Tauvry Admits of a Solution, hy, durin that, during Digeſtion, the Lacteals appear in the Meſentery in Great Numbers, after surmm which they Vanii, and the Lymphaticks Fill and Riſe in their Stead; Which muſt ã rbæ M/ſmbe oving to the Greater Expanſive Force of the Chyle, and a Leſſer Degree of it in to, and afiun the Lympha, by which the one Repells the other and Enters Firſt the Meſaraick 7.uſſ" Veſſeſs; and when it has thus opened a Paſſage, to it ſelf, to the Common Receptacle, the Zympha is leſt to Succeed it by a Slower and Heavier Expanſive; And for the ſame Reaſon it continues to Glide into the Common Receptacle, and to Aſcend in the Ductus Thoracicus, after the Chyle has Relinquiſd it. 5. 3. THESE Lymphaticks Tend from their Firſt Origin in the Glandules, or m Small Knots, of the Inteſtines, which it is Probable are Formed by a Contractive u: rForce to Curb and Reſi*t the Greater Expanſive of the Chyle and the Leſſer of from ibeir Fuſ the Lympha, to other Glands, which likewiſe are ſeveral Congeries and Aſſem- &iiin 1o oriu blages of the Conttactive Force to oppoſe the Expanſive of the ſame Chyle and æĩy ibe Griar Iympha, and hich are Greater, as we Approach nearer to the Center of the ſ ꝗLan i p Contractive; and therefore the Greateſt Gland is in the Center of the Meſentery, ib: auſmæ, and Leſs, as ve Come neater to the Center of the Expanſive, and conſequently, and ihe ſmalo the ſmalleſt Glands are in the Coats of the Inteſtines; which alſo furniſes us with n—— a Reaſon, vhy the Meſentery is Enlarged from a Center to a Circumference, B at the one the Contractive Force moſt Prevails, and at the other the Exive. ms 9. HENCE alſo it is, that the Chyle and the Lympha paſs thro' the ſmall Glands _0 of the Inteſtines, notwithſtanding theit Obſtruction, becauſe theit Contractive Force jhuii: a is Inconſiderable in Compariſon vith the Expanſive of the other; but when the ſrom ikir on Lymphaticks in their Progreſs towards the Common Receptacle Arrive at any Sub- brde uul ſequent Glands, they do not Paſs thr them, but are Diſperſed on their Surface, ſac of ibe sui becauſe the Contractive Force of the Latter is too Great to be Surmounted by the ſe— Former; On the Contrary, the Lacteals paſs thro' the ſame Glands, the Expanſive ibn im. Force of the Chyle, which they Contain, being Greater than that of the Zympha but yet they are always Diſperſed into ſeveral Small Channels from a Larger Duct, before they enter the Glands, by Reaſon of the ſame Oppoſition from the Contractive Force of them, and from thoſe Small Channels unite again into one Duct, aſter their Paſſage thro the Glands, by the Property in Nature before Explained of Similar Forces Aſſembling to each other, by which alſo ſeveral Branches unite into one Trunk before their Entrance into the Glands; Laſtly for the ſame Reaſon, when all the Trunks of the Lacteals Approach to the Pancreas Aſellii, or Middle Gland of the Meſentery. moſt of them Enter into it by the ſame Superiority of the Expanſive Force, but ſome are Repelled by the Contractive Force of the Gland, which Force is here the Greateſt, and are made to Climb upon it's Surface; And all of them preſently after unite in the Common Receptacle by the ſame Property, Quality, or Affection in Nature, of Similar Forces Attracting each Other, by which They Aſſemble together, and Coaleſce into one. S. 10. I muſt be farther Obſerved, that in the Paſſage of the Chyle and Zympyha Hæ ih chle from the Inteſtines to the Common Receptacle, their Forces are Altered by this Re- ſ⸗ Lumiſa pulſion from the Glands, and their Re-union afterwards, for tho' there dos not ſeem ilur Paſu: to be any Percolation of the Chyle or Lympha thio' them, yet their Expanſive Forces ſ//m ilæ h. ar ĩeſtines to 1le ie Changed by the Contractive oſ the Glands, and very Probably Diminiſied by them, ſo that Creeping up by the Thoracick Duct to the Subelavian, they do not Enter that Vein in one Large Orifice, but in Six or Seven Little ones, the Expanſive of the Venal Blood in ſome Meaſure Repelling the Chyle and Lmpha, which is now almoſt of a Contractive Nature, as when it was of a more Expanſive, the Glands, which are of a Contractive, had done; For this Reaſon allo the Ducius Thoracicus is carryd up on the Side of the Great Artery, the Expanſive oſ it's Fluids being Weak, and wanting to be Animated and Supported by the Cheriſhing Forco of ſo Poverſul a Neizhbour: And hence likewiſe it was neceſſary, that the Bile, which is Hot and Expanſive, ould be conveyed to theſe Parts, to Act againſt and Poiſe the ſtrong Contractive, which was Propagated from the Verielræ of the Loins, and the Center oſ the Meſcntery; vith theſe Forces, namely, the Languid Expanſive of the Chyle, the Lynpha, and the Venal Blood, and the more Exalted of the Bile, the Entrance is made into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, which thereſore Mixing with the Blood there, which is ſtill of a more Expanſive Force, muſt Cauſe an High Degree of Accenſion, and Contribute to the Vaſt Pulſation in it, which we ſhall aſterwards conſider. s. 11. THIs alſo gives an Account, why the Lacteals and Lymphaticks arc either Inſerted into the Common Receptacle, or the Thoracick Duct, or into Veins; For the Expanſive Force of the Blood in the Arteries is too Great to admit of a Force in the Lacteals and Lymphaticks, which, by the Smallneſ of it's Expanſive, has in Compariſon almoſt the Nature of a Contractive, and the Contractive Force in the Nerves is Repulſive of the Expanſive of the ſame Lymphaticks and Lactcals; On the Contrary, that Lacteals may convey their Fluids into Lacteals, or Lymphaticks into Lymphaticks, is Evident, by that Law of Nature, we before Mentioned, by which Similar Forces Aſlemble to each other; Thus alſo Lymphaticks may Transſer their Juices into Lacteals, and Both their ſeveral Liquids into Veins, becauſe they have all a low Degree of the Expanſive, and nearly Approach to one another in their Diſtinct and Particular Forces. 5. 12. WHAT this Lympha is we have already Explained, that it ſeems to be Water Exalted into a ſmall Degree of the Expanſive in the Stomach and Inteſtines, and which well Enough ſuits with the Opinions of Bariholin, Gliſſon, Diemerbroect, and Segerus Concerning it, which were beſore Recounted; And that by Standing, without Heating it, it Turns to a Jelly, which Serum will not do, is owing to the Low Expanſive oſ the Lympha, being ſubdued by the Small Contractive oſ the Air, from vhence it Grows into a Conſiſtence; Serum on the Contrary is of too Heavy and Phlegmatick a Nature, as Common Water likewiſc is, to be thus Affected, Conſtipated, or Coagulated by the Gentle Force oſ the ſame Contractive, which yet ſubmits to a more Violent one, as that oſ Froſt and Extreme Cold; That is, Common Air has the ſame Influence to Reduce the Animal Lympha to a Contractive, which a Frozen one has to Impreſs it on Urine and Common Water; which ſicws the one is a more Fine and Delicate Fluid, and the other a more Lumpih and Groũs: As for the Lympheducts, which Paſs from the Liver throo the Meſentery,tis not Impoſſible, but ſome of the Meſaraick Veins may Convey a Lympha in them to it, and by an Aſſcmblage of Lympha from other Parts it may bc Remanded back to the Meſcntery to Attend and Balance the Expanſive Force in the Bilious Veſels. S. 13. THE Reaſon of the ſeveral Glands in the Meſentery, and of that in the Center of it, called Pancreas Aſellii, ve have beſore Aſſigned: Why they are Whitei in Young Perſons than in Old, Proceeds from the Chyle being ſo, with which they are Tinged, and that, ſrom the Expanſive Force oſ the Chyle being Greater in the one than the other, as all the Forces of the Animal Syſtem are; Theſe Glands arc likewiſc Fewer and Smaller in Men than in Brutes, becauſe upon the Account of the Continual Aliment taken in by the Latter, which is of an Expanſive Force, and ⸗ Continual Digeſtion of it in the Stomach and the ſirſt Inteſiines, the Expanſive Force from the Alimentary Canal is Leſs in Men than in Brutes; and conſequently the Contractive Force ſrom the Ferielræ of the Loins, and the Center of the Meſen tery, muſt be Greater to Oppoſe and Balance the Expanſive, and thereſore the Gland: in the Meſentery muſt be more Numerous and Greater in the Latter than in the TFormer, in Brutes than in Men. . 15. ALI S. 14. ALL the Venæ Lacteæ are Inſerted into the Pancreas Aſellii; Becauſe the whole Expanſive Force of the one is Directed againſt and Unites to Oppoſe and Surmount the Contractive of the other, which is there the Greateſt: And when theſe Glands grov Schirrous and Hard, or are Obſtructed, That is, vhen the Contractive of them is too Great to be overcome by the Expanſive of the Chyle, it cannot be Conveyed into the Blood for a ſupply of it; the Blood cannot be Furniſhed to the ſeveral Patts of the Animal Syſtem for their Nouriſhment, and by conſequence, an Atrophy muſt Enſue, and the Perſon die Tabid; and by a like Obſiruction of the L mpha, an Aſcites is probably Cauſed. s. 15. THE Common Receptacle is Membranous, that is, of a Contractive Force; becauſe the Chyle and Lympha are oſ an Expanſive, which therefore it Surrounds and Incloſes; It is Thicker in Men than in Brutes, but not ſo Capacious, becauſe the Contractive and the Nervous Force is Greater in the Former, and the Alimentary and Expanſive in the Latter. s. 16. THE Meſaraick Veins are Bigger, and the Lacteals more Numerous and Smaller, not for the Reaſon above Aſſigned, . 1. ſince the Largeneſs of the one may be Compenſated by the Number of the other, but becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Venal Blood, tho' Leſs than that of the Arterial, ĩs Greater than that of the Chyle; from whence the Cavity of the Meſaraick Veins is Dilated to a Larger Circumſerence than that of the Lacteals, and the Coats or the Contractive Forces, which Encompaſs them, are Greater and Stronger; The Veins are Fewer, becauſe the Expanſive Force, which they carry, is Stronger and therefore more United, that of the Lactcals Weaker, and therefore more Diſperſed by the Contractive. 5. 17. THE Chyle alſo is of a White Colour, and the Blood of a Red, becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Firſt is Leſs, than that of the Laſt; It being known, that Rays of a Red Colour are the Leaſt Refrangible, that is have the Greateſt Expanſive Force, and thoſe of a White one Proceed from a Mixture of all the Different Degrees of the Expanſive Forces, as the Chyle may be juſtly Imagined to do. 5. 18. LasTLY, As to the Motion of the Chyle and L;mpha, it is ſuppoſcd to be by a Preſſure of the Guts, and afterwards by a Continual Protruſion of thoſe Fluids to the Heart; Againſt which there is this Objection, that the Contraction or Preſſure of the Guts cannot be ſo Great, as to bring the Sides of them together, without which, it is not to be Conceived, how ſo Thin a Fluid, as the Chyle and Lympha, ſnould be Forced into the Small Mouths of the Lacteals of the Meſentery, by a mere Periſtaltick or Vermicular Motion of the Guts, which is all the Contraction, they own or acknovledge: Beſides, afterwards, in the Lymphaticks and Lacteals, theſc Fluids cannot be Promoted or Protruded to the Heart by an Impreſt Force from the Inteſtines, for the Reaſon we have given before, becauſe by a Protruſion only they cannot be Forced back again, which the Tender Valves, in ſuch ſmall Veſſels, would certainly admit of, if there were not ſomething in the Real Forces of the Liquids and Solids, vhich Contradicted and Oppoſed it. FARTHER, Tho' this might be Allowed, and that the Valves opened towards the Common Receptacle, and ſhut the Contrary way, yet it cannot caſily be Imagined, how the Chyle and Zympha ſhiould be Thruſt upwards thr the Thoracick Duct by a Protruſive Force only; Since, according to this Account, the Gravitation oſ the Fluids backwards might be Superior, or Equal, to any Propulſion of them forwards, from whence there vould be an entire Obſtruction to the Circulation of them. ON the Contrary, we ſay, againſt which there are nonc of theſe Difficulties, that the Expanſive Force of the Chyle and Lympha Tends towards the Expanſive Force of the Blood in the Heart, by that Law of Nature, which we have often Mentioned, of Similar Forces Aſſlembling to each other; but the Contractive Force from the Vertebræ of the Loins coming in to Balance this Expanſive, theſe Fluids do not Proceed immediately to the Heart, but are carryd thro' the Meſentery, the Receptacle, and Thoracick Duct, as before Explained. . Whar the Chyle and Lympha do not Tend tovards the Liver, which we have ſaid has a Great Degree of the Expanſive, but towards the Heart, is for TWo Reaſons. FinsT, Becauſe the Courſe of both of them is Determined towards the Heart, ol the Red Beating Speck in the EZmbryo, before the Liver is Formed, which is not done till aſter the Joining of the Placenia, or Womb-Liver, to the Uerus. B b b SECOND SECOND, Becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Bile is ſo Great, that it Repells the Smaller one of the Chyle and Lympha, and Urges it towards the Receptacle and Thoracick Duct, and from thence to the Subelavian and the Heart: And this is the Reaſon, wherefore the Chyle cannot be Forced into the Lacteals by a mere Protruſion, according to Dr. Drate; Becauſe in a Dead Subiect the Expanſive Force of it is Loſt, and the Tendency of it to a Similar Force in the Venal Blood Ceaſcs, and cannot be Repaired by any Protruſion. C H AP. VII Concerning the Thorax, Diaphragm, Pleura, and Mediaſtinum. 5. I. HE next Part to the Abdomen, which is Examined in an Human Diſſection, is the Thorax or Breat; Which is Bounded above by the Claviculæ or Channel Bones, below by the Diaphragm or Midriſf, which ſeparates it from the Abdomen, in the Fore-part by the Breaſt-bone and Cartilages, in the Sides by the Ribs, and behind by the Veriebræ of the Back; It's Figure is in a Manner Oval, ſomewhat Flat before and behind, whereas in Beaſts it is ſomewhat Sharp; It's proper Containing Parts are either External, as the Breaſts, the Muſcles, and the Bones, or Internal, as the Pleura, the Mediaſtinum, and Diaphragm. As to the Breaſs, they have Arteries, Veins, Nerves, and Lymphaticks, in Common vith other Parts of the Body, which it is not neceſſary here Particularly to Deſcribe and Diſtinguiſi; only that the Arteries and Veins are Branches of the Subclavian and Intercoſtal, and that the Nerves are from the Verteoral Pairs, and from the Sixth Pair of the Brain; And from the Quantity oſf Fat in them Aralpighius Collects there are Ductus Adipoſi Diſperſed in their Subſtance; This may be ſaid, that they conſit of many Glandulous Bodies of a Diſferent Bignels, of which there is one Bigger than the Reſt, juſt under the Papilla, or Nipple, which is of an Exquiſite Senſe, Spongy, Covered with a Thin Skin, and full of Little Holes; It is made oſ Two Orders of Fibres, the Smalleſt make a Fine Net-work within the Larger Spaces of the Net-work of the Larger Fibres; The Spaces betwixt the Glands are ſilled up with Fat, and there are Abundance of Veſſcls that zo from one to another, and are all Incloſcd by the Membrana Carnoſa; Theſe Glands ſeparate the Milk or Chyle ſrom the Blood, Iſſueing out of the Leſt Ventricle ofthe Heart, to which the Chyle is not yet Aſſimilated, and which is driven hither along the Thoracick Arteries, unleſs we allow the ſena Lacteæ to come hither, which Opinion is not thought Probable; And in the Papilla all the Tubi Loctiſeri End; The Areola is a Small Circle, which Surrounds the Papilla, hich in Virgins is Pale and Knotty, in thoſe that are with Child, or give Suck, Brown, and in Old Women Black, as the Papilla is Red in Virgins, Livid in thoſe that give Suck, and in Old Women Blackiſ; The Tubuli Lactiſeri are Seven or Eight, or more Small Pipes, which have ſeveral Croſs Canals, by which they Communicate vith one another, and they grow Smaller, and Smaller, to theit Extremities in the Parilla; The Milk is conveyed to them from the Arteries, which Terminate in the Glands, that ſeparate the Chyle from the Blood brought thither, as was beſore ſaid; which Chyle Runs into the Tuelbuli Lactiſeri, upon the Suction ol the Child: As to the other External Containing Parts of the Ereaſts, namely, the Bones and Muſcles;, we ſhall Leave them, with the Anatomiſts, to be Diſcourſed of Diſtinctly and Apart ſrom the Preſent Argument. s. 2. THAT Which is here to be Conſidered is, what Account can be given of theſc Parts, and the Miſk, which they contain, from the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; Some have Thought, that the Chyle may paſs Directly to the Breaſt by Lacteals from the Stomach, or the Common Receptacle, or the Ductu. Thoracicus, or from the Womb; but Diemerbrece and Others, vho are of this Opinion are Confuted by Steno, Dr. Wharton, and Dr. Needham ; and Taury has ſiewn, tha all the Chyle is Tranſmitted thro the Subclavian Vein, both by Experiments fron Dr. Lower, and by his Ovn, which Conſirm them: Anatomiſis thercſore have Generally gone into the Sentiments beſore Explained, that the Chyle is Separated by the Glands i m n the Mammaæ or Breaſts, from the Blood conveyed to them by the Mammary or Thoracick Arteries; But how this ſould be is as little Intelligible as the other; Since the Chyle is ſuppoſed to be Transformed into Blood in the Heart, and how it ould be Separated from it by the Glands, when it is no longer in it, but is Changed into another Subſtance, is not to be Conceived; To Say, that the Chyle is not perſectly Aſſimilated into Blood, as Dr. Gibſon, and Dr. Ieill, or, To Say, as Tauvry, that the Blood is Compounded of all Particles, of Milky, of Bilious, Utrinous, &e. is To Say indeed, but not To Prove or Evince the Aſertion. Ir is more Probable therefore, that as the Chyle is made in the Stomach, and the Firſt Inteſtines, the Bile in the Liver, the Blood in the Heart, and the Nervous Fluid in the Brain, ſo that the Milk is in the Breaſis, and that it Differs from the Chyle, tho' not much in Colour, yet in Quality and Subſtance; And therefore Dr. Wharton's Argument is of no Force againſt Milk being made from the Blood; Since according to him, if Chyle is Firſt Excocted into Blood, and then made into Chyle or Milk, Nature vould Act in Vain and Fruſtrate her ovn Work: Whereas we Afſirm, that Chyle is Effected and Produced from the Digeſtion of the Aliment, but Milk from a Digeſtion of the Blood in the Glands, and the Fat of the Breaſis, and that as the Cauſcs, ſo the Fluids Formed and Conſtitured from them, are Different. Tnus, tho' our Aliment is Red, or Green, or Yellow, or of any other Colour, it is Reduced to a White Chyle, and is Reſembled in it's Conſiſtence and Colour to Barley-Broth; And by the ſame or the like Operations in the Animal Syſtem, it is not Inconceivable, that Blood may be Reduc'd to a Milk; which is very Different from the Former Fluid, ſince no one ever Imagined, that Water-Gruel could by any Art be Transformed into thoſe Coagulums, of which Milk is known to be Capable by every Days Experience; Beſides that the Conſiſtence of the one is much Greater than that of the other. Whaar Confirms this is, that Malpighius likewiſe is of Opinion, that the Buttery Part of the Milk Iſues from the Fat of the Breaſts, and Dr. Drate Aſſerts, that in all Milk the Butter and Oil of it is a Great Part, and that it ſeems to conſiſt ol Nothing but Water and Oil united by the Artifice of Nature, perhaps by the Intervention of Salts, with which Milk however Sweet abounds, and he tells us, that by the Mediation of Salts, Water and Oll may be ſo Mixed, as very much to Reſemble Milk, tho we cannot come up to the Mechaniſm of it, and Make it: In Anſwer to Malpighius, Dr. Gibſon Objects, in the ſame way as Dr. Wharton beſore, that it is Improbable, that Nature ſhould Separate the Oily or Fatty Particles of the Chyle, to the End they may be Mixt with the ſame again; Which Objection ſuppoſes Two Things, vhich ve Deny; Firſt, That Chyle and Milk are the ſame; And Second, That Fat is made from Chyle; Since we have given an Account how Fat is Formed before, and that it has as much it's Peculiar Production from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, as Chyle it ſelf has; And we may as juſtly Affirm, that Chyle is made from Fat, as this from the other; Beſides which, there is no one ever Dream'd, that Barley-Broth or Water-Gruel, to which Chyle is Compared, Contained much Oil or Butter in it. WEe cannot therefore but Think, that Milk is made by the Expanſive Force of the Blood Mixing with that of the Fat, which is of a Lower Degree, and with the Nervous Juice, which is of a Contractive one; The Contractive Force gives it it's Salis, and the Expanſive it's Sweetneſs and Oil, and there is Apparently a Lympha or Water, in which the Red Globuli of the Blood Swim, beſides that which is Imported by the Lympheducts obſerved by Dr. Wharton ; From whence there will be all the Ingredients, which Dr. Drate requires to make a Milk of, and theſe are all worked up together by the Animal Force, which he calls, the Artifice of Nature, that is, by theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces Acting amongſt cach other in the Animal Syſtem, which cannot be by any Methods Imitatcd exactly out of it; As the Animal Oil or Lympha cannot be Repreſented by a Vegetative one and common Water, the Two Former having a Peculiar and a Greater Degree of the Expanſive Force than the Latter, and ſuch a Degree, as cannot be Induced upon them, but by the Digeſlions and Circulations, and other Motions, in the Animal Frame. B b b A As to the Nervous Juice or Fluid, which we take to be, not any Imaginary Suerus, but of the ſame Kind and Subſtance with the Brain, Dr. Wharton concurrs with us in Attributcing a Share to it in the Formation of Milk, and the Objection which is made againſt it by Dr. Gibſon, we ſhall here conſider, namel;, the Weakneſs, which it muſt nceds Induce upon the Mother, to have ſo much oſ it Drained avay by Suction, which is allo a Reaſon alledged againſt the Blood's being Exhauſted in the ſame Manner; But is not the Anſwer caſy, that the ſame Objeclion vou'd lie againſt the Chyle? Since the Blood and the Nervons Fluid would be Deſtauded of ſo much Chyle, as would be Requiſite to ſupply their Syſtems; And it is not Matcrial, whether we take ſuch a certain Quantity of Blood and Spirits away, which will be Replac'd by the ſuccecding Chyle, or whether we take ſuch a certain Quantity oſ Chyle avay, vhich was by Nature deſtined to Replace the Expence oſ Them. IF to this Doctrine it is Oppoſed, that thereſore, if This were True, Milk ſiould be Produced by the Adipoſe Membrane, and by the Omentum; As to the Firſt, it is a Conſirmation of what we have ſaid, that a Kind oſ Milk is Produced by it; ſince the Reticulum Mucoſum or Parenchyma, which lies betwixt the Curis and Cuticula, is a White Milk or Slime, which is Scraped off from the Inner Side of the Cuticula, when Raiſed from the Cutis; And as ſor the Laſt, it has been ſiewn, that the Fat oſ the Omentum is not oſ an Olly and Expanſive, but in ſome Degree of a Contractive Nature, by it's Brittlencſs, and it's Proneſs to be Congealed; There is yet a Greater Quantity of Milk in the Breaſts than under the Cuticula, becauſe there is a Greater Inſlux of Blood, and a Greater Proportion oſ Fat in Them. 5. 3. HENCE alſo the Breaſts Swell about the Time of Puberty, and the Eruption of the Menſes; Becauſe we have ſaid the Expanſive and Sanguincous Syſtem Prevails moſt in the Female Sex, and the Nervous and Contractive in Men; and from the Faetus to Puberty there being a Conteſt betwixt the Expanſive and Contra tive Forces in Women, the Expanſive now becomes Predominant, and the Blood Diſcharges it ſelf by the Hypoaſtrick Arteries in the Monthly Profluvia, and by the Thoracick or Mammary into the Breaſts, where by a Mixture with the Nervous and Contractive Juice it is Elaborated into Fat, as before Explained, in order to Form Milk upon Attracting ſtill a Greater Quantity of Blood that way by Suction; On the Contrary this Phænomenon is not obſervable in Men, there is no Swelling of the Breaſts, nor no Eſſlux of the aſenſes, becauſe the Contractive Force is moſt Prevailing in Them; of which Kind is the Semen, and which is Acknowledged by Borellus to be of the Nature and Subſtance of the Brain, and is Agrecable to what we before Alledged concerning it; and the Diſcharge oſ it is as much an Indication of the Contractive Force being Superior in Men, as that of the Menſes is of a Superior Expanſive in Women: And as ve have all along ſicwn, that to Preſerve the Animal Syſtem there muſt be a Kind of æquilibrium betwixt thoſe Two Forces, ſo from hence ve are ſarther Confirmed in that Opinion, becauſe it is neceſſary even to the Procreation oſ it, that is, a due Mixture of the Expanſive with the Contractive is ſo. s 4. LuT to go on vith the Phænomenons of the Aſammæ or Breaſts; This gives a Solution oſ the Difſficulty, which has been thought Impoſſible to be Explained, namely, why the Milk flows into the Breaſts at certain Times only: Becauſe upon Puberty, and by an Exceſs of the Expanſive Force at that Age, the Blood is Derived into thoſe Parts, where there is the leaſt Obſtruction to it, and conſcquently, where there ĩs a Paſage open to it out of the Body, as by the Hypogaſtricks and the Papillæ; by the Former of vhich it is Diſcharged, but meeting with a Nervous or Contractive Force in the Latter, and in the A7ammsæ, together with the Lympheducts, it is ſoſtened into Fat and Oĩl and there Remains; Aſterwards upon Suction, there being more Blood dravn that way from the Mammary or Thoracick Arteries, it is Transformed into Milk by a Mixture vith the Oil, Lynpha, and the Nervous Fluid, as ve have already ſhiewn and Evinced. 5. 5. IN Old Women, as the Expanſive Force Abates, and as the Adammæ by the Contractive Force, upon a Deficiency oſ the Expanſive, Harden into Glands and Veſtls, that is, as the Blood, and Oll or Fat, Declines, the Milk is no farther Produced; And if Diemerbroect's Inſtances are True, Vhich may be much Queſtioned, and may be only the Prate and Tattle of mere Old Women, that Milk has been ſupplied . ſrom from them, it muſt be, upon the Account, that their A7ammæ have ſtill Retained their Fat or Oil, and that there has bcen a plentiful Influx of Blood into them; vwhich will be found to be as Rare, as Men preſerving their Senſes and Reaſon in their ſull Force and Vigour to Fourſcore, or an Hundred Certainly it cannot Prozecd ſrom Imagination, becauſe almoſt evety Old Man or Old Woman might, upon ſuch a Suppoſition, be Capable of giving Suck to Infants, whereas ve havt only Two Examples mentioned by him, the one of the Former, and the other oſ the Latter. As to the Glands thereſore, they are not, as Anatomiſts Imagine, to ſtrain the Chyle ſrom the Blood, but having a Contraclive Force, which we Explained before in the Glands of the Meſentery, they Repreſy and Reſtrain the Expanſive of the Blood, and Ering it to a Temper nearer to Milk, which is Perfected, by the Oil and Lmpha in the Ireaſs, into that Balſamick Fluid, which is ſo neceſſary to the Conſcrvarion oſ the Inſant; and which by the Compoſition, ve have Named, muſt hbe very well and rightly Adapted to that Purpoſc; that is, to the Maintining the Riling æquiliLrium oſ Forces in the Child, without any Detriment or Prejudice to Them. 5. 6. THis Account of the Glands gives us allo a Reaſon, why the Largeſt is i5/ibe Larzſituate under the Papilla, which the Preſent Anatomy cammot do; For iſ the Glands òſu in⸗ are 10 be Conſidered only as Strainers oſ the Chyle from the Blood, the Largeſt ,ih pi hn vould not be Placed there, where all the Milk in the Breaſis is already made, andIæ⸗ 20 where there is no farther occalion for a Percolation of ir; On the other Hand, às ſaũ ſuri, anà ve heved in the Meſentery, the Glands muſt be the Greareſt, where the Contractive /he Arela æ Force was the Greateſt from the Vertebræ of the Loins, and where the Expanſive was Formii. the Leaſt from the Alimentary Duct, or Canal, ſo here the Gland under the Papilla muſt be the Greateſt, becauſe the Contractive Force of the Nervous Juice, and L;mpha, is the Greateſt by the Extreme Senſibleneſs of thoſe Parts, and the Expaniſive Forcẽ of the Blood is the Leaſt, as Mixing with the Fat and Oil of the Breaſts, and being oppoſed thro' the Whole of them by thoſe Contractive Forces; and the Taluli Lactiſeri grow Smaller and Smaller to their Extremities in the Papilla upon the Increaſe of the ſaid Contractive, and Diminution f the ſaid Expanſive Forces; Laſtly, As there is ſome Llood Wreſtles thro' all this Oppoſition, it's Expanſive Force is thereby Augmented and Heightened, as we before ſaid of the Blood, which paſſed thro' the Liquor oſ the Amnion to the Liver of the Fætus; This Expanſive Force thereſore Exerts and Diſplays it ſelf beyond the Breaſt, by which the Papilla is Formed, and from the Vivacity and Livelineſs of it, the Red Colour Enſues, which upon a Decay of the Expanſive, Firſt Turns to a Livid, and Then to a Blackiſh; Th] Areola ſeems only to be io many ſmall Efforts of the Expanſive towards the Raiſing ſcveral other Papillæ round ihe Large one, but the Expanſive being too Weak there is nothing more Produced than certain little White Knots or Protuberances in the Skin, and the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood, which Thiuſt them out, Languiiing by Age, they become ſomething like the Papilla, Firſt Brown and Then Black, as before Recounted. 5.7. HavING laid the Cavity of the Thorax Open, the Diaphragm, Pleura, Media- The Acouni ſliuum, Feart, and Lungs, Appear. ſmpe Tnu Diaphragm or Midriſf Divides the Trunk of the Body into Two Ventricles, n, Meſiſi the Aldomen and Thorax; It is Exceeding Nervous, and, thr the Great Conſent it nm, /u ĩl has with the Brain, when Enflamed or Diſtempered Affcũts the Mind; It is almoſt mb i RRound, Excepting it's TWo Appendages, whereby it is Faſtencd to the Vertebræ of Seœ the Pla the Back and Loins; It is Seated Tranſverſely or Acroſs the Body, only Slopeing a ſrà abon little Dackwards, and is as Broad as the Widih of the Thorax, for it's Edges are Ti Dis Faſtened to the Lover Part of the Sternum, to the Ends of the Loweſt Ribs, and to tbragm, æ the Lowceſũ ſertebra of the Thorax; Its Subſtance is Muſcular, Conſiſting of Carnous suſ iam. and Tendinous Fibres, like other Muſcles; It has formerly been thought to be only one Continucd Muſcle, but Caſpar Bartholin Divides it into Two, a Fore and an Einder, or an Upper and a Lower, as the Diaphragm is ſomething ſlanting Backwards3 The Upper Muſcle by one End, viæ. it's Head, Adheres Circular-wiſe to the Ribs and o the Appendix of the Sternum, the Other paſſcth into the Tendon, which makes the Nervous Center of the Diaphragm, and is Spent on or Continued unto the Fle oſ the Lower Muſcle, and ſo the whole Midriff becomes like one Digaſtrick or Double-Ielly'd Muſcle; the ſame Author has obſcrved, that the Fore-part of the Upper Upper Muſcle Shoots forth a Tendon to every Baſtard-Rib on each Side the Sreruum, to which Ribs the Upper Part of the Tranſverſe Muſcles of the Lover Belly alſo Adheres: The Lower Muſcle Springs from the Vertebræ of the Loins and Back, and Riſes from thence by Two Appendices, the Right and Lefſt, the Former of which Exceeds the Latter in it's Length, and in the Number oſ it's Carnous and Tendinous Fibres; The other Extremity of this Muſcle is joined in an Oval to the Center, or Tendinous Part of the Diaphragm, and the Fibres of both the Upper and Lower Muſcles Tend in a Kind of Radius's from their Centers to their Circumſe ences; The Upper Muſcle is Thin and Broad, the Lower is Thick and has a very Flehy Belly. Tas Upper Side of the Midriff is Cloathed with the Pleura, and it's Lower with the Peritonaum, to the Upper Membrane the Mediaſlinum and Pericardium are Knir, and ſometimes the Loweſt Tips of the Lobes of the Lungs, but this is Preternatural It is Perforated in it's Tendinous Part by the Vena Cava Aſcending from the Liver, and in the Flehy Part of its Lower Muſcle by the Gullet, and Two Stomachick Nerves Springing from the Par Vagum, where the Fibres do not Run ſtreight from the Appendices, as before, but bend towards and Encompaſs the Orifice, by the Conſtriction of which the Gullet is exactly Cloſed, ſo that the Continual Motion oſ the Diaphragm cauſes no Regurgitation of the Contents of the Stomach, nor is rhe Aſcent of any Vapour Permitted thro' it; The Laſt Perforation is made behind the Appendices by the Deſcent of the Aoria along the Vertebræ of the Loins and Back, the Thoracick Duct, a Branch of the 7ena Aæyqus and the Intercoſtal Nerve. Im has Two Arteries called Phrenicæ from the Deſcending Aorta, and as many Veins from the Aſcending Cava in their Paſſage thro' it, with ſome orher Peculiar ones, from the Vena Adipoſa and Arteriæ Lumbares  I's Nerve, which is called the Nerve of the Diaphragm, Ariſes from the Vertebral and Communicates with the Intercoſtal Pair, according to Dr. Willis, from whence he Aſſigns a Reaſon of the Great Conſent of the Midriff with the Heart, Brain, and Face, when a Man Laughs; For when the Imagination is Affected with Pleaſure, the Heart would fain Triumph by Throwing off it's Burthen, wherefore, that the Blood may be the Quicklier Emptied out of its Right Ventricle into the Lungs, and conſequently out of the Left into the Aoria, the Diaphragm, being Inſtigated by the Nerves from the Intercoſtal, is dravn up wards with a more Rapid Syſtole, and often Repeating it's Jumps, bears up the Lungs and cauſes them with more Quickneſs and Frequency to Diſcharge the Air and Blood, but the ſame Intercoſtal Nerve, which Communicates below with the Nerve of the Diaphragm, is Continued above with the Maxillar Nerves, and therefore, hen a Cackling is begun in the Breaſt, the Geſtures of the Mouth and Face anſwer thereto; and when the Diaphragm is wounded in it's Nervous Part, the Muſcles of the Face ſuffer Convulſions and an Involuntary Laughter, or the Riſus Sardonius, is Cauſed. TuHE Uſe of the Diaphragm is, Firſt, To Divide the Thorax ſfrom the Abdomen, that Noiſome and Impure Vapours may not Aſcend from the more Ignoble Parts, as the Guts, to offend the more Noble, as the Heart; Second, To help the Muſcles of the Abdomen in Excluding the Excrements and, in Women, the Fetus, and to Preſs the Stomach and Inteſtines for the Diſiribution of the Chyle; Third, To aſſiſt Reſpiration, vhich is ſuppoſed to be Performed in the following Manner: The Diaphragm from the Vertebræ to the Circumſference, according to St/n0 and Bartholin, is Convex towards the Thorax, and Concave to the Abdomen, vhoſe Firſt Motion is downwards, ſo that from a Convex Laxity it is Depreſs'd to a Plane Surſace, as Bartholin Teaches, ithout being Extended, as Sreno Suggeſis, or Thruſt into the Abdemen, as Diemerbroect; This Depreſſion of the Diaphragm to a Plane Surſace, by which its Circumference is Extended, muſt of Courſe Elevate the Sides of the Thorax, which Diemerbroects Protruſion of it into the Abdomen could not do, and yet this is what we Experience. The Cavity of the Thorax being thus Enlaræed, the Air by it's Preſſure or Elaſticity Iſues in at the Trachea, Aſpera Arteria, or Wind-Pipe, and the Bronchus, which is the Lover Part of it, and immediately Poſſœſes all the Bronchia, or Branches of the Brnthus, and Veſicula of the Lungs, and Puſſs them up and Inflates them, by vhich means Inſpiration is Eſſected; On the Contrary, the Diaphragm now Returning to it's ſormer Convex Situation, and Moving upvards into the Thorax, it's Sides fall towards tach other, whereby it's Cavity is Diminiſhed, and by this Compreſſion of the Thorax, and and the Contraction of the Muſcular Fibres of the Veſiculæ, and of the Inner Coat of the Trach-a and it's Bronchia, the Air is Expelled irom the Lungs by the ſame way, by which it Entered, which is the Account given of Expiration; and thus, Inſpiration and Expiration ſucceeding each other Alternately, Reſpiration is Cauſed. TuE Motion of the Midriſf is thought to be Mixed, but rather Animal and Voluntary, than Natural and Neceſſary, becauſe, tho' it Moves in our Sleep, yet, when we are Avake, we can Stop, Slacken, or Haſten it's Motion. TuE Pleura is a Double Membrane, which Covers all the Cavity of the Thoraxæ, and is White, Thin, and Hard, Reſembling the Peritonaum, the Inner Membrane, or that next the Thorax, is the Thickeſt; Tis ſmooth on its Inſide, and bede vd with a Wateriſn Humour, Proceeding probably from Vapours Raiſed from the Blood, and Condenſcd by the Comparative Coldneſs of this Membrane, but the Outſide, which is fixed to the Perioſteum of the Ribs, is Thinner and Rough; It ſends out fſrom its Inſide certain Nervous Fibres even in Healthful Perſons, which are Inſerted into the Inveſting Membrane of the Lungs, and Hinder the Aſcent and Deſcent of them in Reſpiration, without any Great Injury to their Breathing, tho' ſometimes, when they tic the Lungs too Cloſe, they cauſc a Continual and Incurable Dyſpnæa; I's Perforations below have been already mentioned, thoſe above are for the Vena Cava Deſcending, and the Aorta Aſcending, the Gula, the Rough Artery, Lacteals, Lympheducts, and Nerves; It Ariſes from the Membranes, which Inveſt the ſequlla Spinalis, and from the Vertebræ of the Back, from Whence it comes ſorward on each Hand by the Sides to the Sternum, or Breaſt- Bone, under which the Membranes oſ cach Side are joined together, and ſo becoming Double, it goes back again ſtreight from the Middle of the Breaſt to the Back, Dividing the Cavity of the Thorax into Tvo Parts, and one Lobe of Lungs from the other, and is called the Meaiaſtinum It has Veins and Arteries from the Superior Intercoſtal Branches, and they are ſaid to Run berween the Two Membranes of the Pleura, betwixt which, vhen any Mattei Impoſthumates, from whence an Inflammation is Cauſcd, a Pleuriſy is ſuppoſed to be Produced; It hath Nerves from Twelve Vertebral Pair, namely, from all the Pairs of the Thorax, for from betwixt each of the Twelve Vertebræ of the Back there Springs a Pair of Nerves. : j TuE Mediaſtinum is Formed by a Continuation of the Pleura, as Above, and conſequently conſiſts of Four Membranes, being a Duplicature of the Pleura, which conſiſts of Two; As it Tends from the Sternum where they are ſtrictly United, the Duplicated Membranes are Sever'd, ſo as to Contain the Heart vith it's Pericardium in rthe Cavity, which Intervenes their Separation; Aſter which they again Unite as Cloſc, as before, but preſently Part, to Form as Long, tho' a Narrower, Cavity for the Oeſophagus, or Gullet, the Vena Cava, and Stomachick Nerves to Deſcend by; Whoere it is Parted, ĩt is Thinner and Softer than the Pleura; The Outſide towards the Lungs is Smooth, but the Inner is Rough, by Reaſon of the Fibres, whereby in ſome Places it adheres to the Pericardium, and there is Fat diſperſcd in it, eſpecially about i's Veſicls; It has Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, and ſome Lympheducts, as other Parts, and it's Chief Uſes are, To divide the Lungs, ſo that if one Part is Wounded, the other may be Secure, To keep the Heart from Falling upon the Eack, or BreaſtBone, or the Ribs upon our Bending our ſelves Back wards, Forwards or on one Side, To give a Paſãae to Veſcls, and ſupport the Diaphragm againſt the Weight of the Stomach and Liver, which hang by it. TuE Th;mus is a Glandulous Body, ſituate in the Upper Part of the Mediaſtinum under the Clavicul?, it is Whitiſ, Soft, and Spongy, and Larger in Children and Women, than in Men; In Infants it conſiſts of Three Glands, and is ſomething like the SweetBread, but in Adult Perſons it Drys and Contracts up into one Subſtance; It has no Proper Duct, whereby any Thing is conveyed into any Peculiar Cavity, and thereſore is Eſtcemed in the Number of Conglobate Glands, tho' Dr. Drake makes it a Conglomerate one; The Jugular Veins and Arteries paſs thro' it, as they go to the Neck; In Children it has Liquor like Chyle in it, and i's Nerves and Lympheducts are Acknovledged; The Uſe of it is ſcarcely Known, and only Gueſd at by Anatomiſts, the Later think it is a kind of Diverticulum to the Chvle in the Thoracick racick Duct, vhen over charged in Children, and that it conveys a Lmpha ſtom the Adjacent Parts to the ſaid Duct; It having no Valves, for if Wax or a Liquid ĩs Injected into the Ductus Thoracicus, it will paſs into the Lympheducts of the Thymus. We ſnall now, as Uſual, Examine theſe Phænomenons of the Animal Syſtem by the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. 5. 3. AND Firſt, the Diaphragm Separates the Thorax from the Abdomen by the Exertion of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces athart the Body, which could not be done in any other Place of the Thorax, or the Abdimen, they being both already poſeſſed by the Lunus and Heart, and by the Stomach, Liver, and Inteſtines, which as we have hewn are Primarily Formed, Excepting the Lungs, which will aſterwards be Proved; In this vacant Space thereſore the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid from the Spine Advances, which is Confirmed by Anatomiſis, vho acknowledge it's Riſe to be in TWo Nervous Appendices Produced from the Vertebræ of the Back and Loins, that it is Derived ſrom the Membrane, which Inveſts the Wedulla spi nalis, and the like; And hence it is, that the Tendinous Fibres, of which it is Compoſed, are Propagated, as a kind of Radius's from the ſaid Vertebræ, as a Center; But whilſt this is doing, the Expanſive Force of the Blood from the Deſcending Aorta Exerts it ſelſ in the Phrenick Arteries, to whoſce Aſſiſtance likewiſe the Lumbar Arteries Arrive, in order to Balance the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid from the Spine, by which it's Carnous or Flehy Fibres are made, being Conſtipared by the ſaid Contractive Force from Blood into Fleh; To which the Nerve oſ the Diaphragm alſo Contributes: The Diaphragm is alſo Slanting, being Lover at it's Riſe in the Vertebræ, or in it's Nervous and Contractive Part, and Higher at it's Ending in the Sternum and Ribs, or in it's Carnous and Expanſive, becauſe Naturally the Contractive, as it Tends to a Center in it's Force, Deſcends likewiſe towards the Earth, but the Expanſive, Dilateing it ſclf from a Center, Riles and is Elevated from it: Nor is it any wonder, that ſo Nervous a Membrane, which is immediately Derived from the Spinal Marrow ſhould, when Enflamed or Diſtempered, ſo ſtrongly Affect the Mind, whither all Nervous Senſations are Ultimately Referred. S. 9. THE Reaſon, why this Muſcle of the Diaphragm, which otherwiſe would be but one, is Divided into TWo by the Intervention of the Nervous Center, ſeems to be the Paſlage of the Vena Cava Aſcending from the Liver, which, Containing the Expanſive Force of the Blood, Heats the Parts about it, to Balance which therefore the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid Aſſembles to it, and Conſtitutes that Part, which is called the Tendinous, juſt as about the Aoria the ſame is done by the Appendices from the Vertebræ; On the other Hand, the Expanſive Force of the Aliment, vhich is carry'd thro' the Oeſophagus, is Small and Gentle in Compariſon of that oſ the Blood, and therefore is not Encloſed with ſuch a Degree of the Contractive Force, but yet the Tendinous Fibres Bend towards it, and more nearly Encompaſs it, and Leave their Rectilineal Progreſs in order to Counter-Poiſe it: And for the ſame Reaſon the Diaphragm is Convex toards the Thorax and the Heart, and Concave to the Guts and Abdomen, the Contractive bending tovards the Expanſive in this Caſe likewiſe: The Lower Muſcle of the Diaphragm is alſo more Thick and Flehy, and the Upper Thinner, becauſe the Contractive Force at the Vertebræ or Origin of the Former is Greater than that of the Tendinous Part of the Latter; and conſequently, the Expanſive Force of the Fleſhy Fibres muſt be Greater and Stronger to Balance the one than the other: The Midriſf Adheres Cloſe to the Sternum and Ribs on each Side, not by the Expanſive Force of the Fleſhy Fibres, but by the Contractive of the Nervous and Tendinous ones; for, having now made it's vay thro the Expanſive, it more ſtrongly Cements and Unites 1o the Perioſteum which is of the ſame Nervous and Contractive Force with it; And this is the Reaſon that Bartholin Affirtms, that the Upper Muſcle Shoots forth a Tendon to every DaſtardRib on each Side the Srternum; The Upper Side of the Diaphragm is Lincd by the Pleura, and the Lower by the Peritonaum, which are more Fle'hy Membranes that is, have a Greater Expanſive Force, and are made by it to Encompaſs and Conſine the Contractive of the orher, that ĩt iould not be oo Prevailing. 5. 10. As s. 10. As to Laughing, there is an caſy Account given of it from theſe Principles,ĩ vithout ſuppoſing that Communication of the Intercoſtal Nerve with the Nerve of the; Diaphragm below and the Maxillar above, and the Heart's Endeavouring to throv oſf ivs Load, according to Dr. Willis; For what? Theſe Nerves do not only Communicate with each orher, but there is a Connexion almoſt betwixt all the Nerves of the Body,: as may be ſeen in the Syſtem of them, Expreſsd Tab. 16. Appendix to Vol. 1. of Dr. Drate's Anthropologia, and in Dr. Williss Anatomy of the Erain, Tabb. 9, & 115 And it is not Probable, that the Communication here mentioned ſhould Produce ſuch Particular and Singular Effects in the Parts ſpecified in Diſtinction from the Reſt; And why, when the Imagination is Pleaſed, the Heart ſiould Endeavour to throw off it's Burden, is Unexplained, nor is there any Natural Dependency ſhewn of the one upon the other; Beſides the Cachinnus, or Noiſe, occaſioned by Laughing, cannot be owing to the Quick Expulſion oſ the Air from the Lungs barely, for a Quicker or Shorter Inſpiration or Expiration can no more Produce ſuch a kind of a Sound, than our Quick or Short Breathing can produce a Note, or a Modulation of the Voice; On the orher Hand, Joy, Pleaſure, Delight, and Satisſaction, are Affections in the Mind of an Expanſive Force, and are Raiſed in it by ſome Expanſive Force in it ſelf, or which is External to it; Thus Wines and Spirituous Liquors, and Wit, which conſiſts in a Velocity, and a Diſſolution or Diſſipation, or Airyneſs, of our Idcas, are Evidently of an Expanſive Nature, and occaſion Mirth, and Laughter, and Jollity, and as Similar Forces produce Similar, Mirth and Laughter likewiſe muſt be õf an Expanſive Nature; And from hence it comes to paſi, that as ſoon as the Mind is thus Affected, it Communicates it's Expanſive Force to the Nervous Syſtem, which is of a Contractive, and which Reſults and Rebounds upon the Impreſſion, and Exerts it ſelf in Leaping, Jumping, Danceing, Laughing, and the Like; in the ſame Manner, as the String of an Harp, which is of a Contractive Nature, is Raiſed into Vibrations by Percuſſion, which is of an Expanſive, and in the ſame Manner, as ve have ſiewn all Motions are Produced and Continued by an Oppoſition of the Expanſive and Contractive; which Solution, if True, is a plain Conviction of the Diſtinction of the Mind from the Body, and that it is not the Intercoſtal or Diaphragmatick Nerve, which is the main Inſtrument of Laughing, but the whole Nervous Syſtem; and hich is the more Confirmed from hence, that Men do not in that Action ſhake their Maxillart Muſcles and their Diaphragm only, but their Sides and their whole Body. S. 11. As to the Cachinnus in Particular, or the Noiſe made in Laughing, it is a Quick Return of the Voice from the Quick Vibrations of the Nervous Syſtem, Part of which Acts upon the Lungs, but the Voice it ſelf is formed, as all other Modulations of it, by the Intervention of the Aſpera Arteria, and the Palate; an Explanation of vhich comes under the Doctrine of Sounds, which, as we have before ſaid, always Ariſe from the Reſiſtance of the Contractive to the Expanſive, which is here Communicated from the Mind to the Nervous Syſtem, and from thence to the Lungs and Air Included, and is Reſiſted by the Contractive of the Rough Artery, Palate, and Elaſticity of the External Air. S. 12. TIS Account is ſtill farther Evinced from Conſidering, what Grief and Sorrov is, and how Tcars are cauſed; for ſince theſe Affections are the Reverſe of the Former, if it is True, that they Proceeded from an Expanſive Force in the Mind, Theſ muſt from a Contractive, vhich it is Plain they do; For Aſflictions have a Natural Tendency to make Men Wiſe and Judicious, and Judgment conſiſts in the Gravity, Cloſeneſi, and Connexion of our Ideas, vhich are manifeſtly of a Contractive Nature; When thereſore the Mind is in a State of Grief, which alvays makes us Conſiderate and Thoughtful, it has a Contractive Force Impreſs'd upon it; Thus alſo, if there is a Melancholy, or Languor in the Blood, which muſt be owing to a Contractive Pover, the ſame State is Induced upon the Mind, and it is Inclined to Grieve and to be Sad; This Contractive Force in the Mind, Imparting it ſelf to the Nervous Syſtem, has alſo quite Contrary Effects from what were before Produced, as it ought to have, for now the Nervous Syſtem does not Reſit and Rebound againſt the Incurring Expanſive of the Mind, but Submits to and Complys with the Contractive of it, the Forces being now of the ſame Nature; Hence it Contracts ĩt C cc ſelf ſelf, Draws it ſelf Inwards, and Retires within the Sphere of it's Proper Activity; Conſequently, we find the Body in a Reſerved and Sedentary Poſture, the Head Drooping, the Legs Acroſs, and the Arms Claſped within each other, which are all ſo many Indications of a Contractive Force Prevailing, and Evident Marks and Proofs of it, as they are Contrary to Leaping, Jumping, Danceing, &e. The Tears alſo fall on ſuch Occaſions, becauſe the Nervous Syſtem, and with it the Brain, being Contracted, the Lympha, which always ſtands in the Ventricles of it, is Preſsd and Squeezed from thence, and Carry'd thro' the Foramen Lachrymale, ſituate at the Inner Canthus, or Corner of the Eye; to which Opinion, tho' he Rejects many others, Diemerbroeck alſo is willing to Subſcribe. THE Riſus Sardonius does not Contradict the Solution before Given, ſince where ſo Nervous a Part as the Diaphragm is Wounded, it muſt neceſſarily Afſect in a ſenſible Manner the whole Nervous Syſtem, and therefore the Muſcles of the Face, and the Maxillar Nerves Inſerted into Them. s. 13. AMONGST the uſes of the Diaphragm the Principal is ſaid to be, that oſ Aſſiſting Reſpiration, hereas we have ſilewn how it comes to be Formed, and that in the Formation there does not ſeem to be any ſuch Deſign or Intention; Nor does the Account Propoſed to us of Reſpiration appear to be True; In order to which it is Preſumed, that the Firſt Motion of the Diaphragm is Downwards, by which the Cavity of the Thorax is Enlarged, and the Air thereby Ruſhes into the Lungs in Inſpiration; But whieh way is this Motion downwards Performed? Not by the Incurſion of the Air, for the Cavity is originally Enlarged before ſuch Incurſion; Not by the Contraction of the Diaphragm, as a Muſcle, becauſc that would drav the Sides of the Thorax together, and diminiſh it's Cavity, whereas in Inſpiration they are Raiſed and Elevated, and the Cavity is Widened and Increasd; Not by the Diſtenſion or Dilatation oſ it, becauſe that is not the Proper Action of a Muſcle, and only is ſubſequent upon the Contraction of it, and therefore it's Firſt Motion cannot be Downvards; But if the Firt Motion is Upwards, there being no Air yet Inſpired, the Diaphragm will only Preſs out what Air Reſides in the Lungs before Inſpiration, and upon it's Moving Downwards, ſuch Air will be Replaced, which does not come up to the Phænomenon, as it is Propoſcd, of Inſpiration and Exiration, which sher Endeavoured to be Explained; Beſides it is manifeſt, that it is ut little Air, that we Inſpire and Expire at once, ſo that there does not ſeem to be any occaſion for the Enlargement of the Cavity of the Thorax by the Methods AlIedged, rhat is, by the Deſcent of the Diaphragm, and Leaving a Room or Space for the Lungs to Swell in from the Incurring Air; Nor, which is Material in the Preſent Account, is it really Proved, or can it be, that the Diaphragm does Aſcend and Deſcend; Since another Motion may be Aſigned to it, which is more Probable, and vill Equally Anſwer the Particulars we obſerve of it. S. 14. CONSIDERING therefore what foregoes, it is more Conſiſtent with Reaſon to Think, that Reſpiration is Performed in another, that is, in a ſimpler Manner, namely, not by the Local Motion of the Diaphragm, the other Muſcles of the Thorax we at preſent omit, which yet have their Share in this Action, but by the bare Diſtenſion of it from the Expanſive Force of the Fleſhy Fibres, and the Conſtriction of it from the Contractive of the Tendinous; The Contractive Force of the Latter is allowed by all Anatomiſts, and we only beg the Favour to Introduce the Expanſive of the Former, as Equally Natural and Proper to the Action of a Muſcle, with it's Contraction; And from Whence Muſcular Motion in General may be Explaincd. WE have alteady ſnewn, that the Nervous or Tendinous Fibres of the Diaphragm Procced from the Fertebræ towards the Sternum, and the Ribs on each ſide it; and thereſore the Contractive Force of theſe Fibres will drav the Ribs and Srernum tovards the Vertebræ, and the Expanſive Force of the Carnous, Acting againſt and in Oppoſition to the Former, will Protrude the ſaid Ribs and Srernum from the ſame Ieriebræ3 which, if any one will Reſlect and Look upon himſclſ, when he Breaths, he vill find to be the Real Action of the Thorax; This likeviſe Explains, vhy the Ribs on one Side do not in Reſpiration Approach to, or Recede from thoſe on rhe nther, but are carryd Jointly to and from the errebræ Ox8 ON the other Hand, if we ſuppoſe the Diaphragm to be Moved upvards and downwards in the Thorax, in the Firſt Caſe, the Ribs ought to come Nearer to each other, as well as to the Vertebræ, and in the Laſt, to Retire from each other; and the Conſtriction and Dilatation of the Thorax would be Circular, and not from the Sternum to the Vertebræ, contrary to Fact and Experience; This alſo Informs us, how Reſpiration may be Perfect, tho' the loweſt Tips of the Lobes of the Lungs ſhould Adhere to the Midriff, becauſe they may eaſily follow the Motion of the Diaphragm backwards and forwards from the Vertebræ to the Sternum, but not ſo well its Motion downwards without ſome remarkable Impediment to it. j For which Cauſe the Nervous Fibres, which are ſent out from the Pleura, and are Inſerted into the Inveſting Membrane of the Lungs, ſometimes cauſe an Incurable Dyſpnaa, which is not ſo readily Conceived, if the Diaphragm is Moved upwards and downards, as if the Tips of the Lobes Adhere to it, whilſt it is Moved backwards and forvards, for in ſuch a Circumſtance, the Nervous Fibres would very much obſtruct the Motion; Laſly, This Gentle Conſtriction and Expanſion of the Diaphragm much better Agrees with the ſmall Influx and Reflux of Air, which ve find in Breathing, than the Turbulent Ruſhing in and Expulſion of it, which the other Doctrine ſeems to Patronize and Eſpouſc by Enlargeing and Contracting rhe Cavity of the Thorax. ] . 15. THE laſt Queſtion concerning the Diaphragm, is, whether the Motion, which belongs to it, is Natural and Neceſary, or Animal and Voluntary, or whether it is a Mixture of both; To which we Anſwer, that in the Human Frame, vhich we nov Conſider, there is no Diſtinction betwixt Natural and Animal, or betwixt Neceſſary and Voluntary, and therefore the Queſtion ceaſes; For the Natural Motion in it is the Animal, and the Neceſſary is the Voluntary, ſince there can be nho Motion, which is not Animated, and no Animation, which is not with the Concurrence of the Mind, and no Concurrence of the Mind vithout the Conſcnt of the Will, that is, every Action, as it is an Animal one, is ultimately àa Voluntary one, as Volition is Inſeparable from Thinking. j Tnus Sitring ſtill is as Voluntary an Action as Walking, Sleeping as Wakeing, and the Motion of the Diaphragm as the Reſt of it, for ſince we can Stop, Slacken, or Accelerate it's Motion by the Will, it muſt be by the Will that it is Perpetuated and Continued; Muſcular Motion is confeſsd to be Performed by the Wili, which alſo is an Animal one, and therefore the Neceſſary Motion of a Muſcle is a Voluntary one; The Circulation of the Blood, which, if any other, is a Neceſſary Motion, is yet a Voluntary one, both as it is a Muſcular, and as the Heart it ſelf is a Muſcle; and as ve can obſtruct it by Coughing or Straining, and by a Voluntary Expulſion of the Air from the Lungs, or permit it to Flow thro' them at our Pleaſure: Nay, Theſe very Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which we have been Explaining, and which ſeem to be as Neceſſary in their Laws and Actions, as any Thing in our Syſtem, could not obtain their Effcdt without an Animation, that is, without a Mind Enducd with, and Exerting, it's Faculties, One of which is Volition; of which Opinion, I alſo, ſince my Writing of This, find Borellus to have been. l S. 16. THE Pleura likewiſe, as well as the Diaphragm, is formed by a Contractive Force from the Medulla Spinalis and the Vertebræ of the Back, with which the Expanſive of the Blood Mixing from Veins and Arteries of the Superior Intercoſtal Branches, the Membrane is made; The Contractive Force is farther Strengthened by Tvelve Vertebral Pair of Nerves, which will require an Addition of the Expanſive to Balance it; The Expanſive and Contractive being thus Increas'd, as alſo the Latter being Stronger from being nearer the Brain the Source and Fountain of it, which again is to be Balanced by an Expanſive, when they arrive at the Sternum, their Forces are ſtill Vigorous and Active, and ſince they Meet each other there in oppoſite Directions, and cannot Proceed forwards,tis neceſſary they ſhould Cling faſt together, and at the ſame Time Preſs jointly backwards in a ſtrait Line from the Sternum to the Veriebræ, by which the Mediaſtinum is Conſtituted and Framed: Which Forces muſt yet give vay to the Expanſive of the Heart, and therefore Separate upon theit Approach to ir, but Unite again afterwards, till they Separate a Secohd Time foi the Expanſive in the Oeſophagus and Vena Cava; And upon theſe Separations, the Mediaſlinum is Softer and Thinncr than the Pleuræ, becauſe the Expanſivè Forces C cc 2 vhich hich Divide it, Diminiſi the Contractive; The Contractive alſo takes it's Courſc from it's Riſe in the Vertebræ along the Ribs, which are of a Contractive Nature, becauſe Similar Forces, according to the General Lawv we have Mentioned, Tend to each other, and the Expanſive follows the ſame Track in order to Counter-poiſe it; The Pleura is Whitiſ from the Contractive Force. TuE Thymus is Formed from the Contractive Force of it's Nerves and Lymphe ducts, and from the Expanſive of the Jugular Veins and Arteries; It ſeems to be ol little uſe, and only the Natural Product of the Concourſe of thoſe Forces; It is Larger in Children and Women than in Men, becauſe the Expanſive Force is Greater in Them, which Diſtends and Swells it, and for the ſame Reaſon it is Divided into Three, ſince it belongs to the Expanſive Force to Separate and Divide as well as Diſtend; But in Men whoſe Contractive Force is Greater, it is Leſs, and Compinged Into One; In Children, Chyle may ſupply the Place of the Venal Blood, and therefore is many Times found in it. C H AP. VIII. Concerning the Heart, and irs Pericardium, the Aorta and Cava, rhe Arteria and Vena Pulmonaris, and Circulation of the Elood. s. I. HE Next Parts, which we are to conſider in the Human Syſtem, are the Heart and it's Pericardium, with the Aortæ and Circulation of the Blood: The Heart is the Source of Vital Heat, and the Principal Bowel of the Body, which no Perfect Animal wants, nor can long ſurvive it's Wounds; It is ſituate in the Middle of the Breaſt, Encompaſ'd with the Pericardium and Meqiaſtinum, and its Lover Tip or Mucro Inclines a little to the Left Side; It hangs Looſe in it's Casſula or Caſe, only ſuſpended by the Veſſels, that go in and out of it's upper Part or Baſis, to which the Pericardium Adheres; In Beaſis, that Feed upon Graſs, it is near the Middle of the whole Body, from the Head to the Tail, but in Men, and moſ Carnivorous Animals, vhoſe Necks are Shorter, it is ncarer to the Head; It has a Firm, Thick, and Denſe Subſtance, Thinner, and Softer in the Right Side, Thicker. and more Denſe in the Left, but moſt Compact and Hard at it's Tip, only on the Left Side of the Tip it is Thin, as Conſiſting moſtly of the Concourſe of the Inner and Outer Membrane; It's Parenchyma is made up chieſly of Muſcular Fibres, ſo that the Heart it ſelf may be Eſteemed a Muſcle. TuE Fibres are of Three Kinds; FinsT, The outermoſt, which Run in ſtrait Lines from the Apex to the Baſis, or which Run, tho not quite from the Apex, yet Parallel to Them which do. SECOND, Thoſe which lic next under the Former, and Aſcending obliquely from the Left Side towards the Right Terminate in the ſame Baſis, Imitating a Snail-Shell, or Screw, by their Spiral Circuit. TunirD, The Inmoſt, which are alſo oblique, but Run a contrary Courſc to the Former, Ariſing from the Right Side of the Heart, and from thence Aſcending SpiralWiſe towards the Left, when, having Embraced each Ventricle of the Heart, they Terminate in the Baſis on the Left Side. TnE Fibres of the Leſt Ventricle differ not from thoſe of the Right as to Kind, only rhey are conſiderably Stronger, and all of them are Inſerted into a Tendon, that is ſpread over it's Baſis under the Auricles, Part of which Tendon at the Egreſ of the Aorta in ſome Creatures, as in a Stag, becomes Bony; Its Shape is that of a Cone vith it's Baſis upwards, and the Lower Part is called it's Apex or Mucro; It is Bigger in Men than in other Creatures, conſidering the Proportion of their Bodies, and Leſſcr and more Denſe in Hot and Bold Men, than in the Cold and Covardly; In Adult Perſons it is commonly Six Fingers Breadth Long, and Four Broad at the Baſis; Outwardly it is Covered with a proper Coat, which is Thin, but Strong and Denſe, and very hard to Separate from it, and is the ſame vith the outer Coat of the Great Artery, as that, which Cloaths the Ventricles on the Inſide, is Conrinued unto and Common vith that Thin Skin, that Covers the Inſide of the Arteries, like like a Cuticula; and hence it is thought Probable by Diemerbroec, that the Arteries borrow theſe Coats of the Heart, as the Nerves borrow their Two Tunicles from the Pia and Dura Mater of the Brain; Upon this Membrane, which Inveſis the Heart, there grows ſome hard Fat about the Baſis; It is not nouriſhed by the Blood or Chyle Received into it's Ventricles, but by the Veſſels of it's Parenchyma ; It has Two Arteries, which Spring from the Aorta before it's Paſſage out of the Pericardium, and are called Coronaria, becauſe they Encompaſs the Baſis of the Heart, like a Diadem, by fetching a Circuit on its Surface, from Whence they are branched ſeveral ways to the Apex of the Cone, Where they Inoſculate; It has alſo as many Veins, which go by the ſame Name; and it's Nerves are Derived from the Plexus Cardiacus and Par Vagum ; It is Diſtinguiſhed, in it's Parts, into it's TWo Auriculæ, it's Two Ventricles, and it's Septum. : TuE Auriculæ, or Ears, are ſo called from ſome Similitude they have with thoſe of the Head, for they Riſe from a Long Baſis upon the Baſis of the Heart, and End in an Obtuſe Point, making an Obtuſe Triangle; They are Two Appendages of it, and are Seated over it's Ventricles, and are of the ſame Fabrick and Uſe, being both Muſcles, and made up of a like Order of Fibres, which are carryd into oppoſite Tendons, vhereof that at the Baſis of the Heart is Common to it, and theſe Auriculæ, and the orher Runs along their upper Part; The Right is Larger and Softer, the Leſt is Leſs, but more Firm; Their Superficies is Smooth, when they are Filled, but Wrinkled, when Empty, and the Left more than the Right; When They are Cut open, there Appear in their Cavity many Fleſhy Columns Running from the Upper to the Lower Tendon, and betwixt Them there are pretty Deep Ditches, or Long Cavities, but Fewer in the Right, than in the Left; They are Dilated and Contracted, as the Heart is, but at Different Times; For the Syſtole of the Ventricles is at the ſame Time vith the Diaſtole of the Auriculæa, and the Syſole of the Auriculæa with the Diaſtole of the Ventricles; ſo that the Auricula Receive their Blood from the Veins, while the Ventricles Expell theirs into the Arteries, and when the Ventricles ate Relaxed and Empty in their Diaſtole, the Auricles Force their Blood into Them by their Syſtole: They have Coronary Arteries and Veins, in like manner as the Heart, from the Former of which their Subſtance is nouriſ'd, and by the Latter the Superfluous Blood is carry'd Back to the Heart to be again Circulated thro' the Arteries; They ſerve to Receive the Venal Blood immediately out of the Vena Cæta and Pulmonaris, and 10 Meaſure it into the Ventricles, into which, that they may Expell it ith the Greater Force, Their Internal Fibres or Columns Ariſing from their Root, where they are Joined to the Baſis of the Heart, Reach directly outward tovards the Vena Cava and Pulmonaris, and in the Syſiole of the Auricul2 Graſp the Blood Contained in their Cavity, like ſo many Fingers, and Squeeze it into the Ventricles, whilſt they are Relaxed in their Diaſtole. Tur Ventricles Receive the Blood from their Auricles, and Expell it into the Arteria Pulmonaris and Aorta; The Right is the Wideſt, and almoſt Semicircular, but does not Reach down to the Apex or Mucro of the Heart, whereas the Left does and is almoſt Round; Their Sides are Hollowed into Diverſe Interſtices or Furrows, and Interoven with Carnous Fibres Reaching this Way and That; Which are more Numerous in Men's Hearts than in Thoſe of any other Animal, tho' ſuch as are Big as Horſes, &. have them Larger; Theſc Fibres or Fleſhy Columns ſerve to Streighten and Conſtringe the Ventricles, and the Furrows betwixt them help their Sides to Cloſe more exactly in their Syſtole; The Fibres are More and Stronger; and the Furrows Deeper in the Leſt Ventricle, than in the Right, and are alſo in the Side of the Septum, tho' that Side of it, which looks to the Right, is nearly Smooth; for there was occaſion for a Greater and Stronger Conſtriction in the Leſt, than in the Right, becauſe the Firſt Expells the Blood to the Extremeſt Parts of the Body by the Aorta, but the Lat by the Arteria Pulmonaris, thro the Lungs only. TuE Septum divides the Ventricles ſrom one another, and is a Carnous and Denſt Partition that ſtands like a Wall betwixt them; It is Hollow towards the Left Ventricle and has it's Fibres and Clefts, as was juſt now ſaid, but Convex and Smooth tovards the Right; It has been a Conteſt with ſome, whether there is not a Paſſag: thro' this Septum out of one Ventricle into the other, but none ſuch is found, noi Ii is it likely there ſould be any; becauſe, if there were, there would be no need of the Foramen Ovale and the Canalis Arterioſus in the Fætus, by the Former of which the Blood paſſes out of ihe Cava into the Vena Pulmonaris, as it is Entering the Left Ventricle, and by the Latter out of the Arteria Pulmonaris into the Aoria. j TuE Heart is Incloſed by it's Pericardium, Capſula, or Involucrum, which is Membranous and of the ſame Figure; It Springs at the Baſis of it from the outer Common Coats of thoſe Veſtls, that Enter into the Heart, and which are borrowed from the Pleura; It's Outſide Adheres to the Mediaſtinum by many Fibres, and is Continued to it at the Baſis of the Heart, where the Veſſels Perforate it; It's Lower End is knit firmly to the Center or Nervous Part of the Diaphragm, which is ſaid by Bariholin to be Peculiar to Men, and that in all other Creatures it hangs Looſc; It has Nerves, Arteries, Veins, and Lympheducts, as other Parts, and any Tremors or Inordinate Vibrations are thought to Proceed ſrom the Succuſſion oſ this Membrane, and to Differ ſfrom the Pulſation of the Heart; It contains in it a Serous Liquor, vhich in healthſul Bodies is Reddiſh, like Water wherein Fleh has been Wahed, and is ſuppoſed to be Bred of Vapours Exhaleing ſrom the Heart, which are Stopt and Condensd by this Membrane, or elſe to Drop out of the Glands ſcated at the Baſis of the Heart, and what is Superfluous is Imagined to be carryd off by it's Lymphaticks to the Ductus Thoracicus 3This Liquor is not Naturally above Two Spoonſuls, tho in Diſcaſed Perſons it ſometimes Increaſes to half a Pound, or a Pound; It ſerves for Moiſtening the Heart and making the Superficies Slippery, that it may Move the Better; Worms have been obſerved to Breed in the Pericardium, which Subjects the Perſons, who have them, to Palpitations of the Heart and Swoonings. Ir has Five Perſorations: Firſt, One made by the Aſcending Trunk of the Cava; Second, Another by the Deſcending, both which Enter the Right Ventricle of the Heart; from whence there goes out the Vena Arterioſa, ot Arteria Pulmonaris, into the Lungs, which makes a Third Perforation; A Fourth is made by the Arieria Venoſa, or Vena Pulmonaris, which Enters the Left Ventricle of the Heart; And a Fifth by the Aorta or Great Artery going out of the ſame. As to the Branches of the Deſcending Cava, they have been already Deſcribed, vhen ve Treated of the Liver, and the Aſcending Trunk was Traced as far as the Midriff from the ſame Bowel, where we ſhall now take it up and purſue it; Upon the Paſſage thro which it ſends forth into it's Subſtance the Venæ Phrenicæ, which alſo Run thrò the Mediaſtinum and Pericardium, and are ſuppoſcd by ſome to Abſorb the Pus Collected in the Thorax, from whence it is Circulated thro the Heart, and ãat Length Diſcharged by Urine from the Emulgent Arteries. FrROM the Diaphragm the Vena Cava Aſcends Undivided to the Right Auricle of the Heart, but before it Enters it, having Pierced the Pericardium, it Emits the Venæ Coronariæ before-mentioned, which carry back the Superſluous Blood to the Cava; and vhere they open into it, there is a Valve fixed, which Permits the Blood to Return by them into the Cava, but Hinders any from Paſſing out of the Cava into Them; Before this Aſcending Trunk of the Cava opens into the Auricle, it is Joined by the orther, which Deſcends from the Claviculæ, a certain Tubercle or Protuberance Intervening betwixt them upon their Junction, which Hinders the one from opening into the other in a Direct Line, and makes them go obliquely to the Left Hand, as they Enter the Auricle, otherwiſe the Deſcending Blood would have met the Aſcending to the Sroppage or Retardation of both; Immediately beyond this Protuberance out of the United Trunk, there goes a Paſſage called Foramen Ovale along the Baſis ol the Heart to the Vena Pulmonaris in a Fatus, juſt as it Enters into the Leſt Auricle which Cloſes up and is Obliterated as ſoon as the Fatus is Born; as alſo, from the Arteria Pulmonaris to the Aorta there is a Pipe called Canalis Arterioſus, which Conveys the Blood from the one to the other, and Which upon rhe Birth Degenerate: into a Ligament; Theſe Ducts are Formed, becauſe there is little or no Motion o the Lungs in the Womb, and no Paſage of the Blood thro' them, Excepting whai is Required for their Nutriment and Growth. TuE United Trunk of the Cava opens by one Large Oriſice into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, (but sreno aſſirms that it goes no farther than the Auricle,) into vhich is Poured all the Blood, that Returns in Circulation ſrom all the Parts of the Body Body, except the Lungs; At the Orifice of the Cava there Grows a Membranous Circle: which is Cleſt into Three Membranous Valves, looking Inwards and called Tricuſpides, which Permit the Blood to come in, but not to go out, and whoſe Action Dr: Lower thus Explains; Out of the Sides of the Right Ventricle there grow certain Prapille, or Round and Long Caruncles or Fley Columns, from whoſe Top Proceed ſome Tendinous Fibres, which are knit to theſe Membranous Valves, and Encompaſs the Oriſice of the Cava ſo, that when the ucro of the Heart is drawn up towards the Baſis in it's Syſole, the Fibres, and conſequently, the Membranes or Valves are Slackencd, and Hanging looſe are Driven upwards by the Blood that is Squeezed up in the Syſiole, by which means this Inlet is exactly Cloſed, ſo that no Blood can flow Back into the Cava, but is Expelled into the Arteria Pulmonaris, whoſe Orifice is now Open; On the Contrary, in the Diaſtole the Mucro Receding from the Baſis, the Papillæ and Fibres are Drawn down, and the Membranes and Valves with Them, by which the Orifice is Uncloſed, and a Paſage Opened for more Blood to Flow in, the Former being Expelled by the Laſt Syſtole. THE Trunk of the Cava, which Deſcends from the Claviculæ has many Branches, which Empty themſelves into it, before it Diſcharges it ſelf into the Heart, which ve ſnhall only jut Mention, Referring to Anatomiſts for a more Particular Deſcription oſ Them; As Firſt the Aæyqus or Vena Sine Pari, which Enters the Cava juſt before it's Tranſmiſſion thro' the Pericardium, and Receives into it the Inferior Intercoſtals from the Interſtices of the Eight Loweſt Ribs, on Each Side; from whence they Aſcend from the Eighth or Ninth Vertebra of the Breaſt to the Fourth or Fifth, and ſo up thro the Right Side of the Cavity of the Thorax: The next are the Superior Intercoſtals, hich are Derived from the Interſtices or Intervals of the Three or Four Uppermoſt Ribs, but ſometimes they Diſcharge themſclves into the Aæ-0 and then they are Wanting to the Cava; but it is obſervable, that where the 4-0, and the Superior Intercoſtals Enter the Cava, there are Valves placed, which Admit the Influx of Blood into it, and Prohibit the Reflux from it; After theſe, upwards, under the Claviculæ, the Subclavian Veins, one from the Right and the other from the Leſt, Empty themſclves into the Cava, where they Unite into one Deſcending Trunk, which Subelavian Veins, Continued out of the Thorax, are called the Axillar. r i b.-: TuE Subclavian Receives ſeveral Branches Upwards and Downwards. IN ir's Lower Side; FIRsT, The Mammary, which are Internal and External; The Former from the Ends of the Ribs, the Intercoſtal Spaces, and the Glands of the Mammaæ; The Latter from the Navel and near the Epigaſtrick Veins, from whence they Aſcend to the ſaid Subclavian: But ſo Deſultory is the Courſe of the Veins, thai ſometimes theſe Mammary Enter iiito the Cava and not into the Subclavian. SECOND, The Mediaſiina, vhich is Derived from the Mediaſlinum, and ſometimes Diſchaorges it ſclf into the Cava. Tumn, The Cervicalis or Vertebralis, which is Derived from the Vertebræ of the Neck, and the Membranes, vhich Inveſt the Marrow contained in them. FOURTH, The Muſcula Inferior, hich comes from the Lower Muſcles of the Neck and the Upper of the Thorax, and ſometimes Empties it ſelf into the Jugular Vein. In its Upper Side, Finst, The Meſcula Superior from the Upper Muſcles of the Neck. SECOND, The External and Internal Jugulars, which have Valves to hinder the Return of the Blood out of the Subclavians; The External from the Membranes, which Cover the Brain, from the Fore-head, Temples, Head, Face, Chaps, and Neck. They Run juſt under the Skin, and are thoſe which are opened for Diſtempers of the Head, or a Quinzy, &r. TuE Internal from the Dura Mater, and the Rough Artery or Wind-Pipe. INTO the Subclavian is alſo Inſerted, as before-mentioned, the Ducrus Thoracicus, and the ramus Lymphaticus, which brings the Zympha from the Arms, Neck, &. but this ſonmetimes Enters the Jugular. ii THE Iena Arterioſa, or Arteria Pulmonaris, Obtains the Nature of an Artery, both in carry ing hlood out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart to the Lungs, and in its being Inveſted with a Double Coat, like other Arteries; At it's Riſe out of the Right Ventricle, Ventricle, it's Orifice is Guarded with Three Membranous Valves, looking outwards called the Semilunar, or Sigmoides, becauſe they Repreſent the Old Greek Sigma, or the Engliſa C; They are made, according to Sreno, oſ the Tendons of the Fibres ol the Heart, vhich go into the Subſtance of the Artery it ſelſ; In the Syſiole the; Open and ſermit the Blood to Paſs out of the Ventricle into this Artery, but ©n the Diaſtole they Shut, ſo as none can Return; A little beyond theſe Valves, in ⸗ Fatus, the Canalis Arterioſus Springs, which Runs croſs the Breaſt to the Aorta, and Conveys the Blood out of this Artery thither, without Paſſing thro the Left Lobe of the Lungs, or thro' the Left Ventricle of the Heart, but, as was before ſaid, upon the Birth turns Ligamentous; After it's Paſſage out of the Pericardium, it Bends to wards and Aſſociates it ſelf ith the Aſpera Arteria, or Wind-pipe, and Attends it in all it's Ramifications thro' the Lungs; and where the Branches of the Wind-pipe End in the Lirtle Cells or Bladders aſter Deſcribed, the Twigs of this Artery, being Intervoven with thoſe of the Vein, Embrace them like a Net, in order, as it is Imagin'd, that the Air may more Intimately mix with the Blood. THE Arteria Venoſa, or Vena Pulmonaris, Obtains on the other Hand the Nature oſ a Real Vein, in carrying Blood to the Heart, and in being Inveſted with a Single Coat only, as orher Veins; It accompanices the Rough Artery, and the Arteria ſul monaris, in all their Branchings in the Lungs, and conveys the Blood from the ſmall Twigs of the ſaid Pulmonary Artery by it's own Capillaries into Two Trunks, which aſterwards Unite into one, which opens into the Left Ventricle of the Heart; At it's Orifice there are placed Two Membranous Valves, beſides which it has no other, called Aſitrales, becauſe together they Reſemble a Biſhop's Mitre; They are of a ſtronger Contexture than the Tricuſpides in the Right Ventricle, and ſo are the Fibres, vhich Aſcend to them from the Papilla or Flelhy Columns, ſor the Reaſon above given; Theſc Valves ſhut in the Syſole of the Heart, and the Oriſice of the orta opens, by which means the Blood is Hindred from Returning into the Pulmonary Vein, and Directed to Proceed in the ſaid Great Artery; Juſt as the Pulmonary Vein Enters the Leſt Auricle, the Foramen Ovale, a Pipe or Canal, opens into it coming from the Cava, as was mentioned before, and at it's Orifice into this Vein there is a Valve placed, that hinders any Blood from Returning into the Foramen. TuERE is one Thing Remarkable in this Pulmonary Artery and Vein, That, whereas in all the other Arteries, the Blood is of a Bright Scarlet Colour and in the Veins of a Black Purple, on the Contrary, in the Pulmonary Artery it is of a Black Purple and in the Vein of a Bright Scarlet, which can be owing to nothing but to the Mixture of Air with it in the Lungs. TnE Aorta, or Great Artery, which is the Laſt Veſſel, that Perforates the Pericardium, is That, ſrom vhich all the Arteries, Excepting the Pulmonary, are Derived; At it's Riſe from the Left Ventricle of the Heart, it hath Three Valves looking outwards, called Semilunares, being altogether like thoſe at the Orifice of the Arteria Pulmonaris in the Right Ventricle, and both They and the Aorta, according to Steno, arc Conſtituted of the Tendons of the Fibres of the Heart; Theſe hinder the Blood from Returning out of the Great Artery into the Heart again; The Orifice of the Alorta, or the Tendon of the Heart, which is Continuous to it, in ſome Creatures, eſpecially in Stags, does oſten, as was ſaid before, and ſometimes in Men, become DBony; It Aſcends out of the Left Ventricle, and is immediately Turned into an Arch, and from thence Deſcends downwards, which is called the Deſcending Trunk, and that which is called the Aſcending, according to Dr. Ruyſch, is only Branches ſent upwards from the Bending Arch of the Main Trunk of the Aoria; Before it comes out of the Pericardium it conveys the Coronaries to the Heart, it's Auricles, and to it's own Coats; but when it has Pierced it, it is Divided into what is uſually Termed the Aſcending and Deſcending Trunk. Tut Aſcending Runs up under the ?ena Cava, Lies upon the Wind. pipe, and preſently Sends forth Two Large Branches, the one to the Right, the other to the Left Arm, called the Subclavian, as Marching under the Clavicula, and after they are out of the Dreaſt, the Axillar: They Send out ſeveral Branches, both from their Lower and Upper Side. FrROM FROM the Lower, The Superior Inrercoſtal to the Interſtices or Intervals of the Four Uppermoſt Ribs, to the Neighbouring Muſcles and Spinal Marrow; Theſe are ſometimes Propagated from the Cervical Arteries, coming out thro' the Holes of the Vertebræ. FroM the Upper, FirsT, The Mammary to the Breaſts, and down the Abdomen to the Epigaſtrick Arteries Aſcending, with which they are ſuppoſed by ſome to Inoſculate, contrary to the Circulation of the Blood; ſince no Blood can Aſcend by the Mammary, nor Deſcend by the Aſcending Twigs of the Epigaſtrick. SECOND, The Cervical or Vertebral to the Vertebræ and Muſcles of the Neck, the Spinal Marrow and it's Membrane, which Inveſts it, to the Pia Mater, on which a wonderful Net-like Plexus of them is Formed, to the Subſtance of the Cerebellum; and to the Carotid Arteries, with which uniteing, Part of the Rere Mirabile is made. THiRD, The Muſcular to the Muſcles of the Neck and Arms. i AT the ſame Place or very Near, where the Aſcending Trunk ſcnds out the Subtlavian Side-ways, The Remainder is Divided into Two, called Carotides, which Aſcend directly Upwards, tho' the Right ſometimes Ariſes from the Right Subclavian; They are ſuſtained at their Riſe by the Thymus, beſtow certain Twigs on the Larynxæ, Tongue, the Muſcles of the Os Hycides, and the Neighbouring Glands, paſs up on cach Side by the Wind-pipe to the Jaws, where they are each of Them Subdivided into the External and Internal Branches. : TnE External and Smaller is Diſperſed into the Muſcles of the Cheeks, Fore-head, Temples, Lips, and all the outer Parts of the Head and Face, and into the Roots of the Teeth of the Lower Jav. Tue Internal and Larger into the Larnx, Tongue, &e. the Glands behind the Ears, and the Spongy Parts of the Palate and Noſe, and the Roots of the Teeth of the Upper Jaw; The Remainder Climbs upon the Scull, and at it's Baſis is Divided into Two Branches. THE Leſõ and Hindermoſt is ſpent upon the Inner Muſcles of the Neck, the Membrane of the Spinal Marrow, and the Dura Mater, at whoſe Sinus it Ends. THE Larger, likeviſe, is ſpent in ſeveral Tigs on the Dura Mater, and being Initerwoven vith many ſmall Slips of the Cervical Artery, Produces the Rete Mirabile, which is more Conſpicuous in Beaſts than Men; It afterwards Pierces thro' the Dura Mater, and Enters the Pia, Mixes with the Twigs of the Cervical Artery, with which it Accompanys the Spinal Marrow to the Loins; It ſends alſo one ſmall Branch with the Optick Nerve to the Eye, and ſupplying ſtill more Twigs to the Subſtance oſ the Brain and Pia Mater, which Unite with thoſe of the Cervical Artery, it makes the Plexus Choroides. TuE Deſcending Trunk of the Aorta goes down by, and cleaves to, the Gullet, and is the Reaſon, vhy Perſons, vhen Hot, are ſo much Cooled by a Draught of Water; It's Branches are as follow, FirstT, The Inferior Intercoſtals to the Interſtices of Eight or Nine of the Lower Ribs, the Marrow of the Back, the Muſcles of the Vertebræ and Thorax, and, according to Ruyſch, to the Bronchia of the Wind-pipe. When it comes to the Midriff, SECOND, The Phrenical to the Diaphragm, Mediaſtinum, and Pericardium. When it comes down by the Spine to the Fiſth Vertebra of tht Loins, TuiRD, The Cœliacal, from the Fore part of the Trunk, to the Stomach, the Hollow of the Liver, and the Trunk of the Vena Portæ3 where it is Divided into Two Branches, the Right and Left. TrE Right, which is the Smaller, Aſcending from it's Upper Part, ſends out the Gaſtrica Dextra to the Pylorus, and the Cſlicæ Gemellæ to the Gall-Bladder. FroM the Lower Side. 1. The Epiplois Dextra to the Hinder and Inner Leaf of the Caul, and to the Colon Annexed to it. 2. The Inteſtinalis to the Duodenum, and the Beginning of the ejunum: 3. THE Gaſlroẽpiplois Dextra to the Bottom of the Stomach, and the Caul, which Adheres to it. 4. TnE Hepaticæ to the Inveſting Membrane of the Liver, the Capſula Communis the Gall-Bladder, and Porus Bilarius. i TnE Remainder of this Right Branch Enters the Meſentery in ſeveral Twigs : d d Tui TuE Leſt Branch of the cæliaca, which is called the Splenick, and ſometimes Springs Immediately from the Aoria, is Larger than the Right, and ſends forth, FROM it's Upper Side, The Gaſtrica Major to the Stomach, and then is Divided into the Coronaria Stomachica, which Encompaſſcs the Upper Oriſice of it like a Gar land, and is Spread in Twigs upon it's Ventricle; and the Gaſirica Siniſira, which i Carryd 1o the Upper Part of the Stomach and to the Pylorus. FrROM it's Lover Side, The Epiplois Poſtica to the Hinder Leaf of the Omentum, and the Colon Adjoining, and the Epiplois Siniſtra to the Lower and Left Side of the Omentum. JusT as this Splenick Branch Enters the Spleen, there Ariſes out oſ it's Upper Part Vas Breve Arterioſum, which goes ſtrait to the Left Part of the Bottom of the Stomach, and the Gaſtropiplois Siniſtra, which, being ſuſtained by the Upper or Fore Leai of the omentum, ſends ſome Twigs to the Stomach, and to the ſaid Omentum ; After which the Splenick Branch Enters into the Spleen. FOUuRTH, The Superior Meſenterick from the Fore-part of the Trunk to all the Upper Part of the Meſentery, where it is Accompanied by the Meſaraick Vein of the Porta, to the Yejunum, lleum, and Part of the Colon. FirrH, About the Second Vertebra of the Loins from each Side of the Trunk an Emulgent to the Kidneys, where it is Separated into a Thouſand Twigs, which are Inveſted, with the Veins, in one Common Capſula Borrowed from the Pelvis, and End vith their Capillaries in the Glands; where the serum is Secreted, and carry'd from them by the Urinary Siphons into the Peluis, and from thence thro' the Ureters into the Veſica, in order to be Expelled the Animal Syſtem. SixTH, The Spermatick, or Arteriæ Præparantes, from the Fore-part of the Trunk, ſeldom from the Emulgents, to the Fpididymides and Teſtes, and in Women, to the ovaria, and Bottom of the Womb. SEVENTH, The Inferior Meſenterick, a little before the Aorta is Divided into the Rami Iliaci, to the Lower Region of the Meſentery, to the Colon, Rectum, and Anus, where it makes the Internal Hæmorrhoidal Artery. EiGnTH, The Lumbares, out of the Back-ſide of the Aorta, to the Neighbouring Muſcles of the Loins, the Peritonaum, and, thro' the Holes of the Vertebræ, to the Membrane of the Spinal Marrow, and to the Marrov it ſelf. WuEN the Aorta is Deſcended to the Fifſth or Laſt Vertebra of the Loins, and to the Top of the Os sacrum, it begins to Climb upon the Veua Cava, under or behind vhich iĩt Paſled thus far, and is from thence Divided into the æami Iliaci, and immediately upon the Diviſion there Springs out the Arteria Sacra, whoſe Twigs Penetrate into the Marrow of the Os Sacrum. TuE Rami Iliaci are Subdivided into the Interior, and Exterior Branches. FrOM the Interior Proceed. 1. The Inferior Muſcular to the Glutai, or Muſcles of the Buttocks, to the Iliack Muſcle, and the Pſoas. 2. THE Hypogaſtrick, to the Bladder, &. and in Women to the Bottom of the Womb and it's Neck, from whence Iue the Menſes, in their Monthly Purgation, and to the Anus, vhere it makes the External Hæmorrhoidal Artery. 3. THE Umbilical, by the Sides of the Bladder, berwixt the Membranes of the Peritonæum, to the Navel, and Paſſes, in a Fetus, into the Placenta Uterina, but after the Birth, Turns to a Ligament. FRrOM the Exterior. 1. The Epigaſirick, betwixt the Peritonæum and Muſculi Recti of the Abdomen, to the Mammary Artery, ſat the Navel; tho' it does not Inoſculate with it, as is ſuppoſed. 2. THE Pudenda, to the Secret Paris. THE Rami Illiaci after This go out of the Aldomen into the Thighs, where they e called Crurales. UroN the Heart and the Veſſels, which Appertain to it, There are Three Grand Controverſies, or Queſtions. Finst, What ĩs the Cauſe of the Heart's Motion? SECOND, HOW the Pulſation of the Heart, and Circulation of the Blood is Performed? TunirD, How Blood is made of Chyle, ſrom whence it's Heat and it's Colour, and vhether thẽ Body is Nouriſhed by it, and in what Manner? 5.2. Væ 5. 2. WE ſall nov, as uſual, Inquire what Solution our Doctrine of Expanſive Hou ihe Hart ind Contractive Forces can give of theſe Phænomenons. p Ia hiing Ir is Agreed on all Hands, that a Red-Beating Speck Appears in the Embr before iuũ is the Heart is Formed, and that this Ariſes upon the Impregnation of the ovm; That Bbiyo, ail the ovum has Originally an Expanſive Force belonging to it, is maniſeſt in Fowls, bemm both from its Yellow Colour, vhich is ſome Indication of it, as it Approaches to that ſu o iæ oof the Sun and of Fire, the Great Sources in Nature of the Expanſive, and from it's ſſnſ tV Strength, as an Aliment, which chiefly conſiſts in that Force, as we have before hewn; he amil On the other Hand, the Semen, which Impregnates it, has a Contractive Foree, and ꝑſtm i-qins accordingly vas never deemed fit for Nouriſhment, and it's Colour is near to a White, as Froſt, and Snow, and Salt, the Greateſt Inſtances ve know of the Contractive, are; ſo that the One may be Eſteemed the Animal Fire or Warmth, and the Other the Animal Froſt or Cold, or Salt, of the Growing Syſtem: Whilſt therefore the ovum Continues Unimpregnated, the Expanſive Force oſ it Remains Undiſturbed and Quicſcent in it ſelſ; but as ſoon as the Contractive Force, which is Oppoſite to it, Supervenes, a Motion and Ferment is Cauſcd, and the Expanſive of the Ovum is Excited, and the Red- Beating Speck is Produced, which by it's Pulſe declares it's Force to be, what we have Mentioned; And now the Animal Flame begins, which Burns to the laſt Period of our Lives. 5. 3. THUS in Mechanical Forces, where a Contractive and Expanſive Act oppoſite Th ſoregoito cach other, a Morion is continued ſo long, as thoſc Forces ſubſiſft; Thus it is in — the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies; and Thus in the Mixture of Chymical Li- àehauci quors of a Contractive and Expanſive Nature, all which we have already Explained: Life ſ ſn alſo has been Compared, and not Unjuſtly, to a Lamp and a Taper, as it depends upon  ibe nex;: the like Forces; For here there is the Expanſive of Fire or Flame, to which the Oily ſ æuin, ſ or Expanſive Subſtance continually Runs and Aſſimilates it ſelf, and the Contractive & mu. æ of Air, and if cither of Theſe are not Regularly ſupplied, it is Extinguiſied and Dies: q⸗/,, ſrom Laſtly, that this Animal Flame Commences in the Red-Beating Speck, and from the rmForces alledged, is Proved even in our own Syſtem, ſfrom the Common Inflamma- ĩb Comnm tions àand Redneſſes Produced in it, which are always in a Wound by the Expanſive Intammation Force of the Blood, and the Contractive of Air or Cold Mixing with it; For if the  5ſmn Alr is kept off, the Expanſive of the Blood Preſerves it's own Craſis and Temper; And from ĩbe 4rSalts, which are of a Contractive Nature, applied to a Freſh and Large Wound cauſe u sbaa, it to Redden and Feſter, but Balſams and Salves, which by their Inflammableneſs are of Experimeni a a Gentle Expanſive, Cheriſ and Aſſimilate ith the Blood, and gradually Cloſe and Diſetim. Heal it; Colds likewiſe produce Fevers, and a Contractive Force, Mingling with the Expanſive of the Blood, Exalts it into the Greateſt Heat and Ferment; And the Venal Blood, which is of a Deep Purple, by it's Paſſage thro the Lungs and Pulmonary Artery, that is, by Meeting with the Contractive of the Air there, is Raiſed into a Bright Scarlet, which is the Colour of the Arterial Blood, or which is the ſame, into an Higher Fever or Flame, or into a more Elevated Degree of the Expanſive, and which is immediately Perccived by the Pulſation, which Enſues, and the Vivid Colour it puts on, which are both Irreſragable Arguments of ſuch a Force and the Increaſc of it. And the ſame Blood Expoſed to the open Air in Venæſection Changes into a like Scarlet, as is known to every Obſerver. Hence alſo it is, that e Graeſ in the Diſſection of Rabbits, half an Hour, Six, Twenty Four, Twenty Seven, and Forty Eight Hours, after the Coitus or Injection of the Semen, or Conractive Force, found the Cornua of the Uterus to Redden, and the Limpid Liquor of the ovum gradually to change into that Colour. S. 4. THE Animal Flame being Kindled in the Manner Deſcribed, that is, the ææ ib anRed-Beating Speck being Produced as above, it Scatters, like Fire, and Diſperſes it's —i Inſluence, and Converts what is Alimentary to it, that is, the Lower Degree of the conmuãa & Expanſive in the ovum, into it's ovn Force, from whence Streaks of Blood are pre- a Neæ ſuriy ſently aſter Obſervable in it, the Contractive Force, like the Air, ſtill Fanning and ſuſ æ Exciteing the Vital Flame; And as the Aliment of the Embryo or Faetus is of an aũne Fre Expanſive Nature, as what we aſterwards Receive in for our Nouriſment is, it be- a ælu n comes the Pabulum or Fucl of the Blood or Animal Fire, by which there is a Con- ſ ſiæ Hem tinual Increaſe of it; And the Contractive Force is on the other Hand ſupplicd by anà Bran D d d2 the the Albugineous Liquor ſurrounding the ovum, and by the Nerves of the Womb, and of the Plexus Meſenterii Maximus, which Run into the Ovarium, by the Aſſiſtance oſ Which, the Seminal Principle Subdues other Forces to the Contractive, as the Sanguineous does to the Expanſive, from which Conjunction oſ the Contractive Forces are Derived the Rudiments of the Brain, which at Firſt ĩs little more than a Watiy and Thin Fluid. THE Red Beating Speck, which is aſterwards the Heart, thereſore being the Scat and Center of the Expanſive, and the Brain that of the Contractive, and being Forces oppoſite to each other, as the Red-Beating Speck ſends out Rays and little Streams oſ Blood towards the Latter, ſo the Latter emits Nerves and Saline or Contractive Juices towards the Former, in order to Preſerve the æquilibrium betwixt Them: And the Diſtance berwixt the Heart and the Brain is Determined, vhen that æquilibrium is Fixt and Aſcertaincd in the Farus, and is ſtill in Proportion Enlarged in Men, as the Expanſive and Contractive Forces Increaſe by new and continual Additions of Nouriſiment to both, till the Animal Syſtem is Arrived ro ĩit's urmoſt Maturity. 5.5. FROM this Account it is maniſeſt, that the Blood is Formed before the Veſſtls, which contain it, according to what is Acknov ledged and Wondered at by the Eminent Dr. Harvey and the Anatomiſts, vho have Followed him; But the Red Beating Speck being, as was ſaid, the Center and Seat of the Expanſive, Freſh Blood is continually Ama'/d to it, by it's Power of Converting Alimentary and Expanſive Juices into it's ovn Nature, as Fire does the Fuel, which is Miniſtred to it, and by the Lav of Nature, which Aſſembles Forces oſ the like Kind together. ON the Contrary, the Nerves from the Brain Endeavour to ſurround it with their Contractive Force to Balance the Expanſive, from whence the Right Ventricle of the Heart is Formed; for in a Fetus, as there is no uſe of the Leſi, by Reaſon of the Canalis Arterioſus Conveying the Blood from the Arteria Pulmonaris immediately to the Aorta, ſo we have no occaſion at Preſent to conſider it, but to ſuppoſe the Heart to Conſiſt only of One. 5. 6. WE ſnall now therefore from this Doctrine g30 Regularly on, and Aſſign a Reaſon for all the Phænomenons of the Heart and it's Veſſcls in Order, as they are before Recounted from Anatomiſis. Ir is the Source of Vital Heat, that is, the Blood, which is Contained in it, the Heart it ſelf being nothing more than a Thick Muſcular Coat, which Inveſis it; The Heat of the Blood Ariſes ſrom the Expanſive Force Acting in Oppoſition to the Contractive, as has been ſiewn before in the Red-Beating Speck, and is the Caſe of an Efferveſcence Produced in Chymical Liquors of Contrary Forces; And the Blood in the Ileart is the Source of this Vital Heat, becauſe the Blood here is Originally made from the ſaid Red-Beating Speck, and aſterwards Converts other Alimentary Juices into the ſame Subſtance, till Growing into a Maſi, it is ſurrounded by the Contractive with Muſcular Coats, and Included in the Ventricle; The Wounds in it are Mortal, for the ſame Reaſon, as the Cutting of any conſiderable Artery is ſo, the Blood being thereby Let out into the Body, the Circulation Diverted, and the whole Animal æuilibrium entirely Deſtroyed; It hangs looſc in it's Capſula, and is only ſuſpended in the Breaſt by it's Veſſels; For the Red-Beating Speck was ſolitary and alone, and by Degrees Collected a Maſs of Blood or the Expanſive Force to it, which aſterwards was Cloathed with the Fibres of the Contractive. 5.7. I's Figure is Conical with the Baſis upward; becauſe the Principal Conteſt betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive Forces is on that Surface, which lies Intermediate to Them, that ĩs, to the Heart and Brain, and therefore the Expanſive will there make the Greateſt Reſiſtance to the Contractive and will Diſplay it ſelf the Moſi, after vhich the Expanſive will be Continually and Gradually Diminiſh'd, and the Contractive cloſe in upon it accordingly, from Whence it will Surround it in ſtill Leſier Circles, till it Ends in the Aſucro and Apex of a Cone; Which Aſucro or Tip Inclines a little to the Leſt Side, becauſe the Chief Weight of the Action bewixt the Expanſive and Contractive Forces lies on the Right, that is, the Right Ventricle is Loaded with Blood and Preſicd by the Contractive, whereas the Left, iſf Formed, is as yet Empty, which thereſore muſt Elevate the Aruero to the Lefſt and ſink the Loaded Ventricle to the Right ꝗ. 8. I S. 8. Ir is ſituate Nearer to the Brain in Men than in Brutes; becauſc the Con- lyii ſusi mactive Force is Greater, as we have before Evinced, in the one than the other, by 3ſuſ.æwhich the Hcart is drawn Nearer to it in the Firſt, than in the Laſt Caſ. ihan in Brutus IT Adheres to the Pericardium at the Baſis, but not at the Tip; becauſc the Con- irinu ſuiee tractive uſes all it's Efforts there, where there is the Greateſt Expanſive Exerted againſt ĩum a i⸗æ it, and therefore Unites the Pericardium to the Muſcular Fibres of the Heart; On b.ẽ- maniy the Contrary, where the Expanſive Force is Weak, and the Contractive ſufficiently pu Prevalent, as at the Mucro, the Pericardium do's not Preſs to it's Aſſiſtance, Tiickneſi en It has a Firm, Thick, and Denſe Subſtance; becauſe the Expanſive Force of the ſit ; Blood Amaſſcd together being Great Required a ſtrong Contractive to Balance and a r⸗ Apex Encloſe it; and therefore the Arteries, which contain a Leſier Expanſive Force of the æ ſiBlood, have Thinner Coats, and the Veins, vhoſe Expanſive Force of Blood is ſtill illãt: more Diminiſhied, Thinneſt of all: For the ſame Reaſon, the Subſtance of the Heart is Thinner and Soſter on the Right Side, thro which the Venal Blood Flows, which has a Leſs Expanſive, and Thicker and more Denſe on the Left, thro whioh the Arterial is carryd, and which has a Greater Expanſive; but the Tip is the moſt Hard and Compact, ſfrom the Expanſive, which is here ſubdued, giving little Diſturbance to the Contractive, and from the Contractive Forces Uniteing more firmly together after their Conteſt with, and Superiority over, the Expanſive by the Law of Nature, by which Similar Forces Aſſemble and Cement together, and are Excited, if not Vanquiſhed, by a Contrary Action. s. 9. FARTHER, in Reſpect of the Fibres, which Compoſe theſe Coats, the Inner- The Rian ef mo©t Run Spiral- Wiſe from the Baſis to the Tip, Deſcending from the Left to the ſ́t c I Right; becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood lying in the Right Ventricle, the it Heari, in Contractive Force is carryd in its Action againſt it from the Leſt to the Right; the s=: Contractive alſo Deſcends, as it is Derived from the Brain, and Spirally, becauſe the Veride ar Expanſive Force Exerting it ſelf in Oppoſition to it, it cannot Deſcend in a Strait simonœ ihnn Line from Left to Right, and therefore muſt do it in a Curve; That is, every Step, 4 which the Contractive takes, is ſomething Elevated by the Expanſive above a Rectiſinear Deſcent, and conſequently is made to Wind about the Heart in a Spiral: The Second Courſe of Fibres Deſcend from the Right to the Left, For the Contractive Meeting with an Oppoſition from the Expanſive in it's Former Courſe, the ſame Contractive, Deſcending ſtill from the Brain, Attempts a Contrary, which by the Expanſive is notwithſtanding again Diverted into a Spiral, which Forms the Middle Coat: Laſtly, the Contractive Force from the Brain ſending out Freſh ſupplies againſt the Expanſive of the Blood, it at Length proceeds in ſtrait Lines from the Baſis to the Tip, or in Lines Parallel to Them; becauſe the Balance is now Compleated betwixt the Two Forces, and the Contractive Left to go in it's own Direction, and ſo the Heart with it's outmoſt Coat is Finiſied: The Fibres oſ the Leſt Ventricle are ſtronger than thoſe of the Right; becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Arterial Blood is Greater than that of the Venal, and therefore the Contractive Force in the one Caſe muſt be Superior to that in the other, to make an Aquilibiium of the Expanſive with the Contractive. S. 10. THERE is a Tendon ſpread over the Baſis of the Heart; becauſe the Expan- iy a Tendi ſive Force there Exerts it's whole Effort againt the Contractive, and conſequently ftthe Contractive from the Brain will be the moſt Conſtipated and Confirmed at that /ar, aa Surſace in Oppoſition to it: For which Reaſon alſo at the Egreſs of the Aorta, where æly ihe Hæ the Expanſive of the Blood is ſtill Increaſt, that Part of the Tendon in ſome Crea-;,2880 tures becomes Bony, that is, is Guarded with a Greater Contractive. Creatures, HENCE the Heart is Bigger in Men than in other Creatures, becauſe the Brain is suu'æt ſo, being as Big again as an Ox's, for to Preſcrve an æquilibrium betwixt the TWo ſĩæ Covardi; Forces, it the Source oſ the one is Enlarged, that of the orher muſt be in Proportion; but it is ſeſſcr and more Denſe in Bold and Couragious Men than in the Cowardly, becauſe the Spirituous, Nervous, or Contractive Force is Greater in the Firſt, and the Expanſive and Sanguincous in the Laſt; which is Certain in Experience, as the Meagre and the Enthuſiaſtick are more Nervous and Bold than the Fat and the Sanguinary. ſ. 11. THE Fat about it's Daſis is Produced ſrom a Mixture of the Blood, and im ihe u Nervous Juice, as other Fat; and it is not nouriſhd ſrom the Elood Contained in irmcn it, but by the Veiels Diſperſcd in it's Parenehyma : For as ſoon as the Blood is Pulſed ræ Coron: o t Fermed, an out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart thro' the Aorta, Part of it Runs immediately to the Heart by the Appetite of Nature, which carries it towards a Similar Force; the Expanſive within the Heart, from whence it was Expelled by the Contractive, and forms the Innumerable Branches of the Coronariæa upon the Baſis of it, where the Expanſive is the moſt Senſible and Strong; from thence it Deſcends to the Tip, and Penetrates into and Diſſuſes iĩt ſelf in Various Rivulets and Meanders thro the whole Subſtance; On the other Hand, the Contractive Force in like Manner, and by a like Appetite of Nature Aſſembles to the Contractive of the Heart, and Attends this Expanſive from the Plexus Cardiacus and Par Vagum of the Nerves, and Congeals and Hardens it into Fibres and Fleſh, by which means the æquilibrium is ſlill Preſerved berwixt the Two Forces, and the Parts Equally Nouriſhed. s. 12. THE Right Ventricle of the Heart being made, as above, with it's Fibres and Coats, an caly Account is given of the Reaſon of it's Motion and the Pulſation of it; For the Blood by it's Expanſive Force Swells and Dilates it, both that within it's Cavity, and that which is Spread and Scattered in it's Subſtance, that is, the Fleſhy Part oſ it, which is the Cauſe of it's Diaſtole; and the Nervous Fibres and Coats by their Contractive Force Streighten and Compreſs it, from Whence it's Syſlole Ariſes; And theſe Forces being in an Equal Balance, or nearly ſo, mutually ſuccced each other by Turns, neither being able to Overcome, Surmount, or Deſtroy and Annul the other; Like the Weight oſ a Clock and it's Pendulum, in which the Former is the Contractive and the Latter the Expanſive derived from the Expanſive of the Hand, which puts ĩt into Motion; and which therefore Conſills of TWo Oppoſite Forces Balanceing each other, from whence it's Motion Commences, and which, if either of them is Stopt or Hindered from it's Exertion, Ceaſes. S. 13. THE Blood, being by the Syſtole or Conſtriction of the Heart Driven out of it in a Fatus, by it's Appetite to the Expanſive hovers upon the Baſis, whither the Contractive Force Purſues and Surrounds it, and as the Blood is ſtill Pulſed ſorvards and Expands it ſelf, and the Nervous or Brainy Subſtance by it's Contractive Incloſes and Inveſts it, The Beginning of the Arteria Pulmonaris and the Canalis arterioſus is Formed, and aſter that, the Aorta with it's ſeveral Aſcending and De ſcending Branches; For a Progreſſive Expanſive Incloſed by a Progreſſive Contractive muſt oſ Neceſſity produce hollow Tubes and Canals, ſuch as the Arterices are. AxD from hence it is, that the Inner and Outer Coats of the Arteries are the ſame vith thoſe of the Heart, being Conſtituted in the ſame Manner: And as to the Aſcending and Deſcending Branches of the Aorta, why the Blood ſhould Deſcend is not hard to Conceive, ſince it is Endued with it's own Proper Gravity, but why it ſould Aſcend, or Receive a Lateral Direction, is ſomething Diſſicult to Explain, unleſs upon this Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. 5. 14. THE Reaſon of which therefore is, becauſe, as the Contractive Force of the Nervous Subſtance is carry'd from the Brain towards the Heart, ſo the Expanſive of the Sanguineous is Reciprocally carry'd from the Heart towards the Brain to Preſerve the quilibrium of the Animal Syſtem, by their Forces Acting in Oppoſition and in Counterpoiſe to each other; And this is ſo True, that the Carotid and Cervical Arteries, thro vhich the Blood Aſcends to the Brain, are ſo Large and Numerous, that a Third Part at leaſt of the whole Maſs is Conveyed thither by Them, which, Paſſing thro' the Capillary Arteries in ſimall Quantities, is Congealed and Transſormed into the Contractive Force oſ the Brain, in order to ſupply the Medulla oblongata, which is the Trunk of the Nerves, with new Matter for their Conſumption upon the ſeveral Parts, to which they are Branched and Propagated; And this made Malpighius think it Probable, that the Coagulative, or Concreſcible, Serum was Filtred in the Correx or Glandulous Part oſ the Irain ſrom the Arterial Blood, and from thence Transſerred by the Fibres ol the Corgus Calloſum to the ſaid Medulla; Upon the ſame Account, the Expanſive Force oſ the Blood is carryd in a Lateral Direction by it's Acting Contrary and in Oppoſition to the Contractive ſfrom the ertebræ of the Thorax, Back and Loins, and the ſcveral Nerves and Fibres ſent from thence; and which will alſo ſolve all orher the Innumerable Variety of Directions, Upwards, Downwards, and Tranſverſe, or Oblique, in which the Sanguineous and Nervous Matter is Diſperſed thro' the whole Body. G. 15. WE are likewiſe hereby Inſormed, why the Proceſſes oſ the Heart and Brain open towards cach other, whereas the Parts, which are Averſe, are Incloſed; For the Blood Blood and the Brain Exerting their Actions continually again each other, that is, their Expanſive and Contractive Forces, there muſt of Courſe be a continual Outlet to them that way, but the Expanſive in the Heart being Leſs at the Tip, as was before Explained, the Contractive Prevails and Inveſts it; On the Contrary, if the Brain is not Sollicited by any Action from the Expanſive, it Cloſes and Contracts of it ſelf, and therefore, under the Os Frontis, the Synciput, and Occiput, is Continuous without any ſuch Proceſes. 5. 16. THUS far we have gone, ſuppoſing the Fætus to be ſtill in the Womb, whilſt the Lungs are of no Uſe, and the Canalis Arterioſus and Foramen Ovale obtain their Proper Offices: But aſter the Birth, Things are otherwiſe, for then the Air Ruſhing into the Lungs, gives a new Turn to the Circulation of the Blood, and it now Paſes no Longer thro' the Canalis Arterioſus from the Pulmonary Artery into the Aorta, nor from the Vena Cava into the Pultmonary Vein thro' the Foramen ovale  vhich not being kept open by the Expanſive Force of the Blood Acting againſt their Sides, their Contractive Force Prevails, by which they Cloſc, and the Canals are thereby Converted into Ligaments; On the other Hand, the Blood from the Right Ventricle of the Heart Expands it ſelf againſt the Incurring Force of the Conrractive of the Air, in order to Oppoſc and Balance it, from Whence it is Diſperſed into the Innumerable Branches of rhe Pulmonary Artery, whoſe Coats are ſupplied to it by the Method above Deſcribed; But being able to Expand it ſelf no farther by the Oppoſition, which is made to it from the Contractive Force of the Air, it Returns in Streams towards the Heart the Fountain of the Expanſive, from whence the Branches of the Pulmonary Veins are Formed; and the Right Ventricle being already Poſſeſſed, it Forces it ſelf into the Left Side, and Makes or Compleats the Left Ventricle; and being Excited and Exaſperated into an Higher Degree of the Expanſive by the Op poſition it has met with, it Penetrates to the very Tip, and Dilates it ſelf ſo, that the Cavity of the Left Ventricle becomes Prominent into the Right, and the Seprum is Concave to the Former, and Convex to the Latter; but here being Reſiſted by the Coats of the Heart, and Propelled by their Contraction, it is Driven into the Aorra, which is already made to Receive it. i 5. 17. FROM hence it is Plain, that if there was any Communication betwixt one Ventricle and another by a Foramen thro' the Septum, this whole Contrivance of Nature would be Deſtroyed; And Either, when the Blood in the Right Ventricle was Expanded into the Lungs, the Blood in the Left would Follow thro' ſuch Foramen and not Paſs into the Aorta, ſrom whence the Aorta, and all the Arteries Derived from it, would Change into Ligaments, and the Body Wither into a Skeleton; Or Elſe it would Paſs into the Aorta and not into the Foramen, in which Caſe the Foramen would Change into a Ligament, and then it would have been in Vain for Nature to have made it, that is, only to ſtop it up again; Or laſtly, the Blood would Flow out of the Right Ventricle into the Left, without Paſſing thro the Lungs, from vhence it would vant it's Accenſion, from the Contractive Force of the Air, into Arterial Blood, which is ſo neceſary to it's Pulſation and the Circulation of it, and the Pulmonary Artery and Vein would be Contracted into Ligaments: From all which it is Evident, that as no Foramen was ever obſerved in the Septum, ſo that there Really is none; Namely, both from the Diſtinct Formation of the Ventricles, and from the neceſſary Conſequences, which vould Enſue in the Human Syſtem, which are not Experienced in it. S. 18. Tis Account alſo Furniſhes us with a Reaſon, why all the Blood Flows to the Right Ventricle, and is Dilcharged and Diſperſed from the Left; The Firſt, becauſc, beſore the Leſt Ventricle was Formed, or Compleated, the Blood Aſlembled to the Heart by that Law oſ Nature, which makes Similar Forces to Cement and Unite together; The Laſt, becauſe, as the Inſlux of the Blood continually Increaſes it's Quantity, there muſt be ſome vay ſor its Diſiriburion and Eſilux, which therefore is by the Pulmonary Artery and Vein into the Leſt Ventricle, ſrom whence by the Contractive Force of it's Coats it is Expelled into the Aorta, as already Deſcribed. s. 19. THE Auricles are of the ſame Nature with the Ventricles, and ſerve for the ſame Uſc, and are only the Firſt Efforts of the Contractive Force to Encloſe the Expanſive of the Blood, vhich is Finiſied and Effected in the Ventricles; and lhereſore the Fibtes in the Auricles, as beſore in the Ventricles, are Stronger in the - Lefſi Left than in the Right, that is, the Contractive Force is ſo, of which they Conſiſt; becauſe the Expanſive of the Arterial Blood is Greater and Stronger than the Venal, to Balance which a ſtronger Contractive is Required. THE Pulſation of the Auricles Procecds likewiſe ſrom the ſame Cauſe with that of the Ventricles, Namely, ſrom the Expanſive Force of the Blood, and chieſly from it's Accenſion in the Lungs by the Contractive Force of the Air, and from the Contractive Force of their Coats; So that it is very Probable, that the Principal Pulſation Ariſes from the Left Auricles and Ventricles of the Heart, when the Blood has been Inflamed, and the Expanſive Force of it Excited in the Lungs; However it is Plain, that the Syſtole of the Ventricles muſt be at the ſame Time with the Diaſtole of the Auricles, and the Syſtole of the Auricles with the Diaſtole of the Ventricles; And the ſame Lav ſcems to be Obſerved thro' the whole Arteries, that the Syſole of the Superior Parts ſould be at the ſame Time with the Diaſtole of rhe Inferior, and the Syſtole of the Inferior, with the Diaſtole of the Superior, or Vice Versi3 Since This Appears to be Requiſite in a Courſe of the Expanſive, as of the Blood, and oſ the Contractive, as of the Coats, which Inveſt it; For ſuppoſing theBlood to be Entering the Auricle, by it's Expanſive Force concurring with the Sanguineous Fibres, It immediately Dilates and Diſtends it, till the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fibres and Coats being Excited, It Repreſſes on the Blood and Fleſhy Fibres, and Con: ſtringes the Auricle, by which the Blood is Driven into the Ventricle, which is DiIated and Diſtended by it, whilſt the Auricle ſubſides and is Contracted; On the other Hand, the Contractive Force of the Ventricle is now Exerted, and whilſt the Blood is Expelled from it by it's Conſtriction, New Blood Flows into the Auricle, which again by it's Expanſive Force Dilates and Diſtends it. IN like Manner, in any Two Contiguous Parts of the Aorta, or it's Branches, in the Deſcending Trunk, when the Blood Enters the Superior Part, a Dilatation is Cauſed by it's Expanſive Force, and that of the Sanguineous or Fleſhy Fibres, which is ſucceeded by a Conſtriction from the Contractive of the Coats and the Nervous, and vhich Propells the Blood to the Inferior Part, which now Swells and is Dilated, whilſt the Superior Sinks and is Contracted, and whilſt the Inferior is Contracted after it's Dilatation, the Superior is Dilated by a Freſh Influx of Blood, and a Reneval of the Expanſive; And what is ſaid here of a Superior and Inferior Part oſ the Deſcending Trunk of the Aorta, obtains of an Inferior and Superior in the Aſcending: And by theſe Methods a Progreſſive Pulſation appears to be Propagated thro' the whole Sanguincous Syſtem, not much Unlike to, or Differing from, the Vermicular or Periſtaltick Motion of the Inteſtines; So that Nature in the Animal Frame, as well as in the Mundane, Acts Agrecably and Conſiſtently with it ſclf, ſince its Motions are Uniform, and are Derived from the ſame Principles; and which is a Forcible, if not an Invincible, Argument for the Truth of Thoſe, vhich we have Alledged. ꝗ. 20. FROM hence it is Manifeſt, that the Pulſe of the Arteries does not Depend upon, nor is Communicated to Them ſrom the Pulſation of the Heart, but that every Pulſe is Diſtinct and Independent, and Ariſes from the Influx of Blood into the ſeveral Parts, and the Reciprocal Contraction and Dilatation of thoſe Parts from the Expanſive of the Blood and of the Sanguineous or Fleſhy Fibres, and the Contractive of the Nervous; And therefore it is, that in Experience we find the Pulſe of the Wriſt keeps no Time with that of the Temples, or of the Upper Part of the Noſe, nor Theſe with the Grand Pulſe of the Heart, which is Eaſy for any one himſelf to Obſerve, and is an Indication of Their being Separate and Independent Motions, and ſuch, as are Agreeable to the Account, we have given of Them. 5. 21. THiIS likewiſe Informs us, how the Heart comes to Beat, and to Retain a Pulſation even after it's Separation from the orher Parts of the Body; becauſe, tho the Blood no longer Flows into it, yet the Flehy or Sanguincous Fibres Preſerving their Expanſive Force, ſo long as the Heart continues Warm, Act againſt the Contractive of the Nervous; From whence there will be a Reciprocation of Motion, till the Expanſive is quite ſubducd, and tl cſeart becomes Cold and Contractive: And this is farther Confirmed from the Pulſe b3 Revived, aſter the Heart has Ceaſcd Beating, by an Aſfuſion of Warm Blood, or evei Warm Water upon it; For thereby the Expanſive : of of the Sanguincous, or Fleſhy, Fibres is again Excited, and Enabled to Prolong it's Conteſt with the Contractive, till it again Languiſhes and Expires, and the Contractive finally Triumphs and Prevails. j ; 5. 22. SO that from this Doctrine the Circulation of the Blood, it's Colour and Nutrition, and the Motion of the Hcart, are Neceſary, tho' they are Difficulties, which have hitherto Confounded and Puzzled the Greateſt and moſt Celebrated Anatomiſts; For the Blood Aſſembles to the Heart by that Law of Nature, by whichi Similar Forces are Collected to each other, and it is Expelled from thence by the Contractive Force of it's Coats and Nervous Fibres, which cannot fail of Piòduceing the Circulation Mentioned; More particularly, according to the foregoing Account, the Heart being Formed, the Blood is Pulſed out of the Right Ventricle into the Leſt, and ſo into the Aorta, for it is Impoſſible for it to Proceed thro' the Mucro or Tip; The Cauſes, Springs, and Directions of which Motions have been already Explained; From the Aorta it is carry'd thro' the Branches of it to all Sides, by the Contractive Force of the Coats and Nervous Fibres, which Protrude and Propell it ſrom the Heart towards the Extreme Parts, where it is Made or Congealed into Fleh by the Contractive Force of the ſaid Nervous Fibres, and becomes the Nouriſhment of the Carnous Syſtem; But, the Blood ſtill Flowing into thoſe Parts, by its Expanſive Force being now Superior to the Contractive, it Aſcends, and Tends towards the Heart by the afore- mentioned Law, from whence it was Driven, but, being ſiill Followed and Balanced by the Contractive, it is Inveſted with Nervous Couts, from whence the Veins are Formed, and the Circulation Perfected. s. 23. ALSO, we may from hence give an Account, how the Parts of the Body are continually Reneved; ſor the Blood being Condenſed into Fleh by the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fibres, as it Rots and Putrifies it Grows Expanſive, and is therefore carry'd off by the Expanſive Force of the Superfluous Blood in the ſeveral Parts, and is ſupplied by the Condenſation of New Blood into Fleſh, from whence Ariſes the Perpetual Renovation of Them; But when the Expanſive Force of the Blood grows ſo Weak and Languid, that it cannot Elevate and Raiſe the Corrupted Pants, an Univerſal Tabes Enſues, and a Diſſolution of the whole Animal Oeconomy. i 5. 24. As to the Colour of the Blood we have ſhewn, that it Ariſes from an Increaſe of the Expanſive in the ovum by the Oppoſition of the Contractive of the Seminal Principle, and that the Chyle is Raiſed into that Colour by Mixing With the Blood, as Fuel is Converted into Fire; And as to the Motion of the Heart, we have Explained it from the Expanſive of the Blood, and the Carnous Fibres on the one Hand, and the Contractive of the Animal or Brainy Subſtance, and the Nervous Fibres on the other, Acting againſt each other, ſo as neither of the Forces can Prevail, from Whence Proceeds a Reciprocation of Them. 5. 25. THERE ſeems nothing therefore Remaining in Relation to the Heart, Excepting to Examine the Famous Alphonſus Borelluss Opinions Concerning it, ſince what ve have ſaid vill ſuſficiently Confute the Fancies of Anatomiſts,; which have been vulgarly Received about it; As, That it's Motion Proceeds from an Influx of Animal Spirits conveyed by the Nerves, altho' the Heart Moves in the Zmbryo, before eithet Brain or Nerves are Formed, and in Living Fætuss vhen cut out from the Body and Entirely Separated from all the Parts of it; Or elſe from the Rarefaction and Accenſion of the Blood, tho', according to Dr. Loer's Experiment and his Friends, the Heart continues it's Pulſation, when no Blood Flows into it, and only Beer and Wine, or Broth, are Derived into it's Ventricles; l TuA? Chyle is Changed into Blood by the Vital Spirit, and Ative Principle of ihe Latter Looſcning, by Fermentation, the Salt, Sulphur, and Spirit of the Former, and Aſſimilateing and Aſſociateing Parts to it, which are of a like and ſuitable Nature; Tuar Blood becomes Hot by a Viral Flame, which is Lodged in the Heart, and vhich Heats the Blood, as it Paſſes thro' it, tho' it is Clear, the Heart is nothing but a mere Muſcle; or by a Saline Subſtance Mixing with a Sulphureous, or an Acid with an Altali, tho' no ſuch Subſtances are Obſerved in the Blood; or by an Accenſion of it, vhich is Unexplained; E  f ANi AxD laſtly, That the Colour of the Blood is owing to the Heart, or to the Mix ture of Salt and Subacid Juices with Sulphureous, as in the Diſtillation of Sal Nitre or in Pouring Oil of Vitriol on Conſerve of Roſes, by which a Pale Red is Changed into a Deep one: Theſe we ſhall omit particularly to Conſider, becauſe they are Refuted by what foregoes, or, ſo far as they ſtand Good, are Explicable by the Pre cedeing Doctrine; The Vital Spirit and Sulphur, being Different Expreſſions of our Expanſive Force, and the Acid and Saline Subſtances, of the Contractive. 5. 26. As to Eorellus in order to Explain the Mechanical Motion of the Heart, he Firſt gives the Structure of it from Aalpighius Lower, and Bellinus, and makes it not to be a Parenchyma, but a Muſcle, conſiſting of ſtrong Carnous Fibres, of rthe ſame Priſmatick Figure, of the ſame Colour, Conſiſtence, and Tenacity, with the Fibres of other Muſcles, which cannot be Drawn out into a Greater Length, as they are Renitent to a Diſtraction, but are Contracted of their own Accord, have a Tenſion, are Inflated, and acquire an Hardneſs, vhen they Act in the Heart's Pulſation, and in Boiling become Groſs and Turgid, and are caſily Torn in Pieces and Broken; But this Fibrous Conſtitution of the Heart Differs from that of other Muſcles, its Fle being Firm, Hard, Uniform, and Dyed with a Red Colour, not Lax and Soſt, nor are it's Priſmatick and Carnous Columns Separated from it's Membranes, and it's Innumerable Tendinous Fibres, as the Carnous Fibres of the other Muſcles are; Thus alſo it's Carnous Fibres are not in Strait and Parallel Lines, but Spiral, and Variouſly, and with a wonderful Artificc, Interwoven with each other, ſomething Agreeable to what has been before Deſcribed. BESIDES Which, there are Ten Millions of Millions of the Ramifications of Nerves, Derived from the Par Vagum, Scattered and Diſperſed thro' the Carnous Fibres oſ the whole Heart 3 After which he Proceeds to Inform us of the Two Coronary Arteries ſfrom Bartholin, and of the Auricles, and the Trunk of the Vena Cava, all which were before Mentioned. ] IN a following Propoſition he farther ſiews the Action of the Heart, as before he had given the Structure of it; That in Pulſation, it's whole Carnous Subſtance, as is Evident from Senſe, is, like that of other Muſcles, Inflated upon the Tenſion, and Hardened with the utmoſt Violence, but that the Swelling of the Fibres is not Deſigned by Nature, as in other Muſcles, to ſhorten the Diſtance betwixt the Extremities, and by that means to Draw them together, and the Joints, in which they are Inſerted; On the Contrary, in the Heart the Fibres are Shortened, that they may be Inflated and Swell, and thereby Straiten and Contract the Concave Surface of it, in order to Preſs out and Expell the Blood, which it Contains; which is Apparent from hence; That in every Pulſation or Tenſion of the Heart, the Contents of it are in Fact Driven into the Arteries, as by a Syringe, and if we Thruſt a Finger thro' a Wound made into a Live Heart, which Bellinus and Lower Obſerved, it will, at every Pulſation or Tenſion of it, be Caught and Encloſcd as in a Forceps, and the Fleſh, upon it's Inflation and Hardening, Surrounds and Embraces it with Force, and Buries it in it's Subſtance, whilſt the External Surface of the Heart is not Increaſed or Altered by ſuch a Turgeſcence or Inflation. Whuar is afterwards Alledged to ſolve this Repletion of the Cavity of the Heart, from an Hollow Glomus, Compoſed of Threads Equally Thick, and of a like Conſitence, Wound Spirally Round a Bladder, blown up to Form an Intermediate Cavity, that if the Cavity of the Glomus is filled up by a Moiſicning of the Threads, the Internal Spires of the Glomus muſt be Wrinkled and Pleated, whilſt the External Remain in th]ir full Tenſion, from whence the Mechanical Operation, by which the Cavity of the Moiſtened Glomus is filled up, is Explained, is ſo Abſurd and RidicuIous an Account of the Repletion of the Cavity oſ the Heart in it's Pulſation or Tenſion, that, however Mathematical it may Appear by the Figures it makes uſe of, it ſcarcely Merits anm Anſwer. 5. 27. For, tho' it is certain, that if the Cavity of the Glmus is filled up by a Moiſtening of the Threads, thoſe Threads, be they Circular or Spiral, muſt be bent Inwards in Plic or Wrinkles in order to Penetrate into and Poſſeſs ſuch Cavity, yet it is not Evident, that the Cavity of the Glomus will be filled up by Moiſtening the Threads, or that they will Deſcend into ſuch Cavity by theit Madeſaction; On the Con- Contrary, Threads, which are Lax and Flaccid, by Moiſture become more Stretched and Shorter, whereas this Doctrine ſuppoſes, that Threads, which are Stretch'd, by Moiſture are Rendered more Lax, Flaccid, and Longer. BESIDES, This Doctrine Informs us, that the Cruſt of the Glomus and the External Threads, of which it is Compoſed, do not Change their Figure by Madefaction, and there is no Reaſon Aſſigned, why the next Interior Coat of Threads ſould do it; tis Truec, we are Told, that there is an Inflation of the Internal Threads, which Augments theit Superficies, and ſince the External Coat is Immoveable, ſuch Augmentation of the Superſicies muſt be ſpenr Inwards towards the Center of the Gſmus, by which it vill become Wrinkled; but an Inflation of the outward Coat is likewiſe Acknoledged, and yet no Augmentation of the Superficies Owned; If therefore the Superſicies of the outward Coat is nor Augmented by Madefaction, why ſhould the Inner? IF it is, why ſhould the Inner Tend in Wrinkles to the Center of the Glomus? Moreover, This is contrary to the Experiment in the Heart, in which the outward Surface is not Augmented, to Explain which the Gſlomus is Introduced. FARTHER, Suppoſing the Madefaction of the Threads of the Interior Coats vas capable of Protruding them in Wrinkles towards the Center or Cavity of the Glomus; Here vould be a Languid Motion of the Internal Parts of the Glomus tovards it's Cavity or Center, but how will this ſolve that Force and Vehemence, with which the Heart Acts in Pulſation? Here would be a Soft, Looſe, and Pulpy, Subſtance from the Relaxation of theſe Spirals into the Cavity of the Glomus, but where ſhall we find from thence the Hardneſs and Induration Acquired upon the Muſcular Tenſion? On the Contrary, the Principles, ve have Advanced of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, furniſh us with a Complete Solution of the Phænomenons Propoſed. ꝗ. 28. THE Carnous Fibres cannot be drawn out into a Greater Length, but are Renitent to a Diſtraction, whilſt they are Contracted of their own Accord; Becauſe they conſiſt of the Expanſive Force of the Blood ſubdued by the Contractive Force of the Nervous Fluid, by which they are Rendered Tenacious and Solid, the Contractive Force therefore Prevailing, the Fibres are Diſtracted Hardly, but Contracted Eaſily: They are of a Priſmatick Figure; Becauſe the Expanſive Force, Exerting it ſelf in their Formation, and being Oppoſed by the Contractive, Shoots into Angles, as is done in all other Chryſtallizations, and the Number of the Angles are Diſferent, according to the Different Proportion of Force betwixt the Expanſive and Contractive, as we have before Explained: They become Turgid in Boiling, and are caſily Torn in Picces and Broken; Becauſe, by the Application of the Expanſive Force of Heat and Fire, the Contractive is Diminiſhed, by which their Parts in a Turgeſcence are Scparated farther from each other, and in Tearing and Breaking of them are entirely Diſunited: They have a Tenſion, are Inflated, and Acquire an Hardneſs, in the Pulſation of the Heart; Becauſe, when the Blood Flows into the Ventricles of it, the Expanſive Force is exceedingly Increaſed, and Raiſes and Excites the Remaining Expanſive in the Fibres, which therefore Swell and are Dilated; This likewiſe cauſes the Contractive Force to Exert it ſel? with Greater Vigour in the Fibres, in Oppoſition to the Expanſive, to which the Nerves from the Par Vagum Joining their Contractive, an Hardneſs is Produced: And from this vaſt Contention of Forces the Cavities of the Heart are Filled, and, the Contractive Prevailing, the Expanſive Force of the Blood is Expelled into the Arteries, and the Heart is Cloſed, till it is again opened by a new Influx of the Expanſive Force of Blood, which is in like Manner Driven out, as before. TuE outward Surface of the Heart in the mean Time is little or nothing concerned in this Action; Becauſe, as we have alrcady ſhewn, the Contractive Force is there o ſully Eſtabliſied, that it is not Affected with the Expanſive of the Influent Elood. THE Fleh and Carnous Fibres of the Heart are Firmer and Stronger than thoſc of other Muſcles; Becauſe the Conteſt of the Two Forces is here Greater, and the Contractive Prevailing muſt be likewiſe here the Greateſt in Reſpect of any othei Carnous Fibres. Axn for the ſame Reaſon, the Carnous Fibres in the Heart are more ſtrictly Joined and Cemented vith it's Membranes and Tendinous Fibres, which are of a Nervour E e e 2 and ind Comrractive Nature, than in other Muſcles; Becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood being Greater, the Contractive Forces are more united together in order to Oppoſc and Balance it. FrROM Whence Appears alſo the Neceſſity of ſuch an Infinite Number of Ramifications of Nerves from the Par Vagum, which have a Contractive Force, to ſupport the æquilibrium againſt the Expanſive of the Incurring Blood. AND Why theſe Fibres of the Heart are Spiral, ve have before Explained, which vill give a Solution, why thoſe of other Muſcles are Direct and Parallel. THiS Doctrine thereſore Declares to us plainly, how the Cavities of the Heart are filled by a Tenſion and Inflation of the Fibres of it, how they become Hard, Conſtipated and Cloſe, and how this Action is Performed with the urmoſt Vehemence and Energy, vhich is not done by the ugæ or Plicæ of the Threads of the Glomus, and the Madeſaction of Them. FroM hence alſo an caſ Account may be given, vhy the Aruero of the Heart in it's Syſtole ſtrikes againt the Left Part of the Breaſt; Becauſc aſter the Blood has Paſſed thro' the rena Pulmonaris, it becomes more Accended, and by Conſequence more Expanſive, the Contractive Force will therefore be Greater on that Side, and the Conteſt betwixt borh the Forces Irritated and Increasd; from whence, as we have ſiewn, the Pulſation, Tenſion, or Erection, of the Heart Ariſes, and therefore the Action of the Heart will Preponderate to the Left; And as to it's Auricles, we have already Conſidered, and Given an Explanation of, the Syſtole and Diaſiole of Them. 5. 29. WHAT Remains of Borellus upon the Heart is to Inquire into the Force and Power of it's Motive Faculty, and into the Immediate Efficient Cauſes oſ irs Motion. As to the Firſt, he tells us after a Series of many Mathematical Propoſitions. 1ſ. That the Motive Force of the Fibres of the Heart, conſidered by it ſelf, is able to ſuſlain a Greater Weight than of 3000 Poundss. 2à. That all the Arterics of an Animal, aſter Pulſation, could not Subſiſt, if they were wholly Exhauſted oſ their Blood, and therefore always Retain ſome in Them after ſuch Pulſation. 30. That the Motion of the Blood in the Arteries has Thrice the Velocity of that, with which the Heart is Moved and Impells the ſame Blood. 47h. That the Power ol the Heart, which Conſiringes it, is Leſs than the Reſiſftence, which the Blood Contained in it's Ventricles Exerts, in a Subſeſquialterate Proportion. 5h. That the Force, which the Blood Contained in the Ventricles ſuffers from the Compreſſion of the Heart, is Equal to the Force, with which the ſame Blood, like the æmlolus of a Syringe, Impells the Blood into the Arteries, to whoſe Reſiſtence it has the ſame Proportion, as 1 to 40 nearly. 6rh. That the Abſolute Motive Force, by which the Heart is Conſtringed, is to the whole Force, with which the Blood in the Arteries is Reluctant to it's Expulſion, as I to 60. 7th. That the Motive Force of the Heart Exceeds in it's Moment the Reſiſtence of the whole Blood of the Arteries, and the Faſciæ, vhich Hinder their Dilatation, which Reſiſtence is Greater than the Force, vhich Reſults from a Weight of 180000 Pounds. 8h. That in every Pulſation of the Heart, either a whole Maſs of 3 Ounces of Blood, or ſome Portion of it, is Expelled ſfrom the Heart, not into, but on the Outſide of, the Arteries by a Motive Force Diſtinct and Different from the Embolus of the Heart, Conſidered as a Syringe. orh. That the Cauſe, which Expells the Blood on the Outſide of the Arteries thro the Orifices of them, is the Compreſſion and Reſtriction of the Arteries by the Mechanical Force of the Human Syſtem, by which the Fibres of the Veſſels and Bowels are Contracted. 10rh. That the Power of the Heart in one Pulſation only ſurmounts a Reſiſtence, which is Greater than a Weight of 135000 Pounds, and ſincc there are at Leaſt 1000 Pulſes in an Hour, it will in that Time have ſurmounted a Reſiſtence, which is Greater than a Weight of 135000000 Pounds, and in a Day, a Reſiſtence Greater than a Weight of; 150000000 Pounds, an Amazcing and Incredible Force, if it were not ſo, that the Force of Percuſſion in it's ovn Nature is  Vaſ, that it is Able to Surmount any Finite Reſiſtence. As As to the Second, or the Efſficient Cauſes of the Hearts Motion, he Aſſerts con trary to the Ancients. 1ſf. That the Immediate Cauſe of the Motion of the Heart, which is a Muſcle, does not Differ from that which makes the Muſcles of the Joints to Move. 2ã. That the Firſt and Mediate Cauſe of the Motion of the Heart does Differ from that, which Actuates the other Muſcless. 3d. That the Motion of the Heart is Performed by certain Stated and Neceſlary Laws of Mechaniſm, as well as that of other Automatonss 47h. That it is Poſſible, the Motion of the Heart may be Eſected by the ſame Animal and Cognoſcitive Faculty, by which that of the Muſcles of the Joints is Produced, tho we do not Obſerve it, by Reaſon of it's being ſo Habitual to us. TuEsE are the Chief Propoſitions of Borellus in Relation to the Heart, beſides thoſe, which we have already Conſidered, and which we ſhall now Examine. 5. 30. AND Finst, as to the Motive Force of the Fibres of the Heart being able to ſuſtain a Greater Weight than of 3000 Pounds, it is Proved upon a Suppoſition, that all the leaſt Fibres of Different Muſcles in the ſame Animal are Equally Strong, and Exert an Equal Motive Force in the ſame Time; and that therefore, ſince the Carnous Fibres of the Heart are nearly Equal in Bulk to one of the Temporal Muſcles, and one of the Maſſeters, and their Motive Force is known, that of the Heart may be likewiſc Determined: But it is a large Conceſſion to allow, that the Ieaſt Fibres of Different Muſcles in the ſame Animal have an Equal Force; and we might as vell Preſume, thar the Blood obtains as Great an Expanſive Force, and the Nervous Fluid a Contractive in the Extreme Parts, as in the Heart and the Brain, as that the Fibres, which are Compounded and Formed of thoſe Forces, are every where the ſame; The Contrary rather ſeems to be Evident, that the Fibres Vary and Diſfer in their Forces, according to the ſeveral Degrees of the Expanſive Force ol the Blood, and of the Contractive of the Nervous Fluid, of Which they are Conſtituted and Made. IN order likewiſe to Prove this Motive Force of the Fibres of the Heart, the Cortex of it is Imagined to Repreſent a Gun, it's Internal Fibres, upon their Turgeſcence and Inſlation, ſerve for the Powder upon it's being Fired, and the Blood, Expelled from it, is the Bullet Diſcharged; From whence it is Reaſoned, that as every Grain of Powder in it's Exploſion Impells a Correſpondent Particle of the Bullet, and all the Grains together Impell ſo many Particles of the Bullet, as there are Grains, ſo in like Manner each of the leaſt Fibres of the Heart Acting together Impell Equal Particles of the Sanguineous Bullet; and it's whole Reſiſtence is Compounded of ſo many Particles, every one of which is Equal to the Power of one of the leaſt Fibres, as there are leaſt Fibres in the whole Heart: But is it not ſomething Extraordinary, that here the Heart is made to Reſemble a Gun, and its Fibres the Exploſion of Gun-Powder, when before it was a Glomus, and it's Fibres Expreſſcd by the Madeſaction of Threads, And aſter a Syringe, and its Fibres the Embolus? Is not this to Reconcile Fire and Water? And to Play the Proteus inſtead of the Philoſopher? Beſides, the Exploſion of Gun-Powder, which is ſo neceſſary to this Doctrine, is not Truly and Juſly Explained, whilſt the Particles oſ it, and the Number of them, are only Conſidered, as if all Matter were Similar, and not their Real Force, which, in Diſſimilar, may be much Greater in a Particle of One Kind, than a Bare and Common Impulſe in a Thouſand of Another. S. 31. WuaT therefore we ſhall Conclude with upon this Propoſition is only, that tho we may give an Account of the Motion, or Motive Force, of the Heart, yet it is not likely, that we can Aſcertain the preciſe Degree of it's Force, excepting in General, that it is much Leſs than what is here Aſſigned, and that it is Little more than what Exceeds an æquilibrium of Two oppoſite Forces; That the Heart does not Surmount the whole Maſs of Blood by it's Pulſations and Ejecting it out of it's Cavities, but that in Reſpect of it ſelf the Blood is in an Equal Balance of it's Parts nearly, it's Expanſive Force being throughout the Human Compages not Extremely Difſerent, and the Exceſs of the Contractive Force above it in the Nervous Syſtem ſeems to be the Cauſe of it's Expulſion from the Heart, it's Promotion thro' the Arteries and Veins, and conſequently oſ it's Circulation, as we have beſore Evinced. SECoND, SECOND, That therefore the Arteries are never Empty, but always Retain ſome Blood, and are even Generally almoſt Full, is Aſented to and Granted; For otherviſe, neither the æquilibrium of the Expanſive in the Blood could be Maintained, nor the Exceſs of the Contractive in the Nerves Exerted, nor conſequently the Pulſation ol the Heart and Arteries Continued, which Ariſes frcom the Conteſt of thoſe Two Forces; This therefore we readily Admit, and it is farther juſtified by Fact and Experience. TumrD. That the Motion oſ the Blood in the Arteries has thrice the Velocity oſ That, with which the Heart is Moved and Impells the ſame Blood, is Proved upon this Suppoſition; That the Inflation of the Heart, the Reſtriction of it's Cavities, the Expulſion of the Blood from the Ventricles, the Motion of it within the Arteries, and the Protruſion of the Cruor, or of the Blood which was Pre-exiſtent in Them, are all Performed in the ſame Time;3 Whereas there muſt be an Inflation of the Heart before the Cavities are Filled, and the Cavities muſt be filled before the Blood is Expelled; and the Morion of the Blood within the Arteries is as much owing to the peculiar Contractive Force of Them, as to the Expulſion from the Heart; and the Promotion of the Crur belongs alſo to the ſame Cauſc, according to what has been before Explained. FourTH, That the Pover of the Heart, which Conſtringes it, ſhould be Leſ than the Reſience, which the Blood, Contained in ĩt's Ventricles, Exerts, in a Subſcſquialterate, viæ. as 2 to3, or any other Submultiple Proportion, is Inconceivable; Since, if the Reſiſtence of the Blood vithin the Heart vas Greater than the Compreſſive or Contrattive Force of it, which way would it be Poſſible for the Blood to be Expelled out of it? On the Contrary, ve ſuppoſe the Expanſive Force of the Blood to be Inferior 1o the Contractive of the Muſcular Fibres; Beſides, the Preſent Propoſition Proceeds upon a Reaſoning, vhich Preſumes, that the External Fibres Act as a Cord Revolved Round a Globe or a Cylinder, and that therefore the Power, which Contracts the External Fibres of the Heart, is to the Reſiſtence of the Blood Compreſſed, as the Semidiameter of a Circle to it's Circumſerence, or Leſs than as 1 to 6, and that the Internal Fibres Act as a Cuneus, or an Embolus, of a Syringe, and Impell the Blood from the Periphery of the Heart to it's Center: To Which there needs be.no orher Anſwer given, than that this Philoſophy, if it Pleaſed, might make the Heart a Milſtone, which was able to Grind all our Aliment into Blood, and there would be an End of the Matter; for how will a Cord and a Cylinder, or an Zmbolus or a Wedge, give us any Account of the Erection and Inflation of the Heart, and of it's Exceeding Liſe and Encrgy? vhich are not to be Repreſented by ſuch Dead and Unactive Powers, and can be only ſolved by the Expanſive and Contractive Forces we Defend. FirTH, And for the ſame Reaſon we have no occaſion to Examine into the Fiſth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Propoſitions before Mentioned, which all Depend upon the Ilike Precarious Fancies. s. 32. As to the Second Series of Propoſitions concerning the Efficient Cauſes of the Hearts Motion, there is no neceſſity of Inquiring into them particularly, we ſhall only ſay, that we have already Explained what they are; and perhaps there will be found to be no Great Diſagreement in this Celebrated Author from what we have Aſerted, Excepting that, as he in General Affirms in Prop. 3d, That the Motion of the Heart is Performed by certain Stated and Neceſſary Laws of Mechaniſm, as vell as That of other Automatons, and Prop. 41h. That the Motion of the Heart may be Effected by the ſame Animal and Cognoſcitive Faculty, by which that of the Muſcles of the Joints is Produced, without giving any Account how this may be done, ſo we have on the Contrary ſicwn the Way and Manner of it from the Laws of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, tho' ſuch a Mechaniim is Impoſſible to be ſolved by the Common Laws of the Cuneus or Embolus, or a Cord Revolved about a Globe or a Cylinder, which this Philoſophy Eſpouſes. Nor can we allow what Dr. Drale Propoſcs ſor a Solution of the Diaſtole of the Heart, which he Confeſſcs is Unevplained by Dr. Loer, Sorellus, and the beſt and moſt Accurate Anatomiſls, Namely, that it is owing to the Air Incumbent upon the Lungs, and which Acts as an Antagoniſt Muſcle ro the Heart; ſince the Pulſe of the Heart does not keep Time with the Action of the Lungs, For we can Breath Faſter or or Slower, vhilſt the Pulſe Continues Uniform; nor can it be owing to the Mòment and Pondus of the Influent Blood, ſince Fluids, which Paſ in a continued Canal, as the Blood in the Heart and Arteries, are in an quilibrium, and have not any peculiar Weight or Preponderancy at all; And as to the Syſtole, which he thinks ſuſficiently Explained by thoſe Learned Men, ve muſt Alledge, that however they may Agree in making Contraction the Proper and Natural State of the Heart, or any other Muſcle, they have not ſhewn, how it comes to be ſo, which we have beſore Accounted for from the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem. s. 33. I Intended from hence 10 Proceed to the Lungs, to the Brain, the Eyes, the Muſcles, Bones, and Marro, and to Inquire into Them in the ſame particular Method, which I have hitherro Preſcribed to my Self, and into all the Remaining Phænomenons of the Animal Syſtem. IN Reſpect of the Lungs, I ould have ſhiewn from the ſame Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; That the Bronchia of them and their Veſicles or Bladders are Formed ſrom the Contractive of the Nervous Syſtem, and the Expanſive of the Air; That the Expanſive of the Air obtains a Middle Proportion betwixt the Contractive of the Brain, and the Expanſive of the Blood and the Aliment; That therefore it's Entrance into the Animal Frame, in the Færus, is betwixt the Fore-head, vhere the Contractive of the Brain Prevails, and the Mouth, vhich is made by the Expanſive of the ſaid Aliment; That the Noſtrils are Flatter at Firſt, and aſtervards more Prominent by the above- mentioned Expanſive of the Air; and That the Air, hich is of a Middle Force betwixt the Contractive of the Brain, and the Expanſive of the Blood and Aliment, Terminates it's Progreſs in the Lungs by the Superiority of thoſe Forces, which have their Canals and their Conveyances in Pipes and Tubes Diſperſed thro the whole Syſtem. IN Reſpect of the Brain, I would have likewiſe Evinced; That it Conſiſted of a Cold and Contractive Force; That the Blood- Veſſels in it, which are of an Expanſive, are Small and Few upon the Account of the Prevalence of the Contractive; That yet the Degrees of the Contractive are Different in it, the one Part being more Conſtipated and Denſe, and the other more Watry and Fluid, or Expaniſive; That from the Different Natures of theſc Forces, we are to Judge of the Conſtitution of the Brain, and it's Influences and Effects upon the Mind, ot the Conttãry, and not from the Texture of it's Parts, or the Diſtinctions made of Them, by ihe Nomenclators in Anatomy. j IN Rẽ\ſpect of the Eyes, I would have Proved; That they are Formed by the Wa. try Part of the Brain, and are the Contractive of It, Raiſed into the utmoſt Degree of the Expanſive; From whence they may be ſaid to be the Life and Spirit of it; and therefore that there is that particular Connexion betwixt the Temper and Conſtitution of the Brain and Eye, the Latter of which is ſaid to be the Index of the Former, and of the Mind and Underſtanding, which Reſides in it; Hence it is, that having ſo near an Alliance with the Brain, and conſequently with the Mind, it Communicates all the moſt Delicate Senſations to us; Whereas thoſc Perceptions, which we have from our other Senſes, vhoſe Organs are leſs Nervous, and are Mixed with the Sanguineous Force, are of a Groſicr and Duller Information. TnE Contractive. of the Brain is Raiſed into this Spirit, or Expanſive, of the Eye by it's Conteſt with the Sanguineous Force (For it is owned by Anatomiſis to be ſurrounded with Muſcles, which have the Sanguineous Force in them, with which the Brain is not) and ſurmounting it, Starts out and Riſes into thoſe Fiery Balls, which give that Life and Beauty to the Animal Frame, and which Acquire, by that means, as Great a Degree of the Expanſive, as the Contractive of the Brain is capable of Receiving; Why they are Two, or the Noſtrils, or the Hands, or Feet, or why the Fingers are Five, and the Heart, Brain, and Mouth but One, Is to be Determined from the Courſe of the Nervous and Sanguineous Fluids in the Animal Syſtem, which, by what we have Recounted of Them, would not be Impoſſible to do. IN Reſpect oſ the Muſcles; The Belly of them Conſiſts of Nervous, and Sanguineous or Carnous, Fibres, by the Former of which they are Contracted, and Expanded by the Lan, upon the Action of them from the Impulſe of the Mind on the Nervous Syſtem: and their Tendons are more Conrractive by their Adheſion to the Bones, which are of a Contractive Nature, and to vhich they therefore Aſſimilate and Unite; bui nre are kept Pliant by the Motion of the Muſcles, and their Vicinity to the Expanſive of the Sanguincous Part of Them; So that lying betwixt the Bone and the Belly of the Muſcle, they partake of a Middle Force betwixt both, being neither ſo Contractive as the one, nor ſo Expanſive as the other. THE Bones are of a Contractive Force, and Ariſe from the Salts, or the moſt Contractive Parts, which are Separated from the Animal Compages, and are to the Marrow, and Aſſemble about it in order to Encloſe it, as the Nervous Subſtace is to the Expanſive of the Blood, which it Embraces; All the Difference is, port the Expanſive of the Blood is Quick, Agile, and Lively, whereas that of the M; àn, whoſe Subſtance vill be aſterwards ſiewn from it's Compoſition, is Flat, Hę and Languid: And thereſore the Equal Balance is Preſerved in the Animal L,m by the Duller and Heavier Contractive in the Bones, and the Salts which Compoſe them, Acting againſt the Duller and Heavier Expanſive of the Marrow, which they Encloſe; In like Manner, as ve have before Explained the æquilibrium, in the ſame Syſem, to be Maintained by the Contractive of the Quick and Nervous Fluid of the Brain, and the Expanſive of the Quick and Sanguineous Fluid of the Blood. Theſe Bones and this Marrow go thro' the whole Animal Frame upon the ſame Account, and for the ſame Reaſons, as the Nervous and Sanguineous Fluids do, which have been before Explained. TuE Marrow ſeems to be a Mixture, as Fat is, of the Contractive of the Nervous Force by the Nerves, which are ſent into it, and of the Expanſive of the Sanguineous by the Blood-Veſſels, hich are Diſperſed in it; by which Mixture it is plain, that the Expanſive Force is much Diminiſhed by the Contractive of the Nerves, and that it is leſs Inflammable than Fat or Oil, by the Salts, and the Greateſt Contractive Force of the Bones, which Surrounds it. I would have Enlarged more particularly upon theſe Subjects, but the Philoſophers and Anatomiſis being in a Different Way of Thinking, I ſall Satisfy my ſelf with what I have Propoſed to them, and only take Notice of Two Things more, Wakeing and Sleeping, and the Paſſions of the Mind. As to Wakeing and Sleeping; Wakeing appears to be Derived from an Exceſ”i in the Contractive Force of the Nervous Syſtem, and the Expanſive of the Mind Acting upon it, the Latter of which Excites the Former into an Elaſticity or Springineſs, and is the Cauſc and Occaſion of all the Actions of Life, and the many Motions and the Varieties of them obſervable in it; Hence Perſons, who are Studious, and vhoſe Mind and Nerves are Employed, are the moſt Wakeful; As alſo from a Defect in the Expanſive of the Sanguineous, from whence Perſons, who are the Leaſl Repleniſhed with Blood, and who want the Neceſſaries of Life, are the Leaſt Diſpoſed to Doſcing and Slumbers: On the other Hand, Sleep is owing to an Exceſs in the Expanſive Force of the Sanguineous Syſtem, when the Mind and Nerves are Paſſive; or to a Deſect in the Contractive of the Nervous; Thus the Voluptuous and the Ideot are alike Inclined to Sleeping. AND from this Doctrine it will follow, what has been a late Obſervation of Philoſophers, that we are Taller by ſome Parts of an Inch, when we Riſe, than when ve go to Bed, and I would Venture to ſay, tho not Obſerved, Thicker and Plumper; Becauſc, as we have before Aſſerted, In Sleep the Expanſive Force moſt Prevails, which Dilates and Diſtends all the Dimenſions of the Body; But when we Wake, the Contractive, which Compreſſes and Conſtringes them. And thus by Sleep Men Grow Fat and Diſtended, and Lean and Contracted by Watching. Ir muſt be alſo ſaid, That this Viciſſitude of Sleeping and Wakeing is a certain Sign and Indication of theſe TWo Oppoſite Forces Exiſting in our Natures, and that there is a continual Conteſt betwixt them, by which ſometimes the one and ſometimes the other Prevails, till the Contractive at length ſubdues the Expanſive, the Animal Flame is Extinguiſhed, the Soul Flies off, and Death Enſues. As to the Paſſions, They are all Reſolvible into thoſe, which are of an Expanſive and Contractive Nature, and, to Preſerve the Animal æquilibrium, ate to be Entirely Suppreſſed as much as Poſſible, or to be Indulged in their Turns in a Moderate Degree; If a Man vere always to Grieve, or always to be Joyous, he would make his Frame Sink by the Contractive Force of the one Paſſion, or Diſſipate and Diſſolve it by the Expanſive oſ the other, and the Like may be ſaid of the Reſt j CHA C H AP. IX. Concerning the Expanſive and Contratlive Forces. s. I. TJE have hitherto made all Nature to Conſiſt in Thought and Intelligence, Tna: Maihuor Action, for all that we Experience or find in it, is either Thought uu . ind Intelli. An:, or Matter, which we Afſfirm to be nothing clſe than Action; This a. therefore w nll ſtill farther Explain in this Chapter. THAT thc arts of Matter are Actuated by Various Motions is owned by the Pre- a, inſlane in ſent Philoſophy, but it is fancied, that the Parts of Matter themſelves are Solid, Maſiy, ſi a ila and Impenetrable, that they are Quieſcent, and only the Seats of Action, which may 3um, an sbi mol be Imparted and Communicated to them, whilſt they have an Abſolute Inertia in their own Nature; On the Contrary we cannot but be Perſuaded, that this Opinion of Matter is a Creature and an Abſtraction of the Mind, whereas in Truth, and in Fact, It appears to be nothing but Action it ſelf: Thus in Fire, for Inſtance, or in the Sun, our Perceptions from Either are thoſe of Light, Heat, and Colour, which are Evident Prooſs of the Action of Both; and if we go farther than our Perceptions, by which we can only Judge of the Nature of Things, and will Aſſert, that this Action Procceds from Solid Parts, which are Agitated, we mix Preſumptions and Imaginations of our own vith our real Senſations and our undoubted Experiences; For from them, All that we can juſtly Conclude concerning thoſe Subſtances, is the Action of Them. LET us nov take a Solid, Heavy, and Reſiſting Body, as Gold, we Perceive it Aniber inoppoſes our Hand Endeavouring to Penetrate into it; It Gravitates upon it, when ſisnen nſ Suſtained by it; and the Eye is ſenſible of it's Brightneſs and Yellow, which are like- Iid mi Comviſe Inſtances and plain Indications of it's Action; and what we Experience from a pẽ a whole Globe of it, ve are convinced belongs to every the Minuteſt Particle, which can poſſibly fall under the Cognizance of our Senſes; If yet we are Reſolved to make this Subſtance conſiſt of ſmall Solid and unactive Particles, we depart from Nature to our own Fancies, and from Experience to Imagination, and Introduce into Matter and Bodies. what we never Actually found in Them; but if we will Adhere to Fact, and Regulate our Notions by our Informations from Material Beings, we ſhall then Confeſs, that they furniſh us with no other, than what manifeſtly Evince nothing more than the Action of Them. IF any one ſhall ſay, that mere Action is Inconceivable without ſome Solid Sub- ni;y ææ æſtance to ſupport ſuch Action, and in hich it ſould Inhere; That only Proceeds Aĩ io Imagin from our being Uſed to conſider Things in the Corpuſcular Way, which has con- —-— tinually Inculcated to us it's Atoms or Particles, and the Moving of Them, and to hæ/æ ſm sour Obſervations of Groſſer Bodies Moving in Nature, which Bodies we have Con- potimm ceived to be Solid and Unactive in Themſelves, without Conſidering, that even They ſupor: ir. Conſiſt of nothing elſe but Action. s. 2. THis Action we have alſo ſaid is Diſtinguiſd into the Expanſive and Con- Tiæ varis tractive Forces, which, and the Different Combinations of them, are the occaſion of Xindi of Ma thoſe Diverſities of Matter, which we Feel and Sce to Exiſt in Like and Equal Por- nip. n tions of Space; Thus an Infiniteſima of Fire, which has no Pores or Vacuities in it, gr of ih ſhall be Different from an Infiniteſima of Gold or Lead, and an Infiniteſima of Gold Ertanſia ui or Lead ſnall be Different from that of Water, or Wood, or Stone, which has like- Forc. viſe no Pores or Vacuities in it; And any Equal Globes Compoſed of ſuch Infiniteſimas ſnall be alſo Diſferent from the Various Mixtures of theſe Forces. s. 3. WuAT We mean by an Expanſive Force is an Action, which is Similar and T EææſHomogeneous in any Body, either in the Whole or in it's Parts, and Which Exents ſre Explai it ſelf Equably from a Center every Way; For Example, let us take a Globe of Fire, or that Immenſe one of the Sun, we ſuppoſe the Exertion of ſuch a Body to be outwards, not by an Actual Motion, but by a Force, which Endeavours to Dilate and Expand it ſelf every way from the Space, in which it Reſides, and that every Point in the ſame Globe has a Iike Property and Affection oſ Exerting it ſelf from thence in F fP the the ſame Manner, ſo that the Action of the Whole, and of every Part, is Entirelj Similar and Homogeneous. Tuar the Sun, or Fire, has this Expanſive Force of Exerting it ſelf from a Center, or ſeveral ones, that is outwards, is Evident from our Feeling, and it's Burning Qua lity, by which it Diſſolves the Nerves, the Inſtruments of our Senſations, Cauſes Bliſters, Diſſipates Clouds and Vapours, Raiſes and Elevates Water into the Air, anc Rends and Tears in Pieces Wood, and other Inflammable Subſtances, and even Me tals by the Fuſion oſ them; and that every Particle of Fire has, in Proportion to it's Quantity, the ſame Force, we know by the leaſt Spark of it Burning and Diſſipate ing the ſame Way. 5. 4. ON the orher Hand, what we mean by a Contractive Force is an Action vhich is Similar and Homogeneous in any Body, either in the Whole, or in it's Parts and which Contracts it ſel? Equably to a Center, or Centers, from all Sides; For Example, the moſt Solid and Compact, and the Coldeſt Body we can mention or ſuppoſe, as the Moon, or the moſt Metallick Ice we are capable oſ Imagining, or this Earth we Inhabit. TuaAT the Moon has this Contractive Force is plain from the Tides it occaſions by which the Waters Tend towards it; That the Earth likewiſe has, is as maniſeſt ſrom Heavy Bodies Gravitating to it; and That Solid and Compact Subſtances are Endued ith the ſame Pover, is Notorious from the Diſficulty we find in Separating or Dividing of them; That they feel Cold to us, Proceeds from the ſame Cauſe; For as Heat Diſiolves, Cold Contracts our Nerves, the Inſtruments of our Senſations; As Heat Diſſipates and Diſunites Material Beings, Cold Hardens and Cements them; Which are all Inſtances of a Force Acting Inwards, and tovards a Center, or Centers; And as every Particle of theſe Bodies has, in Proportion to the Quantity of it, the ſame Influence and Effect, it is Reaſonable to Conclude, it has the ſame kind of Force with the Whole, that is, ſuch a Contractive one, as we have been Deſcribing. 5.5. HoW the Expanſive Force Exerts it ſelf Outwards, and makes it's Impre ſſions upon all Bodies, which come within the Sphere of its Activity, is Conceivable enough that is, how a Fire, or the Sun, ſould by it's Exertion thro' the Plenum communicate it's Force to it, and the Beings which Exiſt in it, and by that means either Heat or Burn them; But how the Contractive Force ſiould obtain any Effect External to it, whilſt it's Action is ſuppoſed to be Inwards, and towards a Center, or Centers, may be diſficult to Apprehend; Thus, how the Earth, which has a Contractive Force, ſhould cauſe Bodies to Deſcend to it, and the Moon, the Waters to be Raiſed and Elevated from it; But this will Admit of an Eaſy Solution, if we Conſider, that a Contractive Force has the Nature of an Expanſive, only Acting from a Different Center, and in a contrary Direction; What therefore any Expanſive Force can Produce or Effect, in a Plenum of Matrer, by a Progreſſion into it or a Repulſion of it, a like Influence vill a Contractive Force have by a Regreſſion from it, or an Attraction of it. HENCE iĩt is, that there is ſuch an Immenſe Diſtance betwixt the Sun and the Planets; becauſe the Sun by ĩr's Expanſive Force Reduces all Material Beings to it's own Action, or elſe Repells them ſrom it, the Intermediate ther being ſubject to it's Impre ſſions of Light and Heat; Whilſt the Plancts on the Contrary, Preſerving their Contractive Force, Recede ſrom the ſame Medium Invards, into which the Sun Expands it ſelf, and Attract and Draw the Plenum, and all other Iodies, towards them. ANOTHER Reaſon oſ this Conſtitution oſ the Univerſe is, that Forces of the ſame Nature Tend to each orher, ſrom whence, all, which is of an Expanſive Force, as Fire, Unites with the Sun and Stars, and what is of a Contractive one, with the Earth and the Plancts of each Syſtem; By Which likewiſc that Immenſe Intervall of ther, which is of the ſubtileſt Matter, is cauſed, having neither the Expanſive of the Sun, nor the Contractive of the Planets, but being Obedient to cither, as their ſeveral and particular Forces Prevail; Air on the other Hand has an Elaſtick Force, from the Expanſive of the Sun Mixing with the Contractive oſ the Earth, by which upon Compreſſion it is Dilated, and Vibrates upon Percuſſion; And from a Conteſt betwixt the Expanſive oſ the Sun and the Contractive oſ the Planets, as we have beſore ſaid, the Revolutions of the Latter about the Former are roduced and Made. And this Account oſ theſe Two Forces is Juſtificd by all the Quantities, which we know, or have been hitherto Propoſcd in Nature or in the Mathematicks, which are ether Negatũve Negative or Poſitive, that is, Regreſſive or Progreſſive, Expreſied by  or +, and vhich have Equally their Abſolute Effects in the Ratio, or Reaſon, of Things, which is Evident in all Algebraick Demonſtrations, as we have ſiewn they have in Nature. s. 6. IN Reſpect of theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces, it may be farther Inquired, how they are Communicated, and which way, and by what means they Prevail; To which, it is Anſwered, that the Expanſive Force, for Inſtance, of Fire Prevails by Turning and Converting every Thing into it's ovn Expanſive Force or Action; Thus a Spark is Kindled into a Flame, and one Portion of Fire or Flame Unites to Another. TuE Firſt may be caſily Conceived; For a Spark Exerting it ſelf every way from a Center, if it meets with a Contractive Force, as of Stone, which it cannot Subdue, it is Extinguiſ'd and Dies, but if with a Light and Expanſive Subſtance, upon which it can make it's Impreſſions, as Tinder, or Linnen Burnt, it Communicates it's Force, in the ſame Manner, as Motion is Produced by Impulſe, and the Erfect, in both Caſes, Partakes of the Nature of the Cauſe; And by the ſame Method this Aſſtmblage oſ the Expanſive Force vill Impart it's ſel? to what elſe is Inlammable, by Impreſſing it's ovn Action upon it, and Converting it into it, till a Flame is Raiſed ſufficient to Promote the like Force to what Degree, or as ſar as, ve Pleaſe. i TuE Sccond, hov one Expanſive Force Unites with another, is alſo Evident from the above-mentioned Explanation, if thoſe Forces are Contiguous; for if the Expanſive Force Reduces, as far as Poſſible, what is Contrary to it, to it's ovn Action, it cannot but Cement, and Concur, vith it's own, for that very Reaſon; if they are not Contiguous, they muſt be either Hindered from Uniteing by Contrary Forces, which they cannot Overcome, or they will Overcome thoſe Forces by Impreſling theit ovn Action upon them, till they do Unite. FrROM hence it is, That if we take Two Lamps, or Candles, and ſet them a-Burning at ſome Diſtance from each other, they will Riſe in Diſtinct Flames in a Conical or Pyramidal Form; Becauſe they Exert themſelves in an Oppoſite Direction by their Expanſive Force to the Contractive of the Earth, and the Medium of Air, or the Atmoſphere, which Tends towards it; and the Flame grows Pointed at Top, becauſe the Expanſive Force is there Leſs, and the Contractive of the Air or Atmoſphere, in Reſpect of it, Greater; But if we place theſc Flames in a nearer Situation to cach other, they will on the Sides of them manifeſtly come together, and endeavour at an Union. And thus in Fire, the Fuel at firſt Separates it into Different Flames, till at length the whole Receives the Action of the Expanſive Impreſſed upon it, and the ſeveral Expanſive Forces are United into one. THAT therefore Forces of the ſame kind Tend to one another, It is Plain is not by an occult Quality, but by the Method, by which all Motions are Communicated to Material Beings; and there is no more diſficulty in Conceiving, how an Expanſive Force ſhould Produce an Expanſive, than how an Impulſc from the Hand ſhould Produce Action or Motion in Body, the Effect is Anſwerable to the Cauſe, and Follows, and Participates of, it's Nature; And we have ſiewn, Granting this Principle only, that it is eaſy to Account for a Tendency to an Union of the ſame Forces. Wuar ve have ſaid of the Expanſive Force is Equally Applicable to the Contractive, ſince they Diſſer, not in Force, but in the Direction of it, and therefore a Contractive Force vill Impreſs the ſame Force upon Bodies, which are not, as Fire, too Expanſive to be overcome or ſubdued by it; Thus the Contractive Force oſ the Earth and the Moon, vhere the Expanſive of the Sun is not too Predominant, vill Turn Water into Ice, and Earth into Metals, Minerals, and Stones, which are all thereſore Formed in the Inward and Subterraneous Receſſes of our Planet; and it is not Certain, ſince we can only Penetrate a few Yards of Four Thouſand Miles, oſ vhich the Semidiameter of the Earth nearly Conſiſtss but there may be Subſtances of a much Greater Contractive Force than any we meet with juſt under the Surface of it. AND for the ſame Reaſon Heavy and Compact Bodies Deſcend to the Earth, which have a Contractive Force, becauſe they will be either Hindered by ſome Oppoſite Expanſive Force, which they cannot Surmount, or elſe they will Reduce that Force by their Contractive, till they are United and Cemented vith that oſ the Earth, which is oſ the ſame Kind and Species of Action with Them. F ſ 7 æ THUS Tuus Heavy Bodies are Actually Hindered from Deſcending by the Expanſive of Fire but otherwiſe Unite with and Precipitate to the Earth, As in Smoke and Vapours. 3. 7. SINCE thereſore theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces conſiſt in a Similarity or Likeneſs oſf Action, tho the one Exerts it ſelf from a Center, and the other to vards one, yet it cannot be ſaid, that ſuch Centers are any fixed or determined Points becauſe the Whole and Every Part of theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces are Homogeneous; and conſcquently, when we ſay, that Bodies, as the Planets, are Re pelled from the Sun by this Expanſive Force, ve do not mean, that they Recede from the Exact Center of it, or vhen we Aſfirm, that Bodies Deſcend to the Earth, do ve Inrend to ſay, that they do not Deſcend to the whole Maſs of it's Contractive Force, without any Diſtinction of a particular Center belonging to it; On the Contrary it ſcems Plain, that the Sun is to be Conſidered as an Aſſemblage of the Expanſive Force, without any particular Center of it's Action, and that the Earth is to be looked upon, as a Congeries of the Contractive, without any ſuch certain Point to vhich the Contraction is made; For no One ever Dreamed oſ ſuch a Center in a Fire, or a Flame, or of ſuch a Point in Amber, or the Load-ſtone. As to the Firſt, all the Reaſon, which can be given ſor it, is only, that the Planets Revolve round it, as if there were ſome Fixed and Determined Center of it; But it is known, there is ſuch an Immenſe Diſtance betwixt It and Them, that the whole Body of the Sun bears no Great Proportion to ſuch a Diſtance; Beſides, the moſt Accurate Account of the Revolutions of the Plancts ſuppoſes, there is no ſuch fixed Center in the Sun, the Common Center of Gravity oſ all the Planets, tho Quieſcent, yet by the Agitation of the Sun, being ſometimes in it's Surface, and at oſher Times, a little Above or Below it; which may be owing to what we Affirm, that the Sun really has no Center, and that the whole Body of It is to be Eſteemed, as one Maſs of the ſame Similar and Homogeneous Action. As to the Second, the Spherical Surface of the Waters in the Ocean is Imagincd to be an Argument of it, which may be as Rationally Explained by ſuppoſing the Earth is nearly Globular, which is Confeſſed, and that the Contractive Force of it being of that Figure Preſcribes the ſame to the Waters, which manifeſtly obey the Impreſſions it gives, as we have ſiewn they do in the Tides, in the Regulating of which the Earth has it's Influence, as well as the Sun and Moon. s. 3. FroM this Explication of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces it follows, FirsT, That each Expanſive Force, or each Contractive Force, Conſidered by it ſelf, has it's Center of Action every where, and Acts Uniformly from, or tovards. it's ſeveral Centers; Thus Fire Acts outward in the whole Maſs of it, and in every Part of that Maſs; Heavy and Compact Bodies Act Inwards, in the Whole, and in every Part of the Whole. i SECOND, That Bodies, or the Parts of them, Which have the ſame Expanſive or Contractive Force, are in an Equal Poiſe and Balance, and therefore at Reſt amongſt themſelves; Thus Solids, and the moſt Fiery and Spirituous Fluids, are alike Quieſcent. TumRD, That if Two Expanſive or To Contractive Forces, that is, vhich Act to or from the ſame Center or Centers, are Equal, and there is an Addition of the one to the other, namely, of the Expanſive to the Expanſive, or the Contractive to the Contractive, ihere will be no Alteration Produced in the Degrees of the ſeveral Forces; becauſe the Actions will be Similar and Homogeneous, and therefore in an Equal Poiſc or Balance, by Article the Second; And hence it is, that Fiery and Spirituous Fluids mixed with Fiery and Spirituous ones of the ſame Nature, or Solids vith Solids, as Gold with Gold by Fuſion, continue the ſame. FourTH, That i? Two Expanſive Forces are Unequal, and the one is Blended or Mixed with the other, the Greater vill Increaſe the Leſs, but not a Leſs, a Greater; For Inſtance, if an Expanſive Force Acts ſrom a Center vith a Force of Two, and another from the ſame Center with a Force oſ Five, the Force of Two on borth Hands vill be Equal, and ſo far Similar and Homogeneous, and therefore, by Article the Third, there will be no Alteration Produced; but the Force of Five Exerting it ſelf ſtill with an Exceſs of Three, ſuch Point or Center will be Acted by that Impreſſion, and what is ſaid oſ one Point or Center, holds Good in all of the ſame Bodies, which nave the ſame Nature and Similarity of Action. FrROM FroM hence it is, that the Expanſive Force of Fire or Flame, Mixing with a Greater or Leſs Expanſive Force of Oil, or Fuel, and the Diſferent kinds oſ it, becomes more or leſs Vigorous in it's Action or Force; And from the ſame Cauſe it is, that if we mix a more Fiery or Spirituous Fluid with a Leſs, as Spirit of Wine vith Water, the Expanſive Force of the Water is Increaſcd, and that of the Spirit of Wine is Diminiſhed. LixEvISE, If TWO Contractive Forces, which Tend towards the ſame Polnt or Center of Action, are Unequal and Compounded together, the Caſe will be the ſame, as beſore in the Expanſive, that is, the Forces, will be in an Fquilibrium, ſo far as they are Equal, and the Exceſs of the Greater Contractive Force above the Leſs will only cauſc an Alteration. FroM hence it is, That Gold mixed with Silver or Copper in Fuſion loſes of it's Weight, and Silver or Copper Receives an Addition to it, and ſo in other Metals, vhere an Heavier and a Lighter are Fuſed together. 5. 9. AD from this Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces we are alſo Informed, why the Parts of ſome Fluids are more caſily Separated, and the Parts of ſome Solids more Diſficultly, than thoſe of others; Becauſe, in the Former Caſe, the more Expanſive any Fluid is, the more Eaſy is the Separation oſ it, and in the Latter, the more Contractive any Solid is, the more Diſſicult is ſuch Separation. I0 muſt be here Obſerved, in Reſpect of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces oſ Bodies, that they are not always Equal to their Expanſive from the Earth, or their Contractive to it; Thus the Expanſive Force of Spirit of Nitre, and Oil of Vitriol, is very Conſiderable in it's Diſſolving of Metals, vhich Fire or Flame cannot do, and yet Fire or Flame Recedes from the Earth, whilſt the Spirit and Oil Gravitates tovards it; On the other Hand, Gold Gravitates more, or has a Greater Contractive Force towards the Earth, than a Ruby or a Diamond, and yet the Parts of the Latter have a Greater Contractive Force to each other, than the Former; The Reaſon oſ which is, becauſe Fire and Flame are Entirely of an Expanſive Nature, whereas Nitre and Vitriol are originally of a Contractive one, and are made Expanſive by the Force of Fire, and therefore Retaining ſtill a Degree of their original Contractive, they Gravitate to the Earth, tho' Exalted into Spirit and Oil; Thus alſo Gold Gravitates more, or has a Greater Contractive Force towards the Earth, than a Ruby or a Diamond; Becauſe the Firſt is Formed in the Bowels of it, and in the Midſt of the Contractive Forces, as all other Metals are, and in Colder Countries and Climates, whercas the Latter are Produced nearer to the Surface of the Earth, where the Contractive does not ſo much Prevail, and in Hotter and Warmer Climates; But Gold is more caſily Separated, is more Fuſible and Ductile, than the others; Becauſe the Expanſive Force has Exerted it ſelſ to the urmoſt in the Formation of the Latter, and yet their Contractive Force continues, whereas there has been but a ſmall Expanſive Force, in Compariſon, Applied to the Production of the Former, and therefore, when a Greater Supervenes, it is Diſolved or Separated in the Parts of it; For ſo Earth and Clay, tho' they are eaſily Separated, yet have an Intenſe Force of Gravitation, vhereas Glaſs and Chryſtal, vhich are made by Fire and of Flint, are with Difficulty, tho' they have a Leſs Force of Contraction or Gravitation to the Earth; Another Reaſon may be, that Gold and Metals are poſſibly Formed from Quick-ſilver, which is ſaid to be Mater Metallorum, the Volatility of which will make the Metals, which are Fixed and Produc'd from it, more eaſily Separated, tho' their Contractive Force to the Earth may not be Diminiſhd, but Increaſed. i TuIS therefore will lead us to Enquire, what Effects will Ariſe from a Mixture of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. . S. 10. Ir Two Forces are Equal, the one an Expanſive, and the other a Contractive, They muſt upon their Application to each other, like + and in Algebraick Quantities, and in the Motions of Bodies, Deſtroy each others Effects; For if one Force Exeris ĩt ſclf from a Toint, and another towards the ſame Point, the Conſequence will be a Quieſcence or Inaction, or Nothing in Reſpect of an Expanſive or Contractive Force; and a Syſlem of Matter, which is Compounded of ſuch Forces, muſi be Endued vith an entſre Inertia, and be Paſſive to any External Impreſſions; There does not ſcem to be any Marcrial Being, vhich comes ſo near to this Compoſition i as the Corporeal Space, or the thereal Plenum, which Surrounds us; It is ColourIeſs and Tranſparent, and has no Heat in it ſelf, and therefore has little or no Expanſive Force to Produce the Senſation of Colour or Heat in us; It has an Inſenſible Gravitation, and is eaſily Separated in it's Parts by our Moving in it, and Dividing it by the leaſt Percuſſion, and thereſore is void of any Apparent Contractive Forcę, and conſequently is capable, by this Inertia, of Receiving and Obeying any Foreign Impulſe; It is alſo Conſtituted and Formed by the Expanſive Force of the Sun, and the Contractive oſ the Earth, which we may reaſonably Imagine are here nearly in an Equal Balance, ſince otherwiſe the Expanſive Force of the Sun, if Superior, would Repell the Earth farther from it, or, if Inferior, the Contractive of the Earth, would Approach nearer to ĩt, till it had Strength and Force enough to Repell it. Ar and Water are the next Material Beings, which come the neareſt to this Conſtitution of Forces, by their want of Colour, Heat, and Activity, and their Deſeòt in Gravitation and Contraction, by which almoſt all Bodies Sink and Gravitate in them and by which they eaſily yicld to any Impreſſion, or become Fluid; but theſe yœ have certain Forces of Expanſion and Contraction belonging to them, by which ithey ſew their Forces are not in an Exact Equilibrium, as is Evident from their Elaſic Colour, and Power of Diſſolving Bodies on the one Hand, and their Re-union o Parts, upon their being Separated, and their Gravitation, on the other. OrHER Fluids alſo by their Colour, and their Spirituous Qualities, and their Pover of Diſſolving Bodies, manifeſtly declare their Expanſive Force, and by the Aſſemblage of their Parts to each other, and by their Gravitation, their Contractive, and that they are not in an Equal Balance; Solids, in like manner, Evince, that by their Colour they have a plain Expanſive, and by the cloſe Cement of their Parts, a Contractive one, and that they are not in an quilibrium. S. 11. BUT it deſerves to be Enquired, whether theſe Equal and Expanſive Forces, however Different, Acting againſt cach other, will Produce the ſame Quie ſcenes oI Inertia, which it does not Appear, that they will, ſince, where the Cauſes are Different, the Effects muſt be ſo too; Thus let us take a Leſſer Expanſive Force of the Suns Rays, and a Leſſer Contractive of Earthy Matter, and the Fluidity of ther, or Air, or Water, is Produced; if we take a Greater Expanſive Force of the Suns Rays, as in a Burning Convex or Concave, and a Greater Contractive, as of Gold, the Fluidity or Fuſion of it is cauſed; and yet the Fluidity, or Inertia, or Quieſcence of the one, is nor Equal to that of the other; Thus alſo, if Two Bodies meet with Equal Forces, which are Leſſer, and other TWo meet with thoſe which are Greater, tho there is an Equal Deſtruction of their oppoſite Forces, yet the Effect or the Reſult on both Hands is not Equal, for it will be caſier to Separate them in the Firſt Caſe, than in the Laſt; And it is the ſame even in Mathematical Quantities, for tho anx is =o, and b42=o, it will not be immediately Conſequent, that 2—x is =b4Z1, no more than a is = b; for there may be as many various Noughts, as there may be Infinites, and which are Different according to the Different Quantities, from which the Relations of Infinite and Nought are Derived, as a Nought or an Infiniteſima of a Cube or a Surſolid is not Equal to that of a Line or a Square; but if we mean by + and  an Affirmation and Negation of the ſame Thing, it is an Abſtracted Idea, and do's not deſerve to be conſidered in Nature or in Real Quantities. For, as in the Inſtance of Two Concurring Bodies before, if I preſs my Two Hands together vith an Equal and a Contrary Force, and then with an Equal and Contrary Force, yet Double or Triple of the Former, it will not, I hope, be ſaid that ihe Efect in both Caſes is Equal, tho' there is a like Deſtruction of the Contranitent J 5. 12. Ir now Two Forces are Unequal and Act contrary to each other from a Point, ſand that which is the Caſc of one Point, will be the Caſe of an Hundred or a Million, which are ſuppoſed to have the ſame Conditions in a Syſtem of them, that is, in any Material Being) what will be the Effect? Namely, That ſo far as they are in an Equal Balance, a Different Fluidity would be Produced, that iss a Leſs or Greater, as the Equal Forces are Greater or Leſs, according to what we have before Explained; But ſo far as the Expanſive is Superior, that Fluidity will be changed into Fire and Volatility, and ſo far as the Contractive is, into Solidity and Coheſion. Lur LEr us in the Firſt Place Examine into Fluids, Ether we have already Mentioned ind Endeavoured to Account for; Wine and other Spirituous Fluids, are Fluid by an Equal Balance of their Expanſive and Contractive, but are Spirituous by their Expanſive; And this Spirit is Lighter or Heavier, as the Expanſive is Greater, which Actuates the Contractive, and the Contractive is Leſs, or as the Contractive is Greater, which is Actuated, and the Expanſive is Leſs; ſo that every Spirituous Fluid is a Contractive Force Acted by a Superior Expanſive, which Contractive, as it is Different gives likewiſe a Diſferent Moment and Impreſſion to the Expanſive; and from hence ariſes the Different Spirituouſneſs of Water, Wine, Brandy, Alcohol, &. ON the Contrary, Solids proceed from a Prevalence of the Contractive over the Expanſive, by which it Curbs and Reſtrains it from Exerting its full Force and Energy, and preſcribes it's ovn Bounds and Limits to it's Action, but tho the Contractive Prevails the Expanſive is mixed with it, and gives a Diſferent Impreſſion and Moment to the Contractive, as the Contractive did before to the Expanſive; And from hence it is, that the Expanſive of Solid Bodies Exerts it ſelf only on and vithin the Surface of the Solid, and by it's Impulſes upon the ther occaſions the Various Senſations of Colour, which we Reccive from them, when the ther is Excited by the Sun's Expanſive, and rendered ſuſceptible of ſuch Minute Agitations of it; Sometimes alſo the Expanſive, notwithſtanding the Contractive, continues ſo Vigorous and Strong, as to Raiſe the Senſations of Smell in us, as in Odorous Bodies; And in General, the Capacity of Bodies being moved by the Expanſive Force of Percuſſion, Ariſes from this Mixture of the Expanſive in all Bodies, as likewiſe their Capacity of being Separated and Divided; for if the Contractive Force was Infinite in the one Caſe or the other, it would be Impoſſible, that Bodies ſhould be either Moveable or Diviſible. 5. 13. THE Source and Origine oſ theſe Forces in all Material Beings, which we know, is the Sun, or Fire, or Heat, namely, of the Expanſive, and the Earth, the Moon, and the Planets, or Cold and Salts, of the Contractive; ſo that we may truly Aſfirm, that all the Various Portions of Matter arc Compounded of Infinitely Various Degrees, and Various Combinations, of Heat and Cold, Mixed and Tempered together. : - the Method of Acting of theſe Forces one upon another ſeems to be, that the Expanſive Aſſiſts and Promotes the Expanſive, and the Contractive the Contractive; Thus any Inflammable Subſtances, which have a ſ Proportion of the Expanſive Force in them, by the Application of the Expanſive of Fire or Flame are eaſily Reduc'd 1o an Expanſive, and Cold and Contractive Bodies, and vhich are not Inflammable, as Water and Earth, by the Application of a Contractive, to Froſt and Ice. ON the orher Hand, the Expanſive Acting upon a Contractive, if not Superior to it, Increaſes the Contractive, and a Contractive Acting upon an Expanſive, if not Superior, Increaſes the Expanſive; Thus Fire Increaſes the Weight of Lead in Calcining, and that of other Contractive Bodies, Water gtows Colder for being Boiled, and thus ve may Imagine that Mercury by a Heat, which would not Diſſipate it, that is, by a Gentle one, would grow Fixed and Heavier, that is, that Gold might be ſrom thence Produced; On the Contrary, Water, thrown upon the Fire, if not in too great a Quantity, or a Froſty Air, makes it burn the Fiercer, and Water poured mupon Quick-Lime cauſes an Intenſc Heat, and an Acid upon an Alkali an Efferveſcence: The Reaſon of which appears to be Plain, that as one Force vill Act in Conjunction with another Force of the ſame kind, fo Two contrary Forces will Act, as much as Poſſible, in Oppoſition to each other. S. 142. WE ſhall not therefore now Enlarge any farther upon theſe Forces, to ſiew the Great Advantage there is from them in Explaining all the Effects we obſerve in Being, only Conclude by Saying, That they will much better ſerve that Purpoſe than any Principles, which have been hitherto Propoſed by the Defenders of Epicurus's Syſtem of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter, it's Atoms and the Gravity of them and, That there is an Eaſy Solution given of the Coheſion of Matter, and how therc may be Diſferent Conſtipations of it in the ſame Space, namely, from the Variou Combinations oſ Action in it; Neither of which Problems are in any Meaſur Accounted for by the æpicurean Scheme, and the Atoms vith their Gravity, which ĩ Aſcrts, and vhich It Thinks to juſtify by Intricate Propoſitions, and Demonſtrations it in the Mathematicks, which have no Relation to the Point in Queſtion, and vhich ſew more the Sagacity and Penetration of the Geometer, than the Solid Reaſoning or Senſe of the Philoſopher, and of a Strict and Impartial Inquirer into Nature; The Circulation oſ which not only in the Heavens, which we have before Explained, but in our Sublunary World, is Owing to theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces: For the Reaſon oſ Water and Earth Riſing into Plants, Trees, and Vapours, is Derived from the Expanſive oſ the Sun, and their falling Back again in Dew, Rain, and Leaves, is from the Contractive oſ the Earth; which Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Sun and Earth, being nearly in an æEquilibrium on the Surface of the Latter, as above-mentioned, is the occaſion of thoſe continual Revolutions of Marerial Deings, which we Behold. s. 15. WuaT ve have more to do is to Evince, from theſe Principles, the Neceſ ſity oſ an Inſinite and All-wiſe Agent, that, as we originally Propoſcd, we may make the Demonſtration of a God the Reſult and Concluſion of all our Reſcarches and Inquiries into Philoſophy; And what can be more Evident than that there is ſuch a Being,. ſrom the Principles, which we have laid Dovn? IF there were an Inſinite and All-wiſe Agent, of Conſequence we muſt ſuppoſc there would be an Infinite Action Produced from him, and that this Inſinite Action would be ſo Adjuſted in the ſeveral Parts oſ it, as to Cauſe the moſt Regular Order and Diſpoſition of Things; On the Contrary, if we ſiew that this Inſinite Action is ſo Adjuſted, ve muſt be obliged to Acknovledge, that there is ſuch an Infinite and All-wiſe Agent. AND Nothing can be more Evident than this; Since, notwithſlanding all the Infinite Variety of Forces, hich are in their ovn Nature Contrary to cach other, yet they are ſo Diſpoſed by the Infinite Wiſdom and Intelligence of the Almighty and Great Creator, as to Produce an Equilibrium in the Whole, and an Harmony in all the Beings of the Univerſal Syſtem. I Have not any Thing more at Preſent to Add in Reſpect of theſe Forces, Unleſi to Inform the World; That this Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces was what I originally had a Notion of, before my Reading the Leat of what Sii Iſ. Newton has Advanced in his Mathematick Principles of Philoſophy; That I have Mentioned it, many Years ago, in my Geometria Solidorum ſive Materia, which was in Part Written by me, when I was Under-Graduate in this Univerſity; That I was not a little Pleaſcd to find ſo Great a Genius, as Sir Iſaac, to Confirm my Sentiments in Reſpect of a Gravitating Force in Matter, which is a Species and Kind, or rather a Conſequence, of the Contractive, which IMaintain; and That what Firſt led me into theſe Opinions, was, that I found Different Appearances of Material Beings in the ſame Space, which could not be Accounted for by conſidering Matter, as conſiſting only of a Trine Dimenſion; I thereſore Examined, as carefully as I could, what might be the Cauſe of ſuch Different Appearances, and could not Perceive, after the ſtricteſt Scruriny, that it could be Attributed to any Thing. clſe, Excepting to a Difference of Action; This Incited me to Inquire, what that Difference of Action was, vhich I could not but Acknowledge. muſt have a contrary Direction, and could be Reſolved into nothing more Rational than an Expanſive and Contractive one: And, if to all this it oùld be Objected, that I make Two contrary Actions to Exiſt in the ſame Space, I ſhall only Anſwer, that this ve may Experience, if we Pleaſe, every Minute in our Lives, if we will bur Preſs one Force againſt another in Oppoſite and Contrary Tendencies. : C H AP. C H AP. X. Concerning Pneumatics and Hydroſlaticts, and a Real Space, or Extension, i or of Air and æther, and the ſeveral Kinds of Experiments made in Them. s. 1. HAT Real Extenſion, or the Space, which Exiſis in Nature, has all the æ Digrm Properties of that Subſtance, which is called Matter, and beſides thoſe, —ſome others peculiar to it ſelf, we ſhall in this Chapter ſiew; The Properties, which Exiœmæ' are Aſcribed to Matter in General, are theſe, viz. Extenſion, Impenetrability or a NonPenetration of Dimenſions, Solidi5y or Reſiſtence or Firmneſs, Gravity, Mobility; and, as the Corpuſcular Philoſophy ſays, Figure and Diviſibility. FirstT, As for the Extenſion of Space no one doubts of it, ſince Thoſe, vho Defend a Vacuum, make it to conſiſt in nothing elſe; and Thoſe, vho Maintain a ſlenum, make it of the very Eſſence of Body; But in Both it is an Abſtracted Idea; as generally uſed by Them, and Similar according to that Idea; Whereas, as it Exiſis in Air, æther, and ſeveral Parcels of Matter, that is, in Nature, it is very Different; One is Cloſer and more Compact, Another Thinner and Rarer, One Stronger and Firmer, Another Weaker and more Diluted, According to the Different Proportions of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, Acting in the ſame Abſtracted or Similir Space. rꝶ SECOND, Impenetrability, or a Non-Penetration of Dimenſions, is likewiſe A- impurabi Enowledged by both theſe Sects of Philoſophers in one Senſe, that Space cannot vte Penetrate Space, or that one Part of Space cannot Poſſeſs another at the ſame Time, ſraũtu, il that the other Poſſeſſes it; but on the Contrary it is Acknowledged, that tho' this Sucsud Ena cànnot be, yet Body, whichis Extendcd, may Poſſeſs Space, which is likewiſe con-4ſuma feſſed to be Extended, which Two Opinions we ſhall Conſider. Nasure. i1ſt. THE Primarius Locus, as it is Termed, or Place, in it's Proper Signification, is Sir Iſ: Ne thought to be Immoveable, and therefore cannot Enter into another Place; or if it heamr was not Immoveable, if one Place could Penetrate another, Place would Exiſt in Place, and conſequently one of them only would be Primary, which is no more than to ſay, our Idea of one Part of Extenſion is not our Idea of another; For in Truth, Place, or the Primarius Locus is only a ſtanding Meaſure of Extenſion delineated in the Mind; It is an Abſtracted Idea, and nothing in Nature and Reallity; It is a determinate Image of Space made and ſhaped by the Mind, ſo as to Agree to any Body we are Willing to Conſider; The Reaſon of which Procedure of the Mind ſcems to be, that, not obſerving any Thing in Space, but Length, Breadth, and Depth, and finding no Reſiſtence in it to the Motion, or Dimenſions, of Body, and at the ſame Time, that all Space is in a perfect Repoſe, it from thence Concludes, that Body does Move in Space, and conſcquently Poſſeſſes a Portion of it, agreeable to it's own Bulk; Another Reaſon is, our Perceiving Extenſion every where; without Conſidering the Real Properties and Affections, which belong to it, which leads us to Form our Notion of it's being Abſtracted and Similar; bur what has Contributed the moſt to this are the Elements of Geometry, and the Abſtractions of Length, Breadth, and Depth Inculcated in them, we are therefore to Examine, 2d. VHETHER Body does Move in, or Poſſeſs Real Space, or, which is all one, ZEther; We ſay not, no more than a Plumbet Moves in the very Dimenſions of Woater. i1ſ. BECAUSE the Mind falſely Concludes, that there is neither Motion nor Reſitence in the Ather, or Real Space, for the Reaſon only that it Perceives none; Since the Senſes are very unequal Judges concerning a Matter ſo Refined and Subrile, that it muſt needs Eſcape them; Thus there is a Gravitation of one Body to another, which yet is not Perceptible, becauſe it is nothing in Compariſon with their Gravitation to the Earth; our Feeling more eſpecially is ſo Groſs, that we cannot diſtinguiſh betwixt the Reſiſience of one Body, and another, even where it is extremely Different; and therefore there is no wonder, if it is not capable of Informing us in the Reſiſtence of the ther; tho our Feeling our ſelves to Exiſt, as G 58 ta to the External Parts of our Hands and Faces, may poſſibly proceed from the Gentle Impulſe of the Surrounding Space; which we do not take Notice of however, becauſe the Perception is ſo Conſtant, as a Man ſcarcely feels the Cloathes he Wears, unleſs when he ſcts his Mind to refleẽt upon thoſe Perceptions; it is yet very Evident we can ſeel Cold and Heat, which are nothing more than Different Modiſications of thẽe Fluid ve are Defending, as they are of Water; And indced, when thoſc Qualities of Aſſecting us are Abſent, I do not ſce, that we ſhould have any Manner of Senſe without us; That is, if there were no Action at all of Space or ZEther upon our Organs, we could neither See nor Feel, nor have any other Senſation. 2d. IF Body Exiſted in Abſtracted Space, that Abſtracted Space, or Extenſion, Will be Commenſurate to Body or not, for Inſtance, a Globe of ſuch Space to a Globe of Gold of Equal Length, Breadth, and Depth; If Commenſurate, it will be Diſperſcd thro every Part of the Gold, that is, it will Enter into each Point of it, and conſequently, ſince the Extenſion of Gold does not only conſiſt in Length, Breadih, and Depth, but in Thickneſs too, the Globe of Space or Ether will be as Thick, ſeeing it is Commenſurate to it, as the Gold it ſelf, which will not only Cauſe a Penetration of Dimenſions, which this Philoſophy denies, but is contrary to it's own Notion of Space or æEther; If it is not Commenſurate to it, then there will be ſome Parts of Gold, which do not Exiſt in Space, which is again Contradicted by the ſame Philoſophy: But if Body does not, nor cannot Poſſeſs Space, or Enter into it's Dimenſions, that is, ſuppoſing them both to Retain their own Natures, viz. Gold and æther, Then is Real Space or Extenſion Equally Impenetrable with Body. I ſay ſuppoſing them both to Retain their own Natures, for if they do not, there may be a Penetration of Dimenſions, in one Senſe, ſince a Penetration of Dimenſions may be ſaid to be either, 1ſ. WHEN the Dimenſions of one Body Penetrate into thoſe of another, and at once that other Preſerves it's own Dimenſions; This Penetration is Impoſſible in all Matter, and Space or Real Extenſion, Equally; for it is no more than to ſay, the one Body cannot be it ſelf, and another, at the ſame Time, that is, It Excludes all Things from being, what It is. 2d. A Penetration of Dimenſions may be ſaid to be, hen the Dimenſions or Bulk of one Body not Porous are contrived into the Bulk or Dimenſions of another, which is likewiſe not Porous, without any Increaſe of the Length, Breadth, and Depth of ſuch Bodies; That is, when a Globe of Gold not Porous, for Example, is Compreſſed into another of Equal Bigneſs not Porous without any Alteration of the Magnitude of the Globe, and with only a Change of the Denſity of it; This Penetration of Dimenſions we ſay is poſſible, and that Matter is not Impenetrable in this Senſe, and thereſore not Real Extenſion; Becauſe we take all Matter and Space, as they are Real in Nature, to be nothing elſe than Different Combinations, Compoſitions, or Congeries of Actions, which Actions are Reſolved into the Various Degrees and Aſſemblages or Compoſitions of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which, however Diverſified, may and do ſubſiſt in the ſame Abſtracted and Similar Space. j S. 3. THIED, Solidity, or Reſiſtence, or Firmneſs, as Extenſion, is commonly no more than an Abſtracted Idea Formed by the Mind, and is gencrally Reputed to be the ſame in all Bodies, the Dullneſs of our Perceptions not allowing us to diſtinguiſh it; whereas, in Truth, there is as much Difference, as in Colours themſclves, or any other the moſt Variable Property in Matter; Solidity, as it is an Excluſion of all Matter from that Place, or Space, which it takes up, is one Thing in all Sorts of Matter, and admits of no Change, This we conſidered under the Head of Impenetrability; But that, which we ſpeak of now, is of a Diſferent Nature; Namely, tis that Degree of Foree, Reſiſftence, or Action, which any Body obtains againſt the Actions or Violences of other Material Beings; Nor does this Solidity only reſpect the Reſiſtence of a Body to any orher Matter Penetrating into the Space it is forced to Leave, but Penetrating into the ſame Space, which it Poſſeſſes, I mean into the ſame Length, Breadth, and Depth, i. æ. not only it's Oppoſition to Removeing out of irs Place Place, but ir's Oppoſition to the being Contracted or Condenſed into a Leſs, tho' it was ſuppoſed to have no Pores or Vacuities before ſuch a Condenſation; For if Water could be Compreſſed into a Nineteenth Part of the Space, which it Poſſeſſes, it is not certain, but it would be as Solid as Gold; and tho we have no Methods, by which we can Effect ſuch a Compreſſion, or indeed any Compreſſion at all, it is not Evident, whether Nature by it's To Great Inſtruments of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, or by Heat and Cold, may not do it. S. 4. THAT Real Space or Extenſion has a Reſiſtence may be Proved by Experiments from Galileuss Syſtema Coſmicum, which are Known and Common; For a Stone may be thrown farther than Cotton; An Arrow projected Lengthways will go farther, than one Tranſverſely; On the Contrary, the Wind blowing carries away the Tranſverſe one, and leaves the other; Agitate the Air, as much as poſſible, with a Fan or Napkin in a Narrow Room or any other, bring in immediately the ſmalleſt Candle imaginable Lighted, or the fineſt Leaf-Gold, and there will be no Motion Apparent, the Air in that Inſtant Returning to it's Reſt, which is an Argument of i's Reſiſtence; The Clouds, which hang in the Air, when they come Loer, fall into Rain, which may be, becauſe, tho there is a Reſiſtence, yet there is not enough to ſupport them; In Rideing, the Air Acts with Violence upon our Faces; Air is apt to carry the lighteſt Things with it, but not the heaviet in it's Motion, and Atoms Svim every where in it's Subſtance, when a Feather Sinks; If the Earth Moves round it's Axis, it muſt carry the Air and all Projectiles with it, which Demonſtrates a great Force in the Air, for, if it did not thus carry Them, a Bullet ſot Upwards would not fall in the ſame Place, nor a Stone thrown Downwards deſcend in a Perpendicular; nor would a Bullet Shot to the Weſt with the ſame Force, as another to the Eaſt, deſcribe Equal Lines, but one as much ſhorter than the other, as the Earth deſcribes a Space from Weſt to Eaſt; If Air therefore has a Force or Action, it has, à ſortiori, a Reſiſtence; A Globe of Lead will alſo make 600 Returns in a Pendulum, whilſt one of Cotton or Wood vill not make above 3 or 4; Rohault's Vitrea Lacryma, Broken and Shatterd to Pieces by the Intruſion of Air, likewiſe ſnews this Action or Reſiſtence; And all theſe Demonſtrations of Fact Equally Extend to one Point of Real Space or Extenſion with another, and as much Evidence a Continuity of Reſitence or Action, as the Paænomenons we obſerve in Water ol Bodies Sinking and Swiming in it, which yet is Acknowledged to have no Pore: or Vacuities, ſo far as the beſt Microſcopes could ever Diſcover. i S. 5. DR. Wallis Endeavours to compute the Air's Reſiſtence to all Projectiles by this Lemma, as the moſt Rational that occurrs; That the Reſiſtence of the Air is Proportional to the Celerity, for in a double Celerity, there is to be Removed in the ſame Time twice as much Air, which is a double Impediment, in a Treble thrice as much, &?. Therefore, according to this Computation, there is Reſiſtence in every Point; And upon this Computation, the Linea Projectorum Reſembles a Parhola Deformed, which Agrees with Sir Iſ. Newton, ho makes it a Curve Approaching nearer to an Hyperbola than a Parabola, upon the Suppoſition of ſuch a Perpetual Reſiſtence; He alſo tells us, that a Viſcous Medium ſhall more Reſiſt than one more Fluid, tho' of like Intenſive or Specifick Gravity; That a Sharp-Headed- Arrow finds an Eaſier Paſſage, than an Obtuſe or a Blunt one, thro' the Medium, and the ſame Pyramid vith the Point, than with the Baſe forvard; That Different Mediums equally Liquid, and other Circumſtances alike, Reſiſt in Proportion to their Speciſick Gravity, becauſe there is a Heavier Medium to be Removed by the ſame Force; That the Heavier Projectile being once in Motion, and being Equally Swift, and all other Circumſtances the ſame, Moves thro' the ſame Medium more ſtrongly than a Lighter, in Proportion to it's Intenſive Gravity, the Force being Greater in Proportion for the Removal of the ſame Reſiſtence; All which can be no otherwaies Accounted for than by ſuppoſing, that there is a Continued Action or Reſiſtence in Real Space or Extenſion, and which we alſo Defend, that there is an Innate Contractive Force in Heavy Bodies, vhich makes them Act with a Greater Moment againſt the Expanſive of Air or /Ether, than Lighter or more Expanſive ones. G g 5 ⸗ Dr. walli DA. /allis farther tells us. I. Si vis ur V moveat Pondus P, vis mV movebit mP, cateris paribus, puta per eandem Longitudinem, eodem Tempore, h. e. eadem Celeritate: Thereſore the Reſiſtence is Equable, if that Computation proceeds juſtly. 2. 5i vis V movere poteſt Pondus P Celeritate C, vis mV movebit vel P Celeritate m C, vel Celeritate C Poridus m P, vel quodvis P ea Celeritate, ut factum ex Pondere Celeritate ſit m P C, arque hinc depende? omnium Machinarum pro facilitandis Motibus conſtruendarum ratio, Viz. ut quà ratione augetur P, eàdem minuatur C, quo fiat, ul V.2C:: V. mn?PxC=PC. m 3. Celeritatis gradus ſunt Longitudinibus eodem Tempore tranſuctis proportionales, vel Temporibus in eàdem Longitiudine tranſactis reciprocè proportionales; Either therefore there is no Reſiſtence at all, or an Equable one. 4. Impingentia corpora reſilient ab invicem, ſi Impetus ex vi Reſtitutivi vel Elaſticà ſii progreſſico major. s. In motibus acceleratis & retardatis Impetus pro ſingulis momentis is reputandus eſt. qui gradui Celeritatis tum acquiſito convenit ; ubi per curuam fit motus, directio motãs ea eſt, quæ Tangentis; ſi acceleratus Motus ſit & per curvam, Impetus in ſingulis punciis erit ut acceleratio & obliquitas Tangentis ; hic motus Pendulis competit. 6. Impetus obliqu? Impingentis eſt ad ejuſdem Impetum, qui eſſet, ſi directiè Impingeret, cateris paribus, ui Raqius ad Secantem Anguli Obliquitatis; Eſ eadem eſt ratio Gravitationis Gravium obliquè Deſcendentium ad eorundem iculariter Deſcendentium Gravittionem; Therefore, as in oblique Deſcents on the Surfaces of Water, ſo in Air Motion is more Retarded; and in General, it is Plain, that a Continued Reſiſtence in ZEther is ſuppoſed by theſe Philoſophers. UF5. 6. SIæ Chriſtopher Wren ſays. I. Velocitates corporum propria & maximè naturales ſunt ad corpora reciprocè proportionales ; Therefore there muſt be a Reſiſtence, beſides vhat Ariſes from their own Gravity; for the Vires acceleratrices to the Center are owned to be alike in both the Bodies, the ſame or an Equal Force therefore ill change both the Bodies from that Determination, and ſince they take another, which is Reciprocally Proportional to their Bulks, there muſt be as much Reſiſtence, as ũ they were Reſiſted in every Part; and conſequently is to be Attributed to the Medium, thro which they Move; For the Acceleration of the Parts in either Bodies is owing to one and the ſame Force, and therefore it is one and the ſame Force, which will als that -m 2. Corgora habentia proprias Velocitates etiam poſt hmpul ſum retinent proprias. 3 tiiim pm ut in Librà ſuper æ⸗ m vel Centra, 2 Cop. 1 . :: 1 Veloc. 2 Veloc. therefore, if they meet permutatis velocitatibus, they are he ſine ſtill, if both Acted with Equal Force. l 4. Cotpora Improptias Velocitates habentia ex Impulſu Reſtituuntur ad æquilibrium. Hugens tells us in his Regula de Motu Corporum ex Mutuo Impulſu. 1. Si Corpori queſis; duro aliud aquale pau durum bu poſt eq.-tiſ quidem pter quicſcenti verò acquiretur eadem, quæ fuit in Impellente, Celeritas. 2. At ſi alterum illui Corpus æquale etiam moveatur, feraturque in eàdem Lineà rectã, poſt contacium Permuiatis invicem Celeritatibus ferentur. 3. Corpus quãmlibet magnum à Corpore quimlibet exiguo & qualicunque celeritate Impacio movetur. Lua eſt Regula Generalis Determinandi Motum. 4. Quantitas motis duorum Corporum augeri minuivẽ poteſt per eorum Octurſum, at ſemper ibi remanet eadem quantitas verſus eandem pariem, ablati inde quantitate motãs contrarii. 5. Summa priductorum, factorum à Mole cujuſlibet corporis duri ductà in quadratum ſua Celeritatis, eadem ſemper eſt ante & poſt Occirſum eorum. 6. Corpus durum quitſcens actipiet motũs ab alio corpore duro ſe majori minorivè per t tertii, : u ſn Lo- m_ p— quAm ſi J⸗ uſſum ab eo fuiſſet immediatè, & ſi corpus illud interpoſitum fuerit medium proportionale inter duo reliqua, fortiſſimè omnium aget in quieſcens. ] 7. Conſiderat Hugenius Corpora ejuſdem materiæ, ſive cujus Moles æſtimatur ex Pondere. 8. In 3. In Corporibus Spharicis demonſtrase ſe poſſe ait, & videtur ipſi eandem eſſe Naturæ Legem reliquis mi ſive Duris, ſive liſ ſive directe,  te tms e se Centrum commune Gravitatis duorum vel quotlibet um aæqualiter ſemper promoveri verſus candem partem in Lineà rectà ante & poſt Occurſum. ALL vhich Laws or Rules do cither ſuppoſe no Action or Reſiſtence in Space at all, or an Equable and a Continued one; If the Firſt, they are mere Abſtracted Notions, and do not Explain, what the Real Motion of Bodies is from Mutual Impulſe; If the Laſt, That Reſiſtence and Action in all the Parts of Space is Conſeſſed which we Contend for. Ir is farther ſaid by Otherss. 1. I Cycloide Grave quodlibet cadens ex quovis ejus puncio attingit fundum eodem tempore, quo eum attingeret, ſi caderet ex quovis ejuſdem o alio. 2. Globulus ſuſpenſus è funiculo juſtæ longitudinis, & intra duas Cycloides vibrans, movetur in Cycloide, ergo vibrationes ejuſmodi ſunt Synchrona; This is Demonſirated by a Perſon of Quality; And the ſame by Hugens in his Horolog. Oſcillator. 3. THAT an Heavy Body Deſcends Quicker in a Cycloid Drawn, than in a Right Line Drawn, betwixt Two Points, not in the ſame Vertical Line, but Unequally diſtant from the Horizon; This is Proved from Bernoullis Probl. pag. 551. and another Probl. pag. 553. and is ſiewn by Dr. Keill in his Introd. ad Ver. e Lect. 15. Pag. 221. Lemm. Edit. 3. 4. Leibnitæ, Pag. s54. Philoſ. Tranſact. Abridged, Vol. 1. ſays, That a Spring being Bent to the ſame Degree, will always Unbend it ſelf in the ſame Time, Provided it find the ſame Freedom of Unbending it ſelf ſuddenly, which Proves there is a Reſiſtence or Action in Space: And all the foregoing Propoſitions Evince it, or elſe, that they are merely Abſtracted and Mathematick Reaſonings without giving us any Explication of the Actions and Forces in Nature. S. 7. THAT DesCartes makes the Particles of his Celeſtial Matter, by being Refleꝗted from the Surface of the Earth, to drive down into their Places thoſc Terreſtrial Bodies, which they find above them, §. 20, 21, 22, 23. of his laſt Book of his Principia Philoſophia, is known. Dr. Halley Anſwers: 1ſſ. That his Obſcurity in §. 23. is an Argument of his Confuſed Idea of Gravity. 24. That it is unlikely, that a Body moving Downwards ſmould be ſo moved by an Impulſe Upwardss. We do not here Defend Des Cartes's Account of Gravity, only ſhew, that Philoſophers have Thought a Continued Action in Space no Inconceivable Thing. DRr. Voſſius Aſcribes it to the Diurnal Rotation of the Earth. Dr. Halley Anſwers: 1ſf. That there is Demonſtration, that Bodies, circularly Moved, Recede from the Center of their Motion, and if not kept faſt by ſuch a Principle, as Gravity, would be caſt into the Air in a Tangent. 24. That the Effect of this Principle of Gravity is nearly Equal every where, or rather Leſs towards the Equinoctial than tovards the Poles, as very certain Experiments Evince, whereas, where the Motion was Swiſteſt, the Effet would be the moſt Conſiderable; which is a Proof, either that the Weight of the Air does contribute to Gravity, or that Bodies being Moved in a Circular Motion with the Air, have a leſs Circular Impreſſion to hinder their Deſcent near the Poles than near the Equinoctial: So that Iet us take Dr. Voſſius, or Dr. Halley, there is an Action Acknowledged in Space, and a Continued one. OrHERS Aſſign the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere. Dr. Halley Anſwers. 1ſt. That the Atmoſphere's Preſſure is it ſelf from it's own Gravity. 2d. That the Preſſure of the Upper Parts of the Atmoſphere, by bending the Springs oF the Lower, give the Lower a Force of Reſiſtence Equal to the Bearing or Compreſſive Force of the Upper, having of it ſelf no Force at all. 36. That tis unlikely there ſould be any Deſcent of a Body by the Intervention of the Armoſphere, becauſe there is an Equal Preſſure of it Upwards and Downwards. 4th. By a plain Experiment a Feather in Vacuo Deſcends with near the ſame Velocity as a Stone, from which it is Evident, that the Atmoſphere is ſo far from being the Cauſe of Gravity, that it hinders it's Effect; becauſe the Atmoſphere i: nearly of the ſame Specifick Gravity with a Feather, but the Vacuum Boylianum &i no not, which ſhows, that in Air there is Gravity and Reſiſtence, or that there is an Action every where, and Diſperſed thro' every Point of Space. AGAIN, Others make the Earth Attract as a Loadſtone. To vhich He Anſwers, That the Loadſtone Attracts only in and about it's Poles, but the Earth near Equally in all it's Parts. LasrLy, Others Aſſign a Sympathetical Attraction betwixt the Earth and Bodies, whereby they have, as it were, a Deſire to be United to it. HE Anſwers i1ſ. This is to ſay, that Bodies Deſcend, becauſe they Deſcend. 2d. Beſides, a Feather would then Deſcend with the ſame Appetite, or Deſire, as a Stone. He afterwards tells us, vhat the Properties oſ Gravity are, according to the New Syſtem, vhich we have before Inquired into in our Account of the Phyſical Aſtronomy. He ſays; FirST, By this Principle the Earth and all the Heavenly Bodies are kept from Diſſolution, ſo that any Part of them cannot Recede far from the Reſpective Centers, and tho violently throvn from them they ſtill Tend to be Re-united. But this Doctrine of the Projectile and Gravitating Force has been already Examincd, and if it had not, what is This, unleſs the Sympathetical Attraction he before Condemns? SECOND, That all Bodies Deſcend towards a Point, which either is, or is very near the Center of the Earth, conſidered as a Globe, to which it Approaches, being Really a Spheroid. Which Center we have before Denied and Conſuted, as well as the Earth's being a Spheroid. THIRD, That the Center is fixt, becauſe, if it Changed it's Place, the Low-Lands of that Side of the Globe, to which it Approached, would be over-flown, and the oppoſite Side exhibit New Iſlands; but the Iſlands of the Mediterranean, near which the oldeſt Writers Lived, are much what they were in their Times, and therefore no Alteration of the Center; That the Univerſal Deluge is beſt Accounted for by an Approach of the Center to the Parts of the then Habitable World, which, if it were only a 20001h Part of the Radius, would be ſufficient to Drown the Higheſt Hills. All which is Calculated and Affirmed upon the Suppoſition of the Truthi of the Phyſical Aſtronomy, which is Diſputed. FourTH, That in all Parts of the Surface of the Earth, as well as in all Points Equidiſtant from the Center, the Force of Gravity is nearly Equal; That the French Obſervers near the Equinoctial, and Himſelf at St. Heles 16 Deg, South Lat. have found however, that it is there neceſſary conſiderably to ſhorten the Pendulum to make it vibratc Seconds; He thinks this Proceeded from the Height of the Place above the Sea, where the Gravity being Diminiſhed, it was Requiſite to ſhorten the Pendulum in Proportion; but this we have Conſidered and Refuted in the Firſt Book of the Preſent Philoſophy. FirTH, That the Impediment being Removed, as in the Experiment of the Feather in Vacuo, the moſt Compact and moſt Looſe, the Greateſt and Smalleſt Bodies, Deſcend the ſame Spaces in Equal Times; Which, together with the former Property, ſiews the Difference betwixt Gravity and Magnetiſm, this Affecting only Iron, and towards it's Poles; Hence tis ſaid to be Evident, that there is no poſitive Levity, that Cork, which Swims on Water, or a Feather in the Air, can no more be ſaid to be Light than Iron, which SWims on Mercury, they are only Bulk for Bulk, not ſo Heavy as the Fluid they SWim in; This is Contradicted by our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; However Air is here Confeſſcd to be as much a Fluid, as Water, and as Water has no Vacuities, ſo neither is it neceſſary, that Air or Real and Material Space ſhould have. SixTH, That this Power Increaſes as we Deſcend, and Decreaſes as we Aſcend, in Proportion to the Squares of the Diſtances from the Center Reciprocally, ſo as at a Double Diſtance to have but a Quarter of the Gravity; Vid. Miſcell. Curioſ. Vol. x. rag. 14. Upon this Principle, Sir Iſ. Newion is ſaid to have made out all the Phænomenons of the Celeſtial Motions; And it is thought to be very Rational, that the Attractive or Gravitating Force ſhould Exert it ſelf more in a Small Sphere, and be weaker in a Larger, but the Surfaces of Spheres are as their largeſt Circles, i. æ. as the Squares of their Radii, thereſore this Force will be Diffuſed in Larger Spheres, ind Contracted in Smaller; That is, in Proportion to the Squares of the Radii, and vill be always Equal upon the Surface of the ſame Sphere; We have in another Place Place Examined into the Truth of this Reaſoning, and ſhall only Obſerve, that it is therefore here again ſuggeſted, that the Action or Force is not Inherent in Bodies, but in the Spaces they Pals thro, which have Different Actions, as they are at Different Diſtances from the Earth; and according to the Different Diffuſions of Space, that the Action is variouſly Diffuſed thro' it; which is a plain Aſſertion of an Action ot Force Continucd thro' every Point or Portion of it. SEVENTH, That Bodies, tho' they really Tend to the Center, Deſcend in Parallel Lines, the Difference being ſo Small, as by no means to be Diſcovered; And therefore a Reſiſience or Force in ther may really be, where iĩt is not Diſcernible; nay it is Evident by this Philoſophy; for Gravity, which is a Reſiſtence or Force, tho' ĩt Increaſes and Decreaſes, as in Property the 61h, yet is not ſenſible in Projects or Deſcending Bodies, becauſe they fall from a ſmall Height; and all Bodies upon the Surface of the Earth Gravitate to cach other, which no onc could ever yet Perceive. 5. 3. THiS Action, or Force, in all Parts of Space is likewiſe Confirmed from Thoſe Accounts, which Philoſophers give us of the Velocities of Deſcending Bodies. FinstT, The Velocities of falling Bodies are ſaid to be Proportionate to the Times from the Beginning of their Falls; Suppoſe a Body has the Velocity of 32 Feet at the End of 1 of Time, it will have Double of 32 Feet at the End of 2, Triple at the End of 3, becauſe, each 1 of Time, a new Velocity is added Equal to the Former from the ſame Power of Gravity continually Acting thereon; ſuch Force therefore cannot be Inherent in Bodies, but in the Space they Paſs thro,, or in the Earth, for Body could nor Increaſe it's own Force or Velocity, but, in every Poimt of Extenſion being ſtill thru Downwards with an Equal Action, it muſt continually Acquire a nev Velocity Proportional to it's Progreſs; If then this Power or Force Exiſts in Space, we have what we Contend for; If in the Earth, It is neceſſary, that it ſould be Diffuſcd from thence thro' all Space, wherever Gravity Prevails, otherviſe Bodies could not be Affected by it; And take which we will, a Continued Action or Force is owned on both Hands to Reſide in the Univerſal Expanſe, if there is an Univerſal Gravitation thro it. SECOND, The Spaces Deſcribed by the Fall of a Body are as the Squares of the Times from the Beginning of the Fall; For they are as the Arcas of Triangles, which are as the Squares of their Homologous Sides, therefore as I. 4. 9. 16. &c. and the Differences, according to Galileus, as I. 3. 5. 7. &c. Tuimmn, The Velocity, which a falling Body Acquires in any Space of Time, is Double to that, wherewith it would have Moved thro' the Space Deſcended by an Equable Motion in the ſame Time, i. æ. the Velocity of falling Bodies is Double to that, which in the ſame Time would have Deſcribed the Space faln thro' by an Equable Motion. TnESE Three foregoing Propoſitions depend upon this, that in every Moment oſ Time there is a Tniangle Produced by this Velocity, becauſe what Law obtains in Larger Spaces, the ſame does in Smaller and even in the Minuteſt, and which have been beſore Conſidered in Book the Firſt of this Philoſophy. FOURTH. All Bodics, on or near the Surface of the Earth, in their Fall Deſcend ſo, as at the End of the firſt 24 of Time they have Deſcribed 16 Feet 1 Inch London Meaſure, and Acquired the Velocity of 32 Feet 2 Inches in a 2à of Time; Becauſe it is Demonſtrated by Hugens, 25th Prop. Part 2d. Horol. Oſcillat. That 16 Feet 1 Inch is the Deſcent of a Body in a 2à of Time, and by Prop. 3d. the Velocity will be Double thereto; and near to this it hath been found by ſeveral Experiments; near, becauſe the Swiftneſs of the Fall hinders us from Determining exactly it's Quantity, and vhich Difference perhaps may be owing to the Reſiſtence or Action of the Medium. 5. 9. FroM theſe Four Propoſitions, all Queſtions concerning the Perpendicular Fall of Dodics are ſaid to be eaſily Solved, and the Doctrine of Projects likewiſe Deducible, If we Aſlume the Two ſollowing Axioms. 1ſl. TuAT a Body, ſet a-Moving, vill Move on Continually in a Right Line with an Equable Motion, unleſs ſome other Force or Impediment Intervene, whereby it is Accelerated, or Retarded, or Deflected, which depends upon this, that Marter is perſctly Paſlive; But this Axiom we are not villing to Allow; becauſe ve form . our our Notions of Matter from what we Generally Pereeive, and the Generality oſ Matter being of a Sluggiſ and Groſs Nature, we from thence Conclude that all is ſo; whercas there are a Thouſand Inſtances of Fire, Spirituous Liquors, Vegetables, &⸗ hich are not ſo, and even the groſeſt Parts of Matter have Properties, according to this Philoſophy, more Active, than what our Senſes Inform us of, as, the Gravitation of one Portion of Matter to another, and Others, which are diſcernible by our very Senſes, vhich no vays Agree with a Paſſive Nature, as Elaſticity or Springineſs, Vegetation, &e. 24. THAT a Body, being Agitated by TWo Motions at a Time, does by their Compounded Forces paſs thro' the ſame Points, as it would do, were the Two Motions Divided and Acted ſucceſſively, or, that the Diagonal is Compounded of the Sides of a Parallelogram; This Axiom has alſo been Examined into, Book the Seeond, and the Objections againſt it need not be Repeated here. However it is Affirmed; FIRsT, That the Motion of all Projects is in the Curve of a Parabola, becauſe the Project is Compounded of Two Forces, the Projectile, which, if there is no Impediment, moves Equal Spaces in Equal Times, and is as I. 2,3. 4, the other Deſcending, and is as the Squares of the Times, or as I. 4. 9. 16, which by Axiom the 24 mect in their ſeveral Reſpective Points; the Firſt are Parallel to the Ordinates of a Parabola, and the Second to it's Abſciſſes, and the Property of a Parabola is, that the Abſciſſes are in a Duplicate Reaſon of the Ordinates. Since therefore a Parabola ſuppoſes no Reſiſtence, that Deſcents are in Parallel Lines, which may as well be denicd as Reſiſtence, and that Bodies without an Impediment move Equal Spaces in Equal Times, whereas the Air Reſiſts, as well as Gravity, it is Plain, that this is nothing elſe than a Mathematick and Abſtracted Reaſoning. SECOND, That the Force of a Shot is always the Leaſt at the Vertex of the Parabola, and at Equal Diſtances from it, it's Force is always Equal; From whence, according to this Reaſoning, a Bomb ſhall have as much Force, as it ſeems, when ĩt is wholly Spent, as when it Firſt comes out of the Mortar; ſo that, notwithſtanding This, in an Abſtracted Reaſoning, may be true, when we only conſider the Projectile and Gravitating Force, yet, ſince it is not in fact True, it is Manifeſt, that the Reſiſtence or Action of Space is very Material in the Doctrine of Projectiles, which occaſions ſo Great a Difference from what is Concluded by a Geometrick Deduction. TuiRD, That in the Elevation of a Mortar; i1ſf. If very Great, the Bombs fall too Perpendicularly and bury themſelves in the Ground without any Effect, and that therefore the Beſieged unpave their Streets; 24. That, if they come more obliquely, they many Times break upon, or near, the Surface of the Earth; From whence it is plain, that there is a Reſiſtence or Action of the Air or æther, or Real Space, as in other Fluids, in which Heavy Bodies are leſs Obſtructed in their Force, when Projected Perpendicularly, than when Obliquely; 3à. That by Diminiſhing or Increaſing the Quantity of Gun-Powder, the ſame Effects may be Produced as by a Greater or Leſs Elevation of the Mortar, and to more Advantage; becauſe you know the Force of Gun-Powder, whereas the Elevation is uncertain in Ships, where the Waves are ſo; Which is an Evident Eviction, that the Reſiſtence or Action of the Medium, or Space, has a conſiderable Influence in Produceing theſe Phænomenons, ſince it may be Conquered by a determinate Force of Powder, as well as by the particular Elevation oſ the Mortar; 40h. That a Mortar 45 Elevated is little Different, in it's Projection, from one Elevated ſome Degrees above, or Depreſſed below, that Poſition; Which may be Poſſibly, becauſe ſuch an Elevation is in the middle Situation betwixt the greateſt and the leaſt Reſiſtence or Action of the Air or Ather, or Real Space; for in a Perpendicular Elevation probably there is the Leaſt, and in an Horizontal the Greateſt, the Realon of which may be, that in an Horizontal all the Parts of the Ather, or Real Space, have an Equal and the Greateſt Gravity, and therefore the Greateſt Action or Reſiſtence; but in a Perpendicular Elevation the Gravity of the æther, or Real Space, is Diminiſied upwards, and conſequently the Action or Reſiſtence; Nor are theſe our Concluſions altogether Unjuſtified from Dr. Halley, vho ſays, That the foregoing Rules vould be Rigidly true, were it not for the Oppoſition of the Medium, whereby the Projectile Motion is Retarded, as well as the Deſcent, being not exactly as the Squares of the Times: Tis certain Air is to Water in Weight, as 1 to 800 i : nearly; nearly; However in large Shot of Metal, vhoſe Weight ſurpaſſes many Thouſand Times that of Air, and whoſe Force is very great in Proportion to the Surface; wherewith they, namely Shot, preſs thereon, this Oppoſition is ſcarcely Diſcernible; For by certain Experiments, in a ſolid Braſs Shot of 44 Inches Diameter and 14ſ. Weight the Ranges above and below 45° were nearly Equal, tho' the under Ranges went rather the fartheſt; In a ſmaller Braſs Shot of about 12 Inch Diameter, caſt by a Croſs-Bow to 400 Feet, the Force being much more Equal than in the Mortar Piece, the Under Ranges evidently out-went the Upper; So that in the Smaller Shot, tho the Air's Reſiſtence is to be Accounted for, yet in Larger it may be Neglected, and his Concluſion is; If ſo, it will be Objected, that the Air's Reſiſtence is Leſs towards the Horizon than the Perpendicular; To which he Anſwers, That the Air's Reſiſtence is really Greater, but the Nearer we come to a Perpendicular, the more Direct is the Projectile Motion contrary to the Deſcent, which muſt therefore diminiſh the Force of the Project; To which we Anſwer, That, according to the Mathematick Doctrine, the Projectile Motion muſt be the ſame, any way, as alſo the Gravitating. But this we are Agreed in, that there is a Force, Action, or Reſiſtence in Real Space or Extenſion. We ſhall now Proceed to Sir Rob. Moray's Obſervations. FirsT, Take leſs Powder than a full Charge, and ſtill Diminiſ it every Charge. and it will throw a Bullet ſtill a ſhorter and ſhorter Way, then Increaſe it, and it will thro' it farther and farther, till it comes to a juſt Charge, when, if you Increaſe it never ſo much, it vill be of no Advantage; We ſay, becauſe it's Force is not Infinite to Vanquiſh the Reſiſtence, or Action, of the Air, or Real Space. SECOND, The Powder and Bullet is to be Rammed home Equally at every Shot, he means in Trials made, to know the juſt Charge of a Piece, tho' the looſer the Powder lies, it Fires the better; We ſay, becauſe the Contractive Force in the Ramming ought to be Equal, to know what the Expanſive Force of the Fire and Powder is able to Eſfect againſt the Contractive of the Bullet and the Medium, or the Action and Reſiſtence of Lead or Braſc and of Real Space; and the Looſer the Powder is, the Berter it takes Fire; Becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Powder is Greater, the Leſs it is Rammed and Contracted together, and therefore more Readily Joins and Unites with the Expanſive of Fire. . Tumb, Powder finding more Reſiſtence from a Bullet Drives it out with Greater Violence, as in Screw Barrels, or where Wedges or wooden Tampions are made Uſe of, (the Deſcription of Which he gives Pag. 5 82.) which may Increaſe the Force of the ſame Charge of Powder, till the Piece burſts; The ſame Quality is alſo Experienced in Air, that the more it's Action is Compreſſed or Reſiſted, the Stronger it is, which ſews, that Real Extenſion has a certain Action or Force with Powder it ſelf; and the Phænomenons on both Hands may be Explained by the Expanſive, Acting againſt the Contractive. FOURTH, Guns fixt from Recoiling by a certain Weight, laid upon their Carriages or Barrels, will require les Powder to Shoot a Bullet the ſame utmoſt Length, than when they Recoil freely; Becauſe none of the Motion or Force is ſpent contrary to the Project, but is wholly Refiected upon it; Or rather, as We ſay, becauſe the Contractive Force is Greater, as in the former Phænomenons, and therefore the Expanſive of the Powder is Increaſed. FirTH, If there be the ſame Weight in the Carriage, there will be the ſame Recoil; as if you cut off the Muzle and place it upon the Carriage, the ſame Recoil vill be, as when Continued in one Barrel, becauſe there is the ſame Reſiſtence to the Violence of the Powder; Or, according to our Doctrine, becauſe the Action of the Contractive againſt the Expanſive is in both Caſes Equal. MR. Greaves Informs us, That a Cylinder-Bore carries with much the ſame Force; orher Circumſtances being Equal, as Bullet, Length and Weight of the Piece, with 8, 9, or 10l. of Powder. THAT a Taper Bore, the Weight an 100ſ. more, 4 Inches longer, and the ſame Bullet, carries with the ſame Force as the Firſt, with 7 I. of Powder. THAT a Braſc Piece carries thro all the 3 Butts with 9 ſ. of Powder, and 18. Bullet of Iron, whereas an Iron one, with 4ſ. of Powder and 9/. Bullet of Iron only Entered the ſecond Butt, and a Braſs one vith 4/. of Powder and 9/. Iron Bullet carried thr 2 Butts, and with 3. of Powder almoſt thro 2 Butts. l H h h FroM FrROM Whence it feems Evident, that the Expanſive Force of ihe Metal, or the Elaſticity or Springineſs of it, Adds a Force to the Action or Expanſive Force of the Powder; and from the Firſt Experiment, that the Force of Powder does not lie in the Quantity, but in the Specifick Action, or Expanſive Force, of it, as the Gravity or Acceleration of Bodies to the Center likewiſe does, and perhaps it is a General Law of Action; But then it will be Objected, that 3 or 4 Grains of Powder would be as Effectual as 3 or 4L. to which we Anſwer, ſo it will, Cæreris puibus, that is, if the Reſiſtence or Contractive Force as Gravity, or any other Reſiſtence or Contractive Force, as the Straitneſ's of the Bore, has no greater a Proportion to; or 4 Grains, than it has to ſo many Pounds; viz. the proper Actions of Bodies are to be only conſider'd in this Caſe, and how the one differs from the other in Quality, Abſtracting from the Quantity, &. Thus for Inſtance, a ſmall Particle or Point of Iron may be probably carry'd as far by 3 Grains, as 9l. by 3 l. of Powder, every Thing elſe I ſay being conſider'd as equal, excepting the Specifick Action or Expanſive Force of the Powder, compard with the Specifick Reaction, or Contractive, of the Iron. Thus the Specifick Action of a Drop of Water or of an Ocean of it is the ſame. TuEsE Experiments however prove the Reſiſtence, or Action, of the Air, or Real Extenſion, ſince there are different Forces of Powder requird to carry the ſame Weight a ſorter Space, or a longer. And ſeeing all the Experiments of this and the foregoing Sections, as well as of the following, Extend to every Point or Portion of Space without Diſtinction, We from thence Afſfirm, that ſuch Reſiſtence, Force, or Action, is Continued, Uniform, and Uninterrupted. 5. 10. A Ball of Lead may be Caſt to a very great Diſtance by Compreſſion or Rarefaction; Rohault deſcribes an Inſtrument for the Firſt, and Dr. Papin for the Laſt, and which amounts to this, that if, by certain Methods preſcrib'd, you Compreſs the Air in a Cylinder, it's Action being much greater than thãt of the External, it will violertly Ruſh out, and carry along with it the Lead, which is Included; On the Contrary, if yon Extract the Air out of a Cylinder by a Pncumatick Engine, the External Air will be too Powerfull for the Internal, and conſequently drive the Lead thro' it toa great Diſtances The Effects of Rarefaction are little leſ' than thoſe of Compreſſion, or which is all one, the Force of Compreſed Air, in Reſpeẽt of Common Air, is not much more than the Force of common Air, in Reſpect of the Rarefacted; However from both theſe Experiments it is Manifeſt, that there is a vaſt Reſitence, Force, or Action in the Air, or in real Extenſion, and that ſuch Force, or Action in General, is Uninterrupted and Continued in it, ſince theſe Experiments Obtain in any Parts or Parcels of Space whatſoever; Theſe likewiſe are Inſtances of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Nature, for Common Air, Contracted becomes more Expanſive, and in its natural State is Expanſive, which Power we may ſuppoſe it Derives from the Expanſive of the Sun, as, what it has of the Contractive, is from the Earth, the Moon, and the Planets. FirsT, In Order to Compute the Velocity of Air Ruſhing into an Exhauſted Receiver, or Wind-Gun, we are told, that Fecis d Eau riſe not ſo high, as their Source, by Reaſon of the Reſiſtence of the Medium, tho they have originally a Force or Swiſineſs, hich would carry them to that Height, being an Hydroſtatical Principle; Which may be Explain'd from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; For if Water, for Inſtance, has a Comparãtive Expanſive Force in Reſpect of the Earth, which has a Contractive, the Parts ofit, if permitted, will Riſc to the ſame Height from it, vhilſt the Reſt are equally Balaneed with one another. SECOND, From which Hydroſtatical Principle this Propoſition is Derivd, That of Fluids equally Preſ”'d the Lighter riſes higher than an Heavier, in the ſame Proportion as one is Heavierthan the other, that is, the Height is in a Reaſon Reciprocal to the Weight; Which may be likewiſe Explained from the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; For the Lighter any Body is, the more Expanſive is it's Force, and the farther it will Recede from the Contractive of the Earth Thus Spirituous Liquors, and Fire, will riſe higher than in a Reciprocal Proportion to their Weight, by their exceeding Expanſive Force and their Volatility: From this Expanſive Force, is Solved that Phænomenon alſo, which the common Hydroſtaticks cannot do Namely, Why, upon mixing a Spirituous Fluid with Water, it Diffuſes and Diſperſes it's ſelf thro' it in a Thouſand Undulations, whereas if Lighter, it ſiould SWim at the Top, or, if Heavier, Subſide to to the Bottom; The Reaſon of which can be only, that the Expanſive Force Exerts i's ſel? in all Directions, wherever it is oppoſed by the Contractive of the Water, as the Expanſive of Fire or Flame, in the Contractive of the Fucel, which it Surmounts and Vanquiſhes. TuiRD. We are farther told, that of Fluids equally Preſs'd the Lighter Acquires a Greater Velocity, the Heavier a Leſs, and are to one another Reciprocally, as the Square Roots of their Specifick Gravities, 7Z. e. As the Square Roots of their Heights, Propoſition the 1ſ,. That is, the Squares of their Velocities are Reciprocally as their Heights, or the Spaces deſcrib'd by the fall of Bodies, as the Squares of the Times from the beginning of the Fall; But the Velocities are Proportionate to the Times of Deſcent, therefore the Squares of the Velocities may be ſubſtituted for the Squares of the Times; And in the ſame Proportion as Bodies Preſs Downwards, the Fluids muſt Riſe Upwards. FourTH, TO know then the Velocity of the Air, driven by any Degree of Preſſure, we are, it is ſaid, to Enquire, vhat the Velocity of Water is under the ſame Preſſure, but as much as the Square Root of the Gravity of Water exceeds the Square Root of that of Air, ſo much the Velocity of Air will the Velocity of Water. FIPTH, The Preſſure of Air is = to the Preſſure of 32 Feet of Water, which would make the Water Aſcend with a Velocity ſufficient to carry it 32 Feet, and therefore the Velocity is = to 45 in  of Time, tho' it is 64 according to Dr. Halley, or rather 16 Feet is only deſcended in a ſecond, and the Velocity  to 32 Fect, therefore 32 Feet is deſcended in 2 Seconds and the Velocity is 64. SixtH, The Gravity of Air to Water, tho' it is known to be Variable by the Height, Heat, or Moiſture of the Atmoſphere, in General is ſaid to be as 1 to 840, Franceſco Lana, as 1 to 640, their Square Roots therefore villbe as 29. I, and the VeIocity of Air 29 Times greater than that of Water, or 29 Times 45 to I305 Feet vill be perform'd by it in a Second of Time. FrROM All which it appears, that Dr. Papin has the ſame Notion of Air, as of a thinner Fluid, and conſequently Endud with Action, Force, or Reſiſtence, and it is plain by it's Ruſhing with all that Velocity into the exhauſted Gun or Receiver. From hence we are carry'd to Dr. Pope's Obſervations of Wind, being produced by the Fall of Water in the Braſs Works at Tivoli. A Small Pipe paſſes betwixt a Tube and the Hearth, which has a Foramen in the middle to the Air; There is a conſtant Fall of Water into the Tube, and if the Foramen is ſtopt, there is as conſtant a Courſe of Wind thro' the Pipe to the Fire, which ſerves inſtead of a pair of Bellows, if thar End of the Pipe towards the Fire is ſtopt and the Foramen open'd, there vill be a Wind ſtrong enough to make a Ball play. So Rohault's or Des-Cartess Braſs Ball filld with Water produces Wind, if ſet to the Fire, as likewiſe Mr. Boyless Eolipile. THERE are two Qeſions which We make upon thiss i1ſ. Whether the Wind is Woater Rareſy'd, but Water ſtill, or whether it is another Fluid, Thind in it's Dimenſions and Increaſed in it's Activity by the mixture of Fire or the Expanſivee. 24. Whether the Stream of Wind to the Fire proceeds from the Attraction of that Element, or from the diminiſhed Reſiſtence of the Air in the Pipe, as Air Ruſhes into an Exhauſted Receiver. 1ſ. It ſeems not to be Water, but a Fluid oſ a different Extenſion and Activity, and tho it may be poſſibly condenſed into it, as Clouds and Winds may, yet whilſt they are Clouds or Wind, they are another Fluid. 24. It is Evident, that Fire has a Power of Attracting Liquids, which have the ſame Expanſive Force with it,as Oil in Lamps; And the Fumes of Water and other Liquors Boiling, it is Probable, Proceed from the Expanſive Force of the Fire, and the Contractive Force of the Fluid and Veſſel; which may be the Cauſe, why the Fumes do not Aſcend directly, but Hover upon the Veſſel, being Drawn down by the Veſſel and Fluid, and Repelld by the Fire, and vhich at length by the Superior Force of the Expanſive of the Fire are carry'd upwards: The Reaſon therefore oſ the Stream of Wind to the Fire ſeems to be from the Con teſt there is betwixt the Expanſive Force of the Fire and the Contractive of the Woater, which, vhen too Weak for the Fire, is Attracted by it, when too Strong and too Diſa grecable to it's Nature, is Repelled by it. H h h 2 Fro» FroM Dr. Hokr?s Horizontal Sails for a Wind-Mill, nothing more, or leſs, can be Collected, but that the Air Reſiſts more to the Vane, when ſtanding a-croſi to the Wind, than when ſet ſarp againſt it, and is ſtill a Confirmation of the Force, or Reſitence, or Action, of the Plenum we Defend. Franceſco Lana tells us in his Account of a Flying Chariot, ſomething like which ve ſind in Sturuiiuss Collegium Curioſum, that if a Piece of Braſ, for Example, could be dravn out to that Thinneſs in forming a round Globe, as to make the Braſs Weigh leſs than the Air included in the Globe, if we were to draw out the Air, the Globe would Aſcend, and the ſaid Globe, being made extremely Thin and Large, it might at lengih be able, not only to Aſcend it ſclf, but to carry up3 or 4 Men in it: To which Dr. Hoole Anſwers, that tho' the Preſſure of the Air is Equal on Equal Surfaces, yet in Larger the Preſſure is proportionably Increaſed, ſo that the Bras Globe muſt be made likewiſe proportionably Stronger, and therefore it will not be Lighter, as it is made Larger. Frox Which it is Evident, that the Preſſure is equally diſſusd thro' all the Air, or nearly, and therefore the Reſiſtence, Force, or Action, Univerſal; becauſe the Preſſure Encreaſes, as the Surſace does, according to the Acknovled2ement of the laſt Philoſopher, who ſeems to be the Wiſcr of the Two, and leſs Addicted to ſuch Strange and Unaccountable Whimſies, as thoſe are, of Flying in the Air; To which Dr. Wiltins gave Riſe in his Natural Magick, and who was as Weakly followd by his Admirers, who Thought in Time, that Voyages to the Moon would be as Frequent, as thoſe to the Levant, or the Caribbeess The Contrivance of a Perpetual Motion by a Pair of Bellows and Mercury is thus Confuted by Dr. P4pin; Becauſe the outward Preſſure of the Air would be Superior to the inward Preſſure of the Quickſilver, and hinder the Bellows from opening, the firſt being Equal every where to 27 Inches oſ Quickſilver, and the laſt only to 20, ſince the greateſt Preſſure is as 40, and the leaſt as o, and the reſt in an Arithmetical Progreſſion betwixt o and 40, therefore - the Number of the greateſt Term, viz. 20, into the whole Number of the Preſſures 40 is=to the whole Arithmetical Progreſſion; From Vhich likewiſe a Reſiſtence, Force, or Action in every Part of the Medium is own'd and confeſęd by this Celebrated Philoſopher or Wag, vho vas Able to Conſute Another, vho was a Member of the College, where IWrite, upon the ſame Topick. Let us nov take Mr. Comers's, and Sir Samuel Moreland's Speaking Trumpets. 5. 11. FRoM Conſidering of which it ſcoms Evident, that the Ather has the Nature of other Fluids, becauſe by the Angularly Arch'd ones the Voice is ſaid to be Stopt, that is, the Progreſs of the ther is hinderd by the Sides of the Angles Oppoſing themſelves to it's Waves, and ſo driving them back upon the Succeeding; vhich if ſo, it is Manifeſt, that there is a Reſiſtence, Force, or Action diffuſed thro' the Medium, in which Sound is Promoted. ME. Walter, in his Account of the Swiſtneſ" of Sounds, and their Reſiections, or their Ecchocs, Informs us, FirstT, That by Obſerving Ecchoes in a Calm Morning a Sound moves I526 Feet or 1378, at other Times ſomething above or under 1200 in a Sccond of Time, Merſennus makes it 1474. MI. Boyle above 1200 Feet3 The Academy Del Cimenti by the Exploſion of Harquebuſſes, computed from the Flaſh to the Sound, 5739 Feet in 5 Seconds, vhich is leſs than any of the reſt by 1261 Feet in 5, or 252, at Ileaſt, in 1, which therefore was Deſcribd before the Flah came to the Eye, and Conſequently the Progreſ of the Flaſ to the Eye vas in the ſame Time, as 252 Feet were Deſcrib'd by the Progreſs of the Sound; viz. The Flaſh Deſcribd 5739 Fect in the fifth Part of a Second; Granting therefore the Time, in which the Light of the Sun comes to us, as is provd to be ? of an Hour, or 10, or 600', or 3000 fiſth Parts of a Second, the Action oſ the Sun may be known in Reſpect to that of Fire, ſappoſing the Diſtajnce, or ſuppoſing the Action the ſame, the Diſtance may be Enown. SECOND, Thut at Mid-way the Motion of the Sound from the Harquebuſies was in hal? the Tine cxtly, õ that the Space it Deſcribes is Proportional to the Time, which ſiovs, that the ~Reſitence or Action of the Medium is every where Uniſorm. and A-like. THIRD, TniED, He thinks by ſome Experiments, which He try'd, that the Sound Movd Quicker when it was Calm, than in an Equable Wind, when it movd half way vith it; Be cauſe the Reſiſtence would be greater to it's Return than it's Aſſiſtance was to ith being carry'd forward. VPFourTH, That Sound moves Swiſter at ſirſt than afterwards; The Reaſon muſt be becauſe of the Reſiſftence or Action of the æther. FirTH, In St. Folu's Cloyſter in Oxford, which is 104 Feet 7 Inches Long, the Sound was Reflected 11 Times in to Seconds; In New College Cloyſter, which is 160 Feet 8 Inches, 72 Ecchoes were Performd in 2 Seconds; The Firſt Repetition was Slower than the Second, or Third; The Reſt Slower in Order, the Third than the Second, the Fourth than the Third, &. That is, the Subſequent vere Slowe than the Precedent. BECAUSE The firſt was ſtruck farther off upon the Wall, the reſt in the Mannei following, A4 is the Place, where the Perſon ſtands, B, the Firſ A Percuſſion of the Voice, C the Second, &. But 44 is longer thar Ac, and AD longer than AC, AE longer than 4D, &. So tha the Eccho is always Heard from the Place, againt vhich the B Sound ſtrikes; and if the Wall is Smart and Hard, an Eccho vill be produced, becauſe Sound is always from Reſiſtence, Reaction, Elaſticity, or Repulſion, which happens in Old BuildC ings, where the Walls arc fixt by Nitre; but if they are Soſt. and have little Reſiſtence, Elaſticity, or Repulſion, the Eccho vill be Flat or none at all, as in New Buildings, and in Brick ones, D rather than Stone, and in Clay Walls, rather than Brick; and from hence in Groves, where no Building is near, an Eccho may be Heard either from the Reſiſtence of the Nitrous, StagE nating, or fixt Air, or from the Old Trunks, which are fixt tõ that Degree of Reſiſtence; From Hence it appears likewiſe, that a Perpendiculat oppoſite Wall is not Requiſite, becauſe you may Hear an Eccho in any Direction, if the Reſitence is Sufficient to Rebound it; and it is exactly the ſame, as if any one were to ſtrike an Himmer upon a Wall, whichi would be Heard, tho we ſtood in the ſame Line with the Wall; This is provd, ] 1ſt. FrOM Fig. 189. Where the Sound Is not Toſſed Perpendicularly to the Wall 2d, From the Ecchoes following one another Quicker, where the Parallel Walls are nearer. 3d, From a Door Reflecting a Baſer or Duller Sound than a Wall, which gives a Brisker. 47h, From Diſiinguiſhing the Eccho from the Clap, till you come vithin 7 or 3 Yards of the Wall, the Diſtance being then ſo ſmall that it Deſcribes the 16 Yards in too ſhort a Time; From whence we may alſo gather, what Time is too Minute for the Succeſſion of our Ideas to Diſtinguiſ, or in vhat Briskneſs our Thoughts can At; For if a Sound Deſcribes 400 Yards in a Second, it will Deſeribe 16 in about 63 Thirds, hich therefore is the urmoſt Quickneſs of our Thoughts. sth, From ſtanding in the midſt berween Two Parallel Walls and hearing the Sound tvice as Thick, as ſtanding near one Wall, becauſe the Perpendicular betwixt the Parallels and the Oblique Lines cannot be Diſtinguiſht by the 47h Article. SixTH, The Reaſon vhy Fig. 190 the Sound is not Toſſed ſo long betixt the Walls, vhen you ſtand at the End of one or the other, as when you ſtand in the middle betwixt them both, is, becauſe the Sound is Toſſed more Perpendicularly, and therefore Reflects oftner; whereas, when it is more Oblique, it is ſooner Loſt; But vhy don't ve Hear Two Ecchoes at a Time? It is Anſwered, becauſe the Direction is one Way; tho' that may ſometimes be, that we may Hear Two Ecchoes at a Time. SEVENTH, The Reaſon of an Eccho in a Vault is ſomething like a Speaking Trumpet, where, all the Parts of the Vault being in a manner ſtruck upon by the Fluid Sound Succeſſively, it gives a continu'd Noiſe, juſt as if we ſould Conceive a moſt thin Subſtance ſcatter'd to every Part of a Vault or Dome, and thence Rebounded to us; Mr. Waller tells us, that it Proceeds from the Toſſing of the Sound from one Side to another. And from all this it is abundantly Manifeſt, that the ther is a Fluid and has a Reſiſtence, or Action, in every Part of it, which Diſperſes in a Stream nro a whole Dome, meets with a eſiſftence, Reaction, or Repulſion in every Part, nd Cauſes a ſort of difſusd Murmur or Ringing, vhich we find in Choirs; And the he ſame Account may be given of Violins, not that the Sound is Toſ3'd about in them, but tis done by one Current of Ether, Impinging upon the Concave and Sonorous Bodies of them; And this likewiſe may be rhe Reaſon, why the Strings and the Bow are fixt with a Reſinous Subſtance, viZz. That they may be Capable of a ſmarter Reſiſtence, or Repulſion. It may be alſo Enquired, whether Fluids in the Air are not oſ different Kinds, ſome of a Nitrous, orhers of an Oily, a Third of this Reſinous Nature, the lat of which, if it ſalls upon Walls, will impart an Eccho, or perhaps the firſt, but where the Second Prevails, it Damps it 3 Moreover from this Doctrine of Sounds, ſeveral Phænomenons are propoſcd to us, which very much Confirm our Philoſophy of the Expanſive, and Contractive Forces; For Reaction, Elaſticity, or Repulſion, is the Expanſive Force we Contend for in Bodies, and where there is a Flatneſs and Deadneſs of Sound Produced, it is an Eviction of our Contractive. TuE Binmop of Ferns and Leighlin, in his Account of Sounds, makes them Direct, Reſracted, or Reſlexed; From whence, He Thinks, might be Derived the Science of Acouſlicks, Diacouſticks, and Catacouſticks, or Phonicks, Diaphonicks, and Cataphonicks; They likewiſe, He Imagines, may be conſider'd under another Diſtinction of being Produced or Propagated; As to the Firſt, He Believes, that Ways might be Invented to Imitate the Sounds of Birds, Beaſts, ?. And Perhaps more Delicatc ones Contrivd, than Any we yet Know. As To the Second, or the Propagation oſ them, He tells us; 1ſt. THE Medium is to be Quieſcent and Thin, ſo in a Calm Night a Sound Goes Fartheſt. 2d. THE Sonorous Body is to be placed near a ſmooth Wall, either Plane, or Arci'd Cycloidically, or Elliptically, rather than Circularly; Thus in a Church, the Preacher is better Heard ſo, Eſpecially by thoſe, who Stand near the Wall, or by thoſe, ho lay their Ears to the oppoſite Wall, and thoſe in the Middle Hear the Worſt. WE Say, becauſc as a Shot Goes Farther and Brisker by laſhing down the Piece and Eeeping it from Recoiling, ſo the Steadineſs of the Wall behind Rebounds the Voice upon the Audience with greater Force, and the Arch Collects it into that Force, vhich the Cloſer it is, the Better, and therefore the Elliptical Figure is Preferrable to the Circular; The oppoſite Wall being better for Hearing than the Middle, is an Argument, that a Wall by Reverberating gives a freſln Force to the Sound, which thereſore is not wholly Paſſive, but Renitent and Springy, and is a Proof of the Repulſive, or Expanſive, Force in Bodies, which we Afſfirm. 3d. ON Water, Sound is Propagated to a greater Diſtance, and is Soſter; On Land, Hatſher and more Periſhing; Which is Plain from Bells on the Warer, which are Soſter, and from a great Gun at Sea, which is farther Heard, and ſo in a Plane, to a far greater Diſtance, than on Uneven Ground The Laſt of which is, becauſe there is nothing to Break or Interrupt the Courſe of the æther in the one Caſe, whereas there is in the other; The Firſt, becauſe the Water is leſs Nitrous or Springy, and thereſore the Aſr about it, with which it is Mixt, which may Contribure likewiſe to it's ſarther Progreſs, becauſe the Springineſs or Expanſiveneſs of the Air makes ſome ſort oſ Reſiſtence to Sound, which Spring, and Conſequently Reſiſtence, is weakend by the Moiſture of the Water. For, 41h. Air Paſſing, tho' over the even Superſicies of an hard and reſiſting Body, is Retarded in it's Undulations or Revolutions. sth. THE Biſop's Account thereſore of the Reſurges of the Water, Promoting by a kind of Elſticity the Motion of the Air, and ycilding to it's Impreſſions, ſeems not Valid; becauſe Sound is Waſted too Swiſt thro' the Air, to Owe any of it's Ce lerity to the Phlegmatick Motions of Water. 6th. SouNDs are Propagated beſt thro' an Arch, near a Wall, the Surſace of Water, or of Earth, to which if we lay our Ears, we may hear Sounds at a Great Diſtance: Thus the Trampling of a Troop of Horſe, in a ſtill Night, on a large Plane, the Ea being cloſe to the Ground, may be Heard at an Incredible Diſtance. 71h. HENCE Narrow Arches will Propagate a Whiſper from one End to the other which is thereſore Thought to be the beſt lace for a Conſort; becauſe the Sound would would Conſolidate and Embody into one, which becomes a irue Compoſition of Sounds, in which iĩs the Life and Soul of Conſort. But perhaps it may be Objected, that ĩt will be too Loud and Harſh, ſince a Whiſper can be ſo eaſily Diſtinguiſd. IN The 6rh. Experiment, how the ther or Medium in a large Plane ſould Tranſmit Sound ſo vell, is not Evident, becauſe the Vegetables, which are ſcatterd upon it, muſt needs Interrupt the Courſe of the Ather, thereſore Sound is not Tranſmitted that way, but by the Trembling or Expanſive Force or Springineſs of the Ground, and perhaps the ſame may be ſaid of Water, which has alſo a great Degree of Elaſticity, when it meets with a Force which is likewiſe Expanſive; On the Contrary in Clay Ground, which has a Contractive Force, we ſhall never Hear the Sound at that Diſtance, becauſe it Damps and Stiſles it; The ſirſt has the Nature of a Wall, as in the preſent Experiment, the other of a Door, as in the Third of Mr. Walter, or of Silver in the firſt Caſe, and Lead in the laſt; But if the ther tranſmitred the Sound, in the preſent Experiment, it would do it, as well on Clay, as on a Large and Bounding Plane; So that here we have another Reaſon of Ecchoes, viz. The Expanſive Force or Springineſs of ſome ſort of Ground or Soil, in Preference to another; That is, wherè there is neither Grove nor Wali, there may be an Eccho from the Ground, as vell as a Sound upon Trampling; And indeed ſome Airs, which have an Elaſtick or Expanſive Force, may be diſjoſed Poſſibly to Produce the ſame Effect, as in an hard Froſt. IN The 71h. Experiment it is not unlikely, but it may not only depend upon the Arch, but the Temper of the Stone, as being Tremulous, Expanſive, and Active, from a Springineſs Acquired from the Air by a Long Tract of Timc, not Flat, Contractive and Heavy. FrROM Hence the Biſiop Proceeds to Compare; FirsT. Acouſticks to Opticks, or Direct Viſion, and Runs the Parallel betwixt them; In Direct Viſion The Looking thro' a Tube cauſes a different Sight of a Picture; For Example, what is only in Projection in the Picture, ſhall ſeem Real tht' a Tube; Be it ſo, if therefore there were nothing but an Intermediate Space or Vacuum, That could be no ways alter'd, for Things, if at all Viſible, woul appear the ſame with or vithout the Tobe; Nor is it enough to ſay, that the Rays of Light are Material but Space not, ſince the Light, by which we ſee Objects, is not the direct Rays oſ the Sun, or Emanations from it, but the æther actuated by the Impreſſion of that Luminous Body, no more than the Light of the Candle is the Emanations or E ffluviums of the Candle, and not Impreſſions made by it upon the Ather; For if they were really Rays or Parcels of the Suns Matter, or of te Candle, the Light of a Cloudy Day would be the ſame as Sun-Shine, and the Flame of a Candle would be ſpent in an Inſtant, before it was Poſſible to Convert any farther Matter into it's own Nouriſiment; From hence therefore we have alſo an Argument for the Diffuſive Action and Force of ther. The Reaſon, why a Tube makes that Alteration, may be, becauſe the Projection is caſt Flat upon the Eye, whereas a Perpendicular being rais'd to the Sight, it Poſſibly makes the Object appear ſo too, as all Things appear according to the Circumſtances of the Medium, thro which they are Preſented to us. The Parallel in Sounds is that of thoſe, which paſs thr a Tube or a Trumpet, by which they Flow like a Current, and are altered, Namely, by an Increaſe of them from the Expanſive Force of the Concave Metal, againſt which they Impinge. SECOND, He Compares Refracted Sounds or Diacouſticks, to Viſion or Dioptricks, in the Purſuit of which Compariſon he tells us, That, 1ſ. A Man, or any Object, appears larger thr a Thicker than a Thinner Medium; We ſay, becauſe the Dimenſions in the ſame Space are Larger in a Thicker than a Thinner Medium; And therefore when Impreſi'd upon the ther, will act in a greater Circuit than ſo much æther, and is a Proof of it's Continued Force or Action. 2d4. A Fine Glaſs Bubble fill'd with clear Water, and plac'd before a burning Lamꝑ or Candle, helps it to dart forth it's Rays to a prodigious Length and Brightneſs We add, Probably for the ſame Reaſon as before, becauſc the Water is a thicke Medium, and therefore Magniſfies the Flame ſo far, that the Bubble appears to be no thing elſe, and the Flame being Increaſed the Length muſt be; This likewiſc is an Argument for a Continued Force or Action in ther. 3d. THE Manifeſt Refraction of ther thro' Convex Glaſſes is an Evident Inſtanci of it's Force or Action, and Conſequently of it's Reſiſ°tence, which are only Rela i tiv tive Terms of the ſame Thing, for what is Action one way is Reſiſtence another. 41h. As There are 1ſ. Spectacles, 2à. Perſpectives, 30. Microſcopes, 47h. Polyſcopes; So the Biop thinks there might be contrivd, iſf. Otacouſticks for old Men to Hear with, 2à. Others to Hear Things, otherwiſe Inaudible, at great Diſtances, 3d. Others, viz. Microphones, to Hear the Voices of Inſccts, 47h. Others, viz. Polyphones, to make a Violin a Conſort. BUT For my own Part I cannot believe, that there is ſuch an Analogy betwixt Hearing and Viſion, that what may be Effected to Aſſiſt the one, may likewiſe be contrivd for the other; becauſe, 1ſ. The Organ of the Ear is not ſo Curious and Senſible, as that of the Eye, and therefore if the Nature of Sounds were never ſo vell Underſtood, it is not likely, that the æAther, however directed, ſhould find the ſame Admittance to the Mind by one Paſſage, as another. 2d. It is not Probable, Sound conſiſting in Elaſticity, that there are any Bodies Elaſtick enough to Reverberate, for Example, the Voice of a Mite or an Inſect. The Biſop goes on, TuIRD, TO Refiected Viſion and Hearing, or Catoptricks and Catacouſticks. AND, Here it is likewiſe again Evident, that there is Action, Force, or Reſiſtence, in the thinneſt ther; ſince we ſee the ſame Images of Things Reflected from the ſame Looking-Glaſs, remove it into what Part of the Ether we will, which Reflection could not be made without a Continued Force, or Action, or Expanſiveneſs, in the æther; For if there were the ſmalleſt Part of Space, which was not Expanſive, by whichExpanſiveneſs the Reflex Image is Communicated to the Eye, in ſome Poſition or other it would be Diſcernible, which would Diſcover, that what was Repreſented, as Part of the Image in one Place, would be a void Space in another. As To Reſlext Audition or Ecchoes He Tells us, That. 1ſt. A Sound falling Directly or Obliquely upon any Denſe Body, and of a ſmooth Superficies, there muſt be Ecchoes more or leſs, tho' they are not always Heard; Ii ĩt is Parallel to the Surface, no Eccho is Producedl. We may Add, rhat it ſeems to be a General Law of Nature, that the Greater the Reſiſtence or Oppoſition is, in the Actions of Bodies amongſt Each other, the Greater is the Noiſe or Sound which Reſults from ſuch a Conteſtt And the ſame may be ſaid, in ſome Reſpect, in that of Minds. 2d. Ir the Surface is Rough and Uneven, the Sound will be thereby Broken and Extinguiſn'd. IN Relation to theſe two Aſſertions, we ſay the Eccho may not be Heard, not only upon the Account of the Unevenneſ"s of the Surface, or of the Sound being Parallel to it, bur becauſe the Surface, however Smooth, is of an Unelaſtick, and Contractive Force, which Damps the Sound, without a Capacity of Returning it. 3d. A Plane Surface Refſects the Sound in a due Tone and Loudneſs, Allowing a Decreaſe Proportionable to it's Diſtance. It muſt be Added, Suppoſing ſuch Surface is Elaſtick and Expanſive. ] 41h. A Convex Reſlects a Smaller and Weaker, tho Quicker, and a Concave a Bigger and Stronger, tho' Slower, and alſo Inverted, but never according to the Order of the Words. OF Which we Propoſe the following Solution; The Concave muſt Reſlect a Bigger Sound, becauſe it Collects the Sound, or the Motion of the Fluid Ether, Stronger upon the ſame Account, but Slower, becauſe a Contracted Medium, or Condenſcd, muſt be Slower than one at Liberty from ſuch Reſtraints; The Convex muſt Refleẽt a ſmaller and Weaker, yet Quickss, for the contrary Reaſon; The Concave Inverts, becauſe ſome Sounds ſtrike the Sides ſooner, whilſt others, which were Spoke firſt, fall on the Bottom of the Concave, and therefore the Inverſion is never according to the Order of the Words; The Convex on the Contrary does not Reſlect the Sounds, which Strike on the Sides, which are Diverted another Way, and only thoſe, which fall directly, or nearly, upon the Apex of the Convex; Which may be a Second Reaſon, why thoſe from the Convex are the Quicker, and thoſc from the Concave, Slower, Thoſe falling on a Nearer Point, and Theſe on a Remoter. sth. Ir Is ſaid to be Impoſſible to Contrive a ſingle Eccho, which ſhall Refiect all the Words Inverted, becauſe the Words laſt Spoken muſt be firt Repell'd, which cannot be; tho' in Compound Ecchoes, where many receive from one another, this Inverſion is thought to be not Impoſſible. It does not, we ſay, ſeem, that the one is more Impoſſible than the other, for if in a ſingle Eccho one reſecting Superſicies l was was ſet ſo far oſf, that it ſould not Reverberate the firſt Sound, till a nearer had Reverberated the laſt, a ſecond Superficies the Sound nexr to the laſt, &?. The Words ould be Inverted; Let us, for Inſtance, conceive five Wells of very different Depths, ſo near one another, as to be within the Compaſs of one, we might Hear, what we Spoke firſt, in the Deepeſt, laſt, and what we Spoke laſt, in the Shalloweſt, firſt, ſuppoſing they vere filled to different Heights of Water. 6th. SoME Bodies will Eccho back but one Determinate Note, it is ſaid, and in one certain Place and no other; The Biop concludes this to be from the Concavity, or Archedneſs, of theſe Bodies, and their undue Poſition to any other Place. ON the Contrary we may ſuppoſe this to be rather from the Degree of Elaſticity, which perhaps may not be Capable of Reflecting a Baſi- Note, tho' it may a Treble, or Vice Versi; for by the Temper of the Wall, whether Nitrous, Reſinous, or Oleaginous, the Elaſticity muſt be alterd, and no more Capable of Reflecting ſome Notes upon the Percuſſion of Ather, than the Strings of a Baſ- Viol are Capable of Reflecting thoſe of a Violin upon the Application of the Hair, which Produces the Sound in both; that is, any ther, Striking upon ſuch a Degree of Elaſticity, will ſtill Occaſion the ſame Note3 And as to Hearing it in one certain Place, and no more, that ſeems not to Proceed from the Poſition of the Body, which Reſlects, but the Direction of the Elaſticity one particulart Way, and from it's Expanſion to ſuch a certain Degree. 2ih. THE Ecchoing Body Reflects more of the Sound, when farther off, than when nearer, and therefore ſome Ecchoes Repeat but one Syllable, ſome one Word, and ſome many. i 8th. A Multiple Eccho may be produced from one Sound, and vill be either Confuſed, or Succeſſive, as a Laugh from an Ha-, ſeveral Claps from one, and from one Word many of the ſame Tone and Accent; The Biſop Thinks this is done by ſo placeing the Ecchoing Bodies at unequal Diſtances, that they Reſlect all one Way, and not one on the other. ] voh. ONE Sound, by a diverſe Poſition of the Reſlecting Body, ſhall produce many Ecchoes different, both as to their Tone, and Intenſion; So that one Inſtrument might ſeem not only many of the ſame Sort and Size, but even a Conſort of different ones. j To Theſe Obſervations the Biſhop ſubjoins the three following Problems. Probl. 1ſt. To make the leaſt Sound equal to the greateſt, ora Whiſper as Loud as the Shot of a Cannon, by which the Minuteſt Sounds in Nature might be Heard. Probl. 2d. To Propagate the leat Sound to the greateſt Diſtance, by which the Whiſtling of a Weather-Cock would be Heard at Sea many Leagues, and the ſtrength of Winds meaſurd, allowing for their Moiſture; for the Drier a Wind, the Louder it Whiſtles. Probl. 3d. To Conveigh a Sound from one Extreme to the other without being Heard in the Middle, that a Man might Converſe with his Friend at a Diſtance, and not be Heard. FirsT, The Reaſon of Experiment, the 72h. Which we have not before taken Notice oſ, ſcems to be, becauſe the Elaſticity or Expanſive Force of the Ecchoing Body, vhen we ſtand too near, is overpowerd by too great a Violence of the Expanſive of the Voice or Sound, ſo as not to be able to Exert it ſelf, but at a greater Diſtance it Impinges with a leſs Force, by which Means the Ecchoing Body, according to the Degree of it's Force, Reſlects a Syllable, a Word, or two, &e. Becauſe when you ſtand farther off, it has Liberty to Play and Rebound, as it is Succeſſively touch'd by the Impulſe of the ther, flowing from the Voice or the Sonorous Body. SECOND, The Reaſon of Experiment the 81h. is, becauſe of the Extreme Elaſticity or Expanſive Force of the Ecchoing Body, whereby, being once touch'd by the Impinging Ether, it gives Two, Three, Four, or Five Rebounds with the ſame Force and Determination So that Poſition ſeems to have nothing to do in this Phænomenon. TninD, By being Reſected upon Walls of different Elaſticity or Expanſiveneſs, the Tone vill be varyd from Treble to Baſs, Tenor, &. S0 That the Biſnop, if this is True, is in an Error, not only, when he Aſfirms that theſe Variations of the Eccho proceed from the different Poſitions of the Ec choing Bodies, but when he likewiſe thinks, that a true Underſtanding of the Progrerſ Iii l or ſion of the æther vould make Acouſticks, as Capable of being Improv'd, as Opticks; for it is plain in Opticks, as they are now Received, and as He Underſtands them, that the Improvements in that Science are not owing to the Knowledge oſ the Medium, but of the Figures and Bodies, by which the Medium is Refracted or Reflected; and ſo likewiſe, to uſe his own Parallel from Opricks, Acouſticks are not to be Improvd from a Knovledge of the Medium, but of the Nature and Degree of Elaſticity, or Expanſion, in the Repelling Body; as the Sound, which a Hammer vould Produce upon a Wall, a Door, a Bell, or an Anvil, is not to be known by the Poſitions of thoſe Bodies, or the Motion of the Hammer, but from the Force of Recoiling upon the Stroke; So that his three Problems in Acouſticks ill appear to be Chimerical. From all which, for this is the Concluſion ve would make, it is Evident, that there is as much real Action, Force, or Reſiſtence in the æther, as there is in any one Body ſiriking upon another, or as there is in a Stone Reſracted in, or Reſlected from Water. As For Problem the Firſt, ſuppoſing it Feaſible, we ſhould not Hear the Minuteſt Sounds, but different ones produced, ſrom, indeed, a Minute Cauſe; In Optickstis otherviſe, becauſe we are Aſſiſied in Diſcovering the real Figures of ſmall Bodies, their Situation and Poſition, which Figure, Situation, or Poſition are the ſame in great Ones as they are in Minuter But Sound Conſiſts in it's very Magnitude, and therefore, if Increat by any Methods, is different from the Real; unleſs we Conſider the Tone only, that is Baſs or Treble, &?. Which might Poſſibly be diſcoverd; But ſince the Reſlection of Sound chieſly Conſiſts in Elaſticity, or Expanſion, where ſhall we find Bodies Elaſtick or Expanſive enough to Reſlect the ſtill Note of a Mite or a Leech-Worm, if they have any Organs to make one? i I Have in the foregoing Account mention'd Walls acquiring a Force by Proceſs of Time, which did not Originally belong to them; Which brings to my Mind, what Ihave many Years ago obſerved of the Famous Building of Sione- Henge in Wiliſhire, upon my Travells into thoſe Parts; It is generally Eſtcemed to be Compoſed of a Factitious Stone, or of Natural ones, vhich were Originally of the ſame Prodigious Magnitude and Size, in which we now behold them; Whereas, not to Inſiſt upon the ſeveral Objections, which lye againſt thoſe tvo Accounts, nothing ſeems to be more Evident to me, than that it was Raiſed, as all other Buildings, by a Cement of Mortar; For in many of the Tranſverſe Stones, which are laid upon the Perpendicular ones, there is Evidently a Disiointing of them into ſeveral ſmall and ſquare Stones, vhoſe Mortar or Cement is Periſhed; I was ſtill more Confirmed in this Opinion, when Iſav a Wall, Adjoining to the Cathedral Church at incheſter, Hardened into Stone; I likewiſe found, that the Stones calld, by the Adjacent Villagers, the Xings Stone and his Men, nothing clſe, but the Remains of an Old Building; Theſe lye betwixt Long- Compton and Endſtone in Oxforãſbire; The ſame Sort of Stones I obſerved betwixt Abingdon and Milton, in the ſame County, in ſome of Which there was a Plain Cement Diſcernible, and Harden'd into Stone; and Hemloct-Stone betwixt Stapleford and Starly in Derbyſbire, I could plainly Perceive had the ſame Marks of Mortar and Cement in ſeveral Parts of it, vhich were yer Harden'd into the ſame Subſtance; But we need go no farther, than to a Building of Stone next to the College where I Write, one of the moſt Famous in the World, King Henry the 61hs Chapel in Cambridge, the outward Surſace of which has acquired a Particular Hardneſs, whilſt the inward Parts of the ſame Stone are Soſt and Moldering: From all which I conclude, that the Elaſtick and Expanſive Force of the Air, and Sun, has a Power of producing, in a long Courſe of Time, an Hardneſs and Elaſticity in Mortar, Equal to that, which we find in Stone it ſelf, and that the ſame Expanſive Force can make a ſofter Stone more Hard and Elaſtick; And thus all Stones and Flints upon the Earth are Formed; In the ſame Manncr, as Fire, or an Expanſive Force, Hardens Clay, and Imparts an Elaſtick or Expanſive Force to it, hich before had a Dull and a Contractive. As to the Deſign of this Building of Srone- Henge, it ſcems to have been to Perpetuate the Memory oſ the Entire Victory of the Saxons over the Britons, under their great Leader Hengiſl, from whom it Derives it's Name; and thereſore we ſind the Britiſh Prince Ambroſe, vho vas the laſt Champion in that Cauſe, Buryd in an Obſcure Village not far from thence, which alſo has it's Name from him, and is now commonly called 4mestury, and in their Writings Ambroſe- Bury; There are other Accounts of this Matter, but which, upon Examination, Examination, will not be found ſo Conſiſtent as this; The long Reign of the Saxons in this Iſland will give a Reaſon, why that Monument of their Triumphs ſhould ſtand undiſturbed ſo many Years, till it was beyond the Will, or the Power, of any to Ruin it, by it's becoming Venerable to a Saxon Poſterity, and Impoſſible to be Deſtroyd by a Britiſb. A Continura 5. 12. WE Shall now Proceed to the Doctrine of Barometers, and Firſ, as it is Propoſed ſ. by Dr. Beal, who Tells us, that Mr. Boyle was the firſt who made them Publick with in æal s:a Obſervations upon them in the Years 1659 and 1660. And he Thinks it to be one ꝗſĩſ́ of the moſt Wonderful Diſcoveries, that was ever made in the World, 10 Weigh ſLi opters Clouds and Weather, and to prove the Sereneſt Air to be the moſt Heavy, and the  iln NThickeſt Air, when Clouds are ready to Diſſolve, or Dropping, to be the Lightet. ſimſof iia Wuicn Indeed ſeems to be both very Extraordinary, and very Incredible; On the Eæmeæ, Contrary we ſay, that the Reaſon, why the Quick-Silver is higher in Serene Weather, 22,æ ibthan in Wet and Cloudy, is not from the Weight of the Air, but from It's Spring, Couluſims Elaſticity, or Expanſive Force, or from it's Contractive, which in Moiſt Weather is Concurning h Diminiſ'd, and more ready to Yeild to the Gravity or Action of the Quick-Silver, Juhe ſrthan in Dry; So that the Weight of the Air may be greaterb, when the Action or n npon ir Expanſion, or Contraction of it, is ſmaller; For Inſtance, Water is Heavier than T,0ũ Ice, and yet any Body, as Quick-Silver ſhall Deſcend in Water, where it cannot in Vol. æ. PagIce; And by a Parity of Reaſon, the Mercury may Deſcend in a Moiſt Atmoſphere, 2,* ſ & when it will not in a Frozen, or Contractive, or in a Serene, Elaſtick, or Expanſive one. ĩr. LowTuE Barometer, he made Uſe of, was a Cane or Tube, 35 Inches long, of a ſlender thorgh Abrs Cavity, and a thick Glaſs, and the Height of the Mercury was never but very little raʒ; a ' above 30 or 304 Inches. Hi1s Experiments are, as Follow, of which I ſhall Endeavour to give the Solutions, according to our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. iſt. Decemb. 13h, 1664, The Mercury ſtood at 30; Inches, when it was fickle Fair in the Evening. 2d. June 22d. 1664. It ſtood at 304 Inches, if no Miſtake, at 5 in the Morning, when it was ſettled Fair; This is however certain, that it continued High in ſettled Fair, and Warm Weather, and as High in the Hotteſt Summer, as the Coldeſt Winter. 3d. Ir Yet was Higher in Winter and Summer, in cold Mornings and Evenings, than in the Warmer Mid-Day, and deſcended lower upon Rain, or great Winds; Yet was ſometimes High in Stormy Winds of 3 or 4 Days Continuance; It was alſo Lower after Rain than before it. THE Reaſon of the foregoing Experiments is plain; That the Mercury is higher, v bym⸗ vhether in Winter or Summer, when the Weather is Fair or Cold, is, becauſe the ĩ ſi iimta Contractive Force of the Air is Increaſed, in Cold Weather, and in Fair, the Expan- Jlesd fromi ſive, both which will At againſt the Mercury, and Hinder it from Deſcending, the u-4 a One by Compreſſing the Parts of Air together, ſo as to thruſt up the Mercury, or by Conradi: Contracting the Cavity of the Tube; The Other by giving them an Elaſticity and Ex- fpanſion, by which they Repel the Mercury, or Mixing with it, Dilate it; And in ſome Stormy Winds it is Higher, where they are Dry and Cold, upon the Account of their Contractive: On the Contrary it Sinks in Mid-Day, or upon Warmth, becauſe That Weakens the Contraction or Reſiſtence of the Air; Alſo upon Rain, becauſe Moiſture has the ſame Eſfect, and on Stormy Winds, where they are Warm or Moiſt: In ſhort, where Cold and the Contractive Force, or Dryneſs and the Expanſive, Prevails, the Reſiſtence of Air to the Deſcent of the Mercury is ſtrong, where Heat and Moiſture, Weak and Feeble. 41h. STRONG Fumes, or Odours, and thick Smoaks, let into a Cloſet, do not much alter the Height of the Mercury; The Reaſon of which ſeems to be, becauſe they are not of a Moiſt Nature but Dry, and do not therefore Weaken the Expanſive or Elaſtick Force of the Air, which Enervation of it ſinks the Mercury ; But the abundant Fumes of Water Boyling, which are Warm and Moiſt, Poſſibly would do it. sth. THE Mercury is Higher in an Eaſt or North Wind, than in a South and Werſt, which is for the ſame Reaſon; becauſc the two Firſt are Cold and Dry, and the two Lat Warm and Moiſ. 61h. THE Greateſt Alterations in the Height of the Mercury are not above 24 or 24 or near; Inches at the moſt; Becauſe the Expanſive or Contractive Force of the Iii a Ais, Air cannot be very conſiderably Diminiſhed or Increaſed by the Variations of Heat ind Moiſture. 7th. IN Days, which were Clear, and Dewy Nights, vhen the Moiſture Deſcended in great Quantities, the Baroſcope held the ſame; becauſe the Dryneſs or Expanſive Force of the Air, and the Coldneſi or Contractive Force oſ the Dews, produce much the ſame Effect, as in Experiment the 34. 31h. IN a Bright and Clear Day, and in the Next, which was Darken'd by ſome Rain and Sno ſalling, the Mercury was the ſame, ſo on High Winds and in Calms it was the ſame; This is already Accounted for, ſince Bright and Clear, or the Expanſive Force, Produces the like Efſects ith Darkneſi, caus'd by Cold Rain, and Snov, or the Contractive, and High Winds, that are Cold, the like with Calms, that are Dry. n December 17th. The Wind, Froſt, and Quick-Silver, were the ſame, the Day before there was a large Black Cloud and the Sky was Darken'd, yet Froſt and Wind the ſame. December 18th. The Quick- Silver fell 2 of an Inch, tho the Sky and Air were Clear, Bright, and Cold, as before; This ſcomd a Myſtery to him, till he ſent his Servant Abroad Caſually, who diſcoverd the remote Hills about 20 Miles oſf Cover'd with Snow, by which he Thinks the Air was Lightend and the Mercury fell: This looks to be a very fanciſull Account of the Matter; On the Contrary, ve cannot but ſtill Aſfirm, that the Alteration of the Height of the Mercury Proceeds from the greater or leſs Reſiſtence of the Air, Zi e. From the greater or leſs Expanſive or Contractive Force of it, tho the Height, under which it never falls, may Proceed from another Cauſe, which we ſhall aſterwards Explain; Since I ſay, ve ſtill Affirm it, there might be ſome Unheeded Circumſtance, which might Occaſion an Alteration of the Airs Spring, ſo far as to Sink the Mercury 2 of an Inch. 10th. THE Change of the Height of the Mercury is ſeldom great at a Time, tho' once it fell 2 of an Inch in a Day; We ſay, becauſe the Alteration of the Air's Spring is Gradual and Small. 117h. THE Mercury he found to be high in Thick and Miſty Weather, tho' it ĩs uſually lower then; it is acknowledgd, that it Continu'd above a Week, and at laſt, that the Wearher was Senſibly more Cold, and that there was an Eaſt, and North-Eaſ Wind Which Agrees with what we have Advanc'd, that the Mercury may Riſe or Fall in Miſty and Cloudy Fogs, or in a clearer Air, according as thoſe Fogs or Ait are Cold and Contractive or not; here they were Cold, being the Effects poſſibly of a North-Eaſt, or Eat Wind, and therefore the Mercury Roſe. 12th. UroN Dark thick Miſis riſing, and when there was ſome ſmall Rain, the Mercury held at a great Height; Becauſe the Darkneſs, Miſts, and Rain, were of ⸗ Cold and Contractive Complexion, and the Craſis or Temper of the Air thereby Altered. 13h. IF The Mercury Riſcs after a Fall of Rain, a ſettled Serenity Enſues, if it Subſides, the Weather is broken and Showry; Becauſe in the firſt Caſe, the Air recovers it's Spring or Expanſive, or rather it is a Sign, that by i's Spring and its Expanſive, it forced the Rain down, and preſervd it ſelf from the Impreſſions of it's Moiſture; In the ſecond it is Plain, the Spring or Expanſive of the Air is quite loſt and Diſſolvd, and has little or no Force remaining, it's Craſis is Flaccid, and it is able to Support, neither any Clouds, nor any Quick-Silver, above it's neceſſary Standard. 141h. THE Weather and our Bodies are more Chill, Cold, and Drooping, when the Mercury is the Loveſt, and the Air Lighteſt; Which is Agreeable to what we Advance, that the Chiller and more Drooping we are (which is one Sort of Cold Perceivable by us, tho' a Moiſt, not a quick one, as that of Froſt) the Mercury is the Lower; becauſe the Craſis of the Air is Flat and Diſſolute, and Strikes not ſo briskly upon our Senſes, but Unbraces the whole Animal Occonomy. 151h. THE Loweſt Deſcent of the Mercury is near 277 Inches; It was 284 in great Storms, and much Rain, Ob. 25th, in the Morning; Alſo 28, when the Winds were quiet, and there were Thick and Dark Clouds on the 267h, in the Morning; But 274, that Day and ſome Days following, when there was frequent Rain, and by Rain and the South Wind the Mercury ſunk  an Inch. ALL Which Phænomenons are Accounted for, in the Manner Explained, by our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. 16th. Tur 161h. THE Aſcent of the Mercury was above 2 an Inch more than 30 Inches, ſometimes higher to an 81h, ora iorh, Part of an Inch; The Air was then Bright and Clear, and there was a gentle Froſt, yet Melting by the Sun's Heat; The Air was Silent, and there was no Wind ſtirring, excepting what was Remarkable by a Curious Vane, vhich ſiow'd the Wind to be in the Eaſt directly; then it went to the NorthWeſt, and haſted again to the Eaſt, during which Time the Mercury Deſcended a little: We ſay upon the Account of the Weſt being a Warm and a Moiſt Quarter, but upon returning to the Eaſt, the Mercury Aſcended from the Expanſive; All which is Agrecable to what we have ſaid. AxD We ſhall only Add, that from all, which foregoes, it is Manifeſt, that Dr. Beal did Imagine and Believe, that there was a Real and Continued Force, Reſiſtence, or Action in Space, tho he was Wrong in ſuppoſing, that ſuch a Force Conſiſted in Gravitation. WE Shall therefore now Proceed to the Obſervations, vhich Dr. allis has made upon the ſame Subject. HE Tells us, that the Mercury is not Higher than 30, nor Lover than 28 Inches, or not 75 of an- Inch Lower or Higher; The Mercury was vell cleansd from Air, tho' Mr. Boyle's was much better cleans'd (hoſe Barometer he compard with his own, being both in Oxforà), for the Mercury ſtood always Higher, in Mr. Bozle's, near of an Inch; The Reaſon vas Thought to be, becauſe the Doctor's Mercury was Heavier than Mr. Boyle's, or becauſc Mr. Boyle's was bertet cleans'd from Air; But hov ſhould a light Body Expell'd make an Heavier Riſe Higher? Or becauſe his Bore was larger than Mr. Boyle's; But if a Weight of a Pillar of Air is equal to a certain Pillat of Mercury in Height, the ſame will hold in a leſſer or a greater Column of it in Diameter; As for the Glaſs, That ſeems to be ſo far, by any Aptitude of it's Parts, from Aſſiſting Quick- Silver's Riſing in the Tube, that, it is Plain, it Rejects it by the Mercurys Convexity at the Top of it. As Thercfore the Variation of it's Height has been Endeavourd to be Accounted for, by the Change of the Airs or Ether's Action, Spring, or Expanſive and Contractive Force, ſo now ve are to Account for it's Suſpenſion in the Tube; which is not to be done by the Gravity of the Air or Atmoſphere, as has been Generally Apprehended, but by the Mutual Action, and by the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Glaſs and Quick-Silver, as alſo of the Air, or æther, or Atmoſphere Surrounding it. TnOSE. Wio vill have the Weight of the Air the Cauſe of the Suſpenſion, Run into Difficulties, which are not to be Anſwerd, and Depend upon Reaſons, which may be; For, iſt. Ir it was the Weight of the Air, which really ſuſtaind the Mercury, why does it not do it, when the Tube is Inverted in Air or Water, as well as QuickSilver? Since the Weight of the Air, if any, will be in both Caſes the ſame; but if we Aſſign any other Cauſe, it is Plain, there is ſomething more in the Buſineſ; than the Weight of the Atmoſphere. 2d. It is not Imaginable, how ſo great a Weight ſhould be Senſible in it's Preſſure upon the Quick-Silver, and not upon our Hands, or Faces; Eſpecially, when by the Laws of Fluids, tho' there is an Abſolute Gravitation in the Air, yet there is not a Comparative one, but all the Parts of it are in quilibrio; And therefore any Thing, which is in Air, does not Perceive the leaſt of ſuch Gravitation or Preſſure. 3d. IP there were really an Incumbent Weight upon the Mercury in the Veſſel able to Support the Mercury in the Tube, the ſame Force would be able to Raiſe it into it, but That ve do not find; Thus we Perceive by the Preſſure of Water in one Tube of a Recurve Siphon, the Water is Rais'd in the other, as well as Supported; Beſides, the Aſſertors of Gravity own, that the Mercury Riſes, and Subſides, in the Tube, as the Atmoſphere is Heavier, or Lighter, and therefore ſould be Raisd into it by the ſame Weight. 41h. THE Experiment o? Monſieur Hugens is an Invincible Argument againſt its being Upheld by the Weight of the Atmoſphere, in which the Mercury is kept u; to 75 Inches, which is above double the common Height; Tis true the Preſſure of a Subtilei Fluid, beſides that of the Air, is here Introduced, becauſe Marbles and other Smootſ Surfaces will Adhere together even in Vacuo, and the Uppermoſt will drav the Un dermoſt after it, tho' ſome Pounds of Lead hang upon it; But Huzens did not con ider ſider, that, in the commoneſt Elevations of Mercury, That Preſſure oſ a Subtiler Fluid, if any ſuch there is, could not be wanting, unleſò it was Created jut to ſerve that Turn, and was aſtervards no where to be found in Nature3 Nor does Dr. Hallis's Elaſticity Solve the Matter much better, which is Increaſed Proportionably to the Preſſure; Becauſe, if that Rule held, the largeſt Tubes or Cylinders of Quick-Silver might be Suſtain'd, and not only to 30 Inches, but 30 Yards, ſince the Elaſticity oſ the Air, by being Preſſed, Repreſſes in Proportion. sth. WuicH gives usa Fiſth Argument againſt this Account oſ the Suſpenſion o Mercury by the Gravity of the Atmoſphere; For if a Cylinder of Air of  an Inch Diameter, for Example, can Support by it's Gravity a Cylinder oſ Mercury, 30 Inches High and  an Inch Diameter, a Cylinder of Air of 20 Inches Diameter will as well Support a Cylinder of Mercury 30 Inches High and 20 Diameter; Which doe: not Happen. 6th. Ir the Weight of a Cylinder of Air was Equal to a Cylinder of Mercury ol 30 Inches, how comes it to Paſs, that the Surface of Mercury in the Veſel, which is round the Tube and is only Preſſed by the Air, which Surface is greater than the Baſis of the Cylinder of the Mercury vithin the Tube, does not Raiſe or Suſtain a Pillar of Mercury, in Proportion Higher, as the Pillar of Air is Bigger:? As to the Reaſons for this Doctrine, They are only, i1ſ. THAT the Mercury Riſes and Subſides according to the Gravity, or Lightneſs of the Atmoſphere; Which we have already Confuted; Becauſe the Alrerations of the Height of the Mercury, as we have Proved, Proceed from diſferent Cauſes. 2d. That it is Lower in the Higher Parts of the Atmoſphere, and Higher in the Lower3 Which does not Ariſe ſrom the Leſs or Greater Gravity of the Incumbent Air, but from it's Reſiſtence or Spring, or it's Contractive or Expanſive Force, being Changed in thoſc different Situations. Tnus the Mercury may fall Lower at the Top of High Mountains upon the Account of Moiſt Clouds and Vapours, vhich would Break and Diſiolve the Elaſtick or Expanſive Force of the Air; or the Medium may be Thinner, and not ſo Contractive, by which it may be leſs able to Reſiſt the Deſcent of the Mercury;he Contrary of which may happen at the Bottom of ſuch Mountains. To Return to Dr. Walliss Experiments. 1ſ. IN Thick Foggy Weather the Quick-Silver Riſes, in Sun-Shiny likewiſe, and the Clearer the more, for if Clouds Intervene, it Falls, and upon Breaking out of the Sun, Riſes; it's Riſing in Thick Foggy Weather, He Attributes to the Weight of the Air, which might be as well Aſcribed to it's Reſiſtence, being more Conſtipated and Condenſed, that is, to the Increaſe of it's Contractive; As to it's Riſing in Sun-Shine, if ſo, it muſt be owing to the Increaſe of the Expanſive; Tho' by after Experiments He found the Contrary, that it rather Subſided: But when we ſay the Fogs are Denſe and Contractive, That ſtill muſt be judg'd by their Nature, for there may be ſome Moiſt Foꝶs and Warm, which will make the Mercury rather Fall than Riſe, by Diſiolving the Elaſtick and Expanſive Force of the Air. 2d. IN Rain it Falls, which was likewiſe Experimented by Dr. Beal, and was before Accounted for. 3d. IN Snowy Weather, and ſometimes in Hoar-Froſt, it Falls, but not ſo much as in Rain; becauſe theſe are only Colder Rains, in which the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Air is Enervated and Weakned in ſome Meaſure, as it is in Rains. 4th. IN Windy Weather Univerſally it Falls, m ore than in Rain; He ſays, becauſe it Hinders the Gravity of the Air from Preſſing Downwards3 on the Contrary, we rather Think, becauſe Winds Take off from the Airs Expanſive or Contractive Force, and Hinder it from Exerting it's Action; tho' it is own'd, where the Winds are Cold, as Eaſt, or North-Eaſt, the Mercury Riſes; and therefore Perhaps this Windy Weather was from a diſferent Quarter, which was Warm and Moiſt, and which certainly would make the Mercury Subſide. sth. THE Mercury has fallen without any Viſible Cauſe at Home, but looking Abroad, Rains have fallen at diſtant Parts, which He thinks Lightened the Air; But this ſeems to be unlikely, that the Mercury ſhould be Affected by ſuch Remote Cauſes, and it is more Probable, that the Cauſe was to be Sought at Home from the diſſerent Temperament of the Air, from what it uſed to be, which was Unhecded His Argument Argument for his Opinion is this; That, the Air being Lighten'd on a different Side, ind become more Thin and Rare by the Fall of the Rain, the Groſſer Air, which lyes towards the Barometer, Diſcharges it's ſelf towards the Rarer Part of the Atmoſphere; Which might Poſſibly be true, if Rains falling from Particular Clouds, and not Settled and General ones, Weaken'd the Reſiſtence or Spring of the Air, but by Dr. Beal it is Plain, that Partial and Accidental Rains do not Weaken it's Reſiſtence, ſince aſter ſuch Rains the Mercury Keeps it's Station, or Riſes Higher; Whereas; in General and ſettled Rains, the whole Craſis of the Air is Diſſolvd, and is not able to Support the Mercury, as it otherwiſe would do; and therefore Dr. Wallis's Rains falling are no Argument, vhy the Air, which lyes towards the Barometer ſhould Preſs that Way, where the Rains fell, ſince after ſuch Rains the Reſiſtence will be as great or greater than beſore; Beſides, if the Air ſhould Preſs from the Barometer, it would be Succeeded by the Air on the other Side of it, which would Supply the Place of that, which was carry'd ſrom thence. 6rh. HE Retracts his Experiment about the Sun-Shine making the Mercury Riſe Higher, or rather Endeavours to Reconcile his laſt Obſervation of it's Falling at ſuch Times, vith his firſt of it's Riſing, but at the ſame Time Owns, that in Froſty Weather it Riſes, tho before He had Affirm'd, that in a Hoar-Froſt it Falls; He Endeavours hovever to Reconcile his Elevation and Depreſſion of the Mercury upon Sun-Shine thus, that at firſt it was not Clear'd enough from the Air, and Conſequently, the Heat Increaſing, it's Elaſticity Rais'd it, but afterwards the Air Diſentangling it's ſclf, and Getting to the Top of the Mercury, it Depreſd it; But the more Obvions Account ſeems to be, that in the firft Caſe the Rays of the Sun fell upon a Medium, which was Dry and Elaſtick, and by that Mcans Increaſed the Expanſive Force of it, by which the Mercury was Raiſed; and in the laſt upon a Moiſt, by which the Expanſive Force of the Rays was Diminiſhed, and the Medium became Diſfolute and Flaccid, from whence the Mercury Subſided. 7th. THIS Experiment Informs us, that the Quick-Silver, Striking againſt the Ice in the upper Part of the Tube, gave a Smart Noiſe, not a Dead one, which is uſual 10 Quick-Silver which does not ſcom to Proceed from a void Space, but from the Nitrous, and Springy, or Expanſive Nature of Ice, which would therefore, by it's Brisk Reſiſtence to the Quick- Silver, Produce that Tone; as we have ſaid in Ecchoes, the Tone very much Depends upon the Elaſticity, or Degree of Reſiſtence, in the Bodies, which Strike one againſt another. 31h. THE Highcſt Standard of the Mercury was 30; Inches in Froſt, the Loeſ 27 4, the Uſual Height 29 Inches, or a little more The Reaſon, vhy Dr. Walliſs Mercury Roſe not ſo High, as Mr. B--le's, or Dr. Beal's, ſeems to be the Largeneſs oſ the Bore, which, He ſays, was greater than Mr. Bo”le's, and Dr. Beal Acknowledges his to be very Small; Becauſc the Action betwixt the Mercury and Glaſs would be Weakened from the Gravity of the former, and the Mercury would Subſide. BuT The Principal Phænomenon Remains ſtill to be Accounted for, Namely, why the Mercury is Suſpended to the Uſual Height; Which, we ſay, chieſly Depends upon the Mutual Action, or the Expanſive Force, of the Glaſs and Quick-Silver, tho' the Expanſive Force of the Air, or æther, is Aſſiſting to the ſame Effect; It is Manifeſ, that Glaſs has Acquired a Conſiderable Expanſive Force from the Fire, in the forming of it from Sands and Flints, Mercury has likewiſe a very Evident one from it's Exceeding Volatility; When theſe Actions, or Forces, therefore are at Liberty to Exert themſclves upon each other, they muſt Unite, as being both of an Expanſive Nature, and as they Preſs towards each other by that Expanſion; The Contractive Force, on the Contrary, of the Mercury, from whence it's Gravity is Derived, being much Superior to that of Glaſs, would draw theſe Expanſive Forces from each other, were there not an Expanſive Force in the Air, or ther, which Acted in Oppoſition to the Contractive of rhe Mercury; By both which Concurrent Cauſes, it is at length Supported, and Suſtained, in the Tube; And from hence it is, First, That Water, if Immitted into a ſmall Tube, Adheres ſo cloſely to the Glaſs, as not to be Expelled from thence by it's own Gravity, or by the Strongeſt Breath, which can be Applyd to it; SECOND, That Dr. allis Imagined, there was an Aptitude of Parts betwixt rhe Glaſs and Quick- Silver, and that Dr. Hooke Affirmed, there was a Coheſion of them, as Sir Iſ. Newton's Followers, an Attraction of the one to the other: THIRD, Tunm®D, That the Bore, or the Cavity, of the Tube muſt be Small; Becauſe the Acti on lyes betwixt the Mercury and the Glaſs, and not betwixt one Portion of Mer cury and another, which is in quilibrio, and which would Subſide by it's Gravity, ii not Supported by this Mutual Action; FourTH, That the Mercury at the Top of the Tube has a Convex Surſace; Becauſe the Expanſive Force of the Glaſs is Greater than that of Quick-Silver, which is Loaded with a great Degree oſ the Contractive, and thereſore by that Superiority of the Expanſive, Repells it; And which may be one Reaſon, vhy the Mercury Riſe: in Dry Sun Shiny, or Froſty Weather, when it is Expanſive, as it Contributes to the Expanſive Force of the Glaſs, and Cooperates, and Concurs, with it. THE Next Experiments, ve have, are thoſe of the Eminent Mr. Boyle, Who Tells us: 1ſt. THAT Obſervations upon the Barometer Diſagree, when the State of the Air is the ſame, very much ſor want oſ taking Notice of the Height oſ the Country, or it's Low Situation; He Inſtances in two Barometers, which He had, the one at Oxford, which was Low, by the Thames, the other at Stanton St. Johns, on a Moderate Hill; the lat vas alvays between E of an Inch lower than the orther, in which Proportion He found them Riſe and Fall by Conſent; This has been Accounted for vithout the Gravity of the Atmoſphere; Namely, by the Different Temper and Ex panſive Force of it, vhich might therefore make a leſs Reſiſtence, when Higher, than when Lover; Theſe Obſervations, He ſays, may Teach us, that the Subterrancous Stcams Riſing into the Air do more Uniformly Affect it in Lower and Higher Places oſ the Atmoſphere, than He durſt at firt Conclude; To which it is Anſwerd, that however that may be, it Teaches us at the ſame Time, that the Height of the Quickſilver, or Lowneſs of it, does not Depend upon the Gravity of the Air, but upon tſic Armoſphere's being leſs Expanſive or leſs Contractive when Higher, than when Lover, by the Diminution of either of which Forces the Mercury will Fall; that is, that there is a different Force from that of Gravity, which Cauſes the Alteration. 2d. HE Informs us, that once theſe tvo Barometers vary'd from the Proportion before Mention'd, i. e. the Barometer at Stanton, which us'd to be Lower than that of OxfordZ of an Inch, was; of an Inch diſferent from it's uſual Proportion, vithout any Manifeſt Change of Weather, either in one Place or the other; This therefore is a Proof, that there may be ſome Domeſtick Cauſes, as we ſaid beſore, or ſome Particular Craſis or Temper of the Air in that Place, which Occaſiond the Alteration; Which is caſily Solv'd by Suppoſing, that the Airs Expanſive or Contractive Force might be Weakend by ſuch Private Cauſes, but cannot be Solvd by the General Gravity of the Air, which muſt certainly be much the ſame at all Times, and under all Circumſtances of Heat or Cold, of Moiſture or Dryneſ. 3d. THE Quick-Silver was Higher than, He Thinks, has been Obſerv'd in Exgland, viz. æ above 30 Inches, tho' Dr. Beal has Obſervd it 30 Inches and : and more; Upon Conſiderable Showers, aſter a long Drought, it fell at Stanion to 4 Bencath 29 Inches, which He Foretold, not in Quantity indeed, but that the Mercury would Fall3; We ſay, becauſc the Expanſive Force of the Air was Diſiolv}d by the Moiſture oſ it, Agreeably to what has been before Aſfirmed. 41h. HE Says it is Diſficult to ſettle a General Rule for the Riſe and Fall of Mercury; the moſt General is, that vhen High Winds Blow, the Mercury is the Lover; We have already given a Reaſon of this; Namely, becauſe the Expanſive or Contractive Force of the Air is Diminiſd, and it's proper Force is taken oſf in General, by ſiuch an Emotion in it; But iſ this is the moſt General Rule, it is Evident, that the Weight of it has not much to do in this Matter, ſince that would be much the ſame, notvithſtanding the Caſual and Accidental Perturbation of it; Thus in Water, Move it as we Pleaſe, it will ſtill nearly Retain it's own Natural Gravity. Sin Iilliam Beeſten Obſcrved in Yamaica, TuaT the Mercury vas one Degree belov Changeable in the Morning, and as the Heat of the Sun Increas'd, that it Fell within one Degree oſ Rain; that, leaving open his Window, the Sun Shone upon the Tube, and in  an Hour it Sunk; Degrees; He Shut his Window, and vithin an Hour it Roſe to vithin one Degree of Changeable3 Which fully Confirms, what we Say, that the Alteration oſ the Standard id of the Mercury Proceeds from the Change of the Expanſive or Contractive Force of the Air. TuE Biop of Clyne Says, , TuaAr, in very much Thunder, the Mercury was Conſiderably Lower than ever He E Obſerv'd it, He does not give the Reaſon; Namely, becauſe the Thunder, which is⸗. always Accompany'd with Lightening, breaks the Expanſive or Elaſtick Force of the Air, vhich is Evident by Showers Generally Falling upon it, and ſiows the Diſſolvd and Languid Craſis of the Medium upon ſuch Accidents: MER. Tounley goes on to Aſſure us by his Experiments, x 1ſt. THAT Mr. Flamſtee?'s Barometer at London, was more thar à, of an Inch? Higher than his at Townley, which is Scated in a Valley, yet is Higher than the Low Lands ncar the Sca, where the Standard Differs little from that of London; That is, the Barometer Stood Higher in the Atmoſphere at 7o , than at London, and therefore the Mercury was Lower; But this is no Proof of the Airs Gravity, as we have ſewn. ] 2d. THAT November 181h, 1674. The Mercury Fell very Faſt at 2 in the Afternoon, and Roſe at 4; Becauſe perhaps the Air grew Sharper and Colder at 4, and at 2, vas Poſſibly Moiſter, being in November. WEe Proceed to Dr. Hote's Baroſcope, which Conſits of 2 Canes, and3 Cy-} Iinders, the Canes are filld with Mercury, Spirit of Wine Dy'd with Cochineal, : and Oil of Turpentine; The two laſt are made Uſe of, becauſe they are very nearly of the ſame Specifick Gravity, tho' the Oil Swims at Top; But if the Spirit be Highly Rectify'd, it will be Lighter than the Oil, which yet, by Mixing with ĩt a Drop or two of Water, will Preponderate and Sink below it. IN this Baroſcope it is Obſerved, 1ſt. THAT cach 13 Foot of Oil and Spirit will Raiſe the Mercury ĩo Inches. 2d. THAT, When the Atmoſphere is Heavy, the Mercury will Riſe into the firſt Cylinder, and Ieave the ſecond, which the Spirit of Wine takes Poſſeſſion of; The Spirit of Wine leaves the Cane, Which the Oil Seizes, and Quits the third Cylinder; On the Contrary, when the Air is Light, the Mercury Sinks from the firſt Cylinder, and Enters the ſecond, the Spirit of Wine Riſes from the ſecond Cylinder and Enters the Cane, and the Oil of Turpentine leaves the Cane, and Replaces it's ſelf in the third Cylinder; ſo that the Difference of the Mercury at the Higheſt, and Loweſt, will be Inlargd into the Length of the whole ſecond Cane. 34. THat the Dilatation and Contraction of the Spirit of Wine, which may happen in this Baroſcope, is to be Accounted and Allowed for, by the like Dilatation and Contraction of a Thermometer of equal Size. WE ſhall here therefore take Notice upon the foregoing Obſervations; FirsT, That from the Deſcription of this Baroſcope, tis P lain, that Fluids Mixing together, do not Preponderate, or Aſcend by the Reſpective Gravity, or by the Lubricũty or Oilineſs of their Parts, but by their Natural Inactivity and SluggiſineſZ or their Contractive Force on the one Hand, or by their Fire, and their Spirituouſneſ, or their Expanſive, on the other; SECOND, That from the iſf. and 2. Obſervations,tis true Mercury does Aſcend by Preſiure in this Experiment, that is, of the Oĩl and Spirit, but whether this Preſlure Proceeds from their Comparative Gravities, or from the Exertion of the Expanſive of the Oĩl and Spirit, againſt the Contractive of the Mercury, is not Determined; we Inſiſt upon, and Defend, the Latter, in Conjunction with the Expanſive and Contractive of the Glaſs and Air; THIED, That it is not unlikely but Mercury may be Dilated or Expanded by Heat, or the Expanſive Force, and be Contracted by Cold, or the Contractive, as well as Spirit of Wine in the Thermometer, tho' not in ſo great a Degree, upon the Account of the Weight and Contractive Force of the Mercury, in Compariſon with that of the Spirit ofWine; And this is not only not unlikely, but pretty Manifeſt and Certain. THE next Obſerver upon the Barometer, vhom we ſhall Conſider, is Dr Halley Who Informs us; FirsT, that May the 261h 1697. between one and two in the Afternoon on the Top of Suoãom-Hill in Carnarvonſhire, which was Meaſur'd by Mr. Caſuell to be 1240 Yards High, the Mercury ſtood at 26, 1 Inches, and when He came to Llanberris, a K k k the Footr of the Hill, about 6 in the Evening He found it 29, 4 Inches, and this Experiment He thrice Repeated; He alſo as often Experimented very near the Surface of the Sca, the next Night at 8 in the Evening, that it ſtood at, 29, 9 Inches, and the Air continued both before and after in the ſame State; Therefore He Concludes, that 1240 Yards of Air is = to3 Inches of Mercury, or thereabouts, and that 45 of an Inch of Mercury is=to 99 Foot of Air very nearly 3 Mr. Derham, September 1696. ſinding his Experiments on the Top of the Monument in Londim, ſomething Different from Dr. Halleys, Namely, that , of an Inch of Mercury was = to 50 Foot of Air, and to 16, Tryed the ſame Experiment with more Niceity, and Exactneſs, November 1697, vhen ,æ of an Inch was I to 82 Foot, and- =to 164, i. æ. the Mercury Fell in that Proportion; But He found by ſtaying above, ſomewhat long, the Preſure oſ the Atmoſphere was alter'd, and therefore, going up and down Quicker than before, He found the ſame Proportion as at firſt; He thinks however, that if the Mercury ſinks  of an Inch at 82 Foot Aſcent, when the Barometer is at 30 Inches, it may not yet ſink ſo much, when at 29. Tnis ſeems to be the Irreſragable Argument for the Gravity of the Air, being the Cauſe of the Aſcent of the Mercury, and Conſequently of it's Suſpenſion3 Which Gravity is far from being prov'd by theſe Experiments; Becauſe the Air's Expanſive and Contractive Forces, as ve Aſcend, may be Proportionably Diminiſhd, and it is, what Philoſophers themſclves own, that the Medium is ſtill Rarer, as we go Higher into it, and therefore the Expanſive and Contractive Forces muſt by Conſequence be Leſſened, upon vhich Forces we have made both the Suſpenſion of the Mercury in the Tube, and the Variation of it's Standard to Depend. WE ſay, that Gravity cannot Produce theſe Eſfects, becauſe no Gravitating Preſſure is felt from the Atmoſphere by our ſelves, or any other Bodies, upon the Account of the quilibrium in it3 Nor is it enough to Anſwer, that in the Aquilibrium of a Fluid, tho' the Parts do not Preponderate, and ſo their Gravity is not ſelt, yet they may Preponderate, where there is nothing to React againſt them, in the Tube above the Quick-Silver; ſince the Parts of the Atmoſphere, as to any Actual Gravitation, are Perſectly in sEquilibrio, and if the Quick-Silver were away, and that Space were Abſolutely Void, would Aſcend no more than as that Void Space had Ileſs Action or Force than the Expanſive and Contractive of the Atmoſphere, and not according to the Force oſ the whole Incumbent Column, which is ſuppoſcd to Gravitate; For ſuch a Force would be ſo much Superior, as to Break in Pieces the Glaſs, which does not happen even in an Exhauſted Receiver. Tis True, where there is no Reſiſtence or Action to the Contrary Side, the Air has a Prodigious Force, which is Manifeſt in it's Ruhing into Spaces Exhauſted of it, as in the Wind-Gun, Mention'd before, of Dr. Papin by Rarefaction; No One yet ever Pretended to Explain this Effect by the Gravitation of the Air, but by it's Elaſticity; Tis this Expanſive Force joyned with it's Contractive, which has ſo vaſt a Pover in the Barometer, which, tho' Flat and Languid in it's Natural State, Exerts it's ſelf to ſo great a Degree, where there is none to Oppoſe it; The Mercury thereſore in the Barometer, when it has Conquerd all the Force of Air in the Tube, or leſt none there, finds the ſame Force from the External Air, as if the Mercury were Shot into a Wind-Gun; For it is the ſame, vhether it hinders ſuch a Weight from Deſ cending in the Tube, or whether it Shot ſuch a Weight into it, which was of equal Force. We do not however here Affirm, that this Expanſivre and Contractive Force of the Air Supports the whole Standard of Quick-Silver in the Tube, ſince we have ſuid the Mutual Action or Expanſive Force of the Gla' and Quick-Silver has an Important Eſet in the Producdtion of this Phænomenon. WuAT We have Alledged concerning Air and Mercury holds in ſome Proportion in Air and Water, which, as Rohault Informs us, Riſes to 12 Foot above 30, in the Siphon, which ſhows the Force of the Airs Action to no Action, or a very Inconſiderable one, to be much the ſame; For Suppoſing we take 30 Foot oſr Water, so Foot of Air, according to Mr. Derham, is5to,5 oſan Inch of Mercury, i e. 960 Inches of Air= to of an Inch of Mercury, or 9600 Inches of Air=to I Inch of Mercury; On the orher Hand 30 Foot of Water are = to 30 Inches of Quick-Silver, becauſc the Air has that Reſiſtence or Reaction to both, i. e. Mercury is to Water as 12 to 1, but Water is to Air, as 300 to I; therefore by this Computation, likewiſc, Mercury is to Air Air, as 12 x 800 = 9600 to I; Which is not the Gravity of the one to the other, but there is that Force of Action in the Air, Exceeding the Action of vhat is call'd a Vacuum, into which it would Ruſh, if not hinderd by an equal Force; and upon theſe Principles, all the Variations of the Mercury are eaſily Accounted for, and not by Gravity 3 For as this Force in Air is Increas'd, as was ſaid before, by Cold, or Dryneſs, or Elaſticity, or by Heat ſometimes, or Diminiſ'd by Warmth or Moiſture, or by Winds, ſo it has a greater or leſs Power, to Act upon a Non-Reſiſting or Inactive Medium; And as the Air grows Thinner, and more Dilated, by it's Height, it is Plain, there muſt be a leſs Difference betwixt a leſs Active, or more Dilated, and a Non-Reſiſting or Inactive Medium; This likewiſe gives an Account why, if we Incline the Barometer or the Tube of Water, the Mercury or Water does not Vary, which it ſould do, if it's Height Depended upon a Perpendicular Gravity of the Atmoſphere. FroM Hence it is likewiſe Apparent, that there is not a Void Space in the upper Part of the Barometer, ſince there is a Proportion given betwixt the Reſiſtence of the External Air and that, viz. as 9600 to I. LastLy, here is an Eaſie Account given of Mr. Hugens's Experiment, which has ſo much Perplexed the Philoſophick World, which couſd never be done by the Gravity of the Atmoſphere, tho' the Lord Brouncter tells us, that there is Really a greater Gravity in it, than what will Support 29 or 30 Inches of Mercury; on the Contrary, Gravity is a Firm and conſtant Principle, and therefore, notwithſtanding any Concuſſion of the Tube, would Support the Mercury at 75 Inches, according to Mr. s's Experiment, whereas, upon Shakeingit, it Falls to it's uſual Standard; Dr. Wallis Aſcribes it to the Elaſticity of the Air, which would lie under the ſame Inconveniency, as the former; for Elaſticity, according to his Explanation of it, would not be the leſs, but the greater, by an Incumbent Load, and therefore upon Concuſſion and the Mercury endeavouring to Deſcend, ſuch Elaſticity would Proportionably Increaſe and hinder it's Deſcent; Mr. Hugens would have it, that there is a Preſſure beſides of a Subtile Matter, hich is a Carteſian Romance, and entirely Precarious and Groundleſs; It can therefore be Reſolvd into nothing but this, that the External Air endeavouring to follow the Mercury, which Proceeds into the Vacuum of the Tube, which it would Poſſeſi, if the Mercury was away, fixes it's ſelf cloſe to the Mercury in the Ciſtern, and there Suſtains it3 becauſe if the Mercury ſhould Deſ cend vithout any Succuſſion, it would by it's Gravity, which is none in the Tube, where it is in an Aquilibrium, be able to Preponderate the Force of Reſiſtence in the Air, vhich has none at the Top of the Tube to Oppoſe it, and whoſe Force in Reſpect of that would therefore be Infinite. Tuis at leat may be one Reaſon of the Suſpenſion of the Mercury to ſo great and unuſual an Height; but if we vill Allow the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractivee Forces, this Matter I believe will ſtill be Clearer; for the Expanſive Force of the Mercury, Acting againſt the Expanſive of the Glaſi, Cements them to each other, and the Contractive of the Mercury or it's Gravitating Force, being Balanced in it's ſelf in ſome Meaſure, and what remains unbalanced being Supported by the Expanſive or Contractive of the Ambient Air or Plenum, Nothing can make the Mercury Deſcend, but Diſturbing this quilibrium by the Expanſive of Percuſ ion. HOWEVER, upon the Reſult of the whole, we may draw this Concluſion, which is what we Originally Intended, that Philoſophers, in their Diſputes about theſe Matters, do own a Continued Action of Gravity, or Elaſticity, Diffuſed and Diſperſed through cvery Point of Space, to which, it is Evident, theſe Experiments Reach or Extend. SECOND, Dr. Halley, in Order to Aſcertain from this Doctrine the Height of the Atmoſphere, makes the Weight of Water to that of Air, as 840, 852, or 860 to I, by ſeveral Experiments of Water upon the Barometer, which ſtood in each of them at 29 Inches 2 in Summer, when the Air was Rarefy'd, and therefore the Thinner; ſo that 300 to I, He takes to be a Moderate Proportion of Water to the Air in a more Natural State. BuT the Weight of Mercury to Water is as I34 to I, and therefore the Weight of Mercury to Air, as 10800 to I, or 550 Foot of Air =to I Inch of Mercury, and the Atmoſphere will be 5, 1 Miles High, if the Air were equal in all _ KE k 2 ul but being Expanded in the ſame Proportion, as the Incumbent Weight of the Armoſphere Decreaſes, each Space Anſwering to an Inch of Quick Silver, grows Greatet and Greater, as we g0 Higher; and Conſcquently the Expanſion of the Air being Reciprocally, as the Heights of the Mercury, the Atmoſphere will reach at the Higheſt, to 45 Miles, See the Computation, Pag. 16. ſol. 2. and at 41 Miles the Air is ſo Rarefied, that it takes up 3000 times the Space it Occupies here, and at 53, 30000 times the Space, and therefore it is unlikely that the Air's Spring ſhould Exert ir's ſelf to that Degree; and Conſequently 45 Miles is the Higheſ. IN Anſwer to this we ſay, that the Height of the Atmoſphere, or Gravity of it, cannot be Deduced from Experiments upon the Barometer; For, beſides the Arguments we have brought againſt it, and the Explanation we have given, it is very Unſair in Reaſoning to Aſcribe the ſame Effect to two different Powers oſ Producing it; the Mercury Sinks from 30 Inches, or more, to 27 in the ſame Height of the Atmoſphere, the Reaſon of which is the Alteration of the Temperature oſ the Air, as theſe Philoſophers Acknovledge, tho' they Aſcribe that Eſſect to the Lighter Temperature, ve to the leſs Active or leſs Reſiſting; It Sinks in the ſame Proportion, if we carry it to an higher Part of the Atmoſphere, what's the Reaſon? Why now Truly, not becauſe the Temper of the Air is alterd, but becauſe there is ſo much direct Gravity cut off from the Incumbent Column; Whereas, ve Say ſtill, that it Proceeds from the ſame Cauſc, as the other, an Alteration in the Temper oſ the Air, or it's Force of Action or Reſiftence3 For here it is own'd by thoſe who Oppoſc us, that the Air's Expanſion is Increas'd, or, which is all one, it's Force Diminiſi'd, as the Mercury Falls; Moreover, it is not Improbable, that the Airs Reſiſrence, Action, or Force, may not only be Diminiſd 3000, or 30000 times, but 30 Millions, or to Infinity; as Sir Iſ. Newton ſcems likeviſe to Apprehend; and thereſore Dr. Halley cannot Conclude from the Impoſſibility of ſuch an Expanſion, that the Height of the Atmoſphere is only 45 Miles at the moſt; Becauſe, according to the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, there may be ten Millions of Degrees of both, without Suppoſing Elaſticity or Expanſion to bear any Proportion to the Preſſure of the Incumbent Atmoſphere. HOWEVER Dr. Halley ſays this Computation, which is Affirmed upon the Suppoſition of the Atmoſpheres Gravitating upon the Mercury, ſeems to be Aſcertained from a Computation made from the Crepuſculum's continueing till the Sun's Falling 18 Degrees below the Horizon; which yet is the ſame Kind of Demonſtration, which Varenius Confutes, and by which Nonnius and Clavius made the Height Indeed of rhe Atmoſphere about 44 Miles, Dr. Halley 44, 4. See Pag. 17. Vol. 2. but Varenius 246, and another, vhom Varenius Mentions, made it 52, which is within one Mile of that Number, which Dr. Halley reckons Impoſſible, viæ. 53; ſo that from ſo Uncertain a Computation nothing Certain can be Inferred, Eſpecially to Confirm Another, which is equally Uncertain, and as we ſay, Falſe. TuHmD, by this Computation Dr. Halley ſays, the Air is Expanded to 3000 times the Space it Occupies here, and by Experience it may be Condenſed into a 601b, ſo that it is Capable of being Compreſcd into the 180000rh Part, viæ. 60æ 3000th, of the Space it would take up, if free from Preſſure; which great Contraction and Expanſion, he thinks, is not to be Accounted for by the Compariſon of Wool or Cotton, as Mr. Bojle would have it, or other Springy Bodies; for what Texture or Compoſition of Parts is Capable of ſuch Contraction or Dilatation? a Queſtion, He ſays, which ſeems very hard to be Reſolved; Farther, that the Rarefaction of the Air cannot Proceed in Infinitum, as is Proved the Condenſation cannot, He ſays is Plain, becauſc there muſt be a Determinate Magnitude of the Natural State of each Particle, as in Wool, and the like, which have a Determinate Bulk, which they cannot Exceed, when freed from all manner of Preſſure. æ Tuis Expanſion of the Air we ſhall thereſore Conſider, and, as it ſeems to me, there is no more Diſficulty in Conceiving Air to be Expanded to 3000 times it's Space, vhen Compreſſed, or to 180000, when Rareſyd to the urmoſt, which He allows, than to 30000, or I800000, Which He Will not; Nor is there any Abſurdity to Imagine it to be Expanded to Infinity, as Sir Iſ. Newton would have it 37 Tis true it cannot be Condenſcd by Experiments to Inſinity, nor can it be Rarefyed by them to Infinity; But all our Force in Experiments is only Finite, which we can Uſe, whether to Rareſy Rarefy or Condenſe it; It is alſo True, that every Particle has it's Determined Mag: nitude; But the Particles of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy I take to be here no vay: Concerned; And as to the Particles of Wool, they continue the ſame, whether Condenſed or Dilated, and their Action only is Different, and therefore is an Improper Inſtance: In ſhort, a Similar Matter can be no other than it's ſelf, and cannot be Expanded but to a certain Degree; But the Queſtion is not, whether the ſame Kind oſ Similar and Homogeneous Matter can be Infinite in it's Expanſion, burt whether Matter may not put on Various Forms, and Equally fill Space; The Air, Conſidering it to be Compoſcd of Determined Parts, or Atomes, according to the Corpuſcular Scheme, can reach no farther, than thoſe Parts will Permitt it; But if ve Conſider it as a Body, Capable of Changing it's Dimenſions, and being Thicker or Thinner, that is, having a more Compreſicd or a more Diluted Action, and yet Continued thro Space, it may be Expanded to Infinity; that is, being a Body eaſily wrought into any Form by it's very ſmall Reſiſtence, it may be Conſtipated, as far as the Finite Force of Engines vill do it, and may be Dilated to Infinity by the Expanſive Force of the Sun; As for Example, tho by the Florentine Experiments of the Academy Del Ciments, Water cannot be Compreſſed, yet it may be Dilated and made Lighter, by heing Changed into Air, by the Expanſive Force of the ſaid Body, and Air by being Changed into æther, and yet all three fill Space; On the Contrary, Matter may be Contracted into Gold, or an Adamant, which Force will be Infinite in Reſpect of the Conreactive of ther; that is, the Expanſive Force of Matter, or the Contractive, may be Increaſed to Infinity in Nature, tho' not by our Experiments, or by Finite Aents. s FOURTH, He tells us, that the whole Weight of the Atmoſphere is Various, heing Counterpoiſed by 23 Inches and 4 ſometimes, and at others, by 30 2, which, if æ Inches of Mercury are Equal to the I5:b Part of the Gravity of the Air, will make the Gravity of the Air ſometimes Lighter by a 151b Part, than at orher times. Tuis ſeems to be a Suſficient Argument, vhy the Gravity of the Air is not here Concerned; For by the Alterations of the Atmoſphere, from any Cauſes whatſoever, can we Poſſibly Suppoſe, that there ſould be ſuch a Difference in the ſame Place, and many times vithout any great Alteration of the Air, as that it ſould be Diminiſhed a I5th Part of its Weight? Whereas, Allowing the Force, or Action, of the Air, 10 be different, the Solution is Eaſy. i FIPTH, We are Told, that Heat and Cold do Conſiderably Dilate and Contract the Air, and Conſequently Alter it's Gravity; On the Contrary, ve do not Think they can to any great Degree, at leaſt not to Increaſe, or Diminiſh it, to a 15h Part of the Whole ; for wherher Water be Boiled or Frozen, which is more than happens 10 Air from any Natural Cauſes, they are much of the ſame Specifick Gravity, tho Ice is ſomething Lighter; which is a Plain Argument, that the Variations of the Mercury Depend upon the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Air, ſince in Froſt it Riſes Higher, and yet, according to an Analogy with Water, the Air ſhould be Lighter; Hovever Ice will Reſiſt to the Deſcent of any Body, more than Water, and therefore Air, vhen Frozen, may, tho' it is Lighter. SixTH, He ſays, if we add to this the Mixture of Effluvia or Steams, which Aſſimilating into the Form of Air, are kept Suſpended therein, as Salts Diſſolved in Liquors, or Metals in Corroding Menſtrua, as in Spirit of Nitre, which are Heavier by much than Air, it's Gravity will be Increaſed. ON the other Hand we Alledge, if theſe Metals, or Salts, Aſſimilate into Air, and are Suſpended there, it is a Proof they are then in Aquilibrio with it, and therefore do not Gravitare amongſt one another, nor upon any Body, as Mercury, which is Incloſcd in them; but they may Increaſe the Contractive Force of the Air, i. e. not only to keep the Mercury from Deſcending Lower, but to make it Riſe Higher, by adding a Moment to the Expanſive, becauſe there will be then a greater Force, in Proportion to the Boylean Vacuum, in the Top of the Tube, and Conſequently a greater Force of Ruſhing into it, if the Quick-Silver did nor Intercept it. SEVENTH, We are Informed, that Condenſations of Air are Confined to a certain Degree, for if the Air is Compreſſed to an 80crh Part of the Space it takes up here, it's Conſiſtence would be equally Denſe with that of Water, which Yeilds not to any Force by the Experiments of Florence, or the Academy Del Cimento. : ' Ir this is a Surmiſe, becauſe He has Thought it is Prov'd from Barometers, that Aii is to Water, as 1 to 800, the Experiment is wanting; if it is Matter of Fact, that Air can be Compreſſed into an 800rh Part of it's Space, it is Contrary to his othei Experiment of it's being Condenſed into a 60rh Part only, ſince He takes no greate a Proportion to Prove the utmoſt Contraction and Dilatarion of the Air, which would be 1800001h Part, when Contracted, of what it would be without any Preſſure; buc Suppoſing Common Air could be Condenſed to that Degree of 800, and no Force could aſterwards Condenſe it, no more than Water, it only Proves, that the Reſiſtence or the Expanſive or Contractive Force of ſuch Water, or ſuch Air, Com preſſed, is Equal to any Force we can bring againſt it, and not that it is Infinite; or i Water or Air Condenſed is Infinite in it's Expanſive or Contractive Forces or Re ſiſ*tence, it does not Prove againt vhat We have before in General laid Down, that there are Degrees of the Expanſive or Contractive Force or Reſiſtence; for in thoſc Experiments, there is an equal Preſſure upon the Water on all Hands or nearly, but the Weakeſt Reſiſtence, or Expanſive or Contractive Force, will be as Firm as the Strongeſt, where the Preſſure upon it on all Hands is Equal. Tuat there are different Degrees of the Expanſive, or the Contractive Force, is Evident from Quick-Silver and Water, for if we Separate the Parts of Quick-Silvei and let them lie ncar together, they will tend to each other with a wonderfull Ce Ierity, and ſeem to Embrace ſo cloſely, that one would think there was ſome more than common Sympathy betwixt them; whereas the Parts of Water do not ſhow the ſame cager Propenſity to cach other. EIGHTH, Dr. Halley tells us, that the Variations of the Air Compenſate one another and ſo leave the Gravity of the Air to obtain it's Effect, for when it is Hot, Vapours are Raiſed, which Load the Air as much, as the Heat Li ghtens it; But if ſo, how comes the Mercury to Riſe, when it is Suppoſed the Air is full of Vapours by the Heat, if thoſe Vapours Compenſate the Heat only ? THEREFORE it does not ſeem ſo well Atteſted, that the Mercury does Riſe in Hot Weather, tho' it is Generally Receiv'd, and the Reaſon Commonly given is, becauſe the Air is Crowded with Vapours;tis certain Dr. Halley here Reckons the one does but Bælance the other; and afterwards, vhen he Enumerates the Principal Obſervations upon the Barometer, He does not Mention that of it's Riſing in Hot Weather; And by an Experiment already Recited the Sun being let in upon it, the Mercury Sunk, and when the Window was Shut, it Roſe. AND as for the Air being charg'd with Groſs Vapours, tho' in the cleareſt Day in Hot Weather, I cannot believe there is any ſuch Thing, tho' Dr. Halley here Affirms it, but that what Moiſture is Raiſed by the Expanſive Force of the Sun's Rays is Changed into a different Complexion, Nature, and Temper, than that of Water, viæ. into a fine Fluid Subſtance; and as for Rain after exceſſive Heat, iſ. that does not always follow, ſince there have been very Hot and Dry Summers, when the Winters have not been Rainy for Years together, 22. when Rain, or Dew, does Succeed, that Proceeds not from the Latent Groſs Parts of the Air Congealing, but from the ſame Alteration in the Craſis of the Air to Produce Moiſtneſs from a diſferent Cauſe of Cold and the Contractive Force, as Dryneſs Proceeded from the Expanſive Force of the Sun; So that the Air is not the Heavier, but the Lighter, for ſuch Imaginary Vapours, which are Chang'd by the Sun into the Expanſive. NINTH, Dr. Halley farther Aſlures us, that Mr. Caſivell's Experiment, on SnowdonHill in Caruarvon-Shire, Agrees very nearly with his Calculation; the Height of the Hill is 1240 Yards, and the Mercury ſtood at 25-5, 4 Inches below it's uſual Standard; the Space in Dr. Halleys Calculation Anſwering to 4 Inches near the Surface is 1288 Yards, which is not more than 48 Yards above Mr. Caſuell's Obſervation; hich according to Mr. Derham, is about equal to half - of an Inch of Mercury; and Dr. Halley found the Diſference to be 3 Inches,, ſo that it isæ leſs than Mr. Caſuells, and therefore ſould be, according to Mr. Derham, 4. 82 Yards lover, viæ. 328; and in the firſt, the Mercury ſhould be half  of an Inch Higher than Mr. Caſivell Obſervd it, and in the ſecond, the Space or Height of the Hill 400 Yards Iover than Mr. Halley's Calculation has ſett it, which therefore is no Argument of the Truth of ſuch Calculation. Nor is it Impoſſible but this Difference of the Standard of Mercury at the Top, and at the Bottom of the Hill, may Procced, not only from vhat vhat we before Mentioned of the different Expanſive and Contractive Forces o the Air, vhen we gave an Account of this Piænomenon, but from the Expan ſive Force of the Mereury towards the Expanſive of the Glaſs, which may Riſe Higher by a greater Oppoſition of the Contractive of the Earth, and Fall lower by a Leſs, for Contraction, or Gravitation, is Leſs at greater Diſtances, and greater at leſt Diſtances, from it; thus the Expanſive of Fire, and Flame, Riſes Higher, by an Oppoſition from the Contractive of Water, and one Force is often in Nature Excited and Exaſperated by it's Contrary. Or it may be, as the Mercury is Heavier, it's Expanſive Force has a greater Moment, and Adheres, and Preſſes, more Strongly to the Glaſ Tube, and as it is Lighter, more Weakly, and therefore ſtands Higher in the Tube, at the Bottom of the Hill, than at the Top; And Perhaps Succuſſion in the Aſcent up the Hill, may have ſome Influence in this Phænomenon. TexTH, in General, Dr. Halley Aſcribes all the Variations of the Mercury to tvo Cauſes. i1ſt. THE Principal is the Variable Winds in the Temperate Zones, which are not ſo in the Torrid, and thereſore, the Mercury at St. Helena, and Barbadoes, and ever betwixt the Tropicks, ſtands much at the ſume Height; The Winds, if they have any Effect, muſt Produce it, by heaping up the Air together and Diſperſing it, and Carrying to the Mercury, or from it, different Exhalations, that &s, by Increaſing or Diminiſhing the Gravity of the Air in both Caſes; As for the firſt, the Winds Blowing from the ſame, or contrary Quarters, no more add to the Weight of the Air, than Streams or Currents of Water, meeting or taking the ſame Courſe, Increaſe the Speciſick Gravity of Rivers; and for heaping Air togerher by the Winds, it ſeems to be only a mere Chimæra; if it be ſaid, that Clouds Fly about, in Abundance, in Stormy Weather, tis Anſwered, and for that Reaſon they are Lighter, and it is Obſerv'd, that even Rain is kept up by the Force of ſuch Storms, and Conſequently Winds will rather Diſperſe than Heap the Air together; as to the Second, or Exhalations, that is Referred to his ſecond Cauſe. ; 2d. TuE other General Cauſc is the uncertain Exhalation, and Precipitation, of Vapours lodged in the Air, which in great Meaſure depends upon the former, viæ. the Winds; To which likewiſe we in General Anſwer, that Vapours lodæſd in the Air are Really no more than Parts of Water, or orher Terreſtrial Fluids, Aſimilated to Air; They become nearly of the ſame Specifick Gravity, and therefore do not Increaſe it's Weight to any tolerable Degree, ſo as to produce the Eſfect, vhich we want; and when they Precipitate, it is, becauſe they loſe their Expanſive Force, and put on a Contractive, and therefore Preponderate; ſo that, upon their Deſcending, the Air ſiould be Heavier, and upon rheir Aſcending, Lighter; The Contrary to which is commonly Affirmed by Philoſophers. TuEsE Eight following are the chie?f Obſervations upon the Barometer, according to Dr. Halley. Fiust, the Mercury Falls in Calm Weather, when the Air is Inclin'd to Rain; vhich He ſays is, becauſc the Air being Light, the Vapours are no longer Supported thereby, as they are become Speciſically Heavier; To which we Anſwer; If the Air is Lighter, and the Vapours Heavier, than their ſeveral Intenſive Gravities, the Weight oſ the whole Air may be ſtill the ſame, and ſo the Mercury may not Deſcend, but that I ſuppole Dr. Halley does not Mean; For by what Methods ſould the Intrinſic Gravity of the Air be Alterd, or that of Vapours, and the one continue Air, and the other Vapours? tho' this may be by the Power of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, but theſe He did not Conſider; What therefore He ſeems here to Think is, that the Vapours would Preſerve their own Nature, and Gravity, but being Collected together, and the Air keeping it's Natural State, the Vapours may Preponderate; If ſo, in ſuch a Column of Air, where it Rains, I Ask, whether, whilſt the Air Preſcrves ĩt's Natural Gravity, and the Vapours are Amaſſd together, ſo as to be Heavier than before, the whole Column is not Heavier, and Conſequently, whether the Mercury ſiould not Riſe, rather than Fall, upon the Suppoſition, that the Cauſe of s Riſe is the Gravitation oſ the Armoſphere? On the Contrary, we Affirm, as beore, when the Weather is Calm, and there is a Diſpoſition to Rain, whether the Atnoſꝑhcre be Heavier or Lighter, it matters not, that the Craſis of the Air is bisne⸗ that that it's Expanſive and Contractive Force is Leſſened, and thereſore the Mercury muſt of Neceſſity Fall. . Tnis however is only Dr. Halleys Account of it's being Lower in Rain; But vhy it is Lower in General at one Time than another, He ſays is, becauſe the Air of that Place is carryd both Ways from it by Winds, Blowing two different Ways from the ſame Place, from whence, the Weight of the Air being Diminiſhed, the Vapours Fall; This isa Wonderfull Solution indecd, to bring Winds to what Place we Pleaſe, and then make them ſet out Fairly together, to Sweep all the Air avay before them, in Order to make the Mercury Deſcend; but Suppoſing from this ſame Barometer, that two Winds ſould make all the Room, that is Poſſible, for Deſcending Vapours; Would theſe Heavy Vapours have no Preſſure upon the Column, in which they Deſcend? As great, it is not Improbable, as the Preſſure is Leſs, which is taken off by the Winds, Suppoſing they take it off; Eſpecially, ſince it is before Obſerved by Dr. Wallis or Dr. Beal, that as the Air is Lighter, there is always a Preſſure to thoſe Parts, and very Juſtly, tho' Perhaps not at the Diſtance, as was there Imagined, and 10 Solve that Phænomenon. SECOND, in good Serene ſettled Weather the Mercury is generally High3 This Dr. Halley Attributes to Winds Blowing from different Quarters to the ſame Place, here the Mercury ſtands in the Barometer, by which the Air is Accumulated and made Heavier, and the Atmoſphere Higher, and the Rain is hindered from Falling, which He ſays is the Reaſon of the Serene good Weather, which Attends the greater Heights of the Mercury: Therefore, as before the Winds ſett out from one Point, ſo they are now to begin their Courſe from contrary Points, and to meet in the ſame; and by the like way of Reaſoning, if it would have Solved the Phænomenon better, He might have made Choice of all the Winds, and all the Quarters, in the Univerſe, and Diſposd and Shuffled them together, as beſt ſuited his preſcnt Purpoſc; This is not however Solving of Diſficulties, but Blowing them away; That Windy and Bluſtering Weather yet, ſhould be called Serene, is a little Strange; If He means Serene afterwards, and that then the Mercury Riſes, He takes away the Support, which He gives, Namely, the Winds meeting in the ſame Point, or the Storms He had Rais'd ro Suſtain it: And here I cannot but Obſerve, that according to Dr. Halley, the Mereury Falls, whilſt the Condenſed Vapours are Actually in the Air, which ſhould make it Riſe, and Riſes aſter the Winds are Over, which are the Reaſon He Alledges, that it does not Fall; Unleſs I ſay, He makes good Serene Weather the ſame as Windy : The Solution therefore, as before, I take to be this, that in good Serene Weather, when rhere are neither Rains, which Diſſolve the Craſis of the Air, nor Winds, which ĩake oſf from it's Innate Force, the Mercury is generally High, whilſt the Air obtains it's Proper Force of Expanſion or Contraction, and of Endeavouring to Ruſh into the Tube, where there would be leſs Reſiſtence, if the Weight of the Mercury did not Counterbalance it's Preſſure. TuirD, upon very great Winds, tho not accompanyd with Rains, the Mercury Sinks Loweſt of all; tis ſaid 1ſ7. Becauſe theſe Winds do not Blow every where, and therefore the Stagnant Air, where they do not, cannot come in faſt enough to Supply the Deficiency of Air, which is carryd off by them; 24. Becauſe they may Poſ ſibly, by their Horizontal Rapidity, Intercept the Perpendicular Preſſure, or Gravitatation, of the Air: But 1ſ. It is not certain, that the Winds carry off any Air, but it is rather certain, that theſe Winds are the extraordinary Motion oſ the Air it's ſelf, and as a Rapid Stream does not carry off the Water, ſo as to leave none to Succeed it, it may very Probably be ſo in the Air; that is, ſuppoſing here is a violent Current in one Place, and there is Ai or Water Stagnates behind, yet as the one goes oſf the orher comes on;3 And therefore we cannot but believe, that the Alteration made in the Air is not a Diminiſhing of it's Gravity, but oſ its Force or Preſſre, as Quieſcent or Stagnating Fluids have a greater Preſſure than rhoſe, which have an Activity, induced upon them, to take off that Preſſure; 24. As to the HoriZzontal Rapidity Diminiſhing the Perpendicular, i e. the Gravitating, Force of the Air, it is true; Bui then it is likewiſe true, that it Diminiſhes the Preſiure to other Parts, as well as to the Center, that is, the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Air, on which we hav ſaid the Variations of the Mercury Depend. E WE are here farther told, that Rain is the Conſequence of the Air's Rareſaction, becauſe being Heavier, it then Precipitates: On the Contrary, it is not Improbable, but that the Languid and Contractive Force, not only of the Air, but of the Vapours, is the Cauſe of Rain; The Air and Vapours grow leſs Expanſive, their Elaſtick Tone is Perfectly Chang'd, and ſo they Diſſolve and Fall; For if it Proceeded from Rarefaction, it ſould Rain moſt in Sun-Shine, and Extreme Hot Weather, which it ſeldom does; and ſince in Sun-Shine the Mercury Falls, as has been Proved, if the Deſcent of Mercury, and Rain, Ariſes from Gravity, why ſhould not Rain Fall then two, that is, in Sun-Shine, when the Mercury is ſaid to Fall, and the Air is Rarefyed? FOURTH, Cateris paribus, the Mercury is Higheſt on Eaſterly and North-Eaſterly Winds; Becauſe, it is ſaid, the Trade Winds conſtantly Blow upon the tlantick Ocean, which are Weſt and South-Weſt, and therefore ſtop the Current of the Eaſterly and North-Eaſterly Winds, by which the Air is Accumulated, but if they Blow exceeding Strong, they overcome the Oppoſition from the Trade Winds, and ſo the Mercury Falls, which, on ſuch Occaſions, the ſame Perſon has Obſerv'd to ſtand as Low, as 29 Inches: To which we Reply, that the Accumulation of the Air by ſuch Means has been already Anſwer'd; and the Reaſon of this Phænomenon ſeems to be, becauſe thoſe Winds are Impregnated with a Cold, Nitrous, and Contractive, Force from the North, or with an Expanſive from the Eaſt and the Sun, both which Forces, we have ſiewn, may Contribute to the Riſe of the Quick- Silver. FæTH, It is ſaid, in Calm, Froſty Weather Mercury is Generally High; Becauſe the North Winds poſſibly Blowing near, and being met at the Ocean by contrary Winds, may heap the Air towards the Barometer, and then bringing from the North a Denſe Frozen Air, the lower Parts of the Atmoſphere, being Contracted into a leſs Room, the upper Parts Deſcend upon it to make an quilibrium, and Conſequently Increaſes the Gravity of the Air on that Account: To which we Anſwer, that it is not Agrecable to Reaſon to Think, that in Calm Weather, the Winds ſhould be any ways Concern'd, Eſpecially where the Eſfect may be Accounted for without ſuch Foreign Cauſes; the Cauſc is Intimate and to be found in the Air it's ſelf, that is, in its Coldneſs or Contractive Force, which being Increaſed muſt Neceſſarily Raiſe the Mercury by the Contraction of the Glaſs or the Quick-Silver, or both, into a ſmaller Cylinder, and muſt therefore Increaſe it's Length, or it's Height. ' SixtH, aſter great Storms of Wind, when the Mercury has been Lo, it gencralIy Riſes again very Faſt; after a continu'd Storm of a South-Weſt Wind, it Riſes I Inch and  in leſs than 6 Hours; Dr. Halley Affirms, becauſc, the Air being very much Rarefyd by the great Evacuations, the Neighbouring Air runs in more Swiſtly to bring it to an Equilibrium, as Water runs faſter for having a greater Declivity; To vhich we Reply, that it is not Evident, that there is any Evacuation of the Air or any Chaſm made in the Atmoſphere by Winds3 vhich ſeem to be only an Extraordinary Ferment or Agitation of the ſame Fluid, ariſing from a Conteſt in it betvixt the Expanſive Force of Heat and the Contractive of Cold, as there is betixt the Acid and Alkali of the Chymiſis, and as this Agitation Languiſhes by Degrees the Air is Reſtored to it's Natural Preſſure and Impetus upon the Mercury, which therefore Riſcs, in a little Time after, from the Reſiſ*tence or Impulſe of the Air; I ſometimes call This, Reſiſtence, Impulſe, Elaſticity, or Impetus, becauſe what is Reſiftence in i's own Fluid of equal Reſiſtence, or to a Body of Superior Reſiſtence or Impulſe, is Impulſe upon Vacuum, or a Fluid of a much leſs Reſiſtence; That is, we are to Conſider nothing in Nature, but the Relative Forces of it, there being none, which are Abſolute or Poſitive, without a Relation to others, and by which Relation the ſame Force is Inſinitely Differenced and Varied. SEVENTH, the Variations are greater in the more Norrhetly Parts, than the Southerly, at Stockholm than at Paris, as compared by Mr. Paſcall; It is ſaid, becauſe the Storm: of Wind being Greater there, they make the Mercury Sink Lower than in othei Places, and the Northerly Winds, bringing Ponderous Air from the Poles, and being Stopt by the Winds of the Ocean, make it Riſe Higher in the other Extreme, thar ve find in the more Southerly Parts: On the other Hand we Alledge, that the moſ Probable Account ſeems to be, what has hitherto Anſwerd all the Phænomena of the Barometer, the Exceſſive hard Froſts, which i there, and which muſt needs Increaſi - LI the the Air's Contractive Force, and therefore, the Height of the Mercury, more than in any other Place, and ſince this Froſt is not conſtant, whenever it Changes, that very Froſt Contributes to making the Air the Moiſter; And Conſequently upon an Alteration of Weather, the Craſis and State of the Air is more Diſſolute, and Languid, by the Froſts Changing into Moiſture, than in other Places, from Whence the Mercury Sinks, as we find even here upon Thaves. Eiõurn, Within and Near the Tropicks, or, as is aſterwards ſaid, Near the ZEquinoctial, there is little or no Variation, as Dr. Halley himſel? has Obſerv'd at St. Helena, and has found by Comparing it with the Accounts of Others; He tells us, becauſe the Winds there, Blow generally from the ſame Points, E. N. E. at Barbados,and E. S. E. at St. Helena ; So that there being no contrary Currents of Air to Exhauſt or Accumulate it, the Atmoſphere continues much in the ſame State, tho upon Hurricans, the moſt Violent of Storms, the Mercury has been Obſerv'd very Low3 This however is but once in 2 or 3 Years, and it ſoon Recovers it's ſettled State of 29 Inches and : Dr. Halley takes this to be a full Confirmation of his Doctrine, whereas it is rather the Contrary; For it is 1ſ&. OWn'd they have Winds, which Blow ſrom the ſame Point, which therefore ſiould make the Mercury Sink by carrying off the Air; 2d. There is no Reaſon to Suppoſc there are not contrary Winds at a Diſtance, which Stop this conſtant Courſe of the Air, and we may as well Introduce the European Winds to Stop the Tropich ones, as He the Atlantict, to Check our Engliſt, and therefore the Mercury would ſometimes Riſe: And to this vhole Doctrine, we ſay, where a Philoſopher will give himſelf the Liberty to Range through the Univerſe for Forei Cauſcs of a Domeſtick Effect, it will be hard if He cannot Solve all Phænomenons; ſince, by Rambling about, He may Pick up Cauſes for his Purpoſe, tho' He is Senſible at the ſame Time, He Overlooks ſeveral, which are not, and yet may bid as Fair to be Inteteſted in the Production of ſuch Effects; For when at ſome times, one Wind ſhall be only Concernd, and at others, Winds ſhall be Rally'd from diſtant Corners of the Globe, it is Plain, we do it, to Patch up an Hypotheſis, vhere we find it Deficient, and not to give a True and Adequate Solution of Nature : Our Account on the other Hand is Conſtant to it's ſelf, and Conſiſtent with what fore-goes, and Alledges no other Reaſon of this Pnænomenon, but what is drawn from the Circumſtance of the Air, which hangs about the very Barometer, that is, the Temper and Conſtitution of it; For the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, ve have Aſfirm'd, Produce the ſame or a like Effect; Therefore there being no great Variation of the Expanſive betwixt the Tropicks, as not lying, as the Temperate Zones do, betwixt the two contrary and contending Forces, or Principles, of Heat and Cold, or the Expanſive and Contractive, the Mercury keeps at the ſame Height; Tis True, there are Winds, which conſtantly Blow there, but thoſe cannot Influence the Mercury, unleſs they be of ſuch Forcę, as to Intercept the Preſſure of the Air to the Tube, which common Winds, or Breezes, cannot do, becauſe there is a greater Force of Direction towards the Tube, than there is a Force of Wind to Change that Direction, which only happens in Hurricans; Or when there is an Enervation of the Air, by a Particular Moiſture or Languor of iſ, the Mercury Sinks likeviſe. 5 29. I Shall here Add, ſince we are Entered into this Argument, what Appears 10 be the Cauſc of the different Weather and Winds within the Tropicks, and the Temperate Zones, and of the Mercurys Aſcent and Deſcent from thence. Fins7, Therefore we ſay, where Heat, or the Expanſive Force, Prevails, the Weather muſt be much the ſame, as to the Temperature of it, or where Cold, ot the Contractive, does, and Conſcquently the Mercury in all Likelihood would find very few if any Variations under the Poles, as it does not betwixt the Tropicks;3 Becauſe that Region is ſo far removd from the Sun's Heat, that it is wholly Obedient to the other Principle of Cold, or the Contractive Force, and Thercfore the Craſis and State of the Air muſt be nearly the ſame; For that which makes it Alter, is lometimes the one being Predominant, and ſometimes the other; Which happens in thoſc Countries, which are Situate betwix the Articks and the Tropicks, where Heat and Cold, or the Expanſive and Contractive are in a kind oſ Struggle with cach other, by which Means Winds and Storms are Pro duccd; That is, vhen a Nitrous Medium and a Fiery meet, and Neither of them is able to Subduc the other; And this is the Reaſon, that our Storms are Generally bet ixt Sunimei and Winter, or the Contrary, and ſeldome or never in ſettled Froſt or Heat; So that there are two Cauſes of Winds, our being Situate betwixt the Regions of Heat and Cold o or of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, that is, in the Temperate Zones; and the Seaſons, which lie betwixt the Hot and Cold, or the Expanſive and Contractive ones of the Year, viæ. Spring and Autumn; However, ve may perhaps give a fuller Account oſ the Nature of Winds, when we come Particularly to Treat of them; We only Conſider them here, as they Relate to the Barometer. SECOND, But as Heat and Cold, or the Expanſive and Contractive Force, are the firſt to be Conſider'd, as the Cauſes of the Alterations in the Air, ſo is the Medium, on vhich they make their Impreſſions; ſometimes it is perfectly Dry, and ſometimes Moiſt; If Dry, whether Heat or Cold, or the Expanſive or Contractive Force Intervene, the Mercury vill Riſe, that is, vhere the Heat or Expanſive Force is ſuch, that it does not Weaken the Air's Spring or Moiſten it by Vapours, becauſe the Air then has it's full Force of Expanſion or Elaſticity; But if Moiſi, the Air grows Flat and Enervated, and Heat or Cold, or the Expanſive or Contractive Force, vill do little to Reſtore it to it's Natural Force, and Conſequently Rain or Snow vill make it Sink; And that there is an Enervation of the Air's Spring in Rain and Snow is Manifeſt, ſrom the Dead Sound of Bells, which we Experience at ſuch Times; Therefore, according as theſe Principles Prevail, Heat and Cold, or the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, or the Enervation of them in the Languor and Moiſture of the Air, ſo is the Riſc or Fall of the Mercury3 And when it Falls upon very grear Winds, it ſeems to be owing to the Moiſineſs of the Air, ariſing from the Conteſt of theſe two Forces, vhich Weaken and Impair each other, and therefore our Weſterly Winds, which come from the Ocean, being Loaded with Water, Act with greater Force to the Depreſſion of the Mercury, than Eaſterly and Dry ones, which come from the German Continent; The Former make the Mercury Sink, becauſe Moiſt, and therefore is a Proof, that it does not Riſe from the Weight, ſince Watry Winds muſt be Heavier than Airy The Latter make it Riſe, becauſe Dry and Expanſive, and therefore the Natural Force oſ the Air is not Impaird or Diminiſi'd From all which it Appears, that neither the Weight of the Air, according to Mr. Boyle, nor the Winds, according to Dr. Halley, are the Cauſes of the Variation of the Heights of the Mercury, but the Dryneſs or Moiſtneſs of the Air, that is, the greater or leſs Expanſive or Contractive Force of it; For beſidess, where a Barometer is kept in a cloſe Room, and its Ciſtern likewiſe encompaſſed with a Box, what Effect can we ſuppoſe the Winds will Produce, where we Feel not the leaſt of them in an open Room: Yet tis true by Diſperſing their Wett Parts in the Air, and by Degrees Weakening i's Expanſive or Contractive Force that Way,tis Conceivable enough, how they ſhould be the Occaſion of ſo Senſible a Depreſſion of the Mercury. § 30. THE next Obſerver upon the Barometer, vhom we ſhall take Notice of, is Dr. Liſter, who Informs us, FinsT, That let the Weather be Cloudy, Rainy, Windy, or Serene, the Mercury is not Affected in St. Helena and Barbados, according to Dr. Halley; Becauſc, we ſay, if it is ſo, in all theſe Caſes the Temperature of the Air is much the ſame, being under the Influence of one, and the ſame, conſtant Principe of Heat, or the Expanſive Force, which keeps the Air, nearly, in the ſame Spring and Temper, notwithſtanding the Accidental Fluids, which may Swim in it. SECOND, That in England, in a violent Storm, or when the Quick-Silver is at the very loveſt, it then Viſibly Breaks and Emits ſmall Particles; which He looks upon as a kind of Fretting, and Conſequently, at all times of it's Deſcent, that it is more or leſs upon the Frett. 1ſ. FRoM Hence He Concludes, that it's Depreſſion is from a Contraction of the Quick-Silver, and Purging it's ſclf from Air, by which the Parts fall cloſer to one another, and the Aĩr, which is Expreſſed, Riſing to the Top of the Tube, Increaſes it's Elaſticity, and ſo Depreſſes it from above. 24. THAT the Quick-Silver Riſes in Hot and Froſty Weather, becauſe it then obtains it's Natural Expanſion, which it therefore always does berween the Tropicks, which makes it never Fal. To which we Anſwer, FirsT, As to the Quick-Silver Emitting Particles in a Storm; That in all Likelihood Procęeds from a Moiſture Impregnated with Warmth; For if we put Water to QuickSilver, it keeps it's Parts together, whereas if we ſet it over a Fire, or mix Unſſackt Lime vith it, it preſently Scparates into ſmall Parts; And therefore, as the ſame Moiſture, Impregnated with Fiery Particles, will Sink the Mercury by Weakening 5 LI I2 r Air's Force, ſo will it make it Sparkle by Separating it's Parts into ſmall Globules; Which Agrees with what we have before ſaid, that Mercury Sinks in a Storm, be cauſe the Expanſive and Contractive Forces are in a Conteſt vith, and Weaken each other, that is, there is a Moiſture Impregnated with Warmth, or a Contractive Mixed and Blended with an Expanſive; And Conſequently, if the Mercury is not, at leaſt the Air and Medium, which Surrounds it, is upon the Frert, and may Cauſe it in the other. SECOND, As for the Mercurys Contraction, the Parts are ſo cloſe, and even upon the Interpoſition of Groſer Bodies, than that of Air, are ſo fully bent upon Uniting, that it may be very much Queſtioned, whether there is any ſuch Contraction; But ĩt is common to Purge it from Air, ĩt is ſaid, by Applying a Hot Iron, and therefore it has Interſtices; Granting it, yet it can never be Suppoſed, there are ſfuch vaſt Chaſm: in the Mercury, that it ſiould Sink two or three Inches upon that Account; For as to the Depreſſion of it from the Top of the Tube by the Air, which is Purged from it, it muſt be very Inſignificant, becauſe the Elaſticity of the Air, which is his fecond Reaſon, is not much helpd by it; Since Suppoſing a Boylean Vacuum at the Top, and ſome Parts of Air Sprinkled in it, what can this Signify to the Encreaſing i*s Force of Elaſticity, which muſt be very Small, that Ariſes from a Medium, vhich before had none at all, and now cannot be much Encreased by a few Particles of Air Diſpersd in it? THIRD, As to it's being in it's Natural Expanſion in Heat and Froſt, as it is in Barbados and St. Helens; if it is ſo, how comes it then in this Natural Expanſion to be only 295 Inches, as Dr. Halley has Experienc'd, and here to be 30, or ſometimes 302 Beſides Mercury, as Conſiderd of it's ſelf, without the Air being Intermixt vith it, ſeems to be no more Capable of Expanſion or Contraction than Gold or Water, or any other Bodies, which really are not, by the Experiments Del Cimemo ; However that Heat and Froſt, or the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the Air, may have a like Effect upon Mercury, in Raiſing or Keeping it to a higher Standard, than otherwiſe, we have Shewn; The Firſt by Dilateing and Lengthening the Cylinder of Mercury by it's Expanding it, and the Laſt by Contracting the Cylinder into a Shorter Diameter, by which its length is likewiſe Encreaſed; Alſo the Expanſive Force A&ts upon the Mercury in the Baſon, by which it Repells it into the Tube, and the Contractive Compreſſes the Mercury in the ſaid Baſon, by which it again Riſes. FOuRTH, He ſays, 1ſſ. that Heat and Froſt may Produce the ſame Dilatation of Mercury, or vhich is all one, according to his Notions, may Reſtore it to it's own Expanſion; Becauſe Salts Liquefy'd will Chryſtallize either by Heat or by Cold, that is, Return to their own proper Natures, by ſerting them in a Cold Cellar, or as Zuelfer, by keeping them conſtantly in Balneo; 2d. Water is Naturally Ice, as Bornichius a Learned Dane thinks, it is Imagined in Complement to his Climate, and Dr. Liſter himſel? Thinks fo, becauſe Salt is naturally Rock, or Foſſile, which is the moſt like Ice, for it's Tranſparency, and eaſy Liquefaction, and Yeilding to the Impreſſions of Air, ſo that it is Difficult to keep it in it's Natural State of Chryſtallization; And all Salts in General ſeem to Propagate themſelves, and Vegetate in a Dry Form; The like is to be Obſervd in Quick-Silver, of it's being a hard Rock, and from it's Readineſs to Amalgamate vith Metals, or Embrace a more fixt State upon all Occaſions. To vhich it is Anſwered, as to his 1ſſ. Argument from Salts, it is Deſtroyd by his ſecond from Ice; Since, if Heat and Cold will make Salts Chryſtallize, they will nor make Ice; 24. iF the Nature of Mercury is to be Fixt, it is not Reſtord to it's Nature by being ſtill Fluid and leſs Contracted 337. We ſay it Preſcrves it's ovn Nature, whether Depreſſed or Elevated, and it is ſtill the ſame Mercury; We ſhall therefore, being entered into this Argument, Conſider the Reaſon of his Experiments, Abſtracted from their Solving the Variations of the Mercury, which they do nor. FirsT, Salts Liquefy'd Chryſtallize by Heat or Cold, or by the Expanſive and Contractive Force; Becauſe in the firſt Caſe, the Moiſture is Evaporated and Leaves the Salts to theit own Natural Contractive Force or Quality of Fixation, which are ſaid to Vegetate in a Dry Form; And in the ſecond, the Cold or Contractive Force, being a Salt and of a Fixing Nature, its ſelf Contributes to the producing the ſame Effect of a Contractive Force or of Fixation. SECOND, Water is ſaid to be Naturally Ice, becauſe Salt is, which very much Reſembles it; This ſeems to be a very Triſſling Diſpute Concerning the Word, Natural; Sincæ Since Bodies are Capable of being cither Fixt, or Fluid; And that Capacity is theii Nature3 Nor is it more Natural for Water to be Fixt, or to be Ice, where there ĩi a Power, as that of Cold, or the Contractive Force, to Produce ſuch an Effect in it, than it is for it to be Fluid, where there is another Powerfull Principle, or the Ex panſive Force, which is the Cauſe of ſuch Fluidity; The Nature of Bodies is noi an Abſolute, but a Relative Thing, and Varies and Differs according to the Relations and Circumſtances, under which it Lies to other Beings, which are Applyed to it, Thus Ice is Water if Applyed to Fire, or the Expanſive Force, and Water is Ice, iil Applyed to Salt, or the Contractive. Dr. Liſter, adds by way of Corollary ſomething concerning Healthfull and Sickly Seaſons, that ſince, in very Cold and very Hot Seaſons, the Mercury and other Liquids have the leaſt Violence done them, the Humours of our Bodies in all Probability muſt be in ſome Meaſure accordingly Affected; And that therefore Cold is Healthfull; Which He i1ſ. Argues from the vat Number of Old Men and Women, vhich are to be found upon the Mountains of England, Comparatively to what are found elſe where. 2d. FrRoM Cold being more Agrecable to our Natures than Heat is, becauſe tho' the Blood of Quadrapeds, Fowls, and Men, is Hot, yet that of Inſects and Fiſhes is Cold, and He has found, that there are above a Hundred Species of the latter to one of the former. 3d. As a farther Argument of the little Injury, which Cold docs to the Nature of Animals, He ſays He has ſeen Hexapode Worms, and Flies of divers Sorts, Frozen in the Winter, He has taken them up from the Snow, has caſt them againſt the Glaſs, and they would Endanger the breaking of ir, and make it Ring, like ſo much hard Ice; Yet when He has put the Inſects under the Glaſs, and ſet them before the Fire, they would, aſter a ſhort Time, nimbly Creep about, and be gone, if the Glaſs, which He Whelm'd upon them, had not ſecur'd them. 4th. AN Eminent Philoſopher Contradicts this Notion of Cold being Healthfull, and that other common Proverb, that a Green Chriſtmas makes a Fat Church-Yard, becauſc the Plaguc broke out at London, aſter a long and Severe Winter, 1665; To which He Anſwers, that a Plague is a Foreign Diſeaſe, and Proper to 4ſia, and comes to us only by Trade and Infection from Commerce with thoſe Parts; To which ſeveral Particulars we Alledge. Finst, That Cold, or the Contractive Force, cannot be Concluded to be Healthfull, from the Riſe of Mereury in the Tube, unleſi Heat, or the Expanſive Force, may be ſo too, by which it alſo Riſes; However this we may ſay, that the Force of the Air when Hot, or Cold, and Dry, is then the greateſt, it's Craſis ſtrongeſt, and therefore ſtrikes the moſt Briskly, at ſuch Times, upon the Nervous or Sanguineous Syſtems, which makes us more Chearfull, and the Nerves more Active, and the Blood Circulate much better; And in theſe Caſes the Mercury Riſes; But if it is Cold, or Hot, and Moiſ, the Mercury Sinks, and the Air Droops, which not Affecting our Bodies with ſo lively a Motion, is therefore not ſo Healthfull; So that the Healthfullneſs of Weather ſeems rather to Conſiſt in the Dryneſs, or in the Force and Springineſs of the Air, when the Expanſive or Contractive Forces are in the greateſt Vigour, and the Sicklineſs in it's Moiſture, or in the Flaccidneſs and Languor of it, when the Expanſive or Contractive Forces are broken and Diſſolved, that iss Moiſture ſeems to Proceed from the Expanſive of Heat, and the Contractive of Cold, Weakening and Impairing cach other; Thus the Expanſive of Fire, or the Sun, Acting againſt the Contractive of Ice, or Froſt, or Snow, Produces Water, a Thaw, or Rain; From vhence the Old Proverb may Poſſibly be true, that a Green Chriſtmas, or a Moiſt, makes a Fat Church-Yard. SECOND, Cold can never yet be Inferred to be Agreeable to our Natures, from the Cold Vitals of other Inſects; Since Our's are both Cold and Hot, that is, Conſiſt oſ the Nervous, or Cold, and of the Sanguinenous or Hot, or, which is the ſame, of the Contractive and Expanſive Forces; and Thus Cold by it's Contractive Force Preſſes upon the Blood, and gives freſh Life and Motionto it; For, as the Lympha of the Blood becomes a Jelly. when ſet in a Warm or Cold Place, I ſuppoſe by it's ovn Proper Inclination to Coagulate, ſo the Blood on the Contrary becomes more Fluid, either from the Expanſive of Heat, or the Contractive of Cold. THIRD, TuiRD, As ſor the Inſects Reviving by the Fire, when Frozen in Snow; ſince their Vitals ate Naturally Cold, it cannot be Injurious to them, and the extraordinary Heat oſ the Fire vill equally put a Cold Fluid into Motion, when Frozen, as the gentle Heat oſ the Sun vill, when it is not; And it is very likely, their Vitals are much of the ſame Nature with Water, and tho' Frozen into Ice may, becauſe of its Simple Compoſition, eaſily be made to Circulate by Heat, whereas the Blood of o ther Animals, being more Compounded, when once ſirmly Congeal'd, tis Impoſſible by any Heat almoſt to Diſſolve it; Again, the Vitals of Inſects lying in a ſmall Compaſs, and being cover'd with a tender Skin, are more readily put into Motion by the Fire, than thoſe of other Animals, which lie Deep in the Fieſh,, and are not eaſily Approac'd by any External Impreſſions. FouRTH, As for the Plague aſter a hard Winter, that Poſſibly might not Ariſe from any Foreign Infection, nor yet ſrom Cold, and ſo will not Contradict the Old Proverb of a Green Chriſtmas, &e. But ſrom an extreme Diſolution of the Craſis of the Air, aſter it had been long held and bound up by a hard Froſl, as the vorſl Thaws ſometimes ſucceed the ſevereſt Winters, l FroMm Dr. Liſter, e ſhall Proceed to Mr. Hugens's Celebrated Experiment upon the Barometer, which is. § 31. THAT a Tube, filld with Mercury Perfectly Purg]d of Air, and Inverted, will remain top full to the Height of 75 Inches, equal in Weight to 89 Foot of Water, and it is not known, vhether it will not be Suſpended ſtill Higher; Iſ the Mercury is not Purgd of Air, or if a ſmall Bubble of Air enters into the Tube, or if the Tube be ſhaken or ſtruck, it Immediately Falls to it's Standard oſ about 29 Inches, and after ſome Ebbs and Flows, or Reciprocations, at length Settles at that Standard. THE Solution of which Phænomenon, by the ſaid Mr. Hugens, is as Follows, THAT There is a Subtile Matter, vhich Penetrates Glaſs, Mercury, &. which has a Preſſure Peculiar to it's ſelf, and by being added to that of the Groſſcr Air, Supports the Mercury at the fore-mention'd Height3 That this Subtile Matter, tho it can Penetrate Glaſs, does not Preſs upon the Mercury in the Top of the Tube, when full, ſo as to make it Deſcend, for two Reaſons, i FirsT, Becauſc the Parts of the Glaſi, which are Impervious, take off a great deal of the Preſſure, ſo that That, which Paſſcs thro' the Pores, is very ſmall in Reſpect of the whole Surface of the Mercury at the Top of the Tube, whereas the Mercury in the Ciſtern is Preſſed by this Subtile Matter all over it's Plane; Second, as the Parts oſ the Mercury above, which lie under the impenetrable Parts of the Glaſs, are freed from the Preſſure of the ſubtile Fluid, ſo are they cloſely United to the Glaſ;i and to one another by a ſort of Coheſion, whereby the other, which lie under the Pores of the Glaſs, and are Exposd to the Preſſure of the ſubtile Matter, are likeviſec kept Suſpended; Laſtly, if by any Violence there is the leaſt Room made for the ſubtile Matter to enter, it Ruſhes in and Purſues the Mercury, till the upper Preſſure of the ſubtile Matter is in an equal Balance with the lower, that is, when the Mercury is fallen to it's uſual Height. TuERE are ſive Things therefore to be provd in rthis Account; Firſt, that there is a Preſſure of ſuch ſubtile Matter, different ſrom that of the groſſer Air, and able to Suſtain the Mercurys Height3 Second, that there are Pores in Glaſs, which this ſubtile Matter Penetrates; Third, that there is a Coheſion of the Mercury with the Parts oſ Glaſs, and with it's own; Fourth, that this ſubrile Marter has no Eſect, till there is Room made for it in the Top of the Tube, and then that, Deſcending rill the Mercury is only 29 Inches high, ĩt is in an Equilibrium with the Preſſure of the ſame Subtile Matter below; Fifth, that the ſaking or ſtriking of the Tube, or the Admittance of Air, or the Mixture of it with the Mercury, makes Room for this Subtile Matter. . Dr. nallis, therefore, does not ſeem fully to Underſtand Monſieur Hugens's Hypoiheſis, vhen He thinks, that the Glaſs at the Top of the Tube is every where Pervious according to this Account; And thereſore his Firſt Objection is not of Force againſt it, that, ſince there is a Preſſure above thio' the Glaſs, he does not ſee, why that ſhould not be equal to the Preſſure below, and Conſcquently, why, that Subtile Matter being in Aquilibrium, the Mercury ſiould not Deſcend by its ovn Weight; Whereas Whereas Monſieur Hugens denies there is a Preſſure thro' all Parts of the Glaſi, and therefore Affirms, that it is leſs above, than that, which lies upon the Ciſtern: Second, Dr. Wallis ſays, that granting the Preſſure is not ſo great thro the Glaſi, as it is on the Mercury below, the ſame Obſtacle of Glaſs would remain, when the Tube is in ar empty'd, or the Quick-Silver Unpurg'd, the Pores of the Glaſs not being made more Open or Pervious by either; It is Anſwerd, that nothing is more Notorious, than if a Veſſel vas full of Quick-Silver, and cover'd with a Plate, in which ſome few ſmall Holes were made, and Water Stagnating upon it, that the Water would not Deſcend, till the Quick-Silver gave Place, and that a great Part of the Preſſure vould be Intercepted by the Solid Part of the Plate; But if the Mercury ſhould be made 10 Deſcend, that then the Water would immediately Tranſmit it's ſelf thro the Foramina, and lie upon the Mercury with it's whole Weight; Taking the Water then for the Subtile Matter, and the Cover for the Top of the Tube, and it will be Monſicur Huzens's Caſe, in which there is nothing Monſtrous, or Unaccountable: Third, Dr. Wallis Objects, that if it freely Penctrated Glaſs, the Preſſure of the Subtile Matter vould be much the ſame, notwithſtanding the Glaſ as without it, and thereſore the Mercury would Deſcend at the very firſt, but this is Anſwer'd in the Firſt, and Second Articles; If it Penetrated with ſome Difficulty, and was. as it were, ſirained thro it, then the Mercury would not Deſcend at once as it does, but by Degrees; On the other Hand we ſay, that as ſoon as the Quic- Silver Unſtops the Foramina of the Glaſs, the Subtile Matter flows in like a Torrent, and with the greateſt Eaſ and Freedom Imaginable, and therefore the Mercury muſt Deſcend in an Inſtant, as is Experienced: Fourth, Dr. ’allis ſays, the Weight or Preſſure of this Subtile Matter cannot be ſo Conſiderable, as that, when let in at the Top of the Tube, it ſhould drive down the Mercury with that Vehemence; And I add, nor is it Conceivable, how It ſould keep it up to that Height, for, according to Monſicur Hugens, it's Preſſure is much Greater than that of the Groſſer Air; Fiſth, Dr. allis does not Underſtand, why the Mercury Unpurg'd from Air, ſould Deſcend ſooner, than when it is Cleanſed from it, nor I ſuppoſe, Monſicur Hugens 3 Sixth, Dr. Wallis Thinks, the Coheſion of the Parts of Mercury is Inſufficient to Solve this Effect, and morè Eſpecially is Adheſion to the Glaſi, the Contact of which it rather Declines, tho Dr. Hooke is ſaid to have found it ſtick to the Sides; as was Mentioned before. MONSIEUR Hugens, to make good his Hypotheſis, of all the five Particulars, to be provd, only Endeavours to Evince, by two Experiments, one Part of the firſt, viæ. That there is a Subtile Preſſing Matter. For Firſt, He ſays, two Plates of Metal or Marble, whoſe Surfaces are Perfectly Plane, ſtick ſo cloſ togerher, that, the uppermoſt being lifred up, the undermoſt follows without quitting it; He took two of an Inch Square, the lowermoſt held up three Pounds of Lead, and vould keep thus together, as long as you Pleaſed; He put them into an Exhauſted Receiver, in which the Preſſure of the Air did not Suſtain an Inch Height of Water, they yet did not Disjoin; He put Spirit of Wine betwixt the two Plates, they ſtill obtain'd rhe ſame Effect, both in a full and an Exhauſted Receiver; from whence He Thinks there is no more Reaſon to Doubt of the Preſſure of a Subtile Matter, than of the Air its ſclf, to which this Effect is Univerſally Aſcrib'd. To Which we Anſwer FIrsT, that from Hence it is Plain, that the Adhefion of the two Plates does not Proceed from the Preſſure of the common Air; If it did, the Preſſure of the common Air muſt Contribute to this Effect, whereas by the fore going Experiment the Subtile Matter does as much without it 7 That is, ith the common Air the undermoſt Plate does not Suſtain a greater Weight of Lead, and without it not a leſs; So that it is hard to Imagine, how that ſhould be a Cauſe, which is no vays Aſſiſting in Producing the Effect; And Monſieur Hugens by this Experiment Deſtroys the Argument He makes uſe of, which is, that He may as juſtly Affirm, that the Coheſion of theſe Plates in an Exhauſted Receiver Proceeds from a Preſ ſure of Subtile Matter, as Others, that their Coheſion out of a Receiver Ariſes from a Preſ ſure of common Air, which all are Agreed in, but by this Experiment it is Evident that their Coheſion out oſ a Receiver, or in the open Air, is not owing to ſuch a Preſſure; and therefore Mr. Hugens can no more Juſtly Aſfirm, that it is owing to the Preſſure of a more Subtile Marter in the Receiver, than others have done, that it is owing to a Groſ ſer out oſ it; This way of Arguing ſeems to be True and Genuine enough, but yet Con clude Concludes quite Contrary to what Mr. Hugens Deſign'd; Beſides, how can the Coheſion of theſe Plates be owing to the Preſure of the common Air, when the Height of Water, which is Derivd from the ſame Preſſure, is Diminiſd in Vacuo, and this Coheſion is not? SECOND, It Will not be caſily Underſtood, how in a Fluid, as the Air, in which an equal Balance is Maintain'd, there ſould be ſuch a Preſure; ſince we find in Water, whoſe Weight is much greater, a Freedom to Bodies of moving according to any Direction, and ſo likewiſe in Air, to theſe Plates, Singly or Jointly, tho not from one another, which ſiows the Cauſe is to be ſought in the Plates, and not in the Air; If it be ſaid the Air has not Time to Succeed into the Vacuum betwixt the Plates, it ſeems to be a mere Fancy to Aſfirm it of ſo Subtile a Body, as that of Alir, and ſuppoſing it had not Time, there vould no Inconvenience Ariſe from thence; ſince granting the Space betwixt the Plates as Void, as the Medium in an Exhauſted Receiver, and nothing Succeeded into it, yet the Air is not ſo Thick and Conſtipated, that it would be Impoſſible to Compreſs it by the Disjoining of the Plates, tho none of that Compreſſcd Air ſhould Succeed into the Space betwixt the Plates. TumD, If therefore there is no Reaſon to Attribute this Effect to the Preſſure of the Groſſer Air, there is certainly leſs Reaſon to believe it Producd by that of a Lighter and more Subtile; there are at leaſt the ſame Objections againſt the Preſſure of this more Subtile Matter, which lie againſt the other; Namely, 1ſf. It's not Raiſing the Water above an Inch, for if the Preſſure of this Subtile Matter has the ſame Effccts ith the Imaginary one of common Air to keep the Plates together, it vill likewiſe have the ſame Effects with it to Raiſe the Water Higher; Eſpecially ſince this Preſ ſure is thought to be ſtronger than the Preſſure of common Air; 24. It's being in an quilibrium, for be the Medium Thinner or Groſſer, it will Obtain that Property, if it's Parts are Fluid and Homogeneous; If it is not Fluid, there can be no Motion Perform in it, and if iĩt is not Homogencous, nothing certain and Conſtant can be Affirm'd of it: It might farther be eaſily Demonſtrated, whether this Phænomenon vas owing to the Preſſure of this Subtile Matter, by Examining the Weight of the Mercury in a Tube, which, if three Pounds,tis the ſame Weight with what the undermoſt Plate ill bear by the Aſſiſtance of the ſame Preſſure, if not, this Subtile Matter is a mere Chimera. FourRTH, What therefore has been generally Aſſignd to the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, it is Plain, requires another Cauſe, which we ſhall Venture to give; Namely, the Strong and Eager Attraction of theſe to Plates, Derived from the Expanſive Forces. THE Queſtion is, FIrsT, why that Attraction is ſometimes Senſible, and at other times not. SECOND, HOW it is Perform'd, or the Reaſon and Manner of it. Fiust, If two Bodies do not Touch one another, unleſs the Expanſive Force is very Strong, as in Electrical or Magnetick Bodies, and in Fire and Flame, It is not Senſible; DBecauſe the Contractive Force to the Earth is Superior, and Takes off from that Inclination, which One Body has to Unite ith another, by that greater Propenſity it gives them to the Earth, which has an Infinitely greater Contractive Force, than Bodies Generally are found to have of the Expanſive amongſt themſelves; So if e place one Drop of Quick- Silver near another on the ſame Table, they will not Unite till they either Touch, or very nearly Touch, each other; Becauſe they both have a ſtronger Contractive Force towards the Earth, than an Expanſive towards one another; But if they Touch in one Part only, they Immediately cloſe into one round Globule; Becauſe as the Contractive Force is ſtrong towards the Earth, ſo is that of the Expanſive by which they Unite; Water will have the ſame Effect, if two Drops of it are placed near cach other, but the Union of them is not ſo Quick and Expedite, becauſe their Expanſive Forces are not ſo Strong, as is Evident from the Exceeding Volatility of Mercury in Reſpect of that of Water; On the other hand, if we ſei one Globe of Gold to another, they will not join by ſuch Contact, becauſe theĩ Contractive Force is greater to the Earth than their Expanſive to one another; Bui iſ two Plates of Gold touch one another in more Parts than they do not touch, that is, ĩ their Surfaces are Plane and Even, they vill Unite by that Mutual Conract; Becauſd cach Part Senſibly Expanding it's ſelf to cach Part and the Contractive Force to the Earil Earth in both, being now as of one Body, ſuch Expanſive Force is Superior to any ſmall Contractive Force, which can be brought to Separate them, as of three Pounds of Lead; Tis True, they may be more eaſily Separated Sideways; Becauſe by that Means we Conquer the Expanſive Force, by which they Unite, of each Part by Degrees, that is, the Expanſive Force of a Line at once, whereas if we Endeavour to Draw them Perpendicularly from one another, we arc to overcome the Expanſive Force, by which they Unite, of a whole Surface. SECOND, It is not farther Improbable, but ſomething elſe is likewiſe Requiſite, to the Uniting of the Plates, viz. The ſame kind of Expanſive Force; So if we put a Plate of Metal upon a Surface of Poliſd Stone, ſince their Forces are Diſſimilar, they will not Unite, there will be no Adheſion of them, and they will no ſooner Cement together, than Oil and Water will Mix by a mutual Contact. THIRD. And this may give ſome Account of the Coheſion of Matter, that is, this Expanſive Force of one Part to another is Probably the Cauſe of ir, or which is all one, a natural Tendency of the Parts in Matter, which is Solid, tho not many times Perceptible to us, by which they Unite with ſeveral Degrees of Tenacity or Force of Attraction. TuE Sccond Experiment is of a Siphon of unequal Legs, by which Water is: drawn out of a Veſſel, the Effect of which is Aſcrib/d to the Preſſure of the Air upon the Surface of the Water, which makes it Riſe in the ſhorter Leg, afrer we have Extracted the Air by Suction, and in the longer Leg it Deſcends by it's own Gravity; Monſicur Hugens has Obſerv'd the ſame Effect to Obtain in an Exhauſted Receiver, where the Water is Purg'd of Air; And therefore 1ſ7. He Concludes there muſt be a Preſſure of a more Subtile Air than that of the Atmoſphere; 2. And from hence He alſo thinks, by knowing to what Degrees of Force this Preſſure Reaches, that is, by Experiments made with longer Baroſcopes than Mr. Bo”le's, it vill perhaps be found, that it is ſuſficient to Cauſe the Union or Coheſion of Glaſs, and other Bodies, which, He is of Opinion, require a more Poſitive Cauſe of their Cementing, than bare Contiguity or Reſt, as Deſcartes Teachess. To which we Anſver; ſ i ĩd. IF This Eſfect of the Water Riſing in the Siphon is certain, as well in an ExRauſted Receiver, as out of it, for the Reaſons Alledgũ it cannot be Derivd from the Air's Preſſure, and if not, as was likewiſe ſaid before, it is more Unreaſonable to Suppoſe it Proceeds from the Incumbent Weight of a ſtill thinner Fluid; But it is a wonderful Thing, that ſeveral of this Kind of Phænomenons ſhould be Attributed to Gravity, whereas we Perceive nothing at all of it our ſelves, and the holding out our Hands in the Air, or in Water, and the feeling no Preſſure from thence, is a Suſficient Confutation of ſuch Solutions; Or Suppoſing that the Inferior Column of a Fluid to the Hand æquiponderates the Superior, and that therefore we Feel no Treſſure, how comes it yet to Paſs, that we are not Senſible of any, when Perhaps a Floor, or a Table, Supports one Side of our Hand, and Leaves the other to be Preſſed by the whole Weight of the Incumbent Fluid?Tis thereſore Probable, FirsT, That there is an equal Balance in Perfect Fluids of the Expanſive and Contractive Force nearly, as in Air and Water, ſo that tho the whole may Gravitate, as Water, or not Gravitate, as Poſſibly Air does not, but is rather Expanſive, yet ſuch a Contractive or Expanſive Force is not Felt by any Animate, or it's Effects Perceived by any Inanimate Beings; viæ. In the Preſſure, or the Expanſive Forces, one way, or the Contractive another, of the Parts of the Fluid; there is no manner of Force Scnſible, the Forces being equally Poiſed on all Hands. SECOND, That where the Contractive Force of any Body, as Gold or Marble, is Superior to that of the Fluid, as Water, which Encompaſſes it, the Preſſure of the Fluid towards the Earth is ſo much leſs, as the other is greater, and therefore the Deſcent of Bodies is not more owing to the Contractive Force of the Solid, than to the Expanſive of the Fluid, for in this Reſpect, and in this Compariſon, the Watei as much Aſcends in Reſpect, and Relatively, to the Gold or Marble, as the Gold or Marble Deſcends in Reſpect, and Relatively, to the Water. THIRD, That where the Preſſure of the Fluid is greater, the Preſſure of Real Spact or Body, to the Earth is ſo much Ieſs, and therefore the Aſcent of Cork or Wooc in Water, is not more owing to the Expanſive of the Solid, than the Contractive M m m o ,f the Fluid; For in this Reſpect, and in this Compariſon, the Water as much Deſends in Reſpect, and Relatively, to the Cork or Wood, as the Cork or Wood Aſ:ends in Reſpect, and Relatively, to Water; What therefore ve Imagine, and which ve Believe to be the Truth in Nature, is, that Bodies Aſcend or Deſcend by their proper Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Relation to cach other, ſo that what may be a Contractive Force in one Compariſon, may be an Expanſive in another. Tue Reaſon, then which we give of the Water's Riſing in the Siphon, is, not the Weight or Preſſure of the Air, becauſe that cannot be the Cauſe of it, ſince the ſame Effect happens, according to Hugens, in an Exhauſted Receiver, nor can it Riſe vithout Suction; The Reaſon Conſequently, I ſay, muſt be this, that Suction haveing the Nature of an Expanſive Force, as it Acts againſt Gravity and the Contractive, becomes in ſmall Tubes, in which Suction can Prevail, Superior to the Contractive of the Water, and by that means Elevates it to a certain Height, after which it will Deſcend by it's ovn Contractive Force, and ſink in the Inferior Contractive, or the Comparative Expanſive of the Air, which lies under3 or which is all one, if ve Fill the Siphon with Water, and then put the ſhorter Tube into the Water, and leave the Orifice of the longer open, the Effeẽt will be the ſame; Becauſe, then the Water vill be Raiſed without Suction in the ſorter Tube, and again Deſcend, as before, in the longer; But if the Tubes are equal, then there will be no greater Force in one Tube than another, and Conſequently, the Water, contained in the one, will Obe the Force of it's Contractive, and will Fall into the Air, and the other will not Eſl into the Water, if leſs than 32 Foot High, as is Expetienced. ON the other Hand if one Tube is longer than another, and bòth are Fill'd with Water, one Aſcending, Which is the ſhorteſt, and the longeſt Deſcending, if it be askt, how the Woater in the ſhorteſt comes to Aſcend Contrary to it's propet Gravity, we Anſwer, becauſc Fluids do not Act according to their Gravity, but their Preſſure or Expanſive and Contractive Forces, in Fluids of an equal Balance, and therefore the Water in the Baſon being Stagnant and in an equãl Balance, that has no Influence upon the ſhorter Tube of the Siphon, but the Water in the longer Tube of the Siphon giving way, i. e. Weakening the Balance of the Air below, the Water in the ſhorter Tube Preſſes to that Part, where it finds the leat Reſiſtence, like Air into an Exhauſted Receiver, or which is the ſame, the Water Deſcending in the longer Tube has the Force of an Expanſive to that in the ſiorter, by Which it Dras and Attracts it aſter it by i's Superior Force, and has thereby the Effect of Suction or an Expanſive. So Again, if we take this Siphon and Invert it ith it's Orifices upwards, and fill it with Water, the ſorter Tube will Spout out Water, as the longer did in a contrary Poſition, becauſe the Contractive Force of the Water in the longer Tube now Prevails againſt the Contractive in the ſhorter, and therefore has the Force of an Expanſive, by which it is Raiſed into the Air in Spouts or Jetteaus, V. Sturmius's Colleg. Curioſum. ] BuT Suppoſing Monſieur Hugens had Prov}d a Preſſure of this Subtile Matter from theſe two Experiments, He is yet far from Solving the preſent Phænomenon, becauſe He does not Pretend to give a Reaſon, why the Force of a Subtile Matter ſhould be more Weighty, and Raiſc more Mercury in the Tube than a Groſſer; That is, He has too much Senſe to go about to Prove, that a Lighter Body has more Weight than an Heavier. Tnis However was only one Article to be Provq, TnE Second Is, that there are Pores in Glaſs, which this Subtile Matter Penetrates at Pleaſure; which is no ways Evident, becauſe one would be apt to Suſpect there are no ſuch Pores, which are generally made by the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, to ſuit ſuch certain Parts as are cut out and ſhap'd for them; HowWever we may Reaſonably Doubt of them, till they are Demonſtrated; Eſpecially, if the Appearances or Effects in Nature may be Accõunted for another away, than by ſuch Imaginary Suppoſitions, which are Contrivd only to ſerve the Purpoſe of Solving, Vhat is thought Impoſſible to be done without them. TuE Third is, that there is a Coheſion of the Mercury with the Parts of Glaſi vhich Br. Wallis Diſowns, and Dr. Hoote Aſfirms, and both may Poſſibly be in the Right, in different Circumſtances of it; for at the Top, the Mercury certainly De clines the Contact, and ſtands in a Convex, as all other Fluids do, where they ar o of a vaſtly different Specifick Gravity or Preſſure from thoſe Bodies, which Surround them; for in ſuch a Caſe the Actions or Forces are ſo different, that they cannot Unite, but the Quick-Silver is left to follow it's ovn Contractive Foree to it's ſelf, rather than it's Expanſive towards the Glaſs3 On the other Hand, if there is a Preſſure of Quick-Silver from the Parts above upon thoſe below, the Caſe is Alterd, and ſince it is Preſſed, it Tends towards the Weakeſt Part,, and therefore Urges, vith it's Expanſive in Conjunction with the Expanſive of Preſſure, the Sides of the Glaſs, by which it Adheres to them, which Adheſion is Probably very Significant in Producing the Effect we are now Conſidering; And for that Reaſon a Tube of a large Bore would not Exhibit to us the ſame Phænomenon, as my Lord Brouncher very Juſtly Thinks and Owns, THE Fourth is, that this Subtile Matter has no Effect, till the Pores of the Glaſs arc unſtop'd by the Mercury's Subſideing; This therefore Depends upon the Glaſi haveing ſuch Pores, which are not Proved, nor are we willing to Acknowledge. FirrH, It will be Enquired, what the Reaſon is, vhy the Mercury Deſcends upon the Air's being Admitted, or upon ſhakeing of the Tube; Which Monil icur Hugens does not likewiſe Account for. 5 32. MY Lord Brounchers Notion of this Experiment is, as Follows, . 1ſt. THAT There may be in the Air, where Mercury is only to be Supported, as in a full Tube, yet a greater Weight, than what will Suſtain only 29 Inches; 24. That this Purer or more Subtile Part of the Air is of a like Nature with the Groſſer, and therefore Springy, and Conſequently Acts, in that Reſpect, as much when a ſmall Portion of it is Admitted into the Top of the Tube, as when the whole Column is Incumbent. To which we Anſwer, FirsT, That if there is a greater Weight i in the Air, than what will Support 29 Inches of Mercury, it would always Exert it's Force or elſe there ſhould be a Reaſon given, vhy it did no. SECOND, That it is altogether Impoſſible, siut the Weight, or Spring, of the Air ſould ſometimes only Suſtain 29 Inches, and at others above Double, and almoſi Treble, that Number, without any ſenſible Alteration of the Air, and certainly vithout any Imaginable Reaſon, as well as without any Aſſignd. As for the Springineſs of the Air, we ſhall Examine it in Dr. Wallirs Account ol this Phænomenon, to which ve now Proceed. S 33. DR. Walliss Account of this Matter is therefore this. 1ſt. THAT The Spring of the Air is Neceſſary to put Heavy Bodies into Motion, which are not Impell'd by any other Force; 24, That therefore the Elaſticity of the Air and the Non-Elaſticity of the Quick- Silver, is the Cauſe of this Effect;3 Since Water by ſeveral Experiments has been Prov'd to have none, and Conſequently Mercury in all Probability has not 3 30. That Bodies at Reſt will not Move, without ſome External Force, as the Elaſticity or Pulſion of the Air, Admitted into the Tube, or Reſideing there, or elſe without Percuſſion, or Shakeing the Tube, or Strikeing upon it; 41h. Gravity is a Conatus to a Motion Downwards, and the Queſtion is, why that Conatus is not Senſible in the preſent Experiment; sth. That Gravity may Poſſibly be only the Effect of Percuſſion, i. e. of Shakeing or Strikeing the Tube, o of Pulſion, i. e. of the Elaſticity of the Air, iz. That Gravity is no Innate Principle in Matter, but Proceeds from ſome External Cauſc, as Pulſion or Percuſſion, and therefore Bodies, Accounted Heavy, will not begin to Fall, till either Pulſion or Percuſſion Intervene, and Cauſe their Deſcent. To which we Anſwer; THAT There may be ſeveral Reaſons given, why Dr. ’allis's Hypotheſis is not Valid, FirsT, As to the Springineſ" of the Air, it ſeems to be no more than the Expanſive Force we have been Speaking of, viz. That, where the Force of the Air is Superior, and meets with a leſi Reſiſting Medium, it Expands it's ſelf into that Medium, and Water, or Quick-Silver, Probably would do the ſame, were they not hindered by their ovn Proper Contractive Force; That is, Air, in Reſpect to the Mat ter, vhich Compoſes the Earth, has but a ſmall Contractive Force towards it, whereas Water and Quick-Silver have a Senſible Propenſity to it, and therefore are Obliged to Obey the ſtrongeſt Direction; On the Contrary, where the Contractive Force is Superior to the Airs Expanſive, it is Compreſſed, which does not happen to WaM m m2 ten Water or Mercury, becauſc they have a Force of their own, C e of Surmounting any we can bring againſt them What I Mean is, that Poſſibly the Spring ol the Air, which has been the Theme of ſo many Pens, is not, what is Pretended, an Elaſtick or Reſtituent Force in the Air, by which it Returns to it's Primitive State aſter it's Preſſure is off, but rather a Property of Preſſing and Exerting it's ſelf that vay, where is the leat Oppoſition, which is the Cauſe of it's Expanſion or Dilatation and it's Yeilding to a Superior Force or Preſſure is the Cauſe of it's Contraction; But whatever is the Reaſon of the Air's Spring, or whatever it's ſelf is SECOND, There ſcems to be no Foundation for Aſſerting the Elaſticity of the Air to be Neceſſary to put Heavy Bodies into Motion, which are Impell'd by no other Force, and that thereſore the Air Admitted into the Tube puts, by it's Elaſticity, the Quieſcent Parts of the Mercury into Motion; For the Air Admitted into the Quieſcent Parts of the Mercury ſtanding at it's uſual Height, does not Precipitate it into the Baſon, which it ſhould do, According to this Doctrine, and Air Admitted into the Mercury of the Baſon, ſiould Agitate and put its Parts into Motion, which yei does not happen. l TuHiRD, It is ſaid, that Bodies at Reſt, will not Move without ſome External Force, as Percuſſion, &c. But the Queſtion is, why the Mercury is art Reſt, and does not Obey the Laws of it's own Gravity, as He owns in the Fourth Article we Mention'd. FrROM The FirTH, it is Told us, that Gravity may Poſſibly be only the Effect oſ Percuſſion, &e. This is Sufficiently Confuted by it's being Prov'd to be an Innate Force in Matter, j 5 34. Mæ. Hugenss Account of this Experiment, my Lord Brouncter's, and Dr. Wallis s, being Inſuſficient, we ſhall Propoſe another, which is this. Fiust, That, the Tube being fill'd to 25 Inches, the Mercury, as was ſaid before, is there Suſended by the Air's Expanſive and Contractive Force, and not by it's Gravity, in Conjunction with the Expanſive Force of the Mercury towards the Glaſs, by which it Unites and Cements with it; and by. this Mcans there is an equal Balance of all the Forces : 58COND, That where two Fluids are once in an Equilibrium, an Addition oſ the ſame Fluid, on either Hand, does not Deſtroy the equal Balance; 50 if the Experiment be made in a cloſe Room, in Reſpect of Air, or in a Veſſel, where it is Impoſſible for the External Air to Enter, whether it be made in a larger Room or Veſſel, or in a ſmaller, the Effe&t will be the ſame, that is, a greater or leſſer Quantity of Air will not Deſtroy the equal Balance; On the Contrary, if a Tube be filled with Quick- Silver to twice, or Poſſibly to any Height, in Reſpe&t of the common Standard, ſo as there is no Air above, it will not Preponderate, for this Reaſon; Becauſę all the Parts of Quick-Silver are at Reſt, or in an æquilibrium amongſ themſclves, as well as thoſe of Air, that is, the Expanſive Force of the Mercury towards the Glaſs, be the Gla' Tube longer or ſhorter, will be the ſame, by which Expanſive Force it is United to it; The Expanſive Force of the Air, by which it Exerts it's ſelf againſt the Contractive or Gravitating Force of the Quick-Silver, is likewiſę the ſame, ſo as to hinder it's Deſcent, ſince the Parts of the Quic- Silver are equally Balanced amongſt one another; But if the Diameter of the Tube or Cylinder is t10o Large, the Expanſive Force of the Mercury towards the Glaſs in the Parts, hich lie towards the Axis of the Cylinder will not be much, and vill therefore Deſcend towards the Earth by their Contractive or Gravitating Force to it, by which Means all the Quick-Silver ill Subſide; And thus it is not unlikely, but in a Siphon of unęqual Tubes in length, Inverted upwards, if the Foramen of the longer is ſtopt, that the Water in the ſhorter Tube vill no more Flow out, than if Inverted downvards, it will in the longer, if the Foramen of the ſhorter is likeviſe ſtopt, or in the ſhorter, iſ the Foramen of the Longer is, but if both are unſtopt, the Water vill Aſcond thro' the ſhortes, and Deſcend thro' the longer3 Since this wvas Writ, I find the Conjecture was not Wrong, being Experimented by Sturmius in his Collegium Curigſum, Tentam s. Pag. 29. Which ſews the equal Balance of the Parts of Watcr amongſt cach other, in ſuch unequal Tubes. THIRD, AS to the Mercury's Deſcending in a Tube by Percuſſion, or when any ways ſhaken, it is Evident, that ſuch an Additional Force Deſtroys the ZEquilibrium, above Deſcribed, of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. FOURTH, FourrtH, If Air, or even the leaſt Bubble of it, enters, that alſo Deſtroys the ſaid Balance, ſince we make the Natural Expanſive or Contractive Force of the ſmalleſt Portion of Air to be equal to the largeſt. FirrH, If there is a Vacuum, or thin Ather, at Top, that vill have the ſame Effect, ſince it is not of the ſame Specifick Force in it's Expanſion with Mercury3 And this alſo obtains in rhe Siphon, where the Foramina are upwards, for if we unſtop the Foramen of the longer Tube, the Water in the longer will Preſs upon that in the ſhorter, till it is Reduced to an Equilibrium with it's ſelf; that is, Water does not A&t upon Water, ſo as to Produce Motion, nor Air upon Air, nor Mercury upon Mercury, tho' they have all an Innate Force of Expanſion, vhich they Exert, when they meet with Bodies of a different Nature3 Thus Air will Expand it's ſelf by it's proper and Innate Force into a Vacuum, or a thinner Medium, or into Water, tho' a thicker, Warer into Salts and Earths, Spirit of Nitre into Silver, and Aqua Regalis, or Mercury, into Gold; Namely, that which has a greater Expanſive, Volatile, or Spirituous, Force will Exert and Expand it's ſelf into that, which has a Leſs, if the Contractive, which belongs to the leſer Expanſive, is not too great to be Surmounted by ſuch greater Expanſive; For Air, or Water, cannot Penetrate into Iron or Marble, nor Spirit of Nitre, or Mercury, into a Diamond; And this Abundantly Proves the Difference ve Maintain betwixt the Expanſive Force, and Gravity, ſince by the firſt, the preſent Phænomenon of Mr. Hugens's, as well as ſeveral others, may be eaſily Solvd, but cannot by the lat; and thereforc what Philoſophers offer concerning ſuch Gravity of Air, or the Subtile Matter, is of no Significance to the Solution of this Important Problem. THE Laſt Explication, which Dr. ’allis gives, is, that there may be ſome Springy Parts of Air, Intermixt with the Mercury, which ſall be able to Support it to a greater Height than uſual ; Becauſe each Springy Patt of Air has the ſame Force as a Iarger Quantity; But this, as He owns, Concludes, that Mercury Unpurgſd from Air wil ſtand Higher, than that which'is Purg'd, Contrary to the Experiment, Which Preſcribes that the Mercury ſhould be well Purg'd from Air, àand Atems thãt if the leaſt Air is admitted, the Mercury Falls, hich, accortling to Dr. #allis, ould Riſe the Highei for ſuch an Acceſſion. 5 35. WE Shall now therefore go on t0 Mr. Bojle's Statical Baroſcope; Ir Conſiſts of a Glaſs Bubble, abour the Bigneſs  an Orange, Blown Extremely Thin, and Counterpois'd in a fine Balance, that would turn with the 301h Part of a Grain, by one Drachm and 10 Grains in Braſs or Lead, or which is beſt, Gold, a bearing the leat Proportion to the Magnitude of the Bubble; There may likewiſt be fitted to the Anſa, or Cheek, of the Balance an Arc of a Circle, Divided into I5 or 20 Degrees, that the Tongue of it, reſting over againſt theſe Diviſions, may ſhew the Quantity of the Angle, in which the Scale is Depreſſed on one Hand or another. Thuis Statical Baròſcope ſiow'd the Variations of the Air, when no greater, than vhat alterd the Height of the Mercury half a Quarter of an Inch, viæ. 1ſ. SoMETIMES The Bubble was in an Aquilibrium with the Counterpoiſe. 2d. WHEN The Atmoſphere was High, Z. e. when the Air was Light, upon gently ſtirring the Balance, the Tongue would Play on the Side of the Bubble, which would Manifeſtly Preponderate. ] 3d. HEN The Air was Heavier, the Counterpoiſe would Preponderate, and would continue ſo for ſeveral Days, if the Air held its Gravity. : 4th. UroN Other Changes the Bubble would regain an Equilibrium, ſo that He could Foretell the Riſe or Fall of the Mercury by looking upon the Bubble, which vould Riſe and Fall Suitably to the other. Tur Reaſon of which He Conceives to be, becauſe the Bubble is perhaps a 100 or 200 times bigger than the Metalline Counterpoiſe, and according to the Hydroſtatical Laws, 1ſ. If tvo Bodies of equal Gravity, but unequal Bulk, are Weigh'd in another Mcdium, they will be no longer quiponderant, but in a Heavier Medium, the Greater in Bulk, and. Lighter in Specie, will loſe more of it's Weight than the Leſſer and more Compact, and in a Lighter Medium, leſs than the other in Proportion to the Diſparity of Bulk; 22. And Conſequently, this Law will hold in the ſame Medium, as of Air, where it's Gravity is Alter'd. 5th. ONI 5th. ONE Morning, when there was a Miſt, He Thought the Weight of the Air ould Buoy up the Bubble, but it continu'd in an quilibrium. 6th. THE Greater Length of the Beam would make the Balance more Exact; The Reaſon of which is, according to what we have Mentioned in Book the Firſt, becauſc the farther any Point is from the Center of Detention, or Contraction, the Velocity, or the Expanſive Force, will be the greater, and therefore the Balance will more eaſily turn. 7th. THiS Shows, that the varying Weight of the Atmoſphere is the Cauſe of the Riſe and Fall of the Mercury, ſince here can be no Pretence of a Fuga Vacui or a Funiculus. 81h. It Shows, that there is a greater Weight in the Air, than ſome Learned Men vill allow him, tho' they allow him to have Provd ſome, ſince the Weight oſ the Quantity of an Orange is Senſible in no very Nice Balance. oth. Tuis Baroſcope is in one Reſpect better than the Mercurial, becauſe in that there is Skill and Trouble requird to free the deſerted Part of the Tube from Air. 10th. THE Mercurial is uncertain, becauſe it is ſometimes more or Ieſs Cleansd from Air, which He has Diſcover'd by the Statical; viæ. that many rimes it has not been well Cleans'd from Air, which is done by makeing Uſe of an heated Iron. 11th. BY This may be Computed the Weight of Air, which Anſwers to an Inch or other Diviſion, of Mercury in the: Tube; for when it is High, or Lov, or Middle, ſet the Scale to an exact quilibrium by a Counterpoiſe to the Bubble, when there fore the Mercury is Riſen an Inch, &e. or Fallen, Reduce it again to an Equilibrium, and the Weight put in, which muſt be Divided into Minute Parts oſ a Grain, vill give the Weight Requird. 120h. THIs Will ow the Difference of the Weight of Airs in ſeveral Places, which Supports the Mercury in the Tubes at thoſe Places; for by the 117h. we know the Weight of Air anſwering an Inch of Mercury, or other Diviſion, in one Place, and by the ſame ve may know it in another, which Compar'd will give the Difference; But ve muſt take our Obſervations in the ſame Height of the Air, and not one in a Vale, and the other on an Hill, becauſe then the Lower vill certainly be Heavier. l l ] 13h. I? The Bubble is Pois'd at the Foot of a Steeple, or Mountain, and at the Top, it will give the Difference of the Weight of the Air in one Place and the other. To Which I Anſwer, that the whole of all this lies upon the Bubble's Preponderating in Lighter Air, and Aſcending in an Heavier; OF which there may be an eaſy Account given by it's Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and no one can be by its Gravity. FirsT. We ſay, that none can be given by Gravity, from the 57h. Article; ſince there was a Miſt, and no Alteration; which could only Proceed ſfrom this, that the Miſt Weakend ſo far the Air's Spring or Expanſive Force, that what was Increaſed in the Contractive, or the Weight, was Diminiſ'd in the Spring or the Expanſive, ĩ. e. that the Expanſive being in a certain Proportion, the Weight, or Contractive, Imported and the Spring, or Expanſive, Weaken'd, Deſtroyed one another, and therefore the cqual Balance Continu'd. SECOND, From ſeveral Inſtances, it is Thought, ve may Compute the Weight oſ the Air Anſwering to a certain Portion, as an Inch, &. of Quick- Silver; If therefore all this Depends upon Gravity, how comes it to Paſs, that the ſmall Diviſions of a Grain ſhall be equal to a certain Weight of Air, and that Weight of Air equal to Support ſuch an Inch, or whatever other Portion it is, of Quick-Silver? It isa known Axiom, if two Things are equal to a Third, they are equal to one another, and Conſcquently il ſo much Air is equal to Perhaps an /51h Part of a Grain, and that Air is likewiſe equal to àh of an Inch of Quick-Silver, or whatever it is; in this Caſe, ſince e take the leaſt, 7h of an Inch of Quick- Silver is equal to an ;25h Part of a Grain, Whereas it is much Superior to a whole one; So that all this Doctrine ſeems to fall, upon the Suppoſition of Gravity. Tuimn, What thereſfore ve Affirm is, that ſuch ſimall Variations of the Statical Baroſcope ſcom more juſtly to be Atrribnted to the Air's Spring or Expanſive Force, or elſe it's Contractive, being Increaſed or Diminiſid, than to any Imaginary Gravi ty, vhich is ſuppoſcd to be in it; And nothing appears to be Conſiderable in Philoſophy loſophy, as to Material Properties and Beings, unleſs theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces. To Confirm this Expanſive Force of the Air, and it's Contractive, we ſhall only mention a Propoſition, the Demonſtration of which Philoſophers at preſent Acquieſce in, and which I have not now Time Particularly to Conſider; Namely, that if the Air Expands it's ſelf, according to this Lawv, which is ſaid to be Confirmed by Experiments, to Wit, that the Spaces, into which a given Quantity of it is Compreſed, are Reciprocally Proportional to the Weights, which Compreſs it, a Globe oſ our Air, which is only one Inch Diameter, if it was of the ſame Rarity and Fineneſ vith that, which is at the Height of one Semidiameter of the Earth from us, would fill all the Regions of the Planets, as fat, as the Sphere of Saturn, and much beyond it; An Expanſion, which can be only Accounted for by our Philoſophy of Forces, which may be more Diluted and Diffuſed, or more Conſtipated and Denſe, to Infinity, and Space may be Filled and Repleniſhed with ſuch different Forces; But if ve Reſolve all into a Similar Matter, and the Parts of it, if Air is Rarefy'd to that Degree, there muſt be ten Millions of Vacuities for one Part of Solid, Similar, and Inflexible Matter, and Conſequently Space cannot be Filled by it3 I ſhould now have Proceeded to the Theory of the Winds, but haveing already Diſcourſed ſomething concerning them, as alſo concerning Hydroſtaticks, which can be only Accounted for by theſe Forces, I ſhall not Trouble my ſclf, or Others, with any farther Reaſonings, or Arguments, upon thoſe Subjects. ALL That I am therefore to Conclude from this Chapter is, in General, that Philoſophers Diſpute about Real Space, as of a Space, which is full of ſome Properties, and Affections, beſides Length, Breadth, and Depth, which is our, and their Notion of a Vacuum; and that therefore they Tacitly Conſent to and Affirm a Plenum, tho it is perfectly Inconſiſtent with their Fundamental Opinion of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter; For all their Arguments about Air, and the Gravity of it, do equally Extend to one Portion of Space, as well as another. TuEY Alſo Reckon this Force of Gravity to be Diſperſed thro' all Parts of Space, and therefore do Acknow ledge, that there is a Diffuſion of Force every where; ſo that, albeit they do not Declare it, becauſe they in Terms Aſſert a Vacuum, yet they in Fact, and in their Reaſonings, Concurr with, and Aſſent to, what I have Defended, that all Space is Full, and that it is Full of ſome Force or other; They Call it Gravity, I Name it the Expanſive and Contractive Force, and that Expanſive and Contractive Force, or Action in General, I Maintain, to be the Eſſence of Matter; anc therefore, that all Space is full of Matter, and that it is Immediately Produced, or Created, from and by the Power, Will, and Pleaſure, of the Infinite, Eternal, and Self-Exiſtent Being, by an Immenſe, and Unlimited Exertion of his Agency thro the whole Univerſal Expanſe of Nature; And therefore may be Annihilated by him in an Inſtant, upon his withdrawing and Repreſſing ſuch Agency ; All which Phæ nomenons the Corpuſcular, or Atomical, that is, the Preſent Philoſophy cannot Ac count for, nor does Underſtand. PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY O F THE EXPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE F OR CE S B O O K IV. CONCERNING OPTICKS, DIOPTRICKS, AND CATOPTRICKS. N nn . Digitized by Gooꝗ PRINCIPLES O F THE PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE F OR CE S B O O K IV. CONCERNING OPTICKS, DIOPTRICKS, AND CATOPTRICKS. 5 va 7 àã x - ò l THE PRINCIPLES of the PHILOSOPHY O F THE EXxPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE FORCES. B O O K IV. C H AP. I Concerning the Doſtrine of Reflettion, as Propoſed by Deſcartes from Impulſe and Reſiſtence. s. I. AVING In the former Books of theſe Principles Conſiderd the Notions and Apprehenſions, which the Corpuſcular Philoſophy gives us of External Being, and afterwards having Examined, whether the Mechanical could afford us a better Solution of thoſe Phænomenons of it, which it has Endeavour'd to Explain; We ſhall now Proceed to an Enquity into the Dodtrine of Reſlection, and Refraction, and of Opticks, Dioptricks and Catoptricks. 5. 2. BEFORE We do which, ve ſhall only at Preſent ſay in General, that in ⸗a True and Adequate Account of Nature, the Principles, upon Which we Propoſc to Explicate the ſeveral Appearances of it, ought to be Conſiſtent with themſelves; and Conſequently, if the Mechanical Philoſophy ſhould be granted Capable of Solving thoſe Effects, which the Corpuſcular co'd not, as it is a Demonſtration againſt the Truth of the Corpuſcular Syſtem, ſo on the Contrary, if the Corpuſcular Philoſophy Accounts for the various Properties oſ Matter, which the Mechanical cannot, it is equally a Confirmation of the Incompetency and Defects of the Mechanical; and the ſame may be ſaid of the Mechanical Philoſophy and the Optical; Since i? we would Diſcourſe vith any Reaſon or Congruity upon the Nature and Eſſence of Things, there muſt be ſome General Principles laid down, from Whence both the one and the Other, both the Properties of Matter, and the Laws of Motion, or of Opticks, may be Deriv|d, ſo as to Unite the Optical to the Mechanical, and that to the Corpuſculai Philoſophy, under one Natural Cauſc of their Exiſting, according to the Method Alledgd in the Preface to the two fitſt Parts of the preſent Principles Publiſied many Years Ago. Nn na BUæ . 3. BUT That we may Proceed in a certain Order and Method, and with that Cautiouſneſs, which is Requiſite in the Conſutation of Principles, which have been hitherto Receivd with a General Applauſe3 As ve have Deſcended to each Particular in the Mechanical Philoſophy, and Concluded, our laſt Part of thoſe Principles Formerly Publiſied, with an Examination into the Celebrated Theory of Light and Colours, and that of the Rain-bow, which we alſo Proſccuted in the Introduction to the preſent Volume of our Philoſophy; So we ſhall now Enter into a Particular Conſideration of the Laws of Reſiection, and Reſraction, and the Doctrine of Op. ticks, Dioptricks, and Catoptrickss. And firſt we ſall Examine into the Laws of Reflcction, as Propoſed by Deſcaries. 5. 4. As To vhat Concerns Reſlection, there are two Principal and Eminent Laws Aſcrted of it, iſf. That the Angle of Incidence is Equal to the Angle oſ Reſnection, 24. That Each of them are in the ſame Perpendicular Plane to the Reſecting Surſace; Both which are Endeavour'd to be Provd by the ſollowing Demonſira tion. A is Suppoſed to be a Lody perfectly Hard, and to Fall upon the Surface of Another, CF, which is equally ſo; The Body 4, which is thrown upon the Surſace, CF, is likeviſe to be Conſider'd, as having neither Gravity, nor Figure, nor Craſſitude; and that there is no Reſiſtence to it's Motion ſrom the Air; Granting rhis, it is ſaid, it will Neceſiarily follov, that the Motion vill be Uniformly continucd from A to B, and will be Reſlected with the ſame Motion, Br-u likewiſe, but to what Part, or which way, is to be Inquired; It Deſcends from the Point, 4, in the Circumference C 4IF, to B it's Center; and ſince the ſame Motion is continued, with which it Fell, it muſt Riſe :0 ſome Point in the ſame Circumſerence, ſo as to make the Line oſf it's Reſlection Equal to that of it's Incidence 4 B; But A B is Reſolv'd into two Motions, of which it is Compounded, A G, and G B, a Perpendicular and a Lateral, and as the Perpendicular is only Obſtructed, and is ſup. posd to be chang'd into the Reflected I L, there only remains the Lateral to be Anſverd, which muſt be Equal to  L=C B; and Conſequently I L is=toũ 4, orthe Sine of the Angle oſ Reſlection is Equal to that of Incidence, and thereſore the Angles are ſo; And iſ this Demonſtration is certain, ĩt will follow, that the Angles of Incidence and Reſlection are in the ſame Plane. 5. 5. IN Reply to which, there are ſeveral Things to be Objected againſt, in a Real, and not an Abſtracted, Philoſophy, which this Demonſtration ſoœms only to Favour, that is, a Philoſophy Created by the Mind, vithout being any ways Agrecable or Adequate to Nature, as it in Truth Exiſts; For what can be more Abſurd, than from a Suppoſition of Bodies perfectly Hard, to Raiſe an Univerſal Theorem, which ſhall Extend to Bodies which are Perfectly Soft, to Bodies, which for all that ve yet know, may have Properties Diametrically Oppoſite, to thoſe which this Demonſtration Aſſumes, as Light, Fire, Air, Water, &e. which cannot any orher ways be Imagin'd to be Hard, unleſs upon the Hypotheſis of their being Reſolvd into little Hard Particles of Matter, according to the ouſculr Syſtem vhich has been al ready Sufficiently Confuted; And therefore we ſhall not now Inſift upon the Unreaſonableneſs of the preſent Suppoſition of Parts without Gravity, Figure, or Craſſitude, and which ſhall yet have Hardneſs; ſeeing it is Abundantly Evident from what we have before ſaid, as well as from this very Inſtance, that where Philoſophers Diſcourſe, or Demonſtrate in that Way, they only Prove, as Phænomenons Riſc, and according to the preſent Emergence. 5. 6. WnaT We take to be our Immediate Province is to ſhev, that, allowing theſe Corpuſcular Notions, however Irrational, the Reaſoning of this Philoſophy i: not Valid in Reſpect of the Laws of Action it Affirms; And in the firſt Place, Iet us make our Notion of the Refiected Body, as Abſtracted as we Pleaſe, in Relation to it's Figure or Groſnheſs, tho borh of them are to be Conſiderd in the Lavws of a Real Reſeẽtion, we cannot yet take Gravity from Matter, according to the Moderr Philoſophy, unles ve willl Annihilate Matter it's ſelr, to vhich Gravity is ſaid to be Proportional; If therefore a Gravity is allowd to the Dodv 4, tho ihe Motior Motion from Impulſe was Uniformly continued to B and I, yet the Force of Gravitatation vou'd make a conſiderable Difference betwixt the Deſcending Line 4 G, and the Aſcending L I, ſince in the firſi, it wou'd Accelerate the Impulſe, and in the laſt, Retard it. S. 7. HOWEVER, Granting this Demonſtration to Proceed upon a mere Speculation of Impulſe, in the Abſtract, without Conſidering the Properties of the Body Impelld, we ſtill Deny the Force and Evidence it Pretends to; Since if 4 has no Properties belonging it, nor CF, unleſ thoſe of Hardneſs, that iss oF one not Yielding to the orher, there can be no Reaſon Aſſign'd, why the Impulſe Communicated from 4 to B, in it's Incident Line, ſhould be Equal, in it's Reflected one, ſo as it ſould come to ſome Point, or other, of the ſame Circumference, from which it was Originally Propagated; Becauſe, by the ſame Reaſon that 4, when Impell'd in it's Perpendicular Incidence to G, ſfor the Lateral Directions may at preſent as well be ſuppos'd Equal, as not looſes nothing of its Impulſe at ũ, or B, but is Reſected from thence, by the ſame Argument, when it is Reſlected from B or L toI in its Perpendicular Reſult, it ſnoud not ſtop there, but proceed in Infinitum; by which Means the Angle of Reflection wou'd be Infinitely different from the Angle of Incidence, for vhy a Bare and Abſtracted Impulſe ſould Looſe it's Force at  where there is no Obſtruction ſupposd, rather than at  or B, where there is one Acknowledęſd, vill be Impoſſible to Determine. Nor will the Hypotheſis of an equal Velocity Solve this Difficulty, ſince 4 B is to be Provd = to B I, not by ſuppoſing it, but by the Forces, of which they are Compounded, which, tho' G  and 2 L may be equal, in Reſpect of 4G, and L I, may be vaſtly Different; Becauſe they are not to be Meaſurd by their Force of Velocity, but by the actual Motion, which is Deſcribd in Length. According to what is above Argued. Some have Endeavour'd to Refine upon this Demonſtration, by ſaying, that Nature always takes the ſhorteſt Courſe to ſatisfy two Determinations; But even this Suppoſes the Forces, or Determinations, Equal, which we have ſaid may be juſtly Conteſted. j 5. 8. BESIDES in Matter of Fact it is Evident, that Marble, or any other Elaſtick Eody, as an Hard Ball of Wool, may be made to Rebound in a Perpendicular Direction much Higher than the Place, from Whence the Impulſe was given; and therefore, ſince according to this Doctrine the Oblique Force 4 B is Compounded of a Lateral and Perpendicular, it is likewiſe certain in Fact from the foregoing Section, that the ſame Body may be made to Rebound with an Angle of Reſlection, very different from the Angle of Incidence. j s. 9. For Moreover, ſuppoſing that an Impulſc ſiould be given to 4, which woud carry it 5 or 10 times as far, as from 4 to B, cither ſome of that Force muſt Neceſſarily be loſt at B, ot elſe the Reflected Line muſt be much greater than 4 B, cither of vhich Conceſſions vou'd Abſolutely Deſtroy the preſent Demonſtration; For if 1here is not the ſame Motion after Reſlection, as before it,  will not be equal to 4 B, and if the Point at B can divide the Impulſe, as it pleaſes, it Will be no more Neceſſary to thin, that it will give an Equal, than an Uncqual Portion, to the Lines of Incidence and Reflection, ſince it ill have a Diſcretional Liberty of Acting, without Conſulting the Pleaſure of ſuch Abſtracted Reaſonings, or the Patrons of them. 5. 10. MORE Than this, it is not undoubted, and vants ſome Force of Conviction 10 ſhew, that an Impulſc Communicated from 4 to B will, from the Principles made uſe of, Neceſſarily Riſe aſter it's Obſtruction at B, and not Proceed in a Lateral Direction to F, even ſuppoſing the Line of Incidence is Equal to that, which it's Motion or Action Deſcribes after it's Incidence upon B, and that there is no other Affection Conſiderd than bare Impulſe and Hardneſs; Sceing there is nothing in Hardneſs which can give ĩt a particular Determination, that is, the mere Reſiſtence of one Body to another, which hinders it's Progreſs one Way, cannot give it a Direction another Way 3 And there is nothing in Impulſe, but what wou'd give it a Different or Contrary to that, which is Experienc'd, or Fix it in the Point B, S. i1. IF all this were True, this Reaſoning cou'd not Demonſtrate to us, how the Angle of Incidence and Reſiection ſhould be inthe ſame Plane; becauſe altho the Line of Incidence and Reflection were Equal, that is, the Impulſe in both Caſes ſhould be Alike, yet it is not Evident, why they may not be in the ſame Sphere, as well as in ihe Circle only, which is here Aſſum'd, ſince the whole Argument Depends upor tha that Equality, which may as well be Preſer vd in the Radius of a Sphere, as in that of a Circle. 5. 12. WE have ſaid in the foregoing Sections, that this Demonſtration Depended vholly upon the Suppoſition, that the Reflected Line was Equal to the Incident, for if B Iis not Equal to B 4, that is, if they are not Radiuss oſ the ſame Circle, neither G B and B L, nor G A and L I, the Forces, of which the Radius's are Compounded, will be Equal, that is, the Sine of Incidence vill be different from that of Reflection; If is 2 to 4 B, and this is by Suppoſition, and not Provũ to be ſo, as it is Plain, it is not, from 5. 7, 8, 9, ſince there is no Diſtinction betwixt 4 B, and 4 G, G B, and betvixt B, and B L, LI, Excepting in the Compoſition and Reſolution of the ſame Force. to Conclude ſrom thence, that the Sine of Incidence is Equal to the Sine of Reflection, is no more than to Prove it, by Suppoſing it; that is, 4 B is ſupposd m to B I, but 4 Gand G B are the ſame in Effect as 4 8, and B L and LI, as æI, and therefore, by Subſtituting one Inſtead of the other, 4G and B G are ſuppos'd /to  L and L I, or the Sine of Incidence =to that of Reflection, or which is all one, it is ſo. becauſe it is ſupposd to be ſo. 5. 13. BUT Beſides the extreme Precariouſneſs oſ this Way of Reaſoning, it is likewiſc unhappy to it, that, when it is applyd to Philoſophy, there is not one Phænomenon in ſeveral, which might be Named, to which it Agrees, or which it Gives any Explanation of; Thus Dirt, Clay, Salt, Sand, Glaſs, Stone, Iron, Lead, Gold, and all Sorts of Fluids, have little or no Reſlection, that is, the Reflected Linc, if any, is much ſhorter than the Incident; On the other Hand, all Elaſtick Bodies, as Wool, made into an hard and conſiſtent Ball, Marble, &. if ſiruck with any Conſiderable Force upon a Reſiſting Body, Deſcribe a Reſlected Line much longer than the Incident, if with a more Faint and Weaker, the Reflected Line will be ſhorter; Add to this, that in the ſame Bodies, whether Elaſtick or not, their Reflected Force will be Greater, as their Bulks are Diminiſ'd and their Impulſe Increaſed, and a Small Piece of Marble or Lead, which is ſtruck with a Greater, will be more Reflected than a Larger, which is ſtruck with a Leſs; in all which Caſes, there is not one Inſtance, in which the Sine of Incidence is Equal to that of Reſection, ſince the Lines are not. . 14. Ir it be here Alledg'd, that theſe Inſtances are not any ways Concluſive againſt the foregoing Demonſtration, which Abſtracts ſfrom all other Qualities of Body, as Gravity, Figure, Elaſticity, &e. and only Retains that of a Mutual Reſiſtence upon Impulſe, and therefore, allowing for, what Effects ſuch Properties may have, that it is not certain, but this Theorem of the Angle of Incidence being Equal to the Angle of Reſlection may Univerſally obtain; We Anſwer, that we have already ſnewn, that, bare Impulſe and Reſiſtence only Conſiderd, the Demonſtration is both Falſe in it's Argument, and at the beſt Ends in a Suppoſition of what vas to be Proved; and ve now ſay, that to Confirm ſuch a Demonſtration, when there is no matter of Fact to Support it, by telling us of the Poſſibility, that other Properperties in Nature, which were not Conſider'd, may Cauſe a Deviarion from this general Rule, is no other than to Confeſs, that we do not know, what the Force and Impreſſions of thoſe Properties may be, nor which way they are Reconcileable ith the pretended Lavs of Reſlection; That is, a Demonſtration of the Laws of Reflection, in the Abſtract which is Falſe, is Endcavourd to be Juſtiſy'd by an Ignorance Acknovledg'd of the Cauſcs oſ that difference of Reflection, which is Obſerv'd in Exiſtence and Reallity. 5. 15. BUT to Evidence farther the Vanity of ſuch a Reſuge, ve ſhall Inquire, vhat Effects Gravity, or Elaſticity, may Probably have, to Diſturb the Reflection of Bodies ſo far, as the Reflected Line ſhould not be Equal to the Incident, if it would be ſo from mere Impulſe and Reſiſtence. It is therefore in the firſt Place certain, that Gravity cannot make in ſeveral Caſcs any Alteration, in the Real Reflection of Bodies, ſince Marble, which is Heavier than Water, is Reflected, whereas Water, which, in the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, is ſuppoſed to Conſiſt in the laſt Reſult of Hard and Solid Parts, is not to that Degree, altho' according to s. 13. the Ieſ't the Parts oſ a Solid and Hard Body are, other Things being Equal, the more they are Reſlected; It is alſo Plain in Experience, that if Fluids are not Admitred in the preſent Compariſon, that Dirt, Salt, Sand, and Glaſs, which arc alſo Lighter than Marble, Marble, have not ſo great a Reſection; If therefore theſe Bodies, Abſtractedly Conſiderd, would from Impulſe have Deſcribd Lines of Reflection Equal to the Incident, Gravity would not be any Obſtruction to ſuch a Deſcription. S. 16. ON the Contrary, Elaſticity does not Cauſe ſuch an Alteration in other ;ſæſ7 il Bodies, as ſould hinder the Line of Incidence, from being Equal to that of Reſiection, Enlſci/ m if it were Originally ſo, ſince Lead, or Gold, &. which has little or no Elaſticity, and œ⸗s dot: not. therefore cannot be any ways Interrupted in it's Reflection by it, does not Obſerve this La. franm⸗ S5. 17. LastLy, if it is ſaid, that Elaſticity in the former Inſtances, and Gravity in hiibe Elithe latter, is the Cauſe, that this Law of Reflection does not obtain, which it wouq ciy i ihe Inhave from Impulſe and Reſiſtence; This will be Confuted from the ſame Heavy or flaneus of S Elaſtick Body Riſing to different Heights, according to the Velocity of the Impulſe, vi⸗ i int of as is Evident in 5. 135 For if 4, having the ſame Elaſtick or Gravitating Foree, b,25 Jæ.. vill Riſe Higher from  upon one Impulſe, than it will upon another, ſuppoſing ſxnr For both thoſe Forces are taken away, 4, if we Conſider only bare Impulſe, will Riſe ſi æ n knan Higher from one Impulſc than it will from anorher, and Conſequently will Fall of ibis Lan, if under the Confutation of §. 7, 8, 9, and 10. it is True. 5. 18. THAT we may not yet Reſign this Objection of Foreign Forces changing Arqumm ihe the Laws of Reflection without a particular Examination, we Perhaps may afterards ſſi, busiſ: Conſider, 1. what Effect Gravity wou'd have to Produce an Ahteration in Reflecti- ſrmi on, 2ã. hat coud be ſuppoſed to Proceed from Elaſticity3 And Thall at preſent Obſerve, inſ ihi Naur that if two new Forces, as Gravity, and Elaſticity, are made Uſe of to Explain, aã Roal BaReal Reflection, the Hypotheſis of Impulſe and Reſiſtence cannot do it; and that, if the ĩuſ⸗ mã æ.Doctrine of the Sine of the Angle of Incidence being æto the Sine of the Angle ſſin 2ùnu of Reſlection were True in the Theory, which we have ſhewn ũs not, yet it is far cauſ io Efrom being Truc in Nature, which in a Real Philoſophy we are only to Conſidet, ſain ir albeit it is made Uſe of in all Demonſtrations of it, as an Undoubred Axom. j S. 15. THAT However, which has led Philoſophers into this way of Thinking, Is thè Advtge, ches Appishenici ſuch a Propoſion woud æ ſo hen ĩn Con-ſi bum ſidering the Action of Light, and Laying tht Foundation of àa new Sciece in Deria ſim ticks s They thought Light might be Abſtracted from Gravity and Figure. nd the other —-n common Afections of Bodies, and therefore, whatever Was Demonſtrated apon ſuch æuld i oſ i Suppoſitions, would be true of it in General 3; We ſhall next then Examine into  oticau Mattet of Fadt, in Reſpect of the Refiection of Light, md See, whether ĩt Juſtifies Cartes. Rothis Abſtiratted Reaſon ing of Refleẽtion. which in it's own Principles we have E. Iai. H.ęe Vinced to be, at the vorſt, Falſę, and at the beſt, Precarious and Inconcluſive, as they sir ſ Nem 5 only an Aſfirmation of the very Thing, which is to be Provd, as is Explain'd in I2. lEEGE . 5. 20. ACCORDING to §. 12. if the Sines of the Angles of Incidence are Equal Intub- it to the Sines oſ the Angles of Reflection, the Incident and Rtflected Lines, or Forces, .— ani muſt be ſo likewiſe, and Reciprocally, neither of which, we ſhall Prove, Obtains in Risteſtin an the Reflections of Light. ] tit lem §. 21. THAT the Latter does not is Plain, ſince the Incident Line from the Sun æi to the Reflecting Body is Infinitely greater than the Reflected Line, and even in Ob4, æ v jects, which are near us, the Images of them are ſometimes preſented to us at a much ſnqiem ini Ieſs Diſtance by Refiection, than that of thoſt Objects from the Reflecting Surface, Rosustion ror upon which the Rays are Incident; Either therefore in both Caſes the Rays f Ferimni : Light are Equal in their Incident; and Reflected Force, or not; If they are, as the Light oprc. of the Sun is Derivd from it ſeveral Millions of Miles to the Reſlecting Surface, it ought to bè Reſlected as many Millions of Miles from it, and the Brightneſ of Burniſht Gold would be as Viſible at that Interval, as at a nearer, which is not Experienced; Likeviſe, as the Satellites of Jupirer, and the Phaſcs of Venus, are Diſcernd from a Coatoptrick Teleſcope at a ſmall Diſtance from it, they ought rather to be ſeen as far from ſuch a Teleſcope, as the Satellites of Jupiter, or the Phaſes of Venus, are Removd from the Refiecting Poliſi, and not at ſo ſhort a Diſtance, ſince the Rays falling in a mannet Parallel, and Perpendicilar, ſould be Reflected with the ſame Direction, with which they were Incident, and Conſequently would cither Aſſemble into no Focus at all, or at an Infinite Remove from their being Reflected; And laſtly, as com- common Objects are Perceivd by Reflection from a Glaſs, the Reflected Rays ought to be as Strong and Lively at the Diſtance of the Object, which Cauſes the Reflection, as when we are nearer the Reſlecting Surface; whereas in the firſt Caſe the Light is exceedingly Diminiſt, and the Object grows Obſcure, and ſcarcely to be Diſcern'd, altho' in the Iant, it is ſufficiently Diſtint and Vivid3 On the other Hand, If the Forces of the Incident and Refiected Lines are not Equal, the Sines or Angles of Incidence and Reflection will not be Equal, according to §. 12, 20. . 22. Nor does the former, according to the Diſtinction we made in §. 20. Univerſally obtain in Light, by any Thing we can Experience; ſince it is Manifeſt, that we ſee Colours Produced by the Rays of the Sun, thro a Priſm, at alll Angles of Reſlection, tho it is Impoſſible, in the ſame Poſition of the Priſm and the Wall, on vhich the Colours are Projected, that they ſould Fall in all Angles of Incidence; And the ſame may be Aſfirm'd of Colours in General, i? we allow they Proceed from the Appulſe of the Direct Rays of the Sun to the Colourd Body, and from thence are Reſlected to the Eye, which ſeems to be the Opinion and Sentiment of the preſent Philoſophy; For in either of theſe Caſcs we may as vell Aſſert that the Incidence 4 B ſnall Cauſe a Reflection to õ, D, E, F, and at the ſame time Produce no Variation in the Angle oſ Reflection, as Imagine that Colours can be Determin'd to every Part from a like Incidence, if the Angle of Reflection is always Equal to the Angle of Incidence, as this Doctrine ſuppoſcs, ſecing the Coloured Image, or Body, as B, may be equally ſeen at q, D, E and F. 5. 23. BESIDES Which even in the Reflections of Catoptrick Glaſſes, or Poliſt Marbles, &. if the Images, preſented to us from them, are an Argument, that Light is Rebounded in the ſame Angle, as it Falls, in Opake and Colour'd and White Bodies, where no ſuch Images are offerd to us, and Light is Acknowledg'd to be Reflected, it will be a Proof, that Light is not Return'd in the ſame Angle, in which it Falls; For if it be ſaid, that all the Rays are Reflected in one Caſe, and in the other ſeveral are Loſt and Abſorpt by certain Imaginary Pores, ſuch an Objection depends upon the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, which we have already Conſiderd and Refuted, Part 2d. Chapter of Light and Colours. Or if it was allow'd, an Interruption of the Homogeneous Matter, by the Intervening Pores, could only Cauſe an Interruption, or ſeveral Breaks, in the Features and Lineaments of the Image, if there was nothing more to be Conſiderd, than the Refiection, or the Rebound, of Light in Angles Equal to its Incidence, and the Capacity of Reflecting that Light in the Oppoſite Body, to Determine, what Subſtances are Reflexive of Images, and what are Opake, and Colourd; From whence it is Evident, that there is ſomething more, which this Philoſophy does not Explain, and which is Requiſite to the Underſtanding the Various Reflections of Light, and the Laws of them. S. 24. HOWEVER, if We Grant, according to the Suppoſition of &. 23. that Light is Incident in the ſame Angle, with which it is Reflected in Bodies Reflexive of Images, which yet is not True from §. 21. and vill likewiſe Allow, according to S. 22. that Light, which is Incident on Colour'd Bodies is not, it will no ways Appear, that the Angle of Incidence and Reſlection being Equal, is a general Property of  Light, but on the Contrary, that it Varies according to the Bodies, on which it Impinges; The Cauſes of which no Philoſophy has hitherto Aſſign'd: From all which it will follow, that the Angle of Incidence being Equal to the Angle of Refſiection, is no more a Property in Nature, than it's being Ten times Leſs or Bigger, and therefore is deſervedly to be Rejected from a true Philoſophy, as Groundleſs and not Anſwerable to the full Extent of Being, or Scarcely to any Part of it. ON the other Hand, if we Conſider all Bodies, as differing Faſciculi, Aſſemblages or Congeries of Actions, or of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, ve may eaſily Conceive, how Light may be Reflected from them in a Thouſand Varieties, accord ing to the Varions Forces, on which the Light is Incident, and it's Various Repul ſion from them C H AP C H AP. II Concerning Sir lſaac Newton's Hypotheſis of Reſlettion from Impulſe and Attraſtion. s. I. E Have in the Preceding Chapter endeavourd to ſhew, that the Angle of Incidence being Equal to the Angle of Reflection, or on the Contrary, is not an Eſtabliſnt Law in any part of Nature, nor even in the Rays of Light, and that i? we Conſider it only, as an Abſtracted Reaſoning, it is Deſicient, and Wants a farther Explanation; Since this Opinion notwithſtanding has ſo far Prevail'd, as to Drav into it's Patronage another Way and Method of Arguing, ve ſhall farther Conſider it likewiſe, ſo as nothing may be Omitted, which ſhall ſeem Material in the preſent Argument. 5. 2. THE Nev and very Ingenious Hypotheſis, for Solving the ſupposd Equality of the Angle of Incidence and Reſlection in Light, is Founded upon a Conjunction of two Forces, Attraction and Impulſe, whereas the former Hypotheſis had only Conſiderd the laſt of them, and a bare Reſiſtence to it; If therefore this, which ve are at Preſent to Examine into, is True, the other cannot but fall ſhort of that, vhich it pretends to Demonſtrate, becauſe to Forces will be Requir'd, whenas That had only Aſſumed one; If it is not True, ſince it muſt be yet own'd to be Intro duc'd upon a more Rational and Accurate Inquiry than the other was, it will follow, that if this Hypotheſis is not Juſt, the Preceding, which beſides has been already Confuted, is much leſs ſo. S. 3. THE Hypotheſis is, that if a Uniform Perpendicular Attraction from D ã tovards 4 a, that is, from a Rarer towards a Denſer Medium, is ſuppos'd, of any Body paſſing thro' the Space Intercepted by the Planes 4 4, and Dã, and it is at the ſame time Impell'd in the Line GH, Granting likewiſe, that the Motion before Incidence ĩs ſwifter than it is after, The Body, by the Line of Incidence being Inclind, ill be at length Reſlected, G ẽ and the Angle of Reflection will become Equal to that of Incidence; y h For by the Doctrine of Refraction, : - a which this Philoſophy had before 4VIl]i- b Explain'd, and we ſhall at preſent  ———— ſuppoſe True, H R is a Parabolick  E u a Curve made by the Perpendicular E c Attraction from the Plane Dã towards the Plane 4 a, and the Incident Force G à. Let thereſore now the Obliquity of the Line of Incidence GH to the firſt Plane 4 a4 be ſuch, that the Sine of Incidence may be to the Radius of the Circle, of which it is the Sine, in the ſame Proportion, as it is to the Sine of Emergence out of the Plane D4, into the Space Dã, Ee, hich Sine of Emergence will Conſequently be equal to the Radius oſ the Circle and the Line oſ Emergence Coincide with the Plane D à; but the Body or Light Impell'd cannot Proceed according to the Direction of that Plane, becauſe it is Attracted in a Perpendicular to the Medium of it's Primary Incidence, that is, to the Plane A a; nor is it Poſſble for it to Emerge into the Space or Medium Ee, becauſe the Sine of Emergence is in the Line or Plane D ã; It muſt therefore be Reſlected back to ? and h, and Deſcribe in it's Return the ſame Portion of a Parabola, as it did before in it's Deſcent, ſceing the Laws and Conditions of Motion are the ſame in the one Caſe, as in the other; And as this Demonſtration ſuppoſes the Attraction, and Impulſe, to Act Uniformly, according to a certain and ſtated Rule, ſo if that is Varyd, and the Planes 4 a, Bb, &e. Approach Infinitely near to each other, the ſame Proof Extends to all Caſcs, that can be Aſſign'd of different Impulſes and Attractions in the ſeveral Spaces contaid within the foremention'd Planes, whilſt the Infinite Diminution of the Intervals of the Planes, and the Infinite Increaſe of the Numbei of them, renders the Action of the Impulſc and Attraction Imperceptibly different, and Reduces it to one and the ſame Lav, and Conſequently the Angle of Emerence gh a will be Equal to the Angle of Incidence G H 4. O o o 5. 4. THI S. 4. THis Hypotheſis of Reſlection is, the, more Eſtcemd and Applauded, as it is Thought to Solve Refraction upon the ſame Principles; but when we Conſider the whole, and Obſerve, that tho' Impulſe and Attraction are the Terms made Uſe of, yet that in Reality there are ſeveral other Foreign Suppoſitions Introduced to make this Doctrine Conſiſtent, it will not perhaps appear, that Reſraction and Reſlection are Accounted for from the ſame, or like, Cauſcs by this Hypotheſis. 6. 5. FORr at preſent Allowing the Refraction to be in a Parabola, which we ſnall aſtervards Conſider, ſince the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to the Sine of the Angle of Emergence in a given Reaſon, for Inſtance, as æ to b, Either in the ſupposũ Inclination and Obliquity of GH to the Plane 4 a, in which the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to have the ſame Proportion to that of Emergence, as it has to the Radius of the Circle, of which it is the Sine, the Reaſon of 4 to b is Preſerv'd, or not; If it is not, there is a new Suppoſition, and the ſame Hypotheſis does not Solve Reſlection and Refraction, but another Arbitrary one is Introduced, which does not depend, nor has any Connection vith the Laws or Doctrine of Reſtaction, excepting that Impulſe and Attraction are made Uſe of, in both Caſes, but with different Rules and Appointments of their Actions; IF the Reaſon given is Preſcrvd in this Suppoſition, then the Sine of the Angle oſf Incidence will be either Leſs, or Greater, or Equal, to the Sine of Emergence, which is ſupposd the ſame with the Radius; If it is Equal, that is, i æ4 and b are ſo, there can be no Refraction to or from rhe Perpendicular, vhich is the Problem to be Solv'd in Refſraction; Iſ it is Greater, the Sine of the Angle of Incidence will be Greater than the Radius, of which it is the Sine, which is Impoſſible; If it is Leſs than the Sine oſ Emergence, it will only explain the Proportion of Reſractions from the Perpendicular, and not thoſe, vhich àre made to it, whereas it ought to Account for the one, as well as the other, for the ſame Reaſon, as it Endeavours to Unite Reſlection under the ſame Cauſe vith that of Refraction. 5. 6. BuT What is ſtill farther Conſiderable in this Hypotheſis is, that it ſuppoſes the Sine of Emergence=to the Radius, and then Concludes, that the Body Impell'd will not Emerge to Ee; for to make the Sine of Emergence Equal to the Radius, is the ſame, as to Place the Body Impell'd on the Planc D àZ by an Arbitrary Hand, and vithout any Direction or Determination from the Nature or Laws of Refraction; For if any Meaſure or Rule of Refraction was Obſerv'd in the preſent Caſe, according to 5. 5. there would an Abſurdity follow, which is, in General, that a Sine of Refraction, which is always Leſs than the Radius in any Incidence or Angle of Obliquity, voud yet be Equal to it. 5. 7. Ir the Line of Incidence is Imagind to be Infinitely Oblique to the Plane D ã, or its Parallel 4, vhen the Sine of Emergence Coincides with it, this will be nothing more than conſidering a Body Impell'd, according to the Preſcription of one Uniform and ſtrait Line, which what it will Signify to the Explaining Reflection upon the ſame Hypotheſis with that of Reſraction, will be hard to Comprehend; It there is ſomething more Intended, than what we have Mentiond, it is this, that tho' ve ſuppoſe an Inſinite Obliquity oſ Incidence, the Sine of it will yet Preſerve the ſame Reaſon and Proportion to the Sine of Emergence as before; Becauſe the Sines of Incidence are to thoſe of Emergence in a given Ratio; If ſo, the Sine of an Infinite Obliquity will be either=to the Sine of the Emergence, or greater, or leſ, and vill fall under the Conſutation of the ſeveral Caſcs Alledgd in §. 5. We may alſo further ſay, that, in an Infinite Obliquity, the Radius is always ſupposd to be the Sine of the Angle oſ Incidence, and therefore æ will be to b in a Reaſon of Equality, tho' on the Contrary, in Refraction, it is ſaid to be in a Reaſon of Inequality. S. 8. HOWEVER, that this Infinite Obliquity can be of no Service in the preſent Caſ is Manifeſt, ſince if ve allow, by ſuch a Suppoſition, that the Body Impell'd is Arrivd at æ, and cannot Proceed any farther than Dã, to Effe&t which this Hypotheſis is Introduced, yet ſeeing, according to the preſent way of Reaſoning, it is to Riſe, by means of the Perpendicular Attraction, in a Parabola as æ I p h, it muſt likeviſe Deſcend in one, or otherwiſe, the Angle of Incidence will not be Equal to that oſ Reſlection, which is the very Propoſition intended to be Prov'd; But if the Parabola of Deſcent has the ſame Inclination to the Plane of D ã with the oihæ we have Namd, either GH P LR will be Infinitely Inclid to the Plane D à, and Conſequently ”I p h, that is, the Force of Attraction, which is ſupposd to Raiſe the Body Impeſ'd from the Plane D4ã, will not be able to do it, or if it is, and the Body Impelld is Attracted to h for Example, the Deſcending Parabola GH P QR vill be likewiſc in an equal Obliquity to the aforeſaid Plane, contrary to the Suppoſition of it's being Infinitely Inclind to it. 5- 9. WE cannot alſo but take Notice of another Suppoſition, which is directly miturſContrary to what is made Uſe of for the Solving of Reſraction; Namely, whereas the soœi; æAuraction draws the Body Impelld upwards, Which is moving downvards by Sup- ſeiui in iha poſition in Accounting for Refraction, in Giving a Solution of Reflection, it is Con- ſrtnbit: ceivd to Act the ſame way likewiſe, but then the Body is ſupposd to be Aſcend- Aturã. ing; For ifit is not ſuppos'd to Aſcend, it ſeems Impoſſible for the Attractive Force to Dravthe Impellent from ? upwards, which could not hinder it from Arriving downwards to it; Upon which we ſhall only Obſerve, that, in an Abſtracted Hypotheſis, as this of Reflection and Refraction, i? Philoſophy has a Liberty to make as many Arbitrary Forces, Acting in as many Different Determinations, as the Effects, it voud Solve, Require, it is no more, than Explaining thoſe Effects by themſelves; Thus, if, when wve vou'd Explain, what Reflection is, we take a Force, which ſhall Impel a Body downwards, and then Another, which ſhall Strike it upvards in an Abſtracted Hypotheſiss, What is it more than to Adapt and Contrive our Suppoſitions at Pleaſure, according as we ſhall find there is Occaſion for them, from the Effects we Conſider, without Giving us any Truer a Knowledge of Nature, than we had before? Since by the ſame Methods we may Explain any Thing, that is, by ſuppoſing the very Thing to be Explain'd. 5. 10. AND This, beſides what has been ſaid, is Evidently done in the preſent Hy- If ihis Hy;potheſis, for ſuppoſing GH by Impulſe to fall upon 44, and from thence to Deſ- ſam cend in a Parabola to æ, there muſt cither be a New Impulſe at æ towards F h, and ſræãin æ: Conſequently, a freſ Suppoſition Introduced contrary to the Former, or elſe it muſt nu iiæ be a Continuation of the ſame Impulſc from G H, and Turn'd and Diverted by the n x5 Action in A a, towards Fh, for by mere Attraction the ſame Parabola, as æ h, can- celeſi than ilnot be Deſcrib'd, which was before by Attraction and Impulſe together, in H”; If ſideme. it is a Continuation of the Impulſe, the Velocity of the Impulſe from H to æ, vill be either Greater, or at leaſt Equal, to that from R to h; If it is Greater, the Attraction æ F being ſuppos'd to be the ſame in  and h tovards A a, æ h will be leſs than æ H, and Conſequently F æh the Angle of Refledtion leſs than H R F, the Angle of Incidence; If it is Equal, the Attraction at h will have a greater Force, where it Conſpires with the ſame Velocity of Impulſe, than at , vhere it Oppoſes it, and æ ſ will be Greater than QL, which again will make F Rh the Angle of Refiection leſs than HR F the Angle of Incidence. 5. 11. WHEN farther, in this Hypotheſis, the Rays are Tranſmitted thro' the Glaſs, The Vibrain and afterwards Attracted back to it, in order to Produce Reflection, it will be Dif- ſ ſn puedin ficult to ſay, how there ſhould ever be any Reſraction Produced at all; but this it gdon ma ſcems is done by the Vibration of the Medium, which, when it Concurrs with the Reſaction Incident Rays, Refraction is Produced by carrying them off from the Influence of ramim; u the Glaſs, when it Meets or Oppoſcs the Progreſs of the Rays in it's Vibration, Si\ I. New Reſection is; But in the Firſt Place, this Vibration of the Medium is not True, un- &iesIeſs a Stagnant Fluid, as the Airor Ather, is Naturally a Pendulous Subſtance, which no Fis of eaſũ; Philoſophy, but the preſent Celebrated one of Pendulums, has Aſſerted; Second, it is not Reſetion æ Conceivable, how the Pulſe and Repulſe of the Air or æther, allowing of it, ſould  ſrusiim have a Force to Rebound the Rays of Light, if Glaſs its ſelf, by it's Solidity and Prop. 1a Atrraction, cannot do it. 2 5. 12. ANOTHER Suppoſition in this Reaſoning is, that in the Formation of the pimæ: Semi-Parabolas H ? R, and R ph, the contrary Directions of the Impulſe will ſæ æ.n Produce the ſame Figure, which it ſeems Impoſſibſe, that they ſould; For if H M, tuhii c PO, ”L, are ſeverally Expreſſed in the Abſciſs of the Parabola  æ, they will be as pacle oa Dy 5. 3. I. according to the Laws of Attraction, or Gravitation, that is, as the Differen- ſ,  u: ces of the Squares of a Series of Numbers in a Simple Arithmetical Progre ſſion, ſuppoſing æ to be the Vertex of the Semi-Parabola H æ F, and therefore the Attraction O o o2 in in the Return of the Body Impell'd, Obſerving the ſame Law, as before, but being Aſſiſted by Impulſe, whereas before it was Retarded by it, s h, 7ꝓ, u l, will be alterd in their Proportion to the former; from Whence it will follow, that if the Vertex of the Semi- Parabola F ? H is Fixt and Determin'd in æ, in Reſlection it will ceaſe to be a Parabola, as it vould Produce a Curve nearer to F æ than æ h the ſupposd Parabola, which would be far from proveing the Angle of Reſlection Equal to that ol Incidence. S. 13. LastLy, it is ſuppos'd, that to Produce Reflection, there muſt be a Progreſ; of the Body Impell'd beyond the Medium, which Reflects, and that the Refraction of it is Neceſſary and Previous to it's Reflection; which is ſo Extraordinary, not to ſay, ſo Extravagant an Opinion, that nothing but the Authority of the Philoſophy, which Propoſcs it, coud Support it; for if Refraction is Neceſſary to Reſlection, ſince the Lav of Reſraction is, that the Sines of Incidence, and it, ſhould be as æ to b, and thoſe of Incidence and Reſlection, as æ to 4, it vill be Requiſite, that æ ould have it's Deſinite and Certain Reaſon of Inequality to b, that 4 may have it's own or a Proportion oſ Equality to a, than which nothing can be more Contradictory; Eeſides that the Progreſs oſ the Body Impell'd is beyond that which Reflects it, there are not any Inſiances in Nature to Juſtiſy it. or to Shew, that if Light, for Example: Falls upon a Denſer Medium, it ought to Paſs thro' it, and be Reſlected from a Rarer. 5. 14. BuT granting all theſe Suppoſitions, vhich are yet calld by the Name oſ one ſingle Hypotheſis, there is not any of them, as they are Inſufficient in an Abſtracted Reaſoning, but what are equally Deſective, when Applyd to External Being; It is Evident in the ſirſt Suppoſition, where the Line of Incidence is ſupposd to be Inſinitely Oblique to the Reſlecting Surface, ſince not only in common Bodies, but in Light alſo, the Rebound is made in all Angles of Incidence, excepting where the Incidence is Inſinitely Oblique, which in ſuch a Caſe is Propagated in a direct Line, and therefore all Catoptrick Reſlections, as well as all Refiections of other Bodies, are a Confutation of the Hypotheſis of an Infinite Obliquity. S. 15. Ir is alſo Manifeſt in the ſecond Suppoſition, that ſuch an Hypotheſis cannot be Agrecable to the real Attractions of Bodies, becauſe if Glaſs, for Inſtance, was the Medium Attractive of the Rays of Light, let 4 B Repreſent a Cube, of which it is the middle Plane, ſo that half the Side of 4 C, Rais'd Perpendicularly from the Surface of the Paper I now Write on, ſhould be one half of the Depth of it, if ſuch a Cube Attracted the Rays of Light Perpendicularly from B to , or E to F, orG to L, &e. when they Emerge out of A L F C the Side D B, according to the preſent Doctrine of Reſlection, the ſame Light, the Conditions of the Body being the ſame, ſnould be Equally Attracted from C to B, F to E, L to G, &e. upon it's Emergence out of the Side 4C; from whence would Reſult this Affcction of the Gla Cube, cither that the Forces of Attraction towards D B and Retraction tovards 4 , would be EE  G E B qually Pois'd, and there would be no Attraction or Retraction of Light at all, vhich would wholly Deſtroy the preſent Hypotheſis, Since there would be no more Force to Raiſe the Light in Reflection, than what would be Equal to Depreſs it; or elſe that there would be a Parabola Deſcribed upon the Side 4 C;, as well as upon that of D, which would be alike Inconvenient to this Hypotheſis; Not to mention, that Light takes no ſuch Courſe in Fact, and Experience, as to be Trajected thro' the Cube, and from D B to Form a Parabola, then again to be Trajected and to Form another upon 4C; Nor yet farther to mention, that all this Doctrine ſeems to be form'd upon that of Projectiles, which by Impulſe and by their Proper Gravitation to the Earth are ſaid to Deſcribe a Parabola, to which the Rays of Light by their Projectile Force and their Attraction to the Glaſs, Appear to be made Analogous; vhereas we ſhall Prove in Examining into the Hypotheſis of Refraction, that there is no ſuch Analogy. 5. 16. Ir is ſarther as certain, that the third Hypotheſis is not Equal to the Nature oſ Things; Namely, that there is a Penetration of the Rays of Light in Particular into a Denſer Medium, as Glaſs or Water, and a Procceding from thence into a Rarer, beſore they are Reſlected; If there was, there could be no Reſlection from the Surfaces ſfaces of theſe Bodies, which it is Plain there is, ſince i? we make Plates of Glaſs 18 Thin, as we can Poſſibly Imagine, and hinder the Rays of Light from being Tranſmitted, by Quick- Silver laid behind it, or by any other Method, there will be a Refieũion, where it is Impoſſible there ſould be a Parabola; And on the orther Hand, where the Plates of Glaſs are Tranſparent, ſo that the Parabola may be Formd, there is a much leſs Senſible Refiection. ꝗ. 17. BUT What is ſtill more to be Objected againſt the Compliance of this laſnt Hypotheſis with Nature, is, that it can no vays Account for the Refiections of Light from common Bodies, as Marble or Steel, in which it is Apparent, that the Light does not Enter into the Bodies, from which it Rebounds; Beſides which nothing can be more certain than that a Ball of Wool, or any other Elaſtick Body, docs not Penetrate into the Pavement, from which it is Reflected, whereas if this was a true Hypotheſis for the Solution of Reflection, it ſhould give us a juſt Reaſon of theſc Phænomenons, as vell as thoſc of Light; Becauſe there is no more Pretence to Exact the Cauſe oſ Reflection to what we Experience in Light, than to what we Experience in Groſler Bodies, nor to make the Reflections of the one or the other to Proceed ſrom a diſferent Force, than Reflections and Refractions in General, hich are Endeavourd, by this Hypotheſis, to be Brought and United under one Reaſon oſ theirt Appearance, or of their being Phænomenons in Nature. C H A P. III Concerning Dr. Wallis's Hypotheſis of Reflection from Impulſe and Elaſicity. 5. 1. HE RE is another Hypotheſis Remaining, which Appears to be the moſ Rational of any we have yet met ith, for the Solution of Bodies being in General Reflected with the ſame Angle, with which they Fell, which is divided into two Propoſitions; The firt of them is, that if a Heavy Body Impinges in a ſtrait Linc upon one that is Fixt and Unmovd, and either or both are Elaſtick, the Body, which Impinges, vill Recoil with the ſame Celerity and Direction, with which it Imi nged. p 5 2. To Prove this Propoſition, one Caſe is firſt Conſidered, that is, where the Elaſtick Force is ſuppos'd to be in the Body, which Repells; Thus let 4 be the Body, which is carry'd with the Celerity  C againſt an Oppoſite and Elaſtick Obſtacle BEC, and let the B Weight of it be m P, therefore the whole Moment A vill be it's Celerity Multiplyd by it's Weight, or D m PrC, with which it Falls upon æ; where it meets vith the Reſiſtence B E C, which by the Force of the Impellent is Preſs'd Inwards to BDC, till the Reaction in BD C becomes Equal to the whole Compreſſion from the Incurring Body; but the Reſiſence in B E C is Equal to the Moment in 4, or m PrC, therefore the Reaction in 2 DC in it's Counterpoiſe to the Preſſure, which lies againſt it, is Equal to 2m PrC; fſarther, ſince the whole Moment of 4 is loſt aſter the Compreſſion of BEC to 3DC, BDC, as it is Thought, muſt neceſſarily Recoil with the Force oſ 2mPrC, onc half of which it ſpends in Reſtoring it's ſelf to B E C, and vith the other it Reſults upon the Impellent, and Strikes it back to 4 with the ſame Celerity, vith which it was Incident; And if the ſame Conditions are Obſerv'd in 4, as arc here ſuppos'd to be in B EC, or if they are Preſumd in both, the Demonſtration vill be the ſame. S. 3. IN Anſwer to this Prooſ we ſnall firt ſay, that as the former Hypotheſis, vhich we have Conſidered, ſeems to be Calculated for the Doctrine of Opticks, and does not any vays Agree with the Phænomenons of orther Bodies, ſo this on the Contrary is drawn ſrom a Conſideration of Hard and Reſilient Bodies, and cannot be vell Applyd to the Reſlections of Light, unleſs upon the Suppoſition, that Light is at leat a Solid and Hard Subſtance, if not Elaſtick, which as few will be willing 10 Allov, ſo it cannot be Prov'd, but upon the Preſumption of the Truth of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, againt which ſeveral Arguments have been already Pro duced. s. 4. And . 4. AD for the ſame Reaſon it is, ve cannot Acquieſce in this Demonſtration, vhere the Weight of the Body m P Enters into it; ſince the Moment oſ the whole n Pr C is Computed ſrom Multiplying the Celerity into the Weight, and Conſequenty making Matter Proportional to it; a Poſition, which we have in the firſt Part of heſe preſent Principles Examin'd into, and given thoſe Realons, which then Occurr'd, why it could not in General be Affirm'd. 5. 5. NOTWITHSTANDING, Granting the Hypotheſis of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, and the Equal Proportion of Weight to Matter, ve are not ready to Acknovledge, till it is Evidenced, that in all Reflections, which are made, there is a Change of Figure, eithcr in the Body, which Compreſſes, or which is Compreſſed; for if, to make this Demonſtration certain, iĩt is Neceſſary, that B E C ſhould Retire to B DC, it vill Exceed an Ordinary Comprehenſion, how the Small and Tender Rays of Light ſould cauſe any ſuch Impreſſion on the Rigid and Obſtinate Surfaces of Glaſs or Steel; or, on the other Hand, how thoſe Rays ſould be alter'd in the Fizure of their Parts, which vill have enough to do, to make us Believe, they have any Determin'd or Figur'd ones. 5. 6. BESIDES even in the common Reſlections of Bodies, ĩt ĩs not to be Imaginã, that the change of Figure Inwards any ways Contributes to their Reflection; ſince any Inſtances, hich may be made uſe of to prove it, ſfrom the Senſible Jarring oſ Metals or Glaſi, do Evince the Contrary; Namely, that the Elaſtick Force Exerts it's ſclf outwards, and inſtead jof being Compreſcd to D, as this Doctrine ſuppoſcs, and then Recoiling to it's former Situation in E, Rebounds from æ to F, and from thence Retires to æ, from whence it Rebounded. 5. 7. AND, that this is more Probable, is Evident, iſ we Conſider, that this Preſſure from æ to D is Impoſſible, according to the preſent Account of it; for the Reſiſtence in the Obſtacle  C is ſuppos'd Equal to the Force of Impulſce in 4, that is, to m PrC; but if m PrC is Reſiſted by m Pr C, what can we Conclude, unleſs that their Forces will be in an Equal Balance, and that 4 will be Quieſcent in the Point E, and not Proceed to D as is Preſumd? If the Reſiſtence in the Obſtacle is Leſs than 4, or m Pr q; the Action of 4, or m Pr C, together with that Action, which Accrues to 4 from the leſs Reſiſtence of the Obſtacle will not Produce a Force of Elaſticity Equal to 2 m P r C, which on the other hand is likewiſe ſuppos'd, Excepting m Pr CH x an unknown Quantity is Equal to 2m PrC. S. 8. FARTHER, the Suppoſition of Reſiſtence in the Obſtacle  EC being Equal to the vhole Moment of 4, the Incurring Body, ſeems to be without any Foundation; ſince the Proper and Innate Force of Reſiſting, vhich any Body has, muſt be Fixt and Determin'd, and cannot Change or Alter it's Degree of Recourſe to the Impellent, unleſs by Adding a new Property to Matter, which has not been yet Explaind, that is, that it is more or leſs Active according to the greater or leſs Force of Bodies, which Act upon it; But, if in the Notions of the preſent Philoſophy Matter is Immutable and Homogeneous, and has one certain Power of Reſiſting ſince the Impulſe upon it may be Infinitely Varyd, Reſiſtence cannot in all Caſcs and only in one, be Equal and Commenſurate to them. 5. 9. BuT if We ſhould Allow, what we have hitherto Endeavourd to Diſprove, that B E C by the Force of the Impelling Body may be Preſi'd Inwards to DC that the Reſiſtience is Suitable to the Impulſe, and that the Force at D is Conſequently Equal to 2 m Prq; it will not follow from thence, that the Elaſtick Force is then in an Equal Poiſe with the Compreſſion; unleſs, vhatever the Moment is ol any Body, half the Elaſtick Force, or m Prc, is always Equal to it, which, as before in Reſiſience, ſo in Elaſticity likewiſe, is to make a Certain and Determind Degree oſ Elaſticity vary in Proportion to the Impulſe or Preſſure upon ĩt; Which yet, ĩ True, any Body which is Elaſtick, the more it is Preſſed, the more would be it's Re nitency, and the leſs it is Preſſed, the Repreſſure vould be ſtill Proportionably ſo; from whence it would follow, that either there would be an Equal Poiſe betwixi them at firſt, or not all; if at firſt, there is no Occaſion, that æ ſould Retire to D till there is an Equal Balance, which this Demonſtration ſuppoſes, ſince there would be that in æ; if there is no Equal Balance at all, then D C in it's Elaſtick Forcc vill not be Equal to 2 m Pr, hich is alſo Neceſſary in the preſent way of De monſtrating.  σ. THi 5. 10. THE Truth of the whole is this, that Elaſticity in any Body ĩs a Certain and Definite Force, which may Exceed or be Exceeded by that of the Impellent Body, and which therefore cannot be alvays Anſierable or Proportional to the Moment m PrC, vhich is Impreſ'd; for if it could, the Repreſſure of Wool, for Inſtance, or of any other Body, which is Elaſtick, would Increaſe it's Force of Elaſticity, according to the Weight which Oppreſſes it, when yet we find the Contrary in all Fact and Experience. 5. 1I. WHAT yet is ſtill more, if the Force of Elaſticity in D C vas Equal to 2mP rq, Equal or Proportional to the Preſſure, it would be Impoſſible to Reſiore it's ſelf to E from D, excepting upon the Suppoſition, that  had loſt it's whole Moment by Impinging upon the Reſiſtence BE C, which is Equal to it; if it had loſ it's whole Force at E, B E C could not be Preſſed to D, if it had not, till it came to D, the Reſiſtence at Z was not Equal to the Moment in 4, becauſe the Moment in 4 would be Superior to it. S. 12. MorEOVER, how both Reſiſtence and Elaſticity ſiould be Equal to Preſſure or Impulſe, which this Demonſtration Suppoſcs, excepting Reſiſience and Elaſticity are the ſame Affections of Marter, which the preſent Philoſophy does not AcknowIedge, will be Diſficult to Apprehend, and much more to Demonſtrate, the firſt being only a Flat and Dead Force, and the other a Reactive. 5. 13. SHOULD We farther Suppoſe, that 4 had Ioſt it's Whole Moment at D, that the Reſiſtence at æ is Equal to that Moment, and that the Elaſticity in  D C is Equal to 2 m PrC, what vould Neceſſarily follow from theſe ſeveral Suppoſitions is only this, that m Pr C, or half of 2 mPr C. vould be Communicated to 4, vhich had Ioſt i's Moment at D, and that the other Part would be Communicated to the Reſiſtence of  EC; which Iikewiſe would cither be Ioſt or not; if the Reſiſtence is ſuppos'd to be loſt at D, as that of the Impellent Body is, it ought to be Reflected with the ſame Degree of Force as 4, ànd by Conſcquence the Obſtacle B æc vill fiy off from D with the ſame Celerity, and will reach the Point 4 at the ſame time vith the Impeſlent; if the Force of Reſiſtence is not Ioſt, then having the Re fittence ot Force of m P ?C tovards 4, and being Aſſiſted or United with an Equ one from the Elaſticity of DC, it vill have adouble Force, and ecither Deſcribe in is Return double the Line of D4, or at leaſt, if there is any other Imaginary Opſtocle hinders at 2 and C, Proceed to F, which is Contrary to what is at preſeni Affirm'd. S. 14. LastLY, as the Force of the Impellent 4 Conſiſts of it's Pondus and Ce Ierity, tho' m Pr C ſiould be Communicated from the Elaſtick Body to it at its Re turn, eĩher the whole Moment of 4 is loſt before ſuch a Communication, and Conſcquently its Weight, or not; If its Weight, or m?, is as well as it's Cele rity, it is contrary to what is both Supposd in this Philoſophy, and is Experienced in Nature; If it is not, the Force upon Reſection vill be mP æ m Pr C, and therefore the Celerity will be leſs in Reflection, than it was in the Incidence, which this Propoſition endeavours to Prove Equal. §. 15. To Conclude upon this Theory of Reſlection, we do not deny, but Bodie: may Rebound, or be Reflected, in the ſame Angle, with which they are Incident; we yet deny, that in Philoſophy, and in ãà Real Science of Nature, it is any more a Pro perty of Bodies, or of Light, than that the Angle of Incidence is 10 times Bigger ol Eeſs than that of Reflection, and that the Abſtracted Reaſonings to Prove the for mer are Valid, or can any ways Aſſiſt us in Accounting for the Phænomenons oi Appearancos of External Being. 5. 16. As to what Concerns the Second PropoGition in this Hypotheſis of an Oblique Incidence (a© Direct being beſore only Conſidered] Producing an A/ c Equal Angle of Reſlection, ſince the Incident and eſlected Lines 4 8, and æę, are Reſolv}d into the two Components, 4 D and D B, on thit one Hand, and BE and E C on the orlier, and the Conditions of rhe Direct Lines 4D and EC are the ſame vithi thoſe ꝑ we have already Examin'd, there is not any Thing more, which is Requiſite to be Conſidered in the preſciit Argument, unleſs the ComB E Compoſition of Forces, which has been done under another Head of Philoſophy. WEe ſnhall only therefore farther Obſerve, that if there are any Demonſtrable Proofs, cither in Mechanicks or Opticks, for the Equality oſ the Angle of Incidence and Reſlection, e are not at preſent Concernd to Anſwer them, Tince ve nov Inquire into the Principles of thoſe Sciences, which if they are Falſe or Precarious, the Deductions from them are ſo; and if any Plain Phænomenons are Urg'd againſt us, We Alledge they muſt be Accounted ſor another way, if the Fundamental Propoſitions, upon which they are Affirmd, are not True, that is, by our Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. S. 17. THE Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces will therefore Inform us, that all Bodics Conſiſt, and are made up, as vas ſaid before, of Various Aſſemblages and Congeries of Actions, which Actions are Ultimately Reſolv'd into the Forces now Mention'd; If, in Reſpect of Colours, a Black, Blue, or Purple, or any other of a Dark and Melancholy Aſpect are Conveigh'd to the Eye, it is a Sign, that the Light or Ether is ſo far from being Reſlected, that it is Contracted in Various Degrees ſfrom the Eye towards the Body; I a Red, Orange, or Yellow, or any other of a more Lively and Vivid Complexion, it is a Proof, that the Light or ther is Reſlected with Various Degrees of Force from the Different De. grees oſf the Expanſive of the Bodies, which Refiect ir, and that this is done in all Angles of Reſlection;3 Or rather the Light or ther is not Incident in ſtrait Lines or Rays upon the Bodies, from whence it is ſuppos'd to be Reflected, but Surrounds and Encompaſſes them, as Water, or any other Fluid, the Bodies, which are Immerſed in it ; And as Fire Communicates it's Impreſſions to the Ether about it, without any one's ever Imagining or ſuppoſing ſuch an Incidence or Reflection, ſo the ſeveral Bodies, which Exiſt in the ther, and are ſo many Various Kinds of Fire, Flame, or the Expanſive Force, differently Mixed and Loaded with the Contractive, Impart their Sundry Influences to the ſame Ambient Medium; On the other Hand, in Poliſicd, Tranſparent, and Uncolour'd Bodies, the Expanſive and Contractive Forces are nearly in an æquilibrium, as we have ſaid they are in Water, and other Fluidss; And therefore the Light or æther is Reflected in the ſame Manner, as it Fell, with little or no Impreſſion from the Bodies on vhich it Impinges, to Alter it's Quality or Force; or, which is the ſame, the Ambient Light or Medium Continues and Preſerves it's own Force without Receiving any very Peculiar or Diſtinguiſing Impreſſions from the Bodies it Surrounds; Which ſeems to be the True Meaning of the Angle of Reſiection being Equal to the Angle of Incidence That is, the ther or the Light is Rebounded the ſame as it Fell; Whict gives alſo an Account, why Images are ſcen from ſuch Refiections, but not from o thers; Becauſe in the ſirſt Caſe the Incident Light or æEther is Unalter'd in the Reflected, but in the lat the Reflected is Changed by the Forces of the Bodies, on which it Falls, into a diſſerent from the Incident. I C H A P. IV. Concerning the ſeveral Hypotheſes of Reſraſtion. 5.1. FTE R Conſidering the Doctrine of Reſlection, as it has been hitherto Proposd to us, we are next to Inquire into that of Refraction, which we ſnall do in the ſame Order of the Hypotheſes, which we before Obſervd in the ſeveral ones of Reſlection. §. 2. THE fſirſt Demonſtration made Uſe of, to Prove the Laws of Reſfraction, and that the Sine of the Angle of Refraction in Particular is in a given Proportion to the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, is, that Suppoſing CB E to be a Superſicies, which Reſiſis the Velocity of a Body in 4 Deſcending to B, ſo as that 4 ſhall looſc halſ it's Velocity in Surmounting the Reſiſtence at B, 4 will be Refracted, and, Inſlead of Proceeding in a Line continued from A thro' B to D, will be Diverted to I; Becauſe 4 B is Compounded of the Forces 4 C and C B, and ſince 4 has loſt hall it's Velocity at B, it will be double the Time in Deſcribing the Radius of the ſame Circle3 But the Perpendicular Motion 4C is only Obſtructed, and therefore the l l Latera Lateral CB will in it's Velocity Deſcribe double the Line CB, that is, BE, whilſt 4 is Falling from B to the Circumference, and Conſequently, the Determination of 4 vill be to I, ſo as GT may be double of CB, and 4 at the ſame time may Arrive at ſome Point in the Ambitus of the Circle, which by a plain Neceſſity, upon theſe Suppoſitions, muſt be in I. 5 3. IN Reply to which we are Oblig'd to take Notice; Firſt, that if with the ſame or any other Incidence, which ve can Poſſibly Imagine of 4 A to B, the Medium at ſhould Reſi?t 3 or 4 times more than is here Suppos'd this Demonſtration will not be Valid; ſince B æ in Reſpect of CB muſt be in that Proportion, either 3 or 4 times longer than CB; in which Caſe B E will be Produced beyond the Circumference tovards Q, and therefore there can be no Line drawvn from B, which will Determine its ſclf in the Circumference, which is Neceſſary in this Doctrine, and yet Take in and Comprehend another Line, which goes beyond it, viz. tovards  And thus, if Quick-Silver, which is to Wa. ter, as about 12 or I3 to I, is Capable of Refracting, and not of Refiecting only, an Incident Body, as vill be Acknowledgd, it muſt be done upon other Principles, than what are here Affirmd; ſince if Water Diminiſhes the Velocity of the Incident Body in any Degree, Quick-Silver will do it, if Reſiſtence is Equal to Denſity, 12 or 13 times as much without any Reſlection; or if ve take common Mud or Earth, their Reſiſtences are much greater than that of Water, and if this Theory can Account for the latter, which it will ſcarcely do, it cannot Conſcquently for the former, ſuppoſing their Reſiſtences only to be to that of Water, as 2 or3 to 1, Which yet it is Probable are in a greater Proportion. . 4. AND this ſeems to be an Evident Proof, that, as before in Reſlection, the Compounded and Diagonal Force ought to have been Demonſtrated from the Compounding, Namely, the Lateral and Perpendicular, ſo here likewiſe, that 4 will not be Refracted from B to I or any other Part of the Circumſerence, unleſs by ſuppoſing it, that is, by Circumſcribing and Aſcertaining the Diagonal Force, Antecedently to thoſe, into which it is Reſolv'd; Thus, for Example, in the preſent Caſe, 4 in it's Lateral Direction may Proceed from B to , as well as to E, but it is Originally ſuppos'd, that it ſnall not 20 beyond the Circumference, becauſc the Compound Refracted Force 3 is not to Proceed any further than the Incident 4 8, which is Taking for Granted, what is Really to be Proved. 5. 5. HOWEVER, Ieſt we ſiould be thought to Aſfirm only, without giving a Reaſon for the Aſſertion, tho what we have ſaid is in its ſel? Manifeſt, let us Conſider the Original Suppoſition, which is made to Prove this Doctrine of Refraction; Namely, that upon the Diminution of the Velocity of 4 at B, 4 ſnall Deſcribe after it's Reſiftence at B the ſame Line, which it did, before there was any Reſiſtence to it's Motion; that is, tho' the Velocity of 4 is but half, in it's Deſcent from B to ſ, of vhat it as in it's Deſcent from 4 to B, the Linc of it's Motion from B ſhall yet be Equal to the Line of Incidence to ; But to Compenſate for ſo Arbitrary an Hypotheſis, it is Contrivd, that 4 ſall be double the time in Deſcribing it, albeit there is no more Reaſon, why upon any Impediment given to Velocity, it's Decreaſe ſhould not be Meaſurd by the different Lines it Deſcribes in the ſame Time, than by the ſame Lines in different Timos, if nothing elſe is Conſider'd, but bare Reſiſtence; If therefore we take the former Meaſure, 4 after the Reſiſtence at B, will only Proceed to half the Line it had before paſũ'd thro', and Conſequently, this vhole Demonſtration Falls; Or i we take that other Meaſure, which is here ſupposd, ſo as the Velocity of A ſhould be Diminiſhed in its Degree, and 4 only Proceed in a ſlower Motion, P pp i it will be altogether Unaccountable in this Philoſophy, how 4, when it is vholly Reflected from B, and meets with an entire Reſiſtence, ſhould Preſerve it's Velocity wholly Unimpaird and Undiminiſhed. S. 6. FARTHER, as this Opinion of Refraction Depends in a great Meaſure upon Reſiſtence, which yet is not thought by a more Rational Account of Things ar Preſent to Solve Reſlection, but that a certain Elaſticity or Attraction is Requiſite, it is equally Impoſſible it ſould Solve Refraction; For if two equally Reſiſting Bodies meer, the Confeſſtd Reſult of ſuch a Concourſe is, that they will be Mutually Quieſcent, and if they are not Equal in their Reſiſtence, that the Stronger will Impel the other, which can never Solve the Phænomenons of Reflection; and ſince Reſraction is ſupposd to Procced from a kind of Reſiſtence, and is in Fact a ſort of Reflection, th in a diſferent Angle from that of Incidence, it will be as Evident, that Refraction cannot be Solv'd from bare Reſiſtence. S. 7. BuSIDES, as we have before Evidenced in the firſt Book of theſe Principles, Chap. 10. 5. 8. 9. this Philoſophy ſuppoſes only one Uniform Force or Velocity, and thereſore, if it Introduces other Degrees of it, it is Reaſonable it ſiould Account for the Cauſe of ſuch a Various Force, which it does not ſo much as Pretend to. : 5. 3. MOREOVER, if it did not that, it is ſtill Evident, that this Demonſtration Depends upon a Suppoſition of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter,, which we have Endcavourd to ſiew the Abundant Abſurdity of in the ſame firſt Pant of theſe Preſent Principles; For iſ it did not Depend upon it, what is here Provd of either Hard or Reſiſiing Bodies in General, would Signiſy nothing to the Properties of thoſe Beings, which may Poſſibly have no ſuch Qualities; for it is not certain, that Fire, or Oil of Vitriol, have not Properties Contrary to thoſe of Plain Reſiſtence, by being Intenſcly Active. 5- 9. Ir all this vas yet Acknowledg'd, and the Degree of the Velocity was Chang'd upon the Reſiſtence at B, it would not follow, that the Refraction ſhould be made to I; ſince CB, one of the Reſolute Forces of 4 B the Reſolvend, is Unalterd after the Reſiſtence at B, as before in Reflection; which if granted, as it was Provd, that the Angle of Incidence could not be Equal in all Caſes to the Angle oſ Reſlection, ſo here we ſhall Demonſtrate, that the Angle of Incidence cannot be in a Certain and Deſinite Proportion to the Angle of Refraction upon theſe Principles; For of the Compound Force of 4 B, CB Continuing the ſame, and H B meeting with a Reſitence in B, the whole Alteration of the Velocity of 4 muſt be Conferrd on the Perpendicular Direction, and Conſcquently in the ſame time, that 4 after Reſitence comes to ã, ſo as B ſhould be Equal to CB, it vill Proceed from à to 41, and Deſcribe a Line M Equal to half BH, by which Means the Perpendicular Velocity ill be as Slow again, as it vas beſore the Impinging of 4 upon B; from whence the Refraction vill be Determind to Z, and not ſo much as Form any Sine of the Circle 4D; If now the Velocity of A is Increaſed or Diminiſhed, the Reſiſtence at B vill be Reciprocally Diminiſhed or Increaſed, and accordingly will be longe or ſhorter, vhilſt B 4, Equal to 2C, is ſlill the ſame; ſo that 47 L will be alvays in a Proportion of Equality to the Sine of Incidence 4 H, but the Angle of Refraction MB L vill be Greater or Leſs, as A7 L Approaches nearer to B4, or Retires farther from it, that is, as the Velocity of Impulſe is leſs, or more Intenſe, or, which is the ſame, as the Reſiſtence at B is leſs, or more. ] 5. 10. LastLy, ſuppoſing the Incidence Chang'd, and A to Fall from æ or s to B, the Reſiſtence at B vill either be the ſame or not; If it is not the ſame, it muſt either Proceed from it's Encountering a greater Thickneſs of the Medium in an Oblique Deſcent, than in a Direct, or from a different Poſition of the Parts of it to the Incident Body 3 As to the firſt, it is Manifeſt, that if the Medium is two or twenty Inches Deep, the Reſiſtence is Preſumd to be the ſame in theſe Principles; Beſides B, the Continuation of the Incident Line 5 æ, is Equal to B D, the Continuation of the Incident Linc 4 B thro' the Refſracting Medium; And, as to the Second, there is no Reaſon to Affirm, that the Situation of the Parts Obſtructs the Progreſs of 4 in one Caſe more than another, in the former Figure; ſince, altho in in the preſent, if the Body was to Fall from L to 44, in the Poſition of the Parts 4 B it would find leſs Reſiſtence, than if it was to Fall Obliquely from Q to M4, yet this is not the Caſc of õ any Medium, which is Homogeneous, where the Parts are in a like Poſition every Way, ſince if æ 4 ſould be drawn ſo, as Q might Fall in a Perpendicular to it, the Deſcending Body vou'd find as eaſy an Ingreſs, as in it's Incidence ifrom L to 2;tis True it is generally thought, that Perpendicular Directions to a Mcdium Penetratc into it with greater Facility, than Oblique ones do; but That in the firſt Place is not certain, and in the next iſ it were, is a Problem as yet to be Accounted for, and which at preſent we are not to Conſider, what we Inſiſt upon is, that it cannot be done by theſe Principles, ſeeing neither the Profundity or Deepneſs of the Medium, nor the Poſition of it's Parts are ſuſficient for the Solution; it muſt therefore be OWnd by this Philoſophy, if it Reaſons Juſtly, that the Reſiſtence of a Medium in any Obliquity of the Incident Body is the ſame; If it is, the Lateral Force B4 and Conſequently, 7L, in the Figure, foregoing the laſt, may be Infinitely Vary'd, whilſt the Perpendicular 2 Continues Unchangd, and the Line Opposd to the Angle of Refraction, which will not be the Sine of a Circle, will not Obſerve any Certain or Definite Proportion to the Sine of Incidence, excepting that of Equality; from whence we may Aſfirm, that if the Sine of Incidence is in a given Proportion to the Sine of Refraction, by what, as is ſaid has been fully Experienced, in the Refractions of Light, we may yet from hence Aſfirm that the preſent Doctrine does not Evince it. S5. 11. As to vhat concerns Experience, it is not any ways Reaſonable, allowing the Experiments, to make a general Law of Refraction, from the Refraction of Lignt, which may be as different in it's Action upon Water, or Glaſi, from that of other Material Beings, as the Heat of the Fire is from the Effects of a Froſt upon the ſame Bodies; Beſides that by Experiments it is Provid, that Light Refracts ſfrom the ſame Incidence into different Sines, which, whatever Evaſions are made Uſe of, can never be Reconcil'd with the Hypotheſis, as it is here Aſfirm'd, of the Sines of Incidence being in a given Proportion to thoſe of Refraction; ſince it is Impoſſible, where Light Falls with the ſame Velocity upon a Medium, and is Refracted in various Angles, that the different Sines of thoſe Angles ſould be in the ſame Proportion to one Certain and Determin'd Sine of Incidence, and we have before Provid, that Light is in it's ſel? Homogencous, and does not Originally Conſiſt of Diſſimilat Rays, and therefore is Incident with the ſame Velocity upon the Refracting Medium, or if we had not, accordingto §. 3. and ò, different Reſiſtences in the Refracting, or different Velocities in the Refracted Body, would Deſtroy the Abovemention'd Proortion. p 5. 12. THE next Hypotheſis we ſhall Examine into, after this of Reſiſtence, ſhall be another more Modern of Attraction, which is brought to Prove, that the Sine o Incidence is in a given Proportion to that of Refraction, or Emergence. 5. 13. TuE Title of the Section, in which this Hypotheſis is Propos'd, is, Concernning the Motion of the leaſt Bodies, which are Agitated by Centripetal Forces, that Tend to each of the Parts of any large Body; From whence it is Neceſſary for us to Obſcrve, that this Reaſoning ſtill depends upon the Truth of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy and an Homogeneous Matter, and Reducing the Actions of the Subtileſt and moſt Active to the ſame Laws, which are found in the Groſeſt or the Heavieſt; for otherwiſe, tho the Bodies, which are Conſiderd in Mechanickss may have a Force of Attraction amongſt one another, unleſ”™ all Matter is Homogencous, it ill not be Neceſſary, that Light, or Subſtances, which are the moſt Refin'd, ſould have, in their Compariſons with orhers, which are of a Thicker and more Unvieldy Nature; and Conſequently, vhat was before Alledg'd Concerning Reflection, upon this Suppoſition, vill be Liable to the ſame Objection; That is, this Reaſoning ſuppoſcs, that the Expanſive Force of Light is of the ſame Nature and Temper with the Conractive of other Bodies, or that the Expanſive and Contractive Forces are the ſame. P p p 2 5. 14. BUT 5. 14. BuT to Omit this; The Demonſtration of the Sine of the Angle of Incilence being in a Certain and Definite Proportion o the Sine of Refraction is as Follows3 4æ md B b are ſuppos'd to be Parallel Planes, which nclude a Space, the Property of which ſnhall be, either one way or other, from I to g, or from E to I, to Attract Perpendicularly an Incident Body, according as it Falls upon the Planes, 4 æ4 or Bb, thro Mediums which are Similar, and are here ſuppos'd to be Denſer; Let it therefore, for Inſtance, Fall on the Plane 4 4, and paſſing thro' the Intermediate Space, let it be Attracted in the Direction ſrom I to =; on the Contrary, if the Incidence had been upon B b, the Perpendicular Attraction would have been from æ to ſ; and in cither of theſe Caſcs, the Attraction is ſupposd to be Equal in the ſame Diſtances ſrom 4a or Bb, that is, in any Point of Cæ or Dã Reſpectively, the Attractions are alikee Let now the preſent Figure be ſuppos'd to be Drawn, in which GH is the Incident Force,  1 the Refracted, and 7X the Emergent, 7L is the Continuation of IX, the Emergent Foree, till it meets with Ha17, which is the Production of the Incident G H, and R A1 is Petpendicular thrò' the Point 7 to the Plane Bb, ſo as to Reach the Oppoſite Plane A a, and Interſect the Continuation of G H in a43  NQ farther is a Circle Deſcribd from L with the Radius LI=L N, and LO is a Perpendicular from the Center tę the Chord ſ, which is thereſore Biſected in O. 5. 15. HAVING given an Explanation of the Suppoſitions, and the Figure, Neceſſary to the Enſuing Demonſtration, ve ſhall now Proceed to the Realoning upon both. It is therefore in the firſt Place Affirnvd, that if the Attraction, or Impulſe: is Uniform, the Refracted Force HT vill Deſcribe ſome Portion of a Parabola, ſhe Property of which will be, that the Rectangle, Comprehended under the Latus Rectum given, and I 4, is = to the Square of the Tangent H M, and H M vill be Biſected in £ from whence it vill follov, that ? O and O  are Equal, ſince LO is Parãllel to HE, and Conſequently 0 and OR, ML and L H, Segments or Sides of Similar Triangles, therefore 70=0N, added to each, vill make 4 N=I~; But IR is given, being the Interval betwixt the to Planes 4æ and Bb, and for the ſame Reaſon MN will be given, which is =to I*t; NM therefore, which is given, into IM will be to the Latus Rectum, which is given, into the ſame I47 in a given Proportion; But 71 into the Latus Rectum is 5 H M q, and Conſcequently NA into IM vill be in a Given, or a Known, and Determin'd Proportion to H Mq; or the Square of the Tangent of the Parabola; Farther, the Rectangle NAſ into TM is = to the Rectangle P M into .Q M by a Propoſition in the Elements of Euclid, which Affirms, that ſfrom the ſame Point 44, all the Secants of a Circle Drawvn into the Line Intercepted betwixt 4 and the Circumference of the Circle, make Equal Rectangles; But P M into QM is  to the Difference betwixt the Square of 47L, and the Square oſ PL, or LR, the firſt being L”Qã+2 LQMm+Qarq and the lat LQq andthe difference, 2 LQM  QM  =  L L V LaI æ Mm, =rat QLM=NM x IM, which has been Prov'd to have a given Proportion to H M q, and therefore betwixt 2LqL Iq, and H M q, there vill likewiſe be a Determind or given Proportion; Again HM q has a given Proportion to the fourth Part of it's Square =L Mq, and therefore the Difference of 47L q and LIq;, or ML q LIq;, vill have a given Proportion to 4Lq ,the fourth Part oſ  a75. Laſly, i MLqL Iq has a given Proportion to Lq; arg Lisja vill have a given Proportion to ML q, or LIq to LM q; And if ve Extract the Roots of, the Squares, which are in a certain Proportion, L7 vill have a given Proportion to  L; LI thereſore being Prov'd to have a Known and Definite Realon to 47L, ſince the firſt is Oppos'd to the Angle LM IZ to the Angle GH F, the Angle of Incidence, and the laſt to the Angle L1ar=to the Angle 27E the Complement of the Angle ol Emergence LIR=MIV, the Sines of the Angles being Proportional to the Sides which are Oppos'd to thoſe Angles, the Sine of the Angle of Incidence will be in a Given  Given Proportion to the Sine of the Angle of Emergence, and by Conſequence o the Sine of Refraction. §. 16. TuE firſt Suppoſition in this Demonſtration is, that 4a and B are two iſimActive Planes, which Include a Medium entirely Unactive, and that the Active Me- ſſamt ium 4 a or Bb vill Reſpectively Attract tovards each, the Incident Line GH I on the dium ſbonid 5 one Hand, or X TH on the other, in their Progreſs thio the Unactive Medium, in Equal Include b Diſtances from 4 a or Bb; If therefore we take GHI and A4 a, the one for the In- radqu on. cident Line, and the other for the Boundary betwixt the Active Medium, which is above 4 a, and the Unactive, which is below it, Cæ and Dã will have their Attractions Peculiar to each, and Equal in the ſeveral Points of them in their Tendency to A a. 5. 17. IN which Hypotheſis, either the Plane 4 4, which is the Diſtinction be- Argument atvixt the Mediums, is ſufficient to this Demonſtration, or not; If it is not, the Me- gæinſi ſuch a dium B b, Similar to that of 4a, is alſo Requird, that is, an Unactive Medium betwixt ⸗́ two that are Active, which if Neceſſary, it will not Solve one Phænomenon of Re- Condition is fraction; ſince that is always made by Mediums, which lie Contiguous to each o fiud v ſi ther, and have each oſ them a different Force or Action, and it was never Experien- m, tæ it ced, that two Unactive Mediums, and one A”tive, or tvo Active Mediums and one Un- æuſa ni E active, vere Requird in Order to produce Refraction; For Light in Particular is eropora nem Refracted without any orther Requiſite, than the difference of tvo Mediums only, a Rarer i*and a Denſer; Morcover, iftwo Similar and Active Mediums were Neceſſary to Refraction above the Plane 4 a, and below the Plane B6, the laſt Medium would Attract as much as the former, in equal Diſtances, and would Conſequently Diſturb the Perpendicular Attraction to 4 a, ſuppoſing the Incident Line to be GH, and thereſore the Impulſc and Attraction together will not Deſcribe the Line H I, which is ſuppos. 5. 18. FARTHER, if the Plane 4 Attracted Light, for Example, in it's Paſſage i ib Plans from H to I, Bb in Equal Diſtances vould give a contrary Impreſſion to it, and Con- a a ſequently, when Light by Impulſe came to Cę, Dà, the Mutual Attractions of 4a ãmãim and Bb, hich draw contrary Ways, would Cauſe that 4 a, in the whole, would æula i EAttract tovatds it's Plane, as much as 35 would do towards it's Plane, from Whence ſ|l but Ras the Attractions of both the Planes would be Equal, but Reciprocal, in their Force; Which would produce Eſfects very different and unlike from what are here Imagin'd. s. 19. Ir the Planc 4⸗ is ſufficient for the preſent Demonſtration without a Si-i a; æ 4 milar Medium, and an Active, at Bb, the Angle of Emergence IK will Vaniſh, iraũãne Mſince there will be no Emergence at all, or which is the ſame, HI will be Con- ſtum, ans Jus tinued on in one Similar and Unactive Medium, without being Limited or Bounded Requqſi i in it's Progreſi, unleſs by the Reſtraint, which is put upon it from the Attradtive Me- ſaſaaun dium 4a; from vhence it vill follow, that the Angle xIM, as it is not an Angle 4 n ani of Emergence, ſo will not be Fixed in any Particular Place, but may be Drawn from Emergenc. any Point betwixt T and H, as well as from I, there being no Circumſtance or Condition to Determine it to one Point more than to Another; But ſuch Angles, made by Lines Parallel to 7M1, and Interſecting the Curve H1 in the ſeveral Points of it, would be Extremely different from the Angle a 7 , and therefore it cannot be the ſame, whether we take the one or the other, and yet there is no Reaſon, why onc may not Repreſent an Angle of Emergence, as well as another. 5. 20. AGAIN, for the ſame Reaſon that HI is Attracted by the Active Me- ꝶ ibere wa: dium 4 a after it's Ingreſs at H, it ought to be Attracted before it's Entrance eæb o Mæ into it, and GH Will Fall in a Curve, as well as be Refracted in one; But this is duum ò phi far from being Prov'd by Experience, and if it were True, vould Deſtroy the Iucident Line Fundamental Suppoſition of the preſent Demonſtration, which is, that G H is a Qua bea Projectile Force, and not Diſturb'd by any Foreign Impulſe; Nor vould L7I be = to a ibe Rethe Angle GH F, not LIſ to RIK nor LIK to TX. But what is not to be Sur. fraãd. mounted in this Hypotheſis is, that the Medium above 44, and below Bb, is Preſumed to be Denſer than the Intermediate one betwixt them, that is, that Air is Denſer than Glaſs or Water, and therefore Light is Refracted to the Perpendicular thro' Water or Glaſi, and from the Perpendicular in Air; Whereas, as we have ſhewn §. 32, the Refraction to the Perpendicular Proceeds, as in Reaſon it ſhould, from a Greater Denſity or Contractive Force in the Glaſs or Water, than in Air, and the Refraction from the Perpendicular Proceeds from a Greater Expanſive Force in Air, than in the Other. 5. 21. Avo- 5. 21. AvoTHER Suppoſition in this Way or Method of Reaſoning is, that the Projectile Force from H to T is, as the Lines H M, H L, HT, that is, as the Times of Progreſſion to 44, L and 7, and the Gravitating or Attracting, M Z, H S LI TU, as the Squares of the Times, in which H a1, H L, and HT, are Deſcribd; upon which Conceſſion the Compounded Forces will Form the Parabola, HZ IU, and the Tangent Drawn from one Point I Fig. 5. 14.) ſo as to meet the Tangent H M, Drawn ſtom another Point, as H, vill Biſect it. . 22. FROM vhence it is Evident, that the Laws of Refraction are made Analogous, and Alike, with thoſe of Projectiles, Conſidered as they Gravitate to E: the Earth, and the Rays of Light are Imagin'd to Deſcend and to be Attracted towards the Active Medium H S, after the ſame Manner, as a Stone, thrown out of T the Hand, is Dravn and Impell'd to the Surſace of the Earth, from which it is Projected. 5. 23. BUT, if ſuch an Analogy is allow'd of, the Terms of Gravitation and Refraction ought to be Reciprocal, and as ve may Affirm a Ray to Gravitate to the Medium, vhen it is Refracted to it, ſo on the other Hand, we may Aſfirm a Stone to be Reſracted by the Earth, when it Gravitates to it, which as it is very Diſagreeable to our common Senſe of Things, ſo at Ieat ſiews the Extravagant Reaſoning of this Philoſophy. S. 24. BESIDES, that rZ, LI, TU, ſould Gravitate to H5 in the Rays of Light, according to the Proportion of what a Heavy Body does to the Earth, is very Inconceivable, unleſs we can Imagine, that the Active and Vigorous Rays of the Sun have the ſame Propenſity to Gravitation, as a Stone, or the Dead Weight of Lead, or any other Projectile. 5. 25. WHiICH is ſo far from being True of Light, in Reſpect of Glaſs, or any other Body, as Poliſhed Steel, that this Philoſophy gives us an Inſtance of the Contrary, in the Examples, which it Produces to Prove ſuch a Gravitation or Attraction; for to make good the foregoing Reaſoning, or to give ſome kind of Approbation to it, There vere tvo Things to be Conſidered; 1. Whether in Reality the Sine of the Angle oſ Incidence and Refraction were in a certain Proportion to each other; 24. Whether Light did Gravitate to a Refracting Medium, as other Bodies did to the Earth; If ncither of theſe were True, this Philoſophy very Juty Apprehended, that it had only Propos'd an Abſtracted or a Chimerical kind of Reaſoning. 5. 26. IN the Scholium therefore to the 967h Prop. both theſe are Endeavourd to be Provd, iſſ. by ſaying, that Snellius found out, that the Secants of the Angle of Incidence and Reſraction were in a given Proportion, and that Des-Cartes by Conſequence might eaſily Reduce it to the Sines of thoſe Angles; On the Contrary, we have Shewn, that Des-Cartes, and therefore Snellius, has not Provd this Proportion; the 2ã. is Shewn from Matter of Fact by Grimaldus, that the Rays of Light are Attracted by Glaſs, Stecl, Gold, Silver, Braſs, &c. ſo as to make an Incurvation oſ the Rays, aa, bb, cc, &e. towards 4 CBE; But how this Incurvation ol Rays to ACB is any vays Anſwerable to the Gravitation of a Stone to the Earth, is no more to be Comprehended, than how àã, which is Supposd to be only bended towards 4 CB, ſould Actually Gravitate to C; For the Queſtion here is not, vhether Glaſs or Stecl, or any other Body, has the Power of Attracting, in ſome Meaſure, the Rays of Light, which may be Troved by our Principles, that they have, but whether they Attract them, as the Earth does Lead, a Stone, or any Heavy Body; If they do not, the Doctrine oſ Refraction and Projectiles canꝶot be the ſame, vhich yet is here ſupposd; If they do, the Rays of Light fæ da d d, cc, &c. ought to Deſeribe either Parabolas, if they Touch the Body, or Ellipſcs, if they do not, to the Att racting Medium, which it is not Preſumd or Apprehended that they do. S. 27. FARTHER, the Matter of a Stone, or Lead, and that of Light, in their Com pariſons with the Earth and Glaſi, &. muſt be ſuppos'd to be the ſame, otherviſe Light, in Relation to it's Action upon Glaſi, may have a very different Property from what a Stone or Lead has in Reſpect of it's Action to the Earth, and therefore ſfrom Compareing the Actions of the laſt, we cannot Infer a Certainty of the Actions or the Reſpects, which cach has to the other in the ſormer, unleſs the Matter, borh in Light and in Lead, is the ſame, and their Properties ſo too, which is Impoſſible. . 5. 28. WHAT We have thereſore now farther to Examine into, aſter the Suppoſitions, is the Reaſoning upon them, which is usd to Prove, that the Sine oſ the Angle of Incidence and Refraction is in a given Rario; We at Preſent Own, vhat is ſaid to be Provd by Galileus, Concerning the Parabola formd by Projectiles, but cannot Think it is Applicable to the Laws of Reſraction; We likewiſe for the Preſent Acknovlcdge, that in (Fiz. §. 14.) H2 is Biſected in L, and that the whole Series oſ Argument from thence to ſLqL Iq having a given Proportion to ſL q is True and Unconteſted. 5. 29. IF thereſore ArLq LIq is to ML 4 as a to b, for Inſtance, by Diviſion ML qLIqMLq MLq:: a—b.b; from whence it vill follow, that if b is greater than a, or LIq than ML q, the given Proportion will be, asc to b, and Conſcquently the Extractions oſ the Rloots vill be Impoſſible, ſo as to give any Definite Proportion. : 5. 30. MORE than this, what is it, which is Meant by a given Proportion? If it is ſaid to be a certain Proportion, as æ to b, it is not True, ſince this Demonſtration takes the Liberty to Change it in every Step of it's Reaſoning; If 4 to b may be Changd to any other known Proportion, yet that of to b cannot be known; Or if it could, it would be eaſy to Prove any Quantities to be in a kKnown and Definite Proportion, if we ſuppoſe em ſo at firſt, and at the beginning of the Demonſtration, which is the preſent Caſe; Or if the Sinc of the Angſe of Incidence and Refraction are in a given Ratio of 4 to b, or any other Proportion, it cannot be Provd that they are ſo from their being in the Proportion of c to 4, or g to, or any other Reaſon ve can Name, vhich is the Reſult of the preſent Demonſtration; Namely, that the Sine of the Angle of Incidence and Refraction, ſhall be in a certain Reaſon of 4 to b from very different and various Proportions, which cannot be Reſolv'd into it. ] ] § 31. As in Reſſection there were three Hypotheſcs of it, ſo we might Expec:t the ſame Number to Account for Refraction, but Elaſticity being one, and the beſt Hypotheſis for Reflection, the Reaſon of which we have already given, and there being no Proſpect of Solving Refraction by the ſame Principles of Elaſticity; upon that Account we have only two Solutions of the preſent Phænomenon, and muſ iherefore, if they are any vays Satisfactory, Acquieſce in them, altho', as was before Obſcrv'd, both Reflection and Refraction ſould Rely upon the ſame Individual Hypotheſis for their Solution; Which we ſhall thereſore now give from the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. lli . 32. REFRACTION therefore, as Reſlection, is different and Various, according to the difference and Variety of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Incident Body, and of the Mediums of Incidence and Refraction, thro which it is Carried Thus Light, being of an Expanſive Force, and falling upon Water or Glaſ;, vhich, in Reſpect of it, is of a Contractive, is Refracted to the Perpendicular, thai is, it's whole Subſtance, by ſuch an Incidence and upon it's Ingreſs, without Conſidering it, as Conſiſling of Particular Rays, is Contracted, and Preſſed cloſer together, which beſore was more Dilated, Expanſive, and Difuſed; Upon the ſame Account, Light Trajected thro a more Spirituous or Expanſive Fluid than Water, vill be leſs Reſracted to the Perpendicular, that is, ill Dilate and Diſſuſe it's ſelf more in it3 On the other Hand, if a Stone, which is oſ a Contractive Force, is Incident upon Water, which is of an Expanſive in Reſpect of it, it is Refracted from the Perpendicular, that is, it's Action is more Dilated and Diffuſed from ſuch an Expanſive Forc Force in the Water; But Lead will be leſs Refracted from the Perpendicular, betauſe it's Contractive Force is greater than that of a Stone, and therefore the Expanſive of Water will make a leſs Impreſſion upon it to Divert it from the Perpendicular Thus alſo, I ſuppoſe, a Groſſer Medium of Air vill be leſs Diſfuſed in Water, than a more Expanſive and a Lighter And Probably a Virgula or Rod of Wood, which is of a Lighter and more Expanſive Nature, will Appear more Crooked and Diffuſed in it from the Perpendicular, than a Spatula, or a Rod, of Iron or Braſs, vhich is of a more Contractive; The latter of which, ſince my Writing of this, I have in Fact, in ſome Meaſure Experienced; For take a Baſon of Water, and thruſt a ſmall Virgula of Wood into it, and then one of Braſ, or Iron, the former vill appear Longer and more Dilated in the Water, and the latter, Shorter and more Contracted ? Hence alſo an Object Appears greater from a Denſer Medium thro' a Rarer, and leſs from a Rarer Medium thro' a Denſer; Becauſe, in the firſt Caſe, the Subſtance of Light is Expanded and Diffuſed, and in the laſt Compreſſed and Contracted: And in all theſe Inſtances, the ſame Proportions of the Expanſive or Contractive Forces are Preſerved betwixt the Mediums of Incidence and Refraction; which Probably gave Riſe to the Doctrine, which has been ſo much Laboured by the Mathematick Philoſophers, that the Sine of Incidence is in a certain Proportion to the Sine of Refraction. C H A. V. Concerning the Tundamental Principles of Optichs. s5. 1. AVING Already Conſiderd the two Hypotheſes Produced to Explain Refraction, that of Reſiſtence, and the other of Attraction, and ſinec ve find in Opticks, that the former is Defended a different Way than we have yet Explain'd, we ſhall now Proceed to an Examination of thoſe New Hypotheſes, and which Particularly Reſpect the Refractions of Light. G. 2. THE firſt is, that Light Proceeds, from the Radiating Point to that which is to be Enlightend, that way, which is of all the moſt Eaſy, and that two Mediums have theirt Determinate Degrees of Reſiſtence to the Progreſs of the Ray, from vhence it follows, that the Sines of the Angles of Incidence and Refraction are to each other Reciprocally, as the Reſiſtences of the Mediums, that is, as the Reſiſtence of the Refracting Medium to that of the Medium of Incidence, and therefore will be in a given Proportion; Tis therefore Inquird by what Way, or Path, C ſhall Radiate to 6, (Fig. §. 4.) ſuppoſing IE to be Air, and E  Water, or Glaſ, Separated from each other by the Surface A 8, or which is the ſame, the Point Z is ſought, which is to Refract the Incident Ray CE to G, that vay. which of all is the Eaſieſt; But the Diſficulty, which a Ray is to Surmount in it's Paſſage thro' any Medium, Conſits of the length of the Way it is to go, and the Reſiſtence of the Medium to it's Progreſs; Let m be the Reſiſtence of Air, and n of Water or Glaſs, the Difficulty of the Way from C to E vill be, as the Rectangle m x CE, and from æ to G, as n æ EG; If thereſore any Point, as F, is taken in the ſame Surface, CE x m + EG x n, being the lea oſ all Poſſible Ways, ought to be leſs than CF x m + FG x n; The Point E is now Requird with theſe Conditions; C, G, and 4 B, are given by Poſition, and Conſequently the Perpendiculars CH, G L, and the Line H L; Let CH be e, GL, 5 and H L, h, and EH the Line ſought, 75 F L therefore is=h3, and C Eæ 10V v25mp3EG g27+  22 hy h2 q vherefore mp +n q ought to be the leaſt of all thoſe Quantities, which can be ſo Expreſſed, and is to be Determind accordingly; But by the Doctrine De Maximis & Minimis, my q =n Px h, ornp. m q ::5, h, and CE being put ZEG, or ꝓ to q, n. m:: ). h, or the Reſiſtence of Glaſs or Water is to that of Air, as HE the Sine of Incidence to X õ the Sine of Refraction, which was the Aſſertion to be Provd. 5.3. BUT to this Demonſtration, Firſt it may be Replyd, as before, when we Conſiderd the preſent Hypotheſis of Reſiſience, that CE and EG are ſupposd to be Equal in their Incidence and Refraction, which is not Evident, rhat they aree However this may be ſaid in Favour oſ this Demonſtration, that it makes the Reſiſtence oſ Glaſs or Water to be Greater than that of Air, according to what we have Aſfirmed, 5. 32. and Contrary to vhat Sir Iſ. Newt. Aſſerts, 5. 14. and 20. of the foregoing Chapter. 5. 4.  4. SECOND, it muſt be Own'd, that, as in Reſlection CE, E D, are ſhorter thar CF, F D, ſo in Refraction CE, EG, are ſhorter than CF, FG; but it has been Obſervd in the firſt Caſe, what ve do now in the laſt, that the Compound Determinations are Originally Preſum'd, which ought to be Provd; Thus CE, ED, in Reflection are only the ſhorteſt vay of Satisfying CI, CH, on the one Hand, or ID, DR, on the other; For if CH, HF, and DR, FR, were the Determinations, CF, F D, would be the ſorteſt way of Satisfying them; From whence it is Evident, that C7 and C H are Originally ſupposd, or, which is the ſame, that CE is=/ ED; And the Caſe is in ſome Meaſure Parallel in Refraction, where CE is ſupposd =to EG; for H E, HC, are Preſumd to be the Determinations oſ Incidence, and E L, E X, of Refraction, upon which Hypotheſis CE, EG, will be the horteſt Way; but ſuch an Hypotheſis is the Propoſition to be Demonſtrated; for if CH, HF, arc the Determinations of Incidence, and F L, LG, of Refſraction, that is, if CE is not Z to EG, then CF, F ũ, will be the ſhorteſt Way, Contrary to what is ſupposd in the preſent Demonſtration; But that, which Overturns this whole Reaſoning is. that CT is ſuppoſed to be to XG, the Sine of Incidence to that of Refraction, Reciprocally, as the Reſiſtence of the Reſracting Medium to that of the Medium of Incidence, and thereſore Glaſi and Water are ſupposd to Reſit more than Air, which if ſo, the Refraction, it is Thought ſould be from the Perpendicular and not towards it, the Contrary of which is Experienced, and which Diſficulty we have Accounted for before from the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, §. 32. Chap. 4. S5. 5. THEREFORE all the Advantage, that I know of, in this Method of Reaſoning, is only to add a new Hypotheſis to the former; Namely, that Nature takes the eaſieſt Way to Perform her own Operations, and to this End Light is Reflected and Reſracted according to the Laws before Mentiond; And from Hence, if the Cauſe or Reaſon of Reſraction or Reſlection was Inquir'd, it is Told us ve might Anſwer, that the Reaſon of both was, that the Ray might Proceed the Eaſiet Way Poſſible; In Reply to which we Say, however Pious Final Cauſes may be Imagind to be and tho' ſuch Laws of Reflection or Refraction were Obſervd, if at all, in Obedience to ſuch an Intention or Deſign in Nature, it yet can never be Evidenced, that there was ſuch a Deſign in Nature, till thoſe Laws are Prov'd, which according to s. 3. and 4. are not; that is, if ſuch a certain Lav of Reſection or Refraction was Eſtabliſied with an Intent and Purpoſe, that Things might be Atcheivd in the Plaineſt and Eaſieſt Way, that Certain Law in both ought firſt to be Demonſirated, and iſ it is, the Final Cauſe cannot be an Additional Evidence to the Demonſtration, but a Conſequence and Deduction from it; if it is not Demonſtrated, then the End or Deſign of any Thing, which is not known, cannot be known neither;3 And in Truth, the End and Intention of the Almighty Diſpoſer of all Things can be onlj Collected from Properties in Nature, as they Really Exiſt; Since, if thoſe Propertie: are not Firſt and Originally Determin'd to Exiſt, it will be Impoſſible to Affirm the Deſign of what we are not certain does Exiſt 5. 6. FARTHER the Hypotheſis it ſelf is not Evident, that Nature takes always the ſhorteſt vay in it's Operations in the Senſe, which this Demonſtration ſuppoſcs, that is, that CE ſhould be a ſirait Line, ſince it is Prov'd by Experiments, that there is an Incurvation of the Ray in it's Incidence thr Air to Glaſs, or any other Refracting Medium. 5. 7. MoREOVER, ſceing Reſiſrence is in ſome Proportion, or orher, to Denſity, and, as Sir Iſ. Newton ſays, Cateris Paribus, in a Proportion of Equality, if certain Lighter and more arefyd Fluids Reſract more than Heavier and Denſer, the very Concluſion of this Demonſtration will be Falſe, that the Sincs of the Angles of Incidence and Refraction are to each other Reciprocally, as the Reſiſftences õf the Mediums, when yet the Fineſt Fluids, as Spirit o Wine, and Oil of Turpentine, and, as Des Cartes Inſorms us, Qq q An Air Reſract Light more than Subſtances, which are of a Groſſer and Denſer Nature, and Conſequently more Reſiſting. j 5. 8. SoME likewiſe have Obſerv'd, that the Refraction by Glaſies Apparently Enlarges an Object every Way, which cannot be Accounted for by any Suppoſition or Demonſtration of the ſame Individual and Incident Rays being Refracted into the ſame Individual Rays, be the Proportions of the Sines of Incidence and Refraction whatever we Pleaſe, ſince the Refracted Image and the Incident muſ©t Neceſſarily be Equal in ſuch an Hypotheſis, there being no more Rays in the one than the other. . 9. VE muſt alſo Add, that by Vitellio and Alhaſenus an Arabian, it was found from Experiments, that the Meaſure of Reſractions was according to the Proportion of their Angles, and not according to that of their Sines, in leſſer Inclinations oſ the Rays, but in greater, the ſame Proportion did not Prevail, being according to the later Obſervations, in the Proportion of their Sines and not of their Angles; Therefore, altho' the former Obſervations cannot Determine, that all Reſractions oſ a greater Inclination are made according to the Meaſure oſ their Angles, on the other Hand, it will not be certain, that the later Obſervations, that the Refractions are to be Meaſured by their Sines, where there is a greater Inclination, ſhould Aſſert the Properties of thoſe of a leſs to the ſame Meaſure, and it would be more Rational to give a Solution of both theſe Phænomenons, as they are Diſtinguiſd by Experiments, than to Reduce the one to the other. 5. 10. LasTLY, as in Scction the 71h, it was ſaid to be Experience, that ſeveral Lighter Fluids Reſracted the Rays more than Heavier ones did, and that thereſore the Reaſoning from Reſiſtence, or even from Attraction, could not be Valid, in Order to Solve theſe Refractions, ſ0 by the ſame Experiments it is found, that the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is in a certain Proportion to that of Refraction, at Ieaſt, as in the foregoing Section is Obſerv'd, in any greater Incſinations; If this yet were True, ve Conrend, that none of the Preceding Hypotheſes or Demonſtrations, do give us any Satisfactory Account of this Appearance. AnD aſter this it will not be Neceſſary to Conſider the Hypotheſis of Rays Falling upon the Refracting Medium G E, in a Parallelogram 4GD B, and turning round on a Center , ſo that the Ray 4G, which Falls ſooneſt, ſall be Diminiſhed in it's Motion, whilſt B the other  D, which is farther removd from the Refracting Medium, is Accelerated, till they borh enter the Medium, and are from thence carry'd on in an Equable Morion thro' it; We Say there is no Occaſion to Conſider this Hypotheſis, ſince, why D ſhould Move faſter, till it Enters GE, than it does aſterwards in Reſpect of G, cannot be Deter- r mind; That is, vhiy G ſhould ſtop, till D Arrives at EG, which is Impoſſible, whilſt G and D are ſuppos'd to be Points in the ſame Radius; Not to Mention the Chimerical Suppoſition of the Center F. HOWEVER this at leat we may Infer from the Reaſoning Alledg'd by Dr. Barro to Solve Refraction, that He vas ſo far Penetrating and Sagacious as to ſce, thai it could not be done by any of the Preſent Hypotheſes. And which I have once more Attempted, Chap. 4. §. 32. from our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Con tractive Forces. 5. 11. NExT to the Determin'd and Certain Proportion betwixt the Sine oſ Incidence and Refraction, upon which the whole Doctrine of Opticks Depends, is thai other Fundamental Propoſition, that the Progreſs of Light thro' different Medium: is Reciprocal; Namely, if a Ray, ſalling ſrom D, is Refracted to C, vhere the Dia phanous Medium, as Glaſi, is Placed on the Side of 4 B towards C, iſ the ſame Dia phanous Medium is Placed on the contrary Side towards E, the Reſraction of will be to E, ſuppoſing D 4, 4 C, make the ſame Angles of Incidence and Reftaction as F A, AE, becauſc all the Circumſtances are the ſame in both Caſcs, ſince ? 46 HAl H AE, in the latter, are to HAD, CAG, in the former. This therefore is rather an Axiom, or an Affirmation of the ſame Thing, than a Propoſition, or a Demonſtration But, as it ſeems, this does not Reach, what is here Intended in Opticks by a Reciprocal Progreſs of Light thro' different Mediums, as Air and Glaſs, which is, that as D 4 is Refracted to C, ſo on the other Hand, CA is Refracted to D, ſuppoſing Light to take a contrary Courſe in the laſt Inſtance, from what it did in the firſt; for if it takes the ſame Courſe, it is only Conſidering one Individual Refraction by Traceing back the Effect CA to the Cauſe 4 D, as before the Cauſe D A was Aſfirmd to Produce the Effect 4C. S. 12. IF Light takes an Oppoſite Courſc, ſo as D ; rrœ If Light roſhall be the Point of Radiation in one Example, and 5i E C in another, it is not altogether ſo Evident, what is here Endeavourd to be De- ſi Couſus s monſtrated, or at leaſt the Demonſtrations made uſe of by the Writers of Opticks Mummm are no vays Concluſive of the Propoſition; ſince if the Luminous Point C Radiates æ/ſi of is ni: thro C4, vith the ſame Force as D thro D 4, C 4 vill Proceed to E in a Direct ſrm Line vithour any Reſraction, if it Radiates with the ſame Force as 4 to C, that is vith a Force that is Weaken'd and Impair'd, in it's Egreſs from A to D it will be Impoſſible to Recover that Vivid and Lively one, which is Expreſſed by A D, and Conſequently cannot be Return'd in that Direction; Nor is this Reciprocal Refraction Piovd by the common Experiment of our ſeeing Objects Situate in C, at F, ſince that would Equally happen from a bare Inflection of the Viſual Rays from D 4 to C, vithout Preſuming any Retrograde Refraction of C4 to D; becauſe the Eye at D may as vell Purſue the: Stroke of the Ray 4 D, back to , whether 4D is Refracted from' ꝗ; or any Intermediate Points from F to G; however this is, what we have now t Conſidèr is only the Reaſoning made Uſe of to Prove, that Light Acting two contrary Ways thro different Mediums, Produces in the whole the ſaimc Effet, that is, Deſcribes the Lines C A, 4 D backwards, as it does D 4, A C forwards, which is not Manifeſt from the Arguments Alledg'd to Confirm ir, and which likeviſe ſeems Averſe to common Reaſon. 5. 13. For moreover, if this were True, as D Ais Refracted to , ſo likewiſe A C If ih Prom would be Refracted to X, and the Angle X CT would be  to H A D, ſuppoſing a dif- ſ- rii ferent Medium 4 B FG to ſeparate two Similar ones lying on cach ſide it, and in this oꝶ/ã æ Poſition of the Figure, Objects at D to the Eye at X would appear on the left Hand stiav, miu of their Real Situation, which is not found to be True in Experience; on the con- difforent trary Philoſophers Endeavour to Explain the Reaſon of our ſeeing Objects thro' the ii ſim æi Glaſs of a Window in their Natural Poſture from this very kind of Refraction, be- ihy do. cauſe the Refraction from C to X Undoes, and, as it were, Unravells the Effect Produced from the Refraction of D A to C, vhich how Juſtly, it is Eaſy to Determine. li 5. 14. BusiDES, if Light is Refracted thro' Gla' or Water, every one knows, the] Iſ ibere æa Rays come out of them ith a Faintneſs and Languor, which is not in the leaſt mtns Equal to the Vivacity and Force, with which they Enter; if therefore we Purſue tam m back the Rays from X, it will be altogether Inconceivable, how the Weak and Luguid R9 Feeble Light at X ſould be Refracted in the ſame Line CA, and in the ſame Angle Eæu ACL, with the more Vigorous and Strong from D in the Line 4C, and in the a ſrsh. Angle C 4 G, which yet muſt be Acknovledg'd, if this Doctrine of Reciprocal Re- 2ſer: Vra fractions is True; What therefore we cannot but Conclude is, that, as in other Firish. Parts of Philoſophy, ſo in this, an Abſtracted Reaſoning is Preferſd to a Real Knowcdge of Things, and that, by theſe Demonſtrations, there is nothing more Provd than a Simple and Plain Refraction of Light, Conſiderd as one ſertled Effect in Nature, which ſuppoſes a Refracted Ray 4 C from a Refracting one D A or XC, or Reciprocally, a Refracting from a Refracted, which is all the Reciprocal Refraction we can at Preſent Comprehend to be Explain'd, or in any manner Deducible from this way of Arguing On the Contrary, all theſc Difficulties Vaniſh in our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces: Qq q2 5. 16. A . I5. A third Principle, Preſumd in the preſent Account of Opticks, is the Diviſion of Light into ſeveral Diſtinct Rays, as in the Preſent Figure, and the Conſidering ſuch Rays, either as Parallel, or Diverging from a certain Point, or Con- llls verging to one; and Particularly, every the Minuteſt Portion of a Viſible W Object is ſupposd to Send out and Emit a Pencil of theſe Rays in the Form of a double Cone, vhoſe one Vertex is the Viſible Point, the Pupil oſ the Eye the common Baſis of both, and the other Vertex is Determin'd in the Retina of it, Expreſſcd in Figure 5. 16; Thus likeviſe a Lens is Imagin'd to Collect ſeveral Parallel Rays to a Focus, according to Figure §. 17. S. 16. As to the Diſtinction of Light into Individual Rays, ſuch a Doctrine ſcems to have it's Riſe from Conſidering it, in the Corpuſcular way, to Conſiſt of Parts, but if we uallow it to be one Homogeneous, Undiſtinguiſhed Subſtance, and of one Entire Nature, the Spli- » Obicã. ting and Scparating it into little Filaments, or i y , Rays, appears to be nothing elſe than a Creature & i of the Fancy, in Order to Form a Mathemati- pil cal Romance in Opticks, as beſore has been Provd to be the Deſign of the Corpuſcular Syſtem, in Reſpect of Philoſophy. 5. 17. For if the Beams of the Sun, which, as coming in dire& Lines from it, bid the faireſt for the Proof of ſuch an Hypotheſis, Conſiſted of little Rays, or ſmall Threads, or Filaments, derivd from thence, there could be no Collection of them by a Lens to a Focus, as in this Figure; Since the Surface of the Lens, which is Opposd to the full Light of the Sum, is Perſectly Illuminated without any Vacant Interſtices or Inte of Shadow, or not; If it is, ſince theſe Imaginary Rays are as cloſe, as it is Poſſible for them to be, they could not be Colleted into a narrower Compaſs in the Focus; If the Surface of the Lns, which is Opposã to the Sun, is not Entirely Illuminated, ſince the: Diameter of the Focus may not be a 20rh or 301h part of the Diameter of the Lens, and therefore the Arca of the one not a 4001h or 9001h Part of that of the other, and ſince the Number of Rays are the ſame before and after their Tranſmiſſion, it will follow, tha the Illuminated and Shaded Parts of the Lens will be as the Dimenſions of the Focus to thoſc of the Lens, Subſtracting Unit, i. æ if there are a Million of Rays Incident on the Surface of the Lens, which are Collected together in the Focus, there vill be 399, or 8399, Shadow'd Spaces in the Lens for one that is Illuminated, which, if True, would be Abundantly Viſible, nothing of which has yet. Appeard ſrom any Obſervations; But on the Contrary, the Surface of the Lens has not the leat Viſible Space, which is not Illuminated, as well as the Focus, and all the Difference is, not in the Extent, ſo far as cach of them Reach, but in the Degree and Force oſ their Illuminations; and this is in a manner Acknowledgd, in 5. 19. where tht Rays of the Sun are ſupposd to be Parallel, becauſe their Inclination to each othei is Infinitely ſmall, that is, the whole Lens is Illuminated by them. 5&. 18. BUT to put this farther beyond Diſpute, it is Manifeſt ſfcom Experience, that if, in a Lens, 4 3 CD ſhould be the Surface Exposd to the Sun, and LG or Læ A the Circles with their Areas, or 4 BCD Qæ, or Q ABCA, or E A BCF E, are coverd by a Paper, the Rays, in all theſe Caſes, will be Collected to much the ſame Focus, and Burn with a like Fierceneſs; and therefore the Hypotheſis, in Fig. 5. 17. of Parallel Rays Falling, and being B n Reſracted vith the Conditions there Specify'd and Expreſicd, cannot be Equal to ſuch a Solotion, which muſt Depend upon ſome other unknown Property, betwixt the Light and a Lens, than what has been hitherto Preſumd or Imagind; for how a Determind Number of Rays Rays, upon their Collection, ſould Conſtiture a Cerrain and Inflammant Focus according to (Fi. ꝗ. 17) and yet rooth or 100rb or a Millionth part of thoſe Rays, and in different Incidencies and Poſitions, ſould nearly Produce the ſame Effect, according to the Preſent Figure, will not be Readily Solvd by the Hypotheſis of Definite and Diſtinct Rays, or Filaments, in the Sun's Beams. 5. 19. Ir this Notwithſtanding was True, which we have Endeavour'd to Confute, the Suppoſition of Parallel Rays is another Difficulty in the preſent Hypotheſis, for thoſe Rays are made to be Parallel, which by the Immenſe Diſtance of the Object, as the Sun, Cauſes an Infinitely near Approach of the Rays to cach other, or elſe, vhich, Conſidering the Smallneſs of the Pupil of the Eye, may be ſupposd as Parallel, there being in ſo ſhort a Circuit little or no Difference in their Incidence. 5. 20. As to the Rays of the Sun being Propagated and Diſſeminated from one Center; If there is a certain Number of Diſtindt and Individual Rays, Derivd from thence, which this Hypotheſis muſt ſuppoſe, they will be ſo far from Approaching to cach other by Increaſing the Diſtance from the Luminous Body, that they will continually Enlarge their Divarication; Thus in the preſent Figure, i? A is ſupposd to be the Sun, and to Propagate Rays from it's ſelf, the farther the Diſtance is, the greater will be the Diſperſion of the Rays A4 B, AC, from each other, and Conſequently the leſs Inclin'd to a Paralleliſm; If there is not a certain Number of Rays emitted from the Sun, but they grow Thicker and Cloſer, as they Retire from it, that new Property of a Circle is firſt to be Demonſtrated, which is Impoſſible; And therefore it ill be Reaſonable in the next Place to Conſider, whether we are not to Inquire into the Nature of that Ether or Medium, which Surrounds us, and the Action of the Sun upon ĩt, in Order to Solve the Refractions of it thr&' a Lens, rather than Form our Notions of Philoſophy from Pictures, which have been made us of the Sun's Radiation, in Lines and Filaments, which ſeems to be the Renl Foundation of ſo Groſ and Childiſh an Error, as that of ſuppoſing there ure any ſuch Radiations. l §. 21. For it is not Sufficient to ſay, that the farther we are Removd from any Object, the Viſual Rays Approach the nearer, fince that is a Problem in Viſion, which remains to be Solvd, and will be aſterwards Conſiderd, the Queſtion only here is, whether the Sun, as a Luminous Body, Emits a certain number of theſc Imaginary Rays, or not; If it does, it is very Evident and Maniſeſt, that they muſ Divaricate from their Center, the farther they are Produced from it; If it does not, there vill be no Occaſion to Conſider the Sun's Diſtance, ſince the Patalleliſm ol the Rays muſt be Aſſerted from a nearer Cauſe, which has not been as yet Aſſign'd and ſeems to be the Action of the Sun upon a Univerſal Ather or Plenum, vhich, when a Glaſs is Interposd, is Refracted. . 22. BUT rhat, which makes this Doctrine ſtill more Inconceivable, is, that a Paralleliſim of the Rays is requird even in the Viewing of Objects, which are near us, in which Caſe the Pupil of the Eye is ſaid to be ſo ſmall, that the Rays, which Fall upon it, find linle or nò Diſtinction in their Incidence. 5. 23. LET us therefore Imagine the Object to be 4, and the Eye B, and D At the Inclination of the Rays, which Fall upon the Pupil of it; in this Caſe ſuppoſing it is True, vhere ſo ſmall a Portion of the Radiating Sphere is taken in, that the Rays vill not be caſily Diſtinguiſhed from Parallel ones, as 4C and AD, it is certain notwithſtanding, if the Eye be carried nearer to 4, that it may be made to Intercept all the Rays, which are Comprehended betwixt 4F and 4 E, and which vill therefore have a very Senſible and Notorious Obliquity; and on the Contrary, if it is Placed at a greater Diſtance from A4 than in it's Poſition at 5, 4C and 4D ma Diverge to that Degree, as not to be Incident upon the Eye at all; ſo that, accordin; to this Doctrine, ſince a Paralleliſm of the Rays is Required, which cannot be al i way Preſerved, the Eye can only fully Diſcern an Object in one certain State and Poſture, or in that, which is nor very Different from it3 Whereas in Experience we Plainly and Clearly Diſcern Things, both at a very ncar, and at a very great Diſtance, and in all the Intermediate Degrees of Interval from the Object; we cannot likewiſe Omit to take Notice, that it is very Extraordinary, that Parallel Rays from a Remote Object, and Divergeing ones from a Near, ſhould be the ſame, in Effect, upon a Lens, or the Pupil of the Eye; But this Philoſophy can Reconcile Contradictions. 5. 24. WE are alſo Confirmd in the Opinion of the Inſufficiency of the preſent Doctrine, from its giving us no Account, how the ſeveral Points of an Object are Capable oſ this Wonderfull Radiation, for in this Philoſophy, which Conſiders Matter as Paſſive and Homogeneous, it muſt be from a bare Reſlection of the Rays, which are Incident upon it, which Rays are either the Direct ones of the Sun, or elſe thoſe of Light, which are every where Diffus'd around the Object it Iluminates; If the firſt, upon the Suppoſition of the Angle of Incidence being Equal to the Angle of Reſlection, which is Adopted into the preſent Science, as a ſixt Axiom, it will be Impoſſible, that ſtrait Lines drawn from the ſame Point, as the Sun, ſhould be Reſected from another in the Object, on Which they Fall, in the Circumference oſ a Circle, or a Sphere, or which ĩs the ſame, that the Rays from 4 ſould Produce thoſe from B; If the laſt, what that Diſfuſion of Light is, will want to be Explain'd, that is, Q how it comes to paſs, that Light Acts in all Directions, ſo as to a E D be Reflected in all, ſince the Sun, which is Acknowledgã to be the Origine and Source of it, does not; or, which is Equivalent, how Light in General ſould Determine it's ſelP from æ and D to B, ſo as to be Reſlected to  and L, when the Suns Action is ſfrom 4 to F, B, and G; or, if it did not Contradict that Action, how the ſame Light Conſiderd, as Diſtinct from the Sun, ſould take ſuch Arbitrary and Different Paths to the ſame Point, vithout any Known or Confeſſcd Cauſe of it's Various Determinations. : j 5. 25. IF this were notwithſtanding Acknovledg'd, ſince Light is now ſuppos'd to be every where Promiſcuouſly Diffusd, there would be no more Reaſon, why æ and D, ſhould be Reflected from B to Q and L, than why the latter ſhould be to the former, and Agreeably in all other Caſes; from Whence it would follow, that from ſuch a Univerſal Diffuſion of Light, Action would be Equal to Reaction, and there would be no Reſlection at all, but a Perfect quilibrium in the Actions oſ Light, by which they would be a Mutual Curb and Reſtraint upon cach other, ſo as Effectually to hinder any Returns of the Rays ſfrom the Bodies, on which they Impinged. i 5. 26. Ir it be ſaid it is Matter of Fact, that Rays are Reflected in all Angles, ſrom our ſeeing Objects in any Poſition of the Eye to them, we Anſwer, the Phæ nomenon is Acknovledęd, but the Solution of it denyd from the Hypotheſis of Diverging Rays; for, beſides what has been Alledgd, it is farther to be Remarked, that on ſuch a Conceſſion, and granting all that can be Deſird, there would thoſe Difficulties ariſe, vhich would be altogether Inextricable; For it ſeems to be Impoſſible ſor the Points 4, B, C, D, to ſend out their ſeveral Pencils of Rays 4 E, BF, CG, D H, without Occaſioning the utmoſt Confuſion upon their firſt ſetting out, from whence their Progreſs vould, be Entangled and Embaraſſed to that Degree, that it would bealtogether Inconceivable, how they ſhould Produce the Efſects, (notwithſtanding a Million of Interruptions, which they are ſuppos'd to do; And that there muſt be an Infinite Number of Actions and Reactions, (which the preſent Reaſoning ſuppoſes] ſo as either to Cauſe an Equal Balance which is Probable, or a Wild Confuſion of the Forces Acting from different Points, which is the Plain Reſult of the Preſent Philoſophy, is Evident, if there are any Forces Confeſſcd at all, which are Propagated ſfrom Various Points in Various Directions and Determinations. The Doctrine, Again, of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces ill Extricate us ſrom theſe Objections and Explain Nature in a much more Rational Way. 5 27. A S. 27. A fourth Principle Preumd in this Philoſophy is, that the Rays, which Th Fourii Diverge from any Point in à Viſible Object, are Collected by a Lens to the ſame ſ æ Point after their Tranſmiſſion thro' it, and that the Points, from which the Rays are iti;, an ſScatterd, are to the Points, to which they are Refracted, in an Inverted Order, and paind in its that the Eye Purſues the Rays, and Returns it's Action back upon them in the ſame ũuu pai Strait Lines, by which the Impreſſion was made; Thus in the Figure here Inſerted, Molyneux. The Rays, which Fall from 4, are Dioptr. Colleted in F, thoſe from B, in E, and thoſe from  in D, and ſo of any Intermediate Points betwixie 4 and B, or B and C; The Axes of which ſeveral Pencils of Rays are ſuppos'd to be in ſtrait Lines, as 4 F, BE, CD, and to Croſs each other in the middle Point H, betwixt G and K; It is alſo farther to be Obſerv'd, that the Object 4 C is preſumd to be directly Opposd to the Refracting Medium õ X. 5. 28. FIRST, as to the Axes of the ſeveral Pencils being in Direct Lines, it ĩs Ti: ar of Impoſſible they ſhould be, unleſò in this certain Poſition Obſervd in the preſent Fi- iſe ſes ual gure, or unleſs, as the Object 4 BC Approaches nearer to GH, or is Removd far- ꝶ., ther from it, the Image D E F is Proportionably Increaſed or Diminiſhed; for as the æœã n b& Lines 4H, and CH, by the Acceſs or Receſs of the Objet A4 BC, Divaricate and n — VWiden, or Come cloſer together, ſo will HD and H F, being Oppoſite Lines, which æmià & ſui are Continued to the former, and At upon the ſame Center of their Motion H  Dm From whence it vill follow, either in the firt Caſe, that the Repreſentation DE F i, oĩã, ⸗ can only be made in this Fixed and Unalterable Poſition of the Object to the Lens, rhi Reaſmmn vhich is Contrary 1o Fa& and Experience, or elſe in the ſecond, that ithin the 2ſſuæ: ſhort Space or Diſtance of double the Line  H, ſuppoſing D P to be hal as Large Expriæ. as 4 c, the Object may Appear twice as great near H, as ĩt does at B, and as fat beyond B, as B is from H, twice as ſfmall, both which are likewiſe Contradicted by Fact and Experience; fince 4 C is ſeen wthout any Confiderable Alteration in more Places than 5, and in Particular, without that Increaſe or Diminution on this Side B, or beyond it, which this Reaſoning muſt ſuppoſe. 5. 29. Nor does this Objection againſt the preſent Doctrine ſeem Capable of The Accrſi an being taken off by an Hypotheſis of a Change in the Figure of the Lens, or of the Ruuſi of ie DPiſtance betwixt it and DF; ſince however the Lens is made, either Flatter or more ſrom ihe Lens Protuberant, C H D is ſtill Imagin'd t0 be one ſtrait Line, as likewiſe 4 HF, and ſer ſufem therefore the Elongation of the Retina from the Lens, or it's Approximation to it, will ã, i Di have much the ſame Effect with H D, and HP, Receding from cãch other, or Coming to- suby. gether, where DE F is ſupposd to keep the ſame Determin'd Diſtance from the Lens; that is, the Image will be Proportionably Lengthened and Contracted; beſides it is Impoſſible to Concevę;, how the Retina by any ind of Adjuſtment ſould Retire as 4 C Advances, or on thæe Contrary, and Eſpecially, ſince, vhen our Eyes are moſt Fixed and Intent, and dò not ſeem to Admit of the leat Change, Objects, notvithſtanding that, in very different Diſtances Appear to have thie ſame Dimenſions for ſeveral Yards together, whereãs, either by the Hypotheſis of the former Section, or the Preſent, they could nor Prœſerve them Unalter'd and Certain for an Inch. 5. 30. WHAT ſtill Renders this Way of Reaſoning more Obſcure is, that A H Net Extlaa and CH are not Conceivũd to ſuffer any Refraction, whilſt other Rays, which do not j yumi Senſibly Fall with a greater Obliquity, are Subject to a very Conſiderable one, asũn of ihe CK and 4G; or rather in the diredt Pencil B6 E, Eſpecially in the Rays, Which Obiquè Fenci Fall the neareſt to the Axis B H, ſeveral are ſpposã to be Reſrated, that are Ap-7:ſuuun parently Incident with a leſs Obliquity, rhan the Axes of the Oblique Pencils, which uæ ray in are ſuppos'd not to be Refracted 3 And in General, it will Exceed an Ordinary ſſ/ Inei Comprehenſion, how the different Pencils, as well Oblique as Direct, ſhould Equally aĩ́ anm, Terminate in their ſeveral Points behind the Lens in F, æ, and D, where the Con- ⸗ ſen ditions of their Incidence are ſo Varions and ſo Diſagrecable to each other; For if the Rays from B are ſo Refracted, as to Arrive at the ſame Point in E, how ihe Ravs Rays from 4 ſould be Collected in F, or thoſe from C in D, where there is not one Ray that Falls with a like Incidence with thoſe from B, Will be a Difficulty not eaſily Surmounted; or which is all one, becauſe 2 H Proceeds Directly to E, vhy CH, which has a different Incidence, ſhould to D, and Conſequently, why the other Rays of the ſame Pencil ſhould, becauſe thoſe from  do, or are ſuppos'd to do, vill want a better Explanation. . 31. AGAIN, it has been before Aſfirmd §. 15, that Rays are to be Conſid er'd, as Falling in a manner Parallel, which tho' it ſould give an Account, how the Axes of the ſeveral Pencils Obſerve the ſame Law, in their Tranſmiſſion thro the Lens, of not being Refracted at all, and how the Rays belonging to each Pencil follow the Conditions of the Direct; yet on the other Hand, it will be altogether Inconſiſtent, that Rays, vhen we Conſider different Pencils, ſhall be Paralle, and when we Conſider the ſame, ſhall not be, but are ſupposd to make up a double Cone, Radiating from one Point, and Collected to another; For there can be no Reaſon Aſſign'd, vhy 4 H, CH, and B H, ſhould be Conſiderd as Parallel, and BG, B H, and BX, or Cũ, CH, and CK, ſould be Diverging; nor is it caſily Reconcil'd to common Senſe, how Lines, which Conſtiture an Angle 4 Hq, ſhould be Equidiſiant from one another; and yet the Paralleliſm of Rays is made Neceſſary, according to §. 15, to the Refraction of them, thro a Lens, to a Point. 5. 32. FARTHER, the Diverging Rays are ſupposd to be Collected after their Tranſmiſſion to a Point, which is not Manifeſt, or any ways Conſirmd from the Property of the Lens; on the Contrary, we Plainly Experience, that in the Active and Vivid Rays oſ the Sun, they are only Determind to a Circular Focus, vhich could never be ſufficient to Delineate ſo Perfect and Exact an Image as DEF, whoſe ſeveral Points are thought to be Expreſſed from the Radiation of thoſc in the Object 4 BC. 5. 33. MOREOVER, this Doctrine ſuppoſes 4 C to be Objected to the Lens in à Perpendicular Situation to it, whereas if 4 C is Placed ſeveral Yards Obliquely on one Side, or another, it will by Experience be Equally Viſible, as in that direct Poſition. 5. 34. ANOTHER Argument againſt the preſent Account of Opticks is, that the Points of the Object, and thoſe of the Image, are in an Inverted Order only in Reſpect of Length, that is, 4 is Refracted to , and C to D, and the like Arrives to the Intermediate Spaces betwixt 4, B, and C, B; Suppoſing 4 B C a Plane, with a ſmall Plane eſ croſſing it, the Parallel Lines in the Plane 4 B C will Obſerve the ſame Laws of Refraction with the former, and Conſejuently the whole Plane vill be Inverted, in Reſpect of it's Length, but it's Breadth will Continue in the ſame Poſition, in the Image, as in the Object; that is, ſ will be Refracted to f, and e to e, and not on the Contrary e in the Object to f in the Image, or ſ in the Object to e in the Image; or, according to this Theory, there will be only an Inverſion one vay, unleſs a Ray from e or ſ can be Refracted in a diſferent Plane from that oſ it's Incidence, that is, in Planes not Parallel to 4 G HC; which is contrary to the Fundamental Law of Refraction; whereas in Fact, and by Experiments, made from the Refraction of Light, thro' a Lens oppos'd to a hole made in a Window-Shut, and the Room being Prohibited any other Light, than what paſes thro the Foramen, and is from thence caſt by the Lens upon a White Paper, which I lild behind it, if there is any Effect Produced by the Lens, Objects Appear to be every way Inverted, and at all Angles, and Determinations, ſo that in every part it is the very Reverſe in the Image, of vhat it is in the Object, of which it is the Repreſentation. S. 35. WuAT We here juſt now ſaid, is upon the Suppoſition, that the Lens Inverts the Image, but that which is Wonderſul in this Doctrine is, that the Refraction ol the Lens ſiould be here Aſſign'd, as the Cauſc of this Inverſion, when it has nothing to do in it; ſince it is caſy for any one to find a Tree, ſor Example, or any othei Objcct, Imprinted thro' the Foramen upon a White Paper with it's Branches down wards, and thoſc on the Right Hand in the Object will by a Tranſverſe Direction Proceed to the Leſt Hand of the Image and thoſe on the Leſt in the one to the Right of the other, without the Interpoſition of a Lens, as this Doctrine ſuppoſes and if a Lens be Interpos'd, it makes no Alteration, unleſs in Collecting the Image which is Diſfus'd, into a narrower Compaſs, and in Repreſenting it with a greate Clearneſs and Diſtinction. i 5. 36. DESIDL S. 36. BESIDES, if a Lens had the Property of Inverting the Rays, which Fall upon it, it would be hard to Reconcile it with that other Property, which is Afirmd of it, of Collecting the Rays to a Focus, which Diverging from thence are at laſt Inverted; but if they were Inverted at the Time, vhen they came to theit Focus, after theirt Croſſing each other there, they ought to Reſume their Natural and Original Order, which they could not do, if they were Inverted before-hand; From all which it is Evident, what little Reaſon we have to Truſt to, and Confide in Experiments, made to ſerve an Hypotheſis, which we are Reſolv'd to Maintain, ſince theſe of the Lens, which are Fundamental to the preſent Theory of Opticks, are ſo ſtrangely Perverted to ſupport it. 5. 37. LastLy, it is Inconceivable, how the Eye ſhould Recoil upon the Action, which is Impreſſed, ſo as to Purſue the Rays according to the Direction, in which they Fell; It is a known Experiment, that in Polyedral Glaſſes, of ſeveral Cuts or Faces, as AD, DC, CB, and where the Rays Fall upon each of them from L, and are Refracted to the Eye in E, by it's following back the Rays according to the Direction with which they were Incident, it ſees three Objects, for Inſtance, inſtead of one; And for the ſame Reaſon, in the Preceding Figure, by the Eye's Referring it's ſelf back in the ſame Line CH D, in which the Action was Communicated to it, D is ſeen in , F in 4, by the Line F HA, and E in B, by EHB; But why it ſould not make Uſe of the ſame Reference according to the Direction of ?G, F X, EG, EX, and DG, DEX, and Conſequently ſee the Object much beyond the Limits of 4 and C, as vell as Reſign it's ſelf to the Conduct only of the Axes of the Pencils is not, and I believe cannot be Explain'd; If the Eye does Purſue the Rays, which are Refracted, as well as thoſe, which are not, this Philoſophy is not Juſ ;3 becauſe in ſuch a Caſe AC vould appear much bigger at leaſt, than it is ſupposd to do, that is, we ſould ſee an Object as large as the Extent, which from 4C would lie betwixt DX and F G Prolongd; however this is, ſince notwithſtanding, theſe Principles take no Notice of any Rays beyond thoſe which reach to 4 and C, it is plain the Eye is not ſuppos'd to Refer it's ſelf back in D X and FG, Which why it ſhould not do, as well as in DH and F H, ve vant to be Informd; What has been ſaid Concerning the Rays D X and FG, in the former Figure, ĩs Applicable to E A4 and E B, as alſo DE and CE in the Preſent, which if the Eye Purſu'd back according to their Incidence, the Objeci would not be only Multiplyd into three, but cach of them would be Exceedingly Increaſed in their Magnitude and Dimenſions, hich yet is not Affirm'd in theſe Opticks but rather the Contrary, and is Confuted by Experience, by vhich we find Objects to be not Increaſed but Diminiſhed in ſuch Polyedral Glaſſes. 5. 38. In Concluſion, whilſt we Conteſt the Prin] ciples of Opticks, we do not Deny cither the Experiments made by the Lens of Collecting Light, or the Reflection or Refraction of Light in General Namely in one Senſe, that there isa Return of the Action of Light in the firſt Caſc, and a Tranſmiſſion and Contraction or Diſperſion of it in the lat; what we Affirm here is, that theſe Phænomenons ire not Juſtly Explain'd from any Radiation of certain Points either Reflected or R rr Refracted, Refradted, and which we ſhall Endeavour farther to Prove from the other Phænomenons, which remain in Opticks. BESIDES Which we ſhall only at preſent Add, that, if the Doctrine, Proposd in the foregoing Section, was True, there is no Account given by what Lav or Property of Nature the Eye Purſues back the Rays, which Affect it, and in that Direction, in which they Fall; This is aMyſtery not thought fit to be Dived into, and thereſore we muſt not Require an Explanation of it. But if we are willing to admit oſ the Principles, I have Advanced, the Expanſive Force will Furniſh us with a Solution of the Eyes, Reacting upon the Rays and of their Diſperſion, and the Contractive with one of their Collection and Contraction. C H A P. VI. Concerning the Propoſitions in Optichs, which Relate to Glaſſes, which are either double Convex, or Plano-Convex Ones. 5.1. FTER Conſidering the Foundations of the preſent Science of Opticks, we ſhall, in this Chapter, Proceed to the Propoſitions Advanced in it; Which ſince, as we have Prov|, the Hypotheſes, on which it Depends, are not Anſwerable to Nature, the Deductions from them can be no other, than the Aſcertaining the ſeveral Proportions of Quantities in their Compariſon with each other, which were Origiginally Abſtracted by the Mind, without any Conformity of them to the Real Eſ ſences of Things, or the True Properties of Light, and the Mediums of Glaſi, or Water, or Air, with which it's Action is Compared. 5. 2. TuE ſirſt Propoſition therefore in this Science is; That when a Ray 4 b Falls on a Spherical Glaſs 4 e D, and after it's firſt Refraction Croſſes the Axis  æ, it will be; As the Sine of the Angle oſ Refraction to the Sine of the Angle of Inclination, So the Radius of the Glaſts Sphere to the Reſracted Ray. For, 1ſſ. ſince æh and è r are Drawn Parallel, br  will be Equal to the Angle hbr, which is that of Refraction, according to i; the Definition us'd in the preſent Opticks; 24. Since e f and br are likewiſe Drawn Parallel, the Angle e ſ will be = e le to bre, and bo will be the Sine of the Angle of Inclina- 4 o nation, and æc the Sinc of the Angle of Refraction; 33. A D Since thereſore, by this Conſiruction, the Triangles e f and bro are Similar, the Proportion will be, as ec. bo:: ſ. ſ br. which was the Propoſition to be Demonſtrated; Or according to Hugens, as cr. ſr:: bo. S. Aug. bfe :: br. fr. 5. 3. AGAINST which Demonſiration, in Reſpect, and vith Relation to a True Philoſophy, we ſhall firſt ſay, that it only Procecds upon Principles, which are Perfectly Abſtracted by the Mind; Since the ſame would be Valid Concerning any Body or Quantity, as well as Light, if it r Obſerv'd the ſame Conditions in it's Progreſs, which ſi are here ſuppos'd, of Falling Parallel to ⸗ f;, of Entering a E Mcdium, which has the Convexity 4 c D, the Radius of which is c f, and of being Incident with the Angle of Inclination æb, and Refracted in the Angle h br, or, according to Hugens, ? bſ; That is, there is no more ſaid in this Demonſtration, than that, if e ſę, /to bre,is /to hbr, and b fę is=to lbt, the preſent Propoſition is True; that is, if ſbæ is the Angle of Incidence, and hbr of Reſiaction; that is, b ill Proceed from b to r, iſ it is ſo Refracted, or, vhich is the ſame, if it does Proceed from b to r. FrOM whence it follows, that there is nothing Peculiat in this Demonſtration, vhich ſould give any Acceſs of Credit or Reputation to the preſent Principles of Opticks; Since the whole of it Terminates in the Proportion betwixt b o and fc iſ the Sines are the Meaſure of Reſraction, or betwixt Ib ſ and hbr, if the Angles are. Ir thereſore e c and bo, or if IbE and hir, are not Aſcertaind by Fact and Experience, this whole Reaſoning is Abſtracted in it's ſclf, and, as it Reſpects Nature, Invalid and Inconcluſive. S. 4. TuE S. 4. THE Meaning of the former Section in Part is this, that in the Glaũ Cyinder 4DE, in which the Refraction is made, the Medium 4 D E Continuing the ſame, and the Convexity of its Superficies 4 D, and Conſequently the Radius of it rf, it is altogether Inconceivable, that the Incident Ray b Falling vith different Forces, as well as Inclinations, ſould be Refracted to the ſame Point , and therefore that the Rays which are Parallel to the Axis and Reſracted in Glaſs, ſhould be United with the Axis at a Certain and Determin'd Diſtance of near a Diameter and half of the Convexity, ſuppoſing the Glaſs to be a Portion of no more, than of about 3 Degrees of it, which Certain and Determin'd Diſtance, notwithſtanding, this Propoſition Affirms; If thereſore it is found by Experience, that there is a Determination of the Focus at the Diſtance of near a Diameter and half of the Convexity of the Glaſs, it is yet Certain, that this Demonſtration does not give any Account of it; If it is not found by Experience, it is nothing elſe but an Abſtracted Reaſoning, and Fails of that Accuracy, which might be Expected from it. s. 5. Ir yct the Reſractions of all Kinds of Light, whether more or leſs Vivid and Strong, Reacht to 7, we ſould Probably find ſome Difference in the Glaſs at r from any other Part of it; There would be ſome Particular Brightneſs or other, ve may Imagine, in that Place, which as this Doctrine of Opticks does not Aſſert, ſo ve may Reaſonably Conclude it does not Appear; and, that Conſequently this is nothing more than a Realoning from Abſtracted Notions, and not a Conviction of the Reality of Things, as they are found to Exiſt without us. 5. 6. For moreover, according to this Demonſtration, ſuppoſing the Glaſs was to Terminate in f, there will be a whole Diameter of it's Convexity, in which the Light would have Proceeded in the ſame Medium had it been Continu'd, and Conſequently would have Force enough to be Collected to a Focus in a different one as Air, notvithſtanding the Thickneſs of the Glaſs æ ſ; which yet is not Manifeſt from Experience, that a Glaſs, vhoſe Thickneſs is the Semidiameter or the Diameter of it's Curvity, vill Cauſe, or any ways Produce, ſuch a Collection of the Rays to a Focus, ſince half a Globe, or a Globe, of Glaſs will not do it, unleſs it is of a Determined Magnitude ; Whereas this Demonſtration ſuppoſes the Radius cf to be as large as we Pleaſe. S5.7. LastLy, ifec. bo:: e f. b r, which this Demonſtration Preſumes, ſeeing æ ? and bo will be changſd according to the Incidence of b being nearer or farther off ſfrom cf, the Length of the Line b7 ill be Proportionably Alterd, and Conſequently that of cr, which vill not in the leat Agree with the ſettled Rule in Opticks of the Rays being United with the Axis, at a Certain and Determin'd Diſtance of near a Diameter and half of the Convexity of the Glaſs, as is Aſfirmd in §. 4. But that which s more Surprizeing is, that in Hugenss Demonſtration r. fr:: br. fr, thatis crisæbr. 5. S. AND here we cannot but in General Add, that the Refraction in Glaſs, or Water, in the Paſage of Light from Air thro' it, or the Contrary, Wants a farther Explanation; It is Affirm'd, that the Firſt, Namely Glaſs or Water, makes a Refraction to the Perpendicular, and the Laſt, to it Air, from it; And the common Experiments to Aſure us oſ this are, iſſ. that A H a Ray of Light Paſſing thro' the Foramen at æ Proceeds to B, if the Box D F E G be Empty, but if Filled with Water, is Reſracted toC; 24. Fig. s. o. that ſuppoſing D CE a Baſon, hich is Empty with a Piece of Silver, or any other Object, Placed A L at , it vill be ſeen in B, or 4, but if Filled with Water, in 4, 4, and Conſcquently the Refraction is, in this Caſe, made from D F the Perpendicular. 5. 9. IN Anſver to the firſt of which Experiments it is Evi- E dent, that this is a Property or Affection of the Solar Light,  ũ5 CE when it Falls in Full and Pointed Beams on the Foramen , (Fig. . 8.) and tho' it ſould be True in ſuch an Obliquity of 4 H to D H, this yet is not a Standard, by which ve can either Meaſure the Actions of the Diſfus'd Light oſ Day on Glaſi, or Water, or even of the Perpendicular Rays of the Sun; 17. As to common Light, it is ſuppos'd to be Directed to H in Columns oſ all Incidences, which Indeed are only Imaginary, ſince Light is a Continucd Diffuſion of æther Actuated by Rrra the the Suns Expanſive Force, and if they were Real, would Confute a Refracted Radiation; For in Reſpect of the firſt, who can Conceive Rays of Light, which ſeem to Float Undiſtinguiſt in the Enlighten'd Medium, B who can Imagine them like ſo many Active Lines x Tending from 4, and L, to H, Fig. . 8. without A any Apparent Cauſc in A or L, which Impells them; D: 77iil A If this notwithſtanding were Eaſy to Apprehend, it E would Follow ſecondly, that Light in it's Refraction, G H would take up leſs Space than in it's Incidence, and if DF was vholly Illuminated, GE either ought not to be, and therefore ſome Part of the C Latter would not be Tranſparent Contrary to Experience, or elſe by the ſeveral Contractions of 7B to NC, that is, by the Gradual Approaches made thereby to a Focus, each Part of the Line GE would be more Bright and Luminous than that of DF, which likewiſe is Contrary to what we Obſerve, ſince after Reſfraction the Light is rather Impaired and Weakened. 2. As to what Concerns the Perpendicular Rays of the Sun, or of Light in General, which Fall Directly upon the Surface DF, it is Impoſſible for them to be Refracted to a Perpendicular, and yet as Improbable they ſould Proceed in one; for the Conditions of the Mediums, thro which they Paſs, being Different, it is not Agreeable to Think they ſiould Obſerve the ſame Laws; Thus a Stone, let Fall Perpendicularly into Water, vill find it's ſelf Carricd in another Line, than what it Deſcrib'd before it's Entrance into it. All which Diſficulties are Accounted for, s. 32. Chap. 4. 5. 10. THE other Experiment, by which it is Provid, that Light is Refracted from the Perpendicular in it's Tranſit from Water to Air, tho' it is True, is not Concluſive of that, which is Intended to be Evidenc'd by it, that is, the Refraction of Particular and Diſtinct Rays, which are ſuppos'd to be Emitted from the Object q, Fig. s. o. For beſides what has been already Argu'd Concerning the Hypotheſis o Radiation in the foregoing Chapter, we ſhall here Subjoyn; That if all the Rays, which are ſent from C towards B, are Bent and Inclin'd to 4, that we ſee the Object at all when the Eye is Poſited in 4, muſt Depend upon the Suppoſition of the Eye's Purſuing back the Rays according to the Direction, in which they Fall, which, if it is Matter of Fact, is however, as we have already ſaid, not Explain'd; But moreover ſuch a Refraction could not Alter the Number of the Rays, and only Change the Poſition of them to the Object; Whereas by Refraction ve do not only ſee Objects in a diſferent Situation, but likewiſe in a different Magnitude, and even when the Eye is in F, where the Rays are ſupposd to be Perpendicular; Laſtly, if the Refraction of Particular Rays was only to be Conſiderd, we ſhould ſee the Object in C no other ways, than by ſilling the Baſon with Water up to D E; for ſince we looſe the Sight oſ the Object C by the Interpoſition of the Side of the Baſon EC, that is, when the Eye is below C4, it would be Impoſſible for C a7 to be Reſracted to the Eye, unleſs the Surface of the Water was even with the Margin or Brim of the Baſon; ſor if it was belov, as in GH, the Rays would be Refracted to the Sides of it, betwixt E and H and Conſequently, would never Reach the Eye, contrary to Experience, ſince the Rays, which are Emitted from C nearer to CF, as Cõ and CK, vill be Reſracted above 4, as thoſe, which are nearer to C4, are below it; Not to Mention the Abſurdity of ſewer Rays being Refracted to the Eye, Cauſing an Increaſe in the Magnitude of the Object; What has been Proposd in the foregoing Sections, is equally Applicable to the Experiments of Xepler, Particularly of a Cube of Chryſtal Adapted to an Opake Body, by Which it appears, that the Shadow, made by the Glaſi, is Contracted, and the Adjoyning continucd beyond it, as far as the Rays without Refraction Extend, and may be thus  B Expreſs'd, as before in Section 82h, 4 B is the Unreſracted Ray, and AC the Reſractedc Which Difficulties are likewiſe Solvd, ꝗ. 32. Chap. 4. S. 11. VE ſhall therefore, after having Premis'd theſe general Conſiderations, Pro ceed to the Second Propoſition in the Science of Opticks or Dioptricks, which is: That ſuppoſing a Glaſs to be Terminated by tvo Superſicies, the one a Convex as a ſ4 Fig. 5. 12. and the other aPlane a h b,and the Incident Ray to be è a Patallel to e ſ, the Courſe of the Ray upon Refraction will be Determin'd 10 æ; That is, Paralleſ Ray: from any Object to the Axis are United with it about the Diſtance of a Diamerel of the Convexity from the Pole of the Glaſs, if the Seęment be but 30 Degrees In n Order to Prove which, there is nothing more Conſiderd, than that ? à will be Reſracted to h, and Conſequently the Sines of Incidence and Refraction will be Repreſented by mn and op, if à is the Center of the Arc, mq and the one is made to the other as 14 to 9, and à: vill be likewiſe Refracted to s5, ſo as ?æ the Sine of Incidence, on the Contrary, may be to rs the Sine of Refraction, as o to 14, k being the Center of the Arc æs, by which Means s will meet the Axis in z; from whence it is alſo Prov'd, that the Point of Concourſe æ7/ is leſs or more Removd from the Pole of the Convexity ſ, as the Glaſs is leſs or more Thick, but cannot Exceed a Diameter and half, ſince it would meet with the Axis at that Diſtance, if there was only one Refraction, by the firt Propoſition. S. 12. THAT this Demonſtration alſo is only an Abſtracted one, and does not Extend to the Reality of Things, . i ji as they Exiſt, is Manifeſt on ſe- z veral Accounts; The firſt ĩs, that AB e the Rays are ſuppos'd 1o be Pa- El rallel, which are Incident, and yet to Proceed from an Object, vhoſe Points were before Preſumd to Emit certain Pencils of Rays in the Form of Cones, and therefore not Parallel, but Diverging; upon the lat Hypotheſis this Demonſtration will not be True, and upon the former. that the Incident Rays are ParalIel from the Diſtant Objects, from which they are Derivã, it muſt be Enquird, how Objects at a Diſtance Radiate in Parallel Lines, which we have already ſhewn, there is no Reaſon to Affirm. 5. 13. GRANTING Which, the Convexity of the Glaſs is ſupposd to be à ſ, Namely, of a Certain and Determin'd Situation to  à; hereas, if the Curvity of the Glaſs is leſs, as in ſ, whoſe Radius is à F, or greater, as in fy, whoſe Radius is y E, there muſt Neceſſarily Enſue an Alteration in the Refraction oſ the Incident Rays; ſince, in the firſt Caſe, they will be little different from ſo many Perpendiculars e f, which are not ſupposd to be at all Refracted, and therefore will not meet the Axis æf in any Diſtance from the Pole of the Glaſ, much leſs at the Diſtance of the Diameter from it; if yet they are not to be Conſidered in this Caſe as Perpendiculars, at leat à, which vill be the Angle of Inclination, vill be very different from 4à Aſſlumd in this Demonſtration, that is, it will be much leſs, and Conſequently, the Sine of it will be much leſs than mn, the Sine of the Angle 4àæ, by which Means the Point of Concourſe of the Refracted Ray with the Axis will be much farther Removd from the Pole of the Glaſ, than is here Defin'd; On the other Hand, in the ſecond Caſe, where the Curvity of the Glaſs is greater, D5e vill be the Angle of Inclination greater than Aãe, the Angle Aſſumd, and Conſequently the Sine of it will be greater than mn, by which Means the Concourſe of the Refracted Ray with the Axis will be much nearer the Pole of the Glaſs than is Expreſſcd in the preſent Figure; Or, according to this Demonſtration, monſtration, ſince the Radius ſæ of f the greater Convexity is ſhorter than the Radius q f of the Convexity Aſumd ⸗, and the Radius ſF of the Leſer Convexity v ſ is longer than the ſame Radius, and ſince the Concourſe of thic Reſracted Ray vith the Axis is at a Diſtance of a Diameter of the Curvity of the Glals ſrom the Pole of it, it is Neceſſary by the Acknowledgements of this Philoſophy, that the more Convex the Glaſs is, on which the Incident Ray Falls, the ſooner it ſhould meet with the Axis upon Reſraction, and the leſs Convex, that the Point of Concourſe ſhould be farther Removd. Ir therefore what foregoes is either True in it's ſelf, or Acknowledg'd by this Philoſophy, it is as certain, that the Rays, which Fall betwixt ſã and Parallel to e ſ, vill cither be like Perpendicular ones, and therefore not Refracted at all, or at leaſt their Concourſe vith the Axis, upon Refraction, vill be farther Removd from the Pole of the Glaſs, than the Concourſe of cã is, upon it's Reſraction, Becauſe they Fall upon a leſſer Convexity; And on the Contrary, the Rays which Fall betwixt àa and Parallel to e ſ, and upon a greater Converity, will have their Concourſe with the Axis, upon Refraction, nearer to the Pole of the Glaſi, vhich is Impoſſible to be Reconcil'd with the Rays Mcering, upon their Refraction, at one certain Point; Namely, at the Diſtance of a Diameter oſ the Convexity; But if ĩt is ſaid, that one Ray only is here Conſiderd, as cã, it is Evident, that ſuch Demonſtrations will give us but a ſlender Information of the Properties of the whole Incident Light betwixt ſ and a, and that the Science of Opticks is no other thar a Purſueing, and Reaſoning upon, Abſtracted Lines, without any Regard to Nature, or to Light, as it Really Exiſts in it. j S. 14. NOR is it Suſficient to Aſſirm, that Circles are Similar, and therefore what is Provd of one is Concluſive of all; Becauſe the Rays of Light, whilſt Light is Aſerted to Conſiſt of them, are and muſt be ſupposd to have one and the ſame Individual Number and Tenour, that is E, F, and G, which Fall upon 4 B, are alſo in the ſame Quality and Number Incident on CD, ſo that if 4B is 30 Degrees, and likewiſe CD an Arc, which is Similar to it, the Rays which take up the whole Arc CD vill only Poſſeſs half that of 4 B, and therefore the ſame Rays, which are almoſt Perpendicular in the firſt Inſtance, may be Extremely Oblique in the Second, and thereſore muſt admit of thoſe Variations in Refraction, which are Expreſſcd in the foregoing Section;3 On the Contrary, to make what is Demonſtrated of one Circle Applicable to all others, it is Preſumd, that there are as many Rays Fallon a Leſſer as on a Larger Convexity, that is, that in 4 B Light is Diffusd, and in C D Contracted, Proportional to the Arcs, which it Illuminates; An Hypotheſis, which it is Impoſſible ſiould be any vhere elſe, than in the Head, that Forms it. j 5. 15. WE muſt farther Add, that the Segment of the Circle in this Doctrine is ſuppos'd to be only 30 Degrees, and not to Exceed it3 The Reaſon of which is Alledgd to be this, becauſe ſo far the Sines and theit Angles are nearly Proportional, a Double Angle having a Double Sine, and a Triple in like Manner a Triple one, Anſerable to it; All the Refractions of Light beyond ſuch an Arc are either thercfore Reducible to this Demonſtration, or not; If they are, there is no Occaſion for Speciſying the Particular Segment Requiſite to it; If not, it is Evident, that ſuch a Proof is a Thing of Abſtraction in the Mind, and not Adapted to the Explanation of Nature. 5. 16. DESIDES Which, If the Refraction of Light is in General to be Meaſurd by the Sines, let the Angles be Proportional to them, or not, the laſt of vhich is Plainly Aſerted by this Philoſophy, Namely, that they are not, there can be no Reaſon to Conſine a Demonſtration to a certain Segment only, in which the Sines and Angles are Proportional. 5. 17. LastLy, S. 17. LAsTLY, it is ſaid, that the Point of Concourſec æ is nearcr to, or ſarther #ea: it c from ſ, as the Glaſs is of a leſs or a greater Thickneſs; Becauſe, as the Glaſs is uſin ſrom Thicker, à æ will be the longer before it is Reſracted, and therefore will not meet of ihæ rem fæ ſo ſoon as it would ortherviſc do; From whence it is Manifeſt, and Acknow- sea ledg'd by that Demonſtration, which is given, of the Point of Concourſc being at õũLp i J the Diſtance of about a Diameter of the Convexity from the Pole of the Glaſs, that liſi Taick it may be at near a Diameter and half from it; Which is a ſuſficient Conviction, that ſuch a Demonſtration only Purſues the Evidence oſ it's own Principles, and is This or the Other, as They Direct, without any Reſpect had to the Real Principles of PhiIoſophy, or the Aſections of Nature; Since for the ſame Reaſon, iſ the Glaſs is Thinner, the Point of Concourſe may be leſs Removd, than at the Diſtance of the Diameter of the Converxity. 5. 18. A Third Propoſition in Dioptricks is, To Find out the Point of Concourſe of the Ray cã, aſter it's Refraction thro' a Double Convex u a Glaſs a b, with the Axis ?æ;3 Which is Affirmd to be h c r Reſiu at the Diſtance of the Radius or Semidiameter of the c_cm Convexity ab 3 As to what Concerns the Progreſ E ſler d and I of the Incident Ray cã, which is ſupposd Parallel to lE plaina. Molyneuxs Dioptritks Prop. 3. Part. 1. Hugens's Dioptricks Prop. 16. the Axis æ, it is Reſracted to 7, that is, to the Perpendicular q4, for otherwiſe it would have Proceedcd to e; Aſter it's Arrival at i, it would go on to m, if it were not Refracted from the Perpendicular Eil to æ; This therefore is the ſuppos'd Progreſs of the Ray cd The Determination of which in æ is Calculated in the following Manner; hywy +wq=Iq, and g ã is the Perpendicular Diſtance betwixt cã and Eę; But in the Rectangle Triangle 704, gà the Diſtance and qã the Semidiameter of the Glaſ's Convexity being given, the Angle ęq4, and Conſequently qd e vhich is= to it, and the Side 2, are known by Trigonometry, and therefore  5,to tqq g5 Likeviſe in the Rectangle Triangle tgęã, kę and gã are given, and Conſequently the Angle g*ã, =to cã t, and the Side 4ã, are known; Farther, as 300. 193:: S. Ang. qde. S. Ang. qd i, which is therefore alſo found out by this Proportion, but deqdi is7 to eã i, and 180 tldcedi=tokdi; It is alſo Evident, that in the Triangle hãi, the Angle æd i, and the Sides æĩ, and E d, being known, the Angle æid=m i l is found, and the Angle i ã, and by Conſequence q t i, vhich isto q d—à li; Again, 193. 300:: 5. Aug. ki d. S. Ang. æ i l, which therefore is Determin'd by that Analogy, as ist æi likewiſe, being /æ il qti=hfl nfl=bhbfn=txæi, vhich is Manifeſt by draving h f Parallel to æi, and n f to kæ; Laſily, in the Triangle æ èi, the Side æi and the Angles kæi and ĩ tæ, being known, the Line æ will be found, and thereſore y æ,  æſIy, the Quantity Deſird; That is, the Diſlance berwixt the lower Convex, and the Focus, in which the Rays are ColIected, will be Determind by this Calculation, which, if the Thickneſs be Inconſiderable in Reſpect of the Radius of the Convexity of the Glaſs, and the Diſtance of the Point of Incidence from the Axis be likewiſe Small, will be about the Length of the Radius of the Glaſs's Convexity from it; whereas in a Plano-Convex the Diſtance oſ the Focus ſrom the Glaſs was near double that Length. 5. 19. As to what Concerns the Simple Progreſs oſ the Rays, Expreſſed in the Beginning,/ 4u D. of this Demonſtration we have already Conſiderd it, and ſhewn the Incongruity of ſuch an ĩraiæ Hypotheſis of Rays, upon which this Calculation is Entirely Formd3 We ſhall no there- Trua iha fore Exmine into the Calculation of the Particular Diſtance of ; æ here Aſſerted, which rãDà nu is by finding out from the Data, viæ. ę ã, the Diſtance of the Incident Ray from the Axis, Fæus, a the Rizht Anzle at g, and the Radius of the Glai's Convexity 74, 5 the unknown t i æ Line, from whence ę is known; And by that Means all the ſſne and Angles of lqę d are Maniſcſt; 7à7 by the Proportion of Reſraction is likewiſe Determin'd, and Conſequently the Angle ãã, and therefore all the Angles and Sides of that Triangle, as well as the Angle m i l, which is Vertical to æĩ d, and by the Proportion of ReſractIon, ion, æi l, from which the Angle ææi is found and in Parricular the Side ææ, and yæ that Portion of it, which is ſought. From which ſeveral Steps oſ Inveſtigatingy æ it is Plain, that one certain Ray cã only will Arrive at the Point æ, and another on the Oppoſite Side of the Axis ſ, which is Incident at an Equal Diſtance vith gã; ſince, as the Diſtance g4ã is Continually Chang'd from b to the Axis , ſo vill the Angle ęæà be Alter'd, and the Conditions of all the Triangles, by the Intervention of which 7æ at laſt comes to be known, and which will therefore be Variable in every Approach of cã to the Axis, or it's Removal from it 3 And Conſequeutly, ſuppoſing the Triangle kę à to be Revolv'd upon it's Axis tg, and a b to be the Tortion of a Sphere, the Point  would Deſcribe a Circumference on that Sphere, on vhich the Parallel Rays  à Falling would be Collected to æ, and no others; From vhence it vould follow, that ę4, by being Enlarg'd or Diminiſh'd, would Proportionably Deſcribe different Circumſferences on the Sphere a b, of a longer or ſhorter Diameter, from which the Rays would be Collected to Various Focus's, ſome of which vould Fall below æ, and none Riſe above  According to this Reaſoning likewiſe, the Focus's would end in Abſolute Points, one Brighter than another, as the Circumſerences Deſcribd by gd were Larger, or if they were Circular, thoſe yet, which came nearer to q, vould be leſ and their Light Equal, or Equal and their Light more Diminiſd, all which is Contrary to Experience; Since if we Oppoſe a Paper to the Lens at ſeveral Diſtances from & to æ, there is Evidently a Circular and Larger Image Projected nearer, and a Leſſcr and Brighter farther ſrom it, within a Certain and Determin'd Diſtance; which is a Plain Conviction, that ſuch a Calculation is only made from an Abſiraction of the Mind, and is not any ways Suited or Agreeable to the Reality of Nature, or the Phænomenons of it; Moreover as the Rays of the Sun are more Vivid and Strong, the Image or Focus is Projected at a farther Diſtance fromy, and They are more Weak and Languid at a ſorter. §. 20. THAT Which Renders this kind of Philoſophy ſtill more Incomprehenſible is, that this Computation of the Diſtance of the Focus from the Glaſs Procecds in General without any Determination of the Convexity a 4, or of the Radius 4, or of the Diſtance g4ã from it, which are left for us to chooſe at Large; Whereas the Concluſion from thence is Particular; Namely, in Glaſſes, that have little or no Thickneſs in Proportion to the Radius of their Convexity, and where the Rays, which are Incident, are at a ſmall Diſtance only from the Axis of the Convex: Either therefore this Demonſtration in General is not True, or elſe the Deductions from it are not ſo, which is in Fact the very Caſe; for if there were no Reſtrictions, in this way of Arguing Glaſſts of a very great Convexity as wr, would have the ſame Properperties with thoſe of a leſs, contrary to Experience; and yet, if any Limitations were made, this Abſtracted Demonſtration would not know, where Preciſely to Fix them, and is therefore Obligd to Reaſon upon gã and y, without any Determination of vhat they are, unleſs of their being in General Given. 5. 21. BUT that vhich is ſtill more Wonderfull tio Comprehend is, that in the Particular Concluſion from this General Propoſition, the Convexity of the Glaſs is Requird to be leſs, and the Incident Rays to be at a ſmall Diſtance from the Axis, whereas, if the General Propoſition Obtain'd, the greater the Convexity is ſuppos'd to be, the Incident Rays would be of Conſequence nearer to it; It is therefore ſtrange that after a General Propoſition is Aſirm'd and Provd, which ſuppoſes and Neceſſarily Inferrs, that the greater the Convexity of the Glaſs is, the nearer the Incident Rays are from the Axis, in the Concluſion from thence we ſhould Aſſume a ncearneſs of Rays from the Axis and a leſer Convexity, than which nothing can be more Arbitrary. 5. 22. Ir yet we grant the Convexity of the Glaſ to be as little as Poſſible in Reſpect of the Radius of the Convexity, the Diſtance gà vill be Determin'd and Certain, and cannot be Diminiſ'd, as the Radius is Increas'd; that is, the ſeveral Rays, which are Incident betwixt æy and b can never be brought to æy, nearer than they Really are, ſo as to make the Difference of their Diſtances from the Axis of the Glaſs ol little or no Account; for altho by the Diſtance of the Glaſ' ſrom the Sun, the Rays may be Conſider'd as Parallel, and not Inclind to cach other, yet thoſe Paral Iel Rays, in Reſpect oſ the Glaſi, cannot be Conſiderd as nearly one without anj Diſtinction of Diſtance, which will be to the Full as Large, as is Expreſſcd by the ſe vera veral Sines ę 4, which are Capable of being drawn betwixt the Axis æy and b4, and yet this Demonſtration ſeems to ſuppoſe, that all Parallel Rays are to be Conſider'd, as c à, without any Reſpect had to their different Diſtances. 5. 23. FROM all which, and from what has been ſaid before of the Progreſs of Rays thro' a Lens, and of Radiation in General, we cannot but Think it Reaſonable to Conclude, that whatever Pompous Demonſtrations have been found out Concerning the Invention of the Focus's of Rays Tranſmitted thro' Glaſſes, they only Reſt in Abſtractions of the Mind, and are not any ways Serviceable in Conducting us to a True Knovledęe of the Laws of Nature, or of Opticks in Particular, and that therefore there are ſome Principles behind, and as yet Undiſcover'd, which muſt give us a better Solution of theſe Problems, and which, as it ſeems, can be no other than thoſe of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. See B. I. C. 5. 5. 43. and B. 3. C. I. §. Is. 5. 24. LAsTLY, according to the Calculation Propos'd in §. 18. and Suitably in the 111h, the Focal Depth hĩ will be leſs in a Plano-Convex Glaſs, where the Convex is Oppos'd to the Incident Rays, than where the Plane is, and ſtill leſs in a double Conver than in either; and the Reaſon of this Focal Length is, becauſe the Rays, which Fall nigher the Axis, are not United thereto ſo near the Pole of the Glaſ5, as thoſe that Fall farther from it. Tuus in the preſent Figures, according to the Calculations in this Science, the Rays vill be Collected in a much ſorter Lineal Focus in the firſt Figure rhan in the ſecond, the one being to the orher ſ(where the Proportion of Reſraction is ſupposd, as 3. 2) as 725 to 72727. of an Inch, and (vhere the Retraction is ſuppod to be as 300. 193), as à2, HIEN to 35 of the ſame Meaſure; And the double Convex will in the firſt Caſe be, as ;555 and in the ſecond, as 22 oſ an Inch; from whence it is Infer'd, that in Viewing an Object by a Plano-Convex Glaſs, it is better to Turn the Spherical ſide to the Object, or in Burn- i ing to the Sun: On the other Hand ; ] it is Plain in Experience, that Rays i t are not Collected to a Point in h or i, which this Philoſophy Affirms, or to any other Determin'd one, but in a Circulat Plane; It is likewiſe Evident, that the Circular Focus is Diminiſ'd or Enlarg'd in every Point of it's Receſs from, or Approach to, the Refracting Medium; and Conſequently, if all the Luminous Circles betwixt h and 7 may be Accounted the Focus, all the Luminous ones, betwixt h and the Refracting Medium, may with as much Juſtice be Termd ſuch, and the Focal Depth will not be hi, but ei, which will be very Inconvenient to the Doctrine of Focus's to Acknowledge; Beſides in (Fig. 24.) the Focal Depth by Calculation is more than four times greater than that in (Fig. iſt, and if the Length of the Focus is a Diſadvantage to the Clearneſs of our Views, or the Force of it in Burning, it muſt be four times more ſo in the one Caſe than in the other, whereas in Experience the difference is almoſt, if not altogether, Inſenſiblee. The Caſe in Nature Appears to be This; that the Expanſive Force of the Rays is Collected to a Cloſcr Focus, by the Contractive Force of the Convex Glaſs tending tovards h in the 1ſſ. Fiq. than in the 2à. where the Contractive of the Convex tends ſfrom it, and ſtill to a Cloſer in a Double Convex, where the Contractive Forces oſ both rheſe Figures are United to Collect and Condenſe the Expanſive 3 And theſe Focus's will be nearer to the Glaſs, as the Expanſive Force of the Rays is leſs, or the Contractive Force of the Glaſs greater; or farther from it, as the Expanſive Force of the Rays is greater, and the Contractive of the Glaſs leſ. 5. 25. A Fourth Propoſition is, that the Parallel Rays, which Proceed from each Collateral Point of an Object, and Fall Obliquely on a Glaſs, are United with their 5 55 Axii Axis at the ſame Diſtance, as the direct Parallel Rays are United with their Axis, vi⸗ by a Plano. Convex about the Diſtance of the Diameter, and by a Double Equal-Con vex about the Diſtance of the Radius. IN Order to Prove this, it is Premis'd, that the Axes of the Oblique Cones o Rays are not Refracted, but may be Conſiderd as ſtrait Lines, as well as the Axes of the Direct ones; a dp (Fig. iſ.) is the Axis oſ a direct Cone of Rays, and e b of an Oblique, which Refracted to f, and from thence to ꝗ, makes ſę Parallel to e b, and therefore ebfqę is ſupposd 1ò be the ſame, as one ſirait Line; and on the Contrary, if the Axis of the Cone is Incident from g to f;, ęfbe for the ſame Reaſon will be as one Direct Line. ALso eh fg (Fig. 2d). is ſupposd upon the like Account to be in Directum, becauſc ſg is Parallel to eh in a Double Equal-Convex; So that the Rule in theſe Caſes is, that in a Plano-Conveyx, as in (Fig. iſt.) Vhere the Oblique Axis Falls upon the Convex, it is Incident on it's Vertex in it's firt Refraction, and vhere it Falls upon the Plane part of the Glaſs, it is Incident on the ſame Verte in the ſecond Reſraction; but in the double Convex (Fig. 2d.) it croſſes the Axis of the Direct Cone of Rays in the Middle at; Nor is it Thought at all Inconceivable, that where the Cones of Rays are ſuppos d to Fall in ſeveral Incidences, there ſiould be amongſt ſuch a Number of Rays, theſe Axes, which Obſerve the Conditions Preſcribd of Arriving at b in the firſt Caſc, or ꝗ in the ſecond, upon ſuch certain Refractions, and of being as one ſtrait Line, by their being Parallel. 5. 26. BUT in the firſt Place, altho eb ſould be Acknovledgd to be Parallel to ſ⸗ in Fig. iſt.) and in (Fig. 2d.) f ꝗ t0 e h, it would not follow, that they were to be Conſiderd as ſtrait Lines, ſince all the Points betwixt æ and à would be ſeen at ę on the Right Hand of their Real Poſition, vhich, if Granted, vould prove, that e b, or e h and ſę ere not ſtrait Lines, nor to be ſo Conſiderd3 And that thoſe Points are Viſible on the Right Hand of their Real Situation is Evident from the Object's being Magnified and Enlargã, by which Mean: they are Extended from e towards æ and n in each Figure; Moreover, that the Incident Rays e b and e h are Parallel to the Reſracted ę4, is not Evinced, unleſs the Anglee bſ is=to gfb, or hbf to hfb in (Fig. iſt.) and in (Fig. 2d.) ehf to gſh or ohfto n ſ h, which we ſhall Examine in the following Section; For altho, if eò, . arc Parallel to ęf; the Points betwixt à and e would Verge to the Right Hand in the preſent Figure, and Which in Fact they do by the Augmentation of the Object, yet they may Tend to the Right Hand of their Real Poſition by an Enlargement of the Object, without a Neceſſity of ſuppoſing ſuch a Paralleliſm; Since there vill be in that Caſe the ſame Number oſ Rays gſ &. Refracted, as there are Incident ones berixt ehore hand à b, from vhence by the Paralleliſm the Entire Situation of the Object will be Changũd, but the Object it ſel? not Magnified, whereas Really the Poſition of the Object ſeen thr a Convex is not Chang'd, or the Object Remov'd from one Place to another, but the Whole is Magnified; Suppoſing yet e b ( Fig. iſt.)to be Parallel to ęſ if upon that Account they are to be Eſteemed as Direct Lines, æbh will be the ſame as ſf ę, which tho True in Reſpect of any ſtrait Lines, which may Interſect them as b f, vill not be ſo, here a Curve, as bæ, does; for in ſuch a Caſe the Conditions of the Parallels will be Different and Various, and ę f or ſ will not be the ſame in Reſpect of be, as e b or bh is. 5. 27. I 5. 27. IN the ſecond Place, as to what Concerns (Fig. iſſ.) It is ſupposd, tha the Refraction back from g to f, b andæ is the ſame, as from ę, to b, ſ, and4; or, that th Angle bſ is= to the Angle hb f, and Conſequently, that the Curve a b Refract: the Rays in the ſame Manner, as the ſtrait Line æ f7, and that a Plano-Convex in it's Re fractions oſ Light will be the ſame, as the Plane a mnc; ſince as m n is a Tangeni in one Point, ſo is 75a Secant in ? another, and therefore the Refraction at ⸗, ſuppoſing a Ray to be Incident upon it, will Obſerve the ſame Laws, whether it is Conceivd to Fall on 47, or rts3 As to the double Convex, where mn, or, are the Tangents, the Reaſoning will not be Different; From whence it will follow, that the Refractions of a Plano- Convex or a Double Convex are the ſame with thoſe of a Plane Glaſs, and that the Point of a Curve has no Peculiar Properties in it's Refractions from that of a ſtraight Line, which is Abundantly Confuted by Experience: and the whole Doctrine of the preſent Opticks. IF it is ſaid, that the Curve t f (Fig. 24.) is Equalto b h, and Poſited in the ſame Manner to the Incident Ray g7; as the other is to eh, and therefore the Refraction on both Hands will be the ſame, and the Angles of Reſraction &n ohf Equal, and Conſequently h e Parallel to gf; it muſt be Anſwerd, that this is only taking for Granted, what was to be Provd; For altho'e h will be Refracted in the ſame Manner at h, as gf is at f, where h b and ſ are Equal Portions of the Lens Computed from the Axis, yet it is not Certain, nor can be Demonſtrated, that æ h will be Refracted Preciſely to f, ſo as ſ ſhould be Equal to hb, and that it may not be Refracted to ſome other Point betwixt A, f or f, a, which if it may be done, the Equal Arcs will be Deſtroy'd, as well as the Equal Angles of Refraction o h f, h fu, and Conſequently the Aſſumd Paralleliſm; And the ſame may be Argud in Reſpect of the Incident Line gf, which is not Certain of being Refracted to h, any more than to ſome other Intermediate Point betwixt b and b, or h and c; The ſame Kind of Reaſoning will alſo Extend to (Fig. iſt.) ſo as b f may not be the Common Line of Refraction to e b and gſ, but æb, for ought that is Demonſtrated, may be Refracted to another Point than f, and gſ to one Different from b. 5. 28. BESIDES Which, however ſtrongly it is Imagin'd, that theſe Axes may be found in the ſeveral Cones of Rays, which are Incident, upon a nearer Inſpection our Reaſon will Aſſure us of the quite Contrary; For tho a Cone of Rays, which Falls from à or e, in (Fig. iſt.) the Baſes of which Extend from  to b and f, or thoſe, which Fall from any other Intermediate Points, ſhould Perchance find an Axis in b, yet where theſe Cones are Incident on ⸗ fc, from ꝓ and ”, and the Points that lie betwixt them, it is far from being Apparent, that the Axes of them will be Determind in b3 for hov g f ould be an Axis of a Cone of Rays Falling upon 4, when f is much nearer to  than it is to ⸗, is Inconceivable, ſince the Axis of any Cone is always ſupposd to Terminate in the Center of it's Baſis; unleſs therefore af isæ fe, it is Impoſſible, that gſ ſhould be that Axis; If it is ſaid, that any Ray is the Axis of the Cone which is Refracted ſo, that be ſhould be Parallel to it; That cannot be called the Axis of the Cone, but that Ray, which is ſo Refracted, whether it be the Axis, or not. 5. 20. WE muſt farther Add, that it is altogether Impoſſible in this Doctrine of Refractions to think, that any other Ray, Excepting g /, ſhould be Refracted to b3 for if the Axis drawn from any Intermediate Point betwixt ꝗ and ꝓ is, in different Incidences there will be the ſame Refraction, which is Contrary to this Philoſophy, if not, there will be no Axis of Radious Cones, as they are Term'd, Refracted to b, Excepting ęf, which will be of little Advantage to the Science of Opticks. 5. 30. To Conclude, if all this were Granted, in ſFig. 2.) it will be Unaccountable, how the Axes of the Cones ſhould End in the middle of the Refracti on, whereas beſore they were Determined in the Beginning or End of it, unleſ"s we are willing 10 Receive every Thing for Truth, which is Manifeſtly only a Contrivance For why ſould ve Imagine, that the Axis of the Cone of Rays in (Fig. 2à.) ſould be Terminated in q in the Midt of the Glaſs, when it is ſuppos'd in (Fig. the iſ.) to Center in b the Beginning or End of the Reſraction? Or, which is the ſame, it is very Arbitrary, where the Incident Rays, before they Fall upon the Glaſs, are alike, nd when the Convexity in  Fig. iſt and 2d.) is ſo, to make the Axis in the lat Caſc upon Refraction to Croſs b, and in the firſt to be Refracted beyond it. 5 s s 2 5. :1. THI: 5. 31. THis Philoſophy having Premisd, what has been already Conſiderd, the Demonſtration oſ the Propoſition Mention'd §. 25. Proceeds as follows, according to the Common and Uſual wvay of Proving it3 agh is a Plano-Convex, on the Plane Side of which the Rays c 4, e f, are ſupposd to Fall Obliquely, and Parallel to cach other, and thereſore the Angles of Inclination e ?ſb, c à b to be Equal, and Conſequently the Correſpondent Angles of Refraction within the Glaſs vill be likewiſe Equal, and ah Parallel to ſę; Farther, becauſc the ſame Point in the Object, from whence theſe Rays are ſeverally Deriv'd, Emit an Infinite Number of others, vhich Poſſſ the whole Circuit of the Glaſs, ſome one of theſe Rays, after the firſt Refraction, being Produc'd backwards, will Paſs thr the Center of the Convexity i, as hã, Vhich is alſo ſupposd to be Producd the Contrary vay, Namely to  for being Perpendicular to the Convexity ægh, it ſuffers no Refraction in it's Egreſs from the Glaſs to I;3 As to the other Refracted Ray fg, the Angle of Inclination at the Point g is ſęi=gih, and the Reſracted Angle gęl, vhich by Experiment ought to be 7 more than that of Inclination; But in the Triangle igl, l i. lg:: Si. lgi=s L. Igt. s L. lig; and in theſe ſmall Angles the Sines are as the Angles, andthereſore, the Angle ſę being ; more than the Angle ſig, the Side ſi is; more than the Side Ię or Ih; for Ię and Ih may be Reputed as Equal, in Glaſſes of ſmall Segments, and large Spheres, wherefore h being the Semidiamerer, h ſ vill be the Diameter Q. E. D. 5. 32. THERE are other Demonſtrations of this by Inveſtigating the Line hſ from given Angles, and their Sides; But as we have before Conſiderd that kind of Proof, . 18. ſo we ſall now do this, which is the moſt Common and Familiar to theL Writers in Opticks; There are alſo other Caſes put, where the Convex part oſ the Glaſũi is turnd to the Object, or elſe where the Glaſs is Equally Convex on both Sides, or laſtly where one Convex is diſferent from and Unequal to the orher; All which we ſhall Omit, ſince they Proceed upon the ſame Principles, and ſhall only Examine into the Demonſtration Alledgſd. 5. 33. IN which it is ſuppos'd, that cã, æ f, are Parallel to each other, and by that Means that the Angles of Inclination c b, æ fb are Equal; whereas Granting e or ⸗ to be the Point of an Object, whoſe Rays are Scatterd and Diſpers'd on the whole Surſace of the Glaſs a b, the other which is Parallel to it cannot be Drawn from the ſame Point; Albeit therefore we ſould allow ſuch a Suppoſition to be Eaſy in Reſpect of the Sun's Rays, which Fall at ſo Immenſe a Diſtance from us, it vill not yet be any vays Tolerable, where we come to Conſider the Radiating Points of near Objects, unleſs we can Imagine e and e to Coaleſce at the ſame rime, that they arc Preſumd ro lye at a certain Diſtance from each orher in the Parallel Lines c à and e f And we cannot but here take Notice, that the Repreſentation, which is given us in this Figure of the Progreſs of the Rays, which Conſtitute the Point  after their Re fraction thro' the Glaſs a 5b, and which Tracd backwards are carried to Diſtinò: Points in æ and æ, is very different from what is made to us in other Figures, beſore Deſcribd, as in (Fig. iſt. and 2ã. §. 25th.) where they Terminate in one Point æ vhich is an Evident Sign, that this is nothing elſe than an Abſtracted Reaſoning upon Hypotheſes, which are Arbitrary, and have not a Foundation in Nature; HoWcver, the Paralleliſm of Rays, flowing from a Near or ſrom a Remote Object, has beer already Examind. 5. 34. WnA 5. 33. WHAT more Confirms this, is the ſecond Hypotheſis Neceſſary to this Demonſtration, that not only cã and ef, which were before ſupposd to be Parallel, but alſo all the other Rays, which Fall betwixt 4 and b, tho' Parallel, are preſently aſter (See §. 31ſ) ſupposd to flo from one and the ſame Point of an Object; which hov it is Poſſible that all the Rays, which are Deriv'd from one Point in a nigh Object to the whole Surface or Extent of æ b ſhould be Parallel, is as Inconceivable, as how Rays Propagated from the ſame Center ſhould be. 5. 35. GRANTING yet, that c, æ, and the reſt, are an Infinite Number of Points and at the ſame time no more than one Point, this Demonſtration Labours under a third Suppoſition, for Suppoſitions the preſent Philoſophy always takes Care to Introduce, as any new Difficulty Ariſes, which is, that amongſt an Infinite Number of Rays, we may Juſtly ſuppoſe there is ſome one, which if Producd backwards aſter its ſirſi Refraction, as  à, will meet with the Center of the Glaſi's Convexity i, and Conſequently Form the Radius h i; But even this Suppoſition is ill Grounded, ſince in a very large Object there may be a Point in it ſo much Inclin'd to the Surſace a , that none of it's Rays Produc'd after the firſt Refraction ſhall meet with the Center i; for Inſtance, ſuppoſing æ to be Removd to the Right Hand, as far as it is Poſſible for it's Ray to be Refracted (without being Reflected) upon it's Incidence on æ4, which Ray let be m, ſecing r ? is Parallel to wm, and mq to t5, it is Evident, that no Rays from q to s willever, if Producd after their firſt Refraction, Arrive at à, but fall below it, as ?c, mx, the Angles c75, i dc being yet Equal, or if cr5 upon the Account of the greater Obliquity of s 7 ſhould be allowd to be greater than i ã ct would yet Fall below à, as is Manifeſt from this Scheme. 5. 36. IF, notwithſtanding, one Ray would certainly Obtain that Property, of being a Radius of the Circle æ5b5 upon it's being Produc'd backwards afrer the firſt Refraction, it cannot yet be Conceiv'd, how c à ſould be that Ray, no more than ef, tillthe Points, e, ? are Determind, which are here taken at Large; and if they are not Determind, as they are not, ſince the Incidences of ſg5, à b upon the Curve hę may be different from what is here Expreſſed, the Progreſs of the Rays aſter a ſecond Refraction will be likewiſe different, and will not Tend to the ſame Point / in their Concourſc; and which may in General be Affirmd of all the Rays, Excepting c4à, and ff. 5. 37. LET this be likewiſe Granted, which has been Diſprovd, that cà is the Particular Ray, hich after its firſt Refraction upon it's being Produced backwards, vill make hi the Radius of the Convexity æ gb, it is in this Demonſtration from thence Aſfirmd, that à h will not be Refracted, but Proceed in a ſtrait Line to l Whereas, whatever Experiments may be Pretended for this Aſſertion, there is nothing more Evident than that every Point of an Object is Magniſyd by Reſraction from a Groſſer to a Finer Medium; But how it is Poſſible for Rays to be Derivd in a Perpendicular from each Point of the Object to the Eye, which is Oppoſite to it, when each Point of the Object Appears Larger than it is in Reallity, is Inconceivable; Beſides which, although 44, if it Radiated from i to 4, and ſo to h, might be ſuppos'd not to be Refracted, as Falling in a Perpendicular, it would not be Certain, that àb would be likewiſe unrefracted, if the Ray was Incident from  to à, which is here ſuppos'd, unleſs a Ray Falling from  to àis the ſame, as one fromi to , which is Impoſſible. 5. 38. IN the latter Part oſ the Demonſiration Alledg9d §. 37. which Concerns the Refracted Angle Iſę4, it is morcover Supposd, that the Sines of the Angles  ę⸗, lig, are Proportional to the Angles themſelves, becauſe they are ſo Extremely Minute, that there is no Senſible Diſtinction betwixt them; on the other Hand it is not Evident, that ſig is ſo Small, as is Repreſented, unleſs it be firſt Determind, amongſt an Infinitc Number of Rays which Fall upon the Surface æ b4, which it is, that when Reſracted, and Producd backwards, meets with the Center of the Glaſũtſ's Convexity; but this, as is before Obſervd, is leſt altogether Looſe and Undeſind; Since, if the Ray Falls from a Point more Removd from the Axis than æ is or ncarer to it, ſęi will not be Equal to hię the Angle of Incidence in the ſecond Reſraction; Beſides, it has been likewiſe before Remarkd, that to make the Sines ſometimes Proportional to the Angles of Reſraction, and at other times not, is a Maniſeſt Indication of the Arbitrary Methods, which this Philoſophy Takes to Demonſtrate. 5. 30. Lastv, 39. LastLy, if all theſe Suppoſitions were True, ſo Unhappy is this Kind o Reaſoning, it vould not yet Prove what was Originally Aimd at and Deſign'd by them, that is, that the Oblique Rays, which Flow from any Point of an Objecqt, are Collected to a Focus at the ſame Diſtance, as the Direct ones are; ſince here is only one Ray Provũ to be ſo, Namely, That, which, aſter its firſt Reſraction, and Reprò ducd, Forms the Radius of the Glaſ”'s Convexity; For either all the Rays, which meet in , meet likewiſe in i, or not; If they do, it is not only one Ray, as ? à amongſt an Inſinite Number, which are Incident on ⸗4 b, and is what this Demonſiration Requeſs or Demands, which Reproduced meets in /, but all of them do, which is Impoſſiblę; If they do not, the Solitary Collection of theſe two Rays will not be to the Purpoſ of Proveing the Collection of ail. 5. 40. VE muſt allo Add, that, if even this was Evinc'd, too much would be Provd, viæ. that an Object, after the Refraction of it's ſeveral Rays, would be Inflexibly Determin'd, in it's Repreſentation in , I, to one certain Diſtance of a Diameter of the Glaſi's Convexity ſrom g, and would thereſore be only found in the Portion of a Circle's Perimeter, or of a Sphere, and in one Immutable Poſition; Whereas an Object is Diſtinctly Projected thro a Lens on a Plane; and is alſo very Accurately ſeen by the Eye, which is a Reſracting Lens, at ſeveral varying Intervalls, without the leaſ Alteration of its Figure from any Imaginary Elongation or Depreſſion of it by the Muſcles, that is, when it is Perfectly Steady and Unmovd; vhich any one may at Pleaſure Experience. 5. 41. FROM theſe Four Propoſitions, and ĩt is the chief Uſe, which is made o them, the Repreſentation of outward Objects in a Dark Chamber by a Convex Glaſi is Endeavoured to be Explain'd, Vhich therefore ve need not Particularly Conſider; ſince, as we have ſiewn, it is not Provã, that the Rays from 4 are Collected to F after their Refraction, nor thoſe from C to D; However to Evade what has been ſaid, it is Affirmd, that the Rays, Conſidering the Diſtance of the Object 4C and the Smallneſ" of the Glaſs G X, vhich are Incident from the one upon the other, may be Eſteemd, as Parallel; If they were Parallel, we have Demonſtrated this Reaſoning to be Falſe, but that they cannot be ſupposd to be Parallel, either from a Ncar or from a Diſtant Object, has been before Evinc'd and Conſirm'd. 5. 42. BESIDES Which, the Image Formd by the Refraction of a Lens is not Inverted, and is only Enlarg]d, before the Decuſſation of the Rays in the Focus, upon and aſter hich the Object appears Inverted; whereas the Inverſion of the Image here is made in the Focus upon the Decuſſation of the Rays in the Pole of the Glaſi's Convexity H, which is not the Property of a Lens, as any one may caſily Experience; For if the Eye is made to Approach from DF towards the Lens G X, it will ſee the Object in it's Natural or Erect Situation, which it could not do, if the Rays croſed each other in H, and not in the Focus; If the Eye is Removd from the Convex G X to the Focus DF, or beyond it, the Object will be Inverted, becauſe the Rays there Change their Order into a Contrary one. S. 43. BUT that which is ſtill more Diſadvantageous to this Philoſophy is, that without a Lens, or without any Refractions oſ Glaſi, the ſame Inverted Image of an Object is Impreſſed upon an Oppoſite Paper, with a ſmall Variation in the Diſtinctneſs of the Image, or the Diſtance of the Focus; which may be Experimented by a Foramen in a Window- Shut, and firſt Obſerving what a Picture is Cauſcd, and at what Diſtance the Paper Receives it without aLens, and aſterwards what the Effects are with one, which are very nearly the ſame; from whence it is Manifeſt, that theſe Four Propoſitions are Alſedgſd to little Purpoſe in Opticks, unleſs they can Explain the Properties likeviſe of ſuch a Foramen, which Produces Similar Effects with the Lens. 5 453. Nor 5. 44. NoR is the Phænomenon of the Speculum better Explain'd, which is this, tha if a Speculum is plac'd in DCF, the Image Reflected from it to the Eye will Ap pear very Faint and Dilute, but if it is Situate betwixt G, and DF, vith its Re flecting Surface towards G X, and a Paper is held Oppoſite to it, betwixt GX and it at the ſame Diſtance from it, as the Speculum is from the Diſtinct Baſe F CD, it vil Imprint upon the Paper a Clear and Exact Repreſentation of 4 BC, alike Inverted as it is in the Diſtinct Baſe3 The Reaſon given for this Appcarance is, the Imperfect Poli of the Glaſs, vhich therefore is Thought Incapable of Reſecting the Rays with that Diſtinction, that it ſould; But it is more Evident that this is an Imperfect Reaſon; For it is not Prov'd, that by Poliſhing a Glaſs all the Aſerities of it are not Taken of, or if they were not, that there are fewer Incqualities in the Surface of the Paper, when it is Abundantly Manifeſt, that there are more, and which in the Modern Philoſophy are made to be the very Cauſe of it's being White, by Reſe-ting the Rays of Light, upon that Account, to all Angless The Truth ſeems to be, that the ſhaded Light of the Image, which is of a Contractive Force, is more Viſible in the Brisker Expanſive of White Paper, than in the Duller one of Poliſied Glaſs, becauſe their Actions being more Diſferent, their Diſtinction is more Apparent. And in General the Images here Formed are the Shadows of Light, cither Intercepted by Bodics oſ a Contractive Force, or Projected from them, by giving new Impreſſions from their Expanſive or Contractive Forces in Various Degrees to the Light or Ather, which is Incident, as Fire, which is one Degree of the Expanſive, does; So far are Opticks from being Explained by the Collection of the Rays of Light to a Focus, or a Diſtinct Baſe, that the Images are only differently Coloured Shades of it. 5. 45. IF the foregoing Solution was True in Reſpect of the Glaũe's unequal Poliſ, it would be yet Impoſſible to Aſſign a Reaſon in this Philoſophy, why the Image, which is Diluted on the Speculum, ſhould be Diſtinct on the Paper; For, if the Rays on the Speculum are Diffus'd and Diſpers'd from the Inequalities of it, the ſame Ecct will be found on the Paper; unleſs the Rays, which are Diſpersd upon their Incidence on the Glais or Speculum, can Collect and Range themſelves by a Willfull and Obſtinate Determination of theit own to a more Compact and a Cloſer Order in their Second Reflection, which, however Willfull, would yet ſiow a Good Diſpoſition in them, whilſt they Endeavourd to make Amends for the Errors of the Firſt. 5. 46. THAT the Image is Diſtinctly Reflected upon the Paper, this Philoſophy Perhaps might Account for, ſince according to it's Principle of the Angle of Reflection being Equal to the Angle of Incidence, it vould be the ſame, whether the Rays Proceeded to the Diſtinct Baſe, or were Reſlected to the ſame Diſtance from the Intercepting Surface, as the Diſtinct Baſe is, becauſe the Vertical Angle to the Angle of Incidence will be the ſame in the Progreſs of the Ray, as the Angle of Reſſection in it's Return, both being Equal to the Angle of Incidence; This however vill not Solve the Difficulty of the Image being more Diluted upon the Glaſs than on Paper; nor vill it Inform us, how this Appearance upon the Paper is Viſible at other Diſtances of the Paper from the Glaſ, or the Glaſ”i from the Focus, than what is here Preſcribd; nor Laſtly, will it Explain, how that, which is call'ld the Diſtinct Baſe its ſelf, or the Focus, is found at Various and Diſfering Diſtances from the Lens, which is here ſupposd Immutable; All which are Evident in the Experiment; that is Diſtinct Appearances are Obſerv'd at ſeveral Diſtances, tho in different Degrees of Diſtinction, whereas according to this Scheme, if the Glaſs or Paper were Placed in the leaſt out of the Diſtinct Baſe, All would go into Diſorder and Confuſion. 5. 47. CONCERNING DParallel Rays from Remote Objects and Diverging ones from Near, it is ſaid in this Philoſophy, that the firſt will be Refracted to a Focus ſat a much Leſs Diſtance b from the Lens be than the other vill, which are not Determin'd in h a Focus, unleſs at æ which isa Con- T ſiderably Greater; But if we are villing to Reaſon Juſtly, ve ought to know at vhat Diſtance of the Object the Rays are to be Conſiderd as Parallel, ind here they become Diverging, and vhat Diſference there will be betwixt the Focus of one and the other; becauſe if the Sun is only ſupposd to Emit Parallel Rays there there vill be only ſuch Rays Collected to the Focus ſ, and if nearer Objects have their Diverging Rays Aſſembled at æ it will be Conſequent, that the Focus of Near and Diſtant Objects is vaſtly Different, where- a as the four Preceding Propoſitions Endeavour to Prove, that the r Refractions of Rays thro'a Lens have their Focus at the Diſtance of a Semidiameter of the Glaſſ's Convexity, even in near Ob- s jects as well as thoſec, which are farther Diſtant, as the Sun, and upon one and the ſame Suppoſition, that the Rays are Parallel; So likewiſe in Experiment, the Focus is Alter'd by the Approach to, or Removal of the Lens from the Object, inſomuch, that when a Candle is placed in a Dark Room, the d Flame vill be Expreſſed in an Inverted Image, Diſtinctly, in a t+ much nearer Diſtance from the Lens, when the Candle is RemoVd farther from it; and in a much greater Diſtance, when it is nearer to it; and yet the Focus of the Sun's Rays is not at a much greater or leſs Diſtance from the Glaſs, than that of l a Terreſtrial Object: Nothing of which is Solv'd by theſe Princi- l les. lli p 5. 48. To Conclude this Chapter, ve have thus far Con- i l ſiderd the Four Eſſential Propoſitions to the Doctrine of Opticks, and ve do not find any Juſt or Solid Reaſoning in the Demonſtrations of them, as to what Concerns a Real Knovledge of Vi- m ſion and the Phænomenons of it 3 They are Plainly no more than an Abſtracted Arguing upon Hypotheſes, hich are laid down for the Solution of what is Experimented in Opticks, and it is as Maniſeſt, that thoſe Hypotheſes of Rays Expreſ"'d by Lines, and the Various Reſractions, and Reſlections of them, which r are Induc'd, are neither Equal to the Explaining of Nature nor their ovn Reaſonings upon it. And therefore we Conclude again as in §. 44. That theſe Images are not made by the Refractions and Collections of Rays, but that they are Shadows of Bodies, which Intercept the Light, or which Alter and Change it by their Expanſive or Contractive Forces into a Shaded. t C H A P. VII. Concerning the Reſpeclive and Vertual Focus's of Glaſſes. EES HIS Philoſophy Proceeds to a Fifth Propoſition, in which it is Aſfirm'd; That, As the Difference between the Diſtance of the Object and Focus is to the Focus or it's Length, So the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs, to the Diſtance of the Reſpective Focus or Diſtinct Baſe from the Glaſs; ; Thus, (Fig. Preced.) t d isa Plano- Convex, whoſe Abſolute Focus is about a Diameter of the Convexity, which is ſupposd to be sã, a is a Radiating Point,  the Center of the Convexity, ſi the Radius of the Convexity, Producd Directly to q, and æ ? a Ray Falling on the Glaſs Producd directly to y; and therefore the Angle of Inclination or Incidence of the Ray ar is ta; From this Figure and the Suppoſitions upon it, it is Aſfirmd that as. sd:: ad. d l, the Reſpective Focus, or the Diſtinct Baſe from the Glaſ. S. 2. HAVING Examined in the Preceding Chapter into the Fundamental Propo ſions of the preſent Optics, we cannot Think it worth the while to Conſider the ſeveral Particulars in this Demonſtration, or in others, which follow in the ſame Doct rine, we ſhall only Brieſly Recount the Hypotheſes, which are Neceſſary to theſe De monſtrations, and make ſome ſort Remarks upon them. S5. 3. IN the firſt Place the Reſpective Focus, which is Defin'd to be that, whict is made by the Collection oſ Rays ſfrom a Nigh Object, is ſuppos'd to be differen fſrom the Abſolure Focus, whereas the Repreſentation of outward Objects in a Darl ; Room is Endeavourd to be Explain'd by a Collection of the Rays to the Abſolur Focus, that is, ſrom Propoſition the Fourth, where the Rays are Collected in a Plano Convex to about a Diameter ſrom their Convexity. 5. . V. n 5. .. WE may Add likewiſe in the ſecond Place, that ſince this Demonſtration ĩ Concerning the Reſpective Focus à , (Fig. Preced.) and Proceeds upon the Conceſſion o the Abſolute Focuss4, it by Conſequence ſuppoſes the Truth of the foregoing Propoſition which we have already Evidenc'd to be only a Reaſoning upon Abſtracted and No tional Principles without any Conſormity of them to Nature. 5.5. THIRDLY, it is ſuppos'd, that the Ray, which is Incident from 4 to ? is Capable of a double Refraction, firſt towards m, and then to 4 Which is altogether Inconceivable, how a ſingle Point in the Glaſs ſhould Admit of two ſuch diſferent Refractions, or if it could, how any other difſerent Ray which is Incident betwixt and 4, ſhould have the ſame double Refraction. ꝗ. 6. IT is farther Obſervable, that ſ7 and ſã are ſupposd to be Equal, becauſe ĩl is taken for Granted, that the Glaſs is of the leaſt Thickneſs Imaginable, and the Scoment, that oſ a large Sphere. Therefore here is no Account given us of the Actions oſ Light in Thicker Glaſſes, and ſmaller Spheres, in this Doctrine oſ Opticks tho' in a True Philoſophy that ought to be done; and even in Glaſſes oſ the leaſt Thickneſs, and the largeſt Spheres, ſ7 and I cannot be ſuppos'd Equal, unleſs the Radiuss of diſferent Circles are ſo; Beſides it will follow, that a1 is nearly the ſame as a à, and vill be as little Refracted by the Glaſs, ſince it is Neceſſary, that the Extreme ſmall Curvity of r4ã hould be nearly the ſame in Reſpect of aã, and a1, vhich vill not Agree vith this Demonſtration; Laſtly, it is allo ſuppos'd, that the Angles of Incidence are ſo ſmall, that the Angles and Sines are Proportional, which has been beſore Conſiderd and Reſuted. 5. 7. APTER this we are carry'd to a Sixth Propoſition; That, an Object being placd in the Focus of a Convex Glaſs, the Rays from each Point thereof aſter Paſſing the Glaſs become Parallel; that is, let 4 BC be the Object, Si- a. tuate in the Abſolute Focus of the . Lens = S, ſince æ a, b b, e c are Paral- Iel Lines, which will be Reſpective- li ly Collected to 4, B, and q, therefore 4, B, and , vill be Reciprocally Diffus'd backwards, thro the Lens æS5, to aa, bb, cc. 5. 8. IT is Really Admirable, that Men can Satisfy themſelves with ſuch a kind of Reaſoning, if they did not Think there was a Sort of Inherent Right to Truth in Mathematick Lines and Figures; for why ſhould C 4 _ return theſe Rays juſt in the ſame Manner, in which they are Incident, c be they Direct or Oblique, or in whatſoever Angle they Fall, when it is an Avow'd Maxim of Opticks, that Rays are Reſſected in thoſe Angles, in which they are Incident, which, i? True, vould cauſe an Inexpreſſible Conſuſion in the preſent Figure, inſtead of that Accuracy and Diſtinction oſ Lines, which it Repreſents? Thus, ſince 4, B, , are Refracted to ⸗, h, c, becauſe a, b, c, are Refracted to 4, B, C, when an Object is not Interposd at 4 BC, and ſince æ, b, c, Reſracted to 4, B, C, vill be Reſiected from thence in Angles Equal to thoſe oſ their Incidence, when an Object is Interpos'd, therefore 4, B, C, when an Object is Interpos'd, muſt be the Points of Rays, which Proceed not ſfrom the Points 4, B, C, Originally, but of Rays which are Incident upon 4, B, c, in thoſe Angles, in which they vere Refſiected after their Reſraction thro 25; Conſequently thoſe, which are Incident upon 4, B, C, in diſſerent Angles, and which will have an Equal Title to the being Reſccted, will be Reſracted back thr 5 in all Inclinations to æ, b, and ?, and will not therefore be Parallel, but Cauſe a Confuſion not to be Expreſcd, unleſs in the Imagination only. S. 9. BLsiIDES Which, it is not any ways Prov'd, which is here ſuppos'd, that the Action or Reaction of C B A, is Equal to the Action from ⸗ a, bb, cc, or that the Vivacity of Rays Emitted ſrom an Object is Equal to that of thoſe, which are ImTit preſi'd preſod from the Sun, which it ought to be, ſince the Effects of both are ſupposd to be Reciprocal, and there is as much Force Requird to Conquer the Reſiſtence of the Glaſs in a backward Refraction, as a forward. s. 10. BuT that which is ſtill farther Exceptionable in this Demonſtration is, that CB A is ſupposd to Refract its Rays in Parallel Lines, becauſe it is ſupposd, that Parallel Lines are Refracted to CB4, which Demonſtration cannot but carry with it a wonderſful Force of Conviction, which Conſiſts of Suppoſitions, for they are no more, that Mutually and Reciprocally Infer each other. S. 11. WE Mall Ianly Add, that if 4BC is the Abſolute Focus, there ought in the Return of the Rays, according to the Preſent Doctrine oſ Opticks, to be a Reſpective one by Propoſition the Fiſth, which is Impoſſible, if 43 C is Refracted backwards in Parallel Rays; Becauſe a Paralleliſm and a Focus are Inconſiſtent. 5. 12. ANOTHER Propoſition is, that if an Object be Placed nigher a Convex Glaſs than it's Focus, the Rays from each ſingle Point thereof, aſter they have paſsd the Glaſc do Proceed onwards Diverging, but do not Diverge ſo much, as before they Enterd the Glaſs. Thus, Suppoſing 4 to be a Radiating Point in the Focus of the Glaſs c4, its Rays a f, am, are by Reſraction reduc'd to a Paralleliſm, in the Lines he, kd; but if we take a Radiating Point, which is nearer to the Lens than it's Focus, as b, it's Raysc e, n will not be Refracted to 4, h, but to g, I, and thereſore will be ſtill Diverging, tho' in a leſs Degree than beſore their Incidence; ſor ſince bæ and bã Diverge more than 4c and a , and ſince the Reſtactive Power of the Glaſi is only Sufficient to draw the laſt to a Parallel, it vill not be able to bring the ſirſt, which have a greater Divergence, to the ſame Situation. Z. E. D. S. 13. IN Vhich Demonſtration there is one Thing very Extraordinary, that he, ld, are Return'd from the Radiating Point æ in Parallel Lines, becauſe they are Refracted ſrom Parallel Lines to the Point æ, and for the ſame Reaſon, as in the ſecond Caſe, gc and lã are Return'd in Diverging Lines from b, they ſiould be Incident on c and 4 in Converging; but how the Rays of the Sun ſhould Converge, which are alvays ſuppos'd to Fall Parallel on the Glaſ, is altogether Unexplain'd and Unintelligible. S. 14. FARTHER, ſince a and b are made two Radiating Points, the one Situate in the Focus and the orher without it, either ſuch a Radiation Depends upon the Collection of the Rays in the Focus a, or on the Univerſal Diſfuſion of them from the Point in the Object; If upon the firſt, there will be no Radiation Excepting in the Focus 4, and in b there will be only ſome ſcatterd Rays found which are United in a, Contrary to their being Determin'd in b; If upon the laſt, Reciprocal Reſracions will be Unaccountable, ſceing there may be a Hundred Radiating Points as x, a, b, &e. in which the Rays are Collected, whereas in Refractions backwards there is only one Point, in which the Rays can be Collected, Namely in ⸗. . 15. THERE is another Material Objection againſt this Demonſtrarion, that in all theſe Points as a, b, &c. vhich are thoſe of near Objects, and which thereſore ſhould by the Preceding Doctrine have a Reſpective Focus at ſome Diſtance or other beyond the Lens c à4, the Rays, which are Emitted from them and afterwards Refracted, become cither at the moſt Diverging, or at leaſt Parallel, which every one is Senſible can never Converge, and therefore never Aſſemble to a Focus, contrary to the very Fundamental Propoſitions of this Philoſophy; So little Reaſon have we to Conſide in this Kind of Reaſoning, which is Vulgarly Handed about for Invincible Demonſiration. S. 16. As ſor the Imaginary Focus, which is Determin'd by the Producing of ę⸗ ld, till they Croſs each other in , and is Endeavourd to be Aſcertain'd in the next Propoſition, we ſnall Prove in ſ. 23. 24, &. that it cannot Signiſy any Thing to the Explaining of Nature, which is the Aim we chiefly Propoſe in Examining into theſe ſeveral Allegations; And it is Evident in the Calculus it's ſelf, which belongs to thi this Eighth Propoſition, and the Foundations, on which it Proceeds, that thoſe, who have Eſpous'd this way of Reaſoning, Differ to that Degree, that the ſame Line, vhich one makes to Conſiſt only of 7200 Parts, another Thinks he has Demonſtrated to take in 10560, and whereas a ſecond Linc is Affirmd to be 8566, it is by a very Celebrated Writer in Opticks made to be r12484. 5. 17. OMITTING therefore this Extravagant Difference even in an Abſtracted Calculation, which is a Sufficient Proof of the Inaccuracy of this kind of Demonſtration in Reſpect of a Real Philoſophy, we ſall go on to another Propoſition, which in the preſent Doctrine of Opticks, is the Ninth 3 Namely, that in Double Convex Glaſſes of Equal or Unequal Convexities, the Rays Proceeding from the Diſtance of a Diameter of one Convexity are United at the Diſtance of the Diameter of the other Convexity 3 The Truth of vhich is Endeavour'd to be Evinc'd by Dividing the Convex Glaſs into two Plano- Convex Glaſſes by the Lincab (Fig. 5. 18.) For ha, te, ke, tp, b, being Reſracted in Parallel Directions thro' the Glaſ, they will be Incident on 44 in Parallel Rays, and therefore Refracted to a Focus at the Diſtance of a Diameter à f1e. 5. 18. IN Anſwer to which we ſay, that the Propoſition, on which this is Founded, has been already Conſider'd, and therefore that ĩt is not Neceſſary to give a Particular Confutation of it, unleſs we Add, that to make the Rays run Parallel aſter Refraction, and to Divide the Glaſs by the Line a4, ſeem both of them to be Arbitrary Preſumptions, and farther, that no ſuch Appearance, which we know of, Exiſts in Nature, which this Reaſoning ſeems to Affirm; ſince in the Collection of the Rays of the Sun, the Sun's Diſtance from the Glaſs is not Equal to that of the Focus, nor even in nigher Objects are the Radiating Points at the ſame Interval from a Lens opposd to a Foramen in a Dark Room, with the Paper held behind it, on which the Images or Focus's of thoſe Points are Impreſi'd; nor laſtly even in Convex Glaſſes, which are made Uſe of for the Aſſiſtance of Weak and Infirm Eyes, do we find that Equality of the Focus with the Diſtance of the Object, for in all theſe Caſes the Focus is much nearer to the Lens than the Object is; From whence it ĩs again Notorious and Manifeſt, that this is nothing elſe, but an Abſtracted Reaſoning, and Perfectly Inadequate to the Real Appearances of Things; tis a Sport and Exerciſe of the Mind, which ſerves to Divert, or, at the moſt, to Train up and Educatc our Thoughts to Rational Contemplations, but is no more Capable of Informing u: in any True Knovledge of the Properties of Viſion, than the Demonſtrations in Geometry, and the Affections of Figures, can Furniſh us with a Juſt and Equal No tion of the Real Nature of Extenſion. 5. 19. TuE following Propoſitions are Concerning Concave Glaſſes, and their Vertual Focus's or Points of Divergence, which are Determin'd by the Refracted Ray Produc'd backwards, till it meets with the Axis of the Gla's Concavity; Thus ę is Refracted from ſę, and being Prolongd croſſes the Axis de in e, which is Termd the Point of Divergence or the Vertual Focus; Concerning which we ſhall take Notice, that ſuch Focuss, as theſe, are Perfectly Creatures of the Imagination, and do not ſerve to the Explication of any Real Phænomenon in Nature. 5. 20. Tuis is Maniſeſt, ſince a Ray fg which is Refracted to æ, cannot be Really return'd to e, becauſe it is Impoſſible that ſę. which by it's Refraction to ? is ſupposd to tend from g to  ſhould have a contrary Direction from  to g; Iſ that notvithſtanding could be done, whilſt ſę is Refracted to /, it would be Abſurd to Think, that ſ7 would Proceed in a Straight Line to æ. . 21. BESIDES, no one ever Obſerv'd one of theſe Points of Divergence in the Ręvs of the Sun, aſter their Refraction thro a Concave, of which it is the Evident I.perty to Diſperſe the Rays, whether, ina Plano-Concave, the Concave or the Planc Ttt2 be be turn'd to the Incident Beams; and therefore it is altogether Impoſſible, that the Rays, which are diſfus'd from g to ? one vay, ſnould be Contractcd from g to æ the other, ſince either ways they ought to Diverge; From whence it is Clear, that the Propoſitions, which follow in this Doctrine, are only made to Trace an Imaginary Point, vhich is no where Exiſting in Nature, and which it ĩs Impoſſible ſould, Exiſt init; That they are Problems in Opticks Invented only to Diſplay the Sill, and to ſhew the Art and Contrivance of the Geometer, vho Explains them; and which, by the Similitude of the Reaſoning usd in the Solution of them with what goes before in Convex Glaſſes, makes it ſtill more Certain and Undoubred, that the whole Doclrine of Focus's, both in Concave and Convex Glaſſcs, is nothing elſe than an Amuſcment of the Mind, and an Entertaining of it with Abſtracted Truths Concerning Lines and Angles, and the Properties of them, without giving us any Explanation oſ the Real Nature of Viſion, or the Action of Glaſſts, or the Refractions of Light thro them: We ſnall therefore Enumerate the Propoſitions which Fall under this Head, without Entering into a Particular Confutation of them, both becauſe the Vertual Focus is Maniſeſtly an Imaginary or Notional Point; and becauſe the ſame kind oſr Reaioning obtains againſt theſe, as was Alledg'd againſt the ſormer. S. a2. Tut Firſt Propoſition, which in this Philoſophy is the Tenth, is, that a Ray, Falling Parallel to the Axis from the Air on the Concave Surface of a Gla©s Mcdium, has it's Vertual Focus, by it's firſt Reſraction, at the Diſtance of a Diameter and hali oſ the Concavity. 2d. Prop. 11. IN Plano-Concave Glaſſes, when the Rays Fall Parallel to the Axis, the Point of Divergence or Vertual Focus is Diſtant ſrom the Glaſs the Diameter of the Concavity. 3d. Prop. 12. IN Double Concaves of Equal Cavities, Parallel Rays have their Vertual Focus at the Diſtance oſ the Radius of the Concavity. 4h. Prop. 13. In Double Concaves of Equal or Unequal Concavities, It will be, As the Sum of the Radii of both Concavities to the Radius oſ cither Concavity, So the Double Radius of the other Concavity to the Diſtance oſ the Vertual Focus. sth. Prop. 141h. In Concave Glaſes and Rays, which Converge, if the Point, to which the Incident Ray Converges, be Diſtant from the Glaſs farther than the Vertual Focus of Parallel Rays, It will be, As the Difference between the Diſtance of this Point from the Glaſs and the Diſtance of the Vertual Focus from the Glaſs is to the Diſtance of the Vertual Focus, So the Diſtance oſ this Point oſ, Convergenge ſtom the Glaſs, to the Diſtance of the Vertual Focus oſ theſe Convergeing Rays. 61h. Prop. 15. IN Concave Glaſcts and Rays, which Converge, iſ the Point, to which the Incident Ray Converges be Nigher to the Glaſs than the Vertual Focus of Parallel Rays, It will be, As the Exceſs oſ the Vertual Focus more than this Point oſ Convergence, to the Vertual Focus, ſo the Diſtance oſ this Point oſ Convergence ſrom the Glaſs, to the Diſtance of the Point, where this Ray Croſſes the Axis. 71h, Coroll. IN Concave Glaſſes and Rays, which Diverge, let the Point of Divergency be farther from or nigher to the Glaſi, than the Glaſũ's Vertual Focus, it will be, As the Sum of the Diſtance of the Point of Divergency ſrom the Glaſs, and the Glaſ”i's Vertual Focus to the Diſtance of the Point of Divergence from the Glaſ, So the Glaſ's Vertual Focus to the Diſtance of the Point, from which the Ray, aſter Paſſing the Glaſ, does directly Diverge. : õ. 23. IT is Manifeſt, that all theſe Propoſitions are much the ſame in Reſpect of the Vertual Focus's of Concave Glaſſes, as were before Examin'd and Refuted, in Reſpect of the Abſolute Focus's of Convex ones;3 We ſhall thereſore only farther Obſerve, beſides what has been ſaid in §. 19, 20, 21,. That the Deſign oſ theſe Vertual Focus's, tho' they no where Really Exiſt, is to aſcertain the Particular Inclination of the Rays upon their Refractions thro Concaves, which cannot be done, unleſs by Referring them to a Point to which they Converge. 5. 24. As therefore we have beſore Evinc'd, that the Actual Exiſtence oſ ſuch Focus's is Impoſſible, ſo we ſhall now Endeavour to Prove, that the Deſign and Intention of them is Chimerical;3 For iſ this Doctrine oſ Vertual Focus's was True, it would be Conſequent, (Fig. . 19.) that from a certain Point e if an Infinite Num ber of Radii are Drawn, as from a Center, Namely e, ed, &æ. The Portions oſ the Rays, which are beyond the Glaſs ill be the Reſracted Rays, as ſ ę, d b, &æ. Suppoſe now the Glaſs a bc to be Removd ſarther ſfrom æ or Drought nearer to it, either the Vertuã Vertual Focns æ vill be Changd or not; If it is not Changſd, the Refractions of the Rays vill be diffetent, as æę, and the reſt will be differently Inclin'd to a4, even Where ihe Incidences ſę, &. are Parallel, and the ſame, which is Abſurd; If the Vertual Focus e is Chang'd, by the Approach or Receſs of the Glaſs, ſo that, as æ bc Advances, e Retires, or the Contrary, it muſt be Preſum'd the Incident Rays are Parallel, otherwiſe there would be the ſame Reſractions, where the Incidences are Diſferent; and thereſore in Rays, which are Diverging, a Vertual Focus cannot be ſuppos'd, (notvithſtanding it is Aſſumd in all the Preceding Demonſtrations Concerning ſuth Rays) and can never be Applyd to nigh Objects, whoſe Rays in the ſame Demonſtrations are Aſſirmd to Diverge. 5. 25. BUT that, which is ſtill farther Obſervable is, that Granting the Rays to be Parallel, a Vertual Focus cannot be Provd, unleſs all the Rays, which are Refracted in a, c, &e. have ſuch an Adjuſtment as Produc'd backwards to Terminate in one and rhe ſame Point e, which cannot be Imagin'd in a Sphere, let the Diameter of it be what it will, Excepting the Refracted Lines g è, &. are Parallel to ſo many Lines Dravn ſtom b, as br, &e. and Conſequently, Excepting Rays, which are Refracted nearer to a, have a greater Force of Reſraction ſfrom the Perpendicular, than others which are ſarther from it, which is wholly Unaccountable in this Philoſophy; For how thoſe, which have a greater Renitency from the Curvity of the Glaſs, ſiould be able to Diſperſe themſelves more, than thoſe which have a leſs, is not to be Solv|™. 5. 26. BESIDES in this way of Reaſoning from Light Conſider'd as Conſiſiing of Individual Rays, ſince all the Rays Incident betwixt ſę and e b are Comprehended in their Vertual Focus betwixt ge b, or r bd, Equal to kęh, all the Rays betwixt hgę, b d may be Repreſented by their Parallels rb à, that is the whole by a Part; from whence it ĩs Evident, that Light is not Refracted by ſingle Rays or Threads, but Diluted and Attenuated in it's whole Subſtance; becauſe in ſuch a Caſe the Diffuſion of the Rays in k e d, may be Equal to the Conſtipation of them in r ba, that is, not by Conſidering the ſingle Rays, which are in each of the Spaces, ſince both are filled with them, and therefore in Number Equal, but by Conſidering the Space of the one to be filled vith a more Diluted Light, and the other with a more Denſe and Solid. S. 27. FARTHER according to this Doctrine, ſceing all the Rays which are Incident betwixt ſg and f b are more or leſs Refracted, and the Refracted Rays Produc'd backwards are Determind in e, to which the Lines in rbã are Parallel, it will ſollow, that there are ſome Lines Reſracted betwixt 7bd or not; IF there are, the ſame Diſficulty will ariſe as in 5. 26 If not, rb will be the firt Refraction Parallel 10 fæg, and Conſequently the Angle of Refraction of the Line, which is neareſt to the Axis, will be as great as that, which is the fartheſt from it, Namely hę = fgeægeb=rbã; ſo that in a greater or leſs Curvity of the Glaſs, the Refraction vill be the ſame, that is, Lines of different Incidences will have the ſame Refraction. S. 28. LastLy ea, eę, eb, eę, if Prolongd ſo as to make Equal Radiuss, will Conſtitute a Circle, as well as àa, dꝗ, db, à c, Form the Concave of the Glaſs; in which Caſe the Refracted Rays, which are Propagated to the Circumference, which is ſuppos'd to be Drawn from e, vill be Equal in their Number to thoſe which are Incident on æ b q, which is Deſcribd from 4, or elſe the Contrary is Affirmd ; If it is Aſſirm'd, that they are Equal in their Number, the Parallel Rays Falling from ſ; e, and ihe reſt of the Points Parallel to them, will have ſo many Reſractions in a, b, and r, whoſe Center aſter their Reſraction is in e, and the Ultimate Determination of the Arc in a and  or near thoſe Points; from whence it vill follow, that the Arc a qc, which is Drawn from the Center e, will be Equal to the Arc a bæ, which is Dravn ſrom the Center à ſince all the Parallel Lines fę e b, &r. are Incident upon every Point of the Arc a4 be, to which da, db, àc, are Drawn, and it is ſup pos'd, that there is an Equal Number of Reſracted Rays, which Deſcribe ſo many Ioints in æ q, and therefore an Arc from æ Dravn betvixt the Points à, and f, i Equal to one Dravn ſrom 4 betwixt the ſame Points, altho the Radius's of the Arc: are very Diiferent, which is Impoſſible. Ir it is Aſſirm'd, that the Rays from æ are not Equal in Number to thoſe from 4, thai is, that the Reſracted Rays are not Equal to the Incident, this Philoſophy would do vell to Inſorm us, how Rays ſould be Refracted, where they are not Incident, o liow thoſe, which are Incident, ſould not be Reſracted, they Appearing to be accord ing to this Dotrine Perſectly Reciprocal. . 20. PROPOSITIO 5. 29. PROPOSITION the Sixteenth is, that the Focal Lengths à5, æ h of tvo Convex Glaſſes ſf cc, being given, (Fig. 1.) and the longer 4 placd before the ſhorter it any given Diſtince àx, leſs than 1 the longer Focal length æE, it will be; asdstd h. dle:: ds. a d, to Determine the Diſtance of the Diſtinct Baſe from the ſhorter Glaſs; for by Prop. 81h of aMolyneuxs Dioptricks, which we have not beſore ſet down, and ſhall therefore here Inſert; IN Convex Glaſſes, when an Object i placd nigher to the Glaſs than the Focus, the Rule ſor finding the Imaginary Focus ſ. ię 2d.) is, as as. sd:: ad. dl, that is, As the Difference between the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs, and the Glaſs's Focus, is to the Glaſ5's Focus, So the Diſtance orſ; s a A q the Object from the Glaſs to the 4-/4/]/]  ———m Diſtance of the Imaginary Focus  3ſlil Explain'd s. 16. Therefore in that c h Prop. d a isgiven and à  Requird, EE on the Contrary in the Preſent dt is given, and à a ſought, and ſince by the ſame 81h Prop. it is as, as. ds:: ad. à h, by Alternation it will be as as dt:: as. ad: : dsda. a d, and by Compoſition àd5s+àt. dd:: dsda +da =ds. a d, and Conſequently, 5 and àt being given, a à will be found. 5. 30. IN Examining into this Demonſtration, it will be Neceſſary to Compar the Lines, and the Expreſſions of them made Uſe of in both the Figures; In (Fir. 2d.) as is the Difference between the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſũ, ani the Glaſ”'s Focus, that is, the Object is ſupposd to be plac'd in æ, and the Focus ol the Rays in 5, and on the ſame ſide with the Incident Rays from 4; sà therefore is the Diſtance of the Real or Abſolute Focus from the Glaſs, æ à the Diſtance of the Object from it, and àſ the Imaginary Focus, which is made from the Refraction of rhe Incident Linc æ into e h, which Produc'd backward is Determin'd in æ3 on the o ther Hand in the preſent Prop. (Fig. 1.) as is the Difference betwixt the Diſtance of the Diſtinct Baſe 4 from the Glaſs ſf, which is a à, and the Glaſi's Focus à5 which is on the contrary Side to the Incident Rays, which Fall from bb; and the Diſtint Baſe in this Propoſition is ſupposd to Repreſent the Object in the other; Conſequently, as before, sà is the Diſtance of the Abſolute Focus, æ à the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs, and àæ the Imaginary Focuss which here Falls betwixt the Abſolute Focus s and the Object à, notwithſtanding it before Fell beyond the AbſoIute Focus. S. 31. THERE are therefore three Things Principally to be Enquir'd into in Reſpect of the Application of Propoſition the Eighth to the Preſent, Namely æà the Diſtance of the Object in the one Caſe and the other, 45 the Abſolute Focus, and ã l the Imaginary; As to the firſt, æ in the Eighth Propoſition or (Fig. 2ã.) is ſupposd to be the Radiating Object, which Emits Rays, and in the Preſent Propoſition or (Fig. 1) it is that Point, to Which the Rays are Refracted; and by Conſequence, unleſs the Courſc of the Rays, and the Force of their Direction, from æ and to it, is the ſame, that is, unleſs in (Fig. iſt.) it is the ſame Thing, whetherĩ is carry'd by a certain Impulſe from thence to ã, or on the Contrar; from æ to i, theſe tvo Demonſtrations are ſo fat from ſupporting, that they Contradict cach other; and that two Oppoſite Directions are the ſame we cannot caſily Imagine. 5. 32. IT is farther to be Obſerved, that as the Diſinct Baſe, which is Produc'd from the Reſtaction of Rays Deriv'd ſrom any Object is, in this vay Reaſoning, made to be the ſame with the Object, from whence the Rays are Derivid, which ſcem: c ſeems to be both Incongruous and Abſurd; So it is likewiſe very Unhappy in this Philoſophy, that it takes a for a certain and known Point, whereas it is the very Focus that is Requird, and to be Determin'd; for by (Fig. 2d.) it is as as. ds:: aã d I, in which æ is known, as being the Radiating Point of the Object, but how the ſame Proportion ſould be made Uſe of to find out æ in the Preſent Propoſition (Fig. 1.) unleſs by ſuppoſing it, that is, unleſs by ſuppoſing the Point to be Demonſtrated, ve are not Informd; ſince the Throwing out 4 from the Proportion, and Reducing it to às+ãt. db:: ds. a d the Quantity Requird, is upon the Suppoſition, that a5. às:: ad. d b. that is, upon the Suppoſition, that æ is known, vhen it is the Point Deſird. S. 33. THE ſccond Inquiry is Concerning s the Abſolute Focus, which in the 2d. Scheme is on this Side  the Imaginary Focus, and in the i1ſſ. beyond it, the Reaſon of which is not Aſſignd, nor can be; ſince the Refraction of a Plano-Convex Glaſs to a Focus is about the Diſtance of the Diameter of the Convexity, and the Refraction of a Double Convex to a Focus at the Diſtance of a Semidiameter only; from which it will ſollow, that a Double Convex will have it's Focus nearer to the Glaſs than a Plano-Convex has, whereas according to this Reaſoning the Contrary vill Enſue, and in Fig. iſt.) the Focus s ſfrom ſf is at a greater Diſtance than that from àe in (Fig. 2d.) s. 34. I?s in (Fig. 1) is not farther Removd from the Glaſs than in (Fig. 2.) it muſt be upon one of theſe Accounts, that cither the Glaſſes Occaſion ſome Difſerence in their Refractions by their Different Thickneſs, vhich this Philoſophy Diſclaims, ſince it only Conſiders the Different Curvities of the Glaſſes, and ſuppoſes the Glaſcs themſelves to be as to their Thickneſs, of little or no Conſideration; or elſe becauſe the Rays are Preſumd to be Parallel in their Incidence on ſ whereas he is not ſo, but Divergeing from the Axis, which is at Ieaſt an Hypotheſis, which is Perſectly Arbitrary, and ought not to be made Uſe of in a Juſt and True Reaſoning. ORr Laſtly it may be ſaid, that s in (Fig. iſt.) is not farther Removd from ff, than s in (Fig. 2d.) from e d, becauſe the Imaginary Focus ? may be ſooner Determin'd to a Point in the firſt Caſe, than in the laſt; in Reſpect of which we ſhall here ſay, that ſuppoſing à5 in (Fig. 1ſt.) to be Equal to à5 in (Fig. 2à.) which yer muſt be leſs, if there is any Inequality, by what has been ſaid in the Preſent Section and the Foregoing, becauſe the Incident Rays ought in both Caſes to be ſuppos'd Parallel, and if ſo, a Double Convex will Reſract them at a leſs Diſtance from the Glaſs than a ſingle one will, but ſuppoſing them Equal, it is Impoſſible, that æ ſould be Determin'd ſooner to a Point in (Fig. 1ſ.) where cĩ, ci are Convergeing to the Lens ſf;, than where he is ſuppos'd to be Iikewiſe Convergeing, unleſs it can be ſewn us, what their Difference of Convergeing is, which ſeems at Preſent to be Entirely Arbitrary. S. 35. THE third Inquiry is Concerning the Imaginary Focus, which is , and in (Fig. 2d.) is made by the Production of the Reſracted Ray e h; Whereas in (Fig. 1.) it is Formed by the Production of the Incident cĩ; but it is Impoſſible, it ſhould be the ſame Thing to Prolong the Refracted, or the Incident, Ray, in Order to Determine the Point E; ſince, as the Refracted Ray has a Different Inclination to the Axis from the Incident, the Continuation of them muſt Neceſarily meet the Axis in Various and Diſtinct Points, and therefore cannor Repreſent one and the ſame Imaginary Focus. 5. 36. WE do not however Deny, that a ſecond Lens will Collect the Rays to a nearer Focus, than one of it's ſelf vill without the Aſſiſtance of another; and Conſequently æ will be niZher to cę (Fiz. 1ſ.) than æ is; That Poſſibly may be a Phænomenon in Nature and Conſirmd by Experience; vhat ve Aſfirm is, that this kind oſ Reaſoning, which is Eſpousd by the Preſent Philoſophy, does not ſue a Juſt Account of that, vhich it Pro;oſes to Demonſtrate. All theſe Difficulties are Avoided by the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, that is, by Conſidering Light, as an Expanſive Force Spread and Diſfuſcd thro the ther from the Sun, and Glaſs as a Contractive one, Acting in the Convex and Concave, as before Explained, Chap. 6. . 23. 24. 5. 37. OF the ſame Nature with the Preceding Propoſition is the Seventeenth, which ſays, that a Convex Glaſs being given with a Concave of a larger Sphere, the Concave being Plac'd behind the Convex at any Diſtance, leſs than the Focal Lengih o the the Convex, it will be, if the Diſtance of the Glaſſes is Subſtracted from the Focal Length of the Convex, ſo as to make the Difference àæ3 As the Focal Lengih oſ the Concave ie leſs by the Difference à e, to the Focal Length of the Concave, So the Diſference to the Diſtance of the Diſtinct Baſ from the Concave, Namely h e; That is, the Focus, made by a Concave after the fir?t Reſraction is Perſorm'd thro' r q a Lens, is farther oſſ from ſf, than it vould have been, iſ the Concave had not been Interposd; hich Perhaps may be True iń f 1 Fact, but the Demonſtration of it not ſo. S. 38. TuE Eighteenth Propoſition is, the Focal Lengths of a Convex Glaſs, and a Concave being given, and the Concave plac'd towards the Object, Diſtant ſrom the Convex, ſo that the Sum oſ the Concave's Focal Length and the Glaſſts Diſtlance may be greater than the Focal Length oſ the Convex, and this Diſtance oſ the Glaſes being given alſo, if the Focus oſ the Convex is Subſtracted ſrom the Sum of the Focus oſ the Concave and the Diſtance of the Glaſes, ſo as to make the Diſſcrence sæ; It will be, As the Diſſerence s a to the Focus oſ the Convex s à, So the ſum of the Concaves Focus and Glaſſes Diſtance æ à to the Diſtance of the Focus ſrom theConvex 4'; that is, if nb, mc are ſirſt Reſracted by a Concave, by which they Diverge, and afterwards by a Lens, the Focus ? will be farther oſf from e f, than if they had been Reſracted by the Lens alone, which alſo may be True in Experience, but that this Demonſtration Proves it, we are not villing to Allo. 5. 30. To Conclude this Chapter, all theſe Demonſtrations fix the Collection of the Rays to Particular and Certain Points, vhich is Evidently Falſe in Experience, ſince they Terminate in Circles; and therefore we may Rationally Infer, that all this Buſlle and Ado about Lines and Angles is nothing elſe than an Abſtracted Reaſoning of the Mind, without being any ways Agrecable to the Real Forces of Nature; They are the Diverſion and Exerciſe of a Mathematick Genius, and not the Reſult of a Judicious and Philoſophick Reaſoning. But it is with Geometers in Conſidering the Great Volume of Nature, as it is with ſome Criticks in Explaining Particular Authors; They both Endeavour, rather to ſiew their Skill in the Science of Criticiſm or Geometry, than to give us the True Meaning of the one, or the Senſe of the other. C H A P. VIII. Concerning Meniſcus Glaſſes and the Propoſitions thereto Belonging. 5. 1. E have hitherto Conſider'd the General Propoſitions in this Science, in Reſpect of Concave or Convex Glaſes; We ſhall now Procẽed to Enquire into thoſc, which Concern what are Termd Meniſcus ones, Namely, ſuch as are Convex on one Side, and Concave on the other, as in ſFig. 5. 6.) They have their Name from the Greek Word Mſeſox⸗, vhich Signifies Lunula, whoſe Figure theſe Glaſes ſcem to Imitate and Reſemble. 5. 2. IN Meniſcus Glaſſes, where the Semidiameters oſ the Convexity and Concavity are Equal, the Rays, that are Incident on them Parallel to theit Axis, are ſaid to Proceed aſter Reſraction in Parallel Lines; where Unequal, if the Semidiameter of the Convexity is leſs than that oſ the Concavity, the Convexity is Affirmd to have the greateſt Force oſ Reſraction, and the Glaſs to Poſſeſs a Real Focus; if the Semidiameter of the Concavity is leſs than that of the Convexity, the Concave is ſupposd to Prevail, and the Glaſs to have only a Vertual Focus; Conſequent to this, the Focus oſ a Meniſcus, ſthe Semidiameter oſ whoſe Convexity is Ieſs than that of the Con cavity, and theſe tvo Semidiameters being given) is Thought to be eaſily Determin by Prop. 17. Since in that two Glaſſes are given, the one a Convex, and the othe a Concave, and the Focal Length of the Convex is ſhorter than that of the Con cavt cave; and farther, by the ſame Propoſition, the Diſtance betwixt the Glanes is given vhich in this Meniſcus is Preſumd to be nothing, or not Conſiderable, in Reſpect ol the Thickneſs of the Glaſs, or the Diſtance of the Convex Side from the Concave Compard with the Focal Length of each3 Thereſfore, ſince by Prop. 17. Itis, As the Focal Length of the Concavethe Focal Lengih of the Convex + the Glaſſes Diſtance to the Focal Length of the Concave, So the Focal Length of the Convex the Glaſẽe: Diſtance to the Diſtance of the Diſtinct Baſe from the Concave, The Diſtance oſ the Concave and Convex being Conſider'd as nothing, the Proportion is Changſ to the following; As the Focal Length of the Concave the Focal Length oſ the Convex, to the Focal Lenoth of the Concave, So the Focal Length of the Convex, to the Diſtance oſ the Focus of the Meniſcus. l AND the Semidiameters of the Convexity and Concavity of a Meniſcus being given, the Focal Lengths of the Plano-Convex, and Plano-Concave, of which the Meniſcus is Compounded, are alſo given; Wherefore, the halves being as their wholes, inſtead of the Focal Lengths, the Diameters of the Concavity and Convexity may be Aſumd; and the Proportion will be, As the Diſference of the Semidiameters oſ the Convexity and Concavity, to the Semidiameter of the Concavity, So the Diameter of the Convexity to the Focal Length, which is the Proportion Aſcrted by the Writers in Opticks. 5. 3. As to the firſt Part of the Preceding Section, we ſnall afterwards Conſider it in the following Propoſitions, vhich are Alledgſd to Prove it, and at Preſent take it for Certain and Demonſtrable; It is Aſſirmd in Conſequence of it, that a Meniſcus, the Semidiameter of whoſe Convexity is leſs than that of the Concavity, may be Reduc'd to the Caſe in Prop. 17. where there are two Glaſſes given, the one a Convex, and the other a Concave, and the Focal Length of the Convex is ſhorter, than that of the Concave, ſSee Fig. §. 37. Chap. 77 To make this Analogy thereſore True; iſf. It is Requiſite to Prove that Propoſition, which has not been done; 2d. It is Neceſſary to Evince, that where the Vertual Focus 7e oſ the Concave is Ionger than the Abſolute Focus àx of the Convex, it is always Certain, that tht Semidiameter of the Concave is alſo greater than that of the Convex, which has been Endeavourd, Indeed, but by Propoſitions and Demonſtrations, which have been already Reſuted, Namely, which make the Vertual Focus of a Concave in Equal Curvities to be Determind at the ſame Diſtance with the Abſolute one of a Convex, that is about the Diſtance of the Diameter of the Concavity or Convexity, and thereſore the Larger the Concavity or Convexity is, the Focus will be the Longer; 34. Even thoſc Demonſtrations Concern Plano-Convex and Plano- Concave Glaſſes, But Prop. 17. is Concerning a Double Convex Glaſs, which Collects it's Rays at halt the Diſtance of a Plano-Convex, to wit, at about the Diſtance oſ the Radius oſ the Convexity, whereas the Meniſcus is Compounded, by what is before Aſfirmd, of a Plano-Convex and a Plano-Concave, which therefore cannot be Reduc'd to two Glaſts, in Prop. 17. one of which is a Double Convex, and the other, either a Double Concave or a Plano-Concave. I 5. 4. Ir this were Allow'd, ſince by Prop. 17. it is, as ied x +ex. ie:: dxex. he, or as id. ie:: de. he, and ſince e æ the Diſtance of the Glaſes is ſuppos'd to be Exterminated out of the Proportion in the Meniſcus, it is ſaid, it will be, as 7æ dx. ie::ã x. h e, the Focal Length of the Meniſcus; But why e æ the Diſtance of the Glaſts ſhould in the Meniſcus be Conſider'd as nothing, when it is ſupposd to be Divided into a Plano-Convex, and a Plano-Concave, whichęDiviſion will make a much greater Diſference in the Refractions than the Intermeũiare Diſtance berwixt a Double Convex and a Concave, is Unaccountable; for the Plano-Convex and PlanoConcave have theit Abſolute and Vertual Focus's at Double the Diſtance of vhat a Double Convex or Concave have, whereas the Diſtance berwixt the Glaſes e x which is Undetermin'd, and may be more or leſs, as it is given, will in twenty Caſes Cauſe not half the Diſference in the Vertual and Abſolute Focus's, vhich the other does. iill 5 5. MoRrEOVER it is not Evident or Plain, that upon the Diminution of the Diſtance of the Glaſſes to an Infinity, the ſame Proportions will hold, unleſs, by Enlarging it to Infinity within the Limits Preſcridd in the Propoſition, they likeviſe vill, which this Phloſophy will not, IPreſume, Venture to Aſirm; ſince if the U uu Concave Coneave Approaches Inſinitely near to à, it will be in the very Focus oſ the Convex, and Conſequently in ſuch a Caſe, and by this way of Reaſoning, the Proportion will be as i à. id:: de. he, vhich will therefore be Equal, and the Diſiinct Baſe of the Concave the ſame with the Focus of the Convex; that is, the Concave and Convex vill Refract the Rays alike, which is Impoſſible, or elſe the Concave vill not Refract them at all, which is Contrary to Experience To Wit, à will Exactly Coincide vith h f after it's Refraction in æ5 So little can we Depend on the Proportions Aſſign'd by the Writers in Opticks. 5. 6. PROPOSITION the Nineteenth, it is Aſſerted, in a Meniſcus, if both the Spherical Superſicies have the ſame Diameter, the Ray, Which is Incident upon it, Parallel to the Axis, aſter it's ſecond Refraction Proceeds likewiſc Patalle. To Prove which it is ſupposd, that the Thickneſs of the Glaſũ is Inconſiderable, and that the Sines and Angles, and Sides, in theſe ſmall Angles are Proportional; IF ſo, let 57=gca be made Triple of be=fa, the Semidiameters of the Convexity ææ and the Concavity s a, the Incident Ray àe at e is Refracted towards g, and esę is 3 Right Line, ats it is again Refracted to h, and as Isæ is the Angle of Inclination or Incidence, which is  i fs”, the Angle of Refraction is hs ę=sgſ, if hs and gſ are Parallel; Con ſequently by Experiment the 52h. the Angle of Refraction hsę=sgſ, will be hali of gsf, as it is Evident it is by this Conſtruction, becauſe s ſ is the half of g/ and it is ſuppos'd, that the Angles and Sides are Proportional, and therefore hs and ęf are Parallcl. 5. 7. IN AnſWer to this Demonſiration we ſay, that if f and bæ are Equal, ſs and bæ vill be ſo too, and ſince the Diſtance berwixt a and ⸗ is Conſiderd as nothing, and b will Fall into the ſame Point; From Whence it vill follow, that ſæ and ſs are Equal, and that there is no firſt and ſecond Refraction, which this Demonſtration ſuppoſes, but that they are both of them Reſolvd into one in s or æ, which vill Deſtroy the very Nature of a Meniſcus, which Conſiſts of a Concave and a Convex; Since by taking away the Diſtance betwixt them, the Meniſcus muſt cither be a Concave or a Convex, and Conſiderd as ſuch, muſt cither entirely Contract the Rays, or make them Diverge. 5. 8. Ir is likewiſe Aſfirmd, that the Sines and Angles are Proportional, which is not True, unleſs in very ſmall Segments of a Sphere, and Where the Diameters of them are very Large, whereas it is not, that Iknow of, Evident in Fact, or from this Demonſtration, that if Rays are Reſracted Parallel in ſmaller Segments, they arc not ſo in much Larger, the Diameters of their Curvity Continuing the ſame. 5. 9. GRANTING Which, it is not Provd, that bs is Parallel to ęf, unleſt by ſuppoſing in the Conſtruction of the Scheme, that ęſ is the Double of ſs, or which is the ſame, that sęſ is half of the Angle of Inclination ſ⸗Q; To Evidence thereſore, that sgf is half of the Angle of Inclination ſsg, by ęf being ſupposd in the Conſtruct ion, to be Double of ſs, or ſ⸗ half of f”, is no other, than Proving by ſuppoſing the very Thing, vhich is to be Prov'd; For tho' it ſould be Granted by Experimeni the 51h, that hsg is half of gsf, it will not follow that ſgs5 is ſo, unleſs by this Conſtruction, that is, by ſuppoſing ſs to be half of gſ, or f gs Equal to hsę, o which is the ſame, it will not be Conſequent, that h5 and ga are Parallel, unleſ by by ſuppoſing, that they are Parallel; On the Contrary, if we take gf the Triple ol Quadruple of fs, which it may as well be, as the Double of it, the Angle g5f ill be the Triple or Quadruple of 7gs, vhereas it is only Double of hsg by Experiment; and thereſore ſince ſg⸗ is not Equal to hsgę, ęa and hs vill not be Parallel; vhy therefore this Demonſtration Aſſumes gſ to be the Double, rather than the Triple, or any other Multiple, of ſ5 wants to be ſhewn; ſeeing the Angle of Inclination or Incidence g57 may be Double the Angle of Refraction h sg, according to the Experiment, let the Proportion of gf to fs be what it will. 5. 10. PROPOSITION the Twentieth is, that in a Meniſcus if the Semidiameter oſ the Concavity be Triple the Semidiameter of the Convexity, the Focal Length is Equal to the Semidiameter of the Concavity; For let à be the Semidiameter of the Convexity and be =3 dc the Semidiameter of the Concavity, let the Axis be 44, and the Incident Ray hi; by Prop. 1. Schol. hi after it's firſt Refraction will tend to a Point, which is Diſtant a Diameter and half of the Glaſ's Convexity, that is to b, but b is the Center of the Concavity, and therefore i æ Falls Perpendicular on the Concave Surſace ſę and Conſequently is not Refracted at all, Proceeding, aſter it's Emerſion from the Glaſs, directly forwards in the Line i hb= to the Semidiameter of the Concavity. 5. 11. THIS Demonſtration therefore Depends upon Propoſition the firſt, which has been beſore Examined, and farther ſuppoſes that i b is = to be, which is the Diameter and half of the Convexity, the Diſtance Requird for the Focal Length oſ hi aſter its firſt Refraction; but e b is =to b and therefore b4 is=bi a Part to the whole; if æà is Conſiderd as nothing, then there will be no firſt and ſecond Refraction, and the Original Suppoſition of the Semidiameter of the Convex being a of that oſ the Concave is deſtroy'd; ſince 7 and æ Will every where Coincide, and the Concave and Convex vill be the ſame. 5, 12. BESIDES Which, hi aſter the firſt Reſraction is ſaid to Proceed from i to 4, becauſc it is Equal to e b, which is a Diameter and half of the Glaſ''s Convexity by Conſiruction; Tis True the Radius of the Concavity Reaches ſfrom b to / but it does not from thence follow, that i b muſt Neceſſarily be drawn thro' æ; for it is not Evident, that it may not Fall upon any other Radius, which is made from b betwixt æ and e, in vhich Caſe i ſ would be a ſecond time Refracted, contrary to hot is here Aſfirmd, and yet might Preſcrve it's Focal Length at the ſame diſtance of b. s. 13. WE Say it is not Maniſeſt from this Way of Reaſoning, that the Ray does not Admit of a ſecond Refraction, ſince the only Proof, that it does not, is, that after the firſt Reſraction it is Incident upon b æ which is a Perpendicular to the Concavity, whereas it will not be thereſore certain that i  is a Perpendicular to the Convexity; if it was, ie, orà drawn to any Intermediate Point betwixt æ and , vould be likewiſe a Perpendicular; ſince it would Fall upon a Radius, which is Perpendicular to the Concate from the Center b; and in General there could be no Secondary Refraction in a ſecond Convex fe tg, or even in the firſt ſcię; ſince even hi is Incident upon ſome Radius or other Produced from 4, and yet in this Demonſtration all this is ſaid to be moſt Evident. 5. 14. PROPOSITION the Twenty Firſi, it is Afirm'd, that in a Meniſcus the Semidiameter oſ whoſe Convexity is Triple the Semidiameter of the Concavity, the U uua Vertua Vertual Focus is diſtant the Semidiameter of the Convexity; The Demonſtration of vhich is Exactly the ſame vith that of the Preceding Propoſition, (See Fig. 4. Tab. 20. which it is not here Neceſſary to Tranſcribe) unleſ"' that the Vertual Focus is here Conſiderd, whereas the Abſolute was in the Former, and as to what Concerns the other Propoſitions, which Determine the Real or Vertual Focus's of Meniſcus Glaſſes in General, where the Semidiameters of their Convexity or Concavity are likewiſe Unequal, we ſhall wholly Omit them, as their Demonſtrations are Founded upon a Reaſoning, vhich is alike Abſtracted, and therefore Signiſies nothing to the Explaining the True Nature or Plain Phænomenons of Viſion, and is Equally Falſe and Erroncous. S. 15. From Propoſition the Twenty Firſt, ve ſhall thereſore Proceed to Propoſition the Twenty Fourth, which is, That an Entire Glaſ-Sphere Unites the Parallel Rays at the Diſtance almoſt of half it's Se- l midiameter behind it; a æ is a GlaſsSphere, bã is the Incident Ray Paral- b Iel to the Axis a 4/ vhich aſter a double Reſraction meets with ſ, ſo that ſſ is ncar 2th oſ the Diameter of the Sphere, 7 is the Center oſ the Sphere; let ſh be =to the Semidiameter c E, a b vill be a Diameter and half, and the Ray hæ aſter the firſt Reſtaction by Prop. 1ſ. would Proceed in a Strait Linc to h, if the Glaſs reacht ſo ſar, but at e it Emerges ſrom Glaſi into Air; Draw the Perpendicular cę, the Angle oſ this Second Inclination or Incidence is cæ d =ge h. and the Ray is Refracted from the Perpendicular ę in the Angle feh, vhich ought by Experiment the s1h to be halt oſ ceàd =ge h, and ſo it is ſaid to be; Forc ed is= ech e he by 32. I. Elem. but e ch =e hę nearly, becauſe their Subtenſes e h and ec, or h l, are ſo, and thereſore e he is half oſ ced; Again ehc is5ſeh nearly, ſince ſe the Subtrenſe of the one is nearly S to fh the Subtenſe of the other, becauſe fh is=to ſ by Conſtruction, and there is little or no Difference betwixt ſl and fe, and by Conſequence the Angle ſsh =to ehc is half the i Angle h e ę= c e d, the Angle of Inci- i dence or Inclination. i . 16. As to the firſt Reſraction  B of the Incident Ray bà to h, that Ll Depends upon ſrop. iſt. and as to ſeh the Angle, which is made by the ſecond Reſraction, being half of the Angle of Incidence or Inclination, the Proof of it is Referrd to Experiment the sth, both which Articles of Demonſiration have been Reſured ; What Remains therefore to be Conſiderd is only this, the near Equality of ſſ and fe, as likewiſe of ht and he: For if ſ and ſe may be Conſiderd as Equal, and h and he may too, then hf, fd may be likewiſe Conſiderd, as=to he, and he, e c, to he, which will not only Contradict a Plain Propoſition in Euclid, where the two Lines of any Triangle are Greater than the Third, ſand e ? h is in this very Demonſiration ſuppos'd to be ⸗ Triangle,) but alſo the Lines e ſ, f h being the ſame, or being Conſiderd as the ſame vith e h, the Point ſ may be Imãgind to be in the Line e h, and therefore the ? a bd after the ſecond Reſraction ought to Procced t00 h, ſince it Continues in the ſame Line from the ſirſt Reſraction, in which it would Advance, if there were no Second. s. 17. BUuT What is more is, that the firt Propoſition ſuppoſes an Arc not Greater than 30 Degrees, that the Angles are Extremely Small, and the Lines and Sides oſ them thereſore Proportional, whereas the Properties of a whole Sphere are here to be Conſiderd in Reſpect of the Refractions oſ Light, and Conſequently Angles that are Large, and whoſce Sines and Sides are not Proportional. S. 18. LastLY in that Propoſition the Convexity is Preſumd to be Large, and the Incidences oſ the Rays not Extremely Diffcring, altho in the Preſent the Diameter oſ the Sphere is not Speciſy'd, and whether it is Greater or Leſ3, or it's Convexity 3 There is no Exception made, nor any Precautions usd, notwithſlanding it is Evident the Diſference of both will Cauſe a Conſiderable Alteration in the Refractions oſ the Rays, and make the Angles c e ã, ſæh very much Diſproportiond from what they are here Repreſented, as ell as ecſ, e hſ, and ſe h, fhe, far from being Equal. S. 19. TuE 251h Propoſition is oſ the ſame Nature with the ſormer, and thereſore we ſhall not particularly Examine into the Demonſiration of it, but go on to the 26h, which is Contrivd to Determine the Diameter oſ the Image, that is made by the Projection of an Object in the Diſtinct Baſe oſ a Convex Glaſs, and vhich is ſaid will be thus found; As the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſ's to the Diſtance of the Image ſfrom the Glaſs, So the Diamerer of the Object's Magnitude to the Diameter of the Image  abe is an Object, ſà m a Convex Glaſi in the Foramen of a Dark Room, f ſę& the Image Formd by this Glaſs on a White Paper in the Diſlinct Baſe; It ill be, as c à or bd to e àd or fã, ſo ac to ge, which is thus Prov'd; For by the Premiſes to the 40h Propoſition, the Axes æ à and cã of the Luminous Cones a m, ke m Paſs thro' the Glaſi, as if they were not Reſracted at all, becauſe their Reſfractjons are Parallel to their Incidences, and thereſore in Glaſſcs of large Spheres, and ſmall Segments, the Thickneſs of the Glaſs, being Inconſiderable in Reſpect of the Focal Diſtance, may be Neglected From whence it vill Follow, that æãe, edg vill be two Similar Triangles, and Conſequently cà. ed:: ac. ge. s. 20. THE Premiſes to the 41h Propoſtion have been Conſiderd, and a Conſutation of them necd not be here Repeated; we ſhall Add, that ſuppoſing the Triangles a de, ęd e, even in a greater or a leſs Thickncſ' oſ the Glaſs to be Similar, this very Demonſtration is an Abundant Proof, that this Philoſophy of Rays and their Refractions is only an Abſtractcd Reaſoning, vhich is neither Agrecable to Nature, nor to other Parts of the ſame Docd rine, nor to the preſent Aſſcrtions; It is not Agrecable to Nature, ſince in Proportion, æ ihe Diſance of the Object from the Lens is Diminiſhed, the Diſtance of the Imag:e in the Diſtinct Baſe ſfrom the Lens ought to be Increasd, and the Magnitude of it by which Means iſ ac Approaches the Lens ſæ to the ſame Nearneſs, as the Image e 7 is Refracted from it, eę vill be as ſar Diſtant, and Obtain the ſame Magnitude, as æc is ſupposd to have in the Preſent Figure, which is not Confirmd by any Experiment in Nature, but the Contrary; For iſ an Object, which is in Length about four or five Yards, is Projected thro' a Lens in the Foramen of a Dark Room at the Diſtance ol Thirty eight or Forty Vards, the Image vill not be above one or two Inches at the moſt at about the Diſtance of a Foot from the ſame Lens; which will not Agree witl this Doctrine oſ the Image's being Increaſed or Diminiſhed in Proportion to the Acceſi or Receſs oſ the Ob ect; ſor ſince, where the Length of the Object is four Yards, fol Inſtance Inſtance, and the Diſtance from the Lens Thirty Eight, the Magnitude of the Imagc vill be but about an Inch, and the Diſtance of it from the Lens about one Foot the Diſtances will Conſcequently be of the Object and the Image from the Lens a 114 to 1, whereas the Magnitude oſ the Object and Image will be as 144 to I. S. 21. Ir is alſo Maniſeſt from this Doctrine, that the Eye is Conſiderd only a a Lens, and Conſequently as a c comes nearer to it, the Diſtance of the Diſtinũt Baſe at the Retina muſt be Proportionably Enlargd, as well as the Image, which i: Impreſs'd upon it, which is altogether Impoſſible, unleſs we can ſuppoſe the Retina to be Extended beyond the Lens of the Eye to the Length of hàd on the one Hand, or to the Breadth of the whole Object ac on the other, which will be above the Power of any Muſcles to Eſfcct, whatever Faculty they may be Reputed to have that vay. 5. i BESIDES Which, where the Eye is Fix'd and Unmovd, and cannot with the leaſt Reaſon be Thought to be Alterd in it's Figure by the Compreſſion of its Muſcles, this Proportion does not Obtain, for we do not ſec an Object Double at Halſ the Diſtance and Triple at one Third of the Diſtlance, &z. But it Continues Viſible in much the ſame Magnirude for a Conſiderable Space together. S. 23. Tuis Propoſition farther is not only Contrary to the Appearances in Nature, but to other Parts oſ the Preſent Philoſophy; for by Propoſition the 57b in Plano- Convex Glaſes, when a Nigh Object is Placed more Diſtant than the Focus, there is one Certain Rule for Determining the Diſtinct Baſe, in which the Difference betwixt the Diſtance oſ the Object and the Focus is Conſider'd, and the Proportion Aſcertain'd vith Reſpect to that Difference; by Propoſition the orh. In Double Convex Glaſſes, the Rays Proceeding from the Diſtance of a Diameter of one Convexity are United at the Diſtance oſ a Diameter of the other Convexity3 which Propoſitions cannot be Reconcil'd with the Preſent, for cã being to ed:: ac. ge, whenever cà and e à are Equal, and the Diameters of the Convexities Equal, ac and fg ill be ſo likewiſe by the oth Propoſition, but we never find the Images of Objects in a Dark Room, or in the Eye, of the ſame Magnitude with the Objects themſelves; And as to the Dirference betwixt the Focus and the Diſtance of the Object in Plano Convexes Mention'd in Propoſition 51h, ſince a Double Convex is a Double Plano-Convex in this Philoſophy, ſuch a Difference ought in ſome Proportion or other to be here Conſiderd; but that it is not, is Evident, ſceing, whether the Object is in the Focus it ſcelf, or on this, or the other Side, of it, the Diſtance of the Object is only Affirmvd vithout any Difference of that Kind, to Determine the Diſtinct Baſe æ⸗. 5. 24. LET us now Examinc into the Preſent Aſſertions, which we ſaid vere not Agrecable to each other, for cãe is no otherwiſe Preſumd to be one Direct Linc than as eà is Refracted Parallel to c ã3 let therefore eãd be Parallel to f ã, and dę to ad, ſo as e and g ſnould be Determin'd in  and q, it is Manifeſt, that the Lines Drawn from ſ and  ill not Comprehend the ſame Angle with thoſe, which are Produced from e and 5, and therefore cannot make a Similar Triangle vith aã], upon vhich Suppoſition this Reaſoning Depends. S. 25. Prop. 271h is, that the Object and it's Image in the Diſtinct Baſe are Reciprocal 3 Thus, Sce the foregoing Figure, a b c being the Object, e ſę is the Image in the Diſlinct Baſe; And ſince the Object and it's Image are Reciprocal, the Image may be Conſiderd as the Object, and a b c on the Contrary vill be the Image; In like Manner, let the Sun Project his Image in the Focus of a Convex, that Image Reciprocally may be Conceiv'd as a Real Sun, which ill have it's Diſtinct Baſe as Large, and as Remote, as the Real Sun is, ſo that every Convex vill have two Focus's, one in the Image, and the other in the Object. 5. 26. Tuis ſort of Reaſoning is, as if we ſhould Aſſirm the Fountain and the Stream, vhich is Derivd ſrom it, is Reciprocal, and Mutually Infer each other, and therefore Conclude, that becauſe the Stream Runs down from it's Source, it is carry'd up to it in a quite contrary Current; or as if ve ſould Pretend to Demonſirate, that ſince an Adequate Cauſe Produces it's Proper Eſſcct, in Return the Erſfect will Produce it's Cauſe; The Caſe is the ſame here, the Sun, or any other Object, by a Derivation oſf Light ſrom either, and a Reſiaction oſ it to a Focus, Expreſſes an Image in the Diſinct Laſe, and where there is an Obiecl, in ſuch a Circumſtance tance of it, there will be an Image, and Reciprocally; But from thence to Infer, that here is a ſort of Reaction in the Image, by which it Returns the Rays back to a Focus in the Object, is to ſuppoſe the Rays Actually Refracted in two Contrary and Oppoſite Directions, Namely, from and to the Object; or, which is all one, that they Reſult back to the Source, from Whence they Flow, at the ſame Time, that they are Derivd in a Direct Stream from it. §. 27. Ir is Plain and Evident, that all, which can be ſaid in Reſpect of theſe Reciprocal Focuss, is only this, that the Object, as the Cauſe, has at ſuch a certain Diſtance ſrom the Glaſi, ſuch a certain and Determind Focus, as it's Effect, or on the Contrary, the Focus, Conſiderd as the Effect, ill have an Object at ſuch a Diſtance for it's Cauſe; ſince it is Extremely Unreaſonable to Think, that Rays ſhould have the ſame Properties, vhen they are Conſiderd as Active, as they have, when they are only Paſſive; for whilſt they are Impreſſed from the Object upon the Lens, they are Active towards the Lens, and Paſſive, or Unactive, from it towards the Object, and ſo likewiſe from the Lens to the Focus; But if the Diſtinct Baſc is now Imagin'd to be Active, the Rays on the Contrary vill be Active that way, in which they were before Unactive; and Conſcquently, unleſs Action, and Paſſion or Inaction, will Produce the ſame Effects, the Object and Image cannor be in the Senſe, which this Philoſophy ſuppoſes, Reciprocal 5. 23. BESIDES, the Falſehood oſ theſe Reciprocal Focus's is Maniſeſt from Hence, that the Object æ be, as it Approaches nearer to the Lens, makes an Alteration in the Dimenſions of the Image, which is Proportionably Increaſed to the Approach of the Object, whereas on the Contrary, the Approach of the Image has not the like Effects, ſince the Object continues Immutably the ſame. We ſhall therefore here Conclude the Preſent Chapter, having Conſider'd all that is Material in the Abſtracted Reaſoning and Demonſtrations of this Science, from which we ſhall Proceed to the Explanations given us oſ the more Evident Phænomenons, it Undertakes to Solve. After we have ſaid in General, that the Properties of Meniſcus Glaſes are only, and no ortherwiſe to be Explained, than by Aſcertaining the Expanſive Forces of Light and the Contractive of the Glaſſes, and Examining into their Mutual Acions upon each other; And the ſame Doctrine Obtains both in Relation to the Refractions of a Sphere, or the Determining the Diſtinct Baſe of an Object. C u A P IX. Concerning Simple or Plain Viſion. 5.. HE ſirt Appearance, which this Philoſophy Endeavours to Account for, is T the Manner of Plain Viſion with the Naked Eye; a bæ (Fig. §. 3) is an Object, illm is the Globe of the Eye, in which i hh g Comprehended betwixt the Tunica Cornca il, and the Convex g h, is the Aqueous Humour; go h, Contain'd in the Lens, the Chryſtalline; g hm I, which lies betwixt the Chryſtalline and the Bottom of the Eye, the Vitreous; but in the Preſent Opticks the Chryſtalline Humour is only Conſider'd, as Subſervient to Viſion, and the Refraction of the Rays from the Object a bę thro' it to the Bottom or Retina of the Eye ef. 5. 2. It is therefore to be Obſerv'd upon the former Section, that the Writers in Opticks Expreſly Mention three Sorts oſ Humours, the Aqueous, Chryſtalline, and Vitreous, and yet one Refraction of the Rays thro the Chryſtalline is only Conſider'd, which at leaſt is a Poſtulatum, that may be Juſtly Diſputed; for ſince they are all Acknovledãſd to be diſferent Mediums, why in the 1ſ7. Refraction a Meniſcus, or Concavo-Convex, or in the 37. a Concave Medium, ſhould not have their Particulai Laws of Reſracting, as well as in the 2. a Double Convex ſhould, will not be eaſily SolvVd; Eſpecially, where by no Experiments, which have been made, the Aqueous, Chryſtallinc, or Vitreous, Humours are any ways Aſcertain'd in their Refractive Force, as they Lye in the Eye, and thereſore not the one to be Preferd to the other; unleſs we are willing 10 Allow, that this Philoſophy may give a Particular Indulgence to the Humour it Eſpouſcs, without Aſſizning the lea©t Reaſon, why that ſould be more Important or Conſiderable than the Reſt. On the Contrary, the Doctrine of the Expanſive and and Contractive Forces Requires, that we ſhould know, what Force of Expanſion or Contraction belongs to Each, which is more Signiſicant to the Explaining of Viſion than any Convex, or Concave, Figure of the Humours Whatſoever. S. 3. FARTHER, this Explanation of Viſion Propoſcs, that from cach Point oſ the Object ſiould Flow the Rays gah, ghh, ęch &c. which, being Refracted by the Chryſtalline Humour gh, are again United at the Bottom or the Retina oſ the Eye in f, e and 4, and ſeeing it is Neceſſary, that the Pencils of Rays ſould have their Preciſe Apices in the Points 4, e, ſ, to make Viſion Diſtinct, tis likeViſe Requird, that there ſould be a Power in the Eve of Adapting its ſelf to Nigh and Diſtant Objects, the Rays oſ the former of which, roceeding ſrom the Luminous Points, Diverge more than thoſe, which are Deriv'd from Remoter ones; but how this Conſormation of the Eye to the different Incidences of Rays is Accompliſicd, ſo as to Collect them to certain Points in the Retina vithout any Manner oſ Conſuſion, is Undetermin'd3 however two ways are Thought of, by which this may be done; Either by the Approach and Receſs oſf the Chryſtalline to and from the Retina, or by the Change of it's Convexity, but which oſf them it is, is Reſign'd to the Anatomiſis to Inquire, and at Preſent is only Conjectur'd, that they Attend each other, Namely, that a leſs Convexity oſ the Chryſtalline is Accompany'd vith an Elongation oſ the Eye, and a greater vith a ſortening or a Contraction of it; It is alſlo Obſcrvable from this Account of Viſion, : : & that the Rays ſrom each Point oſ the Object are Conſusd together on the Pupil of the Eye gh, ſo that, iſit were not ſor the Reſraction of them by the Chryſtalline or Lens, they would Proceed to the Retina in the utmoſt Diſorder, ſince the Rays from the ſeveral Points of the Object, a, b, and f, are there ſupposd to be Mixed and United into one. 5. 4. IN Anſwer to this whole Account oſ Viſion we muſt fir?t Say in General, that it is very Surpriſing, that Twenty Seven Propoſitions ſiould be Spent in this Science of Opticks without being able to Apply one of them to the Explanation of the ſitſt Principle in it, the Cauſe oſ Sight, and how it is Performd in the Eye; ſince there are not any of them Cited to Confirm this Doctrine, which Undoubtedly they ought to be, if they vere oſ any Signiſicancy to the Proof of it, and which is thereſore a farther Conviction, that all, which has gone before, is nothing elſe than an Abſtracted Reaſoning, and is of no greater Service to the Demonſtrating, by what Methods we ſee, than the moſt Abſtracted Propoſition or Axiom in the Mathematicks, that the three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to two Right ones, or that 90, 6o, and 30 Degrees are Equal to 180. 5.5. BUT that, which is more Unhappy in this Doctrine of Opticks is, that ſeveral of the Propoſitions, beſore Demonſſrated, are ſo far ſrom Complying with the Preſent Account of Viſion, that they Contradict it; for by the Preceding Propoſitions the Lens Collects the Rays at a Deſinite Diſtance ſfrom it; And if the Object is nearer or ſurther off, there are only four Caſes; Either, where the Object is Placed at a Greater or at a Leſ Diſtance than the Focus, in which Suppoſition there is a certain Rule to ſind out the Diſtance of the Focus, which is before Alledęd, Propoſition sh and 71h3 Or, where it is Placed in the Focns, in which Caſe aſter Reſraction the Rays become Parallel Propoſition 6rh; Or Laſtly, where it is Placed at the Diſtance of the Diamcter of one Convexity, in which Circumſtance the Rays will be Reſracted to ⸗ Tocus at the Diſtance oſ the Diameter oſ the other Prop. otl; But in the Preſent Accoun the the Focus of the Refracted Rays will not be at tvo or three Determind Diſtarces, but at a Thouſand or a Million Varying ones, which let the Convexity of the Chryſtalline Humour, or the Elongation of the Eye, be what it will, can never be Solvd; ſince by thoſe Caſes the Abſtracted Part of this Philoſophy only Determines two or three diſferent Focus's, and upon the Suppoſition of Parallel or Diverging Rays in General, as well as of one, that is, a large Kind of Convexity in the Glaſs; but the Preſent Doctrine Aſſerts an Infinite Number of Focus's, and Rays to have their Particular Angles oſ Incidence, as the Convexity of the Chryſtalline Humour, or it's Remoteneſs from or Approach to the Retina, is Alterũd. 5. 6. WE ſall yet Omit this Compariſon betwixt the Preſent Account of Vi- Fm ihis ſion, and the Abſlracted Realoning in Opticks, which Precedes it, and Conſider, nulſaũ whether the Account its ſelf of Viſion is Juſt, or what a Rational Mind may Ac-⸗ ra o i quieſce in 3 As to vhat Concerns the Radiation of the ſeveral Points oſ an Object, Objiit uns r ve have already Conſiderd that way of Reaſoning, and have Shewn it to be alto- ſte iitaie gether Unſatisſactory in an Unprejudiced Inquiry into the Nature of Things; we ſnhall only Add, that the Expreſſion of the Point a in the Object in the Point ſ of the Image is either a Full or only a Partial one from this ſupposd Derivation of the Rays from æ; If it is a Full and Compleat one, all the Rays ſiould be ColIected in f, which Radiate from a4, whereas there are only thoſe, which Fall upon the Pupil goh, and are but a ſmall Part of thoſe, which are Incident from æ; If it is only a Partial Expreſſion of the Point 4 in the Retinã, it vill Follow, that as we only ſee one Part of the Points, 4, b, and , ſo we Receive one Part of the Object only a bc at the ſame Time, that we are Imagin'd and ſupposd io ſee the whole. 5. 7. THAT Moreover, which this Doctrine Depends upon is, that the Rays, Tùe biſiren vhich are Emitted from 4, b, or f, ſould be Collected to ſo many ſeveral Points Consiiny f in ſ, e, and à, vhich is ſaid muſt be Perform'd either by a different Convexity of ihe clmit “ the Chryſalline Humour, or elſe by it's Approach to, or Receſs from, the Retina of ſiaeà in or the Eye, or both togzether; As to the different Convexity of the Chryſtalline Lens, m trodu which we ſall firſt Conſider, that does not ſeem to be Capable of Producing the Eſfect, which is Deſired, Namely, of Collecting the Rays, which Flow from the Obiect a b c, when itis Carryd to ſeveral Diſtances ſrom the Eye, at the ſame Diſtance nearly of the Retina from the Lens go h, and in much the ſame Points 4, æ, ſ; for the Convexity of the Lens ę o h, if. it is Imagin'd to be Flatter, would Refract the Rays at a farther Diſtance than àæ f, and in a larger Circuit, if more Round and Protuberãnr, it would on the Contrary Refract them to a leſs Diſtance than e ſ, and in a leſſer Circuit, Granting the Diſtance of the Object from the Eye to be the ſame. 5. 38. IP the Diſtance of the Object is Vary'd, and the Convexity of the Lens is Ibæ Digien: not, the ſame Effect will Follow, that the Rays at a Greater Diſtance of the Object Crnai of vill be Collected to a nearer Focus than æe ſ, and at a leſſer Diſtance of it vill be ãumu co to a farther, by what is Subjoind to Prop. 4. Concerning Nigh Objects or Diverg- ſuuunoni ing Rays, Where it is ſaid, that Rays, which leſs Diverge from a Point in Vien u the Object are ſooner Collected than thoſe, which Diverge more; From which it is Conſequent, that cither a leſs Convexity of the Lens, ſuppoſing the Diſtance of the Object to be the ſame, or a leſs Diſtance of the Object, ſuppoſing the Convexity oſ the Lens to be the ſame, will Collect the Rays at a farther Diſtance than e ſ, and in a larger Circuit, and on the Contrary, that a Greater Convexity of the Lens, ſuppoſing the Diſtance of the Object to be the ſame, or a Greater Diſtance of the Object, ſuppoſing the Convexity of the Lens to be the ſame, will Collect the Rays to à nearer Focus than àef; and in a leſſer Compaſs. . 9. IF therefore ve now Imagine, both the Convexity of the Lens and the ſ òir Diſtance oſ the Object to be Alter'd, either the Chryſtalline muſt grow Flatter, as the ſ chyſaſs Object Removes from it, and more Gibbous and Rounder, as it Approaches it, or, Hum on the other Hand, it muſt grow Rounder, as the Object Removes from it, and Flat- Coptier ter, as it Approaches it; If the Iaſ, both the greater Convexity of the Lens above what is Expreſ'd by g o h, and the Increaſe of the Diſtance beyond b o, will Jointly Contribute to Collect the Rays to a much nearer Focus than ãe f, as on the Contrary, a leſer Convexity and Diſtance than ęo h, and bo, will Unite in Producing one and the ſame Efſect, Namely, of Removing the Focus to a Greater Diſtance from the Lens than àef. X x x s. 10. THE S. 10. TuE ſirſt therefore, if any, muſt be Affirmd, that the Convexity of the Lens grows Flatter, as the Object Removes from it, and more Gibbous and Round, as it Approaches it; If ſo, ve cannot but Ask the Reaſon why, or on what Account, or upon what Manifeſt Proofs and Demonſtrations it is, that the Convexity of the Chryſtalline Humour ſould be Leſs, as the Diſtance of the Object Increaſes, rather than it ſhould be Greater; If there is no Argument, that can be Produced for it, as it is Certain there cannot, it is Evident, that the Diminiſhing the Convexity of the Chryſtalline in Proportion to the Diſtance of the Object Increaſing, is only a Principle Arbitrarily Alumd to Explain a Phænomenon in Viſion, which could not be done without it, and thereſore all the Reaſon of it's being Introduced into the Preſent Philoſophy, is becauſe it is Neceſſary to it, a Method of Solution which an Impartial Inquiry into Nature may be Juſtly Aſham'd of, however Frequently it is Practiced by our Modern Reaſoners; For there Certainly can be no Connexion, in the Nature of Things, betwixt an Increaſe and Decreaſe of the Convexity of the Chryſtalline, and a Decreaſe and Increaſe of the Diſtance of the Object, which is in this Philoſophy Neceſſary to Viſion, or at lea©t no more Connexion, than there is betwixt the Increaſe and Decreaſe of the Convexity of the Chryſtalline and the Increaſe and Decreaſe of the Diſtance of the Object, which would Deſtroy all Viſion. 5. 11. MOREOVER, in this way of Argueing, there muſt be ſome Certain Diſtance oſ the Object as bo, where the Rays are Refracted to the Bottom of the Eye by a Particular and Determinate Convexity of the Lens g0 h, if therefore the Object is farther Removd than ⸗ be, the Convexes of go0h will Proportionably come nearer together; On the orher Hand, if the Object is Placed any where betwixt the Eye and a he, the Convexes will Recede in Proportion from each other3 which Contrary Properties in the Lens are Inconceivable, that when the Object is on the farther Side of a be the Lens ſhould Contract it's ſelf, and when on this be Dilated to a greater Convexity ; For as to what Concerns the Muſcles of the Eye, they do not ſeem to be Contrivd for the Alteration and Change of it's Figure, but for the Supenſion of it in it's Proper Place, and for it's Rotation and Motion, Suitable to vhat we find to be the Office and Deſign of all other Muſcles, which are not for an Inflation or Depreſſion of the Parts, to which they belong, but for their Action. 5. 12. LastLy, it is Notorious, that when the Eye is Fixed and Unmov'd, and when the leaſt Alteration in the Figure of it cannot be Reaſonably Suppos'd, that even then the Rays are Reſracted to à e f at ſeveral Varying Diftances of the Object, and that ve ſee Clearly and Diſtinctly thoſe Objects, which are Expos'd to our View, at very diſferent Intervals, at the ſame Time that we cannot Imagine there is a Diverſity in the Figure of the Eye, which ſould be Capable of Producing ſo Conſtant an Effect, as that of Clear Viſion; And for the like Reaſon it is, that we may Juſtly Conclude, that the Remoteneſs or Acceſs of the Retina has no Influence in this Phænomenon. 5. 13. For if the Figure of the Eye in General was to be Conſiderd in an Explanation of Viſion, we ſould only ſee Objects in a Direct Poſition to it, according to the Account of this Philoſophy, Namely, in 4 bę, or in ſome Situation, or other, Parallel thereto; whereas it is Matter of Fact, and our Senſes will Juſtify us in the Aſſertion, that we ſee Objects at one View in a Thouſand different Poſitions to the Eye, and not only, when they are Parallel to a hę, but when they are Placed in Right, Obtuſe, or Acute, Angles, to what is here Repreſented, that is at lea©t in a Hemiſphere Round it, if not more. S. 14. BESIDES, as the Object may be Placed in thoſe Situations, which the Preſent Opticks do not Account for, ſo i? we take it in that Situation, which is here Proposd to us, ĩt is Inconceivable how the ſame Lens, which Collects the Rays from à in the Object to e in the Retina, ſiould have the ſame Faculty in Collecting the Ray: ſrom æ and ? in the Object to ſ and 4 in the Retina, and the ſame may be ſaid ol the other Intermediate Points; for it Appears to be Impoſſible, rhat the ſame Len ſnould Collect Rays in that different Manner, which is here ſuppos'd; Farther in the ſecond Place, the Rays upon their Refraction are Determin'd in à æe f the Chord o the Arc or in the Arc it ſelf; If in a ſrait Line, there will be only the two Ex tremitic tremities  and  Viſible; IF in the Arc it ſelſ, the Repreſentation of a ſirait Linc will be in a Curve one, nothing oſ vhich is Accounted for; Laſtly, it is Fact, that the Object a bc ill be Repreſented in àef without any Refractions of a Lens at all, as is Evident by the known Experiment of Objects being Repreſented on ſaper by Admitting the Rays thro a Foramen in a Window- Shut into a Dark loom, without any Interpoſition of a Lens, or any Imaginary Reſractions of the Rays thro' ir. 5. 15. WE are Moreover to Obſerve, that if the Rays could be Collected to the ſame Points, à, e, ſ, in the Retina, at Differing Intervals or Diſtances of the Object, or in the ſame Diſtance of the Object, yet this Scruple vill ſtill Remain, how one Point in the Object ſould be only ſeen, where a Million of Rays are ſupposd to be Emitted ſrom it; For either each ſingle Ray has an Eſfect upon the Organ of Senſation, or not; If not, if each ſingle Ray has no Force in it's Impreſſion upon the Retina, all oſ them rogether cannot have; If cach Ray Obtains it's Separate Force, as e h, eo, and e g, &c. by the Property Alledg'd in this Philoſophy of the Eye's Purſuing the Rays in the ſame Direction, in which they are Incident, the Point b vill Appear to be Larger than the whole Length of the Object a be, ſince e li, eo, and eę, Prolongd in Direct Lines from e, ill Fall at a greater Diſtance ſfrom b, than a and c do, in the ſame Strait Line abc Produced; And the ſame may be ſaid oſ cvery other Point as à and f, which, if their Rays are Purſued in the ſame Manner, would make the ſeveral Points in the Object Longer than the Object it's ſelf, and Coincident with each other, both which are Contrary to the Preſent Hypotheſcs, as well as to all Senſc and Reaſon; If it is ſaid, that the United Forces of all the Rays from one Point in the Object Refracted to another in the Retina are only Capable of Producing Viſion, that is Manifeſtly Falſe, ſince Viſion by Experience may be Effected in e, when the Pencil of Rays is greater or leſs by the Nearneſs or Diſtance of the Object, which could not be, if the Collection of a certain Number of Rays vas Neceſſary to cauſe a Senſation in us, and when there is not ſometimes a Tenth or a Hundredth Part of the Rays, vhich Flow from the Point of any Object, Reſracted to the Retina, and never all of them; But if it is Acknowledęg'd, that ſometimes more, and ſometimes fewer Rays can Produce Viſion, it is at the ſame time Confeſſed, that geh, for Inſtance, may Conſiſt of ſo Large a Number, that a Tenth or Hundredih Tart of them may Cauſe that Senſation in us, and if ſo, by what Foregoes, the Eye muſt Purſue each of thoſe Parcels of Rays in the ſame Direction, in which they Fall, which, as before has been Provd, is Abſurd. S. 16. Inr is farther to be taken Notice of, that in goh the Rays are in the Utmoſ Confuſion, which are made to be ſo by an Arbitrary Drawing of them ſrom the ſeveral Points of the Object 4, b, , in Compliance with the Situation of the Lens goh, or not; If the firſt, and as the Eye comes nearer, the Rays arc in a greater Inclination to æ bę, ſo that the Angles beo, ba o, are Leſs, and a0  Larger, or as the Eye Removes farther off from 4 bę, the Rays are in a leſs Inclination, ſo that the Angles beo, b ao are Greater, and 40c Smaller, tvo Abſurdities will Follov; 1ſt. That c o and æ0 ſhould meet at all the Points betwixt b and o, or elſe there will be ſome Point o betwixt o and b, in which the Rays are not in the urmoſt Confuſion, Contrary to the Hypotheſis; If they meet in every Point betwixt thoſc two Terms, they cannot be Propagated in Cones, or Parts of a Sphere, ſrom 4 and ? Conſider'd as Centers, or, which is the ſame in this Plane, in Circles ſrom a and f, as Centers of thoſe Circles, which Ilikewiſe is Contrary to another Hypotheſis in this Philoſophy 5 For let the Circumſerence be Drawn thro' o, it is Evident, that the Rays vhilſt they are Extended from the Centers a or 5, will Interſect the Line bo at Irregular Diſtances, and thereſore not in every Point of it, unleſs a ſtrait Line as b⸗ can be Imagin'd Commenſurate to the Circumference ſrom a or c3 But it is Ab ſurd in any Philoſophy to Introduce Hypotheſes for the Explanation of the ſame Thing, which Contradict and Deſtroy each other; 24. A ſecond Abſurdity ĩs, thatiſ ao and co are Arbitrarily Drawn, ſo as to meet each other in any Point betwixt o and b, ſince the Angle àoſ is Equal to aoc, it will be Conſequent, by the Approach oſ to, that à f may be Ten times as Great as  , but ſince a  could never be Expreſ”'d at it's full Length in the Retina, it is Impoſſible, that That, which is ten times more Extend ed, ſould be: On the other Hand, if the Rays are not Arbitrarily Drawn from æ and c but are Fixt and Determin'd in one certain Point o, which is here Expreſs'd, it is Abundant xX x x 2 I ly Maniſeſt, that if the Lens go h is Removd farther off from a4 be, or brought nearer to it, there will not be a Confuſion of Rays from all the Points of the Object a be, in one at o in the Chryſtalline, which this Philoſlophy Builds and Depends upon ſo Entirely in it's Preſent Demonſtrations; For if it did not, ſuppoſing the Lens g o h to be Placed in 7? orsq, vhat Terrible and Puzzleing Work hould we have to make theſe Rays Unite vith all the Uniformity Imaginable in the Points 4, ę, and 7? And yet for all that we can at Preſent ſee, the Lens may be as well Placed in thoſe Poſitions, as in that, in which it is, unleſs we may be Allowd to Draw the Rays from æ and c vith what Arbitrarineſs ve Pleaſe, which, we have Provd, cannot be done without the greateſt Abſurdity and Contradiction. 5. 17. TuE next Thing we are to Conſider in Viſion is, that the Repreſentation of the Object abc on the Bottom of the Eye ſed is Inverted, as it is likewiſe on a Paper in a Dark Room, from whence this Inquiry may be Naturally made, how it comes to Paſi, that we ſee Objects Erect, when by this Account they are Inverted in their Impreſſion upon the Retina; To Solve this Diſſiculty, Thoſc, who Proſeſ an Abſtracted Opticks, are villing to Diſclaim the Solution of it, as nat belonging to their Province, becauſe it Encroaches upon another Queſtion, that is, what the Properties of the Soul are in ſuch Circumſtances of the Image oſ an Object being Imprinted on the Bottom of the Eye; However, they have not Thought Fit wholly to Omit the Aſſigning a Reaſon for this Phænomenon, vhich is, that the Eye Purſues the Rays back in the ſame Direction, in which they Fall, or, which is the ſame, that, the Eye in the Point ſ Receiving a Stroke or Impulſe by the Protruſion forards of the Luminous Axis a0 f, the Mind muſt Neceſſarily be Directed to Conſider this Percuſſion, as Derivd from the Point 4, rather than from the Point , or any other. 5. 18. As to the Willingneſs, which Opticians ſiew of being Excus'd from Solving this Diſſiculty, it ſcems to Proceed from a Conſciouſneſs they have of the Inſuſficiency of their Principles to do it: On the Contrary, ve Inſiſt, that it as Properly belongs to a True Doctrine of Opticks to give an Account of this Appearance as any other, which it Conſiders; For i? we might Neglect it, becauſe it Borders roo much upon an Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul, ve may Equally Diſcard the Magnitude, or Apparent Places, or the Diſtances, or Indeed any other Circumſtances, in which Objects are ſeen, becauſe ve do not, nor are ſuppos'd to know the Paſſions of the Mind, which Reſult from ſuch Impreſſions; that is, the whole Science of Real Opticks will be Foreign to the Purpoſe, and we are Advis'd to Acquieſce in a Vain Knovledge oſ Rays, and their ſeveral Progreſſes thro' Glaſſes of different Figures, or, for it is the ſame, in an Abſtracted and Notional Reaſoning upon them, tho' we ſould not be able to Apply iĩt to one Explicit Phænomenon of Nature, or of Viſion. . 19. NOR is the Reaſon, which is here Alledgſd for this Appearance much better than the Excuſe for not Explaining it; for why a Point in the Object ſould be ſcen by the Axis rather than any other Reſracted Ray we can Name, is not ſaid, nor can be, unleſs one Ray of a Force not much Greater than another may be ſupposd to Enjoy a Prerogative almoſt Inſinitely Superior to it; much leſs can we Imagine, that the Axis ould Aſſert a Diſtinction to its ſelP in Preference to the Force of a Million o Rays Acting together, each of which has one, not much Inferior at lea to that of the Axis, which yet in this Philoſophy is only Conſiderd and Eſpous'd; If the Axis and Refracted Rays are nearly Equal in their Force oſ Percuſiion or Impulſe upon the Eye, for the ſũſthe Reaſon that the Mind Refers it's ſelf back from æ to o, it ought to React from e to ę and h, by which Means the Point b would be Diſfusd into a Line much longer than the Object it's ſclf. 5. 20. PESIDES, altho we ſould Allov, that the Axis is only Concern'd in Exciting the Mind to Obſerve it's Direction, it willyet be Unaccountable, why it ſhould not Purſue that Direction, cither to a Leſs or to a Farther Diſtance than that oſ the Objcct ſrom the Eye; that is, notwithſtanding ve ſould Acknovledge the Impreſſion, which is made upon e ſrom b or o, to be Returnd in the ſame Line, yet from any Property in the Mind, or in the Object, it is not Certain, where the Reaction ol the Eye, or at what Diſtance, it will be Determin'd3 IF it is ſaid in the Object, ſrom which the Ray Flows, or is Derivd, that cannot be Provd ſrom the Force oſ the he Mind, upon vhich the Impreſſion is made, unleſs it were firſt Aſcertain'd, how far that Force Extends in it's Reacting upon any Impulſe, which it Feels; Nor can it be Evidenc'd from the Object it's ſclf, becauſe it cannot Determine to what Place the Rays, which it Emits, ſhall either Proceed or Return, ſince it Reſigns them to the Power of orher Beings, on which they Fall; Thus in Tranſparent Bodies they are Refracted, and in Opake Reſſected, to diſferent Angles, Lengths, and Diſtances. s. 21. VE muſt farther ſay, that this Inverſion oſ the Image in the Eye is Grounded upon a Falſc, or at leaſt a Preccarions Reaſoning, which is, that, becauſc ve Obſerve the Object Inverted in a Dark Room, or even in the Bottom of an Artiſicial Eye made Uſe of in Experiments, thereſore it is ſo in Real Viſion or in the Retina of the Eye, which the Viſive Faculties of our Minds Employ for their own Information; Whereas it is not Certain, that an Object does Paint the Image Inverted upon the Paper or the Artiſicial Eye, becauſe it Appears ſo to the Natural, unleſs ve Firſt and Previouſly knov, that what is Erect in the Object is Inverred in the Ere, or which is the ſame, what is Inverted in the Object is Erect in the Eve, which is the Thing to be Provd; for if this Principle is not known, ve are not Certain, but vhat is ſeen Inverted in the Object, which in this Caſe is the Image upon the Taper, or the Artiſcial Eye, may be allo Inverted in the Eye, and what is ſeen Erect in a Natural Object may be alſo Painted Ercct in the Eye3 But according to the Reaſoning of this Philoſophy, that which is Painted Inverted in the Eye may Really be Erect in the Object, and that which is Erect, Inverted; from whence it will Follo, that altho' the Image upon the Paper, or the Artiſicial Eye, may Appear Inverted, yet it may be in Truth Erect, according to the Reaſoning of this Philoſophy, becauſc what is Inverted in the Eye may be Erect in the Object, which is here the Image upon the Paper, or Artificial Eye, and the Object, vhich Appears Erect, may likewiſe in Truth be ſo, as in a Natural Object, ſince the Principle is unknown; but if it is ſaid it is known, that is Said, which is to be Provã. 5. 22. LastLy, when we Stand Upright upon our Legs, the uppermoſt Part oſ the Object is ſupposd to Fall on the lowermoſt Part of the Retina, and the lovermoſt Part of the Object on the uppermoſt Pa rtof it; On the Contrary, when our Heads are downwards, the uppermoſt Part of the Object Falls on the uppermoſt Pari of the Retina, and the lowermoſt Part of the Object on the lowermoſt Part oſ it, that is, not in Reſpect of the Center of the Earth, but in Reſpect of the Parts oſ ihe Eye, or, which is the ſame, the Object in the laſt Caſe will be Painted on the Retina in a quite Contrary Situation to vhat it was in the Firſt; And thereſore the Mind, which only Conſiders, and takes Notice, as ve may Reaſonably Think, oſ the Internal Poſture of the Parts of the Eye, and how they are Affected, muſt ſec the Object Erect in one Circumſtance, and Inverted in the other, which is not Agrecable to Experience, ſince either ways it Appears Erect. 5. 23. APTER the Inverſion of the Object in the Eye, we are to Examine into the Explanation given of it's Magnitude, which is ſuppos'd to be Eſtimated by the Optick Angle ao c=foà; But how the Eye ſould Determine the Dimenſions of the Object by the Angle, under which it is ſeen, ĩs Inconceivable, for ſince it is nor Preſumd to be Commenſurate to àe f, it will be Impoſſible to Aſſign a Reaſon, vhy it ſiould be the Exact Length or Bigneſ of 4b⸗, rather than of any other Line Drawn Parallel to it, within the Angles aoc, à0f, cither berwixt the Retina ſ and the Object, or even beyond the Object it's ſelf; ſceing the Eye is Imagin'd to have no other Direction ſor the Forming it's Judgment oſ the Magnitude of an Object, unleſũ that of the Optick Angle, which will be the ſame, when the Lines, which Subtend it, are Infinitely Different. 5. 24. It is likeviſe to be Obſervd, that the Optick Angle is Undetermind, ſome Placing the Point o in the Center of the Eye, others in the Vertex of the Chryſalline, and a Third in that of the Cornea, which muſt certainly Cauſe a great Variety in the Optick Angle it's ſelf, and Conſe.juently of the Magnitude of the ſame Object, even ſuppoſing ve could Fix upon one certain Line, which Subtended it, and vhich might be the Meaſure of the Viſible Dimenſions of the Object, vhich according to the foregoing Section is not done. 5 25. THr s. 25. 1ſt. THE Preſent Opticks Procecd to Inform us, that the Rays, which Flow from the Points oſ the Object Diverge in their Progreſs ſcom thence to rue Eye, and that if the Object was Inſinitely Diſtant, or ſo far Diſlant from the Ere, that the Breadth of the Pupil was Inſenſible in Compariſon oſ ſuch a Remorencſ of the Object, the Rays would Fall in a manner Parallel, where beſore they were ſupposd to Diverge, and that by this Means they would be United at the Retina in the Points 4, e, ſ. 2d. FARTHER, that if the Diverging Rays bę, bh, which are Derivd from the Point b, meet a Convex Glaſ, and are thereby made to Conv erge, and in their Refraction thro' the Chryſtalline are made to Converge yet more, they vwill Croũs in a Point beſore they reach the Retina à ſ, and Conſcquently Paint the Image of ihe Point b Confuſcdly, ſince it is Difſuſcd intoa certain Space, whereas in Diſtinct Viſion it is Expreſſcd in a Correſpondent Point on the Retina. 3d. FROM wence it is Inſerrd, that Convex Glaſſcs, when us'd by thoſe, who are call'd Myopes or Purblind, or by thoſe, who are ſhort Sighted, inſtcad oſr Aſliſing the Sight, are an Occaſion oſ a Conſuſcdneſs in it; Decauſe the greater Convexity oſ the Chryſtalline, or the greater Diſtance oſ the ſame Chryſtalline ſrom the Retina, which in this kind of Eyes is Preſumd to be join'd with the Conveaity oſ ihe Lens, which is Interposd betwixt the Eye and the Object, Unite the Rays beſore they Arrive at the Retina, and therefore Concave Glaſſts on the contrary are found to be Serviceable, which make the Rays Diverge ſo, that the greater Convexity oĩ the Chryſtalline ſhall be only Suſſicient to Unite them at the Bottom of the Ere, or the greater Diſtance of the Retina from the Chryſialline ſall be at a Juſt Interval only to Receive and Obſerve their Union; It is upon this Principle alſo, that by bringing the Object nearer to thoſe, who are ſiort Sighted, it is Painted upon the Retina with a greater Clearneſs and Diſtinction; Becauſe the Rays, which Fall from cach Point of the Object, Diverge more, when the Object is nearer the Eye, than when farther oſſ, and Conſcquently the too great Convexity oſ the Chr;ſlalline doe: but Suſſice to bring them together on the Retina, as on the Contrary, when the Object is farther oſf, it Unites them too ſoon, becauſe of their leſſcr Divergence in their Incidence upon the Eye. 41h. ON the other Hand, the Eyes of Old Men have their Chryſtalline too Flat, and thereſore the Aſiſtance of an Adventitious Convexity in a Glaſs Lens is Requiſite to Unite the Rays at the Retina, which otherwiſe would Proceed beyond it; from whence it is ſaid, that Spectacles are an Advantage to Old Men, not by Magniſying an Object, but by making it's Image Diſtinct; ſince Old Men cannot Read the Largeſt Characters without Spectacles, and yet with them can Read the Smalleſ, though theſe with Spectacles do not ſeem ſo Large, as thoſe without them. sth. MOREOVER, there is an Oppoſition made berwixt a Clear and Faint Viſion, or betwixt a Diſtinct and Confus'd; Namely, cither, when the Points oſ the Object are Collected to a Point in the Image, or not, which makes the Diſſerence betwixt our Sceing Diſtinctly or Confuſcdly; Or, when there is a greater Quantſty of Rays in the ſame Pencil Illuminating the Correſpondent Points  the Image, or a leſcr Quantity oſ them, which is ſuppos'd to make Objects Appear cĩther Clearer or Fainter. 61h. To which we muſt Add, which is Proposd in this Philoſophy, that to the Diſtinctneſs or Clearneſs of Viſion, it is only Neceſſary to Conſider a Point in the Object, whereas the Inverſion oſ it in the Image upon the Eye Requires an Examination of the whole Object, or the ſeveral Points oſ it. 5. 26. As to the firſt Part of the foregoing Section, it is Evident, that neither an Actual Infinite Diſtance is Requird to make an Object Seen Diſtinct in the Eye, becauſe ſeveral Objects at a much Leſs Diſtance than hat ĩs Infinite by Experience Diſappear, nor is a Comparatively Inſinite Diſtance in Reſpect of the Pupil oſ the Eye Requird to make an Object Seen Diſtinctly, becauſe when the Diſlance oſf the Object from the Eye is Inconſiderable in Reſpect of the Pupil oſ the Eye, the Object yet is fully and Clearly Diſcernd; For this Paper, which I Write on, whether it is brought nearer to my Eye, or Carty d farther ſrom it, Cauſes much the ſame Impreſſion; and ſor the like Reaſon it is, that we cannot Suppoſe the Paralleliſm of Rays, which is there Aſſerted, unleſs ve can Imagine, that Rays which Flow ſrom a very a very nigh Object, are Parallel at the ſame Time, that they Manifeſtly Diverge, and are Confeſſed to do ſo in this Philoſophy 3 for we See Objects at almoſt an Infinitely ſmall Diſtance ſfrom us, in which Caſe it is Impoſſible to Conceive, that the Rays, if ever, do not then Diverge, and are far from being Parallel, albeit the Contrary is ſaid to be Requiſite to the Painting the Image upon the Retina with a Sufficient Diſtinction. 5. 27. Nor is the Account given of their Manner or Way of Viſion, who are ſnort Sighted or Purblind, any Confirmation of the Truth of theſe Opticks, for they Suppoſe either the Chryſtalline to be more Convex in ſuch Perſons than in others, or elſe that the Diſtance of the Retina from it is Greater, both which are Hypotheſes Aſſumd at Large without the leaſt Proof, that the Figures of theſe Kind of Eyes are Really ſuch in Fact, Excepring that by this Means it is Thought thoſe Phænomenons of Viſion may be Explain'd, which otherwiſe could not be, but we have already ſaid, that ſuch a Procedure is Perſectly Arbitrary and Unwarrantable in a True and Juſt Philoſophy. 5. 28. THAT Which is yet Worſe is, that if theſe Hypotheſes were Granted, they are not Capable of Solving the Appearances, which they are Deſign'd to Explicate, for if the Rays are not Collected to ſeveral Determinate Points in the Retina, but are Diſfus'd into Spaces, as is Suppos'd, Art. 2d. 5. 251h. e ſhould be ſo far from Sceing the Object Confuſcdly, that there would not be the leaſt Picture or Reſemblance of it Deſcrib'd upon the Eye; ſince the Rays, which are Derivd from one Point of the Object, would be Intermixt and Blended in the Retina with thoſe, which Flowd from another, the Conſcquence of which muſt be, that ? would be partly Seen in b and 4, b in a and ?, and 4 in b and ⸗, which could not but Entirely, not only Confound, but Eraſe and Obliterate the Object, and Exhibit a quite different Appearance from it; for no Rules or Methods of Thinking could, in ſuch a Caſe, ever Reduce a Space to bear any Analogy to a Point, or make a Thouſand Lines, laid Promiſcuouſly upon one another, form a Quantity Agreeable to ſo many Points Placed in Directum. 5. 29. LET us however Allow even this, it is Evident ſfrom §. 26. that the Pæralleliſm of the Rays does not Contribute any Thing to a Diſtinct Viſion, but that, Vhether the Object is nearer or farther off, within certain Limits, the Repreſentation of it is not, as to its Diſtinction, Conſiderably Varyd in the Eye; it ĩs likewiſe Demonſtrated in this Philoſophy, that the greater the Convexity of the Lens is, and the nearer it Approaches to a Sphere, the Focus will be likeviſe leſs Removd from the Lens; the nigher therefore any Object is to the Eye, and the greater the Convexity of the Chryſtalline, the ſooner the Rays will be Determind to a Focus; Con ſequently, thoſe who are Purblind, or ſhort Sighted, ſould See Objects leſs Diſtinctly, as the Convexity of the Chryſtalline is greater, which is contrary to what the preſent Hypotheſis Affirms, and if the Diſtance of the Retina from it is likewiſc ſupposd Greater, which is Conjecturd in this Philoſophy to Accompany the other, the Confuſion in Viſion will be ſtill more Senſible. s. 30. Im is alſo to be Obſervũd, that, at ſeveral Changing Diſtances, both Purblind and ſort Sighted Men can See Objects very Diſtinctly, and it has been before Provq, that there is no Reaſon for us to Believe, where the Eye is Fixt and Un movd, that there is any Alteration either in the Convexity of the Chryſtalline or it's Diſtance from the Retina, and Conſequently the Diſtinctneſs of Viſion can Proceed from neither. As to the Eyes of Purblind or ſhort Sighted Men groving Flat by Age, and their Seeing Objects more Diſtinctly at a greater Diſtance, when Older, it is Contradicted by all Experience. . 31. WE do not yet Deny, that Convex Glaſſes are Prejudicial, and Concave Serviceable, to ſuch Perſons, becauſe if a greater Convexity of the Chryſtalline is Prejudicial, as ve have Evidenced, a Lens Interposd muſt be ſtill more ſo, as it Contributes to the ſame Effect; and on the other Hand, ſince a Lens held betwixt the Object and the Eye cauſes a grearer Confuſion in Viſion by Experience, hy may we not Think a greater Convexity in the Chryſtalline ought in Reaſon 10 do ſo too? Likeviſe, as a Concave makes the Object Appear more Diſtinct, vhy ſhould we not Imagine, that there muſt be ſomething Analogous in the Chryſtalline, or the Eye, which Occaſions the ſame Diſtinct Perception, When no ſuch Glaſſes are us'd? Which, what it is, ſall be aſterwards Explain'd. 5. 32. ANOTHER 5. 32. ANOTHER Argument againſt this vay of Reaſoning in Opticks is, that as it ſuppoſes the Convexity of the Chryſtalline, or the Diſtance of the Retina from it, Extraordinary, ſo it likewiſe Preſumes a Divergence of the Rays to be more than Uſual, which this ſupposd Convexity is to Collect; for if the Divergence of ihe Rays was not Increaſed by the Approach of the Objeẽt, there would be no Occaſion to make the Chryſtalline more Convex in Order to Refract them to that Deęree, vhich is Requird, but that the Divergence of the Rays is not Increaſed by the Approach of the Object to the Eye is Maniſeſt from §&. 26. ſince, if it is, Plain Viſion canmot be Accounted for, which ſuppoſes the Rays to be nearly Parallel, and it is by that Section Evident, that we Sce Objects Clearly and Diſtinctly at a ver7 near Diſtance. 5. 33. THE next Solution we are to Examine is that, which is given us of the Viſion of thoſe Perſons, vho are Old, vhoſe Chryſtalline is ſupposd to be leſs Convex than that of the Myopes, and therefore not Capable of Uniting the Diverging Rays ſo ſoon as is Neceſſary for their Diſtinct Impreſſion on the Retina, and Conſequently are not Collected to a Focus, Excepting in a Point beyond the Bottom of the Eye. S. 34. BUT here it ĩs likewiſe Remarkable, as beſore, that Diverging Rays are Introduced, when it is ſaid they ought to be Conſiderd as Parallel to Cauſe a Diſtinct Viſion, and even in an Oppoſite Caſe to the former; for in thoſc that are Purblind, it is Requird, that the Object ſhould be placed at a very near Diſtance to be Seen without Confuſion, whereas in Old Perſons the Contrary is Requiſite; if therefore in an Eye oſf a Common and Ordinary Figure the Rays are to be Conſider'd as Parallel to Produce a Diſtinct Perception, as alſo in a Long or more Convex onc, tho' they are Granted to be Diverging, it is Impoſſible they ſhould be ſo, where a greater Diſtance of the Object is Neceſſary to a Diſtinct Perception, than what is ſuppos'd in Common Viſion; If it is ſaid Diverging Rays are not ſuppos'd, it is only Looking upon §. 7. 8. Prop. 28. to Convince us of the Contrary. 5. 35. THE Conſuſion of the Rays in the Retina, likewiſe, will be as Unaccountable as beſore in the Caſe of the Myopes, and ſince the Interpoſition of a Lens is Serviceable to this Kind of Eye, we may Reaſonably ſuppoſe there is ſomething in the Chryſtalline, which is Anſwerable to it, where it Sees Objects Diſtinctly and Clearly, rather than juſt the Contrary; For ſeeing it is by Experience found, that a Convex is Beneficial to theſe Eyes, why ſould we not Conclude, that the Reaſon, vhy Old Men See Diſtinctly at Certain Diſtances without theſe Glaſſes, is, becauſe of the greater Convexity of the Chryſtalline, rather than becauſe of a Leſs, it ſeeming very Incongruous to Aſcribe a greater Convexity of the Eye to thoſe, vho are Plainly Aſſiſted by Concaves, and a leſs to thoſe, vho are Aſſiſted by Convexes, for why ſhould not Men See Originally by thoſe Methods, by which their Sight is Aſſi*ted ? I may at leaſt be Allowd to Ask the Queſtion, tho' I do not Affirm, that they do ſo. To Conclude in Relation to this Hypotheſis of Different Convexities in the Chryſtalline, it is not Impoſſible upon the Suppoſition of a greater Convexity of it in Old Men to Account for the Phænomenons of Viſion in them, for in ſuch a Caſe nigher Objects may not be Seen Diſtinctly by them, becauſe the great Convexity of the Lens may yet not Collect the Rays ſoon enough, to Produce a Clear and Determin'd Image in the Eye, whercas by Removeing the Object farther oſf, as the Rays have a leſſer Divergence, they may be Collected to a juſt Focus on the Retina, this may be done if the Eyes of Old Men are Flatter than thoſe of orhers, as they are ſupposd to be, and Conſequently the Diſtance betwixt the Chryſtalline and the Retina Leſs; Again, iſ a nigher Object cannot Collect it's Rays to a Focus in the Retina by the Greater Convexity of the Chryſialline, being farther Aſſiſted by another Lens it may do it; On the other Hand, ſhort Sighted Men, if the Convexity of the Chryſtalline is Leſs, may See nigh Objects more Diſtinctly, if the Figure of the Eye is more Oblong and Protuberant; Becauſe the leſs Reſractive Force of the Lens is Compenſated by the greater Diſtance of the Retina from the Chryſtalline, ſo that the Ray: in a longer Eye vill be juſtly Reſracted to the Retina by a leſſer Convexity of the Lens, and Remoter Objects on the Contrary may be better Diſcern'd by the Inter poſitior poſition of a Concave, becauſe the Ieſs Diverging Rays would be Collected toc ſoon, and therefore ould be made to Diverge, or Diſperſe, by ſuch a Concave, ir Order to their Exact Collection in the Retina; Theſe Things may be, as Truly Sup posd, as thoſe, which are Alledgũd by the Preſent Philoſophy, and will Perhaps as well Account for the foregoing Phænomenons, and yet theſe Suppoſitions are Perſcctly Contrary to thoſe, whieh are made Uſe of by theſe Opticks; which is at leaſt an Argument, that they are Precarious and Arbitrary, and can be no more Depended upon for a Solution of Nature, than thoſe, which have been Nam'd, and which are Diametrically Oppoſite to them. 5. 36. E are alſo to Obſerve, that Old Men cannot Sce Diſtinctly the Largeſt Characters without Spectacles, and yet with, they can the Smalleſt, which is a Demonſtration, that the Lens, which is Interposd betwixt the Eye and the Object has ſome other Property (Namely, oſ Increaſing the Expanſive Force of Light) than that oſ Magniſy ing, vhich would Signiſy nothing to make Viſion Diſtinct, as is Evident ſrom the Preſent Phænomenon; nor is it the Collection of Rays to Certain and Determind Points, which Produces this Eſfect, ſince with Spectacles the ſame Diſlinct Viſion is Cauy'd, vhere the Diſtances of the Object are Changd, and without any Imaginable Alteration of the Figure of the Chryſalline or the Eye, unleſs that, which is Hypothetical and Chimerical. 5. 37. BUT that, vhich gives a full Confutation to this Sort of Opticks is, that the Diſtinction and Conſuſion of Viſion is ſo far from Depending upon the Exact or Irregular Collection of the Rays on the Retina, that, where the Object is at the ſame Diſtance, the Figure and Poſture of the Eye the ſame, the Appearance of the Object may be cither Diſtinct or Confus'd according as the Organ of Senſation is in a Diſferent Temper to Receive the Impreſſion; Thus in Men, who are Lunatick, or vho, by an Exceſs or Intemperance in Wine, find a Diſorder in their Senſations, Objects at the ſame Diſtance, and where the Collection of the Rays is the ſame, may Appcar Confus'd and Indiſtinct, which at other Times they would not do; and why we may not ſuppoſc as great a Difference betwixt the Humours of an Old Mans Eye and a Young ones, or betwixt thoſe of a ſhort Sighted Man, and the Contrary, vill not be eaſily Shewn. j s. 38. IN Fine, all theſe Difficulties are Solvd by the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; Simple Viſion is Performd by the diſferent Degrees of the Expanſive Forces Communicated from Bodies thro' the Ethereal Plenum to the Eye, from whence they Appear to be Variouſly Colourd, The Magnitude of Bodies is Diverſify'd according to the Latitude or Extenſion of the Action; and their Diſtinction or Clearneſs Ariſes from a Juſt Proportion or Quantity of it to the Contractive Force of the Optick Nerves, which is alſo Various in diſferent Perſons; ſo that, if the Expanſive Force from Bodies is too Weak to Excite the Contractive Force of the Nerves, a Faint or Obſcure Viſion Enſues, if too Strong, a Confuſed and Diſordered; an Example of the firſt we have in looking upon Dark Objects, which have not Light enough, to Render them Perfectly Viſible to us, and of the Iaſt, in looking upon the Sun, which Overturns and Conſounds the Organ of Senſation3 And ſrom hence it is, that Eyes, hich want Convex Glaſes, have their Optick Nerves more Cold and Contractive in their Force, as thoſe of Old Men, and of Younger Men likewiſe, vhoſc Eyes are Phlegmatick and Watery; a ſtronger Expanſive Force of Light is therefore Aſſiſtant to them, and which is Effected by the Collection of the Rays in the Convex, and they ſee Things better at a greater Diſtance, becauſe more Luminous and Brighter; On the Contrary, thoſe Eyes, which want Concave Glalſes, have their Optick Nerves more Warm, Lively, and Expanſive, and therefore the Rays Emitted ſfrom Bodies are too ſtrong in theit Expanſive for them, which Exceſs of the Expanſive is Moderated by Concaves, which Diſperſc and Weaken ihe Force oſ the Expanſive, and thereſore ſuch Glaſts are Bencficial to them; and they ſee Things better at a leſs Diſtance, becauſe they are leſs Iluminated and are Obicurer; Hence alſo ſuch Eyes will ſce better in a Duskiſ Light, than any others. Y yy CHaP. C H A P. X. Concerning Viſion, as Perform d thrò' Single Glaſes, Plane or Convex, uhich are Interpos d betvixt the Object and the Eje. 5. 1. HIS Philoſophy, haveing Endeavourd to Explain Viſion in General, Proceeds to Conſider, how we are Aſfected with Objects, when we look upon them thro' Glaſies, as it had before Examin'd into them, when they were View'd by the Naked Eye; It thereſore Aſfirms in the Twenty Ninth Propoſition, that an Object Seen thro' a Plane Glaſs, whoſe Surſaces are Parallel, is Magniſy'd thereby, altho' Ihnoratus Faber, another Famous Optick Writer, Aſſerts the Contrary, and rhat the Viſual Angle is not Alterd, but the Apparent Place of the Object only Changd ſrom ſuch an Interpoſition; However that the Viſual Angle is Enlargd, and Conſequently the Object Magniſyd, is thus Demonſtrated; the Incident Ray æ f is Reſracted to i, and aſterwards to h, the Place of the Eye, let hi be Produced to æ, and a ſirait Line Dravn from h to a, h b vill be the Viſual Angle aſter Reſraction, and a hb the Natural one, which would have been, if there had been no Refraction, the Former of vhich is Evidently Greater than the Latter. 5. 2. THOSE, Who have Aſfirmd any thing in Opticks, as it ſeems Houoratus Faber has done, in Contradiction to this Propoſition, we ſall Leave to the Mercy of r 1 this Philoſophy to be Refuted by it, hb makes a leſs Angle than ht with h b, ; yet, ſince in this Doctrine of Opticksiit is an Axiom, that what is Demonſtrated of onc Ray, and the Axis, holds Good in all other Rays in their Incidence from any Point of an Object, on the Contrary, there is an Equal Reaſon to Affirm, that I hha Containing a leſs Angle in the Return of thoſe Rays from the Ocular Toint, than what is Comprehended betwixt Rays, which are Deriv'd from any Certain Point in an Object, ſould make as little Diſinction, and thereſore h æ in the Return of the Rays from the Eye mould be Equivalent to h ag in their Incidence upon it, that is, ſnould Cauſe Il no Variation, Suitable to what other Opticians Aſiert, that ag b is=ahb=thb. 5. 3. BUT that, hich is Morcover taken for Granted in this Demonſiration is, that Objects are Magnify'd in Proportion, as the Optick or Viſual Angle is Enlarg}, which, as we have beſore Evidenced, wants to be ſiewn, or if it did not, a hb is not the Natural Optick Angle, where ⸗ f is the Incident Ray, but ag4, vhich is Equal to hb, the Viſual Angle from Refraction. 5 4. LasTLY, we do not find this Propoſition Confirmd by Experience, ſince ĩt is Conſeſſed not to Obtain in Glaſs Windows, the only Reaſon for which is ſaid to be the Thinneſs of them, by which Mcans the Reſraction becomes Inſenſible; and yct in other Parts of this kind of Opticks they are ſuppos'd Thick enough to Alter the oſition of the Object ſrom a to ſ, that is, to the leſt of its Natural Situation; Indeed this Reaſoning here ſeems to be Agrecable to the Reſt, which we fſind in this Doctrine, which, by Conſidering Things Abſtractedly, Argues ſeveral Appearance: into Nature, which are not found in it, and then Wiſely Endeavours to Contrive a Solution, why they are not Viſible, when the True Account is, becauſe they do not any where Really Exiſt, and are only Creatures of the Mind Formd ſrom ſuch Ab ſtractions . : and Inquire, whether it's ovn Demon- u i ſtration is as Valid, and Suſficient, as it ? Apprehends it to be; For, tho hæ vith u ; ; ; ſtractions3 and tho' in Thicker Plates Objects Perhaps are Magniſy'd, we ſtill are Aſurd it cannot Proceed from the Increaſe of the Viſual Angle from what has been ſaid before, but from the ſame Reaſon, that all Objects Appear Larger, which are Viewd thro' a Thicker or a more Denſe and Contractive Medium. 5.5. Im is in a following Propoſition Aſfirmd, that all Objects Seen Erect thro' Convex Glaſes are Magnify d thereby, the Demonſiration of which is, ax b (Fig. . 6.) is an Objcct, o the Eye, a eo, bd o, are Rays Drawn Directly from the Extremities of the Object ohe Eye, and the Angle æ 0 /,, which is Comprehended betwixt them, is the Natural Optick Angle; let the Glaſs cſf be Interposd, which will Haſten the Concourſe of the forementiond Rays beſore they Arrive at o, wherefore the Eye in o vill not Perceive the Extremities of the Object æ and b by the Rays æ o, hao, but by orher Rays, which are Extrinſicall to them, ſrom whence cox, the Optick Angle aſter Reſraction, will be greater than fo  the Natural one, and the Object will appear Bigger in the ſirſt Caſe, than in the Laſt. 5. 6. WE ſhall not here Anſwer to this Demonſtration, that the Solution of the Increaſe oſ the Object's Magnitude by Reſraction is here, as well as in the Former Propoſition, Preſumũd to Depend upon the Optick Angle's being Augmented, ſince we have beſore Inquird into ſuch a Way of Reaſoning; what we ſnhall Oſer in Oppoſition to this Prooſ is, that ſuppoſng a e to be the Ray, which is Extended from thence to the Eye in o, ſo as to make the Continucd Linc a æo from the Object to the Eye, ſince, upon the Interpoſition of the Glaſi, the Ray a4 vill be Reſracted nearer to the Lens than o, and ſince all the Rays from the ſame Point of an Object are Refracted to the ſame Point in the Eye, that is, have the ſame Effect upon it, ac will likeviſe be Reſracted to a nearer Point than o, and therefore cannot Cauſe a Senſation in the Eye different from what æ æ Refracted would do, which will not Affect it all, or, which is the ſame, all the Rays Incident ſrom the ſame Point of an Object are Collected by a Lens to nearly the ſame Focus. 5. 7. Bur What is farther Obſervable is, that the ſame Ray is not Conſiderd in the Natural, and the Refracted Optick Angle, vhich ought to be done, and if we do take the ſame Ray, the Solution vill not be Valid; ſince if ſo, aæ will be Refracted nearer to the Lens than the Poſition or Situation of the Eye in o, and Conſcquently there will be no Erect Appearance at all of the Object from ſuch a Refraction; if Different Rays are Aſſumd, and the RRay Falls nearer to the Axis than a4e, it will be Refracted o nighcr to the Lens than aæ would be, iſ it Falls farther from the Axis than ir, which is here ſuppos'd, as ac, let the Glaſs be taken avay, and there vill be no Natural Optick Angle from ſuch a Ray, with which we may Compare the Reſracted one; But if we are Allowd at Pleaſure to Compare the Natural Oprick Angle made by one Ray with the Refracted Optick Angle made by another Ray, it is Evident, 1ſſ. that Seeing there may be a Hundred or a Million Diſferent Rays Incident betwixt æc and a, there vill likewiſe be as many Diſferent Viſual Reſracted Angles Formd by them, which, when Compard vith one Certain Optrick Angle e ox, vill have a Diſferent Proportion, and therefore the Object will not be Scen by oc in Preference to any orher Reſracted Ray, that is, by this Reaſoning it may as well Appear in a Hundred or a Million Different Magnitudes above it's Narural, as in that one, which oc Preſcribes; 2ã. It is likewiſc Evident, that if the Object a is Enlargd to a much greater Proportion in Reſpect of the Lens, that is, ſuppoſing a to be 3 or 4 or 20 Times as Great, as it is here Repreſented, and the Lens to be the ſame, there cannot be any Imaginable Reaſoning like that, which is Propoſed to us from this Scheme, ſince the Rays, dravn ſrom the Extremities of the Obiect, vould lie beyond, and External to, any Reſracted Rays whatſoever. ꝗ. 38. ANOTHER Objection againſt this Demonſtration is, that if it were True, it only Proves, that Objects Seen Erect thro' Convex Glaſes are Magniſyd by it, which at the ſome Time Inſinuates, that iſ Objects are not Erect, when Seen thr a Convex, they are not Magniſyd, and yet that is not any ways Apparent from this Doctrine, but on the Contrary it rather ſeems Plain, that they would be; for the Y y y⸗ Ray: Rays, Croſſing each other in the Focus o, are ſaid to Cauſe an Inverſion of the Imaze, but ſince the Lines fo, co, Produced beyond the Focus o, are not Alterd in their Direction after their being Reſracted in the Lens at  and , and ſince the Eye ĩs ſuppos'd to Purſue the Rays backwards in that Direction, in which they Fall, ir ĩs Maniſeſt, that, whether it is Placed in o, or in any Situation beyond it, ſo as the Object may be Seen, the Action of the Viſive Faculty cannot Return it's ſelſ in any other Direction than that oſ co, ſo, from whence it will follow, that the Inverſior of the Image will be Attended vith an Increaſe of the Magnitude oſ the Object, a: well as the Erection of the Image vill be. F5. 9. TuE Thirty Firſt Propoſition in this Philoſophy is Concerning the Apparent DPlace of Objects Seen ithro' Convex Glaſſes, of which we have this Account; Thai in Plain or Simple Viſion Eſpecially, when Objects are ſo far Removd, that the In terval between our two Eyes bears no Senſible Proportion to the Diſtance of the Object, or when the Object is looked upon by one Eye only) the Diſlance Obſervd is rather the At oſ our Judgment than of Senſe, and is Acquird by Exerciſe and a Faculty of Comparing one Object with another; for Diſtance, as it is a Line, is only Perceiv'd by one Point oſ it in the Eye, and therefore muſ©t owe it's Impreſſion upon our Minds to certain Interjacent Bodies, as the Earth, Mountains, Ficlds, Trees, ⸗ If Diſtance is not, or cannot be, Solv'd this Way, there is another Propos'd, which is by Conſidering and Comparing the Diſferent Magnitude of Objccts, or their Diſferent Colours, ſor if we Perceive them leſs in Bulk, or their Colours Fainter, ve Con clude ſuch Objects are at a greater Diſtance from us than ortherways3 And this is ſupposd to be the Method of Judging Concerning the Diſtance of Objects, that are Conſiderably Remote; Iut if they are Nigh, and their Diſtance bears a Senſible Proportion to the Interval of the Eycs, it is then ſuppoſcd to be Apprehended by the Mind, either from the Turn of the Eyes, or by the Angle of the Optick Axes; to which if it is Objected, that we Perceive Diſtance by the Help of one Single Eye only, that Dirficulty is ſaid to be Solv'd from the Figure Annexed, where ꝓu Repreſents the Pupil of the Eye, a d, ae, af, ag, ah, are ſeveral Rays Emitted from the Radiating Toint of an Object æ, and ſince 2 u, in the Situation f, Receives Three of theſe Rays, and in b the whole Five, there will be from hence a Diſferent Perception of Diſtance in the one Caſe, from what there will be in the other. 5. 10. IN Oppoſition to the foregoing Account ve cannot but take Notice, that to Explain the very ſame Appearance in Nature, Namely Diſtance, ſix or ſeven Diſtinct Hypotheſes are thought Neceſſary to be Introduced; 1ſf. That it is not an Act of our Senſc but our Judgement; 24. That the Magnitude of Objects Increaſing or Decreaſing is one Method, by which we Judge of their Varying Diſtances3 36d. That the Livelineſs or Faintneſs of Colours is another3 40h. That the Interpoſition of Bodies Occaſions this Preception in us 3 57h. That the Diſtances of Remote and Nigh Objects are oving to Different Cauſcs of our Perceiving them; 6h. That the Turn of the Eyes, by which the Optick Axes are made to Concur and Center in Varidus Points, as the d h Object Approaches or Recedes from us, is a Mcans like- c 1 & viſc, by which we Form our Notions of Diſtance; Laſtly, That the Greater or Leſſer Number of Rays, and their Leſſtr or Greater Divergence ſfrom cach other in their Incidence on the Pupil oſ the Eye, is a Direction to the Mind to Conceive Objects Placed at ſcveral Changing Intervals from it; Each oſ vhich Hypotheſes we ſhall Examine, and in the mean Time Obſerve, that it is Impoſible ſuch a Philoſophy hould be True, where ſo many Various Suppoſitions are made, and Cauſes Aſſignq, for the Explication of the ſame Determinate and Individual Efcct. 5. 11. As to the Firſt, that Diſtance is an Act of the Judgement, and not of the Senſe, we cannot Acknovledge; ſince every one as Fully and Really Perceives the Interval, which lies berwixt the Object and the Eye, as he does the Object it's ſclr; clf; but to Imagine an Actual Perception t0 be owing to an Inference in the Mind, t a ſort and Summary Concluſion of the Underſtanding, ſlet it be Thought to be 15s Habitual as it will) is as Irrational and Abſurd, as to Suppoſe, that our Ideas of Senſation may be Derivd into us from bare Reſiection only, or that we can See or Feel in General, becauſe we can Judge and Infer upon thoſe Perceptions. 5. 12. In Darticular, to Collect the Greater or Leſ's Diſtance of Objects from their being Reciprocally Leſs or Greater in their Apparent Magnitude, is Inferring from certain Perceptions, which the Mind has, to others, which have not the leaſt Connexion with them, unleſs any one will Affirm, that it is Neceſſary for the Mind to Jud⸗e the Diſlance is Greater, when the Object is Leſs, and the Diſtance Leſ, vhen the Object is Greater, rather than the Contrary; for if the Mind did Actually Perceive nothing, Excepting the Diſfering Magnitude of the Object, and we ſhould likewiſe Preſume, that, vhen it was at a farther Diſtance ſrom us, we by Experience could tell the Magnitude vas Leſs, and when nearer, Greater, yet why ſrom ſuch a Terception, and ſuch an Experience, the Mind by it's ovn Power, and by the Judęement it makes, ſhould be rather carry'd to Perceive the Diſtance Longer in the ſirſt Caſe than in the laſ, will be Impoſſible to Say. 5. 13. AND ſor the ſame Reaſon the Difference Obſervable in Colours cannot be an Argument to our Minds of Perceiving Diſtances as it does, for tho' the CoIours oſ Diſtant Objects, as to their Vivacity, are Fainter, and thoſe of Nigher, more Vigorous and Strong, yet why the Mind ſhould join an Idea of Greater Length to a more Languid Colour, and of a Shorter to a more Forcible and Active, vill be in this Philoſophy Equally Unaccountable with the former. 35. 14. A Fourth way of Judging is ſaid to be from the Interpoſition of ſeveral Objects betwixt the Eye and the Diſtant One, and this is ſuppos'd to be the Cauſe of the Sun's or Moon's Appearing Greater near the Horizon, than when it is Obſerv'd in the Meridian; Againſt which there is the ſame Invincible Objection, the Inconceivableneſs, how the Mind ſhould rather join the Idea of a Greater than a Leſs Diſtance to an Object in ſuch Circumſtances, when it is ſupposd only by Actual Perception to have an Impreſſion from the Object it's ſelf, and thoſe, which are Interpos'd betwixt it and the Eye; that is, vhen the Intervalls betwixt cach of them Cauſe no Perception, Ihow the Mind ſiould by it's own Force or Choice rather Conceive the Diſtances to be Longer than Shorter, ſince there muſt be an Actual Cauſe to Produce an Actual Eſfect in the Mind. S i5. IT Was very Ingeniouſly Urg'd ſome Years ago by my Excellent Pupil Mr. Nenſime, ſince Fellow of this College, but now Dead, in a Theſis of Philoſophy Propos'd by Him in the Schools in Defence oſ this Doctrine; That our Judgement is Concern'd in Aſcertaining, borh the Diſtance of Objects, and the Magnitude of them, ſince if ve look upon any Large Object thro' a Caſement of a Window, which is much Leſs than it, yet we ſeem to Perceive it in it's ſull Latitude and Extent, which Appears to be Impoſſible e ſhould do, if this Perception was not owing to our Judgement and not to our Senſe. 5. 16. IT is perhaps the beſt Argument for this Notion, that any Philoſopher has hitherto Oferd; but, beſides what we have ſaid, we ſhall Add, that as the Preſſure, or Expanſive Force of the Air or of æther is known to be the ſame, vhether in a Room or without it, ſo ĩt is Juſt to Think, that all the other Affections and Properties ol it are ſo, and Conſcquently thoſe, by which the Impreſſions of Objects upon out Sight are Conveyd to us. 5. 17. BUT farther, in Contradiction to theſe three Accounts of our Perception of Diſtance, the Diminution or Increaſe of the Object, the Faintneſs or Vivacity ol it's Colour, and the Interpoſition of other Objects betwixt it and the Eye, or the NonInterpoſition of them, it is Evident; That, in the Firſt Caſc, the Magnitude of an Object is not Diminied in Proportion to it's Diſtance from the Eve, and Conſcquently not Increasd in Proportion to it's Approach to it, for i we ſet up a Lamp, or a Candle, and the Socket, in which it is held, there is nothing more Manifeſt, than that the one is Scen at ſeveral Diſtances, where the other Diſappears, altho' the Flame is oſ no greater a Magnitude, rhan the Socket, which Contains it, or the other Part of the Lamp, or Candle, which is not Burning; and in Common Objects, which have not that Brightneſs, ve Sce the ſame Magnitude of them at ſeveral Changeing Diſtances. In the ſecond Caſe, the Faintneſs or Livelineſs oſ Colours, as the Object is Removd from or Comes nearer to the Eye, can be no Reaſon from Experience, why tht the Mind ſhould Judge, that Objects are more or leſs Diſtant from us, becauſe Whire or Red, is Seen at a much Greater Diſtance than other Colours are, and thereſore ĩ the Mind was to Judge of the Diſtance of Objects by the Intenſeneſs or Remiſneſ of the Colour, it vould Apprehend White and Red Objects to be leſs Diſtani than others, which it does not do. In the Third Caſe, it is likewiſe Manifeſ fron Experience, that, where there are ſeveral Objects Interposd, the Diſtance to our Ap prehenſion is not Increaſed by it, but the Contrary, ſince any Eminent Place upon the Surface of the Earth Appcars to be at a Greater Diſtance, if a large Portion of Aſl vithout any Interruption is Exposd to the Eye, than iſ that View is Broken and Intercepted by other Intermediate Objects, as in an High and Loſty Ediſice, which tho' at a Great Diſtance from a Hill or ſeveral Hills, which are Interpos'd, yet Appears in a manner Cloſe to them. And the ſame may be ſaid of the Sun or Moon Riſing or Setting behind one or ſeveral Mountains Interpos'd, ſor it will ſcem to Riſe or Set Cloſe behind them, be they nearer or farther ſrom us. 5. 18. THAT Which is moreover Abſurd in this Philoſophy is, that the Diſtance oſ Nigh Objects and Remote is Accounted for by two as Diſferent Hypotheſes as can be Poſlibly Contriv|, the laſt is ſaid to be owing to one oſ the three abovemention'd Cauſes, the ſirſt to the Angle Formd by the Axes of the Eye, or to the Greater or Leſs Number or Divergence oſ the Rays, which are Incident on the Pupil; but what Connection or Alliance is there betwixt Colour, Magnitude, or the Interpoſition of an Object with the Divergence of Rays, or an Angle made by the Direction of our Eyes to a Point? and yet one and the ſame Eſſect or Appearance of Diſtance is ſupposd to be Produc'd in the Mind by thoſe Cauſes, which have not the leaſt Reſemblance one to another; tho' it is altogether as Unreaſonable, as to Believe, that Extenſion it's ſelf is owing to them, which every Body Acknovledges to be Impreſſed upon us by ſome Individual and Unvaryd, tho unknown Principle, which therefore we ſall here Preſume to Supply; Namely by the Expanſive Force oſ the Ethereal Plenum; and Diſtance is Perceiv'd in the ſame Manner, as all other Bodies are, that is by the Expanſive Forces of them. 5. 19. NOTWITHSTANDING, this Philoſophy is not only able to Digeſt all theſe ſeveral Abſurdities, but it likewiſe Proceeds to Eſpouſc a Sixth, that Diſtance is Meaſurd and Percciv'd by the Direction of the Eyes to a Point, that is, by the Angle, in which the Axes of them meet; againſt which there is this Evident and Common Argument, to vit, the Appearance and Senſation of the ſame Diſtance, or nearly the ſame, to one Eye only, without any Imaginable Concourſe of the Optick Axes at all, vhich is Experienced, when we look upon an Object with both; However it may Poſſibly be ſaid, that, where one Eye is ſhut, the Mind Refers it's ſelſ back in that manner, as to direct the Axis of the Eye, which is ſut, to the ſame Point, with that of the Axis of the Eye, which is open; or at leaſt the Axis of the Eye, which is open, may be ſo variouſly Inclind at different Diſtances of the Object to it, as not to Require a Concurrence of the other Axis to Inform us of the Changeing Interval: If the firſt is aſſirm'd, ĩt is neceſſary, that the Eye, which does not ſce the Object, ſhould be carried to the ſame Point in the Object with that, which does ſee it, or, which is the ſame, that, ſince the Rays are purſued back by the Eye in the Incidence, in which they Fall, thoſe, which are not Incident at all, ſhall be Purſued back with the ſame Direction, with thoſe, which are Incident; IF the laſt is Aſfirm'd, it is a Conſeſſion, that no Concourſe of the Optick Axes, and Conſcquently no Angle Comprehended by them, is Requiſite to our Diſſerent Perception oſ Diſtance, which yet is an Abſolute Aſſcrtion of this Doclrine. s. 20. IF nothing in the former Section was Juſily Argued, it vould be yet Certain, that neither by the Diſſerent Concourſe of the Optick Axes, nor by the Diſferent Inclination of one of them, Diffcrent Diſtances could be Accounted for, becauſe in both Caſes the Mind is ſupposd to Act and Determine its ſel? Agrecably to the Diſtance of the Object, inſtead of the Obiech or the Diſiance of it, Determining the Mind, whereas Diſtance, as it is a moſt Evident Perception in us, ought to Proceed from an Action without us, and in which the Mind is aſſive, and not from an Action within us, and in which the Mind is Active. ; 5. 21. Bus iDrS, ĩf the Mind was ſuppos'd to be Paſſive only in the Inſormation it Reccivd of Diſtance ſrom External Nature, how an Angle ould Give ĩt, or the Different Inclina- clination of a Ray, any more than the Extreme Point of a Ray, which is own'd to be Incapable of doing it, is altogether Inconceivable. 5. 22. LastLy, it is notorious in the Diſtance of nigh Objects to any one, who vill give himſelf leave toobſerve it, that, if one Eye is nearer to an Object than the o ther, the Diſtance is ſenſibly different, and ill be perceivd ſo, whether we make uſe oſ one Eye, and then the other, or of both of them together, which will be Impoſſible 1o be Explaind by the Concourſe of the Optick Axes, which ſuppoſes one and the ſame Object to Appear at an Equal Diſtance from both our Eyes. 5. 23. THE Weakneſs and Infirmity of the laſt Solution of the Diſtance oſ nigh Objects ſfrom the Concourſe of the Optick Axes, ?which our ſeeing the ſame Diſtances by one Eye vas Suſſicient to Confute) ſeems to be a Reaſon oſ Introducing a Se venth Hypotheſis to Solve Diſtance, Namely, that Different Diſtances may be Inferrd by the Mind, where one Eye only is Concern'd, from the uncertain Divergence of the Rays on the Pupil, and by that Means Falling in a greater or leſs Number upon it. S. 24. IN Anſver to which we Alledge, that, if Diſtance Depends upon the Angle made by the Optick Axes, it will be but a Lame Vindication of ſuch a Docrine to Aſert, that it does not Depend upon that Angle, but upon the Divergence of the Rays, which Fall on the Pupil of the Eye, or, which is the ſame, it is a New and Surprizing Way oſ Deſending an Hypotheſis by Relinquiſhing it, and having Recourſc to another, which is Different from it. 5. 25. HOWEVER, that the Uncertain and Undetermin'd Divergence of the Rays, or a greater or leſs Number of them being Incident on the Eye, cannot Produce a Perception of Diſtance in us, is Manifeſt from this Philoſophy, which Acknowledges, that the Eſfect, which Reſults from thence, is the Clearneſs or Faintneſs of the Object; But Objects Appear with a Diſtinguiſhing Brightneſs and Clearneſs at a Thouſand different Diſtances, and do not grow Faint and Obſcure, Excepting, when they arc ready to Vaniſh ſrom our Senſcs, and are near the Extremity of the Line, in which the Eye is Capable of Secing them, and Conſcquently can be no Meaſure to the Mind of Judging Concerning the Diſtance of them. S. 26. FROM the foregoing Principles it is Aſfirmd in Reſpect of Looking upon Objccts thro' Glaſſes, that, if the Parcel of Rays, which Falls on the Pupil from each Point in nigh Objects, is by Refraction made to Flow as Cloſe together, as it is from Diſtant Objects, or, if the Rays from Diſtant Objects are made to Diverge, as much, as if they Flow'd, or were Derivd, from nigh Objects, the Eye thro' ſuch Glaſſes vill Perceive the Place of the Object Chang'd; This is Exemplify'd by a Common Experiment, which has been before Conſiderd, of a Baſon, Which is at firſt ſupposd to be Empty, and a Piece of Silver Placed at the Bottom of it, and afterwards to be Fill'd with Water, by which the Rays of Light, Emitted from the Object in the Baſon, are ſuppos'd to be Bent and Inclin'd to the Eye, which were before carry'd above it, and could not be Perceivd without Refraction; from Whence it is Concluded, that Refraction Cauſes a different Place or Diſtance of the Object in our Perception of it; To Reduce this Inſtance to Objects ſeen thro' a Glaſs, the Preſent Figure is made Uſe of, where, tho' ææ is the Ray from the Object, and is Refracted thro' the Glaſs æ b to ꝗ, and from thence to o, the Poſition of the Eye, yet the Object ĩs Seen in og Continucd to ſ and therefore in a different Situation from what it would have been Obſerv'd in without Refraction; Laſtly ſfrom (Fig. 5. 28.) the Rays c à, cæ, will after a double Reſraction Arrive at 7 and  Which, being Receivd by the Pupiloſ rhe Eye, will be Return'd in ſtrait Lines to f, and the Object Seen at a nearer Diſtance than it Really is; ſo that Refraction in this Caſe does not only Alter the Place of the Object, but Changes the very Diſtance, in which it Appcars to us in a ſtrait Line or Direction from the Eye. 5. 27. It is Admirable to Obſerve the Strange and Deſultory Genins of this Philoſophy, and which is a Juſt Argument oſ the Uncertain and Wavering Princioles, on which it Depends; Firſt Diſtance is to be Meaſurd by tſic Increaſe or Decreaſe of Objects in their Magnitude; Then by the Livelineſs and Faint- neſs of their Colours; Aſterwards by the Interpoſition oſ other Objects; From thence we are carryd to a Solution of it by the Concourſe of the Optick Axes; When at laſt the Whole is made to Turn upon the more or leſs Divergence of the Rays, or a leſſer or greater Number of them Falling on the Pupil of the Eye, by which the Diſtance of Objects View'd thro' Glaſſes is ſuppos'd to be Accounted for. . 28. As to the greater or leſ's Number oſ Rays Cauſing our Senſation of Diſtance we have already Conſiderd that Solution in 5. 25. which, if it were Truc, vould not be of any Service to the Explaining of the Diſtance, or the Change of it, Obſervable thro Glaſcs; ſince in the Figures Annexcd there is no ſuch Thing, as a greater or leſs Number of Rays ſuppos'd, but all is Reſolvd into the Affections of one Ray in (Fig. the iſ.) and in two only in (Fig. the 2d.) 5. 29. MorEOVER in ſſig. the 1ſr.) there is an Alteration of Place only, Namely, ſrom f to f, but, vhy the Lateral Change from one Ilace to another ſnould be Solv'd by the ſame Cauſe, by which a Change of the Direct Diſtance is, cannot be Explicated in this Philoſophy, becauſe there is no Analogy betwixt them; unleſs the Change oſ Diſtance in Looking upon Objects ſrom Refiection, as well as Refraction, will Perhaps Aſliſt us in Aſcertaining the Theory oſ Diſtance, that is, unleſs in Reſiecting Glaſes, as well as Refracting, there is alſo an Alteration of Place, which whether there is or not, yet no one ever Imagin'd, that Diſtance was therefore to be Explaind by it 3 hat we Mean is, that the Change of Place by Reſraction, and of Diſtance or Remoteneſs from the Eve, may Depend upon different Cauſes, for any Thing, that has been Provd, altho' they are Preſumd to be Reciprocal. 5. 30. VHAT we may ſarther Obſerve is, that, altho it is ſaid in the Beginning of 5. 26. that if the Parcel of Rays, which Falls on the Pupil from each Point in nigh Objects, is by Reſraction made to Flow as cloſe together, as it is from Diſtant oncs, or, if the Rays ſrom Diſtant Objects are made to Diverge as much, as if they Flowd, or vere Deriv'd, ſrom nigh ones, the Eye thro' ſuch Glaſſes will Perceive ihe Place of the Object Changd, yet in the foregoing Figures no ſuch Caſe is Supposd or Imagind, that Rays ſhould be Refracted with that Cloſeneſs, with which it is Treſumd they are by the Eye in Diſtant Objects, nor with that Divergence, which is Appropriated to the Reſractions oſ the Eye in Nigher; Since it is Evident in thoſe Figures, that neither Objects being Nigher or Farther off is Conſider'd, where the Points, from which the Rays Flow are taken at Pleaſure; Nor is the Cloſeneſs or Divergence of the Rays, by which theit Number is Magniſy'd or Leſſcn'd, where only one or two are made Uſe of in the Demonſiration3 It thereſore ſcoms Plain that, as the greater or leſicr Divergence of Rays was Introduced to Account ſor Diſtance, tho' Diſagrecable to all the other Hypotheſes of it, ſo it is here Endcavourd to be Applyd to the Diſtance of Objects Obſervable thro Glaſits, tho' there is no manner of Correſpondence or Relation betwixt them. S. 31. BUT that vhich ĩs ſtill more is, i? a diſferent Divergence of Rays Signify'd any Thing to Diſtance, it would Furniſh us with an Argument, not ſor, but againſũt, the Preſent Doctrine; For ſuppoſing the Radiating Point oſ an Objcqt in f, (Fir. s. 28.) which Emits Rays ſrom a Center to à and æ, to be now Poſited in ſ; either cæ, cã, and all the other ſcveral Rays ſfrom ?, vill Diverge, and Dilate themſclves of thei ovn Accord, vhich is Impoſſible and Abſurd, or elſe they vill keep the ſame Station and Poſture to each other in ſ;, as before in ę; If ſo, it is Evident, the Rays vill be Cloſer in their Incidence upon the Plane aæ, the nearer the Radiating Poini Approaches to it, becauſe in any Circle the Rays are more Conſlipated, the nearel they are to the Center, and Ieſũ ſo, the ſarther they are from it, by which Mean it will ſollow, that the nearer any Object is to the Reſracting Glaſs, the farthei iſtant it will Appear ſrom it; For the Incident Rays from c are ſupposd by Re fraction to be ſeen in æh, and the Incident Rays from ſ by a like Reſractior ro be ſeen in 7557 but the Incident Rays ſcom f? Diverge more, and are leſ Cloſ Cloſe and Denſc, than the Incident Rays from ſ, and therefore the Refracted Ra ys 15 will be more Conſtipated and Diverge leſs than the Refracted Rays  h, and Conſequently the Object ſeen at a greater Diſtance in 7 than in fr which is Directly Contrary to what is Affirm'd and Maintained in this Philoſophy. 5. 31. FROM a Solution in General of Diſlance, the Preſent Opticks Proceeds to Cimerin Determine the Apparent Place of an Object in Particular, which is Situate nigher a borat Convex Glaſs than it's Focus; in Order to this, it is ſaid we are to have the Pover ?næ Ni of the Glaſs, the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſ, and the Length of the Ob- 5m/" ject given. Thus æb is an ObjeQt, the Diſtance from the Gla bæ, the Glaſs its ſ, ſelf being of the leaſt Thickneſs, that is Poſſible, that the Optick Angle at the Im- Molynei merſion and Emerſion may be the ſame, the Middle Point 4 is likewiſe ſupposd to ſęſ;ſ: Radiate upon the Glaſs, ſo as the Rays ſhould be Re- Pa il ſracted, as if they came Directly from æ3 From the foremention'd Data, the Point è, being the Imaginary Focus, is Determin'd by Prop. 8. Through e Draw the Indefinite Line àe ſ, Parallel to a he, and as the Apparent Place of the Point b is at e, ſo the Places of the Collateral Points 4, , will be in the Strait Line àef; unleſs the Convexes are of very ſmall Spheres, that is, in à and f; ſince the Glaſt is ſupposd to be of an Infinitely ſmall Thickneſs, and the Vertex of the Immerſion and Emerſion æ to be the ſame; and therefore, if the Eye is in æ, the Optick Angle would be aze, and the Point b would Appear, as at e, and Conſequently the Object æb c as in àef. S. 33. E cannot but in the ſirſt Place Obſerve, that all the ſeveral Hypotheſes, made Uſe of to Explain the Apparent Interval of Objects, are here laid Aſide The Concourſe of the Optick Axes is of no Signiſicance; The greater or leſs Divergence or Number of the Rays of no Importance; The more or leſ" Vivacity of Colours is not Material; The Interpoſition of Objects it ſelf is Diſcarded; And we are now only to Conſider, it ſeems, the Greater or Leſs Magnitude of the Optick Angle, which at the ſame time has been already Confuted, as to it's being a Juſt and Exact Rule, by which we ſhould take our Meaſure of Diſtance. 5. 34. GRANTING which, it is Acknowledgſã, that if the Convexes are of very ſmall This Aun Spheres, à æ f will not be a ſtrait Line, but a Curve one, which Phænomenon of Diſtance ſ7 this Philoſophy ThinEs fit to Solve by Neglecting it, whereas it is as Neceſſary to be Ac- Conrauiiea counted for, as any other Refracted Diſtance; for why ſhould large Spheres be more J u Conſiderable, or more Important to us to Underſtand, than ſmall ones, here Na-L.ſ, ;7a ture is the Subject of our Inquiries, and is always as fully Expreſ”dd, and as Perſcctly Convexi;. and Compleatly Exiſis, in a Glaſs of an Inch, as of a Yard Diameter? 5. 35. WE ſhall alſo Add, that Allowing both theſe Suppoſitions of the Optick couræàitui Angles being the Meaſure of Diſtance, and of the Sphere of the Glaſs being Ex- & *eo. tremely Large, tho' it is Manifeſtly Introduc'd to Square vith the Preſent Reaſoning, Allowing which, it would no ways follow, that f and à ſhould, in the Return of the Reſracted Rays to their Imaginary Focus's, be in the ſame Line with æ3 becauſe there is no Reaſon Aſſign'd, or can be, vhy æ, which is more Diſtant from æ than b, ſould be Referrd back by the Eye thro' a greater Lenth ⸗ f; than b is, which Determines it's ſelf at a ſhorter Interval, b æ; for , which Affects the Eye at a greater Diſtance, one would Think, ſould Cauſc a leſs Force of Reaction in it than b, which is Nearer, and Conſequently  ſould Appear leſs Removd from the Eye than æ, and e ſ in a Bent, or Concave, Situation. 5. 36. MOREOVER, the Eye is ſupposd to be in /, which is Contrary to Ex- onnadinid perience, that is, ſuch an Hypotheſis will not be Capable of Solving, what we find & Exteruma to be True in Matter of Fact; ſince we Plainly Perceive Objects, Refracted thro' a Lens. to Appear at a greater Diſtance than other ways they would do, Albeit the Eye is Placed at a Conſiderable Diſtance from æ, or the Glaſs, in Reſpect of the Diſtance of the Object ſfrom it, that is, where the Diſtance of the Object and the Iye from the Glaſs, bear a very Senſible Proportion to each other, which is here reſumd to be none at all. Z 7 2 s. 37. LastLy, The Optick Diſtanee beſ Conſuted. r o s s. i7. Lasrtv, if we likewiſe Reſign this Suppoſition to the Preſent Doctrine of Opticks, and Place the Eye in æ, as near to the Glaſs, as is Poſſible, cither 21 ill Perſorm the Office of the Eye, or not; if it does, bę, bl, will be Refracted towards o; if not, the Glaſi and the Eye vill Repreſent a double Lens, and the Rays he made to Approach ſooner to the Axis æo than before; in both which Caſes, ęr, I5 inſtcad of Divergeing, as they are Imagin'd to do Contrary to the whole Tenour ol this Philoſophy, will Converge to a Point on this ſide æ, towards ę, and there fore it will be altogether Impoſſible for them to have any Imaginary Focus at e, ã, or ſ; ſince in their being Referſd backwards according to the Direction of the Reſracted Rays they will Neceſſarily Diverge and Divaricate from each other, ſo far are they from being Determin'd to any of the ſoremention'd Points in de ſ. 5. 38. IF this Pretended Demonſtration is Inſuſficient to Solve Refracted Diſtance in General, the Particular Inſerences, made from it, will be Equally Invalid, Namely the Reaſon, 1ſ. Why Convex Glaſes Repreſent Objects as ſarther oſf than Really they are. 22. Why Picees of Perſpective Appear very Natural and Strong thro them when duly Apply'd, ſince they make the Parts of the Perſpective ſeem, by being more Diſant, Hollowd and Sunk in. 3d7. Why Convex Glaſſes help the Eves oſ thoſe, tha See only Diſtant Objects, as Old Men, ſince they make nigh Objects Appear, a: Diſtant, 4h. Why the Diſtance between the Object and Glaſs Continucing the ſame the Apparent Place is not Alterd, tho' the Eye be Removd to and ſrom the Glaſs, ſince the Diſtance between the Object and Glaſs Continucing the ſame, the Imaginary Focus e vill always be the ſame. 5. 39. To go one Step farther in the Conſutation of this Doctrine, all rhat has been hitherto Denyd and Diſprovd we will Suppoſe to be True; Yet, iſſ. For the ſame Reaſon, that this Accounts for the greater Diſtance Obſcrvable thro Convex Glaſes, than without, Concaves likewiſe will have the ſame Eſfect, ſeeing the Rays, which are Reſracted thro' them, do Evidently x Divere, and vill thereſore be Reſerrd back to an Imaginary i Focus in æ3 2. For the like Reaſon, that the Parts of a Perſpective Appear Sunk in and Hollow4d, thoſe of a Picture, or a Face, ouzht to do ſo too, which yet Appear Prominent, as the Noſe, the Checks, and the Eye-Brows; 34. If Old Men only See Diſtant Objects, becauſe their Chryſtalline is Flat, as this Philoſophy Teaches, it is not Conſcquent, that they ſould See Objects, as Diſtant, becauſe their Chryſtalline is more Convex, or the Rays are Reſracted, as if it were ſo, by the Aſſiſtance of the Lens Applyd to it; 4h. If ac is in the ſame Poſition from the Glaſũ, tho' the Eye is Removd nearer to æ, or farther from it, the Imaginary Focus being the ſame at e, the Objeqt, ĩt ĩs ſaid, will Appear at the ſame Diſtance, which is not Probable, or at leaſt not Maniſeſt; For if the Eye is Situate in æ, and Referrs the Ray bæ back to e, if it is aſterwards Placed in o, bYy s. 35, It is Unreaſonable to Think, or at Ieaſt ĩt is no ways Evident, that the Eye vill Determine it's Reaction to the ſame Point; Eſpecially, ſince at ſeveral Diſtances of an Object, without any Refraction, the Eye is ſuppoſcd to React to diſferent Points. S. 40. 1ſ. THE next Solution, which is offer'd to us, is that oſ the Plce oſ an Object, Expos'd to a Convex Glaſs in it's Focus, being Undetermin'd; Forif the Radiating Point a is Placed (Fię. s. 70.) in the Focus of the Convex cã, the Rays ce, à g, aſter paſling ihe Glaſs, run Parallel, and being Produced backwards to c æ, à æ, vill not any where Converge to a Point, and therefore the Place of the Object will be at a Vaſt and Prodigious Diſtance ſtom us, or elſe be wholly Unaſcertain'd. 2d. A LIKE want of Determination of Place is Aſcrib'd to an Objcct, Poſited beyond the Focus of a Convex Glaſs, when Seen by the Eye, Situate between the Glaſs and Diſtinct Baſe; a (Fię. . 41.) s the Radiating Point farther Removd from the Glaũ than the Focus oſ it, the Rar: ac, a d, aſter Reſraction Converge, Iet e ſę thereſore Receive them, beſore they àſſemble z ſemble to a Point, and Conſequently ec, g4, being Converging Production backwards will Retire from each other to fæ, àæ, by which Means no Imaginary Focus can be Form'd, which is here ſuppos'd Neceſſary to Determine the Place of the Object. 3d. If an Object be more Diſtant from a Convex Glaſ than it's Focus, and the Eye beyond the Diſtinct Baſe, the Apparent Place of the Object is in the Diſtinct Baſe; the Object a bæ (Fig. S. 42.) is Projected by the Glaſs ęæ to the Diſtinct Baſe à e ſ, the Place of each Point in the Object is in the Correſpondent Point of the Image in the Diſtinct Baſe, thus a Appears at 4, b at e, and at ſ 41. As to the firſt and ſecond Articles it is Acknowledgd, there are Difficulties lie againſt them, which are Unanſwerable; for, whereas the leſs Rays Diverge in their Incidence upon the Eye, the Remoter the Object will Appear, and where the Rays Fall Parallel upon it, the Object is Judgd to be Extremely Remote, or it's Place altogether Undetermin'd according to this Doctrine, and ſtill more ſo, if the Rays are Converging, the Contrary of all this is found in Experience, or at leaſt nothing is Apparent in Nature Agreeable to ſuch a Reaſoning; for (Fig. 24.) 4, a Luminous Object, is Apprehended in Fact to be Variouſly Diſtant according to the Various Situations of the Eye between the Glaſs and Diſtinct Baſe, and ſcarcely ever, if at all, is Seen more Diſtant, than it vould Appcar to the Naked Eye, and ſometimes much Nigher; or rather, the greater the Convergence of the Rays is, the Object in Proportion Approaches; ſo that, if the Eye is Placed, as Nigh the Glaſs, as can be, the Luminous Object Appears in it's Nat farther Removd from the Glaſs towards the Diſtinct Baſe, the Point a Obſerves a leſs Diſtance from the Glaſs; till at laſ, the Eye being Placed in a certain Station, as at the Diſtinò: Baſe, the Luminous Object, or Point a, Appears very near, when it begins to Vaniſh away in mere Confuſion; Which is a Sufficient Confutation of Cas. I. and 2. in the foregoing Section; 5. 42. ON the other Hand, if the Glaſs is held, as near to the Luminous Object, as is Poſſible, the Diſtance will be no other, than what it Appears in to the Naked Eye, tho' the Rays then are moſt Diverging; and as the Glaſs is carry'd from thence towards the Eye, the Diſtance will Decreaſe, till it comes to about a middle Station betwixt both, and then will Increaſe, and at the Eye is the ſame, as before at the Object; ſo that, when the Rays are ſuppos'd to be the moſt Converging, and the moſt Diverging, the Diſtance ill Appear the ſame. S. 43. FARTHER, When the Glaſs is Placed next to the Eye, and is kept in the ſame Poſition, whilſt the Eye Removes from it, or is Placed next the Object, and the Luminous Object is Removd from it, in both Caſes the Diſtance is leſſe'd, and the Magnitude oſ the Object is Continually Increaſed, till it is too Large for the Glaſs to Comprehend it, and the Diſtance is none at all, but the Light, as ſuppoſing that of a Lamp, or of a Candle, is Diffusd upon the Body of the Glaſ its ſelf, by which it's ſelf becomes one Bright and Luminous Object; And this does not happen with any Reſpect to the Focus, as Cas. 3. Affirms, but as the Proportion lies betwixt the Magnitude of the Glaſs and the Object. S. 44. BusiDES, if, inſtead of a Bright and Reſplendent Object, we take a Darker and more Obſcure one, as the Letters we now Write, and we lay the Glaſs upon them, they will Appear ai the ſame Diſtance nearly, and of the ſame Magnitude, as others, which are not Refracted by it, but if, on the other Hand, the Z zz2 Slaſs Is made to Approach the Eye, as near as Poſſible, they become into one White Proſpect Intermixt with a Confuſion of Black; and if the Glaſs and Eye are brought nearer to the Paper, the Letters will be of ſomerhing a greater Magnitude and Diſtance than before, when it was laid on the Paper; nothing of which can be Accounted for in this Philoſophy, if we only Conſider the Refractions of Rays in the Abſtract, without Inquireing into the Nature of the Objects, which Emit them, in Relation and with Reſpect to the Glaſs, which Refracts them, that is, unleſ's wve Conſider the Various Expanſive and Contractive Forces of each. 5. 45. Nor does this Philoſophy better Explain that Common Eſſect of Objects ſeeming to Dance and Move, when they are ſeen thro' Spherical Glaſles, whether Convex or Concave, Nimbly ſhaken between the Eye and the Object; Tis, it ſcems, a Noted Experiment, by which a Glaſs, vhen Formd upon a large Sphere, and which ortherwiſe cannot be eaſily Diſcover'd, is known, vhethier it is Plane or Spherical; for if the Latter, the abovemention'd Phænomenon is Obſervable, if the Former, not; The Reaſon of which Deſultory Motion in the Object, when the Sphere is Shaken, is ſaid to be this; That the Rays, being Refracted more towards the Extretremities of the Glaſs than towards the Middle, the Apparent Place of the Object is more Changd by Refraction in the firſt Caſe, than in the laſt; ſo that the Object by the Motion of the Glaſs, Appearing ſometimes thr the Middle, and ſometimes thro the Extremities of it, the Apparent Place of the Object is Vary'd, and therefore the Object it's ſelf ſeems to Move, but in Plane Glaſſes the Refractions are the ſame. S. 46. Ir is True, if this Doctrine of Opticks is Certain, that the Rays, which are Incident upon the Spherical Glaſi, are Refracted more, or leſs, towards the Sides oſ it than at the Middle, but it is likewiſe as True, upon ſuch a Conceſſion, that the Eye does not See the Object by the Rays, which are Refracted at the Sides, in Diſtinction from thoſe, which are Reſracted in the Middle; ſince the whole Pencil of Rays from one Point in the Object, ſome of which are Refracted at the Middle, and others at the Extremities of the Glaſs, and at the Intermediate Diſtances betwixt them, I ſay, the whole Pencil is Requird to Produce Viſion in us, and Conſequently there can be no Argument Dravn for a different Perception of Place or Diſtance from the diſferent Refraction of the Rays of the ſame Pencil; on the other Hand, if we take the whole Pencil or Cone of Rays, there will be different Refractions, vhen ve Move the Glaſs from one Pencil of Rays to another, in a Plane one, as well as a Spherical, and therefore not only Spherical, but Plane Glaſſes, ſould likewiſe make Objects Dance and Move, which will Deſtroy the Grand Criterion betwixt them. S. 47. BESIDES Which, all, that has been ſaid againſt the Determination of Diſtance from theſe Reſractions of Rays thro' a Convex, will be Equally Valid againſt this Solution; To which we ſhall Add, that an Imaginary Focus is that, into which the vhole of this Theory of Refracted Diſtance is Reſolvd, which is neither Magnitude, nor the Optick Angle, nor the Interpoſition of Objects, &æ. Into which common Diſtance is Reſolvd; But, vhy Common and Refracted Diſtance ſhould be Ac counted for, on ſuch Principles, betwixt which there is no Connexion or Reſem blance, it is Impoſſible to Affirm. 5. 48. LasTLY, an Imaginary Focus cannot be had in all Refractions, and yer in all Refractions there is a Diſtance, which Varies according to the Nature of them, which Depends upon the Figure of the Glaſs, whether a Priſm, a Lens, Globe, Cube, a Parallelepipid, &. Or on the Conſiſtency and Temper of it, in Reſpect of the Refracting Medium, and in Reſpect of the Rays, which are Refracted, upon the Objects, from which they Flow, as the Sun, Common Light, Colours, and the greater or leſs Vivacity of the Actions of Bodies in General, all which Cauſe an In finite Diverſity in Refractions without any Imaginary Focus ſuppos'd, or even Poſſible; that is, the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Objects and of the Glaſſtcs are to be Conſidered, and not the Abſtracted Rays Emitted from the one, or Reſracted by the other. j C H A P C H A P. XI. Concerning other Propoſitions, which Relate to Convex Glaſſes, Interpos d betuixt the Objeſt and the Eye. 5. 1. HE Preſent Doctrine of Opticks having Explain'd the Principles of Refracted Diſtance, and the Reaſons of it, Proceeds to Form ſeveral Propoſitions Concerning it, but, which is the conſtant Miſchief of it's Solutions, without the leat Adherence to any of it's Hypotheſes, or even to it's laſt Favourite one oſ an Imaginary Focus. 5. 2. TuE Firſt Propoſition it gives us, is, that an Object being Placed in the Focus of a Convex Glaſi, and the Eye on the other Side of the Glaſs, the Object is Seen Diſtinctly and Erect; For it's being Seen Diſtinctly, there are two Reaſons Aſſignd; 1ſt. From (Fig. S. 40. Pag. 546.) becauſe ac, a à being Refracted ParalIcl to the Eye, they will from thence Tend to ſeveral Diſtint Points in the Retina oſ it, for where Rays Fall Parallel, that will be their Lav of Refraction by other Propoſitions before Alledg'd; 24. From the Preſent Figure, becauſe the Chryſtalline of the Eye op ſbeing in the Place, where ſome of the Rays from every Point in the Object are Mixt together) is in the Place of the greateſt Confuſion of the Rays, and therefore by a Former Propoſition the Viſion is Diſtint in the Retina; As to the Objects being Erect, it is thus likewiſe Prov'd from this Figure, c, b, and 4, each of them, Emits a Cone of Rays, which Spreads it's ſelf on the Glaſũs ę, of vhich ęch, i a  (vhich are but Parts of thoſe Cones) are only Conſiderd; but the Rays, which lie betwixt ;, , will be Refracted by the Eye to f and thoſe, which are Incident betwixt g, h, to à, which therefore will Paint the Obiect Inverted in the Eye, and Cauſe it to be Seen Erect in c ba. ” E. D. ll 5. 3. As to what Concerns the Propoſitions Referr'd to, ve have before Examin d into them, ànd have at Ieat ſhewn the Precariouſneſs of them; we ſhall therefore now only Inquire into the Validity of the Reaſons Aſſign'd, and the Application of tho: Propoſitions in Order to ſtrengthen them; In (Fig. 5. 40. Pag. 546.) ce and àg are ſaid to be Refracted to a Point in the Retina æ, becauſc they are Parallel; but if this Argument was a Juſt one, ſince, aſter their Reſraction in the Lens cã, they are ſuppos'd to Continue Parallel, vithout any farther Alteration in their Direction, it vould Follow, that, wherever the Eye was Placed, whether nearer or farther oſf from the Glaſs, the Object would Appear equally Diſtinct, which is Contrary to our Plain and Manifeſt Experience; For the Object in ſcveral Diſtances from the Convex will Appear Confus'd, and at length Vaniſh, and make no Impreſſion at all upon us. 5. 4. ANOTHER Reaſon given for Objects Appearing Diſtinct to the Eye, when Placed in the Focus oſ a Convex, is from the Preſcnt Figure, where the Rays ch and ai are thoſe, which are now ſuppos'd to Cauſe this Confuſion in the Chryſtalline, or the Cornea, that is, at the beginning of the Eye's Refraction, Namely ſuch, which after Refraction ſall be Parallel to æꝑ, g0 on the Contrary, in Propoſition the 28/h, the Rays, which were Deriv'd from dif ferent Points of the Object, and Caus'd a Conſuſion in the firſt Refractions of the Eye, vere the Axes of the Cones; Unleſs thereſore the Axes of the Cones of Rays which Proceed from  and æ are the ſ=ame with a7 and ch, which they Evidently are not, this Demonſtration cannot be of any Force or Significance; But if 4ĩ and eh are not thoſe Rays, which are Refracted Parallel to æ  and f”, the Reaſor a ign ſign'd in the foregoing Section cannot be Valid, which ſuppoſes the Rays, that Fall on the Eye, to be Parallel. 5. 5. WE muſt likewiſe Obſerve, that in this Figure the Confuſion of the Rays is in the Cornea, and Which Divaricate upon the Chryſtalline, whereas by Propoſition the 287h. they meet in the Chryſtalline, and Diverge at the Cornea, vhich difference in the Incidence muſt Manifeſtly Cauſe a difference in their being Diſtinctly Refracted; But the Contrivance is Evident, Namely, to Preſerve the Paralleliſm of the Rays aſter their Refraction thro' the Convex, that it may Agree with what is Afſirm'd in (Fig. S. 40. Pag. 546.) and at the ſame time to Aſcertain the Confuſion of Rays from all the Points of the Object, which, by the 287h. Propoſition, is thought to be Neceſſary to their Jut and Punctual Refraction to the Retina. S. 6. THE next Thing Aſſerted in this Demonſtration is, that the Object Appears Erect, but why it ſhould ſo, is not Evident by any very Flagrant Proof, and certainly, not from an Arbitrary Aſſumption of one Part of the whole Cone of Rays, vhich is here done; For ſince it is Acknowledg'd, that from a and f, the Extreme Points, the Rays are Diſperſt, as from a Center, upon the whole Surface of the Convex, it will be Impoſſible to Aſſign a Reaſon, vhy gch, or i at, ſould rather make an Impreſſion upon the Retina of the Eye at à and f; than the Other, or Remaining, part of the Cones, hc t, ia g5, which yet, if taken into the Account, would wonderfully Diſturb the preſent Reaſoning. 5. 7. A Sccond Propoſition is, that an Object being Placed in the Focus of a Convex Glaſs, and the Eye being Placed in the Focus on the other ſide of it, the Object is ſeen under the ſame Angle, as if the Naked Eye was Placed at the Station of the Glaſs in the preſent Figure; 4 b is an Object Placed in the Focus of the Glaſs e ſ, which is ſupposd to be of the leaſt Thickneſs Imaginable; The Rays æe, b f, Run Parallel to the Axis æ æ o, and therefore are United in the Focus o, at which Point the Eye is Situate; oe, o f, are Produced to g and  and ec f is Parallel to axb, betwixt which the Lines æc, bę, are Dravn; The Optick Angle thro' the Glaſs is æo f, and is to be Provd Equal to a c b, which is Maniſeſt; ſince æ æ ce, ec ro, are Parallelograms that are Equal, and Conſequently, the Diagonals oſ them æc, e o will be Equally Inclin'd to xę, co, that is, will Comprehend the ſame Angle, and ſince the like may be Aſſirmd of æbef, cfſo, the Angle ach vill be Equal to the Angle æo . ” E. D. s. 8. BUT, notvithſtanding this Infallible Demonſtration, ve muſt beg Leave to ſay, there is nothing in it; for, in the firſt Place, the Object a b muſt be ſuppos'd to be no greater than the Glaſs, otherwiſe æf, bf, could not be Parallel to the Axis æ, but would Converge toards it, and therefore this Demonſtration cannot ſignify any thing to the Explaining of Objects, in General, being ſeen under the ſame Angle æof; or acb. 5. 9. IN the ſecond Place, it is Obvious to Obſerve, that the Rays are Diſposd, in Order to Prove this Propoſition, in a different Manner, from what is found Requiſite to Evince the former; there, only  iæ is Conſider'd, that is, ſuch Rays as may be Refracted Parallel to each other, whereas in the Preſent Figure, bf, ae, are ſuppos'd to be Refracted Converging to the Eye, without any ſuch Paralleliſm; or, which ĩs the ſame, in (Fir. 1ſt.) there is one Portion of the Cone o Rays Aſumd to Evidence the former Propoſition, to which it belongs, and in (Fi” 2d.) a diſſerent Portion to Evince the lat, which is not Reconcileable, unleſs upo one Suppoſition, that ve may uſe the Cone of Rays, which is Emitted from an Objcct, as we Pleaſe, which is Abſurd. s. 10. BESIDI s. 10. BESIDES Vhat we have ſaid, fc ſ is ſuppos'd Parallel to a x4, that is, that 4 tirà obhe Glaſs is of an Inſinitely Small Thickneſũi, or that the Curve of the Double Con- ?-—— ex, and the ſtrait Linc Drawn betwixt them, ate the ſame; if ſo, there can be no i Imaginable difference betwixt a Plane, and a Convex Glaſs, and the ſame Demonſtration, which is here made Uſe of, will be Valid in the one, as well as the other, vhich is not Conſiſtent with this Philoſophy; ſince, according to ſuch a Reaſoning, the Convex ecf vill have no different Properties from a Plain Parallelogram. 5. 11. AThird Propoſition is, that an Object being Placed more Diſtant from a Con- Corerin as vex Glaſs than it's Focus, and the Eye being Placed on the other ſide oſ it, nigher to the — Glaſs than the Diſtinct Baſe, the Object is ſeen Erect and Confus'd; a bc is an Object ſiom a Cone Refracted to the Diſtinct Baſe dæf, and æ is the Eye; If. the Object Appears Erect, cſò ihn i ? Focus and the E;æ Placed x nightr iLe terꝶ: Gla© thin il Dilnũt Baſe. Molyneux Dioptricks Prop. 36. Parta. à a'n becauſe the Rays from a Tend, after their Tranſmiſſion thro' the Convex gl, to 4, and thoſe from ę, to ſ; 2à. It Appears Confus'd, becauſe the Rays from b aſter Refraction are Converging, whereas to make Viſion Diſtinct, they ſhould be Parallel. Q. E. D. §. 12. To which Demonſtration, as it is Term'd, we Reply, that it is Impoſſible Fiſt Rel; u the Eye in ſ ſould Perceive the Object otherwiſe than Diſtinèt, ſince in that Situa-ꝗſuſir tion there will be a perfect Confuſion of the Rays from all Points in their Incidence on the Cornea, or the Chryſtalline, which before has been Aſfirm'd to be Requiſite to a Clear and Diſtinct Viſion. S. 13. IF we now Remove the Eye to m n, orhi, it is not Certain, or Prov, that any Suni Retl Rays are Incident upon it, Excepting thoſe from b, but how the Rays, which are Emitted from one Point of an Object, ſould give us an Impreſſion of the Erection or Inverſion of the whole, cannot be Solv'd by any Method, or any Reaſon. 5. 14. As to the Object's Appearing Confus'd, becauſe the Rays after Refraction Third Rtl. are Converging; for the ſame Reaſon, according to this Philoſophy, Old Men ſhould not be Aſliſted in their Viſion by Convexes; If it is ſaid, their Chryſtalline being Flatter wants them, that can be no Objection to a Confſutation of a Propoſition, which in it's Demonſtration in General Aſſerts, that Objects Appear Conſus'd, becauſe the Rays are Converging upon the Eye. 5. 15. BUT that, which Overthrows all this Reaſoning, is, that in Fact and Experience Objects do not Appear ſo Confusd, as this Doctrine Repreſents; on the Contrary, when the Eye is Placed the neareſt to the Glaſs ę/, the Object is Seen with the greateſt Diſtinction, when by the Courſe of the Rays it ought to be Seen with the leaſt; and as the Eye removes farther off, by  13. It will be ſo far from Seeing the Object Conſuſcdly, or Diſtinctly, that it is not Provd, it will See more than one Point of it. Cencirning a 5. 16. A Fourth Propoſition is, that an Object being more Diſtant from the Glaſ3 O⸗ Len than its Focus, and the Eye Placed in the Diſtindt Baſe, the Object Appears moſt ſm ix c. Confusd; Thus in the foregoing Figure, when the Eye is Placed in fe à, the Object thu m Fac in abe vill ſeem more Confusd, than if the Eye is in any other Poſture, which p has been Conſiderd in 5. 13. And does not Require any farther Anſer; that is, Dſnũ ny the Space, which the Eye takes up, is to be Determin'd, beſore we can Aſfirm what Molyneuxs Rays will Fall upon it, and what will not, as allo the Compaſs of the Divergence ſ; oſ each Pencil oſ Rays. Serenes 5. 17. A Fiſth Propoſition is, that, the Object being more Diſlant from the Glaſt m D ſrst than the Focus, and the Eye farther from the Glaſs than the Diſtinct Baſe, the Ob- ſm il GL ject begins to be Perceivd Inverted, and, ata Proper Diſlance, Diſtindt. This is Provdv ſſ i ſrom the Preſent Figure the Firſt, abc is the Object, gs the Convex, the Diſtinct Baſe ſa ſed, o the Place of the Eye; ſrom ⸗ the Cone of Rays æęſ is Emitted, but ſinceſſ ſta⸗ half oſ this Cone is ſupposd to Diverge to ꝗ4 æ vhich does not Fall upon the Eye, u2. the Fourtly Retl the other half a5ſ is only Conſiderd, which does; æ5ſ thereſore being Reſracted to o on the Chryſtalline of the Eye, and fę to ꝓ0, they vill be Refracted to the Retina Inverted, in Reſpect of the Diſtinct Baſe ſeã; and Conſcquently, ſince the Object a bc (hen Erect, and is Painted upon the Eye Inverted) Appears Erect, Secing the Diſtinct Baſe is an Inverſion of the Object, and that is again Inverted in it's Impreſſion upon the Eye, it ought to Appear Inverted; and as the Object in ſuch Circumſtances is ſaid to be Seen in a contrary Poſition to it's Natural, ſo there will likewiſe be a Diſtinction in it's Appearance, if the Eyc is ſo far Removd from the Diſtinct Baſe, as to be able to Correct the Divergence of the Rays, that come to it from each Point in the Diſtinct Baſe, and to Form them into Correſ pondent Cones, which Determine their Apices on the Retina. 5. 18. THE firſt Thing we ſhall Obſerve upon the foregoing Section is, that hali the Cone of Rays is only made Uſe of in the Preſent Demonſtration, the Conſequence of which muſt be; either that æ is not fully Expreſſed in , and therefore not in r, which may be ſaid of all the other Points in the Object, and if ſo, that the Object is only Partially Repreſented to the Eye, vhen it is ſuppos'd to be Wholly Impreſſed upon it, and Confuſedly, when the Repreſentation is Imagin'd to be Diſtinct; or elſe, half a Cone of Rays will make the ſame Impreſſion upon the Eye as a vhole one vould, that is, in Reallity half is Equal to the whole, which is Impoſſible and Abſurd. . 19. Nor does the Account, which is here given us of the Inverſion of the Object, carry the urmoſt Evidence with it, which we could Deſire, for if the Eye was Placed betwixt the Convex and Diſtinct Baſe, ſome Where in the half Cone of Ray: sd l, ſince ĩt is a Rule in this Philoſophy, rhat the Eye Purſues the Rays back according to the Direction of the lat Refraction, sàſ will be returnd to , and fię™ to a, that is, a will Appear in f, and  in 4, and Conſequently the whole Object in a Poſture, which is the Reverſe of it's True one. S. 20. Suppoſing yet, that the Eye in 5àl would Sce the Object in it's true Poſition, it is not Neceſary to Inſcr, that beyond à it will Apprehend it in a Contrary Situation, becauſc  oq is in a Contrary one to àsl, ſince ldo, sã q are Lines Continucd from the laſ*t Refraction in the Convex g/, and by the foreæoing Rule the Rays are Purſu'd back to the Object according to the Preſcription of the Refraction in gſ, from Whence it will follow, that if the Object is Seen Erect in 5à, it ought to be ſo in odq. S. 21. If not, it muſt be upon one of theſc two Accounts; cither becauſe sà and 4l are in an Inverted Poſition to ã ꝗ, and o, that is, s dq ldo Croſs each other in à or elſe, becauſe sàl, when the Eye is Poſited in it, is Kefracted towards æ, and gſs towards 7, whereas, when it is Poſited in oã q, ĩt is Refracted tovards 7, and ęſs to vards n;3 As to the firſt, it is very Manifeſt, that the Croſſing of the Particular Ravs, vhich Flow from one and the ſame Point of the Object can Signify nothing to the Altering the Poſition of the Object. ſince no one Affirms. or can vith any Reaſon do it, that the Point a or è it ſelſ is Inverted; for Suppoſing the Points 4, b, and ⸗ Inverted Inverted, that would not Cauſe ſuch an Inverſion of the Object as is here Alledg'd and Maintain'd, Namely, that the Linc, which Croſes bo, ſould be Transferrd to the ſame Diſtance at æ from b, as it is at a from b, in it's Natural Poſture; Nor, as to the Second, is it Reaſonable to Grant, that the Rays ſal, od q, are Refracted to Contrary Situations in the Retina; all the Diſſerence, which can be Juſtly Imagind betwixt the Refractions of them in the Eye, is only this, that the one are Refracted by it Converging, the other Diverging, which would Produce one Effect indeed according to this Philoſophy, that, the Chryſtalline Continuing the ſame, if the Rays in sã  were Refracted to æ with a greater Exactneſs, thoſe in oàdꝗ vould be vith a leſs, and on the Contrary, if the Rays in sàl were Refracted to n with a leſs Accuracy, in odq they would be with a greater, Suitable to the Doctrine, which is Affirm'd, in this Philoſophy, of a Lens Aſſiſting the Sight of ſome Men, and a Concave of others, Jhere the Rays are made to Converge, or to Divaricate; But what is this to Inverion? 5. 22. As to what is Experienced in Fact Concerning the Inverſion of the Object by a Convex, it is this, that at a near Diſtance of the Glaſs from a Luminous Object, as a Lamp or a Candle, the Eye Perceives it Erect, but at a farther Diſtance ſrom it, and at the ſame Diſtance of the Eye from the Glaſs, it Perceives the Object Inverted and Diminiſhed, and more ſo, the farther the Glaſs is Removd from the Object; tho upon the firſt Inverſion, or at the Time, when it begins to Appcar Inverted, ĩt is much Larger than the Object it's ſelf; If the Diſtance of the Glaſs from the Object ĩs the ſame, and the Poſition of the Eye is Alterd, the Object will likewiſe Appear at firſt Erect, and Larger, then Larger, and Inverted, as we Remove farther from the Glaſs, afterwards Inverted and Diminiſhed, then, as ve Remove to a greater Diſtance, it will Appear on the ſame Side of the Glaſs with the Eye, at ſome Interval from the Glas3 and as we go ſtill farther from the Glaſs, vill ſeem to Flame in it. 5. 23. Tuis Philoſophy on the other Hand Suppoſes, that the Diſtance betwixt the Eye and the Glaſs is very different, vhen an Object is Seen Erect, and when Inverted; in the firſt Caſe, it is Requir'd, that the Eye ſould be Placed ſomewhere in gdl, and in the laſt, in oàq, whereas the Erection and Inverſion of the Object is Perceivd at the ſame Diſtance of the Glaſs from the Eye, that is, when there is a different Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs; If it be therefore ſaid, that by the Increaſc of the Objects Diſtance, the Rays become more Parallel in their Incidence, and Conſequently are ſooner Refracted, by which Means an Object, which Appears Erect in sã l may by a farther Remove of it from the Glaſs ſeem Inverted in the ſame s àl by the Croſſing of the Rays before they Arrive at à5v Anſwer, iſThat the Focus of Rays Emitted from a Nigh Object, by this Philoſophy, is Supposd to a Demonſtration to be very nearly the ſame, whether ſuch an Object be Ieſs or farther Remov'd from the Glaſs3 27. That, the Rays, which Fall from a or c, do not Approach nearer to a Parallel by the Removal of the Object from rhe Glaſs, unleſs upon a Suppoſition, which has been already Confuted, that the Rays, which Flow from a Point, do not keep the ſame Station from cach other, at whatever Diſtance they are Emitted, which they ought to do, Excepting they are Conceivd to be ſel-Moving, and to Dilate and Contract themſclves, as Occaſion ſhall Serve; that is, they will be alvays Equally Diverging from the ſame Point, when the Glaſs is Placed in any one Part of the ſame Circumference from ſuch a Point, as the Center; and if the Circumſerence is Drawn, at a greater Diſtance, where the Glaſs is now Supposd to be, they will be ſo far from growing Parallel by it, that they will Diverge the more; 34. If the Rays sa  could be Imagind to grow more and more Parallel, by which Means they would be Refracted ſooner, yet that they ſhould Exactly Repreſent the Diſtinct Inverſion of the Object at one and the ſame Diſtance is Unaccountable, in what Manner ſoever the Eye and Glaſs, Preſerving the ſame Diſtance in Reſpect of each other, are Removd from it; Laſtly it is Obſerv'd, that the Object ĩs very much Diminiſd in this Inverſion of it, which is likewiſe not Solvid, ſince Magnitude is ſaid to Depend upon the Angle, made by the Axes of the Rays Meeting on the Eye, whereas there are no Axes Conſider'd at all in theſo Partial Cones, which are Alledgſd, or if there were, the ſooner the Rays were Refracted, the greater vould the Angle of the Axes be, and Conſcquently the Object would be Increaſed in it's Appearance. A a a a 5. 24. I 5. 24. Ir is no Wonder however, that theſe Opticks do not Explain thoſe Phæomenons, which they do not ſeem to have known, ſince they do not Endeavour to Account for the Inverſion of the Object, where the Diſtance of the Eye and the Glaſs is the ſame, and the Diſtance of the Object and Glaſs different, but, on the Contraty, vhere the Diſtance of the Eye and Glaſs is diſferent, and that of the Glaſs md Object the ſame; And yet it does not give us a Solution even of this; for iſ. In ſuch a Circumſtance of the Eye, the Glaſs, and the Object, the Object will Appear Larger than it's ſclf and Erect, and at a little farther Diſtance of the Eye from the Glaſs, Larger than it's ſelf, and, Inverted, and aſter that, Inverted and leſs than the Object, but here we are only Informd of the Inverſion, without giving any Account oſ it's Increaſe or Diminution, which for the Reaſons Aſfirmd in the foregoing Section cannot be done; 24. Aſter this, by a farther Removal of the Eye from the Glaſs, if it is a Luminous Object, it will Appear like a Flame Darting from the Convex, and, in the Proportion oſ this Figure, betwixt gl f, ſo that the Eye ſall be much farther Removd from the Flame, than the Flame is from the Giaſs, but vhich way this Phænomenon can be Explaind, is Inconceivable, i? we only Conſider the Reſractions of s a l, or ges, the Rays Croſſing each other in à and ſ; their being Reſracted again in the Eye to r and n, and from thence Referr'd backwards in the Incidence, in which they Fell, which are the ſtanding Principles of this Philoſophy, and no other are at Preſent Introduced3 And for the ſame Reaſon it is Unaccountable, how the Luminous Object ſould ſeem, at a farther Diſtance of the Eye, to Flame in the Glaſs it's ſclf, and, at ſtill a greater Diſtance of it, to Appear beyond it. 5. 25. MoREOVER, in Reſpect of the Diſtinction of the Object, ĩt is ſaid, That is Obtaind, when the Eye is ſo far Removd from the Diſtint Baſe ſæa, as to be able to Collect the Rays to Certain and Determin'd Points in r and n, which, as ha been before Provã, is not in very many Diſtances of the Eye and the Object, or, as here, of the Diſtinct Baſe, which is Conſider'd as an Object, vhereas almoſ©t in any Poſition of the Eye to the ſaid Baſe, where the Diſtance is not extremely Great, the Clearneſs and Diſtinction of the Object is Suppos'd by this Demonſtration to be, and in Fact and Experience is, fully Preſerv'd. : 5. 26. Another Phænomenon, which this Figure Propoſes to Solve, iĩs, that if the Eye be Movd upwards towards æ, (Fig. 1. and 2. §. 17.) the Object ſhaſl Appear to Mov downwards, and if the Eye be Movd downwards towards æ, the Object ſeems to Move upwards; To Explain which, the Pointæ is Conſiderd, and how the Appearance is Brought to and Formd in the Eye, which is thus; the Rays Refracted from  are gę l, which Proceed to f, and afterwards to o æ, half of which are only Supposd to Fall on the Eye in the Preſem Situation of it, Namely fo, and æfp to Eſcape it; if therefore the Eye is Movd higher towards æ, it then Receives the Rays æ ſp, and the Point, from whence theſe Rays Flow, vill Conſequently be Perceivd in a lower Situation than ; thus alſo, if the Eye be Mov'd downwards to x, æ will Appear in a higher Situation for a like Reaſon; and by this Means ĩt is Thought, that the Locus Apparens of the Object is Evidently Proved to be in the Diſtinct Baſe, as was before Alledgũ in a foregoing Propoſition, for by Raiſing the Eye, the Point ſ is Depreſſed, and by Depreſſing the Eye, the Point ſ is Raisd, juſt as  in the Objeẽt ſeems to Move Contrary to the Motion of the Eve From hence it is likewiſc ſaid to follow, vhat ve in Reality Experience, that if the Glaſs be Movd upwards, the Object Appears to Move upwards, and if the Gla's be Movd downwards, the Object Appears to Move downwards, for Moving the Glaſs upwards is the ſame, as Moving the Eye downwards, and therefore the ſame Effect of the Object's Appearing to Move up wards vill be Produced from either; Or, ſince the Diſtinct Baſe always Follows the Glaſs, as the Glaſ Moves upwards, the Baſe ill too, and Conſequently the Object, hich is here Repreſented by it. S. 27. BuT, ĩf as the Eye Movd upwards tovards æ, ? vould Appear to Mov downwards, for the ſame Reaſon  vould not be Seen at all, becauſe, as the Eye Receives the Rays from  in æ, which before Eſcap'd it, ſo ào being the urmoſt o the Reſracted Rays from ⸗, there will be none above it, which, Falling upon the Eyc, ſhould Repreſcnt æ or 4 in a lower Situation than before; and the ſame ma: bi 2 Argued in Reſpect of the Deſcent of the Eye to æ, ſince, in ſuch a Caſe, there would be no Rays below fo to make ? Appear in a higher Station to the Eye. 5. 28. SUPPOSING this yet could be done, the Raiſing of the Eye to æ could Signify nothing to the making the Point ſ Appear higher or lower, for iſ we only: Conſider that Individual Point, whether it is lookt upon from æ or from ,, it ill be the ſame, as the Center of a Circle, if View'd from any Part of the Circumference, vill be; On the other Hand, if the Eye at o Purſues the Ray to g, and at æ to l, in the laſt Caſe / indeed will Appear much lower than g, but then it muſt likewiſe be Affirm'd, that this can be no Argument for Seeing the Apparent Place of the Object in the Diſtinct Baſe, which is made a Conſequence of this Kind of Reaſoning, and therefore Suppoſes, that the Eye Terminates it's Reference in f; Contrary to the Preſent Hypotheſiss which makes the Eye Purſue the Ray to g 5. 29. BESIDES Which, if the Object, vhen the Eye is at æ, is not Seen in the Point ſ, but in fsl, it will not Appear in fl, in Preſerence to fs;, which will Terminate in ę, and vill therefore make no Alteration in the Place of it, but each Line in the Triangle vill have an Equal Claim to carry back the Notice of the Eye to the Object, which Impreſſed it; if the whole Triangle ſls is Concer'd in Returning the Action of the Eye, the Point  will Appear in a Line Parallel to s/, Dravn betwixt ſ5 and ſl Produced, and the ſame ill obtain in all the other Points of the Object à hæ, from Whence it is Conſequent, that bc will ſeem Larger and Confus'd; notwithſtanding it is Certain in Fact, and is Endeavourd to be Provd by this PhiIoſophy, that the Object is Leſs in it's Inverſion, and is Painted on the Eye with a Peculiar and Remarkable Diſtinctneſs. i S. 30. FARTHER, as to the Object's Appearing in the Diſtinct Baſe, for which Propoſition 31. 5. 10. is Alledg'd, and Which Depends upon Principles, which have been already Confuted, it is Falſe in Experiment, nor is it Confirmd by this Reaſoning; It is not Confirmd by this Reaſoning, as is Evident from the foregoing Sections, and more Particularly from §. 28. and 29. and that it is Falſe in Experiment, will be Notorious to any one, who is willing to make the Trial; for, if a Luminous Object is Placed beyond the Glaſs at a Certain and Determin'd Diſtance, and the Eyc is made to Retire from the Focus of the Convex, where the Object Appears Inverted, the Eye will yet be far from Perceiving the Object in the Focus; If the Eye ſtill Recedes, there is no ſuch Phænomenon Produced, but for a Conſiderable Diſtance together, the Object Appears Inverted and Diminiſhed, and on the other Side of the Glaſs, till at Length, when we are Removd ſeveral Yards from it, a Pointed Flame Darts out on this Side of the Glaſs towards the Eye, at about half a Yard from the Convex, which, as the Eye goes farther from it, Retires back to the Glaſs, and is at laſt Scatter'd and Diffus'd on it's Surface; from which it is Apparent; 1ſ. That there is no Expreſſion of the Object at all, either Erect or Inverted, on this Side the Glaſs, But only a Bright and Brillant Flame; 24. That if there vere, it is not in the Focus, becauſe it Appears in ſeveral Diſtances from the Glaſs, whereas, the Diſtance of the Glaſs and Object being the ſame, the Focus ſiould likewiſe Preſerve the ſame Station. 5. 31. LET this Reaſoning be, as Precarious as it will, it is yet ſaid, that from hence it follows, that, if the Glaſs is Mov'd upwards, the Object Moves upwards, iſ downwards, the Object Appcars to do ſo likewiſe; becauſe it is the ſame Thing for the Glaſ' to be Movd upwards, as for the Eye to be Movd downwards, or the Contrary; but ve muſt take Leave to Say, that, if ſo, there is no more Reaſon to Exact the Phænomenons of the Glaſs's Moving upwards, to the Account, which is given of thoſe, that Reſult from the Eye's Moving downwards, than, on the other Hand, to Accommodate the Phænomenons of the Eye's Moving downwards to the Account of thoſe of the Glaſ's Moving upwards; that is, if, according to what is Acknowledgſd in the Preſent Opticks, the Diſtinct Baſe, or the Object, of which it is a Repreſentation, follows the Motion of the Glaſs, there is no more Reaſon, why ve ſhould Aſcribe the Phænomenons Produced by the Glaſs's Moving upwards to the Poſition of the Rays, vhoſe Cauſe is ſaid to be the Baſe's following the Glaſs; than why we ſhould Aſcribe the Phænomenons Produced by the Eye's Moving downards to the Motion of the Gla'c upwards, which Relatively, in ſuch a Caſe, is Aaaaa Movd Movd upwards, whoſe Cauſe is yet Affirmd to lie in the Poſition of the Rays; that is, there does not ſeem to be any Connexion betwixt the one and the other; for, it à is Movd upwards to f, the Eye would Purſue the Rays back in a more Di rect Line than beſore, and Conſequently æ would Appear in a lower Situation inſtcad of a morè Elevated, whercas on the other Hand, if the Eye is Movd downwards, it is ſaid to Purſue the Rays from a back to a higher Situation. S. 32. FARTHER, the Various Poſition of the Rays is the Cauſe Inſited upon by which the Phænomenons of the Eye Moving upwards or downwards are to be Explaind; But, if the Glaſs is Movd upwards or downvards, the Phænomenons, Ariſing from it, are Aſignd to the Diſtinct Baſe, or the Object, following the Glaſs; and ſince the latter Explanation is made a Conſequence of the former, the different Poſition of the Rays muſt be a Reaſon, why the Diſtinct Baſe, or the Object, follows the Motion of the Glaſs; if therefore the Eye is Removd from o to ꝗ, and the Glaſ from to lome other Point above it, which ſhall be in Proportion as far Diſlant from, as q is from o, the Queſtion is, whether the Angle o à 4, which is Supposd to make the Object Appear in one certain Poſition of à in the Diſtinct Baſe, or ofæ in the Object, and qdx, which ve ſuppoſe Equal to the former, and to Repreſent the Diſtinct Baſe and the Object in a diſferent and a higher Situation, the Queſtion is, whe: her either of theſe two Angles are Exactly Equal to the Angles, made by the Motion of the Glaſs according to the Conditions before Preſcrib'd, which it is Impoſſible they ſhould; for altho' in the Preſent Figure ꝗãs is=to 5àx, and od qtosãl, yet if l is Removdto on the Contrary gãs vill become =to s dl=/ to o à q, vhich vill not be Equal to 54x, and therefore the Depreſſion of the Eye, and the Elevation of the Glaſs, will not Cauſe the ſame Angles, nor the ſame Appearance. s. 33. IT is alſo Obſervable in the Preſent Figure, that the Eye is Contrivd to be Placed ſo, that the Depreſſion of the Eye, and the Elevation of the Glaſs might Appear the ſame, but if the Eye is thre? or four Times the Diſtance from the Diſtinct Baſe, than it is Supposd to be in this Scheme, the Matter will Appea quite otherwiſe than is here Repreſented; for, in ſuch a Caſe, a Third, or Fourth, Part ol the Cone od ꝗ, Namely oã ⸗, ill be Sufficient to Fill and Poſſeſs the Space o4 ſince ào, de, Continually Divaricate, as the Eye Removes from à; if therefore at thæ Diſtance the Eye is Movd downwards to q, the Space it Deſcribes will be / to a Third, or Fourth, Part of oàq, Namely o ę, Conſcquently upon the Depre ſſion of the Eye to ꝗ, the Glaſs vould be Elevated only from I to r,, whereas upon the Elevation of the Glaſ© to s, as far as the Eye was Depreſſed to q, the Eye in Order to Apprehend it, muſt be Depreſſed Three, or Four, Times the Space it was before, Namely to the Triangle 5dx, or quite through the Triangle o 4, and by the Hypotheſis o q is Three, or Four, Times Bigger than o àc, which is Contrary to this Doctrine, which Aſfirms, that it is the the ſame; whether the Eye is Depreſſed, or the Glaſs Elevated; from vhence it is Evident, that this Philoſophy of Rays is Incapable of Solving the Preſent Phænomenonss. We ſnall only farther Add in this Section, that by the Eye's Moving downwards, the Object will not always Move upwards, even according to the Preſent Way of Reaſoning; for, as the Eye is carryd from o to ⸗ in cr, the Object will Appear in a lower Situation than 4, as may be more fully Seen in ( Fig. 2d.) for there even in  , i i, it will be Depreſſed, and vill not Riſe, till the Eye comes below eæ, which ſiews, how Uncertain this Kind of Arguing from the Poſition of the Rays is, and that the former Figure is Contrivd on Purpoſe to Solve the Phænomenon, not Drawn to Explain it3 ſince the Eye in any other Poſture vill Receive the Rays differently, by which the Object will be made ſometimes to Move downwards, and ſometimes upwards, vhilſt the Eye is yet all the Time Moving downwards, which will not in the Iea©t Agree either with the Phænomenon it's ſelf or the Preſent Explication of it. S. 34. LastLy, there is another Phænomenon, which theſe Opticks do not take Notice of, and vhich vants to be Explaind; that is, if the Eye is Placed berwixt the Diſtinct Baſe and the Glaſs, ſo as the Obje&t ſhall Appear Erect, every Thing happens Contrary to what was ſaid before, that if the Eye is Movd upwards, the Obiect Moves upwards, and if the Eye is Mov'd downwards, the Object Moves ſo too;3 On the other Hand, if the Glaſs is Movd upwards, the Object Moves downvards, and iſ the Glaſi is Mov'd downwards, the Object Moves upwards. 5. 35. LE 5. 35. LET the Eye be Poſited in ? 0.Q, and aſtervards Rais'd ſfrom 2 to 0, as Hoœ il ſirr t Gradually Aſcends, the Rays, which are Refracted from a Succeſſively Vaniſi, till 8æ rhn1t Lengih they are Perfectly loſt in 0; and thus, if the Eye Moves downwards from b Vuty aP to O, the Kays, which are Emitted from f, will likewiſe by Degrees Eſcape the Eye, -unm tll they Finally Diſappear in the ſame Point 0; vhich vill be far from Explaining ſq1. how a or c Move upvards, or downwards, according to the Motion of the Eye, ſince even thoſe Rays, which Remain, Preſerve the ſame Incidence ncarly, and therefore ſould Conſtantly Repreſent the Points in 4 and ę, or, if any Thing, æ4 Lower, and ? rather Higher, than in their Natural Poſture, ſince the ſirſt is lookt upon from a more Elevated Station, and the laſt ſrom a more Depreſſed. 5. 36. ALSO, if the Ghaũs is Movd from ſ to5 it vill then only Receive the, ſiritr higher Rays, vhich Flow from the Points æ and f, to vit, ęaæs gcs, and therefore, ih ſr;m it this can be Imagin'd to Cauſe any Alteration, it ſhould rather ſcem to Elevate Ih cnemmm ihe Object than Depreſs it, ſince, if the Eye Purſud back the upper Reſracted Rays ſ,diſferently from the lower, it is Prepoſterous and Abſurd to Think, it vould do it in the Direction of the lower3 We ſaid, if this Occaſion'd any Alteration, becauſe it is not Moreover Evident, that Rays, which Flow ſrtom the ſame Point, and are Reſracted thro' the ſame Glaſs, will Produce a diſſerent Poſition of the Point to the Eye; from all which it is Plain, that this Pnænomenon vas Wiſcly Suppreſſed by the Preſent Opticks. 5- 37. CONCERNING the Double Viſion of an Inverted Object thro' the Convex, couenin the Appearance is this, that, if the Glaſs is Placed any where, ſo as to Repreſent the stums miib Obiect Inverted, if the Eye is neat the Glaſũs, the Inverted Object will Appear Double,,, 4 or, if it Retires ſarther ſrom it to ſome Vards Diſtance, it will ſtill Appear Double, Douẽle ihrou but Diminiſied, and in a nearer Approach or Situation to each other, till by Degrees —u they ſeem to Coaleſce into onę; moreover, if the Right Eye is clos'd, the left Image Doſtrie. Diſappears, and if the left Eye is Shut, the Image on the Right Hand likewiſe Va- _5 . niſhes. lllitã 5. 38. THE Account or Explanation of theſe Phænomenons, which this Doctrine T&æ Expla Supplies us with, is from the Preſent Figure; 4 bc is the Object, gſ the Glaũi, fe à the n fſ ih foregoing Pl nomenons fr. theſe Princijl Diſtin Baſe, the Eyes n and m, which Meet the Cone of Raysææy; the Eye æ therefore is ſaid to Perceive the Point e, or b, by the Rays æe q, which Flow Forward from i el, and Conſcquently ſomewhere betwixts and ſ; for the ſame Reaſon the Eye m Perceives the Point e, or b, ſomewhere betwixt sand ę, ſince the Rays, by which the Impreſſion is made, are xe, or gehs from whence it follows, that the Point , or b, vill be Seen in two Diſtinct Places; and as the like may be Demonſtrated of any other Point, the whole Object will Appear Double; it will likewiſe Unite into one ſingle Repreſentation, at a greater Diſtance of the Eyes from the Glaſs, becauſc, the Rays e l, e p, Diverging Continually, they will at lat be Incident upon them, viæ. fſ on the Eye n, and e» on m, by which Means the Eye n will Perceive e at u, keu being one right Line, and the Eye m will Perceive the ſame Point e at r, per ben⸗ likewiſc one Continued Line, ſo that the Diſference of the Places 7 and æ becomes Ieſs than before, till at lat by a farther Removal of the Eyes, this Difference of the Apparent Places is ſo Small, that it is altogether Inſenſible to the Sightt. We muſt alſo Add, which the Preſent Opticks does not Obſerve, tho' it ſeems to be a mighty Conſrmation of this Account, that if the Eye is Removd to ſome Place betwixt the Diſĩnct Baſe, and the Convex, the Object will then likewiſe Appear Double, and if we Shut the Right Eye, the Image on the Right Hand will Vaniſi, and if the he left Eye is Closd, the Left Image will in like Manner become Inviſible, becauſe re h, in this Caſe, falls upon the Left Eye, and uel on the Right. 5. 39. FIRST, as to our Eyes Seeing the Point æ by the different Cones, or Pencils, æ e q, æe5, and thereſore f, or b, Appearing in two ſeveral Places; We Anſwer, that either the Rays are Purſu'd by the Eye no farther than æ, or they are Purſud beyond it; If the former is Affirm'd, ſince the Optick Axes do Concur and are Terminated in ę, the Point æ ſould Appear Single, by what is aſterwards Declared in this Philoſophy ; beſides, if e could in ſuch Circumſtances be Seen Double, on the Account only of æe q being Diſtinct from æ e, tho' our Sight ſhould be Determin'd in æ, it would follov that all Objects whatſoever, for they alſo ſend diſfferent Cones to the Eyes m and n ſrom the ſame Points, ſiould Exhibit a double Repreſentation oſ themſclves to us; Moreover, if the Eye Determin'd it's ſelf in æ, it vould be Impoſſible to Explain, how e comes to be Obſerv'd towards ę& and /, and even beyond the Convex gſ; If the laſt is Aſlirmd, the Eye m is carried in it's References towards ę h, and the Eye u towards à l, but then how the Rays, which Terminate in a Line, as g h, i l, honld Expreſs to the Eye no more than a Point, is Inconceivable; for ſince, vhen the Eye is Removd to a greater Diſtance from æ, the Rays æe, or æe q, are more Divergeing, and Conſequently, a 4h, or 5th, or a 1o1h, Part of them Perhaps are not Incident upon it, and yet upon their Refraction to the Retina, they are Capable of Exciting a Senſation in us, it will follow, that if ge h is Divided into 4, ors, or 10 Parts, each ol them vill be Sufficient to Affect the Eye; and if the Point in the Eye, whoſe Senſation is Caus'd by a Complication of the Various Parts of ge h, is not Referrd back to a Point in æ, but in the diſferent Parts of ge h, the Point in the Eye, by ſuch a Reſerence, will be Diffus'd into the Parts of geh, and b, or æ, will not Appear in a Point, but vill be Diſperſed and Scattered into ſeveral. 5. 40. AcaN, if the Eye Refers it's ſelf back beyond e, it will be hard to Say, where it ſiould Determine it's Purſuit; if at s, that is, in the Convex its ſelf, the Apparent Place of the Object ſiould be Seen there, whereas it Evidently is not; iſ we Affirm at b, the Plain Diſtance of the Object from the Eye would be the ſame as the Refracted, which is Contrary to Experience and this Philoſophy; Laſtly, if the Diſtance of the Object is to be Aſcertaind by an Imaginary Focus, here is none, if by the Concourſe of the Optick Axes, they do not Meet but Diverge, if by the Optick Angle aec, or ge I=to æe, it is Impoſſible, ſince that is Divided into three Parts, TWo ol which æ e q, ye æ, Fall upon each Eye, and ꝗæ æ, which Falls on neither, or if by any other Method Propos'd by this Philoſophy, it has been alrcady Confuted, beſides its Incapacity of being Applyd in the Preſent Circumſtance. 5. 41. WE muſt likewiſe Obſerve, that if the Eye Referrd it ſelf back beyond æ, the Object would Appear Larger and more Confus'd, than it Naturally is Repreſented, altho by Experience it ſeems, when Inverted, both Diminiſied and more Diſtinũt; That, according to this Reaſoning, it muſt Appear Larger, is Evident, for let the Cone of Rays ga l be Refracted to à, and from thence Proceed to Form another, upon the Eyes, as æay, one Part of which only is Seen by the Right Eye m, viæ. xd , which Referrd back will make the Point 4 Appear about ę, the middle Point b, by the Reference back of æey to ge h beyond the Convex, will be Seen at B, ſo that in this Deſcription, b a, which is half the Object, will Appear in B 4, which is much Larger than the vhole; Again, if gl is Reſracted to ſ, and from thence a Cone of Rays is Form'd upon the two Eyes, Namely æ ſy, Part of which, æfy, illonly Fall upon the Right Eyc m, which will be Referrd back in fs to C; ſo that the Image will Appear above twice as Long, as the Object it ſelf, when it ought to be rather Diminiſhed in that Proportion, and the ſame Argument Obtains in Reſpect of the Left Eye at n; nor can a greater Diſtance of the Eyes m, n Solve this, for where they are at a ſhort Interval from the Diſtinct Baſe, the Object is thus Diminiſhed; nor can a greater Diſtance of rthe Object from the Glaſs, becauſe in a very little ſiorter Interval of the Eye and the ilaſs than before, the Object is very much Increaſed, even where it Appears Inverted. S. 42. BESIDES, ſs Falling on one Side of the Glaſ, and ſeveral of the Rays, Conſequently, betwixt æ and b, upon their being Refracted to the Points between f and , and their Reſerence from ſe tovards s5, it vill follow, that one Part of the Object vill vill be Seen Refracted, whilſt the other is not, which is Contrary to Experience, and muſt Evidently alſo Produce a Confuſion or Irregularity in the Repreſentation, which is not Acknovledęd by this Philoſophy. 5. 43. Tns is Argu'd upon the Suppoſition, that xà is the Cone, which Falls upon the Eye from a, and is Referrd back from 4 towards Ię; but there isſtill another Scruple Ariſes in this Doctrine, Which is, that ęaſ is Refracted to 4, and Forms the Cone g41l, which Proceeding Tranſverſely, according to the Lavs of the Cones ge /, æe, vill Conſtitute the Cone æãt, from vhence it is Conſequent, that no Rays from a, after their Tranſverſion, will Reach the Left Eye n, ſince thoſe, which lie moſt to the Leſt, as æ d y, are Poſſeſſcd by the Right Eye, and therefore the Remainder - à 1 will Fly o without being Perceiv'd at all, and the ſame may be ſaid of the Rays, which Flow from the Point c; that is, thoſe, which are DerivJd from the Leſt Point of the Object, will not be Seen by the Leſt Eye, and thoſe, which come from the Right Point oſ the Object, will Eſcape the Right Eye; or, vhich is the ſame, the Left Point 4 will be only Seen by he Right Eye m, and the Right Point æ, only by the Leſt Eye n; For, if à æ can be ſuppos'd to Reach the Leſt Eye æ, either æ à: muſt be Equal to xàt, that is a Part to the whole, or elſe a Cone of Rays may be Bigger aſter the outmoſt Rays have Croſt each other in a Point, than before, which is Impoſſible. S. a4. Ir yet àæ could Reach the Eye n, æàq, vhen Referr'd back by the Eye, would be Directed to a Point, which would Fall at a very great Diſtance on the Right Hand of c, ſo that, the other Points betwixt a and  Obſerving a like Direction, ⸗ b vhen Scen by the Leſt Eye, would Appear vaſtly Larger, than when Scen by the Right, whereas by Experience they are nearly of an Equal Magnitude, and their Poſition is only Inverted. . . : S. 45. THERE yet Perhaps may ſeem to be ſomething Coincident with this Explanation, that in the Inverted Objeũt, if the Right Eye is Clos'd, the Left Image Diſappears, and on the Contrary, if the Left Eye is Shut, the Image on the Right Hand ulſo Vaniſhes; as on the orher Side, in the Erect Object, if the Right Eye is Shut, the Right Image Diſappears, if the Left Eye, the Left Image; from whence the Diſpoſition of the Rays, Aſerted in this Scheme, ſeems to be Neceſſary; becauſc gh, being the Reference of rhe Right Eye m, and Repreſenting the Left Image, and il being the Reference of the Left Eye »n and Repreſenting the Right Image, if m is taken avay, gh is, and if n, il is; So in the Erect Object, where the Eyes are Placed betwixt æ and gl, the Reference of the Leſt Eye will be g2h, which before was that of the Right Eye, and the Reference of the Right Eye will be il, which was before that of the Left, and Conſcquently, if the Left Eye is taken avay, gh vill be ſo too, and if the Right Eye, à  will, the firſt of which Repreſents the Left Image, and the Iaſt the Right. S. 46. BUT notwithſtanding theſe Phænomenons, which Appear to be the moſt Ingeniouſly Accounted for in this Philoſophy of any Thing I have Seen, yet, if ve have already ſiewn both before, and in this Preſent Figure, that the Reaſoning made Uſe of in theſe Opticks is both Precarious and Falſe, this Coincidence with ſuch an Explanation, which is Falſe in it's ſelf, cannot be an Argument, why we ſhould Believe it to be True; on the other Hand, what is Coincident with a Falſe Reaſoning will be a Juſt Perſuaſion to us to Think, that what is ſo Coincident is likewiſe Falſe, ſo far as ĩt Depends upon the ſame Principles. S. 47. WniCH is the Preſent Caſe before us, for altho' the Explanation given in S. 45. might Poſſibly hold Good, if we Conſiderd the whole Object æ be, as one Point b which that Section only does, it ill not yet be Juſt or Sufficient, where the Objeẽt is Suppos'd to Conſiſt of ſeveral Points, and thoſc ſeveral Points Impreſſed upon the Eye by Diſtinct and Independent Cones of Rays, for the Reaſons before Alledgd, and Particularly in §. 43. where, even tho' the Cones cannot be Incident upon the Eye, as is Imagin'd, the Tranſverſe Poſition of the Images is notwithſtanding Preſerv'd; thus Albeit there are no Refractions oſ the Rays from the Left Point æ upon the Leſt Eye n, and no Refractions of the Rays ſfrom the Right Point è upon the Right Eye m, yet there being Refractions from a to m, and from ? to n, the foregoing Phænomenon may be True, tho' the Reaſoning in this Philoſophy is Falſc. 5: 48. LAsTLY, S. 48. LasTLy, it is Evident, that if by our Principles of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces we can give a Reaſon, why the Eye in ſuch Circumſtances does Refei it's ſelf, as is Preſcribd by theſe Phænomenons, without the Aſſiſtance of Rays being Refracted in the Manner, which is Supposd, theſe Appearances can be no Plea for ſuch a Doctrine, which has been Provd to be Falſe; And this we Say may be done. 5. 49. As to both our Eyes Receiving, at a ſarther Diſtance ſfrom the Diſiinũ Baſe, the Rays only æ and , by which Means h and 7 will Approach to r and æ and at Length will Coaleſce in s, which is Suppos'd to be Agrecable to what we Experience, that theſe Inverted Objects, which Appear Double, will by a farther Diſtance oſ the Eye from the Diſtinct Baſe Unite into one; I ſay, as to this Phænomenon, we Anſer, that this Explanation of the Approach of the Images only Reſpects the Point 4, but what is Demonſirated Concerning that Point, is, as has been Evinced, far from being Applicable to the whole Object. 5. 50. LET us now however Suppoſe, that X and P are the Places of our Eyes, in Right Lines Continued from  and 2 and let us Conſider the Reſult from ſuch a Situation; it is Manifeſt therefore, that iſ the Rays from 4 are but Juſt Refracted to m, in the Cone xa, they cannot be Reſracted to ? at all and ſince the Rays from ⸗ are but Juſt Refracted to u, they cannot be Carried by any Imaginable Refraction to K; from which it Follows, that when the Eyes are Poſited in X and ?, all the Rays from the Points æ and  vill Equally Eſcape them, as, when they are Placed or Situate in m and n h and ꝓ are Confeſſed to do, by not being Incident on them, but if this Reaſoning is True, r and u Will be ſo far from being nearers, than h and j, that they will not in any Reference of the Eyes back to the Rays, which are Incident, be Perceivd at all. S. 51. THE next Propoſition we have no Reaſon to Conſider, becauſe, as ſeveral others, which we have Omitted, it Depends upon an Abſtractcd Reaſoning, that has been Conſuted; the Corollary of it however we ſhall Examine, which is, that the farther the Eye is Removd from the Diſtinct Baſe, it Perceives the greater Area of the Object, but can never See more, than what is Projected in the Breadth of the Glaſs; that is, æ7 can never be greater than gſ, nor ever Equal to it, unleſs the Eye o be at at an Infinite Diſtance; This is Concluded from Suppoſing a be the Object, ſæ à the Diſtinct Baſe, and the Eye in o; for the Eye can See no more of fed than ær, which is Intercepted betwixt gol, and therefore no more of the Object than x, which lies between  s x =xs. S. 52. IF thereſore gol is the Meaſure of what the Eye is to See of ſeà, and Conſequently æsx, of what it Perceives of the Object a be, the farther the Eye is RemoVd from the Diſtinct Baſe, as at 0, the more it will take in, borh of it and the Object, and at Length, at an Infinite Diſtance, 0g vill Fall Perpendicular to gl which would Interſect a Portion of feã Equal to the Diameter of the Glaſs ę5/; This Perhaps may be True upon the Suppoſition of the Doctrine of Rays, but it is not any ways Confirmd by Experience, and therefore is only a Right Concluſion from a Wrong or Falſe Hypotheſis; ſince, if the Object was Larger than the Glaſs, it vould be never, that we could See it Entirec, whereas it is Evident we do, at ſeveral Various and Changing Diſtances, or Removes, of the Eye from the Diſtinct Baſe, that is, if the Glaſs is Placed Two, or Three, Yards from the Object. 5. 53. O 5. 53. ON the Contrary, if o is made to Approach to fe à, it will Intercept a leſ”Portion of it than before, and Conſequently vill See leſs of the Object abc, whereas in Experience the Object Appeàrs much Larger than the Glaſs, and Inverted, when the Eye is Extremely ncar to the Focus, if the Glaſs is but Removd at ſome Diſtance from the Object. s 54. ANOTHER Propoſition in this Philoſophy is, that an Object being Placed nigher a Convex Glaſs than it's Focus, and the Eye on the other Side of the Glaſs, at any Diſtance within the Eye's Pover, it Sees the Object Diſtinẽt and Erect. The Demonſtration of this Depends upon Propoſitions, which have been before Conſiderd, and therefore does not Require a Particular Examination here; we ſhall Add to this Propoſition, that, on the other Hand, if the Eye is Placed betwixt the Focus and the Glaſs, it is alſo Sufficiently known, that the Object will Appear Erect and Diſtinct; and therefore, ſince, whether the Eye or the Object is Placed betwixt the Focus and the Glaſs, the Appearance will be the ſame, and ſince the former Caſe has been Conſider'd, upon that Account alſo, therc is Scarcely any Occaſion to Speak to the Latter. 5. 55. HOWEVER, we ſhall Alledge one Thing more Peculiarly in Anſver to this Reaſoning upon the Rays Emitted from the Object, which is, that in the Demonſtration Annexed to this Propoſition, it is ſaid the Rays ought to be Moderately Diverging, that is, not to Diverge too much, otherwiſe, by ſome former Propoſitions, the Eye will not be able to Collect them; Whereas the nearer the Object is Placed to the Glaſs, that is, the more Diverging the Rays are upon it, the Clearer and more Diſtinct it is Seen, and on the other Hand the farther from the Glaſs it is Situate, and the nearer to the Focus, that is, the more Moderately Diverging the Rays are the Object will Appear the more Indiſtinct and Confus'd, which is quite the Reverſe in Experience of what is Affirmd in the Demonſtration; ſo likewiſe, the nearer the Eye Approaches to the Glaſs, the more Diſtinct the Object Appears, tho' the Rays Diverge the moſt then. 5. 56. THE next Propoſition is, to Deienuine the Viſible Area and the Optick Angle, or Apparent Magnitude of an Object, Placed berwixt the Focus and the Glaſ, from an Abundance of Conceſſions, as the Power or Focal length of the Glaſ, the Diſtance of the Object or Eye from the Glaſs, and the Breadth of the Glaſs, but as the Deter: mination of the Viſible Area of the Object, and the Optick Angle, or the Apparen Magnitude of it, has been before Examined and Confuted in Reſpect of the Account Vhich this Philoſophy gives of both, ſo the Data or Conceſſions, which are Suppos'd of the Power or Focal Lengrh of the Glaſs, the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs, &e. are all Chimerical, and not Correſpondent with Nature or Experience by the former Section; ſince it is Plain by that, that Objects are not Seen according 10 the Pover or Focal Length of the Glaſi, or the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs, or the Diſtance of the Eye from the Glaſs, or according to the Breadth of the Glaſũ, but according as the Eye or the Object Moves betwixt the Focus of the Glaſs, and the Glaſs it's ſelf, and the Appearances are not much Alterd at any other Diſtance either of the Eye, or the Object from the Glaſũ. 5. 57. WE ſhall therefore Conclude this Chapter with a moſt Particular Admiration, that Men vill Suffer their Reaſon to be Inſulted by a Magnificent Show of Lines, and Angles, and, as they are Thought, Elaborate Calculations upon them, which, by what we have yet Seen, Alledge no more to Convince us of their Truth and Certainty, than that they Indeed make a Figure, and which may be Juſtly ſaid, not to Inform but to Amuſe us; and if ſuch a Temper ſhould ſtill Prevail in the Learned World, we cannot but Think and Pronounce, that, as Humane Nature, in the Common Occurrences of Life, is too much Influenced by Pomp and Grandeur, ſo in Matters of Reaſon and Speculation, it is likewiſe. I may Add, that in Geometrick and Algebraick Performances, Men Reaſon by Certain Rules of Art, and their Principles are Contracted and Narrow, which, when once Learned and Attain'd, make Geometry and Algebra an Eaſy Science, and therefore, whilt we are ſo Fond of this Kind of Reaſoning, in Preference to all others, which are many Times more Difficult and Hard, tho equally Demonſtrative and True, it may not be owing to our Vanity only, but to our Idleneſs. B b b b  u A V C H A P. XII. Concerning the Properties of Concave Glaſſes, Placed hetixt the Olbjett amd the Eye. 5. 1. HE next Sort of Glaſſes, we are Led to Examine the Properties of, are Concaves; The firſt of which Properties or Afſfections is, that all Objects, Seen thro Concave Glaſſes, Appear Erect and Diminiſhed 3 They Appear Erect it is ſaid, becauſe there is no Diſtinct Baſe Formd by them from a Collection of the Rays, and therefore no Inverſion of the Image, Excepting on the Retina of the Eye, which by what has been already Advanced, will Cauſe the Objet to be Viewd in its a Natural Situation; They are Affirmd to Appear Diminiſed from Tab. 32. (Fig.  u æ itſr.) axh is an Object, o o 2v the Eye, a eo, bdo, are Drawn Strait from the Extremities of the Object to the Eye, betwixt which the Natural Optick Angle ao b ll Is Contain'd, the Concare è ſ is now Interpos'd, by which Means the Concourſe oſ the tvo Lines a e, b d, will be Refracted beyond o, ſfrom whence the Eye will not Perceire the Extremities of the Object by the Rays ae, bã, becauſe they will be Refracted beyond o, and thereſore will not be Incident upon it, nor by any Rays External to a e, hd, ſince they will be ſtill niore Reſracted beyond the Eye in o, and Conſcquently the Rays, which are Refracted to the Eye, muſt be Internal to aæ, bã, as for Intance æf, b f, and vhich Continucd in Direct Lines would Meet in , but by the Refractive Power of the Concave are made to Diverge from thence, and at Length to Concur in 5, in which Caſe coſ is the Refracted Optick Angle, and is leſs than e oà the Natural one, and by Conſequence the Object in the firſt Circum. ſtance will Appear of a Diminiſied Magnitude, in Reſpect of what it will do in the Lan 5.2. As to the Erectneſs of the Object, Where there is no Diſtinct Baſe Produced, ot the Divergence of the Rays Refracted thro' a Concave, by which they are far ſrom being Collected to a Focus, that has been before Conſidered; and as to the Account, vhich is given of the Objects being Diminiſhed, it Proceeds likewiſe upon the ſame Reaſoning, which was made Uſe of to Prove, that all Objects, Seen thro Convex Glaſſes, are Magnify'd, Prop. 30. of this Philoſophy, and therefore, a Juſt Alloance being made for the Convergence of the Rays in the one Caſe, and a Divergence in the other, the ſame Arguments vill be Valid againſt this Account of the Diminution of the Object, hich were usd in the Former againſt the Inereaſe ol it. 5. 3. ArTER the Erectneſs of the Object and it's Diminution thro Concave ' Glaſſcs, the Diſtinctneſs and Conſuſedneſs of it, as alſo it's Faint and Obſcure Appearance, is Proposd to be Solvd, which is done in the following Manner; To make an Object Appear Diſtinct it is Requird, that the Rays from each Point ſhould be Endtly Collcẽted to ſeveral Points on the Retina, vhich cannot be Effected, unleſt the Rays Diverge ſo, as the Eye may be able to Unite them; (7ab. 32. Fig. 2.) s7 is the Pupil of the Eye, Placed at ſuch a Diſtance from rhe Radiating Point a, as to Receive the Incident Rays in a Proper Divergence to be Punctually Reſracted to the Bottom ol the Eye; if now the Puril is Set at a nearer Diſtance from a in the Poſition, which =ir, has to it, thoſe Rays, vhich are Reſracted vith a ]Juſt Diſtinction to the Retina, vill be Conſin'd to 4i; ad, ai, being of an Fqual Divergence with æ5 ar, which an are Suppos'd to be ſo Refracted; the ſame alſo vill be True, when Vifion is Performd thro' a Concave Glaſs from (Tab. 32. Fig. 3.) where the Breadth of the Pupil is ꝓ, and is Placed in a near Situation to the Glaſi, the Rays a2, a 7 vill Diverge ſo much, that it will be Impoſſible for them to be Refracted Diſtinctly to the Eye; but, the ſame Pupil being Poſited in s7, 45, a r arc Supposd to have à more Moderate Divergence, and by that Means to admit of a Collection in the Retina, and Conſequently æ d, ai, vhich have the ſame Divergence; This is morcover Thought to be Confirm'd by an Experiment on a Concave of a Small Sphere, which if Placed near the Eye, the Appearance of Diſtant Objects thro' it is Confus'd, if farther, more Diſtinct; and even, where Objects Appear Confus'd, Contract the Pupil by Placeing before it a Small Foramen, made in the Midſt of a Paper by a Needle, and the Object will Appear more Diſtinct, tho Obſcure, and not ſo Lightſome, or ſo much Illuminated, as if the Paper was not Interpos'd; and the ſame is ſaid to happen if an Object, without the Intervention of a Glaſs, Appears Conſus'd, by too near an Approach of the Eye to it, Namely, that ſuch a Foramen will Cauſe the Object to Appear more Diſtinct; Farther, if the Imaginary Focus of, ſã, ri, is in æ, the Object may be Seen Diſtinct in æ, ſince the Divergence of the Rays is ſtill the ſame; and as to the Strong or Faint Appearance of Objects thro' Concaves, Secing the Concave Scatters anc Diſperſes the Rays, the Object will Appear thro' it more Faint and Obſcure; a Strong or Luminous Viſion Proceeding from a greater Quantity of Rays, and a more Faint and Obſcure, from a leſs; What is Laſtly Remarked in this Doctrine is, that in Convex Glaſſes, the farther the Eye is from them, or the nearer it Approaches to the Focus ſince the Rays Converge the more, the Object Appears more Confus'd; on the Con trary in Concaves, the farther the Eye is from the Glaſs, the more Diſtinũt the Ob ject Appears, but ſtill more Faint, becauſe the Rays in ſuch a Caſc have a greater Divergence. j li j S. 4. IN Anſer to which we ſnall firſt Conſider, what is Proposd to us from Tab. 32. Fig. 2d.) where ſr and ài Receive Rays of the ſame Divergence, the Pupil of the Eyesr and ꝓꝗ being Equal; if therefore the Eye is Placed inꝓq, cither the Rays, which Flow from æ betwixt ꝓ, à and q, i, will have the ſame Effcct upon the Eye with thoſe, which are Derivd from a4 to the Space betwixt s, b and 7, ę, or not; If not, the Eye, Situate in 2q, will not be under the ſame Circumſtances, as when it is Poſited in s7, and Conſequently will not Sce the Object with the ſame Diſtinction, which is Aſſirmd; If they have the ſame Effect, the Rays aiq; adp, vhich Fall on the Pupil of the Eye in ꝓ4, vill make no greater Impreſſion upon the Sight than are, asb, which do not Fall upon the Eye at all, which is Impoſſible; For it is altogerher Unavoidable, that in Truth, 4 9, a i q, hich are Conſidered as nothing, ſould not Obtain a very Conſiderable Inſluencè in Rendering the Image Exttemely nditint and Confus'd, or rather in Entſrely Obliterating and Eraſing it; ſince eithcr B b b b a o of them are much greater than 4 di, and altho they cannot be Refracted to the ſame Point ith it, yet they will be Diffus'd at leaſt and Spread on the Retina, and Sceing the ſame will happen from each Point in the Object, there will be as many Rays Scattered and Diſpers'd to all the Points of the Retina, as there will be Rays Collected to them, ſo that the Confuſion of the Rays upon the Bottom of the Eye vill be as Forcible, as the Diſtinct Impreſſion of them; from Whence the Reſult and Conſcquence is Plain, that we ſhall either See the Object Confusd and Diſtinct at the ſame Time, which is a Contradiction, or elſe we ſall See neither the one nor the other, which is Contrary to Experience; For if aꝑ, a i q Produce no Effect upon the Eye, neither will æidã. S5. WHAT has been ſaid Concerning (Fig. 2d) is eaſily Apply'd to (Fig. 3à) Since the Reaſoning upon the former Figure is Introduced to Explain the Phænomenons of the latter, that which is ſtill farther Obſervable is in Reference to (Fig3d.) Compar'd with (Fig. 2à.) That in both Caſes the Rays, which Flov from æ are Equally Suppos'd to Cauſe Diſtinct Viſion, tho', where there is no Interpoſition of a Concave, the Rays Fall in a much Cloſer Order upon the Eye, than where there is; Allowing therefore, that 10 or 12 Rays, or 10 or 12 Hundred, are Collected, where a Concave Intervenes, and Double or Treble, or Ten times the Number, vhere it does not, it is Impoſſible to give an Account, why the Object ſould Appear Equally Diſtinct, or, which is Juſtify'd by Experience in Short-Sighted Eyes, more Diſtinct, when fewer Rays are Refracted to the Retina, than when more are; for Myopes See Objects without a Concave at a Certain Diſtance with a Sufficient Diſtinction, and yet with one ſhall See them with a much greater Clearneſs and Perſpicuity. 5. 6. As to the Experiment of a Small Foramen made thro' a Paper, I have found the Contrary, that if the Eye is made to Approach very near to what is here Written, ſo that it can hardly Diſcern the Letters Inſcribd upon it, if a Paper with ſuch a Foramen is Interposd, it is far from Aſſiſting us in a Diſtinct Perception of them, on the Contrary it makes them only Larger and more Confusd; I this were not yet Certain, why either the Pupil of the Eye ſould be Contracted, becauſc it Looks thr' a Small Foramen, rather than Enlarged, that it might Receive all the Rays Poſſible, which are Tranſmitted thro' it from the Object, which ſeems 10 be the Caſe, or, if it were Contracted, how it ſould be a Confirmation of this Solution, where the Pupil is not Suppos'd to be Contracted, but the Rays only to Fall upon a leſs Space of it, Excepting the Contraction of the Rays and the Contraction of the Pupil is the ſame, which it is not by the Reaſoning from the Preſent Figures, will be hard to Determine. S3. 7. Ir is likewiſe Aſſerted in . 3. that the Object will Appear Diſtinct, if it is Placed in æ, which cannot be, unleſs the Imaginary Focus is the ſame, when the Concave is Poſited in bfe, and the Object in ⸗, as it is hen Placed in the ſame b fc and the Object in æ, whereas in ſuch a Caſe it muſt Neceſſarily Aſſume a different one. S35. 8. ANOTHER Affirmation is, that the Object thro Concaves Appears more Faint and Obſcure, becauſe the Rays are Diſperſcd and Diffus'd in their Refraction thro' them, whercas to make an Object ſeem Bright and Vivid, a greater Multitude of Rays is Required; This has been in ſome Meaſure already Conſidered, and we ſhall only Add, that if the Brightneſs or Livelineſs of an Object was to be Aſcribed to the greater Number of Rays, which are Refracted to the ſame Point, there would be no Reaſon, why a Poliſed Piece of Steel, or Silver, ſould Appear more Luminous than that of a White or Black Marble, ſince we See both with an Equal Diſtinction, that is, the Rays from the Points of both are Equally Refracted to ſeveral Points in the Retina, and there cannot be any Difference in the Number of Rays, unleſs upon the Suppoſition of an Inequality in their Surfaces, according to the Account of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, which has been before Abundantly Confuted. 5. 9. BUT that which is ſtill more is, that this Part of ꝗ. 3. Endeavours to Account for a Phænomenon, which is not in Nature; Namely, that Objects Appear more Luminous and Lively, if they are Seen without a Concave Glaſs;, than if they are beheld with it, whereas the Contrary is Evident, for whether we Obſerve Ob jects thro Concaves or Convexes, it is Maniſeſt, that at a due Diſtance we Perceive them, let our Eyes be longer or ſhorter in their Views, with a fuller Clearneſ anc Brightneſs, than when we Obſerve them thr' Air; thus, thoſc Pictures, which thro' the Ail Air Appear to be Flat, and only bare Repreſentations of what we Imagine, by Convexes are Impreſſed upon us, both before and after an Inverſion in the Focus with a vonderſull Life and Vivacity, and in Concaves to the ſame Sight Objects are made to Appear, cither by Refraction or Reflection with a greater Force and Strength, than they would do in common Air or æther, which cannot be owing to any Thing, but to the diſferent Expanſive and Contractive Force in Glaſs, from that in Air, to Communicate the Impreſſions. 5. 10. MOREOVER, it is ſaid, that in Convex Glaſſes the farther the Eye is Removd from them, within the Diſtance of the Focus, the Object Appears more Confuſed, and in Concaves, the farther the Eye Recedes, the Object on the Contrary Appears more Diſtinct; This, if there were nothing elſe, would be a ſtrong Objection againſt the Philoſophy of Rays; for how in the ſame Eye, which Sees Objects Diſtinctly, both vhen the Rays are Converging, and when they are Diverging, a greater Divergence of Rays ſould have the Preference, in Repreſenting an Object Diſtinct, to a greater Convergence, is not eaſily Apprehended; that is, Iet there be a fixt Station of the Eye, in which it exactly Refracts to the Retina the Converging Rays, which are Incident upon it; let there be likewiſe one certain Poſition, in Which it will Reſract the Diverging with an equal Accuracy and Diſtinction; when it Removes from theſe Stations, it will be Inexplicable, why thoſe Rays, which Converge more, ſhould in a very ſhort Diſtance of the Eye from its firſt Situation be Reſracted with Confuſion, and thole, which Diverge more at a greater Diſtance of the Eye from it's firſt Situation, ſould be Refracted with Diſtinction; ſince Rays, where they Recede from each other, as well as where they Approach each other, ought to be Equally Incapable or Equally Capable of being Refracted with a Juſtneſs to the Retina, if the Eye is Placed beyond the Suppoſed Station of Diſtinũt Viſion. 5. 11. What we have ſaid in the former Section Naturally Leads us into another Inquiry, how Diverging and Converging Rays in General can Poſſibly Repreſent an Object Diſtinct; for, if the Eye is of one Determin'd Figure, be it Longer or more Depreſſed, according to the Difference made in it's Figure by this Philoſophy, it ſeems Unaccountable, that the ſame Eye, which Sees Objects Diſtin&t by Converging Rays, ſhould do it by Diverging, or the Contrary; unleſ”s the ſame Figure of the Eye can Refract Rays, which Flow from different Points, as in the Converging, and Rays, which Flow from the ſame Point, or the Imaginary Focus, as in the Diverging, to the ſame Individual Point in the Retina, which ſeems to be Abſurd and a Contradiction. 5. 12. WE are after an Account of the Diſtinction, in which Objects Appear thro' Concaves, led to the Aſcertaining the Apparent Place of them, which is Explain'd from (Tab. 32. Fig. 4.) where 4 ĩs the Radiating Point, c à the Concave, Which Cauſes the Rays to Diverge, in that Manner and Inclination to æ g, upon the Eye, as, if Produced Directly backwards, ſhould Determine the Imaginary Focus in b from whence, aſter ſuch a Refraction of the Rays, it is ſaid to be Conſequent, that the Apparent Place of the Object will be nearer than in it's Natural Poſition, and that thoſe, who are Short- Sighted, therefore See Objects Diſtinct thro' theſe Glaſſes, becauſe they make them to Approach Nigher to the Eye. 5. 13. IP this Reaſoning is True, on the ſame Account, that Rays Diverging and Return'd back to an Imaginary Focus, Determine the Apparent Place of an Object. Rays, which Converge upon their Reſraction thro a Convex, and are Return'd back 10 no Focus at all, ſhould Aſſign no Apparent Place to the Object, from Whence thej are Emitted; And therefore this kind of Arguing is either Falſe, or elſe Objects thro Convex Glaſſes are not Seen in any Poſition, which is Contrary to Expgien ,  14. AnI 5. 14. AND as to the vay oſf Accounting for Short-Sighted Perſons Seeing bettei vith theſe Glaſſes than without them, becauſe they make Objects Appear nearer; ĩt is a wonderful Method of Solution, to Infer, becauſe we See Objects nearer, as the Optick Angle is greater, without the Interpoſition of a Glaſs, which this Philoſophy owns that therefore we ſhall See Objects nearer, as the Angle of the Imaginary Focus is greater where a Concave Intervenes; for, unleſs ve can Reconcile the Angle of the Imaginary Focus of a Concave, vhich is Determined by the Rays, that Proceed from one Point of an Object, with the Optick Angle, which is made by Rays, that Proceed from different Points of an Object, which is Impoſſible, ſuch a Concluſion vill be Invalid, and Falſc. j 5. I5. BESIDES, it is very Unreaſonable to Preſume, that, where there is a Shon Sight, an Approach of the Object ſhall be alvays Beneficial to it, ſince an Object by ſeveral Means may be made to Approach, where it is not Beneſicial to it; as if ithout a Concave it comes too near, every Thing Appears Undetermined and Confuſcd, if with a Concave, tho' according to this Reaſoning Objects are nigher in all Caſcs than otherwiſe, yet it is Experience and Fact, and Acknovledged likewiſe by this Doctrine, ſince it Preſcribes a certain Diſtance from the Concave to certain Eycs, that they are not Seen in all Caſes with any Clearneſs or Diſtinction; and Laſtly, Objects may be made to Approach nearer to Short-Sighted Men, where it is of no greater Advantage to them, than to thoſe of a longer Proſpect, as in any Eminency, which is Situate beyond another, which, tho' there may be the Diſtance of ſeveral Yards, yet will Equally Appear to a Short Sight or a Long one, to be Immediately behind it; from which Inſtances we may Reaſonably Conclude, that a Short Sight does not always See Objects, as they are at a ſhorter Diſtance, or which is the ſame, that a Short Sight and a Short Diſtance are not always Reciprocal. 5. 16. WE muſt therefore Omitting the Forty Sixth Propoſition, go on to the Forty Seventh which is, that the farther the Eye is Removd from the Concave Glaſs, the Object Appears the leſs, and is Provd from (7ab. 32. Fig. 5.) becauſe the Object abe by (Fig. 4.) vill be Seen in def, and the Optick Angle àof; the farther the Eye in o is Reõm from the Glaſũ g/, will be in Proportion Diminiſed, and Conſcquently the ject. S. 17. BUT that which is an Invincible Objection againſt this Demonſtration is, that o f is Suppoſed to be Diminiſhed, as o Recedes from the Concave, upon this Imagination, that ào and ſo are alvays, without any Variation, to be Dravn in Diret Lines from à and f to o, vherever it is Situate,, Whenas even à and ſ, as e is, will be Varied according to the diſferent Diſtances of o; thus the Point b in the Object, for Inſtance, will Emit Rays, which by their Refraction in the Glaſs Diverge to r and q, Ilet the Eye be therefore here Preſumd to Receive thoſe Rays, and to Return them back to e, if the Eye is now Placed in o, it will Receive Rays, Which are leſs Diverging, and thercfore will Return them to a Point betwixt æ and b, and the ſamc Reaſoning Obtains in the other Points æ and  Referrd to 4, f3 from whence it Follows, that àe f will Appear Larger, inſtead of being Diminiſhęd, from a greater Diſtance of the Eye in o. s. 18. PROPOSITION the Forty Eighth is, that if the Eye be Removd from a Concave, ſo Large an Area or Space of the Object cannot be Seen thro' it, as before, (Tab. 33. Fig. 3.) abe is an Object, ęl the Glaſ, o a nearer Poſition of the Eye, and æ a more Remote, f is the Point of Divergence in the former Caſe, and 4 in the latter; if therefore Direct Lines are Drawn from f to a and , the Eye in ⸗ will See the whole Extent of the Object a be, if from ꝗt0 n, m, the Eye in æ will mly Perceive ſo much of it, as lies betwixt thoſe two Letters, Namely nb m, which  Maniſeſily leſs than ⸗a be. 5. 19. s. 19. In this Demonſtration it is to be Obſervd, that ſ and q, the Points of Di- æ rergence, are Preſumd to be betwixt the Glaſs and the Eye, and Conſequently, the m Rays to Diverge from the Glaſi to the Object, whereas in the former Propoſition , which we Conſidered, (7ab. 32. Fig. 4. and 5.) the Points of Divergence on the Contrary were betwixt the Object and the Glaſs, and Conſequently the Rays Diverged from the Glaſs to the Eye; but if we can make the Rays Diverge from the Glaſs to the Object, or from the Glaſi to the Eye, we can make them do what we Pleaſe; ſince, if the Rays m the former Propoſition are Incidet Converging to the Point, from which ihey Fall, and are Refracted Divergini, ſò that the Reſracted Diverging Rays ſould meet in a Poimt in an Imaginary Focus betwixt the Glaſs and the Object, it is Impoſſible; that they ſiould Diverge: iò the Objeqt, and hate their Point of Convergence betwixt the Glaſs and the Eye. ain i §. no BESIES, Suppoſing the Põint of Divergence might be on this, or the other ⸗ Side of the Glaſi, as the Former or ihie Preſent Solution ſonld Require, it will bes hard to Conceive, how the Eye in o or ? 7ab: 33. Fig. 3.) ſould Determine it's Viſion of a greater or ſeſs Extent of the Object hy the Imaginary Focus's in f and 4, which do not ſo much as Reach the Eye in either of it's Situations, and Conſequemly cannot, as it yer Appears, have any Inftuence upon ĩt. s. 21. Ir notwithſtanding the Eye at 0 was Placed in f, or the Eye at ? was Placed in , ſo that it might Effectually be Govern'd by the Optick Angle in it's⸗ Judgment of the Extent of the Object, yet the Eye in f would Perceive the Object Larger and in  Smaller, where the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſ is the ſame; which is not Evident in Experience, that in the ſort Interval betwixt ſ and q in the Poſition of the Eye from the Glaſs, there is ſo great an Increaſe or Diminution of the Object to our Sight, as the Proportion betwixt m n and æ c Repreſents. . 22. THE Optick Angle alſo is here Suppos'd to be diſferent, where the Diſtance of the Object ſrom the Glaſs is the ſame, but before, when it was made Uſe of to Explain the Magnitude or Diſtance of an Objedt, the Diſtance of the Object from the Glaſs was Suppoſed to be different; unleſs thereſore the different Diſtance of the Eye from the Glaſs is the ſame, as the different Diſtance of the Object from it, which this Doctrine Denies in the ſollowing Section, the Concluſion which is made of the Object Appearing Greater or Smaller, as ſ and qꝗ are leſs or more Removd from the Concave, cannot be Juſt even according to thè Preſent Philoſophy; not to Mention, what has been alrẽady Obſerv'd Concerning the Incompetency of the Optick Angle to Solve the Phænomenons of the Object's Magnitude or Diſtance. 5. 23. LastLY, it is Acknovledgd, that it is not the fame for the Eye to be Removd from the Glaſs, as for the Object, fimce in Moving the Glaſs from the Eye, the Glaſis Appronches the Object, and the Apparent Place of the Obict is Changũd, but imn Movingthe Eye to, or from the Glaſs; the Apparent Place of the Object never Alters; dnd yet a Famous Optician, and one of the moſt Sazacions Men of the Age, he Lived in, the Great Xepler, Endeavours to Prove tht ſamne of theũlaſs being Removd from the Eye, which is here Afiimd of the Eye being Removd ſrom the Glaſt, which Shows, how Complying this Doctrine of Rays is, which can Demonſtrate both the Sides of a Contradiction, that the Ruys are Refractet ſn the ſame manner, where the Apparent Place oſ the Objeẽt it Changed, and: ſhere it is not Changed.  24. Tu: 5. 24. TuE Laſt Propoſition, which Concerns Single Glaſſes Applied to the Eye, is that the farther a Concave is Removd from the Eye, the Objects are thereby the more Diminiſhed, as long as the Glaſs Continues nigher to the Eye than to the Object; this Propoſition is alſo ſaid to be Univerſally True both of Concaves and Convexes, unleſs that in the Convex the Object is to be nigher the Glaſs than the Glaſi's Focal Length, or betwixt the Glaſs and it's Focus; from whence vill Reſult this General Propoſition, that a Convex Glaſs, being Equally Diſtant from the Eye and from the Object, Renders the Appearance the moſt Magnified, and a Concave the moſt Diminiſhed, that That Diſtance of the Eye and Object will allow; This is Provd from the Preſent Figure, and Figure 5. 16. becauſe the Angle àoe or aoſ (which is the Angle, under which the Object Appears thro' the Glaſs) where the Glaſs is Equally Diſtant ſrom the Eye and the Object, is greater in the Convex and Ieſs in the Concave, than where the Diſtance between the Eye and the Glaſ is greater or leſs than between the Glaſ's and the Object; and therefore, when the Glaſũ ĩs Equally Removd from the middle towards the Eye, or towards the Object, the Appearance is Equally Magniſy'd by the Convex, and Diminiſhed by the Concave, for the Angle àoe is Equal, where the Diſtance between the Eye and the Glaſs is greater or Ieſs than between the Glaſs and the Object; This Doctrine is farther Demonſtrated from the Magnify'd Appearances of Objects thro Convexes, and their Diminiſhed Appearances thro Concaves, Deduced from the Apparent Places of Objects thro' thoſe Glaſes; for it is ſaid, ve may eaſily Conceive, that in the Convex Gla from (Tab. 34. Fig. 2.) and in the Concave from (Tab. 34. Fig. 3.) Suppo5 a ſing either of the Glaſes ęſ to Touch the Eye in o, and that the Apparent Place of the Object abæ is def;, the Eye Perceives the Object under it's own Natural tick Angle, neither Magnify'd nor Diminiſhed by the one or the other Glaſs; likewiſe if in the ſame Figures we Conceive the Glaſſes (which are Suppos'd of the leaſt Thickneſs Imaginable) to Touch the Objects, the Object and Apparent Place of it are the ſame, and Conſequently the Optick Angle in this Poſture can neither be Increaſed nor Diminiſhed by either of the Glaſes, wherefore it Remains, that Secing the Glaſes do not at all Exert their Effects in either of the Extremes, that is, either Touching the Eye or Touching the Object, and Secing they Exert their Effects Equally, being Equally Removd from the middle Point / between the Eye and the Object, it is Aſiirm'd, it will ſollow, that they Exert their Effects moſt Poverfully fully, being Placed juſt in the middle Point æ between the Eye and the Object, that is, the Convex by Magnifying, and the Concave by Diminiſhing the Ap;car ance. S. 25. THE ſirſt Thing, which is Affirmd in the Preceding Section is, in the Propoſition it's ſelf, that the farther a Concave is Removd from the Eye, the Objects are thereby the more Diminiſhed, as long as the Glaſs Continues nigher to the Eye, than to the Object, which from (Fig. 5. 18.) is Falſe; ſince there it is Endeavoured to be Proved in General, that Objects are Diminiſhed, as the Eye Removes from the Concave, ſrom nm being leſs than æc and if the Reaſoning upon that Figure is True, it Obtains in all Caſcs, where the Eye is ſtill farther Removed from the Glaſs, without the Exception Mentiond in this Propoſition, as long as the Glaſi Continues nearer i10 the Eye than the Object, either thereſore that Reaſoning is Unjuſt or this is not Truc. S. 26. NOTWITHSTANDING Which, the Univerſality of this Propoſirion both in Reſpect of Concaves and Convexes is next to be Conſidered, and the Reaſons Alledgſd for the Proof of it; The General Propoſition is, that a Convex Glaſs being Equally Diſtant from the Eye, and from the Object, Renders the Appearance the moſt Magniſy'd, and a Concave, being Equally Diſtant from the Eye and from the Object, the moſt Diminiſhed; and the Reaſons for it are from (Fig. 1. §. 24.) and ſFig. 516.) becauſe the Angle àdoe or ào f, where the Glaſs is Equally Diſtant from the Eye, and the Object, is greater in the Convex and leſs in the Concave, than the ſame Angle is, either where the Diſtance between the Eye and the Glaſs is greater than berween the Object and the Glaſs, in the Convex or Concave, or where the Diſtance between the Eye and the Glaſs is leſs than the Diſtance between the Object and the Glaſs, in a Convex or Concave. §. 27. Iris Evident this Reaſoning Depends upon that, which is Uſed in (Fig. I. §. 24. and Fig. 5. 16.) which ſince ve have Particularly Conſidered and Examind, it will not be here Neceſſary to Repeat the Confutation of it; And we ſhall only farther Obſerve, that de ſ is Aſſumd for the Object, which is yet no other than the Apparent Place of it, but how the Glaſs can be ſaid to be nearer to the Object than to the Eye or farther from it, becauſe the Apparent Place of the Object is ſo, want: an Explanation, Eſpecially, ſince in Fig. . 16.) à o f in the Concave, and the ſame may be ſaid of the Convex, is Adjuſted, as to it's Magnitude, by the Object a be, being more or leſs Diſtant from the Glaſs, without any Conſideration of the Diſtance of the Eye from it, which by what goes before, and is Argu'd upon (Fię I. and 2. 5. 3.) vill at a greater or leſ's Diſtance Receive the Rays in the ſame Divergence. 5. 28. OMITTING therefore this Demonſtration, which Refers us ro Figures that have been already Refuted, we ſall now Inquire into another, which is Propoſed 1o us ſrom (Fig. 2. 3. 5. 24.) Namely, that Suppoſing the Convex or Concave Glaſs ęſ to Touch the Eye in o, and that the Apparent Place of the Object ab⸗ is def, the Eye Perceives the Object under it's own Natural Optick Angle, neither Magnify'd nor Diminiſhed, if alſo the Convex or Concave Glaſs are Suppoſed to Touch the Object, the Object and it's Apparent Place are the ſame, and Conſequently the Optick Angle in this Poſition is neither Increaſed nor Diminiſhed; therefore, Seeing the Glaſes do not at all Exert their Effects in either of the Extremes, that is, either Touching the Eye or Touching the Object, and Seeing they Exert their Effects Equally, being Equally Removd from the middle Point æ, between the Eye and the Object, it will Enſue, that they Exert their Effects moſt Powerfully, being Placed in the middle Point æ between the Eye and the Object, that is, the Convex by Magniſying, and the Concave by Diminiſhing the Appearance. Bur if all this was True, the Solution would not be owing to the Doctrine of Rays and their Reſractions to a Convergence or a Divergence, which this Philoſophy Aſfirms, and which we are at Preſent only Concernd to Oppoſe, on the Contrary, the Rays are either very little, or not at all, Refracted, where the Glaſſes are Placed at the Eye, and where their Thickneſſes are Imagind to be Infinitely Small. Cc ęc Noæ Nor can this Reaſoning be Valid in it's ſelf; for if the Rays ire not Refracted, or are Inſenſibly ſo, there can in this Philoſophy be no difference betwixt the Object and the Apparent Place oſ it, and æbe and àe ſf vill Coaleſce, which are Preſumd to be in very different Situations. MorEOVER, if, when the Glaſs Touches the Eye or the Object, there is no difference in the Magnitude of it, inſtead of Concluding from thence, that in the middle Diſtance of the Convex betwixt the Eye and the Object, the Object will be Enlarged, and in a Concave Diminiſhed, ve ought to Infer the Contrary, that, ſince in the greateſt Remove of the Eye from the Glaſs, or in the Ieaſt, the Magnitude of the Object is not Changed, it will not be in any Intermediate Diſtances. LastLv, if this was Granted, that in Intermediate Diſtances it's Magnitude ſould be Increaſed in the Convex and Diminiſed in the Concave, yet it will be Impoſſible to give a Reaſon in this Philoſophy of this Exertion of the Glaſi's Power, and of the Glaſ”'s Power it's ſelf, unleſs by Attributing both to a certain Occult Quality, which tho' it does not Offer to Explain, yet in other Caſes it would make us Believe, it very much Deſpiſes the Aſſuming any ſuch unknown and Fantaſtick Principles. C H A P. XIII. Concerning the Propoſitions, which Relate to Teleſcopes and Microſcopes. 5. I. CINGLE Glaſſes Apply'd to the Eye was the lat Thing, vhich this Philoſophy Conſidered, the next is a Compoſition of theſe Glaſles in Teleſcopes, where the Object- Glaſi is Deſind to be the Glaſs, which is Placed towards the Object, and the Eye-Glaſs that towards the Eye; but if there be more than one, the firſt Eye-Glaſs is that next the Object-Glaſs; the ſccond is that next the firſt, and ſo on. S. 2. APTER Which Definitions, the firſt Propoſition is to Explain a Teleſcope Conſiſing of a Convex Object-Glaſs and a Convex Eye-Glaſs of a leſs Sphere or greater Convexity, (Tab. 35. Fig. 1) A B C is a Diſtant Object, which Emitts Rays ſrom the Leſt Hand-Point 4, a x, ajy, a æ, from the middle Point bx, by, bæ, and from the Right- Hand Point C, f x, c, and c æ, to the Object-Glaſs xy æ/, where they are Refracted to the Diſinct Daſe ſed; ghl the Eye-Glaſs is Placed ſo, that fæà and the Eye in o may be nearly in it's Focus, but the Eye rather beyond it, and Conſequently the Diſtance betwixt the Glaſſes is the Aggregate of their Focal Lengths 3 The Object, the Glaſſs, and the Eye, being thus Diſpoſed, the Eye, it is ſaid, will Perceive the Object 4 BC Diſtinct, Magnifyd, and Inverted. iſl. It will Appear Diſtinct, becauſe the Rays from each Point, being made by the Object- Glaſs to Converge towards the Image ſed, Proceed forvard from thence Diverging, and ſo Fall on the EyeGlaſũs; thus bx, by, bæ, Converge into æe, ye, æe and Croſling at e, Diverge tõ h, but æ being in the Focus, the Rays at h will be Reſtacted Parallel to the Eye in o by a ſormer Propoſition, and from thence are brought together in the Points on the Retina, according to what is before Deſ cribd Concerning the Refractions of the Chryſtalline, and the other Humours; In like Manner 4 x, aj, aæ, Converge to ã from thence Diverge to l, aſterwards arẽ Reſradted Parallel too, and at lat meet in 7 on the Retina, and the ſame may be ſaid oſ rx, c7, cæ, which aſter their ſeveral Reſraction: ro a Con vergence vergence, then a Divergence, and ſo to a Paralleliſm, at length Arrive in ſ. 2d. TuE Object will be Magnifyd from Tab. 35. Fig. 2) ſince if the Naked Eye were in the Place of the Object-Glaſs at , the Object would Appear to it under the Angle à5c, fyã, that is, the Object would Appear to the Eye at y under the ſdme Angle, as the Diſtinct Baſe ſea, were it an Object, vould Appear to the ſame Eye at y3 let therefore now the Diſtinct Baſe ſæà be Conſiderd as an Object, this Appears to the Eye at o through the Eye-Glaſs under the ſame Angle g0l, as were the Naked Eye Viewing it at h by a former Propoſition; Make e 7=to e h, and Drav hf, hã, and qf. qd, the Angle ſ ha, by another Propoſition, is Equal to gol the Optick Angle thro' the Teleſcope, and the ſame Angle fha is Equal to ſqd, but fqd is much greater than ſyqà ayc, the Natural Optick Angle to the Eye ſuppos'd at;, and yet much greater than the Natural Optick Angle would be to the Eye at o, becauſe o is yet farther from the ourward Real Object than & by the whole Length of the Teleſcope. 3d. THE Object ĩs Inverted from (Fig. I. Preſent ſ.) ſince the Diſtinct Baſe ſeã is Inverted in Reſpect of the Object, and thereſore 7s1 in the Retina is Erect in Reſpect of it, which will Conſequently make, by the foregoing Doctrine, the Object Appear Inverted. S5. 3. As to the Objec Appearing Diſtinct, ve may be Juſtly Allowd to ſay in Confutation of it, that the Original Diſpoſition of the Rays Falling from the ſeveral Points of the Object 4, B, C, Io as to Poſſeſs each Point of the Object, and to ſeem to Flow from it, is ſomething Extraordinary; for if 4 can Emitt Rays in that manner, that they ſall Appear to be Deriv'd from 4, 4, 4, there is no Reaſon can be Aſſignd, why it may not ſend Rays likewiſe to the Points b, c b, c which lic betwixt æ on the Left Hand and that on the Right, and Conſequently, why 4 ſhould not have as great an Influence in the Reſraction of it's Rays, thro' the Objet-Glaſs and the Eye-Glaſs, to the Eye or the Retina ofit, as B or C, betwixt the ſame Left Hand and Right-Hand a; for if it has not the ſame Influence, 4 has a Particular Impreſſion of it's own, which is Inferior to that of  or C, tho' they are Points of the ſame Object; if it has the ſame Influence, it will be Impoſſible to Say, how bb, cc have their Particular Inſluence upon the Eye in Diſtinction from it, which this Scheme ſuppoſes; and what has been Argud Concerning the Point 4, is Valid in Reſpect of æ or C. S. 4. Ir yet the Points 4, B, and õ, could be ſo Wiſe and Sagacious, as to Emitt their Rays in Diſtinction ſrom one another, ſo as 4 in Particular ſand the ſame may be ſaid of the Reſt) ſould Chooſc it's Place of Refraction to the Left Hand of b and ?, and then to the Right Hand of the ſame ſ and f, aſterwards to the Right of the ſame b and ⸗, and then to the Left of them, and ſo on, Suppoſing this Wonderful Sagacity in the Rays, they will be hard put to it to Contrive, hov they ſall come vith any Order or Diſtinction to the Eyc; a aa, bbb, ccc, are therefore now Suppoſed to be Derivd ſrom the ſeveral Points of the Object 4, B, õ, notvithſtanding vhich, if the Lefi Hand 4 is Refracted thro the Obect-laſs to 4, why the middle or the Right-Hand a nould be Reſracted to the ſame Point, rather than b, hich is Reſracted to e, or , which is Reſracted to f, is Unaccountable; ſince b and æ are both to the Left and Itight oſ a, vhich is yet Refracted to a Point to the Right oſ what either of the others are Refracted to. C c c ca 5. 5. LES 5. 5. LET us yet Imagine, that the Rays are by good Fortune or good Conduct Arrivd from a aa, bbb, tœc, to the Diſtinct Baſe à e f, why the Rays æ aa, bbb, c⸗; which lie in ſo many Planes, that Terminate at length in 4, B, and C, and therefore vill Coincide with a, b, , ſould rather be Collected from ſeveral Points in the Object-Glaſs x, j, æ, to one Point in the Diſtinct Baſe à, f, or f by Converging, than from one Point in the Object-Glaſs æ, y, or æ be Diſperſed to ſeveral, in the Diſtinct Baſe, 4, e, f, by Diverging, vill be Impoſſible to Affirm; for as the great Diſtance of the Object makes æ a æ Coincide, as alſo, bbb, and ccc in Reſpect of the Rays, which are Continued from the Glaſs to the Object, ſo likewiſe on the Contrary æ, 7, and æ ſhould Coincide too in Reſpect of the Rays, which are Continued from the Object to the Glaſs; and Conſequently there is no more Reaſon to make the Rays aaa, bbb, ccc, Flow from Single Points in the Object 4, B, C to ſeveral Points in the Object-Glaſs x, -, æ, than to make a be, a bę, a bc, Flow to one Point of the Glaſs æ, y, or æ, Suitable to what any one of them Separately does, and therefore they may as well in the laſt Caſe be Suppoſed to Diverge from either x, j, or z, as in the firſt to Converge from æ, &, and æ; from whence tho' the Rays ſhould come to fed, they would not yet be Capable of forming a Diſtinct Baſe, which always is Produced in this Philoſophy by à Collection of Rays to ſeveral Diſtinct Points. S. 6. WE ſhall now however Preſume, that the Rays come to fe à, and that they there Conſtitute a Diſtinct Baſe, thoſe notwithſtanding, which are Refracted from 4 4⸗ to 4, will not Neceſſarily Fall on the Glaſs at /, but may, for all that is Demonſtrated, paſs by it, which by the Proportion of this Figure ſeveral of them ſeem Actually to do, and, aſter their croſſing each other at à, to Proceed towards m; whereas to make an Object Appear Diſtinct, all the Rays, which are Refracted from one Point thro' the Glaſs, ought to be Tranſmitted to another in the Retina of the Eye; and the ſame may be ſaid of the Rays from ⸗cc. S. 7. LastLY, Suppoſing lo, ho, go, that is, the Rays Refracted from the Eye-Glaſs to the Eye in o, to Poſſeſs or Engroſs in their Progreſs all thoſe, which were Originally Refracted by the Glaſs ææ, and that they are Parallel in their ſeveral and Diſtinct Directions to o, yet this Doctrine cannot Account for the Confuſion of the Rays in the Pupil of the Eye, which is ſaid to be Neceſſary to a Diſtinct Viſion in the Retina of it; for to make the Rays Mix together in o, fę, e h, àl ought to be Parallel to each other, which is thus Provd, becauſe the Cone of Rays æfx or x d æ vill have ſome Ray or other Parallel to æ5 and Conſequently the Cone of Rays g1, ld, which Ray therefore will be Refracted to o, and the reſt of them will be Refracted Parallel, ſince ſ and  are in the Diſtinẽt Baſc. l S. 8. THE Fallacy of this Reaſoning lies in the Reducing all the Rays of the Cones gf and Id to the ſame Laws of Refraction, which are Obſerved by the Rays Parallel to the Axis, vhich are Acknowledged to be one only in each Cone, but why that Ray in Particular, which is Parallel to the Axis, ſhould Preſcribe a Rule to the reſt, rather than the reſt, or any one of them, to it, is not, nor is it Poſſible it ſhould be Explain'd, but if any of the other Rays, beſides the Parallel one to the Axis, is the Standard for the Refractions of the Reſt, they will not be Refracted to the Focus in o; Moreover the Foundation, upon which this Demonſtration Proceeds, that an Object Poſited in a Focus will Refract the Rays Parallel, has been already Conſidered and Confuted, and therefore cannot have a Place here, ſo as to give us any Solid Conviction of what it is Deſigned to do. S. 9. THERE is likewiſe another Explanation offered us of this Confuſion of the Rays in the Pupil of Eye, which ſiows, that the Preſent Doctrine was not ſully Satisfy'd in the Former; but this Depends upon Prop. sth. of this Philoſophy, which has been before Examined, and does not upon that Account Require a Particulai Confutation here. 5. 10. HAVING taken Notice of the Arguments Allcdged for a Proof of the Object's Diſtinction thro' a Teleſcope in this Philoſophy of Rays, we are next to Inquire into the Account, which is propoſed for the Solution of the Increaſe of it's Magnitude in 5. 2. Art. 2. where it is Affirm'd, that if (Fig. 2. 5. 2.) the Naked Eye is Placed at, the Object will Appear to it under the Angle æ- c =fyd, thai : is is, the Object will Appear to the Eye at7 under the ſame Angle, às the Diſtinò Baſe ſed, were it an Object, would Appear to the ſame Eye at. s. 11. IN this firſt Part of the Account of the Object's Magnitude, it is ſuppos'd, that a5c is the Natural Optick Angle, and Conſequently, that æbe is the full Extent of th] Object A BC, and therefore that aa a, bb6, ccc in (Fig. iſt. 5. 2.) are Ultimately Reſolved into 4, b, æ; if ſo, what is Argued in s. 5. is Valid, and we have here à Confeſſion of what we there Endeavoured to Prove to be an Apparent Weakneſs and Infirmity in this Hypotheſis of Rays. ] 5. 12. BESIDES Which, if æy7 was the Natural Optick Angle, ĩt is moſt Evident, that æ and ? muſt be the urmoſt Extremities of the Object, and therefore, that no Rays can Poſſibly Fall from ſuch an Object, unleſs to y; for if they could Extend themſclves to æ or æ, and be there Refracted, it would be Impoſſible for æ yc to be the Natural Optick Angle, ſince that would be Determin'd by the Refractions of a x, ⸗ æ, and the Purſuit of them back in a Direct Line, but if no Rays can be Refracted beyond 4 and f, the whole (Fi™. the iſt 5. 2.) is ſet aſide, where a 44, c c c, are ſuppoſcd to be Diſtinctly Refracted; either therefore that Figure, and the Reaſoning upon it, or the Preſent, is Triffling and Abſurd. 5. 13. Tuis vay of Proceeding in the Optick Demonſtrations will Oblige us to Drav a Compariſon betwixt the Preſent Philoſophy of Rays, and that of Small Corpuſcles, or Particles of Matter, the Abſurdity and Folly of which has been Suf ficiently Evidenced; For, as in the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, ſometimes the ſame Body or Subſtance is made to Conſiſt of Oblong Parts, then of Globular, afterwards ol Pointed, and ſo on, according to the Exigence of the Phænomenon, which is to be Explain'd, ſo in the Philoſophy of Rays, at one Time they ſhall Proceed in a Direct and Parallel Courſe, at another in an Oblique, Juſt as the Nature of the SoIution Requires, without any Regard had to the Reality of Things; which is noi only Manifeſt from Comparing theſe two Figures together, but from almoſt all the Solutions, which are given us in this Doctrine. S. 14. LET nov a5 =fyd be granted to be the Natural Optick Angle; That ol is Equal to ſh àd J fqd cannot be Provd, whatever former Propoſitions are Al feagea to Evince it, of which Propoſitions we ſhall not Repeat the Conſutation; we ſhall only farther Say, that if gol is Equal to ſh4, ſince fę, by what goes be fore, is the Ray, which is Parallel to the Axis he ſfor upon that Suppoſition fę& is Refracted to o by Fig. iſ.) gſh will be =to fhe =to goh, and therefore gſh will be =togo h = to g eh, and Conſequently he is=to gf, that is, the Direct Line betwixt the Diſtinct Baſe and the Glaſs ęſ, and the Oblique one betwixt the Glaſs and the ſame Diſtinct Baſe, which is Impoſſible. S. 15. BESIDES, if fę Was not Suppoſed Parallel to æ b, gol could not be Equal to ſha, for ſould the Object be greater or leſs than 4 B C, the Natural Optick Angle would be greater or leſs than 45 c = tof) à, and Conſequently the Sides, which Comprehend it, vould Suitably Retire from or Approach to each other; if therefore go h, hich is half of g0, ſould be Imagin'd Equal to ſ he the half of ſhã, in this Situation of the Rays, ſince ſg is not Parallel to he but Diverges from it, in any other Poſition of the Rays they could not be Equal, becauſe if the Ray yfę comes nearer to the Axis or Removes farther from it, in both Caſes, it will Intercept a a leſs Portion of the Diſtinct Baſe æ f than of the Glaſs gh, wherefore oh, hæ being Equal, the Line, which is Drawn from o to g, vhich is at a greater Diſtance from b, than  from e, will with the Axis Contain a greater Angle go h, than the Line Dravn from h to f will with the ſame Axis; For which Reaſon we may alſo Think, that goh, even in the Preſent Poſture of the Rays, will not be Equal to ſhe, unleſs o, being ſomething farther Diſtant from the Glaſs than æ, can Compenſate for this Inequality, which if it can, it yet cannot for the Itregular Interſections of ſe, gh by the Line f : Moving upon the Center5, Compard with the Variations of the Angles ſhe, go h, Formd by the Motion of the Lines og, hf upon their ſeveral Centers o and h, vhich Motions, according to what we have before Explain'd, will Reſult from Suppoſing the Object Bigger or Leſs than 4BC. S. 16. MoREOVER It is ſaid in S. 2. that g o I=fh à is Equal to ſqd by ConſtruQtion, but fqd is greater than fyã the Natural Optick Angle of the Eye Placed ar, und therefore much greater than the Natural Optick Angle, when the Eye e ſumed to be in o, becauſc ĩt is then farther Diſtant from the Object than in, by he vhole length of the Teleſcope; in Reply to which we muſt Obſcrve, that iſ ayc is the Natural Optick Angle to the Eye Situate inj, that is, if a5, c  are the butmoſt Rays, which Fall from the Extremities of the Object 4 and , it is Impoſſible there ſould be any Natural Optick Angle in , becauſe they would not be the ourmoſt, ſince a0, co, would be External to them; if æ4 , c are not the ourmoſt Rays, which Flow from the Extremities of the Object, there can be no Reaſon given, vhy Rays may not be Drawn from A4 and C to, ſo as to Comprehend a greater Angle than 4yc, as vell as to o, ſo as to Comprehend a leſs, and Conſequently 4yc will not be the Natural Optick Angle to the Eye Placed in. 5. 17. IF yet a oc was the Natural Optick Angle to the Eye in o, it would Prove 100 much, Sceing ſuch an Angle would be in a manner Infinitely Small in Reſpect of the Refracted Optick Angle go l, whereas Objects are not by any Teleſcopes Magnify'd in that, but in a Maniſeſtly Definite and a much leſs Proportion; for Suppoſing go ſ to be 30 Degrees, and 40c a ſecond of a Minute, Which ſeems to be the moſt, the Object will be Increaſed to 10800 Times it's Natural Bigneſs, which is not Experienced in the Largeſt and Beſt Teleſcopes, which make the Diameter of the Object Appear only 48 Times as Great, as when it is View'd by the Naked Eye, and the Circular Surface 2304 Times as Great. 5. 18. ON the other Hand, ſince in (Fig. iſt.) ax, cæ are Reſracted by the Glaſs from the Extreme Parts 4 and C, the Natural Optick Angle ſould not be, what is Expreſſed in (Fſg. 2d.) aoc, but a xoæc in (Fig. iſt.), vhich are widely Diſſfcrent ſrom each other. 5. 19. LastLy, in (Fig. 2d.) as the Object, iſ this Reaſoning was True, Approached, it would be leſs Magniſy'd by the Teleſcope, and as it Receded, more, vhich ſtoms to be Abſurd and Impoſſible; for in the firſt Caſe, the Natural Optick Angle ⸗ would be Enlarged, and in the ſecond Diminiſhed, whilſt ſhà = go l Continucd ncarly the ſame, that is, in the former Caſe there would be a leſs Proportion betwixt the Natural Optick Angle, and the Refracted, and in the latter a greater. 5. 20. As to the Inverſion of the Object, mentiond in . 2. by the Images being Inverted in the Focus of the Convex xyæ, that has been already Conſidered, and does not Require a Re-cxamining, nor yet the Apparent Place of the Object, which is Subjoined, as a Scholium to this Demonſtration. 5. 21. THE next Propoſition is to Aſcertain the Apparent Diametral Magnitude oſ an Object view'd thro' the former Teleſcope; in Order to which it is thought Neceſſary to Premiſe two Lemmas; the firſt is, that if the Eye directly Approaches to or Recedes from an Object, it will be as the Tangent of the Semi-Optick Angle oſ one Station, to the Tangent of the Semi-Optick Angle of the other Station, ſo Reciprocally the Diſtance of the Eye from the Object in this latter Station, to the Diſtance of the Eye from the Object in the ſformer; Which is Provd from (Tab. 35. Fig. 3.) in which ac b ſSee Scheme §. 23.) is an Object, ſrom whoſe middle Point ę, ææ is a Perpendicular to a4, the firſt Station of the Eye isat e, and the ſecond at 4, and the Proportion vill be, as cæ to cã, ſo the Tangent of the Angle a4c, to the Tangent of the Angle aec; for let ca be Infinitely Produced tovards æ, and æ æ be dravn Parallel to à4. the Angle æ ec is= to the Angle a , and ec being put for the Radius, æc is the Tangent of the Angle æec =adc, and ac is the Tangent of the Angle æcc; but as ce. cd:: æ c. ac, which was to be Demonſtrated. 5. 22. BUT this Demonſtration ſuppoſes the Philoſophy of Rays to be True, that the Object is ſeen by a, bã, and ae, be, and under thoſc Angles, which they Comprehend, whereas it has been before Provd, that all theſe Hypotheſes are either Falſe or Precarious, and thereſore, altho' the Mathematick and Abſtracted Reaſoning upon theſe Lines may Poſſibly be Juſt, yet, if the Lines themſelves are Arbitrarily Intro duced, ſuch a Demonſtration will not be any Thing to the Purpoſe of a Real Phi loſophy. 5. 23. AND ſor the ſame Reaſon the ſecond Lemma will Signify as little, which is, that iſ the Eye directly Approaches to, or Recedes from an Object, it's Apparent bigneſs Increaſes or Diminiſies, as the Tangents of the Semi-Optick Angles at the onc and the other Station; This is ſaid likewiſc to be Manifeſt from the ſame Figure; be becauſe the Eye at à Sees ac as Big, as the Eye at æ would See ær, ſince the Angles adc, æec are Equal, and it is a Max- z. im or Axiom in theſe Opticks, that thoſe Ob- : jects, which Appear un- i der an Equal Angle ſeem Equal, therefore the Eye advancing from f to d Sees ac as much Bigger, as if continuing at e the Object æc had Increaſcd to æ. 5. 24. ALTHO thSs VL/V Reaſoning is Anſwered :F by what goes before, i:]F0 we ſall yet Conſider the Particular Foundation of it, as it Depends upon the EquaIity of the Appearance of an Object, and the Equal Angle of it's Viſion; which if it were True, a Brighter or more Luminous Object would have the ſame Conditions in the Repreſentation of it's Magnitude with one that is leſs ſo, whereas the Contrary is found by Experience, and is Acknowledged in the Preſent Philoſophy, where in Proportioning Teleſcopes to the Eye, not only the Deepeſt Charge is Conſidered, that is, ſuch an Objet Glaſs, which will bear an Eye Glaſs of the greateſ Convexity, but alſo the Object we Contemplate; for Objects of a Sedate Light, as Saturn, Jupiter, &. will allow deeper Charges than thoſe of a more Lively and Strong, as Venus, Mercury, and Mars. 5. 25. BESIDES, even in Common Objects, with which we are Daily Converſant, it is Evident, that upon ſeveral Removals of them from the Eye, where the Angle is Manifeſtly Changed, the Appearance is not, as well as in Luminous Objects, where the Angle is not Changed, the Appearance is; ſo far is the forementioned Maxim from Obtaining in a Real and not a Notional and Abſtracted Philoſophy. 5. 26. WE ſhall therefore now, after this ſort Conſideration of the Lemmas, Proceed to the Propoſition it's ſelf, which is; That the Apparent Diametral Magnitude of an Object, View'd thro the Teleſcope before Deſcribed, is to the Apparent Diametral Magnitude of the Object View'd by the Naked Eye at the Station of the Objcct-Glaſs, as the Focal Length of the Object Glaſs to the Focal Length of the Eye-Glaſs3 This Propoſition is Aſfirmd to be Evinced by no Dioptrick Writers, neiier by Kepler, Galileus, nor Faber, and as to Dechales, He was ſo far from Thinking it Capable of a Demonſtration, that He Believed the Propoſition it's ſelf Falſe; what is ſaid to be done is, that they have Endeavoured to Prove it by Experiments and there Leave it, which is taken up by theſe Opticks and Pretended to be Fully Cleared and Explained from the following Demonſtration3 The Object- Glaſs x yæ (Fig. 2. S. 2.) Projects the Image of the Object A4 BC to the Diſtinct Baſe fæd; ghl is the EyeGlaſs, he the Focal Length of it, to which e q is made Equal, and the Lines h f, hd, qf, qd are Drawn, the Eye at o is Placed in the Exteriour Focus of the EyeGlaſs, and the Rays & fę, yã l, are Refracted by the Eye-Glaſs and Croſs at o;3 Where fore gol is the Angle, under which the Object Appears thro' the Teleſcope, but the Angle gol is=to ſfhd =to fqd, if therefore the Naked Eye were at 5, it would Perceive the Object under the Angle ſyd=ay, and thro' the Teleſcope under the Angle ſqd, the halves of which Angles are ſy?, fq e, which may be made Uſe of Inſtead of their wholes, as alſo ſe Inſtead of fà  by Lemma 24. the Apparent Bigneſi oſ the Object fe at the Station q, is to it's Apparent Bigneſs at the Station as the Tangent of the Angle ſ—]æ, tò the Tangent of the Angle ſye, and by Lemma iſ. the Tangent of the Angle ſãe is to the Tangent of the Angle ſye, as æ to eq5 ſrom whence it follows, that the Apparent Bigneſs of the Object fe at the Station qꝗ is to it's Apparent Bigneſs at the Station; as ey to fq; that is, as the Foea cal Lengrh of the Obje&-Glaſs, to the Focal Length of the Eye-Glaſs; but ę o h the Angle, under which the Eye Sces halſ the Object through the Teleſcope, is Equal to the Angle ſhe, or fqe, and therefore the Apparent Diametral Bigneſs of an Objeò Viewd thro a Teleſcope, is to the Apparent Diametral Magnitude of an Objeũ View'd by the Naked Eye at the Station oſ the Object-Glaſi, as the Focal Lengih of the Object-Glaſs, to the Focal Length of the Eye-Glaſ. Q. æ. D. 5. 27. THiS Demonſtratlon, it is Plain, Suppoſes the two Preceding Lemmas to be True, and Indiſputable; it likewiſe Suppoſes, rthat ſhã is = to gol, that a⸗ is the Natural Optick Angle, and gol the Reſracted; which Suppoſitions have been already Examincd into, and as ve Think Refuted, ſo far as they Reſpect the Preſent Philoſophy oſ Rays; All thereſore, which we ſhall farther Say is. that if other Optick Writers have had but little Succeſs in Solving this Problem, we have no Reaſon to Believe the Preſent Doctrine gives us any better Informations Concerning it, upon Which Account ve ſnall Diſmiſs it with the Reſt. F5. 28. ALEIT the Reaſoning Alledged in Confirmation of this Propoſition ſcem: Weak and Invalid, it will not yet perhaps be Superfluous or Impertinent to Conſider the Method of Experiment uſed to Evince it; The Focal Length of an Object Glaſ is given, and is ſuppoſed to be 44 Inches, and that of the Eye-Gla's 35 A Teleſcope Compoſed of theſe ſall make the Apparent Diametral Magnitude of an Object, to the Apparent Diametral Magnitude of the ſame Object View'd by the Naked Eye, as 144 to 3, or as 48 to 1, and in the Circular Superſicies of ſuch an Object, as the Square of 48 to the Square of 1, or as 2304 to 1; From a Convenient Scale thereſore take one Part and Deſcribe a Circle with it, and ſrom the ſame Scale take 48 Parts and Deſcribe another Circle, let theſe two Circles be Cut out in Paper, or any Conſpicuous Object, and Placed at 3 or 4 Feet from cach other on a Wall, at ſuch a Diſtance, as vill Require the Length between the Glaſſes in the Teleſcope but juſt 144+ 35 147 Inches to ſiew theſe Objects Diſtinctly, then with one Eye through the Teleſcope, Obſerve the ſmaller Circle, and at the ſame Time with the other Eye Naked Look upon the greater Circle, theſe two Circles ſhall Appear Equal to both Eyes. 5. 29. IN Anſwer to which Experiment we muſt Obſerve, what this Philoſophy it's ſelf Apprehends is a Diſficulty which lies againſt it, that the Compariſon is not Juſt between both Appearances; becauſe the Propoſition Suppoſes the Naked Eye at the Station of the Object-Glaſs, whereas the Experiment ſets the Naked Eye Diſtant from the Object-Glaſs the whole Length of the Teleſcope; This is likewiſe Own'd to be a Material Objection, were not the Diſtance of the two Circles from the Eye vaſtly greater than the Length of the Teleſcope, ſo that the one may not bear any Senſible Proportion to the other; ſuch a Solution therefore oſ the Objection, altho it will poſſibly obtain, where we Contemplate the Moon or Planets, yet does not ſcem well Adapted to the Preſent Caſe, vhere we View a Nigh Object, as Paper; on the Contrary, if the to Circles of Paper Appear Equal in the Circumſtances before Deſcribed, when there is a Senſible Proportion betwixt the Diſtance of the Object, and the Length of the Teleſcope, the Moon or Planets cannot Appear Equal in the ſame Circumſtances, when there is no Senſible Proportion betwixt the Diſtance of the Object, and the Length of the Teleſcope. s. 30. THis is Wiſcly foreſcen in the Preſent Doctrine, and therefore it Affirms, that there is no Senſible Proportion betwixt the Diſtance of the Paper and the Length oſ the Teleſcope, becauſe there is the ſame Diſtance of the ObjectGlaſs and EyeGlaſs in Viewing it, as there is in Viewing an Infinitely Diſtant Object; Which is ſ far from Clearing the Matter, that a freſ Diſficulty ariſes from it, Namely, vhy ve ſhould See Objects at a leſs Diſtance, and at an Inſinitely greater, in the ſame Diſtance of the Object-Glaſs and Eye-Glaſs, which Conſits of the Aggregate of both their Focal Lengths, and not only with a ſufficient Clearneſs and Diſtinction, but alſo in the ſame Increaſcd Magnitude with Reſpect to the Natural Appearance of them; However, ſuppoſing theſe Difficulties Surmounted, becauſe 147 Inches bears no Proportion to the Diſtance of the Moon from the Earth, which Diſtance is no leſs than 60 Semidiameters of it, or 220000 Miles nearly, it can be no Reaſon vhy the ſame 147 Inches, becauſe they are only 147 Inches as before, ſhall bear no roportion to ſome Yards, at vhich Diſtance a Nigh Object is Scen. 5. 31. BESIDES S. 31. BESIDES Which, this Experiment takes not the leaſt Notice of ihe Brightnels of an Object, which yet, as the Preſent Philoſophy Affirms, ought to come into the Account; if therefore it were True in Reſpect of theſe Circles of Paper. the following Calculation, which Reduces the Appearance of the Moon to the ſame Proportion of 43 in it's Diameter, when Seen thro a Teleſcope to 1, vhen Viewd by the Naked Eye, cannot be Juſt, unleſs the Brightneſs of the Moon is no more, not greater, than that of an Object, which is barely Diſtinct and Viſible, as Paper. 5. 32. LastLy, it is Evident, that if we take one Convex, and View an Object thrò' it at a certain Diſtance, it will Magnify it in a Determin'd Proportion, which at a farther Diſtance of the Object it ill not; why therefore Two Convexes ſhould have ſuch a Peculiar Property, as to Magnify an Object in the ſame Proportion at many Thouſand Miles Diſtance, as when it is only ſome few Yards Removd from us, is Inconceivable, and Unexplain'd. S. 33. THE Calcularion notwithſtanding, which is uſed to Prove Diſtant Objects Reducible to the foregoing Experiment, is Formd from (Tab. 35. Fig. 4.) which Proceeds upon the ſame Principles, which are Aſſerted in (Tab. 35. Fig. 2.) an Accournt of which has been given in ſ. 26. and are ſiown in §. 27. to be Incompetent and Invalid; ſo that, if even the Preceding Experiment was Really Applicable to Diſtant Objeſts, yet that Proportion, which it Affirms of 48 to I, could not be made out by a Juſt and fair Computation, ſince the Grounds, upon Which it Depends are not cither Accurate or True, we ſhall therefore now go on to Examine the Corollaries, which are Deduced from this Propoſition. 5. 34. THE firſt Corollary, which is Inferred from it is, that if the ſame ObjectGlaſs æyæ (Fig. 2. §. 2.) is at one time Combin'd with an Eye-Glaſs, whoſe Focus æ h or oh ĩs 1, and at another time with an Eye-Glaſs, whoſe Focus eh or oh is 2, the firſt Teleſcope will Magnify twice as much, as the Latter, I Suppoſe, becauſe the Angle fhe =goh or the Subtenſe h =fe will be Double in the one Caſe of what it is in the other, vhen on the Contrary hæ or o h is Reciprocally but half. 5. 35. LET therefore he and ho be Increaſed to twice their Length, that is, let the Glaſs be Placed in o, and the Eye as far Diſtant from the Glaſs, as the Glaſs from the Diſtinct Baſe, and let us then Conſider the Conſequences of ſuch a Situation; and firſt fꝗ, and àl, would not be Propagated in a ſtrait Line from & to the ObjectGlaſs ghl, for ſince yfę, y àl Continually Diverge, if ghl is Poſited at a greater Diſt ance than in the Preſent Scheme, it muſt Neceſſarily fall within the Rays, which Recede more from each orher than before, when they were Incident upon it, and Conſequently fę, and à, Continued will not touch the Glaſs ghl, and the Natural Optick Angſe ſy àda yc will be wanting, with which the Refracted one is Suppoſed to be Compard; if yfg. yãl are not ſtrait Lines, they muſt be Bent and Refracted to the Eye-Glaſs in o, from the Points ſ and 4, which is Impoſſible, un leſs the Diſtinct Baſc feã has a Power of Refracting, as well as the Object-Glaſs x y æ, which will not, I Preſume, be Acknowledged; or Laſtly, if in (Fig. 1.ſ) ſome of the Innermoſt Rays oſ fę ã l, may Poſſibly Fall on the Eye-Glaſs at o, the Object will not be Diſtinctly Repreſented to the Eye, where all the Rays from the Diſtinct Baſe are not Collected to it. 5. 36. MOREOVER, Suppoſing the larter Poſition of the Glaſs and Eye to be Expreſſed by gq, where h is the Double of o h, and the Angle at the Circumſerence gq, half of the Angle at the Center gel, if the Object is Seen Single at the Circumference, and Double at the Center; in the Firſt Place,  and muſt be Preſumd to be the ſame Unvaried Points, which by the Preceding Section, it is Impoſſible they ſould be, and in the ſecond, the Received Axiom in Opticks muſt likewiſe be Allowed that Objects Seen under the ſame Angle are Equal, and Conſequently under Double ones Increaſed in aDouble Proportion, which Axiom has been already Diſproved. S. 37. THE Second Corollary is, that in two Teleſcopes of different Lengths, il the Focus of the Eye-Glaſss of the ſorter bears the ſame Proportion to the Focus of it's Object-Glaſs, as the Focus of the Eye-Glaſs of the longer bears to the Focus oſ it's Object-Glaſs, theſe two Teleſcopes Magnify Equally ; which is indeed à Neceſſary Conſequence of the Preſent Reaſoning, becauſe what is Demonſtrated in (Fię. 2. 5. 2.) will Obtain in a greater or leſſer Length of the Scheme, where the ſame Proportions are Obſerv'd. D d dd 5. 38. O 5. 38. ON the Contrary, as ſuch a Reaſoning has been Evidenced to be Falſe, ſo it is alſo Confuted from ſo Abſurd a Deduction from it; for if this were True, it is very Evident, that there would be no Occaſion to Enlarge Teleſcopes to ſo Prodigious a Length, as 30, 40, 50, or 100 Feet, &c. However, to Solve this Objection it is Aſfirmd, that Object-Glaſſes of a ſorter Focus will not bear Proportionally Eye Glaſes of ſuch ſort Focus's, without Colouring the Object, and Rendering it Dark, as Object-Glaſſes of longer Focus's; thus, if a good Object Glals of 12 Foot Focus vill Receive an Eye-Glaſs of no ſorter Focus than 3 Inches, with any Clearneſs and Diſtinction, an Object-Glaſs of 24 Foot Focus of the ſame Goodneſs or Perſcòion ſall Receive an Eye-Glaſs of leſs than 6 Inches with an Equal Clearneſs and Diſtinction, and perhaps, it is ſaid, it may take an Eye-Glaſs of 5 or 4 Inches Focus; if ſo, an Objec&t- Glaſs of 12 Foot with an Eye Glaſs of; Inches Magniſies but 48 Times, whereas an Object-Glaſs of 24 Foot with an Eye-Glaſs of 4 Inches Magnifies 72 Times, Namely, ; more than the former; it is Conſeſſed indeed, that the longeſt Teleſcopes do generally Render the Objects more Dark and Obſcure, yet when ſhorter Glaſſes have Proportionably, as ſhort Eye-Glaſſes, and as Cloſe Apertures, they are more Obſcure than the longer Teleſcopes. 5. 39. IN the Beginning of the former Solution we have this Aſſertion, that Object-Glaſſes of a ſhorter Focus will not bear Proportionably Eye-Glaſſes of ſuch ſort Focuss, without Colouring the Object and Rendering it Dark, as Object-Glaſes oſ longer Focus's, and this is the very Reaſon given, why longer Teleſcopes are better than ſhorter, notwithſtanding which, at the latter End of the ſame Solution, Truth and Matter of Fact Extorts a quite different Confeſſion from this Doctrine, that the Iongeſt Teleſcopes do generally Render the Objects more Dark and Obſcure. 5. 40. HOWEVER, it muſt be Acknovledged, that this laſt Affirmation is with ſome Reſtrictions, for it is Added, where ſnorter Object-Glaſſes have Proportionably as ſort Eye-Glaſſes, and as cloſe Apertures, they are more Obſcure than longer Teleſ copes; but as the Apertures of Glaſſes are Introduced, which are not yet Explaind it does not ſeem to be any ways Pertinent here, where the Length and Shortneſs of the Teleſcope is only Conſiderable, and if that is done, by the foregoing Section the Longeſt Teleſcopes Render Objects more Dark and Obſcure altho the Reaſon Alledged, why the Longeſt are Preferrable to the Shorteſt, is, becauſe the Shorteſt Render Objects more Dark and Obſcure; beſides, ĩt is aſterwards Acknovledged in this Philoſophy, that the Viſible Area of an Object is not Increaſcd, or Diminiſied, by the Greater or Leſſer Aperture of the Glaũ. S. 41. BUT that, which is ſtill more, is, that by this Propoſition Longer or Shorter Teleſcopes, in the forementiond Circumſtances, ſould Magnify Equally, and the Reaſon Aſſign'd, vhy this does not Prevail in Experience, is, becauſe Objects Appear more Dark and Obſcure, or elſe Coloured, in Shorter ones than in Longer, when we are not at all Informd, why the Obſcurity, or Colours, of an Object ſnould Diminiſh the Magnitude of it, and it is Impoſſble to tell us, why they ſould; ſince it is Notorious and Maniſeſ, that Objects of one Colour, or another, may Preſerve their Proper Dimenſions. S. 42. LastLy, ſuppoſing the Obſcurity, or Colours, of an Object Changed the Dimenſions of it, this Conceſſion it ſel? would Prove, that Shorter Glaſſes, whoſe Focal Lengths have the ſame Proportion to each other as Longer, do not Magniſy Equally, which is the very Thing, which the Preſent Propoſition, and this ſecond Corol lary of it, Affirms. S. 43. A Second Solution, Which is Offered of the Diſſiculty mention'd in s. 37. is, that the Image of the Moon, or other Object, in the Diſtinct Baſe of the Object-Glaſs of 24 Foot, is twice as long as the Image in the Diſtinct Baſc of an Object-Glaſs of 12 Foot, and therefore the Picture in the Former muſt be much more Diſtinct and Perfect than in the Latter. 5. 44. VHICH Solution comes to this, that by the foregoing Propoſition, and the Corollary of it, Longer or Shorter Glaſſes, if they bear the ſame Proportion in the Length of their Focus's, will Repreſent the Object in the ſame Magnitude, but rhe Reaſon in Fact, that they do not, is, becauſe an Object-Glaſs of 24 Foot Magnifies twice as much as one of 12, that is, the Reaſon, why this Propoſition, and its Corollary rollary, does not hold is, becauſe it is Manifeſtly Contradicted by Experience, which if it is not a Confutation of it, nothing elſe can be. 5. 45. THE Third Corollary to this Propoſition is, that, if the Object- Glaſs be Form'd on a leſs Sphere, for Inſtance, whoſe Radius is 6 Inches, than the Eye Glaſs, whoſe Radius is 12, the Appearance of the Object will be Diminiſhed, and in this Caſc will be half the Natural Appearance of the ſame Object; becauſe, Suppoſing the Object-Glaſs æ in q, (Fig. 2. 5. 2.) the Radius fq 6 Inches, and 0h the Radius of the Eye-Glaſ”is gſ likeviſe 6 Inches; ſe à will be the Diſiinct Baſe, ſince in a Double Convex of Equal Convexities, the Focus is at the Diſtance of the Radius or Semidiameter of cither; the Natural Optick Angle ill alſo be ſqd =fhd =gol the Refracted Optick Angle, and thereſore the Object will Appear Equal, when Looked upon by the Bare Eye, or thro' the Teleſcope; Let the Eye be Removd to m, ſo that m h may be 12 Inches,  to the Semidiameter of the Eye-Glaſi's Convexity, and Double of oh or æq the Semidiameter of the Object- Glaſ's Convexity, gml vill be the Refracted Optick Angle, which, by what goes before, is ſaid to be the half of go IZ fqd the Natural Optick Angle; from whence it follows, that the Object, thro' ſuch a Teleſcope, will ſeem Leſs by half, than vhen Viewd by the Naked Eye. 5. 46. IF this is the Demonſtration Intended, for we have been Obliged to Supply what was wanting in this Philoſophy, and we do not at Preſcnt See any other; We Anſwer, that the Propoſition Referr'd to of Double Convexes, Determining their Focus at the Diſtance of their Semidiameter, as well as all the other Particulars of the Preſent Propoſition, and the Scheme Annexed to it, have been before Examined, as likewiſe gm l being only the half of go l, all which lic againt what is Advanced in the Preceding Section. ] S. 47. To which we may Subjoin, that if the Glaſs is Suppoſcd to be in q, it is Impoſſible, that 57, q ſhould ever Arrive at ę& or /, unleſs they are Broken and Refracted in ſ and ã to a Prodigious Degree, which it is not Allowed to be a Property in the Diſtinct Baſc to Effect; Moreover, that any Teleſcope ſould Repreſent an Object in the ſame Magnitude, in which it is Seen without the Interpoſition of Convexes, cannot be Conceiv'd; not even in the Preſent Caſe; for if fꝗd is the Natural Optick Angle, it is not to be Imagined, that gol =fqd can be the Refracted one, unleſs the Rays, which Flow from feã, which is here Conſidered as the Object, are not Refracted by the Convex gl, or, if Refracted, do' not Form à diſferent Angle from what they would do, if they were not; which on cither Hands is Abſurd, according to the very Notions and Principles of this Philoſophy. S. 48. To Conclude upon this Propoſition, and it's Corollaries, Hugens is Thought to have Demonſtrated, that an Object, Seen thro a Teleſcope, is to that, which is Perceivd by the Naked Eye, in the Diameters oſ both, as the Diſtance of the Focus of the Object-Glaſs to the Diſtance of the Focus of the Eye-Glaſs, which, if True, would be an Admirable Propoſition Indeed; ſince by making the Diſtance of the Focus oſ the Object-Glaſs Infinitely Great in Reſpect of the Diſtance of the Focus of the Eye-Glaſs, Objects would be Infinitely Magnify'd, and there would be nothing more vanting to the Perfection of Teleſcopes; vhereas it is Suſficiently known, that there is a great deal wanting to Complete that Sublime Theory; and therefore this, as well as the reſt of that Ingenious Perſon's Opticks, ſince they Proceed npon the ſame Foundations as the Preſent, are nothing more than an Abſtracted Reaſonme. ſ . , 5. 49. NoR is it enough to Say, vhat another Philoſophy Offers, that the main Cauſe of the Imperſection of Teleſcopes is owing to the different Reſrangibleneſs in he Ravs of Light; Seeing the Chimerical Contrivance of ſuch a Doctrine has been already Shewn, and the Project of Refiecting Teleſcopes has had ſo little Succeſs. 5. 50. BESIDES, i Colours were Introduced in Teleſcopes of a larger Size by the diſferent Refrangibleneſs oſ the Rays, it would be an Evident Confutation of Hugens; vho only Conſiders one Sort of Rays to be Reſracted in his Demonſtration of this Propoſition, as well as in all his Opticks. l D d d d2 urit 5. 51. FARTHER S. sI. FARTHER, it is Acknowledged in Experience, that Convex Glaſes, whether Lights are differently Refrangible, or not, do Refract Rays ſo, as to make therò of the ſame Uniform Appearance; how therefore the ſame Convex Glaſies in Teleſcopes ſhould Produce Colours, or Rays of a Difform Appearance, ſhould be Demonſirated; as alſo, hy common Window-Glaſſes, and all others of what Figure or Dimenſions ſoever, do not Produce the ſame Effect of Colours, which, by the Manuſcript I have Seen that undertakes it, is not done; And nothing, that I know of, has been Oſfered ro the World from the Author of this Hypotheſis upon that Subject, Which can be ſaid to be in the Ieaſt Convincing; Which is nor Wonderful, ſince, as we have Provd, the Hypotheſis it ſelf is Falſe; and therefore we ſhall not Trouble our Selves Particularly to Inquire into the Explanations of that Doctrine, as it is Apply'd 1o Teleſcopes. 5. 52. TuE next Thing Obſervable in this Philoſophy of Rays is, the Rule which is given for Finding out and Determining the Angle Receivd by a Teleſcope of the foregoing Combination, which is ſFig. 2. 5. 2.) as hy the Diſtance of the Glaſſes, to gh half the Breadih of the Eye-Glaſ, ſo the Radius, to the Tangent of the Angle gyh, which is half of the Angle yſ=to the Angle Receivd by the Teleſcope3 That is, the Eye at o ſall Perceive no more of the Object than Subtends this Angle at the Object-Glaſs. S. 53. I) this Demonſtration is True, Either go lI= fqd is Equal to ę7 l J fy d, which is both Impoſſible by the Elements of Euclid, and. Contradicts this Philoſophy, which Aſſigns it as a Reaſon for the Object's being Magnifyd, becauſe ſꝗ à to the Refracted Optick Angle ęol, is greater than the Natural Optick Angſe =fyã; Or elſe, gol, which is greater than ę yl, Repreſents the Object in the ſame Magnitude, which is again Contrary to this Philoſophy; ſince Objects are greater or leſs in Appearance, according to the different Angles, under which they are Seen; that is, the Objet in the Angle ę ol is Viewq under the Angle ę;l, which is Abſurd. 5 54, I] yet g5ſ was the Standard for the Viſion of the Object, ſo that there ſould be no more Scen of it, than what it Preſcrib'd, and was therefore =to gol, all the Diſficulties are 1o be Solved, which are before Mention'd, of gl being the Natural Optick Angle. 5. 55. THE firſt Scholium annexed to the foregoing Propoſition is, That if the Eye Approaches nigher to, or Recedes farther from, the Eye-Glaſs ghl, (5. 2. Fig. 1) than it's Focus at o, it ſall Perceive a leſer Area of the Object, tho what it Sces ſhall be as Diſtinct as at o; for if the Pupil of the Eye is at m, the Rays go, Io, do not enter the Eye, and Conſcquently the Points in the Object Anſwerable to ſ; 4, in the Diſtinct Baſe ſhall not be Viſible; The ſame, it is ſaid, may be Conceivd if the Eyo Recedes farther from the Eye-Glaſs than o, becauſe all the Rays ſrom the ſeveral Points in the Object are Mixt together and Interſect each orher at o, in the Focus of the Eye-Glaſs, and from thence Flowing forward Separate and Diverge; but then the Eyo at m Receives the Rays, that onter it Parallel, or very little Diverging, and Conſequently the Viſion is Diſtinct. 5. 56. In is ſaid, that the Object Appears leſs, when the Eye is at m, or be yond o towards s, becauſe go, lo, or, o1, ro, do not Fall on the Pupil of the Eye in ſuch a Situation; but if ſo, the Object, by this Explanation, will not Appear leſs, but Curtaild, and Maimed of the Extreme Parts of it; ſo that feã will not be Seen in it's Perſection, and only Diminiſhed in Reſpect of it's Dimenſions; but, as ſ and a are loſt to the Sight by this Account, ſo will ſeveral other Intermediate Points betwixt f and e, and d and e; from whence it vill ſollow, that æ æ, the Diſtinction ol the Preſcnt Object from other Parts of it, may likowiſe Diſappear, which will be far from Informing us, how the Object may be Diminiſhicd and yet Diſtinct, where ſeveral Parts are Obliterated and Eraſed out of the Image. 5. 57. MoREOVER, if any of the Rays of ęo, which are neareſt the Axis, or any next towards them betwixt g2 and h, or any from i and 4 which are near the Ray: h o, ould be Refracted to m they will make a greater Angle than go/, and Conſe quently the Object will not Appear Diminiſhed, but Increaſed; if none but the Ray: ho enter the Eye at m, they will not form any Angle at all, becauſe they are Sup poſed to be Reſracted Parallel, and therefore will not Repreſent much more of the Obiect than ſome few Points of it on cach Side of f, that is, ſo much as the Ray: hi bo, Referr'd back in ſtrait Lines, will Interſect; from Whence the Objet will not Appea? Diminiſhed in it's Dimenſions, but, as before in 5. 56, Curtaild and Imperfect. 5. 58. THE ſccond Scholium is, that the Angle Receivd, or Viſible Area of the 7 sna Objeqt, is not Increaſed or Diminiſhed by the greater or leſſer Aperture of the Ob- sthiſlm ject- Glaſs, that is, whether there is more or leſs of it uncovered, becauſe the Angle Explad. ꝗyl Continues the ſame, tho' the Object-Glaſs were all Covered to the very middle ſoint ;, all that is Effected by the greater or leſs Aperture is the more Bright or Obſcure Appearance of the Object. S. 59. THis thereſore likewiſe Depends upon gyſ being the Natural Optick Angle, æſ-unu: il and our Sccing Objects Magnify'd or Diminiſhed àccording to the greater or leſs Pro-ſſſ E. portion of the Viſual Angles in their Bigneſs; it alſo Aſſumes the whole Second Scheme for Granted; all vhich have been Confuted and Diſproved; vhat we ſall farther Alledge is, that if g9 =ayc (Fig. 2. 5. 2.) is the Pencil of Rays, which is only Neceſſary to make an Object Appear in a certain Magnitude and Diſtinction, the ſame will Obtain (Fig. 1. 5. 2.) and axc, aæc vill be Perſectly Uſeleſs; on the Contrary, if a xc, ac in the laſt Figure are Subſervient to the Painting the due Diſtinctions of an Image upon the Eye, they will be ſo in the firſt; and if æ and æ are Covered, and the Intermediate Parts betwixt them and, the Image too muſt be Obſcured, and the Portraiture oſ the Object upon the Retina Marrd and Defaced, which is yet Suppoſed of a Jut Magnitude, and to be Diſtinct. S. 60. FARTHER, if g59 =ayc are the Rays Principally Requiſite to Form a Di- 4mm: il ſtinct Viſion, an Object may be Seen Diſtinct, and in the Proper Maghitude, which sæm⸗. Appertains to it's Refraction, by one Ray from cach Point, whereas the Collection of ſeveral from each Point has been hitherto thought Neceſſary to that Diſtinction : If therefore this were now True, that one Ray from each Point could have Forœ enough to Awake our Attention to it's Impreſſions, vhat vould be the Conſequence of it in other Parts of this Philoſophy? Namely, that, where ſcveral Rays are Collected to one Point in the Retina, cach of them will have a Diſtinct Force to Repreſent the Point in the Object, from which they are Deriv'd, and being Referred back in almoſt Infinite Directions, will Cauſœ one Pont in an Object to Appear, as, very near, an Infinite Number of them would do. which, at leaſt, is not Confeſſed, or OWnd, in the Preſent Opticks. . 5. 61. CONCERNNG the Apertures, however, of Object- Glaſos, by them is Meant that canemin: Part of the Glaſs, which is left Open and Uncovered, which is ſaid ought to be Various, simu of according as ve would have more or leſs Light admitted, or according to the dif- _ fering Focal Lengths of the Object- Glaſes; ſince a 10 Foot Object-Glaſs, that is, whoſe DiojrieFocal Length is 10 Foot from the Glaſs, will bear a greater Aperture than an Object- _.55Glaſs of one Foot, and a 20 Foot Glaſs yet greater than a 10 Foot; but at what Rate or Proportion the Apertures of Glaſſes Alter in Reſpect of their Focal Lengths is not yet, it ſeems, well Settled; All that is done in this Caſe is, that Monſieur Auzout has found, that the Apertures, which Glaſſes can bear with Diſtinctneſs are in, or about, a Subduplicatt Ratio to their Lengths, or as the Square Roots of them. 5. 62. BUT that this Theory of Apertures is not Juſt, is from hence Evinced, that Ie Tim the ſame Glaſi vill Endure greater or leſſer Apertures, according to the leſſer or 7.. greater Light of the Object; thus to Obſerve the Sun, or eaus, ot the Diameters oſ the Fixt Stars, ſmaller Apertures are Requird, whereas the Moon in Day-Light, Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, expect the Largeſt ; And if this is certain in theſe Diſtant Objects, the ſame in Proportion muſt hold in Nigher, where the Force of their Lights or Colours are different, which is a ſufficient Confutation of the foregoing Rule. r  Contirnin 5. 63. A following Propoſition in this Doctrine is to Explain the Teleſcope con- itu ſiſting of a Convex Object-Glaſs and three Convex Eye-Glaſſes; but this Depending Bbub Conſ entirely on Propoſition 50 §. æ. and being only a double Teleſcope of that kind, which õ4ã õlaſ is there Deſcrib'd and we have fully Conſidered, there is no occaſion to Examinc it an itre any farther, nor yet the Theory of Combining ſeveral Convex Glaſſes in Various ũ.7 and differing Numbers. i Molyneny i  Dioptricki 5. 64. HOW ron 56 Pari. 1, ſ 5. 64. HowEvER, We ſhall Jut Recount the Method of ſuch Compoſitions or Combinations of Convexes, and then make one ſhort Remark or two upon them; we are ſirſt, ĩt is ſaid, to Obtain, by ſome Practical Rules to be aſtervards Delivered, the Focal Length of each Particular Glaſũi by it's ſelf; then we are to Conſider the Diſtances of each of theſe Glaſes, as they lie in the Tube, from the Glaſes before and behind it; aſterwards, where the Diſtinct Baſes are Formd by theſe ſeveral Glaſes and how they are Projected, as to Amplification or Diminutionn, which is Aſtirmd to be eaſily found by what has been before Delivered; and then, how the Eye-Glaſies Affect theſe Diſtinct Baſes, as how they Conſound them, Rectiſy them, Invert or Magnify them; the Reſult of all which this Philoſophy Aſrts is, that the Rays from the ſeveral Images in the ſeveral Diſtinct Baſes ſhall be Conſuſed on the Pupil of the Eye in Order to be Rectify'd by the Chryſtalline, which is to be Conſidered, as a Glaſs, vhoſe Focus is on the Retina; from Whence it is, Laſtly, ſaid it will Appear, why ſome Teleſcopes Conſiſting of Convex Glaſes Repreſent the Object Erect, others Inverted, in ſome one Glaſs is to be taken as one, and in orthers two Glaſes likewiſe Perform the ſame Effect.  S5. 65. IN Anſwer to this Mcthod wve muſt ſirſt Say, that Practical Rules are Originally Requird in it, which is, or ſeems to be, a Plain Confeſſion; that the Theoſ retick ill not do, hich have been before Endeavoured to be Demonſtrated in this Philoſophy; for if they could, in this firſt Part of Opticks it ſhould at leaſt have been ſiown us, how the Focal Length of cach Particular Glaſs by it's ſelf is to be Obtain'd, without having Recourſe to the ſecond which is Experimental; ſince either the Practical Rules Agree with the Theoretick, or not; if they do, there was no Reaſon to Referr us in the Theoretick Part of this Doctrine to the Practical Part of it, but rather to thoſe Propoſitions which went before, and which, in all other Caſes, it Conſtantly does; if they do not, it is an Evident Demonſtration, that what is Propoſed to us in Theory is not Anſered, or Juſtifyd, by Matter of Fact or Experiment, and that therefore the whole Doctrine is no other than a Laboured and Abſtracted Hypotheſis of the Brain, without being any ways Conformable to Nature. S5. 66. BESIDES Which, the foregoing Propoſition being the main Foundation, on which this Method of Combining Glaſſes Proceeds, and having likewiſe Conſidered the way, by which the Diſtinctneſs, Magnitude, Inverſion, and Erectneſs, of an Object is Explain'd in this Preſent Philoſophy, we need not Enlarge in the Confutation of a Doctrine, which Endeavours to Account for thoſe Effects upon the ſame ſiinciples. S. 67. VE ſnall therefore go on to the next Propoſition, which is, to Explicore the Teleſcope Compoſcd of a Concave Eye Glaſs and Convex Object- Glaſs of a larger Sphere; in this Teleſcope, the Diſtance of the Glaſſes is to be the difference oſ their Focus's, or the Concave Eye-Glaſs is to be Placed ſo much nigher the Object-Glaſs than the Focal Length of the Object- Glaſs, as is the Vertual Focus of the Eye Glaſ, and the Eye Poſited as near as Poſſible to it; in which Caſe the Object will Appear, Diſtinct, Erect, and Magnify'd; ab. 37. Fig. 2. or Fig. 5. 68.) the Diſtinct Baſe fe d, is Form'd, as before in the Preceding Propoſition, and let æ h be the Virtual Focus of the Concave, the Rays xi, yh, æ h, in their Incidence on the Eye-Glaſis, Converge towards the Focus e, and after Paſſing the Glaſs become Parallel in im, he, kn, which is Suppoſed 10 have been already Prov'd in this Philoſophy; and the ſame may be Conceivd of the Rays, which Flow from the Collateral Points, and which Converge to the Focus's ſ and 4, but by Refraction are made to Diverge to a Paralleliſm, as iſ they Procecded from ꝓ, hp being by Conſtruẽtion =to heæ to the Length oſ the Virtual Focus. 5. 68. IN the firſt Place therefore, all which has been ſaid in the ſormer Propoſition, ſS. 2. Fiqg. 1.) againſt that Part oſ the Scheme, which lies betwixt aa æ, bbb, ccc, and fea is Valid likewiſe here; it is farther to be Obſerved, that the Rays are Suppoſed to be Refracted Parallel from Corollary to Propoſition the Thirteenth, which Says, that a Ray Falling on a Concave Glaſs, and tending towards the Virtual Focus, aſter it has Paſſed the Glaſs, ſall Proceed Parallel to the Axis, becauſe the Progreſs of Light thro' Glaſſes is Reciprocal; but that Reaſoning ſrom the Virtual Focus's and the Reciprocal Progreſs oſ the Rays has been already Examined; to which we ſhall only Add Concerning the Preſent Figure, that if ſuch a Realoning vere True. True, to make it Applicable to this Scheme; 1ſ the Concave gſ muſt have ſeveral Virtual Focus's, becauſe xi kæ do not tend to the ſame Point with ælæ, or x gæ; 2d. thoſe different Vintual Focuss are Preſum'd to lie in the Diſtint Baſc ſe ã, that is, that the Virtual Focus of a Concave Eye-Glaſs ſnall be in the ſame Point with the Real Focus of the Object-Glaſs 3d. that gr Ir are Refſracted Parallel to the Axes. Namely, to 5f yd; the two Firſt are not Prov'd, and the Laſt is Evidently Falſe. 5. 69. THE next Thing, which is done in rhis Propoſition, is to ſhow, how the Diſtinctneſs of the Object would be Conſcquent upon this Explanation; for the Rays from each Single Point after Refraction thro' the Concave, Falling Parallel on the Eye amongſ themſclves, by Propoſition 2 87h. each Point is Diſtinctly Repreſented in the Retina of it; On the other Hand, we Say, that the Propoſition Referred to has been fully Conſidered, and moreover, that not only the Paralleliſm of the Rays Incident on the Pupil of the Eye, but the Confuſion of them likeviſe are, by the ſforegoing Doctrine and Propoſition, alſo Thought Neceſſary to a Diſtinct Perception; Whereas, Suppoſing, as in (Fig. 3. Tab. 37. orFig. 5. 71.) the Eye as cloſe to the Concave Glaſi, as we can Poſſibly Imagine, the Rays ſrom the ſeveral Points of the Object do not in the leaſt Intermix, or Blend, with each other; If therefore at one Time a Confuſion of the Rays in the Pupil of the Eye (Prop. 28. 5. 3.) from cach Point is Deem'd Requiſite to Solve the Diſtinctneſs of Viſion, and at another Time not, what is it Poſſible for us, to Conclude, unleſs that ſuch a Doctrine Depends more on the Fancy, and Imagination, than on any True or Juſt Reaſon for it is Impoſſible, if the Axes of the Rays Converge to a Point in the Tupil of the Eye, in Order to Produce Diſtinct Viſion in the Retina, that the Axes when they do not Converge, but Diverge, ſould; Nor can we Conceiv vhy this Particular Cloſeneſs of the Eye to the Gla ſnould be Required, excepting with the Intention, that the Rays might be Confuſed in it's Pupil, which are not even then; and if it is not upon that Account, why they might not be Juſtly and Punctually Refracted to the Retina, at a greater Removal of the Eye from the Glaſs, ſince they will ſtill be Parallel, is not Explain'd. 5. 70. As for the Object's being Erect, which is Provd from (Prop. 28.) we ſhall not Say any more Concerning it, than what has been Alledged under that Propoſition; excepting, that it ſeems Impoſſible the Rays ſould Paint the Object Erect, ſince, Conſidering the great Divergence of them, they do not Appear Capable oſf Expreſſing the full Extent of it at all for we ſind in (Fig. 3. Tab. 37. orFig. 5. 71.) that the Eye is made Extremely Large, and Placed very near to the Glaſs, in Order to Receive theſe Diverging Rays, vhich it could not do, unleſs there was ſuch a Monſtrous and Unnatural Diſproportion betwixt the Glaſs and the Eye, tho' the one ſhould be Poſited never ſo ncar to the other, that is, unleſõs there was ſuch a Diſproportion, as is no ways Agreeable to Nature, or Experience; ſor if Rays could be Admitted into the Pupil of the Eye, it would be Impoſſible in ſuch a Divergence, as is here Expreſſed, for them to be Collected in the Retina, excepting the Eyc is made Larger, than it is Juſt to Allow. 5. 71. THE next Solution Propoſed is of the Object's being Magniſfy'd by this Glaſ5, which is thus Accounted for; that by (Prop. 37.) if an Object be Projected by a Convex Glaſs æyæ in the Diſtin& Baſe fed, (Fig. 5. 68.) and the Eye is Placed any where between the Glaſs and the Diſtint Baſe, Suppoſc at h, the Object will Appear under the Angle ſh, which is much Greater than ſyd the Natural Optick Angle; and the ſame is ſaid will hold, th we Interpoſe the Concave Glaſũi gl, becauſc the Ray æę which comes ſrom the Leſt- Hand Point of the Object and æ which comes from the Right-Hand Point, which Run Parallel to the Axis byh e, are Reſracted into g4, and Ir, as if they Proceeded Directly ſrom the Pointꝓ3 if therefore we Suppoſe the Rays gſ; z l d, Parallel to the Axis, gſ ill be= to ſd; and ꝓh being by Suppoſition= to he, pgt vill be Parallel to hf, and ?lr to hã, and Conſequently the Angle gr hall be = to the Angle ſhd; from Vhence it Follows, that the Object thro this Glas Appears under the ſame Angle, as we may Imagine the Apices of the Pencils f, à would Appear to the Naked Eye at h the Concave Glaſi being Removd, and therefore the Object Appears Increaſed. 5. 72. THE firſt Objection againſt this Explanation is, that ſyã is Suppoſed to be the Natural Optick Angle, hich has been already Diſputed; and that ſhã is the Angle, under which the Object is Seen in any Intermediate Poſition of the Eye betwixt the Diſtinct Baſe fed and the Glaſ xyæ; but how the Object ſould be View'd with any Diſtinctneſs, and therefore how it ſiould Appear in any certain Magnitude in h or ꝓ, or Whatever other Point we Aſſign betwixt the Glaſs and the Diſtinũt DBaſe, here the Rays are ncither Parallel, nor Confuſed on the Pupil of the Eye, vhich this Philoſophy Requires to make Viſion Diſtinct, will want to be Unfſolded; ſince upon theſe Principles, it it is Impoſſible to be done, excepting by Introducing a New Scheme according to Prop. 37. which is not Anſwerable to the Preſent, and Conſcquently by altering the Courſe of the Rays, in Order to Explicate another, that is This, which is different from it. . S. 73. WE are farther to Obſerve, that if ſhà was always the Angle, under which the Object thro' the Glaũ æ yæ is Seen, as h Approaches to, the Object will Appear the Leaſt and as to ę, the Greateſt, whereas this Philoſophy Acknowledges, that when rhe Eye is Placed in the Focus of the Glaſs, as at ſed, every Thing is Repreſented in the urmoſt Confuſion, without being of any Determind Bigneſs, and if on this Side the Focus towards the Glaſs, that there is not, according to the foregoing Section, any Juſt Rule of the Refraction of the Rays Aſſerted, by which we ſhould know the Object will either be Perceiv'd with Diſtinction or any certain Magnitude. 5. 74. Ir vill alſo be Diſficult, if not Impoſſible, to Explain, why 7h à ſould be rather Terminated in h than in any other Point betwixt feàd and xyæ, before the Interpoſition of the Glaſs, which is Suppoſcd, ſince the Intervention of it is Aſfirmd to Cauſe no Alteration, g⸗ l being Prov'd 10 be = to ſh, and ſince the Angle, which is therefore thought to be made by the Glaſs, is g»l. 5. 75. WE may Add, that if à h f is the Angle, under which the Object is Seen, yet grl is not Evinced to be Equal to it, unleſs by taking it for Granted, that g, lp, are Parallel to fh, à h, or which is the ſame, that the Refracted Rays / g rl, are ſo, but this is Proving fhã, gꝓl, are Equal, by Suppoſing it. s. 76. SuCH a Suppoſition is Moreover Impoſſible, becauſe if in the Preſent Situation ?g, r l, were Refracted Parallel to f h, d h, they could not be in any other; for xg, æl are Imagind in this Scheme to be Parallel to the Axisy h, and Conſequently vill be always Refracted, whether the Glaſs Approaches to, or Recedes from. xyxæ, into gt, Ir, Secing the Reſracting Power of the Concave ę™ will Continue the ſame, whereas ſh, à h, are Conſtantly Vary'd in their Inclinations, as h comes nearer to, or is farther ſrom, the ſame x&æ. l a S. 77. AGAIN xg, æl, are made Parallel to 7h, and therefore the Concave ę ought at leaſt to be Equal to the Convex æj æ, foriſit is leſs, æ ꝗ, æ l, will neceſſarily Converge towards the Axis, and if greater, Divaticate from it, but all the Phæno menons of the Teleſcope are Equally the ſame, in Reſpect of the Diſtinction and Magnitude, with which Objects are Repreſented by. it, whether the Apertures ol the Glaſſes are Greater or Leſs, according to the Confeſſions of this Philoſophy. 78. LasTLY, this Account ſuppoſes, that Concaves are Capable of Magnifying tht Object, or not; If not, we ſhould See it in the ſame or greater Dimenſions without the Concave g, than with it, which is not Experienced; If they are Capable of Mag. niſying the Object, a Property is Aſcribed to them, Which is Contrary to all that has been Endeavoured to be Demonſtrated and Proved concerning them; and thai this is done is Evident, ſince the Wider the Rays r, rl, are Reſracted from each other, the Greater the Object will Appear, and thereſore according to this Doctrine, the Divergence of the Rays will be a Reaſon for the Increaſe of an Object, which was One before for the Diminution of it, and it will have the ſame Effect, as was Explained to belong to the Contraction of them; and g/, Where the Vertex of the Angle is from the Eye, and the Baſis gſ lies upon it, will Produce the ſame Appearance, as a Convex, where the Vertex of the Angle lies uponthe Eye, and the Baſis, which Subtends it, is in an Averſe and Reciprocal Poſture. 5. 79. WE ſhall not here Conſider the Corollaries, which are Deduced from this Propoſition, ſince by what goes before it is Manifeſt, this is only an Arbitrary Diſpoſition of the Rays Contrived by the Mind, without any Foundation in Nature, to Solve, as well as it could, the chie? Appearances of this Teleſcope; we ſhall therefore Proceed to the Doctrine of Microſcopes, of which we ſhall Treat in the Following Sections of this Chapter. : : 5. 80. THE next ſort of Glaſſes, which are Endeavoured to be Explain'd, are Microſcopes, Conſiſting of a ſingle Convex-Glaſs, in which, the Object is uſually Placed, cither in the Focus of the Glaſ, or a little Nigher the Glaſs than the Focus, and the Eye is Placed in or about the Focus on the other Side of the Glaſs, in which Caſcs, the Phænomenons are ſaid to be Solved by Prop. 31. 32. 33. 34-353 Which Propoſiions, as to the Subſtance of them, have been already Examined. : E e e e 5. 81. Wæ 5. 81. WE ſnall only thereſore Add, that this is contrary to Experience, ſince iſ ve take a Glaſũs, which is Convex on each Side, the Larger the Convexity is, the Greater Difference there is betwixt the Eye's and the Object's being in the Focus, and the Smaller it is, the Leſs; for if in a Glaſs of a Large or Extraordinary Convexity we look upon a Print, the Character ſhall Appear the Greateſt, when the Eye ii 5 Or 6 times more Removed from the Glaſs, than the Glaſs from the Object. which Diſproportion will be Diminiſed, as the Convexity of the Glaſi Decreaſes ; Noi to mention, that the Focus, vhen Determin'd upon a Paper ſrom a Candle, or any other Luminous Object, is diſferent from that of a Printed Character. 5. 82. THE double Microſcope, compoſed of a Convex Object-Glaſs, and Convex Eye-Glaſs, is, after the former, Propoſcd to be Solved; ab. 38. Fig. 1) ab is a Minute Object expoſed before the Object-Glaſs æ yæ, the Segment of a very ſmall Sphere, the Focus of vhich is , the Object therefore being ſomething more Diſtant from the Glaſs than it's Focal Length yp, the Diſtinct Baſe will be Formed on the other Side of the Glaſs in fd, according to Prop. 5; the largeneſs of the Image in the Diſtinct Baſe is likewiſe Determined by Prop. 26 Let now the EyeGlaſs gl be Placed, ſo far Diſtant from the Diſtinct Baſc fd, as is the Focal Length of this EyeGlaſs, and the Eye ort, ſo as the Rays o, go, may be Confuſed together on the Pupil of the Eye, which will be about the Focus of the Eye-Glaſs, and the Effects of this Microſcope are Explained in all Things, as in the Teleſcope of Prop. 50. as to the Magnify'd, Inverted, and Diſtinòt Appearance of the Object; It is yet to be Remarked in Reſpect of the Extraordinary Magniſying of theſe Teleſcopes, that whereas, for Viewing a Minute Object, a good Eye does uſually Approach thereto about the Diſtance of eight Inches, could we make the Eye come to it, and View it Diſtinctly at the Diſtance of half an Inch, the Optick Angle would be extremely Magnifyd, by Prop. 51. 52. that is, the Apparent Magnitude of the Object would be Increaſed ar the Rate of Sixteen to one; we are therefore deſired to Suppoſe the Eye at y Viewing the Object a b, which will then Appear under the Angle a5 b =djf, which is ſaid to be the ſame, as were the Object Increaſed to the Bigneſs à1, and Viewed by the Eye at the ſame Diſtance from it, as y in the Figure is Removed from f; wherefore if by the help of the Eye-Glaſs ęl, the Eye can Approach to the Diſtinũ Baſe à ſ, which is in this Philoſophy now Reputed the Real Object, Suppoſe ro times Nigher than ; is to àf, the Apparent Magnitude of àf ſhall again be Increaſed ten times more than beſore, and the Object by all theſe Helps will be Magnify'd 160 times in Length, or in its Diametral Magnitude; It is farther Affirmed, that there are various Combinations of Glaſſes in this kind of double Microſcopes, there being in ſome two Object- Glaſſes, one of a very deep Convexity, and the other of a leſſer, placed Nigher the former, than the Projection of the a Diſtinct Baſe, according to Schol 1. Prop. 16. which is ſometimes called a middle Glaſs, and in others two EyeGlaſſes, &c. but the Theory of all theſe is owned to Depend on the Explanation: and Principles of the Foregoing. 5. 83. THE Grounds of Prp. 5. 26. and 50th. have been before Proved to he Unjuſt and Abſurd, and therefore the preſent Explanation of Microſcopes cannot be Rational or True, what we ſhall more particularly Examine into now is, the So] lution lution, which is given of the extraordinary Magnitude Obſervable in Objects, View'd thro' this ſort of Glaſs. 5. 384. IN the firſt Place this Explanation ſays, that in Viewing a Minute Object, the Eye Approaches to the Diſtance of about 8 Inches, and if ĩt could See it Diſtinctly at the Interval of half an Inch, which is the 167h Part of 8 Inches, the Object would Appear 16 times as Large as before, according to Prop. 51. 52. But as the Lemmas contained in thoſe Propoſitions have been already Reſuted, ſo likeviſe, which was then Obſerved, it is contrary to the plaineſt Fact and Experience in Nature, that Objects ſhould be Seen Magnifyd by our Naked Eye in Proportion to their leſs Diſtance from it; ſince the Letters I now Write, and the ſmalleſt Points, which belong to them, are Viewd at 18 or 20 Inches, at 4 or s, and in all the intermediate Spaces, with the ſame Magnitude and Diſtinction; and when they are Placed nearer to the Eye than the leaſt Diſtance, or farther from it than the greateſt. of their being Perfectly Repreſented to us, they are not in the firſt Caſe Increaſed, or in the laſt Diminiſhed, only look Confuſed and Uncertain. 5. 85. SUPPOSING this were yet True, that Minute Objects, or any other, were Increaſed or Diminiſhed, in Proportion as they Approach to, or Recede from the Eye, what this would Signify to the Explaining the preſent Microſcope, we cannot eaſily Apprehend; for when the Eye is Preſumed to be Placed in y, and there to View the Object ab, it is at the Diſtance of half an Inch, or not; If it is, it Contradicts the Acknowledgments of this Philoſophy, which owns, that a good Eye Sees Objects Diſtinctly at about 8 Inches Diſtance from it, and cannot do it at 2 an Inch the laſt of vhich is alſo Manifeſt from common Obſervation; If it is not, the Ob ject will not be Magnify'd in the Proportion of 16 to I, and Conſequently by a 10 times nearer Diſtance, not as 160 to I in it's Length, or the Diametral Magnitude of it. S. 86. GRANTING farther the Eye at, being 7 an Inch Diſtant from a b, to receive the Object Diſtinctly; ayb is alſo=4djyf, which is ſaid to be the ſame, as if the Object was Increaſed to the Bigneſi àf, and Viewed by the Eye iny or o at the ſame Diſtance from it, asy in the Figure is now Removed from à, and Conſequently ày f=do f ayb vill Repreſent the Image àf at a greater Diſtance, as ab at a leſ, in an Equal Magnitude, that is, on both hands I6 times Bigger than before, and if ſuch a Diſtance is ſhortened to a 10th Part of the whole, both the I mage àf, and the Object ab, will be Increaſed to 160 times the Greatneſs of what it was. 5. 87. The Fallacy of which Reaſoning will Appear in the firſt Place from this, that when the Eye is Placed in it is Impoſſible it ſould See Z7 at all, ſince the Courſe of the Rays tend from the Object a 5, and cannot return from à to the Parts, from Whence they are Derivd; if the Eye is Situate in o, it is likewiſe Impoſſible, that it ſould See à7 at all, without the Interpoſition of the Glaſ ęſ, becauſe the Rays àl, fę, vould Proceed directly forwards, and Fall beyond the Limits of the Eye ino; On the Contrary, if the Interpoſition of the Glaſs is Neceſſary in this Firſt Caſe ol making the Object Appear 16 times Bigger, how comes it to be only Introduced in the Second, where it is to Magnify it to 160 times it's Dimenſions? 5. 83. BESIDES, the Interpoſition of the Glaſs cannot be Conſidered in the firſt Caſe, where the Object is to Aſſume 16 times it's Bigneſs, Seeing that is Proved, vhen the Eye is in o, upon the Suppoſition that do ſ is =àj f, which is Impoſſible, if the Glaſs is Interpoſed; and if not, it will be on the other Hand Impoſſible, that any Rays ſhould be carried from à or ſ to o, ſince they would Proceed in the Direction ſrom à to /, and from f to g that is, Diverging from o, and not Converging to it. 5. 89. IF yet do ſ vas =to à5f, and upon the Interpoſition of the Glaſs o, was 10 times nearer to à1 than before, it would not be Neceſſary, that àf ſhould Appear 10 times Bigger; 1ſ7. Not according to the Preſent Scheme, where the Rays are Refracted to o from g and /, whereas in the Angle ào f the urmoſt Rays, which could be Refracted, would be à0, fo, which Fall within the aforementioned àl and ſę; 2d. Becauſe the Refractions of ào, fo, however the Diſtance betwixt o and àſ was Contracted by them, would not be Anſwerable to the Eye's Approaching Regularly from o to à1 without ſuch Refractions, which is made to be the Reaſon in Ecee2 the the Firſt Caſe, why the Object is Magniſy’d in a certain Proportion, and therefore ought to obtain in the Second; 34. Becauſe, as has been before Proved, the Approach it's ſclf of the Eye to ithe Object is not a ſuſficient Reaſon for it's Viewing it Increaſed in Proportion to it's Proximity or Nearneſs to it. 5. 90. MoREOVER, it is Remarkable, that this whole Demonſtration ſuppoſes à Conſiderable Diſproportion berwixt the Object-Glaſs and the Eye-Glaſũ, and that the Laſ is much Leſs than the Former, otherwiſe the Diſtance of 10 to 1 could not he Obtained, which is Requiſite to Magnify the Object ſrom 16 times it's Bigneſs to 160, vhereas in moſt Microſcopes the Object. Glaſſcs and the Eye-Glaſſes are Extremely Small, and do not much Exceed the Diameter of the Object-Glaſs xæ. ꝗ. 91. LasTLY, it is known, that if 160 is Squard, the Product will be æ5600, the whole Latitude of the Object, as 160 is the Diameter of it, which is not certain in Experience from the foregoing Suppoſitions, but may be more or leſs, for all that we are yet Informed concerning the Real Dimenſions of it; or, if the AbſoIute Meaſure of the Object, when Magniſy'd by this Microſcope, was truly Aſcertain'd in this vay oſf Reaſoning, it would be hard to Reconcile it with the other of Single Microſcopes, vhere one Convex only ſiall Magnity as much, if not more, than ſcveral put together. C H A ?. XIV. Concerning the Propoſitions Relating to Catoptrichs. 5. 1. FTE R an Examination into the Principles oſ Dioptricks, we ſhall Proceed to an Inquiry into thoſe of Catoptricks, or the Doctrine concerning ſuch Glaſſes, which, inſtead of Refracting, Reflect the Rays, which are Incident upon them; The Firſt Propoſition, which this part of Philoſophy undertakes to Explain is, how the Phænomenons, which Reſult from common Speculums, are, or can be, Accounted for; which is done in the following Manner, by Proving that æ after Reſlection is the Focus of thoſe Rays, vhoſc Focus vas A before their Incidence; For in the Triangles ACD, a cD, ACand Cã are Suppoſed to be Equal by Conſtruction, the Angles 4 CD, a CD, are alſo Equal, becauſc they are Right oncs, and the Side CD is common to both. from whence it follos, that the Angle 4 DC is Z to the Angle æ DC; But the Angle a DC is = to the Angle E DF, as being Vertical, and Conſequently 4D Cto a D C is alſo =to E DF, and DE is the Reſflected Ray, ſince the Angles of Incidence and Refiection are Equal; The ſame is ſaid to be Demonſtrated concerning any Ray, which Proceeds from A4, as 4 B, A F, and therefore the Rays, which Diverge from A, aſter Reflection Appear to Diverge from æ; To this it is added by way of Scholium, that wherever the Eye is Placed, as at 0, it Receives the Rays, as if they came from ⸗, and therefore Sees the Image of the Object in that Place; ſince the Rays, which Diverge from a, are Affirmd to Aſct the Eye in O, as if they were immediately Derived from 4. FROM this Account of our Perceiving Objects by Reſection in Plane Glaſſes, it is Inferrd; 1ſſ. That the Rays E D, O B, which Converge to the Focus a, aſter Reſlection Converge to the Focus 4;3 24. That the Image of any Radiating Point, as of 4, i: Seen in the Concourſe of the Reſlected Line O B Produced, with the Perpendiculai ACa to the Glaſs CD, and thereſore if the Part of the Speculum B is covered, the Object Diſappears; 3à7. That the Images, Reflected from the Speculum, are in the ſame Inclination to it, as ihe Objects, from which they are Impreſſed, and thereſore Glaſe: in in an Horizontal Situation make Objects Appear in a direct Oppoſition to a Vertical one, ſince what is Demonſtrated of a Point, obtains in a hole Object, which Conſiſts of ſeveral Points; 47h. That a Radiating Plane and it's Image in the Glaſs are Equal and Alike, but in a different Poſition, as a Seal is from the Character Imprinted on the Wax; s7h. That the Diſtance of the Image in the Glaſ from the Eye is Equal to the Incident and Reſlected Ray taken together; 6rh. That whatever is Affirm'd Concerning the Image of an Object, may be alſo Aſerted of the Image of thar Image, &. Suppoſing ſeveral Glaſſes to be made Uſe of; in which, it is Principally to be Obſerved, that the Diſtance of any Image from the Eye is Equal to the Ray, Incident from the Primary Object, and from thence Propagated thro' all the Various Reſlections, which are Conſidered. / j 5. 2.IN Reſpect of the firſt Part oſ this Reaſoning, we are to Obſerve, that 4C is made Equal to C⸗, and Conſequently the Angle 4D Cæ to the Angle a DC= to the Angle E DF, that is, the Angle of Incidence to that of Refiection, which is the ſame, as if Reciprocally, the Angle of Incidence ſhould be ſupposd to be Equal to the Angle of Refiection, and by Conſequence 4C=Ca; But it has been before Proved in the beginning of this Fourth Part of the Principles of Philoſophy, that the Angle of Incidence is not alvays Equal to that of Reflection, and therefſore ſuch a Demonſtration cannot be Juſt; On the other Hand, if we take the Original Suppoſition of 4C, being Equal to Ca, it muſt be Confeſſed to be an Arbitrary one; ſince, vhy we ſhould rather make AC= to Ca, than of different Lengths, is not Explain'd, unleſs to Prove the Angle ?D F æ to the Angle 4 D C; which is in Effect to Suppoſe, what is to be Evidenced, Namely, That the Angle of Incidence is alvays Equal to the Angle of Refiection. ] j ; 5. 3. THE ſecond Thing Aſſerted is, That the Eye in O will Receive theſe Rays upon their being Reſlected, which it is not Manifeſt, thãt it will; for if DF is the Latitude of the Incident Rays on the Glaſs, ?H cannot be that of the Pupil of the Eye, unleſs we ſuppoſe, that it does not only bear a Senſible, but a very Great Proportion to the Reflecting Surface, when in Fact the Eye is Inconſiderable in Reſpect of it; beſides, granting D F to be Infinitely Small, and by that Means abundantly Capable of being Receivd into the Eye at 0, which is the greateſt Conceſſion, that can be made in Favour of this kind of Reaſoning, yet if we Conſider the Point 4 Diffuſed into a Plane, 4 Xũ I, as likewiſe the Linc CF, into a like Pſane; ſince every Point in the Plane, which is Objected to the Glaſs, vill have the ſame Conditions vith 4 in it's Reflection, according to the Preſent Demonſtration, iĩt will be Neceſary, that there ſnould be ſo many Diſtinct Points O in Reſlection, as there are Points 4 in the Object; from whence it vill Follow, that the Pupil of the Eye ſhould be at leaſt of as gre: a Capacity, as the Object Repreſented to it from Reflection, which is Impoſible. S. 4. Tnus far ve have Conſidered the Propoſition it's ſelf, and the Scholium upon it, Excepting what Concerns the Place of the Object's Appearing, which is ſaid to be in a, for that alſo is unexplained; ſince ĩt is not yet Proved, why the Eye in O ſhould rather juſt Extend it's Viſive Faculty to a, which is at the ſame Diſtance from the Reflecting Speculum, as the Object it's ſelf is, than to a greater or a ſhorter Diſtance: This however, we ſhall not at Preſent Inquire into, becauſe it falls under a following Conſideration in one of the Corollaries to the Preſent Propoſition. 5.5. AFTER the Propoſition, and it's Scholium, we are to Examine into the Conſequences, or Corollaries, which are Drawn from it; as to what Reſpects which we muſt Premiſe, that they being Derived from the foregoing Scheme, if any of them Prove Falſe in Fact, and are not Anſwered in Experience, it is a Maniſeſt Conviction, that ſuch a Scheme is not an Adequate Repreſentation of Nature. S. 6. TuE Iſſ. Corollary is, that E D, O B, which Converge to a, aſter Reflection Converge to 4; But this Reaſoning Depends upon a Principle, which we have before Endeavoured to Refute, Namely, that becauſe4 D ĩs Reflected to D E, andA B to o, therefore, if the Rays were Returned back from æ and O, they would be likewiſe Reflected from D and B to 4; which would be Impoſſible, unleſs the Rays are Suppoſed to Riſe from the Glaſs Exactly with the ſame Force, with which they Fall; for if D? Reſults witha leſs or a greater, from the Action of the Glaſs, than what is in the Incideni a4D, ED F vill not be Equal to 4DC, which is the very Foundation of the Preſeni ſent Inference; and ſince there is an Attractive Power in the Glaſs Acknowledged by the beſt Syſtemes of Philoſophy Extant, it will by Conſcquence follow, that the Incident and Reflected Rays cannot have the ſame Force, ſince 4 D will be Accelerated in it's Motion, and E D Retarded. S. 7. THE 24. Corollary is, that the Image of the Point is Seen in the Concourſi of the Reflected Ray O B, with the Perpendicular 4 Ca; If this were True, it would not only Obtain in a Single Point, but in all the Points of the Object; Suppoſing therefore, as beſore, 4 to be Spread into one Uniform Plane 4 XG 1, the Point:  and G vill Require a Reflection to ſeveral other Points, which are as Diſtant in their Latitude from O, as  and G are from 4, I, which lie in the ſame Plane with q, D; and for the like Reaſon, G, I, will Require a Reſlection to ſeveral Points, which ſhall be as far Removed in their Length from O, as G, I, are ſfrom 4, ; from whence it will follow, that the Eye, to be Rendered Capable of Receiving theſe Diſtant Reflections, muſt be at leaſt as Large, as the Object it's ſelf 4Xõ I, which is ſo Monſtrous an Abſurdity, as will be enough to Sink the beſt Philoſophy in the World, however, or by whatever Arguments, it may be otherwiſe Supported. s. 8. IF yet the Eye could Receive all theſe Reflections, without being as Large, as the Object it's ſelf, the Image of it cannot be Seen, by any Thing which is here Demonſtrated, in the Concourſe of the Reflected Ray O B, with the Perpendicular Ac, in a, unleſs A4C is Suppoſcd Equal to Ca, which is Directly Contrary to Experience, as we ſhall Evidence, vhen we come to Conſider the 57h. Corollary. 5. 9. THE 3d. Corollary from this Propoſition is, that the Images, Reſlected from the Speculum, are in the ſame Inclination to it, as the Objects, from which they are Impreſſed, and therefore thoſe, which are cither in a Perpendicular or Horizontal Poſition to the Glaſs, Appear in a Perpendicular or Horizontal one behind it; In Anſwer to which we ſay, that Suppoſing ? L 1o be a Line Parallel to 4, P will be Reflected from a7 to N, that is, ?  vill be Parallel to 4 B, and Conſequently, ſince the Eye is Placed in O, will not be Seen at all according to the foregoing Sections; or elſe ? will be Reflected from F to 0, and the Point will Appear in 4, at an Equal Poſition from the Glaſ with a, which is Contrary to Experience; and the Angle of Incidence will not be Equal to the Angle of Reflection. 5. 10. THAT, Which morcover lies hard againſt this Doctrine is, that what is here Demonſtrated of Objects, which are Parallel to the Glaſs, is Obſervable of thoſe, which are in a Right Angle to it, but how that, which is in a Parallel Situation, and that, which is in a Perpendicular, can be Explained by the ſame Scheme, is Unintelligible; ſince what is Affirmed of 47 does not ſeem to Obtain in 4C; for let us take ſome of the Points, which are the neareſt to C, and Draw the Lines S R ParalIel to 4B, which will therefore be Reſlected Parallel to 0, and Conſequently will never Arrive at the Eye in O; If the Angle SR C is made leſs than 4 BC, the Rays vill be Reflected below the Eye in O, nearer to B A4, if greater, above it, nearer to 4C; In both which Caſcs, the Rays will not Reach the Eye in O; and indeed, whilt the Eye is Fixt in one certain Poſition, as in O, it is Impoſſible it ſiould See the ſeveral Points in A4C, by Rays Reſlected in the ſame Angle, with which they Fell; For Suppoſing 4 is Scen by the Angle 4BC=O0 B M, the Reſt of the Points betwixt A and C muſt either be Seen in Angles of Incidence, which are Equal or Greater, and of Reſlection, hich are Leſs, or elſe in Angles of Incidence, which are Leſs, and of Refleqtion vhich are Greater, which is Contrary to the Fundamental Rules of this Phioſophy. 5. 11. BESIDES, if We take a Glaſs, and Place it Perpendicular to the Paper, on which I Write, all the Characters will Appear Inverted, and in a Contrary Order to their Natural and Real, whereas, by this Scheme and the Reaſoning from it, every Point ſhould be Expreſſed in the Glaſs, as it lies in the Object, 4 in a, X in , G in ? and I in i, without any other Alteration, which yet by the Preſent Inſtance is not Experienced. S. 12. FARTHER, this Demonſtration gives us at the beſt an Account only of Obſects Appearing in the ſame Poſition or Inclination to the Glaſs, vhich they have, when they are Parallel to it, but in Experience ve find, that if the Glaſs, from a Perrendicular Situation to the Horizon, is made to Turn upon an Axis, till it has Deſcried a Semi-Circle, the Image oſ the Object, which is Suppoſed likewiſe to be in a Per- Perpendicular Poſition to the Horizon, Suitably Changes it's Inclination from being Parallel to the Glaſs, to the being in a Direct Line with it, with all the In termediate Variations, and the ſame is True, if the Glaſs is Fixt, and the Object is Re volvd upon an Axis; Thus, if CD is the Speculum, 4 Iõ X the Objeẽt, and 4 X the Axis, as GI Recedes from the Glaſs, the Image vill ſo too, on the other Side of CD, and at Length vill come to be in the ſame Continued Plane; whercas on the Contrary, ſince G, I, P, and the other Points of the Object, do conſtantly Retire from the Glaſ CD M by this Revolution, the Perpendiculars from them to the Glaſs will be Increaſed in their Length, and Conſequently the Angles of Incidence ? F D, &. will be Greater o Leſs than before, and the Angles of Refiection O F 44, either Leſi, if the Incident Ray Falls betwixt F and D, or Equal, if on F, or clſe the Angles of Incidence, as ? a1D, vill be Equal to the Angles of Reſlection N 277; If the laſt, the Rays will not be Reſlected to the Eye in 0, but much below it; If the firſt, the Image will Appear æ a Leſs or Equal Diſtance behind the Glaſs, as before, contrary to Experience; and the Angles of Incidence will not be Equal to the Angles of Reſlection, contrary to the Original Hypotheſis of the Preſent Doctrine. §. 13. LastLy, in Fact it is Evident, that by the Reflection of the Speculum we See Objects almoſt in the whole Circuit of a Room, and very nearly in all manner of Poſitions ar once, which does not ſeem Capable of being Explained by ſo Short and Conciſe a Figure, as what is here Offered; For if the Eye at O could View Objects at 4 XG , which are directly Oppoſcd to the Glaſs, how it ſhould from thence be Manifeſt, that it will Take in and Comprehend thoſe, which lic on the Right, or the Left, which are Situate above, and below, and all around it, is not ſo readily Conceivd; And when any Optician vill Draw us a Scheme in Lines, vhich Way it may be done, it will be then time enough to Confſute it. S. 14. TuE 41h. Corollary is, that a Radiating Plane, and it's Image in the Glaſ, are Equal and Alike, but in a contrary Poſition, as a Seal is to the Character it Impreſſes; Let us thereſore Take the Point ?, the Rays, which Fall from it, and are Refected the Eye in 0, muſt make the Angles of Incidence and Reflection Equal, and therePF D is Z to OFT, which is greater than the Angle 0 BT=A B, from whence the Angle CA B will be greater than the Angle I P F, and the Lines, which Subtend them, C B greater than IF, ſince 4C is= Pl; But the Force of the Incident Ray from P is & to that from 4, that is, the Diagonal Force 4 B is = to the Diagonal Force P F, and therefore the Forces ACACB=PI+DF, or CB is=IlF, tho' before it was Proved, that CB was greater than IF, which is Impoſſible; The Caſe is this, if this Kind of Demonſtration, which the Preſent Opticks makes Uſe of, is True, we muſt Suppoſe different Inclinations of the Rays, ſo as the Eye may Return one to à, and the other to L, and that yet theſe Rays, which are differently Inclined, ſhall have the ſame Conditions, as if they were not ſo, which is a Contradiction, ſince the different Inclination is it ſelf a different Condition; but that this Philoſophy does Preſume all Rays alike, however Incident, is Plain, becauſe the ſame Demonſtration, which ſerves to Prove 4 B vill be Determin'd in a beyond the Glaſi, ſhows, that AF, 4 D, or any other Ray, will Arrive at the ſame Point; If therefore this Reaſoning is not Juſt, o F will not Arrive at L, that is, unleſs it is Certain, that 4 D, or 4F, as vell as 4B, will Arrive at a, and Conſcquently ? will not be Seen at L, nor the Object either Equal, or in a Contrary Poſition. S. 15. THE 51h. Corollary is, that ſince a B is=4 B, 4 BO vill be4 B+E80, that is, the Diſtance of the Image from the Eye is= to the Incident Ray, and the Reflected If this is a True Conſequence from the foregoing Reaſoning, it is very Manifeſt, that the whole of it is Falſe; For let the Object 4XGI Continue in the ſame Situation to the Glaſs CB, if the Eye at 0 Approaches Nearer to, or Removes Farther from it, the Object will Appear at the ſame Diſtance behind the Glaſs, that is, at the Diſtance of a certain Line or Interval beyond it, as Suppoſe ⸗ B, and not of a B O, Seeing, vhen B O is Continually Altered, there is no Alteration of ſuch an Interval. 5. 16. BESIDES Matter of Fact, ſince ? F is Reſected to the Eye in 0, which is not Equal to 4 B, and ſince there are Ten Thouſand Rays betwixt 4 and I, which Fall from the ſeveral Intermediate Points, which are not Equal to 4 B=a4 B ſand the ſame may be ſaid of the whole Surface 4 7XG) it is Impoſſible to give a Reaſon, why the Diſtance of the Reſlected Image ſhould be rather Meaſured by 43+ BO, than by r PF 4 FO, or any other Incident and Reſlected Rays, which are Extremely diſferent, according to their Various Inclinations to the Reflecting Surface. 5. 17. THE 6h. Corollary is, that whatever has been Affirmd or Demonſtrated  Concerning the Image of any Primary Radiating Point, as 4, is alſo certain Concerning a Secondary Radiating Point from the Glaſs, which Reſlects it's Rays upon another, that is Objected to it, or a 3d. 41h. or sth. Point, which Radiates from a 2à 3d. or 41h. Glaſs, and is Reſlected from a 34. 40h. or sth. But, that this is not True, is Evident from what has been already Propoſed; ſince there is no Juſt Account given of the Primary Radiating Point of an Object being Reflected to the Eye ſrom the Glaſs; Granting which, the Secondary Radiating Point muſt either be in  or inæ; It cannot be in the laſ, becauſe that is Determined by the Reaction of the Eye upon a Reſiection from B to 0, nor yet in the firſt, that is, in B, becauſe the Rays are Diſperſed from the Primary Radiating Point in 4, and therefore Impoſſible to be ColIected in B; from whence it is Evident, that the Point  cannot Emit the Rays with the ſame Conditions as 4 does; ſo far from it, that, of the Infinite Number of Rays. which are Suppoſcd to be Derived from 4, there can only one of them Arrive at B, Which is Reſlected to a Second Glaſs, and from thence to the Eye; But how an Infinite Number of Rays Flowing from 4, and being Reflected to the Eye in 0, ſhould Cauſe the ſame Appearance with one Solitary Ray Emitted from B, and Reflected from a Second Glaſs to the Eye is Inconceivable, and cannot be any ays Explained And the ſame may be Argued Concerning a 3q. 41h. or 5th. Radiating Point, which is here Demonſtrated oſ a Secondary. S. 18. HAVING Conſidered the Reaſoning Alledged for the Solution of the Phænomenons of Plane Speculums, we ſhall Deſire an Indulgence from the Preſent Philoſophers, if we do not Enter into a Particular Confutation of the Hypotheſes, Contrived to Explicate Thoſe, which are Obſerved to Reſult from Concave or Convex ones; For if this Philoſophy cannot Account for the Phænomenons, which Ariſe from the former, it is not likely it ſould do it in Reſpect of the latter, whoſe Theory muſt Neceſſarily be more Intricate and Perplexed than that of common Reſlecting Surfaces; Beſides, as Convex Reſracting Glaſſes, and Concave Reſlecting, have the ſame Effects of Collecting the Rays to a Focus, and Magnifying an Object, which is Preſented to them, and on the Contrary, Concave Reſfracting Glaſſes and Convex Reflecting, of Diſperſing the Rays, and Diminiſhing the Object, their Explanation in ſeveral Particulars muſt be much alike, and will Depend on Principles, that have a near Alliance and Agreement with cach other; and Conſequently, ſince we have Examined into thoſe, which are Offered to Solve the Diſficulties, that Occur in Refracting Spherical Glaſſes, ve have the Ieſs Reaſon to Oblige our Selves to a Tedious Inquiry into the Hypotheſes, made Uſe of, for the Solution of the Appearances of Spherical Reflecting ones; we ſhall therefore think our Selves Juſtly Excuſed, i we Omit theſe, and Proceed to the Examination of one or tvo Opinions more, which this Science Eſpouſes, and ſo Conclude our Diſquiſitions Concerning the Preſent Opticks, which have been hitherto Received; The Firſt is, That of the Optical Axes, which Notion, as it is Managed, is Thought of Singular Service in this Philoſophy, and very Deſervedly, if True; The Second is, That of the Prejudices, which we are Apt to Entertain in ſeveral Caſcs, by which Means ve are ſaid, not to See Things, as they are Really Repreſented to us, and more Eſpecially in Reſpect of Diſtance. 5. 19. As to what Relates to the Optical Axes, there are Three Inquiries Produced by the Reverend Dr. Laughton, a Late Worthy and Learned Fellow of this Colledge, in his Philoſophical Queſtions, which rather ought to be Named a Compendium of the Modern Philoſophy  The 1ſt. is, When an Object is Seen with both our Eyes, Whether it is oving to the Concourſe of the Optick Axes, that we See iĩt Single, and not Double; The 242. Whether ſeveral Objects, Secen by both Eyes, ought to Appear Double, ſince the Optical Axes, in ſuch a Caſe, are not Particularly Directed to any one Object; 3d. Whether the diſferent Inclinations oſ the Optical Axes, upon Various Removals of the Object from the Eye, have an Inſluence in giving us a Perception of it's Diſtance. . 20. IN Anſ7er to all which Que ons, we ſhall Endeavour to Prove, that there are no ſuch Imaginary Viſual Lines, a: thoẽ, which are call'd the Optical Axes; Firſt, Becauſe it is Notorious, that the Ic Se a Million of Points at once in any Obiect, Object, which is Propoſed to it, but it is Impoſſible the Optick Axes ſould Concuri in all thoſe ſeveral Points, unleſs they can Concurr in a Million of Points at th ſame time, that they can only Meet in one; There is nothing more Confirmed by Ex perience, than that we See Objects both on the Right, and the Left, Hand of us at the ſame time, and if the Optical Axes are Concerned in Reforming and Adjuſting ou Viſion of ſuch Objects, it muſt be by their Divergence, and nor by their Concourſe but of what Service the Divergence of the Optick Axes is in any Part of this Science, we are not yet Informed. 5. 21. A Second Objection againſt the Optical Axes is, That if we look upon any Object with one Eye only, the Diſtance of it is the ſame, which is a Manifeſt Confutation of the Optick Axes being any ways Concern'd in Impreſſing that Idea upon us; or if it were not, this very Doctrine of Opticks Endeavours to Explain our Notion of Diſtance by other Methods, that is, by the Optick Angle, by the greater or leſs Magnitude, or the more or leſs Brightneſs of the Object, which little Agrees with the Optick Axes;3 And therefore ſuch Explanations, whether the one or the other, Seem to be Equally Inſufficient and Invalid; We ſhall only farther Say, in Reſpect of the Optick Axes, that the Inclination of them cannot be any Meaſure of the Diſtance of Objects, where there is no Inclination of them at all, as there is not, vhen one Eye only Receives the Impreſſion. WE muſt alſo Subjoin, that in Refracted Diſtance, as thro' a Lens, or a Concave, it is Impoſſible for the Optick Axes by any Inclination to Deſcribe the Interval of an Obje&t from us; becauſe, tho' our Eyes were Suppoſed Capable of Directing their Axes to any Point in a Common and Ordinary Medium, yet they could not do it in a Refracting; ſince to what Point ſoever the Axes were Directed before the Interpoſition of the Glaſi, the Refracting Medium would, after it, moſt certainly Interrupt that Direction, and Oblige us to See Objects according to it's own Refracting Power, and not according to the Arbitrary Reference of our Eyes. S. 22. BuT That, which lies, as an Invincible Objection againſt theſe Imaginary Axes, is, that there is no Conncction betwixt the Cauſe, which they are Suppoſed to be, and the Effect Produced from them, that is, betwixt the Perception of an Object Single, or of Diſtance, and the Concourſe of the Optick Axes, and the Various Angles, which they Comprehend; It is Manifeſt, that the Optick Axes meet, and have a certain Inclination to cach other, is an At of our Wills, and of our own Minds; and That Perception is a Paſſion in us; But how it is Poſſible for the Mind to Perceive by a Reſult from it's ſelf, or how it can be Paſſive by being Active, is a Problem, which wants to be Reſolved; Thus in the firſt Inſtance, that we See Objects Single, is a Perception in the Mind, or an Impreſſion made upon it, that the Axes Concurr, is an Action of the Mind, or a Direction and Impreſſion from it, and Conſcquently there can be no Manner oſ Reaſoning from the one to the other, ſince there is no Agreement betwixt them, unleſi an Impreſſion upon the Mind is the ſame, as an Impreſſion from the Mind, which is altogether Impoſſible; And the like Argument obtains in Reſpect of Diſtance, betwixt which Perception, and the Inclination of the Axes, there is not the leaſt Congruity; If it is ſaid, the Mind Supplies what is vanting in it's Actual Perceptions by it's Judęment, it is the ſame, as 1o Aſfirm, the Mind can Perceive by Judging, which is Abſurd and Ridiculous; and we may as Juſtly Aſſcrt, that the Mind can Hear by Secing, or Taſte by Smelling or Apprchend any Thing by one Faculty, which is only Cogniſeable by another, as that it can Perceive by Inſerence and Reaſoning. 5. 23. THE Lat Thing we ſhall take Notice of in the Preſent Opticks is, the Prejudices, which the Mind is Suppoſed to Receive, by which Means it Oftentimes is Thought to See Objects at a Different Diſtance from that, in which they are Really Repreſented to it; But, that this is not ſo, is Evident from the foregoing Section, ſince it is Impoſſible our Judgments ſould Impoſe upon our Senſcs, however our Senſes may upon our Judgments; For tho ve may Falſely Collcct, that an Object ĩs nearer than it in Truth is, becauſe our Senſes Perceive it ſo, yet oui Senſes cannot Perceive an Object nearer than it is, in Conſequence of our Mind* Judging it to be ſo. F f ſ ſ 1ſl. BECAUs: 1ſl. BECAUSE, if the Judgment of our Minds could Determine us in our Perceptions, it could make us See Objects farther off, as well as nearer, than we Really Perceive them; and ſince we know the Sun to be ſeveral Millions of Miles Re moved from us, Conformable to that Judgment, we ſhould Apprehend it at tha Diſtance, as well as in a Reflecting Concave Glaſs, ve ſhould See an Object at ⸗ very near Interval, vhoſe Image is ſaid to be at an Infinite one from us, upon the Account of or Knoving, and having before-hand Judged, it to be nigh the Glaſ which Refiects it. 2d. BECAUSE, if the Judgment of our Minds could Determine us in our Perceptions, it muſt be Affirm'd, that what we Remember has a greater Force, and makes a ſtronger Impreſſion upon our Thoughts, than our Actual Senſations; Thus in the Inſtance above- mentioned, the Image, which is Reflected from the Concave, is Suppoſed to be at an Infinite Diſtance from it, and ſo Repreſented to the Eye, that is, that the Rays come to the Eye, as they would from an Object, which is Actually Placed at an Infinite Diſtance, and yet the Image Appears at a very ncar one, becauſe we had before Judged, or it had been already Impreſſed upon us, that the Object was ſo; Which is as much as to Say, that a Former Impreſſion made upon our Minds is more Forcible than a Preſent; But, ſince that Former Impreſſion was once Preſent, for that very Reaſon, the Preſent cannot be leſs Forcible than the Former. 3d. IF our' Pre- judging could have any Influence upon our Actual Perceptions, and Particularly in the Caſe we have Named, it would be a Reaſon, why we ſould never Perceive any Thing at all; For if we do not Perccive Things, as they are Impreſſed upon us, becauſe we Perceived them otherwiſe before, for the ſame Reaſon we ſhould not Perceive them at all, becauſe there was a Time Prececedent to our Perceiving them, when we Really did not Perceive them. 41h. IF Pre-judging can Alter our Preſcnt Perceptions, or Senſations, our Preſent Judging may vith Equal Reaſon Alter our former Perceptions, that is, if we See an Object at a nearer Diſtance, becauſe we had before Judged it to be ſo upon another or a former Perception, we ought upon the Preſent Perception, which if it Obtained it's due Force, would make the Object, or Image of it, Appear more Remote, to Judge, that the Object was more Remote in our firſt Perception, than it Appeared, and accordingly, whenever we look on it again, after ſuch a Perception, it muſt by this Reaſoning Appear more Remote. sth. IF Pre- judging has any Thing to do in our Perceptions, ve muſt Aſſert this, that becauſe an Object Appears at a certain Diſtance in one Circumſtance, Namely, vhere no Glaſs is Interpoſed, therefore where a Glaſs is, and the Circumſtance of the Object ĩs entirely Changd, the Mind is ſo Irrational to Conclude, that the Diſtance vill be ſtill the ſame; It ſecms to be a much quicker Reaſoning for the Mind, and a more Natural, into which theſe Prejudicate Perceptions are Reſolved by the Preſent Philoſophy, to Imagine, that where the Mediums, thro which we See Objects, are Altered, the Preceptions of them muſt be ſo likewiſc. 6th. It is alſo to be Obſerved, that, if Prejudice could Conquer and Subdue our Actual Perceptions, it ſould do it in one Caſe, as well as another, and the Image Reflected from a Concave Speculum ought to Appear in the ſame Dimenſions, as the Objcct, as well as the Diſtance from it; For vhy we ſould See an Object Reſlected from a Concave Speculum, much greater than iĩt is, and it's Diſtance the ſame, when our Prejudice would Equally carry us to think the Object no greater, and the Diſtance no more, than what we before Perceived them, is not to be Explained; It is therefore Evident ſfrom what has been Alledged, that this Notion of Prejudices in the Mind being able to Alter, and even to Efface, and Obliterate, our Actual Senſations, is nothing elſe than a Fineſs, and a Prevarication in Philoſophy, 1o vhich Recourſe is alvays had, where it is not able to Account for our Real Perceptions; It being very Eaſy to Say, we are Prejudiced, where we do nor Sce Things, as theſe Philoſophers would have us. 5. 24. To Conclude this Fourth Book of our Examination into the Principles of the Preſent Philoſophy, ve do only Requet of the Rationaliſts, and FreeThinkers oſ our Age, to Judge more Modeſily of theirt own Reaſoning, if, what has been Propoſed to us under the Name of Demonſtration, we have Proved comes ſar far ſort of ĩit; This of Opticks is that Part of Philoſophy, which has been Thonght more Eſpecially to Arrive at a Mathematick Certainty, whereas if the Contrary ha: been Evinced, the World will do vell to Conſider, how much they are to Conſidc in Iuch Pretences oſ Reaſon, and how much they ought to Value their Religion, in Preference to whatever the Wiſdom of Men can Offer in Affront to it. It is ſomething Strange and Unaccountable, that, tho we are every Age Convinced of the Vanity, and Falſchood, of the ſeveral Syſtems of Philoſophy, which have been Produced to the World, by One, Like an Ionis Fatuus, Diſappearing, and Another Riſing in it's Room, We ſhould yet alvays be ſo Fond of the Prevailing, as i? That Undoubtedly muſt be Right, vhen None before had ever Succeeded, but Each had been Baſſled in it's Turn; And one vould be Amazed, that Men, who make Great Scruples and Diſficulties in Believing the Doctrines of Religion, ſould not take Warning from their Predeceſiors, in being too Credulous in theſe Marters; But ſo it is, that as in Enthuſiaſm, ſo in Philoſophy, there is no Convincing Men of their Errors,tis a Kind of Frenzy, which Poſſeſes the Mind ſor the Preſcnt, and muſt have Time to Work it's ſelf off, and it is by Degrees, and by Patient Waiting, not by the Application of Reaſon and Argument only, that they at Length Recover their Senſes. HAD Ariſtorle been once ſo Uſed, as he is now, Perſons vould Scarcely have been Thought to have been in their Witts, whereas, ſhould any one go about to Defend his Opinions of Nature at this Time of Day, he would ſoon be Concluded to be out of Them; And why may we not Think the ſame of the Modern Syſtems; That They alſo may in Future Times be Diſparaged and Decryed, as much as They are now Eſteemed and Valued? Human Nature is the ſame, as it was, and the Geniuss of Men are, at leaſt, not Improved; Nor do ve find Brighter, or Nobler, or Sublimer, Faculties in thoſe, vho Commence Authors in this Age, than in thoſc who Wrote many Hundred Years ago. WEe may farther Aſfirm, without any Claims to Inſpiration, or a Pover of Divining, That the Modern Syſtems of Philoſophy cannot ſtand Long, if we are True in our Explanations of Nature, from our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; And if, likewiſe, Men will put themſelves to the Trouble of Examining, and Determining according to the Truth and Reality of Things, and not according to Intereſt, Paſſion, Prejudice, or Authority. F fffo TH E PRINCIPLES O F THE PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE F O R C E S B O O K V. Concerning the METAPHYSICKS and LOGICKS, or the SYSTEME of IDEAS, of Mr. LOCKE. T Hl ane ] ) THE PRINCIPLES of the PHILOSOPHY O F THE ExPANSIVE and CONTRACTIVE FORCES. B O OK V. CH AP. I Concerning the Deſign and Intention of the Eſſay on Human Underſtanding. s. 1. H E Purpoſe, it ſeems, of this Eſ=ay is to Inquire into the Original, Certainty, and Extent, of Humane Knovledge, together with the Grounds and Degrees of Belief, Opinion, and Aſſent, that is, in two ſhort VWords to Inform us, what Faith and Reaſon are, and how far ve may be Convinced by Either of them A Deſign, which is Truly Great and Noble, butwas Illy, and too Raſhly undertaken by a Philoſophy, which had not Conſidered the Evidences, which Ariſe from the One or the Orher; Had this Philoſophy Impartially, and Sincerely, Examined into all the Sciences, which are Subject, and do Properly belong, to the Province of Reaſon, or the Connection of Ideas, and at the ſame time made a Juſt Inquiry into thoſe Evidences, which might Rationally Convince us of any Hiſtorical Fact, whether Sacred or Profane, Neither of which ĩl has done, becauſe It Underſtood Neither, we might have had ſome mighty Expectations from ſo great a Performance; But, as it is not found, nor does it ſtand upon Record in it, that it Knew one Rational Science in Nature, or vas much Ac quainted with the Hiſtories oſ the Ancients, or the Reaſons, which we have to Believe them, we may Juſtly Think, and be Aſſured, that it is an Unſit, and a very Improper Judge oſ Either. : 5. 2. As to Reaſon, it was very Extravagant for this Philoſophy to Think to ſci Bounds to the Celebrated Inquiries of Sir Iſ. Neton, and all the Philoſophers, and Ma thematicians, who ſhould Succeed him; When, by what Appears, it Kne little more thar the Corpuſcularian Scheme oſ it, then in Requeſt, and in Mathematicks, two Common Propoſitions in Euclid, That the three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to two Rizhi ones ones3 And That, in a Rectangle Triangle, the Square of the Hypotenuſe is Equal to the Squares of the Sides, without, for all that is yet Evident, it's Underſtanding the Demonſtrations of Them: And as to it's Knowledge in Hiſtory, it was, ſo far a: can be Collected from the Tenour of it's Writings, Conſin'd pretty much to the Modern Travels and Voyages, to the Accounts of the Bay of Soldania, and the Hottentotts of Afric and the Cape of Good Hope, and the Inhabitants of the Caribbees, and to ſuch Kind of Stories which are Afſirm'd, and Refuted every Day: AND vith theſe Grand and Magniſicent Qualiſications of Knowing little in Philo ſophy, or the Mathematicks, or being Acquainted with any Rational Science, which is Extant, and of being a Marvellous Proficient in the Hiſtories of the Romiſb Miſſionaries, and other Voyagers to the Indies, this Philoſophy is Pleaſed to ſet up for a Preſeriber ol Limits to Human Underſtanding, for a Sertler of the Boundaries of our Knowledge, and for a Tetherer to the Mind of Man, ſo far as to let it Know, how far it can, or ſhall, go. and vhere it muſt ſtop; This is one Part of ũt's Province: Upon the other Branch of it's vaſt Attainments, from the Reading of the Reports and Stories of Travellers, it Riſes into an Inſtructor, and a Dictator, of what we are to Believe, Concerning all the Ancient Hiſtories, even the Beſt and the Teueſt of them, vhother Sacred or Givil, and which all of them, thereſore in ĩt's Senſe, arc only Probable at ſiè moſt; becauſe it's Converſation lay amongſt thoſe, which had little Authority, and leſs Integrity, to Recommend them; And Conſequently it too haſtily Imagined, that the Ancient ones were much upon the ſame Level with them, without giving its ſelf the Trouble to Conſider the different Atteſtations belonging to them. S. 3. TuE Real Deſign thereſore of rhis Philoſopꝶhy of Ideas, whatever it's Gloſſes, or Pretences, may be, is, Firſt to Propoſe its ſelf, as Judge in all Matters of Reaſon, and to Tell us, how far our Underſtandings can Reach in Mathematick and Philoſophick Inquiries, which, if we Reflect upon the Small Portion it was Poſſeſed of, in Either of thoſe Studies, cannòt but Raiſec in exery Learned Mind a Kind of Contempt and Indignation, at ſo Dareing and Aogant a Pręſumption; Muſt all the Glorious Atchievements of the Mcn of Speculation anã Science be laid Aſide, becauſe It Pronounces, 5e can only Extend our novledge to ſuch certain Limits and Degrees, which It has been Pleaſcd to Preſcribe to it, from it's own Want of it? Or muſt ve Think, that jt was Impoſſible for Sir Iſ. Newton to make any Advances in Natural Knoledge, in Fluxions, or the Infinite Series, becauſe this Philoſophy had never the Ieaſt Notion, or Apprehenſion of them? Tnis Philoſophy ought to have Known, that the Underſtanding of Man is BoundIeſs, and that there might Poſſibly be ſuch Principles of Reaſon and Knovledge, which were as much above it's own, as it's own were Superior to thoſe of an Ideot; and of which, when it was not Apprized, it would Diſcourſe of Reaſon, and the Powers of the Mind, vith as much Ignorance, as one, who never ſo much as Read Euclid, would do of Apollonius, or Archimedes. THERE is nothing more Plain, than that this Philoſophy of Ideas muſt either give us the Limits and Bounds of Human Knovledge, from what it's ſclf vas Informed of, or not; If it Meaſured the Extent of all knovledge by it's own, it was a Falſe and Injurious, as vell as a Scanty Meaſure; If it did not, it Diſcourſcd out of the Bounds oſ i's ovn Knovledge, and Lighted up the Candle of it's oun Reaſou to thoſe, vho #alted in Clear Sunſhine. 5. 4. Bur, being Conſcious of it's own Deſects, and Frailties, in theſe Matters, it Tells us, that it ſhall not at Preſent Meddle with the Phyſical Conſideration oſ the Mind, or Trouble it's ſclf to Examine, wherein it's Eſſence Conſiſts, or by what Motions of our Spirits, or Alterations of our Bodies, we come to have any Senſations by our Organs, or any Ideas in our Underſtandings, and whether thoſe Ideas do any, or all of them, Depend on Matter or no; It ſays, it only Intends to give us an Hiſtory of the Mind, and it's Faculties, and by that Means it Hopes to be very Serviceable to our Knovledge of it. 5. 5. BuT, how this Philoſophy of the Mind, and of it's Ideas, ſhould give us any Account, or Hiſlory, of it, withour knowing omerhing of it's Eſence, and Nature, whether it is Material, or not, tho it Inclines to the Latter in the Progreſs of this Eſſay, is Inconccivable. Axy ANY One would be Eſteemed to be a very Lame, and Imperfect Hiſtorian of Light and Colours, or of Plants and Vegetation, or of any Being in Nature, who did not know ſo much, at leaſt, of the Eſſence of that Being, as to Inform us, whether it was Matter, or not Matter; Becauſc if Light and Colours, br if Plants, and the Vegetation, which Attends them, have a Principle Appertaining to them Diſtinct from Matter, all the Hiſtorical or Experimental Properties, which Reſult from them, will be but ſo many Names, without our Underſtanding, what thoſe Properties are, or wherein their Nature Conſiſts; Thus there are a Million of Plants and Vegetables, which Grow upon this Earth, which are ſo many Hiſtorical Facts in Nature, and yet, if we Knew nothing more than, that there were ſuch Plants or Vegetables, and the Names of them, vithout Underſtanding their Qualities, Natures, or Virtues, we ſould only have a Vocabulary in our Minds, and ſhould be very Wiſe in our Knowledge of Names, and at the ſame time very Ignorant in Things themſelves. AnD this is the Caſe of the Preſent Philoſophy of Ideas; It Pretends to Inform ns of the ſeveral Properties of the Mind, which do in Fa¢t Exiſt in it, that it Wills, Remembers, Reaſons, and Judges, but will not be ſo kind as to tell us, what it is that does ſo, whether it is Matter, or not, or what the Nature of that Being is, which has all theſe Great and Sublime Qualities; But if it is ſo Doubtful and Cautious in a Thing ſo Certain and Clear, as that of the Mind's Immateriality, how can it be ſo Punctual and Poſitive, in Reſpect of our Ideas being Innate or not? Becauſe, if the Mind is a Being of it's ſelf, and Independent of Matter, it may have Notions and Conceptions Originally of it's own, without Thanking this Philoſophy for Introducing them into it; For how can this Philoſophy Say, when it does not Enter into the Nature of the Mind according to it's own Profeſſions, whether it may not be Furniſed with Certain Ideas Previous to thoſe, which it Receives ſrom Senſation. ANY One therefore, who would give us a True and Impartial Hiſtory of the Mind of Man, ſhould at leaſt be Informed of the Nature and Kind of that Being, upon which he is willing to Comment; Otherwiſe we ſhall be Entertained with a very Defective Hiſtory of it, and ſhall be only Inſtrudted what the Mind is, which this Philoſophy Means, but not Furniſhed with a Real and Jut Account of what is Meant by Human Underſtanding. BuT, as this Philoſophy does not Profeſs to Inquire into the Nature of the Mind, vhether it is Immaterial, or not, ſ0 we ſhall Excuſe it upon that Head, and ſhall therefore Examine, whether it has given us a Juſt Hiſtory of it, in Reſpect of its ſeveral Operations, and of Abſtracting and Compounding it's Ideas, which we Say and Affirm, it has not done; And as that is, what it Acknowledges to be it's Deſign, upon that only, I ſhall put the whole Stres of the Controverſy in Relation to Reaſon; Becauſe, Indeed it Knows nothing more, and therefore was not Capable of Judging any farther. 5. 6. A Second Province, which this Philoſophy Undertakes, is, to Inform us, what Faith and Opinion is, and what Degree of Aſſent we are to Vield to Things, which Depend upon Teſtimony, and Report, All which Evidences, in it's Notion, Riſe no Higher than to ſome Kind and Degree, or other, of Probability; So that the moſt Certain and Undoubted Matters of Fact, that there is ſuch a Country, as Spain, or the Indies, that there were ſuch Cities, as Athens and Rome, and ſuch Hiſtrians, as Thucydides and Livy, that there was ſuch a Perſon, as our Saviour, ſuch ⸗ Doctrine, which he Taught, and ſuch Miracles, which he Performed, according to the Account and Eſtimation of this Philoſophy, are not Certain, and only highly Pro bable; And Who is it, that tells all the Learned World;7 and all the Divines of it, this Wonderful Story? A Dealer in Voyages and Ròmances, and as to the Ancient Hiſto ries, whether Eccleſiaſtical or Profane, and the Undoubted Credit of them, as maj be Juſtly Imagined, a Perfect Novice. TnUS a Perſon, vho Knew little or nothing of Nature and Philoſophy, ſets up for a Dictator to the Wiſeſt Men in thoſe Sciences; And One, who had Cultivated but a ſparing Acquaintance with the Learning of Former Times, Propoſes himſelf for an Umpire and a Judge to all the Excellent Perſons of the Preſent, in the Knovledge of thoſc Times, how far they are to Value, and to Regard it.  g8 583 Tm Tuis, in Plain and Open Terms, is the Real Deſizsn of the Preſent Philoſophy ol Ideas, and theſe the Qualifications, as it Appears, with which it was Endued, for the Perſecting and Accompliſhing of it; OF which in what Manner it has Acquitted ĩi ſclf, nall be the Inquiry of the ſollowing Chapters. C H AP. II. Concerning no Innate Ideas, and the Mind's bemg a Raſa Tabul. 5. 1 HE ſirſt Attempt in this Philoſophy is, to Clear the Mind oſ any Innatc Ideas or Principles, and to make it a æaſa Talula, or:to Reſemble a Piece oſ Blank Paper, without any Original Characters, or Inſcriptions, Engraved upon it 3 Whereas it is Impoſſible for it to Prove this, whilſt it Proſeſts it's ſelſ Iznorant of the Nature and Conſtitution oſ the Mind; For, if it is a Being Independent oſ the Body, and had an Exiſtence of its ovn before it's Union with it, it is not certain, but it might have Ideas Peculiar to it's ſelf, Previous to any Received from Senſation; This Philoſlophy will not Diſown, that there are Spirits and Intelligences, which Exiſt in the World, Separate and Diſtinct from Body, and that Almizhty God doc; Exiſt in that Manner3 HowW then can it be Evidenced, that Human Minds may not have, not only Powers and Faculties, but Ideas alſo, Derived ſrom thoſe Powers, Vhich vere not owing to any External Impreſſions? How can it Demonſtrate, that our Souls did not Prc-exiſt to their Union with our Bodies ? All which is to be done, before it can Aſſirm, that the Mind has no Innate Ideas, no Proper Notions, belonging to it, which are the Immediate Reſult and Conſcquence of it's own Immaterial Nature. s. 2. BEs IDES, if the Mind had its Riſe, and Origin, at the ſame Time with the Body, iſ yet it is of a Diſtinct Narure from it, if it is Suppoſed to be a Perceptive, Intelligent Being oſ it's ſelf, it might, and vould, have Ideas and Notions of it's own, tho none had ever been Cõmmunicated to it from Senſation, and it might Reſlect upon it's own Operations and Povers, tho' it had been never joined and United to a onorſ Subſtance. . 3. Nay farther, if the Mind is only Alloved to have a Capacity of Perception at the ſame Time, that an External Impreſſion is made upon it, and it vould be Abſurd not to allow it that Capacity, ſuch a Faculty of Perceiving muſt either Include Actual Perception and Senſe, Originally in the Percipient, or not; Iſ it does, then there is Senſe and Perception in the Mind, Previous to the External Impreſſion; IT it does not, Senſe and Perception is Communicated to that, which had no Senſe and Perception beſore, ſrom an External Impreſſion, which has no Senſe or Perception belonging to it; Wnich is as Irrational, and as much Impoſſible, as that Inanimate Subſtances, or mere Corpuſcles of Matter, by a Mutual Concourſe, ſould Produce Thought, or Perception, which, this Philoſophy does Acknovledge, cannot be; But, if there is Senſe, and Perception, in the Mind, beſore the External Agent ſirikes upon it, it has ſomething Innate, ſome Ideas, or Notions, or, by whatever other Name ve Pleaſe to call them, ſome Senſe, ſome Perception, or other, Peculiar to it's own Nature. 5. 4. For Morcover, if the Mind vas a mere Raſa Tabula, if it was only a Plain Piece of Paper to Write on, what Diſſerence could there Poſſibly be in Fact in One Mans Underſtanding, and Another's? The Characters Engraven on cach, vould 1 the ſame, Derivd from thoſe Senſations, which are Common to all; ſince according to this Philoſophy, what is Originally Writ upon our Minds, is from our verſation with External Objects, and then. Reſlecting upon the Operations of the Facultics and Powers oſ our Underſtandings; Theſe thereſore would be nearly Alike in all Mcn, and there would, in General, be little or no Room leſt ſor that Prodigious Variety and Diſtinction, Obſervable in the ſcveral IThoughts, Reaſonings, Opinions, and Fancies of Men, and in the Forces and Strengih of their Proper Genius's, and Complxions of Mind; If the Ground-work oſ all was nothing elie than a Raſa Tabulu, and the Pencils Employed to Embelliſh it, vere no other than our Senſes, vhich are the ;me in moſ, and the Paintings and Portraitures made upon it, the Conſtant ſtant and Unvaried Objects of Nature, an Ideot, according to ſuch an Account oſ the Mind, may be as Wiſe, as a Philoſopher, and a Brute as Knowing, as a Man; There is one Raſa Tabula belongs to them all, the ſame Senſes to Inſcribe the Various Characters of External Nature upon it, and it is not to be Doubred, but they have Reflection. THERE ſeems to be nothing more Evident, on the Contrary, than that there is a Peculiar Nature, and Genius, a Various Force, and Power, which be longs to every Individual and Animate Being, and that even in Human Minds, there is ſome Diſtinction, by which One Perſon comes to have Sentiments and Notions, entirely Different from thoſe oſ Another; that therefore the Mind is not a Raſa Tabula, upon which any Thing may be Inſcribed, but can only Receive ſuch Notions and Apprehenſions of Things, either from Senſation or Reflection, as are Suited to it's Particular Nature; which ſeems to be the Riſe of all the Various Reaſonings, and Opinions, we ſind, either in common Life, or amongſt Men of Science and Speculation. Nor is it Unreaſonable to Think, that from this Vigour, Force, and Strength of Mens Minds, in which they are Infinitely Superior to any other Animate Beings, the Natural Immortality of them may be One way Derived; But this is not our Preſent Inquiry. S. 5. LASTLY, Suppoſing the Mind was not an Immaterial Subſtance, Grant it to be a Material one, if it has yet any Peculiar Nature or Conſtitution of it's own, it could not be a Raſa Tabula, upon which any Thing might be Imprinted : This Paper, for Inſtance, on which I Write, is Suſceptible oſ thoſe Characters, which I Drav upon it, becauſc it's Nature is ſuch, as to Receive the Impreſſion of the Ink, which Falls from the Pen, but Fire, or Flame, would not Admit oſ the ſame Characters, Deſcribed in the ſame Way, nor would Oil, or Spirit of Nitre, do it, nor, on the Contrary, would it be Poſſible to Write theſe Characters upon this Paper with thoſe Subſtances; That is, the Paper I Write on, as much Concurrs by i's Nature to the Production of theſe Characters, as the Ink does, or the Hand which Writes them; And thus it is in the Mind, if it is any Thing at all; It cannot Receive any Characters, whatever we Pleaſe, but ſuch only, as are Suitable to it's Being and Conſtitution; and therefore, if ſuch Being and Conſtitution in Diſferent Men is Different, the Inſcriptions made upon their Minds will be Different likeviſe; and Conſcquently, hat may ſeem Good to ſome Men, may Appear Vicious and Ill to others, hat may Produce Pleaſure in one Man, may in another Cauſc Pain and Uneaſineſs, and which is more, what one Perſon ſhall Eſtcem Juſt and Reaſonable, another may Think has the utmoſt Iniquity and Baſeneſs in it; And all this may be Derived from the Various Geniuss and Complexions of Men's Minds, and the Natural Powers and Faculties, which belong to them; A Good Temper vill, in the ſame Inſtance, Judge Mercy, and Kindneſs, and Compaſſion, the moſt Reaſonable Method of Procedure, in which an Auſtere and Rigid One will Prefer Harſhneſs and Severity; Which ſeveral Kinds of Reaſoning, in the ſame Caſe, cannot vell be Accounted for, excepting from a Fundamental Difference in Men's Minds, and upon the Conceſſion, that they are not, nor can be Conſidered, as ſo many Raſæ Tabulæ. 5. 6. BUuT be our Minds Raſæ Tabulæ, or not, it will be the Part of Wiſe Men 1o Inculcate and Impreſs upon them, when they are Young and Tender, the moſ Noble Sentiments, oſf which they are Capable; This ſeems to have been the Practice of the moſt Antient and Eaſtern Nations, from vhom the Grees and Romans, and the Preſent Europeans, Derive all their Principles of Reaſon, Philoſophy, Religion, and Learning; For they in their very Alphabets, which they Taught their Children, Appcar to have Contrived them ſor their Inſtruction, in the Grand and Sublime Dictatès of Religion and Reaſon, at the ſame Time, as they Learned and vere Informed, how to Write and Read; So that the Alphabet of the Eaſtern Countries, and of the Old Egyptians in all Probability, was a Summary of Divine and Moral Precepts, Conveyd to them with the very Rudiments of their Language and from their Infancy, Expreſſcd by Hieroglyphicks, and Explained by their Aſagi, or their Inſtructors And ſrom whence, the Fables of the Antients Poſſibly, and Particularly thoſe o ſop, were Modelled and Framed. Gg8”88° Tuu Tnus Aleph, ot Alpha, which Signifies an Ox, in all Likelihood, was the Repreſentation of God, to ſew his Stability and Strength, his Majeſty and Greatneſs, and Force; And this is the Firſt Letter in the Alphabet to Inſtrut us, That God i: Principally to be Regarded by us, and that he is to be Firſt in our Adoration and Eſtcem. Bath is a Daughter, and Berh an Houſe, to Inſorm us, That our Domeſtick Rela tions ought to Claim our next Veneration and Reſpect 7 Which two Precepts are cractly Agreeable to what we find in the Writings of Moſes and Pythagoras, hu both vere in æ271, and vere Inſtructed in all the Learning of it; The Firſt in EF fect Tells us, That a Molten Calf, or Ox, was the God, vhich the Eqim Worſhipped, Exod. 32. vhich is alſlo Confirmed by all the Accounts of thair Oſiris, or Miſraim, or Meres, or Apis, being Worſhipped in the Form of a Bull; The ſame Inſpired Perſon alſo Tells us, that God as firſt to be Worſhipped, according to the Commandments of the firſt Table, Exod. 20. And, That our Parents were in the next Place to be Reſpected by us, according to the firſt Commandment of the ſecond, in the ſame Chapter; The Laſt in the uoãEam wherher they vere his, or one oſ his Diſciples, is not Material, Gives us the following Precepts. Alarã rus pu nũm Ousi ua di Mdxræ. Tiua, à oice Oer tæu? Heòas àyavis. Tis m xœm x ulus ctte uluoãs inua pj, TEs Te vuũs æua, Tis ? dyXi? inynaams. Whaicu Perfectly Correſponds with the Precepts of arſoſes, That the Deity is firſt 10 be Worſhipped, and our Parents in the next Place to be Honoured by us. Gimel, or Gamal, Imports a Camel, and therefore Poſſibly Denoted Induſtry and Patience in their ſeveral Vocations and Employs, which they ought to Purſue vith Conſtancy and Labour, and of which that Creature was a Glyphick or a Characteriſtick, and an Example and Monitor to them. Daleth has the Signification of a Gate or Door of an Houſe, which by the Adagi and the Doctors of the Antient Egyprian Learning, even before the Times of anſri, might be Explaincd, as an Inſtruction to kecp within, and to give a Cloſe Attendance to the Affairs of the Family. He, from Hiſah, to be Silent, might with the ſame ſagi Signify, that a Family ſould be Governed and Ordered without Noiſe or Tumult, that each ſould Perſorm the Buſineſs oſ his Station with Silence, and that Oeconomy Conſiſts in ſuch a Regular Diſcharge in every one of his Duty, without Quarreſs and Contentions, and even without the Speaking of a Word And it is not Impoſſible, that it might not likewiſe farther Intimate all the Advantages oſ Silence in Reſpect of our Conduct and Behaviour in our common Converſation, as alſo in all the Solemn Offices of Religion, which always adds a kind of Reverence and Grandeur to both, there being more Eloquence many Times in Silence, than in the greateſt Perſormances of Human Wit and Oratory 3 And from hence it is not unlikely, that the Pythagorick Silence was Derived, as alſo That amongſt the Grees in their Engagements with the Trojaus, according to Homer, as That likewiſe amongſ the Eaſtern Nations to their Princes, and in all their Grand Solemnities, and Which is Preſerved amongſt the Turks and Mahometans to this Time, and with us Chriſtians, in the moſt Important and Serious Affairs; Nature ſtill Dictating to us, vhat was Thought to be a Juſt and Rational Precept with the moſt Learned and moſt Knowing of the Egyptians, their Magi, even before the Great Law-giver of the Jews Appeard. Vau, which Signifies the Hinges, on which a Door Turns, might be Interpreted by the ſame aragi, to be an Emblem, that we ſould not be always Recluſe, but that the Door ſiould be Opened for Hoſpitality, for Acts of Love and Kindneſs, and to Keep up a Commerce with others, and to Cultivate the Duties, which belong to a Community. I might go thro' the Remaining Part oſ the Hebrew Alphabet, from which the Greelt, and others, are Evidently Derived, in the ſame vay oſ Conjecture; And, Tho Perhaps it would be Difficult to Aſſign a Meaning to every Word in it, both becauſe there may be many Words Loſt to the Helrew Language, which vere then in Being, Being, when the Alphabet was Formed, and becauſc ve may not know the ſull Extent of that Language; As alſo, becauſe ſeveral might be Derived from the Old Eg ptian or Coptick, which is entirely unknown to us; Yet it is not Improbable, but that rhis vas the firſt Deſign of Alphabets, to make Children Learn their Letters, and at the ſame Time ſome Wholeſome Precepts Annexed to them, both as it is a Natural Way of Inſiruction, and as Words are made Uſe of in them; Whereas mere Lerters might have been as well Expreſſed by Syllables, as 4, B, Ce, De, E, e , &c. According to what is done in our Modern Languages. THE Order of theſe Eaſtern Alphabets is likewiſe from hence Determined, Namely, from the Importance of the Precepts, as Aleph is Placed before Berth 3 Becauſe our Duty to God is to be Preferred before our Duty to our Parents or Family, &æ. For there is nothing in the Nature of the Letter, why the one ſiould be ſet beſore the other, and why it might not be B, 4, &c. as well as 4, B, &. Only that we follow the Order of the Old æg-ptian and Hebrew Alphabet, without Retaining the Senſc and Intent of it. Iſhall therefore here give, Suitable to my Conceptions and Apprehenſions of theſe Matters, a Philoſophici and Chriſtian Alphabet, Agrecable to the Deſign of the Primitive and Eaſtern ones, which was very Good and Laudable, and which will Contain the Sum of our Religion, as we are Chriſtians, of Philoſophy, as we are Wiſe Men, and of Learning, as ve are Scholars; And which, if Lodged in the Memory, when we are Young, may ſerve for an Alphabet to our Reading, and for a Compendium of our Knowledge in Religion and in Reaſons In Both which, we ſhould Endeavour to be Informed thro' the whole Courſe of our Lives. Which Philoſophict anà Chriſtian Alphabet is as, follows, and which will make the Letters to be in the Order Subjoined, vix. F. C. S. M. R. O. L. H. E. P. A. G. N. &, D. B. L V. Z. W. T. I. U, X. I. TuE Explanation of which Alphabet is this. F. Father, The eme, Eternal, and Self-Exiſtent Being. i C. Chriſt, The Son of an Eternal Father. The æ of ou 5. Spirit, The Eternal Proceſſion from Both. Divine Worſhip. M. Mankind, That we ought to Conſult the Good of the whole Species in General, Abſtracted from Countries, Particular Perſuaſions, Relations, or Friends. R. Relatives, iſ. As to Chriſtianity, which is Firſt to be Pre-ſ ferred, we are to Love one Another, and to Deſpiſe all this World, in Reſpect to, and in Compariſon ith a Future State of Perfeũtion and Bliſs; 22. As to our Country, ſrom the foregoing Principle, we ſhould be Ready to Die for it, where it's In- ; rerets ao not Interfere with ſne Good and Happineſs of Man  jæ ſ kind; 37. As to our Parents; or our Bretheren, Children. and of our Care an Pupills, and Friends; or our Servants; we are to Pay the greateſt Solicitude Duty and Reverence to the Firſt; the greateſt Love and i moſi entire Affection to the Second; and the urmoſt Condeſcenſion and Kindneſs to the Laſt. O. Ourſelves, That we ought to be Temperate and Sober, and Averſe to all the Vices, which Deſtroy our Faculties, or Ruin our Conſtitutions, that we ſiould know Religion and Morality, to be both Contrived and Deſigned for our Wãꝶ being here, and for our Happineſs hereaſter. L. Language, C Engliſh, Latin, Greek, HeH. Hiſtory, brev, &c. Containing E. Eloquence,) all our School, or Claſſir. Toctry, cal Learning. Objects of our Memorial, or Elc mentary Knovledge. Algebra, Geometry, or Mathematicks in General, Nature, or Philoſophy, Catoptricks, or Opticks and Dioptricks in General, Diſſection, or Anatomy, Botany, . Chymiſiry, Phyſick, or Medicine in General, Zodiack, or Aſtronomy in General, World, or Geography, Time, or Chronology, Inſtitutes, or Civil Law, i Univerſal, or Catholick Doctrine, Schiſms, or Heterodox Opinions, Years, or Antiquity, ꝗHebrew, Greek, Ro-?and Philoman, Engliſh, &e. logy. Objects of our Ratio nal, or Academica Knov ledge. EEEEEEEEEEEEE 4TF ſuch an Alphabet was in Uſe among us, inſtead of the Modern, all theſe Name: would be Imprinted early upon Children, and they would have their Letters, and ⸗ Monitor to their Duty, and an Incentive to Learning, at the ſame Time; And even Thoſe, who ſhould aſterwards Want an Education in Learning, vould yet Retain the Alphabet of it, and would thereſore, either be Deſirous of Proceeding farther them ſelves in the Knovledge, it Propoſed, or Reſpect and Eſteem Thoſe, who did; Which would bring Religion and Learning into Honour and Reputation, which now are too oſten Received with Mirth and Ridicule, or Looked upon with Contempt; becauſe Men do not in the General, ſo much as know the very Names of the Studies and Sciences, which ſo highly Deſerve our Regard and Cultivation. AND that, what I here Write concerning Alphabets, may not ſeem to be upon a Low and Trivial Subject, I ſhall Venture to Say, that the Invention of them was one of the greateſt Eſforts of the Human Genius; Namely, to Reduce all the Various Sounds in any Language to 24 or 25, Characters, which by the different Combinations of them ſhould be Capable of Expreſſing, whatever was Poſſible to be Uttered by the Voice3 This muſt be a Work of Ages, not of one Man; And therefore, we find Cadmus of Thebes, and Palamedes at the Siege of Troy, who is ſaid to be the Inventor oſ cheſi, Celebrated for Introducing new Letters into the Alphabet : Ariſiotle, has been Famous ſor Telling us, how many Ways we may Conclude Juſtly in a Categorick Syllogiſm; But the Method, by which he found this great Secret out, is eaſily Diſcovered from Combining the Letters A, E, I, 0, in all the Poſſible Varitions of them; On the other Hand, how we ſhould Arrive at a certain Number of Characters, as 24, or25, vhich by a different Diſpoſition ſould Anſver all the Articulate Sounds in all Languages, I leave as a Problem to Philoſophers to Explain, and at Preſent Conclude, it muſt be by Innumerable Trials, and that it muſt have Exerciſed the Wit of many Ages, and oſ the greateſt Virtuoſo's in it, till the Alphabet came to that Perſection, that when ſucceeding Genius's made their Attempts that Way, ihey found them Unſucceſful, on Account of there being no Character vanting to Expreſs, what we were Deſirous to Pronounce; and ſo that Kind of Learning Ended, and Poſſibly with Palamedes ; But to Return to our Preſent Subject of no Ideas being Innate. 5. 7. To Conclude this Head of no Ideas being Innate, or of the Mind's being a Raſa Tabula: Iſ it is ſo, it muſt be ſirſt Suppoſed, according to s. 1, That the Mind is not a Being Independent of the Rody, and that it did not Pre-cxiſt to it's Union vith it3 Second, Agreeable to §. 2, That it has no Diſtinct Spiritual Powers, and Faculties of it's own, nor any Proper Ideas from thence Ariſing; Third, according likeviſe to . 3, That it has not ſo much as Senſe or Perception, before an External Impreſſion is Actually made upon it; Fourth, According alſo to §. 4, That all Mens Minds, tho' allowed to be Immaterial, are Alike, and that they are even upon the Level with thoſe of Brutes themſelves; And Laſtly, according to §. 5, That if they e Material, they yet have no Peculiar Genius, Nature, or Complexion, belonging to them, they are all no more than one Similar Blank Paper, upon vhich any Impreſſions ſions may be Made, br Characters Drawn, or Engraven All which Suppoſitions arc cither without Grounds, and Unproved, or elſe are Falſe in Fact and Realon; And yet, if all theſe Suppoſitions are not True, this Doctrine of no Innate Ideas, and o the Mind's being a Raſa Tabula, is entirely Unſupported, and has as litile oſ Innate Senſc in it, as it is Preſumd rthere was in the Mind, that Contrivũ it. S. 8. I is no Wonder yet, that a Philoſophy, which Entered into an Eſay upon the Mind with ſuch Notions of it, that it ſnould in the Progreſs oſ it Declare, that it could not Tell, whether it might not Reſult ſrom a Syſteme of Matter fitly Diſpoſed, and from whence that Power of Thinking, which we Perceive in our Selves, might be Derived; It was Eaſy for a Philoſophy, which had Diſclaimed àll Proper Senſe, or Intelligence, to belong to the Mind, and that it had any ldeas or Perceptions of it's own, and which had Affirmd, that all it's Notices were Conveyed into it from Senſation, and afterwards had Informed us, that the Soul did not alvays Ihink, it was Eaſy for it to Maintain farther, that it was either in i's own Nature Material, or that it was only a Property, which aroſe from a Syſteme oſ Matter fitly Diſpoſed, and which would Conſequently Vaniſh, and be no more, when that Syſieme was Deſtroyed, and therefore, that as the Soul was Material, ſo it was Mortal likeviſe Theſe Sentiments do Naturally Cohere with one another; and what Religion, cither Natural or Revealed, ve are to Expect from ſuch Perſualions, any one may with Facility enough Conclude, and what Notions we are to Enterrain of ſuch a Syſteme of Ideas, vhen it Comments on the Scriptures, or Diſcourſes to us ol the Being of a God, or of Morality, or of the Sanctions of the Divine Lav, or ol the Revards and Puniſhments oſ another World, or vhen it Solemnly Appeals to the Iat Tribunal: This is no Wonder. 5. 9. BUT this muſt needs be a Wonder, that a Philoſophy, which had Profeſſcd, it ſhould not Inquire into the Nature of the Mind, ſhould Engage in Queſtions, vhich ſo Immediately Concern it, and a little farther Openly Avov it's being Matter, or elſe a Quality, which Reſulted from a due Diſpoſition of it, and therefore, that it is not much more than the Vegetation of a Plant, which Riſes and Dies ith it; for according to its own Declared Opinion, a Fœtus in the Mother's Womb Diſfers not much. from the State of a Vegetable. 5. 10. AND yer Perhaps this Wonder may alſo Ceaſe, if we Conſider with what Deſign and Intention it Profeſſcd this, hich was, that it would not ſeem to know any Thing of the Nature of the Mind, but the Hiſlory of it But, as it Evidently Enows nothing of the one, ſo it will I Believe Appear, that it has not any Notion of the other; That it has not given us a True Account of Human Underſtanding, and that it's only Real Buſineſs was to Clear that Spacious and Magnificent Room of all i's Proper Furniture, that it might afterwards fill it with an Ornament and Garniture of Ideas, Suitable to it's own Fancy, and that thereſore, Inſtead of a Real and Impartial Hiſtory of the Mind, ve muſt reſt Satisſy'd with a Romance of it. S. 11. THERE is one Thing, which I ſhall take Notice of in this Chapter, as ReIating to the Nature of the Mind, as well as to the Hiſtory of it, and which therefore I ſall not have an Opportunity of Conſidering ſo fully in another Place; which is, Wnhether the Soul always Thinks, or not. i 5. 12. As to the Nature of the Mind, whether it is a Material or an Immaterial Being, if it is not of it's ſelf an Intelligent one, it may not always Think; becauſe it will only do ſo, vhen its Thoughts are Excited in it by ſome Impreſſions made upon it; and thereſore, if the Prelent Philoſophy is of this Opinion, that the Mind is a Raſa Tabula, a Perſectly Unactive and Unintelligent Being in it's ſelf, and in it's own Nature, if it only Perceives, as Impulſes are made on it, in like Manner, as this Paper Receives no Characters, but what are Written thereon, it will not alvays Think and Perceive; And it may, if it Pleaſes, upon ſuch a Worthy Sentiment oſ our Minds, Aſfirm, that they do not always Think, or have no Senſe at all Appertaining to them; That is, that our Underſtandings, and our Minds, are no more, than Motion is to Matter, a mere Accident of it, and that Thought, Perception, Senſe, or Intelligence, ĩs nothing elſe, but a Quality oſ ſome unknown Subſtance, vwhich may in ſuch a Caſec be Matter, as well as any other Subſtance, and which it Thinks it may be, when ſitly Diſpoſed. F. 13. PUT, s. 13. BuT, if on the Contrary, the Mind is of it's ſelf, and in iſ's own Nature, an Intelligent and Senſible Being, it will always Think, that is, will have always Senſe, Intelligence, and ſome Kind of Perception or other; becauſe it is Impoſſible, that a Being. which has Intelligence, Senſe, or Perception, in it's own Nature, ſhould ever be Deſtitute of it, and therefore, in ſuch a Notion of the Mind, it muſt alvays Think, that is, be always Endued with an Actual Senſe, and Perception, and not with a Capacity of it only, ſo that it is very Evident and Plain; That thoſe, who Aſfirm the Soul does not always Think, do it upon this Principle, that it is not an Intelligent Being in it's own Nature, but may be Matter, or any other Subſtance, for it is all the ſame, if it is an Unintelligent one; and on the Contrary, that Thoſe, who Afſfirm, the Soul does always Think, muſt do it upon a Principle Perſectly Diffęrent, Namely, that it is, in it's own Nature, a Senſible, Perceptive, and Intelligent Being. Tuis Philoſophy yet Proſeſſes, it will not enter into the Phyſical Conſideration of the Mind, tho' at the ſame Time it Pretends to Determine ſuch Queſtions, hich do moſ Intimately Relate to it, and which Determination of it does very Plainly Conclude, that it was of Opinion, that the Soul either was Material, or if it was Immaterial, was notwithſtanding an Unintelligent Being, in its own Nature and Conſtitution; if ſo, it ſould ſurely have brought us ſome Arguments, ſome Conviction, that it was ſo; Whereas, ve do not find one Word to that Purpoſe, becauſc it muſt be very Conſcious to it's ſelf, that it could Produce no ſuch Arguments: On the other Hand, there are very Notorious Proofs, that the Mind is an Intelligent, and Perceptive Being in it's oWn Nature, which I have given in other Parts of this Philoſophy, and ſhall only at Preſent Say, that it cannot Prove the Being of a God, unleſs it Allows the ſame Arguments for a Human Intelligence, Separate and Diſtinct from Matter, or any Unintelligent Subſtance, which it does for a Supreme and a Divine One. 5. 14. As to the Hiſtorical Part of this Diſpute, whether the Mind does in Faòt always Think or not? tis Anſwered; That, Altho we may not have in View any onc or other Particular Idea, that is, Altho the Mind may not be Determined to the Contemplation of any Ideas in Preference, and in Diſtinction, to others, for in ſuch a Caſe the Mind is Active, tis Buſyed and Employed about Objeſts of it's own Chooſing, and in that Meaning of the Word it will not alvays Think, Yet it does not from thence follow, that it may not have a General Senſe and Perception; Thus IBelieve any one may every Day in his Life Experience, that whilſt he is Walking, Sitting, or Standing, he many Times has no Certain and Explicit Ideas, vhich he can the next Minute give any Account of, and yet he can Remember this, that he had, all that vhile, Senſe and Perception in General, as he was Sitting, Walking, or Standing, and that he was Conſcious of it, all the Time he did ſo; Thus alſo, even in Study, vhere the Mind is Intent, and does then certainly Think, there is an Interruption, and ſome Kind of Interval betwixt our Actual Ideas, which Succeed one another, and ſometimes that Interruption is Continued for a Conſiderable Time, when it cannot find out the Idea, which it wants, and yet, notwithſtanding that, we are Conſcious to ourſelves of a Strong and Eager Senſe and Perception in the Mind, tho ve cannot Aſcribe to ſuch Interval any Idea at all; So that Hiſtory, and Fact, ſeems to be on that Side of the Queſtion, that the Mind'always Thinks, that is, has alvays Senſc and Perception belonging to it; for ſurely this Philoſophy cannot Mean, by the Minds not always Thinking, that it does not always Study, that it does not alvays, on ſet Purpoſe, and by it's ovn Choice, Contemplate ſome certain Ideas or other, or that it does not always Remember thoſe Ideas, which it had; If ſo, as the Aſſertion is Triſling and Impertinent, it might be Aſſured, it vould never meet vith any Adverſary upon that Head; The Queſtion is, whether the Mind of Man has alvays in Fact an Actual Senſe and Perception? Thus far we have Endeavoured to ſhew it has; In Reſveries it Acknovledges it, whilſt it Defines them to be a Stare of the Mind, in which Ideas Float thro it, without our Notice or Obſervation; However ve ſnall not be villing to take it's Acknovledgements, unleſs ve find it Really i: ſ0; In that Condition and Circumſtance of the Mind now Mentioned, it does not Appear, that it has any Ideas Floating in it, but rather, that it has only then the General Senſe and Perception beſore Expreſſed, that it is in a Perfect Srate of Quieſ cence, as to any Particular or Explicit Ideas, and is little more than Conſcious oſ it Exiſting Exiſting; For, i? we Ask ſuch a Perſon, what he has been Thinking of, he cannot Inform us, but if we Ask him, whether he was Alive, or had Senſe, or not, he vill readily Anſwer to the Inquiry; In Sleep, which is the laſt State of the Mind to be Conſidered, every one will eaſily own, that Dreams are an Inſtance oſ our Thought, and Perception; And that there is this General Senſe, and Perception, in the Mind, when we do not Dream, or do not Remember, that wve did, is Evident from Hence. 1ſ. BECAUSE, we Perceive, vhen others are in the Deepeſt Slumbers, that therè are certain Motions and Agitations of the Human Body, which are as Real Indications of this General Senſe, and Perception, as our Sitting, Standing, or Walking, is, even when our Minds may be Void of any Explicite, or Actual Ideas. 2à. BECAUSE, in the Deepeſt Slumbers, if any Pain is Applyed, the Perſon is Immediately Senſible of it; which is as much an Argument of this General Senſc, and Perception, and the Mind's always Thinking, in that Acceptation of the Word, as it is an Argument, that the Fire alvays Burns, tho' I do not always Perceive it, becauſe, whenever I am Deſirous to make the Trial, I ſall alvays find it does. 3d. BECAUSE, Without this General Senſe, and Perception, it is not Conceivable, how the very Fluids of the Body ſhould obtain their due Action and Circulation; for, if upon the Abſence of Senſe and Perception, a Perfect Stagnaney Enſues, and the whole Maſs of them is Congealed into a Cold and Contractive Subſtance, as in Death, the Preſence of it muſt Certainly be Concluded from their Activity and Motion. 41h. BECAUSE, there are an Hundred Inſtances, where we are Certain we have a General Senſe, and Perception, and yet are not Conſcious of, or do not Remember, any Determined or Diſtinct Ideas, which we had; and therefore, it is Equally Reaſonable for us to Think, that ſuch is the Circumſtance of the Mind in the Deepeſt Slumbers. C H AP. III. Concerning Simple Ideas. S. 1. TF we Conſider the Images, or Ideas, of External Objects, which are only Mentioned in the Chapter of Simple Ideas, how they Enter into the Mind, it is Plain, that they are Impreſſed upon it at once, and together, ſo that it is not one Single and Diſtinct Image, which Strikes us, and then another, but we See the CoIour, the Extenſion, the Solidity, the Opakeneſs, or Tranſparency, the Brightneſs, or Obſcurity, and all the Viſible Qualities of an Object at the ſame Time; We likewiſe Feel Solidity and Extenſion, Hardneſs or Soſtneſs, Warmth or Cold, and all the other Properties of any Body, which Fall under the Senſe of Feeling at one Inſtant; And ſo it is, in Reſpect of our Hearing, Taſting, or Smelling: That is, our Ideas Enter into the Mind, Complex and United, according to the Variety, with which our Senſes are Capable of being Affected, or according to the Variety, with which one Senſc is ſo3 And after theſe Impreſſions are made upon them, when we have Acquired them in the Groſs, we can then, if we Pleaſe, Sit down and Reflect upon theſc Complex Ideas, and Diſtinguiſh them into the ſeveral Parts, of which they Conſiſt, and Contemplate them, as ſo many Different Properties, Exiſting together in the ſame Subject 3 Thereſore, if we allow the moſt to this Philoſophy, that the Mind has no Ideas Originally in it's ſelf, but that they are Derived into it from Senſation, All that we can Affirm is, that the Complex Ideas, which it Reccives from External Nature, are the Foundation and Materials of it's Knowledge, And not that its Simple Ideas are. S. 2. TuaT is, as to External Beings, our Knowledge Depends, and is Founded, upon thoſe ſeveral Informations, we Receive from our Senſes, Concerning Bodies, and their Exiſting in that Aſſemblage and Conjunction of Properties, vhich we Obſerve in them; Thus the Heat of the Fire, it's Burning and Conſumeing Quality of the Fuel, which is laid upon it, or of the Finger, Applyed to it, and the Pain, which ĩi j H h h h Conſequen Conſcquent thereupon, its Brightneſs and Flame, and it's Colour, do all Unite toge ther in one and the ſame Subject; So likewiſe, the Whiteneſs and Soſtneſs of Snov, it's Coldneſs, and it's Capacity of being Condenſed upon a Compreſſion of it or of Melting upon an Acceſſion of Heat or of Warmth, are Ideas which Appear un der one Collection3 And the ſame may be Aſfirmed of all other External Being in the Univerſc; That they all of them lie in the Underſtanding, like ſo many Diit inct Faciculi, or Congeries of Properties, which the Mind has Obſerved from it Senſations to belong to each, and which, when it is willing to Survey, it Diſtinnguiſhes into the Various Ideas, of which every Individual Complexion of them is Composd. S. 3. THIS ſcems to be the True Hiſlory oſ our Ideas of External Beings. how they Enter the Mind, and how upon a Critical Examination oſ them aſterwards, ve come to Divide and Diſtinguiſh them into thoſc, which are here Termd Simple ones. FroM whence it will Follow; i1ſt. THAT the Foundation of our knowled2e of External Beings, and the Materials oſ that Knowledge, are the Ideas, which we in Fact Receive ſrom thoſe Beings, and according to that Complexedneſs, and that Conjunction oſ Properties, which they Obtain in Nature. 24. THAT ve Receive ſuch Ideas by the Mediation oſ our Senſcs. 3d. THAT We cannot Frame any new Being in our owvn Minds, any new Congeries or Faſciculus of Propertics, which we have not Obſerved in Fact to Exiſt, unIeſs a Chimerical onc. 4h. THAT We cannot Divide theſe Complex Ideas, vhich we Reccive from External Beings into Simple ones, ſo as to make them Exiſ©t Diſtinctly and Separately, tho we may View in our Minds, both the Difference of theſe Simple Ideas, and can Recollect, by which of our Senſes they were Impreſſed upon us; That is, in Short, our Knovledge of Beings without us Depends upon, and is Derived from, what we Experience Concerning them, and what we Experience Concerning them is owing to thoſc Informations, vhich we Receive ſrom our Senſes, all which is nothing leſs than a Plain and Evident Axiom. ON the other Hand, this Philoſophy Propoſes thoſe, which it calls Simple Ideas of Senſation, and aftervards thoſc oſ Reſlection, for the Foundation of all our Natural Knovledge, and that they are the Materials of it; In which Doctrine two Things are Aſfirmd, which are either Falſe, or not Provd. i 1ſt. TuAT our Senſations are the Original Perceptions in our Minds, and that, what is Diſtinct from them, Proceeds only from our Reſlections upon thoſe Senſations; Which Suppoſcs the Mind to be a Raſa Tabula, to be an Unintelligent Being of it's ſelf, and in it's own Nature, and that Senſe, or Perception, is Excited in that Eeing, which had no Senſc or Perception before, by a Being like wiſe, which had Neither; All which Suppoſitions are at leaſt not Provd, and by what has been ſaid in Chapter the Second are All of them Falſe. 2à. THE Sccond Thing Aſfirmd in this Doctrine of Simple Ideas is, that they are the Materials at leaſt of our Knovledge of External Beings; tis True they are ſo, when theſe Simple Ideas are Joined and Connected together, Agrecably to what Nature Preſcribes, and ro what we by our Senſations Experience from it; but if we Diſſolve this Union of the Real Properties, which are found to Exiſt together, and Separate them into Single Ideas according to this Philoſophy, we lay the Foundations of a Chimerical Knowledge of Nature, but not of a Real one. THUS we knov, that Heat, that Light, and Brightneſs, and a Particular Kind oſ Redneſs, and a Power of Conſuming the Fuel, which is thrown upon it, of Fuſing Metals, and Raiſing an Ebullition in Water, of Melting Wax, and Hardening Clay, arc Properties, which belong to Fire, and we have the Diſtinct and Simple Ideas of all theſe, and of their being United in one Subſtance; Thus alſlo ve know, that Whitencſs, and Softneſs, and Cold, and a Capacity of being Diſſolved into Water by Heat, of being Condenſed by Compreſſion, &. are Properties, which belong to Snov, the ſeveral Simple ldeas of which our Minds are Furniſhed with ſfrom our ſenſes, and we at the ſame Time find, they Exiſt together in one Individual Subſtance; Thus ſar thereſore ve Proceed according to Nature. BU- DBur, If ve Reſolve theſe Subſtances into their Simple Ideas, and Suppoſe theni to Lie Single and Separate in the Mind, and Reſign it to the Underſtanding to Pur what Ideas, and what Number or Collection of them it Pleaſes, into one Complex One, and Imagine our Simple Ideas to be the Materials of our Knowledge in this Senſe, We then Depart from Nature, and Form ſo many Chimeras in our own Fancies, which vill be of little Uſe or Service to any Real Knowledge of Things; For if we Confound the Simple Ideas of one Subſtance, and Mix and Blend them with thoſe of another at Pleaſure, we to all Intents and Purpoſes as much Triſſle in our Compounding them, as when we Frame the Idea of a Griſfin, ora Centaur, upon Members and Parts, Taken from Animals of Various Kinds, and Differing Denominations; And therefore, what is Aſfirmed by this Philoſophy, and which is the Foundation of the Whoole, is Intirely Falſe, and Wrong; That, vhen the Underſtanding is once Stored vith theſe Simple Ideas, It has the Power to Repeat, Compare, and Unite them, even to an almoſt Infinite Variety, and ſo can make at Pleaſure new Complex Ideas. WuEREAS, It cannot make one Complex Idea from theſe Simple ones, otherviſe than what is Experienced from Nature, and when it Recedes from that, vhatever Complex Idea it Forms, it is as much Chimerical, as that of a Griffin, or a Centaur. S. 4. Tus far ve have Conſidered Simple Ideas, and the ſecond Chapter, which belongs to that Head; This Philoſophy from thence Proceeds to Ideas of one Senſe, n Chap. 3 Book 2. After having Recounted the ſeveral Ways, by which the Mind Ob- ſæ: tains it's Simple Ideas; Which are ſaid to be Impreſſed upon the Underſtanding, m 1ſt. ErTHER by one Senſe only. M 2d. Or by more Senſes than one. Eſ 3d. OR by Reſlection only. 5 4th. ORr by all the Ways of Senſation, and Reflection: As to the Ideas of one Senſe, Light and the Various Colours, which we Perceive, are Gained by the Eye; All Kinds of Noiſes, Sounds, and Tones, by the Ears; The ſeveral Taſtes and Smells, by the Noſe and Palate; And the moſt Conſiderable of thoſe belonging to the Touch, are Heat, Cold, and Solidity. 5. 5. BUT, after all this Enumeration of our Simple Ideas, which Enter the Mind 7 by one Senſe only, what is the Diſcovery, which is made to us? Unleſs, thart Exter-7 nal Beings cannot be Perceived by us, but by the Mediation of our Senſes, whichVi no Philoſopher, vho vas ever in them, would go about to Deny; Tis a Truth, as Plain, as that the Mind, and the Beings External to it, are Diſtinct and Different Deings. Ir any Thing farther is Inſinuated, Either; 1ſt. THAT the Mind is a Raſa Tabula, ſince it would not have one of theſe Ideas, if it's Organs of Senſation were Stopt, or Diſabled, from Informing it, ve have already Conſidered that Pretence; And it may be here Added, that even in this Caſe, the Mind is no more Proved to be a Raſa Tabula, from the Neceſſity it finds of Senſations to Furniſh it with the Ideas oſ External Nature, than External Nature is a Raſa Tabula, from the Neceſſity it finds of the Mind to the being Perceived; That is, Perception is as Neceſſary to our Senſations, as our Organs of Senſe are; And till it is Evinced, that the Mind is nothing in it's ſclf, and that Perception is only a Quality, Reſulting from a Syſteme of Matter fitly Diſpoſcd to Produce it, all the Enumeration of Idcas in the World, and the Senſations, which are ſaid to be the Cauſes of them, vill not be Sufficient to Prove, that the Mind is nothing elſe, than a Raſa Tabula, or a Piece of Blank Paper, good ſor little, but to Write on. 2d. Or, if it is farther Inſinuated, That theſe Simple Ideas Enter the Mind Singly, and not in Conjunction vith others, or, That, altho' they do Enter in Conjunction ith others, the Mind may afterwards Conſider them, as Single and Independent Ideas, and Unite and Compound them at Pleaſure; The Firſt ĩs Falſc in Fact, and the Laſt a mere Chimera. ] 3d. OR, Iſ it is Inſinuated, That theſe Simple Ideas from Senſation are Firſt in the Mind, becauſe this Philoſophy has Placed them Firſt in this Exact and Accurate Hiſtory of ii, ĩt is, what is taken for Granted, without the leat Shadow or Appearance oſ a Prooſ of it. H h h hæ s. 6. As 5. 6. As to the Ideas, which we Receive from the Eye, the Ear, the Taſle, or the Smell, This Philoſophy Paſes them over, it may be Juſily Suppoſed, as Underſtand ing little or nothing of the Matter, and very Unſortunately Chooſes to Take the Ide: of Solidity into it's Examination, which is Affirmed to Proceed from our Touch.  WnEREAS, Firſi, I by Solidity is Meant, according as it is Defin'd, That Unſur  mountable Force, which Hinders the Approach of two Bodies, when they are Mo ving One tovards Another, it is not an Idea of one Senſe only; or rather it is noi Properly any Simple Idea at all, but a Complex and Abſtracted one; It is not an Idea ol one Senſe only, becauſce we can as well by our Eyes be Informed, that ſome Bodies are Supported by others ſrom not Sinking downwards, that they cannot have a Mutual Acceſs to each other, without the Removal oſ the Intermediate one, that one cannot Enter into the Place of another, unleſ upon the Latter's Relinquiſhing the Space it Poſieſes, all this we may be as ſully Informed oſ by our Sight, as by our Feeling, and thereſore, as we ſhall aſterwards Prove, it cannot be a Simple Idea, ſince that can only Enter by one Senſe, 5. 7. 8. I  is not ſarther any Simple Idea at all, but an Abſtracted and a Complex one; It is an Abſtracted one, becauſe it is a Force in General, which is Aſſerted in this Idea, and not any Particular and Deſinite one, which is Neceſſary to any Diſtinct and Simple Senſation; And it is a Complex Idea, becauſe it takes in the Mutual Relations of ſeveral Bodies to each other, or of two at leaſt, ſo that there is the Force Proper to cach Body, the Space which it Poſſeſes, the Removal out of that Space before the other can Enter into it, to be Conſidered in this Idea, which therefore is far from being a Simple Idea of one Senſe, or of being a Simple Idea Derived from our Fecling in Particular, unleſs we can be Allowed to Feel Space, as well as Solidity. SECOND, If by Solidity is Meant only, vhat we Actually Feel from Body, upon the Application of our Hands to it, in Reſpect of Reſiſtence, for we muſt not take into this Idea any other Tangible Qualities, as Heat or Cold, Roughneſs or Smoothneſs, Gravity or Levity, but only thoſe Perceptions, which we Plainly Experience, ſrom the Preſſure of our Hands upon the Body we Touch or Feel; in ſuch a Caſe, our Perceptions are not of the Abſtracted Solidity, which has been Named, we do not Feel the Space, which our Hand Enters, and the Body Leaves, but our Senſations are, in Reſpect oſ Reſiſience, cither that a Body is Hard, and therefore Reſiſts more, or is Soſt, or is Fluid, and Reſiſts leſs; That is, all which we Experience in Relation to the Reſiience of Bodies, ſfrom our Preſſing our Hands upon them, is only the Various Degrees of ſuch Reſiſtence, and which are the ſame in Regard to our Feeling, as the Various Kinds oſ Colour are to our Sight; But if, becauſe we Actually Perccive Blue, or Red, or Green, in the ſeveral Objects we Converſe with, we are therefore Mindcd to make Colour in General, which Certainly is an Abſtracted Idea, a Simple one of Senſation, we ſhould do Juſt, as Wiſcly, as this Philoſophy has done, in making Reſiſtence in General a Simple one of Feeling: As to theſe Various Kinds of Reſiſtences, which we in Fact Experience, tis the Part of Natural Philoſophy to Accounr for them, and vhich has been already done from the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. 5. 7. TuE next Thing, which this Philoſophy Conſiders, is the Simple Ideas oſ Diverſe Senſes, and here likeviſe it is far from giving us a True Hiſtory oſ the Mind; ſince there never vas any Simple Idea, which Entered the Mind by more Senſes than one, becauſe ĩt is in the Nature of the Thing Impoſſible. No one ever Imagined, that Colour could be Gained by the Ear, or Sound by the Eye, or that we could Smell, what was Sweet or Ditter to the Taſte, or on the Contrary, Taſte the Fragancy of a Roſe or a Violet, tho' the Smell and the Taſe have as near an Aſſinity to each other, as any Senſes, vhich we have, becauſe thoſe Organs of Senſation are Perhaps of the Neareſt and moſt Similar Contexture oſ any we are Poſeſicd of, and why we ſould not Affirm the ſame in Reſpect of our Sight and our Feeling, vill be hard to Say; Can any one Suppoſe, that what I Actually Sce, I Feel ? Is Sight, Feeling? If this cannot be Aſfirmed or Maintained, our Real and Simple Ideas, which are Derived from Sight into our Minds, muſt be as Diſferent ſrom thoſe of our Touch, as they are ſfrom Sounds, which we Receive by our Ears, or from Taſtes and Smells, whici we have from thoſe Senſes, which are Proper to them. 5. S. DESIDES, S. 8. BESIDES, the very Formation and Contexture of our Organs of Senſe, whicl is Various and Different in cach of them, does Sufficiently Evince, that it is Impoſ ſible, the ſame Simple Idea ſould be Impreſſed upon the Mind from diſferent Organ of Senſation, where the External Object is the ſame, which is the Occaſion of ſuch an Impreſſion; It is Impoſſible, if the Contexture of my Eye is Diſſcrent from thai of my Hand, or of my Ear, or any other Organ of Senſation, that my Mind ſnioul Perceive the ſame Simple Idea from the ſame Object, where the Impreſſion muſ needs be Diſferent, from the Different Quality in the Organ of Senſation to Re ceive it. 5. 9. As to the Ideas Mention'd, which are ſaid to Enter the Mind by Diverſc Senſes, they are thoſe of Space, or Extenſion, Figure, Reſt, or Motion, which are Aſfirmd to be Derivd into it, both by our Senſes of Sight and Feeling. IN Reſpect of Space, which Conſiſts of Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, which is neither Solid, nor Coloured, nor Tranſparent, and is only Room, in which Bodies Move or Exiſt, or are Felt or Seen, it is Impoſſible our Minds ſhould Receive it, from either our Eyes, or our Touch, becauſe it is an Idea Abſtracted from all our Senſes, and Formed by the Mind in Excluſion of their having any Share in it; Tis True, ve Feel the Extenſion of Body or of Matter, but that is not Space, and we Sec the Extenſion, or Colour of it, or a Diffuſion of Light or Darkneſs, where we cannot Perceive any Groſſer Subſtance to Exiſt, but nothing of this is Space neither; ſo that Space in the Abſtracted Notion of it is a Creature Shaped and Contrived by the Mind, without any Derivation of it from our Eyes or our Feeling. AND as to that Real Extenſion, which our Eyes Perceive in Bodies, it is as Diſtinct from that, which we Feel in them, as Colour is from Extenſion, or any Viſible Quolity of Matter from a Tangible one of it, or as our Eyes are from our Fingers; And thus in the Extenſion of Light or Darkneſs, where no Groſs Body is Viſible to them, what do our Eyes Receive, unleſs the Impreſſions of the one, or the other? And if ve come to Feel that Space, throo which both are Diffus'd, we are Apprehenſive of nothing, but of Heat, or a Lively Action from the one, or a Coolneſs, and more Languid Senſation from the other. s. 10. THUS alſo in Relation to Figure, ve See the Terms and Boundaries of Bodies, and likewiſe Feel them, but yet notwithſtanding, this Philoſophy will own, that a Perſon, vho is Born Blind, and afterwards Receives his Sight, cannot Diſtinguiſh a Globe ſrom a Cube, tho' he had been never ſo well Verſed in Diſcriminating the one from the other by his Feeling; which is an Evident Argument, that the ſame Idea of a Globe or a Cube does not Enter the Mind by both Senſes, ſince, if it did, the Eye vould ſoon Acknowledge ſeven upon the firſt Impreſſion made upon it) the Idea, which the Mind had been ſo Long, and ſo Familiarly, Acquainted with, by it's Organs oſ Feeling. IT is therefore Maniſeſt, that this Idea of Figure, which is ſaid to Proceed from both Senſes, is not an Idea of Senſation, but one of Abſtraction, Made and Formd by the Mind; and it is only an Abſtracted Termination of an Abſtracted Space, which would be a True Idea, tho' there was no ſuch Thing, as a Real Figure Exiſiing in Nature; for this is the Senſe of Philoſophers, that a Globe, or a Cube, a Circle, a Square, or a Triangle, would be the ſame, whether there were ſuch Figures Actually Exiſting or not, and the Properties of them would be Alike and Invariable, which they call Eternal Truths; But what is this but a Confeſſion, that ſuch Ideas are not the Ideas of our Senſes, but the Abſtractions and Creatures of our own Minds? And what are ſuch Eternal Truths Diſferent from a Chimera, and the Properties of it, being Diſtinct, and bearing ſuch a Proportion and Analogy to thoſe of a Centaur, which they will always do, tho' ſuch Beings were never found in Nature? Such Truths would be Eternal indeed, but would not be worth any Wiſe Man's Knowing. IN Fact, what we Experience from our Eyes in Reſpect of Figure, is, that we find Bodies Variouſly Terminated and Bounded, and we likewiſe Feel them ſo, but the Impreſſions, which are made upon our Minds from ſuch Terminations by our Eyes. and by our Feeling, are as Different, as the Feeling of a Surface of any Portion of Matter is from the Seeing of it; Or again, as before, as our Eyes are from our Fingers;3 This Indecd, according to what I have Mentioned in the firſt Part of the / ciples ciples oſ Philoſophy, may be done; we may Traverſe a Figure with our Eyes with the ſame Direction of Motion, as we do vith our Hands, and by that Means a Man; who is Born Blind, may know how to Diſtinguiſi a Globe from a Cube upon his firſt Sceing them; This however is not from an Impreſſion upon the Organ of Sight; but from giving it the ſame Motion, which Arrives to the Hand in ſuch an Incident, and is not an Argument that ve have the ſame Idea oſ Figure from both our Senſes, but the Contrary; ſince ſuch a Notion of Figure is not Produced in the Mind from it's Actual Senſations, but from it's Reaſonings upon them, and therefore cannot be Term'd an Idea of two Senſcs. 5. 11. THE Laſt Idea, which is ſaid to be Derivd into our Minds by two Senſes, is that of Motion, or it's Contrary Reſt; But how? What is this Motion, which is Impreſſed upon us, both by our Senſes of Sight and Feeling, or this Reſ, which is Contended for? Do I Sce a Body Move in the ſame Manner, as I Feel it Move? I call Indeed both of them Motion, by one General Term; But are the Senſations the ſame:? If they are, my Sight is the ſame Perception, as my Feeling is; In this Caſe thereſore, as in the others beſoremention'd, The Real Senſations of Motion, or Reſt, in Body, from our Sight and Feeling are Diſferent, but the General and Abſtracted Idea of them is the ſame, and ſuch an Idea is not Conveyd into the Mind by two Senſes, nor yet by one, becauſe it is Formd and Made by our Reaſoning and Abſtractions upon ſuch Different Perceptions. S. 12. Ir yet it ſould be Argued, that altho' theſe Abſtracted Ideas are not the Immediate Impreſſions upon our Senſcs, or Derivd into our Minds from them, they are notvithſtanding Originally owing to them, becauſc without them ve could nor make ſuch Abſtractions, and if from thence it is Concluded, that the Mind is nothing elſe but a Raſa Tabula, and Receives all it's Impreſſions from External Objects, it is Anſwered, That the Powers of Reaſoning and Abſtracting, and by that Means of Making nev Ideas Diſtinct from thoſe, which the Mind has from Senſation, are as Juſt Prooſs, that there is ſomething Originally in the Mind diſferent from the Impreſſions of Senſe, as our Ideas of Senſation are an Argument, that there are Beings External to us; Beſides all the other Powers and Faculties of our Minds, of Willing, Judęing, and Remembering, and even of Perception its ſelf, are no vays Derivd from Senſation, nor the Ideas which belong to them, but arc OWnd to be Ideas of Reſlection3 All which Ideas of Reſlection, do as fully Evince the Mind not to be a Raſa Tabula, as it is Supposd the Ideas of Senſation do Prove it is one. S. 13. THE next Sort of Simple Ideas, which this Philoſophy Conſiders, are thoſc of Reſlection, as being Supposd to be Deriv'd into the Mind from the Former, Namely, when the Mind turns it's View Inwards upon it's ſelf, and Obſerves irs own Actions about thoſc Ideas it had Received ſfrom External Objects; From whence a nev Set of Ideas Ariſes, which are Term'd Ideas of Reflection, which the Underè ſlanding can Reaſon upon and Contemplate as Fully and Exactly, as thoſe, which are Furnied to it from any Foreign Cauſes3 And the two Main and Principal Actions of the Mind are ſaid to be Perception or Thinking, and Volition or Willing; Remembrance, Diſcerning, Reaſoning, Judging, Knovledge, Faith, &e. Being only ſeveral Modes of theſe Simple Ideas of Reſlection. S. 14. THIS Account of our Ideas of Reflection does therefore Suppoſe in the fſirſt Place, which hath been already ſaid, is far from being Provd, or True, that the Mind is oſ it's ſel? a Raſa Tabula, and that it Derives it's Original Ideas from External Impreſſions 3 No one can Aſſirm, that an Embryo, or an Infant, does not Perceive, that it does Perceive, and Vill, as Early as it is Senſible; It cannot indeed Think of theſe Operations oſ the Mind in the ſame Manner, as a Philoſopher does, nor can it Diſtinguiſ it's Senſations into thoſe Orders and Claſſes, vhich a Perſon of Reaſon and Speculation vould do; But as this is no Argument of it's wanting theſc Ideas oſ Senſation, ſo ĩs the other none of it's being Deſtitute oſ thoſe other Ideas, oſ Percciving and Willing, from it's very ſirſt beginning to Exii. 5. 15. Tuis Account does likewiſe farther Suppoſe, that theſe Ideas are gain? by a Reſection upon the Operations of our Minds, in Reſpect of it's other Ideas Accrucing to ĩt ſrom Senſation; Whercas it is not Maniſeſt, that they are anmy more Idcas oſ the Mind's Reſecting upon it's ſclſ, than our Ideas of Senſation are: That my Mind is a Perceptive, Willing, Reaſoning, Being, is as much an Actal Perception Perception, as that I See this Paper, that is, my Idea of Perception, or Volition, i not ſo Properly an Idea of Reflection, as of Inward Conſciouſneſs3 Or, which i the ſame, my Ideas of Senſation are Impreſſcd upon my Mind from External Objects: That I have Reaſon, Will, and Perception, I Knov, and have an Actual Perception oſ from the Internal Impreſſions of my own Mind; I do not Perecive, I have Percep ception by Reſecting, but by the Actual Senſe and Experience I have of it, as I do not Perccive any Senſation by Reſlection, but by the Real Incourſe of it upon my; Mind. 5. 16. TnUS far Indeed they may be called Ideas of Reſlection, vhen we come to Reſlect upon and Conſider what Ideas the Mind has, of which theſe are one Sort and Kind; but in this Acceptation of the Word, our Ideas of Senſation will be likewiſe Ideas of Reſlection, becauſe they are another Sort, of which the Mind is Poſſeſed from it's Actual Experience. ] S. 17. FARTHER, If the ldeas, Derived from the Mind in Diſtinction ſfrom thoſe, vhich are Derived from External Objects were Ideas of Reſlection, it is yer Suppoſed in this Accounr, that they Reſult only from the Mind's Reſiecting upon it's Ideas of Senſation, and the Operations of the Mind about them, which is alſo Unprovd from what goes before, and is in Fact Falſc. 5. 18. ForR Morcover, all the Qualities and Properties oſ the Mind, which are not to be found in Matter, as that I Doubt, I Hope, I Fear, and the ſeveral other Paſſions, and Affections belonging to me, of Love, Hatred, Anger, and Averſion, and the Like, or of Perception, Willing, Judging, &e. Are as much Real and Actual Ideas in my Mind, as Sound, Colour, or Extenſion are Nor are they Ideas, which are Produced in me from Refiecting upon the Ideas of Senſation and the Operations of the Mind about them, ſince they are Impreſſions, which I Feel and am Senſible of from within, without having the Ieat Reſpect or Regard to any Foreign Objects, or the Ideas of Senſation, which Ariſe from them; I may Doubt of the Faculties and Properties of my own Mind, or of other Mens, I may Hope Concerning them, I may be Aſtaid of them, I may Love them, I may Hate them, or be Angry vith them, and may Employ my Paſſions about them, without any Regard to Material Objects, or the Senſations, which they Produce in me; I may likewiſe Exerciſe all theſe Paſſions in Reſpect oſ Spirits, and Immaterial Subſtances, as Good or Bad Angels, which this Philoſophy does ſeem to Acknowledge, the Notices of which Beings cannot be Derivd from our Senſations; And Laſtly, in Relation to Almighty God, I may Experience ſeveral of them, as my Fear and Dread, or my Love of him, my Hope or Joy in him, and the like: Theſe Properties therefore or Operations of the Mind in all theſe Caſes, arc not Employed about any Ideas of Senſation, nor are they Deriv'd from them, becauſe all, Excepting the Firſt, are Own'd by this Philoſophy to be Immaterial, and the Being of Almighty God in Particular is Endeavoured to be Provd to be ſo. Axn, What is ſaid in Reſpect of the Paſſions of the Mind, of Love, Fear, &e. Equally Obtains in the other Faculties, which belong to it, of Perception, Willing, Judging, Reaſoning, or Remembering; Namely, that they are in themſelves Original and Actual Ideas in the Mind, Derivd from thoſe Inward Impreſſions, which we have of them, as our Ideas of Senſation are, which we Receive from External Objects, and that they may be, and are, Equally Employed about Immaterial and Intelligent Beings, Abſtracted from any Ideas of Senſation, as they are about External Objects, and the Senſations which Reſult from them; and all theſe Ideas, both thoſe, which are Originally i”™ my Mind, and thoſc vhich are Derived from Senſation, may become Ideas of Reflection, that is, vhen I Reſlect upon them. 5. 19. As to vhat is ſaid in the Thirteenth Section, that Perception, and Volition, or Thinking, and Willing, are the Principal Actions of the Mind, and that the others Mentioned, are only Modes of thoſe Actions, that likewiſc docs not Appear to be True; becauſe all the Faculties and Operations of the Mind have an Equal Claim to belong Primarily and Originally to it, they are all oſf them Fundamental Properties of it, and do Eſſentially Reſult from it; tis Conſeſſcd indeed, that there is Thinking, and Willing, in Remembering, in Reaſoning, and Juduing, but theſe Laſt are no more Modes of the Former for that Reaſon, than becauſe there is Extenfion in Solidity and Colour, and in all Material Propertics vhatſoever, that there. fore ore all the Beings in the Univerſe, and all the Qualities, which Appertain to them, are uly ſo many Modes of ſuch Extenſion: 5. 20. ANOTHER Kind of Simple Ideas, which this Philoſophy Conſiders, are hoſe, which are Derived into the Mind from Senſation and Reſlection, ſuch are ſaid to be Pleaſure or Delight, and Pain or Uneaſineſs, Power, Exiſtence, Unity, and Succeſſion. WuEREAS there are no Ideas, which Enter into the Mind, the ſame by Senſation and Reſlection, but they are Perfectly Different; Thus the Pleaſure, which is Created in the Mind from the Taſte of a Nectarine, or the Smell of a Roſe or a Violet, is Perfectly of another Nature and Kind, than what is Experienced from the Satiſfactions of Friendſhip, or from the Delight of Doing Good, or ſrom the Joys of Religion; We may call all theſe by one Name Pleaſure, but the Ideas are Different, and vaſtly Diſagrecing; And therefore Pleaſure in this Senſe, is not an Idea either oſ Senſation or Reflection, but is a General and Abſtracted Term, under vhich we Comprehend, whatever is Pleaſing and Delightful to the Mind; Thus the Particular Colours of Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Elue, or Purple, are Ideas of Senſation, but no one Ihope vill therefore Affirm, that Colour in General is ſo, which is an Abſtracted Idea, Made and Formed by the Mind from thoſe Diſtinct and Various Senſations. Whuar has been Affirmd of Pleaſure, is likewiſe True of Pain and Uneaſincſ; ſince the Pain, vhich is Produced from the Point of a Needle, is Different from the Uncaſineſs, hich Ariſes from the Ill Uſage or Ingratitude, which we Receive from Others, in Return for any Good Offices Performd to Them. 5. 2I. As to the Pleaſure or Pain, which is Suppoſed to be Annexed by Almighty God to moſt of the Ideas, which we have, with a Deſizn Mention'd in this Philoſophy, to Incite us to Purſue ſuch certain Actions and Thoughts, and to Deter us from others, I ſall only Say, That whatever Pretences this Philoſophy may make to the giving us due Sentiments of the Wiſdom and Goodneſs of God, and Inſpiring into our Minds a Juſt Knowledge and Veneration of him, it will be a hard Matter for it to Prove, that Almighty God only Intended, that we ſhould follow our Pleaſures in this Life, and that, vhat we ſiould moſt Avoid, ſiould be the Pains of it 3Tis a Syſteme of Divinity, or of Morality, well fitted for an Epicure, bur how it ill Suit vith the Rigorous Diſcipline of the Chriſtian Scheme, which Teaches us to Bear and to Suffer, and that Pain is ſometimes our Duty, Thoſe would do well to Conſider, who Profeſs that Religion, and yet Eſpouſe this Philoſophy. BESIDES, in the Nature of Things, Pleaſure and Pain are no Standards to Adjuſt our Actions by'; ſince we ought not to Depart from what is Becoming us, as Rational Creatures, for any Fear of Pain, or any Proſpect of Pleaſure, and we are not to Conſider, what we are to Feel from, but what Reaſon we have for, our Actions: But Perhaps it may be Thought I Strain this Matter too Far, when I Charge the Preſent Philoſophy with making Pleaſure and Pain the Meaſure of what is Good, or vhat is Evil3 Which yet will not be found ſo, in the Proceſs of this Eſay, ſeeing it does Expreſly Aſſrt This; And that the Preſent Account of Pleaſure and Pain being Annexed to our Actions and Thoughts by God, in Order to Raiſe us to the Purſuit of ſomething or other, has a Diret Tendency to the Aſſerting the ſame Doctrine, is What I here Affirm; Since, If Almighty God intended to Excite our Minds into an Activity, by the Pleaſure and Pain Affixt to certain Ideas, it was his Deſign, that Pleaſure and Pain ſhould be the Motives, according to which our Actions and Thoughts ſould be Directed; and Conſequently, When we did any Thing, which was Uneaſy or Painful to us, ve Acted Contrary to God's Deſign and Intention, and when ve Purſued our Pleaſures and Delights, we Preſerv'd the beſt Conformity to it; How far this is Rational, I Believe I need not Say, and how far it is Pious, or Gives us due Sentiments of the Wiſdom and Goodneſs of the Soveraign Diſpoſe: of all Things, the Knowledqe and Veneration of whom ſhould be the chief End of all o Thoughts, and the Proper Buſineſi of all Underſtanaings, I will not Say, ũnleſs ſo far, tha it muſt give every Conſiderate Man a very Mean Opinion of the Deity irs ſel?: The Caſc ſeems to be this; That Almighty God has been Pleaſed to Create all Things ir that Manner, that theſe External Beings, with which we Converſe, are Fitted anc Adapted ſo to our Organs of Senſation, that as we Receive the Perceptions ol Tain, or of Pleaſure, from them, it in Prudence becomes us to Avoid and Shun, o t to Uſe and Embrace them, ſo far as is either Conſiſtent with our Duty, or our Lovc to him; but he has not Annexed theſe Ideas of Pleaſure and Pain, a3 Motives or Incentives to our Thoughts and Actions, and as a Rule and Standard, by which we ſhould Conduct them; The Firſt is an Inſtance indeed of his Wiſdom, his Pover, and Good neſs; but to do the Laſt, vould be an Argument, that he Originally Deſigned tc Encourage all the Pleaſures of Vice, Licentiouſneſs, Lewdneſs, and Debauchery in the Vorld, which is a much Worſe Notion than Epicurus ever had of the Deity, who by him was Suppoſed not to Concern himſelf at all in the Affairs of it. 5. 22. CONCERNING Exiſtence and Unity we ſhall Say no more, than what ha: been already Alledged in Reſpect of Pleaſure and Pain, that they are Abſtracted Ideas, and ſuch as the Mind Forms to it's ſelf, from what it in Fact does Experience Would it not be an Odd Fancy to Affirm, that Number in General was an Idea oſ Senſation and Reflection, which is not any Certain or Determined one? for it is neither 1, nor 2, nor 10, nor 100, and therefore cannot be an Actual Idea of Senſation, nor is it an Idea of Reſlection, becauſe what is ſuch, is ſaid to be Derived from our Reflecting upon our Actual Senſations, but there can be no Reſlection upon a Senſation, which never was, that is, of Number in General; And the ſame is True of Unity and Exiſtence, which are not Ideas cither of Senſation or Refiection, but are Created by the Powers of the Mind and Abſtracted by it. TuE like Reaſoning does alſo Equally Extend to Power, and Succeſſion. 5. 23. APTER having Sertled the foregoing Points, this Philoſophy Proceeds to ſome farther Conſiderations Concerning Simple Ideas; And the firſt Aſiertion, which we meet vith is, that whatſocver is able by Affecting our Senſes to Cauſe any Pereeption in the Mind, doth thereby Produce in the Underſtanding a Simple Idea, which would be a Poſitive one, altho the Cauſe of it were a mere Privation; The Queſion here therefore is, whether a mere Privation can Affect the Senſes, ſo as to Produce an Idea in the Underſlanding, for if it can, there is no Manner of Doubt, but ſuch an Idea will be as Poſitive, as any other. ON the Contrary, what Idea is it Poſſible for a mere Privation to Produce? This Paper, which I Write on, does Impreſs a Certain and Determined ldea upon my Mind; Remove it, and I have None, Excepting of the Space, which it Left, and which does not Ariſe from the Abſence of the Paper, but from the Preſence of a new Cauſe to Produce that Idea in me. Tnus I have the Idea of Matter and Space, Annihilate the one, ond Suppoſc with Borellus a Privation of the Dimenſions of the other, and he will be a Shrewd Metaphyſician Indeed, who can find any Poſitive Idea in his ovn Mind from ſuch Privations, and a much Shrewder, if he can Perceive an Ability in theſe Privations to Affeci his Senſes. Tnis ſcems to be too Notorious and Plain, that Privations of any Kind can only Infer the Abſence of an Idea, where it is not Impreſſed, but not the Preſence of a Contrary onc to that, which would have been Impreſſed, had there been no Privation. LET us take the Inſtances Mentioned in this Philoſophy, of Heat and Cold, Light and Darkneſs, or Shadow, Motion and Reſt, vhich are all Confeſſed to be Poſitive Ideas; but that the Cauſes of any of them are Privations is Alumed without Proof, and cannot be Granted for Asking only, and we may in General Affirm, that no Privation can Produce a Poſitive Idea, or any Idea at all. 5. 24. As to what Reſpects Heat, there is no Queſtion Concerning it, every one vill allow it to Produce a Poſitive Idea in us, and that Cold does ſo likewiſe, but that Cold is barely a Privation of Heat, and has not a Poſitive Cæuſe, by which the Mind becomes Senſible of it, is more than this Philoſophy Undertakes to Prove, or can Prove. For if we Conſider Cold in Relation to External Beings, it is Inveſted with Properties as Actual, and as Poſitive, as thoſe of Heat are; It Congeals and Cements Fluid Bodies together, as the orher Diſſolves and Diſunites them; It has Various Degrees of Force, as the other has; Liſts and Raiſes Ponderous Subſtances; and Strikes and Penetrates into Earth and Stones to a Conſiderable Depth. Iiii Bur Bur the Privation of one Force, as of Heat, cannot be Productive of another, which is Contrary to it, it can only Infer the Ceſſation of that Force, without Introducing a New and Oppoſite one. AxD thus in Relation to our ſelves, the Cold, which we Feel, is not a bare Privation of Heat, but Proceeds from the Acceſs of a Contrary Force, Acting upon our Organs of Senſation; That is, Heat Proceeds, according to what has been before Explained, from an Expanſive Force, and Cold from a Contractive, which are both of them Equally Poſitive, and Equally Poſitive Cauſes of thoſe Ideas in us. S. 25. LiouT, and Darkneſs or Shadow, is another Inſtance Propoſed by this Philoſophy, Light is Conſeſſed to be a Poſitive Idea, and to be Derived from a Poſitive Cauſe, whereas Darkneſs and Shadow are ſaid to be Privations, but tis Affirmd vithout any Conviction of their being ſo. For the moſt, which can be with Certainty Alledg'd is, that as the Rays oſ the Sun Impreſs a Brightneſs upon the Medium, thr which they Paſs, and therefore Communicate a Kind of Vivid Colour to it; ſo the Abſence or Interception of them Deprives the Medium of that Brightneſs; but the Darkneſs or Shadow, which Succeeds, may be owing to the Native and Proper Color of the Medium in ſuch Circumſtances of the Light's Privation. Tuus, if Water is Shone upon with the full Rays of the Sun, it Receives from thence a Beauty and Luſtre, which is loſt in a Kind of Darkneſs and Obſcurity, when thoſe Rays are Intercepted by a Cloud; vhich Complexion and Hue is not yet owing to the Privation of Light, but to the Colour, Nature, and Temper of the Medium in ſuch a Circumſtance, which in ſtill other Circumſtances is Continually Varyd and Altered, that is, as the Expanſive Force is Diminiſhed, or the Contractive Increaſcd, which Forces we have ſiewn to be the Occaſion of all the Colours we Experience. So likewiſc Black, does not Proceed from a Privation of White, ſince Blew, YelIow, Green, and every other Colour is a Privation oF White, as well as Black is, and yet every other Colour is not Black; Light and Darkneſs, or Shadow, as alſo White and Black, ſeem to come under no other Conſideration, than all other Colours do; They Equally with them Produce Poſitive Ideas in us, and are Equally owing to Poſitive Cauſcs Ariſing from the Nature of the Mediums, and the Various Affections of them, in which theſe Viſible Qualities are; That is, Light Proceeds from an Expanſive Force, by which the Optick Nerves are Acted upon by Impulſe; and Darkneſs Proceeds from a Contractive Force, by which the ſame Nerves are Attracted towards the Medium, and from whence we Thruſt our our Hands in the Dark, in Obedience to ſuch Attraction of our Nerves, and our Eyes are more Intent on, and Protrude themſclves forwards in it3 The Contrary to which happens in an Exceſs of Light; The Eye Declines it from the too Great Impulſe upon it, and the Motions of our Hands and Body are Alert and Vigorous, not Stupid, and Heavy or Contractive. 5. 26. THE laſt Inſtances Mentioned in this Philoſophy are Motion and Reſt, the the lat of which is ſaid to be a Privation of the other, and yer to Produce a Poſitive Idea, vhich is in ſo many Terms Deny'd For as Motion Produces a Poſitive Idea in the Mind, that is, of a Continual Alteration of Place in Reſpect of the Body, vhich is Movd, ſo a Privation or Ceſſation of ſuch Motion can only Cauſe a Privation or Ceſſation of ſuch an Idea, without any Poſitive one Impreſſed in the Room of it; The Poſitive Idea of Reſt, on the Contrary, is as much Derived from the Poſitive Continuance of the ſame Body in the ſame Place, as that of Motion is from the Continual Change and Alteration of Place, unleſs a Variation of Place is a Poſitive Cauſe of an Idea, and the Continuance of the ſame Place is nor, which cannot be Aſfirmd;3 Morcover, if we Examine into the Cauſes themſelves of Motion and Reſt, they will Appear to be Equally Poſitive, the Firſt Proceeding from an Expanſive Force, and the Laſt from a Contractive. 5. 27. THE Diſtinction of Ideas, as they are Perceptions in our Minds, from what they are in Bodics, is a Triſſling one, ſince there can be no ſuch Thing as Ideas in Bodices, no more than there can be Perceptions in them; Qualities there are Indeed Inherent in Bodies, which Raiſe ſuch Certain and Determined Ideas in us, and the Queſtion will be, whether our Ideas are Exact Images and Reſemblances of ſuch Qualities. Tn Tuis Philoſophy Aſerts, that in ſome Caſes they are, and in others not, and accordingly Divides theſe Qualities into two Sorts, Primary or Original, and Sccondary or Imputed; the Firſt Sort, as Solidity, Extenſion, Motion or Reſt, Number and Figure, are ſaid to Exiſt in Bodies themſelves, and to be the Exact Patterns of thoſe Ideas, which we Tranſcribe from them, and of vhich thereſore our Ideas are the True and Juſt Reſemblances. TuE Laſt Sort, as Sweetneſi, Blueneſs, or Warmth, and Colours, Taſtes, Odours, and Sounds in General, are Aſſfirm'd on the Contrary, not to Exiſt in Bodies themſelves, nor are our Ideas of them the Portraitures or Draughts of any Real Qualities, which are Inſeparable from them. 1ſt. BECAUSE, Solidity, Extenſion, Motion or Reſt, Number and Figure, will be in Bodies, whether wve Perceive them or not, whereas Colours, Taſtes, Odours, and Sounds are not there, but when we Perceive them. 2d. BECAUSE, when we do Perceive them, they are not Really there, but in our Perceptions only, which Ariſe from certain Powers in Bodies fit to Excite them. 3d. BECAUSE, theſc Powers in Bodies are Ultimately Reſolved into the Primary Qualities of Extenſion, Figure. Motion, &. . 5. 28. As to Solidity, Extenſion, Motion or Reſt, Number and Figure; They are all of them General and Abſtracted Ideas, and therefore are their own Archetypes, and are not the Real Reſemblances of any Thing but themſclves; But let us Conſider them, as the Properties and Affections of Particular Bodies, and we ſhall find them to be no ways Diſtinguiſhed from the other Qualities of Bodies, which are Termed Secondary or Imputed, that they are all of them Equally Powers in thoſe Dodies to Raiſe ſuch Determined Ideas in our Minds, and that there is no Likeneſs berwixt the Idea and the Quality in the one Caſe, more than in the other. Tnus the Solidity, or Extenſion, of Marble or Gold, ſo far as it is not an Abſtracted Idea, but is Derived into the Mind from an Actual Feeling of each Body, or from the Viewing of it, is as much an Effect of a Power in cither to Produce thoſc Explicite Senſations in the Mind, as the Whiteneſs, the Blackneſs, or the Variegated Colours of the one, or the Yellowneſs of the other; And the Ideas or Senſations of ſuch Solidity or Extenſion are, as unlike the Qualities or Powers, which Impreſs them, as Perception is unlike the Body, which is Perceiv'd, or as the Smell, or Taſte, or Colour of a Roſe, or a Violet, is unlike thoſe Qualities, vhich Cauſe thoſe Ideas in us. TnE Solidity or Extenſion of Marble or Gold, ſo far as they are Ideas of Senſation, and not of Abſtraction, are alſo upon the Level with thoſe of their Colours, that is, they no longer Exiſt in Bodies than they are Perceived, Excepting in their Poers of Producing at any Time thoſe Senſations in us. For in all theſe Caſcs, the Perception of Solidity or Extenſion, and all the other Ideas, which Ariſe from the Primary Qualities of Bodies, are no more thoſc Primary Qualities, which are only ſo many Powers of Producing ſuch Actual Senſations in our Minds, than the Heat or Warmth, which we Receive from the Fire, or the Pain from the Point of the Necdle, are the Real Qualities in Fire, and the Needle, which Cauſe thoſe Perceptions in us. As to the Lat Reaſon Mention'd in the Foregoing Section, wherefore the Secondary Qualities of Bodies are Different and Diſtinct from the Primary, Namely, be cauſe they are Ultimately Reſolved into the Latter, it ſo Entirely Depends upon the Corpuſcular Scheme of Philoſophy, that we ought to be very Certain of the Truth of that Syſteme, beſore it can be Allowd to have any Validity or Force in it; For i? we are not willing to Grant, which a Rational Inquirer into Nature will not caſily do, that the Phænomenons of Colours, Taſtes, Smells, and the other Secondary Qualities of Bodies, are not to be Solv'd by the Various Figures of the Parts, and the Contexture of them, tis an Arbitrary Aſſumption to Say, that all the Secondary Qualities are Ultimately Reſolved into ſuch Corpuſcles, and this litile Excurſion iuto Natural Philoſophy might vell enough have been Spar'd, unleſs theſe Celebrated Metaphyſicks had known ſomething more of it; To Conclude this Chapter, we neec Say no more, unleſ that in the Former Parts of this Philoſophy we have Shewn how the ſeveral Qualities of Bodies, both Primary and Secondary, may be Accountec for from the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and that in Natur Iii i 2 then there is no Real Diſtinction betwixt them; and which Diſtinction is only made Neceſſary by the Abundant Follies and Abſurdities of the Corpuſcular Syſteme, or the Syſteme of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter. C H AP. IV. Concerning Perception. 5. 1. HIS Philoſophy having Treated of Simple Ideas in General, and aſterwards of thoſe of Senſation, or of Senſation and Reflection together, Goes on to the Ideas, which more Particularly belong to Reſlection. 1ſt. AND the Firſt is Perception, in which the Mind is ſaid to be for the moſ Part Paſſive, ſince what it Perceives it cannot Avoid Perceiving, and what this is, we cannot otherwiſe Knov, than by Reflecting on what Paſſes in our Minds, when we See, Feel, Hear, &. 2d. It alſo Informs us, that Impreſſions made on the outward Parts, if they are not taken Notice of within, Cauſe no Perception, as is Seen in thoſe, whoſe Minds are intently Buſied in the Contemplation of Certain Objects; ſo that, where there is Senſe or Perception, there ſome Idea muſt be Actually Produced, and Preſent in the Underſtanding. 3d. WE are farther Told, that the Ideas, ve Receive from Senſation, are often in Grown People Altered by the Judgment, without our taking Notice of it; Thus a Globe of any Uniform Colour, as of Gold or Jet, being ſet before our Eyes, the Idea thereby Imprinted is of a Flat Circle Variouſly Shadowed, but being Accuſtomcd to Perceive, what Kind of Appearances Convex Bodies are wont to make in us, she Judgmeat Alters the Appearances into their Cauſes, and from that Variety of Shadow or Colour Frames to it's ſelf the Perception of a Convex Figure of one Uniform Colour; and this by a ſettled Habit is Performed ſo Readily, that we take that for the Perception of our Senſation, Which is but an Idea Formed by the Judgment, ſo that one ſerves only to Excite the other, and is Scarce taken Notice oſ i's ſelf; as a Man, vho Reads or Hears with Attention, takes little Notice oſ the Characters or Sounds, but of the Ideas, that are Excited in him by them; Thus Habits come at laſt to Produce Actions in us, which often Eſcape our Obſervation. 41h. Ir is likewiſe Alledged, that Perception ſeems to be That, which puts the Diſtinction between the Animal Kingdom, and the Inferior Parts of Nature, as Vegetables, whether Senſitive or other, /. And that, even in an Oyſter or Cockle, there is ſome Degree of it, tho' they have not, it is likely, ſo Many nor ſo Quick Senſes, as a Man, or ſeveral other Animals. sth. LastLY, Perception is Afſirmd to be the fir?t Step and Degree towards Knowledge, and the Inlet of all the Materials of it; ſo that the fewer Senſes any Man has” and the Duller the Impreſſions made by them are, the more Remote he is ſrom that knoledge, which is to be found in other Men. 5. 2. THE Mind in Reſpect of Perception is here Affirmd to be for the moſt Part Paſſive, and the Reaſon given for it is, becauſe it is ſo in Reſpect of its Senſations, as thoſe oſ Sceing Feeling, Hearing, &. IF thereſore That is Mcant, that Senſation and Perception are Reciprocal Terms, Namely, that we have no other Perceptions than thoſe of Senſation, and our Senſorions are our Perceptions, It will not be True, according to the Profeſſions and Acknovledgements of the Preſent Philoſophy, which OWns, that we have Perceprions of a Different Nature from thoſe of Senſation, to vit, thoſc of Reſlection; And Farther, if our Perceptions are all Reſolv'd into our Senſations, it could not be ſaid that the Mind is for the moſt Part Paſſive in ĩt's Perceptions, ſince it would be alvays, and in all Caſes, or at no Time, nor in any Caſe, ſo. Ir is Plain, what this Philoſophy Aims at, Namely, to Reduce all Perception to Senſation, and to make the Mind Paſſive in the Impreſſions it Reccives, that ſo the Fond Notion oſ it's being a Raſa Tabula, or a Blank Paper, may be the better Eſtabliſed in the Preſent Syſteme of Ideas. Ox ON the Contrary, it is Evident, that the Mind is both Active and Paſſive in it's Perceptions. Tuar it is Active, is Evident from all the Voluntary Ideas, which it Raiſes and Excites in its ſelf, by Study, Contemplation, or Reflection, and by it's Intent and Eager Purſuit of thoſe Ideas in Preference to any others, ſo far, that very Forcible Impreſſions, made upon it from External Objects, ſall not be Obſerv'd by it; That it is alſo Paſſive in it's Perceptions, is from hence Manifeſt, that it cannot Avoid in certain Circumſtances, the Senſations, which are Impreſſed upon it from the Force and Violence of External Objects; and yet it is likewiſe Plain too, that in that Paſſion of the Mind from Foreign Cauſes, it is at the ſame time Active, ſince it does not only Receive Pain, or any other Involuntary Idea from Senſation, but at the ſame Time Reſents it; It Recoils and Reflects upon it with a Force Equal, if not Superior, to the Action, which Diſturbs it; And any one may as well Aſfirm, that Fire is merely Paſſive, hen any Impreſſion is made upon it, as that the Mind is ſo. THERE is another Property, which belongs to the Mind in Reſpect of Perception, when it does not Appear tò be, either Active or Paſſive, but in a certain Kind of ZEquilibrium; Namely, vhen we have either a General Senſe or Perception without any Explicit Ideas, or when our Explicit Ideas Float in our Minds without any very Particular Obſervation, as in what is callld a Reverie. 5. 3. IN Order to Solve theſe Various Phænomenons of our Perceiving, let us Suppoſe the Mind to be an Active, Intellectual Principle, Conſiſting of Thought, Senſe, or Intelligence, which does not Imply any Thing of Matter, unleſs Thought or Senſe is an Avovd Property of it, which no Philoſopher docs Pretend to Shew, or to Prove. FirsT, if therefore there is an Action of this Senſitive and Intelligent Principle, which is Greater than the Impreſſion, which is made upon it from the Body, or from Matter, or from the Action of other Mens Minds, the Force of the one vill be Superior to the other, and in that Caſe the Mind will be Active, and the Body, or Matter, or other Mens Minds Paſſive. Tunus, vhere the Mind is Active, as in Study and Contemplation, it is little, or not at all, Afected with it's own Senſations; and even the External Impreſſions from other Mens Minds, tho' Attended with a very Senſible Pleaſure or Pain, as thoſe of Praiſe and Reproach, carry in this Circumſtance of the Mind a very Inconſiderable Force with them, and the Aggreſſor in Calumny and Reproach often Proves the Patient 3 And it is the ſame in the Natural and Innate Action of the Mind, which the Greater it is in it's Real Conſtitution, the Leſs Impreſſion do any External Povers or Forces make upon it; So that he, who is by Genius and Complexion Endud with the moſt of this Action, is the moſt Magnanimous, and finds the leat Concern from any External Violences, whether of Senſitive Pain or of Pleaſure, or of Reproach or Injury, or even of Commendation, and Conſequently is the moſt Couragious and Undaunted, and the moſt Reſolute in his Purſuits or Atchievements; This Action of Thought, Senſe, or Intelligence, ſeems farther to Conſiſt in a Force of Exertion or Expanſion, by which it Dilates it's ſelf to the whole Material Syſteme, which is United thereto, and by Conſequence to all External Nature by the Mediation of it. 5. 4. FrRoM this Account of the Action of the Mind, it is Manifeſt. 1ſt. THAT the Mind does always Think, that is, has always Senſe and Intelligence, and is Endud with a Native Action belonging to it, that it is in a Continual Diſpoſition to have Ideas Impreſſed upon it from outward Cauſes, or to Conceive them from it's own Capacity of Acting, and that, cither of theſe Ways, Perceptions may be Produced in the Mind. 2d. TuaT all our Ideas are not Originally from Senſation, and then Reflection, ſince we have Equal Reaſon to Think, the Mind was firſt Endued with an Active Pover of it's own, as vell as it is Certain, it now Exerciſes ſuch a Power, in its Refſlections, Diſtinct from Senſation. 3d. THAT it would be no Objection againſt this Original Action of the Mind, and this Innate Intelligence in it, alth we could find no other Ideas there, Excepting ſuch as vere Derivd from Senſation; Since our Original Ideas may be Worn out and Effaced from the Continual Importunity of our Senſes, as well as our Preſent Senſations Senſations may be, by Future ones;3 Thus Suppoſing any one had Livd for ſomec Years in an European Country, and vas Removd from thence to an Iudian, where many of theſe Objects did not Occurr to his Senſcs, there is no Doubt, but they would in a Courſe oſ Time be Obliterated from the Mind, which yer would be no Trooſ; that it never had any Notion of it's former Ideas. 4h. THAT therefore, if there is an Innate Intelligence and Action belonging ro the Mind, it is not certain, but it might Pre-cxi©t to it's Union with the Material Syſteme; it being vholly in the Plealure oſ it's Creator, whether it ſould Exiſt before, or Immediately upon, it's Conjunction vith it. sth. THAT from this Innate Action and Intelligence of the Mind are in a great Meaſure Derived the Various Properties, which belong to Animate Beings; Namely, in Men, the Natural Pride or Elation of Spirit, or the Humility and Depreſſion of it, and the other Qualities Obſervable in Humane Nature, both in Reſpect oſ it's Temper, Complexion, and Duration; and in Brutes, the Fierceneſs and Courage, or Stupidity and Tameneſs, and the ſeveral different Affections and Properties, which we behold in them. Tuis is the Foundation of that Pſychcometria, Mentioned in the Firſt Part of the Principles of the Preſent Philoſophy Examined; To Wit, an Innate Action and Intelligence of the Mind, by which one Perſon is Diſtinguiſhed from another, and by which one Species of Animals has it's Peculiar Difference ſfrom all others whatſocver. l AND I do not much Queſtion, by a Juſt Conſideration of the Animal World in this Way, but there may be a Philoſophical and Mathematick Account given of the Various Properties of Senſible Beings, of Virtue and Vice, and of the Immortal Duration of our own Minds, as well as of the Periſhableneſs of all other Creatures; but when I Speak of Virtue and Vice, I Speak of them in a Natural Senſe, Religion being of a Different Genius and Complexion, and Depending upon Different Arguments, Namely, thoſe which are Derived from Teſtimony and Fact. 5-5. SECOND, If the Action of this Senſitive and Intelligent Principle is Inferior to the Force, which is Impreſſcd upon it from the Body, or from Material Beings, or from the Action of other Mens Minds, the Mind vill in ſuch a Caſe be Paſſive. Tnus, in all Involuntary Ideas or in Painful ones, where the Impreſſions are Greater than the Action of the Mind, it Suffers and is Paſſive; and ſo, if the Action of orher Mens Minds is Superior to that of our own, we likewiſe Submit, and become Tractable and Obedient to the Impreſſions Received from them. FroM whence it Follows, 1ſ. THAT the Force of the Mind is Weakened and Impaired by the External Violences upon it, and even by our Common and Ordinary Senſations. Thus Blind Men are Generally found to be Quicker and Livelier and more Vigorous in their Intellectual Faculties than others; becauſe they are not Liable to many oſ thoſe Impreſſions, which are ſtruck upon the Mind from External Objects, and in which the Mind is Principally and Chiefly Paſſive. l Tnus likewiſc, thoſe who Reſign themſelves to the Pleaſures of Luxury and Debauchery, ind to the Impreſſions of their Senſes, are Weaker in their Intellectual Faculties than others; becauſe the Mind is Paſſlive, and the Proper Action of it Diminiſhcd by ſuch Inſults made upon it. ALso the Native Action of the Mind is Impaired by Pain Ariſing from Corporeal Beings, or ſrom the Inſolence or Action of other Mens Minds upon it; becauſe in all theſe Caſes, the Action of other Beings, ſo far as they Aſfect the Mind, is Superior to the Action of it; but theſe, being only Temporary Impreſſions or Violences upon the Action of the Mind, have only a Suitable Effect, that is, a Temporary one, the Mind ſtill Reſtoring it's ſelr to it's Priſtinc and Native Action. 2d. THAT the Immortality of the Soul is from hence Demonſtrable; ſince it has an Action Peculiar to it's ſelf, which is ſo far from being Extinguiſicd by the Separation of the Body from it, that the Senſes do Actually Impair and Weaken it in moſt of the Inſtances, which can be Nam'd. 3d. THAT, as to its Nature, it is alſo Immaterial; ſince the Properties of Matter are Directly Repugnant and Oppoſite to thoſe of the Mind, the Mind heing often the moſt Active, Active, when it Suffers the Ieaſt from Matter, and the moſt Paſlive, when Matter is the moſt Active upon it. 5. 6. THIED, there is another Property of the Mind, which we find by Experience, when it is neither Active nor Paſſive, as in Reveries, or in the Floating of Ideas in it without any Particular Obſervation of them, or Vhen there is a General and Conſus'd Senſation, without Perhaps any Particular or Explicit Ideas at all; And in this Caſe, the Action of the Mind ſeems to be in an Equal Poiſe, with that of the Material Syſteme United to it. 1ſt. FrRoM hence Reſults the Union of the Body with the Soul, which Depends upon this exact Balance betwixt them; and the Separation of the one from the other Ariſes from an Exceſs of the Action of the one above the other, by which the Divulſion is made; Thus any Great Diſtempers in the Body, or any Extraordinary Pains in it, or any Violent Emotions of the Mind, are follow'd by Death: So that all the Science of Phyſick muſt Rationally Determine in this, viæ. In a Knowledge ofthe Proper Force and Action of the Mind and of the Body, and by what Methods an æquilibrium may be Preſerv'd betwixt them. 2d. FRoM hence likeviſe it Follows, that all Senſible Creatures are Endu'd with Free Will in their own Nature; ſince the Mind, and the Material Syſteme Annexed to it, are in an æquilibrium, and yet we find a Power in all Animate Beings to Exert an Action, which ſhall make an Over- Balance. 5. 7. FourTH, it is not Impoſſible, but the Motive Force oſ the Mind may be in ſome certain Proportion, or other, to the Force of Perception in all Animate Beings; and that theſe Forces or Intenſions of Perception may be Infinitely Various in the ſeveral Claſſcs and Orders of them; and that the Force or Intenſion or Intenſeneſs ol Perception is Infinitely Greater in Men, than in any other Animals. FrROM Diſferent Suppoſitions of the Force or Intenſeneſs of Perception in each Animate Being, and of it's Proportion to the Motive Force of the Mind, as alſo oſ the Active Force of the Material Syſteme upon it, might be Derived a Perfect and Compleat Pſychcometria, by which all the Properties of any Poſſible Syſteme ol Mind and Body would be Mathematically Aſcertain'd and Explain'd. ] IP to this were Added the Proportions of Time, in which one Syſteme of Mind and Body Exerted i's Actions, in Compariſon with another, there might be a Determination made of the Degrees of Knowledge, and Attainments, which one would Have and Arrive to, in Reſpect of the other. AxD in General, ve ſhould Firſt find, That, If the Force or Intenſeneſs of our own Perceptions is Inſinitely Greater than that of an Inſect, and if the Motive Force is Proportional to the Force or Intenſeneſs of Perception, and if farther the Action of the Material Syſteme is in an Equal Poiſe or Balance with the Animal one, it would Follow, that if a Human Mind vas Annexed to the Material Syſteme of an Inſect, t would Diſſipate and Deſtroy it, the firſt Moment of it's Union, becauſe it would not be able to Suſtain the Immenſe Force and Action of a Human Soul; From vhence there would be Reaſon to Admire the Wiſdom and Contrivance oſ our Maker, vho had ſo Exactly Suited the Temper and Action of each Body, to the Action of the Soul, vhich Informs it, that it would be Impoſſible for them to Subſiſt together, unleſs with thoſe very Proportions of Action in Both, which he has Allorted and Aſſign'd to Each. S. 8. FiPTH, If farther the Intellect, the Knovledge, or Underſtanding, of Animate Beings, is Suppoſd to be Increaſed in a Reaſon Aſſigned of the Force or Intenſion of Perception in thoſe Beings in a Time Given, let the Different Forces or Intenſions of Perception be Multiplyed into Times, which are Reciprocal, and the Intellect, the Knowledge, and Underſtanding, will be on both ſides Equal; And on the Contrary, if the Intellects, the Knowledges, or Underſtandings are Equal, and they are Multiplyed into Times, which are Reciprocally Proportional, the Intenſion or Force of Perception in cach Caſe will be nown. Thnus, Suppoſe the Intenſion or Force of Perception in one Animate Being, is to that in another, as 1 to 2, and the Knowledge in each in a Given Time is Increaſed in that Proportion, it will be therefore in that Time as 1 to 23 But if the Time, in vhich the firſt is Increaſed, is as 2, and in which the laſt is, as 1, the Knovledge in each will be, as 2 to 2, that is; in a Ratio of Equality. - AxD AND ſrom this Propoſition only it would Follow, That Thoſe, vho are more Ad vanced in Years, and who are of a Duller Apprehenſion, may Underſtand more thar Thoſe who are Younger, and vho are Enducd with a Livelier and Brisker Genius And on the Contrary by a Change of the Proportion, That Thoſe, who are of: Quicker Apprehenſion, may in leſs Time Underſtand more than Others, who are o a more Groſs and Languid, can in a Longer Period of it. HENCE likewiſe, If other Ratios were Alumed, it would not Perhaps be Impoſ ſible to Aſcertain the Various Differences, Degrees, and Proportions, betwixt the Underſtandings of Men and Brutes, and of the Vhole Animal Creation Ir might alſo Probably be this way found out, why Brutes and Inſects can never Arrive at the Knovledge and Underſtanding of Men; becauſe their Force or Intenſion of Perception is Infinitely below that, which belongs to Human Minds, which would likewile Furniſh us with a Good Argument for the Periſhableneſs of the one, and the Duration of the other. Ir is morcover Conſcequent from ſuch a Doctrine of Intenſions or Forces of Perception, that the Identity oſ any Mind does not Conſi*t in it's Self. Conſciouſneſ but in that Force or Intenſion of Perception, which is Peculiar to it; and that there are as many Various Intenſions in the Animate World, as there are Extenſions in the Material one, and all of them Reducible to a Mathematick Reaſoning. 5. 9. SixTH, If Laly ve Conſider the Mind, as United to it's Material Syſteme; Firſt, If the Motive Forces of the Mind are in a Ratio of Equality with the Intenſions of it's Perception, and the Organs of the Material Syſteme, upon hich the Morive Force of the Mind is Exerted, are, as to their Re- Action or Reſiſtence to that Exertion, in the ſame Ratio of Equality, as may be Suppoſed in ſome Inſtances or other, the Perceptions will be, as the Motive Forces of the Mind, or as the Reſiſtences from the Corporeal Syſteme to them; In which Caſe, there will be an æquilibrium on all Hands, and the Mind will be in a Reverie, with a General Senſation or Perception, without any Particular or Explicit Ideas: But if the Reſiſtence or Contra- Action of the Material Syſteme, and the Motive Force of the Mind are in a Ratio of Inequality, and the Intenſion of Perception is as the Motive Force; TuEN Second, If the Motive Force of the Mind is Increaſed by the ContrAction of the Material Syſteme being Greater than it, the Intenſion of Perception will be Proportionably Greater. Tnus ve find Mens Perceptions are more Lively and Vigorous in Proportion, as the Corporeal Syſteme is ſo, and as the Blood and Animal Spirits Circulate more Briskly and, Strongly; and ſrom whence, if in a Great Degree, may Proceed Madneſs. TuirRD, on the Contrary, If the Motive Force of the Mind is Diminiſhed, by the Contra- Action or Reſiſtence of the ſame Syſteme being Leſs than it, the Intenſion of Perception is in like Manner, and in Proportion Leſs; which is alſo Confirmed by Experience, that the more Languid and Flaccid the Circulation of the Blood and Animal Spirits is, the Intenſion and Force of Perception is the leſs Elate and Alert; and from whence, if in a great Degree, may Proceed Lethargy and Death. Tut Former of theſe Suppoſitions is Confirmd by Inſtances, where Things of a Volatile Nature, as thoſe which Cauſe an Intenſe Pleaſure and Satisfaction, Add to ihe Volatile Force oſ the Mind; and the Latter by Sickneſs, or Sleep, or Melancholy, or Labour, and Fatigue, which Detract from it: And if this is True, it will be the Province of Phyſick, as was before ſaid, to Enquire into the Motive Force and Intenſion oſ Perception in the Mind, as well as into the Contra- Action or Reſiſtence of the Material Syſteme, in Order to make it's Preſcriptions Juſt or Succeſsful. FourTH, Iſ the Motive Force of the Mind is Increaſcd by the Contra- Action of the Material Syſtleme being Leſs than it, the Intenſion of Perception will be Proportionably Greater; which is alſo Experienced in Study and Contemplation, vhere ithe Leſ the Mind is Acted upon by Senſual Pleaſure, or by Pain, the Stronger, the more Vigorous, and Active, it becomes. FirrH, on ihe Contrary, If the Motive Force of the Mind is Diminiſhed, by the Contra- Action of the Material Syſteme being Greater than it, the Intenſion of Perception vill be Proportionably Leſs; which is alſo Confirmed by Experience, ſince, Thoſe, vho Indulge themſelves in Senſuality and Pleaſure, do Weaken and Impair he Force of theit Underſtandings, and many Times Degenerate into Brutiſhneſs and Stupidity. TuESE TnESE ſeem to be the only Caſes, which are Poſſible in the Union oſ the Mind vith it's Material Syſteme; For they cannot be Diverſify'd Unleſs by Suppoſing the Intenſion of Perception is Greater or Leſs than the Motive Force of the Mind, or that the Contra-Action of the Material Syſteme is not Correſpondent or Agreeable to the Conſtitution and Temper of that Syſteme, both which Suppoſitions ſeem to be Unreaſonable, and will not, I Imagine, be found to be Anſwered by Experience. AND from theſe Caſes now Mention'd, the Natural Immortality of the Soul Appears to be Evinced; for they all Depend upon the Mind's having a Peculiar Force and Intenſion of Thought belonging to it's ſelf, and Independent of Matter. IN the Firſt Caſe, the Force of Perception is Equal to the Reaction of the Material Syſteme upon it. IN the Second, the Action oſ the Material Syſteme is Greater than the Motive Force of the Mind, and Increaſes it's Perception3 which if done in a great Degree, as in a Fever or in Diſtraction, Occaſions Death, even whilſt the Perception is Augmented; which therefore Deſtroys the Union of the to Syſtemes, and Drives the one from it's Cohabitation with the other, but does not Diſſipate or Diſſolve it. IN the Third, the Action of the Material Syſteme is Leſs than the Motive Force of the Mind, and Diminiſhes it's Perception by Hanging, as a Weight upon it, by which it Sinks and Depreſſes it's Proper Vigour; and which if done in a great Degree, the Union is again Deſtroyed betwixt theſe two Powers, and upon the Falling off of this Weight by Death, the Mind Recovers it's Priſtine and Native Force and Energy. IN the Fourth, the Action of the Material Syſteme is Leſs than the Motive Force oſ the Mind and Increaſes it's Perception; and if the Motive Force of the Mind is 100 Great for the Reaction of the Material Syſteme, as in the Caſe of Intenſe Study and Contemplation, the Union is likewiſe Diſſolvd; The Thought of the Soul is too Mighty for the Body, which it Informs, and therefore Diſengages it's ſelf from it. IN the Fifth, the Action of the Material Syſteme is Greater than the Motive Foree of the Mind, and Diminiſhes it's Perception; not as before, as by a Weight Hanging Heavy upon it, but as a Superior Force Overpowering it, by which at Length the Union is Deſtroy'd, till the Mind, Releaſed from the Over-bearing Force by ⸗a Disjunction from it, Returns to it's former State of Activity and Perception. 5. 10. As to the Second Article Mentioned in ꝗ. I. it is no leſs than an Axiom, that Impreſſions made on the outward Parts, if they are not taken Notice of within Cauſe no Perception, if by being Taken Notice of within, is Meant our Perceiving them, becauſe it is Impoſſible we ſiould have any Perception without our Perceiving. . BUT the Queſtion is, vhether we may not be Senſible of an External Impre ſſion, vhen it is made, tho we do not Retain or Remember it one Minute after; the Mind, as in Study, being Diverted to other Thoughts in the Purſuit of vhich it is Eagerly Carried, ſo far as to Reject, or not to Regard thoſe other Impreſſions, tho' it may at the ſame Time Perceive them; Thus any one, I Believe, does and muſt Expeperience, that, in the Midſt of the greateſt and moſt Intenſe Thoughts, he is by a Fire, or he is not, that he is Warm or Cold, that he Sits in the Profoundeſt Silence, or Surrounded with Various and Tumultuary Noiſes, tho he may not Regard or Take Notice of any of theſc at the ſame Time that he Perceives them, but Procceds in the Purſuit of his own Thoughts and Ideas in Neglect of them. 5. 11. TuE Third of thole Articles, into which that Firſt Section is Divided, ſeems to be Entirely Falſe and Wrong, Namely, that the Ideas, which we Reccive from Senſation, are oſten in Grown People Altered by the Judgment, without our taking Notice of it; for it does not Appear Poſſible, that wẽ ſiould have any other Senſations than what are Agreeable to, and which Naturally Reſult from, the External Impreſſions, which Cauſc them. As to the Globe of Gold, or of Jet, Imprinting only the Figure of a Flat Cirele upon our Eyes Variouſly Shadowed, the Caſe is this, that thoſc different Shadows are Intimations to the Mind, that the Impreſſions Received are of the ſame Body from different Diſtances and Situations of the Parts; and thereſore the Action of Light, or of Colour, Produces the ſame Senſation of Yellow or Black, as being the ſame Kind oſ Action upon the Mind; but the Diſtances of Action being Various KE k k and and Shadows being thereby Made and Formd in the Circle, the Mind has Natural Impreſſions of thoſe Varying Diſtances, and therefore from ſuch a Circle has the Real Senſation of a Globe, that is, of Circles of Changing Diſtances ſrom it; On the Contrary, that this Appearance ſhould be an Effect of the Judgment is not Con ceivable, becauſc, tho our Judgments Inform us, that the Sun is ſeveral Millions o Miles above us, yet we can See no other Diſtance, than what our Senſes Impreſs up on us; and in the Preſent Caſe, if we make Uſe of our Sight only, we cannot Per ceive any Convexity, unleſs that, which is Derivd to us from the Organs of it; The Judgment cannot Interpoſe here, ſince if our Senſc of Seeing does Repreſent a Convexity Wrongly to us, our Judgment has nothing to Correct that Error by; we muſ See Convexity, juſt as it is Impreſſed, and we have no other Methods of Determining Concerning it, but by the Sight, which Imparts it to the Mind. IF we make Uſe of more Senſes than One, as of Sight and of Feeling, ſince there can be no Connexion betwixt the Ideas of one Senſe, and thoſe of another, ſo as that our Feeling the Convexity of a Globe ſould make us Sce it, it cannot be Imagined, how our Senſe of Feeling, in this Particular, ſould Correct the Errors of out Senſe of Secing, or how our Judgment has any Thing at all to do in the Matter; Becauſe, tho we vere never ſo well Informed, vhat Convexity was by our Feeling, e could not from thence Learn, what Idea would be Rais'd in our Minds from our Sceing it, by any Judgment, which we could make from one Senſe or the other. BESIDES, how a Judgment of our Minds ſhould give us an Actual Senſation, for no one vill Deny, that he Actually Sees, what we call Convexity in a Globe, is as Unintelligible, as that the Mind ſould Think it's ſel? into a Real Perception of Fire, without any External Impreſſion from it; or, becauſe it finds a Graim of Sand is in it's ſelf Tranſparent, if looked upon by a Microſcope, that it ſould by it's Judgment Correct the Abſolute Senſation, which it has of it, into another, which it has not. As to vhat is ſaid in Reſpect of our Hearing or Reading with Attention, that we take little Notice of the Characters or Sounds, but of the Ideas, which are Excited in us by them, it is no Proof of our Altering our Ideas by Judgment, but only of the Quickneſs and Activity of the Mind, which can have ſeveral Ideas in a Train, and that inj an Inſtant; Thus, when ve Read, and the like may be ſaid of Hearing, the Words, and even the Letters, cauſe an Impreſſion upon us, and from thence a Senſation of them, if they did not, ve might Read without Seeing; theſe Words Produce thoſc Ideas in us, which have been Annexed to them, and yet the Mind taking Notice Principally of the Ideas, the Words Vaniſh, as ſoon as they are Imprinted; But this is not Changing Ideas of the Firſt Impreſſion into Ideas of the Laſt by our Judgment, but ſhiews a Quick Progreſs of the Mind from the Firſt to the Laſt, without any great Regard had to the Former; And, that this is ſo, is Confeſſed by this Philoſophy, which Acknowledges, that the Words and the Letters, which we Read, do Excite the Ideas Affixed to them in us, but how they ſould Excite any Thing in us, is Inconceivable, without our Actual Senſations of them. LasTLY, as to Habits Producing Actions in us, vhich often Eſcape our Obſervation, this likewiſe can be no Argument of our Changing our Ideas by our Judgment; Becauſe, when it is ſaid they oſten Eſcape our Obſervation, it is OWn'd, they many Times do not, nor yet do they ever Entirely do it, tho' they may be forgot the very Inſtant after they are Performd; There is no onc, Ibelieve, vho ever did any Action, who was not Senſible of it at the very Time and Moment he did it, tho' it might not make any other than a Temporary Impreſſion upon him, and it is Certain, that vhen we Uſe Attention, ve alvays Diſcover theſe Habits. Lur onr Altering our Idcas by our Judgment is ſo Unobſervable, that it does not only oſten Eſcape our Obſervation, but never Falls under it, th we Uſe never ſo great an Attention; No one, if he ſiould Watch his ovn Thoughts and Ideas with the utmoſt Nicety and Exactneſs, could Say, how he came to See a Globe Convex vhen his Eye only Repreſented it as Circular: And therefore, as this lat and the other Arguments are Inſuſficient to Prove this Alteration of our Senſations by Judgment, and as there are Reaſons given on the Contrary againſt the Poſlibility of it. and Laſtly, as there is an Account Propoſcd, how that, which is a Shaded Circle in the Eye, may Produce the Actual Senſation of a Globe or a Convexity in our Minds, ve we have no Occaſion to Suppoſe, or to Believe, for there is no Demonſtration of it that our Judgments in any Caſe have a Power of Altering or Changing our Actua Senſations. S. 12. IN the Fourth Diviſion or Article of 5. 1. It is Aſfirmd, that Perception is That, which puts the Diſtinction berween the Animal Kingdom and the Inferiot Parts of Nature, as Vegetables, whether Senſitive or other, and that even in an Oyſer, or Cockle, there is ſome Degree of it, tho they have not, it is likely, ſo Many nor ſo Quick Senſes, as a Man, or ſeveral other Animals. BUT this may be Doubted, whether all Kinds of Vegetables are not Endued by the All-Wiſe Creator with a Certain Portion of Senſe and Perception, tho' Perhaps as much Inferior to that of an Oyſter, as that of an Oyſter is to a Man's; an Oyſter, it is Probable, has no other Senſe than that of Sight and Feeling, to Diſtinguiſ its Nouriſiment from what is Noxious to it; and Plants and Vegetables no other rhan that of Feeling; of which if there were not ſome Degree, it is not Conceivable, how there ſhould be thoſe Strange Affections Obſervable in them, of a Sort of Sulleneſ and Dejection, of Enmities, and Antipathies, and Averſions, on the one Hand, and on the other, of a Certain Kind of Pleaſure and Complacency, oſ Friendſhip, Harmony, and Agreement, vhich Naturaliſts have Reported Concerning them; Tis ſaid Tree: do Senſibly Contract themſelves upon the firſt Stroke of the Ax, which Fells them, as an Oyſter does it's Shell, when it Perceives a Violence Uſed to Disjoin and Dilunite it.; And the Phænomenons of the Senſitive Plant are well Known. TueY arc Formd from Seeds, as Animals are from Eggs, and there ſeems to be as much Care taken for Preſerving and Defending the New Offspring amongſt Plants and Vegetables, and Encloſing the little Seeds for a Future Production in Choice CaBinets Contrived on Purpoſe for them, and many Times very Curiouſly and Artiſicially Wrought, and with a Proper Mucilage Lodg]d there for their Nouriſhment, as there is amongſt Bees, in their Fine and Delicate Hexangular Cells, and in the Repoſitories, which they make of Honey, for the Education and Bringing up of their New Fotus. . AbD to this, that Almighty God may be as Juſtly Suppoſed to give theſe Innate Impreſſions, or Inſtincts, to Plants and Vegetables, to Propagate their own Species, as he is Confeſſed to do in Relation to theſc Small Inſects, and to all the Various Ranks and Orders of the Animal Creation. Tuis is likewiſe Suitable to the Wiſdom and Providence of God, to Aſſign to every State and Condition of his Creatures the Province, which belongs to them, and to Enact by his High Will and Pleaſure, that all of them ſhould have, from the Greateſt to the Meaneſt of them, their Proper Employments Agrecable to their Natures, and to the Stations, in which he has Fixt them. ON the Contrary, Perception ſif we Reſpect the Intenſion of it, as Explaind in 5. 2. 3.4, &.) Does as much Diſtinguih us from all the Animate Creation, which is below us, as Almighty God's does the Divine Nature from the Human; For, as there is no Compariſon betwixt the Inſinite Energy and Force of the Perception of the Deity, and our Finite one, ſo is there none betwixt the Finite Energy and Force of Human Perception, and that of any Being, which is Inferiour to us; The Cauſe is Provd from the Effect in both Caſes, and in the ſame Manner; Since all the Arts and Sciences, the Wiſdom and Prudence of Forming and Modelling Societies, and Governing the Affairs of this World we Inhabit, and of all the Creatures in it, is an Argument of this Force and Intenſion of Perception being Infinitely beyond that, which Brutes are Endowed with, in ſome Mcaſure Analogous and Correſpondent io that, which ve Uſę, for the Inſinite Intenſion and Forcè of Perccꝶtion in the Deity beyond our own, by which àll Thirigs in the whole Univerſe are Ordered and Diſpoſcd according to the urmoſt Knowledge, the moſt Accurate Skill and Contrivance, and the Greateſt and moſt Conſummate Prudence, Foreſight, and Penetration. S5. 13. TuE Lat Thing Mentioned in the above Nam'd Section is, that Perception is the Firſt Step and Degree towards Knowledge, and the Inlet of all the Materials of it; ſo that the Fewer Senſes any Man has, and the Duller the Impreſſions made by them are, the more Remote he is from that Knovledge, which is to be found in other Men. ll& ] llt T XE E E2 l BUY BUT by this Account a Man is in no Degree above an Oyſter, unleſs that he has More Senſes, and Quicker, which is a low Diſpen ſation, that Human Nature is Reduced to Indeed, if it ſould happen to be True, and we ſhould have no great Cauſe to be Fond of the very Beings we Poſcis. HOWEVER, to our Satisfaction it is Plain and Evident, that the Force and Intenſion of Perception in Men is Inſinitely Greater than what is found in an Oyſier, and if a Man had no more Senſes, than what an Oyſter is Suppoſed to be Endowd ith, and an Oyſter had all the Senſes, which a Man is Conſelled to have, there would be yet a great Diſparity betwixt the Underſtanding oſ the one and the other, and much in Favour of the Latter. FOR it cannot but be Own'd, that Brutes have all the Senſations, which Men hare, they Feel, they Sce, they Hear, they Taſte and Smell, and yet with all theſe Senſes they are not Capable of Arriving at the ſame Degree of Underſtanding and KnowIedge, which a Man can do, who has no other Senſe leſt to him than his Hearing and Feeling; for with theſe tvo Senſes only, ſſince Taſte and Smell will not be Aſfirmcd to be very Conducing to Knowledge) there may be Numerous Examples Produced, where Men have been Blind, and notwithſtanding that Defect, have ſicwn a Force of Genius and Perception, which has ſet them, in Reſpect of Science, Learning, and Sagacity, not only above the Brutes, which were Endued with all the Senſes, but even above the Greateſt of their own Species, vho were alike Deſective in None. Nor can it be ſaid, that this is owing to their Senſes of Feeling and Hearing, being Naturally more Vigorous than in other Men, becauſe their Organs oſf Feeling and Hearing are in all Reſpects like thoſe of Others, there is nothing that was ever Obſerved, which Diſtinguiſied a Blind Man's Fingers from any other Perſons, or was the Tympanum of his Ear ever found to be oſ a Different Make or Contexture; and there can be no Reaſon Alledged. for any Superiority of Knowledge in ſuch a Caſe, Excepting what Terminates in the Superior Force and Intenſion of the Mind's Perception. SiNCE Eſpecially, on the other Hand, thoſe who have the Quickeſt Senſes in Reſpect of Secing, Fecling, and Hearing, are not always the Quickeſt in their Apprehenſions and Underſtandings; a Man may See at a Great Diſtance and very Clearly, and yot want a True Diſcernment of Things in his ovn Mind; he may Feel the Ieaſt Impreſſion ſrom an External Action upon his Senſes, and yet not be Able to take the Impreſſion of the Plaineſt Propoſition, which ſhall be Delivered to him in Algebra or Geometry; he may Hear very Accurately and Exactly, and not Know the Senſe, the Coherence, and Meaning, of Ten Words, which are Spoken; So that there is not, nor can be, any Poſſible Connexion betwixt the Vigour and Quickneſs of our Senſes, and that of our Intellectual Faculties, vhich we only now Conſider, tho' there may be in the Senſe, vhich we have Expreſſed in J. 8. and 9. That is, our Organs of Senſation, as to the Vigour of them, may be Adapred to the Force and Intenſion of our Perception, which vill be ſo far from Contradicting, what we have here ſaid, that it vill Confirm it, Namely, that as the Force and Intenſion of Perception is Greater in Men than in Oyſters, ſo the Organs of Senſation are Correſpondent and Anſwerable to thoſc Forces. C H ADP. V. Concerning Retention, and of Diſcerning, Comparing, mi Compounding, our Ideas. S. .TROM Perception this Philoſophy carries us to Retention, which it Divide: into Contemplation and Memory. TuE Firſt is, vhen we keep the Idea, which is brought into the Mind, for ſomx Time Actually in View, Concerning vhich Iſhall Say no more Unleſi, that this Fa culty of Retaining our Ideas is an Argument of the Proper and Native Action o the Mind, and makes it ſomething Different from a Raſa Tabula, or a Being, which is only Paſſive of Perception, or of Ideas being Imprinted upon it. ; ni : TnE Second is, vhen we Revive thoſe Ideas in our Minds, which have Diſappear'd, and have been. as it ere, laid out of Sight; which is another Inſlance of it's Active Principle, and even of a Pover oſ Creating Ideas to ĩt's ſelf; ſor thoſe Ideas, which ve Remember, being Different from thoſe Ideas, vhich we have ſrom Senſation, are as much the Creatures and Production of the Mind, as the Paintings of Artiſts, or the Deſcriptions of Pocts are; which yer, like our Ideas of Memory, are Tranſcribed from, as they are the Imitations of, Nature. 5. 2. THAT, Which is to be Conſidered here is, what this Recollection of Ideas is owing to, and from vhence it is Derived; It is Plain it cannot ſo much as Subſitt in the Mind, if the Mind was no more than a Raſa Tabula; Becauſe then there would be Ideas Impreſſed upon it, of which it would be Paſſlive, without any Power of Reviving them; They would be Imprinted upon it, and there Continue, or elſe by Degrees Wear off and Die, and ſo there would be an End of them, and this whole Chimerical Syſeme of them; Whereas, if we Conſider the Mind, as an Active Principle, and which has a Share in Forming and Conſtituting even thoſe Ideas, which are alſo in Part owing to an External Agency, it is no Wonder, that it can Recollect, and Nev Form Ideas from it's ſelf, which it was Capable oſ doing ſfrom Exterior Objects; It will then Act Conſiſtently with it's Nature3 And Perception and Recollection vill have ſome Kind of Aſſmity to cach other, and vill Appear 1o be Properties, which muſt Naturally belong to the ſame Subſtance. Bur, if we make the Mind to be Paſſive only in it's Perceptions, it can go no farther than the Impreſſions it Receives, and there will be no Principle in the Mind, from which we ſhall be able to Derive it's Power of Recollecting, or even of Judęing, Abſtracting, or Compounding; All Which are Affections and Properties, Which muſt Reſult from an Active Principle in it. 5. 3. As therefore the Intenſion and Force of Perception, and the Native Action of the Mind is That, which Principally Diſtinguiſies Men from Brutes, as well as from One Another; ſo Retention, both that of Contemplation and that of Memory, being Active Forces of the Mind, are Analogous and Correſpondent in ſome certain Proportion, or other, to the Innate Force and Intenſion of Perception; and which will be another Ground and Foundation for a Pſycheometria, or a Reduction oſ the Force: of the Mind to a Mathematick Reaſoning. Tnus, if the Intenſive Force of Perception, the Force of Keeping or Retaining an Idea in out Minds, and that of Reviving one, are in a Ratio of Equality; ] 1ſt. THE Greater the Quickneſs of Apprehenſion is, the Greater will be the Capacity of Retaining the Idea in our Minds, and of Reviving it upon Occaſion. j 2d. THE Leſs the Quickneſs of Apprehenſion is, the Leſs will be the Capacities of Retaining or Reviving our Ideas. If the Intenſive Force of Perception, of Retaining an Idea, and Reviving it, is in a Proportion of Inequality; Then, 3d. THE Apprehenſion may bt Quicker, when the Faculty of Retaining an Idea may be Weaker, or of Recollecting it Slower. 41h. OR, The Apprehenſion, may be Slower, when the Faculty of Retaining is Stronger, and that of Recollecting is Quicker. sth. OR, The Faculty of Retaining may be Stronger, when the Apprehenſion may be Slower, and the Faculty of Recollecting Slower. 6rh. OR, The Faculty of Retaining may be Weaker, when the Apprehenſion may be Quicker, and the Faculty of Recollecting Quicker, 7th. OR, The Faculty of Recollecting may be Quicker, vhen the Apprehenſion may be Slower, and the Faculty of Retaining Weaker. 31h. OR, The Faculty of Recollecting may be Slower, when the Apprehenſion may be Quicker, and the Faculty of Retaining Stronger. Which ſeem to be all the Caſes, which can Poſſibly Happen; and Each of which may be Conſidered in a Thouſand Different Pròportions to one anothcr. Ir is not Impoſſible but Moſt, if not All, of theſe Caſes may Obtain in Human Nature; or, if they did not, they would Furniſh abundant Matter ſor Mathematicians to Employ their Speculations about; and which would as much Anſwer the Purpoſes of a True knovledge, and a much more Important one, as the Procecding (Which is at Preſent done) in the Inquiry only into the Relations and Proportions of Abſtracted Quantities in Extenſion; For Each of theſe Caſes will Admit, as Ihave ſaid, of a Thon and ſand, and I may Say, of a Million of Different Proportions and Relations, which will Open a vide Field of a New Mathematick Knowledge, not hitherto Propoſed to, or ſo much as Imagin'd by, Philoſophers: And to ſhew, that theſe Caſes in General de Obtain in Humane Nature, we ſhall Conſider them Separately and Singly. 1ſ. SoME Perſons ſeem to be Equally Quick in theit Apprehenſions, Firm ir Keeping and Retaining their Ideas before them, and as Vigorous and Lively in Recollecting them; which is the Utmoſt Happineſs of a Rational Mind, and the Greateſ Inſtance of the Force, and Capacity of it. 2d. ON the Contrary, where theſe Faculties are Equally Dull, ĩt is a Mark and Character of Stupidity. 3d. THERE are Others, whoſe Genius's are Quick in Apprehending, what is Propoſed to them, cither from External Objects, or from other Mens Notions, and yet cannot be cither ſo Intent in their Contemplation of any one or more oſ their ldeas, or ſo Sudden in Recollecting them. 4h. Nor are there Wanting in Humane Nature ſuch, vho may be Dull in Apprehending Things, and, notwithſtanding that, may be very Studious and Induſtrious in the Contemplation of them, and very Ready likewiſe in Recollecting the Ideas, which they have thus Conſidered or Apprehended. sth. It is alſo Obſervable, that Men may Retain Ideas in their Minds, and Engage their Contemplations upon them, when yet theit Apprehenſions are Languid and Weak, and their Memories Short and Imperfect. 6th. It is likewiſe known, that other Men, who cannot Study, or Bring any oſ their Ideas under an Intenſe Contemplation, Have yet a Quick and Lively Apprehenſion, and as Sudden a Memory and Recollection. 7th. WE are ſarther Informd from Experience, that Men may have g3ood Memories, when their Apprehenſions are not Extraordinary, nor their Application to theit Conſidering their Ideas, or their Intenſe Contemplation of them, in any Kind Remarkable. 31h. Nor do we leſs Obſerve, that, when Perſons are Short, and Fallible, and Defective in their Memories, or in their Recollection of Ideas, they yet may be very Tenacious of the Ideas, vhich they have, may Contemplate and Study upon them with an Intenſeneſs of Mind, and may be very Quick and Ready in the Receiving the Impreſſion of them. TuESE ſeem to be the Various Denominations of Men, according to their ſeveral Particular Faculties, and which may again be Diverſified by an Infinitely Different Number of Proportions. AND the Caſe of Brutes, at leaſt in Compariſon with Men, ſeems to be that, which is Expreſſed in the Second; where all theſe Faculties are Equally Dull, and which Denotes, and is a Mark of Stupidity: But the Faculties of an Intelligent Being, Conſidered in this loweſt Diſpenſation of them, may be likewiſe Infinitely Varied; from whence Ariſes the Different Capacities Obſervable in thoſe Species of Creatures, which are Below us;3 As the Firſt Caſe Expreſſes the Capacities of thoſe Orders of Beings, which are Above us; And all the Six following Ones may, in a Higher, or Lower Degree, than what belongs to Human Nature, be Applied to them. I Ir vould Perhaps be Difficult to find Proper Names, or Appellations, for theſe ſeveral Sorts of Undeſtandings, amongſt the Terms, which are now in Uſe; and the Trueſt Way to Diſinguiſi them would be, by Denominating them from their Particular Natures. Tnus the ſeveral Kinds of our Underſtandings might Fall under the Subſequent Appellations; TuE Firſt might be Called, The Apprehenſive- Retentive-Recollective. TnE Sccond, The Non- Apprehenſive- Non-Retentive- Non-Recollective. TuE Third, The Apprehenſive-Non- Retentive- Non-Recollective. TuE Fourth, The Retentive-Recollective- Non- Apprehenſive. Tur Fiſth, The Retentive- Non- Apprehenſive-Non-Recollective. Tut Sixth, The Apprehenſive-Recollective- Non-Retentive. THE Seventh, The Recollective- Non- Apprehenſive- Non-Retentive. TnE Eighth, The Apprehenſive-Retentive-Non Recollective. Axu AND by theſe Means, and this Procedure, we might Form a Thouſand Mathematick Propoſitions, and Draw Concluſions from an Abſtracted Reaſoning; And then by Comparing thoſe Concluſions, with what ve Obſerve in Humane, or any other Intelligent Minds, we might know, which of them Agreed with and were Correſpondent to Nature, and which of them were to be Conſidered, as Abſtracted Theorems and Contemplations only. S. 4. I muſt be farther Said, that as the Mind is Active in Perception, and not Paſſive only, ſo is it in Retention and Recollection, which is a Secondary Kind of Perception, or a Perceprion of a Perception; And, as in our Senſations, External Objects do not barely Act upon our Minds, but our Minds are likewiſe Active in Receiving their Impreſſions, thus, hen ve Apply Water to Fire, Water does not only Act upon it, but it Acts again in Receiving it's Impreſſion, ſo is it in our Memories, when any Idea Lies in them, and is View'd by them, the Mind is Active, and is Exerted in the Contemplation of it; that is, of an Idea, which in this Circumſtance is not Properly an Idea of Senſation, but a Picture of ſuch an Idea, made by the Mind from irs Firſt and Original Perceiving it. 5. 5. BUT it may be ſtill Inquired, hov Memory Reſults from this Active Principle of Primary or Original Perception, which ſeems to be from a Greater Proporrion of Action in the Mind in Receiving it's Senſations, than in the External Agents, which Impreſs them; For where the Mind is moſt Excited to Obſerve it's Senſations, either ſfrom Pain or Pleafure, or any other Paſſion or Emotion Produced in it, and 10 which it is, as it were, Animated and Rouzd, it always Remembers ſuch Senſations, with a more Particular Emphaſis and Regard, tis more Quick and Lively in Recollecting them, and more Apt and Ready to Retain them; And, that this Pain or Pleaſure, or any other Paſſion or Emotion of the Mind, cannot Proceed from the mere Impreſſions of External Agents, and their Action upon it, but from it's own Innate Action likewiſe, is Evident; Since the ſame External Actions will Produce Different Reſentments of Pleaſure or Pain, or any other Paſſion, where the Action of the Mind, which Receives them, is Different, and ſince without any External Agency, where a Man Thinks within his own Breaſt, ſome Thoughts will Cauſe him more Pleaſure or Pain, or other Paſſions or Emotions of Mind, which no External Agents were ever able to Produce in him. ON the Contrary, when the Action of the Mind in Receiving an Impreſſion is not much Greater, or Leſs, than the Action of the External Object upon it, ſuch an Impreſſion Ends in a bare Senſation, and the Mind will Retain but a Faint and Languid Memory at the moſt, or Perhaps none at all, of it; Which is alſo Confirmed by Experience, for when the Mind is not much Movd by it's Ideas, they ſoon Vaniſh, and it Remembers little or nothing of them: And what has been ſaid, in Reſpect of our Ideas of Senſation being the Subject of our Memories, or of our Secondary Perceptions, is alike Applicable to our Ideas of Reſlection. 5. 6. FARTHER We may Obſerve, that the Mind cannot only Remember, that it once Actually Perceived ſuch an Idea, but it can alſo Remember, that it Remembered it, or Remember that it Remembered, that it had a Memory of it; So that, as our Ideas of Memory are Secondary Perceptions in Reſpect of our Primary and Original Ones, ſo likewiſe, there may be Secondary Ones in Reſpect of theſe Secondary Conſidered as Primary, and ſo on; Or vhich is the ſame, there may be Secondary, Ternary, and Quaternary Perceptions, &c. In Reſpect of our Primary Ones; Tis True, the Mind does not Proceed far in this Way, becauſe of the Uſeleſsneſs and Inſignificancy of ſuch Perceptions, either in Common Life, or in the Purſuit of Knowledge, or of any Rational Inquiries; but that it has this Capacity is Evident in Fact and Experience. AxD the Perceptions of this Sort, I Mean all theſe Secondary Ones, are Perfect: ly Different from either our Ideas of Senſation or Reſlection; They are in a Man ner Entirely owing to the Native Action of the Mind, and the farther we Proceed in them, the farther we are Retird from our Primary Ones, and Conſequently from thoſe of mere Senſation only. So that the Mind Thinks and Acts within it's Self, without any Relation to, or Dependence upon External Objects, which is the Caſe of Study and Contemplation which always makes Uſe of Memory and it's Secondary Ideas of the Firſt Sort. SixCi SINCE therefore the Mind is thus Active, even in it's Primary Ideas, and mucl more ſo in its Secondary Ones, which Action is Innate to it, and Independent ol Matter, ve have. all the Reaſon in the World to Think, and be Aſſured, that the Mind will Survive the Body, and Preſerve ſtill it's Proper Action, upon a Diſſolu tion from it. S. 7. THE next Faculty of the Mind, which this Philoſophy Proceeds to, is That o Diſcerning between it's Ideas; Which need not be Diſtinguiſhed, as is here done from it's Faculty of Perceiving; For upon the very Account, that we Perceive our ſeveral Ideas, for that very Reaſon we have a Faculty of Diſcerning between them, and the One is a Neceſary Conſequence and Reſult of the Other. AND this Faculty of Diſcerning is Common to all, vho have the Faculty of Perceiving their Ideas, and therefore is not what is Peculiarly Requiſite to an Exactneſe of Judgment, and to a Clearneſs of Reaſon, according to the Aſfirmations oſ this Philoſophy  Nor is Wit, in it's Diſcerning of Idcas, Oppoſite to Judgment, there being an Equal Faculty of Diſcerning and Diſtinguiſhing Ideas in both Caſes; For to Form an Ilias, or an neis, will Require as Accurate, and as Juſt a Diſiinction oſ our Ideas, as to Demonſtrate with Euclid or Archimedes. 5. 8. ON the Contrary, an Exactneſs of Judgment, or a Clearneſs of Reaſon, does Suppoſe Indeed, that we can Separate and Diſtinguiſh one Idea from another, with the utmoſt Nicety; but then beſides this, all the Faculties of the Mind Have and Obtain their Proper Share and Province; For we muſt likewiſe be able to Compound, to Compare, and Abſtract our Ideas with a like Juſtneſs and Accuracy, and above all to Remember and Retain the ſame Ideas which we have Originally Fixt in our Minds, without Suffering them to Vary and Change into others, in the Proceſs of our Reaſonings; To which Infirmity, the Greateſt and Wiſeſt Men are Subject, as is Evident from the Writings of Philoſophers, and Divines, whoſe Failures in Argument do Generally Proceed from an Unwary Altering of thoſe Ideas, Concerning vhich they Diſcourſe, into others, which are Entirely Different from them; from vhence there muſt Neceſarily Reſult an Inconſiſtency in their Concluſions. AND, that this is a Natural Frailty in the Mind is Manifeſt from our Dreams, vhen the Mind in Sleep is Reſigned to it's ovn Actings without any Government or Diſcipline Exerciſed over it by us, or any Rules Preſcribed, whereby it's Thoughts may be Conducted, for then our Ideas Change their Shape and Appearance every Minute. AND for this Reaſon it is, that the more Lazy and Oſcitant we are in our Conſidering of Things, the nearer ve Approach to that State of Mind, in which we Dream, and the leſs Accurate we are in our Reaſonings; Becauſe our Ideas are leſs Conſlant to themſelves, and are more Prone to Change into others; From Whence it Follows, that to an Exactneſs o Judgment, and a Clearneſs of Reaſon, the Utmoſt Diligence and Intenſencſs of Thought is Required, and a Watchful and Vigilant Eye is to be kept upon our Ideas, that they do not Gradually Transform themſelves into Different Ones. Tns, when Philoſophers Diſcourſe of Matter, vhich they have Laid Down to have certain Invariable Qualities belonging to ir, by which it becomes a Similar and Homogenous Subſtance; Carry them a little farther into their Syſtemes, and we ſhall find That Similar and Homogenous Matter has Changd it's Shape and Form, and is cvery Thing elſe but Homogenous, and has a Thouſand Various Powers, which at Firſt were all Excluded from it; Tis Hard, tis Fluid,tis Colourd, tis Sonorous, tis all that we ſind in Matter, and yet at Firſt it was only Impenetrable, Diviſible, Moveable, and Extended; This is a Frailty in Reaſon and Judgment, and Inſtcad of Philoſophizing, is only a Learned Kind of Dreaming. 5- 9. ON the other Hand, Wit Relaxes the Mind from this Severity of Thinking, and tho it has a Sulſicient Diſcernment betwixt one Idea and another, and can Accuratcly enough Diſtinguiſh them, and tho' with a Juſt Application and Artention it might thereſore keep its Idcas Firm and Unaltered, ſo as from thence to make an Exact Jud2ment oſ Things, it yet Chooſes a quite Contrary Method, that is, to Change and Diverſiſy it's Images of the ſame Thing, as much as Poſſible, ſo as to Strike us vith Surprize, and vith Variety; And whereas Reaſon and Judgment Connects our ldeas Cloſcly tozether, and Shews the Dependence oſ one upon another, n Breaks Breaks every Link of the Chain, Throws oſf ſuch Fetters of Thought, and is neve better Pleaſed, than when it Soars with a Licence Uncontrouled, and Looks Dowr upon Coherence, as a Thing below it; which is Evident from the Pindarick Writing: of the Poets, Compared with Thoſe of the Mathematicks and of PhiloſOphy. 5. 10. REASON and Judgment is a Scrupulous Exactneſs of Thought, and Wit ar Unbounded Liberty of it; The One is, Agreeable to the Subject on vhich it is manj Times Employ'd, Like the Nice Deſcription of a Figure, where the Lines and Angles are Punctually Drawn by Rule and Compaſs; The Other, Like the Bold and Maſterly Strokes of the Painter's Pencil, which muſt not be Guided by any Thing, but by Ge nius and Fancy. j : AND thereſore it is, that to Jnse well, the utmoſt Seriouſneſs and Attention ĩt Neceſſary, but to be a Wit, nothing Leſs; The Invention muſt be let Looſe, and no Reſtraints laid upon the Management of our Ideas, but all muſt be Reſigned to the Pleaſure of the Mind to Set them in what Light, or to Give them what Form or Colour, it Thinks Proper; Whereas Judgment and Reaſon Dare not Stir one Step beyond what Nature Preſcribes, and always Conforms it's ſclf to her Directions. S. 11. Tuis Philoſophy farther Tells us; that the Comparing of our Ideas one vith another, in Reſpect of Extent, Degree, Time, Place, or any other Circumſtances, is another Operation of the Mind about it's Ideas, which is the Ground of Relations, and that Brutes ſeem not to have this Power in any Great Degree; and that they Probably have not any Power at all of Comparing General Ideas. It would be Hard Indeed, if a Philoſophy, which has Conſidered Ideas with ſuch Accuracy, ſould be Miſtaken in every Point; And it may Poſſibly be True in this, vith one Reſtriction, in Reſpect of the firſt Part of what is here Affirm'd, that our Comparing Ideas with one another, as to Extent, Degree, Time, Place, &e. ĩs the Ground of Relations, Namely, if it is Meant, ſo far as e Apprehend thoſe Relations; But if it is Aſfirmd in General, it is a Miſtake; Becauſe not only our Comparing our Ideas, but the Diſferent Genius's, Tempers, and Complexions of our Minds, by which we firſt Receive, and then Compare them, comes into the Account, which this Philoſophy does not at all Regard; For it's whole Syſteme Aims at this, to make the Furniture of every Perſon's Mind Alike, their Reaſon and Faculties the Same, and vhich Garniture, after it has made it a Raſa Tabula, muſt be of it's own Supplying;Tis an Empty Room, without any Thing to Set it off or Adorn it, till this Philoſophy has taken Care to put into it, what Ideas and Faculties it Thinks Proper for it's Ornament and Embelliſiing; And amongſt the Reſt, is this of Comparing Ideas; as if it was the ſame in all Men, and was not to be Diſtinguiſied by the Various Forces, Powers, and Capacities of the Mind, which it Certainly Ought to be. Tunus in Reſpect of Extent, by Comparing our Ideas,'tis True, we find that one Thing is Greater or Leſs, and that one Mind is more or Leſs Extenſive or Capacious than another; In Reſpect of Degree, that one Subſtance is Hotter or Colder, Harder or Softer, Whiter or Blacker, &. than another; In Reſpect of Time, that the Exiſtence of certain Perſons or Things has been of a Longer or Shorter Continuance; and that, in Reſpect of Place, ſome Beings are at a Farther, and others at a Nearer Diſtance from us; And ſo it is in Reſpect of any other Circumſtances, in which Things are Conſidered by us. Tuis is very Obvious and Plain, and does not Require any Great Depth of Philoſophy to Know, or Underſtand, however Pompous theſe Aſſertions may Appear. 5. 12. BUT, IF We Say theſe Relations are the ſame in all Men, becauſe all Men Gain them by Comparing their Ideas in this Way, That does not ſeem to be True; Since Men's Ideas themſelves Differ, according to the Various Complexions of theit Minds, and Conſequently the Relations, vhich Ariſe from a Compariſon of thoſc Ideas. Tnus One, who has been Uſed to Large and Boundleſs Proſpects upon the Ocean, vill Eſteem that a Narrow and Contracted View, which Another, not Accuſtomd to Greater, vill Reckon Suſficiently Wide and Spacious; One, who is Poſſeſſcd of an Ample Eſtate, or of Immenſe Riches, will Look upon that, as an Inconſiderable Revenue, or as a Small and Triſſling Sum, which Another will Think a very Great and Extraordinary One. LIII AxD of Retention, and of Diſcernings Book V. AND a Perſon ſhall be Regarded by the Vulgar, as One oſ a Great and Extenſive Genius, vho to Wiſe and Knowing Men ſhall Appear to have a very Small and Narrow One; So that in Reſpect of Extent, our Idcas of Greater or Leſs Vary and Change according to the Different Minds, which Compare, and Form the Relation: of Things from ſuch a Compariſon. TuHAT Temperature of Air or Climate, which is Exceſſively Hot or Cold to One is not in the ſame Degree ſo to Another; He, who has been Laid in Down and Silks, vill Eſteem that Hard, which is Soft enough for a Labourer's Repoſe3 And an American, who never Sav, what Snow is, will Admire the Whiteneſs of an European Skin. AND even in Time, One, who has Lived to Fourſcore or a Hundred, vill call his Son of Threeſcore a Young Man, vhom his Grandſon of Thirty will call an Old One. Tnus alſo in Diſtance, that will Appear to One Perſon to be but a Short Journey, who has been Uſed to Travel a Longer, which to Another will ſcem a Long and Tedious One, who has not been Uſed to any at all. ANb in other Circumſtances of Comparing our Ideas; That is Bcauty, Symmetry, and Proportion to One, which to Another is Deformity; And in General, what is Rational or Agrecable to One Man is not ſo to Another. TuE Genius and Temper of the Mind therefore, or the Innate Force oſ it, isto be Conſidered in our Forming the Relations of Things; ſince it Influences our Ideas, and Mixes it's ſelf in all our Compariſons of them, s. 13. As to the Second Part of the Aſſertion in the Beginning of &. Iſ. that Brutes do not ſcem to have this Power of Comparing in any Great Degree, nor to have any Pover at all of Comparing General Ideas, it is Anſwerd, That they Appear to have an Equal Incapacity for both. Comparing our Ideas Suppoſes a Certain Kind of Study and Contemplation, for when wve Compare our Ideas one vith another, we ſet them together in Order to Conſider and Examine their Difference, which is a Studious and Contemplative Faculty, and quite of another Kind from that of Perceiving a Diſtinction in our Ideas; Thus I may know, that Fire is Hot, and Snow Cold, by my bare Senſations, without ſetting theſe Ideas together in my Mind, and then Comparing them; The One is the Faculty of a Perceptive Being, the Other of a Rational and a Conſidering One; The Firſt of which Brutes have, but I Think I may Affirm, they have not the Laſt, tho' they may ſeem to make ſome Approaches towards it: For let us Examine a little into this, ſince it is of ſome Importance to us, to Know it, and to be Satisfy'd about it. MEN, who can Study, Contemplate, and Compare their Ideas, are likewiſc Furniſhed with Abilities, by Speech and by Writing, to ſhev, they have ſuch Faculties, for if they were not, they would be in Vain Poſſeſſed of them; It is therefore Reaſonable to Think, that Brutes are not Endowed with them, ſince they would have them to no Purpoſe, if they lay Hid in their Minds, without a Poſſibility of Shewing or Explaining them; But tisa Common Axiom vith Philoſophers, that Nature Works nothing in Vain; Nay, even in Perſons, vho are Dumb, we find ſuch a Capacity of Expreſſing their Thoughts by Signs and Geſtures, which is in a Manner, as Significant, as any Language could be, and which we do not Experience to be in Brutes in any Degree. APES or Monkeys have Indeed ſome Surprizing Actions, which ſiew a Quickneſ~ oſ Perception, and a Readineſi in Diſtinguiſing their Perceptions, and Conſcquently of Remembering them, and the ſame may be ſaid of Dogs; But there does not ſeem 10 be any Footſteps of Study or Contemplation in them, Which there muſt be, if they Actually Compared their Ideas or Perceptions with one another, and did Set them together in their Minds in Order to Conſider them Whereas the Ridiculous and Unthinking Tricks of Apes and Monkeys ſhow no ſuch Faculty or Power. ON the other Hand Parrots, vhich make ſome Kind of Efforts towards Language, can only Expreſs themſclves in ſome few Particular Things, which Evidences, that they Diſlinguiſ their Perceptions and Remember them, but not that they Study or Compare them, not even in the Famous Inſtance of Prince Maurice's, given by this Philoſophy, Suppoſing that Inſtance True. AND Thus, it is, even in the Fine and Curious Cells or Neſts of Bees or of Birds, which ſcem to be Formed by a Mechanical Operation, ariſing from this Quick and Lively Diſtinction oſ Ideas, and the Memory, vhich Reſults ſfrom ir, but does not any Ways Evince Evince, that they Compare their Ideas, or that they Study upon them; no more, thar a Mechanick Building a Houſe, by what he has Learnt from mere Perception, anc Memory, does Prove, that he has Studied upon, and Compared all the ſeveral Ideas which belong to his Building, or, that he is the beſt Philoſopher, or Architect in the World. 5. 14. BuT, If Brutes have not the Power of Comparing Particular Ideas, it will be very Certain, they have it not, in Reſpect of General Ones, To Compare which is ſtill more Operoſe, and will Require a much Greater Study and Contemplation. AND, If they have it not in Either of theſe Particulars, If Brutes can only barely Diſtinguiſh their Perceptions, and juſt Remember what they Diſtinguiſh, without being Able to Proceed any Farther; And If on the Contrary, Men cannot only Diſtinguiſh their Perceptions, and Remember them, with an Infinitely Greater Exactneſs and Quickneſs than they can, but can alſo Study and Contemplate upon their Ideas, and Compare them to an Infinite Variety; for the ſame Reaſon, that Almighty God, who InfiniteIy Exceeds us in the Comprehenſion of his Mind, is Eternal, ve may Preſume, that the ſame Infiniteneſ" of Comprehenſion in Reſpect of Brutes, will Entitle Our's to a Natural Immortality; whilſt the Minds of Brutes are Periſhable and Mortal. ADD ro this Farther, that a Faculty, which is merely Paſſive of Perception, and tis Poſſible, That is all, which Brutes have, and Memory, or a Recollective one, which Reſults from it, (which is no more than a Kind of Reſiliency in the Mind upon an Impulſe made upon Senſation) in i's own Nature ſeems to be as Capable of Ceaſing and Vaniſhing, as the Percuſſion made upon an Harp or a Violin; But, vhen we find in ourſelves, that there is not only a Perceptive Faculty, and a Memory, vhich is Derivcd from it, but an Adtive Principle in thoſc Perceptions and in Memory, as alſo in Comparing our Ideas, in Studying of them and Contemplating upon them, Abſtracted from Senſe, it gives us a Juſt Impreſſion, that there is ſomething in ſuch a Mind, which will Continue after all it's Perceptions from Senſation are no more, that is, after the Diſſolurion of our Minds from the Bodies, which Encompaſs and Attend them; Laſtly, tho' Brures have not the Faculty of Comparing Ideas, this Philoſophy cannot ſiew, why they have not, whereas, it may be done by the Pſycheometria Explained above, that is, from the Different Intenfions of Perception. 5. 15. THE next Operation of the Mind, which this Philoſophy takes Notice of; is Compoſition, a Faculty, with which Human Minds are certainly Endu'd; Thus we can Form a Centaur, or Chimera, and Join and Unite Ideas together at our Pleaſure; But in Brutes, this Faculty ſeems alſo to be Perfectly wanting; and a Dog does not Appear to know his Maſter, any other way, than by Diſtinguiſhing his Ideas, and by Memory, both which he muſt, of Courſc and Neceſſity, have from his bare Faculty of Perception. ABSTRACTION is a quite Contrary Operation of the Mind, by which we Frame General Ideas, and Separate and Diſunite every Thing from them, which ſhall Render them Particular. Tnus, we can Remove Solidity, Figure, and other Properties, from Body in our own Minds, and Conſider only the Colour of them; or Colour, &/c. and Conſider only the Extenſion of them. Tnis Faculty is Confeſſcd not to Reſide in Brutes in any Degree, but why they ſould be Able to Set and Combine Ideas together, as this Philoſophy Thinks, and not to Separate them, which it does not Allow, is Inconceivable. 5. 16. THE Whole Caſe therefore ſeems to be This, in Reſpect of Human Minds, and Thoſe of Brutes; THAT the Latter are only Capable of Percption, by External Objects Acting upon their Senſes, and in which theit Minds are barely Paſſive, or Suſceptible, of thoſe Impreſſions, and, by a Kind of Natural Reſult or Reaction, of Remembering them likeviſe; That, by theſe Means they Diſtinguiſh one Thing from another, and accordingly are Dirccted to Purſue, or Avoid it; That they do not Contemplate, Compare, Compound, or Abſtract their Ideas, becauſe their Minds are only Paſſive of the Impreſſions, which are made upon them, whereas thoſe Operations Conſiſt in Action; and Conſequently, and for the ſame Reaſon, That they have no Ideas of Reflection; And upon all theſe Accounts that they have no Conſcience of their Actions, and are Capable of no Moral Rules to Guide them; Since thereſore their Minds are merely Paſſive ſrom LIII⸗ the the Strokes of External Objects, it is Reaſonable to Think, that when thoſe Impulſes Ceaſe, their Perceptions will alſo Vaniſh 3 And ſince they have no Actions to Anſver for, as they have no Senſe or Conſcience of them, nor no Reſiection upon the Operations of theit own Minds, it is not to be Imagined, that they will be Summond to a Future Audit; If therefore we Conſider Nature, or Religion and Morality, there is every Thing, which can Convince us, that the Souls, or Minds, of Brutes are Mortal. TuAT, yet Human Minds are not ſo, is as Evident on the Contrary; Since (Which has been already Shewn) their Faculty of Perception is Active, and their Recollective Poers, not a Natural Recoiling, or Reſult, from a bare Impreſſion upon them, made by External Objects, as in Brutes, but an Active Force likewiſe; ſrom which Principle of Action Proceeds their Ability of Comparing, Compounding, and Abſtracting, and Reſſecting upon the Operations Produced in them; That they are Endued with a Conſcience of their Thoughts and Actions, and can Form Moral Truths ſor their Direction and Conduct; and Conſequently we may Juſtly Preſume from Nature, that this Principle of Action, which is Innate in theſe Human Minds will never Ceaſe, ſince it grows Stronger vith Age, and is Fortified by Time and Experience; and we may Preſume from Religion, that ſuch Beings muſt, ſome Time or other, Anſver for their Actions, and be Revarded for theit Good Ones, and Puniſhed for their lll; And for both theſe Reaſons we may Pronounce, that Human Minds are Immortal, that they vill Survive the Bodies, to which they are at Preſent Joined, and vill Continue in a State oſ Activity, which is Innate to them, for Everlaſting Ages. To be Satisſy'd and Apprized of the Inſinite Difference betwixt Human Minds and Thoſe of Brutes, there is nothing more Requiſite, than to Conſider the Vaſt, the DBoundleſs and Immenſe Realonings of Philoſophers, and Mathematicians, with their Various Comparing, Compounding, and Abſtracting their Ideas, the Excurſions of their Thoughts, and Contemplations, thro' the Diſtant Regions of the Univerſe, and thro all the Ranks and Orders oſ Created Beings, and then Compare them, with the Short and Narrow Intellects of a Dog, a Monkey, or a Parrot; For ſrom thence we may be Convinced of the Great and Stupendous Powers and Faculties of the One. and of the Small and Minute, and Inconſiderable, Forces of the other; The One makes Us Approach to God himſelf, the Other Scarcely Raiſes Them above the Energy of Matter. Iſ we thereſore Regard only the Relations of Things, we ſnall be Led to Think, and to Believe, that as Almighty God is Eternal, Io We are Immortal; and as Matter is Periſable, ſo the Souls, or Minds, of Brutes, which have a near Alliance with it, are nearly in the ſame State of Corruption, Change, and Alteration vith it. 5. 17. NoRr can it be Objected, that there are ſome Men, who ſeem to be very little Superior in Knowledge to Brutes themſelves; Since, altho' the Improvements oſ their Faculties are not Equal to thoſe of Others, yet they have the ſame or like Faculties of Activeneſs in Perceiving, and Remembering, of Comparing, Compounding, and Abſtracting, and of Reſlecting upon theit own Thoughts and Perceptions; All Which Brutes Want; And tis the Faculties, not the Uſe or Improvement of them, which muſt Denominate and Diſtinguiſh Une Intelligent Being, as Such, ſrom Another: There is not the Meaneſt Perſon in Underſtanding, who has not Language, and there is no one, who has Language, who has not, in a Greater or Leſs Degree, the Diſcurſive Faculty 3 which ſiews they have an Active Perception, and a Memory, that they Compare, Compound, and Abſtract Ideas, or elſe they could not Talk in the ſame Language vith others, which even Ideots or Madmen can do3 Tho' Perhaps they may not Connect their Ideas Juſlly; But this is an Imperſection or Diſorder in the Mind, and not a Proof, that they have not the ſame Kind oſ Faculties with other Men; On the Contrary, Brutes have no Diſcurſive Faculty at all, and what is Alledged ſrom Parrots Extends only to ſome fev Words, or even Sentences, which might be Learned by a bare Diſtinction oſ Ideas, and a Paſſive Memory, Reſulting from ſuch a Perception. 5. 13. BUT althdo we Argue upon a Conceſſion, that the Story of Prince aranricess Parrot ĩs True, Mentioned by this Philoſophy, yet we are no more Obliged to Believe, that it is ſo, much leſs to Form and to Ground our Perſuaſions in Philoſophy, Contrary to all the known Facultics of Brutes, upon ſuch a Story, which is Alledged n to Prove, or, at leaſt, to Countenance the Suppoſition of a Rational Parrot; Than this Author of Great Note, who is Quoted, or the Great Author, who Quotes him, vould have Thought themſclves Obliged to Believe the Immortality of the Soul, becauſc Prince Maurice, with his Uſual Plaineſi and Dryneſi in Talk, or Shorily and Colaly, ſor it's much the ſame, as to the Truth of the Story, had Informed them, that he had Met vith a Tall Black or Tawny Ghoſt in Braſil, which had Told him as much; For the Evidence Amounts to no more, than what we have for every Ghoſt, that has been Talked of for this Hundred Years, or as many Ages, which Generally is Confined to the Teſtimony of One or TWo; and therefore we may as fully Believe any Story, which ve have Heard of an Apparition, as this of the Rational Parrot; But Thoſe, who are ſo willing to Believe This, vould take it to be an Affront to their Reaſon and Underſtanding to Believe the Other. BESIDES, Is it not Incredible, that of ſo many Millions of Parrots, which either have Belongſd, or do Belong to the Species, there never was one beſides Prince Aſaurice's, that was Old, or Big, enough to come to the Uſe of it's Reaſon, that ever any one Heard oſ? And would not One be Apt to Think, that this was only ſome Cold and Dry Jeſt of the Prince, to Divert himſclf with the Credulity of thoſe about him? Is it not alſo ſomething Surprizing, that, vhen Prince Maurice had the Curioſity to ſend for this Rational Parrot, tho at a Good Diſiance off, he ſhould only give us one Poor Dialogue for the Proof of i's being Rational, and that the ſame Curioſity did not Tempt him to Inquire farther, and Examine very Strictly into the Profound Abilities and Attainments of this Wonderfull Bird? Here is nothing, only a ſhort Story of coming from Marinnan, of belonging to a Portugeze, and looking aſter the Chictens; The Prince's Invention muſt be either very Low, that could not Prompt him to Ask any more Queſtions, or very Cunning to Put ſuch, which he Thought might be the Propereſt, and not the moſt Unlikely, for a Parrot to Anſwer; For if it had the Diſcurſive Faculty, it might have Anſwered a Thouſand Queſtions beſides; From whence it is Plain, that this was only a Leſſon, which the Parrot had Learned, and therefore is Reſolved into the Ideas of bare Memory and Perception, Which is Allowed to be in all Animals, in ſome Degree or other. i BUT, what is very Extraordinary in this Dialogue is, that it was betwixt the Prince and the Parrot; The Firſt Spoke in French or Dutch, for by his own Confeſſion, he did not Underſtand the Language of Braſil, and the Lat Anſwered in that Language; and tho' by the Method, Which the Prince took of an Interpreter, he might Underſtand, what the Parrot ſaid, yet the Parrot could not know, what he ſaid, unleſs by a like Interpreter, which yet is nor in this Account Affirmd; Nay Farther, it is not ſo much as ſaid, that the Prince Inquird oſ his Interpreters, upon every Anſwer of the Parrot, what was Meant by it But it is rather Repreſented ſo, as if after the Dialogue, which Paſſcd Currently betwixt them, the Prince took his Interpreters Apart to Knov, whether they both Agreed in giving the ſame Senſe of the Parror's Anſver; vhich if ſo, is an Evident Conviction, that the Story is al. a mere Contrivance; ſince it is Impoſſible the Prince ſould Propoſe his Queſtions in French or Dutch, and the Parrot ſiould Anſwer in the Braſil; However it is ſo Imperſect, and at the ſame Time ſo Improbable a Relation, and if it were not, ſo little Proves that Diſcurſive Faculty which there is in Men, that we have no Reaſon to Build any Opinions or Notions in Philoſophy upon it, and with this I ſall Diſmiſs it, and Conclude the Preſent Chapter, after having Conſidered the ſeveral Facultics of Human Minds ir a Mathematick Way, and as a Foundation for a Geometrick Reaſoning upon them and aſter having Reduced them to the Doctrine oſ the Expanſive and Contractive Forces 5. 19. TnE Three Operations of the Mind, not yet Conſidered in this Way, arc Comparing, Compounding, and Abſiracting our Ideas, in Reſpect of vhich, the ſevera Combinations are as Follov, First, Comparing- Compounding- Abſtracting. SECOND, Non-Comparing-Non-Compounding-Non- Abſiracting. TnRD, Comparing- Non- Compounding: Non- Abſtracting. FourTH, Compounding- Abſtracting- Non-Comparing. FirrH, Compounding-Non-Comparing-Non- Abſtracting. SixTH, Comparing- Abſtracting-Non- Compounding. SEVENTH, Abſtracting-Non-Comparing Non Compounding. EiGHTH, Comparing- Compounding Non- Abſtracting. Tni TuE Firſt Caſe is of thoſe Intelligent or Animate Beings, which have an Equal Faculty and Quickneſs in Comparing, Compounding, and Abſtracting their Ideas. THE Second of thoſe, vho Entirely want theſe Faculties, æ it is Probable Brute: do, or elſe have them in a very low Degree. TuE Third is of thoſe, vho Compare their Ideas with Vivacity and Quickneſi, but who Compound and Abſtract them with Difficulty. TuE Fourth is of thoſe, vho Compound and Abſtract them with Eaſe, but Compare them with more Trouble and Pains. TuE Fifth is of thoſe, vho Compound them with Readineſi and Facility, but Compare and Abſtract them more Slowly. TuE Sixth is of thoſe, vho Compare and Abſtract with Greater Briskneſs and Activity, but Compound vith a Leſ. THE Seventh is of thoſe, vho Abſtract more Readily, and Compare and Compound more Difficultly. TuE Eighth is of thoſe, who Compare and Compound vith more Readineſs and Eaſe, but Abſtract with a Leſs. ALL theſe Various Faculties will give ſo many Different Denominations to Intelligent Minds, as the ſeveral Combinations of Perception, Retention, and Recollection, before did; and all theſc Faculties in Animate Beings, if they are at all in them, may be there in a Thouſand Different Degrees and Proportions. AND Farther, theſe Three lat Mentioned Faculties may be Differently Combined vith the Three Former; From whence an Infinite Variety of Intelligent Beings will Ariſe, Suſficient to Account for the whole Animate Creation, and the ſeveral Orders, Claſſes, and Diſtinctions of them Which are known, or can be Conceived or Imagined in the Univerſe; and vill Infinitely Inlarge the Bounds of a Pſycheometria, and Give Scope and Room for a Mathematick Genius to Extend it's ſel? to a Million of Propoſitions, hitherto Unknown to Geometry. 5. 20. As to the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, Perception ſeems to Participate of both; It has the Greateſt Expanſive Force, when it Exerts its ſelf into Buſineſs and Action, and the Greateſt Contractive, when it Retires from it, and Reſigns it's ſelf to Study ahd Contemplation. Tnus alſo, vhen our Senſations are Vigorous, Lively, and Strong, in Exerting themſclves Outwards, and Purſuing the Objects, which Impreſs them, it is an Inſtance of the Expanſive Force of the Mind, or of Perception; when our Senſations are Vigorous, Lively, and Strong, in Exerting themſelves Inwards, ſo as to make us Reſſlect upon them in our own Minds, it ſiews the Contractive. So that Senſation in General Appears to Demonſtrate the Expanſive Force of the Mind, and which Agrees with what we have ſaid before, that the Mind is not only Paſſive, but even Active in Senſation; Reflection, on the other Hand, does not Explain àn Expanſive Force of the Mind, by which it Exerts it's ſelf towards External Objects, but a Contractive, by which it Exerts it's ſelf Inwards tovards it's own Perceptions. S. 21. FROM Whence it vill Follow, that as Senſation, or the Expanſive Force, is the Source of Vice and Folly in Mens Minds, ſo Reſlection, or the Contractive Force, is That of Wiſdom and Virtue; Suitable to what has been Aſſerted, in other Parts of this Philoſophy, of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. EXT to Senſation and Reſlection, we are to Conſider, what Retention and Recollection is, in Reſpect to the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; That Force, by which we Retain Ideas in our Minds, and Fix them down in it, Appears to be Evidently a Contractive One; as alſo That, by which we Recollect to our View, thoſe which are Scattered and Diffuſed in it, or by which we Revive the Dormant and Latent Ones; As Retaining and Fixing, or Recollecting, Reflecting, or Reviving them, are Inſtances of Contraction on the one Hand; and their being Volatile and Deſultory, their being Scattered and Diffuſed, or Tranſient and Periſhing, is an Example oſ Expanſion on the other; This Recollection muſt be Diſtinguiſicd from the Memory of Brutes; this being an Actual bringing Ideas into our Minds by this Contractive Force, the other only a Repeated Perception, with a Power of Diſcerning, that it was before Perceived, and therefore is an Affection of the Expanſive. As to Comparing, or Setting our Ideas together, in Order to Conſider them, it is Maniſeſily the Reſult and Conſequence of the Contractive Force, as is that of Compounding pounding or Uniting them into One; In like Manner, as the Diſſipation oſ them, the Disjoining, or Diſſolving them, Infers and Suppoſes an Expanſive. ABSTRACTION, Or that Faculty, by which we Separate Ideas from each orher, may be Thought to belong to the Expanſive Force; But i? we Conſider, that this Operation of the Mind Ariſes from Reflection, which has been Provæd to be Derived from the Contractive; and if we farther Conſider, that when we Abſtract, ve Contract ſeveral Ideas into One, as Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Purple, &æ. into one Abſtracted Idea of Colour, and the ſame be ſaid of Sound, Taſte, Solidity, and Extenſion, which are all Abſtracted Ideas, we ſhall Eaſily be brought to Acknowledge, that this Power of Abſtraction is to be Aſcribed to the Contractive Force of the Mind, as it's True Cauſe and Origine. 5. 22. THIS Opinion oſ the Principal Faculties of our Minds being owing to the Contractive Forces of them, is farther Proved from Hence3 That theſe Faculties of Diſtinguiſhing our Ideas, of Retaining, Reviving, Comparing, Compounding, and Abſtracting them, are Impaired and Diminiſhed by Debaucheries, Exceſſes, and Lewdneſs, or by Vice in General, which is o an Expanſive Force, and Enervates and Diſſipates the Contractive Force of the Underſtanding This alſlo Agrees with the Account, vhich we have given in Anatomy of the Nervous Syſteme, which we made to be of a Contractive Force. 5. 23. FROM hence it Follows, that the Minds of Brutes, being Solely or Chieſly of an Expanſive Nature, and Conſiſting only in bare Perception and a Memory, which is no more than a Repeated Perception, with a Perception, that it was beſore Perceived, are not Capable of Virtue or Vice, which Requires Reflection, Thought, Choice, and Conſideration, that is, Faculties of a Contractive Force and Conſtitution3 And Conſequently, they are not Capable of Rewards and Puniſhments, and therefore ĩt Is Unreaſonable to Imagine, that ſuch Minds will have any other Period of their Exiſtence, than what is Allotted to their Material Syſtemes. BESIDES, as ſuch Minds are of an Expanſive Force; without the Contractive, they, by their Expanſion, and in their ovn Nature, Tend to a Diſſolution, as Fire and Flame, which are Expanſive, do. S. 24. ON the other Hand, the Human Mind Depends upon Properties and Affections, which, as we have ſiewn, are of a Contractive Nature, Excepting its Senſitive Faculty, which is of an Expanſive; and therefore ſuch a Mind is Capable of Virtue and Vice, and of Rewards and Puniſhments, andi for that Reaſon muſt be Suppoſed to be Immortal, ſince Virtue is not alvays Rewarded, nor Vice Puniſhed, During it's Exiſtence here; And, tho' the Senſitive Powers may Ceaſe their Action, with the Diſſolution of the Material Syſteme, which may again Exert themſelves upon the Reunion of the Body to them; Yet it is Juſt and Rational to Think, that the Contractive Forces of the Mind vill Remain and Subſiſt in their full Strength and Vigour, or in a Greater Degree of Both, after ſuch Diſſolution; And, as Blind Men Remember and Reaſon more Strongly, by a Deprivation of one Senſe only of Secing, ſo we may Imagine, that the Human Mind, when Deprived of all, may Reſlect upon, Retain, Recollect, Revive, Compare, Compound, and Abſtract, it's Ideas with more Quickneſs, Life, and Vivacity, than at Preſent it does, whilſt United to this Syſteme of Senſe and Matter. TuESE Contractive Forces of the Mind alſo ſeem in their owvn Nature to be Averſe to a Diſſolution, quite Contrary to the Expanſive Forces of it; As, in Body, the Contractive Forces Tend to a Cloſe Cement and Connection, and to the Eſtabliſhing the Perpetuity of the Material Syſteme, whether of Marble, Flint, or an Adamant: Whereas the Expanſive Force, of Fire, Percuſſion, or a Proper Menſtruum, Diſſolves the Continuity, and Diſſipates and Deſtroys the Compages. 5. 25. WHEN I Speak of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces of the Mind, and Aſſert the like Forces to belong to Bodies, Ido not make Mind and Matter the ſame; I only Affirm, that they have Properties and Powers, which are Analogous, when the Beings, in which they Reſide, are Perfectly Diſferent; The One being a Thinking and Intelligent Subſtance, The Other a Material and Inanimate. Tunus we may Affirm, that there are Motions in the Mind, as well as in Mattet, that there is Gravity, Levity, Solidity, Diſſipation, Complexion, &. in the one, as vell as the other; But every one knows, that theſe are only Properties, vhich we find in the Mind, Anſwering and Correſpondent to others, vhich ve Obſerve in Matter Matter; but, that they are not Punctually and Literally the ſame, and only ſo far, a the differing Natures of each, of Intelligence and Matter, will Bear, and only ſc far, as they will Allow of the Compariſon. IN like Manner we ſay, there is an Expanſive Force in the Mind, by which ith Ideas are Diſſipated, Diſſolved, or Diſunited, and a Contractive, by which they ar Held and Continucd together, and Cohere with cach other; Agrecably to what e Experience in Matter, in which we Obſerve two Diſferent Forces Reſiding, an Ex panſive, by which it's Parts are Diſſolved, and a Contractive, by which they Cohere; Tho we do not thereſore Aſfirm, that Mind is Matter, or that the Ideas of the one are the Parts of the other; However, this is no Reaſon, why we may not Juſtly Conclude, that the Expanſive Force is the Principle of Diſſolution, and the Contractive of Continuance and Perpetuity in both; And ſince the Firſt belongs to the Minds of Brutes, and the Laſt to thoſe of Men, That thereſore, there is a Natural Principle of Mortality in the Former, as there is one of a Perpetual Duration in the Latter. 5. 26. I ſhall here only farther Add, that the Different Proportions of theſe Expanſive and Contractive Forces in the Minds of Men, or of Brutes, will Furniſh us vith a New Set of Mathematick Propoſitions, and Give a farther Advance to the Elements of a Pſychcometria. C H ADP. VI. Of Complex Ideas, and Firſl, of Simple Modes of Space and Duration. 5. I. S to what Relates to Simple Ideas, and whether the Mind is barely Paſſive, or not, in Receiving them, both have been already Conſidered; Complex Ideas are ſaid to be Thoſe, which Ariſe from that Faculty, which the Mind has, of Compounding it's Simple ones; We muſt therefore Inquire, what this Faculty in the Mind of Compounding is, and how far, and in what Inſtances it is made Uſe of by us. Tnis Philoſophy gives no Account of what the Nature of it is, or whence it Ariſes, and only Mentions Three Inſtances of our Compounding. FmrstT, in Reſpect of Modes; Secondly of Subſtances; and Thirdly of Relations; As to Modes, which are ſaid to be ſuch Coumplex Ideas, which Contain not the Suppoſition of Subſiſiing by themſelves, but are Conſidered, as Dependences on, and Affections of Subſtances, as Triangle, Gratitude, Murder, &. They are, it is Alledged, of two Sorts ; Firſt, Simple, or ſuch as are the Combinations of the ſame Simple Idea, as a Dozen, Score, &c. Which are but the Ideas of ſo many Diſiinct Units put together; Second, Mixed, which are Compounded of Simple Ideas of ſeveral Kinds, as Beauty, which Conſiſts in a Certain Compoſition of Figure and Colour, cauſing Delight in the Beholder; Theſt, which is the Concealed Change of the Poſſeſſion of any Thing without the Conſent of the Proprietor. 5. 2. As to theſe Ideas, ſo far as they are Defined not to Contain a Suppoſition oſ Subſiſiing by themſclves, but to be Dependences on, and Affections of Subſtances, they are Abſiracted and General Ideas; and therefore, i we Conſider them as Modes, or ſuch Aſfections and Dependences, they are owing to the Abſtracting Power of the Mind, and not to the Compounding; for, when we Abſtract a Triangle, Gratitude, Murder, Beauty, or Theſt, from any Subjects, in which they Inhere, ve do not Compound them, unleſs Abſtracting and Compounding are the ſame Things; and ſo in the Repetitions of the ſame Ideas, as of a Unit, when we Speak of 100, or 1000, or any Number in General, without Conſidering the Things, which are Numbered, we do not Compound but Abſtract. IF, on the other Hand, we Conſider theſc Ideas, as made up of Several Combined together, we Receive them at once, and as much by a Single Perception, as the Simpleſt Ideas whatſoever; To wit, ſo far, as they are Ideas of Senſation, or Reſiection, that is, Real and not Fantaſlick ones, Made and Formed by the Will and Pleaſure of the Mind, in which Caſe only the Mind Compounds, as it does in all. other Chimeras. Turs Tnus, If ve take a Triangle, as it any where Exiſts in Nature, or is Dravn in a Mathematick Scheme, it is an Idea of Senſation, which ve no more Compound than we do any one Line of it, or any other Senſation of Red, or Green, or Blue, or the moſt Simple Idea we can Imagine; If we Conſider it in a Notional Way, as Abſtracted from it's being Drawn in a Mathematick Scheme, or Exiſting in Nature, it is an Idea of Abſtraction; And the only Compoſition of the Mind can be in Taking at it's Pleaſure Three Lines, and Joining them together, to make a Triangle, and to Give what Properties, or Aſlign what Conditions ſuch Lines and Angles ſhall be Conſidered Under, as thoſe of mere Length and Breadth, which is an Arbitrary Conſideration and Compoſition of them, and does not Fall Short of any othet Chimera. Tnus alſo, If ve Take Gratitude, Murder, Beauty, or Theft, and Conſider them as Real Actions, or Properties of the Subſtances, in which they Exiſt, they are Ideas of Senſation, and are no more Compounded by the Mind, than any other of outr Ideas, vhich Ariſe from Simple Impreſſions; Thus we See one Man Curting another's Throat, and the Two Men, the Knife, the Throat, and the Baſeneſs of the Action, as much'at once, as we See a Table, the Extenſion, Colour, and Situation of it, at one and the ſame Time, and at one View. IF again ve Abſtract theſe Ideas from the Subſiances, in which they Exiſt, they are Ideas of Abſtraction, and not of Compoſition. AND Laſtly, If we Compound theſe Ideas any Way, it is by taking Arbitrarily ſeveral Ideas and Uniting them together, as ve Think Fit and Proper, and then giving them ſuch certain Denominations, which alſo is the Procedure of the Mind in Forming any other Chimera; For if we give Definitions of them Agreeable to vhat ve Really find in Nature, we do not thereby Compound thoſe Ideas, but only Deſcribe them from what we in Fact Experienced by the Intervention of our Senſes. S. 3. SECONDLY, as to Subſtances, we do not Compound them, ſo far as they are Real Beings Exiſting in Nature, as a Man or a Stonc, they are Ideas of Senſation, and are Impreſied upon our Minds in æhe ſame Manner, as our Simple Ideas are;3 ve See the Shape, the Figure, and Compoſition at Once; And, th we may Arrive at other the Various Properties of theſe Subſtances one after anorher, and at Different Times, yet they are ſtill the Reſult of our Obſervation, and do not Meet together from the Minds Combining or Compounding them, but from it's Obſerving rhem to Exiſt United; And if we Conſider them as General Ideas, and Separate them from Real Exiſtence, they are Ideas of Abſtraction, and never become Ideas of Compoſition, but vhen the Mind Arbitrarily takes ſeveral Propertics and Unites them together, and then Denominates ſuch a Compoſition, a Man or a Stone, which is not Correſpondent to, nor is an Exact Deſcription of Nature, but a Chimera in it. Tnus alſo an Army, an Heap, or an Hundred, as they are Ideas of Senſation, or Abſtraction, are not Compounded by the Mind, and only are ſo, when the Mind Arbitrarily Puts ſo many Men or Things together, whether there ever were ſo many Put ſo together in Nature, or not; that is, vhere we do not Join Things together as they Exiſt, but according to our own Pleaſure; For, where they are Joined together, as they Exiſt, that Compoſition or Combination is made Ready to our Hands, and cannot be Properly Termed a Compoſition or Combination of the Mind; Rather, what the Mind does in ſuch Caſes, is Dividing, what is thus already Combined, and Conſidering the ſeveral Parts of the Idea, of which the Whole is Formd and Compoſed. 5. 2. AND the ſame may be ſaid in Reſpect of Relations, that they in Fact Exiſt, or elſe are Abſtractions of the Mind, and are only Compoſitions of it, when they are Arbitrarily made So that we may ſay in General, that our Complex Ideas are either Ideas ſo Compounded in their Exiſtence and in Nature, and Conſequently are Ideas of Senſe and Obſervation; or elſe are General Ones, and therefore Ideas of Abſiraction; or elſe are Compounded Ideas, which the Mind Divides into the ſeveral Parts, of which they Conſiſt; In none of which Inſtances does the Mind Compound them; And ſo far as they are not Conſidered in One, or Other, of theſ Ways, that is, where they are Formed by the Arbitrary Power of the Mind, they become Creatures of it, and on that Account Chimerical. M m m m 5 5. Tu® 5. 5. THE Firſt Sort of Complex Ideas, which this Philoſophy Procecds Particu larly to Conſider, are thoſe of the Simple Modes of Space. As to Space it's ſelf, it is ſaid to be a Simple Idea, which we get both by ou Sight and Touch; when it Lies in Length betwixt two Bodies, it is called Diſtance; when it Fills the Dimenſions of Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, 'tis Named Capa city; and when Conſidered between the Extremities of Matter, which Repleniſhe: Space with ſomething Solid, 'tis Termed Extenſion. THERE are therefore Three Things Aſſerted here, which are not True. 1ſt. THAT Space is a Simple Idea, ſince it is an Abſtracted One, for what ve Feel is not the ſame Senſation with what we See, nor is Extenſion, vhich we Feel, the ſame with the Diſtance, which we See; Space therefore is Abſtracted from both, and is only Room for Bodies to Move or Exiſt in, without Conſidering our Senſotions of it; and thereſore is not a Simple Idea, it being not ſo much as an Idea oſ Senſation. 2d. THAT we get this Simple Idea of Space both by our Sight and Touch; For, if it is an Abſtracted Idea, we get it by neither; nor can ve Obtain the ſame Idea of Senſation from our Sight and Feeling, unleſs our Eyes are the ſame vith our Hands, and the Conſtitution and Formation of thoſe Organs of Senſe in no Reſpect Diſferent. 3d. THAT Extenſion of Body is the ſame with Space; Whereas Space, as it is an Abſtracted Idea, is neither Capable of being Seen nor Felt, but Extenſion of Body, or Matter, is Subject to both thoſe Senſes, and is Different to our Sight, and to -ur Fecling. S. 6. THE next Thing, which this Philoſophy of Ideas Conſiders, is, the Modiſication of Space; and it is ſaid, that each Different Diſtance is a Different Modiſication of it; and that cach Idea of any Diſferent Space, is a Simple Mode of ſuch an Idea, Namely of Space, as an Inch, a Foot, or a Yard, &e. and when the Mind has got Ideas of theſe Meaſures, it is Capable of Repeating them, as often as it Pleaſes, and by that Means, at Length Arrives at the Idea?o Immenſity. S. 7. BuT, as we have Proved, that Spaceis an Abſtracted Idea, and thereſore no Simple One of Senſation, which this Philoſophy Affirms, ſo neither is the Modiſication of this Idea into Different Lengths and Meaſures a Complex One; For an Inch, a Foot, or a Yard, is not an Idea made by Compoſition, but by Abſtraction likeviſe; ince, if we take an Inch, ora Foot, we do not Conſider it, ſo far as it is an Inch, or a Foot, as Conſiſting of Parts, but of one Certain and Determined Length, Taken and Abſtracted ſfrom Univerſal Space or Extenſion. Tis True, ve may Conſider a Foot, to be Made up and Conſtituted of ſo many other Lengths, as Inches, and a Yard to Correſpond to ſo many Feet; But this is Foreign to the Real and Determinate Meaſure of a Yard, or a Foot, and only Ariſes from a Compariſon of them with other Lengths; For a Foot is no more Compounded of 12 Inches, or a Yard oſ ; Feet, than of any other Number of Parts, we can Mention, into which they are Capable of being Divided. TuE Length, or Meaſure, whether of an Inch, a Foot, or a Yard, is one Preciſe. Individual, and Uniſorm Portion of Space, Abſtracted by the Mind from the Reſt of it; And therefore, ſo far only, as it is a Modification of Space, is not an Idea of Compoſition but Abſtraction. ArTER the Mind is Furniſhed with theſe Lengths, it cannot be Denied, but that it has a Power of Repeating them, from whence Indeed will Ariſe Certain Complex Ideas of Space; Thus, if the Abſtracted Length of a Yard is made by a Repetition of 3 Feet, or a Foot by the Repetition of 12 Inches, or an Inch by the Repetition of a Cerrain Number of Barley Corns, they will then become Complex Ideas, but ſtill, they vill not, as this Philoſophy Affirms, be Compounded of Simple Ideas of Senſation, but of a Repetition of the ſame Abſtiracted Idea oſ Length; And it ſeems, as if the Mind had it's Original Meaſures from Abſtraction, and that the Repetition of them does Obtain only in Uſe and Practice. 5. 3. As to the Idea of Immenſity, it does not Appear to be Gained to the Mind, by a Repeating any Finite Meaſure, becauſe that only would Supply us with the Idea oſ a Greater Finite, but by a Negation of Finite, be it as Great as it vill; This yet does not make Immenſec Space a Negative Idea, becauſe it is a Negation of Finite, no no more than Finite is a Negative Idea, becauſe it is a Negation of Infinite; On the Contrary, Infinite Space is a Poſitive Idea, and Includes every Thing, which is Finite in it; Finite is nothing more than the Mind's taking a Portion or Part of vhat is Infinite, and we cannot have the Idea of Finite Space, without the Suppoſition oſ an Infinite one; Becauſe, ſince we may take our Finite Portion oſ it, Wnhere and as Great as ve Pleaſe, tis Maniſeſt. ve could not do it, unleſs it were in Fact Infinite. Tut Idea of an Immenſe Space is therefore Acquired, not ſfrom a Repetition oſ any Finite Meaſure of it, but from Reaſoning, and a Plain and Evident Concluſion rom the Nature of it, which Receives no Bounds, and is not Capable of any Limitation. THERE are alſo other Ways, by which we come by this Idea, that is, ſrom the Various Theorems and Demonſtrations in the Mathematicks, Concerning the Angle oſ ; Contact, Incommenſurables, the Aſymptotes of the Hyperbola, . BUT this Idea of an Inſinite Space is Formed by Men of Reaſoning and Speculation; The Common and more Uſual Way of Gaining it ſeems to be from the Boundleſs Proſpects of the Sky and ther, which we every Day See, and gives an Impreſſion of the Immenſity of Space to the moſt Ignorant, as ell as to the moſt Learned, becauſe ve Sce no End of ſuch Proſpects, that is, They are Infinite; But I dare Affirm, that no One ever got his Idea of it by the Method, which this Philoſophy Aſſerts, Namely, by the Repetition of any Finite Mcaſure of it whatſoever, for the Reaſon before Alledged, that it is Impoſſible, that the Repetition of any Finite ſould Troduce any other Idea in us, than that of a ſtill Greater Finite, which vill always be Inſinitely ſort of what is Unlimited and Immenſe. 5. 9. ANoTHER Modification of Space is ſaid to be That of the Different Terminations of it, which is Called Figure; But according to what has been before Alledged in &. I. Figure is cither an Idea of Senſation or Abſtraction, and is not an Idea of the Mind's Compounding, but when it becomes a Chimerical One, and is not Made up of Simple Ideas of Senſation. 5. 10. THE Laſt Mode of Space Mentioned in this Chapter is Place, which may be Conſidered, as Relative, or Poſitive and Abſolute; Relative Place is, vhen we Conſider any Thing with Reference to it's Diſtance from ſome Fixed and Certain Points, but then this is not a Modification of Space, nor an Idea, which Ariſes from Compoſition, but from Comparing the Situation of any Body in Reſpect oſ ſuch Points, and which does not Inferr any Modification of Space, not even as to Length, be cauſe ſuch Modiſications are always Preciſe, and' Determinate, as in an Inch, a Foot, or a Yard, according to the Confeſſions of this Philoſophy ; Whereas in Relative Tlace, ve only Conſider any Bodies in General, being Nearer to or Farther oſf ſrom the Point, to which it is Referr'd, and the Manner of Poſition, which it Obtains in Reſpect of it; For if we Examine into the Real Diſtance, and Take the Exa Number of Yards or Miles, or Semidiameters of the Earth, into the Account of Relative Place, Relative Place will not be Diſlinguiſied ſrom the Modiſications of Space in Reſpect of Diſtance, which Fell under another Head, and which has been already Inquired into. PosiTIvE Or Abſolute Place muſt thereſore, if any, be a Modiſication of Space, nor yet is This, becauſe it is an Idea of Abſtraction, and not of Compoſition; For, iſ ve Take any Body or Portion of Matter, which Exiſts, the Place is an Abſtracted Idea, which Exeludes all other Properties, but mere Space or Dimenſion; Whereas the Real Place is no Other than that Body or Portion oſf Matter, which does Exiſt; And ſo it may be ſaid in Reſpect of the Univerſe, that it does not Exiſt in Univerſal Space, or Place, but that ĩt Exiſts in it's Sclf, whatever the Nature of that Exiſtence is3 Which we have Proved to be a Plenum of Action, Worthy of an Infinite and Al mighty Agent. S. 11. THE next Kind of Simple Modes are ſaid to be thoſe oſ Duration, Which are ſeveral Meaſures, or Diſtances, of Duration, as Hours, Days, Years, &e. Iime and Eternity. TuE Idea oſ which Duration is Aſfirmed to be Derived ſrom the Fleeting and Perpetually Periſing Parts of Succeſſion, and the Idea of Succeſſion, from Reſectina Mm m m2 or on that Train of Ideas, hich Conſtantly Follow one another in our Minds, as lonã as we are Avake. AND the Continuation of the Exiſtence of ourſelves, or any Thing elſe Commenſu rate to the Succeſſion of any Ideas in our Minds, is ſaid to be, what we call oul own Duration, or that of another Thing, Co-exiſting with our Thinking; That this i ſo, is Proved from Hence. 1ſ. BECAUSE we have have no Perception of Succeſſion, or Duration, when tha Succeſſion of our Ideas Ceaſes, as in Sleep; The Moment we Sleep and Awake how Diſtant ſoever, ſeems to be Joined and Connected, Excepting, vhen we Dream and there is a Manifeſt Succeſſion of our Ideas. 2d. BECAUSE, Whilſt we are Avake, and our Thoughts are Intent upon one Thing, we let Slip out of our Account a good Part of that Duration, and Think that Time Shorter than iĩt is. 3d. BECAUSE Motion, which is Commonly Suppoſcd to be a Meaſure of Durãtion, is no farther ſuch, than as it Produces in our Minds an Idea of Succeſlion, or a Continued Train of Diſtinguiſhable Ideas in us. AND therefore, it is ſaid, Motions, which are very Slow, are not Perceived by us, becauſe the Change of Diſtance is ſo Slow, that it Cauſes no New Ideas in us, but after a Long Interval; As in the Hand of a Clock, or the Shadow of a Dial. AND the Same Happens in Things, which Move very Swift, which, not Affecting the Senſe vith ſeveral Diſtinguiſhable Diſtances of their Motion, Cauſe not any Train of Ideas in oùr Minds, and Conſequently are not Perceived. Tnus any Thing, which Moves Round in a Circle, in leſs Time than our Ideas are vont to Succeed one another in our Minds, is not Perceived to Move, but ſeems to be a Perfect and Entire Circle of that Matter, which is in Motion. AND ſuch a Part of Duration, as takes up the Time of only one Idea in our Minds, wherein we Perceive no Succeſſion, is Called an Inſtant. WuEN we have thus got the Idea of Duration from a Succeſſion of our Ideas, it is ſaid, e can Apply it to Things, which Exiſt, whilſt ve do not Think, and thus we Meaſure the Time of our Sleep. §. 12. THE Firſt Thing therefore, which is to be Conſidered is, whether the Succeſſion of our Ideas is that, from Which we Derive our Idea of Duration, which it is not. 1ſt. BECAUSE the Succeſſion of our Ideas does Neceſſarily Suppoſe an Interruption of them, as there is in Shadows upon a Wall Succeeding each other; there muſt be ſome Kind of Diſtance and Interval betwixt them, or elſe there would not be a Succeſſion; Beſides which, it is Plain in Fact and Experience, that our Ideas are as Diſtinct and Separate from each other, as the Words are, which I now Write, and by which I Expreſs the Ideas, which I have; But if this is ſo, how is it Poſſible, that we ſhould Form an Idea of Duration from a Succeſſion of Ideas, which Includes, as to our Conſciouſneſs of it, a Non-Duration in it, by the Chaſms and Intervals made in Duration, from the Chaſms and Intervals made in the Succe ſſion of our Ideas, from their being Diſtinct, Separated, and Divided, from each other? 2d. BECAUSE the Succeſſion of our Ideas is Various in Reſpect of the Velocity and Quickneſs, or the Slowneſs of them, with which they Paſs thro' the Mind, and therefore upon that Account muſt Imprint very Different and Uncertain Ideas of the Duration, which they give us. FroM vhence, it is not Impoſſible, that other Creatures may have been ſo Formed by their Creator, that what Appears to us an Hour or a Day only, may to them have the Length and Period of an Year, or an Age, and a Minute the Duration of an Hour or a Day3 And the Creature, vhich Tully makes Mention of, upon the River Hypanis, Whoſe Term of Life was only for a Day, might ſeem to it's ſelf to Live as long, as we do; And on the Contrary, vhat Appears to us to be an Hour or a Day, to other Creatures more Perfect than we are, and the Pace of whoſc Ideas is Swifter and Quicker than ours, may ſeem to be no more than a Minute; For thus, when our Thoughts Move Duller and Heavier, and with a leſs Vivacity, Time ſeems to be Proportionably Lengthened; and to beconm Shorter, as they are Carricd on with more Fire, Spirit, and Activity. 7d. BECAUSE, 3d. BECAUSE, the Succeſſion of our Ideas Receives an Alteration, in Reſpect o Duration, from the Pleaſure or Pain, with which they are Attended; Thus if our I deas are Accompanied with Pain, the Time ſeems Long and Tedious to us, but i vith Pleaſure, Short and Tranſient; Whereas our Idea of Duration is that of ont Uniform Flux of Time, and thereſore cannot be Derived from the Succeſſion of ou Ideas, which is Broken and Interrupted in every Interval oſ one ldea Succeeding ano ther, and is Alterable and Various in the Quickneſs and Slowneſs of their Succe ſſion and by the Impreſſions of Pleaſure or Pain; the one or other oſ which does Gene rally go along ith them. j : 5. 13. As to the Argnments made Uſe of to Prove, that we have our Idea ol Duration from this Succeſlion of Ideas; TnE Firſt is, becauſe we have no Perception of Duration; when that Succe ſſion o our Ideas Ceaſes, as in Sleep; Which does not Evince, that we Obtain our Idea o Duration from the Succeſlion of our Ideas, but that we cannot Obtain it from oui having no Ideas at all, of which we are Conſcious; But no One ever Affirmed, that we could know vhat Duration was, without a Conſciouſnes of our own Exiſtence; It is not Pretended, that we can Form an Idea of Duration from our having no I deas at all, of which we are Conſcious, or which at Iea©t ve can Remember, as in Sleep; It yet does not ſrom thence Follow, that ſuch an Idea muſt be owing to the Succeſſion of our Ideas, vhen we are Aake, and not to our having Ideas in General, of which we are Conſcious, without Conſidering the Succe ſſion of them. . 14. THE Sccond Argument, that becauſe whilſt we are Awake, and our Thoughts are Intent upon one Thing, and there is no Succeſſion of our Ideas, ve Think Time or Duration Shorter than iĩt is, is as lirtle to the Purpoſe; For Firſt, if we have not our Idea of Duration from the Mind's Intent Contemplation of one Idea only, it is not yet therefore Conſequent, that ve muſt Derive it from the Succeſſion of our Ideas and not from ſeveral Ideas in General, Compard together, without Attending to the Exact and Minute Succeſſion of them. SECOND, if Time or Duration Appearing Shorter than it is, is a Reaſon, why we cannot have our Idea of it from that, which makes it Appear ſo, the ſame vill Equally hold againſt the Succeſſion of Ideas; ſince thoſe ſmall Diſtances, which lic betwixt our Ideas in their Succeeding each other, ill make us to Slip out of our Account one Part of Duration, by which it will Appear Shorter than it is, as thoſe Intervals are Greater, or Longer, as they are Leſs. TuIRD, again likewiſe, vhen the Succeſſion of our Ideas is Accompanied with Pleaſure, or vhen they Move Swifter than Ordinary, Duration will Appear Shorter, and when they are Attended with Pain, or the Motion of them is more Languid and Slov, it will Appear Longer; From all which it is Evident, we cannot have an Idea of Duration from the Succeſſion of our Ideas, no more than we can from the Intent Contemplation of one Idea only; Since in all theſc Circumſtances Time or Duration will be Altered from what it Really is. FouRTH, beſides which, this Inſtance of the Mind's Intent Contemplation of one Thing, to Prove that our Idea of Duration is Derived from Succeſſion, is wrongly Choſen; for either by one Thing is Meant one Idea, or elſe one Subject, Argument, Propoſition, or Demonſtration, or the like; Ir the Firſt is Intended, as it muſt be, and in which Senſe we have taken it, becauſe otherwiſe there would not be that Oppoſition betwixt one Single Idea, and the Succeſſion of ſeveral, which the Preſent Argument ſeems to Require, it will be ſo far from being True, that Duration Appears Shorter, whilſt the Mind is Employd about one Idea only, that it Maniſeſtly is Longer3 Thus, if a Perſon was Confined to Hold a Feather upon his Finger for an Hour together, and not to take his Eye off it, but to View it all that Time, tho' there would be no Pain in the Object, cither to his Sight or Feeling, it is not yet to be Doubted, but it would be a Long and Tedious Hour, where he had no Variety of Thought, or Action, to Relieve him; nd the like may be ſaid of any other Idea, and which, it is not Improbable, may be one Reaſon, why Pain becomes ſo Irkſome to us, not only becauſe of the Violent Action upon the Mind, but alſo, becauſc the Mind is thereby Forced Continually to Attend to one and the ſame Idea, which Cauſes it's Aſliction; for iſ ve have Courage and Reſolution enough to Draw our Minds off to other Ideas, the Pain is Rendered Rendered more Tolerable, mni the Time of it's Continuance ſcems to be Diminiſed. Ir, by the Mind's being Intent upon one Thing, is Meant our Intenſe Application to Conſider any Subject, Argument, Propoſition, or Demonſtration, which Lies before us It is an Inſtance Foreign to the Intention, for which it is Produced; ſince in the Studj and Contemplation of any Subject, there is an Inſinite Succeſſion of Ideas; and thoſ Hours, in which the Mind is Engaged in a Dee) Attention, are Crouded with a Greater Variety and Multiplicity of Ideas, than thoſc which we Commonly Paſs in the Other, and more Idle Part of our Lives, and in which our Ideas may be Thought 1o keep their Uſual Pace in theit Succeſſion to cach other; Nay it may be Tarther vith Truth Aſlirmed, that the moſt Tedious Part of our Time, and when Duration Aprears the Longeſt, is, vhen the Mind is wholly Unemployed, and Conſequently, vhen there is the Leaſt Succeſſion of our Ideas in it. Tis yet True, that at ſuch Times oſ Study and Intenſe Thinking, Duration ſeems 10 be Shorter, tho' the Number oſf Ideas, which Enter the Mind, is Greater, than when we do not on Purpoſe Set our Minds to Think and Conremplue; The Mind in Study is in the moſt Active State, which it is Poſlible to be in, and Turns and Revolves it's Ideas about, with more Life and Quickneſs, than at any oiher Time. AxD the Reaſon of Duration's Appearing Shorter is, not from our Reſling upon one Idea, tho' that is ſometimes done too, when we do not at Firſt fully See and Comprehend it, or the Relation, which it has to another, with which it is Compared, but ſrom the Pleaſure, Which we Receive ſrom finding out Truth, and from the Satisfaction we Experience in the Managing, Ranging, and Conducting our Ideas in that Manner, as to Produce a Convidtion ĩ in us, that we have Attained it; And for this Cauſc, it is, that to thoſe, vho cannot thus Command their Ideas, ſo as to ſind any Succeſs in their Inquiries, Contemplation and Study becomes Tedious and Irkſome, and the Time ſeems Long, which they Employ in it: Another Thing, which makes Duration ſeem Shorter in Study and Contemplation is, that the Mind is Entertained with an Infinite Variety of Ideas and Speculations, which are New toit, and which are like ſo many Fre'h Pictures and Landskips of Things, which Raiſe a Perpetually Succeſſive Scene of Delight to the Studious and Inquiſitive. Bur that ve cannot have an Idea of Duration from a Succeſſion of Ideas, will be ſrom Hence ſarther Maniſcſt; That the very ſame Number of Ideas, which are cpeated by One, and Heard by Another, and whoſe Succeſſion muſt therefore be the ſaome, ſrall Troduce Diſtrent Ideas oſ Duration in Each. Ti5s no Uncommon Thing ſor a Perſon, who Reads, or who Speaks, any Certain Number of Ideas, to Think the Time much Shorter, in which he Delivers thoſe Ideas, than he Imagines it to be, who Hears them, and this Perhaps may not be only Generally, but Alvays True; Not only in Reſpect of Compoſitions Made by thoſe, who Read them, and oſ Diſcourſes Held in Converſation by thoſe, vho Maintain them, but likewiſe, in Reſpect oſ the Compoſitions or Diſcourſes of Others, when Read or Heard; The Time or Duration, I believe I may Say, is alvays, in theſce ſeveral Caſes, Shorter to the Perſon, who Reads, or Speaks, the ſame Number of Ideas, than to him, who Hears them. Ir thereſore it is Matter of Faꝗt, in all or any of the aſorementioned Inſtances, tha the Reader or Speaker of the ſame Number of Ideas Thinks the Time Shorter, and he, who ĩs the Hearer of them, Longer, it is Suſſicient to Invalidate the Preſent Doctrine oſ Duration from the Succeſſſon oſ Ideas; And, that the Hearer is at leaſt ſometimes the Patient, and does Think the Time Longer, than he, vho Reads or Speaks. is Matter oſ Fact, and beyond Contradiction. Tuar it is ſo in General, I have ſome Reaſons to Convince me, ſfrom a Conſideration of what is too much the Frailty of Humance Nature, to be verv well Pleaſed with what each oſ us does in Particular, and to be too Fond of it, even in the Smalleſt and Minuteſt Matters 3 By which Means, the Duration, or Time, may Probably Appcar Shorter from the Pleaſure and Satisſaction, which we Conccive from our owr Perſo.mances, when the Hearer oſ the ſame Number of Ideas Imagines it Longer, be cauſ cauſe it Looks like a Sort of Inſult upon his Mind, and a Kind of Dictating to his Underſtanding; he, at leaſt, many Times Receives not the ſame Pleaſure, for the very Reaſon, that there is nothing of his own in it; Self-Love being a Ruling Principle in our Natures, and that, which Recommends, or Diſparages, Actions in our Eſteem, according as they are Approvd, or Rejected, by it. ANOTHER Argument, why the Hearer may Think the Time Longer, and the Speaker, or Reader, of the ſame Ideas, Shorter, is, that the Mind is in the Firſt Caſe Paſſive in ſome Degree, and in the Laſt Active, by which it Approaches to Aſliction in the Former, and in the Latter to Pleaſure; from whence likewiſe, the one State of 1he Mind becomes more Tedious than the other. A Third Argument is, that the Hearer is in a Certain Kind of Pain many Times, either for want of Underſtanding the Ideas, which are Delivered 1o him from the Speaker or Reader, or becauſe they are not Agrecable to his Apprehenſions, or elſe becauſe they are too Quick, or tvo Slow, for the Pace, which his own keeps in their Succeſſion; vhich either Overwhelms and Oppreſſes the Mind of the Hearer, or Creates an Uneaſineſs, Ariſing from an Heavineſs and Dulneſs in the Speaker or Reader;3 All which Pains in the Hearer, in the Speaker or Reader, often Times arc Turnd to ſo many Pleaſures; he Underſtands Frequently his Ideas, they are Agreeable to his Apprehenſions of Things, and are Delivered with a Velocity and Impetus, or a Sedateneſs and Gravity, Natural to his own Mind: And therefore, ve may in General Affirm, that Duration ſeems to be Shorter, or Longer, according to the Pleaſure, or Pain, vhich Attends our Ideas, and not according to the Succeſſion, or Non-Succeſſion of them. j Tis True, ſometimes the Duration may Appear the ſame, both to rthe Hearer and 10 the Speaker, but never unleſs, where their Pleaſures and Satisfactions are Equal, that is, where the Hearer is as much Delighted with the Subject, as the Speaker, mhere he Alike Comprehends the Ideas, and the Succeſſion of them is Alike in both; From all which it is Manifeſt, that the Succeſſion of Ideas is no Meaſure of Duration, nor is it that, from Which we Derive the Idea of it. S. 15. THE Third Argument, for our Gaining our Idea of Duration from the Succeſſion of Ideas, is, becauſe Motion, which is Commonly Suppoſed to be a Meaſure of Duration, is no farther ſuch, than as it Produces in our Minds an Idea of Succeſ ſion; for the Proof of which, two Inſtances are made Uſe of, and which we ſhall Conſider. BuT, Firſt let us Grant the two Inſtances Alledged, yet, if Motion is only a Suppoſed Meaſure of Duration, and is not Really One, it is of no Importance to Explain, how it becomes a Meaſure of that, of which it is no Meaſure; If it is a Meaof Duration, then it is not a Mcaſure of Duration, as it Produces in our Minds an Idea of Succeſſion, but as it is Motion, which will Continue Invariable and the ſame, even when the Succeſſion of our Ideas Alters, and even, when there is no Succeſſion of them at all A Pendulum vill Perform it's Vibrations Regularly, whilſt the Ideas of the Mind may Succecd One Another in a Tumult and Hurry, or whilſt they are, in a Manner, Quieſcent, without any Senſible Succeſſion; The Pace of our Ideas does not keep the ſame Conſtant Tenour vith the Returns of a Body, which Oſcillates, the One Moving Faſter or Slower, whilſt the Other Swings with an Exact Uniformity. Nav Farther, Suppoſing any One were Set on Purpoſe to Obſerve the Progreſ and Regreſs of a Pendulum for an Hour together, without Sufſering his Ideas to Wander to any Thing elſe; In this Caſe, if in any, the Succeſſion of his Idcas would Anſwer and Correſpond to the Succeſſion of Motion, and to that of every Inſtant in Duration; But yet the Mind is not Able to do this; It can Follow the Progreſi and Regreſs in the ſeveral Oſcillations, and Finds a Continual Motion in the Pendulous Body; But its Ideas cannot Succeed ſo Faſt, as the Body Moves, which Alters it': Situation in every Single Point oſ its Itus and Reditus, and which Points are Infinite, and all is, in ſome Pendulums, Perſormed in a Second of Time, or the 601/ Part of a Minute; And therefore the Mind can no more make it's Ideas Succeed in that Velocity, than it can Count an Inſinite Number of Points or Units in that Time. FARTHER FARTHER, Let us Take our Conceptions of the Moving of a Pendulum in the Groſſeſ Way, Namely, that we See a Continual Motion, and the Diſtinct Progreſſes and Returns of it; If any One were, for an Hour together, Set to Obſerve and Count them, and the Same Perſon ſnould Spend ſo many Vibrations in a Succeſſion of Ideas in Study, or in Reading, he would Apprehend the Duration to be very Different3 The Firſt would be Long and Tedious, and the Laſt Short and Tranſitory, at leaſt, if the One was Painfull and Irkſome, and the Other Agrecable and Pleaſant; Which ſews, thai there is no Connection at all berwixt Motion, and the Succeſſion of our Ideas, or betwixt the Succe ſſion oſ our Ideas, and Duration; Deſides, as is before Said, the Succeſſion of Ideas is Different in Different Perſons, as to their Slowneſs, or Velocity, and thereſore cannot be a Standing and Determinate Meaſure of Duration; In Some they are Carried on with a Certain Kind of Rapidity, in Others they Proceed in a more Solemn Pace, and in a Third, they Move ſo Slowly, that we Eaſily Infer and Conclude from thence the moſt Groſs Stupidity. 5. 16. As to the Inſtances Abovementioned, by which this Doctrine of the Succeſſion of Ideas is Endeavourd to be Prov'd from Motion being no ortherways a Meaſure of Duration, than as it Impreſſes upon us ſuch a Succeſſion of Ideas; TuE Firſt is, that Motions, which are very Slow, are not Perceivd by us, becauſc the Change of Diſtance is ſo Slow, that it Cauſes no New Ideas in us, but after a Long Interval, as in the Hand of a Clock, or in the Shadow of a Dial; Which is as much as to Say, i1ſ. That Motion is not a Meaſure of Duration, unleſs ſo far, as ſuch Motion is Senſible to us; And 24. That no Motion is Senſible to us, unleſs, that which we can Trace by our Ideas in every Point of it's Period; And 3d. that there is no Duration, where there is no Senſible Motion; All which are not only Paradoxes, but are Propoſitions, which are in themſelves, both Falſe and Abſurd; For 1ſ. The Motion of Pendulums, and the Index of a Clock, which is Carried Round by it, vill Deſcribe a Minute, or an Hour, or a Day, whether we Look upon it's Motion, or not; And 27. As for our Tracing it's Motion in cvery Point of it's Period, even tho' the Motion is Senſible to us, it is Directly Impoſſible to do it; And to Affirm, 3d. That there is no Duration, where there is no Senſible Motion, is to Say, that there would not be Duration in the World, that is, the World would not Continue to Exiſt, if all the Parts of it were Quieſcent, which is Abſurd. 5. 17. THE Second Inſtance is, that for the ſame Reaſon, when any Thing Moves Round in a Circle in leſs Time than our Ideas Succeed One Another in, it's Motion is not Perceived by us, but ĩt ſeems to be One Continued Circle; But if this vere the Reaſon, vhy we could not Diſcern it's Motion, Namely, becauſe it was too Sviſt ſor our Notice, as Probably that may be the Reaſon, yet this would Signify nothing to our Notion of Duration; Becauſe, vhen we See a Body Quieſcent, and to Continue in that State of Quieſcence, as in the Circle Mentioned, we have as much an Apprehenſion of what Duration is, as ve have from any Body Continuing in Motion. TEESE Inſtances have therefore no Relation to Duration, or to the Meaſure of it, and are only Accounts, vhy a Body, which Moves, Appears to be Quieſcent to us; whereas Duration Equally belongs to Bodies, which are at Reſt, or in Motion, and what the Meaſure of this Duration is, is what is Required, which cannot be the Succeſſion of our Idcas for the Reaſons beſore Alledged. 5. 18. WE are thereſore nov, after Inquiring into the Preſent Doctrine, and the Arguments for it, to Propoſe, what ſeems to be the Truth in this Matter. AND Firſt, ſince the Various Quickneſs and Slowneſs of our Ideas, with vhich they Paſs thro' the Mind, ought to be Conſidered in the Succeſſion of them, and ſince the Pain and Pleaſure, with which they are Attended, makes Duration ſeem to be Longer, or Shorter to us, it is Evident, that the Succeſſion of our Ideas, tho' it may be a Meaſure of Duration to ourſclves, yet cannot be One of a Real, or rather, a Rational, or Abſtracted Duration, which is the ſame in all Beings, and does not Diſfer, or Vary, tho' our Apprehenſions of it may. OTHER Creatures may Diſfer from us in their Ideas of Duration, as Thoſe upon the River Hypauis Mentioned by Tully, and which we Reſerred to beſore, whoſe Period of Exiſting is ſaid to be only that of a Day, which yet might be, if any ſuch Creatures ever vere, eſther from the Slow Pace of their ldeas, or ſfrom the Dull and Langui guid Pleaſure, which Attended them, as much to Them, as many Years are to Us; And it is not Certain in other Animals, and even Inſects, tho their Term of Life is in] Reality Shorter than ours, but it may to them Appear as Large and Extenſive, as ours does. to ourſelves; And if we go into the Higher Order of Beings, which are above us, we may Juſtly Think, that a Thouſand Years, to Them, is but as One Day, upon the, Account of the Extreme Vivacity of their Faculties, and the Pleaſure they Continually Enjoy, ſince we are Aſſured by the Scriptures, itis ſo with the Almighty. ] IF we have Recourſe to Religion in this Caſe, it will Tell us, that it is very A-l greeable to the Goodneſs of God to Adapt the Lives of his Creatures, and the ſeeming Duration of them, to the Nature of their Ideas, and the Quickneſs and Slowneſs of their Succeſſion, which he has Implanted in them; That they may Appear to themſelves Equally Happy in their Preſent Duration in this Life; And as to Rational Beings, hatever Afflictions or Diſficulties they Meet with in it, in Reſpect of Others of the ſame Denomination with them, there is no Queſtion or Doubt to be made, but they will be Abundantly Compenſated by the Beneſicence of their Creator in a Future One. I we have Recourſe to Philoſophy, what can be more Reaſonable to Think, than at, as Men Differ amongſt themſclves in the Paces, hich their Ideas Take in their Minds, and in the Pleaſure or Pain, with which they are Accompanied, ſo, that the ſeveral Species of Animals do ſo too; and, that the Inferior Species of them, as an Oyſter, or a Muſcle, or a Fiſ, have their Term of Life, which is many Times Short, Proportioned to the Slowneſs and Stupidity of their Ideas, and the Dull Pleaſures Annexed to them, and which yet to them may ſeem as Long, as that to other Creatures, which Live to many Vears beyond them? ON the Contrary, we find that Birds, as Ravens, & are Eſteemed to Live to a Great Age, tis alſo at the ſame Time Evident, that their Faculties and Powers of Perception, and their Ideas, are Quicker and Stronger, than thoſe of an Oyſter, or of any Kind of Fiſh; ſo that, as their Ideas have a Quicker and more Lively Turn and Succeſſion, and are Attended with a Variety of Pleaſure, accordingly we may Think the Duration of their Life does not Appear Greater to them, than that of an Opyſter or a Muſcle to it. LET us now Conſider Rational Beings, in Reſpect of theit Exiſtence here, Ideots and Men, who have but a Stupid Senſe of Things, or whoſe Ideas are leſs Pleaſing to them, are Generally more ſhortLived than Others are, vho Abound in the Quickneſs and Livelineſs of their Parts and Intellects, and in the Velocity or the Strength of their Ideas, or whoſe Ideas are Agreeable and Delightful to them; and yet it ſeems Rational to Believe, that the Duration of each of their Lives does not Appear to them Extremely Different, for the ſame Reaſon, that an Hour Spent withi a Quick and Lively Succeſſion of our Ideas, and with Delight and Satisſaction, does not Appear half ſo Long, as one Conſumed in a Slow and Languid Succeſſion of them, and in Dullneſs, Stupidity, and Unenjoyment; However This is, This yet is Certain, that the Succeſſion of Ideas cannot be a Meaſure of Real Duration, or a Rational and Abſtracted one, which is one Conſtant and Unvaried Succeſſion of Time; whereas the Succeſſion of Ideas is Different in Different Perſons, borh in their Natural Velocity, with which they Paſs thro' the Mind, and in the Pleaſure or Pain, which belongs to them. 5. 19. SECOND, there is an Interruption in the Train of our Ideas, as in Shadows upon a Wall, whereas the Idea of Duration is that of a Continued and Uninterrupted Succeſſion of Time; And Conſequently the moſt Rational Account, which can be given of our Idea of Duration, or of a Continued Succeſſion of Time is, that, Obſerving we Exiſt in ſeveral Parts or Portions of it, and likewiſe Concluding, that we have always Exiſted, whether we have been Conſcious to the Succeſſion of our Ideas or not, ſince we cannot Imagine ourſelves to NonExiſt, and then again Revive into Being, we from thence Inferr, that there muſt have been a Continued Duration, whether wve have been Senſible of every Part or Minute of it, or not, and which Goes on and Proceeds with Conſtancy and Equability, and is not Beholden to our Ideas, or the Succeſſion of them, for it's Reality; or elſe Obſerving, that other Beings, as a Tree, or a Stone, or the whole Univerſe, ſtill Continue to Exiſt, whether ve Particularly Contemplate the One, or the Other, or not, ve likewiſe again Nn nn are ire Aſſured from thence, that there muſt have been a Continual Duration of them; becauſe we cannot Conceive, that they ſould Exiſt at one Time, then Ceaſe to be, and aſterwards Return into their Former Exiſtence. FROM both theſe Ways we Juſtly Conclude, that there is an Uninterrupted and Equable Succeſſion of Duration, in which our Ideas, or the Succeſſion of them, have no more Concern, than any other Exiſtence whatſoever; Tis an Idea not Formed by any ſuch Succeſſion, but from the Standing Reaſon and Relation of Things, and from the Evident Convictions of our own Minds. 5. 20. AND, When we are fully Satisfy'd of ſuch a Conſtant and Continued Duration, vhich all Philoſophers have been hitherto Convinced of, it was very Proper for them to Enquire, as they have done, what was the moſt Equable, and the Exacteſt Meaſure of it; Aſtronomers have Sought aſter it in the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, and the Mechanical Philoſophers in thoſe of Pendulums, and Both vithout the Deſired Succeſs, as is Evident from the Theory of a Fictitious Sydus, Propoſcd by the One, for the æEquation of Time, and from the Anomalies, and Irregularities, Daily Obſerved in Watches, in Clocks, and Common Pendulums, by the Other. AND altho' theſe are Noble and Laudable Attempts, and altho' they Approach tovards an Equation of Time, yet we muſt, I am Aſraid, Deſpair of a Perfect One, for this Reaſon; Becauſe, if we Conſider the Motions of Heavenly Bodies, or of endulums, we Conſider them, as Conſiſting of the ſame Kind of Matter, and Moving in much the ſame Medium, that is, we Conſider them in an Abſtracted Way, and Agreeably to our own Abſtracted Reaſonings upon them, which is, what the Diſferent Natures of Things will not Bear or Allow oſ; And upon this Account it is, that a Perſect Equation of Time, by any Motions whatſoever, is Perhaps a Problem, as Incapable of being Explained by all the Philoſophick, or Mathematick Genius's in the World, that either now are, or have been, as a Perpetual Motion, or Sailing to the Moon, which will Scarcely ever Meet with a Solution; Becauſc ſuch Notions Appcar Contrary to the Standing Laws of Nature, and of Being. . 21. HOWEVER this is, Let us now Inquire into that Opinion of the Preſent Philoſophy, which Maintains, That it is not Neceſſary, that Time ſhould be Meaſured by Motion, That any Conſtant Periodical Appearance in ſeemingly Equi-Diſtant Spaces, may as vell Diſtinguiſ the Intervals of Time, as what ve make Uſe of;3 For Suppoſing the Sun to be Lighted up, and then Extinguiſied every Day, and that in the Space of an Annual Revolution, it ſiould Senſibly Increaſe in Brightneſs, and ſo Decreaſe again, ſuch a Regular Appearance would ſerve to Meaſure out the Diſtances of Duration to all that could Obſerve it, as well without, as with Motion; The Freezing of Water, or the Bloving oſ a Plant, Returning at Equi- Diſtant Periods in all the Parts of the Earth, would ſerve for the ſame Purpoſe; Tis farther ſaid, that, in Effect, ve ſind a People of Ameriea Counted their Years by the Coming and Going away of Eirds at Certain Scaſons. BuT Whatever this Philoſophy may Think Neceſſary, it could be very much Wiſhed, that there vas ſuch a Motion found out, that vould give us an Exact Equation of Time, that is, which would Keep an Uniſorm and Equable Pace with the Flux of cach Minute and Inſtant of it; but, as we are not yet Informed of any ſuch Motion, and as in all Likelihood, None ſuch there is, or can be found out in Nature, tis a Laudable Undertaking to Come as Near ſuch a One, as ve Can. ON the other Hand to Aſfirm, that any Conſtant Periodical Appearance, in ſeemingly Equi-Diſtant Spaces, would ſerve the Purpoſc of Meaſuring Time as well, is Suitable to the Reſt oſ this Philoſlophy; For, how ſhould ve know, what was a ſcemingly Equi-Diſtant Period, if there was no Uniform Motion, nor no Mcaſure of Time by it? Hours, and Minutes, and Days, would ſeem Longer or Shorter, according to the Various Sentiments oſ Pleaſure and Pain, ve Perceive in them, and according to the Various Occupations, and Employs, in which Men are Ingaged3 And if the Sun was to be Lighted up and Extinguiſhcd, at ſeemingly Equi-Diſtant Periods to us, it would ſind it's Illuminations, and Extinctions, to be very Irregular; nor vould there be Per haps Three Men in the World, who vould Agree to have it Lighted up and Ex tinguiied at ihe ſame Time; This Illumination and Extinction vould Run thro' all the Hours oſ Day and Night, and thro' all the Seaſons of the Year, and like the Mahometan Mahometan Moons, for which ſome of the Diſciples of this Philoſophy ſeem to have nò Small Regard, Make the Hotteſt Day in Yuly Fall in the Midſt of Winter3 This Contrivance for the Meaſure of Duration would do much the ſame, and be an Equal Proof of it's Ignorance in Aſtronomy, and of it's Contempt of the Sacred Writings; Which Aſſure us, that Almighty God Created the Sun and Moon ſor Lights, to Rule the Day and the Night, and for the Diſtinctions of Seaſons, of Days, and Months, and Years; And by the Conſideration of their Motions, and Endeavouring to Aſcertain an Equation of Time from them, Learned and Inquiſitive Men have been Satisfyd, that it is a much better Way, than if it had Pleaſed Almighty God to have Lighted up and Extinguiſhed them at Certain Times, in Compliance with the Humour and Fancy of this Extravagant and Vain Opinion. BuT Apart from Religion, what can be more Plain, than that we have a Notion of an Equable Succeſſion of Time or Duration? The Queſtion is, how ve ſnhall Meaſure that Succeſſion? That ve cannot do it by that of our Ideas, I have Endeavoured to Shew, nor yet by ſeemingly Equi-Diſtant Periods to us, which comes to the ſame Thing; ſince thoſe ſeemingly Equi-Diſtant Periods to us muſt be ſcemingly ſo by our Ideas, which Succeed one Another, and which Succeſſion of Ideas is Varied, as to the ſeeming Duration of Time, by the Pleaſure and Pain, and other Circumſtances, which Attend them. ON the other Hand, not to Mention the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, which are little, or not at all, Underſtood by this Philoſophy of Ideas, we ſall Point it out to a Common Inſtance of Watches, which Gentlemen are Particularly Acquainted with; Suppoſing a Perſon was in the urmoſt Gaiety of Company, and Injoyd all the Pleaſures and Satisfactions of it, which he could Wiſh for, or Deſire, or was Intent upon Studies, which were the moſt Agreeable to him, Let him look upon his Watch for the Hour, and he vill find it is gone beyond the Period he Expected. BuT, If the ſame Perſon is under a Fit of the Stone, or the Gout, or under any other Pain, or Indiſpoſition, vhich makes every Minute, and every Hour, ſeem Tedious to him, the Hand of the Watch will Move Slower, than he Thought for, and he will Fix the Period of his Hour on this Side the True One; And the ſame would Happen, If it was in his Power to Light up and Extinguiſh the Sun at ſeemingly EquiDiſtant Periods; Or, Changing the Senſe of Seeing for that of Hearing, the Striking of a Clock at ſeemingly Equi-Diſtant Periods would Serve the Turn as vell; and yet we find by Experience, that tho' the Hour is Pretty Exactly Meaſured by the Motions of a Pendulum, the Sounds, which are Repeated at much the like Intervals of Time, come Faſter or Slower upon us, as we Imagine the Duration of it to be Shorter or Longer. 5. 22. ON the Contrary, how do we Correct this Error of our Imaginations, but by the Regular Motions of the Celeſtial Bodies, or of Pendulums? I Mean ſo far Regular, as they are Capable of being ſo. TuaAT is, we find Pendulums, Allowing for ſome Small Irregularities Ariſing ftom Foreign Cauſes, to Perform their Oſcillations in much the ſame Time, as alſo the Heavenly Bodies, theit Revolutions; and we have this Reaſon to Conclude they do, becauſe their Nature, and the Motion, which Reſults from it, Continues Unvaried; and what Effect Proceeds from them One Minute, it is Juſt to Think, will Nearly Obtain the Next. Ir is therefore Rational enough to make ſuch Motions a Meaſure of a Conſtam and Uniform Succeſſion of Duration, becauſe they come the Neareſt to it; but the Succeſſion of our Ideas is Deſultory and Various, full of Irregularity and Caprice, and Conſequently a very Unfit and Improper Standard for a Succeſſion, which goe: on vithout any Interruption, Change, or Alteration. FrOM all which it Follows, that theſe Ideas of Duration, and the Meaſure of it, are not ſo Truly Ideas of Senſation or Reſection, as they are Ideas, which are For med by our Reaſon, and Made and Collected by the Mind's Abſtracting, Com paring Things together, and Arguing upon them, and much more ſo is That of E. ternity, S. 23. As to Duration and Expanſion Conſidered together, the Notion and Ap prehenſion, which this Philoſophy of Ideas has of the Firſt, has been already Exa mined, and the Laſt, to Wit, Space or Expanſion, we have Shewn in our Former In Nnn n2 quir; quiry into the Principles of Natural Philoſophy, is Nothing Elſe than an Abſtracted Idea, and a Creature of the Mind, and that there is no Real Space, or Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs, Exiſting by it's ſelf in Nature. Bur, ſince that Opinion has given a Diſtaſte to ſome, tho), for the Reaſons ther Alledged,I Think it True, T ſall Explain my Self here a little Farther upon thai Head. AxD Firſt, Thoſe, vhom I Oppoſe, are Such Philoſophers, who make Space Inſinite and Eternal, and who give, in a Manner, all the Attributes to it, vhich belong to God himſelf, I Affirm this is Nothing Elſe than a Creature of our Imaginations, and that there is no ſuch Real and Abſtracted Space in Being. ON the Contrary, ĩt has been Told me, that I make Matter Eternal and Infinite, ſince it is ſaid, that I Suppoſe all Space to be Filled with it If it were ſo, I hope there is no Greater an Abſurdity in Aſſerting, that the whole Univerſe was from all Eternity Filled and Repleniſied with Something Derived from God, than in Aſſerting, that it was from all Eternity, till about Five or Six Thouſand Years ago, Filled and Repleniſied with nothing but Space, Underived from Him; as if the Deity had lain Idle and Unemployſ, till that Time, and, as ſome Maintain Concerning our Saviour, his God-Head had been, for a Certain Term, Quieſcent. Ir is more Reaſonable to Believe and Think, that the Almighty Author and Creator oſ the Univerſe did from all Eternity Exert his Power in the Production of ſomething, that he for Ever Communicated and Diſpenſed his Influences thro' the Immenſe and Boundleſs Space, and at Length, in his own Good Time, Formed and Created the World, ve Sce. AxD this is the Eternal Plenum, in Oppoſition to an Eternal Vacuum, which I Maintain; and in this, I do not Affirm an Eternity of Matter, according to the Vulgar Conceptions of it, Namely, of it's being a Paſſive, Solid, and Extended Subſtance; But thus far I Aſſirm an Eternity of Matter, as I Affirm an Eternity of an Almighty Action of the Deity, Spreading and Diſfuſing it's ſelf thro' all Nature; And in which Action and Exertion of the Inſinite Mind, I take the very Eſſence and Being of Matter to Conſiſt, as it was Formed and Created by him, and without Whom it cannot Subſiſt one Moment. WEe likewiſe Aſfirm, Theſe Exertions and Actions of the Alwiſe Creator are Infinitely Varied and Diverſify'd by him, according to his own High Will and Pleaſure; from whence Ariſes that Heterogencouſneſs of Matter, which is Obſerved in the World; ſo that the Real and Intrinſick Nature and Properties of Ether are as Different from thoſe of Air, as Air from Water, or Water from Earth, or Earth from Minerals or Vegetables, or thoſe from Metals, or Gold, Agrecably to what we have Propoſed Concerning the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. As ſor a Plenum in General, in Contradiction to a Vacuum, I have not only moſt oſ the Ancient Philoſophers on my Side, as Thales, the Wiſeſt and Earliet of them; and the Reſt, Excepting Democritus and Epicurus, but alſo even Des-Cartes himſelf, tho it is Inconſiſtent with his own Principles of a Similar Matter3 And it is very Evident, that the Celebrated Sir Iſ. Newton has, ſince the Printing of that Inouiry, of which I did my ſel? the Honour to make him a Preſent upon the Firſt Tublication of it, it is Plain, that he has alſo come into the Notions of an Univerſal Plenum or ther, in what he has Subjoined to the Second Edition of his Opticks; notwithſanding in his Principles he had Endeavoured by Reaſonings and Experiments to Demonſtrate, there was a Vacuum, vhich in a Second Edition of them, he has Changed to this Aſfirmation, That All Things are not Equally Full. For the Caſe is this with all the Corpuſcularians, that their Principles, which are Contrivances oſ their ovn Minds, in Shaping Matter into what Figures they Pleaſe; do Certainly Lead them to Aſſert a Vacuum; becauſe there muſt be Pores and Interſlices betwixt thoſe Figures; But, as Nature, and the Common Reaſon of Mankind, does Direct us to a Plenum, Des-Cartes was Obliged to Form a Romantick One, tho in Oppoſition to his own Avowed Tenets; And which Plenum Sir Iſ. Newton, and other Fugliſo Philoſophers, have Suſſiciently Conſuted. ON the Contrary, the ſame Learned Perſons, Building their Schemes upon the Corpuſcular Doctrine, Retained the Errors oſ their French Maſter, and Rejected the Truth, which his Great Wit and Genius had taken Abundance of Pains to Reconcilæ to to Them; So Unforrunate is it for us to be Philoſophers upon Truſt, and in O bedience, and Complaiſance, to the Dictates of Thoſe, for Whom we Profeſs a Vene rãtion. C H AP. VII. Concerning the Complex Ideas of Number, Inſinity, Motion, Colour, Taſte, and Smell. s5. 1. S to our Complex Ideas of Numbers, they are Gained by our Obſerving ſeveral Diſtinct Beings to Exiſt in a Variety of Individuals, ſo that the Minq by a Proſpect of Nature in General, Obtains in Groſs the Idea of Multitude, Wvhich Conſiſts of ſeveral Combinations of Particulars, and each Particular gives us the Idea of Unit; from thence we Proceed to Abſtract Number from Beings, as they Exiſt, and Conſider every Number, as Formed from a Collection of Singie Units; Thus Multitude in General, and as it is Preſented to us in Conjunction vith the Beings which we Survey, ſeems to be the Firſt Idea in the Mind, and the Arithmetical Progreſſion of Units isa Work of Abſtraction and Reaſon, as it is the Foundation of a Science, which is Certainly owing to thoſc Powers and Faculties of our Underſtandings; ſince it is by the ſame Powers, that we Arrive at our Notions of Decimals, and their Progreſſion, which we could not have from a Bare Contemplation of Things Exiſtin s. Wuar is ſaid in Reſpect to the Preciſeneſs and Diſtinction of our Ideas of Numbers, as if. upon that Account, the Demonſtrations Concerning them were more General in their Uſe, and more Determinate in their Application, than thoſe of Extenſion, it is not True in Fact. For Firſt, the Ideas of Numbers are not more Diſtinct than Thoſe of Extenſion;3 we Preciſely and Exactly know, what 1, 2, and;, are, and ſo likewiſe we Preciſely know and Comprehend, what I Inch or Foot, or 2 or 3 Inches or Feet are. BuT, if it is ſaid, that we are not ſo fully Informed, what Various Properties lie vithin the Extenſion of an Inch, or a Foot, and therefore do not ſo Perfectly Conceive, hat the Nature of Extenſion is, as ve do what Unit is, the Contrary muſt be Affirmed; Since, whatever Properties an Inch or a Foot has Different from that Certain Length or Meaſure, they Ariſe from Different Compariſons and Relations; Thus if a Line of an Inch is the Diagonal of a Square, it becomes, in Compariſon ith them, Incommenſurable with the Sides of it; If it is the Radius of a Circle, or the Abſciſs of a Parabola, ĩt likewiſe Obtains the ſame Property, with Reſpect to thoſe Curves; And ſo, in other Relations, it Undergoes Different Forms, and Aſſumes a Diſferent Nature, from the mere Length and Meaſure of an Inch, which Compariſons or Relations being Infinite, ĩt is Impoſſible for us to Know the whole Extent of them. AND the ſame alſo Obtains in Unit, for it, in Compariſon with the Surd Roots of Nunmbers, is Incommenſurable, as with the Root of Two, or the Root of Three, and with the Roor of a Thouſand other Different Numbers; It likewiſe, as the Extenſion of an Inch, is Diviſible to Infinity, and Admits of a Million- Million of Fractions, whoſe Names we know not, and whoſe Properties and ſeveral Relations we as little Comprehend, as thoſe of the Infinitely Various Diviſions of Extenſion. 5.3. SECOND, and as the Ideas of Numbers are not more Diſtinct and Preciſe than thoſe of Extenſion, ſo neither are the Demonſtrations Concerning them, more General in their Uſe, or more Determinate in their Application; They are not more General in their Uſe; Algebra Indeed is ſo, becauſe it Equally Reſpects all Quantities, hether Number or Extenſion, or Motion, or whatever elſe, which is Capable of a Compariſon or Relation; But all the ſeveral Propoſitions in Diophantus or Euclid, vhich Peculiarly Concern Numbers, I Preſume, will not be ſaid to be more General in their Uſe, which are moſt of them only Contemplations of the Properlies of Numbers, and Reſt in ſo many Theoretical Truths, without any farther Adrantage, than the knoving them; Theſc ſurely will not be ſaid to be more General in in their Uſe, than the Demonſtrations Contained in the Elements of Geometry, which are Uſefull and Serviceable in all the Arts and Sciences of Human Life; whereas, thoſe Reſerved and Abſtruſc Properties of Numbers are of no Kind of Service to it. l 5. 4. BUT Perhaps, I may Preſs this Philoſophy too Far in this Particular, ſince it might not Think or Mean any more by it's Demonſtrations in Numbers, as Poſſibly it might Underſtand no more, than the Common Operations in Arithmetick, of Addition, Subſtraction, Multiplication and Diviſion, tis not Improbable alſo, that it might Reach ſo far, in it's View of theſe Studies, as the Extraction of the Root, and the Rule of Three, and from thence might Determine, that the Common Arithmetick was more General in it's Uſe, than Common Geometry. IF that is the Queſtion, this Philoſophy will yet be in the Wrong; For tho Arithmetick is Taught to moſt, and Geometry not to ſo many, yet the Generality of the Uſe of the One in Preference to that of the Other, cannot be from thence Concluded; Thus, tho Algebra is of a more General Uſe than Either, ſince it Includes the Demonſtrations of Both, yet it has Fewer Diſciples, Perhaps, than any Study whatſocver. BESIDES, it is alſo Plain, that Geometry does Aſſiſt us in a Thouſand Difficult ProbIems, which are of Univerſal Uſe to Mankind, to which the bare Contemplation of Numbers could never Lead or Guide us; And in a fev Words, a Philoſopher may as well Affirm, that a Writing Maſter, and a Teacher of Accounts, is a more Uſefull Man, than he vho Inſtructs us, how we may Perform our Navigations with Security to all Parts of the Earth, how we may Pretty Nearly Aſcertain the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, for the Uſe and Service of Men in General, in their Diſtinctions of Time, and how we may Propoſe thoſe Theorems to the World, which in Reſpect of Philoſophy, and all the Mechanical Arts and Sciences, are of the Higheſt and Utmoſt Advantage toit. 5. 5. BUT if this was not True, in Reſpect of Vulgar and Common Arithmetick, Compared vith the Demonſtrations of Geometry, there would yet be no Proof from Hence, that the Ideas of Numbers were more Preciſe and Diſtinct than thoſe of Extenſion; becauſe the General Uſefullneſs of any Thing is no Conviction of the Clearneſs, Preciſeneſs, or Diſtinction of the Idea; we may have a very Confuſed Idea of Fire or Water, or any other Subſtances in Nature, which notwithſtanding does not hinder the General Uſefullneſs of them, and I may have a very Diſtinct and Perfect Idea of Twenty Propoſitions in Diophantus, without being Able to do one Good or Uſcfull Thing vith them. 5. 6. LasTLy, in the Preſent Queſtion Concerning Number and Extenſion, ve are not to Conſider the Common Axioms or Demonſtrations of Either, but the Sciences of Both, as to their Uſefullneſs and Advantage, which yet if we were to do, the Axioms and Principles of Euclid's Elements of Geometry are of more Univerſal Uſe, than thoſe of Addition and Subſtraction in Arithmetick, for the ſame Reaſon, that this Propoſition in Geometry, If TWo Quantities are Separately Equal to a Third, They are Equal to One Another, is of more General Uſe than this in Arithmetick, If One and Two is Equal to Three, and Two and an Half + Half is Equal to Three, One and Two, and Two and an Half + Half are Equal to One Another; Becauſe This Laſt is Included in the Former; And for the like Reaſon, Algebra is of more Univerſal Uſc than either Arithmetick or Geometry, ſince Both of Them are Comprehended in it. Tnus alſo, if we Proceed Farther, the Demonſtrations in Geometry are more General than thoſe in Numbers, as is more Particularly Evident from the Second Book of Euclid's Elements, where, what is Demonſtrated in Extenſion, does by Conſequence Obtain in Numbers, and Algebra gives a Demonſtration of the ſame Propoſitions, which is Equally Applicable to Both. ANDB it is not Unknown of what little Uſe or Service, ſeveral of the Problems ol Diophantus, Monſicurs Fermat, Bachet, and Frenicle, are, in Reſpect of the mere Propertie and Relations of Numbers; Tho' it muſt be alſo Confeſſed, that Geometers likewiſc havc Exceeded in that Point; However this does not Evince, but that the Demonſtration: in Geometry are more Univerſal, and therefore of more General Uſe, than thoſe ol Numbers. 5. 7. Wna 5. 7. WnAT is ſaid in Reſpect of their being more Determinate in their Appli cation is Unintelligible; For vhat Demonſtration is not Determinate? and to vhat ĩt it, or can it be Applied, unleſs to what it Demonſtrates:? Ler us make Uſe of a Favourite Demonſtration of this Philoſophy; That the Threc Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones; Is it not Determinate? and ii it not as Determinate in it's Application, where there is ſuch a Triangle in Nature which Geometry Conſiders, as any Demonſtration in Numbers, but as there is none which Conſiſts of Lines without Breadth, and Surface without Depth, ſo is it nol Applicable to any Thing, unleſs under thoſe Abſtracted Conſiderations. AxD what is the Difference betwixt theſe Demonſtrations, and thoſe of Numbers: which alſo only Center in themſelves, and are not Capable of being Applied to Things, as they Exiſt, unleſs as they Exactly Correſpond to the Abſiractions of the Demonſtration; which they do not; For as before in Geometry, ſo in Arithmetick, tho Two and Three are Equal to Five, yet Two and Three Exiſtences are not Equal to Five Exiſtences, Two and Three Stars, are not Equal to Five Stars, Excepting upon the Suppoſition, that they Diſfer from One Another, no more than Unit from Unit; and ſo it may be ſaid of all other Beings, vhich we Number in the Univerſe. THE Miſtake, which this Philoſophy ſeems to lie under, is, that it Imagines Geometry to be an Abſtracted Science, and that of Numbers not ſo; vhereas, they are both of them Equally Abſtracted Parts of Knowledge, and have no Relation to Nature any farther, than as it is Submitted to thoſc Abſtractions. S. 8. INFINITY is another Idea, which this Philoſophy Conſiders; The Firſt Thing, vhich it Aſſerts is, that Finite and Infinite arc Modes of Quantity, and are Attributed Primarily to Things, that have Parts, and are Capable of Increaſe or Diminution by the Addition or Subſtraction of any the leaſt Part, as Space, Duration, and Number;3 And when we Apply this Idea to the Supreme Being, it is ſaid, we do it Primarily, in Reſpect of his Duration, and Ubiquity, and more Figuratively, when to his Wiſdom, Pover, Goodneſs, &e. which are Properly Inexhauſtible and Incomprehenſible; for when ve call them Infinite, we have, it is Affirmed, no other Idea oſ this Infinity, but what Carries with it ſome Reflection on the Number, or the Extent of the Acts, or Objects, of Gods Power and Wiſdom, which can never be Suppoſed ſo Great, or ſo Many, that theſe Attributes will not always Surmount and Exceed, tho we Multiply them in our Thoughts with the Infinity of Endles Number; Thus far this Philoſophy. S. 9. BUT Firſt, tho' Finite is Capable of Increaſe and Diminution, Infinite is not ſo; for if it could be Increaſed or Diminiſhed, it would Ceaſe to be Inſinite, and thereſore it cannot be Applied to Things Capable of Increaſe and Diminution. ON the Contrary, Infinite, in Reſpect of Duration, Space, or Number, is a Negation of Increaſe or Diminution, or a Negation of the Greateſt Finite; whereas Finite may be Perpetually Increaſed or Diminiſhed; Infinite is not any Thing, which is Finite, but every Thing, which is Finite, is Included in what is Infinite. SECOND, by what has been ſaid in the Principles Propoſed for the Advancement oſ a Pſycheometria, or a Geometry of Minds, we may Conceive an Infinite Variation oſ them in their Innate Forces and Faculties, and that, as Human Minds in their Towers are Inſnitely Greater, than thoſe of Brutes, ſo that Almighty God's is Infinite in Reſpect of Men's; And this Infinity of Force in the Supreme Mind would be the ſame, vhether he Exerted Fewer, or More, Explicit Acts in Number; And there ſeems to be as much a Gradation of the Powers and Faculties of Intelligent Beings, down from the Almighty, thro' all the Orders of them, to Men, and from Men, thro' the Intermediate Species of Animals, to an Oyſter, as there is a Variety of Meaſures in Extenſion, ſrom Inſinity to Nothing. s. 10. AND Conſequently, there may be an Infinite Wiſdom, Pover, and Goodneſs, not only in a Figurative, but in an Abſolute and Real Senſe3 The Natural Force and Strengih of the Mind, and its Faculties, in Perceiving, Remembering, Judging, &e. I Pretume, will be Allowed to be Infinitely Greater in Men, than in Brutes, and that thereſore their Wiſdom, Sagacity, and Penetration, is Greater in the ſame Inſinite Proportion; This Appears to be Evident, from what has been before Alledged, in Reſpect oſ the Diſcurſive Faculty in Men, which, even in Ideots, is Infinitely beyond what Obtains in Brutes; For, Iſ Brutes had Language, ve may Reaſonably Imagine, thery they would only Expreſs ſome few Ideas, which they had Learned by Rote, without being able to Connect them, or to Reaſon and Diſcourſe upon them, which yet Ideots can in ſome Meaſure do. I IF therefore there is a Wiſdom, Ariſing from the Natural Force and Penetration of oui Faculties, which may be Infinite in Reſpect of that of other Animals, which are below us It is not Incongruous to Suppoſe, or Irrational to Conceive, that the Wiſdom of God may be Infinite from the Innate Forces of his own Mind, from the Stupendous and Vaſt Comprehenſion, Underſtanding, Conception, and Thought, which he has; and which Reſults from the Infinite Nature and Eſſence of his Intellectual Powers; in which he Exceeds the Higheſt Orders of Created Beings, Infinitely more, than thoſe Higheſt Orders do the Meaneſt Inſect; Becauſe, the Diſtance betwixt the moſt Glorious Spirit, or Seraph, and the moſt Abject Worm, is only Finite; Whereas, That betwixt Almighty God, and the Greateſt and Sublimeſt of his Creatures, is Boundleſs and Infinite. 5. 1I. AND, as an Infinite Wiſdom, Ariſing from the Nature of the Infinite Mind, in which it Reſides, may be Juſtly Maintained and Defended, ſo likewiſe, for the ſame Reaſon, may an Infinite Power. Tns, ſince it is Obſervable in Men, that, from the Infinite Force and Strength of their Faculties, in Reſpect of what Brutes are Poſſeſſed of, they Exerciſe an Unlimited Sway over the ſeveral Animals and Creatures of the Earth, Subject them to their Dominion, and Make all Nature, and the Beings of it, in ſome Meaſure Subſervient to their Wills, which no Creature in the World, beſides them, can do; May we not therefore very Reaſonably Affirm, That they Have and Poſſeſs an Infinite Power, in Reſpect of what a Fly or an Inſect does, and that this Infinite Power is Derived from the Native Force of their Intellectual Capacities and Beings? IF ſo, it is no hard Matter, to Conceive a Mind, which is more Infinitely Powerfull than our's is, by which it Governs all the Beings in the Univerſe, Submits them to it's Laws and Decrees, and Makes, that, not only Men, but all the Orders and Claſſes of Intelligences above us, ſould Pay an Obedience to them; For, whatever our Pover is, we find one Superior to it, ſince we can only Act within a Certain Sphere, and under Certain Limitations in Nature, Preſcribed to us; Nor is it Hard to Conceive, that this Infinite Power of the Almighty Mind is the Derivative and Reſult of the Superior Force of his Faculties, as Our's is, from a like Superiority of them, in Reſpect of the Creatures, which are Below us. S. 12. LasTLY, nor is an Infinite Goodneſ, in it's own Nature, leſi Intelligible, or leõ Agrecable to Reaſon; For do we not find, that Brutes and Animals, which are Inferior to us, have little or nothing of this Quality and Perfection in them? Their Senſe ſeldom, if ever, Extends any farther, than to the Conſervation of their Species, or the Preſervation of themſclves, an Inſtinct, we may Juſtly Think, Implanted by Almighty God in their Natures, for the Continuance of thoſe Beings, which he had Originally Formed and Created. AND therefore we may Say, that Mankind in General is Infinitely above them in Reſpect of Goodneſs; for here we do not Speak of Individuals, bur of the Natures of Each; ſince there are not wanting Thouſands of Inſtances of the Greateſt Inhumanity in our own Species; But then it muſt be Obſerved, that very Corruption and Perverſion of it to a Brutal Fierceneſs and Barbarity is, what is Properly Termed Inhuman by us; From whence it is Apparent, that we Diſclaim it from belonging to us, or from being a Part or Attribute of our Beings. LET us now come to our own Species, Diſtinct and Separate from a Compariſon with Brutes; and may ve not there find a Thouſand Degrees and Diſtinctions of Goodneſs, Ariſing from the Innate Temper, Genius, and Complexions of our Minds? Some have a Goodneſs, vhich is more Confined, from the very Narrowneſs of their Conceptions, and the Contractedneſs of their Faculties, and Others a more Univerſal and Unlimited, from the Largeneſs and Extenſiveneſs of Them; For it is always Obſerved, that the Greater any One's Mind is, the Gooder it is, and the Leſi it is Hampered and Cramped with the Private Views of Self, of Intereſt, or Ambition; It Exeris it's ſelf in Spite of all theſe, by the Energy and Force of its Faculties, into a Boundleſs and Noble Generoſity of Doing Good for Ill, of Returning ſler ings ſings for the Curſes of it's Enemies, and Diffuſing it's Beneficence, it's Charity, and Love, to even the Meaneſt Inſects of the Creation, where it is Impoſlible it ſould Meet with any Retaliations of Gratitude for it's Bounties and Favours. TuuSs alſo may we Conceive, that the like Powers and Faculties, Increaſcd to Infinity, will Produce a Goodneſs, which is Infinite in it's Native Energy, and by which it Scarters and Diſperſes it's Influences thr the whole Univerſe, by which every Being in it Subſiſts, by which it Broods over cach Animate Creature, and Suſtains it's Life, and Supports it's Species, with the Tendereſt Regard, and by a moſt Indulgent Providence. FroM all which, ve may not only Apprehend, how there is a Natural Connexion betwixt Wiſdom, Pover, and Goodneſs, in Human Minds, Derived from, and Owing to, the Innate Strength and Force of their Capacities, but how there is a like Connexion betwixt Infinite Wiſdom, and Infinite Power, and Infinite Goodneſs, Ariſing and Floving from the Infinite Comprehenſion and Eſſence of the Erernal Mind. s. 13. HAVING liitherto Endeavoured to Shew, that Infinity is not only Applicable to Space, Duration, and Number, but alſo to the Powers and Faculties of Intelligent Beings; THE next Inquiry in this Philoſophy iss which vay we come by this Idea of Infinity; which it Informs us is, by an Endleſs Repetition of Stated Lengths in Space, as of a Foot, a Yard, &. which gives us the Idea of Immenſity; and that by the Addition of Certain Stated Lengths in Duration, as of a Minute, a Day, or a Year, with the Inſinity of Number, we have our Idea of Eternity; But it Tells us, that we cannot have the Actual Idea of an Infinite Space, and Conſcquently not of an Eternal Duration, for the ſame Reaſon, that we cannot have an Actual Idea of an Infinite Number; For an Actual Infinite Number is Affirmed to be a Contradiction, and therefore an Actual Infinite Space, and therefore alſo an Actual Eternity; Tho' it Owns, there is an Infinity of Number, of Space, and Duration. 5. 14. BUT this Fallacy of Arguing Appears from Hence; That, if there was not an Actual Infinite Space, or Duration, and I may alſo Add Number, in One Senſe of it, and hich ſhall afterwards be Explained, there could not be Everlaſting and EndIeſs Approaches to it; And for the ſame Reaſon, that there is an Infinity of Space, or Duration, or Number, there is an Infinite Space, Duration, and Number; For how is it Poſſible, there ſould be an Infinity of any Thing, without That Thing's being Infinite? This Philoſophy may Diſtinguiſh, as it Pleaſes, but ſuch Diſtinctions will never make the Real Relations of Things, which are the Same, to be Different. For, If Space is not Actually Infinite, and the ſame may be ſaid of Duration and Number, it muſt be Actually Finite, and there may be an Endleſs Addition of Stated Lengths of Space, or Duration, or of Unit, in that which is not Endleſs, which is a Contradiction; Or, in other Words, the Poſſibility of an Endleſs Addition in any Quantity whatſoever, without Suppoſing that Quantity to be Actually Infinite, is Abſurd and a Contradiction; For, if it is not Actually Infinite, we cannot be Continually Adding, ſince, where it Ceaſes to be in Reality Infinite, our Addition muſt Stop, and it vill be Impoſſible to Go any Farther. Ir it is ſaid, that therc may be an Infinite Space, or Duration, or Number, but that we have not the Idea of it; That is not at Preſent the Queſtion, but whether there is an Actual Infinite Space, Duration, or Number, as well as an Infinity of them, which ve Affirm, there is. s. 15. WHAT ſcems to Puzzle and Conſound this Philoſophy is, that it Unarily makes an Actual Infinite Space, Duration, or Number, to be, what we have Gone Over and Meaſured in our Minds; That is, it makes Actual, or being in Fact, to Signify nothing elſc than Finite, that is, vhich we have Actually Gone Over in our Minds3 And then there is no Doubt, but an Actual Infinite Space, Duration, or Number, that is, a Finite Infinite Space, Duration, or Number, is a Contradiction. BuT, if we make Actual, or being in Fact, to Signiſy, not what we have in Fact Gone Over in our Minds, which is a very Improper Senſe of it, but what does in Fact Exiſt, which is the True Senſc of it, it is ſo far from being a Contradiction to Say, that there is an Actual Infinite Space, Duration, and Number, that is, that an Infinite Space, Duration, and Number, does and muſt Exiſt, that it is a Plain and Evident Truth; Unleſs this Philoſophy will go one Step Farther, and Aſlure and Oo o o Prove Prove to us, that there is nothing, which does or can Exiſt, but what is Finite; And if ſo, then there cannot be that Endleſs Addition of the Meaſures of Space, Duration, or Number, vhich it Contends for, ſince there cannot be ſuch an Endleſs Addition, unleſs they vere in Fact Infinite. : 5. 16. IF it be Inquired, whether we can have an Idea of an Actual Infinite, and if we can, if it be farther Asked, which way we Obtain it; Tis Anſwered to both theſe Inquiries, that ve may have ſuch an Idea, and that we Obtain it, not by the Repetition of any Stated Meaſures of Space, or Duration, or Number, but by Evident Deductions from our Reaſon, and from the Nature of thoſe Quantities and Beings. TuarT we may have, and Really have, ſuch an Idea is Certain, that is, if we Mean by Idea, what the Mind Apprehends, and can Reaſon upon, and not only that, of which it has an Exact and Definite Image or Picture. IF the Latter is only Meant by Idea, tis very Plain, that we can have no Idea of an Actual Infinite; becauſe an Exact Image, or Picture, of a Thing is always Finite; But then it muſt be alſo Said, that if this is the Notion of an Idea, we cannot have an Idea oſ a Thouſand Finite Things; becauſe we cannot have an Image, or a Picture, of them; Thus we have no Image of Ten Thouſand, of a Million, Billions, Trillions, Quatrillions, &. or of a Polygone, whoſe Sides arc Expreſſed by thoſe Numbers. BuT if by Idea is Meant, which Undoubtedly is the Juſt Meaning, That, which we ſo far Apprehend, as to be Able to Diſcourſe about and Reaſon upon it, we then have an Idea of Thouſands, of Millions, Billions, Trillions, Quatrillions, and farther of an Inſinite Number, as alſo of an Infinite Space, and Duration; And in Particular all Surds, as the v2, V3, &e. are in Fact Infinite Numbers. TuE Properties of vhich Infinites we know to be, that None of them are any Thing, which is Finite, that they have the ſame Proportion to any Thing, which is Finite, as any Thing, which is Finite, has to Nothing; Becauſe, Take any Finite Quantity, as a Line, and Multiply it into it's ſelf, and it will Produce a Square, which vill be Equal in this Compariſon to an Infinite Line Multiplied into Nothing, that is, to an Inſinite Line, without any Multiplication of it; For a Square is as much Infinite in Reſpect of a Line, which has no Breadth, as an Infinite Line is in Reſpect of Nothing, which has no Length. S. 17. SINCE we have therefore an Idea of an Actual Infinite, it Remains upon us to Shew, how we Obrain this Idea, which is not from a Repetition of any Stated Meaſures of Space, or Duration, or Number, but by Evident Deductions from our Reaſon. For thus, ſrom the Nature of Incommenſurables and oſ Surd Numbers, and from the Properties oſ the Aſymptotes of an Hyperbola, and from the other Various Arzuments, made Uſe of by the Learned Mr. Raphſon, to Prove there is an Actual Inſinite, Philoſophers come to knov there is ſuch a Thing. So likewiſe they Arrive at the ſame Idea, not by the Repetition of a Finite, but by Reaſoning, and Conſidering, that if there is nor an Actual Infinite in Space, Duration, and Number, there is ſome Finite Aſſignable in them, which ſhall be Capable of Comprehending all the Numberleſs Relations of Greater or Leſs, which the Mind can Poſſbly Attribute to them without End, or Determination; But ſince no ſuch Finite is, or can be, there muſt of Conſequence be an Actual Infinite. 5. 18. AND, as This Obtains in Number, Space, and Duration, ſo docs it moreover, in the Faculties of the Mind, and in the Properties of Body; By which Means Nature vill be every Way Infinite, not only in it's Extent, but in the Variety of it's Forces, Suitable to the Great and Almighty Author of the Vaſt and Amazeing Syſteme. As to the Faculties of the Mind, we have already Conſidered them; And as to the Properties oſ Body, and Particularly thoſe of Taſte and Colour, which this Eſay of Ideas Mentions, ve muſt Aſfirm, that, tho we cannot with any Propriety of Speech Say, that there is an Infinite Sweetneſs, or an Infinite Whiteneſs, no more than that there is an Inſinite Numerouſneſs, or Extenſiveneſs, or Succeſſiveneſ oſ Time; yet we may Juſtly Say, that One Thing is Infinitely Sweeter than Another and that there are Infinite Degrees of Taſte berwixt the Sourneſs and Harſhneſs of a Lemon, or an Unripe Grape, and the Sweetneſs and Luſciouſneſs of a Dried Fig, or a Raiſon, by which they ſhall Gradually Approach from the One to the other, and by that Means become Ieſs Sour, and more Sweet, thro' an Infinite Number ol Diſtinctions, Diſtinctions; which alſo Holds in our Smells betwixt thoſe, which are the moſt Delicate and Pleaſant, and thoſe, which are the moſt Ungrateſull and Oſfenſive. AND the ſame may be ſaid in Reſpect of Colour, ſince if ve Conſider all the Intermediate Degrees of Colour from Black, Violet, Purple, Blue, Green, Yellov, Orange, to the Solar Red, and if we Conſider all the ſeveral Variations and Shades of Violet, and thoſe of Purple, or Blue, Green, &æ. and the ſeveral Compound Lights, which Ariſe from the Mixture of theſe, we ſhall be Eaſily Led to Think, that the Degrees of Colour are Endleſs and Infinite; And we have already Shewn in the Principles of Philoſophy, that they are only Infinitely Different Enervations and Diminutions of the Force of the ſame Homogeneous Light. S5. 19. THUS far we have Conſidered the Inſtances, which this Philoſophy gives; But this Reaſoning does moreover Prevail in the other Properties of Body, as in Gravity, and Levity, in which we find an Infinite Number of. Gradations, ſo far that from the Weight of Gold, which is the Heavieſt Subſtance, which we know, it has been ſo far Diminiſhed, that it has been Juſtly Inquired by Philoſophers, whether there is not an Actual Levity; That there is a Centrifugal or Expanſive Force in Bodies, is not to be Doubted, ſince the Elaſtick or Repulſive Force is ſuch a One; And in Vegetation, what there can be, which ſhall Raiſe Plants from the Ground, Contrary to their Centripetal or Contractive, unleſs a Centrifugal or Expanſive One, no One can Imagine; or how Fire, or Flame, ſhould not be Endued with ſuch a Force, but ſhould Exert it's ſelf with that Violence and Fury ſometimes, by it's Comparative Levity only in Reſpect of other Bodies, which Surround it, is not Eaſy to Conceive; If therefore there are theſe Centrifugal or Expanſive, and Centripetal or Contractive, Forces in Nature, which Perhaps are only other Names for what is Meant by an Actual Gravity, and an Actual Levity, and as theſe Forces may be Infinitely Diverſified, Some having a more Violent Tendency from their Center than Others, and Others a more Violent Tendency to it, and as theſc Forces may be Infinitely Combined, Apart amongſt themſelves, and Conjointly with One Another, e may with Reaſon Aſſert, that theſe Properties of Bodies are Infinite, according to their Various Degrees of Gravity or of the Contractive Force, or of Elaſticity or the Expanſive, Scparately, or of Gravity or the Contractive, and Elaſticity or the Expanſive, in Conjunction with each Other; From whence will Ariſe an Infinite Variety of Theorems, in Reſpect of theſe Properties of Bodies, or of Matter, as before in Reſpect of the Properties of the Mind, which will be all Reducible to a Mathematick and Algebraick Calculation; And it is not to be Queſtioned, but by this Mcthod, we might Find out the Variety of Taſtes, of Smells, and Colours; Which ſeem to be all Owing to a Certain Proportion of their Elaſtick or Centrifugal or Expanſive Fotce, Mixed, tho' Perhaps in a very ſmall One, with their Gravitating or Centripetal or Contractive. 5. 20. LastLy, As to the Peculiar Extenſions of Bodies, by which they Appear in ſuch a Certain Manner to Fill the Eye with a Greater or Leſs Conſtipation of their Parts, and to our Feeling, to have ſuch a Certain Degree of Roughneſs or Smoothneſs, of Solidity or Fluidneſs, of Rarer or Denſer, and of all the Tangible Qualities of Bodies, by which they are Infinitely Diverſify'd to us;3 They ſeem to Ariſe from the Filling of their Dimenſional Spaces with Infinitely Different Kinds of Matter, that is, with Different Sorts of Actions, Communicated to our Senſes, and which Diſferent Action: are Owing to the Infinitely Various Compoſitions of the Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces, or the Contractive and Expanſive, from which all the Phænomenons of Matter may be Solved, and the Grand Inquiry of the Subſtratum of it Finally Determincd; The Variety oſ Sounds will be alſo Accounted for from the Infinitely Different Mixtures of the Elaſtick and Gravitating Forces, or of the Expanſive and Contractive, or, which is much the ſame, of the Centrifugal and Centripetal. ALL which Theory of Matter only Proceeds upon this One Plain Axiom, that it is Impoſſible for us to have any Senſations from Matter, but by ſome Kind ol Action, or Other, Impreſſed upon our Minds from it; And that, it is Impoſſible, we ſould have Different Senſations, but by ſuch Different Impreſſions or Actions. 5. 21. AoTHER Kind of Complexſdeas, taken Notice of by this Philoſophy, arc thoſe of the Simple Modes of Motion, of which I ſnall here only Mention thoſe of Swiftneſs and Slowneſs, the Meaſures of which are ſaid to be made out of the Diſtances of Time and Space put together; But theſe Modes of Motion have been alO o o Oa read; ready Conſidered in our Examination into the Mechanical Philoſophy, Book the Firſt, and in other Parts of our Preſent Inquiry, and therefore I ſhall not Repeat that Trouble here; And ſhall only Say, that it was my Intention to have gone thro' every Part of this Syſteme of Ideas, but finding the Number of Sheets to Grow too Faſt upon my Hands, I was Obliged to Lay Aſide that Deſign; And muſt therefore give, for the Future, ſome ſort Strictures upon the Following Chapters of this Eſſy. C H ADP. VIII Of the Modes of Thiuting; Of Pleaſure and Pain; Of Pover; Of Mixed Modes; Of our Complex Ideas of Subſlances; Of Collective Ideas of Subſlances; Of Kelation; Of Cauſe and Efſeſt; Of Identity and Diverſity, Of Other Relations ; Of Clear and Obſcure, Diſmſt and Confuſed Ideas; OF Real and Tantaſlict ldeas; Of Ideas Adequate or Inadequate 3 Of True and Falſe Ideas ; and Of the Aſſociation of Ideas. S. .7N This Chapter, Contemplation, and Intention or Study, are Suppoſed to be I Diſferent Operations of the Mind, and yet the Deſinitions of them are the Same; And, vhereas a Re'verie is made to be, when the Mind does not Obſerve it's Ideas Floating thro' it, it is more Rational to Think, that ſuch Re'verie is, when there are no Explicit Ideas Floating in it at all, but it is Reſigned to it's General Senſe or Perception; And if Sleep without Dreaming is, as it is Aſfirmed, a Reſt ſrom all theſe, it is a Reſt from a Re'verie, or a Reſt from a Reſt, which is Abſurd; On the Contrary, a Re'verie, and Sleep without Dreaming, ſeem to be much the ſame; and the Mind in both Caſes may be Compared to a Stagnant Fluid, which has no Impreſſions made upon it,; with this Diſtinction, that as the Fluid Nature is to Water, ſo is the Senſible to the Mind. ] 5. 2. It is here ſaid, that things are Eſteemed Good or Evil, only in Reference to Pleaſure or Pain; But 1ſf. If nothing is Good or Evil, but what Produces Pleaſure or Pain in us, Virtue and Vice would be very Changeable in their Natures, according as every One was Pleaſcd vith the One or the Other; ſo far, that if a Vicious Man was Pleaſed with his Vices, they would be Good to him, and if a Religious or Virtuous Man underwent any Pains or Aſſlictions upon that Account, his Religion and Virtue would be Evil to him; And in General, according as Perſons were Pleaſed, or Diſpleaſed, with the ſame Thing, it would be a Good or an Evil, which is to the Utmoſt Degree Abſurd; Since there would be no Intrinſick Nature of Things, by which they might be Valued, and Diſtinguiſied from each Other; The Immutable Reaſons of them vould Vaniſh, and all vould be Reſolved into Caprice and Humour3 27. This is farther a Syſteme, or Leads to a Syſteme, of Morals, which makes all our Actions Center in a Sclfiſ Principle, without Conſidering Things, as they Really Exiſt, vhich we ought to do, Abſtracted from our own Pleaſure or Pain, which are Accidental, and cannot Enter into the Real Relations of Things, or the Moral Relations of Good or Evil; 3d. According to this Doctrine, by Refiecting upon the Thought we have of the Delight, which any Thing is Apt to Produce in us, we have an ldea, which ve call Love3 Which if ſo, no One can Love his Enemics, tho Religion Requires it of us, nor any Virtue, which Cauſes him Pain, tho' Morality Enjoins it3 4th. The Like may be ſaid of the other Paſſions of Deſire, Joy, Hope, if the Foundation of them is Pleaſure, and of Hatred, Sorrow, Fear, Anger, Deſpair, and Envy, if they are only Referred to Pain. 5. 3. POWER is here Divided into Active and Paſſive, the Former is ſaid to be Derived ſrom Thinking and Motion, the Latter from Senſible Beings and Matter: But iſ Matter is Active, and not Paſſive only, ſuch Action will as much Inform us ol an Active Pover, as God, ſfrom vhom all the Properties and Actions of Matter arc Produced, as Motion or even Thinking vill In In the Progreſs of this Chapter, Will is Defined to be a Power, which the Mind has, to Order the Conſideration of any Idea, or the Forbearing to Conſider it, or to Prefer the Motion of any Part of the Body to it's Reſt, and Vice Verſà; and Preſently after it is ſaid, So far as a Man has Power to Think, or not to Think, to Move, or not to Move, according to the Preference or Direction of his own Mind, So far is a Man Free;3 Will therefore is a Power to Prefer, and Liberty or Frecdom, a Power to Act according to that Preference, and the Firſt belongs to the Mind, and the Laſt to the Man, as an Agent: But this Doctrine makes the Preſent Philoſophy Conclude, that therefore a Man may not be Free, tho' the Action is Voluntary, that is, a Man may have a Liberty or Freedom of Will, at the ſame Time, that he is not Free, as to his Will; For as to a Liberty of Executing or Performing his Will, that is Entirely Foreign to the Nature of the Mind or it's Freedom, which is here only the Queſtion, which will be the ſame, whether a Man is in Chains, or upon a Rack, or Abſolutely Reſigned to his own Actions. S. 4. ON the Contrary, the Will, and the Freedom of it, ſeems to be a Pover in the Mind to Produce any Action, or to Think of any Determinate Idea from it's ſelf, and from a Principle of it's own, by which it is the Beginning and Riſe of fuch Actions or Thoughts, and by which it is Diſtinguiſhed from a Neceſſary Agent; And Conſcquently, there might be a Will, and a Freedom of it, if the Mind was Confined to One ſingle Idea, and could not Think of any Other in Preference to it, that is, if that Idea was Produced from it's ſelf, and Aroſe from an Innate Principle, Reſideing in it; For thus, if a Ball could Move it's ſel? in One Certain Direction, vithout any Stroke or Impulſe from a Racket, it would be a Free, and Ceaſe to be a Neceſfary, Agent; And, where the Queſtion is, vhether a Man is a Free Agent, or, vhether the Will is Free, it is to Inquire, whether the Mind can Act and Think from it's ſelf, Independent of any External Impulſe, cither from Almighty God, or from any Material Beings; which Appears Pretty Evident, that it may, and that Almighty God has been Pleaſcd to Create it, and to Endue it with that Power. IF therefore the Mind has this Faculty of Determining its ſclf to this Thouht or Action, it will Follow, that it has the Power to Determine it's ſelP to any other Thought or Action, there being nothing in the Nature of One Thought or Action, more than in Another, which ſhould hinder the Minds Determining its ſelf to it; Thus, if a Ball can Move it's ſelf in One Direction without an Impulſe, it may in Another, there being no more Impediment to it's Motion in One Direction, than in a Contrary, if it has a Principle of Moving, from it's ſclf, and Innate and Internal to it. This brings to my Mind a very Wonderfull and Surprizing Phænomenon, which I lately Obſerved of the Small Down of a Feather, as it ſeemed to be, which Movcd ir the Air, near a Glaſ-Window, in the Inſide of a Room, Upwardss Downards, Backwards, Forwards, and Tranſverſely, in all Kinds of Directions, with an Incre: dible Celerity, when there was little or no Air ſtirring in the Room, tho' it as ſomething Windy Abroad; If we can Imagine therefore this little Down to have Moved it's ſelf, there is Scarcely any Doubt to be made, but it had a Certain Degree of Volition, and Conſequently of Perception, Annexed to it, as we ſind in the ſmall Eels of Vinegar, or in the Exceeding Minute Animalcula of Pepper-Water. Bur it is Irrational and Ridiculous to Suppoſe, that ſuch a Freedom of Will was ever the Diſpute of the Learned, which Conſiſts in a Power to Think, or not to Think, to Move or not to Move, according to the Preference or Direction of our own Minds: Since, according to ſuch a Notion, a Man ſhall have a Freedom of Will, in Reſpect oſ his Thoughts, when he is Allowed to Think as he Pleaſes, but no Freedom of Will, vhen he is Hindered from doing it, and in Reſpect of Action, he ſall have Freedom of Will, when he may Walk, where he Thinks Fir, but no Frcedom of Will, vhen Loaded with Chains and Fetters3 BY which Means the ſame Mind ſhall be Endued vith a Liberty of Will, or not, according to the Diiſering External Circumſtances of the Body, which have no Relation to, or Conncixon vith, the Properties of the Mind, which in the Diſputes Concerning the Freedom of the Will, are only to be Conſidered. 5.5. Mixed Modes are ſaid to be Combinations of Simple Ideas oſ Diſſcrent Kinds, as Virtue, Vice, a Lie, &e. and are Diſtinguiſied from Simple Modes, which Conſiſt only oſ Simple Ideas of the ſame Kind, Put together by the Mind; Wherea as Mixed Modes ſeem not to be Formed by the Mind from it's Joining and Uni ting ſeveral Simple Ideas into One, but they are Received, and Impreſſcd upon it, in the Complex from an Obſervation of Human Actions, and then Separated and Divided by the Thinking and the Contemplative, into the ſeveral Parts, of which they are Made up; Thus, Mens Virtuous or Vicious Actions are ſeen by us at Once, which 'Leads us to Form the General and Abſtracted Notions of Virtue and Vice; We Heai a Lie in Fact, which Perhaps may Carry us to Conſider the ſeveral Ideas, which En ter into the Nature of it; And ſo of the Reſt. ] 5. 6. SUBSTANCES, in this Philoſophy, are ſaid to be General, or Particular, and Each of them to be a Complication of many Idcas together, which Subſiſt in one Subſtratum, vhich is the Support of them, by which they are United and Cemented into One Complex Idea, and from whence they are Derived and Connected with cach other; Particular Subſtances are alſo ſaid to be Compoſed out of the Obſcure and General One, which have their Particular Combinations oſ Simple Ideas, and are Suppoſcd to Flow from the Unknown Eſſence of their ſeveral Subſtances. ON the other Hand, it ſeems to be Evident, that the General or Obſcure Subſtance is Formed by Abſtraction from Particular Ones; and that, as the Preſent PhiIoſophy has Managed it, it is a mere Notional Thing, an Arbitrary Creature of the Mind, and Conſiſis of Abſtracted Ideas, United together at the Pleaſure of the Will; Thus we Form our General Idea of Matter from the ſeveral Particular Material Subſtances, hich Exiſt, as Gold, Lead, Earth, &. and when we come to Inquire into the Subſtance of Matter, we ſhall find it to be only an Aſſemblage of Various Abſtracted Ideas, ſuch as Extenſion, Solidity, Diviſibility, Mobility, &æ. which have no common Cement, by which they are United, nor any Mutual Dependence upon each Other, and therefore can have no Subſtratum, Subſtance, or Eſſence, from whence they are Derived. 5. 7. IN a True Philoſophy, and in the Reality of Things, Particular Subſtances are therefore Firſt to be Examined into; Which are not Subſtratums, Conſidered as Beings Diſtinct from the Properties, which are Imagined to Inhere in them; But are One and the Same Nature, or Being, Applicd to Different Natures, or Beings, from which Application it's Properties Reſult; So that any One Property of a Particular Subſtance is the Eſſence of it, as much as the Subſtance is, becauſe, One Property being Given, all the Reſt will Follow upon Different Applications; Thus Gold is not a Subſtratum, with Yellow, Weight, Malleableneſs, Fuſion, Extenſion, Solidity, &Inhereing in it; but it is One Invariable Nature, or Being, which is Suſceptible of ſeveral Qualities, upon it's being ſeverally Related and Reſerred to Diſſerent Natures; If it is Applicd to the Eye, it Produces it's Peculiar Yellowneſs in us; If to the Hand or Eye, it's Peculiar Extenſion and Solidity; I to Fire, it becomes Fuſed; If to a Hammer, Malleable; If to Aqua Regalis, a Diſſolution Enſues; And the Nature of Gold, as much Conſiſts in any One of theſe Properties, as it does in All of Them; Becauſc where One is, the Other, upon Different Applications, will be Conſequent; For where there is the Peculiar Yellowneſs, Weight, or Solidity of Gold, there will be the Peculiar Malleableneſs, Fuſibility, or any other Property of it, and Vice Verſà. Ir therefore a Certain Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces will Produce the Yellowneſs of Gold in us, and the ſame Degree of each will Produce the Weight or Solidity of it, it's Particular Extenſion, it's Malleableneſs, and Fuſibility, ſuch a Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive Force will be the Eſſence, or Subſtratum, of Gold; And which Degree of Force will be as much Expreſſed by One Property, as Another, and, upon Different Applications, may be Productive of a Thouſand more, of vhich we are at Preſent Entirely Ignorant; And yet we may be ſaid to Knov the Entire Nature and Eſſence of Gold; Becauſe, That, as much Conſiſts in One Property, as in a Million of Them. Tnus likewiſe; If Fire is Applicd to the Eye, it Cauſes in us the Senſation of its Peculiar Yellow; If to the Hand, it's Heat; IF to Wood, it Burns it; It alſo Melts Wax, Hardens Clay, and Fuſes Metals, by it's Various Applications to Them; And yet this is One and the Same Nature, which is as much Expreſſcd by one Property, as by all of them; Becauſe, That, which will Produce One Effect, upon Different Applications, will Produce the Other; And, If a Certain Degree of the Expanſive and c tractive tractive Forces will Anſwer theſe Phenomenons, ſuch a Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, will be the Eſſence or Subſtratum of Fire, which is as much Exerted in the Production of One of theſe Phenomenons, as in the Production of All of them, and the Nature of any Being, as much Aſcertained by One Property, as by an Hundred. j . l To Exemplify this Doctrine Farther; The Point of a Necdle is Sufficiently Determined, which yet can Perforate Paper, or Rend it, can Cauſe a Pain in the Finger, or a Pleaſure to it, and by Different Applications can Produce other Effects, which may be all ſaid, upon ſuch Applications, to be the Properties of it, when, notwithſtanding, every One knows, what the Point of a Necdle is, as well by One of theſe Properties, as by Twenty of them, as to it's Nature, Figure, and Conſtitution. 5. 38. LET us nov Extend this Reaſoning to Geometry and the Mathematicks, wĩ⸗ and it may be Inquired, What is the Eſſence oſ a Triangle? To which it is Anſvered /æ in the ſame Way, That any Certain and Undoubted Property of it, is it's Eſſence, ſi and not any One ſuch Property in Preference to the Other; Becauſe where any Cer- æ7 tain and Undoubted Property of a Triangle Exiſis, all the Others will Follow, upon ĩ' : ir's being Applied, or Referred, to Different Quantities, and upon it's being Conſidered under Different Relations3 Thus Three Lines Inclined to Each Other, ſo as to Include Space, or ſo as to Form Three Angles, may be Termed the Eſſence of it, and Generally is ſo Eſteemed to be; But there ſeems to be no more Reaſon for it, than to Aſſert, that the Three Angles of a Triangle being Equal to Two Right Ones, is it's Eſſence, or, that the External Angle of a Triangle being Equal to its Two Internal Oppoſite Ones, is that Eſſence, or any other Property of it, which we can Name, vhen it is Compared with, and Referred to, other Quantities; Becauſe Each of theſe Properties of Figure will Infer One Another; Thus, Suppoſing there is a Figure, which Conſiſts of Three Lines and Three Angles, the other Properties will be Conſequent, vhen it is Compared with, and Referred to, other Quantities, and if a Figure is Reſerred to, and Compared with, other Quantities, and has theſe Propertics, it muſt be a Triangle; What I Mean is, that all the Properties, which can Reſult from a Triangle, either Conſidered with Reſpect to it's Lines and Angles, or in Compariſon with any other Quantities, are Intimately United and Connected together, and if we have One Property, all the Reſt muſt Follow, whenever the Reſation, Reference, or Compariſon is made. l l AND this is ſo True, that the Late Geometers Diſtinguiſ theit Curves, and the Natures or Eſſences of them, by Algebraick Equations; Becauſe, where thoſe Equations are, all the Properties, which can be Imagined or Found out, in Reſpect of thoſe Curves, will be a Neceſary Reſult and Conſcquence from ſuch Equations; As is Evident from L'Hopitals Conick Scctions. L Thus, 7 y& ꝑ æ, Expreſſcs the Nature of a Parabola. br — ; With Reſpect Prop Alſo, yy& t the Nature of an Ellipſis. ad Relaion n to their Axes. Prop. And, & 3 t, the Nature of an Hyperbola. BEFORE Whom our own Country Man, the Famous Dr. Hallis, Late Savilian Pro- Dr.v ſeſſor of Geometry in Oxford, in his Treatiſe of Conick Sections, and Who Firſt pen Took the Sections out of the Cone, and Conſidered them, Abſtracted from and Inde- ꝑQʒ pendent of it, Propoſed this Equation for the Parabola, Namely, 2? S àl, which he nici Says is the Eſſential Symptome, Property, or Affection of it, and from Whence all the' Reſt may be Deduced; LicEVISE, for the Ellipſis, =lla, which Expreſſes the Nature of the Ellip- ſrom ſis, and from whence all the Properties and Affections of it may be Derived, which is there done by him; l AnD for the Hyperbola, h =ld +, àr, which is it's Eſence, or Eſſential Property, h from which all it's Others may be Inferred; becauſc they are all Intimately United and Connected together. ; ON the other Hand, If we take any One of theſe Properties, which are Derived from theſe Equations, ve may call it the Eſſence of theſc Figures, and the Equation vill be an Eſſential Property, becauſe it will Neceſſarily Follow from ſuch Property, which is now Suppoſcd the Eſence; That is, every Eſiential Property of any Figure has an Equal Claim to be Eſteemed the Eſence of it; Becauſe they Mutually Infer and Conclude Each Other. Tnus in the Hyberbola, 1ſ. u=ia+tae, it will be Conſequent; 2. That h=v: l IL,uiadta- Mm j daI : +4a =v— I, 3a. That l =/t341h. That I=579 Each oſ which Equations are Linked and United together in that Manner, that, if One is Suppoſed, the Reſt do Neceſſarily Enſue; And thereſore the 2à. ;4ã. or 4h. Equation may be as vell Termed the Eſſence of this Figure, as the 1ſ. And this, as we have ſaid beſore, is the Caſe of Material Subſtances or Eſſences, which will be Equally Expreſſed by any of their Eſſential Properties, becauſe they are Joined and Subſiſt together by an Indiſſoluble Connexion. 5. 9. WnEN the Mind has got it's Ideas of Particular Material Subſtances, if it Procecds to Form a General One, as that of Matter, it is done by Throwing out of it's Idea every Thing, which is Particular, and which Diſtinguiſhies One Portion of Matter from Another, and Retaining only, what is General and Common to all the Parcels of it; Thus if we find, that all the ſeveral Portions of Matter Conſiſt in the Various Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, we Abſtract from all Particular Degrees of thoſe Forces, and Conſider the Expanſive and Contractive Force in General, and in which we may Say the General Nature and Eſſence of Matter Lies; and if we farther Abſiract Force from the Expanſive or Contractive, we may then Affirm, that the General Subſtance, Subſtratum, or Eſſcnce, of Matter is Force, or Action; In all which there is nothing Obſcure or Unintelligible; Tho in the Preſent Way of Thinking in Philoſophy, All is Involved in Clouds, Darkneſs, and Confuſion; And we are Entertained with little elſe upon this Subject of Eſences, and Subſtratums, Excepting ith an Unknown, Inconceivable, Something, It cannot Tell What, nor has any I maginable Way of Comprehending. 5. 10. VE may farther, from this Doctrine of Subſtances or Subſtratums, Give ſome Account of the Eſſences of Particular Minds, and from thence of the Eſſence of Mind in General; As to Particular Minds, we ſhall Inſtance in thoſe of Men, vith which we are moſt Acquainted, and upon which therefore our Reaſonings in Philoſophy will be the beſt Grounded; For thoſe of Brutes we are not ſo fully Informed of. TnE Eſſence therefore of any Particulart Human Mind Conſiſis in any One Eſſential Property of it, with which all the Others, which are Eſſential to it, are Connected; Thus, if any One has a Particular Force of Perception, he will likewiſe have a Particular Force of Volition, Memory, Recollection, Comparing, and Compounding his Ideas, a Particular Force of Judgment and Reaſoning, Particular Paſſions and Forces of them, all Joined and United together, ſo that i? he has One, he has all of them; And this is ſo True, and ſo Evident and Certain, that it will be never found in Nature, where One Man's Mind was Exactly and in every Reſpect the ſame with Anothers, cither as to his Force, or Quickneſs and Slowneſs, of Perception, of Volition, of Memory, Judgment, Paſſions, or of any other of his Faculties. This is the Riſe and Cauſe of all the ſeveral Genius's amongſt Men, the Peculiar Force and Diſiinction of their ſeveral Faculties; BYy which, One becomes a Poet, Another a Philoſopher, a Third an Orator, or a Stateſman; And it would be as Impoſſible, for One Man, vho has his Certain Force of Perception, not to have a Force of Volition Memory and Judgment, &æ. Peculiar to that Force, and Vice Verſã, as it would be for a Being. which has the Yellowneſs of Gold, or the Weight of it, not to have the orher Qualities belonging to it, and Vice Verſã; or, as it would be for a Parabola an Ellipſis, or Hyperbola, not to have all their Properties Appertaining to them, upon the Suppoſition of One, with which all the Reſt are United and Connected 3 The Eſſence, Subſtratum, or Subſtance, therefore of any Human Mind Conſiſts in the Particular Force of Paſſion or Emotion in that Mind, or in the Particular Force ol it's Perception or Volition, or in That of Reaſoning or of Judgment, &. which Mu tually tually Infer each other; and the One may be Taken for the Eſſcnce, and the Other for the Eſſential Property, or Vice Verſã §. 1I. THE Only and Principal Difficulty is, how the Properties of any Particular Human Mind are Connected with cach other, as the Properties oſ Gold, or oſ a Parabola, an Ellipſis, or an Hyperbola, are; Which may be thus Explained3 Wherc there is Perception, there is Volition always Attending it; For Volition is only Begining an Action of its ſelf; Thus, if a Ball ould Move its ſelf in any Direction, ĩt vould Will that Direction; But Perception is Beginning an Action of it's ſclf, becauſe, tho' there were a Thouſand Impreſſions made upon the Mind from External Objects, they would be no more than ſo many Impulſes upon Body, without Producing any Senſation at all, if the Mind did not of it's ſelf, and from it's own Innate Force begin the Perception; for the Mind thereſore to Perceive of it's ſclf is the ſame, as for it to Act of it's ſelf, and where any Thing Acts oſ it's ſelf, there is Volition3 That this is ſo, is Evident even in our Senſations, which are Eſtcemed the moſt Neceſſary; As in Seeing an Object, which is Preſented to us, when our Eyes are Open, it is ſaid, we cannot Avoid Percciving it; but it muſt likewiſe be Aſfirmed, that ve could not Perceive that Object, unleſs the Mind had a Principle of doing it, that is, unleſ' it was of its ſel? Active in Perceiving it, for i it was only Paſſive, there would nothing more Reſult from an Impreſſion on it, than from One Piece of Matter, which has no Principle of Perception, Acting upon another Paſſive Subſtance, vhich has no Principle of Perception, which at the moſt vould be only Motion; Beſides which, we can Shut our Eyes at Pleaſure, and by that Means Reject the Impreſſion ſrom the External Object; that thereſore we keep them Open to Receive it, is as much an Act of Volition, as if wve had Shut them, and thereby Refuſed the Senſation; And from Hence it is, that even in Dreams, for the ſame Reaſoning will Obtain Concerning them, the Mind is of it's ſelſ Active, and therefore has Volition in thoſc Perceptions, which it Experiences in them; And from whence it is, that the Reverſe is True; That, where there is Volition, there is always Perception, for no One ever Doubted, that, where a Man Wills, he Perceives, and why, where a Man Perccives, he ſiould not Will, cannot be ſaid, or ith any Juſticc Maintained; And, as this Force of Action or Perception is Weaker or Stronger in the Mind, ſo is that of Volition, and Vice Verſã. PERCE?TION and Volition being thus United, it is Eaſy from thence to Shew, how Memory muſt be Conſcquent; becauſe a Recollecting our Perceptions is Manifeſtly Derived from an Active Principle of the Mind, and the Mind, which can Begin Action or Perception in it's ſelf from the Impreſſions of External Objects, muſt Neceſſarily have a Power of Beginning Action or Perception in it's ſelf, from the Impreſſion of it's own Perceptions; For Memory, or Recollection, is only Perceiving a Thing before Perceived, with a Will or an Act of Volition to do it; And as Perception is to External Objects, ſo is Memory to Perception; From whence it will alſo Follow, that as the Force of Perception is Weaker or Stronger in the Mind, ſo will the Force of Memory or Recollection be, and Vice Verſa. PERCEPTION, Volition, and Memory, being thus Connected, Reaſoning Enſues, by which we Diſtinguiſ our Perceptions from each Other, and which Reſults from our very Faculty of Perceiving, and by which we Compare them with each Other, which Follows from Volition and Memory, and from thence make Deductions, Inſerences, and Concluſions from them; And as the Force of Perception, Volition, and Memory, is Weaker or Stronger, ſo will the Force of Reaſoning be, and Vice Verſã. Tuus, alſo the Paſſions of the Mind are Evidently Derived ſrom the Peculiar Force oſ Perception and Memory in it; Since therefore all theſe Properties of any Human Mind are Connected with cach Other, I we have any One of them, ve ſall have All of them, and in that Particular Force and Degree, which the One or the Other Preſcribes; So that, i? we have ſuch a Certain Force of Perception, we ſnall have ſuch a Certain Force of Volition, which belongs to it, and is Joined with it, ſuch a Certain Force of Memory, Reaſoning, &œ. And Vice Verſà, If ve have ſuch a Certain Force of Reaſoning, ve ſall have ſuch a Certain Force of Memory, Volition, Perception, &e. I will not Pretend here Exactly to Define what Proportion of Force of Perception there muſt be, or of Volition, or Memory, or ? PPP Reaſoning, Reaſoning, which will Mutually Inferr each Other; It is Sufficient in General to Shew, how theſe Faculties of the Human Mind are Connected together, and in Different Degrees of Force; And that any One of the Properties of it is enough to Denominate it's Eſence, Genius, or Nature, ſince all the Others are Connected with it. 5. 12. FRoM Hence ve may Reaſonably Conjecture, in what the Eſſences and Natures of the Minds of Brutes Conſiſt, Namely, in a very Low Degree or Force oſ Perception and Volition, and Conſequently of Memory or of Reaſoning; That is, the moſt Lively and Vivacious of them ſeem to be Raiſed little Higher than Matter, theirt Minds have Juſt Action enough in themſelves to begin Perception; They Perceive Objects, which are Impreſſed on their Minds, but take not much farther Notice of them, and I Believe it may be ſaid in General of them, that they never Perceive them with any Kind of Force, Activity, or Attention; And they are as much Paſſive, as an Active and Intelligent Nature can be; Their Force of Volition therefore is Suitably Low and Depreſſed, for ve find no Exerciſes of that Faculty, Excepting to Walk, or to Fly, or to Swim about, for the Preſervation of Themſclves, or the Conſervation of their Species; Their Memory, likewiſe, Conſiſts in a Repetition of the ſame Senſations upon theit Minds, by which they at Length Learn to Diſtinguiſ ſome Few Objects, which are the moſt Advantageous or Pernicious to them. AND their Reaſoning ſeems to be Correſpondent and Anſwerable to their Perception, Volition, and Memory, Inconſiderable, Triſſling, and Next to Nothing. IF we Deſcend Lower to a Cockle or an Oyſter, ve ſhall find, that as the Perception in them is of the Leaſt Degree or Force Imaginable, ſo is the Volition, the Memory and Reaſoning of them, by which they are Placed but little above the Vegetable Kingdom. IFr we therefore now go ſtill Lower to Vegetables, there is nothing more Plain, than that they have a Peculiar Action to themſelves, Beginning and Ariſing from them, by which they Exert themſelves in a Thouſand Various Directions, but there can be no Action from it's ſelf without Volition, and there can be no Volition without Perception, and therefore ve may Suppoſe very Juſtly, that even Plants and Vegetables have a Degree of Perception and Volition, tho' Infinitely Below, even that of a Cockle or an Oyſter. LastLy, the Inanimate Part of Nature we have Endeavoured to Shew, Conſiſis of Various Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which Forces, being Active of themſelves, muſt alſo Infer ſome Degree and Force of Volition, and Conſequently of Perception, but this is in ſo Infinitely Small a Degree, that it may be Eſteemed as Nothing, or as mere Stupidity, or as a General and Dull Senſe Diffuſed by Almighty God throo his Whole Creation. Tuis Opinion is in ſome Meaſure Confirmed by the Small Animalcula, which are Found in Vinegar, as almoſt in all Nature, vhich Move in all Directions, tho' theſe little Eels ſall be Ten Thouſand Times Leſs than the Fineſt Hair, which can be Imagined; And is it not more Rational to Affirm, that ſuch Anguillæ are Minute Parcels of Matter, which are Endued by God with a Principle of Beginning Action, and therefore have Volition and Perception, than to Suppoſe they have all the Organs of an Animal? For how is it more Contrary to the Wiſdom of Almighty God to Impart ſuch a Property of Self- Action, Volition, and Perception to a Small Hair of Matter Unorganized, than to Communicate it to a Syſteme of Matter Organized, that is, to a Brute, an Oyſter, or a Cockle? 5. 13. WE have hitherto made the Human Mind, as it is that, which we have the moſt Perfect knovledge of, the Standard of our Reaſoning to all the Parts of Nature Below us; And if we carry our Inquiries to thoſe Intelligent Subſtances, or Eſſences, which are Above us, and to that of the Infinite and Divine Mind, we ſhall ſind the ſame Reaſoning to Obtain; Thus, if it is Asked, in what the Eſence or Nature of Angelick Minds Conſiſis, it is Anſwered in the Degree and Force of their Perception, which is as much Superior to the Degree and Force of Human Perception, as that is to the Perception of a Brute, an Oyſter, a Plant, or any Being, a common Matter, vhich has the Leaſt Degree of it, and in Compariſon is Nothing This Inſinite Degree and Force of Perception, Above what we are Endued with, by which they Apprehend Things with an Infinitely Greater Quickneſs and Force than we do, is Attended with an Infinitely Greater Force oſ Volition, by which they are are Active and Miniſtering Spirits to the Whole Univerſc, as we are to the Creatures Below us, and the Earth we Inhabit, and with an Infinitely Greater Force of Memory, Reaſoning, and Judgment, by which they can Baſſle and Confound all the Short and Imperfect Reaſonings of Men. S. 14. AND in Reſpect of the Infinite and Divine Mind, even the Force of Perception, Volition, Memory, and Reaſoning, in the Angelick, is as much Below it, as that of the Human is Inſerior to that of thoſe Exalted Beings and Intelligences; So that the Infinite and Divine Mind has an Infinite, Unlimited, and Inimitable Force of Perception, by which he Views and Comprehends all Nature at Once, Penetrates in Onc Inſtant into all the Beings and Powers of it, and Contemplates Millions of Millions of Worlds, with all the Innumerable Parts and Appendages of Them at one Glance, and vith a Quickneſs of Thought, and a Force and Vivacity of Perception, which Infinitely Surpaſcs that, which is Exerted in Human Minds, whoſe Faculties are the moſt Expedite and Lively. CONSEQUENT to this, his Force of Volition is likewiſe Immenſe, by which he Wills the Whole Order and OEconomy oſ Univerſal Nature, Eſtabliſhes the Lavs and Rules of the ſeveral Beings in it, and this with ſo Boundleſs and Irreſiſftable a Force, that nothing is Able to Controul it, but every Thing has it's Eſfect, and Obtains it's Particular Powers and Conſtitution, Suitable to the Almighty Volition oſ the Supreme Diſpoſer. TnE Force of Memory thereſore of this Infinite Mind muſt be likewiſe Incomprehenſibly Great, Vaſt, and Stupendous, ſo that not the Minuteſt Thing has Paſſcd, nor even any of the Ideas of his ovn Mind, in an Eternal Duration, which are not Preſent with him; the Force of Recollection is ſo Exceedingly Quick, that the Time of Recollection is Infinitely Diminiſhed, by which his Memory is not Properly ſuch, but is Reſolved into Actual Perception and Intuition. Tnus alſo, the Force of Reaſoning of this Divine and Inſinite Mind is in like Manner Infinite, by which he does not Recollect his Ideas, but Retains them under a Preſent View and Contemplation, nor does he Compare and Reaſon upon his Ideas by a Temporary Deduction of Conſequences, but he at the ſame Time, and in the ſame Moment of it, Beholds, Perceives, and Apprehends, the Premiſſes, and the Concluſions. LastLy, the Force of his Paſſions likewiſe muſt be from hence Infinite, by which he has an Infinite Deteſtation and Abhorrence of Vice, and an Unbounded Love and Eſteem for Piety and Virtue. AND theſe Properties are ſo Intimately United and Connected together, that where any One of them is, the Reſt muſt be Neceſſarily Inferred and Concluded from it, ſo that Each of them is Perfectly and Fully Expreſſive of the Divine Eſ ſence and Nature. S. i5. I therefore here Aſfirm a Various Quantity, or Force of Perception, Volition, &e. by which the Properties of the Mind may be as Juſtly Reduced to Mathematicks and Proportions, as Extenſion may, and which, as was ſaid before, vould Lay the Foundations of a Pſycheometria, as well as the other has Furniſhed us with the Elements of Geometry ; For it is very Evident, that Men do Perceive the ſame Things with a Diſferent Force, even in their Common and Ordinary Senſations; Thus, Some ſhall Naturally See Objects with Greater Quickneſs and Life, whil©t Others Behold them with more Dullneſs and Stupidity; ſo far, that the Volition of the Firſt all be Excited to Conſider and Examine into the Objects Preſented, when the Laſt ſall Sit down Satisſyd, with only taking a Lazy Notice of the Impreſſion: ihe Firſt ſall Immediately Penetrate into all the Circumſtances of ſuch Objects upon the Firſt Sight of them, the Laſt hall Apprehend them but Slowly and by Degrees: and there is nothing more Apparent, than that Men's Minds, and the Forces of them, are as Diſferent in the Quickneſs and Slowneſs of their Senſations and Perceptions, as of their Apprehenſions, ſince the Latter is no more than another Term ſfor the Former; And from hence it ĩs, that Men Reaſon with a Different Force, which i: a Perception of ſeveral Perceptions, and of the Diſiinction, or no Diſtinction, which Lies betwixt them; As alſo, that ſome Men's Volitions are more Strong and Impetuous, and other Men's more Faint and Languid3 Thus Men, who in Learning have a Quick Perception of the Ideas and Studies of it, will be Carried into an Eaget P PP P2 Turſui' Purſuit of ſuch Ideas and Studies; But thoſe, vhoſe Perceptions are Duller, find their Volitions as Heavy, and they will be Scarcely ever Perſuaded to make any Progreſſes in Knovledge, where the Nature oſ their Perceptions has given them ſo little Encouragement to Endeavour aſter it. 5. 16. VHEN we have thus Formed our Notions oſ the Eſſences of Particular Minds, which Conſiſt in Certain Forces and Degrees of Perception, we from thence may Naturally and Reaſonably Proceed to Conſider, what the Eſſence of Mind in General is, which is to be Fixed and Determined by Throwing out of the Particular Eſſences of Minds every Thing, which Diſtinguiſhes the One from the Other; And ſince that is the Peculiar Forces of Perception, Volition, Memory, or Reaſoning, which belong to Each, The Eſſence of Mind in General is a Force of Perception, Volition, Memory, and Reaſoning, without Defining, what that Force in Particular is, vhether Greater or Smaller, whether Inſinite, Finite, or Next to None at all. 5. 17. THE Reaſon, why the Preſert Philoſophy Diſcourſes ſo Obſcurely and Unintelligibly Concerning Subſtances, Subſtratums, or Eſſcnces, and with ſo linile Truth, ſcems to be; Iſi. Becauſe it Imagines the Subſtratum, or Subſlance, to be ſomething Diſferent and Diſlinct from the Eſſential Properties, vhich are Suppoſcd to be Derived from it; The one is the Root or Stock, the other the Branches; The one the Baſis or Foundation, the other the Superſtructure upon it; The One is the Support, the Other it's Dependences But this it is to Philoſophize by Metaphors and Similes, without Inquiring into the Nature of Things themſclves; For the Eſſcence oſ any Thing is neither the Root, nor the Baſis, nor the Support or Subſtratum, of it's Eſential Properties3 All which Terms are made Uſe of to Explain it; Since, as we have Shewn, every Eſential Property as much Denotes the Eſſence of the Thing, as any Imagined Eſſence it's ſelf can do; 24. Becauſe it very Prepoſterouſly Conſiders General Subſtances, before Particular Ones, and Forms the Particular out of the General, which it Acknowledges to be the more Obſcure, whereas it ought Firſt to have Conſidered Particular Subſtances, and ſfrom thence Formed it's Notion of a General One, Agreeable to what we have here done. 5. 183. As to the Idea of the Supreme Being. which this Philoſophy gives, it is ſaid to be a Complex One oſ Exiſtence, Power, Knowledge, Duration, Pleaſure, Happineſs, and of ſeveral other Qualities and Powers, which it is better to have ihan be without, with ithe Addition of Iufinite to each of theſe; And it is very Punctually Affirmed, that we have no other Idea of the Supreme Being than ſuch a Complex Onc; But I have already Shewn, that there may be another and a more Rational Idea Propoſed to us of the Infinite and Divine Mind; On the Contrary, this which is Offered to us, is only a Complication of Abſtracted Ideas, cach of which, as they are General Ones, are mere Creatures of the Mind, and Conſequently God himſelf according to this Philoſophy, is nothing elſe than a Fancy and Imagination of it; And, that it was of this Opinion, ſeems to be Plain and Maniſcſt, ſince it Subjoins with a kind oſ Ridicule, that there were ſeveral other Qualities and Powers Annexed by us to this Idea, which it was hetter to have ihan be ithout, with the Addition of Infinite; So that all the Idea, which we have of a Supreme Being, is an Idea made up of all the Fincſt Ideas we can Invent, and Put together, from our own Fancies and Imaginations, without any Certainty of the Exiſtence of ſuch a Being in Nature, unleſs as it Exiſts in our ovn Minds; It muſt be yet ſaid in Excuſe of this Philoſo phy, that it has given as Good a Deſinition of Almighty God, as it has done of Matter, which is likewiſe made to Conſiſt of a Combination of Abſtracted Ideas, as Solidity, Extenſion, Mobility, Diviſibility, &æ. in General, which are only ſo many Creatures oſ the Mind, and ſo many Beings and Imaginations in it. WEe cannot but Think in Reverſe of all this, that the Infinite and Almighty Being is a Real and not a Fantaſtical One, that he has in Truth and Reality an Inſinite Force oſ Perception, and Volition, of Memory, Reaſoning, and Thought, which is his Eſſence, according to what has been before Explained, and that this may be Trul; Collected ſrom Conſidering the ſeveral Beings and Creatures oſ the Univerſe, theil Nature, Order, Situation, Dependence upon, and Conncrion with, cach Other, botl in the Animal and Material World; In like Manner, as the Eſltnce oſ Matter doe: not Conſiſt in the Abſtracted Ideas Abovementioned, but is Collected and Inferred from from the Effects and Properties it Produces ſrom the Diſferent Applications of it tc the Various Natures of Mind or of Matter. S. 19. Tnis Philoſophy yet Tells us; That the Infinite Wiſe Author of our Being has Fitted our Organs and Faculties to the Conveniences of Liſe, and the Buſineſ we have to do Here; That we have alſo Inſight enough into the Admirable Contri vances of Things, and the Wonderfull Effects of them, to Admire and Magnify the Wiſ dom, Power, and Goodneſs of their Author; That ſuch a Knowledge as this, which is Suited to our Preſent Condition, ve Want not Faculties to Attain; and we hav Abilities enough to Provide for the Conveniences of Living. WHaAT Notion this Philoſophy has of the Infinite and Al-wiſe Author of our Beings has been Obſerved in the Foregoing Section; and if he has only Fitted our Organs and Faculties to the Conveniences of Life and to Know ſo much of Nature, as to Admire and Adore Him; There are only TWo Ends, which any Man ſhould Propoſe, Namely, to Take Care of Himſlf, and to Worſhip the Deity; So that all Endeavours after Knowledge and Truth, are at once Caſhiered, which this Philoſophy ſeems to be ſo Fond of, and the firſt Thing we ſould do, ſhould be to Throw avay and Renounce this Mighty and Celebrated Eſſay on Human Underſtanding; For we have Abilities enough to Provide for the Conveniences of Life without it, and Senſe, and Religion, and Faculties enough, to Worſhip God, thoo we were Deprived of its Pious and Worthy Inſtructions;3 Theſe ſeem therefore only to be a Set of Words put together in this Philoſophy to Cover it's Atheiſm, which has made the Deity to Conſiſt in Fancies of our own, and to Drav a Veil over, and to Palliate, it's Ignorance, which knows little of Nature, but the Abſtracted Ideas of the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, and little of Mathematicks, Excepting ſome few Propoſitions in the Firſt Book of the Elements of Euclid, and the Common and Ordinary Rules of Arithmetick and Numbers. 5. 20. As to what is ſaid in this Chapter, that ve might have Different Idcas of Things, if our Senſes were Acute enough to Diſcern the Minute Particles of Bodies, and that Microſcopes are of Uſe to Aſſiſt them in ſuch an Inquiry; ve Anſver, that, if our Senſes were never ſo Acute, or Microſcopes never ſo Perfect, they could not Inform us of the Various Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces in Bodies; and as to the Minute Parts of them, we ſhall Leave them to the Corpuſcular Syſteme to Inveſtigate and Trace them out, as well as it can, by the Aſſiſtance of ſuch Valuable Glaſſes, and Deſire, that it would in Particular Search after, and Inquire into, the Minute Particles of Water, and the Pores and Interſſices, which Intervene them; ſince, according to the Preſent Philoſophy, there is 19 Times Leſs Matter in Water, than there is in an Equal Portion of Gold, and therefore, the Particles and Pores muſt needs be very Senſible by the Interpoſition of a Good Glaſs, and One vell Contrived for ſo Notable an Invention. 5. 21. CoLLECTIVE Ideas of Subſtances, as a Troop, Army, &c. do not ſeem to be Gained to the Mind by it's Power of Compounding, but by Actual Senſation, or by a Repreſentation from Others; For no One, I Believe, ever Sat down to Frame a Notion of a Troop or Army, by Putting Fifty, or Fiſty Thouſand, Individual Men together; On the Contrary, when he has Seen, or Heard of, a Troop or an Army, he may then Poſſibly Conſider the Number, of which each Conſiſis. 5. 22. THE Relative Ideas of Father, Brother, Son, Husband, Friend, Subject, General, European, Enaliſv-Man, Ilſlands, &, ate ſaid to be got by the Mind from the Comparing of One Thing with Another; Whereas they Appear, as the Former, to be rather Produced in the Mind by Experience and Obſervation, and then Diſtinguiſicd by Thinking, and Inquiſitive, Men into their Reſpects and Relations; Thus a Farmer, or a Pcaſant, vould call One Perſon a Father, Another a Son, as he Sces them Acknowledged in Life to be ſuch, without Formally and Previouſly Comparing or Relating theſc Ideas to each Other, and then Determining them; He may know himſclf to be an Engliſoman from Living in this Country, vhich is Called England, or an Iſlander from Inhabiting this Iſand, and yet Perhaps be Ignorant, what a Continent is, or whether there is any other Country in the World3 As to whut is ſaid, that Relations are better known than Things Related, it Proceeds ſrom this Philoſophy's Imperſect Notion of Subſtances, or Subſtance in General, which has been before Explained, and which it is Evident it Knev little of. i 5. 23. THE . 23. TuE Caſe is this, in the Preſent Syſeme of Ideas, that ſince the Mind i made to be a Raſa Tabula, this Philoſophy Undertakes to give an Hiſtorical Account how it is Furniſhed with that Variety of Ideas, which we Experience in it3 The firſt Step therefore is to Repleniſh it with a Set of Simple Ideas, and then to Put ĩ into Action, and Set it to Work upon theſe Materials by Abſtracting, Comparing and Compounding of them; by Which it has Formed a Quaint and Pretty Romanc of the Mind's Procedure, but has by no Means Given us a Natural and Real Hiſtor; of it; For I vould Ask any Reaſonable Man, whether he Thinks, or does Imagine that a Plain Honeſt Shepherd, or a Ploughman, Obtains all his Complex Ideas by the Method here Repreſented? If ſo, he muſt be a very Studious and Contemplative Perſon, and he would be ſo wholly Taken up in Comparing, Abſtracting, and Compounding his Ideas, that he would have little Time leſt for his Flock or his Furrows; On the Contrary, is it not more Juſt to Suppoſe, that he Gains his Complex Ideas, if he has any, in the ſame Manner, as his Simple, that is, by his Senſes and his Obſervation? All this Syſteme of Ideas therefore comes only to this, not 1o Inſiruct us, how ve Gain our Ideas, and how cvery Human Mind is Furniſhed with them, but how a Curious and Metaphyſical Head may Divide and Diſtinguiſh them into Various Claſes, and Give Diverſe Witty and Ingenious Denominations to them. 5. 2. As to Cauſe and Efſect, this Philoſophy only Informs us oſ the ſeveral Ways, by which an Effect is Produced, Namely, by Creation, as Matter, by Generation, as a Man, an Egęg, a Roſe, &c. and by Alteration, as when any Simple ldea is Produced, which was not in the Subject beſore, or by Making, as any Artificial Things; However it may be Worth While to take Notice, that tho' this Philoſophy may ſeem to Acknovledge the Creation of Matter, yet it's Notion of Matter is ſuch, that it is beyond any Conceptions, how it is Poſſible for Almighty God to Create or to Annihilate it; For take any Solid, Extended, Particle of Matter, no One can cver Imagine, how that ſhould be made Solid or Extended out of Nothing, that is, out oſ that, which had no Solid Extenſion, or how ſuch a Solid Extenſion ſhould become not Solid or Extended3 And thereſore the Philoſophers of the Corpuſcular Perſuaſion very Wiſely make Space or Extenſion, and theſe Solid Particles of Matter, to be Eternal and Unproduced3 And Conſcquently, as Incapable of Diſſolution; For how can Omnipotence it's ſelf Diſſolve Extenſion into Nothing, or Solidity into a mere Extenſion? It ſeems to be little Leſs than to Suppoſe, Omnipotence can Eſfect, what is a Contradiction, and that he can make Extenſion to be no Extenſion, and Solidity to be no Solidity; The Truth is this, that Extenſion and Solidity are both Abſtracted Ideas or Creatures of the Mind in the Preſent Philoſophy, and tho Almighty God can Create and Annihilate a Real and Active Maticr, he cannot a Chimerical and a Fantaſtick One, which never was in Nature or in Being. ON the other Hand, if we Preſume Matter to Conſiſt in Force and Action, Derived from an Infinite Agent, there is nothing Inconceivable, how an Infinite Agent ſnould Produce Action, or Surceaſe that Action, that is, how Almighty God ſhould Create Matter, or Annihilate it. To vhat is Diſcourſed farther Concerning Relations in this Chapter, we ſhall only Add; That all Nature Conſiſts of Relations, and thoſe Ideas, which we rake to be the moſt Abſolute and Poſitive, are yer Relative; Thus Subſtance, as that of Gold, is Yellow with Reſpect to our Eyes, Heavy with Reſpect to the Earth, Solid with Reſpect to our Hands Preſſing it, Malleable with Reſpect to a Hammer, and Fuſible with Reſpect to Fire, according to what we have Propoſed in the Doctrine of Subſtances, 5. 7. 5. 25. IN Relation to Identity and Diverſity, it is ſaid, that the Mind here Conſiders the very Being of Things, but that it Determines the Identity of them by Conſidering a Thing, as Exiſting at any Certain Time or Place, and Comparing it with it's ſelſ, as Exiſting at any other Time, and Place; when therefore we Demand, whether any Thing be the Same or no, it Refers always to Something, that Exiſted ſuch a Time, and in ſuch a Place, which it was Certain at that Inſtant, was the Same vith it's ſelſ and no Other; This Looks like the Famous Definition of a Syllogiſm, by that Great Logician Burerſdicius, Syllogiſmus eſl Oratio, in quã, quibuſdam poſitis, Diverſum quid à poſitis, vropter ea quæ poſita ſunt, Neceſſario ſequitur 3 For what is the Thing, which Exiſts at any Certain Time or Place? If we do not know, vhat this Thing is, how ſhall we Compare ir it with ir's ſelf, at any õther Certain Time, and Place? or which vay ſnall We be Informed, what it is, or how it Agrees vith i's ſelf? What is the Something, which Exiſted ſuch a Time, and in ſuch a Place, which it was Certain at that Inſtant, was the ſame vith ir's ſelf, that is, with we luow not what, till the Something is Known and Determined? IT is too Evident, that the Identity of any Thing carinot be Determined from a Certain Time or Place alone, which are External to it, but from it's own Nature; Being, and Conſtitution; Thus, if we take a Particle of Similar Matter, which this Syſteme of Ideas Embraces, the ſame Particle of it may Exiſt in the Same Place, or in Different Places, in Diſferent Inſtants of Time; and if we take a Particle of Heterogeneous or Diſſimilar Matter, it may be Different in the Same Place, or in Different Places, in Different Inſtants of Time, as a Coal, by Fire, may be Turned to a Cinder. TimE and Place have therefore nothing to do in Aſcertaining the Identity of Things, in Excluſion of the Nature of the Things themſelves, but we muſt rather Inquire into the Real Nature of them; This Philoſophy yet vas villing to make the moſt it could of the Firſt, as it Underſtood little or nothing of the Latter, and yet could not but Confeſs, that when the Mind Examined into the Idea of Identity, it Conſidered the very Being of Things; See the Beginning of this Section. 5. 26. ArTER giving us a General Notion of Identity, this Philoſophy vould Fix that of Subſtances, which will be found to be Attempted with as little Succeſs; They are ſaid to be of three Sorts, 1/. That of God; 24. That oſ Finite Intelligences; 3d. That of Bodies. As to the Firſt, God being Eternal, Unalterable, and every Where, Concerning his Identity, it is ſaid, there can be no Doubt; moſt Certainly, ſince if Identity is to be Determined by Time and Place, what is Eternal, and every Where, muſt be Unalterable, and rherefore the Same; But this has been Shewn to be a Falſe Notion of Identity; and in the Preſent Caſe, a Being may be Eternal, and every Where, and yet not Unalterable, unleſs it is Proved and Evidenced to be ſo from it's own Nature; And Conſequently, the Identity of God muſt be Derived and Concluded from his Infinite Force of Perception, Volition, Recollection, and Thought, of Love and Abhorrence, which are Properties Intimately United and Connected with each Other, as before Explained; But what is thus Infinite, muſt be Unaltered, and Unchangeably the Same. I have here Mentioned Paſſions, as Appertaining to the Divine Mind, Namely, an Infinite Love of what is Virtuous and Good, and an Infinite Deteſtation and Abhorrence of Evil; Nor does it ſeem Derogatory to the Perfection of his Nature, to Admit even of Tranſient and Temporary Paſſions, which are the Reſult of ſuch a Perfection, as an Infinite Love, Delight, and Pleaſure in Particular Men, and Particular Actions of Men, who are Good, and an Infinite Abhotrence and Averſion to ſuch as are Profligate and Ill; Since, as Religion and Revelation does Exhibit and Repreſent ſuch a Being to us, ſo we may as Juſtly Collect and Infer theſe Paſſions or Properties in him, in an Infinite Degree of Force, from what we Obſerve in our Selves, in a Finite, as we may his Infinite Force of Perception, Volition, &æ. from that, which in us is Limited and Confined; God yet cannot Admit of Fear, becauſe he knows he is Almighty; Nor can he Grieve or Repent, becauſe he is Infinitely Wiſe, Juſt, and Good; Nor is he Capable of any other Paſſions, which Imply a Weakneſs and Imperfection in him, which Love of Good, and an Abhorrence ol IIl do not; but on the Contrary, are the Effects and the Inſtances of the Infinite Rectitude of his Will, and Demonſtrations of his Soveraignty and Power, which Raiſes and Supports the Virtuous and Humble, and Confounds and Overturns the Haughtineſs of the Inſolent and Proud. S. 27. SECOND, it is Told us, that Finite Spirits, having had their Determinate Time and Place of Beginning to Exiſt, the Relation to that Time and Place vill alvays Determine to cach it's Identity, as long as it Exiſis. ON the other Hand ve Affirm, that the Identity of Finite Spitits cannot be Eſtimated ſrom Time and Place only, which are Circumſtances External to them, but muſt be Defined from the ſeveral and Various Forees of their Perception, Volition, cæ. In IP it ſiould be here Objected, that therefore, Suppoſing the Force oſf Perception, Volition, &e. ſhould be Impaired and Diminiſhed by a Diſtemper, or by Age, in a Finite Spirit, the Identity of it would be Deſtroyed, and Conſequently the Soul or Spirit of a Man will not be the Same, when he is in Health, and under the Par oxyſms of a Fever; when he is in the Vigour of Thirty, and in the Dotage o Ninety or an Hundred; It is Anſwered, that what Alterations are/made in the Forcc of any Peculiar Mind or Spirit, and it's Perception, Volition, &e. Are Effected by Cauſes External to it, as the Diſtiemper of the Body, or the Decay of it, which muit Neceſſarily make Suitable Impreſſions; But this will not Deſtroy the Identity of the Mind or the Force of it, by whichit is Diſtinguiſhed from all Others, which Identity is only here Conſidered, ſince, notwithſtanding theſe Impreſſions, it ſtill Preſerves thoſc Diſiinctions, Agreeable to it's Native Force, which no other Mind or Spirit, in the ſame Circumſtances would; Thus, let us Imagine Two Equal Bodies, to be Endued with their Peculiar Forces or Velocities, let the Velocity of One be as an Hundred, and the Other as Ten; It is Plain, if Another Equal Body with a Velocity of Five Incurs upon Each of them, tho' their Forces are Altered, yet the Alteration will be ſuch, as to Shew, that the Once had the Velocity of an Hundred, and the other oſ Ten, by Which the Identities of ſuch Forces of Ten and an Hundred, will be as much Aſcertained and Diſtinguiſied from One Another, as if there had been no Impreſſion made upon them from the Incourſe of a Third. ON the Contrary, if the Identity of Finite Spirits is to be Determined from the Time and Place alone of their Beginning to Exiſt; It muſt be Suppoſed, that it is Impoſſible for Two Finite Spirits to Begin to Think in the ſame Place, at the ſame Time; Whercas, ſince Thought and Spirit is not Extended, One Finite Spirit may be Conſcious to it's own Perceptions, and Begin to be Conſcious of them in the ſame Place, and at the ſame Time, in which Another Finite Spirit is ſo; Thus, my Beginning to Think, and to be Conſcious of ſuch Thought, in a Certain Time and Place, does not Exclude any other Being from Beginning to Think, and being Conſcious of ſuch Thought, in the ſame Time, and Place; Unleſs it is Affirmed, that no Spirit can Think in the Same Place, where I do, which is Abſurd; ſince it muſt be OWned by this Philoſophy, that Almighty God, or any Angelick Nature may; Or, Unleſ it is Affirmed, that Almighty God cannot make an Angelick Nature, or any other Finite Spirit, Begin to Exiſt at the ſame Time, that I do. FroM whence it ſtill ſcems to be Plain, that the Identity of any Finite Spirit is to be Determined from it's own Nature and Force oſ Perception, Volition, &æ. and not from the Time Alone, when, or from the Place Alone, in which, it Exiſis; Nay Farther, we may as well, and more Truly, Aſicrt the Identity of a Finite Spirit, ſrom the Identity of it's Force of Perception, Volition, &c. tho' Beginning to Exiſt in Diſferent Times and Places, as we may Defend the Identity oſ Finite Spirits from the Time and Place, in which they Exiſt; Since a Finite Spirit, tho Beginning to Exiſt in the ſame Time and Place, may Change and Alter in it's Nature, for all that ve Know of it; and tho' it may be Diſtinct from Others, and have the Principium Individuationis, by which it becomes that Individual Spirit, which it is, yet it may not be Conſtant to it's ſelf, by which it becomes an Identical One; But Identity and the Principium Individuationis ſeem to be not Suſficiently Diſtinguiſhied in this Philoſophy, both which are Fully Aſcertained in what Precedes at the Beginning of the Preſent Section. 5. 28. THE Identity of Matter is not Determined from Time and Place Alone, but from its Internal Being and Conſtitution, and from the Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, which cach Portion Obtains; becauſe the ſame Matter may begin to Exiſt in Diſferent Places, and at Different Times, as Gold, Ivory, Water, &e. As to the Inſtance given oſ a Particle or Atom of Matter, to which no Addition, or Subſtraction is made, that it's ldentity is Defined by the Time and Place, in which it Exiſis, it is True, becauſe the Conſtitution of it is Suppoſed to be the ſame and Unaltered; It is a Portion of Similar Matter, which is Imagined to be its ſelf, and Unvaricd. 5. 29. TuE Identity and Diverſity o?f Modes and Relations are ſaid to be Determined aſter the ſame Manner, that Subſtances are; Iſ thereſore this Philoſophy has not not given us a Jut Account of the Identity of Subſtances, it will be Equally Defi cient in that of the Identity of Modes and Relations, which I ſhall not, for that Reaſon, Particularly Conſider. S. 30. THE Identity of Vegetables, we are Told. Depends not on the ſame Maſi and is not Applied to the ſame Thing; The Reaſon of which is, the Difference be tween an Animate Body and Maſs of Matter; The Laſt being only the Coheſion of Particles any how United3 The Firſt ſuch a Diſpoſition and Organization ol Parts, as is Fit to Receive and Diſtribute Nouriſhment, ſo as to Continue and Frame the Wood, Bark, Leaves, &. of an Oak for Inſtance, in which Conſiſts the Vegetable Life; That therefore, which has ſuch an Organization of Parts Partaking oſ one Common Life, Continues to be the ſame Plant, tho' that Life be Communicated to Nev Particles of Matter, Vitally United to the Living Plant; And it is ſaid, the Caſe is not ſo much Different in Brutes, but that any One may hence See, what Makes an Animal, and Continues it, the Same. IDENTITY therefore here is not Defined by Time and Place, but by a Certain Organization of Parts, Partaking of One Common Life, which is Fit to Frame the Parts of the Individual, and the Notion of Identity is Changed by this Philoſophy into Another, which is Different from the Former 3 Whereas, whatever Being is Denominated the Same, it ſnould Receive that Denomination from One and the Same Reaſon, Otherviſe the Idea of Identity it's ſelf becomes an Idea of Diverſity. ON the other Hand, Suitable to what has been Alledged before Concerning the Identity of Subſtances, we Say, that the Identity of a Plant or a Vegetable Conſiſis, not only in the Time and Place of it's Exiſting, but in it's Peculiar Degree of its Expanſive and Contractive Force, and, if Senſe is Allowed to belong to Vegetables, as it is Confeſſœd in a Cockle and an Oyſter, in it's Peculiar Degree of Perception and Volition, which yet may be Infinitely Below that of the Lat Mentioned Species of Beings. Tus Identity of Brutes therefore muſt be Determined likewiſe from the Various Degrees of their Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and of their Perception and Volition. which Forces of Perception and Volition are Infinitely below thoſe of Men, by which they are only Lazily Carried into Actions, which Tend to the Conſervation of their Beings, but not into the Brisk, Eager, and Lively Ones of Study, or Contemplation, of Forming Laws, and Inſtituting Societies, and the Eſtabliſhing ſeveral Plans and Models of Religion, Polity, and Government. S. 31. THis Philoſophy Proceeds to Explain to us the Identity of a Man and a Perſon, which it has Thought Fit to Diſtinguiſ, and makes no Scruple of ſtill Varying it's Idea of Identity; which is Different, when Applied to a Man, or an Animal Body, and is ſaid to Conſiſt in a Participation of the ſame Continued Life, in Succeeding Particles of Matter Vitally United to the ſame Organized Body, and when to a Perſon, or an Intelligent Being, that Reaſons and Reſlects, and can Conſider it's ſelf the ſame Thing in Different Times and Places, and which is ſaid to Conſiſt in Conſciouſneſs ; And as it Adds alſo, vhen Applied to Subſtances, it is likewiſe Different. But Firſt, as we have already Obſerved, it is very Strange, that a Philoſophy, which Undertakes to Define and Explain to us the Identity of Things, ſhould be ſo Inconſtant in it's Notion of Identity it's ſelf, and ſould make Identity to Conſiſt ſometimes in One Thing, and at other Times in Another; This is the ſame, as to Endeavour to give us an Idea of Identity, by an Idea of Diverſity, or to make Identity Conſiſt in Diverſity; Second, it has without any Manner of Reaſon, and Certainly without any Precedent, made the Man and the Perſon Different3 For whoever Heard, that he who vas ſuch a Man, was not ſuch a Perſon? Nay farther, it goes on to Inform us in Purſuance of this Diſtinction, that the Man is the Human Body, and the Perſon is the Human Soul3 Th' every One hitherto has Imagined, and I Believe, does ſtill Imagine, notwithſtanding this Wiſe and Subtile ColIuſion, that a Man is a Being, Compounded of a Human Body and a Human Soul, or of Organized Matter and of a Mind and Intelligence; And yet according to this Philoſophy, any One may be a very Rational, Learned, and Underſtanding Man, without the leat Thought or Reſlection belonging to him, becauſe the Man is nothing but an Organized Body, and Thought and Reflection is Confined to the Perſon; And on the Contrary, a Perſon may be very Handſome, well Shaped, may Qa q q have have a Good Aſpect, Walk Gracefully, and be Perſonable enough, without either Lincaments, Feature, or Proportion, or any Form or Motion, which he can Boaſt of Becauſe the Body is the Property of the Man, and not of the Perſon. I cannot bui Speak it with a little Kind of Indignation; Is this to Philoſophize? Is this to Rea ſon? Or rather, Is it not to Play the Banterer and Buffoon? Nor do I See what Ac count can be given of ſo Monſtrous and ſo Abſurd a Diſtinction, as That of a Mar from his Perſon, unleſs this Philoſophy, in it's Zeal againſt the Logicks of the An cients, was willing to Ruin and Overturn that Eſtabliied Deſinition of a Man, that he vas animal Rationale, that is, a Being, which Conſiſted of an Organized or Animal Body, and of a Rational and Intelligent Mind; Which it Endeavours to do ſo Effectually, as to make a Man and a Brute the Same, and Both oſ them to bc Nothing more than an Animal Nature. 5 32. LAYING aſide therefore this Ridiculous and Senſcleſs Diſtinction of a Man and a Perſon, Let us now Inquire into the Real Natures, which are Intended by thoſe Names, and the Identity of them; By Man therefore is Mcant a Human Body, and by Perſon a Human Mind or Soul; According to this Philoſophy. As to the Identity of a Human Body, or a Man, it is thus Deſined, an Animal is a Living Organized Body, and the ſame Animal is the ſame Continued Life, Communicated to Diſferent Particles of Matter, as they Happen Succeſſively to be United to that Organized Living Body, and our Notion of Man is but of a Particular Sort of Animal. BuTr What is this Organized Body with the ſame Continued Life Communicated to Diſſerent Particles of Matter, as they happen to be Succeſſively United to it, When the Organs of the Body are Undetermined, and, for all which this Philoſophy knows, may Change every Minute? The Capillary Veins and Arteries, at leaſt, may do this; The Small Nerves and Lympheducts, and Adipoſe Veſſels, likewiſe, may Undergo a Thouſand Alterations, when yet, it ſeems, the whole Syſteme of an Organized Body may be Preſerved the Same; Nay, a Man may Loſe his Organs of Secing, or Hearing, of Taſte, or of Smell, may be Deprived of a Leg, an Arm, or any other Member, or Organ oſ Feeling, and Muſt we yet call this the Same Organized Body: If it is ſaid, the Identity of an Animal or Human Body does not Conſiſt in the Identity of the Organs, but in the Identity or Sameneſs of Life, Communicated to Different Particles of Matter, as they Happen to be United to them We muſt again Inquire, what this Identity or Sameneſs of Life is? Does it Conſiſt in any Diſtinct Life, Spread and Diſfuſed thro' this Organization of Parts, Separate from the Mind? If ſo, what is that Identity of Life, which Ariſes from an Organization, which is Various and Undetermined? To Anſwer the Queſtion, is to Confeſs an Abſurdity; If this Identity of Life is Communicated, not from the Organs themſelves, but from the Mind, from Intelligence, from the Conrſcious and Reflecting Being, the Identity of the Organized Body, or of Man, vill Conſiſt in the Identity of the Perſon, or of the Mind; And then, he that is the Same Man, is the Same Perſon, and Vice Verſà, and this PhiIoſophy will be Obliged to Unite, what it had Took ſuch Pains to Diſtinguiſi. But beſides, vhat Connexion is there berwixt a mere Organized Body, and Perception, Reſlection, and Conſciouſneſs, ſo that a Mans being Conſcious to his Thoughts ſnould give an Identity of Life to the Organs of his Body? All therefore, which this Philoſophy Propoſes, ſeems to be Entirely Romantick, and without any Foundation in Nature or in Reaſon. ON the Contrary, the Identity of a Human Body muſt Conſiſt in the Expanſive and Contractive Forces Peculiar to it, and which are Adapted to the Nature or Degree, and Force of Perception, Volition, &⸗. of the Mind, to which it is United; According to what has been in ſome Meaſure Explained in our Principles of Anatomy; For, let the Organs or Veſſels of the Body be what they will, of One Shape or Another, Fewer or More, we have there Endeavoured to Demonſirate, that the very Formation oſ them muſt be Oving to theſe Forces, and to a Particular Degree and Proportion oſ them; But a Human Body, whilſt Living, cannot Exiſt of it's ſelf without a Mind or Soul to Actuate and Inform it, and therefore the Identity of a Human Body Conſiſis in the Degree of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, by which it's Organs are Formed, in Conjunction with that Peculiar Force of Perception, Volition, &æ. which Contributes it's Influences to the Conſtituting and Making the Same Same Human Body; For there is no Rational Man vill Say, that a Human, Living and Organized Body has no Manner of Connexion with the Mind or the Soul tho' this Philoſophy does in Terms Aſert it. : : ON the other Hand, ĩt is the Same Human Body, when Dead, which we had, whei Alive and Actuated by the Soul; Becauſe, if the Same Soul was Reunited to it, it would Reſume the Same Peculiar Forces and Properties, which it had before, and is no more Diſferent from it's ſclf by an Extinction of thoſc Forces, than a Body at Reſt would be from what it was, when in Motion, or than a Triangle would be Different from it's ſelf, when Circumſcribed by a Circle; For thus, the Human Body is the Same, tho' Conſidered under Different Relations, by which Identity it Obtains ſuch a Degree and Proportion of Force, vhen Informed by the Mind, and ſuch a Degree and Proportion of Quieſcence of it's Parts, vhen Separated from it; And by which it is Diſtinguiſicd from any other Human Body, when ſo Separated from the Soul or Mind, vhich Acts it. lit S. 33. THE Identity of a Perſon, or of that Thinking and Intelligent Being which we Perceive within us, or of the Human Mind or Soul, does not ſcem to Conſiſt in Conſciouſneſs, as this Philoſophy Suggeſts, but in that Particular Forec and Degree of Perception, Volition, &. which is Proper and Peculiar to it, by which it is It's ſelf, and Diſtinct from all Others; And tho' this Force and Degree of Perceprion, Volition, &. may be Varied under Different Circumſtances of Life, as oſ a Diſtemper, or Eating and Drinking to Exceſs, and the like, yet the Human Mind or Soul is the Same, for that very Reaſon, that it is Suſceptible of Alterations, upon an Alteration and Change of Circumſtances; For if Fire was not Increaſed by Fuel, and Extinguiſied by Water, it would not be the Same Fire; If a Square was not Divided into two Triangles by a Diagonal, and into two Parallelograms by a Perpendicular to it's Sides, it would not be the Same Square; On the other Hand, Thoſe, who make Perſonal Identity to Conſiſt in Conſciouſneſs, Lead us into many Abſurdities. : l For Firſt, If ſo far only, as I am Conſcious of my Thoughts, ſo far only I am the Same Perſon, that is, the Same Thinking, Perceptive, and Intelligent Being, or the Same Human Mind or Soul, the Same Human Mind or Soul will become Dirferent every Day, and almoſt every Hour, and Minute, of our Lives, and every Human Mind or Soul will be Split and Diſtinguiſhed into a Thouſand Different Ones; Thus, Ten Years ago, I vas Conſcious to ſeveral Thoughts and Actions, which now I have Entirely Forgot, and cannot by any Ways or Methods of RecolIection Recover; Nay even Yeſterday, I had many Thoughts, which I do not now Remember; And it is not an Hour ſince, that ſeveral Ideas Paſſed thro my Mind, which at Preſent wholly Eſcape me; and it is but a Minute, from the Time, vhen I Red ſeveral Periods in Demoſthenes, of which I was then Conſcious, tho' I cannot at this very Juncture Repeat One of them; I therefore Ask, whether my Perſon, or vhich is all One, whether my Soul or Mind is the Same, which it was Ten Years ago, Yeſterday, an Hour ſince, a Minute, or not; If it is the Same, Then the Identity of my Soul or Mind does not Conſiſt in what I am Conſcious of; Becauſe Iam not Conſcious of a Million of Things, which were at thoſe Times Preſent to my Mind, and of vhich I now Know nothing; If it is not the Same, Then this Soul or Mind, which I Poſſcſs, is the Same, when yet it is Acknowledged to be not the Same; It is the Same, Becauſe I am Conſcious of ſomething, which Paſſed Ten or Twenty Years ago, hich Joins and Connects that Intelligent Being with That, of Which Iam now Conſcious; But it is not the Same, Becauſe there have been Intervals of Time betwixt That and the Preſent, of which Iam not any ways Conſcious; So that by this Way of Determining the Identity of the Human Mind or Soul, it is Connected with What it was, Ten or Twenty Years ago, and in all the Intermediate Time, oſ vhich it is not Conſcious, ĩt is Unconnected with it; That is, the Mind is the Same or not, According, as it Remembers, or Forgets; the Ideas, which have Paſſed in it, which is to the utmoſt Degree Irrational and Abſurd. SECOND, IF Conſciouſneſs makes the Mind or Soul the Same, if that Conſciouſneſs Reſides in the little Finger, the Soul or Mind would be Same, as it is now, and is what this Philoſophy Conſeſles; And for the ſame Reaſon it might as well Affirm, that iſ the ſad Conſciouſneſs Reſided in the Pen, I Write with, it would be Qq qq2 the the Same Human Soul; Which are ſuch Extravagant Aſſertions, and ſo Contrary to Nature, that no Philoſophy would ever have Taken it into it's Head, or it's Finger, to have Propoſed ſuch Romantick Fancies, unleſs ſuch a One, which is ſo Remarkable for Them; Since it is Unreaſonable to Affirm, that the Perſon, or the Intelligent Being is the Same, where the Subſtances are Various, to which it is Annexed; For the ſame Properties of Thought, Conſciouſneſs, &. cannot Reſult from Different Principles or Subſtances, th this Philoſophy would Perſuade us, that it will be the ſame whether Derived from a Material or an Immaterial Subſtance, whether it Reſides in the Head, or in the Finger, Separated and Cut off from the Body; But what can be more Extravagant and Unnatural, than to Take Properties from Things, in which they Really Exiſt, and Affix them to Thoſe, in which they never did, nor could? Conſciouſneſs is only One Property of the Mind amongſt ſeveral Others, and is beſides a General Term, which, vhen Abſtracted from the Subſtance, in which it Inheres, is the Same, and as Ridiculous, as if we ſiould Abſtract the Heat of the Fire from the Subſtance of it, and Place it in the Subſtance of Water or Ice, or the Yellowneſs and Extenſion of Gold, from it's Subſtance, and Place it in That of a Cork or a Feather. TumDb, if Conſciouſneſs makes the Mind or Soul the Same, it will be Differemt under a Diſtraction, an Exceſs of Wine, or in Sleep, from what it is in a State of Wakefullneſs, or of Sobriety; Becauſe in the Latter Caſe, it is not Conſcious of what was done in the Former; To Solve this Difficulty, the Preſent Philoſohy Diſtinguiſies betwixt the Man and the Perſon, and Tells us, that tho' in theſe Caſes, the Man is the Same, it may not be the Same Perſon; Or, according to it's own Explanations, there is, in theſe Circumſtances, the Same Human Body, but not the Same Human Soul; So that a Man is Mad, or Drunk, or A-Sleep with One Soul, and Awake and Sober with Another; Than which, what can be more Notable, or more Profound? To Juſtify yet this Way of Reaſoning. we are Referred to ſome Engliſb Phraſes, or Ways of Speaking, of a Man's being not Himſelf, or beſides Himſeſf, by which it is Inſinuated, that Self is Changed, and the Self-ſame Perſon is no Longer in that Man; But if we ſay, ſuch a Man, or Perſon, is Diſordered in his Mind, I Suppoſe the Engliſb is as Good, and the Phraſe as Common; Which yet Preſumes the Man and Perſon to be the Same, and that he has the Same Mind or Soul, tho' its Povers and Faculties are Diſturbed by ſome Foreign and External Impreſſions. FouTRH, if Perſonal Identity is the Object of Reward and Puniſhiment, that is, Conſciouſneſs, or the Thinking, Intelligent, Being within us, the Chriſtian Religion is Falſe in One of it's Fundamental Articles; which Teaches the Reſurrection of the Same Body; and that the Perſon, which ſhall be Rewarded or Puniſhed in another World, does not Conſiſt of the Mind only, but of a Soul and a Body, which ſhall be Reunited, and Jointly Receive the Sentence, which ſnall be then Pronounced by the Supreme Judge, of Eternal Happineſs, or Eternal Miſery. BuT, Revelation Apart, what can be more In ongruous or Diſſonant to Reaſon, than to Imagine, Firſt, that Conſciouſneſs ſhall be Rewarded or Puniſhed, and not the Soul, and all it's Faculties, in which ſuch Conſciouſneſs Reſides, whether ſuch Soul or Intelligence Forgets or Remembers it's Thoughts or Actions? Or Second, that the Soul ſhall be Revarded or Puniſhed, and not the Whole Man, as Compounded of Soul and Body, ſince not the One in Diſtinction from the Other, but the whole Compounded Being was the Innocent, or the Criminal? Thus, in the Firſt Caſe, it vould be but a Lame and Defective Kind of Juſtice amongt Men. not to Revard or Puniſ Real Actions, according to the Intrinſick Virtue, or Malignancy of them, whether the Perſons, whoſe they are, are Conſcious of, or Remember them, or not; And in the Second, we ſhould Take it to be a Partial Diſtribution of it, to Revard or Puniſi a Mans Mind only, by Imparting Joy or Affliction to it, without making Uſe of thoſe Revards or Puniſments, which are, or may be, Termed Corporal, and vhich Affect the Mind and Body in Conjunction; For Inſlance in Puniments, in which Human Laws Chiefly and Principally Exert themſelves, Suppoſing any One has been Guilty of Murder, would it not be a very Ingenious and Philoſophick Doctrine to a Judge, and a very Agreeable One to the ſiuſſine, to Plead in Open Court, that Perſonal Identity is only the Object of Puniſment, that is, the Mind or Soul of the Man, that his Body thereſore is to be be Excuſed from any Penalty to be Inflicted upon it; and tho' ic may Deſerve to be Pained and Grieved in his Mind, he does not Deſerve to be Treated in the Rough Manner, which Perhaps Laws, and the Reaſon of Mankind, would, and in Fact do, Preſcribe in ſo Wicked a Crime? S. 34. As to Proportional Relations, This Philoſophy Tells us, that all Simple I deas, wherein are Parts or Degrees, Afford an Occaſion of Comparing the Subjects, wherein they are, to One Another, in Reſpect of thoſe Simple Ideas, as Whiter, Sweeter, More, Leſs, &. Which, Depending on the Equality and Exceſs of the ſame Simple Idea in ſeveral Subjects, may be Called Proportional Relations; Whereas, it is Impoſſible, that the ſame Simple Idea ſould Admit of Parts or Degrees, or of Equality or Exceſs, if it is the ſame Simple ldea; Thus White, Sweet, and Quantity or Extenſion, are Simple, General, and Abſtracted Ideas, and as they are Simple, General, and Abſtracted Ideas, do not Admit of any Variation in Parts or Degrees; But when the Mind comes to make it's Compariſon of the Ideas of White, Sweet, Quantity or Extenſion, it Forms it's Relations of Whiter, Sweeter, More, or Leſs, from Obſerving Particular Ideas, which are Different in themſelves, and not from an Increaſing or Diminiſhing it's Simple or Abſtracted Idea of White, Sweet, Quantity or Extenſion, by it's ovn Power of Framing ſuch an Increaſe or Diminution of them. l 5. 35. NATURAL Relations, as Father, Son, Brother, &c. are ſaid to Ariſe from an Occaſion of Comparing Things, Taken from the Circumſtances of their Origine; Inſtituted or Voluntary, as General, Captain, Burgher, &. from ſome Act, whereby any One comes by a Moral Right, Power, or Obligation, to do Something; The Laſt are Alterable, and Separable from the Perſons, to whom they ſometimes beIonged, tho Neither of the Subſtances ſo Related be Deſtroyed 3 The Fir©t not ſo, but are as Laſting, as their Subjects. TuESE being Little more than Definitions of Terms, there is Little more to be ſaid Concerning them, Excepting, That the Mind does not Form theſe Complex Ideas from it's Comparing of Simple Ideas, but Receives them Complex from Experience and Obſervation, and then by Reflection and Reaſon Diſtinguiſhes them into the ſeveral Parts, of which they are Compoſed. We the rather take Notice of this here; Becauſe this Philoſophy had made the Mind a Raſa Tabula, or a Blank Paper, or an Empty and Void Room without any Furniture, which therefore it was to SupPly; And this is done by Storing it with it's Simple Ideas from Senſation and Refieẽtion, and from thence Deriving it's Complex Ones3 On the Contrary we ſay, that what this Philoſophy Terms Simple Ideas, arc Abſtracted Ones, as Colour, Sound, Extenſion, &e. and therefore are not Firſt in the Mind, but are Made by it; And on the other Hand, what it Names Complex Ideas, are Reccived Whole, and Compounded into the Mind, and are afterwards Separated into the Simple Ideas, or the Particulars, of which they Conſiſt. 5. 36. MORAL Relations are Affirmed to be Derived from the Conformity or Diſagreement of our Voluntary Actions to a Rule, to which they are Referred, and by which they are Judged of; This Conformity or Diſagreement of our Actions to ſome Lav, whereby Good or Evil is Drawn on us from the Will and Power of the Law-maker, and is what we call Reward or Puniſhment, is That, which Renders our Actions Morally Good or Evil3 OF which Moral Rules or Laws there are Three Sorts with their Different Enforcements; Firſt, the Divine Lav, whether Promulgated to us by the Light of Nature, or the Voice of Revelation; That there is ſuch a Law is Concluded, from God's Right to give us One, who are his Creatures; from his Goodneſs and Wiſdom to Direct our Actions to what is Beſt; and ſrom his Pover to Enforce it by Reward and Puniſiment of Infinite Weight and Duration; And this Law, or Rule, is ſaid to be the only True Touchſtone of Moral Rectitude, by which Men Judge of the moſt Conſiderable Moral Good or Evil of their Actions, and by which they are Denominated Duties or Sins, which are like to Procure them Happineſs, or Miſery, from the Hands of the Almighty. Second, the Civil Lav, or the Rule Set by the Common Wealth, to the Actions of Thoſe, that belong to it, which has it's Peculiar Reards and Puniſhments to Enforce it, as the Protecting, or Taking away, of Life, Liberty, and Eſtate, of Thoſe, vho Obſerve or Diſobey it, and by which our Actions are Termed Innocent, or Criminal. Third, sa; av Lav of Opinion or Repuration; Or, which is the ſame, the Law of Fahion; Which has likewiſe it's Enforcements from the Praiſe or Blame, which Attends thoſle Action: which are Conformable to it, or Swerve and Deviate from it And by which they are Defined to be Virtues or Vices; For tho' Virtue and Vice are Names Suppoſec every where, to Stand for Actions in their own Nature, Right and Wrong, yer ſt far, as they are ſo Applied, they are ſo far Coincident with the Divine Lav3 Anc it is Viſible, that theſe Names in the Particular Inſtances oſ theit Applicat on, ihiro the ſeveral Nations and Societies of Men, are Conſtantly Attributed only to ſuch Actions, as in each Country and Society, are in Reputation or Diſcredit; For tho' that Paſſes for Virtue in one Place, which is elſewhere Accounted Vice, yet every where Virtue and Praiſe, Vice and Blame, go together; Virtue is every where, thar, which is Thought Praiſe-worthy, and they have ſo Cloſe an Alliance, that they are often Called by the ſame Name; Tis yet ſaid, that Virtue and Vice do in a Creat Meaſure every where Correſpond with the Unchangeable Rule of Right and Wron⸗, which the Laws of God have Eſtabliſied, becauſe the Obſervation oſ theſle Laws Viſibly Secures, and Advances, the General Good of Mankind, and the Neglect oſ them Breeds Miſchief and Conſuſion. MORALITY therefore being Nothing, but a Reſerence of our Actions to thieſe Laws or Rules, and theſe Rules being Nothing but a Collection of ſcveral Simple Ideas, the Conſormity thereto is but ſo Ordering the Action, that the Simple Ideas belonging to it, may Correſpond to thoſe, which the Lav Requires; ſrom whence it is ſaid to be Plain, hov Moral Beings and Notions are Founded on, and Terminated in, the Simple Ideas of Senſation and Reſlection3 Thus, in the Complex Idea of Murder; From Reſlection we have the Simple Ideas of Willing, Conſidering, Purpoſing, Malice, &e. Alſo of Liſe, Perception, and Self-Motion; From Senſation we have the Ideas of Man, and the Action of Killing him; This Collection of Ideas, when Referred to the Firſt Rule or Lav, according as it Agrees, or Diſagrees with it, we call Good or Evil, a Sin or a Duty; when to the Second, Lawful or Unlawful, Innocent or Criminal; and when to the Third, Praiſe-or Blame- worthy, Virtuous, or Vicious. Ir is ſarther ſaid, that Moral Actions may be Conſidered tvo Ways; Firſt, as they are in themſelves a Collection oſ Simple Ideas, in which Senſe they are Poſitive, Abſolute Ideas; Second, as Good, or Bad, or Indifferent, in which Reſpect they are Relative, it being their Conformity or Diſagreement with ſome Rule, that makes them be ſo; Both which are Comprehended under one Name, which often Occaſions Confuſion, and Miſleads the Judgment, as Stealing a Madman's Sword from him is Stealing, but not Vicious or Criminal; Thus far the Preſent Philoſophy. IN Anſver to which, we Alledge. FirsT, that what is here Meant by Moral Relations, is no more than this, that Moral Actions are nothing elſe but Human Actions Referred to ſome Lav or Rule, by which they become Moral, whereas, as Human, they are in themſclves Indifferent, whether Murder, Theft, Adultery, &e. that is, there is no Intrinſick Good or Evil in our Actions, and the laſt Named arc Nothing more than the Turn of a Hand, or the Writing on this Paper, unleſs ſo far as they are Referred to a Rule, by which they are Denominated Duties or Sins, Innocent or Criminal, Virtuous or Vicious, according to their Agreement or Diſagreement with the Divine Law, the Civil, or the Law oſ Faſhion, to which the Reference is ſeverally Made. Bur, Suppoſing no Revelation Promulgated to Mankind, and no Natural Religion Proved, and no Ciil Laws Enacted to Preſcribe to our Actions, and Fahion had Determined nothing in the Caſe, vould there be no Intrinſick Difference betwixt Virtue and Vice, betwixt Murder or Malice, and the Preſervation of a Man's Life or Benevolence? And without any of theſe Rules, vould not the Former be Odious and Abominable, and the Laſt Virtuous and Good? Human Actions, withour any Reference to a Poſitive Law, are as much Diſtinguiſed into Good or Evil from the Nature oſ them, as Colours are into Beautiful and Ugly; Or any other Qualities in Bodies into thoſe, which are Agrecable, or Unpleaſant and Diſtaſteful3 And we may as Juſtly Affirm, that Malice and Benevolence are the ſame, and that there is no Diſiinction betwixt them, as that the One is as Good as the Other, and as Innocent nocent and Virtuous, if ihere is no Reference made to a Lav, by which we ſhoulc Judge of them. SECOND, if we Refer our Actions to a Lav; by which it is to be Determined whether they be Really Good or Evil, Virtuous or Vicious, Innocent or Criminal, there can be no other than the Divine, or That, which is Ackno wledged to be the Revealed Will of God, whether in the Scriptures, or from Nature; God's Will to Mankind, as Revealed to us in the Chriſtian Syſteme, is Definite and Certain, and tho there have been an Infinite Number of Diſputes Concerning ſome Doctrines in it, thoſe Generally Ariſe from Genius's, vho are more Willing to Speculate upon, than to Practice, the Truths of it; The Scope, Deſign, and Intention of it is on all Hands Confeſſed, and it's Fundamental Articles of Faith are almoſt every where Acknowledged; And it is as Clear and Punctual in the Whole, as any Rule or Law can vell be; Which yer, were it never ſo Explicit and Plain, might be Perverted and Miſinterpreted by Corrupt, or by Weak Minds, and from which no Rule or Lav whatſocver is Secure. Gon's Will to Mankind, as it is Revealed in Nature, is much more Intricate and Obſcure, and it will Require Vaſt Attention and Pains to Diſcover it, becauſe it is Impoſſible for us even to Kno, that there is ſuch a Being, unleſs from the Nature of the Works and Operations, which are Suppoſed to be Derived ſrom him, that is, unleſs we Enter into the Depths of Reaſon and Philoſophy. As to the Light of Nature, which is here Mentioned by this Philoſophy, and ſeems to be Preferred to the Voice of Revelation, both as it has the Preſerence in Place, and as a Man would ſooner Chooſe to be Enlightened in a Thing, than barely Told it, for his Information; I Say, as to the Light of Nature, vhich this Philoſophy Eſpouſes, it is much the ſame, as the Light Within of the Enthuſiaſis, which Conſiſts in nothing more than in Conceit, and in a Proſound Ignorance of what Chriſtianity is on the one Hand, or Nature on the other. Tnis Light of Nature therefore, or this Law of Reaſon, ve Reject from being a Divine Lav, becauſe Reaſon, as the Light of Enthuſiaſts, is a Vain and Deſultory Buſineſs, and ĩs little elſe than the Various Fancies of Men, with which they are Pleaſed, and then Stamp the Sacred Character of Divine upon them; Moreover, how can Reaſon, in the beſt Senſe of it, Aſſume the Attribute of Divine? Since the Stricteſt Reaſon Depends upon Perception, Memory, Judgment, &c. hich are all Human and Uninſpired; Unleſs therefore, hat is Human is Divine, the Lav oſ Reaſon or of Nature is no Divine Law; Laſtly, as Reaſon is Fallible in Ten Thouſand Inſtances, of which we have given ſome Examples in our Inquiry into the Preſent Sentiments of Philoſophers, it would be Unjuſt and Derogatory to the Divine Mind, to Charge all the Errors and Frailties of the Human upon it; Which we muſt do, if we make our Poor and Imperfect Reaſon a Light Within, ſet up by Almighty God in our Minds, and to be nothing Leſs than a Ray of the Divinity. IN Reſpect of the Divine Lav it is ſaid, that it ſeems Undeniable, that God has given us ſuch a Law; But the Arguments to Prove it are Weak and Inconcluſive; For God may have a Right to do it, as we are his Creatures, and yet may not have done it, ſince it is Confeſſed he has not done it to mere Brutes or Animals, which not vithſtanding are OWned to be his Creatures; He may have Goodneſs and Wiſdom to Direct our Actions to what is Beſt, and yet he may not have Thought Proper ſor Reaſons Unknown to us, to Exert ſuch Wiſdom and Goodneſs in that Particular, but might Leave us to the Liberty of our ovn Actions, as is the Caſe, with Reſpect to the Inferior Part of his Creation; He has Power to Enforce his Las by Revards and Puniſhments, of Inſinite Weight and Duration, but it is not Evinced by this Philoſophy, that he has Determined and Reſolved to Exerciſe ſuch a Pover; All thereſore, which is here ſaid, to Prove the Certainty and Undeniableneſs of a Divine Law is only this, that becauſe it is in the Power of Almighty God to Enact ſuch a Lav, therefore he has in Fact done it. Had Chriſtianity Argued ſo Oſcitantly and Lazily for the Truth of it's Divinity, as this Philoſophy has done for the Light of Nature, and the Lav of Reaſon, it would have been Deſervedly Scouted and Ridiculed, for Impoſing upon Men's Faith, without Convincing their Underſtanding. Ox§ ON the Contrary, the Evidences for the Divine Law of Revelation Depend upon Hiſtorical Facts, which cannot be Conteſted, on Prophecies, and the Completion of them, which cannot be Refuted, and on a Written, not an Oral Tradition, which no Man in his Wits, or his Senſes, vould not Aſſent to. TuE Evidences for the Divine Law, Collected and Inferred from Nature, are thoſe; which Ariſe from an Induſtrious and Diligent Inquiry into it, from ſome Certain Knovledge or other of it, and not from a Superficial Syſteme of Ideas, which Profeſſes, not to Meddle with, or Inquire into, the very Nature of the Mind, or of any Thing Elſe, only Deſires, it may be Allowed to give an Hiſtory, which Indeed is a Romance, of it; That is, this Philoſophy Takes a Method, which is the Reverſe of a True One, it would Reduce the Divine Law of Revelation to the Evidences of Reaſon, which is to be Aſcertained by Fact and by Hiſtory, and the Divine Lav of Reaſon, to the Evidences of Hiſtory, in which yet it is Wonderſully Miſtaken, which ought to be Aſcertained by Nature and Philoſophy. TuniæD, the Civil Law, or the Law of the Common Wealth, is ſaid to be a Second Rule, to which Men Referr their Actions, by which they are Termed Innocent or Criminal; It is True, if by Innocent and Criminal, is Meant no more than ſuch Actions, which Correſpond with, or Offend againſt ſuch a Rule; For then it is only to Say, that Actions which do Agree with the Rule, do Agree with it, and thoſe which do not, do not, which is a very Wiſe, as well as a moſt Indiſputed, Axiom; But if by Innocent and Criminal is Mcant what is Really Good or Evil, Virtuous or Vicious, it is Exceedingly Falſe, becauſe nothing can Determine what is ſo, but the Law of Revelation, or of Nature; Since the Civil Law, or that of a Common Wealth, Depends upon the Uncertain Tempers, Inclinations, and Intereſts of Men, which in Various Countries, Climates, and Circumſtances, are Different, and therefore can be no Certain Standard of what is Really Innocent or Criminal ; Laws may be Enacted, which are Unjuſt and Unrighteous in themſelves, and which, it would be ſo far from being Innocent, that it would be Criminal, to Obey 3 And therefore the Civil Law, or the Law of a Common Wealth, cannot be a Juſt Rule for our Ations; Which is ſo far True, that even the very ſame Socicties of Men Repeal and Diſannul their ovn Laws, or Decrees. FourTH, the Lav of Opinion, Reputation, or Fahion, is Affirmed to be a Third Rule, to which we Refer our Actions, and by which they are made to be Virtuous, or Vicious; TO which it is Anſwered, in like Manner, as before;3 That, If Virtue and Vice do not Signify Actions in their ovn Nature Good and Evil, this Philoſophy only Says, that thoſe Actions Meet with Blame, which Meet with the Diſlike of the Society, and thoſec with Praiſe, which Meet with the Approbation and Applauſe of it, which is a very Certain Truth, but a very Silly One; If Virtue and Vice do Signify Actions, in their own Nature, Good and Evil, it is not True, that Virtue and Praiſe, Vice and Blame go together; Becauſe in a Greater, or a Leſs, Society of Men, a Really Good Action may be Blamed and Reproved, and an Ill One Countenanced and Encouraged. FiPTH, MoOral Beings and Notions arc nor Founded on, and Terminated in, the Simple Ideas of Senſation and Reflection; Becauſe, in the Inſtance of Murder, we do not Compound ſuch an Idea from ſeveral Simple Ones already Lodged in the Mind, and then Refer it to a Rule, but we Receive the whole Complex Idea at Once, and afterwards by Conſideration and Refiection, Separate and Divide it into it's ſcveral Parts, of which it is Made up; And we ſay it is a Bad Action, tho we do not Immediately Think of God'sor Men's Diſpleaſure or Diſlike to it; and we ſould Pronounce it the Action of a Baſc; 'a Villainous, and lll Temper, tho' the Laws of God, or the Decrees and Opinions of Men, were Silent in the Matter, for the ſame Reaſon that Malice is not Benevolence, nor Black, White, nor a Triangle, a Square or a Circle. S 37. WE ſall not ſay much of this Chapter, it being little more than Naming our Ideas, and Making a Diſtinction of them without a Difference; For there ſeems to be no Reaſon for the Difference Alledged betwixt Clear and Diſtinct, and Obſcure and Conſuſed; ſince, I Believe, it may be Generally Affirmed of them, that thoſe, which are Clear, are Diſtinct, and Vice Verſa; and that on the Contrary, thoſe, which are Obſcure, are Confuſed, and Vice Verſa3 Thus a Clear Idea is Defined to be, when it ĩs ſuch, as the Object it's ſelf, from Whence it is Taken, did in a well Ordered Senſation Senſation or Perception Preſent it, which is done in a Diſtinct Idea, a Diſtinct Idea That, wherein the Mind Perceives a Difference from all Others, which it does in: Clear Idea. As to what is Mentioned of a Chiliaedrum, being Clear and Diſtinct in Reſpec to the Number of it's Sides, but Obſcure and Confuſed as to its Figure; we ſay, 100c in Number is Diſtinct from 999, as they are Abſtracted Collections of Units, but æ 1000 Sides in the Chiliaedrum is not Diſtinguable from 999 in a Polygone of thoſ Sides, and therefore the Numbers, ſo far as they arc Applicd to Polygones, arc Equally Obſcure and Confuſed with the Figures. 5. 38. REAL ldeas are ſaid to be ſuch, as have a Foundation in Nature, ſuch as have a Conformity with the Real Being and Exiſtence of Things, or with their Archetypes. FANTASTICAL, ſuch as have no Foundation in Nature, nor any Conformity with that Reality of Being, to which they are Referred, as to their Archetypes. ALL our Simple Ideas are Affirmed to be Real, not that they are Images or Patterns of what does Exiſt, but as they are the Certain Effects of Powers in Things without us, which are the Cauſes of them, whereby we Diſiinguiſ the Qualities, that are Really in Things themſelves. OF Complex Ideas, Mixed Modes and Relations, having no other Reality, than what they have in the Minds of Men, nothing elſe,tis Alledged, is Required to make them Real, but a Poſſibility of Exiſting Conformable to them; and being themſelves Archetypes, they do not Differ from their Archetypes, and ſo cannot be Chimerical, unleſs we Join in them Ideas, which are Inconſiſtent, or Aſfix a Name to them, which has not Uſually that Signification. COMPLEX Ideas of Subſtances are alſo ſaid to be Real, ſo far as they are ſuch Combinations of Simple Ideas, as are Really United and Coexiſt in Things without us; Thoſc Fantaſtical, which are made up of ſeveral Ideas, that never were found United, as Centaur, &e. Thus far the Preſent Syſteme. ON the Contrary; If we vill Diſtinguiſh our Ideas into Real and Fantaſtical; All thoſe ſcom to be Real Ideas, vhether Simple or Complex, which we Receive from Nature, either from Things without us, or from the Operations of our own Minds, and according, and in the ſame Manner, as they are Impreſſed, that is, all our Real Ideas are only Real Effects Produced in the Mind from Real Cauſes; Thus, a Table, a Fire, a Plant, or a Tree, a Man, the Mind, Volition, Perception, Memory, Father, Brother, Gratitude, Murder, &. are Real Ideas, or any Other Idea, which comes into the Mind, as Received and Derived from Nature; Fantaſtical Ideas, on the other Hand, are ſuch, which are made by the Pleaſure of the Will, or the Strength and Force of the Imagination and Fancy. Tnus, If wve make any Simple ldea to be the Pattern, Image, or Repreſentation, of the Thing it's ſelſ, it is a Fantaſtical Idea; Becauſe we only Receive from Nature the Impreſſion of the Idea, and the Power of Impreſſing it; I? we make à Simple Idea to Enter into the Mind, Separate and by it's ſelf, which always is United and Combined vith Others in the Impreſſion, ſuch a Simple Idea is a Fantaſtical One, becauſe ĩt is OWing to our own Fancy and Imagination, and not tò Naturc; If alſo this Simple Idea is an Abſtracted One, it is a Creature of the Mind, and not the Product oſ Nature, and thereſore again Fantaſtical; If Laſtly, we make this Simple Idea to be Impreſtd upon the Mind by External Objects, and the Mind t6 be a Raſa Tabula only, and not as Active in Receiving the Impreſſion as the External Object in Impreſſing it, it is a Fantaſtical One, and not Agrecable to the Natural Forces, vhich Produce itt. And yet theſe are the Ideas of this Philoſophy. AND in Reſpect of Complex Ideas; Mixed Modes, and Relations of Things, are Real Ideas, as Gratitude, Murder, Father, Brother, &. becauſe they are Idcas Derived to us from the Real Exiſtence of ſuch Actions and Perſons, and not from a Poſſibility of their Exiſtience; For, if they had no Other Reality, than what they have in the Minds of Men, if they were only Archetypes there, that is, Compiex I deas of our own Creating and Forming, without any orher Foundation in Nature, they would be Fantaſtical Ideas; Since, if a Poſſibility of Exiſtence was only Required to the Reality of ſuch Ideas, a Centaur or a Chimera might be a Real Idea, becauſe no One ill Say it is Impoſſible for a Monſter to be Produced in i Rrr: thę tho it is Acknowledged, that ſuch Ideas are Fantaſtical; Beſides, it is Abſurd, to Make the Reality of an Idea, in the Caſe of Simple Ideas, to Conſi©t in it's having a Foundation in Nature, and in the Caſe of Complex, to Conſiſt in it's having no Foundation in it, but wholly to Conſiſt in it's Exiſtence in the Mind; The Reaſon yet of this is Plain; Becauſe this Philoſophy of Ideas was to Form all it's Complex Ideas out of Simple Ones, and to Make both of them Real, otherwiſe the whole Contrivance, and all the Ideas of it, had been Fantaſtical; But whether, or no, it has not Incurred this Imputation, by the very Way, which it Endeavours to Avoid it, may be eaſily Scen, by what we Juſt now Offered to Prove and to Evince it; Since all its Ideas, both Simple and Complex, for the Reaſons Alledged above, as they are the Creatures of the Mind, and not the Effects and Impreſſions of Nature, are Really Chimerical and Fantaſtical Tnus likewiſe, our Ideas of Subſtances are Real, ſo far as they are Impreſſions Derived from Nature, and the Exiſtence of Things; But, when the Mind makes Subſtances to Conſiſt in Certain Subſtratums or Eſſences, which it Knows nothing of, and then Joins a Parcel of Qualities to them, which, it is Suppoſed, Flow from them, but How, or in what Manner, is Undetermined, our Ideas of Subſtances become Fantaſtical; and ſuch are the Ideas of Subſtances in the Preſent Philoſophy. S. 39. APTER this Philoſophy had Diſtinguiſhed it's Ideas into Real and Fantaſtical, which we have Conſidered in the foregoing Section, it Divides it's Real Ideas into Adequate or Inadequate; Adequate are ſaid to be Thoſe, which Perfectly Repreſent thoſc Archerypes, which the Mind Suppoſes them Taken from, and which it makes them to Stand for; Inadequate, Thoſe, which are ſuch, as do but Partially or Incompletely Repreſent thoſe Archetypes, to which they are Referred. ALL our Simple Ideas are ſaid to be Adequate, as being the Effects of Certain Powers Ordained to Produce them in us, which cannot but be Adequate and Correſpondent to ſuch Povers. ALL Complex Ideas of Modes, as Virtue, Vice, a Lie, Murder, being Voluntary Collections of Simple Ideas put together by the Mind, without Reference to any Real Archetypes, muſt be Adequatę, and can only be Inadequate, vhen we wouſũ Conform them to Thoſe of another Perſon, to which yet they do not Agree; Out Ideas of Subſtances, if by that is Meait Cerrain Eſſences of Things, which are Unknown, or a Collection of Senſible Qualities, which will be alvays Imperfect, ate Inadequate ; Thus far the Preſent Philoſophy. ON the other Hand, Simple Ideas are ſaid to be Adequate for the ſame Reaſon, for which they were before Affirmed to be Real, and therefore Real and Adequate, in this Caſe, are not Diſtinguiſed; and in one Suppoſition rhey are not, for if the Idea is a Real Effect of a Cauſe which Produces it, it muſt be an Effecdtt Adequate to the Cauſc; That is, the Idea, which is Produced in the Mind, as an Effect, by the Mind it's ſelf and the External Impreſſion upon it, as the Joint Cauſe of ſuch an Effect, muſt be Adequate, the One to the ther; But this is not the Meaning or Intention of this Philoſophy, which Suppoſes :he Mind to be a Raſa Tabula, or Merely Paſſive in it's Perceptions, and External Objects or Bodies to be Active upon, and to Imprint or Engrave their ſeveral Characters in it; We ſay therefore in ſuch a Suppoſition, that the Idea or Effect is nor Adequate to the External Object or the Cauſe; ſince it is Impoſſible, that External Body ſhould Produce any Idea or Senſation in us, unleſs there was ſome Original Percep tive and Active Force in the Mind, which Concurred, and was Aſſiſtant to the Production; And it is Surprizing in this Philoſophy, that it makes Body Active, which is Deſined, and Eſtcemed by it, to be Paſſive, and the Mind, or Principle of it, Paſſive, which is known to be Adtive; and all to Favour it's New Syſteme of Ideas, which is to Explain and Unravel the Grand Myſtery, or the Great Falſehood, to us, how the Mind, as a Raſa Tabula, becomes Replete with all it's Furniture; and which is done by a Thouſan d Contradictions: Of which this is One, which we have Mentioned. A-aN, if we Refer our Simple Ideas, as they Lie in the Mind to the Objects which are Suppoſed to Produce them, in Reſpect of the Similituc le, or Likeneſs, ol the One to the Other, they are Inadequate; our Ideas not beingt he Repreſentation: j o or Reſemblances of Things themſelves, but only the Effects of Certain Powers in the Mind and Body to Produce them, and in which Particular only they beconie Adequate to each Other; SO that, ſo far as Simple Ideas are Adequate, they are Real, and on the Contrary; And ſo far as they are Inadequate, they arc Fantaſtical; and Vice Verſa.- j CoMPLEX Modes, if they are only Voluntary Collections of Simple Ideas, as they are Aſfirmed to be, can neither be Adequate nor Inadequate; becauſe they are not Capable of being Compared with any Thing, as being theit own Archetypes, they are Originals Themſelves, and therefore cannot be Referred to Any; But would another Philoſophy, beſides the Preſent, make Virtue, Vice, Gratitude, a Lie, Murder, &, only Voluntary, or Arbitrary, Collections of Simple Ideas? Is there no Foundation in Nature oſ Them, to which when they Correſpond, they may be ſaid to be Adequate, and when they do not, Inadequate? Thus, in it's own Inſtance of Murder, it ſeems Unreaſonable to make a Collection of all the Ideas of Benevolence and Goodneſs, and then give it that Denomination, this vould be far from being an Adequate Idea of it; and yet, according to this Syſteme, we may do this, becauſe it is a Voluntary Collection of Ideas, to which we may Aſſix, what Name we Pleaſe; There is no One Doubts, but Names are Arbitrary, and ve may, if we Think Fit to be ſo Fooliſh, call Virtue Vice, and Benevolence Murder; But, this will not yet Evince, that the Ideas themſclves are Arbitrary, and that they are not Settled and Determined by Nature; There is now Probably ſome where, or has been at leaſt, ſuch an Action amongſt Men, by which a Period is put to another Man's Life, tho' Innocent and Undeſerving of ſuch an Uſage, with the Great Injury, and a Malice Prepenſe, in the Aggreſſor; If we Take in all the Circumſtances and Qualities of this Action, as it Really and Truly Exiſted, ve have an Adequate Idea of it; But if we Omit any, or Add others, which did not belong to it, it becomes Inadequate to it; And if e call this Action Murder, we may in this Senſe have an Adequate, or Inadequate, Idea of it; If farther we Strike out of this Idea any Immaterial Circumſtances, hich Attend it, as the Manner or Way, in which ſuch Action was Performed, or by Whom, &c. our Idea of Murder then becomes General, and it is Adequate or Inadequate, as ve Retain all the Eſſential Properties of it, or not; From whence it is Apparent; that our ldeas of Murder, or of any other Virtuous or Vicious Action, are not Voluntary or Arbitrary Collections of Ideas, but are Ideas, which are Derived from the Real Exiſtence of Human Actions, and are Adequate or Inadequate, as they Agree, or Diſagree, with the Reality and Exiſtence of ſuch Actions, and have as much a Foundation in Nature, as our Ideas of Subſtances themſelves; It is alſo Evident, that of theſe Complex Modes, Thoſe, which are Adequate, are Real Ideas, and Thoſe, which are Inadequate, are Fantaſtical; We muſt here Add, that, vhen ve Refer our Ideas oſ Complex Modes to, and Compare them with, other Mens, which are only Voluntary Collections of ſeveral Simple Ideas, they may be Adequate Fantaſtical Ideas, as all Voluntary or Arbitrary Collections are Fantaſtical; whereas Real Ideas are in this Philoſophy ſaid to be only Adequate or Inadequate, but ſuch Real Adequate Ideas they cannot be. As to our Ideas of Subſtances, which this Philoſophy Propoſes, becauſe their Eſſences are either Unknown, or the Collections of their Properties Defective, it is Plain in both Caſes, ſince they are not Agreeable to Things, as they Exiſt, they are Inadequate, and for the ſame Reaſon Fanraſtical; and are not Adequate, and Conſequently not Real Ideas, Excepting in the Senſe, which we before Explained, when ve Endeavoured to ſiew, what were the Real Eſſences of them. 5. 40. IN Reſpect of True and Falſc Ideas, it is ſaid, that Truth and Falſehood, Really Speaking, belongs only to Propoſitions, and can no more be Applied to Ideas, as they are bare Perceptions and Appearances in the Mind, than to Single Names of Things, and the Idea of Centaur has no more Falſehood in it, than the Name of' it has; Our Ideas therefore are only True or Falſe, vhen the Mind Paſſes ſome Judgment on them, that is, Affirms or Denies ſomething Concerning them, and Refers them to ſomething Extraneous to them, to which it Suppoſes them Conformable or not; As ſuch Suppoſition therefore is True, or Falſe, ſo the Ideas themſelves come to be Denominated. Rrrr2 Tnus, Tuvs, Firſt, when the Mind Suppoſes it's Idea Conformable to that in other Mens Minds, Called by the ſame Name, as Juſtice, Virtue, Green, Blue, Sweer, Bitter, &e. it may be True or Falſe, according to the Truth or Falſchood of ſuch a Suppoſition; When we Judge of our Ideas by their Conformity to thoſe of other Men, they may be any of them Falſe, but Simple Ideas, as Green, Blue, Bitter, Sweet, &c. are the leaſt Liable to be Miſtaken; Much leſs do wve Confound the Names belonging to Different Senſes, and Call a Colour by the Name of a Taſte; Complex Ideas are much more Llable to Falſehood, and thoſe of Mixed Modes, more than Subſtances, the Firſt being Men's Voluntary Combinations of their Simple Ideas, whereas the Laſt are Diſtinguiſhed by their Senſible Qualities. SECOND, When the Mind Suppoſes any Idea Conformable to ſome Real Exiſtence, it is True or Falſe, as that Suppoſition is ſo3 Thus, That of a Man is a True Idca, and That oſ a Centaur, a Falſe One; And when we thus Refer our Ideas, it is ſaid, that none can be Termed Falſe, but our Complex Ones of Subſtances; our Simple Ideas being nothing but Perceptions in us, Anſwerable to Certain Powers in External Objects Capable of Producing them; Which can Neirther be Falſe, whether we Judge theſe Ideas to be in the Things themſelves, or no, that is, whether Blue is in the Violet, or in the Mind; The Name Blue, Noteing Properly nothing, but that Mark of Diſiinction, that is in a Violet, Diſcernible only by our Eyes, whatever it Conſiſts in3 Nor can they be Falſe, if by the Different Structure of our Organs it were ſo Ordered, that the Same Objects ſould Produce in ſeveral Men's Minds Different Ideas, for this could never be Known, ſince Objects would Operate Conſtantly after the ſame Manner; it is yet Probable, that the Ideas Produced by the Same Objects in Different Men's Minds, are nearly and Undiſcernibly Alike; Names of Simple Ideas may be Miſapplicd, as a Man, Ignorant of our Language, may call Purple Scarlet, bur this makes no Falſehood in the Ideas. CoMPLEX Ideas of Modes cannot, it is ſaid, be Falſe in Reference to any Thing Really Exiſting, becauſe they have no Reference to any Pattern Exiſting, or made by Nature. TuiRD, When the Mind Refers any of it's Ideas to that Real Conſtitution and E ſence of any Thing, whereon all it's Properties Depend, and Suppoſes them Conformable to ſuch Real Eſſences, its Ideas are Falſe, which is ſaid to be the Caſe of the Greateſt Part, if not, of all our Ideas of Subſtances, as being all Referred to Patterns in Things themſelves; Thus, when we Look upon our Ideas, as Repreſentations of the Unknown Eſſences of Things; or when we Put together Simple Ideas, which, in the Real Exiſtence of Things, have no Union, as in a Centaur; or when from any Collection of Simple Ideas, which always Exiſt together, we Separate any One Simple Idea, as the Colour of Gold from it's Extenſion, Solidity, Fixedneſs, Malleableneſs, Fuſibility, &e. they may be Juſtly Eſteemed Falſe Ideas; Tho the Laſt Sort are Thought io be rather Inadequate and Imperfect, than Falſe; Since there are none Put together, which do not Reaily Exiſt together. Upon the whole, it is Deemed, that our Ideas, cither in Reference to the Proper Signiſication of thei?t Names, or to the Reality of Things, may more Truly be Called Right or Wrong Ideas, according as they Agree. or Diſagree, to thoſe Patterns or Archetypes, to which they are Referred; Ideas, as they Lic in our Minds, without being Keferred, cannot be Wrong, unleſs Complex Ideas, wherein Inconſiſtent Parts are Jumbled together; All other Ideas are Right, and the Knowledge about them Right and True Knowledge, unleſs when Referred to Patterns or Archetypes, with which they Diſagreee Hitherto this Philoſophy. As to the Firſt, we ſay, our Ideas cannot be Properly Termed True or Falſe, with Reference to other Men's; For, tho' they Agree never ſo Exactly with Thoſe of other Men, and upon that Account are True according to this Syſteme, yet if Thoſe of other Men are Falſe, our Ideas, which are Conformable to Them muſt be Falſe likewiſe; from whence it is Evident, that the Conformity of our Ideas to other Men's can be no Standard or Mcaſure of the Truth of them, becauſe, if ſo, they may be True and Falſe at the ſame Time, which is a Contradiction; The Truth oi Falſchood of Ideas muſt therefore be Determined the ſame Way, as the Reality o Fantaſticalneſs, or the Adequateneſs and Inadequateneſs of them, that is, by Com paring them with the Real Exiſtence of Things, to which, if they Correſpond, the; are True Ideas, if not, they are Falſe Ones; Thus, all Simple Ideas are True, at Blue, Green, Sweet, Bitter, &e. nor are they made Leſs ſo, tho what is Green u m me ſiould be another Mans Blue; ſince my Idea and his are botli Derived from Real Powers in External Nature and in the Mind, which are Adapted to Produce thoſe ſeveral Ideas in us; The Force of his Perception may be Different from mine, and therefore the ſame External Object may Cauſe Different Senſations, but yet both the Senſations will be Equally True, becauſe Derived from Real, tho Differing, Forces in Nature. All Complex Modes, ſo far as they are Voluntary or Arbitrary Collections of Simple Ideas, which do not Agree with Men's Real Actions, are Falſe; And if I Call that Human Action, by which a Poor Man is Relieved from his Wants, the ſame as that, by which a Period is Put to his Life, it is a Falſe Idea, whether the One or the Other is Named Charity or Murder; Or, If I Collect a Certain Number of Ideas together, which never did Exiſt together in Human Actions, it is a Falſe Idea; For Complex Modes are the ſame in Reſpect of Real Human Actions, as Subſtances are in Reſpect of Real Beings; And if Voluntary Collections of Ideas are made vith Relation to Either, which do not Agree with the Exiſtence of Human Actions, or Real Beings, they are Falſe Idcas. As to the Second Arricle, it is Told us, that Man is a True Idea, and Centaur à Falſe One; and yet it Immediately after Subjoins, that no Ideas can be Termed Falſe, Excepting our Complex Ideas of Subſtances, but Man is a Complex Idea of a Subſtance, and therefore ſhould be a Falſe Idea, whereas it was Juſt before Aſfirmed to be a True One; And there is no other Way of Expediteing ourſelves from ſuch a Contradiction, which this Philoſophy has Incurred, but by Aſſerting, what we have done; That ſo far as our Ideas are Anſwerable and Correſpondent to Nature, they are True Ideas, and ſo far as they Diſſent and Deviate from it, they are Falſe Ones; Thus, however we Define him, a Man is ſomething Really Exiſting in Nature, a Centaur not, the Former therefore is a True Idea, the Latter a Falſe; But, vhen we Speak of the Complex Subſtance of a Man, we Mean by it a Certain Unknown Eſſence, from whence all his Properties of Mind and Body are Derived, and therefore is a Falſe Idea; becauſe we cannmot Aſfirm any Thing of that, of which ve Know Nothing, and which is not Derived into our Minds from Nature, but from our own Fancies and Amuſements. i AxorHER Thing Obſervable in this Article is, that all our Simple Ideas are Affirmed to be True, as if it were Impoſſible they ſiould be Falſe, whereas we have given ſeveral Inſtances in 5. 38. in which our Simple Ideas may not be Anſwerable to Nature, and therefore according to the Preſent Article Falſe; As in that Section they were Proved Fantaſtical. llli BuT it is Surprizing, that this Philoſophy ſould Aſſure us, that our Simple Ideas cannot be Falſe, whether we Jnise or Suppoſe them to be in Things themſelves or no, that is, whether the Blue is in theMind, or the Violet, in an Article, which Expreſly Maintains, that when the Mind Judges or Suppoſes any Idea Conformable to ſome Real Exiſtence, it is True or Falſe, as that Suppoſition is ſo; If therefore the Mind Judges or Suppoſes the Blue to be in the Mind, when it is in the Violet, or the Contrary, and that Judgment or Suppoſition is not True, is it not Plain and Notorious, that ſuch an Idea muſt be Falſe according to it's own Confeſſion? And the ſame may be Argued in Reſpect of the Different Structures of the Organs, for if Different Ideas are Produced from what we Judge or Suppoſe to be, ſuch Simple Ideas muſt be Falſe Ones. LastLy, Complex Ideas of Modes, it is ſaid, cannot be Falſe, whereas we have already ſhewn, they may be True or Falſe, according as they Correſpond, or not, vith the Real Exiſtences of Human Actions, to which they are to be Referred, and not to themſelves, as their own Archetypes. As to the Third, it is Manifeſt, that our Ideas of Subſtances are Falſe, becauſe not Agreeable to Nature. IN Concluſion therefore upon theſe Three lat Chapters, ve ſay, that True and Falſe ldeas are in the Main the ſame with Adequate and Inadequate, and with Real and Fantaſtical; That Ideas may be Juſtly ſaid to be Real, Adequate, or True, when they Exactly Correſpond and Anſwer to the Real Adequate, and True Cauſes, from which they are Derived, that they are then Fantaſtical, Inadequate, or Falſe, when they are made and Created by the Mind, without any Dependence on a Real Nature to Produce them; And therefore. - FIRST FirsT, Simple Ideas are Real, Adequate, and True, ſo far as they are Effects Cauſed in the Mind, by the Natural Powers in External Objects in Conjunction with thoſe of the Mind to Imprint them there; But if we Aſfirm any Thing of theſe Simple I deas, cither that they are Repreſentations and Patterns of Things themſelves, that is that the Bluc in the Mind Exiſts in the Violet; or that they Enter the Mind Sepa rately and not Combined with Others, which this Philoſophy Teaches; or if we make them Abſtracted Ideas, and General Ones; or Suppoſc them to be Introduced into the Mind by the Action of Material Beings, without any Action of the Mind i's ſelf, and by a mere Paſſion of it, Conſidered as a Raſa Tabula, which is alſo done by this Philoſophy; or if we Suppoſe any Thing of theſe Simple Ideas, which is not Agreeable to the Nature of them; Such Simple Ideas are Fantaſtical, Inadequate, and Falſe. SECOND, Complex Modes made by the Mind, by a Voluntary or Arbitrary Collection of Simple Ideas, which this Philoſophy only Takes Notice of, and Affirms to be Real, Adequate, and True, are Fantaſtical, Inadequate, and Falſe; becauſe they are Creatures of the Mind, and are not Suppoſed or Imagined to be Referred to any Real Exiſtence in Nature3 On the Contrary, Complex Modes, which are Derived from, and are Conformable to, the Real Exiſtence of Human Actions, with the Principles and Motives of them, are Real, Adequate, and True, by whatever Names we Call them. TuiRD, Complex Ideas of Subſtances are in Reſpect of the Eſſence of them, which no One Knows what it is, and is therefore only a Thing Contrived by the Mind, Fantaſtical, Inadequate and Falſe; But in Reſpect of the Collection of Properties, which Really Exi©t in Nature, Real, Adequate, and True; If yet we make this Collection of Qualities or Properties to be a Juſt Idea of the Subſtance, in which they Inhere, it is a Fantaſtical, Inadequate, and Falſe Idea, becauſe ſuch a Collection is at the beſt Defective and Imperfect3 And the only Real, Adequate, and True Idea of a Subſtance is, vhen ve know the Eſſence and Eſſential Properties of it, which we have before Explaincd from the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contracdtive Forces. S. 41. Tuis Philoſophy, to Account for the Extravagant Fancies, Opinions, and Perſuaſions of Men in Matters oſf Truth and Falſehood, Proceeds to Tell us, that beſides a Natural Correſpondence and Connexion of our Ideas with one another, which it is the Office and Excellency of our Reaſon to Trace, there is an Accidental One, vhich is wholly Owing to Chance or Cuſtom; by which, Ideas, which are not at all of Kin, come to be ſo United in ſome Men's Minds, that it is very Hard to Separate them; they always keep Company, and the One no ſooſſer comes into the Underſtanding, but it's Aſſociate Appears with it, and if they are more than Two, the whole Gang, always Inſeparable, ſiew themſelves together; This Strong Combination of Ideas, not Allied by Nature, the Mind makes in it's ſelf, either Voluntarily, or by Chance; and hence it comes in Different Men to be very Different, according to their Different Inclinations, Educations, Intereſts, &c. Cuſtom ſettles Habits of Thinking in the Underſtanding, as well as of Determining in the Will, and of Motions in the Body; all which ſeem to be but Trains of Motion in the Animal Spirits, which once ſet agoing, Continue on in the ſame Steps, they have been uſed to, which by oſten Treading are Worn into a Smooth Path, and the Motion in it becomes Eaſy, and as it were Natural. THIs Combination or Aſſociation of Looſe and Independent Ideas in our Minds, is of ſo great Force to ſet us Awry in our Actions, as well Moral, as Natural, and in our Paſſions, Reaſonings, and Notions themſelves, that Perhaps there is not any one Thing, that Deſerves more to be Looked after. Tuus, the Ideas of Goblins and Sprights, have Really no more to do with Darkneſs than Light, which yet by a Fooliſh Maid may be ſo often Inculcated and Raiſed together in the Mind of a Child, that he may not be able to Separate them again, as long as he Lives3 But Darkneſs ſhall ever after bring with it thoſe Frightfull Ideas; Iſ a Man has Suffered Pain or Sickneſs in any Place, if he Sawv his Friend Dic in ſuch a Room, when the Idea of the Place or Room Occurs to his Mind, ir brings that of ihe Pain and Diſpleaſure vith it. Tnus, TnUS, in Intellectual Habits, let the Ideas of Being and Matter be ſtrongly ſoined cither by Education or much Thought, what Notions, vhat Reaſonings vill ther be about Separate Spirits? Let Cuſtom from very Childhood have Joined Figur and Shape to the Idea of God, and what Abſurdities will that Mind be Liable 10 about the Deity? Let the Idea of Infallibility be Joined to any Perſon, and then One Body in Two Places at Once ſhall be Swallowed for a Certain Truth, whenever that Infallible Perſon Dictates and Demands Aſſent without Inquiry. THis Wrong Combination or Aſſociation of Ideas Eſtabliſies the Irreconcileable Oppoſition between Different Sects of Philoſophy and Religion; for we cannot Imagine every One of their Followers to Impoſe Willfully on himſelf, and Knovingly Refuſe Trurth offered by Plain Reaſon; Intereſt may do Something, tho' that cannot Work vhole Societies of Men to ſo Univerſal a Perverſeneſs; Some Independent Ideas are by Education, Cuſtom, and the Conſtant Din of a Party, ſo Coupled in their Minds, that they always Appear there together, and they can no more Separate them in their Thoughts, than if they were but One Idea, and they Operate, as if they were ſo This gives Senſe to Jargon, Demonſtration to Abſurdities, and Conſiſtency to Nonſenſe, and is the Foundation of the Greateſt, if not, of All the Errors in the World. Tnis is a Summary Account of the Preſent Doctrine of the Aſſociation of Ideas, in which it muſt be Firſt Inquired, whether there is in Reality ſuch an Aſſociation or Combination of them; and Second, whether the Inſtances Alledged do Prove it. AND Firſt, that there is no ſuch Aſſociation or Strong Combination of our Ideas by which One Enters Forcibly into the Mind in Conſequence of the Other, but only that it is a Quick and Lively Recollection of Ideas One after Another, and which the Mind at Pleaſure can Separate and Disjoin, ſeoms Plain from Hence. FirST, Becauſe otherwiſe, ſince this is Eſteemed by the Preſent Philoſophy, to be the Foundation of the Greateſt, if not, of All the Errors in the World, Men would not be Chargeable with, or Accountable for, thoſe Errors, which would be Neceſſary, and not in their Power to Avoid; But it is Unreaſonable to Suppoſe, that we ſhall not be Anſwerable to Almighty God for what is Awry in our Moral Actions, if not in our Natural, as well as in our Paſſions, Reaſonings, and Notions themſelves; ſince it is Told us, that Perhaps there is not any one Thing, that Deſerves more to be Looked after; But it is likewiſe Unreaſonable to Imagine, that we ſhall be Anſwerable for an Aſſociation of Ideas, which, by Chance or Cuſtom, unheeded by us, are ſo Strongly Linked and United in the Mind, that we ſhall never, it is Poſſible, be able to Separate them, no more, than if they were but One Idea, and which Operate, as if they were ſo. SECOND, Becauſe, i we may be Allowed to Reaſon, as this Philoſophy does in it's Chapter of Identity, from Engliſb Phraſes, and Ways of Speaking, we Generally Say in ſuch Aſociations, that ſuch a Place, or Thing, or Notion, Puts us in Mind of Another, to which it has been Aſſociated, as ſuch a Room, of a Friend that Died there, Darkneſs, of Goblins and Sprights, &e. Which at leaſt ſiews, that in the Strongeſt Combinations of our Ideas, we Take and Apprehend them only to be Ideas of Memory and Recollection. THIRD, Becauſe there cannot well be a Stronger Aſſociation of Ideas than there is in the Leſſon of a School-Boy, which he Perfectly Retains, and can Repeat without the leaſt Heſitation, and with the utmoſt Quickneſs and Fluency; And yet theſe Ideas are only Ideas of the Memory or Recollection, and were never Imagined to Enter Forcibly into the Mind by a Mechanical Aſiociation, ſo that if One makes it's Appearance there, the whole Gang, always Inſeparable, ſicw themſelves together; Since he can Stop at every Word, Verſe, Line, or Period, which Evinces, that they are Entirely under the Diroction and Conduct of the Will, and are as much Separable by the Pleaſure of the Mind, as any other Ideas whatſocver. FOURTH, Becauſe, That there is a Power in the Mind of Perceiving, of Comparing, Compounding, and Dividing, and of Recollecting it's Ideas to a Great Degree of Quickneſs, is Owned and Confeſſed; But it is Inconceivable, that there ſiould be a Power in it of Aſſociating them in the Senſe of this Philoſophy, that is, Really a Pover of not Aſociating them, but Recciving them already Mechanically Aſſociated, and nd Joined together; This ſeems to be, to make the Mind an Active Principle, and et a mere Paſſive and Mechanical One at the ſame Time, which is little Leſs than 1 Contradiction; IF therefore a Power Acknowledged in the Mind, as that of Memory and Recollection, is Sufficient to Solve theſe Imaginary Aſſociations, it is Irrational to Introduce a Mechaniſm into it, which is not kKnown to be there, in Order to Account for them. Fi7TH, Becauſe, which was to be our Second Inquiry, None of the Inſtances AlIedged do Prove or Conclude ſuch a Mechanical Aſſociation or Combination of our Ideas. For Firſt, it does not from this Neceſſary Aſſociation Come, that ſuch a Neceſſary Aſſociation of Ideas in Different Men is very Different according to their Different Inclinations, Educations, Intereſts, &. Unleſs ſuch a Neceſſary Aſſociation is Proved, and thereſore this is no Inſtance of the Thing, but a Preſumption of it 3 And ve may as vell and more Juſtly Say, that there is no ſuch Aſociation of Ideas, but that Men Judge Diſferently of Things, according to the Different Powers in their Mind of Perceiving Recollecting, Compounding, Comparing, &æ. and that Inclination, Education, and Intereſt, are only Accidental to the Mind, but can never Overbear the Real Povers of it, of Perceiving, Recollecting, and Judging. SECOND, As to Cuſtom Settling Habits of Thinking in the Underſtanding, as well as of Determining in the Will, and of Motions in the Body, and all Ariſing from Certain Trains of Motion in the Animal Spirits; HoW is this a Proof of ſuch an Aſſociation? A Man may Acquire a Habit of Thinking without Suppoſing his Ideas are Inſeparably Linked and United together; Beſides, what is here Called a Habit of Thinking, may in Reality be no more than a Habit of Remembering, and Memory is oſten Explained by a Train of Motion in the Animal Spiritss; which once ſet agoing Continuc on in the ſame Steps, they have been Uſed to; But what theſe Animal Spirits are, or whether there are in Reality any ſuch Spirits, is yet Unknown, and thereſore cannot much Clear this Matter of the Aſſociation of our Ideas. Tnim®D, the Ideas of Goblins and Sprights are not ſo Connected with Darkneſs, that the Idea of the Latter ſiould Neceſſarily Raiſe in us the Idea of the Former, for the Weakeſt and moſt Timorous Mind is under no ſuch Apprehenſions, whilũt it is in Company with Others; And if Alone, by a Moderate Courage and ReſoIution can Throw off and Divert them; On the Contrary, even in Day-Light Minds, which are Subject to ſuch Fears and Terrors, will not be without them in Retirement and Solitude, and Eſpecially in a Room, vhich has been Reported to be Haunted, or in the Body of a Church, with the Doors Locked, and Amidſt the Graves and Scpulchres of the Dead. The Caſe is this, upon any of theſe Occaſions, the Mind Recollects ſeveral Stories, which it has been Told in Relation to Sprights, or Goblins, or Ghoſts Appearing aſter the Deceaſe of thoſe, vho have been Interred, by which it is Frighted and Scared; but it may by a Steady Reliance on the Divine Goodneſs, or by a Fixed Reſolution and Intrepidity, Maſter ſuch Groundleſs Fears and Separate thoſe Ideas, which it's Memory Suggeſts; Theſe Inſtances therefore are Reſolved into Memory and Recollection, and are not in the Leaſt any Proof of the Aſociation Pretended.Tis True, there is ſomething in Darkneſs Peculiar to it, which Naturally gives us a Horror, and Dejection of Mind, and therefore a Kind of Covardice from the Contractive Force of it, as Light is Connected with Chearſullneſi, Vigour, Alacrity, and therefore Courage, from the Expanſive Force; But this is no more, than what we in ſome Meaſure Obſerve in Birds and Animals, and even in Venetables and Plants, which Droop and Languih in the Night, but are Brisk and Lively with the Riſing of the Sun; Which alſo Furniſhes us with the Aecount of another Phænomenon in Nature, hy Studious Men, if they Spend rhe Night in Contemplation and Attention, and the Day in Repoſe, Contract ſuch a Deĩection of Mind, and ſuch a Fear and Deſpondency in it, as is always Infinitely Prejudicial to Them; However this is Plain, that ſuch a Connexion of Fear and Horroi with Darkneſs is Natural, and is not OWing to any Imaginary Aſſociation of Ideas Derived ſrom the Stories and Tattle of a Nurſe. FourTH, When a Man has Suſfered Pain or Sickneſs in any Place, or Saw his Friend Die in ſuch a Room, the Place or the Room only gives Occaſion to the Mind o Recall or Revive thoſe Ideas of Pain or Diſpleaſure in it; Which does noi Prov Prove a Mechanical Aſſociation of theſc Ideas, but a Power in the Mind ſo Recollect them upon ſuch Intimationss This brings to my Thoughts the Artificial Memory, Deſcribed by the Author to Herennius, Practiced amongſt the Ancient Romans, which the Orators made Uſe of to Enable them to Repeat Memoriter, and Verbatim, or Nearly, what they had before Premeditated for their Audience, and by the Aſſiſtance of which no Doubt it was, that Hortenſius Pronounced his Oration, for Meſſala Word for Word, as he had Contrived and Set it Down in his own Mind, without any Tables or Writing; and which Tully gives us, as a Great Inſlance of the Memory of Words in that Orator, as he Informs us, Lucullus was ſuch an Example for the Memory of Things; who, tho he was wholly Unacquainted with the Art of War, vhen he went as General againſt Mithridates, yet by Reading only the Hiſtories and Exploits of other Generals before him in his Paſſage from Italy to Greece. and in his Expedition againſt that Prince, became the moſt Accompliſhed General of his Age; And what was this Artiſicial Memory ? It Conſiſted in making Choice of a Certain Number of Loci, or Places, which were Diſtinguiſhed ſiom each Other by their Order, of Firſt, Second, &e. by Various Spaces, Figures, and Intervals, and by Certain Marks and Characters, which were Affixed to every Fiſth, or Tenth Place of them; Theſe Places were Inculcated on the Mind ſo often, and ſo Strongly, by a Froquent Repetition of them, that a Perſon, Complete in his Art, could Recite theſe Places in Order, Backwards, or Forwards, or by any other Ways of Combining them;3 Theſe vere Conſidered and Eſteemed in the ſame Manner as Paper, or a Raſa Tabula, on which any Characters were to be Writ, or Engraven; And which were to Serve all Occaſions of Writing, as a Book of Vellum, which, upon the Daing out of the Former Impreſſions made by a Pencil, is Fit to Receive any New Ones3 When ihe Mind was Furniſhed with theſe Loci or Places, whatever was to be Repeated by the Memory, vas Conceived in Images and Repreſentations of Things, which were Set down in Order, the Firſt Image in the Firſt Place, the Second in the Second, and ſo on; By theſe Means the Orator by going over the Places, which were FamiIliar to his Mind, Raiſed in himſelf the Images, which he had Affixed to thoſe Places, as in the Inſtance, which we are now Conſidering of a Room, or a Place, which Excites Certain Ideas in us Peculiar to thoſe Places; This I Believe is the Strongeſt Inſtance, which can be given, of an Aſſociation of Ideas, which, it is ſomething Wonderfull, ould Eſcape the Great Learning and Reading of this Philoſophy of them, which to ſiew it's Acquaintance with Antiquity, ſometimes makes Mention oſ Alexander, and Bucephalus, and Socrates, tho' it may be almoſt Queſtioned, whether it Knew much more, than that the one was a Man, the other a Horſe, and the Laſ a Philoſopher; in the ſame Manner, as it Aſſumes in it's Explanations of its Doctrine, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, and yet One may Reaſonably Think it's Knowledge of ſuch a Propoſition vas rather from Hear- ſay, than from a Demonſtration of it; Omitting Which, this Greateſt Inſtance of an Aſſociation of Ideas is Plainly Reſolved into the Ideas of Memory and Recollection, and the Mind can Separate and Disjoin them, as it Pleaſes; For it could Remember theſe Places in Order, Backwards, or Forvards, or by other Ways oſ Combining them; It could Diſpoſe Certain Images in theſe Places, and then Expunge them, and Affix others in the Room of them; All which ſhiews, that there was no Mechanical Aſſociation of theſe Ideas, but all of them were under the Management and Government of the Mind and the Will, which made Uſe oſ them to thoſc Deſigns and urpoſes, which it Intended. Firru, Intellectual Habits are given, as another Inſtance of this Aſſociation; But can any One Perſuade himſelf to Think or Believe, that the Paulyliſls, or Authropmorphites Aſſerted the One, that all Being, and all Nature, were Matter, the Other, that Almighty God was in the Form of a Grave and Vencrable Old Man, from an Aſſociation oſ Idcas, and not ſfrom a Falſc Connexion of, and a Groſs and Abſurd Reaſoning upon, them? Or can ve Suppoſe the ”Romaniſts to Embrace theit Doctrine of Tranſubſtantiation from the Infallibility of their Guide, when thoſe, who Diſown and Renounce the Latter, and Place it in the Church, and in General Synods and Councils, yet Patronize and Deſend the Former? Theſe are not therefore Examples oſ the Aſociation of Ideas, but of the Weak and Erroneous Concluſions of Human Reaſon; And as to what Reſpects Tranſubſtantiation, which we take to be a DoctS ſ ſſ rine rine, neither Juſtify'd by Scripture, nor Agreeable to Nature or Philoſophy, yet this Syſteme of Ideas ſould not too Haſtily Determine, what is Poſſible, or not, in the Change or Alteration of Subſtances, which is ſo Entirely Ignorant, of what they Are, or whercin they Conſiſt. SixTH, In the Irreconcileable Oppoſition, which is found between Different Sects of Philoſophy and Religion, it is not Probable Indeed, that whole Societies of Men ſhould be Wrought to ſo Univerſal a Perverſeneſs, as that every One of them ſould Knowingly Maintain Falſehood. This Irreconcileable Oppoſition does not yet Appear to be Eſtabliſed from ſuch Wrong Combinations oſ our Ideas, which by Education, Cuſtom, and the Conſtant Din of a Party, are ſo Coupled in our Minds, that we can no more Separate them in our Thoughts, than if they were but One Idea, but from Men's Different Faculties and Powers of Perceiving Things, oſ Viewing and Comparing them, and of Judging and Reaſoning upon them, which may be ſometimes as Various as their Complexions, and by which each Perſon ſhall Imagine himſclf to be in the Right. Thus in the Diſputes of a Plenum and Diſſimilar Matter, or a Vacuum and Similar Matter, which I have ſiewn muſt be Connected together, Philoſophers have Diſagreed; which Diſſenſion cannot be Owing to a Mechanical Aſſociation of Ideas, butto Men's Different Apprehenſions of Nature, even Perhaps after the Stricteſt Inquiry and Scrutiny into it; They Look upon it in a Different Light, and he who has Formed his Ideas Concerning it with the moſt Exactneſs, and Reaſons upon it with the greateſt Accuracy, Bids the Faireſt for Truth, and is the moſt likely not to be Deceived: And the ſame may be ſaid in Reſpect of Religion and the Scriptures; The Two Grand Diſtinctions in Chriſtianity are Thoſe of Proteſtantiſm and Popery, and in Proteſtantiſm, Thoſe of the Orthodox, and the Socinian or Arian Faith; it would be too Hard an Imputation not to Think, that there may be Men of Integrity in all theſe Perſuaſions, and that That, which makes ſuch Men Diſfer, is not a Wrong and a Mechanical Aſſociation of Ideas, but a Falſe and Undue Connexion of Ideas from Falſe Views and Notices of Things; Their Powers and Faculties of Perceiving, Reaſoning, and Judging, are not the Same, but Every One Concludes Right according to his own Premiſies, and Every One is Convinced by the Force oſ his own Demonſtrations; But he who Examines his Ideas in Religion vith the Greateſt Care, and Argues with the Greateſt Strength and Force upon Them, and Penetrates the moſt into the Nature and Senſe of Revelation, will Come the Neareſt to Truth, and will Prefer Proteſtantiſm to Popery, and rather Chooſe to be in the Orthodox, than in the Arian or Socinian Scheme. This Philoſophy oſ Ideas was Unwilling however to Charge all theſe Errors upon Human Reaſon, which is only Anſwerable for them, and would have been Glad to have Shiſted oſf the Load upon an Imaginary Aſſociation of Ideas of it's own Inventing; That Reaſon might ſtill be an Infallible Guide, a Light ſet up by Almighty God in our Minds, and a Ray of the Divinity. But it is too Notorious in Fact and Experience to be Concealed, and of which all the Modern Philoſophy, as well as this Syſteme oſ Ideas, is a Standing Evidence; That Reaſon is a Delultory and a Vagrant Term, and that, That is Reaſon to Whole Socieries o&-Men, which is not ſo to a Thouſand Others. C H A C H AP. IX. Of Words or Language in General; Of the Signiſication of Words; Of Gæ neral Terms3 Of the Names of Simple ldeas Of the Names of Mixea Modes and Relations; Of the Names of Subſlances 3 Of Particles; Of Abſiratt and Concrete Terms; Of the Imperfettion of Words ; OF the a of Words 3 Of the Remedies of the Foregoing Imperfections and Abuſes. 5. . OINCE There is a Cloſe Connexion betwixt Ideas and Words, it is ſaid ĩt vill be Neceſſary to Conſider Language, which Man, being a Sociable Creature, was Furniſhied with by God, as the Great Inſtrument and Common Tye oſ Society; and therefore had his Organs ſo Fahioned, as to be Fit to Frame Arriculate Sounds, which he might be Able to Uſe, as Signs of Internal Conceptions, in Order to make them Known to Others. Bur it was not Suſficient for the Perfection of Language, that Sounds might be made to Stand for Marks of Ideas in our Mind, unleſs they could at the ſame Time Comprehend ſeveral Particular Things; For the Multiplication of Words would have Perplexed their Uſe; And hence Aroſe General Terms, which are Expreſſive of General Ideas, as Particular Ones are of Particular. THERE are, it is Told us, other Words, which Signify the Want or Abſence of I deas, as Ignorance, Barrenneſs, &?. which Relate to Poſitive Ideas, and Signify their Abſence. LastLy it is Obſerved, that the Words, which Stand for Actions and Notions, quite Removed from Senſe, are Borrowed from Senſible Ideas, . ꝗ&. to Imagine, Apprehend, Comprebend, Underſtand, Adhere, Conceive, Inſtill, Diſguſt, Diſturbance, Tranquillity, which are all Taken from the Operations of Things Senſible, and Applied to Modes of Thinking; Spirit is no more than Breath, and Angel a Meſſenger; ſo that Nature is Suppoſed, even in the Naming of Things, Unawares to have Suggeſted to the Beginners of Languages, the Originals of all their Knowledge; whilſt, to make Known to Others, any Operations they Felt in themſelves, or any other Ideas, that came not under their Senſes, they were Fain to Borrow Words from the Ordinary and Known Ideas of Senſationn. To which we Anſwer. As to the Meaning and Deſign of Languiss That is Confeſſed on all Hands, tho' it muſt be Said, that Letters, and Words Written, or Dumb Signs, are likewiſe Expreſſive of our Thoughts and Ideas, as well as Articulate Sounds, tho not to ſo Great a Perfection; And Society might be Preſerved even thoſe Ways; OF which Laſt very Surprizing Stories are Told, and which Shew, that there is ſomething Infinitely Superior in the Mind of Man, to That of Brutes, even, where Both of them are Deprived of Language. BuT it is not Certain, that our Ideas are Originally Derived from Senſation, becauſe ve make Uſe of Words Taken from the Operations of Things Senſible. FirsT, Becauſe there is no Connexion betwixt the Naming our Ideas, and the Origine of them; For tho' they vere Derived from one Source or another, ve might Uſe Metaphorical Expreſſions Borrowed from Either, where there is an Analogy betvixt the Operations of the Mind and Body. Thus we often Transfer the Operations of the Mind to thoſe of Body, as well as thoſe of Body to the Mind, where there is a Similitude and Agreement with each Other; For we Call Colours, Lively, or Faint, and Languid, a Sound Vigorous and Strong, or Weak and Feeble; ve Aſcribe the Paſſions of Love, Fear, and Abhorrence, to Inanimate Beings; and the Beautifull Expreſſions of Language, Invented by the Wits and Genius's of it, can never be made an Argument in Philoſophy, for the Formation of One, from the Origine of our Ideas. SECOND, Becauſe there is nothing more Plain, than that there are Operations in the Mind, as Doubting, Fearing, Hopeing. Memory, Perception, Judging, Reaſoning, S ſ ſ ſ2 &. &e. which have no Kind of Reſemblance vith the Operations of Senſible Beings, and therefore muſt Originally have ſome Arbitrary Names Invented to Denote them, vhich do not Depend upon any Operations without us. THIRD, Becauſc all which is in our Mind, and all the Ideas of it, are not Originally Derived from the Impreſſions of External Objects, ſince there is an Innate Senſc in it Previous to any ſuch Impreſſions; For, if there were not, it would be as Impoſſible for Them to Produce Senſe in the Mind, as to do it in any Piece of Matter, which is Acknowledged to have no Senſe; Therefore Senſe muſt be Originally Exiſting in the Mind, otherwiſe it could never be Produced in it by the Actions of Things Inſenſible: Nor is it Suſficient to Say, that there may be a Capacity of Senſation in the Mind, but no Explicit and Real Senſe, till Excited by External Impreſſions; Becauſe a Capacity, for Inſtance, of Burning in Fire does Actually Infer a Real Quality of Burning in the Fire; And the ſame may be ſaid of Senſe or the Mind, that it's Capacity of Senſation muſt Conclude an Actual Senſe in it  And therefore the Ideas of Perception, Memory, Hope, Fear, and other Operations of the Mind, may from that Innate Senſe, which it has, as well, for all that ve Knov, Exiſt before, as aſter, Senſation from External Impreſſions. FoUuRTH, Becauſe there is Really an Analogy betwixt the Operations of the Mind and Body, Founded in Nature, as we have ſiewn in our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and therefore Expreſſions to Denote the Operations of Each may be Promiſcuouſly Borrowed from One Another; For there is a Real Gravity and Levity in the Mind, with other Affections, which Attend them, as there is a Real Gravity and Levity in Bodies, with their Peculiar Qualities, which belong to them; The Firſt being the Reſult of the Contractive Forces in Each, and the Laſt of th Expanſive. This Philoſophy Proceeds. i 5. 2. WorDS then are made Uſe of by Men, as Signs, or Senſible Marks, of theit Ideas, yet not upon the Account of any Natural Connexion between Articulate Sounds and Certain Ideas, for, if ſo, there would be but one Language amongſt all Men, but by a Voluntary and Arbitrary Impoſition, and ſuch Words Stand for Nothing more but the Ideas in the Mind of him, that Uſes them; For, when a Man Speaks to Another, it is, that his Sounds may make Known his Ideas to the Hearer; Thus a Child, that takes Notice of Nothing more in Gold than the Yellow Colour, Calls the ſame Colour in a Peacock's Tail Gold; Another, that hath better Obſerved, Adds it's Weight to it's Colour, and then the Sound, Gold, Stands for a Complex Idea of Yellow, and Great Weight; Worbs, being Voluntary Signs, cannot be Impoſed on Things we Know not, this would be to make them Sounds without Signification; A Man cannot make his Words the Signs either of Qualities in Things, or of Conceptions in the Mind of Another, whereof he has None in his Own. l Tuo' Words Signify Nothing, but the Ideas in Mens Minds, yet they are in their Thoughts Secretly Referred to To other Things. FirstT, They Suppoſe their Words to be Marks of Ideas in the Minds oſ other Men, with whom they Communicate, elſe they could not Diſcourſe Intelligibly with One Another; And in this Caſe they Think it enough, that they Uſe the Word in the Common Acceptation of that Language; and do not Examine, whether Their Ideas, and Thoſe of Other Men. be the ſame. SECOND, They Suppoſe theirt Words alſo to Stand for the Reality of Things; And by a Conſtant Uſe and Connexion, the Sounds, or Names Heard, almoſt as Readily Excite Certain Ideas, as if the Objects themſelves were Preſent to the Senſes; and becauſe we do not Preciſely Examine into the Signification of Words, which we Frequently Learn before the Ideas they Stand for, we often ſet our Thoughts more on Words than Things, and ſometimes Speak them, as Parrots do, without any Meaning at all; But if they are of Uſe and Signification, there is always a Connexion between the Sound and Idea. SINCE therefore Words Signify our Ideas by an Arbitrary Impoſition, every Man has an Inviolable Liberty to make Words Stand for what Ideas he Pleaſes; it is True Common Uſe by a Tacit Conſent Appropriates Certain Sounds to Certain Ideas in all Languages, to which if we do not Conform, we cannot Speak Properly, and un Ieſs our Words Excite the ſame Ideas in the Hearer, which we make them Stand for, we cannot Speak Intelligibly. Thus far This Doctrine. Tun Tnis Philoſophy, by the foregoing Account of the Signiſication of Words, ſcems Anſum n 1 to Vary its Sentiments; Sometimes Language is to Maintain Society amongſt Men, 3ſã⸗ ,, and thèn it muſt Signify ſomething more than the Ideas in a Man's oWn Mind, that is, ib Langna: the Ideas, which are in Other Mens; Afterwards it Denotes only our Own Ideas, vet is Pupoſu is with a Secret Reference to thoſe of Others, and to Things themſelves; Then it is a Ghimenie⸗ Mere Arbitrary Impoſition of Words and Terms, but yet again, ve Tacitly Conſent to Thoſe, vhich Others have Impoſed, and Uſe has made Common, and which will Raiſe the ſame Ideas in Other Mens Minds, vhich we have in our Ovn; In mhort, if we were to make Uſe of that Arbitrary Language, which this Syſteme oſ Ideas Says, we have a Right to, it Owns we ſhould neither Speak Properly, nor Intelligibly, which yet ſcem to be Eſſential to the Deſign of Language according to it's own Confeſſionss. No one I Believe will Deny, that we might, if we Pleaſed, make Uſe of a Triangle to Signify Perception, a Square might Denote Memory, a Circle Recollection, and a Pentagone might be a Good Sign or Mark for Judgement, as well as any Combinations of Letters in the Alphabet; But this would be ſuch a Chimerical and Fairy Language, that no one vould either Think it worth his while to Learn, or to Diſcourſe, or Diſpute, about it. REAL, and not a Chimerical, Language, thereſore does not only Conſiſt of Words, a a Real which Stand for Nothing more than the Ideas in the Mind of him, that Uſes them, m_‘°o. but which alſo Stand for the Ideas of them, with whom we Converſe, and ſo far as gua: u our Knowledge Reaches, for the Ideas of Things themſelves. If it were not ſo, if Language only Terminated in Marking and Noteing our own Ideas, I would Ask, hov it would be Poſſible for us to Conimunicate our Ideas to Others, which yet is the Principal Intention of it ? This is a Problem, which I Apprehend the Preſent Philoſophy could not Solve, and therefore Leſt it; For this is the Chief Thing to be Explained in Real Language, how it is ſo Contrived, as to Expreſs our own Thoughts or Ideas by Articulate Sounds, which Articulate Sounds ſhall Raiſe the ſame Thoughts or Ideas in Others, which we have: This, which is the Grand Difficulty, is Wholly Unaccounted for here, and all the Anſwer is, that every One may Name Things for himſelf, and when Men come to Converſe with One Another, they Uſe Words in the Common Acceptation without Examining, whether their Idcas be the ſame. ON the Contraty we Say, that Men do Endeavour in Language, as far as they The Problem can, to Expreſs the ſame Ideas by the ſame Words; and the Queſtion or Problem is, æ ; Firſt, How, when Ideas are Latent only in our ovn Minds, we ſhould make Uſe of à Raſ Laſuch Articulate Sounds, which have no Connexion with thoſe Ideas, and yet ſhall n ſæ Communicate them to Others; Second, it will be alſo Proper to Inquire, HoW h not on Dumb Signs can Impart the ſame Ideas to Others, which we Have. Iiuin onm As to the Firſt, it muſt be Said, and cannot be Denied, that the Ideas oſ Senſation, en Fil or Thoſe, which Proceed from the Impreſſions of External Objects, Lie in Common Eeſpæãt of i to any Two or More Obſervers,. ho Live in the Same Community with each Other, ternal Ofe and therefore they may Call, What they Jointly See and Obſerve, by One Certain Name; Thus, if Two, or Three, or More, See the Same Subſtance of Gold, They All Call it by the Same Name, and as They have much the Same Faculties of Perceiving, They Conclude their Intrinſick Perceptions and Ideas of it are the Same; For it is no more Probable, that the Yellow of Gold in the Idea of One Man, ſhould Produce the Idea of Blue or Violet in Another, than that the whole Idea of the Subſtance of Gold in one Man, ſhould be the Idea of Indigo in Another, or that the Idea of the Weight of a Pound in One, ſhould be the Idea of an Ounce in Another: The Powers of Perception from External Objects are very nearly Alike in all, as is Evident from their Agreeing to Call their Perceptions of them by the ſame Name; For, it wvhat vas One Man's Blue, vas Another Man's Yellow, or what was One Mans Gold, was Another Mans Indigo, or what was One Man's Pound, was Anothers Ounce, it vould be Impoſſible for Men to Tallk or Diſcourſe with any Kind of Conſiſtency with each Other. Tis True, from the Difſerent Force of the Perceptive Faculties In Different Men, the Same Kind of Ideas may be Received or Apprchended with a Greater, or Leſs, Quickneſs and Vivacity, and One Man may Perceive the Yellow of Gold, or any orther Quality of Body, with Greater Spirit, Life, and Attention, than Another, but the Nature or Kind of the Idea it's ſel? vill be much the Same Tunis Tuis thereſore is not ſo Hard to Determine; But, HoW we ſhall Explain the La tent Ideas of the Operations and Paſſions of our own Minds, as Perception, Memory, Hope, Fear, Joy, Sorrow, &. So as by Language to Communicate them to Others is the Inquiry, ſince they do not, as External Objects, Lie Open to Three or More Obſervers, but are Internal Actions of the Mind, in which they Subſiſt; It iĩs Conſequently to be Known, how we Judge, that other Men have the ſame Affecions and Properties in their Minds, which we Perceive in our own, Which ſeems to be done by the following Method. As to Perception, it is Evident, that Every Man has that Faculty, which is Agreeable to Mine, by our Senſations of External Objects, Correſponding with each Other, and by Obſerving, that Other Men Act, and Speak, and Diſcourſe, in the Same Manner, as I would do, in ſuch Circumſtances. So I find my ſclf to have an Active Power of Remembering, but how ſhall I Declare to Another, what I Mean by that Word Memory, unleſs I Know there is a like Faculty, which I Have, which alſo Exiſts in his Mind? This therefore we are Convinced of, by Finding, that other Perſons can Repeat ſeveral Lines or Words in a Book, which have their Ideas belonging to them, and which they could not do when the Book was Abſent, unleſs they had the Same Faculty, which ve Perceived in our ſelves upon the Same Occaſion; and by Conſequence we may well enough Agree to Call the Same Faculty by the Same Name of Memory. Tnus, if I can Demonſtrate a Propoſition in Euclid, Apollonius, or Archimedes, and I Perceive Another can do it likewiſe, I may Fairly Say, there is a Faculty of Reaſoning, in Both of us, and we ſhall not be Miſunderſtood by Each Other, if we Call ĩt by the Same Name. I am Conſcious to my Self, of the ſeveral Paſſions of Hope, Fear, Joy, Sorrow, Complacency, Anger, Pleaſure, Pain, &e. Which I Expreſs by Certain Natural Indications oſ them, by an Aſurance in my Behaviour, or a Dejection and Deſpondency in it, by an Air of Delight and Satisfaction, or by One of Grief and Trouble, vhich is alſo ſometimes Explained by Tears, &c. When therefore I find the Indications or Signs of the ſame Paſſions in other Men, I Conclude they are there, and may Juſtly Call them by the Same Name, which I give to my own, by which Means I become Intelligible; ſince they Actually Experience, they are Endued with ſuch Paſſions. Tnis would be the Method, if ve were to Begin and Form a Language A-new. by Which Two or Three, or More Perſons, or a Whole Community of Men, might Communicate theit Thoughts to Each Other, that is, Agree upon Certain Words or Articulate Sounds, which ſhould Expreſs and Signify the Same Idea or Perception, vhether in the One, or the Other; But Languages being already Framed, we have nothing to Do, but to Leãrn the Meaning of Articulate Sounds, which either do, or ought to, Expreſs and Signify the Same Ideas in the Minds of all the Members of the Community, which Uſes it; And tho there may be ſome Words of a Doubtfull Senſe, yet Generally Speaking, I Believe ve may Say in all Languages, that they are ſo Contrived, as to be Certain and Determinate Marks and Characters of Ideas, Common and Known to All of that Society or Clan of Men, which have Conſentcd together to Adopt ſuch Sounds, to Expreſs their Ideas. Tnis Philoſophy on the other Hand, becauſe there are ſome Ambiguous and Undefined Words, which muſt be in all Languages, and which Proceeds from the Diſficulty of the Ideas, which are Annexed to them, in which Men may not fully Agree, would Extend this Obſcurity to a Whole Language, and therefore Aſſerts that Language is only an Expreſſion of our own Ideas, and not of other Men's, which is Exceedingly Partial and Abſurd, and Something More. FroM what we have here Argued it Follows, that Language is not only an Expreſſion of our own Ideas, but of other Men's, as well as of Things themſelves, ſo ſar as our Knowledge, or Comprehenſion of them, Reaches; As alſo, that our Ideas may be Expreſſed by Dumb Signs, as well as Articulate Sounds, ſince Articulate Sounds themſclves are Impoſed from ſuch Dumb Signs, or the Natural Indications of ihe Operations and Paſlions in our ovn Minds. This Philoſophy Proceeds. 5. 3. ALL 5. 3. ALL Things, it is ſaid, Exiſting in Particulars, it might be Expected, that Words ſhould be ſo too in their Signification, whereas moſt of the Words, which make all Languages, are General Terms, which is the Effect oſ Reaſon and Neceſſity; For. FirsT, It would be Impoſſible to Retain the Name oſ every Particular Thing, vith it's Peculiar Appropriation to the Idea of that Thing. SECOND, It would be Uſeleſs, unleſs all could be Suppoſcd to have theſe ſame I deas in their Minds; Becauſe Names Applied to Particular Things, whereof I alone have the Ideas in my Mind, could not be Intelligible to Another, who is not Acquainted with all thoſe Particular Things, which had fallen under my Notice. TunirD, It Would be of no Great Service for the Improvement of Know ledge, which, tho Founded in Particular Things, Enlarges it's ſel? by General Views, to which Things, Reduced into Sorts under General Names, are Properly Subſervient; For, when ve Diſcourſe of Individuals, ve Uſe Proper Names, as in Perſons, Countries, Cities, Rivers, Mountains, &. ] WEe are afterwards Informed, how General Words come to be Made, which is by being made Signs of General Ideas, and Ideas become General by Separating from them the Circumſtances of Time, Place, or any other Ideas, that may Determine them to this or that Particular Exiſtence; By this vay of Abſiraction they are Capable of Repreſenting more Individuals than One, Each of which having a Conſor mity to that Abſtract Idea, is of that Sort;3 Thus, the Firſt Ideas of Children are only Particular, as of the Nurſec, or Mother, but aſterwards finding orher Beings like to them, they Leave out that, which Diſtinguiſhes them, and Form their General Idea of Man; Then Leaving out Shape, and ſome other Properties, and Retaining only a Body with Life, Senſe, and Spontaneous Motion, we Frame the Idea of Animal; And by the ſame way the Mind Proceeds to Body, Subſtance, and at Laſt to Being, Thing, and ſuch Univerſal Terms, which Stand for any Ideas, whatſoever; From whence it is Evident, that the whole Myſtery of Genus, and Species, is nothing elſe but Abctract Ideas, More or Leſs Comprehenſive, with Names Annexed to them. l j GENERAL therefore and Univerſal, it is ſaid, belong not to the Real Exiſtence of Things, but are Inventions of the Underſtanding made by it for i's own Uſe, and Concern only Signs, either Words or Ideas. TuEsE General Terms, farther, do not Signify a Plurality, for then Man and Men would Signify the ſame Thing, but a Sort of Things; and this they do, by being made Signs of Abſtracted Ideas; And the Eſſences of the Sorts or Species of Things are nothing, but theſe Abſtracted Ideas. ] Ir is Allowed, that Nature makes Things Alike, and ſo lays the Foundation oſ this Sorting and Claſſing, but the Sorts or Species themſelves are the Workmanſhip of Human Underſtanding, ſo that every Diſinõt Abſiracted Idea is a Diſiinct Eſſence; Thus, Oval, Circle, Rain, Snow, are Eſſentially Different; The Word Eſſence may be Taken two Ways. Fiust, For the Real, and Internal, tho Unknown Conſtitution in Subſtancẽs. SECOND, In the Schools, it has been almoſt wholly Applicd to the Artiſicial Conſtitution of Genus and Species, which are nothing elſe but Abſtracted Ideas; The Firſt of theſe Eſſences may be Termed Real, the Laſt Nominal. BETWEEN the Nominal Eſſence, and the Name, there is ſo Neat a Connexion, that the Name of any Sort of Things cannot be Attributed to any Particular Being but what has the Eſſcnce, whereby it Anſwers that Abſtracted Idea, whereoſ that Name is the Sign, as Man or Brute has the Efſence oſ an Animal. Tur Real Eſences of Corporeal Subſtances are either. VFinsr, Thoſe, according ro which all Natural Things are Suppoſcd by Some to be Made, and of which they Equally Partake, and do become of this or that Species and of vhich there is Thought to be a Certain Nuniber; But the Monſtrous Pro ductions in Narure are Imagined to be a Suſſicient Conſutation of ſuch a Sup poſition. ] lii . SucoND, Or they are Suppoſecd by Otheis to be the Real, but Unknown Con ſtitution of the Inſenſible Parts of Bodies, ſrom Whence their Senſible Qualitie Flow. i illi i ii l T . Ir is alſo farther Obſerved, that the Nominal and Real Eſſences of Simple Idea and Modes are always the Same, but in Subſtances always quite Different; Thus th Real and Nominal Eſſence of a Triangle is the Same; But the Real Eſſence of Gold that is, the Real Conſtitution of it's Inſenſible Parts, on which all it's Properties De pend, is Different from it's Nominal Eſſence, that is, a Collection only of it's Pro perties, as of Colour, Weight, Fuſibility, Fixedneſs, &e. which is our Abſtracted and Complex Idea of it. TuaT Eſſences are but Abſtracted Ideas, Appears alſo, from their being held In generable and Incorruptible, ſince all Things in Nature are Liable to Change, bui as they are Ideas Eſtabliſied in the Mind, they are Inmutable, and whatever becomes of Alexander, or Bucephalus, the Ideas of Man and Horſe Remain the Same.  How far this Philoſophy is Right, and in what it is Miſtaken, may be Eaſily Judg ed, by what has been Diſcourſed and Argued before, in Relation to General, Abſtracted, or Complex Ideas, and Particularly thoſe of Subſtances, and by the Preceding Section, Concerning the Signification of Words, and therefore it would be Needleſs to Repeat the Trouble of a farther Examination here of the Particulars Alledged. I mũ only Add, Firſt, that Men do not Form their General Ideas, and Aſffix to them General Names, which Expreſs ſuch Ideas, becauſe they could not Remember Particulars, but becauſe they could not otherwiſe be Intelligible to One Another; For I Ask, whether ever any Man, or Child, made his General Idea of Gold, or a Triangle, to ſave himſelf the Trouble of Remembering every Particular Parcel of Gold, or every Triangular Figure, which has Occurred to him? On the Contrary, I Sce a Piece of Gold, or a Triangle, which Another does, and a Third, or a Fourth, &e. we Call each by their Different Names, and when we See any Subſtance, or any Figure of a Like Kind, tho we do not Know all the Properties of Either, we Call them by the Same Names. Tnus, any Ordinary Tradeſman may nearly Know, what Gold is, as well as the beſt Refiner of it, by it's Weight and it's Colour, and a Common Meaſurer of Lands and Acres, what a Triangle is, as well as the Profoundeſt Geometer; ſo Thought, Perception, Judgment, are General Terms, which are made, not to Save the Memory a Trouble, but to Expreſs Ideas without the Particularities of them, which arc Common to All, and from whence we Know what Each other Mans are, according to what has been Explained before in the Signification of Words. SECOND, As to the Improvement of Knowledge, General Ideas are ſo far from being Serviceable to it, that they are the very Bane of it, and if we vould Inquire into Particular Ideas, or Particular Things, with more Accuracy and Attention, the Learned World would find a Greater Advantage from it; Thus, iſ I, or any other Perſon could Tell what the Nature of any One or More Particular Beings was, their Subſtance and Eſſence, I ſould do more towards the Informing of it, than all the Volumes, which have been Writ in Logicks, of Genus, and Species, or than what even the Preſent Syſteme of Ideas has done; Which is Spent in Sorting and Claſſng it's Ideas, without Inſtructing us in any Uſefull Truths in Philoſophy, or caſon. As to the General or Nominal Ideas of Genus and Species, they are Certainly nothing but Creatures of the Mind, and can give no Advance to Knowledge, nor can the General or Real Idcas of Subſtances, whilſt thoſe Subſtances are Unknown; And as to the Diſtinction of Simple and Complex Ideas, of What Uſe is it to the Knowledge of Things? This all only Reſts, as the Ancient Logicks did, in General and Abſtracted Terms, without Leading us into the Solution of any one Appearance in Nature. TninD, We are Told, how ve come by theſe General Ideas from Children to Men, as before Recounted; Whereas the Mind does not ſeem to Proceed in that Way, but it rather Forms it's General Ideas. by mere Senſe, and the Apparent Likeneſs and Similitude of Things, and not by Abſtraction, which is a Philoſophick Way of doing it, and which can never Enter into the Minds of Children, no more than the Genus or Species of a Logician; Thus, vhen we See ſeveral Men together, or One after Another, we find they Agree in Shape, Figure, in Diſcourſing, and ſeveral Actions, which are Common to them, or vhen we See ſeveral Pieces of Gold, e we alſo find them to Agree in Colour, and to be Like Each Other in Diverſe Particulars ; And if it be Inquired of a Child, What that Perſon is, or the Other, or a Third, he vill Anſwer a Man, or What that Piece of Metal is, or a Second, Third or Fourth, his Anſwer will be Gold; Becauſe he Concludes them to be the ſame Sort from their Similitude, without Knowing the Exact Properties of Either; Which we aſterwards Learn, and how to Abſtract them, by Obſervation, Reaſoning, and Philoſophy 3 And that this is ſo, is Manifeſt, ſince we Acquire our Native Language, and even the General Names in it, vhen we are yet Exceeding Young, and are Incapable of Abſtracting. As to Genus and Species, they are Evidently the Contrivance, not of Children, but of Subtile, Studious, and Ingenious Men, and arc no other than ſeveral Abſtracted Ideas, which are More or Lels Comprehenſive; and yet Genus and Species are General Terms or Ideas. Nav, it is farther Allowed by this Philoſophy, that tho Nature makes Things Alike, and ſo lays the Foundation of this Sorting and Claſſing, yet the Sorts or Species themſelves are the Workmanſhip of Human Underſtanding; If ſo, the Firſt therefore belongs to Children, viæ. to Apprehend Things as they are Alike; But the Laſt, that is, the Forming Abſtracted and General Ideas, to the Philoſopher; According to what we have before Affirmed. FOURTH, The Suppoſition, that there are a Certain Number of Eſſences, which are Patterns and Standards, according to which all Things in Nature are Formed, Is Derived from the Nominal Eſſences, or the Abſtracted Ideas, of the Logicians of Genus and Species, which are Creatures of the Mind, and do not Really Subſiſt in Nature. FirTH, The Real Eſſences of Things, which are the Unknown Conſtitution of the Inſenſible Parts of Bodies, from Whence their Senſible Qualities Flow, are in Truth nothing but Nominal Eſſcnces, or Abſtracted Ideas, made by the Mind, and do not Exiſt any where, but in the Underſtanding; Thus Matter, Abſtracted from it's Particular Qualities, by which it is made Similar and Homogeneous in all Corporeal Beings, tho' it is Imagined by Philoſophers to be Real, is nothing but a General Idea, an Abſtraction of the Mind, and a mere Nominal Eſſence, or a Genus of the Logicians, as I have Shewn in the Firſt Part of our Principles of Philoſophy, Chapter the Sixth. SixrH, Nominal and Real Eſſences of Simple Ideas and Modes, are not always the Same, but in Subſtances always Different, as this Philoſophy Aſfirms; For as Simple Ideas or Modes are General and Abſtracted Terms or Ideas, as Colour, Sound Red, Green, Blue, Grave, Acute, Gratitude, Murder, &. they have a Nominal Eſſence, but as Colour, Sound, Red, Murder, &⸗. are Real Properties in Nature, or are Real Human Actions, they have a Real Eſſence, and So of all Others. Abſtractions of the Mind have only a Nominal Eſſence, and no Real; Real Properties of Nature, or Real Human Actions, have a Real Eſſence Diſtinct and Different from the Nominal; Thus a Triangle, as it is a Genus or General Term, has a Nominal Eſſence, but not a Real; as a Triangle Exiſts in Nature, it has a Real Eſſence, and not a Nominal; And the ſame may be ſaid of Gold, or any other Subſtance; And vhat the Real Eſlcnces of a Triangle or Gold are, we have before Explained. 5. 4. THO Words Signify nothing Immediately, but the Ideas in the Mind of the Speaker, yet, it is ſaid, the Names of Simple Ideas, Mixed Modes, and Natural Subſtances have cach of them ſomething Peculiar. FirsT, The Names of Simple Ideas, and Subſtances, with the Abſtracted Ideas in the Mind, Intimate ſome Real Exiſtence, from which was Derived theit Original Pattern, but the Names o Mixed Modes Terminate in the Idea, that is, in the Mind. SECOND, The Names of Simple Ideas and Modes Signify the Real, as well as Nominal Eſſtnces of their Species, the Names of Subſtances Signiſy Rarely, if ever, any Thing, but Barely the Nominal Eſences of thoſe Species. TuiRD, The Names of Simple Ideas are not Capable of Deſinitions, Thoſe ol Complex Ideas are; Becauſe a Definition is nothing elſe, but ſicwing the Mcaning oſ onc Word by ſeveral other not Synonymous Terms; The Names thereſore oſ Simple Idcas are Incapable of being Deſincd, ſnce the ſeveral Terms of a Deſinition Signi Ttt fyin” lying ſeveral Ideas, they cannot Repreſent an Idea, which has no Compoſition at all. i AND from not Obſerving this Difference in our Ideas, it is ſaid, Proceed thoſ Triſling Deſnitions of the Ariſtotelian Philoſophy ; That Motion is the Act oſ a Being in Power, as ſar forth as it is in Power; and of the Aromical; That it is the Paſage of a Body, from One Place to Another; or of the Carteſian; That it is the Succeſſive Application of the Parts of the Superficies of One Body to thoſe of Another; That Light, in the Peripatetick or Ariſtotelian Ph©loſophy, is the Act oſ Perſpicuous, as far Forth, as Perſpicuous; and in the Carteſian; That it is a Great Number of Globules Striking Driskly on the Bottom of the Eye3 Theſe are ſaid to be Triſling Deſinitions, becauſe he that has nor before Received into his Mind by rhe Proper In-let the Simple Idea, which any Word Stands for, can never come to Know the Signification of that Word, by any other Words or Sounds whatſoever. BuT in Complex Ideas, it is ſaid, Definitions take Place; For Words Standing for thoſe ſeveral Ideas, that make up the Compoſirion, may Imprint Complex Ideas in the Mind, that never were there before, and ſo make theit Names be Underſtood; So in the Rain bow, by Enumerating the Figure, Largeneſs, Poſition, and Order oſ the Colours, it might be ſo well Defined, as to be Perſctly Known and Apprehended. It is farther Said, that the Names of Simple Ideas, Subſtances, and Mixed Modes, have this Difference, that Thoſe of Mixed Modes Stand for Ideas Perſectly Arbitrary; Thoſe oſ Subſlances are not Perfectly ſo, but Reſer to a Pattern with ſome Latitude; and Thoſe of Simple Ideas are Perſectly Taken from the Exiſtence o Things, and are not Arbitrary at all; All which Aſſertions we ſhall now Conſider. AND Firſt, this Philoſophy had Endeavoured to Prove, Chap. 2. that Words Signiſy Nothing, but the Ideas in the Mind of the Speaker, againſt which we Argued, 5. 2. it now Retracts that Notion and Tells us, that the Names of Simple Ideas and Subſtances, with the Abſtracted Ideas in the Mind, Intimate Some Real Exiſtence, from which was Derived their Original Pattern, that is, that Words Signify ſomething more than the Idcas in the Mind of the Speaker, which we Affirmed; and Thoſe, who are not villing to be Convinced by the Arguments Alledged in that Section, I hope will Pleaſe to Acquieſce in the Acknowledgements of That Philoſophy, Which had Advanced the Contrary3 Tis True, the Names of Mixed Modes Terminate in the Idea, that is in the Mind, but we have Evinced, that thoſe Mixed Modes are mere Creatures oſ it, and if not, that they Torminate in the Real Exiſtence of Human Actions. SECOND, If the Names of Simple Ideas, and of Modes, Signify the Real, as well as Nominal Eſſences of their Species, they are upon the Level with each Other as to their Reality; Whereas beſore, Simple Ideas Intimated ſome Real Exiſtence, but Modes Terminated in the Idea, which was in the Mind; On the Contrary, if the Names of Subſtances Signify only the Nominal Eſſences of thoſe Species, ſince Nominal Eſſences are only General and Abſtracted Ideas, they Terminate in the Mind, and ought to be Joined with Mixed Modes, whereas before, they were Joined with Simple Ideas, as to their Intimating ſome Real Exiſtence. To Conclude upon this Head, Simple Ideas, Subftances, and Mixed Modes, have nothing Peculiar and Diſtinct from cach Other, bur do all Terminate in the Mind, when Conſidered as General and Abſtracted Ideas, under which all of the ſame Kind are Ranked and Sorted3 And on the other Hand, they all Intimate ſome Real Exiſtence, ſrom which thoſe Abſtractions are Made, and from hich was Derived their Original Pattern, vhen they Signiſy thoſe Real Exiſtences, as Gold, &. in Subſtances; Red, Yellow, Green, &e. in Simple Ideas; and Gratitude or Murder, in Mixed Modes; that is, when theſe are Suppoſed in Fact to Exiſt in Nature, or in Human Acion and are not Merely General or Abſtracted Ideas, which only Terminate in the Mind. Froa Hence it is, that all Simple Ideas, Subſlances, and Mixed Modes, have their Nominal and their Real Eſences; The Firſt Concerns the Logician, who is willing to Rank and Claſs his Ideas under ſeveral Diſtinctions, which is Common to this Syſteme, vith that of Predicaments and Predicables, and which is of little Importance or Signiſicance to a Juſt Inquiry into Things; The Second Concerns Nature, and Thoſe, Thoſe, vho Love and Value the Studies of it, and which we have Endeavoured tt Shev, and Evince, what they are, in the foregoing Chapter. ANY Apparent Properties of Gold, a Man, a Triangle, &c. which are Suſficien to Diſtinguiſ one Sort of Beings from Another, will Serve for their Nominal Eſ fences, but we muſt Inquire into the Nature of Gold, Man, or a Triangle, to Kno the Real Eſſences of Them. TuirD, Complex Ideas of Subſtances do not ſeem Capable of a Definition, nc more than Simple Ideas, ſo far as to give us a True Conception of Them; Nor are they Known, but by Obſerving and Secing Them. For Firſt, they cannot be Defined by any Synonymous Terms; Becauſe, that is Explaining Idem per Idem, and they cannot be Defined by Terms, which are not 55nonymous, or Equivalent to the whole Complexion, becauſe that is Explaining Idem per Diverſum ; Ot Thus, if Simple ldeas cannot be Defined, it is Impoſſible Complex Ideas, which Conſiſt of thoſe Simple Ones, ſould be; unleſs ve can Define an Aſſemblage of Simple Ideas, by an Aſſemblage of Simple Ideas, that is, by Synonmous Terms, or an Aſſlemblage of Ideas, by that which is not an Aſſemblage of the ſame Ideas, that is by Terms, which are not Synonymous. SECOND, Moreover, in Complex Ideas of Subſtances, the ſeveral Peculiar Ideas; which Enter into their Compoſition, Want Names to Diſtinguiſh them from all Others; Thus, the Infinite Variety of Colours and Shades of the ſame Colour, the Innumerable Kinds oſf Extenſion, and Sorts of Brightneſs or Dulneſs, of Smoothneſs; or Roughneſs, are Deſtitute of Terms to Explain them; And this is the Reaſon, why it is Impoſſible fully to Conceive the Deſcription of a Plant, or a Tree, a Metal, Stone, or an ædifice, or of Landskips and Countries, hich we have not Seen; Nor can a Rainbow, which this Philoſophy Mentions, be ſo Defined to One, who never Sav it, by the Order of the Colours and Figure of the Bow, as to give him the ſame Idea, which he would have upon a View oſ it. FirsT, Becauſe, a Bow Painted on Paper, with all the Diſtinctions of Colour with that in the Heavens, will not Produce the ſame Idea in us, with that in the Heavens; It will Want of it's Peculiar Hue, which Proceeds from the Sun's Various Impreſſions on the æther, of it's Particular Agreeableneſs, Life, Vivacity, and Brightneſs, which vill be Entirely Different from the Fineſt and moſt Delicate Colours Laid on Paper, or a Canvas; And yet no One can Deſcribe or Define to Another the Rainbow, vith the ſame Advantage, as a Skilfull and Accurate Pencil may. SECOND, Becauſe, we have not Names for the Different Reds, Blues, Greens, &. which are as Diſtinct from each Other, as Red from Green, or Blue. THIRD, Becauſe, a Blind Man may as well Know, what Light is, as a Man, who never ſav the Rain bow in the Air, can Form a Notion of the Different Modifications of Light in the Air, from a Deſcription of them; A Rain-bow may, it is Likely, be ſo Defined or Deſcribed, as that we ſhall know it, when we Sce it, that it is, what was Deſcribed; And ſo it is not Impoſſible, but Light may be ſo Defined to a Blind Man, as that he ſiould be Able to Diſtinguiſh it from Darkneſi; when he Receives his Sight, tho' the Idea of it may be Perfectly New to him; For a Blind Man knows, what Alacrity, Pleaſure, and Chearfulneſ is; And on the Contrary, vhat Melancholy, Unpleaſantneſs, and a Gloomineſs of Mind are; If therefore he ſhould be Told, that Light Imparts Alacrity and Pleaſure, and Darkneſs the Reverſe of it, all Spread thro' the Space he Walks in; It is not Improbable, but he might know the One from the Other, altho his Conceptions of them are not any Thing Like what his Ideas would be upon the Actual Impreſſion of them. WuaT ve have ſaid of Subſtances, may be Equally Applied to Mixed Modes; which may be Indeed Defined, and Suſficiently Deſcribed, ſo long as they are Conſidered only as General, or Abſtracted Ideas, or Creatures of the Mind, and ſo may a Chimæra; That is, what Lies and Terminates in One Man's Mind, may be Exactly Communicated and Imparted to Another's, as a Triangle or Murder in General, or a Globe, or a Cube, or any Proportions in the Mathematicks, which are Abſtractions from Things, as they Really Exiſt; From whence a Blind Man is Equally Capable of ſuch Notions, and of having Juſt Conceptions of them, with One who has the moſt Abſolute, and Perfect Uſe of his Sight; But when we Conſider Mixed Modes, as Real Human Actions, vhich are the Foundation of thoſe Abſtractions, Ttit ta they they are not, nor can they be Clearly and Fully Defined, for Inſtance, Murder;Tis True, ve know it is Killing a Man with a Malice Prepenſe, and Extends to all Murders in General, but this is not to Repreſent any Particular Murder, which is Attended with that Horror from the Singular Behaviour, Innocence, Looks, and Features of the Perſon Suffering, and the Barbarity and Cruelty, and the Grim and Ghaſtly Countenance of the Aggreſſor, and the Diſtinguiſing Paſſions of Each, that the whole of the Action, and all the Circumſtances of it, are no More, but much Leſi, to be Deſcribed or Defined, than they can be Fully and Exactly Painted. FOURTH, As to vhat is ſaid, Concerning the Trifling Definitions of Philoſophers, that they are Occaſioned from a Want of Obſerving, that Simple Ideas cannot be Defined, but that Complex Ones may; It is no ſuch Matter; For theſe Definitions of the Philoſophers, are not the Definitions of the Simple Ideas of Light and Motion; They Suppoſc both to be known, as to the Ideas of them, and only Endeavour to Explain their Nature; And therefore the Abſurdity and Trifling Lies on the Side of the Logician, and not on the Side of the Philoſopher; The Truth here ſeems to be, that tho' this Syſteme of Ideas had Entirely Diſclaimed the Entering into Natural Philoſophy, yet it was willing to Shew, it was not out of an Ignorance, but a Contempt of it; And from this Example, Iam Apt to Believe, it will be Pretty Evident, that it had Good Reaſons for the Latter, becauſe it had ſo Much of the Former. 5.5. IT is Eaſy from what ve have already ſaid, Concerning Mixed Modes, to Determine againſt the Preſent Syſteme of Ideas. FIrsT, That They are not made by the Underſtanding, and that They do not in this Reſpect Diſfer from Simple Ideas, which are not made by the Underſtanding; Becauſe They Depend upon the Real Exiſtence of Human Thoughts and Actions, as much as Simple Ideas do upon the Real Properties of the Mind or Body. SECOND, That They are not made Arbitrarily withouti Patterns or Reference to any Real Exiſtence, and therefore do not in this Caſe Differ from our Ideas of Subſtances, which are not made without ſuch a Reference; And which is afierwards Confeſſed, when we are Told, that Mixed Modes are not made at Random, and Jumbled together without any Reaſon at all, but as Men have Frequent Occaſion to Mention them, that is, ve Say, as Human Actions Require them; And if ſo, They are not made Arbitrarily, and withour Patterns or Reference. In Fine, Mixed Modes in all Particulars ſecem to Lie under the ſame Laws and Conditions with Thoſe of our Simple Ideas, and our Ideas of Subſtances; They are Equally Taken from Nature, and have às much a Foundation in it, as thoſe Others have; All the Diſference is in the Patterns, from whence they are ſeverally Derived; The Simple and Uncompounded Properties of Beings are the Foundation of our Simple Ideas, Beings themſclves of our Ideas of Subſtances, and Human Thoughts and Actions of our Mixed Modes, which Human Thoughts and Actions are as Real in Nature, as Beings, or the Properties of Them; With this Diſtinction, that the Laſt are Neceſſary, and the Firſt Voluntary only, and therefore may not Exiſt in Fact, but always muſt, and will, in the Power we have to Produce them. ON the Contrary, ve Own, that All theſe Ideas, both Simple, Thoſc of Subſtances, and Mixed Modes, may be Conſidercd as only Abſtracted Ideas, under which we Rank and Sort Things, without having any orther Real Exiſtence; But then we Affirm, they are ſtill upon the Level, and are alike General Terms, and Logical or Metaphyſical Notions. Nor is it True, which this Philoſophy of Ideas Aſſerts towards the End of this Chapter, that the Names of Mixed Modes are Commonly Got, before the Ideas, they Stand for, are Perfectly known, whereas in Simple Ideas, and thoſe of Subſtances, the Names or Ideas are Got the One before the Other, as it Happens. For the Names of Mixed Modes, as well as of Simple Ideas and Subſtances, are Got before or aſter the Ideas of them are Perfectly Known, according as it Happens; Thus, we may as well See a Human Action Committed, as Murder, before we have a Proper Name for it, as we may See a Simple Idea, or a Subſtance, before the Name, by which it is Expreſſed, is Known to us; Nay it is Evident, that we are as much Taught in our Intancy, what to Call Human Actions, as by what Term to Signify our Idea ol Red, Green, Dlue, Sound, or any other Simple Idea; But we have Shewn all oui Mixed Modes have their Foundation in Human Actions, and Depend upon them: li If yet we Mean by Mixed Modes, Abſtracted and General Ideas Formed by the Mind, it has been Proved, that they are of the ſame Nature with our Simple Ideas, or Thoſe of Subſtances, when made General and Abſtracted. Ir is Said, what has been Affirmed of Mixed Modes, is Applicable to Relations, which we therefore need not Conſider. 5. 6. THi1S Chapter, Excluding all Unneceſſary Ambages and Circumlocutions, which this Philoſophy is not a little Fond of, is Contrived to give us an Account of vhat a Nominal and a Real Eſſence is, and the Diſtinction betwixt them. THE Meaſure and Boundary of each Sort of Beings, whereby it is Conſtituted that Particular Sort, and is Diſtinguiſhed from Others, is ſaid to be, what we Call its Eſence. Whaicu Eſence is nothing but that Abſtracted Idea, to which that Name is Annexed, ſo that every Thing Contained in that Idea is Eſiential to That Sort, This is Called Nominal Eſſence. BUT Real Eſſence is Affirmed to be that Real Conſtiturion of Subſtances, on which this Nominal Eſſence, and all the Properties of That Sort Depend. Tnus, the Nominal Eſſence of Gold is that Complex Idea, the Word Gold Stands for, for Inſtance, a Body, Yellow, Weighty, Malleable, Fuſible, and Fixed; But it's Real Eſience is the Conſtitution of it's Inſenſible Parts, on which all it's other Properties Depend, and which is Affirmed to be wholly Unknown to us; And the ſame is ſaid of Matter, it's Nominal Eſſence is Extenſion, or Solidity, or Both, according as Philoſophers Define it, but it's Real Eſlence is, vhat we are Entirely Ignorant of; And therefore it is Alledged, that we Rank and Sort Subſtances and Things by their Nominal, and not by their Real Eſſences, of which we Know nothing; And it is from hence Concluded, that it is in Vain to Think of Ranking or Sorting of Things by their Real Eſſences, whoſe Fine Contrivances are Infinitely beyond our Comprehenſion; Since the Workmanſhip of the Al-wiſe Powerful God in the Great Fabrick of the Univerſe, and every Part thereof, farther Exceeds the Comprehenſion of the moſt Inquiſitive and Intelligent Man, than the Beſt Contrivance of the moſt Ingenious Man doth the Conceptions of the moſ lgnorant of Rational Creatures. Tnis Philoſophy of Ideas Proceeds to Tell us, that Nominal Eſences of- Suſtances are not made ſo Arbitrarily, as Thoſe of Mixed Modes, but that it is Neceſſary in a Nominal Eſſence, FinsT, That the Ideas, whereof it Conſiſts, have ſuch an Union, as to make m One Idea, how Compounded ſoever; The Mind here only Follows Nature, and Puts none together, which are not Suppoſced to have an Union in it. SECOND, That the Particular Ideas ſo United be Exactly the Same, neither More nor Leſ;, otherwiſe they make Two Different, and not One and the Same Nominal Eſence3 And here, tho' the Mind never Puts together any Ideas, that do not, or are not Suppoſed to Co-exiſt, yet the Number it Combines, Depends upon the Various Care, Induſtry, or Fancy of him, that makes it; In Vegetables and Animals, which are Propagated by Seeds, and are Organized Bodies, the Shape is the moſt Characteriſtical Part that Determines the Species; in moſt other Bodies, which are not Propagated by Seeds, and are not Organized Bodies, it is the Colour we Chieſly Fix on, and are moſ Led by TnE Nominal Eſſences of Subſtances, tho' Suppoſcd to be Copied from Nature, are very lmperſect, and we may Conclude, that theſe Boundaries of Species are as Men, and not as Nature makes them, if at Leaſt there are in Nature any ſuch Prefixed Bounds; And the Sorting of Things by us being in Order to Naming and Comprehending them under General Terms, it is Thought, it cannot Properly be ſaid, that Nature Sets the Boundaries of the Species of Things, but if iĩt be ſo, that our Boundaries of Species are not Exactly Conformable to Nature; And in the whole Buſineſs of Genus and Species, the Genus, or more Comprehenſive Term, ĩs but a Partial Conception of what is in the Species and the Species but a Partial I dea of what is to be Found in each Individual3 and this is done without any Conſt deration of Real Eſſences. As to Nominal and Real Eſſences, ve have before Diſcourſed Concerning them and we ſhall only here farther Take Notice. FinsT First, That this Syſteme of Ideas Owns, what we Endeavòured tõ Shew in oui Principles, Chap. 6. Book I. that Matter, as Received and Embraced by the Preſent Philoſophy, is an Hypotheſis or Creature of the Mind, and is nothing more than the Nominal Eſſence of it; and therefore It might as well Take the Genus and Specie: of the Logicians to Explain Nature, as that Nominal Matter, which it Aſſumes: And Conſequently Thoſe, vho will not be Convinced by what we have Writ on that Head, we Hope will at Leaſt Subſcribe to the Authority and Confeſſions of ſo Oraculous and Infallible a Guide. SECOND, That the Judgement, which is here made Concerning the Real Eſſences of Things, and the Fine Contrivances of them, being beyond our Comprehenſion, and the Pious Inference Drawn from thence, is only upon the Suppoſition of the Truth of the Corpuſcularian or Atomical Scheme: And we may Venture to Suy, That from ſo Abſurd and Irrational a Plan, it would not only be Impoſſible for the Greateſt Genius's, vhich ever were in the World, to Sort Things according to their Real Eſſences, but for Infinite Wiſdom it's ſelf to do it; Becauſe it would be Endeavouring to Aſcertain the Reality of Beings from Chimæras and Fantaſtical Eſſences, which never had any Exiſtence in Nature, Excepting in our own Dreams and Imaginations. TuirD, From hence likewiſe it is, that is, from it's being only Acquainted with the Corpuſcularian Scheme, that this Syſteme of Ideas Thinks, that the Boundaries of the Species of Things are as Men, and not as Nature makes them, and at the ſame Time Doubts, whether there are any ſuch Prefixed Bounds in Nature; that is, it only Knows the Nominal Eſſences of Things, which are ſaid to be Various in Different Men, and therefore it Concludes, or is Apt to Believe, there are no Real Eſſences of them; Whereas Nominal Eſſences may be Various, and may Conſiſt of One. Two, Three, or more Properties, which yet may Denote the ſame Real Eſſence; But becauſe One Perſon Signifies his Idea of Gold by it's Colour and Weight, Another by it's Colour, Weight, and Fixedneſs, and a Third Adds Fuſibility, and therefore their Nominal Eſſences Differ, Would any One from hence Infer, that it was Uncertain, whether there was ſuch a Real Eſſence in Nature, as that of Gold, hich Intrinſically Diſtinguiſied it from all other Metals or Subſtances whatſoever? The Nominal Eſſence with Men, let it Conſiſt of Fewer or More Properties, Diſtinguiſes it from all other Subſtances, and the Real, in the Nature of Things; The Firſt is Contrived for the Mutual Communication of our Ideas, and for the Convenience of Converſation and Commerce, the Laſt is the Labour and Province of the Philoſopher. And the Same may be ſaid of Vegetables and Animals, that, Albeit the Nominal Eſſence is Varied, it is yet Intended to Signify and Denote the Same Thing or Real Eſſence, which tho Unknown, yet may Poſſibly be Traced out and Diſcovered by the Diligence and Sagacity of the Studious and Inquiſitive. FOURTH, It is very Probable, as we before Hinted, That, where there are Two or Three Ideas, hich Diſtinguiſh a Subſtance from all Others, all it's other Properties are likewiſe Diſtinct, and Mutually Infer Each Other. Tnus in Gold, which ue Jun now Mentioned, it's Peculiar Yellowneſs and Weight, will have a Particular Extenſion, Fuſibility, &. Attending it, in Diſtinction from all orher Subſtances; And ſo the Nominal Eſſence may be a Juſt Repreſentative of the Real; For a Triangle may have Ten Thouſand Properties by being Differently Related to and Compared with Different Quantities; And yet it's Two Properties of Three Lines, and Three Angles, which are Plain and Viſible, and which Diſtinguiſ it from all other Figures, are Thought to be a Sufficient Deſcription of i's Eſence; It is the ſame in Subſtances, where the Real Eſſence of any One of them, as vell as Nominal, may be Expreſſed by TWo or Three Plain Properties, which ſhall Diſtinguiſh it from all other Subſtances, and the Numerous other Properties will Ariſe from the Various Applications of Different Subſtances to it, by which their Peculiar Expanſive and Contractive Forces will be Exerted, in which their Real Eſſences Conſiſt. . 7. PARTICLES are ſaid to be Words, which are made Uſe of by the Mind to Connect it's Ideas into Propoſitions, as is, is not, are Marks of Aſfirming or Denying; or to Unite whole Sentences with One Another, to make a Coherent Diſcourſe; or to Expreſs hat Connexion, Reſtriction, Diſtinction, Oppoſition, Emphaſis, &æ. it gives to the ſeveral Parts of it; Which cannot be Rightly Underſtood without a Clear View of the Poſtures, Stands, Turns, Limitations, Exceptions, and other Thoughts of the the Mind, of which there is a great Variety, much Exceeding the Number of Particles, that moſt Languages have to Expreſs them by, from whence moſt Particles have Diverſe, and ſometimes Oppoſite Significations; Thus in the Particle But; But to ſuy no more, Intimates a Stop of the Mind in the Courſe it was Going, beſore it camẽ to the End of it; I ſaw but Two Planets Shews, that the Mind Limits the Senſc to what is Expreſſed with a Negation of all Other; You Pray, but it is not, that Goa would bring you to the True Religion, but that he would Confiris you in your on  The Former Intimates a Suppoſition in the Mind of ſomething otherwiſc than it ould be, the Latter Shews, that the Mind makes a Direct Oppoſition between that, and what goes before; All Animals have Senſe, but a Dog is an Animal, Ergo a Dog has Senſe, which Signifies the Connexion of the Latter Propoſition with the Former; And in the Right Uſe of theſe Particles it is Thought, that more Particularly Conſiits rthe Clearneſs and Beauty of a Good Stile. TuaT there are Affirmations and Negations in the Mind of it's Ideas is Maniſeſ, and that they are Expreſſcd in our own Language by is, and is not, is as Evident; but the Queſtion in Philoſophy will be, which Way we make theſe Particles, or any Others, to be Significant of ſueh Aſfirmations, or Negations in the Mind, or of the Connexions, Reſtrictions, Diſtinctions, Poſtures, Stands, Turns, and Limitations in it, ſo as Others ould Underſtand them to be ſuch; Which is not here Explained; And which cannot be by making Uſe of Words, which only Signify our own Ideas, which yet this Philoſophy in Mixed Modes Affirms, but which ſhall Expreſs and Communicate the ſame Ideas to Others; This Difficulty notwithſtanding will be Eaſily Solved by what has been Alledged before, upon the Paſſions and Affections of the Mind, and the Way of Imparting them to Others by Names and Marks, upon which the ſame Community Agrees, and therefore there will be no Occaſion at Preſent to Enlarge upon this Head. TuE Second Thing to be Inquired into is, whether a Right Uſe of theſe Particles is That, in which Conſiſts the Clearneſs and Beauty of a Good Stile; Which is far from being True, becauſe the Clearneſs of a Stile does not ſo much Conſiſt in the Particles, as in the Explicit and Determined Ideas of the Mind, Expreſſed by the Same Terms always Annexed to the Same Explicit and Determined Ideas, and the Beauty of it is Owing to the Lively and Agrecable Images Raiſed in us by it ; Which is Evident from What we find in Homer, whoſe Particles of ſa, 7i; , Th, tho ve do not fully Underſtand, yet his Images are ſo Determined and Juſt, and at the ſame Time ſo Lively and Agrecable, that we cannot but Pronounce his Stile to be both Clear and Beautifull; and the like may be Affirmed of Demoſthenes, tho we do not ſo Perſectly Comprehend, what Perhaps is Meant by xal u bn vi, ob và,  æ uũ, &. Nav farther in thoſe Particles, which are of Greater Importance in Language, and which this Philoſophy Principally Intends, which Connect and Range our Idcas into Sentences and Diſcourſe, there is many Times a Kind of Negligence and a Want of Strict Propriety and Grammar, where yet the Language is Sufficiently Intelligible and Clear, and the Notions Beautifull, Magnificent, and Sublime, which is Manifeſt in the Nobleſt Productions of the Ancients, as well as Moderns; For no One will Deny, that the Language and Stile of Homer is Infinitely Superior to that of Apollonius ~Rhodius, tho the Laſt is a Critical Obſerver of theſe Particles, and the Rules of Conſtruction, whereas the Firſt is more Unreſtrained and Unconfined, and ſeems to Soar above them. It is the Same in Pindar, Horace, and our OWn Ailton, Compared with other Writers. WE do not, it is True, come up to the Elegance and Fineſs of the Spirit of any Langnage as it was, vhen Spoken, Writ in, and Exactly Underſtood, and which, ſince that Time, we Call a Dead One; But yet no One will Say, that there is not both Clearneſ and Beauty in the Stile of the Claſſicks, tho' the Life and Spirit of them may be very much Loſt, from a Want of Underſtanding thoſe Small Expletives or Particles, we have Mentioncd; It ſeems to be like a Fine and Beautifull Picture, which has Colour, Lincaments, Symmetry, and Proportion, but the Liſe and Spirit is wanting, Excepting ſo much as Subſiſts in the Grand, Excellent, and Divine Sentiments oſ the Authors; Tho' I do not Think it Impoſſible, by a Strict Application to the Study ol them, and of Denioſihenes, and Homer, and Sophocles in Particular, to Renew rhis Life and Spirit to them, by an Explanation of thoſe Particles or Expletives, which have beer been hitherto Deſpaired of, and of Which, in thoſe Great and Celebrated Genius's, have given ſome Inſtances Formerly to my Pupils, in Reading of Them. For the Truet Way oſ Interpreting the Mind and Senſe oſ an Author, and the Particles he makes Uſe of is, by Conſidering, and Endcavouring to Enter into, th True Poſture, Genius, and Force of his Mind, vho Writes to us in a Dead Lan gnage; To Know and Inquire into all the Circumſtances of it at that Time, and fron Comparing his Various Paſſions and Thoughts, and Collating the ſeveral Expreſſion: in him with each Other, To Place ourſelves, as much as Poſſible, by all the In ſormations we can Get or Acquire Concerning him, in the Same State; This vill give Life and Vigour to the Dead Language, and the Particles of it, which other viſe will be quite Loſ, and Appear as Flat and Inſipid, as the Reading or the Con ſtruing of a Claſſick does to a School Boy; Becauſe by this Means, that is, by Con ſidering, what We ſhould Say in ſuch a Poſition of Circumſtances and Paſſions, ve often, as Human Nature is much the Same in all, do Find out and Diſcover, what Really was ſaid in thoſe Circumſtances of Things, and under thoſe Affections of the Mind; If therefore we would Explain any Author, our firſt Buſineſs muſt be to Get into the Man, and we muſt do like the Famous ſoſcius, Mentioned by Tully with Applauſe, who, to Expreſs a Character to the Life, vas Obliged to Put himſelſ into the Place and Circumſtance of the Character, he Perſonated or Explained. Tnus, if we vould Explain Demoſthenes, ve muſt Put on all the Paſions and Vehemence of an Athenian, Defending the Liberties of Greece, againt the Encroachments and Ulurpations of a Barbarian ; If Sophocles, we muſt Place our ſclves in the Perſons and Circumſtances oſ all the Characters he Introduces; If Homer, ve muſt do the Same in Reſpect of his ſcveral Heroes, and thoſe other Characters, which he Tranſmits to us; And What is Singular and Particular to each Author, will be beſt Explained, by Endeavouring to Know the Genius and Character of his Mind. Tuis alſo is the Truet Method, which any One can Purſue in Giving the Real Sentiments of St. Paul, or any Other Apoſtle, Evangeliſt, or Sacred Writer, Allowing for their Inſpiration; that is, the Mind muſt be Warmed with the Same Integrity and Zeal for the Chriſtian Faith and Perſuaſion, which Obtained in the Primitive Times of it, and then the Expoſitor will in all Likelihood Fall into the Same Notions, Paſſions, Way of Reaſoning, and Senſc, with the Divine Author he Expounds; But if Men vill Explain the Scriptures without the Spirit of Them, by a Dull and Fantaſtick Way oſ Reaſoning upon them, which is the Caſe of our Preſent Syſtematiſt, in his Comments upon thoſe Writers, and of moſt of the Socinians and Arians, they will do much the Same, as if a Philoſopher ſould Endeavour to Explain to us, what a Man is without his Soul, which in Fact is done by this Syſteme of Ideas, or vhat Fire is without any Heat belonging to it, which is done by it's Notable and Frencl Maſter, or Inſtructor, DesCartes. 5. 3. As to Abſtract and Concrete Terms it is Told us3 That cach Abſtract Idea being Diſtinct, ſo that the One can never be the Other, the Mind vill by it's Intuitive Knowledge Perceive their Difference; and therefore in Propoſitions, no Two vhole Ideas can ever be Aſfirmed One of Another, nor does the Common Uſe of Language Permit it3 All our Aſfirmations are only in Concrete, which is the Aſtirming One Abſiract Idea to be Joined to Another, not that One Abſtract Idca is Anothcer. ALL our Simple ldeas, it is likewiſe Said, have Abſtract, as well as Concrete Names, as Whiteneſs, White, Sweetneſs, Sweet, &c; alſo our Ideas of Modes and Relations, as Juſtice, Juſt, Equality, Equal, &; but as to our Ideas oſ Subſtances, we have very FeW Abſract Names at all, Excepting Auimalitas, Humanitas, &e. which bear but a Small Proportion to the Inſinite Number of Names of Subſtances, and which could never get Admittance into Common Uſe, or to be Current amongſt Underſtanding Mcn. As 0 what is Said, that no Two Abſiradt Words or Names oſ Abſtract Ideas can be in the Common Uſe of Language Affirmed One of Another, and that all our Aſſirmations are only in the Concrete, which is the Aſirming One Abſiract Idca to be Joined to Another; It is no more ithan to Tell us, that we never Aſirm, that a Subſlance, as Gold, ĩs Yellowneſs, but that a Subſtance, as Gold, is Yellow, which is 1 Wonderſull Diſcovery, and Worthy oſ ihe Sagacity of this Grand Vocabulary oſ our Ideas. As As to what is afterwards Said, it ſcems to be a very Great Miſtake, and a Diftinction is made without a Difference; For we have as many Abſtract Ideas of Subſtances, as we have of Simple Ideas, or Mixed Modes, or of Relations, and as many Concrete Terms belonging to thoſe Abſtract Ideas; Thus Man, Animal, Body, Gold, Iron, Stone, are all General, and Abſtract Ideas, and have Abſtract Terms Appertaining to them, and their Concretes are Human, Animate, Corporeal, Golden, Iron, and Stony; And it is as Impoſſible, that Subſtances ſould not have Abſtract Ideas and Terms, and Concrete Ones belonging to them, as well as any Modes, Relations, or Simple Ideas, as that a Subſtantive in Grammar ſhould not have it's Adjective Derived from it. Nor, becauſe the Schools have Formed but a Few Abſtract Names of Subſtances, as Animality. Humanity, Corporeity, &e. does it Follow, that a Thouſand morè might not have been as Juſtly Adopted into Language, as Aureity, Ferreity, Lapideity, or Goldneſs, Ironneſs, Stoneneſs, &e. ſince they are all of them either the Same vith the General Ideas Expreſied by Animal, Man, Body, Gold, Iron, Stone, and therefore may be Equally Admitted into the Propriety of Speech, or elſc rhey are Abſtractions of Abſtractions, or General Ideas of General Ideas, which have no Particular Ones belonging to them, and therefore ought to be Equally Rejected as Mere Jargon, and the Creatures of Soleciſm and Barbarity. 5. 9. THE Uſe and End of Words is Said to be, cither to Record our own Thoughts, or to Communicate them to Others; The Firſt is for the Help of ou own Memories, for which any Words may ſerve Turn, which being Arbitrary Signs we may Uſe, which we Pleaſe, for this Purpoſe, and there will be no Imperfection in them, if we Conſtantly Uſe the Same Sign for the Same Idea; The Second, Namely, for the Communication of our Ideas, has a Double Uſe; Firſt, a Civil Uſe, or ſuch a Communication of them, as may Serve in Common Converſation and Commerce about the Ordinary Affairs and Conveniences of Civil Life; Second, a Philoſophical Uſe, or ſuch as may Serve to Convey the Preciſe Notions of Things, and to Expreſs Certain Truths in General Propoſitions; Theſe Two Uſes are very Diſtinct, and a great deal leſs Exactneſs will Serve in the One, than in the Other. i THE End of Language in Communication is, to be Underſtood, that is, to Excite by Sounds in the Hearer the Same Ideas, which they Stand for in the Mind of the Speaker; And the Doubtfullneſs and Uncertainty of their Signification, which is the Imperfection of Language here Meant, Ariſes more from the Ideas themſelves, than from any Incapacity in the Sounds to Signify them; For in that Regard, they are all Equally Perfect; That then, which makes the Difference is, the Difference of Ideas they Stand for, which muſt be Learned and Retained by thoſe, vho would Diſcourſe together Intelligibly, which is Difficult in Theſe Caſcs, First, Where the Ideas, they Stand for, are very Complex, and Hence the Names of Mixed Modes are Liable to great Uncertainty and Obſcurity in their Signification; For here the Idea being made up of many Parts, it is not Eaſy to Form and Retain it Exactly; OF this Sort Chicſly are Moral Words, which have Seldom in Two Different Men thie Same Preciſe Signification. SECOND, Where the Ideas, they Stand for, have no Certain Connexion in Nature, and therefore no Serttled Standard to Rectify and Adjuſt them by, which is again the Caſe of the Names of Mixed Modes, which are Aſſemblages of Ideas Put together at Pleaſure; Common Uſe Indeed Regulates the Meaning of Words Pretty well for Common Converſation, but it is not Sufficient to Adjuſt them to Philoſophical Diſcourſes, there being Scarce a Name of any very Complex Idea, which is not made the Sign of far Different Ideas. TuE Way of Learning theſe Names is ſaid, not a little to Contribute to the Doubtfullneſs of their Signification; For Children are Taught the Names of Simple Ideas and Subſtances, by having the Things Shewn them; And then they Repeat the Name, that Stands for it, as White, Sweet, Milk, Sugar, &e. but in Mixed Modes. the Sounds are Learned Firſt, and Men are to Learn afterwards their Signification by theit own Obſervation and Induſtry, or the Explication of Others, which is the Reaſon, that theſe Words are little more than bare Sounds in the Minds of Moſt; Becauſe Fevw are at the Pains to Settle their Ideas and Notions Preciſely, and Thoſe, Uuuu vho who are, Make them the Signs of Idcas Different from what Others Underſtand by them, which is the Occaſion of moſt Diſputes. TuimD, Where the Signification of a Word is Referred to a Standard, which is not Eaſily Known, as in the Names of Subſtances, which being Suppoſed to Stand for their Real Efſences, which are Unknown, muſt needs be of Uncertain Application; And the like may be Said oſ the Names of Subſtances, when they Stand for the Various Collections of Simple Ideas, which are found to Coexiſt togerher, and which are Put together Diſferently by Different Men. FourTH, Where the Signification of the Word, and the Real Eſſence of the Thing, are not the Same, which is ſtill the Caſe of Subſtances. FROM Hence it is Said, Firſt, that the Names of Simple Ideas are leaſt Liable to Miſtakes, both becauſe they Stand for Single Perceptions, and becauſe they are not Reſerred to any Other Eſſence. SECOND, That the Names of Simple Modes, are next the leaſt Liable to Doubt or Uncertainty, Eſpecially thoſe of Figure and Number. TuirD, The Names of Mixed Modes, when they are Compoſed oſ a Few and Obvious Ideas, are Clear and Diſtinct enough, otherwiſe Doubtfull and Uncertain. FourTH, The Names of Subſtances, that are neither the Real Eſences not Exact Repreſentations of Things, are Liable yet to a greater Imperfection. Tu Grand Problem thereſore Propoſcd to be Solved in this Chapter is, from whence Ariſes the Imperſection, Doubtfullneſs, or Uncertainty of Language; In Order to do which it is Premiſed, that One End of Names and Words is to Record our own Thoughts or Ideas; and Conſequently in that Reſpect they cannot be Doubtfull, Uncertain, or Imperſfect, if we always Uſe the ſame Sign for the ſame Idea; becauſe theſe Signs are Arbitrary, and ve may Impoſc them upon our Ideas, as ve Pleaſe. But, Whoever Heard of a Language, the End of which was to Record our Ideas Separate and Diſtinct from our Communicating them to Others? Or did ever any One Sit down to Name his own Ideas Arbitrarily, and Aſſume Signs to that Purpoſe of his ovn Chooſing, which no One Underſtood beſides Himſelf, and which he did not, cither by Defining them, or Shewing the Things which they Repreſented, Intend any One ſhould? For Inſtance in Botany, which is for the moſt Part a Mere Science of Words, and only Conſiſts in giving Names and Terms to Plants, which are very Frequently of little Uſe or Significance; Suppoſing a Perſon had Found out Twenty Four Nev Simples, Unknown beſore to the moſt Learned and Skilfull in the novledge of Vegetables, it is not to be Queſtioned, but he might Name them by the Twenty Four Letters of the Alphabet, as Signs are Arbitrary, if he did not Defign to Communicate his Thoughts to Others; But it muſt be at the ſame Time Said, that he might as well not Name them at all; Since he would neither Diſtinguiſ them better, nor would he Rerain them longer in his Memory by ſuch Denominations, than by a bare Contemplation of the Ideas themſelves; And any One may Perfectly Diſtinguiſh all the Plants in Nature from each Other, and Record their ſeveral Diſtinctions in his own Mind, by a Careſull and Conſtant Review of them, tho' he may not Know the Name or Term, which is Affixed to any of them; And there is nothing elſe, which makes that Knowledge ſo Delightfull to us, Excepting that we are Able by Names to Communicate our Ideas to Others; Which is a Remaikable Inſtance of the Innate Philanthropy of Human Nature; For if we were only to Name them for our Selves, there would be no more Satisfaction in it, than there would be to a Man, who is Ignorant in Botany, to Contemplate the ſeveral Species of Plants without Underſtanding the Terms, by which they are Diſtinguiſhed. Tuis therefore muſt be Laid down, as a Certain Maxim, that Words or Language, are never Intended to Mark and Record our Ideas, unleſs with a Deſign to Communicate them to Others; and he ho ſhould go about to Invent Arbitrary Signs for his ovn Ideas without a Regard had to the making them Intelligible to Others ould not only Uſe an Imperfect, Doubtfull, and Uncertain Language, whateve: this Philoſophy may Think, but a Chimerical, Whimſical, and a Romantick One And that the Deſign of Words and Language. is to Communicate our Ideas, no to 1o Record them, is Evident, becauſe all the Languages, which we at any Time Learn, are in Order to the One, and are oſ no Uſe or Service to the Other. TuE next Thing, which is Premiſed is, that Language, when Intended to Communicate our Ideas, may be either Termed Civil, that is, which we Uſe in Common Converſation and Commerce, or elſe Philoſophical, vhich is to Convey the Preciſe Notions of Things to us, and is therefore more Accurate and Exact than the Former; But I vould Beg Leave to Ask, whether a Mechanick, and a Philoſopher, do not Mean the Same Thing by Gold, and whether a Triangle, or a Square, is not the Same Figure to a Peaſant or a Geometer? If ſo, Civil or Common Language does not Diſfer from the Philoſophick, ſince they both Expreſs the Same Things; I not, the Same Terms vill be Applied to Diſferent Ideas, or Different Terms to the Same Ideas, which will Render Civil Language Unintelligible to the Philoſophick, and Vice Verſà3 And Conſequently a Mechanick could not Converſe with a Philoſopher, or the Contrary, which is Contradicted by all the Mutual Commerce of the World. Tis True, a Philoſopher may Underſtand more Properties of the One, and à Geometer of the Other, than a Mechanick or a Peaſant is Capable oſf knowing; But I vould Preſume to Aſfirm, that neither Gold, nor a Triangle, become of Different Natures, by there being more Known of them in the Firſt Caſe, than in the Laſt; Thus in the Vegetable World, every One is Acquainted with as many Properties of an Oak, as vill Serve to make him Diſtinguiſh it from an Aſh, or a Willow, and yet the Anatomy of Plants, and the Application of Microſcopes, may Furniſh us ith ſeveral Qualities and Affections, which are Unknown to the Vulgar; Notwithſtanding which, I Hope this Philoſophick Oak, is no other than the Civil One, and that the Same Individual Oak is Meant and Expreſſed by the Same Name. BESIDES Which, it has been already Shewn, that any Thing or Subſtance may be Sufficiently Known by One or Two of it's Leading Properties, upon which the Reſt Depend; and therefore thoſe Common Ones, by which Subſtances or Figures are Diſtinguiſhed from each Other in Civil Commerce and Converſation, as Gold or a Triangle, will as much Cauſe Men to Call the Same Things by the Same Name, as any other more Latent and Reſerved Properties will; For it is not to be Doubted, but there are ſtill Others in all Subſtances and Figures, which are yet not Diſcovered, and which it is Impoſſible ever ſhould be; Becauſc the Properties of every Subſtance, and of every Figure are Infinite, as their Compariſons with, and their Relations to, Other Subſtances and Figures are Infinite; the Ignorance of which Properties Notvithſtanding no more Hinders Philoſophick Men from Agreeing in their Language, than the Ignorance of them Hinders the Civil or Common Language from Agrecing with the Philoſophick; From whence it Follows, that the Philoſophick Language is in Vain Diſtinguiſhed in this Syſteme of Ideas from the Common or Civil. j AFTER theſc Premiſes and Diſtinctions, which are Falſely Alledged, we are vith an Equal Prevarication Told, that the End of Language in Communication is to be Underſtood, that is, to Excite by Sounds in the Hearer the Same Idea, which they Stand for in the Mind oſ the Speaker, which is True, if we Mean by the Same Idea, the Same Thing, as Gold or a Triangle, but i we Mean by the Same Idea, the Same Knovledge of all the ſeveral Properties of Gold or a Triangle, which this Philoſophy does, it is Falle; For, to be Barely Underſtood it is Suſficient to Denote the Same Figure, Subſtance, or Thing, by the Same Name, which Others Uſe for the Same Figure, Subſtance, or Thing3 Which is very Diſferent ſrom our Knowledge oſ all the ſeveral Properties of ſuch Figure, Subſtance or Thing, Which is not to be Gained, unleſs by Study, Application, and Thought; and we may as Juſtly Say, iſ this is Intended by the Same Idea, That the End of Language is to be Underſtood, that ĩs, to Excite by Sounds in the Hearer, the Knowledge of all the Abſtruſe Properties and Relations of Things, which are in the Mind of the Speaker, of which the Hearer is lznorant, than which Nothing can be more Abſurd; becauſe it is to Aſfirm, that the End of Language in Communication, is to be One of the Greateſt Philoſophers in the World, which is the End of Labour and Study, and not of Language; Language gives us the Names of Things, which are Common to the lliterate, and the U uuu2 Learned. Learned; and Application and Study Furniſhes and Imparts to us the Knowledge oſ them, which is Peculiar to the Laſt. AND from Hence we are Carried to the Solution of the Problem, Namely, from whence Ariſes the Imperfection, Doubtfullneſs, or Uncertainty of Language, that is from whence Ariſe all or moſt of our Diſputes; The Way of Solving which is, by Diſtinguiſhing our Ideas according to the Preſcriptions of this Syſteme of them; Bui iſ it has a Wrong Notion of Mixed Modes and Subſtances, as e have before Shewn it has, the Uncertainty and Imperfection, Charged upon Language, is OWing to it's Chimerical Opinions of theſe Matters, and to the Corpuſcular Scheme of Nature, which this Philoſophy Defends, and from which it's Sentiments of Subſtances in Particular are Derived3 And Language is ſaid to be Imperfect and Uncertain, becauſe it's own Ideas are ſo. AnD Firſt, as to Mixed Modes, which are General Ideas Formed from Human Actions, as Virtue, Vice, Gratitude, Murder, this Philoſophy only Conſiders them as Arbitrary Collections of Ideas, and which have no Settled Standard to Rectify and Adjuſt them by 3 Whereas they are in that Reſpect upon the Level with our Simple Ideas, or our Ideas of Subſtances; Thus, if in Simple Ideas, ve Take any Particulat Idea as Red, it is Explicite, Certain, and Determined, but the General, which Includes ſeveral Particular Reds, is not; Thus alſo in Subſtances, any Particular Idea of Matter, as Gold, or Marble, is Determined and Certain, but the General One not; And the Same may be Said of Mixed Modes, that Human Actions are Determined and Certain, but the Genus's under which they are Ranged, are not ſo; And the Particulars always Anſwer to ſome Originals, whereas the Generals are Abſtractcd Ideas, and only have their Exiſtence in the Mind: And in Reſpect of the Principle, from whence theſe Ideas Flow, they ſeem to be alike Certain, and Determined; For, as in Simple Ideas, Red or Blue, & or in Subſtances, the Properties of Gold, are Actions of Bodies Derived from a Peculiar Force, which is Capable of Producing thoſc Senſations in us, ſo in Mixed Modes or Human Actions, all Particular Ones are Derived from a Principle of the Mind, from whence they are Denominated what they are; For Inſtance, vhen we Look into our Minds, ve find a Force or Quality in it, which Inclines us to the Stricteſt and Severeſt Dealing with Others in all Occurrences of Life, which makes us Punctual, and Exact, both in cvery Thing, which we Say, and every Thing which we do; Human Actions, which Reſult from ſuch a Principle are Jut; In like Manner, we find another Force or Principle in our Minds, which Inclines us to Love and Compaſſion, and thoſe Human Actions, which Derive from it, are Properly Termed Benevolent; So that the Nature of all theſe Ideas, whether Simple, or of Subſtances, or of Human Actions, or Mixed Modes, is Equally known to us, and there is no more Doubtfullneſs, Imperfection, or Uncertainty in the One, than the Other; And if we Conſider them as General Ideas, they are only then Names, by which we Claſs and Sort Things or Actions. As to the Way of Learning the Names of the ſeveral Ideas, whether Simple, or thoſe of Mixed Modes and Subſtances, which this Philoſophy before Mentions, that can Signiſy nothing to the Clearneſs or Obſcurity of the Ideas, in which it is Said the Imperſection and Uncertainty of Language, or the Contrary, Conſiſts; For it will be the Same, whether we Learn the Articulate Sound of Red or Blue, before we Knov the Proper Idea which belongs to it, and are afterwards Shewn it, or whether we Learn the Terms Red and Blue, and the Ideas Annexed to them together; And the Same is True in Mixed Modes; I ſall not have a Clearer Idea of what Juſtice is, by Learning the Term, and the Idea together, than if I Learned the Term before the Idea; And the Imperfection, Doubtfullneſs, or Uncertainty of Terms, or of Language, Proceeds from the Imperfection, Doubtſullneſs, or Uncertainty of the Nature of the Ideas themſelves, which we have before Conſidered, And not from the Way that we Learn them. Ir is farther Affirmed in this Philoſophy oſ Ideas, that Simple Ideas are leaſt Liable to Miſtakes; becauſe they are each of them but One Single Perception, whereas tie more Complex Ones of Subſtances and Mixed Modes are not; And becauſe they are not Reſerred to any other Eſſence, but barely that Perception they Immediately Signiſy. On the Contrary we Say, Particular Subſtances, or Particular Human Actions, ions, are as much One Single Perception, as Red or Blue is, and are Equally, not Referred to any other Eſſence, but Barely that Perception, which they Immediately Signify; But if General and Abſtracted Ideas are Formed from Particular Subſtances, or Particular Human Actions, the Same may be done in the Simple Ideas of Red or Blue, which may likewiſe be made General by the Abſtractions of the Mind, and therefore they will be ſtill upon the Same Foot, and not Diſtinguiſhed in this Reſpect from each Other. Ir is Moreover here Alledged, that in Mixed Modes, when they are Compoſed of a Few and Obvious Ideas, their Names are Clear and Diſtinct enough, otherwiſe Doubtfull, and Uncertain; But this Allegation Proceeds upon Mixed Modes, being Suppoſed to be Arbitrary Collections of Ideas in the Mind; Whereas on the other Hand, Mixed Modes are General Ideas made by Abſtraction upon Human Actions, and vhich are not Diſtinguiſhcd from cach Other, by the External Circumſtances, which this Philoſophy ſeems to Apprehend, but from the Nature and Principle of Them; Thus Modeſty is Sufficiently Diſtinguiſhed from all other Human Actions, not by the External Paſſions of the Body, as by Bluſhing, or Looking Pale, but from the Internal Principle of Diffidence and Humility, from which it Proceeds; For Diſferent Paſſions of the Body may Proceed from the Same Principle or Paſſion in the Mind; As the Same Paſſions in the Body may likewiſe from Different Principles or Paſſions in the Mind, for Inſtance, Bluſhing from Pride and Indignation, or from Humility and Modeſty; And therefore, as in Simple Ideas, and Subſtances, ſo in Mixed Modes, the Perceptions are Diſtinguiſhed enough, but the Nature of all of them Obſcure and Undetermined, which it is the Province of Reaſon and Philoſophy to Diſcover; ſo that Simple Ideas, Subſtances, and Mixed Modes, are ſtill upon the Same Level in that Particular; Which Conſideration alone is Sufficient to Invalidate all Mt. ollaſton's Scheme of Natural Religion, ſince the Principles of Men's Actions are ſo very Different, when the Explanations of them are the Same, and Vice Verſã. The Concluſion of this Chapter is with a Preference of Natural Religion to a Revealed, becauſe there is ſuch an Uncertainty in Words, in which the Scriptures and Written Relations are Delivered to us, whereas Natural Religion is Thought to be Clear and Plain; But it has been Proved, that Words are Certain enough, and all the Difficulty is in our not Underſtanding the Real Nature of Things, in which Diſfi culty Human Actions are Involved, as much as even Subſtances themſelves, and which as much Want an Explanation from Philoſophy. Tuis Arguing againſt Revealed Religion Amounts therefore to This, that becauſe we do not Underſtand the Nature of Things, we are not to Depend upon any Hiſtory of Fact, that ever was in the World, which is Exceedingly Wiſe, and moſ Wonderfully Sagacious' 5. 10. BESIDE the Natural and Unavoidable Imperfections of Languages, it is Said, there are Willfull Faults and Neglects, vhich Men are often Guilty of in their Uſe of Words. Finst, it is Affirmed, they Uſe Words without Clear and Diſtinct Ideas, or, which is Worſe, Signs without any Thing Signified; Such are for the moſt Part Introduced by Sects of Philoſophy and Religion, cither out of an Affectation of Singularity, or t10 Support ſome Strange Opinion, or to Cover the Weakneſs of their Hypotheſis; Theſe it is Thought may be Ii Called Inſignificant Terms, and are often to be Met vith in School-Men and Metaphyſicians; Others Learn Words, which the Propriety of Language has Affixed to very Important Ideas, and often upon Occaſion Uſe them without any Diſtindt Meaning at all; From whence their Diſcourſe muſt be Filled with Empty, Unintelligible, Noiſe and Jargon, and Eſpecially in Moral Matters; Amongſt which Inſignificant Terms, Glory and Grace are Mentioned by this Philoſophy. Tnis Paragraph therefore ſeems to be Little Elſe than a Short and Comprehenſive Satyr, or Invective, againſt Philoſophers, and Divines, without any Particular Charge againſt Either, unleſs in General Terms, and Propoſes the Author, as Supreme Judęe of both theſe Profeſſions of Men, vhen himſelf mut he Conſcious, ow Unequal he was to ſuch a Province, vho vas Scarcely Acquainted with the Firt Rudiments and Principles of Revelation, or of Nature. : ii Ir is Said, School-Men and Metaphy ſicians are here only Deſigned, but it is too Plain and Evident, that Revelation it's ſelf is Aimed at, by the Firſt, under the Words Glory and Grace, and the Terms of Singularity and Strange Opinions; and that Philoſophy and Nature are ſo too by the Lat; That is, the Preſent Syſteme of Ideas, Intending to Pave a Way for the Reception of a Natural Religion, that is, for the Ancient Hea theniſm, Deſpiſes the Arguments and Diſputes about a Revealed One, or about the Explanations of Nature and Philoſophy, and Repreſents them, as nothing more than an Abuſe of Words, and the Fancies and Chimeras of Metaphy ſicians and SchoolMen; Whereas in Reality, the Main and Principal Conteſts are not Concerning Words and Terms, but the Truth or Falſehood of Things, and which Ariſe from the Diſſiculties, in which they are Entangled, when we come to Conſider them; Thus, there is as Great an Abuſe of Words amongſt the Rationaliſts or Deiſts, or the Defenders of this Syſteme of Ideas, as there is amongſt Philoſophers or Divines And the Queſtion upon the whole vill be, not which of them Abuſes Words Moſt, but which of them Underſtands Things Beſt, and which upon Inquiry, will be Determined in Favour of the Latter. ] SECOND, It is Said, another Abuſe is Inconſlancy in the Uſe of Words, the Wilfull doing vhereof can be Imputed to nothing but Great Folly, or Greater Diſhoneſty; And a Man in his Accounts with Another, may with as much Fairneſs make the Characters of Numbers Stand, ſometimes for One, and ſometimes for Another Collection oſ Units. IN Obſervation upon which Remark I ſnall only Say, that this Chapter Treats of the Wilfull Faults and Neglects of Men in their Uſe of Words, of which this is Eſtcemed One of them; Whercas, it is Evident in Fact and Experience, that Men are Naturally Prone to Change their Ideas, to which they Aſſix the Same Word or Term, and it Requires the utmoſt Caution and Attention not to do it; Thus in Dreams, where the Mind is not any ways upon it's Guard, the Idea, which is AFfixed to the Name of Man ſhall Change into a Multitude of Shapes, when yet we Think we are Dreaming of the Same Perſon, and ſo of other Ideas; And which ſeems to be the Chief Occaſion of that Confuſion, which we find in thoſe Deluſory Sports oſ Nature; It is in ſome Degree the Same, when we are Awake, as is Maniſeſt in the Reaſonings borh of this Syſtieme oſ Ideas, and of the Philoſophy of DesCartes, and even in thoſe of the Great and Incomparable Sir Iſ. Newton, and in Particular of their Notion of Matter, which is ſometimes One Thing, and ſomerimes Another, juſt as it Suits the Preſent Emergence of Explaining this or the other Phænomenon, by which it becomes at Length a Subſtance Entirely Different from what it was at Firſt Thought and Aſſerted to be; Inſomuch, that what was at Firſt Inactive, and vas Endued vith a Perfect Inertia, ſall by Degrees Riſe into Action, and Find it's ſelf Changed in it's Properties into all the Varieties of Motion, Gravitation, or Attraction, which we can Poſſibly Imagine; This however does not Appear to be a Wilfull Fault or Neglect, but a Natural Infirmity of the Mind, which is not to be Avoided without the urmoſt Guard and Caution againſt it, and is therefore neither Chargeable with Folly nor Diſhoneſty. TuirD, Another Abuſe of Words is an Aſfected Obſcurity, either by Uſing Old Words in New Significations, or by Introducing New and Ambiguous Terms without Deſining them, or by Putting them together, ſo as to Confound their Ordinary Meaning3 The Peripatetick Philoſophy, and the Admired Art of Diſputing, are Loaded with this Charge. BuT this Cenſure may be Attributed to the Author's Diſlike of the Worthy Univerſity, of which he had the Honour to be a Member, and of the Philoſophy, which is Profeſſed there, rather than to any Solid Reaſon for it; For, notwithſtanding what has been Alledged againſt Ariſotle, and his Syſteme of Nature, there will not be Found a more Affected Obſcurity in the Peripatetick Account of it, than there is in the Atomical or Epicurcan, which is at Preſent Eſpouſcd by our Modern Reaſoners, md with what Juſtice ve have already Shewn. FourTH, Another Abuſc is, the Taking Words for Things; Thus in the Peripaetick Philoſophy, Subſtantial Forms, Abhorrence of a Vacuum, &⸗. are Taken for mething Real. Here alſo the Same Philoſophy is Attaqued, but without any One Argument againſt it; Since Subſtantial Forms are nothing more than ſome Certain Eſſences,  ————————— Eſſences, from whence the Properties of Particular Bodies are Derived, and are iherefore as Real as the Unknown Subſtratums or Subſtances of the Preſent Syſtems; and an Abhorrence of a Vacuum, is no other than Affirming the Neceſſity in Nature of a Plenum; Conſequently to make this Remark Significant, it ſould be Proved, that there is no Real Eſſence of Things, nor any Plenum Exiſting, which will in the Iſſue be a Difficult Task to Perform. Firru, Another Abuſe is, the Setting Words in the Place of Things, which they can by no Mcans Signify; As in the General Names of Subſtances, vhereof the Nominal Eſences are only Known to us, vhen ve Affirm or Deny any Thing about them, we Tacitly Suppoſe or Intend, they ſhould Stand for the Real Eſſence of a Certain Sort of Subſtances; Thus, when a Man Says Gold is Malleable, he would Inſinuate ſomething more than This, that what I Call Gold is Malleable, ſtho' Truly it Amounts to no more,] Namely, that what has the Real Eſſence of Gold is MalJeable, that is, that Malleableneſs Depends on, and is Inſeparable from, the Real Eſſence of Gold; But, a Man not Knowing, wherein that Real Eſſence Conſiſs, the Connexion in his Mind of Malleableneſs is not Truly with an Eſſence, he Knows not, but with the Sound Gold, he Puts for it. IN Anſwer to which we Say, that Something more is Meant than the Nominal Eſſence of Gold, which is a General Term, and a Creature of the Mind, when we Affirm, that Gold is Malleable, Namely, that Real Gold is ſo; of which tho we have not an Idea, as to it's Real Eſſence, or Principle, from Whence it's Properties Flow, yet ve Know as many of it's Real and Eſſential Properties, as are Sufficient to Diſtinguiſh it from all other Bodies or Subſtances whatſoever, and which muſt Include and Suppoſe a Real Eſſence Different ſfrom that of any orher Subſtances, as it's Eſſential Properties are ſo; And by no other Ways is a Triangle Diſtinguihed from a Square or a Circle; But Concerning the Real Eſſences of Subſtances or Figures, we have already Diſcourſed, and Shewn what they are, and wherein they Conſiſt. Ir is farther Alledged in this Fifth Article, that in Mixed Modes, any Idea of the Complex One being Left out, or Changed, it is Allowed to be another Thing, that is, to be of anorher Species, as is Plain in Chance- Medley, Man-Slaughter, Murder, &e. becaule the Complex Idea Signified by that Name is the Real, as well as Nominal Eſſence, and there is no Secret Reference of that Name to any other Eſſence but That; But in Subſtances it is not ſo, for tho' in That Called Gold, One Puts in his Complex Idea, what Another Leaves out, and Vice Verſã, yet Men do not Uſually Think the Species Changed, becauſe they Refer the Name in their Minds to a Real Immutable Eſſence of a Thing Exiſting, on which thoſe Properties Depend. To which we likewiſe Reply, that in Human Actions, or Mixed Modes, the Caſe is much the Same with that of Subſtances; becauſe, as in Subſtances we have Eſſential Properties or Qualities enough to Diſtinguiſa One Subſtance from Another, and when we have ſo, ve know them, and Name them as Different Subſtances; So in Mixed Modes or Human Actions, tho' the Fact in all theſe Caſes Mentioned is Killing a Man, yet, ſince ſuch an Action is Derived from a very Different State and Principle of the Mind, and ſince the Mind, or the Active Principle, is as much to be Conſidered in ſuch Actions, as the Hand, which Commits the Fact, theſe Human Actions are as much Differenced by the Real Properties of them, as Subſtances are; In Chance- Medley, the Mind does not Act with an Intention, in Man Slaughter it does, but with a Sudden One, in Murder with a Premeditated and a Malicious; It is True, the Killing of a Man belongs to all of them, and ſo does Extenſion to all Subſtances, hich are Material; But the Killing a Man upon Diſferent Principles of the Action, is as much Diſtinguiied by the Peculiarities of Doing it, as the Exrenſion of Suſtances is by the Particular Properties which Attend it, as Diſference oſ Colour, Denſity, Weight, Brightnels, Smoothneſs, &. Nou is the Difference, Affirmed above, betwixt Mixed Modes and Subſtances True; Becauſe ve may Add a Million of Properties to our Idea of Gold, by Applying it to the Inſinitely Various Actions of other Bodies and Subſtances upon it, and yet not Change the Nature of it, or our Idea of that Nature; in the Same Manner a: we may in a Triangle, or any other Geometrick Figure, which, in its Relation to other Mathematick Quantities or Figures, will Admit of an Infinite Number of Properties, when yet the Nature of the Triangle is not from rhence Altered, but Con firmed firmed and Aſcertained3 And the Same may be ſaid in Mixed Modes, or Humar Actions, that the Nature of the Action, as of Murder, ſall be the Same, tho' there may be Various Properties Annexed to it, from it's Compariſon with and Relation to a Million, or an Infinite Number of Actions belonging to Human Beings, which yet will not Alter the Principle of the Mind, from which it Proceeded; Thus Mur der, or the Killing of a Man with a Premeditated and a Malicious Deſign, is Suſfi cient to Shew the Nature of ſuch an Action, and yet we may Add the Perſon oſ the Man, the Way and Manner of Killing, ve may Compare this Action ith Gratitude, or Benevolence, or with Theſt, Whoredom, or Drunkeneſs, and a Thouſand other Human Actions, in Reſpect of which it will have it's Particular Properties and Relations, but yet will ſtill Continue an Act of the Same Nature. Ir is Farther Alledged under this Fifth Article, that the Reference oſ the Name to a Thing we have not the Idea of, is Grounded upon this Suppoſition, Namely, that the Same Preciſe Internal Conſtitution goes always with the Same Speciſick Name, in vhich are Contained theſe To Falſe Suppoſitions. FiusT, That there are Certain Preciſe Eſſences, according to which Nature Makes all Particular Things, and by which they are Diſtinguiſhed into Species. SECOND, That this Tacitly Inſinuates, as if we had Ideas of theſe Eſences. To vhich we Anſwer, that there are no Two ſuch Suppoſitions, as are Ima: ined. ⸗ FirsT, Becauſe ve do not Suppoſc any ſuch Chimerical Eſſences, ſince we only Suppoſc ſome Certain and Eſſcntial Properties, with which the Eſſence of Things is Connected, or rather, which is the Real Eſſence of them, as before Explained, and vhich Eſſential Properties every One may, and does Know, ſo as Really to Diſtinguiſ One Subſtance from Another. SECOND, Becauſe, th we ſhould not Pretend to any Knovledge of the Internal and Real Eſſences of Subſtances, yet we can Fully Know ſome. Real and Eſſential Properties, which are as Expreſſive and Significant of the Eſſences, and which as much Diſtinguiſ their Subſtances from all Others, as the Eſſences themſelves. SixTH, Another and more General Abuſe of Words is Said to be, that Men, having by Long and Familiar Uſe Annexed to them Certain ldeas, they are Apt to Imagine ſo Near and Neceſſary a Connexion between the Names, and the Significations they Uſe them in, that they forwardly Suppoſe, One cannot but Underſtand what theit Meaning is, vhen they arc no more than the Voluntary and Unſteady Signs of their own Ideas. Tnus Liſc is a Term, none more Familiar; And yet if it Comes in Queſtion, whether ſuch a Thing has Life, or not, it is Eaſy to Perceive, that a Clear, Diſtinct, Settled, Idea does not alvays Accompany the Uſe of ſo Known a Word. ON the Contrary, we Say, that Men are Generally Agreed in their Uſe of Words. and Underſtand each Other well enough by the Marks or Signs, by which they Diſtinguiſ their Ideas; and the Chief and Principal Difficulty Lies in the Nature of Things; Thus every One Means the Same Thing by Gold, but yet the Real Nature and Eſſence of it may not be kKnown to Any, and there may be Diſputes and Differences about it; The Same may be ſaid of Vacuum, Plenum, Matter, &. which Terms are Suſſiciently Intelligible to all, and yet the Controverſies about the Things themſelves are Endleſs upon Account of the Perplexity and Obſcurity of them; So likewiſe in the Inſtance Mentioned, ve do not Miſtake One Another in what we Mean by Liſe, or almoſt in any other Term, to which ve Affix an Idea; We all Knov, that an Animal has Life, and that a Vegetable has, according to the Common Acceptation of the Word, that a Plant is Alive; But then, wherein the Life oſ the One, or the Other Conſiſts, is a Diſpute of the Nature of Things, and not of Words, or the Meaning of them; It is an Inquiry of Philoſophy, and a Diſficulty in it, and is not a Want of Aſfixing Certain Idcas, to Certain Terms; Thus where we See in Animals a Motion, which is Voluntary, and Contrary to a Neceſſary Impulſc, as of a Ball Struck by a Racket, and there are ſeveral Indications oſ Thought and Senſe, we Call it Life If in Vegetables we Obſerve a Verdure and Sptightlineſs of Growth, Contrary to vhat we Find in Groſs and Dull Matter, which Continues rthe Same with Little or no Alteration, we Call it alſo Life, and there is no Diſagrcement in the Terms or the Signification of them; But what is the Caurc o of either of theſe Phenomenons, or what the Nature of them, may be a Queſtion, and which Reaſon and Philoſophy is to Reſolve. SEVENTH, It is Affirmed, that Figurative Speech is an Abuſc oſ Language, which is True, where it is Intended to Enſnare and Deceive, otherwiſe it is Unjuſtly Condemned; Becauſe, if we can Infuſe into Others our Real Ideas by Metaphors, it will be the Same, as if we did it by Simple and Plain Expreſſions; Excepting, that the One Conveys the Same Ideas to us with Pleaſure, whereas the Other has not the like Advantage of Elegance and Beauty to Recommend it; And I Hope no One vill Deny, that as Great and Important Truths in Morality are Impreſſed upon us from the Divine Parables of our Saviour, and the Exquiſite Fables of æſqp and the Antients, 3s if they had been Delivered in a Dry Syſteme of Precepts, and in the Stif Garb hnd Dreſs of an Heathen Philoſophy. illl IF yet Figurative Speech is an Abuſe of Language, what Pity it is, that there ſould be ſo many Thouſand Abuſcs of it in the very Philoſophy, which Condemns and Explodes it? and who vould Think, we ſhould, Preſently after ſuch a Cenſure, find it Talking in this Manner?  Language being the Great Conduit, whereby Men  Convey their Diſcoveries Reaſonings, and Knowledge, from One to Another;  He that Makes an Ill Uſe of it, tho he does not Corrupt the Fountains of Knov-  ]edge, vhich are in Things themſclves, yet he does, as much as in him Lies, æ Break or Stop the Pipes, whereby it is Diſtributed to the Publick Uſe and Advan-  tage of Mankind. Which Language, I Suppoſe, is ſomething Figurative. HOWEVER, ſince, according to Laertius, Epicurus had Profeſied the Same Doctrine, Sce Chap. I. Book I. it was Neceſſary for a Philoſophy to Eſpouſe the Sentiments of One, vhom in ſo many other Particulars it had Acknowledged to be it's Maſter; And, IPreſume it is more Pardonable, vhen Figures and Tropes are Uſed in a Philoſophy, which Diſclaims them, than when they are Adopted into the Lively Eloquence of the Divine, or the Pulpit, where, I Humbly Conjecture, it Chiefly Blames the Force and Beauty of them. 5. 11 As to the Remedies of the Foregoing Imperfections and Abuſes, we ſhall Say Little to them, Seeing we have already Shewn, that they are either Imaginary, or Falſely Repreſented, or Derived from the Wrong Notions, which this Philoſophy has taken up of Subſtances and the Real and Nominal Eſſences of them, and which Generally Terminate in this Suppoſition, that Men do not Underſtand Each Other's Terms, and the Language, in which they Diſcourſe; Whereas it is pretty Evident from a Thouſand Inſtances in Mathematicks, Philoſophy, and Divinity, that our Diſputes are, not ſo much about Words and Terms Illy Underſtood, as about Things and the Real Diſficultics, with which they are Invironed and Surrounded. Inſtinct, Sympathy, and Antipathy, which are here Mentioned, are well enough Known, as to the Properties and Affections in Animals or Bodies, which arc Expreſſed by them, and they are far ſrom being Words without a Meaning, as is Aſfirmed; But what is the Cauſe of them, or from whence they Ariſe, or wherein the Nature of the One or the Other Conſiſts, is Hard to Determine; and ſo it is of moſt of our Other Terms, and the Ideas Annexed to them; That is, Men, who are Educated and Trained up in the Same Language, in the General Know, what Ideas, or Things, are Marked out, and Tointed at, by ſuch and ſuch Words or Terms, tho they may not Know the Entire Nature of thoſe Things or Ideas, hich yet are Confounded and Made to be the Same by the Preſent Syſteme; Thus, when Gold, or Silver, or Wood, or Stone, is Named, every One is Carried in his Mind to the Same Subſtance, and no One has ever Miſtook ſo, as to Call Stone Metal, or Wood Stone; But if we come to Inquire into the Real Nature and Conſtitution of any of Theſe, we are then at a Loſs; Clouds and Obſcurity begin to Ariſe, we Feel about in the Dark, and often Clah and Inter fore with each Other; It yet ought not to be Said, that we do not Affix the Same Ideas to the Same Terms, becauſe ve Reaſon and Philoſophize Differently about our Ideas themſelves, no more than it ſould be Said, that we cannot Converſe Intell ibly together, unleſs we are all Philoſophers, and Philoſophers of the Same Syſteme and Perſuaſion; On the Contrary, Men could not ſo much as Reaſon and Philoſophize Differently about their Ideas, if thoſe Ideas, about which they Diſpure, were not the Same: And thereſore it is nothing elſe than a Piece of Afectation anc Vanity to Aſicrt, which is done, that if all Diſputes about Words and Term: j X x x x wert were Cut off and Abridged, many of the Philoſophers, (not to Mention thoſe oſ Divines) as well as Poets Works, might be Contained in a Nutſhel3 Since the Principal Difficulty is not to Underſtand Each Other's Language, but to Determine Concerning the Truth and Reality of the Things, Expreſſed and Intimated by ſuch Language. . NorviTHsTANDING Which, we are made to Believe, that, whilſt Men are Diſ courſing in Plain Engliſo to Each Other, they are yet ſo Uncertain in the Ideas which they Affix to the Terms they make Uſe of, that they might as well Propoſe their Thoughts or Sentiments in the Ruſſian Dialect, and Write or Speak in the Turkiſn, or the Sclavonian Which is ſo Monſtrous a Poſition, that this Philoſophy muſt have been well Acquainted with the Art of Rhetorick and Inveigling, and how to Cheat and Delude Men with it's Tropes and it's Figures, which could be able to Gain ſo Many Proſelytes to ſo Great an Abſurdity. AND from whence does all this Flow? Namely, from this Syſteme of Ideas Conſidering only the Terms and Appellations of Things, without Entering into a Real Diſquiſition of them, which it Diſclaims, and from Ranking and Claſſing it's Ideas under Various Denominations, and in Short, from Profeſſing a Science of Words in Contempt of every Rational Science now in Being, before it had Inquired into any One of them; From which, it is Natural to Conclude, what would be the Reſult, to Wit, a Valuing of Words in Preference to Things, and Making Terms, and Signs, and Marks, of our Ideas the moſt Important Part of our Knowledge: The Conſequence of which is, the Filling our Heads with Trifling Niceties and Diſtinctions about Language, and Forms and Manners of Speaking, and Turning the Solid Reaſonings on Nature, Religion, and Philoſophy, into Mere Chicaning and Sophiſtry, into Weighing of Points and Syllables, and Canvaſing of Expreſſions and Phraſes, and in Fine, Converting Senſc and Argument into a Levity of Thought, and into Ridicule and Buffoonery 3 OF which this Syſteme of Ideas is a Standing Inſtance, in it's Defenſes of it's ſelf againſt the Attaques of Thoſe, whoſe Religion, Integrity, Gravity, and Learning, has been much Superior, and who Wanted nothing to make them Victorious in their Cauſe, even with the Friends of this Syſteme, unleſs a Few Small Arts, and Lirtle Cavils, which they were Above, and Thought iĩt their Wiſdom to Deſpiſe. C H AP. X. Of Knovledge in General 3 Of the Degrees of our Knouledge ; Of ihe Extent of Human Knovledge; Of the Reality of our Knouledge Of Truth in General Of Univerſal Propoſitions, their Truth and Certainty; Of Maxims; Of Triſling Propoſitions 3 Of our Knouledge of Exiſtence3 Of our Knowledge of the Exiſtence of a God; Of our Knouledge of ihe Exiſtence of other Things ; Of the Improvement of our Knovledge ; Some Farther Conſiderations Concerning Knouledge ; Of Fudgement Of Probatility, Of the Degrees of Aſſent  Of Reaſon; Of Faith and Reaſon, and their Diſtint Provinces; Of Enthuſiaſm; Of Wrong Aſſent, or Error; Of the Diviſion of the Sciences. 5.1. NOWLEDGE Is Said to be Nothing, but the Perception of the Connexion F and Agreement, or Diſagreement and Repugnancy, of any of our Ideas; And where it is not, there, tho we Fancy, Gueſs, or Believe, yet we always come Short of novledge; Thus ve Know, that White is not Black, becauſe we Perceive theſe Two Ideas do not Agree, and that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to TWo Right Ones, becauſe they do; This Agreement or Diſagreement, it is Said, may be Reduced to theſe Four Sorts. FirsT, Identity, or Diverſity; that is, Ideas are the Same, or elſe they Differ; or, vhich is the Same, they Agree or Diſagree; So that the Firſt Sort, it ſeems, of Agreement, or Diſagreement, is Agreement or Diſagreement, which is a very Accurate and Wiſe Diſtinction. SECOND SECOND, Relation; that is, the next Sort of Agreement or Diſagreement the Mind Perceives in its Ideas, may be Called Relative; But I would Ask, whether there can be any Agreement or Diſagreement without a Relation, or a Comparing One Idea with Another? This therefore is not a Diſtinct Sort; but Identity and Diverſity Suppoſes Relation, and Identity and Diverſity Signifies no more than Agreement and Diſagreement; Here therefore is a Second Diſtinction without a Difference. THIRD, a Third Sort of Agreement or Diſagreement in our Ideas is Co-cxiſtence, or Non- Co-exiſtence, in the Same Subject; And this is Said to belong Particularly to Subſtances, as when we Pronounce Gold to be Fixed, or to Remain in the Fire Unconſumed; But this Falls under the Relative Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, when we Compare One Property of Gold with the Other Properties of it, and therefore does not Deſerve a Diſtinction here. FourTH, The Fourth Sort is, that of Actual and Real Exiſtence Agrecing to any Idea, as that God is; Which is no more than to Say, that the Idea of God Agrees with our Idea of Exiſtence, or that Comparing One Idea with Another they Agree, which ſtill comes under Relation, and likewiſe did not therefore want a Particular Diſtinction. ALL that can be Said, is Conſequently only this, that the Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, upon any Compariſon or Relation of them vhatſoever, is the Sole Foundation of all our Knowledge; To which we Anſer. FirsT, That the Bare Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of Ideas is no Certain Foundation of Real knowledge, unleſs our Ideas are Accurate and Exact; Becauſe a Man may Think he Perceives ſuch Agreement or Diſagreement, when yet in Truth there is no ſuch Thing; Thus the Viſions of a Madman, or an Enthuſiaſt, vill be Equally Certain with the Truths and Concluſions of Geometry; and if a Perſon Sees an Agreement betwixt the Idea of himſelf and a Prince, as in the Caſe of Madneſs, or if Aahomet, or Fox, does, betixt that of himſclf and an Apoſtle of God, as in the Caſe of Enthuſiaſm, or if this Philoſophy finds One betwixt it's own Reaſon, and a ”zay of the Divinity, or a Candle Set up by Almighty God in the Mind, which I Suppoſe is little Leſs than a Light ithin, tho' there is no ſuch Real Agreement, it will be as Certain and as True, as that the Square of the Hypotenuſc is Equal to the Square of the Sides. Tnis Doctrine will likewiſe Juſtify all the moſt Whimſical Reaſonings in the World; For if Men Think, or Imagine, they Perceive a Connexion betwixt Certain Ideas, let thoſe Ideas be never ſ0 Wrongly Connected, it will be all Irrefragable Truth and Demonſtration, and there is not the Greateſt Falſehood, or Ignorance, in the World, which may not be Patronized upon ſuch a Conceſſion; Every One is a Philoſopher, as well as Prieſt, to himſelf, and Every One is in the Right according to his own Connexion of Ideas, tho' Every One Differs in his Philoſophy and his Religion, according to that Connexion. WE thereſore Say, it is not Every One's Particular Connexion of Ideas and his Perception of that Connexion, or Agreement and Diſagreement, of them, which is a Standard of Knovledge, or of Truth and Certainty; But it muſt be the Concurrence of Many and of Thoſe of the Wiſeſt, moſt Judicious, Studious, and Sober Men; And if their Connexions of Ideas Agree, we may then Rationally Conclude, that Truth and Knovledge is on their Side, which we ſhall in Vain Seek for amongmſi the Connexions, or rather Fancies, of Some, vho Think fit to make their own Private Perſuaſions a Rule for Others to Form their Sentiments upon, in Reſpect of Religion, Nature, or of Government. SECOND, The Bare Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, tho' they ſhould be Accurate and Exact, cannot be a Foundation of our Real Knowledge of Things, unleſs our Abſtractions are True; Thus, tho all our Ideas of Lines, Surfaces, and Solids, ſould be Exact and Punctual, and all the Connexions of the Ideas Relating to them, ſhould be ſo too, ſo that every Propoſition in the Elements of Euclid vas True and Certain; Yet Nonc of them would be ſo in a Real Knowledge, Excepting we Grant the Abſtractions of Length without Breadth, Breadth without Depth, and Depth without Thickneſs, to be Juſt and Conformable to Nature, which they are not, according to what we have Shèwn in our Geometria Solidorum, ſive Materiæ, and in the Preceding Books of this Philoſophy. X x x x a TuIRD; Tumb, If the Perception of the Agreement and Diſagreement of our Ideas was the only Foundation of our Knowledge, all our Senſitive and Natural Knowledge would be Excluded, which yet is, and is Confeſſed by this Syſteme of Ideas, to be a Real One; Becauſe there is no Connexion betwixt our Ideas, and the Exiſtence ol Things, of which we have the Ideas, till ſuch Exiſtence is Proved; and this muſt b done by other Mediums than the Connecting of Ideas in our own Minds, which cannot Extend to any Thing, which is Foreign and Extraneous to it. FourRTH, Hence alſo all Hiſtorical Knowledge of the Plaineſt and moſt Notorious Facts in the World would be Diſcarded, and even the Evidences of Chriſtianity its ſelf Precarious and Uncertain. ON the Contrary, the Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas is the Baſis only of one Part of our Knowledge, Namely, of That, which is Abſtracted or Mathematical, and which would be True, if there was no Being, nor any Exiſtence Suppoſed, in the whole Circle of Nature; Since a Triangle would not be a Square, or Black White, upon any Suppoſitions whatſoever. As to vhat is Said aſterwards of Actual and Habitual Knowledge, the One by an Actual Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, the Other by Remembering ſuch a Perception, it will not be Material to Offer any Thing in Relation to that Head, Excepting, that ſince we may Know from Remembering, we may Arrive at Knovledge another Way, than by a Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, unleſs Remembering is Perception, or Habitual is Actual Knovledge, and there is Conſequently no Foundation for the Foregoing Diſtinction; Which cannot be, ſince the Immutability of the Same Relations, between the Same Immutable Things is OWned to be the Idea, that Shews us, that if a Propoſition was Once True, it ill always be ſo, and which is Said to be the Foundation of our Habitual Knowledge, and is Different from the Connexion of Ideas, the Baſis of our Actual. 5. 2. IN Reſpect to the Degrees of our Knowledge, the Firſt is Affirmed to be Intuitive, when the Mind Perceives the Agreement or Diſagreement of Two Ideas Immediately by Themſelves, without the Intervention of any Other, as One and Two are Three, or Five is not Equal to Six. INtUITIVE Knovledge therefore, according to this Account of it, is no Other, nor More, than a Faculty in the Mind of Percciving3 For if we Grant, that the Mind Perceives, it muſt by Conſequence have thoſe Perceptions, which it has, and therefore muſt Diſtinguiſh, where they Differ or Agree; But to Aſiert, that we have a Faculty of Perceiving is no very Great or Profound Matter, much Leſs does it Inform us, in what Science, or where, it Prevails, and only Acquaints us in a Chapter about Knowledge, that One Idea is, or is not, Another, according to our Perceptions of it. THE Second Degree of Knowledge is Called Demonſtrative, where the Mind Perceives not the Agreement, or Diſagreement, Immediately, or by the Juxta- Poſition, as it were, of the Ideas, but is Fain to Diſcover the Agreement, or Diſagreement, which it Searches, by the Intervention of Other Ideas, and this is that, which we Call Reaſoning, which is Exemplified by the Demonſtration of Euclid, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones; Thoſe Intervening Ideas, which Serve to Shew the Agreement of any Two Others, are Called Proofs, and where the Agreement or Diſagreement is by this Means Plainly and Clearly Perceived, it is Called Demonſtration; A Quickneſ" in the Mind to Find theſe Proofs, and to Apply them Right, Is, it is Suppoſed, that which is Called Sagacity. THIs Account of Demonſtrative Knowledge is only Defining. without Proving, that all Knowledge, which comes under the Character of Demonſtration, is Mathematical or Abſtracted, and Conſiſts in the Connexion of our own Ideas; From whence all Senſitive and Hiſtorical, all Chriſtian and Civil, kKnowledge is Excluded, as before, from being Demonſtrative and Certain; But this is only Mere Definition, and Calling Things by thoſe Names, which we are Pleaſed to Give them. ON the orher Hand we Affirm, till the Contrary is Evinced, that there is as much Demonſtration in Matters of Senſe and Hiſtory, as there is in the Connexion of Abſtracted Ideas; If there are Plain and Manifeſt Propoſitions in Euclid, both in Reſpect of Figures and Numbers, which no One can Diſpute, There are alſo Propoſirions tions in Reſpect of Senſc and of Fact, which every Body in his Right Mind muſt Allow and Aſſent to; If there are Propoſitions in Reſpect of Senſe and of Fact, which are Found Falſe and Untrue, there are the Like in the Connexion of our Ideas; And let any One Shew, that he is Leſs Deceived in the Reaſonings of Mathematicians and Philoſophers, vho Proceed in the Abſtracted Way of Conſidering Nature, of vhoſe Errors there may be Ten Thouſand Inſtances Produced, Nay it may be Proved, that even all Mathematicks and Philoſophy are upon a Wrong Baſis, as they are nov Profeſſcd; I Say, let any One Shew, that he is Leſs Deceived in this Kind of Knovledge, than he is in theſe Propoſitions, That there are ſuch Places as China, and the Iudies, as Borneo, Fapan, or the Caribee llands, or That there are or were ſuch Cities as Rome, Athens, and Thebes, or ſuch Perſons at Preſent, as his moſt Excellent and moſt Sacred Majeſty King George, and the Pretender to his Crown and Dominions; or Formerly ſuch, as Epaminondas, Pericles, Themiſtocles, and Demoſthenes, Scipio Africanus, Cato Uticenſis, Brutus and Cicero, or Piſiſtratus, æſchines, and Philip of Macedon, Marius, Catiline, and Julius Cæſar, and then I ſall Readily Acquieſce, that there is more Knovledge and Demonſtration in the Connexion of Ideas, than there is in Common Senſe, and in Hiſtory of Fact; and Conſequently, that the Chriſtian Religion, with the Author of it, which is a Piece of Hiſtory, is not a Part of knowledge, which is Demonſtrative, and only comes under One Degree of Probability; But till That is Evidenced, I muſt Beg Leave to Think, that Probability Lies on the Side of the Connexion of Ideas, Eſpecially, ſince the Connexion of them is here OWned to Require Pains and Attention, and a Steady Application of the Mind; and that Demonſtration Lics on the Side of Senſe and of Fact, in Oppoſition and Contradiction to the Aſſertions of this Syſteme of Ideas, into which we are now Inquiring. HOWEVER, it would be ſome Comfort and Satisfaction to an Inquirer into the Truth of Things, to find this Definer and Claſſer of the ſeveral Degrees of Knowledge, to Furniſh us with ſome Inſtance of his OWn, which even in the Demonſtrative, ſeems to Riſe little Higher, as Ihave Said, than that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, or that in a Rectangle Triangle, the Square of the Hypotenuſe is Equal to the Squares of the Sides. As to what is Said of the Juxta-Poſition of Ideas, and Diſcovering their Connexion by the Intervention of other Ideas, and Calling it Reaſoning, it is nothing elſe, but an Idle and Trifling Comment upon the Way, by which we come to be Convinced, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones; and, that the Mind Arrives at Conviction in ſuch Caſes by thoſe Methods, will not be Denicd by any One. AND as to what is Said, that Sagacity Conſiſis in a Quickneſs of the Mind to find out the Intervening Ideas, by which we come to a Proof of the Propoſition, it is a Wrong Affirmation; Becauſe Sagacity does not Conſiſt in a Quickneſs of the Mind, to find out ſuch Intervening ldeas, but in a Faculty of the Mind, for which we have no other Name than That of Penetration 3A Quickneſs of the Mind to find out theſe Intervening Ideas, is rather an Act of it, which may be Derived from Memory, and which belongs to a Parrot, but Sagacity or Penetration is that, which Dives into Hidden and Remote Things from Common Obſervation, whether the Mind Acts Quicker or Slower in ſuch a Reſearch; The Inſtance of the Former is That of Philoſophers, vho can only be Sagacious on other Mens Writings, which ſeems to be the Caſe of the Preſent Syſteme of Ideas, and of the Latter, That of Thoſe, vho can Enter into the Nature of Things with a Sagacity and Penetration of their Own, as Sir Iſ. Newton has Endeavoured to do, and with an Applauſe, which is in a great Meaſure Due to him; That is, ſo far as he is an Advocate of the Forces of Nature; But, whether thoſe Forces are Juſtly Aſſerted by him of Gravitation or Attraction, vill Perhaps be ſtill a Queſtion; Since, on the Contrary ve Aſfirm thoſe of Contraction and Expanſion, which by the Preceding Books of Philoſophy, are Shewn to be Diſferent Principles ſrom the other, and in ſome Caſes Diametrically Oppoſite to them. Ir is True, this Philoſophy after takes Notice, that other Parts of Learning, it is Poſſible, are as Capable of Demonſtration as Mathematicks and Numbers, but it doe: not Inform us, what they are; Beſides, for the Reaſons before Alledged, by the Doc rine of the Connexion of Ideas, which cannot Extend beyond the Ideas of our ou Minds Minds, all Senſitive and Natural Knowledge, and all Hiſtories of Fact, as well as Thoſc of Chriſtianity, arc Excluded from Demonſtration and Certainty, and Terminate only in Faith and Opinion, which has been Shewn to be Abſurd, and thai Faith and Opinion is rather the Reſult of the Connexion of Ideas, than of Fact Senſe, and Experience. 5. 3. IN this Chapter, there is Little more than a Repetition of what goes be fore, Excepting Where it Speaks of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas in Co-exiſtence, in Which, it is Said, our Knowledge is very Short, tho' in this Conſiſis the Greateſt and moſt Material Part of our Knowledge Concerning Subſtances, which are nothing but Certain Collections of Simple Ideas, Co-exiſting in One Subject; Upon vhich I ſnall only Obſerve, TuAT, What is here all along Repreſented, as a Defect in our nowledge of Subſtances, is no other than ſo many Proofs of the Ill and Abſurd Contrivance of the Modern Syſtemes of Nature, that is, of the Corpuſcularian or Atomical Philoſophy, hich is now almoſt Univerſally Eſpouſed, and which has been already Inquired into, in Relation to it's Notion of Subſtances, and does not Want any farther Confutation. AxorHER Aſſertion, which is Remarkable, is, that we have no Knowledge farther thanwe can have a Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, cither by Intuition, Demonſtration, or Senſation; For what Agreement or Diſagreement oſ our Ideas can there be by Senſation? I Perceive Colour, for Inſtance, Sound, Extenſion, or Solidity, &æ. but where is the Agreement or Diſagreement of Two Ideas, when only One is Perceived by the Mind, by the Intervention of it's Senſes? DesCartes, I Suppoſe, was Aware of this, and thereſore, when he made Certainty to Conſitt in the Connexion of the Ideas of our own Minds, very Juſtly Rejected Senſation from any Claim to it, which the Preſent Syſteme of Ideas has, as Weakly, Reſumed. TuHiRD, It is Told us, that the Idea of a Supreme Being Infinite in Power, Goodneſs, and Wiſdom, whoſe Workmanſhip we are, and on vhom we Depend, and the Idea of our ſelves, as Underſtanding, Rational Creatures, would, it is Suppoſed, if Duly Conſidered, Afford ſuch Foundations of our Duty and Rules of Action, as might Place Morality among the Sciences Capable of Demonſtration, and it is not Doubted but from Principles, as Inconteſtable, as thoſe of the Mathematicks, by Neceſſary Conſcquences, the Meaſure of Right and Wrong might be made out to any One, that would Apply himſelf with the Same Indifferency and Attention to the One, as he does to the Other of theſe Sciences; For the Relations of other Modes may Certainly be Perceived, as well as thoſe of Number and Extenſion, and where there is no Property, there is no Injuſtice, is a Propoſition as Certain, as any Demonſtration in Euclid, as alſo, that no Government Allows Abſolute Liberty 3 It is Farther Alledged, that, What has given the Advantage to the Ideas of Quantity, and made them Thought more Capable of Certainty and Demonſtration, is; FinsT, That they can be Repreſented by Senſible Marks, which have a Nearer Correſpondence vith them, than any Words or Sounds. SECOND, Becauſe Moral Ideas are Commonly more Complex than Figures. FrROM hence the Three Cauſes of our Ignorance are Said to be, First, Want of Ideas. SECOND, Want of a Diſcoverable Connexion between the Ideas, we have. TumD, Want of Traceing and Examining our Ideas. As to vhat is Alledged Concerning a Supreme Being, and Morality, being Capable of Demonſtration, it only Shews, hov Willing this Philoſophy is to Prefer the Reaſonings of a Natural Religion, and the Refined Heatheniſm of Socrates, or Plato, to the Evidences of Revelation, and the Doctrines and Precepts of a Aſeſſiah; BY making the Firſt Demonſtrable, and the Laſt only Probable, and the Former to be the Reſult of Truth and Certainty, the Latter of Bare Faith and Opinion. But whatever it's Will, or it's Inclinations, may be, or it's Prejudices, It is Wiſe enough not to give us any Principles, upon which we might Demonſtrate the Being of a God, or Morality, which will not be more Liable to Exception than the Arguments and Prooſs for a Revelation; by which Means the Religion of Nature, or of a Philoſopher, vill Appear to be more the Effect and Product of Faith and Opinion, than That of Revelation or of a Chriſtlan; For the very Being of a God is not afterwards Proved Proved by this Philoſophy, which muſt be the Baſis and Foundation of the whole Syſteme; Or if it were Proved, an Obligation of Duty upon us can never be Inferred from the Nature of God, unleſs we are Obliged to Imitate the Pover and Wiſdom of God, as well as his Juſtice and Goodneſs, which it does not ſeem Reaſonable, becauſe not Poſſible, for us to do; Nay it will Want ſome Force of Argument to Evince, that I am Obliged to Imitate God at all in any of his Excellencies or Perfections; It may, till it is Revealed to us, that it is his Will, it may be Pride, and Preſumption in us to Affect the Attributes, and Array our ſelves in the Qualities and Properties of our Creator. FARTHER, the Meaſure of Right and Wrong being the Thing to be Made out, it Looks, as if all Morality was Suppoſed to Conſiſt in Aſcertaining, What was every Ones Property, and that, therefore, the whole Terminated in Juſtice; Whereas BenevoIence, and Generoſity, are Principles in our Nature, vhich Carry us to a Higher Degree of Morality, than a Mere Principle of Juſtice would do; and to Give or Impart to Another more than his Right, which is Munificence and Charity, is a Nobler and Sublimer Act of Morality, than Mere and Strict Juſtice, or Giving to Another, What of Mere Right Appertains to him. MOREOVER, the Axioms here Mentioned are Little Better, than what are afterwards Termed Triſling Propoſitions, amongſt which are all Identical Ones; For, To Say, where there is no Property, there is no Injuſtice, is little more than to Affirm, that where there is no Property, no One has any Thing to Claim, or there is no Property; And to Tell us, that no Government Allows Abſolute Liberty, is the Same as to Pronounce, that no Government will Permit any One to do what he Plcaſes, that ĩs, to Live without Government; And the Great Diſputes about Property and Government are not any ways Cleared by ſuch Small Maxims in Either. TuHE Reaſon, vhy we cannot ſo vell and ſo Demonſtrably Argue upon any Moral Subjects, as upon Mathematical Ones, is not, becauſe we cannot have Characters Engraven of thoſe Ideas, as we have in the Figures of Geometry, nor, becauſe they are more Complex; Since the Firſt is Remedied by Exact Definitions, which Definitions, when Set down in Writing, may be Eſteemed Juſt and Standing Characters of thoſe Moral Ideas; And as for their Complexedneſs, a Triangle or a Square, or a Cyclols, or a Parabola, Hyperbola, Ellipſis, or Parabolocid, do Equally Conſi*t of a Number and a Variety of Simple Ideas, of Space, Lines, and Angles, of which the Complex is made up. THE Reaſon therefore of the Difficulties in the Science of Morality is, the Diververſity of Temper and Complexion in Human Nature, which makes it a very Unſit Judge of Virtue and Vice, or of Good and Evil, and Conſequently Evinces the Neceſſity of the Divine Interpoſing to Fix and Preſcribe Rules for our Actions and Conduct. A Triangle, or any other Mathematick Figure, is Certain and Unaltered, and ſo is Gold, and other Material Subſtances, and for that Reaſon we may Argue upon them with ſome Kind of Truth and Conſiſtency; But the Tempers of Men are Different, Deſultory, and Uncertain, and therefore, tho we ſhould have never ſo Determinate Ideas of Moral or Human Actions, the Rules and Methods of Judging of them would be Various, and Gratitude would be Eſtcemed a Virtue with One Man, which would be a Weakneſs and Vice with Another, Charity would be a Laudable Action in One Perſon's Opinion, which with Another would be little better than Extravagance and Folly;3 And there is Scarcely any Doubt to be made, but that the ſeveral and Particular Complexions of Men's Minds, Derived from the Different Expanſive and Contractive Forces of them, are the Occaſion of the Continual Diſputes about ſuch Matters. As to vhat is Mentioned of the Cauſes of our Ignorance, and that our Want of Ideas, of which we are Capable, is One of them, as for Inſtance, of the Bulk, Motion, and Figure of the Particles, of which all the Bodies in the Univerſe are Suppoſed 10 Conſiſt, there is little or nothing in ſuch an Aſſertion; Becauſe ve do not vant 1o See the Minute Figures of the Particles of Bodies, in Order to Inform us of theNature of them; For, if there were ſuch Microſcopes, as could Shew us the leaſt Atoms of Bodies. they could no more Acquaint us with the Primary Qualities of Bodies, and the Cauſes of them than our Modern Ones can, which only Preſent us with a Different View o r the Parts of Bodies, without giving us any ſuch Information; and ve may as vell Say, vhen a Microſcope Repreſents to us little Plants in a Spot of Mold, or Hairs in a Mite, or Feathers in a Fly, that therefore we betrer Know the Nature of Mold, a Mite, or a Fly, as that by Secing the Lat Atoms of Bodies, ve ſhould be better Inſtructed in the Nature of them, which does not Conſiſt in a Various Configuration of the Parts and the Pores, as is here Imagined, but in the ſeveral Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, according to what has been before Alledged. S. 4. Tuis Philoſophy begins now to Doubt, that the Reader by this Time may be Apt to Think, that it has been all this While only Building a Caſtle in the Air, and may be Ready to Object, If it be True, that all Knowledge Lies only in the Perception of the Agreement or Diſagreement of our own Ideas, the Viſions of an Enthuſiaſt, and the Reaſonings of a Sober Man, vill be Equally Certain; It is no Matrter, how Things are, ſo a Man Obſerve but the Agreement of his own Imaginations, and Talks Conſormably; It is all Truth, all Certainty; That an Harpy is not a Centaur, is by this Way, as Certain Knovledge, and as much Truth, as that a Square is not a Circle; But it is Said, of what Uſe is all this Knowledge oſ Men's own Imaginations to a Man, that Enquires after the Reality of Things? To which it Anſvers. THAT, if our Knowledge of our Ideas ſhould Terminate in Them, and Reach no Farther, where there is ſomething farther Intended, our moſt Serious Thoughts vould be of little more Uſe, than the Reveries of a Crazy Brain; Thattis Evident, the Mind Knows not Things Immediately, but by the Intervention of the Ideas it has oſ them, and that our Knovledge therefore is Real, only ſo far, as there isa Con formity between our Ideas, and the Reality of Things; It is farther Alledged, that there are TWo Sorts of Ideas, which, ve may be Aſſured, Agree with the Reality oſ Things. FiusT, Simple Ideas, which, ſince the Mind can by no Means make to it's ſelf; muſt be the Eſect of Things Operating upon the Mind in a Natural Way, and therefore are not Fictions oſ our Fancies; Thus the Idea of Whiteneſs, as it Lies in the Mind, Exactly Anſwers that Power, which is in any Body to Produce it tl cre. SECOND, All our Complex Ideas, Except thoſe of Subſtances, being Archetype: of the Mind's ovn Making, and not Referred to the Exiſtence of Things, as to theũ Originals, cannot Want any Conformity Neceſſary to Real Knowledge, for that, which is not Deſigned to Repreſent any Thing, but it's ſelf, can never be Capable of a Wrong Repreſentation; Thus the Mathematician Conſiders the Truth and Properties belonging to a Rectangle or a Circle, only as they are Ideas in his ovn Mind, and yet his Knowledge is not only Certain, but Real; Becauſe Real Things are no ſarther Concerned, nor Intended by any ſuch Propoſitions, than as Things Really Agree to thoſe Archetypes in his Mind. HENCE it is Said to Follow, that Moral Knowledge is as Capable of Real Certainty, as Mathematicks; Becauſe our Moral Ideas, as well as Mathematical, being Archetypes themſelves, and ſo Adequate or Complete Ideas, all the Agreement or Diſagreement, ve ſhall find in them, will Produce Real Knowledge, as well as in Mathematical Figures: That, which is Requiſite to make our Knovledge Certain, is the Clearneſs of our Ideas; And That, which is Required to make it Real is, that they Anſer their Archetypes. Tumb, But the Complex Ideas, which we Refer to Archetypes without us, may Diſfer from them, and ſo our Knowledge about them may come Short of being Rteal; aid ſuch are our Ideas of Subſtances, which, to be Real, muſt be made up of ſuch Simple Ones, as have been Diſcovered to Co-exiſt in Nature, whether they are Perfect Collections of ſuch Simple Ideas, or not. Tuus ſar the Preſent Philoſophy, in Reſpect of the Reality of our Knowledge; But, notwithſtanding all the Fine Turns, which are given to this Account of the Reality of our Knovledge, it will, IDelieve, upon a Juſt Examination be found to be nothing more, than Building a Caſile in the Air, than the Viſions of a Rational Enthuſiaſt than an Agreement of his own Imaginations, and Aſfirming, that an Harpy is not a Centaur, aud ithat a Square is not a Circle. For, in General, This Syſteme of Ideas, This Hiſlory, or Philoſophy, oſ the Mind is, as we have Shewn, little Elſe than a Romance of it; which, in the Firſt Place, Disfurniſies the Mind of all it's Ideas and Forces, by Making it a Mere Raſa Talula, and and then by it's own Art and Contrivance Endeavours to Place it's Ideas in it, actording to it's own Fancy and Pleaſure; That is, by Introducing Simple Ideas Firſt into the Mind, and afterwards Complexing and Combining thoſe Ideas, in Order to give us Materials enough for the whole Extent of our Knowledge; Whereas the Real Hiſtory of the Mind is the Reverſe of all this, which Originally Receives it's Ideas in a Complex Form, and then Separates and Divides them into the ſeveràl Diſtinct or Simple Ideas, of which they are Compounded. TnUs in our Infancy, we Receive the Ideas of Subſtances. and of Human Actions, United, by a Groſs Experience and Obſervation of Both, which, when afterwards we come Philoſophically to Inquire into, we Diſtinguiſh into Extenſion, Solidity, CoIour, Figure, &. on the One Hand, and into the ſeveral Species and Kinds of them on the Other; And whether they are to be Eſteemed Good or Bad, Virtuous or Vicious; For what Children, or Youths, tho' Grown up to ſome Degree of Maturity in Years and in Judgement, were ever Known to Diſcourſe of theſe Matters in the ſame Manner, as this Philoſophy ? And yet they ought to do, if it is the Natural Way, by which the Mind is Originally Furniſied with it's Ideas, and we ſhould not Meet with theſe Notions in the Privacies of the Studious or Learned in theſe Ideas, but in the very Plays and Diverſions, and the Converſation, of School-Boys, who would be as Good Philoſophers, as the Patrons of this Syſteme, vhich yet we dò not Find, as, I Preſume, the Greateſt Favourers of this Eſay will Acknowledge. BuT to Omit Generals; Firſt, as to Simple Ideas, which, it is Said, wve may be Aſſured Agree with the Reality of Things; How is this Proved, Suppoſing, that Simple Ideas Enter firſt into the Mind, and that the Mind afterwards Complexes and Combines them, which has been before Diſputed? Why Truly, by only Telling us, that, ſince the Mind can by no Means make theſe Simple Ideas to it's ſelf, they muſt be the Effect of Things Operating upon the Mind in a Natural Way, and therefore are not Fictions of our Fancies; Thus the Idea of Whiteneſs, as it is in the Mind, Exactly Anſwers that Power, which is in any Body to Produce it there. But, I would Ask, What is the Effect of Things Operating upon the Mind in a Natural Way, Unleſs a Suppoſition, that Things do Operate upon the Mind? And What is it for an Idea ro Anſwer that Power, which is in any Body to Produce it there, Excepting to Take it for Granted, that there is ſuch a Power in Body to Produce it? Which is the very Thing Conteſted by Philoſophers; And which this Philoſophy, at the ſame Time, that it wvould Shew the Reality of our Knowledge, does not Prove, but Preſume, and Evinces, how much it is Uſed to Play with Words, without Entering into the Truth and Evidences of Things. On the Contrary, ve have Endeavoured to Demonſtrate in the Firſt Part of our Principles of Philoſophy, that there is ſuch a Being as an External Nature, which Acts upon our Minds, and to Overthrow all the Cavils and Objections againſt it, cither from Dreams, or Deliriums, or any Reputed Imaginary Pains, upon the Amputation of an Arm, or any other Member. SECOND, Complex Ideas, ſuch as Mixed Modes, which are Archetypes of the Mind's ovn Making, and are not Referred to the Exiſtence of Things, it is Said, cannot want any Conformity Neceſſary to Real Knowledge, and for which an Inſtance is Produced from the Mathematicks; But, if any Mixed Modes, or any Mathematical Figures, do not Agree to the Reality of Things, and have only their Exiſence in the Mind, and are the Mere Creatures and Fictions of it, which has been Shewn, we on the other Hand Affirm, that this is, as much a Chimerical and Fantaſtical, and not a Real Knowledge, as i our Simple Ideas did not Anſwer the Powers of Nature, or, as if there were no External Powers in Nature to Produce them, or, as if we ſhould make Certain Concluſions about a Sphinx, or a Centaur, vhen there were no ſuch Things in Being. Reality is a Term, which is Applied to Things, as they Really Exiſt, and of which we therefore have a Real Knowledge, or it is a Vagrant One, and may Signify any Thing, which cither does, or does not Exiſt, according to the Pleaſure of the Philoſopher; And as to Mathematicks and Philoſophy, we have Shewn in Reſpect of Both, that they are not Agreeable to the Nature and Reality of Things, nor, that the Reaſonings upon Morality, or Natural Religion, are ſo. Yyryr Tumo, TuimRD, It has been alſo Shewn, that our Knovledge of Subſtances, as it has been hitherto Propoſed, is no ways Agrecable to the Reality of Things, no more than That of Mixed Modes; And Indeed, how an Imperfect Collection of Simple Ideas which Co-exiſt in Nature, ſhould be Anſwerable to the Reality of it, is Unaccountable and yet, That is here Aſſerted. I might Proceed to Examine into the Remaining Chapters of this Book, in ſo many ſeveral Sections, but it will be a Superfluous Work, Eſpecially to One, who is already Tired with the Fatigue, he has Undergone in theſe Diſquiſitions, and ſince I have given my Sentiments and Opinion in Relation to all of them, cither by what Foregoes, or in the Book which Follows, Concerning Natural Religion. I ſhall only Add, that if any Thing has Eſcaped me in my Inquiry into this Philoſophy of Ideas, which may ſeem too Harſh and Severe, I would Deſire it may be Attributed to my Real Love and Affection for Truth in Philoſophy on the One Hand, and for Chriſtianity on the Other, Againſt both which It ſeems to me, in many Points, to have Offended; For, as to the Perſon of It's Author, vhom I never Knev, and therefore cannot be Suppoſed to have Contracted any Prejudice againſt, ſo if he were nov Living, I ſould Value and Eſteem upon ſeveral Accounts, as a Curious, Inquiſitive, Ingenious, and Underſtanding, tho' I Believe, no very Learned, or Judicious Man; And if the Heat of Youth, when many of theſe Papers were Written, as alſo ſeveral in the Following Book, has Carried me rather too Far in Warmth and Zeal, in the Eagerneſs of the Contention, I Hope, if the Reaſoning is Juſt, as I Think it is, it will be Allowed and Indulged me by every Candid and Ingenuous Inquirer into theſe Matters. PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE. ExPANS IVE and CONTRACTIVE F O R C E S B O O K VI. Of the ETHICKS, or Natural RELIGION, of DES-CARTESS MEDITATIONS, Mr. LOCKES Eſas, of Dr. OL ARKE, and Mr. WOLL ASTON. Yyyy⸗ 9 PRINCIPLES of the PHILOSOPHY O F TH E Exp Aa S1 vE and CoONTR ACTIVE FORCES. B O O K VI. C H AP. I Concern ing the Little Importance of Natural Religion, after the Revelation of the Chriſlian. 5. 1.  HE RE is no Argument, which I Know of, that has been ſo Careſully, and vith ſuch Dexterity, Managed and Propoſed to us, in the Preſent, and ſome Late Times, as that of a Natural Religion; Which, upon its firſt Appearance, ſeemed with ſome Kind of Modeſty, only to Take the Merit upon it's ſelf of being an Aſſiſtant to Chriſtianity, nor did it Pretend to have any òther Deſign, Excepting to Convince Atheiſtical Men of the Truth of thoſe Doctrines by Rational Principles, which they were not willing to Embrace upon Chriſlian Ones. s. 2. Ir alſo farther Surmiſed, that ſuch a Method might not only Prevail upon Atheiſts and Deiſts, but upon Men of Learning and Thought, vho, Notwithſtandinę they had Entertained a moſt Entire Veneration already for Chriſtianity, yet mizht thereby be Confirmed in the Truths it Delivered, as well from the Undoubted Tcſimont of their Revelation from God, as from the Aſent, which Reaſon it's ſelf Gavte to Them. 5. 3. TuESE Intentions of Thoſe, vho Endeavoured to Promote a Natural Religion, if Sincere, were moſt Certainly Commendable and Good, and could not Fail of Gaining a Number of Proſelytes, where Chriſtianity and Reaſon vere Inculcated to us, as Terms, in a great Meaſure Reciprocal and Synonymous; But ſo it has Fallen out, That, whatever ſuch Intentions were, the Conſequences have not been Anſwera ble, ſince, Inſtead of Converting Athciſts to Chriſtianity, we find Chriſtianity is nol vith ſome Men, who Proſeſs it, many Degrees Removed from Atheiſm; Whilſt Rea li ſor ſon, which at firſt Preſumed nothing more than to Aſſert it, Sets up for it's ſelf, and is at Length Reſolved to be it's ovn Conducter. §. 4. As therefore Reaſon, under a Shew and Pretence of Religion, has Acquired the Reputation it at Preſent Enjoys, and, notwithſtanding which, has been ſo Kind tc Deſert it, we ſhall Endeavour to Evidence the Weakneſs and Infirmity of Natura Religion in General, upon thoſe Principles which have been hitherto Eſpouſcd, Thai all the Reaſonings, hich we are Entertained with upon this Subject, are either Precarious or Falſe, and That they are rather Arguments of the Contrivance and Wit ol the Philoſopher, than of any Religion, which is, or can be, Concluded from them. S. 5. IF we had nothing more to Offer, in Vindication of our ſelves, for Diſputing the Principles of Natural Religion, as Propoſed by the Philoſophers of Ideas beſides i's Unworthy Treatment of the Chriſtian, by Affirming it in Pretence and in Reality Rejecting it, it would be Sufficient; But we have more Reaſons to Juſtify us in it. For, IF according to ſ. I. Men are Atheiſts, Reaſon, as it is now Managed, vill have as little Svay in Convincing them of the Truth of Religion, as Chriſtianity its ſclf; If, according to J. 2. they are Confirmed in the Belief of their Chriſtianity, a farther Confirmation from Reaſon is Superfluous and Unneceſſary, however Agreeable it may be to our Inquiries after Truth, or to every Mans Particular Curioſity, or Private Perſuaſion. 5. 6. It may be Poſſibly Said in Anſwer to the Preceding Section, that we Divide all Men, who have Heard of Chriſtianity into Atheiſts or Chriſtians, as if there was no Medium betwixt the One and the Other; And That is, What we Affirm, They muſt be, vho Embrace this Ideal Philoſophy; For, if we Believe the Chriſtian Religion from the Abundant Evidences, we have for it, and which are ſuch, as no Matter of Fact in the World is Capable of more, we are at the ſame Time Certain, that there is a God, and that, That Gracious, Omnipotent, and All-wiſe Being, Revealed his Will to Mankind; On the Contrary, if this is not Allowed, but Reaſon and the Connexion of Ideas is Recurred to, which is what is now Generally Meant by Reaſon, we ſhall Abundantly Prove, that, as it can be of no Service to the Chriſtian Religion, which Depends upon the Evidence of Fact, ſo it is Inſuſficient to Support or Defend it's oun. 5. 7. Nor are ve at all Apprehenſive of any Ill Conſequences, which ſome Good Men may Probably Think, vill Follow from ſuch a Procedure; Becauſe, in the Firſt Place, we have already Evinced our Chriſtianity to be True, and to be Derived from Almighty God himſelf, by Arguments, which Depend on Matter of Faqt, and which are as Clear and as Full, as Thoſe which Convince us, that there ever was ſuch a Place, as Athens, or ~Rome, or ſuch a Perſon, as Alcibiades, or Cæſar; Second, Becauſe, beſides this Demonſtration, we have Another, which Confirms the Divinity and Truth of the Chriſtian Religion from the ſeveral Doctrines, It Propoſes to our Belief; A Third, from the Nature of the Morals it Aſſerts; A Fourth, which we ſhall Purſue, as far as we are Able, from an Explanation of the Scriptures themſelves; And a Fifth from the Afſfirmations and Senſe of the Primitive Writers. 5. 8. WE are likewiſe under no Apprehenſions, in the Second Place, of any Ill Conſcquences from ſuch a Procedure; Becauſe, if Natural Religion was Requiſite to the Conviction of Chriſtianity, we Dare be Certain, that we have Proved, the Higheſt and moſt Important Doctrines it Prerends to Demonſtrate, upon suner and more Rational Principles, than Any, It has been hitherto Pleaſed to Reveal to us. ꝗ. 9. We cannot alſo but Add, that if the Chriſtian Religion is not True, which to any Wiſe or Juſt Inquirer into Things, is an Impoſſible Suppoſition, whatever Atheiſis, or Deiſis, may Think of it, it is not worth the vhile to Prove a Natural One is; Since the Being of a God, if our Souls are not Immortal, vill not Deſerve our Conſideration, any more than any other Being, which Exiſts in the Univerſe3 And that our Souls are Immortal, the Preſent Syſtemes of Natural Religion, Derived from Metaphy ſicks, as we ſhall aſierwards Shew, are not Capable of Proving; It being the Revelation of Almighty God himſel? to us, in that Holy and Divine Religion we Profeſs, Which brought Liſe and Immortality to Light thro' the Goſpel; Notwithſtanding which, we do not Afſirm, but both the One and the Other may be Demonſtrated from Principles, Unknown to the Preſent Philoſophy. . 10. LastLy, S. 10 LasTLy, It is Plain, that Natural Religion Abſtractedly Speaking, is nothing elſe than the Philoſophy of the Heathens, and we cannot Think, That Chriſtianity and Religion can be Supported by That, Which it was Intended to Annul and Deſtroy, and Which the Apoſtle to the Corinthians in Expreſs Terms Explodes, as Carnal, and Contrary to the Divine Spirit, and Genius, of the Doctrine, He Preached to Them; Which was to Inſtruct them in the Knowledge of God. S. 11. THE Method therefore, which we ſhall Follow, in Conſidering the Evidences of Natural Religion, ſhall be; 1ſ. To Compare Teſtimony with Knowledge, and Faith with Reaſon; To Aſſign the Provinces, which belong to Each of Them, and to Examine into the Degrees of Certainty, or Probability, which may be Expected from Both, as alſo into the Obligations, in Reſpect of our Duty, which Reſult or Ariſc from Them; 2d. We ſhall Enter into all the Particular Doctrines of Natural Religion, and Endeavour to Shew, that there is no Satisfaction to be had from any Reaſonings, which have been hitherto Propoſed to us on that Subject; The Firſt of which Hcads we ſhall Treat of in the Two Enſuing Chapters. C H AP. II Concerning the Evidences from Self-Information. 5. . HERE is Nothing more Manifeſt, than that, whatever comes to our Notice in a Natural Way, muſt either be, from our own Informations, or from other Men's; That, which is Derived into our Minds by theFirſt of theſe Methods, I Call SelfInformation, and That, which is Imparted to us by the Laſt, Teſtimony, the Evidences of which we ſhall Diſtinctly Conſider. S5. 2. WE ſall not therefore, as Others have Prepoſterouſly done, Define What our Notion of Probability is, Namely, that it is a Likeline to be True, and then Arbitrarily Rank under that Head All thoſe Propoſitions, in which we cannot Find an Immediate Connexion of Ideas, wherein Certainty is Said to Conſiſt; Nor on the other Hand, ſhall we Firſt Explain, what we Mean by Certainty, Namely, That in all the Parts of it, There is Intuition, and Each Idea, Each Step, has it's Manifeſt and Viſible Connexion, and after we have Happily Settled this Point, with great Satisfact: ion and Contentment of Mind, Receive no other Propoſitions into the Number of Certain Ones, which do not Agree with that Definition; And yet this is all, which is Atchieved by theſe Sagacious Reaſoners, that is, Thoſe Propoſitions are Termed only Probable, and not Certain, which they Define to be ſo, and Thoſe are Certain and Infallible, which they have Pronounced ſuch; Becauſe they have ſo Named them. WuEREAS the Probability, or Certainty, of Propoſitions cannot be Inferred or Concluded from a Definition of Probability and Certainty, but from a Real Prooſ of What Probability and Certainty are, and wherein they Conſit, and then Examining What Kind of Propoſitions have a Claim to the One, or the Other. S. 3. AGREEABLE yet to this Method, we àre Told, That all Matters of Fact, however vell Atteſted, may Produce Aſſurance in us, but cannot Certainty, That they may be Highly Probable, but do not Carry Demonſtration with them; Alſo, That Conſequently ſuch Matters of Fact ve Aſſent to; ve Believe, and have no Manner of Doubt Concerning them, but do not Know them to be True, nor are Infallibly Certain of them. 5. 4. FrRoM which Doctrine we muſt Obſerve, that we are Led by it into very Improper Ways of Expreſſion; For Firt, ve muſt Affirm, that Probability and Aſ ſurance are in General the Same; Aſſurance being only a Kind of Probability. Thus, altho we are as Sure, as we can be, of any Thing, that there is ſuch a Place a France, or Spain, Philoſophically Speaking, we muſt Only Say, it is Probable there is: and vhilſt I am Writing this, altho' I am Sure, that my Friend Lies Dangerouſly Ill by Twenty Meſſages, which I have Received Concerning it, according to the Phraſc of our Modern Reaſoners, This is only Probable. 5.5. ON the Contrary, Certainty, Knowledge, and Aſſurànce, are made to Diffei in this Way oſ Reaſoning; For it ſeems, tho' I may be Aſſured of a Thing, I maj no not be Certain of it, nor Knov it to be, What I am Aſſured it is; Thus, as in the Former Inſtances, I may be Sure, that there is ſuch a Country as France or Spain, or that my Friend is Nine Miles from this Place, in a Weak and Languiſhing Condition, and yet I ſhall not Knov, or be Certain, of the One or the Other; Such Methods of Thinking, it is Plain, therefore are either not True, or elſe, that they make Uſe of a Language, which is Directly Contrary to what they Propoſe to Speak in. 5. 6. What we have Said in the Foregoing Sections will be more Evident, if we Shew the Reaſon of theſe Improprieties, which is Manifeſt; For, as the Preſent Doctrine had Originally Fixt the Viſible Connexion of Ideas, as the only Teſt of Certainty, it was Neceſſary for it to Reject all other Propoſitions from being Certain, which did not Depend upon that Evidence, and to Make them only Probable Ones, whatever Convictions beſides, they were Surrounded with; Let us therefore Conſider the Full Senſe of ꝗ. 3. if Put into a Language Suitable to the Ideas, this Philoſophy has Entertained, and Stript oſ the Equivocal Terms of Aſſurance, Probability, Certainty, and Knovledge, and ve ſhall Find it to be, no more than This, that Matters of Fact, however well Atteſted, do Depend upon other Evidences, than Thoſe, which Ariſe from the Viſible Connexion of the Ideas in a Propoſition; and if we are Deſirous to Call One Aſſurance, and the Other Certainty, and the One Probability and the Other Knowledge, it will be an Argument, how Eaſy it is to Impoſc Names of Diſtinction, but not One, that ve Know the True Nature of the Evidences themſelves, which Reſult from Both; For, Albeit we ſhould Affix or Attribute any other Terms to them, the Queſtion vould ſtill Return, which is to be Diſcuſſed, that is, hat the Real and Proper Evidences are, which the Mind Receives from Teſtimony, and what Thoſe are, which it has from Reaſon, or the Connexion of Ideas, and how far they are Each of Them Adapted to Produce a Full and Certain Perſuaſion in our Minds; All therefore, which we Obtain from this Celebrated Philoſophy, is only an Arbitrary Nomenclature of Things, or rather a Miſnaming of Them, as will be Evident to any One, who Reads over the Chapters Cited. 5. 7. SINCE then we cannot be Satisfy'd in the Preſent Doctrine, we ſhall Conſider Things in the Way, we at Firſt Propoſed, of their being Informations from our own Minds, or of their being Thoſe from other Men's; The Firſt of which we ſhall Examine into in the Following Sections, and the Laſt, in the Succeeding Chapter. 5. 3. As to what Reſpects thoſe Informations, ve Receive from our ſelves, They are cither Reſolved into Senſation, or into the Intuition of our own Ideas, or into our Arguments from Either, or Both. The Evidence, which the Mind has from Senſation, ve may Call Senſitive Knowledge, or Certainty; and That, which it has from the Intuition of it's Ideas, Intuitive; What it has from Arguing upon Senſe, Experimental; and That from it's Abſtraction of Ideas, ve may Term Mathematical ; and laſtly, Where ve Reaſon both from the Intuition of our Ideas, and from Senſation together, we cannot give a Juſter Denomination to it, than That of a Philoſophical One; We ſall Speak Diſtinctly to Each of Theſe, and Conſider the ſeveral Aſſurances or Convictions, which the Mind is Capable of Receiving from them. 5. 9. VE have Mentioned Knowledge, Certainty, and Aſſurance, in all theſe Caſes, as the ſame Thing; If it be thereſore Inquired, what we make Knowledge, or Certainty, or Aſſurance to Conſiſt in, in General; we Anſwer, in a Conviction oſ the Mind from Juſt Premiſſes, vhich may be Diſferent, as in the ſeveral Kinds of Knovledge above Named, where the Certainty is Equal; If it be farther Asked, how ve ſhall kKnow, when the Premiſſes are Juſt, and what Fixed and Determined Criterion there is to Diſtinguiſ them from Falſe Ones, from which a Mind, that is Leſ Intent and Cautious, may be ſometimes Convinced, and Conſequently Deceived ; ] do not yet know of any other Reply, than that in Order to Aſcertain this Point, ve are to Examine into the Nature of the Premiſſes or Evidences themſelves, which being Different, cannot be Reduced to One Certain Rule of our Judging of them; and we may as vell Say, what Nature is in General, which Conſiſts of the ſeveral Diſtin&t Species and Orders of Beings, which it Comprehends, as what Certainty is in General, which ought likewiſc to be Conſidered in the ſeveral Particulars, it Includes. 5. 10. As to the Evidences oſ Self-Information, the Firſt to be Examined into, are Thoſe, which we Receive from our Senſes, and which, in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy Philoſophy we Endeavoured to Shew, were as Forcible and Strong, as the Evidentes, or the Arguments, we have for our own Perceptions, or our Thinking; Since all the Errors, vhich are Committed in our Senſations, do not Proceed from our not being Really Senſible of External Objects, as they Appear to us, but from our Falſe Judgments and Concluſions, vhich we make upon thoſe Senſations; Thus, we as Fully See and Perceive that Diſtance, which Appears to be betwixt us and the Sun, and it is as Juſt an Effect Produced in our Minds from the Sun, and the Intermediate ther, which Lies betwixt our ſclves and it, as any other Perception of Willing, Judging, Remembering, &æ. which Terminates in our ovn Minds; We have only a Certain and Determined Perception in either of theſe Caſes of what we do Perceive, but what the Real Cauſe of thoſe Perceptions is, whether of Diſtance, why it Appears Different from what it in Fact is, or of Willing, Judging, Remembering, why, or in what Way, it is Impreſſed upon our Minds, we are Equally at a Loſs to Know; This is Evident, that our Senſations, as they are Oſfered to our Minds, however Falſe our Judgments or Concluſions upon them may be, are as Certain and Infallible, as our Perceptions themſclves are, and we have, according to thoſe Principles of Philoſophy, as Juſt an Evidence for the Reality and Certainty of the One, as the Other. 5. 11. WE have in the ſame Principles alſo Shewn, that Intuitive Knowledge is likewiſe Certain, that is, That which Properly and Peculiarly Reſults from the Contemplation of our own Ideas; Thus we are as Certain, that we Perceive, we Will, and Judge, and Remember, and that there are thoſe ſeveral Faculties in the Mind of which we are Conſcious, as we are, that there are the ſeveral Powers in External Objects, of which we are Senſible; For we are Equally Sure, that we Perceive Thought in our ſelves, and Heat, or Light, or Solidity, & from Beings, which are without us. i 5. 12. HERE are therefore Two Foundations of Certainty, which are Infallible; The One from our Senſations, thar, what we See, or Feel, or Hear, &e. we do See, Feel, or Hear, &c. The Other from our Intuition, that, what we Perceive from a Reſlection upon our own Minds, as that we Will, Judge, and Remember, ve do Perceive by ſuch a Reflection; Theſe TWo we Affirm to be the Sources of all our Natural Knovledge, and the only Criterions of what is Certainty in thoſe Sciences, which Proceed upon Self- Information. S. 13. If what we have Said is True, Original Certainty does not Conſiſt in the Connexion of our Ideas, or our Perceptions, but in the Intuition, or Senſation, of them; We are Certain, that we Perceive our own Thoughts, or the Impreſſions of External Objects, as they Appear to us, but the Connexion of Ideas, and the Compariſon of them with one another, is Made and Formed by the Mind, according as it Apprehends their Diſtinct and ſeveral Relations; and therefore, ve may be Deceived in the Connexion of Ideas, tho we cannot be in the Ideas or Percoptions themſelves. But this will Lead us to Conſider after Intuitive, and Senſitive, Certainty, what a Mathematick, or Geometrick, One is. 5. 14. A Mathematical. or Geometrick, Certainty Ariſes from our Comparing I deas together, which are Abſtracted by the Mind, and betwixt which it as Fully and Clearly Diſcerns the Agreement or Diſagreement, as it Sees and Views the Perceptions, which thus Agree or Diſfer, and ſo far as this is done, our Certainty is as Great, as that which we have from our Reflections upon our Minds, or from the Impreſſions made upon our Senſes; Notwithſtanding which, this Certainty Alters according to the Nature of the Ideas we Conſider, and the Greater or Leſſer Number of them, which ve Compare. Number and Extenſion are the Principal Quantities, vhoſe Proportions and Reſpects to each Other, Mathematicks Demonſtrates. As to Number, ſo far as it Conſiſtsof Units, or any Determined Parts of a Unit, our Perceptions are Diſtinct and Determined, and ve may Reaſon with Certainty upon them; and even in Surd Numbers, of which we have no Clear or Exact Conception, ve may do it; for we as vell Knov, and are as Sure, that the vV3 is Equal to the v3, as that 3 is Equal to 35 that the v 2 is not Equal to the vV3, as that 2 is not 35 Thus, alſo in Extenſion, we are as Certain and Definitive, that a Triangle is not a Square, or a Circle an Octogone, or that a Triangle is Equal to Another of the Same Dimenſions, as we can be of our own Proper Perceptions of ſuch Quantities: For, where only Two Ideas are Compared, whether in Number or Ex: Zz z a z tenſion tenſion, the Mind Perceives their Agreement, or Diſagreement, upon the very Account, that it Diſtinctly Perceives them, and therefore, thus far we are as Certain, as we are from our Perceptions, or our Senſes; Theſe being, what we Call, Axioms, or Self- Evident Principles. ò. 15. IF aftervards the Mind is Carried to Conſider ſeveral Perceptions in thei Compariſon with each Other, Certainty begins to Diminiſh; Becauſe it does not Reſult from the Immediate Contemplation of our Ideas, but Memory is alſo Required to Connect the Laſt Idea with the Firſt, ſo that in all the Intermediate Steps, from the One to the Other, the Mind ſhould Perfectly Retain the Progreſs, which it has Made, in the Compariſon of it's ſeveral Ideas, as well as, by it's Judgment, Diſcern the Connexion or Agreement betwixt the Compariſon of every Part, and of the Whole, which is, what is Termed Demonſtration; That is, Mathematick Demonſtration Conſiſis of Five Things; 1ſ. OF the Apparent and Viſible Agreement, or Diſagreement, betwixt the Ideas made Uſe of, and therefore in that Reſpect is Reſolved into Perfet Axioms, according to 5. 14. 2à. of Axioms Compared with One Another, or the Agreement, or Diſagreement, of Two Cerrain Ideas, Compared with the Agreement, or Diſagreement, of Two other Ideas, and That Compared with a Third, &e. in the Compariſon of which, Memory is Particularly Requiſite; 33. OF Connecting theſe ſeveral Axioms together, ſo as to make one Conſiſtent Demonſtration, which is the Province of Judgment, and to which it is Reſigned; 47h. OF the Agreement bet wixt One Propoſition and Another, which may Proceed upon Different Suppoſitions, and ſometimes Contrary Ones; 51h. OF the Adequateneſs of our Perceptions to the Real Nature of Extenſion, where we make theſe Mathematick Demonſtrations Abſolute Ones, and not Relative to the Principles Suppoſed or Abſtracted. AcCCoRrDING therefore to the Accuracy o? our Connecting Ideas, or according to thè Firmneſs of our Memorics, or the Strength and Force of out Judgmen the Certainty of this Kind of Evidence, which is Called Demonſtrative, Varies; From whence we find ſome Perſons Miſtaken, ho Argue even upon theſe Abſtracted Principles, whilſt Others Produce to us the moſt Undoubted and Infallible Concluſions from them. WEe have an Inſtance of the Falſe Reaſoning in Reſpect of each of theſe Heads, in the 161h. Propoſition of Euclid's Elements, Book 34. and Schol. Art. I. 2. Tacquets Edition. 5. 16. THE Propoſition is, That if a Right Line b f is Drawn Perpendicular to the Diameter be, it will not Enter into any Part of the Circle, but Touches it in one Point only in b And lVL3F that no other Right Line can be Drawn to the Point Q of Contact b betwixt the Circle bo, and the Tangent Sr b f, without Cutting or Interſecting the Circle. a For let us Take the Neareſt Point Imaginable to b, Namely /, ſince by Suppoſition, I6a4 is a Right Angle, a bla vill be an Acute from Coroll. 5. Prop. 32. Par. 2. Book 1. Which Propoſition is, That all the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, from vhence the Coroll. Cited is Evident; But all the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, that is, to 180 Degrees, becauſe Fig. 2. the External Angle fb⸗, f is Equal to the Two Internal Oppoſite Ones bæ a, b a c, by the Firſt Part of this Propoſition, and ſbr, with the Angle 4be, / are Equal to Two Right Ones, or to 180 Degrees; Alſo, that the External Angle ſbc is Equal to bea, bac, is Proved from & bl being Drawn Parallel to ac, in which Caſe, by Prop. 27. DBook 1. Ibc is Equal to bca, which are Alternate Angles, and ſbl to ba, vhich are Oppoſed, the External to the Innal, a d Eaſdem Partes; The Firſt of which is likewiſe Demonſtrated ſfrom Hence, that bã is Equal to ec, and be tode, and a d thereſore the Triangles æ be, à cb, being Equal, the Angles, Expreſcd by the ſame Letters oo, will be ſo too; The Second is Proved from fbl being Equal to gha, which are Vertical Angles, and gb a being Equal to b ac, Which are Alternate; From which Series of Propoſitions it is Evidenced, that æ Ib, Fig. I. is an Acute Angle. THERE- TuEREFORE àl, Fig. 1. which is Oppoſed to the Greater Angle a bl, is Greater than a b, which is Oppoſcd to the Leſſer Angle alb, by Prop. 19. Book I. For al is not Leſs than æ b, if it was, by Prop. 18. the Angle Iba would be Leſs than the Angle bla; Nor is al Equal to a b, ſince, if ſo, by Prop. 5. Book I. the Angles lba, bla, would be Equal, and Conſcquently, aſ is Greater than æb. FARTHER, that the Angle lba is Greater, which is Oppoſed to a Greater Side, and the Angle b la Leſs, which is Oppoſed to a Leſſer, according to Prop. 18, is thus Proved; Since the Angle lba cannot be Equal to the Angle bſa, otherwiſe by Prop. 6. Book I. the Sides, which are Oppoſed, would be Equal, Contrary to the Preſent Suppoſition; And the Angle Iba cannot be Leſs than the Angle b la, for, if ſo, by a Line Dravn from à to l, àlb may be made Equal to the Angle Iba, and therefore, according to Prop. 6. à and à b will be Equal, and 4 b = to ad +ãl; But a b, by Suppoſition, is Leſs than a, and therefore a  will be Greater than æà+ à l, Contrary to the Notion of a Right Line, which is the Shorteſt of any Drawn from the ſame Points 4 and ſ; from whence it Follows, that ſince the Angle ſba is not Leſs than the Angle b ſa, nor Equal to it, it muſt be Greater. LastLy, the 52h. and 61h. Propoſitions Cited, the Firſt of which is, that the Angles at the Baſis of an Iſoſceles, or quicrural, Triangle are Equal, the Second, that if Two Angles in a Triangle are Equal, the Sides, which are Oppoſed to them, will be likewiſe Equal, are ſtill to be Proved; Both Which Propoſitions Depend upon the 4th. Prop. of Euclid, Book 1ſt. Which is, that of Two Triangles à b, and f cb, Fig. 2. if one Side bã is Equal to one Side fæ, and another Side à Equal to another Side e b, and the Angles bãc, be c, made by thoſe Sides, are Equal, the Baſes be, ⸗b, and the whole Trianglesc à b, b e , and the Remaining Angles at the Baſes, which are Oppoſed to Equal Sides, ec, eb, and à b, dc, will likewiſe be Equal; And This is Evinced from the 7th. and 81h. Axioms; The Firſt of which is, that thoſe Quantities or Things, which Mutually Correſpond or Agree with Each Other, are Equal; The Second, that if any Right Lines, or any Angles, are Equal, they will Mutually Correſpond or Agree with Each Other. Ir is alſo to be Obſerved, that the Definition of a Line is That of the Flowing of a Point, and only Conſiſls of an Abſtracted Length, that a Superficies Conſiſts of Length and Breadth, and is Produced from the Flowing of a Line, and that an Angle is the Inclination of One Line to Another, and Includes a Space made up of Length and Breadth only; This is Suppoſed in all the Preceding Demonſtrations. ALL that has been Premiſed, being therefore Granted, it is Conſequent, that if Fig. 1. al is Greater than ab, and æ b Reaches only to the Circumference, any Point, as I, muſt Fall out of it, and the Line 7 b will Touch the Circle in one Point only. THE Second Part of this Propoſition is, That no Line can be Drawn betwixt the Tangent ſb, and the Circumference of the Circle b o, without Interſecting the Circle, which is Manifeſt from the Former Demonſtration; ſince, if any Point in bf, Excepting 4, Falls out of the Circumference, there cannot be another Line Drawn, as br, unleſs it makes an Angle rbe, Leſs than a Right One, and therefore muſt Interſeſt the Circle, ſince b makes a Right One, by Juſt Touching it. IP this therefore is True, it will Follow; 1ſ. That the Angle of Contingence fbo is Leſs than any Acute Angle, as ſb r; 2d. That the Angle of the Semi-circle c bo, altho' it is Leſs than a Right Angle, is Greater than any Acute One; Which ſeems to be no Leſs than a Contradiction, whatever Evaſions are made to Elude the Diſficulty. And from Hence is Derived the Famous Controverſy in Mathematicks, Concerning the Angle of Contact ſbo, Some Aſfirming it not to be a Quantity, as Peletarius, and Dr. Wallis, and Others as Strenuouſly Maintaining, that it is not only a Quantity, as Clavius, but that there are Infinite and Different Series of Quantities Included in it, as Sir Iſaac Newton, Schol. Lem. 1I. Sect. 1. Lib. I. S. 17. THE Firſt Thing therefore to be Conſidered in this Abſtracted Reaſoning, in Order to Judge Concerning the Certainty of it, is, whether, in this Long Series of Ideas, ve have Connected them A-right, ſo as there is a Viſible Agreement betwixt them in Each Step of the Demonſtration, for if in any Part that Agreement Fails, the Whole Ceaſes to be Demonſtrative, or Certain; And ſuch is the Infirmity of the Mind in the Connecting of Ideas, that in the Firſt Advance it makes in the Preſent Z z2 z7z2 Demonſtration it is Miſtaken; For bla is not Proved to be an Acute Angle, unleſs upon the Suppofition, that hl is a Strait Line, and not a Curve, or the Portion of a Circle, for if it is a Portion of the Circle, the Three Angles of ſuch a Triangle are not Evidenced to be Equal to Two Right Ones, if it is not a Part of the Circle, bſ is Suppoſed not to Coincide with the Circle in the Demonſtration Uſed to Prove it, or, which is the Same, b does not Touch the Circle any where, Excepting in one Point, becauſe it does Touch it only in one Point; For it is not Certain, or Evident, in it's ſelf, that an Infinitely Large Curve may not Coincide with a Tangent, as well, at Leaſt, as an Infinitely Small Subtenſe is Acknowledged to Coincide with a Curve; and if ſo, in the Smalleſt Circle, there may be likewiſe a Coincidence betwixt a Strait Line and it, ſince a Large Tangent is no more in Relation to a Large Circle, than a Leſſer One is to a Smaller; On the Contrary, if there is no Coincidence betwixt a Circle and a Tangent, Excepting in one Point, it is yet not Proved by Suppoſing it, which the Preſent Demonſtration does. 5 §. 18. THE Second Step, made in this Demonſtration, is to Prove, That all the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones; For i,. there being, by what is Proved before, a Connexion of Ideas Separately, betwixt ſb l, bac, and lbe, be a, and betwixt a b c and it's ſelf;, Fig. 2. The Mind Immediately Concludes, 24. That there muſt be an Agreement betwixt a bc +bac +ach, and ſfb l4 lbe+abe, becauſe the Parts are Equal to the Wholes, which we Called the Agreement of Axioms, §. I5. or the Agreement of the ſeveral Separate Connexions Compared with One Another in the Demonſtration, in which Memory has it's Province; and therefore in this Caſe we may be Deceived, where the Compariſons of our Ideas are Long and Tedious, rtho we ſhould Plainly Diſcern all the Diſtinct Connexions of them: Farther, 34. Judgement is alſo here Concerned, for altho the Mind ſhould Retain by it's Memory the ſeveral Separate Connexions of the Ideas, and the Connexions of thoſe Connexions, &e. yet, if it ſould Fail in making a Right Judgment from them, the Demonſtration would be again Defective, that is, if the Mind did not by it's Judgement Connect theſe Ideas ſo, as they ſould be Anſwerable to Each Other in every Part, and in the Whole, and thus far the Preſent Propoſition Proceeds Juſtly; 47h. Another Requiſite in Demonſtration is, that the Principles and Reaſonings of One Propoſition ſhould be Agreeable to, and Correſpond with any Other, to which it is Compared; And in this it Fails, viz. in the Application of the Three Angles of a Triangle, being Equal to Two Right Ones, to the Triangle a Ib, Fig. I. before it is Known, or Demonſtrated, to be a Triangle, which Admits of that Property; ſince, till the Contrary is Evidenced, it may be a Curvilinear One, according to what has been Obſerved in S. 17. 5th. We are to Conſider, whether our Perceptions, in the Abſtraction of them, are Adequate and Juſt; For, if they are not, Mathematick Demonſtration will, in ſuch a Caſe, Fall Short of Certainty; Thus, Albeit the Three Angles oſ a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, Relatively to the Principles, upon which our Ideas in that Propoſition are Connected, yet it is not Abſolutely and Univerſally True; Since this Propoſition, as well as moſt, if not all, in the Elements of Euclid, are Contrived upon a Uniform Space and Extenſion. Accordingly, in the Preſent Caſe, TWo Right Angles are Conſidered to Take up the Uniform Space, which Lies on one Side of a Right Line, which always Subtends a Greater or Leſs Semi-circle, whoſe Degrees are Suppoſed to be 180 Immutably, and without any Alteration; It is alſo Suppoſed Reſpectively, that ſbl, lbe, cba, are Portions of ſuch an Abſtracted Extenſion or Space, to vhich bac, bęa, cha are Equal, and therefore are Conſidered, as Portions of a like Abſtracted Space; So far therefore it is True and Certain, That the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to To Right Ones; But if theſe Principles are not Adequate to the Real Dimenſions of Space, according to Chap. 4. 5. II. Part 1. of our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, but Extenſion is Variable, This Propoſition would not be True in General, and only upon the Preſent Suppoſition of this Particulat Abſtraction of Space, which it Affirms; For Inſtance, if the Degrees of a Circle were Meaſured, not by the Equal Spaces, which Thoſe of a Greater and a Leſs, Comprehend at the Center, upon which Suppoſition, both the Semi circles are 180 Degrees, but by the Celerity, or Slowneſs, of their Motion, by which thoſe Spaces are Performed, which would be more Reaſonable, there may be 180 Degrees Deſcribed in One Circle, Circle, which is Double of Another in it's Circumference, whilſt there are only 90 Deſcribed in That, which is Half of it. I . Tnus, if 4BC, Fig. 3d. is Double of abe, it will Require a Double Velocity to Deſcribe 4BC, in the ſame Time, that abc is Deſcribed; Let us now therefore Suppoſe 4B C= abe, and the Velocity, by which One is Performed, Double to the VeIocity of the Other, 4 BC, or 180 Degrees, will be Deſcribed, when only 90 of ah⸗ are; From whence it vill Follow, that 180 Degrees in 4 B C will be Double of 180 in abc; Or, there B vill be a Greater Force Compreſſed into the Same Space on the One Hand, than on the Otherr. AnD Conſequently it would Follow, that a Right Angle, made by the Perpendicular to the Diameter, would not be Equal in both Caſes; What I Mean is, that A c in Fig. 2. if the Extenſion on the Side of ſba may be NIl. Variable and Different, it will not be Certain, that, becauſe bac, ach, c b a, are fam to the ſaid Space, that therefore they are Equal t0 Two Right Angles, or 180 Degrees; Becauſe the Velocities, with which any Quantities are Deſcribed, may be as Juſt a Meaſure of their Values, as the Spaces, whicli are Deſcribed, ſince the Effect may be Truly Eſtimated from the Cauſe, which Produces it; and where we Conſider Space, or Extenſion, as one Individual Thing, it is only an Abſtraction of the Mind, without Taking the Reality of it's Cauſe and Production into the Account; And This is the Fault of the Firſt and Original Generation of Quantities in Mathematicks, That it only Conſiders the Length, and Breadth, and Depth, of Lines, or Superfſicies, or Solids, as already Generated, ſo as to Determine their Value or Quantity from their Abſtracted Length, or Breadih, or Depth, without Taking any Notice of the Power, Force, or Velocity, by which they are Generated ànd Produced. WHEREAS, there is nothing more Plain, than, if One Force, which is Double of Another, will Produce a Line Double in Length to Another, as 4 l B is Double of 4 ]b, ſo, that if the Line is the Same, and 4 B is S to 4b in Length, the Quantity, or Value, of the Line muſt be Meaſured by the Force, which Produces it, and tho the Length is Equal, the Effect of the One will be Double of the Effect of the Other, as the Cauſe is; Ihave Mentioned ſomething of this Nature in the Geometria Solidorum ſiue Materiæ, and tho' this Notion is not at Preſent Apprehended, or Underſtood, by either the Philoſophers, or Mathematicians, yet I will Venture to Aſfirm, That, Neither the One will Form a Juſt Scheme of Elements in the Mathematicks, Such as ſhall be Agrecable to Things, as they Exiſt, Reaſon Indeed they may, anl Truly, upon their ovn Abſtractions, Nor will the Other give us a Conſiſtent Syſteme of Philoſophy, Till this Notion, as New and as Uncommon, as it may Appear, is better Conſidered by Them; For then They will find, that a True Mathematicks does Exactly Correſpond with a True Philoſophy, and that there will be an Intimate Connexion betwixt the One and the Other;3 Whereas, according to the Preſent Management in Both, no One can Sce the Leaſt Agreement betwixt the Elements of Euclid, and the Arguments and Reaſonings upon Nature; Both are, at Preſent, Studies, which Terminate in Abſtraction, and There they End, without Informing us oſ vhat either Extenſion is in the One, or what the Real Properties of Beings are in the Orher; They vill alſo then Perceive more Fully the Infiniteneſs of the Agent from the Infinite Variety of the Agency, and Confeſs from a Contemplation of Nature it's ſelf, that there is, and muſt be, a God. AND yet, as the Philoſophick World now is, We are Apt to Admire the Wit, Contrivance, and Invention, of Men of Abſtraction, and Speculative Opinions, more than Nature it's ſel?, or the Infinite and Divine Author of it3 It was Once a very Great Portion oſ Knovledge to be Able to Underſtand Des-Cartes, and Nature Lay Deſpiſed and Neglected, whilſt That Celebrated Commentator upon it was Eſtcemed the only Perſon Fit to Inſtruct us in the Secrets of it, Notwithſtanding which, we nov find our Miſtake, and that, whilſt we were Thought to be Purſuing the knowledge oſ Nature, ve vere only Following the Sentiments of the Philoſopher; And the Same may be Said oſ the Modern Philoſophy, whatever High Conceptions Men may have Formed Concerning it; But. This I ſall Refer to a farther Diſquiſition, vhich ha: beer been made upon theſe Subjects, and to thoſe Real Principles of Nature and Philoſophy, which we have in the Preceding Books Propoſcd to the Learned World. WE ſnall only Add in this Section, that the Three Angles of a Triangle, upor Different Suppoſitions of the Space, Lying on one Side of the ſame Line, and accord ing to the ſeveral Denominations, Values, or Quantities, of that Space, may be Equal to 2, 3, 4,5, c. Right Angles, or to à, 7. 4. &e. of Two Right Angles, or in any other Proportion, and ſo in Inſinitum; And, on the other Hand, Suppoſing the Denominarion or Value of the Abſtracted Space to be the Same on the Side of one Line, and the Denominations and Values of the ſeveral Angles of the Triangle to be Varied, the Proportions betwixt the Three Angles of a Triangle, and Two Right Ones, vill be Infinitely Changed likewiſe; I have Mentioned here only the Force of Velocity, tho there may be other Forces alſo, by which Spaces, and the Contents of them, may be Altered. S. 19. AFTER What we have Alledged in the Foregoing Section, it will not be Neceſſary for us to go thro' the ſeveral other Steps of the Demonſtration Produced in . 16. ſince All of them may be Examined by the Same Methods; 1ſ. By In quiting, Whether there is a Viſible Connexion betwixt the Ideas ve make Uſe of; 22 Whether we Perceive the Connexion of the Connexion of thoſe Ideas, and in the Whole are not Miſtaken in our Memory, in Retaining the ſeveral Parts of it 34. Whether our Judgement has been Firm and Sincere in Diſcerning the Connexion oſ the Parts, and the Whole, and This Concerns only One Propoſition; 4h. When we farther Compare One Propoſition with Another, and That with a Third, or a Fourth, the Same Memory and Judgement is ſtill more Requiſite, and the Viſible Connexion of the Simple Ideas, which belong to Each, and the Connexion of thoſe Connexions, &F. ſo that One Propoſition, neither in the Whole, nor it's Parts, ſould Interfere or Diſagrec with Another, cither in the Principles, they Each Lay Down, or in the Connexion of their ſeveral Parts; 52h. we are to Inquire, Whether thoſe Principles are Particular, or Univerſal; If Particular, as in One Abſtraction of Space, the Propoſitions, hich are Demonſtrated, can Extend no Farther, and are Falſe, vhen Applied to a Space, which has not the Same Abſtraction of the Mind;3 Which is the Chief Cauſc of all the Errors and Obſcurities, or Uncertainty, in Mathematick Reaſoning; If They are not Particular, but Univerſal, that is, if One Particular Abſtraction of Space is not only to be Conſidered, but Several may be, All the Elements of Euclid will be far from giving us Demonſtrations, which are Abſolutely, or Univerſally True, as we have Inſtanced in the Three Angles of a Triangle, being Equal to Two Right Ones. s. 20. WE ſall therefore Conclude this Head of Mathematick Certainty, by Examining into the Celebrated Controverſy Concerning the Angle of Contact, being a Quantity, or being None; Which is Eaſily Solved; For if æb l, Fig. 1. is a Right- Angle Triangle, that is, if bſ is a Strait Line, (Which is not Proved, unleſs upon the Suppoſition, that what is Called a Tangent, Touches the Circle in one Point only,) it is Maniſeſt, that a bo makes a Leſs Angle, and Conſequently, the Angle of a Semi circle is Leſs than a Right Angle, and the Angle of Contact ſb0 is a Quantity; On the Contrary, if Ibh is not a Strait Line, but a Curve, æ bo will be Equal to a bl, and thereſore the Angle of Contact ſbo vill be no Quantity, and the Angle of the Semi cirele a bo will be Greater than any Acute Angle, becauſe it will be Equal to a Right One. 5. 21. The Queſtion Therefore is not, whether the Angle of Contatt is a Quantity, or no Quantity, but whether a Curve Line Coincides with a Strait, Drawn from the Same Point; If it does, the Angle of Contact is no Quantity ; If it does not, the Angle of Contact will be a Quantity; And in this Terminates the whole Diſpure, vhich can never be brought to a Deciſion; Since the One Side muſt Affirm a Curve, Dravn from the Same Point, is Coincident with a Strait, and the Other, that it is not Coincident vith it. S. 22. AxornER Branch of Cerrainty, which Ariſes from SelfInformation is, That which we Named Experimental; Thus, ſince all we Experience is Reſolved, either nto the Properties of our own Minds, or thoſe of External Beings, and ſince we ire Certain oſ Both, This Kind of Evidence or Knowledge is as Infallible, as the Geometrick is; For I may as well, and with as Great Certainty, Affirm, that Doubting 5 not Believing, or Remembering is not Judging, &. in Reſpect oſ the Operations of the Mind, or, in Reſpect to the Properties of External Beings, that Colour is not Sound, or Taſte Smell, as I can, that Three is not Equal to Four, or a Triangle the Same Figure with a Circle; So far therefore, as e Reaſon upon Fact and Experience, without Entering into the Nature or Cauſe of the Properties they Preſent to us, The Principles, upon which we Proceed, are Equally Certain with Mathematick or Abſtracted Ones; And upon theſe Principles it may be as Evidently Proved in ReIation to the Mind, that the Properties of it, ſo far as they Appear to us, or are Experienced by us, hen Compared together, dõ Agree amongſt themſelves, or Differ, as that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, or not; for Inſtance, a Dejection of Mind, That is, that Uneaſineſs and Oppreſſion of Spirit, which we Feel in our ſelves, does Agree with Fear, and That with the Apprehenſion of an Apparent Miſchicf, which is likely to Befall us from the Malice, or lll Will, of our Encmies; On the other Hand, a Dejection of Mind does Agree, and is Connected vith a Remorſe, and That with a Conſciouſneſs of Faults, or Crimes, which we have Committed; From whence we may Conclude, rhat Innocence and Blame may be Equally the Cauſe of Deſpondency; On the other Hand, a Sprightlineſs and Gaiety of Temper is Connected with the Eaſe and Satisfaction of the Mind, and That with Innocence, as likewiſe, the Same Sprightlineſs and Gaiety of Temper will Agree vith Pleaſure, Pleaſure, in ſome Tempers, with the Oppreſſion of Thoſe, vhom they Hate or Diſlike, and Oppreſſion with Injury; From whence it will Follow, that Innocence and Blame may be Equally the Cauſe of ſuch an Alacrity; So that from the whole Connexion, the Mind may be Dejected, when Innocent, or Debonair, when Conſcious of it's own Crimes, and on the Contrary, Dejected when Conſcious of it's Guilt, and Eaſy and Satisſied in i's Innocence; It may alſo, from what Foregoes, have a Mixture of Satisfaction and Diſcontent from it's own Innocence on the One Hand, and from the Injuries, it finds its ſelf Oppreſſed with, on the Other, or elſe, in ſome Tempers, from the Pleaſure of Oppreſſing Thoſe, whom they Diſlike, and the Inward Regret they may have of the Injury, they Commit, in doing it; Such Reaſonings, as theſe, in Reſpect of the Properties of the Mind, and what is Experimentally found in it, as Men are Good or IlI, Innocent or Miſchievous, are as Demonſtrable, as Mathematicks themſelves; We only Produce This as One Inſtance; and where we make Uſe of the ſame Kind of Arguing upon what is Experienced in Humane Minds, Such a Science is not Inferior to a Geometrick One;3 But when we Apply theſe ſeveral Caſes to Particular Inſtances of Perſons, being Chearfull or Dejected, ſo as to Pronounce the One Innocent, and the Other Conſcious of his Faults, or the Contrary, There we may be Deceived. ALso, in Reſpect of what we Experience from outward Objects, vhere we Reaſon only upon what we Perceive, or are Senſible of, our Demonſtrations are as Juſt, a any in Euclid; For we as fully Know, that the Sun is not the Earth or Moon, and that Light is not Heat, or Colour is not Sound, as we are Sure, that Three is not Equal to Five, or a Line or a Surface is not Equal to the Double of it; We therefore in this Sort of Reaſoning Know, that a Red Light is an Impreſſion upon our Eyes, that Heat is One upon our Organs of Feeling, and Theſe we Experience in the Sun, We likewiſe Perceive, in ſome Degree, the ſame Senſations from Fire; and Conſequently may as Juſtly Conclude, that the Sun and the Fire are of the Same, or of a like Nature, in thoſe Reſpects, as that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones: So in Glaſs, Water, or any other Tranſparent and Uncoloured Subſtance, where we find Correſpondent Effects in Senſation, ve may Rationally Infer, they Agree in that Particula. And to this Head of Knovledge all Matters of Fact are Reducible. 5. 23. BuT, as the Foundations of Experimental Knowledge are as Certain, as the Trinciples of the Mathematicks, and the Connexions of Ideas are as Plain and Viſible in the One Caſc, as the Other, yet we muſt have Recourſe, in Order to Produce Certainty, to the Same Method, which was Requiſite in Mathematick Demonſtrations, which nccording to §. 19. vas, Firſt, to Inquire, whether there is a Viſible Connexion betwix the Ideas ve make Uſe of; Second, whether we Perceive the Connexion of the Connexion of thoſe Ideas, &e. That is, Memory and Judgement are here likewiſe Concernec in the Connecting of Ideas, and we muſt farther Examine, whether ſuch Ideas, which ve ve Receive, in what we Call Experimental Know ledge, are Agreeable to the Nature of Things, and to Facts themſelves, as they Exiſt; In which Reſpect, This Knowledge is Superior to the Mathematick; Becauſe, in the Preſent Circumſtance, we Argue upon Fact, and vhat we Experience; Whereas, in the Abſtractions of Figure and Ex tenſion, The Will is Employed, which does not always Conform its ſelf to the Rea lity of Things, but to i's own Pleaſure; When, on the Contrary, in Experimental Knovledge, the Mind only Reaſons upon what it Finds, without Forming and Shaping to it's ſelf it's own Notions; That is, Mathematick Know ledge Proceeds upon the Arbitrary Abſtractions of the Mind, and Experimental, upon what is Really Offered or Propoſcd to it from Nature. : §. 24. THE Laſt Head of Certainty, which Proceeds from Self- Information is, what ve Termed a Philoſophick One, where we Reaſon upon what ve Experience in Nature, or our ovn Minds, and Join our Abſtractions to it, in Order to Explain the Phenomenons, which Occur to ũs from Both; Thus we Perceive Extenſion, Solidity, &e. in all Bodies, upon which the Mind, by Abſtracting, Forms to it's ſelf One Invariable Perception of Each; and the Same may be ſaid of Matter in General; The Uncertainty of which Kind of Reaſoning we have Endeavoured to Shew in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, wherein moſt of the Arguments upon Nature are Evinced to be only a Reaſoning, upon Arbitrary Abſtractions, made by the Mind, without being any vays Agrecable to the Truth and Reality of Things; From whence it Follows, that the Chief Cauſe of our Errors Proceeds from the Depravity of our Wills, even in Speculative Matters, as well as in Practical; For by theſe Abſtractions, which are the Reſult of our Pleaſure, rather than of our Underſtandings, we are Led into moſt of the Miſtakes we Commit in Philoſophy or Mathematicks; Beſides which, here likewiſc is Requiſite, Memory and Judgement, to Retain and Connect our Ideas A-right thro' the whole Progreſs of the Demonſtration; This therefore may be Said, that if our Abſtractions in the Mind are Agreeable to the Qualities and Properties of Being, and if upon thoſe Abſtractions, wve Connect our Ideas Juſtly, and Retain the ſeveral Ideas we Connect, Philoſophy is as much Capable of Demonſtration, as Geometry is, and we may be Equally Certain of Both. S. 25. To Conclude this Chapter of the Certainty, we Receive from Self- Information or, Private Perſuãaſion; Intuitive and Senſitive kKnowledge are Infallibly Certain; Experimental, as it is Explained in §. 22. is the next Certain Knowledge we have, which Proceeds from Reaſoning only upon the Intuitive and Senſitive; Mathematick and Philoſophick Knowledge may be Certain, with Due Caution and Judgement, but Falls Beneath That, which we Receive from the Other Three; Becauſe in theſe Two Laſt Caſes, the Mind Reaſons upon Hypotheſes of it's own Contriving, which are not often, and Perhaps never, cither in Mathematicks or Philoſophy, Agreeable to the Nature of what it Conſiders, whether of Extenſion and Quantity in the Firſt Caſe, or of the Properties of a Spirit, or of Space, or of Matter, in the Laſt. C H AP. III Concerning the Evidences of Teſlimony, or Thoſe Informations, we Receive from Others. 5. 1. E have in the Foregoing Chapter Conſidered the Certainty, which may be had from our own Informations, we ſhall now Inquire into Thoſc which ve Receive from Others; And in this Caſe it is Manifeſt, that ve may Arrive at a Certainty and Knovledge, Equal to the Experimental, which, we Said, was the Higheſt our Minds were Capable of; For in Matters, whoſe Evidence Proceeds upon Teſtimony, the Foundations, upon which we Reaſon, are the Same, without any Arbitrary Abſtractions of the Mind; in which Abſtractions ve before Obſerved, we are Principally Deceiv'd, and from whence Ariſe all the Various Hypotheſes of Philoſophy and Mathematicks; which Demonſtrate Indeed the Humour and Pleaſure of the he Philoſopher, or the Geometer, rather than the Strength or Force of his Judgement, or his Making his Notions Agree with the Truth and Reality of Things. ꝗ. 2. In Arguing therefore from the Teſtimony of Others, all Abſtractions of the Mind are Excluded, which are the Chief Cauſe of our Errors, that is, ve Reaſon upon Fact, and not upon an Hypotheſis Framed by us, or which is the Same, we Reaſon upon Fact, which is Neceſſary, and which we Experience, in the One Caſe, whereas in the Other, our Arguments are Formed upon the Abſtractions of the Will, which is Deſultory and Capricious, or, which is all one, Uncertain. 5. 3. SiNCE then the Foundation of our Reaſonings upon Teſtimony Imports the Higheſt Evidence that can be, and That which is Superior to What we find in the Abſtractions of Philoſophy, or Mathematicks, to Wit, the Same, which is Found in Experimental Knovledge, which we Conſidered before, ſFor Thoſe, who Atreſt Things to us, do it upon the Evidence of Fact and Experiment,) the Inquiry, which Remains, is, vhat Methods we Uſe in Reaſoning upon ſuch Teſtimony, and whether we have not a Superior Evidence alſo from it, to vhat Mathematicks or Philoſlophy can Afford to, or Supply us with. 5. 4. It has been Said already, that in Order to Produce a Mathematick or Philoſophick Certainty, we muſt be Sure, that our Abſtractions arc Juſt and Agrceable ro the Properties of the Extenſion or Body Conſidered; and in this Particular Both Fail. in Reſpect of Certainty, to which Error Matter of Fact or Experience is not any ways Liable or Obnoxious; Farther, in Mathematick or Philoſophick Certainty, the Connexion of Thoſe Abſtracted Ideas is Requiſite, in which the Mind cannot be Deceived, where there is a Viſible and Apparent One; And thus in Teſtimony, if a Perſon, vho Affirms any Thing to us upon his Experimental Knowledge is Sincere, and of the utmoſt Veracity, we have as Great a Certainty and Evidence from the Report of ſuch a Perſon, as if we our ſelves had been Experimentally Convinced of That, which he Affirms, and which for Diſtinction's Sake, we ſhall Call Certainty on a Single Report; All the Diſficulty, which Lies in ſuch a Caſe is, by what Method: we ſhould know, where a Perſon is Sincere and Veracious, for there is as Real a Connexion betwixt Speaking Truth, and being Sincere, as there is betwixt any Ideas, which we have. 5. 5. AND this may be Known ſeveral Ways; iſ. If the Whole Courſe and Tenour of the Perſon's Actions is according to the Rules, not only of Juſtice and Honeſty, but of Charity, Generoſity, and Love; 24. If his Apprehenſions and Thoughts, in all his Converſation, Explain an Inward Principle of Integrity and Goodneſs; 34 If he is Willing to Sacriſice his Intereſt and Advantage in this World, his Life, Reputation, or any Thing elſe, which is Dear to him, in the Juſtification and Defence of vhat he Afſfirms, and Knows to be True. Any One, vho has theſe Characters, may be as Juſtly and Experimentally ſaid to be Sincere, as we may Pronounce it Impoſſiblc for a Pious and Good Man to be a Wicked or an Ill; He, who is ſo far from Injureing or Wronging Another, that he would always, and upon any Occaſion, do him all the Services and Good Offices, which Lie in his Power, and which Property is Rooted and Fixed in his Temper; He, ho is ſo far from Impoſing upon the Weakneſs and Credulity of thoſe he Converſes with, that he is rather Willing to be Patient under thoſe Fallacies and Abuſes Practiced towards himſelf, and who on the Contrary Speaks, howver Illy it may be Received, what ſeems to be the Trueſt, and the moſt Conſormable to an Exact Honeſly; He, who to This is Ready to Undergo Reproaches, or Death, in the Vindication of That, which he Atreſits to us; In Any, or All of Theſe Caſes, we may be as Sure, that Such a Perſon is Sincere, and Conſequently, that What he Reports to us is True, as we can be Certain, that we Hear him Speak, or that he ReIotes it. G. 6. BusiIDES theſe Three, there are other Marks alſo, by which we may Diſtin2uiſh the Sincerity of one, vho Reports his own Experimental Knoledge, or which is the Same, his Knowledge of Fact and Experience; as 17. When there can be no Worldly or Temporal Advantage Accruing to him from his Aſſirmations, but on the Contrary, Calamities, Aſſlictions, and Oppoſition, are the moſt Likely and Probable Conſcquences of them; 2. When he has a Full Impreſſion of the Revards and Puniſhments of another World, the Former of which, he is Convinced, will not be Diſpenſed to the Aſertors of a Falſchood, and that they will, as Certainly Aaaaa In- Incurr the Latter; Theſe are ſuch Invincible Ties upon Men, who are Confirmed in ſo Juſt a Belicf, that all the Intereſis of this World can never Induce them to Relinquiſ their Integrity; And therefore upon ſuch ve may as Intirely Depend in what they Solemnly Report to us, as we can upon our own Experimental Knowledge that is, upon our Perceptions, or our Senſcs. 5. 7. THERE may be ſeveral Characters more of a Perſon's Sincerity, which we cannot Perhaps now Recollect; we ſhall only Mention the Simplicity and Plainneſi of Converſation and Behaviour, Meaneſs and Deſpicableneſs of Fortune, and the Contempt, vhich Attends it, Application and Induſtry in all the Affairs and Circumſtances of Life, and an Averſion to any Thing, which is Trifling and Ludicrous, All which Generally Infer the Integrity of the Perſon, in whom they are; For, If any One is Innocent and Harmleſõis in his Commerce vith Others, if he would not therefore, and upon that Account, Injure them in the Leaſt Reſpect, he, no Doubt, would not Deceive them; Iſ the Same Perſon is Mcan and Deſpicable, the Contempt, he Lies under, will make him Regardſeſs of every Thing, but what he Thinks and Knows to be True; Application and Induſtry likewiſe, in whatever Employ, Produces a Severity in the Mind, which is Contrary to the being Ludicrous and Triſling, and is an Argument oſ Sincerity; ſince, where the Mind is Grave and Severe in it's own Temper and Conſtitution, it cannot Raiſe it's ſelf into the Lightneſs and Levity of Impoſing Tricks and Fancies upon Others of it's own Inventing. 5. 3. As to what Concerns the Fact which is Related, in Reſpect of Certainty from Teſimony, it does not Enter into the Account; For, iſ it isof ſomething Agrecable to our Reaſon, Teſtimony Imports no Evidence at all to that, which we can Conclude from thence; Thus, Suppoſing any One ſhould Inform me, that the Three Angles of a Triangle vere Equal to Two Right Ones; If I was Capable of Collecting the Same Propoſition from Reaſon, the Evidence, which I had from Teſtimony, would be of no Force or Signiſicance; If I was not, my whole Acquicſcence would be Reſolved into the Veracity of the Perſon, vho Aſfirmed it. 5. 9. THE Only Queſiion therefore, which Remains, vhen we Compare the Evidences we have from Self- Information, and ſrom the Teſtimony of a Single Report, is, whether the Arguments upon the Abſtractions of Any other Part of Selſ-Information, Excepting the Experimental, which Admits of None, and therefore is not ſo Fallible upon that Account, are Really more Concluſive than Thoſe we have of any Perſon's Sincerity; On the One Hand, there is the Connexion of Ideas, the Connexion of the Connexion of thoſe Ideas, the Connexion betwixt One Propoſition and Another, and the Exacteſt Memory and Judęment Required, which is Poſſible, to make a Conſiſtent Demonſtration from the Whole; On the Other Hand, the Arbitrary Abſtractions of the Mind are Entirely Superſeded in Experimental Knovledge, and vhen we come to Conſider the Evidences of a Single Report, we are only to Examine into the Sincerity of the Perſon, who makes it to us, which alſo is kKnown from Fact and Experience, that is, from the Probity Expreſſed in his Words, and from the Tenor of his Liſe and Actions, and the other Characters ve Mentioned of Sincerity 3 So that, as he who Reports any Thing to us, does it from his own Experimental novledge of what he Relates, ſo from the Same Experimental Knowledge we are Convinced of the Honeſty and Integrity of the Reporter, without any Fallible Abſtractions, or Connexions of Ideas; And Conſequently, ſuch an Evidence is Superior to a Mathematick One, according to §. 23. of the Preceding Chapter; For, if it be Said, a Perſon may have all the Characters Mentioned of Sincerity, and yet in Reality be Falſe and Inſincere in any Solemn Report he makes to us, ve only Anſer as before, that it is as Impoſſible, as that a Truly Good Man, ſhould be a Truly lll One. 5. 10. WE have hitherto Conſidered the Report of a Single Perſon, and ſhall only Add ſome Inſtances, to Shew the Unreſerved Aſſurance and Confidence we may have n ſuch a Teſlimony; Thus, if the Preſent Great and Surprizing Genius of the Mahematick World Sir Iſ. Newton, or the Excellent and Learned Profeſſor of Aſtronony in this Univerſity Mr. Cores hoſe Names are Suſficiently known and Celebrated or Integrity and Goodneſs, as well as theit Uncommon Penetration and Judgment, hould Aſſirm, and Punctually Declare, that they had Found the Square õf the Hyotenuſc vas Equal to the Squares of the Sides in a Right- Angle Triangle, I could could be as Fully Satisfied, and as Certain, that they did See that Connexion, fron whence they Apprehended ſuch a Concluſion might be Drawn, as if I had Seen and Viewed that Connexion in the ſeveral Parts of it; Likewiſe in Experimental Philoſophy, if they had Aſſured me, that they had made ſeveral Experiments upon the Pendulum, or upon the Tranſmiſſion of Light thro' a Glaſs Priſm, which were ſuch, a: they Deſcribed them, I ſould not make the Leaſt Scruple of giving my Perfect Aſ ſent to them; Where they did not Plainly Tend to the Advancing any Hypotheſes and were only Delivered, as Matters of Fact; And in Common Life, if any Single Perſon, whoſe Integrity, from the whole Series of his Conduct, was Evident to me, and who had moreover all the Characters, above Recounted, of Sincerity, ſhould Aſert he had Seen any Accidental Occurrence, which to my Apprehenſion might, or might not, be True, Icould be as Juſtly Certain of it, as if it had Happened in my own Notice and Obſervation, tho it might Appear to me very Surprizing and Extraordinary. S. 11. THIS therefore is the Undoubted and Infallible Evidence, which we have from a Single Report; If farther, 12, 60, or 500, or Some Thouſands, ſould Averr the ſame Thing to us, All of them Perſons Inveſted with the ſame Characters of Sincerity; Who were Ready to Die in Atteſtation of what, they were cither Convinced of from their ovn Experimental Knowledge, or from their Experimental Know ledge of the Sincerity of Thoſe, who Reported Their's to them; Who Firmly Believed the Rewards and Puniſhments of another World; Who were Endued with the Urmoſt Affection to Mankind, were in the whole Tenor of their Lives Upright and Diſintereſted, and Exactly Honeſt and Punctual in their whole Converſation and Behaviours; Who did not Regard the Applauſe of this World, or the Honours of it; Who vere Simple and Main in their Tempers, and Deſpicable and Mean in their Fortunes, Sedulous and Diligent in their Employments, and in the Complexion of their Minds Grave and Severe, according to §. 5. 6. and 73 What would the Concurrent Teſtimony of Such Perſons Produce in us, but the Utmoſt Aſſurance, which it was Poſſible for the Mind of Man to Entertain or Receive ? And This ve may Call a Certainty from the Concurrent Teſtimony of Men, Who are Sincere. 5. t2. IF aſter This, Theſe very Perſons do not only Report Matters of Fact, but Commit thoſe Facts to Writing, and in the Books, which they Wrote, if there are the ſame Characters of Sincerity 3 This would be ſtill a farther Confirmation of ſuch an Evidence; So that hitherto Certainty is as Great, as That, which Reſults from Experimental Knovledge, which is the Higheſt, that can be, according to . 22. and23. Chap. 2. And This is the Evidence, which the Primitive Times had for the Truth and Divinity of the Chriſtian Religion, and which therefore ve may Affirm to be Superior to a Mathematick One, as it was an Experimental, and therefore not Liable to the Errors, which are Committed by the Mind in the Abſtraction of it's Ideas, and the Connexjon of Them. S. 13. BESIDES That Certainty, which is Derived from the Report of a Single Perſon, Who is Sincere, or from the Concurrent Teſtimony of Several, Who are ſo, there is Another, which Reſults from a United Teſtimony of all Sorts of Men, Who are of Different Intereſts, Perſuaſions, and Deſigns; For Example, That there is ſuch a Place as France or Spain, as Paris or the Haque, or That there is ſuch a Prince as Charles the 3d. or Leuis the 141h. Every One is ſo far from Thinking it only highly Trobable, that he is Sure and Certain of it, not from the Connexion of Ideas, but from the ſeveral Steps, or Degrees, in Experimental Knoledge, from which we Conclude it; For, althd we are not Convinced of the Sincerity of Thoſe, vho Tranſmit Weekly, and almoſt Daily, Accounts Concerning them, yet the Concurrence there is in their ſeveral Reports, vhen the Reporters themſelves Diſagree, in their Intentions of Writing, in their Principles, and their Party, is ſo Strong a Conviction to us, that there are ſuch Places and Perſons, that we can be as Certain of it, or more Certain of it, than of the Abſolute or Univerſal Truth of any Mathematick Propoſition vhatſoever; And This Kind of Evidence we may Name a Certainty from the Concurrent Teſtimony of Perſons, Who in other Matters Diſagree, and which is alſo Derived from Experimental Knowledge, that is, from the Report of Matter of Fact from One to Another; This Evidence alſo the Chriſtian Religion has, as we have Endeavoured to Prove in the Demonſtration of the Truth and Divinity of it; Diſcourſe the Laſt, 5. 28. 29. 30. 31I. 32. Aaaaa⸗a 5. 14. Ano- 5. 14. AvoTHER Kind of Certainty, which Ariſes from Experimental Knovledge, is, vhat we may Term Hiſtorical, which is Derived to us, either from Written, or from Oral Tradition; The Firſt of which is as Certain, as our Experimental Knowledge its ſelf; Thus, If it was Certain, that Chriſtianity was True in the Primitive Times, it is as Demonſtrable, that it is ſo in Ours; Since there arc Books Extant in all Ages, from it's being Firſt Propoſed, which Prove, that the Scriptures were Written in thoſe Times, according to the Demonſtration we have given of the Chriſtian Religion; That the Perſons, vho Wrote Them, Died in Defence of Them, and had all the Characters of Truth and Sincerity, which we before Explained; And, as the Eccleſiaſticall Writers in Hiſtory are the moſt Numerous of any Other Hiſtorians, ſo it is alſo Evident, they were the moſt Sincere, as they were Ready to Sacrifice their Lives in Defence of vhat they Wrote; Beſides, Thoſe Principles of Future Rewards and Puniſhments, and the Severe Doctrines and Rules, which the Chriſtian Religion Preſcribed to them, vould of Neceſſity make them more Impartial in their Hiſtories, than any other Perſuaſions could do; If thereſore there is any Hiſtorical Certainty, which no One vill Refuſe to Acknovledge, unleſs he who Places all in the Fantaſtick Connexion of his own Ideas; If there was ſuch a Perſon, as Pompey or Cæſar, as Alexander or Philip, or ſuch Places, as Athens or Rome, and if there were thoſe Actions, which are Recounted to be done by thoſe Perſons or States, which Depends upon Hiſtory, We may as Juſtly Aſfirm, that the Chriſtian Religion is True, and the Experimental Knowledge, given us of it, by the Evangeliſts and Apoſtles, and which has been Tranſmitted Down to us thro all the Ages of the Church. 6. 15. TO Drav the Parallel more Particularly; We Know there was ſuch a Perſon as Cæſar, and that he Performed thoſe Actions againſt the Gauls, Helvetians, and Germans, which his Commentaries Affirm to us;3 We are likewiſe Certain, that he Gained the Victory over Pompey, at the Battle of Pharſalia, and Subdued the Roman State to his Obedience; This, in that Time, was not Proved by a Connexion of Abſtract Ideas, but as Evident and Manifeſt from an Experimental Knovledge of it; We have his own, if the Criticks will Allo it, and other Hiſtories, Extant to Prove it; And the Experimental Knowledge, which is Derived from Matter of Fact to the Reporter, and from the Sincerity of the Reporter to a Second or a Third, and ſo on, is Thought a Sufficient Conviction, that we may be Certain of all this, as Indeed we may; On the other Hand, our Bleſſed Saviour never Writ any Commentaries of his owvn Life and Actions, and therefore the Hiſtory, we have of Him, is not Liable to the Partiality, which might be Expected from One, who did; His Diſciples, vho Saw and were Witneſſes of every Thing, have done it, and thereſore may be Juſtly Imagined to give us a more Sincere Account of them, than Cæſar would do of his own; Not to Mention the ſeveral Marks of Sincerity, which are in the Hiſtories, and the Perſons, of the Evangelick Writers. Let us now Proceed Farther, from the Times, in which the ſeveral Commentaries were Wrote, and it is Manifeſt, that the Evangelick Writers upon the Account of the very Genius and Temper of their Chriſtianity, which was, To be Sincere and Honeſt, To be, as Thoſe, vho were to give an Account of all their Words and Actions to a Supreme Tribunal, it is Evident, That they had Juſter Principles to make their Hiſtories Exact and Impartial, than any Heathen Writers could Pretend to; And Conſequently, we have a Greater Certainty from the Degrees of Experimental Knowledge, that is, from the Tranſmitting it from One to Another, for the Truth of Chriſtianity, than we have for any other Hiſtory, which is Extant; To which we may Add, beſides the Sincerity of the Writers in Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory, which muſt be Greater upon the Principles of their Holy Religion, than That of Heathen ones, who had not the ſame Perſuaſions to Awe them, The Succeſſion of theſe Atteſters is ſo Conſtant, and have been ſ0 Numerous, that no Experimental Knowledge whatever has been Delivered Down to us with a like Certainty and Conviction. 5. 16. LIXEWISE by Oral Tradition, as vell as Written, Chriſtianity is Aſfirmed to us, which no Experimental Knowledge has beſides it; For No One by Oral Tradition, ever Knew, there was ſuch a Perſon as Pompey, or Caſar; And yet, ever Evidence, whatever it is, hici we ſnall afterwards Conſider, Chriſtianity aims, 5. 17. WE 5. 17. WE ſhall therefore now in General, after a Compariſon betwixt the Hiſtorical Evidence of Chriſtianity, and That of any Heathen Writer, Conſider the Certainty we have from Hiſtory it's ſelf, either Written or Oral; As to what Reſpects Written Hiſtory, If the Experimental Knowledge, Originally Expreſſed in any Book, is True, the Methods of Judging of which we have already Deſcribed, it is not Weakened or Enervated by a Long Series of Ages, thro' which it Paſſes, Suppoſing That Book has been always Publick; Thus, if the Hiſtory of the Peloponneſian War by Thucydides was of Real Matter o? Fact, and it was Publickly Handed about from his Time down to the Preſent, we are as Certain of ſuch a War betwixt the Lacedaæmonians, and Athenians, as That Age was; becauſe we are Sure it is the Same Book, which was Writ in Thoſe Times, and Gave an Account of It; That is, This Certainty does not Fall Short of an Experimental One; For this Book was then Known Experimentally to be a Deſcription of that War, the next Age Experimentally Knew this to be that Book, and ſo on to the Preſent, Namely, as to the Main and the Groſs of it, ſince we are not to Anſwer for all the Critical Variations, which may have been made in the Tranſcribing it, or even any Falſe or Diſingenuous Interpolations, which may Poſſibly have been made in Favour of the One State or the Other, from the Firſt Writing oſ it; But, if farther, there are ſeveral Hiſtories Written in the Same Time, and by Different Perſons, and All of them come Publickly Tranſmitted to Poſterity, ſuch a Derivation of Experimental Knovledge is in it's Evidence Irreſiſtable, and is far from being Weakened by Time or Continuance; Which is the Caſe of the Chriſtian Religion, and the Hiſtories and Goſpels, which Affirm it, at this Diſtance from their Firſt Promulgation; And therefore the Principia Mathematica Chriſtianæ Religionis of Mr. Craig, I Suppoſe, in Imitation of Sir Iſ. Newtons Principia Maihematica Naturalis Philoſophiæ, in which he Endeavours to Shew, that the Evidences of the Chriſtian Religion, which, it ſeems, are only Probable Ones, muſt be Weakened and Impaired by a Long Progreſs of Time, are Vain and Abſurd Imaginations of his Own, and neither Juſtified by Common Senſe, or Common Reaſon. 5. 13. As to Oral Tradition, That is another Way likewiſe of Conveying Experimental Knovledge to us; But This is very Fallible, and can Scarcely be Depended upon, unleſs it is nearly Univerſal amongſt Thoſe, vho may be Suppoſed Capable of Delivering ſuch a Knowledge to us, in which Circumſtance the Evidence is as Forcible and Convincing, as That of Hiſtory; Becauſe, where the Truth of any Matter of Fact is ſo Notorious, and Plain, that it is not Changed by the Variety of Men's Inclinations and Complexions who Report it, in Different Ages and Countries, iĩt is an Indiſputable Mark of the Certainty of it; And This is the Nature of the Earlieſt Traditions Concerning Chriſtianity and it's Author, and the Miracles Wrought by him, and the Doctrines, which he Preached to the World, and which Oral Traditions were Publickly Committed to Writing in the Primitive Times, and from thence are Tranſmitted to us by Written Hiſtories of them; The Evidences of which we have already Conſidered Thus we Know and are Aſſured of Several Tranſactions, I do not ſay All, in the Time of King Charles the i1ſt. Edward the 6th. Harry the 81h, &c. and which we could have Entirely Depended upon from Tradition, vithout any Hiſtories Writ to Inform us of them. S. 19. LastLy, where Written and Oral Tradition Unite and Agree, ve may Juſtly Call That the Higheſt Evidence, which belongs to Experimental Knovledge, at any Diſtance of Time from That, in which the Matter of Fact Related was Experimentally Known3 And This Evidence allo belongs to our moſt Holy and Divine Religion. 5. 20. To Conclude thereſore this Head of Experimental Knovledge, ve ſhall Drav a Parallel betwixt That, which we have for Religion, and for Philoſophy, as we have done betwixt It or That of any Profane or Heathen Writer in Hiſtory; It is Evident then, in all the Syſtemes of Experiments, which are given us in Philoſophy, that they Depend upon the Teſimony of a Few, ſince they are not Many, who are Furniſed with the Opportunities and Conveniences of the Same Trials; In Aſtronomy the Evidence is ſtill Leſs, becauſc in ſeveral Hundreds of Years, from the Time ol Hipparehus of <thodes, or Ptolomy, to Tyeho Brahe, Caſſini, Hevelius, Mr. Flamſteed, and Dr Halley, how Inconſiderable is the Number of Obſervers, we Meet with in that Science? and ye yet all our Arguments Concerning Nature, or the Planetary World in Particular, are Formed upon ſuch a Teſtimony, which is Infinitely Leſs in Reſpect of the Multitude of the Atteſters, and the Credibility of them, than That, which Affirms Religion Not to Mention the Difficulty and Uncertainty in the Experiments and Obſervation: themſclves. 5. 21. HAVING hitherto Examined into the ſeveral Foundations of Certainty, wt cannot but take Notice of Two Errors, which have of Late been Induſtriouſly Promotec by Men, who ſeem to have Little or no Regard to Religion, unleſs ſo far as it Agrees with their Reaſon, or, which is the Same, with their own Humours and Fancies; The Firſt is, that Faith and Reaſon are not Oppoſite, ſince we cannot Believe the Scriptures themſelves, but upon Good Reaſon, and upon an Evident Conviction of their Truth and Sincerity. The Fallacy of which Lies in the Equivocal Uſe of the Word Reaſon, which is ſometimes made to Signify our Connecting Ideas together, as in the Rational Sciences of Philoſophy and Mathematicks, and in that Senſe, Faith is Oppoſed to Reaſon; ſince it is Impoſſible ſor us by any Methods of Conneòing Ideas to Prove, there is ſuch a Place as France, ot the Indies, or that 171 Years Ago, Feruſalem was a City in Yudea, and that Jeſus the Meſſiah was aſterwards Cruciſied in it 3 becauſe there is no Viſible Connexion betwixt my Idea of France, or the Indies, and of the Perſons, or their Sincerity, ho Report it to me, as there is betwixt m Idea of 3 and 2 making5, or the Half not being Equal to the Whole; Anothèr Senſe of Reaſon is, vhen we Conclude any Thing upon thoſe Evidences, which the Nature of the Subject will Bear, according to the ſeveral Ways, by which we Arrive at Certainty, and which ve have before Deſcribed; Thus, in Matter of Fact, or Experimental Knowledge, Faith is not Oppoſed to Reaſon, becauſe Reaſon, in other Terms, is the Evidence we have of Fact, and Faith or Belie? is the Same Evidence of Fact likeviſe. 5. 22. A Second Error is, that Revelation cannot be Admitted againſt the Clear Evidence of Reaſon; Or, in other Words, there is nothing in Religion, which we ought to Aſſent to, Excepting what is Agreeable to Reaſon, that is, to our Connexion of Ideas in a Rational or Scientifical Way, as is Plain and Obvious from the Section, to which we Refer, and is the very Foundation of ſome Men's Rejecting all Myſteries from Chriſtianity; Whereas we have already Proved, that Certainty may be Attained to by other Methods, than That of the Connexion of Ideas, that is, by Senſe and Experiment, and Undoubted Hiſtories of Fact, and on which Evidences Chriſtianity Depends: For no One by a Connexion of Ideas can Prove, that there ever vas ſuch a Perſon as eſus, that he wrought thoſe Miracles, which are Recounted of him, or that there was an Eſfuſion of the Holy Ghoſt upon the Primitive Chriſiians, and upon theſe the Myſteries of Religion are Founded, which if we Diſcard, becauſe not Deducible by Reaſon, or a Scientifical Connexion of Ideas, which is made Uſe of in Mathematick or Philoſophick Knowledge, ve may as Juſtly Deny the whole Hiſtory of our Religion, which is Equally Incapable of ſuch an Evidence, according to the Foregoing Section, Albeit, as we have Proved, whilſt it comes up to an Experimental Certainty, the Evidences are Stronger and more Forcible than the moſ, if not all, vhich ve Meet with, in thoſe Rational Sciences. S. 23. BESIDES What we have Said Concerning the External Teſtimony of any Weriting, there is alſo an Internal One, which is Capable of Producing the Higheſt Degree of Certainty in us; Thus, hen we Conſider the Olynthiacks, and Philippicis of Demoſſhenes, and that Noble Concern, which he Expreſes in them, for the Safety of his Country, againſt the Invaſions and Encroachments of Philip upon the Libertics of Greece; When we find him, by all the Turns and Paſſages of his Orations, to Speak to, and Harangue, his Audience, as any One would have done in thoſe Times; When his Arguments and his Paſſions are all Adapted to the Genius and Temper of the Athenians, to the Circumſtances in which they vere, and to all the Minute Occurrences of that State, when the Olynthians ere to be Supported, and the War againſt the Macedouians to be Carried on in a Forcign Country, in Oppoſition to Thoſe, who were for Staying, till Philip came into Attica, as Phocion, ho was the Ax of Demoſthenes's Periods according to Plutarch, and his Party, were Willing to do; When we Hear him Declaiming againſt æſchines, andthe Orators of his own Age, and againſt Philip, with that Warmth and Vehemence; When we Perceive him Tracing all Philips Actions and ind Intentions, and the Methods he Uſed to Enſlave Greece, by Entering the Pylæ upon a Peace, and under a Pretence of Defending the Amphictyones and Redreſſng the Sacrilegious Injuries done by the Phocians, in Pillaging the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, and aſter he had Poſſeſſed himſel? of Phocis, by Falling in with the Thebans Argives, and Meſſenians, againſt Sparta, and Athens; What can we Conclude from Such Particulars, which are Agrecable to the Hiſtories of thoſe Times, unleſs, that Demoſthenes was the Real Author of theſe Orations? And This Internal Evidence Chriſtianity likewiſe has, according to the Aforeſaid Demonſtration given of it. 5. 24. WE ſhall here only Add, that therefore that Demonſtration, which we have Propoſed of the Chriſtian Religion, may be more Juſtly Termed ſuch, than Thoſe, which we ſo often Call by that Name, in Philoſophy and Mathematicks; Becauſe the One has all the Evidences, which are Poſſible, to Produce an Experimental Knowledge in us, and on the Contrary, the Preſent Philoſophy and Geometry even Want thoſe Evidences, which are Required in a Jut and Rational Connexion of Ideas, which ve have, as ve Hope, Abundantly Shewn in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and our Geometry of Solids, or of Matter, as well, as in the Preceding Books of this Inquiry. 5. 25. AFTER Which we cannot but be Surprized at ſome Good Men, Who have ſeemed to Endeavour to Weaken the Arguments, ve have Formerly Alledged for Religion, by Telling us, that Hope, which is Seen, is not Hope, that Faith is a Chriſtian Virtue, but if there is Demonſtration for Religion, that Virtue will be Superſeded, from whence they Conclude, that Religion is only, in a Certain Degree of Probability, True; But does not every Know, that the Hope, there Referred to, Reſpects the Joys of another Life, which Chriſtians might Expect hereafter, the Nature of which was not Fully Comprehended, and therefore they with Patience Waited for the Full Revelation oſ them? yet this Hope did not Exclude a Certainty of what they Hoped ſor, ſince St. Paul Says, for we Know, rhat when this Earihly Taternacle is Diſjolved, we have a Building of God Eternal in ihe Heavens, and itis Manifeſt by the whole Tenor of the Scriptures, that the Primitive Chriſtians did not Hope for a Future Joy and Immortality, as if they had the Leaſt Doubt or Heſitation Concerning it, as if it was only Probable; They were Certain and Aſſured of it, and wanted upon all Occaſions to Shew their Full and Abſolute Perſuaſions therein, by Undergoing the Greateſt Tortures, and Submitting to the moſt Ignominious Deaths, that they might Enter into thoſe Bleſed Manſions they Expected; And of the Same Kind was their Faith, which was the Foundation oſ their Settled and Certain Hope, and ſo it is Expreſly Defined by the Author to the Hebreus, that it was the Aſſurance and Confidence oF what they Hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not Seen; And all the Inſtances, Alledged in that Chapter to the Hebres, do Evidently Explain Faith to be a Fixed and Certain Perſuaſion in the Mind, by which the ſeveral Patriarchs were Excited to the moſt Heroick Actions, which could not Proceed from a Principle of Doubt and Probability; Beſides, was it only Probable in the Firſt Times of the Goſpel to the Diſciples, who Converſcd with our Lord, that he Wrought thoſe Miracles, which they Saw him Perform? Was it only Probable, that he Roſe from the Dead? If ſo, what becomes of all Religion, and how is it Proved not to be a Fiction? or how ſhall we Believe our own Senſes? If it was not only Probable, but Certain, I have Endeavoured to Shew by a Continued Atteſtation of Authentick Hiſtories, that ve may be as Certain of all this, as the Primitive Diſciples and Apoſiles of our Lord were; How therefore do we Deſtroy the Virtue of Faith by ſuch a Procedure? Was it a Virtue then, how does it Ceaſe to be a Virtue nov, if we Believe upon nearly the Same Evidences which they did? Moreover, what Virtue can it be to Believe a Thing, for which we have no, or no Competent, Grounds: If it is, we may as well Reſign our Selves, and our Aſtnts, to any Impoſture in the World, and il ſhall be ut to the Account of our Virtues ſor ſo doing; And Indeced, the Virtue ol Faith does not ſcem to Conſiſt in Believing without Reaſon, but in Submitting to the Plain Evidences of Chriſtianity, Notwithſtanding all the Prejudices of the World, or our own Minds, which might Lie againſt it, Notwithſtanding the Virulent Oppoſitions made to it, and the Invererate Perſecutions Raiſcd to Suppreſs it. 5. 26. We muſt likewiſe Obſerve another Way, which has been made Uſe of to Enervate the Forementioned Demonſtration of the Chriſtian Religion, Namely, by ſewing, that the vhole Lidence of it Depends upon the Reſurection of onr Lord and and not upon the Truth of his Miracles; But is not the Reſurrection Juſtly to bè Eſteemed One of the Greateſt Miracles he Wrought? And is it not One of thoſe Facts, Related in Scripture Concerning him, which how is it Poſſible for us to be Certain of the Truth of, unleſs by a Previous Demonſtration of the Truth and Validity of the Scriptures, which Relate them? We have yet on Occaſions Proved the Certainty oſ our Lords Reſurrection, and which we have Shewn to have all the Evidence, vhich is Poſſible, for a Truth ſo Divine, as well as ſo Important to us. Bur Laſly, the Famous Huetiuss Demonſtratio Evangelica might, I would Hopè, Suſſiciently Juſtify me in ſuch a Procedure, and the Rather, when we find Demonſtrations of a God Propoſed to us, and of Natural Religion and Philoſophy, which have not Half ſo many Evidences on their Side, as the Chriſtian Religion has. C H AP. V. Concerning the Being of a God, and the Demonſiration of it, from DesCartes's Connexion of Ideas. 5. I. E Have Said in our Preface to the Demonſtration of the Chriſtian Religion, that the Being of a God is there Affirmed with thoſe Attributes and Perfections of Juſtice, Goodneſs, &⸗. as no Reaſon could ever Furniſh us vith the like Apprehenſions of him; For, what Connexion of Ideas, without a Revelation from God himſelf, could Lead us into an Imagination of his Sending his OWn Son into the World for our Redemption? That he ſhould Take upon him Human Nature, and Unite it with his God-Head ? That he ſhould Paſs thro' a Series of Miſeries and Aſflictions, and at Length Die the Death of a Malefactor? That he ſhould Riſe again, and Aſcend into Glory, for the Salvation of Mankind? This gives us ſo High and Elevated a Notion of the Infinite Goodneſ" of God to us, and of his Severity againſt the Sins of the World, that if it had not been Revealed to us, it had been Impoſſible for us to have Imagined or Thought of a Diſpenſation ſo Wonderful and Amazing; The Utmoſt Fathom o?f Human Reaſon could not have Entered the Depths of ſuch a Knovledge, by any Connexion of Ideas of the moſt Penetrating and Sagacious, and yet all This is Strictly Demonſirable by an Experimental KnowIedge, that is, by Plain Evidences of Fact. 5. 2. ON the other Hand, the very Being of a God, vhen we come to Natural Principles, is very Diſficult to be Demonſtrated, and much more, all thoſe Shining and Glorious Attributes, with which we are Sure he is Inveſted from the Truth and Certainty of our Religion. The Firſt Demonſiration of an Omnipotent, All-Wiſe, and Perſect Being, we ſhall Inquire into, is That, which is Derived from the Idea we have of ſuch a Being. In Order to Prove which, It is Suppoſed, ArT. 1ſt. That all our Thoughts ſould be Abſtracted from External Objects, and from our Senſes, and That we ſhould Conſider Nothing, but the Properties of our own Minds, as Thoſc of Thinking, Willing, Judging, Remembering, &re. ARrT. 2d. That ve are Certain of Nothing, but what we Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive, and that, what is Impreſſed upon us by our Senſes, has not that Clearneſs and Diſtinction in our Ideas of it, which is Requiſite to ſuch a Certainty; becauſe ve Unwarily Join the Idea of Things, Exiſting vithout us, to our Perception of them, for it is not Evident, that they Really do Exiſt without us, upon the Account only of our Perceiving them. ARrT. 3d. That we are Certain, that Two and Three make Five, unleſs it is Poſſlible for Almighty God to Deceive us in the Plaineſt Matters; and, according to the Prejudice we have in Reſpect of his Omnipotence, we are Apt to Think, it is nol Impoſſible, but he may do it, and thereſore, that we cannot be Infallibly Certain, tha Two and Three do make Five; Yet, vhen we Recurr to the Clearneſs and Diſtinct ion of Ideas, we cannot but be Confirmed in this, that, whatever Omnipotence car do to Impoſe upon us, ſuch Propoſitions muſt be True; Eſpecially, ſince we are ſo Fai Far from Knowing, whether Almighty God will Deceive us, that we are not Sure, whether ſuch a Being in Reality Exiſis. . ARrT. 41h. That an Almighty Being is in the Firſt Place to be Proved, and in the Second, that he will not Deceive us, and before this is done, that we cannot be Certain of any Thing. ART. 5h. That to Eſfect the Proof of an Almighty Being, it is Farther Laid Down, that our Thoughts, or Perceptions, ſhould be Divided into their ſeveral Kinds, and an Inquiry made, to which of them Truth or Falſehood belongs. TuE Firſt Sort are thoſe, which, as it is Said, may be Properly Called Ideas, and are only Images of Things, as vhen we have the Conception of a Man, of Heaven, of an Angel, or of God. A Sccond Sort, which are Different from the Other, are thoſe of Willing, Fearing, Affirming, Denying, &. in which Caſes, the Mind has always ſomething, which is the Subject of it's Operations, and does not Terminate it's ſelf in the Bare Perception of the Similitude or Likeneſs of Things with it's own Ideas, but Refers its ſelf ſtill Farther, and of this ind of Thoughts, or Perceptions, Some are Termed our Wills or Affections, and Others our Judgments. Divis. 1ſt. As to our Ideas, for Inſtance, of a Man or a Chimæra, &⸗. it is Impoſſible they ſould be Falſe, if they are not Referred to any Thing beyond the Perceptions of them in our own Minds. Duvis. 2d. As to our Wills and Affections, there is no Falſchood to be Apprehended from Them, becauſe, altho we may Wiſh for Things, which cither are IIl, or which do not any where Exiſt, yet it is True, that ve do Wiſh for them. Divis. 3d. Our Judgments therefore are Thoſe only, of which we are to Beware, Leſt we ſhould be into any Error by them; And our Chief Miſtake in them is, that we too Frequently Conclude our Ideas are Anſwerable and Correſpondent to Things, as they Exiſt without us; For if we only Conſidered them, as Certain Modes or Fahions of Thinking, vithout Referring them to any Thing Farther, it would be almoſt Impoſſible for us to be Deceived. Divis. 40h. Our Ideas may be either Termed Innate, as Thought; or elſe Adventitious, as when we Hear a Sound, or See the Sun, or Feel Fire; or elſe Fictitious, and are Made and Produced by the Mind, as a Syren, or a Centaur; or they may be all Innate, or all Adventitious, or all Made and Formed by our Selves, their Origine or Cauſe being yet Unknown. Divis. 5th. Concerning Adventitious Ideas, we are Apt to Think them ſuch, becauſe they are Involuntary, and many Times are Impreſſed upon the Mind without it's Conſent or Approbation, as Heat; and we Eaſily are Led to Conclude, that ſuch an Impreſſion from an External Cauſe will rather Repreſent That, from which it Proceeds, than any Thing elſe, which is Different from it; Whereas, 1ſ. a Natural Propenſity, or Inclination, to Think any Thing is not an Argument, that we are in the Right, on the Contrary, we ſould be the more Suſpicious, by how much Stronger ſuch an Inclination is, which often Carries us in a Direct Oppoſition to what is Truc and Rational;3 24. Altho theſe Ideas do not Depend on our Wills, it is not ſcom thence Manifeſt, that they Ariſe from an External Cauſe, becauſc, as there may be Natural Impetus's in our Minds, which Run Counter to our Wills, ſo it is not Impoſſible, but there may be a Faculty in them, which ve do not Underſtand, which may be the Efficient Cauſe of theſe Adventitious Ideas in us, Eſpecially, ſince in Dreams we have the ſame Repreſentations without the Aſſiſtance of External Objects to Produce them; 37. Altho theſe Adventitious Ideas did Proceed from External Cauſes, it does not Follow, that they ſould bc Conformable to the Things themſelves; Thus, That Idea, which we Receive of the Sun from our Senſes, is Different from That, which Ariſcs in our Minds from the Computations of Aſtronomers, by which it is Proved to be ſcveral Times Bigger than the Earth. Divis. 61h. The Way therefore to Evince, that any Beings Exiſt withour us, the Ideas oſ which we have in our ovn Minds, is, by Conſidering, that ſo far as thoſe Ideas are only ſo many Modes of Thinking, there is no Difference or Inequality betwixt them, and they all Proceed from our ſelves in the ſame Manner, but ſo far, as One Idea Repreſents One Thing to us, and Another Idea Another Thing, there it an Apparent Inequality or Diſference oſ them; For thoſe Ideas, which Exhibit Sub B b b bb ſtance ſtances to us, are ſomething Greater, and have more of an Objective Reality in them, than thoſe, which only Repreſent Modes or Accidents of Thinking; And again, That Idea, by which we Apprehend ſome Certain Supreme, Eternal, Infinite, Omniſcient and Almighty Being, the Creator of all Things, has more of an Objective Reality in it, than Thoſe, by which Finite Subſlances are Repreſented to us, but it is Evident from Reaſon, that there is at Leaſt as much in the Cauſe, as there is in the Effect, and Conſcquently as much of Reality in the One, as in the Other; For upon this Principle it is, that Something cannot be Produced from Nothing, nor That, which is more Perſect, (or which has more of Reality in it), from That, which is Leſs ſo. And this is not only Evidently True Concerning thoſe Effects, whoſe Reality is Actual or Formal, but likewiſe in Reſpect of Ideas, in which an Objective Reality is Barely Conſidered; Thus, for Inſtance, As a Stone, which was not before, could. not begin to Exiſt, unleſs it was Produced by Something, in which was Contained, either Formally or Eminently, all that, which is in the Stone, and As Heat cannot be Induced into any Subject, which was not Hot before, unleſs by that, which at Leaſt has as much of Perfection in it's Kind, as Heat has, So likewiſe, I cannot have the Idea of Heat in me, or of a Stone, unleſs it is Impreſſed upon my Mind from ſome Cauſe, in which there is as much of Reality, as I Conceive there is in Heat it's ſelf, or in a Stone; For, altho' that Cauſe does not transfuſe any oſ it's own Actual or Formal Reality into my Idea, yet there is no Reaſon to Think, that it is therefore Leſs Real, but rather, that the Nature of the Idea it's ſelf is ſuch, as not to Require any other Formal Reality, Excepting what it Receives from my Thought, of which it is a Mode; And, whereas this Idea Contains One Certain Objective Reality, by which it is Diſtinguiſicd from other Ideas, this Ariſes, and is Derived, from ſome Cauſe, in which there is as much Formal Reality at Leaſt, as there is Objective in the Idea, ſince, if there is any Thing in the Idea, which is not in it's Cauſe, it will be Produced from Nothing; But let the Mode be, as Imperfect as it will, by which any Thing is Objectively in the Mind, in the Form of an Idea, it cannot be Nothing, and therefore cannot Procecd from Nothing, nor ought we to Suſpect or Imagine, ſeeing the Reality, which we Conſider in our Ideas, is only Objective, that therefore it is not Neceſary, that the Same Reality ſhould be Formally and Actually in the Cauſes of thoſe Ideas, and that it is Sufficient, if it is Objectively alſo in ſuch CZuſes; For, as that Objective Mode of Being, or Exiſting, is Suitable to the Nature of o Ideas, and Properly belongs to them, ſo a Formal or Actual Mode of Being, or Exiſting, is Proper and Peculiar to the Cauſes of our Ideas, and the Nature of them, inſomuch, that it is Manifeſt by the Light of Nature, that thoſe Ideas, which are Painted in our Minds, are there, as the Images and Reſemblances of Things, which may fall Short of the Perfection of the Things, which they Repreſent, but do not Contain any Thing Greater, or more Perfect than the Things, which they Repreſent; From whence, if the Objective Reality of any of our Ideas is ſo0 Great, that we may be Certain it is neither Formally, nor Eminently, in us, and Conſequently, that we our ſelves are not the Cauſes of ſuch an Idea, it Follows, that ſomething Exiſts in the World Diſtinct from us. Divis. 7th. Of theſe ldeas, vhoſe Cauſes are External to us, there are Five Sorts, cither Thoſe, which Repreſent Corporeal and Inanimate Beings, or Thoſe, which Repreſent Animals, or Men, or Angels, or God, and as to That, wvhich Exhibits to us our own Exiſtence, it is Manifeſt and Obvious to every One. IN Relation to the Ideas, we have of Angels, Animals, or other Men, beſides our Selves, Theſe are all Said to be Compounded of Thoſe, which we Form from our own Exiſtence, from That of Corporeal Beings, and That of God, and therefore might Eaſily be Underſtood, or Collected, altho' there were no Men, Animals, or Angels Exiſting in the World. Duvis. 8th. As to the Ideas of Corporeal Beings, there is nothing, it is Said, in them which we may not Eaſily Conceive to Proceed from our Selves, becauſe, althd Ex tenſion, Figure, &e. cannot be Formally in a Thinking Being, yet as they are onl) Certain Modes of a Subſtance, and a Thinking Being is a Subſtance, they may b Eminently Contained in it. Drivis. orh Duvis. 91h. Therefore the Idea of God, it is Said, only Remains to be Inquired in to, that is, of a Subſtance, which is Infinite, Independent, All-Wiſe, All-Powerful and from Which we our Selves, as well as every Thing clſe, if any Thing elſc Exiſts is Produced and Derived, which are Attributes or Perfections of that Nature, as nol to be Capable of Proceeding from our Minds Alone; For, Notwithſtanding we have the Idea of a Subſtance from our own Exiſtence, yet we have not of an Infinite Sub ſtance, ſincc we are Finite, and which, Conſequently, muſt be Impreſſed upon u: from an Infinite One; Nor are ve to Think, that we cannot Perceive, what is Really Infinite by an Expreſs Idea of it, and that we can only do it by a Negation ol vhat is Finite, becauſe, on the Contrary, we Plainly Apprehend there is more oſ Reality in an Infinite Subſtance, than there is in a Finite, and Therefore our Perception of what is Inſinite is Previous to our Perception of what is Finite, that is, our Perception of a God is Previous to that of our own Exiſtence; for we could not nov, what it was to Doubt, or Deſire, or that ſomething was Wanting to us, or that, in General, ve were Imperfect, unleſs we had an Idea of a Being more Perfect than our Selves, from a Compariſon with which we Found our own Defects and Failings; Nor can it be Said, that Poſſibly this Idea of God is Materially Falſe, and therefore may Proceed from Nothing; Since on the orher Hand, as it is the moſt Clear and Diſtinct of any which we have, and Contains more of an Objective Reality, there is no ldea, which has more Truth, and leſs Suſpicions of Falſehood in it; It is True, becauſe, altho we might be Capable of Thinking or Imagining ſuch a Being did not Exiſt, yet it is Impoſſible for us to Affirm, that ſuch an Idea does not Exhibit ſomething Real to us; It is Clear and Diſtinct, becauſe, whatever we Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive, which is Real and True, and which Carries any Perfection with it, is all Contained in this Idea; Nor is it any Objection, that we cannot Comprehend, what is Infinite, or that we cannot ſo much as Reach in our Thoughts ſeveral of the Attributes, which belong to an Almighty Being; Since it Appertains to the Eſſence of what is Infinite, that it ſiould not be Comprehended by us, who are Finite, and all which is Requiſite in this Caſe is, that we Underſtand and Judge, that all thoſe Things, which we Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive, and have any Perfection in them, and, it may be, Innumerable others, of which we are Ignorant, are Formally or Eminently in God; Farther, it cannot be Affirmed, that all theſe Perſections may be in our own Minds Potentially, tho' not Actually and in Effect, becauſe the Idea of God has nothing Potential in it; For, tho' our own Knovledge may Admit of Gradual Increaſes, yet to Suppoſe it in God, is an Argument of Imperfection, and therefore cannot Enter into our Idea of a moſt Perfect Being, whom we Conceive to be Actually Endowed with all Perfections, and to which Nothing can be Added; Beſides which, the Objectiveneſs of an Idea in the Mind, cannot Proceed from what is Potential, which is Nothing, but from what is Real and Actual; Notvithſtanding which, ſince we are Apt to Think, iĩt is not Neceſſary, that the Idea of a Being, more Perfect than our Selves, ſould Proceed from a Being, which is Really more Perfect, it will be farther Requiſite to Examine, whether we who have ſuch an Idea, could Poſſibly Exiſt, if ſuch a Being did not; If we could, our Exiſtence muſt be either Derived from our Selves, or from our Parents, or from Something elſe, which is Leſs Perfect than God; IF we were from our Selves, we ſhould not Experience the Imperfections of Wiſhing, Doubting, or any Other, ſince all the Perfections, which our Ideas Repreſent to us, and are Objectively in the Mind, we Impart to our ſelves, and Conſequently ſould be Almighty, Omniſcient, Eternal, Infinite, &e. nor is it Reaſonable to Think, that, if we were from our Selves, it would be more Diſficult for us to Supply, what ve Want, than to Give, what we have; On the Contrary, it is Evident, that it is more Difficult to Exiſt from our Selves, or for a Thinking Subſtance to Emerge, and Riſe, out of Nothing, than to Acquire the Knowledge of many Things, of which we are Ignorant, our Informations being only the Accidents of ſuch a Subſtance, and the Same may be Said of the other Perfections of an Infinite Being; Nor can we farther Evade the Force of this Reaſoning, by Suppoſing, that we always Exiſted, what we find our Selves to be at Preſent, that is, that our Minds did always Pre-exiſt, becauſe, tho we do now Exiſt, there can be no Reaſon Aſſigned, vhy we ſhould Exiſt the next Minute, which is Conſequent upon a Former, unleſs from a Cauſe, which Creates us every Moment, and B b b b b2 therefor- therefore the Inquiry will be, whether we are Endued vith any ſuch Efficacy or Power, by which we, who now Exiſt, can Produce, or Create, our Selves a Moment from our Preſent Exiſting; For, Seeing we only Conſider our Selves, as Thinking Beings, if we vere Poſſeſed 4f any ſuch Efficacy, or Power, we ſhould be Conſcious of it, which ſince we are not, it is Manifeſt, that we muſt Proceed from ſome Cauſe, or other, Different from our Selves; Which yet, it may be Said, is leſs Perfect than God; But there being, as much at Leaſt in the Cauſc, as there is in the Effect, and ſince we are Thinking Beings, and have a Certain Idea of God in us, whatever is the Cauſe of our Exiſtence, it muſt at Leaſt be a Thinking Being, and muſt have an Idea of all thoſe Perfections, vhich we Attribute to God, and it will be then Inquired, whether this Cauſe is Derived from it's Self, or Something Elſe; If from it's Self, it will be God; If from ſomething Different from it's Self, That will alſo either be Derived from it's Self, or from ſomething Elſe, till at Length we Arrive at the Firſt and Original Cauſe, which is God, for there cannot be a Progreſſion to Infinity; Eſpecially, ſince the Cauſe, which Firſt Produced us, is not at Preſent Conſidered, but That, which now Preſerves us in Being, and Produces us every Moment; Nor can it be Imagined, that ſeveral Partial Cauſes may Poſſibly Concurr to the Production of us, as Thinking Beings, and that ve Receive the Idea of One of the Perfections, which we Aſcribe to God from One Cauſe, and a Different from a Different, ſo that all thoſe Perfections, ſome-where or other, Exiſt in the Univerſe, bur are not Joined and United in God; For, on the Contrary, Unity, an Uncompounded Eſſence, and an Inſeparableneſs of all thoſe Attributes, vhich we Conceive in God, is One of thoſe Perfections, which we Apprehend, and Underſtand, to belong to him; nor vould it be Poſſible for us to Conceive ſuch a Unity and Conjunction of Perfections in God from any Cauſe, which did not Impreſs them Jointly and Inſeparably upon us. As to what Concerns our Beings, Conſidered as Thinking Ones, Deriving from our Parents, there is no Neceſſity of Confuting ſo Abſurd a Thought or Opinion. TuE only Queſtion therefore, which Remains is, vhica Way, and in what Manner, we Receive this Idea from God; For it is neither Derived from our Senſes, as Material Objects are, nor is it Contrived or Invented by our Selves, ſince we cannot Add to it, or Take from it, and therefore muſt be Innate, and is, as it were, a Character Impreſſed upon our Minds by God himſelf, ſo that, whenever we Reflect upon them, we are at the ſame Time Carried to an Acknowledgement of this Infinite Being, of which there is ſo Plain a Signature in our Own. Ir is farther Added, in Reſpect of the Exiſtence of a God, that there are Innumerable Ideas in us of Certain Things, which, altho' they do not Exiſt without us, cannot be Accounted nothing, and Notwithſtanding they may be Conceived by the Mind at Pleaſure, yet are not Abſolutely Formed by it, but Aſſert a Nature to themſelves, which is Real and Immutable; Thus in a Triangle, which we Imagine, altho there never had been ſuch a Figure in Being, Excepting in our own Thoughts, it is yet a Certain Determined Nature and Eſſence, or an Immutable and Eternal Form. Which is not Contrived or Feigned by us, nor Depends upon our Minds, ſince there may be ſeveral Properties Demonſtrated Concerning it, Namely, that it's Threc Angles are Equal to Two Right Ones, that the Greateſt Side Subtends the Greateſt Angle and the like, which Properties, whether we will or no, we Diſtinctly Perceive, Albeit we did not Apprehend them, when we had only a Bare Notion of a Triangle, and therefore were not Contrived and Forged by our Minds; Beſides which, what we Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive is Somerhing and not a Mere Non-Exiſtence; for what is Truth is Something, and that, which we Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive is Truth; Conſequently, if, becauſe we can from our Thoughts Draw out the ldea ol any Thing, it Follows, that all thoſe Things, which we Imagine to Appertain to ſuch an Idea, Really do belong to it, we are Farther to Conſider, vhether ve may not from Hence Derive another Proof of the Being of a God; In Order to hich, it is Said, we have as Clear and as Diſtinct an Idea of a Being Infinitely Perfect, as e have of a Triangle, or any other Figure, and we with an Equal Clearneſs and Di ſtinction Perceive, that Eternal Exiſtence belongs to ſuch a Being, as we do, that any Property, which we Demonſtrate of a Triangle, belongs to it, for, however it is in other other External Beings, the Exiſtence of God is Inſeparable, and cannõt be Diſtinguiſhed from his Eſſence, nor do our Thoughts Impoſe a Neceſſity of ſuch an Exiſtence, becauſe we cannot have the Idea of a God without it; But we have a Clear and Diſtinòt Idea of him, which we cannot Avoid, and therefore it is True, that God Exiſis. 5. 3. WE have Tranſcribed, as Exactly, as we Poſſibly could, this Demonſiration of Des Cartes, becauſe, altho' it is now almoſt every where Exploded, yet it Once had as Great a Reputation for the Juſtneſs of it's Concluſions, as any Thing, which has been ſince Propoſed to us from the Connexion of Ildeas; Nor was the Sagacity, or the Penetration. of the Author in the Leaſt Inferior to That of our Preſent Reaſoners, whoſe Accuracy in the Connecting of Ideas, which they ſeem to be ſo Fond of, we ſhall afterwards Examine, when we have Firſt Diſmiſſed their Great Maſter, and Perhaps, in theſe Late Ages, the Chief Patron and Aſſertor of them, in Reſpect of Religion. S. 4. To Prepare us for this Demonſtration, it is Preſcribed to us, that we ſhould Abſtract our Selves from every Thing elſe, and Conſider only the Properties of our own Minds; which, Indeed, is a Neceſſary Lemma to a Demonſtration, which Proceeds Wholly upon the Properties of our own Minds, but is not therefore Neceſſary to be Granted; For, if we are not Willing to make ſuch Abſtractions, and if ve are as Fully Satisfied of the Truth and Exiſtence of other Beings, as well as our own, which we have Proved, we may be, in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, there is no more Reaſon to Confine our Thoughts to Thoſe Perceptions, which we Experience from the Operations within our Selves, and to Reject Thoſe Perceptions, which are Impreſſcd upon us from External Objects, than to Conſider any External Operations upon our Minds, and to Neglect Thoſe, which Proceed from our own Reflections. 5. 5. AFTER this Requeſt from us, that we ſhall, in Matters of Reaſon, only Think f our Sclves, without Regarding any other Part of the Creation, which is rather an Inſtance of our Pride, than of an Humble Inquiry after Truth, we are Told in the Second Place, that we are Certain of Nothing, but what we Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive, which is True Indeed, if we Abſtract our Selves from every Thing elſe but our own Minds; But, if we have as full an Evidence of Beings Exiſting without us, as that we our Selves Exiſt, which has been Evidenced in our Principles of Philoſophy, the Whole of our Knowledge will not Reſt in the Connexion of Ideas, or in Joining the Abſtracted Perceptions of our own Minds; For Inſtance, there is no Connexion in the Ideas of our own Minds, betwixt the Perception of Fire, and the Fire it's ſelf, which Cauſes that Perception, and which is not an Idea in the Mind, but a Being Diſtinct from it, and yet we are as Certain, that an Igneous Subſtance Exiſts, which Produces the Senſations in us, of Light and Heat, as that we have the Ideas of thoſe Senſations; Becauſe there cannot be any Greater Reaſon given, why we are Sure we Perceive them, than there can be, that they are Perceived; There is no Connexion of Ideas betwixt Twenty, or a Hundred, Perſons Telling me, that there is ſuch a Place as France or Paris, and my having a Notion, or an Idea, of them in my own Mind, much Leſs than betwixt the Fire and the Perception of it, and yet I can be as Fully Satisfied, that there is ſuch a Country, and ſuch a City, as of any Connexion of Ideas in a Philoſophick, or even a Mathematick Reaſoning, according to the Compariſons, which we have already made betwixt an Experimental, and a Notional Certainty. 5. 6. THIRD, What we do Clearly and Diſtinctly Perceive, it is Said, we may be Aſſured of, as that 3 and 2 make s, and it is Impoſſible for Almighty God himſelf to Deceive us in ſuch Explicit and Diſtinct Perceptions; But how Different the Joining of our Ideas of 2 and; together, or even Inferring the Evident Property oſ any Mathematick Figure, as that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, is from Reaſoning in General upon the Ideas of our own Minds, whether Abſtracted or not, is Plain and Manifeſt; ſince, tho in the Firſt Caſe we ſould be Incapable of Erring, yet in the Laſt it is too Notorious, that we are often Abuſed and Miſſed into very Wrong and Unjuſt Concluſions, both in Mathematicks, and in Philoſophy; Beſides which, 3 and 2 are not Abſolutely Equal to 5, but upon a Suppoſition only, Namely, of Individual Units, for if a Unit may have ſeveral Values ſo as One Unit ſiould Contain 100 Parts, and another 1000, 3 and 2 will not be Equal to5, in that Reſpect or Relation, becauſe 4; Added to 745 Vill not Pro duc: duce any ſuch Number; and that Unit, even in Mathematicks, and in the Connex ion of ldeas, has a Diſferent Value, is Evident from the Method of finding a Third, or Fourth, Proportional in Lines, vhere Unit is Repreſented by One Aſſumed a Pleaſure; as alſo, from One and the Same Individual Line in the Abſciſſes of Curve: Exhibiting a Million of Different Quantities; And the Same may be Said of the Threc Angles oſ a Triangle being Equal to Two Right Ones, which is not Abſolutely True, and only is ſo, under Certain Circumſtances and Conditions, according to what has been Evinced in our Geometry of Solids, or of Matter. S. 7. FouRTH, It is Told us, that an Almighty Being is Firſt to be Proved, and then, that he vill not Deceive us, and before this, that we cannot be Certain of any Thing; To which we Reply, 1ſ. That this Aſſertion very Illy Agrees with, as it Perfectly Contradicts, the Former, which Affirmed to us, that we might be Certain, vhere our Ideas were Clear and Diſtinct, and that it was Impoſſible for Almighty God himſelf to Deceive us in ſuch a Caſe; 272. We Anſwer, that if we can be Certain of Nothing, till we are Certain of a Deity, and that he will not Deceive us, our Ignorance is Invincible; Becauſe it will be Impoſſible for us to be Certain oſ the Being of a God, if the Being of a God is Neceſſary and Previous to any Certainty; It will therefore Perhaps be Inquired, how this Philoſophy ſhould Set Two Propoſitions together, vhich ſo Evidently Deſtroy each other; The Reaſon of which is Plain, becauſc it Aſfirms the Idea of God to be Innate. and Impreſſed Originally upon our Minds, and yet that Certainty Depends upon the Clearneſs and Diſtinction of our Ideas, and the Connexion of them; Whereas, if there is an Impreſſion of ſuch an Idea upon our Minds, we muſt be Certain of it, without any Connexion of Clear and Diſtinct Idcas to Prove it; That is, Certainty is Said to Conſiſt only in the Agreement of Ideas, and yet we are Certain of the Being of a God, without any Agreement or Compariſon of Ideas, Namely, from a Bare Impreſſion only. 5. 8. F1PTH, We are next Adviſed, in Order to Prove the Being of a God, to Diſtinguiſh our Perceptions into their ſeveral Claſes, which are Divided, Firſt into Ideas, that lie in the Mind, as they are Repreſentations of Things, and not Referred; Thus we have the Imagination of a Man, of Heaven, of an Angel, or of God; and theſe Ideas, it is Said, it is Impoſſible ould be Falſe, if it is not from thence Concluded, that Things Exiſt; That is, vhat we Think of, is That Thought and no Other, which is an Axiom; But Notvithſtanding this, There may be a Falſehood in our Thoughts or Conceptions, altho we do not Refer them to any Exiſtence, Excepting That, which they have in our own Ideas; For, if, I Take a Triangle ſor a Circle or a Square, and Imagine the Space Comprehended by the One to be That, which Appertains to Another, I am Deceived, Albeit I ſould not Refer theſe Perceptions to any Thing External to me; So likeviſe, if I ſhould, in my Idea of a Chimæra, make the Head of a Lion the ſame with That of the Body of a Goat, or the Tail of a Dragon. my Perceptions would be Falſe, which yet is That, which often Happens in Dreams, wherein, whilſt we Dream of a Man, ve Frequently have the Ideas of a Chimæra Enter into his Compoſition, and Conceive him to be made of a quite Diſferent Shape, than what belongs to that ldea; And thus it is in Madneſs or a Phrenzy, that Men Think themſclves to be Wolves, to have Horns, to be Glaſs, Butter, &⸗. according to what we have Mentioned from Mallebranche in our Principles of Philoſophy ; Which is not by a Reſerence of the Mind from it's Ideas to Things without us, but by Falſely Apprehending One Idea to be Another, which is Different from it; Nor does this Proceed ſrom any Undue Connexion of Ideas, vhich would, if ſo, be Reſolved into our Judgments, but Merely from a Falſe Appearance in our Ideas themſelves, by which Means we Actually See and Perceive One Idea Inſtead of Another;3 From whence it is Conſcquent, that ve may be Deceived in the Proof of a God, not only in our Connecting our Ideas, but in the Ideas we Connect; So that it can never be Evinced, hich this Philoſophy only Endeavours to do, that we have the Idea of an All-Wiſc, Perſect, Omniſcient, and All-Powerful Being, and that ſuch an Idea does not Proceed ſrom our Selves, but from ſome External Cauſe, and that ſuch a Cauſe is no other than God himſelf, if that Idea is a Falſe One, or the ſeveral Parts of it are not True, becauſe all the Arguments, Concerning the Being of a God from the Idea of liim, Depend upon this very Suppoſition, that ve cannot be Deceived in our Ideas, or in the Bare Repreſentations of our Minds, which it is Evident we may; Thus if our pur Idea of God does not Expreſs all the Attributes, which belong to him, or Comprehends more than do, if it Exhibits that, as a Perfection in the Deity, which is none, or Unduly Apprehends thoſe Perfections of Omnipotence, Omniſcience, &. which it Aſcribes to him, it will be a Wrong and Miſtaken Idea, tho' it ſhould not be Referred to any Being, which Exiſts without us, and yet all this is Preſumed in the Preſent Demonſtration; Namely, that our Ideas of Infinite, Eternal, Omniſcient, Almighty, &e. are Accurate and Juſt, that there are no orher Attributes belong to God, and that all theſe do; for if there is any Thing Defective or Redundant in the Repreſentation, vhatever is Falſe, or Illy Pictured in the Mind, vill be as much an Argument againſt the Exiſtence of ſuch a Being, as what is Poſitive and Determined there, can be an Argument for it. 5. 9. A Second Kind of Ideas arc Aſirmed to be thoſe of our Affections and ?n Wills, in which, it is Said, there can be no Falſchood, becauſe tho we may Wiſh for ie suThings, which cither are lll, or do not Exiſt, yet it is True, that ve do Wiſh for i them, which is as much as to Say, becauſe it is Certain and True, that what ve Wiſh cia;æ for, we do Wiſh for, therefore our Wihes never Incline us to Form Wrong and Evident Unjuſtifiable Ideas in our Minds; whereas the Contrary is moſt Evident, that our Inclinations and Wills have as Great an Influence and Sway in Producing very Fantaſtical and Falſe Ideas in us, without Conſidering the Conncction of them, as any other Property of our Minds; Thus in the Famous Impoſture of Arahomet, or Mohammed, his Senſual Paradiſe, his Deſcription of Heaven, of the Angels, and of God, his Changing Virtue into Vice, and Vice into Virtue, rall which was Calculated for his Darling Paſſions of Luſt and Ambition) are Sufficient Inſtances, what Strange and Chimerical Ideas a Man may Paint upon his Mind, who Reſigns himſelf to the Conduct of his own Brutal Appetites and Deſires; No one I Believe will Think theſe Errors of his were Oving to his Want of Judgment, or the Connexion of Ideas, but to his Will, to Dæ Pri his ovn Pleaſure and Caprice. which was the Author to him of theſc Fancies in ſaœà Plain Oppoſition, to his Certain Knowledge and Conviction, ſince he muſt be Con- Mr. O& ſcious to himſelf, that all he Propoſed of this Nature was an Impoſture, tho it is very sinom Probable, there was a Mixture of Enthuſiaſm in it. s. 10. AFTER this it is Told us, that our Judgments are only Capable of Deceiving us, ie and that the Chief Reaſon of our Errors in them is, our Referring thoſe Ideas, we iã s have in our Minds, to Things, as Exiſting without us, when there is no Connexion Driſi betwixt our Ideas, and any Exiſtence Foreign to them; in which Aſertion, there are ꝗ Three Things, which are Falſe; 17. That our Judgments are only Capable of Decei- Tru. ving us, Secing it is already Proved, our Ideas themſelves, and our Inclinations and Paſſions, may do it; 24. That, in our Judgments, the Principal Occaſion of our Errors is our Attributing the Ideas, we have in our Minds, to ſome External Cauſe of thoſc Ideas, whereas we have Evidenced before in our Compariſons of an Expemental and Notional Knowledge, that in Abſtracting our Ideas from any Thing External to them, the Connexion of them may be Fallible in ſeveral Reſpects; 34. It is Said, that there is no Connexion betwixt our Ideas, and that which is Foreign to them, if by that is Meant, that there is not the Same Connexion betwixt the Ideas of our Mind, as thoſc of 4 and 4, or the Three Angles of a Triangle being Equal to Two Right Ones, as there is betwixt my Perception of Light or Heat in the Fire, and that which Cauſes thoſe Perceptions in me, it is True, but at the ſame Time it is no more than to Say, that the Connexion betwixt any Two Abſtracted Perceptions is not the Same, as the Connexion betwixt a Perception in the Mind, and that which Produces it, but it is no Argument or Proof, that becauſe there is a Connexion in the Ideas of our Minds, betwixt 4 and 4, &⸗. that therefore there is no Connexion or Dependence betwixt my Idea, or Perception, of Heat, or of, Light, and that, which Produces it; to Wit, ve cannot Infer, that the Cauſe of Heat or Lizht may not Exiſt Diſtinct from our Perceptions of them, and that there is not a Connexion or Dependence betwixt them, becauſe the Cauſe, which Produces them is not an Abſtracted Idea in the Mind; unleſs it is Firſt Proved, that there is no Knowledge, but in ſuch Abſtractions, the Contrary of which is Evidenced in our Principles of Philoſophy; or, which is the Same, we cannot Conclude, that our Perceptions of Light or Heat are not Oving to Something External to us, viæ. becauſe we are Sure, that 4 is Equal to 4, or that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones. 5. 11. Fnom 5. 11. FroM Hence therefore it is Plain, how Little this Philoſophy Underſtands what belongs to the Real Evidences of Things, which makes all Certainty to Conſiſt in the Clearneũ and Diſtinction of Ideas, and the Connexion of them, that is, in the Abſiracted Ideas of our own Minds; for there is no Proper Connexion, Excepting betwixt ſuch Ideas, there being None, as it is Affirmed, betwixt our Ideas, and the Exiſtence of the Things, which they Repreſent; by which Means, all Experimental Certainty, all Hiſtorical Certainty, all Certainty from Teſtimony, and, Indeed, all the Maxims oſ Prudence, by which we Conduct the ſeveral Actions of our Lives, are Diſcarded, and there is nothing Certain in the whole Maſs of Human Affairs, bateing, vhat ve Find and Experience in our own Abſtracted Notions; The Contrary of which has been Fully Evinced. But, However Falſe ſuch an Opinion may be, this Philoſophy is in ſome Meaſure Conſiſtent ith it's ſelf, for whilſt it Derives all Certainty from a Clearneſs and Diſtinction of Ideas, and the Viſible Connexion of ſuch Ideas, it Wiſcly Rejects External Beings, betwixt which, and our Perceptions of them, there is no Connexion from that Certainty, and Endcavours to Prove the Exiſtence oſ a God from our Idca oſ him, which is Impreſſed upon us; On the other Hand, our Preſent Celebrated Philoſopher of Ideas has taken Care to Tranſcribe into his Syſteme this Doctrine, and to Vend it for his Own, without Underſtanding the Scope and Intention of it, whilſt he Argues, for the Certainty of External Beings, betwixt which, and our Abſtracted Ideas, there is no Connexion of Abſtracted Ideas. and for the Deing of a God from the Nature of Motion, when ve are not Certain of Motion it's ſelf, if Certainty Depends Solely upon the Abſtracted Ideas of our own Minds, and the Agreement or Diſagreement of them; and, vhich is ſtill more Un fortunate to this Gentleman, he begins his Philoſophy with a Confutation of any Innate or Impreſcd Ideas of God, vhich Des-Cartes well Knew, or any One elſe might Know, was Necellary to the Demonſtration of One, if Certainty was Conſin'd to our Ideas, Independent and Diſtinct from all Foreign Conſiderations, and yei Profeſſcs to Demonſtrate the Exiſtence of a God from Things, which are Foreign to our Ideas as they Lie, without any Reference, in the Mind, Notwithſtanding he has Adopted that Notion of Certainty into his Writings, vhich Excludes every Thing from being Certain, vhich is not Reſolved into thoſe Ideas, and the Plain Connexion of them; So Unhappy always is the Caſc of ſuch, vho Borrow theit Notions from Others, and Live Laily upon the Scraps of Begged Opinions, the Riſe, and Occaſion, and Deſign of Propoſing which, they have not been Poſſeſſed of Sagacity, or Diligence, enough to Examine. . 12. FroM hence we are Preſcribed to Divide our Ideas into Innate, as Thought, Adventitious, as Sound, or Heat, &e. or Fictitious, as a Syren, or a Centaur; Whereas this Deſcription of our Ideas into their ſeveral Claſes is not Juſt; For Thought cannot be roved to be Innate, unleſs it is Firſt Shewn, that our Reſlections, or the Bare Operations of our Minds, are not Conſequent upon our Senſations from External Objects, and therefore not Derived from them; On the Contrary, i? Thought and our Perceptions are Innate, it cannot be Explained, how any Perceptions are Adventitious, Eſpecially, if we Acknovledge, that we are Certain of Nothing, but the Plain ldcas of our ovn Minds; For if ſo, ve have no more Reaſon to Call our Ideas oſ Heat, or Sound, Adventitious, than our Ideas of Memory or Perception, that is, if our Reaſon or Knovledge can Proceed no farther than the Repreſentations made to us by our Ideas themſelves; Laſtly, as to what Reſpects Fictitious Ideas, ſince they are Reſolved into Thought, without any Reference to External Beings, it is not Determined in this Philoſophy, why they may not be Innate too, ſince Thought is Said to be ſo, or if they they are not, and thoſe Compoſitions Depend upon our Wills, it is not Certain, but they may be as True Ideas, as thoſe of God, or an Angel, according to the Preſent Reaſoning; ſince they are not Referred to any Thing vithout us, and it is Suppoſcd, there can be no Error in our Affections, or our Wills, ſfrom . 2. Art. 5. Divis. 2. oſ this Chapter. S. 13. HOWEVER this is, ve ſhall now Particularly Conſider the Nature of thoſe Ideas, which are Called Adventitiouss, which is Said to Conſi©t in their being Involuntarily Impreſed upon the Mind, by which they are Diſiinguiſied from all Others; if therefore they Ariſc from Something Diſferent from our Selves, we are Apt, it is Said, to Think, that they Bear a Reſemblance rather of that, which ĩs the Cauſe oſ them. them than of any Thing elſe; whereas, we are Told, as to the Firſt, that Involuntary Ideas may Start up in our Minds, without an External Efficient to Produce them, for ſuch we Actually Experience in Dreams; and as to the Second, that it is not Neceſſary, altho' they ſhould be Impreſſed from without, that they ſhould be the Piẽtures or Images of the Things, from which they are Taken; thus the Sun, of which we have a Conception, is not the Same in it's Magnitude with that which Really Exiſts, according to the Computations of Aſtronomers. Bur, 1ſi. if Involuntary ldeas may Proceed from the Mind, ſince the Idea of God is Aſfirmed to be Innate, that is, Originally Impreſſed upon it, and therefore Involuntary, it is not Certain, but the Same Efficient Faculty in the Mind, which is Capable of Cauſing One Involuntary Appearance in it of Objects, which are Suppoſed to be External, may Occaſion another, as of God; For, both being Explicit Ideas in the Mind, and Repreſenting, as it were, Certain Signaturcs and Characters Engraven upon it, in the Senſe of this Philoſophy, the Difference of Finite and Infinite is of no Conſideration; ſince, if they are both Ideas, hich in Fact Exiſt in, and are Produced upon the Mind, and are alike Involuntary, there can be no Reaſon Aſſigned, why the Suppoſed Efficient Faculty of it may not Introduæe into it's ſelf the Idea of the One, as well as of the Other, that is, the Idea of God, as well as that of Corporeal Beings; Beſides which, there are ſome Involuntary Ideas, as Particularly thoſe, ve Reccive from Objects, which are Suppoſed External, that cannot be Derived into the Mind from i's ſelf, by what we have already Evidenced in the Principles of Philoſophy. Chap. 2. Part. I. As to what Concerns the 24. Aſſertion, that, altho theſe Involuntary Ideas may Proceed from External Impreſſions, it is nor yet Neceſſary, that the Effects in the Mind ſiould be a Bare Tranſcript upon it, of the Cauſe of them; It is OWned; But Jt cannot be Concluded from Thence, which is done in this Philoſophy, that therefore, ithere is no Connexion betwixt the Cauſe and Effect; for, th Heat in One Dody Produces Heat in Another, that is, Heat Original, or Transferred, Produces the Same Kind of Perception in the Mind, yet it is not Conſequent, that Heat in Body ſhould be the Perception of it in our Minds, no more, than that Thought ſhould be Matter, and therefore the One vill not be a Tranſcript of the Other; and yet it cannot be Inferred, that our Perception of Heat is not Derived from Somerhing, vhich Cauſes that Perception, Albeit that, which Cauſes it, is not that Perception. MOREOVER, If it is Acknowledged, that Involuntary Ideas may Proceed from External Impreſſions, be they Anſwerable to thoſe Impreſſions or not, in Reſpect of the Idea Impreſſed, and the Cauſe which Impreſſes it, the Argument Uſed for the Setting Aſide all Ideas, Except the Abſtracted Ones of our own Minds, is Invalid; Becauſe, in the Preſent, it is Suppoſed, that there are External Objects, tho' they are not Conformable to our Ideas of them; and even, as to vhat Reſpects the Inſtance of that Idea, which we have of the Sun in our Minds, and that, vhich we have from the Computations of Aſtronomers, I would Ask, is it to the Purpoſe of Proving, that we are not Certain of External Objects? or, that External Objects are not Anſ7erable to our Ideas of them? Ii the Firſt, it is Evidenced to the Contrary in our Principles of Philoſophy; If the Second, OF what Advantage is it to the Aſſertion of all :deas, and the Cauſes of them, being in our Minds, when it is a Plain Conſeſſion, that the Cauſes of them are Without, and External to us? 5. 14. NoTwIiTHSTANDING vhat we have Objected againſt that, which this Philoſophy Propoſes Concerning Adventitious Ideas, we ſhall now Relinquiſh it, and Conſider, whether the Proof of External Beings is Juſt, which it Alledges from our Ideas themſelves; In which, there is ſuch a Jarzon of True Nonſenſe, and ſo Unſuitable to the Celebrated Wit, and Genius of DesCartes, that I cannot Attribute it to any Thing elſe, Excepting, that, as he had made the Exiſtence of External Beings Uncertain, ſo he was Willing to make the Exiſtence of a God ſo too; that is, This Wiſe Philoſopher had Diſcarded the Chriſtian Religion, by Believing Nothing, but what the Abſtracted Ideas of his own Mind Preſented to him, but then he was Obliged to Aſer ſome Religion or other, that the World might not Conſider him in the Quality of an Athciſt; he therefore Thought it was Neceſſary to Prove the Being of a God, hich yet was done in ſo Unaccountable a Manner, that, if Men were Satisfied to Leave thei ovn Religion, it was at their Pleaſure, whether they would be of his or of any, that is C C C òc a [ he was not Much Concerned about Chriſtianity, ſo was he as Little about ihe Being of a God its ſelf, any farther, than as it might Serve him in his Romance o Philoſophy, and to Divide his Similar Matter, into what Elements he Pleaſed. 5. 15. WAT We have Said in the Foregoing Section, we ſhall Prove in This, and the Following Ones, whil©t we Shew, that Des-Cartess Notions are the moſt Abſur in this Particular, that can Poſſibly be Imagined, and which he himſelf could no Think vere True, tho he Hoped at Leaſt, they might be well enough Digeſted by thoſe, ho were Apt to Believe the Chriſtian Religion was a Slavery upon Men Minds, and therefore Willing to Entertain the Firſt, which ſhould be Propoſed in Oppoſition to it. Ir is Said therefore, that the Way to Evince, that any Beings Exiſt without us, the Ideas of which we have in our own Minds, is, by Conſidering, that ſo far, as thoſe Ideas are only ſo many Modes of Thinking, there is no Difference or Inequality betwixt them, and they all Proceed from our Selves in the Same Manner, but ſo far, as One Idea Repreſents One Thing to us, and Another Idea Another Thing, there is an Apparent Inequality or Difference of them; For thoſe Ideas, which Exhibit Subſtances to us, are ſomething Greater, and have More of an Objective Reality in them, than thoſe, which only Repreſent Modes or Accidents of Thinking; and again, That Idea, by which we Apprehend ſome Certain Supreme, Eternal, Infinite, Omniſcient, and Almighty Being, the Creator of all Things, has more of an Objective Reality in it, than Thoſe, by which Finite Subſtances are Repreſented. Tuis is laid Down, as a Fundamental Axiom, for the Proof of External Beings, whereas, there are ſeveral Exceptions to be made againſt it. FirsT, that Thought, in General, is Suppoſed to be an Abſtracted Idea, that is, that whether we Think of a Triangle, or a Square, or of the Sun, it is ſtill Thought, or Perception; When yet we do not Perceive, or Think, of any of theſe without their Particular Diſtinctions; That is, Thought or Perception, in General, is nothing but an Abſtraction of the Mind, which is not Owing to our Experience, but our Wills; ſince no One can Tell, what Thought Abſtractedly is, without Couſidering the Thing, which we Think, or have the Idea, of. SECOND, Suppoſing this Abſtracted Notion of Thought, without Conſidering the Particular Thing, which we Think of; In what, I would Ask, does the Inequality of our Thoughts or Idcas Conſiſt, Excepting in Thought or Idea:? If ſo, there is no more Reaſon, vhy the Difference of Thought ſiould not Proceed from our Selves, than the Identity, or the Sameneſs, of it ould; and therefore, the Difference, or Inequality, of our Perceptions cannot be an Argument for External Beings, ſince thoſe Different Perceptions may, as vell Proceed from the Mind, as Thought or Perception may. TniRD, Thought, in General, where we Exclude any Particular Ideas, being an Abſtraction of the Mind, is an Idea, which Depends upon the Will and Pleaſure of it; any Particular Idea, hich we have, on the Contrary, as of a Man, or an Angel, or of Doubting, Willing, &. is not made by ſuch an Abſtraction, but is the Immediate Senſe, which the Mind has of thoſe Ideas; from Whence it is Certain, that, becauſe the Mind is Pleaſed to make Abſtractions of it's Own, it is no Inference, that where it does nor make thoſe Abſiractions in it's Ideas, they may not Equally Proceed from it; Unleſs the Will is a Standard for our Minds, and thoſe Perceptions only, which are Derived from it, ſhall be Received as the Genuine Product of them, which is as Abſurd, as Arbitrary, to Suppoſe. FOURTH, as to the Inſtance Alledged of Subſtances, having a more Objective Reality in them, than Modes or Accidents, it muſt be Inquired, what is Meant by thoſe Subſtances and Accidents; If by that is Intended the Subſtances and Accidents of Matter, which is External to us, it is a Confeſſion, that there is Something Exrernal to us, in the Argument, which is brought to Prove, that we are Certain of Nothing. but what we Perceive in our own Ideas; If, by Subſtances and Accidents, is Mcant thoſe of our Thoughts; What is the Subſtance of Thought, or the Accidents of it, unleſs what we have before Mentioned, that is, Thought in General, or the Abſtracted Notion oſ it, and the Particular Diſtinctions of that Abſtracted Thought into our Real Perceptions? and if ſo, ve have no Reaſon to Think, there is more of an Objectve Reality in the Subſtance of Thought, than in the Accidents of it, but the Contary, by what Foregoes; becauſe the Subſtance of Thought is an Abſtraction ſin ind Mind at Pleaſure, and therefore has no Objective Reality in it, whereas the Accidents of it are Real and Actual Perceptions. ] FirTH, What is Meant by a Greater or Leſs Objective Reality is Unintelligible; for that is Said to be an Objective Reality, where there is a Repreſentation made in the Mind of an Object, which is Really Exiſting, either in our Minds, or out of it, and which is the Cauſe of Impreſſing that Repreſentation; But, if there is any Idea in our Minds, it has a Real Cauſe of it's Exiſtence by Impreſſing it upon us, or not; If it has not, it is a Compoſition of the Will, and a Chimæra, and has no Objective Reality in the Mind; If it has, that Cauſe cannot be more or Leſs Real, and therefore not the Objective Reality of it in the Mind. SixTH, This very Doctrine of Things, being Objectively in the Mird from a Real Cauſe, Procceds upon a Suppoſition, that all Ideas, which are Involuntary, are Impreſſed upon it, as the Idea of God, and of External Beings, Notwithſtanding this Philoſophy had before Aſfirmed, that it was not Certain, but Involuntary Ideas might Riſe up in the Mind by an Innate Faculty of it's own, without any External Cauſe to Produce them; for, if the Involuntary ldeas of God, and of External Beings, are not Suppoſed to be Impreſſed upon the Mind, they may Start up in it by a Peculiar Power, which belongs to it, and therefore are not Objectively in the Mind, by any Real Cauſe, which Produces them, External to it. SEVENTH, An Objective Reality in the Mind cannot be Proved, but by Suppoſing, that Something Exiſts External to us, as the Cauſe of that Objectiveneſs in the Mind, which is an Expreſſion of that, which is External to it; For otherwiſe, what is an Objective Reality more than any Common Appearance in the Mind? If therefore we Argne for the Reality of External Beings from an Objective Reality of thoſe Beings in the Mind, ve Argue for the Exiſtence of External Beings from a Suppoſition and Preſumption of their Exiſtence; I? we Conſider an Objective Reality in the Mind, only as Diſtinct Perceptions in it, and as they are Differenced from Thought in General, it is Confeſſed by this Philoſophy, that any Repreſentations, vhich are made in the Mind, have no Connexion with the Objects, they are Imagined to Repreſent, and therefore are no ways Concluſive of them. EIGHTH, As to the Idea of an Infinite Being, having more of an Objective Reality in it, than that of a Finite, ſuch a Notion is already Confuted, or if it were not, as there is no Reaſon Aſſigned, why it ſiould have, there would not be a Neceſſity of Alledging One, why it ſould not; However we ſhall Proceed even ſo far, and Shew, that there is no more Objective Reality in an Infinite Being, than in a Finite; Becauſe it is Evident, the Idea of God is not Proved to be an Innate Character Engraven upon the Mind, and therefore is not Derived to us from One Uniform Signature or Impreſſion upon it, and yet the Ideas of Finite and External Objects are Manifeſily ſo; From whence it will Follow, that there is more Objective Reality in Finite Subſtances, than in an Infinite One, ſince there is an Objective Reality in the One, and not in the Other, Contrary to this Philoſophy. NiNtH, We ſhall Moreover take Notice, that in this Doctrine of an Objective Reality, the Impreſſions, which are made upon the Mind, are Suppoſed to Differ in nothing from the Things, which are Impreſſed, Excepting, that the One are in an Objective Repreſentation to it, whereas the Other are in Form and Exiſtence; Thus my Idea oſ a Stone has all that Objectively in the Mind, which is Eminently or Formally, or, which is the Same, which is Truely and Really Contained in the Stone; Namely, naking an Allovance for the Different Natures of our Minds, and of External Obiccts, there is all that in the Mind Agreeable to it's own Nature, vhich is in External Objects Agrecable to theirs. IN Anſwer to which, ve ſnall 1ſ. Say, that this Philoſophy Endeavours to Shev, rhere is no Kind of Connexion betwixt our Perception of Heat, Colour, Sound c. and the Cauſes of them, no more, than betwixt the Point of a Needle, and the Pain it Produces; in all which Caſes, it Suppoſcs, that the Objection, or Repreſentation, in the Mind is no ways Anſwerable, or Analogous, to the Cauſe, which Impreſſe: it, as the Point of the Necdle is not to the Pain, which it Produces, and yet, according to the Preſent Doctrine of an Objective Reality, the Point in the Needle, ſhould not Cauſe a Pain, but ould Object, or Repreſent, a Point to the Mind, as a Stont is only Suppoſed to Impreſs it's Signature, or Character, upon it. C ę c Cc c⸗ ad. Tt 2d. To Suppoſe or Imagine, that an External Being ſould Transfuſe it's ſelf, as it were; into the Mind, ſo far as it is Capable by it's Nature of Receiving it, is at the Beſt a very Diſficult Hypotheſis to Apprehend; Eſpecially, before we are Acquainted cither with the Nature of External Beings, or That of our own Minds, and the Propriety of thoſe Actions, which belong to each, which this Philoſophy is ſo Wiſe, as to Conceal, or ſo Weak, as not to Underſtand. 3d. Ir is farther the moſt Unaccountable Thing, that is Poſſible, to Introduce Examples and Reaſonings from External Beings, in an Argument, which is brought to Prove, there are ſuch Beings, and before which Proof it is Suppoſed to be Uncertain, whether there are any, or not. 5. 16. HAVING thus far Conſidered the Import and Real Senſe of this Doctrine, as it is Propoſed in the Beginning of the Foregoing Section, it will be Unneceſſary to Purſue the Reaſoning from it in the Remaining Part of Divis. 6. Art. 5. 5. 2. and ſince, upon the Arguments Alledged in that Diviſion, the 71h. 8th. and orh. Diviſions, the Lat of which Particularly Concerns the Proof of a God, do Entirely Depend, that is, upon an Objective Reality, it will be likewiſe Superfluous to Conſider the ſeveral Turns, if I may ſo Call it, and Doubles, made in them; HoWever, becauſe at the Latter End of the 9rh. Diviſion, there is a New Argument Propoſed from DesCartess Fifth Meditation, we ſhall now Inquire into that. S. 17. THE Argument is, that there are ſeveral Ideas in our Minds of Things, which do not Exiſt without us, and yet thoſe Ideas are not wholly Chimerical, but have Something of Reality in them Independent of the Mind; Thus the Triangle and it's Properties are Something Real, Notvithſtanding no ſuch Figure ſould Exiſt in Nature, and ſor the ſame Reaſon, the Idea of God is not an Arbitrary Compoſition of the Mind, becauſe it is Said, we Certainly have ſuch an Idea, One of the Properties of which is, that he muſt Neceſſarily Exiſt. IN Anſwer to this, ve muſt Firſt Say, that the Idea of a Triangle, and the Proies of it, is a Creature of the Mind, according to §. Is. I6. 17. 18. Chap. 2. ect a Triangle may have other Properties than thoſe, which are Aſſigned to it, ſince the Three Angles of a Triangle may be Equal to 4, or s, or a 100, Right Angles, as well as to 2, if the Suppoſitions of an Abſtracted Extenſion are Different. SECOND, Allowing this, Namely, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, and that it is a Property which is Invariable, and belongs to it, it is not from thence Neceſſary, that it ſould not be an Abſtraction of the Mind, and Conſcquently a Creature of it in that Reſpect; for, if there is no Triangle in the World, it only Exiſis in the Mind, as an Idea of it's Own, and the Truths, which Reſult from it, are only ſuch, which are the Conſequences of it's being ſuch an Idea, and no Other, for Inſtance, That of a Square or a Circle; for, whilſt it is Conceived to be a Figure, which is Terminated by Three Lines, all the Properties of it are Included cither Apparently, or by Conſequence, in it; Thereſore ſuch Immutable Relations are no more than to Aſfirm, that our Idea of a Triangle is that Individual Idea, and is neither the Idea of a Square, nor oſ a Circle, for That will be Equally a Property of it vith the Reſt; and ſuch Immutable Truths are likewiſe to be found in our Ideas of a Chimera and a Centaur; ſince, after the Mind has Fixed each of thoſe Ideas, it will be as Certain and as True, that the One is not the Other, as that a Triangle is not a Square, and there may be ſeveral Properties Affirmed and Proved of Both of them, Diſtinct from each Other. TuirD, The Application of this Doctrine to the Proving the Being of a God is ſtill more Exceptionable; For it does not Follow, becauſe the Idea, or Conception, of a Triangle is it's ſelf, which is all, as we have Proved, which can be Meant by the Im mutable Truths, it Comprehends, and becauſe the Idea of God is it's ſelf, that there fore God Exiſts; which yet is all, which can be Concluded from this Analogy, or Compariſon, betwixt the Idea, which we have, of the One or the Other. FOURTH, Altho' the Exiſtence of a God ſhould be Included in the Idea of him as Thrce Angles are in our Idea of a Triangle, yet ſince in the Iaſt Caſc, ſuch: Property is only Immutable and Certain, as it Reſpects that Idea, without Suppoſing any Real Exiſtence of a Triangle in Nature, ſo, tho' Exiſtence ſould be Contained ir the Idea of God, as it Lies Explicitely in our Minds, it would be only a Property ol that Idea, and could not, by being ſo, Infer the Neceſſary Exiſtence of that Being of vhich it is an Idea. Fi?TH FirrH, The Original Suppoſition, that there is ſuch a Character, or Idca, Impreſſed upon the Mind, that it is an Innate Signature, Engraven, as it were, upon it, is, and Perhaps may be Juſtly, Diſputed; and yet all this Reaſoning Depends upon that Suppoſition, and thèe Principal Endeavour in this Philoſophy is to Explain, which Way we come by ſuch an Idea. LastLy, If this likewiſe was Granted, that the Idea of an Infinite Being Lay, as an Expreſs Character, or Signature, in the Mind, the Way to Prove it Imprinted upon us from an External Exiſtence, could not be by Comparing it with Ideas, which are in the Mind, as that of a Triangle, the Origine of which Ideas are Acknowledged not to be Derived from any External Exiſtence, but may be there, if there was no ſuch Thing, as a Triangle in the World; ſince, in ſuch a Caſe, the only Method, which could be Rationally Taken, muſt be by Conſidering the Nature of the Mind, which Receives the Impreſſion, and That of the External Agent, which is Suppoſed to Imreſs it. p 5. 18. HAVING gone thro' the ſeveral Parts of this Demonſtration of a God from the Connexion of Ideas, and Shewn, how Defective it is in every Branch of it, it might be Unneceſſary to Proceed any Farther in the Confutation of thoſc other PhiIoſophers, vho have Succeeded Des-Cartes in the Same Doctrine, but have Diſallowed his Demonſtration of a God by it; ſince, if theirt Great Maſter and Leader, and who has been Thought to Poſſeſ''c a Genius Superior to That of any, who Followed him, is ſo Evidently and Apparently Miſtaken, it is not to be Imagined, that they ſhould be more Fortunate in their Connexion of Ideas, than One, who Taught them the Connexion irs ſelf; However, we ſhall, in the Following Chapter, Examine into the De monſiration given us by the next Great Patron of the Connexion of Ideas, Mr. Locte, and Evince, how Imperfect it is, in Order to Produce a Juſt Conviction in the Mind oſ a Truth ſo Valuable to us. C H AP. V. Concerning Mr. Locke's Demonſiration of the Being of a God. 5. 1.7N This Demonſtration of the Being of a God it is Aſſirmed, that there are no Innate Characters Imprinted upon the Mind of him, but, that his Being may yet be Collected, by a Due Attention and Application of our Faculties, and from ſome Part, or other, of our Intuitive Knowledge, ſo that we may be as Certain of it, as of any Thing in the Mathematicks; if not, it is Said, we ſhall be as Uncertain and Ignorant of this, as of other Propoſitions, which are in themſelves Capable of Clear Demonſtration. ARrT. I. Firſt the Way therefore to Shew, there is a God, is, by Affirming, that it is Certain we Exiſt, which is Proved by Sajing, that it is beyond all Queſtion, that One vould Argue no more with a Man, who Denies it, than One vould with Nothing, or, than One would Endeavour to Convince Non-Entity vas Something; For the Pains, or the Pleaſures, ve Feel, are a Sufficient Conviction of it. ART. 2. Second, as ve Know by the Foregoing Argument, it is Said, that we our Selves Exiſt, ſo it is as Maniſeſt by our Intuitive Certainty, that Bare Nothing can no more Produce any Real Being, than it can be Equal to Two Right Angles; for, if a Man Knows not, that Non-Entity, or the Abſence of all Being, cannot be Equal 1o Two Right Angles, iĩt is Impoſſible he ſiould Know any Demonſtration in Euclid; Iſ therefore ve Know there is ſome Real Being, and that Non Entity cannot Produce any Real Being, it is an Evident Demonſtration, that from Eternity there has been Something; ſince, vhat was not from Eternity had a Beginning, and what had a Beginning muſt be Produced by Something elſe. ART. 3. Third, it is Evident, that, what had it's Being and Beginning from Another, muſi alſo have all that, which is in, and belongs to it's Being, from Another too; all the Poers, it has, muſt be OWing to, and Received from, the Same Source; this Eternal Source then of all Being muſt alſo be the Source and Original of all Power, and Io this Eternal Being muſt be alſo the moſt Powerſull. ART. 4 ArT. 4. Fourth, we find in our Selves Perception and Knovledge, frõm Whence we are Certain, that this Being is ſome Knowing and Intelligent Being, or other, in the World. WEe muſt alſo Say, that there was a Time, when there was no Knowing Being and vhen Knowledge began to be, or elſe, there has been a Knowing Being from all Eternity; If the Firſt, it is Impoſſible, there ever ſould have been any Knowledge it being as Impoſſible, that Things wholly Void of Knowledge, and without any Perception, ſould Produce a Knoving Being, as it is Impoſſible, that a Triangle ſhould make it's Three Angles Bigger than Two Right Ones; For it is as Repugnant to the Idea of Senſeleſs Matter, that it ſould Put into it's ſel? Senſe, Perception, and Knoledge, as it is Repugnant to the Idea of a Triangle, that it ſould Put into it's ſelf Greater Angles than Two Right Ones. ART. 5. And from hence it is Concluded, that there is an Eternal, moſt Poverful, and moſt Knowing Being, Which, whether any One vill Pleaſe to Call God, it Matters not, ſince the Thing is Evident; and from this Idea will Eaſily be Deduced all thoſe other Attributes we ought to Aſcribe to this Eternal Being. Ir, Nevertheleſs, any One ſhould be found ſo Senſcleſly Arrogant, as to Suppoſe, Man alone Knoving and Wiſe, but yet the Product of Mere Ignorance and Chance, and the Reſt of the Univerſe Acted only by that Blind Hap- Hazard, this Philoſopher vill Leave with him that very Rational and Emphatical Rebuke of Tully, Lib. æ. de Legibus, to be Conſidered at his Leiſure. uid eſt enim verius, quAm neminem eſſe oportere tam ſtultè arrogantem, ut in ſe mentem & rationem putet ineſſe, in calo mundoque non putet ? Aut ea, quæ vix ſummà Ingenii ratione comprehendat, nulli ratione moveri tet ? iit 2. THis is the Famous Demonſtration of the Being of a God, which is Thought by the Rationaliſis, or Free- Thinkers, of the Age, Sufficient, not only to Convince us of the Truth of his Exiſtence, but likewiſe to make us ſet Aſide all the Evidences of a Revelation of him, from the Wonderful and Admirable Conviction it Contains. Ir vill be therefore Neceſſary to Inquire into the ſeveral Parts of it; and Firſt it is Told us, that, tho' the Idea of a God is not an Innate Character, Imprinted upon our Minds, yet his Being may be Collected by a Due Application and Attention to the Arguments for it; Which is a Confeſſion from this Philoſopher of Ideas, that his Maſter DesCartes was in the Wrong in his Connexions, vho Affirmed ſuch an Innate Character; we ſnall therefore now farther Inquire, whether this Perſons are more Juſt and Concluſive. l Ir is Affirmed therefore in the Firſt Place, that we Exiſt, that is, that we are Thinking, Perceptive Beings;tis True, but to Affirm, is not to Prove; Suppoſing we Dream, that we Perceive and Think, and nothing more, and Conſequently, Suppoſing we only Dream, that we Exiſt, what is there Offered to Convince us of the Contrary? not onc Word, Excepting, that this Grave Philoſopher will not Talk with you, that he Deſpiſes you, as much as he does Non-Entity, &e. we have, in our Principles of Natural Philoſophy, Anſwered all Objections, which can be Alledged againſt our Exiſtence, and Endeavoured to Conſider every Part of the Argument, which, ſince this Perſon had not done, he was in the Right to Contemn thoſe, who ſhould Queſtion him about it. GRrANTING however, that we Exiſt, to this Demonſtration, for it is not Evinced, but Preſumed; the next Step is, that Something cannot be Produced from Nothing, that is, that our own Perceptive, Thinking, Exiſtence cannot; and therefore, it is Said, there muſt be Something from all Eternity, becauſe, what was not from Eternity, had a Beginning, which muſt be Produced by Something elſe. BuT, how Weak and Infirm this Connexion of Ideas is, may be Eaſily Shewn; for it is Firſt Said we Exiſt, that is our Perceptions do; It is, in the Second Place, Affirmed, that Something cannot be Produced from Nothing; But what is that Something, unleſs, that which we are Convinced of, as to the Truth and Reality of it's Exiſtence, which is, that we Think and Perceive, and therefore Perception cannot be Produced from Nothing? It is, Thirdly, Affirmed, that Something muſt Exiſt from all Eternity, becauſe, vhat was not from Eternity, had a Beginning, which muſt be Produced by Something elſe; Whereas again, ve being Certain of Nothing, but that our Minds Exiſt, this Aſœrtion can Signify no more, than that, ſince our Minds Exiſt, and are Produced Produced from Something elſe, therefore That, which Produces it, is Eternal, which i the very Thing to be Proved. So that, Excluding the General, and Inſigniſicant, Words of Something, Nothing What, That Which is, &æ. the Preſent Demonſtration of the Being of a God vill Amount to this; We are Certain, we Perceive; That Perception cannot be Produced from it's ſelf, therefore it is Produced from Something elſe; Which, What it is, we are IInoram of, and therefore is Eternal. If any One can find a Connexion of Ideas here, he may, if he Pleaſes, be as Enthuſiaſtick in Philoſophy, as Others are Said to be in Re ligion; for it is Nothing elſe than a Reſolution and Impetus of the Mind, which Carries Men to Take up with ſuch Convictions, and not the True Reaſon, which they find in them. LET us yet Conſider each Particular of this Demonſtration; the Perceptions of our Minds Exiſt; it is Owned; but, Notwithſtanding which, how is it Certain, that the Perceptions of our Minds are not Original in them? If they are, the whole Argument Falls of their being Produced by Something elſe; If they are not, it is Firſt to be Proved, that our Ideas of thoſe Things, which are Accounted External to us, cannot be Produced in the Mind by it's own Faculties, which Des-Cartes Thought they might; for, if our Involuntary Ideas may Proceed from our Selves, there is no Reaſon to Think, our Voluntary Ones may not, as thoſe of Willing, Judging, &. and therefore our Minds, and the Perceptions of them, Which are our Minds, may not be Oving to any Thing, External to them. Ir this Difficulty was Surmounted, it is to be Proved in the Second Place, that, if our Ideas are Produced from Something elſe, That Something is God; this Philoſophy vill not, I Believe, Affirm, that our ldeas ſfrom Senſation are Produced by God, becauſe it Endeavours to Shew, that any Material Being cannot be God; and it only Ons another Sort of Ideas, which are thoſe, vhich we Perceive in our Selves, by Reſlecting upon our own Minds; But thoſe Ideas, vhich we Perceive by Reflecting upon our own Minds, that is, the Faculties and Powers of them, as Willing, Judging, Remembering, &. ſeem to have as little Apparent Pretenſe to be Derived ſrom God, according to the Preſent Philoſophy, as our Ideas of Senſation; ſince it is as Unaccountable, or as much Unknown, in the Preſent Doctrine of Nature, how we Will, or Judge, or Remember, or Doubt, or Fear, as how we Perceive, or have the Senſations of External Objects; that is, our Senſations from External Objects are Matter of Fact, and ſo are our Refſlections upon the Operations of our Minds, but as the Preſent Philoſophy cannot Shew, which Way thoſe Senſations are Produced, or what the Nature of Matter is, or how it Operates upon us, ſo it is Equally Defective in Demonſtrating to us, vhat the Faculties and Powers of the Mind are, and from whence, or from what they Proceed, and whether they may not Ariſe from a Syſteme of Matter Fitly Diſpoſed. Tu®D, Either our Actual Perceptions, whether of Senſation or Reflection, Proceed ſfrom God, or the Powers oſ our Minds, by which we have thoſe Perceptions; the Firſt will not be Aſfirmed by thoſe, who Deny, that we See all Things in God; If yet the Power of Perceiving, &c. was Immediately Derived from God, our Actually Perceiving any Thing, which is a Neceſſary Reſult and Conſequence of that Power, would be ſo too, Contrary to what this Philoſophy Maintains, it being very Cautious of Admitting, what may Appear like Enthuſiaſm, which Indeed is no more than to Say, that it will have as little to do with an Almighty Being, as is Poſſible, and ſo ſar only, as is Juſt Neceſſary to it's Deſigns. FourTH, If the Powers and Faculties of our Minds are Derived from God, there was a Time, when each of them Exerted the Firſt Act of thoſe ſeveral Powers; thus, if the Power of Willing was Originally from God, when we firſt Willed, it was from his Inſluence, or, vhen we Firſt Perceived or Judged, &e. if ſo, there can be no Reaſon Aſſigned, vhy any Subſequent Acts of thoſc Powers ſiould not Proceed from the Same Impulſe, which is a Degree of Religion, to which this Philoſophy, I Fear, vill not be Willing to Riſe. Fi71H, HOW is it Proved, that our Souls are not Pre-Exiſtent to their Being in our Bodies? for, if they are, what Point of Time can be Affixed to them, When they began to Exiſt, which may not be Carried Higher, and Conſequently, why may they not be Eternal? If this Philoſophy Alledges, that all our Ideas are ſrom Senſation, and ind from our Reſlection upon thoſe Senſations, and therefore, that our Souls are not Pre-Exiſtent to our Bodies, it will yet IPreſume Acknovledge, that thoſe Povers of them, which are Said to be Derived from God, are Pre-Exiſtent to their Senſations ind Reſiections; and if ſo, it will be Hard to Demonſtrate, when they began to Exiſt; For, if they Exiſted before our Senſations and Reflections, they might Exiſt before our Minds were United to our Bodies, and ſince no Time can be Determined, when they began to Exiſt, they might, for all that is Proved at Preſent, Exiſt from Eternity; If they did not Exiſt before our Senſations, and our Reſſections upon thoſe Senſations, how will it be Evinced, that they did not Ariſe from ſome Unknown Affections of Matter, as Heat, and Ebullition, from the Mixture of an Acid and an Alkali, which ſeems Indecd to be the Senſc of this Philoſophy, when it Affirms, that a Syſteme of Matter Fitly Diſpoſed may, it is Poſſible, be Endued with a Power of Thinking. Tuis we Argue only againſt the Preſent Demonſtration, tho we have in our Eſay upon the Mind, or our Pſycheometria, Shewn, that it is Diſtinct from Matter, that it's Faculties are Independent of it, and that both the Powers of the Mind, and of Matter, do Equally Proceed from God. TuHE Third Thing, which is Said to be Evident in this Demonſtration is, that Wnhat had it's Being and Beginning from Another, muſt alſo have all that, which is in and belongs to it's Being from Another too; all the Powers it has, muſt be Owing to, and Received from, the Same Source and Original of all Power; and ſo this Etcrnal Being muſt be alſo the moſt Powverful. IN Anſwer to which, it would be Sufficient to Say, that if any Thing is Unintelligible, this Way of Writing is ſo; For all that can be Meant by what had ir's Being, and all that which is in, and belongs to it's Being, &c. is only this, That, if the Mind, ith it's ſeveral Faculties and Perceptions, was Produced from Something elſe, it muſt Derive all the Faculties and Perceptions, which belong to it, from that, which Produces it, and becauſe all it's Powers are Received from ſome Source and Original Diſtinct from it, therefore ſuch a Being, from Whence our Minds Flow, muſt be All-Poverful. BuT Firſt, it is not Evident, that all That ould be in the Cauſe, Which is in the Effect; For, tho' Heat Diſſolves Wax, and Hardens Clay, Heat is, Notwithſtanding, neither Hard nor Liquid; To come nearer ſtill to the Preſent Caſe, Heat Cauſes the Senſations in us of Pleaſure and Pain, and yet Heat has nothing of that in it, which it Cauſes; that is, Effects are Produced in Nature, Suitable to the Proportions of Action, which Lie betwixt One Being and Another, and the Kinds of them; and therefore, how is this Certain, that, becauſe the Mind is Produced, That, which Produces it, muſt be Mind to? SECOND, It is leſs Clear, that, if the Mind, and the Powers of it, were Derived from ſome other Intelligent Being, that, therefore, ſuch a Being muſt be All-Powerful; For, tho it ſould be Granted, that there is all That in the Cauſe, which is in the Effect, it would not from thence Follow, that there was more in the Cauſe, than in the Effect, or that the Intelligent Being, which Produced our Minds, was any Thing more than they, Excepting that he was Prior in his Exiſtence; Beſides which, there is no Connexion betwixt the Infinite Power of Almighty God, and the Powers or Faculties oſ an Intelligent Being; Firſt, becauſe it is not Proved from our Finite Faculties, being Produced by ſome Intelligence, that ſuch an Intelligence is Endued vith Powers of the Mind, Infinitely Superior to thoſe of our OWn; Second, becauſe, if thoſe Powers were Infinite in ſuch a Being, which were Finite in us, it would not be a Conviction, that he was All-Powerful; ſince, to have the Faculties of Perceiving, Willing, Remembering, Judging, &. in an Infinite Degree, ſ(Which is Said to be Unintelligible, Namely, what ĩt is to Perceive or Will Infinitely), would not be the Same, as to be Almighty, that is, to Create the World, and all Things in it, and to Rule and Govern the Whole by an Abſolute and Uncontroulable Empire over it For, in this Demonſtration, we are not Certain of any Thing, but our own Exiſtence and therefore not of any World, or any Thing External to us; In Fine, this Wonder ful Prooſ of the Almighty Power of God, from the Powers of our own Minds, is, in the laſt Reſult, nothing elſe, Excepting a Chime, or Jingle, upon the Word, Povers, which if we Alter into That of the Faculties, or Properties, of an Intelligent Being, the Entire Forci Force of the Argument is Loſt, and it will Appear, as Weak and Inconcluſive, as it Really is. l Woar Follows in the 49h. and 51h. Articles of this Demonſtration is of the Same Kind of Reaſoning with what Foregoes, and which has been Particularly Conſidered, and thereſore it will be Unneceſſary to Enter into any Farther Examination of it. S. 3. THE Foregoing Demonſtration is not ſo Perfectly Convincing, but that this Philoſophy Thought it Neceſſary to Subjoin Another;3 Which is thus Summed up in Short; If we Suppoſe Nothing Firſt or Eternal, Matter can never Begin to be; If we Suppoſe bare Matter without Motion Eternal, Motion can never Begin to be; If we Suppoſe only Matter and Motion Firſt or Eternal, Thought can never Begin to be; Thereſore there is, and muſt have been, a Thinking and Intelligent Being from all Eternity. 5. 4. Urox which it will be Requiſite to Obſerve; Firſt, that, thò this Philoſophy Calls it going over the Former Demonſtration again, yet it is a Different One; ſo Eaſily is it able to Miſtake i's own Notions with all it's Infallible Pretenſes; For, whereas the other Demonſtration was from our own Exiſtence, this is from the Exiſtence of Things without us, as well as our Own. SECOND, It is Impoſſible, even according to this Philoſophy, that we ſhould be Certain of this Demonſtration, becauſe it's only Standard of Certainty is from the Agreement or Diſagreement of our Ideas, that is, from the Connexion of them; but, whenever we make one Step from our Selves, and from that, which we Perceive in our own Minds, Abſtractedly from every Thing elſe, the Connexion of Ideas is Loſt and Vaniſhes; Becauſe there is no Connexion, Properly Speaking, berwixt the Idea of Matter, and Matter as it Really Exiſts, betwixt the ldea of Motion, and Motion it's ſclf; and the Same may be Said of the Ideas of our Minds in General, and of the External Objects they Repreſent: But this, as we have before Mentioned, is the Weakneſs of the Preſent Philoſophy, that, whilſt it Tranſcribed ſfrom the Carteſian it's Opinion of Certainty, from the Connexion of Ideas, it Departed from it, in Proving Things to be External to us without ſuch a Connexion, whereas, 16 Adopt the One into it's Syſteme, and not the Other, is Inconſiſtert, and a Contradiction; For to Say all Certainty Depends upon the Connexion of Ideas, and to Say at the Same Time, that there is a Certainty, which does not, is no Leſs. 5. 5. THUS far we have Conſidered this Demonſtration in the Groſs, and ſhall nov Enter into the Particulars of it; Firſt, it is Said, if we Suppoſe Nothing Eternal, Matter could never Begin to be; Which is very Evident, becauſe Something muſt have always Exiſted, and Nothing is only a Relative Term, which Suppoſes Something, according to what has been Shewn in the Principles of Philoſophy, Chap. 4. S. 2. Part. 1. But then it muſt likewiſe be Said, that this Philoſophy does not Prove it, becauſe, if we Inquire what Nothing is, it is Silent, i? what Matter is, it can as little Inform us; but to Argue upon Principles, which are Unknown, is, at the Beſt an Ignorant Kind of Demonſtration.. 5. 6. THE next Thing in it is, that, i? we Suppoſe Bare Matter, without Motion, Eternal, Motion could never Begin to be; But this Argument Depends upon a Suppoſition, which has been Confuted in the Principles of Philoſophy, of Matter's belng Similar and HOmogeneous, that is, a Paſſive, Extended, Solid, Diviſible, Subſtance; which, if True, it would be Impoſſible for Actual Motlon to Enter into that Definition of Matter, which in Terms Excludes it; if yet, on the Contrary, ſuch an Hypotheſis of Matter is neither Agreeable to the Nature of it, nor to any Appearances, vhich are Obſervable in it, if, Farther, Matter is Endued with a Certain Force and Action, it will not be Maniſeſt, that Motion, ſome way or other, may not be Produced ſrom it, as it in Fact is from that one Principle only of Gravitation, with which it is Inveſted. The Third Step in this Demonſtration is, that, i? we Suppoſc Matter and Motion Eternal, Thought could never Begin to be; Whereas this likewiſt is Uncertain; becauſe this Philoſophy does not Underſtand, what the Nature of Mar ter is, and therefore cannot Preciſely Aſſure us, vhether Thought, as well as Motion, may not belong to it; we have already Shewn, that the Firſt cannot; and vhat wve Say now is only this, that the Preſent Philoſophy does not Prove ir, whilſt it makes an Arbitrary Abſtraction of Matter, and Throws out of it's Eſſence D d d d d ſevera everal Properties, which, it is not Certain, may not Appertain to it, by making Exenſion, Solidity, &. the Definition of it; None of which Properties do Really Enter nto it's Nature, ſince they are only Abſtracted Ideas, according to what has been Erinced in the Principles of Philoſophy, Chap. 6. and 7. Part. I. Tui Lat Advance made in this Demonſtration is, that, from what Foregoes, rhere muſt be a Thinking, Intelligent Being, ſrom all Eternity; Suppoſing it, yet it no ways Follows, that, iT Thought is Eternal, therefore Thought is God; to Wit, that it is Endued with all the Perſections and Attributes of an Almighty, Omniſcient, and which is more, oſ an Inſinitely Good, and Benefient, Being; Since Thought, ſor all this Philoſophy Knows, might be from Etermity, and yet be no more than Mere Thought, without cither any Great Pover, or Wiſdom, or Goodneſs, or Inſinity, belonging to it. 5. 7. To Conclude this Chapter, alth' we have Diſputed the Being of a God vith this Connexion of Ideas, that is, with a Philoſophy, which Fails in every Part of the Connexion, vhich it Suppoſes Neceſſary to Certainty, yet we have, and ſhall Farther Evidently Prove, there is ſuch a Being from the Infinite Variety and Wiſe Adjuſtment of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. Next to which, we Say, that the beſt Demonſtrations of One are from Matter of Fact; Namely, From the Obſeivation of the Wiſe Occonomy and Order in the Animal and Marerial World; From the Various Providences, which are Maniſeſt in Reſpect of Particular Perſons, as well as Wnhole Nations and Communities; and From the Chriſtian Religion it's ſelf. Tut Firſt is to be had from a bare View of all thoſe Beings in the Univerſe, which Surround us;3 which, when we Look upon only, we are, without any Laboured Deductions of Reaſon, as fully Carried into an Immediate Acknoledgement of a Supreme Author, as when we Look upon an Exquiſite Picture, or a Landskip, we are Satisfied, it vas Drawn by ſome Skillfull Hand; and yet, if we were to ſet our Selves to the Proving oſ the Latter by the Method of Conncecting Ideas, it would be Impoſſible. TuE Second is to be Deduced from Hiſtory, and the ſeveral Occurrences Obſervable in the World; Which are not only Incapable of being Solved from Natural Principles, but do Neceſſarily Infer an Almighty and Superintending Agent; Such are the Strange Revolutions of States and Empires, and the SurpriZing Accidents, which Arrive to Particular Perſons and Societies, Perfectly Unforeſcen, and, upon Reſlection, as Unaccountable. TuE Third, which is the Greateſt and moſt Convincing of them all, is That, which is Derived from our Religion, and the Certainty and Truth of it; For it is a Great Miſtake to Think, that the Being of a God is Previouſly Neceſſary to the Demonſtration of Chriſtianity. SiNCE, if the Chriſtian Religion is True, that is, if our Saviour came from God, and was the Son of God, and Wronght thoſe Miracles, which are Recounted of him, by the Power of God, and vas God himſel? United to our Human Nature, it is very Evident, that there is a God, without any other Proof of it; Beſides which, can we Think, or Imagine, that the Firſt Chriſtians Wanted to have a God Proved ro them, beſore they Believed their Religion, or was it ever Attempted? If they did, why are not all the Chriſtian Writers full of ſuch Demonſtrations, vhy do they alvays take it for Certain and Concluded? If they did not Want a Proof of ſuch a Being, it is as Evident, that their Religion Inferred it, that the very Facts of it Teſtified and Aſſured it to them, and to bring a Rational Demonſiration of it, was in Eſſcõt to Queſtion the Truth of thoſe Facts, and that Faith, of which they were Convinced. ON the other Hand, if the Chriſtian Religion is Doubted of, or is not True; in the Firſt Caſe, the Demonſtration of the Being of a God would be of little or no Service to it; For, if it vas Manifeſtly Certain, that there vas an Infinite, Almighty, and All Viſc DBeing, of what Importance vould that be to a Religion, which Owns, that this Peing ĩs not only ſo, but Infinitely Jut and Good, that he Sent his own Son into the World ſor the Redemption of Mankind, and that he Suffered him to Die the Deaih of a Maleſactor for their Sakes? This cannot be Proved from the Reing oſ ⸗ God, bur from the Phin Evidences of Hſſtory and of Fac In IN the Second Caſe, if the Chriſtian Religion is not True, a Demonſtration of àa God vill not be Previouſly Neceſary to Prove it, becauſe it vill not be in the Ieaſt Significant to it; From whence it is Plain, that thoſe, vho Proceed in this Way, take a Method to Evince the Chriſtian Religion in Pretenſe, by Diſcarding it in Reality, which ſince ſeveral Good Men have Unwarily Followed, we ſhall nov Conſider the Riſe and Original of this Procedure;3 vhich ſeems to be Derived from that Great Inventor DesCartes, vho when, tho not in Shew, yet in Truth, had Relinquiſhed his Religion, by making all Certainty to Conſiſt in the Connexion of the Ideas of his own Mind, to which it was Impoſſible that Religion ſould be ever Exacted, was Pleaſed to Propoſe the Demonſtration of a God; This Indeed was Neceſſary to Juſtify a Philoſophy, which had nothing elſe to Recommend it, but a Colour or Appearance at Leaſt of ſuch a Demonſtration; Mr. Locke alſo Following the Steps, ſo far, of this Demonſtrator, as ro Think the Proof of a God to be the Neceſſary Foundation of Morality, as the Other's was of his Philoſophy, and Gretius Premiſing One to his Proof of Chriſtianity, the World began to be Perſuaded, that this was likewiſe Requiſite in Religion, whereas, as we have Shewn, there is nothing Leſs ſo. ALL that ve ſiall Say farther is only, that this Demonſtration of a God is Said to be, by the Preſent Philoſophy, the Foundation of Morality; IF therefore it is not a Juſt One, all the Mighty Rules of Morality, which it Aſfirms, Fall to the Ground, Notvithſtanding which, we ſhall in the Following Chapter Conſider Them likewiſe. 5. 8. BuT before we do This, we ſhall make a Short Inquiry into what has been Propo ed by another Celebrated Philoſopher upon this Subject, and which is Drawn out into ſeveral Propoſitions. Tut Firſt of vhich, Namely, that Something has Exiſted from all Eternity, is Owned and Confeſſcd on all Hands; the Deiſt Affirms it, and the Atheiſt does not Deny it, and every Chriſtian will Readily Subſcribe to the Truth of the Aſſertion; The Grand Queſtion is, What this Erernal Something is, vhether it is a Supreme, Infinite, Intelligent, and Independent Being, Diſiinct from Nature and the Univerſe, which the Chriſilan and the Deiſt Aſſerrt, or whether it is the Univerſe and Nature it's ſelſ, which is the Doctrine of the Atheiſt. TnE Second Propoſition is, that there has Exiſted ſfrom Eternity ſome One Unchangeable and Independent Being; If not, it is Said, there muſt have been an Infinite Succeſſion of Changeable and Dependent Beings Produced One from Another, in an Endleſs Progreſſion, without any Original Cauſe at all, which is Abſurd, and Plainly Impoſſible, and Contradictory to its ſelf. It ſould have been here Subjoined, Or elſe, there has been an Infinite Succeſſion oſ Changeable and Dependent Beings One upon Another, Joined and Cemented together by a Mutual and Neceſſary Dependence of Cauſe and Effect, Ariſing from the Fixed and Unalterable Laws of their Natures, vhich Act one amongſt another by Certain Eſtabliſhied Rules, and according to which, they always did Act, and ever will; That is, there is a Neceſſary Dependence of One Thing upon Another, OWing to the Intrinſick Nature of Things 10 Depending, which Nature of Things is Neceſſary and Eternal, and by which Neceſſity all theſe Dependent Beings upon cach Other are United together into One Syſteme, ſo that any Dependent Being could not Exiſt without That, on which it Depends, and on the Contrary, That on which it Depends could not Exiſt without That, v liich is Dependent on it; They Mutually Infer and Suppoſe each Other, and Thai vhich Connccts them is, the Original Neceſſity of their Natures; Or, which is the Same, there is a Series of Beings Dependent upon each Other, which has à Neceſſity and Cauſe, and thereſore a Reaſon, of it's Exiſtence from the Nature of the Things themſelves, which Conſtitute this Series, and from Which Neceſſity of their Nature hey Obtain that Relation of Dependence upon cach Other, which we Obſerve in iiem; So that, Notwithſtanding this Propoſition, and the Preſent Demonitration oſ it, Atheiſm Stands where it did, and the Queſtion ſtill Returns, and is not yet Solved, whether the Nature of Things is in it's ſel? Eternal, or whether it is Derived ſrom a Supreme and Intelligent Cauſe, Diſtinct ſrom it; The Preſent State of the World and the Univerſe is That of a Mutual Dependence of One Thing upon Another, and the Queſtion only Lies, whether this Mutual Dependence is Owing to the Intrinſick Nature oſ Things themſelves, as they Exiſt in that Dependence u;on each D d d d d æ Other Other, or vherher to the Will and Pleaſure of an Infinite, All- Wiſe, and Super In tending Being; Which cannot be Reſolved by ſuch Metaphyſical Reaſonings. as we are Entertained with upon this Propoſition, but by Inquiring into Nature it's ſelſ, and Shewing, as we have Done, the Neceſſary and Indiſſoluble Connexion betwin the One, and the Other, that is, betwixt an Infinite Action, or an Inſinity of Expan ſive and Contractive Forces, of which Nature Conſiſts, and an Infinite Agent, who is the Author of ſuch Action. For Thus, if we à Priori Suppoſe, that Almighty God is an Infinite, Eternal, and All- Wiſc Agent, which is but a Juſt and Reaſonable Suppoſition, it will be Conſequent, that he Exerted himſelr into Action from all Eternity in the Way, which was the moſt Suitable to his Wiſdom and Power, and therefore, that he Created and Produced an Infinite Action ſrom all Eternity, and that the World, or the Univerſe, was always Full oſ ſuch an Infinite Action, which by the ſame Infinite Pover, and by his Uncontroulable Will, he can Alter, Diverſify, and Change, as he Pleaſes, but that there will ſtill be, by the Neceſſity of his Agency, ſome Action or other Diſperſed and Diffuſed throo the whole Expanſe of Space, and the Unlimited and Boundleſs Extent of Being. On the Contrary, it has been Shewn, that there is no Vacuum in Nature, but that all Things Conſiſt of a Plenitude of Action, and that it is Diverſified and Changed into an Inſinite Variety oſf Expanſive and Contractive Forces, into which Ather, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, and the ſeveral Planets, Sun, and Stars, are Separated and Divided; and by Conſequence, or à Poſeriori, there muſt be an Infinite, Eternal, and All- Wiſe Agent; And the Particulai Diſpoſition of Things, or of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, or of this Infinity of Action, muſt be the Reſult of his Will and Pleaſure, tho' the Infinite Action or Plenitude of Being is Neceſſary from his Infinite Agency. AND by Conſidering Things in this Way, there is a Plain Connexion betwixt the Author of Nature, and that Nature, which is Produced and Derived from him; and they Mutually Infer each Other; We Conclude, what the Effect muſt be from the Cauſe, and what the Cauſe muſt be from the Eſfect, and that there muſt be an Infinite Action from an Inſinite Agent, and, Reciprocally, an Infinite Agent from an Infinite Action; Which has not been done by any Philoſophy; and the Reaſon of it is, becauſe no One has hitherto been Able to Reduce all Marter, and the Properties of it, to Action, which has been always Eſteemed to be a Mere Paſſive Subſtance, whereas we have Evinced, that it Confiſts Entirely in Action, which is the Eſſence of it, and that all it's Qualities and Affections are OWing to Diſferent Degrees of it's Expanſive and Contractive Forces. THE Third Propoſition is, that That Unchangeable and Independent Being, which has Exiſted from Eternity, without any External Cauſe of it's Exiſtence, muſt be SelrExiſtent, that is, Neceſſarily Exiſting. Bur it may be Said by thoſe, who Defend a Self-Exiſtent Nature againſt a Supreme Being as the Author of it, that this Propoſition might be True, if there was no Neceſſity in the Nature of Things themſelves, from whence a Mutual Dependence of Beings amongſt one another Ariſes, and from which Neceſſity of Nature, which is SelſExiſtent, an Endleſs Progreſſion of Cauſe and Efect is Derived; But, if there is ſuch a Neceſſity in Nature, All, they will Say, which can be Granted is, that That Neceſſary Connexion, which there is berwixt Cauſe and Effect in a Mutual Dependence upon each Other, Ariſing from the Nature of Things themſelves, is Self-Exiſtent, or is Neceſarily Exiſting; That therefore One Neceſſary, Unchangeable, and Independent Being is not Proved, nor it's SelfExiſtence; They vill Own, That Unchangeable and Independent Exiſtence is Self Exiſtence, or a Neceſſary Exiſtence, but that this belongs to one Certain Being in Diſtinction to Nature, and the Mutual and Neceſſary Dependence of Things upon each Other, is vhat they Want to See Demonſirated, and upon vhich the whole Controverſy Turns, and Which vill Require a Greater Depth in Philoſophy to Prove, than, I am Afraid, this Demonſtration is Maſter oſ. As to vhat is Said afterwards, that, to be Self-Exiſtent, is, not to be Produced by is Sclf, but to Exiſt by an Abſolute Neceſſity, Originally in the Nature of the Thing is Selſ; Ie it ſo, tho what any One can Mean by Self-Production, but Self Exiſtence, I do not Eaſily Apprehend; The Queſtion yet Remains, hitherto Undetermined, mined, and Undecided, betwixt the Deiſt and the Atheiſt, Namely, whether this SclfExiſtence Appertains to God, or to Nature, and there has been nothing yet Alledged, which Proves it of the One, or Diſproves it of the Other. In the Proceſs oſ this Propoſition it is Inferred, 1ſt. THAT the only True Idea of a Sclf- Exiſtent, or Neceſſarily Exiſting, Being is the Idea of a Being, the Suppoſition of whoſe Non. Exiſtence is an Expreſs Contradiction, which by any Thing, which has been hitherto Shewn, may be as vell Aſfirmed of a Self-Exiſtent Nature, as of a Self-Exiſtent Being, Different and Diſtinct from it; For, if Nature is Self Exiſtent, and therefore Neceſſarily Exiſting, which is ftill to be Proved by this Demonſtration, that it is not, it muſt be a Contradiction to Suppoſe it not to Exiſt; And by Nature, the Defenders of it againſt a Supreme Being, Diſtinct from it, will not Mean Matter or Motion, but thoſc Eternal Laws oſ Beings, which, tho Unknown to us, have always Obtained in the Univerſe, and ever will Obrain. BuT, as no Patrons of Atheiſm can ever Shew, what thoſe Eternal Laws, and Self-Exiſtent Ones, of Nature are, ſo their Cauſe is Deſperate and Indefenſible; On the Contrary, as the Aſſertors of a Supreme Being can Evidence, that there are Marks and Characters of an Infinite and All- Wiſe Contrivance in the Conſtitution, Order, and Harmony of the whole Fabrick, they may from thence Shew, that there is an Almighty, Eternal, Self-Exiſtent, and All-Wiſe Author of ir. 2d. It is Inferred, that there is no Man whatſocver, vho makes any Uſe of his Reaſon, but may Eaſily become more Certain of the Being of a Supreme, Independent Cauſe, than he can be of any Thing elſe, beſides his own Exiſtence. THis yet is not Certain, or Proved, from any Thing, which Foregoes, only, that there is ſomething Eternal, Self-Exiſtent, and Independent of any other Cauſc, but whether it is God, as the Deiſt Affirms, or Nature, as the Atheiſt, is Entirely, as yet, Undetermined. 3d. IT is Inferred, that Des Cartess Proof of a God from an Idea of him, is not Juſt or Concluſive; Which has been, in a Former Chapter, Particularly Inquired into, and Shewn to be Weak and Abſurd. 41h. It is Inferred, that the Material World cannot Poſſibly be the Firſt and Original Being, Uncreated, Independent, and of its Self Eternal IN Order to Evince which, Nature is Reſolved into the Form or Diſpoſition oſ the World, into the Motion Obſervable in it, and into the Matter of it3 None ol which are ſaid to be the Firſt Original Being, Uncreated, Independent, and of themſclves Eternal BuT if this Demonſtration is altogether Unacquainted with what Nature, or a True Philoſophy, is, it only Argues and Aſſerts in the Dark, and nothing can be Produced by it, in Conviction of an Atheiſt. For Firſt, as to the Form or Diſpoſition of the World, no Atheiſt will Maintain, that the Preſent, or any other Particular, Form is Neceſſary, but will Affirm with the Deiſt, that the Univerſe may have Undergone Various Forms and Changes, which yet, he vill Say, do all of them Reſult from Certain Eternal and Self- Exiſtent Laws in Nature; Thus, he will not Deny, that there are Various Scaſons in the Year, ĩn vhich Plants and Inſets Riſe, Come to Perfection, and Decay, Revive again, and ſo Run the Round of their Exiſtence; That Stars and Planets may do the Same; And yet, that all theſe Viciſſitudes and Alterations may be Owing to ſome Eternal, Self: Exiſtent, and thereſore Neceſſary, Laws of their Being and Acting; This, tho' he cannot Prove, he may Imagine and Surmiſe, and there is nothing Produced in this De monſtration, which ſhould, or can, Convince him of the Contrary; Becauſe it does not Enter into the Reality of Things, or into an Inquiry of what Nature is, but Diſcourſes Metaphyſically, and Generally, about theſe Matters, with lirtle nowledge of, or Concern about them. SECOND, as to Motion, vhatever the Author Mr. Toland, who is Cited, Aſiitiis Concerning a Conatus to Motion, or whatever his Character is, I have nothing a Preſent to Say to Either, whoſe Tenets and Principles I have Conſidered upon oſhei Occaſions; I ſhall only Say here, that an Atheiſt is not to be Convinced by an Ar gument from any Particular Motion, not being Neceſſary; Becauſe, tho' any Certain or Determined, Motion is not Neceſary, or Self-Exiſtent, ĩt is not Shewn, that the Principli Principle and Cauſe of it may not be ſo, in the Real Nature of Things; Eſpecially if ve Allow the Gravitation oſ Matter, that is, of every Part of Matter to every Part of Matter, which Sir Iſ. Newten Aſſirms, and is little more than Mr. Tolanã⸗ Conatus to Motion; For if ſo, that Principle of Gravitation may be Sclf Exiſtent and Eternal, as that of Epicuruss Atoms vas Suppoſcd to be; and, vhere rhere isa Preponderancy of One to the Other, Motion will be Neceſſarily Produced. TuHmD, as to Matter, That, in this Demonſtration, is likewiſe not Proved not to bæ Neceſſary, unleſs upon two Suppoſitions, which are Precarious, and therefore nor Suſficient to Convince an Atheiſt; The Firſt Suppoſition is, that there is a Vacuum in Nature, which, as I have beſore Shewn, is not, nor can be, Proved by any Philoſophers, unleſs by Suppoſing the very Thing in Queſtion, Namely, that there is a Vacuum, Part the 1ſſ. oſ this Philoſophy, in the Chapter Concerning a Vacuum; The Second Suppoſition is, that, if Matter Neceſiarily Exiſis in one Place, it muſt thereſore Neceſarily Exiſt in every Place, which is not Juſtified by any Reaſon or Argument; For, tho' the Eternal Laws of Nature might, by Certain Mutual Attractions, Amaſs ſeveral Proportions and Quantities of Matter to the Sun or Stars, to the Planets or Comets, it would not from thence Follow, that thoſe Lavs ſiould Diſperſe and Diſſuſe it every where, but rather the Contrary; But, which is more, this Argument from Matter Proceeds upon an Entire Ignorance of what the Nature of it ĩs, which if it ſiould Happen to be Diſferent from what the Preſent Demonſtration Conceives it to be, the whole Reaſoning on this Head is Weak and Inconcluſive; and This we have Shewn to be the Caſe, as we have Evidenced it to Conſiſt in Action. which is here Imagined to be Merely Paſſive, and that ſuch Action is Made up oſ the Various Degrees of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. As to vhat Spiniæa is Cited aſterwards to Say, that there is no Diſference of Subſances, and that One Subſtance cannot Produce Another, and therefore, that an Almighty, Independent, and Supreme Being, cannot Produce a World or a Univerſe. Diſtinct from its ſelf; It is ſaid Entirely without Proof, as it is likewiſe Aſfirming the very Thing in Queſtion, that every Subſtance is Neceſſarily Infinite, and therefore the Univerſe, which is a Subſlance, is Neceſſary and Infinite, and Includes all Being within it, and Conſcquently, that there is no God Diſtinct from the World, or the Univerſe; Which are all of them Aſertions only in Different Words of whai was to have been Shewn, that Nothing, No Being, or Intelligence, Exiſis Diſtinct and Independent of Mere Nature. SO that hitherto, here is no Demonſtration on the One Side or the Other, the Matter, as yet, is wholly Undctermined, and all Centers and Ends in Bare Aſfirmation; On the Side of the Deiſt, that there is a Supreme Self-Exiſtent, and Independent Being, Diſtinct ſfrom the Univerſe, and who is the Cauſe and Author of it, and on the Side oſ the Atheiſ, that there is no ſuch Being, but that the Univerſe it's ſelſ is the only Sclſ-Exiſtent, Neceſſary, and Independent Subſtance, and that Things could not have Exiſted in a Manner Different from what they do. oOcellus Lucanus is aſtervards Quoted under this Propoſition, and vhoſe Authority and Antiquity Mr. Blount, it ſeems, is Pleaſed to Oppoſe to That of aſſes; Whereas he does not Appear to have been an Atheiſt, but of Platd's, and Ariſtorld's Opinion, and his Followers, to Wit, that the Univerſe was Eternal, tho' Created, Produced, or Impreſſtcd by an Inſinite Mind, which is a Doctrine not much, if any Thing Different, from tha of Moſes, Rightly Underſtood, as we have Formerly Shewn; Princip. of Philos. Part. 1ſ; And that theſe vere the Sentiments of ocellus Lucanus is Evident, becauſe tho' in one Place he Says, Avimro T æẽ, à àdætu, in another, that it is, Aræ ⸗ nnimme, and in a Third, that æous abus iẽ cavrã àisus ian, æ abnm ⸗ à ſauhe i mm aldiz, yet in other Places he tells us, that æ àexſme Seo i”-, i Mqn ixæ, 2 tuęæ, that œixa ® nloun àpunla, mòms  dmes ? Oils. From whence it is Maniſeſt, that he both Aſerts the Eternity oſ the World, or the Univerſe, and that there is a Wiſe and Intelligent Being, which Actuates, Informs, and Supports, the whole Fabrick or Frame of Nature. HOWEVER, be Ocellus Lucanuss Opinion, or Plate's, or Ariſtorle's, what it will, in Reſpet of Atheiſm or Deiſm, a Deciſion oſ the Diſpute is not from thence in the leaſt Advanced by it; the Controverſy Remains, where it was, and there is nothing yet Urged in ithè Preſent Demonſirarion, which is Concluſive of the Latter; In ſine, ihere there does not ſcem to be any other Way of Proving the Being of a God from Nature, and the Univerſe, but by knowing what Nature is, and in what it Conſſs; If we are Ignorant of the Laſt, ve cannot Arrive at a Knowledge of the Firſt; ve are only Entangled and Conſounded vith Idle, and Metaphy ſical Reaſonings, without being Able to Affirm any Thing with Solidity or Certainty 3 All is Cobweb, and Fine Spun Thoughts, and Nice Speculations, and we ſhall find nothing on cither Hand, unleſs Abundance of Abſtracted Terms, Abſtruſe Words, and Mere Sophiſiry and Chicaning. BuT, if Nature is Proved to Depend upon Action, and that Action is OWned to Subſiſ*t in an Inſinite Variety and Extent of Expanſive and Contractive Forces; From an Inſinite Action, and the Order and Diſpoſition of ſuch Action into it's ſcveral Forces, we Immediately come to an Infinite and All-Wiſe, and All-Poverſul Agent, and Vice Verſa; which thereſore Mutually Evince and Inſer cach other, according to what has been beſore Repreſented. PROPOSITION the Fourth is, That, what the Subſtance or Eſſence of that ſein⸗, vhich is Self-Exiſtent, or Neceſſarily Exiſting, is, ve have no Idea, neither ĩs it at all Toſſible for us to Comprehend it. Tnis will be Allowed by the Atheiſt, as well as the Deiſt; For, tho' the Former Aſſerts, that the World, or the Univerſe, or Nature, is that Selſ: Exiſtent, or Neceſſarily Exiſting Being, he will not Affirm, that he Underſtands what Nature is, or that he Inows the Subſtance or Eſſence of Matter or the Mind, or that it is at all Poſſble for us to Comprehend cither of them; So that here is no farther Argument Alledged for the Proof of Deiſm, than of Atheiſm, and isa Conviction, that both the One and the Other Reſt in General and Abſtracted Terms, without Inquiring, what God, or Nature is; On the Contrary, in our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, we have Endeavoured to Explain, what Nature is, and what the Author of it. HOWEVER, from this Propoſition is Inferred the Weakneſs of ſuch, as have Preſumed to Imagine Infinite Space to be a Juſt Repreſentation or Adequate Idea of the Eſſence of the Supreme Cauſe; This is the Notion of Mr. Raphſon, de Spatio Reali & Infinito, which, in the Firſt Part of the Principles of Philoſophy, we have Shewn to be Falſe, and that Space is nothing in Reality, unleſs an Abſiracted Idea; Beſides which, Infinite Space can neither be the Eſſence of God, nor the Attribute of him, becauſe he is an Infinite Agent, whereas Space is an Empty, Unactive, Nothing; On the Other Hand, the Ariſtotelians, and School-Men, much better Define his Eſlence to be Purus Actus, that is, if they Mean by That, Mere Agency or Intelligence. PrOPOSITION the Fiſth is, that tho the Subſtance, or Eſence, of the Self Exiſlont Being is its ſel? Abſolutely Incomprehenſible to us, yet many oſ the Eſcntial Attributes of his Nature are Strictly Demonſtrable, as well as his Exiſtence; Thus, in the Firſt Place, the SclfExiſtent Being muſt of Neceſſity be Eternal; In Explanation of vhich it is Added, that becauſc Somerhing muſt of Neceſſity be Eternal, therefore it muſt be Neceſſarily Self-Exiſtent; and becauſe it is Impoſſible, but Something muſt be Selſ-Exiſtent, therefore it is Neceſſary, that it muſt likewiſe be Eternal. As to the Propoſition, Thoſe, vho Affirm Nature to be the Self Exiſtent Being vill Equally Ovn the Main Parts of it, Changing his ſor irs, with thoſe, vho Aſfirm, that a Supreme Being, Independent of Nature, is that Sclf-Exiſtent Being; There is therefore nothing Proved in this Propoſition to make us Believe the One, more than the Other, and the Atheiſt and Deiſt are ſtill where they were, Notwithſtanding the Force and Evidence of this Propoſition. As to vhat is Said of the Connexion betwixt being Eternal and Sclſ Exiſlent, there is this Diſtinction in our Ideas of them, Namely, that every Thing, which is SclſExiſtent, is Eternal, but every Thing, which is Eternal, is not Self-Exiſtient, as is Ac novledged by thoſe Divines, vho Believe the Eternity of the Son, and his Ceneration, or Origination from the Father, amongſt whom is the Preſent Ingenious Per ſon, and by thoſe Philoſophers, as the Platoniſls, and Ariſlotelians, vho Held the E ternity of the World, and yet the Eternal Production of it ſrom an Eternal Cauſe. TuE Sixth Propoſition is, that the SelfExiſlent Being muſt of Neceſſity be Inſinitc and Omnipreſent. Tun Tu15 Propoſition will likewiſe be Affirmed by the Aſcrtors of a Self-Exiſtent Næ ture, Independent of a Supreme Being, that is, that Nature is Inſinite, and every vhere, or, that the ſame Laws of Being and Acting, Exiſt thro' the whole Univerſe and in every Part or Portion of it. . NoTviTHsTANDING which, from this Propoſition it is Inſerred. 1ſt. THAT the Infinity of the SelſExiſient Being muſt be an Infinity oſ Ful neſs, as well, as of Immenſity, that is, it muſt not only be without Limits, but alſo vithout Diverſity, Defect, or Interruption, and therefore not the World, or Matter, but a Supreme and All-Wiſe Intelligence, Diſtinct from Either, muſt be this SelExiſtent Being. Bur it may be Replied to this, that if Infinity belonged to the Self-Exiſtent Being not only in Reſpect of Immenſity, but in Reſpect of Fullneſs, a Supreme and All Viſe Intelligence, if he is the Self-Exiſtent Being, muſt have that Infinity of Full neſs, that is, he muſt have no Aſſignable Vacuities in himſelf, but muſt be One So lid, Conſiſtent, Compacted Maſs, without Diverſity, Defect, or Interruption; which is Giving us the Image of a Supreme Being, Compoſed of Denſe and Groſs Matter, and may be therefore Juſtly Reſembled to that Image, which Aaron Made, both as to the Clumſineſs of the Materials, and the Ridiculouſneſs and Abſurdity of the Repreſentation. ON the other Hand, Nature, for all that is yet Proved, may be Infinite, tho' with Various and Infinite Degrees of Fullneſs, (Nay, if there was only One Certain De gree of Fullneſs, upon that Account it would be Finite,] and therefore it may be Said, that it is Infinite as to its Immenſity, and as to it's Degrees of Fullneſs; Thus, One Part of Space may be Full of a Stronger or more Conſtipated Force and Action, and Another of a Weaker or more Diffuſed and Diluted; And all may be Derived from the Infinite Mind or Agent, as an Infinite Effect from an Infinite Cauſe. 2d. TuaT the Selſ-Exiſtent Being muſt be a moſt Simple, Unchangeable, Incorruptible Being, without Parts, Figure, Motion, or Diviſibility Whereas, Infinity does not Suppoſe, that, what is Infinite, muſt be a moſt Simple, Unvaried, and Uninterrupted Being, without Parts, Figure, Motion, or Diviſibility, which are the Deſcriptions oſ an Abſtracted Space; Becauſe, iſ Space is Infinite, as it is Acknowledged to be, the Univerſe may be Infinite, which Conſiſts of that Space, with ſeveral Corruptible, Changeable, and Moveable Subſtances in it, which Univerſe, ill be Said, is not Leſs Inſinite for having theſe Additional and Acceſſory Beings in it; Since no One, it is Imagined, can Shew, that Nature, or the Univerſe, is not Infinite, becauſe a Fire, or a Sun, Burns, or a Planet Revolves within it's Verge or Extent; So that we may ſtill Conclude, that there is nothing yet Alledged by this Metaphyſical Demonſtration, vhich can Inform us, whether God or Nature is this Self-Exiſtent Being, which is the only Point in Queſtion. PrOPOSITION the Seventh is, that the Self-Exiſtent Being muſt of Neceſſity be bur One, vhich is Said to Follow from his being Neceſarily Exiſtent; Since therefore That Propoſition has been Examined, there is no Occaſion to Inquire into the Evidences of This, Eſpecially, Seeing the Atheiſt will, if he has any Reaſon, AcknowIedge, that Nature is but One Thing, if it is Self-Exiſtent, that is, that it is one Infinite Syſteme Governed and Actuated by the Same Laws of Being and Acting, which are, have been, and always will be, Neceſſary and Eternal, and this is the Thing to be Refuted. PrROPOSITION the Eighth is, that the Self-Exiſtent and Original Cauſc of all Things muſt be an Intelligent Being. ] Tuis I have Aſfirmed to be the Principal Queſtion, in which, I have ſaid, Lies the vhole Streſs of the Controverſy berwixt the Atheiſt and the Deiſt, and which, upon Some Occaſions, has been Diſputed with me; when yet, this very Demonſtration does in Fact Own it, which Says, in this Propoſition Lies the Main Queſtion betwixt us and the Atheiſis; For, that Somerthing muſt be Self-Exiſtent, and that That, which is SelfExiſtent, muſt Neceſarily be Eternal and Infinite, and the Original Cauſc of all Things, will not Bear much Diſpute; Notwithſtanding which, it has Spent Seven Propoſitions, and its Arguings upon them, to Contradict and Conſute the Atheiſis, in vhich Propoſitions yet it Owns, that both the Atheiſt, and the Deiſt, do Agree, and n vhich I have Endcavoured to Shew, there is no Diſęnſion betwixt them; Which is l Something Something Admirable, and has an Appearance of Artifice, rather than of any Solid or True Reaſoning. Whaar afterwards Follows to Prove the Being of a God Independent of Nature, and that the SelfExiſtent Being is a Wiſe and Intelligent One, is from the Same Topicks, which have been always made Uſe of by the Aſiertors of ſuch a Being, that is, from the Harmonious and Beautiſul Structure of the World, and all Things in it, and are Celebrated in all Chriſtian Writers from St. Paul, down to the Late Eminent Hugo Grotius, the Excellent Mr. Ra5, in the Wiſdom of God in the Creation of the World, and Orthers, and which, as ve Acquieſce in, ſo we have no Reaſon to Contradict, but Affirm. Ir was my Intention to have Examined into the Notions of a New Patron of the Connexion of Ideas, as to his Truths, Relating to the Deity; but they ſo Entirely Depend upon vhat has been already Conſidered, that there is no Manner of Occaſion to Enter into a Diſquiſition of him upon this Head, however, to Satisfy his Admirers, ve ſhall not Refuſe that Trouble. Thue ſirſt Article, or Propoſition, of this Section is, That, where there is a Subordination of Cauſes and Effects, there muſt Neceſſarily be a Cauſe in Nature, Prior to the Reſt, Uncauſed3 Or thus, where there is a Series, in which the Exiſtence of One Thing Depends upon Another, the Exiſtence of This again upon ſome Other, and ſo Upards, as the Caſe ſhall be, there muſt be ſome Independent Being, upon vhom it doth Originally Depend. l Tuis is Exemplified in the Following Manner; If Z ſSome Body) be Put into Motion by 7, 7 by X, and X by V, it is Plain, that X Moves 7, and 7 Moves Z, only as they are Firſt Moved, Y by u, and T by X: that Z, 7, X, are Moveds, or rather Z  T+X Taken together, are One Mved : that w Stands here, as the Firſt Mover or Author of the Motion, Unmoved by any Other: That thereſore, without ; there wvould be a Moved, without a Mver, which is Abſurd: And Laſtly, that of what Length ſoever the Series may be, the Caſe will be ever the Same, i. æ. if there be no Firſt over Unmoved, there muſt be a Mſoved, without a Mover. Bur this Grand and Oſtentatious Way of Reaſoning of Z++X Depending upon the Firſt Mover W, as if there was ſomething Mathematical in the Demonſtration, is nothing more than vhat is Aſſerted in the Second Propoſition of the Foregoing Demonſtration, that there has Exiſted from Eternity ſome One Unchangeable and Independent Being; if not, there muſt have been an Infinite Succeſſion of Changeable and Dependent Beings Produced One from Another, in an Endleſs Progreſſion, without any Original Cauſc at all; And the Anſwer, which may be made to ſuch a Kind of Reaſoning is the Same, and therefore need not be here Repcated; It alſo Falls in with Mr. Loctæs Way of Conſidering theſe Matters, which has been before Inquired into, and Conſequently on that Account alſo does not Require a Particulat Confutation. Waar I ſnall here farther Obſerve, in Relation to this Algebraick Proof of a Supreme Being, is, that if Z is not put into Motion by I, T by , and X by W, or Z X7 by ; but if Z Moves T and Reciprocally ? Moves Z, T Moves X and X Moves , &c. or Z +X+7 Moves W and W Moves Z +X+7 by any Neceſ ſary, Eternal, and Fixed Laws of Nature, or Attraction, or Gravitation, this whole Reaſoning Falls to the Ground. . BESIDES, to Prove there muſt be an Original Mover, as , it is Suppoſed, that Z is Moved by 7, T by X, and X by w; that is, if we go no Higher than 7, 7 is the Firſt Mover, if no Higher than X, X is the Firſt Mover, and if no Higher than V, wis the Firſt Mover; ſo that to Prove an Original or a Firſt Mover, ĩt is Suppoſed there is One; which is a very Emphatical, as well as a Sagacious, ay oſ doing it. What is aſterwards ſaid of a Chain, with it's Links, Hanging in the Air, it well enough Explains, what Notion this Philoſophy has of an Eternal Progreſſion of Motion, or Things, without an Original Cauſc, but is not Significant to the Proving, cither for or againſt it. AND no, aſter thus Freely Inquiring into the Demonſirations of a God by the Preſent Philoſophers, it will not, nor can be, Imagined, that IDeny ſuch a Being, but the Preſent Philoſlophick, or Metaphy ſical, Demonſtrations of One; Since I have Shewn, that a Supreme and Intelligent Being is Strictly Demonſtrable from a True Underſtanding ol Nature, and the Inſinite Forces, and the Inſinite Variety of Actions in it, Diſpoſec E e e e e and and Adjuſted in the Wiſeſt Order, and according to the Exacteſt Occonomy; Tha the Chriſtian Religion, of the Truth and Divinity of vhich I have Formerly given a Demonſtration, does, Independent of Reaſon and Philoſophy, Aſford us anothei Unconteſted Proof of a like Being; And that the Providences oſ God, Exerciſed by him over Nations and Kingdoms, and Particular Perſons, are full and Convincin” Evidences of his Exiſtence. I have only Impartially and Sincerely Inquired into the Cauſe betwixt the Atheiſ and the Deiſt, as it has been hitherto Managed; and upon the Sum, I cannot but Con clude, that Neither of them are much Acquainted with the Merits of ir; becauſe they Underſtand little or nothing of Nature, the Comprehenſion of which is, in ſome Degree, Entirely Neceſſary to the Determining a Controverſy, which Concerns the Author, and Origin, of the whole Syſteme; which yet is Neglected, and all is Reſolved into General, Metaphy ſical, and Abſtracted Terms, which a Man ſhall not be Extremely the Wiſer for Knowing. I have been likewiſe more Open, Explicit, and Unreſerved in this Inquiry, that Men, by Sceing the Diſſicultioes, which Attend ſuch Abſtruſe Speculations, may be more Ready to Acknowledge the Neceſſity of, as well as the Infinite Wiſdom and Goodneſs of God in, his making a Revelation of himſelſ to the World, in the ſeveral Ages and Periods of it, by the Patriarchs before and after the Deluge, by Moſes, and at Laſt, by his own Son, the Great Fullſiller of the Law, and of Prophecies, the long Expected Meſſiah of Mankind, the Divine Word, or Adyss, and the Eternal Begotten of his Father. BuT What has ſtill Farther Conſirmed me in this Way of Inquiry is, that I ſind very little Difference betwixt the Atheiſt, and the Deiſt, as to their Notions, or their Practices in Moral Matters, they are Equally upon the Foot of Reaſon, or the Connexion of Ideas, Equally Deſpiſers oſ the Chriſtian Goodneſs, and Equally Strangers to Philoſophy and Nature;3 Which is not to be Known by Metaphyſical Abſtractions, nor yet, even by ſome Fanciful Experiments made in Chymiſtry, Anatomy, Hydroſtaticks, Mechanicks, or any other Way; but by Conſidering the whole Order, and Syſteme of it, which Lies Plain to every Ones View, and is the Subject of every Onc's Obſervation; For is it not very Abſurd, that Philoſophers ſould Pretend to give an Account of Theſc, or the Other, Experiments, made by a Few, when they cannot Solve any One Common Phænomenon, or Appearance, in the Whole Fabrick? Iſhall only here Add, that it is a Lumentable Caſe, and which Deſerves to be Conſidered by Learned and Good Men, that all our Philoſophy is Derived to us from Popiſh Countries, vhich Abound in Superſtition; Namely, from Italy and France; and it is not Impoſſible, or Unlikely, but that the Fopperies and Follies of the One, which could not be Reliſhed by Underſtanding and Thoughtful Men, might give an Impreſſion of Atheiſm, or Deiſm, to the Other; and Hence it was, that Galileus in Italy, and DesCartes in France, it is Probable, Met, the Firſt with ſuch Severe Uſage, ànd the Laſt vith ſo little Encouragement. As to the Freedom of Will, or Man's being a Free, and not a Neceſſary, Agent, nor Determined by any Impulſes from External Nature; It is as Evident, that we have a Pover of Beginning Motion, and Directing our Actions this or that Way, or in this or that Manner, as we Pleaſc, as that there is ſuch a Thing as Motion, or Thought, and there Wants no more, nor other, Arguments to Prove it. AND, as to what is Alledged by Mr. Hobbs, or Spinora, that the Will may Poſſibly be Determined by ſome Impulſes from External Nature; IF it were ſo, it would Render it ſo Whimſical and Ridiculous a One, which ſould by Fits and Starts, upon every Determination of our Will to Move our Hand Backwards or Forwards, be Suppoſcd to make it's Inſults upon our Minds, that no Rational or Conſidering Man can ever Fall in with ſuch an Abſurd Notion of it. I have all along here Repreſented the Argument, as Lying betwixt the Atheiſt, and the Deiſt, in Order to make the Controverſy General, but am far from Imagining, or Suppoſing, that the Philoſopher, here Referred to, is to be Ranked with Either, for vhom, as a Perſon of Religion, and Learning, tho I Diſẽnt ſfrom many of his Notions in Both, I have a Great Eſteem and Value. CHAP. C H AD. ViI. Concerning the Moral Relations of this Philoſophy 5. 1. FTER a Diſtinction of Proportional, Natural, and Inſtituted or Voluntary Relations, ve are Directed to thoſe, which are Moral; the Firſt Three Sorts, whether Juſtly Diſtinguiſied or Explained, we ſhall not now Inquire, ſince they are not of any Concern to the Preſent Argument. ART. 1. As to Moral Relations, the Account in General is, that they are Human Actions with their Various Ends, Objects, Manners, and Circumſtances, Formed into Diſtinct Complex Ideas, and from thence may be Termed ſo many Mixed Modes, a great Part whereoſ have Names Annexed to them, as Gratitude, and Polygamy; the Underſtanding the ſcveral Simple Ideas, which Enter into the Whole Compoſition of theſe Mixed Modes, to which we Aſfix Certain Names, is Neceſſary to Denominate them Clear and Diſtinct. ART. 2. And their Conformity to, or Diſagreement with, ſome Law, to which they are Referred, that is, vhereby Good or Evil, Pleaſure or Pain, is Dravn on us ſrom the Will and Pover of the Law-Maker, is Neceſſary to Denominate them Morally Good or Bad. ArT. 3. Which Good and Evil, Pleaſure or Pain, Attending our Obſervance, or Breach, of the Law, by the Decree of the Law-Maker, is, what we Call Reward and Puniſhment. OF theſe Laws, it is Said, there are Three Sorts, with their Three Different Enforcements, or Revards and Puniſhments; For, ſince it would be Utterly in Vain to Suppoſe a Rule Set to the Free Actions of Man, ithout Annexing to it ſome Enforcement of Good and Evil, to Determine his Will, we muſt, vhenever we Suppoſe a Lav, Suppoſe alſo ſome Reward or Puniſhment Annexed to that Rule. THE Laws, to which our Actions are Referred, are Suppoſed to be either, the Divine Lav, or the Civil, or the Law of Opinion and Reputation, to which is Subjoined the Philoſophical Law3 by the Relation theſe Complex Ideas, or Mixed Modes, Bear to the Firſt of theſe Rules, Actions are Sins or Duties, to the Second, Criminal or Innocent, to the Third, Virtues or Vices. i ART. 4. Firſt, as to what Reſpects the Divine Law, by that is Meant, what is Promulgated to Men by the Light of Nature, or the Voice of Revelation, neither of which, it is Said, any One can be ſo Brutiſh as to Deny; This Section goes on to Tell us, that God has a Right to give a Rule, that we are his Creatures, that he has Wiſdom and Goodneſs to Direct our Actions to that, which is Beſt, that he has Tover to Enforce it by Rewards and Puniſhments, of Infinite Weight and Duration, in another Liſe, for no Body can Take us out of his Hands;3 This is Said, however. 10 be the only True Touch-Stone of Moral Rectitude, and by Comparing them to this Law it is, that Men Judge of the moſt Conſiderable Moral Good or Evil of their Actions, that is, whether as Duties, or Sins, they are like to Procure them Happineſs, or Miſery, from the Hands of the Almighty. ArT. 5. Second, as to the Civil Law, which is the Rule Set by the CommonWealth to the Actions of thoſe, vho belong to it; This is Propoſed, as another Standard, to which Men Reſfer their Actions, to Judge whether they be Criminal or not; This Lawv no Body is Said to Overlook, the Revards and Puniſhments, that Enforce it, being Ready at Hand, and Suitable to the Power that makes it, which is the Force oſ the Common- Wealth, Engaged to Protect the Lives, Liberties, and Poſſcſſions of thoſe, who Live according to it's Laws, and which has Pover to take away Life, Liberty, or Goods, ſfrom him, who Diſobeys, which is the Puniſment of Offences Committed againſt this Law. Anrr. 6. Third, as to the Law of Opinion and Reputation; That is, in this Philoſophy, Eſtcemed to be the Mcaſure of what Men Generally Call Vertue and Vice; ſince, where they Stand for Actions, which, in their ovn Nature, are Right or Wrong, they are Said to be ſo ſar Coincident with the Divine Law, and in the E ec ce eæ Parti Particular Inſtances of their Application, thro' the ſeveral Nations and Societies of Men in the World, are Conſtantly Attributed only to ſuch Actions, as, in cach Country and Society, are in Reputation or Diſcredit; and, that this is ſo, will Appear to any One, who Conſiders, that tho that Paſes for Vice in one Country, which is Counted a Vertue in another, yet every where Vertue and Praiſe, Vice and Blame, go together; thus Virgil Says, Sunt ſua Pramia Laudi; and Cicero, Nihil habet Natura Praſtantius, qu?m Honeſtatem, quàm Laudem, quàm Dignitatem, qum Decus, which, he Tells us, are all Names for the ſame Thing. Tnis is the Language of the Heathen Philoſophers, vho well Underſtood, wherein their Notions of Vertue and Vice Conſiſted; and tho' Vertues and Vices Changed in Different Communities, yet, ſince nothing can be more Natural than to Encourage with Eſtecm and Reputation That, wherein every One finds his Advantage, and to Blame and Diſcountenance the Contrary,'tis no Wonder, that Eſteem and Diſcredit, Vertue and Vice, ſhould, in a great Meaſure, every where Correſpond with the Unchangeable Rule of Right and Wrong, which the Law of God has Eſtabliſhed, there being nothing, that ſo Directly and Viſibly Secures, and Advances, the General Good of Mankind in this World, as Obedience to the Laws he has Set them, and norhing that Breeds ſuch Miſchieſs and Confuſion, as the Neglect of them; Whereby, even in the Corruption of Manners, the Truc Boundaries of the Law of Nature, which ought to be the Rule of Vertue and Vice, were Pretty well Preſerved; ſo that even the Exhortations of Inſpired Teachers have not Feared to Appeal to Common Repute, whatſoever is Lovely, whatſoever is of Good Report, if there be any Vertue, if there be any Praiſe, &. Phil. 4. 8. and of this Law, the Enforcements, or the Rewards or Puniſments, Annexed to it are Commendation and Diſcredit. TuESE Moral Relations are farther Accounted, as Certain and Diſtinguiſhable, as any: Perceptions, which we have; for, altho' the Rule were Falſe, to which we Referred and Compared our Actions, yet the Conformity, or Non-Conformity, of our Actions to that Rule, would be Viſible enough. 5. 2. HAVING given as Short an Account, as we could, of this Syſteme of Morality, we ſhall Conſider every Part of it. Bur Firſt, ve muſt Obſerve in General, that this Philoſophy takes a very Inaccurate Method to Inculcate to us any Principles of Morality at all, before it has Proved the Being of a God, which is not done, Excepting in Book the 47h. Eſpecially, ſince it there Ackno ledges, that the whole of Morality does Depend upon the Demonſtration oſ ſuch a Being. SECOND, if it be ſo, neither the Civil Law, nor the Law of Opinion and Reputation, can be any Rules, by which we can Judge of Moral Actions; ſince, if Morality Depends upon the Being of a God, the Laws of a Common- Wealth, or the Lav of Opinion and Repuration, or Plain Nature, cannot be any Rules or Standards, by which our Actions can be Denominated Moral; ſince Men may make Laws and Decrees for the Government of a Community, and they may alſo Think Well or Ill of Certain Actions, and Blame or Commend them, whether there is any ſuch Being, as a God, or not, and yet they ſhall not be Moral upon that Account. TnimrD, If our Moral Actions ſall be Said to Conſiſt in their being our Natural or Human Actions, and thoſe Referred to ſome Rule, or other, in General, and therefore, that our Moral Actions are to be Diſtinguiſhed from What is Properly Called Morality, which Suppoſes the Exiſtence of a God, the Fallacy will be Plain, that this Philoſophy Confounds Moral, and Natural or Human Actions; and under thoſe Equivocal Terms would Inſinuate, that they are the Same; for, if our Natural or Human Actions, by being Referred to the Eternal Rule of Right and Wrong, or to the Lav of God, from thence may be Called Moral, as Morality is Said to Depend upon the Truth oſ Almighty God's Exiſting, they cannot without the Greateſt Impropriety and Confuſion of Language and Words be Termed Moral, when Referred to the Lav of a Common-Wealth, or to That of Opinion and Reputation; ſince the Actions, being only Natural or Human Ones in themſelves, upon Different References to Diſtinct Rules, muſt likewiſe Receive Different Denominations; and if the one are Moral, the other will be more Juſily Accounted, Agreeable to the Rules, to hich they are Referred, Civil or Sociable. 5. 3. ALTHO 5.3. ALTHO, What we have Said in the Foregoing Section, would be a SufficientConfutation of this Doctrine, yet we ſall not Refuſe to Conſider every Branch of it. It is Said, in the Firſt Place, that Human Actions, with their Various Ends, Objects, Manners, and Circumſtances, are Formed into Diſtinct Complex Ideas, and from thence may be Termed Mixed Modes; In Anſwer to which, we ſhall FirstT Say, that Nothing of this is Certain, according to the Senſe of the Preſent Philoſophy, which makes all Certainty to Conſiſt in the Connexion of Ideas, or in the Agreement or Diſagreement of them, as they Lie, and are Abſtracted, in the Mind; Whereas Human Actions, and the Circumſtances, which Attend them, Depend upon Things, which are External to us, of which we cannot be Certain by any Connexion of Ideas. And Indeed, this is the General Failure in the Preſent Philoſophy, which was Avoided by the Carteſian, which Proved the Being of a God by Ideas, as they Lay in the Mind, and from thence, that God would not Deceive us in Reſpect of External Beings, in which there was ſome Kind of Conſitency; On the Contrary, there is nothing can be more Unreaſonable, than to make Certainty Conſiſt in the Agreement or Diſagreement of the Ideas of our Minds, and yet at the ſame Time to Speak of Human Actions with their Various Circumſtances, and their Relations to a Rule, as Matters, in which we may Arrive at Certainty, when there can be no Connexion of Ideas in them; becauſe Human Actions, and their Reference to a Rule, are External to the Abſtracted Ideas of our ovn Minds. SECOND, Let us Inquire into the Method, which this Philoſophy Teaches in Compounding Mixed Modes; we are therefore Directed, in the Firſt Place, to be Clear and Diſtinct in our Simple Ideas, into which ſuch Modes are always Reſolved, and, afterwards, to be Certain, that we have neither More nor Fewer Simple Ideas in the Complex One, than what Properly belong to it, and to which we have Afſfixed a Name, as that of Gratitude, or Polygamy, &. BuT Firſt. the Mind does not ſeem to take any ſuch Method of Compounding it's Ideas from Simple Ones, which is every where Inculcated to us, thro' this whole Philoſophy; ſince all our Ideas cannot be ſo Juſtly Divided into Simple and Complex, as Voluntary and Involuntary, or Abſtracted and Actual Perceptions; For our Complex Ideas of a Man, of Beauty, Gratitude, Polygamy, of Gold, of a Stone, or the Like, are ſo many Single and Uniform Impreſſions upon the Mind, as much as any Simple Idea of Extenſion, Colour, or any Individual Property of a Man, of Space, or of Matter, is; Thus, if we Actually See a Piece of Gold, it is as much one Image in the Mind, as the Yellow, or the Extenſion of it; if we See a Man, the Picture, or Repreſentation of him, is as Entire and Uniformly One, as that of his Eyes, or his Face; and the Same may be Said of an Army, or of a Multitude of Men Ranged in our View, in Reſpect of a Single Perſon, which has been Affirmed of a Single Perſon, in Reſpect of any Part of him; Thus likewiſe it is in Human Actions, as in Murder, where we Actually behold One Man Cutting Another's Throat; in Gratitude, where ve Actually See a Kindneſs done and another Kindneſs Returned for it; in Polygamy, vhere ve Actually Sce a Perſon Married to, and Cohabiting with, many Vives; Theſe all are Obſerved ſeverally by the Mind, whether Gold, a Stone, a Man, an Army, Murder, Gratitude, or Polygamy, and ſo of the Reſt, as one Picture or Repreſentation, as much as any Simple Ideas we can Mention, as the Yellow, or Ductility, or Weight of Gold, &e. and thereſore, Really are no more Complex I deas, the One, than the Other; All, which they Differ in, is, the Variouſneſs of the Repreſentation, not the Uniformity of it, and in the ſame Manner, as One Simple Idea Differs from Another, which is Diſtinct from it. Ir it be Said, that the Repreſentations of Extenſion, or Colour, &æ. may be Termed Simple Ideas, becauſe they are more Single and Undivided than the Entire Images or Pictures in the Mind of Gold or a Stone, ve may as Truly Say, that Man therefore is a Simple Idea, tho it is Reckoned in this Philoſophy amongſt the Number of Complex Ones; ſince it likewiſe, in Reſpect of an Army, is more Single and Unditided too; For it does not Enter into the Nature of Simpleneſs or Uniformity of Impreſſion in our Ideas, the Parts of hich any Single Impreſſion is made up, no more than a Collection of Units in Numbers is an Hindrance to our Secing ſuch a Number at One View; For the ldea we have of 4 or 100 is as Clear and Diſinct and is as Simple and Undivided in the Idea, which we have of them, as that of Unit, iit; Sceing, i? we Conſider 4 or 100, as Conſiſting of 4 or 100 Units, and it is magined ro be Complex upon that Account, Unit alſo, if Referred to the Parts of vhich it is Compoſcd, may be Equally Compounded, for 4 I2:1; If this vere not ſo, but the Parts oſ any Idea are to be Inquired, to Know, whether it is a Simple One or not, neither any Extenſion, or Colour, or Figure, or Motion, &e. which ve Actually Beheld, would. be a Simple Idea; becauſe it would Conſiſt of Parts, in Reſpect oſ which thereſore, it would Neceſſarily be a Complex One. Tuvus alſo, the Idea oſ a Chimera, or a Centaur, when Painted upon a Paper, or Repreſented in the Mind, is One Uniform Image, or Picture, in Either, and Differs from thoſe we have Mentioned, in nothing elſe, Excepting, that the One is Arbitrary or Voluntary, whilſt the Other is Involuntary, the One Abſtracted from Things as they Exiſt, the OtherActual, or Suitable to their Exiſtence; and all that Philoſophy vould have to do, vould be to Inquire into the Nature of theſe ſeveral Ideas, how they are Produced in us, what the Various Relations of them, and of what Parts they Conſiſt. ON the Contrary, the Preſent Philoſophy Proceeds in a quite Different Method. and Suppoſes the Mind to Gain Firſt it's Simple Ideas, and Then to make it's Compoſitions ſrom them; Whereas, by what Foregoes, it is Certain and Evident, that the Mind Receives thoſe Ideas, which are Termed Compounded, in the ſame Manner, as it does thoſe, vhich are Named Simple, where they are both Actual or Real Perceptions; But, if they are not, and the One is Actual, and the other a Compoſirion made by the Mind, it is ſo far from being True, that the Mind Forms it's Complex Ideas ſrom it's Simple, that it Really Forms it's Simple from it's Complex; For from the Actual Perception of Extenſion, Yellow, and Weight, in Gold, it does not Form the Notional or Complex Idea, which is made up of Extenſion, Colour, and Weight, hich Inheres in an Unknown Subſtance; but from it's Actual Perception of Gold, in Seeing and Weighing it, it Forms or Abſtracts the Diſtinct Properties of it, and then makes thoſe General Ones, which it likewiſe finds in other Rodies, of Extenſion, Colour, and Weight; Thus alſo, the Mind does not Form an Army from the Actual View of a Single Perſon, but from the Actual View, or Report, of an Army Divides it into Single Perſons; and the ſame may be Said of Human Actions, as Murder, Gratitude, or Polygamy, which the Mind Obſerves or Hears in Groſs, and aſterwards Reſolves, by it's ovn Abſtractions, into the ſeveral Parts and Circumſtances, which Enter into thoſe Actions, and does not Perceive the Different Parts and Circumſtances of them, and then Form them into Complex Ideas. Tuis, if Truly Conſidered, would be a Full Anſwer to the Preſent Eſ=ay upon Human Underſtanding, which is Spent in Rangeing our Ideas into Simple and Complex Ones, and Placeing them in ſeveral Diſtinct Claſſes, and under it's own Arbitrary Denominations; that is, as we before Obſerved, it's Chapters of Certainty and Probability were nothing clſe than a Nomenclature, Suitable to the Definitions it had Arbitrarily given, ſo the Philoſophy of Simple and Complex Ideas, and Conſequently, this whole Eſay upon the Mind is no other; Namely, than an Adjuſtment of our I deas under thoſe Names, which it is Pleaſed to make Uſe of, without their being Agreeable to the Reality of Things. Im has been Said, that if our Simple and Complex Ideas are, the one Formed by the Mind, and the other by our Actual Perceptions, the Mind is rather Concerned in Abſtracting the Firſ, than in Compounding rhe Laſt. LET us yet now Grant the Contrary, that Simple Idcas are the Firſt in our Knowledge, and that, what are Called Complex Ones, are Deduced from them; It vill Evidently Follow, that all this Entire Syſteme, however Celebrated by the Free- Thinkers oſ the Age, is no more, nor no better, than One Continued Error. THE Simple Ideas from one Senſe only are Light and Colours, with their ſeveral Diſtinctions, from our Sight; all Kinds of Noiſcs, Sounds, and Tones, from the Ears; the ſeveral Taſtes and Smells from the Noſe and Palate; the moſt Conſiderable from the Touch are Heat, Cold, and Solidity; the reſt, Conſiſing almoſt vholly in the Senſible Conſigurations, as Smooth, and Rough, or elſe more or leſs Firm Adheſion, ol the Parts, as Hard and Soſt, Tough and Brittle; The Ideas from Diverſe Senſes are Space or Extenſion, Figure, Reſt and Motion, ſtom the Eyes and Touch; Simple Ideas from Reſlection are Thinking and Willing, the Modes of which are Remembrance, Diſce;1ing, Reaoning, Judging. Knovledge, Faith, &; The Simple Ideas ſrom Senſation rion and Reſlection are Pleaſure or Delight, Pain or Uneaſineſs, Power, Exiſtence, Unity; and theſc are Said to be the Materials of all our Knowledge, which the Mind cannot Create to it's ſelf, but may from thence Form Various Combinations, and Compoſitions, at Pleaſure. IN Reply to which, either all theſe Simple Ideas are Actually Experienced in the Mind Singly, Diſtinctly, and Abſtractedly from all Others, or not; If they are, we Perceive Colours in Body, without Extenſion; Sound, Abſtracted from that, which is Sonorous; Taſte, without Feeling what we Taſte; Smell, without Conſidering, that vhich is Odorifick, &æ. which is Maniſeſtly Falſe, and Contrary to everv Senſc, which we have; tis True, they are Diſtinct Perceptions in us, as the Warmth of Wax, and the Softneſs of it, but they come Joined together in the Mind, and the One is not Felt, Excepting at the ſame Time with the Other; If they are not Perceived by the Mind Diſtinct, or Abſtracted, from all Ideas beſides, the Way, by which they become Simple Ones from Compounded, is by the Arbitrary Pleaſure of the Mind, in Separating the One from the Other in it's own Thoughts; Contrary to the Aſlirmations of this Philoſophy, which Reſigns the making of Complex Ideas, not Simple, to the Reſolutions of the Will; for, if the Mind is Allowed the Prerogative to Diſtinguiſ, and Conſider, only the Warmth of Wax, for Inſtance, Separate from the Softneſs of it, tho' they both Enter into the Mind at Once, and from thence they ſhall be Eſteemed the Materials of all our Knowledge, for the ſame or a greater Reaſon, it may Join them together, and more Ideas, as the Extenſion and Colour of it, if they are Perceived at the ſame Time; and Conſequently, not Simple, but Complex Ideas, will be the Materials of it. FARTHER, if the Simple Ideas of any Object, Preſented to the Mind, may be Abſtracted by it from all Others, and from ſuch Simple Ideas or Abſtractions all our Knovledge Proceeds by the Different Combinations and Compoſitions of ſuch Ideas; that is, if ve Conſider Warmth in General, or Softneſs, without any Reſerence made to the Wax, which Produces it, and the ſame may be Said of Heat or Cold, of Figure, Solidity or Extenſion, or Roughneſs and Smoothneſs, &. they vill become Ideas Perfectly Abſtracted in our own Minds, from whence all our Knovledge will be Derived. ON the Contrary, ſuch Abſtracted Ideas are ſo far from Supplying us with any True Knovledge, that it will be Difficult to Determine, what they themſelves are; They are not the Extenſion we See, or the Solidity we Feel, or the Sound which we Hear, &. for if they were, there would be ſome other Perceptions, which would Enter the Mind together with them; Thus in Extenſion we See Colour, Figure, Reſt, and even a Cloſer or Looſer Extenſion; as in Gold, or in Silver, ve See ſuch Extenſion is more Compact and United than in Cork, or a Feather, tho' there is no Senſible Interruption of the Parts; and yet our Abſtracted Idea of Extenſion, in General, throws out all theſe other Perceptions, and only Conſiders it, as one Undiſtinguiſhed Idea; The ſame may be Said of Solidity, or even, of any Particular Colour, as Red, or Blue, or Purple; or of Sound, as a Grave, or Acute, or a Mellow, or a Shrill, &e. orof Taſtes, as Sweet, Bitter, Sharp, and the like; and ſo of Smells; All theſe Simple Ideas, when they are Abſtracted from our Actual Perceptions and Senſations, arc Names only, and Denominate General Ideas, Made and Created by the Mind, without any Thing Real belonging to them; But to make the Creatures ol our Minds the Foundation of Knowledge, and to Propoſe them as the Materials oſ it, is, at the beſ, Reduceing the Whole of it into a Chimera, the very Notion oſ which Conſiſis in Compounding Ideas, and Putting them together in an Arbitrary Manner, which have been Formed and Lodged in the Mind by a like Arbitrary Abſtraction. BESIDES, theſe Simple Ideas, which are Suppoſcd to be the Materials of our KnowIedge, may be Combined and United together at the Will and Fancy of the Mind, or not; If they may, we may Form a Complex Idea of the Sweetneſs of a Violet, the Redneſs of a Roſe, the Taſte of a Damaſcene, the Solidity of Gold, and the Sound of a Virginal; which will make a very Incongruous and Inconſiſftent Compoſition, and more Abſurd and Chimerical than any Picture or Fiction, which the Poct: have hitherto Tranſmitted to us; If theſe Simple Ideas may not be Joined together, as ve Pleaſe, in Order to Produce Real Knovledge in us; What other Rule is there i Iũ to Dire&t us in Duly Connecting them, Excepting our Experience? That is, we find in Fact, that the Purple, and Sweetneſs, and Soſtneſs of a Violet, Exiſt together, and therefore we may Combinc them into one Complex Idea; that a Solid Reſiſtence, a Yellow Colour, Weight, &æ. are Aſlembled into one Complex Idea of Gold; and thereſore ve Juſtly may Form ſuch a Compoſition. BuT if this is all, as I am Apt to Think it is, the Preſcnt Philoſophy will havc Taken a great Deal of Pains to little Purpoſe, whilſt it Endeavours to Reſolve all our Knovledge into Simple ldeas, which whenever it comes to Compound, it is Obliged to Put them together again, Juſt as it at Firſt found them; a Method of Procecding, vhich is Exactly Repreſented by the Proverb of Penelopè's Web, Applied to thoſe who Trifle; For what is this, but Unweaving, if I may Call it ſo, and Disjoining the Properties of Things as they Exiſt, in Order to Weave and Connect them into Onc again? Which Shews at Leaſt the Wonderſul Force of Truth and Nature, that, whilũt the Mind of the Philoſopher is Tugging and Labouring to Tear and Rend, by the Pover of his Thoughts, One Property of Being from Another, which Exiſts with it, Nature, by a Kind of Invincible Obſtinacy, Recoils, Forcibly Returns to it's own State, and Carries the Proud and Reluctant Mind of the Philoſopher along in Triumph vith it. S. 4. HAVING Conſidered the Nature oſf Simple and Complex Ideas, and Shewn the Chimerical and Abſurd way of Proceeding in this Philoſophy thereupon, we are nov to Conſider the Reference of theſc Complex Ideas, or Mixed Modes, to ⸗ Rule, which is Neceſſary to Denominate them Moral, according to their Agreemeni or Diſagreement with it. IN Anſver to which, we ſall Suppoſe our Complex Ideas to be made in that Manner from our Simple Ones, which this Philoſophy Preſcribes to us, altho' that Method has been already Confuted; Let theſe Complex Ideas therefore, or Mixed Modes, be Produced in the Mind one way or other, the Queſtion is, whether their Reference to a Rule in General can Denominate them Moral, or not; Which it is Plain it cannot; For what Connexion is there, or can there be Suppoſed, betwixt a Complex, or even a Simple Idea, and a Rule, which has no Analogy to it? Thus, for Inſlance, let us take, in the Firſt Place, the Simple Idea of the Redneſs of a Roſe, or the Fragancy of a Violet; What Rule can cither of thoſe Ideas be Referred to, with which they Correſpond, ſince they are only Anſwerable or Analogous to themſelves; IF farther we take the Complex Idea, as it is Called, of a Violet, or a Roſe, or of Gold, it is Plain they cannot be Referred to any Rule, to which they Agree or Diſagree by any Connexion of Ideas; and the ſame may be Said of any Complex Idea of Human Actions, as Gratitude, Murder, or Polygamy; that is, theſe are all Human Aòtions, which are Expreſſive of themſclves, and nothing more; For if they are Referred to any Thing beſides, as the Divine Law, the Civil, or that of Reputation, there can be no Connexion of Ideas betwixt them, in which Certainty is Said to Conſiſt; Thus in Murder, which is the Action of Killinga Man, there is no Reſemblance or Connexion betwixt That, and the Divine or Human Lav, or the Lav of Honour and Reputation, asto the Agreement or Diſagreement of it with them; Seeing, when ve Say One Idea is Connected with Another, as 4 with 4, or Unit with Unit, the Connexion is Evident, or vhen 4 is not the Same with 5, the Diſagreement of thoſe Ideas is Maniſeſt; But, vhen we Compare a Complex Idea of Murder, or Polygamy, that is, the Ideas we have of thoſe Actions, vith the Divine Law, that is, with the Authority of God over Human Actions, ſo as his Will ſnould be a Rule to them, the Connexion is ſo far from being Certain and Viſible, that there is None. Tis True, when theſe Human Actions, for Inſlance, are Prohibited by the Divine Law, and vhen we at any Time find ſuch Actions Committed, ve Perceive they are the Same vith thoſe Forbidden; betwixt which, there is an Apparent Connexion; but then, what is the Rule? Not the Action Expreſſcd, but the Authority of the DiVine Law, which Forbids it, and the Sovereignty and Empire of Almighty God over his Creatures, betwixt which and Murder, or Polygamy, there is not the Leaſt Similitude or Reſemblance; For ve may more Agreeably Connect the Ideas of a Mite and an Elephant together, than Human Actions with the Supreme Will of an Almighty Lav-Giver; and yet all Certainty is Said to Conſiſt in the Connexion of Ideas, and thereſore the Preſent Foundations of Morality muſt be Uncertain. What has has been Said of the Divine Law, may be Applied to the others of the CommonWealth, or of Honour, with Jut Allowances to the Different Natures of the LawGivers. 5. 5. THE next Thing Propoſed to us in theſe Moral Relations is, that Human Actions arc Denominated Good or Bad, according as they Draw on us Pleaſure or Pain, from the Will of the Law-giver; that is, in the Divine Law, Happineſs or Miſery; in the Human, Deprivation of Life Liberty, and Poſſeſſions or a Protection of all of them; in the Lawv of Honour and Reputation, Applauſe or Diſgrace and Reproach. IF therefore Actions are to be Denominated Good or Evil, by the Pleaſure or Pain, which they bring upon us, the Epicure is the moſt Vertuous and the Beſt Man in the World; the Covetous Man, who Delights in Riches, is a Good Inſtead of an IllNatured Perſon; and the Prophane and Atheiſtical, whilſt they take Pleaſure in being ſo, and this Philoſopher himſelf, whilſt he Rejoyces in his Ideas, are all Moral and Excellent Men; For the Queſtion is not here, whether a Man has Reaſon to be Pleaſed, but whether heReally is; and Indeed, where we Recede from the Truths of Religion, what is there Offered to us in this Wiſe Syſteme of Morality, which was not more Accurately Conſidered by the Heathens, and by Tully, in Particular, De Finibus Bonorum & Malorum, than has been done by this Sagacious Reaſoner? For, if Pleaſure and Pain are the Chief Things to be Purſued or Avoided, what will Reſult from ſuch a Doctrine, unleſs, that the ſeveral Opinions, Recounted by that Incomparable Roman Concerning the Summum Bonum, are all True? If Epicurus Thought, there was the greateſt Satisfaction in Corporeal Pleaſures, (Which yet is to be Doubted, and who rather ſeems to have had the Notions of Mr. Locke, that Pleaſure, in General, was what we ſhould Chiefly Aim at), all the Vices of Human Life would be Really Vertues; If there was the Greateſt Pleaſure in Temperance, Sobriety, and Chaſtity, Thoſe would be Vertues; If in Wiſdom and Learning, or in Riches or Honours, &. Thoſe vould likewiſe Fall under the ſame Denomination; From whence it is Evident, that, if Human Actions are to be Termed Good or Evil, according as they bring Pleaſure or Pain along with them, Vertue by the ſame Reaſon may be Called Vice, or Vice Vertue; Since, as we before Said, the Inquiry is not, what Rationally ought to Produce a Pleaſure or Satisfaction in us, but what Really does. Ir is farther to be Objected againſt this Philoſophy of Pleaſure and Pain, being the Meaſures of Vertue and Vice, or Good and Evil, that Men may be Vertuous and Good under the greatet Aſflictions, tho' they were not Certain of being Rewarded for their Piety, either in this World, or the next; Becauſe there is ſomething Intrinſically True in the Nature of Things, which muſt, and will, Determine us to Think Agreeably to them, whatever the Conſequences of it are; Thus, if there were no Revards or Puniſhments in this Life, or another, or if there were, the Mind may Conſider Things Abſtractedly in themſelves, without any Reference to a Rule, which may bring Pleaſure or Pain upon it, and without Regarding, what will Enſue, vhether Pleaſure or Pain there-from; For, if I Prove, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are not Always and Abſolutely Equal to Two Right Ones, I may Expect Reproach from Aſſerting it, and all that could Induce me to Affirm it, is nothing elſe, Excepting what Appears to be Truth, without the leat Reſpect to any Pleaſure or Pain, which I ſhall Receive ſfrom ſuch an Affirmation, being Entirely Regardleſs of Either; and ſo it is in Human Actions; for thoſe, which are Vertuous and Excellent, have ſome Innate and Peculiar Diſtinctions in them, which would Denominate them Good; and on the Contrary, Vicious and Criminal Ones would be Bad; altho' Pleaſure ſmould belong to the Laſt, and Pain ſould be the Conſtant Reſult of the Firſt, to the Perſon, who Committs them; So little has Pleaſure or Pain, which are the Conſequences of our Actions, to do, in Aſcertaining the True Nature of them. Ip therefore a Kingdom was the Reward of Ingratitude or Murder, as it has been ſometimes, even in our own Hiſtories, and the Greateſt Innocence, Piety, and Vertue was Puniſhed with Death, which once at leat Happened in the Perſon of our Lord the Great and Divine Author of our Religion, it would not be from thence Conſe quent, that Ingratitude or Murder were Good Actions, or that Innocence and Ver tue vere Bad Ones; There is ſomething Unalterable in the Conſtitution of Things them ſelves, which cannot be Changed by any External Cireumſtances, which Attend them F r ff F anc ahd Conſequently, not even by the Rewards and Puniſhments of another Liſe, no more than by thoſe of this. S. 6. THE Firſt and Principal Rule however of Morality is Said to be the Law of God, which is cither that of Revelation or of Reaſon, to which Referring out Actions, they become Good or Bad, according as they are Productive to us of Piea ſure or Pain, that is, of Happineſs or Miſery, ſrom the Will oſ the Almighty Lawgiver, vho has a Right, as he is our Sovereign, 10 Preſcribe a Rule to us, &e. As to Revelation, in the firſt Place, this Philoſophy cannot Aſſure us, that therc is any ſuch Thing; For, where it makes Certainty to Conſiſt in the Connexion oſ the Abſtracted Ideas of our own Minds, to which Matters of Fact, and the Eviden ces of them, can never be Reduced, it is Plain, that we cannot be Certain of any Revelation from God by the Chriſtian Diſpenſation, which is a Matter of Fact; This the Preſent Philoſophy was Senſible of, and thereſore Ranks it under thoſc Truths only, which are Highly Probable; But if Revelation is one Chief Rule, by which we Judge, vhether Human Actions are Moral or not, and that Rule is not Certain but Probable, which way will Morality, I Wonder, be Capable of a Demonſiration, which this Philoſlophy Apprehends it iss vhen one of the Chief Rules of it is nol Certain? Unleſs Demonſtrations can be Happily Formed and Contrived from Principles, which are not Demonſtrable. OMITTING which, and Granting Revelation Certain, the Evidences of which this Philoſopher had never ſo much as taken the Pains to Conſider, or Really, what the True Nature of Certainty was, Excepting in the Notion he had Tranſcribed from Des-Cartes, and of which, in all his Philoſophy, he is ſo Unfortunate to make Uſe, without Underſtanding, even what is Mcant by it, as we have already Shewn; Notvithſtanding this, HoW are Human Actions Referred to this Rule, ſo as there ould be a Viſible Agreement or Diſagreement betwixt them? If the Actions, ve Commit, are found Expreſicd in that Rule, or either Allowed or Forbidden in it, the Queſtion vill be, which way we are Certain of it; For, whilſt Certainty is made to Conſiſt in the Connexion of the Abſtracted Ideas of our Minds, as in the Mathematicks, which is the Favourite Inſtance of this Eſſay, it will be Impoſſible for us to Know, or be Certain of, any Actions, or any Bule, which we even See or Read, ſince they are External and Foreign to the Abſtracted Ideas of our ovn Minds. FARTHER, let this be likewiſe Acknowledged; Human Actions yet, when Compared with what is Written in the Scriptures, which is the Revelation here Intended, can only Inform us of a Connexion betwixt thoſe Actions, and thoſe which are Deſcribed in the Writings, which are Fixed as a Rule of them; that is, if Adultery or Murder &e. are Prohibited, and Innocence, Chaſtity, and Goodneſs, are Enjoined upon us, we Know each of theſe Actions in Practice are Correſpondent, or not, to the Deſcriptions of them in the Rule Revealed to us; But yet the Connexion of Ideas will again Fail us in Referring thoſe Actions, (whether of Murder or Innocence, Deſcribed in the Revealed Rule) to the Will of the Legiſlator, vho Preſcribes that Rule to our Actions; ſince there can be no Conncxion of Ideas betwixt them and the Will and Power of an Almighty Law-giver, vho in this Philoſophy is Suppoſed to have a Right over us as our Sovereign, and therefore may do what he Pleaſes with us, and Set what Limits or Boundaries he Thinks ſit to our Actions; But betwixt the Arbitrary Will and Pleaſure of an Almighty Being, and the Human Actions, which are Referred ro it, there can be no Conncxion. IT is morcover to be Objected, that the Revealed Rule, which is Set to our Actions, is Suppoſed to be vholly Reſolved into the Sovereignty, which God has over us, whereas, I would Hope, the Rational Rule, which we ſhall aſterwards Conſider, has ſomething better in it, than what is Derived from Mere Power and Sovereignty; It it has, this Philoſophy would Deal Kindly and Ingenuouſly by us, if it would Inform us, wherein the Revealed Rule is more Arbitrary than the Rational, i. e. wherein ĩt is not Superior in Real Goodneſs and Vertue to any other Syſteme of Morality Deduced from Reaſon. Lasty, if all this vere Set Aſide, it could not be Said, that our Actions were Good or Iad, according as they Mett with Pleaſure or Pain, Happines or Miſery; Becauſe they would be Good or Bad, according to their Conformity, or not, to this Revealed Rule, and the Power and Sovereignty oſ the Law-giver, Abſtracted from from the Rewards and Puniſiments Annexed to the Law, which his Sovereign Pleaſure had Preſcribed. UroN the View therefore of the Whole, we cannot but Think, that this Philoſophy has, as little Value for Revelation, as it has a True Senſe of it; It was Neceſſary Indeed to Pretend Something of that Nature in a Country, which Believed it, and was fully Satisfied of the Truth of it; But, if it was Really and Certainly Perſuaded of the Excellent Doctrines it Contains, it has taken a very Ill Method to Convince us, that it was ſo. THE next Rule of Morality is That of Reaſon, which is Said to be a Divine One, as Revelation is, by the Bounty of this Philoſophy, Acknowledged to be. IN Anſwer to which we Say, that Revelation we Know, but what is Reaſon? Is it the Connexion of Ideas, or is it every One's Humour and Opinion? IF the Laſt, which is too often what Men Call Reaſon in the Preſent Age, it neither is, nor ought to be, any Rule to our Actions, much leſs is it a Sacred or a Divine One. IF the Firſt, it has been already Proved, that Certainty, and therefore Reaſon, does not Conſiſt Barely in the Connexion of Ideas, and that, even in ſuch a Connexion, Men are as Capable of being Deceived into Appearances of Truth and Certainty, as in any other Way of Conviction, which this Philoſophy is Pleaſed to Term Probable only; But if this was alſo Granted, by what Methods is it Evinced, that Reaſon is a Divine Rule, unleſs by a Affirming it to be ſo? It is not Certain from any Connexion of Ideas, becauſe there is none betwixt Human Reaſon and the Divine, as there is not betwixt Finite and Infinite; If it is not Certain, we may as Juſtly Propoſe another Idea of Human Reaſon, which is Agreeable to that Humble Notion we ought to have of our ſelves, that is, that we are Human Creatures, and not otherwiſe Divine than by the Grace and Spirit of God, which is Imparted to us from our Religion; For by the ſame Argument, that our Human Reaſon is Divine, becauſe Implanted by God in us, ve may Equally Prove our other Faculties to be ſo, that our Memory, our Perception, nay our very Eyes, Legs, and Hands, arc Divine, ſince they are alſo Derived to us from Almighty God; If yet this Inſpired PhiIolopher could Prove, that our Bare and Abſtracted Reaſon was, by a Peculiar Diſtinction from the Reſt of our Faculties, ſome Enthuſiaſtick Ray or Light Within, he would either give us by his Falſe Concluſions, which we have Shewn, a very Low Idea of that Divine Light, which, it ſeems, was ſ0 Good as to Irradiate and Illuminate his Underſtanding, or Furniſh us with a full Confeſſion, that his Reaſon had no great Reſemblance of any Thing Divine in it. IN ſhort, what ve can Mean by Human Reaſon, is nothing elſe than what is Expreſſcd by thoſe Words, which is, has, and may be, Fallible in a Thouſand Inſtances; whereas, this Philoſophy would Induce us to Believe, that it is Infallible and Divine, that is, that Human Reaſon is Human- Divine Reaſon, which is a Contradiction in Terms, and will Require a greater Faith to Aſſent to, than any Propoſition in the Whole Chriſtian Diſpenſation. 5. 7. ANOTHER Rule of Morality, after the Divine, is Said to be That of the Law: of a Community, by Referring our Actions to which, they are Denominated Criminal or Innocent; But, that Human Laws or Injunctions ſould Change the Nature ol Actions themſelves, is altogether Impoſſible; All the Authority in the World can never make Murder an Innocent Action, or Gratitude a Criminal One. Much leſs can the Law of Opinion or Reputation Denominate our Actions Vertuous or Vicious; For, if Real Goodneſs and Clemency, if Humility and Modeſty, il Juſtice, and Honeſty, and Integrity, were Hooted out of Human Society, they would not therefore become Vices; nor would Malice and Envy, Pride and Inſolence, Injuſtice and Oppreſſion, tho Supported and Abetted by whole Nations of Men, Com mence and Change into Vertues upon that Account; Thus, no One Thinks Ariſtides tho Baniſhed ſfrom Athens by the Oſtraciſm, was an Ill Man, or that Alexander o Macedon, amidſt his Oppreſſions and Victories, vas a Good. NoTHING can be more Abſurd or Irrational than to Impoſe Names upon Humar Actions in this Arbitrary Manner, and which are only Contrived to Abuſe us intc Falſe Opinions of Things themſelves; ſince the Firſt may be more Truly and Juſtlj Termed, according to the Rule to which they are Reſtrred, Legal or lllegal, and th F ſfffa Sccond Second, Sociable or Unſociable; by which Mcans the Mind, being Free from thoſũt Equivocal Terms of Criminal and Innocent, Vertue and Vice, Immediately Diſcerns, that Human Actions may be Legal or lllegal, Sociable or Unſociable, without being Suitably Innocent or Criminal, Vertuous or Vicious, Commendable or Blame- Worthy in their owvn Nature; from whence ve may Conclude, that there is not much in tht Real Senſce of this Philoſophy, when ve Appropriate to every Thing it'sown Name; Bui That is, what it ſeems Peculiarly Delighted with, to Range and Order Things into Various Claſes, and then Impoſe what Names it Pleaſes upon them; Thus we have Evidenced, it Proceeds in Certainty and Probability, in Simple and Complex Ideas, in Moral Actions, under which are Comprehended Sins and Duties, Crimes and Innocence, and Vertue and Vice, and nov, in making Innocent and Criminal Stand for Legal and lllegal, and Vertue and Vice, Praiſe- Worthy and Blamcable, ſor Actual Praiſe and Blame, or Sociable and Unſociable; And the Same is Obſerveable in this whole Philoſophy, or Eſlay upon the Mind. : s. 3. HAvING Examincd into the Moral Relations of the Preſent Eſſay, we ſhall now Proceed to Inquire into the Reaſons it gives, vhy Morality is Capable oſ Demon ſtration. :i For Firſt, it Tells us, that Mixed Modes, Eſpecially thoſe belonging to Morality, being moſt oſ them ſuch Combinations of Ideas, as the Mind Puts together of i's own Choice, and where-of there are not alvays ſtanding Patterns to be found Exiſting, cannot, as Simple Ideas, be Expreſicd to us by Shewing, but by Defſining them. SECOND, upon this Ground it is Bold to Think, that Morality is Capable of Demonſtration; becauſe, theſe Mixed Modes being Combinations oſ ſeveral Ideas, that the Mind of Man has Arbitrarily Put together, without Reference to any Archetypes, Men may, if they Pleaſe, Exactly Know the Ideas, that go to cach Compoſition; and this, if well Conſidered, it is Said, would Lay great Blame on thoſe, who mate not their Diſcourſes about Moral Things very Clear and Diſtinct ; ſince the Preciſe Real Eſſence oſ the Things, Moral Words Stand for, may be Perfectly known, and ſo the Congruity or Incongruity of the Things themſelves be Certainly Diſcovered, in vhich Conſiſts Perſect Know icdge. IN Anſwer to vhich, it has been already Proved, that Mixed Modes, and even thoſe oſ Morality, are not Combinations of Ideas, which the Mind Puts together oſ it's own Choice, unleſs they are very Chimerical Ones, which can never be the Foundation of any Knowledge at all; Thus the Complex Idea of Gold or a Diamond, or oſ a Man, cannot be made at Pleaſure, tho on the Contrary, ve may Indeed at Pleaſure take the Perception of our Minds, the Yellowneſs and Weight of Gold, and the Hardneſs and Conſiſtency of a Diamond, and Unite them together into One Complex Idea; But what will this be, unleſs the Forming of a Chimera? and the Arguing upon it will be, not Knovledge, but Whimſy, if not an Inſtance of the urmoſ Phrenzy and Diſiraction; tis yet the very Same in Moral Complex Ideas, for Human Actions, as they in Fact Exiſt, and to which we Affix Particular Names, are the only Real Complex Ideas in Morality which we have, and are Anſwerable to the Complex Ideas oſ Subſtances, before Mentioned, of Gold, or a Diamond, or of a Man; 50, when we See any one Kill another, we Call it Homicide; if Malice enters into the Action, Murder; iſ the Relation of a Father to a Son, Parricide; if any One Actually Returns an Ill Oſfice for a Good, we Term it Ingratitude; and ſo of the Reſt; that is, our Denominations oſ this Sort of Ideas are from the Actions themſclves On the orher Hand, if we may Form theſe Complex Ideas at Pleaſure, without Conſidering, what Really Exiſis in Nature, ve may Join the Idea of Malice, which is one Part of the Complex One oſ Murder, with the Idea of doing a Good Ofſſice, vhich is One oſ the Ideas belonging to Ingratitude, and which, when Unired, will be as Chimerical a One, as if in Subſtances, we ſhould, as beſore, Unite the Yellowneſs and Weight of Gold, the Conſiſtency oſ a Diamond, and the Perception of our Minds into the Same Complex Idea; From whence it is Evident, that the Mind has not a Liberty to Join, what Ideas it Pleaſcs, either in Subſtances, or in Moral Actions, into One Complex Idea, and then Aſcribe a Name to ſuch a Compoſition; It is ſiill Conſined and Tyed down to Nature, that is, either to Subſtances, as they Exiſt, or to Human Actions, as they are Perſormed, and vhen it Leaves them, it Wanders into Mere Fancies and Chimeras. MOKEOVER MorEOVER, if Mixed Modes vere Reſigned to the Pleaſure of the Mind, the Compariſon of ſuch Complex Ideas, let them be as Determinate and Diſtinct as we vill, with their Proper Names Annexed to them, could not Produce any Conviction or Demonſtration of Morality; becauſe, where the moſt Determined Ideas are Compared together, as in the Mathematicks, there can nothing Reſult from that Compariſon, or from their Agreement or Diſagreement, unleſs Certainty and Uncertainty Truth and Falſehood; That is, ſuch Complex Ideas could Signiſy no more, by the Comparing of them, to the Aſcertaining, what was Moral or Immoral, than the Comparing the Three Angles of a Triangle with Two Right Ones; They would be only Abſtracted Truths, and nothing more. FARTHER it is Confeſſed, that to Denominate any Action Good or Bad, or in General to make it a Moral One, it ought to be Referred to a Rule; if therefore the Connexion betwixt the Action and the Rule is not Evident and Plain, the Demonſtration vill likewiſe Fail in this Reſpect, which we have beſore Proved it does. LastLy, Granting the Mind could Form Mixed Modes at Pleaſure, in Reſpect of Human Actions, yet, ſince in thoſe Complex Ideas there would Enter the Idcas oſ Subſtances, both Diſtinct from us, and whoſc Natures and Eſſtnces ve Knew nothing of, upon each oſ theſe Accounts the Demonſtration of Morality in this Philoſophy would be Impoſſible. For Firſt, as Human Actions, and the Subjects of them, are External to our Minds, the Connexion of Ideas, which is, in this Philoſophy, the only Teſt oſ Certainty or Demonſtration, Lies only in the Mind, Abſtracted from every Thing which is External to it, ſo it is Evident, that where Things which are External to the Mind, as Human Actions are, Enter into the Inquiry, they are not Capable of Mathematick Certainty; and Conſequently Morality, which does Conſider ſuch External Actions, is not Capable of Demonſtration. IN the Second Place, if this were Allowed, Namely, that we might Connect with Certainty the Ideas of Things, which Lay External to our Minds ſwhich, Notwithſtanding, is not a Mathematick Certainty) yet if thoſe Things, or Subſtances, are UnEnown, it will be Impoſſible to Derive any True Knovledge from them; Thus, iſ it is a Moral Axiom, that Man is Subject to a Law, I muſt Know, vhat is Mcant by a Man, or by a Lav, that is, the Real Nature of the One, and the Real Conſtitution of the Other. Nor is it Sufficient to Say, that it is not Requiſite to Define, what the Nature of Man is in a Phyſical Senſe, becauſe, be that as Diſputable as it will, it Concerns not, it is Said, the Moral Man, which is this Immoveable Unchangeable Idea, a Corporeal Rational Being; Since iſf. the Moral Man, Abſtracted from the Real Man, vill be only a Creature of the Mind, a Notion and Fancy only, in the Same Manner, as in the Principles of Philoſophy we have Proved Matter is, and in our Geometry of Solids, that Mathematick Spaces and Quantities are, according to the Vulgar Eſtimation of them; and Conſequently, as the Received Philoſophy, and Mathematicks, is from thence Evidenced to be a Notional Thing, without any Real Knowledge of Beings, as they Exiſt, belonging to them, ſo vould it be in Morality, if the Moral Man was a Notion Suppoſed, and Diſferent and Abſtracted from the Real; 24. If the Moral Man is Deſined to be a Corporeal Rational Being, it will be yet Neceſary for us to Knov, what Body or Matter is, and what is Reaſon or the Mind, how they are Joined together, and what Inſluences they have upon each Other, whether Reaſonis a Connexion of Ideas, which is not Certain; if it is, from whence, and how that Faculty Ariſes in the Mind, whether from God himſelf, or from the Nature and Conſtitution oſ it; if ſrom God, what that Communication of himſelf is to us, and in what Manner it is Performed, and whether ſuch a Notion may not be as Enthuſiaſtick, as this Thiloſophy ſeems to Think his Imparting himſelf to us in the Graces and Vertues of Religion is; All theſe Things are to be Known and Demonſtrated, beſore we can be Sure, whether Man, as a Corporeal Rational Being, is Subject to a Lav, that is, as ĩt is beſore Explained, to the Divine One. Fon, if the Faculty of Reaſon Ariſes from the Mind alone, or from it's Union with the Body, it will be no more Certain, that Reaſon is Subject to a Law Impoſed, than that our Memory, or our Perception is; and if the Faculty of Reaſon in our Minds Procecds from God, as our Creator, ſo do our Memories and Perceptions likeviſe, kewiſe; But, if the Faculty of Reaſon is an Impulſe from Almighty God, or a ſaricular Ray of the Divinity, which this Philoſophy would ſeem to Inſinuate; Which vay is it done? or Hov is ĩt leſs Enthuſiaſtick, than any Thing in Revealed Religion? or How does it fall Short of that Notion, which this Philolopher himſelf wvould Ridicule, and does in his Chapter of Enthuſiaſm, of Men having a Light Within? 5. . WE have thus far Traced the Notions of this Eſay, and could Proceed to a Particular Confutation of every Part of this Philoſophy of Ideas; What we have already Said, is only to Shew, as beſore in it's Moral Relations, that there was nothing to be Depended upon, in what ĩt Oſered to us, ſo here, that there is nothing, which the World has Reaſon to Lament the Loſs of, when it gave us the Hopes of a De monſtration of Morality, that it has not done it3 ſince, if the Great Friend of it Mr anl,neux were now Alive, and would Read vith Impartiallity, what has been Propoſcd upon this Subject, he would be Aſlured, that the Preſent Philoſophy was ſo far from being Capable of giving us a Demonſtration of Morality, that it did not ſo much as Underſland, what Belonged ot Appertained to a Demonſtration. For, if vhat we have Said is not enough to Evince this, ve ſall Add, what this Philoſophy Tells us at the End of the Section Cited in the Margin; That the Names oſ Subſtances, if they be Uſed in them, as they ſhould, can no more Diſlurb Moral, than they do Mathematical Diſcourſes, vhere, if the Mathematician Speaks of a Cube, or Globe, oſ Gold, or any other Body, he has his Clear Setiled Idea, which Varies not, &e. From whence it is Plain, that this Perſon Thinks, vhen the Mathematicians Argue upon the Abſtracted Space, which a Globe, or Cube, of Gold Poſſeſſes, they Reaſon upon the Nature of Things or not; i not, ſince he will not, I Hope, Say Morality is a Notional, and not a Real Science, by the ſame Argument which he brings for the Truth of Mathematick Speculations, which are only Notional, he Concludes Morality to be no other, Contrary to his Opinion; if it is his Opinion, that Morality is a Real Science, and not a Chimerical or Notional One, and Mathematicians, when they Conſider a Globe or a Cube of Gold. do Enrer into the Nature of thoſe Bodies, Then they are not Settled and Abſtracted Ideas, but rhe Nature of the Matter Comprehended in a Globe or Cube is to be known; and by Conſequence the Nature of thoſe Subſtances, which Enter into our Ideas of Moral Actions, Contrary to the Aſfirmations of this Philoſophy ; Which, may we not Add vith ſome Juſtice and Propriety, if well Conſidered, would Lay great Blame on thoſe, uho male not their Diſcourſes about Moral Things very Clear and Diſtinct? 5. 9. IFthis thereſore is the Caſe of Demonſtrations from Reaſon, or the Connexion of Ideas, in Reſpect oſ a God and Morality in General; What a Poor, What a Mean and Triling Religion is here Propoſed to us? When, if all was True, as all is Falſe, the Demonſtration of the Souls Immortality would be ſtill Unproved, and That of Future Revards and Puniſments; and which ill be Impoſſible from the Connexion of Ideas; and yet, without ſuch Demonſtrations, the Proof of a God and of Morality, would not be of much Concern to us; For, if ve were not to Exiſt hereafter, the Knowledge of the One or the Other would only make us Act our Parts with Decency here, Suiſtable to the Notions we had of an Almighty and Perſect Being, and to the Rules of Morality, which ſiould be Anſwerable to ſuch Notions; which is no more than a Player Acting his Part upon a Stage, with an Air and Manner becoming the Perſon he Repreſents, and Agreeable to the Rules of the Dramatick. ON the Contrary, we have Demonſtrations of Fact of our Religion, which does not only Aſſure us of a God, and of the Truth of Morality, but of our Exiſtence hereaſter, and that our Revards and Puniſiments ſhall be Proportioned to our Good or Ill Actions here; ſuch Notions, as theſe, ill Indeed make us Behave our ſelves Seriouſly, and with a Conſcientious Regard to what ve do; whereas, the other Turns our Thoughts and Actions into Folly and Grimace, and all the Grand Duties oſ Liſc into a Theatrical Apiſineſs and Buffoonery. 5. 10. IT Will Perhaps be Expected here, before we go any Farther, that we ſould Inquire into the Moral Notions of a New Philoſopher, which Aſſert, Tha Good and Evil, Vertue and Vice, Conſiſt in Acting according to Truth, and the Real Relations of Things, or Contrary to them; That a Man may Declare a Lie or a Truth by his Actions, as well as his Words;3 And that the Firſt is Vice, and the Laſt Lat Vertue; This is a General Repreſentation of this Celebrated Doãtrine of Moral Good and Evil; To which it is in General Anſwered; ] Firor, That Barely Saying or Aſfirming in Words, what is True, or what is Falſe, can neither be Vertuous, nor Vicious; Thus, if any One Affirms, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, or that the Diagonal of a Square is Incommenſurable with the Side of it, and thoſe Propoſitions ſould be True, he cannot therefore be Denominated from thence, ſo far a Vertuous Man, bur a Rational; Nor, if he ſiould Deny them, could he be Termed ſo far a Vicious One, but One, who ſoined and Connected his Ideas together Wrongly; Should Anaxagoras, or Sir Iſ. Newton Aſiert, that the Sun vas an Immenſe Globe of Red-Hot Iron, or Something like it, and it ſould Prove to be a Globe of Liquid, Denſe, Fire, or ſmould Hugens, or Dr. Wilkins, take the Moon to be Inhabited by Good Philoſophers or Aſtronomers, and it ſhould Happen to be a Vat Rock of Adamantine Ice, it would be Hard to Condemn them ſo far for Vicious Perſons, nor, if they were Right, would it be any Commendation of their Vertue; The Reaſon of which is, becauſe there can be no more Vertue or Vice in the Placeing and Setting our Ideas together Rightly or Wrongly, than in the Diſpoſing of ſo many Grains of Whear or Sand in a Regular and Juſt Order, or with Perplexity and Confuſion; our Ideas, in the Nature oſ Things, and Abſtracted from all orher Conſiderations, being only One Part of Nature, and ſuch Grains of Wheat or Sand, Another; It would be Infinite and Endleſs to Produce Examples in all the Ways of Life and of Science, wherein Men may Connect their Ideas Juſtly, and Aſfirm Truths ſfrom thence, and yct not be therefore ſo far Vertuous, and wherein they may make an Undue Connexion Of them, and from thence Affirm Falſchoods, without their being ſo far Vicious or Immotal. IF therefore this is ſo in our Aſfirmations in Words, the ſame muſt be AcknõwIedged by this Syſteme in our Aſfirmations in Actions, and that Men may Aſfirm very Innocently, and without any Immorality, ſeveral Things, vhich are Falſe, and Others, which are True, without any Acceſſion to their Vertue; ſince it Endeavours 10 Reduce the Actions of Men to their Expreſſions by Words, and to Show, that they are Equally Capable of Truth and Falſchood. SECOND, It is not Evinced, that Men are under any Moral Obligation to Speak alvays what they Think, and therefore not to Declare and Explain always their Thoughts by their Actions; For, if they were, all Prudence and Diſcretion, which have been hitherto Eſteemed amongſt the Cardinal Vertues, muſt be Reſigned, ànd Caſhiered a Once; And Innocence and Goodneſs muſt be laid Open to the Attaques of Avarice Ambition, Intereſt, Prejudice, and all the Paſſions and Deſigns of the Inſolent and the Injurious, and Perhaps even of ſome Perſons, vho would Promote ſuch a Doctrine, not with an Intention to Practice it themſelves, but that Others ſould, whoſt Weakneſs yet they would Deride and Ridicule, and upon Proper Occaſions would Know, how to make an Advantage of; What I here Defend is the Chriſtian Moral, Namely, To be Ingenuous, Honeſt, Candid, Charitable, and Free in all our Words and Actions but withal, to Uſe a Wiſdom and Prudence, not to Expoſe our Thoughts, and the Invard Sentiments of our Minds, to every One, and upon all Events, under a Conviction of ſuch Notions. TuirD, I is not Proved, that our Actions are as Expreſſive of Truth or Falſehood, as our Words are in Propoſitions; Becauſe in Verbal Propoſitions, we Formally and Intentionally Aſfirm or Deny Something, but our Actions are many Times, and moſily, not Explicite, nor do they Mean, or Intend, any Thing by vay of Aſfirming or Denying any Truth; Thus, vhen we Walk or Ride, or Viſit a Relation, or a Friend, or in any other of the Actions of Life, ve do not Aſfirm any Propoſitions, which I know of, in Reſpect to Truth or Falſchood; we Perform theſe Actions, as they are Agrecable to us, and Delight us, and vhich Render this World in ſome Meaſure Pleaſant and Eaſy ;3 And if this Doctrine, of Reduceing Moral Good and Evil to the Truth and Falſchood in Human Actions, is True, it muſt Pronounce and Aſſert, that Men may not, nor can, Act to Indulge their own Innocent Pleaſure, without Aſſirming ſome Propoſition or orher, Relating to Truth or Falſehood, tho the Perſons vho Act, are not Conſcious to themſclves of any ſuch Propoſition; And it wouli would be a Laborions Thing for the Patrons of this Syſteme to Show, what Propoſition every Action Amounts to. FourTH, It is Impoſſible to know all the Relations of Things, and thereſore, ii Vertue Obliges us to Act np to the Truth of ſuch Relations, Moral Good and Evil vill, as to the Practice of it, be an Impoſſible Buſineſs; For who can Determine all the Relations, in which any Particular Man Stands to all the Men and Beings in the Univerſe? And yet, it we do not Act with, or by, ſuch a Perſon, as he ĩs thus Re lated, we Incurr, according to this Syſleme, the Blame of Vice, and are Cenſured and Condemned, as Guilty of an Immorality; Thus I may Act with or by a Man, as an Honeſt One, and yet as he Stands Related in the World, he may be quite the Reverſe of it, which yet I may Know nothing of; I do not thereſore here Act according to the Truth and Reality oſ Things, Notwithſtanding which, I vould Beg the Favour to be Excuſed ſfrom being a Vicious and Immoral Man for ſo Doing; On the Contrary, a Man may to Appearance ſeem Gay and Triſling, or Perhaps Extravagant and Fooliſh, tho in his Inward Sentiments, and the Reſerves of his Thoughts, he may be Grave, Sedate, and Serious; Iſ I ſould therefore Act with, or by him, according to the Firſt Relation of Things, which are Apparent and eal to me, I ſmould Act, as this Philoſophy Says, Agreeably to Truth, and to Vertue; That is, iſ I Acted in a Ridiculous Manner with, or by him, When at the Same Time Iſhould Think my Self highly Blameable, and in Reality Injurious and Vicious, iſ I was Acquainted vith his True Character, and the Natural Relations, under which he vas to be Conſidered, in Reſpect to Men and Things; So that, iſ this Doctrine is Juſt, a Man may be a very Good and Vertuous Man, when it Pronounces him a Vicious, and a very Vicious Man, when it Declares him a Vertuous One; That ĩs, Vertue is by this Syſteme Changed into Vice, and Vice into Vertue; There might be a Multitude of Inſtances of the like Kind Produced to the Same Purpoſe, which would Show the Great Abſurdity, and Vanity of the Preſent Doctrine. FirTn, In all Moral Good and Evil, or in Vertue and Vice, there muſt be an Intention and Deſign of Acting; otherwiſe our Actions are Merely and Barely Mechanical; But this Syſteme takes no Notice of the Intention of our Actions, only of their Conformity to the Truth and Reality of Things,. whether we Intend ſuch a Conformity, or not; As Thus, a Man may Act according to the Truth and Reality of Things, and not now he does it, and may Act Contrary to them, and yet be Ignorant of it; Notwithſtanding Which, it would not Follow, that he would be ſo far a Vertuous Man in the Firſt Caſe, or a Vicious in the Second, of which likewiſe many Examples and Inſtances might be Produced. SixTH, by Acting according to the Truth and Reality of Things, and the Relations of them, or the Contrary. we may be Said to Act Properly or Improperly, Rationally or Irrationally, but ſurely not Vertuouſly or Viciouſly. Morally or Immorally; Thus, if I Cut a Stick in Pieces, or Talk and Reaſon with a Poſt; I Uſe the Firſt as it is, and the Laſt as it is not3 But I would Deſire, that ve may not be from thence Obliged, to Call the One a Vertue, and the Other a Crime. SEVENTH, The Suppoſition of a God is Neceſſary to Moral Good and Evil, Vertue and Vice; For if there was no God, all our Actions would be only Purely Natural and Human, ſome vould be more Agreeable and Beautiſul, more Applauded, and better Eſteemed than Others, but there would be no more Vertue or Vice in them, than there is in Colours, for their Pleaſing and Delighting, or Oſfending the Eye and Senſe of the Beholders; And therefore, there is Something more Required to Vertue and Vice, than Acting, or not Acting, according to the Reality of Things. Ei16nTH, Nor muſt a God be only Suppoſcd, but that he Concerns himſclf vith the Actions of Men, and that he has Preſcribed and Laid down a Rule for their Behaviour and Conduct; Which muſt cither be from his own Adjuſtment of the World, and ſrom the Works of his Creation, that is, ſfrom Nature, which therefore ought to be Underſtood by us, or from Revelation; and Conſequently to Know, what Morality is, ve ſould be Good Chriſtians, or Good Philoſophers, or both, neither of which Sciences ſcom to Enter into the Preſent Syſteme. LastLv. LastLy, Future Rewards and Puniſhments, and therefore the Immortality oſ the Soul, are alſo Neceſſary to the Moral Good and Evil of our Actions; For if there was a God, and he alſo Concerned himſelf in the Actions 6F Mankind, and had farther Impoſed upon them a Law cither from Nature, or from Revelation, and did not Enforce it by Suitable Rewards and Puniſhments; It would be no more, than if I, or any other Perſon, ſould Make and Ordain Rules for the Deporrment and Demeanour of Others, over whom I either had not, or would not, Excrciſe any Power or Authority, which would be a Ridiculous Grimace, and a Pride and Affectation, both Irrational and Abſurd; and therefore we muſt ſtill have Recourſe to Revelation, which gives us the Sureſt Proof of ſuch a Futurity, to Complcte our Notions of Morality. TuESE are the Arguments in General againſt this Scheme, but ſince it is Received with an Applauſe, vhich does not Juſtly belong to it, I ſall now Particularly Inquire into every Article and Propoſition of this Doctrine. 5. t1. TuE Firſt Propoſition is, that That Act; which may be Denominated Morally Good or Evil, muſt be the Act of a Being Capable of Diſtingulſhing, Cliooſing, and Acting for himſelf, or more Brieſly, of an Intelligent and Free Agent. Which is thus Proved, becauſe, that which cannot Diſtinguiſh, cannot Chooſe; And that, which has not the Liberty of Chooſing for it's ſelf, and Acting accordingly, from an Internal Principle, Acts, if it Acts at all, under a Neceſſity Incumbent ab extra, and is in Reality only an Inſtrument in the Hand of Something, which Impoſes the Neceſſity, and cannot Properly be Said to 4ẽt, but to be Acded; a Being under the Above- Mentioned Inabilities is, as to the Morality of it's Acts, in the State of Inert and Paſſive Matter, and can be but a Machine, to which no ĩòu or Mores can be Aſcribed. Whaicu Proof is nothing more than Aſfirming the ſame Thing in a Variety of Expreſſions, of Free and Neceſſary, Acting and being Acted, of being an Agent or an Inſtrument and a Machine, Namely, that a Moral Action muſt Proceed from a Free Agent. Was this ever Diſputed? or does it Want a Demonſtration? There is no Doubt of it: And we may Add, that not only a Moral Action, but every other Action, which is Voluntary and Free, Proceeds from a Free Agent, which alſo muſt be Aſierted, and as little Requires a Proof of it, as the Other3 And the Queſtion here will be; Whether every Voluntary and Free Action is a Moral One? This Doctrine ſeems to Inſinuate it, but does not Think Fit to Prove it; As it cannot do; For tho every Moral Action muſt be a Free, and a Voluntary One, yet every Free and VoIuntary Action is not a Moral; Since even Brutes are Capable of the Former, and yet no One will Say, they are of the Latter. AND yet this Syſteme Sets out ſo Prepoſterouſly, as to Think, that, if it Shows one Side the Propoſition, it Proves the Reverſe of it; that is, that if it Demonſtrates, that ævery Moral Adion muſt come from a Voluntary and Free Agent, which no One vill Contradict, therefore every Voluntary and Free Action muſt come from a Mo: ral Agent, which no One vill Aſſent to, unleſs he Eſteems Brutes to be ſuch. TuAT this Propoſition does yet Inferr and Suppoſe this, is Evident; becauſe, to Prove, that a Moral Action Proceeds from a Frec Agent, is nothing, Excepting it is Shewn in this Syſteme, that every One, who Acts Voluntarily and Freely, and even according to the Reality of Things, is a Moral Agent; all which Brutes may do, and yet not be either Vertuous or Vicious; For a Brute may Eat Hay or Graſi, and do it Voluntarily and Freely, and At according to the Nature of Things, and yet not be a Vertuous Brute, as, I Suppoſe, this Doctrine will Acknowledge. S. 12. THE Sccond Propoſition is, that thoſe Propoſitions are True, which Expreſi Things, as they are; Or Truth is the Conformity of thoſe Words or Signs, by which Things are Expreſſed, to the Things themſelves. Is this then a Definition of Truth: Where therefore is the Connexion of Ideas? And what becomes of an Intuitive Perception of ſuch a Connexion? We are Indecd to Expreſs Things, as they are, or to Conform our Signs, by which Things are Expreſed, io Things themſclves; Thus, ve muſt not in Words, Call White Black, nor Apply that Sign or Word, which Expreſſes an Horſe, to a Man; And In Actions, ve ſhould not Uſe a Motion of the Muſcles, or a Geſture of the Body, which is Significant of Joy, to Denote Grieſ or Sorrow, nor Explain any Thoughts or Paſſions of our Minds by thoſe Signs, which may Inſinuate to Others, the Contrary to them; This would be Agreeable to Truth, G8ꝶ55838 bu but it is not all, which is Requiſite to it; Becauſe, a Man may be very Punctual in his Expre ſſions, cither by Words or Actions, and yet may be Erroncous in his Connecting his Ideas, which he thus Plainly and Honeſtly Expreſſes; That is a Sincere; Dovnright, Well-Meaning Perſon may neither be a Good Mathematician, a Divine, or a Philoſopher. BUT here likewiſe is ſomething Deſicient, as to the Point of Morality, which is to Shew, that we may not Miſname Things without a Vice, that to Put off Paſſions and Sentiments upon Others, which we have not our ſelves, is a Crime, and that even Error in the Connexion of our Ideas is a Grand and an Unpardonable Fault, and a Great Impeachment to Vertue; which Things will be Hard to Evince, that they may not be Allowed in any Caſe whatſoever. 5. 13. THE Third Propoſition is, that a True Propoſition may be Denicd, or Things may be Denied to be what they are, by Deeds, as well as by Expreſs Words, or another Propoſition. Tuis Propoſition is very Certain, ſo far as it Aſfirms; ſince it is very Evident, that a Man may Signify, and Aſſert, a Propoſition by his Actions, as well as by his Words, they being only Diffcrent Ways of Explaining the Inward Conceptions oſ our Minds; But it will not from thence Follow, that becauſe he may, he always does do it, or is Obliged to do it; a Perſon, who is Dea? and Dumb may Expreſs the ſame Senſe, Meaning, and Intention by his Signs, as another does by his Words; But then it is with a Purpoſe to Expreſs it; As much as the other does by his Words; Or elſe they are Idle Signs, without Intention or Meaning; And ſuch may the Caſe be of many Actions in Human Life, which are not Intendeà to Expreſs any Propoſition in Relation to Truth, or to Falſchood, as well as ſeveral Words, which Paſ' in Converſation, which are not Deſigned to Affirm or Deny any Truth, but are the Sport and Diverſion of ſuch, who are Willing to Relax and Unbend ſome Times from the Cares of Liſe, or the Severities of Study and Contemplation; For who ever Imagined, that ſome Propoſition or other in Reſpect of Truth, was always Meant and Intended in a Jeſt, and that ve muſt look for Maxims of Reaſon and Philoſophy in a Pun or a Witticiſm? IF therefore Words and Actions may, or may not, Expreſs a Propoſition in Relation to Truth or Falſehood, how muſt we know, when they do, or do not do it, unleſs from the Explicit Intention and Deſign of the Perſon who Speaks or Acts? To Interpret other Mens Words and Actions for them, and to Affirm, that they Mean this, or another Propoſition by them, when they Declare, they never Thought or Dreamed of any ſuch Propoſition, is Dealing, not only Abſurdly, but Arrogantly, vith Mankind, and Deſerves a Suitable Return of Contempt from them. HOWEVER, We ſhall Examine this Propoſition Farther, by the Inſtances Alledged. 1ſ. It is Said, there is a Meaning in many Acts and Geſtures; Every Body Underſtands Weeping, Laughing, Shrugs, Frowns, &. Theſe are a Sort of Univerſal Language ; Zeno's and Diodoruss Argument againſt Motion, vas Anſwered by getting up and Walking; Roſcius Pretended to Expreſs the ſame Sentence, as many Ways by Geſture and Action, as Cicero could do by a Variety of Words and Elocution. To which it is Replied; That if there isa Meaning in many Acts and Geſtures, it is a Confeſſion, that in ſome there is, or may be, None; That if every Body Underſtands Weeping, Laughing, &. it is, when they are Intended and Deſigned to have a Mcaning by the Perſon, who Uſes them, for Men may Weep or Laugh, &⸗. they Know not the Reaſon why, as is the Caſe of ſome Diſtempers, or they may do it upon a Diſferent Account from what is by Others Imagined or Preſumed; That the Philoſopher, vho Anſered the Arguments againſt Motion by his own Motion, did it with that Intention; That, if Roſcius Endeavoured to Expreſs the ſame Sentence by Action as Variouſly, as Cicero could by Diſferent Forms of Elocution, it was his Meaning and Intention ſo to do. FrROM Whence it is, hitherto thus far Evident, that not only Speaking or Acting, but a Deſign and Intention in ſuch Words and Actions, is Requiſite to the making them Signiſicant and Expreſſive of ſome Truth or Propoſũtion. 2d. It is Told us, that theſc Inſtances do not come up to the Meaning of this Philoſophy 3 And that there are many Acts of other Kinds, ſuch as Conſtitute the Character oſ a Man's Conduct in Liſc, which have in Nature, and would be Taken by by any Indiſferent Judge to have, a Signification, and to Imply ſome Propoſition, às Plainly to be Underſtood, as if it was Declared in Words; and therefore, i? what ſuch Acts Declare to be, is not, they muſt Contradict Truth, as much as any Falſe Propoſition or Aſſertion can. To which we again Reply3 That there are no ſuch Acts, as are Mentioned above, which have in Nature a Signification, or Imply any Propeſition, unleſs they are ſo Meant and Intended, and thereſore, if what ſuch Acts Declare to be, is not, that they do not Contradict Truth, as much as any Falſe Propoſition or Aſertion can, unleſs they are Deſigned to do it; This ſeems to be ſo Plain, that nothing can be more ſo; For does any One Affirm or Deny in Words a Propoſition, but with an Explicite Intention of doing it? And ſince Actions arc put in this Syſteme upon the ſame Level with Words, there is the Same Reaſon, that we ſiould Aſſirm or Deny in Actions with the Same Explicite Intention; And yet it would Fain Gain this Point, that Mere Actions, without any Intention or Deſign Annexed to them, ſhould Affirm or Deny; And that theſe Actions are not to be Explained from the Intention of the Perſon, vho Commits them, but by Iuaiſſerent Judqes, by having a Siznification, which in Nature belongs to them, and by an Implication of a Propoſition; When yet it would be Impoſſible for the moſt Indifferent Judqes in the World to Determine; what the Nature of an Human Action is, or to Knov, what Propoſition it Implies, without taking into the Account, the Intention of it. 3d. Ir is Inſtanced, that if a Body of Soldiers, Secing another Body Approach, ſhould Fire upon them, this Action would Declare, they were Enemies, and if they were not Enemies, this Military Language would Declare, what was Falſe; This Inſtance goes on to Shew it's Learning about the Athenians, in the Attacqũe of Epipolæ, and of the Carthaginians, in their laſt Incampment againſt Agathocles in Africa, but Reſumes the Aſſertion, that Suppoſe, Inſtead of this Firing, ſome Officer ould have Said, they were Enemies, when Indeed they vere Friends, ſuch an Affirmation would be a Falſe, th a Miſtaken One, and what Holds in Words, Obtains alſo in Actions. To which we likewiſc Anſwer, that here the Intention of the Action is Plain and Expreſs, which, we have Said, is always Neceſſary to an Affirmation of any Thing, in Words, as well as Actions, in Relation to Truth and Falſehood; For Suppoſing an Officer had Said they were Enemies, vhen they were Friends, and had Acted with them Accordingly, he as much, and Equally Intended to Declare them Enemies by his Actions, as his Words, when yet they were Friends; Notwithſtanding which, he on the other Hand had no Deſign or Intention of Speaking or Acting Falſely; What therefore can be Concluded from hence? What ? That ſuch a Perſon Speaks and Acts againſt Truth, and the Reality of Things, and that he is by Conſequence an Ill and Immoral Man? Surely this Syſteme vill not Aſfirm ſo Groſs an Abſurdity, and yet it's Doctrine Directly Leads to ſuch an Aſſertion; Since Mere Truth and Falſchood in Words and Actions, are made the Meaſure and Standard of Vertue and Vice, and of our being Good, or being Immoral, without Conſidering the Intention of the Speaker or the Agent. Ir this Philoſophy only Deſigns in this Propoſition to Prove, that ſome Actions are as Expreſſive, as Words, it will not find any Opponent; Every One vill Readily Aſſent to the Thing, and not Require a Demonſiration of it; But, if it would Inſinuate, or Evince, that Speaking, or Acting, according to the Reality of Things vithout an Intention of doing it, is a Vertue or a Vice, it will not Meet with many Rational or Conſidering Perſons, who ill be Patrons of ſuch a Doctrine. 41h, It is Inſtanced, that, when Popilius Lænas Sollicited to have Citero Proſcribed and that he might find him out, and be his Executioner, his Carriage Suſficiently Signified, that Tully was either ſome Bad Man, or had ſome way Injured him, or at leaſ had not Saved his Liſe; all which Things being Falſe, his Actions were Expreſſive ol that, which was Falſe, or wvere Contradictions to Truth; and herein, it is Said, Conſiſtec his Ingratitude. To vhich it is again Anſwered, that what theſe Actions of Popilius Signified can not be Explained or Determined, without Knowing the Intention oſ them; They might be Expreſſions of ſome Inward and Latent Malice and Inveteracy towards Ci cero, upon Incidents and Incentives, which are not come to our knovledge, and rhere fore might not Show Cicero, but Popilius to be a Bad Man; Tho', if he Acted accord Gg 358358°2 in; : ng to the Reality of Things, that is, according to any Juſt Reſentments againſt Cirero, he might be in this S;ſteme, a very Good One;3 They might be alio Expreſſions of his Ambition, and of his Complements to a Great and an Elevated Villain, Antony, and Conſequently, might not Declare, that Tully was a Bad, but a Worihy and a Vertuous Man; So that Ppiliuss Ingratitude might not Conſiſt in the Falleneſs oſ the Action, but in the Truth of it, by his Proſeſſed Intention to Gratiſy his Ambition, and Ruin the State, rather than Side vith Vertue Oppreſſed, tho' it had been Formerly ſo Advantageous and Salutary to him. I have hitherto Called him Ppilius, in Obedience to this Philoſophy, but his Name was Popillius Lanas, according to Fabriciuss Hiſtory of the Life of Tully; And that his Actions did not Declare Tully to be a Bad Man, bur himſelſ to be One, is Plain from the Exit, which that Brave and Noble oman made, according to Auſidius Baſſus in Seneca, Paulim remoto Velo, poſtquàm Armatos Vidit, Eqo vero Conſiſto, ait, accede Veterane, & ſi hoc Saltem potes rectè facere, Incide Cervicem. Our Philoſopher Forgets alſo, that one Herennius a Centurion, as well as ropillius a Tribune, was Concerned in this moſt Barbarous and Inhuman Murder, which ill likewiſe a little Perplex his Reaſoning upon this Head; DBecauſe Herennius did not ſtand in the ſame Relation o Tully, as Popillius did, and therefore, if Tully had been an Inveterate Enemy to the Formeſ, he Acted, in the True Senſe of this Philoſophy, according to the Real Relations of Things in Killing of him, and Conſcquently, the Same Murder was a Good and Vertuous Action in the Firſt, thd Perhaps a Criminal and a Vicious One in the Laſt sth. It is Alledged, that it 4 ſould Enter into a Compact vith 5, by vhich he DPromiſes never to do ſome Certain Thing, and after this he does that Thing, it muſt be Granted, that his Act Interferes with his Promiſe, and is Contrary to it. Will any One Deny this? Or that an Action may not Afſirm and Deny, as vell as Words? The Queſtion is, whether any Actions or Words Affirm or Deny, without an Intention in the Agent or the Speaker, and whether Farther an Intention likewiſe is nor Neceſſaty to any Moral Aſertion in Words or Actions; If 4 Enters into ſuch a Compact vith B, and his Act, with Deſirn and Intention, Interferes with his Promiſe, he is an Immoral and an Ill Man; if Inadvertently, and Unavares, and without his Deſign, it Chances to Interſcre with his Promiſe, ve may Safely and Truly Aſfirm, there is no Vice or Immorality in it. As ſor æqons Sheep, or Damatas's, or Alphondas's, or Melibauss, and the Arguing from Theocritus, or Virgil, it is not very Material to the Point, and only Shews, that this Philoſophy had Once been a little Converſant in thoſe Authors, without Perhaps Knoving the Full Scope and Senſe of them; Excepting, that Damaætas Underſtood them to be æę0ns Sheep, becauſe he had the Uſe and Diſpoſal of them; And from whence it is as Weakly Concluded, that he who has the Uſe and Diſpoſal of a Thing, has the All, or the Property, of that Thing. 6th. It is Told us, that in the Jeiſh Hiſtory we Read, that when Abimelel: Saw Iſaac Sporting vith Rebeah, and Taking Conjugal Liberties, he Preſently Knew her io be Iſaads Wife, and if ſic had not been his Vife, the Caſe had been the Same, as that of æ40n5 Sheep, which tho' he Uſed and Diſpoſed of them, were not his, but Alphondas's or Melibuuss; and it is Said, if it is Objected, that ſhic might have been a Miſtreſs, or an Harlot, it is Anſered, that ſo ſie might have been, tho' Iſaac had Told him by Words, that ſie was his Wife, as he Told him ſhe was his Siſter; Whaat is Said to be Suſficient for the Preſent Purpoſe, and to make Acts Capable ol Contradicting Truth, is, if they may be Allowed to Expreſs Things, as Plainly and Determinately, as Words can. To wiich it is alſlo Replied, that we do not, nor vill any One Deny, that 4ĩ. may not Expreſi Things, as Plainly and Determinately, as Words can 3 They may do it, but do they do it? Iſaac might by ſome Act oſ Fondneſs, Affection, and Endearment Diſferent ſrom what is Practiced to Levd Women, Expreſs and Shew Febetah to be his Wire, as much as by any Words, but then here is a Deſign and Intention o doĩng it; On the Contrary, the taking Conjugal Liberties, as they are Termed, could never Declare æetetah to be his Wiſe, when they might as well Declare her to b his Harlot; As any Word, which has a Double Senſe or Mcaning, cannot be Expreſ ſive of One only; From vhence it is Maniſeſt, that when we would Expreſs on Thoughts by Actions, we are to Intend and Deſign thoſe Actions to Expreſs ou Thonghts Thoughts; but will it be here Said, that Iſãac Intended to Shew by his Actiòns, that Rebeab was his Wiſe, vhen in Words he Affirmed her to be his Siſter? i DiD æægon, becauſe he gave the Sheep to another's Keeping Intend to Declare, they were his Sheep? They might be a Third Perſon's, and 4g0n Deputed by him to the Care of them; Does he, who has the Uſe and Diſpoſal of a Thing, Declare that he has the All, and the Property of that Thing? Add might not æ2 Commit the Sheep to Damatass Inſpection from, and under, an Authority from Melibaus ? j Tuis therefore is what we Maintain, that where Actions are made to Expreſs our Thoughts, they are Choſen on Purpoſc to do it, and with a Deſin and Intention of doing it, as a Dumb Man makes Uſe of Signs, when he is Incapable of Explaining his Sentiments by Language ; Theſc Actions muſt be Proper and Significant of vhat they are Intended to Expreſs, and not of a Dubious and Uncertain Interpretation; And we muſt be as Careſul to Convey our Real Meaning by them, as by Tuſt and Appoſite Words; For if we take Mens Actions in General, there is ScarceIy One of them, which may not Admit of a Thouſand Conſtructions, and can only be Aſcertained from the Principle, that is, the Inward Intention of the Mind, and the Motive, ſrom which it Proceeds; and which does not Lie Open to Common Obſervarion. 7h. It is Said, if a Soldier ſould Take an Oath to Cæſar, and afterwards Deſert to the Enemy, this would be as much as if he Denied him in Words, ſince his Aòtions Abjured him; And if a Chriſtian ſould Burn Incenſe to upiter, upon the Command of a Tyrant, tho' he did not in Words Deny Chriſt, yet by that very Fact he would Deny him; And if a Man Lives, as if he had that Eſtate, which he has not, he Acts or Lives a Lie. i ] ON the other Hand we Say, the Soldier might upon ſome Motives of Terror, and fol Self-Preſervation, go over to Pompey, and yet Wi well to Cæſar; The Chriſtian might Love, and Inwardly Adore and Reverence his Saviour, and yet not be Courageous enough to Reſiſt and Encounter the Tortures of an Heathen Perſecutor; And a Man may Live above his Eſtate, and yet Condemn his ovn Weakneſs, Vanity, and Indiſcretion for it; In all which Caſes, the Man Affirms by his Actions, what in Terms he Denies, and therefore theſe Inſtances are ſo many Proofs, that Actions are not oſten ſo Expreſſive of the Thoughts and Sentiments of our Minds, as Verbal Propoſitions are; For it is Plain here, that our Aſſertions in Words Declare our Real Opinions of Things, and that our Actions are Entirely Inexpreſſive of them; And from Hence it is again likewiſe Evident, that the Intention of an Action is Neceſſary to make it Significant of our Inward Thoughts or Conceptions. 31h. NOTWITHSTANDING Which, this Religion of Nature Delincated, goes on to Tell us; That Words are but Arbitrary Signs of our Ideas, or Indications of our Thoughts, ſince that Word, which in Hebrew Denotes Poverty, in Arabick Denotes Riches, Whereas Facts may be Taken as the Effects of them, or rather as the Thoughts themſelves Produced into Act, as the very Conceptions of the Mind, brought forth, and Grown to Maturity, and therefore as the moſt Natural and Expreſs Repreſentations of them; And beſides this, they bear Certain Reſpects to Things, which are not Arbitrary, but as Determinate and Immutable, as any Ratio's are in Mathemaricks; For the Facts, and the Things they Reſpect, are Yuſt what they are, as much as any Two given Quantities are, and therefore the Reſpects, Interceding between thoſe, muſt be as Fixed, as the zatio is, vhich One of theſe Bears to the Other; That is, they muſt Remain the Same, and alvays Speak the Same Language, till Things Cceaſe ro be, what they are. Tuis therefore is lIaid Down, as a Fundamental Maxim, that whoever Acts. as ĩi Things were ſo, or not ſo, doth by his Acts Declare, that they are ſo, or not ſo, a: Plainly, as he could by Words, and with more Reality;3 And if the Things are otherwiſe, his Acts Contradict thoſe Propoſitions, hich Aſſert them to be as they are. BuT Firſt, we Say, Words are Arbitrary Signs Indeed of our deas, beſore any Senſe is Affixed to them; Thus we may Take what Articulate Sounds we Pleaſe to Denote our Ideas by, and from Hence, Diſferent Nations and Countries make Uſe of Difſerent Tanguages; But after the Senſe is Aſſixed to the Word, it Ceaſes to be an Arbitrary Sign, and ve may not, if ve will Diſcourſe, Converſe, or Reaſon with Others Anne Annex to it, vhat Idea we Think fit; It is Certain and Determined, and is always Expreſſive of the Same Idea, as much or more than any Fact or Action can be. ON the Contrary, Facts are not always the Effects of our Thoughts, or our Thoughts themſelves Produced into Act, &. and therefore more Natural Expreſſions of them; Since they in many Particulars are as Arbitrary as our Words, as this Philoſophy Owns; thus Chriſtians, ib is Said, when they Pray, Take oſf their Hats, but the Vews, when they Pray, or Say any of their Beratoih, Put them on, the Same Thing Expreſſing Reverence with the One, which Denotes Irreverence with the Other3 And it will be Hard to find any Acts, which have an Unalterable Signification; and even Killing a Man with One Intention, Expreſſes Malice and Murder, and vith another, as in the Execution of a Criminal, Humanity and Juſtice; æ50n5 Treating the Flock, and Diſpoſing of it, as if it was his, did not Inferr, that i? was his, for he might have been Authoriſed ſo to do by Arelibaus. j SECOND, But Which is more, if this Doctrine is True, that Facts more Naturally and Unalterably Expreſs our Thoughts, than Words do, and that they are our Thoughts themiſelves Matured and Produced into Act, it muſt Aſfirm that a Perſon, who is Deaſ and Dumb, can Maintain a more Intelligible Converſation with thoſe about him, and can Explain his Mind more Fully, Truly, and Naturally, by Actions and Geſtures, than another can by any Force of Language, or the Ambiguity of Verbal Propoſitions; And yet, every one Knows how Diſficult it is, and how much Gueſſing and Conjecture it Requires, to come at the Inward Senſe and Meaning of ſuch Dumb Signs, and how Plain and Obvious Words are, and how Eaſily they Inſtill into the Mind oſ the Hearer the Thoughts and Ideas of thoſe, vho Uſe them. TuIRD, Facts are not our Thoughts Matured and Teeming into Actions, becauſc, there is many Times no Connexion betwixt our Thoughts and our Actions, that is, our Actions may not Expreſs our Thoughts; A General of an Army may at this Time Think of Inveſting and Laying Siege to a Place, and yet at that very Time, by a Feint, March his Soldicrs a quite Contrary Way; Hannibal may Thir of Subduing and Conquering ome, and yet Suſfer his Men to Diſſolve in Luxury and Eaſc at Capua, which was no ways Expreſſive of ſuch a Thought or Intention; And a Chriſtian, or a Philoſopher, may have very Good Thoughts, which are not always Declared or Explained by his Actions. FouRTH, Nay Farther, Men may Perſorm ſeveral Actions, with which they do not Perceive any Thought is Connected, we do not find in the Common Actions of Life, as Walking, Sitting, Standing, &F. that every Step, which we Take, is the Reſult of any Explicit Thought, or that every Moment, we Sit or Stand, is Attended vith the Thought of doing it; That is, ſeveral of our Actions, and even thoſe, which come under the Notion of Moral Ones, are Mechanical, and are not the Expreſſions or Indications of any Abſolute or Determinate Thought or Perception; And this is the Caſe of moſt Habits. FirTH, Nor do Facts bear Certain Reſpects to Things, which are as Immutable, as any Ratio's are in Mathematicks, nor do they always therefore Speak the Same Language; For, tho Things are Juſt, what ithey are, and vill never Ceaſe, 10 be what they are, yet the Same Facts will not always Bear the Same Relation to them, which ſhould have been Proved, but is very Wiſely Declined by this Philoſophy  For we are to Judge of Mens Thoughts by the Facts, which are Said to Explain them, and therefore the Intention of the Fact cannot be here Taken in, and the Fact it's ſeli is only Conſidered; Whereas the Same Human Fact may be Infinitely Diverſified by the Intention of it; Thus, if any One Killsa Man by Accident, or with Deſign. the Fact is the Same, but I Hope it does not Bear the Same Immutable Reſpect to Things; Becauſc the Intention Alters the Compariſon; If with Deſign, and that is Various, cither to Indulge his ovn Malice, or to Put him out of his Pæin, or in Obedience to a Juſt Law, which Condemned him, Iwould ſtill Believe, that tho' the Fact ĩs the Same, th Principle of it, the One Expreſſing Cruelty, the Second Mercy, anc the Laſt Juſtice, will make it ſtand in a Different Relation to Things, and therefore that Mſere Facts, without the Intention or Principle of them, do not Bear Certain æe ſpecis to Things, which as it is Said, are not Arbitrary, but as Determinate, and Im mutable, as any ſatids are in Mathematicks;3 And yet this is what the Preſent Docrimt rine mut Maintain, for according to it, we cannot Know the Principle or Intention it ſelf, but by the Facti. SixTH, As to the Fundamental Maxim Concluded from Hence, that whoever Acts, as if Things vere ſo, or not ſo, doth by his Acts Declare; that they are ſo, or not ſo, as Plainly as he could by Words, and with more Reality, it is, from what Foregoes, One Entire Falſehood. 1ſf. BECAUSE a Man may Act, as if Things were ſo, and yet not Declare by thoſe Acts, that they are ſo; Unleſs he Intends to do it. 2d. BECAUSE Acts do not Declare our Thoughts ſo Explicitly and Fully as Words do, as was Inſtanced from Dumb Signs and Actions, not being alike Intelligible with Words and Verbal Propoſitions. y4. BECAUSE all the Reaſoning above, ſfrom whence this Concluſion is Made, has been Conſidered and Refuted. Ir therefore this Fundamental Maxim Proves to be an Error, What muſt ve Expect from a Syſteme of Natural Religion, which is wholly Built and Depends upon jt? Nothing Certainly but Romance, and Thouſands of Petitions and Poſtulatums; However, ve ſhall Proceed to it's Fourth Propoſition. S. 14. Tur Fourth Propoſition is, that no Act, whether Word or Deed, of any Being, to vhom Moral Good and Evil are Imputable, that Interferes with any True Propoſition, or Denies any Thing to be, as it is, can be Right; For, iſt. Ir that Propoſition, which is Falſe, be Wrong, that Act, hich Implies ſuch a Propoſition, it is Said, cannot be Right, becauſe it is the very Propoſition it ſelf in Practice. But it ſould have been here Determined, what is Mcant by Right and Wrong; If Truth and Falſehood is Intended by it; The Aſſerrion Runs thus, if that Propoſition, which is Falſe, be Falſe, that Act which Implies ſuch a Propoſition, cannot be True; which Perhaps may be a Certain Propoſition, but is a Silly One; If by Right and Wrong is Intended, Vertue and Vice, Good and Evil; The Aſſertion will be; Ii hat Propoſition, which is Falſe, be Vicious or Evil, that Act, which Implies ſuch a Propoſition, cannot be Vertuous or Good, Which is wholly Precarious and Unroved. P For it is not yet Shewn, that Vertue and Vice, Good and Evil, arc Terms Reciprocal with Truth and Falſehood; Nor has it Proved, that ſere Acts are as Expreſ ſive and Significant, as Words, or that they are at all Significant, without a Motive, a Principle, or Intention, Annexed to them. 2d. It is Told us, that thoſe Propoſitions, which are True, and Expreſs Things, as they are, Expreſs the Relation between the Subject and the Attribute, as it is; That is, This is either Aſfirmed, or Denied of That, according to the Nature of that Relation, which Relation is Fixed by the Natures of the Things themſclves; To Follow Nature thereſore, is not to Comply with our Bodily Inclinations, as ſome Imagine, but to Conform our ſelves to the Truth and Reality of Things, and the Proper and Determined Relations of them; As to what is Said here of Right and Wrong in Nature, that has been before Conſidered. IN Anſwer to which we Say, that it is not hitherto Evinced, that our Conſorming our ſelves to the Relations of Things is cither a Vertue or a Duty; It is at the moſt only Proved, that we Act according to thoſe Relations; Which Suppoſing ve ſould not do, it is not Demonſtrated to be a Vice or a Crime. If any One ſould Toſſs a Stone into the Air, or Uſe Gold, as he would a Piece of Cork or a Feather, he would Act againſt the Gravitation of the One, and Confound the Natures of the Others, by making no Diſtinction betwixt them; but, I vould Hope, this Philoſophy, the Grand Patron and Aſſertor of Truth, and of the Reality of Things, would not Condemn theſe for Evil and Immoral Actions; Nay, if we ſhould Endeavour to Deſtroy thoſe Relations, which we find Subſiſting in Nature, does it Appear, that ve Deſerve Blame; Lead is Solid, and Water Fluid, with Reſpect to each Other, and yet it is 1o be Preſumed, that ve may without any Impeachment of Vertue, Fix the One into a Salt, and Reduce the Other into a Fuſion, and ſo, that we may Alter the Properties of an Infinite Number of Beings, without any great Harm or Moral Evil; Thus likewiſe, a Father may Change his Son into a Husband by Marrying him, into a Brother, by having another Son, into a Magiſtrate, by Procuring him rhat Dignity, or into a Subject, by Admitting him into any Civil Community, and ind this with Commendation and Vertue enough3 Tho' this i5 not Acting Conſor mably to the Reſpects and Relations of Things, as they are, but Changing the Old Ones, and Introduceing New: That is, this Doctrine muſt Oblige us to Receive and Take Things, as they are, and to Conform our ſelves to them, as they are, and Con ſequently Forbid our Changeing them, Annulling, or Deſtroying them, or any Rela tions of them, which is Monſtrous, and Abſurd, by what Foregoes. Beſides which, hov is it Shown, it is at Leaſt not yet done, that we are under an Obligation to Follow Nature, or to Conform our ſelves to the Fixed and Determined Relations of Beings in it? Things, and the Relations of them, may be Produced with other Deſigns, for all that we are yet Informed, than for our Following of them, or Conforming our ſelves to them; Perhaps they were Conſtituted and Framed, not for a Standard o: our Practice, or for a Rule of our Actions, but for Incitements to us to Admire and Adore the Inſinite Wiſdom and Goodneſs of the Almighty Architect; They might be Meant and Intended to Employ our Studies and Speculations, and not 10 Direct our Behaviour or Conduct; However, it is not Apparent, that we are Obliged to Conform our ſelves to theſe Relations of Things, becauſe God is the Author of them, and has Formed and Created them, till it is Shewn, that any Thing, which he has Created, is and ought to be a Meaſure of, and a Preſcription to, our Actions; Which if ſo, the very Actions of Brutes themſclves on the One Hand, and of the Angelick Natures on the other, vill be a Rule and a Guide for our Morality, the One a very Unworthy One, and the Other an Unknown One, but Each, no Doubt, Incompatible with the Other; But, why we ſhould Conform our ſelves rather to the Relations oſ Things, which he has Created, than to Intelligent Beings, which he has Created, Diſtinct from us, cannot be Shewn. LastLy, What the Fixed and Determinate Relations of Beings are, is the Hardeſt Thing in the World to Know; The Greateſt and Wiſeſt Philoſophers could never yet Tell, what they wvere, that is, vhat Nature is, for That it ſeems, is what we are to Follow; It has heen the Inquiry of many Ages. and of the Nobleſt and moſt Elevated Genius's in each Age, and yet Perhaps Mankind is as far from Arriving at Truth and Certainty in theſe Matters, as when the Search, and the Inveſtigation, Firſt began; Notwithſtanding which, we ſhould and ought to have a Comprehenſive View of all Nature, and of the Laws and Principles of it's Acting, before we can Know the Real and Abſolute Relations of the ſeveral Bèings in it, and thereſore, before we can Conform our own Actions to ſuch Relations; And Conſcquently, if we are to Follow Nature, we are to Follow That, which it is Morally Impoſſible for us Fully and Exactly to Underſtand; If we can at all Underſtand it; Thus, in Particular, ve Deal with Brutes, as Intirely Irrational, but till it is Known they are ſo, how can we Say, that we Act according to the Real Relations of Things? And yet, no One has hitherto Scrupled to Hunt a Fox, a Hare, or a Deer, or to Kill a Fiſh, or a Fowl, or any other Creature, tho' it is only to Serve our Palates, or our Diverſion. ALL which ſtill Evinces, how Neceſſary it was for Almighty God to make a Clear Revelation of his Will to us in the Chriſtian Diſpenſation, that we might be Informed, vhich Way, and in what Manner, he would be Served and Obeyed. 3d. It is Said, that if there is a Supreme Being, upon vhom the Exiſtence of the World Depends, and nothing can be in it, but what he either Cauſes, or Permits to be, then to Own Things o be as they are, is to OWn what he Cauſes, or at Leaſt Permits s0 be thus Cauſed or Permitied; And this is totake Things, as he gives them. to go into his Conſtiturion of the World, and to Submit to his Will, Revealed in the Books oſ Nature; To do this therefore muſt be Agreeable 10 his Will, and ithe Contrary Diſagrecable, and ſince there is a Perfect æoctitude in his Will, as will be afterwards Shown, Certainly rong; And, as the Owning of Things in all our Conduct r0 Le, what they are, is Direct Obedience, ſo on the Contrary, not to Own Things to be, or 10 have been, ihat are, or have been, or not to be, what ihey are, is Direct Rebellion againſt him, who is the Author of Nature. To which we alſo Reply; that here it is thereſore Confeſſed, that Conforming our ſelves to Nature, or the Truth of Things, is not a Duty Incumbent upon us, Excepting, as the Exiſtence of the World Depends upon the Supreme Being; that, by Conſequence, ſuch a Conformity to the Real Nature or Relations of Things, is Taling Taking Things, as ie Gives them, is Going into his Conſtitution of ihe World, and Submitting to his Will, Revealed in the Bools of Nature. ; FirsT, That Nature is not Self-Exiſtent, but Depends upon the Supreme Being, as the Cauſe and Producer of it, is thereſore Originally and Primarily to be Shewn, as the Baſis of all Natural Religion; which, tho it may be Evidently done, is yet not done by any of the Patrons oſf ſuch a Religion of Nature; As we have already Evinced. SECOND, Suppoſing the Supreme Being to be the Author of Nature, it is not Proved, that our Conforming our ſclves to it, is Submitting, or Conforming, to his Vill, unleſs it is Firſt Evidenced, that it is his Will, that we ſhould Conform our Actions to it, which likewiſe Remains without any Proof or Eviction of it, according to vhat ve have Jut now Alledged; Deſides which, if any Perſon had made a Curious Piece of Clock-Work, and at the ſame Time vas Able to make a Fly, and tInſpire a Senſe into it, by which it ſiould Know the Maker of Both; Would any One Think, that the Lat was Obliged to Conſorm it's Actions to the Motions or Syſteme of the Former, unleſs it kKnew and was Satisfied, that it was the Will and Pleaſure of the Perſon, who gave it Being, that it ſould? It might Admire it, and the Author of the Contrivance, and be Carried to an Adoration of him, for the Wiſdom of ſo Exquiſite a Piece of Exiſtence, and to a Gratitude and Thankſullneſ: for it's own, but not Imagine its ſelf any farther Concerned with the Motions ol the Syſteme, which were leſt to go on, as it found them, at leaſt, not Suppoſe that it was Scrupulouſly to Exact it's own Actions to the Laws or Relations oſ Things which it Preſcribed. i lii? As to vhat is Said of Tating Things, as he Gives them, and Going into his Conſitution of the world, they ate only Ingenious Phraſes and Ways of Expreſſion, which have more of the Pun of a Wit, than of the Argument of a Philoſopher, belong ing to them. Tuin, It is here alſo Preſumed, that Nature is the Revelation of God's Will to Mankind; It may be ſo; But then it is to be Interpreted in Conjunction with, and in Obedience and Conformity to, the Revelation of Chriſtianity; Unleſs, whilſt we Aſſert the One, we Diſcard and Deny the Other; For God has not, nor can have, Two Diſtinct Wills; The Revelation of his Will by Nature, or by the Goſpel, muſt Speak the ſame Thing, or the One or the Other is Falſe, and an Impoſture. HERE we Conſider Nature, with the Patrons oſ it, as Separate and Apart from Chriſtianity3 And then how is it Proved, that Nature is a Revelation of God's Will: May not an Inſinite, All-Wiſe, and an Almighty Agent Create a World vith all the Relations and Reſpects of the ſeveral Beings in it, for the Exertion of his Power, and the Diſplay of his Wiſdom, which all other Rational Creatures, as well as Man, which all Superior Intelligences, Angels, and Arch- Angels ſould Celebrate with theĩr Praiſes, and Fall Down Proſirate to the Omnipotent Author of, in an Humble Adoration of his Greatneſs and Majeſty, without Suppoſing, that this Grand and Stupendous Scheme of Nature vas Intended for a Rule, and as a Preſcription to the Poor and Perihing Actions of Men, and the Small Mortal Inhabitants of this Globe we Live on, and that it was his Will iĩt ſiould be So?r May not the ſame Almighty and All. Wiſe Agent have had a Thouſand other Deſigns and Intentions in his Creation, in Reſpect of other Beings, beſides our ſelves, which are not, nor, in this Imperſcct State, ever can, or vill, come to our Knowledge, which will not Infer, that vur Actiens ould be Governed by his Nature and Conſtitution of Things? LastLy, Granting Nature to be the Revelation of his Will to us, Separate and Diſtinct ſrom the Chriſtian One; It vould be almoſt Inſcrutable to, and Unfathomable by us, and Conſequently could be no Direction to our Lives, or our Practice; Since it would not be Sulſicient ſor us to now the Obvious and Apparent Relations of Things, Which may Depend only upon our Fancies, but the Intimate, Inward, and Real Ores; That is, ve muſt be Apprized and Fully Informed of all the Depths and Receſſes of Nature, and of thoſe Infinite and True Reſpects, which Things bear to each Other, thro all the Mazes and Labyrinths of the Vaſt Univerſe of Being; For otherwiſe, we could not Submit to God's Will, nor Tate Things, as he Gives them, nor Go into his Conſtitution of the orld; Whereas, all that we do, is to Conſider Things in Reſpect of our ſclves, and to Form our Relations of them, H h h h h Chieſly Chieſy, as they have a Reference to us, and many Times ith too much Affectation and Vanity, as well as Partiallity to our own Beings and Exiſtence; When therefore this Philoſophy Tells us, that the Owning of Things in all our Conduct r0 be, as they are, is Obedience to the Supreme Being, and not to Own Things to be, or 1o have been, thar are, or have been, or not r20 be, what they are, is Direct Rebellion againſt him, is all an Unintelligible Chime of Words, upon Abſtracted Notions of are, be, been, have been; Till we are Informed, what Things are, and what the Relations of them; That is, till ve Know, what Real Nature is, and that God Deſigned the Creation of the World for the Rule of our Conduct, and not for a Subject of our Praiſe and Adoration. As to the Firſt, what Real Nature is, and the Relations of the ſeveral Beings in it, this Philoſophy does not Undertake to Explain, or if it did, it would be Incapable of the Performance. AND as to the Laſt, Prop. 9. Art. 2. Sect: 5. which Concerns Truths Relating to the Deity, it ſeems to Acquit Almighty God of ſo Vain-Glorious an Intention; But That is withall to be Proved there, which is not done, that for an Eternal Being to Conſult his own Glory, vould be as Weak and as Frail, as ſor a Cæſar, a Pompey, or an Alexander to do it; On the Contrary, a Being, which is Infinite and Eternal, and All- Wiſe, would A&t as Imprudently, if he did not Conſult his own Glory, as a Man of Common Diſcretion would do, vho did not Conſider, or Value, his own Reputation; And the Weakneſs and Folly Lies in Extending our Names beyond the Grave, Suppoſing we our ſelves Ceaſed to be; Which is not the Caſe of a Being, who is Confeſſed Eternal; Tho Perhaps this Philoſophy, Notwithſtanding it's Natural Religion, may Preſume to be That of us Groveling Mortals. FourTH, Ir is Affirmed, that Things cannot be Denicd to be, what they are, in any Inſtance or Manner whatſoever, without Contradicting Axioms and Truths Eternãl, ſuch as theſc, Every Thing is, what it is; That which is Done, cannot he Undne, and the Like; And then, if thoſe Truths be Conſidered, as having always Subſiſted in the Divine Mind, to which they have always been True, and which Differs not from the Deity its ſelf, to do this, is to Act, not only in Oppoſition to his Goverment or Sovereignty, but to his Nature alſo; Or, in another Way of Expreſſion; Ii there are ſuch Things. as Axioms, which are, and always have been, Immutably True, and Conſequently, have been always Knoun to God to be ſo, the Truth of them cannot be Denied any Way, but the Truth of the Divine Knowledge muſt be Denied too. Which is ſuch a Heap of Jargon, and Metaphyſical Trumpery, that it is almoſt Hard to Anſwer it. For Firſt, tho Things cannot be Denied to be what they are, does this Philoſophy Know, what they are? Nothing Leſs; How therefore is it Poſſible for us to Deny ,ſhings to he vhat they are, vhen we are Ignorant of their Real Conſtitution SECOND, The Truths or Axioms, which are here Said to Subſiſt in the Divine Mind, are in the Number of Triſling Propoſitions, Namely, Every Thing is, what it is, and rhat which is done, cannot be Undone, and to Suppoſe the Divine Mind to be Fraught with ſuch, or a Million of ſuch, Fooliſ and Ridiculous Axioms, is to Suppoſe, what is Unworthy of him; On the Contrary, we may Juſily Imagine, that the Infinite Mind is Replete with the Ideas of all Nature, whether Intelligent, or Material, and that the Whole and Univerſal Syſteme of it Lies Perfectly Delineated and Drawn out on his Mind in all it's Relations, Properties, and Proportions, which are Truths and Axioms, that are Remote from our Knowledge, and therefore it is Impoſſible, ve ſhould Deny them. TuirD, Suppoſing theſe Truths and Axioms, which are only the Ludicrous Abſtractions of Fanciful Men, to be the Furniture, with which the Divine Mind is Repleniſhed, and I ſould Deny a Thing to be what it is, vhich God knows, and Sees; I ſhould not Deny the Truth of the Divine Knowledge, unleſs I vas ſome Way or other Informed, that God did Know and See This, and if I was ſo Informed, it would be Madneſs to Think, that I, or any One Elſe, ſould or would Deny it. LastLv, There is no One in Terms or Words would Deny ſuch a Propoſition, That every Thing is, vhat it is; And therefore it cannot be Imagined, or Preſumed, that any One would do it by Facts; which ſould Mean and Intend the Denial of ſuch ſuch a Propoſition, becauſe the Same Mind would Expreſs the Same Senſe, whether by Facts or by Words, if it was to Declare it's Senſe of ſuch a Propoſirion; But, if Mens Facts can Affirm or Deny Things or Propoſitions without their Expreſs Meaning and Deſign to do it, Facts are made to Aſſlirm and Deny, without any Purpoſe or Intention Annexed to them; which is Ridiculous, and againſt this Philoſophy, which Suppoſes, and has Endeavoured to Prove, that Facts are as Expreſſive and Signiſicant, as Words. FirTH, It is Told us, that Deſignedly to Treat Things, as being, what they are not, is the Greateſt Poſſible Abſurdity; It is to Put Bitter for Sweet, Darkneſs for Light, Crooked for Streight, &. it is to Subvert all Science, to Renounce all Senſe of Truth, and Flatly to Deny the Exiſtence of any Thing; For Nothing does Exiſt, if Things are not, vhat they are; To Talk to, or Treat a Poſt, as if it was a Man, would be an Abſurdity, if not Diſtraction; And why ſhould it not be as Bad to Treat a Man as a Poſt ? As if he had no Senſe, and Felt not Injuries, which is what the Cruel and Unjuſt often do. To which we Anſwer Firſt, that to Treat a Poſt as a Man, is a very Abſurd Thing, and to Treat a Man as a Poſt, a very Bad and Cruel One; But I would Beg the Favour to be Excuſed from Thinking, that ſuch a Perſon who does ſo, therefore Denies, that there is any ſuch Being, as a Man or a Poſt in the World; He may Deal Wrongly by theſe Exiſtences, but does not from Thence Pretend to Annihilate them. SECOND, To Treat a Poſt as a Man, is Said to be Abſurd, and to Treat a Man as a Poſt, to be Bad or Vicious; But to be Abſurd, and to be Bad and Vicious, are, in the Common Acceptation of Language, Two Different Things; And yet they ſould be the Same, according to this Doctrine; Since they are both of them Facts, which Deny Things to be what they are; And if any One ſhould Talk and Reaſon with a Poſt, he ought not to be Eſteemed a Ridiculous or Abſurd, but a very Immoral and Wicked Man; Tho' One would be Apt to Believe, that, if any One had a Mind to Play ſuch a Prank, and Toſs ſome Words in the Air to no Purpoſe, there would be no Occaſion to Condemn him for a Vicious Man, but a Fool; On the Other Hand, if Treating a Poſt as a Man, is only Abſurd, and not Bad or Vicious, then Treating a Man, as a Poſt, will be ſo too, and not ſo Blameable, as Prepoſterous and Silly. TuHiRD, Injuſtice and Cruelty does not Conſiſt in Treating a Man, as a Poſt, that ĩs, as what he is not, which is only a Fancy of this Philoſophy, but in Uſing him Baſcly and Illy, tho he Owns and Acknowledges him to be a 4an3 No Perſecutor, or Tyrant, ever Treated a Man, as a Poſt, as if he Thought or Imagined he had no Senſe of Pain or Torture; The very Reaſon he Treats him in that Manner is, becauſe he Knows him not to be a Poſ?, and can Feel Both; And the Vice of the Tyrant's or Perſecutor's Mind does not Lie in Denying Things by his Actions, ro be what ihey are, but in Affirming them i0 be what ihey are, and Explaining at the Same Time the Revengeful, Malicious, and Inhuman, Principle of ſuch Actions; That is, the Perſecutor or Tyrant, by the Tortures he Inflicts upon another, Affirms him, not to be a Poſl, but a aran, for otherwiſe, he would not have Inflicted them, but then he Aſſirms his ovn Rage, Violence, Paſſion, and Injuſtice, which Denominates the Vice; That is, the Principle of the Action, and not the Falſe Aſertion Implicd by it; For the Aſſcrtion Contained in the Action is True in every Particular, that the Perſon Perſecuted or Tortured is a Man, and an Innocent Onæ, but that the Perſecutor, or Tyrant, be he as Great, or as Small, as he Will, is a moſt Notorious Raſcal and a Villain. SixTH, It is Said, that to Deny Things o be as ihey are, is a Tranſgreſſion of the Great Law of our Nature, the Law of Reaſon, for Truth cannot be Oppoſcd, bul Reaſon muſt be Violated. To which alſo we Reply FirsT, that it ſould be Proved that the Great Law of our Nature is the Law of Reaſon, ſor it may be the Law q God, that is, the Law of Revelation, as we find it Delivered to us in the Scriptures. SECOND, If it is Said, that the Law of God, or of Chriſtianity, is the Same vitl that of Reaſon, then Reaſon ould Submit to Chriſtianity, or not Interfere with it And if ſo, our Diſpute is at an End. H h hhh æ Tnm? TuiD, What Chriſtianity is, ve Know; But what is ”zeaſon? Why Truly little more, as the Matter is nov Managed, but Faith, Belief, Fancy, and Opinion; Which we have Shewn to be the Caſe of this, and other Syſtemes of Natural Religion And which is in another Place Subſcribed to by this Philoſophy, however Fond it ĩ of the Law of Reaſon in this; For it Tells us §. I. Prop. 9. That they, who make Right Reaſin to be the Lav, by which our Acts are to be Judged, and according tc theirt Conformity to this, or Deſexion from it, Call them Lauſul or Unlauſul, Sa; Something more Particular and Preciſe; But the Manner in Which they have Delivered themſlves, is not yet Explicite enough; It Leaves Room ſor ſo many Diſputes and O⸗ꝓ.ſite RightReaſon;, that Nothing can be Scttled, while every One Pretends, that his Reaſon is Right. IP this Philoſophy will but Allow, that this Remark may be Applied to it's ſelf, as it very Juſily may, ve need not Diſcourſe much more about the La of eaſus; Anã Indeed, it is in Vain to Talk of the Lau of Reaſon, or of Nature, till we Knov, vhat the one or the Orher is, which I much Doubt, whether we ever ſhall; Tho'l Think, and Believe, that the Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces vill Lead us into as many Truths in Both, as any Syſteme of Either, which has been hitherto Propoſed by the moſt Celebrated Genius's in Philoſophy, however Mcan theſe Performances of Mine may Appear to the Grand Adepts and Profeſſors in that Science, the Science oſ Nature. As to what is Added Concerning the Amiable Nature oſ Truth, and the Great Force of it; Every One who Writes, Lays Claim to it3 And as to this Philoſophys Feeling within it's ſelf a Great Reluctance to the not Embraceing it, and Valuing it in the Highet Degree, I would In Charity Believe, that all Impartial Inquiries into Nature, or Religion, are Indued with the Same Noble Paſſions and Sentiments. S. 15. TuE Fiſth Propoſition is, that, what has been Said of Facts Inconſiſtent vith Truth, may be Said of many Omiſſions, or Neglects to Act; that is, by Theſe alſo True Propoſitions may be Denied to be True; and then thoſe Omiſſions, by vhich This is done muſt be Wrong, for the Same Reaſons with thoſe Aſſigned under the Former Propoſition. Ir is Farther Alledged upon this Propoſition, that ſome Things cannot Poſſibly be done, but Truth muſt be Directly and Poſitively Denied, and the Thing will be Clear; But the Caſes Ariſing from Omiſſions are not always ſo well Determined, and Plain; It is not always Eaſy to Know, when, or how Far, Truth is Violated by Omitting; Here thereſore more Latitude muſt be Allowed, and much muſt be Leſt to every One's own Judgment and Ingenuity; But yet there are ſome Neglects, or Refuſals to Act, which are Maniſeſtly Inconſiſtent with Truth, or with ſome True Propoſitions. To vhich we Anſwer, that this ſo Entirely Depends upon the Foregoing Propoſitions, that there is no Occaſion to Enter into a Particular Confutation of it here; And ve ſnall only Farther Obſerve, that it is Owned Omiſſions to Act are not ſo Explicite in the Denial of Truths, as Actions themſelves are, which have been already Conſidered; And Moreover, that it is Abſurd 1o Pick and Cull our Omiſſions to Act, and make ſome of them Deny Truth, and Others to be no Ways Significant oſ ſuch a Denial; Hovever, ve ſhall Proceed to Examine the Inſtances Produced; Becauſe, by them the Force of a Doctrine is much better Explained than by Looſe and General Terms, and Reſting in Univerſals. 1ſt. THE Firſt Inſtance is, that if 4 ſould by ſome Solemn Promiſe, Oath, or other Act, Undertake to do ſome Certain Thing before ſuch a Time, and he Voluntarily, Oblivione Voluntariã, as Cicero Expreſies it, Omits to do it, he would Behave himſelf, as iſ there had been no ſuch Promiſe or Engagement, which is Equal to Denying there was any; and Truth is Manifeſtly Contradicted; And the Omiſſion 10 Act therefore, according to this Philoſophy, becomes Criminal and Vicious. But in Reply, we muſt Deg Leave to Say; That, if 4 does not Perform his Oath, or his Promiſe, out of an Involuntary Forgetſullneſs that is, becauſe he had Actually Forgot it, it is to be Hoped, he is not Blameable; and yet the Mere Fact, or the Omiſſion to Act, Contradicts Truth; For he Promiſed and Swore it, and did not Perform it; If a ſoluntary Forgetfullneſs, that is a Deſign to Forget, or, which is the Same, an ſitention not to Perſorm his Oath, or his Promiſe, is Neceſſary to make the the Omiſſion Infer a Denial of Truth, then mere Acts, or Omiſſions to Act, do not Aſfirm or Deny, but the Iutention of them; which is, what we have been hitherto Defending, and is Contrary to the whole Scope and Tenour of the Preſent Doctrine, which Endeavours to Shew, that Facis themſelves without the Meaniug of the Perſon, who Produces or isthe Author of them, are Significant of Truth or Falſehood, as they Fall in with, or Diſſcnt from, the Real Relations of Things, and that they are more Expreſſive than any Verbal Affirmations or Denials of them, tho' the Intention is never ſo Obvious, and Manifeſt MOREOVER, it is here Suppoſed, that Performing an Oath, or a Promiſe, is a Vertuous Action, and the not doing it a Vicious One, and this Philoſophy only Explains, wherein the Vertue of the One, or the Vice of the other Conſiſis, to Shew the Reaſonableneſ and Juſtneſs of i's own Doctrine; But, if it ſould be Denied, that the One is a Vice, or the Other a Vertue, it would be at a Loſs for a Proof of Either; And yet, when we Propoſe to Demonſtrate a Natural Religion, or to Delineate it in a Series of Propoſitions, we ſhould be Able Firſt to Prove, what is Vertuous, or what is Vicious, and then Evidence, that all Vertuous Actions are ſo many Aſſcrtions of the Truth and Reality of Things, and all Vicious Ones ſo many Contradictions to it. TnusS, that A's Performing an Oath is a Vertue, is not Shewn, unleſs upon the Conceſſion of the Being of a God, which by Atheiſts ill not be Allowed or Granted, till it is Proved; And which, I have Evinced, cannot be done by a Connexion oſ Ideas, Excepting by Knowing ſomething more of Nature, than this Philoſophy is Acquainted with; Nor can it be Said, that 's Performing his Promiſe is a Duty, or, what is in Nature Required of him, if Men are only an Higher Order of Brutes, and only Endued with Greater Capacities to Over-Reach and Circumvent One Another; that is, if there is not a Future State, vhen we ſhall be Accounrable to Almighty God for our Actions; Which likewiſe ſiould be Demonſtrated in this Syſteme of Moral Good and Evil, of which yet it Takes no Notice. So Slippery and Uncertain are theſe Arguments for Natural Religion, and ſo Neceſſary is it for us to have a Recourſe to a Revealed. 2d. Ir is Said, that there are ſome Ends, which the Nature of Things and Truih Requiro us to Aim at, and at which, therefore, if we do not Aim, Nature and Truth are Denicd. If a Man does not Deſire to Prevent Evils, and to be Happy, he Denies both his oun Nature, and the Nature and Definition of Happineſi, to be what they are; And then Further, villingly to Neglect the Mreans, Leading to any ſuch End, is the Same, as not to Propoſc that End, and muſt Fall under the Same Cenſure; As to the Means it is Confeſſed, there is a Difficulty to Know, what Thoſe are, and what they are with Reſpect to us, which is Said to Procced from our Ignorance of the True Natures of Things, of their Operations and Eſfects in ſuch an Irregular and Diſtempered World, and of thoſe many Incidents, that may Happen, either to Further or Break our Meaſures; It is Farther Said, that our Abilities and Opportunities are not Equal, and that ſome Labour under Diſadvantages Invincible, but ſtill ve may Judge, as well as we can, and the Neglect to do this, will be an Omiſſion within the Reach of the Propoſition. Upon vhich we ſall Obſerve; First, that Temporal or Worldly Happineſs and Evils muſt be here Intended, becauſe, whatever the Natures of Things are, their Operations or Effects, or whatever our Diſadvantages are in this World, they cannot Hinder, or Debarr, us from our Purſuits of the Happineſs of the Next; ſince our Etetnal Happineſs does not Depend upon the Natures of Things, or any Incidents oſ this Life, or on the Better or Worſe Circumſtances of it; A Perſon may be Happy Hercafter, by Conforming himſel? only to the Doctrines of Chriſtianity, without Troubling himſelf with the Natures of Things, or the Relations of them; And One who Lies under Invincible Diſadvantages, as to the Arriving at his Chief Good in the Preſent State of Things, may yet be in a Fair Way to Obtain it, in Another and ⸗ Future. SECOND, This thereſore is the Aſſertion, That, i? a Man does not Deſire to Prevent Temporal Evils, and to be Happy in this World, he Denies both his own Narure, and the Nature and Definition of Hagpineſi to be what they are; From whence it will Follow, that all the Primitive Martyrs and Sufferers for Religion, ho, i i lain Plain, did not Deſire or Conſult their own Temporal Happineſs, nor were Sollicitous to Prevent Temporal Evils, Acted againſt, and thereſore Denied, the Nature and Truib of Things, and Conſequently, were very Vicious and Profligate Men; Nay Farther. any Good Man, who Prefers the Enduring of Pain to the Loſs of his Vertue, or Contemns Pleaſure, that he may Preſerve it, muſt be Condemned by this Doctrine as a very Wicked and Immoral Perſon, as he Acts againſt Narure, and thereby Denies the Truth of Things, and the Real Relations of them; For Happineſs is aſterwards Deſined to be Pleaſure, and Evil, Pain. TniRD, It is here Taken for Granted, that the Summum Bonum, or the Chief G:ã, which a Man ought to Purſue, is Happineſs, or Pleaſure, and the Chief Evil, which he ought to Avold, is Miſery and Pain; Whereas this Philoſophy cannot be Iznorant, or ſhould have Known, that this was the Grand and Principal Diſpute amongſ the Antient Patrons of Nature and Reaſon, and the ſeveral Sects oſ them, ſome Aſſirming, that the Summum Bonum Conſiſted in Vertue, Others in Wiſdom, and the Epcureans only in Pleaſure, all vhoſe Arguments are Admirably Enſorced and Explained by Cicero in his Books, De Finibus Bonorum & Malorum; And when the Stoick Pqſidenius was Reading a Lecture in Philoſophy, as I Remember, to Pompey, under the Greateſt Pain of the Gout, his Nihil Agis Dolor Shews the Contempt he had oſ it FoURTH, Let us now Suppoſe, that Temporal, or Eternal, Happineſs ĩs here Meant, no One can be Said by his Facts to Deny both his on Nature, and the Nature and Definition of Happineſi, unleſs he has by thoſe Facts an Intention to do it, an Inſtlance of which ill Perhaps be Scarcely Found in Human Nature; For can it be Imagined, that any One Adviſedly, and with Deſign, ſould Aim at his ovn Miſchief, Contrive his own Miſeries and Misfortunes, and be Bent and Determined upon his ovn Ruint Even thoſe, vho Put an End to their own Beings here, do it with an Expectation oſ a Better, or no Life hereafter; And the moſt Immoral and Vicious do not Mcan or Intend their ovn Evil, tho' that may be the Conſequence of their Actions; And therefore, if an Intention is Neceſſary to Denominate our Facts, as it moſt Certainly is, ſince no One cannot but Intend his ovn Happineſs, there can be no Meaſure of Verture or Vice from ſuch Facts, which are all Deſigned by the Agent for it's own Plea ſure and Satisſaction, either in this World, or Another. 3d. IT is Said, that there are Omiſſions of other Kinds, which will Deſerve to be Annumerated to theſe, by heing either Toral, or Notorious, or upon the Score of ſome other Circumſtance; and Farther, this Philoſophy goes on to Tell us, that it is Cer tain, it ſould not Deny the Phaniſſa of Euripides to be an Excellent Drama, by not Reading it, nor Chihil menar to be a Rare Piece of Antiquity, by ner going to See it; But ſhould it, having Leiſure, Health, and Proper Opportunities, Read Nothing, nor make any Inquiries in Order. to Improve it's Mind, and Attain ſuch Knoledqe as may be Uſeful to it, it ſould then Deny it's atind to be what it is, and Uſeſul Knowledqe to be what it is; and it Matters not, what thoſe Studies are, every Man muſt Conſult his own Opportunities and Genius, and Judge for himſelf, as vell as he can. Bur, Finst, how comes a Partial Omiſſion to be leſs Expreſſive of Denying a Thing to be what it is, than a Toral? And why ſhould the nr Reading the Phaniſſa of Euripides, not Imply a Denial of it's being a Good Tragedy, as well as the nor Reading any Books at all Imply a Denial of their being Good or Uſeful? This cannot be Explained, and is a Confutation it's ſclf of the Preſent Doctrine. SECOND, It is Moreover Inexplicable, how an Omiſſion to do a Thing, ſould bæ an Evident Denĩal oſ that Thing to be what it is, or how my not Improveing my Mind in Knovledge, ſould be Equivalent to the Aſſerting, that it is nor, what it is; That is, a Rational and Intelligent Being; Since my not Improveing a Rational and Intelligent Being in Knovledge, is not, by any Connexion of Ideas, the Same, as Denying ſuch a Being to be Rational, or Intelligent. On the Contrary, if I, having Leiſure, ſould Omit all Opporrunities of Inſiruction in Matters of Ieaſon, Speculation or Learning, and ſould Devote my Time and my Thoughts to Religion, and to the Adoration and Service of my Creator, to the doing of Good, and to the Peirſorming Acts oſ Hoſpitality and Benevolence to Mankind, and to the Securing an Intereſt in the Happineſs of another World, I ſiould not much Inſorm my Underſtanding, or Improve the Knovledęe oſ my Mind, and yet I ſiould not Act by it as an Irrarional, or Unintelligent Being, nor ſiould I Aſfirm it to be ſuch a Being, or Deny its Ræaſon Reaſon or Intelligence, but Aſſert it; So little is there in this Fantaſtick Doctrine, and ſo Weak are the Pleas for the Support of it. TumD, It is Told us, that it Matters not, what thoſe Studies are, in which the Mind is to be Employed, which muſt be Left to every Ones Diſcretion, or his Genius and Inclination. HoW Undefined and Undetermined are the Meaſures in this Philoſophy, by which we ſhould Affirm our Minds to be, what they are? When, if we do but Engage them in any Kind of Study or Contemplation, the Aſſertion is the Same, that they are Rational and Intelligent Beings, altho' it ſhould Happen, as it does in this Delineation of the Religion of Nature, as well as in all the Preſent Syſtemes of Nature it's ſelf, that we are Entertained with nothing elſe in all theſe Studies, but what is, either Precarious, or Ridiculous, or Abſurd, or Irrational; Which muſt be as much a Denial of the Mind's being what it is, a Rational, and Intelligent Being, as any Omiſſion to Inform the Mind can be. 41h. To Prove a Partial Omiſſion does not Deny Truth, whercas a Toral Omiſſion does; It is Said, if I give nothing to this, or that Poor Body, to whom I am under no Particnlar Obligation, I do not by this Deny them to be Poor, any more than I ſould Deny a Man to have a Squalid Beard by not Shaving him, tò be Naſty by not Waſhing him, or to be Lame by not Taking him on my Back; Many Things it is Said, are here to be Taken into Conſideration, according to the next Propoſition, and Truth Perhaps might be Intrenched upon by doing this; But if I, being of Ability, ſould never give the Poor any Thing at all, I ſould then Deny the Condition of the Poor to be what it is, and my Own to be what it is, and thus Truth would be Injured; So again, it is Alledged, If I ſould not Say my Prayers at ſuch a Certain Hour, or in ſuch a Certain Place and Manner, this would not Imply a Denial of the Exiſtence of God, his Providence, or my Dependence on him; But, if I ſould never Pray to him, or Notoriouſly Negleũt to do it, ſuch à Total or General Omiſſion would be Equivalent, or Nearly ſo, to this Aſſertion, There is no God, who Governs the World, to be Adored; Which, if there is ſuch a Being, muſt be Contrary to Truth; Laſtly, ſould I find a Man Grievouſly Hurt by ſome Accident, and without Preſent Help like to Perii, or See his Houſe on Fire, no Body being near to Help; in this Extremity, if I do not give him my Aſſittance Immediately, I do not do it at all, hich Amounts to a Total Omiſſion; I Deny his Caſe to be what it is, Human Nature to be what it is, and my own Deſires and Expectations, which I am Conſcious to my Self, I ſould have under the like Misfortune, to be what they are. BuT FirST, all theſe Inſtances are Far from Proving, that Total Omiſſions Deny Truth, if Partial Ones do not; If the Nature of an Omiſſion is the Formal Denial of that which is Omitted, a Particulart or Partial Omiſſion muſt be a Particular or Partial Denial, as well as a Total Omiſſion, a Total Denial; If the Nature of an Omiſſion is not the Formal Denial of that which is Omitted, then a Total Omiſſion does not Infer a Total Denial of it; Thus in the Firſt Inſtance, if I give nothing to this or that Poor Body, I muſt Equally Deny this or that Poor Body to be Poor, as if I give to no Poor Body, I Deny every Poor Body to be Poor; I muſt of Courſe by ſuch Omiſſions Deny both, or Deny neither. So in the Second Inſtance, if I Deny the Exiſtence of a God, his Providence, and my Dependence on him by a Total Omiſſion of his Worſhip, my Particular Omiſſion at any Time to Worſhip him is at that Time a Denial of his Exiſtence; And Indeed, according to this Docrine, if an Omiſſion Includes the Formality of a Denial, ĩt is Impoſſible for us not to Deny a Man to have a Beard, unleſs we Shave him, &e. which is very Abſurd;  it does not Include the Formality of a Denial, then a Total Omiſſion of Charity or of Devotion, does not Inſer or Suppoſe, that I Deny that there are in the Worid Cerrain and Real Objects of both. SECOND, As in Facts, ſo in Omiſſions, it is Evident, that the Principle and Intention of them is Requiſite to Denominate of what Nature and Complexion they are; Thus, if a Perſon, Acknowledging the Duty of Charity, ſiould Neglect or Re fuſe to Relieve the Poor, he does not Deny the Poor t0 be what they are, but Con feſſes himſclf to be an Ill Man; If another Perſon Thinks he is under no Obligation to any ſuch Duty, he ſtill Affirms the Poor to be what they are, but Proclaim: his own Inhumanity, and the Difference betwixt them is, that the One is ar Man in his Practice, tho' his Principle is Good, and the other a Proſigãte in both. So likewiſe, if any One ſiould Own the Being oſ a God, but Neglect to Vorſhip him, vhich is the Caſe of Thouſands, it cannot be Preſumed, that his Omiſion of ſuch Worſhip is a Denial of him, but is an Inſtance of his Madneſs, or his Stupidity: On the Contrary, it any One ſhould Negiect the Worhip of God, becauſe he Ie lieves there is no ſuch Being, his Omiſſions are ſo many Denials oſ him, yer not as they are Mere Omiſſions, but as the Deſign and Intention of them makes them ſuch Denials; and the Former, by his Omiſſions, Means nothing Leſs rhan the Denying of a God, and the Laſt nothing More The One is Right in his Principle, and Wrong in his Moral, and the Other alike Vicious in Reſpect to Either. The Chieſf Novelty in this Doctrine ſeems to be in Aſerting a Greater Authority to Facts, than to Words, as if there was more Truth and Sincerity in the One, than in the Other: whereas Men may as well Deceive by their Actions, as their Words, or Speak their Real Sentiments by them; and both of them can be only Judęcd oſ ſrom the Principle and Intention, ſrom Which they Proceed, which often Lies Undiſcovered to the Stricteſt and Acuteſt Obſerver, and which thereſore we muſt Leave to the Judge oſ all Hearts, the Great and Final Trier of them. TnirD, It is Obſervable in the Laſt Inſtance before-Mentioned, of a Man's being Hurt by ſome Accident, or his Houſc being on Fire, it is Said, if I do not give him Immediate Aſſiſtance, I Deny Truth, becauſe, if I do not then Help him, I ſhall not do it at all, which thereſore is Concluded to be a Total Omiſſion. To what Shiſts is this Philoſophy Put to Vindicate its own Doctrine? For if the not Helping him at all Inſers a Total Omiſſion, my not Shaving a Man's Beard at all, or not Taking a Lamè Man upon my Back ar all, or not Waſhing a Man, vho Wants it, at all, are to be Aruumerated to Total Omiſſions, and therefore are ſo manv Denials of Truth; But it is too Evident, that this Doctrine of Omiſſions is a very Weak and Infirm One, from what has been already Alledged Concerning it, and more Particularly from it's Shuſſling, and its Precarious Manner of making ſome Omiſſions Denĩals of Truth, and Others not, according as they are Apparently Vicious, or not Eſicemed to be ſo. S. 16. THE Sixth Propoſition is, that in Order to Judge Rightly, what any Thing is, it muſt be Conſidered, not only, what it is in it's Self, or in One Reſpect, but alſo what it may be in any Other Reſpect, which is Capable of being Denyd by Facts or Practice; And the Whole Deſcription of the Thing ought to be taken in. Tnus, iſ a Man Stea's a Horſe, and Rides away upon him, he may be Said Indeed by Riding him to Uſe him as a Horſe, but not as the Horſe of another Mſan, vho Gave him no Licenſe to do this; He does not therefore Conſider him, as being what he is, unleſs he Takes in the Reſpect he Bears to his True Owner; Dut, it is nor Neceſſary Perhaps to Conſider, vhat he is in Reſpect to Colour, Shape, or Age; Becauſe the Thiefs Riding avay with him, may neither Afſirm nor Deny him to be of any Particular Colour, &e. upon which Account it is Said, that thoſe, and all thoſe, Properties, Reſpects, and Circumſtances, which may be Contradicted by Practice, are to be Taken into Conſideration; For otherwiſe the Thing to be Conſidered is but Imperſectly Survey'd, and the Whole Compaſs of it being not Taken in, it is Taken not as being what it is, but as what it is iu Part only, and in other Reſpects Perhaps, as being what it is not. BUT Fmnst, in Anſver to this Propoſition, and the Foregoing Inſtance Alledãed upon it, ve Say, that there is no Reaſon Aſſigned, why thoſe Reſpects and Relations, which may be Contradicted by Practice, ſhould be only Taken in, to Determine the Nature of Things, unleſ's ve Originally Suppoſe the Truth of this Doctrine, which is to be Proved, and not Suppoſed; For the Nature of Things, and their Relations, are Fixed and Immutable, but our Actions Deſultory and Uncertain; Ant ithereſore the Laſt cannot be a Meaſure or Standard of the Former, and Conſcquent ly we cannot be Said to Act according to, or againſt, the Nature, Truth, or Relation Of Things, as ve Act according to, or againſt, thoſe Reſpects, vhich ſo Far as we Knov, are Capable of being Aſitmed or Denicd by our Actions, which is only ⸗ Partial Conſideration of ſuch Nature of Things, or theit Relations, bur as ve Ad according to, or againſt, the Wnhole Syſeme of Beings, hich is Impoſſible for us to Knov, whether we do or not; Eecauſe the Real Relations oſ Things, not Reduced e to the Narrow Scantling of our Actions, are Infinite and Boundleũũ; And, in thè Stile of this Philoſophy, rhe Thing to be Conſidereã is but Imperfecily Surveyd, and ihe Whole Compaſs of it not being Taken in, it is Taken, not as heing what it is, but as what it is in Part only, and in other Reſpecis Perhaps, as heing what it is not. SECOND, Suppoſing the Thieſ ſould, when he Rides away with this Horſe, Uſe him as a Black Horſe, by Throwing a Black Cloth over him, when he is a Grey One, to Conceal his Theft, or ſould Uſc him as a Young Horſe, when he is an Old One, by Riding him Harder, than is Fit for his Age, to Expedite his Thievery; Here are Facts, which Equally Deny the Relations of Things with the Former, and yet, if it was not another Mans Horſe, it would be Hard to Impute this as a Crime to a Man, or to Hang him for his Clothing, or Quickening, his Steed. THiRD, However it muſt be Imagined, that, when a Thief Rides avay with a Horſe, he does it by Stealth, and in ſuch a Manner, and with ſuch Circumſtances, as to Show, that he doces not only Uſe a Horſe, but the Horſc of another Man; And it is to be Preſumed, that we are to Take in, not only the ſeveral Reſpects of the Horſc, but his Rider;3 And if ſo, the Thieſ does not only Aſfirm the Horſe to be a Horſe by his Riding of him, but to be the Horſe of another Man, by his Way and Manner of doing it; and Conſequently, we are to Conclude from this Doctrine, that the Thicſ Acts according to the Truth, and the Relation of Things, and is therefore a very Vertuous and Moral Perſon. FourTH, The Horſe is Suppoſed in this Inſtance to be another Man's; whereas what Property is, is Unaſcertained here, and is not much better Explained in §. 6. Concerning Truths, Reſpecting Mankind in General, Antecedent to all Human Laws, ſrom every Man having in himſclf a Principle of Individuation, which Diſtinguiſhes and Separates him from all other Men in ſuch a Manner, as may Render him and them Capable 6f Diſtinct Properties in Things, or, Diſtindt Subjects of Property. Since no One in a Natural State of Things is Intirely Independent of all other Beings in the Univerſc, he Stands in a Thouſand Relations to them, and even according to 1he Conſeſſions of the Preſent Philoſophy. But more Particularly, every One is Dependent upon God, and therefore can have no Property of his Own, nor are his Life, or his Limbs, &e. his own Peculiar; And ſomething like this, in an Inferior and Subordinate Degree, may be Said in Relation to our Parents, Maſters, Guardians Tutors, or Inſtructors; TO whom we Owe many of the Advantages and Improve: ments of our Minds, which we ſhould have never had without them. THE Second Inſtance under this Propoſition is, that if a Rich Man, being upon a Journey, ſhould be Robbed and Stript, it ould be a Second Robbery and Injuſtice Committed upon him, to Take from him Part of his then Character, and to Conſider him, only, as a Rich Man; His Character Completed is a Rich Man Robbed ana Abuſed, and Indeed at that Time a Por Man and Diſireſed, tho' Able to Repay aſterwards the Aſſiſtance Lent him; From Whence I Suppoſe it is Concluded, that it would be Criminal, and a Denying of Truth, not to Relieve ſuch a Rich Por Man. FiusT, And ſo it would be, but not upon the Account of a Denial of Truth in this Caſe; For, if you do Relieve him, you Deny him to be a Rich Man, tho' he is One, and if you do not Relieve him, you Deny him ro be a Poor One, tho' he is Said to be That too; That is, there is no Action in Nature, which can Aſſcrt both theſc Truths, that he is a Poor Man, and that he is a Rich Man, but whatever Action it is, which Affirms the One, muſt Deny the Other, and therefore the Acting according to Truth, and the Relations of Things, is here altogether Impoſſible and Impracticable; If it be yet Alledged, that you may Act with him, or by him, as a Toor Man at that Time, th he is in other Reſpects a Rich One, we do not Take in all the Relations and Reſpects of Things, which yet this Doctrine Informs us, it is Neceſiary for us to do, and that if ve do not, we may Affirm Truth in One Reſpect, and Contradict it in another, which is the Preſent Circumſtance. SECOND, If on the other Hand, ve may be Allowed to Act according to the Preſent Reſpect or Relation of Things, without Conſidering any other, and therefore to Relieve a Man, who is Poor at Preſent, tho in other Reſpects he is Really Rich, we need not Conſider a Horſe, in the Former Inſtance, as another Man's, tho he Really is ſo, but as a Por Solitary Horſe, without a Rider, and Perhaps not Taken the beſt Care of, which might be Deſired, and thereſore, as wanting a better Owner; J i ĩ ii ; Or he may be Conſidered, as a Horſe of little Value to the Rich Poſſeſſor, but oſ great Importance to the Neceſſities of the Poor Thief, and ſo forth. TumRD, It ſould be Taken into the Account, what this Rich Poor Alan's Behaviour was, when he was Robbed and Stript, and what that of the Thieves, who Attacked him; For if they Met him in a Humble and Submiſſive Way, and Repreſen ted the Great Neceſſities, which they Lay under, and that they muſt be Starved, un leſs they were Relieved, this would Scarcely be any more than a Perſon, Ready to Famiſh, Taking Bread, or Victuals, where he could Meet with it, which, I Think Caſuiſts; and the Laws, Allow to be a Compaſſionate Caſe;3 And, if a Rich Man Refuſed his Aſſiſtance to ſuch Aggreſſors, he would Deny Truth and theſe Poor, Neceſſitous Men, to be what they were, and the Fault would Lie on his Side, that he did not Relieve them; and, if to this Injuſtice hc Added Reproach and Contume: ly, and Perhaps Shot at them, and Endeavoured to Deprive them of iheir Lives, he would Deny a Man to be what he was by Trying to Murder him; And, if they Took, from him, what he had, and Stript him, they would Affirm, vhat he vas, a very Inhuman Perſon; and therefore, if we Comprehend all theſe Relations in the Account, according to this Doctrine, the Thicves might be very Honeſt Men, and the Rich Man a very Ill One;3 And to Relicve him might Poſſibly be to Aflirm, that he was, what he vas not. ; TuE Third Inſtance, under this Propoſition is, that a Man, in giving Aſſiſtance ol any Kind to another, ſould Conſiderb, what his own Circumſtances are, as well as what the others are; If they do not Permit him to give it, he does not by his Forbearance Deny the Other to Want it, but if he ſould Give it, and by that Deny his ovn or his Family’s Circumſtances to be what they are, he would Actually Contradict Truth; And ſince, as it is Said, all Truths are Conſiſtent, nor can any Thing be True any Farther, than as it is Compatible with other Things, that are True, when both Parties are Placed in a Right Light, and the Caſe Properly Stated for a Judgment, the Latter may Indeed be Truly Said to want Aſſiſtance, but not the Aſſiſtance of the Former, any more than a Man, vho wants a Guide, may be Said to want a Blind or a Lame Guide. BUT FinsT, if a Man, in giving Aſſiſiance of any Kind to another, is to Conſider what his own Circumſtances are, as well as what the other's are, he will not, as in the Former Inſtance, find any Action, which ſhall be Expreſſive of the Truth of both their Circumſtances; For if he Refuſcs to give, he Denies the other Perſon's Circumſtances to be what they are, and if he does Give, Suppoſing them Mean, he Denies his own; Since it is Impoſſible to Say, that a Man Contradicts Truth more by Denying his own or his Family's Circumſtances to be what they are, than by Denying thoſe of another Man to be what they are, and ſince our Denials are to be Judged by our Facts. All Truihs, it is Said, are Conſiſtent, and yet it is not ſo here, becauſe the very ſame Fact, which Aſfirms the Truth of our own Circumſtances, Denies the Truth of another Man's, and Vice Verſã. SECOND, Nor is it Sufficient to Alledge, that nothing can be True any Farther, than as it is Compatible with other Things, that are True, and that, when both Parties are Placed in a Right Light, and the Caſe Properly Stated for a Judgment, the Latter may be Truly Said to want Aſſiſtance, but not the Aſſiſtance of the Former; Becauſe the ſame Fact, which Aſfirms one Truth, Denies another, and therefore the One is not Compatible with the Other; and as for Stating a Caſc for Judgment, there is no Room left for it, ſince the Fact Declares the Judgment and Sentiment of the Mind, and Conſequently muſt Affirm my own Circumſtances, what they are, and Deny another Man's to be what they are, or, on the Contrary. TuE Laſt Inſtance under this Propoſition is, vhen a Man, 4, is under ſome Promiſe or Compact to Aſſiſt another, B, and at the ſame Time Bound to Conſult his ovn Happineſs, Provide for his Family, &. and he cannot do Theſe, if he does That, Eſfectually. For, what muſt 4 do? Here are not Indeed Oppoſite Truths, but there are Truths on Oppoſite Sides; To which this Philoſophy Anſwers, tho' there cannot be two Incompatible Duties, or tho' to Inconſiſtent Acts cannot be both 4's Duty at the ſame Time, yet an Obligation, which may be called Mixed, may Ariſc out oſ thoſe Differing Conſiderations, 4 ſould Aſſiſt B, but ſo, as not to Neglect himſelſ and Family, and ſo to take Care oſ himſelf and Family, as not to forget the . other other Engagement, as vell and Honeſily, as he can; Here the Importance of the Truths on the One Side, and the Other, ſiòuld be Diligently Compared, and there muſt, in ſuch Caſcr, be always ſome Exception or Limitation Underſtood; It is not in Mans Pover to Promiſe Abſolutely; He can only Promiſec as One, vho may be Diſabled by the Weight and Incumbency of Truths not then Exiſting; In ſhort, vhen Things are Truly Eſtimated, Perſons Concerned, Times, Places, Ends Intended, and Effects, that Naturally Follow, muſt be Added to them. To vhich we Venture to Reply, Finst, That i? 4 is under ſome Promiſe or Compact to Aſſi*t B, if he Acts according to Truth, he ought to Aſſiſt him, and if at the ſame Time he is Obliged to Conſult his ovn Happineſs, and Provide for his Family, which is Inconſiſtent with the Former, if he Acts according to Truth, he ought to do this likewiſe, which yet is Impoſſible, and Shews the Abſurdity of the Preſent Doctrine; For, what muſt 4 do Indecd? When by the Rules of this PhiIoſophy, his Duty is Impoſſible to be Performed by him. SECOND, Nor is it enough to Say, that from Hence a Mixed Obligation Ariſes; Hov a Mixed Obligation? That he muſt neither Perform his Promiſe Effectually, nor Conſult his ovn Happineſs, or Provide for his Family, Effectually? Why this would be to Act according to Truth on neither Hands, but to Shuſfle, and to Trim Matters ſo, till his Actions on both Sides became a Lie; which ſeems to be Confeſſed here, when this Philoſophy Owns, that in ſuch a Caſe, 4 is not Obliged to At up to the urmoſt Punctilio and Exactneſs of Truth, but to Act as æell and Honeſlly as he can; This therefore, it ſcems, is the Celebrated Doctrine of Acting according to Truth, and the Real Relations of Things, that, upon Certain Caſes and Emergencies, ve are left at Liberty to Deſert them; And what is Said aſterwards of Exceptions, and Limitations, and of being Diſabled by the Weight and Incumbency of Truths not then Exiſting, are only Different Ways of Expreſſion, to Juſlify the ſame Latitudinarian Explanation of it's own Doctrine. TuiRD, And vhat is farther Alledged of Perſons Concerned, Times, Places, and Ends Intended, being Neceſſary to be Conſidered in a True Eſtimation of Things, is, as ve have Shewn, an Entire Confutation of it. : LastLy, If, in Order to Judge Rightly, what any Thing is, ve muſt Conſider not only, what it is in it's ſelf, or in One Reſpect, but àlſo, what it may be in any other Reſpect, vhich is Capable of being Denicd by Facts or Practice, that is, i? we muſt Take in allthe Relations of a Thing, under which it Stands to other Beings, the Knowledge of Moral Good and Evil will be an Impoſſible, or ſo Difficult, a Sclence, that no Onc, but a Philoſopher, and one of the Subtileſt Kind, will be able to Comprehend it; But one would Think a Religion of Nature, ſould be a Plain and Simple Buſineſs Suited to every One's Capacity, and Level to every Mans Reaſon; Unleſs we Imagine, that the Intention of Almighty God was only to Save a few Learned, and Speculative Men and Leave the reſt of the Poor Ighorant World to Shiſt for themſclves, as well as they could. WE ſhall thereſore here Conclude, that Vertue and Vice, or Moral Good and Evil are not to be Eſtimated barely by Men's Facts, or their Actions, but by the Deſigns ànd Intentions of them likewiſe; and, where thoſc Deſigns and Intentions are to do Good, and to Beneſit Mankind, or any Individual Perſon of the whole Species, they are Good and Moral Intentions, and the Actions, which are Derived from them, are ſo too; and vhere thoſe Deſigns and Intentions are to Prejudice, or to do a Harm or a Miſchieſ to Mankind, or any Single Individnal Perſon of the whole Species, ſuch Intentions are Immoral and Evil, and the Actions or Facts Derived from them; And nothing can be Determined from the Imaginary Conformity or Diſagreement of them to the Truth and Real Relations of Things. Upon which Account it is, that the Chriſtian Religion, which is the Utmoſt Syſteme of Goodneſs to Mankind, and to every Individual of the Species, is the Trueſt Standard of Moral Good and Evil, and which Syſteme, This, nor Any other, Derived from Men's Fancies aid Whimſies, which they Call Reaſon, will be ever Able to Overturn. I do not here Pretend to Aſfirm, that the Intention is only to be Conſidered, biit that it is a Main and Principal Ingredient in every Moral Action, which yet is Rejected ſrom this Philoſophy; The Conformity of our Actions to the Divine Will and Lav is likewiſe Expedient to Denominate them Good, and is a Neceſſary Requiſite to the Morality of them. Ii iiiæ s. 17. Tm S. 17. THE Seventh Propoſition is, that, vhen any AG vould be Wrong, the Forbearing that Act muſt be Right; Likewiſe, vhen the Omiſſion of any Thing would be Wrong, the Doing of it, i. e. not Omitting it, muſt be Right; Becãuſe Conrariorum Contraria eſt Ratio: This ſo Manifeſily Depends upon the Foregoing Doctrine, which has been Examined, that there can be no Occaſion to Conſider it in Particular here. TuE Eighth Propoſition is, that Moral Good and Evil are Coincident with Right and Wrong; For that cannot be Good, which is Wrong, nor that Evil, which is Right. Bur here it is to be Obſerved, that the Terms of the Queſtion in Diſpute are Changed; And Right and Wrong are Equivocally made to Signify, either Good or Evil, or what is Juſt or Unjuſt, or what is True or Falſe; Or Acting, or not Acting, according to the Nature and the Relations of Things. FirsT, Therefore if Right and Wrong are Coincident with Good and Evil, tha is, Signify Good and Evil; The Reaſon Aſſigned for the Truth of the Propoſition is; For that cannot be Good, which is Evil, nor that Evil, which is Good, which is a very Wiſe, and a moſt Profound Axiom. SECOND, If by Right and Wrong is Meant Juſtice or Injuſtice; The Propoſition vill not be True, nor the Reaſon Alledged to Prove it; For Moral Good and Evil are not Coincident with Juſtice and Injuſtice, ſince Good and Evil are more Extenſive Terms than Juſt and Unjuſt: a Juſt, Rigid, and Punctual Man may not be a Good, Kind, and Beneficont Man, but a Good Man will at Leaſt be a Jut Man. And on the other Hand, an Unjuſt or Unrighteous Perſon may not be an Evil, Malicious, and a Cruel One, but an Evil or Malicious Perſon is at Leaũt an Unjuſt One; So that, th we may Say, That cannot be Good, which is Wrong, or Unjuſt nor That Evil, which is Right or Juſt, yet it does not Follow, that Good and Evil are Coincident with Right and Wrong, Juſtice and Injuſtice; Which Shews the Sophiſtry and Weakneſs of the Reaſon Offered to Evince the Propoſition. TuirD, if by Right and Wrong, Truth and Falſchood are Intended, the Reaſoning is much the Same ith that under the Preceding Head; Becauſe Good and Evil are more General and Comprehenſive Terms than Truth and Falſehood, as they are, than thoſe of Juſtice or Injuſtice; Truth and Falſchood, as well, as Juſtice and In juſtice, are at the moſt and the beſt only ſeveral Kinds and Species of Good and Evil, and not the Eſſences of them; Thus, a Man may Speak and Act according to Truth, and yet not be a Good, Kind, and Charitable Man, but a Good and Kind Man vill alyays Speak and Act according to Truth, becauſe he has no Siniſter or lll Ends, which ſhould Induce him to Deceive; And on the Contrary, he may Speak and Act a Lie, and yet not be an Ill, or Malicious Man, tho' an Ill or a Malicious Man at Leaſt is a Falſe Man and a Liar; So that, again, th we may Say, That cannot be Good, which is Wrong, Falſe, or a Lie, nor That Evil, which is Right or True; Yet it does not Follow, that Good and Evil are Coincident with Truth and Falſchood ; Which likewiſe Shews the Sophiſtry and Weakneſs of the Reaſon Offercd to Evince the Propoſition. FourTH, If by Right and Wrong is Signified the Acting, or not Acting, according to the Truth and Relations of Things; Which muſt be the Real Senſe of this Propoſition, as it is Agrecable to the Preſent Doctrine; Then the Propoſition ill Run thus, that Moral Good and Evil are Coincident with our Acting, or not Acting, according to the Truth and Relations of Things; For that cannot be Good, vhich Contradicts them, nor that Evil, which Correſponds with them; Which is the very Point in Controverſy, and has been Sufficiently Proved to be a Precarious, Unjuſt, Falſe, and Wrong Aſertion. AND, as Moral Good and Evil are more Extenſive and General Terms, as we have Shewn, than Juſtice or Injuſtice, Truth or Falſehood, Acting or not Acting according to the Truth and Relations of Things, ſo, as at the Concluſion of the SixtlY Propoſition, we here likewile Affirm, that the Principle and Intention of doing Good to All is the Foundation of ſuch an Extenſive Morality, and is more Forcibly and Fully Inculcated in the Chriſtian Scheme, than in any other Scheme of Philoſophy or Reaſon, which was ever Propoſed to Mankind. 5. 18. THE S5. i8. THE Ninth Propoſition is, that every Act of ſuch a Being, as is beſore! Delcribed, and all thoſe Omiſſions, vhich Interſere with Truth, i. e. Deny any Propoſition to be True, which is True, or Suppoſe any Thing not to be, what it is, in any Regard, are Morally Evil, in ſome Degree or other; The Forbearing ſuch Acts,: and the Acting in Oppoſition to ſuch Omiſſions, are Morally Good; And, when any : Thing may be cither done, or not done, Equally, without the Violation of Truth, j that Thing is Indifferent. Tnis Propoſition is ſo Maniſeſily Derived from the Former Ones, that it is rather| a Corollary from them, than a Diſtinct and Independent Propoſition, and therefore we ſhall Say no more Concerning it. WEe ſall only take Notice, that under this Propoſition are Enumerated the ſeveral Chieſ Opinions of the Antient Philoſophers, Concerning the Summum Bonum & Malum, which a Wiſc Man ought to Purſue or Avoid, that is, by which all his Actions ought to be Squared, and to which they ought all to be Ultimately Referred, and by which they might be Diſcriminated and Diſtinguiſhed into Good or Evil; Theſe vere Called the Fines Bonorum & Malorum, and it is Said, there vas ſuch a Variety of Sentiments among the Old Philoſophers Concerning them, that Varro Reckons up 288 of them. HOWEVER, this Philoſophy Thinks it has Outdone them all, and Propoſes the Acting, or not Ading, according to the Nature and Relations of Things, as a Standard of Vertue and Vice, or of Good and Evil; Which yet is no more, than what One Seſt of thoſe Philoſophers has already Offered; Namely, that Scientia, or the Truth und Knovledge of Things ſould be the Ultimate End, or the Summum Bonum, at which we ſhould Endeavour to Arrive, and which, as it was Confuted in thoſe Times by Different Sects and Perſuaſions, ſ0 we have Endeavoured to Shew the Weakneſs of ſuch a Pretenſe, in the Foregoing Arguments againſt it; Beſides which, would not any One in theſe Times Wonder at a Philoſopher among the Greets or Romans, who ſhould Affirm that science was the Standard and Meaſure of Vertu:? And yet this Old, Exploded Plea is Revived, and made to Over- top all the other Criterions of it, with only this Advantage of the Ignorance of it's Preſent Patrons, vho are Eminent for Knowing little of the science of Nature, to which yet all our Actions are to be Adapted and made Conformable. For, First, As to Thoſe, who Reckon nothing to be Good, but what they Call Honeſlum, as Cato in Cicero, this Philoſophy Asks, but what is that Honeſtum 2 To which I Anſwer Brieſiy, and hat is the Truth and Relations of Things ? But more Fully, the Honeſtum was any Action, which Proceeded from a Senſe and Principle of Generoſity and Honour, which would Incite a Man to Prefer the Good of Mankind, or his Country, to any Mean and Paltry Conſiderations of Ambition or Intereſt; Which Falls in with the Character of that Brave and Excellent Roman, and is a Juſt Deſcription of his Sentiments and Opinions; And This Agrees with that Definition, which we beſore Gave of the True Criterion of what is Moral, or Immoral, and which is Exactly Coincident with the Chriſtian Scheme and Standard of Both. SECOND, As to Thoſe, who Place all in Following Nature, as Zeno, this Philoſophy Tells us, if they Mean by that Phraſe, Acting according to the Natures of Things, that is, Treating Things, as being, what they in Nature are, or according to Truth, they Say what is Right; But this does not ſeem to be their Meaning; And if it is only, that a Man muſt Follow his own Nature, ſince his Nature is not Purely Rational, but there is a Part of him, which he has in Common with Brutes, they Appoint him a Guide, which, it is Feared, will Miſlead him, t this being, Commonly, more likely to Prevail than the Rational Part; At the Beſt this Talt is Looſe. BuT 1ſ7. One would Think this Philoſophy Scarcely Underſtood its own Quotations, or Imagined, Others could not, TiN-- ũim Zinan i buanevBuis (al. &xonũòas)  Qlou ſm m; in xdl agm r” Avu 2lp æpts mbm huãs  ęns. Diog. Laert. is the Citation. And was it Poſſible for this Philoſophy to Doubt, whether Following Nature here Meant the Acting according to the Natures of Things, that is, Treating Things, as being what they are, vhich if it Meant, it Approves of, or whether it Meant Following our ovn Nature, as it Conſiſts both of a Rational and Brutal Part, which it Condemns, when ĩt is Impoſſible it ſiould Mean Eitter? Since Zeno does not Trouble himſelf about the Nature or Relations of Things, or our own i ut but Vertue, and to Live according to Vertue, he Says, is to Live Profeſſedly, or in Conſequence, according to Nature, for Nature Leads us to This; The Tia or Finis thereſore is to Live nar àęm, vhich is Said to be to Live 7ã òou; And therefore we muſt Know vhat Zeno Meant by Vertue, for That with him was Nature, in Direct Oppoſition to the Preſent Philoſopher, vho would make Zeno Determine, what Vertue was from cither the Nature oſ Things, or our own Nature; Now it is Plain. vhat the Stoicks Intended by Vertue; Namely, to be Temperate, Chaſte, Sober, and Good, in all Circumſtances of Liſe, whatever the Nature of Things or our own Beings were, which they did not ſo much Conſider; Which alſo Falls in with the Honeſtum of Cato, vho was Addicted to that Sect, and is ſtill Agreeable to the Chriſtian Scheme of Goodneſs and Vertue, and which Knew Little of the Natures and Relations of Things, and yet Perhaps as much, as the Modern Patrons of Them. 2d. IN Reſpect of the Two Interpretations Pretended from this Paſſage of Follouing Nature, which, we have Shewn, are nothing to the Purpoſe of it, The Firſt, of Following the Natures and Relations oſ Things, which this Philoſophy Applauds and Eſpouſcs, has been Fully Conſidered, and, I am Apt to Think, Refuted; The Second, of Following our ovn Natures, as Conſiſting of a Rational and a Brutal Part, vhich it Explodes, we ſhall now Examine; And I would here Ask, and Deſire to be Anſwered, as to the Rational Part, whether it is not, as Reaſon is now Managed, as little to be Followed, as the Brutal; For what is Truth or Reaſon, in Reſpect of Moral Good and Evil? It is not, by the Confeſſions of this Philoſophy, with which I only at Preſcnt Argue, it is not, hat has been hitherto Propoſed by the Antient Philoſophers, or the Modern, and we have Proved, that Truth and Reaſon is not to be Found in the Preſent Syſteme; To what then muſt we have Recourſec, unleſs to the Principle, I have beſore Mentioned, of a moſt Intenſe Goodneſs to all the World, and vhich Exactly Agrees, and is Correſpondent with Chriſtianity; Not to Mention, that this Philoſophy, when it Speaks of Right Reaſon afterwards, Tells us; That it Leaves Room for ſo many Diſputes, and Oppoſite Right- Reaſons, that nothing can be Settled, while every One Pretends, that his Reaſon is Right. BurT, Which is more, as to the Brutal Part of our Natures, there can be no more Reaſon Aſſigned, why we ſhould not Follow the Natures and the Relations of them, than the Natures and Relations of Beings, which are External to us; For why ſhould it be a more Sacred Matter, or a more Vertuous One, to Conform our ſelves to the Appetites and Propenſitics of Beings Diſtinct from us, and their ſeveral Relations in Exiſtence, than to thoſe External Portions of Being, which are United to our ſelves And is not the Conforming our ſelves to the Real Relations of Things, or of Beings: which have an Intimate Union with our ovn Minds, as Good and as Moral, as the Conforming our ſelves to the Relations of Things, or of Beings, which are Foreign to us in Nature, and have little or no Affinity with us? And are not the External Parts of Nature in Reſpect of us, as Brutal, as thoſe Parts of it, which are Joined and United to us? I Ask theſc ſeveral Queſtions, that they may be Replicd io by this Philoſophy, and is Patrons, at their Leiſure. THiRD, As to Thoſe, who make Right Reaſon to be the Law, by which our Acts are to be Judged, tho' they are Owned to Say ſomething more Particular and Preciſe, yet are Rejected, as to their Sentiments, by this Philoſophy ; Becauſe there are ſo many Oppoſite Right-Reaſons, that nothing can be Settled from thence. BuUT here again ve muſt Anſwer, that, if we put the whole upon Truth and the Real Relations of Things, there will be as many Oppoſite Truths and Real Relations oſ Things, as they are Called, as Oppoſite Right-Reaſons; For what is Truth, but Reaſon, or on the Contrary? And, if it is a Diſficult Matter to Determine, what Right Reaſon is, it will be no Leſs a One, to Aſcertain, what is Truth, and the Real Relations of Things; Does this Philoſophy in Particular Inform us, which Underſtands nothing of Nature, what Truth or the Real Relations of Things are, by any Inſtances, which have been Alledged by it? Far from it; If not, it is Talking in a General Way, without Telling us, what Truth is, or what the Real Relations of Things are; and thereſore we may Say, in it's ovn Expreſſions, that, a the Beſt, this Talk is Looſe. u FourTH, FourtTH, As to Thoſe, vho Contenting themſelves with Superficial and Tranſient Views, Deduce the Diſference between Good and Evil, from the Common Senſe of Mankind, and Certain Principles, that ate Born with us, it is Said, Put the Matter upon a very Infirm Foot; For ſuch Innate Maxims may be only the Impreſſions of Education; And beſides that, the Sentiments of Mankind are not ſo Uniſorm, and Conſtant, as that ve may Safely Truſt ſuch an Important Diſtinction upon them. 1ſt. In Anſwer to which we Say, that thoſe Maxims, Which are here Called Innate, cannot Proceed Merely from the Impreſſions of Education, that, as we have before Shewn, there is ſomething Natural to the Mind, which Leads it to ſuch Concluſions, and in Fine, that it is not a ”Raſa Tabula, as ſome Imagine. 2d. THE Second Objection againſt Iniate Maxims, that the Sentiments of Mankind are not Uniform and Conſtant in ſuch Maxims, Equally Obtains againt Acting according to the Truth, or Nature, or the Real Relations of Things; Becauſe, what is Truth, or Nature, or ſuch Real Relations, will be a Diſpute, and will be Tound to be Terms, as Vagrant and Uncertain, as thoſe Innate Maxims. ON the Other Hand, which we Defend, the Principle of Doing Good, and being Deneficial to All, as Far, and as Much, as Lies in our Pover, and Avoiding all Evil and Malicious Intentions, is an Eaſy and a Natural Criterion, of what is Good, or vhat is Evil, and in which, or the Contrary, Vertue and Vice Conſiſts; No Onc can Fail to Know, vhen he Means to do Good to Others, and when he Intends to Injuere, Gricve, Prejudice, Wrong or Oppreſs them; Such Actions therefore, which are Derived from the Former Principle, are Good, Vertuous and Moral; And Thoſe, which Reſult from the Latter, are Immoral, Vicious, and Evil; The Former alſo do not only Agree with the Chriſtian Scheme, but are Conſormable to the Infinite Love and Goodneſs of God to his Creatures, and thereſore Depend upon the Trueſt Source of all Natural Religion, the Confeſſion of ſuch a Gracious and Beneficent Being; And the Latter are Entirely Oppoſite and Repugnant to Both. Fi?TH, As to Thoſe, vho own nothing Good, but Pleaſure or the Yucundum, and nothing Evil, but Pain, as Epicurus and his Followers; It is Said, they do not Agree in what this Pleaſure is to be Placed, or by what Methods and Actings the moſt of it may be Obtained; As Men have Different Taſtes, Different Degrees oſ Senſe and Philoſophy, the ſame Thing cannot be Pleaſant to all; And if Particular Actions are to be Proved by this Teſt, the Morality of them will be very Uncertain; The ſame Act may be of One Nature to One Man, and of Another to Another; Beſides, unleſ there be ſome Strong Limitation Added, as a Fence for Vertue, Men will be Apt to Sink into Groſs Voluptuouſneſs, as in Fact the Profeſſors of this Doctrine did, Notwithſtanding all their Talk of Temperance, Vertue, &. and the Bridle will be Uſurped by thoſe Appetites, which it is a Principal Part of all Religion, Natural as well as any Orher, to Curb and Reſtrain. Bur iſt. If we Take this Doctrinè Right, it is a True One, that is, if ve make the Jucundum, or Pleaſure, to Conſiſt in a Rational Enjoyment or in Knovledge, and Doing Good to Others; Which Certainly are the moſt Agrecable, and thereſore the moſ Pleaſing and Delightful to a Rational Nature, and is again Coincident with the Truths oſ Religion, and the Great and Sublime Precepts of Chriſtianity. 2d. Tuv Truth and Relations of Things ill be, as ve Said beſore, as Diſputable a Point, as what is Pleaſant and Agreealle; And, if Particular Actions are to be Proved by ihis Teſt, ithe Morality of ihem uill be very Uncertain, ihe ſame At may be of One Nature to One Man, and of Ancther to Anothẽr. : 3d. It is not the Deſign of all Religion, Natural, as ell as any Other, to Curb anà ZReſſrain our Bodily or Corporeal Appetites, for this ould be to make Religion Conſiſt in Meats, and in Drinks, which are of a Trifling and Inſigniſicant Nature. Religion has a Higher and Nobler View, to Raiſe our Thoughts to ſomething above this World, and all the Pleaſures and Satisfactions of it, to make us not only Temperate, Sober; and Chaſte, but Good, Kind, Charitable, and Bencficent to All, and to Aſſure us, that, whatever Aſlictions ve Meet with in the Performance of our Duty, Almighty God will Reward us in another and a better State, ith an Exceeding Weight of Glory, for any Light and Trivial Sufferings, which we ſnall here Encounter. S51xTH, SixTH, AS to what is afterwards Said, Concerning Vertue being Placed in the Middle betwixt Two Extremes, it is not Worth the While to Conſider it ; And as to Platò's making Vertue to Conſiſt in ſuch a Likeneſs to God, as we are Capabl of, and God to be the Great Exemplar, this Philoſophy Says, it ſhall not Diſpute tho' it Wants to Know by what Mcans, ve may Attain this Likeneſs, and Think it muſt be by the Practice of Truth, God being Truth, and doing nothing Contrar; to it. 1ſt. WE Say, that it is not Worth the While to Conſider that Doctrine, which Places Vertue berwixt To Extremes, becauſe Some Vertues may have no Extremes, and Others may Conſiſ*t in them. For what Extremes has Honeſty and Integrity, Since it has only a Contrary to it, which is Villainy and Knavery? Or, who can be too Extremely Good, Since the Gooder a Man is, the Better he is, and thereſore the more Vertuous. 2. WE may Attain a Likeneſs to God, more by the Practice of Goodneſs, than Truth, for God is Love or Goodneſs, as well as Truth; and, whereas his Truth, or Knovledge, is Infinite, and Far above our Comprehenſion, his Goodneſs, th Immenſe, is yet a Pattern for our Imitation; This Platonict Vertue thereſore, in Approaching to a Likeneſs to God, Falls in ith the Deſinition, which I Gave beſore of Morality, and is likewiſe Maintained by the Chriſtian Notions Concerning it. As to the Propoſitions, which Follow after in this Section, it is not any ways Neceſſary to Examine into them; Becauſe they are Entirely Dependent upon what Foregoes. I ſall therefore Conclude this Inquiry with Obſerving, that whether this Religion of Nature Delincated is an Effort of Deiſm, or Intended for the Service of a Revealed One, is Perhaps ſomething Diſficult to Determine; Tis Certain, if what is here Alledged was True, it would not be Significant, with what Deſign it was Propoſed; But, as it Appears to be Falſe, it would be ſome Satisfaction to find, that they are the Errors of an Adverſary, and not of a Friend. WEe ſhall not here Object to the Author his Particular Familiarity and Acquaintance with One, who, by many Learned and Judicious Men, was Thought to be no Great Patron of Revelation; Nor yet, that hè Relinquiſhed the Orders of the Church, into which he had Entered; Tho' a Truly Pious and Good Chriſtian would Scarcely have done it, Notwithſtanding all the Temporal Riches, or Greatneſs, he ſould have Acquired; On the Contrary, a Sincere and Humble Chriſtian would have Rejoyced in the Advantage Accrueing to him from thence, by which he might be Rendered more Serviceable to his Sacred Profeſſion, and would have ſooner Reſigned the Latter, than the Former3 OF which we have ſome Late and Preſent Inſtances, where Good Men have not Thought their Miniſtery in the Church a Reproach to their Eſtates, or their Fortunes; But this we do not Inſiſt on; Nor any Thing, which is Perſonal. BuT, when he makes Vertue and Vice to Conſiſt in Acting or not Acting according to the Truth and Relations of Things, that is, in Natural Knowledge, or in Philoſophy, or an Ignorance of it, he Appears to Sap the very Foundations of a Chriſtian Morality, which Conſiſts in the Imitation of God and our Bleſſed Saviour, in Doing of Good, and in being Loving and Beneficent to Mankind, and he has much leſ" Reaſon, as we have Shewn, for ſuch an Aſertion, than the Chriſtian has for his. It vould be a Hard Caſe, if Religion was Put on ſuch a Foot, that no One could be a Good Man, but an Inquirer into the Nature and Reality of Beings, as they Stand in their Infinite Relations to Each Other, and that, no One could be a Vertuous, or a Moral Man, unleſs he was a Philoſopher, or ſome Rich Perſon, who was at Leiſure to Indulge and Riot in his own Speculations. Chriſtianity would Certainly Inform us Wrong, which Tells us, that not many Wiſe, not many Rich, or Noble were Called  And every Poor Peaſant, let him be as Honeſt, and as Innocent, as he will, muſt be of Courſe a Vicious, and Immoral Perſon. FARTHER, IF we muſt Treat all Things, as they are, ve are Obliged in Conſequence of ſuch a Doctrine, to Treat an Enemy not only as not a Friend, §. I. Prop. 11. but as an Enemy; and yet our Saviour and his Religion Inſtructs us, 7 Bleſs our Enemies, 10 do Good 10 them, who Hate us, and io Pray for ihoſe, who Deſpitetully Uſe us, and Perſecute us, which is not Treating them as they are, but the very Contrary oſ it; And yet, if we ſould do this, ve are Told, Notwithſtanding the Rants Ranis of ſome Men, Wè ſhould Cancel the Natural Differences of Things, and Confound Truth with Untruth which Looks little Better than like a Down- Right Impeachment of the Chriſtian Scheme; and it's Divine Author; If it is not, it is at Leaſt very Incautiouſly Expreſſed, and may be Explained to that Senſe. LastLY, S. 9 Pag. 211. He Says, I hope, that neither the Doing of this, nor any Thing elſe, Contained in this Delincation, can be the Leaſt Prejudice to any other True Religion; Whatever is Immediately Revealed from God, muſt, as well as any Thing elſe, be Treated, as being what it is, which cannot be, if it is not Treated with the Higheſt Regard, Believed and Obeyed 3 That therefore, which has been ſo much Inſiſted on by me, and is, as it were, the Burden of my Song, is ſo Far from Undermining True Revealed Religion, that it rather Paves the Way for it's Reception. HERE One vould Think, if this Philoſophy had been Truly Chriſtian, it ſould not have Spoke in ſuch General, but in more Plain, Full, and Explicite Terms; Since there is no Deiſt, or Mahometan, who might not have Said the ſame Thing. HE HOpCes, he ſnall not by his Natural Religion do a Prejudice tõ any orher True Religion, but whether that True Religion is Moſes's, Chriſt's, or Mahimers, is not here Said, but rather left Undetermined; I have Shewn, that ſome of his Notions are Diametrically Oppoſite to the Chriſtian Syſteme, and Conſequently muſt be Prejudicial to it; And if he vas Senſible of This, which could Scarcely be Hid from ſo Penetrating a Perſon, he muſt Think Chriſtianity had not a Chance to be in the Number of any other of his True Religions, but that it was Directly and Abſolutely Falſe. HE Farther Tells us, that whatever is Revealed from God, ought to be Treated vith the Higheſt Regard, that is, to be Believed and Obeyeà; But he is not ſo Good to Inform us, which that zevelation is, whether it is the Chriſtian One, or whether it may not be the Pretended One to Mahomet, or even That of the Goddeſs æęeria to Nuama ; Nothing is Laid Down, as Definitive or Certain, and we are only Told, that nhatever is Revealed ſfrom God, ought to be Treated with the Higheſt Regard; And who vill Deny a Truth ſo Plain? Or, what Philoſopher would Aſſert One ſo Triſlingi When ve are not Informed, What this ~Revelation is. AND, when it is Said, that we ought to Treat a Revelation from God with the Higheſt Regard, by Believing and Obyying it; What is the Real Conſtruction of ſuch a Short Character of a Revealed Religion, (for, which, or what, it is, ve are not Suppoſed to Know) unleſi, that ve muſt be Credulous and Obey? That is, the True Senſe of this Paſage Appears to Amount to this, that, as all this Book has been Spent to Support the Evidences of Natural Religion by Inconteſtable Prooſs and Reaſons, ſo there is Little to be Said for Revelation, Excepting, that, If it is True, we are to Beteve it. Bur does not this Philoſophy Knov, as the Terms of Faith and Belief go nov, they are only made to Signify the Probability of a Doctrine; And Reaſon and Argunient are Thought to Infer the Certaiuty of it? If ſo, we Say, the Chriſtian Religion is not only in that Senſe to be Believẽd, but that it has more Evidences for the Truth of it, than This, or any Other Syſteme of Natural Religion, which has been hitherto Propoſcd to the World; And ve muſt Retort the Expreſſion upon the Author, that ſ this Natural Religion is from God, it ought to be Treated with the Higheſt Regard, Believed and Obeyed, but if it Proceeds from Man, as by the Errors it Contains, it moſt Certainly does, we are not Obliged to do Either. As to what is aſterwards Said, that a Natural Religion Paves the Way for the Reception of a Revealed, That Certainly cannot be True, till we know, what that Revelation is; And, if it is the Chriſtian Revelation, it cannot be True, if ſuch a Natural Religion Endeavours either to Overturn or Contradict it; If it does not do it, this Natural Religion Tells us no more than Chriſtianity did before, and therefore niight have been, if ĩt Pleaſed, altogether Silent upon the Matter. ] BESIDES in General, the Revelation of God in the Chriſtian Diſpenſation is ſo Exceedingly Superior to any Thing oſ Human Reaſon, or which Human Reaſon could Imagine, that it cannot be Exacted to the Rules, or the Preſcriptions of it; That the Inſinite and Almighty Creator of all Things ſiould Send his Son into the World for our Redemption, that he ſould Reſign him, as a Sacriſice upon the Croſs, for the Sake of Mankind, is above Human Comprehenſion, and Deſpiſes all the Me: E rhod: hods oſ Reaſon to Account for it; But This is Revelation; And a Revelation, which s Atteſted by Greater Demonſtrations and Proofs, than can be Alledged for any Syſteme of Philoſophy and Natural Religion, which we at Preſent are Acquainted vith; And, Suppoſing any One could Prove the Being of a God, or the Immortality oſ the Soul, or Future Rewards and Puniſments, beyond the Power of being. Refuted; He would be as far from Aſſerting the Chriſtian Scheme, as a Man, vho ſould Prove the Being of a God, and could not Evince his Paternal Care of, and Indulgence towards us, or who ſhould Evince the Soul's Immortality, and could not Demonſtrate the Reſurrection of the Body, or who ſhould Demonſtrate the Rewards and Puniſiments of another Life, but could not Inform us to vhom rhey Belonged, vhether to Jews, Turks, Infidels, or Chriſtians. TuE Caſe in the Preſent Age ſeems to be This, that Men are Grown very Fond of Philoſophy, and what they Call Reaſon, and vould therefore Reduce even the Chriſtian Religion it's ſelf to the Dictates of it; But Chriſtianity, and a Revelation from God, cannot Bend to every Mans Fancy and Humour; It will, in Spite oſ all the World, be what it is, as much as Nature is, what it is, whatever our Comments may be upon Either; And to Endeavour to make the Chriſtian Revelation of God's Vill to Mankind Bow and Submit to any Imaginations, ve have Entertained Concerning Nature, or the Suppoſed Relations of Things, is ſomething Like, what we Read of the Miſſionaries in China, who to Convert thoſe People to Chriſtianity, Mix Their Paganiſm with it. Thus Philoſophick Men are Apt to Take the Chriſtian Religion, not, as it is in it's ſelf, Pure and Uncorrupted, but to Blend Nature and Reaſon with it, if they Mean the Beſt to it; And if the Worſt, to Undervalue and Contemn it3 OF the Former Sort, I Take the Arians, and Socinians to be, and whether This Philoſopher, Mr. Locke, and Des-Cartes, are not in the Number of the Latter, I will not Take upon me to Decide; But would rather Think on the moſt Favourable Part, and, which is the moſt Agreeable to the Chriſfian Candour, that they are only Men, who were Deceived in the Connexion of their Ideas, and Conſequently only aſen Miſtaten. HOWEVER, in a Chriſtian Nation, where the Revelation of God to Mankind is Acknovledged by us, One would Wonder, hy we ſhould Deſire any Other Reliligion, than what it Propoſes; It is Suppoſed to be True, what Occaſion then is there for a Natural Religion? If it is not True, why ſhould a Natural Religion Endeavour to Support it? For, as we have Shewn, if Natural Religion vas never ſo Fully Proved, it would be of no more Importance to the Truth of the Chiſtian Revelation, than Mahometiſim it's ſelf would be, which Acknovledges a God, the Immortality of the Soul, and Future Rewards and Puniſhments. I ſhall therefore Finiſh this Head of Inquiring into the True Intention of this Religion of Nature Delineated, with One Obſervation, that if the Author of it had been as Scrupulous in speating of Truth, as he Pretends to be in Acting of ir, I do not Know, but he had been a much Better Man, and a much Wiſer Philoſopher. i might Proceed to the other Sections of this Natural Religion; As the Second. Concerning Happineſs;3 The Third, Concerning Realon, and the Ways of Diſcovering Truth; The Fourth, Concerning the Obligations of Imperfect Beings, with Reſpet to their Power of Acting; The Fifth, Concerning Truths Relating to the Deity, Of his Exiſtence, Perfection, Providence, &. The Sixth, Concerning Truths Reſpecting Mankind in General, Antecedent to all Human Laws; The Seventh, Concerning Truths, Reſpecting Particular Societies of Men, or Governments; The Eighth, Concerning Truths Appertaining to Families and Relations; The Ninth, Concerning Truths, belonging to a Private Man, and Reſpecting (Directly) only himſelf. But, as it would be an Endleſs Task to Inquire into every Thing, and as the Principal and Singular Doctrine of this Philoſophy of Acting according to the Truth and Relation of Things has been Examined, I muſt Leave the Diſquiſition to Others, who vill Find, as much Weakneſs of Argument in many of the Subſequent Sections, as we have Shewn in the Preſent, I could do it in many Inſtances, but ncither my Time, nor the Riſing Number of theſe Sheets, will Permit or Allow it; And I ſhall only Conclude, with my Thanks to my Worthy and Ingenious Friend Mr. Clarke, Maſter of the Free-School in Hull, for his Sentiments in theſe Mn vhich which, however the Favourers of this Syſteme may Declaim againſt, Perhaps will find it ſomething Diſſicult to Anſwer in many Particulars, and which I Received as a Kind Preſent from him, after I had gone thro theſe Inquiries. C H AP. VII Concerning Ideas from Senſation and Reſleclion, and that there are Ideas in the Mind Perfectly Immaterial. 5. 1. HAT We have Alledged in the Foregoing Chapters would be Suſficient to Overthrow this Whole Eſſay of the Mind or Underſtanding. which yet has been Diſcourſed upon the Conceſſion of that Notion, which is Fundamental to the Reſt, and which we ſhall here Examine into, Namely, that all our Ideas Ariſe, and are Derived, from Senſation and Reſlection. 5. 2. ErTuER Our Ideas are thus Diſtinguiſed; Firſt, From their being Different Kinds or Sorts of Ideas, which therefore have Diſtinct and Separate Originals; Or Second, From their being Derived from Diſtinct and Separate Originals, which thereſore are Different Kinds and Sorts of Ideas; If the Firſt, it cannot be Proved, that there are not ſeveral other Sources or Fountains of our Ideas, beſides Senſation and Reflection; For, vhen we Perceive the Sun, or Feel Pain, or Hear Sound, or Taſte Fruit, or Smell a Roſc, or a Violet, All theſe arc from Senſation, but they are Different Kinds of Ideas, and therefore muſt, according to the Preſent Suppoſed Doctrine, have Diſtinct and Separate Originals; and Conſequently, Senſation in General will not be a True Account of the Original of theſe Various Ideas. A-GAIN, our Ideas from Senſation in General are Different from thoſc Ideas, which we have of them upon Recollection; Thus the Sun we See, or the Pain we Fecel, or the Sound we Hear, &. are Diſſerent from the Ideas, which are Produced in our Minds upon the Remembrance of them; The One, as we have Evidenced in the Principles of Philoſophy, being an Actual Perception, whereas the Other is a Picture, or Repreſentation only, of that Perception; And I may here Add, that Memory is a Bringing of Objects or Things, as Near to the Mind as Poſſible, which is done by Thought, Study, and Application, and Forgetſullneſ is a Removal of them at a Diſtance from it, which is done by Oſcitancy, Intemperance, and Idleneſs, and is Anſwerable to, but not the Same vith, our Senſation oF Objects at a Nearer Diſtance, and our Non-Senſation oſ them at a Farther; Nor are theſe Ideas of Remembrance Ideas of Reflection, which are Conſincd to the Operations of our own Minds, as Perception, Judging, Willing, Remembering, &. For, if our Ideas of Memory may be Termed Ideas of Reflec ion, becauſe Remembering is an Idea of Reſlection, by the ſame Reaſon our Ideas of Senſation may be Termed Ideas of Reſlection, becauſe Perception is an Idea of Reflection. ON the other Hand, if the Ideas, ve Remember, may be Accounted Ideas of Senſation, becauſe we could never have Raiſed by Recollection thoſe Ideas in our Minds, unleſs our Senſes had Supplied us with theit Archetypes, We Say, TuAT by the Same Argument, it is not Proved, that our Ideas oſ Reſection may not be Equally Derived ſrom Senſation, becauſe it is not Certain, that we could ever have the Ideas of Perception, Remembering, Doubting, and Willing, if we had not been Furniſied with Ideas ſfrom Senſation, about Which our Perception, Remembering, Doubting, Villing, &c. vere Employed. From whence it is Evident, ihat our Ideas, vhich ve by our Memories Recollect, are either Diſtinct from our I deas of Scnſation and Reficction, or if they are the ſame with our Ideas of Senſaſation, for the ſame Reaſon our Ideas of Reflection may be ſo too, and ConſequentIy, that there will be either Thtee Diſtinctions oſ our Ideas into thoſe of Senſation, Memory, and Reſlection, or that they will be all Reſolved into thoſe of Senſation only. Waar has been Argued Concerning the Ideas of our Memories, may be Extended to the other Faculties of the Mind; For, as when we Remember any Idea of Senſation, it is Different from our Atual Perception of it, ſo liceiſe, When we Paſs a JudZment upon that Idea, or when we Receive any Appetites or Inclinations from l KE  k æ jt t, the Appearance of ſuch an Idea in the Mind, when Attended with thoſe Circumſlances, muſt be Diffcrent from a bare Impreſſion of it, as Diſferent as Perception is ſrom Memory, or That from Judgment, or from Willing, &⸗.MonvovER, if the Original of Ideas is to be Derived from the Diſtinction of them, our Ideas of Reſection, as we have alteady Conſidered Thoſe of Senſation, vould not come under One Head of Reſlection; becauſe, as Perceiving, Remembering, Willing, Judging, Doubting, &. are Diſſerent Ideas, they would alſo have Diſferent Originals, and thereſore they vould not be ſo Properly Called Ideas of Reſlection, as the Ideas of Remembering, Willing, Judging, which we Actually Experience in our own Minds; For, iſ becauſe we Really Will, and Perceive, and Judge, and Remember, ve may Term theſe Ideas of Refiection, which we Obſervẽ in our Minds upon Reſiection, ve may as Juſtly Say, that our Actual Ideas from Senſation, are I deas oſ Reſiection, becauſe upon Reflection we Perceive them there. TESE WoOrds, Senſarion and Reſiection, thereſore ſeem to Mcan no morè than this, that what Actually Lies in our Minds, as a Perception there, is Senſation, and Conſcquently, vhen ve Will, or Remember, it is Equally a Senſation, as vhen ve See or Feel; On the Contrary, all theſe Actual Perceptions may be Reſlected upon by the Mind, and Formed into Abſtracted Ideas of Perceiving, Willing, Judging, and Remembering; This is the True Senſe of the Preſent Philoſophy, if it Really Underſtood, what it's ſelſ has Propoſed to us. Bur, if ſo, ſince the Ideas of Senſation are Reſolved into our Actual Perceptions, and thoſe of Reſſection into our Wills; How are Either of theſe the Original of our Ideas? ſince the Firſt arc only Ideas, vhich we in Fact Experience, the Original oſ which we are Ignorant, and the Laſt, what we our ſelves Pleaſc. 5. 3. HAVING therefore Conſidered our Ideas, as to the Diſtinction of them, and Shewn from thence, that there is no more Reaſon to make two Sources of our Ideas, than a Hundred, we ſhall in the Second Place Examine, whether this Philoſophy can Direct us to any True Fountains of our Ideas, by which we may Diſtinguiſ them. Tis Said, Senſation and Reſlection are ſuch, ve have Shewn, that the Firſt Expreſſes our Real and Actual Perceptions, and the Laſt the Abſtractions of our Wills; Whereas our Really Perceiving any Thing, or our Pleaſure in Abſtracting, can neither of them be the Fountains or Sources of our Ideas; For, what we Perceive is only Matter of Fact, without our Knowing, what is the Riſe or Origin oſ that Experience, which we have from Bodies or our owvn Minds; and what we Abſtract by our Wills is no Origin of Ideas, unleſs of Chimerical Ones, which may be, as well Thoſe of a Centaur, or a Gryſfon, as the Abſtracted Ones of Perception, & if the Origin of both is Reſigned to the Will and Pleaſure of the Mind. BESIDES Which, it will be Perſectly Impoſſible to Determine, what are the Origins or Sources of our Ideas, unleſs ve know the Nature of Matter, and our own Minds, neither of which this Philoſophy is Pleaſed to Oblige us with; For till that is Aſcertained, how is it Evident, that our Ideas of Senſation and Reflection too, may not be Originally Derived ſrom Matter? Since if, as the Preſent Eſſay Believes, Almighty God may Impreſs upon a Syſteme oſ Matter, Fitly Diſpoſed, a Faculty of Thinking, Matter may be Capable oſ Reſlection too; that is, our Wills, by which any Reflection is made, may be the Reſult of Material Influences, as our Senſations are, and therefore may be Reckoned oſ the ſame Nature and Order with them. MOREOVER, without any Reſerence to this Eſay, before we are Convinced, what the Nature of Matter is, it will not be Certain, that our Ideas of Reflection, or of our Wills, are Derived ſfrom any other Source, than thoſe of Senſation; becauſe our Senſations are Derived from Matter, and it is not Proved, that our Reſlections may not be Derived from our Senſations, which i? True, Senſe will be the Origin of all our Ideas. Ox the Contrary, it will not be Maniſeſt and Plain by this Philoſophy, that the Ideas oſ Senſation may not be Oving to a Faculty in the Mind of Producing thoſe Ideas; ſince, as it can Raiſe Ideas in it's ſelf by Memory, and by Dreams, and in a Frenæy, till this Eſſy can give us an Explication of theſe Phenomenons, or Appearances, in our Minds, it will be in Vain for it to Fix any Opinion, how, or from vhenee, our Ideas have their Origin, whether ſrom Senſation or Refection, or Both. To To Sum up, as Brieſly as we can, what has been hitherto Said; If-the Diſtinction of our Ideas is a Reaſon, why we ſould Aſcribe them to Diſferent Origins, every Diſtinct Idea, even of Senſation, will have a Peculiar Source belonging to it, from whence it is Derived; In the next Place, Memory vill have an Equal Title with Senſation, to be a Diſtinct Fountain of our Ideas, and ſo of the other Faculties of our Minds, as Willing, Judging, &. Third, what we in Fact Experience, and what we Arbitrarily Contrive of our ſelves, are alſo Fountains of our Ideas; That is, in the Firſt Caſe, becauſe we Perceive a Thing, therefore the Perceiving oſ it is the Riſe and Cauſc of that Perception, and in the Second, becauſe we Contrive and Form Abſtracted Ideas by our own Will and Pleaſure, therefore thoſe Arbitrary Abſtractions are another Origin and Fountain of them, Both which it is Abſurd to Aſfirm. IF the Diſtinction of Ideas cannot Furniſh us with the True Origin of them, much Leſs can that Philoſophy do it, which neither does know, nor does Pretend to Knov, the Cauſes of Senſation or Reſlection. S. 4. HAVING Conſidered the Opinion of our Ideas being Derived from Senſation and Reſlection, as the Two Fountains or Sources of them, we ſhall now Inquire, whether there are not Ideas in our Minds, which are Perfectly Immaterial, that is, which cannot either be Derived ſrom Senſation, or any Reflections upon thoſe Senſations, which this Philoſophy ſeems to Aim at and Deſign, tho,, according to it's Uſual Method, it would make us Believe, that it Means by Reſlection, nothing more than Reſlecting upon the Operations of our own Minds; But this Double Entendre is the very Temper of this Gentleman in his Whole Philoſophy, as it is in his Religion, which, whilſt he Proſeſſes in Appearance, he Endeavours to Ruin in Reality, and vhich ſeems to be the True Character of this Fallacious Perſon. WE therefore Say in Proof of This, 1ſ/. That all our Ideas of Reſlection, as Thoſe of Willing, Judging, Remembering, &. are not Originally Derived from Senſation, but from the Mind; 24. That all the Paſſions and Impulſes of the Mind, in which the Mind, Feels as much as in it's Senſations, (and which therefore may be Called Perceptions, tho' not Ideas, or Particular Images, and Repreſentations of Things) That all of them have no Dependence upon, or Connexion vith, our Senſations; 37. That even in our Idcas of Memory, and Dreams, there is ſomething Mixes its ſelf in thoſe Perceptions, which no Senſations ever did, or could, Supply us with; 47h. That the ſeveral Ideas of Solidity, Space and Figure, Eternity, oſ Infinity, of God, or ol Mathematicks in the General and the Abſtracted Notions of them, are not Oving to our Senſations; 5h. That the Graces, and the Divine Influences, from the Chriſtian Religion are Superior to any Thing of Senſe, or what can Poſſibly be Derived ſrom it; Each of theſe we ſhall Endeavour to Prove in the Following Sections. 5. 5. FIRs?, When we Reſlect upon our own Minds, we find Thought, Wiiling, Judging, Doubting, Remembering, &e. to be Properties Exiſting there, which Evidently are Immaterial, for when I Doubt, or Will, or Remember, or Perceive, whatever the Objects of my Doubt, Will, Memory, or Perception, are, the Acts of the Mind in theſe ſeveral Inſtances are as Diſtinct from the Objects, as Memory is from the Thing, vhich is Remembered, Perception from the Thing Perceived, and ſo of the Reſt; or as Diſiinct as Action is from Paſſion, or the Contrary; Therefore, thus far the Matter ſeems to be Clear. BUT then the Queſtion will be Asked us, whether we could have ever WilIed, or Doubted, or Perceived, or Remembered, i it had not been for our Senſations3 It would not be Neceſſary at Preſent to Anſwer this any other Way, than by Sauying, Tnat, if we could not, it is as Certain, that we could never have had our Senſations, if it had not been for our Perception, which Perception is before Proved ro be Immaterial, and Conſequently, that Judging, Willing, Remembering, &. Which Depend upon Perception, could not Exiſt without it neither. DBur we ſhall Fartther Add, that Perception may be without Senſation; for tho', by the Union of our Minds with our Bodies, ve are Trained up to Think and Believe they are Inſeparable, yet it is Maniſeſt, that for the ſame Reaſon, that Senſation could not be without Perception, Perception may be without Senſation; Since, as the Mind is Active in it's Senſations, whilſt the Objecis it Perceives are Paſſive, or the Mind, Paſlive, whilſt the Objects are Active upon it, ſo it is moſt Certain, that if there had never been any Action or Paſſion of the Object in Reſpect of the Mind, the Mind, Not- Notwithſtanding that, would ſtill Retain it's own Force, whether it Conſiſted in the being Paſſive or Active, That is, it's own Proper Perception, or Perceptive Faculties, Abſiracted from the External Object Perceived; and the only Inquiry, which will Re main is, whether it can Perceive it's own Action or Paſſion, which it is Evident ĩl may, by the Reflections ve Daily make upon our own Thinking. Remembering Judging, &. in General, which every One may, when he Pleaſes, Perccive. MOREOVER, my Perception of my own Thinking. of my Remembering, &e. is not a Perception from Senſation, nor can be Derived from it; Not the Firſt, unleſ— Thinking and Remembering are Senſations, which no One will Affirm, who vill not Say, that when IThink, I See, or Hear, Something, Notwithſtanding that Intenſ Thinking, even Deprives us in a Manner of thoſe Senſations; Not the Laſt, fince vhat I Think of, is not alvays External Objects, but the Inward Operations of my own Mind; and, that thoſe Operations cannot Subſiſt, without Something being Derived into it from External Objects, cannot be Proved, till it is Firſt Known, wherein the Nature of the Mind, and of Matter Conſiſts; Neither of which this Philoſophy has made one Step tovards the Informing us of; Or at Leaſt, till it is Eviden ced, that the Mind may not Exerciſe it's ſelſ in it's own Operations, without Conſidering it's Senſations, or the Impreſſions of Material Beings, which we have Shewn, It may. 5. A SECOND, As to the ſeveral Paſſions and Impulſes of our Minds, as Conrage Fear, Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrov, &æ; as alſo Vehemence and Impetuouſneſs in oui Tempers, or Sloth and Deſpondency; Patience and Aĩquanimity, or Anger and Fury; None of theſe have any Semblance or Appearance of Ideas or Images in them, Drawn from Senſation; All that the Philoſophy of Ideas does, or can, Propoſc to us, is only, that we Receive Certain Repreſentations in our Minds from External Objects, that we have a Power of Reflecting upon, Comparing, Compounding, Abſtracting, and Judging of thoſe Repreſentations, &e. Which yet Falls Short of the Powers and Faculties of the Mind, in Conſidering, Viewing, and Comparing it's own Operations, Abſtracted from our Senſes, as we have already Obſerved; But, for ſuch a Philoſophy, which is only Concerned in a Dull and Languid Perception and Com pariſon of Ideas, to give an Account of the Great and Sublime Paſſions of ou Minds, which are not Expreſſible by the bare Shadows and Images of Things, is as much Impoſſible, as that the Seeing ſeveral Objects in a Looking Glaſs, and Comparing them together, ſould Furniſh us with the Forces and Impetus's, or the Actions of the Rays of Light, which are Incident, or oſ the Reflexive Ones of Glaſs, and the Receptive of our own Minds; Betwixt which, and the Plain Repreſentation of ſuch Images to us, there is no Connexion. Ir it be yet Said, that the Objects of our ſeveral Paſſions, as Courage, Fear, &. are Material; That will no more Prove, that our Paſſions themſelves are not Originally in the Mind, than becauſe our Senſations are Derived from External Objects, therefore the Perception of them is not in the Mind Diſlinct from Matter. LastLy, If the Mind is Aſfirmed to be Material, or if it is Suggeſied, that it is not Impoſſible but it may be ſo; Whilſt this Eſãy is ſo far from Knowing, what the Neture of the Mind is, that it is Ignorant of the very Eſſence, and rhe Eſential Properties of Matter, as we have Shewn in our Principles of Philoſophy, we can only Think, that ſuch Opinions are Taken up at Random, and that the Mind might as vell have been Surmiſed to be a Broomſtick, made of ſome Unknowvn Wood or Other, as to be Material, that is, of It Knows not What. 5. 7. THIRD, In our Ideas of Memory and Dreams, ve Said there was Something Alledged by the Mind, vhich could not be Owing to our Ideas from Senſation; For it has been already Proved in the Principles of Philoſophy, that at the moſ, they are only Repreſentations or Images of what we Actually Perceive by Senſation; There muſt be therefore ſomething Peculiar in the Mind, which it never Derived from Senſation, if the ſame Idea, which it Reccived by an Actual Impreſſion from an External Object, upon Remembering it Repreſents in a Diſſerent Manner to it's ſelf; and which ſeem to have the Same Relation, as a Shadow has to it's Subſtance; And this is more Evident, vhen we Conſidert Thought in General for when ve Remember, that ve Thonght at ſuch a Time, a Recollection of it isſtill Farther Removed from any ldea of Senſation. : As As to our Dreams, beſides what we have Said in Reſpect of our Memories, the Ideas of which thoſe of our Dreams ſeem moſt to Reſemble, it may be Added; That, both in the Nature of the Perceptions, and in our Judgments of them, they arc Extremely Different ſfrom any Thing, which could be had from Senſation. As to the Nature of them, there is Something, which ſeems almoſt to be Inexpreſſible by any Notions, which we have of Material Beings; Thus in our moſ Senſible Dreams, and which we can beſt Remember, vhen ve Awake, we ſeem upon Reſlection to have been Converſant in another World of Beings, where every Thing is Quite and Plainly Diſferent from what we Apprehend here, and yet at the Same Time we Think we do not Dream, and the Painting is ſo Lively upon our Minds, that even our Senſations are Dull and Languid in the Compariſon; All which cannot be Derived from, or Oving to our Senſations; And yet all this we in Fact Experience, which can never be Solved by a Grave Philoſophy of Ideas, and the bare Perceiving, and Comparing, and Compounding of them; and which can be no other Ways Accounted for, than by our Pſycheometria, and our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. BESIDES Which, it is what every One, if he Pleaſes, may Obſerve in our Dreams, as to our Judgments upon the Perceptions, we have in them, that we oſten, and Indeed Generally, make one Idea to Paſs into another, without Diſtinguiſing the Propricty of each; Thus ve make the Idea oſf a Man to Change into another of a Brute, or even of an Inanimate Being, and yet we Dream all the While of the Same Individual Perſon; And the Same may be Said of other Beings, as in the Idea of Water, it is many Times Changed into that of a Solid, or of a Viſcous Subſtance, when we Perceive nothing of all this from our Senſations; Alſo the Proportions of Men and Animals are Repreſented to us many Times more Gigantick and Terrible, and at other Times Infinitely more Dvarfiſh, than what are found in Nature; We ſhall not at Preſent Say, what the Reaſon of this is, becauſe, if we could not give any Account of it, we ſould yet be upon the Level with the Modern Philoſophy, which does not Offer, or Pretend, to do it; Which, Notwithſtanding, may be done by the Above-mentioned Principles; What is to be Affirmed at Preſent is, that if the Perceptions in our Dreams are Owing to our Senſations, they would be Correſpondent to thoſe Senſations, whereas, in the Inſtances Alledged, they are Directly Contrary to them. 5. 8. FouRTH, There are ſeveral Ideas, viæ. of Solidity, Space, or Extenſion, Figure, &e. of Duration, Eternity, of Infinity, and of God, Which are in a Manner wholly Oving to the Mind; As to the Firſt Three Mentioned, it may Perhaps ſcem a very Improbable Aſſertion, but there is nothing more Evident, than that all theſe are, as they now Lie in Philoſophy, Ideas Formed by the Mind its ſelf; For what is Solidity ? Why Truly it is Received from Touch, it Fills Space, but is Diſtinct from Space, as alſo from Hardneſs, and upon it Depends Impulſe, Reſitence, and Protruſion; But, if any One Asks at Length, what Solidity is, this Philoſophy Begs the Favour to be Excuſed from Telling you, only that it is a Simple Idea not to be Defined, and Diſmiſſing you with Contempt, for ſo Impertinent an Inquiry, ſends you ro your Senſes to be Informed. Bur, if it is not to be Defined, why is it Defined? Why are we Told, that it is an Idea vhich is Received ſfrom Touch, which Fills Space, and is Diſtinct from both It and Hardneſs, and on which Depends Impulſe, Reſitence, and Protruſion? If That is the Definition of it, it is either an Imperſect and a Wrong One, or, if it were True and Exact, there would be no Occaſion for any farther Inquiry, What Solidity is, nor to be in the leaſt Diſturbed, if any One ſhould Preſume to Ask the Queſtion, what it was. TuE Caſe thereſore ſeems to be, that this Philoſophy had been Amuſeing it's ſeli for ſeveral Sections together about Solidity, which it did not Comprehend, and at Laſt, being Conſcious to it's own Ignorance, began to be Magiſterial, and to Send it's Readers, if they would not Acquieſce in what it had Pronounced to them, to be Informed, if they Pleaſed, from their Senſes. And, that this is ſo, we ſnhall Prove from giving a True Notion of Solidity, and then Examining the ſeveral Parts of this Definition of it. What any One therefore Mcans by Solidity, or Impenetrability, is only This, That a Cube of Gold, for Inſtance; cannot Enter into another Cube of Gold, and Preſerve the ſame Dimenſions it had beſore; That a Needle cannot Penetrate in 10 the very Body and Dimenſions of Water, or Quick-Silver, but the Parts of Eacl muſi muſt Recede, before there can be any Penctration, that is, ſuch a Notion of Solidi ty, or Impenetrability, only comes to this, that every Being will Preſerve it's own Nature, whilſt it Continues the Same; Which is no orher than an Axiom, and Equal ly Extends to all the Beings in the Univerſe, and even to the Mind it's ſelf; fo One Thought cannot Crond or Preſs it's ſelf, i ve may ſo Call it, into anothe Thought, and that Thought Continue, What it was; and therefore Thought is Equall; Solid and Impenetrable with Matter, as we have already Shewn, Space, Light, Co lour, &. to be in our Principles of Philoſophy, according to ſuch a Notion, which is, what is Really Meant by Solidity, or any Thing being Impenetrable. Ir what ve have Aſirmed is True, it is Maniſeſt, that Solidity, or Impenetrability, is an Abſtracted Idea of the Mind, and no more belongs to Matter, than to Thought; ſrom whence we may Juſtly Conclude, that Solidity is not Owing to Senſation, ſince it is an Idea Formed by the Mind, and which would be Certain, whether there were any External Objects or not, Namely, that One and the Same Thought is not Two Different Ones, or, that there is no Penetration of them. FroMm this Notion oſ Solidity or Impenetrability, which is the Real Senſe of that which is Deſignd and Intended by thoſe Words, it will be Evident in the Firſt Place, that the Idea of Solidity is not Received by our Touch, ſince ſuch an Idea may be as vell Collected from our Thoughts, as our Feeling; in the Second Place, that thæ Solids of Mathematicians have no Connexion with this Idea, Seeing they are only Portions oſ Abſtracted Space or Extenſion; Third, that it is no more Intimate or Eſential to Body, than to the Mind; Fourth, that Solidity, or Impenetrability, does not Fill Space, becauſe any Thing being it's ſel?, is not an Argument that ſuch a Eeing is Extended, which will be Neceſſary to the Filling of Space, or, which Amounts to the Same, Solidity, or Impenetrability, is an Abſtracted Notion, which therefore cannot Inſorm us of the Nature of That, which is Solid and Impenetrable, whereas it will be Requiſite to Know That, before we can Affirm the other; Beſides which, as we have already Demonſtrated in the Principles of Philoſophy, Chap. 4. S. 11. Book 1. Abſtracted Space is not Commenſurate to the Dimenſions of Matter, and Conſequently the Conſtipation of it, if that is Meant by it's Solidity, does more than Fill it, that is, the Real Dimenſions of a Cubical Inch of Gold Contains more, than a Cubical Inch of Abſtracted Space; Fiſth, that Solidity, or Impenetrability, is not Diſtinct from Space, if it Fills it, and is Commenſurate with it; becauſe one Space can no more Penetrate into another Space, and Continue the Same, than Body can Penetrate into Body; nor can Body Penetrate into Space, ſince it only Exiſis in it's own Dimenſions, and not in Space, which we have Proved, is no other than an Abſtracted Idea; Sixth, that Solidity, or Impenetrability, is Indeed Different ſrom Hardneſs, for it is very Plain, that a Soft or a Fluid Body is as much it's ſelſ, as a Hard One is; Seventh, that Impulſe, Reſiſtence, and Protruſion, do not Depend upon Solidity, or Impenetrability, for the Hindering any Foreign Being ſfrom Encroaching on it's Own, whilſt it Continues the Same, Appertains to Thought, to Space, to Light, Heat, Colour, &. and to all Beings whatever, as well as to the Dimenſions of Body, and is no Proof, or Evidence, what the Nature of that Being is, which yer muſt be known and Underſtood, beſore it can be Said, that Impulſe Reſiſtence and Protruſion Depend upon it; For ve may as Juſtly Pronounce from this Notion oſ Impenetrability, that Impulſe, Reſiſtence, and Protruſion Depend upon Thought, Space, Light, &e. as upon Matter's Preſcerving it's ovn Dimenſions, vhilſt they Continue the Same; Moreover, Solidity, or Impenetrability, more Properly Depends upon Reſiſtence, than the Latter upon the Former, for how are the Dimenſions oſ Eodies Impenetrable, but by a Reſiſtence to a Penetration? VE muſt alſo Say, in Full Conſutation of this Doctrine, that it is not Evident, that Bodies may not be Penerrable in that Senſe, which this Philoſophy ſcoms to Think they are not, that is, in theit Dimenſions being Conſtipated and Condenſed in the Same Abſtracted Space; Thus, altho' a Cubical Inch of Water, cannot Enter into a Cubical Inch of Water, and That Body Preſerve it's Nature, which is an Axiom, yet it is not Manifeſt, that by Certain Forces in Being, Water may not be Transſormed into another Kind of Body, which ſhall Equally Fill Abſtracted Space, and, Notwithſtanding that, be Double, or Treble, or Quadruple, the Dimenſions it had berore, according to the Geomerria Salidorum ſie Materiæ, and thereſore, in ſuch a Caſe, 1 Caſe, Water may Admit of a Penetration of Dimenſions, and be as little Obſtlinate in Preſerving it's own Nature, as Thought, or Heat, or Light, is, which, ve are Senſible, are Capable of a Continual Change and Alteration. j FroM all which it is Plain, hat we at Firt Aſerted, that this Philoſophy had chæ  ò. c been Gravely Diſcourſing about Solidity, which at Length, upon a Conſciouſneſs of it's own Ignorance, it was Forced Ingenuouſly to Conſeſs, it did not Underſtand. 5. 9. WHAT we have Alledged Concerning Solidity, that it is an Abſiracted Idea 413,.73 Formed by the Mind, is Certain alſo of Extenſion or Space, of Figure, and the Like; lacas in Gen And the only Queſtion, which Remains, is, whether our Abſtracted Ideas are not Ow- n a_ ing to Senſation, by which is Meant, either the Objects of thoſe Abſtractions, or the r e. ne Abſiractions themſelves; If the Firſt, that will not Entitle them to the being Ideas Oœæ; ſa-) oſ Senſation, ſince there is an Abſtraction, as vell as an Object of it, which Enters te aecu into all our Abſtracted Ideas; If the Laſt, ſince our Abſtractions are Performet by ſaron the Will and Pleaſure of the Mind, it is Evident, our Abſtracted Ideas are not Ow- ing to Senſation, unleſs the Will of the Mind Is the Same with the Senſation ing. oſ it. j : BESIDES Which, the very Objects of our Abſtractions are Different from our Ideas of Senſation; For, that the Dimenſions of One Body do not Penctrate into thoſe of Another, is not Seen or Felt, but Conceived. FARTHER, when ve Abſtract our Thoughts, our Wills, or Memories, &c. they are ſiill Leſs OWing to Senſation, that is, even the very Objects of our Abſtractions. IF yet it be Laſtly Said, that our Senſations are Firſt, and all the Operations or Abſtractions of the Mind Proceed Originally from External Impreſſions, That cannot be Known, till it is Firſt Shewn, what the Nature of the Mind and Matter is, and that the Mind is Poſſeſſed Originally of nothing, but what it Derives from Matter; For, unleſ' that is done, it will not be Certain, how our Senſations themſelves are Performed, and that there is not as much OWing Primarily to the Mind, which Receives thoſe Senſations, as to Matter vhich Impreſſes them, and if ſo, that there is not as much Reſlection in our Senſations, as there is in the Ideas, which are Said to be Deduced from that Source and Fountain. SINCE therefore from what Foregoes, there may be Reflection in Senſation, and ſince there may be alſo Reſlection without Senſation, it cannot be Proved, that there inay not be Ideas in our Minds, which are not OWing to Senſation, Excepting it is Firſt Evidenced, that the Actions or Reſlections of our ovn Minds are not as Natural to them, as any Actions or Impreſſions upon them from External Agents. 5. 10. BUT the Ideas of Eternity, of Infinity, and of God, are ſiill more Removed The Idea of from our Senſations, than the Abſtracted Ideas we Mentioned; As to That, of Eternity, Dut oa it is Certain, it may be as well Inferred and Collected from our own Thought and aeæ rãfiut Exiſtence, as from the Senſations of any Beings External to them; For we can have  ut⸗ .no more Reaſon to Say, that any External Being Exiſted from Eternity, than that sæ  s our Thinking One did; and if we Affirm, that there muſt have always Exiſted Some- at the begin thing, becauſe Nothing could not Produce Something, ſuch an Argument will be ẽ Equally Valid from Thought, or from our Mind, as from Matter or Body; But if it is Said, our own Thought, and the Exiſtence of the Mind, is Derived from Senſation, it muſt be Enquired, what is Meant by Senſation; If by That is Intended an External Impreſſion, without the Mind to Receive it, there is no Senſation in the Mind at all; If what is Signified by it, is, that the Mind is Matter, and the Actions of External Objects upon it are no other than the Signatures of a Seal upon Wax, it vill be Neceſſary to Prove the Mind is Matter; The Contrary of which we have Evidenced in our Pſycheometria; Iſ neither of theſe are Aſfirmed, the only Thing vhich Remains ĩs, that Thought, or the Mind, is not Derived from Senſation, but is a Being Peculiar and Diſtinct from Matter, or any Senſations from it. S. 11. THE next Idea Aſorementioned is That of Inſinity, which is Said to be De- N ie Ii rived into the Mind by it's Actual Perceptions of what is Finite, as the Obvious Por- ꝗ ptions of Extenſion, which Affect our Senſes, and the Ordinary Periods of Succeſ- àr ihè Bevn ſion, whereby ve Meaſure Time and Duration, and Repeating without Bounds thoſc n E Ideas, for by this Means we find, we have no more Reaſon to Stop at one Addi- u. tion of theſe Finite Quantities, than another; It is. alſo Said, that the Infinity of the Eſtnce of Almighty God is not to be Conſidered here, unleſs in Reſpect of his DuLIIII ration ration and Ubiquity, and that, what other Notions we have of his Infinite Power, Wiſdom, and Goodneſs, are only Figurative, and are Properly Inexhauſtible and Incomprehenſible, &c. WEe Say, There are Conſequently only Three Things. which are to be Conſidered in this Doãtrine; Firſt, whether Extenſion and Duration are the only Ideas, by which ve Know, vhat is Finite; Second, whether Repeating ſuch Ideas by the Mind i Able to give us a Notion of what is Infinite; Third, whether the Notion of an Infinite Wiſdom, Power, and Goodneſs, are only Figurative, and not Real, Expreſſions of them. As to the Firſt, Namely, whether Extenſion and Duration are the only Ideas, by which we Know what is Finite, which this Philoſophy Affirms, it is ſo Apparently Confuted by Numbers of Inſtances, that it would be almoſt Needleſs to Diſprove it; For, whenever we Experience, in Particular, any Thought, or Paſſion, or any Idea, or Knowledge, or Wiſdom, or Power, whatſoever, in our own Minds, or when, in General, upon Reſiection, we find, that our Minds themſelves Exiſt, we See they are Finite and Determined Perceptions, and therefore may a Juſiy give us an Idea oſ what Finite is, as any Portions of Duration or Extenſion, we ſhall Pleaſe to Conſider. Nor, is it Suſficient to Alledge, that Finite Properly belongs to Extenſion and Duration, as having Stated Limits, and which are Confined within Fixed and Certain Terms or Boundaries; For, if that were a Definition of what is Finite, There would be no Finite Number; Since That has not the like Kind of Determination or Preſcrip tion of it's Limits with Extenſion or Duration, nor has even Duration the Same vith Extenſion; the Firſt is Incluſive of ſo many Units which it Contains, and Excluſive of all Others, the Second of Moments of Time which Paſſes, and the Laſt oſ Parts Extended; But, as Unit in Number is not a Moment in Duration, nor a Mo ment in Duration a Part in Extenſion, and yet each of theſc Furniſhes us with the Idea of Finite, ſo likewiſe, tho a Thought, or a Paſſion, or a Power in the Mind, or the Mind it's ſelf, are Different from a Unit, a Moment, or an Extended Part, a1 they alſo Differ amongſt themſclves, yet are they Incluſive of what they are, and Excluſive of any Thing elſe beſides, and therefore may as Juſtly be Termed and Denominated Finite, as any Portion of Number, Time, or Extenſion can be. IFr this Philoſophy has Given us bur a Lame and Imperfect Account, of what is Finite, it's Method of Supplying us with the Idea of Infinite is ſtill more Exceptionable, which Leads us to the Second Inquiry, whether a Repetition of the Finite Ideas of Duration and Extenſion is Capable of Impreſſing a Notion upon us, of what is Infinite; It is Plain in the Firſt Place, that it cannot do it in General, ſince the Finitc Ideas of Duration and Extenſion, however Repeated, cannot Produce an Infinity of Thought, Wiſdom, Power, &æ. and which therefore this Philoſophy is Pleaſed to Reject from being Properly Infinite, and to make them only Figuratively and Incomprehenſibly ſo3 which is Suitable to it's whole Procedure, in giving Arbitrary Definitions of Things, of Certainty before, and of Finite here, and then Telling us, what ought to be Accounted Certain or Finite, and what not, according as it Squares with ſuch Arbitrary Definitions; On the Contrary, if we have Proved, that Thought or Knovledge, or any of the Powers or Ideas of our Minds may be as Juſtly Termed Finite, as any Portions of Duration and Extenſion, Infinity, without any Figure or Incomprehenſibleneſs, will as Truly, and with as Great a Propriety, belong to the One, as to the Other. For if it be Said, that Infinite Thought, or any other Power of the Mind, is an Abſurdity,'tis Owned, if we Mcan the Abſtracted Idea of Thought, or of any Power of the Mind in General; and in the Same Abſtracted Senſe, Duration, or Extenſion. are not Inſinite; for, whether Finite or Infinite, it is in Abſtraction neither More nor Leſs than Duration and Extenſion, ſince neither of them in General can be Finite or Inſinite; If we Conſider Indeed Particular Portions of Duration or Extenſion, they may be Termed Finite, and accordingly, if we Conſider a Particular Force of Thought, of Wiiling, or Judging, they may be Finite likewiſe, and Granting the Notion, which this Philoſophy Propoſes of Repeating Finite Ideas, ſuch Determinate Forces of Thought, Willing, or Judging, &e. are as Capable of being Repeated to Infinity, 15 Space or Duration is. Waar Wuaar ve Intend by the Forces of Thinking, Willing, Judging, &. is, that even in our Ordinary and Common Senſations, as of Colour, or Sound, or Taſie, or Smell, or Feeling, there may be a Thouſand Different Forces in the Mind it's ſelf, by which ſeveral Minds Perceive theſe Senſations with ſo many Different Degrees of Force; as ſome are more Quick- Sighted, or have a Sharper Ear, or a more Delicate Palate, or an Acuter Noſe, or a more Senſible Fecling, than others have in ſeveral Various and Intermediate Degrees of Senſation; IF this is Said to be Owing to the Organs of Senſation, and not to the Mind its ſelf, That we have Shewn to be Impoſſible in our ?ſycheometria, or Eſſay upon the Mind; If not, the Contrary is not Proved. IN the Mean Time, if the Mind is Capable of Different Forces in it's Senſations, this Philoſophy, I Believe, will Own, that it is ſo in it's Reſlections and Judgments, or it's Volitions upon them; For, if the Mind has a Peculiar Force, by which it Sces, or Hears, or Feels, or Taſtes, or Smells Differently, it will be Certain, that its Reſe-tions upon thoſe Forces will be Anſwerably Various, whilſt the Power and Energy of the Mind, whatever it is, is Diverſify'd, and Conſequently, that it's Judgments, Volitions, &c. are ſo. j IT has been hitherto Said, that our Notion of Infinity cannot in General be Confined to the Repetition of the Ideas of any Certain Portions of Duration or Extenſion, becauſe there may be Finite Thought, Willing, Judging, &e. which if they were Repeated, according to the Different Forces of Different Minds, might be Infinite. BuT We muſt Farther Affirm, that if Infinity was Applicable only to Duration and Extenſion, yet a Repetition of the Finite Portions of it could never Produce our Idea of Infinite; ſince any Determined Repetition of them would but Produce a Greater Finite, and an Actual and Infinite Repetition of them is both Impoſſible to a Finite Mind, and at the ſame Time as Inconceivable, as an Actual Idea of Infinite, (which this Philoſophy Denies, and Aſfirms our Idea of Infinite to be only Negative of what is Finite;] For an Inſinite Repetition of a Finite Idea is Equally Unintelligible with one Repetition, or one Impreſſion of an Infinite Idea. BESIDES Which, that our Idea of Infinite is Negative only, is Surmiſed upon this Opinion, that ve muſt have Expreſs Images or Repreſentations in our Minds of what ve Perceive and Know, it being a Neceſſary Doctrine to Certainty from the Connexion of Ideas; Thus, when it is Said, our Idea of Infinite is Negative of what is Finite, it is Suppoſed, that the Actual Idea, ve have of any Thing, is no other 1han Finite, and rhat, what we have Beyond That, is only a Conception of ſomething more, vhich, when we have Taken in to our Former Idea, will ſtill make a Finite One. I IN Anſver to which, we ſhall Say, that if it is Neceſſary to Certainty from the Connexion of Ideas, that thoſe Ideas ſould be Expreſs and Determined in the Mind, Either our Idea of Infinity is Expreſs and Determined, and therefore not a Negative Onc, ſince to Deny in General, that any Finite is an Infinite, is not to Affirm Expreſly what is Infinite; Or, if our Idea of Infinity is not Poſitive and Determined, we cannot be Certain of any Thing Concerning it, and therefore, it would be no Great Matter, whether Infinity of Wiſdom, and Power, were Figurative or not, vhen Applied to Almighty God, ſince this Philoſophy has Conſulted ſo vell ſor the Proper Inſinity of Duration and Extenſion, that at the Laſi, we ſhall Knov nothing of Eithers Which Shews the Admirable Contrivance of it, whilſt in one Part we are Soothed with an Infallible Demonſtration of the Being of a God, and, in another, are in Effect Plainly and Roundly Told, that Infinite Wiſdom, and Inſinite Power, is an Improper and Incomprehenſible Way of Speaking, and that when we Aſert it, even, of Space and Duration, there is nothing Certain Concerning it. IF therefore we have any Idea at all of Infinite, it is Maniſeſt, it cannot be Col Iected from any Repetition of our Ideas of Finite, which only would Produce àa Greater Finite; nor from a Negation of what is Finite, ſince That would be Affirming nothing; For, where we Deny, that any Finite Idea of Space or Duration, be it Greater or Smaller it Matters not, is Infinite, we do not in the Leaſt Say, what is o, no more, than, if ve Said an Inch vas Leſs than a Foot, we ſhould be Imagined 10 Determine what a Foot was, All that is more than an Inch being Wholly out oſ our Notice. LIIIIæ FrO FrOM whence we may Juſily Conclude, that this Philoſophy does not Give us an Account, how our Idea oſ Inſinity is Derived from Senſation; ſince a Greater Finite zan only Poſſibly Ariſe from a Repetition of a Finite Portion of Space or Duration. with which our Senſes Supply us. To vhich we may Add, that the Portions of Either, which we Receive in our Senſations, may be Extremely Diſferent, and Conſequently, Seeing the Mind has an Equal Power in Multiplying in the One Caſe, as it has in the Other, One Univerſal and Inſinite Space or Duration vill be Greater than Another, according to the Diſferent Meaſures, which we Repeat; If the Meaſures are Certain and Fixed, what are they? If an Inch or a Yard, why are they more Entitled to be the Foundations of our Repetitions, than a Foot or an Ell? If an Indiviſible Point in Time or Extenſion, how are they Owing to our Senſations:? LastLy, That ve may have an Idea of an Actual Inſinite is Plain from the Nature of Incommenſurables, in which there is no Common Point, be it never ſo Small, which will Meaſure them; Thus the v2, is Incommenſurable with Unit, or the Diagonal with the Side of a Square, and yet we have as Expreſs a Notion or ldea of the Root of Two, as we have of Unit; For, th we do not Know by Extraction of the Rootr, what the Eſfable Number is, (nor do we Know of how many Parts Unit Conſiſis,] it is not from thence to be Concluded, that we have not a Notion or Idea of v2, ſince we can Reaſon and Argue Concerning it, with as much Clearneſs and Diſtinction, as if we had Entered into the ſeveral Parts, of which it is made up; Thus we can Affirm, that v2, Multiplyd into its ſelf, is Equal to 2, that, if an Extraction is made, it is Actually Infinite and Inexhauſtible, that if it is Compared vith the //3, it is in Power as 2 to 3, &. and we can Say no more of Unit or a 100, for cach of them may Conſiſt of an Infinite Number of Parts, vhoſe Expreſſions we are Ignorant of, but this we are Certain oſ Concerning them, that Unit Multiply'd into Unit, or 100 into 100, will Produce Unit, or 10000, &. WhATEVER Notions thereſore we can Fully and Perfectly Reaſon upon with the Utmoſt Certainty and Diſtinction, they may be Juſtly Termed Abſolute and Actual Ideas of our Minds; If ſo, this is Manifeſt in General, that we can Argue and Reaſon upon Infinites, as Clearly, as we can upon Finites; Thus we are as Sure, that an Infinite is not any the Greateſt Finite, as we are, that 1 is not 2; that an Infinite is never to be Exhauſted by any Diviſion, or Reached by any Multiplication; that it is One and Similar in it's ſelſ, and the Like; and the ſeveral Propoſitions, which may be Formed and Evinced upon ſuch a Notion, may be Found in the Excellent Mr. Raphſon, in his Eſ=ay upon an Abſolute and Infinite Space. Ir thoſe cannot be Accounted Poſitive and Actual Ideas in our Minds, upon hich we can Reaſon vith Juſtnes and Accuracy, but thoſe only, which are Determined Images and Repreſentations of Things, and which Lie in the Mind, as Pictures there, which this Philoſophy ſeems to Imagine, we can no more Comprehend, What a 100 or a 1000 is, or what a Chiliagone, or a Billiagone is, that is, a Figure of a Million of Millions of Sides, than we can Conceive Infinity; ſince an Infinite Number, ot a Figure oſf an Infinite Number of Sides, is not Leſs Expreſſed in the Mind, than a 10°, or a 1000 is, or the Polygones we Mentioned; for no one ever Saw 100 or a 1000 Diſiinct Units in his Mind at Once, no more than all the Sides ol thoſe Polygones; And Conſequently, both Finite and Infinite here, are no other than Diſlinct Ideas Lodged in the Mind, upon Which we can Reaſon, and have Peculiar Conceptions of, Proper to cach, and by which they are Diſtinguiied from all Others, and not Images or Expreſs Characters of thoſe Numbers, or Figures, which ve Conſider. Iv this is ſo, then our Idea of Infinity, ſince it is far from being Finite, cannot be Derived from our Senſations, or Reſections, but muſt be Oing to the Boundleſs Nature of the Mind, which Forms an Idea Superior to any Thing, hich is Finite, and can Reaſon upon it with as much Perſpicuity, as it can upon thoſe Finite Ideas, which it Receives from Senſation or Refiection. ANOTHER Idea is That of Eternity, which ve Conſidered Above, which can not be Derived from Senſation or Reſiection, and ſor the ſame Reaſons likewiſe which are Alledged before, in Reſpect of Infinity; Since Eternity is nothing elſ but an Infinite Duration. 5. 12. Tn: S. 12. TuE Laſt Idea is that of God, the Demonſtration of which we have already Examined, and ſhall here only Inquire, according to what was Propoſcd in the Third Place, S. 11. Paragraph 24. whether the Notions of an Infinite Wiſdom, Power, and Goodneſs, are only Figurative, and not Real Expreſſions of them; we have Proved, that our Finite Ideas of Power, Wiſdom, and Goodneſs, may be as Properly Called Finite, as thoſe of Extenſion and Duration, and Conſcquently, if the Repetition of ſuch Ideas is Neceſſary only to the making them Infinite, that Inſinity, ithout any Metaphor or Figure, may be as Properly Aſfirmed of Wiſdom, Power, and Goodneſs, as of Duration and Extenſion; but we have farther Shewn, that there is ſomething more, which is Requiſite to the Idea of Infinity, than a bare Repetition of what is Finite, and Conſequently, that our Ideas of Infinite Wiſdom, Power, and Goodneſs, are not Derived from our Repetitions of any Finite Ideas of them, but from the Nature of the Mind, which is Able to Conceive Ideas Superior to any Thing, which it has from it's own Senſations and Reſlections, or any Repetitions of them; what that Nature is, ve have already Endeavoured to Explain in our Eſay upon the Mind, and which, we are fully Satisſied, muſt be Derived from Almighty God; It is Sufficient, if it is Fact, as it Certainly is, that we have Idcas, vhich no Senſe, or Reſlection upon that Senſc, could Supply us with, and how ve come by them, has been a Former Inquiry. S. 13. APTER What we have Said, Concerning the Demonſtrations of an Almighty Being from the Connexion of Ideas, and the Principles, upon which it Proceeds, Contained in this Eſay upon Human Underſtanding, and Des. Cartes's Meditations, which, ve have Endeavoured to Evince, are Falſe in the Chief Parts of them, it vill be Unneceſſary to Prove, that all other Demonſtrations of a God are Inſuſficient, which Depend upon the Corpuſcular Philoſophy, or Sir Iſaac Newio's Mathematick Improvement of it, that is, which Depend upon the Suppoſition of a Vacuum, as Dr. Bentleys, Dr. Cheyne's and Others; Seeing, if the Corpuſcular Principles, and Conſequently a Vacuum, are Erroneous, which we have Shewn in our Principles of Philoſophy to be ſo, it will be Impoſſible to Maintain any Demonſtrations of a God from Principles, which are not Juſtifiable in themſelves. 5. 14. THAT Which We are therfore Farther in this Chapter to Conſider, is, whether the Immortality of the Soul can be Proved from the Preſent Philoſophy; which it is Impoſſible it ſiould be, when it neither Knows the Nature of Matter, or of Motion, or of the Mind, and only Depends upon the Idea of Matter and Motion, which the Syſteme of a Similar or Homogeneous One has given us, and which is Confuted in our Philoſophy, and upon the Elaborate Eſſay on the Mind, which is Reſolved, as we have Shewn, into Terms, and Artificial Names of Things, without Underſtanding even ſo much, as what is Meant by them. i C H AP. VIII Concerning Identity and Diverſity. 5.1. FTER Having Conſidered the Ideas of Infinity, Solidity, and the Reſt, we ſall Conclude this Inquiry into the Syſteme of Ideas, with ſome Obſervations upon the Notions, which have been Entertained in it, Concerning Identity and Diverſity, and Concerning Enthuſiaſm; The Former of which are Said to Conſiſt in the Mind's Comparing any Real Being, as Exiſling at any Determined Time and Place with it's ſelf, Exiſting at another Time, upon which it Forms it's Conception: of Identity and Diverſity; for, vhen we See any Thing, to be in any Place, in any Inſtant of Time, we are Sure, be it what it will, that ĩt is that very Thing, and not another, which at that ſame Time Exiſts in another Place, how Like and Undiſtinguiſhable ſoever it may be in all other Reſpects; And in this, it is Said, Identity Conſiſts; when the Ideas, it is Attributed to, Vary not at all from what they vere that Moment, wherein we Conſider their Former Exiſtence, and to which we Compare the Preſent; What is afterards Said, is to the Same Purpoſc. : Tir TuE Whole of which, is only this, that a Thing may be Properly Said to be the Same, when in one Inſtant of Time, in which it is Conſidered, and in one Place it is that very Thing, and not Another, Notwithſtanding the Cautions of this Philoſophy. s. 2. BuT FiRsT, Iſ Identity Conſiſis in this, it is ſo Confined, and Limited an O. pinion of it, that any Thing, tho' it ſould not be Varied, cannot be Called the Same in any Different Intervals oſ Time, and Conſequently the ſame Undiſiinguiſhec Atom of Solid Matter, Exiſting in Difſerent Times, and in the ſame Place, muſt be Diſferent, which is Impoſſible. SECOND, Whatever is Diſcourſed in the Following Sections, Concerning the Identity of Vegetables, of a Brute, a Man, or a Perſon, is all Falſe; ſince the Identity of thoſc ſeveral Subſtances is not Determined from being, what they are, in one Inſtant of Time, but from other Methods; Agreeable to what is aſterwards Explained in this Chapter. TuIRD, according to this Notion of Identity, Two Undiſtinguiſied Solid Atoms of Matter, which Exiſt in the Same Time, but in Different Places, have not any Identity belonging to them; and yet it is not Explained, why in this Theory of Identity, To Undiſiinguiſicd Atoms of Matter may not as vell be Called the Same in Reſpect of their being to all Appearances ſo in the ſame Inſtant of Time, as One Portion of Matter ſiould be Deemed to be the Same, which is to all Appearances ſo, tho' Exiſiing in Two Differing Inſtants of Time; Unleſs the Identity oſ Place has a Greater Prerogative in Determining, vhat the Identity of a Thing in General is, than the Identity of Time has. 5. 3. FROM what Foregoes, it is Plain, that Identity ĩs, in theſe Logicks, a General and Abſtracted Notion, which is ſo far from Extending to all the Particular Beings, which we Call the Same, that it cannot ſo much as Solve the Identity of one Atom of Matter, which is Suppoſed to be Unvaried, whether in Reſpect of Time, or Place, or it's own Exiſtence; Much Leſs will it ſerve us in the Identity o? a Vegetable, a Brute, a Man, or a Perſon, which will be afterwards Conſidered. 5. 4. ON the Contrary, a General Notion of Identity ought not to be Firſt Defined and Determined in our Minds, and then all other Beings, in Reſpect of their Identity, Submitted to that Notion, but the Method we ought to Purſue, is to Con ſider all Kinds of Beings, which we Call the Same, and then Pronounce, whether they are ſo, and wherein the Identity of each Particular Being Conſiſts, and afterwards Compare thoſe Identities, and Examine wherein they Agree, and from thence Form, iſ any muſt be Formed, our Idea, or Notion, of Identity in General. S. 5. As to what therefore Reſpects the Identiry of Things, ſince they are Infinitely Various, we ſnall only Conſider thoſe, which are Pointed at and Marked out to us in this Philoſophy, Namely, the Identity of Time, Place, an Individual or Single Atom of Matter, a Subſtance, Vegetables, Animals, a Man, and a Perſon. 5. 6. FirsT, in Reſpect of the Identity of Time, That cannot be Known, unleſs by Telling us, vhat Time is, and the Meaſure of it; If it is the Succeſſion of Ideas, by which we Determine the Limits of Time, and the Certain Boundaries of any Portion oſ it, vhich we Conſider, tis a Falſe and Unequal Standard of it; ſince the Succeſſion of Men's Ideas are as Various, as any Different Velocities of Bodies what ſocver; If it is not, what other Meaſure of Time is there? Not from Pendulums, which are Irregular; Not from the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies, which are ſo likeviſe; If therefore there is any Identity o?f Time, it muſt be Fixed from our own Abſtracted Conceptions of it, Namely, that Time is ſome Certain Succeſſion of the Inſtants of it, which Agrees to every Man's Succeſſion of Ideas; But ſince That is not True, that there is ſuch a Succeſſion of the Inſtants of Time, which will Agree to every Man's Succeſſion of Ideas, Identity of Time is either Nothing, or is an Abſtracted Idea. IF the Identity of Time is an Abſtracted Idea, from the Particular Succeſſions of every Man's Thoughts, or the Motions of any External Beings, Then, Firſt the Succeſſion of Idcas cannot be the Meaſure of Real Duration; And Second, the Identity oſ Time can only Conſiſt in the Abſtraction of it from all Particular Succeſſions of Ideas or Motion, and in Conſidering it only, as any other Abſtracted Extenſion, as Length, Separated from Breadth or Thickneſs, which is no more than an Arbitrary Creature of the Mind. TnE Tur Identity of Time therefore, if there is any, muſt Conſit in the Minds Abſtraction of Duration from every Thing, which may Cauſe any Alteration in it's Succeſſion, and therefore a Unit or Inſtant of Time is it's ſelf, and no òther; Not becauſe it is not Different, if Applied to Particular Beings, in Reſpect of Thinking or Mòtion, but becauſe all Beings are Thrown out of the Queſtion, and the Mind Conſiders barely the Abſtracted Idea of Time, and the Portions of it. S. 7. THE next Sort of Identity to be Examined into, is that of Place, which as has been before Proved in our Principles of Philoſophy, is no more than an Abſtractcd Idea, and therefore the Identity of Place Conſiſts in that Abſtraction, which is made by the Mind of Extenſion in General, in Excluſion of all other Properties Inherent in it. 5. 8. IF therefore the Identity of Time and Place àre either Nothing, or Abſtractjons of the Mind, of what Significance is it, to Determine the Identity of a Thing, as of any Solid Portion of Matter, by them? But this is not all, for which Way, Abſtracted from Time and Place, is a Solid Portion of Matter Conceived to be the Same? Unleſs from Conſidering, or Suppoſing, that all Matter is Similar and Homogeneous, which is, according to what has been Shewn in the Principles of Philoſophy, no other than an Abſtracted Idea. Whuar therefore the Real Identity of Matter is, muſt be Computed from the Nature of it, as much, as That of Vegetables, or of an Animal, or of any other Subſtance; And therefore the Identity of Subſtances, of God, of Spirits, or of Corporeal Beings, muſt be Conſidered in the ſame Manner; that is, we are to Know the Natures of theſe ſeveral Subſtances, before we can Determine Concerning the Identity of them, or vhich is the Same, before we can Know, that a Thing is, what it is. 5. 9. As to the Being of a God, we have already Conſidered the Notions, which this Syſteme of Ideas has Received, and Entertained Concerning it, and therefore, ſince it is not Acquainted with the Nature of any ſuch Being, it can as little Determine Concerning the Identity of it; And for the ſame Reaſon, it cannot Preſcribe to us the Identity of Finite Intelligences, or of Bodies; Becauſe it does not Know what they are, and therefore cannot Inform us what it is, to be, what they are, in which Conſiſts Identity. 5. 10. FROM what has been beſore Said, it Is Evident, that the Principium Individuationis is as little Accounted for, as Identity is, we ſhall therefore next Proceed, to the Identity of Vegetables; In Order to Aſcertain which, this Philoſopher Deſires us to Conſider, wherein an Oak Differs from a Maſs of Matter; which ſeems to him 10 be in this, that the One is onlythe Coheſion of Particles of Matter any how United, the other ſuch a Diſpoſition of them, as Conſtitutes the Parts of an Oak, and ſuch an Organization of thoſe Parts, as is Fit to Receive and Diſtribute Nouriſiment, ſo as to Continue and Frame the Wood, Bark, and Leaves, &e. of an Oak, in which Conſiſts the Vegetable Life. IN Anſwer to which we muſt Firſt Say, that it is an Idle Amuſement to Tell us, what is the Diſtinction betwixt a Solid Particle of Matter, and ſeveral of them Arranged together, ſo as to have an Organization, Fit to Receive and Diſtribute Nouriſhment, &c. vhen this Perſon neither Knows what Matter is, nor what ſuch an Organization is. SECOND, Granting both, this Philoſopher, if we may Call him ſo, does not, nor can Shew, that there is any Identity in Vegetables, unleſs he Relinquiſhes his Notion of Determining the ldentity of a Thing, by the Time and Place, in which it Exiſis; ſince there may be ſeveral Different Things. as to Time and Place, which are Requiſite to Maintaining the Liſe of the Vegetable, whilſt the Identity of the Vegetable Continues the Same. TumRD, as to the Identity of the Life in the Vegetable, if the Organization of it is not Known, and vhat is Required to Support the Life of it, it will not be Certain in what the Identity of that Life Conſiſts, becauſe it may not be the ſame Life; It may in Certain Caſes, Flag and Revive, as a Fire does, according to the Fuel Adminiſtred to it, and other Circumſtances of Blowing, under which that Fire is Fomented; And therefore, as the Fire will not be in all Caſes the Same, tho there is a Fire Continued, ſo the Vegetable Life may not be, tho' it is likewiſe Continually Kept u; and Preſerved. li 5. 11. 5. i1. IN Reſpect of the Identity of an Animal, or of a Man, the ſame Thing may be Said, Namely, that there is no Aſcertaining the Identity of Either, without Underſtanding the Real Nature, in which they Conſiſt, that is, it is Impoſſible for us to Know they are, what they are, till ve Know, vhat they are. 5. 12. TuE laſt Thing to be Conſidered, is Perſonal Identity which is Aſfirmed to be Reſolved into Sclf-Conſciouſneſs, and is Properly, what a Man Calls his Self, and from Hence it is Suppoſed, that a Man may be Himſelf aſter the Reſurrection, without his having the Same Numerical Body3 We ſhall thereſore Conſider this Notion more Particularly, becauſe Religion ſeems in ſome Meaſure to be Affected with it. WEe ſnall then FirsT Say, that we cannot Underſtand, how a Perſon is here made Diſtinct from the Man; For the Identity of a Man, is Said to be Diſferent from the Identity of a Perſon, whereas it is Impoſſible, unleſs e Name Things at Pleaſure, that the Same Man ſhould not be the Same Perſon, or Vice Verſà. SECOND, If a Man is to be Called Himſelf from his Self-Conſciouſneſs, Nothing of his Body belongs to him, as he is That Self; Whereas, it cannot be Imagined, that the whole Syſteme of Mind and Body muſt not Enter into the Definition of what a Man's Sclſ is, unleſs we Diſcard one Half of our Sclves from our Selves; For, vhere there is that Intimate Union betwixt the Soul and Body, that if the One is Affected, the other is, it would be a very Abſurd way of Conſidering Self, to Suppoſe it only Conſiſts in one Part of that Compounded and United Being. THIRD, TO Suppoſe Self to Conſiſt in Sclf-Conſciouſneſt is to Imagine, that we ſnall not be our Sclves in any Different Period of our Lives; For let a Man Extend his Conſciouſneſs, as far as it is Poſſible for him to do, by Recollecting all the Thoughts and Actions, which he is Conſcious have Paſed, and do belong to him, and let him Join them with the Preſent Thoughts he has, he will not yer be Able to make the very ſame Collection Perhaps in any other Stage or Period of his Life, ſome Things vill be Forgotten, and others Remembered, which were not Put into his Former Collection; and Conſequently the Identity of a Perſon cannot Conſiſt in SelfConſciouſneſs, vhere Self Conſciouſneſs it's ſel? is Continually Diverſifyd and Varied, unleſs Identity Conſiſts in Diverſity. FourTH, Some Perſons have Thought they were Made of Glaſs, of Butter, &⸗: as Mallbranche Tells us, of which they were then Perhaps as Conſcious, as they could be of any Thing elſe; wherein then does the ldentity of a Mad Perſon Conſiſt? If in Self- Conſciouſneſs; willthat Mad Perſon be the Same, as when he is Sober, and is Conſcious of no ſuch Thought, nor Perhaps, Knows, that he ever was? It will be Said, if a Mad Perſon is not the Same with a Sober, or with One in his Senſes, why does the Identity of a Mad Perſon Conſiſt in Self-Conſciouſneſs, and the Identity of a Sober Perſon likewiſe, vhen Self-Conſciouſneſs in this Caſe is as Different, as Identity and Diverſity can be? that is, if the Identity oſ a Perſon Conſiſts in Self- Conſciouſneſs, which in this Circumſtance is Acknovledged to be Different, Perſonal Identity Conſiſts in Perſonal Diverſity. Frrrn, In Self: Conſciouſneſs of what Inow do Knov, that I have Formerly Thought or Acted, or of what Inow Think or Act, the Memory in the Firſt Caſe is Intirely Concerned, and in the Laſt, my Actual Perception, and Conſcquently, to Selſ-Conſciouſneſs the Faculties of the Mind are Requiſite, which, being Various and Different in the ſeveral Circumſtances of Time and Occaſion, and in the Vivacity of them, can not be a True Meaſure of what Self- Conſciouſneſs is, and in Conſequence, None of the Identity of a Perſon, which is Suppoſed to Conſiſt in Self-Conſciouſneſ. SixtH, Iſ this could be Granted, that Self Conſciouſneſs Depends upon Memory and Actual Perception, and that theſe did not Enter into the Account of Self: Conſciouſneſs, in Reſpect of what the Mind either Really Perceived or Recollected, yet, iſ the Nature oſ thoſe Faculties of the Mind are not known, we cannot either make the Identity of a Perſon to Conſiſ*t in Sclf-Conſciouſneſs, or Self-Conſciouſ neſs in the Nature of thoſe Faculties; and therefore the Identity of a Perſon in the Deity, or in Humanity, cannot be Determined, but by Knowing the Nature of Each LastLv, the Identity therefore of a Perſon can be only Known, by Conſiderin; what the Deity, or any Particular Man is in Reſpect of his Soul and his Body Jointly; Ii this Philoſophy can Tell us the Nature of Either (which it Diſclaims the Knowledge of) ſomething might be done towards the Inſorming us, what the Identity of God, a Man, or or a Perſon is, vhich can be no otherways Aſcertained, than by Knowing more of the Deity, a Soul and a Body, than what this Syſteme of Ideas does, or can Pretend to. PVor if there is any Thing of Identity in God, a Perſon, or a Man, it muſt be Determined, by what the Real and Intrinſick Qualities of that Infinite Being, a Man or a Perſon arę, and the Latter, both in Reſpect of his Body and Mind, which vill make him the Same Man and Perſon, whether Mad, or in his Senſes, vhether Well, or in a Feaver, or in any other Differing Circumſtances of his Life. Tnis may be done, becauſe we have already done it, and upon the ſame Principles we Dare Aſſure the World of the Reſurrection of the ſame Body; All which will be Impoſſible, unleſs by Conſidering and Knowing the Nature of the Mind, and of that Organized Matter, which is United to it, nothing of which the Preſent Philoſophy is Acquainted with; But we have likewiſe Conſidered this Doctrine of Identity in another Place, and therefore ſhall not here Enlarge. C H A P. IX. Concerning Enthuſiaſn. 5.1. AVING Conſidered the Advances made by this Philoſophy, in Favour ol Reaſon, and Shewn the Abſurdity oſ it's Pretenſes, ve ſhall Finiſh our Preſent ſnquiry with it's Chapter of Enthuſiaſm, and Examine, whether it is not as Erroneous and Falſe in it's Derogateing ſrom Religion, as it has been Proved to be Extravagant and Partial in it's Bounties and Conceſſions to Reaſon. s. 2. Ir is therefore in the Firſt Place Told us, that if we are Willing to Find out what Truth is, our Minds muſt be Prepared with a Love of it, that we are to Value and Eſtcem iĩt for it's own Sake, and therefore ſould never give our Aſſent 10 any Propoſition beyond the Evidence, we have for it; for, whateyer Credit or Authority, which we give to any Propoſition more than it Receives from the Principle: and Proofs it Supports it's ſclf upon, is Owing to our Inclinations that Way, Derived from our Paſſions or Intereſis. Ir is Agreed; ſince Truth is That, which we have Endeavoured Unpaſſionately and Impartially to Follow in our whole Reſearch of it, both in the Demonſtration oſ Religion, in the Principles of Philoſophy, and in this Inquiry into the Syſteme of I deas; But then ve muſt be Allowed to Say, that this Eſay has little Reaſon to be ſo Strenuous an Advocate of That, with which it Appears to have ſo Small an Acquaintance. l For, it is not Sufficient to make General Declamations, and Ingenious Harangues upon Truth, and the Excellency of it; ſince no Wiſe or Thinking Man can have any other than an Intimate Value and Reſpect for it; Every One vill be Ready to Em brace it, vhen they Know, where it lies, what it is, and which Way we may Attain it ; But That's the Queſtion; This Philoſophy Suppoſes, it Conſiſts in the Connexion of Ideas, which if we ſould Deny, and at the ſame Time Diſprove, as we have already done, all the Fine Eloquence, vhich is Spent upon Truth, that is, in Reality upon the Delicate Notions, which this Philoſophy has Eſpouſed, will in Effect be no more than a Panegyrick upon Falſchood; if any other Truth is Meant, than what this Eſay Endcavours to Eſtabliſ for ſuch, I am Certain and am Conſcious by my own Experience, that the Patrons of theſe Ideas, and Perhaps the Author of them himſelf, if now Alive, would not Speak Half ſuch Kind Things of it. ] Ir is Farther Said, that we ſould never give an Aſſent to a Propoſition, which ould Reach Farther than the Proofs or Evidences we have for it; But then, what the Nature of the ſeveral Proofs or Evidences are, which ought to Convince us, ve are not Informed, unleſs the Connexion of Ideas will Satisſy us, which, we have at Large Shewn, is Fallible, or if not, that ĩt is not the only Meaſure of Truth, and that if it were, this Philoſophy does not Underſtand, vhat is Meant by it; If therefore it is Perfectly Ignorant of the Nature of the Evidences, by which we may be Fully Aſured and Convinced of any Thing, it cannot but be Superlatively Wiſe, when it Tells us, tlhat our Aſſent to a Propoſition ſhould Reach no Farther than the EviM m m m m dence: Iences, by which it is Supported, that is, than the Evidences, which it nows Nothing of. 5. 3. THE next Thing we are Led to in this Chapter is, the Aſuming an Authority of Dictating to Others, and a Forvardneſs to Preſcribe to their Opinions, which is Said to be a Conſtant Concomitant of a Biaſi, and a Corruption of our Judgments; For how, it Continues, almoſt can it be otherwiſe, but that he ſould be Ready to Impoſc on Others Belief, who has already Impoſed on his OWn, vho Tyrannizes over his own Mind, and Uſurps the Prerogative, that belongs to Truth alone, which is to Command Aſſent by, and in Proportion to, that Evidence, which it Carries with it? Wnao theſe Men are, vho Aſſume an Authority of Dictating to Others, who are Corrupt and Biaſd in their Judgments, who, aſter they have Impoſed a Belief upon theit own Minds, Require thie ſame of other Men, and Uſurp the Prerogative which belongs to Truth of Commanding Aſſent, it is not Diſficult to Gueſs; For it Perhaps would have been a Civility done them, if the Teachers of the Chriſtian Religion in General had been Excepted out of this Character, and Chriſtianity it's ſelf Excuſed from being an Enthuſia/m; If that is the Caſe, the Senſe, as Innocent and as Juſt as it may Appear, vill Really be Reſolved into theſe Two Impious and Falſc Aſfirmations. First, That Thoſe, vho Aſume and Take upon themſelves to Require from other Men an Aſſent to the Chriſtian Faith or Belief, Uſurp a Prerogative, which only belongs to Truth, or to the Connexion of Ideas, or which is the Same, which only belongs to this Wiſe Aſſertor and Dictator of them. SECOND, That there is more Real Truth in the Connexion of Ideas, that is, in this Eſay on Human Underſtanding, than there is in the Scriptures themſelves, which Inculcate and Teach that Chriſtian Belicf, and that Men ought to Reſign their Aſſentæ up to the Former, rather than to the Latter. As to the Firſt, we ſall only Say, that the Compariſon Inſinuated betwixt the Author of this Sort of Truth, and the Apoſtles of Chriſt, vho did Require, and Inſiſt upon, a Belief in Chriſtianity, and therefore in this Perſon's Senſe, Aſſumed a Prerogative, which only belonged to Truth, or his Ideas, or betwixt himſelf, and even thoſe Good and Excellent Perſons, vho ſtill Aſffirm the ſame Faith, and are Ready to Vindicate it with the Hazard, or with the Loſs, of their Lives, is Ridiculous; Since he has not given us the ſame Proofs of his Ingenuity and Sincerity, in any Reſpect, which they have done. AND as to the Second, we are Aſſured, that there is more Truth in any One Page of the Scriptures, than there is to be Found in his whole Eſſay; if any Thing we have Said in Demonſtration of the Firſt, or any Thing ve have Alledged in Confutation of the Laſt, is True and Certain; of which we have at Preſent as Full a Conviction, as he had in the moſt Demonſtrative Part of it, the Proof of a God, which it is much to be Queſtioned, whether he himſel? was Conſcious, or Thought, was One. 5. 4. A Third Ground of Aſent is Enthuſiaſm, which is Said to be as much Relied on, as Faith or Reaſon, by which Words Compared with . I. and 2. of this 19 Chap. it vill be Farther Evident, that we have not Injured this Philoſophy, when we Said, in the Preceding Section, that, by the Aſſuming an Authority in Matters of Belief; was Really Meant the Preaching of the Chriſtian Faith; Since there are only Three Grounds Aſfirmed, upon which Men Generally Aſſent, cither Reaſon, Faith, or this Third of Enthuſiaſn; the Firſt of which was Recommended in the Firſt Section, the Second Exploded in the Next, and in the Preſent Enthuſiaſm is Propoſed to be Conſidered. MorEOVER, Where can Men be Imagined 1o Tyrannize and Aſſume according to the Harh Language of this Gentleman, or in the Trueſt, where are Men ſo much Concerned to Recommend vwith all the Zeal and Authority, which is Oving to a Truc Faith, a Belief to Others, Excepting in Chriſtianity? For in Common Matters the Liberty oſ Aſſenting, or not, upon another's Belief, is Left at Large, and there ĩ no Aſuming, or Authority, Uſed to Enforce it. LastLv, Faith and Reaſon, or Belief and Certainty, are alvays made Uſe of tc Signity the Religion we Profeſs, and the Connexion of Ideas Propoſed by this Eſ ſay, betwixt the Evidences of which, we have Abundantly Proved, there is no Com pariſon 5. 5. WVua, 5. 5. WHAT we have Said, is ſtill Farther Conſirmed in the Scũtiion here Cited; For what vas Called Faith and Reaſon beſore, is now Termed Reaſon and Revelation; therefore, as the Firſt Section of this Chapter was Spent in a Commendation oſ Truth or Reaſon, the Second in Deſpiſing the Aſuming upon Faith or Delief, the Third in Telling us, there was only another Ground oſ Aſſent, which was Enthuſiaſm, ſo the Fourth is Contrived, to Reduce Faith or Revelation to Reaſon, and when that is done, this Philoſophy vith Abundance of Satisfaction Proceeds to Confute Enthuſiaſm. Ir is therefore to be Conſidered, whether Revelation, or Faith, can be Reduced to Reaſon; It is Aſſirmed it may, becauſc æeaſon is Natural Revelation, whereby the Eternal Father of Light, and Fountain of all Knowledge, Communicates to Mankind that Portion of Truth, which he has Laid within the Reach of their Natural Faculties; Revelation is Natural Reaſon, Enlarged by a New Set of Diſcoveries Communicated to,  He would Say, by) God Immediately, vhich Reaſon Vouches the Truth of, by the Teſtimony and Proofs it gives, that they come from God; So that he that Takes avay Reaſon, to make Way for Revelation, Puts out the Light of both, and does much what the Same, as if he ſhould Perſuade a Man to Put out his Eyes, the better to Receive the Remote Light of an Inviſible Star by a Teleſcope. Is therefore Reaſon Natural Revelation? Whici Way? How is it Proved? We are Ready to Own, and to Evince, that a True Knowledge of Nature is One Revelation of Almighty God to us, and that ſuch a Revelation is in ſome Degree Correſpondent to that, vhich we have from the Chriſtian Religion; that is, as the Firſt gives us an Impreſſion of an Almighty Being, ſo the Lat Advances that Notion 10 the urmoſt Heighth and Perfection; But a Real Knovledęe oſ Nature cannot be Meant by Reaſon in this Philoſophy, ſince it is not Acquainted with one Syllable of it, which cannot Tell us what the Nature of the Mind or of Matter is, nor even Furniſ us with any Account of the Properties of either, whether of Solidity, CoIour, or Indeed any Affections of Bodies in the one Caſe, or of Willing, Judging, Remembering, or Thinking in the other, unleſs that in Matter of Fact, we have all theſe Perceptions; but which Way, or in what Manner we come by them, it is as Ignorant, as if it had never Conſidered one Word of Either. TnE True Knovledge of Nature cannot therefore be Meant by Reaſon here, ſince the Preſent Philoſophy of Ideas Knows nothing oſ it; we are by Conſequence next to Inquire, what it does Mean or Intend by Reaſon, which is Manifeſt from the whole Tenor of it. Namely, the Connexion of Ideas; we have already Shewn, it does not Underſtand, what the Counexion of Ideas is, or if it did, that there is no Compariſon betwixt the Evidences from the Modern Connexion of Ideas, and the Evidences oſf AMtatter of Fact, by which the Chriſtian Religion or Revelation is Proved 3 vhich Evidences the Author of this Philoſophy of Ideas did not give himſel? the Trouble to Inquire into. i Ler it yet be, as this Eſlay Suppoſes that ”eaſon Conſiſis in the Counexion of I deas, and let Revelation be, vhat ve Actually Find in the Scriptures, that our Bleſſed Saviour vas Born of a Virgin, that he Died for the Redemption of Mankind, that he Roſe again, and Aſcended into Heaven, which ĩs the Leaſt, that the Scriptures Recount of him, beſides his being Really Man, and Truly God, how is Reaſor Natural Revelation, or the Contrary? Unleſs all this Matter of Fact can be Reduced to the Connexion of Ideas, that is, unleſs we can be as Fully Aſſured, that our Saviour was Born of a Virgin, &c. by the Counexion of Ideas, as we can be, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to TWo Right Ones, Suppoſing that Propoſition Abſolutely True, which is ſo only upon Certain Abſtractions and Limitations. Ir is Notwithſtanding Aſſirmed, that Reaſon is Natural evelation, whereby the Eternal Father of Light, and Fountain of all Knowledge, Communicates to Mankind that Portion oſ Truth, which he has Laid within the Reach oſ their Natural Faculties: What Reaſou, and what Revelation is, ve have already Endeavoured to Explain; and if that Explanation is Juſt, ihe Senſc of the Preſent Philoſophy Amounts to This; That æeaſoir, or the Conuexion of the Ideas of our Minds, is Natural Chriſtianity, which is Abſurd, or if not, Depends upon Faci, and therefore is not, nor can be, Exacted to the Connexion of Ideas. i M m m m m2 Ir IF by Revelation is Meant, not the Chriſtian Religion, but Inſpired Reaſon, and that Portion of it, vhich Almighty God has Alloted to every Man; we cannot be of the Opinion, that the Eternal Father of Light, and Fountain of all Knovledge, as this Philoſopher is Pleaſed here to Term Almighty God, does Communicate this Reaſon to us by an Immediate Influence or Inſpiration. FirsT, Becauſe this vould be Aſſerting a Philoſophick Enthuſiaſm, whil©t it is Declaiming againſt a Religious One, and Patronizing a Light within Derived from the Eternal Father of Light, whilſt it Endeavours to Confute ſuch Notions. SECOND, Becauſe, according to the Notions of this Author, Inſpirations can only belong to Religion in thoſe Caſes, where Reaſon cannot Aſſiſt us; For, As this Philoſophy Argues in another Place againſt the Idea of God being Innate or Inſpired from the Ability there is in every One, by his Rational Faculties to Collect ſuch an Idea, and Tells us, that wve may as well Aſfirm Colours to be Innate, th ve have Eyes given us to Receive thoſe Ideas, which would be, upon that Suppoſition, of no Uſe to us; So we may as Juſtly Say, that what Lies within the Reach of our Rational Faculties, cannot be Thought or Imagined to be Inſpired, or Derived into our Minds by the æternal Father of Light from any Immediate Impreſſion, ſince there can be no more Reaſon Aſſigned, vhy we may not Collect or Infer what Lies within the Reach o? our Natural Faculties, ithout an Inſpiration from Almighty God, than why we may not have an Idea of him from our Reaſon, or a Perceprion oſ Colours from our Sight, without any ſuch Inſpiration, which the Preſent Philoſophy Owns we may. TuirD, In General to Think of an Inſpired Reaſon, becauſe Almighty God Endues us with our Rational Faculties, is a moſt Egregious Abſurdity; ſince by the ſame Argument, our Eyes, Legs, and Hands are Inſpired, all which we Owe to the Great and Wiſe Framer oſ them. MORrEOVER, if Bare Reaſon was an Inſpiration from Almighty God, Ariſtotle, Tully in his Philoſophical Tracts, and even Demoſthenes in his Orations, which are Certainly Writ with the Greateſt Force of Reaſon and Senſe, that it is Poſſible for a Lover and a Patriot of his Country to Poſſeſs againſt all the Factions Raiſed by Philip to its Ruin, Theſe, and a Thouſand more, at this Rate, muſt be Inſpired. FourTH, If this is Granted, all the ſeveral Diſputes Recounted by Cicero in his Book De Finibus Bonorum & Malorum, Concerning the Summum Bonum, or the Chief End, 5hich a Man, or a Rational Creature, ought to Purſue in his Actions, and the Chief Evil, which he ought to Avoid, will be all Inſpirations, tho' they are as Contradictory to each Other, as any Sentiments can well be, and Almighty God will be Introduced, as an Inſpirer of theſe Contradictions. LastLy, if Reaſon, or the Connexion of Ideas, is an Inſpiration from Almighty God, this Philoſopher ſeems to have had as Small a Portion of that Inſpiration, as any Philoſopher vho has Writ, and much Leſs than cither Socrates, Plato, Ariſtoile, or Tully 3 Does not all the World Knov, that in Matters, which are Capable of the Stricteſt Demonſtration, we are Deceived? Will Almighty God therefore Seduce us into Error, which he muſt do, if Reaſon is an Inſpiration from him? Did even Euclid, or Archimedes, or Apollonius, or Sir Iſaac Newion Demonſtrate, what they Think they have, by Inſpiration, or by the Natural Force of their Minds? If the Firſt, we ſhall not for the Future Look upon theſe Geometers, as Plain Men, but as Inſpired, which vill be a greater Conceſſion, than what has been hitherto Allowed them, and which if we Grant to Them, we are not yet Willing to Give, however Deſirous he may be of it, to One, who is even an Irrational Being in the Compariſon; If the Laſt is Aſſirmed, that their Demonſtrations were Owing to the Force of theit own Minds, that is, if Euclid, Archimedes, Apollonius, or Sit Iſaac Newton, were not Inſpired, when they Writ, ve may with the greateſt Eaſe and Facility be Led to Think, that Mr. Locke was not. It has been hitherto Affirmed, that Reaſon is Natural Revelation, which has becn Conſidered, the next Aſſertion is, that Revelation is Natural æeaſon, Enlarged by a New Set oſ Diſcoveriess Communicated to (or rather) by God Immediately, which Reaſon Vouches the Truth of by the Teſtimony and Proofs it Gives, that they come from God. To To vhich it is Anſered, that, if by Revelation is Meant Reaſun Inſpired, that has been already Sufficiently Confuted, or if it were not, it would only come to this, that Reaſon Inſpired was Natural Reaſon, which is a Contradiction; if by Eevelation the Chriſtian Raligion is Intended, and is Said to be Natural Reaſou, Enlarged by a Nev Set of Diſcoveries Communicated by God Immediately, which Reaſon Vouches the Truth of by the Teſtimony and Proofſs it Gives, that they come ſrom God, there are ſeveral Things to be Objected. Finst, that the Chriſtian Religion is not Natural Reaſon or Religion, Enlarged by a New Set of Diſcoveries, unleſs this Philoſophy, or any other, can Tell us what Natural Religion is, hich it is Impoſſible it ould do, Whilſt it neither Knows the Nature of the Mind, or of Matter, and Conſcquently cannot Inform us, what the Real Principles of Natural Religion are; if not, it is Evident, that Chriſtianity cannot be Said to be an Improvement of That, of which this Philoſophy is Entirely lgnorant. SECOND, If Natural Religion was Known and Aſcertained, there would be yet no Connexion betwixt it, and the Myſteries and Facts of the Chriſtian Religion, where the Union of the God-Head with our Humanity, the Reſurrection and Aſcenſion of our Lord, and all the Miracles Performed by him, are Confeſſcdly above the Powers of Nature, and are the Reſult of the Abſolute Will and Pleaſure of God. THIRD, This New Set of Diſcoveries, (as a Revelation of the Chriſtian Religion from God is with Great Modeſty Called by this Philoſophy,] is not Vouched by Reaſon; tis True, we have Abundant Evidences to Convince us of the Truth of Chriſtianity, from Hiſtory and Fact, but ſuch Evidences, as we have Shewn, are Perfectly Different from thoſe, which Reaſon Vouches, or, which is the Same, the Connexion of the Idea of our own Minds; that is, Chriſtianity is no Rational Science, to which the Writer of this Eſſay would in his Abundant Wiſdom Reduce it, unleſs to be Born of a Virgin, to be a Man and to be United to God, to Work Miracles, Riſe from the Dead, and Aſcend into Heaven, are all Rational and Agreeable to the Common Courſe and Tenor of Things. LastLy, if yet Chriſtianity was a Rational Science, why this Writer in Particular ſould Endeavour to make it One, is Unaccountable, who ſeems to Underſtand as Little, vhat Reaſon, as what Religion is; Had he been Maſter Indeed of the Utmoſ Force and Accuracy of Thinking, had he been Acquainted with the Foundations and Principles of all the Rational Sciences, of Mathematicks, and in them of Fluxions, Algebra, and Geometry, of Philoſophy in it's ſeveral Parts and Diſtinctions, oſ Aſtronomy, and the Lavs of Attraction and Gravitation in the Planets, had he been Poſſeſſed of all this Wonderful novledge, there might have ſome Reaſon Appeared for his Reducing ſo Rebellious a Doctrine to all the Rational Sciences of this World, as that of Chriſtianity, it ſeems is, to his Own; but when it is not Evident, that he Underſtood any Thing of this, and Knew, Perhaps, Little more in Mathematicks, than that the Three Angles of a Triangle were Equal to Two Right Ones, or that the Square of the Hypotenuſe was Equal to the Squares of the Sides, when in Philoſophy and Aſtronomy he ſeems to be a Perfect Novice, and in his own Syſeme of Ideas Abſurd thro' the Whole, it is Inconceivable, with what Deſign he ſhould be ſo Fond of Reaſon, which had been ſo Unkind a Friend to him, unleſs that he Undervalued Religion only, becauſe he Underſtood it Leſs. To Shew us however, that he had ſome Notion of Aſtronomy, we have the Ingenious Compariſon of putting out our Eyes, the better to Receive the Remote Light of an Inviſible Star by a Teleſcope. 5. 6. HAVING vith great Satisfaction of Mind Reduced Chriſtianity, and Obliged it to Say nothing more than what the Inſpired Reaſon of this Philoſophy ſhall Dictate to it, it Procceds to give us a Reaſon of the Riſe of Enthuſiaſm; Which in Short is, that it is an Eaſier Way for Men to Eſtabliſn their Opinions, and Regulate their Conduct, than the Tedious, and not always Succeſsfull, Labour of Strict Reaſoning; Hence it is Said, that ve See in all Ages Men, in whom Melancholy has Mixed with Devotion, or vhoſe Conceũr of themſelves has Raiſed them into an Opinion of a greater Familiarity with God, have often Flattered themſelves with a Perſuaſion of an Immediate Intercourſe vith the Deity; It is Farther Told us, that God cannot be Denied to be Able to Enlighten the Underſtanding bv a Rav Darted into the Minc Mind Immediately ſfrom the Fountain of Light; This they, that is, theſc Religious People, Underſtand he has Promiſed to do, and who then, it is Said, have ſo Good a Title to Expect it, as thoſe, who are Peculiarly Choſe by him, and Depend on him? Bur in the Firſt Place, the Riſe oſ Enthuſiaſm cannot be Owing to Mens Lazi neſi, or theit Unvillingneſs to take Pains in Conſidering, nor yet to a Deſire ol Eſtablihing Opinions for Authentick and Sacred; This Indeed is the True and Juſt Character of the Preſent Philoſophy, which by it's own Conſeſſion, was Compoſed Oſcitantly and Lazily, at Leiſure Hours, and for the Diverſion of the Author; and vhen it was Conſcious, that it had too Little oſ Truth and Diligence in it's Inquiries to Recommend iĩt, it took Care to Eſtabliſ the Opinions it Aſirmed by a Pretenſe, that they were Rational Inſpirations, and Proceeded ſfrom an Underſtanding, Enlightencd by a Ray Darted into the Mind Immediately from the Fountain of Light; Notvithſtanding, that, whoever Looks over this Eſlay with any Kind of Impartiallity, vill Find, if Things vere ſo, Almighty God vould Appcar to be but a Fallible Inſpirer; The Riſe of Enthuſiaſm is therefore made to be only Agreeable to that Picture, this Philoſopher had in his Mind of his ovn Enthuſiaſm, and which Suppoſs Men not to Lie under any Convictions of their being Inſpired, but to Pretend it ſor their Eaſc and Authority, which is much the Caſe vith this Eſay. SINCE therefore the Riſe of a Real Enthuſiaſm cannot be Owing to that, which is an Aſſected One, and in Pretenſe, for ſuch an Enthuſiaſm is only the Reſuli oſ Cunning, Artiſice, or Deſign, and is neither Agrecable to any True Convictions in Religion or Philoſophy, both which we Hope it is Poſſible ſor Men to have, however the Preſent Philoſopher might be Unacquainted with them; It then this cannot be a Cauſe of Enthuſiaſm, Seeing Enthuſiaſm is as Scttled a Conviction, and as Firm a Perſuaſion of God's Reall Influence upon the Mind, as any other, vhich Proceeds from the Evidences of Reaſon; for thoſe, vho Take them ſelves to be thus Inſpired by God, are as Certain, and as Fully Aſſured in their own Breaſis, that they are ſo, as that they Think any Thing is True, and it is as Firm a Principle, upon hich they Act, and Shape the Conduct of their Lives, as that of Reaſon is to other Men; They are Ready to Die in, and for the Sake of, theſcConvictions, and Conſequently, ſuch Notions are Derived from another Source, than vwhat this Philoſophy Apprehends, of Deſign or Aſſectation; Since this therefore is in Fact and Experience ſo, it will become us to Inquire, with Greater Care and Exactneſs, than has been here done, from whence it is, and what is the Nature of it. As to the Nature of Enthuſiaſm, this Philoſophy is Equally to Seek, whilſt ĩt only makes it to Conſiſt in any Groundleſs Opinions, which come to Settle themſclves Strongly upon our Fancies, and from thence is Termed an Illumination from the Spirit oſ God, or in any Odd Action ve find in our ſelves a Strong Inclination to do, the Impulſe to which is Reſolved into a Supernatural Call or Direction. Tuis is Said to be Properly Enthuſiaſm, which, tho Founded neither on Reaſon, nor Divine Revelation, but Riſing from the Conceits of a Warmed or Over-Weening Brain, Vorks yet, where it once gets Footing, more Powerſully on the Perſuaſions and Actions of Men, than either of thoſe Two, or both together, Men being moſt Forvardly Obedient to the Impulſes they Receive from themſelves, and the Whole Man is Sure to Act the moſt Vigorouſly, vhere the Whole Man is Carried by a Natural Motion; for Strong Conceit, like a New Principle, Carries all Eaſily with it, when got above Common Senſe; and Freed ſrom all Reſtraint of Reaſon and Check of Reflection, ĩt is Heightened into a Divine Authority in Concurrence with our own Temper and Inclination. WEe cannot but Obſerve upon this Account of Enthuſiaſm in the Firſt Place, that it is here Ownęd to Work as Powerſully on the Perſuaſions and Actions of Men, as Realon or Revelation, or both put together; Whnatever therefore was Said beſore, Concerning the Riſe of Enthuſiaſm, is Contradicted in the Preſent Account of it; For, i? Men Act in Enthuſiaſm upon as full Perſuaſions and Convictions as they do in Reaſon and Revelation, Enthuſiaſm canno: Proceed from any Artiſicce or Cunning in the Enthuſiaſtick Perſon, by which he may Hope to Eſabliſu the Authority of his Opinions, with the Greater Eaſc and Facility, and without any Laborious Inquiry into Things. SECOND, SECOND, ve may Affirm, that if Enthuſiaſm is neither Founded on Reaſon nor Revelation, the Firſt Containing the Principles of the Preſent Eſày, and the Laſt thoſe, ve Hope, of Chriſtianity, it is Evident, there is ſomething in Enthuſiaſm, which is not Reducible to a Philoſophy of Ideas, hich Depends upon thoſe of Senſation, or Reſlection only. j TniRD, In the Explaining the Nature of Enthuſiaſm it's ſelf, which we will, if this Philoſophy Pleaſes, or if it will not, Call now by another Name, to Wit, Inſpiration, for what is Meant by Enthuſiaſm, is the Immediate Influx of the Deity, and the Communications of his Spirit, into the Mind of Man; and therefore, tho the Light within, is in Grimace and Pretenſe only Oppoſed, yet the Real Intention ſeems to be Levelled againſt any Influence of God upon us; In the Explaining therefore the Nature of Enthuſiaſm, there is Abundance of Oratory Uſed, to make us Believe it is only a Heat of Fancy, and a Fulneſs of our ſelves, and upon that Hypotheſis, the Whole Man is Sure to Act, &. Is therefore Inſpiration in General, or the Influence of God upon the Mind, a Heat of Fancy only, and a Fulneſs of our ſelves? IF it is ſo, we are Ready with the Firſt to Subſcribe to the Rational Inſpirations of this Eſay, and on the Contrary to Acknowledge, that the Grace and Aſſiſtances of the Spirit of God, which all Good Men have hitherto Owned, is a Wild and Enthuſiatick Pretenſe; that our Publick Prayers to the Almighty for his Aid and Direction in our Affairs and Concerns, or for his Influences and Spirit to Aſſiſt us in our Progreſs towards Holineſs and Vertue, are Ridiculous and Vain; and that the Whole Liturgy of the Church, and the Supplications and Addreſes to God thro Whole the Chriſtian World, are nothing clſe than Mere Pagcantry and Amuſement. For This, in Effect, is the Senſe and Affirmations of the Preſent Philoſophy, which ſeems very Ambitious to Demoliſh all that is Divine, and Great, in Religion, in Order to Eſtabliſh it's ovn Enthuſiaſm, and Vend it's New Set of Diſcoveries, under the Specious Character of being an Inſpired Syſteme. Happy Enthuſia©t Whoſe Opinions are Founded neither on Reaſon, nor Divine Revelation, but Riſing from the Conceits of a Warmed or Over-Weening Brain, Work yet more Pouerfully on the Perſuaſions of this Gentleman, than either of Thoſe Two, Both together, v Strong Conceit, lite a New Principle, Carries all Eaſily with it, when got above Common Senſe; it is Heightened into a Divine Authority, in Concurrence with his ovn Temper and Inclination. BUT Suppoſing That, which is Generally Taken for Grace, Inſpiration, or the Influence of God upon Human Minds, is only a Heat of Fancy, or Fullneſs of our ſclves; which Way is it Evidenced or Proved? For ſo Important a Point, as this, vould Deſerve ſome Sort of Connexion of Ideas, or other, to Explain it to us; Eſpecially, ſince this Philoſophy has ſo Entire a Command of Uniting, Compounding, Abſtracting, and Connecting, theſe Imaginary Pictures in the Mind at Pleaſure, and yet there is not one Idea Connected to Aſſure us of it; and the only Method which is Taken to Convince the Thing is, by Naming it Enthuſiaſ/m; For by that Means it is Thought, ve may be Eaſily brought to Acknowledge it to be nothing elſe, but the Fancies and Illuſions oſ our own Minds; And from whence, as before, it is Evident, that the Chief Artifice of this Philoſophy is Placed, in Playing vith Terms, and Abuſing us by the ſame Names Affixed to Things of a Different Nature; For, if an Influence, or an Immediate Inſpiration, from God is Enthuſia(m, and That a Wild Fancy of our own Begetting, an Influence from Almighty God is ſo; But, if a Real Inſluence ſfrom the Deity is not Enthuſiaſm, or if Enthuſiaſm is not an Extravagant Fancy, all which it has hitherto Offered, is to no Purpoſe; and yet, theſe ſeveral Terms Paſs under one General Name oſ Enthuſiaſm, without the Leat Evidence to Prove they are the Same. 5. 7. Tnis Philoſophy Proceeds; Tho the Odd Opinions and Extravagant Actions Enthuſiaſm has Run Men into, were enough to Warn them againſt this Wronę Principle, ſo Apt to Miſguide them both in their Belief and Conduct, yet the Love of ſomething Extraordinary, the Eaſe and Glory it is to be Inſpired, and be above the Common and Natural Ways of Knovledge, ſo Flatters many Men's Lazineſ, Ignorance, and Vanity, that when Once they are Got into this Way of Immediatc Revelation, of Illumination without Scarch, and of Certainty without Proof anc vithout Examination, tis a Hard Matter to ger them out of it, Reaſon is Loſt upor them them, they arc above it, they See the Light Infuſed into their Underſtandings, and cannot be Miſtaken;tis Clear and Viſible there, like the Light of Bright Sun- Shine ſmews it's ſelf, and Needs no other Proof, but it's ovn Evidence, they Feel the Hand of God Moving them within, and the Impulſs of the Spirit, and cannot he Miſtaken in what they Feel; this Light from Heaven is Strong, Clear, and Pure, Car ries it's own Demonſtration with it, and we may as Rationally take a Glow Worn to Aſſiſt us to Diſcover the Sun, as to Examine the Celeſtial Ray by our Dim Candle, Reaſon; This is the Way of Talking of theſe Men; They are Sure, becauſe they are Sure, and their Perſuaſions are Right, only becauſe they are Strong in them. WEe are therefore here to Reply as before, that by Enthuſiaſm is Meant, either a Hea of Fancy and Fullneſs of our ſelves, by which we Conceive, we are Inſpired, or clſe the Immediate Influx of God's Spirit upon our Minds; If the Firſt, who does not knov, that Conceit, and Heat of Fancy, has Led Men into a Thouſand Unaccountable Whimſies? Who that Reads this Romantick and Imaginary Syſteme of Ideas without Prejudice, will not Readily Own it? Who will Deny that the Love of ſomething Extraordinary, the Eaſe and Glory it is to have our Reaſon Inſpired, and to be above the Common and Natural Ways of Knowledge and Conſidering Things as they are, may ſo Flatter ſome Men's Ignorance, Laxineſi, and Vanity, that when Once they are Got into this Way, it vill be a Hard Matter to Get them out of it? Who vill not Confeſs, that True Reaſon is Loſt upon ſuch Men? They are above it, they Sce the Creatures of theit own Imaginations Clearly and Diſtinctly, and the Various Connexions of them; Theit Arbitrary Abſtractions, and the Images they Frame in theit ovn Minds, and which they Shuſfle and Combine as they Pleaſe, are Strong, Clear, and Diſtinct, and Carry their own Demonſtration with them, and we may as Rationally Take a Glow Worm to Aſſiſt us to Diſcover the Sun, as to Examine ſuch Elevated Fancies by the Common Rules of Plain Thinking, according to that which Simple Nature Dictates to us; This is the Way of Talting of iheſe Men; They arc Sure of theit Abſtracted Notions, and their Connexions of them, becauſe they are Sure, and their Perſuaſions are Right, only becauſe they are Strong in them; And is not this I vould Ask, a moſt Refined and Accompliſied Way of Arguing, which, Changing the Terms of Enthuſiaſm, Heat of Fancy, Conceit, &⸗. for thoſe of Reaſon, Connexion, and Compounding and Abſtracting of Ideas, is Equally Valid and Concluſive? Ir Enthuſiaſm is not Conceit, Heat of Fancy, and the Like, but the Real Influences of the Deity upon the Mind, the Section Alledged from the Preſent Philoſophy will Evidently Take this Turn, which is not only Impious and Blaſphemous, (a Trifle it may be to ſome of the Patrons of this Philoſophy, if not to the Author of it) but, which they will more Exceedingly Reſent, Abſurd and Irrational; Namely, tho' the Odd Opinions and Extravagant Actions, the Influence, Grace, or Inſpiration of God has Run Men into, vere enough to Warn them againſt this Principle, ſo Apt to Miſguide them, both in their Belief and Conduct, yet the Love of ſomething Extraordinary, the Eaſe and Glory it is to be Inſpired, ſo Flatters many Men's Ignorance, Lazineſs, and Vanity, that when once they are Got into this Way of Immediate Revelation, that is, vhen they are once Really Influenced or Inſpired by God, Reaſon is Loſt upon them, they are above it, they See the Light Infuſcd into their Underſtandings, they Feel the Hand of God Moving them within, and the Impulſes of the Spirit, and cannot be Miſtaken in what they Feel. Whuar Chriſtian, Mahometan, Jew, or even Heathen, unleſs an Atheiſt, would not Bluſh, not only at the Writing, but almoſt at the Recital of ſuch a Paragraph, which yet ſeems to be the Ultimate Meaning of this Philoſophy. As to the Blaſphemy and Impicty of it, what can be more Atheiſtical and Profane, than to Tell us, that the Real Inſpiration of God, or the Divine Grace, is a Principle Apt to Miſguide us? Let God be True, may we not Juſtly Say in this Caſe, and every Man a Liar? For, if there is any God, or if this Philoſophy will Really Own One, Truth and Veracity is an Attribute as Eſſential to him, as his Wiſdom or his Power, or as Error and Falſehood to Human Nature, or to this Gentleman ; Can thereſore Veracity it's ſel? Miſguide us? It is both Impious and Abſurd to Aſfirm it. A A Sceond Impiety is the Ridiculous way of Repreſenting ſuch an Operation o God upon Mens Minds, by the Eaſe and Glory of being Ignorant and Inſpired, by Feeling the Hand of God Moving them Within, and Secing the Light Infuſed into their Underſtandings; For, if there is any Real Grace oſf God, by which Good Men are upon their Prayers to him Influenced and Directed, this Philoſopher might have Treated ſo Sacred an Emanation of the Deity with a Greater Deference and Regard than he has done, which every one who Reads him, and Conſidets the Air and Stile of his Writing, will find he has, on the Contrary, Endeavoured to Expoſe to Common Contempt and Ridicule, according to what he afterwards Modeſtly in Effect Tells us, that this Light, that is, any Influx from the Deity upon our Minds, is an Ignis Fatuus, which Leads us Round in this Circle; It is a Revelation, or it is the Grace and Influence of God, becauſe we Apprehend it to be ſo, and we Apprehend it to be ſo, becauſe it is a Revelation from him. BuT, beſides the Atheiſm of what Foregoes, let us now Inquire into the Senſe, and the Connexion of Ideas, which it Alledges, which Fails as we have before Obſerved, in making a Being of Infinite Veracity, Capable of Deceiving us; In the Second Place, tho Almighty God by his Influences could Deceive us, and this Philoſopher could make an Ionis Fatuus of them, how is Eaſe and Glory, Ilgnorance, Vanity, and Inſpiration, Joined with the Idea of an Almighty Being Deceiving us? If he does it by his own Power, and by his Arbitrary Influences upon our Minds, there is neither Eaſe, nor Glory, nor Ignorance, nor Vanity, which has any Thing to do in the Queſtion; Becauſe, upon this Suppoſition, Almighty God may do what he Pleaſs with us, and the Conſulting our ovn Eaſe or Glory, our being Ignorant or Vain, vill Signify nothing, whilt we are only Paſſive to the Divine Influx. S. 8. Tuis Philoſophy goes on with Enthuſiaſm, and has a Mind to Declare to us, how it may be Diſcovered; Tis Said, there is an Internal Light or Impulſe, becauſe Men See or Feel it; But it is Asked, whether this Seeing is the Perception of the Truth of the Propoſition, or of This, that it is a Revelation from God; as alſo, whether this Feeling is a Perception of an Inclination or Fancy to dò ſomething, or of the Spirit of God Moving that Inclination, which it is Told us, ought to be Careſully Diſtinguiſhed ; Since we may Perceive the Truth of a Propoſition, and yet not Perceive, that, it is an Immediate Revelation from God3 Nay we may Perceive, that ve came not by this Knowledge in a Natural Way, and ſo may Conclude it Revealed, without Perceiving, that it is a Revelation from God; Becauſc there are Spirits. which, ithout being Divinely Commiſſioned, may Excite thoſe Ideas in us, and Lay them in ſuch Order before our Minds, that we may Perceive theit Connexion, ſo that the Knowledge of any Propoſition coming into our Minds, we Know not how, ĩs not a Perception, that it is from God; Much Leſs is a Strong Perſuaſion, that it is True, a Perception, that it is from God, or that it is ſo much, as True. BESIDES, if a Propoſition is True, it will be Certain from it's own Evidence, and therefore Revelation will be Superfluous; and if a Propoſition is not Certainly True, but only what we are Perſuaded is ſo, ve do not See, but Believe, which muſt therefore Depend upon Teſtimony; What Teſtimony therefore have we, it is Asked, that God did Reveal any Thing to us, by an Immediate Influence upon our Minds? If we Know not this, ve Know nothing; how great ſocver the Aſſurance is, that we are Poſſeſſecd with, it is Groundleſs; and whatever Light we Pretend to, it is but Enthuſiaſm; it is an Ionis Fatuus, which Leads us Continually Round in this Circle, it is a Revelation, becauſe we Firmly Believe it, and we Believe it, becauſe it is a Revelation. What has been Said of Light in the Mind, and our Secing of it, may be Applicd to Impulſe, and our Feeling of it. Urox what has been now Propoſed to us from this Philoſophy, we may Obſerve, that Revelation is not Pretended to be Impoſſible; ſince it is Said, there are Spirits, which, without being Divinely Commiſſioned from God, may Reveal Things to us; which if Granted, it will be moſt Certain, that all our Ideas do not Proceed from Senſation and Reſlection, becauſe they Poſſibly may be Derived to us from ſome Superior Beings, and Conſequently, this vhole Philoſophy is Falſe; If it is not Granted, the Mention of it is only to Evade a Revelation from God, without it's Believing, that any Revelation can be made even from Superior Spirits, at the ſame Nn n n n Time Time that it Afirms it, vhich &s, to Say no Worſe of it, a moſt Notorions Hypocriſy and Prevarication. BE this yet as it will, how can ve Diſcover, whether we have any Influences from the Deity or not, by our being Certain of ſeveral Truths and Propoſition: vithout him? No one ever Afſirmed, that Euclid, or Archimedes, or Apollonius, were Inſpired, and yet all this Learned and Wiſe Reaſoning againſt any Inſluences of God upon Human Minds, is Reſolved into this, that we may Perceive the Truth of a Propoſition in Mathematicks, vithout an Inſpiration from him; Which no one ha: hitherto Denied, Excepting, that this Genrleman's Mathematicks, which do not Reach Far, Namely, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are Equal to Two Right Ones, have not all the Truth in them, Which his Connexion of Ideas Suppoſes. ON the Contrary, tho we do nor Acknowledge the Mathematicians, and much Leſs this Philoſopher of Ideas, to be Inſpired, yet we cannot but Think, the Firſt Preachers of Chriſtianity were, and that every Good Chriſtian has the Aſſiſtances of the Almighty, is Endued with his Grace, and Partakes of the Influences oſ the Divine Spirit, as St. Paul, St. Peter, and the reſt of the Apoſtles, and in this Lat Age, the Great Authors oſ our Reformation, beſides all thoſe Excellent Men in the Church of zome, in our Own, and amongſt our Diſſenting Brethren; All whoſe Piety and Goodneſs are Suſficient Prooſs, that they do not Derive their Afſœctions, or Ideas, from themſelves, but from God. WE cannot thereſore Imagine, tho we have Conſidered all Ways to find any other Senſe of this Philoſophy, what Farther it can Mean, unleſs, that if Euclid, Archimedes, or Apollonius, were not Inſpired, it is not Certain, that St. Paul, or St. Peter, or St. John were, that ĩs, that becauſc Mathematicks are True, Religion is Falle;3 whereas, I Hope it has been Proved in the Demonſtration of Religion, and in the Principles of Philoſophy, and the Geometry of Solids, that Religion is True, and Mathematicks in one Senſc are Falſe. IF any Thing Farther is Intended, it is this, that, tho we Know a Propoſition is True, ve are nor Sure it is Revealed, which comes to the Same with That, which ve have already Mentioned, that no One vill Aſſirm, that Euclid, Archimedes, or Apollonius were Inſpired; Is it therefore Certain, as was beſore Said, that St. Paul, St. Peter, or St. John, were not? Or is it any vays Evident, that becauſe, what we can Fully Comprehend by our Reaſon, we do not want any Revelation for, that therefore there is nothing which is Superior to our Reaſon, and which we do want a Revelation for? May we not at Leaſt with as Great Truth Affirm, that Revelation is Above, and Superior to Reaſon, as this Gentleman, that Reaſon is Superior to Revelation, by his Endeavouring to Reduce Revelation to it? LastLy, It may ſtill be Inquired, how we Knov, that the Apoſtles, or any Good Men ſince, have had the Influences of God upon theit Minds, if it cannot be Diſcovered this Way? To which we ſhall only at Preſent Firſt Anſwer, that, how the Divine Influences are Performed upon the Mind, is a Secret, to which this Searcher into Human Underſtanding has not Arrived, as Perhaps he never had the Happineſs to Experience them; That does not yet Hinder, but that in Fact Men have been Inſpired, and have Intimately Communicated of the Divine Eſſence, as the Apoſtles and Diſciples of our Lord, vhom we Mentioned; Second, that the Truth of a Propoſition, which is Collected and Inferred from the Connexion of Ideas, cannot be a Teſt of Revelation, Iet it come into the Mind by what Way ſoever we Pleaſc; Becauſe Revelation, if there is any ſuch Thing, does Furniſh us according to the Confeſſions of this Philoſophy, vith a New Set of Diſcoveries, and which therefore are not Reducible to what the bare Faculties of the Mind can Reveal to us. TuE only Queſtion therefore which Remains, is, wherher Almighty God does Impart himſelf to Human Minds or not, and by what Methods; Neither of which is Entered into by this Philoſophy, which only Tells us, that Truth in it's Senſe of it, or the Connexion of Ideas, docs not want any Inſpiration; which, as it is Certain it does not, becauſe what we do Arbitrarily of our ſelves, cannot be an Impreſſion from God, ſo this Philoſophy, which is a Syſteme of Ideas of it's own Making and Compoſition, carnot Proceed from any Inſpired Reaſon; And by the ſame Argument, that our ovn Arbitrary Compoſitions are not an Impreſſion from God, it will be Concluded, that Revelation, or the Will and Impreſſion of God, is not Reaſon, or the the Acts and Volitions of our own Minds, upon which our Abſtractions of Ideas, and the Connexion of them, Depend, and Conſequently our Reaſon, which is Formed from Both. ArTER this Deſcant upon the Diſcovery of Enthuſiaſm, which Signifies nothing to the Matter, ſince it Affirms, in Truth, no more than that Euclid, ot Archimedes or Apollonius, were not Inſpired, which no One ever Imagined they were, we are at Length Told, that the whole Queſtion is Reſolved into This, how it ſhall be Known, that any Propoſition in our Minds is a Truth Infuſed by God, that is, how we are Certain it is a Revelation. BUT may we not Ask this Philoſopher of Ideas, what is Truth? For, if it is Thai; which is Thought to be ſo by a Connexion of Ideas, or a Mathematick and Abſtracted Reaſoning, Contrived and Formed in our own Minds, there is nò Queſtion at all, whether it comes from God, or how we Know it dots, becauſe it is Manifeſtly Derived from our ſelves; and we may as Juſtly Say, that e Walk, or Eat; or Drink by Inſpiration, as that ve Reaſon in this Senſe of it; Since the One is only the Action of our Bodies, or of our Senſcs, and the other of our Minds. IP therefore Reaſon, or the Connexion of the Ideas of our 3Wn Minds, is this Truth, as it is Perfectly Human, what is Divine and is Suppoſed to Proceed from God, cannot be Exacted tò it, unleſs we will Affirm, that the Thoughts of God are our Thoughts, and his Ways, our Ways; The very Notion of a Deity is that of a Being, Infinitely Different from That of our Minds, and for that Reaſon, if there is any Influx of God upon us, the Thoughts and Conceptions, with which he Inſpires us, muſt be Suitable to the Nature of the Being which Inſpires, and Conſequently, cannot be Reduced to the Perceptions of the Being, which is Inſpired, or to any Connexion of them; Becauſe this would be to make Almighty God in no Reſpect Different from our ſelves; And as the Revelation cannot be Submitted to òur Rules ot Methods of Thinking, without the Greateſt Abſurdity, ſo neither can we come to Know, whether any Thing is Revelation, by the Help of our Reaſon, not even in Chriſtianity it's Self; For we have already Shewn, that the Scriptures, and the Inſpirations therein Contained, do not Depend upon the Evidences from Reaſon, or what is always Meant by it in this Phlloſophy, the Connexion of Ideas, which is only Employed in the Compariſon of Abſtracted Ones, and is therefore an Evidence Peculiar to Mathematicks and Philoſophy, or to thoſe Sciences, which are Properly Termed Rational, and which is Perfectly Diſtinct from the Convictions, which the Mind Receives from Teſtimony, arid Matter of Fact, according to what has been at Large Evinced, and on which the Evidences of Chriſtianity are Founded. 5. 9. It will be therefore Laſtly Inquired, which way we may be Certain, that we have an Immediate Revelation from God, ſince it cannot be Known by Conſidering the Rationalneſs, or the Truth, of the Propoſition Revealed; Nor yet can we Say, that ve are Inſpired by God from any Strong Impulſe, which we find in our ſelves, or ſfrom any Firm and Settled Perſuaſion, which we have, that we are ſo; For every Fancy, ſo fat is True, every Wild and Extravagant Impetus of the Mind might, it ſo, be Deemed an Inſpiration. IN Anſwer to which Diſficulty, we are to Take Notice, that an Influx oſ ihe Deity upon Mens Minds is Confeſſed to be Poſſible, that it has in Fact been, that the Apoſtles of our Lord and the ſeveral Prophets of Old were Inſpired, and all the Queſtion is, how they, or any Good and Pious Men ſince, ſould be Certain of it; If this were not Owned, ve might Shew, that the Influences of the Deity upon us are no Ways Inconceivable from what we have Alledged in the Demonſtration of the Chriſtian Religion, in Reſpect of the Divine Aſflatus, which we may as Fully Apprehend to be Capable of Impreſſing Notions upòn us, and Raiſing or Exciting Iàcas in us, as we are Certain, that ſeveral Silent Motions of the Hand or Eye, &⸗. by the Mediation of the ther, are Productive of Various and Differing Ideas in tis; TO whichh we may Add, that there is no Reaſon, which can even be given, why one of our Thoughts Communicates it's ſel? to another, by which they become Mutually Conſcious, which will not Obtain to Prove, that the Deity, if it Pleaſes, may Communicate it's ſelſ to us, ſo that we may be Conſcious of his Mind and Intention; Since there is no more Tie, or Neceſſary Connexion, betwixt one Thought, vhich my Wiil ſhall Arbitrarily Excite in my Mind, and anorher, than there is beN nnnn: twixt etwixt one Thought, which the Almighty Wiil and Pleaſure of God ſhall Excite in me, and another, which is Derived from my own Mind, as to the being Conſcious of Either; However this is, it will not be Denied, but that, in Fact, the Deity has Communicated it's ſelf to Men's Minds; Iſ thereſore we could not give an Account, how, or in vhat Manner, this was Perſormed, it would yet be no greater Objection againſt Inſpirations in Fact, than becauſe ve Know not the Reaſon, or Way, by which the Magnet is Attractive of Iron, or Amber of a Hair, or a Glals Tube of a Feather, it would therefore be an Objection, whether the Magnet, or Amber, or the Glaſs upon Attrition, have in Fact any ſuch Communicative or Attractive Qualities. ii ] AꝑD the ſame may be Said, in another Senſe, Concerning our Certainty of Inſpiration; For, altho we were not Poſſeſſed of any Criterion, by which we could Diſtinguiſ, vhat was a Revelation from God, and what was not, as the Truth of a Propoſition Viſible from the Connexion of Ideas, or a Firm and Invinciblc Perſuaſion, are Undoubtedly no ſuch Criterion, it would not from thence Follow, that all Inſpiration, or the Influence of God upon Men's Minds, was nothing elſe but Enthuſiaſm; Since, th we could not Tell, how to Diſlinguiſ ſuch Divine Inſluences, or had no Certain Rule, to which we might Reduce them, they would not be Leis Real on that Account; Thus a Pious and Good Man, upon his Earneſt Prayers and Addreſſes to Almighty God, may Receive thoſe Returns oſ his Grace and Spirit from hiim, which may Enable him to Perform his Duty, with greater Care and Exactneſs;, th? he ſould not be Able to Deſcribe, how that Aſſiſtance is Communicated to him, or Bring ĩt to any Standard, by which he might Judge oſ it. So, in. the Rational Sciences, tho no Criterion of Certainty were Fixed, Truth would not be Leſs it's ſelf, or the Evidences of Things Leſs Convincing; For we may now, that the ſeveral Propoſitions in Euclid are True, upon thoſc Suppoſitions and Abſtractions, which he Aſſumes, vhatever the General Mcaſure of Truth is, and that 2 and3 make 5;7 however Metaphyſical and Speculative our Notions may Prove Concerning the Nature of Truth, and in what it Conſiſis; vhich Notions may Alter, according to the Different Complexions of Men's Minds, and their Various Acquirements, Studies, or Contemplations; One may Think the Viſible Connexion of Ideas the only Teſt, Another Experimental Knowledge, either ſrom our Senſations or Reſlections, &. In is Suſficient, that the Real Criterion of Truth has been Perhaps as much Diſputed, as a Criterion of Inſpiration can be, and if the One is no Objection againſt Reaſon, the other will be of as Little Force or Importance againſt an Immediate Revelation, I Say an Immediate Revelation, and which I will Venture to take upon me to Deſend; For, as we have already Said, tho' this Philoſopher in Pretenſe Argues againſt the Light mithiu, which ſome Modern Sectaries Maintain, who ſeem, however Harſ the Compariſon may Appear, to be much the Same to the Primitive Chriſtians, as Apes or Monkeys are to Men, yet it is too Evident and Plain, that the ſame Viſe Arguments arc Alledged to Weaken the Inſpirations of Chriſtianity its ſelfſ; Since he at Length Confſeſſes, that if even the Apoſtles and Diſciples oſ our Lord had not ſome Atteſtations to their being Inſpired, beſides their bare Perſuaſions of it, Namely, Miracles, they would have had as little Reaſon to have Depended upon their Deriving any Immediate Influences from God, as any others; But we muſt Say with this Gentleman's Leave, that i? Men cannot be Satisfied, that they are Inſluenced by God, unleſũ a Miracle is Wrought to Confirm them in the Perſuaſion, there is not One Pious Perſon ſince the Firt Ages of our Religion, who can be Sure, that he has been Aſſiſted by the Grace of Almighty God, in any of the Actions, or Occurrences, of his Liſe; his Prayers for it muſt have been Idle and Vain, and the Whole Chriſiian World is under a Groſs Miſtake, to Think, there is any ſuch Grace or Inſluences of the Deity Derived to him. WE have thereſore thus far Conſidered, what Criterion this Philoſophy Alledge: for Inſpiration; Namely, either a Perceprion in the Mind, that a Propoſition is True which cannot be a Proof, that it comes from God, or elſe a Strong Inchnation and Fancy to Believe, it is an Emanation from him; Neither of which, ve Own, can be ⸗ Meaſure, by which we may Judge of any Thing Proceeding from a Divine Influence His Criterion oſ Reaſon and Truth, to Wit, the Connexion oſ Ideas, we have alſo before before Examined, and Shewn it to be Falſe, and ſince he Plainly Confeſſes, that he is Ignorant of any, by which we can Determine upon Inſpiration, we ſhall Endeavour liere to Supply one, tho' it is not, according to what has been Said, any ways Neceſſary for us to do, in Order to Aſcertain the Reality of Inſpiration it's ſelf. Tis Own'd, that Inſpirations have in Fact been, we have Explained even how it is Poſſible for Inſpirations to be, and what we are now farther to Evince is, the Method, or Way, of Diſtinguiſhing True Inſpirations from Falſe or Pretended Ones. OF which there only at Preſent ſeem to be Two Ways; either by Conſidering the Nature of that Infinite Being, which is Suppoſed to Inſpire Men; or elſe by Conſidering the Nature of that Religion, which is in Fact Acknovledged to be Inſpired; By the Firſt ve may Know, Abſtracted from Miracles, whether the Apoſtles were Inſpired, of which Miracles ſtill are a Collateral Evidence; and by the Laſt, whether Any ſince have beenn. i THERE is nothing more Rational than to Think, that the Emanations or Influences of Almighty God are Suitable to his own Nature, and if he is a Being of Infinite Knowledge, Goodneſs, Juſtice, and Truth, that what is Derived from him into Others will be of the ſame Form and Reſemblance; Inſpiration therefore cannot Conſiſt cither in a Connexion of Ideas, or in an Heat of Fancy, or a Fullneſs of our ſelves, but in the moſt Elevated Notions of Things and a Fore-Knovledge of them, in the urmoſt Love and Goodneſs, in the moſt Exact and Unbiaſſcd Juſtice, and in the Greateſt Truth and Sincerity; and where theſe Qualities of the Mind are Reſident, Superior to vhat we can find in Mere Human Nature, where there is likewiſe ſuch a Syſteme of Knowledge Advanced, which Inculcates all theſe Perſections in the Higheſt Manner, and which all the Wiſdom in this World could never have Arrived to, it Appears to be no Leſs than a Demonſtration, that ſuch Perſons were Inſpired, and did Communicate and Partake of the Divine Eſſence, and of a Real and Certain Influx from it; All which is the Caſe of the Apoſtles and Diſciples of our Lord, according to what has been Evinced in the Demonſtration of the Truth and Divinity of the Chriſtian Religion. MOoRrREOVER, When to theſe Inward Inſpirations of the Mind, we Perceive Miracles to Atteſt them, it is Plain, that at the ſame Time, that it Pleaſed Almighty God to give an Impreſſion, and Strike a Character, as it were, of his Immenſe Wiſdom, Goodneſs, Juſtice, and Truth upon the Inſpired, he alſo Exerted his Infinite Power to Convince the World of it; That therc might be no Attribute Wanting, which he did not Fully Explain in that Religion, which he Intended ſould be the Meaſure of our Lives and Actions; And when farther there is a more than Human Zeal and Fervour, and the urmoſt Energy and Emotion of Soul, which Accompanies ſuch Impreſſions, it is nothing elſe but a Conſequence of the Almighty and Divine Impulſe, which, ve may Juſily Conceive, would Shake and Raiſe all the Faculties of the Mind, and Enforce and Envigorate them to that Degree, which in their own Natural State, they could not Poſſibly Experience; However, as This, without the Other, may be in ſome Mcaſure Imitated, ſo we here Mention it, not as a Diſtinguiſhing Mark of Inſpiration, but as the Probable Reſult and Conſequence of it. FroM this Mark or Character of Inſpiration, ve may Know, that the Chriſtian One is the only True and Divine Religion, which has been hitherto Propoſed to Mankind; becãuſe the Deity has not made ſo Full and Entire an Impreſſion of it's ſelf upon any Religion as the Chriſtian; For in all others, there is either Cruelty, or Injuſtice, or Folly, or Falſeneſs and Inſincerity, or a Deſect of Power, or a Heat of Fancy; Quite Contrary to the Characters we find in the Chriſtian Religion, of the utmoſt Mercy and Clemency in Almighty God, and of Love and Forgiveneſs in us, towards cach Other; of the moſt Rigid and Exact Juſtice in Sacrificeing his Son ſor the Attonement of Sins, and of the Greateſt Truth and Sincerity in the Diſciples oſ this Religion, ſo far as to Die in the Proſeſſion of it; of the Infinite Power of God, in the Working of Miracles, and of a True and Unpaſſionate Zeal and Elevation of Mind in Them, without any Wild Heats of Fanty, and which was ſuch, as vas a Solid Support to the Diſciples of our Lord againſt the Oppoſition of the whole World, amidſt all the Hardips and Diſſiculties, they Encountered. Bur what is there Like this in Mahomeriſm, or the Arian Scheme, Unleſs Luſt and Ambiton, Turbulency, Cruelty, and Ill-Nature, are the Meck, the Humble, and Juſ ſar ſons, ſions, Derived from Chriſtianty? And wherever ve find ſuch Aſtctions, as theſe, Mixed with any Religion, oreven with the Natural or Rational One of the Preſent Philoſophy, we may Juſtly Conclude, that it is not Inſpiration, but Enthuſiaſm; becauſe it has a Deep Reliſh of the Violences and Irregularities of Human Nature, but None of the Divine, by which, according to the Foregoing Rule, we ought to Judge of Inſpi ration. TuE Second Method of Determining, vhat is Inſpiration, is by Conſidering the Nature of that Religion, which is Confeſſedly Inſpired, as the Chriſtian Religion i: Acknovledged to be, and Knoving, how far thoſe Inſpirations, we Pretend to, are Conformable with it; For, if no Religion can be Inſpired, unleſs the Chriſtian, whatever is Contrary to that Religion, is Impoſſible ſould be Inſpiration; becauſe Almighty God cannot Inſpire Contradictions; Since therefore Chriſtianity is now a Rule to us, for Judsing oſ Inſpiration, the Criterion is Evident, and every one, who is a Truly Good and Sincere Chriſtian, ve may Juſtly Pronounce Inſpired; which may be done Two Ways, either by the Mediate Influences of the Scriptures of our Religion, or from the Immediate Inſluences of Almighty God himſelf. As to the Firſt, there can be nothing more Plain and Manifeſt, that if the Scripture: are Inſpired by Almighty God, which even this Rationaliſt will not Diſown, Thoſe, who Take their Notions and Apprehenſions of Things from them, muſt be Inſpired likeviſe; becauſe the Hagiographa, or Holy Writings, are an Expreſſion of the Will and Pleaſure of God to us, and therefore the Perſon, who Reads them, and Entirely Conforms his Notions to them, muſt of Neceſſity be Divine and Inſpired alio, tho ſuch Notions arc Communicated to us by the Mediation of the Scriptures of that Inſpiration. As to the Second, there is no Diſficulty in Apprehending, that if Almighty God can Immediately Communicate himſelf to us, which we have Shewn he may, or which, if we had not, is Acknowledged, and if that Communication of himſclf is only in the Chriſtian Religion, it is not Difficult, I Say, to Apprehend, how he may Inſpire, or Give his Aſſiſtances in that Way, by Earneſt Prayers and Addreſſes to him, which in a Greater Degree he Communicated to the Firſt Chriſtians; So far Removed is the Gra of God from Enthuſiaſm, or the Influences of the Deity from a Heat of Fancy, or a Fullneſs of our Selves. IN Concluſion, we cannot but Think and Believe, that, in this Senſe of Inſpiration, and from what Foregoes, that the Romaniſis, that the Mahometans, and Arians, and Thoſec vhom they Call Quatters, that the Diſſenters, and Anabaptiſts, and Independents, are All in ſome Degree Inſpired; That is, ſo Far as they Agree with the Church oſ England, in the True and Orthodox Chriſiianity, which it Profeſſes; To Wit, That Chriſt was the Saviour of the World, That he was the Son and Meſſiah of God, That he Died, and was Crucified for the Sins of Mankind; All this even the Arians and Mahometans do in ſome Meaſure and Senſe Acknowledge; And, as it is Agrecable with Chriſtianity, is a Divine Revelation, or an Inſpiration from God; And What Arius or Mahomet, and their Followers, the Laſt, as well as the Former of which, was nothing more than a Chriſtian Heretick, Namely, of the Sect of the Manichees, What Theſe have Advanced in Contradiction to the Chriſtian Religion is to be Reſigned to the Infirmities, to the Paſſions and Prejudices, of Human Nature, which might Prevail ſo Far, as to Mix themſelves with Revelations from God, and the Operations of the Divine Mind upon Them. IF this is ſo, ve may Eaſily Conceive, what the Genius and Complexion of the Light Within is, which this Philoſophy is ſo Careſull to Examine, which muſt be, in Part, a Revelation or Inſpiration from God, that is, ſo Far as it Agrees with Chriſtianity; and vhere It or any other Hereſy Departs from it, it is not an Argument againſt the Truth of the Revelation, or Inſpiration from God, which the Chriſtian Religion Beſtows, but is an Inſtance and Conviction of the Frovardneſs, the Obſtinacy, and Perverſeneſs, of our Minds or our Wills, which are not ſo Paſſive and Obedient, as they ſould be, to the Divine Impreſſions, THE PRINCIPLES O F THE PHILOSOPHY O F THE FXxrANS IVE and CONTRACTIVE F O R C E S B O O K VIL Concerning ALGEERA. PRINCIPLES of the PHILOSOPHY OF THE ExPANSIVEINd CO NT RACTIVE F O RCES. B O O K VII. Concerning ALGE BRA C H AP. I : Of Notation, Addition, Subfirattion, Multiplication, Diviſion, and Extraſtion of the Roots. 5. LGEBRA Scems to be the Nobleſt Science, which was ever Invented, and to be the Utmoſt Effort of the Human Genius, by which we Arrive at a Solution of thoſe Problems in Arithmetick, and Geometry, which, without it, it would be Impoſſible to Find out; It was Suppoſed to be Known to the Antients, and there are Evident Footſteps of it in Euclia himſelf æ; But Diophantus of Alexandria was the Firſt, who Profeſſcdly made Uſe of it, in his Numerical Queſtions, the Mathematicians before being Thought to have Concealed this Art, that their Inventions might Appear more Stupendous and Surprizing * Thus, for Inſtance, as moſt of the Propoſtions of the ad. ook of his Elements, Particularly the 111h. and man; Others, ſo Propoſition the iorh of the 41h. Book, which is One of the moſt Ingenious in the Whole Elements, may he Enſily Solved by Algebra; See the Scheme Annexed to that Propoſition, Edit. Tacquer; Let AB be =a, AD/2 EDa x, and let the Problem be Suppoſcd to be Performed or Eſected; Thereſore the Triangles, C AB, DCE are Similar Ones; For the Angle B A C=Angle D CB by the Problem, and the Angle at B is Common 1 both ih Triangles, from whence the Angle 4C8= Angle CD B; Conſequently 4B: CE/C D:: CDO=/A4D: DB. Ta is, a: x:: x:8x, and xx=aauax, or xæ ax=aa; Thereſore -aæ+3 as =;as, and x+3av3aa or x12a+ 3as, as will be aſterwards Seen, and which ĩs the very Solution of the 11rh. Propoſition of the a Rook hefore Cited, or is the Rule there Preſcribed ſor Interſecting a Line Meliã & Exiremã rations, and is here Re ouired for Expediting the Preſent Problem. See Siurmiui's Maiheſ. Enurleat. Prop. a7. Set. a. Libn. Schol. æ Pag. 131. Edit. 1. O o o o o tc o the World; But oſ Late, Vieta Firſi, and aſter him our own Country Man Hariot, then DesCartes, and Oughtred, and ſince, the Celebrated Dr. Wallis, the Great ind Incomparable Sir Iſaac Neton, and the Famous Dr. Halley, have been the Chief Promoters and Advancers of it; I ſhall only here Endeavour to give as Compendious an Account of it, as is Poſſible, and I Believe I may Say, that in a Few Sheets I have Comprized ſeveral Folio's; Mr. erſeys Algebra, which is Voluminous enough, is Aſiirmed by Dr. ”allis, to be the moſt Complete Syſteme of this Science, and yet I Believe, there is Scarcely any Thing Material in him, which is not here Fully Explained, Beſides what is Added from Kinkhuyſenius and Sit Iſaac Neton, and Othets, and from my own Obſervations upon theſc Authors, and the Shewing, that this Part of Knovledge likeviſe is Submitted to the Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces. BUT beſore I Proceed, I ſall take Notice, that Algebra is either Applicable to Numbers, or to Extenſion; The Method of doing the Firſt ſould be Punctually Learned, and then we may vith greater Facility go on to the Latter, hich is not better Explained by any Author, than by Sturmius, at the End of his Matheſis Enueleata, nor more Finely Exemplificd by any, than by Sir Iſaac Newton in his Algelbra, or his Arithmetica Univerſalis. I muſt alſo Subjoin, that there are TWo Ways of Teaching this Science, either by Explaining the Abſtracted Rules and Precepts Firſt, of Notation, Addition, Subſtraction, &c. and aſterwards Applying them to the Solution of Problems; or elſe. by Immediately Beginning with Problems, and Explaining the Rules or Precepts, as they Occur in each Problem. æ5 l IP the Firſt is done, Learners Comprehend nothing of the Meaning of a Known. or Unknown Quantity, of a or of æ, or of a Privative or Poſitive One, of +4 ora; It is all Myſterious to them, and thro' all the Rules, which are given Concerning them, they are Carried on in the Dark, Know not where they are, and, out of Mere Deſperation, Relinquiſh the Purſuit of the Science, which they Think, they ſhall be never Able to Attain; And ſo it is in Reſpect of Equations. This alſo is very Probably the Reaſon, why, tho' Zugliſb Letters, as a, b, c, &æ. are as Intelligible, as the Aralick Cyphets, 1. 2.3, &c. which every Boy underſtands, Yet Algebra has Fever Diſciples among thoſc of Advanced Years, than Arithmetick has among thoſe of much leſs Experienced or Judicious Ones; Notwithſlanding it is Manifeſt, that all Arithmetick whatſoever, and Infinitely more, and even all Geometry, in a Manner, is Containcd and Included in this moſt Sublime and Divine Science. There may be Indeed anorther Reaſon given, why Arithmetick Prevails more than Algebra, but it ſould not be Acknoledged by Rational Men; Namely, that there is ſome Intereſt at the Bortom, and ſome Gain to be Acquired from the One, whereas there may be Poſſibly little but Reproach or Contempt from the Other, at Leaſt, with or among Certain Genius's, and Complexions, vho Chooſe to Ridicule, what they themſelves do not Underſtand. Ir the Second is done, it will be Repeating the ſame Rules and Precepts Over and Over, which will be Tedious, and Cauſe as Great a Confuſion in that Way; And thereſore, the only True Method, to make Algebra more Generally Studicd, ſeems to be to Haſen to Problems, as ſoon as is Poſſible, and to Lay down thoſc General Rules, hich are Perſectly Neceſſary to the Underſtanding them, when Propoſed; we ſnall Proceed in the Middle Way and Intermix the Problems vith the Abſtracted Rules Given for the Solving of them, both, as it will be more Inſtructive, and more Diverting. S. 2. Tur Notation of Algebra is the Language of it; a, b, c, à. æ, f, &e. that is, the Former Letters of the Alphabet, Signiſy Xnen Quantities, or Numbers, as I. 2. 3. 1I0O. 500. 25. 64. 1000, or any orher Number or Quantity, whatſocever; æ5 IL,v, X, 7,  or the Concluding Letteis of the Alphabet, Signiſy Unknown Quantities or Numbers; + Signiſies More, or is a Note of Addition, as3+4 Signiſies 73Signiſies Leſi, or is a Note oſ Subſiraction, as 2-3 Signiſies 13X is a Note, which Sig niſies the Multiplying of One Number or Quantity into Another, as3 X 4 is 12 E vith a Cypher above and below it, is a Note of Diviſion, as % Signiſies 5 Di Vided by 10, or, which may be thus Expreſcd, 10) 5 in Common Arithmetick; v Signifies the Root, or the Extraction of it, from any Quantity, as the vV 4 is æ the V o is 3, V 16 is 4, &. that is, the Root of any Quantity or Number, is that Quantit; Quantity or Number, Which, Multiply'd into it's ſelſ, is that Quantity or Number; Thus the Root of 4 X Root of 4 is 4, that is, the vV 4 is 2, and ſo of the Reſt; And æ is a Note or Mark of Equality, as 45 4. And, Suitable to this, in Algebra, a+ b Signifies the Addition of a to b3 4b Signifies the Subſtraction of b from a; a xb, or a b, Denotes the Multiplication of One into the Other; ana2 or b) a the Diviſion of One by the Other; And the v a, or V b, Intends the Extraction oſ the Root of a or b, vhich v a, or vV b, Multiplyd into it's ſelf, will Produce 4, or b; And in Equations, a  æ Signifies, that æ is Equal to æ. Tuis ſeems to be a Suſficient Account of Notation, and vill Explain any other Quantities whatſoever, be they More or Leſs Complexed, and which we ſhall not here Inſert, as Sir Iſaac Newton does, ni Complexione Terminorum Tyrones, quaſi Conterriti, in Limine Hæreant, as he himſelf Expreſies it, and yet Inſerts thoſe Algebraick Quantities, which would Affright them. ALL, that we ſhall Farther Obſerve upon this Notation is, that here are only Two Sorts of Quantities Received, in the moſt Extenſive Science, which was ever Propoſed in Nature, Namely, the Poſitive and Privative, Expreſſed by +and ; Which is Exactly Correſpondent to what we Affirm, that there are only Two Principles in It, the Expanſive Force, and the Contractive; The Former of which, or +, is Agrecable to the Expanſive Force, and the Latter, or, to the Contractive. 5. 3. WE ſhall Exemplify this Doctrine, ſo far as ve have Gone, by the Firſt ProbIem, we ſall Take Notice of, in Numbers. PROBL. I. A Merchant had a Certain Sum of Money, which is not Known; hich he Increaſed one Third every Year, Deducting a Certain Sum, which is Known, and vhich he Annually Expended on his Family; And at the End of Three Years, he was Twice as Rich, as he was at Firſt; It is Inquired, what that Unknown Sum was, which he Originally had? ME. Kerſey, and, aſter him, Sir Iſaac Newton, Teaches us a Method of Solving this, and all other Problems, by Barely Changing the Terms in the Engliſb, or any other Language, into the Algebraick, and which Method, we ſhall for the moſt Part Follow in the Succeeding Problems; Thus, In Engliſ. In Algebra. I. A Merchant has a Certain Sum of Money, which is Unknown. 2. OUT of which he Expends the Firſt 2. xa Year a Certain Sum which is kKnown ⸗. : 3. THE Remainder he Increaes by] 3. a+xa, 44⸗ I. æ. Onc Third. 3 3 4. THE Second Year he Expends the 4. 4xa a 4x78 ſame Known Sum ⸗.  naor ; 5. THE Remainder he Increaſes by one 5. 4x 7a +4x7v7a, 16x284 Third.  J/9u0/3 6. THE Third Year he Expends the 6. I6 x28 16x374 ſame Known Sum ⸗. EEES n o 7. THE Remainder he Increaſes by one 7. 16x37a 16 x374 Third.  V or 64x148a l 27 3. AND he is Twice as Rich, as he 8. 64 x1I4822 was at the Beginning. 27 ExPLANATION. 1ſſ. This Laſt Step is Called an Equation from the Note of Equa lity, which Lies betwixt the Two Quantities; and every Problem muſt be Reduced 10 an Equation, before it can be Solved, and all the Unknown Quantities muſt be Placed on the One Side of it and the nown Ones on the Other, in Order to Determine, what the Unknown Quantity is, by the Known. Oo oo 0: Tnu Tnus, both Sides of the Equation Multiplicd by 27, makes 64x  148  5453 Subſtract 54 from both Sides of it, and the Equation Will be 10I484 =o; Add 148 4 to both Sides, and the Equation vill be 10x= 1484; Divide both Sides I48a 10 Axiom, that, if To Quantities are Equal, Add to, or Subſtract from them, Equal Quantities, or Multiply or Divide them by Equal Quantities, and they will be ſiill Equal. And from hence is Derived that General Rule in Equations, That they vill ſtill Continue Such, Let us Tranſpoſe the Terms of them, as we will, to Contrary Sides, if it is done under Contrary Signs; Thus, if 64I48 a = 545, 641484 s4x=O, Or 64x = I48 a + 545, &c2d. THE Known Quantity 4 may Signiſy any Known Number whatſoever, as 100, 1000, Ij4, 625, 109, &. Suppoſing the Firſt; Then the Merchant Expends upon his Family every Year ico l. and x the Unknown Sum, which he was Originally Worth, will be m n= 1480l.  to his Gain, at the End of Three Years For he vas then Worth, Double of what he vas at Firſt. 3d. The Intermediate Steps, from the Second to the Laſt, are made upon the Rule for the Reduction of Quantities of Different Denominations to the ſame Denomination; Which is, by Multiplying the Denominator of the Firſt into the Numeratoi and Denominator of the Second, and the Denominator of the Second into the Nua of it by 10, and the Equation will be x= 3 All which Depends upon this Plain xa x : merator and the Denominator of the Firſt; Thus, xs, or r is Reduced to : by Multiplying I the Denominator of the Firſt into xa the Numeratoi xa. of the Second, and into3 the Denominator of it, which makes, as before 7 and by Multiplying3 the Denominator of the Second into x2 the Numerator of the Firſt, and into r the Denominator of it, which makes p: , Becauſe all Ratios, Multiplicd by Equal Quantities, will ſtill be Equal, as . && But 7 3x3a4x4⸗ a3 Or, + ;  ror + and, 3æ uiẽ: Add Privative Quantities to Privative, and they vill be Privative, as if ve Add Poſitive Ones to Poſitive, they will be Poſitive. 4h. THIs Way of Proceeding is Called the Analytick Method; becauſe it gives us the Analyſis, or Reſolution, of the Problem, and Leads us from the Unknown Quantity to the Known; The Reverſe of which is the Synthetick, or the Syntheſis. hich begins with the Quantity Found out by Analyſis, and from thence by a Retrogreſlion Proves the Truth of the Propoſition; Thus in the Foregoing Problem. IF a Merchant is Poſſeſed oſ 1480/. and he Increaſes that Sum, every Year, One Third, Subſtracting 100 l. which he Expends in his Family, at the End of Three Years, he vill be Twice as Rich, as he vas at Firſt. DEMONSTR ATION. The Merchant's Original Stock is 1480. he Expends the Firſt Year 100. and the Remainder is 1380/ which he Increaſes One Third, or with 460l. At the End of the Firſt Year he is therefore Worth 1840l. Tur Second Year he likewiſe Expends 100 ſ. and the Remainder is 1740 . which he Increaſes One Third, or with 580/. At the End of the Second Year he is therefore Worth 2320l. TuE Third Year he alſo Expends 100/. and the Remainder is 2220. which he Increaſes One Third, or with 740. and Conſequently, at the End of the Third Year he will be Worth 2960 L. =2 X 1480/. his Original Stock; and thereſore he vill be Tvice as Rich, as he was at Firſt. . æ. D. Tnis Synthetick Method the Antients made Uſe of, as being the moſt Beautiſull and Agreeable, as well as the moſt Surprizing; And Artfully Kept to themſelves the An Analytick, by which they are Suppoſed to have Found out their Propoſitions, as has been already Intimated. sth. As there is a Syntheſis belonging to every Analyſis, ſo likewiſe there may be a Canon or Rule Formed upon every Equation, which Expreſes the Problem, and is nothing more than Rendering the Algebraict Terms of it into ængliſs, or into rhat Language, in which we Write. Tuus, the Preſent Equation is  4; And the Canon Reſulting from thence I0 is, That, If we Take 148 Times the Sum, which the Merchant Annually Expends upon his Family, and Divide it by 10, the Quotient ill give the Sum Required, or the Original Stock, which he was Worth. I have been the Longer upon this Problem, that I might Explain to Young Beginners, the Nature, Scope, and Deſign of Algebra, and to make it as Eaſy and Familiar to them, as Poſſible. S. 4. TuE Addition, whether of Integral, or Decimal, or Fractional Numbers, or of Algebraick Quantities, is all Explained by One, and the ſame Principle; Namely, that we muſt always Add Homogeneous Quantities together, or Quantities of the ſame Kind and Denomination; Thus 3 Books +4 Books 7 Books; But 3 Books +4 Pens are not Capable of being Reduced to a Sum, becauſe the Things are Heterogeneous, and of Different Denominations. 1ſt. HENCE it is, that in the Addition of Integral or Whole Numbers, the Units are Placed under onc another, ſo likewiſe the Tens, the Hundreds, Thouſands, &. and ſo many Tens, as there are in the Units, are Carried to and Counted in the Place of Tens; ſo many Hundreds, as there are in the Tens, are Carried to and Counted in the Place of Hundreds; and ſo many Thouſands, as there are in the Hundreds, are Carried to and Counted in the Place of Thouſands, &r. TnUS in the Preſent Example, 9, 3, 0, 5, Stand in the Place of U- 87899 nits, 9, 0, 2, 8, in the Place of Tens, 8, 4, 9, 8, in the Place of Hun- 13403 dreds, 7, 3, I, in the Place of Thouſands,and 8, I, in the Place of Ten I1920 Thouſands; and 5+03+9 =17, Where 7 is ſet Down in the Sum, and 385 I Carried to the Place of 10s and Counted as Unit; 1+8+2+09920, where o is ſet Down in the Sum, and æ Carried to the Place of 1005; I04197 248V9V44+8531, where 1is ſet Down in the Sum, and 3 Carried to——— the Place of 10007, &⸗. 2d. THE Caſc is the Same in Decimals, as in the Example Annexed, 630,953 in which the Integral Numbers are Separated from the Decimal by the 51,0809 Comma, and 9, o, 2 Stand in the Place of;, or, of the Tenth Parts 305,27 of an Unit; 5, 8, 7, in the Place of /,, or, of the Hundredth Parts Sum is 987,3037 of an Unit; 3, o, in the Place of.,;%4 or of the Thouſandth Parts of an Unit; And 7 in the Place of ,52.5, or of the Ten Thouſandih Parts of an Unit; Which are Added together in the ſame Manner, as Whole Numbers are, Carrying ſo many Tens in the Lover Place to the Right Hand, and Counting them as ſo many Units in the Place above to the Lett; For 47. 3 5 95,5 and .4 5 and t5 =qt, and 22=1; And æ +737+ .75: V55575 = vẽ557 becauſe =25 è5 rętæ, and ,4 =575 All Which Depends upon what  F œc s was Allcdged before, under Article 3. Explanation of Problem 1. That all Ratios, Multiplied by Equal Quantities, will be ſtill Equal. 3d. I is the ſame alſo in Fractions, which have the ſame Denomination; For 7 + 35%5 13+2  becauſe the sth. or 16th. Part of an Unit is here the Denomination, or the Kind or Sort of Quantities, which are Added together. But, if the Fractions are of Different Kinds, or Denominations, as ã and 2, they muſt be Reduced to the Same, according to Article 3. Explanation of Problem i. that is, to5 and;, and then Added together, which will make ;2, or 17 Divided by 12. 41h. THE Matter is not otherwiſe in Algebra, as in this Firſt Ex- 12x +74 ample; æ is the Quantity, or Thing. or Denomination, or Sort of 75+9a Thing, to be Added on the one Hand, and æ on the other; So that the Numbers Preſixed are only to be Added, and the Thing, 9x+164 or Denomination of it, to be Annexed to the Sum. i Tuvs 2V bxtVata 3Vbx +vVa Vix +7Vab Of Addition in Algebra. Thus likeviſe in a Second Example, the i/ix is the Denomination or Sort oſ Thing, to be Added on the one Hand, and the V7t&æ on the other; And let the Quantities be never ſo Complicated, or Perplexed, in Addition they are to be Conſidered only, as ſo many Books, or Pens, or Things, which are of the ſame Kind, to be Added to each other, and 67bæ V9 Vãbqc x may be Imagined to be 6 Books  9 Pens. Where no Number is Prefixed, Unit is always Suppoſed. TuE Diſficulty therefore in Algebraick Additions will Chiefly Ariſe from the Signs, +and , made Uſe of in them; Concerning which, the Shorteſt and Plaineſ Rule is, That what + Aſfirms,Denies, or what the Firſt Alledges or Brings, the Laſt Annuls and Takes avay; I + Carries us 10 Miles Forwards from any Place, Leads us back to it; If  Lays a Book upon a Table, Takes it avay again; IF + makes me Worth ſuch a Sum,  Deprives me of it; If + is the Expanſive Force, as of Heat; is the Contractive, as of Cold; And, in all Inſtances, theſc Signs are Directly Oppoſite to, and Deſtroy, each other. But is an Addition to and + to +, or 2 and3 Aſfirmatives will make 5 Affirmatives, and 2 and; Negatives will make 5 Negatives; Thus alſo 2 and; Expanſive or Contractive Forces, vill make 5 Expanſive or Contractive Forces: Or, Addition is Performed by Connecting the Quantities to be Added vith their Proper Signs of + and , and Uniting or Joining together thoſe, which are Capable of it, according to Oughtred; The Following Examples will Explain this. &VbxV9V abc BSS5858SSSS 17ax1i45+3 11he7v ac tEq +6V1+3 6xx +4æ S8 ax+4a+2 156c2980 +1172rV3+: sæ +5xæ ax+7a Sums  34+3 26bc5V A: 72Vv 3+4 5x6xx4æ 2a748a5+a: 55+2x lll 79 t2a37-Laay 32ax85aVa⸗tæx a J— anyt:; 2x+5bx 204 V aaxx2 4 bx 73aVaà v7æ a4 Sums Vii s jaaytia; x+bhxs tai vaãtææ20a3va2ææ WnERE nO Sign is Prefixed, + is Suppoſed; The Aſterisk Denotes a Want or Defect of a Term in the Sum from Certain Quantities in the Addenda, or Addends, Mutually Deſtroying each other. PROBL. 2. There are Three Unknown Quantities, or Numbers, Required to be Determined, to Wit, What they are, The Sums of each Two of them being Known, or Given. In Engliſ. 1. The Three Numbers, or Quantities, Unknown are Required. l 2. The Sums of each Two of them, vhich are known, are. 3. What is æ by the 24. Step? l 4. What is æ by the ſame Step? 5. What is y by the ſame Step:? 6. Therefore by Comparing the Equations of the Former Steps with cach Other. In Algebra. x? 47 æ? x+7y5=a x tæ2æb. 7  tæ= =a =h=c212 x=actæa=a:c+bnx x z c+6 2 qn or 2ac +b, and æ 7- Alſo 7. Alſo, by a Compariſon of the ſaid E- 2=bx=t a+c bba+⸗ quations. lli /F B U 4Vbac cAdb+a 3. Laſtly, by a like Compariſon. yæ⸗f=c ; li 2 2 ExrLANATION. Iſſ. The 3d. 41h. and 51h. Steps are Effected by Subſtracting y, æ, and æ, from both Sides of the Foregoing Equations, or by Transſerring the Quantities to Contrary Sides of them under Contrary Signs, as beſore Explained, Artic. 1. E planation of Probl. I. THE 6h. is Obtained by Subſtituting the Quantities = to7 and æ in the Room of them, and the 77h. and 81h. by a like Procedure. 2d. a, b, and , may Signify any Numbers, we ſhall Chooſe, Suppoſing 9, 10, and 913+10 109 +13 2 2 135 Therefore x =3;3 2bx=1I1035 =737 æ=I1375 n æs 3d. THE Syntheſis is Formed fromæ +)5a3 x2=b; y +æ=c; and from Subſlituting the Known Quantities for  æ and;, the Unknown. 41h. Since a is  tò the Sum of the Leat Number and the Middle One, = 3+63 and b is = to the Sum of the Greateſt Number and the Leat, =;3 +7; and c is  to the Sum of the Middle Number and the Greateſt, =6 +73 The Canon for finding out æ, or the Leat Number, =r b u be This; Add the Sum oſ the Leat Number and the Middle One to the Sum of the Greateſt Number and the Leaſt, and Subſtract from this Sum, the Sum of the Middle Number and the Greateſt, and Divide the Whole by 2, it vill give the Value of the Leaſt Quantity or Number; And in the ſame Manner Canons are Formed for the Middle Number, and the Greateſt, or fory and æ. 5. 4. As in Addition, ſo in Subſtraction, it is Neceſſary, that the Quantities ſiould beHomogencous, or of the ſame Kind and Denomination; No One can Subſtract a Line from a Surface, or That from a Solid, or Vice Verſa; Nor in Numbers can we Subſtract 1co ſfrom 10000, unleſs ſo far as 10000 Conſilts of, and is Reduced to Hundreds. l 1ſt. THEREFORE, Hence it is, that, in Integral Numbers, or in Decimal Ones, Units are Placed under Units, Tens under Tens, and Hundreds under Hundreds, &. and the ſame may be Said oſ Tenths, Hundredths, &e. of which we have the Following Examples, which are only ſo many Inſtances of this Doctrine of Subſtracting Homogeneous Laniin from Homogencous Ones, 782570 that is, Units ſfrom Units, Tens from Tens, Tenths from Tenths, &&. 63543 Iſ the Number is too Small, fromwhich we Subſtract, ve muſt Borrrom Unit from the Place above, and Repay it in the next Subſtraction. . 719036 2d. In Decimals 547 35,72 46, 5003 308,7 0,63 14,.32 3,078 25,74 Remainders are 546,37 2L,4 43,4223 282,96 Which Remainders are ſuch, becauſe 3 Hundredths out of 10 Hundredths is 7 Hundredths 37 Tenths ont oſ 10 Tenths is3 Tenths, and 10 Tenths, or Unit, out of 70 Tenths, or7 Units, is 6 Units, in the Firſt Example; And ſo of the Reſt. 3d. In Fractions, which have the ſame Denomination, 4532, id%F ſE, be cauſe the 5th. or 16th. Part of an Unit is here the Denomination, or Kind, o Sort oſ Quantities, hich are to be Subſtracted ſrom each Other;3 But if the Fract ions are of Diſferent Kinds or Denominations, as ; and ;, they muſt be Reducer 10 the ſame, according to Artic. 3. Explanat. Probl. I. that is, to  and,& anc then Subſiracted the one from the Other, and the Reſiduum will be,. 41h IT is the ſame in Algebra; for æ, or a, orbę, or the v ac, or æ3, orẽ, or æx or ax, &. are cach of them Denominations, or Sorts of Quantitiesor Things, which are th ſame, and therefore may be Subſtracted from each Other; And all the Diſſiculty, a befor: before in Addition, will be in the Signs + and ; for which there may be this Short Rule, which was there, in Part, Propoſed; That  Denies or Deſtroys + or, and + Affirms or Supports them; That is, if we Subſiract +, we Take avay the Poſitive, and make it , or a Privation; If we Subſtrat /, ve Take away the Priva tive, and make it , or a Poſition; If wve Add +, ve Aſfirm the Poſition; And if ve Add , we Affirm the Privation; Thus, ræ3; , =+43 , V4+ , =-3 Or, Subſtraction is Performed by Connecting the Quantities with all the Signs of the Quantities Subſtracted, Changed into Contrary Ones, and then Uniting Thoſe, which are Capable of it; The Examples Follow, which will Clear This 12247a 15bt277 s0+55 nz—7vi+; 798 tibe+7Vac 6 33 5-6Vi; Temainders. sx28 26bc3Vac x;ox +32 nv +:  0 — WEe ſnall only here Obſerve, in Reſpect of our Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; That the Expanſive Increaſes the Expanſive as +, +, or + Aſfirmed, =+; And the Contractive the Contractive, as +, , or  Affirmed, is 2/; But the Expanſive Diminiſhes, or Deſtroys, the Contractive, as , orDenied  +, and the Contractive the Expanſive, as , , or + Denied =. PrOBL. 3. Let a Line of 4, or a Known, Number of Feet be Propoſed to be Divided into æ, a Known Number of Parts; So that the Exceſs of the Second Part above the Firſt ſould be b, or a Known Number of Feet; of the Third Part above the Firſt, f, or a Known Number of Feet; of the Fourth Part above the Firſt, à4, or a Known Number of Feet, &. The Queſtion is, what is the Firſt Part, viæ. the Number Unknown? Or, It is Required to Divide a Quantity Known, or Given, into any Number of Parts; So that the Greater Parts may Exceed the Leat by Exceſſes or Differences, which are likewiſe Given, or Known. In Engliſh. In Algebra. . The Quantity to be Divided, and which is Known is. l . It is Divided into any Known Number of Parts. . The Firſt and Leaſt Part is Unknown. . The Second, the Exceſs, b, of which above the Firſt is Known. x+b . The Third, the Exceſs, c, of which above the Firſt is alſo Known. ] 4⸗ . The Fourth, the Exceſs, 4, of which above the Firſt is likewiſe ], +a Known, &e. 7. But all the Parts are Equal to the Whole Line. extotctd=a 3. Therefore by Changing the Signs of the Equation as beſore. ex=abcda 9. By Diyiding both Sides of the Equation by the ſame Quan- l ab—ci tity. l c 5x W  1ſ. Hov all theſe ſeveral Steps are made has been alrcady Explained, and they do not want any Farther Comment. 2d. Suppoſing a  20 Feet, b=2 Feet, c=3 Feet, and d7 Feet, and e, ſince abocid 2002-37 4 Parts are only Conſidered, / 4; Therefore x  F= 44m =2 Fect; x+h=2224 Feet; x2+4353 Feet; x+d =2759 Feet; and 2+4 +5+9=20 Feet. 3d. The Syntheſis is; If we Take Four Times the Leat Number of Four Num bers, and Add the Exceſſes of the ſeveral Numbers above that Leat Number, it vill Give the Sum of all the Numbers; Thus 222+37520. 41h. The Canon for Finding out æ is; If we take the Sum of all the Numbers and Subſtract all the Exceſſes, and Divide the Remainder by the Number of the Parts, the Quotient will Give the Firſt and Leaſt Part Required. PROBL. 4 PROBL. 4. A Certain Perſon was Deſirous to Diſtribute ſome Money amongſt ſome Poor People, and he Wanted Eight Pence, to Give each of them Three Pence; He therefore Gives each of them Two Pence, and he had Three Pence Over, or to Spare; What was the Number of the Poor: In Engliſ. In Algebra. 1. The Number of the Poor People Unknown is. x. 2. The Perſon, who Diſiributes, has ſo many Three Pences, as there are Poor, Excepting Eight Pence, which is. 3. He Gives to Each Two Pence, and there Remain'd in his Hands Three Pence, which is. 2xF; Pence. i ha . ut u he had in the 2à. Step, is Equal to what he x3220F3 Pence. 5. And by Tranſpoſition of the Quantities to Contrary Sides of the Equation under Contrary Signs, the Number352xx3V85II. of the Poor was. 6. The Sum of Moncy therefore, which he had, was. 3x8225+3525Pence. 358 Pence TuERE is no Occaſion for the Explanation of this Problem, nor of the Canon or Syntheſis of it. And however Low this Sum may be Put for a Diſtribution to Poo People, I vould not have it an Example of our Charity to them, but of the Penury or Generoſity of Algebra, which can make the ſame Letters Stand, for as Small, or as Great Sums, as it Pleaſes. 5. 5. MULTIPLICATION is nothing more than a Repeated Addition of the ſame Kind, Sort, or Denomination of Quantities; Thus in Integrals 310,30, is 10 Added 3 Times to its ſelf; And in Decimals 35.5, =&, is / Added Three Times to it's ſelf; So likewiſc in Vulgar Fractions, 2x3, S8, is  Added Twice to its ſelf, and 255,735, is ? Added Three Fourths to it's ſelf, or, Reduced to the ſame Denomination, 55335 H757755, Signiſies, that 20 ſuch Parts of a Unit are Added to irs ſelf, by 27 ſuch Parts of a Unit; And in Algebra axx, =ax, is x Added to it's ſelf, as often as a Preſcribes; It is the ſame in the Algebraick Signs +X- makes , becauſe ĩt is+ ſo many Times Added together; +Xmakes , becauſe it is ſo many Times Added together; But x+ makes , becauſe Denies ſo many Times the Affirmation or Poſition of + And xmakes +, becauſe  Denies ſo many Times the Negation or Privation of , and therefore makes the Quantity +; And Conſcquently all Things will Proceed, as before in Addition, excepting that the Multiplicator is to be Conſidered as the Number, according to which the ſame Quantity, or Multiplicand, is ſo many Times to be Added to it's ſelf; This will Appear in the Following Examples. 1ſ. In Integrals the Procedure is, 4x5, then 4X90, and Laſtly 4x700, and Add the Products together; Alſo in the 2à. Example, 5x33 5X403 5X03 5x9000; Then oxX3; ox4, &. aſterwards 30063; 300840; 30X0; 3004690003 And ſo 200043; 2000 x40; 2000605 2000X9000, and Add the Products together, by Placing the Units under Units, Tens under Tens, Hundreds under Hundreds, &. Multiplicand 795 Multiplicator 4 20 Partial Products 36 Multiplicand 9043 28 Multiplicator 2305 Whole Product 3180 45215 oo00 Tartial Products 27129 ISO86 Whole Product 20844115 2d. IN Decimals, the Multiplication is the ſame, as in Integrals, Excepting, that there muſt be as many Decimal Placos Cut off in the Product by a Comma, or Mark Pp P P P of ſ Diſtiuction, as there are ſuch Decimal Places in the Multiplicator and Multipliand, in Order to Preſerve the Value of the ſeveral Places; for thus 1ox 10c =ſoco⸗ x 4 Places in Integrals, Beſides the Unit. Multiplicands 72,4 50,18 3,0025 Multiplicators 29 2.75 c,or32 õ; 6 25090 Partial Products 78050 Partial Products 1448 Partial Products 35126 117075 Whole Product 2099,6 10036 39025 Whole Product 137,5950, Whole Product. o,5, ũ300 3d. SO likewiſe in Common Fractions, Multiply the Numerators into the Numerators, and the Denominators into the Denominators; thus 374335 æ & for the Reaſon before Alledged. l 41h. THUS alſo in Radical Quantities of the ſame Denomination, ve muſt Multiply the Quantities under the Radical Sign, and Preſix the ſame Sign, Multiplication being only a Repeated Addition; V3xvsæVis537 abxv cdl=vated; v sazv, 753 ; sth. IN Algebraick Quantities, hich Conſiſt of ſeveral Parts, we are to Multiply all the Parts of the One, into all the Parts of the Other in the ſame Way and Manner, as is done in Numbers, alvays Obſerving to Multiply the Numbers into the Numbers the Species, or Letters, into the Species, or Letters, the Signs into the Signs, the Roots into the Roots, the Numerators into the Numerators, and the Denominators into the Denominators; The Examples Follow. Multiplicandaa2acLbe Multiplicand ati Multiplicator ab Multiplicator a+ſ ——— ab+bi a +2aacabe aatab Product V2a3caab; abcVbbc Product at2av Multiplicand ath Multiplicand n+2a3aa Multiplicator ab Multiplicator 2æ% aa bſtb li aay;ta2a yta as+ab —2083V4aà́tar; Produtam ih »+2a74aa Product 7s%am; + 3a5qaMultiplicand æv: Multiplicator 38V72 l ;ai Product 3 3avæ 2IN which Examples, the Juxta- Poſition of the Letters always Signifies the Multiplica tion of the Quantities Expreſſcd by them, a Zasa=axaxa; aly =aaymaxaxyxy &e. but 32aaa; 209a+a, &. and Denotes the Addition of a, or the Mul tiplication of 3, or 2, Xa, =34, or 2a. PrOBL. 5. The Sum of TWo Numbers being Given, 4, and the Difference of the Squares, b, it is Required to Find the Numbers. A Square is any Quantity or Num ber Multiplied into it's ſels; as is beſore Said. In Engliſ. In Algebra. I. Two Unknown Numbers are Sought, ] æ whoſe Sum is kKnovn or Given. a—x 2. Their Squares are. xx. an2ax+xx. 3. The Difference of the Squares. aia2axtxx—xxaa-2ax, 4. Which Difference is Equal to b. anaaxb. 5. Or by Tranſpoſition of the Terms, a3b b and Dividing both Sides by 24. an—bæaax, or x = EraMeL: EXAMPLE. a%8. b=16. x6a16453. ax=3; The Car ire Eaſy. c PROBL. 6. IF TWo Letter-Carriers A4 and B, vho are at 59 Miles ſet out in the Morning to Meet each Other, and 4 ſhould go 7 M and B 8 Miles in3 Hours, but B ſiould ſet out an Hour Later than is, how many Miles 4 will have Gone, before he Meets B. SoLUTION. I. The Length of the Whole Way Performed by both the Letter-Carriers, 4 and B. 2. The Length of the Way, which 4 Perſorms, before he Meets B. 3. The Length of the Way, which Perſorms. 4. 4 Diſpatches 7 Miles in 2 Hours, and therefore in Proportion will Diſpatch his Whole Journey in 5. B Diſpatches 8 Miles in 3 Hours, and therefore in Proportion vill Diſpatch his Whole Journey in 6. But B Sets out one Hour Later than 4, and therefore the Number of Hours, which B Travels, will be Equal to the Number of Hours, by the 4th. and 5th Steps, which 4 Travels, Abating or Subſtracting One. 7. And by Tranſpoſition of the Terms. 8. By Multiplying both Sides by S. 9. Multiply both Sides of the Equation by 7. 10. By Tranſpoſition of the Terms. I1. Divide both Sides of the Equation by 37, and the Journey of 4 vill be. And the Journey of B. 12. And 4 Travelled 10 Hours, and B9, For, by the 4th. 5th. 6th. and Iſth. Steps. 13. 4 Travelled at the Rate of 7 Miles in 2 Hours, and B of 8 Miles in3 Hours, ſor 4 Travelled 5 Times 2 Hours, and B 3 Times3 Hours. But, 59 Miles. x Miles. 59x Miles. y Hours; Becauſc Mil. Hsur. Mil. Hour. 7: 2:: : 2 7 177-11 8 Mil. Hour. 8:3:: Hours; Becauſe Mil. Hour. 59xXX3 8 59x: 2x 7 I773x0 1=2273 Hours. 2x1 35 ættæ ; I. 16x Evſ 1773518. IGXI2952IX. 37xI295. x=35 Miles. 59x39-3524 Mile 2x 235 223510 Hous. 2 7 7 2 122 7 757 I7735 =3ætous. 7552935 Miles. 3824 Miles. The Canon and Syntheſis are Eaſy, and the 4th. and sth. Steps are DPoctrine of Proportions, or the Golden Rule, or the Rule of Three, whic are Four Numbers, which are Proportional, as 2: 4:: 3: 6, The Multiphicd into each other, will be Equal to the Product of the Tr and therefore, if the Product of the Two Middle Ones is Divided portional, the Quotient vill give the Fourth, or Laſt; Thus 2X6: fore  —6. It muſt be Obſerved here, that: :: a :or.::. areN being Proportional. , PPP P? The Same PrRoBLEM Propoſed in more General Terms. The ( biles, or Moveables, 4 and B, Proceeding in the ſame Courſe, be together with the Interval, or Diſtance, of the Times and Pl begin theit Motion, it is Required to Determine the Meta, o in which they will Meet. SoLUTION. I. The Celerities of the Two Moveables, 4 and B, are Known, or Given, that is, 4 Paſſes thro' the Space ⸗, in the Time ; And B thro the Space 4, in the Time ę. 2. Th]e Interval or Diſtance of the Places, from which they begin theit Motion. 3. The Interval or Diſtance of the Times, from vhich they begin their Motion. 4. Cas. 1. If 4 and B Tend the ſame Way in theirt Motion, and 4 is the Farthet Diſtant from the Meta at the Beginning of ſuch Motion, That Diſtance, being Unknown, may be Called. 5. Thereſore the Diſtance of B from the Meta vill be. 6. And Conſequently, the Time, in vhich 4 vill Paſs thro it's Whole Space x, will be by Proportion. 7. And the Time, in which  will Paſs thio it's Whole Space x—, ill be 8. If therefore  Begins Firſt to Move, ſince h is the Interval, or Diſtance, of the Times, let h be Added to the Shorter Time, and the Times will be Equal, that is. I. Multiply both Sides of the Equation by ę, and then by à, and it will be. 2. Tranſpoſe the Quantities under Different Signs, and it will be. 3. Divide both Sides of the Equation by c;df, and the Numerator and Deno- ] x minator by ⸗, and it will be. 9. If 4 Begins Firſt to Move. Repeat the 3 Steps as before, i. e. I. Multiply both Sides by ? and 4, it will be. 2. Tranſpoſc the Terms, it will be. 3. Divide both Sides of the Equation by ſdcę, and the Numerator and Denominator by , and it will be. Then, Space. Time. c. f Space. Time. d. g. of B. of 4. n Space. Time.  Becauſe ⸗: f: c : Space. iiſ 3 Becauſc :4 Iſx +h=gx )7 c l i fxAch an c xdſx=dihtge. deleqe abe. ę iſ f g5ge x 7t= cęxcgeedb=fax. fadxecgæ=cdhcge. ah egedh—ge fa—; f5 ExAMPLE. I. If B Begins Firſt to Move, Suppoſing the Sun t One Degree in the Ecliptick, and the Moon Thirteen, and that Time is in the Beginning of Cancer, and that, Three Days afte Deginning of Aries, the Place of their Following Conjunction I. Let the Moon be 4, and the Sun 2; and ſince they both Tend the ſame Way, and B or the Sun Begins to Move Firſt, for s, or the Moons, Motion cqc+dchge+dh does not Begin till Three Days aſter, the iiæãl /&i Diſtance oſ 4, or the Moon, from the Meta, or Place of Conjunction, vill be by the 4th. and sth. Steps. 2. By the iſt. 2d. and 3d. Steps and by the Preſent Example. ] Of Multiplication in Algebra. Degr. Day Degr. Da; S133 ſæ1531; &I Nctachixixooti 3. And therefore by Subſtituting the Known Numbers inſtead of the Letters. r u Jæ Em: 4. Lay 1003 Degrees upon the Ecliptick, from the Beginning of Aries, for that will be the Whole Journey of the Moon, before it Meets, or is in Conjunction, with the Sun, and the Meta vill be at 103 Degrees of Cancer; For it is 90 Degrees from the Beginning of Aries to the Beginning of Cancer, and 10 beyond, but 9c+103=1003 Degrees. Days Days Day 5. The Sun's Progreſſion therefore inl 3 v 7 +2 Degr. Degr. Degr. De;g was 1  7 + 35 102 The Moon's Progreſſion in the ſame Time. j Degr. Degr. Degr. Degr o+7x13, DoI, +93 100 ExamMpLE 2. If 4 Begins Firſt to Move, Suppoſing the Sun Proc One Degree in the Ecliptick, and the Moon Thirteen, and the Mo tain Time ſhould be in the Beginning of Aries, and after Three Days be in the Beginning of Cancer, the Place of the Following Con quired. I. Let the Moon be 4, and the Sun B, as before, and ſince they both Tend the ſame Way, and 4, or the Moon, begins to Move Firſt, the Length of the Moon's Journey, or it's Diſtance from the Meta, or Place of Conjunction, will be, by the 4th. and oth. Steps. 2. By the iſt. 2d. and 3d. Steps, and by the Preſent Example, as before, there being only a Change of the Signs. 3. And therefore by Subſtituting the Known Numbers in the Room of the Lerters. 4. Lay 945 Degrees upon the Ecliptick ſrom the Beginning of Aries, For that vill be the Whole Journey of the Moon, before it comes to the Meta, or it's Conjunction with the Sun. and the Meta vill Fall, at 45 Degrees of Cancer, Becauſe, from the Beginning of Aries, to the Beginning of Cancer, is 90 Degrees. 5. The Moon's Progreſſion therefore in vas The Sun's Progreſſion in the ſame Time i was =tabcce dhe fi æ Degr. Day =i3; fæI; Degr. Day ai; g513 Degr. Days e90; h=3. 1351531I3%X1X90 IXr1351I 391170 11I380 13 -12 945 90+4394; Degrees. 3 +4+; Days. 3X134X13H;5135944 o+ 4  4 Degrees. Cas. 2. If the Two Mobile's, or Moveables, do not Tend the Same, but Contrary WVars, that iss Meet each Other in æ. 1. Let Ax, or the Diſtance of 4 from the Meta æ, vhich is Unknown, be. 2. Let the Whole Line 48, or the Diſtance oſ A4 ſrom B, which is Known, or Given, be. 3. Thereſore the Diſtance of B from vill be. 4. The Celerities of the Two Moveables 4 and B are Known or Given, Namely, 4 Paſſes thrd' the Space f, in the Time f;, and B thro' the Space à, in the Time g, as before. 5. The Interval or Diſtance of the Times, from which they Begin their Motion, is as before. 6. The Time, in which 4 Performs it's Space or Journey, æ, is. 7. The Time, in which B Performs it's Space or Journey, ex, is. 8. To the Leſſer of which Times Add h the Interval oſ them, and they will become Equal; That is, i B Begins Firſt to Move, the Time of 4 will be the Leaſt, to which Add h, and they will be Equal. And by Multiplying, Tranſpoſing, and Dividing, as before. 9. If 4 Begins Firſt to Move, the Time of B will be the Leaſt, to which Add b, and they will be Equal. And by Multiplying, Tranſpoſing, and Dividing, as before. aA O cX. Spacee. Time. c. f- of 4. spme. Time. d. g. of B. h. I v fora: g:: ; for, c: x2: f: =u H= afutcdh=qgecęx Aferegæ=cgecah, cacih c5tãr gæ,/ſ a c cgcgxedb=af, dſreg=gercdh, =uctcqh ęraf ExaAMPLE. I. IF 4 Begins to Move Firſt, the Firſt Exampl Letter-Carriers, and is Exactly the Same, as before Set Down 1. Since they are TWo Mobile's, vhich Tend Contrary Ways, or Meet cach other, and 4 Begins to Move Firſt, his ]Journey will be, according to the ęth. Step. 2. And by Subſtituting the Known Numbers in the Room of the Letters, vhich Expreſs the nown Quantities. The Journey of 4 is. The Journcy of B. 3. The Progreſſion of 4 in the Time was in Length. egeedh ãr v r; ſ/2; i3 =xxsor7xs 763852 1239456 I29 x39150 2S 2116 37 ex=3s93524 I4+9Hours. 33+315735 Mil The Progreſſion oſ B in Length, in the ame Time, vas +2438 Miles. ExAMPLE 2. If B Begins to Move Firſt..ecqcalh 1. The Journey of 4 will be. ii æar x355978iĩ138 j 2. And by Subſtitution of the Known rm; Miles. Numbers. And the Journey of B. e=3s9-31352757 Miles. 3. The Progreſſion of 4 will be in Time. |1  9 +45 Hours. ; : : 75 . in Length, in that Time. o 315+ 7 Miles. Mil. Hour. Mil. Hour. 174 Becauſe 9xX353314; and 35:1:: ibã 3 ; The Progreſſion of B in the ſame Time. ]23 +2.4 % Miles. il. Hour. Mil. Hou:. Becauſe But I ſnall Conclude this Problem with the Canon, Belonging to this Laſũ Example of it; Which will Shew, into what Prodigious and Stupendous Depths Algebra Leads us, which yet is only a Fourth Caſe of the General Problem, and into which it would be Impoſſible for the Greateſt Genius amongſt Men to Penetrate, tho Endued with the Urmoſt Sagacity ; And which Canon is no more than Tranſlating the Algebraick Expreſſions of æ, in the Laſt Inſlance, into Thoſe of our own Language. CANON. IF there are Two Mobilia, or Moveables, 4 and B, which Tend in their Motion to each other, and we Multiply the Space, which 4 Performs in a Time Given, into the Time, in which B Performs a Space Given, and we farther Multiply that Product into the Interval or Diſtance of Places, from Which they Begin their Motion; And from this Laſt Product, if we Subſtract Another, which is Formed from Multiplying the Space, Which 4 Performs in a Time Given, into the Space, which B Performs in a Time Given, and That likewiſe into the Interval of Times, from which they Begin their Motion, and then Divide the Difference of the ſaid Produẽts by the Sum, vhich Ariſes from Multiplying the Space, which 4 Performs in a Given Time, into the Time, in which Performs a Given Space, Added to the Product, vhich is Made ſfrom Multiplying the Space which B Performs in a Given Time, into the Time, in which 4 Performs a Given Space; The Quotient will Exhibit the Length of the Line, or Space, which a vill Perform, or Paſs thro, before it Meets with ; IF B Begins it's Motion Firſt. Ihave Said, that no Human, tho' the moſt Exaltcd Genius, could ever Poſſibly Arrive at ſuch a Concluſion, without the Aſſiſtance of Algebra; Angelick Natures yet may Comprehend all this at One View. From whence ve may in ſome Meaſure Form an Imagination, how Vaſt and Aſtoniſhing the Divine Knowledge muſt be, which Contemplates at Once all the Mutual Relations, Proportions, and Dependences oſ Things, in Univerſal Being; That is, Ten Millions of Millions of Million: more, than are Comprized or Contained in the Preſent Theorem. 5. 6. As Multiplication is a Repeated Addition of the ſame Quantity, or Number according to the Preſcription of the Multiplicator; So Diviſion is a Repeated Sub ſiraction of the ſame Quantity, or Number, according to the Preſcription of the Quotient. Or, Diviſion is Performed by Inquiring, ow many Times the Diviſor i Contained in the Dividend, and Writing down ſo many Units in the Quotient; and this is to be done, as often, as the Diviſor can be Subſtracted from it; Thus in Integrals =4, or3) I2 ſ4, Vhere the Quotient 4 Shews, that 3 the Diviſor may be 4 Times Subſtracted from, or is 4 Times Contained in 12 the Dividend; So likewiſt 300) 12290 ſ4, Shews, that 300 is 4 Times Contained in, or may be Subſtracted ſrom 1200 &c. In Decimals 5) 2 4, or,3.) 2. la, &c. Declares or Expreſſe; the ſame oſ the Tenth, or the Hundreth Parts oF a Unit, &c. which vas beſore done of Units or Hundreds, &e. Likeiſe in Vuigar Fractions of ihe ſame Denomination, it ĩs the ſame ſame as in Decimals, 3) 5 ſ4, Explains, that ; are 4 Times Contained in, or may be Subiſtracted from 3'; and in thoſe of Different Denominations, à) 7 ( Shews that the Numerator 2 may be 3 Times Subſtracted from 6, and the Denominator 5 7 Times ſom;5, that is, that 4 may be Subſtracted ; from ,4. Nor is it other viſe in Algebraick Quantities  =x, or a) ax (x, Signiſies, that a is x Times Con tained in, and thereſore may be x Times Subſtracted from ax, for ax-ax=o. It i alike in the Algebraick Signs; or +  (+, that is, + Divided by + make: + in the Quotient; Becauſe it Denotes, that + in the Diviſor is ſo many Time: Poſitively Subſtracted inthe Quotient from + in the Dividend. -, or) + that is Divided by makes + in the Quotient; Decauſe it Shews, that in the Diviſor is ſo many Times Poſitively Subſtracted in the Quotient from  in the Dividend. /, or+)  (, that is,Divided by 4 makes  in the Quotient; Becauſe ĩt Signiſies, that  in the Diviſor is ſo many Times Negatively Subſtracted in the Quotient from in the Dividend, or that in the Dividend Contains in the Diviſor Negatively ſo many Times. Latly V, or) (, that is, + Divided by makes  in the Quotient; Becauſe it Means, that in the Diviſor is ſo many Times Negatively Subſtracted in the Quotient from + in the Dividend, or that + in the Dividend Contains in the Divilor Negatively ſo many Times. FROM Whence, Compared with what goes before in the Multiplication of rheſe Signs, will Reſult this Short and General Rule in Reſpect of them; That Multiply or Divide vith like Signs, and the Product or Quotient vill be 4, if with unlike Signs. 3 For +X+, orx, or, 7+; And x-, orx+, 4 or, 7-3 Or, which is the ſame, +x+, orx-, or ) +. or) , /+5 And +x-, or 4+. or/) , or ) /, /; The Examples Follow. 1ſ. IN Integrals and Decimals; HoW 7) 371 ſ53 many Times 7 in 37? Anſwer, 5 Timess. 35 Write 5 in the Quotient, which Multi- 21 23)4798,0000(208,28, 6086 ply into 7 the Diviſor, and Subſiract the, 46 : Product 35 from the Dividend 37. and D there Remains 2, to which bring down / Iin the Dividend, and Add it to 2 or 20, and then Proceed as beforee And ſo in m the Second Example, in which after a i5 Diviſion is made of the whole Number, I40 there Remains 14 to be Divided by 23, 138 which may either be Expreſſed by a 20 Vulgar Fraction 3, or by a Decimal / 6086, &c. by an Addition of ſo many 200 Cyphers to the Dividend, and Continuing 184 ithe Diviſion, and then Cutting off ſo Tõo many Decimal Places in the Quotient, as there are Cyphers Added in the Dividend, becauſe the Diviſor is a whole Number. Tnus likewiſe, ----- 46,1)3,5213 (,7639. 9043) 2084415 (2305 In which Firſt Example of Decimals, 3227 18086 Diviſion is Performed Exactly, as in 2048 27581 the Second or in Integrals; Except- 2766 27129 ing, rhat after Diviſion, there muſt I520 45215 be ſo many Decimal Places Cut off 1383 45215 by a Comma, or ſome other Note 370 o of Diſtinction, which together, with hoſe in the Diviſor, may be Equal to the Number of Decimal Places in the Dividend; For there are 4 Decimal Places Expreſſed in the Dividend, and 2 Underſtood, by ſo ; many many Cyphers being Annexed in the Operation, and there is 1 Decimal Place in thi Diviſor, and Conſequently there muſt be s Decimal Places in the Quotient; Th Reaſon is, becauſe the Diviſor and Quotient in Diviſion, Anſwer to the Multipli cator and Multiplicand in Multiplication, and the Dividend to the Product; But il was beſore Shewn, in Order to Preſcrve the Places, that there muſt be ſo many De cimals in the Product, as there are in the Multiplicator and Multiplicand, and there fore there muſt be ſo many in the Diviſor and Quotient, as there are in the Divi dend; For Diviſion Reſolves, vhat Multiplication Compounds; Alſo, 72,4)2099,6(29 56, 18)137,995.75 ,0132)00,751306, 1448 10036 3196 6, 16 37635 II9r 6516 35126 1188 o 2,090 33 25090 co o 330 264 66 ] 66 - o IN all which Inſtances or Examples of Decimals, Diviſion is Performed in the ſame Manner, as in Integrals; Excepting, as before, that aſter Diviſion, there muſi be ſo many Decimal Places Cut off in the Quotient, which together with thoſe in the Diviſor, ſall be Equal to the Number oſ Decimal Places in the Dividend; Thus in the Firſt Inſtance, there is 1 Decimal Place in the Diviſor and Quotient,  to I in the Dividend; In the Second Inſtance, there are 2 in the Diviſor, and 2 in the quorient  to; Expreſſcd in the Dividend +1 Underſtood by Annexing a Cypher to it in the Operation; In the Third Inſtance, there arc 4 in the Diviſor, and 4 in the Quorient,  to 6, Expreſſcd in the Dividend, and 2 Underſtood by Annexing 2 Cyphers to it in the Operation. 2. In Common or Vulgar Fractions Divide, for the ſame Reaſon, the Numerator by the Numerator, and the Denominator by the Denominator; Thus 3 5 &3; 5 ; 3 In which, and in all other Caſes, the Signs are 10 be Divided by the Signs, the Numbers by the Numbers, and the Species, or Letters, by the Species, or Letters, the Roots by the Roots, the Numerators by the Numerators, and the Denominators, by the Denominators. Tuus likewiſe) ; & 7; and à) 3 & 33 Becauſe theſe Kind of Frations. which are not Reducible by the Former Method to any orher Terms, are Firſt to be Reduced to the ſame Denomination, by Multiplying 7 the Denominator of the Dividend into, and 4, the Numerator and Denominator of the Diviſor, and 4 the Denominator of the Diviſor, into3 and 7 the Numerator and Denominator of the Dividend, and by hich - becomes =to 44, and 2 æ to 44, for Ratios Multiplied by Equal Quantities, as was before Said, are ſtill Equal; And afterwards the Numerator oſ the Dividend 12 is to be Divided by the Numerator of the Diviſor 35, according to the Principles before Explained; and the ſame is the Caſc of D;(=%  Wnich alſo is Applicable to any other Quantities, however ro Appearance Intricate and Involved. . : 3d. IN Radicals, V3) Vis &Vs; Ved) Vabid (vab; v3, say vVi, 3305æ vas] vatbbvabb i  741; ææ which is Proved by what Foregoes in this Section, and by Multiplication in the Former, which Compounds, what Diviſion Reſolves; Thus the V3xv,=vis; Vedxy abv abed, &. 41h. In Algebraick Quantities, vhich Conſiſt of ſeveral Parts or Mcmbers, we are to Divide or Subſtract all the Parts of the One, by or from all the Parts of the Other, if Poſſible till there is no Remainder, Obſerving he Rule Given under the Q q q q q Head ) Head of Vulgar Fractions, Article 2à. of Dividing the Signs by i dical Notes by the Radical Notes, the Numbers by the Numbers by the Numerators, the Denominators by the Denominators, by the Species; In which Laſt, as the Juxta- Poſition of the Letters tiplication of them, ſo the Separation of them from each other, ſion of them, that is, as a2a=axaxa, ſo, a) aaa u=4, r. IT muſt be Farther Remarked, that the Terms of the Dividend are to be Ranked and Diſpoſed, according to the Dimenſions of in both Quantities, Placing the Higheſt Dimenſion Firſt, and the Suitably in the Intermediate Places, as in Numbers 1000, 10, 10 other, Thus, a) an38xx &t;-5 a—byas t2ac =naatrac aa  aab3 abe+bbe 3x az +386 o+2a4ac;alc 0xx 208c2alc xx abbbe o abc+bbc o IN which Inſtances, the Way of Proceeding in the Firſt, where ſiſis of a Single Member only, has been already Explained; For it Dividing aa, then 3ax, and afterwardss —x, by , and Multiplyi into the Diviſor, and Subſtracting the Product from the Dividend where the Diviſor Conſiſis of Two, or More Members, the Lettei cording to which the Dimenſions are Ranged, a3, 4, a?, a4, is the Diviſor, and the Quotient is Multiplied into both, or the ſe and the Products Subſtracted from the Dividend; Which is Agr Practiced in Numbers; As 23) 4798 (208, &e. where we Divid the Quotient is 2, which yet is to be Multiplied into 23, and the Subſtracted from the Dividend 47, and ſo of the Reſ, according tc tore Alledged; To Explain this Farther, the Following Example: Annexed. As, b-a) ei a 5. p æ acb  Z2ãcta* aa +2aac 26ct2880 aa +a*  O at So, y-an) ybaaa*r a2ac 208 +a _u 20 4 c-?) aac r c aac y-a ll c o288,a* t ũ ) - n” V208 2a* c24ac + aacc + ca I. Let the ſeveral Agents be 4, B, C and let 4 Produce it's Effect a in the Time e. 2. B Produces it's Eect & in the Time f. 3. C Produces it's Eſfect ? in the Time g. 4. 4 B, C, Produce theit Effedt à in the Time æ. 5. The Whole Eſfet therefore of 4 vill be by Proportion. 6. The Whole Effect of B by Proportion is. 7. The Whole Effect of C ſor the ſame Reaſon vill be. 38. But by the Problem, the Effects of A, B, C, are Equal to à. That is, 9. And by Dividing both Sides of the Equation by the ſame Quantity. ExamMpLE. Three Day-Labourers, 4, B, Work or Task Given in a Time Given; A can Perform ĩt once in Three Weeks. B Thrice in Eight Weeks. C Five Times in Twelve Weeks. The Queſtion is, in what Time, they can all of them together Perform the ſame Work or Task? Anſw. in 6 Days and 55 Hours; For, And that this Solution is True, is Proved by the sth. and oth. Steps, and by the Preſent Example, ſince the Wholc Effect of 4is. The Whole Eſfect of B by the 6th. and 9th. Steps, and by the Preſent Example. The Whole Effect of C by the 7th. and 9th. Steps, and by the Preſent Example. But all theſe Effects ought to be Equal to à, or 1. Which they are, For Ef. Time a. eæ. of 4 the Agent. Eſfe? Time. b.f. of B the Agent. Ema. Time c. g of C the Agent. Efe.. Time. à. x. of 4, B, C, the Agc Time. E?. Time. E& z becauſe, æ: 4:: x⸗ x ol b Time. E. Time. E . becauſe, ſ: b:: t of Time. E?. Time. Eſſ. æ becauſc, ꝗ: c:: æ: or c. g b g ax x c. z  4 Za E*eœ:. e t g =2F  Time. : J ;, can cach of them Perſorm ai, b=3, c3, d&=1, e3, =S, 5I&5123 ræs, s . + =+5 Week: 288 I =77277272 of a Week; m  of a Week = 183 Hours, a Sof a Week=1i4a5; Hours, =6 Days 5 Hours. y m ET. Weeks. E?. n 3 8 =72; for, 3. I.:: 5.. Weeks, E. Weeks. E hx : ſ 72;; for, 8. 3.:: ..% 7 x .. 3 4j: for, 12. 5:: &% Weeks. E?. Weeki. ] E æ+7% +1553551 Efcct PROBL. 9. TO Compound the Diſſimilar Mixtures of Two or morc or Things ſo, that the Subſtances or Things, which are Mixed, ſould Obt Reaſon amongſt each other. 1. The Three Subſtances, or Things Mixed, are. 2. The Quantities or Proportions of A. B. C. he Subllances, or Things Mixed, in the ] d 4+e B ſC. Firſt Diſſimilar Mixture are 3. The antities or Proportions of : hem in the Second Diſiimilar Mixture. ] 84HhB. 4. The Quantities or Proportions of them in the Third Mixture. la+mB+nC. 5. Let the Mixture, which ought, or is Required, to be Compounded from theſe Three Mixtures or Maſſes be a Known ſ A+qB+rc. Quantity. 6. Let x, 53 æ, be the Unknown Numbers; int& which if the Given Mix- ] XdA-txeB +xſc tures are ſeverally Multiplied, The Pro- 2gA+7hB At C=pA+qBC. du&t will Exhibit the Compoſition or ] èl4ræmBtænc Mixture Required. 7. By Taking the Quantities, which ;; arc Muitiplied into 4, h and C dxtgyl=p exthytm=qſ 3. By Tranſpoſing the Terms. and Di- n, viding both Sides o the Equation by the ] æ2&le 17ly_mæ rbſame Quantity. a l r 9. By Reduction. 7laqly-mæ M a6 §f 2m=4] -tra Make epdqdmelæfqerten rigtmde liræ3⸗ e;cdh 10. By Abbreviation, and Putting æ for +Cæ, 23 dq,  for dm—el,  for e;dh, à for atiæ s nd 2 æ foer, g ſor enfim, and ſ for fh-et. v æ ſſ a+8æ 11. æ being Found. =ũ 12. And and æ being Found. ? æ which is therefore ExampLE. If there are Three Mixtures of Metals Molten together, a the Firſt of which Contains 12 Ounces of Silver, 1 Ounce of Braſs, and of Tin; a Pound of the Second Contains 1 Ounce of Silver, 12 Ounce: and3 Ounces of Tin; and a Pound of the Third Contains o Ounces of Ounces of Braſs, and 2 Ounces of Tin; It is Required to Compound tures ſo, that a Pound of the New Compoſition ſall Contain 4 Ounces 9 Ounces of Braſs, and 3 Ounces of Tin. d, e, f, m12, 1, 35 8 h h, =1, 12, 33l, m, n=0, 14, 23 ꝑ ꝗ . Therefore aeey)d79 1X4,12X995104. 3. L=dmel=12X14,j v=eqdh=ixi, 12X122143. 5. ſqer=3x9.IX3524.  Læenfm=1ix1, 3x1440. 7. Iſh-e/=3512,IX3933. lu333104, la3xæ. vſ~ 1ia4349,, 168x33 a+ſ”zr1o4+t168x0 3  +  . Conſcquently æ?/ 9. Therefore 7& v ſa3 Til 0. And xæ læs1x7oxo 3 I1hym rynæ næ lli Irĩ 12 rm Irom whence it Follows, that if we Take æ or ths, of a Pound Mixture, and5, ort; ths, of a Pound of the Second, and æ, or o, of the mall have a Pound of the Compoſition Required; For 2+,;ths. of a Pound; And that this will Solve the Queſtion, is Apparent from hence, a be Silver, B Braſs, and C Tin; Then dxa+37à+læA=pA4, or 12X +1x ,+0æ4 Ounces of Silver. Allo, exBhyBmæ5Z4q8, ot 1æ3,12X 2,9 Ounces of Braſs. Laſtly, ſxCHtyc+næcærc, or 33;+3% :0=3 Ounces of Tin. PROBL. 10. The Prices of ſeveral Mixtures of the ſame Things being Given and the Proportions of the Things, which are Mixed, it is Required to Determine from thence the Price of Each. I. The Things which are Mixed are. ]4. B. C. 2. The Price of the Firt Mixture with the Proportions of the Mixed is. da+ęꝶic=pr 3. The Price of the Second Mixture eAYhB tmcæ4. with their Proportions is. 4. The Price of the Third Mixture. fatBC. 5. Subſtitute inſtead of 4, B, C, the Things, which are Mixed, their Unknown  àet7+læ=p,exthytme=q, falytne=r Prices, which are Required, ,, æ, then. 6. Proceeding therefore, as in the Fore-  la a+ẽæ 7læ going Problem? a/ ; anob- =x. ExamMpLE. A Certain Perſon Buys à7 or 20 Buſhels of 4 or Wheat, ę or 24 Buſhels of B or Barley, and  or 20 Buſhels of C or Oats for  or I5 Pounds 12 Shillings; He afterwards Buys æ or 26 Buſhels of Wheat, h or 30 Buſhels of Barley, and m or 50 Buſhels of Oats for 7 or 16 Pounds; and at a Third Time he Buys f or 24 Buſhels of Wheat, æ or 120 Buſhels of Barley, and n or 100 Buſhels of Outs for r or 34 Pounds; The Queſtion is, what was the Price of each Buſhel of Wheat, Barley, and Oats? Anſw. A Buſhel of Wheat was5 Shillings, of Bar ley 3 Shillings, and of Oats 2 Shillings. 1. d, ꝗ l, /40, 24, 2; C, h. m, æ26, 30, 50; f; , =24, 120, 1C; ? 5. 154 16, 345 2. amepdqm26X t 3,4X1623433 3. L=dm-el=4050,26x2051480 4. 77c;dh=26x24,4X 33376 5. 3ſqer=24X16,26X33/;300; 6. cenfu=sex 1oo,24x ,0- 1480 7. fh-et=24X30,26X12092400 eta vdm/362560-28 3000 274560 i 3. Thereſore æ- ſ55555;3,350 3743 8  of a Pound 2 Shills tæ23144 9 Conſequently = .S of a Pound =3 Shills. ylIæ 1i' 10. And ; of a Pound =5 Shills. PrOBL. TI. The Specifick Gravities of the Mixture, and of the Things which arc Mixed, being Given, it is Required to find our the Proportion betwixt one another of the Things. hich are Mixed. I. Let the Specifick Gravity of the Mixture, 448, be. e 2. The Speciſick Gravity of 4. a. 3. That of B let it be alſo. b. 4. Since the Abſolute Gravity, or Weight is Compounded or Conſiſis of the Specifick Gravity Multiplied into the Bulk,  æ 4. the Abſolute Weight of 4 will be. 5. The Abſolure Weight of B will be alloo. bB. 6. And the Abſolute Weight of the Mixture 448. eA+eB. 7. Since thereſore the Abſolute Gravity or Weight of the e muſt be Equal to the Abſolute Gravity or Weight of the  a4+bB=c A+eB hole. 8. And by Tranſpoſition of the Terms. : adeA=eBbB 9. And by Reſolving the Equation into it's Proportionals. 1Z⸗ a—:: A. B ExaAMPLE ExaMpLE. Let the Speciſick Gravity of Gold or 4, be as 19, or a, of Silver or B, as 195, or b, and oſ their Mixture, or A428, or Hiero's Crown, as 17, or e; and it is Required to now, how much Gold and Silver was Uſed in ſuch a Mixture; 1. 4 and B are the Bulks of Gold and Silver, but eb. ac : : 4. B. O1 ,S1I/31 20 177155/&7S- 19-17992:: IO. 3:: A. B3 Therefore there were Ten Parts oſ Gold in the ſaid Crown for 3 of Silver. z. Since eb, and 4—e are as the Bulks of Gold and Silver in the Crown, or as A and B, Mulriply a the Specifick Gravity of Gold xeb, and b the Specifick Gravity of Silver into ae, and the Products will give the Proportion of the Weight oſ the ciola m the Crovn to the Weight of Silver in the Crown; But eb. —:: 10.3, therefore axeb=19X 10=190, and bXxa—e1035331, and the Weight oſ the Gold will be to the Weight of ie Silver in he crom as 190. 31I. liili 3. Therefore the Weight of the Crown will be to the Weight of the Silver, as 190+31922I. 3I. i PROBL. I2. Suppoſing 4 Cows or Oxen can Graze or Feed up a Meadow ſ in a Certain Time f, and à Cows or Oxen can Graze a Meadow e, which is EqualIy Good, in the Time ſ; and the Graſs Grows Uniſormly, it is Inquired, how many Cows or Oxen vill Graze a like Meadow g in the Time h? 1. If æ Oxen Graze a Meadow b in the Time ⸗, then by Proportion Ox- ili Or M a en in the ſame Time  vill Graze the aii 75 Meadow e, becauſe by Proportion. : i ec 2. And in the Time f; & Oxen Tine Time on o vill Graze the ſaid Meadov e, Suppoſing f c: ea eca ihe Graſs does not Grov after the Time  5 lf ę, becauſe by Proportion. 3. And in the Time hb, æ Oxen vill] 4. rim o: ox Graze the Meadow e, Suppoſing the Graſs ] ,, ⸗:: ã v does not Grow aſter the Time ?, becauſe by Proportion. 4. But ſince upon the Account of the Gras's Groving,  Oxen, in the Time f, only Graze the Meadow e, thereſore that Increaſe of the Graſs in the Meadow e in ihe Time /— vill be ſuch, as to be Sufficient to Feed Oxen in the Time f that is, ſuch as will be Sufficient to Feed v Oxen in the Time h; for by Propor Time Time Oxen Oxen : .eca adf em tion. h: fi: d Vãtũã 5. And in the Time c the Increaſe of the Graſs in the Meadow e will be ſuch as to be Suſficient to Feed x y— Oxen, becauſe by Proportion. Fime Time Oxen Oxen j df eca bdfhecabbdeftaece  aca 6. Add this Increment of Oxen in the sth. Step to V Oxen, in the 3d. Step, and the Sum vill Give the Number of Oxen, ſor the Feeding of which the Meadow ecahbds i æis Suſficient for the Time h, Thatis, æ —_— teſæ 7. And 7. And by Proportion, the Meadow 2 will be Sufficient to Feed aſę hty Oxen, in the ſame Time h. ef hbce Moad. Mead. Oxen Oxen  hathecabbdeſecfa baſghecaghtacgſvecſea. Becauſe æ: ę:: 5a  ſ; ⸗ Tech ExaMPLE. If 12 Cows, or Oxen, can Graze or Feed up 33 Acres of a Meadov in 4 Weeks, and 21 Oxen can Graze 10 Acres of a like Mcadow in 9 Weeks, it is Inquired, how many Oxen vill Graze 36 Acres in 18 Weeks? The Anſwer Is 36. I. 4, b, f, à, e, f, . h=ti2, 33, 4, 21, Io, 9, 36, I8, Reſpectively. 2. Thereſore, by Subſtituting the Numbers for the Letters, it will Follow, That bash 4 peeſe: is Equal to 36. 3. Or this Problem may be Traced thro' all the Foregoing Proportions, and the Solution of it Given by Putting the Numbers, inſtead of the Letters, in the ſeveral Steps of the Preceding Proceſs; Which is done in Sir Iſ. Newton's Algebra. PROBL. 13. The Magnitudes, or Bulks, and the Motions being Givęn, of Two Spherical Bodies, Moving in the ſame Right Line, and Mceting each other, it is Required to Determine theit Motions, aſter Reflection. The Reſolution of this Problem Depends upon theſe Conditions, that both the Bodies ſhould Suffer ſo much by Reaction, as Each Acts upon the Other, and that they ſould Recede from each Other with the ſame Celerity aſter Reflexion, with which they Approached each Other before it. We have already Given an Account of this Problem in what we have Writ upon the Mechanical Philoſophy, and therefore ſhall not Repeat that Trouble here, and only Subjoin an Example or Two. 1. It has been there Shewn, that if the Celerities of 4 and B are a, b, and the Bodies 4, and B Tend in their Motion the ſame Way, the Celerity of 4 after Re: adaB2 ji : i 24-bA+bB, flexion will be +5 , and the Celerity of B after Reflexion will be 53 2. But, if they Meet each Other, then the Sign of b is every where to be Changed, and the Celerity of æ after Reſlexion will be iitaã and the Cele: 2a4+vba-bB. rity of B aſter it, 7F And, if Either of theſe Quantities, or the Motion of 4 in the Former Inſtance, Happens to be Negative, it Shews, that the Motion after Reflexion Tends a Contrary Way to that of 4 before Refiexion. ExampLE iſ. If TWo Homogeneous Bodies 4 of 3 Pounds, and with 8 Degrees of Celerity, and B of 9 Pounds with 2 Degrees of Celerity, Tend the ſame Way, i aAaB+208 Then, 4, a, B, b,3, 8, 9, 2, Reſpectively; From whence 73 24-bAbB 5. A+E5 vill Recoil or Recede with 1 Degree oP Celerity, and  will Proceed on with 5. o 8 Celer. O 2 Celer. A=3; B=o9o ExaMpLE. 2d. I the Same Bodies with their Celerities Meet each other, 4 will Reſult with 7 Degrees of Celerity, and B will Procẽcd Forvards with 3. And, if the Bulks, or 4 and B, are Equal, 4 vill Proceed vith 1 Degree of CeIerity, and B with 2. ] S. 7. As Divifion is only, which we have Shewn, a Subſtraction, according to the Preſcription of the Quotient, ſo the Extraction of the Root is only a Particular Kind of Diviſion; in which the Diviſor is not Given, but Sought and Inquired; Thus, if ve Extract the Square Root of 16, ve want the Diviſor, which Multipliedinto the Quotient, ſhall Produce 16, Namely 4, that is, vhich being Subſtracted from 16 the Dividend, according to the Preſcription of the Quotient mall = Celerity of Am1, and = Celerity of 35; And thereſore 4 aſter Reſlexion Thus in the Preſent Scheme ſhall Exhauſt it; From whence it is Maniſeſt, that the Rules given before in Diviſion Concerning the Signs and the Species or Letters, or whatever elſe, Obtain here ſince the Operation is the ſame, Excepting that the Diviſor is here wanting, whicl before was given, and therefore we ſhall Proceed to Examples; But here we ſhall Begin vith Algebraick Quantities, as being the Foundation of the Rule in Arithmetick foi theſe Extractions, and vhich it would have been Hard ro have Found out without them 1ſſ. IN Algebraick Quantities, let the Root of aa +2a4b+lb be Required to be Extracted; that is, ve ant to now, what that Diviſor is, vhich Subſtracted according to the Preſcription of the Quotient will Exhauſt the Dividend, which ve find to be a+b; For a) aa+2 a b4+bb ſa, That is, a a = a, and à4 X a Subſtracted ſrom 4 2 =o, aa a 220 +2ab+tb b, That is, 2ab,; But bx 2a +2ab+bb I 27z and bxb Subſtracted æo. r i FroM whence this General Rule for the Extraction of the Square Roots of Quantities or Numbers is Derived 3 That we ſhould find That Diviſor and Quotient, which Multiplied Vinto each other ſhall Produce the Firſt Part of a Binomial Dividend, That ve ſould then Double That Quotient for a New Duviſor, and Multiply the Second Quotient into the Laſt Diviſor, and into it's Sclf; Thus a the Firſt Diviſor =a⸗ the Firſt Quotient; 24 the Second Diviſor /24, the Double of the Firſt Quotient; And 2ab  bb /b the Laſt Quotient X23, the Double oſ the Firſt Divilor, and xb the Laſ Quotient. i AnD this is the Standing Method for all Extractions of the Square Root whatſoever, ſince all Numbers, or Quantities, may be Conſidered as Binomials, or as Conſitting oſ Two Portions or Members; Thus, a3t2abbb, may be Divided into a4a, and 264bb; 144 may be Divided into 100 and 443 And the ſame may be Said of any other Quantities, or Numbers, which are therefore Reduced to aa+2ab-+hb, whoſe Root, by what Foregoes, is atb. BuT before ve Procecd to any more Inſtances of Binomials, we ſhall give ſome Examples of the Extraction of the Root of Simple Algebraick Quantities; Thus, ꝶ ava-uan bbaab Vaa=a; vaaccac; 9nace=3zac; V4950 xx=7aax; v4=; vV/47JS, cc1:t Iũ c gaizæ3a8 uæ. 2a7oncæ a43x abbx at3x 2bxaabextobx: 2500 0 55,4: V5taa: 9a 9ac 850 266 AxD in the Extractions of the Cube Root, vV7 and of the Bi-Square Root v*,aalb=rvab, &. ] IN Binomials or Compound Algebraick Quantities, Agrecable to the Preceding Rule, the Extractions are, as Follow. aaa7; a*46a brsaabbyi2ab 46- (aa3266 a* aaxan. 27237  +6a3h +6a3 broaabl3 abx2ant;at, =bx7ath 2422056a8 Caaabb- 1280 46 4aabbr 2ab +4b-2bbx 2362tb,=bx2atb o o o a=x) xx-axt,a8 (; a XXxXAx azax)  ax+3aa ax+3anm: axa ra=bx/atb o o a3zx8 9x—248+16a* 354an +1206 16aabb +2bb +40ox355535xaXa o Rrrrr 26 a=c xx o —24a8164* +12606 1i6aabh +4624n8V+16a4 =a4aaxoxxa4aa bx2a+6 +1206 ©16aabb V20 +2b6 +46o o a=p) y+43$;  s;+ (nH27-2 r=mx; =axa 2a=235 ©t+4 J +5 3a77 ryxæ”+27bx20+6 2=21yt47) o 4n 3rt — 487r4axãꝶ+ta7r7 :5bxaa+h O o IN all which Examples, the Firſt Diviſor is the Root of the Firſt Quantity, and every Succeeding One the Double of the Root already Extracted; And the Firſt Subtrahend is the Firſt Diviſor X the Firſt Quotient, and every Succeeding One the Laſt Quotient x the Diviſor, + that Lat Quotient; or the Subtrahend may be always the Squares of the Quotient or Root Obtained. . IN the Extraction of the Cube-Root, the Rule Differs from the Former, according to the Difference of the Algebraick Binomial. as) a t3aabr3atb+6 (a+b a axaxa 3a30 O +iaab43abb+6: +3aab3 abb+h =bx 33V5 o o o Tuar is, the Firſt Diviſor is the Square of the Firſt Cubical Quantity, and every Suc ceeding One the Triple of the Square of the Root already Extracted; And the Firſi Subtrahend is the Firſt Quotient, Multiplied Cubically, and every Succeeding One, the La©t Quotient X Three Times the Square of the Firſt,  Three Time: the Rectangle of the Firſt Quotient into the Lat, + the Square of the Laſt Quotient; Or the Subtrahends may be always the Cubes of the Quotient or Root Obtained; And fſrom hence the Cube Root of æf+6æ402) +96264772æ+224. AND by the ſame Method, the Roots of any Higher Powers may be Extracted, that is, by Forming the Rule for Extraction from the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, or Seventh Power of the Binomial 4+5, and ſo of the Reſt in Infinitum, as will be Shewn Preſently. 2d. IN Integrals and Decimals, the Procedure is the ſame, as in Algebraick Binomials; In Extracting the Square-Roots of which, the Cyphers, or Figures, are Diſtinguiſied into Parts or Members Conſiſting of Two ſuch Cyphers or Figures, Beginning from the Right Hand, and Going on to the Leſt; As in the Following xamples. a=300 99856 (GI6 9=300X3c0axa 2a5600) õ™3 61=16 55+ Io=bx2a+h 2a5c20) 376 37566x620F65bx2ath o o /aa000) a=4000) 22178791,0000C0 4709,4363, &. I64000X4000aaxa 208000) T17 600 850007 Cx700924+bxbh 209400) D33701 84681 7900F9X924+bxh 4110,00 : 37673694186F4x42a+bxb 34264,00 2825649941 380F33 Zatbxb 60075,00 S651319694188665F6X 628+bxb 356190400 2825661699418872043533 24+bxb 73624231 &F. When the Root is Extracted, halP Way, or Beyond, the Remaining Figui yphcrs may be Found out by Diviſion only. 294180) 27941880) 2/9418860) 2”794188720) a=100) 32076 i81,59 &v. I 2A5200) Z20 22472004+80X 824+bxb 2360) 576 3619360F IXiI=ZãFbxh 2362) 215,0 181O0 *3258 3400 142, &⸗. x I have hitherto Extracted the Root according to the Real Value of the Pla 1ev the Correſpondence of the Numeral with the Algebraick Extractions olloving Examples Expreſs the ſame Operation in a Conciſer Manner, but I pon the Foregoing Reaſoning. 3297,6 &. (57,4247, &. 25 0,99'856 ſ0,99927 Z07 3 749 1885 4369 1701I 4576 T5460 1148) 5 (247 17901 1998) 559 ſ279 In the Extraction of the Cube- Roots or the Roots of any higher Powt Rules are likewiſe Derived from the Algebraick Quantities; a is the Firſt DI Extracting the Root of the Square or Second Power, and 24 the Second I ar2a is the Firſt Diviſor in Extracting the Root of the Third Power, or Cube, and 3a3, or 33 the Second Diviſor; a is the Firſt Diviſor of the Tover, and 4a3 the Second Diviſor; a is the Firſt Diviſor in rhe Fifth Pou 524 ihe Second Diviſor, &e. So that the Firſt Diviſor is always the Power diately below That, whoſe Root is Extracted, and the Second Diviſor is th Power Multiplied into the Index of the Power, whoſe Root is Sought tracted. AxD in Numbers, If it is a Cube, or the Third Pover, every Three Place be Dillinguiſhed by Points, or Commas; If the Fourth Power, every Four PI R rrrra the Fiſth Pover, every Five Places, &c. Deginning or Counting from Unit; Anc the Subtrahends are the Squares, or Cubes, or Biſquares, or Surſolids, &e. of tht Quotients, or Roots, Found out or Obtained; Thus in the Cube, and in the Quadratò Cube, orthe Fiſth Pover. 13312053 37 Subſtiradt Cubes8 36430820 ſ32,5 Diviſor 12) ; ſ4 or; j 243 Subſtract Cube 12167 405) 1213 ſ Diviſor 1587. 1450 & 33554432 Eubſtract Cube 13312053 5242880) 2876388,0 ſ5 Remains  O WhEeN the Quadrato-Quadratick Root, or v*a*, is to be Extracted, ve muſ Tvice Extract the Squaic Root; For v' a*aa and vraan—a; And vhen the Cubo- Cubick Root is to be Extracted, or vfa, ve muſt Extract the Cube- Root and then the Square Root of that Root; For V,at=a, and vV:,a=a; And th Same may be Said of other Powers, whoſe Indices or Exponents, are Compound-Num bers, and may be Reſolved into Simple Ones. C H A . I Of the Reduction of Traſlions and Radicals to the Leaſl Terms, or to the Same Denomination, as alſo of Radicals to more Simple Radicals hy the Extratlion of the Roots; And liteviſe Of the Form of Equations, the Diſpoſition of Them, and the Extermination of the Unknoun Quantities out of Them. 5. TTRACTIONS are Reduced to the Leat Terms, by Dividing the Numerators and Denominators, by the Greateſt Common Diviſor; Thus the Greateſt Common Diviſor being e, the Numerator aac, and the Denominator be. The Reaſon of vhich is, becauſe Ratio's Divided or Multiplied by Equal Quantities, are ſtill Equal; 4/4 where 4 is the Greateſt Common Diviſor; 24 . 203aac 7a/ 3 . 5, where the Greateſt Common Diviſor is 20/7,, Vhere the Diviſor is c6760 2306 ca' 9acc 2a83-3 a —aababb—b aa+bb 20c; =—A, the Diviſor 3 ];&— the Greateſ©t Gaa+3ac 20+c aan—ab a Common Diviſor &z/V; LY this Way, the Terms aſter Multiplication or Diviſion may be oſten Abridged; j 2ab 9ace bdd 18aabcr i caabb hus x ivi  is//—, b duction . Thus uuã or Divided by a is lc 7 Reduction Bur it is betrer before the Operation to Divide the Terms by the Greateſt Common Diviſor; which if not done, muſt be done aſterwards; that is, 2a00 and baà by b, 2zabb li ſà nd 3ccd and 9ac by 3 from whence vill Ariſe z or Divided by æ a caabb :i = , us beſore. b aa aaxx & =; and4x v xx aaax So likewiſe m5ææ and  Divided by c b 1 b c v c a ax c ac . Iui - Xx-=-c; and 28 Divided by ; 4 Divided by ; IZ2. x I x UNDER this Head it has been Thought Requiſite by Algebraiſis to Conſider, vhich Way we may Find out the ſeveral Diviſors of any Quantity, that from thence we may aow, vhich is the Greateſt Common Diviſor belonging to any Two Quantities Propoſed; Lut being of little Uſe to Beginners in this Science, ſor vhom this : c : : a: Hiſ Abſtract of it is Intended, I ſiallin a Manner vholly Omit that Doctrine, tho' there may may be an Eaſy Account Given of it, and which Way it was Invented; As it xxx10x+6, for æ Subſtitute 1, ,1, Separately and Diſtinctly, and the Numbers Ariſing from ſuch a Subſtitution, will be4, 6, i4, which, vith all their Diviſors are to be Placed over againſt the Arithmetical Progreſſion 1, o,1, according to th Scheme Subjoined. THEN, ſince æ?, the Higheſt Term, is Diviſible by no Number I Excepting Unit, it is Inquired amongſt the Diviſors for a Pro- o greſſion, whoſt Terms only Differ by a Unit, and Decrealc from the Uppermoſt to the Lowermoſt in like Manner as I. i o,1; of Which Kind of Progreſſion there is only One Found amongſt the Diviſors, Namely 4, 3, 2, of which Numbers ve Take 3, which ſtands over againſt , and Try a Diviſion by +3, Which Succeeds, and Produces in the Quotient xx4x+2. 5. 2. FRACTIONS are Reduced to the ſame Denomination by Multiplying the 6 li. 2. 3. 6 4 ſ. 2. 7. 14H2 Ei 2.4 iti 3 Terms oſ Both by the Denominator of Each; Thus in : and : na and = and E and the Common Denominator is bld; The Reaſon of vhich Procedure is, becauſe, as e have before Said, Ratios, Reſpects; or Relations Multiplied by Equal Quantities, will be ſtill Equal; So likewiſe 4, or z and m and ab c BuT, Where the Denominators have a Common Diviſor, it is Suſficient to Multi; : a aaxa ; ply Alternately by the Quotients, Thus ſ and and a the Quoticnts being æ aud 4, and the Common Diviſor b. Tnis Reduction of Fractions is Chieſly Serviceable, or of Uſe, in the Addition and Subſtraction of them, becauſe Things cannot be Added or Subſtracted, unleſs they are of the ſame Sort or Kind; Thus by Reduction æ r, and abacabua⸗  sdnari ana - and i  Vtaã ai x ſ4 And in 14+15 7 ri Alſo, ? 3/24%3; Likeviſe  t =rſ;4; And 3=r53y 24; And 255. WHERE there are ſeveral Fractions of Ditferent Denominations to be Added to: . aa 2xx3 ax , gether, they are to be United One aſter Another; Thus, in 5  ; Firſt ax as asax an—ax 2xx3a ;aaxt2x i :i i  a 3 Sccond, +24v-v—v]A4 Third to this laſt Fraction x x x 38 35 a axt 2xAdd-and the Sum vill be 22&æ x2axxax 3883axx ;; Fitt 3342, )13; Second? /; Therefore Third, The whole Fraction =5. F. 3. VuERE the Root of the Whole cannot be Extracted, Extract the Root of a Diviſor; Thus, the vaale=ay be, by Extracting the Roor of the Diviſor aa; Allo the v435473, where 16 is the Diviſor; And the Vasaabec4a7 3bec, here 16a is the Divilor; Becauſe 4axv 36V 16aaxV 3bcV 48aabe, by the Mulriplication of Radicals beſore Explained, and ſo of the Reſt; So likewiſe vabqanbl44a3 a—2b aaaab4400 val, Vher4t4nc c 3 And in Numbers, as 3% vVaajmm 431m am pæ 7;”æ r Veo +4m1, is the Diviſor; aamm l . vhere æ is the Diviſor; So 67V555 V, vhere ;5 is the Diviſor, and 32/4 ppRZ : h ab 3l =94=6, vhere Lis the Diviſor; Thus a- or a,Sval, whereis the a an an Diviſor; Vi 5b116a2a03012 and 8a3 is the Diviſor, vhoſe Cube-Root is  be Extracted; Alſo væ,a3 ſaxyæ,ax, where am is the Diviſor, and the BiS 5 5 55 Souare quare- Root is Extracted, or = ⸗ where a+ is the Diviſor, and the Bi- Squareot is Extradted; And v,a x55a/6,ax5, vhere a iĩs the Diviſor, and the Cuboa ; Cube Root is Extracted, or max vhere a xẽ is the Diviſor, or =/axxy} ,aax vhere at xt is the Diviſor. This Reduction of Radicals is not only Convenient for the Abridgment, but for the Addition and Subſiraction of them, Which cannot be Performed, unleſs they have the ſame Denomination; Thus /4 8V75, by Reduction, Z435.3., by Addition 29V35 v4835, by Reduction, m434V3, for 2521 6 : i : 4ab as?a4aabb& 4ab But by Subſtraction 44V35V3 Likeviſe,, vVVSIV b h = ar vab=2ab ; And 3,8a35h  164y3,bF 2000 m 2803,0F 24 bb2a2abyvi ba. 5. 2. WHEN there is a Multiplication, or Diviſion, to be made in Radicals oſ a Different Denomination, they are to be Reduced to the ſame Denomination, which is done, by Prefixing the Radical Sign, whoſe Index is the Leat Number, which their Indices will Divide without a Remainder, and Multiplying the Quantities Annexed ſo many Times into themſelves, Abating One, as that Index is Increaſed; Thus V ,a15, asxv*,ar xs xy,at xx vithout a Remainder, and the Exponents of a? x3 the Quantities Annexed under the vf, Namely 3, 3, are a Unit Leſs than 4, by which the Index of the Root is Increaſed from 2 to 65 So in V3,aax, the Index is Increaſed ſfrom 3 to 6, and the Exponents 2, 2, of aa, æ under the v* are a Unit Leſs than 35 Aſter which Reduction to the ſame Denomination, the Quantities under the Radical Signs are Multiplied into each other, and the Radical Signs Prefixed, as is before Preſcribed in the Multiplication of Radicals; That is, v,at æ? xvs,atxxv,ax?; For the ſame Reaſon, it is ſaid v?,axyæ,axv*,aaxv*,ax =4,a x; But here the /, is Increaſed to væ, and the Exponent of  under /* ſmould be 2-151, that is, it ſhould be the væ,3, vhereas it is v*,a, where the Exponent is æ. . PERHAPS therefore the Following Rule will be more General and Complete, as well as more Natural; Multiply the Radicals Given according to the Preſcription of the Index of the Radical Required, to whoſe Denomination they are to be Reduced, and to the Products Prefix the Index of the ſaid Radical; Or, the Dimenſions of the Quantities arc to be Increaſed in Proportion to the Increaſe of the Indices of the Roots; Thus. Suppoſing, as before, /ax, and /3,aax are to be Reduced 0 è, Multiply vax, v,aax, 6 Times into themſclves, and Prefix vè, and they vill be =vè,arx3, vb,atxx3 And Jaxxaxxax=ax/ax, and ax=y1,ax, ax, and 3, ãxſaxæ ,asx=y,a5 vaxi a7xs. Tnus the v2 ,æ =v3,a3 =s*,a=sſ,at =/,at=/,a, &c; Alſo / ax/⸗,ax =v*,aax/4,axv* atx; Becauſe /axyv/axy ax/aa' to which Prefix æ, for the Reaſon above, which makes væ,a =va; So the V&xX*,3v*,365v,3væ,30 Becauſe v 6x6xv 6xv 6=36, and /6/4,36 and ſo of the Reſt; Again, æavbcvaa xybe=v aabe, becauſc a5v axva/v?,a'; And 4av 36cV 16aaxv 3bc=v 48aabe, be cauſc 4V aaxy a/v 16aa; Thus, 2a7 ba/7,5; xv ,b72av3,8a b4164 vVacvVacac 6abbv 36a And =V́ ; And vſvsa/Vaab 3 And ſo of others. 5. 5. TE Roots oſ Quantities, vhich Conſiſt of Integrals, and Quadratick Ra dicals are Thus Extracted. LET 4 Expreſs the Greater Part of any Quantity, and B the Leſs, and a4tvaass l 2amt vill be = to the Square of the Greater Part of the Root, and ayas to the Squar of the Leſſer Part, which is to be Added to the Greater with the Sign Prefixed tc 2; Thus, if the Quantity is 3+78; 43, B8, and VAA—BB=1; Therefor j the the Squire f the Greatet Part of the Ròot will be r and the Squar f the Leſſer ill be m , and Conſequently the Root will be =i+7V2 If the Quantity is V 32v24, ASV 32. B=V 24, and /à45B=VS; From v37rvs J32v8 i l and—/253/2 and V2, to the Squares of the Parts of the 2 Root, ang the Root therefore =æ, 1874,2, Thus in Algebraick Quantities, il natax/aaxx is the Quantity to be Extracted, A43, B2x/aanxx, Ad-BB =a*4naxx+4x, and the Root of it =as2xx; The Square of one Part of the Root therefore aaxx, and of the other æx, and the Root will be æ+/2x. OTHER Examples might be Produced from Algebraiſts, but we ſhall rather chooſe to ſiow, how the foregoing Rule might be found out from the Precepts of this Science, Suppoſing the Extraction of the Root of Affected Quadratick Equations is Known, which will be afterwards Explained; Let a be the Integral Quantity or Number, and b the Surd, the vah is Required; Let væ+ be =va+6, thereſore xæ7t2væyæa+b; or xt79a, and 27x/b; From Whence x=à, and 459bb, ot hb hb bb ili or bb=4y343, or 7, and n7z, and by Completing whence the Square, and Extracting the Root of the Equation, 5yat2a:m bb a 3a = xmu and 724a+ Yaabb b ætvash 3 But xa ya  Yæ—ts 4 a 2 4 a an—bb i :i . —; And therefore a, as is Preſcribed in the Rulę, is to be the Greater Quantity or Number, and b the Leſs, for otherwiſe the /æa—bb would be an Impoſſible Root; And theſe are the Expreſſions before ſet down Changing a into 4, and b into B. 5. 6. EQUATIONS are Reduced to the following Forms, according to the higheſt Dimenſions or Powers of the unknown Quantity æ, the Reaſon of which is taken from the Conſtruction of the ſeveral Dimenſions or Powers from a Binomial, which Conſiſts of a Known Quantity », and an Unknown æ. TnS let us take æ for the Root of the ſeveral Powers and Dimenſions. TuE Square or Second Power therefore will be-xx-20xt17. TuE Cube or Third Power vill be alſo =x+3 p+3 47. TuE Bi- Square or Fourth Power likewiſe =x*+4x3p+6xpi +4xp: +p, &e. IN the Firſt Power or Dimenſion æ-ꝓ Stands, as it does, without any Variation. IN the Second, ſince 209), and /q; xx+2pxts9=xxtræ+4. In the Third, ſince 33950, 30 =q. and p =r, æ3 +3x p3 9 =x +pæ +qx+. IN the Fourth, 47090, 6??4q, 4/' =r, and )*s, makes it æ*+pæ qx +ræ+s. AFTER the Forms of the Dimenſions, or Powers, are thus Eſtabliſied, The Deſign of Algebra being to Find out the Unknown Quantities from the Knõwn, which are Given, they are caſt into the Model Annexed. xp xpo x=pxtq Or x pxqO x /px* qx+ xi pxqxro =pxtqx +ræ+s xtpx? qx*rxs;o For the Principal Difficulty in Algebra is to Find out æ the Unknown Quantity by the Intervention of the Known Ones ꝓ, . 7,5, &e. and therefore they are Thrown on onc Side of the Equation, and æ and it's Powers on the Other; Or elſe the whole Compounded Quantities of known and Unknown are made =o, in order to Try, if ve can Inveſtigate the Unknown that Way; ſince + on one Side of the Equation makes on the Other, as we have Shewn. FrOM whence it is Maniſeſt, that the chief Deſign of Algebraiſts muſt be to Exterminate, and Extricate themſelves from, theſe Unknown Quantities, which are Involved with the ll S s 5552 Known nown by all the Merhods, they can Think of and Deviſe; Thus, vhere x, ihe Buſineſs is Accompliſhed, and ſo it would be if x* vas /p+q, or x? Ltrin & But ſince æ /px+q and xi =/px* +qx+r, the Problem is to Diſengage the Unknown Quantities  in the one Equation, and * and æ in the Other, from the Known ) 4 SOMETIMES the Intermediate Terms are Wanting, as in x =*qx+r, x*=pxi +3 from which Defſect of the Terms the Equation often becomes more Simple, and ĩ likewiſe Depreſſcd, as it may Happen, 1o a Lower Degree or Power; and the Love That is, the Eaſier is the Equation to be Reſolved; becauſe it is Implicated and Involved vith fewer Unknown Quantities, as is Apparent from rhe Forms above; Thus æ*=qxx+s5, by Subſtituting y5xx, is yyq7+s, an Equation of the Second Power or Dimenſion, and if 5 is Found, æx ill be Known. IT muſt be farther Obſerved, that as to the Signs Prefixed to the Terms, they may be Infinitely Diverſified and Varied. 5. 7. ALL Equations are to be Ordered and Diſpoſed ſo, as to fall in with One of the Aboveſaid Forms, Preparatory, or Previous, to theit Reſolution, which Kind of Reduction of Equations is Comprehended by Algebraiſts in the Following Rules. RULE I. If there are any Quantities, which Deſtroy one Another, or which will by Addition or Subſtraction Unite into One, the Equation vill be ſo far Abridged. Tuus, if 5-3823a+35 Subſtract 2x from, and Add 34 to, both Sides of the Equation, and it vill be 5684+x; If i.t ſince i it will be Bæ. a HENCE it is, that if Quantities are Transferred to Oppoſite Sides of the Equation under Contrary Signs, the Equation ill ſtill Subſiſt, that is, the Quantities on both Sides will ſtill be Equal; For, if 53b8+x in the Former Example, Subſiract 34 from both Sides of the Equation, or, which is the ſame Transfer it to the Oppoſite Side under a Contrary Sign, and it vill be 56-3x or )2=x; Again, if a4347 =abbb+by, Transfer the Quantities Unknown to One Side of the Equarion and the Known to the Other under Contrary Signs, which is nothing but Adding or Subſtracting the ſame Quantities to, or from both Sides of the Equation, and ĩt will be a3ab+hb=3a7F by; And if we Divide both Sides of the Equation by the ab ſame Quantity 34+5, it ill be - _ or )/x. If Latly, abx+a aax=abb—2abxx3, Transfer the Terms to Oppoſite Sides ol the Equation under Contrary Signs, ſo that the Unknown Quantities ſiould be as much as can be, on the One Side of the Equation, and the Known on the Other, and iĩt vill be, nmu i or x1 7*qæ+r. RULE 2. If we find all the Terms of an Equation Multiplied by any Quantity, e are to Divide them by That Quantity, and if they are Divided by any Quantity, they are to be Multiplied by it. It 156b=24ab+3bx Divide all the Terms by 36, and it will be, sb=84+x; Alſo, : bb i ba_tbxx Multiply all the Terms by  and it will be bb or xx ac cc c a c =px+4. l . If there is any Fraction, which can be no farther Reduced, in the Dœnominator of which is Involved the Unknown Quantity, or the Letter, according to whoſe Dimenſions the Equation is to be Ranged, all the Terms of the Equation are to be Multiplied by that Denominator or by ſome Diviſor of it; Thus, if æ +t=x Multiply 2 into both Sides of the Equation, and it will be, ax+ab—bæ ? a  Muli a tiPly bY the Denominator 2cc or by it's Diviſor 27, that 7 or the Unknovn =axnxx, or abbx=xx, or xx=bx—ab, or xxpæq; So if 3 Quantity may be Cleared from the Denominator, and it will be, vL 75-35 +c⸗ aabb tec, and by Tranſpoſition c+3692y, or, xxpx+q; In like Manner, i an Sa=x Multiply by x, and it ill be 2327xx=px+a: i5 nabbxx ply by i an—ax=xx-px+q; Alſo if  / Multiply all the Terms firſt by æx, and then by abx, and it will pe 2bbtasb aabl: c =xt-px+4. RULE. 4. If the Unknown Quantity, or the Letter, according to whoſe Dimenſion: the Equation is Ranged or Diſpoſed, is Involved with a Surd or a Radical, which is Incapable of any farther Reduction, all the other Terms are to be Transferred to the Oppoſite Side of the Equation under Contrary Signs, and both Sides to be Multiplied Quadratically, or Cubically, &⸗. as the Radical, or Surd, is a Square-Root or a Cubick, &c. Thus, if vaaaxta=x, by Tranſpoſition /amax=x-a, and by Squar ing both Sides. a;ax=xx2ax+aa, or, Oxxax, or, ax=xx, and a=x=p; Likeviſe, if v3,aax+2axx a4xo, by Tranſpoſition v*,àax2à5xx⸗t =ax, and by Cubeing borh Sides, anxt20xxnx =a 3;anx+35x, orſ, xx=4axaa; and, if y=ay+avay, by Squaring both Sides, nmatn a. and by Tranſpoſition ay ay3ay, or 77Vay-33, and by Squaring both Sides n=a7D, and again by Tranſpoſirion, 2y75a7, or 2ya, or x9p. RULE. 5. If th] greateſt Dimenſion of the Unknown Quantity, or oſ any Letter, be Multiplied by a Known, the whole Equation is to be Divided by it; 2794 x I makes y=4a, or x/p; PE if we Divide by P2 becomes æ æ and ji x +at 2za i x ta 2ac alcc ĩ i +aacæè 4a4a tcc=o, Divided by 20¢t, vill be anc Xaqarc 200cc al taac alc o9, or, xi xxuaax DO, Or, x pxx—qx ro. , or, xt + Ta pp- , Or, v xq RULE. 6. This Kind of Reduction is ſometimes Performed by Dividing the Equation by ſome Compound Quantity ; Thus »=47+tty-te vill be Reduced to ”207+:, for by Tranſpoſition »æritertti=o. and by Dividing by y-b, »H2-beo; or, æ +rxxqx+r=o is Reduced to æxpxq=o; But the Invention of ſuch Diviſors is very Difficult, and Wants a farther Explanation. RULE. 7. Sometimes, as in all Affected Quadratick Equations, where the Unknown Quantity is Involved with the Known, all hich come under the Second Form of x*=px+q, the Reduction may be Performed by the Extraction of the Root of both Sides of the Equation; for which there is this General Rule; Place all the Unknown Quantities on one Side of the Equation, and the Known on the other, as in the Preſent Equation, æpx=q; Add the Square of the Semi- Coeſficient, or of Half the Known Quantity Involved with the Unknown, Namely , to each Side of the Equation, and there vill Reſult. iſt. æ p+ =23p+q the Former of which will be an Exact Square, whoſe Root x/4p=44p1+q, becauſc +x+ orxill Produce the ſame Square; and therefore xp753 2d. Thus alſo, if xx/pxq; Then xxpxq; and xxpx+;mm24 andx2 in and tr75́ 3d. If xx=px+q; Then æx-tpxq; and x+px+:m=2+q and x+:=5rV34, ind x2pſ5r3 41h It xx=pxq ; Then xxtp=-c; and æxtp+:=im: and æ+? ũ ud =s/5m⸗ TuEsE are the only four Caſes, which can happen in Equations of the ſecond Form, and are Reſolved alike by Completeing the Square on the one Hand, by the Tttt:t Addition Addition of the Square of the Semi- Coeſficient, which therefore muſt be Added on the other, and ſeems to have been Induſtriouſly Concealed by the preſent Famous Algebraiſt, whoſc Rules and Examples, ve have hitherto made Uſe of, as the moſt Significant ind Compendious. And from hence Is Formed that General Expreſſion for Extracting the Roots of theſe Kind of Equations; That, if xxJ. px. 5,. 2Vãſ?ꝗ, in which ; and q in the Latter Equation obtain the ſame Signs with  and ꝗ in the Former, and p» is always Affirmative or Poſitive; But the Way of Comeing to this Univerſal Theorem is ſo Indirect and Oblique, in the Algebra here Referred to, that it gives a Suſpicion, that it had not a Mind to Impart the whole Secret. TuE Inſiances, to which this Theorem is Applied, and of which we ſhall afrervards give many more, are, if  tix and ve are to Extract the Root 45 25 xx x xx ~à Thereforc n and =q; Vã and tim. a; or ſErE atæ; Alſo, if 2ay20 aacc, m259 and aaccq, and læ rac+. ſaa ac; Likewiſe. if xr=aaxxtals, xx=4aatv ſatabi, and x=/aat, aævatè. I ſall only farther Obſerve, that here is a Certain and Determined vay of finding out two Values of x, or the unknown Quantity, in Equations of the ſecond Form, by adding the Square of the Semi-cocſſicient to each Side oſ the Equation; But it is not from hence Maniſeſt, that there may not be ſtill other Values of æ, which we have no Method of Arriving to; And This perhaps may be One of the Deſects in Algebra; but Another and the Principal is, That we have Nothing like the ſame Certain Rule for finding out æ, or the Unknown Quantity, in Equations of an Higher Form, as in x Zpx +9x+r, &c. ſo as to Complete the Cube x? px* x=r; And tho a great Deal is done in Algebra towards finding out the Unknown Quantities in it, yet it ſnews, what a vaſt Field of Knowledge, notwithſtanding, Remains undiſcovered in that Science, and how Infinitely it falls ſnort of an Abſolute Perſection, which is ſtill Sufficient to Exerciſe the Genius's of many Ages to Accompliſi; The Third, Fourth, and the ſtill Higher Powers, lying very much in the Dark to us, and are ſcarcely better Reſolved than by the Tentative Methods, which will be afterwards Explained. 5. 8. WHEN there are ſeveral Equations, which Expreſs the Nature of the Queſtjon to be Reſolved, and there is a Variety of Unknovn Quantities Involved in them, ſuch Equations are to be taken Two at once, if there are more than Two, and to be ſo Connected together, that One of the Unknown Quantities ſhould be Exterminated in every Operation, and a New Equation Produced; Thus, if 25+5 and xy+2, it vill be 2x)+57/2, Or X3;3 And it is to be Obſerved, that by every Equation one Unknown Quantity may be Exterminated, and therefore if there are ſo many Equations Included in the Terms of the Queſtion or Problem, as there are Unknown Quantities, All may at length be Reduced to One, in which there will Remain only one Unknown Quantity, as in the Inſtance Above; But, if there are more Unknown Quantities by One, than there are Equations in the Queſtion, there will Remain in the lat Equation Two Unknown Quantities; it there are more Unknown Quantities by Two, than there are Equations in rhe Queſtion, there vill Remain Three Unknown Quantities in the Laſt, and ſo on;3 Thus, according to the former Inſtance, If 25y+ and x/y+2, 2xjæ)2, Or xæ22 If 2x5)+%, and xZy+s, 2xx)æ 5, ot x5æ3, &c. Sometimes TWo or More Unknown Quantitiès may be Exterminated by Two Equations only; As, if ax abaz, and bx4by=bb+taæ, Therefore by Addition of Each Side of the Equations ax—bytbx+by=abaztbbtaæ, or axtbx=abbb; But ſuch Caſes, as Theſe, do Evince, that, either there is ſome Fault Latent in Stating the Queſtion, or, that the Calculation upon it is Erroncous, or Unskilſull. THE Method, by which one Unknown Quantity may be Exterminated in Every Equation is Comprehended by Algebraiſis in the ſollowing Rules. RUL. 1. When the Quantity to be Exterminated is of one Dimenſion only in Eoth the Equations, Both it's Values are to beSought, which are to Form a Nev Equation; Thus, if atx=t-y, and 2x793b; and is 10 be Exterminates, it wil -a be, atx-b=j, and 36-25; and thereſore a+xl=3b2, or * 350,1 x⸗ ax=j, and 5+x5, it vill be; 25+x, or j5; if ax-2b7ab, and x7hb, it i axab,b 260  bbxaly a7 will be & = or xxbx27250; again, if  =ab+x, and be 2000a be . bb bbe duction, n4rm m yrtio, Laſtly, if 7æ=o and 479æ2, and æ is to be Z204, and æ is to be Exterminated, it will be e, s , and by ReExterminated, it will be 72 or xxx7æay. Tnuis alſo may be done by Subſtracting one of the Values of the Unknown Quantity from the other, and making the Reſiduum, or Remainder, Equal to 6; ſo, in thè firſt Example, Subſtract 362x from 4+xb, and there will Remain 4+34b0, or 3 RUL. 2. When in one of the Equations at leaſt, the Quantity to be Exterminated is of one Dimenſion only, it's Value is to be Sought in that Equation, and then to be Subſtituted in the other Equation in the Place of the Quantity to be Exterminated; Thus. it ;m=, and xxy=byax, and æ is to be Exterminated; by the : b Aut Equation /=vhich Subtut in the Second for x and then =nſ and by Reduction 5by' tabi 5*bt=o; likeviſe, if ayyaamz and y2-35Faæ, and y is to be Exterminated, in the Second Equation - vhich Subſtitute in : al z⸗ alx : the firſt Equation for y, and then Z2a724 r75 , and by Reduction æ+2a0 aaræs2at æta=o; in like Manner, if 27 and ytæxcc, and æ is to be Exx terminated, Subſtitute 7, in the firt Equation, in the Place of æ in the ſecond, and xxy ] r⸗ Uſe and Exerciſe in theſe Matters will Furniſh us with more Contracted Methods ht of Proceeding; as, if tiæ and Multiply Equals by Equals and the Products will be Equal. or axx=abb, or xb; But ſuch Caſes are Particular, and therefore cannot fall under any General Rule or Preſcription. RUL. 3. When the Quantity to be Exterminated is in Neither of the Equations of one Dimenſion only, the Value of it's higheſt Power is to be ſought in Both; and, If thoſe Powers are not the ſame, the Equation of the Leſſer Power is to be Multiplied by the Quantity to be Exterminated, or by the Square, Cube, &. of it, ſo as to make it of the ſame Power with the other Equation; and then the Values of the ſaid Powers are to be Formed into an Equation, in which the greateſt Power or Dimenſion of the Quantity to be Exterminated will be Diminiſhed, and by Re peating the ſame Operation, the ſaid Quantity at length will be Entirely taken avay. Tnus, if xxt593y and 2x7-3x74, and æ is to be Exterminated; from the axy: æ thereſore 3555 firt Equation xx;3x+3 and from the Second xx 2? and by Reduction 9y9I5524, or x which Value of x Sub. 3 ſtitute in the Room of it iIn one of the former Equations, as in xx +5x35 8 y +720$41645 y20 iolving b 6 ] From vhence u Trr; +55m: by Multiplying by 47€+69+225 s y+72$t1690 +495+67 53+3009 t25- +18075 6759, or, 699' +72”3 +40F3600O. Ttttt2 LixE SECOND, As to the Application ofthem it isthus; if xx+53y770; and 3x244 =o, and æ is to be Exterminated; according to the fir?t Rule, for i, 50-393 32), and 4, we Subſtitute 4, b ⸗3 f, g, and h; from whence the following Equation will be Derived, Namely, 4F17Fſẽ-⸗: +ic; x15: +5527735; or, 16+40+725€+ 30-905+697 0. LixEwisE, if y=-xy-33x0, and z+xyxx+370, andj is to he Exterminated; according to the ſecond Rule, for 1,x, 0,3; I, x,xx+3, and y we Subſtitute a, b,c, à; ſ, ”. h, and æ Reſpectively, and the Equation will beFxæFæxæx5Ccxx: 35xV 6x35tx: +365x8: 9835xx330; O 27 I18x4354, xxtx,3x,18x +12x* 418x4355x2790; The Reaſon of theſe Subſtitutions is Manifeſt from the Preceding Examples being Rules or Standards for all other Equations of the ſame Kind. TnE Rules, which have been hitherto Given, Concern the Extermination of one Unknown Quantity from two Equations; but if ſeveral Unknown Quantities are to be Exterminated from ſeveral Equations, it is to be done Gradually; Thus, if ax=yz, xty?7æ, and 575+32, and y is the Quantity Inquired after; Firſt  or æ Suppoſing æ) is to be Exterminated by Subſtituting it's Value L, found out from /a the Firſt Equation, into the Second and Third, from henee &+ y2, and z 432; and then ve Proceed to Exterminate æ by the foregoing Rules; Namely, Jætaymaz, and 5y2=ayt3a5, or aymazæ, and = in the firſt Equation, and ii?d æ7s33aæ, and Pm in the Laſt; Therefore  2 59 3 : avi 57 or a)3a, and 6794, or ym324. To this Head belong Surd Quantities, which may be alſo Exterminated from Equations, by Suppoſing them Equal to Certain Letters; Thus, if v&Va]a=ia+ via. Suppoſe vayæt, Vaa7/æv, and  an=x, it will be, v=iatxt=a5, =aaay, and x? ay;, and by Exterminating , v, and æ from the Equations, one aſier anorher, there will at Length an Equation Reſult, which will be Clear of all Incommenſurables, or Irrational Quantities; The Procedure is, as before. C H AP. III Coucerning the Solution of Problems, and Reducing them to Equations. 5. 1. LGEBRAISTS Inform us, that Beginners in theſe Studies ſhould firſt Exer-, ciſe themſelves in the Abſtracted Rules before Delivered, and then Pro- ⸗ ceed to Try their Strength in the Reſolving any Queſtion, Propoſed, into the ſeveral⸗ Equations, which Appertain to it; But it ſeems to be a Truer Method of Inſtructjon for Reaſons already Alledged, to Come to Problems, as ſoon as Poſſible, and ĩ afterwards to Recur to the Abſiracted Rules for a more Complete Perfection in this Great and Divine Science. Tis True, theſe Rules muſt be ſometime Learned, æ if we are Willing to make any Kind of Proficiency in this Sort of Knovledge; but if we are Deſirous to Conſult the Genius oſ Beginners in it, we ſhall find the beſt Way to Humour That, is to Lead them to Problems from the firſt Step we Take vith them in the Inſtructing of them; and therefore it is, that ve have Intermixed Problems with the Ruless which are Given for their Solurionn. And what I have done in this Caſe, has been Dictated to me from my own Experience in theſe Matters; For tho, by Reading Dr. Wallis, Mt. Harriot, Deſcartes, Schooten, Florimond de Beaune, Huddenius, erſey, and Others, I was very Early, and when an Undergraduate in this Univerſity, Acquainted with the Abſtracted Rules of Algebra, yet it was all an Abſtraction, and a Kind of Myſterious One, till I afterwards knew to what Purpoſe and Deſign thoſe Abſtractions were Intended. Docs any One One Teach the Greek or the Latin Language by Grammatical Rules only, without Applying thoſe Rules at the ſame Time to the Underſtanding of Authors, who Write in thoſe Languages? If any One does, I Suppoſe he will find his Scholars to kno the Rules by Rote, or Memory, but Perfectly Unapprized of the Meaning o them; It is Confeſſed by Algebraiſis, that Algebra is a Particular Kind of Language and therefore at the ſame Time, that we Learn the Language, we ſhould be Informed for what Intention and Purpoſe it is Learncd. 5. 2. WHAT We have Said in the former Section Reſpects the Way and Method, which ſould be Uſed in the Teaching of Algebra; The Next Thing is to Knov, how we ſhould, upon any Queſtion or Problem Propoſed, Expreſs all the Circumſtances and Conditions of it by ſo many Equations; In Order to which, we are Firſt to Examine, whether the Propoſitions, or Sentences, in which the Problem, o Queſtion, is Put, are Capable of being Reduced to Algebraick Terms, or to the Language of Algebra, in the ſame Manner as we Signify our Notions or Conceptions, by Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Characters; If this can be done, as it may be in Queſtions, or Problems, which Concern Numbers and Abſiracted Quantities, ve are then, if it is found Neceſſary, to Denominate the Known, and Unknown Quantities, and to Expreſs the Senſe, and Meaning, of the Problem or Queſtion in an Analytick or Algebraick Stile; and the Conditions of the Problem or Queſtion thus Expreſſed will give as many Equations, as are Requiſite to the Solution of it; But it may ſometimes Happen, that the Problem or Queſtion is ſo Stated, that it may ſeem Difficult to Tranſlate it into the Algebraick Language; If yet we make ſome few Alterations, and Attend to the Senſe, rather than the Sound of the Words, the Verſion will be Eaſy3 So every Language has it's Particular Idiom or Propriety, and if we Tranſlate out of One into Another, ve muſt Conſider the Senſe, and not the Words, to make an Accurate and Juſt Tranſlation; It muſt be farther Obſerved, that the fever Unknown Quantities wè make Uſe of in any Problem or Queſtion, the more Expedite and Artificial will be the Solution. 5. 3. PROBL. I4. Itis Propoſed to Find out Three Unknown Numbers, the Conditions Given of which are, That they are Continually Proportional, That the Sum of them is Equal to 20, and the Sum of the Squares of them Equal to 140 What are the Numbers? I. THERE are Three Unknown Numbers Sought. x, uæ? oræ, n 2. TuEY are Continually Proportional. x.yi:3æ, or æ/I x 3. THE Sum of all of them is Equal to zo. r2æ2o. x 4. THE Sum of their Squares is Equal to 140. tnv&is0. xx Tnis Problem is Solved § 8. Rule 3. of the Preceding Chapter. OR otherwiſe, by Reduction, I.9= and m.n= and Iet æ be Exterminated; Therefore according to Example the 34. Rule the 34. of the forecited Chapter, for a, b, c, à, e; and f, ꝗ5 h; Subſiitute 1, 0. 140, o, y; and 1, y20,, and the Eouation will be +28xy: 25 409+20042607 4)F: +3: 243407 4c0,æo, or 16005208007+67 6007 o, or 16c09 2080+676000; or  =i342, and by Extraction of the Root, by the General Theorem of æ 2o ſꝶœ.7565ſa2; a13764;; or, 160075 -2080095+ 67 601 6007 2080057104c o5, and 67 6007f 1040077, or, 160056 =10405, in both which Caſes 7 6155 oro. Wheny is found out, it's Value, to 10400 I600 i i Wit, 64, is 1o be Subſtituted, in the Stead of it, in the forezoing Equation, Namely, 6x+7 , t1770, from whence ill Ariſe the ſollowing xx135v4240, and by 20 Extraction of the Root of the Equation, x6 2+v/35 of which the Firſt is the Greateſt Term, and the Laſt the Leat; For  in the Queſiion Ambiguouſly Repreſenting ſenting Either of the Extreme Terms, upon that Account Admits of a Double Value, Either of which may be æ, and the Other z AxorHER Way of Solving this Problem i is by Extracting the Root of the Equ tion, According to the General Theorem, before Explained, of x= Iy*vũ7 ꝗThus xx20y, and =10yVc132y. Square the Three Numbers and the Sum of them will be 490-407140 by the Problem, or 400-1405409, or y =6; as before; Subſtitute 62 for in the Values of æ, and the Greateſt Number or Proportional will be 3H iæ and the Leat 623, Which Numbers, it is Manifeſt, will Anſwer te Conditions of the Qertion, or Problem; For Firſt, they are Continually Proportional; ſinee 63V3 & 64::6. 6 +V 35 ; Sccond, 63 q+61+V3.%61=20; Third, the ſame Numbers Squared vin be Found Equal to 140. 5. 4. PROBLEM I5. TO Find out Four Numbers, which are Continually Proportional, of which the Sum of the Two Middle Ones is Equal to 12, and the Sum of the Two Extreme Ones Equal to 2c. I. THE Second Number is Suppoſed tò be. x. 2. THEREFORE the Third Number is by the Prob-] lem, which makes the Second and Third Number] 12-3 bosaiſa xri12-xæ12. Equal to 12. 3. THE Firſt Number therefore, becauſe they are] ææ  æ xx by the Problem onninliy Proportional, will be. 77æ ſor /xiix. æ 2xtæ j 4. TuE Fourſ Nũmber for the ſame Reaſon 74 : lor xæ. 12-x:. ill be. : - j vi ii x 144 æ5. BUT by the Problem the Firſt and Fourth Numbers 14424x+xx arc Equal to-20 ob. l7 =20. 6. AND by Reduction ànd EXtraction, the Second . j Number will be. ] xx=u12x303, or, c+Vs54 7. THEREFORE by the Second Step the Third ii i Number vill be, ta-=cVsi s. Inenerons by the Third Step the Fifſt Num- u;t 253 er vi s3 9. AND by the Fourth Step the Fourth Number 413712/55 will be. V5 Wuicu Numbers Solve all the Conditions of the Problem; For iſt. They are Continually Proportional, ſince ar+vst . 53::6+V53. 654 and +Vs3 s; Vsii: 6vs3 vE 24. The Sum of the Middle Numbers, +53 46Vv53125 3d. The Sum of the Extreme Numbers  au 2465 s5: 4+60'æ 3ii132v52 ; urꝶrꝶ " ; +306 7 1135V52 2320 2229 Dividea by 4 5. 5. PROELEM 16. To Find out four Numbers, which are Contimally Proportional, whoſe Sum æ is Given, and the Sum of the Squares b. IT is here Told us by Algebraiſis, that, altho' it is Uſual to Inquire Immediately aſter the Quantities Wanted or Deſired, that is, the Unknown Ones, yet iſ there Happen to be Two, which are Ambiguous, or which are Endued with Conditions, which are in all Reſpects Alike, as in the Preſent Problem, the Two Middle and the Two Extreme Numbers of the Four Proportionals are, it will be better 10 Inquire after other Quantities, which are not Ambiguous, and by which the Ambiguous may be Determined, as for Inſtance, the Sum, or Difference or Rectangle of Them 1. Læx I. LE? us now Suppoſe the Sum of the Two Middle Numbers Equal to an Unknown Quantity. 2. THAT the Rectangle of them is Equal to Another Unknown Quantity. 3. THE Sum of the Extreme Terms will be the Sum of the Middle Terms Subſtracted from the Sum Given of all the Terins, or. ] 4. THE Rectangle of the Extreme Terms will be Equal to ihe Rectangle of the Middle Terms ſrom the Nature of Proportion, and therefore Equal likeviſe to. 5. SuPPOSE the Firſt and Second Numbers to be. 6. THEREFORE the Third Number will be the Second Subſtracted from the Sum of the Two Middle Ones, as iſ 16, 8, 4, and 2 are the Numbers, 2/8 +4-8 or. 7. AND the Fourth Number will be the Sum of the Two Middle Numbers,  the Firſt Number, Subſtracted from the Sum of all of them; Thus, 16+3 +4r2-83-4-1672, Or. 8. TuE Rectangle under the Middle Terms will be. 9. AND by Reduction and Extraction. 10. THE Rectangle under the Extreme Terms vill be. AND by Reduction and Extraction. s. r. r. asux. 5;]; g m3tv 5-r. ax;sxxxær. 1I. THE Sum of the Squares of theſe Four Numbers will by the Problem be Equal to b, or. 12. SUBSTITUTE for r it's Value in the Former Step in the Equations of æ and ; Steps the Ninth and Tenth, and the Two Middle Terms, Namely, the Second and Third will be. AND the Two Extreme Ones, Namely the Fir©t and Fourth. 13. BUTS is ſtill Unknown, therefore by Subſtituting ꝓ, and q for the Roots of the Laſt Step, the Se- ] cond and Third ill be. AxD the Firſt and Fourth will be. I4. BUT by a ~Remaining Condition of the Problem, vhich has not been yet Satisfyd, the Rectangle under the Second and Fourth Terms is Equal to the Square of the Third, or. 15. ALSO by another Condition of the Problem not yet Conſidered, the Rectangle under the Firſt and Third Terms is Equal to the Square of the Second, or. 16. SUBSTRACT the Equation of the Fourteenth Step from that of the Fifteenth, and it will be. 17. SUBSTITUTE the Roots above in the Twelſth Step for ꝓ and q in the Thirteenth, and. 18. AND by Squaring both Sides of the Equation asi pap Il ſ z  eꝶ q5-pa-tps=2p3, O Vi; u=staath and Extracting the Root. +3a3b Iir æa be;0, and b 345, and let us take the Poſitive Value of . THEREFORE S5 +/289muo45 =v= 2. 9 TuE Firt Term =L ſ5336507916; The Fourth Term o 792 2 The Second Term =6c+V8536+ 18072236V458; The Third Term =6v/V43 Conſequently, 16. 8. 4. 2 vill Anſwer all the Conditions of the Problem; For Firſt, They are Continually Proportional, and therefore 16X258X8, and 8X294X43 Second, 16+8+42530, the Sum of the Proportionals; Third, 256+64+16+4 =340, the Sum of the Squares of ſuch Proportionals. ] WEe ſall nov Proceed to Give ſome farther Problems from Algebraiſts to Exerciſe the Beginners in this Science, which Terminate in Simple, or Simple Quadratick, or Simple Cubick Equations, which they ſhould be firſt Practiced in, and Algebra would be then an Eaſy Science to Them. S. 6. PROBL. 17. There are TWOo Numbers vhoſe Sum is 26, or b, and their Difference, to Wit, the Exceſs of the Greater above the Leſſer is 8, or c; What are the Numbers:? PROBL. 18. There are TWo Numbers, Whoſe Sum is 40, or b, and the Greater Number hath ſuch a Proportion to the Leſſer, as 3 to 2, or as 7 tos3 What are the Numbers? PROBL. 19. There are TWO Numbers, whoſe Sum is 7, or b, and the Difference of their Squares is 21, or  What are the Numbers? SoLUTION of PROBL. 1I7. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 18. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 15. Greater Number. æ. ] Greater Number. æ.] Greater Number. x. Leſſer Number. bx. sx ] Leſſer Number. b. Difference. 22b. ] Leſer Number. 7 l Square of the Greater. æx. By the Problem. 2bc. x.  Sq. of the Leſſer xx26x+66. BY Reduction. xib+4ec. Becauſe. r. 3:: x. v Difference of Sq. 260bb. And. bx=Lbic. x By the Probl. 2bbb=a. 16l2+2c j . ait5utm/mq Sum of hoth  BY Redugion. p a : ã 1749726.  xt- ; ſã3 g By the Problem +5i. Alſo. ;u Or. By Reduction. rxtixætrb. tbtba bb æ Leſer Number. æ l Ana =t xus rbbba uiba : - nd =; And 7F 42 Greater Number. bx. r+5 r rHs Difference. bax.,Irbn:” b=7 bb+à 7.. By the Problem. b-2xc. ] V24m24- am21 2614 BY Reduction. ææ20-2c. 1F 23 l 10 hha 28 And. bx+Le '*  716. 20147 24. 16:: 3.23 24416540. 5V27; 24a1. TnESE Problems End in what are Termed Simple Equations, where the &nknown Quantity æ is of One Dimenſion only, and is on One Side of the Equation, and all the Known Quantities are on the Other. 5. 7. PROBL. 20. A Certain Perſon being Ask'd, what was the Age of every One oſ his Four Sons, Anſwerd, the Eldeſt was 4. or b, Years Elder than the Second, the Second was 4, or b, Years Elder than the Third, the Third was Four Years Elder than the Fourth or Youngeſt, and the Double of the Youngeſt Son's Age vas Equal to ihe Age of the Eldeſt; What was the Age of Each Son:? PROBL. 21. A Merchant began to Trade with a Certain Number of Pounds by his Firſt Voyage he Doubled that Stock, by his Second he Loſt 1200ſ. or b, by his Third he Doubled his Remaining Stock, by his Fourth he Loſt again 1200 o b, and then he had no Money Left; How many Pounds did the Merchant begin tc Trade vith? U uuuu PROBL. 22 PROBL. 22. A Gentleman Hired a Servant for a Year for 1205, or c, together vith a Livery Cloak, Valued at a Certain Number of Shillings; but when %, or 4, Parts of the Year were Expired, the Maſter Falling out with his Servant, put him away, and gives him the Cloak vith 505 or ſ, and ſo the Servant Received full Satisfaction for the Time of his Service; How many Shillings was the Cloak Va. lued at? SoLUTION of PROBL. 20. SOLUTION Of PROEL. 2I. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 22. Age oſ the Eldeſt. x. Pounds the Mer- Number of Shillings Of the Second Son. æb. chant Began with.  the Cloak Valued a. * Of the Third. x2b. Pounds at the Due of the Cloak to Of the Fourth. x3b. End of the Firſt 25.] the Servant forà Parts 4x. By the Problem. 2-6b=x. Voyage. of the Year, which he By Reduction. x=ch.  Pounũs at the End Served. = J; il Ye sh. Vr. sh. p-om Scconda2xb. Becuuſe xii a a s 20.  oyage. ue oſf the Moncyuim Pounds at the End ; Wages c for à Parits cã. a - _ of the Thisd Voy- 42-24. u the Year, which he - -4a5 5c. crved. Or Pounds at the End c vi sn. vE sh Age of the Younge. x. ſoſ the Fourth Voy- 4x3b. Of the Third Son. æ+4. Jage gc. Oſ the Second. xt2b. By the Problem. 4;36=o. Becauſe. I. c:: ã. cd By the Probl. +7xcã. By Reduction xdv=cd, Of the Firſt. æ+3b.] By Reduction. x=3b.]Or. dxxfcd. By the Problem. 2xx+3b.] 51200l. x900l. cdſ fucd By Reduction. x=3b. 241800L Aut a o x;35412. 20-b=cool. c120df70-50 x+b16. 4221200l. 4 l74 x+220 453b3600l.3600l. 0. =30 ib xt3624. =48 Shillings. cd20  F43 Shillings 48550=985. 5 oſ 435+75 of 120935 h. e. 75%4575X10598. And 2x12724. TuESE Three Problems likewiſe End in Simple Equations. 5. 8. PROBLEM 23. One being Asked, What a Clock it was, Anſwered, That the Time Then Paſſed from Noon vas Equal to 23, or b, Parts of the Time Remaining until Midnight; What was the Preſent Hour, Suppoſing the Time between Noon and Midnight, to be Divided into 12, or ⸗, Equal Hours:? PROBLEM 24. A General of an Army, having ſet his Soldiers in a Square Battel, there Happened to be 500, or b, Soldiers to Spare; But to Increaſe the Square, ſo as that it's Sidè might Conſiſt of I, or ?, Soldiers more than the Side of the Former Square, there would be 29, or 4, Soldiers wanting; HoW many Soldiers had rhe Ge neral in his Army? PROBLEM 25. Two Perſons 4 and B Diſcourſe of theit Money in this Manner, A ſaith, if B would give him a Crown, or f, then 4 ſhould have as many Crown: as B had left, but B ſaith, i? 4 would give him a Crown, thea B ſould have Twice as many Crowns as 4 had leſt; How many Crowns had each Perſon:? PROBLEM 26. TWO Men Diſcourſing of their Moncy, 4 ſaid to B, give me ? or 4, Shillings of yours, and I ſnhall have e, or3, Times as much as you; B ſuid, give me à, or 6, Shillings of yours, and we ſhall have both Alike; How much had Eac of Them? llt SoLuTIo: Of the Solution of Prollens. SoLuTION of PROBL. 23. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 24. The Time Sought x. The Side of the aſter Noon. firſt Square. The Time from The Number of thence till Mid- c.  Soldiers in the xx. night. Firſt Square. b Parts oſ that Time. bcebx.  The Number of By the Problem. x=bcbxæ. ] Soldiers in the xxth. By Reduction. And. be 396 =1 98 401+6 40 I= 75 876 E: it 396; 12 Hours 5 3o 876396480 7x 7I3 73 the Time Remaining till xtbxte. whole Army. beThe Side of the ſF Second Square. of an Hour  Therefore. xA-e. The Square. By the Problem. xxt2cxecd=xx+. By Reduction. 71373 20xbcc+d, orvm3s. xx+b bddd leròſ; +e+6-14. I Midnight; 2 = 40th. Part b5 j 50000 of that Time, and;3 ofl/, 2 the +i+250-142 3 ſuch Parts Time Sought after Noon. O I. The Time till Mid+2 9000+84T. 4 699603+,+2 50-144 =70196, Soldierss. x=2064, and, xx69696. x lAnd xx+b69696+3500 SoLUTIOoN of PROBL. 25.26 æ] Number of Crowns vhich 4 had. a Number of Crowns, which B had after he had given  Crowns, ilii to a4. Number of Crowns : vhich  had, at Firt, 2e Number of Crovns which B had after 4 æ+3c xx2ex-ec. had given him One. And the Number of Crowns, which 4 had, after he had given One to B. But by the Problem. +3c =2x2t. By Reduction. x=3c. And. xt2/7c. c1 Crown; The Proof, 5VI=716 Crowns. 7P15X25838 Crovns. Probl. 26. Number of Shillings, vhich 4 hadl. æ Number of Shillings, which B had, aſter he had given 2x+20. xc night. =70196. c Shillings to A. The Time Sought  2644+19265; The Square,  Number of Shill . after Noon. æ7c225, and 70225-295 ings, which B xt2c+. b Pans of the Firſt bx. 70196 Soldiers. had at FirsſtT. Time. That is, æ4c is the Side] Number of ShillBy the Problem xbx. lof the Second Square;] ings, which haa By Reduction. bæ+x=c. land 4d=xx+i As after 4 had 2 x+2c+c+4. lo⸗ pua=xxſi, A] given him à SnilAnd. vas Required in the Prob- inę 1+6 lem; So that all the Con- i Z22, as beſore, ditions of it being Satis- But by the n u =63+ Hours; fied, the Solution of it is And. Lt=Etctct2d But, s -A62 Hours. Juſt. — 5 L =12 Hours. Or. xhtt+2d. And. xæ p⸗ſ 4, 3, d6, =tx4t2x3556 Theſe Two Problems and the Two Annexed, Terminate alſo in Simple Equations. The Lat of which was Propoſed to me by a Friend ſome Vears ago, and Formerly Fellow of this College. 31 Exthere+247145 But. 2654530 14354I05. Alſo. 145651 Or. 26-657295. 9. PROBL. 27. A Vintner having Two Sorts of French Wines, one Sort worth 10d. or b, the Quart, and the other 64. or ⸗, per Quart, would have a Mixt Quan tity of both Sorts, to Conſiſt of 100 Quarts, or m, that might be worth 74, or f ver Quart; What Quantity of each Sort muſt be taken to make that Mixture? U uuuu:æ PROBLEM PoBLEM 28. A Ciſtern in a Certain Conduit Is Supplied with Water by Two Pipes, of ſuch Capacities, or Diameters, that by both their Cocks A and B, ſet open at once the Ciſtern will be Fill'd in 12, or b, Hours, but by the Cock 4 alone in 20, or , Hours. In what Time will the Ciſtern be Fill'd by the Cock B alone? PROBLEM 29. A Shepherd in the Time of War Driving a Flock of Sheep, Fel into the Hands of Three Companies of Soldiers, vho Compell'd him to Delivel the Half of his Flock, with Half a Sheep over to the Firt Company, alſo Half hi: Remaining Flock, with Half a Sheep over to the Second Company, likewiſe Hall the Reſt of his Flock, with Half a Sheep over to the Third Company, which Diviſions the Shepherd Performd without Killing a Sheep, and there Remaind 20, or b, Sheep to himſelf; HoW many had he in his Flock at Firſt? SoLuTION Of PROBL. 27. SoLUTION Of PROBL. 28. ] SOLUTION Of PROBL. 20. x.] Number of Sheep, Number of Quarts of the better Sort Time Sought. x. The Part of the Ciof Wine. ſiern Filld by the b Number of Quarts Cock  in b Hours. x of the Worſer mæ. b Wine. For. æ t::b. æ he Wonh of thelhe Pan of ie C Wine at b per Quan xlſtern Filld by the b Becauſe L.b:: x. bx. Co: 4 in b Hou : The Worth of the For. c 1::6. b Worſer Sort ofFPr mcex. c Wine at è per Quart. But by the Problem Becauſe I. c.: : mx. emex But by the Problem. mc:cxbxpfm. Whole Ciſtern. Theſe Two Parts  to the _ That is, +=1 By Reduction 57 . x æ ro BY Reduction. brẽæ, c6 =ær=i;. m=i00mxioo—25575 And, cb+bxcx, Or, = 7 r=r» mſroc d. =255104. +75 x6 d. =2504. 4504. Canon or Theorem bc. m:: f}. x. Hence the Rule of Alligation Alternate in Vulgar ſ rooſ. Arithmetick fmntom Alſo mxm bc bmcmpfm-tem lli bc i  b—o 3 Therefore bc. m:: bf. . =20, b12, 240 x 30 Hours. Canon or Theorem. cb.c;: b. æ. a It 2 7 -n .ſ ; bc Theſe Problems alſo End in Simple Equationsc El 2 5 Book VII which the Shep- x. herd had at Firit. Number of Sheep Delivered to thea Zx7  ] Firſt Company of Soldiers. The Remainder .] to him aſter ſuch 24 Delivery. The Number of Sheep Delivered 2-L+2 to the Second 53. Company. Remainder to him after ſuch De- 2x4%2 dui . 3 livery. =4x2 The Number of Sheep Delivered to the Third Company. Remainder to,,,, him after ſuch ?28 Delivery. 7 By the Problem. 36. vr3 =5+3 By Reduction. xS8b+7. b=20,,167. 1ſt. Company 333+ had. =34. Remain'd to i the Shepherd. ?678433. 2d. Compan haam&410474 Remain'd to the Shephera. 8142741. a. ſã cm o. Remain'd to 412120. the Shepherd. S. 10. PROBL. 30. TWO Merchants 4 and B were Copartners in Traſſick, the Sum of their Stocks was 3004 or b, the Stock of 4 Continu'd in Company 9, or c, Months, and the Stock of B 11, or à, Months, they Gain'd a certain Sum of Money, which they Divided Equally;3 What was each Mcrchant's Stock at Firſt? PROBLEM ;1I. PROBLEM 31. A Certain Man being Ask'd, how many Years Old he was, An ſvered, if , or b, Part of the Number of Vears he had Livd were Multiplied by J or ę, Parts of the ſame Number, the Produt would give his Age; What was it PROBLEM 32. There are TWo Numbers, the Greater of which hath ſuch Propor tion to the Leſi, as 3 to 2, or as 7 to5 and the Sum of the ſaid Numbers hath ſuch Proportion to the Sum of their Squares, as I to 13, or as b to ?; What are the Numbers? SoLuTION of PROBL. 30. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 3I. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 32. The Stock of 4, Number of Years, Greater Number. x when he Enterd x. lor Age, Sought. x.  Leſſer. x Partner. By the Probſem, Becauſe r. s:: x. ix The Stock of B bx b Parts of x xæ 7 therefore. Xe Parts of x Xxbexx=. x The Stock of 4 Eixex, Or, Sum of Both. — in Company, viæ. And. iũ7 : ? - n by c, Produces. b=4 I y noporsn + The Stock of ir b. c:: x45 ſIex Multiplied by the ' Eæ. Years. i ſime i Continsa dbdx. lFor: : = of 32, and 20 By Probl. erx+ex s3xx pany, viæ. =45 of 32, and 20 xr tbr ” by 4, Produces. Z20+12732 YeasBY Reduction m im Or, I Follos, tòæ vided the cains E aa According to the Problem, ] That, br ” qually ax.  th. Part of his Age, And rremin Lbux. : Namely 32 Years, Multi- i By Reduction X plied into-ꝗ1hs. of it will And. errtcs=ubrrxthux. æ Give the Whole of his Age; crrtex dbqcbISo that, the Conditions of ] And. i7 And bx ; : brr+bss cd c+a the Queſtion being Sati- l/5. 195 b300 3300 J fied, the Problem is Fully l æ; /715 . 75 7165 and Abſolutely Solveq, with- l=1. l. ; ai. 27c0 out which no Solutionscan 135æro. =135be Accurate, or Complete. r And, that this Solution is 135.165.7300. Founds. Poundi. Monthi. Monthi. 135. 165:: 9. II. Foric;s xo133651151485 i. e. 165 l. for Nine Months is the ſame, as 135 L for 11 Months. Canon or Theorem. c+d. b:: d. x Stock of 4. cd. b: : c. L/x Stock oſ B. Right, is thus Proved, Becauſe. I5. 1O0:: 3. 2, And 25. 325:: I. I3. That is, the TWo Numbers Required, 15 and 10, are to each Other, as3 to 23 and the Sum of the Said Numbers is to the Square of Them, as 1 to 13, which vere the Conditions Propoſed in the Problem. Theſe Problems likewiſe End in Simple Equations. ſ. 1I. PROBLEM 33. There are Two Numbers, the Greater of which hath ſuch Proportion to the Leſſer, as æ to 1, or as 7 to s, and the Sum of the Squares of the ſaid Numbers is 125 or b; What are the Numbers? PROBLEM 34. A Merchant Bought a certain Number of Yards of Linnen Cloth, at 124d, or b, per Yard, and if the Number of Pence, Paid for all the Cloth, be Multiplcd by the Number oſ Yards Bought, the Product will be 30000, or c; What was the Number of Yards ought? norLEM 35. TWO Merchants 4 and  were Copartners, 4 brought in a Certain Number of Pounds, which Continued in Company 4, or ?, Months, B brought in 100 100, or b, Pounds, which Continued in Company ſuch a plied by the Stock of 4, it makes 50 or à At the En had Gained 60 I. whereo? 4 had 40, or 7, Pounds ſor his 20, ors, Pounds; What was the Stock, which 4 put i Months did the Stock of B Continue in Company:? SoLuTION of PROBL. 33. Greater Number. x EEã Leſſer Number. EH r x r. s:: x. Becauſe. r Sum of their Sr. ær. SoLuTION of PROBL. 34Number of Yards x. Bought. Number of Pence Paid for the Cloth. Number of Yards Bought X Number of Pence Paid. bx. bxæxæ. But, by the Problem. N hich by the Piobl. ssæx . e. bxx=c. =i. c . =t ”? b By Reduction. xx 7 By Reduct. rrxxtsuxx=irr. : And. æ=trAnd. rris brr b=i2. And.  / f30000. mis ooc0 =i25. vt =V2500. rmaz. ; 300,0 12 i. v5 =30 VYards. x I0 But 50X12600 à. the Price 55 Paid for the Cloth. bx. i f h And, 600X 50 the Number of v/ Yards =3 0000. V 7 Or; I2x50850bx=c. a sub rirrmss is But 10. 5:: 2.. And the Squares/100 +25. Which were the Conditions Required in the Problem. Theſe Problems End in Equations, which are Term: tions, where the Unknown Quantity xx is a Square on and all the Quantities are Known on the Other. 5. 12. PROBLEM 36. Certain Noblemen made a Prog Nobleman carried with him the ſame Sum of Pounds; men vas Equal to the Number of Servants, which Atter the Number of Pounds, which each Nobleman had, vas of all their Servants, and the Sum oſ all their Money was: ber of Noblemen, and how many Pounds and Servants I PROBLEM 37. A Merchant Bought as many Pounds c as was half the Number of Crowns he Laid out; Then i ceivd for every 25l. of Pepper as many Crowns as he ſ in Concluſion he had 20 Crowns; HOW many Crowns PROBLEM 38. There are Two Numbers, the Greater c tion to the Leſſer, as 3. 2, or 7. 5, and the Sum oſ the bers is 4375, or b; What are the Numbers? 36. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 37., SOLUTION Of PROBL. 8. Number oſ Crovns The Greater Numlaid out. ber. Number of Pounds x æ loF Pepper Bought æ The Leſſer Number. m for one Crown. E 0 The vhole Quan- Becauſe r. s:: æ 7. tity of Pepper XXThe Cube oſ the x  Bought. 2 Greater Number. xæ. Crown. Crown. Peppet. Pepper.  an The Cube of the sxx 2xx.  Becauſc 1. æ: 7 7. Leſſer. m/ The Number of s3 x3 s Sum oſ the Cubes x? + -  ] Crowns, for which xxx r all the Pepper was 50] Which by the Problem is ]Sold By Reduction. l  x? ?iæts xrih. 728. 2 .. p j 3 ? Becauſe 25. æ:: 5 And. ſ L By the Problem, , r ſhe Equation ill Thereſor. xv / By Reductionn. æ3 =10oo.] ,4 2, 2t 12. Thereforee. x=ioCrowns. i rr rns Quantity of Pepper 50L] : b nb Bought. iũũ rn5 n⸗ I44 He therefore Bought ;. 5l. of Pepper for æ l /2. 288. ]1 Crown ſ5 being 2l bm4375Half of 10.) or, 118125 For every 25 l. of Therefore. y Pepper he Receivd i jii 456.  Couns andx? o ær-t therefore for 50l. 55 720] And. = —91I0 he Received 20 r s Crowns, the Sum But. I5. 19: è 3. 2 Expreſſtd in the Problem. And. 3375+10004375 d in Equations, which are Termed Simple Cubick Equations Quantity xxx is a Cube on onc Side oſ the Equation, an Known on the Other. C H AP. IV. vadratict Equations, and the ſeveral Forms of Them. Quadratick Equations are Diſtinguiſied into their ſeveral Forn ariety oſ the Privative or Poſitive Signs, which are Uſed i firſt Form, in Particular, xx6x353, or, xxoqæX+55, an b, or xexcx+b; In the Second Form, in Particular, xxI 4, and in General, xxbxt, or xxbx+; And the ſan Third Form; For in Two Quantities Equal to a Third, thel ree Caſes, in Reſpect to the Signs, either xxtcxb, or xx or the Fourth Form of xxcxb, is Impoſſible; Becauſe nnot be Equal to a Poſitive; It muſt be alſo Obſerved wi Iratick Forms, That they may be Continucd in Infiuitum; Fi —q, &c. in which Equations 4, q, ], n are Knovn Quantitic . Ell æ141 x=4in 10=-120 1020 P2a TROBL. 51h. Reſolution of the Second Equation of the Second Form n Proof; If x12, =24; If /, Column 4 By the Theorem, xx=ir+V;ã Eòmaa-ſ And Conſequently, by Extracting the Root of xx, cã5m⸗ v- b4i x38I xx:i 4 &a" PROBL. 61h. Reſolurion of the Third Equation of the Second Form, Proof; If æ3, 4 =27; If v-3, Column 4 By the Theorem, n=3mv7æ5; j 3 ſmtv/iæl +753: 42ut 76 Thereſore, x=i Amvmm⸗ 3⸗ 3.892, Or, v?. 6. x=c Proof; Iſ x2, Sf 48; If x=y.56, umn as. Tumo FORM. PROBL. 71h. Reſolution of the ⸗ Equation of the Third Form, Column 41h. By the Theorem, tVm , a le2775 =1ſ I6 1I0x40 Pioof; If 65, , - =24; If x/4. -= PROBL. 8/h. Reſolution of the Second Equation of the Third Form, Column 47/ By the Theorem, xx2+V7; _p u+4224513 I And, Thereſore, =vyævi]Ts; 4 2 l I. vI : xx20 56x7 l Proof; If x2, 52. ; If xæI. J=a 4 PrOBL. 9h. Reſolution of the Third Equation of the Third Form, Column 4h d glxt /4 A];i/4t:3 By the Theorem, x3 I+vVTa-i; Ii Z : And, Therefore, . 2d+Vãi ; u5 - =li. m Ls. x' =1 Eſ I. oxI/r72 xt264 Prooſ; Ifxæ2, 38; If x1. i IN the Firſt and Second Forms, the Roots are, the One Negative, the Other Poſi tive, And in the Third, both Roots Poſitive; That is, where the Higheſt Unknowr Power in the Firſt and Third Columns is Poſitive, One Root is Negative, the Othei Poſitive, where the Higheſt Power is Negative, both Roots are Poſitive, and become Poſſible or Impoſſinle, according as the Quantity, from which the Extraction is made is Poſirive or Negative, and according to the Nature of the Root, which is to be Extracted; Thus v? 38 is Impoſſible, or v:.43 Becauſe, no Quantity Multiplied into it's ſelf will Produce a Privative One; But /38 is Poſſible, becauſe 2x2 xX2438, &. . 2. PROBL. I. There are TWOo Numbers, whoſe Difference is 156 or ?, and the Product of their Multiplication is 36, or b; What are the Numbers:? PROBL. 2. There arce Three Numbers in Continual Proportion, the Difference of the Extremes is 16, or c, and the Mean Proportional is 6, or m; Wnha are the Extremes? ProBL.3. There are TWO Numbers, whoſe Diference is 15, or ã, ana if the Product of the Multiplication of the ſaid TWoOo Numbers be Divided by 2 or ⸗, the Quoticnt wiſ give the Cube of the Leſer Number; what are the Numbeis? X x x x x SornurIn SoLUTION Of PROBL. 2. SOLUTION Of PROBL.;. Leſſer Number Sought. æ. SoLurioN of PROBL. I. æ Leſſer of the Two Greater of the Two Numbers Sought. Extreme Proportionals æ. ]Greater Number. xta Leſſer Number. x-ct. ] Sought. Product of them. xx+dx The Product of the xcx Greater. xte. xxtdx Two Numbers.  Produẽt of them. æxx+ex. |BY the Prob.,—&=nx. By the Problem. xxcx=. BY Reductionn. xx=cx+b. By Reſolut. x=V75. x34V6a+36 . =3ſio13 Or, 2 Difference of x, and xc is 18-216, o,2+2 +1616. Product of their Multiplition is, 18x2536, Or, elſe, 2x-2-1636. Square of the Middle Proportio- mm. nal. By the Nature of xxexæ Proportionals. mm. Becauſe by the Problem, It will be, x. m:: m. x+e. By Redut. xx=—cx+mm. By Reſolution. ai521413;, 4+v /mon E FT 16x284V6+36 Greater Number. I8,or,122. m=6 l=—30=32,05-18. Difference 18-;52153 Difference of the Extremes,O: 122-22515. By Reduction. a4. or, c c l BY Reſolution.  /i11+8 7 v e+— i5: Enu Or, Leſſer Number. x æ, ætc. 2, and 18, =r6.I8;s4 Greater Number. x+c.  Or,18,fromi18+16516. 2 Elli&ũ the Cube ol The Product of and the MeanProportional 63]3, the Leſer Number. the Two Num- xx+cx=b. bers. BY Reſolut. æ= +vVEh 2. For 2. 6:: 6. 18, Or, I25-2 18. 6:: 6. 2. Orn,—: i5% Since 18 is 3 Times more]= Cube of 2.. than 6, as 6 is than 2, and . =s8*110  the Multiplication of xAnd. 18T5VFI6=36. ]is /x+Difference. 16. 5. 3. PROBL. 4. There are Three Numbers in Geometrical Proportion Continuꝗ, and Such, that if the Difference between the Sum of the Extremes and Mean be Maultiplied by the Sum of the Extremes, the Product will be 112c, or 4, but if the Said Difference be Multiplied by the Sum of all the Three Proportionals, the Product will be 1456, or ;3 What are the Proportionals? PROBL. 5. There are TWo Numbers, vhoſe Sum is 10, or b, and the Proportion, which their Difference bears to the Sum of their Squares, is, as 2 to 29, or as r to s3 What are the Numbers? PROBL. 6. There arce TWOo Numbers, the Product of whoſe Multiplication is, 43, or ꝓ, and the Diſference of their Squares is 28, or à3 What are the Numbers SoLUTION of PROBL. 4 SoLUTION of PROBL. 5., SOLUTION of PROBL. 6. Difference of the Sum Greater Number. æ.] Greater of the Numbers. æ of the Extremes andæ. ] Leſſer Number. bx. . ? Mean. Difference. 22-b] The Leſſer will be. æ x By the Problem the b] Square of the Greater x.] The Square of the Firſt. æx. Sum of the Extremess æ. ] Number. ” The Mean Propo-  Square of the Leſer. Of the other. æ tional. * bb26bxtxx. For thus, in 3. 9. 27. Sum of the Squares. Difference of the æ. Since 3+279921, the bb20x42xxæ. ] Squares. xx Difference berwixt the Sum] BY the Problem. Which by the Prob. =4 of the Extremes and Mean] 2b. bba2bx+2xx:: r. 5.] BY Reduction. 34272190, the Mean] Equation will be. ppræ45dxx Proportional. 2sb=rbb2rbx2rxx. ] And, xtdxx ſ The The Sum of all Three. But by the Probl. x=t. Or, x BY Reduction. xx=25c. And. xvV77. b1120VI VZ240 14560 T56 V784 =28/X. 2xxc. b x 1120 74m0; Sum of the b Extremes 40,28 =i2. The Mcan. The Extremes are found to be 4 and 36, by a Problem, i which their Sum 40 is Given, and the Mean Proportional 12. Vi. Probl 24. But, 4. 12:: IZ. 36. Likewiſe, 28 X 40 II20. Laſtly, 2865251456. And the Reſolution of Them BY Reduction. . 20xx=2rbxrbb+25s3b. Or, tx3b+- x 4 ——— r ar By Reſolution or Extraction. 3 bb uva b=roxs+7 2 Væ i =29 1237 =i2345174, Or, 7. The Greater Number /7. Leſſer io-793. Proof; 3+7 10;and 4. 58:: 2. 29. 1753 and 74 will, Alſo, Solve this Problem; For their Sum, 17573 IO. Their Difference /25. The Sum of theit Squares vill be /3623. But, 25. 362:: 2. 29. By Reſolution or Extraction, It will be, xe=42a+V da3. V;dd tpp. And, xVũ 7. 7 la=28 xx=1i4+/250064  ſm2] DOr, 36 Therefore, x3, or, y 36. The Leſſer Num. 2 s32 EEE Proof; Their Prod. 5x3943. Differ. of Sq, 64-3628. Or, this Problem may be Solved, by taking even an Impoſt ble Root for æ, which is One of it's Values, Namely, V36. For then the Leſſer Number. I- a L Their Produt V361 43 2 y6* And the Difference of thei 2304 Squares36 45 36+64/28. S. 4. PROBL. 7. There are TWo Numbers, vhoſe Sum is 14, or b, and ii the Sum of their Squares be Multiplied by the Sum of their Cubes, the Produẽt i ĩs 72800, or c; What are the Numbers:? PROBL. 8. There are TWO Numbers, the Produ&t of whoſe Multiplication ii 20, or b, and the Difference of their Cubes is 61, or 5 What are the Numbers: PrOBL. 9. A Merchant Bought certain Cloths, and Sells them at 175 ſ. or b, the Cloth, and then found, that by every 100l. or f, that he had laid out, he Gain'd a many Pounds, as he Paid for One Cloth; What was the firſt Coſ of a Cloth? SoLuTION Of PROBL. 7. One oſ the Num1 bers Requir'd. b+æ The other. 2b. Square of the firt Number is. xxtbx+3bb. Square oſ the Secont xx.bx+3t. Sum of the : Squares. axx+4bb. Cube oſ the Firt Number xi 4;hux3bbx50 Cube oſ the Second. x 2bxx 3bxA+3. Sum oſ the Cubes. +3bæx+;6. Sum of the Cubes X Sum oſ the Squares. clx +203x + 36c by the roblem. SoLuTION of PROBL. S. Greater Number. x Leſſer Number. : Cube of the Greater. æxxæ. Cube of the Leſſer. Llv xx Difference of the Cubes. xB» x: By the Problem. =i. 'By Reduction. xdxi +13. By Reſolution. x Z3atv3iu+h And. xv 3, 5tTp. b=æa0 x/301 z c1 304+789304 X x x x x 2 . IFirſt Coſt of a Cloth. IGain ſor laying out SOLUTION Of PROBL. 9. x. Gain of one Cloth. --x. ch-ex his Money ⸗. x Becauſe. chex . xbx:: c But by the Problem. chcx =x. And by Reduction. xx2tx+cb or Evolution 30VEc. Lcccb. nE 4225 ;0465 5. +15. By Extractio ion = IoO V Therefore. B; By Reduion. : 01t9:3 u n=3tbxeb-+ę; And 5 or By Reſolution or Extraction. nò. vi.64. x it 7 Julom, *vę s0, n=4or, v 20 b+ę _y 34 x ' 3. 64 J - Alſo. xx 7 5X4920. vVæi: + and,  Lirewite I2 56461I. 20 Or. 3. 64xv7.65 20. And the Difference of their ib +væimt +5 Equat ions, Book VII Gain of One Cloth. bx=2l Gain for laying out ever, 100/. or æ. cb—ex 1725150 xI35 15l. Z to the Price o One Cloth. Alſo, 15l. 221:: 10l. 151 Thus, 115. Coſt of Ont Cloth, makes the Gain 132l. for every 1004, oræ r /.. a: b14 ſæ ii c7280 4=: ’ v 18 3224335; =5Hi or,655. 3br7F 1983371 =6; 8+6145 IOOX728 =72800. Itx=;2333/65+. 776557 653514 5æl .5L5 æ 7 õ +7F6 x 77658 t753) 1322 And. 22 115 the Pricc of one Cloth, But,115.1325:100.115. Cubes upon Trial will be 1I15 to Found to be, in like Manner, 6I. I have here all along Choſen, contrary to the Cuſtom and Practice of Algebraiſis, to Expreſs the Negative, as well as the Poſitive Roots of theſe Equations; That Beginners in this Science may See the Wonderfull Latitude and Extent of it, which can Solve Real Problems by even Chimerical and Imaginary Quantities, if Privative Ones may be Accounted ſuch; Tho' I ſould rather Think, if the Price of a Cloth is worthni3L ĩt is, as Poſitive a Circumſtance in a Problem, as if ir was worth 15. That is, if a Man has a Cloth for leſs than =72 800. Nothing by 1i5, or has 115. given him for the Purchaſe of the Cloth, his Gain muſt be in Proportion Greater, than if he Paid 15. for it, ſince —115. in this Caſe is to him  115, and + 15/. is to him 15. And the Reaſon, that theſe Privative Roots are not taken Notice of by Algebraiſts, is, becauſe in Common Life it ſeldom Happens, that a Man Pays Nothing, or Leſs than Nothing, for what he Purchaſes, which is too Generous a Way of Trading, but lays down Money for what he Buys, which, tho it is + in the Problem, is to Him. I have likewiſe been thus Minute in the Arithmetical Operations, for the Sake of my Pupils, for vhom theſe Papers were Originally Intended; But the World not Favouring me. as I could have Deſired, in an Employment, which of all Others, I had the Greateſt Inclination to, the Inſiruction of Young Minds, which were Studious and Good, in Religion, Philoſophy, and Reaſon, I hope the Learned World will forgive my being, Perhaps they will Think, too Particular; Tho' I may Say in the vhole, that, Notwithſtanding this, there are more Problems Preſcd in a Leſs Room, and Solved in a Clearer Method, than, IBelieve, in any other Algebra, which is Extant. The ſeveral Forms of Equations, the Reſolution of which Takes up in a Cerrain Famous Algebraiſt, near Twenty Pages in Folio, I have Reduced to Leſs than Two, and in lome Meaſure the ſame may be Said of the orher Problems; The Solutions of which are here Abridged, and Dravn into ſeveral Columns, to the Great Advantage of the Learner, who vill by that Means See the whole Proceſs, in a Manner, at One View. 5. 5. PROBL. 10. Each of Two Captains, vhereof One had a Leſſer Number of Soldiers in his Company by 40, or b, than the Other, Diſtributed Equally among the foldiers of his own Company 1200, or , Crowns, whereby it Happened, that the Soldiers of the Leſſer Company had 5, or 4, Crowns a Piece more than the Soldiers oſ the Greater Company; Wnat was the Number of Soldiers in each Company, and how many Crowns did each Soldier Receive? PROBL. 11. TWO Merchants Sell Linnen Cloth in this Manner, Each Sells 60, or b, Ells, and the firſt Merchant Selling 2, or , Ells leſs for one Pound than the Second, Receives ſor his 60 Ells 5, or à, Pounds more than the Second Merchant for his co Ells; How many Ells did each Merchant Sell for 1 Pound? PROBL. 12. TWO SoCieriess, whercof the One Exceeds the other by 4. or 4, Men, Divide Two Equal Sums of Crovns, the Men of the Leſler Society have s, or or æ, Crowns a Picce more than thoſe of the Greater, and the Number of Ciowns, which each Society Receives, Exceeds the Number of Men of both Societies by 172. or 3 What was the Number of Men in each Society, and the Number of Crowns, which each Society had? SoLUuTION of PROBL. IO. Number of Soldiers in the Leſſer Com- x. pany. j Number of Soldiers in the Greater Com- æ+b. pany. Share of Crowns be- J Ionging to each Soldier in the Leſſcr. x Share of Crowns belonging to cach Soldier / in the Greater Com- æ+6 Rad a to the lat Aerab+e Share, it will beæ4 And by the Problem. v axtabre x x By Reduction. dæxdbxtex Zextbe, and, dxxtdbx=bce. he And, xxixt 7 By Evolution or Extraction. 4rt3u+5 1200—20+100730. b=40 =204V 10000 a3 - Or, 120. c x4b120, or, —s0 135. c 710. 120-835740. x+b 80X15 120010I200. SoLUuTION of PROBL. II. Number of Ells, vhich the Firſt Merchant æ. Sold for 1 Number of Ells, which the Second xVec. Sold for 1l. Money Received by the Firſt Merchant b for his 60, or b Ells æ Becauſc æ. 1:: b. z Money Received by the Second Mer- iã chant for his 60 or æ7 b Ells. , Becauſe. xtc. I tihſ Add àZ Pounds to, the lat Sum, it dxde+ b vill be. xtc But by the Problem, dxVde+b + x By Reduction. àxxdcxA5hx Zbx+be, and dxx+dexEtc, And, auiè By Evolution or Extraction. jrv;5 b=6 1i4v 254 ; +c6 Or, 6. i51. & 7ls ol - Ells. Ellæ. But, 4. 1:: 60. 15l. And. 6. 1:: 60. 10l. SoLUTION Of PROBL. I2. Number of Men of the Leſer Society. Number of the Greater. Number of Crowns, which were Divided. 2xb+4.  The Share of ] each Perſon in 2x ad the Leſſer So- rli ciety. The Share of cach Perſon in the Greater Society. Add Crowns to the laſt Sum, it will be. But by the Problem. 2x6+hd 4cxtebax+b44 xtb llil x . By Reduction & Extraction. b x 7b æ pru 2x4bd 2x4b4dex+ch xAb : b bI t, m 2 c b=4 Wi3+v90; =8 1349.78. a=1i72 Or, 11 xtbi2. 2+b47192. axtbta 2xb+d 7 5 =16. And, t--. 204b+d E r 24. 5. 6. PROBL. 13. A Graſier, having Bought Certain Oxen for 270, or b, Pounds, finds, that if he had Paid that Sum for 5, or /, Oxen Fewer, every Ox would have Coſt him EL or ã, more than he Paid for an Ox3 What vas the Num ber of Oxen Bought? PROBL. 14. A Merchant Buys Linnen Cloths of Two Sorts, viz. 90, or b, Elli of one Sort, together with 40, or f, Ells of a Worſer Sort for 42, or 4, Pounds and he finds, that in laying out 1/. upon each Sort, he hath 4: or m, of an Ell morc of the Worſer Sort than the Other; What was the Price oſ an Ell of ecach Sort? PROBL. 15. A Merchant, having certain Spices, to Wit, 30. Weight, or b, of Mace and 100 I. Weight, or ę, of Cloves, Sells both Quantities for 65. or à4, Pounds in Mo ney, vhereby it Happened, that he Sold a Quantity of Mace for 10, or m, and tht like Quantity of Cloves, with 60 L Weight, or n, mote of Cloves for 20l. or 7; Homany Pound Weight oſ Mace did he Sell for 1oſ? SoLuTIO SoLUTION Of PROBL. I4. Number of Ells of the SoLuTION of PROBL. I3. Number of Oxen tisficd, the Solution is Juſt; —40 vill no Leſs Anſwer all the Requiſites of it. 5.7. certain Sum of Pounds, which continu'd in Company I2 Linnen per Ell. 3X6 5. 8d. æ1 l. 9X65. 84. 30l. Price of the Worſer 65. 3%56 5. I385. Remains 2 s. or 74. of 65. to make up the Pound, Which therefore ill Purchaſe ; of an Ell more at 65. per Ell. 406 5, 12l. Book VII. SoLUTION of PROBL. IF. Number of I. Weight Bought.  ] better Sort of Linnen, æ. ] of Mace, which the b  Bought for 1l. Merchant Sold for Coſt of One Ox.  ] Number of Ells 0L or m , of the worſer Sort æ+m. ] Number of I. Weight Becauſc. x b:: L4 Bought for 1l. i : of Cloves, which he x+n. Coſt of all the Ells Sold for 2o0l. or r. Oxen; The Re- j Becauſe. x1::b ' ſounds of Mass sold Eli mainin umber is. ii Coſn up cach of Coſt of all the EllSs  3ecaue m3.m this Number. . lof the worſer Sor æ i -7  Money vhich ioo, Becauſe. xc. b:: I. Becauſe. x4m. 1:: c. / ore, Pounds of Cloves ſ. But by the Problem. But by the Problem. Sold for. hiii b b&c Becaue. tu.r:: c. æ.. 7577 FEũ æũ By Reduction. dxxdexte, ] BY Reduction. But by the Problem And xx=/. + x. xbuan 4m 4 = , cxr—- x x+. x xn d a al . luii : : IBy ReductionBy Evolution or Extradtion By Extraction or Erolurion mbxtmbntrexdex+anx. x Ju J hoamn i x=;v+ Suppoſing, T And.xtmban Fæ 18065 T m3Yarimas. Tvillbe, /2 ſ+vãsf Suppoſt. re+mba = l -n . æ Or, 40. 90 iæ+y4rs: ſi =f. Alſo.=6l 40. d4: , v 18,22 By Extraction. 40 57V25 _ mn And. u4;1 n=; l212 4123- ivi/. i xx à n⸗ſml/7ſiæ] ;  lb=30 But. 6X4556409270. i A Or, % ,Z100 l/=3 ci Moreover. 45. 270:: I. 6 x+m=m3+;30l. a=65 rx Likeviſe. 40. 270:: I. 6 Vx m/ro nꝶ; Laſtly, 611-6 I=t1a. &4121;3041219421./66=20l. So that all the Conditions  xtm r2a2o0 Or,3652l. of the Problem being Sa-  Price of the better 4,, lſi6ẽ⸗ iil 3 Whole Quantity of Mace Sold for 40 l. of Cloves ſor 251;40l 425165; 201 of Cloves + 60l /30l Sold for 20l. Becauſe 100. 25:: 8O. 20. PROBL. 16. TWO Merchants entered into Partnerſhip, the Firſt brought in , or b, Months, and the Se cond put in 30, or, for 17, orã, Months; They Gain'd together 184, or m, vheæ of the firt Merchant had 26/. or n, for his Principal and Gain; HOW many Pound did the firt Merchant bring into the Common Stock? PROBL. 17. TWO Merchants entered into Partnerſhip, the Firſt put in a Certai Number of Pounds for 3, or b Months, the Second put in 50, or c, more than th Firſt for5, or à, Months, they Gain'd together 140 I, or m, whereof the Firſt Mel char chant had ſuch Part, that if 604, or æ, be added to it, the Sum will be Equal to the Stock, wherewith he entered Partnerſiip; What was the Stock and Gain of each Merchant? PROBL. 18. A Cirizen, having Bought a Houſe for a certain Number of Pounds, Sells it for 641, or à, and finds that his Loſs in 1004, or ?, was Equal to a Fourth Pant, or m, of the Money, that he Paid for the Houſc; What Number of Pounds did the Citizen Pay for the Houſe? SoLUuTION of PROBL. I6. SoLUTION of PROBL. 17. SOLUTION Of PROBL. IS. Pounds, which the Firſt Stock of the Firſt æ Number of Pounds Merchant brought into æ. ] Merchant. ' lPaid for the Houſe. the Common Stock. Stock of the Second . Whole Loſs in Sel- i Which Multiplied into Merchant.  ling the Houſe. xthe Time, b, it Continu- bæ. ] Stock of the Firſt ca d in Company, makes. Merchant æ into the Iæ. ſLoſs per Cent. i Second Merchant's Time b it Continued exci Stock ⸗, Multiplicdc⸗ã. p- . Becauſe. x. x:: c. i into the Time 4, it tock of the Secon Continued in Eu Merchant into the But by the Problem. pany makes. Time à it Contin- àxace. x æ Gain of the fiſt mbx  ued in Company. j x Merchant. IæVcd Fir?t Merchant's mibx By Reduction. Becauſe. Gain. i Va7ac x amxx mbx Becauſe. xdxtae. m:: lAnd xx= x 'u.l bxd. m:: bæ. 4c mix m m Principal and Gain of bVãæ7ãc |By Extraction. the fir?t Merchant But by the Problem. 4 à i mbx mbx i 2mZmm m vill be. m7iii ræta t- =100 =200414400 By the Problem. =n. ] BY Reduction. 64 =20020By Reduct. mbx-thxx+cdx mbx Anbx +ndx + ndebxxm4 l;20L or 30l. Znbxtedn, | Hauxdex, And 320L.64l. 7256l.x4. mbecàa_ cdn |,  mb+ubtnidc , ndela);20ſ 80, and And. vr ;nx+F. xxm 77ã 320. 256:: 100. 30, - nbmbcd ⸗ By Extraction or Evolution ⸗ a snſ su.s. uppoſe. . mbrnb-+nd-de eviſe. x28ol. Suppoſe cal. x By Evolution or Extation. iii t / r-— Isl _. iſvãr Ni Then i;ſ+v% 80. 16:: 1OO. 20. Ji Or, bi2. cxcd 30 173 z 45+Vi52533 x. x-d:: c. v . ai7 lvi4isi:  Fao;755137100 Thererore all the Conditio = p ns m=is; m1u754037% e Or, 185 ]oſ the Queſtion being An6 ,JFæ o-sr æmi ſwered, this Problem alſo is 5 it Juſtly Solved, and  Adprss jp æ 50l. 130837 Fi o. mits of Two Poſitive Values; ' Namely, Either 320, .2. ]?40.6 ſolol  Bur 1050 130: ſ,5049 oõl , 750.185 5s 10.1233261. And. 40lt60. Z 1001. 5. 8. PROBL. 19. TWO Merchants Entered into Partnerſhip, the Sum of theii Stocks was 165 l. or b, the firſt Merchant's Stock continued in Company I2, or ⸗ Months, and the Stock of the Second 8, or 4, Months, they Gained a Certain Sum of Pounds, which together with their Stocks, they Divided between themſelves in ſuch a Manner, that the Firſt Merchant Received 67, or f, Pounds for his Stock and Gain, and the Second 126, or , for his Stock and Gain; What was cach Merchant's Stock and Gain? PROBL PROBL. 200 A Certain Foorman 4 Departeth from Londin towards Lincolu, and at the ſame Time another Foorman B Departeth from Lincolu towards London, cach keeping the ſame Road, when they Met, 4 ſaith to B, I find that I have Travelled 20, or q, Miles more than you, and have gone as many Miles in 6;, or d, Days, a you have gone Miles in all, Tis true ſaith B, I am not ſo Good a Foorman as you, but I find that at the End oſ I53, or f, Days hence I ſnall be at London, if I Travel as many Miles in every one of thoſe 15 Days, as I have done every Day hitherto; What is the Diſtance of thoſe Two Cities from each other, and how many Miles had each Footman Travelled, wvhen they Met? SoLuTION Of PROBL. I9. SoLUTION of PROBL. 20. The Firſt Merchant's Stock- æ. ] Diſtance in Miles betwixt the Second Merchant's Stock. bx. ] to Cities. æ Gain of the Firſt Merchant. fæ. ] Number of Miles, which 4 haa,, Gain oſ the Second Merchant. 2b+x. J Travelled. 2t5 But by the Nature oſ the Rule of Fel-] Becauſe ? being the Difference betwixt lowhip with Time. the Miles, which 4 and  Travelled, 4 fx. gbtx:: ex. dbadx. ] will Travel 2+27, and B Lxr, vhich Therefore the Equation will be. together are =x. ll cqxcbxtexxadlbſ-dbxfuxdxxæ. Number therefore of Miles, ri By Reduction. vhich B Travelled.  4.cxxdxx=cbx cgx—dbxfdxaãlf. Number of Miles, which 4 2xL And b ba + albf Travelled in one Day. ai ad d 21i6 Becauſe. d. bx2c::1./. BY Extraction, Suppoſing, ſębſa jillli a y Extraction, Suppoſing, 2J5 Number of Miles, which æ Ix+2e Travelled in o . 7 E vill be, 36 Viiiſ ne Day int iillmũi d Becauſe. f 2550:: I. =5 =i65 1732HVs522122 l r 12 Lbi Number of Days, in which 4, de2de a3 1733+228339 s5 o1 Travelled all his Number of axtie c7 i 4026. Miles. 5 126 |Alſlo. x110l. 1; 2dx+2de =;47 And. 110l. 55 L.165. Becaulee. S 1:: H3 7 Likeviſe, 12l355 l. t12l 67l. : ; 3i  æ ſ Number of Days in which B; i So. gbrxisl; iol t161, 126.. Travelled all his Number of iſ & iſ 55X12660. I2. Miles æxt50. IIOX8&880. 16. ii 4  2ũ And. ſ370. 28 are the Sums of them. ] Becaure. &5.: x4L. vi 660. I2. 7r But. 1540. 28 b i : p But the Number of Days, in hich both m ⸗ is xu itm ;œlũ ſrt ĩ ſ u a/ũ belonged to the Firſt Merchant's Stock, Lax 4+2dc fx1ſi was 55. which Subſtracted from 165/. ] Thereſore. jdx+7c75ſx3 the Sum of both their Stocks, gives 110l. 3 Ili 72⸗ the Second Merchant's Stock; The Gain of By Reduct. dex2dexdecfxxafxtfee. the Fir? Merchant vill therefore be 1a,] And. fuxdxx 2dex-taſex+decfes. Gain of the Second 16. or. D2cæſe ſã . But I2. I6:: 660. 880. nx 7 7a a H ſæ ts 380. Suppoſing Thereſore, 5i. : Sud' Aesmton ut imesion.Is Enraion urim 1540 nſ. u ac; l=s21V2307528435 i00. Alſo,402 I will Solve this Problem. Ji Or, 4. The The Latter Root Impoſſible, becauſe 4 had Travelled 20M mer Anſwers the Queſtion. 2x+2660.254=40. 60+4 6 Miles a Day, 6X63/403 B went 4 Miles a Day, 4xX15 vhich 4 and B Travelled, 1053 6X10560. 4105940. Alſc 12-8594. 12-8520, &c. C H AP. V. Of the ſeveral Ways of Managing Equations of Highe the Roots of Them, by Stevin, Harriot, Vieta, Ke Ferreus, as alſo hy Deſcartes, Sir Iſaac Newton, Dr. I 5. 1. HEN we come to Cubick or Biquadratick ſtill Higher Power, the Work is more Diſi Scarcely be done any better Way, than by the Tentative, here Subjoined from Stevin. PROBL. I. ' +26x401885 What is the Number PROBL. 2. X* 4+3501834638. 68013 What is the Nur PROBL. 3. æ 20x19543 What is the Number æ? SoLuTION of PROBL. I. 1ſt. Suppoſe. I. Then. xs 5I. And. 2626. Thereforoe xP 26x27. This being too little. 24. Suppoſe. x=r0. Then. x3 =1000. And. 26x260. Therefore. xV 261260. This being too little. 3d Suppoſe. x=100. Then. x3 =I000000. And. 26x2600. Theref. x? 42 6x1002600. This being too much. 41h. Suppoſe. x=30. Then. x +26x833520. This being too little. 5h. Suppoſe. x=/30. Then. This being too little. 6th. Suppoſe. x40. Then. x+2665040. This being too much. 71h. Suppoſe. ææ31,32,33, xi 26x27780. SoLuTION Oof PROBL. æ. 1ſt. Suppoſe, æI. and ro. vhich Proving too little. 2d. Suppoſe, x=rnoo, which Proving too Great. 3d. Suppoſe, ææ20, which Proving too little. 41h. Suppoſe, æ=30, which Proving too Great. sth. Suppoſe, 21, Which alſo being too Great, and 20, too little. 61h. Therefore Suppoſe æ =20. I, 20. 2, 20. 3, 20. 4, 20. 5, 20. 6, which all Proving too little. 71h. Suppoſe, 920.7, which vill Produce. x*+50184638. 680I. But if 20.7 had Proved too little, and 20. 8 too Great, Then Trialls muſt have been made with 20. 71, 20. 72, 20.73, &. for. 30 =. 8, if 20.7 had been too little, and 20. 71 had Succe ſſively, which all Prov- been too Great, Trialls muſt ing too little. 31h. Suppoſc. Then. The Equation Deſired. And if the Root falls betwixt TWo whole Numbers, Trials are to be made by Increaſing the Root with  4534, &. and iſ that vill not do vith &ſ, ſæ, &. e 34. have been made with 20. 701, 20. 702, 20. 703, &. x2640188. For. 7109.71 which will be Exemplify'd in the Following Problem. Becauſe, J109753 And, T15705 But, næ7; Yyvyy Problm 4th.G.3, PROBL. 4. If æ3 32407269; What is the Number æ sih mi 61h.pP ot. 5. If 2 220F157360 Whar is the Number æ PRrOBL. 6. If 3200446577; What is the Number x? SoLuTION of PROBL. 4. 1ſ. Suppoſe, x=I. Which is too Great. 2d. Suppoſe, x=.1, Which is likewiſe too Great. 3à. Suppoſe, x.I, Which is too Little. 41h. Suppoſe, .02,.03, .4, .O5, .06,.07, .OS. Which will be all too little. s1h. Suppoſe, x=.09, Which will be too Great. 6h. Suppoſe, Y.081,.082. Which will be too little, but o383 vill Solve the ProbIem, and .o83 is Leſs than .0905.C-. When all the Terms of the Unknown Part of an Equation are Affirmative, as they have hitherto been, it is Eaſy to know, how to Increaſe or Leſſen the Root of an Equatior, in Order to make it at Length give the Juſt Solution; But where as in the Following Inſtances, Subſtractions are to be made, it is harder to Gueſs, how to allow for thoſc Subſtractions, by which Mcans the Operation becomes more Intricate and Difficult. Tis alſo to be Obſerved in theſe Following Equations. that there may Happen to be as many Poſitive or Affirmative Roots, which will Solve the Equation as there are Units in the Index of the higheſt Unknown Power which will be afterwards Shewn. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 5. iſt. Suppoſe, xI. which will be too little, for then the Abſolute Number is 136. 2d. Suppoſe, x=Io. The Abſolute Number is 370, which is more than the Jut Abſolute Number 360, and therefore 10 is too Great. 3d. Suppoſe, x2. 3. 4. which will be all too little, but 5 will Solve the Equa tion Propoſed, beſides which there are Two other Roots 3 and 9, vhich will likewiſe Produce the ſame Equation, and will be found out by a Method aſter Delivered. Limits of Equations which do not Exceed Biquadratick Ones, are Taught by Flori mond de Beaune; are vith Dr. Walliss, and ſome other Mathematicians, Signs or Characters for Greater or Leſs; Thus for Example. Equation Probl. 6. to be Reſolved, 3200x3 46577Thereſore x? z200æ. x 3200. x Z56.5, &c Again, 3200465775x}. Therefore, 320046577. And. x15572Or. SoLUTION of PROBL. 6. 1ſ. Suppoſe, x1I. The Abſolute Number vili be. =3199. 24. Suppoſe, x=10. The Abſolute Number wiil be. =3 1000. Both which will be too little. 3d. Suppoſe, x100. The Abſolute Nutber will be. æ680C00. Which alſo will be too little; But ſince it is Negative, it Shews, that x muſt be ſome Number Leſs than 100; Becauſc a Poſitive Root, if any, vill Neceſſarily be found, before the Abſolure Number becomes Privative. 41h. Suppoſe, x=20. The Abſolute Number will be. = 35 6000. Which is too Great. Therefore it is a Number betwixt 10 and 20. sth. Suppoſe, æ=11, 12, &. they will be too little. But 15.7 Will ncarly Anſwer the Equation. 6th. Alſo, becauſe 56000 is Greater, and 6 80000 is Leſs, than the Abſolute Number, there will be another Root betwixt 20 and 100, which after ſeveral Trials, will be found to be 3200 ]47, which will Exactly Conx 14.5, &. ſtitute the Equation PropoConſcquently , Value of]ſed. the Root Sought, is Greater than 14. 5 and Leſs than5 6. 5, vhich accordingly it is, for by the Following Operation it is either 15.7, or 47I ſall now Proceed to Shew from our Famous Country-Man and Algebraiſt Mr. Harriot, the Father and Founder of our Modern Algebra, and to whom DesCartes is Indebted for all his Inventions and Improvements in that Science, the Way of Forming Equations, which ſhall have ſeveral Roots Given, Affirmative or Negative. 5. 3- ion of theſe Equations, but ] If x/4. Difficulty, he who Surmounts Deſerves to have his Statue in Gold. All is pretty much hitherto done by Repeated Trialls, and is Reſigned to the Sagacity of the Operator. But that 2,3 and 4 vill Anſwer the Equation, being cach of them put for æ, is from hence Manifeſt. If x2, x=s3 9xx: 6 +26x32 Then, =24. If æ/3, x27 xx:3=_I +26/78 Then, 24. If x/4, xt=c4 Then, l-oxx-144 | +26x104 That is, the Glorious ProbIem to be Found out is; The Sum of the Roots is Given 24. alſo from the following Way of Proof. If xæ2, x=3 =4/24. 14/28 Then, If /3, x27 '= I4x=42 If x.i1, Then, 24. x 2o64 6/24. 145x56 That is, the Noble Problem to be Found out is; The Sum of the Roots is Given in the Second Member of the Equation, with their Signs  and , as before, and the Product of them in the Fourth, with is Sign  or , in the Third the Product of every Two of them with their Then, | x271 in the Second Member of ]Signs  or; What are the Equation, with their Signs  and , Annexed, and the Product of them in the Fourth, vith it's Sign  or, in the Third the the Roots? And this is an Inſtance of the Infinite Defect in Algebra, that of the Infinite Povers, which there are in Product of every TWo of lit, the Second, or Quadrathem with their Signs + or ſtick, is almoſt only Solved ; What are the Roots:? by any Certain Method. x3/:c4 +58024. 2x=3 Then, SoLuTION of PROBL.7. le1/ xtli. e.læ\o. x lx+a/o. x+tl/m/xxtbxtextic xx4c] xæxt+d/o =x AlxxHbex exxbdxttcicæo AdxxHcdx t c-3ſhereſore, x bxxVbex cxx+bdx+bcao. +dxxHcdx =x 9xx+26t24c. Or, x f9xx+2624. If x/2, x—3 9oxx;60-24. 266:352 If x/3, x=327 xx3I 26738 If x4 xyd&c 9xx14424 Then, | ſi Then, 24Then, 26/104 Problem, as before. AND we may Proceed in the ſame Way and Method with Biquadratick Equations or Thoſe of the 41h. Pover, or sth. 6th, &c. And like Problems will Ariſe from thence But, tho all theſe Equations are Formd by the aboveſaid Roots, it is not Certain that there may not be other Roots, which would Conſtitute the ſame Equation; Thu tho' 2X6 makes 12, yet 354 may do it; and thd 6 and 6, 24 and 24, are foun by theſe Suppoſitions of 2, 3 and 4 being /æ, there may be other Numbers, oi Fractions of Numbers, which, for all e know, may Effect the ſame Thing. Hovever 1ſt. If any of theſe Equations o be Divided by One of the Roots /o, a Quadratich Equation vill be Produced =o; And if That be again Divided by another Root, it will Produce the Remaining Root =o; Thus, n=0 xi toxxt26xr240 & +757270 x2xx O +7xxI46 7x5 o+12x xt350)x +7x1270 (xt47 12+24 x43 o o o+4x 4x+12 o O 2d. In Equations thus Formed, and in which all the Terms are Extant, and =o, as often as Follows after +. or  aſter, ſo oſten there is an Atſlirmative Root, and as often, as TWo Signs, or TWo Signs +, ſtand next to one another, ſo oſten there is a Negative Root; Thus in the Firſt, there are TWo Afſſirmative, in the Second, one Affirmative, and one Negative, &e. 3d. It is ſaid, In Equations thus Formed, that is, where the Number of Roots, Aſfirmative or Negative, is Equal to the Number of Units in the Index of the Power of the UnEnown Quantity; Becauſe ſome Equations are Produced by Multiplying the Root into an Impoſſible Equation; Thus x270 X xx4x30, Produces an Equation x36xx+1351090, which hath only one Affirmative Root, viæ. æ/2, o- x279, and no other, either Aſfirmative or Negative, for this Reaſon, that xxax4550 is an Impoſſible Equation, ſince x=4x3, and æ=24V, but the /-], or V/, is Impoſſible; However, Theſe To Lat Roots, tho Impoſſible, and is a Diſficulty, with Algebraiſts, we Say, are Affirmative, and do not Deſtroy the Rule. 41h. It is to be Obſerved, that in every Equation, which hath as many Aſfirmative Roots, as there are Dimenſions in the firſt Term, the Coefficient, or Known Quantity, in the Second Term is Equal to the Sum of all the Affirmative Roots, and the known Quantity in the Third Term is Equal to the Sum of the Products of every Two of the ſaid Roots Multiplied into one another, and the Known Quantity in the Fourth Term, as in Biquadratick Equations, is Equal to the Sum of the Products of every Three of the ſaid Roots, and ſo on, in Equations of the Fifth Power, and the lat Term, or the Abſolute Quantity, is Equal to the Product oſ all the Roots Multiplied into each Other; And the ſame Properties will hold, where there is the ſame Number of Negative Roots, or of Negative and Aſfirmative, Interm ixed with cach other, Reſpect being had to the Addition and Subſtraction of + and . To Form a Biquadratick Equation To Form One of the Fifth Pover. x hxxhex =xA+bx*+bcxt +bcdx? +ſbcdx Vcxxbdx +ex*bdx Afbex? vgbedx Cubick Eq. dxxtcdxbiddo A+dxtcdxs Aftdx +ęſbix Root. xxæ+ſ-o +fæ*+ſtxs 4fedx 45 ftdæ =x+bxi 4hex* hcdx +ęx+fext Aghcx Aę fedxrgſbcdæ o +exi Vhdæ ftex +fdxt gbdx* +dxi tedx +fbdx +gbxi Agedx? i +ſæs Aſox? Afcdx4ftedo +gex 4 ſox? +fix? +gdxr gſix: Biquadrat. Eq. +fdx? +ęfæi +ęfx* Equat. 51h. Power. Root. XxA370 xx+h=o, &c. Root. Which will Form an Equation of the 67h. Power, and ſo on in Infinitum; The Signs of theſe Equations alſo may be Infinitely Varied; For every Binomial Root which is Multiplied into its ſel? may be æx4b, or xb; I x has Two Values; Ii may be, to Form a Quadratick Equation, as before, x-b0 X x—o, or, b=c xx+co, or, xtbo x x+o; If æ has Three Values, as in Cubick Equations, the Signs may be Diverſified, as in the Problems above; It muſt be alſo Noted, thai from this Conſtruction of Equations is Derived, the Tabella Poteſtatum of Dr. Halley, which he Calls his Spetulum Analyticum Generale, Sir Iſ. Newto's Algebra, Pag. 336. Which I have here Subjoyned; In whicli, 4t2, /x-4, is Continually Multiplied into its ſelf. Tabella Poteſtatum. 5 t u n x læ =Ia  47la cev21la teet350 4351a 364421la æm æ  a 46la e415ta *ee4-20ka3315a 2e+ 6ta e?+ he hæ shat +5hate+10ha see10hate:  sha e+ h æ' g5 =ga*+40a+ ca teev 494 esr g fær/fa+3ſa e ifa ee f æ dz  =da* t2d1 ed ef j i c =ca + c e 5. 5. Wha . Laſtly, it will be, 41h. Term. ro456 2- 1044x5. 4th Term. 625 And Therefore, E7ã 1044x. Add all the New Invented Terms toge-  IO0 275 P6250 8090 ther, 1296 216 2I6 7õtꝶo ii And Reduced to Integers, y*2c07 +1650 22501I534570. If y5 ſ2, Then xu/2. And the Reſolution of Themm If an Equation is Propoſcd, vhoſe 24. 3d. 41h. Terms, &e. have Fractions with Diſferent Denominarorss Reduce thoſe Fractions to the ſame Denominator, and then Proceed as above. The Reaſon of this Procedure is Plain, bi becauſe, ſince in the ſirt Problem 5 is Produced by LitnL. if ve Muliiply 8 into the Second Term, 2 the Diviſor vill give a Quotient without a RemainIf y518, Then æ&/3. der, that is, without a Fraction, and the ſame vill obrain in any Multiple oſ 8, as in the Caſe Mentioned of 3x8, and Divided by 2, or in any other, which Occurs in the foregoing Examples, or Problems. S. 6. Mr. Harriors Method of Taking avay or Deſtroying the Second Term oſ a Compound or Affected Equation, (See Harrio?'s Algebra. §. 6. Dr. Wallis Oper. Mathemat. Cap. 43. Vol. 2.) is to Divide the Coefſficient of the Second Term of an Equation Propoſcd by the Index of the Power of the Firſt Term, and if the Signs of the Firſt and Second Terms be unlike, that iĩs, if the One be +, and the other , Subſtract the Quotient ſrom the Affirmative Root Sought, but if the Signs be like, that is, both+ or both Add the ſaid Quotient to the Affirmative Root; Then make an Equation betwixt the ſaid Sum or Remainder, and ſome Letter Repreſenting an Unknown Quantity, from whence a New Equation vill ariſe, wherein the Second Term is Wanting. PROBL. I. X06720. PROBL. 2. xx+6X2160. PROBL. 3. X?I8x37x+69560. SoLUuTION of PROBL. I. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 2. SOLUTION Of PROBL. 3. Suppoſe, x3x3. Suppoſe, +7x+3. ] Suppoſe, - ? /x6. Thereſore. x=y43.  Therefore. xy3.] Therefore. xyF6. The firſt Termxxpyy+6y+9. ] Fit*t Term. xxy? 65F.] Squares. xxy? +127}36. Sccond Term. Second Term. 6xcyI8. ] Firſt Term. :5;18 cxcy18.] And, æx+6xc9] +1085t216. Therefore. ꝓ+67965 +67185?9] Second Term. I8xx 1857-99xxOx. But, æx+6x2165729I83 21676438. And xx6x729 21655? 22550 Third Term.7x742. 72-8190. Or, y æ2125, and  I3.] Therefore. æ1i8x7æ Therefore 77981 in which] Or, i5]4 6962 + 185? + I08 Equation the Second Term] And. x=i53712.]216185Z167 648 is Wanting, and 759, and] Or, 15/-1I8 — r, ct x9+t;3512 xx=r44] 1155422250, in whic Or, _l Proof. 6cx= n =216. Eton the Second Tern Proo. æ=i44, By the Canon or Theoremy? is Wanting. 2cx— ©7201 for Reſolving Quadratick E-] I therefore y=2,2553 By the Canon or Theorem ] quations. If y2v112-1, for Reſolving Quadratick E- xx=—cxt216. Tſ7+5. quations. x34V5F216. Proof. xx=ox+72, and, 34V2a;3. xt =s12,1821I152, x3V57⸗ =;315512. 7x936. x;3v8i/i2 Or, i3. | Therefore, 512-1152-51 Or, c l +6961208-1208950, PROBL. 4 PROBL. 4. æxxxt6xxx+11xx6x1000. The Inquiry is, hat is æ? SoLuT. PROBL. 4.S S 2 3 ; LUT. PROBL. 4. Suppoſe, +- + =j5. Then, xy 7 Ant, +Thereſore, æ7=;;2,:422, 27 ierefore, x =-y 7 ũ In all theſe Problems, o fonples the Rule there  3t. 81325 ore is Obſerved, of Divi2d Term, 6x c V+r7:5% ding the Coefficient of the Second Term by the Index 1ſt. Term, æ=ycy: +22,.27, 81 ſt i r Lꝶ 77 j 22, 66 6 3d. Term, 1]r-Set z of the Power of the Firſt, : i . fora New Unknown Roor, 4h. Term, ocxæ— and + and  are Prefixed, 2 16 as Required. 1600 sth. Term, 100I Therefore, the Equation will be, æ+6x +11æ +6xI00=0. 2 8 1ſ. Term, Added to the -+ rn : a ihe na. 34. 8I 324 cach Term Re2d. Term, Added to the +6y: 7 + 7 duced the 66 ame nomi3d. Term, Added to the r nation for the L more eaſy Col4th. Term, Added to the +2,æ5 lection of them 2 I6 into one Sum. sth. Term, . Sum of the Terms Added make,  * i x 5o. But, by Reduẽtion it will be, ?r=rtoũ j i And, by Extraction or Evolution, »r= u 101. - ] j And again, by Extraction, v æ=vVi. F The Reaſon of this Procedure is, becauſe in Quadratick Equations, the Cocſficient being Divided by 2, and the Signs Prefixed according to the Rule, will in the Square =uxx, certainly Produce a Second Term, whoſe Coefficient is Equal to that in the Given Equation, but with a Contrary Sign, and a New unknown Quantity of the ſame Dimenſions Affixed to it, and the Multiplication of the Second Term, according to the New Value of the Unknown Root, vill Produce a like Coefficient with the Nev Unknown Quantity oſ a like Dimenſion, but with the ſame Sign vith the given Equation, and therefore theſe Terms muſt Neceſſarily Deſtroy each other, and the ſame will hold in the Cube, Bi- ſquare, &e. by Dividing the Coefficient by 3, 4. & 5. 3. To Reſolve all Manner of Compound or Affected Equations in Numbers; 1ſt. Let the Equation be made Equal to o, and if Neceſſary Freed from Fractions. 2d. Then Search out all the Juſt Diviſors to the Lat Term, that is, the Known Abſolute Number; Connect them Succeſſively by + and  to the Root Sought æ, and Divide the Equation by it; If the Diviſion Succeeds, ſo as there is no Remainder, either the Known Part of the Diviſor will be Equal to the Unknown, and therefore will be One Root Sought, or at leaſt the Diviſor will be Equal to o, and Conſequently will leave an Equation /0, which will be One Power leſs than the Former, and by that Means, if it becomes One of thoſe  Forms Specified before, may be Reſolved by the Canons there Delivered, but if the Firſt Term Contains Three or more Dimenſions, then Examine it by Diviſion, as before. 7 If 3d. If this does not Succeed, Take away the Second Term by the Method already Explained, by which Means an Equation will ſometimes Reſult, which vill Fall under One of the 9 Forms before Mentioned, and then may be Reſolved by the Canons thereto belonging. j : 41h. If none of theſe Ways prove Effectual, then Find out One Affirmative Root by the Method before Expreſſed, either Exactly or nearly True, Join it to the Root Sought x by, and Divide the Equation, and by the ſame Way Proceed to find out the other Roots, either Exactly, or Nearly, True. PROBL. I. x? 9x 26243 Or, æx? —x* 268240; What Is æi PROBL. 2. x? 22x157x360; Ot, x 22+157x3600;3 What isæ? PROBL. 3. 91xx3330; Or, x? 91x+330903 What is ? SoLuTION of PROBL. I. 1ſ. Search out all the Juſt Diviſors of the Abſolute Number 24, vhich are I. 2. 3. 4. 6. 8. I2. 242. Then Try x-1, æ+1, x2, xt2, &c. and x-2 vill Divide the Equation without a Remainder. x290) x?t26x-24 x 2x x=o i o7⸗x* The Quo-7x 414x tient. o+12x (x*7x+120. v12x24 x20 o o x=2. xtr7xt120.7-I2.  Vũ1 =4 and 3 Therefore 2, 3, and 4, are the Roots Sought, and which will Solve the Equation. PROBL. 4. SOLUTION. To Find TWo Numbers, whoſe Sum ſhall be 5, and if the Sum of their Squares be Multiplied by the Sum of their Cubes, the Product SoLUTION Of PROBL. 2. ist. The Jut Diviſors of 360 are I. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 8. 9. IO. I2. I5. IS8. 20. 24. 30. 36. 40. 45. 60. 72. 90. I20. I80. and 360. 2d. Examine them in Order xI. xt1I. x2.x2. x-3. xt3, &c. 5 will Divide the Equation without a Remainder. x x3)x 22x157x360 0) x*5x: x o o175 Quot. (æ? 172 85x (17+ xs=o o+72æ720 x/3 +72x360. o Oo Alſo, xt—17xt7270. And. x=i17-72. = and 8. The Roots Sought are therefore 5. 8. and 9. PROBL. 5. SOLUTION. To Find Four Numbers in Arithmetical Progreſſion Continued, Such, that their Common Difference may be Unit, and the Product made ſhall be 455. by their Continual Multipli1ſ. One of the Num- cation may be roo. bers Sought. Firt Number. x. 2d. The Other. 5/x.  Second. x+1. 3d. Square of the . Third. xV3z. Firſt Number. xx. ] Fourth. xt3. 41h. Square of the Second. n-10-23. s1h. Sum of the Squares. 2xx10X+25. 61h. Cube of the ; Firſt Number. x 7th. Cube of the Second, xt155 755125. The Product of their Continual Multiplication will be x*+6x311x 6x= 100, by the Problem. The Diviſors of 100 are I. 2. 4. 5. IO. 20. 25. 50. and r00. j But if Diviſion be Tryd by Zzzzze ilt SoLUTION Of PROBL. 3. 1ſ. The Diviſors of 330 are I. 2. 3. 5. 6. IO. II. I5. 22. 30. 55. 66. IIO. 165. and 330. 2d. Divide in Order by 1, x+1, 2, xt2, &c. -5 vill do our Buſineſs. x3) x* 91xt3300 =o) xi3xt  +55 o+3x* (66o +556225x5 o-66x 66x+330 o O Therefore, æ? 45x66o And, x=3x+66 Alſo, a;3v7æ That iss, x/258337 Or, II The Roots Sought are therefore 53 6, and 11, Which vill all Solve the Equation. PROBL. 6. SOLUTION. If, 8æ3 +635 x341x =1304, Or, If, x38x? 63xt341 +13040, What isthe Number æ? The Diviſors of 1304 are I. 2. 4. 8. 163. 326. and 13043 And, after ſeveral Trials, Y820 Divides the Equation. Therefore. x=3. And the Quotient, upon Diviſion, is x?6351630. The Diviſlors of 163 are only 1 and I63. But 1, x1, i53, x+163, will not Divide the Equation Juſtly without : Fraction, and there being 81h 8th. Sum of the Cubes. 155 755+125. 9rh. Sum Of the Squares X Sum of the Cubes, 302;005 f13755* 312553125455, by the Problem. x1i. x1. x2. F2, . to x4 or 100, it will not Succeed; ſince this Way therefore is Inefſectual. Take away the Second Term by the Method beſore Preſcribed of putting 7-, roth. And by Subſtracting which will Reduce the E455 from each Side of the Equation, andDividing the Remaining Quantity o by 30, xiox 4535 10435 +890. To take avay the Fractions. Ii1h. Suppoſc 7/6, and Proceeding, as before, 7 607 + 16505? 22500 +11534470. 121h. The Diviſors of 1I5344 ate I. 2. 3. 4. 6. 8. 9. I2. I8. 24. 27, &c. and after Trials made, as before, by Diviſion, y-1290 vill Exactly Divide the Equation, and therefore 7=12, and the Quotient will be 7948y +1074961 2270. 131h. The Diviſors of 9612 arc I. 2. 3. 4. 6. 9. I2. 18. 27. 36. &c. and aſter ſeveral Trials 7/180 ill Exactly Divide the Equation; Therefore 7718, and the Quotient vill be 72-309 45340, andy? =305343 quation to, y 23 99/0. b o57 ymiAViomn 77V4 ion. Or, Therefore. xy 1;4Vio-3. x15v 13V io1-2. xt27v 134vio+x+37V1347 ioi+3. Which Multiplicd into One another are =roo. Reſolution the Second. Firſt Number. x13. Second. x42 Third. x+3. Fourth. x+14. Which being Multiplied into onc another, the Product is 100 by the Problem. ſfrom whence the ſame Equation vill Riſe as before, *22x2, =9975 and the Numbers Sought will be the ſame, no Second Term to be taker avay, We are to Search out One Affirmative Value of æ by the General Method be fore Delivered. Which will be x9.9655& Then Divide the ſaid Cu bick Equation x 6316: =o by x9.0055. And the Quotient ſthe Remainder, after the Diviſion is Ended, being Neglected) is xx +9. cõ555 + I8. o9”0;3025 o. But this Equation having no Affirmative Root, the Two. vwhich can be had are only 38 and 9.0053, &. If every Term of an Equation has an Irdex of it's Pover, which is an even Number, it may be Redu ced to a Lover Denomition, as xt 20x 2445 5760 Put 79x, and it will be Reduced to a Cubick Equation, vix. V207t244957650. And, y5 155V225534, which is an Impoſſible Root in Extraction, but not in Solving the Equation; That is, being a Negative Root, it is Impoſſible to be Extracted; But 1547V22534 vill be To Roots more, vhich will be Poſſible, by what has been Said, in Solving the Equation, Aſfirmative Ones. Thereſore, in this 1ſ Problemy=t1, 18,I stvV309, And x and vill Equally do it with the Two other v—30 2, 3, 25 5 g Proof iſt. x=2, 5x3, 243595, 4ro913, 3t27935; And 455513%35. Proof 2. x3, 5x72, 2+;55, and 13535455. 30 30 30 Proofſ ;34. 3r/ 5xX=35 -3Y,, V5in vV/309 r;=3. Troubleſome. c 309 3 Therefore 27 6 6 We muſt here Add ſome other Rules in Algebra; That, 1ſf. The Reduction of a Biquadratick Equation, not Falling under the Three Forms Abovementioned, to a Cubick One, or to Two Quadratick Ones, is Tedious and 2d. It is Seldom Capable of being Reduced into Two Quadratick Ones, and may Happen to be ſuch, as it's Root, or Roots, in Numbers cannot be Perfectly Found out by any Rules hitherto Publiſhed. . 3d. To Shorten the Various Trialls of the Diviſors of the Laũt Term, it will be when Reduced to a Cubick, well to have Recourſe to the Method of Finding out the Limits, within which rhe Root, or Roots, oſ an Equation Fall, and then to make Uſe of no Diviſors but vhai Stand within thoſe Limits. See Dr. walliss Algebra, P. 227. Vol. 2. of his Works; Alſ©o And the Reſolution of Them. Alſo Sic Iſasc Newto's Algebra, Pag, 276. And DesCarte's Rule Derived fron Mr. Harriot, where we ſhall find the Reſolution of a Biquadratick Equation into Twe Quadratick Ones Performed in this Manner, viæ. Let x* xi 5x 12-6o. 1ſt. Take away the Second Term by making v+;=x, and v230 4 23550 2d. Clear this lat Equation of Fractions by making 2æ/v, &c. S. 9. Cardas Two Rules Aſcribed by him to Stipi Ferreus, for the Reſolutior of Certain Cubick Equations in Numbers, are as Follow. All Cubick Equations after the Second Term Is taken away, when there is any, are Reducible to the Following Forms. PROBL. I. * =pæ+q, Or, xt=ocx+20; What is ? PROBL. 2. æ =+pxq, Or, xt m+6xt40; What is æ? PROBL. 3. X /px q; Or, X =gix—330; What is ? SoLuTION of PROBL. I. 1ſt. Suppoſe æ=to the Difference of Two Unknown Numbers. 2d. Suppoſc 57 æ the] of their Cubes. SoLuTIOoN of PROBL. 2. iſ. Suppoſe x to the Sum of Two Un- 7tæ. ' known Numbers. 2d. Suppoſe 5 to the Sum  42. Difference of their Cubes.] 34. And 2/3 thè Triple 3d. And 2=3y2 the Triple] of their Multiplication. of their Multiplication. Therefore, æi =j; +37+ Therefore, x? /5' 37+ 3y2 +æ /pæ+4. 392 4æ) =qpx. àn And, =35æt353°. x=39 æ73y2.  41h. y and æ are found out 41h. y and æ are found outſby this Problem. by this Problem. There are TWOo Numbers, There are TWOo Numbers, ] the Product of whoſe Multhe Product of whoſe Mul- ltiplication is 3. and the tiplication is 35 and the] Sum of their Cubes is 4; Difference of theit Cubes] What are the Numbers:? is 3. What are the Num- ] For one of the Numbers? The Greater Number. The Leſſer Number. Cube of the Greater Number. Cube of the Leſſer. ær' Vii 3 y §V 7q258 But. , ũ q. And. qræqmm Or.  )/21 V77. Or. 77V;27V a5t:7 But. ;239, And, æ} = 14itV773 :4trrta3 7 IThe Cube of the Firſt ,y. Number is.  Cube of the Second. bers Sought Put læ the other Number =. I By the Problem. , p Or, y.qy: =77'. ]BY Reduction. nm And. yitæm=m. Or. =qy4 a And.  ſ+/7 a On 77vitſt 352 x5%, Therefore,ut- 77 +æ1. m Vs1 rr i V;.10Vò3 ? Therefore, E3 17 y i 131739177 S But. Z z2 222 SoLUTION of PROBL. ;. 1ſ. Suppoſe, 2d. Suppoſc, 3d. And, 3æ Thereforeb, æ=y +352æ +32 +28 =pxq. And; p=3y æt379. 41h. 7 and æ are Found out by this Problem, if by any Way. There are TWOo Numbers, the Product of whoſe Multiplication is 37, and rhe Sum of their Cubes is—q; What are the Numbers? By the foregoing Proceſs, y=q3q. »321mr V. xytæ M +æ. And. But T tæ Jæ Therefore. = qHiV5m77 v:3V 57 vs va/5 ii+ 7  75T——@N06— xi315+7 —s553 +3.1657c834. Therefore this Equation, and the Roots of it Impoſſible, in Reſpect of any Affirmative Solution; The Firſt becauſe q is Suppoſcd Equal to y+æ3, a Negative to a Poſitive Quantity ; The Second, becauſe the Root of a Negative Quantity is to m 41D i a :  be Extracted, which is Sup-  eViãvũ. bastr*v- poſed cannot be done. ; z va. z 3 . Notvithſtaitding which; t there is no Dorbt to be i377V 29777° lmade, but that the Root, Vi os 1Vi. V310V 1I08/7/3-1 Or. 371 ?m6 3.20V;92 tho Impoſſible in Extractthereſ.4=t14vV3vV3+1 774 ſ557; 55. ion, is not Impoſſible in Or, at/m HN E il Reſpect of rhe Equation; Proor,  S F20 viaotv;.]4v⸗ For in General it muſt be 6x1I2 i x/24v2+t277254] Aftirmed, that, where the Proot. x=64 240 Reaſoning is Accurate, and o6x24 i Exact from One Step to Another in the Solution of any Problem, it is Impoſſible, that it ſiould Lead us into Falſe or Wrong Concluſions; And therefore all the Roots, which are Found out by ſuch a Reaſoning, tho Perhaps they are not Capable of being Extracted, yet are True and Real Ones in Reſpect of Solving the Problem Propoſcd, and will Anſ&er all the Conditions of the Queſtion, as well as the Aſſirmative Ones ill do; Examples of this may be Scen in the Foregoing Problems, and in the Nine Forms of Equations before Specified. 5. 10. Concerning the Method of Reſolving Problems, wherein many Quantities are Sought by Aſluming diſferent Letters to Repreſent the Said Quantities. Hitherto, one Letter has been only made Uſe of to Expreſs the Unknown Quantity We ſall now mãke Uſe of different Ones, being in the Solution of ſeveral Problems, the moſt Eligible; Rule 1ſ7. By Exterminating the Unknown Quantitie: One after Another. SoLuTioN of PROBL. I. A Factor Exchanged 6 French Crowns, and 2 Dollars, for 45 Shillings of EnIiſh Money, alſo at another Time he Exchang'd o French Crowns, and 5 Dollars (each of theſe being of the ſame Value with the Former) for 76 Shillings; What was the Value of a French Crown and oſ a Dollar in Engliſh Money:? The Valuc of a French Crown. The Value of a Dollar. ⸗. Therefore by the Problem. 6x+217745. 9xt57776. x. Firſt, by the Firſt Equation] By the Foregoing /?/cb+x.  Therefore, ſind what æ is. 452. x45 2. c i Therefore in the Second Equation. 9x s053187F57776. +5 ſã And, 405-18yF390456 ſ iæsi. 754L. æ æ x x  By the i1. Equation y77b SoLuTIoN of PROBL. 2. SOLUTION Oof PROBL.. Three Men had, Each of Rule 24. them, a certain Number oſ] By Subſtracting One Equa Pounds, the Sum of the Firſt] tion from Another, or Ad and Second Man's Monty] ding One to the Other. was, 5, or b, Pounds, the Sum] From ææb6r12 JWhat an of the Second and Third] Subſtr. xy=c=3 ]  andj? Man's Money vas I2, or c, 27€zbb—=34 Pounds, and the Sum o yib4c2. the Third and Firſt Man" Lb+2=1o. 14+2712. I0258. Or, To x4755b121What are vhich Each had. æ. 5. ?.  Add æ)c83. ]x and ? 1ſt. and 24. x7æb. 20b+c=20. 2d. and 34. 7pæ=c. x4b+42=o. iſt. and 34. x+7/d. >7/4572. BY the iſ. and 2d. x+æc æ  æ * Thereſore in th Firſt Equation. xtxtebd. cxr2776x+r853545. 2x=dcb) cx43839362, x=dc+42b. c4. y772b4d+2c] A French Crown, 65. I 724a+44bh] A French Dollar, 45 3ã. 5 xæ212r355. 6x6 1d736 64 =i2 593li+o 12 axa s. 38731. 6. a=11 æ=ol+9511]ox6s. id=s45.94 =76s 5X45 3d213 3d 76 PRrOBI.. SoLuTION of PROBL. 4. Rule 3ã. By Alternate Multiplications of the Equations. To find Two Numbers, That, if the Quadruple of the Greater be Increaſed with the Triple of the Leſs, it ſhall make 36, But, if the Triple of the Greater be Leſſened by the Double of the Leſs, the Remainder ſhall be 10. The Greater Number. æ. The Leſſer. By the Prob- 4x+37936. lem. 35:27910. 1ſt Equation Multiplied x3 makes 1297108. 24 Equation Multiplied x4 makes 12x840. Subſtract the Second Equation from the Firſũt, niz. From 12x975 108. Subſtract 12x85940. There Remains 177968. 68 And, 7n Alſo, 3310+27918. And, =6. Proof. But, 4x6+35436. And, 3536-241I0. Which therefore are the True Values of x and, and the Firſt is likewiſe Greater than the Laſt, or õ Greater than 4, as was Required by the Problem. ]235690. And the Reſolution of Themm. SOLUTION Oof PROBL. . Sup- 2x3227/50. poſ- 5274527240. ing. x+5732710. What are the Numbers xy.æ? 1ſt Equation X59 1oæfI5 1029250. 2d Equation X2  ro49 +1027/480. Subſtract the Former ſrom the Latter, and it will be 197t2009230. 3d Equation X55-355t257 1529350. J. This Added to the 27 Equation, which, Multiplied into 1, Continues the ſame, gives +23102290. Then take the Equations found our in which are only Two Unknown Quantities, viz. I9yF2029/2;0. +23- 1027290. 1ſt Equation X235437 +46025290. 2 Equation X 199 437 I902j55 IO. Add theſe Two lat Equations together. And, 2702710800, Or, æ?/40. 137 1059234009290. 77/30. 2+322750. =24+90-80. 250-10540. x=10. 2x940 390 22-30 5XIOO 589=200 255-60 =-20 595 I50 J 32912 Fæ =240. SoLuTION Of PROBL. 6. Threc Men Diſcourſe of their Monies thus; The Firſt ſaith to the other Two, if ye give me 100  my Money will be made Equal to borh your Remaining Monies. The Second ſaith to the other Two, if ye give me 100. my Money will be made Equal to the Double of both your Remaining Monies; Laſtly, the Third ſaith to the other Two, if if ye give me 100. my Money will be made Equal to the Triple of both your Remaining Monies; HoW many Pounds had Each? The Firt Man's Money. æ. The Second's. jã The Third's. z. Or, the Queſtion may be thus Expreſicd. If æ+100942100, And ;t1002x+22200, And æ+100;5t35300, What are the Numbers æ. j.æ? By Tranſpoſition, x+7+27200. 2x)+ 227300. 353 29400. 2X 1ſt Equation -2x+t272209400. Add this and the 24 Equation together, which Multiplied by I1, Continues the ſame, Sum is, =y+42700. ]Again, 3 X 2 Equation, =6x3y+62900. And 2X 3à Equation, =6x16y22/800. Subſtract this Equation from the Former; Remainder is. 97+82100. Tabe the Two Equations Found, in which are only Two Unknown Numbers. 7:429700. and 9)+82100. 1ſt OF theſe Equations X999y+3626300. 2d OF theſc Equations XIZ-9y+82100, Add them together, And 4426400. 271457. yt4æ=700. y5700-5601185 X)æ200. 2=ytæ20092637200963. I10+637I182%455; 100. 10+II3 =12654290200. 100+145518935V354730. It may, Perhaps, by ſome, vho are more Advanced in this Science, be Wondered at, that I ſnould now Explain the ſeveral Ways of Reſolving Cubick and Biquadratick Equations before Recounted, when the Preſent Algebraiſts are Suppoſed io have gone much beyond any Thing of this Nature; But I would Deſire them to be Informed, that this was Intended ſor the Inſtrution of my Pupils, and by Way of Preparai tion 909 lion only to their Underſtanding Sir Iſasc Newton's Algebra, which was Formed, from what Ihave here Propoſed, and cannot be well Apprehended without ſome ſuch Previous Explanations; With which I have Intermixed ſome Reſlections, and Obſervations upon this Science, not to be found in any other Syſtem of it, which, I would Hope, may Tend, both to the Rendering it more Eaſy, and to the Improving it. SoLuTION of PROBL. 7. One is Offered 10 Apples for a Penny, and 25 Pears for Two-Pence; IF at thoſe Rates he would lay out 9 % ã. to buy roo Apples and Pears together, How many Apples, andHow many Pears ought he to have? Number of Apples. x. Of Pears. bã Coſt of the Number of Apples Bought. Ap. à Ap. d. Becauſe. 10. 1:: X. x I0 Coſt of the Number 2 of Pears. 5 reais d. Pean à. Becauſe. 25. 2::. z 25 But according to the ProbIem, the Price of Apples and Pears, Number of 'em, +7ico. By Reduction, 1ſt of the Two laſt Equations =0x+4054750. 2d of the Two laſt Equations X505505-507 5000. Subſtract the 1? of theſe Two Equations from the 2d, Remains, 1079250. 7925. 7l= Fmæ 75 Apples =7 4. 25 Pears /24. Y 424, =7r⸗ = 954. For. ]And,. SoLuTION Oof PROBL. E. To Divide 90 into Four ſuch Numbers; That if the Firſt be Increaſed by 2, the Second Leſſened by 2, the Third Multipled by 2, and the Fourth Divided by 2, The Sum, Remainder, Product, and Quotient, may be Equal between themſelves. The Four Numbers Sought. u x. j. æ. ' Numbers given, 90 and 2, or, b and 4. ] Or, in Algebra, the Queſtion lwill be Thus. If, u+xty+æ=b. uAd/xd And, u+d=jya. And, u What are the Numbers, u. x. 5. and æ iſt u is Equal to it's ſelf u=u. By the 2à Equation. x=u+2à. Iu 4 : By the 47h Equat. æ?uã+ãd. Therefore, by the foregoing Equations. rstt vui vaiutæ +y+æzæ6, by Reduction, bdddià 4aut7a41 b=90,i162 a= l—°7=i8. Therefore, And, And, By the 3à Equat. xi18V4/22. 18+2 V2Zr10. 2 z=18X2t2x240. But, 18220. 22-220. IOX29/20. 2) 40 (20. And, 1822+10+40990. SoLuTION of PROBL. 9. There are TWo Numbers, whoſe Sum is Equal to the Difference of their Squares and ifthe Sum of the Squares of thoſe Two Numbers be Subſtracted from the Square of theit Sum, the Remainder will be 69, or, . Number given. b Greater Number Sought. æ Leſſcr. 3 The Queſtion in Algebraick Terms vill be this. If xx3y75+. And xxV2x70xx78. What are æ and 5: 2d Equation. 2x996, BY Reduction. xm2b. 1ſt Equation Divided by x+ gives x71. Therefore, /y+1. And, ty5ãb. Or, nmj+3b. By Extraction, m3vV/D a b=6053+v303 ll l æ E ll l 7745775- -ſ. xy+1975+1156. Or, ẽ. 6 the Greater Number, and 5 the Leſs will Solve the Problem. For, xx53936-255x1) 6+511. And 2x9b12x5560. Alſo, 3 the Greater Number, and 6 the Leſs, will Solve the Problem. For, xx=as119xt) 3656. And 2x9+60xx+25 +y—xx =25t60+36-2536I Generally take Notice of Privative, as well as Poſitive Roots, and of Impoſſibit Ones, as well as Poſſible, becauſe they are all of them Equally Affirmative and Poſ ſible in the Solution of Problems, there being no Diſtinction betwixt the One anc the Other, in that Reſpect, and that which makes the Diſtinction, as I have Obſer veę ved before, is, that the Poſitive and Poſſible Roots are Serviceable to us in the Buſineſs of the World, and therefore the Other are Neglected; Whereas in Nature, Reaſon, and Philoſophy, and in the Relations of Things, the Privative, and Impoſſible Roots, are as Valuable, as the Other, and will as fully Solve all the Conditions of the Problem, and may be in Reality as Perfectly and Truly Extracted, whatever Algebraiſts may at preſent Imagine; A Poſitive Quantity or, +, being a Sign of an Expanſive Force, and a Privative, or, of a Contractive, and which are both Equally Poſitive Forces in Nature; They are alſo Signs of Credit, or Debt, of Progreſſion and Regreſſion, &. From whence it Follows, That they are only Signs of Quantities of different Kinds, or Denominations, and thereſore, as V100+10, ſo the v—100V 100510, Whoſe Denomination is,—10; That is, it is the Root of a Quantity, or Sum, which is Contractive, which is Owing, or is Regreſſive, &. as the Other is of a Quantity, or Sum, which is Expanſive, which is Due, or is Progreſſive; Nor in this Caſe, is/10XrIo=AI00, as is Taught by Algebraiſis, but —roo; Becauſe, if we Multiply Quantities of the ſame Kind and Denomination into one Another, they will ſtill Continue of the ſame Kind and Denomination, and will not Change into Different Ones. Notwithſtanding which, 1010—100, Where the Negation of the Negation of Quantities of the ſame Kind or Denomination is only Conſidered, as is done in Common Algebra. SoL.uTIoN of PROBL. IO. SoLUTION of PROBL. II. To Divide a given Number, 14, or b, into] To Find Three Numbers in Arithmetical Three Continual Proportionals, Such, That] Progreſſion, Such, that if the Firſt be If the ſaid given Number be Divided ſe-] Multiplied by 1, the Second by 2, the verally by One of the ſaid Three Propor-] Third by 3, the Sum of the Product: tionals, the Sum of the Three Quotients may be Equal to 125, or à. The Firſt of the Three Proportionalss æ. The Second or Middle. The Third will be therefore. Sum of the Three Proportionals vill be by the Problem. Ar2=i And by Reduction. xxtxytyox. Alſo, according to the Problem, it vill be. bbEB b E àau —/d. may be 62, and that the Sum of the Squares of the 3 Numbers may make 275. Numbers Sought, æ. 7. æ. and let æ be .  the Firt and Smalleſt Term, 6256, 275 =d. ?] Therefore in Algebra, the Problem will be thus Expreſſed. If;, by Arithmetical Progreſſion, æq+2971 or y-x/2, x being the leat Term. And Sum of the Products. +27+3296 And Sum of the Squares. æx+)y+ææ/d What are the Numbers æ. . æ1 By Arithm. Progr. x+2/2, and 2æ +25 -  U9 Their Squares, Ex+;xx+227 BY Reduction. bys +ty xtbyx? =dji æ. And ſince, +2/27. 'and r Wien Divided by thyxthe =tæ. Therefore, 2042=t, and x220944 n borT⸗ And b-222x, and 2bb2b242æ7xæx. n+x by? 4byx+hx bbx. And by Subſtituting theſe To lat Equaſues j by Hiyætx x tions in Zxx +4xæt;ææ=j, it will be Therefore, 1ſt Equation =2d. ày btxæ. 7bbEbæt;ææy; But, 225ææ, And by Dividing by . 4=i Thererore. Xt2t+ sEær=xxt5+tæ And by Dividing by à. r =a, and Stq77 ;ltghtd. 22 E i b=14  By Extrat-b And ææ= æ-ſtb+4, or pæ/— a12] ion, » vVI 4. . a2 But, by a Former Equat. xx+xyty=tæ. By Extraction. 7/2, 0 l&ti That is, ſince 7=4, xxtax+1614. 2132421 34 . And by Tranſpoſition. 10xx16.0r ũ i On by Reduction. xx=iox16. Conſequently, 79 or è: nd, by Extraction. æ=5V7;-6. And thereſore, x=3, or 3 Therefore. x=s353, Or, 2.But 5. 9. 13 are in Arithmetical Progreſſion And ”y DI 16 The Products. s2X94351362. And, 35 Or, ;3 The Squares. 2581V1609273. » And the ſame Obtains in the other NumIf, ææ2. 754,  And2. 4::4. 3. Ibers. ra ia a =13 :1r, For35. 85. 135 are in Arithmetical Progr. 2/r  ?/u 7mꝶ7æ ſ ſodas nſ4334i;0; 176 If ææ3. 754. Iæ.. And, 8. 4:: 4. 2. The Squates, =242+3 13+15275. 5. 11. Astothe Reſolution of Queſtions, Capable of Innumerable Anſwers, by Monſicur Bachet in his Problems, Plaiſans and Delectables, qui ſc font par les Nombres, Printed at Lyons 1624, The Account is this; If, aſter a Problem or Queſtion is Reduced to it's ſeveral Equations by the Methods above, there are as many Equations, as there are Quantities Sought, then a Queſtion has a certain Determinate Number of Anſwers; But, whenſoever a Queſtion affords not as many Equations Independent of One Another, as there are Quantities Sought, it is Capable of Innumerable Anſers. ueſtions of which latter Kind are very Pleaſant and Delightful, but ſometimes very hard to be Reſolved, Eſpecially, when all the Anſwers in whole Numbers, that a Queſtion is Capable of, are Deſired. PROPOS. 1. TWO Whole Numbers, Primary between themſelves, being Given, that is, whoſe Common Diviſor is 1, as 12 and 5, 20 and 21, 7 and3, &e. To Find out Two others, Suppoſing  and, that if x be Multiplied by the Greater of the Two given Numbers, and to the Product there be Added a given whole Number, the Sum ſhall be Equal to the Product of y Multiplied by the Leſſer of the Two Numbers firſt Given; Moreover, To Find out all the whole Numbers,  and, which ſnall Produce the ſame Effect. PROBL. I. Let 9x+6 be =77; Conſequently, 9 and 7 are the Two Primary Numbers giveh, whoſe Common Diviſor is 1, the given Number Added is 6, and all the Poſſible Values of æx and, in whole Numbers, are Sought. Therefore This is very Diſferent from all the Preceding Algebra, where Equations are given, from which may be Deduced all the Unknown Quantities, according to the Methods before Preſcribed, ſince here is only One Equation given, and Two or more Quantities are Sought. ęr6i5] X797 ] Therefore in the 1ſ Column, If x=I, ox615, æo+62417914lf xæ2, 9x+624, &s. If x/4, ox642. æo4+533 3%7721] Thus alſo in the 2 Column, If 7m1, 7777, If y52, õ16542 æ7928 779 14, &. If 796, 742; Conſequently x=4, and V5x7935] y96, Will Solve the Equation. Becauſe 2x5+642. sX9+651 6X742  and 6x7942. &x9+6o60 Having found the Two ſmallet Terms in whole 7X94669 Numbers, Namely, v=4 and 756. Reſolution. Then 479 11. 4+27518. +55725, &e. vill any of them Repreſent æ. And 6+9515. 6+2X0924. 6-355933, &. Will any of them Repreſent & That is, æ+ any Multiple of the Cocſficient of y, and + any Multiple of That of æ. Becauſe the Equation is 9x+67y; If therefore x4, and ,96, will Solve the Equation, 9X4+7+67X6+9, 103, vill likewiſe do it; And ſo of the Reſt. Another Way of Solving the foregoing Propoſition. PROBL. 2. 80979357. What are all the Poſſible Values of xand;: Therefore 8 and5 àre TWo Primary Numbers, whoſe Common Diviſor is I; And 97 is the given Number Added. I. 3979105. That is, the Coeſficient of æ+ the Given Number. Reſolution. æ. EE =215. That is, the Former Sum Divided by the Coeſficient of. 3. Therefore 1I=x73) 57-9758) 1039778) 8(I. Values of æ. 1. 1H5 =6. 1473711. 1+35516. &. Values of 7. 21. 214820. 214258937. 2143789a 5. &. PROEL 49x+6137. What are all the Poſſible Values of æ ànd 4:  4946=355. That is, the Coeſficient of x+ the Given famber: . The Former Sum Divided by the Coeſficient of 2, viz. L3, Pro duces no whole Number, and thereſore not Reſolvible into the æ Problem.  But 5ſ7444, therefore 4xX1352 is Leſs than 55, and 5x135965 is 10 more, which next Multiple of 13, viæ. 3XI3 is to be taken vith the Exceſs of 10 to be Subſtracted out of it; Therefore 6 5-I0 55. . But 49, Preſixed to æ, Divided by 135343. Therefore 35135; 9 and 39+10949. . Since then, there is 10 Woanting in the Former Equation to make an Exact Multiple of 13, and in this Latter, 10is to be Added to do it; If theſe Two Equations are Added together, a Number vill be Produced, which is an Exadt Multiple of it. 5IOIF55] +1 m Io; IO 1046  Therefore H/ and =274æ. That  10, and  I0 ſhould ſo Exactly Deſtroy each other is Accidental, and may not Obtain, unleſs in this Example. . 2+13515. 242X13528. 2431341, &. 8. 3+49957. 3-t2599106. 3-+3à9155, &⸗. 82x+661I377 What are all the Poſſible Values of  and ? 8 82+66148. Bn thereſore 11013143 vill be Leũ than 148; But 12X13156, and Conſequently, 1489156-8. B2 4 — Alſo m Therefore 8256513+478+V4. Since 455 of 8, Multiply 78+4 by the Denominator of the Fraction 2, Therefore 2X78F1641I 56+8. 14839156-8 Thereſore 1481i56-3. x82978Vax2t156+3 b ſi554. 1 y  æ I3 3. 3V1X13716. 34251329, &. 4. 24V1X82106. 242X32188, &c. 121x+5937. What are all the Poſſible Values of  and ;: 126121+35. Ls, Therefore 1X93 is Leſs than 126, bur 93 93 2X935186, and 1866I26. IZI 2 a Therefore, 1X935953, and 932859121. Suppoſc. 932+650=285. 29? 1 IS3 I3 601I53. =35 93+ 532503 but 6X289168, and 168-15I53, Thereſfore 3x285140 is Leſs than 153, 2-15 Therefore 3523934, and 8495993. Suppoſc. i3qt155975 591 r=I 2841543. b4 4X9 too Little, but sx9—45, and 45-2743 281 — 5 and 329927. 271928. 2X27715442. 54+2H452999. i Aaaaan Ræ- ByRegreſſion 29 1178 1õ Aſt. 3. 4.] I-11r. 1IX9573351176.54 5. J—— 5208 Art. 10. I. J II. 42x121+p1265 5208.56. and 2. And . 93 by the Equa- 320854;xæ tion. I2n Values of æ. 43. 43r9;5136. 4372053229, &. Values of 5. 56. 56+1219177. 56r271217298, &⸗. PrOPOS. 2. TO Divide a Given Number into Three or mt if every Onc of them be Multiplied by a diſferent Number Products may be Equal to a Given Number, But the Sum Fall between the TWo Products made by Multiplying the C Greateſt and Leaſt of the Given Multiplicators. PROBL. I. TO Divide 24 into Three ſuch whole Numb Multiplied by 36, the Second by 24, and the Third by s, Products may make 56. Let the Numbers Required be Repreſented by æ, &, æ. 1. Thercſore the Three whole Numbers. 2. And the Products Required. 3. Firſt Equation Multiplied into 36. 4. Second Equation Subſtracted from the Third m 5. Fourth Equation by Tranſpoſition makes. 6. Fiſth Equation Divided by 12 makes. 7. If Inſtead of - in the Firſt Equation 20-3æ i be Subſtituted, it will be. Reſolution. ſ3, That is, by Tranſpoſition. 9. That is. 10. Therefore. IF , is made to be a Sign of r. And. 12. And. 13. By the Sixth Equation. IF is made to be 14. Therefore. I5. And. The vhole Number æ therefore, to be found, muſt be C Greater than 12, for whole Numbers are only Required in th æ and 7 muſt be vhole Numbers likewiſe, 7/ muſt be ſuch, that Z in the Sixth Equation, or into æ in the Ninth Equation, it Number, which thereſore can be no other than 6. 9. and the Numbers will ſtand in the following Order. x. J. æ. x and y are found out 3 156 3 +156 /24. 36X3 + by thè 61h. and orh. 17 I8 lo 17 48 +90 m24. 36x7 + 12 ĩl II+1 V+1224. 36X114 Equations. PrROBL. 2. If One would lay out 98 Pence to Buy ao0 Bir Larks, and Quails; How many oſ Each Kind may be Bought, 3 Pence a Piece, Larks at an Half Penny a Picce, and Quails a I.  the Number of Partridges, 7 the Number oſ Latks, æ the Number oſ Quails, Thereſore, xtytæ=4i0. The Coſt oſ the Partridges 3:, oſ the Larks 2, and of the Quails 4æ. 2. Therefore. 35+42=o9s. 3. The ſirſt Equation Multiplied by 3 makes. 337F3295120. 4. The Sccond Equation Subſtracted from the Third. 3 ææ=22. 5. The Fourth Equation by Tranſpoſition makes. 2y-23. 6. Subſtitute the Value of æ in the laſt Equa- i z tion, for æ in the Firſt. xtytĩya2/40. 7. And by Reduction. x=c2-. 8. By the 51h Equation, æ/y22, Thereſore, 3æz:. Alſo. 44. And. 32. 9. Dy the 71h Equation, æ622, Thereſore, EEES Allo. 7124. And. 3i75. the Numbers Required muſt be whole Numbers, y muſt be an Even tauſe 5 or 7 into an Odd Number would Produce an Odd Number, and  vould make a Fraction in the 5h and 71h Equations; 7 muſt alſlo be 3, and Leſs than 17, betwixt which the even Numbers will be 10. 12. ch will Solve the Queſtion. Paut. Latks Quails. x. - z. found out 27io]3 I2710 40. 35272x10+ax3 /08. mnd 71h 20r28 l2oti1248 /40. 362042x12445x8 93. 13i4li; lizti4ri340. 3x13214+4x1398. 6 ]i6is J6o +16+18540. 3466 4ZX16+75x18798. A Vintner having 3 Sorts of Wines, the Prices of which are 24 Pence, nd 18 Pence per Gallon, Deſires to make a Mixture out of them, that n 60 Gallons, in ſuch Manner, that the Total Mixture being Sold at Price rer Gallon, between 24 Pence and 18 Pence, Suppoſc at 20 Pence, he ſame Sum of Money, as all the Particular Quantities of Wine in the heir ovn Prices vould do; What Quantity of cach Sort of Wine is to make that Mixture? >ſ Gallons of the Firſt Sort of Wine x, of the Second 5, of ihe Third æ 1. Therefore. x4y+2/c0 2. And. 245+227F18276OX205 1200 3. Multiply the Firſt Equation by 24, ĩt willbe. 245+24+242 1430 4. Subſtract the Second ſrom the Third. 27t62240 5. Thereſore by Tranſpoſition. 2377240-6 6. And. Jm120-32 7. Subſtitute the Value of y in the laſt Equa-  3 3t333 = tion, ſory in the Firſt, it will be. x+120-32+2960 3. And by Reduction and Tranſpoſition. =22260 9. By the laſt Equation. 2260, and æ30 10. And by the Sixth Equation. 32120, and 240 x. 5. æ. 21273112 274313760. 28242227185311200. 4l243214 +24432760. 25422X2418321200. 6 21l33 6 F214+3360. 24X6V22521418X331200. ſound by] s i334 8 V18+3460. 24X8V22X18V 18X341200. d 81h E-liolis ſ35]10+15435 60. c. 12112]36]The Rule of Alligation in Vulgar Arithmetick find i4] 937]out only one Anſwer, which is the 6/h, Whereas b 16] 68]the Table Above, there are 9 Anſwers in whole Num1831 3139]bers, and in Fractions there may be Innumerable Ones: For æ/ may be Equal to 30%, &. Aaaaaaa 5. 2. S. 12. Mr. Raphſon's Analyſis æquationum, or his General Way of Extracting the Roots of Equations, whether Simple or Affected, by the Infinite or Converging Series is Derived from the Exegetice, or Exegeſis Numeroſa of Vieta, and Harriot, and to which Series, Thoſe of Sir Iſ. Newion, Lagney, and Dr. Halley very much Correſ pond; Ar Explanation of Mr. Raphſon's I have here Subjoined. Let the Equation propoſed, whoſe Root is to be Extracted be ba—at c, in which, according to Harriot, a is the Unknown Quantity. RUL. I. Divide the Unknown Quantity a into Two Parts ę& and , the ſormer of vhich is known, the other Unknown, therefore ę+xa. And ' +380 x380 +c 2a. That is, their Cubes ill be alſo Equal And bobxba. Which Conſtitutes the other Part of the Equation. Therefore, bgbxg 3  x3832D2 Or, hig' t5350 *x385 RUL. 2. Reject from this New formed Equation all thoſe Terms, in which any of the Povers of æ are, whether by themſelves, or Involved with the known Quantity, and Retain only thoſe Terms, in which the Simple Quantity æ is found, from whence vill Ariſe this Equation, which is Named the Converging one; viz. bqg-g' tb3xxc, and bgtg7b35xx. RUL.;. From the foregoing Simple Equation, in which one Unknown Qũantity æ is only Found, is Derived the following Equation; Namely, x hich is the Theorem Fundamental to this Method, and is alſo Termed a Coverging One; Becauſe, tho' it will not at Firſt give the True Value of x, yet by Aſſuming continually New Values of 5, the Unknown Quantity  will be Produced nearer to the Truth, by which Means there will be a nearet Approximation in Infinitum to the Quantity or Value Sought //gx. RUL. 4. Having found out by the Precedeing Equation the Value of x, ſince æ4 may be Equal to g+x or 7x, according to the Signs + or, Add or Subſtract the Value of  to or ſfrom g, and let the Sum or Remainder be called  therefore this Nev Value of g. +x is now Suppoſed =a, and æ=to the Quantity ſet down before in Rule 34. putting always the New Value of g for g in that Equation. So likewiſe by a Third Operation, a New Value of g2 vill ariſe / to the laũt g+x, and this New Value of g+ is now Suppoſed =a, and ſo on in Infinitum, bũt a Third or a Fourth Operation will be in General Suſſicient to Anſwer any Queſtion Propoſed, or Exhibit any Root to be Extracted. RUL. 5. To Find out the firt Term g, let the Equation be Diſtinguiſied by Points, that is, both the Power, which is to be Reſolved, and the Coefficients in the Manner Practiced by Vieta, Harriot, and Oughtred, as in the Equation of Problem 22. haa =c. a*+323609, 6636893 +4228931, O85087852422540483202, 61356198751I6. where the Reſolvend is Pointed as a Biquadratick, becauſc it is an Equation of the 4th. Pover, the Coeſficient Xa as a Cubick, becauſe 4 X the Cube is = to a Biquadratick, the Cocſticient Xa? as a Square, becauſe a? xX the Square is = alſo to a Biquadratick; For all the Terms of an Equation are Conſidered, as Conſiſting of the ſame Power, ſince otherwiſe they could not, if they were of Heterogencous Denominations, bc Added to, or Subſtracted from one another. And after the Equation is thus Pointed, let the Numbers be taken, which belong to every ſirſt Point, as if the Equation had no more to Examine, as is done in the 81h. Problem, and from thence, let the firſt Simple Side or Root be Extracted, to vhich let there be ſo many Cyphers Added, as there Remain Points in the Reſol vend, as is done in the 57h. Problem, and afterwards let the Operation Proceed ar cording to the foregoing Rules; ꝗ may be Obtained by an Eaſy Conjecture, or by the Limits of Equations, or by Logarithms, See Oughtred's Clavis Mathemat. Di ZEquationum Affectarum Reſolutione in Numeris. From Various Quantities being put for g, Various Roots of the ſame Equation may be found out, as in Problem 15, 16. ~uL i c+0 RUL. 6. Since x iSE by Rule 34, and g+x=a, by Rule i, Therefore u be—3; i i up]t Converging / 3 s : From vhence it Follovs, if ꝗ Converging is =to ⸗ Converging Exactly, tht Solution vill likewiſe be Exactly True, that is, or, b3a) c21a a For axt34 and Subſtracted from 20 makes cba-tai=o, if ; is=avith n out a Remainder, but cba+a? is =o by the Equation, or ha—ai r, and Conſe quently g+x=a—g Converging. Demonſtration of this Method. Let any Quantity be taken as 52& firſt Member or Part of the Root; It is Aſffir med, that this Quantity, be it what it will, according to the Method before ſet down does Converge to the True Root; Let the Equation Propoſed be Reſumed, ba—ar=c gt7a, ot, if 4is Greae heseo b;4g H5 xx33 2195, A than a, 2xa. +ę tg 3854x M7 - a : Put : Niſi and mut , and there will be Eight Different Caſes, acx=-1-+mcording to the Variation of the Signs + and ; That is, x. t. m is Terx=-t—m med an Abſolute Theorem, and the Quantity  in this Caſe is Abſolute +x=A+1—miin Diſtinction from xæt, which is Converging. x=-tm From what has been Premiſed it is Evident. +x=-tm ſt. That in x=tm (which is the Caſe of baa1 =c) the Converging —xA+1-mx is Leſs than the Abſolute x by the Quantity m, that is, ? is Leſs than x-tmt-m, the Part than the Whole, if therefore the Converging x=t be Adx=+tm cd to g,tis Maniſeſt that this New g, which Conſiſis of the Former ę vith the Converging æ or ? Added to it, is Greater than the Former g, by the Addition of  or ?, and that by this Means g ill be Continually Increaſcd, and m Diminiſhed in Infinitum, and that after an Infinite Convergency to the True Root, the Bifference of the Root found out by Extraction from the Real One, vill be Leſs than any Aſſignable Quantity. q 2 ] 2d. xt-m, or a=:t, therefore g° +25+x'=c. and =x=t m; In this Caſe it is Manifeſt, that the Converging x=t is Greater than the Abſolute x=r-m by the Quantity m, and Conſequently, if the Converging ? is Added to g, it Will make a Quantity Greater than 4, and from thence g Greater than ?, by which Means x1-m ill be Changed into the Second Form, x--m and vill Converge by Deſcending or Going from a Higher Quantity to a Lower. 3d. By the ſame Way of Reaſoning, ail the other Caſes may be Reduced to the Two Firſt, and therefore will all Converge, Namely, all that have 4m may be Reduced to the firſt Caſe, and all which have m to the Second, but the four la Caſes are not Poſſible, unleſs, by Changing their Signs, they are Converted into the Four Firſt. A Second and more Particular Demonſtration of the Foregoing Method. PROPOS. I. Let the Equation Propoſed be 4355, and let æ/ bc =x the Abſolute Quantity, and not the Converging, and let any Quantity g& be taken Greater than 4, tis Aſtirtmed, that the next g, which Atiſes, by Proceeding in the Merhod before Delivered, is always Leſs than the Precedeing, but Greater than a, and therefore does Converge to the Truth; 7]æa by the Hypotheſis, and g'38æ+35825a⸗ =b, 38æ5 b-  me Convergin 5 3 g - 8ng. ig æ 7=x, lct g2 be Added to both Sides of ſhe Equation, and 38 5 Therefore,3+3508723b-g3, and æ+ Therefore,æ+ 302 2 : . :  —— to a Nev g, and thereſore this New g is Leſs than the 3 3082 Precedeing, but a+ = to the New g, becauſe /g7æ, and thereſore ilil 3gNev g is Greater than 4, that is, the Whole, than the Part. Q E. D. PROPOS. 2. Let the Equation Propoſed be ha-a3 c, and Let ę be any Quantit Aſumed Leſs than . Tis Aſfirmd, that the next 7 which Ariſes from the Metho of Proceeding before Delivered, is always Greater than the Precedeing, but Leſs than a, and thereſore Converges to the Truth, 272⸗ by the Hypotheſis, and le54 b35;5023 baarc, therefore b;353i0 æV=c+5'lg, and Con 3028+23 c+5dL⸗ : 102 +23 ſequently, ?m—=-/ +x the Converging; From whence æ7/x+ E-3ãꝶ b38 b35 EꝶPꝶ g7æ+æ3 Add g to both Sides of the Equation, and tct& a; But the Nev 7 g+x is Greater than the Precedeing g by the Quantity æ, òut Leſs than , by the Quantity E the Part, than the Wholee Z E. D. 38 CoroL. 1. In Equations, where the Higheſt Power is Negative, if g is Leſs than a, it Aſcends in its Approach to the True Root. CoRroL. 2. In Extracting Pure or Simple Roots, if g is Leſs than a, in the Firſ Operation it Aſcends above the Root, and aſterwards Converges by Deſcending. But does not any one Sce, vho Knows the Nature of Infinites, notwithſtanding theſe Demonſtrations, that Approximations may be Infinitely made to a True Root of the Equation, and yet aſter all may be Infinitely Diſtant from it? One may Approximate Infinitely to the Real Truth of a Line, but yet fall Inſinitely ort oſ the Real Truth of a Surface, a Solid, Surſolid, &c. and ſo in Numbers, vill come nearer to Unit than 43, or 4;, but 22, or 27 Approximate nearer to Unit than 3, or 22 &c. How thereſore is it Proved, that thefe Approximations are the Neareſt and Juſten which can be made? For an Approximation in General to Infinit, can never Signiſy any Thing to the finding out what the Real Truth is, where the Infinities arc Different and Various. PROBLEM. 1ſſ. of Mr. Raphſon is the Extraction of the Root of 2, which here Follows. Let gixa Equation a=qc In Numbers a2/2 Theorem =cqę Eũl g51 =1 282) 1.0 .55æ IL.5 5, 25 2093), 25, O8373x I. 500 .0383 g t.417 cqg5, oo7889 2052.834),007889(,002783 i.417 .002783 1.414217 cQgę,000009723089 2852.828434),000009723089(,0000034376225æ I.414217 .000003437622 a=I.414213562378 5. 13. Dr. S. 13. Dr. Halleys Method of Finding out the Roots oſ any Equations what ſoever, without a Previous Reduction of them, is as Follows. Mr. Raphſon in the Year 1690, Publiſied his Univerſal Aualyſis of Equations be fore Explained, upon which, as it is Probable to Think, Monſieur aæ Laguey Proſeſ ſor of the Mathematicks at Paris, Entering into the ſame Argument, Propoſed theſ Two Compendious Rules for an Approximation oſ the Cube Root, the one Ratio ab zaaa+t arah; And the Root of the Fifth Power, Namely, of a7+4, he thus Expreſſes = ElEl nal, the other Irrational, Namely, 2b., and the Viatm+in for the Culb V+4im; Which Rules are Demonſtrated from the Geneſis of the Cube, and of rhe Fiſth Pover. Thus, let the Side or Root of a Cube be a+æ; The Cube, according to the Foregoing Generation of it, vill be a⸗a+3a+3ac+; I thereſore we Suppoſe aaa to be a Cube Number, the next under any Number given, which is not a Cube, ece Will be Leſs than Unit, and the Reſiduum, or Remainder, or b, will be Equal to the other Members of the Cube, 320+3 aec+eec,3aac+300, becauſc eee is ſo Small, as not to be Worth the Conſideration. For Inſtance, if aaa+b7, and a=t; aaa+3aac+3aceece, or ana+i+330 +eee=7, if æ is Conſidered, as nothing; If ama=26, and a=23 ara+3an+3ac Vece, ot ara+b8+1206ctece=26, iſ æ is Conſidered as nothing; If an+c3, and a=3; aaa+3aae3acctcce, ort aarrb27+270t9ece63, iſ æ is Conſidered as nothing, &. Since allo aae is much Greater than aee, and ſince b is =3a23acæ, æ will be b i b JE , and therefore Nsulyææ. 3 And Conſcquently, t35 3zaat+3ab I iũ Z an 381(;ac m s - 328+vh b b z—am———m—mau-x3 ai a 3815 320056 7 J335 and therefore the Side or Root oſ the a a Cube 4te=a+ ob , vhich is Monſieur àæ Lagneys Expreſſion of it; If aaa is the 3a8a6 Cube Number next above the Number given, the Root or Side of amm-4 will be ab mamm by a like Reaſoning, as before; For æ13aa3accecenaab, and . E becauſe æ is very Small, -b=-3aa, and vii?- Nearly; But, Come: ſtĩll nearer to —, and thereſore 5;0e 3031b Jaa3ae a22-h b ab u n I 331 and 32 a ab — Conſequently, nea-m Thus let amab be =2, and a/2; ſ=s32e +6ceecc, Iſ e is Conſidered as Nothing; Let a1 be =9, and a/3 a 27727t9ceccc9, Iſ e is Conſidered as Nothing; Let a3ab be =28, and n4; aedc448c1ceece/28, If e is Conſidered as Nothing; Let ama he 65, and a=5; 7 12375+150065, If æ is Conſidered as Nothing, &⸗. j i The Irrational Expreſſion, or Form, of the Cube Root is thus Found out; If æ23+6 ihæ ſul b is the Cube, 3a004;3a207b, and tu/⸗ and by Extracting the Root oſ both E—— ae : b b Sides oſ the Equation, 7te Lot and :2ntv+ and ate=2a+ h vir In the ſame Manner the Root oſ a22-b vill be vin 3 Or, Or, C H AP. VI. Which is Miſcellaneous, Namely, Concerning the Infinite Series, the Square of the Circle, the Inveſligation of the Longitude ; 0f Thunder and Lightning ; O the Rainbow; Of the Vegetable Statichs 3 4 Juſt Ridicule of the Corpuſcularian Scheme, or That of Similar or Homogeneous Matter; Concluſion, by Shewing, how many Hypotheſes there are, by which it is Poſſible for Nature to be Explained by Philoſophers. 5. T was many Vears i Mon. Lat. Triang. Pyr. Tri. Pyr. Pyr. Pyr. ò mi æ m 1 N I Communicated to my Triang. Eſtcem in other Parts of this Inquiry; And which Diſſertation I ſhall, if this Volume Firſt Entrance in- Monad. to theſe Mathematick Speculations, when I drew up a Diſſertation in Later. V \ Latin, Concerning Sir Iſaac Newton's Infinite Series, Which VVrauZuaau Worthy Friend and Ac- Va quaintance Mr. Cores, Late Profeſſor of Aſtronomy and Pyram. Experimental Philoſophy in this Univerſity, by our Pre- Triang. Pyram. v \ ſent Learned and Good Maſter of Clare Hall, Mr. Morgan, vhom I have Men- Pyram. Pyram. V rioned with Affection and will Permit, Annex to theſe Papers, to which I had the Following Objections, and the Anſwer to vhich Objections is here ſet down. In this Table Suppoſcd to be Infinitely Continued, tis Evident that the Oblique Columns Exhibit the Unciæ belonging to the ſeveral Powers of a Binomial, if we put T for the Number of the Terms, and  for the Laſt Term of any of theſe Series of Numbers, the Sums of them will be Reſpectively. Monad. Later. Triang. Pyram. Tr. Pyr. Tro T- T- T T  -_t Let m be a General Repreſentative of the Index of any Pover, it will be Eaſy upon theſc Data, to Calculate the General Expreſſions of the Unciæ belonging to that Pover, and we ſhall find them to be. mo m - - - - L iX/, uPixBn, xæ/,"x &: I I 2 I 2 3 I 2 3 4 The Terms of any Pover of a Binomial, Setting a-part the Unciæ, are alvays Continual Proportionals; Thus 2. ? Squared has ?2. ? ?2. R?, Cubed Ps. P2R. PER?. 3, Whereof the Firſt Term is always the Analogous Power of the firſt Number oſ the Root, and every Precedent Term Multiplied by H Generates it's SubſeJu R , quent; Thus, 7 J has theſe Terms, P-. rẽ r] &c. Prefixing therefore the Correſpondent Unciæ found, as above Mentioned, we have 7]r r +nr +mx Bbb bbb m: mi1DnQ: m1i1 m R: f : i ꝶ r æ &. Or to Avoid Fractions in the Canon, Putting r m mi 79 and Conſequently R=rL, PAPILr rmrQtm—rprb +m x— ræ. &c. I Suppoſe the Diſſertator will readily Allow of the Validity of this Canon, whili m Remains an Integer, but will Deny, that there can be any ſiew of an Argument drawn from Analogy to Prove it to be of any Uſe, when it becomes a Fraction or Indeed, that there can be any Proof of it at all, Preſuming that it is Utterly Falie in ſuch Circumſtances; I will not here Inſiſt upon the Force of Analogy, ſince he ſeems to be ſo Utterly Averſe to it, but will make Uſe of another vay oſ Prooſ, which may Perhaps be more Suitable to his Conceptions. Tis then Aſfirmed, that putting I for any Fraction. m m m m m mn m i : i r];7r,+,;,+,x 77. &c. Let ihis Series be /5. Ir ã be =5, then vill mr/ã⸗=s, Bur by the Former Canon, vhich is Allowed of, sæ is Equal to the Following Series. mn m2n m -g n3. 9: n:n 95 P-tax TPQpnxæ ; ræ nx mæ 3n ræ mm n m m mn n—i 2Z pg: np9:. Anx Pru 2 & Hxx am: 2 nn2m m m rr r95, &e. AA Pã, & Which is = P4nrãm& r”Ar , &. Which is PAPZL, which is ] Therefore, &e. The Same vay of Reaſoning may be made Uſe of for the Admittance of the Abovementioned Canon, even, when m Signifies a Negative Quantity, or any whatſoever. ANSWER. The Sums are Reſpectively as above, and Vice Verſdà, thoſe Series whoſe Sums are  . xe &e. are Reſpectively Monadick, Lateral, ?. What I would here Add is, which Perhaps Mr. Cotes has not Obſerved Let m Deſign the Index of any Integral Power, which is always found in the Series of Laterals, it may, I believe, be Juſlly Demonſirated, that the Perpendicular Co I 2 lumns are Produced by this Series næom e,4 &. That is 1 is the 2 3 24Character of Monadicks, m of Laterals, -i of Triangulars, r ryramidals, &. Suppoſing we Subiſtitute, as is aſtervards done, m—o, mi1, m2, m;, &e. Succeſſively in the ſtead of m; If we take therefore for Example the s1h Power, m is=3,1 x will give the 2 Firſt Unciæ ;4/m1, the 30 Uncia, which is a Triangular, 1 n0f4xæ44, 3 is /Hm—2, therefore the 47h Uncia, which m-2dto mD2+1 m+2 no”nI m2 2 3 I 2 is a Pyramidal, is / 1x ; 2isW3, m;340 , &. =IX and Conſcquently the 577 Uncia, which is a Triang Pyramidal =1x -/ 3 1I=m, and the 61h Uncia, a Pyr-Pyramidal, and ſince the next Step gives m—3=o, the Scries is Finiſed; But to Return, What Mr. Cores AlIedges above, as he Says, is very Eaſy, the Calculation I readily Allow of, and the Demonſtration, upon which it is Founded, but muſt Beg the Favour to make Uſe of the very ſame Proof for that Canon, or Series, which I Oppoſcd to Sir Iſ. Newton's in thoſe Papers, which, Ihope, He has done me the Kindneſs to Peruſe, which is Exactly the ſame with Sir ſ. Newton's, when Applied to Integral Powers, but Diſſents ſrom his in Fractional; The Series for the 52h Power is This, rZ, m m3m4  uere is noi m4 m;3 m2 m 1 moI thing in the World diſferent from That of Sir Iſ. Newton's, only This, that, whereas in the Former, the Laterals, which are the Numerators, are Expreſſed by m4, m—3, m2, m-1, m, the ſame Laterals which are the Nominators have not the ſame Expreſſions, which certainly they ought to have, in the Latter the ſame Laterals have the ſame Expreſ ſions, which, whether it is not the moſt Reaſonable, I leave to Mr. Cores to Conſider; It were no hard Matter to Prove by another Method, that Fractional Povers, from the very Nature of this Table, cannot Admit of the ſame Rule for finding their Unciæ, with That, which is Uſed for Integrals, but I ſall Omit it, that I may not be too Tedious, ſince this Series will, I Believe, Sufficiently Evidence it to him; However it vill Prove thus much, that whether they are to be found by the ſame Rule, or not, Sir Iſ. Newton's Series for the Unciæ of Fractional Powers cannot be Valid; If they are not, it is Plain, ſince Sir Iſ. Newton Uſes the ſame Rule; If they are, then this Latter Rule muſt Produce the ſame Series of Unciæ for Fractional Powers. with the Former, hich is Impoſſible, or elſe this Latter Rule is not the ſame with Sir Iſ. Newion's for finding the Unciæ of Integral Powers, which yet we have Proved is. The Terms of any Pover, &c.) This I allowed in Integral Powers, but Expreſly Denied, that every Precedent Term Multiplied by - Generates it's Subſequent in Fractional Ones; my Words are, Jam verò, iuquam, hanc rationem, quare x?, x* Dividatur perc?, c3, non ad fſractas poteſtates periinere, niſi eodem, quo modo Integra, componantur, quoa feri nequit. I there Offered ſome Reaſons, why their Compoſition muſt be very Different, nor is there any Thing ſaid here to give me the leat Occaſion of Altering That Opinion. Thus far Mr. Cotes has Explained the Canon for Integral Powers, which I do very Willngly Embrace and Admit, I always Acknovledged it Good and Irrefragable, ſo long, as it was Applied to Integral Powers, but cannot yet own it's Uſe in Fractional; As to the Preſent Demonſtration, I come now to Conſider it, the Argument lies Thus. ing ion, tht FFE”?- is +2 2.8 Mr. Cotes Affirms, putting F for a Fraction, that Pęl; is rr+ = & which Series he Suppoſes =5, Therefore I m= =F7ã be =5, then vill  +.m rræl; be /S; But, by the Former Canon Alloved of, 5 is 5 PAP— therefore mn FPæ;755 If a Suppoſition of the very Thing to be Proved is a Demonſiration of it, I Conſent that this is a very Firm and Good one; To give a nearer View of this Proof, e. ꝗ. ?L is Suppoſed =5', or Aſfirmed ſb to be; If P =s, then PE=si, but P! is roved /5, upon the Suppoſition, that PL is 5', therefore PE is/5; for, if P; is not Suppoſcd =5', P' can never be Proved to be  to 5, any more than to S'; Or o Reſume the Quantities Propoſed, mã is Said to be =4, &æ. which, iſ it were not Suppoſed, and Taken for granted, without proving, P4P4ſ could never be =5; If it can be, without ſuch a Suppoſition, Namely, of That, which is only to  m he Demonſtrated, thereſore let PHPæl; be /Z, that is, tillit's Proved what it is, an UnB b b bbb⸗ Enown Enown Quantity, and FPQræ5 as beſore; I 7PQ=æs5, then vill mr= _0 om be=Z; But ?APæſL=5 by the Former Canon, therefore PEIX=2 3 This Mr. Cotes will Allow to be a ſtrange Concluſion, which if it were Right, we ſhould be as far to Seek as ever, ſince Z is Aſfirmed to be Unknown, and yet this is the moſt tha can be fairly made of Mr. Cores's Argument; To Clear this Matter, if I can, a little Farther, That 7ãl; is =5 is the Propoſition to be Evidenced, or which is the ſame, that r7 is 55; for Mr. Cotes therefore to Argue thus, it PAPſ is=s.  m then FP"ls but 7ã ſi is =5, by the former Canon, therefore &. is no more than to Say, if r/5 is, /5, then ããæs, but it is Told us by the Former Canon, that rãſ;æs therefore it is =, that is, if a Thing is ſo, it is ſo, but it is ſo, thereſore it is ſo; What I have Said is Seriouſly no other than what is his Real Demonſtration; Now Mr. Cores will, th his Argument does not, Acknowledge, that 7ã cannot Prove its ſelf to be =5 . ,5 cannot Prove it by the aforeſaid Canon, nor Indecd by any Canon in the World, unby the Former Canon, therefore 7PLI's, which is the ſame as ?775 JE— nmn leſs it be Proved that ??Pſ cannot be 5, or that +Pæl- muſt be 5 à Priori,  mi] that is, Fręl5 =5; In Short it is Affirmed, that 777ſ is& 5, that is, that the Series =S belongs only to an Integral Power, the Proof againſt this is, that 777ãL is /5, if ve Suppoſe rãs the very Equation which is Denied; I might give other Conſutations of this Objection, for it is Eaſy to make Appear, which I have. I ſhould Think, in my Papers done, that H cannot Expreſs a Fraction, or Integer, as we ſhall Pleaſe, or have Occaſion forit, which it muſt do, if rãſ; is =5. The Reſult of this Converſation between Mr. Cores and me, was, that he would not Enter into any farther Controverſy about this Matter, whether this Proceeded from his Exceeding Modeſly, or his Utter Averſeneſs to Diſpute, which I call Inquiring, or from his Conviction, that his Demonſtration vas not Juſt, I ſall not Take upon me to Determine, but the Report then was by Mr. Whiſton, vho Knew Nothing of this Kind of Learning, or very Little of it, that he had Entirely Con futed me; Whereas Mr. Cotes himſelf could not be a Maſter of this Argument, unleſs he had Read Dr. ’alli'ss Arithmetick of Infinites, from Whom Sir Iſ. Newion Derived his Infinite Series, and who yet is now Neglected in that Particular by the Generality o Mathematicians, altho' all their Reaſonings on the Infinite Serie: Depend upon the Truth or Falſehood of that Arithmetick. US. 2. ME. Profeſſor Coress Demonſtration againſt the Square oſf the Circle is, a: Follows,  Droros. 1. The Square of the Diameter of any Circle, is to the Area of a Re gular Polygone of Sixteen Sides Circumſcribed about the ſame, as the Tangent ol the Sixtcenth Part of the Circumſference is to the Quadruple of the Exceſs oſ it Secant above the Radius. l i Lo Let 4D be the 81h Part of the Circumference of a Circle Deſcribd upon the Center C, with the Radius C4, Drav AB Touching the Circle in 4, and Catting the Radius CD in B, Draw DE Touching the Circle in D, and Curting the Tangent 43 in E, Join , E, Interſecting the Circle in F; Drav HFG Touching the Circle in , and Cutting the Tangents 4E in H and DE in G; Laſtly, Join CH, CG; Now tis Maniſeſt, that the Lines AC, and 4B are Equal, as alſo the Lines AE, ED, and DB, and the Lines AH, HF, FG and GD, and the Angles ACH, HCF, FCG, GCD; And moreover it is Evident, that the Square of the Diameter is Equal to the Triangle AEC taken Eight Times, and that the Circumſcribed Polygone of Sixteen Sides is Equal to the Triangle 4HC taken Thirty TWo Times, and that rhe Tangent of the 167h Part of the Circumference is 4E, the Secant of the ſame being CE, and the Exceſs of rthat Secant above the Radius being EF; Tis therefore to be Proved, that 3AB8C is to 324HC, or ABC to 44HC, as AE to 4EF. The Triangle 4BC is to the Triangle AHC, as AB to 4H, or as AC to FH, or ſbecauſe the Triangles ACE, FHE are Similar) as 4E to EF; Therefore ABC is to 44HC, as AE to 4EF. Q E. D. PROPOS. 2. The Tangent of the Sixteenth Part of the Circumference is Greater rthan the Quintuple of the Exceſs of its Secant above the Radius; I Say, that 4E is Greater than 5EF. For, S8CBAS 8CB, or 3364C8;, ot 6728CAq is Greater than 6724CAq, or, 3204x32C4. Therefore 58C8 is Greater than 82C4. l And 58CAXCB Greater than 82045. And 50CAXCBAS8CAXCE Greater than 100CAq-18CAq. And 18CA7+8CAXCE Greater than 100CA750CAXCB. Whence, CE+4c4 X CB4CA, or CB3A16CAa+SCAXCE, or 18CAq+8CAXCE is Greater than 100CAqsCAXCB, or 2 53x4Cã 2CxCB, or æ sXCEſ2CD?2CDXCB, or 255CB720D5-2009-20DXDB, or 25XCEq20DXDB; or 25xCDVDEq; OI 254Chq+DEq; or 25CEq;, or SCEXSCE. ii Therefore CB4A is Greater than SCE. And CE-CA Greater than 5CE3CA. And DB, or DE, or 4E, Greater than SEF. Q E. D. ] PrRopos. 3. The Proportion of the Area of the Circle to the Square of it's Diameter is not That of 4 tos. Iſ it be Said, that the Area of the Circle is to the Square of ir's Diameter as 4 tos, then, becauſe the Square of the Diameter is to the Area of a Circumſcrib'd Polygone of 16 Sides, as 4E to 4EF, the Area of the Circle will be to the Area oſ the Polygone, as AE to SEF; And Conſequently, (ſince AE is Greater than yEF) the Area of the Circle will be Greater than the Area of the Circumſcribd Polygone, that is, a Part will be Greater than the Whole; But a Part is not Greater than the Whole, the Circle is not Greater than the Polygone, therefore the Circle is not to the Polygone, as 4E to SEF, and Conſequently, it is not to the Square of its Diameter, as 4 to 5 2. E D. Aſter Ihad Publiſied my Firſt Inquiry into the Principles of the Modern Philoſophy n 1712, and in the Preface to it, and in the Geometria Solidorum ſive Materiæ, had Aſ ſerted, that the Proportion of the Circle to its Square, was as 4 tos, the Ingeniou and Learned Proſeſor Above-Named was ſo Kind and Obliging, as to Communi cat cate to me, vith great Candour and Friendſhip, the Foregoing Demonſiration againſt it; Tho if he had been Pleaſed to have Peruſed with Care, cither my Preface, or the Geometry Mentioned, he would have found all Demonſtrations Obviated of thi Kind; Which Suppoſe, that a Circle is nothing more than a Polygone of an Infi nite Number of Sides, and that the Diameter oſ it is only a Plain and Common Line, Conſiſting of a Progreſſion of Units. Or the Contrary I Affirm the Quadrant, or Fourth Part of a Circle, to be, accord jng to the Improvement there made upon the Arithmetick oſ Infinites, a Biquadratick Paraboloeid, whoſe Abſciſs and Ordinate are Equal, the Former of which, or the Radius, does not Proceed in an Arithmetical Progreſſion of Units, but in a Quadruplicate Proportion of them, and the Latter in an Arithmetical Progreſſion; Or, vhich is the ſame, as is there Shewn, the Parrs of the Radius or Abſciſs Proceed in a Series of Units, and the Ordinates in a Subquadruplicate Proportion of Them; And therefore there can be no Compariſon betwixt a Circle or a Paraboloeid, which Conſiſts of Biquadratical Parts, and a Polygone of an Inſinite Number of Sides, which Conſiſts of Plane and Triangular Parts, which Proceed in an Arithmetical Progreſſion, no more than there can be a Compariſon betwixt a Plane and a Solid; And from hence it is, that tho' the Parabola is Acknowledged to be Squared, which is a Quadratical Paraboloeid, yet there can be no Proportion found betwixt the Curve and the Abſciſs; as there cannot betwixt the Radius and the Circumſerence of a Circle. This Demonſtration takes for Granted likewiſe, that there may not be Different Quantities and Values even in the ſame Space, which I have Evidently Proved there may be, both in that Inquiry, and in the Geometry above Cited, and which Kind of Geometry or Mathematicks, tho Perhaps New and Uncommon, muſt be the only Baſis and Foundation of a True Philoſophy; For if it did not take it for Granted, it could not Prove, that a Part was Greater than the Whole, according to my Proporportion of 4 to 5, ſince, if the Quantities Included in the Circle are of a Greater Value than Thoſe in the Polygone of an Infinite Number of Sides, there can be no Inference like That, which is here Made, that a Part is Greater than the Whole, becauſc in ſuch a Circumſtance a Part may be Infinitely Greater than a Whole; For thus a Part of Gold is Greater than a Whole of Air, or Water; Since Gold is to Water for Inſtance, as 19 to 1, and therefore th Part of a Globe of Gold of an Inch Diameter, is Equal in it's Value, Weight, or Matter, to a Whole Globe of Water of the ſame Diameter; But theſe are Notions, which my Worthy and Learned Friend had not Entered into, who had Received the Opinions Embraced, of all Space being alike, and that Matter alſo was Similar and Homogencous, Purely from Geometrick Abſtractions; OF whom I ſhall only Take this Laũt Farewell, as he is ſince Dead, and as I had a great Eſtcem and Value for him, by Telling the World, ſo far as theſc Writings ſall Reach, that He was One of the moſt Candid, moſt Humble, and Modeſt, as well as One of the moſt Ingenious, Judicious, and Learned of Men, which Perhaps This Age has Produced3 His other Writings have abundantly Recommended him to the Philoſophick and Mathematick Part of it, and there will Appear in this Demonſtration againſt what I have Affirmed, and I think Proved, ſuch a Sagacity of Mind, and ſuch a Penetration of Thought, Eſpecially in the ſecond Propoſition, where he Proves, that AE is Greater than 5 EF by that Accurate and Exquiſite Compounding and Dividing of Quantities, which he Uſes, ſo as to come to his Main Concluſion, that it is Deſervedly to be Admired; And all the Difference betwixt him and me is, that we do not Conſider Things in the ſame Way; Upon his Principles of Similar or Abſtracted Space, his Demonſtration is not only Juſt and True, but Exceedingly Fine and Beautifull; But upon my Principles of a Diſſimilar Space, as well as Marter, and that there may be Different Quantities and Values in the ſame Dimenſional Space, or in the ſame Circular Superficies, his Demonſtration does not Aſfect, what I have Aſſærted, and do Defend, in the Leaſt; He Conſiders a Circle with Archimedes, as Conſiſting of an Infinite Number of Small Triangles, whoſe Apices Lie in the Centre, and whoſe Baſes are in the Circumference, and which therefore makes a Plane Figure, I Conſider it, or the Quadrant of it, with Dr. ſãallis in his Arithmetick of Infinites, as Conſiſting of an Infinite Number of Abſciſſes, the Progreſſion of which I have Shewn will be as 1. 2. 3. 45, &c- 5, &. and of an Infinite Number of Ordinates, the Progreſſion of which vill be, as v, 1L. v5.2, V3, v 4. v,5, &c. or vhich is the ſame, the Abſciſies will be, as 1, 24, 34, 44, 54, &c and ithe Ordinates, as I. 2. 3. 45, &c. which will make a Solid Figure, whoſe Proportion will be to it's Square, as 4 to 5. See Geometria S ldoram, Pag 35. And in the ſame Manner is the ſarabola Conſidered, and by that Means Squared by Arollonius of Perga in hisConck Sections; This Way of Conſidering the Circle is alſo Juſtiicd by Sir Iſ. Newton's Endeavours at the Square of it by his Inſinite Series, and his Interpolations, Taken from Dr. allis's Arithmetick of Inſinites, and vhat I have done in this Particular, is only Solving the ſame Problem without any ſuch Infinite Series, or without any ſuch Interpolations by an Improvement upon, or a Correction of, the Aforeſaid Arithmetick oſ Infinites, and till that Correction or Improvement is Shewn to be Wrong, which I have Propoſed in the Geometria Sol dorum ſie Materiæ, all Arguments againſt me can be of no Force, or Validity. 5. 3. Firſt, ſIt muſt be Obſerved, that if we can Find out the Longitude of a Place by Day from any Point, or Phenomenon Given, as the Sun, ve Arrive at an Equal Certainty in theſe Matters, as in the Lariude, ſince that can be only Obtained fro n Knowing the Elevation of the Pole, which is Equal to t, and which Elevation cannot be Derermined, unleſs by Obſervations made in the Night; And thereſore, if Clouds Interſere by Day, or by Night, They are no Exceptions to the one Method of Invention, or the other, nor is the Time oſ Obſerving any Objection to Either; But both of them will be upon the Level in theſe Particulars. Second, if farther the Longitude may be found out by Night, from any Fixed Star or Phenomenon Given, the Invention of the Longitude will have the Preference to That of the Latitude, tho not in the Certainty of it's Determination, in vhich it vill be Equal. yet in the Frequency, and Conſtancy oſ it. Third, what therefore is to be Done by Mathematicians and Aſtronomers is to Endeavour, if Poſſible, to make the Sun by Day, or a Planet or Fixed Star by Night, as Certain a Point, from whence to Compure the Longitude, as the Pole is One for the Latitude But This is the Problem, or ſhould be, and This the Inſuperable Diſficulty For how can we make the Sun, or a Star, which by the Earth's Revolution about it's Axis, ſcom Themſelves to Revolve, as Fixed as the Pole? Fourih, beſides the want of a Fixed Point, from whence to Compute the Longitude, Suppoſing ve could hate One by Day, as the Sun, or by Night as a Star, or a Planer, in the Equator, yet the ſeveral Places of the Earth, Excepting thoſe which Lic under it, being in Diſferent Parallels to it, Renders this Problem more Unſurmounrable than That of the Latitude, which is always Computed upon the Meridian. Fiſth, the Diſference thereſore of the Two Problems of Inveſtigaring the Latitude and Longitude oſ a Place Proceeds from hence, that the Axis of the Earth is Fixed ani Imnioveable, ſo that in whatever Meridian we are, we are Conceived to Change our Plice only from one Pole to the other upon the ſame Immoveable Axis, in Reſpect oſ the Latitude of a Place, that is, to Walk, or Sail, or Move, upon the ſame Line ſrom one Point to another; Whereas in the Invention of the Longitude, we are upon a Moveable Line, which Shifts and Changes it's Situation every Minute as when we atre in the Equator, or it's Parallels, which Proceeds ſrom the Revolution oſ the Earth Round it's Axis. Sixth, Let us therefore Imagine the Earth to be Quieſcent, and not to Revolve about its Axis, or which is the ſame, the Heavens and the Celeſtial Bodies not to do ſo, and the Longitude of any Place vill be as Eaſily Determined, as the Latitude oſ it; hecauſe, the Latitude is Suppoſed to be Known, and Conſequently the Inclination of the Equator to ihe Horizon, which is the Complement of the Latitude to 90 Degrees; Let then an Obſervation be made with a Quadrant Poſited Parallel to the Equator, oſ the Diſtance of the Place, from the Sun, or any Fixed Star, Suppo ſing them Quieſcent, and whoſe Longitudes are Determined and Given, and the Lon gitude oſ =ic Place vill be likewiſe Aſcertained, ſince it will be the Diſtance of tht Place ſtom the Star or Sun, Obſerved, Added to or Subſtracted from ſuch Longitude There are only Two Objections againſt this Procedure, the Firſt is, that it ĩ not the ſame Thing to take an Obſervation from the ſame Fixed Point, when we : ar ire in the Equator, and when in Different Parallels to it, to which it is Anſered, that ſince the Earth is only as a Point in Reſpect of the Infinite Diſtlance of the Fixed Stars, and of the Immenſe One of the Sun from it, it is the ſame Thing; For thus it is Acknovledged, that the Horizon, and all it's Parallels, even to rhe Vertex, vill Terminate in the ſame Fixed Stars, which are in the Horizon, upon Account of the Earti's being a Point only, and from hence it is, that the Moon, which is much Nearer to us than the Sun, Appears in the ſame Part of ithe Heavens, tho we ſhould Walk ſeveral Miles upon the Earth, and Obſerve it's Situation at Different Intervals, becauſe thoſe Miles, or thoſe Intervals, are only as a Point in Reſpect of the Moons Diſtance from us; And even in Objects upon the Earth. which are very Remote, it is hard to Draw any Parallel Lines from them, becauſe they Coincide, ſuch Diſtant Objects Uniting, as it were, in a Point The Second Objection is, that we cannot make any Obſervations with a Quadrant Inclined to the Horizon, ſince thoſe are always made in ſome Vertical Circle, that the Line and Plumbet, which Marks the Degrees of the Quadrant, may Retain it's Perpendicular to it; Let us therefore Suppoſe a Right Situation of the Sphere, in which the Equator, and it's Parallels are Perpendicular to the Horizon, the Equator in ſuch a Caſe vill be a Vertical Circle, and Conſequently an Obſervation of our Diſtance in Longitude from the Sun may be Punctually Taken, Allowing the Earth to be Quieſcent, and not to Revolve about it's Axis; If the Equator is now Inclined to the Horizon, let the Quadrant upon any Obſervation be in a Parallel Situation to it, and the Plumbet will ſtill Mark the Degree of Diſtance or Longitude from the Sun, becauſe it will be in rhe Arc oſ a Circle which Paſes thr the ſame Degree of the Quadrant, which it Touched, when the Sphere was in a Right Situation. Seventh, the only Diſficulty, vhich Remains is, that the Sun by the Earth's RevoIution cannot be Conſidered as a Fixed Point; But ſince it Proceeds in the Ecliptick One Degree only in 24 Hours, that Time may be nearly Meaſured by a Sand-Glaſs or an Automaton, but rather by the Firſt, and thereſore may be Allowed for in the Computation of the Longitude; Farther, as the Revolution of arars is Performed in 2 Years, of Fupiter in 12, and of Saturn in 30, they may to all Intents and Purpoſcs be Imagined and Deemed as Fixed Points, and therefore will ſerve to CalcuIate the Longitude from, as well as the Pole for the Latitude; Beſides which, even all the Fixed Stars in this Method may be Eſteemed as ſo many Fixed Points, from vhich the Longitude may be Determined, i we can' Meaſure 24 Hours nearly by an Automaton, or, which ſeems to be much more Certain, by a Sand Glaſs, or a Woater One. If I am Miſtaken in Determining the Longitude, I am only Fallible in my Reaſoning, as many Others have been before me, but I am pretty well Satisſied, that this Method of Proceeding is the only Way, that is, to Compute from a Fixed Point in the Heavens, as is done in the Latitude; For it is Impoſſible to Find out the Longitude by Methods, which are Deſultory and Uncertain, as by the Exploſion oſ Bombs, becauſe the Communication of Light is Uncertain, both on the Account of the Different Force of Gun-Powder, and the Quickneſs of the Light from thenee Ariſing, as alſo from the Difference of the Medium, or Air, thro' which the Light is Conveycd That of the Dipping Needle is alſo Subject to a Thouſand Caſualties, which may Diſturb it's Indications; See the Ingenious Mr. Graham's Experiments Concerning it. Philoſoph. Tranſact. Numb. 389. 3. Nor can it be better Aſcertained by Pendulums, or Automatons, vhoſe Motion is Varied, not only by the Motion oſ the Ship, but by the Difference of the Mediums, being more or leſs Expanſive and Contractive, in which they Oſcillate; Nor Laſtly, will the Eclipſes of the Satellites of Jupiter ſerve the Turn, as is Confeſſcd by the Philoſophers Cited, and as is very Evident, becauſe thoſe Eclipſes happen only at Certain Times and Intervalls, and therefore cannot be a Conſtant Direction to thoſe at Sea, vho may Want to Know the Longitude of the Place, where they are, every Minute; But, i? we could Determine the Longitude in the ſame Way, by ſome Certain and Fixcd Point in the Heavens, as the Latitude is by the Elevation oſ the ole, the Problem would be Fully and Perfectly Solved, and which I have Endeavoured to do in the Foregoing Eſſay, and which is Submitted to the Judgement of the Aſtronomets, and Thoſe who have a Love and Eſtcem for the Marhematick Sciences, j Here ſnall only here Subjoin in Reſpect to the Variation and Dipping of the Needle, Hmæ ibæ væt I have heard, from thoſe who have been Acquainted vith theſe Matters in 2ĩ  i Navigation and in Fact, Namely, that the Variation of the Needle from the North Neils ne i Point to the Eaſt or Weſt is ſuch, that when it Varies to the Eaſt, Mariners are Ob- 4couied for. liged to Sail ſo much towards the Weſt, as it Varies towards the Eaſt to come Due North, tho the Needle always Points to the North in the Card, and this Variation is More or Leſs, according as ve come Nearer to, or are Farther from the Shore, and which Variation Differs in the Interval of ſeveral Years, even where they are at the ſame Diſtance from the Shore. The Reaſon of which can be only This, that the Shore Attracts the Card and the Needle by it's Contractive Force, which is Greater than that of Water, and as the Contractive Force of the Shore is Greater or Leſs, ſo is the Needle and Card more or Leſ Attracted to it,  which Contractive Force may be in a Courſe of Years. ror bat Ena Greater or Leſs, according to the Greater Contractive Force of the Moon, and Leſs of the Necle Expanſive of the Sun, or the Leſs Contractive Force of the Moon, and the Greater uhih ſein Expanſive of the Sun in their Influences upon it; From whence it is Plain, that the il be more Imaginary Nucleus of Dr. Halley, ithin the Earth, can have no Effect in this Phe- AQted opon by nomenon.  ruu From hence alſo it is Probable, that there is a Variation of the Needle in it's the Earth, in Dipping, and that it Dips more in a Shallower Sea, and Leſs in a Deeper, becauſe the  Nonb. Contractive Force of the Earth, by which the Needle Dips, is Greater, than that of ihn Tht Water, which is of an Expanſive Force in the Compariſon; From Whence, if this which Pointa is True, it will be again Maniſeſ, that the Dipping Necdle can Furniſh us with no ſuò Soubi Since the Indication of the Longitude. Needle, being Here Follow ſome Propoſitions, which may be of Uſe in the Preceding Method ſzuæl io ua of Inveſtigation, by a Point in the Heavens, if the Former is not Juſt. be Nearer to 1ſ. The Meridian of any Place is Found by Prop. I6. Lib. 2. Sect. 4. of Dr. æ Eatſ, Gregory's Altronomy, as likewiſe by Prop. 7. Lib. 2. of Vareniuss Geography. bm 2d. The Altitude of the Pole, and the Situation of the Equinoctial Circle in Re- than it' ſpect of the Horizon is Determined by Prop. 17. Lib. 2. of Dr. Gregory's Aſtronomy. ſouhem ſad 3d. The Declination of any Sydus, whether Sun or Star, is alſo Known by Piop. ieniſghon, 18. Lib. 2. of Dr. Gregory's Aſtronomy. i 4th. The Inclination of the Ecliptick to the Equator, and the Ecliptick's Situation, Jeuit A ruom toas vell as That of the Coluri, the Tropicks, and the Polar Circles in Reſpect of Faigi, the Equator, is Determined by Prop. 19. Lib. 2. of Dr. Gregory's Aſtronomy. in u sth. The Obliquity of the Ecliptick being Given, the Right Aſcenſion and Declination of a Given Point in the Ecliptick, as alſo the Angle, which is Comprehended at the ſame Point betwixt the Meridian and Ecliptick, may be Known by Prop. 20. Lib. 2. of Dr. Gregorys Aſtronomy, and è Converſo the Point of the Ecliptick, to which any of ihe Foregoing Circumſtances arc Agreeable, may be Determined, and therefore the Place of the Sun in the Ecliptick may be Known from Obſervation, by Prop. Is. or Art. 3. 6th. The Revolution of the Earth is in 24 Hours, and therefore there may be Allowed for that Revolution the Sun's Progreſs in the Ecliptick, One Degree, which it makes in the ſame Time; ſo that as the Earth Revolves from Weſt to Eaſt in 24 Hours, it is the ſame Thing, as the Sun's Proceeding in the Ecliptick, One Degrec. 7th. As for the Particular Motion or Velocity of the Ship, ĩt can Signify nothing, becauſe if a True Longitude can be Found out, it muſt not Depend upon That, but muſt be Certain, as the Latitude is, vhether the Velocity of the Ship be Greater or Leſs. 81h. By Prop, 11. and 6. of Vareniuss Geogr. Lib. 2. ve may Know, in what Parallel the Ship is, and in what Point of that Parallel to the Equator. S. 4. I do not Remember, that I have any where taken Notice of that Wonder- co.in ful Phenomenon of Thunder and Lightning, in Relation to the Doctrine of the Ex- Thunder and panſive and Contractive Forces, which ſeems in ſome Meaſure Deſigned by Almighty Ehnin God, to Strike an Awe and Terror into Men's Minds, and to keep up a Religious Fear and Dread of him in the Hearts of the moſt Obſtinate and moſt Obdurate; For ihen the Worſt of them, as ve may eaſily Imagine, Conceive an Unſpeakable HorC cc c cę ron ror, and would, as it is Reported by Suetonius of Caliqula, by any, the mol Abject Methods, Skreen themſelves from the Avenging Fury, which they may JuſtI Apprehend from that Good and Righteous Being. they are Conſcious to themſelves they have Offended; On the Contrary, we may eaſily Believe, a Truly Pious and Re ligious Man is little Affected with ſuch Paſſions and Emotions of Thought, which may Cauſe Fear or Apprehenſion in him; He Adores the Greatneſs and Majeſty oi his Sovereign Preſerver; And is rather Pleaſed and Rejoyced to See and Find himſelf under the Protection of ſo Almighty a Ruler and Governour of all Nature3 Write this, May the 21ſ. 1726, vhilſt Thunder is Rolling about my Room, ſhakes the Chamber Iam in, and the very Chair I Sit on, and Lightning Darts in at every Window, and ſeems to fall upon the Table, and on the Papers I now Write, which has given an Handle to this Inquiry into the Preſent Phenomenon; I ſall not ſlay to Conſider, or to Confute Des Cartes's Fancifull Notion of Two Clouds Clahing and Interfering with each Other, and from thence Striking out Lightning, as we are uſed to do Fire from a Couple of Flints, which is Excecdingly Ridiculous and Abſurd; But the Way, which it has Pleaſed Almighty God to Eſtabliſh, for the Production of this Amazing Phenomenon, ſeems to be by Certain Laws of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, and which Ariſes from a Mutual Conteſt or Conſlict betwixt them, till Things are Reduced to an Equilibrium, or Equal Balance, and Then all is uiet. Thus in the Year 1725, and in the Beginning oſ it, there were Scarcely any Rains Fell for ſome Months, when all the Succeeding Summer, ve had almoſt Continual Ones every Day; The Former was an Inſtance of the Expanſive Force, and Heat Prevailing, and the Laſt of the Contractive; And there were Storms of Thunder and Lightning betwixt the One and the Other; Juſt before this Tempeſt of Thunder and Lightning, in this Preſent ſay 1726, there had been a great Drought and Heat, which muſt Conſequently Raiſe from the Earth, which was Moiſt before by the Continual Rains, which had Fallen upon it, a great Number of Vapours, or a great Quantity of Water, which in Reſpect of the Sun's Heat, is of a Contractive Force, as the Sun's Heat is of an Expanſive; Theſc TWo Forces coming to Contend in the Air, the Contractive Force of the Water makes the Expanſive of the Heat Aſſemble into Flame, and to Dart into Lightning, and the Expanſive on the Contrary Drives and Compreſſes the Moiſt Vapours into Rain or Hail; And where there is a Reſiſtence of One Force to Another, as ve have before Shewn, Sound muſt be Produced, which we call Thunder; But at Length the Contractive Prevailing againſt the Expanſive, a Temperate and Cool Air Enſues, or if it does not entirely Prevail, there will be a Sultry Heat, and ſmall Glimmerings, or Languid Flaſhes of Lightning for ſome Time after, which Shews, that the Expanſive is not wholly Subdued by the Contractive. This Account is in ſome Meaſure Confirmed by Pouring Cold Water upon Fire, or on Hot Melted Lead, allowing for the Difference of the Expanſive and Contractive Force of the One and the Other, in Compariſon with the Subtile Expanſive Force of the Sun Communicated to the Air, and the Subtile Contractive Force of Water Diſſolved into Vapors; For Pour Water in a Certain Degree upon Fire, and it vill Emit a Flame and a Sound, as a Drop of Water upon the Flame of a Candle, &and Pour it upon Hot Melted Lead, and it will Produce an Exploſion. It is farther Conſirmed from what Happened in this Storm of Thunder and Lightning; For about To Miles from this Place, an Hail Fell at the ſame Time, whoſe Stones were as Large as a Pullet's Egg, and not many Miles farther ſome Barns were entirely Burnt and Conſumed by Lightning, which are Manifeſt and Plain Inſtances of a Conteſt betwixt the Contractive and Expanſive Forces, and which Ended in Rain and a Sultry Heat, a Medium betwixt both, by which it is Evident, that when Extremes are Introduced into Nature, they at Length Settle in nearly an Equal Balance of ſuch Forces, which is the Doctrine I have all along Maintained, in all the other Parts of Nature. And from Hence it comes to Paſs, that in Winter there is ſeldom any Thunder, becauſe the Contractive Force then Prevails, and there can be no Conteſt betwixt the Expanſive and the Contractive. 5. 5. June the 2d. 1726. I Obſcrved a Curious and Spacious Rain-Low upon EverionHeath, with a Secondary Onc above it, the Sun was about Two Fours high, from from it's Setting, and Shone from Everion Church, and the Bow Extended from Sutton on the Right Hand, to Sir George Downing's on the Left, about Two Miles, with Porton Church towards the Right-Hand Extreme of the Bow, and Lying within it; As I Rode towards the Left- Hand Extreme, I ſeemed Apparently to come nearer to it, and if the Diameter of the Bow had been Divided into Six Parts, I ſhould have been about One of thoſe Parts Diſtant from the Lefi-Hand Extreme, and Five from the Right; as I came nearer the Left- Hand Extreme, it Removed farther from me towards Gamlingay, and the RightHand Extreme came nearer, till at Length it ſeemed to Fall on Porron Church, and Riding ſtill farther towards the Left- Hand Extreme, the ſaid Church was entirely Excluded from the Bow at a Good Diſtance; The Solar Colour or Orange was Outmoſt in the Primary Bow, underneath was Yellow, Green, Blue, and Purple; The Outmoſt Colour of the Secondary Iris was Green, and underneath Blue and Purple, ſo that the Colours were in the ſame Order in the Secondary, as in the Primary, but did not Reach ſo far, the Yellow and Solar Orange being wanting; This does not ſeem ſo fully to Agree with what is Aſſerted by DesCartes, and orher Philoſophers in Relation to this Phenomenon. 5 6. After Ihad Printed a great Part of the Preſent Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, that is, the Six Firſt Books of it, in One of which I had Treated of Vegetation, and had Declared my Opinion to be, that Plants in all Likelihood, had ſome Kind of Senſe and Perception, as being Animals of an Inferior Denomination, hich Notion I had Embraced from Reading the Famous Dr. Gre's Anatomy of Plants, and Eraſmuss Colloquy, Concerning the Amicitiæ and Inimicitiæ of Them, when at School, but more Eſpecially, from the Analogy of Nature, and a Conſideration of the Infinite Goodneſs, Bounty, and Beneficence of the Author of it; I was Agrecably Surprized with a Book Publiſhed by my Old and moſt Ingenious Friend Mr. Stephen Hales, Formerly Fellow of Benedict College, which I Think puts that Matter beyond Diſpute in his Vegetable Staticks, where he gives all the Probable Arguments, which can be, to Prove, that there is a Circulation and Expanſion of the Sap, that there is a Perſpiration of Plants, and that the Leaves are Anſwerable to the Lungs in other Animals; And if ſo, what Reaſon is there for us not to Think and Believe, that they have ſome Inferiour Degree of Perception, tho Perhaps it may be Infinitely below That of a Cockle or an Oyſter? And as for my Doctrine of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces, it is fully Confirmed by what he there Delivers, Concerning the Expanſion of the Sap, and the great Amalogy, which there is, between Plants and Animals. S. 7. I ſhall Sum up this Inquiry into the Modern Philoſophy of Similar and Homogencous Matter, with a Ludicrous, but a True and Real Repreſentation of it, according to what I have Formerly made to my Pupils in my Lectures to Them, vhich I Intended as ſome ind of Diverſion to Their more Serious Studies of theſc Matters; For, there are TWo Ways of Aſſerting Truth, and Confuting Error; Either by Arguments, which ſhall Explain the Falſe Reaſoning, or by Ridicule, which ſhall fully Expreſs the Senſe of the Errors, which it Propoſes to Explode; The Firſt Method is the Beſt and the Trueſt, or at leaſt the Simpleſt and the Cleareſt; The Laſt ought to be very Cautiouſly Uſed, and never without the Other; Since elſe it may Deviate into Wantoneſs and Wit, without any Solid or Rational Foundation ſor it's Support, and which can no more Contribute to the Real Knowledge of the Proportions, and Relations of Things, than a Piece of Witticiſm and Romance can Settle the Great and Important Truths of Nature. Thus, what I have Argued againſt the Syſtem of a Similar and Homogeneous Matter, on vhich all the Reſt Depends, Chap. 6, 7, 8. 9, and I10. in my Firſt Part of the Principles of Philoſophy, and Chap. 1. Of the Second Part, Printed in 1712, may be Repreſented in the Following, and a very True Manner; IPreſume to call Des-Cartes, the Grand Aſertor of the Corpuſcularian Scheme, or That of Similar Matter, Philomuthos, or a Lover of Romance, and I would Humbly beg Leave to Name any Aſſertor of an Heterogeneous and Diſſimilar Matter Philalethes, or a Lover of Truth; Philalethes is Suppoſcd to have his Pupils Sitting Round him, and Philomuthos is Imagincd by his Book to Enter, and Rohault, by his, to Follow him, The Former of which comes with a French and Vaunting Air, and lays a Piece of Lead-Ore upon the Table before them, which Repreſents a Parcel or Portion of Real or Diſſimilar Matter, C ccc c c 2 and and which Philomuthos calls Lead, and is an Image oſ his Similar or Chimerical Matter. l Philomuth. Shentlemen, do you See That Piece of Lead? Philaleth. How Monſicur? Lead! By the beſt Eyes, which I am able to Us it ſcems to me to be Lead-Ore, Chap. 6. 7. Par. I Philomuth. No Matter for that, Shentlemen, but do you See that Piece of Lead! Philaleth. (A little Roughly) What muſt we Renounce our own Eyes and Senſes Well Why it may be ſo; Grant it Lead; What then, Monſieur, hat will you do vith it? Philomuth. DoO with it? Why, Shentlemen, I will Tell you;3 That very Piece of Lead, For I Say and Pronounce, it to be Lead, notwithſtanding this Man's Impertinence, I will Turn into Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, into Water, or Fire; Nay, I vill make it, if I Pleaſe, into a Diamond, and then again Transform it into a Feather, or any other Subſtance you ſhall Name, Chap. 8. and 9. Part I. Philaleth. Very Good I Monſicur; DBut How:? Philomuth. How? lznoramus And beſides that, by what I Perceive, Thou art a very Saucy and Troubleſome J/ck—npes, and thereſore you may g2o about yout Buſineſs, but as for you, Shentlemen, I vill Tell you. Philaleth.Tis well Monſicur, I Thank you ſor your Hard Names, and your Reproaches, but I muſt beg the Favour, you vill Plcaſe to Satisfy me, as well as them; I want to Knov, How you do This. Philomuth. Why then, Shentlemen, I muſt Tell you and all the World, that I can do what I Say; For Firſt, I will Take this Piece of Lead, for it is no more LeadOre than it is Gold, and I will Divide it into Ten Millions of Millions oſ Variouſly Figured Parts, I will Then ſet them to Whirl round upon their Centers, and withal, to Move, Dance, and Play certain Vagaries, in a Promiſcuous Manner, or if I may Uſe, Shentlemen, that Vulgar Expreſſion, Helter Skelter one amongſt another, by which I ſhall Gain Three Sorts of Matter, which are my Three Elements or Powders, of which all Bodies, or Beings, are Compounded, Des-Cartes Princip. s. 5I, 52. Par. 3. Rohault Cap. 21. Par. I. 1ſl. By theſe Parts Moving and Buſiling This Way and That, I ſhall have my Firſt Element or Powder, which will be the Intertrimentum, or the little Corners, or ſmall Angular Nooks, Worn oſf from Them by this ſame Inteſtine Motion. 2d. By this Tumultary Way of doing. I ſall get my Second Element or Powder, which will Conſiſt of Terſe, Neat, ad as Fine Globes, as any One vould Deſire to Sce. i rhilaleth. You mean Monſicur, I Suppoſe, as any One would Deſire to See of Things, which are Inviſible. Philomuth. Silly? 3à. Shentlemen, if there are any Parts, which are Reſolved, neither to be an Intertrimentum, nor to be Formed into Globes, why Thoſe I make my Third Element or Powder, and which are of a Thouſand Abnormous Figures, which it is Impoſſible for me to Recount. Philaleth. I Perccive therefore, Monſieur, you go by Way of Powders; Pray, may they be Thoſe, which they call Pimper- le- Pimp, or what Sort may they be of:? Philomurh. Again Why thou willt be ſtill Interpoſing thy Nonſenſe and Jargon, I Tell thee, Thou art a D-It and a S-t. Philaleth. But I beg, Monſieur, be Pleaſed to Tell us, What Way you may take to Divide this Lead, as you will have it, into all theſe Parts, and aſter you have Divided it into them, in vhat Manner do you Proceed to Put them into theſe Various Motions? Philomuth. Why Truly, Shentlemen, I cannot do That my ſclf, but I knov One that can. rhilaleth, I Deſire of all Goodneſs, Monſieur, you will Tell us, who that is? Philomuth, ſLooking very Gravely and Demurely) Is?Tis God. Philaleth. 1 Suppoie it is that Inſinite Being, Monſieur, vhich you Fndeavoured to Prove from an Idea oſ him. Philomuth, Yawning) Yes. rhilaleth. Why then your Deity and your Philoſophy, I believe, may go together, is Two Imaginary Things of your own Inventing. : rhilomuth. Philonuth. Whether I believe a God, or not, that is nothing to you, or theſe Shentlemen, IWill Prove, that, let me Divide Matter as IPleaſe, I will do, what I Told you; I vill Turn this Lead into Gold, Silver, Wood, Stone, Fire, Water, into a Diamond, or a Feather. rhilaleth. Good Monſieur, we cannot allow you to Divide Matter, as you think ſit, unleſs you can Prove Almighty God has done it, which Being you have not Evinced by your Arguments for One, and as you have been Pleaſed to call me an Ignoramus, a Saucy and Troubleſome Jacapes, I muſt Requeſt the Favour to Return the ſame Witticiſms and Civilities upon you; And to me you ſeem to take the ſame Merhod, as the Tragedians of Old, who, when they were under a Diſficulty, they could not Surmount, Introduced a Deity to Extricate them from it. Philomuth. You are the One great Engli F-l, or the Kn—ve, dont tell me of your Deities; your Sir Iſ. Newton is of my Opinion, Excepting, that he will not allow of one of my Elements or Powders, my Intertrimentum, but will have all the Parts, of which my Powders Conſiſt, Durable, Solid, and Immutable; That the Deity may not be at the Trouble of Mending Nature every Day, Sir Iſ. Newt. Optic. Pag. 343. and 345. Rohæult Pag. 105. Dr. Clarte. rhilaleth. Why really Monſicur, That is one great Part of my Affliction in theſe Matters, that ſo Wiſe and Learned a Man ſhould be ſo Incautiouſly carried into the Sentiments and Whimſies of a French Mountebank. Philonuth. Oh Oh? Thou moſt Engliſs Sndr—I, me have no Patience? Call me Mountebank? Shentlemen, I Tell you, that when theſe Parts of Lead, which are Finer than any Meal, or the moſt Impalpable Powder, are Expoſcd to the Air, the Atmoſphere Surrounding them vill Compreſs them together, and from thence Procecds the Coheſion of Marter, Chap. 7. 5. 4 rhilaleth. Monſicur, Give me Leave to Inſtruct you, by Asking you one Queſtion or Two, hov it comes to Paſs, that the Air, unleſs very Calm Indeed, which would Blow avay, or Diſſipate, ſuch a Powder, as you Speak of, ſhould be ſo Kind and Friendly, as to Cement your Leaden One? And whether it would not have been better ſor you to have Introduced the ſame Deity to put your Lead together again, which you had made Uſe of to Divide it? Philomuth. Ignorant But Shentlemen, I muſt Tell you farther, that, if theſc littſe Parts of Lead are Quieſcent amongſt one another, why there you have Hardneſs, if they are in Motion, I will Undertake for the Fluidity of that Body. Chap. 8. Philaleth. Methinks, Monſieur, where there is the moſt Action, as in Motion, there ould be the moſt Reſiſtence, and therefore the greateſt Hardneſs, and where there is the leat Action, as in Quieſcence, there ſould be the leaſt Reſiſtence, and thereſore the greareſt Fluidity; But I do not Preſume to be Peremptory. Philomuth. Shentlemen, I do not Mind or Regard, what that Obſtinate Dnce, and that Cncrted, Pr-t—nding, and Prgm—tical Cxcmb Says, I Tell you, that my Leaden Powder, if the Parts of it are of a certain Kind of Figure, which it is not Neceſary for me Preciſely to Tell you of what Figure, will become Water, and That Water will Diſolve Salt, which is nothing elſe than a Maſs of another Kind of my Leaden Powder; Nay I muſt farther Inform you, that if I take another Sort of my ſaid Leaden Powder, and give it's Parts ſtill a different Figure and Shape, I will Engage it will Turn into Spirit of Nitre, or into Aqua Regalis, and will be able 10 Diſlolve Silver, or Gold, which I likewiſe Make and can Produce to you by another Compoſition of this my Speciſick Powder of Lead; I will alſo Take ſome of the ſaĩd Powder, and vill Inject it into certain Bodies, and it ſhall make them Swell and Rariſy to a Prodigious Degree, and then by only Squeezing it out of them again, they ſnall become as Denſe and Hard as a Board; By Injecting the ſame Powder into other Dodies, they ſhall put on a Force of Reſiliency, and with another Kind of Management of it, Ill Venture to Aſſirm, I can make a very Good Handſome Flame Stare you in the Eyes, Chap. s8, 9. Shentlemen, I Deſire you will not be Amazed, at what I am going to Aſert to you; I Will Raire in the Preſence of you all That Individual Piece of Lead, or, which 1 the ſme, my Poder of it. Lilalerth. Monſieur, Monſicur, Lead Orę! Philomuth Philomuth. Welll But I Say it is Lead, I Tell you. Shentlemen, I will Raiſe in the Preſence of you all, That Piece of Lead into a Tree, by Dividing the Parts, as they ſould and ought to be Divided, or Make it into a Grape, a Pear, a Plum, or an Apple, Chap. Io. Philaleth Monſicur, I pray now Gently! Philomuth. Why thou moſt Abſurd and Stupid BI-ckh-d, ſince thou Endeavoureſi to Plague and Confound me, I will not only Raiſe That Piece of Lead into a Tree, by Dividing it into ſuch Parts, as I Pleaſc, but I will Throw it into an Horſe or a Man, or any other Animal, according as I Think Fit, and then I would Deſire to Enow, what will become of your Gently's? Philaleth. I am Sorry, Monſieur, I ſould put you into any Paſſion, but I hope you vill Excuſe an Engliſv Freedom; We are not Uſed here to be Slaves, but to Speak our own Minds in the properet Way, which we can; However, ſince this Converſation is ſo Diſagreeable to you, I ſhall here End it, and would only Deſire to know, Whether this Piece of Lead of yours, by a Juſt and Regular Diviſion of the Parts of it, can give us a Tune upon the Fiddle? Philomuth. Humph? Why Truly no, Chap. I. Par. 2. Philaleth. Very well Monſieur; Perhaps then you and I may be Good Fri:nds for the Future, notwithſtanding all the Hard Names you have Called me; Iſ you vill but be ſo Kind, as to Diſcard, as I have done, your Leaden Philoſophy. Theſe are ſome of the Names and Appellations, I have met vith from certain Perſons, the Admirers and Patrons of this Philoſophy, for my Examining only into ſo Ridiculous and Abſurd a Syſteme; Which is the Reaſon of my Introducing them here; Th' Des Cartes, vho was Said to have been a Modeſt Man, would Scarcely have Uſed them himſelf. But it is in Philoſophy, and in all Kinds of Learning, as it is in the Common Occurrences of Liſe, that the Slaves or Servants to any Men, or Opinions, are Generally more Inſolent and leſs Decent than their Maſters; And by this I would Deſirc to ſiew likeviſe, that if the Corpuſcularians are for Laughing, and not for Arguing, I can fall in with the ſame Method, and that I am not Concerned by whatever Names I am Called, by my own, or any other; For Names ſeem to have no Peculiar Emphaſis in them, which are a mere Compoſition of Letters only, ſince the Real Inquiry will be, what is the Nature, Genius, and Temper of the Man, which I hope vill be found to be as Good, and what his Applications and Studies, which I Preſume vill Appear to be as Great, as Thoſe of any Perſons, ho have Thought, or ſhall Think it their Intereſt, either to Ridicule, or to Reproach him. 5. 3. I ſall nov put an End to my Labours and Fatigues in theſe Studies, which have been Continued for many Years, how Succeſifully I know not, and muſt Leave to the Deciſion and Determination of Others; I can only Say, that I have Uſed all the Integrity Poſſible in the Purſuit of them, and tho' I Entered a Corpuſ cularian into them, I now come out of them under a quite Contrary Conviction, and of vhich Studies I here take my Final and Laſt Farewell; Afrer I have Subjoined the ſeveral Caſes, under which Nature may be Conſidered and Explained. Matrer muſt be therefore Similar or Diſſimilar, and there muſt be a Plenum, or a Vacuum; A Plenum and a Vacuum it is Evident cannot Subſiſt together, nor a Similar and Diſſimilar Matter; Conſequently there are only Four Caſes Remaining, and therefore there are only Four Poſſible Hypotheſes, which Philoſophers can Eſ pouſe, or Maintain. 1ſ. That of Similar Matter and a Plenum, Which is the Carteſian or the French Philoſophy, and which are Terms Inconſiſtent and Incompatible in Nature, becauſe, it is Impoſſible the World ſhould be full of Matter, if all Matter was the ſame, ſince then there would be no Difference betwixt Air, Water, or Gold, &c. That is, betwixt One Portion of Similar Matter and Anorher, ſince there are no Vacuities to Cauſe the Difference. 2d. That of Similar Marter and a Vacuum, which is that of Galileus, Sir Iſaac Newton, and our Modern Philoſophers, and is a Mixture of the French Derived ſron Des Carres, and of the Italian Derived from Galileus, and is the Old Syſteme of Epi curus Compleat, and which Leads us into a Thouſand Abſurdities, as I have Endea voured to Evince. 3d. Thai 3d. That of a Diſſimilar Matter and a Vacuum, which has hitherto had No Patrons, nor Perhaps is likely to have Any; Becauſe if Matter is Acknowledged to be Diſ ſimilar in it's own Nature, there will be no Occaſion for Vacuities, which are Introduced by Philoſophers to Difference one Portion of Similar Matter from another. 4th. That of a Diſſimilar Matter and a Plenum, which is the Syſteme I have Choſe to Maintain and Defend, and which, as it is Properly my Own, and has hitherto had no Advocates for it, ſo I may Juſily call it a Philoſophy, which is entirely Engliſb, and I hope will in Time Appear to be the moſt Rational. And as I Apprehend this Scheme of Nature to be the moſt Rational, ſo for many Reaſons before Explained, I Believe and Think, it will give us Truer Impreſſions of the Wiſdom, Power, Juſtice, and Goodneſs of the Supreme Being, than any Corpuſcularian, or Atomical, One can do; And Therefore Ihere End this Philoſophy of the Expanſive and Contractive Forces; Which I heartily Wiſh may Convince the Reaſoners of this Age, How Weak, Frail, and Imperfect, their Preſent Notions of Thing: are, How Juſt it is for us to Fall into the Sentiments, which I have Propoſed, in Re ſpect of Nature and Philoſophy, and What a Value and Eſteem we ought to Entertain for our Chriſtianity, and our Religion, which has been 1o0 mich Neglected and Diſregarded by Thoſe who have been the moſt Vigorous Patrons of That Democritian or Epicurean Scheme, which I have here Taken upon me to Refute. F I N IS. QU A DAM PHILOSOPHICA, ATQUE IMPRIMIS, DISSERTATIO D E NOVA INFINITARUM SERIERUM DOCTRINA, PROUT 2 NEWTONO ALIISQUE AFFIRMANTUR, IN PRALECTIONES VARIAS DISTINCTA, AD JuvENTUTEM CLARENSEM HABITAS, A ROBERTO GREENE, A. M. AULæ CLARENSIS SOCIO. D d d d d d MIS- QuænamMm PHILOSOP HICA, S IVE DISSERTATIONES COMMENTATIONESQUE NONNULLæ, Newtono Aliiſque Affirmantur, in Variis Prælectionibus ad Clarenſem Juventutem ex Parte habitis, Perſcriptis autem & Exaratis Anno 1705. Cum Adſcitus fueram in hanc Academiam Oſtob. 5. Anno 1695. II. De Alia Circuli Quadratura, præter Eam, quam in Geometria Solidorum Attulimus; Item, de Problemate Deluco. ſive Cubi Duplicatione, Anno Circiter 1700. III. De Sectionibus Conicis Clariſſimi Milneſii. IV. De Longitudine Imperfecta Quædam, nec niſi Solummodo Inchoata. V. De Philoſophorum Argumentis ad Vacuum Probandum, deque eorum Calumnia & Infirmitate, Anno Circiter 1701. VI. De Motu, Gravitatione, & Cohæſione Materiæ, Eaque ex Immediata Dei Actione Proſluere, Eodem fere Anno. VII. De Rationibus Geometricis, Eaſque Animo perinde Competere, quã Percipienti, ac Materiæ, qua Extenſæ, Anno Circiter 1700. VIII. Medicinæ Collaudatioo, un. 28. 1707. Ad Amiciſſimum mihi Virum Thomam Hewett M. D. IX. Ac Juris Civilis— Eodem Menſe & Anno. Ad Amiciſſimum mihi Virum Thomam Paste L. L. D. X. Gratulatio ad Ipiſcopum Elienſem, Reverendiſſimum Virum Johamen More, Patronum autem Quondam Chariſſimi Amici Caroli Morgan, AM Magiſtri hujus Aulæ Optimi, & quadantenus Meum. XI. Oratio Panegyrica in Divum Gulielmm, Anno Circiter 1701. Ad Præ nobilem Virum, mihi autem & Amico meo Humaniſſimum Patronun Thomam Holles, Ducem Præcellentiſſimum de Novo-Caſſello. D d d d d d æa I. Diſſerta D Nova Infinitarum Serierum Doctrina, prout a Celeberrimo I. Diſſertatio de Nova Infmitarum Serierum Doſtrina, prout a Newtono Aliiſ que Affirmantur, LURES Jam Anni abierunt, Doctiſſimi & Optimi Juvenes, cum Noſtram Circul Quadraturam publici juris fecerim, Quam, paulo poſtquam ex Veſtro Ordine ſive ex Ephebis, Exceſſiſſem, adinveneram; Quid enim nos poſſet ſuſtinere, nc tantam Gloriam avide amplecteremur, quam facile quis autumaverit, in eum quicunque inveniſſet, redundaturam? Nam, ſiquid extitit mirabilius, id omnino Dig num Admiratione putabitur, quod ſummi Mathematici Inveſtigarunt, nulli ſunt Aſ ſecuti, ſiquid Dignum Impenſiori Collaudatione, illud proculdubio, quod Inventum Omnes Admirarentur, Mathematici vero cunctis ſæculis propoſuerunt inveſtigandum; Hujuſmodi ne quicquam; Indocti & Inficeti homines pro Ludibrio & Ineptiis habent ſi tam Glorioſum Problema Solveretur, Mechanici Homunciones, qui nihil ſapiunt, niſi quod ſuis Commodis Inſervire poſſit, Ogganniunt, Cui Bono? Quid inde accreſcii Humano uſui Fructuoſum? Hoſce quoſcunque Viros ablegamus, alteros ad Inſcitiam ſuam, alteros ad Mentem ſordibus & Lucro in ſuos Quæſtus abreptam; Quod vero ad Viros Doctos & Eruditos attinet, qui Veritatis Studium & Amorem præ ſe ferunt, hæc a me accipiatis, Mei Juvenes, ut qui nollem vos fallere, vel quidpiam vobis proferre, quod non ſit mihi Exploratiſſimum, Nimirum, eos Auctoritate Maximorum Virorum magis niti, quam Ratione; Præſenſi plane, quod mihi obtigit in hac Arena Verſanti, Iſtos, qui ſua Nomina Mathematicis Diſciplinis dediſient, ſuos potius velle Amicos, quos diligerent, vel Auctores, quos adamarent, Propugnare, quam in ipſam ſcientiam Mathematicam Inquirere vel Perſcrutari; Dominum Newtonum Acceſſi, ut Conſulerem, Orantem, qui Chartulas Perlegeret, ipſis intactis, ne inſpectis certe, rejecit, aggreſſus ſum dein Epiſiola, recuſavir, quid poſthæc arbitremini me putaſſe? Saltem vel contemptum me, vel Problema. Studia Mathematica ſtatim remiſi, ut ad alia me, non futura forſan uſque adeo ingrata, appellerem, animum plane depoſui de perficienda illa, quam ſuſceperam, Doctrina. Velocitatum, ſive Fluxionum, * Generaliſſima omnium, ni fallor, quæ hactenus comparuere; neque facile, crediderim, me poſe iſta deturbari animi pertinacia dixerim, an firmitate, donec videam, quid inde Gratiarum ſim conſecuturus, ſi tandem inchoatum opus aliquando ad finem perducerem; Interea, ne ſibi videretur Newtonus ea omnia pernoſe, quæ poteſt quiſquam proponere, vel quæ ignoraret, opinarctur negligenda eſſe, hæc de ejus Infinitarum ſerierum Doctrina, qua putat ſe quam proxime ad Circuli rationem acceſſiſe, diſerere Statuimus, ut ſimul Vobis & Erudito Orbi innoteſcat tum falſitas illius Diſciplinæ, tum periculum, quod imminet veræ Cognitioni, ubi conprehendiſſe cam non aliam ob cauſam videmur, quam quod viri ſumma auctoritate muniti, demonſtrationis perparci, tenebris circumſuſi & denſata caligine, non poſſent ſcilicet, ſi fuiſiet viſum, non ea oſtendiſſe, quæ indicaſſe Solummodo ſat magnum eſſcr, ſatiſque præclarum; Utinam tamen Mathematici non amplius paterentur iſtam immanem quorundam Ingeniorum licentiam, ne apud Poſteros perſpicaciores irrideamur, qui, ex libidine certra dominandi in Matheſi, dictitare potius putaremur, quam illam veterem inſiſtere & nimis forſan, ſiqui ita ſentiant, inculcatam demonſtrandi viam, quæ certe Veritati debetur, & rationi erit ſenſiſque humanis tribuenda;3 Quam Lepida, ſi hoc modo Mathematicas res tractare perzamus, foret iſta olim querela, quam afferunt Hodierni contra Antiquos, Convincimur, non Illuminamur, cum eouſque proceſſit Matheſis, ut, quum alterum fere præſens ætas ſubduxerit, alterum jam etiam vix uſpiam reperiamus; Nihil llluſtre, Nihil niſi admodum Obſcurum, vix Quicquam ſatis Explicatum; Ut, ſiquis minus norit Mathematicos, putaverit, vel ſcientiam ſe pudendam ſequi, vel ipſis quidem non nimis perſpectam Quanta autem, Dii boni, quamque ſingulari benivolentia Walliſium oportet proſequamur, Tu Decus Omne Tuiqui ita univerſam Geometriam declaratam velles, ut appareat, te nihil de iſto tuo Ingenio maximo timuiſſe, nihil de Studiis, quæ ornaſti; ſi Vir, cui Sumus reſponſuri, divinus plane, iiſdem veſtigiis inſiitiſier, tantum jam partæ gloriæ ſplendorem addidiſſet, quantum ſua ipſius obſcuritas detraxir, & quem, nube amictum Apollinem admirantur admirantur omnes, qua tandem Veneratione, quo animi Cultu, dignum eum judicaſſent, vi omnique ſua luce radiantem? Si longior autem nobis dabitur Tranſlatio, hoc, inquam, cedet commodum Animadvertenti ex illa Newtoni Tanti tamque Illuſtris involutione & Tenebris, ut, cum magis poſſit defixis oculis intueri, caligetque minus, tum maculas ejus & labes melius perſentiſcet cernetque. Ad ipſum Newtonum jam Veniamus; Newtonus hanc habet ſeriem, PPæ iS v m m-n m2n - B  C1, &. inſervire ait quarumcunque quantitatum Po+ a2+ n Z+ m L &. quam inſcrvi quarumcunque q teſtatibus quibuſcunque, integris vel fractis, inveniendis, porro & quantitatibus per Poteſtates aut Radices dividendis, &c. Quid magis eſſet optandum, quam ut ſe explicatiorem impertiiſet? Quomodo enim probat? Neſcio; Si juſſeris demonſtret ſaltem, Obmuteſcit; Nonne etiam liceat mihi hanc ſeriem reſpuere abſque operoſa illa & vulgo quidem uſitata demonſtrandi pompa? Reſpuo, ergo falſa eſt; Quid poteſt eſſe præclarius? Hoc modo enim multo faciliorem, quam Veteres, aditum nacti ſumus ad ſcientiæ apicem, cum nihil hic opus ſit, niſi ut addiſcamus audacter affirmare; Intelligat vero interim Newtonus hanc ſuam aſſertionem totidem labefactari argumentis, quot confirmavit ipſe, velim nullis; Si, Inſpiciamus, præceperit, Literas ſuas ad Leibnitium poſteriores, Accedimus; Expoſuit ibi, fateor, vel Enarravit potius, Demonſtravit nequaquam, initia hujus diſciplinæ; Ad exordium iſius Epiſtolæ hæc affert; In ſerie Curvarum, quarum Baſis ſeu Axis communis ſit x & Ordinatim-applicatæ Ix3. *;3. Tæſ. ſæls57æl5, & ſt Areæ Alternarum, quæ ſunt x, bx3, xæ +2x5, 3 x +3x Ix, &e. interpolari poſſent, haberemus Arcas Intermediarum, quarum prima I/x7 eſt Circulus. Imprimis, cur dicantur Areæ a Newtono non ſatis liquet, cum ſint tantum Arearum rationes; ſi enim æ æquetur æ, vel Radio, quod fieri poreſ, x4x: =RR, & ſi pro Unitate ſumatur Verus Radii Valor, fiet ”mVLm=/}R = rationi Semiſphæræ ad Cylindrum, cujus altitudo eſt Radius, nemo autem aſſcruerit ”3 eſſe reale iſius figuræ ſpatium, ſi quidem, idem, neceſſe eſt, fateatur æquari Circulum ſemidiametri Quadrato, adeoque perfacile exhiberi ſolutionem Quadraturæ tamdiu deſideratam; Newtonus vero forſan ita ſe velit intelligi, Rationes dicet Arearum ſe indigitaſſe, cum Arcas appellitabat. Inquit porro Newtonus, Quarum prima 14?4 eſt Circulus,] Quæ neque Area eſt, neque Ratio Areæ, ſed Terminus, quem alias vocat Generantem; at nihil hæc moramur, ſufficiat Newtonum monuiſſe, puto Mathematicum, de verbis cjus parum quidem cautis; ea, videlicet, vir ſummus negligit, ad res ſe totum accingit; Videamus, Inquit præterea, ſi interpolari poſſent, haberemus Areas Intermediarum] Affirmat Newtonus, Walliſium fortaſſis ſecutus, ipſe homuncio nego; Quid rationis allegat Newtonus? Tanti viri auctoritatem habes, nihil amplius poſtulaveris; Quod tamen ad me attinet, fatcor me eo magis rationem exigere, quo magis cujuſquam in rebus Mathematicis, quæ neſciunt, auctoritatem imperiumque contemnerem; Interpolationes vero haſce fieri rion poſſe alibi ſumus Demonſtraturi, hic Newtono concedimus, at ineptas eſſc dicimus & inutiles Arearum rationibus in expoſita ſerie eruendis, Binis enim de cauſis; Primo, propter errorem, quem adverſus Walliſium probavimus alio in loco, neque opus erit iſto argumento in præſenti; Deinde etiam nihil valent hujuſmodi interpolationes; Quamvis enim media progreſſionalis inter unitatem deſideretur & Indicem Poteſtatis juxta compoſitionem ſimpliciſſimam, cujus radix e.  exquiritur, unitate auctum, ad obtinendam rationem Areæ Radicalis reciprocam, inquam, quamvis illa deſideretur, ubi quantitates ſint in unum terminum compactæ, non tamen ſequitur, ut eodem modo procedamus, cum in plures diſcurrant, quod Newtonus debuiſct oſtendiſſe antea, quam ad has intercalationes acceſſerat, nos vero poſſumus e contrario; V. G. æ71?, juxta compoſitionem ſimpliciſſimam, /æ]*, requiratur radicalis arcæ ratio, progreſſio erit I. 3.5, ratio reciproca ipſius 3 æquabitur ,= dictæ areæ Rationi; ſumatur jam ææ?', quæ erit, vel ſaltem latet cjuſdem compoſitio, quoad dignitatem ſimpliciſſima, progreſſio ergo erit pro ratione radicalis areæ reciproca, I, 13. 2, adeoque 2=dictæ arcæ rationi, & ratio areæ Radicalis  rationi areæ Quadraticæ, quod fieri nequit; Præterea, Demus æ' æ eſſc cornpoſitam; invenienda erit, quam ramen nemo nemo aggreſſus eſt, prius cujuſmodi ſit compoſitio vel Dignitas ſimpliciſſima, quant redtam poſſimus debitamque progreſſionalem interſerere; nam fruſtra mediam quærimus, ſi ignorentur extremæ; ſit 2/ *, juxta compoſitionem ſimpliciſſimam, ergo inter unitatem & y+1 media progreſſionalis rationem exhibebit quæſitæ reciprocam neque alia quælibet, quam ſiquis interpolaverit, incognita nec perſpecta y, omnibu: eritioribus Geometris gratum fecerit, mihi autem puſillo humilique erit magnus Apol 5 Neſcit hanc Quantitatem Newtonus, Audet interpolare; Imò inquiet forſan Newtonus, ſinguli termini, quorum poteſtates innoteſcant, queant intercalari; Pace Tanti Viri nego autem ita poſſe, ut intercalatæ deſideratam exhibeant areæ rationem, & ſi poſent, Newtonum in his etiam erraſſe Affirmo; Non enim magis habetur ratio areæ Radicalis ipſius 22x? ex interpolatione ipſius ?? & poſtea x2, quam ipſa Radix ejuſdem ex id genus evolutione, nimirum ex VR?x?; Si placet Newtono, ſit interpolatio ipſius ? unitas, ad rationem Areæ Radicalis ? obtinendam progreſſio erit 1. 2. 3. & æ = dictæ arcæ Rationi, unde, 12 elicietur, quod, niſi dempto Nominatore3, minime cum Newtoni ſerie conſentit; At quis porro non videt hanc intercalationem non convenire ipſi ?? x2, Sed VR?vx?; Omitto dicere, ipſam æ2 nullo modo poſſe interpolari, cum inter 1 & o+1 non reperiatur progre ſſionalis media; Ergo, ſi neque termini ſimul ſumpti, neque ſeparatim, intercalationes præbeant, quæ recte exprimerent Rationem radicalis Areæ, merito pro ineptis liceat rejicere; nec video, quomodo fieri poſſic interpoſitio, niſi terminorum, quibus junctis utaris vel diviſis; Newtonus vero mallet intercalationem adhuc obſcuriorem, ut nec dixeris vel hos vel illos velle interpolatos ita conturbat & confundit omnia ; Cujuſmodi autem hæc ſit Interpolatio in ſequenti Prælectione Exponemus. Superiori in noſtra Prælectione contra Intercalationes quaſvis ſerierum Infinitarum Generatim Diſputavimus, jam ad eas, quas Newtonus adhibet, aggrediamur; Adoritur illico autem vir Maximus interpolationem Unciarum; Quamobrem? Quid inde emolumenti quæſo, Newtone? Quaſi Uncias cujuſque Termini recte interpolaveris, cum ipſos Terminos falſe. Ad has interpolandas, inquis, notabam, quod in omnibus primus terminus eſſet æ, quodque ſecundi termini 3, ;æ3, 3x3, ſæ? eſſent in Arithmeticà progreſſione, Zx & proinde, quod duo primi termini ſerierum intercalandarum deberent eſſe , :  2 &c. 3 3 Cum itaque juxta Analogiæ regulam procedat Newtonus, licet maxime ſit fallax, hic præſertim, Petimus, ubique ut ſervetur, vel oſtendat ſaltem, ubi ipſe, & quare, conſiſteret; Quidni enim, cum addenda eſſct 4x ad æ, quo fieret interpolatio inter ipſam & æ3, adjungeremus etiam +3x ad 2x3, pariterque ad x4æ ? Nam æque x4x +35 exprimet æ, ac x4xi; unde, quæcunque fuerit regula interpolationis ropter tertium terminum, ſive per Arithmeticam progre ſionem, ſive Triangularem, ive ignotam porro quamlibet, vel Interpolatio & ſeries terminabitur, vel erit impoſſihilis; Nonne fuerit integrum, pari ratione, hoc modo arguere? Equidem, ne videtur hilum intereſſe, niſi dixeris hanc Doctrinam non perinde quibuſdam Mathematicis, ſi placet, hypotheſibus ſtabiliendis velificari. Verum, ut nihil prætermittamus, cum hujuſmodi ſeries in Locum, quem habet ratio areæ in Curvarum ſerie, in Numerum Terminorum, Signa, Dignitates, Numeraleſque Coeſficientes, conſumantur, ſpeciatim de ſingulis inſtituetur Oratio, quæ ſi omnia probaverimus male eſſe collecta per interpolationes. contra illas, quemadmodum ſpero, non parum dixiſſe videbimur, ſi unum tamen alterumve, ſatis. De loco Rationis Areæ, patet Coeſficientes Numætales terminorum ſecundorum, ductos in Poteſtarum Indices, conſtituere ſemper Numerum, qui, ſi Unitas adjiciatur, definiet locum, quem occupat Areæ Ratio in ſerie Curvarum, e. ę. X3,1919 loco æ; 2 +19/2 loco xx1; 2x, 173 loco æZx* +2x; 53, t177/ loco turt;æmux, &c. ex Analogia itaque 2Xx3, +191 debuiſſet oſtendere locum Rationis areæ T/l2, locum nempe impoſſibilem, præterquam quod, poſt interpolationem, ſecundum teneret, adeoque eſſet 172. Quod ad Terminorum Numerum attinet, quis non perſpicit cos in quaque Areæ ratione progredi Arithmetice ? Ideoque oportuit Numerus Terminorum Rationis Areæx T4à eſe 13, quod fieri nequit; & quoniam in tantum, Newtone, Analogias deperis, des, obſecro, veniam, ſi, quando nollem hollem omnia percurrere, uno neque peracri argumento rem plane graviſſimam conficiam, ex Analogia cum dicam Finitam debere eſſe ſeriem, tu Inſinitam aſſumis; Hæc vero levia ſunt, cum tuis tamen, ni fallor, gravioribus in hoc argumento comparanda; qualiaqualia reddimus tibi, Newtone, contempta eſſe agnoſcimus, &, ſi placet, ad ſigna veniemus; hic autem perquam mirum videtur Newtonum Duplicis methodi indigere, ut ſua ſeries I4~ 5. &. rite eruatur; Quare enim non conſtituantur Termini omnes, vel per inrerpolationem, vel multiplicationem continuam? Liquet verſutia, ratio non liquet; Nam, ſi Terminos omnes, per Inerpolationss ſigillatim Terminorum inſtitutas, exſculpſiſiet, ſtatim ſeriem definiiſiet ad; F vel 2x, nec inſinitionis, quo ſe abderet, habuiſſet aſylum, ſi per Multiplicationem, numcrum ſorſan deſideraſſet, unde progreſſſlonem inchoaret denominatorum; Quoniam, ſi ad interpolationes ſolum arimadvertat, inter 7 &  erit intercalata quantitas à, & juxta ſuam analogiam debent nominatores binario creſcere; Siquid aliud velit, e ſumus poſiea reſponſuri; Nominatores impræſentiarum omittimus; Quemadmodum autem quæſo, Newtone, hæc debita, quæ uſurpas, eſſe ſigna innoteſcit? Verum de hiſce ſignis, in Poſtera Prælectione, fuſiori Copia Diſputabimus. De ſignis jam ſumus Diſceptaturi, & ſi per interpolationem partim, partim per continuam multiplicationem, hanc ſeriem perficias, nam pro ſummo tuo in Matheſi imperio, quid velis, potes, Series erit 14, &. at hic denuo nova oritur diſficultas, uſ3 H . : que adeo volupe eſt Newtono ſemper ſc tegi obſcuritate, nam Quantitas per in: : mo mi utiæast i & terpolationem inventa, pro ſua regula xx, &e. multiplicari debebit in — 2 propter terminum obtinendum tertium, ſed mavult +2 aſſumere, aſſumimus etiam, poſito pro ſecundo termino, & proinde ſeries conſtabit 1- H &. ſi 5 re, cuſet, & jam magis placuerit 2, erit t ã ſin autem per ſolam interpolationem rem velit procedere, actum æit de ſerſebus infinitis; ſiper multiplicationem vero continuam, erit ſeries 4t ã &e. Apponuntur hic Nominatores, multiplicandum intcr, contemnendi; ex hi3, Neione juan vis, eligas, ea vel recte inſtituetur, vel non, ſi recte, illam ſeriem incaſum 13 5 profers, nam utræque nequeunt una conſtare, cum ſigna plane ſuerint diver®a ſiu ique denominatores abjiciantur, ut habeantur Termini generantes, in ſeriebus prædictis illi ducti in ſcipſos nunquam reſtituent Iſ; Dicendum cſt ergo potius, ut omnia poſſint ad amuſſim quadrare, quidvis enim erit aſerendum, renuendum, ſumendum, modo hoc efficiatur, ut intercalatæ ſeries cum radicum extractionibus conveniant, dicendum eſt ergo, non iſtas ſeries recte inſtitui ad producendam rationem Arcæ, fateor, & Ipſe Idem nego i &e. recte eſſe inſtitutam; At quærimus nos, an juxta regulas Analogiæ vel Mutiphcationis a Newtono præſcriptas non rite eliciantur? Si minus, vix habeam quod dicerem, niſi videri illas Dictis regulis obtemperare, & ſic videntur, ut neque obſcuritas Newtoni & tencbræ ſuadeant falſam eſſe viſionem; Hucuſque diſputavimus de ſignis Newtoni, prout ipſe corum rationem ſit dignatus explicare, & quamvis non putem Doctiſſimum virum hæc adeo conturbate perplexeque cogitaſſe, ac dediſſe, cum tamen mallet rem conſulto dementare, non refugimus expoſitioni ejus perquam eleganti occurrere; imo inquiet Newtonus, ſervantur prædictæ Regulæ in ſeriebus illis conſiciendis, ſi poncretur, ſigna ca ſequi, quæ multiplcatione Cocſficientium vel interpolatione inducuntur, id vero dicet non eſſe concedendum; Quam itaque certam regulam immutabilemque, Newtone, aſfers, qua poſſimus debita ſizna evocare? Nullam Dlane; Si queam, dabo; In Arcarum Rationum ſeric æ. x4x3. x ;455. x+3æ x7, Termin ſemper alterni, quoad numerum locorm quos poſſident, pus ſignum ſibi vendicant cſ contrarium, quod conflatur Unciæ ex multiplicatione , &c. in Poteſlatibu integris, impares vero alterni ſignum idem; vel verius, cum ſizna non ad coeſſiciente Numerales pertincant, ſed ad Quantitatis literatæ Dignitates, Unitas, & ſPoteſtates, qua rum indices Unitate minuti juxta Newtonum, vel ſi pro una quavis æ ſumatur uni ras tas, minuti Nihilo, binariorum continent numerum parem, ſignum ſemptr poſitivum aſciſcunt, quarum indices, ſic minuti, imparem, reddunt privativum, ergo ex Analogia & ſecundum poſterioris noſtræ Regulæ ſententiam idem in fractis Poteſtatibus evenire concipias, coeſficientes nempe Numerales nihil ad ſigna valere, unde erit ſeries I3 I.r Iæ7  E2u5, &. Num hæc placet Newtono? Certe neque cum interpolationibus ſuis neque extractionibus radicum congruit; Conſugit ad priorem, quæ ſeriem 1+4+75, &c. in ſeriem deſideratam immutabit 1I-24, &. Cur igitur interpolationem adhibet Newtonus, cum hæc ſcries ſoli Multiplicationi debeatur & ſignorum Analogiæ? Mihi quidem videtur res conſulto perturbaſſe, adeo nihil in his ſeriebus demonſtrat, ne ſignificat quidem, neſcio, an quo magls reconditiorem ipſius Scientiam miremur, an negligamus imperioſam; Intelligat vero Newtonus priorem iſtam regnlam labaſcere, niſi ſigna parium locorum contraria, imparium eadem, cum ſignis%7m coincidant, id quod profeto accidit, ubi poteſates fuerint integræ, in fractis autem nequaquam; ita ut, ſi vel Regulæ iſti vel Analogia recte obſequi velimus, ſumenda erit ſeries I. -.5 75 &. quæ convertetur in I/4+44 contra quod aſſerit Newtonus; Si reponat Vir lummus, neque enim vel leviſſima velim præterire, de ſignis non eſſe ſequendam Analogiam; Cur ponitur x 2 nullam aliam ob cauſam ex vera interpolatione & analogia, quam quod  ſemper inveniatur in ſecundo termino? Si Analogiam proſcqui debeamus ad ſecundum uſque terminum, non verò rorſus, præclare ſed tamen precario; & quare illud? ſad reliquas intercalandas conrbin quod Denominatores I. 3. 5. 7- &e. erant in Arithmetica progreſſione, . : : zx &.] Si denique regerat ipſe, omnes Terminos, qui a ſecundo 5 dependent, ſe reputare veluti cjuſdem partes, adeoque ſignum inibi præſcriptum reliquis eſe commune, audio, aſentiri nequeo; Qua enim ratione duo tantum termini huic ſeriei delentur? Num ex dilectiſſima ſua Analogia patet ? Quia, puto, ea Series, cujus hæc eſt radicalium, habet tantum duos, quo nihil dici poteſt abſurdius; vel ſorſan, quia Secunda Arcæ Ratio, in Curvarum ſerie, iſto numero gaudet, ergo in cadem ſerie interpolata, ſecunda obtinet cundem, &, ſi placet, ideo quia, in dicta ſerie, areæ Ratio tertia tres ſibi vendicat terminos, in cadem interpolata x4x quæ binarium numerum oſtentat, ternarium etiam terminorum poſſidebit: Dabit mihi Veniam Newtonus, ſi Iudere vel ineptias jam videar effutite, cum hujuſmodi argumentis reſpondere velim, nam qui putet rem in Matheſi adeo momentoſam nullis poſe confirmari, facile ſentiet præciſa oportere minutiſſima; Neque dici poteſt, quod ſolum reſtar, ſi multiplicemus 14V4+4% &e. Quæ ſeries Unciarum oritur ex Continua Multiplicatione in æ3xx, nempe +5 inx3, 42X+xF, +7547 Rem inde confici, quia +24+75 deſumuntur, quoad ſigna, ex præſcriptione Terminorum x3, +x, —x7, h. e. ſi minuantur Poteſtates una Dimenſione x, quia x habet + ſibi attributam, ergo x? xx=A+x4 obtinet, ut cum ſeric deſiderata 4x*, &. conveniret; Omiſſis ſignis, ad Dignitates Terminorum Accedimus, nego enim æV, æſ, &. ſericbus hiſce infinitis competere, ſed hæc Dixiſſe impræſentiarum ſuſficiat. De Signis Infinitarum Serierem hactenus Diſſeruimus, Juvenes mei optimi, de Terminorum Locis, & de Methodo Interpolationis; pertendimus jam ad Dignitates Terminorum, quas Negavimus hiſce ſeriebus Infinitis Competere; Quid inquiet Newtonus? Radicum extractio, tum hæc, tum illa ſuperiora comprobat, quæ inani opera Niteris convellere; Nihil, in Præſenti, nobis cum Radicum extractionibus; Invenit has ſeries Newtonus, priuſquam illa methodus ipſi innotuerit, ut ipſe fatetur; qua ratione igitur tanta cxtitit inventio, jam inquirimus, vel, an ullo modo ex principiis ipſius hæ percelebres poſſent ſeries derivari; ex principiis cjus dico 3, æ, &c. hiſce ſeriebus non omninò contingere; Quare enim contingant, nolit diſerte edicere, liceat ergo agere conjectura; crediderim, quoniam in Poteſtatibus integris primus ſemper terminus habet æ, ſecundus x3, tertius æſ, vel 77ſm, una cum Multiplicatione æ in Dignitates, ergo idem velit ſractis oriturum; At quid ſi pari ratiocinio dicerem debere fractarum poteſtatum Numeratores, quo: aſfirmat Newtonus eſle -. 749, &c. de integris deſumi? Aſſentiretur Newtonus? Nullo modo; Quid enim ſiet de comprobatione ejus ex radicibus evolutis? Quid de admirabili ſus ſeric mo m1 Seriex &e. ad fractas Poteſtates applicata? Ne leviſſimo tamen argumento ſuaſit, quin æque idem eſſet pronunciandum de Indicibus Dignitatum in Poteſtatibus fractis, ac de earundem coeſficientibus Numeris; Si ad dictam ſeriem &e. prop ter coeſficientes inveniendos nos amandarit, nullam iſtiuſmodi vero agnoſcat, qua eruantur Dignitatum Indices; primum, inquam, diſpicere decuit, annon talis reipſa extaret, deinde, ſi mallet neſcire, ne ſuccenſcat, ſi tamen ſuppeditarem; nam regula erit prop ter dignitates termini cujuſque, incipiendo ab Ultimo, Primumque verſus inſtituendo progre ſſionem, pm xlm1, xqma3, g6mi, xmm, ſt fuerit Poteſtas biquadratica, vel ſi quævis alia poreſtas, ſimiliter, ponendo ſcilicet pro communi altitudine æ æqualem Unitatem in areæ ratione, ſin autem id minus concedat Newtonus, qui ſuo jure aſſumit quodlibet, ãlm-o, Xx; ãm—I, Xæ3 Xn2,X35m3, Xæ; x*lmm, xx, & ſic de cæteris; Quid ſi jam Terminorum Radicum exquiramus Dignitates Aderunt diverſæ plane ab iis, quas Vir ſummus ſtatuit, nimirum ſ o, Xæ; ſ1xæ xl72, Xæ3 & porro in infinitum, quos Infinitos Errores cum correxerit Newtonus, totidem alios infra dabimus corrigendos; Interea, ſi extractio radicum, ſuæ ſerici, quod ait, conſentanea, hæc omnia diluat, lubenter poſt hæc fatebimur nos fruſtra diſputaſſe; At, ſi vera fuerit & genuina radicum Vulgaris extractio, liceat, Newtone, qui has ſeries prius inveneris, quam radicum extractionem, paululum mirari quorundam hominum Solertiam, qui ad operationem adeo perſpicuam, ac Radicum extractionem, obſcura adeo & anfractuoſa ſemira, ac hujuſmodi interpolationibus, Iummo conatu Geometras, nec parvo molimine, ſatagunt deducere, & poſtea, tantam poſle artem in quolibet exiſtere, tantumque ingenium, ut tam falſa via & retrograda ad veritatem perveniret, ea nempe ad metam, quæ ducit ad carceres; Si tamen aliam extractionem callidiorem habes, quam hucuſque percrebruit, deſendas ſlrenue, tuo more, ſi placet, tenebris & auctoritate, didicimus enim neque hanc neque illas magnopcre pertimeſcere; Venimus jam tandem ad Cocſficientes Numeros, de quibus cum adhuc ſumus didturi, quæ omnia diximus, Newtono condonamus; Verum de his in poſtera Prælectione. Ad Cocſficientes Numeros in hiſce ſeriebus Infinitis Jam devenimus; hæc vero diſputatio, tum ad Cocſficientium Numeratores, tum ad Nõominatores pertincbit; Nominatores primum perpendemus, & quoniam Newtono placent denominatores I. 3. 5. 7. &e. Sinat, rogem ſaltem, quamobrem? Si dixerit, quia coſdem ſibi aſerunt Integrarum poteſtatum termini; Quid prohibet, cum Newtonus aſfirmet Nominatores eſſe de integris, quia in poteſtatibus integris iidem inveniuntur, quin & ipſe pronunciem Numeratores etiam inter integros verſari, quia in poteſtatibus integris idem experimur? Sigillatim, Unciæ in poteſlatibus integris eam ſemper rationem habent ad Dignitatum Indices 3, æ, æ7, &. quam exprimunt Terminorum Cocſſicientes Rationes, quæ item exiſtunt inter Numeros integros, ubi Indices dignitatum fuerint porro integri, ergo, pro analogia ſæpius uſurpata, cum Indices Radicalium, x3, æ, æ?, &. juxta Newtonum ſint integri, debebunt etiam Unciæ eſſc integræ, quas itaque ſi reducamus, 1532;, &c. poſito Newtoni Nominatores, in ratione ad Uncias, eſc veros; Unde ho: ſcqueretur parum cjus ſeriei conveniens, ut ſi deponantur Nominatores, quod petit, quo Termini habeantur generantes, nullos iſtiuſmodi conſequamur, quoniam Uncia non eſſet 4, ſed, vel 2, vel numerus aliquis integer; quomodo hæ autem Unciæ approbantur a Radicum extractionibus, videat Newtonus, ipſe quidem Vir hebes & indoctus me profiteor non eſſe Lynceum; Si dicatur in poteſtatibus integris rationem Terminorum Cocſficientium exiſtere inter Numeros integros, idem non evenire in ſractis; Reſpondeo x, æ3, ſ, &c. ſemper haberi in poreſtatibus integris, in fractis vero f . : m mO f : : aliter evenire; Uncias conſici ex multiplicatione x, &e. in poteſtatibus integris, in ſractis non item; ſecundos Terminos procedere in Arithmetica Unitatis progreſſione in poteſiatibus integris, non vero in fractis; denominatores binario Numero creſcere ibi, hic tamen non eadem integra ratione; Nonne agnoſcit Newtonus hæc omnia æque negari poſſe? Iniquum eſ itaque, & perabſurdum, alia arripere, dum contemnit alia, nullo neque exiſtente neque demonſtrato diſcrimine, cur hæc aſumantur, Nevtone, aſperneris illa, niſi ut ingenioſam, ſi ita putes, hypotheſin conficeres; At E c e e e e Nominatotes Nominatores neque reòte colliguntur; nam x? rationem habet 3 x rationem + & fateor, ſed nego x?, x', &c. ſeriebus infinitis accidere, probavimus enim indices, æa primo termino ſi inceperis, eſe ſſn—, Xæ; mo+1, Xæ; ſm-+2, Xæ; adeoque Nominatores erunt m +0, m  +1, mæ +2, &. ſi prius ſingulos duxeris in 2, poſteaque adjicias Unitatem. Abjiciantur, inquit Newtonus, Denominatores, & Termini provenient, quibus gignuntur areæ,] Vix fidem habeam, niſi tantus Vir affirmaverit, hæreo tamen, cum ex modo dictis conſtet, ſi e. g. 7 eſiet vera ratio inter Unciam & Nominatorem; debitum tamen nominatorem eſſe vel 6 vel 12, &c. Numeris aliquibus majoribus, quam 3, deſumendum, Unciam ex majoribus, quam £, quod primo impetu tollet harumce ſerierum convenientiam cum Radicum exrractionibus; deinde ex præmiſſis porro liquet L e. g. non eſſe rationem inter Unciam, ſt placet, 2, & Nom inatorem, qui erit à. i  +1xX2, 13 & denique probaturi ſumus 24 &e. non eſie quas deſideramus Uncias; quæ nihilominus omnia requiruntur, ut, abjectis Nominatoribus, habeantur Termini Generantes, & iſtiuſmodi Generantes, ut Nevtoni ſeries poſſint cum Radicum ejus extractionibus congrucre. Abjectis, inquit, Denominatoribus provenient Termini Areæ generantes.] Videamus, an ſe melius gerat Newtonus in Poteſtatibus integris, ergo xx3 crunt Termini Arcæ Lateralis Generantes, x2x+x Quadraticæ, &e. Fateor me vix uſpiam intelligere, quid velit hicce nebuIoſus, licet quantus Vir, non quod nimis forſan ardua profert, ſed quod dubia; Quis enim Sciolus in Mathematicis non exiſtimaverit ſe perſentiſcere, quid ſint Termini areæ, vel areæ potius rationis, Generantes? Moneo, ne tamen cognoſcere ſe præſidat, ſt puter eſſe Ix?, 1/2x +x*, cum Newtonus præcipiat totius Areæ altitudinem, ſt recte, quid velit, reſciverim, ſingulis Terminis eſſe apponendam; Hiſce vero non immoramur, ad Uncias tranſeamus3 Imprimis igitur dicimus fractarum poteſtatum Uncias ex qualibet interpoſitione perfici non poſle, adeo ut fruſtra interpolationibus incumbat Newtonus, neque enim ipſa fieri poteſt debita interpoſitio, quoniam ſi liceret interſerere quaslibet deſideratas Quantitates inter x. xx. x2x +Lx, haberetur item interpolatio inter aggregatos Rationum Arearum Cocfſficientes zixæx;æ 5, &c. cum 453 - 3555=1x243, &e. verum liquido apparet hanc ſeriem non poſſe interpolari, quia non eadem eſt ratio Arithmetica inter 1 & 2, quæ exiſtit inter 2 & 4. Interea non latet nos Newtonum ſeriem excogitaſſe, quam inſervire putat quarumcunque poteſiatum Unciis Indagandis, ni ſallor, quia facto tentamine cum Integrarum poteſiatum Unciis, an fortuito, vel certa ratione, non dicit, coincidit, ad quam ſi denique provocarit Newtonus, modo hanc ipſam defendere & tueri ſolam polliceatur, quæ omnia hucuſque attulimus facile reddimus, decedimus de noſtro jure, certaque ratione, non fortuito, etiam eum hanc ſeriem exſculpſiſſe fatebimur, pro recepta illa, poſt Maximum & Celeberrimum ]Walliſium, Inductionis methodo; Quæ diximus, tamen conceſſis, ne quidem perſirictim oſtendit Poteſtates fractas eidem Regulæ Scricive obtemperare; De hac autem Unciarum Regula, ſequenti in Noſtra Prælectione, fuſius liberiuſque diſputabimus, huic, ne Veſtram, Optimi Juvencs, patientiam diutius, quam par eſſ, detineam, finem jam-jam Impoſituri. De Newtonianis Unciis Verba facturi, & de ipſius Regula, quam iis Excogitavit Inveniendis, dabimus inde elici Uncias æ. 2. Quadrati I. 2. 1, Cubi I. 3.3. 1, &⸗. & puto I. I. Lateris; Num ergo ſequitur codem prorſus modo derivari Uncias Radicis Quadraticæ, Cubicæ, &? Si quidem, valeat inepta illa Poteſtatis directæ & reciprocæ diſlinctio, quæ ita, quod velit Newtonus, æquatis legibus obſequuntur, ut revera nullæ forſan quantitates exigant magis diverſas; Dicat, ſi lubitum fuerit, totum, quod intereſt, diſcrimen, in literam m conferri, precario tamen, nulla enim adhuc pro batio; Quod ſi m pro arbitrio aſſumi poteſt pro æ ſcilicet, vel , himirum, ſive directa ſit poteſias, ſeu reciproca, cæteris ubique manentibus, non ſuiſſet opus aà Lem 2. Lib. æ. Priucip. Mathemat. Caſu ejus quarto, cum regula ma Ami complexa eſſet omnes; Recte tamen, quæ ſemper vel tantillo demonſtrationis contigit ſelicitas, ſuo poteſtatum generi ſuam regulam aſſignavit; Permittatur ipſi, quam poſtulavit literam m, ſi modo ſiverit, rogarem, quid iſti numeri appenſi velint? Eſto, illos nihil mutari, ſemper autem intcgros oriri, dum maneat Index poreſtatis integer, an exinde pateat iſtos numero ſuam tueri debere integritatem, ſi index in fractionem verteretur? Vides, Newtone quam quam Matheſis in æternam diſputationem abiret, ſi præcepta tus prò Oſtenſionibu habeantur; Verum, ut apertius tecum agamus, illa tua ſeries, omiſſis, quæ principia petiiſti, reipſa in aliam ſe formam induit, quam hic habeas pro ſexta Poteſtate, nimium, in ix /x22,23,4,3 ia ut Numeratorum progreſſio ſi m3 m4 m3 m2 mi1 m o Nominatorum reciproca, & quod de ſexta poteſtate valet, ad quadraticani, cubicam, vel lateralem etiam, pertingere videbitur, ſt progreſſio inſtituatur ad exemplum : : : 12-0 21I -2 adeoque ſeries Unciarum pro Radice Quadratica erit IX// z J eoque ſes Uncarum P E F?Fn4 1 2/4 I6 x 3  —=  S , &c. ex qua nunquam eruet 7xr - xX/ xX 7+4 V0-+5 7+6 79 +7 7-+8 Newtonus 1. 3.4+V757u7 H+5, niſi demonſtraverit  æqualem eſſe infinito Numerorum aggregato juxta unitatem creſcentium, quo invicem ſe perimant deſtruantque; Unde clarius porro luce pateſcit non oportere Unitates adhiberi in determinandis Poteſtai i . m-o tum reciprocarum Unciis; nam ſecundum prædictam ſeriem x/ &e. ut poteſtatis cujuſvis Uncias extrahere poſſimus, neceſſe eſt in Dividendis propius ſemper poſteriores quantitates numerales ad literatas priores accedant, in Diviſoribus a ſe invicem magis inter progrediendum removeantur, ſi vero in fractis poteſtatibus Unitates aſciſcamus, plane e contrario accidit; 7 o, -I, -2, cum debeant appropinquare, latius divagantur, .-2, 2I, 76, cum receſſiie oporterent, ad complexus advolant; Præterea ] Terminorum Uncias uſque ad mediam elevari cernimus, in Newtoni ſeriebus continue ſemperque minuuntur; Hæccine tandem ſummus Vir & apprime in Mathematicis verſatus ? Quid, obſecro, ex his poſſumus colligere, niſi quod malles hic Auctoritati tuæ & Nomini rem totam concredere, rationem qui tuam toties, tantiſque auſis, alias Confirmaſti ? Præter hæc, Tũſ, uti ipſe etiam aſfirmat,  11925ſ? æ 1421943 T=it43+3193, &c. & Procedent numeri, ut 4, a*, a?, &. vel æ; ſed m, ſt Nevtonum auſcultemus, exprimere debet, fractam æque quantitatem, ac integram quamvis, ſi ſint Dignitatum Indices, ergo ſzæTſl reddet Unciarum aggregatum, quod æquabitur v2; Inquiratur itaque primo, an 124+75 &. in Infinitum æqualis fuerit 1, 414, &e. , pro radicum vulgata extractione, radici 23 Deinde Numeralium Unciæ Poteſtatum integrarum conficiuntur ex Involutione 1+1, quarum ſigna cadem erunt quæ Literatarum, ſi annexæ eſſent, dignitatum; Fractarum autem forſan, ſaltem, ut velit Newtonus, cx Evolutione deſerimur ã ſignis dignitatum; Ad Newtonum conſugimus; Itaque 1+74, &. putanda eſt Evolutio; Adeoque jam ſignorum præſigendorum quantitatibus x2, æ*, &. habet poteſtatem; Numquid amplius poſtulat Newtonus? Sufficiuntne ca, quæ conceſſimus? Adducamus Tſ, 71ſ, TſI', æ Im190, /1-241 =o1-34319O0, ergo 1-Il;70; Inquiratur itaque, an I/F45, &. æquaretur Nihilo, * =14-2454 &c. Poro 1I, Hhx—x4xxt, +58f, &. eſficit I/34'. quæ Scries aliter eſſet 147+75 cadem nempe, quam ſtatuit Newtonus eſſe Evolutionem ipſius 1+13 Hæccine etiam deſideras. Newtone, hæccine item eſflagitas? Nimis proſecto libertate tibi conceſſa abuteris & Matnematicorum clementia; Petis, ut ne Unciæ tuarum ſerierum ſignis obſequantur dignitatum, Obtines; Poſcis, ut dignitates Unciarum ſigna ſubeant, Impetras; Pœnitet te poſtulatorum, & denique velis, ut modo ſigna Unciarum dignitatibus obtemperent, modo dignitates Unciis, ne forſan altera alterius ægre ferat imperium; Quod ſi omittamus Quantitates literatas, Tſ; inquis æqualem eſſe x/x &. Eſio; Quæſo jam abſque ope literarum ex hac ſerie educeres TiIſF; Nonne vides, vel falſam eſſe regulam hanc tuam, vel inconſtantem & mutabilem? De Evolutionibus autem alibi; Hæc vero putes tamen dicta eſſe, etiam alio conceſſo poſtulato, m nempe cxprimere poſſe, ſervato debito juſtoque diſcrimine, tum m I : : : : tum . Atque adeo denique ad ſeriem venimus Newtoni ineunte hac diſſertatione m deſcriptam, nam pergit; LSic itaque, inquit, in Epiſtola poſteriori cum D. Leibnitio communicanda, innotuit mihi generalis Reductio Radicalium in infinitas ſeries per Regulam, quam poſui initio Epiſiolæ prioris, antequam ſcirem Extractiones Radicum.] Et quidem, ſi recte intellexiſet ſua ipſius principia, vidiſſet, poſtquam cognoverat ExEccece e tractione; tractiones Radicum, iſtas quas tandem invenerat, fuiſſe falſas; Ita enim abſunt extractiones illæ, quæ ſuam comprobarent regulam, ut eas ipſas tollant potius intercala tiones regulamque inde deductam, penituſque pervertant, cum ex jam demonſtratis tota illæ ſeries ruant, & regula ea, quam proſert, ipſo Newtono confitente, depender e ĩis, quæ conati ſumus refellere & reipſa pervulſa eſſe putamus, ni fallit augurium Ut neque amplius opus eſſet in cæteros caſus, quos intra generale ſuum Theorem: concludit, inquirere, cum oſtendimus in certis caſibus, quos æque complecti velit Theorema, Theorema ipſum Titubare; Ne videamur tamen refugiſſe ſuſceptum opus, non Regulam ejus Generalem ad examen etiam revocare gravabimur; Verum de hac Poſtea. Tandem Aliquando, Juvenes Ingenui, ad Theorema Newtonianum, ſive Generalem ejus Regulam, Accedimus; Quæ eſt hujuſmodi, ? æ;/VrZ+5 a BQ+ ma min _ ; : re/r— o”+ &e. quam ſeriem libet breviter percurrere; Ponatur itaque PZ1, x: Dmn mo m~0 mt1 n1, L\- adeoque æPęl; 1x x (vel x?) 2 x x 38 mi] xt, &e. = Seriei, contra quam hucuſque diſputavimus; ſi æqueturæ3 vel x*, &. progreſſio erit Indicum hic 3, æ, æ0, &. illic *, b, 12, &⸗. pro incremento Lateralium in Poteſiatibus Quadraticis, Cubicis, &c. Atque idcirco eadem, quæ antea attulimus, argumenta, tum contra Dimenſiones & Signa, tum Uncias & Cocſicicutes, Numerumque & Locum Terminorum, pariter contra hanc Seriem robur habent & pondus, & porro, ſi etiam +x?, +x3, +x* Lateralia deſignent; Nos vero x2, x3, &e. ſcligemus præſertim diſcutiendas, propterea quod inter has exiſlimarunt Mathematici verſari Circuli Terminos Generantes; Siitaque ſumatur QL=nx, vel x, provenire opinatur Newtonus Quantitates, præter Unitatem, omnes Negativas in Poteſtatibus fractis, ob multiplicationem Negativæa Q X 4, vel B, vel C, &. X Cocſſicientem Numeralem, utraque nempe ſimul privativa vel poſitiva exiſtente. At cur, inquam, hæc fiat multiplicatio, cur retineamus  immutatam, cademque ſcrvetur compoſitio, tam cum ſe, quam cum Coeſficientibus, in fractis Poteſtatibus perinde, ac in integris? Si ad analogiam recurritur, nos quoque ad analogiam confugimus, ex qua res plane contrarias probavimus, hac utitur Newtonus, quia Lx% . m m m mmn , multiplicata in 4 /P v x vel E & 79 x  &- conſtituit Terminos N i : : i Seriei æI; ubi n fuerit Unitas, m vero Numerus integer, ergo ubi m ſit fractus, nm1,x=Q ducta nẽ A, &e. debitos eruet Seriei Terminos, qui ad fractas Poteſtates pertincant & aſſignentur; Nos, ut videtur, non iniquiorem prius Analogiam; Quia in integris x? +x xf +x', &c. ca ſibi ſigna attrahunt, quæ habentur ex Dignitatum multiplicatione, neque quicquam eo conferunt Cocſficientes Numerales, itaque neque in ſractis; Atque ibi prorſus latet Newtoni calumnia, quod in integris poteſtatibus Numeralium Coeſſicientium ſigna Poſitiva non mutantur cum Negativis, adeoque Terminorum ſigna Involutioni ſemper obtemperant . . . cmm Dignitatum, e. g. ſit m2, reliquæ ?, Q & n mancant, PAPQUL192x4, ubi mn ; : m : : 7 ſixnum æque obtineat Poſitivum, ac quod ſemper etiam accidet, ſi ſit m2n vel m—3n, &. puta in Poteſtatibus adhuc, quam poſuimus, altioribus, quoniam ſeries in nihilum ante deſinet quam abeat in privationem; unde ſequitur ſigna penes eſe dignitates, cum ſignum Poſitivum, ſeu in ſe, ſeu Negativum ductum, quod conſtitutum invenerit, reliquerit integrum; In fractis vero poteſtatibus e contra, ſignorum conficiendorum provincia ex parte in Cocſſicientes Numerales devolvitur, id quod neque Rationi convenit, nec tamen Analogiæ, toties a Newtono ſinc ulla probatione alumptæ, conſcn- conſcntaneum; Nam ſit n=1, n=2, I?"1—ix 42xt  x& u L n=/3, 7 I/3 q23x 45, ”. ſi Newto num audiamus, =1+1X2Xæ, neque præterea coeſficientes habemus Poſitivos, nihilum vero tranſgredimur, rapimur in privationem; pergamus, X+2X+xt=2x*, in quibus patet , cum debuit Dignitati EEã * conſtituendi ſignum poteſtatem tribuiſe, exturbandi ſibi vendicare imperium, & pariter de cæteris; Facile autem hæc applicarentur ad prædictas ſeries, ubi  æquatur x1, —x*, vel +x+x*, &. præterimus tamen, ut ad alias ſeſtinare poſſit Oratio; Ponatur itaque jam P/c?, 3, c*, &v. x 7 &. reliquis conſiſientibus, adeoque 7A7ã 3 c? , cujuse. ę Dignitatatem Quadraticam imprimis perpendamus, h. e. ſit m=2, n=1, ergo Pã _ n . -_ xt : ; æquatur +/ +2 xeſPx Hix10075, & tota Series colledtim = c20x x*, quæ cum veritate quadrat; Nihil enim hic mutatur, niſi quod ponitur c, pro qua antea habebatur Unitas; Intactis cæteris, m exprimat Unitatem, n Numerum binarium, atque omnia conſtant, quæ contra ſeries arceſſimus Superiores, quoniam vero ingeritur ?, illam præterea Trutinemus, ſed de his jam ſatis. i m x 1-2,x X xr x Newtonus ait P+?PæXl—cc2t2eA-+ /æ——:x he, =(-4S + 5 7+3 r ſ 2c E  O z2 55 Ad veterem nempe Analogiam retrahimur, h. e. quia debita ſeries producitur ex 7ræ : : i . i  u per hujuſmodi operationes, eaſdem itaque ſequitur leges PFP”- licet enim Newtonus rem occultare ſatagat, atque indigitare velit tum à tum à per candem  deſigun nari, tamen, ſi recta ſervetur proportio, per contrarias literas erunt & reciprocas deſignandæ; ut ſi m ſit Unitatis fractio, e. ꝗ. , n=1I, integra reciproca erit 4, & ſimiliter, quæa cunque ponantur poteſtates, ſractæ ſemper & integræ notantur reciproce; Fateor à vel m : : 2 exprimi poſſe per ſumas utramvis, utramque nego, verum notatione, ut quæ moxime, contraria; ergo, in præſenti, Analogia ſic rectius inſtituetur, quoniam primus JES— :2 2 :  rm terminus ſeriei, =? x?3, producitur ex 7 itaque primus ſeriei, =c x?ſ, habe: un x bitur ex ;Xeſ=c, & cum ſecundus illius naſcatur ex 2XęxX/, hujus ſecundus fori xl : 2 — ſan debebit eſe xex & tertius 4;5, nihil enim dicimus de x2, quam i z z I antea conſideravimus; An hæc fuerit juſta Analogia, parum ſumus ſolliciti, æquiorem ſaltem ea, quam Newtonus attulit, eſe contendimus; Hoc tamen indubium habemus, - x i 75 P : : Aſſumi a Newtono , ut in Serie =PFP~ſ* deſtrui poſct Quantitas æ? ſecundi ter c mini 202x2, qui aliter, ex multiplicatione æ* in ſolam 2xt, evaderet 2p04x' contra conſtitutionem Quadraticam; Item ę- tertii termini x*; Qui pariter, niſi eſet c* perempta, videretur exire in +7tx* ex multiplicatione —20+x? x2x, denuo contra Quadrati indolem; & cum in his ſeriebus propter decrementum Poteſtatum ⸗, e c, &c. quas radices vocamus per Indices Radicum æquabile in ſingulis Terminis ſerici cujuſcunque poteſtatis ? Cubicæ, Biquadraticæ, & ab Indicibus expoſiræ Dignitatis ad Nihilum, idem eveniret; Ratio Univerſim patet, cur 2 ſemper diviſerit Nevtonus per ?; E. G, c73, Index ẽs Zc erit -, qui inde per 6 & ; devenit ad o, adeoque ad Seriem debitam eruendam ꝗ  A77] XQ5+1x 35&”L; &. R H x i : . : æquatur continuo ut ipſa tollat a ſecundo termino, quam nimiam 4 =c appoſuerat, ſuerat, a tertio quam B=c, quoad Dignitatem ?, & protſus; Jam vero, inquam, han rationem, quare æ* vel x? dividatur per , 3, non ad fractas poteſtates pertineræ niſi eodem, quo modo integræ, componantur, quod fieri nequit; Num aſſcret Newto nus e. g. in 7x lẽ quoniam decrementum invenitur a æ* per ? ad o, in cjuſder cubo a cf per c* ad ' & dein o, ideo idem eſſe decrementum in radice ejus Qua dratica, Cubica, &?? Aſſerat, nunquam comprobabit, adhibet tamen ? pro Diviſore ut iſtiuſmodi decrementum obrincatur; forſan aſerere velit, quamvis nolit probare; Ego mallem, niſi exigat, quam non dedit demonſtrationem, in poteſtatibus reciprocis ipſius 7] Subrogare /; pro ? diviſore, in 73] c}, &c. ne cum juxta analogiam decreſcere debeat æ. ꝗ&. a & primo termino verſus nihilum, quoad dimenſionem, diminui etiam videatur, verſus infinitum a  ad -; Neque ramen vehemente: litigarem in his Quantitatibus e3, c;, &. eſſc Dividentes, æ?, et eſſe pernego; Nemo enim ſcienter dixerit codem prorſus modo decreſcere * in ſerie Radicali ab ipſa , quo eadem c* decreſcit in Quadratica, neque enim ę* reperitur in ſerie Newtoniana; Siquis autem aſfirmaverit ſeries reciprocas ipſius aIſ a ſuo primo termino eadem minui ratione, qua directæ, ſecundum Newtonum, e. g. ut in æ? 4x?? a c per æ? ad , ita in ?7T%lſ a eæ per } ad ;3, c4, c, perficietur illa ſeries, quam modo ex precaria analogia Newtonianæ conſimili ſtatuimus, Newtonianæ vero ſeriei minime conſentanea; Si decrementum non fiat per dimenſiones ſcd fractiones Quantitatum, id quod velit Newtoni ſeries, Cur in primis adhibeatur * in Poteſtatibus integris ad diminuendas dimenſiones, in fractis ad minutias? Deinde, ſi hanc nullam Analogiam concedamus, Cur non ſervetur Analogia in ipſis minutiis? Nam hoc modo, vel erit ſeries c' xt x ct x: x 454 ſive,3 Quid autem hic habetur cum Newtoni ſerie comcc 20 8c* i5 28 8 Q mune? Hæc, minutula ſi placet, Newtono condonemus, veniamus ad alia; Cæteris itaque manentibus advocetur n; Numquid adminiculatur ejus interpolationibus? Vix dicerem; An latius quid Newtonus erraverit, Dubito; æ hucuſque ſummo Viro donavimus, hujus erit temporis, ut requiramus; ne tamen moleſtum habeat, quod beneficium detraxerimus, aliud in ſc collatum putet; Hæe, quæ modo oſtendimus ſine demonſtratione petiiſe Newtonum, reddimus ipſi; Nihil ſuis fractis poteſtatibus deſiderarPQ : : : . tam E iovidemus, Omnia, præter Coeſficientes etiam antea didtas Numerales, auctoritati ejus tribuimus; Num medetur æ errori, quem in ſerie =, &e. ineſſe probavimus? Nihil minus; Sit m, e. g 4,2, idem ac ſi ponas 3m, n=1; Series Newtoniana erit /æ2æ, Recte quidem; Verum, inquam, aliter ſe rem habere in fractis poteſtatibus; Nam ſit m=2,4. idem ac ſi ponas n=2, n=1, adeoque cum, -m-n m2@n ut dictum eſt antea, illa ſeries jam memorata æquetur noſtræ ~ , hæc 2 2 2- 2 ſeries poteſtatis fratæ erit, vel 1x  u à+1-+2 779+3 7-+4 2-0 2-4 2-8 2-12  XX — —&X——&—-&&&S&X ——j-9/-—}—-73 2-+4 2-  +38 ææ 9a +16 tonus hallucinatus inducendo n, poſtquam admiſerat Unitatem pro Numerante Poteſtatis Indicis in ſeries fractas, ſimiliter prorſus ac in integras, videas tamen errorem ejus hinc nequaquam minui; Aſero tandem una eademque regula ]77 EE &c. diverſas haſce ſeries peragi non poſſe, quod de Coefficientibus, ut prius de iiſdem, pariter & de aliis has ſeries ſpectantibus ſic porro oſtendimus; Nam ſi integræ poteſtatis Index fuerit i erit Index fractæ reſpondentis z 4 & e converſo, ſi index , &. vel x , &c. Atque ita, ſi minus fuerit Newfractæ ſit r integræ reſpondentis erit ut patet; Ponatur poſterius, vaIeat leat autem regula = &. ad ſractas applicata, candem dico nequaquam integrarum uncias explicare, quoniam enim m eſt quantitas fracta & utrobique eadem, tadem prorſus eſſct ſeries pro integrarum Unciis, quam pro fractarum Unciis aſumpſimus; ſi prius, eadem eſſet ſeries pro fractarum Unciis, quæ Uncias expoſuit Integrarum, illic nempe e. g. in Quadrato, perinde ac in radice Quadratica inveniremus ineſſe Uncias 1+24+4 &. hic in radice quadratica, ut in quadrato, I. 2. 1; Si inverſa Quantitate m invertenda ſit regula, quoniam regula Newtoni ſemper ponit m ab illa parte in ſerie, qua in indice conſpicitur, repugnantem non habet, Aſſentior; Poſito ergo m eſſe quantitatem integram, recte procederet regula quoad integras poteſtates, ſi permutet regulam Newtonus pro fractis inveniendis, a ſua planc deſciverit, nec fieri poteſt, ut Jſcau-t3 &e. poſito nempe m fractæ, æquaretur ixx , &. ſi m I 2 mO m-I ponamus æqualem eſſe integræ; & viciſſim ſumatur m fractæ, detur etiam IX mo : i : : , &r. veras uncias Radicum proſerre, integrarum unciis inveniendis erit ſaltem inepta, I niſi 1x iu &e. ſumpta mintegræ, adæquet I &re. cum poſueris m fratæ eſe æqualem; e. g. in Quadrato unciæ ibi viderentur 1. 2. I. in radice quadratica I. 7 I hic in radice Quadratica 1. 2.4. 45 &, in Quadrato 1. 2. 3. 93, & Videat autem Newtonus, an comprobatas Quadrati Uncias reſpuere velit, an ſuas Radicum infirmas, & vix ſibi conſtantes. Longum eſſet omnia Maximi Viri exempla percurrere, ſat habemus indicaſſe initia, ejuſque theorema, eſſe falſa, quod ubicunque accidit, quo ulterius procedimus, non raro magis de recta via deflectimur, ſique titubavit Newtonus in ipſo limine, non mirum eſt, ſi interius provectus collabatur, & qui primos & apertiores caſus, quos poſuit, adeo infelici expedit conatu, eundem fruſira viderimus in perplexioribus elaborantem; Progrediamur ergo, reliquis prætermiſſis ne multi ſimus, & dicimus Newtonum ita egiſſe in his interpolationibus, ut unum ſaltem juvenile exemplum proferam, ſi minus magnificum, declarando tamen quid velim, ni fallor, idoneum, Nempe, quaſi ipſe, ſt inveniſſem regulam generalem, qua expediantur integrorum Numerorum, cum negativorum, tum poſitivorum, Facti, præter merhodum Multiplicationis uſitatam, ſola quadam additione, eandem ad fractorum Producios inveniendos accommodarem; nam, ut Quantitatum Radicalium compoſitio eſt ſpecies certa diviſionis, e. g xl57x,1) 27(; Poteſtativarum, multiplicationis; ita fracti Numeri & integri ſua in compoſitione, quæ ibi eſt diviſio, multiplicatio hic, eadem æque regula comprehendentur ac integræ Poteſtates & ſractæ ; Ergo hæc regula ſtatuatur ad factum quodcunque ex quibuſvis Quantitatibus Numeratis integris obtinendum; Adjicias datarum ſummæ tot Quantitates minores per Unitatem quam altera, Negativas carundem, ſi altera ſit Negativa, ſt Poſitiva, Poſitivas, quot Unitatibus Hæc abeſt a nihilo, cui tandem aggregato apponatur Illius privativa. Exempla habeas,3ax3, Quantitas Numeranda erit ab, ad coeſficientem autem Numeralem adipiſcendam Quantitas Unitate minor quam altera 3 æquabitur4, Negativa ejus +4 quinquies erit ſumenda, +20 effecimus, augeatur amplius quantitate +3, 8 minuatur, Factumque conſtat quæſitum +15; Jam ponatur3x5, 4 repetita 5 vicibus dabit 20, addatur +3 atque etiam +2, factum recte erit —153 Sumatur +3%+5, 2 ſibi quinquies addita =10, 3+558, negativa Quantitatis +33, factum ſive totius aggregatum =15; Tandem multiplicetur +3x3, habeatur 2 quinquies /10, +3535-2, & negativa 437/3, vel 10-2-35-15. E contra +53, 4 ter ſumpta ſilit 12, 3372, negativa 455, &;5+2122/15 Facto deſiderato; Sic3xX+3, ter6 18,5 +352,5345,182+515; Item,55X3, ter+6518,53 8, 53, 183/83+55+15; Denique +55+3, ter aæ12, 5758,+5-5, 124+485I5; adco ut, ſecundum hanc regulam, quatuor variis componatur modis +15, totidem porro 155 Unum aut alterum cxemplum ſolummodo amplius adhibemus, ut pateat eſſe generalem, 9XI, I0 ſemel /10,9-1I1c,9-+9, & IO +10+9+09 Facto quæſito; 20x+350,21 quinquaginta vicibus /-1050, 204+50 =30,20920, & I050+420430920350, & univerſim idem obtinet, ubi factores ſint tantum duo, regulaſque, ni fallor, ſtabilire poſſcm, quæ ad Plures pertingerent, modo quicquam putarem ad Matheſin conferre; interea nihil Utile aut Concinnum, hinc oriri oriri videtur, niſi quod per ſolam additionem, licet hic Multiplicatione uramur ob brevi tatem, queant omnes caſus multiplicationis in negativis etiam quantitatibus probari; nan hæc regula ad diverſam æquationem non ducit, quantitatibus vero perem ptis, quæ diſcre pent, relinquit ipſam propoſitam; Si jam, pro Newtoni more, hanc porro ad fractiones à; plicaremus, vitioſi eſſemus, nam illæ ſuam obtinent plane diſentientem, . ..2x4 2 cumulabitur per 5, tum quoad Numeratorem tum Nominatorem, ita ut fractio ha beatur 25, apponatur * operatione comparanda, 14 nempe ad I5, 0 ad 20, compo nentium autem ſumma, vulgari methodo conſtituta, erit 2, unde eruetur 4; Inquiet Newtonus ſuas ſeries cum Radicum extractionibus conve nire, nos fateri hanc regulam nequaquam cum fractionibus; Principia ejus, ut jam diximus, ſat habuimus conſideraſe, num poſſent quemvis recte ratiocinantem ad has ſeries deducere; Si interpolationes omittit, rationeſque ejus perobſcuras inde derivatas, cum ſalebras & dumeta reliquit, per campum perſequemur; Itaque pro confeſſo habemus, quod forſan probavimus, non debitam eſle, quam Newtonus uſurpat, intercalationem, verum, ſi placet, ex illa intercalatione non debita illæ ſeries proveniunt, quæ competunt prorſus radicum extractionibus; Nihilne hinc conſequitur noſtræ cauſæ opportunum ? fatetur Newtonus rectam interpolationem quæſitas ſeries æque expreſſrram, atque extractiones Radicum, ergo ſi non debita fuerit interpolatio, cum tamen conveniat cum Radicum extractione, eadem ratione qua falſa eſt interpolatio, ruet etiam extractio, & is abſurde perquam tuetur hanc, qui cætera faſſus deſerit illam; Ne tamen velle videremur tanti viri potius rationes convellere, quam rem ipſam conſutare, nihil Newtonum moramur, extractiones cjus accimus, quas cum falſas eſſe collegimus ex eo, quod prædictæ interpolationes non eſſent veræ, jam polliceor, ſit cuiquam dchinc pateat ipſas extractiones eſſe veras & probabiles, me lubenter conceſſurum interpolationes Newtoni non eſſe falſas; Verum de his in ſequenti Prælectione. De Extractionibus Newtoni jam ſumus Diſceptaturi, at proſecto male accidit Viri ſummi ſeriebus, quod in ipſo limine nequaquam eaſdem exponant quantitates, quas promiſerit vulgata radicum extractio, neque ullo modo hactenus oſtenſo poſſint utræque ad ſimiles etiam revocari; e. g. c- juxta vulgatam Radicum extractionem i is ſerici x x xb xi6 exit æqualis ſeriei - a V7/a726 Tõaæ46 %2d 2363 3166Gã ſæe, &. pox: x x- x x- xt : ſita nempe a=c, b="c d=cp4/5z, e&- El c; at ſeries pe ”=c, 2 2]a sat;bo 20 saV ſ280:4 &; 2 Newtoni ?- æquatur u uc Et quidem non diffitetur ipſe Newtonus Methodum Vietæ & Oughtredi huic negorio minus eſſe idoneam; Num velit Newtonus, ut Veterem Extractionem abjiciamus, amplectamur Suam? Si juſſerit ratio, morigeros habet, ſi auctoritas ejus, pervicaces; Dicat enim modo, quemadmodum in Quotiente ex diviſore oriundo, cum numeros tractamus, opus eſt quadam moderatione, quemnam oporteat quotientem ut aſſumamus, ita in caſu præſenti, quam Poſtulet rationem hic obtinere; nam, dum radicem educimus ex numeris, ne privatio inducatur, minuitur vel augetur quotiens ita, ut Rectangulum debitum & quadrartum Subſirahi poſſint abſque ſignorum mutatione, ſt vero idem in hiſce quantitatibus valeret, ne a quidem prima Subſtractio peragi poſſct; Pro Quotiente enim  invento & conceſſo, prima Subſtractio æ? ex ??xæ nulla foret, quoniam æ' major eſt quam »', 4 denuo + erit Subtrahenda ex æ, quod fieri nequiret, & moderandus eſſet Quotiens, ſi ĩiſdem legibus hæ ſubmitterentur Quantitates, quibus Numeri ſive Quantitates eodem ſigno afſectæ, Sc. poſitivo; Eſto tamen, ut velis Newtone, placcatne, & tientes moderemur, vel pro lubitu, vel ſecundum quamvis Regulam? Si pro lubitu, ſine ipſe mea aliorumque Omnium utar extractione, tu ſeries infinitas tuas uſurpes licet a noſtris diverſas, utræque tamen ſint veræ, & patiaris, quæſo, Matheſin, Rationis duris ſuis Vinculis Compedibuſque ſolutam, laſcivire tandem poſt tot tantaſque anguſtias, & aliquali ſaltem licentia diffluere; ſi ſccundum regulam quamlibet, aſciſco tuam; Fate. — x: :i : x* ris tu æ*?ſ eſ=e , atque inſuper haberi reſiduam; Nonne ad hæc ob: ac 4 tinenda, tinenda, Omiſſis interpolationibus, hoc modo proceſſeris Extrahendo ? c) x* (cxt, &. c 7 2c) x? x4x4 ox*, &c. 4 : : x: x i Puto; Ponatur itaque jam 274t, adeoque b]5ax, eademqe me z thodo, qua ipſe Extraxit Magnus Geometra Newtonus 5 ipſe radicem extraherem - x x* iphius L=6- 53 cum reſidua æ Nihil hic ſimile Newtoni ſeriei ſi juxta ſuam ipſius regulam extractiones inſtituamus; Non, inquit vir Optimus, hæc nimis vulgaria affero; Experiendo inveni has ſeries in ſe invicem ductas Quantitatem evolvendam reponere, minus ſollicitus, an a reg:lis vulgo receptis eruantur; Num hunc varium Proteum multiplicemque tandem vinctum comprehendimus? Ex falſa ſua interpolatione pridem invenit has ſeries infinitas, jam forſan Fxperiendo; At Experiendo ctiam ipſe inveni methodum notam ſatis iſtas quantitates evocare, quæ involutæ reſtituent evolvendam, atque caſdem inſimul quantitates per toram eſſe infinitionem iis Ne wtoni prorſus abſimiles; Aut illæ, aut hæ ſunt falſæ; ſi hæ, valeat Radicum extractio ad Radices tamen obtinendas, ſin illæ, de ſua Doctrina videat Newtonus; certe quippiam adhuc in occulto latet, quod tantus Vir his illas prætulerit; utræque Evolvendam redintegrant, alteræ vero neſcio qua via eliciuntur, probata ſpectataque alteræ, his illas anteponit; Cum ſic velit, ſic jubet, imbellis, ne fæmineam dicam, ratio, hac vice, voluntas nempe ejus, vim ſuppleat argumenti; Vulgatas Extractiones, quoniam ita placet Newtono, aſpernamur, amittimus; Suas ipſius contemplemur; Juxt a Newtonum ſic cernuntur; Jlb =3x x—3ęxè, &. I o⸗ x2 4Lxr4 oIx* 2+2x6+].x* & Ix% ii oq2x Lx Verum 12x2 x14x Efficit Exceſſum ipſius L* ſupra 1x, & 12x 4xX 45, Exceſium ipſius 3æ+.æ & Tertius Exceſius erit ſæx +55' A775 ., &e. Adeoque ita abeſt, ut hæ quantitates deſideratam producant, ut quo plures fuerint termini, eo magis producta excedat quæſitam; e. g. prima multiplicatio quæſitam con: : x J ſtituit, ſed apponit ſimul exceſſum V, ſecunda totum illum exceſſum perimit, vepl i pxf xt : .  L rum maiorem inducit +5t & tertia neque totum hunc deſtruit, relinquit enim ? . xtæ : & majorem adhuc affert nempe +35+ E4 & ſic prorſus; Ita, ut non ſolum o4 augeantur termini, qui debeant evaneſcere, ſed facultas, ſi ita loqui liceat, perimendi factoribus quoque minnatur; Hancce vocat Newtonus Quantitatis evolvendæ reſtitutionem? Mirum eſſet Newtonum in tantum erraſſe, niſi quod mallet forſan ſe haberi ingenioſum in Matheſi, tum cum oportuiſiet intellectum adhibuiſſe; Dicet forte exceſſus reapſe minui, donec evadant tandem in quantitates minores quibuſvis datis, dum majores ſemper tollantur; Eſto, impræſentiarum; Aſſentimur in minores hoſce exceſſus quantitates quibuſvis datis evaſuros, velim jam exceſſus quoad ſingulos terminos niinui; At ſecundum hanc ſententiam eo ipſo tempore, quo Termini Exceſſus UltiFſffff mi mi infinite minuuntur infinitus accreſcet ſerieit Terminorum Numerus; Poſt additionem enim Unius Involventis ad Unitatem e. g2. etiam Involventem, unum terminum videmus in exceſſu exurgere, Involventium duarum, duos, trium, tres, &. ita ut æquatio ſemper habeatur inter terminos Radicis poſt Unitatem, & terminos exceſ ſus; Verum, ſi jam ponantur utrique termini infiniti, infinitus Numerus Quantitatum minimarum, Terminorum nempe in Exceſſn Ultimo, ut patet ex Infinitorum Arithmetica vel aream exprimet vel ſaltem lineam, pro natura Quantitatis minimæ, adeoque Newtoni ſcries in ſe ducta nunquam reſtituet 1c, ſcd finite protracta exceſum ſatis Notabilem annectet, vel infinite etiam, nequicquam contemnendum; Si dicat Terminos Ultimi Exceſſus uno imperu in nihilum deturbari, id vix crediderim, vel enim Aliqui Termini Ultimi exceſſus uſque manebunt, vel Termini deſtruendi ſuperiox! a ris, & pariter retroacta infinitione ad Primum uſque exceſſum, e. ę ſi ⸗ ſit ultimus Terminus Exceſſus ultimi, & ponatur infinite parvus vel nihilo æqualis, ergo c Tę crit etiam infinite parvus vel nihilo æqualis, ex quo multiplicato in ſe conflatur 12 x : H + I35 tqu- hinc, fatcor, Omnes Termini Ultimi exceſſus æ2quabuntur porro nihilo, nam Ix* lo x 2 B8x ; - 51 Iix* x1-2-xlxo ?o, verum ex multiplicatione ſuperioris e. ę. 7xx lx1-x° ?ũ 5 reliquus erat exceſſus, qui deberet perimi, quem o nullatenus tollit Si 5 non ſit infinite parvus, vel nihilo æqualis 3, Primo reliquus eſt exceſſus, adeoque non reſtituetur Quantitas evolvenda; Deinde 4 neque erit infinite parvus, vel æqualis nihilo, cum : _ : x Quantitas quæcunque minima nequeat ex nihili involutione produci; 25 nempe ex 25 x xt ſę contra Hypotheſin, & tandem ſi  non ſit infinite parvus =o, conſtabit UItimus excolli; ex Terminis pæne infinitiss quorum ſinguli æquales erunt Quantitati, quoniam iii* quantitas in ſe multiplicatur & in omnes prægreſſos terminos, qui erunt etiam quantitates, in ſe porro multiplicatos; Reddantur hæc Newtono, Auferamus antea conceſum; Quomodo enim probat hos Exceſſus vergere ſemper ad minores? Nei x- i xt xt x- : : s g0 fieri poſſe; Nam ſi 7 major fuerit quam i7 ,a fortiori major erit quam E l 4 h. e major quam , vel in circulo e. g. 4 ſinus  major quam ; cjuſdem ſinus in ſe Cubice ducti, linea quam Solidum, quod nemo aſſeruerit; ergo multo magis x j x x ili xt xt 58 x- xia repugnat, ut ſit major quam + æ itidem, ſi+ vite x*f ætx? æX4 xt tiam 7 ; & ui æ atque adeo ,x-ęx3, vel Lxx3, ut prius, quod ſemper etiam accidet, ut dimenſio poſterior quoad Indicem augeatur binario propter primorum in quoque exceſa Terminorum progre ſionem æ*, æ, æt, &⸗; Quod ſi jam, apponantur reliqui Exceſſuum termini, Exceſſus videbuntur ita non minui procedendo, ut immane quantum augeantur, præſertim cum ſequentes eodem modo probari poſſint Termini in ſingulis exceſſibus augeri, quo oſtendimus auctos eſſc 5 . i 1 :i x a : ſequentes in diverſis æ. g. majorem eſſe quam z. & porro quam xto ' iili , &€. u c Atque tandem Newtoni Principia, unde hæc deducebantur, falſa ſunt & tota caduca, nam quæ diximus omnia facile aliquibus mutatis in cæteras Ne wtoni ſeries erunt conver- cõnvertenda, ſat habemus oſiendiſſe, quomodo reliquæ ejus poſſint convelli. . STD x x0 x Nam hinc ſequitur, ? +æ?]2 non eſſe =+7 r Tõ &⸗ prout Aſfirmai Newtonus in Exemplo ſuo primo. —: cox&xV 28 ;4ctxtazxtItem, xſl4 non eſſe —4iS5,0,L, & prou At 2500 ſerit in ſecundo. 7 =24 æ  æ 7$m ii Denuo Nxy?a3 ; non eſſe =m:4 7 5t7 &c. quod Ponit in .  suàca; 2e'40 tètio; Et Fi non eſſc asr+ 57 iiæ &t. uti Dicit in Exemplo quartò. Simplices Poteſtates recte elicit, ut prius conceſſitnus; de poteſtatibus reciprocis & integris idem erit dicendum, non item de reciprocis & ſractis, adeoque & vu 3 non =NX: / & a 3a8 Si itaque regerat Newtonus inanem nos operam navare, cum liæ ſuæ ſeries adeò conſentiant cum Mathematicorum concluſionibus aliunde demonſtratis; reſpondemus, Primo hanc Doctrinam ergo non eſſe, niſi bellam quandam Hypotheſin, nullis nixam argumentls, quod probavimus, ſed fortuito inventam conſtructamque, nec magis Mathematicam, quam Carteſii Particulas ſtriatas, quæ conceſſæ bene multas forſan explicent Magnetis Proprietates, Deinde hic generatim reponimus, poſtea ſi otium detur ad caſus particulares, ſigillatim aggreſſuri, quoad varias ſolutiones, eas Newtoni ſeries recte exhibere, ſed quæ non deſiderabantur, quæ in receſſu erant, cas adhuc latere, æ. &. in exemplis præcedentibus, Integræ Poteſtates ſive diredtæ ſive reciprocæ rite ex ejus ſericbus inſtituuntur, non autem fractæ, quas igitur dedit ſolutiones demonſtratis convenientes videat, ne cadant ſub conceſſis noſtris, quas non hucuſque demonſtratas, ne ſub iis, quæ Falſa eſſe Demonſtravimus; Nam cum Regula, ſive Theorema proponitur generale, quod ex parte verum ſit, cæiera plane falſum, prout male apteve applicetur, poteſt idem eſſe mendax, vel nihil eo veracius; Sufficiat autem hæc de Newroni ſeriebus abſtractis dixiſſe, ad res porro Geometricas & Numerales progrediamur, Numeralem ſcientiam imprimis contemplabimur, cui hæc præcipua commoda Nevtoni ſeries attuliſſe perhibentur, ut Radicum extractio in Numeris, & Logarithmorum conſtructio, facilius quidem peragantur & lautius; Jam vero de his Satis. Interea, cum Fluxiones ſuas magni æſtimaverit, ægre forſan tulerit, ſi inſalutatas neglectaſque præterirem, quarum rationem & initia duobus modis explicari velit, alter habetur ad Pag. 392. Vol. 2. Walliſii Algebræ, & poſtea fuſius exponitur ab ipſo Newtono in Quadratura ſua Curvarum, alter ad Pag. 250, Newt. Princip. Math. Ad primum aggredimur, ubi non ſatis liquet, cur Quantitates lineares ad velocitates tranſferantur, cum velocitates potius ſint lincis exprimendæ, quam lineæ velocitatibus certe non lineæ potius velocitatibus, quam velocitates lineis; Quid enim hinc adjuvamur? Fluant modo puncta quævis æqualibus temporibus, conficientque lineas æquales; at vero, hæc tempora æque componuntur cx momentis quam minimis, ac linea punctis. atque idem planc eſt, ſive lincas definiamus æquales ex æquali Numero punctorum ſive tempora æqualia ex momentorum æquatione; adeoque quicquid Newtonus ſibi viſus fuerit de Quantitatibus Mathematicis Inveniſe, inquam, cum illas ut motu continuo deſcriptas conſiderat, ut ex partibus quam minimis conſtantes ipſum perpendere, fatetur enim ſe quantitates conſiderare, ut quæ æqualibus temporibus creſcentes & creſcendo genitæ pro Velocitate majori, vel minori, qua creſcunt ac gencrantur, evadunt majores vel minores, h. e. carum incrementum menſuratur per velocitatem ſuam quovis tempore dato, ſed neque definiri poſſet accurate æqualitas temporis vel velocitatis ratio, niſi tum velocitas tum tempus quantitates habeantur ex partibus minimis conſtantes ita ut nihil afferat hæc Doctrina adjumenti methodo Indiviſibilium, removetur altius difficultas, ſiquæ ſit, non ſublata eſt, e. g. in Fig. 1. CE, æc ſunt augmenta Quantitatum 48, BC, at Fluxiones, ſive incrementorum velocitates 4B, 5C, ſunt ut ipſa incrementa CE, Ec, quæ ſi ignorentur, fruſtra corum rationem quærimus, ſi nota fuerint, rogo an ſint definita quædam? Necne; ſi definita, omnia quæ contra indiviſiFrſff ſa bilia bilia afferuntur, contrà hujuſmodi incrementa valent; Nam ſi minimum incrementuꝶ definitum ſit, datur indiviſibile, ſi non, nulla eſt cognitio Quantitatis indeterminatæ Præterea autem minus liquet Fluxiones 4B, BC, eſle ut CE, Ec, niſi, , punctum lineæ æc plane perſecteque coincidat cum puncto Curvæ Ac, quod fieri nequit, ſi Ae, be fue rint incommen ſurabiles; At Problema, quod imprimis erit in hac doctrina corripiendum ſt Data æquatione quotcunque fluentes Quantitates involvente, invenire Fluxiones; Fluat, inquit Newtonus, Quartitas  uniſormitet, erit +0, & Invenienda ſit Fluxio Quan titatis , Quantitas * evadet æſ id eſt, per methodum ſerierum infinitarum I=]  4nov4o: :, &c. continue multiplicando Sn ſe; Nihil hic moramur 2 infinitas ſeries, concedimus; Abjectis itaque æ & æ, Augmenta ſunt no:, &⸗. & , Sed o. no:: 1. n, adeoque o: +, &e. in infinitum pro nihilo habentur, h. æ. evancſcunt, quod negamus admodum, imo & aſſerimus, ſi cæteræ quantitates cocfſicientes repudientur, maneatque autem ſolummodo o? 40 +0+07406 &e. ita abeſſc a nihilo, ut infinitam porro conficiant quantitatem ipſa  majorem, Nam o eſt minimum augmentum quantitatis æ, ita ut ſi o multiplicaretur in æ, nimirum, in infinitum, æ o æquaretur æ; & pari ratione æ æ, vel  Infiniteſimæ Quantitatis h. e. , ſed in ſerie o? +031+04, &. oæ, Oæ/x, adeoque o? +03, &c. +x major erit quam æ; Denuo æ.&. æx. poſt momentum temporis (quod ni fallor indiviſibile erit temporis punctum, quamvis Newtonus ſinc involucro occultare ſatagat) incrementis ſujs auctæ evadent æ+07, 7) xtox, id quod ſatemur, ob rationem vero allegatam pernegamus x 4352 ox+350 xx+03æ3, eſſe Fluxionem æ3, & pariter de cæteris, cum revera Fluxio 3 ſit ol æ3, hoc tamen conceſſo, neœue reſiduum dividi debet per o, neque minui quantitas o in infinitum; Si objiciatur Parab locidea hoc modo quadrari, agnoſcere has me inquam Fluxiones ubi non applicantur ad Quantitates Binomias, cujuſmodi ſunt nulla Parabolarum genera, e. g. in Parabola Quadraticali ? /x', vel , adeoque in hoc caſu multiplicanda erit Fluxio quantitatis ſimplicis æxx;7xx4; Fluxio /&1xx', quæ multiplicata in æ; eſficit zxx'+2, adeoque, ſi invenire velim quantitatem fluentem, abduco æ & appono +1, ut habeatur i1x'+1=1Ix, unde obtineo 1æ'+2, divido autem per Unitatem, quæ aſſixa fuit Fluxioni 1x & per  inſuper propter 5, quæ non pertinet ad Fluxionem arcæ, quoniam cadem eſt, nec ullo augetur incremento, adeoque ſequitur candem regulam, quam Fluxio ſimplex, ut ad ſluentem inveniendam dividatur Fluxio per totum Indicem; At vero horum nihil poteſt ad Quantitates magis compoſitas accommodari, & generatim in omnibus æquationibus, quarum Fluxiones ad ſimplices reduci queant, confirmatur regula nx, in cæteris non item; Longum eſet & nimis Operoſum omnia problemata, corumque demonſtrationes, percurrere; ſat habeo principia eſſe falſa, quæ ſi vera non ſint, quibus variæ? Mathematicæ propoſitiones convincuntur, nunquam mihi erit exploratum alias adhibitas Demonſtrationes carundem eſſe indubias; Non gravabimur tamen excutere demonſtrationem Subtangentis Parabolæ, quæ ideo vera eſt non ex principiis, quæ confutaſſe videmur, ſed ex eo, quod cum principiis convenit probatioribus; 4:, cujus Fluxio erit x , ſed y =2) & propter ſimilia triangula = Subtangenti =,, verum quoad longitudinem 75? =x, ergo quoad longil : iinon ſubtangens =2x. Similiter in Parabola Cubicali x/ vel , & Fluxio xxæ4= Fluxioni arcæ, Fluens ergo erit 27; In omnibus quantitatibus hujuſmodi, Fluxio eſt ſimplicis quantitatis; Ubi vero Fluxio involvit Dignitates aliquas Nihili in æquatione diverſas, accurata Geometria nunquam ex iſtis Fluxionibus veras eliciet Fluentes, quoniam neque veræ ſunt Fluxiones, & ſi veræ eſſent, non recte quaſvis, minimas licet, quantitates rejicit Geometra, qui aſſirmaverit errores quam minimos in rebus Mathematicis non eſſe contemnendos, uti ipſe Newtonus aſſerit Pag. 167. Quadrat. Curvar. Verum hanc dimittimus ad alteram probationem accedamus, a. b. c. agnoſco eſſe Fluxiones 4. B. C. Caſ. 1. AtaxBvb=AB+aB+Ab4ab juxta priorem demonſtrationem, rejiciuntur autem 48 & ab; AB velim, cur ab, neſcio; cur retincatur tur porius, reſpuantur à:tem aB+45, hæc habeo; quoniam reipſa Ab=A, & BA=B, ſeè A+25 fieri eſe nequit infiniteſima ipſius 4B; reſpui vero debent, quia lineæ ſunt, neque quic quam faciunt ad definiendam areæ Fluxionem, & ſolum ad dirigendam eam, ut cuivis pate bit rectangulum contemplanti; ſed aba- propter infiniteſimas a & b, quæ ſi puncta comprehenderent non eſſent infiniteſimæ, ſi non, in ſe invicem ductio eadem erit ac ſibi invicem additio; Jam ſumatur 4+2aXB+4h, de quo ſubducendum erit rectangulum 4%ax82b, quod ſi exceſlus, uti atſirmat Newtonus, vera eſſet Fluxio vel a3+46, zquaretur aB+abtab, vel cjuſdem quantitatis Fluxio eſet diverſa, utrumque autem abſurdum eſt; At vero nec probat Newtonus, quamobrem à, 6 potius quam a, ſ uteremur, vel quavis Multiplici vel Submultiplici ipſius æ & b; Nam non quia z i : a+a : A2na a 4a Subducendum erit ex ;ã 4 ideo ſequitur B-15 Subducendum fore ex ꝶ -13 ad cundem exceſſum conſtituendum, verum planc e contra, uti patet; ſin vero, codem a4-%3 vel a vel 3a, a+2a etiam ratiocinio integrum eſert B3 vel 24 vel 3h45 deſumere ex x2+3 vel +2a vel —2a vel-3a - :i : i vel +3b vel —2b vel-36 &. Quo quid dici poteſt inſulſius? Cæteri caſus facile ex hoc dependent, arque eodem modo refelluntur; Verum hic tandem conſiſtimus, atque interea, dum Adverſarii hanc ſuam Dotrinam tuentur, nos adornamus noſtram, quam, quandocunque propoſuerimus, nullus dubito, quin huic precariæ & vacillanti videbitur eſſo anteferenda, ſirmis ſaltem ſi nixa fuerit rationibus, nec auctoritatem ſibi aucupet aliunde, quam ex Veritatis demonſiratione ſuæ; Geometriam velim Solidorum. Prælectio Undecima alia Affert Argumenta contra Newtoni Series Inſinitas, & ejus Interpolationes, & de Terminis in Infinitum Evaneſcentibus Diſputat, & de Natura Infiniti. Duodecima Agit Fuſius de Radicum Newtoni Extractionibus. Decima Tertia Inquirit in Radicum Extractiones Oughtredi & Raphſoni, cum Numerales, tum Literatas ſive Specioſas. l Decima Quarta in eodem Verſatur Argumento. Decima Quinta Raphſoni Theoremata de ſeriebus Ipſius Convergentibus Trutinare ſatagit. l Decima Sexta iſtam Inquiſitionem ad Finem Perducit. Decima Septima Diſſerit de Newtoni Methodo Inveniendi Primi Radicis Termini. Decima Octava Demonſtrationem contra Infinitas Series Univerſim molitur, & Leibnitii pariter ac Nieventiitii Infiniteſimas, atque etiam Newtoni Methodum Naſcontium & Evaneſcentium Eliminat. At Nimium, prorſus Nimium, de hiſce Rebus jamdiu Diſputavimus, quæ huc Periinent, ut Geometriam noſtram Solidorum, ſive Materiæ, amplius Confirmarem, adeoque Circuli inibi Propoſitam Quadraturam, & ut Nova Matheſcos Elementa Aſſererem, quæ nitidius & verius cum Rerum Natura convenirent, in Magnum tum Matheſcos, tum Philoſophiæ, Incrementum. Manum autem de Tabula. Il. De Alia Circuli Quadratura, præter Eam, quam in Geometria Solidorum Attulimus ; Item, de Problemate Deliaco, ſive Cubi Duplicatione. Lem. I. IRCULUM apud Mathematicos figuram eſſc planam, cujus omnes radii a centro ad Circuitum pertingentes inter ſe æquantur. Nemo non agnoſcit Circulum ita definiri, fatentur Geometræ, hujus quadraturam omni æro eſſlagitarunt Mathematici, eamque ipſam jam etiam exquirimus. Lem. 2. Baſin Coni eſle Circulum, ducique poſle Parabolam in Cono quolibet eodem, cujus Ordinata maxima fuerit æqualis cuicunque, in baſi, Subtenſæ datæ. Prima pars Lemmatis patet ex Natura Coni & Generatione; Secunda ex eo, quod Diamcter Parabolæ eſt alteri Trianguli mediæ baſi inſiſtentis cruri parallela, quæ inſimo ſuo puncto videbitur Diametrum baſis, ſummo autem ejuſdem Trianguli crus alterum in ratione æqualitatis peragrare, dum Latera Parabolæ penes erunt Circumferentiam in eadem ratione æqualitatis cum baſis Diametro. Lem 3. Lem. 3. In Omni figura, cujus Termini paralleli complentes decreſcunt ſemper i Maximo ad Minimum, qui Termini inter hos interjacent, ſe exprimere ſingulos in Maximo. Nam Oppoſita Latera Parallelogrammi ſunt æqualia, ſed minora etiam Maximo Termino ex Hypotheſi. l Vel, quod perinde rem conficiet, Omnem Fluxionem cujuſvis Lineæ eſſe ſimilarem, ita ut partes intelligantur cum tota homogencæ. Lem. 4. Sinus Circuli eſſe lineas, vel Poteſtatis cujuſdam latera, aliter enim eſſet Circulus figura Solida contra Lem. I. Hoc Lemma neceſſe eſ, ut omnes concedant Mathematici, qui ideo in Quantitatum reſiduarum radicibus eruendis tam infinitam operam poſuerunt, ſi itaque quadratæ probaverimus rationem habere biquadratorum, eodem ratiocinio horum porro radices crunt inveſtigandæ. ] Lem. 5. Radium Circuli, vel Abſciſam Maximam, in Unitates conſumi, ſive partes, ex quibus conſlatur, progredi in ratione ſimplici Arithmetica. Nam ſinus ſunt ut v&1I, V&-a V& juxta definitionem Geometrarum. Exponatur dehinc Parabola BAC, cujus Ordinata Maxima, uti in hac figura, ſit æqualis Circuli cujuſcunque Diametro, e. g. 5C, per Lem. 2. Circa hanc autem tanquam Axem revolutus intelligatur ſemicirculus BFC, donec ad anguIum conſtiterit ADF, vel arbitrarium, vel, ut apertius agamus, poſtea aſſumendum; Id fieri poſſe liquet, quod Coni Triangulum medium ſe in omnes formas induet, neque deſtruetur Conus vel Coniſectio, mutata nimirum ſolummodo Circulorum in Cono ad invicem inclinatione; vel ſi BFC replicetur in Parabolam, prout in hac figura cernitur, inde mo liente linca AF continue protrudetut, dum in idem planum cum plano Parabolæ ex adverſo conciderit; A quolibet autem, quod vocant, Applicationis puncto ĩn Diametro Parabolæ ad lineam AF Vertices Parabolæ & Circuli connectentem ducantur Radio DF Parallelæ quotvis, concipianturque a tergo Plani BAC ita propagari, ut Parallelis in Cono Circulis, cujus hæc eſt Sectio, perficiantur Diametri ſecundum Doctrinam ſectionum Conicarum, adeoque erunt illæ partes adjunctæ Radio D Parallelæ & æBDXDC TF =DF. liſdem Poſitis, quæ modo in figura BAC expreſſimus, cogitemus lincam 4F puncto jam ſuo F, quaſi centro quodam, immobilem, ipſam deorſum agi averſo motu, ſimulque inter urgendum perpetuo verſus centrum Circuli D rejiciat Parabolam uſque ad Altitudinem DF, cui ergo æquabitur 4D, & pro Longitudine AF erit 4DF TrianguIum ex Scaleno in Iſoſceles effictum vel Equilaterum; Nam ad Parabolam nihil valet, quocunque tandem modo Linea Verticalis AF occurat Abſciſſæ DA, ſi ita conus conftituatur, ut alterum latus medii Trianguli ſit Abſciſæ Parallelum; cadem enim baſi manente & Coni & Parabolæ, mutatio tantum inducitur eorum Altitudinibus, adeoque, ob clariorem intellectum, quilaterum denique Triangulum ſeligemus, cum integrum ſit quodvis ad ejuſdem Circuli Naturam perſcrutandam uſurpare. Radius itaque Litera æ notetur, ſemiordinatam minorem Parabolæ ſignificet , ꝓ? exprimat abſciſſam, s minorem ſinum, P vero ſemiordinatam majorem, & r Radii quamlibet partem, S ſinum etiam majorem. Ex Doctrina ſectionum Conicarum Lineæ inter Verticalem 47 & Abſciſſ=am ſive Parabolæ Diametrum 4D interceptæ, Radioque PD Parallelæ, æquantur , Ei n : . 2 ſive L verum tantundem eſt, ſeu ſeriem u in Triangulo 4DF ceperis ab 4 verſu: quales, nam DF, ſceu a D verſus 4F, ex natura & notione Equilateri; partes autem, quæ per ſe Iiem : reim v a D verſus AF abſcinduntur in radio DF, æquilateræ, ſunt capropter etiam r a æquales, adeoque E, vel brevius, ſ æquantur prædictis lineis, ergo ductis lineis Paral: lelis AD abſciſſæ, per Lem. E =r, jam ”2r ex Circuli proprietate =AMq;, &æ. =s*, 2 r : : —_—— atque æ s , deleatur * in ẽ vel quia relatarum quantitates nihil immu. tant ipſas relationes, nimirum E cadem eſt in ratione quavis aſſignata, ſeu ponatur x, vel æ:, vel unitas, aut ſaltem, quod apud Mathematicos jamdiu ſolenne eſt, pro Parametro ſive Radio unitatem adhibendo, ac idcirco æ? ꝓt=s2, ”? pæ=3s2. Porro BD=vR, quoniam DA ex Poſitione Trianguli quilateri exæquat », itaque BD-oXBDo=BDq =R-0, BD-EXXBDE=VRPXY R-P=R—P?, BD-LEXBD r z i I ui VLE=R-P? mR& & propter Parametri rationem nullam; ſi igitur ſumatur l i DBFDEA Semi- Parabola nempe Semi- Parabolæ, quarum Vertices F & A, partes p* vel v quæ procederent ab F verſus DA, per Lem. 3. exprimerent totidem æquales in D4 a D verſus 4, adeoque p?AK per Proprictatem Parabolæ EKq; vel —pi=p:, pariterqne P? AH=LHq;, & R-P/p*. Denuo per Lem. 1. DE=DF vel VR=R, & R=R*, crgo DEF etiam erit Semi-Paràbola, cujus Vertex B, Abſciſſa DB, per Lem. autem;. Semi- Ordinatæ Omnes exprimuntur in DF, ergo ex hypotheſi æquilateri Singulæ 2 in ſeric a D verſus  æquantur Singulis 2* in ſeric a D verſus 4; vel, quoniam Fluxio lineæ eſt ſimilaris, partes lineæ DF =VR erunt homogencæ ſive //r, quæ reſpondent totidem 7 in D4, adeoque ubique p)5ꝓ & pt/pt, tandemque RpQEp. Scd in Semi-Paraboloeide Biquadraticali, cujus Abſciſſa æque ac Semi- Ordinata Maxima ſint Radio æquales, vel DF Semi- Ordinata Abſciſſæa DB/vR, atque proinde DF(*)R, erunt Rectangula Quadratis Semi- Ordinatarum æqualia =r pt=vr, vR /P Vvp*; nam Biquadrata, quibus Abſciſſa eſt æ, æquantur Quadratis Semi- Ordinatarum ſibi aſerehtium Abſciſam vE, h. e. V(V)R*, vel V*)”}) R”X/ ) R*v ) R”=R idem erit ac /”? vel VRX/R=VR, ergo enim VR* vel VRXY RXY RXYV R=VR?* =/VRXVE =R, & VR=V(*)R, atque codem plane ratiocinio v(*)yt/prr idem erit ac v?*/p, adeo enim ꝓ*/p?; ſi itaque transferatur Semi Parabolocides in AD ut literis ibi ſignatis utamur, & aſciſcatur ſeries reciproca, quemadmodum antea factum eſt,  æ?p* =AK=EKq/v P, JR* P*AH=LH?Vp*; verum modo demonſtravimus v) eſſe ut Biquadrata Diametrorum, quarum progreſſio incedit per ꝓ?, vel Parabolæ abciſſas interceptas, & eamobrem /”? Vp*, /E?/P4 ſunt ut quadrata Paraboloeidis, cujus Abſciſſa eſt Maxima æ, vel ut Biquadrata, ſt ponatur æ. Jam R?pes2, RP+3, atqui vEpr=R'p, & JR'/P*=RP4, quoniam RR & p=/p vel p)m/p, & P=/P; ergo VRypts?, J”-2//P=3*, per Lem. autem5. Radius progreditur ut 2?, ideoque S?,5? ſunt ut Biquadrata RVp*, J”RV P; Extrahatur denique radix Biquadratica earundem Quantitatum per Lem. 4. reſtituaturque directa Progreſſio, tandemque conſtabit deſiderata tamdiu Circuli Quadratura, quæ eadem erit cum Quadratura Parabolocidis expoſiti, vel Quadrans ad Quadratum Radii ut 4. ad 5. ſed per Lem. I. & 3. Omnes Radii Radiorumque partes ſunt inter ſe æquales, ac proinde eadem Demonſtratio de cæteris obtinebit, & CircuIus integer ad Quadratum Diametri erit ut 16 ad æc. vel ut 4 ad 5. L. E. I. Coroll. 1. Ergo eadem Proprietas Parabolæ competit, quæ notiſſima eſt in Circulo, Salva dignitate, cujus ſunt compotes Semi- Ordinatæ, quarum nempe quadrata æquantur ſeꝶg mentorum Rectangulis, /”+pX Rp=p in reciproca Semi-ordinatarum ſerie, 2vV ”RVpXRp? 5 in ſinuum ordine item inverſo; & viciſſim Biquadrata ſinuum ſunt ad invicem ut Abſciſſæ, perinde atque Quadrata Semi-ordinatarum in Parabolæ; h. e. tam hic, quam illic, Semi-ordinatarum & ſinuum quadrata ſunt ut Abſciſæ, ſi ita Radii deprimantur, ut horum indices ſint ſemper iſtarum ſemiſſis. Corol. 2 Corol. 2. Et hinc demum exhibetur Solutio Problematis Deliaci, ſive Cubi Dupli catio vel Sphæræ; Habeantur enim duæ quævis lineæ datæ, quibus totidem erunt me diæ Proportionales ſtatuendæ; Erigantur datæ a, b, ſibi invicem ad perpendiculum adeo ut altera ſinum Circuli referat cogniti, cujus altera ſit ſinus verſus, pars reliqu: l at : Diametri erit e. g. 55x Super eandem Circuli Diametrum deſcribatur Parabola, quæ itaque abſcindet ex linea  Semi ordinatam /p, inter datas ergo a & b interjacent duæ mediæ proportionales, , & pa= tertiæ proportionali ab a & ꝓ; nam per Corol. I. . .  7 i: .. v(b1 2—o Laua. pip4 vela p: ip.pa:: pa. b; ſed pa/v)b v Corol. 3. Proprietas etiam Parabolæ Bakeriana, ſi jam eſſet requirenda, hinc facile conſequeretur; Nam Læ1. vR+p:: V=/p. Rp* ſive B”QUXQC2XLU, h. e. B”Q VQL:: VQL. Q; vel ſi Dimenſio VL in Parabola æquaretur Dimenſioni L, BQ XL:: QL. QC. Eodemque prorſus modo in Circulo Lu1. 7” A9* :: /” p'. J”? pæ, vel 1.V-RVV?:: V) =4p. /-, ex iis quæ nobiſmet ſaltem videmur demonſiraſe, ſive BQUQC=VMQ. h. e. B”Q V) MZ:: v1219: QC; Quod ſi s7ꝗ obrineat Progreſſionem Radii ſeu Unitatis, erit 1. v) -+/p':: /&O)®-p*. R, h. æ. CDqHD7. vMQL:: VMZL CDI-LD”, & quidem ſit V(})M12 æquaretur æ2, quod ſemper in figuris Planis ponitur a Geometris BQ. M”L:: MQLXC. Corol. 4. Vidcant ergo Mathematici, annon hinc eſuceſcat Methodus Equationes conſtruendi ad Septimam Octavamque poteſtatem aſcendentes, quam, ne in nimiam prolixitatem incidamus, in præſenti omittimus, ſi tempus tulerit, poſihac forſan exhibendam, modo res patiatur, adducendo etiam Parabolam, ut, ea adminiculante, exprimantur radices in Ellipſi, quas ſolius Ellipſeos interſcctio partim tantum indigitaverit. Corol. 5. Propter ea quæ dicta ſunt porro liquet aream Semi-Parabolæ, æquali baſe vel Semi-ordinata Maxima, eſſe ad Circuli Quadrantem, ut s ad 6, atque ita ſpatium inter lincam Parabolicam & Peripheriam interceptum ad quadrantem, ut I ad 6. Corol. 6. Item, cum Quadratum Diametri ſit ad Circuli aream, ut Diameter ad quartam circumſerentiæ? partem, quod vulgo notum eſi, ipſa circumſferentia erit ad Diametrum, ut 4ad 15, vel ut 37, adeoque inter arcum & ſinum graduum 30,  Radii Dimidio interceſierit ratio partium 16 ad I5;3 Ex his autem convincitur corum error, qui rationem peripheriæ definire orant ex iniquiſſimo hoc, ut auguror, Poſtulato, omnem figuram Circulo circundatam, Majorem complecti circuitum, quam Circulum, Minorem, inditam; præſertim cum nihil apud Mathematicos fuerit certius, quam inter figuras, quas vocant Iſoperimetras, circulum eſſe maximam; quæ parum videntur conſtanter dici; Interea liceat adnotare Quadraturam Archimedeam non multum a noſtra abludere, illa nimirum eſt ut 11 ad 14, noſtra cum ſit ut 12 ad 15 vel 4, ad 5;3 Sed II. 14:: 4. 5. Proxime, cum 5556, Proxime. Corol. 7. Itaque Sphæra ad Cylindrum eandem obtinet proportionem, quam olim, nam ſinus ſunt ut v)1, V)2, V*)3, V)R, adeoque quadrata, ut I, V2, v3, R, vel ad totidem Maxima, ut 2 ad 3. Corol. 8. Eademque ctiam ratione, ſi ponatur infinita Parabolarum, quales prius adhibuimus, totalium nempe quæ circa directas & tranſverſas æquales Diametros deſcribantur, ſeries continue decreſcentium; erit iſliuſmodi ſeries ad Cylindroides vel ad totidem Parabolas maximas ut 1 ad 2 Nam figuræ ſimiles ſunt in duplicata ratione homologorum laterum, adeoque ut ſeries Numerorum naturaliter & Arithmetice aſcendentium ad Maximorum ſeriem. Corol. 9. Et tandem, ut finem Corollariis imponamus, quorum copia eſt uberior ex principiis jam allatis, Hinc ſequitur Lineæ dari poſſe Parabolicæ Rectam aliquam æqualem; Nam x4à?  Circulo, Parabola vero /, xà?, ſi ratio peripheriæ ad diametrum jam eſſor ignota; cum autem innoteſcat 2xa? =x;343d vel ZAXI; Ignotam tamen æ requirimus; Ergo quoniam Parabola, quam uſurpamus, pari ratione vel etiam validiori, quia ad formam Quadrati magis accedit, utpote depreſſior, quam Circulus in triangulum poteſt configurari, cujus Altitudo ſit ſemidiametro æqualis, Baſis lincæ Parabolicæ, neque enim magis repugnat, (ut altitudinem trianguli mojorem aſſumamus quam debuiſſemus, quam ſi minorem arceſſiverimus, quod, ut videtur, eſt ſolum diſcrimen inter utraſque ad triangulum conformandas,] Has ob res, inquam, xàLineæ Parabolicæ, atque idcirco 4à. 44:: 2. 3, ſive Linea Parabolica =244, & ad Circumſerentiam ut 5 ad 6. nimirum ut Parabola ipſa ad Circulum; Quod ſi ambigitur tur de Triangulo Parabolæ, ſumatur etiam iſtiuſmodi, quæ circnitione æquetur Circulo, rationeſque ſimiliter definientur, & ſpiſſior ſolummodo linea erit Circularis, Parabolica tenuior; Quæ vero demonſtraſle videmur de Paraboloeidibus & Parabolis Diametrorum æqualium, facile, ni fallor, ad illa nempe, quorum Diametri ſunt diſſimiles, accommodabuntur, nam ne nimis tuas, Vir ſumme, majores & res arduas interpellem, ad metam properamus. Scholium. Atque adeo neque Objectionibus immoramur diſolvendis, quæ ſingulæ, cum noſtra principia linearumque dimenſiones ignorarent Geometræ, ne quidem demonſtrationes, quas allegavimus, poſſint attingere; nihilominus, quia nuperæ Mathematicorum, præter cæteros autem tuæ, illuſtriſſſme Newtone, elucubrationes de ſerierum interpolationibus & approximandi methodo, tanta, forſan atque etiam merito, valuerunt auctorirate, ut cum ibi plane conclamatum ſit, deſperandum omnibus hocce Problema viri Docti arbitrentur, ca de cauſa neque negleximus eas ipſas ſeries perpendere, & non modo ſpem facimus, re diligenter & accurate perſpecta, ſed porro Geometris pollicemur Omnium Quantitatum Reſiduarum Binomiarumque Radices quaſcunque extrahi poſſe, quarum ſeries prima eſt æqualium, ea methodo nullus dubitem, quin quicquid in tam abſiruſa ſcientia teſtiterit implicatius vel magis tortuoſum facillime explicaretur; nam ſi hæc ſatis fuerint comprobata, de Hyperbolæ Quadratura etiam nobis conſtat, & de Quantitatum Addititiarum evolutione, &, ni fallor, aliarum quarumcunque, Fluxionumque nova Doctrina; Neque hic, ſt Noſtra Mathematicis placeant, conſiſtemus; Nam Matheſin a Lineis & Planis ad Materiam & Corpora, Animumque præterea perreximus Abduceræ; Quod aliquando Bono cum Deo, ſi vita atque otium Suppediretur, alterum in Ge ometria, quam adornamus, Solidorum, alterum in Pſycheometria, quam ſumus aggreſſuri, quemadmodum Spero, dabitur effectum; Siquid vero ſim aſſecutus, quod collineet Præmiſſa Demonſtratio, Scil. Circuli Quadraturam, iſlam omni ævo expetitam, non uberiorem lætitiæ & gaudii frutum ex omnium plauſu ceperim, quam ex tuo Solius, Vir Præclariſſime, limatiſimo Judicio, Aſenſioneque tam ſtupendi Ingenii & Doctrinæ Singularis. Neque demonſtrationes allatæ nimium probant, quaſt codem modo omnes rationes quaſcunque de Circulo ad Quadratum Diametri affirmare liceret, quamvis ſub certis conditionibus illud profecto verum ſit, quod alias ſumus oſtenſuri; in præſenti autem Quadratura, quam Mathematici tantopere lace ſſiverunt, recte intra præſcriptos ab ipſis limites & Concluditur, ni fallor, & Solvitur; Nam, iis obſcrvatis, nullam aliam patitur Circulus; E. G. in triangulo ſemiordinatæ a, b, c, &.  ſemiordinatis Circuli æ, b, ę, &c. & abſciſſæ trianguli , b, q, &.  abſciſſis circuli a3, b2, c?, &. h. e. a/=va, b=vbh, &. adeoque hoc triangulum poſitum converteretur in Parabolam, nempe, cujus Abſciſæ forent =a, b?, c?, &c. Semiordinatæ ⸗, b, c, &c. vel cujus Abſciſſæ a, b, , &. ſemiordinatæ va, vb, Ve; &. & pariter de aliis figuris ex quatione, quæ eſficitur Circuli ſinuum & abſciſſarum cum ſemiordinatis & abſciſſis iſtarum figurarum; Nam omnes ex poſitis Diverſis ſc transformatas reperient in Parabolas. III. De Conicis Sectionibus Clariſſimi Viri Jacobi Milneſii. Prop. XV. Theor. XIV. Pars I. Sectio. L Sic Enunciatur. I Bina qualibet Reciæ inter ſe Parallela, & vel utraque ad eandem Sectionem, vel uS traque ad Oppoſitas, vel ſingula ad ſingulas, utrinque in Punctis BCFG, Terminatæ; Vel quarum una, vel utraque Sectionem vel Sectiones oppoſitas contingit in CG, ſi opus producta utrique aſymptoto occurrant in AD, EH: Dico rectangula omnia, ABXBD, EFXFH, CDXCA, GHXGE eſſe ſibi invicem aqualis. Vid. Fig. 39. & 40. Quæ forſan Generalius ſic Concipi poteſt, & Venuſtius. Si quacunque Parallelæ inter Aſymptotos agantur in Eadem Sectione, & a Curuva Hyperholica utcunque biſariam ſecentur, vel ſi Quacunque Parallelæ inter Curvas Hyberbolicas agantur in oppoſitis Sectionibus & ab Aſymptoto utcunque biſariam ſecentur, Linearum Segmenta in ſe invicem Ducta Conſlituuni Rectangula ubiqu? æqualia. Vid. Fig. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. Nam Fig. 39, 41, 43. in Eadem Sectione ABXBD=EFXFHCDxX CA=GHXGE; & Fig. 40, 42, 44. in oppoſitis Sectionibus, ABXBD, ſive, BAXAC ZEFXFH, ſive FEXEGECDXCA, ſive CDXDB=GHXGE ſive GHXHF. Subjectum Lemma 3, hoc modo Explicatius Datur. CEEEEE: Cas 1 Cas. 1. AEmABVBE ED=AB+EC c=a5+ BE+EC Ergo ; BEXECACKCD=AEXED Fig. 43 cp/4a8B Cas. 2. AEEABABE EDAB-CE ACABVBE-CE CD/AEB TCas. 3. AEEABVBE ] EDCE-AB Ergo; BEXEC-AEXED=ACXCD. Fig. 47. ACABVBE-CE CDAB Ergo; BEXECHAEXEDZACXCD. Fig. 48 Prop. XVI. Theor. XV. Sic Enunciatur. In Hyperbòla & Sectionibus oppoſitis, ſi binæ qualibet recta, KN, ST, vel utraque ab randem Sectionem, vel utraque ad oppoſitas, vel ſingula ad ſingulas, vel aliera ad eandem altera ad oppoſitas utrinque ierminatæ, & ſi opus producia, ſibi mutuo occurrant in E, & : KMXMN utrique aſymptoto in R, V, M, L, punctis; Dico, LNXMN LRTXTV:: KEXEN. SEXET. Vid. Fig. 50, 51, 52, 53. 54,55- ll Quæ ſic forſan Generalius & Concinnius poſſet Exprimi. ] S Quævis Duæ Lineæ ſibi invicem Occurrant in Certo Puncto E, Trajiciantur vel Contingantur autem utcunque vel in eadem Sectione vel in Sectionibus Oppoſitis per Duas Curvas Hyperbolicas & Duas Aſymptotos, Rectangula ſub ſegmentis Linearum, quæ Terminanur ab Aſympuotis, Secantur vero vel Diſlinguuntur bifariam a Curva Hyperbolica, Proporrinalia erunt Rectangulis ſub ſegmentis Linearum, quæ Terminantur a Curvis Hyperbolicis, ſæ cantur vero vel Diſtinguuntur a Puncto Concurſus. Vid. Fig. 50, 51, 52, 537 54, 55. 56, 57, 58. 59, 60. Nam Fig. 51, in Eadem Scctione LNXNM. RTXTV: : KEXEN. SEXET. Item in Sectionibus oppoſitis. Fig. 50. LNXNM. RTXTV: : KEXEN. SEXET; Ubi LN & NM, æque ac RT& TV Sccantur vel Diſtinguuntur a Curva Hyperbolica, Terminantur autem ab Aſymptotis & KE ac EN, æque ac SE & ET Sccantur vel Diſtinguuntur a Puncto Concurſus Terminantur vero a Curvis Hyperbolicis. Porro in Fig. 52. Eadem Proportio plane obtinet, eodemque modo ad Generalem noſtram Propoſitionem Reducitur. Fig. 53. Eandem ſortitur Explicationem, uti & Fig. 54, 55, 56. 57,58, 59, & 6 Siquis velit ſingulas Perpendere, & Exigere ad Conditiones, quas modo in Propoſitione Noſtra Præſcripſimus. Quotcunque igitur Caſus obveniant, a Præmiſſis Solvuntur & Explicantur. Verumtamen, cum nihil Reſtat in hac Doctrina, niſi ut Oſtendamus, quemad modum Varios hoſce Caſus adinvenit, qui totidem Figuris Exhibentur, & quomodo cæteros omnes inveſtigare poſſimus; Iſtum etiam Laborem non Refugimus; Singuli enim Cæſus facile hac Ratione & Via Innoteſcent Nempe, ita Lincas RSETV, LKENM, Fig 5I. in Conicis Sectionibus ſibi Invicom Occurrentes Dividendo, ut utriuſque Parte: Sigillatim in Ipſius Diviſione omnes Varios ſitus Obtincant, qui per 4BECD, Fig. 43. in Superiori Lemmate Deſignantur; Eaſdem autem Lincas ita Componendo, ſive Collocando, ut ſe mutuo Decuſſarent, vel Contingerent, vel Concurrerent, in E, Veluti e. g. in Fig. 51, 50, 53. Obſervandum autem eſt, ſicut in Figuris Lemmatis 43 vel BACD vel DC, ita RS vel S=?=TV vel VT, & LE vel KL/mNM vel MN in Sectio num Figuris; Unde neceſſe eſt, ut Quindecim Caſus, Primarii & Principales, vel Poſſibiles vel Impoſſibiles, prout ? in Diverſum Locum Cedat, Conſtituerentur; Vel enim, Primo, ubi Fig. 45. ABECD ſecum Componitur & Collocatur, ita ut Decuſſatio fiat in E, Puncto nimirum Utriuſque Lineæ? Communi, in Conicis Sectionibus RSET? vel SREVT, LKENM Vel KLEMN, Fig. 51, & 54. iſtam Compoſitionem Exhibere Cernuntur; Vel, Secundo, , Sccundo, Ubi Fiq. 26. ABCED cum ſcipſa Componitur & Collocatur, ita ut fia Decſaiio in 25, Puncto Utriuſque Communi, in Conicis Sectionibus RSTEV LENEM, vel KLMEN, Fig. 52. iſtlam Compoſitionem Exhibent; Vel, Tertio, Fiq. 47. ABCDE, ſi Componatur ſive Collocetur cum ſeipſa, ita ut Con curſus ſit in æ, in Conicis Sectionibus Exprimetur per S7VE, vel SVRTE, & LENAME vel KLMNE, Fig. 535 Vel, Quarto, Fig. 48. ſi alE ſecum Componitur, ita ut Decuſãtio ſiat in æ, in Co s I3 : . nicis Sectionibus RFEV, LEM vel MòEL Compoſitionem iſtam Signiſicant Fię. 59. Quinto, Fiq. 49. ſi a DE ſecum Componitur ita, ut fiat Concurſus in E, ir 5 : x : : Conicis Seclionibus r,VE, vel I'STRE, LME iſtam Compoſitionem fere & magn⸗ cx Parte Demonſtrant Fig. 55, & 57. Sextus Caſus eſt,  ABECD Componatur cum ABCED vel Fig. 45. cum 46, in Conicis autem Sectionibus SETV cum LENEM, cujus Compoſitionis nullum datui Exemplum. Septimus Caſus eſt, ſt ABECD Componatur cum ABCDE vel Fig. 45. cum 47, in Conicis autem Sectionibus RSETV cum LKNME vel KLMNE vel NAILKE, Fig. 56. & 60. Otavus eſt Caſus, ſ ABECO Componatur cum a%p vel Fig. 45, cum 48, in Conicis autem Sectionibus RSETV cum LEM, cujus Compoſitionis nullum Extat Exemplum. Nonus Caſus, ſ ABECD Componatur cum abpr vel Fig. 45, cum 49, in Conicis autem Sectionibus RSETV cum nt, vel KLMNE, cujus Compoſitionis Exemplum ex Parte Habemus in Fig. 50. Decimus Caſus Petitur ex Compoſitione 4BCED cum ABCDE vel Fig. 46, cum 47, in Conicis autem Sectionibus ex Compoſitione æSTEV cum LENME, cujus nullum habetur Exemplum. Undecimus Caſus Elicitur ex Compoſitione ABCED cum aEp vel Fig. 46, cum 48, in Conicis autem Sectionibus ex Com poſitione RS7EV cum LNE M, cujus nullum Exemplum Comparet. Duodecimus Caſus Fluit ex Compoſitione ABCED cum abpE vel Fig. 46, cum x : 49, in Conicis autem Sectionibus ex Compoſitione RSTEV cum L NME, cujus nullum Cernitur Exemplum. Decimus Tertius Caſus Oritur ex Compoſitione BCDE cum abæn vel Fig. 47. cum 48, in Conicis autem Scectionibus ex Compoſitione RS7VE cum Nen cujus Exemplum Nullum Conſtat. Decimus Quartus Caſus Emanat ex Compoſitione 4BCDE cum a?pE vel Fig. 47, cum 49, in Conicis autem Scctionibus ex Compoſitione RSTVE, vel VSTRE cum an vel MNLE, Quam Compo ſitionem Videre eſt Fiq. 58. Gg ” ”88 Denique B Denique Caſus Decimus Qiintus Conficitur ex Compoſitione alep cum 4Dl vel Fig. 483, cum 49, in Conicis] autem Sectionibus ex Compoſitione mr cum L”aE cujus Exemplum Deeſt. Porro Liquet hoſce etiam Caſus Principales & Primarios Varſari Poſſe, uti patel in Primo Caſu, item in Quinto & Septimo, Aliiſque. l At vero tamen hos Quindecim Calus, ſi Rem attentius Trutinare Velimus, in ſc Abire Convenit; Vel enim, Primo, E in utraque Linca Invenitur inter ſEquales Partes 48, CD, Fig. 45. h. æ. E in Sectionum Lineis Conſiſtit inter æS, TV, & LK, NM, Fig. 51. & 54. Cas. I. Vel. Secundo, E in utraque Linca inter C & D Invenitur, Scilicet in Equalem Par tem CD Incidit Fig. 46, 48. h. e. E in Sectionum Lineis Reperitur inter 7, 7, & N, a2, Fig. 52, 59. Cas. 2, 4, II. Vel, Tertio, Invenitur Z in utraque Linca ultra D vel Equalem Partem CD Fig. 49. 49. h. e. in Scctionum Lincis E Conſtat ultra V & Ma, ſive Equales Partes TV, Na⸗ Fig. 53.55, 57, 58. Cas. 3,5, I4. Vel, i Quarto, E Invenitur in Altera Linea inter Equales Parres 4B, CD, inter C & D, vel in quali Parte CD, in Altera, Fi?. 45, 46, 48. h. e. in Scctionum Lineis æ inter ”S, TV, & N, M, Debet Conſpici, Cas. 6, 8. Nam Exemplum Nullum in propæ tulo eſt, Vel, Quinto, æ Invenitur in Altera Linca inter C & D vel in Equali Parte CD, ultra autem D, vel Equalem Partem CD, Excurrit in Altera, Fig. 46, 48, 47, 49. h e. in Seclionum Lincis æ inter T, V, & ultra M, vel inter N & M & ultra V Debet Conjungi Cas. 10, 12, 13, I5. Exemplum enim Nullum Palam eſt, Vel, Sexto, E Invenitur inter ſEquales Partes AB, CD, in Altera Linca, in Altera ultra D vel /Equalem Partem CD Vagatur, Fig. 45, 47, 49. h. æ. in Sectionum Lincis æ ſe Oſtentat inter æS5, TV in Altera Linca, ultra A7 in Altera Fi?. 50, 56, 6o. Cas. 7, 9Demum hi Sex Caſus in Tres Reſolvuntur, Una Nimirum Linea Poſita; Vel enim æ Scdem Arripit inter quales Partes 48, CD, Fig. 45. vel inter C& D, ſive in Equali Parte CD, Fig. 46, 48. vel Ultra D, ſive Equalem Partem CD, Fig. 47, 49. In Poſtrema hac Caſuum Enumeratione Quartus & Quintus non Inveniuntur inter Figuras, Quia, ut videtur, fieri nequit in Quarto Caſu, ut  inter C & D Conſiſtat in Altera Linca, ſi in Altera inter B & C Reperiatur, Fig. 45, 46. Nam Fig. 45. in Conicis Sectionibus Exhibetur per RSETV, LKENM, Fig. 51. 54, at vero in Utrovis Caſu Ducere Lineam ad E, quæ Figuræ 46. Reſpondeat, non Licet, Quoniam in Sectionibus æ Interjacet inter Equales Partes, in Fig. 46. autem Incidit in Ipſam Equalem Partem; In Caſu item Quinto ſuppar eſt Ratio, ubi E in Sectionibus inter ſEquales Partes Intercedit, in Fig. 47. Ultra Equalem Partem Provehitur. Sunt itaque, ſi Recte Auguror, Tempus enim mihi Defſicit, Quo minus pertinacius in hanc Doctrinam Inquirerem, ſunt Quatuor Solummodo Caſus Poſſibiles Reſpectu Puncti æ. Primus Caſus duas Diverſas Poſitiones Patitur, vel enim  intra Sectionem Fię. 51. vel inter Oppoſitas Sectiones Fig. 53. Neceſſc eſt ut Conſtarer, quo quales Partes ad Extremas Poſſint Ablegari. Secundus Caſus Quatuor Variãtiones Suſcipere Videtur 1. in Fig. 52. Ubi Altera Linea Ducitur in Sectione Quavis, Altera Pertendit ad Oppoſitas. 2. In Fię. 52 ſi Y, æV, in Eadem Sectione ſc Invicem Decuſſent in E, intra lpſas Partes quales. 3. In Fig. 54. ſi Ambæ Lincæ ad Oppoſitas Scctiones Pertingerent & ſe Invicem ſecent intra lpſas Partes Equales. 4. In Fig. 59. Ubi Contingentes Hyperbolam ſe Invicem Trajiciunt in æ. Tertius Calus Admittit Plures item Variationes. 1. In Fiq. 53, 2. In Fiq. 55, & 57, 3. In Fig. 58. Sextus Sextus Caſus Variam etiam Poſitionem habet in Fi?. 50, 56, 66. Generalis autem Regula propter Linearum Compoſitiones Videtur eſe Hujuſmodi, Nempe vel Ambas Lineas Pertendere ad Oppoſitas Sectiones, quas vel Secant vel Contingunt, vel Altera Secat, Altera Contingit; Vel Ambas Lincas ad Eandem Sectionem Duci, Quam vel Secant, vel Contingunt, vel Altera Secat, Altera Contingit; Vel Tandem Unam Lincam ad Eandem Scctionem Apponi, quam vel Sccat vel Contingit, Alteram inter Oppoſitas, quas item vel Secat, vel Contingit. Porro Notandum eſt, Omnes Caſus, Quotcunque ſuerint, Præmiſos Exprimi poſc pet RSETV, LKENM, ubi E Medium Locum utrinque Tenet inter ſEquales Partes RS, TV. & LK, NM; HOC modo Fig. 50. de RSETV Patet, & in LK, XE, EN, NM ſive LKENM, Conſtat Z Interpoſitam eſſe inter ZEquales Partes LK, NM?; Pariter, Fig. 32. RSETV/RS, SE, ET, TV, & LKENMmL, KE, EN, Na1, ubi E in Medio ſita eſt inter Equales Partes æS, TV, & LK, Nar; ltem Fig. 53. RSETV/nRS, SE, ET, TV, & LKENM=LK, KE, EN, NM, ubi E Viſitur inter .quales Partes ES. TV, & LK, NMſ; Idem Dicendum erit de Fir. 54,55, 356, 57,58, 59, 60. Quod Quivis facile Perſpiciet, ſi Figuras Singulas Oculis modo Dignetur Perſtringere; Ex quo fiet, ut Omnes Varii & Diverſi Caſus ad Fię. 45. Exigantur. Prop. XVII. Theor. XVI. Sic Enunciatur. n Hyperbola & Sectionibus Oonpoſitis, ſi Recta quevis AB ad eandem vel ad Oppoſitas Sectionẽs utrinquæ terminata, & ſi opus Producta ; Vel binæ qualibet recta A, CD, ĩuter ſe Parallelæ, & vel utraque ad eandem Sectionem, vel utraque ad o”ſòſitas, vel Singulaæ ad Siugulas utrinque terminatæ, & ſi opus productæ, Binis quituſcunque FG, IH inter ſe Parallelis, & vel utriſque ad eandem Sectionem, vel utriſque ad oppoſitas, vel Singulis àa Singulas utrinque termiatis, & ſi opus productis, utcunque occurraut, ut in E,T, vel E, T, S, V, punctis, Erunt Reclangula ex Segmentis ejuſdem Recta, vel binarum iater ſe parallelarum, J— Rectaugulis ex Scgmentis binarum reliquarum, modo Sumantur rectangula a binis communilus punctis facta, viæ. AEXEB. GEXEF : : ATXTEB. ITATH & AEAEB. GEXEF : : CVXVD. HIVAVI. Et ſic de cateris punctis. Quæ Propoſitio forſan ſic Generalius Eſferri poſſet & Luculentius. 5i inter Sectiones Orpoſitas, vel intra Sectionem Eandem, Concipiatur quaſi Regula Trajecia & ſi opus Producta, v. z. ABDC Fizg. 61. & per Lineam quamvis Solitariam, v. ꝗ5. GF vel duas quaſvis Parallelas v. g&. CF, HT Secetur, Rectaugula, quirum Latera ab Aliera Parte De finiuntur vel Terminantur Curvis H;perbolicis, ab Altera Segmenti Puncio, erunt Proportiona lia;3 Nempe Rectangula a Segmeutis Laterum Regula Facta, Reſpective iis, quæ Formantur a Se;mentis Liucæ Solitaria vel Duarum Parallelarum. Cas. 1. AEAEB. GEXEF :: CSXSD. GSXSF; ubi Regula 4BDC Linea Solitaria GSEF Trajicitur Fir. 61, 62, 63, 64. Nam AEB, GEF, CSD, GSF, Deſiniuntur a Curvis Hyperbolicis, in 4, B3 G, F;3 & D; Puncta aurem Segmentorum E, S. Cas. 2. ATXTB. HIXTI:: CI'VD. HVAVI; ubi Regula 8DC Linca Parallela HIVT Secatur; verum 478, HTI, FD, HIVI, Terminantur a Curvis Hyperbolicis in A, B; H, I3C, D; Segmentorum autem Puncta T, V. Fig. 61, 62, 63, 64. Ponimus enim, uti & in Scquentibus, ATB, HTI, CrD, HVI Lincas eſſe Continuas, at Retroactas a Se;mentorum Punctis ad Curvam Hyperbolicam. Cas. 3. GSASF. C5ASD:: HIVIXIL. CI'vD; ubi Regulæa 4BDC Alterum Latus CDP Interſecatur per Duas Parallelas GF, H7; Nam GSF, CsD, HVI, CD, Includuntur a Curvis Hyperbolicis ad G, F3 C, D; H, I; Scgmentorum autem Puncta S, V. Fig. G1, 62, 63, G4. Cas. 4. GEXEF. AEAED: : HTXTI. ATXTB; ubi Regulæ 48DC Latus Alterum APT per duas Parallelas GF, HT in Segmenta Diſlinguitur; Nam GEF, AEB, HT ATB, Limites ſuos Agnoſcunt in Curvis Hyperbolicis ad G, F; A, B3 H, I3 Puncta vero Segmentorum Conſtant in æ & T. Fig. 61, 62, 63, 64. Cas 2. & 4. Derivantur ex Proportionibus in Propoſitione Allatis; Cas. 3. ad Amuſſim Quadrat cum Cas. 4. uti Palam erit, ſi inter ſe Conferantur; Nam in utroque Caſu GFTH Aſſumi poteſt pro Regula, ſicut antea 48DC Aſſumpſimus, in Altero autem AT Regulam Secabit, & V huic Parallela, in Altero, Quod eodem Recidit; Cum A7 indeterminate & & pro Arbitrio Deſumitur, atque adeo C7V Demonſtrationi Propoſirionis hujus, æq Inſervit, & Convenit, ac ea, quæ uſurpatur, Nimirum 47; Denique Cas. I. I modo Liquet; Nam per Cas. 3. GSASF. CSXSD: : HVXVI. CVXVD. h. e. CSXSD. GSASF: : CVXI'D. HVAVI. Sed per Proportiones in Propoſitione Allatas, AEXEB. GEXEF:: CVX'D. HVXVI; Ergo AEXEB. GEXEF: : CSASD. GSXSF. Variari, ni fallor, poſſunt Caſus, ut Superius, Adhibendo Punctatas Aſymptoto: & duas Solummodo Lincas ſe invicem Decuſſantes, quarum multiſarias Compoſ tiones poſtquam invenerimus ex Regulis Antegreſſis, iis Parallelæ, in Propoſition Præſcriptæ, peragantur ad Diverſas, ſi inde ſiat Mutatio Figuræ, Diſtantias, Quod Nemp Accidit in Fig. 61. & 62. Poſſem ad alias Propoſitiones hujuſce Doctrinæ Sectionum Accedere, verum hæ impræſentiarum ſuſficiat perſcripſie; ſin autem Eruditiſſimus & Celeberrimus Auo jam adhuc Vivat, vellem, ut quo Candido Animo hunc meum Commentariolum lm pertivi, eodem Benigno Placidoque Amplecti non Dedignaretur. Multa apud me manent Scripta de Nova Methodo Radices quarundam Equatio num Extrahendi; Quæ Viros Mathematicæ Scientiæ Peritiores forſan ad Ulteriora Mo Iimina in hiſce Studiis poſet Excitare & Accendere. At his non eſt Locus. IV. Iperſecta Quaedam de Longitudine, nec niſi Solummodo Inchoata. ONGITUDINEM cujuſvis loci ignoti Proponitur inveſtigare, h. e. quod ad nautas artinet, curſum navis juxta æquatorem, cjuſve parallelos, inſtitutum per Loaodromias, ſcu Rhombos. Patct ergo imprimis hujuſce problematis difficultatem in co verſari, quod meridiani onnes locis omnibus ſint communes, ita ut nullum Meridianum nullius loci dixeris clic proprium, id vero cſſicitur ex telluris motu circa ſuum ipſius axem, per quem unaquæque cjus pars ad ſingulos ordine meridianos appellit, viſitque, abſque ullo, quod adnotari poteſi, diſcrimine, Quod ſi jam definire poſemus differentiam temporis, quo cadem ſtella vel Sydus ad diverſos meridianos aggreditur, eorum diſtinctionem ſatis accommodam habe remus, quam diſferentiam fruſtra quis ex circuitione Telluris exſculpere tentaverit, quia horæ ad ſuos ſemper meridianos relatæ ſunt & appoſitæ, atque adeo nihil ad alios afferunt, quo eorum ſitum agnoſcamus; ſcilicet in hujuſmodi revolutionibus, quamvis reipſa mutntur ſtellarum loci in ratione ſua ad Terram, tamen inter ſe fixæ conſtant & immotæ; unde cum quævis cadem ſtella in duos diverſos meridianos ſuccedit, omnia cadem diſpoſirione codemque ordine conſpiciuntur, atque camobrem perinde videtur, ac ſi ub codem prorſus meridiano hæſerimus. Hinc patet, vel oportere punctum in æquatore, uti polus in coluro, immobile ſuſpenſum, cujus acceſſio vel remotio determinaverit Longitudinem, & meridianos diſ punxerit, vel invenienda erit alia temporis menſura, quæ non pendeat ex diurno motu, vel alius aliquis modus, ſt poſlumus excogitare, meridianos dignoſcendi; Sed nullum iſtiuſmodi punctum natura, quaſt ſignum quoddam, nautis expoſuit, vel erexit, nec quidem concipi tale poteſt Tellure movente, quæ enim ſtellas quantumvis fixas & obſtinatas deſerit, figentem animum derelinquet, præter quod inutile foret obſervationibus capiendis; ſiquis tamen certum in quovis Sydere Motum ita conſonum reperiret, ut cjuſmodi ſuppeditaret punctum, gratum ſaceret Eruditis; de iſla vero inventione forſan eſt deperandum, aut enim directus in caſdem partes ille motus ad amuſſim erit cum diurno æquandus, ſic ut dum Terra circumagitur, peragatur ipſe, quo ad candem terræ partem ſemper dictum Sydus reſpiceret, cujuſmodi vix obtinebimus, aut cognoſcenda erit proportio inter motum diurnum & alium datum, ſic ut diſtantia poſſit innoteſcere ab eodem puncio, quod rantundem ſonat ac invenire menſuram temporis vel motus communem telluris & alicujus corporis diverſi. Hane alio modo requiſiverunt Aſtronomi, alio Mechanici, illi ex Jovialibus & Lunæ periodis, hi Automatum vi & auxilio; ſcd recurſus ſive reditus cæxleſtium iſtorum Luminarium nimis tardi ſunt, quam ut ſnrs ſrequentes obſervationes exhibeant, & automatuũ tomatum motus nimis irregulares, quam ut accuratas & veras; Quid igitur reliquum eſt, niſi ut omni ſpe excuteremur hujus problematis inveniendi? Rem nihilominus tamen adeo momentoſam ne penitus abjiciamus, liceat ſaltem hanc propoſitionem alia, quam quæ percrebruit, methodo trutinare, & videamus, annon fas ſit meridianos, non menſura temporis, verum ſitu & poſitione ſua diſtinguere. Quæ autem hic deſiderantur ex iis, quæ Vernaculo ſermone Conſcripſimus, erunt Supplenda. V. De Philoſophorum Argumentis ad Vacuum Probandum, deque eorum Calumnia & Infirmitate. E Vacuo tam ex diametro pugnantes ſunt opiniones eruditorum hominum tamque inter ſe diſſidentes, varioque adeo ſucceſſu confutatæ & defenſæ, ut exiſtimare velis omnes fere, qui hucuſque ſcripſerunt Philoſophi, vel falſum ſentire, vel quod verum ſit non ſatis tamen exploratum cognitumque proponere; Quot enim, & quam munitiſſima, uti arbitrabantur, experimenta adduxerunt alli ad Vacuum confirmandum, & quoties in ætherem Subtiliſſimum & auras evanuerunt? Nulla interea data explicatione ab iis, qui aliam militiam ſequi maluerunt, quid ſit iſta tenuiſlima materia, aut quomodo etiam corporum dimenſiones poſſet pervadere; Nam & nos, ſi per meatus & foramina pateat iter ſolummodo, & materia hæc craſſa quantumvis minuatur, ſatis diſputaſe adverſarios lubenter agnoſcimus, ſi res aliter ſe habeat, ne quæſtionem attigerunt; Nam, cum Carteſius tanti ſecerit imaginariæ ſuæ triplicis materi? inventionem, quam Morinum alioſque, ut ipſe ait, de induſtria celavit, tandemque ægre Merſenno ſuo impertiebatur, non ſolum veram triplicem ſed infinitam materiæ diverſitatem, graduſque infinitos, nobiſmet perſuadere velimus ex firmiſſimis & Mathematicis principiis nos inveniſſe; Verum, quoniam noſtram hanc diſputationem prolixiorem fore, & nobis invitis, præſentimus, quicquid hic fuſius eſſet præfandum, ibi conferetur. Atque Lockii i mprimis argumenta perpendemus; Quod vero attinet ad diſtinctionem inter Ideas ſpatii & corporis, id nequaquam probat non ſpatium omne ſoliditate vel, inquam, Actione compleri, quia ſpatium concipimus, ubi reipſa corpore vel Actione ſit refertum, neque diſfitetur Lockius; Prima igitur ejus probatio ex eo dependet, quòd nemo aſeruerit, materiam eſſec infinitam; ſolerter admodum & eleganter, precario autem; Aſſerit Quiſ piam; Quid ſequitur? Nihil. Qui enim aliunde nequit Vacuum affirmare, nunquam ſuadebit Materiam vel Actionem non eſſe cum ſpatio infinite diffuſam; Non indignam tamen rem eſſe, ut videtur, putavit, quæ ad Dei Omnipotentlam confugeret; Ea vero conceſa, non eſſe Vacuum, ſed eſſe poſe, convincit; Tertla probatio ex Natura motus deprompʒ ta eſt; Dividatur itaque, ut velit, corpus ſuum denſiſſimum; Quomodo probatur abſque Vacuo partes ejus non poſſc moveri? Apertiſſime; Nempe, quia partes Solidiſſimæ in Solidiſſimo corpore a motu prohibentur, iis neque competit motus in Tenuiſſima materia; Probatum igitur oportuit non dari in natura Subtiliorem; ſed liquet; ſi didtum enim corpus in partes mittas, quam vis minutas, hujuſmodi autem partibus ſpatium denuo oneretur, in corpus evadet conſtipatiſſmum; Sc. natura quævis tota in ſuas partes conſumitur, poſito ergo materiam non extare niſi Solidiſſimam, omnes ejus partes erunt conſimiles, ergo non datur ſubtilior; Quis vero non videt argumentum in circulo trahi? A partibus enim ad totum ductum ratiocinium ad naturam diverſam ne umbra pertinget; Syllogiſmuni ſaltem, certe Metaphyſicum, audiatis, nulla materia ſubtilior habetur, quia nulla eſt niſi denſiſſima; Quomodo autem id? Nimirum, quia nulla eſt ſubtilior. Videamus jam, an vir Clariſſimus Henricus More felicius rem expediverit; Axiomatà cjus ipſi concedimus, damus etiam Cylindrum, revolurumque concipimus; Ubi vero cæteri fere omnes dormitant, nutat & ipſe, & extenſum, per quod tranſit Cylindrus, Ponit eſſe Vacuum; Idem dici poteſt de Curva ejus linca ex telluris & plumbi motu deſcripta, neque colores in Cylindro quos ad ſecundum cjus argumentum imaginationi, ut ait, indulget, vel Subſidii quicquam aſferunt, vel Ornamenti. Præter alios autem, qui hanc rem tractarunt, cum majori copia, tum nitidiori demonſtrationis apparatu diſieruere Raphſonus & Borellus; & quidem ille non inſulſe confirmat in ſpatio pleniſſimo motum, ſi Cyclico-Annularem Excipias, educi non poſſe, neque iſtum ipſum ad veritatis ſimilitudinem propenſiorem videri, quia conatus ad movendum infinitæ quaquaverſum occurreret reſiſtentiæ; Sed quid hæc ad Vacuum ? Nam, quia in ſpatio pleniſſimo vel Sę ũiſlimo omnia nia ſint compreſſiſſma neceſe eſt, ergo, quoniam in hac ſummæ plenitudinis, vel Soliditatis, conditione langueſcit motus, Vacuum erit neceſſario requirendum. Videat profecto Raphſonus, quod in alium procudit, ne ſibi regeratur, miſera Verborum colluſio, & in re fere Geometrica miſera àyuuiręmſæ; Ante vero quam tantum interruptæ materiæ hiatum tranſiliiet, experiri decuit, annon poſſet in medio conſiſere, vel adprobare, ſi modo Ieviter, nihil inter ſummam Plenitudinem vel Craſſitudinem & Vacuum interſuiſſe; Quod ad demonſtrationes ejus de Extenſo intimo ſpectat, recte incedunt, ſeu Solitarium ponatur, ſeu cum denſitate Conjunctum, adeoque nequicquam huc conferre videntur. Eximius Borellus non aliter Vacui nece ſſitatem aſtruere conatur ex diverſis corporum ſiguris perpenſis, quæ angulos & interſtitia implerent, atque iis porro, quæ inter ſe commotæ plenitudinem reſpuerint; Sed, quod inique ſemper accidit hujuſmodi argumentis, dum ſumma cautela poris invigilant, nequa materia ſe per illos ſurriperet, deceptis cuſtodibus aliam ſemitam ingreditur, & dimenſionibus, ſi opus fuerit, potita curioſorum oſcitantiam vel labores caſſos eludit ridetque; Unum argumentum ſui, quantum ego vidi, proprium attulit præclarus Philoſophus, in quo negat dimenſiones, quæ ſpatio Vacuo tribuantur, eſſc reales, neque eſſe niſi privationes meras; Quod ſi intellexerat vir eruditus omnes quaſcunque rationes, & præterea nihilum, ſequi & ponere rei exiſtentiam, ad quam ſemper relatio inſtituitur, neque negationem eſſe poſſe ſinc poſita quantitate, neque iſta quantitate perempta quicquam de reliqua abſolute potuiſſe affirmari, quam ratio non attigit, perſpexiſſet. Huc itaque proceſſimus, nihil firmatum ſpectatumque invenimus, Philoſophi igitur, quicunque a tergo videntur, ſinatis, inſalutati nobis diſcedant, & ad Newtonum, ex quo, ſiquo alio, ſaltem ſanum quippiam deſiderandum eſt, adeamus; In tertio Libro dilerte primo aſſerit Newtonus Vacui eſſe neceſſitatem ex differentia gravitatis Specificæ At non videt Vir celeberrimus Vacuum in Argumento eſſe probandum, Argumentum contra ſpatium pleniſſimum vel Solidiſſimum procedere, adeoque aſſumit, quod debuit oſtendere, non reperiri materiam Subtiliorem; Probatur, inquit; Nam pondera corporum non pendent ab eorum formis & texturis; Aſſentior; Ether nec prorſus gravitate deſtituitur nec quam pro quantitate materiæ ſuæ minus gravitabit; Forſan fatemur; ſed non differt ab aliis corporibus, niſi in forma materiæ, Er;soFnthymema puta; Nam vel latet propoſitio, vel elapſa eſt; Quomodo enim non differt ab aliis corporibus, niſi in forma materiæ ? Hoc modo; Non datur Sc. æther, cujus materia eſt ſubtilior, quia quamvis alia et Compoſitio, tamen materia eſt cadem in æthere, quæ in reliquis corporibus; Vel, quia eadem eſt, non erit diverſa; Præclare quidem & Argute; Verum, quanta ſit opinionum diſcrepantia intelligatis; Ex hac enim diſferentia gravitatis Specificæ probaverim Vacuum a Natura depulſum, non niſi in Scholis & Diſputationibus hoſpitari; Ut autem interea huic demonſtrationi ex ipſo ſuccenturiemus, per ſe infirmiori, ad ſecundum librum & experimenta ejus de pyxide & globorum oſcillationibus inſtituta retrahimur; Quantum, ad Pyxidem ponit reſiſtentiam ætheris ſubtiliſſimi, ſiqua ſit, debere in partibus internis pyxidis plenæ eſſe ſenſibilem, quod negamus; Nam non inde ſequetur reipſa eſſe nullam, quia ſenſum relinquit; imo a perceptiore remotiſſima eſſe oportebit, cum reſiſftentia mediorum minuatur in ratione ponderis ac denſitatis, ſubtilemque materiam a denſitate ſive craſſitie corporum horumce ponimus infinite diſtare & denſam tamen eſſe contendimus; Ex globorum oſcillationibus nihil amplius auferimus; Nam præterea ex infinita etiam acris diviſione, quoad magnitudinem Partium, ſubtilem noſtram materiam nunquam exſcul pes; quoniam aeris particulæ in æternum diminutæ ſuam ſibi denſitatem tuentur, ca quam quærimus longe craſſiorem; Duas tamen Propoſitiones aſſert Sagaciſſimus PhiIoſophus, quibus, uti autumavit, demonſtratis placuit experimenta ejus ſuperſirui, quas itaque in tranſitu perſtringemus; De propoſitione trigeſima & octava, ſi ſtatuatur globus cjus in canali ſuſpenſus cjuſdem gravitatis ſpecificx cum fluido incumbenti, nihil probat Newtonus de ſolidorum motu in fluido Subtiliſſimo, niſi ejuſdem ſecum denſitatis, quod vocat, h. e. in ſolidiſſimo- ſubtiliſſimo fluido, quod plane quid ſit fteor me non aſſequi; ſi ponatur diverſæ gravitatis ſpecificæ, vel petit Newtonus, ut nulla ſit materia, quæ in ratione ad aliam non reſiſiit, adeoque demonſtrandum reſtat, vel iſtiuſmodi materia conceſa pariter oſtendat, primo nihilum poſſe in globum cjus gravitare, deinde ex non gravitante motum Vi gravitatis impreſſum generari, & denique Actionem & Reactionem inter nihilum & quantitatem eſſe æqualem; Hæc ſi probaverit, quæ omnia pugnant, recte ejus corollaria educit, ſi minus, concidunt; Altera ejus propoſitio, quadrageſima nempe, eſt item merum ſophiſma, non enim valet, quam ponit, proportio, niſt cadem ratione ſit fluidum ſubtiliatum, qua ſolidum jus Sphæricum augeatur, augeatur, nimirum, vel in ratione magnitudinis Partium vel denſitatis ; Quid autem hinc obtinet? Corporis Sc. infinita denſitate motus amiſſus in dato fluido eſt ad motum ejus totum, ut Corporis data denſitatO motus amiſſus in fluido infinite ſubriliato ad ejus totum; vel, ut effectus dati fluidi in Sphæricum infinite denſius, ſic effectus fluidi infinite tenuioris in aliud Spæricum denſitate datum; h. æ. ut finitum ad infinitum, ſic finitum ad infinitum; Sed in magnitudine particularum, ut videtur, hæret Nevtonus, æquivoceque utitur verbo, ſubtiliatum, & quidem ubi iſtiuſmodi ſubtiliatio eſt ſimul impoſſibilis & abſurda; Verum Carteſius, contra quem diſputavit, ejuſque materia ſubtilis, in hunc errorem, ut auguror, inopinantem oppreſſumque ſtudiis Newtonum conjecit, atque ita cæteris ſummi Viri maximis meritis erit condonandus; His nititur experimentum ejus globorum oſcillantium, quibus igitur revulſis corruit & ipſum; Ex hoc tamen experimento, ſi accuratius eſſet exhibitum, demonſirationem Vacui dependere Vir magnus profitetur, quod magis mirandum eſt, qui tanto alioquin uſus eſt acumine, in tam manifeſta veritatis & clara luce cæcutiret; Hoc enim omnibus Philoſophis prædicimus, ſi experimentis Vacuum, nec ratione, orent elicere, fore ut inutilem operam navaverint, & ſe inane potius ſtudium ſuſcepiſe, quam inane inveniſſe ſpatium, fatebuntur. Poſthæc, unam tandem aut alteram probationem contra Vacuum, ex abundanti, liceat adducere; Prima ex infinita gravitatum ratione petita eſt, nam compreſſio noſtræ regionis eſt, ut pondus Atmoſphæra incumbentis, & gravitas reciproce ut quadratum diſtantiæ locorum a centro terræ, quod ſi mille, vel millies mille, ſumantur ſemidiame. tri terreſtres in altitudinem, in immenſum diminuetur gravitas, atque ergo mediorum denſitates, nunuam tamen evaneſcent, quia altitudo columnæ cum linca denſitatum Logarithmica nunquam coincidet; Neque objici poteſt vacua ubique eſſe interſtitia, neque noſiram ſoliditatem vel Actionem infinitum ſpatium replere, quoniam hæc lex obtinet in quovis puncto Mathematico dato, & noſtra ſoliditas vel Actio rationem hanc gravitatis plane deſtrueret, cum acr ex hac lege ita rarefiat ad altitudinem unius ſemidiamerri terrcſtris, ut globus, unum digitum latus, impleret omnes Planetarum regiones ad uſque Sphæram Saturni, & longe ultra, adeoque, vel materia ſubriliſſima ubique erit expanſa, vel rareſactio & condenſatio eadem. Aliud argumentum ex differentia gravitatis ſpecificæ deſumitur; E. G. in æquali mole ſuber eſt ad aurum abryzum, ut unum ad paulo plus quam octoginta & quatuor, ex hypotheſi aurem materiam omnem eſie ſimilarem, nec ſubtiliorem haberi, interſtitia vacua, ſive meatus, erunt in ratione reciproca; ergo, cum in auro abryzo, vel nulli fere meatus eompareant, vel tam minuti rarique, ut penitus ab invicem abrumpantur, in ſubere viciſſim materia, vel nulla erit ſenſibilis contra experientiam, vel ita ſparſa & poris interrupta, ut ne in contiguo ulla foret partium continuatio, quod fieri nequit, & quæcunque denique ſuerit matetiæ ſorma, hoc ſemper accidet; At fortaſſis non ita videntur vacuitates, ac ſolidæ particulæ, quamvis æque magnæ; Natura enim verecunda nolit ſe nudam ſpectari, & ſe modeſie lubducit; Atque hic plane mirabile eſt ita oſ citanter, adeo craſſe, uno ore, apertiſque oculis, hucuſque erraſſe Philoſophos, niſi quod nullo modo gravitatem ſpeciſicam explicari poſſe arbitrarentur, ſi poros & meatus abjecerint; Item per experimentum notiſſimum Florentiæ captum Aqua ex compreſſione validiſſima vix quicquam condenſatur, verum etiam per auri foramina deſudat; Nihil dicimus de partium figura, vel ordine, quæ nunquam, ut videtur, tantum renixum poſſent eſficere, ex dicta autem hypotheſi per non iniquam vacui & ſolidi ſpatii moderationem, in partibus Auri ſingulis una Vigeſima fere erit poroſa & pervia, in partibus Aquæ Reciproce; Hæc vero pars Aquæ lolida, vel ſpatio circundata eſt, vel ſpatium ipſt; Si illa ſpatio, inter expreſſionem globus ſuperſicie ſua ſaltem vigecuplo major per ſpatium trudetur vigecuplo minus, quod abſurdum eſt; ſi ſpatium ipſi, partes aquæ ad invicem accedent ex vi illata in ratione fere vigecupla abſque illo ſudore roſcido contra experimentum; In promptu eſſet & argumentum afferre ex ſonis per aerem, & in vacuo, quod vocant, Fropagatis, cum motus omnis in fluidum impactus divergit a recto tramite in ſpatia immota, pendetque a medii quadam denſitate, ſed omittimus, ne nimis longa nobis trahatur oratio, jam etiam prolixa nimis; poſſemque, ni ita eſct, eadem unæ Phyſicis argumentis defendimus, & Mathematicis etiam demonſtrare, ex Parabolocidium, Spiralium, aliarumque fizurarum proprietatibus, cademque opera, ſi orium, & vita inteBſã, noſtra ſtudia conſcquatur, perfectam, quæ enim ſpes mihi affulfit, curvarum & circuli quadraturam exhibere, cauſalque & rationes exponere, cut tot ſummi viri per rot ſæcula H h hh h h in hujuſmodi in hujuſmodi problematis fruſtra elaborarunt; Interea ex his demonſiratis fluit evidens & ge: nuina explicatio Pellucidi & Opaci, &, ni fallor, nova colorum Theoria; ex his etiam ali quatenus, quod facile eſt oſtendere, eluceſcit magnum illud Leibnitio, Torricellio, aliiſque in Philoſophia deſideratum, nempe, unde motuam cæleſtium cauſæ, an a motibus æthe ris, vel, quod perinde eſt, ab orbibus deferentibus, ſed ſluidis, oriantur, ilem mate: riæ ex nihilo creatio, gravitatio omnium partium in rerum univerſitate ad omnes; Miranda etiam illa, quæ Newtonus, Halleius, & Archimedes in Arenario, Cæterique de Angulo contactus & materiæ Subtilitate prædicavere, aliaque innumera hactenus quod ſciam, vel penitus incognita, vel comperta minus, quæ, ſi hujus eſſent temporis, currenti calamo exarentur. Duæ tantum reſtant objectiones, quibus breviter reſpondeo; Altera eſt, non concipi poſſc, quomodo materia in materia moveatur; Verum repetendum eſt, nos materiam infinite ſubtilem aſſeruiſſe, atque ita, ad daram quamlibet, rationem habere nihili; nihili aurem nulli ſunt eſfectus, ergo neque reſiſtit, neque gravitat, neque mover, nec movetur, reſpectu corporum, reipſa omnium compos; idem coram accidere videmus, corpora enim quæcunque in terra conſiſtunt in ſe mutuo gravitare deberent, cum tamen ejuſmodi gravitas neutiquam ſentiatur, quoniam gravitas hæc eſt ad gravitatem in terram, ut ſunt ad terram corpora, h. e. infinite minor; ſic ob immenſam diſtantiam Aſtronomi parallelas ducunt, ubi lineæ revera ad ſe invicem inclinentur, planetas pro punctis habent, & generatim, ea eſt lex naturæ, vel axioma potius, ut inter comparandum res agant patianturve juxta rationem, quam ad ſe mutuo tucntur, non juxta quid ſint abſolute. Altera objectio eſt, implicare videri, ut in Solido Solidum poneretur, vel, ut in idem ſpatium plura quaſi denſcntur ſpatii volumina; in idem quoad longitudinem & Latitudinem non repugnat, nam quotidie corpus cernimus extenſum in exrenſo ſpatio exiſere, cum in ſpatium ingreditur, vel antca ab ipſo non occupatum, vel ſecum tranſfert; primarii autem loci non moventur; & quid ergo prohibet, quin complicationes Spatii augeantur In infinitum? Sed nimis excurrimus, & dum de pleno pugnamus, materiæ ctiam, quam velimus, copia uberior orationi exurgit; ſi vero, quæ diceptatio tantum aliis faceſſit negotium, ſuppeditavitque meſſem adeo ingentem ſcribentium, cam intra Diſſertationem concluſimus, quod verboſiores fuerimus, vel Philoſophorum incuriæ, & heu nimiis erroribus, vel cautioni debitæ, vel argumenti huic ſaltem novitati, tribuendum judicabitis; Ut autem has Objectiones prorſus, & breviter, Diluam; Ipſe Pono Materiæ Eſſentiam in Actione, vel Vi quadam, Conſiſlere, Diverſas vero Materias Oriri ex Viribus vel Actionibus Diverſis; Nemo itaque non Agnoſcet, vel Vim ſive Actionem Majorem poſſc Minorem Subigere, adeoque in ipſa Movere, vel Majorem ſeu Minorem Vim ſive Actionem poſſe Exiſtere in eodem Spatio, adeoque Dimenſiones Muteriæ in iſto ſenſu poſſc Penetrari, vel Solidum in Solido etiam Poni. VI. De Motu, Gravitatione, & Cohæſione Materiæ, Eaque ex Immediata Dei Attione Proſiuere. MNES, qui hactenus de Cohæſione diſputarunt Philoſophi, ita in ſalebris & tanta in obſcuritate rerum implicati fuerunt, ut ſuæ potius ignorationi involucrum prætendere, quod naturæ eſſet detrahendum, quam quippiam ſanum ſpectatumque velle afferre videantur; alii quietem, alii partium ſubriliorum preſſionem, denſitatem alii confirmant efficere, ut cohæreat materia, ſed nec deſunt, qui ramulis, & neſcio quibus uncis ſalibuſque, navarunt patrocinium, quorum omnium, ſi fuerit opus, facilis eſſet diſſolutio, cum vel rem quæſitam expedire ſatagunt inepta verborum colluſione, vel inani per immenſam materiam indagine, donec tandem defeſſi id ſolum aſſequuntur, ut corum perſequendi induſtriam magis, quam felicitatem inveſtigandi, fateamur; qui, dum removent tantum diſficultatem, non diluunt, perſiciunt quidem, ut ca longinquitate proſpectus ſenſibus minuatur, infinita aurem quæſtione cumuletur rationi. Nec phyſicas ſedes cauſaſque motus & gravitationis lautius aperuiſſe judicantur; Præclare Nevtonus, qui Philoſophus ſit inſtar omnium, Virium quantitates & rationes ex quibuſdam poſitis conditionibus demonſtravit, ſpecies carundem & qualitates non attigit; imo deſcrte aſſerit cauſas nondum eſſc cognitas, quibus corporum particulæ ſibi invicem ttm adhæreſcant, vel ab ſe invicem recedant, Deſperatam tamen èſe inquiſitionem non putat; in eandem ſententiam profitetur item Vir alius rei philoſophicæ haudquaquam imperitus, Vires, inquit, illæ, & Univerſalis in natura efficacia, per omnia lucent, cognitionem vero noſiram adhuc refugiunt; Itaque omnibus, quas cætera Philoſophantium turba adhibuerunt, explicationibus prætermiſſis; Imprimis Legem hanc Pono Naturæ; Unionis, ſive iſtius Proximitatis, qua res maximam, quæ dari poſſet, eſſentiarum conjunctionem obtinent, paſſiones cum actionibus eſſe reciprocas & æquales in unitis, ſuiſque tandem naturis conſentancas. Si minus, vel non erit intima, quæ fieri poſſit, eſſentiarum conjunctio, contra Hypotheſin, vel actiones pariter cum eſſentiis ſunt contumaces, immotæ, & incommunicabiles, h. æ. ſibi ipſis renituntur, vel acdtio non eſt actio; æquales autem & reciprocæ ſunt, quantum enim altera recipit eſſentia, deperit alteri; cum experientia porro hæc lex ad amuſſim quadrat, hinc enim dependet Lex tertia Newtoni, quam ut ipſe ex multis conſcctariis, quæ in Mechanica demonſtratis conveniebant & velificabantur, comprobavit, ita & noſtra ex eo ſtabilitur, quod & illa inde conſequitur atque omnia cjus corollaria, quæ licet ad materiam ſpectent, tamen couſque ſolummodo, in quantum eſt activa, nam quoad ſuam naturam abſtractam, nec premit nec reprimit, ſi nulla enim eſt actio, paſſio intercidit, & vice verſa; neque atrinet in quibus ſubjectis actio inhæreat, cum eſſentiæ materiales, quod æque nequeant cum invicem cOmmunicari, perinde actiones a ſeipſis arceant, atque diverſiſſimæ quævis e. ę. cogitantes & extenſæ; hinc itaque præterea in Unione Cogitantis cum Extenſo, incommunicabiles ſunt eſſentiæ, actiones vero reciprocæ non item, ſed plane neceſſariæ; unde profluit animi cum corpore Sympathiæ Iuculenta explicatio, languente enim & laſſato corpore ſlacceſſit & defatigatur animus, & viciſſim; hinc animi etiam poſt mortem exiſtentia, phreneſis, paſſiones, Ideæ perceptionis, motus porro forſan cordis, & multa ejuſmodi poſſent derivari. Ergo ex hac lege jam confirmata Deus, ſive Mens Infinita, quia res cogitans eſt ſua natura activa, quia neceſſario cum ſpatio conjuncta ſt infinito, nam ubique exiſtit, vel ſaltem vis mentis infinitæ erit eriam infinita, ubicunque exiſtit, & nihil poteſt intercedere inter iſtam exiſtentiam & ſpatium, quod unionem prohibeat, hinc, inquam, Deus in ſpatium ex neceſſitate ſuæ naturæ agit; verum actio hæc non motum producet, motus enim actualis eſſe nequit, quoniam immobile cum infinito ſpatio reciprocatur, ergo erit Preſſio; Tandemque proponimus, Preſſionem ſaltem eſſe æquabilem, neceſſariam, per omne ſpatium diffuſam, & ad omnes partes circumcirca æqualiter vergentem. Item Pono pro Naturæ Lege; Partes omni data minores cum omni data majoribus, ſeu cum infiniteſimis, quas vocant, Infinitas earundem, omneſque terminos intermedios, vinculo communi quodam inter ſe contineri, atque invicem ſe neceſſario concludere ita ut data Infiniteſima Infinitas etiam habeatur, omneſque gradus ſparſi per infinitatem; quod prorſus Axioma eſt; Natura in nihilum non abit, niſi vi velut coacta & quaſi de exiſtentia ingenti molimine & pedetentim depulſa, non ad infinitum ſcandit per ſaltus, ſed multa ſerie tardaque progre ſſione emenſa & exhauſta; Infinitum eſt unum in ſe, ut ſi ponatur infinitas ad intus, quam appellant, ſimul conſtituetur illa, quæ ad extra audit, nam termini ſunt reciproci, nec ſejungi poſſunt; unde pateſcir, cum ſit natura infinite tenuis, h. æ. craſſitudinis infinite parvæ, ſpatium intimum dico, quæ, neceſſario exiſtit, neceſſitatem item colligi naturæ Solidiſſimæ vel infinite craſſæ, ita ut non magis ſit neceſlaria continuitas ſpatii ex infiniteſimis extenſionis, quam ex craſſitudinis infiniteſimis denſitas, nempe alicubi, nam ad infinitatem hujuſmodi non neceſſe eſt, ut per omne ſpatium extendatur; vel inverſa probatione, dico ſoliditatem vel Spiſſiorem Actionem eſſe infinitam ejuſdem ſpatii, vel Tenuioris Actionis, repetitionem. Si negetur, ſit ſpatium cum corpore, quod ſemper extenſum eſt in codem loco quo exiſtit, commenſurabile, ita ut utriuſque detur communis menſura, cujus vel eadem erit repetitio vel diverſa; ſi eadem, corpus & ſpatium idem erunt, quod repugnat; ſi diverſa, non poteſt finita eſſe in corpore, modo minima, quæ poſſit, adhibeatur communis menſura, quia ſpatium eſt infinite diviſibile de proſunditate, ergo eſt infinite in materia repetitum, ſic ut nulla diviſione conficiatur; e. g. concipiamus ſpatium abſi que omni profunditate ſua ſolummodo extenſione æquare dimenſionem corporis in ipſo exiſtentis, nempe exponatur globus materiæ, cujus diameter ſit unius pedis vel unciæ, nam cadem valet argumentatio, ſi ſumantur globi quantumvis parvi, vel etiam maximi, huic autem æqualis ſtatuatur globus ſpatii in quo corpus firmatur & recumbit; Si hæc eſet ultima ſpatii diviſio, ita ut interior adhuc extenſio concipi nequiH h h hh ha tet; ret, vel, uti jam diximus, corpus & ſpatium ſunt æquivoca, vel datur ſoliditas, quæ lu ſpatio non exiſtir, vel infinita eſt extenſio quoad proſunditatem. At vero porro atten tius rem perpendenti neceſſitas Soliditatis in ſpatio infinito innoteſcit ex ipſa natura in finitatis;3 ſi enim ſpatium aliqua ex parte determinaretur, adeo ut minima habira eſſt tenuitas, ultra quam progredi ſit neſas, infinitas ejus perimitur & evaneſcit, ſed hæc in finitas eſt ipſa materia, quoniam res Inſinitas ſibi ex adverſo extenſas coexiſtere repugnat, ſi vero infinita ſit ſoliditas, quoad ſpatii multiplicationem, ſive Actio, eſt, ſua natura, indiviſibilis, immota, atque æterna, ſpatii Aſſectio; Hinc extenſum datur in extenſo ſine fine; & Mathematicorum poteſtates Biquadraticæ, Cubo cubicæ, & cæteræ quævis altiſſmæ, quas abſiractas exiſtimarunt, in natura reperiuntur, & materia ſubtilis, licet non Carteſiana; Item datur in natura plenum, item differentia gravitatum ſpecificarum ſine vacuis Interſtitiiscontra Newtonum; Ex his, autem, quæ ſupra poſuimus, ſequitur primo, de qua quærimus, dari materiæ cohæſionem a Dei Actione neceſſariam; deinde id quod Acutiſſinus Newtonus magno propoſitionum apparatu oſtendit, Gravitationem eſſe omnium materiæ partium ad omnes, eamque eſſe quantitati materiæ proportionalem; nam per legem primam Preſſio ubique eſt æqualis ſpatii intimi ad omnes plagas quaquaverſum, & per ſecundam habetur ſoliditas vel Actio ſive materia ex infinita vi preſſionum cjuſmodi æqualium, ergo conſtat Gravitatio propoſita; ca vero etiam permanens eſt & neceſſaria rerum aſfectio ex ĩis quæ dicta ſunt; Hinc autem porro liquet materiam, ſi ſolitaria eſſer. in ſpatio fore ſuſpenſam, perpetuo ad omnes partes conatu incitatam, ablque ullo tamen abſoluto motu. Si vero jam plures materiæ portiones in ſe invicem agerent, minores quantitates in eam partem, qua fit Preſſio ex majoribus, minus reprimunt, atque ita fortiori Preſſioni ſuccumbant neceſe eſſ, unde oritur motus; magnitudines item corporum eodem modo inter ſe diſcrepant, quo partes ſpatii, quæ, licet ad magnum infinitum pertincant, adeoque nec moveri queant nec dividi, tamen quatenus ſunt partes definitæ utrumque patiuntur; Interea, nec motuum orbitas, nec gravitationum proportiones, nec diverſas leges, quibus materia jam formata ſecundum varias ſuas ſiguras vel preſſiones, cohærere poſſit, vel fluere diſoluta, in præſenti non expendimus; quamvis ex multimoda harumce Preſſionum compoſitione, tum Phænomena cæleſtium revolutionum velocitateſque, tum torius fere terreſtris ſyſtematis natura, quod ad figuras & concretiones partium ſpectat, vix dubitem, quin poſient derivari; Multa ſunt, quæ nuda aſſumptione ex præmiſſis facile eſ=et educere; nullam Sc. dari in Natura attractionem, Vim autem Centri;etam Newtoni eſie revera Vim Centrifugam, vel ab aliis corporibus Vim impactam, rationes tamen utriuſque eſſe eaſdem; item æſtus marium neque ex ſolis & Lunæ conjunctis tantum viribus, neque ex acceſſu vel receſſũ Iuminarium, ſed ex diverſa combinatione Preſſionum omnium in Univerſo, ex ſitu & locis differentibus; Vim ſorſan porro Magneticam majorem eſſe differentia inter Preſſiones omnes Univerſt & Repreſſionem terræ, unde innoteſceret ratio ſoliditatis vel Actionis ejus; ſed hiſce non immoramur. Quod reliquum eſt, ne Quis hæc ita adduci putet, quaſi id mihi ſumam, ut Deus nihil ſua voluntate atque arbitrio in rerum univerſitate exequatur, iniquum enim eſt & perabſurdum, qui tantam molem, etiam infinitam, neceſſaria cogitatione, & velut aliud agens, exerceat, agitet, permoveat, illum nequicquam poſc conſilio & ratione adminiſtrare, cum nos ipſi quidem, ſummi Archetypi miſcra exemplaria, mentis vi ſola noſtrum puſillum mundum vivificantes, & injurias defendere, & adjumenta afferre, aliiſque etiam rebus ſuccurrere & adeſſe, non neceſſario neque inviti, ſed volentes & conſulto, poſſimus. Hæc a me Scripta fuerunt, cum Newtoni Gravitationem reputarem eſſc omnium Rerum Principium, neque quicquam fere jam etiam Corrigo, niſi quod Aſeram Preſſionem non forſan eſe æquabilem per Totam Rerum Compagem, nec Materiam eſſe Similarem, vel Proportionalem ipſius Ponderi; Quæ Sententia Celeberrima, Originem ducit, uti omnis, ut fertur, Cognitio noſtra, a Pomo; id quod Accepi ab Ingenioſiſſimo & Doctiſſimo Viro, pariter ac Optimo, mihi autem Amiciſſimo, Martino Foltes Armigero, Regiæ vero Societatis Socio Meritiſlimo; Quem hic Honoris Cauſa Nomino. VII. Df VII. De Rationibus Geometricis, Eaſque Animo perinde Competere, qua Percipienti, ac Materiæ, qua Extenſæ. IRARI Subit inter tot celeberrimos viros & naturæ indagatores, quos hæc nupera præcipue, uti antiquioris etiam ævi, umbratilis Philoſophia tulit acerrimos, ne unum extitiſie, qui, cum rationes Geometricæ tam late pateſcerent, eas fuerit aggreſſus materiæ ab anguſtiis eripere, & quæ corporum ſuperficiebus tam diu innatarunt, in animum capacem ſaltem largumque diffuſas, in ſuam veram & propriam vindicare Libertatem; Fuere, qui ſibi fincerunt Deum ſemper Geometrizantem, quando tamen exiſtimabant res omni ratione carentes juxta ſummam conditas fuiſſe & perfectas, iis, quæ maxima erant præditæ, nullam magnopere vellent accidere, vel minima adminiſtrari; At vero profecto, quorum contentioſæ & petulantes diſpurationes ita animum & intellectum in clamorem ſtrepitumque diſſiparunt, ut ex Geometria Arithmeticam etiam eliminarent, ab iſtiuſmodi hominibus nequicquam eſſet ſperandum, qui adeo propinquam cognatamque ſcientiam a ſodalitate rejecerint, aſcituros alicnam; quomodo autem ii, qui in tantum hiſce ſæculis, non ita pridem elapſis, Analyticam doctrinam excoluerunt promoveruntque, & intra limites rationum incluſere tam diverſam diſperſamque materiam, cogitationem & animum præterirent, vix ſatis intelligi poteſt: Quod igitur vel ab aliis relictum, vel perſpectum minus, vel non attentatum deſperatumque accepimus, ſi aut noſtra voluntas aſequetur, aut exſculpet induſiria, cum nihil eſſe queat optatius, quid magis, aut quonam potius, ſive rerum optimarum cognitioni, ſive PhiIoſophorum ſtudiis, vel Religioni veritatique, adjumentum gratulemur? Scd objiciet quiſpiam nobis in hanc deſenſionem ingreſuris, apertiſſimis eam nugis impeditam & ineptiis ſeipſam convellere. Quibuſnam enim fidem facere nos poſſe arbitramur, animum cjuſque affectiones, quo nihil reperias ſimplicius, in lineas & figuras iturum, & in quadrata velle arcaſque dimitti? Imprimis itaque reponimus infinitam eſſe rem, quæ immane quantum ab extenſione atque adeo a figura abeſt, cujus rationes ad figuram poſſint revocari. Quæſitam ſaltem, ſi minus conſequamur, noſtræ diſputationi brevitatem tranſiliamus, ſi, omnia percurrendo, conemur oſtendere, preſſionem, denſitatem, tempus, velocitatemque, quorum proportiones lineis & angulis veſtitas dedit Newtonus, extenſione vacare; Vis Centripeta autem ita eſt non extenſa, ut neque Animus magis ſpatium reſpuere videatur; ſi enim quocunque demum modo ſpatium multiplices, comminuas, aut commutes, quid inde ex paſſione mera ad attionem conferetur? quoad rationem tamen patitur, capit etiam figuram; Exempla abunde ex Newtono ſi eſſent opus, excerperen tur; & quidem generatim, quod fit in ſectionibus Conicis, poſtquam debitas proportionales obtinuerint Mathematici, abſciſſam nempe rectumque latus, ut & ſegmenta diametri in Circulo, figuras abjiciunt, ſic quarumcunque virium vel quantitatum proportiones ſi nec vires ipſas nec quantitates poſſis, in lineas & figuras licet cumulare, quoniam rationes quædam poſſunt inveniri utriuſque communes. Verum, quid perinde ab extenſione abhorret, atque ipſa non extenſio, quæ niſi recedat, neque iſta prodit? hæc tamen figuris, ſi Walliſium audiamus, poreſt accommodari, & proſecto nullus dubitem, quæ radix impoſſibilis vel falſa in Algebra nuncupatur, quin eam aiquando conſtiterit mediam proportionalem in Geometria agnoſcere. Deinde Reſpondemus extenſioni atque ipſis figuris menſuram rationemque compercre, non quia vel ſunt extenſio vel ſiguræ ſed quoniam aliæ ad alias referri poſunt & cum ſe invicem comparari; e. g. quantitates ſpeciebus deſignatæ, quod eleganti demonſtratione comprobavit Florimondus de Beaune, in cadem, qua ratione corpora & ſpatia, exprimunt etiam lincas, adeoque comparationes in Matheſi ſolæ expenduntur, neque vel lineæ vel ſpatia ingrediuntur in computum, qui idem manct in tam diverſo, qui fieri poteſt, quantitatum tenore; porro enim notationes Algebraicæ non cum ſiguris quadrant, quaſi neceſario, ſed ſortuito tantum, & quod figuræ ĩis legibus ſummittuntur, quas iſtæ rationes inferunt & apportant, cum interea ita ron valeat ſubjectum cui adjungantur, ut neque dubitaret Franciſcus Van Schooten in reſolutione Problematis, quam artificioſiſlimam vocar, demonſtrationem compingere, ubi quantitates, quas in eam accivit, eſſ'nt omnes incognitæ, & rationes ſolummodo poſitioque innoteſcerent; quod idem perfecit Carteſius in quæſtione Pappi de locis planis, quæ appellant, & Solidis, aliique paſſim Marhematici; ſexcenta ſexcentæ vero item ſunt poteſtates, quæ nulla conſtructione hactenus inventa poſſun ad figuram & lineas aptari, nam ultra quartam neque proceſſit Bakerus, ſuperiores auten non minus rationes Geometricas patiuntur; De angulis contactus & infinite incom menſurabilibus miranda prædicantur, iſti, quos Peletarius & poſt cum Walliſius nòr eſſe extenſos contra Clavium & Leotaudum defenderunt, ex Leibnitiano differential calculo & Speciatim a Newtono probantur infinitas angulorum ſeries inter poſierio res quoſque admittere; quoad incommenſurabiles, quid habet iſta incommen ſurabilita: cum extenſione commune? datur tamen Arithmetica ſurdarum, nec rationes ideo e vaneſcunt, quia minus figuratæ. Verum de rationibus diſputatum eſt ſatis, & eas ex ſervitute duriſque materiæ vinculis in præclariorem patentioremque animi totiuſque naturæ provinciam, uti ſpes eſt, eduximus; Omnino tamen fatendum eſt, etiamſi rationes haſce jure optimo a materia & extenſione abſtraheremus, eas, niſi cum ipſo conve-  niant, in animum non recte derivari; nihil autem quod ſciam, ita pertinaciter hiſce relationibus negarunt eruditi, ac ſoliditatem & perceptionem; de ſoliditate in Scholis non ſemel diſputavimus, & oſtendere conati ſumus cam Matheſeus poſe legibus obtemperare, jam etiam aggreſſi perceptionem, quibus ſirmatis & conſtitutis, illud glorioſum vgæa Marhematicis non equidem invideo, miror magis, cum poſthæc, ſi non vana eſt fides, nihil reliquum videatur, quo minus univerſa natura, evoluta, eruta, exuta ex latebris, ante conſpectum, ob ora atque oculos, poſita ſit, appareat, verſctur, niſi otium & penitior Geometriæ & theorematum in ſingulis caſibus inveniendorim ſcientia; quod nollem putetis hoc a me ita eſe dictum, quaſi quidvis ſolertiæ meæ attribuendum exiſtimarem, neque audeam dicere felicitati plurimum; quid enim, quod inveſtigandum reſtat, non amplectimur? quid non ſectamur, diſpicimus? quid, Dii boni, aliud agimus, at quam non aſſequimur? Interea non poſſumus non mirari Viros Analyticæ peritos nihil de animo ſanum demonſtratumque literatis propinaſſe, cum neque rationem ineptia, ut ex prædictis patet, neque Animi ſimplicitas ex iis, quæ ſumus dicturi, vel religionem ullam, quæ prohibeat, injicere poſſe videretur. Hic itaque tenendum oportet, naturas omnes eſſe reipſa ſimpliciſſimas, nec forſan tam abſtractæ, quam reales & veræ, haberi debebunt, ipſa extenſio non augetur nec diminui poteſt, neque ipſa perceptio, adeoque has naturas neglexerunt Mathematici, id vero attulit mens noſtra finita, ut nihil concipiamus, niſi terminis quibuſdam finibuſque concluſum, quorum ad invicem relatio rationes & ſcientiam proportionalem in mundum produxit, & in tantos evexit tamque ſtupendos veritatis incredibileſque progreſſus; Imo & porro, ſi quælibet finita extenſio vel perceptio cum ſe ſolum comparetur, eſt item ſimpliciſſima, neque compoſita dici poteſt, niſi ad partes ſive ad minores quaſdam quantitates relatio habeatur; Verum etiam in maxima rerum & animi ignoratione, ſi neſciamus animi naturam, an ſimplex ſit, an ex partibus conflata, ratiocinationes inſtituere ex hypotheſi licet, quæ quamvis minus indicarent, quomodo crearetur natura, quomodo creari poſſet, commonſtrant; & quidem non raro, quod videre eſt in fluidis Newtoni, adeo quadrant corollaria cum Phænomenis phyſicis, ut perditiſſimæ fere eſſet dementi? & pervicaciæ plane inſipientis, ſt aſenſum abſtincamus, quo minus omnia explicari ſecundum ipſiſimas naturæ vires & indolem fateremur. Matheſeas hujus hypotheticæ in animo unum aut alterum exemplum adducere ſufficiat, tum de mentis ſyſtemate abſtra*to, tum qua corpori adhæreſcit; Per facultatis autem perceptivæ Intenſionem exprimere velim, qua datis conditionibus certa quælibet perceptio in animum poteſt evocari, adeoque omnes actuales perceptiones potentia complectitur & in co, quo gradu, in mentem imprimuntur, per Intenſionem vero perceptionis, ipſam perceptionis quantitatem; Jam dico, ſi intellectus in dignitate quavis e. g. duplicata, triplicata, ſubduplicata, ſubtriplicata intenſionum perceptionis, dato tempore quoquo modo augeantur, ducanturque in tempora reciproce proportionalia, erunt æquales; & viciſſim, ſi æquaIes intellectus oriuntur ex iſtiuſmodi multiplicatione, datis temporibus intenſiones innoteſcunt; facilis eſt demonſtratio; item, iiſdem poſitis de incremento intellectuum, ſi quocunque modo intenſiones perceptionis reciproce majores evadant ducanturque intelIectus in tempora æqualia, erunt etiam æquales; Ex his ſequitur ætate provectiores, licet craſſiori ingenio, intelligentiores ſunt, quam minus adulti, ſi tamen verſatiles magis & fortiori indole; hinc & dari poſſunt caſus, ubi juvenes porro natu majoribus intelligentia præſtent; hinc itidem ex coœtaneis Ephorum prætuleris Theopompo, & committi poteſt, ut cujus pinguior Mincrva calcaris indigeat currentem præverteret; ſin aliter ſuerint proportiones inſtituræ, ſict, ut omnia ſere, quæ ſunt tum inter hominum, tum brutorum & animalium De Rationibus Geometricis ad Animum Applicandis. malium intellectus, diſcrimina, diverſæ rationes, variique gradus, quos ad ſe invicem obtinent, definirentur; Hæc faciliora ſunt & minoris moliminis. Exempla, quoad animus cum corpore ſit conjunctus, ſunto hujuſmodi; Si vires animi motrices ſint in n tione æqualitatis cum Intenſionibus perceptivæ facultatis, inſtrumenta vero corporis in quæ animus exercetur de reſiſlentia in eadem ratione, perceptio erit, ut facultas perceptiva; Quod ſi fuerint reſiſtentiæ in ratione quavis inæqualitatis, ſunt perceptiones, ut Reſiſtentiæ ab intenſionibus perceptivæ facultatis ſubductæ, pro quantitate perempta ſumpta ſemper æquali poſitiva, ſi reſiſientia major ſit intenſione, ſt minor vel nulla, ſuppar erit perceptionum ratio; e contra, ſi actiones fucrint in ratione æqualitatis cum Intenſionibus, perceptiones item ſunt in eadem ratione, ſi in ratione inæqualitatis, perceptiones ſunt ut Intenſiones ab Actionibus ſubductæ: pro quantitate autem perempta ſumpta æquali poſitiva, ſt Actio major ſit intenſione, ſi minor vel nulla, ſuppar erit perceptionum ratio; Ex his conſequitur, dari poſſc perceptionis facultatem, ubi nulla ſit actualis perceptio, vel actualem cogitationem non eſſe de eſſentia animi; item fieri poſe, ut perceptio in animo eliciatur abſque interventu materiæ; & ſi corpore animus poſt mortem diſtrahatur, quod neceſſe eſt, eo erit vivacior, quo craſſiora corporis inſtrumenta abjeerit, atque ſimul paſſionibus, cæteris paribus, magis immunis; e contra, fieri poſſe, ut brutorum animi intereant; in actuali autem perceptione, vel præterpropter æqualem, vel minorem, ſemper eſe reſitentiam quam Vim animi Intenſivam, atque adeo minus ſyſtema corporeum in genere naturam debere minori perceptionis facultati adjungere, unde animalcula minus percipiunt; Quo præterea magis torpore animus laborat, eo eſſe craſſiores ſpiritus animales, vel facultas erit animi debilior; Hinc etiam ſequitur, Muſculos nullum ſibi proprium motum habere, quod Borellus putavit, in magniſico ſuo opere Poſthumo de motu animalium, in quod moribundus Aurhor divinam, quam animam efflavit, inſpiraſe videatur; item de humana mente judicandum eſſe ſccundum id cujus eſt capax, non ſecundum id quod ſit, & quamvis homines forſan inveniantur, quos ne brutis præſiare affirmaveris, non inde ſequitur reipſa & in ſua natura non brutis illos præcellere; porro contra Lockium identitatem perſonæ non in conſcientia, ſcd perceptionis intenſione conſiſtere; hinc denique patet, cur ingenii tarditas plerumque intellectus gravitatc & pondere compenſatur; cur Lethargia alii tenentur; cur ex nimio cibo ſopor animum invaſerit; inſania, voluptas, cruciatus, ſomnus, deliquium, cæteræque animi aſfectiones omnes fere, quas experimur, hinc liquido conſtant, totaque animata natura; Adeoque, ſi nullum aliud argumentum ſuppeteret, quo probetur animi Matheſis, ſat eſſet, poſita ejuſmodi Matheſi, tot, tamque varia ſenſatæ naturæ phænomena reſte explicari; Quid autem aliud fit in Mathematicis Philoſophiæ principiis Clariſſſmi Newtoni? Quid porro in demonſtrationibus Extenſionis? Omnes nempe Geometræ in hac via inſiſtunt ut ex quibuſdam poſitis, quid deinde conſequeretur, oſtendant, an hypotheſes veræ ſint, necne, parum ſolliciti. Verum nihil etiam magis ſentimus neque in ipſa extenſione, quam quantitatem in animis & perceptione exiſtere; præterquam enim quod quotidie videmus, homines ĩiſdem fere vitæ inſtitutis præceptiſque utentes, atque pueros admodum, ingenio nimium quantum diſcrepare, cujus nulla reddi poreſt ratio, niſi quod ira ſint nati; bruta adeo ab hominibus diſtant & alia quædam animantia a brutis, ut non ipſa corpora ſenſu carentia perſectius cernantur & verius magnitudine & mole a ſe invicem abeſle, quam perceptione & animis iſta; Speciatim autem de perceptione, nemo non novit Muſicam ad Matheſin pertinere; Quid vero ſunt ſoni, niſi perceptiones, adeoque quantitatem accipiunt? Nam æ. g. eadem chorda æquabilis & æqualiter tenſa ſonos edit Longitudinibus reciproce proportionales, ſed perceptiones ſunt ut ſoni, ergo chorda, ſic tenſa, perceptiones in hoc caſu producit Longitudinibus reciproce proportionales; Cætertum, ne ſuppullulanti Orationi concedamus, hic tandem modum ponimus, atque ex iis, quæ prædiximus, Aſlcro Rationes Geometricas etiam Animo, qua percipienti, competere, & æque dari poſſc Pſychcometriæ, ac Geometriæ, Elementa. VII. Medi VIII. Medicinæ Collaudatio, five Oratio Habita ante primam Amiciſſimi mihi Viri Thomæ Hewett A. M. Diſputationem pro Gradu Doſſoratus in Medicina, Jun. 23. 1707. UANTO in Honore ſtetit inter cæteras ingenuas Artes Medicina, quanta benevolentia, quo ſtudio, quam ingenti plauſu, omnes Gentes, Sæcula, Virorumque tunct ſigillatim Ordines hanc palmariam Scientiam proſecuti ſunt & amplexi, Veſtrum Neminem, Academici, latet, qui illam tantis, neque imprudentes neque inſcii, tamque amplis Dignitatibus exornaſtis; /Eſculapium inter Deos Anriqui retulerunt, nec tam propter radios lucemque, quam propter Virtutes Medicas, Veneramur Apollinem; Vos autem, dum iſtam inanem futilemque gloriam indignam eſſe, quam conſerrent Sapientes, judicatis, certiſſima eos condecoraſtis laude, cum non Diis, verum Maximis Hominibus, Veſiros Eſculapios velitis annumerari; Maximis inquam, quibus enim Animi facultatibus, qua ingenii vi & acumine, quo rationis momento & gravitate, quibus & ipſi brutis præſtant, cæteris Hominibus præcellitis, ĩiſdem, quos ad hunc Ampliſſimum Gradum evocatis, Vobiſmetipſis prætuliſtis; Neque eſt, quod miremur Medicos tantam omni ævo nactos fuiſle Dignitatem; Qui enim ſunt illis, vel ſumma Indole vel Eruditione omnimoda, vel quolibet genere Laudis præſtantiores? Philoſophiam, Matheſin, aliaſque optimarum Artium Diſciplinas, ſ modo ſeorſim extiterint, impenſe admiramur, in Medicina autem ſolum conjunctas non perinde ſuſpicimus, ac ſtupemus, ita ut videatur quaſi Natura velle ſuum Numen aſfirmare, cum ſui ſtudioſos tam Divina, & velut infinita certa quadam, cognitione remunerarit; Quæcunque, Terra ſuffecerit Mortalibus, promiſerint Sylvæ, generarint Fluvii, Fodinæ etiam ſuppeditarint, Omnia ſunt perſpecta huic Scientiarum Magiſtræ & penitus explorata, Quæ non ſatis eſſe Gloriæ ſuæ ducit has ſuperas Regiones incredibili & ſingulari Virtute ſibi eſſe perdomitas ſubjectaſque, niſi, quod pocræ de Hercule illo perhibent. in ipſius Erebi ſauces Plutoniſque Regna aſſerat Victoriam; Neque minus callet Animalium Naturam, mirandamque compagem, quam cum Deus efformarit ſuo ſolius Numine, ipſa ſecundos ſibi vendicat honores, dum poreſt conſervare. Quid tamen minuta hæc & exilia, ſi cum aliis conferantur, commemoremus? Non enim in Agris & Sylvis, in Fluminibus, in Terræ Animantiumque Viſceribus Rimandis verſatur præſertim Medicina; Aggreditur porro ad Maximarum rerum ſcientiam, ſi quidem Animi & Corporis ingenium ſit dignum, quod cognoſcatur; Id vero adeo probe ſibi inveſtigatum, omnibuſque numeris intellectum habet, ut in illud ſingulos Nervos intendi, in eo ſolum deſudari, merito arbitraremini, cum ad alia reſpiciatis, ex ĩis tantum integram ſuam Laudem nihilominus Gloriamque requirere; At quid majus dici poteſt de Medica Arte, quam cum Deus ipſe ſummam Poteſtatem Sapientiamque demonſtret in Mortalibus ab interitu Vindicandis, Medicina etiam ad Deum ipſum prope accedat liſdem ſalutem tribuendo. Hanc præclariſſimam ſcientiam, Doctiſſime Vir, hodierno Die proſiteris, quem redditum tandem tuis, ac reſtitutum Academiæ huic, ex Animo gratulamur; Non enim recepiſtiss Academici, Virum leviter hiſce re bus imbutum, aut in earum cortice, vel primo limine, hærentem, ſed Medicum Ingenio perfectum, Induſiria elaboratum, atque omni, cum Doctrina, tum etiam accurata experientia, maximaque ſolertia, inſtructum & abſolutum. Nihil itaque amplius addam, ſi prius monuero, ut te fortiter erigas & accingas, ad defendendam imprimis tuam ipſius opinionem Argumentis, deinde ad ſummi Proſeſoris tela pro Virili retorquenda: Et, quam famam plurimam, Ingenioſiſſime Vir, ex Remediis adhibendis apud Londinen ſes tuos jure reportaſti, eandem utinam ex propugnandis aſſerendiſque etiam apnd hoſce graviſſimos Viros impræſentiarum Conſequarel XCellæ IX. Collaudatio JurisCivilis, ſive Oratio habita in Scholis Baccalaureorum Cantabrigiæ Jun. 25. 1707. cum Thomas Paske A. M. Vir mihi Aniciſſimus diſputavit primo pro Gradu Doſtoratus in Jure-Civili. UM tot Videam hiſce in Jure-Civili exercitationibus Viros celeberrimos & ſpectatiſſimos vacare, Locum autem hunc Muſis jucundiſſimum amiciſſmumque adeo frequenti & ingenua Literatorum Juvenum turba decoratum, recreatur mihi pauIum Animus ac reſicitur, Dolenti Vices tam præclaræ atque admirandæ ſcientiæ; Quis enim, niſi fuerit Reipublicæ imprudens penitus, ignaruſque vitæ communis, & ab omni fori judiciorumque ratione alienus, Quis, inquam, Mortalium non perſpicit, nec ſine aliqua Commiſeratione, tam Veterem Laudatamque Diſciplinam jam tandem, cum apud cunctas fere Gentes ac Societates viguerit, apud Anglos obſoleſcere? Nonne cernimus ubique, municipia, civitates, provincias univerſas, aliis Hodiernis, Lautis quidem & Sapientiſſimis, Legibus regi palam ac gubernari; Nulla non tribunalia occupata ſunt, arrepta, obſeſſa a Viris, licet optimis & doctis, tamen ſuarum ſolummodo forſan Popularium Inſtitutionum peritis, quorum nonnulli minus Modeſti, & in has Scholas, mediusſidius, veſtraſque Eruditas lites, tuamque porro, Digniſſime vir, ĩlluſtrem Cathedram, neſcio an invaderent, niſi harumſce rerum ſua ipſorum Inſcitia, hujus autem Loci Auctoritas, tamque venerandi Cœtus gravitas & exiſtimatio, prohiberent; Rejecta itaque & deturbata a Reipublicæ Gubernaculis, eliminata foro, judiciis exterminata, omni demum patrocinio exuta Dignitatiſque ornamentis, velut Aſtræa quædam, non ficta illa, ſed vera, ex hominum conſortio exacta, ad vos tandem Juris-Civilis Prudentia confugit, imploratque veſtram opem & fidem, ut, de cæteris ſuis Hoſpitiis detruſa & depulſa, hic ſaltem Sedem ſtabilem, certumque in ſcram poſteritatem Domicilium, conſequatur; Hic ſemper Romana Lex floreat inter Optimas Artes, & quæ oIim Maxima cum Gloria per totum Terrarum orbem dominata eſt, Gentes vero Populoſque conſtituit ſumma cum æquitate, & in ipſos Reges nobile ſplendidumque propagavit imperium, ſinite, plurima jam confecta ætate, innumeris Laboribus perfuncta, feſſa denique quaſi & laſſata rebus adminiſtrandis, apud vos tandem otio non indecoro deliteſcat; At quis interca tam glorioſam, tantam, tamque potentem rerum Dominatricem has in anguſtias redigi ſatis mirari poteſt, aut dolere redactam? Cui tamen hac ipſa ex ſua humilitate maxime cedet in Gloriam, quod, cum Romani populi Decus, & Robur, quo nihil unquam extitit pulchrius aut præſtabilius, ex rebus humanis exceſſerit, Juſitia ejus & Prudentia Civilis hodiernum uſque ad Diem etiam fuerit ſuperſtes; ũnde colligere licer, quanta Vis inſit in Romanis Legibus, cum Romana arma, potentiamque, ſuperarit; Dii boni, quam tuam, Divina Roma, providentiam, ſcveritatem, ſapientiamque ſingularem, in Statutis ſanciendis, conficiendiſque Legibus, haud aſſequimur Omnia tibi ſunt ſummo jure, ſammaque Religione, cauta & proviſa; Nihil non, inſtituto Præclarum, ordine Venuſtum, oratione Eximium, nec minus ad aliorum Licentiam comprimendam, quam ad tuam ipſius Abſtinentiam, egregiamque Modeſtiam, explicandam Accommodatum; ita, ut vix dici queat, an magis fuerit Conſentaneum iſta tua Decreta alios amplecti, vel iſta te aliis imperare Magnificum; infra quorum ſplendorem dignitatemque tanto magis in ferendis ſuis cæteræ Gentes conciderunt, quanto minus poſcnt ad iſtam Urbis Imperioſæ præcellentiſſimam Animi Magnitudinem aſſurgere ; Quæcunque Prægrandia, Animoſa, Stupenda, Romani Nominis ſemper fuerunt propria; Attoniti & Mirabundi legimus Triumphos celebratos, extructa Theatra, Maria in terras immiſſa, & adverſas Claſſes media ipſa in Arena Dimicantes; Nullum autem extat monumentum mirabilius hujus excelſæ & generoſæ Indolis, pene dixiſſem, majoris Humana, quam ſuarum Legum abſoluta conſummataque Deſcriptio; in quibus adeo cuncta ſua ſibi conſtant, ut videatur Roma vix, alio conſilio, ſuis Armis Gentes deviciſſe, quam ut Legibus devinciret, & Libertatem iis ademiſſe, non ut ablatam conculcet, ſed remitteret ipſis exornatam. Quod ad te attinet, Doctiſſime Reſpondens, ſentio propemodum his oculis, mehercule, Juſtiniani cineres exultare de patronis tantis, talibuſque ſuis, cum tu, & ſine, ut Lateri tuo adjungam iſlum Amicum tuum Regalem, Virum omni Laude non modo dignum, verum etiam ſuperiorem cum vos, inquam, tam benigno Animo Succurritis calamitoſæ, & abjectæ fere, Diſcipli ITi i i ii næ; næ; Erigatis, obteſtor Deos, aſſlictam, proſiratam, camque, qua olm polichant, auctori tatem imperatoriis Legibus in poſterum Vindicetis; in præ enti vero talem, Ornatiſſime Vir, te præbeas impertiaſque toti Academiæ, qualem Onines Exocctamus ex ingenio iſic tuo, quo uſus es maxime, ex caritate autem & gratia, qua apud optimos quoſque ſum mopere ac meritiſſime ſlores, Omnes Vovemus. X. Gratulatio ad Epiſcopum Elienſem Johannem Moore, S. T. P. Patronum quondam Chariſſimi mei Amici Carolſ Morgan, A. M. Magiſſri hujus Aulæ Optimi, & quadantenus Patronum Meum. UANTO cum Gaudio accepimus Tuam, Reverende admodum Pater, Erectionem ad Elienſem, quem præter cxteros jure merito es Adeptus Epiſco;atum, vix concipi poteſ, ne vix enarrari; Ita nempe, hos tibi maximos, pariter ac judicio Summæ Reginæ, omniumque conſenſu & comprobatione, apprime debitos honore: gratulamur, qua mente, quove animi aſectu & ſtudio, huius ipſus Collegii, horum: que, quos incolimus, parietum, Majceſtatem, Decus, Gloriam, amplexaremur; Illud enim vinculum velut inter tuam, Ampliſſime Præſul, atque hujuſce Aulæ dignitatem intercedit, ut quicquid ornamenti præclaram iſlam tuam Doctrinam Pietatemque con ſectetur, videatur eriam aliquomodo in ſe redundare; Accedit porio ad Noſtram Lætitiam, non ſolum, quod tanta huic Collegio Gloria contigerit, ut Suos ad Supremum fere Eccleſiæ ſaſigium conſpiceret evectos, verum etiam, quod Deus Optimus Maximus id præterea in ipſius felicitate poſuerit, ut Præſentes coſdem videat Patronos; ur, cum antca nimis longo intervallo remotus in clientelam nos pro Summa tua benevolentia aſciveris, propriori jam amplexu comprehendas, ac foveres; Deo itaque, Iniprimis, maximas Gratias habemus, qui ſuo Numine & Providentia, talem, tantumque, huic Collegio conſtituit Fautorem, Deinde impenſc precamur, ut quæ Exiſtimatio ad tam ingentes Honores Veſtram Dominationem perduxcrit, Eadem ad Maximos uſque ;ioſequatur. XI. Oratio Panegyrica in Divum Gulielmum, apud Nonas Novembris 1701, ad Prænobilem Virum, mihi autem, & Amico meo, Humaniſſimum Patronum, Thomam Holles, Ducem Pracellentiſſimum de Novo-Caſſello. A Te Principium; Tibi Deſinet; Virgil. Ecl. s. EDIIT jam iterum ille Dies, Academici, qui huic Genti, Academiæ, Nobis omnibus ſalutem, lætitiam, libertatemque attulit; Dies, tantis, tamque egregiis memorandiſque Deorum beneſiciis, præſenti numine, ſolenni fere in terras deſcenſu, inſignitus & ſuperbiens, tot præclaris, ſplendidiſque ſupplicationibus illuſtris, tam vario gaudii apparatu & ornamento cumulatus, ut ipſe quidem tandem veſtibus abjectis pullis, quaſi jam timere deſineret, exultare videatur; Graviſſimum periculum, poſt hominum vero memoriam crudeliſlimum ac maximum, in totam hane Gentem & Rempubcam deſtinatum, hic dies, ad ſalutem fortunaſque Britanniæ pluſquam fſatalis, nobis noſtriſque patribus propulſavit; Quod ita magnum fuit, & omni intricata ratione perplexum, ut neque jam, tam ſalutem conſccuti tuille videamur, quam experti convincimur, non tam miramur, quam ſlupemus, non tam ſtntimus, quam cerninus; Utinam vero hic eſſet Conſiſtendum; Nobis, quod potuit, vel inimicorum ira adimere, vel læſorum indignatio abducere, vel ſceleratorum furor detrahere, quod Parria, vel Conſuctudo, vel naſcendi Ratio, vel Religio, charum aut jucundum cſſicere, Conjuratio hæc, quæ hodierno die pateſacta eſt, abſtulinct; Quid hominibus eſſe debet majoris rel ſua religione:? Illa ita periclitabatur, ut Diſ ĩpſi præſentes, paludati, propriis fere armis & telis, in procinctu, ſuis altaribus adſlarent, propugnarentque; Quid poteſt eſic libertate dulcius, aut acceptius? Quid patria amabilius? Quid, quam ſua ſibi eſt domus, quam natale ſolum, quam cujuſque fortunæ, quam orium & vimæ tranquillitas, carius aut delectabilius? Quid autem non vobis ex his, Proavi, a Diis ctiam oblatum eſt, cum ne ſperare ca, neque enim de illis timere, poreritis? Quid non recepiſis recepiſtis ex ipſis pene ſati faucibus ereptum? Has, has Sedes Muſarum, Academici quas incolitis, literarumque domicilium, periculi hujus invidia jam ſere abſumptas, vobis redditas videtis, reſtitutas, ab interitu vindicatas; ut hi parietes, intra quos continemur, ut videtur, participes eſſe geſtiunt gaudii & lætiti? omnium communis, qui ornamenta ſua, & auguſtum decus, imo quod ſint, accepta reſerunt, hujuſce Diei Fauſlitati, Deorum autem immortalium numini & muniſicientiæ ; Ut, quid pronunciare dubitemus, quod de Trojæa Mœnibus perhibent, hos parietes, Deorum opere, Diis etiam merentibus, extrui & ſurrexiſſe? Tantum vero extitit hujuſce diei periculum, tot malis refertum, ut Dii, mehercule, huc in unum Scelus tam multas calamitates contuliſe videantur, ne non omnem rationem & opem expediendæ noſiræ ſalutis in unum beneſicium conferrent; Tantum, quam pene effectum, quam pene illatum feſellimus, eluſimus Clandeſtinum adverſus Univerſam gentem Angliæ conſilium initur; Rex Oprimus, Nobiliſſimorum Plebeiorumque Senatus laudati ſimus, Regni totius ſlos & principatus, deſignantur ad Cædem; Conducta eſt Cella; Conjuratores ſacramẽnto rogati; Vis incredibilis Nitroſi Pulveris ſub ipſa Curiæ Contignatione in Cellam coacervatur & adſtruitur, peſti ligna ferrumque circundata; Cuncta recte atque ex animo inſiituuntur, comparantur; Conjuratores nihil prædicant, produnt nihil, Omnes tacent, Altum ſilentium; Poſtero Die convocandus erat ſenatus; Nihil de Conjuratione prolatum, ne ſuſurratur quidem; Acceſſit Carnifex, Cellam ingreditur, Rem perſicit; At quo ſe verterent Proavi? Num ad arma confugerent? Ubi vero hoſtes? Comparent nulli. Num promiſſis atque mercede agendum? quibuſcum? qua de re? quam ob cauſam: Non conſtat. Quomodo autem malum exſculpere aggrediantur, quod nec patcat eſc defoſſum? Latet conjuratio, Obmuteſcit, Elinguis eſt; Imo tor nodis involutam & implicatam Tragediam, quem Deum oportuit invocatum, qui ſatis dignus eſſet ad expediendam? Hæc Conjuratio, hæc ipſa, unis literis, illæ vero ad honinem datæ & maIum & ſceleri cupientem, ambigua etiam ſcriptura, deprehenſa eſ, patefacta, illuſtrata; Scelus, quo nihil fuit ex Naſcente hoc rerum Ordine improbius, nihil crudelins, nihil cautius, nihil proviſum melius, propiuſve effectum, multorum annorum elaborat: Iambendo & eſformata proles, ſpes & delici? Romæ, ſine hominum providentia, ſine ſolertia, ſine ratione conſilii, fractum eſt, irritum fit, in auras diſſipatum. Quod etiam prius periculum irritavit & auxit, jam ornat cumulatque beneficium; ſcrvamur antequam metuimus, nec Dii ſe iraſci faterentur, priuſquam declaraſſent ſe condonare; Quid vero? Tanta rerum conſentiens, conſpirans, continuata cognatio, quem non coget affirmare, Nos, Rempublicam, Bona, Fortunas, atque hanc celeberrimam veſtram per totum literatum orbem Academiam, integram vobis & incolumem, invito penc & reluctante fato, Dei Optimi Maximi Numine Divino Præſentique, Servari? Neque enim literæ commiſſæ eſſcnt, neque ad alium hominem delatæ, neque ipſis literis deprehenſa eſſet conjuratio, niſt huic tantæ audaciæ a Diis immortalibus conſilium eſſet ereptum. Quidni etiam illi hanc gentem ſibi charam in tanta pericula adducereni, ut ab iis liberata majori voluptate perfunderetur? Etſi enim, nĩhil eſt magis oprandum, quam intrepida, æquabilis, perpetuaque fortuna Reipublicæ, ſecundo otii & tranquillitatis, ſine ulla turbulenta ratione, curſu, tamen, ſi nobis pacata a terrore, periculiſque ſecura, omnia fuiſlent, incredibili quadam, & pene divina, qua nunc Deorum beneficio fruimur, lætitiæ voluptate caruiſſemus. Quid divinius hominum generi a Diis ſuperis datum eſt, quam ſua cuique Religio? Nobis vero, & propter ejus elegantiam & Ianctitatem, & propter innatam quandam & inſitam noſtris ſuperſtitionem, vita fortuniſque eſt charior; Quid magis delectat, quam ſua quemque patria, quam vita & ſalus: Tamen, non tanta Jucunditate illas a majoribus nobis traditas accepimus, quanta ſervatas & quaſi reſtitutas amplectimur; Ex qua enim re majorem voluptatem capere poſſemus, quam cx ſelicitate, cujus compotes ſumus, non fortunæ arbitrio, ſed Deorum ſingulari benevolentia, quam ex Religionis & Reipublicæ Diſciplina? Quam Dii, tam mirifice conſervando, ſe comprobare oſtenderint, pro qua, nobis, & hac gente, propugnarint, quaſi ſuas ſcdes cxlumque defenderent; Nam, ne Dii ipſi profecto, adeo taciturnum, ſui fallar, tam inhumatum, ſepultumque ſcelus, explorare ſuffecerint, niſi, quemadmodum, cum ſuo Cxælo timerent, non ſolum in Cæpia & Animalia, ſed etiam ſe in Vectes & Sarmenta induiſſent. Illud nimirum eſ, Nos huie genti, totique populo Anglicano, Exitium conſilio crudeliſſimum, genere perditiſſimum, ratione inferendi inauditum, periculo ſane maximum, defenſum depulſumque hodierno die celebramus; Beneficium quidem ſummum, ſed auditum, ſed acceptum tantum a Majoribus; Fidem habemus, non Oculis intuemur; Iii iii a Gaude- Gaudebant de ſua ſalute Proavi, Nos etiam Feſtum dileximus; Nunc vero vivi, videnteſquè hic adſumus, & veneramur; Vidimus enim, Academici, ſub hoc tempus, cum Dii Diviſque permiſtus Gulielmus, huic iterum genti perituræ ſuo numine atque auxilic præſentes ſuccurrerint; Cum, non domiciliis atque tectis, ſed etiam templis arque delu bris ſceleratos ignes denuo illatos, & jam prope ſubjectos, reſiinxerint, gladios in rem publicam eductos repulerint, eorumque aciem a veſtris omnium jugulis retorſerint; Vo: Teſtes eſtis, qualem & quam duram ſervitutem, jam in Cervicibus agentem, hic Dies Nobis, noſtriſque Capitibus defendit, qui non poteſtis non reminiſci, cum acerbiſſimo animi ſenſu & dolore, quando auctoritate hujus florentiſſimæ Academiæ projecta, Omnia nutu atque arbitrio gubernarentur Franciſcorum, neſcio quos, perditiſſimorum hominum, atque omni ſcelere Vincentium; Teſtis eſt Oxonium & Collegium MagdaIenſe, quæ perduellionis arguitur, quæ erat temporum incommoditas, quod ſe, ſuos mores, & inſtituta, defenderet; Teſtis eſt Londinum, quæ lutu & lachrymis cooperta ſpectabat, cum Reverendi Epiſcopi, homines ſanctiſlimi & integerrimi, ſpreto eſient jure, invitis legibus, in carcerem detruſi; Teſtis iterum atque ſæpius Lond num, quæ, periculi timore Oppleta, vidit tormenta bellica, totumque civitatis armamentarium, in ſe dirigi, contra tecta urbis, contra templa, & vitas civium; Teſtes ſunt omnes per Regnum & hanc Gentem provinciæ, omnes provinciarum civitates, vici, villæ fere, & tuguria Teſtes, Quæ, vel ſuis immunitatibus & privilegiis orbata, vel ad arbitrium mutatis & in pejus relatis donata, vel iniqua vectigalium irrogatione, alieni militis vi, injuriis, ſcelere, conſumpta, omnia municipali dolore & armis oppreſſa, libertatem amiſam, perditam, ingemiſcebant, & Rempublicam cum ultimis miſeriis colluctantem; mutum eſt forum, elinguis curia, tacita & fracta civitas; ut ne videremur majoribus noſtris patientia ſcelerum futuri poſieriores, periculo vero multo priores; quo ĩis paretur exitium, Rex erat tollendus, quo nobis, ne conſtituendus quidem; ibi ſenatus removendus, hic ne convocatur; tum comparandæ copiæ, nobis bellum inſtructi ſſmum, directæ acies, miles inſolens, ante fores, in domo, in penetralibus, ante lares & focos verſatur; Quid vero poſthæc ſuſpicandum eſſet proavis, quod non eſſet nobis timendum? Eadem ferox & effrænata audaxque Religio noſtrum periculum inſpiravit, cadem ſimultas, indignatio eadem, quæ olim tantas tragœdias pene excitaſſer, totamque virorum cladibus cruentaſſet Britanniam; At vero hoc eſſet beneficium, ſi Religio tantum, crudelis licet, ſcelus ſtimulaſſet, nos, omnes miſerias & calamitates, quas hoſtium Furor, quas ſervorum Dominatio & Imperium, quas Gens, parentibus truculenta, nara barbara, inter feras & lupos enutrita, immanitatis diſciplina inſtituta, moribus confirmata, quas Hybernia inferre aut excogitare potuerit, nos, noſtraque Reſpublica, ſubiiſſtmus; Imo tamen hoc quidem leve, nobis Victoribus juſſu victorum Dominis nutu mancipiorum, Viris & Britannis arbitrio abjectæ & vilis militiæ, turpiter, manſuete, ſine gloria, ſine dimicatione, ſine virtute patria, inermis, inertibus, inultis eſſct pereundum: Maximo Opprobrio, Crudelitate maxima, fædiſſima aurem Servitute, Magno Gulielmo duce, liberamur Dies profecto hic tandem, ut videtur, tardius per annum ire pertendit, ſeriuſque ſolito revolvitur, tot, tam magnis, & ſtupendis beneſiciis onuſtus graviduſque Quid enim, Academici, eſt pulchrum aut venuſtum, quid amicum aut jucundum, quid elegans & ſplendidum, quid gratum, quid divinum, quid, quod capeſſere, vel eriam a Diis precari, velimus, quod non hodiernus dies contineat, quod non complectatur, quod non reſtituat nobis, atque etiam deſperatum reducat? Ut neſciamus, mehercule, utrum dies hic, magnum temporum decus & ornamentum, hujus ævi longinqua vetuſtas, ſæcula ipſa conderentur, ut tanta nobis apportent, tamque niiranda beneficia, an nos facti, vita, his auris, fruamur, ut tanta experiremur; & videremus, quanto majori cumulo Dii ſuam in nos benevolentiam augere poſſent, cum vitam & patriam ſervarint, quam cum dederint; de quibus difficile erit dictu, an ſint magis celebrandi, qui tam conſpicuum Sibi honorem, aut colendi, qui huic Diei decus & religionem, aut benefici & liberales, qui reipublicæ ſalurem, conciliarint; quæ omnia, adeo mirabilia ſunt, ut nulla terræ pars, non reſpublica, non gens ulla, non natio, paria aut ſimilia re unquam viderit, vel etiam animo ſit conſecuta; ita ut Dii, qui a reliquo mundo hanc noſtram terram pelago & mari ſecernerent & diſtinxerunt, a cæteris gentibus hominum virtute, a multis ingenio, ab omnibus doctrina & pietate, eandem videantur præſentia ſua & beneficiis diſtinxiſſe; & dubitamus quidem, an illi hanc gentem toto orbe divilam conſtituerint, ut palam fateantur ſe conſervare velle, vel etiam relicto cælo habitare; qui ita præſentes nobis opem & auxilium tulerunt, ut conſpectui noſiro ſe oſtentarent, & ante oculos ſerc verſarentur; Deos noſtris oculis pene videre poſſcmus ultro citroque curſarc ſare, nòſtrarumque rerum curam peragere; huic genti & populo ſalutem, non afferebant, ſed elaborabant, alios admonendo, excitando alios, his conſilium eripiendo, ferendo illis, providendo adverſus ſiniſtra, ordinando cauſas, quæ dextra eliciant, &, quocunque opus fuerit, adhibendo concinna & idonca; quæ tantarum rerum gubernatio vix potuit eſſe, niſi eſent adminiſtrata, non ſolum Deorum immortalium nutu & tonſilio, verum etiam ſummis corundem fere curis vigiliiſque. Hoc vero Noviſſimo Beneficio, quid præclarius vel ſplendidius, Cujus gloria tanta eſt, quanta nulli unquam contigit, niſi Diis immortalibus & Divo Gulielmo; quo enim difficilior noſtra erat ſalus, eo accepta erat gratior; co & major tua gloria, quo beneficium cumulatius. Quid vero majus dici poteſl, quam, Diis etiam inſperantibus, nos a Gulielmo ſervari? Quid glotioſius, quam Gulielmum ſervare tanto otio, tanto ſilentio, ſuo ſolius numine & præſentia? Omnia, quæ confuſa jacebant & indigeſta, quaſt Deo aliquo jubente, nutu ſolius & arbitrio Gulielmi, turbatos extemplo reſtituerunt ordines, & in mirandam rerum pulchritudinem ceſſere. Meruit certe hoc tam divinum & præclarum facinus, ut maximo Deorum beneficio ſacrata eſſet dies, quam ornaturus eras admirando tuo. Hoc ſaltem incommodum tua recipit gloria, quod nimio & abundanti munere oppreſſi & ſtupeſacti, memoria ejus carere & ſenſu videmur; quod, tamen & tibi pariet laudem cum omni poſteritate adæquandam, qui ita ſervaſti nos pereuntes, ut appareat tc noſtræ ſaluti cum Diis conſuluiſſe ex naturæ tuæ divina quadam benevolentia, ex tua propriã animi clementia & miſcricordia ſingulari, cum ſtupore noſtro nos neſcire velis, cui vitam & liberratem, quas tu condonaſti, debeamus. Deum itaque Optimum Maximum, imprimis, ſumma Religione, contentiſſimo ardore, pleniſſima animi benevolentia, ſuſpicimus & veneramur, qui ne opinantes, crudeliſſima clade pene obruti, ſolius Dei beneficio & numine erepti, ſæviſſimo periculo, nocturno, inextricabili fere, ſubducimur; nullis precibus vocatus, nam nec timor ullus invaſit, nullis templis extructis, ſine victima, eripuit; Poſtea tibi, Gulielme, maximas, quas poſſumus, & quæ optimo jure tuæ ſunt, gratias habemus, primum, quod beneficium in nos collocaſti, quod nulla erit æternitas abolitura, nulla ætas tacebit, nulla conficiet aut conſumet vetuſtas, deinde, quod noſtras res a te ſervatas & reſtitutas gubernare dignatus es, Gentiſque Anglicanæ ſulute & fortunis, & neceſſitudinem tuam, & hominum dicacium contumelias, poſteriores duxiſti; Vobis poſtremo, Academici, impenſe gratulamur de veſtra omnium ſalute, quam hodierno die conſecuti fuiſtis, de vitis, de fortunis, maxime vero de Religione veſtra & Academia, de illis ipſis ſedibus, quas impletis, quæ omnes, quam pene deploratæ, ſunt a Diis ſapientibus & bonis in veſtram iterum fidem & clientelam commiſæ. Quod, ſiquis ſpe ducitur ſe poſſe rem noſtram turbare aut evertere, dehinc id ſperare deſiſtat, cum Dii cjus tutelam ſuſceperint; quos enim dedi putabant, defendi intelligunt; quos tradituros ſperabant, vident propugnare; ut vero porro deſperent, Deorum patrocinium, quod dono prius accepimus, in poſterum merebimur, nec recuſabunt gratos defendere, quos tuerentur immeritos. Hoc tamen Deos ſuppliciter & enixe rogamus, noſtra tandem Iætitia, qua majorem capere non poſſumus, definiant hujuſce diei celebritatem, nec, quod a tanto naufragio Rempublicam iterum prohiberent, ſuo etiam auxilio percupimus nimium præſidant, ne res noſtræ ſæpius, & duriori manu, tenſæ ſpe citius aliquando diſſilire videantur. Ne diutius vos tencam, hæc gens & reſpublica bis ſub auſpiciis Novembris perſuncta cſt funcſto fatalique exitio; & hic ſpiritus, quem trahimus, non alia condirione ſuppeditari videtur, quam ut Deos, Gulielmum, & hunc ipſum Diem, celebremus; Cujus memoriam, ut dici poteſt Deos ipſos fovere, qui tam ſedulo noſtram ejus & toties implorarint, patriam venerari, vos autem, & hiſce dicendi exercitationibus, & aliis inſtitutis optimis & ſapientibus, caviſe, ut colant Veſiri benevolentia ſempiterna, ita Nos, quod religioni & oſficio decet, quod noſtro in vos obſequio, exoptamus n dies vigere, in annos floreſcere, per omne ævum, tempora, æternitatem, fore perennaturam. F I N I S. KE k k k E 