at the Angel and Bible in St Paul’'s Churchyard. give a Rational Account of ERUPTIVE FEVEKS, oſpecially of the MEASLES and SMALL-POX. In Two Parts. Part I. Of the Blood, the Air, Venoms, Infe lion, Fevers of all Kinds in general; and of ſuch in particular as are Morbillous, with Spots; or Variolous, with Puſtles: And in Specie, of moſt of the ſpurious Sorts mentioned in Books, and met with in Practice, with their Varieties, Deſoriptions, Names, &c. but more profeſſedly and fully of the TRUE MEASL ES. To which is prefixed, a Delineation and Compariſon of the Old and New PHILOSOPHY, in a Dialogue by an unknown Hand. Part II. Ofthe SMALL POX, its Nature, Genius, and Production: Of its Cauſes, Differences, Diagnoſtic and Prognoſtic Signs. Alſo of Prevention, Management, Medicines, and Methods, to be obſer. ed and uſed in the Cure of the ſame; and its Symptoms, from its firſt Invaſion, through all its Periods, and Progreſs, to its Concluſionn. And laſtly, of the BLEEDING POX. The whole illuſtrated with many new, curious, and uſeful Particuhrs. To which is added, An Appendix concerning INO C ULATION. By THOMAS FULLER, M. D. The Female Phyſician: Containing all the Diſeaſes incident to that Sex, in Virgins, Wives, and Widows;3 Together with their Cauſes and Symptoms, their Degrees of Danger, and reſpective Method of Prevention and Cure. To which is added, the whole Art of new improv'd Midwifery; comprehending the neceſſary Qualifications of a Midwife, and particular Directions for laying Women, in all Caſes of Diſficult and Preternatural Births; together with the Diet and Regimen of both the Mother and Child. By J. Mowbray, M. D. The Works of the Right Reverend George Bull, D. D. late B:ſhop of St David'ss Concerning the Holy Trinity. Conſiting of, I. The Defence of the Nicene Creed. II. the Judgment of the Catholick Church, of the three firſt Centuries, concerning the Neceſſity of believing that our Lord Jeſus Chriſt is true God, aſſerted againt M. Simon Epiſcopius, and others. III. The Primitive and Apoſtolical Tradition concerning the received Doctrine of the Catholick Church, of our Saviour Jeſus Chriſt's Divinity, aſſerted and plainly proved, againſt Diniel Zuicker a Pruſſian, and his latæ Diſciples in England: Tranſhted into Englih. with the Notes and Obſervations of Pr Grabe. And ſome Reſlections upon the late Controverſies in this Doctrine. In two Volumes. By Fr. Holland, M. A, Rector of Sutton, Wilts, and Chaplain to the Right Honouravle Tnomas Lord Viſcount Weymouth. CoMPENDIOUS and ME THODICAL AC COUNT OF THE PRINCIPLES Natural Philoſophy. As Explained and Illuſtrated in the Courſe of EXPERIMENTS, performed at the ACADE MY in Little Tower-Street: BY BE NJAMIN WORSTE R, A.M. The Second &ition. Revistd and Corrected, ith large Additions, by the AUTH OR. L O N D ON: Printed for STEPHEN AUSTEN, at the Angel and Bible in St Paul's Church-Yarã, BOOKSELLER T O THE RE ADER ũN INCE our Author has univer-  ſally obtained the Reputation e of a cloſe and clear Writer, I 25& thought I ſhould oblige the PP0Lẽ Publick by a ſecond Edition; eſpecially as this Work is now tendered to the World with the Advantages of many Corrections in the Authors own Handwriting, together with conſiderable Additions and Improvements. The Author himſelf, in his Edition of 1722, has given us this Account of his Performance, which we ſhall not preſume to vary. The Deſign of the following Sheets is not to deſcribe the Apparatus, or the manner of performing the Experiments, which may be underſtood much eaſier and better by ſeing the Inſtruments and Experiments themſelves, than by all the Books that have been publiſbed in that Way ; but only to ſbew how the ſolid Principles of true Philoſophy are deduced from itbe Phænomena of Nature, and what Dependance of particular Cauſes upon general Laws may be rationally concluded from a ſufficient Number of certain and undoubted Obſervations. Nor is it intended to treat this Matter in a pompous and declamatory Way, whereby Truths and Falſhoods are equally capable of being rendered plauſible, and propagated with Succeſs, and which ought therefore to be rejected and deſpiſed by every Man who deſires to diſtinguiſb Trutb from Falſbood : But here nothing more is meant, than to propoſe Things in the ſorteſt and plaineſt Method, and to mate uſe of ſuch Reaſonings and Argumenis as are not applicable to any falſe Notion, or mere Hypotbeſis, ow ingeniouſly ſoever contrived. The great Objection againſt all enquiries into Nature is, that they are dangerous, and many times prejudicial to Religion. llil I take Notice of this Objection the ratber, hecauſe it is induſtriouſly propagated by many Perſons who ought to know better; and indeed I am inclined to think, that the chief Deſign of teeping up this Clamour, is to put a good Face upon their own Ignorance. However, it is no new thing for Men, to deſpiſe and vilify what they don't underſtand, My Lord Bacon obſerved a great while a( Cogitata & viſa, Vol. II. Pag. 269.) That the moſt troubleſome and illnatured Enemy that Natural Philoſophy had, was Superſtitionn.The wę;keſt of theſe Objectors ſays he) are afraid, leſt, by enquiring too deeply into Nature, we ſhould exceed thoſe Bounds of Modeſty and Sobriety which GOD has ſet us; hereby miſapplying to the Secrets of Nature, what is only true of Divine Myſteries; many of which are indeed ſhut up from Humane Underſtandings under a Divine Seal. Others morè craſtily conjecture, that ſo long as Men are utterly ignorant of Natural Cauſes, it will be much eaſier to make them believe that all things are wrought by the immediate Hand of GOD, and a miraculous Direction of Providence. Thus they think to make a Compliment to the Supreme Being by Fallhood and Lyes. Others are afraid of making an ill Precedent; and they don't know but Alterations in Philoſophy may introduce Alterations in Religion. And laſtly, others ſeem very ſolicitous, leſt by Natural Inquiſitions ſomething ſhould be found out at laſt which ſhould overthrow Religion. But theſe two laſt Apprehenſions ſavour very much of Infidelity and carnal Wiſdom; and as to the later, it is impious to ſuppoſe, or eA  ven ſuſpect it. It is certain therefore, that  under theſe Objections, there lies concealed  much Weakneſs, much Envy, and much  Malice.? Thus far my Lord Bacon. Some account may perhaps be expected of the Corrections and Additions in this ſecond Impreſſion; and indeed the unſkilful Practice of Bookmenders may demand this from us; ſince Inſtances are not wanting, where inlarged Editions from ſeveral hands, have appeared of a lower Standard and leſs Value than the Authors firſt Thoughts. The Reader then may be convinced from the corrected Copy, that there are not any Emendations (excepting in a few Literals) but ſuch as have a Sanction from the Authors own hand Writing: And as to the Additions, no Sentence or Paragraph has been inſerted without the ſame Evidence, directing the inſertion to be made in every particular Page and Line. This Exactneſs poſſibly may be cenſured by ſome as over-nice; tho ſeveral valuable Paſſages in looſe Papers not printed in the body of the Work, (which being under the known Hand of the Author, might eaſily have been conſigned to their proper Order) yet theſe have been rejected, and the Reader is leſt to his own Judgment about their Importance. Referring to Kepler the Author obſerves: The true Doctrine of Gravity is ſounded on the ſollowing Axioms. All Matter, as ſuch, will naturally continue at Rest, in any Place where it can be ſuppoſed to exist alone by itſelf, out of the Sphere of Activity of all other Matter. : Gravity is the Tendency of heavy Bodies to meet and unite with each other; yet ſo that the Earth attracis a Stone much more than a Stone attracis the Earth. Even though we ſhould ſuppoſe the Earth to be placed in ihe Center of the Univerſe, yet heavy Bodies will not tend to the Center of the Univerſe, as ſuch, but only as it is the Center of a ſpherical Maſi of Matter, that is of the Earth. And therefore, hereſoever the Earth is placed, or whitherſoever it be removed, the Tendency of heavy Bodies vill ſtill follow it. If two Stones were placed any where in the Univerſe near to each other, and out of the Sphere of Activity of any third Body, thoſe Stones would meet together in that intermediate Point where ibe Lines deſcribed would be reciprocally Proportional to the Quantities of Matter. If the Moon and the Earth were not retained in their reſpective Orbs, the Earth would aſcend towards the Moon the 54th part of the Diſtance, the Moon would deſcend iowards the Earth the other 53 paris of ibe Diſtance, and in that Point ibey would meet ; that is; provided they are both of the ſame Denſity. If the Eartb ſbould ceaſe to attraſt ils oun Waters, all the Waters of the Sea would flow up to the Body of the Moon. The Sphere of the Moon's Attraction redches to the Earth, and draws the Waters together under the torrid Zone, that is towarãs itſelf, whereſoever it is vertical inſenſibly in Laes and incloſed Seas, but ſenſibly in the Main Ocean, where the Tides have free Scope. It follows therefore, that if the Attraction of ihe Moon redches to the Earth, much more doés the Attraction of the Earth reach to the Moon, and heyond it 3 and therefore no earthly body that is ihrown up into the Air can ever eſcape out of the Bounds of that Attrattion. Again: No Maiter is abſolutely light, but that Matier is comparatively lighter which is rarer, cither in its oton Natute or by being heatedl. By rare, I mean not only that which is porous or full of Holes, but, in general, that which under the ſame Magnitude contains a leſi Quantity of Matter. But if any Man has no Genius for the Science of Aſtronomy, or is ſo ſcrupulous that he cannot give his Aſſent to Copernicus ith a ſafe Conſcience ; TI would adviſe bim to lay aſide all Aſtronomical anã Philoſophical Studies, and mind his own Affairs. Let him leave off to contemplate and ſurvey the ment of that little ſpot of Earth upon which he lives. And when he lifts up his bodily Eyes (ince he has no other) to the viſible Frame of Heaven, let him with all his might bleſi and adore God ihe Creator, and rest entirely ſatisfied that he is as truly pious as any Aſtronomer, who with the Eyes of his Underſtanding enjoys, by the Giſt of God, a more enlarged View of things; and is incited to glorify his God alſo, upon Account of his own Improvements and Diſcoveries. I. The Theory of Gravitation was in a great meaſure known to Kepler. II. The true Theory of the Motion of the Planets was not only known to, but diſcovered by Kepler. As 1. That the Center of the Suns Orb is not in that Point to which the mean Motion was referred, but in the middle between that Point and the Body of the Sun. 2. That the Linea Apſidum of the Orbs of all the Planets paſſes through the Body of the Sun, and not through the Point of the Sus mean Motion3. That the Planetary Orbs are Ellit ſes and not Circles, and that the Sun is one common Focus of all ihe Orbs. 4. That each Planet deſcribes equal Areas at the Sun in equal times. Theſe ihings were diſcovered whilst he was endeavouring to find out an Hypoth. that would ſuit with Tychoss Obſervations of the Planet Mars. 5. None was ever ſo deſirous as Kepler to reduce Aſtronomy from Hypotheſis to Fact, and the real Cauſes of the Planets Motions ; yet Kepler was ignorant of ihe true Cauſes. So here are two things next to Miracle. 1. That he ſvould diſcover ſo much Truth. 2. That having diſcovered ſo much Trutb he should be ignorant of the true Cauſes of the Planetary Motions. This Wonder, I thus account for: 1. He thought that the Attractions of Gravitation were limited to a certain Diſtance, or Sphere of Activity, much leſs than the Diſtance between the Earth and the Sun. 2. He did not rightly underſtand the Laws of Motion, and particularly that it requires as much Force to deſtroy Motion, as to produce it. For he only maintained that Motter was inert or unable to produce Motion; but alſo, pag. 174. that it was Naturà pronãà ad quietem, fere ad privationem motus of its own Nature tending towards Rest, or the extinguiſbing of Motionn. Tho indeed ſometimes, pag. 172. he mentions the Reſiſtance of the ſEther, as contributing, together with that natural Diſpoſition of Matter, to weaken the Motions of ibe Planets; however, he always thought that they ſtood in need of being quickned vith new Impulſes. TIhe Firſt, I thus account for, 1. He was always influenced by a ſettled Perſuaſion, that the World was framed according to Geometrical Rules. 2. He made uſe of Facts and Obſervations in in the moſt Sacred and Religious Manner, never bending them to ſerve any Hypotheſis either of his own or other Peoples. 3. He was providentially directed (as he himſelf obſerves, pag. 53.) without any Deſign or Intention of his own, to begin his Speculations with the Planet Mars, ihe only Planet in which it was poſſible to mate cloſe Diſcoveries. For, 1. the Obſervations before Tycho ere not accurate enough. 2. The twenty or thirty Years of Tychos Obſervations (as he intimates, pag. 127) did not affsorã in the ſuperior Planets  and h, a ſufficient Number of Obſervations, from whence to elect ſuch as were neceſſary by Reaſon of the length of iheir Periodic Revolutions. 3. The two inferior Planets 5 and u are very improper ſor this Purpoſe, by reaſon of their perpetual Nearneſi to the Sun, and to the Horizon, at the time of Obſervation. Acelebrated French Author is remarkable for the following paſſage: M. P. ꝓ. 14, 26.  Concevons deux corps ss dont les maſſes ſont comme I à 10;3 & vis e teſſes comme 10à 1: la force du petit  ſera cent, & celle du grande ſera dix, en  multipliant les maſſes par les quarrez des  viteſſes; ceſt-à-dire que la force du pe-  tit corps ſurpaſſe dix fols Iautre, & ce-  pendant la force du grand corps eſt ſuffisc ſante pour faire perdre au petit corps tout ſon mouvement, That is, two unequal Forces may deſtroy each other; and ſo the Author affirms, in expreſi Terms, in the ſame Page,  Deux corps dont les  forces ſont inẽgales, venant à ſe choquer  directment, sils ont point de reſſort,  reſtent en repos aprẽs le choque. What is that but to affirm, That two unequal Forces may produce equal Effecis; or in other Words, that two unequal Forces may be equall Tr that be but ſubſtantially provd; a perpetual Motion I believe is not only poſſible, but a very eaſy tbhing, N. T. Erop. 8. It is concluded that the Forces of two certain Balls in Motion, are equal; becauſe they ſint to an equal depth into the Clay, that is, hecauſe they produce equal Effects: hut it ſeems unequal Forces may produce equal Effects, as ihe Author affirms in the above Quotation, P- 14. M. P. and alſo Prop. 18. N, T, wbhere he deduces from the Theory ihe direct conirary of that very Priuciple upon which the Theory i is founded. But, in order to eſtabliſo this Paradox, as he calls it, that unequal Forces may produce equal Effecls, he lays down theſe two Principles, p. 371. That ihe two contrary Forces dot immediately deſtroy each other, but are ſpent entirely in flatting the impinging Bodies, N, T. ꝑ. 19. en. p 2. That the Force ſo ſpent, or loſt, is proportional to the Reſiſtence, or Inertia, or Quantity of Matter in the other Body, P. 37. But what iſ the two impinging Bodies ſood be equal and perfecily hard, where wou'd ihe Force he ſpent then, and what woud follow from the Colliſion? either two contrary Forces muſt deſtroy each other immediately, or elſe ihe Forces muſt continue without producing any Effect, or one equal Force muſt overcome another. But the Author is reſolv'd, it ſeems, not to ſay one word of Bodies perſectly hard, and that for this Reaſon ; becauſe we know of no ſuch Bodies: But why then does he ſpeat of Bodies perfectly Elaſtic, for we know of none ſuch? And why may not the one Suppoſition be made as well as the other? There are ſeveral Bodies, as Glaſi, Steel, Ivory, &. which leaye no viſible Impreſſion after Colliſion, and yet have qi ifferent Degrees ſurd to ſuppoſe the Elafticity infinitely ſmall, or none, rather ihan infinitely great or perfect? We know of no ſuch Bodies, ſays the Author. Why, yes, I thint we do. Dr Clark, in his Letters to Mr Leibnitz, has demonſtrated that there are in Nature certain Portions or Particles of Matter void of all Pore ; and bow is it poſſible for ſuch Bodies to he either ſoſt, or elaſtic, or any ibing elſe iban perfectly hard, I ould gladly learn? But the Author will not preſume to ſay what will be ibe Conſequence of the Colliſion of two ſucb Bodies, hecauſe he has never made the Experiment. Yet, I think, without any great Preſumption, one might conclude, its conſequence muſi be one of thoſe three above-mentiond, aud that ihe two laſt are abſurd. As to his ſecond Principle, I obſerve, 1. That the Inertia of Matter conſiſis in its not being able to produce or deſtroy Motion in itſelf, and in diffuſing any impreſtd Force thr its whole Matter, and not in any poſitive Reſiſtance, whereby it is inabled to ſuſpend the Effect of any the ſmalleſt Force, for any the ſmalleſt inſtant of Time ; For that would he Activity and not Inertia. Therefore, 2. If the Impinging Bodies are perfectly hard the whole Velocity is impreſtd in one indiviſible inſtant of Time. 3. If the Parts of the impinging Bodies give way, the intire Velocity is not communicated till the yielding is over, for Motion is communicated 10 the whole Body, only by the Cobeſion of its Parts; and ſo far forth as the Parts yield, they don't cobere, and iberefore cannot communicate or diffuſe their Motion through the whole Body. 4. So far forth as the Parts cobere (which they are ſupposd to do in ſome degree) they reſist the Impreſſion, even whilſt they yield to it, and ſo far fortb ſome Motion is communicated to the whole Body at the very firſt inſtant of Colliſion. 5. Therefore no more Motion or Force is loſt than wou'd be loſt if a bard Body vith the ſame Velocily were to ſtrite againſt another hard Body which was equal in Quantity to the flatted Paris. N. T. Prop. IX. A Body in Motion reſiſts Acceleration in Proportion to the Velocity it moves with. Here I grant, That if two Bodies in Motion are to be equally accelerated, the ſviſteſt Mover requires the greateſt Force. But I obſerve, I. That the Reaſon is not hecauſe it reſiſis Acceleration, but becauſe it flies from Acceleration. a 2. The additional Force reſiding in the Accelerated Body is proportional not to the whole Force of the Accelerating Impulſe, but only to that Part of it which act; upon tbe moving Body; for if the Body which ſbould accelerate the other, moves only with an equal Velocity, there vill be no additional Force at all; therefore if it moves faſter, ibe additional Force can only be proportional to the Relqative Velocity. V ò P Natural Philoſophy in general Page Qſ the Properties of all Bodies ſi Of Space P OF Alitraction and Repulſion Dp Of the Attraction of Gravitation p. P P Of the Attraction of æ on of Repulſi on ME CHANICS. F the Nature of Rest and Motion . 31 Of Machines in general P. 34 Of the Simple Machiues ll P 37 LAVW S ofF M O T I ON. H E First Law of Motion  48 Of the Motions, Diſiances, and Periods of the Planets p. 48 The Second Law of Motionrne P. 58 Of the Deſcent of heavy Bodies in a direct Line p. 58 Of the Motion of Projectiles p. 63 Of Reſiſting Mediums p. 65 Of ihe Motion of the Moon and Tidees p. 68 Of Oblique Deſcents and Pendulums P-78 The Third Law of Motion P. 90 Of Elaſticity P. 93 Of the Communication of Motiomae P. 10O HYD R O STATI CS. F ihe Gravitation and Preſſure of Fluits in general, but more particularly of Incompreſt ble Fluids p. IſI xf Siphons and Pumps p. II9 Of Spouting Water p. I20 Of Running Water p. I30 Of ihe Gravitation of Solids and Fluids to gether p. 136 P NEU M ATICS. F the Gravitation and Preſſure of Elaſtic or Compreſſible Fluids p. I44 Of Alir and its Elafticity P: 147 Of Damps and Peſtilence P. 152 Of Heat, Vapours, and Flame P. I57 Of Pneumatic Engines p. 164 O P TICS. F the Rays of Light p. 177 Of Refrattion p. 180 Of the ſeveral Directions of Rays p. 188 OF ihe Refraction of Rays by a plane Surface p. 189 Of ibe Refraction of Rays by a ſpherical Surfacè P: I94 Of a Lens p. I96 Of the Refraction of Rays by a Convex Glaſs ꝑ. 197 Of ibe Refraction of Rays paſſing throug a Concave Glaſs p. 208 Of the Meniſcus p. 209 Of the Eye P. 2II Of Combinations of Glaſſes p: 2I5 Of ihe Refiection of Rays P. 224 Of Mirrours P232 Of Colours P. 239 Of the Permanent Colours of Natural Bodies p. 247 Of Colours in the Clouds, and of the Rai AC COUNT oOF THE PRINCIPLES Natural Philoſophy. Of NATURAL PHILOSOPHT in general. 1E2ò'V” NY Report of our Senſes conIſſ cerning external or corporeal v Object, is called a Phænomell non. 38 Ifa Phænomenon be agreeable to the ſtated and ordinary Courſe of it is called a Natural Phænomenon. The Buſineſs of Natural Philoſophy is to deduce from Experiments ſuch Laws as the ordinary and ſtated Courſe of Nature is govern'd by, and to refer the natural Phænomena to thoſe Laws. In doing this, we are to obſerve the following Rules, as they are laid down by Sir Iſaac Newton, Princip. lib. 4. I. No other Cauſes of natural things ought to be admitted, but ſuch as are true in Fact, and ſuſficient to explain the Pnænomena. This is agreeable to thoſe receivd Maxims, that Nature does nothing in vain; and that iĩt is in vain to make uſe of more things, where fewer will do as well: For Nature always takes the beſt and wiſeſt Courſe, that is, the moſt ſimple and free from Superfluity. Therefore, when any Cauſe is aſſignd, which is true in Fact, and ſufficient to explain that Phænomenon to which it is applied, jt ought to be allowed for the true and real Cauſe of that Pnænomenon. 2. Wherefore the Cauſes of all natural Effects of the ſame kind, are the ſame; as the Cauſe of Reſpiration in Man and other Animals; of the Deſcent of a Stone in Europe and in America ; of Light in common Fire and in the Sun; of the Reflexion of Light in the Earth and in the Planets. 3. Such Properties of Bodies as are incapable of Augmentation and Diminution, and ſuch as belong to all Bodies in which we can make Experiments, are to be eſteemꝗ univerſal Properties of Bodies. EV OF the PROPER TIES of all Bodies. HE firſt is, that they are all indued with Magnitude, and extended in Length, Breadth, and Thickneſs; for where there is no Magnitude, there can be no Contact. 2. All Bodies are hard or impenetrable; for if they were not, they could not reſiſt the Touch, or affect our Senſes; even the ſofteſt Bodies will be found to be as hard as any, if we keep their Parts from ſlipping away. 3. All Matter is capable of being divided into Parts, that is, into Halves, Quarters, Tenths, Hundredth Parts, &. For that which has no Parts, can have no Magnitude or Extenſion, and therefore cannot be Matter. By being divided into Parts, e do not here mean the actual Separation of thoſe Parts from each other, but only the conceiving in the Mind ſuch Parts as are really diſtinct? from each other. 4. All Matter is capable of being divided for ever; otherwiſe we ſhall neceſſarily coms at laſt to ſuch Matter as cannot be divided at all, which is contrary to the third Property. That there can be no end to the Diviſibility of Matter, is both certain and eaſy to be conceivd. The only Reaſon why ſome Perſons have thought the Notion myſterious and inexplicable, was, becauſe they did not know how to diſtinguiſh between a Particle of a certain determinate Bigneſs, and a true and real Part in a Mathematical Senſe; that is, as it ſtands in relation to its whole, and receives its Denomination (as Half, Quarter, &c.) by being compared with that greater Magnitude, of which the leſſer is a Part. BY the infinite Diviſibility of Matter, is not meant that there are contained an infinite Number of Particles of a determinative Bigneſs in any finite Quantity of Matter, how great ſoever. This is abſolutely impoſſible. But the only Meaning is, that no Part of Matter can be conceived ſo ſmall, but we may conceive a ſmaller; to which purpoſe nothing elſe is neceſſary, but to double or treble, &c. the Denominator of the Fraction by which the Part is expreſſed. It is not therefore at all diſficult to conceive how a very ſmall Particle of Matter has as many Parts as a very large Body. On the contrary, it would be ſtrange if it ſould be otherwiſe; for how can a Mountain have more Halves, Quarters or Tenths, than a Mole-hill? 5. All Bodies may change their Situation by moving from one Place to another, or continue in the ſame Situation by remaining at Reſt in their own Places, 6, All Matter is ſluggiſh and inactive, and unable to move itſelf: And therefore if one Body contains a greater Quantity of Matter than another, it ſhall alſo have more Inactivity; that is, it ſhall require a greater Force to make it move with the ſame Degree of Swiftneſs with which the other is made to move. Wherefore, if two Bodies move with an equal Swiftneſs, aud meet with no Reſiſtance, either the Quantities of Matter in the moving Bodies are equal, 'and the Forces by which the Motions are produced equal; or elſe the Quantities of Matter are unequal, and the Forces unequal alſo in the ſame Proportion; for an equal Inactivity will be overcome by an equal Force, and a greater Inactivity requires a greater Force to overcome it. ESUSsS SsS SS3ITm  ————————oF S P 4 C E. I we conceive any one Body to be removed or annihilated, whilſt all other Bodies remain at reſt in their proper Places; that Place which the fir?t Body filled, ſhall then be void of all Matter, and capable of receiving again into itſelf either the ſame Body that was taken out of it, or any other Body of the ſame Size and Shape. Place void of all Matter is called Space or Vacuum; concerning which there have been three Opinions. 1. That there was no ſuch thing in the Univerſe, whatever there might be without it. 2. That there was no ſuch thing in being, and that the very Notion of it implied a Contradiction. 3. That tho' perhaps in Nature there were no large Tracts or Regions of empty Space, yet that it had a great Share in the Texture and Compoſition of all Bodies that are known to us. Now that the Notion of Space is not inconſiſtent, is evident from the Idea that has been already given of it. That Space exiſts diſtinct from Matter, and that it may be ſeparated from all Matter, may be thus proved. It is certain from Experiment, that if Bodies deſcend in the Air, thoſe that are very light ſhall be ſenſibly retarded by the Reſiſtance of the Air; but in the exhauſted Receiver of the Air-Pump, all Bodies, howſoever differing in Weight, Shape, or Magnitude, ſhall fall with an equal Swiftneſs. It is plain therefore, that by exhauſting the Receiver, the Reſiſtance of the Air is in Fact either removed, or at leaſt ſo much diminiſhed, as to be renderd inſenſible. Now the Reſiſtance made by any Medium to a Body moving in it, ariſes either from that Force which is neceſſary to ſeparate the Parts of the Medium, if they are in any Degree ſticking and tenacious; or from that Force vwhich is neceſſary to overcome the Inertia, or Inactivity, of all that Part of the Medium which lies in the way of moving Body. But with regard to the Air, the firſt kind of Reſiſtance is very inconſiderable; and in all Caſes, the ſecond kind of Reſiſtance is proportional to the Quantity of Matter in the reſiſting Medium, as is evident from the ſixth Property of Bodies. Hence it follows clearly, that becauſe there is leſs Reſiſtance in the exhauſted Receiver, therefore there is leſs Matter, and therefore there is more Vacuity than there was before exhauſting. Of all Bodies, (except of the heavieſt of all) it may be proved from their different ſpecifick Gravities, that they have many Vacuities, or Pores void of all Matter, interſper, d between their ſolid Parts. When one Body weighs more than a;m of the ſame Bigneſs, or as much as another that is bigger; then the firſt is ſaid to be ſpecifically heavier than the ſecond. Let us ſuppoſe, for example, a Bullet of Lead, and a Ball of Cork, both of an equal Bigneſs. Now it has been already ſewn, that in a Vacuum, or where there is no Reſiſtance, if the L ead and the Cork begin to fall at the ſame time, they will move qually faſt. herefore the Quantity of Matter in the Bullet is to the Quantity of Matter in the Ball, as the Force that moves the Bullet is to the Force that moves the Ball; that is, as the Weight of the Bullet to the Weight of the Ball: Therefore the Bullet has more Matter than the Ball, and the Ball more Vacuum than the Bullet. TIf Gold be the heavieſt of all Bodies, as it is of all known Bodies, then we may affirm of all Bodies in general, that.they contain Vacuities among their ſolid Parts: For the Particles of Heat and Magnetiſm find an eaſy Paſſage thro the Pores of Gold, and even Water it ſelf has been forced thro them. If we conſider how freely the Rays of Light paſs thro' ſo ſolid a Body as Glaſs in all manner of Directions, we ſhall find Reaſon to believe, that Bodies are much more porous than is commonly imagind; ſo that perhaps in the heavieſt of them the Quantity of Space may be ſeveral times greater than the Quantity of Matter. Km m  u-—— Of ATTRACTION and REPULSION. ES ID ES the inactive Principles of Matter and Space, there are found in Nature certain active Powers, or Principles of Motion, whereby Bodies are carried towards or from each other, according to certain fix'd and determinate Laws, which may be cald the Laws of Attraction and Repulſion. Attraction and Repulſion are not here conſiderd as the Occult Qualities of Bodies, but only as the General Laws of Nature, eſtabliſhed from the Beginning by the Author of Nature; in Conſequence of which, Bodies in ſuch or ſuch Circumſtances are made to tend towards, or fly from each other with ſuch or ſuch Velocities. Attraction and Repulſion are not Occult Qualities, ; for the Qualities themſelves, that is, the Tendencies of Bodies towards or from each other, according to certain Laws, are manifeſt, plain, and certain, from a Muliitude of Phænomena and Experiments. Nor is the Cauſe of theſe active Principles altogether occult and unknown; for though perhaps it may be diſficult to determine how on any of the reſt, or whether all of them do not flow from ſome other more general Principle, as yet undiſcoverd; yet this is moſt evident and certain, that either theſe active Principles themſelves, or at leaſt that more general one from whence they reſult, is altogether immechanical and independent from Matter, and can only proceed from the firſt Cauſe and Author of all things. It is true indeed, that theſe Laws are but general Concluſions, preſumed to be true from an Induction of many Particulars; and it cannot be proved demonſtrably, but that there may be Exceptions to theſe Laws in ſome other Particulars, which have never yet been tried or obſerved. But then we muſt obſerve on the other hand; | 1. That the Induction upon which theſe general Concluſions are founded, is very large and extenſive. 2. That we have no reaſon to expect any thing in Nature, but what is regular and uniform; for the Creation was not the Effect of Chance, but of conſummate Wiſdom and Contrivance, whereby all things were eſtabliſhed according to the niceſt Rules of Number, Weight, and Meaſure, that is, of Mathematicks. 3. That when theſe active Principles are called General Concluſions, it is only meant that they ſhould be pronounced General, till Exceptions are found out; and if at any time afterwards, any Exception ſhall occur from the Phænomena or Experiments, they ſhould thence-forward begin to be pronounced with ſuch Exception. 4. That tho arguing by Induction is not an abſolute Demonſtration; yet in Natural Philoſophy, it is the beſt way of arguing that the Nature of Things admits of; for by this Method more of Nature may be known, and has actually been diſcover'd, than can be known, or has been diſcoverd by any other Method whatſoever. 5. That nothing can be more reaſonable than to argue from Effects to Cauſes, and from the Exiſtence of ſuch or ſuch Motions to the Forces producing them. Of the ATTRACTION of GRAVITATION. T is certain from the Phænomena of Nature, and will be explained more particularly hereafter, that as all heavy Bodies near the Earth tend to its Center, with a Force proportional to their Quantity of Matter; ſo the Moon alſo tends to the Center of the Earth according to the ſame Law, and the Waters of the Sea tend to the Center of the Moon; and both Earth and Moon, and all the Planets and Comets, tend towards the Sun, and towards each other. Therefore we conclude from the third Philoſophical Rule, that all Bodies within the Solar Syſtem tend towards, or attract each other, with Forces proportional to the Quantity of Matter that each Body contains. All Bodies attract more or leſs in Proportion to the Quantity of Matter they contain: Thus the Attraction of the Sun is ſtronger, and the Attraction of the Moon weaker, than that of the Earth. For the Attraction of each particular Body, is nothing elſe but the Sum of the Attractions of all its Parts. But the Effect of that Attraction in Spheres that àre homogeneal, at equal Diſtances from the Center, is the ſame as if the whole attracting Force were united in the Center of the Sphere, as is evident from the Deſcent of heavy Bodies in right Lines from all Parts towards the Center of the Earth. All Virtues or Qualities which are propagated in right Lines from a Center, decreaſe in the ſame Proportion as the Squares of the Diſtances from the Center increaſe; as is eaſily proved both from the Nature oſ the thing and from Experiments. And becauſe Gravitation is ſuch a Virtue or Quality as was juſt now deſcribed, therefore it muſt alſo decreaſe according to the ſame Rule. This is all that is meant when it is ſaid, that at different Diſtances from the ſame attracting Body, the Forces of Attruction are reciprocally as the Squares of the Diſtances. At all equal Diſtances from the ſame Center of Attraction, the Force is proportional to the Quantity of Matter in the Body attracted, as has been already proved: Therefore in all Caſes, the Attraction is as the Quantity of Matter directly, and the Square of the Diſtance reciprocally. Here it muſt be obſerv, that if two Quantities increaſe or decreaſe in the ſame Proportion that two other Quantities increaſe or decreaſe; then the two former are ſaid to be directly as the two later, or in direc?t Proportion of the two later. Thus the Quantities of Matter in Bodies are directly as the Weight of thoſe Bodies; that is, as the Weight of one Body is to the Weight of another, ſo is the Quantity of Matter in the firſt, to the Quantity of Matter in the ſecond. But if to Quantities increaſe in the ſame proportion that two other Quantities decreaſe, or if the two former decreaſe in the ſame Proportion that the two later increaſe, then the two former are ſaid to be reciprocally as the two later, or in reciprocal Proportion of the two later. Thus the Weight of Bread is reciprocally proportional to the Price of Corn; that ĩs, as the Price of Corn at one time is to the Price of Corn at another time, ſo is the Weight of Bread at the ſecond time to the Weight of Bread at the firſt. If two Quantities are proportonl to the Squaures of two other Quantities, the two former are ſaid to be in Duplicate Proportion of the two laterr. Thus 8 to 18 is in Duplicate Proportion of 2 to 3.. For as 4 is to 9, ſo is 8 to 18. If two Quantities are proportional to the ſquare Roots of two other Quantities, the two former are ſaid to be in Subduplicate Proportion of the two later. Thus 8 to 18 is in Subduplicate Proportion of 16 to 81. For as 8 to 18, ſo is 4 to 9. ] Subduplicate Proportion is nearer to a Proportion of Equality, than a ſimple Proportion; and a Simple Proportion is nearer to a Proportion of Equality, than Duplicate Proportion. If two Quantities are as the Product of two Numbers to the Product of two Numbers, then thoſe Quantities are ſaid to be in Compound Proportion of thoſe Numbers. Thus 6 to 20 is in Compound Proportion of 4 to 8, and 6 to 10. For as 6 is to 20, ſo is 4 times  to 8 times Io. But to return to the Attraction of Gravitation, let AB be two attracting Bodies, and C D two attracted Bodies. 1. Now if AB are equal, and CD are equal, and the Diſtance of C from A equal to the Diſtances of D from B; then the Gravitations of C and D ſhall be equal. 2. But if the Quantity of Matter in A be double to the Quantity of Matter in B, all other Circumſtances continuing as they were; then the Gravity of C ſhall be double to the Gravity of D. 3. Again, if the Diſtance of C from A is to the Diſtance of D from B, as 2 to 3, every thing elſe remaining according to the firſt Suppoſition; then the Gravity of D ſhall be to the Gravity of C, as 4 to 9. -4. If A is double to B, and C quadruple to D, and the Diſtances equal; then the Gravity of C ſhall be eight times greater than that of D. 5. If the Quantities of Matter are as in the ſecond Caſe, and the Diſtances as in the third; then the Gravities of C and D ſhall be as 8 to 9. 6. If the Quantities of Matter be as in the fourth Caſe, and the Diſtances as in the third; then the Gravities ſhall be as the Product of the Numbers 2, 4, and 9, to the Product of the Numbers 1, 1 and 4 that is, às 72 t6 45 or 18 to I. That Increaſe of the attracting Force which ariſes from the Quantity of Matter in the attracting Body, is calld the Absolute Force. That Increaſe of the attracting Force which ariſes from the Smallneſs of the Diſtance; is call’'d the Accelerating Force. But the intire Force of Gravity, ariſing from both the former Conſiderations, together with the Quantity of Matter in the Body attracted, is call'd the Moving Force. At the Surfaces of two homogeneal Spheres of different Diameters, the Attractions of two equal and homogeneal Bodies ſhall be as the Diameters of the Spheres. For the abſolute Forces ſhall be as the Cubes of the Diameters, and the accelerating Forces ſhall be reciprocally as the Spheręs of the Semidiameters or Diameters3 therefore the moving Forces ſhall be as the Semidiameters or Diameters. Within the Surface of the Earth, ſuppoſing it in all Parts equally denſe) or any other attracting ſolid homogeneal Sphere, the accelerating Force decreaſes, as the Diſtance from the Center decreaſes. For at the Center there is no Attraction at all; and at any Diſtance between the Center and the Surface, the Attraction of the whole Sphere Is diminiſd by the contrary Attraction of its upper Part: For it is eaſily proved by Geometry, that if a Particle of Matter were placed any where within a concave Sphere composd of attractive Particles, the Particle within would not be at all affected by the Attractions of the Particles which compoſe the concave Sphere: Wherefore the Attractions of the Earth below the Surface at different Diſtances from the Center, are the ſame that the Attractions of ſuch ſolid Spheres would be, whoſe Semidiameters were equal to thoſe Diſtances; that is, the Attractions ſhall be as the Semidiameters or Diſtances. Hence it follows, that the Attraction is ſtrongeſt of all at the Surface of the Earth; for below the Surface, it decreaſes with the Diſtance; and above the Surface, it decreaſes as the Squares of the Diſtances increaſe. Of the ATTRACT ION of COHES ION. TT is evident from a Multitude of Experiments, that the Parts of Matter attract each other with a Force different from that of Gravity, and of a different kind. The Properties of this new Attraction are theſe: 1. The Force is by much the ſtrongeſt when the Parts touch each other. 2. The ſmaller the Diſtance, the ſtronger the Attraction; and if the Diſtance be very ſmall, the Force is very conſiderable. 3. At greater Diſtances, this ſort of Attraction is inſenſible. 4. Wherefore it decreaſes much more than as the Squares of the Diſtances increaſe; elſe it would be perceivable at great Diſtances, as the Attraction of Gravitation is. 5. Perhaps it may decreaſe nearly in reciprocal Proportion of the Cubes of the Diſtances, and at ſome determinate ſmall Diſtance entirely ſtop. 6. In Particles of an equal Size, the abſolute Force of Attraction is ſtrongeſt in that which contains the greateſt Quantity of Matter; for all Vacuity is void of Attraction. 7. Among Particles of an equal Size and Denſity touching each other, the Attraction is ſtrongeſt where the Surface of Contact is largeſt. 8. The Attraction is ſtronger between ſmall Particles than large, if the Particles are equally denſe, and the Surface of Contact equal: For the Effect of the ſame Force has a greater proportion to the Weight and Inertia of a ſmall Quantity, than of a large Quantity. The Ebullitions, Fermentations, and Cryſtalliations of the Chymiſts, are the plain Effects of ſuch an Attraction. That the Drops of Fluids endeavour to form themſelves into a round Figure, is owing to the mutual Attractions of their Parts: And that they are ſometimes hinderd from forming themſelves into that Shape, is owing to the Attraction of ſome neighbouring Body, whoſe Virtue is ſtronger than that of the Parts of the Fluid. Another manifeſt Proof of this Attraction, is the Aſcent of Water in ſmall open Glaſ Tubes, above the Level of the Water into which the End of the Tube is dipt. Here it is evident, that the Water tends towards, or is attracted by, the Glaſs, and endeavours to unite itſelf to it. The Circumſtances of this Experiment are worth remarking, which are theſe: 1. In every particular Tube, the Water riſes to a certain Height, and then ſtops. 2. And in all Tubes, the utmoſt Height to which the Water riſes, is reciprocally proportional to the Diameter of the Bore of the Tube, without any regard to the Thickneſs of the Glaſs, or the Length of the Tube. 3. Wherefore in all Tubes, the Quantity of the Water is directly proportional to the Diameter of the Tube: For we know from Geometry, that the Quantity of Water containd in Tubes of equal Heights and different Diameters, is directly proportional to the Squares of the Diameterss Wherefore if the Height be reciprocally as the Diameters, the Quantity containd ſhall be as the Diameters directly. 4. At the greateſt Height, the Weight of the Water raiſed is equal to the Attraction of the Tube that raiſes it. 5. The Attraction which raiſes and ſupports the Water, proceeds only from that Ring of Particles which lie in the concave Surface of the Tube next above the Surface of the Water in the Tube: For if it proceeded from other Particles within the ſolid Glaſs, the utmoſt Height of the Water would depend in part at leaſt upon the Thickneſs of the Glaſ, and not entirely upon the Diameter of the Bore. If the Attraction proceeded from the empty upper Part of the Tube, then the different Lengths of that upper part would produce different Effects: Nor can it proceed from the Attraction of thoſe Particles beyond which the Water has aſcended; for theſe Particles attract downwards as much as upwards, and therefore can contribute nothing either to the raiſing or ſupporting the Waterr. Wherefore the whole Weight of the Water that is raiſed, hangs by the uppermoſt Ring of the Particles to which ĩt is contiguous. 6. Hence it is evident, that the Quantity of Water at the greateſt Height in every Tube, ought to be proportional to the Diameter of the Tube, as always in Fact it is; for the Quantity of Water ought to be proportional to the Force of Attraction, and the Force of Attraction is as the Number of attracting homogeneal Particles, and the Number of the attractive Particles muſt be proportional to the Bigneſs of the Circle which thoſe Particles compoſe: And it is certain from Geometry, that the Bigneſs of the Circle is proportional to the Length of its Diameter, that is, of the Diameter of the Tube. 7. Hence alſo it is proved, that this kind of Attraction acts only at ſmall diſtances; for the whole Quantity of Water is ſuſtaind by ſuch Particles as are almoſt contiguous to itt. The Pores of a Sponge in ſucking up Water are in the Nature of ſmall Tubes, and act by the ſame Power. Hence it is that Water riſes between two parallel Glaſs Plates, to about half the Height that it riſes in a Tube whoſe Diameter is equal to the Diſtance of the Plates: And that one ſingle Plate raiſes a priſmatic Ledge of Water, equal in Quantity to half the Water which was raiſed between the two parallel Platess Hence alſo it is that Water riſes in the Form of a Hyperbola between two inclind Plates. There is another Experiment upon this Head that deſerves a particular Explanation, and that is the Motion of a Drop of Oil between two poliſ'd Glaſs Plates, touching each other at one End, ſo as to contain a very ſmall Angle between them. Here it is evident, 1. That the Drop moves towards the Concourſe of the Glaſſes, becauſe the Attractions of both the Surfaces incline that way. 2. That the Attraction becomes ſtronger, as the Drop approaches nearer to the Line of Contact, This appears becauſe the Plates of Glaſs muſt be more inclind to the Horizon before the Attraction can be overcome, and the Drop made to deſcend. 3. That if there be ſeveral Drops at an equal Diſtance from the Line of Concourſe, the largeſt moves faſteſt, becauſe the largeſt Drops being the flatteſt, their Surface of Contact with the Glaſſes is not only greater than that of the ſmall Drops, but alſo greater in proportion to the Quantity of Oil. Wherefore many times a large Drop ſhall overtake a ſmall one, which at firſt had got the ſtart of it by a conſiderable diſtance. 4. That the Attractions of the ſame Drop at diſfferent diſtances from the Line of Concourſe, are nearly in a reciprocal proportion of the Squares of the Diſtances of the Center oſ the Drop from the Concourſe of the Glaſſes: For by the ſeventh and eighth Laws of this ſort of Attraction, the Force is in proportion compounded of the Thinneſs of the Drop, and the Largeneſs of its Surface of Contact; both which are in a reciprocal proportion of the Diſtance from the Line of Concourſe, Having proved the Reality of this Attraction, it is no difficult Matter to ſhe farther, that ſuch a Power is ſufficient to explain how the Parts of Bodies may ſtick together with as many different Degrees of Coheſion as have been obſerved in Nature. Therefore by the firſt Philoſophical Rule, this Attraction ought to be eſteemed the true Cauſe of the Coheſion of Parts, and for that Reaſon it is calld the Attraction of Cobeſion. Particles of Matter whoſe Weight is greater than their Attraction, can produce only an incoherent Maſs like a Heap of Sand. Particles of Matter whoſe Attraction is but very little greater than their Weight, ſhall conſtitute a Fluid. Particles of Matter whoſe Attraction is very much greater than their Weight, ſhall form a compact and ſolid Body. If the Attraction exceeds the Weight of the Particles in a moderate degree, they will compoſe a ſoft Body. OF R E P U L S ION. HE RE the Force of Attraction ends, a new Force, which is that of Repulſion, begins. 1. If the Diſtance of two Particles be ſo great, that the Sphere of Attraction cannot reach from one to the other, they ſhall fly from or repel each other with a Force that increaſes, as the Diſtance of the Particles deereaſex . When a Particle that is repelles, is forced virtin the Sphere of Attraction, it ſhall be attracted; and when a Particle that is held by Attraction, is thrown off by ſome ſuperior Force beyond the Sphere of Attraction, it ſhall be repelled. 3. Thoſe Particles hich are attracted moſt ftrongly when within the Sphere, ſhall be repelled moſt forcibly when without it. 4. The repelling Force between a hard Body and a ſoft, is generally leſs than between two hard Bodies, and greater than between two ſoft Bodies. 5. The parts of a ſolid Body may be ſo diſpoſed as to attract the parts of a Fluid with great Violence, tho' the Attraction between a ſingle part of the Solid and a ſingle part of the Fluid may be very weak, and conſequently the repulſive Force between the fluid and ſolid Body but ſmall.It is from ſuch a repulſive Force that ve find it difficult to mix Oil and Water, that is, to make their parts touch and attract each other ſo as to ſtick together. The Repulſion between Glaſs and Water is eaſily overcome, that is, ĩt is eaſy to wet the Glaſs with Water, or make the Water ſtick to the Glaſs; but it is not eaſy to overcome the Repulſion between Glaſs and crude Quickſilver, or to apply the Quick ſilver to the Glaſs with ſo much Force as is requiſite to bring it within the Sphere of Attractionn. The repelling Force between Quickſilver and poliſd Steel, is ſtronger than between Quickſilver and Copper; and between Quickſilver and Copper, ſtranger than between Quickſilver and Gold. From this Principle of Repulſion it is, that a ſmall Needle, if dry, ſwims upon the Water; and that Flies walk upon it without wetting their Feet. Salt is ſpecifically heavier than Water; yet a ſmall Quantity of Salt being diſſolvVd in a large Quantity of Water, will not ſink to the Bottom, but diffuſe itſelf equally thro the whole Maſs. Wherefore as ſoon as the parts of the Salt are ſeparated by the Attraction of the Water, they recede from each other as much as poſſible, (that is, they repel each other, till they all ſtand at equal Diſtances) and communicate an equal Degree of Saltneſs to to all parts of the Water. Some Bodies are reduced by Fire into Vapour and Smoak, others are only melted: The Reaſon is, becauſe Heat is abl- to ſeparatę the parts of ſome Bodies with ſuch a Force, as to drive them beyond the Reach of each others Attraction; but in other Bodies, the Particles are of a fit ſize, and have a ſufficient Attraction to make them endure the Agitations of Heat, without being entirely ſeparated. If one Glaſs Priſm be laid upon another, the Rays of Light ſhall be copiouſly reflected in all oblique Angles from all Parts of the lower Surface of the uppermoſt Priſm: But if the Priſms are preſſed hard together, there will appear in that Surface a dark tranſparent ſpot; the Light, which was before reflected, being now attracted into the undermoſt Priſm, upon its near Approach, and tranſmitted thro it. Hence it clearly follows, that the Priſms did not touch each other before they were compreſſed; and that therefore they were kept aſunder by a repelling Force, greater than the Weight of the incumbent Priſm. Hence it is, that if a Fluid be divided, it eaſily unites again, the repelling Force being but ſmall; but if a piece of Glaſs be broke, and the parts laid together in the ſame order they were in at firſt, with never ſo much Exactneſs, yet the Repulſion is too ſtrong to admit of a Re-union. i Thus alſo, if hard Subſtances are pounded to dry Powders, the divided parts will not eaſily ſtick together, unleſs they are firſt wetted pelling Force is very weak, and afterwards brought together again, by gradually exhaling the intervening Fluid with a gentle Heat. That the Parts of Water are ſo eaſily ſeparated by Heèat, and rarified into Vapour, is an Argument of the ſmallneſs of their attracting Force; that being once ſeparated, they are ſo eaſily condenſed by cold, and turned into Water again, is an Argument of the ſmallneſs of their repelling Force. The fifth Property of this Law of Repulſion is very obſervable in the Diſſolution of Metals in their proper Menſtruums; for Aqua Fortis meets the Filings of Iron without diſiculty, and is aſterwards attracted by the Iron with ſo much Violence, as to looſen and divide the Parts of the Metal with a great Heat and Ebullition. When the Particles of Metals, or the like hard and denſe Subſtances, are emitted or thrown off by a violent Heat or Fermentation, there will be produced a Fluid, (like that of Air) the Parts of which will recede from each other as far as poſſible, and repel with leſs Force the farther they recede. Such Fluids as theſe are called Elaſtick Fluids, becauſe they are capable of Condenſation or Dilatation, as the Force that preſſes them is greater or leſſer than the repelling Force. Heat and Cold paſs thro the denſeſt Bodies, and are alſo conveyed thro' the artificial Vacuum to all Parts of the exhauſted Receiver. Hence it appears, that the Air floats in a Medium much more ſubtile than itſelf, which ſubtile Medium is elaſtick, and remains ſuſpended in the Receiver even after the Air is exhauſted. This ſubtile elaſtick Medium (Which may be called ætber) is expanded thro the whole Solar Syſtem, and conveys the Heat of the Sun with an immenſe Swiftneſs to the moſt diſtant Parts. The Rays of Light, when their Motion is deſtroyed, ſeem to conſtitute this æther, or at leaſt to mix with it. If we conceive the Attraction of Gravitation towards the Body of the Sun, or any fixed Star, to be confined within the Limits of the reſpective Syſtems of the Sun or Star, and that without thoſe Limits a repelling or cen. trifugal Force begins; this centrifugal Force will be ſuſficient to keep the Sun and fixed Stars in their proper Places, and hinder them from falling upon one another, and will be a kind of Wall or Partition about every particular Syſtem, and ſeems not to be unſuitable to the Regularity and Uniformity of the Works of Nature. Electrical Attraction and Repulſion ſeem to be in moſt of their Properties of a like Nature with the Principles that have been now explaind. Wherefore perhaps Electrical Attr action is nothing elſe but the Attraction of Coheſion, excited by a ſtrong Attrition to act with leſs Force in a larger Sphere. It is evident from ſeveral Experiments, that in Electrical Attraction, the Particles of Light and Ether are forcibly repelled or driven away from the Electrical Body; and that this Force reaches to a conſiderable diſtance, but is ſtrongeſt near the Electrical Body. Hence it follows, that the ZEther is denſer, and its Elaſticity ſtronger, at greater diſtances from the Electrical Body. Wherefore Leaf-Gold, or any other attracted Body, ſhall be driven from thoſe Parts where the Preſſure is greateſt, towards thoſe Parts where the Preſſure is leaſt, that is, toward the Electrical Body. When the Leaf-Gold is forcibly emitted by ſtrong and ſmart Vibrations of the Electrical Body beyond the Sphere of Attraction, the Gold itſelf ſeems to become electrical, and to vibrate and repel the ZEther, till the Virtue or Motion of its Parts is deſtroyed by the Contact of ſome other Body. Now Bodies ſurrounded each with an ele Sphere of its own, ought to repel r, becauſe the æther is repelled by t condenſed between them, and the Spl eby hindered from breaking in upor ther. MECHANICKS. MN ECHANICKS is that Part oſ Natural Philoſophy, which treats of the Nature and Laws of Motion. Of the Nature of REST aud MoT IoN. H E Continuance of a Body in the ſame Place, for any Space of Time, is calld Res. A continual Change of Place or leaving one Place and acquiring another, without remaining for any Space of Time in the ſame Place, is called Motion. The Place of a Body is that Space which it fills. Body is ſaid to be in the ſame Place abſolutely, when it does not paſs from one Part of immovable Space to another. A Body is ſaid to be in the ſame Place relatively, when it keeps the ſame Situation with reſpect to other Bodies. Wherefore Reſt and Motion are of two Kinds, Abſolute and Relative. A Body may be abſolutely at Reſt, and relatively in Motion; as a Bullet, if it were made to move juſt as faſt as the Earth moves, but the contrary way. So alſo a Body may be relatively at Reſt, and abſolutely in Motion; as all things that are fix'd to the Earth, and carried along with it. A Line drawn from the moving Body that way that the Motion tends, is called the Line of Direction. That Property of Motion by which the moving Body deſcribes a certain Space in a certain Time, is called the Swiftneſs or Velocity of the Motion. So long as the Velocity continues the ſame, the Motion is called Uniform; when the Velocity becomes greater than it was before, the Motion is ſaid to be accelerated; and when the Velocity grows leſs, the Motion is ſaid to be relarded. 1. In two Bodies moving uniformly, the Velocities are as the Spaces deſcribed in equal Times, or reciprocally as the Times in which equal Spaces are deſcribed, or always in compound proportion of the Spaces directly, and Times reciprocally; and the Spaces deſcribed are always in compound proportion of the Times and Velocities. 2. If two unequal Bodies move uniformly vwith equal Velocities, the Quantity of Motion in each Body is proportional to iĩts reſpective Quantity of Matter; as is evident from the bare Conſideration of the Inertia of Matter. 3. If two equal Bodies move uniformly with unequal Velocities, the Quantities of Motion are as the Velocities: For a double Velocity cannot be impreſſed upon an equal Quantity of Matter, without a double moving Force; and therefore the Effect, that is, the Motion produced, muſt be double. 4. Wherefore, if two unequal Bodies move uniformly with unequal Velocities, the Quantity of Motion is in compound proportion of the Quantities of Matter, and the Velocities of the moving Bodies. This is alſo cqnfirmd to be true by Experiment. The Quantity of Motion, in any moving Body, Oof MACHINES in general. ; AY thing by the Help of hich a Body is either moved, or hindered from moving, is called a Machine. 2. The Body which is moved, or hindered from moving, is called the Weight. That which moves or ſuſtains the Weight, is called the Power. 3. By the Motion of the Weight, we are not to underſtand the Motion of its Center of Gravity in a horizontal Line, nor the circular Motion of its Parts about the Center of Gravity ; for in both theſe Caſes the Gravitation of the Body is no Impediment to its Motion: But by the Motion of the Weight, is only meant the Aſcent or Deſcent of ĩts Center of Gravity; the Motion of the Center of Gravity farther from, or nearer towards the Center of the Earth. 4. We muſt diſtinguiſh three Centers: The Center of Magnitude of a Body, which is a Point taken as much as poſſible equally diſtant from all the outward Parts. The Center of Motion of a Body, which is any Point upon which the Body may reſt, or about which it may move. The Center of Gravity of a Body, which is a Point about which all the parts of the Body balance each other; ſo that if that Point be made the Center of Motion, the Body may be placed, and will continue, at Reſt in any Situation whatſoever. 5. Sometimes theſe three Centers fall upon one Point, ſometimes upon two, and ſometimes upon three different Points. 6. The Property of the Center of Gravity is always to deſcend whenſoever it is at Liberty to deſcend, that is, whenſoever it is not ſtopped by any thing, or ſuſpended upon any thing that lies in a direct Line, paſſing thro' the Center of the Earth and the Center of Gravity. 7. A Body cannot ſtand, or retain its Poſition, either upon a horizontal or inclined Plane, unleſs a Perpendicular, let fall from the Center of Gravity, falls within the Baſe. 8. In all Bodies that are ſuſpended, and at Reſt, upon any Center of Motion, the Center of Gravity is either directly over or directly under the Center of Motion. 9. That Point of a Machine about which the Weight and Power move, or upon which they ſuſtain each other, is called the fixed Point. 10. The Diſtance from the fix'd Point to that Part of the Machine where the Weight or Power is applied, is called the Diſtance of the Weight or Power. 11. The Angle of Application is the Angle made by the Machine, and the Line of Direction of the Weight or Power. 12. The Quantity of a Power is eſtimated by ſome determinate Force of Gravity equivalent theretoo. Thus a Power of ten Pounds, is a Power whoſe Force is equal to the Weight of ten Pounds. 13. It is the ſame thing whether a Machine be employed to lift ſome Weight, or to overcome ſome Reſiſtance or Force equivalent to that Weight. 14. When the Quantities of Motion in the Weight and Power are equal, the Machine ſhall ſtand in æquilibrio; but when they are unequal, the greater Quantity of Motion malt overcome and work the Machine. 15. OF Forces in themſelves equal, that which is neareſt to the fixed Point, is relatively the weakeſt upon the Machine; for as the Machine works, the neareſt Force moves the ſloweſt, and therefore has the leaſt Quantity of Motion. 16. The Effect of any Force upon a Machine will not be changed, if without changing the Line of Direction, we only place it in ſome other Point of the ſame Line. 17. Hence it follows, that if the Angle of Application be oblique, and a Perpendicular be let fall from the fixed Point to the Line of Diſtion, the Force ſhall be no greater upon the the Machine, than if it were applied at Right Angles at the end of the Perpendicular. 18. In treating of Machines, we are to conſider them as mathematically exact and perfect, and moving without Friction. 19. The Nature of any Machine is explained, when it is known in what Circumſtances the Weight and Power will be in Aquiliprio upon that Machine. 20. In any Machine vhatſoever, the Weight and the Power will be in æquilibrio, when their Quantities are in a reciprocal proportion of the Velocities, which the Working of the Machine would give them; for they will be in Aquilibrio, when the Quantity of Motion is equal on each ſidee Now the Quantities of Motion are in compound proportion of the Velocities and Quantities of Force. Therefore when the Quantities of Force are reciprocally as the Velocities, the Quantities of Motion ſhall be equal. mxD2s“p— Of the SIMPLE MACHINES. BAL ANCE is nothing but a right Line moving freely upon a fixed Point. The Aquilibrium will happen at all times, when the Quantities of the Power and Weight are reciprocally as their Diſtances. DOne Weight may be in æquilibrio with ohe equal or unequal Weight, or with ſeveral equal or unequal Weights; and ſeveral equal or unequal Weights may be in æquilibrio with an equal or unequal Number of other Weights. For if the Sum of the Products of each Weight, multiplied into ĩts reſpective Diſtance on one ſide the Balance, be equal to the Sum of the like Products on the other ſide, the Quantities of Motion ſhall be equal on each ſide. Thoſe Weights which are in æquilibrio upon a horizontal Balance, will remain in æquilibrio when the Balance is inclined, provided the Lines of Direction continue parallel to each other. When an inclined Balance returns to a horizontal Situation, the Reaſon is becauſe the common Center of Gravity of the Balance and Weights falls below the fix'd Point. The Statera Romana, or Steel-Yard, is a Balance with unequal Arms; the common Scales is a Balance with equal Arms. Falſe Scales are diſcovered by changing the Weights from each Scale to the other. If by falfe Scales, the Seller will gain one Ounce in ſixteen; then by changing the Weights, the Buyer ſhall gain one Ounce and 4 of an Ounce over. A Leaver differs from a Balance only in the manner of uſing it. Leavers are of four Kinds: 1I. When the fixed Point is between the Weight and the Power. 2. When the Weight is between the Axed Point and the Power. 3. When the Power is between the fixed Point and the Weight. 4. When the Diſtance of the Weight makes an Angle at the fixed Point with the Diſtance of the Power. In all the four Kinds there will be an æquilibrium, when the Forces are in reciprocal proportion of their Diſtances. A compound Leaver is eaſily explained upon the ſame Principles. If a Power is to ſupport two Weights hanging at the End of a Leaver, the Power muſt be equal to the Sum of the Weight, and placed between them, ſo that the Diſtances ſhall be reciprocally as the Weights: For in this Caſe the Power is in the Place of a fixed Point. If the Weights at the End of the Leaver be conſidered as Powers, and the Power between them as a Weight, it will eaſily be perceived, that when a Weight upon a Leaver is to be ſupported by a Power at each End, the Sum of the Powers muſt be equal to the Weight, and the Powers muſt be to each other in reciprocal proportion of their Diſtances from the Weight. The third ſimple Machine is the Pulley. That Pulley which the Rope runs over, is called an Upper Pulley; that under which the Rope runs, is called a Lower Pulley. An Upper Pulley alters the Direction of the Power, but is of no farther Service; for upon the turning of the Pulley, the Velocities of the Weight and Power are equal, and conſequently their Quantities muſt be equal to conſtitute an æquilibrium. With a ſingle lower Pulley; the Power moves twice as faſt as the Weight; and therefore to make an æquilibrium, the Weight muſt be double to the Power. The ſmallneſs or largeneſs of the Pulley makes no Alteration in this Rule. In any Combination of Pullies, where they all communicate with one another, the æquilibvium will be, when the Power is to the Weight, as one to the Number of Strings at the lower Pullies; for it is evident, that the Velocities are in that Proportion, becauſe every String at the lower Pullies muſt ſhorten, juſt as much as the Weight riſes; and the Power muſt deſcend, as much as is the Sum of the Shortnings of all the Strings. In a Combination of ſeparate Pullies, where each lower Pulley has its own peculiar String, the Power muſt be to the Weight, as One is to the Number two continually doubled as many Iimes as there are lower Pulliess, In all Caſes, Allowance muſt be made for the Weight of the lower Pullies. The next Simple Machine is the Wheel and Axle: And here there will be an æquilibrium when the Power is to the Weight, as the Radius of the Axle is to the Radius of the Wheel. But if the Thickneſs of the Rope be conſiderable, the Semidiameter of the Rope muſt be added both to the Radius of the Wheel and to the Radius of the Axlee When the Rope begins to cover the Axle a ſecond time, three times the Semidiameter of the Rope muſt be added to the Radius of the Axle: When the Rope begins to.cover the Axle a third time, five times the Semidiameter of the Rope muſt be added to the Radius of the Axle, &r. VWVherefore if we would work the Machine always with the ſame Velocity, the Power muſt be increaſed every time the Rope recedes from the Axle. An inclined Plane is the laſt Simple Machine. If a Weight be raiſed with an uniform Motion upon an inclined Plane, the Power that raiſes it muſt move the whole length of the inclined Plane; but by the third Article of Machines in general, the Motion of the Weight is the Aſcent of its Center of Gravity: Therefore the Velocity of the Power is to the Velocity of the Weight, as the length of the Plane to the perpendicular Height of the Plane. Wherefore there will be an æquilibrium upon the inclined Plane, when the Power which acts parallel to the Plane, is to the Weight, as the perpendicular Height of the Plane is to the length of the Plane. The whole Force with which a Weight deſcends in a right Line towards the Center of the Earth, is called the 4bſolute Gravity of that Weight. The diminiſ'd Force with nhid a Weight deſcends upon an inclined- Plane, in an oblique Line towards the Center of the Earth, is called the Relative Gravity of that Weight upon the Plane. If a Plane be perpendicular, the Relative Gravity upon it is equal to the Abſolute Gravity; but if a Plane be horizontal, there is no Relative Gravity at all. To move a Weight upon a horizontal Plane with any Velocity, there is nothing wanting but a Force ſufficient to overcome Friction and the Inertia of Matter. A Screw is nothing elſe but a ſpiral inclinnd Plane encompaſſing a Cylinder; and therefore if the Power be to the Weight, as the length of the Arbor to the length of thThread of the Screw, there ſhall be an quilibrium. A Rectangular Wedge is nothing but an ceived to move ſo far as the Wedge enters; and the Weight muſt be conceivd to move ſo far as the Parts of the Wood are ſeparsted by the entring of the Wedge. Wherefore to make an æquilibrium, the Power muſt be to the Weight, as the perpendicular Height of the Wedge to the length of its Baſe. A Wedge in the common Form is nothing but two Rectangular Wedges joined together at their Baſes;3 and therefore the Power and Weight in æquilibrio will be to cach other, as the Thickneſs of the Back of the Wedge is to the perpendicular Length of the Wedge meaſured from the dividing Edge to the Back. In like manner, the Nature of all compound Machines is eaſily demonſtrated; for we have nothing elſe to do but to compute what would be the Proportion of the Velocities of the Weight and Power, and to take their Forces in reciprocal proportion of thoſe Velocities. All theſe Rules are demonſtrated to be true from the bare Conſideration of the Nature of Motion in general; and therefore if a Machine differs from the Rule, (as all Machines will differ more or leſs) the Difference muſt be aſcribed to Friction and the Reſiſtance of the Medium, or ſome Irregularity in the ure of the Machine, or Imperfec ſaterials. more full and particular Accoun nple and Compound Machines, r 1 the little Treatiſe of Mechanick O F TH E Lawsof MOTION. HESE Las relate to the Effects of Moving Forces, upon ſuch Bodies as are at Liberty to move without any Obſtacle or Reſiſtance. —— N uum The firſt LAW of MoTION. L L Bodies purſsvore in their State of Reſt or uniform Motion in a right Line, unleſs by ſome impreſſed Force they are made to change that ſtate. We know by Experience, that it requires the ſame Force to deſtroy Motion as to produce it; therefore as all Bodies are inactive, ſo they can neither move, unleſs they are moved; nor ſtop, unleſs they are ſtopped by ſome Force impreſſed upon them. All Motion is in its own Nature perpetual; but no Motion, how artfully ſoever contrived, can be in Fact perpetual, becauſe of the Reſiſtance of the Medium. If a Body is impelld at the ſame time by two equal Forces in contrary Directions, the Forces will deſtroy each others Effect, and the Body will remain at Reſt between them. And if a Body remains at Reſt between two Forces that act upon it in contrary Directions, thoſe Forces ſhall be equal. If the Forces are unequal, the Body will move in the Direction of the ſtrongeſt Force, in the ſame manner as if it were impelled by a Force equal to the difference of thoſe two Forces. If the Sides of any Parallelogram repreſent the Proportion and Direction of two Forces acting upon the ſame Body at the ſame time, the Diagonal of that Parallelogram ſhall repreſent the Proportion and Direction of a ſingle Force, equivalent to both the former. Upon this Principle any ſingle Force may be reſolved into many; and any Number of given Forces acting upon the ſame Point at the ſame time, may be reduced 'to one. A moving Body cannot be made to deſcribe a Curve Line by any one Impulſe whatſoever. If a Body having received one Impulſe moves in the Circumference of a Circle, it is attracted towards the Center of that Circle by a Force acting upon the Body every inſtant of its Motion: For in every Part of the Circumference, the revolving Body forſakes the right Line of its preſent Direction, and approaches towards the Center of the Circle. Thus a Stone in a Sling revolves about the Hand, till the String is let go, and the Attraction ceaſes; then it immediately flies off in a Tangent, to that Point of the Circumference in which the Stone happens to be. Here are four things to be conſidered: 1. The original Impulſe of the Stone. 2. The continual Attraction which draws away the Stone from moving in a right Line. This is called the Centripetal Force, that is, the Force which carries theStone towardstheCenter. 3. The conſtant Tendency of the Stone to fly off in a Tangent, which ariſes from the Continuance of the Effect of the original Impulſe, according to this firſt Law of Motion. This is called the Projectile Force. 4. A certain Force which balances the Attraction, and prevents the Stone from falling to the Center. This is cauſed by the continual Effort which the Stone exerts to fly off from the Center in a Tangent; and it is called the Centrifugal Force, that is, the Force which carries the Stone from the Center. The Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces are always equal; for they act in contrary Directions, and deſtroy each other's Effect, ſo that the Body neither flies off, nor falls in, but is carried on in its own proper Orbit. Thus in the Sling, the Stone and the Hand pull againſt each other with an equal Force, the String being equally ſtretch’d between them. If the Attraction continũes the ſame, whilſt the Centrifugal Force becomes greater, the revolving Body ſhall recede from the Center; but if the Attraction continues the ſame, and the Centrifugal Force becomes leſs, the revolving Body ſhall approach towards the Center. If the Attraction entirely ceaſes, the Body ſhall fly off in a Tangent; and if the Projectile Force be quite deſtroyed, the Centrifugal Force conſequently ceaſing, the Body ſhall fall in a direct Line to the Center. — Of the MoTIONS, DISTANCES, and PERIODS of the PLANETS. H E cleareſt and fulleſt Teſtimony that the Syſtem of the World, which Copernicus maintained, was known to the Ancients, is to be found in Archimedes. s Ariſtarchus Samius, (ſays he, Arenar, p. 5. s Edit. Walliſ.) ſuppoſes all the fixed Stars t: and the Sun to be without Motion, and t that the Earth is carried in the Circumference s of a Circle round the Sun, which is ſituated c in the Center of that Circle: and that the c Sphere of the fixed Stars is ſo immenſe, that c the Circle of the Earth's Motion bears no c greater proportion to the diſtance of the sc fixed Stars, than the Center of any Sphere s bears to its whole Surface.” The Planets, if we conſider only their mean Motions, Diſtances, and Periods, are Bodies uniformly revolving in circular Orbits, whoſe common Center is the Sun. That the Planets are not carried round by Vortices, is evident, becauſe being denſer than the Fluid of the Vortex, they could not revolve in an Orb, but muſt perpetually fly off from the Sun in a Spiral: For when two Bodies, whether ſolid or fluid, move about any Point as a Center, the denſeſt Body has always the greateſt Centrifugal Force. That there are neither ſolid Orbs nor Vortices in the Solar Syſtem, is evident from the Motion of Comets which traverſe the Orbs of all the Planets almoſt in a right Line. That the Reſiſtance of the Medium, in which the Planets move, is inconſiderable, is evident from the Continuance and Regularity of their Motions for ſo many Ages. That the Planets are attracted by the Sun, is ident, becauſe they continually forſake the right Line of their preſent Direction, and approach towards the Sun. That the Planets have alſo a Projectile Force, is evident, becauſe they do not tend towards the Sun in a right Line. This Attraction and Projectile Force are ſufficient to explain the Motions of the Planets. The Periods ſin Hours) and Diſtances of the Planets from the Sun (in Miles) are as follows: Periods. Diſtances. Saturn, 258232 667,664200 Fupiter, 103980 364,08 1200 Mars, 16488; 1I06,679300 The Earib, 8766 70, 009000 Venus, 5393 4£0,63300 Mercury, 211I 27,097000 There is a wonderful Harmony, which was firſt obſervd by Kepler, between the Periods and Diſtances of the Planets; for the Squares of any two Numbers in the firſt Column, are proportional to the Cubes of the correſpondent Numbers in the ſecond Column; that is, the Squares of the periodic Times are as the Cubet of the Diſtances. Now all Bodies muſt of neceſſity obſerve this Law, if they revolve in Circles about one common Center, by means of a Centripetal and Projectile Force. VFor the following Rules concerning Centripetal Forces are not only demonſtrable Geometrically, but are alſo proved by Experiment. 1. That if two Bodies revolve about diſſerent Centers, and if the Diſtances and periodic Times are equal, the Centripetal Forces ſhall be as the Quantities of Matter in the revolving Bodies. 2. That if the Quantities of Matter and the periodic Times are equal, the Centripetal Forces ſhall be as the Diſtances. 3. If the Quantities of Matter and Diſtances are equal, the Centripetal Forces ſhall be as the Squares of the periodic Times reciprocally, or as the Squares of the Velocities directly. 4. If the Quantities of Matter and the Velocities are equal, the Centripetal Forces ſhall be as the Diſtances reciprocally. 5. Wherefore if only the Quantities of Matter are equal, the Centripetal Forces ſhall be in compound Proportion of the Diſtances reciprocally, and the Squares of the Velocities directly. l Theſe Rules are proved experimentally by the double whirling Table; for the right underſtanding of which, the following Particulars muſt be obſerved. I. That at the Beginning when the whirling Motion is ſlow, the Centrifugal Force of the revolving Balls is leſs than the Gravity of ihe the Weights below. 2. That as the whirling Motion is gradually accelerated, the Centrifugal Force of the revolving Balls increaſes, till at laſt it exceeds the Gravity of the Weights, and then the Weights riſe. 3. That if the Experiment be nicely adjuſted, the Weights will both riſe at the ſame Inſtant, and then the Experiment is over. 4. That when the Weights riſe at the m⸗ Inſtant, it proves, that in the preceding Inſtant, the Centrifugal Forces of the revolving Balls were reſpectively equal to the Gravity of each appending Weight. 5. That the Centrifugal Forces being at that Inſtant equal to the Gravities, are to each other at the ſame Inſtant in proportion as thoſe Gravities. 6. That if the Forces are proportional to the Gravities in any one Inſtant, they are ſo during the whole Experiment; for the Circumſtances of the revolving Bodies, as to Quantities of Matter and Diſtances from the Center, and Proportion of Velocities, continue the ſame all the Time till the Weights riſe. The ſame Rules are eaſily proved Geometrically; for when the Quantities of Matter are equal, the Centripetal Forces are as the verſed Sines of the Arches, which Bodies deſcribe in any given Inſtant of Time; but the verſed Sine of any Arch is equal to the Square of the Chord of that Arch, divided by the Diameter of the Circle; Circle; and in very ſmall Arches, the Chords and the Arches are equivalent. Therefore the Centripetal Forces are as the Squares of the Arches divided by the Diameters of the Circle Therefore the Centripetal Forces are as the Squares of the Velocities directly, and as the Diameters or Semidiameters reciprocally. From the three firſt Rules it follows, that in all Caſes the Centripetal Forces are in compound Proportion of the Diſtances and Quantities of Matter directly, and the Squares of the periodic Times reciprocally. Now it has been already ſiewn concerning the Attraction of Gravitation, that the Force is in all Caſes as the Quantity of Matter directly, and the Squares of the Diſtances reciprocally. Wherefore if from both theſe Expreſſions of the ſame Force we take away the Quantity of Matter, and add to both the Square of the Radius and the Square of the periodic Times, it will appear that the Squares of the periodic Times are as the Cubes of the Diſtances. Therefore an attracting and projectile Force are ſufficient to explain the Motions of the Planets in their Orbs; and conſequently, by the firſt Philoſophical Rule, thoſe Forces are the true natural Cauſes of the Planets Motions. We cannot indeed be ſure that the Diſtances of the Planets contain juſt ſo many Miles as are aſignd to each in the foregoing Table; but yet Geometry will aſſure us, that thoſe Numbers in the Table expreſs the true Proportions of the Planets Diſtances; which is as ſufficient for our preſent Purpoſe, as if they expreſſed the real Diſtances themſelves. Hence alſo we may infer, that the abſolute Velocities of the Planets in their Orbs are reciprocally as their Diſtances from the Sun. For (as appears from ꝓ. 33.) their Velocities are directly as their Orbs, and inverſely as their periodic Times; that is, as their Diſtances directly and periodic Times reciprocally. Therefore the Squares of their Velocities are directly as the Squares of their Diſtances, and reciprocally as the Squares of the periodic Times; that is, directly 4s the Squares of the Diſtances and reciprocalſy: as the Cubes of the Diſtances; that is, in the whole reciprocally as the Diſtances Wherefore if the abovementioned Diſtances are allowed as juſt, the abſolute Velocities of the Planets (expreſſing how many Miles they move in an Hour) ill be as in the following Table. Saturu 16,250 Vupiter 22,000 Mars 40, 640 The Earth 50, I70 Venus 58,990 Mercury 80, 640 The Moon revolves about the Earth from the ſame Cauſes that the Earth and other Planets revolve about the Sun, that is, by means of a Projectile Force and a Centripetal Force, which tends to the Center of the Earth. Yupiter has four Moons or Satellites, in all which the Squares of the periodic Times are proportional to the Cubes of their reſpective Diſtances from that Planett. Wherefore the Revolutions of theſe Satellites, or Secundary Planets, are of the ſame Nature with the Revolutions of the Primary Planets about the Sun; and therefore by the ſecond Philoſophical Rule, we ought to aſſign the ſame Cauſes to both, The ſame is to be underſtood of Saturn and his five Moons. Each Planet has not only a progreſſive Motion in its Orbit, but alſo a Motion of Rotation about its own Axis, which occaſions an alternate Succeſſion of Night and Day to all its Inhabitants, if it has any. The Sun himſelf in the Center of the Syſtem turns about his own Axis, finiſhing one Revolution in twenty five Days and a quarter. The Circuit of the Earth's Equator is above 24000 Miles, and therefore at the Equator the Diurnal Rotation is at the rate of more than 1000 Miles an Hour;3 but the Earth's progreſſive Motion in her Orbit is about fifty Limes as faſt. The Diurnal Rotation in the Parallel of London is at the rate of 622 Miles an Hour. Tho the Earths Diurnal Rotation be very ſwift at the Equator, yet it produces but a ſmall Centrifugal Force, (as appears from the fourth Rule concerning Centripetal Forces) becauſe the Diſtance from the Center is very great, almoſt 4000 Miles. Wherefore ſuch Bodies as lie looſe upon the Surface of the Earth, will not be flung from it by the Diurnal Rotation; becauſe, as Sir Iſaac Newton has computed, the Weight of each Body is 289 times greater than its Centrifugal Force at the Equator. From this firſt Law of Motion and its Corollary, it alſo follows, that Bodies flung into the Air, will in Appearance aſcend and deſcend in the ſame manner, ſuppoſing the Earth to move, as they would do ſuppoſing the Earth to be at Reſt, Since in all Bodies revolving about a common Center, the Squares of the Times are as the Cubes of the Diſtances, we may from hence diſcover, what would be the Period and VeIocity of any ſuppoſed Moon, or Satellite, revolving round the Earth at any given Diſtance. For Example, Suppoſe a Satellite were to revolve near the Surface of the Earth, it would move at the rate of about five Miles an Hour, and would make one Period in about 82 Minutes. Eiill VFor the mean Diſtance of the Moon from the Center of the Earth, is ſixty Semidiameters of the Earth and a Quarter, and the Surface of the Earth is one Semidiameter diſtant from its Center, and the Moon finiſhes one Period in about 27 Days, 8 Hours, or 332 Hours. Wherefore, ſay as the Cube of 6oà is to one, ſo is the Square of 332 to a fourth Number, whoſe ſquare Root, 82 Minutes, is the periodic Time of the new Satellite, and if it moves 25000 Miles in 82 Minutes, then it ſhall move 5 Miles in one ſecond of Time. The Fourth Part of this Periodic Time, viæ. twenty Minutes and a Half, is the Space of Time which a heavy Body would ſpend in falling from the Surface of the Earth to the Center, as is evident from the thirty eighth Propoſition of the firſt Book of ibe Principles. Since the ſuppoſed new Satellite moves ; Miles in a ſecond of Time, the verſed Sine of that 5 Miles ſhall ſnew hqw far a heavy Body near the Surface of the Earth, deſcends at the beginning of its Fall in a ſecond of Time. That verſed Sine may be found by pag. 52. For the Diameter of the Earth being 42 107149 Feet, and 5 Miles being 26400 Feet, whoſe Square is 656760000 Feet; if this laſt Number be divided by 42 107 149 the Earths Diameter, the Quotient 16 Feet ſhall be the verſed Sine ſought, and ſo far doęs a heavy Body deſcend near the Surface of the Earth at the beginning of its Fall in a ſecond of Time. The Second Law of MoT ION. T HE Alteration of Motion is always proportional to the moving Force impreſſed, and in the ſame Direction in which that Force is impreſſed, The firſt Law regards only ſuch Motions as are uniform; the ſecond relates to accelerated and retarded Motions. Of the Deſcent of Heavy Bodies in a direct Line. F a Body be made to move by any Force I in any Direction, and be accelerated by the fame Force in the ſame Direction every Inſtant of its Motion, the acquired Velocities ſall be as the Times computed from the Beginning of the Motion. For if we conceive Time to be divided into infinitely ſmall Parts, which may be call'd Inuſtants, the Number of Accelerations ſhall be equal to the Number of Inſtants; and therefore the Sum of the Inſtants, that is, the whole Time, ſhall be proportional to the Sum of the Accelerations, that is, to the laſt Velocity. The Motion of a Body deſcending by its own Weight in a right Line near the Surface of the Earth, is ſuch a Motion as is here deſcribed. For tho the Force of Gravity does indeed increaſe, as the Body deſcends; yet is that Augmentation of the attracting Force inſenſible and inconſiderable. If a Body falls from a certain Height, and then moves uniformly with the laſt acquired Velocity, it ſhall move twice as far as it fell in the ſame Time that it ſpent in falling. For Example, let us ſuppoſe the Body to ſpend ſix Inſtants in its Fall, and to acquire ſix Degrees of Velocity, it is certain that the Line deſcribed in deſcending may fitly be expreſſed by the Sum of the following Numbers: o, 1I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 And the Line deſcribed by the uniform Motion, may fitly be expreſſed by the Sum of the following Numbers: 6, 66, 6b6, 6, 6 Now the Sum of the laſt Series of Numbers is juſt double the Sum of the firſt Series. And the ſame thing ill happen in all Cafes. Wherefore if a Body that has fallen from a certain Height moves uniformly with half the laſt Velocity, it ſhall move juſt'as far as jt has fallen in the ſame Time that it ſpent in fallingg Thus the accelerated Motion of falling Bodies is reduced to the Caſe of an uniform Motion. Now in all uniform Motions, the Lines deſcribed are in compound Proportion of the Times and Velocities, by the firſt Rule concerning Motion and Reſt in general: But in the Caſe of falling Bodies, the Times are in the ſame Proportion withthe Velocities; therefore the Lines deſcribed by falling Bodies are as the Squares of the Times. Thus if the Time of falling be double, half the laſt V elocity nall be double; and twice the Velocity in tice the Time will carry the Body four times as far. All theſe things are alſo demonſtrated by Experiments with the ſtrong Balance, concerning which the following Particulars are to be obſerved. 1. That the Force with which the falling Ball ſtrikes the Arm of the Balance, is equal to the Sum of the Quantity of i's Motion added to it's Weight; as will be ſhewn hereafter in the 8th Rule of the Communication of Motion. 2. That if the Weight of the Ball be deducted from the Weight in the Scale, we may then conſider i it, as if the Effect were produc’d by the bare Quantity of Motion in the Ball, acting by way of Impulſe from beneath, upon a certain Weight equal to that Remainder. 3. That the Quantity of Motion in the falling Ball, is as the Iaſt acquired Velocity, or as the Time ſpent in falling. 4. That every Experiment ſhews, what Quantity of Motion is neceſſary to raiſe the Arm of the Balance (and conſequently the Weight in the Scale) to a certain determinate Height, viZ. ſo high as juſt to diſcharge the Spring. 5. That ſince in every Experiment the Arm of the Balance muſt riſe to the ſame Height, therefore the ſame Velocity is communicated every time to the Weight in the Scale. 6. That when one Body in Motion ſtrikes another at Reſt, we may find the common Velocity after the Stroke, if we divide the Quantity of Motion in the moving Body, by the Sum of the Quantities of Matter in both Bodies. Or if the Velocity after the Stroke be multiplied by the Sum of the Quantities of Matter in both Bodies, the Product ſhall give the Quantity of Motion before the Stroke, as will appear when we come to treat of the Communication of Motion. 7. That therefore by Obſervation 2. and 5. the bare Quantity of Motion with which the falling Ball ſtrikes the Arm of the Balance, is as the Weight i in the Scale multiplied into a given Quantity, that is, ſimply as the Weight in the Scale. 8. That therefore by Obſervation 3. the Velocity with which the Ball ſtrikes the Arm of the Balance, and conſequently the Time of falling, is as the Weight in the Scale. Bodies are obſerved to fall about 16 Feet in a Second of Time; therefore in 10 Seconds they will fall 1600 Feet, and in 60 Seconds 57620 Feet. The Times or the Velocities of falling Bodies are in ſubduplicate Proportion, or as the ſquare Roots of the Lines deſcribed by their Fall. If a Bullet be ſhot directly upwards, the Motion will be continually retarded by the Attractions of Gravity in a contrary Direction, till at laſt the whole Motion is deſtroyed; then the Bullet ſhall begin to fall, and the Motion ſhall be accelerated in the ſame time, and in the ſame manner as it was before retarded. Wherefore the Velocities of the Bullet aſcending and deſcending ſhall be equal at equal Heights in all Parts of the Line. If ſeveral Bullets are ſhot directly upwards with different Velocities, their greateſt Altitudes ſhall be as the Squares of thoſe Velocities; for in every Bullet, the Line of Aſcent and Deſcent is the ſame, and the firſt Velocity aſcendingis equal to the laſt Velocity deſcending: But the Lines of Deſcent are as the Squares of the laſt Velocities deſcending; therefore the Lines of Aſcent are as the Squares of the Velocities aſcending. . ESmmms  Sl-m u Of the Motion of PROJECT ILES. F a heavy Body be thrown in an horizontal or oblique Direction, it ſhall aſcend or deſcend juſt as it would do if it had no progreſſive Motion; and it ſhall at the ſame time advance by the progreſſive Motion, juſt in the ſane manner as if it did not aſcend or deſcend at all. Wherefore all Projectiles near the Surface of the Earth deſcribe Parabolas, from the Properties of which Figure the Rules of Gunnery may be demonſtrated Geometrically, as they are alſo ſnewn experimentally (making Allowance for the Reſiſtance of the Air) to be as follows: 1. The greateſt Random is at the Elevation of 45 Degrees. 2. If two Elevations are taken at equal Diſtances from 45 Degrees, one above, and the other below it, the Ranges ſhall be equal 3. The greateſt Altitude of a perpendicular Projection is equal to half the greateſt Random. Theſe three Rules will be demonſtrated Geometrically when we come to treat of Spouting Fluids. 4. Wherefore as 16 Feet is to one Second of Time, ſo is half the greateſt Random to a fourth Number; the ſquare Root of which is the Number of Seconds ſpent in the Fall of the Projectile from its greateſt perpendicular Height at 90 Degrees Elevation. 5. If the Number of Feet in the greateſt Random be divided by the Number of Seconds found by the laſt Rule, the Quotient ſhall ſhew the Velocity of the Projection, or at the rate of how many Feet in a Second the Body would be carried by the impreſſed Force alone, according to the firſt Law of Motion: For in a perpendicular Projection, the laſt deſcending Velocity is equal to the Velocity impreſſed at firſt, and would carry the Body by an uniform Motion, in the time of its Fall, tice as far as it deſcended, that is, once the Length of the greateſt Random. Thus the greateſt Random of a Minion is about 29300 Feet: Wherefore the Velocity impreſſed is almoſt 950 Feet in a Second of Time. When Projectiles are thrown into the Air, the greateſt Random is at the Elevation of 44 Degrees and a half; the lower Ranges go farther than the upper correſpondent Ranges, and jection is more than half the greateſt Random. All theſe Irregularities are occaſioned by the Reſiſtance of the Medium. i I Of RESISTING MEDIUMS. H E Reſiſtance of Mediums is proportional to the Quantities of Motion, which Bodies, moving therein, loſe in any given Inſtant of Time. There are two Sorts of Reſiſtance; one that ariſes from the Tenacity of the Medium, or the Friction and Attrition of its Parts; another, that is owing to the Inertia of Matter. The firſt Kind of Reſiſtance in any one Fluid, will always be proportional to the Number of Parts of the Medium, which the moving Body ſeparates in a given Inſtant of Time. Therefore the Reſiſtance of the ſame Medium to the ſame Body moving with different Velocities, ſhall be as the Velocity of the Motion; and the Reſiſtance of the ſame Medium to different ſphericall Bodies moving with the ſame Velocity, ſhall be as the Diameter of the Body; for it muſt be proportional to the Surface of that Part of the Medium which is diſplaced by the moving Body. This ReſiF therefore in all Caſes is in compound Proportion of the Velocity and Diameter. The other kind of Reſiſtance is proportional to the Quantity of Motion, which the Medium receives from the moving Body in a given Inſtant of Time. Therefore if equal Bodies move with equal Velocities in different Mediums, this ſort of Reſiſtance ſhall be proportional to the Denſity of the Medium. If equal Bodies move in the ſame Medium with different Velocities, it ſhall be as the Square of the Velocities; for the Velocity impreſſed upon the Parts of the Medium, and the Number of Parts of the Medium upon which the Motion is impreſſed in a given Inſtant, are both proportional to the Velocity of the moving Body: Therefore the Quantity of Motion impreſſed is as the Square of the Velocity. But if unequal (ſpherical) Bodies move with the ſame Velocity in the ſame Medium, it is evident that the Reſiſtance ſhall be as the Area of a great Circle of the moving Sphere, that is, as the Square of its Diameter. Wherefore in all Caſes, this ſecond kind of Reſiſtance will be in compound Proportion of the Denſity of the Medium, and the Square of Velocity and the Square of the Diameter of the moving Body. If a heavy Body deſcends in a reſiſting Medium, the Motion ſhall be accelerated, but not in the ſame manner as in vacuo; for in vatuo, every Inſtant of Time produces an equal Acceleration; but in the Air, the Accelerations decreaſe continually, becauſe the Reſiſtance increaſes as the Square of the increaſing Velocity. If a Body be throvn downwards, with ſuch a Velocity as ſhall make the Reſiſtance of the Medium equal to the Acceleration of Gravity, it will move on with an uniform Motion, according to the firſt La. The Velocity of a Body deſcending by its own Weight only in a reſiſting Medium, is always leſs than that Velocity which produces the uniform Motion, but continually approaching towards it. Hence it is, that tho' in vacuo all Bodies deſcend equally faſt, yet in reſiſting Mediums the heavieſt fall faſteſt. If a Ball be thrown up into the Air with a Velocity greater than that of the uniform Motion, it muſt move ſower at the latter end of the Deſcent than at the beginning of the Aſcent; and conſequently ſpend more time in going up than in coming down. That part of the Line of Aſcent in which the Velocity is greater than the uniform Velocity, is called the Line of Fire; and the Laws by which Bodies aſcend and deſcend in vacuo, cannot, with any tolerable Accuracy, be applied to Bodies thrown into the Air, till they arrive at the end of that Line of Fire. Merſennus relates, that an Arrow being ſhot into the Air perpendicularly to the Height of fifty Fathoms, aſcended in three Seconds and deſcended in five. But that an Iron Bullet ſhot from a Mortar aſcended in ſix Seconds and deſcended in the ſame time. Of the MoTION of the MooN and TIDES. Aving ſeen by what Laws heavy Bodies deſcend towards the Center of the Earth, it will now appear very evidently, that the Attraction of Gravitation towards the Earth is ſufficient to draw the Moon continually from the rectilineal Motion, according to the firſt Law, and to make her revolve in an Orbit, which has the Earth for its Center. The Diameter of the Earth is 42107149 Feet; the Diameter of the Moons Orbit is 6o times as much, or 2521028940 Feet; the Circumference of a great Circle of the Earth is 132000768 Feet the Circumference of the Moon’s Orbit is 60 times as much, or 7920046080 Feet. The Moon finiſhes one Period in her Orbit in 27 Days, 7 Hours, and 43 Minutes: Therefore in one Minute of Time, ſhe moves in her Orbit an Arch of 201307 Feet. Now the verſed Sine of any Arch is found by dividing the Square of the Chord of that Arch (or the Square of the Arch itſelf, if it be a very ſmall Arch) by the Diameter of the Circlee Wherefore if we divide the Square of 210307 by 2521028940, the Quotient ſhall give 16 Feet for the verſed Sine; and ſo far does the Moon in one Minute of Time forſake the rectilineal Motion, by deſcending towards the Earth. But it has been fhewn before, in pag. 62. that near the Surface of the Earth, heavy Bodies deſcend 57620 Feet in a Minute of Time: Therefore at the Orb of the Moon, where the Diſtance is 6o times greater, and the Force of Attraction 3600 times leſs, Bodies will deſcend in one Minute of Time only 78% or 16 Feet. Wherefore the Attraction of the Earth is ſufficient to make the Moon revolve in the manner ſhe does revolve, and conſequently is the real Cauſe of her revolving in the Orbit. We have all along ſuppoſed that Bodies deſcend at firſt near the Surface of the Earth 16 Feet in a Second of Time; but more accurately it is 16 Feet and I Inch. It was firſt diſcovered by Kepler, from Aſtronomical Obſervations, that the Planets do nOt revolve about the Sun in Circles, but in Ellipſes, the Sun being not in the Center, but in one of the ſ ci of the Ellipſes. That Part oſ the Orbit which is neareſt the Sun is called the Perihelium; that Part of the Orbit which is fartheſt from the Sun is called the Aphelium. If the Original Impulſe upon a Planet was leſs than what was neceſſary to make the Centrifugal Force equal to the Centripetal, it would then revolve in an Ellipſis, whoſe Aphelion would be that Point of the Orb where the Revolution began. If the Original Impulſe of a Planet was greater than what was neceſſary to make the Centrifugal Force equal to the Centripetal, it would then revolve in an Ellipſis whoſe Peribelium would be the Roint from whence the Revolution began. Let it be noted, that in both Caſes it is ſuppoſed, that the Direction of the impreſſed Impulſc is perpendicular to the Direction of the Attraction. The ſame Kepler, beforementioned, diſcovered likewiſe from Aſtronomical Obſervations, that a Ray drawn from the Center of the Sun to the Center of any Planet, deſcribes equal Areas in equal Times; and it is eaſy to ſnew that this muſt of neceſſity happen, if the Planets move by a Centripetal and Projectile Force. What has heen ſaid of the Planets revolving about the Sun, muſt alſo be applied to the Moons revolving about the Earth; only that Part of the Orbit which is neareſt to the Earth is called the Perigæum, and that Part of the Orbit which is fartheſt ſrom the Earth is called the Apogæum. A Planet moves ſloweſt in the Aphelium, and faſteſt in the Perihelium, otherwiſe the Areas could not be equal. In moving from the 4phelium to the Peribelium, the Motion is accelerated by the Aſſiſtance of the Central Attraction: In moving from the Peribelium to the Aphelium, the Motion is retarded by the Oppoſition of the Central Attraction. The more particularly theſe Principles are applied to the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, the more exactly they will be found to anſwer the Phænomena in every Circumſtance. The general Phænomena of the Tides, may alſo be accounted for by the Attractions of the Sun and Moon, By the general Phænomena of the Tides, are meant ſuch as happen in the wide Ocean, or rather ſuch as would happen if the whole Surface of the Earth were cover'd with Waters. The general Phænomena of the Tides are, 1, That there happens two Tides in twenty four Hours and three Quarters. 2. That the Time of High Water is about three Hours after the Moon has left the Meridiagn, either above or below the HoriZzon. 3. That the Tides are greater than ordinary twice every Month, that is, about the Time of the New and Full Moon: Theſe are called the Spring- Tides. 4. That the Tides ære leſſer than ordinary twice every Month, that is, about the Times of the firſt and laſt Quarters of the Moon: Theſe are called the Neap- Tides. 5. That when the Moon is in her Perigæum, the Tides increaſe more than in the ſame Circumſtances at other times. 6. That all things conſidered, the SpringTides are greater in March and September, than at other times of the Year, and the NeapTides leſs. Let ADBE repreſent the Surface of the wvaterss, F KGH the Surface of the Earth turning about its own Axis from F to X, G and H, and carrying the Waters along with itt. Let C repreſent the Earth's Pole, M the Center of the Moon, MCA the Meridian of the Moon. M Now it is evident, that the Motion of the Waters, as they revolve from D to B, ſhall be accelerated by the Attraction of the Moon at M; ſo that at the Point B, the Waters ſhall move faſter than the Earth. But from B to E, the Motion of the Waters ſhall be retarded by the Attraction of the Moon, till at the Point E they move ſlower than the Earth. In like manner from E to A the Motion will be accelerated, and from A to D retarded. Wherefore between the four Points D, B, A, E, there ſhall fall four other Points, as N, O, P, Q in which the Earth and Waters ſhall move with an equal Velocity. It is evident then, that before the Points N and P, the Waters move faſter than the Earth: In thoſe Points the Waters are relatively at Reſt upon the Earth, and beyond thoſe Points the Waters move ſlower than the Eartht: Wherefore at thoſe Points the Waters ſhall be accumulated. In like manner, before the Points O and Q, the Waters move ſlower than the Earth: In thoſe Points the Waters are relatively at Reſt upon the Earth, and beyond thoſe Points the Waters move faſter than the Earth: Wherefore at thoſe Points the Waters ſhall ſubſide. Wherefore N P are the Points of High Water, being about three Fours beyond the Moons Meridian, and O Qare the Points of Low Water. If the Diurnal Rotation were ſwifter than it is, the Points N and P would fall nearer to E and D, and the Points O and Qto A and B. Tf the Diurnal Rotation were ſlower than it is, the Points N and P would fall nearer to A and B, and the Points O and Qto E and D. For the Waters at D and E are attracted by the Moon towards B with an equal Velocity, and the Point where they would meet is the Place of High Water. This would be the Point B, if there were no Rotation; but the ſwifter the Rotation is, the farther will the Waters attracted from D be carried beyond B, before they meet with the Waters attracted from E. If the Diurnal Rotation were ſlower, the Tides would run higher; for the ſlower the Rotation was, the nearer would the Points P and N fall to the Points A and B, where the accelerating Force ends, and the Velocity of the Waters is the greateſt of all. The Reaſon of the third Phænomenon is evident, becauſe at the New and Full Moon the Attraction of the Moon is aſſiſted by the Attraction of the Sun, the Centers of the Sun, Moon and Earth, being at thoſe Times nearly in a right Line. The Reaſon of the fourth Phænomenon is alſo evident, becauſe in the Quarters of the Moon the Sun accelerates where the Moon retards, and retards where the Moon accelerates. Only it muſt be obſervd, that the SpringTides happen not preſently upon the New and Full Moons, but rather one or two Days after, when the Attraction of the Sun has conſpired with the Attraction of the Moon for ſome conſiderable time. In like manner, the NeapTides happen a Day or two aſter the Quarters, when the Attraction of the Sun has continued to leſſen the Effect of the Moons Attraction for ſeveral Days together. The fifth Phænomenon is a plain Conſequence of the Increaſe of the Moons Attraction upon her nearer Approach towards the Earth. At the ꝗpring-Tides in March and September, the Sun and Moon deſcribe a great Circle, and therefore produce a ſwifter, and conſequently a greater Agitation of the Waters: But at the Neap-Tides in March and September, the Moon deſcribes a ſmall Circle, which produces a ſmaller Agitation of the Waters; and the Sun deſcribes a great Circle, which takes off more from the Attraction of the Moon, and makes the Agitation ſtill leſs. As the Motion of the Waters is accelerated and retarded by the Attraction of the Moon, ſo in like manner the Motion of the Moon is accelerated and retarded by the Attraction of the Sun, which is the Cauſe of the Inequalities of the Motions of that Secondary Planet. The Action of the Moon upon the Waters in producing the Tides, is commonly explaind in a manner ſomewhat different from: the foregoing, but in the End it comes all to one. But becauſe that other Method is miſunderſtood by many, and thought defective by ſome, I ſhall therefore give a ſhort Account of it in this Place, ſtill referring to the Figure at pag. 73. Let it be obſervd then, 1. That the Diſtance M C is about ſixty times greater than E C, and conſequently (ſuppoſing a Line to be drawn from M t0 E) the Lines ME, MC are nearly equal. 2. That the Earth deſcribes a Circle about the Moon, as well as the Moon about the Earth, or rather that they both deſcribe a Circle about their common Center of Gravity. 3. That the Earth is continually deſcending towards the Moon, even thoo we ſhould ſuppoſe it always to keep the ſame Diſtance and move in a perfect Circle; for by ſo much as it continually forſakes the Tangent, by ſo much it continually deſcends. 4. The ſolid Earth is attracted juſt in the ſame manner as if the whole Force acted upon the Point C, and all other Points were unattracted. 5. The attracting Force of the Moon Is ſtronger at B, than it is at D, C, or E, in which three Iaſt Points it is nearly equal by Artic. 1. and by that difference of Attraction does the Water at B tend towards the Moon, and become lighter than it was, or lighter than the Waters at D and E. 6. The attracting Force of the Moon is greater at C than at A, and by that Difference does the Earth at C, tend more towards the Moon, than the Water at A does; and by how much the ſolid Earth tends towards the Moon more than the Water at A, by ſo much does the Water at A tend towards the Center of the Earth, or become higher than it was before, or lighter than the Waters at D and E. 7. A ſhorter Column of heavier Water will balance a longer Column of lighter Water, and therefore the Waters ſhall ſubſide at D and E, but riſe and ſæell at A and B. 8. By the Earths Rotation the Points A B, ſmall be conveyd to P N, and the Points DE, to QO, before the Effect is fully produced. Of Oblique DESCENTS and PENDUL UMS. T remains only to apply this ſecond Law of Motion to the Deſcent of heavy Bodies upon inclined Planes, and the Motion of Pendulums. Now upon inclined Planes, it is evident that Bodies ſhall deſcend by the ſame Laws as they do in direct Lines, only allowing for the Difference between the Abſolute and Relative Gravity. Hence the following Rules for Oblique Deſcents may be deduced. 1. Upon any given Plane, the Velocities are as the Times, and the Lines deſcribed from the beginning of the Deſcent are as the Squares of the Velocities or Times, and the Velocities or Times in ſubduplicate Proportion of the Lines deſcribed. 2. The laſt Velocity acquired  by the direct Deſcent is to the laſt Velocity acquired in the ſame Time by the oblique Deſcent, as the Abſolute Gravity is to the Relative Gravity; for the Accelerations from the Beginning to the End of the Deſcent are all the way in that Proportion; and the Number of the Accelerations is the ſame in both Caſes, becauſe the Times are ſuppoſed equal. Therefore the Sums of the Accelerations, and conſequently the laſt Velocities, are alſo as the Abſolute Gravity to the Relative Gravity, or as the Length of the Plane to the perpendicular Height of the Plane. 3. The Line deſcribed by the direct Deſcent, is to the Line deſcribed in the ſame Time by the oblique Deſcent, as the Length of the Plane to the perpendicular Height of the Plane; for the laſt Velocities are in that Proportion by the ſecond Rule, and the Lines deſcribed in the ſame Time are as the laſt Velocities. 4. If the Line deſcribed by the direct DeA 5 li R ſcent AB, be to the Line deſcribed by the oblique Deſcent AC, as the Height of the Plane to the Length of the Plane, then the Times of Deſcent ſhall alſo be in that Proportion: For drawing BD at right Angles to AC, in the Points D and B the Times of Deſcent ſhall be equal by the third Rule; and in the Points D and C, the Times of Deſcent ſhall be in ſubduplicate Proportion of AD to AC, (by the firſt Rule) that is, in proportion of AD to AB, or of the Height of the Plane to the Length of the Plane. 5. If the Line deſcribed by the direct Deſcent be to the Line deſcribed by oblique Deſcent, as the Height of the Plane to the Length of the Plane, the laſt Velocities ſhall be equal: For the Quantities of the Accelerations are reciprocally as the Lines AB and A C, from the Nature of the inclined Plane; and the Numbers of the Accelerations are as the Times of Deſcent, that is, by the fourth Rule, directly as the Lines AB and AC. Therefore the Velocities, which are in compound Proportion of the Quantities and Numbers of the Accelerations, are equal. 6. The laſt Velocities acquired upon ſeveral inclined Planes of an equal Height, howſoever diſſering in Length, are equal: For they are all equal, by the fifth Rule, to the Velocity acquired in deſcending directly thro the perpendicular Height of the Plane. In like manner, the Times of Deſcent are as the Lengths of the Planes by the fourth Rulee. 7. The Time of an oblique Deſcent along the Chord of any Circle, drawn from the loweſt Point of the Circle, is equal to the Time of a direct Deſcent through the Diameter of that Circle. For drawing BF at right Angles to CB, the Times at B and at F ſhall be equal, (by the third Rule) and CF is equal to AB from the Nature of the Circle. 8. The Times of oblique Deſcent thro' ſeveral Chords CB, DB, E B, are all equal. 9. Hence it follows, that the Relative Gravities of any given Body upon the ſeveral Chords CB, DB, E B, are as thoſe Chords. 10. A Body deſcending with a continued Motion from a certain perpendicular Height, ſhall acquire the ſame Velocity, whether it deſcends directly, or on an oblique Plane, or upon ſeveral oblique Planes. For let AB be H D the perpendicular Height of the Plane CD, and of the two Planes AE, ED, a Body deſcending firſt from A to B, and then from C to D, ſhall acquire the ſame Velocity in B and D by Rule the fifth. And deſcending firſt from A to E, and then from C to E, it ſhall acquire the ſame Velocity in EE Therefore it ſhall acquire the ſame Velocity in deſcending thro AED, as in deſcending thro CED. 11. The laſt acquired Velocities of a Body deſcending to the loweſt Point ofa given Circle, through different Chords, ſhall be as thoſe Chords: For the Times of Deſcent are equal by the eighth Rule, and the Relative Gravities are as the Chords by the ninth Rule; and the Velocities acquired in equal Times, are as the Relative Gravities, a as is evident from the ſecond Rule. 12. All Bodies, howſoever differing in Weight, deſcend upon a given Plane in the ſame Time and with the ſame Velocity: For Relative Gravity is of the ſame Nature with Abſolute Gravity, and differs only in Quantity. 13. That Velocity which a Body acquires by falling from any perpendicular Height, will carry it upwards, if the Direction of the Motion be changed, to the ſame perpendicular Height from whence it fell, and that whether it aſcends directly, or upon an oblique Plane, or upon ſeveral oblique Planes. For it is evident, that as the Velocity which was acquired by falling directly from A to B, will carry the Body back from B to A; ſo the Velocity acquired by deſcending from C to D, will carry back the Body from D to C; and the Velocity acquired by deſcending from A to E and D, will carry back the Body from D to E and A Now theſe rhree Velocities are all equal by the tenth Rule: Therefore the ſame Velocity which was acquired by falling in any onę of thoſe three Lines, will carry the Body back to the ſame perpendicular Height, either in the ſame Line in which it deſcended, or in any other Line. ll 14. A Body ſhall deſcend in leſs time from A to E and D, than from C to E and D. For n both Caſes, the ſame Time will be ſpent in deſcending from E to D; and by the eighth Rule, the Time ſpent in deſcending from C to E, is longer than the Time ſpent in deſcending from A to E. 15. The Time in which any Line, AB, is deſcribed by the direct Deſcent, is to the Time A in which an equal Line, AE, is deſcribed by the oblique Deſcent, in reciprocal ſubduplicate ProC portion of the Abſolute Gravity to the Relative Gravity. Draw E D at right Angles to AC, till it meets AB produced in D. Now by the third Rule, the Times of Deſcent in D and E are equal; but the Times in B and D ãre in ſubduplicate Proportion of AB to AD. Therefore the Times of Deſcent in B and E are in ſubduplicate Proportion of AB to AD, that is, of AB o AC. lill Any Motion which is firſt produced by a continual Acceleration, and then deſtroyed by a continual Retardation, is called Ocillation. Let DA, EA be two equal Chords in the Circle BEAD. B 5 x By the thirteenth Rule, if a Body be placed at D, it ſhall oſcillate from D to A and E, and back again from E to A and D. The Time of oblique Deſcent ſhall be equal to the Time of oblique Aſcent, and each equal to the Time of direct Deſcent from B to A by the ſeventh Rule. Therefore the Time of an entire Oſcillation ſhall be equal to twice the Time of direct Deſcent thr B A, or equal to the Time of direct Deſcent thrę? four times B A And the Time of Oſcillation thro any other two Chords of the ſame Circle, ſhall be the ſame. And becauſe the Times of direct Deſcent are in ſubduplicate Proportion of the Lines; therefore in different Circles the Times of Oſcillation are in ſubduplicate Proportion of four times the Diameters, that is, in ſubduplicate Proportion of the Diameters or Semidiameters. In Chords of the ſame Circle, the Times of Oſcillation of all Bodies, howſoever diſſering in Weight, are all equal by the twelvth Rule. All Bodies begin to deſcend 16 Feet one Inch, or 195 Inches in a Second of Time. Therefore 48 Inches (hich is the fourth Part of 195) ſhall be the Diameter, and 24 Inches the Semidiameter of the Circle upon whoſe Chords the Oſcillations ſhall be performd in a Second of Time. If the Chords AD, AE, be taken very ſmall, they will differ but very little from the Arches of the Circle, and C A may be conſidered as a Pendulum oſcillating in thoſe Asche. Wherefore, 1. The ſame Pendulum ſhall oſcillate thro unequal Arches in the ſame Time. 2. Pendulums of equal Lengths and unequal Weights ſhall oſcillate in the ſame Time. 3. The Times of Oſcillation in different Pendulums, are in ſubduplicate Proportion of the Lengths of the Pendulum. YF the Oſcillations of a Pendulum were performd in a Cycloid inſtead of a Circle, theſe three Laws of Oſcillation would hold true in large Arches, as well as in ſmall, as Mr Huygens has demonſtrated. The Length of a Pendulum oſcillating Seeonds in a Cycloid, is 39 Inches and a quarter, and a Pendulum of the ſame Length ſhall alſo oſcillate Seconds in ſmall Arches of a Circle; for the lower Part of the Circle is nearly the ſame with the lower Part of the Cycloid. Wherefore, if the Number 141120 (Which is the Product of 60 times 6o into 39.2) be divided by the Square of any aſſignd Number of Vibrations in a Minute of Time, the Quotient ſall give the Length of the Pendulum, or if the ſame Number 1417120 be divided by the given Length of any Pendulum in Inches, the ſquare Root of the Quotient ſhall ſhew the Number of Vibrations in a Minute, If from D and A two Tangents are drawn interſecting each other in G, the Relative Gravity at the Point D upon the Chord is to the Relative Gravity at the Point D in the Circle, as DG to DA; which is the Reaſon why in thoſe ſmall Arches of a Circle the Oſcillations are ſwifter than along the Chords. If an Iron Bar be ſuſpended at one End, and put into Motion, the Oſcillations ſhall be performed in leſd time than by a ſingle PenG dulum of the ſame Length: For the upper Parts of the Iron ſhall endeavour to oſcillate according to their reſpective Diſtances from the Center of Suſpenſion, and ſo accelerate the Motion. A ſingle Pendulum, whoſe Length is 7o Thirds of the Bar's Length, will be found to perform its Oſcillations in equal Times with the Bar. Hence a Point taken of the Length of the Bar from the lower End, is called the Center of Oſcillation. Hence it is evident, 1. That the Bar oſcillates in the ſame manner as it would do if the Gravity of all its Parts were contracted into the Center of Oſcillation, and all its other Parts remained without Gravity. 2. Therefore if any Obſtacle ſtops the Center of Oſcillation, the whole Motion of the Bar is deſtroyed at once, and conſequently the whole Force of its Motion is ſpent upon, and received by the Obſtacle. 3. Therefore, the Quantities of Motion on each ſide the Center of Oſcillation are equal. 4. Therefore, if any other Part of the Bar ſtrikes againſt an Obſtacle, the Motion ſhall not be deſtroyed immediately, but the Center of Oſcillation ſhall endeavour to go on, and by that endeavour, either break or bend the Bar. From theſe Particulars it is eaſy to explain the Center of Percuſſion, or what part of any Inſtrument or Weapon will ſtrike with the greateſt Force. For if the Stroke be not given with that Part which is the common Center of Oſcillation of the Weapon, and ſo much of the Arm as moves with it (hether it be from the Wriſt, Elbow, or Shoulder,) the whole Force of the Motion will not be ſpent upon that which receives the Blow. All oſcillating Bodies, of what Shape ſoever, have theit proper Centers of Oſcillation; which if the Rod of the Pendulum be ſmall, and the Bob large, ſhall fall within the Bob. By the Length of a Pendulum, is always meant the Diſtance between the Center of Suſpenſion and the Center of Oſcillation. If a Pendulum bè heated it grows longer, and conſequently oſcillates ſlower. Pendulums of the ſame Length oſcillate ſlower the nearer they are brought to the Equator, and that for to Reaſons; becauſe the Semidiamiter of the Earth's Equator is about 17 Miles longer than the Semiaxis of the Earth; and becauſe of the Centrifugal Force (ariſing from the Diurnal Rotation) which at the Equator is the 7 Part of Gravity, from whence it decreaſes continually, till at the Pales it quite vaniſhes. It may eaſily be concluded from the ninth Rule of oblique Deſcents, that if a Pendulum oſcillate in ſmall Arches of a Circle, the Accelerations continually decreaſe (tho' the Velocity continually increaſes) as the Diſtance from the loweſt Point of the Oſcillation decreaſes. Therefore all Motions which are produced by continual Accelerations, decreaſing as the Diſtance decreaſes, from a certain Point towards which the Motion tends, may be compared to the Motion of a Pendulum; and of this Nature is the Motion of Waves. The Third LAW of MoTION. CTION is always contrary and equal to Reaction; or the Actions of two Bodies upon each other are equal and in contrary Directions. Whatſoever draws, preſſes, or attracts, is at the ſame Inſtant drawn, preſſed, or attracted with an equal Force. The Equality of Action and Reaction is to be judged, not from the Velocities, but from the Quantities of Motion produced by each of them. If the Diſtance of the Sun from the Earth be 70 Millions of Statute Miles, the Diameters of the Heavenly Bodies may i judged to be as follows: : Of the Sun 765,000 Of Saturn 52, 100 Of Fupiter 69, 200 Of Mars 3,790 Of the Earth 7,960 Of the Moon1I,850 Of Venus: 6, 750 Of Mercury 3,630 From hence it may be gathereq that the Sun is not much affected by the Attractions of the Planets; becauſe ſuch Planets as are near the Sun are ſmall, and the bigger Planets are at a great Diſtance, and the Diameter of the Sun is almoſt ten times greater than the Diameter of the greateſt Planet. The Breadth of Saturn's Ring ſeems to be equal to the Diſtance between the Body of Saturn and the inner Part of the Ring, and that Diſtance ſeems to bè about two thirds of the Diameter of Saturn. From this Law may alſo be deduced à priori, that the Earth moves round the Sun, or, in other Words, that it is impoſſible, from the Nature of things, that the Sun ſhould move round the Earth. For if two Bodies act upon each other by mutual Attractions, and one of them moves circularly, the other ſhall move circularly too, and that vith an equal Quantity of Motion, that is, they ſhall both revolve about their common Center of Gravity. This is proveqd both by Experiment upon the whirling Table, and by Demonſtration in the 57th Prop. of the firſt Book of the PrincCiples. Now the Diameter of the Sun being almoſt 100 times greater than that of the Earth, the Quantity of Matter in the Sun would be I,000,000 times greater than the. Quantity of Matter in the Earth, if they were both of equal Denſity. But ſince the Earth is four times denſer than the Sun, (as is ſewn 2. 372. of the Principles) therefore the Quantities of Matter in the Sun will be only 250,000 times greater; and ſo much greater is the Earth's Orb and Velocity than the Sun's. If one Body ſtrikes upon another, juſt ſo much Motion as it impreſſes in one Direction, juſt ſo much it loſes in the contrary Direction; and this is the grand Principle upon which all the Laws of Communication of Motion depend. The Laws of the Communication of Motion cannot be truly ſtated, without diſtinguiſhing Elaſtick Bodies from thoſe that are not Elaſtick. f ELASTICITT. Body that receives no Impreſſion, is called a Hard Body. That which receives and retains an Impreſſion, is called a Soft Body. That which receives an Impreſſion, but does not retain iĩt, is called an ElqſticH Body; and if the Force of Reſtitution be equal to the Force of Compreſtion, it is ſaid to be perfectly Elaſtict. Reaction differs from Enſticity for Reaction begins and ends with the acting Force; but Elaſticity does not begin to exert itſelf, till the Force of Action is over. Agan, Action and Reaction are always equal; but Compreſſion and Elaſticity are never equal except in Bodies perfectly elaſticke, which perhaps are not to be found in Nature. If a String be ſtrained like thoſe of a Muſical Inſtrument, it ſhall become elaſtick or ſpringy; for the ſmalleſt Force ſhall be ſufficient to bend it, tho it be ſtrained never ſo hard; and when that Force ceaſes, the Force that ſtrains it, ſhall bring it back to its firſt Situation. As the String retums to its firſt Situation, it is continually accelerated, by a Force decreaſing as the Diſtance of the String from its firſt Situation decreaſes. For let AB C repreſent the String in its firſt Situation, A DC the String bent, and AEC the String returning: It is evident that D C and EC may be conſidered as two Leavers of the ſecond kind, in which C is the Center of Motion; the Force that ſtrains the String is the Power, and the Quantity of Matter to be moved (or the Quantity of Matter in D C or E C) anſwers to the Weightt. Wherefore from the Center of Motion C, letting fall the Perpendicular CHK to the Lines of Direction, the Forces of the Power upon the two Leavers ſhall be as CK and CH, that is, as BD and B E, the Diſtances of the String from its firſt Situation. When the Point D arrives at B, the Acceleration ceaſes; and as the laſt acquired Velocity carries the String beyond B towards G, ſo a Retardation begins exactly proportional to the former Acceleration. Wherefore-the String being once moved, ſmall oſcillate like a Pendulum; and conſequently, 1. It ſhall perform all its Oſcillations, whether great or ſmall, in the ſame Time. 2. If Strings that contain an equal Quantity of Matter are ſtraid unequally, the different Forces by which they are ſtrained may be compared to an Abſolute and a Relative Gravity; and therefore by the fifteenth Rule of oblique Deſcents, the Times of Oſcillation ſhall be reciprocally in ſubduplicate Proportion of the ſtraining Forces. 3. In Pendulums, the Quantity of Matter is not regarded, becauſe whatever it be, it is always proportional to the Force (of Gravity) which cauſes the Oſcillation: But in vibrating Strings equally ſtrained, the Times of Oſcillation are as the Quantities of Matter in the String. For when thoſe Strings are bent equally, the moving Forces ſhall be equal, and conſequently the Velocities ſhall be reciprocally as the Quantities of Matter, and the Times reciprocally as the Velocities, that is, directly as the Quantities of Matte. Wherefore, 4. In Strings that are ſtrained equally, if the Diameters are equal, the Times are as the Lengths: If the Lengths are equal, the Times are as the Diameters. In all Strings, the Times of Vibration are in compound Proportion of the Lengths and Diameters directly, and the ſubduplicate Proportion of the Forces reciprocally. Hence ariſes the Difference of all Muſical Notes which are acute in Proportion to the Quickneſs, and grave in Proportion to the Slowneſs of the Vibrations. The Sounds of two Strings vibrating at the ſame time, agree with each other more or leſ, according as the Vibrations concur more or leſs frequently. This is the Origin of Concords and Diſcords in Muſick. Two Strings of an equal Diameter being equally ſtrained; if they are of the ſame Length, ſhall ſound an Uniſon, and ſhall concur at every Vibration. If their Lengths are as two to one, they ſhall ſound a Diapaſon or Octave; and every Vibration of the longeſt ſhall concur with every other Vibration of the ſhorteſt. If their Lengths are as three to two, they ſhall ſound a Diapente or Fifth; and every other Vibration of the longeſt ſhall concur vith every third Vibration of the ſhorteſt. LIf their Lengths are as four to three, they ſhall ſound a Diateſſaron or Fourth; and every third Vibration of the longeſt ſhall concur with every fourth of the ſhorteſt. If their Lengthis are as five to four, they ſhall ſound a Ditone or greater Third; and every fourth Vibration of the longeſt ſhall concur with every fifth of the ſhorteſt. Theſe are all the perfect ſimple Concords; nor are any other Proportions admitted in Muſick, but ſuch as are taken from the Numbers I, 2, 3, 4, 5, or their Compounds. Other Lengths, in which the Vibrations concur leſs frequently, produce ſuch Sounds as are reckoned either imperfect Concords or Diſcords. The Frequency of concurring is to be computed from the Number of Vibrations of the longeſt String, which are performed before the Concurrence happens. To make an Uniſon Sound, it does not ſeem neceſſary that the Vibrations ſhould actually concur, but only that they ſhould be performed in an equal Time; ſo that they would concur always, if they began exactly at the ſame Inſtant; For the Ear perceives not the ſingle Vibrations, but only a certain Sound which is the Reſult of repeated Vibrationss The like qualified Senſe of the Word Concurrence muſt be applied to the Diapaſon, and other Concords and Diſcords. Merſennus having ſtretched a Braſ Wire 15 Feet in Length, with a Weight of ſix Pounds and an half, counted ten intire Oſcillations (itu redituque conſtantes) in a Second of Time. H Whence it follows, that a Wire of 9 Inches ſhall vibrate 200 Times in a Second, and one of 36 Inches fifty times, and one of 18 Inches 100 times in a Second. And he adds, that from frequent Experiments it is certain, that a String vibrating 104 times in a Second, ſounds an Uniſon with an open Pipe four Feet in Length. The Meaſures muſt here be underſtood according tò the Paris Standard. If a Body in Motion ſtrikes upon a ſtrained String, it ſhall rebound in an Angle equal to that in which it came: For ſo much of the Impulſe as is parallel to the String, ſhall continue; and ſo much of the Impulſe as is perpendicular to the String, ſhall be deſtroyed by the Oppoſition, and produced again by the Elaſticity. All Bodies which, when ſtruck, give a Muſical Sound, do vibrate either in the whole or in part; and moſt elaſtick Bodies, when ſtruck, give a Muſical Sound; and the Reaſon why ſome do not, ſeems to be either becauſe the Spring is too weak, and the Motion too ſlow, as in the Caſe of compreſſed Wool; or becauſe the Elaſticity is ſo ſtrong, and the vibrating Parts ſo ſhort, and the Sound ſo acute and ſo ſoon over, that it cannot be perceived by the Ear, which perhaps is the Caſe in the Colliſion of two Glaſs Balls. The Cauſe of Elaſticity in moſt Bodies ſeems to be the Repulſive Force of their Particles: For when the Elaſtick Body is compreſſed, its Pores are thereby contracted and made ſmaller; ſo that many Particles which were at ſome Diſtance before, are now brought nearer together within the Sphere of each other's Repulſion; which Repulſion grows ſtronger as the Compreſſion increaſes, and the Particles are forced cloſer to each other. Wherefore, if the Pores of a Body are very large, it may admit of Compreſſion without much Elaſticity. And hence alſo we ſee the Reaſon why the Elaſticity of Metals is increaſed by hammering. It is certain from Experiments, that if Bodies rebound after Colliſion, one or both of them are elaſtick; and hence it is that the Angle of Rebounding is always equal to the Angle of Incidence, vhen the moving Body ſtrikes againſt an Obſtacle which is conſidered as immovable. An Obſtacle is conſidered as immovable, when the Quantity of Matter it contains is infinite or as infinite, with regard to the Quantity of Matter contained in the moving Body; for then the Velocity impreſſed upon the Obſtacle will be Nothing, or as Nothing. For whatever that Velocity be, which a moving Body would impreſs upon another Body at Reſt equal to itſelf, the Velocity which the ſame moving Body would impreſs upon the infinite Obſtacle, would be infinitely leſs than the former Velocity. Of the Communication of MoTION. Hoſe Laws, according to which Alterations are produced in the Reſt and Motion of Bodies upon their Colliſion, are called the Laws of the Communication of Motion. When one Body ſtrikes againſt another, if the Line of Direction of the Impulſe paſſes thro' the Center of Gravity of both the Bodies, the Impulſe is called full or direft, otherwiſe it is called an oblique Impulſe. The Relative Velocity of two Bodies is that Velocity with which they approach to, or recede from, each other, and is equal either to the Difference of the Velocities of Bodies moving the ſame way, or to the Sum of the Velocities of Bodies moving contrary ways. For if one of the Bodies were at Reſt, and the other moved towards it, or from it, with the forementioned Difference or Sum of Velocities, the Body in Motion would approach to, or recede from, the Body at Reſt, juſt as faſt as the two moving Bodies approached to or receded from each other. If to Bodies move in the ſame Direction vith equal Velocities, they are relatively at Reſt. When the Impulſe is direct, and the Bodies are void of Elaſticity, the Laws of the Communication of Motion are theſe that follow: I. In all Caſes, the Velocities aſter the Stroke are equal; for the Impulſe ceaſes when the impinging Bodies are relatively at Reſt, and not before. 2. If two Bodies move the ſame vay, and in the ſame right Line, that which moves faſteſt ſhall overtake the other, and the Sum of their Motions ſhall be the ſame after the Stroke às before. For by the third Law of Motion, ſo much Motion as the ſloweſt Body gains, the ſwifteſt Body loſes. 3. If two Bodies move contrary ways, the Sum of their Motions after the Stroke ſhall be equal to the Difference of their Motions before the Stroke: For whilſt the ſtrongeſt Motion deſtroys the weakeſt, it loſes alſo an equal part of itſelf by the third Law of Motion. 4. If the Sum of two conſpiring Motions, or the Difference of two contrary Motions, be divided by the Sum of the Quantities of Matter in both the moving Bodies, the Quotient ſhall give their common Velocity after the Stroke. 5. If the Velocity after the Stroke be multiplied into the Quantity of Matter in each Body, the Products ſhall expreſs the Quantities of Motion in each Body after the Stroke. 6. The Difference between the Quantities of Motion in either of the moving Bodies, before and after the Stroke, is equal to the Quantity of the Stroke. Example 1. Let a Ball of 3 Ounces, moving with 9 Degrees of Velocity, overtake another Ball of 2 Ounces moving with 4 Degrees of Velocity: Then ſhall the Quantities of Motion before the Stroke be 27 and B, the common Velocity after the Stroke ſhall be 7, the Quantities of Motion after the Stroke ſhall be 21 and 14, and the Quantity of the Stroke ſhall be 6. Example 2. Let the ſame Balls move with the ſame Velocities contrary ways; then ſhall the Quantities of Motion before the Stroke be as before; the common Velocity after the Stroke ſhall be 3%, the Quantities of Motion after the Stroke ſhall be 113, and 73 and the Quantity of the Stroke 153. Wherefore, if two equal Bodies move in contrary Directions, with equal Velocities, as ſoon as they ſtrike, both the Motions ſhall be deſtroyedl. And if a Body in Motion ſtrikes againſt an equal Body at Reſt, it ſhall communicate half its Velocity, or half takes another moving Body equal to the ſirſt, the common Velocity after the Stroke ſhall be equal to Half the Difference of their Velocities before the Stroke. But if they moved in contrary Directions, the Velocity after the Stroke ſhall be equal to Half the Sum of the Velocities beſore the Stroke. 7. If a moving Body ſtrikes againſt an immovable Obſtacle, after the Stroke the whole Motion ſhall be deſtroyed, and the Quantity of the Stroke ſhall be equal to the whole Quantity of the Motion. 8. If the moving Body gravitates towards the immovable Obſtacle, (as when a Stone falls upon the Earth) the Quantity of the Stroke is equal to the Sum of the Quantity of Motion added to the Weight of the moving Body; for the Weight remains upon the Obſtacle when the Impulſe is deſtroyed. It was for want of this neceſſary Diſtinction, that the famous Borelli, in his Treatiſe de Vi Percuſſionis, attempts to prove (in effect) that the Impulſe of a Feather is a greater Force than the Weight of a Rock, Cap. 29. Prob. 9o. Which how true ſoever it may be in Theory, provided a heavy Body could reſt upon a Baſis, that was abſolutely incompreſible ; yet it ĩs certainly falſe in Fact. First, Becauſe it is evident to Senſe, that the Preſſure of a greater Weight, in whatever manner it be ſuſtained, produces a greater Effect than thesMoment of a falling Feather. Secondly, Becauſe tho' a heavy Body may ſeem to be ſuſtained and be at Reſt upon another Body, yet it is really in Motion, and actual deſcending all the while. For ſo long as the Force of Gravity in the upper Body acts upon the lower, it muſt continually produce ſome Effect in compreſſing the Parts of the lower Body, that is, in leſſening the Magnitude of its Pores, by acting againſt thoſe Forces of Attraction and Repulſion, which preſerved its former Texture and Poſition of Parts. The Sum of the Motions of two Bodies void of Elaſticity, may be leſs after the Stroke than it was before, but it cannot be more. 9. If a Body moves after the Stroke the ſame way that it moved before, the Diſference of the Velocities before and after the Stroke ſhall be equal to the Velocity loſt or Bained. Thus in the firſt Example, the Velocity loſt is 2, and the Velocity gaind 3,. 10. If the Direction of the Motion aftòr the Stroke be contrary to the Direction : the Motion before the Stroke, the Sum of the Velocities before and after the iirv ſhall expreſs the Quantity of the Velocity gaind. Thus in the ſecond Example, the Velocity loſt is 55, the Velocity gained 7 3. When the Impulſe is direct, and the Bodies perfectly elaſtick, the Laws of the Communication of Motion are different from the foregoing. For, 1. Upon the Colliſion of two Elaſtick Bodies, the Force of Elaſticity is equal to the Force of Compreſſion; and the Force of Compreſſion in each Body is equal to the Quantity of the Stroke. 2. The whole Force of Elaſticity, exerted at the Reſtitution of both the Springs, is double to the Quantity of the Stroke; for it is the Reſult of two Forces in contrary Directions, each of which is equal to the Quantity of the Stroke. Or it may be conceived thus; the Sum of the Elaſticities is equal to the Sum of the Quantities of the Stroke in both bodies together; that is, to double the Quantity of the Stroke in each ſingle Body. 23. The Effect of the Elaſticity in each Body ſhall be equal to the Effect of the Stroke, and in the ſame Direction; for the two equal and contrary Elaſticities in the former Caſe are equivalent to Action and Reaction in the latter, 4. Wherefore, to find the Velocity of either Body after the Colliſion: Firſt, find the common Velocity with which the Bodies would movę after the Stroke, if they had been void of Elaſticity, and find alſo the Velocity loſt or gained; then ſubtract the Velocity loſt from the common Velocity, or to the common Velocity add the Velocity gained; ſo ſhall that Difference, or Sum, be the Velocity ſought; but if the Velocity loſt be greater than the common Velocity, then ſubtract the common Velocity from the Velocity loſt, and the Remainder ſhall give the Velocity ſought in a contrary Direction. Thus in the firſt Example before ſtated, if we ſuppoſe the Bodies to be elaſtick, the Velocities after Colliſion ſhall be 5 and 10, and conſequently the Quantities of Motion ſhall be 15 and 200 In the ſecond Example the Velocities after Colliſion ſhall be 17 and 11 7; and the Quantities of Motion 4 5 and 235. For a third Example; let us ſuppoſe two Bodies in Proportion as three to two, the firſt at Reſt, and the ſecond moving towards the firſt with 40 Degrees of Velocity;3 then ſhall the Quantities of Motion before the Stroke be o and 80, the common Velocity after the Stroke 16, the Quantities of Motion after the Stroke 48 and 32, the Quantity of the Stroke 48, the Velocity gained 16, the Velocity loſt 24, the Velocities after the Reſtitution of the Springs 32, and 8 in a contrary Direction; the Quantities of Motion after Colliſion 96 and 16. In the firſt Example, the Sum of the Motions before Colliſion is equal to the Sum of the Motions after Colliſion; in the ſecond it ĩs greater, in the third leſs This demonſtrates the Abſurdity of Carteſiuss Notion,  That e there is always the ſame Quantity of Motion in the World. Two elaſtick Bodies always recede from each other after Colliſion, and that with the ſame Relative Velocity with which they tended towards each other before Colliſion. Thus the Relative Velocity before and after Colliſion is 5 in the firſt Example, 13 in the ſecond, and 40 in the third. And in all Caſes whether the impinging Bodies are elaſtick or not, the Sum of the Motions in the ſame Direction, and the Difference of the Motions in contrary Directions is the ſame both before and after Colliſion. If two equal elaſtick Bodies move towards each other with equal Velocities, they ſhall recede from each other after Colliſion each with the ſame Velocity. If one of them in Motion ſtrikes againſt the other at Reſt, it ſhall communicate the whole Velocity, and remain at Reſt itſelf. If one overtakes the other, they ſhall interchange Velocities, and continue to go on the ſame way as before. If they meet each other with different Velocities, they ſhall interchange Velocities, and ſly off from each other in contrary Directions. If an elaſtick Body ſtrikes upon an immovable elaſtick Obſtacle, it ſhall rebound with the ſame Velocity that it came. If one of the impinging Bodies be hard, and the other elaſtick, the Laws of the Communi⸗ cation of Motion are the ſame as if both the Bodies were elaſtick; for the Spring will give way, till the Force of Elaſticity becomes equal to the Force of Compreſſion, that is, double to the Quantity of the Stroke in each Body; and the Re-action of a hard Body againſt double the Quantity of Elaſticity, will produce the ſame effect as a ſingle Quantity of Elaſticity in each Body acting in contrary Directions, If the Impulſe is oblique, it muſt be reſolved into two Impulſes; one direct, and the other parallel to the Tangent at the Point of Colliſion. The Effect of the direct Impulſe muſt be computed according to the Laws before mentioned: The parallel Impulſe will continue after the Colliſion the ſame in all reſpects that it was before; nor will it produce any other Effect, except by means of the Friction to make the Bodies revolve each about its own Center of Gravity. Example. Let the Spherical Body B, being at Reſt, be ſtruck by the equal Spherical Body A, moving with a Direction and Velocity expreſſed by the Line CA, deſcribed in any ved into the Velocities and Directions CD, DA; the Line CD being parallel to AB, which connects the two Centers of Gravity at the Inſtant of Colliſion; and the Line D A being parallel to the Tangent P Q, or rather to a Plane (repreſented by the Line PQ touching both the Spheres in the Point of Colliſion. Since the parallel Motion ſuffers no Alteration by the Impulſe, if the Line D A be continued, till AE is equal to D A, the Line A E ſhall repreſent the parallel Motion after Colliſion; and if the Spheres are both void of Elaſticity, half the Motion CD ſhall be communicated by the Impulſee Wherefore, if e drav E G and H K parallel to CD, and reſpectively equal to half CD, then AG, HEK, ſhall repreſent the Directions and Velocities after the Stroke. But if the Spheres are elaſtick, the whole Motion CD ſhall be communicated; and therefore if we take HM equal to CD, the Lines AE, HM, ſhall expreſs the Directions and Velocities after Colliſion. If there were any Friction, the Line AE would be leſs, in Proportion to the Quantity of that Friction, and the Sphere B would revolve about its Center the ſame way with the Motion; but the Sphere A would revolve the Contrary way. OF HYDROSTATICKS: O R, The Gravitation and Preſſure of FLUIDS in general; but more particularly of INCOMPRESSIBLE FLUIDS. FLUID is a Body whoſe Parts are A capable of moving ſo eaſily among one another, that they give way to any Force whatever that acts upon them. To conſtitute a Perfeci or Philoſophical Fluid, (which perhaps is not to be found in Nature) it is neceſſary that the Parts be not held together by mutual Attractions, nor obſtructed in their Motions by Friction or mutual Attritions. However, if a Body is compoſed of Parts whoſe mũtual Attractions and Attritions are but very ſmall, it is vulgarly called a Fluid. Tho the Laws of Hydroſtatics are deduced from the Philoſophical Notion of a Fluid, yet if thoſe Laws be applied to Vulgar Fluids, the Error will be but very ſmall. If the Original conſtituent Parts of a Fluid do already touch each other in ſo many Points, that they cannot be brought nearer together without being divided into leſſer Parts; and if no known Force is great enough to divide them into leſſer Parts, ſuch a Fluid is called æ Compreſſed or an Imcompreſible Fluid. For Example; Water, Oil, and Mercury, are vulgar Fluids of the Incompreſſible Kind. The Surface of any Fluid that is permitted to ſtagnate, will be level; for if one Part ſhould remain higher than another, it would thereby reſiſt the Force of Gravity which tends to make it deſcend, and conſequently would not be a Fluid. All Fluids gravitate upon the Bottom of a Cylindrical Veſſel in which they are contained, in the ſame manner that Solids gravitate, that is, in proportion to the Quantity of Matter. Any Part of a Fluid gravitates according to its Quantity of Matter upon the reſt of the Fluid that lies below it: For if the upper Part did not gravitate according to its Quantity of Matter upon the under, the whole Fluid could not gravitate according to its whole Quantity of Matter upon the Bottom of the Veſſel. Accordingly it is found by Experiment, that if a Veſſel be filled with Water, a Pint of that Water in any Part of the Veſſel ſhall weigh about a Pound, which is juſt as much as it weighs when taken out of the Veſſel. In like manner, a Veſſel which contains about 24 Pints, or Pounds, of Water, is found to contain about 33 Hundredth Parts of an Ounce of common Air. This proves the Specific Gravities of Air and Water to he as I to about 850. 1It is evident therefore, that in a Cylindrical Veſſel, the Gravitation of any Fluid is proportionable to the Depth or Diſtance from the Surface. If any Part of the Fluid be forced down below the Surface; when the Force is taken away, that Part which was forced down ſhall aſcend, and place itſelf even with the Surface. Therefore in every Part of the Fluid, there is a Preſſure upwards, equal to the Preſſure of Gravitation in that Part of the Fluid. It is alſo clear from Experiments, that in every Part of the Fluid there is a Preſſure, equal to Gravitation, in all manner of Directions. Wherefore, ſince every Part of the Fluid is acted upon in all manner of Directions by an equal Force, every Part of a ſtagnating Fluid is at Reſt, and will ſo continue till it is diſturbed by ſome external Force. tho every Part of the Fluid gravitates according to its Depth, yet no one Part preponderates or gravitates more than the reſt. If a new Preſſure be added to any Part of the Surface, the Column of Fluid that lies under that Part ſall deſcend, and become ſhorter, till the Sum of the additional Preſſure, and the Preſſure of the ſhortened Column, ſhall be equal to the Preſſure of an entire Column upon the like Baſe in any other part of the Fluid. If the Preſſure of any Column be leſſened, or its Weight diminiſhed, that Column ſhall aſcend and become longer, till the Preſſure of the increaſed Column becomes equal to the Preſſure of an entire Column upon the like Baſe in any other Part of the Fluid. Fluids of different Kinds gravitate upon each other according to their perpendicular Heights and ſpecific Gravities. Every Part of the Veſſel, which contains a Fluid, ſuſtains an equal Preſſure with that Part of the Fluid to which it is contiguous. Every Part of the Surface of an immerſed Solid, ſuſtains an equal Preſſure with that Part of the Fluid to which it is contiguous; and therefore the farther that any Solid is immerſed under Water, the nearer do the Preſſures upon the upper Part and the under Part of the Solid approach to a Proportion of Equality. That Preſſure which acts with an equal Force upon every part of the Surface of a Solid, will make no Alteration in the Surface, how ſoever ſoft or ſuſceptible of Impreſſion it may be. Hence it follows, that th the Preſſure of the Water at great Depths is very conſiderable, yet it is hardly perceptible. The Preſſure of any Fluid may be ſo far augmented, by augmenting the Depth or Diſtance from the Surface, as to ſuſtain Quickſilver or Gold, or any other Fluid or Solid whatſoever; if the incumbent Column of Fluid be removed. The Weight of an incumbent Fluid will keep down a Body ſpecifically lighter than itſelf, provided it does not inſinuate itſelf between the Solid and the Bottom of the Veſſel. Let AB, BC, be two Cylindrical Veſſels or Tubes of an equal Diameter communicating with each other at B, anc let AB be placed perpendicularly, and B C in an oblique Situation: If Water be poured into ſuch a Veſſel, the Surfaces in both Tubes ſhall ſtand in the ſame Level, or at the ſame perpendicular Altitude, as at D G and FE. F6r the abſolute Gravity of the Water B E is to the abſolute Gravity of the Water BD, as BF to BG; and the abſolute Gravity of the Water BE to its own relative Gravity, as BG to BF. Therefore the abſolute Gravity of the Water B D is equal to the relative Gravity of the Water BE. If a Veſſel be bigger at the Top than at the Bottom, the Preſſure upon the Bottom ſhall be equal to the Preſſure of a Column of Water whoſe Baſe is equal to the Bottom of the Veſſel, and whoſe Height is equal to the perpendicular Height of the Water in the Veſſel: For the Preſſure of all the reſt of the Water is ſuſtained by the oblique Sides of the Veſſel Wherefore, if two Cylinders of unequal Diameters are joined together, the Water, or any other Fluid, ſhall ſtand at the ſame Le vel in both. If a Veſſel bigger at the Bottom than at Top be flled with Water, the Bottom of the Veſſel ſhall ſuſtain as great a Preſſure, as it would do, if the Veſſel were as big at the Top as it is at the Bottom: For the Preſſure of the Water againſt the Side of the Veſſel at c, is equivalent to the Gravitation of the Water at the Depth mn or bc; and the Reaction of the Side at c, ĩs equal to the Preſſure, and in contrary Directions. Therefore the valent to the Gravitation of the Water at the Depth bc. Therefore the Point a is preſſed by the Line c a, as much as it would be preſſed by the Line ba. Let AB repreſent a ſmall Tube fix'd in a large Veſſel CD, and let the whole be filled with Water to the upper Orifice at A. It is evident that the little Colummn AB preſſes uponall Parts C of the larger Veſſel at the ſame time, be- G; D cauſe jt preſſes in all Directions at the ſame time. Wherefore, in all Caſes, the Preſſure of any Fluid upon the Bottom of the Veſſel, is equal to the Preſſure of a Column of the ſame Fluid, whoſe Baſe is equal to the Bottom of the Veſſel, and Height equal to the perpendicular Height of the Fluid in the Veſſe. Wherefſore, in all Points of the Fluid that are equally diſtant from the Surface, the Preſſure is equal. As Fluids of different Kinds gravitate upon each other according to the reſpective Quantities of Matter they contain; ſo the Atmoſphere, or Body of groſs Air, with which the Earth is ſurrounded, gravitates upon the Surface of all other Fluids, with a certain determinate Force proportional to its Quantity of Matter. This Preſſure of the Atmoſphere upon the Water AB at the Orifice A, ſhall be convey?d to all Points of the Bottom and Sides of the larger Veſſel, in the ſame manner as the Preſſure of the Fluid AB is conveyed. Wherefore, in Veſſels of all Kinds that are open at the Top, the Preſſure at all Depths below the Surface of a contained Fluid is equal to the Sum of the Preſſures of the Fluid and Atmoſphere. If one End of an open Tube be immerſed in Quickſilver, and the Air be exhauſted at the other End by ſucking with the Mouth, or any other means, ſo that within the Tube a Vacuum be made, and the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere taken away; the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere without, will force the Quickſilver into the Tube, and there ſuſpend it, ſo long as the Vacuum continues, at a determinate perpendicular Height of about 30 Inches. Wherefore, the Weight of a Column of Quickſilver 30 Inches high, is equal to the Weight of a Column of Air ſtanding upon an equal Baſe, and whoſe Height is equal to the whole Height of the Atmoſphere. Hence it is clear, that Quickſilver will ſtand at the ſame Height in Tubes of all Diameters,. The Specific Gravities of Rain-Water and Quickſilver are to each other as 1 to 13 and two Thirdss Wherefore, the Weight of the Atmoſphere which raiſes the Mercury 30 Inches, will raiſe Water to 410 Inches, or about 34 Feet, or ſomething leſs than 6 Fathoms. -mDm Of SIPHONS and PUMPS. L L manner of Hydraulic Engines depend upon theſe Principles. Hence it is, that a Siphon always works on that Side which has the greateſt perpendicular Altitude: For the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere equally oppoſes the Deſcent of the Water in both Legs of the Siphon; ſo that there is nothing left to determine the Motion of the Water one way or other, but the ſuperiour Preſſure of the Water in one of the Legs; which ſuperiour Preſſure is the Effect of a greater perpendicular Altitude. If the perpendicular Alitude of a Siphon, from its Bend to the Surface of the Water, be ſix Fathom or more, the Siphon cannot be filled by Suction, or any other Method of exhauſting the Air; and if it be filled firſt, the Water vill ſeparate at the Bend, Part of it running out at each Orifice; becauſe when ſuch a Siphon is full, the Weight of Water in each Leg js greater than the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, The ſame thing will happen, if we attempt to draw off Quickſilver with a Siphon whoſe perpendicular Altitude is 30 Inches or more. VFrom theſe Principles we may perceive the Reaſon of the Conſtruction and Working of common Pumps, and why they can raiſe Water no higher than about ſix Fathom. That Siphons and Pumps may work freely, jt is always neceſſary that there ſhould be a Vent or Paſſage for the Air to enter into the Veſſel, and fill up the place of the Liquor as it is drawn off; otherwiſe the Preſſure of the Air upon the Surface will continually decreaſe, and at laſt become too weak to force the Liquor thro the Pump or Siphon. How the Preſſure of the Air decreaſes in Proportion to its Expanſion, or the quantity of Space which it finds empty, will be hewn hereafter, Of SPOUTING WATER. N Atrtificial Jet or Spout of Water is called a Fountain. The Rules for Spouting Liquors are theſe that follow: 1. The Force which makes the Water ſpout thr a Hole in the containing Veſſel, is proportional to the Depth of. the Hole, or its Diſtance from the Surface of the Water in the Veſſel: For the Preſſure of the Water upon that Part of the Veſſel before the Hole was made, was equal to the Sum of the Preſſures of the Water and Atmoſphere; but as ſoon as the Hole is made, the Spouting of the Water is oppoſed by the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere againſt the Hole. The Force therefore with which the Water ſpouts, is only the Preſſure of the Water, which in all Points is proportional to ĩts Depth. 2. The Quantities of Water ſpouting in the ſame Time thr equal Holes with different uniform Velocities, ſhall be proportional to thoſe Velocities. 3. The Quantities of Motion paſſing thio ſeveral equal Holes in the ſame Time, are in compound Proportion of the Velocities, and Quantities of Matter3 that is, by the ſecond Rule, as the Squares of the Velocities, or of the Quantities of Water. 4. The Forces are proportional to their Effects, that is, to the Quantities of Motion generated in the ſame Time; that is, by the third Rule, to the Squares of the Velocities, or of the Quantities of Water. Therefore by the firſt Rule, the Depths are as the Squares of the Velocities, or of the Quantities of Water. 5. Therefore the Quantities of Water paſſing thr equal Holes in the ſame Time, are in ſubduplicate Proportion (or as the Square Roots) of the Depths. The Velocity of any Drop of Water ſpouting throo any given Hole, ſhall be equal to that Velocity which it would acquire in falling perpendicularly from Reſt thro a Line equal to the Depth of the Hole: For at the Beginning the Spouting and the Falling Drop are both accelerated by the ſame Force, that is, its own Gravity; and therefore their Velocities are equal at firſt, and they continue equal afterwards, becauſe they both increaſe according to the ſame Law: For the Velocities of both are all the way in ſubduplicate Proportion of the Depths. 7. Th Water will riſe in Pipes as high as the Surface of the Head from whence it falls; yet in perpendicular Jets it can never riſę quite ſo high, becauſe of the Reſiſtance of the Air, and the Friction of the Adjutage. 8. The Reſiſtance of the Air is ſo much the more conſiderable, becauſe of the different Directions of the Preſſure by which the Water is thrown up. For the Water moving towards the Hole of the Adjutage in different Directions, ſhall go out in the ſame Directions;3 and therefore cannot aſcend in one continued Column, but is ſeparated and ſcattered, and broken into ſmall Threads, each of which aſcends and deſcends by itſelf independently of all the reſt; and ſo the Effect of the Airs Reſiſtance becomes more ſenſible, as in the tenth Rule. 9. The ſcattering of the Jet, and the Reſiſtance of the Air, may be remedied in Part by the Form of the Adjutage. A Tube or concave Cylinder ſeems the propereſt Shape to take off the Lateral Preſſures; but then the Greatneſs of the Friction both ſhortens the Jet, and makes it irregular. The moſt convenient Form of an Adjutage is a Tube cover'd with a thin Plate, in which there is made a ſmooth well poliſd Hole, leſs than the Cavity of the Tube. For in ſuch an Adjutage, the Water will acquire an aſcending Direction in the Body of the Tube, and will find but ſmall Friction in paſſing by the thin Plate, and will go out in a regular Shape thro the poliſd Hole. umo. The Height of the Water in the Reſervoir continuing the ſame, the Quantity of the Friction of the Adjutage is proportional to the Surface of Metal which is contiguous to the Spouting Water; that is, it is proportional to the Diameter of the Hole; but the Quantity of Motion paſſing thr the Hole in any given Time, is as the Area of the Hole, that is, in duplicate Proportion of the Diameter of the Hole. Therefore, the Effect of the Friction ſhall be leſs, as the Hole of the Adjutage is larger. 11. The Conduit, or Pipe conveying the Water from the Reſervoir to the Adjutage, ought to be very large, in Proportion to the Aperture of the Adjutage; otherwiſe the Water will deſcend in the Conduit with a ſenſible Velocity, and therefore meet with a ſenſible Reſiſtance, whereby the Impulſe of the deſcending Water vill be conſiderably leſs than its Preſſure before it deſcended. 12. The Velocity of Water deſcending thr a Hole in the Bottom of the Veſſel, vill be greater than the Velocity of a Horizontal Jet ſpouting from the ſame Depth, and the Velocity of the Horizontal Jet will be greater than the Velocity of a Perpendicular Jet: For in the firſt Caſe, the Velocity of the Water is accelerated by its own Weight, and that Acceleration is communicated to the neighbouring Parts by mutual Attraction. In the third Caſe the Retardation of the Water that is paſſed the Adjutage, is an Obſtacle to that which is paſſing. 13. If we ſuppoſe Water to ſpout without Friction or Reſiſtance, the Amplitudes of all Horizontal Jets may be determined in the following manner: Let AP be a Horizonta Plane upon which the Jets fall, AB the Height of the Surface of the Water in the Reſervoir above that horizontal Plane. BC the Depth of any given Hole where the Water ſpouts. On BA, as a Diameter, deſcribe the Semicircle BHA, draw CE parallel to AP, and make l AM double to EC; then ſhall MA be the Amplitude of the Water ſpouting from the Hole C. For the Water will fall upon the Plane AP with the ſame deſcending Velocity, as if it had fallen directly from C to A; and the horizontal Velocity with which it is projected by the Preſſure, is equal (by the ſixth Rule) to the Velocity that would be acquired in falling from B to C. But the Velocity acquired in falling thro CA, is to the Velocity acquired in falling throo BC in ſubduplicate Proportion of CA to CB; that is, (as is clear from Gęometry) in the Proportion of CA to C E. Therefore when the Water firſt touches the Plane, ĩts deſcending Velocity is to its Horizontal Velocity, as CA to CE. But the deſcending Velocity, if it were uniform, would carry the Water thro' twice C A in the Time of its Deſcent. Therefore the Horizontal Velocity will carry the Water thrò twice E C in the ſame Time. ] Wherefore, the Amplitudes of Jets ſpouting from C and D, being taken at equal Diſtances from G, ſhall be equal; and the greateſt Amplitude of all ſhall be, when the Hole is equally diſtant from the Horizontal Plane, and the Surface of the Water in the Reſervoir; and that greateſt Amplitude AN ſhall be equal to AB, the Height of the Water in the Reſervoir above the Horizontal Plane. 14. By a like Conſtruction, the Altitudes and Amplitudes of oblique Jets may be determined. Let A be the Hole from whence the i ] ã O 4 Jet is thrown, BA its Depth, AE the oblique Direction of the Jet, cutting the Semicircle in E; make AM equal to four times CE; then ſhall AC be the Altitude, and AM the Amplitude of the oblique Jet. Let AE repreſent the oblique Velocity with which the Water paſſes thr the Mouth of the Adjutage, then ſhall AC repreſent the Aſcending Velocity, and CE the Horizontal Velocity. It is certain from the ſeventh Rule, that the Velocity A E would throw the Water in a perpendicular tain, from what has been demonſtrated concerning the Aſcent and Deſcent of heavy Bodies, that the Height to which the Velocity AE would throw the Water, is to the Height to which the Velocity A C would throw the Water, as the Square of AE to the Square of A C, that is, in the Proportion of AB to AC. Therefore AC ſhall be the greateſt Altitude of the oblique Jet, whoſe Direction is AE, and Depth BA. Wherefore, if the Aſcending Velocity were uniform, it would carry the Water thro' twice C A in the Time that it now ſpends in aſcending; and conſequently, in that Time the Horizontal Velocity ſhall carry the Water throſ twice CE, and in the Time of Aſcent and Deſcent thro four times CE. Wherefore, if CE be continued to x till E X is equal to EC, the Point X ſhall be the higheſt Part of the Jet. Hence it is eaſy to conclude, 1. That the greateſt Amplitude of all is in the Direction AH, that is, of 45 Degrees. 2. That the greateſt Amplitude is twice the Height of a perpendicular Jet, thrown from the ſame Depth. 3. That ſince the Arch E A is double to the Angle of Elevation EAM, therefore the Altitudes at different Angles are as the verſed Sines, and the Amplitudes as the Sines, of twice the Angles of Elevation 4. That the Amplitudes are equal at Elevations equally diſtant from 45 Degrees on each ſide. 5. That the Amplitudes of Jets at the ſame Angle from diſferent Depths, are as thoſe Depths, that is, as the Squares of the Velocities; and that the Altitudes are alſo in that Proportion. 6. The Time which any Drop of Water ſpends in paſſing from the Mouth of the Adjutage to the Horizontal Plane, is equal to twice the Time it would ſpend in falling throX the verſed Sine of the doubled Angle or Elevation. Therefore the Times are proportional to the Square Roots of the verſed Sines of the doubled Angles of Elevation, or to the Chords of the doubled Angles of Elevation, or to the Sines of the Angles of Elevation. Theſe ſix Rules are alſo applicable to Gunnery and the Motion of Projectiles, if inſtead of Vets ſpouting from the ſame Depth, we put, Projectiles thrown with an equal Velocity; and in the room of Jets ſpouting from different Depths, we ſubſtitute, Projectiles tbrown Of RUNNING WATEE. A Stream of Water deſcenqing from a Reſervoir, in a Chanel whoſe Bottom is an inclined Plane, is called Running Water. We here ſuppoſe the Reſervoir to be ſupplied as faſt as it is drained, ſo that the Water is always kept up to the ſame Height in the Reſervoir, and runs down the Chanel in a conſtant permanent Stream, in any one Part of which the Water always continues at the ſame Height, and moves with the ſame Velocity. Wherefore, I. Each Particle of Water is accelerated in deſcending, in the ſame manner as other heavy Bodies are accelerated in deſcending upon an inclined Plane. 2. Let AB repreſent the Depth of the Water in the Reſervoir, B C the Bottom of the Chanel, and AD the Surface of the Running Water; the Velocity of any Particle E of the Running Water, ſhall be equal to the Velocity which it would acquire in falling perpendicularly thr a Line equal to the preſent Depth of the Particle below the Plane of the Surface of the Reſervoi. Draw EM parallel to BA, and EX parallel to BC, and KG perpendicular locity as if it fell directly from M to E. And by the ſixth Rule concerning ſpouting Liquors, the Velocity with which the Water rurs out of the Reſervoir at X, is equal to the Velocity it would acquire in falling from A to K. Therefore the Velocity of the Water at E ſhall be equal to that which would be acquired in faling directly from M to E. 3. The Velocities of ſeveral Particles of Running Water, are in ſubduplicate Proportion of their Depths from the Plane of the Surfacs of the Reſervorr. . From any Point, as R in the Bottom of - Chanel, draw R Qperpendicular to BC, ſo ſnall R Q repreſent the Depth of the Water; and (by the third Rule) the Velocity of the Water in R ſhall be greater than the Velocity of the Water in Q, in Proportion as the Square Root of N R is greater than the Square Root of PQ and in like manner thro the whole Line QR, the Velocity of the Water ſhall always be greater in that Point which is nearer to R. 5. The Quantity of Water which paſſes by the Line QR (or rather which paſſes thro' the Plane repreſented by that Line) in any given Time, is equal to the Quantity of Water which falls from the Reſervoir in the ſame Time; and therefore (drawing X Z parallel to RQ) the Quantities of Water paſſing by X Z and R Qin any given Time ſhall be equa. 6. The Depth of the Stream continually decreaſes as it runs, that is, QR is leſs than ZX For equal Quantities paſs by in the ſame time, by the fifth Rule; but in QR the Water paſſes ſwifter than in ZX, by the firſt Rule; and the Chanel is ſuppoſed to be all the way of an equal Breadth. Therefore the Depth QR muſt be leſs than the Depth XZ. 7. The farther the Stream runs, the nearer do the Velocities at different Depths approach to an Equality: For the Depth QR decreaſes, and the Lines PQ, NR, come nearer to an Equality; and the greateſt and leaſt Velocities, which are as the Square Roots of thoſe Lines, approach nearer to a Proportion of Equality than the Lines themſelves. 8. The Velocities of the Water at different Depths approach towards an Equality conſiderably faſter than according to the ſeventh Rule; for the upper Waters are continually accelerated by the lower, and the lower are continually retarded by the upper. 29. The Water deſcends with moſt Noiſe near the Beginning or Head of the Stream: For the loudeſt Murmurs will be produced where the Waters ruſh with the greateſt Force, that is, where the relative Velocities, or Differences of the deſcending Velocities, are the greateſt. 10. Water cannot be conveyed in any Chanel, whoſe Length and perpendicular Altitude is according to the following Table. Perpendicular Altitudes anſwering to each LZLengths. Length. 43=2 2 1060 Yaords. 3 Inches. 2160 5 Miles. Feet. 357 Theſe later Numbers ſhew how much the convex Surface of the Earth ſinks below the Level of its Tangent, at ſuch Diſtances from the Point of Contact as are expreſſed by the former Numbers. IF a Chanel therefore were made according to this Table, each End of it would be equally diſtant from the Center of the Earth. 11. In making Aqueduẽis, o or conducting Rivers the common Way, is to make the Chanel fall one Foot in 100 Yards. 12, IF the Channel be of a ſufficient Length, and its Bottom rough and irregular, the Motion of the Stream ſhall become uniform in a very little time: For the Reſiſtance of ſuch a Chanel 1o the Motion of the Stream will be very conſiderable, and will increaſe, as the Water accelerates, according to the Square of the Velocity, and will be gradually communicated from the Sides and Bottom to the very Middle of the Stream; and ſo in a little time the Reſiſtance will become equal in effect to the Accelaration, and the Motion nearly uniform, as it commonly is in Rivers, Wherefore, 13. In Rivers, the Motion of the Water is ſloweſt at the Bottom and Sides of the Chanel, becauſe there the Reſiſtance begins, and from thence is communicated to all other Parts. 14. In different Parts of the ſame River, the uniform Velocity of the Stream is greateſt in that Part, where the Bottom of the Chanel has the greateſt Inclination or Declivity. 15. In thoſe Parts of the River where the Velocity of the Stream is leaſt, the Depth of Of the GRAVITATION of SOLIDS and F LUIDS together. HE Speciſfic Gravities of all Homogeneal Bodies are as the Weights of equal Bulks directly, or as the Bulks of equal Weights reciprocally. If a Solid be immerſed in a Fluid, it loſes ſo much of its Weight as the Preſſure of the Fluid ſuſtains. The Preſſure of the Fluid would ſuſtain the Weight of ſuch a Quantity of the Fluid as would fill the Space which the immerſed Solid takes up. For if there were ſuch a Quantity of the Fluid in the Place of the Solid, no one Part would move or preponderate, as has been already ſhewn. If that Quantity of the Fluid, which is imagined to ſupply the Place of the Solid, were to harden and become ſolid itſelf, but to retain the ſame Denſity that it had before hardening, it would ſtill continue at Reſt, and be ſupported by the Preſſure: For the Quantity and Direction of the Preſſure between the remaining Fluid and the hardened Fluid, would in all Parts in all Reſ pects be the ſame that it was before. Therefore every Solid immerſed in a Fluid loſes in Weight, ſo much as ſuch a Quantity of the Fluid weighs, as could fill its Place, and all equal Solids loſe the ſame Quantity of Weight; and every Solid immerſed in a Fluid, retains of its Weight, jut ſo much as is the Exceſs of its own Specific Gravity, above the Specific Gravity of the Fluid. So much Weight as the immerſed Solid retains, is called its Comparative Gravity in that Fluid. If the Specific Gravity of the immerſed Solid be leſs than the Specific Gravity of the Fluid, then the Solid ſhall loſe more than its whole Weight; that ĩs, the Exceſs of the Fluid’s Preſſure ſhall make it aſcend to the Surface, and ſwim there. . The Force which makes the Solid aſcend, may be called its Comparative Levity in the Fluid. But if the Specific Gravity of the immerſed Solid be greater than the Specific Gravity of the Fluid, then its Comparative Gravity ſhall cauſe it to deſcend and ſink to the Bottom. The Comparative Gravity or Levity of an immerſed Solid is thę ſame at all Depths: For the Solid and Fluid being both ſuppoſed incompreſſible, the Difference of their Specifi Gravities continues always the ſame. Therefore in a Fluid void of Reſiſtance, all immerſed Solids ſhall aſcend or deſcend with a Motion uniformly accelerated, like that of heavy Bodies deſcending in Vacuo, only making Allowance for the Difference of the Forces of abſolute and comparative Gravity. But in reſiſting Fluids, the Accelarations will continually decreaſe, till the Motion becomes nearly uniform, as has been already explained under the Head Of Reſiſting Mediums. The true Abſolute Gravity of any thing, is only to be found by weighing it in Vacuo; tho its comparative Gravity in the Air is commonly taken for its abſolute Gravity, becauſe the Diſference between them is but ſmall. A Solid ſpecifically lighter than a Fluid ſhall ſwim at the Top, part of it being immerſed below, and part of it emerging above the Surface. The immerſed Part of any Solid that ſwims, is equal in Magnitude to ſo much Fluid as weighs the ſame with the whole Solid. For if the whole Solid were taken away, and the Place of the immerfed Part ſupplied with an additional Quantity of Fluid, all Parts of the former Fluid would continue as they were. Wherefore, a floating Solid increaſes the Preſſure upon the Bottom of the Veſſel, no otherwiſe than it would be increaſed by pouring in an additional Quantity of Fluid, whoſe Weight is equal to the whole Weight of Solid, or whoſe Bulk is equal to the Bulk of the immerſed Part of the Solidl. Wherefore, If the Specific Gravities of the Solid and Fluid were equal, no Part of the Solid would emerge above the Surface of the Fluid; nor would the Solid have any comparative Gravity or Levity, or be carried upward or downward in whatſoever Part of the Fluid it were placed. And conſequentl all Solids that float upon, or are ſuſpended in any Fluid, communicate their whole Gravity to the Fluid; nor is the Preſſure upon that Part of the Bottom which lies directly under the Solid, greater than upon any other Part. The Magnitudes of the immerſed Parts of ſeveral Solids doating upon the ſame Fluid, are proportional to the Weights of the reſpective Solidss. For the Magnitudes of ſuch Quantities of the Fluid as are of an equal Weight with the ſeveral Solids, are in that Proportion. TThe Magnitude of the immerſed Part of the ſame Solid floating upon diſferent Fluids, is reciprocally proportional to the Specific Gravity of each Fluid, For the Magnitudes of equal Weights of ſeveral Bodies, are reciprocally as the Specific Gravities of thoſe Bodies. Thus the Hydrometer diſcovers the different fically heavier than itſelf, by ſinking deepeſt into Fluids that have the leaſt Specific Gravity. A Solid ſpecifically heavier than a Fluid, ſhall ſink to the Bottom and there preſs with its whole comparative Gravity. So much Weight as the Solid loſes, (hich is the Difference between its abſolute and comparative Gravity) is communicated to the Fluid: For the Preſſure of the Fluid upon the Bottom is increaſed, as much as ĩts perpendicular Altitude is increaſed; and the perpendicular Altitude is increaſed, juſt as much as it would be increaſed by the Addition of ſo much Fluid as is equal in Bigneſs to the Bulk of the Solid. Wherefore, in all Caſes, the Sum of the Weights of the Solid and Fluid is the ſame, whether they are weighed ſingly or together. Wiilſt the Solid is deſcending, the Weight of the Fluid that is under it increaſes continually, till the Reſiſtance becomes equal to the Acceleration: For the Preſſure of the Solid upon the Fluid increaſes, as the Reſiſtance of the Fluid increaſes, (Action and Reaction being always equal)l. And therefore, when the uniform Motion begins, the Preſſure of the lower Fluid is augmented by the whole comparative Gravity of the Solid. ln like manner, the comparative Levity of a Solid lighter than a Fluid, is communicated to the upper Fluid in Proportion to the Reſiſtance: gins, the Preſſure of the upper Fluid will be leſſened by the whole comparative Levity of the Solid. If a Solid be immerſed in ſeveral Fluids, the Weights which it loſes in thoſe Fluids are as the ſpecific Gravities of the Fluids: For each Weight anfivers to an equal Bulk of each particular Fluid. If ſeveral Solids which are ſpecifically heavier than any one Fluid be immerſed therein, the Weight which each Solid loſes, is to its entire Weight in Air, as the ſpecific Gravity of the Fluid to the ſpecific Gravity of the Solid. For the Weight loſt anſwers to ſuch a Bulk of the Fluid, as is equal in Magnitude to the Solid. Having found the Proportion of the ſpecific Gravity of one Fluid to the ſpecific Gravities of two Solids, we may eaſily find the Proportion of the ſpecific Gravities of thoſe Solids to each other. For as the Weight loſt by the firſt Solid is to ĩts entire Weight, ſo is the Weight loſt by the ſecond Solid to a fourth Number3 which, compared with the entire Weight of the ſecond Solid, expreſſes the Proportion of the ſpecific Gravity of the firſt Solid to the ſpecific Gravity of the ſecond. For the fourth Number expreſſes a certain Quantity in Weight of the firſt kind of Solid, which would loſe juſt as much as the ſecond loſes, and conſequently would be equal to its Magnitude. The ſpecific Gravities of ſeveral Bodies are found to be as follows: Fine Gold -  9636 Gold of a Guinea 18888 Quickſilver -- 13593 Lead - - - - II345 Sterling Silver - 10535 Copper - -- 83843 Hammered Braſs - 8349 Caſt Braſ's - -- 8100 Steel - - -- V7852 Iron - - -- ?7643 Tin - - - - 19321I Glaſs - - -æ 2666 Pump-Water - 1000 The foregoing Numbers ſhew alſo how many Ounces Avoirdupois are contained in a cubic Foot of each Solid or Fluid: And 192 Ounces Avoirdupois are equal in Weight to 175 Ounces Troy. And if any of the foregoing Numbers be divided by 1728, (the Cube of 12) the Quotient ſhall ſ7hew how many Ounces Avoirdupois ate contained in one cubic Inch. The ſpecific Gravity of a Solid lighter than the Fluid in which it is immerſed, may alſo be found hydroſtatically, by joining it to another Solid which is heavier than the Fluid; ſo that the whole compound Solid may be alſo heavier. How this is to be done, will be beſt underſtood from an Example. Let there be 34 Penny-Weight of Lead, which being weighed in Water, loſes (ſuppoſe) three Penny- Weight; and let 21 Penny-Weight of Wax, which is lighter than Water, be faſtend to the Lead, ſo ſhall the Weight of the Compound in Air be 55 Penny-Weight; and let the Weight of the ſame Compound in Water loſe 25 Penny Weight, which ſiews how much a certain Quantity of Water weighs that is equal in Bulk to the compound Solid: But a Quantity of Water, equal in Bulk to the Lead, weighs three Penny-Weight. Therefore a Quantity of Water, equal in Bulk to the Wax, weighs OF PNEUMATICKS: O R, The Gravitation and Preſſure of ELASTIC vco 0r COMPRESSIBLE FLUIDS. I.  T has been already ſhewn, under the Head of Repulſion, that if the Particles of a Fluid repel each other with a Force reciprocally proportional to their Diſtances, ſuch a Fluid ſhall be elaſtic, and capable of Compreſſion. 2. The repulſive Force, as well as the attractive, ſeems to ſtop at the firſt Particles it acts upon, never extending itſelf to other Particles which lie beyond the firſt in a right Line,. 3. When the Particles of ſuch a Fluid are at Reſt, they are all at equal Diſtances from each other. For if the Diſtances were unequal, the repelling Force would be greateſt where the Diſtance was leaſt; and conſequently the Particles would move that way where the Diſtance was greateſt. 4. Such a Fluid therefore would be homogeneal, and its Denſity or ſpecific Gravity would be proportional to the Number of repelling Particles contained in any given Space. 5. The Denſity of ſuch a Fluid would always be proportional to its Compreſſion, which may be thus proved: The Number of equidiſtant Particles in any given Line, is reciprocally as the Diſtance of the Particles: And the Number of equidiſtant Particles in any given Surface, is reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance of the Particles. For the Number of Particles in each Line is reciprocally as the Diſtance, and the Number of Lines in the Surface is reciprocally as the ſame Diſtance of the Particles; Therefore the Number of Particles in the given Surface, &s reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance. Again, the Number of equidiſtant Particles in any given Solid, is reciprocally as the Cube of the Diſtance of the Particles: For the Number in each Surface is reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance, and the Number of Surfaces in the Solid is reciprocally as the ; L ſame ſame Diſtance: Therefore the Number of Particles in the Solid is reciprocally as the Cubæ of the Diſtance:. Therefore alſo, the Denſity of ſuch a Fluid is reciprocally as the Cube of the Diſtance of the Particles. Now it is evident, that the Force of Compreſſion is in compound Proportion of the Number of Particles acting upon the compreſſing Surface, and of the repelling Force of a ſingle Particle; but the Number of Particles in the compreſſing Surface is reciprocally as the Square of the Diſtance, and the Force of a ſingle Particle is reciprocally as the Diſtance: Therefore the Force of Compreſſion is reciprocally as the Cube of the Diſtance, that is, as the Denfity. 6. The Diſtance of the Particles of ſuch à Fluid, is proportional to the Cube Root of the Benſity, or Compreſſion, or Spring, which is alvays equal to the Compreſſion. 7. In all Homogeneal Bodies, the Denſities or ſpecific Gravities are reciprocally as the Bulks of equal Weights: Therefore the Magnitude of any given Quantity of ſuch a Fluid, is reciprocally proportional to the Denſity, Compreſſion, Spring, or Cube of the Diſtance, of ihe Particles. . If a Fluid is compoſed of repelling Parels and if the Denſity of it be always proportional to its Compreſſion, then the repelling force in the Particles ſhall be reciprocally as their Diſtance. For ſince the Compreſſion is as the Denſity, that is, reciprocally as the Cube of the Diſtance of the Particles; and ſince the Compreſſion is alſo n compound Proportion of the Square of the Diſtance reciprocally, and the force of a ſingle Particle directly: Therefore the force of a ſingle Particle is reciprocally as the Diſtance of the Particles. 9. Elaſtic Fluids conſiſt of Particles which do not touch each other: For if they ſhould touch or come within the Reach of Attraction, the repelling Force, and conſequently the Elaſticity, muſt ceaſlee. Of AIr and its ELASTICITY. H E Particles of Air give way to every ſmall Impreſſion, and move ſreely among one another; therefore Air is a Fluid. Wherefore any Force that preſſes upon Air, preſſes in all manner of Directions at the ſame time. Air becomes denſer when the Preſſure upon it is increaſed, and expands when the Preſſure is diminiſhed, as is clear from Experiments. The force that compreſſes common Air; is the Weight of the Atmoſphere, and the Spring of the Air is equal to that Weight; for they always balance each other, and produce equal Effects. Ve learn from Experiments, that the Denſity of the Air is proportional to the force that compreſſes it; and conſequently (by the eighth Article of elaſtic Fluids) the Air conſiſts of Particles repelling each other with a force reciprocally proportional to their Diſtancee And that the repellent force of each Particle of Air terminates on the neareſt Particles; is evident, becauſe if it did not, the Air contained in any Veſſel would be condenſed near the Sides of the Veſſel. LIf the Diſtance of the Particles of Air in the Receiver of an Air-Pump be only ſeven times greater after exhauſting than it was before, the Mercury in the Gage will riſe within leſs than one eighth of an Inch of its utmoſt Height, according to the preſent Weight of the Atmoſphere: For the Spring of the Air is as the Cube of the Diſtance of its Particles, by the ſixth Article of elaſtic Fluidss Therefore (according to the preſent Suppoſition) the Spring before exhauſting, is to the Spring after exhauſting, as I to 343. The repulſive Virtue of the Particles of the Air is not to be overcome and changed into Attraction by any known force whatever. Therefore by the ſixth Law of the Attraction of Coheſion, and the third Law of Repulſion, the Particles of Air are produced from Metals, or ſuch like hard and ponderous Subſtances. Wherefore, vhen Water is changed into Vapour, by having its Parts ſeparated and put into a State of Repulſion, the Vapour is lighter than Air, This is the Reaſon why watery Vapours float in the Air, and are raiſed up to conſiderable Height in the Atmoſphere, where its Weight, and conſequently its Preſſure and Denſity, is leſs than near the Surface of the Earth. Hence it follows, that a moiſt Atmoſphere is heavier than a clear and dry Atmoſphere cateris paribus, by ſo much as the Quantity of ſuſpended Vapours in the firſt Caſe exceeds the Quantity of ſuſpended Vapours in the ſecond. Moiſt Vapours leſen the Elaſticity of the Air becauſe the Forcæ of Repuſion in the Particles of watery Vapours is leſs than in the Particles of Air. Therefore if there be two Columns of Atmoſphere of the ſame Diameter and Weight, that which contains the moſt vatery Vapour is ſpecifically heavier than the other, and conſequently ſhorter. The Preſſure of the Atmoſphere upon every ſquare Inch, (near the Surface of the Earth) is about 15 Pounds Avoirdupois. For the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere upon every ſquare Inch, is equal to the Prefſure of a Column of Mer cury, whoſe Baſe is a ſquare Inch, and Altitude 30 Inches. Now from the Table of ſpecific Gravities it will be found, that a cubic Inch of Mercury weighs ſomething more than 8 Ounces Avoirdupois: Therefore 30 cubic Inches ſhall weigh 15 Pounds. If the Air was a compreſſed Fluid, the Height of the Atmoſphere would be 29040 Feet, or ſomething more than 5 Miles, reckoning 5280 Feet to a Mile; For the Preſſure of one Inch Altitude in Water is equivalent to the Preſſure of 850 Inches Altitude in Air; and the Preſſure of one Inch Altitude in Quickſilver, is equivalent to the Preſſure of 133 Inches Altitude of Water. Therefore the Preſſure of one Inch Altitude of Quickſilver, ĩs equivalent to the Preſſure of 11616 Inches Altitude of Air; and the Preſſure of 30 Inches Altitude of Quickſilver, is equivalent to the Preſiure of 348480 Inches, that is, 29940 Feet Altitude of Aĩr. But the Atmoſphere muſt extend to a much greater Height than 53 Miles, as the Air is an elaſtic Fluid, and expands itſelf at all Al. titudes, in Proportion as the Preſſure of the incumbent Part of the Atmoſphere decreaſes. Dr Halley firſt found out and demonſtrated, that if Altitudes in the Atmoſphere are taken in arithmetical Proportion increaſing the Denfities of the Air, and conſequently the Heights of Mercury ſuſpended in a Tube, ſhall be in Geometrical Proportion decreaſing; and from thence he ſhewed how to determine the Height of the Mercury at any aſſigned Height in the Air, and è contra having the Height of the Mercury given to find the Height in the Air. If the Logarithm of any Number leſs than 30 be ſubtracted from the Logarithm of 30, and the Difference be multiplied by 58709, the Product ſhall give the Height in the Air expreſſed in Feet, and the aſſumed Number leſs than 30 ſhall be the correſpondent Height of the Mercury expreſſed in Inchess Hence the following Table is eaſily made, Heights Degrees of in the the Airs Alr, Expanſion, o I 7 a4 14 16 21 64 28 256 35 1024 4a 4596 The Height of the Mercury anſWering to each of thoſe Heights in the Air, is found by dividing 30 Inches by the Degrees of the Airs Expanſion, Wherefore, at the Height of 42 Miles in the Air, the Height of the Mercury would be little more than the hundredth Part of an Inch. Puy de Domme is a Mountain near Clermont in France, at the Top of which the Mercury ſall ſtand at about 27 Inches, when it ſtands at 30 Inches at the Bottom of the Mountain. Therefore, the perpendicular Height of that Mountain is about 2686 Feet, or ſomething more than half a Mile. Of DaMPS and PESTILENCE. L L common Air is impregnated with a certain Vivifying Spirit, which is abſolutely neceſſary to the Preſervation and Continuance of the Animal Life. Every time the Air paſſes out of the Lungs of an Animal, Part of the vivifying Spirit i is either deſtroyed or left behind. Theſe two Articles are evident, becauſe an Animal dies as well for want of freſb Air, as for want of Air. It is found by Experience, that the vivifying ficient for one Man about the Space of one Minute, and not much longer. The vivifying Spirit in Air is inflammable, or of a Nature proper to feed Fire, and capable of being burnt and conſumed thereby. This is evident, I. Becauſe the vivifying Spirit is actually deſtroyed by making Air paſs thro the Fire. 2. Becauſe when the Air has paſſed through Fire, and loſt its vivifying Spirit, it will deaden red hot Coals, and extinguiſh Flame. 3. Becauſe blowing a Fire makes it burn Rercer, except when the Blaſt is ſtrong enough to diſſipate the Particles of Fire immediately: For the Current of Air feeds the Fire with a continual Supply of inflammable Particles. 4. Becauſe Fire goes out of itſelf, if it be not fed with freſh Air. 5. Becauſe Cuſtom teaches, that the beſt way of making Fires is to contrive, not only that they may be ſupplied with freſh Air, but that the Air, which paſſes thro the Fire, may be thrown out thr a Tube or Chimney, as being afterwards uſeleſs, or perhaps hurtful, both to the Burning of the Fire, and the Reſpiration of thoſe that are near the Fire. Air that has loſt the vivifying Spirit may be called a Damp, not becauſe it is filled with humid or moiſt Vapour, but becauſe it deadens Fire, extinguiſhes Flame, and deſtroys Life. The Contrivance of warming a Room by ſupplying it with Air, heated by paſſing thro the Fire, or a red hot Tube, ought to be rejected as dangerous, becauſe it fills the Room with an unwholeſome Damp, inſtead of freſh Air; and therefore, in ſmall and cloſe Rooms, jt may prove Mortal, unleſs there be a ſpeedy Admiſſion of healthful and ſpirituous Air. The Elaſticity of a Damp is equal to the Elaſticity of common Air; for the Spring of the artificial Damp in the Receiver is equal to the Weight of the Atmoſphere. Air may be changed into a Damp, not only by paſſing thro' the Fire, or thro the Lung⸗ of an Animal, but alſo by Corruption and Putrefaction of the vivifying Spirit, as in the Hold of a Ship, or in Oil Ciſterns, after they have been emptied for ſome time. The ſenſible Qualities of things putrefied, are different from the ſenſible Qualities which they had before Putrefaction, and affect the Bodies of Animals in a different manner. VVherefore, during the Time that the vivifying Spirit of Air is putrefying, it may reaſonably be concejved to undergo ſuch Changes as may quite alter its Nature, and endue it with malignant and poiſonous Qualities of divers Kinds and Degrees, till the Putrefaction is finiſed, and the Spirit entirely deſtroyed and diſſipated, as Ei it had paſſed through the Fire. If a conſiderable Part of the vivifying 8pirit of the Air in any Country begins to putrefy, the Inhabitants of that Country vill be ſubject to an epidemical Diſeaſe, which ſhall continue for a certain Period, till the Putrefaction is quite finiſhed. If as the putrefying Spirit occaſions the Diſeaſe, ſo the diſeaſed Body contributes towards putrefying the Spirit of the circumambient Air; then the Diſtemper ſhall not only be epidemical, but alſo peſtilential and contagious. Every Particle of Salt conſiſts of a dry, earthy, attracting Particle in the Center, encompaſſed with an acid, watery Fluid, which is retained and held faſt by the central Attraction. For if it were not for the central Attraction of each Particle, the watery Acid would conſtitute a Fluid; and if there were no watery Acid, the Salt would not be diſſolvible by the Moiſture of the Tongue, nor act upon the Taſte. If the vivifying Spirit of the Air be a nitrous Salt, as is commonly believed, (and as ſeems evident, becauſe Nitre is commonly fourid in Stones, and Rocks, and old VWaialls, and other Materials expoſed to the Air) the manner of its Putrefaction is deſcribed by Sir Iſaac Newton, in the 31ſt Query, at the End of his Optics. a  As Gravity makes the Sea flow round the denſer and weightier Parts of the Globe of the Earth, ſo the Attraction may make the watery Acid flow round the denſer and compacter Particles of Earth for compoſing the Particles of Salt. For otherwiſe the Acid would not do the Office of a Medium hetween the Earth and common Water, for making Salts diſſolvible in the Water;3 nor would Salt of Tartar readily draw off the Acid from diſſolved Metals, nor Metals the Acid from Mercuryg. Now as in the great Globe of the Earth and Sea, the denſeſt Bodies by their Gravity ſink down in Water, and always endeavour to go towards the Center of the Globe;3 ſo in Particles of Salt, the denſeſt Matter may always endeavour to approach the Center of the Particle: So that a Particle of Salt may be compared to a Chaos; being denſe, hard, dry, and earthy in the Center; and rare, ſoſt, moiſt, and watery in the Circumference. And hence it ſeems to be, that Salts are oſf a laſting Nature, heing ſcarce deſtroyed, unleſs by drawing away their watery Parts by Violence, or by letting them ſoak into the Pores of the central Earth by a gentle Heat in Putrefaction, For if a Bladder, which is about half Alled with Air, be tied faſt about the Neck, and laid before the Fire, in a very little time it would be diſtended and burſt. Fire communicates a repelling Force to the Particles of all Bodies vhatſoever, whether ſolid or fluid, and that repelling Force increaſes as the Heat increaſess Thus if æ Flaſk be filled with Water only to the lower Part of the Neck, and then ſet upon the Fire, the Water, when it begins to grow warm, ſhall riſe into the Neck, and continue to aſcend higher and higher as the Heat augments. So alſo in ſolid Bodies, it is evident, that the Action of Heat tends to ſeparate their Parts; that is, in making them fly from, or repel each other. For if a Bar of Iron be heated, it ſwells and increaſes its Dimenſũions; but yet the Parts continue to ſtick together, ſo long as the Diſtance to which they are driven by the Repulſion, is leſs than the Semidiameter of the Sphere of Attraction: When the Diſtanee is almoſt equal to the Semidiameter, the Iron melts and becomes fluid; when the Diſtance is greater than the Semidiameter, the Particles are thrown off, and conſtitute an elaſtic Fluid. Heat is produced by violent Attrition, and alſo by the near approach of Bodies that are already hot. For when the Parts of Bodies are agitated, either by Attrition or any neighbouring Heat, the Ather included in the Pores of thoſe Bodies is alſo agitated and repelled, and endeavours to expand, as in electrical Attraction we find it does expand all round the Surface of the electrical Body. And as the Agitation of the Parts of the heated Body increaſes, ſo the Elaſticity of the included Ather increaſes alſo, till by degrees the Pores are widened, the Attraction of Coheſion overcome, and the ſolid Parts ſeparated or thrown off into a State of mutual Repulſion. Thoſe Bodies, whoſe Parts are ſeparated by a gentle Heat are called Volatile; but ſuch Bodies whoſe Parts are not ſeparated without a ſtronger Heat, or perhaps not without Fermentation, are called sixed Bodies. Thoſe Motions which are produced in Bodies by the Attractions or Repulſions of their conſtituent Particles, are called Fermentalion, as all Chymical Fermentations ſeem to be of that Nature. A fixed Body can receive no greater Degree of Heat, than what is ſufficient to reduce it into the Form of a boiling Fluid. For when the æiher, meeting with no farther Reſiſtance, finds an eaſy Paſſage between the Particles, the Augmentation of the Elaſticity is then at an end. Therefore Water that has boiled for a conſiderable time, is no hotter than when it firſt began to boil. By how much greater the Force is, which is required to looſen and remove the Particles of which a Body is compoſed, by ſo much greater is the Degree of Heat which that Body is capable of receiving. Hence it is, that the Heat of melted Metal is much greater than of boiling Water; and that Water boils with leſs Heat in vacuo, than when its Parts are preſſed together by the Weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere; and therefore, no doubt, the Heat of boiling Water is greater when the Air is clear, than when it is moiſt and rainy; and perhaps the Intenſeneſs of the Sun's Heat iĩs owing to the vaſt Weight and Denſity of its Atmoſphere. When the Agitation of the ſuperAcial Parts of any fixed Body is great enough to emit the æther copiouſly in right Lines, then that Body becomes bright or hum nous. If the Parts of a Body are agitated by Heat, to ſuch a Degree as to make them ſhine and become luminous, that Heat is called Fire, and the Body is ſaid to be Reã- hot. That groſs, terreſtrial, or ſulphureous Exhalation which acends from ſuch Bodies as are on Fire, is what we vulgarly call l Smoak ; and if the Smoak ĩtſelf be on Fire, it becomes Flame; for Flame is nothing but red-hot, or ſhining, Smoak. The Heat of Flame may be made more intenſe, by blowing it out with a Tube into a pointed long Stream; for the Blaſt and the Air that encompaſſes the Stream, afford a very plentiful Supply of ſpirituous and inflammable Particles. When watry Particles are ſeparated and thrown off by Heat, they alſo acquire a Virtue of repelling each other, and conſtitute an elaſtic Fluid, which is called Vapour. Vapour preſerves its Elaſticity, ſo long as it continues hot, and as the Heat increaſes the Elaſticity increaſes; but Cold quickly deſtroys the Elaſticity, and turns the Vapour into Water again. The Strength of heated and confined Vapour is very well known by its raiſing Water, digeſting Bones, and burſting little Glaſs Spheres with a Report like that of a Piſtol., The ſtrongeſt Vapour is that which is produced from the watery Acid of Nitre in the Firing of Gunpowder; for by means of the Charcole and Sulphur, and Acidity of that Fluid of which the Nitre is compoſed, the rarifying Heat upon every Particle of the Vapour is both ſudden and violent. Vapour aſcends ſo long as the repelling Force is ſufficient to keep she Particles at ſuch a Diſtance,, as makes the ſpecific Gravity of the Vapour leſs than the ſpecific Gravity of Air; but when Cold has brought the Particles cloſer together, it deſcends as it were by Diſtillation in Miſt and Rain. The biggeſt Drops of Rain fall from the higheſt Clouds; for as the Vapour deſcends, it meets with other floating or aſcending Vapours in its Paſſage: Hence the Drops of Rain in Summer are commonly larger than in Winter. When the ambient Air is nearly of the ſame Temper with Water from whence Vapours are raiſed, thoſe Vapours are inviſible becauſe the Particles that compaſs them are too ſmall to be ſeen: But when the ambient Air is conſiderably colder than the Water, the Vapour is preſently condenſed as it riſes and becomes viſiblee Hence it is that the Breath of Animals is only viſible in cold Weather, and that the Vapours aſcending from Ponds and Rivers are ſometimes Viſible, and ſometimes inviſible. The very odd Phænomena of Glaſs Lacrymæ, which are made by dropping melted Glaſs into Water, ſeem to be the natural and genuine Effects of Heat and Cold. For, 1. The melted Glaſs, as it falls through the Air, begins to cool, and conſequently to ſhirink; upon which the external Parts have an Opportunity of attracting each other, and forming a thin Surface or Skin of compact and hard Glaſ. 2. But the main Body of the Lacryma, before it reaches the Water, continues melted, and therefore the Diſtance of the Centers of the Particles is but little leſs than the Semidiameter of the Sphere of Attraction. 3. When the Heat is ſuddenly checked by the Water, the Dimenſions of each Particle, and of its attracting Sphere, are immediately leſſened and contracted. Wherefore, when the Lacryma i is cold, all its internal Particles are in a State of Repulſion, being without the Reach of each others Attraction. 5. So long as the elaſtical Preſſure continues equãl in all Parts, the external Skin of ſolid Glaſs is ſufficient to confine it; but as ſoon as the Stem is broken off, and the repelled Particles are at Liberty to begin to move, and in moving are accelerated by repeated Actions of the repelling Force, at laſt the whole Maſi ſuddenly burſts, and divides itſelf into a kind of coarſe tranſparent Sand. If a Lacryma be made red-hot, and ſuffered to cool leiſurely, ſo that the Particles may attract each other as they ſubſide, it ſhall be entirely changed into true, perfect, vulgar Glaſs. Of PNEUMATIC ENGINES. LL thoſe Inſtruments, or Machines, that work by means of an elaſtic Fluid, may be called Pneumatic Engines. One of the moſt ſimple is the exhauſting Syringe, which is nothing but a common Syringe, with a Valve permitting the Air to enter through the Orifice into the Body or Barrel of the Syringe when the Piſton is drawn; but not to return back again through the Orifice when the Piſton deſcends. The condenſing Syringe is of the like Nature, only the Valve ſuffers the Air to paſ out of the Body of the Syringe when the Piſton deſcends; but not to enter again when the Piſton aſcends./ The Air-Pump is in Effect nothing but two exhauſting Syringes, communicating with each other, and acting alternately. The Effect of the Cupping-Glaſs has ſometimes been aſcribed to the Spring of Air mixed with the Blood; but ought rather to be imputed ſing upon thoſe Parts of the Blood- Veſſels which lie without the Glaſs. For, 1. It is plain, that the Weight of the Atmoſphere i is ſufficient for that Purpoſe. 2. It is not certain, that there iĩs mny Air mixed with the Blood at all. 3. But, from ſeveral Trials, it ſeems to be pretty certain, that there is not in the Blood a ſufficient Quantity of Air to anſwer the Force with which the Fleſh is raiſed into the Glaſs in cupping. The Diving-Bell is another Machine, vhoſe Uſe depends upon the Elaſticity of the Air. This Engine is deſcribed by Dr Halley in the following Terms:  The Diving-Bell is moſt conveniently  made in the Form of a Truncate Cone, the  ſmaller Baſis being cloſed, and the larger  open, and ought to be ſo poiſed with Lead, s and ſo ſuſpended, that the Veſſel may ſink  full of Air, with its greater or open Baſis  downwards, and as near as may be in a Sic tuation parallel to the Horizon, ſo as to  cloſe with the Surface of the Water all at c once:. Under this Covercle the Diver, ſit-  ting, ſinks down, together with the included c Air, to the Depth deſired; and if the Cas vity of the Veſſel may contain a Tun of  Water, a ſingle Man may remain therein M 3 .at L] a L]  at leaſt an Hour, without much Inconves nience, at five or ſix Fathoms deep. The Preſſure upon the Surface of the Water is nothing elſe but the Weight of the Atmoſphere; at the Depth of ſix Fathoms, the Preſſure is equal to twice the Weight of the Atmoſphere; at the Depth of twelve Fathoms, the Preſſure is equal to thrice the Weight of the Atmoſphere; at the Depth of eighteen Fathoms, the Preſſure is equal to four times the Weight of the Atmoſphere; and ſo on continually. Wherefore, at the Depth of ſix Fathoms, the Bell will be half full of Water, and half full of Air; at the Depth of twelve Fathoms, it will be two Thirds full of Water, and one Third full of Air; at the Depth of eighteen Fathoms, it will be three Fourths full of Water, and one Fourth full of Air; at the Depth of twenty four Fathoms, it will be four Fifths full of Water, and one Fiſth full of Air, &c. But Dr Halley has entirely perfected the Art of living under Water, by ſhewing how to furniſh freſh Air at the Bottom of the Sea, in any ordinary Depths. He gives the following Account of it in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, for Sept, 1716. t& The Bell I made uſe of was of Wood, containing about ſixty cubic Feet in its Concavity, and was of the Form of a Truncate Cone, whoſe Diameter at Top was three Foot, and at Bottom fivee. This I coated with Lead ſo heavy, that it would ſink empty, and I diſtributed the Weight ſo about its Bottom, that it would go down in a perpendicular Situation, and no other. In the Top, I fixed a ſtrong, but clear, Glaſs, as a Window to let in the Light from above; and likewiſe a Cock to let out the hot Air that had been breathed; and and below, about a Yard under the Bell, I placed a Stage which hung by three Ropes, each of which was charged with about one hundred Weight, to keep it ſteddy. This Machine I ſuſpended from the Maſt of a Ship by a Sprit, which was ſufficiently ſecured by Stays to the Maſt- head, and was directed by Braces to carry it over-board clear of the Ship-ſide, and to bring it again ithin- board as Occaſion required.  To ſupply Air to this Bell when under Water, I cauſed a couple of Barrels, of about thirty ſix Gallons each, to be caſed with Lead, ſo as to ſink empty; each having a Bung-hole in its loweſt Part to let in the Water, as the Air in them condenſed on their Deſcent; and to let it out again when they were drawn up full from below. And to a Hole in the uppermoſt Part of theſe Barrels, I fixed a Leathern Trunk or Hoſe, well liquored with Bees- Wax and Oil, and long enough to fall below the Bunghole, being kept down by a Weight appended; ſo that the Air in the upper Part of the Barrels could not eſcape, unleſs the lower ends of theſe Hoſe were ſirſt lifted up.  The Air-Barrels being thus prepared, I fitted them with Tackle proper to make them riſe and fall alternately, after the manner of two Buckets in a Well; which was done with ſo much eaſe, that two Men, with leſs than half their Strength, could perform all the Labour required; and in their Deſcent they were directed by Lines faſtned to the under Edge of the Bell, the which paſſed through Rings placed on both ſides the Leathern Hoſe in each Barrel; ſo that ſliding down by thoſe Lines, they came readily to the Hand of a Man, who ſtood on the Stage on purpoſe to receive them, and to take up the Ends of the Hoſe into the Bell. Through theſe Hoſe, as ſoon as their Ends came above the Surface of the Water in the Barrels, all the Air that was included in the upper Parts of them was blown with great Force into the Bell, whilſt the Water entered at the Bung- holes below and filled them; and ſo ſoon as the Air of the one Barrel had been thus received; upon a Signal given, that was drawn up, and at the ſame time the other deſcended; and by an alternate Succeſſion furniſhed Air ſo quick, and in ſo great Plenty, that I myſelf have been one of five who have been together at the Bottom, in nine or ten Fathoms Water, for above an Hour and a half at a time, without any Sort of ill conſequence; and I might have continued there as long as I pleaſed, for any thing that appeared to the contrary. Beſides, the whole Cavity of the Bell was kept entirely free from Water, ſo that I ſat on a Bench, which was diametrically placed near the Bottom, wholly dreſſed with all my Cloaths on. I only obſerved, that it was neceſſary to be let down gradually at firſt, as about twelve Foot at a time; and then to ſtop and drive out the Water that entered, by receiving three or four Barrels of freſh Air, before I deſcended farther. But being arrived at the Depth deſigned, I then let out as much of the hot Air that had been breathed, as each Barrel would repleniſh with cool, by means of the Cock at the Top of the Bell; through whoſęc Aperture, tho very ſmall, the Air would ruſh with ſo much Violence, as to make the Surface of the Sea boil, and to cover it with a white Foam, notwithſtanding the great Weight of Water over us.  Thus I found I could do any thing that was required to be done juſt under us; and that, by taking off the Stage, I could for a Space as wide as the Circuit of the Bell, lay the Bottom of the Sea ſo far dry, as not to be over Shoes thereon. And by the Glaſe Window, ſo much Light was tranſmitted, that, when the Sea was clear, and eſpecially when the Sun ſhone, I could ſee perfectly well to write or read, much more to faſten or lay hold on any thing under us, that was to be taken up. And by the Return of the Air-Barrels, I often ſent up Orders, written with an Iron Pen on ſmall Plates of Lead, directing how to move us from Place to Place, as Occaſion required. At other times, when the Water was troubled and thick, it would be dark as Night below; but in ſuch a Caſe, I have been able to keep a Candle burning in the Bell as long as I pleaſed, notwithſtanding the great Expence of Air requiſite to maintain Flame. s This I take to be an Invention applicable to various Uſes; ſuch as Fiſbing for Pearl, Diving for Coral, Spunges, and the like, in far greater Depths than has hitherto heen e thought poſſible: Alſo for the fitting and  plaining of the Foundations of Moles,  Bridges, &c. upon rocky Bottoms; and for sc the cleaning and ſcrubbing of Ships Botc toms, when foul, in calm Weather at Sea. c But as I have no Experience of theſe Mat-  ters, I leave them to thoſe that pleaſe totry. c I ſall only intimate, that by an additional  Contrivance, I have found it not impractic cable for a Diver to go out of our Engine  to a good Diſtance from it, the Air being c conveyed to him with a continued Stream  by ſmall flexible Pipes; which Pipes may c ſerve as a Clew to direct him back again, c when he would return to the Bell. But of e this perhaps more hereafter.” Common Thermometers depend only upon the rarifying and condenſing of Fluids by Heat and Cold. The Mercurial Barometer is nothing but a Column of Mercury ſuſpended by the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere in a Tube, the upper End of which is ſealed, the lower End open, and immerſed in Mercury. Wherefore, it is evident that the Length of the Column of Mercury ſhall increaſe and decreaſe, as the Preſſure or Weight of the Atmoſphere increaſes and decreaſes The Weight of the Atmoſphere in any particular Part of the World may be actually dipiniſhed, when the Quantity of the incumbent Air is diminiſhed, being drawn off by two contrary Winds blowing at the ſame time from the ſame Place, whereby the floating Vapours begin to fall, and in falling to form Drops of Rain. Again the Weight of the Atmoſphere may be in Effectd iminiſhed, when its Preſſure is interrupted and broken by the Courſe of violent Winds paſſing over any Place. Hence the Barometer generally ſinks both in ſtormy Weather, and in calm rainy Weather. The Weight of the Atmoſphere may be increaſed, when the Quantity of the incumbent Air is increaſed, being condenſed and accumulated by two contrary Winds blowing towards the ſame Place, whereby the floating Vapours are carried upwards, and ſuſpended in the Air at a great Diſtance from the Earth. Wherefore, in ſerene and calm Weather, the Mercury generally ſtands high. In thoſe Parts of the World where the Winds are conſtant, as near the Equinoctial, there is but little Alteration in the Height of the Barometer: For that Alteration depends upon the different Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, and the Difference of that Preſſure depends upon the variable Winds whereby the Air is accumulated or carried away. Therefore the Height of the Barometer will vary moſt remarkably, in thoſe Regions tha are ſubject to diiiiã VWinds. A Gun is another Pneumatic Engine: For the ſwift Motion impreſſed upon the Bullet, is nothing but the Effect of the very great Elaſticity of nitrous Vapour or Flame. When any Gun is diſcharged, the Quantity of Motion impreſſed upon the Piece, is equal to the Quantity of Motion impreſſed upon the Bullet; and in a contrary Direction, the Motion of the Piece is called Recoiling The Velocity with which the Piece recoils, is to the Velocity of the Bullet, as the Weight of the Bullet is to the Weight of the Piece. Therefore the only way to diminiſh the Velocity of recoiling, is to add more Metal, and increaſe the Fortification (or Weight) of the Piece. The Force by which a Rocket mounts into the Air, is of the ſame Nature with the recoiling of a Gun; the Elaſticity of the Vapour being leſs where it expands and finds Vent, than where it is confined. All manner of Inſtruments for conveying or augmenting of Sound, are alſo Pneumatical. Sound is occaſioned, or excited, by the ſtriking of condenſed Air upon the Drum of the Ear. The Air is condenſed ſo as to produce Sound, either by the Colliſion of two Bodies, or the quick Vibrations of an elaſtic Body, or the ſudden and forcible Return of Air into a Vacuum As ſoon as the condenſing Force ceaſes, the condenſed Air begins to expand, and in expanding to condenſe the next adjacent Air; which afterwards expands alſo, and condenſes other neighbouring Air. Thus the Condenſation of the Air is propagated ſucceſſively in a Sphere, whoſe Center is that Point where the Condenſation began. As the condenſed Sphere ſpreads and increaſes in Diameter, ſo the Condenſation of the Air, and conſequently the Loudneſs of the Sound, decreaſes, till at laſt it becomes imperceptible. As the Air condenſes and expands, the ſeveral Particles are made to oſcillate like a Pendulum, moving firſt forward, and then back again into their former Places, being driven back by the Condenſation of the next adjacent Air. The Lines of Oſcillation decreaſe, as the Condenſation of the Air decreaſes; but the Time of Oſcillation continues the ſame, juſt as the Bigneſs of the Arch deſcribed makes no Difference in the Time of the Oſcillation of a Pendulum. Wherefore the Motion of Sound is uniform, and keeps the ſame Velocity from the Beginning to the End of its Courſe. In the ſame Conſtitution of the Air, all Sounds move with the ſame Velocity: For two Sounds of the ſame Tone differing in Loudneſs only, may be conſidered as one and the ſame Sound, taken at different Diſtances from the Center. As to Sounds of a different Tone, it has been already proved, that they are Grave in Proportion to the Slowneſs, and Acute in Proportion to the Quickneſs, of the Originàal Impreſſion, whereby the Air is at firſt condenſed. Now it is evident, that the Diſtance to which the Air is condenſed by that Impreſſion, is proportional to the Duration of the Impreſſion, which is alſo equal to the Duration of the ſubſequent Oſcillations of each Particle of Air. Wherefore, by how much the Sound is graver, by ſo much is the Oſcillation ſlower, and by ſo much alſo is the Diſtance to which the Air is condenſed at every Oſcillation greaterr. Wherefore Grave and Acute Sounds move with the ſame Velocity. | If the Denſity of the Air increaſes in the ſame Proportion with its Elaſticity, the Velocity of Sounds ſhall continue the ſame as before: For the Augmentation of the moving Force will be proportional to the Augmentation of the Quantity of Matter to be moved. Sound has been obſerved to travel at the rate of about 1142 Feet in a Second of Time, or nearly 13 Miles in a Minute. The Diſtance of 1142 Feet in a Second, is intended to expreſs the Velocity of Sound in Spring and Autumn. But in the Winter, when Cold incrèaſes the Denſity of the Air, and leſſens the Elaſticity, the Velocity is leſs: And in Summer, when Heat diminiſhes the Denſity, and increaſes the Elaſticity, the Velocity is greater than 1142 Feet in a Second. In a Speaking- Trumpet, the Tube which hinders the Spreading of the Sphere, increaſes the Condenſation of the Air; the condenſed Air being thrown by the Oppoſition it meets with into the Axis of the Tube, from thence begins to dilate and ſpread itſelf as before, but with a greater Force; and in like manner, the Force receives a new Increaſe, every time the Dilation of the Sphere is obſtructed by the Reſiſtance of the Tube. Hence it is, that the Augmentation of Sound paſſing thro a Tube or Trumpet, is proportional to the Length of the Tube. T Part of Natural Philoſophy which treats of Viſion and Viſible Objects, is called Optics. All Viſion is performed by Rays of Light proceeding from the viſible Object, and entring the Pupil of the Eye. Of the RaYS of LIGHT. RAY of Light is a Stream of ætbęr emitted from a luminous Body, and pròceeding in a right Line, till it meets with ſome Obſtacle, or new Force, that ſtops it, or alters its Direction. If Light conſiſted only in Preſſure or Motion propagated thr a Fluid Medium, it would ſpread itſelf behind an opaque Object, and bend into the Shadow: For whatſoever Force preſſes upon any Point of a Fluid, is propagated from that Point, not only in the Line of the Direction of the Force, but alſo in all manner of Directions. From Obſervations of the Eclipſes of the fecondary Planets revolving about Jupiter, Aſtronomers generally conclude, that Light ſpends about 7 or 8 Minutes of Time in paſſing from the Sun to our Earth. Sound moves about 13 Miles in one Minute of Time, that is, about 100 Miles in the ſame Space of Time that Light ſpends in moving from the Sun to the Earth, which is 70 Millions of Miles. Therefore Light moves 700,000 times faſter than Sound. The Su's Rays being emitted into the ſtagnating elaſtic æther, which is expanded thro all the Heavens, will cauſe the /Ethereal Particles to oſcillate (as the Particles of Air oſcilIate in the Propagation of Sound) and to form Waves, Pulſes, or Vibrations, whereby Heat will be conveyd and communicated from the Sun to us. Every viſible Point of any Object emits Rays of Light into all Parts, from whence that Point is viſible. Wherefore the Rays of Light proceeding from every Point of an Object, and paſſing thro any ſmall Hole, ſhall form, on the other ſide of the Hole, an inverted Picture of that Object upon any opaque Surface on which the Rays fal. The ſmaller the Hole is, the more diſtinct and perfect ſhall the inverted Picture be. If the Hole be in the Middle, between the Object and the Surface upon which the Picture falls, the Picture ſhall be juſt as big as the Object; and in all Caſes, the Bigneſs of the Picture ſhall be to the Bigneſs of the Object, as the Diſtance of the Surface from the Hole is to the Diſtance of the Object from the Hole. Wherefore, the Bigneſs of the Picture may be increaſed either by removing the Surface farther from the Hole, or bringing the iciiii nearer to the Hole. Thus the Rays of Light which enter the Pupil of the Eye, delineate upon the Optic Nerve inverted Repreſentations of all Objects from whence thoſe Rays proceed. But thoſe Repreſentations are rendred much more perfect by the Refraction of the ſeveral Humours of the Eye, through which the Rays paſs before they arrive at the Optic Nerve. Of RE FRACTION. VERY thing that tranſmits the Rays of Light is called a Mtidium, as Glaſs, Water, Air, &c. In a ſimilar uniform Medium, the Rays of Light proceed in right Lines. If a Ray paſſes from one Medium to another in a Line perpendicular to the common Surface where thoſe, Mediums join, it ſhall go on ſtill in the ſame right Line. If a Ray falls obliquely upon the common Surface of two Mediums, it ſhall be bent in paſſing from one Medium to the other; and that Bending of the Ray is called Refraction. As the Ray paſſes through the firſt Medium to the common Surface, it is called the Incident Ray; as the Ray paſſes from the common Surface through the ſecond Medium, it is called the Refractied Ray; and the Point vhere the Incident Ray falls upon the common Surface, is called the Point of Incidence. A Line drawn through the Point of Incidence at right Angles to the common Surface, both above and below it, ĩs called the Perpendicular. The Angle made by the Perpendicular, and the incident Ray, is called the Angle of Incidence ; and the Angle made by the Perpendicular and the refracted Ray, is called the 4ngle of Refraction. The Sine of the Angle of Incidence, is called the Sine of Incidence; and the Sine of the Angle of Refraction, is called the Sine of Refraction. In all Angles of Incidence, out of one given Medium into another given Medium, the Sine of Incidence is to the Sine of Refraction in a given Proportion. The Proportion of the Sines of Incidence and Refraction out of Air into Water, is nearly as 4 to 3; out of Air into Glaſs, as 3 to 2; out of Air into Diamond, as 5 to 2; and, on the contrary, out of thoſe ſeveral Mediums into Air, the Proportion is nearly as 3 to 4, as 2 to 3, and as 2 to 5. The Sines of Incidence and Refraction, out of Glaſs into Water, are in compound Proportion of the Sines of Incidence and Refraction out of Glaſs into Air, and of the Sines of Incidence and Refraction out of Air into Water; that is, in compound Proportion of2 to 3, and 4 to 3, or as 8 to -. Let ABCD repreſent a ſolid Piece of Glaſs, A B the common Surface between Glaſs and Air, E the Point of Incidence, FE the incident Ray, EX the refracted Ray. FE R the C Angle of Incidence, N G the Sine of Intidence, SEK the Angle of Refraction, PK the Sine of Refraction, or KE the incident Ray, E F to refracted Ray, PK the Sine of Incidence, and N G the Sine of Refraction. If F E be given, EX may be thus ſound, On the Center E, with any convenient Diſtance, deſcribe a Circle cutting FE in N& chrough the Point E draw RE S at right Angles to AB; and from the Point N, draw NGT parallel to AB. Divide AG into three equal Parts, make GH equal to two of thoſe Parts, and parallel to RS drawv H X, cutting the Circle in K. Laſtly, draw EKM, which ſhall be the refracted Ray; for PK is equal to GH; and therefore the Sine of Incidence NG is to the Sine of Refraction PK, as 3 to 2, which is the Proportion for Air and Glaſs. In the like manner, if the incident Ray ME be given, the refracted Ray E F out of Glaſs into Air may be thus found. On the Center E, deſcribe a Circle cutting M E in X, draw KP Z parallel to AB, divide P X into two equal Parts, make PZ equal to three ſuch Parts; from the Point Z, draw Z N, (parallel to RS) cutting the Circle in N. And laſtly, draw E NF the refracted Ray. The Refraction FEM, out of a rare Medium into a denſe, is called Refraction towards the Perpendicular. The Refraction M E F, out of a denſe Medium into a rare, is called Refraction from the Perpendicular. But whether the Refraction be towards the Perpendicular, or from the Perpendicular, the Bending or Tendency of the Ray is always towards the denſer Medium. Therefore the Refraction of a Ray in paſſing from one Medium to another, is produced by the Attraction of the denſer Medium; and this is farther confirmed from Experience; for we always find that the Refraction is greateſt, vwhere the difference of the Denſities of the Mediums is greateſt; except only, that all inflammable Mediums, as Oil, Spirits, &c. refract more in Proportion to their Denſity, than other Mediums, which is ſtill a farther Confirmation: For as Light, congregated by a burning Glaſs, acts moſt upon ſulphurous and inflammable Mediums to turn them into Fire and Flame; ſo, ſince all Action is mutual, ſulphurous and inflammable Mediums ought to act moſt upon Light in bending and refracting its Rays. Wherefore the denſer of the two Mediums may be called the Refracting Medium. If the Ray F E, entering into the Body of the Glaſs, were accelerated at the Point E, by a Force acting in the Direction RES, and making the new Velocity one third Part greater than the firſt Velocity; then the Ray FE would be refracted from E to K. For in two Thirds of the Time that the Ray ſpent in moving from N to E, it would move from E to the Circumference of the Circle; and ſince the parallel Velocity from N towarts T is not altered by the perpendicular Acceleration from E towards S; therefore in two Thirds of the Time that the Ray ſpent in moving from N to E, it will move from E to ſome Point of the Line H K; conſequently at the end of the two Thirds of that Space of Time, it will arrive at the Point . So alſo when the Ray ME paſſes out of Glaſs into Air, if the ſame Force acts upon it at the Point E, and in the ſame Direction as before, the Ray will be retarded, and move from E to N, in half as much more Time as is ſpent in moving from K to E. In like manner, any other Degree of Refraction may be exhibited, if the Quantity of Attraction at the Point E be duly adjuſted, ſo as to accelerate the Ray at its Ingreſs, and retard ĩt at ĩts Egreſs, according to the Proportion of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction. ] A Ray of Light, as ſoon as it arrives within the Sphere of Attraction of the ſmall Parts of the refracting Medium, ill be accelerated in a Line of Direction perpendicular to the common Surface. For let AB repreſent a Surface of Glaſs, MN a Plane (very near and parallel to the Surface AB) in which the Attractions termiM 00 : reò ææ sEERS EESES SR ò EDF B nate, C a Corpuſcle lying within the Reach of the Attraction of the Point E, as well as of the Point D, which attracts it in the perpendicular Direction; make D E equal to DF, and join CF. It is evident that the Corpuſcle C is attracted by the Point F as much as by the Point E; and it is alſo evident, that if the Force CE be reſolved into the Forces CD and DE; and if the Force CF be reſolved into the Forces CD and DF; the two equal and contrary Forces DE, DF, ill deſtroy each other; and the two Forces that remain, ſhall act jointly with the Attraction of the Point D in a Direction perpendicular to the Surface of the Glaſs. Therefore the Corpuſcle C ſhall be accelerated only in the perpendicular Direction. A Ray of Light, when it enters the Surface of the refracting Medium, continues to be accelerated in the ſame Direction as before, till its Diſtance from the Surface within the Medium is equal to that Diſtance from the ſame Surface without the Medium, where the Attraction began. For let R repreſent a Corpuſcle within the D and whoſe Diſtance from AB is equal to the Diſtance of MN from AB. Drav R S perpendicular to AB, and equal to the Diſtance of MN from AB. It is evident that the Corpuſcle R is accelerated in the Direction RS by the Attractions of all the Particles lying between R and S, and that the ſame Corpuſcle R is retarded in the Direction SR by the Attractions of all the Particles lying between the Point R and the Surface AB. MN may be called the external, and PQ the internal Plane of Attraction. When a Ray of Light arrives at the internal Plane of Attraction, it' is accelerated no longer, becauſe the Attractions in contrary Directions deſtroy each other's Effect. In like manner, the Motion of a Ray of Light, going out of the attracted Body, is retarded during the Time of its Paſſage from the internal Plane of Attraction to the externall VWherefore, though a Ray of Light is refracted by a gradual Incurvation, as it is continually accelerated or retarded in paſſing from one Plane of Attraction to the other; yet, in Appearance, the Effect is the ſame, as if it were accelerated and refracted all at once in æ ſingle Point; the Diſtance of the Planes of Attraction being ſo exceeding ſmall, that the Space in which the Refraction is performed, may very vell be conſidered as a Point. Of the ſeveral Directions of Rars. Very Point from whence the Rays of Light ſflow, as from a Center, is called a Radiant Point, and the Rays are ſaid to diverge from that Point. Of ſeveral Rays diverging from the ſame Point, thoſe are ſaid to be moſt diverging, or to diverge faſtest, which contain the greateſt Angle. If ſeveral Rays proceed, as if they fowed from a certain Point, which they do not in reality flow from, that Point is called a Virtual Radiant Point; and in this Caſe alſo the Rays are ſaid to diverge from it. Rays which tend towards any Point, are callod Converging Rays; and that Point in which the Rays concur, is called the Focus of thoſe Rays; but that Point towards which they tend, and in which they do not concur, is hic uis their Virtual Focus. Thoſe Rays are ſaid to converge most or ſaſtest, which if continued, would make the greateſt Angle at the real or virtual Focus. wards, nor proceed from any one Point, but always keep the ſame Diſtance, are called Parallel Rays. Parallel Rays may be conſidered as proceeding from a Point at an infinite Diſtance, and tending towards another Point at an infinite Diſtance alſo. Thoſe Rays which proceed from any Point at an immenſe Diſtance, may be conſidered as parallel Rays. Such are the Rays of Light flowing from any Point of the Body of the Sun; for the greater the Diſtance of the Point is from whence Rays flow, or towards which they tend, the nearer do thoſe Rays approach to a parallel Direction. Of the REFR ACTION of RaYs by a Plane Surface. ET AB repreſent any Plane Surface of Water, R any radiant Point within the Water, R CP a perpendicular to AB. Divide R C into four equal Parts, and towards C take RV equal to one of thoſe Parts; ſo ſhall V be the virtual radiant Point from which the Rays will diverge after their Refralll ction into the Air, provided the Point of Incidence be not taken at too great a Diſtance From the Point CC. Thus let D be a Point of Incidence, draw RD, and VDE, then ſhall RD be the incident Ray, and DE the refracted Ray: For it is eaſily proved, that the Sine of Incidence is to the Sine of Refraction, as VD to RD; and that if the Point D be taken ſufficiently near to C, VD is to RD, as VC to RC; that is, as 3 to 4, which is the Proportion for Water and Air. Wherefore to an Eye placed any where near the Perpendicular PC, the Point R ſhall appear to be in the virtual radiant Point V, becauſe the Rays fall upon the Eye in the ſame manner as if they had proceeded from V. If the Roint D be taken at a conſiderable Diſtance from the Point C, or the Eye be placed at a conſiderable Diſtence from the Perpendicular P C, then the Point V ſhall approach nearer to the Surface A B, and alſo be drawn out of the Perpendicular on that ſide where the Eye is ſituated. If AB had been a ſurface of Glaſs, and R a radiant Point within the Body of the Glaſs, then CR muſt have been divided into three equal Parts, and RV made equal to one of them. Let AB be a Surface of Water, R a radiant Point in the Air, PCRV a Perpendicular to RB. Divide AC into three equal Parts, and from C take RV equal to one of thoſe Parts; ſo ſhall V be the virtual radiant Point from whence the Rays will diverge after lunbLã ò ir their Refraction into the Water, provided the Point of Incidence be taken near enough to move farther from the Surface AB, and will alſo fall out of the Perpendicular on the contrary Side to that where the Eye is placed. If AB had been a Surface of Glaſs, RC muſt have been divided into two equal Parts, and RV made equal to one of thoſe Parts. For in all Caſes VC, muſt be to RC, as the Sine of Incidence is to the Sine of Refraction. All parallel Rays are refracted by a Plane Surface into parallel Rays: For the incident Rays being parallel, their Angles of Incidence ſhall be equal, and therefore the Angles of Refraction ſhall be all equal, and conſequently the refracted Rays ſhall be parallel. Diverging or Converging Rays, that paſs out of a denſe Medium, diverge or converge more after Refraction, than they did before, becauſe the virtual Point or Focus comes nearer to the Surface of Refraction. Diverging or Converging Rays, that paſi into a denſe Medium, converge or diverge leſs after Refraction, than they did before, becauſe the Focus or virtual Point removes farther from the refracting Surface. A Ray of Light paſſing thr a denſe Medium, terminated by two parallel Surfaces, ſhall go on after the two Refractions in the ſame Direction, tho' not preciſely in the ſame right Line. Let ABCD be a ſolid Piece of Glaſs, with two parallel Surfaces AB, CD, and let the incident Ray E F be refracted into FG, then ſhall F G be refracted by the ſecond Surface into GH parallel to EF, or in the ſame Direction with it; as is evident, becauſe the Angle of Refraction at the Point F is equal to the Angle of Incidence at the Point G; and therefore the Angle of Incidence at the Point F muſt be equal to the Angle of Refraction at the Point G. Wherefore, Objects ſeen thro a refracting Medium, terminated with parallel Surfaces, vill appear in the ſame Shape and Magnitude as when ſeen directly, and will alſo retain the ſame Situation with regard to each other; tho vith regard to other Objects which are ſeen directly, their Places will be ſomewhat altered; which Alteration however ill be very inconſiderable, unleſs the refracting Medium be pretty thick. Wherefore, Rays of Light paſſing thro' a Medium, terminated by parallel Surfaces, may generally be conſidered as going on in one right Line, without any Refraction at all. Of the REFRACTIONS of RAYS by a Spherical Surface, ET EF be a Ray of Light falling upon the Point F of the ſpherical Surface AFB, whoſe Center is C; and let AFB be the SurE P face of a Medium denſer than Air in Fig. I. and rarer than Air in Fig. 2. Join CF, and continue it towards P. Laſtly, thro the Point F, at right Angles to CP, draw HFK, repreſenting a Plane, which touches the ſpherical Surface in the Point F. Since therefore the Space in which Refraction is performed, is to be conſidered as a Point, and ſince F is a Point in the Plane HX, as well as in the ſpherical Surface AFB: Therefore the incident Ray E F ſhall be refracted by the ſpherical Surface AFB, as it would be refracted by the Plane Surface H K; and in what manner it will be refracted by that Plane, has been already ſhewn. Hence it is evident, that in a ſpherical Surface, the Perpendicular from whence the Refraction is meaſured, is a Line drawn from the Center of the Sphere thr' the Point of Incidence: For that Line is always perpendicular to a Plane touching the Sphere in the Point of Incidence. i Of a LENS. NY refracting Medium, terminated on one ſide by a plane Surface, and on the other ſide by a ſmall Part of a ſpherical Surface, or terminated on each ſide by a ſmall Part of a ſpherical Surface, is called a Lens. A Lens is either Plano- Convex, DoubleConvex, Plano-Concave, Double- Concave, or a Meniſcus, which is convex on one ſide, and concave on the other. A Line drawn thro the Centers of both the ſpherical Surfaces of any Lens, is called the Abxis of that Lens. In the Refraction of a Lens, we conſider only the Refraction of ſuch Rays as fall near the Axis; all other Rays being unfit for optical Uſes, are excluded either by taking into the Lens only a very ſmall Part of the ſpherical Surface, or by covering the Edges even of that ſmall Part. From theſe Principles, the Properties of every kind of Lens are Geometrically demonſtrated All the Rays proceeding from any radiant Point, whether at a finite or an infinite Diſtance, which fall upon any given Lens, are either made to diverge from ſome new virtual radiant Point; or elſe collected into a real or virtual Focus, at a finite or an infinite Diſtance. When the incident Rays, being parallel to the Axis of a Lens, are collected by Refraction into one Point, that Point is called the Principal Focus Of the REFRACTION of RaAYS by a Convex Glaſs. 3l HE principal Focus may be found experimentally, by holding the Glaſs directly againſt the Rays of the Sun, and obſerving the Center of that lucid Spot into which they are collected, ſo as to heat or burn moſt intenſly. The Diſtance of the principal Focus from the Glaſs, may alſo be calculated from the following Proportion: As the Sum of the Radii of the two convex Surfaces is to either Radius doubled, ſo is the other Radius to the Diſtance of the principal Focus from the Glaſs, provided the Thickneſs of the Glaſs be rejected as inconſiderable. Let BPCQbe a Double- Convex Glaſs, MP the Radius of BPC, and NQthe Radius of BQC; and if the Thickneſs PQbe inconſiderable, then as the Sum of MP and NQis to twice MP, ſo is NQto PF or QF, the Diſtance of the Glaſs from the Point F, into which all Rays, as RS, falling parallel to the Axis MN, ſnhall be refracted. On the contrary, if a radiant Point be placed in thè Point F, all Rays flowing from it, as FS, ſhall be refracted parallel to the Axis. If the two Radqii are equal, then the principal Focus ſhall be the Center, and the focal Diſtance the Radius of the Convexity. The focal Diſtance in a Plano-Convex Glaſs, is equal to twice the Radius of the Convexity, and in a Sphere to half the Radius. Let BC be any Convex Lens of Glaſs, and F its principal Focus; if a radiant Point be placed in any Part of the Axis, as at R, more remote from the Glaſs than F, all Rays flowing from R, and falling upon the Lens, ſhall be collected into a certain Focus, as f, on the other ſide. The Diſtance QF is always greater than PF; and if the Point R approaches towards F, the Point f ſhall recede from Q but if the Point R recedes from F, the Point f ſhall approach towards Q. The Diſtance Qf may be found by the following Proportions (having firſt found FP as above.]) As RF is to FP, ſo is RP to Qſ3; or as RF to RP, ſo is RP to RY. The whole Syſtem of Rays flowing from R, and collected in f, is called a Pencil of Rays, and the Line R f, is called the Axis of the Pencil. Let B PC be a Plano-Convex Glaſs, NP M its Axis, being perpendicular to the Plane B QC; and let SPT repreſent a Plane touching the Convexity in the Point P, and conſequently parallel to the Plane BQC. Wherefore all Rays, as DPE, paſſing through the Point P, are to be conſidered as going on in one right Line without any Refraction at all; for all ſuch Rays are refracted at the Point P, in the ſame manner as they would be refracted by the parallel Surface TPS. Let B C be a double Convex, M P, NQ, the Radii, PQthe Thickneſs Let P Qbe divided, into two Parts, Pp and 2 Qin Proportion to each other as M P to NQ;; thro the Point ꝓ let any Line be drawn, as mpn, terminated by the Convexities in m and n, thro which Points let KL, ST, be drawn touching the Arches B n C, Bm Q. Now it is eaſy to demonſtrate from the Principles of Geometry, that the Lines KL, ST, ſhall be parallel, as alſo the Planes (repreſented by thoſe Lines) which touch the Convexities in m and n. Therefore all Rays which paſs through the Point 2, may be confidered as if they were tranſmitted through the Lens without any Refraction, That Point through which the Rays are tranſmitted without any conſiderable Refraction, may be called the Center of ibe Lens. Let B C be any convex Glaſs, F its principal Focus,  its Center, and R a radiant Point lying without the Axis, but not too remote from it. All the Rays which fall upon the Lens from the Point R, ſhall be collected into a certain Focus, as f on the other ſide the Glaſs. The Focal Diſtance  f may be found by the ſame Proportion as beforee For, making ?E equal to 2 F, as RE to E», ſo is Rpto ?rſ, oras RE to Rp, ſois Rpto R. So alſo the whole Syſtem of Rays flowing from R, and collected in f, is called a Pencil of Rays, and Rpf is its Axis. Wherefore, if a lucid Object be placed before a convex Glaſs Lens, at a greater diſtance than the diſtance of the principal Focus, each radiant Point of that Object will produce a ſeveral Pencil, having its proper Focus on the other ſide the Glaſs, whereby there will be formed an Image or Spectrim of the Object hanging in the Air, in an inverted Poſition. The Spectrum is inverted, becauſe the Axes of thoſe Pencils which proceed from the Top and Bottom of the Object, croſs each other in the Center of the Glaſs. N The diſtance of the Spectrum from the Center of the Glaſs may be increaſed at Pleaſure, llIESS only by bringing the Object nearer to the principal Focus Wherefore alſo the Dimenſions of the Speẽtrum may be increaſed to any Magnitude, by increaſing its diſtance from the Center of the Glaſs: For as the Diſtance of the Object from the Center of the Glaſs is to the diſtance of the Spectrum from the ſame Center, ſo is the Height of the Object to the Height of the Spectrum. The Brightneſs of the Spectrum decreaſes as its Magnitude increaſes, becauſe the ſame Quantity of Light is expanded into a larger Space. The Aereal Specirum may be rendered viſible, either by receiving it upon a Sheet of Paper at the focal Diſtance, or by placing the Eye behind the Spectrum. If the Eye be placed between the Spectrum and the Glaſs, the Spectrum will appear double and not inverted: It appears double, becauſe it is impoſſible to direct the Sight towards an Object that is behind us; and it appears in ĩts true Poſition, becauſe the Rays proceed immediately from the Object itſelf, and not from an inverted Spectrum. The apparent Magnitude of the Spectrum, whether it be ſeen erect or inverted, depends upon the Diſtance of the Spectrum and the Center of the Eye. Let AB be a Convex-Glaſs Lens, p its Center, ſi its principal Focus, R a radiant Point placed between the Glaſs and the principal Focus. All the Rays flowing from the Point R ſhall be refracted by the Lens into Rays diverging from a certain virtual radiant Point, as f, on the ſame ſide of the Glaſs, with the Point R, but farther diſtantt. As R approaches towards ꝓ, the diſtance  R decreaſes; but as R approaches towards F, the Diſtance  R increaſes. . The Diſtance ꝓ f may be found by the folIoWwing Proportion; as RF to Fꝑ, ſois R to 2ſ; or as RF to Rp, ſo is Rp to RY. Wherefore, to an Eye placed on the other ſide of the Lens, the Point R ſhall appear in7. u 5 F R P Here we may ſee the Reaſon why a convã” Lens magnifies any Object that is placed between the Lens and the principal Focus. M For let mRn be the Object, according to the foregoing Rules, the Point R ſhall appear in ſ, the Point m in M, and the Point ninN, therefore the Object m R n, ſhall appear to be MſN, both as to Place and Magnitude. Hence alſo we may underſtand the Nature of Burning-Glaſſes by Refraction, and what Degree of Heat each Glaſs produces. For, 1. The burning Spot is nothing elſe but a Spectrum or Picture of the Sun formed by ſome convex Glaſs, which (being held parallel to hæ Diſk of the Sun) by means of the ſeveral Pencils contracts all the Rays that paſs thro' it into that ſmall luminous Repreſentation. Therefore, 2. The Heat of the Spot is to the common Heat of the Sun, as the Area of the Glaſ's to the Area of the Spot; only ſome Abatement muſt be made for ſuch Rays as are reſlected by the Surfaces, or ſtopped by the Solidity of the Glaſs. 3. And becauſe the Diameter of the Spot is proportional to the focal Diſtance of each Glaſi, therefore if the focal Diſtances of two Glaſſes are equal, the Degrees of Heat ſhall be as the Surfaces of the Glaſſes; and if the Surfaces of the Glaſſes are equal, the Degrees of Heat ſhall be reciprocally as the Squares of the focal Diſtances. Wherefore, 4 In all Caſes the Degrees of Heat collected by ſeveral Glaſſes are in proportion compounded of their Surfaces directly, and the Squares of their focal Diſtances reciprocally. This is the Caſe as to the Quantity of Heat originally collected, comparing the Number of Rays in the burning Spot, with the Num. ber of Rays in an equal Area upon the Surface of the Glaſs. And in this reſpect, all Glaſſes that are ſimilar Portions of their reſpective Spheres, produce the ſame Effect. But then as the Heat of accumulated burning Coals is greater than the original Heat of each ſingle Coal, the ſeveral united Particles of Fire mutually acting upon and aſſiſting each other: ſo likewiſe the Heat of every burning Spot is not only proportional to the Denſity of the Rays, but it is alſo farther augmented by the mutual Actions and Reactions of the ſeveral burning Points of which that Spot is compoſed; and this Augmentation will be ſo much the more, as the original Intenſeneſs of the Heat exceeds that of the ambient Air. Wherefore in Glaſſes whoſe Diameters are under ten Degrees of their reſpective Spheres, the Heat ſeems to be in compound proportion of their Surfaces directly, and Squares of their focal Diſtances reciprocally. In Glaſſes whoſe Diameters are between ten and twenty Degrees of their reſpective Spheres, the Heat ſeems to be in compound. proportion of their Surfaces directly, and focal Diſtances reciprocally. In Glaſſes whoſe Diameters are between twenty and thirty Degrees of their reſpective Spheres, the Heat ſeems to be in direct Pportion of their Surfaces. So that when Glaſſes are ſimilar Segments of their reſpective Spheres: in the firſt Caſe their Degrees of Heat will be equal; in the ſecond Caſe, their Degrees of Heat will be as the Radii of the Spheres; in the third Caſe, their Degrees of Heat will be as the Squares of the Radii of the Spheres. Of the REFRACTION of RAYS paſſing through a Concave Glaſs. Convex helps to unite, and a Concave to ſcatter the Rays: Therefore parallel or diverging Rays which fall upon a Concave, can never be collected into a Focus. Parallel or diverging Rays being refracted by a Concave, are made to diverge from a certain virtual radiant Point on the ſame ſide of the Glaſs with the true radiant Point, but at a leſs Diſtance from the Glaſs. This virtual radiant Point is conſidered as the Focus of thoſe Glaſſes, and is alſo commonly ſo called. The Rules for finding the Foci of Concaves, are the ſame with thoſe that have been already given for Convex, only the radiant Points of the Convex muſt be conſidered as the Focus of the Concave, and vice verſa; and the radiant Points and Focus muſt always be taken on the ſame ſide of the Glaſs. Hence it is evident why a Concave diminiſhes the Appearance of an Object; for in the laſt Figure, if we ſubſtitute a Concave in the room of AB, and conceive M ſN to be an Object, the Point M ſhall appear in m, N in n, and f in R. Of ihe ME NISCUS. ERE the Rule for the Principal Focus is, as the Diſference of the Radii is to either of them doubled, ſo is the other Radius to the focal Diſtance. If the Radii are equal, the Surface wil parallel, and ſo there will be no Focus, indeed no conſiderable Refraction at all. LIf the Radius of the Convexity be leſs the Radius of the Concavity, as in AB, A D23 the Meniſcus ſhall have all the Properties Convex Lens of the ſame focal Diſtance. If the Radius of the Concavity be leſs the Radius of the Convexity, as in CD, C D the Meniſtus ſhall have all the Properties Concave Lens, whoſe focal Diſtance i Of the ETE. OR an accurate Deſcription of the Eye and all its Parts, I refer to the Treatiſes of Anatomy; it will be ſufficient for our purpoſe to take notice of ſuch Parts only, whoſe Uſe depends more immediately upon optical Principles. Such are the three Humours, 4queous, Cryſtalline, and Vitreous, the Tunica Retina, the Ligamentum Ciliare, and the Iris. The Cryſtalline Humour is a double Convex, formed from unequal Radii, the Convexity from the ſhorter Radius being placed inwards. The Aqueous Humour is a Meniſcus, whoſe concave Surface embraces the exterior Convexity of the Cryſtalline, and whoſe convex Surface, being covered with the Tunica Cornea, is the Outſide or viſible Part of the Eye. The Vitreous Humour is likewiſe a Meniſcus, embracing in its concave Surface the interior convexity of the Cryſtalline, and having its Convex Surface encompaſſed by the Retina. The Retina ĩs a fine Expanſion of the medullary F Fibres of the optic Nerve, ſpread upon the convex Surface of the Vitreous Humour, anq covering the Bottom of the Cavity of the Eye. The Humours ſerve to collect the Rays of the ſeveral Pencils into their proper Foci; and the Retina to receive the Image or Spectrum which thoſe Pen ils form, and to convey the Senſation thro the optic Nerves to the common Senſorium. The Ligamentum Ciliare is a Ring of Fibres, incloſing the E 'ges of the Cryſtalline, (like a circular Frame) and tending in right Lines towards its Center. When theſe Fibres contract, the Diſtance between the Retina and Cryſtalline is lengthend. The Uſe of this Ligament is to adjuſt the Diſtance of the Retina from the Cryſtalline, according to the various Diſtances of the Object from the Eye. The back Part of the Ligament is tinged with a deep Black, that ſo the Rays, which are reflected thither from the Retina, may be abſorbed, and ſtifled, and not reflected back again to the Retina, whereby the Images would be rendred indiſtinct and confuſed. The Iris is that coloured Circle which encompaſſes the Putilla. Ihe Uſe of the Iris is to dilate and contract the Pujilla, according as we have occaſion to ſee more clcarly or more diſtinctly. The wider the Pupilla is, the more Rays enter the Eye, and the Image is ſo much the more clear and vivid: The ſmaller the Pupilla is, the nearer are the Rays confined to the Axis of the Humours, and thereby the Images are rendred ſo much the more accurate, diſtinct and perfect. But Viſion cannot be truely diſtinct in any Caſe, unleſs the Foci of the Pencils fall preciſely upon the Retina. Some Eyes cannot ſee diſtinctly, becauſe the Refraction of the Humours is too ſtrong, ſo that the Rays are collected, and croſs each other before their Incidence upon the Retina. This Defect therefore may be remedied by a Concave Glaſs, which diſperſes the Rays, and removes the Foci to a greater Diſtance. Some Eyes again cannot ſee diſtinctly, becauſe the Refraction of the Humours is too weak, ſo that the Rays fall upon the Retina before they are collected; this Inconvenience therefore may be helped by a Convex Glaſs, which promotes the Union of the Rays, and brings the Foci nearer. A good Eye collects the Foci upon the Retina with moſt Eaſe and Exactneſs, when the Object is at ſome conſiderable Diſtance, ſo that the diverging Rays fall almoſt parallel upon the Pupilla. A ſingle Microſcope or Magnifying Glaſs is nothing but a Convex Lens of a very ſmall focal Diſtance; the Object is placed near the principal ocus, in order to render Viſion diſtinct, by refracting all the diverging Rays into Rays parallel to the Axis of each Pencil; and the Object is magnified by being ſeen at ſo ſmall a Diſtance. The Objct would appear of the ſame ſize without the Glaſs, if the Eye could ſee diſtinctly at the focal Diſtance of the Microſcope. Wherefore the Microſcope does not magnify the Appearance of the Object, but only helps the Eye to ſee diſtinctly at ſo ſmall a Diſtance, Or we may conceive the Glaſs to magnify juſt ſo much as the Diſtance of the Object from the Eye is leſſened; that is, juſt ſo much as the greateſt Angle of diſtinct Viſion with the Glaſs, exceeds the greateſt Angle of diſtinct Viſion without the Glaſs: ex. g7. an Inch being divided into 10000 Parts, the Diameter of the greateſt Magnifier was found 590 Parts by Mr Horſeman. That is, if an Inch be divided into 1000 Parts, the Diameter of the greateſt Magniſier will be about 6o Parts; or three ſuch Parts, of which 50 make one Inch. Wherefore, if we ſuppoſe 43 Inches to be the neareſt Diſtance at which an Eye can ſee diſtinctly, the abovementioned Glaſs will augment menſions, and more than 8000 times in the Area, and more than 240000 times in the whole. I determine the Increaſe of the linear Dimenſions to 90 times, becauſe Mr Huygens has proved in the fifty ninth Propoſition of his Dioptrics, that an Object placed in the Focus of a Sphere, vill be ſeen under the ſame Angle of Viſion, as it would appear to the naked Eye at the Diſtance of three fourths of the Diameter of the Sphere. )} * OF CoMBINATIONS of GLASSES. N all Combinations, that Glaſs which is turned next the Object, is called the Object Glaſ; all the reſt are called Zye Glaſſes. In all optical Combinations, the Axis of all the Glaſſes are ſuppoſed to lie in one right Line. The combining ſeveral Glaſſes into one optical Inſtrument, is founded upon the five folJowing Propoſitions; all which have already heen explained and illuſtrated. 1. Parallel Rays incident on a Convex Glaſs, are collected by Refraction into the Focus of their reſpective Axis; and incident Rays diverging from the Focus, are refracted parallel to the Axis of the Pencil. 2. ParallelRays incident on a Concave Glaſi, are made by Refraction to diverge from the Foci of their ſeveral Pencils; and incident Rays converging to the Foci, are refracted parallel to the Axes of the Pencils. 3. The Croſſing of all the Axes of the Pencils is in the Center of the Object Glaſs. 4. If an Object be placed at a proper Diſnce beyond the exterior Focus of the Object Glaſs, a Specirum may be formed on the other ſide, at any given Diſtance from the Center of the Object Glaſs, and conſequently of any given Magnitude. 5. Viſion is rendered diſtinct, when diverging Rays are thrown parallel upon the Pupilla. Optical Inſtruments, conſiſting of a Combination of Glaſſes, are either Teleſcopes or double Microſcopes. A Teleſcope is an optical Inſtrument for diſcovering Objects at a great Diſtance, by exhibiting the Object magnified under diſtinct Viſion. In Teleſcopes, becauſe the Object is ſuppoſed to be at a great Diſtance, all incident diverging Rays are conſidered as parallel, Let AB be a Convex Object Glaſs, CD a Concave Eye-Glaſs, Z their common Focus: This Combination is commonly called Galileos Teleſcope. All diverging Rays that fall'upon AB, are to be conſidered as parallel; therefore (by Prop. 1.) after Refraction they ſhall converge towards Z, till they fall upon the Eye Glaſi; and (by Prop. 2.) after the ſecond Refraction, they ſhall fall parallel upon the Pupilla: Therefore (by the fifth Prop,) Viſion will be diſtinct, The Diameter of an Object ſeen by this Teleſcope, is to the Diameter of the ſame Object ſeen by the naked Eye, as Zm to Zn; that is, as the Radius or focal Diſtance of the Object Glaſs is to the Radius or focal Diſtance of the Eye Glaſs. Teleſcopes for Aſtronomical Uſes are commonly made with two Convex Glaſſes, the Object Glaſs of a very long Radius, the Eye Glaſs of a ſhort one: Thus let AB be the Object Glaſs, CD the Eye Glaſs, and Z their common Focus. By the Lens AB, an inverted Spectrum or Repreſentation of the Object ſhall be formed at Z, from whence the Rays of each Point ſhall be thrown parallel upon the Eye, and Viſion rendered diſtinct. In this Caſe, the immediate Object of Viſion is the inverted Spectirum at Z; and therefore the Object is ſeen in an inverted Poſition. The Diameter or Height of the Object ſeen through the Teleſcope, is to the Diameter or Height of the Object ſeen without the Teleſcope, as Zm to Zn; that is, as the focal Length of the Object Glaſs to the et Length of the Eye Glaſi. The Eye muſt be placed near the Point , being the other principal Focus of the Eye Glaſs CD; for by this means, all Rays ceeding from the Spectrum, parallel to the of the Teleſcope, will enter the Pupilla, become the Axis of ſo many ſeveral Pe common Teleſcope for the Day, is made with three equal and equi-diſtant Eye Glaſſes E, D, and C; the Point æ is the common Focus of E and D, the Diſtance DC is made equal to the Diſtance ED, and Z is the common Focus of the Object Glaſs AB, and the third Eye Glaſs C; the Eye is placed at 5, the other Focus of E. An inverted Spectrum will be formed by the Object Glaſs at Z, from whence the Rays of each Point will be thrown parallel upon the Lens D, by the Refraction of the Lens C. Wherefore, at æ another Specirum will be formed equal in Magnitude to the Spectrum at Z, but in a contrary Poſition; that is, in the ſame Poſition with the Object. From the Specirum at æ, the diverging Rays will be thrown parallel upon the Eye by the Lens. Through this Teleſcope the Object appears erect, becauſe the immediate Object of Viſion is the erect Spectrum at x, to which the Lens E ſerves only as a ſingle Microſcope, to render Viſion diſtinct. The Object is magniſied in Proportion as Zn to Z m. The Eye Glaſſes are made equal, and placed at equal Diſtances, the better to prevent the Colours which would ariſe from ſo many Refractions; for the Rays paſs through the two Glaſſes C and D, as it were through one Medium with two parallel Surfaces; the Angle of Incidence at C being equal to the Angle of Refraction at D, and the Angle of Refraction at C equal to the Angle of Incidence at D. The Conſtruction of the double Microſcope is as follows: A repreſents a ſmall Convex Lens, whoſe principal Focus is c, q repreſents which paſs through m, and fall upon the Lens B, ſhall enter the Pupilla. 3. The Object ſhall appear in a contrary Poſition, becauſe the immediate Object of Viſion is the inverted Spectrum at ꝑ. 4. The Diameter of the Spectrum is to the Diameter of the Object as m q to cq; which Diameter is alſo farther magnified, becauſe it is ſeen as from the Diſtance nꝓ, inſtead of being ſeen from the Diſtance o4. The Spectrum of any given Object, formed by any given Glaſs or Combination of Glaſſes, becomes obſcure in ſuch Proportion as its Magnitude increaſes. Equal Spectrums of the ſame Object, formed by different Combinations, become obſcure in ſuch Proportion, as the Number of Rays conſtituting each Pencil decreaſes, that is, in Proportion to the Smallneſs of the Object Glaſs. Wherefore, if the Diameter of the Object Glaſs exceeds the Diameter of the Putilla, as many times as the Diameter of the Spectrum exceeds the Diameter of the Object; the Spectrum ſhall appear as clear and bright as the Object ſtſelf. ſThe Diameter of the Object Glaſs cannot be much increaſed, without increaſing at the ſame time the focal Diſtances of all the Glaſſes, and conſequently the Length of the Inſtrument; on the Eye Glaſs, and the Spectirum become confuſed and irregular. Of the REFLECTION of RaYs. 1. THE Particles of every Medium act upon the Rays of Light as they paſs into it; therefore the Rays of Light act at the ſame time upon the Particles of the Medium. 2. The Particles of the Medium act by bending and refracting the Rays; the Rays act, by exciting Tremors or Vibrations in the Medium, thereby agitating its ſolid Particles, and cauſing it to grow warm or hot. 3. Theſe Vibrations are propagated thro the whole Medium by the æther included in its Pores, much after the manner that Vibrations or Pulſes are propagated in the Air for cauſing Sound; only the æiber bèing much more elaſtic than the Air, the Vibrations of it will be propagated much ſwifter, and indeed ſwifter than the Motion of the Rays themſelves, as appears from the Effects. 4. When theſe Vibrations, or Pulſes, overtake tion retards the Motion of the Ray, the other conſpires with it and accelerates it. Thus, ſo long as a Ray continues to move in one and the ſame Medium, it is accelerated and retarded alternately at equal Diſtances. Let AG repreſent a Ray of Light paſſing throo any given Medium from A to G; then may AB, CD, E F, &c. repreſent the accelerated Parts of the Ray; BC, DE, FG, &. mm 0 ? q r 1l11 B C D E F the retarded Parts; m, o, q, &c. the Points where the Velocity is greateſt; n, 2, r, &c. the Points where the Velocity is leaſt of all. 5. Note, that the Diſtances AB, B C, &c. muſt be conceived exceeding ſmall, that is, about Jẽ⸗⸗th Part of an Inch in Rays, which paſs perpendicularly out of any Medium into Air, and about 744 th Part of an Inch in Rays that paſ perpendicularly out of any Medium into Glaſs, and about /7/5th Part of an Inch in Rays that paſs perpendicularly out of any Medium into Water: And in general, (as Sir Iſaac Newton proves in his Optics) thoſe Diſtances are leſs in the denſer Medium, in Proportion of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction. 6. Thoſe Diſtances are leaſt of all, when a Ray preſſes perpendicularly into any given Medium, and always increaſe as the Obliquity of the Ray increaſes. 7. The diſtance AB, CD, EF, &. may be called the ſutervals of Acceleration; and the diſtances BC, DE, FG, the Intervals of Retardation. 8. The ſmall Parts of all Bodies are tranſparent, and therefore all Reflection of Light is of the ſame Nature with that Reflection which is obſerved in the Surface of tranſparent Subſtances. 9. The Reſlection of the Rays of Light may be conſidered under three different Circumſtances: For ſome Rays are reflected by the firſt or upper Surface of refracting Subſtances, and that at any Angle of Incidence, how ſmall ſoever: Some Rays alſo are reflected by the ſecond or lower Surface at any Angle of Incidence, how ſmall ſoever; and in ſuch Angles of Incidence upon the ſecond Surface as are ſufficiently oblique, there will be a total Reflection of all the Rays. 10. The Rays of Light are not reſlected by impinging on the ſolid Parts; on the contrary, all ſuch Rays as impinge upon ſolid Particles are ſtopped, and their Motion is deſtroyed; but the Rays of Light are reflected from the Pores of Bodies, and therefore Reſection is performed by ſome Power or Virtue that acts at a Diſtance. 11I. As Reſraction is the gradual Inflection of a Ray by the attractive Power, ſo Reflection is the gracual Inflection of a Ray in ſome Caſes by the attractive Power, and in other Caſes by the repulſive Power. 12. Rays are reflected from the firſt Surface of a denſe tranſparent Subſtance, by the repulſive Power; for in that Caſe it is evident, that the Rays recede from the reflecting Body. 13. Let AB CD repreſent any tranſparent Body denſer than the ambient Medium, mna the exterior Surface of Attraction, rs the Surface of Repulſion, T  any incident Ray entring within the Surface of Repulſion at æ. If the Motion of the Ray be ſtrong enough, it ſhall break through the whole Repulſion, and enter the Surface of Attraction m n, and ſo be refracted into the tranſparent Body; but if the Repulfion be too ſtrong for the Motion of the Ray, then the Ray ſhall be gradually inflected from æ to5 and 2, and from thence emerge again in a contrary direction ?V, and ſo be reflected from the tranſparent Body before its Incidence thereon. 14. IF we conceive the Curve æ 5æ to be àivided into two Parts æ4, yæ; at the Vertexy, thoſe Parts ſhall be equãl and ſimilar to each other; for the Curve æy is produced by continual Retardations, and the Curve y æ by continual Accelerations; which Retardations and Accelerations, in correſpondent Points of the Curves, are equal and in the ſame direction. 15. Hence it follows, that the Angle of Incidence Tx r, is equal to the Angle of Refſlection Væ5; and becauſe of the Smallneſs of the diſtance to which the Repulſion extends, the whole Curve  yæ may be conſidered as a ſingle Point. 16. Let B C repreſent the Interval of Retardation in any Ray, n the Point where the Velocity is leaſt, x the Point at which the incident Ray enters the Surface of Repulſion at x R B l : I C the upper Plane, or at which it enters the internal Surface of Attraction at the lower Plane of the tranſparent Body; and let æ R be equal qual to æ n: Ifthe repelling or attracting Force be but juſt ſtrong enough to reflect the Ray at the Point æ, then all Rays whoſe incident Point falls between æ and B, or Rand C, ſhall be tranſmitted by Refraction; and all Rays whoſe incident Point falls between æ and R, ſhall be turned back and reflected. The Diſtance x R may be called the Iuterval of Reflection; and the Diſtance between any one Interval of Reflection and the next, may be called the Interval of Refraction. After Reflection the Point where the Velocity is leaſt, is no longer the Point n preciſely, but either that or ſome other Point between æ and R from whence the Reflection commences. So alſo after Refraction, the Point where the Velocity is greateſt is not perciſely the ſame that it was before, but either that or ſome other Point in the Interval of Refraction from whence the Refraction commences. 17. Thoſe Bodies are found to have the ſtrongeſt Repulſion, which have the ſtrongeſt Attraction; and the ſtronger the Repulſion is the greater is the Interval of Reflection; and the greater the Interval of Refſlection is, the more Rays are reflected: Therefore thoſe Bodies reflect the moſt Rays, which have the greateſt refractive Power. Hence we learn, on what Principle the Luſtre of a Diamond depends. 18. Let a be any Pommt in the Interval of Reflection, at which the Ray is reflected, if ab, bc, cd, de, &c. be taken ſeverally equal to a b c d e the interval of Acceleration or Retardation, the Points a, b, c, d, æ, &c. ſhall become the Points in which the Velocity is leaſt, and are called the Fits of Reflection. 19. If the Point a be any Point in which the Ray is refracted, then the Points 4, b, c, d, e, &c, ſhall become the Points in which the Velocity is greateſt, and are called the Fus of Refraction. 20. The Diſtances ab, be, cd, &c. are called the Intervals of the Fits. 21. Let CD repreſent the ſecond or lower æ mMMe——1mn Surface of a tranſparent Body, Tn an incident Ray not much inclined to the Perpendicular; it is evident that if x be a proper Point in the Interval of Retardation, the Ray ſhall be bent and reflected by the Attraction of the Body, much in the ſame manner as it was bent and reſflected at the upper Surface by the Repulſion; only at the upper Surface, the Ray is turned back before it enters; but at the lower Surface, the Ray is drawn in again after it has paſſed through the reflecting Surface. 22. The total Refraction of all Rays, (as well thoſe which at their Incidence are in a Fit of Refraction, as thoſe that are in a Fit of Reflection) happens at the ſecond Surface of any tranſparent Body, when the incident Ray is ſo oblique to the Surface upon which it falls, that the Sine of its Angle of Incidence is to the Radius, in a greater Proportion than that of the Sine of Incidence to the Sine of Refraction. Thus if the Angle of Incidence of a Ray of Light paſſing out of Water into Air, be 48 Degrees 35 Minutes, the Angle of Refraction ſhall be 90 Degrees; that is, the Ray ſhall be reſracted parallel to the refracting Surface; but if the Angle of Incidence be greater than 48 Degrees 35 Minutes the Ray ſhall be drawn into the Water again and reflected. In Glaſs, the total Refraction happens when the Angle of Incidence is greater than 40 Degrees 11 Minutes. 23. In all Caſes, the Angle of Reflection is always equal to the Angle of Incidence. OfF MIR RO URS. NY ſmooth well poliſhed Surface from whence the Rays of Light are reſflected, is called a Mirrour. The Image of any viſible radiant Point is always to be found in ſome Point of the Perpendicular let fall from the radiant Point. In a Plain Mirrour, the Diſtance between the Mirrour and any radiant Point, is equal to the Diſtance between the Mirrour and the virtual Focus where the Image of that Point is found. If AB be a Plane Mirrour, and C a radiant C Point; then letting fall CDE perpendicular to AB, and taking DE, equal to DC, the Point E ſhall be the virtual Focus, or the Place of the Image of the radiant Point C; for it is eaſy to prove, that if Rays diverging from C are reflected as diverging from E, all the Angles of Reſlection ſhall be ſeverally equal to their Angles of Incidence. Let ARB be a convex ſpherical Mirrour, C its Center, CR D its Axis, paſſing through C the Center of the Sphere, and through R the Middle of the Mirrour; and let Qbe any radiant Point in or near the Axis; then maKing RF equal to FC, and taking Fq in ſuch Proportion to FR, as FR has to FQ, the Point q ſall be the virtual Focus to the radiant Point Q and the Angles of Reflection ſhall be equal to the Angles of Incidence. If the Point Qbe at an infinite Diſtance, the Point  ſhall fall upon F. Let MQN be any Object placed near the Axis, ꝗ the Focus of Q, found as above, m the Focus of M, and n the Focus of N, found by the like Proportion: ſo ſhall mqn be the Image or Repreſentation of the Object M QN. In a convex Mirrour, the Image is always leſs than the Object; becauſe the Perpendiculars MC, NC, converge, and the Image alti ways falls between the Point of Concourſe and the Object. Let ARB be a concave Mirrour, C its Center, CF R ins Axis; make CF equal to FR, and let Qbe any radiant Point between R and F; then taking Fq in ſuch Proportion to FR, as F R has to FQ, the Point q ſhall be the virtual Focus, making the ſeveral Angles of Refiection equal to their reſpective Angles of Incidence. Let M QN be any Object placed near the Axis of the concave Mirror ARB, and let the x B Foci qm and n be found as above; ſo ſhall mqu be the Image or Reprefentation of the Object M QN. Eiii In this Caſe the Object will be leſs than the Image, becauſe the Object is nearer to the Point C, from whence the Perpendiculars Cm, C n, diverge. Let Let Z be a radiant Point between Cand F; then taking Fæ in ſuch Proportion to FC, as FC has to FZ, the Point æ ſhall be the Focus to which the Rays ſhall converge after Reflection. ĩlli And if æ be the radiant Point, Z ſhall be it Focus: taking F Z in ſuch Proportion to FC, as F C has to Fæ. Wherefore, if the radiant Point be at an infinite Diſtance; that is, if the Rays are parallel to the Axis, the Point F ſhall be the Focus. Let MZN be an Object placed between F and C, and let the Foci mæn be found as above, ſo ſhall næm be an Image or Spectrum of the Object MZ N; and if næm be the Object, MZ N ſhall be the Specirum. If FZ be equal to ZC, then M N ſhall be equal to mn; if FZ be leſs or greater than ZC, then fiall M N accordingly be leſs or greater than mn. It is evident, that the Specirum muſt be inverted, becauſe the Point C, where the Perpendiculars interſect, falls between the Object and the Spectrum. In all Burning- Gla ſſes by Reſtection, the burning Spot is nothing elſe but a Picture of the Sun formed by a concave Mirrour held parallel to the Diſk of the Sun. Therefore, 1. The Degree of Heat at the luminous Spot, is to the ordinary Heat of the Sun, as the Area of the Mirrour to the Area of the Spot. 2. And becauſe the Spot is always in the middle between the Surface of the Mirrour and its Center, therefore in ſeveral Mirrours the Degrees of Heat are in proporion compounded of their Surfaces directly, and Squares of their focal Diſtances reciprocally. But this is to be underſtood only of the Quantity of Heat originally collected, which we muſt conceive to be augmented in the ſame Of COLOURS. THE Rays of Light are Streams of thereal Effluvia, all of which are exceeding ſmall, though not all iiiiiã of the ſame Bigneſs. 2. Of ſeveral Rays emitted with the ſame Velocity, the ſmaller will be influenced and acted upon by any given Force, more than the larger. 3. Wherefore, the Attraction and Repulſion of the ſame Body ſhall act more upon ſome Rays, than upon others, even in like Circumſtances. 4. OF two refracted Rays, the ſmalleſt ſhall be reſracted moſt, and is therefore ſaid to be more refrangible than the other. 5. Of two Rays whoſe Angles of Incidence upon any tranſparent Body are equal, the ſmaller may be reflected when the larger is tranſmitted; and therefore the ſmaller is ſaid to be more reflexible. j 6. The more refrangible Rays excite ſmaller Vibrations, and the leſs refrangible Rays excite larger Vibrations in the Optic Nerve; wherefore each different Degree of Refrangibility occaſions a different Senſation. 7. Rays endued with the ſame Degree of Refrangibility, are called Homogeneal; and Rays endued with different Degrees of Refrangibility, are called Heterogeneal. 8. The Light of the Sun conſiſts of heterogeneal Rays, amongſt which all thoſe that are homogeneal exhibit the ſame Colour, and all thoſe that exhibit different Colours are heterogeneal; and each Ray exhibits its proper Colour anſwering to its Degree of Refrangibility, which Colour cannot be changed by any Refractions or Reflections whatſoever. 9. The ſimple primary Colours are ſeven; Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indico, Violet; the greateſt Degree of Refrangibility belongs to the deep Violet, the leaſt Degree of Refrangibility belongs to the deep Red, and intermediate Degrees of Reſrangibility u to the intermediate Colours. 210. A Proper Mixture of all the ſeven primary Colours makes Whiteneſs. A Mixture pound Colour, which in ſome Caſes is like, and in other Caſes unlike to the Colours of homogeneal Light. 1I. All compound Coloursare mutable, and may be again reſolved, by Refraction, into the primary Colours of which they were compounded. 12. All Colours in the Univerſe, which are made hy Light, are either the primary Colours, or Colours compounded of the primary; for Reflection or Refraction cannot alter the Colour of any one Ray. 13. Any Surface, from whence no Light is reflected, appears blac 14. The Sine of Incidence and Refraction of the moſt refrangible or Violet Rays, in paſſing out of Glaſs into Air, is as 50 to78; the Sine of Incidence and Refraction of the leaſt refrangible or red Rays, is as 50 to 77; tho hitherto the Sine of Incidence and Refraction out of Glaſs into Air has been inaccurately expreſſed in ſmall whole Numbers by the Proportion of 2 to 3, or 50 to 75. 1I5. The Proportion for the Refraction of Water and Ar in the leaſt refrangible Rays, is 81 to 108; in the moſt refrangible Rays, 81 to 109. This Theory of Colours is principally founded upon the Phænomena of thoſe Colours, which are exhibited by the Rays of the Sun tranſmitted through a Glaſs Priſm. For the right underſtanding thoſe Phænomena, it is neceſſary firſt to know how the Sus Rays would be refracted by a Priſm, according to the Laws of common Optics, which ſuppoſes all the Rays of Light to be equally refrangible. For this Purpoſe I have calculated the following Table, in which it is ſuppoſed, 1. That the refracting Angle of the Priſm is 6O Degrees. 2. That all the Rays are equally refrangible, and that they are refracted according to the Proportion of 3 to 2. 3. That the apparent Diameter of the Sun is half a degree, or 30 Minutes. 4. That the Axis of the Priſm is held perpendicular to the Suns Rays, and parallel to the Horizon. 5. That the upper Surface of the refracting ceeding from the lower Limb of the Body ot the Sun; and that the Priſm is gradually turn'd about its Axis, till it arrives ſucceſſively at the ſeveral Situations numbered in the firſt Column of the Table, I, 2, 3, 4, &. The ſecond Column ſhews, at each Situation of the Priſm, the Angle of Incidence of two Rays, one proceeding from the upper, the other from the lower Limb of the Sun's Body. The third Column ſhews the Angle of Refraction, in which thoſe two Rays emerge out of the lower Surface of the refracting Angle of the Priſm. The fourth Column ſhews the perpendicular Height of the Spectrum, the Diameter of the Hole at which the Rays enter being firſt ſubtracted. The fſifth Column ſhews how much the Spectrum deſcends or aſcends, and where it is ſtationary. From the foregoing Table it is evident, 1. That from the firſt Situation of the Priſm to the ſeventh, the Specirum deſcends, becauſe the Alterations of the Angles of Incidence are greater than the Alterations of the Angles of Emergence. / 2. That from the ſeventh Situation to the laſt, the Spectrum aſcends, becauſe the Angles of Emergence alter more than the Angles of Incidence. 3. That at the ſeventh Situation, the pectrum is ſtationary. 4. That the Altitude of the deſcending spectrum ſubtends an Angle leſs than the apparent Diameter of the Sun;3 but the Altitude of the aſcending Spectrum ſubtends an Angle greater than the apparent Diameter of the Sun. 5. That the Height of the Spectrum, in its ſtationary Situation, ſubtends an Angle at the Priſm (of thirty Minutes) equal to the apparent Diameter of the Sun. Note, That in the ſtationary Situation of the Spectrum, if we conſider only that Ray which proceeds from the Center of the Sun's Diſk, and the Angle of Refraction into the Priſm, and the Angle of Incidence in paſſing out of the Priſm, are ſeverally equal to half the refracting Angle of the Priſm; and the Angle of Incidence at the firſt Surface, is equal to the Angle of Emergence at the ſecond Surface. Thus the Rays would be refracted according to the vulgar Laws of Optics; but by Experiment it is found in Fact, "I. That the Height of the Stationary Speftrum ſubtends an Angle at the Priſm of two Degrees twenty Minutes, which is one Degree and fifty Minutes more than the common Laws of Optics can account for. 2. That the Top of the Spectrum is Violet, the Bottom Red, and the Middle adorned with the five other primary Colours in their Order. 3. That the Angle of Incidence of heterogeneous Light upon the ſecond Surface of the Priſm being thirty Degrees, (whoſe Sine is five hundred ſuch Parts, of which the Radius contains a thouſand) the Angle of Emergence of the moſt Refrangible is 5 Degrees 16 Minutes, of the mean Refrangible 50 Degrees 49 Minutes, and of the leaſt Refrangible 50 Degrees 21 Minutes, Whoſe Sines are 778, 775, and 770. The Principles of Philoſophy. 247 Of the Permanent COLOURS of NATURAL BODIES. F the Thickneſs of a Plate of Air, incloſed between two Glaſs Priſms, be leſs than half the Interval of the Fits of Refraction, the upper Surface of the lower Priſm ſhall loſe its reflecting Power; for the Rays which upon entering the Plate of Air are accelerated by the Repulſion of the Glaſs of the upper Priſm, and thereby put into Fits of Refraction, vill arrive at the lower Priſm before they are out of thoſe Fits, and ſo be tranſmitted. 2. The Intervals of Acceleration and Retardation, and conſequently the Intervals of the Fits of Reflection and Refraction, are leaſt in the moſt Refrangible Rays; juſt as the acuteſt Sounds produce the ſhorteſt polis: or Vibrations in the Air. 3. If the Thickneſ of the Plate of Air be equal to half the Interval of the Fits of the moſt Refrangible Rays, then the violet Rays ſhall arrive at the lower Priſm in Fits of Reflection, and ſo be reſlected; but all other Rays ſhall be tranſmitted. 4. If the Thickneſs of the Plate of Air be equal to half the Interval of the Fits of the mean refrangible Rays, then the violet, Indico, Blue, and green Rays, ſhall be reflected, and by their Mixture exhibit a compòund Blue; but the Yellow, Orange and Red Rays ſhall be tranſmitted, and exhibit on the other ſide a yellowiſh Red. 5. If the Thickneſs of the Plate of Air be equal to half the Interval of the Fits of the moſt refrangible Rays, then all the ſeven primary Colours ſhall be refiected and exhibit Wihite. 6. If the Thickneſs of the Plate of Air be ſomewhat greater than half the Interval of the Fits, added to the whole Interval of Reſlection of the moſt refrangible Rays, then the violet Rays ſhall begin to be in Fits of Refraction before they arrive at the lower Surface, and ſo be tranſmitted; and the other primary CoJours continuing ſtill to be reflected, ſhall compound a Yellow, which, as the Thickneſs of the Plate is increaſed, and the other Colours are ſucceſſively tranſmitted, ſhall at laſt turn to Reò. 7. In like manner, as the Thickneſs of the Air is gradually augmented, the Red ſhall diſappear; and a ſecond Order of Colours proceeding from the ſecond Fit of Reflection, ſhall be ſucceſſively reflected and tranſmitted. 8. Colours of the third and following Orders ſhall interfere with each other more and more at every Fit, becauſe of the Inequality of the Intervals of the Fits of different ſorts of Rays; and hereby a great Variety of compounded Colours ſhall be reflected, continually growing more dilute and imperfect, till at laſt all ſorts of Rays being g pretty equally mixt and reflected at the ſame time, nothing ſhall be ſeen but an even Whiteneſs. 9. So alſo, ifa thin Plate of Water or Glaſ be encompaſſed with Air, the like Colours ſhall be reflected by the Attraction of the lower Surface of the Glaſs or Water, according to the Thickneſs of the Plate: And if the Thickneſs of the Plate be leſs than half the Interval of the Fits of Refraction, the lower Surface of the Plate ſhall loſe its reflecting Power and the Rays ſali be tranſmitted. 10. Colours of the ſame kind and Order reflected from a Plate of Glaſs or Water, are more bright and vivid than thoſe reflected from a Plate of Air, becauſe the attracting Force is ſtronger than the repelling Force of the ſame Particles. For if the attracting and repelling Forces were equal, any Ray refracted into a denſe Medium would be equally inclined to the Perpendicular with the incident Ray; and if the repelling Force were greater than the attracting Force, the Ray would be refracted from the Perpendicular in entering into a denſe Medium, and towards the Perpendicular in paſſing out of it. 11. It is farther remarkable, that the Colours reſlected from a Plate of Air, are conſiderably changed by changing the Obliquity of the Eye to the reflecting Plane, but the Colours reflected from a Plate of Glaſs or Water are very little altered by the Alteration of the Obliquity of the Eyee Hence it follows: 1. That all Bodies will appear tranſparent (by the firſt Article) whoſe Parts and Interſtices are too ſmall to cauſe Reflections in their common Surfaces. 2. That the tranſparent Parts of Bodies according to their ſeveral Sizes reflect ſome ſorts of Rays, and tranſmit the reſt ſas thin tranſparent Plates do) and that each Body appears to be of that Colour, whether Primary or Compound, which reſults from the reflected Rays: This is evident from the ninth Article. 3. That the Parts of Bodies on which their Colours depend, are denſer than the æthereal Medium which pervades their Pores; and that, cæteris paribus, the Colours are briſkeſt where the Parts are denſeſtt This appears from the 10th and 11th Articles. 4. That the component Particles of thoſe Bodies are greateſt, whoſe Colours are moſt dilute and compounded, as may be ſeen from the 8th Article. 5. That the permanent Colours of Bodies do not ariſe from their external Surfaces, but from the internal Surface; of their conſtituent Particles. ' 6. If the Particles and Pores of a Body are To ſmall as to reflect no Light, and yet ſo large as variouſly to refract the tranſmitted Light from one Particle to the other, till it be ſtifled and loſt before it can paſs thr the Body; ſuch a Body ſhall be opaque and black, and (by reaſon of the Smallneſs of its Parts, and the Multitude of Refractions) ſuſceptible of the Influence of Warmth and Heat. Of COLOURS in the Clouds, and of the RAINBOW. HEN Vapours are firſt raiſed by the Heat of the Sun, each ſingle Particle is endued with a repelling Force, which keeps all other Particles at a diſtance; and therefore the Atmoſphere continues tranſparent, nntwithſtanding the Vapours that are ſuſpended in jt, becauſe eaeh ſingle Particle is too ſmall to cauſe Reſlections. But when the Vapours of the Atmoſphere begin to be condenſed by Cold, and the ſingle Particles begin to unite with each other, and to form aqueous Globules of different Sizes; thoſe Globules, according to their ſeveral Sizes, ſhall reflect ſome Colours, and tranſmit others, and thereby eonſtiut: Clouds of various Colours. From theſe Principles we may alſo account Iours, with which the Sun and Moon are ſometimes encompaſſed. For let us ſuppoſe the Sun to ſhine thro a thin Cloud, compoſed of aqueous Globules all of the ſame Bigneſs; this being ſuppoſed, it is certain, 1. That thoſe Rays which paſs through the Globules, that are ſituated directly between the Sun and the Eye, paſs thro' the Centers of thoſe Globules without any Refraction. 2. That the Light which is refracted to the Eye, from thoſe Globules that are not ſituated between the Eye and the Sun, does not paſi through the Centers of the Globules. 3. That the more remote the Globules are from the direct Situation, the greater is the Diſtance of Light, in its Paſſage through them, from their Centers. 4. That the more remote the Paſſage of the Ray is from the Center of the Globule, the ſhorter is that Paſ=age. Wherefore, 5. The Paſſage of Light through the Globules is ſorter, as the diſtance of the Globules from the direct Situation is greater. Hence it follows: 6. That if we ſuppoſe the Globules to be of ſuch a Bigneſs, that one of the leaſt refrangible Rays in paſſing through the Middle of the Globule, ſhall have (for Example) 250 Fits of Refraction; then at a certain Diſtance from the direct Situation, the ſame ſort of Rays, being refracted to the Eye, ſhall have only 249 ſuch Fits in their Paſage thro the Globule; and at a certain farther Diſtance, only 248 Fits; and at a certain farther Diſtance, only 247 Fits, &c. The like is to be underſtood of the intermediate and moſt refrangible Rays, only that the Diſtances are greater in the more refrangible Rays, becauſe in ſuch Rays the Interval of the Fits is greater. 7. At ſuch Diſtances therefore as are deſcribed in the laſt Article, the Sun ſhall appear to be encompaſſed with certain Rings of Colours, whoſe concave Part ſhall be Blue, and exterior Part Red; the firſt Crown or Order of Colours being made (as in the Example) by the 249th Fit, the ſecond Crown by the 248th Fit, the third Crown by the 247th Fit, &c. 8. It may eaſily be proved, that the Difference between the Diameter of any Glohule, and the Length of the Paſſage of a Ray thro it, is equal to twice the verſed Sine of the Angle of Refraction of the Ray into the Globule. Wherefore, if the Diameter of the Globule be ſmall, the greater muſt the Angle of Refraction be to make the double verſed Sine equal to the interval of the Fits; and conſequently ſo much greater will be the Diſtance of the innermoſt Crown from the Sun. Let ab be an incident Ray, bc the refracted Ray, then ſhall 30c be the difference of the Angles of Incidence and Refraction. Draw e d parallel to 3 and men paralled to be, then ſhall me p = q bc. Wherefore the Arch b ? meaſures the Angle of Incidence, and the Arch b m meaſures the Angle of Refraction, and the difference between mn and bę is twice the verſed Sine of bm. 9. If the Gloubles are of different Sizes, the Rings of Rays equally refrangible ſhall be caſt at different Diſtances from the Sun, and hereby heterogeneous Rays ſhall be mixed and conſequently the Colours diluted, or rendered inviſible. 10. Every exterior Crown is broader than the interior, becauſe the heterogeneous Rays are ſeparated moſt by the obliqueſt Refractions; therefore the exterior Crowns ſpread more in one another, than the interior; and by ſpreading, interfere and mix their Colours, ſo that there is ſeldom more than two or three of them to be ſeen diſtinctly. 11. The more equal the Globules are to ore another, the more Crowns of Colours will appear, and the more lively will the Colours be. As Crowns are made by Colours tranſmitted thro' aqueous Globules, ſo the Rainbow is formed by Colours reflected from the falling Drops of Rain, and therefore never appears but when it rains in the Sunſhine, and is always to be ſeen by a Spectator in a due Poſition, when the Sun ſhines upon a rainy Cloud in a proper Situation. No Colour can appear in any Drop of Water, unleſs the homogeneal Rays belonging to that Colour emerge out of the Drop, and fall upon the Pupilla parallel to each other: for if the Rays diverge, the Colour will be ſcattered It will be found by Calculation, that the moſt refrangible Rays emerge parallel out of a Drop of Water after one Refſlection, at an Angle of 42 Degrees 2 Minutes; and the leaſt refrangible, at an Angle of 40 Degrees 17 Minutes, and the intermediate Rays, at ſome intermediate Angle. Thus the interior or primary Bow will be formed, whoſe Breadth ſhall be I Degree 45 Minutes, being Purple within, and Red without, After two Refſlections, the moſt refrangible Rays will emerge parallel at an Angle of 50 Degrees 51 Minutes, and the leaſt refrangible at an Angle of 54 Degrees 7 Minutes. Hence the ſecundary or exterior Bow will be formed, whoſe Breadth will be 3 Degrees 16 Minutes, being Red within, and Purple without. The ſecundary Bow will be fainter than the rimary, becauſe ſome Rays are tranſmitted at Eapeuimental Philoſophy. I. Demonſtrations of the Univerſaul Laws of Motion, and the Force of all ſimple and compound Machines. II. The wonderful Effects of the Gravitation VFluids. II. The Peculiar Properties of the Air, conſidered as an Elaſtic Fluid. IV. The Principles of Optics, explaining the Nature of Viſion, of Reflecting and Refracting Glaſſes, and of Light and Colours, according to Sir Iſaac Newtons Principles. Performed by BENJAMIN WorsTEæR, 4. M. ———————————;;;;;:;:;;°; MECHANICS. Cæ the Univerſal Properties of Bodies. Of Matter and Vacuum. Experiments to prove a Vacuumm. The Univerſal Law of Gravitation explained. The Law of Coheſion, or the Attraction of the ſmall Parts of Bodies, deduced from the Aſcent of Fluids in ſmall Tubes, and between Glaſs Plates, and Variety of other Experiments. Experiments concerning the Repulſion of the Particles of Matter. Of Electrical Attraction and Repulſon. Experiments relating to Electrical Attraction. The Electrical Phoſphorus. lii Mercurial Phoſphorus. Liquid Phoſphorus. Solid Phoſphorus. The Light of Phoſphorus augmented in Vacuo. Concerning Motion in general. Experiments to diſtinguiſa Motion from Velocity. Experiments to explain the Nature of, and to find the Center of Gravity in all Bodies, and to diſtinguiſh it from the Center of Magnitude. The Experiment of the double Cone rolling upwards. A heavy Body, which of itſelf would fall from a Table, hindred from falling by adding a heavier Body to it. Experiments about the falling, ſliding, and rolling of heavy Bodies. Concerning the Center of Motion. Concerning the Diſtance and Line of Direction of a Weight and Power. Experiments to ſhew the whole Myſtery of the Feats done by Sampſons, or ſtrong Men. Of ſimple Machines. Of Balances, which are either Scales or Steelyards. Of the four Kinds of Levers. Of Pullies, ſingle and combined. OfF the Wheel and Axle. Of the inclined Plane. Abſolute and Relative Gravity. Of the Wedge. Of the Screw. Compound Engines. Sails of Ships, Wind- Mills, Water-Mills, &. explained on theſe Principles. Experiments to ſnew how Men or Horſes of unequal Strength may be made to carry or draw a Burden in Proportion to their Strength. Experiments to ſew the Advantage of great and ſmall Wheels in Coaches, Carts, &. A general Method to determine the Quantities of Friction in all Engines. Sir Iſaac Newtons firſt Law of Motion demonſtrated. That the Compoſition of Forces in ſeveral Directions, not contrary to each other, produces a new Direction in a diagonal Line. An Experiment to ſhew, that the Line of the relative Aſcent and Deſcent of a projected Body is the ſfame; whether the Place from whence it is thrown be continually at Reſt, or in continual uniform Motion. Objections againſt the Motion of the Earth, ſolved from this Principle. The Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces of ſolid and fluid Bodies in Motion, explained and demonſtrated by Experiments. Monſieur Des Cartes's Vortices exploded. Introduction to the Theory of Projectiles and Motion of the Heavenly Bodies. Flow a Body will move, when its projectile Force either yields to, overcomes, or exactly balances that of Gravity. Sir Iſaac Newton's ſecond Law of Motion demonſtrated. An Experiment to ſew that the Velocity of falling Bodies is as the Times, and the Spaces gone through as the Squares of the Times of Falling. The force of reſiſting Mediums conſidered. A curious Experiment to explain the Foundation of the Art of Gunnery. The Nature of Fortification explained from a large and curious Plan. The Moons Motion explained from the Doctrine of Projectiles. The Motion of the Planets and Comets deduced from the ſame Principle. The Solar Syſtem explained. The Tides, and Phaſes of the Moon demonſtrated. Experiments with the Load- ſtone. Experiments concerning the Deſcent of Bodies on inclined Planes, being an Introduction to the Theory of Pendulums. Experiments concerning Pendulums. Center of Oſcillation explained. A Cycloid deſcribed. Cycloidal Cheeks for Pendulums. The Motion of Pendulums altered by Heat and Cold. That the Motion of Waves in the Sea anſwers to the Motion of a Pendulum. Sir Iſlaac Newton's third Law of Motion demonſtrated. Flying and Swimming accounted for. Of the Nature and Cauſe of Elaſticity. How to deſtroy the Elaſticity of ſome Metals. Concerning the tremulous Motion of ſounding Bodies. Experiments concerning the Laws of Communication of Motion in hard and elaſtic Bodies. HYDROSTATICS. Oncerning Fluids in general. Experiments to prove that Fluids gravitate in the Fluids of the ſame kind. That Fluids of different Kinds gravitate upon each other. That Fluids preſs in all manner of Directions at the ſame time. That the Quantity of that Preſſure in all Fluids is proportional to the perpendicular Height of the Fluid in all Parts of the containing Veſſel That any given Quantity of Water, though never ſo ſmall, may be made to preſs with a Force equal to any given Weight, tho never ſo great. To raiſe any given Weight by the Force of a Mans Lungs only, provided he blows thro a Tube proportionally ſmall. An Experiment of lifting a Weight by a Chain of inflated Bladders, applied to Muſcular Motion. Several other Experiments to explain hii Hydroſtatical Paradox. Experiments to ſhew how high, and vhy Wa. ter will riſe in Fountains and oblique Jets, and the beſt way of making ſpouting Pipes. The Expence of Water ſpouting from equal Holes at any given Diſtance from the Surface computed, and ſhewn to be as the ſquare Root of thoſe Diſtances. The Working of Siphons, ſucking, forcing, and lifting Pumps explained. Experiments to ſhew that Bodies heavier than Water, when weighed in Water, loſe as much of their Weight as is equal to their Bulk in Water; and Bodies lighter than Water will ſo ſwim in it, that a Quantity of Water equal in Bulk to the Part immerſed, vill be equal in Weight to the whole Body. How upon theſe Principles Lead, or any Metal, may be made to ſwim in Water, and even raiſed up by it. The Hydrometer. The Hydroſtatical Balance to determine Specific Gravities. Glaſs Bubbles accounted for. P N EUMATICS. Xperiments concerning the Nature of the Air in general. That the Denſity and Spring of the Air is as the Force that compreſſes it. That the Preſſure of the Air decreaſes, according to its Diſtance from the Surface of the Earth. Cupping Glaſs. The raiſing and falling of the Quick- ſilver in the Weather-Glaſs, explained and accounted for. The different Sorts of Barometers. Thermometers and Hydrometers of ſeveral Kinds. The Effect of high Winds on the Barometer, ſhewn by an artificial Storm. The Air-Pump, and manner of its Working, explained. Several Experiments, which directly prove the Weight, Preſſure, and Spring of the Air, ing, the Phænomena of Bladders, Glaſs Bubbles, Fountains of ſeveral Sorts, and the diving Bell. Barometers in Vacuo. The famous Experiments with the Hemiſpheres. Wind Gun. The ſuprizing Motion of ſeveral Sorts of Liquors in Vacuo. Experiments with the Condenſing Engine. Experiments to prove, that Sound cannot be conveyed without Air, and that it is increaſed or diminiſhed, according as the Air is rarified or condenſed. That Fire and Flame are fed by the Air. That Gunpowder is fired in Vacuo, without any Exploſion. The Effects of rarified, condenſed, and burnt Air upon the Life of Animals. The Force of rarified Vapours in raiſing Water by Fire, &c. With ſeveral other curious Experiments by the Air-Pump. O P T ICS. Oncerning the Nature and Motion of Light. Of Viſion in general. That when Rays of Light are reflected, the Angle of Incidence is equal to that of Reflection. Of Plain Mirrors. The ſeveral Reflections from two Surfaces of Looking-Glaſſes conſidered. Of Concave and Convex Mirrors. A Concave Cylindric Mirrors. A Convex Cylindric Mirror. Cylinder and Picture. The Cauſe and Law of Refraction, explained by Experiments. Multiplying Glaſſes. Experiments to ſhew the Nature of Convex and Concave Glaſſes, and the manner of the Rays of Light paſing through them, and uniting in their Focuſſes. How to find the Focus of a Lens, and whether it be truly centered. Water made to burn by collecting the Suns Rays into a Focus. Camera obſtura. The Magic Lanthom. The Diſſection of the Eye. The Faults of Viſion ſewed by an Inſtrument. Experiments to ſnew how the ſhort- ſighted, and old Eyes, may be helped. To ſiew why both Eyes ſee things only ſingle. The Nature and Uſe of Microſcopes and Teleſcopes. How to meaſure the Refraction of any ſort oſ Liquors. An Experiment to meaſure the Refraction of the Air. A new and moſt curious Experiment to ſhew the Circulation of the Blood in the Lungs of a Frog. Sir Iſaac Newton's Theory of Light and Colours proved by Experiments. Experiments to ſew the Cauſe of the Rainbow. at the Angel and Bible in St. Paul’s Churchyard. and Hydraulicks, Phſloſophical and Practica. Wherein the moſt reaſonable and advantageous Methods of raiſing and conducting Water, for the watering Noblemen and Gentlemens Seats, Buildings, Gardens, &c. are carefully (and in a Manner not yet publiſhed in any Language) laid down. Containing in general, a Phyſico-mechanical Enquiry into :he Original and Riſe of Springs, and of all the Hypotheſes relating thereto; as alſo the Principles of Water-Works, and the Draughts and Deſcriptions of the beſt Engines for raiſing and diſtributing Water, for the Supply of Country-Seats, Cities, Towns Corporate, Fortifications, Meadows, and the like. Deduced from the Theory of Archimedes, Gallileo, Torricelli, Boyle, Wallis, Plott, Hook, Mariotte, Deſaguliers, Derham, Hawksbee, and others:. Reduced to Practice by Vitruvius, Bocler, de Caus, and other Architects among the Ancient Romans, Italians, French, Flemings, and Dutch, and much improved by later Practice and Experience. Illuſtrated and Explained by Fiſty Copper Cuts, done by the beſt Hands, of the Principles which tend to the Explanation of the whole, and of ſuch rural Groteſque, and cheap Defſigns for Reſervoĩs, Cataracts, and Caſcades of Water, Canals, Baſons, Fountains, and Grotto Works, few of which have been ever yet made publick in Works of this Kind. By Stephen Switzer. The Hiſtory of the Council of Conſtance. Written in French by James Lenfant. Done into Engliſ, from the laſt Edition printed at Amſterdam, 1727. Adorned with Twenty Copper Plates, curiouſly engraved by the beſt Hands. 2 Vol. to A N Introduction to a general Syſtem of Hydroſtaticks Directions for the profitable reading of the Holy Scriptures, together with ſome Obſervations for the confirming their Divine Authority, and illuſtrating the Diſficulties thereof. By William Lowth, B. D. and Prebendary of Wincheſter. The Third Edition, 1200, The Tragedies of Sophocles, Tranſlated from the Greek, With Notes Hiſtorical, Moral, and Critical; wherein ſeveral Miſtakes of Editors and the old Scholiaſts are corrected, and the true Senſe of the Author cleared To which is prefixed, a Preface; Containing. I. A Defence of Tragick Poetry; wherein is occaſionally ſewn, how ſome Modern Poets have tranſgreſſed the eſtablied Laws of Poetry which the Ancients obſerved- II. An hiſtorical Account of ĩts Riſe and Progreſs. III. A Compariſon of the ancient Tragedians with each other. By li sllegtion of controverſial Diſcourſes, between Dr George Hickes, and a Popiſh Prieſt, occaſioned chiefly by a young Lady, that was perſuaded to depart from the Church of England to that of Rome. To which is added, the following Tracts. I. Biſiop Bull's Anſwer to the Biſhop of Meauxs Queries. II. A Reply to the ſame Queries, by Mr Leſlie. III. A Letter to an Engliſh Prieſt at Rome, by Robert Nelſon, Eſq; IV. Mr H. Thorndikes Judgment of the Church of Rome. V. Mr Chillingworth's Letter relating to the Infallibility of the Church of Rome; with ſeveral other curious Papers. In 2 Vols 8vo. An Eſſay for a general Regulation of the Law, and the more eaſy and ſpeedy Advancement of Juſtice; in which the great Corruptions and Expences in Law Controverſies are expoſed, and effectual Methods propoſed to redreſs ſuch great National Grievances. By Chriſtopher Tancred, Eſq; Introductio ad Prudentiam: Or, Directions, Counſels, and Cautions, tending to prudent Management of Affairs in common Life. To which is added, an Appendix concerning Sincerity and Deceit. In two Parts. By Thomas Fuller, M. D. 12mo, Chriſtian Prieſthood: Or, the Dignity of the Epiſcopal Order aſſerted and defendedc Deſigned to obviate the erroneous Opinions, fallacious Reaſonings, bold and falſe Aſſertions of all Freethinkers; in which, a Book, entituled, The Rights of the Chriſtian Church, is more particularly taken Notice of, Written by George Hickes, D. D. To which is added, an Appendix, in whichĩs contained ſeveral curious Papers. In two Vols 8vo. The Lord's Prayer explained and recommended, in ſeveral Practical Diſcourſes. By Offspring Blackhall, D. D. late Lord Biſhop of Exeter; neceſſary to be read in all Families. Long Livers: A curious Hiſtory of ſuch Perſons of both Sexes, who have lived ſeveral Ages, and grown young again With the rare Secret of Rejuveneſcency of Arnoldus de Villa Nova, and a great many approved and invaluable Rules to prolong Life: As alſo how to prepare the univerſal Medicine, Moſt humbly dedicated to the Grand Maſter, Maſters, Wardòns, and Brethren, of the moſt Antient and moſt Honourable Fraternity of the Free Maſons of Great Britain and Ireland. By Eugenius Philalethes, F. R. S. Author of the Treatiſe of the Plague. The Worthy Communicant: Or, plain Inſtructions for the Profitable and Comſortable receiving of the Holy Communion, Hymns. By D. Hollows, M. A. Rector of All-Saints, and Vicar of St. John's, United Pariſhes in Hereford. A Practical Eſſ=ay on the Contempt of the World. By William Nichols, D. D. Very proper for all that labour under any kind of Afliction, eſpecially thoſe who ſuffer for the ſake of a good Conſcience. The Chriſtian's Manual. In two Parts. I. The Catechumen: Or, an Account given by a young Perſon of his KnowIedge in Religion, before his Admiſſion to the Lord's Supper, as a Ground-work for his right underſtanding the Sacrament. II. An Introduction to the acrament: Or, A ſhort, ſafe, and plain Way to the Communion-Table; being an Inſtruction for the worthy Receiving the Lord's Supper. To which is added, The Communicants Aſſiſtant, being Devotions to that purpoſe; fitted to be uſed before, at, and after the Receiving the Bleſſed Sacrament. Collected for, and familiarly addreſſed to, every partichllr Communicant. By L. Addiſon, D. D. late Dean of ichfield. The Fifth Edition. Fifteen Sermons preached on ſeveral Occaſions. By Edward Lake, D. D. Dedicated to her late Majeſty Queen Anne. The Second Edition. Cui additur, Concio ad Clerum, habita juxta Collegium Sionenſe, 8vo. j Sermons and Diſcourſes on ſeveral Subjects and Oceaſions, preacd at St. James's Church Weſtminſter. In two Volumes. By Charles Hickman, D. D. late Lord Biſhop of Derry. The Third Edition. A Diſcourſe concerning the uſe of Incenſe in Divine Offices. Wherein is proved, that that Practice, taken up in the middle Ages, both by the Eaſtern and Weſtern Churches, is, notwithſtanding, an Innovation from the Doctrine of the firſt and pureſt Churches, and the Traditions derived from the Apoſtles, Serving alſo to evince, that even the Conſent of thoſe Churches of the middle Ages, is no certain Argument, that even the Particulars, wherein they are ſuppoſed to conſent, were faithfully derived from the Apoſtles, againſt the modern Aſſerters of the Infallibility of oral Tradition. In a Letter to a Friend. By Henry Dodwell, M. A. Moriæ Encomium: Or, the Praiſe of Folly. Written in Latin by Eraſmus, tranſlated into Engliſh, by White Kennet, Lord Biſhop of Peterborough. With a Preface by his Lordſhip. Adorned with a great Number of Copper Plates neatly engraved. To which is added, the Effigies of Eraſmus and Sir Thomas More, from the Deſigns of the celebrated Hans Holbeine, 12mo, Pteryplegia: Or, the Art of Shooting Flying. A Poem. By George Markland, A. B. and formerly Fellow of St. John College at Oxford.  