E P I T O MM E O F A Courſe of Lectures O NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL P H I L O S O P H Y: A Ss rTHEY ARE DELIVERED BY IJ O H N B ANE S. BY THE WORD OF THE LORD WERE T H E HE AVENS MADE: AND ALL THE HOST OF T H EM BY THE BR EATH OF HIS MOUTH. PS. XXXII I. 6. K ENN D A L: l PRINTED EY W. PENNING TON. MDCC LXXV. P R E F AC E. A T tbe requeſt of a great number of my ſubſcribers at different places, I have drawn up, with as much order and accuracy as time wou'd permit, the following epitome; vhich is chieſty doſigned for the uſe of thoſe who have attended my courſe of cxperiments; to ſuch, I flatter myſelf, it will be found of great ſervice, by recalling ideas which had ſlipt the memory; and ihe want of plates it it is preſumed, will be abundantly compenſated by the apparatus; ond to thoſe who bave not yet had the opportunity, it may, in ſome meaſure, convey the firſt principles of the ſciences, provided they will be content with naked aſſertions, without either mathematical demonſtration, or experimental prof. ag & au, p ſ iiiiiũiiiũiũiiũũiũũũũũl AN I T O M E O F A SE Of LECTURES. onto 2000ctnoosoneooocore ooacanoseoob cosmeore oos cooo dſt RODUCTION. courſe is intended to explain, in moſt eaſy, and familiar manner, general properties and laws oſ ter; and to ſet before the inquie cauſes of the moſt material phæwe obſerve amongſt natural bodies; as diſcovered; for though we muſt he works of inſinite wiſdom can comprehended by the faculties oſ ments, may attain, ſeems almoſt equally indeterminable; thus the philoſophers of the preſent age, tho' ſtill wholly ignorant of the true cauſes oſ many the moſt common phænomena, have nevertheleſs, by diligent enquiries and experiments, gained the knowledge of many equally unknown to our forefathers, and by them, perhaps deemed incomprehenſible; and there is no doubt but in future ages, ſcience will continue its progreſſion. For it ſeems providentially appointed, as ſome way neceſſary for the carrying on, or well being oſ ſociety, that the ſciences ſhould be gradually improving. Vet ſtill it muſt be acknowledged, that many things are known, which reaſon could never have led us to the knowledge of: But whilſt man has been diligently ſecking after one thing, he has accidently, or rather providentially, hit upon, or diſcovered another, of greater importance, and of more extenſive utility to mankind. As to the uſe of philoſophy, it muſt be confeſſed to be almoſt unlimited, and may be recommended to people of all ranks. For many things appear to be, what in reality they are not. Thus to the eye, unaſiiſted by philoſophy, the ſun appears to be a flat ſhining plate, the ſtars to be ſmall lucid points, lice diamonds, and all at equal diſtances from us; and ſeem to revolve round the earth in twenty four hours, while the earth ſeems to be fixed, and to be by moch the largeſt body in the univerſe. But a competent knowledge in piloſophy will ſtrip things of the diſguiſe and falſe colours under which they appear; or rather inſtead, as is too commonly ſuppoſed, of contradicting the plain and poſitive j roof of the ſenſes, evince, to the moſt unanſwerable demonſtration, the impoſſibility of their appearing otherwiſe; and from thoſe very appearances deduce the moſt convincing arguments to ſupport its own aſſertions; thus will it furniſh the mind with more juſt and ſublime ideas, by removing the errors of prejudice, received by falſe education, cuſtom, or the authority of men. PPILOSOP HY alſo, as it is concerned in the invention and adjuſtment of machines, is of univerſal utility to mankind; to it we owe the conſtruction of ſhips, ſteem-engines, water-engines, pumps, mills, clocks, watches, dials, teleſcopes, cranes, jacks, the organ, harpſichord, and every other kind of inſtrument, machine, or engine how ever complicated, or for what ever purpoſes they are appointed. Ix teaching philoſophy as a ſcience, it is neceſſary to begin with the moſt ſimple and known properties of bodies; and thence to proceed, by inferring one truth from another 'till we arrive at the moſt abſtruſe parts; always uſing experiments where the nature of the thing will admit of it, except that which is aſſerted be ſufficiently plain without. And altho the experiments afford the higheſt degree of entertainment to the rational mind; yet ſo much the more inſtruction will they convey, as this regular proceſs is more attended to and better imprinted on the memory. LECTURE I. OFf the general Properties of Matter HIS Lecture-is intended to expla general properties of matter, the di kinds of attraction, and from thence to the principles of ſeveral uſeful arts. W four rules whereby we ſhould be guided philoſophical enquiries, the firſt is That more cauſes for natural effecis are no admitted than are both true, and ſuicient to the phænomena. THnIS agrees with reaſon, and revelation is certain that God has made nothing in which would evidently be the caſe, if twe were admitted where one would ſerve. THE ſecond is, That for natural effects of t hind, the ſame cauſes are to he aſſigned as far be done. falling of ſtones in America, Africa, &c. as in Europe; the ſame cauſe for reſpiration in man and beaſt; and that light in all kinds of bodies is produced by the very ſame cauſe. Tue third rule is, That the qualities of natural bodies, avhich cannot be increaſed or diminiſbed, ana agree to all bodies on vwhich experiments can be made, aere io be rechoned, as the qualities of all bodies vohatſoever. TnUs, becauſe extenĩon, ſolidity, diviſibility, &c. are found in all bodies that we know, we may juſtly conclude that they belong to all bodies whatſoever ThHne fourth rule is, That in experimental philoſophy, propoſitions collected from the phæenomena, by induction, are to be deemed, notwithſtanding contrary hypotheſes, either exactly or very nedrly true, till other phænomena cecur, by avhich they may be rendered either more accurate, or liable to exception. Ir according to theſe rules we take a ſurvey of the Material Creation, and ſtrictly examine the nature of difſerent bodies, we ſhall find reaſon to conclude, that they all coniiit of the ſame ſort of matter or ſubſtance; and that all the difference we obſerve among them, ariſes wholly from the various connections, adheſion, and different modifications of the ſame original particles of matter. ALL bodies whatever are found to have the following common properties viz. Extenſion, Mobility, Solidity, Vis inertia Diviſibilitp, MAttraction, and Repulſion. EXTENSIOMN, is a property which belongs to all matter in general; for it is certain no body can exiſt, but it muſt take up ſome part of ſpace. SOLIDITY, is that property which a body hath of excluding all others, from the place iſ poſſeſſes. DIVISIBILITY, is a property whereby bodies are capable of having their parts ſeperated a⸗ infinitum. That it exceeds all bounds, is a mathemat. thematical truth, and may be demonſtrated diſferent ways, as ſbevwn in the lecture. l MOBILITY, is that property which bodies have of being moveable or changing their places. THEVIS INERT IQXÆ, orinactivity of matter, is that property whereby they reſiſt the action of other bodies, tending to generate or deſtroy motion in them. ATTRACTION, is a property whereby bodies mutually tend towards each other; if the bodies be of unequal magnitude, in the greater, it is called attraction, and in the leſſer, gravitation. REPULSION, ſeems to be a property belonging to the ſmalleſt particles of matter; thus we ſee the particles of water, ſeparated by the action of fire, repel each other; and the particles of any kind of hard matter, being ſet at liberty by ſome chymical proceſs, conſtitute a perfect elaſtic air. ATTRACTION andREPULSION ſeem to be one and the ſame power, acting differently in diſſerent circumſtances: but what this pover is, none have yet been able to determine, it ſeems not to be an eſſential property or matter, but rather a conſtant impreſſion of divine power. THE attraction of gravitation takes place only in large bodies ſuch as the ſun, earth, and planets, and is a property whereby all ſmaller bodes within the ſphere of their attraction, tend towards their centres. The attracting eſffluvia or energy is found to decreaſe as the ſquares oſ the diſtances increaſe; that is, if a body at the diſtance of 10,000 miles from the earth tend towards it with a certain force; at the diſtance of 20,000 miles, it would tend towards it with only one fourth part of that force; at the diſtance of 30,000, with only one ninth part thereof &. as is more fully ſbcaun in the experiments. The planets are all retained in their orbits by the attraction of the ſun; and by their motions, the above law is fully confirmed; for as the ſquare of the diſtance of venus from the ſun is to the diſtance that mercury falls from a tangent to his orbit in one hour; ſo is the ſquare of the diſtance of mercury from the ſun, to the diſtance that venus falls from a tangent to her orbit, in the ſame time: and ſo of the reſt. THER E are four different kinds of attraction viz. attraction of coheſion, the attraction of electricity, the attraction of magnetiſm, and the attraction oſ gravitation. THuE attraction of coheſion is peculiar to the original particles of matter, and it is mutual between them, or they are attracted and attract each other. This power ſeems to act only in contact, or at imperceptible diſtances in all ſolid bodies. The exiſtence of this power is proved by two leaden balls, having their ſurfaces pared very clean, and preſſed together with a gentle twiſt, after which they will require 40, 60, or 100 pounds weight to pull them aſunder, according as more or leſs of the ſurfaces are in contact; for this power ſeems to act nearly in proportion to the quantities of contiguous ſurfaces. This is the natural cement by which the parts of ſolid bodies are bound together, and by which they are kept from crumbling to their original duſt. Hard bodies, which cannot by preſſure be brought into intimate contact, like the leaden balls, require ſome kind of matter to be put between them, in order to make them cohere; ſo if flint, glaſs, &c. reduced to impalpable powder, and mixed with ſome viſcid ſluid, be applied between two bodies, whoſe ſurfaces are clean, when dry, it will make them cohere very ſirmly. Hence, we ſee the reaſon that in poliſhed ſurfaces, a little damp, or the moiſt which is conſtantly adhering to them, is ſufficient to make them cohere; if a little oĩl or tallov be uſed, the coheſion is much ſtronger, as is sſhexon by experiment. FRrOM this principle we have alſo the nature of ſoldering, gluing, foliating glaſs, ſilvering and gilding metals, as explained in the lecture. ThHE attraction of coheſion is different between the particles of difſerent bodies; thus, water put into clean glaſs, china, &c. is ſeen to riſe all round by the ſide of the veſſel; but if quickſilver be uſed it will ſtand loweſt at the ſides; from whence it appears, that the power of attraction is greater between the glaſs and water, than among the particles of water themſelves; and that it is greater among the particles of quickſilver, than between the glaſs and quickfilver. In this ſimple cauſe, divine wiſdom is abundantly manifeſt; for, by it we have numbers of the moſt extraordinary effects produced. It is owing to this, that water riſes above the common level in the capillary tube; alſo the action of the capillary ſyphon, and filtre, depends on the ſame principle; for the capillary ſyphon, being a ſmall bended tube of glaſs, by attraction raiſes water up one leg, carries it over the bended part, and down the other, where it falls, by its own weight, drop by drop. The filtre being made of yarn, cloth, felt, &c. the filaments act like ſo many ſyphons, and carry a ſluid off in the ſame manner, but much faſter. From hence we have the reaſon of fluids riſing in heaps of ſand, aſhes, ſugar, &c. of tallow riſing in the wicks of candles; of water being drawn up by the ſpunge; of ink rifſing in the pen and alſo of its being drawn out again in writing. From hence we alſo account for the riſing of ſap in trees and plants: ſor upon proper examination it is found that the bodies of trees are compoſed of an infinite  numbper of capillary tubes, oſ different magnitudes; the largeſt ſeem by various experiments, to be appointed for the circulation of air; and the ſmaller for attracting the juices of the earth, and raiſing them to the top and utmoſt parts of the branches; for it may be obſerved that rhe ſmaller the bore of the tube, the higher a fluid will riſe, as is sfoeuwu in the experiment. FrOM hence we have alſo the cauſe of ſeveral chymical proceſſes. Fonr if a ſolid and fluid be put together, provided the power of attraction between the particles of the fluid and the particles of the ſolid be ſtronger than between the particles of the ſolid themſelves, every particle of the fluid will then attract a particle of the ſolid, or ſo many as it can ſuſtain, and then, the whole menſtruum beiug ſaturated therewith the ſolution will ceaſe; as is evident by putting ſilver, copper, braſs, iron, &c. in aquafortis or ſpirit of nitre; by putting ſalt or ſugar in water; and by water itſelf being diſſolved and diffuſed thro' every part of the atmoſphere, by the ſtrong attraction of the particles of air. AxY matter, thus diſſolved and ſuſpended, is precipitated by the very ſame cauſe; for, if to any kind of ſolution, ſome othe r body be added, ſo that there be a ſtronger attraction between the new added matter and the menſti uum, than between the menſtruum and the diſſolved body, the new matter will then take place of the old, and let it fall to the bottom. llilil FER MENTATION depends upon the ſame power; for if two fluids be put together, provided there be a different power of attraction between their particles, they will thereby be thrown into a ſtrong agitation and commotion amongſt themſelves, and will be ſo inc orporated with each other, that they will ſeem to have changed their properties and acquired new ones. FrouM this difference of the degrees of attraction between different bodies, we have perhaps the moſt rational way of accounting for heat, exploſions, earthquakes, vulcano's, &c. Ir aqua-fortis be poured upon iron-filings, a very confiderable degree of heat is produced. At so if three parts of nitre, two of ſalt oſ tartar, and one of ſulphur, be pounded and mixed together (which mixture is called the pulvis fulminans) and a ſmall quantity of it heated upon a plate, as ſoon as it hegins to melt, and the particles of the dif. ferent bodies come in contact, they are attracted with ſo much force as to cauſe a ſudden exploſion. ALso, if equal parts of ſulphur and iron-filings be made into a paſte with water, and put under ground, they will, in eight or ten hours time, take fire, and blow up the ground about them, venting flames a nd ſmoke like a vulcano; and as it is well known that the earth abounds with great quantities of ſulphur, iron ore, &c. it is probable theſe may be brought together, either by ſubterraneous waters, or other cauſes unknown to us, and by the violence of their fermentation, at length break forth in flames, as in burning mountains; or when confined deep in the bowels of the earth, if the compactneſs of the ſuperincumbent maſs refuſes to give way for an eruption, the effort for enlargement is then made on that quarter, which, by caverns, or the more yielding and looſe contexture of its parts, affords the leaſt reſiſtance; hence may ariſe that wandering convulſive motion, which is denominated an earthquake. ThHE attraction of magnetiſm is peculiar to the loadſtone and iron, as there is no other body but iron that it can be communicated to. EvVERY loadſtone has two poles, one called the north, and the other the ſouth pole, one of theſe poles attracts, and the other repels iron. TraH1 s virtue may be communicated to iron different ways, and thereby artificial magnets may be made to anſwer all the ends of a natural one. Ir we take four or five ſteel bars, ſix inches long, half an inch broad, and about an eighth of an inch thick, well poliſhed and hardened, if they be laid end co end and the magnet drawn over them ſeveral times, they will become ſtrongly impregnated with the virtue: theſe properly fitted up in a caſe will make a good artificial magnet; but perhaps it may be better in ſome caſes to have the bars bent in a particular manner, as is ſbeun in the experiment. Tuis virtue may alſo be communicated to a piece of poliſhed ſteel, by placing it in the magnetic meridian, and rubbing it always one way with a burniſher. InOx bars, by ſtanding long i in one poſition, acquire the magnetic virtue. Ir a magnet be made red hot, or become ruſty, it loſes all its virtue. IT is generally ſuppoſed that the effluvia, coming out at one pole, return in curves of various directions, and enter in at the other; and indeed we have ſeveral experiments which countenance ſuch an hypotheſis. Ipr a needle be touched and ſuſpended upon a point, it will ſtand in a direction nearly north and ſouth, and will alſo be diſpoſed to dip with the north end about 740 below the horizon. Ir a needle be touched with the ſuth pole of the magnet, that end towards which it is drawn, will ſtand toward the north; and that end toward, which the north pole is drawn, will ſtand toward the ſouth: but if the ſame pole be drawn the contrary way, it will ſtand in the contrary direction. IT may be obſerved that the needle in England at this time does not ſtand truly north and ſouth, but varies about two points from the north toward the weſt. In 1580 it ſtood one point to the eaſt, in 1657 it ſtood in the meridian or pointed truly north, ſo that it ſeems to be conſtantly moving weſtward: in different parts of the world the direction is very different; ſome places it has eaſt variation, ſome places weſt variation, at others no variation at all. WE have not yet had any ſatis factory way oſ accounting either for the cauſe of the needle's pointing toward the north, or of its variation. L ECTUR E I.. OF Pneumatics. NEUMATICS is that part of philoſophy which treats of the nature and properties oſ the air. Tn particles of air are extremely ſmall, ſo that they evade the ſight, though aſſiſted with the beſt glaſſes; it is moſt likely that theſe particles are round, and that a repelling power takes place between them, for the air is found to be an elaſtic fluid. THE wWhole body of air in which we breathe, and which ſurrounds the globe of the earth is called the atmoſphere. THE air, being elaſtic, is at every different altitude of a different dunſity; that is, it is moſt denſe upon the ſurface of the earth, and the higher we aſcend, it becomes more rare or thin; except that which is near the earth be ſometimes rarifiel by the heat reflected from its ſurface. Tue altitude of the atmoſphere is not exactly known; it extends about 45 miles above the earth's ſurface before it be too thin to refract a ray of light; if it were every where of the ſame denſity with that near the earth, its altitude would be about five miles and a quarter. THarT the air is a body, is evident by its excluding other bodies from the place ĩt poſſeſſes, for if a glaſs he inverted and ſunk in water, the water will not riſe in it, as is evident by a lighted candle continuing to burn in it, though under water: the diving bell depends upon this property of the air; for if a large veſſel be made heavy enough to ſink mouth downward in water, a perſon may deſcend in it to a conſiderable depth, and the water will be kept from riſing by the ſpring of the air; yet the air being elaſtic, and therefore capable of being compreſſed, as the bell deſcends the water will gradually riſe; and when it comes to the depth of 33 feet, half its capacity will be filled with water; but it may be kept from riſing, or driven out after it is riſen, by ſending freſh air down in caſks which may be taken in at the bottom of the bell, while that corrupted by breathing may be diſcharged at the top by a cock for that purpoſe. As the air is a body, it has alſo weight, or gravitates towards the earth like other bodies, in proportion to its quantity of matter. The weight of the air is evident fsrom a numbor of experiments. I. Ir the hand be laid upon an open topt receiver, and the air pumped from under it, the weiĩght of the external air will be felt upon the back of the hand, and will preſs it cloſe down to the receiver. . 2. Ir a glaſs bubble, containing a wine quart be omptied of its air, and then nicely balanced, as ſoon as the air re-enters, it will preponderate, and will be about 17 grains heavier than when empty. 3. If two braſs hemiſpheres, put together by wet leather, be exhauſted, and the air ſhut out by a oock, they will require a force of about 15 pounds to every ſqaure inch to pull them aſunder. 4. Ir a glaſs bubble, with its neck immerſed in water, be exhauſted oſ its air, when the air re-enterss its weight wili preſs upon the ſurface of the water, and force it up into the bubble. 5. LET a tall receiver be ſet upon a moveable plate, to which is ſcrewed a pipe with a cock, and exhauſt it, then placing the end of the pipe in water, and opening the cock. the preſſure of the external air will be ſeen forcing the water up the receiver with a great velocity. 6. TAxE æ ſtick of oak, hazel, &c. with a hoop round one end of it to hold quickſilver, and with wet leathers fix it in the top of an open receiver, ſo as ro be air-tight, when the receiver is exhauſted, the weight of the air preſſing upon the mercury in the hoop, will force it throug the pores of the wood. 7. Ir a bladder be faſt tied over the top of an open receiver, as ſoon as the air is ſuſficiently rarified below; the weight of the column above, will break the bladder with a conſiderable report. 8. Ir a piece of hazel, having its ends cut very ſmooth, be ſixed in the neck of an open. receivir, and the lower end immerſed in water, upon exhauſting, the outward air, by its weight will ruſh thro' the pores of the wood, and riſe thro' the water in fine ſtreams. 9. Ir ã ſquare glaſs bottle be exhauſted, it will be broke into ſmall pieces, b the preſſure of the circumambient air. 10. APIECE Of plain glaſs laid over an open receiver, will be broke in the ſame manner. 1I. Ir a barometer be placed under a tall receiver, as the air is exhauſted, the mercury will fall, when the air re-enters, it will riſe again: from hence it is evident that the mercury is ſupported in the tube, by the weight of the air; and therefore, in fine dry weather, when the atmoſphere is heavieſt, it muſt ſtand higheſt; on the contrary, in rainy weather, when it is lighteſt, the quickſilver muſt be loweſt. FRroOM this experiment it is found that the ait will ſupport a column of mercury to the altitude of 293 inches, at a mean; the diameter of the tube makes no difference, the reaſon of which will appear evident when we come to the laws of hydroſtatics; and as the weight of a column of mercury, of any given diameter and altitude, is known, the weight of a column of air, of the ſame diameter, is alſo known, and is at a mean about 14lb. upon every ſquare inch; and upon every ſquare foot 18 cwt. or near one ton: and if we ſuppoſe the ſurſace of a middle-ſiæed man to be 15 feet, it will follow that he will ſuſtain a preſſure of 133 tons; which, were ĩt not balanced by the ſpring of internal air, could not be ſupported. Bur the particles of air being extremely ſmall, enter into every part of our bodies, and by their elaſticits balance the preſſure of the ambient atmoſphere. 12. Tu1s is evident by placing the hand upon an open receiver, for as ſoon as the preſſure is deſtroyed, : the air in the fleſh, by its ſpring, will fwell out the ſſin. 13. A SMALL receiver, placed over the hole in the pump plate, as ſoon as the air is exhauſted, will be ſtrongly preſſed down by the column which is over it. 14. It is ſuppoſed by many, that this and other like effects, are cauſed by ſuction, or by ſomething within the glaſs drawing it down thro' the hole of the pump plate; but this is falſe, as ave ſhenv by experiment; for if a ſmall glaſs be placed on one ſide of the hole, and covered with a larger, then while the larger is exhauſting, the ſmall one will be looſe; but when the air is let in again, the large one will be ſet at liberty and the ſmall one, by the weight of the air, will be fixed. THERE is no eſfect in nature produced by any cauſe that can be called ſuction; except that appellation be falſely applied to the attraction of coheſion. 15. SMOAKING of tobacco and ſucking the breaſt are performed by the preſſure of the air: for a vacuum being made in the mouth by drawing back, or bending down the tongue, the ai1 by its weight ruſhes thro' the pipe; and by preſſing upon the breaſt forces the milk into the child's mouth. THut elaſticity of the air avill appear from the following experiments; 16. Ir a bladder, nearly emptied of its air, be faſt tie, and placed under the receiver, as the air is exhauſted, the bladder, by the expanſion of the included air, will ſwell out, and at length appear full blown. 17. Ir a glaſs bubble, having its neck placed in water, be covered with a receiver, as the air is exhauſted, that in theglaſs by its ſpring will make its eſcape, and will be ſeen riſing thro' the water in large bubbles. 18. Ir an egg, having a hole in its little end, be placed under the receiver, upon exhauſting, the air bubble contained in the great end, will, by its ſpring, drive out the contents. 19. Ir an egg be ſunk in a glaſs of clear water, upon exhauſting, the air will be ſeen to riſe from every part of the ſhell, in innumerable fine ſtreams; but moit copiouily from tne great end. 20. TAKE a bladder containing a little air, put it in a proper veiſel, and lay a weight upon it, cover the whole with a receiver, then work the pump. and the ſpring or the air will be ſeen toraiſe the weight. . 21. Ir a ſhrivelled apple be placed under the receiver, and the air exhauſted, the air contained in the apple will expand itſelſ, and cauſe the apple to appear plump and fair. 22. Ir a piece of dry wood he ſunk in water, and covered with a recipient, up n exhauſting, the air contained in the pores of the wood, will expand itſelf, and riſe thro' the water in great quantities. 23. THE experiment will ſucceed with green wood, leaves, &c. but the quantity of air thrown out will not be ſo great: from this it is evident that there are air veſſels in vegetables. 24. Ir a piece of gold &c. be put in water under a receiver, on exhauſting, the air contained in the pores of the ſurface of the metal, will expand itſelf and appear all over the ſurface. 25. Ir a ſmall bladder, with a little air and a weight in it, be faſt tied and ſunk in water, upon exhauſting, the air contained in the bladder will expand itſelf, and cauſe the bladder and weight to ſwim. 26. ALso if a cork be juſt made to ſink, by fixing lead to it, it will be brought to the top. by the air bubbles adhering to its ſurfaee. i 27. Ir a glaſs of clear water be placed under the receiver, upon exhauſting, the air will expand itſelf, and may be feen to riſe from every part of the water in fine ſtreams. 28. Ir we uſe freſh beer inſtead of water, the air bubbles will not burſt, becauſe the beer is more viſcid, but will riſe in a fine frothy head. 29. Jorxν a tall receiver, exhauſted of its air, to the top of a veſſel about half ſilled with water, a pipe going down near the bottom of the veſſel, open the cock and the ſpring of the air acting upon the ſurface of the water, will cauſe it to riſe in the receiver with a great velocity, and will make a beautiful fouutain. 30. TAxE a long glaſs tube, open at both ends, fix it with cement, in the neck of a phial, about half filled with mercury, ſo that the lower end may reach near the bottom of the phial; place the whole under a receiver, and upon exhauſting, the ſpring of the air upon the ſurface of the mercury, uill cauſe it to riſe in the tube juſt as faſt as the mercury riſes in the pump-gauge; which ſhews that the ſpring is exactly equal to its preſſure. 31. Ir a phial of hot water be placed under the receiver, as ſoon as the preſſure oſ the air is taken off its ſurface, it will begin to boil with great rapidity: a much less degree of heat being ſufficient to cauſe the phenomenon in a vacuum, than when under the compreſſion of the atmoſphere. 32. Ir a fiſh be put into a jar of water, and covered with a recipient, as ſoon as the preſſure of the atmoſphere is removed, the air contained im the air-bladder will expand itſelf, and cauſe the ſiſh to ſwim: but it will not very readily die. 33. Ir we put a mouſe, rat, cat, &c. under the receiver and exhauſt the air, the animal will immediately die. From whence it appears that it is abſolutely neceſſary for ſupporting the lives of theſe and all other kinds of large animals. 34. BUT inſects, reptiles, &c. will not die in vacuo. 35. A1r is neceſſary for the ſupport of fire and flame; for burning coals, or a lighted candle will inſtantly go ut in vacuo. 36 ExPLOSIONS are cauſed by the reſiſtance and concuſſion of the air, ſor gunpowder will no flaſh in vacuo. 37. IT is owing to rhe reſiſtance of the air that light and heavy bodies do not fall equally faſt, for a guinea and a feather will fall to the bottom oſ a tall receiver, when exhauſted, in the ſame time 38. THAT the air is neceſſary for the ſupport of vapours is evident, for as ſoon as the receiver begins to be exhauſted, the vapours may be ſeen deſcending like a miſt. 39. IN order to prove that water is raiſed by the attraction of the air, as aſſerted in tbe firſt lecture, take two tea-ſaucers, pour in water till they be exactly of the ſame weight, place one under an exhauſted receiver, and the other in the open air, after they have ſtood a few hours, weigh them again, and that which was expoſed to the air will be found much lighter; tho' the experiment be made in the coldeſt weather. 40. THAT ſound is conveyed from place to place by the medium of air, will appear evident by the following experiments. Ir we place a bell upon the plate of the pump, and cover it with a receiver, if the bell be rung, the ſound will be much weaker than when in the open air, tho' the receiver be not exhauſted; iſ the receiver be well exhauſted, the ſound will not be audible, except very near the pump; but as a perfect vacuum cannot be made, the ſmall quantity of remaining air, will faintly convey the pulſes to the glaſs, which by a tremulous motion, will eonvey them to the outward air: from this, ĩt appears that ſound moves thro' the air, without the air being carried with it from place to place. Ir an elaſtic body be ſtruck, or otherwiſe put in motion, it will continue to vibrate backward and forward for ſome time; the particles of air which are near it, will by its quick vibrations, be put into the ſame tremulous motion with itſelf, and they, in their approach to thoſe which lie next them, will communicate it to them alſo; and ſo on to a conſiderable diſtance, depending on the intenſity of the ſtroke, and the nature of the ſonorous body. 1 THESE aerial pulſes or waves are propagated from the ſounding body, in con-centric ſpheres or ſhells, decreaſing in denſity as the ſquares of the diſtances increaſe; hence a perſon at the diſtance oſ one mile from a ſonorous body, will hear the ſound four times as loud as he would do at the diſtance of two uiiles, &c. THE velocity of ſound, according to the moſt accurate experiments, is at the rate of 1142 feet per ſecond; all iounds whether ſtrong or weak move with the ſame degree of velocity, and nearly as faſt when they move againſt the wind, as when they move with it; but they may be heard much further in the direction that the wimd blows, than in the contrary. THE velocity of ſound increaſes with the elaſticity of the air, and is therefore ſomething greater in ſummer than in winter; yet ſounds are m re audible in winter than in ſummer, becauſe the air is more denſe;* for the ſame reaſon ſound is much ſtronger in a valley than upon the top of a mountain, where the air is leſs condenſed by the weight of the incumbent atmoſphere. As ſound is propagated from the ſonorous body in all directions, if it happens to ſtrike againſt rocks, builcings, wood, &c. the pulſes will be re. C 3 flected  It ſeems to be owing to the denſity of the air, ariſing from the coldneſs of the water, that ſound may be heard flected back, and the ſound repeated, which is called an echo. Ir a muſical chord be put in motion, all its vibrations, whether great or ſmall, will be performed in the ſame time; and therefore the chord, however ſtruck, will always produce the ſame note. In order to produce different notes ſrom the ſame ſtring, either the length, or the tenſion of the ſtring muſt be altered. Ir we take eight muſical ſtrings of the ſame chickneſs, and ſtretch them with equal weights, and if we make their lengths as, 100. 88, 8. 80. 75. 66,6. 60. 53,3. 50. they will ſound the notes of the diatonic ſcale, viæ. C. D, E. F. G. A. B. C. yet the ſounds ofthe higher notes would be more agreeable, if the ſtrings were ſmaller and longer, and their. tenſion leſs. Ir two ſtrings perform their vibrations in the ſame time, the note or tone produced is called an uniſon, and is the moſt perfect concord. If one ſtring performs two vibrations while the othe perfoms one, they will ſound an oÆave, which is the next perfect. If one performs three for the other tvo; they will ſound a ſifth. If one four, for the other three; a fourtb. If one five, for the other four; a third greater. If tvo muĩical chords, placed near each other, be tuned uniſon, and one made to vibrate, the other will vibrate alſo, if the ſtring which is ſtruck be an octave above the other, the two extremes oſ the other will ſound uniſon with it, while the middle point remains at reſt: in the ſame circumſtances the ſame efſect is produced by all kinds of ſonorous bodies; for the vibrations of the air when put into a tremulous motion by the ſounding hody, agree exactly with thoſe which may be produced by the body at reſt, and the vibrations of this reſting body, which in ſome faint degree are cauſed by the firſt impulſes of the vibrating air, are by its correſponding motion, continually encreaſed. That the air may be condenſed is evident from the rollowing experi ments. 4I. LET a ſtrong receiver, with a ſull blovn bladder under it, be firmly ſcrewed down upon the plate of the pump, then with a ſyringe, oi with the pump, if it be of Smeaton's conſtruction, force in a quantity of air, and the bladder will begin to contract or ſnrivel up: whence it is evident that the air in the bladder is condenſed or ſqueeæed into a leſs ſpace than it poſſeſſed before: and as ſoon as the cock is opened and the preſſure removed, it will again expand itſelf and fill the bladder. THE condenſation ought not to be too great, when the receiver is of glaſs, leit it ſhould vurſt, which might be attended with bad conſequences. Ir only.a double atmoſphere be forced into a receiver of five inches diameter, anu eight inches high, there will be a force or 160 lo. acting againſt its inner ſurface; if a treble atuionphere, 3360. 42. Ir a glaſs bubble, with its neck immerſed in quickſilver, be placed under the receiver, and a double atmoſphere forced in. half the capacity of the bubble will be filled with quickſilver, and the air which in its natural ſtate, filled the whole capacity, will be compreſſed in one half thereof. 5. Ir air be condenſed upon the ſurface of waterin a ſtrong veſſel it will cauſe it to ſpout thro the tube of communication with a ſurpriſing velocity, and will make a beautiful fountain, or jet d' eau. TuERE is a kind of air frequently found in the bottoms of deep pits, mines, &c. comuinonly called the choke damp, it is conſiderably neavier than common air, extinguiſhes candles, and is inſtant death to animals. 44. THIs kind of air may be produced by pouring aqua-fortis, or oĩl of vitriol, diluted with water, upon pounded chalk; alſo a noxious air, ſomething like this, may be made by letting the air ifito an exhauſted receiver thro' a charcoal fire, or thro' a hot brazen tube. 45. Anx inflammable air is made by exhauſting a receiver, and letting the air in again thro' burning oil of turpentine, for if a candle be put down into this air, it will take fire and bumn: it is alſo noxious to the higheſt degree, for an animal dies in it in an inſtant. . Alr is alſo made noxious by the putrefaction of vegetables or animal ſubſtances; by the burning of candles; by animal reſpiration; by the calcination of metals; by the efferveſcence of iron-filings and brimſtone; by the effluvia of white paint; by exhalations from putrid marſhes; &c. from hence it is evident that great quantities of air are daily corrupted, aud without ſome remedy, the whole atmoſphere would at length become peſtilential. How air made noxious is again purifieũ, or rendered fit for breathing, has long been a ſubject of enquiry; but it appears by ſome late experiments, made by Dr. Prieſtly, that avater and grouving vegetables tend to reſtore it to a ſtate of purity, which diſcovery may be of the greateſt importance to mankind. THE air is an elaſtic ſluid capable of being expanded by heat and contracted by cold; hence iſ any part be heated it will be rendered ſpecifically lighter than the adjoining air, and will therefore riſe into the higher parts of the atmoſphere, and the neighbouring air, by its weight, will ruſh into its place and thereby a ſtream of air or wind will be produced; thus we find the air ruſhing thro' the key-hole, chinks, crevices, &c. into a cloſe room where a great fire is made: and the rarefac tion made by the heat of the ſun, is the cauſe of all the regular winds, whether general or periodical; for the air to which the ſun is vertical, is rendered hotter than in any other region, and is therefore conſtantly riſing into the up er parts of the atmoſphere, while the heavier air from all ſides is moving in to ſupply its place; but as the motion of the ſun is toward the weſt, the eaſterly wind prevails. Under the equinoctial it blows nearly from the eaſt point; but as the diſtance increaſes it varies more and more on both ſides 'till about the 30th degree of latitude, where, on the north ſide it blows from the N. E. and on the ſouth ſide from the S. E. but this is to be underſtood only of open ſeas; for the direction is altered by hot ſands, mountains, &c. and the wind generally blows towards the land: hence we have the reaſon of the periodical trade winds or monſoons which blow ſix months in one direction, and ſix months in the contrary; as is ſully explained in the lecture. L E C T UR E III. Of Hparoſtatice. g Prosatcs is that part of philoſophy which treats of the properties, preſſure, and laas of fluids. AFLUID is generally defined to be a body, whoſe parts move freely among themſeves, and therefore yield to the leaſt partial preſſure. From whence it is ſuppoſed that the particles of a fluid are ſmall, round, ſmooth. and hard. That fluids are porous is evident ſrom their bulk not being encreaſed by the addition of as much ſalt &c. as they can diſſolve All fuids, except air, are incompreſible. That is, they cannot be forced or Iqueezcd into a fmaller ſpace than what they naturally porſeſs. lIhis is evident by ſi.ling a globe oſ copper with water, and preſſing it with a icrew, for the water iſſues thro' the pores of the metal and ſtands like dew all over its ſurface. HENCE it follows, that the ocean and other deep waters, muſt be every where of the ſame denſity, that is, they will not be more denſe at the bottom than at the top. Tet the preſſure avill be in proportion to the depth, as is eaſy to conccive, by ſuppoſing a fluid compoſed of a number of thin plates, piled up one upon another, for it is evident, that the higher the column, the greater will be the preſſure upon the loweſt. TH IS is proved by putting the open end of a barometer tube, into a wider tube almoſt fill'd with water; for as the imall tube deicends the water is ſeen to riſe in it, in proportion to the depth, tho' equally reſilted hy the ſpring of the internal air. Tue presſure of ſluids at the ſame depth is every avay equal, as upwards, downwards, and ſideways, and is always in proportion to the perpendicular altitude, without any regard to the quantity. That is, a ſluice will be equally as much preſſed in the ſide of a pond four yards in diameter, as it would be iſ the ſaid ponu was four miles in diameter. Ir a piece of flat lead be holden cloſe to the bottom of an open cylinder covered with leather, and placed more than twelve times its thickneſts below the ſurface, it will be ſuſtained by the upward preſſure of the water. LET two round boards, be put together with Ieather, aſter the manner of bellows, in the middle of the upper board fix a long tube, thro' which pour water into the bellows, and the higher board will he raiſed by the upward preſſure, tho' a con ſiderable weight be laid upon it. LET the upper board of theſe bellows be fixed, and to the bottom faſten a wire, which coming thro the tube, may be hooked to the end of a ſcalebeam; then put weights into the ſcale at the oppoſite end, till the water be ſeen riſing above the upper board, now ſuppoſing the weight ſufficient for that purpoſe be two pounds, then muſt the bottom of the bellows neceſſarily ſuſtain a preſſure of that weight, for the two ſcales are juſt balanced. If to theſe weights another pound be added, the water will riſe in the tube, till its preſſure at the bottom, being encreaſed to three pounds, reſtore the equilibrium. In the ſame manner, for every additional pound thrown into the ſcale, the water will riſe an equal ſpace in the tube, and preſerve, by its preſſure, an equal counterpoiſe. For example, let us ſuppoſe that every pound put into the ſcale raiſes tle water one inch in the tube; then if it be raiſed 20 inches, the bottom muſt be preſſed with a ſorce of 20 pounds, altho the abſolute weight of the water be not more than 2 pounds. THu1 s very ſingular effect which is generally called the hydroſtatic paradox, is thus accounted for: the upward preſſure at the ſame depth is equal to the downward preſſure, and therefore the fixed part is preſſed upwards with a force equal to the weight of a column of water of the ſame altitude with that in the tube, and of a diameter equal to the ſaid fixed part, which part re-acts upon the water and cauſes it to preſs upon the bottom with a force equal to the weight of a column of the beforementioned altitude, encreaſed by the depth of the bellows, of a diameter equal to that of the bottom. TAKE an open glaſs cylinder, over one end of which, Iet a bladder he tied flaccid; fill the cylinder, to any height at pleaſure, with water, and by its weight the bladder will be made convex on the low ſide, put the cylinder gradually, into a large veſſel of water, and while the ſurface of that in the cylinder is higher than that in the veſſel, the bladder will continue to be bulged downward; as ſoon as their ſurfaces become level, or of the ſame height, the bladder will be flaccid; if the eylinder be ſunk deeper, the bladder will become convex on the upper ſide, by the ſuperior upward preſſure of the water in the veſſel, becauſe its ſurface is the higher. LEr a ſimall and wide tube be joined together at the bottom, pour water into the wide tube, and it will riſe in the ſmall one to the ſame height, but not higher, whence it is evident that the preſſure is in proportion to the perpendicular altitude; for were it as the quantities which the tubes contain, the altitude in the ſmall one ſhould be, to the altitude in the wide one, as the ſquare of the diameter of the wide tube, to the ſquare of the diameter oſ che ſmall one, FroνM hence we ſee the reaſon of conveying water by aqueducts; or why water may be conveyed to any place not higher than the ſource, tho' a valley intervene, by means ofa bended pipe; for it is evident the water will always riſe to the level of the ſpring., whatever the form of the pipe be. Tur presſure of a ſluid againſt the ſides or bottom of a veſſel, may be computed as follows; sor the botton; multiply the depth in inches by 03617 and the product thence ariſing, by the area of the bottom, in inches; this laſt product will be the whole preſſure upon the bottum in pounds avoirdupoiſe. FoRr a ſide; multiply the area under water, in inches by o3617, and that again by the depth of the centre of gravity, in inches; the product will be the preſſure, in pounds, as before. THE velocity with which wauter ſpouts out at à hole in the bottom or ſide of a veſſel, is equal to that which would be acquire d by a heavy body, in falling from the ſurface of the water to the ſaid hole. A HEAVY body will fall thro' a ſpace of 16. 13 feet nearly, the firſt ſecond, and will thereby acquire a force which would carry it with an uniform motion, over a ſpace of 32:26 feet per ſecond. THEREFORE if a hole be made in the ſide of a veſſel, or thro' the breaſt of a dam, at the depth of 16. 13 feet below the ſurface, the water will ſpout out, with a velocity of 32. 26 feet per ſecond. THE velocity wit which water fpouts out at holes, made at different depths below the ſurface, is as the ſquare root of theſe depths. As for example: ſhould it be required to find the velocity, with which a fluid would ſpout thro a hole ꝗ feet below the ſurface, it would be, as 4 (the ſquare root of 16) is to 3, (the ſquare root of 9) ſo is 32 (the velocity at 16 feet below the ſurface) - to 24 feet, the velocity per ſecond, reguired. Or if the ſquare root of the depth in feet be multiplied by s, it will give the velocity in feet, per ſecond. THE following Table (which may be of ſervice to thoſe who are concerned in water-works) ſhews the velocity per ſecond with which water ſpouts from holes made in the ſide of a veſſel, from one to ſixty feet below the ſurface. Su85 ll ę 85 g ẽ55l 4 s l 5 S.  ] SE & ε1Æ5 ll El Ææ EſEEIEBEEBE Æ 49 l 8] 79 1 8. 17 l 32.96 2] 11.28 ]l 18 ſ 34. 3] 13.84 ll 19] 34.88 4 l 16. 20 ſ 35.76 5 l 17.84 ll 21 ſ 36.64 6 l 19.6 22 37.52 7 l 21.12]] 23] 38.4 8 22.64 ll 24 l 39.2 O 25 ] 40. l 24. I1 10] 25.28 l 30 l 43.84 11] 26.64 ll 35 ] 47.04 12 ſ 27.76 ll 40 ſ 50.56 13] 28.88 ll 45 l 53.68 14] 29.92 ll 50 ] 56.56 15 1 30.96 ll 55 ſ 59.2 16] 32. 60o l 62. l . N. B. In this table I have taken the velocity at 16 feet, to be 32 feet per ſecond, not regarding the decimal. IT is neceſſary that there be a free paſſage to the hole from which the fluid ſpouts, otherwiſe the velocity will be greatly retarded. THE quantity of water diſcharged at any depth below the ſurface, while the aperture remains the ſame, will be as the velocity at that depth. As for example: Should 8 pints be diſcharged thro' a hole, one foot below the ſurface, in a certain time; then an equal hole, made 2 feet below the ſurface, would diſcharge 1 1. 28 pints in the ſume time; and ſo on as in the table. SPOouTING ſluids, when applied to wheels, ſhould ſtrice them in the direction of a tangent; or they ſhould flow in ſuch a manner, were the float-boards or ladles away, as to paſs by the wheel, only juſt touching its circumference. Iſ this be not the caſe a conſiderable part of the force will be deſtroyed, and the velocity proportionably Oſ Hydroſiatics. 53 retarded; which perhaps may be neceſſary where a ſlow motion is required. BY the table we ſee what different degrees of velocity will be given to a wheel, by water flowing thro ſluices, at different depths below the ſurface. Example: If when the depth is 4 feet the wheel makes 16 revolutions in a certain time; then when the depth is 9 feet it will make 24 revolutions in che ſame time, &c. Of Solids immerſed in Fluids. Ir a ſolid be immerſed in a fluid, it loſes juſt ſo much of its weight, as is equal to the weight of its equal bulk of the fluid. Take a cylindric bucket and a ſolid cylinder of braſs &e. which will exactly ſill it; let the bucket be ſuſpended from the end oſa ſcale beam, and the cylinder from the bottom of the bucket, balance them by putting weights into the oppoſite ſcale; then place the cylinder in a jar of water, and the equilibrium will be deſtroyed; pour water into the bucket till it be full and it will be reſtored again. Whence it is evideni that the ylinder is reſiſted by the weight of its bull of vater. D 3 FROM FRoOM this it appears that if a body be lighter than water, bulk for bulk, it cannot deſcend, becauſe it is reſiſted by the weight of its equal bulk of water: If it be heavier it will loſe ſo much of its weight, as is equal to its bulk of water, and deſcend with the reſt; if it be the ſame weight with water, bulk for bulk, it will remain at reſt in any part of the water, all avbich is ſbewn hy ſmall glasſi images, avhoſe specific gravities may be increaſed at pleaſure. Relative or ſpecific gravity is the gravity or weight of one body compared with the weight of another, of equal magnitude. Ir a cubic inch of gold be twice the weight of a cubic inch of copper, then are their ſpecific gravities ſaid to be as two to one. THE ſpecific gravity of any kind of matter is eaſily found by the hydroſtatic- balance; for iſ we ſuſpend the body, whoſe ſpeciſic gravity we would know, from the bottom of a ſcale, by a fime thread, and then balance it exactly, ſirſt in air, and then in avater; It will be, as the difference between the weight in water and in air, is to the weight in air; ſo is the ſpecific gravity of water, to the ſpecific gravity oſ the body required. Heaence if the weight oſ the body in air, be divided by what it loſes in water, the quotient will ſhew how many times it is heavier than water. In order to find the ſpecific gravities of fluids; let a ſolid piece of glaſs be ſuſpended from a ſcale, as before, and exactly ballanced in the air; if then it be immerſed in different kinds of fluids, the grains put into the ſcale over it every time, to reſtore the equilibrium, will expreſs the relative gravities of the fluids. THE ſpeciſic gravities of different bodies, found by the above proceſs, are expreſſed in the follow. ing table. altitudes, their ſpecific gravities wi as thoſe altitudes. THE Hydrometer is an inſtrumer times uſed for finding the ſpec fluids: it conſiſts of a hollow ball or glaſs, with a long ſtem fixed a weight ſcrewed to the other; if adjuſted as to ſink the inſtrument the ſtem when immerſed in proof made by mixing equal parts of water) it will, if immerſed in any c rit, ſhew whether it be above or be inſtrument ſink deeper than the LECT UR E IV. Of Hydraulics, &c. HE ſyphon or crane is a bended tube, which being filled with water and then in, the outward leg reaching below the ſurface water to be conveyed through it, the water longer leg by its weight will begin to deand that in the other by the preſſure of the ll be forced aſter it, provided the altitude of phon above the water do not exceed 33 feet. e phænomenon of the Tantalus's cup, is owa concealed ſyphon, the higheſt part whereof s near the top of the veſſel, one leg reaching the bottom, and the other communicating he inſide near the bottom; as the cup is filled vater, the ſyphon will alſo be filled; or the will continue to riſe in the cup, 'till it run he bended part of the ſyphon, when the ſy. will begin to run and the cup uill be ed. PERMITTING ſprings are accounted for upon this principle, a ſphon being formed in the earth and communicating with ſome cavity near the bottom; if this receptacle be not ſupplied with water as faſt as the ſyphon will carry it ofſf, it will then riſe, as in the cup, till the ſyphon begin to run, which will continue till the cavity be emptied, or till the water falls below the orifice of the ſyphon, and then it will ceaſe. Tugs fountain at conmand is a cylindric veſſel about four inches wide and five inches high, cloſed at both ends; in one end are inſerted, round the centre five or ſx ſmall pipes, half an inch long, and one eighth in diameter; in the centre is ſoldered a tube fourteen or eighteen inches long, and half an inch in diameter, one end of this tube goes near the top of the veſſel, and on the other are ſoldered three claws to ſtand upon, and which raiſe the lower orifice of the tube about half an inch above the bottom of a cup, in which it is placed; in which bottom is made a ſmall hole; the veſſel being almoſt filled with water thro' the long tube, and then inverted, it will run out thro the ſmall pipes into the baſon and will riſe till it touch the lower end of the wide tube, and then the fountain will ceaſe to run, becauſe the air is kept from entering thro' the long tube and preſſing upon the ſurface of the water in the veſſel; but as the water is conſtantly running out of the cup thro' the ſmall hole in the bottom, as ſoon as it falls below the orifice of the long pipe, the fountain will again begin to play. Tur action of the common pump depends upon the preſſure of the air: a piſton, with a valve in it, being made to fit the bore of the pump, is put down near a valve which is fixed below in the barrel; a little water is poured upon it to make it airtight, and then, when it is lifted up, the column of air upon it is alſo lifted, and the ſpring of that below in the pump is weakened, and the water, by the preſſure of the air is raiſed in the barrel, 'till its weight, together with the ſpring of the internal air balance the outward atmoſphere; the ſtroke being repeated, when the piſton is put doun, the air above the fixed valve makes its eſcape thro' the piſton's valve; when it is raiſed the air below is again expanded and the water raiſed as before, &c. until aſter a number of ſtrokes the water is raiſed ibove the piſton and brought up into the ciſtern, from whence it may run off. Ix conſtructing a pump of this ſort, it is neceſſary that the valve be not fixed too high, viæ. not more than 20 or 24 ſeet, and in ſome caſes not more than 15 feet above the ſurface of the water. For altho' the preſſure of the atmoſphere will raiſe a column of water to the altitude of 32 or 34 feet provided a perſect vacuum be made; yet the velocity with which it riſes, at any altitude above 24 feet is too ſmall where any conſiderable quantity of water is to be raiſed: at the ſurface the velocity with which it follows the piſton is upwards of 45 feet per ſecond, but derceaſes to the altitude of 34 feet, where it is nothing. Ir the avind bore or ſucking pipe be made too ſmall in proportion to the working barrel, ſo that the water do not riſe with a ſufficient velocity thro' the valve, to fill the vacuum in the working barre left by the piſton, the pump will then be much harder to work, for whatever the column below the piſton wants of 32 feet, it wili be added by de preſſure of the atmoſphere. THu E velocity with which the piſton riſes, its altitude above the water, and the diameter of the working barrel, are all to be conſidered in computing the diameter of the wind bore, or the diameter of the valve, for it is little advantage to have the lower pipe wider than the valve at the top thereof. TnOSE Who are not able to adjuſt the dimenſions by theory, ſhould fix the valve near enough the ſurface of the water, as within 20 feet, for in this there is no diſadvantage in working the pump, as many people ſuppoſe. Fox ſhould it be required to raiſe water 40 feet, the weight of water to be lifted every ſtroke will be tne ſame, whether the ſpear be 15 or 30 foot long, tho in the firſt eaſe there will be but half the quantity of water upon the piſton, that there will be in the ſecond, but as the weight upon the piſton at every ſtroke, is equal to the weight of a column of water of the ſame diameter with the piſton, and of an altitude equal to the diſtance between the ſurface of the water in the well, and the ſurface of that in the ciſtern, it can make no diſference in what part of the pump the piſton plays, provided it be near enough the bottom: for tho' the water be forced up the lowerpart of the pump by the weight of the atmoſphere, yet the ſaid part is firſt exhauſted of its air by the piſton, which is conſtantly preſſed by the column of air above it with a force equal to the weight of the column of water below. FrOM hence it is evident, that while the working barrel remains the ſame, there can be no advantage in contracting either the lower or upper part of the pump: for it has been already proved, that, avhile the bottom or piſton remains the ſame, the preſſure is in proportion to the altitude. IN the forcing pump, the piſton is ſolid, or without a valve, a pipe with a valve in it is fixed in the ſide of the pump, juſt above the fixed valve; ſo that when the piſton is puſhed down the water is forced out at the ſide pipe, and is hindered from returning by the valve, the ſide pipe may be of any length required, and by it the water may be forced to the tops of buildings, &c. Ix the lifting pump, the ſpear goes in at the bottom, is wrought by means of a frame, and can thereſore only be uſed in deep water. TuE draining pump is made ſquare with a valve in the bottom; it is moſtly wrought in an inclined poſition, the piſton is made in the form of a hopper, the edges are fixed with cords to the ſpear, when it is lifted up, the water preſſes it cloſe to the pump, but when it is puſhed down, the ſides bend in and give way for the water, ſand, gravel, &c. to riſe. THE ſcrenv of Archimedes is a tube open at both ends, coiled round a cylinder; when it is to be uſed it is placed in an inclined poſition, with the lower end in water, and upon turning ĩt round the water is brought out at the top. THE centrifugal pump raiſes water by a centrifugal force combined with the preſſure of the atmoſphere, it cannot raiſe water higher than 30 f et, becauſe it has no piſton, and the velocity with which it riſes at a greater altitude, by the preſſure of the air, is too ſlow for this pump. The quantity of water raiſed by it is very conſiderable, yet it is not found to anſwer ſo well as at firſt expected. NEWS H AMS fire-engine, conſiſts of two forcing pumps which alternately force the water into a ſtrong air veſſel, in the top of which a is pipe fixed and extends near the bottom: when the water is riſen in the veſſel to the botiom of the pipe the air cannot make its eſcape, but as the water riſes it will be comproſſed in the crown of the veſſel, and by its ſpring will forcibly act upon the ſurface ofſ the water, and force it to ſpout thro' the pipe with an exceeding great velocity, and by means of a proper contrivance at the top, may be thrown in any direction at pleaſure. Tus ꝗlindric millwhich grinds without a wheel and with a ſmall ſtream of water, is made of a long upright tube, open at the top to receive the water; at the bottom it has two croſs arms (fome have added four or ſix but it is no advantage) when the cylinder and arms are ſilled with water, the arms will be preſſed outward on exery ſide with æ force which will be as the height of the cylinder; ſuppoſe it be 14lb upon every ſquare inch, then if in each arm, and on oppoſite ſides a hole be made of four inches ſquare, there will be ſixteen ſtones acting on each arm, or 32 in the whole, to turn the mill. THue fire-engine conſiſts of a large beam, cylinder, boiler, &c. in the cylinder which ſtands upright, a piſton is ſuſpended from one end of the beam, and to the other, are fixed the pump rods. The cylinder and boiler are made to communicate by means of a pipe, in which is placed a plate called the regulator. The boiler is ſilled with water to a certain depth, which by fire is converted into a vaſtly elaſtic ſteam, the ſtrength of which is known by its lifting a valve at the top of the boiler, called the ſteam clack; when the regulator is open the ſteam enters into the cylinder and drives out the air thro' a ſmall hole, covered with a valve called the ſnifting clach. When the cylinder is filled with ſteam, the regulator is ſhut, and the injection-coch is opened, by which a jet of cold water is let into the cylinder, from a ciſtern fixed above; this jet condenſes the ſteam, and makes a ſuſficient vacuum for the piiton to deſcend, which is immediately brought down by the weight of the atmoſphere. In its deſcent it ſhuts the injection. cocÆ and opens the regulator, the ſteam again enters into the cylinder, and balancing the preſſure oſ the air, the piſton is raiſed by the weight of the pump rods at the other end of the beam, as it riſes it ſhuts the regulator and opens the injection-coct, the ſtroke is again repeated, and the water in the pumips is raiſed and diſcharged at the top. Tus ſteam is ſeldom much ſtronger or weaker than the outward air, if it be ;5 ſtronger the engine will work well. At a mean the preſſure upon every ſquare inch of the piſton will be 14lb and and upon every ſquare foot 18cwt but in practice the weight at the other end of the beam ſhould not be more than half the preſſure upon the piſton, in order that the engine may ſirike ſuſficiently faſt. THE fire-engine has lately been made with an inverted piſton, to ſave the expence of a beam, the contrivance is ingenious, but it does not work any thing near ſo well as when made with a beam. LECTUR EV. Of Electricity. H E fourth ſpecies of attraction is that of electricity: If a globe of glaſs be turned round its axis, and rubbed with a cuſhion made of leather, covered with an amalgama of quickſilver and tin, it will attract all light bodies which lie near it, or within the ſphere of attraction; which in dry weather extends to the diſtance of ſeveral feet. The electric fluid is collected, by the globe and cuſhion, from the earth; and may be communicated to any inſulated body by means of a conductor. In electricity bodies are diſtinguiſhed into electries and non electries, thoſe which will collect the fire by rubbing, are called electrics, thoſe which will not, non electrics. Ir a tin tube, ſupported on glaſs, be connected with the globe in motion, it will receive more than its common ſhare of electricity, but at the approach of a non electric, it will part with it again, with a ſnap and flaſh. IFr a pointed avire be ſixed in the tube and the room made dark, when the globe is turned the fire will ifſue out at the point in a fine diverging flame; if a non electric be laid upon the tube, as a finger &c. the flame will diſappear, but if an electric be laid upon ĩt, the flame will continue. Tut fire being once collected, may be tranſmitted to any diſtance in an inſtant, by means of a proper conductor inſulated. Ir two bodies contain unequal ſhares of electricity, they attract, but if equal ſhares, they repel each other. If a cup of water be inſulated and electrified, at the approach of a finger, the fire will ſnap from it, nearly with as much force as from the conductor. If wet ſpunge be electrified it will drop much faſter than before, and the drops received in an inſulated cup, will be electrical. whence it is evident the fire is carried down in the water. A riecE of leaf gold will be ſuſpended between the conductor and the finger holden over it. TAXxE a phial almoſt filled with water and cloſe corked, picrce a wire thro' the cork, and put it down into the water, then if a perſon graſp the phial in one hand, and hold the upper end of the wire to the conductor, the fire will be condenſed in the water; if a finger of the other hand be applied to the conductor, the perſon will receive the eruption of fire, which will fly from the inſide to the outſide of the phial, to reſtore the equilibrium, and will give him a conſiderable ſhock, which will be felt about the joints and acroſs the breaſtThe ſhock may, be given to a number of people at the ſame time provided they join hands, or o therwiſe communicate with each other. Ir a perſon ſtand on a board ſupported by glaſs or baked wood, and communicate with the conductor by means of a wire &c. he will be all over filled with electrical matter, which at the approach of a finger will ſnap from any part of his body. If he hold his finger near warm ſpirits the ſpark will kindle the fumes and thereby ſet the whole on fire. Tur electric fluid ſeems to be inherent in all bodies, except thoſe called electries; it is not only found diffuſed thro' every part oſ the earth, but alſo in the clouds, and when two clouds containing unequal quantiti es thereos, are brought near each other, by contrary winds or otherwiſe, it makes its appearance in a fllaſb of lightning, flying from one cloud to the other, or if the electrified cloud be low it ſometimes ſtrikes to the earth, in which caſe it is called a thunderbolt. THuE fire may be brought down out of the clouds by a tall wire, or by a kite ſent up with a wire twined in its cord. The lightning or thunderboli generally ſtrikes the higheſt objects, as the tops oſ hills, ſpires, chimneys, &c. therefore in Americq where they are ſubject to frequent ſtorms of thunder, they, to prevent its dreadtul effects, fix bars of iron up the ends of their houſes, reaching from the ground above the higheſt part of the building, by which the fire is faſely convey'd to the earth. LECTUR E VI. Of Optics. T is manifeſt from a number of experiments that light is a real ſubſtance or body of itſelf. and that it conſiſts of particles inconceiveably ſmall3; otherwiſe they could not pervade the pores of glaſs, diamond, &. The wiſdom of the creator is abundantly manifeſt, and perhaps as fully diſplayed in the ſmallneſs of the particles of light, as in any part of vhe creation. Light is emitted from every point in the ſurface of a luminous body, in right lines, and with a velocity of 170,000 miles in a ſecond of time, which is inconceiveable and unparallel'd. As light is propagated in ſtreight lines, it mu decreaſe, as the ſquares of the diſtances increaſe; that is, if at the earth we have a certain quantity or degree of light and heat from the ſun, then at twice that diſtance there will be but 4 part of that quantity, and at three times the diſtance but 7 part thereof; but at half the diſtance there will be 4 times as much, and at one third of the diſtance 9 times as much: So it will be found that aſ Mercury there is about 63 times the light and heat that we have; at Venus near twice as much; at Mars, about §; at Fupiter, æ; and at Saturn, 75a part of the light and heat which we have. Ir a ray of light, coming from the ſurface of a luminous object, fall upon a plain mirrour, it will be ſo reflected that the angle of reflection will always be equal to the angle of incidence. LiIGHT, alſo, in paſſing out of one meditm into another of different denſity is refracted or bent out of a ſtreight line, and the more ſo as the medium is denſer. THE white light of the ſun is hetrogenial, or of different kinds, and each kind has a different power of refraction, or is differently bent out of its way in paſſing thro' the ſame medium, and appears alſo of a different colour: Theſe rays which are leaſt refrangeable, excite the idea of red; the ſecond ſort orange; the third yellow; the fourth green; the fifth blue; the ſixth indigo; and the ſeventh violet. Ir a beam of the ſun, coming throa ſmall hole into a dark room, fall upon the ſide of a triangular glaſs priſm, it will upon the oppoſite ſide of the room, form an oblong and coloured image of the ſun. Novw if theſe different ſorts of light were not differently refrangable, the image aſter refraction would continue to be round, but we find it is not, and that the red light is leaſt, and the violet the moſt refrangable. TH AT theſe difſerent kinds of light, or different colours realy exiſt in the light of the ſun, and that the image is not ſpread out by the incident rays being diſturbed, ſhattered, or ſplit by the glaſs, is evident from a number of experiments, as ſbeuwn in the lecture. Licur falling upon the ſurface of bodies, is in part reflected and in part imbibed; if the parts of a body be ſo diſpoſed as to reflect all the red rays, and imbibe the reſt, that body will appear of a red colour; for every hody muſt appear of the ſame colour of the light which it relects to the eye; iſ a body reflect all the green rays and imbibe the reſt, it muſt appear of a green colour &c, every body, therefore, appears of ſuch a colour as would be produced by a compoſition of the different kind: of light which it reflects. Bobies which reſlect one kind of light and refract the others, will appear of diſfſerent colours by refraction and reflection. THE phænomenon of the rain bow is cauſed by the ſun's rays being ſeperated by the drops of falling rain, as is ſbeaun in the lecture, by ſilling a glaſs globe with water, and Ictting a beam of the ſun, coming thro' a ſmall hole into a dark room, fall upon it. Ir parallel rays fall upou a concave mirrour, they will be reflected back to a point, diſtant from the vertex of the mirrour equal to half the radius of concavity, this is called the solar focus, or burning point; for the rays of the ſun meeting in this point burn very intenſly; there is alſo in this point a perfect image formed of the object from whence the rays proceed; but if the object be brought nearer ſo that the rays do not fall parallel, the image will not be formed in the focus, but further from the mirrour; and as the object is brought nearer, the image will recede 'till they meet in the centre oſ the ſphere of concavity, where they will be of equal magnitude, but the image inverted. As the object is brought nearer the focus, the image will conſtantly ſly off, till the object arrive at the focus and then the rays will be reflected parallel among themſelves, ſo that no image can be formed: If the object be between the focus and mirrour, the image will be formed behind the mirrour, erect and magnified. PARALLEL rays falling upon a plain glaſs oſ equal thickneſs cannot be converged to a focus, but will proceed parallel after refraction. Ir one ſide be plain and the other convex, parallel rays will be converged to a point, at a diſtance equal to the diameter of the ſphere oſ convexity; if it be double and equally convex, they will meet in the centre of the ſphere of convexityIN jects which the rays ,roceed from; if the objects be brought near, the images will be formed fun tner trom the glaſſes, than the above mentioneu points. Ir he diſtance of the object be equal to twice the focal diſtance of the glaſs, the image will be fo med at the ſame diſtance on the other ſide, and of the ſame magnitude with the object, but inverted, Concave glaſſes do not form images; but parallel rays, after refraction, proceed diverging as if they came from a point, diſtant from the glaſs, equal to the diameter of the ſphere of concavity, if it be a plano concave; but as if they came from the centre, if it be a double concave. THE human eye is of a globular form and conſiſts of three humours, the aqueous, cryſtalline, and vitreous; parallel rays are by the chryſtalline humour converged to a focus at the bottom of the eye, where, if the eye be perfect, an image is painted of the object they proceed from, upon the retina, or optic nerve; bu. if the eye be too convex the rays will meet before they reach the retina; if too flat they will tend to a point beyond the retir a tlie ſirſt is remedied by concave glaſſes, or by hold. ing the object very near the eye, the laſt by convex glaſſes. Ir an object be placed in the focus of a convex glaſs, the rays after refraction will proceed parallel among themſelves, and an eye placed on the other ſide will have a diſtinct view of the ſaid object, which will alſo appear to be magnified; for a perfect eye cannot ſee any thing diſtinctly nearer than 8 Inches, therefore if the focal diſtance of the glaſ be 3 an inch, the apparent diameter will be increaſed 16 times, if ; of an inch 32 times; hence they become of uſe as magnifiers or ſingle microſcopes, for viewing ſmall objects. A compound microſcope has a ſmall object glaſs fixed in one end of a tube, and an eye glaſs in the other end, the object is placed upon a ſtage a little further from the glaſs than the focus of parallel rays, by this glaſs an image is formed of the object in the tuhe, and is as much magnified in length as the diſtance between the image and glaſs is greater than the diſtance between the object and glaſs, which ſuppoſe 8 times, then if the eye glaſs be one inch focal diſtance, the image by it will be magnified 8 times alſo, unu by both glalles 64 times in length. The magnifying power of the ſolar microſcope is computed by dividing the breudth of the room by the diſtance between the object and glaſs: Suppoſe the firſt be 6 yards, and the laſt 3 an inch, then will the object be magniſied 423 times in length. 186,624 in ſurface, ana 80, 021,568 times in ſolidity. The camera obſcura or dark room, has a convex glaſs fixed in the top over which is placed a diagonal mirrour, to throw the horirontal rays upon the bottom of the inſtrument, which is exactly in the focus of the glaſs, where, upon a ſheet of white paper, the objects before the inſtrument are painted in the moſt lively and natural colours, when this inſtrument is uſed it is neceſſary that the objects be ſtrongly illuminated by the ſun. A perſpective glaſi has in one end a convex object glaſs, and in the other a concave eye glaſs: which is placed at its focal diſtance within the foĩlll cus of the object glaſs: let the ſocal diſtance of the object glaſs be 6 inches, and that of the eye glaſo 1 inch, then the diſtance between them uwill be 5 inches; the magnifying power of this inſtrument is computed by dividing the focal diſtance of the object glaſs by that of the eye glaſs. THE aſtronomical teleſcope has in one end an object glaſs by which the rays are converged to a focus where an image is formed of the object they proceed from; this image is vieved by an eye glaſs placed at its focal diſtance from it in the other end of the tube; and is as much magnified as the focal diſtance of the object glaſs is greater than the focal diſtance of the eye glaſs. All objects ſeen thro' this teleſcope appear inverted. THE common tereſtrial teleſenpe has three eye glaſſes of the ſame focal diitance, by which the imuge is viewed erect. Its magnifying power iꝰ computed the ſame way as the laſt. IT is an imperfection in refracting teleſcope; that hetrogenial light is not refracted to the ſame point in the axis of the object glais; otherwiſe the ſocal diſtance of the eye glaſs might be very ſmall and the magnifying power very great. Tn1s imperfection is in part remedied in Doland's patent teleſcope, which is a great improvement of the common refracting one. THE reflecting teleſcope is a wide tube open at one end, and in the other is fixed a concave mirrour with a hole in the middle; rays of light falling upon this are reflected back and croſs in its focus, after which, in a diverging ſtate, they fall upon a a ſmall concave placed nearly at its focal diſtance from the focus of the great mirrour, by which they are reflected back thro' the hole in the great mirrour and fall upon a convex glaſs, by which they are converged to a focus and form an image, which is vieved by an eye glaſs in the end of the tube; this teleſcope magniſies 8 or 1o times as much as a refracting teleſcope of the ſame length. THuE magic lanthorn has a large convex glaſs in one ſide, and a candle being placed in its focus, the rays, after refraction, proceed parallel to each other, and illuminate a tranſparent painting; at a diſtance in the end of a tube is fixed another convex glaſs, by which the rays are converged to a focus and form an image of the painting, vaſtly magnified upon a white ſueet on the ſide of a dar room. , L E CT UR E VII. OF Mechanies. HIS ſcience treats of motion, explains the laws obſerved by moving bodies, and teaches how to compute the force of the mechanical powers, whether ſingle or combined in machines: By this ſcience the utmoſt improvement is made of every natural power, and the various elements made ſubſervient to the purpoſes of man. THE R E are three laws which are obſerved by all moving bodies whatever. Tus ſirſt is, That every body endeavours to continue in a ſtate of reſt, or moving uniſormly in a right line. THnE ſecond is, That the change of motion is alvays proportional to the generating force impreſſed, and is always made according to the right line in ahich that force is impreſſed. THE third is, That action and reaction are equal, and in contrary directions. Oſ the deſcent of bodies in non reſiſting mediums. A sobv left to itfelf, begins to deſcend or is carried towards the centre of the earth by the power of gravity; this power acts conſtantly upon all bodies in proportion to their quantity oſ matter; hence bodies containing unequal quantities of matter will deſcend with the ſame velocitt. A body in one ſecond of time will deſcend thro' a ſpace of 16.13 feet, at the end of this time, were the attraction to ceaſe, it has acquired a velocity which would carry it with an uniform motion over a ſpace of 32.26 feet in the next ſecond, but the attraction of gravitation acting conſtantly upon it, its motion continues to be accellerated, and it is carried over a ſpace of 48.39 feet, or three times as far as in the firſt ſecond. From hence it appears that falling bodies will be conſtantly accellerated, that the ſpaces fallen through will be as the ſquares of the times, or as the ſquares of the velocities, viæ. if a body in a certain time fall thro' 16 feet, in twice that time it will fall thro' 4 times 16 feet, in three times the time thro'9 times 16 feet, &c. the momentum of a falling body is always as the time or velocity; when the velocity is the ſame it is as the quantity of matter, and is found by multiplying the quantity of matter by the velocity. This is proved by letting a small aveight fall from different heights upon the end of a ſcale beam, and raiſing weights ſuſpended from the other end. OF bodies deſcending down inclined planes. As the length of the plane is to the height thereof, ſo is the ſpace paſſed over by a falling body to the ſpace deſcended thro' on the ſurface of the plane in the ſame time; and as bodies are carried down the inclined plane by the power of gravity, it is evident they will be equally accellerated as well as thoſe which fall in perpendicular directions, that is, whatever ſpace they paſs over in one ſecond of time, they will in two ſeconds paſs over four times that ſpace &c. and the velocity at the loweſt point will be equal to that which would be acquired by a perpendicular deſcent thro' the altitude of the plane. WhHILE the altitude of the plane remains the ſame, the velocity at the loweſt point will always be equal, whatever the length be; ſo that if a body F 3 deſcend deſcend down a number of contiguous planes, or down a curve, the velocity at the bottom, as alſo the momentum will ſtill be equal. The times oſ deſcent down planes of the ſame altitude, but of different lengths, will be directly as the lengths. FrOM the above we may infer that whether a body deſcend thro' the diameter of a circle, or thro' any chord of the ſame circle, the deſcent will be performed in the ſame time; and the velocity at the loweſt point will be equal to that which would be acquired by falling thro' the perpendicular height of the chord. Ir while a body deſcends down one chord, another falls thro' the diameter of the circle, then while it would aſcend up the oppoſite chord, which would be in the ſame time, the falling body would paſs over four times the diameter of the circle; the times of deſcent in arches are to thoſe in their reſpective chords, as 1 to. 7854, therefore the length of a pendulum to vibrate ſeconds will be found by the following proceſs to be 39.2 inches; for as 1 (the ſquare of 1 ſecond) is to 16. 12 feet, ſo is à (the ſquare of , a ſecond) to 4.03 feet, che diameter of a cirele in whoſe chord a body would deſcend and aſcend in a ſecond of time, its radius would be 2.01 feet; and as the deſcent in the arch is to the deſcent in the chord, as 1 to. 7854 it will be, As the ſquare of. 7854, is to the ſquare of 1, ſo is 2 o1 feet, to 3.26 feet,  39 2 inches. The lengths of pendulums are in the ſame ratio, as the ſquares of the times in which they vibrate, therefore to find the length of a pendulum to vibrate half ſeconds, ſay, As 1 (the ſquare of 1 ſecond) is to 2 (the ſquare of 3 a ſecond) ſo is 39.2 inches, to 98 inches, the length required. &c. BobnIEs thrown in horizontal, oblique, or upright directions are called projectiles: Every projectile is acted upon by two forces, the impetus or projectile force and the pover of gravity, by the ſirſt it paſſes over equal ſpaces in equal times, but by the ſecond it falls thro' ſpaces which are as the ſquares of the times, every projectile, thereſore, moves in a curve, except they, be thrown upright, in which caſe, to appearance, thoy will move in a ſtreight line. EVERY body revolving round a centre is alſo acted upon by two forces, the cenrifugal and centripetal, the centrifugal ariſes ſrom the firſt impulſe, and tends to carry the body off from the centre. But by the centripetal force it is conſtantly drawn towards the centre. Iftheſe forces have a certain ratio to each other, the body is kept revolving round a centre in a circle or ellipſis. IN revolving bodies we muſt obſerve the quantity of matter, the diſtance from the centre, and the periodical time, or time in which the body makes one revolution round the centre. Tavo equal bodies revolving round a centre at the ſame diſtance and in the ſame time will bave equal centrifugal forces. If the diſtances and periodical times be equal, the centrifugal forces avill be directly as the quantities o/ matter. If the periodical times and quantities of matter be equal, the centrifugal forces aill be in the lame ratic as the diſtances. 1Iip the periodical times be equal, and the diſtance, e reciprocally as the quantities of matter, the centrifugal forces will alſo be equal. When the diſtances and quantities of matter are equal, the centrifugal forces are directly as the square; of ihe velocities, or reciprocally as the ſquares of the periodical times. THESE laws are all demonſtrated in the lectures by the central machine. THE centre of magnitude is a point which is equally diſtant from every part of the ſurfaceThe centre of motion is that point which remains at reſt, while all the outward parts of thè body revolve round it. The centre of gravity is a point in every body, which, if ſuſtained the whole body remains at reſt. in uniform and homegenial bodies it is in the middle of a right line drawn between oppoſite angles, in a circle it is in the centre, in a triangle it is in a line drawn from an angle to the middle of the oppoſite ſide, one third of the length of that line from the ſide. From a knowledge non of the rolling cone, which ſeems to roll upwards between two inclined wires, as ſbenn in the lecture. Alſo for the cy linder which rolls up an inclined plane while the centre of gravity deſcends. From hence we alſo ſee the reaſou why ſome bodies ſtand moure firmly on their baſes than others; for while the perpendicular line which paſſes thro' this centre falls within the baſe of the body, it cannot fall, &c. If a number of bodies be connected together by a line, there will be a common centre of gravity among them, which, if ſupported they all remain at reſt. THER E are generally reckoned ſix mechanical powers, the LEVER which is the firſt, is of three ſorts; the firſt has the aveight at one end, the poaver at the other, and the fulcrum or prop between them. The ſecond ſort has the ſulcrum at one, the pover at the other, and the aveight between them, The third ſort has the fulcrum at one end, the aveight at the other, and the power between them. Ix order to obtain an equilibrium in the lever, the power muſt always be to the weight, as the diſtance of the weight is to the diſtance of the power from the fulcrum; for then the product oſ the power multiplied by its diſtance, will be equal to the product of the weight multiplied by its diſtance, from the fulcrum, which is always the caſe when they balance each other: For bodies of unequal magnitudes can only balance each other when their momentums are equal; and this can only happen when their velocities are reciprocally as their quantities of matter. The power of every kind oſ lever is computed by the ſame rules. 2. The W H EE L and AxIs. In this machine the power is applied to the circumference of the wheel, and the weight to the circumference of the axis; its force is computed by dividing the diameter or the wheel by the diameter of the axis. 3. Tbe  Let no æ the weight p æ the power d æ diſtance of the weight n æ diſtance of the power l from the fulerum Then as p: vo:: d: d e n, hence if any three of theſe be given the ſourth may be found, for we have dv dav pn pn n Eiſſlumu ccdim 2. The PULLEY. A SINGLE pulley if fixed, does not encreaſe the power: for it is evident the weight and power will paſs over equal ſpaces in the ſame time; but in a combination where one part is fixed and the other moveable, the power will be to the weight, as unity to the number of ropes which come to the Iower or moveable block: or however they be combined, the power will be to the weight, as the velocity of the weight to the velocity of the power. 4. The INCLINED PLANE. THE inclined plane makes an oblique angle with the horizon; the length of the plane is the diſtance, upon its ſurface, between the loweſt point and the higheſt: The altitude of the plane, is the perpendicular height from the horizontal line which touches its loweſt point: If a body be to be ſuſtained upon the inclined plane, the power will be to the weight, as the height to the length of the plane, or as the ſine of the angle of elevation to the radius. 5. The WEDOGE. THuHR power of the wedge is the ſame as the power of the inclined plane; for as the breadth oſ the head is to the length oſ botn ndes, ſo is the power to the reſiſtance. 6. The ScrEw. Tag force of the ſcrew is computed by comparing the velocity of the weight vith the velocity of the power; for ſuppoſe the diſtance of the threads be one inch, and the length of the lever to which the power is applied be 3 feet, then, in one revolution of the ſcrew the weight will riſe one inch, and the power will move thro' a ſpace of 226. 28 inches. From hence it appears that the power by ſuch a ſcrev would be increaſed above 200 times. ALL theſe computations would anſwer very exactly were there no friction, but a very conſiderable part of the force is deſtroyed by friction, ſo that in loaded machines, engines, &c. we may deduct in ſome  in others one 3, 2, or . part of the whole effect. AL L machines how ever complicated, are compoſed of the ſimple powers differently combined together, and the force or effect of the whole is uting the force of every ſeperate iplying the products together: As e common crane, ſuppoſe the length 18 inches and the diameter of the ten ſtone be applied to the handle, o at the circumference of the nut, as far from the centre: Let the great wheel be two feet, and the axis 4 inches, then by this, the creaſed 6 times, which multiplied give 54, ſo that if 10 ſtone be apudle, it will balance 10 times 54 or LE C T UR E VIII. Of Geography. H AT the earth is of a globular form, is evident, trom the ſhadow caſt upon the moon in a lunar eclipſe which is always terminated by a curve; by obſerving ſhips at ſea and by ſailing quite round it. Yet it has been found by meaſuring a degree of latitude at the equinoctial, polar circle, and ſeveral other parts, that the earth is not a perfect globe, but an oblate ſpheriod, heing a little ftatted at the poles; this alſo agrees with the theory of revolving bodies, for were the earth fluid, as it probably might in part, at the beginning, the parts under the equinoctial would be thrown further from the centre by the centrifugal force, which is there computed to be 755 part oſ gravity. That the earth is not a perfect globe is alſo proved by the vibrating of pendulums; for ĩt is found that a pendulum to vibrate ſeconds muſt be longer at the polar circles than at the equator: hence it is evident that the power of gravity is greater at the polar circles, and that they are therefore nearer the centre of the earth, for gravity increaſes as the ſquare of the diſtance decreaſes. HOWEVER the form of the earth is ſo near thal of a perfect globe, that the difference in any inſtroment that can be made by art, would be imperceptible, and therefore a globe has been choſen by geographers, as the fitteſt inſtrument upon whoſe ſurface to delineate or lay down and deſcribe, a; near as can be done, the form of the various continents, iſlands, ſeas, gulphs, rivers, &c. ſo the terreſtrial globe is an artificial repreſentation of the habitable world in which we live, but in order to lay down or mark upon its ſurface, the various parts of the earth and ſeas in their natural order, diſtance &c. has put men under the neceſſity of inventing various lines and circles, which are deſcribed upon the ſurface of the artificial globe; for it was abſolutely neceſſary to have ſome certain or fixed point to meaſure from, both to mark out the true places of the ſtars upon the celeſtial globe and to lay down the true form of the earth and ſeas on the terreſtrial globe. . THESE hich divide the globe into two equal parts are called great circles; theſe which divide it into unequal parts, leſſer circles. THE EQUATOR Or EQUINOCTIAL LINE, is a great circle which runs eaſt and weſt quite round the globe, being every where at an equal diſtance from the poles, or axis round which the globe turns. THE EcLIPTIC is that great circle in which the ſun always appears to move, it cuts the equinoctial in tvo oppoſite points called aries and libra, and makes an angle with it of 235 MERIDIANS are great circles which paſs thro the poles of the world, thro' the zenith and nadir, and cut the equinoctial line at right angles. THE HORIZON is a great circle which bounds the ſpectator's ſight in the heavens, and is every where equally diſtant from the place where he ſtands. On the artificial globe it is repreſented by a broad wooden circle. THE COLURES are two meridians one of which paſſes thro' the beginning of aries and libra, and is called the equinoctial colure; and the other thro' the beginning of cancer and capricornus, and is called the ſolſtitial colure. THE leſſer circles are the two iropics, and the two polar circles. The tropic of cancer is 235 ꝰ to the north, andthe tropic of capricorn 233 0 to the ſouth of the equinoctial, one bounds the ſun's declination on the north, and the other on the ſouth ſide thereof. THE northern polar circle, called the arctic circle is 664 V north of the equator, the ſouthern or antarcitc circle, is the ſame diſtance ſouth of the equator. THERE are two frigid zones, one is ſurrounded by the artic circle, and the other by the antarcic circle. There are alſo two temperate zones, one lies between the tropic of cancer and the arctic circle; the other between the tropic of capricorn and the antarctic circle. All that ſpace which lies between the two tropics is called the rorrid or burning zone. THE inhabitants of the torrid zone are called Amphiſcii, becauſe at noon they caſt their ſhadows different ways at different ſeaſons of the year. THuEer inhabitants of the temperate zones are called Heteroſcii, becauſe their ſhadows at noon always fall one way. THuHE inhabitants of the frigid æones are called Periſcii, becauſe in ſummer they caſt their ſhadows quite round them. THO SE Who live under the ſame meridian, but have as many degrees ſouth latitude as we have north, are called Antiſcii, they have the ſame hour, their days are always the length of our nights, and their ſummer is our winter. THuE Perici lie under the ſame parallel of latitude but differ 1800 in longitude, their days and nights are always the ſame length of ours, their ſeaſons are alſo the ſame, but they have the contrary hour or noon when we have midnight. Tun Antipodes, have as many degrees ſouth latitude as we have north, and alſo differ 1800 in longitude, and conſequently are directly under our feet, their day is always the length of our night, their ſummer is our winter, and they have noon when we have midnight. A CLIMATE is ſuch a ſpace on the globe, that in ſummer, the longeſt day on the north fide (iſ in north latitude) exceeds the longeſt day on the ſouth ſide, by the ſpace of half an hour. There are 24 climates on each ſide of the equator, between it and the polar circles; and ſix on each ſide between the polar circles and poles, where the length of the days on that ſide of the climate next the pole, exceeds the length on the other ſide by a whole month. THut globe is divided into three difſerent ſfhere. thoſe who live under the equinoctial have a righi sphere, and have the poles in the horivon. A parallel ſphere hath the equator in the horiæon and all the circles of latitude parallel thereto. An oblique ſphere hath one pole elevated above the horizon, and the other depreſſed below it. LATITUDE Of a place is its ſouth, from the equator. LONGITUDE is the diſtancel dians of any two places, and the equator. THE ZENITH, is that poi which is directly over our heads. THE NaDIR is that which oppoſite, or right under our feet. A CONTINENT is the largeſt comprehending various countr hingdoms not ſeperated by water. AN IsLAνD is a ſmall tract ſurrounded by water. APENINSULA is a part of la by water, except a narrow neck, IsT H MUS, by which it is joine A PRMONTORY is a mountainous part of land ſtanding far into the ſea. THE OCEAN is the largeſt collection of waters, it lies between and environs the continents. A SEA is a ſmaller part of the ocean which goes between the continents. A GULPH is a part of the ſea every where encompaſſed with land except one ſmall part called a STRAIT, which is that narrow paſſage by which it is joined to the adjacent ſea. A LAKE is a large quantity of ſtagnant water entirely ſurrounded with land. THE whole ſurface of the globe contains near 200 millions of ſquare miles; the inhabited part 39 millions, the ſea and unknown parts 161 millions; from whence it appears that there is more than 4 times as much water as land upon the ſurface of the globe. LECTUR E IX. Of Aſtronomy. RONOMY is that Science which diſcovers us the true motions, magnitude, diſtances, and other appearances of the heavenly bothe Solar Syſtem, which is compoſed of the rimary, and 10 ſecondary planets, beſides the ſun is placed in the centre, and the plalve round him from weſt to eaſt, at different and in different periods; as in the followDiurnal Revolutions. Diameter in Miles. Velocity per Hour in Miles H..] D. H. o Sl Periods. 224 17] 24 8 9,000] 80, 300 1 O ol 1 o ſ 7,970l 68,200 68 ] 2 95 S Æ 145 ſJ I1 321I 17 1 O6ã ] s, 150] 55, 000 ùſl 11 315 Ool o 1 ]l94,000] 29,000 29 167 olunknown]78, 000 THue ſpace in which the planets move ſeems to be void of all matter which can afford reſiſtance, for doubtleſs they continue to move with the ſame velocity which they had at the beginning, which according to the laws of nature, they could not do if they were reſiſted; for the planets are conſtantly acted upon or kept moving round the ſun by two powers; one is the centripetal force or attraction of the ſun, by this they are conſtantly acted upon and ãrawn towards the ſun's centre: The other is the centrifugal or projectile force by which they endeavour to fly off in tangents to their orbits. The projectile force which remains the ſame was communicated by the creator at the beginning, and as the attraction of the ſun at every planet is different, ſo is the centrifugal force, for it is neceſſary that they have a certain ratio to each other in order to keep the planets revolving in orbits nearly circular. Comets move round the ſun in orbits vaſtly excentric, and like the planets always deſcribe equal areas in equal times, for as they approach the ſun, their velocity i nereaſes inverſely with the ſquare of the diſtance. The diameter oſ the ſun is 893,760 miles, it turns round its own axis, which makes an angle of 8 degrees with the ecliptic, in ſomething leſs than 26 days. JUPITER has four moons whoſe orbits lie nearly in the plane of the ecliptic, they revolve round him from weſt to eaſt, the firſt at the diſtance of 5.6 ſemidiameters in 1 day 18 hours and 27 minutes; the ſecond at the diſtance of 9 ſemidiameters in 3 days 13 hours and 13 minutes; the third at the diſtance of 14.2 ſemidiameters in 7 days 3 hours and 49 minutes; the fourth at the diſtance of 25.3 ſemidiameters, in 16 days 16 hours and 32 minutes: This planet is alſo ſurrounded with cloudy dark ftreaks commonly called his belts, but what they are is at preſent unknown. SATURN is attended with five ſatellites or moons, the firſt at the diſtance of 2 ſemidiameters, revolves in 1 day, 21 hours, and 18 minutes; the ſecond, at the diſtance of 2.4 ſemidiameters, revolves in 2 days, 17 hours, and 41 minutes; the third, at the diſtance of 3.6 ſemidiameters, revolves in 4 days, 12 hours, and 25 minutes; the fourth, at the distance of 8 ſemidiameters, revolves in 15 days, 22 hours, and 41 minutes; the fifth at the diſtance of 23.3 ſemidiameters, in 70 days 22 hours, and 4 minutes: beſides theſe moons Satura is alſo incompaſſed with an amazing phænomenon called his ring, the diumeter of whicn is computed at 120,000 miles; this ring is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic, about 31 degrees, its nodes are in 19 degrees and 45 minutes of Virgo and Piſces; when Saturn is in thoſe ſigns the plane oſ the ring paſſes thro' the earth, it will therefore be inviſible, or appear like a ſtreight line upon the diſk of the planet, but when Saturn is in Gemini and Sagittarius, the ring will be moſt open, and in the beſt poſition to be viewed. THERE have been other two hypotheſis invented to account for the celeſtial appearances, called the Ptolomaic, and Tychonic ſyſtems; but in the lectures they are ſbeun by the planetarium, to be inſufficient to account for the phænomena, and therefore exploded; and the Copernican proved by unanſwerable arguments and demonſtrations, to be the true ſyſtem of the aovorldAs all the planets are retained in their orbits by the attraction of the ſun, ſo is the moon by the tually attract each other in preportion to their quantities of matter; by this power they are connected, and between them there is a common centre of gravity, * at the diſtance of 1218 miles from the earth's ſurtace, it is this centre that deſcribes the great orbit round the ſun, and not the earth itſelf, for both the earth and moon revolve round this centre once a month; hence it is evident that the earth will be near 1 1,000 miles nearer the ſun when the moon is full, than when ſhe is changing. As the attraction of the moon reaches to the earth, the waters on that ſide next the moon muſt be rendered lighter, and therefore ſtand at a greater diſtance from the centre, than on any other part oſ the globe; while on the oppoſite ſide the attraction of * The diſtance of this centre is found as follows, Let e the quantity of matter in the earth æ 45. m æ the qunatity of matter in the moon æ 1. a æ the diſtance between the earth and moon æ 240,000 x 2æ the diſtance between the centre of the earth and the centre of gravity, Then (per mechanics) we ſhall have ex æ ma  mx; and x -æ una viZ. if tbe quantity of matter in the moon, be c m multiplied by tbe diſtance betaveen the earthb and moon, and that product divided by the ſum of the quantities in the eartb and moon, the quotient ill be tbe diſtance from the eartb's centre æ of the moon muſt conſpire with the attraction of the earth and cauſe the waters to ſink loweſt, therefore were the waters aſfected by nothing but the moon, we ſhould have one flood and one ebb in 25 hours; but as the earth is conſtantly revolving round the centre of gravity, the waters receive a centrifugal force, which, on that ſide next the moon is to that on the oppoſite ſide as 1 to 73 which is the cauſe of two tides in 25 hours, for at the earth's centre, the centrifugal force and attraction juſt ballance each other; on that ſide next the moon the attraction is greater, but on the other ſide the centrifugal force is greater. THur attraction of the ſun partly diminiſhes the gravity of the waters, and therefore, at the full and change when it conſpires with the attraction of cthe moon the tides riſe higheſt. THE EARTH in one day turns round its own axis, and in one year is caried round the ſun, with its axis inclined to the plane in which it moves, making an angle therewith of 663 degrees, and always retaining their paralleliſm, by which means the poles are alternately turned towards the ſun. When the earth is in libra the ſun appears in the equator, and the circle oſ illumination paſſes thro the poles of the world, the days and nights are now of an equal length on every part of the globe. Bnt while the earth moves from libra to capricornus, the north pole will conſtantly turn towards the sun and the ſouth pole from it, during which ſpace the days in northern latitude are conſtantly increaſing and the nights decreaſing: When the earth comes to the beginning of capricornus we have the longeſt day and ſhorteſt night, and the ſun appears in the oppoſite ſign cancer; at this time the whole northern frigid zone is illuminated, and the ſouthern obſcured in darkneſs; the circle which divides between the light and dark hemiſphere, juſt touches the polar circles, ſo that at every place, except the equinox and poles, the days and nights are of unequal lengths. After the earth has paſſed the beginning of capricornus, the north pole begins to turn from the ſun, and the ſouth pole towards it. The days in northem latitude, again begin to ſhorten, and in ſouthern latitude to lengthen; when the earth comes to the beginning of aries the poles are equally diſtant from the fun, the circle of illumination again divides all the parallels into equal parts, and the days and nights are every where ofſ an equal length. As the earth moves forward from aries to cancer the days, in northern latitudes, will continue to ſhorten, and in ſouthern latitudes to lengthen, When the ſun appears in the beginning of capricornus, which happens when the earth arrives at the beginning of cancer, the days in northern latitudes are of the leaſt length, and the nights of the greateſt, at which time we have the middle of winter, the whole northern frigid zone is now obſcured in darkneſs, and the ſouthern frigid zone all illuminated. When the earth has paſſed this point, the north pole will gradually turn towards the ſun, and the ſouth pole from it, the days conſtantly increaſe and nights contract, while the earth moves thro' that halſ of the ecliptic. When the earth comes to the firſt point of aries, it has made one revolution round the ſun, the days and nights, as at firſt, are now equal all over the earth; whence the cauſe of the different ſeaſons, and different lengths of days and nights is evident. Explained by the Orrery. Tue 12 ſigns of the Ecliptic are Northern Signs. Southern Signs. Aries, Libra, Taurus, Scorpio, Gemini, Sagittarius, Cancer, Capricoruus, Leo, Aquarius, Virgo, Piſces. THuE orbit of the moon makes an angle oſ 5 degrees and 20 minutes with the plane of the ecliptic, and interſects it in tvo oppoſite points called nodes, one of which is called the dragon'shead, and the other the dragon's-tail, when the moon is in theſe points or nodes ſhe has no latitude, but when ſhe is in any other part of her orbit ſhe is ſaid to have north or ſouth latitude according as ſhe is north or ſouth of the ecliptic; in the orrery the moon is carried round by a ſyderial plate, on which are engraved the ſigns of the ecliptic; on another plate is alſo engraved her age, the diſtance from her nodes and latitude; by which when the orrery is rectified, her age, place in the ecliptic, diſtance from her nodes and latitude, are, for any day pointed out. The nodes of the moon do not remain fixed in the ſame part of the ecliptic, but have a retrograde motion and make one revolution in 184 years; this motion of the nodes is the cauſe of various phænomena; it is owing to this, that the moon, once in 19 years, goes further both north and ſouth than at any other time, and that the eclipſes always happen at different ſeaſons of the year, &c. THE moon, like all the planets in the ſyſtem, is an opake or dark body, and ſhines upon the earth by reflection from the ſun, therefore, as the moon is conſtantly moving round the earth, it is evident that, when ſhe is between the earth and ſun, her dark ſide will be turned towards the earth, and ſhe will be inviſible; as ſhe moves from conjunction her illuminated ſide will gradually turn towards the earth, 'till ſhe be oppoſite to the ſun, when ſhe will appear full; after which time ſhe will again conſtantly decreaſe, 'till the conjunction or change, as is evident by the orrery. WhaiILE the moon makes one revolution round the earth, ſhe alſo turns once round her axis, and of conſequence ſtill keeps the ſame ſide towards the earth, ſo that a ſpectator in the moon would always ſee the earth, which is a moon, to the moon, in the ſame part of the heavens, and it would appear, when full, about 13 times larger in ſurface than the full moon appears to us. As the moon only turns once round her axis in a lunation, one luner dauy and night will be the length of 295 of ours. The moon in the ſpace of 275 days moves thro' all the ſigns of the ecliptic or quite round the earth; this is called the ſyderial day, the reaſon that ſhe is not again in conjunction with the ſun is owing to the earth's progreſſive motion in its orbit, by which the ſun appears to have moved thro' near a whole ſign to the eaſt, ſo that the moon will yet require about 25 days to come up with the ſun, which ſpace of time is called the difference between her periodical and ſynodical revolutions, or beta een her ſolar and ſyderial day. ſ Ti E moon ſome days before and aſter the change appears cuſped, and the poſition of theſe cuſps at different times of the year is very different; but always the ſame at the ſame ſeaſon, as is ſpexun by the globe. THE different angles which different parts of the ecliptic make with the horizon, when riſing, is the cauſe of that phænemenon we call the harveſt moon; virgo and libra make the greateſt angle; piſces and aries the leaſt, ſo that in a given time, a greater length of the ecliptic riſes in theſe ſigns than in any other, and did the moon move in the ecliptic ſhe would riſe about 26 minutes later every night for 6 nights together; but as the orbit of the moon does not lie in the plane of the ecliptic, ſhe will ſometimes riſe with leſs difference oſ time, and ſometimes with more. For when her north node is in aries and her ſouth node in libra, her orbit will make the leaſt angle with the horizon, at the riſing of aries, that can be; in this latitude it will not be more than 75 degrees, and ſhe will riſe for 6 nights within 1 hour and 35 minutes of the ſame time, or ſhe will be about 2 of an hour later of riſing every night; but ſhe will diſſer 1 hour and 2 every morning in her ſetting. WHE the ſouth node is in aries, and the north node in libra, the harveſt moon will be leaſt advantageous, ſhe will differ near twice as much in her riſing, as ſhe did in the laſt poſition of her nodes; the reaſon whereof appears plain by the orrery. TH E moon riſes with the ſame difference of time once in every lunation, as ſhe does in harveſt, but then, as this does not happen at the full moon, at any other time of the year it is not much noticed. The north node will not be in the beginning of aries before the year 1783, when we ſhall have the harveſt moons to the greateſt advantage, as alſo for two years before and after. Ar the equinoctial they have no harveſt moon, for nearly an equal quantity of the ecliptic always riſes in the ſame time; but as the latitude increaſes the angle which the ecliptic makes with the horizon at the beginning of aries gradually decreaſes 'till we come to the polar circle, where there is no eaſtern angle, and of conſequence one half of the ecliptic riſes at the ſame time, in this latitude the moon does not differ more than 1 hour in her riſing for 15 days but is 23 honrs later in her ſetting. Anx eclipſe of the ſun is cauſed by the moon coming between the ſun and the earth, and is either total or partial; in like manner, an eclipſe of the moon is cauſed by the earth intervening, or coming between the moon and ſun; ſo that the moon looſes her light in paſſing thro' the earth's ſhadow. If the orbit of the moon were in the ſame plane with the orbit of the earth, there would be an eclipſe of the ſun at every new moon, and an eclipſe of the moon at every full; but this is prevented by the latitude of the moon, except ſhe be within 12 degrees 2 minutes and 9 ſeccnds of the node at the time of the full, or within 18 degrees and 20 minutes at the time of the change, which diſtances are called the limits. The nodes, which almoſt retain their paralleliſm, only come in a line with the ſun twice in a year, and therefore there can only be two ecliptic ſeaſons in one year; the limits are not always the ſame, owing to the different diſtances of the ſun and moon from the earth, at different times; when the ſolar limit is leaſt the ſun will paſs over it in 28 days, and when greateſt in 32 days, in which time the moon may come twice in conjunction with the ſun, and ſo cauſe two ſmall eclipſes; however in every ſolar limit there is one eclipſe very certain. When the lunar limit limit is leaſt the earth's ſhadow will paſs over it in 19 days, and when greateſt in about 24 days, ſo that the moon cannot be eclipſed more than once, but may, and oſten does paſs the limit without ſuffering an eclipſe. ThH r earth has a third motion, whereby the pole of the world is conſtantly moving round the pole of the ecliptic, by this motion the equinoxes fall s0 ſeconds ſooner every year, than the year before, and the fixed ſtars, by it, appear to move 1 degree eaſtward in 72 years; ſince obſervations have been made upon the ſtars, they have moved thro almoſt a whole ſign, for the conſtalation which was once in aries, is now in taurus; and the conſtalation of taurus is now in gemini; by this motion the ſeaſons are conſtantly moving backward or in antecedentia, and would make one revolution in 25,920 years; were the world to continue 12, 96o years, the longeſt day would fall on the 23d of December, and the ſhorteſt or mid- winter in June. ALL the ſtars which are viſible in the heavens, except five planets, are called, fixed ſtars, and are ſixed in the ſame part of abſolute ſpace; the moH tions which they ſeem to have are cauſed by the motion of the earth; for it is evident, if the earth turn round its axis in 24 hours from weſt to eaſt, that they muſt appear to move from eaſt to weſt. The fixed ſtars are at immenſe diſtances from the earth or ſun; were a body to fly from the ſun with a velocity of 8 miles per minute, which is about as fwift as a cannon ball, it would arrive at the orbit of mercury in 83 years; at venus in 165 years; at the earth in 2243 years; at mars in 343 years; at jupiter in 1173 years, at ſaturn in 2153 years; but it is ſuppoſed it would not reach the neareſt of the fixed ſtars in leſs than 700, oοO years; however, their diſtance is utterly unknown, being immeaſurable and unconcievable. It is ſuppoſed that the different degrees of brightneſs or ſplendor which we obſerve amongſt the ſtars is owing their different diſtances from us, and not to any difference in their magnitude; for it is moſt likely that they are equally diſtant from each other, as they are from the ſun. The ſixed ſtars ſhine by their own native or unborrowed light, and are innumerable, for by a teleſcope thouſands may be ſeen which are inviſible to the naked eye; we cannot therefore ſuppoſe that theſe unſeen ſtars were placed in the heavens in order to ſupply the inhabitants of the earth with a faint light in the night, for which purpoſe ſome think the reſt of the ſtars were made, neither can we ſuppoſe that they were made to declare to the earth the greatneſs and power of the creator, becauſe very few of the race of mankind have ſeen them or heard of their exiſtance; neithe can we think that the almighty has ereated any thing in vain; but we may reaſonably conclude that chey are ſuns or fountains of light, illuminaring ſyſtems of planets whoſe motions are controuled by their attractive power, and that the ſtars which are invifible to the inhabitants of the earth proclaim the glory and wiſdom of the deity to other intelligent beings dwelling in worlds placed far beyond the utmoſt bounds of our ſight. Tnis hypotheſis diſplays the greatneſs and dominion of the divine being; this confines not the creation within the narrow bounds of the ſphere of fixed ſtars, but ſuppoſes it extended thro the iegions oſ unmeaſurable ſpace. TnIs wide machine the univerſe regard, With how much ſrill is each apartment rear'd? The Sun a globe of ſire, a glowing maſs, Hotter than melting flint or fluid glaſs. Of this our ſyſtem holds the middle place, MERCURY the neareſt to the central ſun, Does in an oval orbit circling run; But rarely is the object of our ſight, In ſolar glory ſunk and more prevailing li VENUs the next vhoſe lovely beams adorn As well the dewy eve as opening morm, Does her fair orb in beauteous order turn. The GLOBE TERRESTRIAL next with poles And all its pond'rous load unweared rolls. MaARS next in order, further from the ſun Does in a more extenſive orbit run. Then we behold bright planetary Jovr Sublime in ſpace, thro' his wide provinc Four ſecond planets his dominion own, And round him tum, as rænd the earth th SATURN, revolving in the higheſt iphere, Is by five moons attended thro' his year. The vaſt dimenſion of his path is found, Five thouſand million Engliſh miles aroun YET is this mighty ſyſtem, which conta But one of thouſands, which compoſe the wl Perhaps as glorious, and of worlds as full. The ſtars which grace the high expanſion, By theirown beams and un precarious light, Tho ſome near neighbours ſeem, and ſome United luſtre in the milky way, At a vaſt diſtance from each other lie, Sever'd by ſpacious voids of liquid ſcy. All theſe illuſtrious worlds and many more, Which by the tube aſtronomers explore; And millions which the glaſs can ne'er deſi Loſt in the wilds of vaſt immenſity, Are ſuns, are centres, whoſe ſuperior ſway Planets of various magnitudes obey. Ir we with one clear comprehenſive ſight Saw all theſe ſyſtems all theſe orbs of light; If. we their order and dependence knew, Had all their motions and their ends in view With all the comets which in ether ſtray, Yet conſtant to their time and to their way, Would not this view convincing marks imp Of perfect wiſdom and ſtupendious art. An EXPL ANAI Of Technical Words, Terms, foregoing L E C T U A. CID, ſour, ſharp. Accumulate, to heap up, to gather Adbeſion, a cleaving, or ſticking to. Alctaly, a fixed ſalt, or ſubſtance that w acid. Ambient, encompaſſing, Analogy, ratio, proportion, Apperture, an opening, hole, &c, Apbelion, that point in a planet's orbit the ſun. Apparatus, inſtruments ſor performing Atmoſphere, the air. C. Capillary tube, a tube with a bore as ſm Central, of or belonging to a centre. Circumambient, ſurrounding on all ſide Coheſion, ſticking together. Compreſs, to preſs together. Concave, hollow. Concentric, that have the ſame centre. Condenſe, to macke thick or cloſe. Contact, touching each other. Convex, round, protuberent, like the ſur Convergent, tending to, or meeting in ono Counterpoiſe, to balance. Cuſps, the horns of the moon &c. D. Deſcent, a going down. Dichotomiſed, diſſected, divided into two Diſt, the viſible furface of a planet &c. Diurnal, daily, belonging to the day. Divergent, ſureading or ſeperating. E. Ebulliticn, boiling, &c. Eclipſe, a deprivation of light. Efferveſcence, waxing or growiug hot. Eſluviæ, the very ſmall particles emitted Elaſtic, ſpringy. Ellipſis, an imperfect circle, an oval like Emerſion, a riſing out, or appearing agail Epitome, an abſtract or ſhortening. Epocha, or Æra, a fixed point of time ſucceding years are numbered. Equilibrium, an even balance. Evaporate, to exhale, or reſolve into vap Excentric, that hath different centres. Exhauſt, to draw out, or empty. Expanſion, ſwelling, or increaſing in bulk. Exploſion, a noiſe or report. FπFibre, ſmall threads or ſilaments, Flaccid, looſe, not tight. Focus, that point where all the rays of upon a concave mirrour, or lenſe, a G. Gibbous, round, convex, or bunched o H. Halo, a circle appearing round the moc Hemiſpbere, half of a globe or ſphere. Heterogeneal, oſ different kinds, or ſorts. Homogeneal, oſ the ſame ſort. Horizontal, level, parallel to the horiæon Hypotbeſis, a ſuppoſſition &c. I. Imbibe, to abſorb, or drink in. Immerge, to immerſe, or plunge in wate Immenſe, infinite. Impetus, a blow, or impulſe. Incidence, a falling upon. Inſulated, ſupported by an electric ſubſt Interſtices, a diſtance or ſpace between. Irradiate, to ſhine upon, or enlighten. L. Lateral, of or belonging to the ſide. Lenſe, a glaſs ground convex. Longitudinal, lengthways. M. Medium, that peculiar conſtitution ofſ Mephetic, noxious. Momentum, the whole forcc with wh ſtrixes againſt another in its way. N. Nocturnal, of or belonging to the night. Noxious, poiſonous, deſtructive. Nubilous, cloudy, gloomy. Nucicous, the head oi a comet, &c. O. Oleaginous, oily, er full of oil. Opaque, dark, ſhady. Orbit, the path of a planet or comet. Orifice, a hole, apperture, or mouth. P. Particles, the ſmalleſt part; of matter. Percuſſion, a ſtriking. Peribelion, is that point in a planet s o to the ſun. Perforate, to bore, or pierce thro'. Phaſes, the different appearances of thi Phænomenon, ſigniſies an appearance, ei a natural body Preponderate, to outweigh. Projectile, a body thrown or projected R. Raio, reaſon, proportion. Rarefy, to make thin. Recipient, a glaſs rei er for the air ru Refraction, turning aſide, or out of a Refrangible, capable of being refracte Reſerwoir, a place for water. Retrogradation, a going backward. S. Saturated, filled. Sluice, a flood gate, a drain. Subterraneous, under ground. Syxzygia, the conjunction and oppol the ſun. 7 . Tangent, a ſtraight line juſt touching a circle. Tenſion, a bending or ſtretching. Tranſit, a paſſing over, or croſſing. V. Valve, a kind of lid or cover, lettir but not the other. Velocity, celerity ſwiſtneſs. Vertex, the top of any thing. lii u. Univerſe, the aſſemblage of heaven 