j The PRINCIPLES of Natural Philoſophy EXPLAIND and ILLUSTRATED by EXPERIMENT In a COURS E of SIXTEEN LECTURES To be perform'd at Ir. PULLERS ACAD EI In Lothbury, near the Royal-Exchange. By J. ROBERTSON, F R. S. mSs M.DCCXLV. This COURSE uwill conſiſt of Five Parts. I. MEcianiIes; wherein will be explain'd the Laws of Motion; the Nature and Uſes of the Mechanical Organs (or Powers.) The Operations of ſeveral Engines; the Quantity of Friction; the Doctrine of Projectiles, of Pendulums, of Central Forces, &c. IH. HVDROSTATICS; Or the Nature and Properties of Fluids explained: And alſo the Conſtruction of ſome of the Engines which are applied to the Uſes deduc'd from this Science. III. PNEUMATICS; in which will be ſhewn the Properties of the Air by a great Variety oſ Experiments. . IV. OPTIOCS; in this Part, the Nature and Properties of Light, Viſion, Optic Glaſſes and Optical Inſtruments will be fully illuſtrated. V. ASTRONOMY; where the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies will be explain'd, by the Planetary and other Inſtruments. The Charge of attending the Lectures of this Courſe will be Two Guineus; to be paid either at he Time of Subſcribing, or on the meeting at he firſt Lecture. Any Gentleman who ſubſcribes to this Courſe, nay attend any future Courſe for one Guinea. This Courſe will begin on cc æ the v Day oPr  Heads of the PriνnCIPLES treated of, AND EXPERIMENTS, Which will be made Uſe of in this CO U R S E. M E C H A N I C S. LECTUR E I. OF Philoſophy, and the Methods of Philoſophizing. Of Matter, its Extenſion, Diviſibility, and other Attributes. Of a Vacuum; this proved by Experiment. Of the Univerſal Law of Gravitation. Of Attraction by Coheſion, explain'd i various Experiments, ſuch as the Aſcent of Liquors in Glaſs Tubes, between Glaſs Planes, &c. Of Magnetical Attraction and Repulſion, illuſtrated by Experiments. Of Electrical Attraction and Repulſion, with ſeveral Experiments thereon. Of Place, Time, and Motion. ir Iſaac Newtons Three Laws of Motion explain'd. LECT UR E II. OF the Effects of Gravity. . Oſ the Direction and Quantity of Motion in Bodies. Oſ the Centers of Gravity, and of Motion. Expetiment to ſhew how the Center of Gravity in any Body may bę found, and how to distinguiſh it from the Center of Modon. llllllll Experiment ſhew ng how a Body may appear to aſcend, during the Time it actually deſcends. Experiments fhewing how to ſuſtain a Body, which of itſelſ would fall, by adding thereto one or more Bodies. General Rules for finding the Center of Gravity. Of the Compoſition of Forces. Experiments thereon. Ofſ the Congreſs of Bodies. Experiments of the ſtriking of non-elaſtic Bodies. Experiments on Efaſtic Bodies. . lll How to compute the Momentum of Bodies aſter theis ſtricing each other. Of Oblique Percuſſion, and how to find the Path whict Bodies will take after their ShockQ RRQ. v L ECT UR E III. F Simple Machines and Mechanĩcal Organs. Of the Bulance, its Uſe and Application. OF the Roman, Daniſh, and Chineſe Stillyurds. OFſ the falſe Balance, and how the Deceit may be de tected. Of Levers, and their ſeveral kinds. Of the Combination of Levers. Oſ Pulleys and Rollers, ſingle and combined. A curious Experiment to ſhew the Loſs oP Weight, wh Bodies hanging over a Pulley are in Motion. OFf the Wheel and Axle. Of the Axle and Compound Wheels. OFf the Inclined Plane. Experiments thereon; and how to find the Loſs of Weigh Of the Wedge. Of the Screw. ; Of the ſeveral Inſtruments in common Uſe, that are im mediately derived from the Mechanical Organs. xè & & ù eùhn a& & . &&ſtss sù ctiaq ſù ſſ & sostecish æù LECT UR E IV. A Grorn Engine, in which are applied all the Simple Machines. Of Friction and Experiments thereon. How to compute the Friction on any Axis. The good and bad Qualities f Wheel-Carriages explain'd. Conment to ſhew the Advantages of great and ſmall heels according to the different Cifcumſtances in Coaches, Carts, &c. . Experiments on Friction Wheels. The Advantantages of Wheel- Carriages, when improv'd by Friction Wheels. How to compute the Friction of Ropes, running over Rollers and Pulleys. Of the Strength of Men and Horſes. Of the Deſcent of Bodies. Experiments to determine the Force of deſcending Bodies. That Bodies will aſcend to the ſame Height from whence chey fall, by the Force which they acquire in falling, when all Obſtacles are remov'd. That the Velocities of deſcending Bodies, are as the Times of Deſcent. That the Spaces run thro' by deſcending Bodies, are as the Squares of the Times of Deſcent. LECTUR E V. F the Motion of Projectiles. ) How a Body will move, when it's projectile F either yields to, or overcomes, or exactly ballances of Gravity. f the Aſcent and Deſcent of heavy Bodies upon Surface, inclin'd to the Plane of the Horizon. ſ the Theory of Pendulums. cperiments concerning Pendulums. ſ the Centers of Oſcillation and Percuſſion. ſ the Cycloid, and of Bodies moving in that Curve he Length, and conſequently the Motion of Pendulu alterd by Heat and Cold. he Pyrometer, being a curious Macl. ne for ſhewing Expantion of Metals, or any other Bodies by Heat. f Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces. any of the curious Propoſitions of Sir Iſaac Newton, Cenurral Forces, proved by Experiments; particul that famous Propoſition, that the Planets revolve ro the Sun in ſuch a Mamner, as that the Squares of Periodic Times are as the Cubes of the Distances. L ECT UR E VI. Oncerning Fluids and Fluidity in general. Of the Incompreſſibility of Water. Of the Equilibrium of Fluids. Of what Uſe it is to conſider Fluids divided into Parts, ty imaginary Surfaces, or by perpendicular Columns. That Fluids preſs in all manner of Directions at the ſame ime. That Fluids of different kinds gravitate on each other. How the heavieſt Bodies may be made to ſwim in Water ; and light ones depreſs'd therein. The Hydroſtatical Paradox explain'd. Experiment, ſhewing that a Pint A Water may be made to preſs with as much Force as ſeveral Gallons; and that a Man may raiſe a very great Weight by the Force of his Lungs. . LECTUR E VII F Syphons, their Nature and manner of Working, explain'd by ſeveral Experiments. The Flowing and Ebbing of Inland Ponds accounted for. The famous Propoſition of Arehimedes, concerning King Hiero's Crown explain'd. Of the Hydroſtatical Ballance. How to find the Specific Gravity oſf any Body Experiment: Experiments concerning the Specific Gravity of Gold, Silver and orher Bodies; and to ſhew that ſuch Bodies weigh'd in Water, looſe juſt ſo much of their Weight, as is equal to the Weight of the Fluid diſplaced by the ,y. LECTUR E VIII. O F Fountains and Spouting- Water. Experiments to ſhew to what Height, and why Water will riſe in Fountains and oblique Jets. How to find, to what Horizontal Diſtance Water will ſpout from the Side of an upright Veſſel or Reſervoir. The Quantity of Water, ſpouting from equal Holes at any given Depth below the Surface computed, and ſheun to be as the Square Roots of thoſe Depths. Several Articles relating to the making of Jets, and the Conveyance of Water thro' Pipes conſider'd and cornputed. The Preſſure of Water on Banks, Gates, and Sluices computed. The Theory and Practice of Pumps explain'd by curious Models in G laſs. A Model of an Engine for extinguiſhing of Fires ſhewn and explain'd. Of PNEUMATICS. LECTU R E IX. O F the Nature of Air in general. Of ſuch Properties of Air, as are common to other Fluids. Of the Properties peculiar to Air. Of Che Rarefaction and Condenſation of Air by Heat and To determine the Specific Gravity of Air, relative to Water. Experiments to prove the Elaſticity and Preſſure of Air. That the Denſity and Spring of the Air, is exactly proportional to the compreſſing Force. That the Preſſure of Air decreaſes according to the Diſtance from the Surface of the Earth. Syringes and Cupping-Glaſſes deſcrib'd. rtificial Lungs. Of the Barometer and its Conſtruction; and alſo, of tht riſing and falling of the Quickſlver ctherein, accounted for. Of the Thermometer and its Conſtruction. SRùRßſãsαſ oμss αùss LECT UR E XF the Air-Pump, and its manner of wocking ex plain'd. The Weight or Preſſure and Spring of the Air directi prov'd by many Experiments, ſome of which are; By breaking of Glaſs-Phials. By the Senſe of Feeling. By ſome Phænomena of Bladders, Glaſi- Bubbles, &c. ( 12 Quickſilver rais'd to the uſual Height in the Barometer, b the bare Spring of a little inclosd Air. Barometers and Fountains in Vacuo. Of the Ebulition of Liquors in Vacuo. The ſamous Experiment of Otto Guerrict's Hemiſpheres. Experiments made with a condenſing Engine. An Experiment, ſhewing that Denſe Air, acts on com mon Air, as common Air does on a Vacuum. That Fire and Flame are fed by Air. The Effects of condenſed and burnt Air on the Lives o Animals. . L ECTUR E XI. F Sound, and the manner of its Propagation. An Experiment ſhewing that Air is the Vehicle by which Sound is convey'd. That Sound is encreas'd or diminiſh'd, according as the Air is rarified or condens'd, prov'd by Experiment. The Diving-Bell, with all Dr. Halley's, and Mr. Triewald's Improveinents. The riſing and falling of Glaſs Bubbles and Images accounted for. How to find what Weight of Air preſſes on our Bodies at any Time: And alſo the Weight of Air on the whole Earth. Of Winds in general. Dr. Hulley's Hiſtorical Account of the Trade Winds and Monſoons; with an Attempt towards explaining their Phyſical Cauſes. Of Vapours, Clouds and Rain. Of the Force of rarified Vapours in raiſing Water by Fire. The Explanation of an Engine for raiſing Water by Fire. O P T IC S. LECTUR E XiI. F Heat, Fire and Flame. Sir Iſuac Newton's Account thercoſ. Of Viſion in general. Concerning the Nature and Motion of Light. Of Dioptrics, the Laws on which it is founded explai by Experiments. Experiments ſhewing the Ratio of the Sines of the An of Incidence and Refraction, in different Mediums. Experiments to ſhew the Nature of Convex and Conc Glaſſes, or Lenſes, and the manner of the Rays Light paſſing thro' them and uniting in their Focus's How to find the Focus of any Lens. Of Catoptrics; the Law on which it is founded prov'd Experiment. Of Plane Mirrours and the Plane of Inflection. Of the ſeveral Images caus'd by two Looking-Glaſſes. Of Convex, Concave, and Cylindrical Mirrours. How to find the Focus and magnifying Power of a Sph cal Mirrour. . Of the Power of Burning by Optic Glaſſes and Spe lums. LECTUR E XIII. F the Eye, its Coats and Humours explain'd. O The Nature of Viſion ſhewn by an Artificial Eve. The Diſection of a real Eye, and che Faults of Viſion n. Enperiments to ſhew how Defects in Eyes may be helped. Of the Magnitude and Degree of Brightneſs oſ Objects. Of the Proportion of Day-light to Moon-light. Of the Limits of diſtinct Viſion. Of the magnifying Power of a ſingle Lens. The Conſtruction of the Camera Obſcura and Magic Lanthorn. L ECTU RE XIV. F the Combinations of Optic Glaſſes. The manner of conftructing the different Sorts oſ refracting Teleſcopes. Of the double Microſcope, and the manner of uſing iſ explain'd. OF the Nature and Conſtruction of reſlecting Teleſcopes. Of the Colours of which the Particles of Light are comoſed. Th Colours of Natural Bodies. Experiments to ſhew, that the Colours of natural Bodies depend on the Texture of their component Parts. An Explanation of the Phænomenon of the Rainbow. How Dioptrical Inſtruments are affected by the different Refrangibility of the Rays of Light. ASTRONOMY AST RON OM V. LECTURE XV. OF the Syſtem of the World, the Order and Period: of, the Primary Planets about the Sun, and of the Secondary Planets round their Primary Ones. Concerning the Diſtance of the fixed Stars. Precautions concerning apparent Motion and Place. The Annual and Diurnal Motion of the Earth, and the Phænomena thence ariſing. Of the Phænomena of the Inferior and Superior Planets. RURũE πeſù ã π π  πũ LECTUR E XUVI. F the Motions of the Moon, and the Nature oſ CEcilipſes explain'd. Of the Satellites of Jupiter and Saturn; and of Satumt Rin Of the Geographical Latitule and Longitude ol Places. Of the Crepuſculum or Twylight. OFf the Refraction of the Stars. Of the Figure of the Planets. The Preceſſion of the Equinoctial Points accounted for. The real Motion of the Sun explain'd. The ſeveral Methods made Uſc oſ to meaſure the Diameter of the Earth. Of the Rarallaxes and abſolute Diſtances of the Heavenly Bodies. Of Comets. Of Tides. F I N I S. - b Digitãed t Google ERVATION SERVICE FMARK l]l l&æσ BOOK HAS BEEN OPFILMED (π]u φ. 