OF MECHANICS; Explaining and Demonſtrating The General LAWS of MOTION, TH E LAWS or GRAVITY, Motion of DESCE NDING BODIES. PENDULUMS, PROJECTILES, CENTERS OfGR AVITY, &C. MECHANIC POWERS, STRENGTH and STRESS of TIMBER, HvYDROS TATICS, and CoNsTRUCTION Of MACHINES. Maltaque per Trochleas, & Tympana pondere magno Commovet, atque levi ſuſtollit Machina niſu. LucrET. Lib. IV. L O V D O N/ Printed for W. INNYS and J. RICH ARDSON, in Pater-noſter Kow. 0v 3 21 HE aort of MECHANICS being the firſt that men had occaſion to make uſe of, it is reaſcnable to ſuppoſe that it took its beginning with man; and was ſtudied in the earlieſt ages oſ the world. For no ſooner did mantind begin to people the earth, than they wanted houſes to dwell in, cloaths to wear, and utenſils to till the ground, to get them bread ; with other neceſſaries of life; and being thus deſtitute of proper habitations, and other conveniencies of life; their wants muſt immediately put them upon the ſtudy of Mechanics. At their firſt ſetting out, they would be content with very litile theory, endeavouring to get that more by experience than reaſoning, and being unaequainted with numbers or any ſort of calculation; and having neither rule nor compaſs to work by, nor inſtruments to work with, but ſuch as they muſt invent firſt of all, nor any methods of working: Witb all theſe diſadvantages, we may judge what ſort of work they were likely to make. All their contrivances muſt be mere gueſſing, and they could but ill execute what they had ſo haaly contrived; and muſt be continually mending their work by repeated trials, till theygot it to ſuch a form as to make a ſhifi to ſerve for the uſe deſigned. And this is the firſi and loeſt ſtate of Mechanics, which was enough to give a heginning to it; and in this ſtate it doubtleſs remained for a long time, without much improvement. But at length as men found more leiſure and opportunity, ond gained mere experience, manual arts began to take their riſe, and by degrees to make ſome progreſs in the world. But we meet with no conſiderable inventions in the mechanical way, ſor a long ſeries of aves; or if there had been any, the accounts of them are now loſt through the length of time ; for we have nothing upon record for 2 or 3 thouſand years forard. But afterwards we find an accunt of ſeveral machines that were in uſee For we read in Geneſis that ſips were as old even on the Mediterranean as the doys of Jacob. We likewiſe read that the Philiſtines brought 30 thouſand chariots into the field againſt Saul; ſo that chariols were in uſe 1070 years before Chriſt. Aud about the ſame time architeflure was brou7ht into Europe. And 1030 years before Chriſt Ammon built long anud tall ſips with ſails, on the Red ſea and the Mediterranean. And about 90 years afſter, the ſbip Argo was built; which was the firſt Greet veſſel that ventured to paſs through the ſea, by help of ſails, wi:heut ſight of land, being guided only by the ſtars. Dædalus alſo who lived 980 years before Chriſt, made ſails for ſtips, and invented ſeveral ſorts of tools for carpenters and joiners to work with. He alſo made ſcveral moving ſtatues, which cculd walk or run of iheniſclves. And about 800 years before Chriſt; e find in 2 CLron. 15. that Uzziah made in, Jeruſalem, engines invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to ſoool arrows and great ſtones withal. Cornmills were early invented, ſor we read in Deuteronomy, tha it was not lawful ſor any man to tate the nether or the upper millſione io pledge; yet water was not applied to mills bifore the year of Chriſi 600, nor windmills uſed bifore the year 1200. Likewiſe 580 years before Chriſt, we read in Jeremiab 18, of the potter's wheel. Architas was the firſt that applied mothematics to mechanics, but leſt no mechanical writings behind bim. He made a wooden pigeon that could fsly about. Archimedes mb lived about 200 years before Chriſt, was a moſt ſubtle geometer and mechanic. He made engines that drew up the ſbips of Marcellus at the ſiege of Syracuſe; and others that would caſt a ſtone of a prodigious weight to a great diſtance, or elſe ſeveral leſſer ſtones, as alſo darts and arrows; but there have been many fabulous reports concerning theſe engines. He alſo made a ſphere which ſoewed the motions of the ſun, moon, and planets. And Poſidonius aſterwards made another which ſewed the ſame thing. In theſe days the liberal arts flouriſbed, and learning mt with proper encouragement, but aſterwords they became negletied for a long time. Ariſtotle, who lived about 290 years before Chriſt, was one of the firſt that writ any methodical diſcourſe of Mechanics. But at this time the art was contained in a very litile compaſs, there.being ſcarce any thing more known about it, than the 6 mechanical powers. In this ſtate it coniinued till the 161h century, and then clockwork was invented, and abont 1650 were the firſt clocks made. At ihis time ſeveral of the moſt eminent mathematicians began to confider Mechanics. And by their ſtudy and induſtry, have prodigiouſly enlarged its bounds, and made it a moſt comprebenſive ſcience. It extends through heaven and earth; ithe whole univerſe, and every part of it is its ſubject. Not one particle of matter but what comes under its laws. For what elſe is there in the viſible world but matter and motion; and the properlies and affections of both theſe are the ſubject of Mechanics. ſo the art of Mechanics is owing all ſorts of inſtrumenis to work with, all engines of war, ſbips, bridges, mills, turious roofs and arches, ſtately theaters, columns, pendent galleries, and all other grand works in building. Alſo clocks, watches, jacks, chariots, carts and carriages, and even the wheelbarrow. Architecture, novigation, huſbandry, and military affairs owe their invention and uſe to this art. And whatever hatb aortificial motion by air, water, wind or cords; as all manner of muA3 ſical inſtruments, weter works, &c. This is a ſcience of ſuch importance, that without it we could hardly eat bread, or Le dry in our beds. . BY Mechanics we come to underſtand the motions of the parts of an animal hody; tie uſe of ihe nerves, muſcles, bones, joints, and veſſels. All which have been made ſo plain, as proves an animal body to be nothing but a mechanical ergine But ibis part of mechanics, called anatom, is a ſubject of itſelf. Upon Mecharics is alſo ſoundeàd the motions of all the celeſiial bodies, their periods, times, and revolutions. Without Mechanics a gencral cannot go to war, nor beſiege a town, or fortify a placee And the meaneſt artificer muſt work mechanically or not work at all. So that all perſons whatever are indeb. ed to this art, from the king down to the cchler. Upon Mechanics is alſo founded ithe Newtonian or only true philoſopby in the world. For all the difficulty of philoſophy conſiſts in this; from ſome oſ ihe priucipal phænomena of motions, to inveſtigate ihe forces of nature. And then from iheſe forces to demonſirate ibe other phænomena ; all which is to be done upon mechanical principles. Thus from tbe diſtances and revolutions of the heavenly bodies, the forces of gravity are derived; and from theſe forces thus known, are deduced the motions of the planets, comets, the moon and the ſea; as well as the motions of bodies upon the ſurface of the earth, theſe relatæ to the viſible bodies of the univerſe But there ore alſo certain forces belonging to the ſmall particles of matter, which we are ſtill igncrant of; by which they are cither impelled towards one another, and cobere in regular fgures; or are repelled und ſo receed from each other. For ibe particles of different ſorts of bedies have different laws ; since the ſmall porticles of ſome bodies attraci one another, whilſt thoſe of other ſorts repel each other  and that by forces almoſt infinitely vorious. Upon theſe forces the cobeſion, ſolidity, and fluidity of bodies depend. The nature ſ elaſticity, electricity, and magnetiſm. Upon theſe alſo depend ihe principles of fermentation, putrefaciion, generation, vegetation, and diſsolution of bodies; digeſtion and ſecretion in animal hodies; the motion of the blood and fluids in animals, and ihe moving of the members by the command of the will; the exciting ſenſations in the mind; the emiſſion, reflection, refraction, and inflection of light; freexing by cold, burning by fire ; all operations in chemiſtry, &. If theſe forces could be found out, it would open to us a new field in the ſcience of Mechanics. But for want of proper experiments, theſe forces among the inviſible and imperceptible particles of matter, are utterly unknown, and exceeding difficult to be diſcovered, and therefore make no port of the enſuing treatiſee Nor ſbali 1 meddle ith aſtronomy, as heing a ſubject of itſelf: nor with experimental philoſophy any further than concerns Mechanics. And although architecture has a great dependance upon Mechanics; yet there are a great many precarious rules in this aort, invenied purely for ornament, and for the ſate of beauty; abich have nothing to do with Mechanics. And therefore mechanical beauty (that is ſtrength in due proporzion) is all that I have any buſineſs to meddle with bere. It has heen ignorantly objected by ſome, that the Newtonian pbhiloſophy, lie all others beſore it, will grow old and out of date, and be ſucceeded by ſome new ſyſtem, which will then be as much cried up as this is now. But this objection is very fondly made. For never a philoſopher hefore Newton ever took the method that he did. For whilſt their ſyſtems are nothing but hypotbeſes, conctits, sictions, coujectures, and romances, invented at pleaſure and without any foundation in the nature of things; E⸗ on the contrary, and by himſelf alone, ſet out upon a quite different footing For he admits nothing but what never be overthrown: Notvithſtanding the efforts of all the Bernoulli's, the Leibnitæs, ihe Green's, the Berkley's, the Hutchinſons, &c. And even the French themſelves have at laſt adopted it, and given up the Carteſian ſcheme. Practical Mechanics might be very much improved, if the ſecrets of all trades were to lie open; and the ſeveral machines uſed in each trade, duly explained. And experimental philoſcphy would be thereby much improved, as vell as the trades themſelves. Aud one trade might borrow many great helps in working, from another trade. It is not my deſign to treat at all on the loweſt part of Mechãnics, which concerns manual arts or working by hand, For there is no thecry rquired here, but only a habit of working, to be acquired by conſtant praciice. TI have in the following hook confined myſelf entirely to the mathematical part, and what depends on it, and is deduced from it, And thereſore Ibave firſi of all laid down and demonſtrated the general laws of motion, as a foundation for all the reſt. Then follows the laws of gravity, the deſcent of bodies, and motion of projectiles, the Mechanical Powers, the Deſcent of Bodies upon inclined planes, the Vibration of Pendulums, Centers of Gravity, and others, the Preſſure, Strengb, and Streſi of Beams of Timber; then you have the Principles of Hydroſtatics, Hydraulics, and Pneumatics; the reſiſtance of fluids; the Powers of Engines, and the deſcription of Mach nes. In all theſe I have delivered all the fundamental principles hoth in theory and practice. And to mate it more univerſally uſeful, I have demonſtrated every thing geometrically, or at moſt by the help only of the loweſt and eaſieſt rules of algebra, avoiding all operations by fluxions. So that ibe reader need not be ſcared with the thoughts of any d fficulty of that tind. In the machives I have given an account of their ſtructure, as far as is neceſary to explain their motions and efecis; omitting the deſcription of their minuter paris not ſo neceſſary for this end. I hope the reader will pardon my inſerting among the reſt, ſome machines that may ſeem trifling, put in here and there to fill up vacant places in the ſchemes. Iet even in theſe there is ſomething curious in their ſtructure or motion, that may be worth obſerving. I might indeed bave added ſeveral other things in the theory, though of leſs imporiance; and might alſo have given the cuts of ſeveral other machines. But perhaps what I have already done may be thought tos much, in ſuch a nation as this, where natural knowledge wants due encouragement; and where no Mæcenas appears to patronize and protect it; and where arts and ſviences stand, as it were, in ſuſpence, whether they ſhall ſtand or fall; and where public ſpirit and Engliſb generoſity are juſt expiring This decline of orts and ſciences is wholly or in great meaſure owing to the ambition and moſt extreme avorice of the preſent age. Where men, not being able to lifi iheir æyes above this earth, think nothing worih their care but raing together the droſs it affords; ſtriving lite the toad, who ſball die with the moſt earth in his Jus The duller part of mantind are entirely engaged in the purſuit of filtby lucre; and tbe brighter ſort are wholly devoted to low, trifling, and oſten barbarous diverſions. In ſuch momentous purſuits as ibeſe, it is no wonder if arts and ſciences flag; and natural tnowledge meet with nothing but contempt; and Minerva give place to Pluto. And indeed if the general temper and diſpoſition of men had been the ſame in all ages, as it is in this; I am in doubt whether we had ever had any ſuch thing as a mill to grind us corn for bread, or a pump to draw us water. It is a trifiing excuſe for men of exalted ſtation to urge that they are unacquainted with ſuch arts or ſciences. For learning has always been eſteemed to be under the peculiar care ond ſuperintendency of the Great; who ought to proteci and encourage hoth it and the profeſſors of it; or elſe arts and ſciences can never flouriſh. The indetrious nis ſtudents only, have the fatigue; whilſt all the world reaps the advantage of their labours. I Scire volunt omnes, mercædem ſolvere nemo. JuvEN: It is reported of Alexander that he allowed 800 talents a year toAriſtotle, ro defray the expences of procuring all ſorts of living ereatures; ſo that by his own particular experience, he might be enabled to write of the nature and properties of them. And the reaſon why the world hath no ſo few Ariſtotles, is hecauſe there are no Alexaners. BEut as to the fate of this book it is indifferent to me what reception it ſball meet with in the world. Not that Iam in the leaſt diffident of the principles bere delivered; for I tnow they will ſtand the ſtricteſt examination. Nor would I be thought careleſs concerning the advantage which my few readers may receive from it: For on the contrary, I have done all I could to instruct them. and lead them regularly through this noble and uſeful ſciencee But in a mercenary age, where there is ſo little encouragement for works of this nature, I am under no concern what julg ment may be poſſed upon it by the ignorant multitude. TYet Isſincerely wiſb, that my more ingenious readers may ſind what they expect bere; and am in hopes, that they will meet with no difficulties, but what thQy vill eaſily sſurmount. To effect which, I have made every thing in this hoo, as full and clear, ass my own abilities, and the nature of the thing would permit me. vV. EMERSON. CONTENTS EFINITIONS. P Pcſulata. Jsu 3 Asxioms. _ 34 SECT. I. The general laws of motion. 7 SE CT. II. The laws of gravity, the deſcent of heamy bodies, cnd ihe motion of projectiles. 27 SECT. III. The properties of the mechanical powers; the ballance,  ſbe leaver, the wheel, the pulley, ſhe ſcrew, and the wedge. 38 SECT. IV. The deſcent v bodies upon inclined planes, and in curve ſurfaces; and ihe motion of pendulums. 56 SECT. v. T he center of gravity ond ils properties. 73 SECT. VI. The centers of percuſſion, oſcillation and &rationn. 93 SECT. VII. The quantily and direction, of the preſſure of beams of timber, by their weight 3 and ihe CT. VIII. The ſtrength of heams of timber in all poſitions  and ibeir ſtreſs by any weights acting upon them, or by any forces applied to them. ꝑ. 117. CT. IX. Tbe properties of fluids, the principles of Hydroſtatics, Hydraulics, and Pneumatics. 143 CT. X. The reſiſtance of ſluids, their forces and actions upon bodies; the motion of sſbips, and poſition of ibeir ſails. 175 CT. XI. Methods of communicating, directing, and regulating any motion, in the practice of Mechanics. 196 CT. XII. The powers and properties of compound engines; of forces acting within the machine; and concerning friction. 204 .CT. XIII. The deſcription of compound machines or engines, and the metbod of computing their powers or forces; with ſome account of the advaniages or diſadvantages of their conſtruction. 225 QXOC as, or in proportion to rp- perpendicular ad. ius S. Sine Coſ. Coſine Tan. Tangent. Cotan. Cotangent Sec. Secant. E R R AT A b. ſignifies reckon from the tostom. vag. line read 510 b. ſreceedeũ 14] 2b. 1: :: 16 11 b. langle 25at top Sect. I. l 33]  Ifig. 7. (in the margin.) 34 4b. lfines of elevation. 36 11 labove the plains. 350 3715 7 u 4013 perpendiculars 41) 14 lequilibrio. 42 12,13 as WC, PC, and P. 5717 llength AC 8616 lihat hody  86b. lplaces a4, b; o4] 9b. put out 50 (in the margin) o91 4 ſof a circle 13] 9b. lat B, C, in 14]13 land s.BCD: i15 3 IS.BC:: pag. line read. 1251100 AC X coſ, A 1291II,I2 YWP I3 x&P, vhence W: 1 leWæDP 135] 1b. 4DB 1539 la body vill 158]10b. AFLE Sę 166] 2 SO =5x 178] 2 IFig. 140. (in the margin.) 179116 lacted on by 199123 ]rections BC, 204]17 weight C; 21110Db. lof a machine 23414 b. Jas far below 2244] 8 b. las H, G; 2641 7 draws it 267]11 b. Jturning a ſpit. 28126,27]put out the parentheſis. 2821 9b. ]Cocks i, i. 284116 b. land another 250 4R, R four 2921Ib. 284 (in the margin) 298] 9 a machine 37] ꝗ b. ]lin- pin of a wheel. I. ECH AN ICS is a ſciencecb which M teaches the proportion of the forces, motions, velocities, and in general the actions of bodies upon one another. 2. Body is the maſs or quantity of matter. IF a body yields to a ſtroke and recovers its former figure again, it is called an elaſtic body : If not, it is inelaſtic. 3. Denſity of a body is the proportion, of the quantity of matter contained in it, to the quantity of matter in another body of the ſame bigneſs. Thus the denſity is ſaid to be double or tripſ, when the quantity of matter contained in the ſame ſpace is double or triple. 4. Force is a power exerted on a body to move it. IfF it act but for a moment it is called the force of percuſſion or impulſee If it act conſtantly, it is called an accelerative force: If conſtantly and equally, it ĩs called a uniform accelerative force. 5. Velocity is an affection of motion, by which a body paſſes over a certain ſpace in a given time. The velocity is ſaid to be greater or leſſer, according as the body paſſes over a greater or leſſer ſpace in the ſame time. : 6. Motion is a continual and ſucceſſive change of place. If a body moves through equal ſpaces in equal times, it is called equable motion. IF its velocity continually increaſes, it is called accelerated motion; if it decreaſes, it is retarded motion. If it increaſes or decreaſes uniformly, it is equably accelerated or retarded. Likewiſe if its motion be conſidered in regard to ſome other body at reſt, it is called abſolute motion. But if its motion be conſidered with reſpect to other bodies alſo in motion, then it is relative motion. 7. Direction of motion is the way the body tends, or the right line it moves in. 8. Quantity of meticn, is the motion a body has, both in regard to its velocity, and quantity of matter. This is called the momentum of a bod;, by ſome mechanical writers. 9. Vis inertiæ, is that innate force of matter by which it reſiſts any change, and endeavours to preſerve its preſent ſtate of motion or reſt. 10. Gravily is that ſorce wherewith a body endeavours to deſcend towards the center of the earth. This is called abſolute gravity; when the body tends downward in free ſpace: and relative gravity is the force it endeavours to deſcend with in a fluid. 1II. Specific gravity of bodies, is the greater or leſſer weight of bodies of the ſame magnitude; or the proortion between theſe weights. Ihe ſpecific gravity is ſaid to be double or triple, when the weight oſ the ſame bulk of matter is double or triple. 12. Center of gravity of a body ĩs a certain point in it, upon which the body being ſreely ſuſpended, it would reſt in any poſition. 13. Center of moticn of a body, is a fixed point about which the body is moved. And the axis of motion, is the fixt axis it moves about. 14. Weight and powe- when oppoſed to one another ſignify the body to be moved and the body that moves it. That body which communicates the motion is called the power; and that which receives it, the weight. 35. Equilibrium is when two or more forces acting againſt one another, none of them overcome the others, but deſtroy one anothers effects, and remain at reſt. 216. Afuid is a body whoſe parts yvield to any imlEEE preſſed force; and by yielding are eaſily moved among themſelves. 17. Hydroltatics is a ſcience that treats of the properties of fluids. 18. Hydraulics is the art of raiſing or conveying water by the help of engines. 19. Pneumatics is a ſience that treats of the properties of the air. 20. Machine is any mechanical inſtrument contrived to move bodies, or to perform ſome particular motions. The mechanical powers are ſimple machines. 2 1I. Engine is a mechanic inſtrument compoſed of levers, wheels, pullies, ſcrews, &c. in order to move, lift, or ſuſtain ſome great weight, or perform ſome reat effect. This is the largeſt and moſt compounded rt of machines. 22. Mechanic powers, are the ballance, the leaver, the wheel, the pulley, the ſcrew, and the wedge. 23. Streſs is the effect of a force acting againſt a beam, or any thing to break it, or the violence it ſuffers by that force. The contrary to this is ſirength; which is the reſiſtance any beam is able to make againſt a force endeavouring to break it. 24. Frittion is the reſiſtance ariſing from the parts of machines, or of any bodies rubbing againſt one another. PO S TU LATA H AT a ſmall part of the ſurface of the earth, or the horizon, may be looked upon as a plane. Though this is not ſtrictly true, yet it differs inſenſibly in ſo ſmall a ſpace as we have any occaſion to conſider it. 2. Heavy bodies deſcend in lines parallel to one another, and perpendicular to the horizon: And they always tend perpendicular to the horizon by their weight. For this is true as to ſenſe, becauſe the lines oſ their direction meet only at the center of the earth. 3. The weight oſ any body is the ſame in all places at or near the ſurſace oſ the earth. For the diſference is inſenſible at any heights to which we can aſcend. Though in ſtrictneſs the lorce of gravity decreaſes in alcending, in the reciprocal ratio of the ſquares of the heights from the earths center. 4. We are to ſuppoſe all planes perſectly even and regular, all bodies perfectly ſmocth and homogeneousè lines perfectly ſtreight, and inflexible; without weight or thickneſs; cords extremely pliable, &e. For though bodies are defective in all theſe; and the parts of matter, whereof engines are made, ſubject to many imperfections; yet we muſt ſet aſide all theſœ irregularities, till the theory is eſtabliſhed; and afterwards make ſuch allowance as is proper. A4 X I OM S. I. VE RY body perſeveres in its preſent ſtate, E whether oſ reſt, or moving uniformly in a right line; till it is compelled to change that ſtate, by ſome external force. 2. The alteration of motion, or the motion generated, or deſtroyed in any body, is proportional to the force applied: And is made in the direction of that right line in which the force acts. 3. The action and re-action between two bodies are equal, and in contrarv directions 4. The motion of the whole body is made up of the ſum of the motions of all the parts. ll 5. The weights of all bodies in the ſame place, are proportional to the quantities o matter they contain; without any regard to their bulk, ſigure, or kind. For twice the matter will be twice as heavy, and thrice the matter thrice as heavy; and ſo on. 6. The vis inertiæ of all bodies, is proportional to the quantity of matter. 7. Every body will deſcend to the loweſt place it can get too. 8. Whatever ſuſtains a heavy body, bears all the weight of it. 9. Two equal forces acting againſt one another in contrary directions; deſtroy one another's effects. 10. If a body is acted on with two forces in contrary directions; it is the ſame thing as if it were only acted on with the difference of theſe forces, in direction of the greater. li i11. If a body is kept in equilibrio; the contrary forces, in any one line of direction, are equal, and deſtroy one another. 12. Whatever quantity of motion any force generates in a given time; the ſame quantity of motion will an equal force deſtroy in the ſame time; acting in a contrary direction. 13. Any active force will ſooner or more eaſily overcome a leſſer reſiſtance than a greater. 14. If a weight be drawn or puſhed by any power; it puſhes or draws all points of the line of direction equally. And jt is the ſame thing, whatever point of that line the force is applied to. 15. If to bodies be moving the ſame way in any right line; their relative motion will be the ſame, as if one body ſtood ſtill, and the other approached, or receded from it with the difference of their motions: or with the ſum of their motions, if they move contrary ways. ; 16. If a body is drawn or urged by a rope, the direction of that force is the ſame as the direction of that part of the rope next adjoining to the body. 17. If any force is applied to move or ſuſtain a body, by means of a rope; all the intermediate parts of the rope are equally diſtended, and that in contrary directions. 18. If a running rope go ſreely over ſeveral ꝑ lies; all the parts oſ it are equally ſtretched. 19. If any forces be applied againſt one end o free leaver or beam; the other end will thruſt or vith a force, in direction of its length. 20. The parts of a fluid will yield, and recede wards that part where it is leaſt preſſed. 21. The upper part of a fluid is ſuſtained by lower part. S E C T. I The general laws of M OTI ON. P R OP. I. The quantities oſ matter in all bodies are in the complicate ratio of their magnitudes and denſities. O R by def. 3. if the magnitudes be equal, the F matter will be as the denſities. And if the denſities be equal, the matter vill be as the magnitudes. Therefore the matter is univerſally in the compound ratio of both. Cor. 1. The quantities of matter in ſimilar bodies, are as the denſities and cubes of the diameters. For the magnitude is as the cube of the diameter. Cor. 2. The quantities of matter are as the magnitudes and ſpecific gravities. For the ſpecific gravities are the denſities, by Ax. 5. P R OP. II. The quantities of motion, in all moving bodies whatever, are in the complicate ratio of the quantities of matter and the velocities. For if the velocities are equal, it is manifeſt (by ax. 4.) that the quantities of motion will be as the quantities of matter. And if the quantities of matter are equal, the motions will be as the velocitiess. Therefore univerſally, the quantities of motion are in the compound ratio oſ the velocities and quantities of matter. Cor. In any ſort of motion, the quantily of motion is as the ſum of all tbe producis of every particle of matter multiplied by its reſpective velocily. For the quantity of motion of any particle is as that particle multiplied by its velocity: Therefore by compoſition, the ſums of all are in the ſame ratio. P R O P. III In all uniform motions, the ſpace deſcribed is in the complicate ratio of the time and velocity. For it is evident, if the velocity be given, the ſpace deſcribed by any body, vill be as the time of its moving. And if the time be given, the ſpace deſcribed will be greater or leſs, according as the velocity is greater or leſs; that is, the ſpace will be as the velocity. Therefore if neither be given, the ſpace will be in the compound ratio of both the time and velocity. Cor. The time is as the ſpace direcily and velocity reiprocally. P R O P. IV. The motion generated by any momentary force, is as the force that generates it. For if a certain quantity of force generates any motion, a double quantity of force will generate double the motion; and a triple force, triple the motion, and ſo on. ; Cor. The ſpace deſcribed is as the force and time directly, and quantity of matter reciprocally. For by this prop. the force ĩs as the motion, that is (by Prop. IL.) as the matter and velocity; therefore the velocity is as the forte directly and matter reciprocally. Alſo (by Prop. III.) the ſpace is as the time and velocity, and therefore as the time and force directly, and matter reciprocally. lli S CH OLIUM. Let b = body or quantity of matter to be moved. f = force of impulſe acting on the body b. m= momentum or quantity of motiongenerated inb. v=uvuelocity generated in b. s = ſpace deſcribed by the body b. t = time of deſcribing the ſpace s with the veloi city æ. Then by the three laſt Props. we ſhall have m ẽ bv, 5 &C tv, and f  m. By the help of theſe three general proportions, the rèlation of the ſpaces, times, velocities, &. may be found, upon all ſuppoſitions. And thence all the laws and proportions belonging to uniform motion, may be reasily and univerſally reſolved: Expunging ſuch as are not concerned in the queſtion; and rejecting all thoſe that are given or conſtant; and alſo thoſe that are in both terms of the proportionn. Thus we ſhall get in general,  P R O B. V. In any motion, generated Ly a uniformly acceleraling force : the motion generated in any lime, is in the complicate ratio of the force and time. For in any given time, the motion generated will be proportional to the force that generates it, this being its natural and genuine effect. And ſince in all the ſeveral parts of time, the force is the ſame, and has the ſame efficacy; therefore the motion generated will alſo be as the time: whence univerſally, the motion generated is in the compound ratio of both the force and the time of acting. Cor. 1. This prop. is equally true in reſpect to the motion loſt or deſtroved in a moving body, by a force acting in a contrary direction. by ax. 12. Cor. 2. If the ſpace tlrough which a body is moved by an force, be divided into an infinite number of equal parts; and if, in each part, the accelerative force acis diſferently upon the body, according to any certain la. And if there be taken the produti of the accelerating force in each part multiplied by the time of paſſing through it. Then I ſay, As any uniform accelerative force Xx by the time of acling (FT): To ihe motion generated in that time (M) :: So the ſum of all the producis of each particular ſorce and time: Ta the motion generated in this whole time, by the voriable For (by this prop) the time of deſcribing any part x by the force:: motion genèrated in that time:: F }T: M. therefore by compoſition, the ſum of all the products, to the whole motion generated; is alſo as  7, to M. Cor. 3T he velocity generated (or deſtroyed) in any time is as the force and time direcily, and the quantity of matter reciprocally. For by prop. II. the quantity of motion is as the matter and velocity; therefore the velocity is as the motion directly and the matter reciprocally, that is, (by this prop.) as the force and time directly, and the matter reciprocally. Cor. 4. The increaſe or decreaſe of any velocity, generated or deſtroyed in any time; is as the force and time directly, and the matter reciprocally. This follows from Cor. 3. becauſe all effects are proportional to their cauſes. P R O P. VI. In any motion generated by a uniform accelerative force; ihe ſpace deſcribed from the beginning of the motion, is in the complicate ratio of the velocity, and the time wherein it is generated. For ſuppoſe the time divided into an infinite number of equal parts, each of which call 1, and let the times from the beginning be 1, 2, 3, 4.. to. And let  be the velocity generated at the end of the time 15 then by Cor. 3. of the laſt Prop. the velocity generated in the ſame body, by the ſame force, in the times i1, 2, 3,4. t, vill be reſpectively c, 2c, 3c, 4c... to tc. And by Prop III. the ſpaces deſcribed in each given part of time, ill be as the time (1) and the velocity; and therefore theſe ſpaces will be c, 2c, c... tc. and the ſum of all theſe is the whole ſpace deſcribed by the body. But the ſum of the arithmetic progreſſion o, c, 2c, 3c, 4c... Ic to ſ terms is o  Ic lrc . . DXxt, or /x t. but æc is the laſt velocity, and t the whole time, therefore the whole ſpace is as ſic X 1) the velocity and time conjunctly. Cor. 1. If a body moves uniformly forward with the velocity acquired by a uniform accelerative force; it will deſcribe tiice the ſpace in the ſame or an equal time, that it deſcribed by the accelerative force. For here the ſpaces deſcribed in the ſeveral ſmall parts of time, will be æ, tc, tc.. &. to ſ terms. whoſe ſum is tc xt. And the ſum of the former ſpaces, deſcribed by the accelerating force, was tc ] tc 7 xt. but ſc }x tis to /x1, as 2 to I. Cor. 2. Since any active force is an endeavour of putting a body into motion; therefore the adequate and immediate effect of an accelerating force is either motion or preſſure or both. S C H O I. Let  æ body or quantity of matter. VPFæ accelerative force acting uniformly and equally on the body b. v = velocity generated in b by the force F. m= motion generated in b.  =æ ſpace deſcribed by . t = time of deſcribing the ſpace s. Then the two laſt propoſitions together with Prop. II. will reſolve all queſtions relating to the times, forces, velocities, &. in uniformly accelerated motions. Thus m x bv, m  Fi, and s  v. whence we have in general,  m  & &c. Whence, if m, b, &c. be given; ſuch quantities muſt be left out. : : P R O P, VII. If any force acting on a body at A in direction AB cauſe the body to paſs through the ſpace AB in any time; and another ſimilar force acting in direclion AC, would move it through the ſpace AC in the ſame time: Iſay by hoth forces acting together, in their proper directions, the body will, in the ſame time; he moved through the ſpace AD, the diagonal of the parallelogram ABDC. CasE I. Let the forces at A cauſe the body to move uniformly along the lines 4B, AC. Then ſince the force acting in direction AC parallel to BD, by ax. 2. vill not alter the velocity towards the line BD; the body therefore will arrive atBD in the ſame time whether the force in direction AC be impreſſed or not: Therefore at the end of the time it will be found ſome wherein BD. By the ſame argument, it will be found ſomewhere in the line CD; therefore it will be found in D the point of interſection; and by ax. 1, ĩt will move in a right line from 4 to D. theruwiſe. Suppoſe the line C to move parallel to itſelf into the place BD, whilſt A moves ſfrom 4 to CC.Then ſince this line and the body are both equally moved towards BD, it is plain the body muſt be always in the moveable line 7C. Therefore when A4C comes to the poſition Zg, let the body be arrived at à; then ſince, both the line 4C moves uniformly along 4B, and the body 4 along AC, thereſore it will be as Ab: bd : : 4B: BD, theretore AdD is a right line. Cas E II. Let the body be carried through 48, AC by an accelerative forcee Then by Prop. VI. the ſpace deſcribed will be as the time and velocity, and therefore the velocity will be as the ſpace directly and time reciprocally. Alſo by Cor. 3. Prop. V. when the force and the body is given; the velocity is as the time. Whence the time will be as the ſpace directly and time reciprocally, and the ſpace as the ſquare of the time. That is the ſame body acted on by the ſame force will deſcribe ſpaces which are as the ſquares of the times. Now let the time of deſcribing 4B or AC be 13 and let the line AC move along with the body, always parallel to itſelf, and in the time ſ, let it arrive at b7, and the body at d. moving towards 2 Then, from what has been ſaid, it is as 1: tt :: AB : Ab, and alſo as i1: it:: bg or BD: bi. whence 4B: Ab:: BD: bd. therefore 4dD is a right line. And if you ſuppoſe the ſpace to be as the nth power of the time, it will ſtill be, 1: ?:: 4B: Ab:: BD: bd; and AdD is ſtill a right line for any ſimilar forees. CasE III. But if the body 4 be carried through 4D by a uniform force, in the ſame time it would be carried through 4M by an accelerative force; then by both forces acting together, it will at the end of that time be found in the point H, of the parallelogram MADH,; but then the line it deſcribes 4GH, will not be a right line. Cor. 1. The forces, in the directions AB, AC, AD, uore reſpectively proportional to the lines AB, AC, AD; and in theſe directions. For by Cor. Prop. IV. the time and the quantity of matter being given; the force is directly as the ſpace deſcribed. And in accelerated motion, the ſame is true, by Pr. V. Cor. 3. and Pr. VG. Cor. 2. The tuo obliquè forces AB, AC is equivalent 10 the ſingle direct force 4D, which may be compounded of theſe two, by drawing the diagonal of the parallelogram a4D. li Cor. 3. An ſingle direct force AD, may be reſolved into the two oblique forces whoſe quantities and directions are AB, AC, having the ſame effect; by deſcribing any paorallelogram whoſe diagonal is AD. Cor. 4. A4 hody being agitated by two forces at once, vill paſs through the ſame point, as it would do if the two forces were to act ſeparately and ſucceſſively. Aud if any other motion he impreſſed on a body already in motion, it does not alter its motion in lines parallel to its former direction. ll Cor. 5 If two forces as AB, AC aſt in ihe directions AB, AC, reſpeciively; draw AR to the middle the right line BC, and 24R is the force compourded out of theſe; and 4R its direction. P R O P. ViIII. Let there be three forces A, B, C oſ the ſame hind, aocting dcainſt one anothcr, at the point D, and whoſe directions are all in one plane; and if they heep one another in equilibrio, theſe forces ill he to each other reſpeciively, as the three ſides of a triangle drawn parallel to thcir lines of direction, DI, CI, CD. Let DC repreſent the force C, and produce AD, BD, and complete the parallelogram DICH: And by the laſt Prop. the force DC is equivalent to the two forces DH, DI; put therefore, the forces DH, DI inſtead of DC, and all the forces ill ſtill be in equilibrio, Therefore by ax. 11. DIis equal to its oppoſite force A, and DH or CI equal to its oppoſite force B. Therefore the three forces 4, B, C are reſpectively as DI, CI, CD. Cor. 1. Hence the forces A, B, C, are as the three ſides of a triangle, drawn perpendicular to their lines of direction, or in any given angles to them, on the ſame ſide. For ſuch a triangle will be ſimilar to the former triangle. Cor. 2. The three forces A, B, C, vill he to each other as the ſines of the angles through which their reſpective lines of direction do paſs when produced. For DI: CI: S. DCſ or CDB: S. CDI or CO4. AndCI: CD: S. CDIor CDA: S. CHD or HDI or ADB. Cor. 3. If there he never ſo many forces acting againſt any point in one plane, and keep one another in equilibrio they may be all reduced to the action of three, or even of tuo equal and oppoſite ones. For if HD, ID be two forces, they are equivalent to the ſingle force DT, and in like manner 4 and B may be reduced to a ſingle force. Cor. 4. Aud if ever ſo many forces in different planes, acting againsi one point, eep one another in equilibrio; they may be all reduced to the attions of ſeveral forces in one plane, and conſequenily to two equal and oppoſite ones. : For if the four forces 4, B, H, I, act againſt the int D; and H, I, be out of the plane BD: Let C be the common ſection of the planes 4DB, HDI; then the forces H, I, are reduced to the force C in the plane 4DB. S C H O L. This Prop. holds true of all forces whatever; whether of impulſe or percuſſion, thruſting, pulling, preſſing; or whether inſtantaneous or continual; provided they be all of the ſame kind. Hence if three forces act in one plane, their proportions are had; and if one force be given, the reſt may be found. And if four forces act, and two be given, the other two may be found; but if only one be given, the reſt cannot be found; for in the three forces A, B, C, the force C may be divided into other two, an infinite number of ways, by drawing any parallelogram DICH about the diagonal DC. And in general if there be any number of forces acting at D, and all be given but two, theſe two may be found: otherwiſe not, tho' the poſitions of them all be given. P R O P. IX. If one body acts againſt ano: ber body by any hind of force ubatever; it exerts ithat force in the direclion of a line perpendicular to tbe ſurſace wberecn it acis. Let the body B be acted on by the force AB in the direction 4B. Let the body C and the obſtacle O, hinder the body B ſrom moving; divide the force 4B into the two forces 4D, AE; or EB, DB, by Cor. 3. Prop. VII. the one perpendicular, the other parallel to the ſurface DB. then the ſurface DB receives the perpendicular force E8, and the obſtacle O the parallel force DB; take away the obſtacle O, and the force DB will move the body B in a direction parallel to the ſurface, with no other effect than what ariſes from the friction of B againſt that ſurface, occaſioned by the preſſure of B againſt it by thè force EB; which, if the ſurface be perfectly ſmooth and void of tenacity, will be nothing. The force DB thereſore having no effect, the remaining force EB will be the only one, whereby the body B acts againſt the ſurface DB, and that in direction ZB perpendicular to it. Cor. 1. If a given body B ſirite another body C obliquely, at any angle ABD, the magnitude of tbe ſtroke ill be directly as tbe velocity and ihe ſine of the angle of incidence ABD; and ibe body C receives that ſtroke in the direãion EB perpendicular to the ſurface DB. For if the angle ABD be given; the ſtroke will be greater in proportion to the velocity; and if the velocity 4B be given, the ſtroke will be as 4D, or S.  àBD. Or the magnitude of the ſtroke is as the velocity wherewith the body approaches the plane. Cor. 2. If a perfectly elaſtic body A impinges on a hard or elaſtic body CB at B, it ill be refected ſrom it, ſo that the angle of reflexion will be equal to the angle of incidence. For the motion at B parallel to the ſurſzc] is not at all changed by the ſtrokee And becauſe the bodies are elaſtic they recover their figure in the ſame time they loſe it by the ſtroke; therefore the velocity in direction BE is the ſame after as before the ſtroke; Let AE, BE repreſent the velocities before the ſtroke, and ED (I AE) and BE the reſpective velocities after the ſtroke; then in the two ſimilar and equal triangles AEB, BED, L ABE is equal to ZBD: But ſince no bodies in nature are perſectly elaſtic, they are ſomething longer of regaining their figure;j and therefore the angle DBF will be ſomething morẽè acute than the Z 45G. lll Cor. 3. If one given hody impinges upon another given body ; the magnitude of the ſtroke will be as the relativę velocity hetween the hodies. : For the magnitude of the ſtrokèe is as the line BE, or the velocity wherewith the bodies approach each other; that is, as the relative velocity. Cor. .. And in any hodies whatever, if a body in motion ſtrike agoinſt anotber, the magnitude of the stroke ill be as the motion loſt by the ſtriking body. For the motion impreſſed on the body that receives the ſtroke is equal to the magnitude of the ſtroke. And the ſame motion by Ax: 3. is equal to the motion loſt in the ſtriking body. Cor. 5. A non-elaſtic body ſtriting another non-elaltic hody, only looſes half as much motion as if ibe bodies ere perfecily elaſticc. For the non-elaſtic bodies only ſtop; but elaſtic bodies recede with the ſame velocity they meet with. Cor. 6. Hence alſo it follows, that if one body alis upon another, by ſtriking, preſing, &c. the other re-acls upon this in the direclion of a line perpendicular to the ſurface whereon they act. By Ax. 3. S C H O L. Though the momentum or quantity of motion in a moving body is a quite diſtinct thing from the force that generates it; yet when it ſtrikes another body and puts it into motion, it may with reſpect to that other body, be conſidered as a certain quantity of force proportional to the motion it generates in the other . llE Alſo alth the motion generated by the impulſe of another body is conſidered as generated in an inſtant, upon account of the very ſmall time it is performed in; yet in mathematical trictneſs it is abſolutely impoſſible that any motion can be generated in an inſtant, by impulſe or any ſort of finite force whatever. For when we conſider that the parts of the body which yield to the ſtroke, are forced into a new poſition; there will be required ſome time for the yvielding parts to be moved through a certain ſpace into this new poſition. Now during this time, the two bodies are acting upon each other with a certain accelerative force, which in that time generates that motion which is the effect of their mutual impulſe. So that it is plain that this is an effect produced in time; and the leſſer the time the greater the force; and if the time be infinitely ſmall, the force ought to be infinitely great, which is impoſſible. But by reaſon that this eſfect is produced in ſo ſmall a time as to be utterly imperceptible, ſo that it cannot be brought to any calculation; upon this account the time is entirely ſet aſide, and the whole effect imputed to the force only, which is therefore ſuppoſed to act but for a moment. The quantity of motion in bodies has been proved to be as the velocity and quantity of matter. But the momentum or quantity of motion may be the ſame in different bodies, and yet may have very different effects upon other bodies, on which they impinge. For if a ſmall body with a great velocity impinge upon another body; and if, by reaſon of its great velocity, it act more ſtrongly upon the ſmall part of the body upon which it impinges, than the force of coheſion of the parts of that body; then the part acted on, will, by this vigorous action, be ſeparated from the reſt; whilſt by reaſon of the very ſmall time of acting, little or no motion is communicated to the reſt of the body. But if a great body with a ſmall velocity ſtrike another body; and if by reaſon of its ſlow motion it does not act ſo vigorouſly as to exceed the force of coheſion; the part ſtruck will communicate the motion to the reſt of the body, and the whole body will be moved together. Thus if a bullet be ſhot out of a gun, the momentum of the bullet and piece are equal; but the bullet will ſhoot through a board, and the gun will only jump a little againſt him that diſcharges it. Therefore ſmall bodies with great velocity, are more proper to tear in pieces: And great bodies with ſmall velocity, to ſake or move the whole. P R OP. X. The ſum of the motions of any two bodies in any one line of direction, towards the ſame part, cannol be changed any action of the bodies upon each other; whatever forces theſe actions are cauſed by, or the bodies exert among themſelves. Here I eſteem progreſſive motions, or motions towaords the ſame part, affirmative; and regreũive ones, negative. C asE I. Let two bodies move the ſame way, and ftrike one another directly. Now ſince action and re-action (by Ax. 3) are equal and contrary, and this action and re action is the very force by which the new motions are generated in the bodies; thereſore (by Ax. 2.) there vill be produced equal changes towards contrary parts. And therefore whatever quantity of motion is gnined by the precedin body will be loſt by the following one; and conſquently, their ſum is the ſame as before. And if the bodies do not ſtrike each orher but are ſuppoſed to act any other way as by preſſre, attraction, repulſion, &. yet ſtill ſince action ai re-action are equal and contrary; there will be inuced an equal change in the motion of the bodies, and in contrary directions; ſo that the ſum of the motions will ſtill remain the ſame. Casæ II. Suppoſe the bodies to ſtrike each other obliquely; then ſince (by the laſt Prop.) they act upon each other in a direction perpendicular to the ſurface in which they ſtrike; the action and re-action in that direction being equal and contrary; the ſum of the motions, the ſame way, in that line of direction, muſt remain the ſame. as before. And ſince the bodies do not act upon each other in a direction parallel to the ſtriking ſurface; therefore there is induced no change of motion in that direction. And therefore univerſally the ſum of the motions will remain the ſame conſidered in any one line of direction whatever. And if the bodies act upon one another by any other forces whatever; ſtill (by Ax. 2. and 3.) the changes of motion wiſl be equal and contrary, and their ſum the ſame as before. : Cor. 1. The ſum of the motions of any ſyſtem or number of bodies, in any one line of direction, taken the ſame way, remains always the ſame; whatever forces theſe bodies exert upon each other: eſteeming contrary motions to be negative And therefore, Cor. 2. The ſum of the motions of all the bodies in the world, eſtimated in one and the ſame line of direction, and always the ſame way; is eternally and invariably the ſame: eſteeming theſe motions affirmative which are progreſſive, or directed the ſame way; and the regreſſive motions negativee And therefore in this ſenſe motion can neither be increaſed nor diminiſbed. But Cor 3. If you recton the motions in all directions to be affirmative, ihen the quantity of motion may be increaſed or decreaſed an infinite number of way;s. As ſuppoſe two equal non-elaſtic bodies, to meet one another with equal velocities ; they ill both ſtop anũ looſe all tbeir motions. For let M be the motion of each, then before meeting the ſum of their motions is M+M; and after their meeting, it is o. But in the ſenfe of this Prop. M—M is the ſum oſ the motions before they meet, becauſe they move contrary ways, which is o; and it is the ſame aſter they meet. And thus a man my put ſeveral bodies into motion with his hands, which had no motion before; and that in as many ſeveral directions P R O P. XI. The motions of bodies included in a given ſpace, are hbe ſame amng themſclves; whether that ſpace is at reſt, or moves uniformly forward in a right line. For if a body be moving, in any right line; and there be any force equally impreſſed, both upon the body and the right line in any directionn. And in conſequence of this, they both move uniformly with the ſame velocity; now as there is no force to carry the body out of that line, it muſt ſtill continue in it as before; and as there is no force to alter the motion of the body in the right line; it will (by Ax. 1) ſtill continue to move in it as before For the ſame reaſon, the motions of any number of bodies moving in ſeveral directions, will ſtill continue the ſame; and their motions among themſelves will be the ſame, whether that ſpace be at reſt, or move uniformly forward. Likewiſe, ſince the relative velocities of, bodies, (that is, the diſference oſ the real velocities the ſame way, or their ſum, different ways) remain the ſame, whether that ſpace be at reſt, or it and the bodies move uniformly forward all together. Therefore their mutual impulſes, colliſions, and actions upon one another, being (by Cor. 3. Pr. IX.) as the relative velocities; muſt (by Ax. 3.) remain the ſame in both caſes, S C H O L. Before I end this ſection, it may not be amiſs to mention a certain kind of force, called by the foreigners, vis viva. This they term a faculty of atling; and diſtinguiſh it from the vis mortua, which with them ſignifies only a ſolicitation to motion, ſuch as preſſure, ravity, &r. concerning this vis viva they talk ſo obcurely, that it is hard to know what they mean by it. But they meaſure its quantity by the number of ſprings which a moving body can bend to the ſame ree of tenſion, or break; whether it be àa longer or a ſhorter time in bending them. So that the vis viva is the total effect of a body in motion; acting till ũts motion be all ſpent. And according to this, they find, that the force, (or vis viva) to overcome any number of ſprings; will always be as the body multiPlyd by the ſquare of the velocity. Suppoſe any number of equal and ſimilar ſprin placed at equal diſtances in a right line; and a body be moved in the ſame right line againſt theſe ſprings3 then the number of ſprings which that body will break before it ſtop, will be as the ſquare of its velocity: whatever be the law of the reſiſtance of any ſpring in the ſeveral parts of its tenſion. For from the foregoing Props. it appears, that the ſwifter the body moves, ſo much the leſs time has any ſpring to act againſt it to deſtroy its motion. And therefore the motion loſt by one ſpring will be as the time of its acting; and by ſeveral ſprings as the whole time of their acting; and conſequently the reſiſtance is uniform. And ſince the reſiſtance is uniform, the velocity loſt will be as the time, that is] as the ſpace directly and velocity reciprocally; whence the ſpace and therefore the number of ſprings is as the ſquare of the velocity. And upon this account they meaſure the force of a body in motion, by the ſquare of the velocity. So at laſt the vis viva ſeems to be the total ſpace paſſed over, by a body meeting with a given reſiſtance; which ſpace is always as the ſquare of the velocity. And this comes to the ſame thing as the force and time together, in the common mechanics. Nov it ſeems to be a neceſſary property of the vis viva, that the reſiſtance is uniform. But there are infinite caſes where this does not happen; and in ſuch caſes, this law of the vis viva muſt fail. And ſince it fails in ſo many caſes, and is ſo obſcure in itſelf, it ought to be weeded out, and not to paſs for P R O P. XI. li The motions of bodies included in a given ſpace, are the ſame among themſclves ; whether that ſpace is at reſt, or moves uniformly forward in a right line. For if a body be moving, in any right line; and there be any force equally impreſſed, both upon the body and the right line in any directionn. And in conſequence of this, they both move uniformly with the ſame velocity; now as there is no force to carry the body out of that line, it muſt ſtill continue in it as before; and as there is no force to alter the motion of the body in the right line; it will (by Ax. 1.) ſtill continue to move in it as before For the ſame reaſon, the motions of any number of bodies moving in ſeveral directions, will ſtill continue the ſame; and their motions among themſelves will be the ſame, whether that ſpace be at reſt, or move uniformly forward. , Likewiſe, ſince the relative velocities of: bodies, (that is, the diſference of the real velocities the ſame way, or their ſum, different ways) remain the ſame, whether that ſpace be at reſt, or it and the bodies move uniformly forward all together. Therefore their mutual impulſes, colliſions, and actions upon one another, being (by Cor. 3. Pr. IX,) as the relative velocities: muſt (by Ax. 3.) remain the ſame in both caſes, S C H O L. Befſore I end this ſection, it may not be amiſs to mention a certain kind of force, called by the foreigners, vis viva. This they term a faculty of acting; and diſtinguiſh it from the vis mortua, which with them ſignifies only a ſolicitation to motion, ſuch as preſſure, a, &re. concerning this vis viva they talk ſo obcurely, that it is hard to know what they mean by it. But they meaſure its quantity by the number of ſprings which a moving body can bend to the ſame - of tenſion, or break; whether it be à longer or a ſhorter time in bending them. So that the vis viva is the total effect of a body in motion; acting till its motion be all ſpent. And according to this, they find, that the force, (or vis viva) to overcome any number of ſprings; will always be as the body multiplyd by the ſquare of the velocity. Suppoſe any number of equal and ſimilar ſprings placed at equal diſtances in a right line; and a be moved in the ſame right line againſt theſe ſprings3 then the number of ſprings which that body will break before it ſtop, will be as the ſquare of its velocity: whatever be the law of the reſiſtance of any ſpring in the ſeveral parts of its tenſion. For from the foregoing Props. it appears, that the ſwifter the body moves, ſo much the leſs time has any ſpring to act againſt it to deſtroy its motion. And therefore the motion loſt by one ſpring will be as the time of its acting; and by ſeveral ſprings as the whole time of their acting: and conſequently the reſiſtance is uniform. And ſince the reſiſtance is uniform, the velocity loſt will be as the time, that is] as the ſpace directly and velocity reciprocally; whence the ſpace and therefore the number of ſprings is as the ſquare of the velocity. And upon this account they meaſure the force of a body in motion, by the ſquare of the velocity. So at laſt the vis viva ſeems to be the total ſpace paſſed over, by a body meeting with a given reſiſtance; which ſpace is always as the ſquare of the velocity. And this comes to the ſame thing as the force and time together, in the common mechanics. Nov it ſeems to be a neceſſary property of the vis viva, that the reſiſtance is uniform But there are infinite caſes where this does not happen; and in ſuch caſes, this law of the vis viva muſt fail. And ſince it fails in ſo many caſes, and is ſo obſcure in itſelf; it ought to be weeded out, and not to paſs for Likewiſe if bodies in motion impinge on one another, the conſervãtion of the vis viva can only take place when the bodies are perſectly elaſticc. But as there are no bodies to be found in nature which are ſo; this law will never hold good in the motion of bodies after impulſe; but in this reſpect it muſt eternally fail. This notion of the vis viva was firſt introduced by M. Leibnitæ, who believed that every particle of matter was endued with a living ſoul. S E C T. II. The laws of gravity, the deſcent of heavy bodies, and the motion of projecties P R OP. XII. The ſame quantity of force is requiſite to heep a hody in any uniform motion, directly upwards, as is required to keep it ſuſpended, or at reſt.. nd if a body deſcends uniformly, the ſume force that is ſufficient to hinder its acceleration in deſcending, is equal to the weight of it. For the force of gravity will act qually on the body in any ſtate, whether of motion or reſt. Therefore if a body is projected directly upwards or downwards with any degree of velocity; it would for ever retain its velocity, if it were not for the force of gravity that dras it down, (by Ax. 1.) If therefore a force equal to its gravity were applied directly upwards; then (by Ax. 9.) theſe two forces deſtroy each others effects; and i ; is.the ſame thing as if the body was acted on by no force at all. And therefore (by Ax. 1.) it would retain its uniform motion. Cor. But if a bods be moved upwards with an accelerated motion ; the force to cauſe that motion will be greater than its weight; and that in proportion to its ocielertion (by Ax. 10.). P R O P. XIIL. The velocities of falling bodies are as the times of their falling ſrom refi. For by poſtulate 3. the body is uniformly acted on by graviy, which is its accelerating force downwards; therefore by Cor. 3. Prop. V. the velocity is as the force and time directly and the matter reciprocally. But (by Ax. 5.) the force of gravity is as the quantity of matter; and conſequently, the velocity will be as the time. Cr. 1. All bodies falling by their own veight, gain equal velocities in equal times. Cor. 2. Whatever velocity a falling hody gains in any time; if it be thrown directly upwards, it vill loſe as much in an equal time: (by Ax. 12.) And therefore Cor. 3. If a body he projecied upwards with the velocity it acquired by falling in any time; it will in the ſame time loſe all its motion. Hence alſo Cor. 4. Bodies thrown upwards loſe equal velocities in equal times. P R O P. XIV. The ſpaces deſcribed by falling bodies are as the ſquares of the times of their falling from reſt. For by poſtul. 3. gravity is a uniformly accelerating force,; therefore by Eron VI. the pace deſcribed is as the rime and velocity. But by the laſt Prop. the time is as the velocity; and therefore the ſpace deſcribed is as the ſquare of the time. c Cor. 1. The ſpaces deſcribed by falling bodies are alſo as the ſquares of the velocities; or the velocity is as the ſquare root of ihe height fallen. Cr. 2. T- aing any equal parts of time; then the ſvaces deſcribed by a falling body, in each ſucceſſive part of time, will be as the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7,9, II, &6. For in the times 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. the ſpaces deſcribed will be as their ſquares 1, 4, 9, 16, &c. And therefore in the differences of the times or in theſe equal parts of time; the ſpaces deſcribed will be as the differences of the ſquares, or as I, 3, 5,7, &. Cor. 3. 4 body moving with the velocity acquired by falling through any ſpace, vill deſcribe twice that ſpace in the time of its fall. By Cor. i1. Pr. 6. Cor. 4. If a body be projected upwaords with the velocity it acquired in falling; it will, in the ſame time, aſcend to the ſame height it fell from; and deſcribe equal ſpaces in equal times, both in riſing and falling, but in an inverſe order; and vill have ibe ſame velocity at every point of the line deſcribed. For by Cor. 2. of the laſt Prop. equal velocities ill be gained or loſt in equal times, (reckoning from the laſt moment of the deſcent). Therefore, ſince at the ſeveral correſpondent points of time, the velocities will be equal; the ſpaces deſcribed in any given time will be equal, and the wholes equal. l Cor. 5. If hodies be projected upwards with any velocir ties; the heights of their aſcent vill be as the ſquares of the velocities, or as the ſquares of the times of their aſcending. the the ſquares of the laſt velocities, by Cor. I. and by Cor. 4. the ſpaces aſcended will be equal to thoſe deſcended. Cor. 6. If a body is projected upwards with any velocity; with the ſame velocity undiminiſbed, it would deſcribe twice the ſpace of its whole aſcent, in the ſame time. By Cor. 3. and 4. Cor. 7. Hence alſo all bodies at the ſurface of the eorih deſcenã equal ſpaces in equal times. S C H O L. It is known by experiments that a heavy body falls 16 feet in a ſecond of time, and requires a velocity which will carry it over 32 5 feet in a ſecond; which being known, the ſpaces deſcribed in any other times, and the velocities acquired will be known by the foregoing propoſitions; and the contrary. Theſe propoſitions are exactly true, where there is no reſiſtance to hinder the motion; but becauſe bodies are a little reſiſted by the air, deſcending bodies will be a little longer in falling; and a body projected upwards, will be ſomething longer in deſcending than in aſcending, and falls with a leſs velocity; and conſequently a body projected upwards with the velocity it falls with, will not aſcend quite to the ſame height; but theſe errors are ſo ſmall, that in moſt caſes they may ſafely be neglected If the force by which a body is accelerated in falling was directly as the height fallen from; it may be computed (by Cor. 2. Pr. V.) that the velocũty acꝗuired will alſo be as the height; or the ſpace decribed directly as the velocity. And therefore if bodies were projected upwards they would in this caſe aſcend to heights, which are as the velocities with which they are projected. This being compared with Cor. 5. of the Iaſt Prop. it is eaſy 1 conclude that bodies projected upwards, and acted upon by a force which is neither of a given quantity, nor in proportion to the diſtance oſ the body from the top of the aſcent, but between them; that theſe bodies will then aſcend to heights which are between the ſimple and duplicate ratio of the velocities. And as theſe propoſitions lead us to the knowledęe of the relation between the velocities and ſpaces deſcribed, from the forces being given. So vice verſa, from that relation being given, the forces may be knownn. Whence if bodies are projected with any velocities into a reſiſting medium, and the ſpaces deſcribed within that body, meaſured; the conſtitution of that body, and the law of its reſiſtance will be found. P R O P. X. If a body be projetted either paorallel to the horizon, or in any oblique direction; it will, by its motion, deſcribe a parabola. Let A4D be the direction of the motion, FG the curve deſcribed; and let 4B, BC, CD, &c. be all equal; draw 4M, BF, CG, DH, &c. perpendicular to the horizon; and compleat the parallelograms, 4F, AG, AH, &c. then by Ax. I. if the body were without gravity, it would move on in the line 4D; and deſcribe the lines 4B, BC, CD, &c. in equal times. Now ſince gravity acts in lines perpendicular to the horizon, it does not aſfect the motion in direction 4D; but generates a motion in direction M. So that the body inſtead of being at B, C, D, &c. will at the ſame points of time be at F, G, H, &c. But in the time of deſcribing 4B, AC, AD, the body by the force of gravity will deſcend through the ſpaces B5, CG, DH; which are as the ſquares of the times they are deſcribed in (by Pr. 14.) that is as the ſquares of the lines 4B, AC, AD. But 4B, AC, AD are equal to XF, LG, MH; and BF, CG, DH, equal to 4X, AL, AM. Therefore the parts of the axis of the curve AK, AL, AM, &c. are reſpectivelyas the ſquares of the ordinates XF/, LG:, MH?, &c. And therefore, by the conic ſections, the curve FG is a paraa. Cor. 1. The line of direction AD is a tangent to the curve in A. And the latus rectum to the point A is KrAB Zz  J/r And in the oblique projection, the principal latus rectum is x , suppoſing AOP perpendicular to . AP* AM, and G the vortex. For then i-  CTC=CPCor. 2. If the horizontal velocities of projectiles be the ſame, whatever their elevations be; they will deſcribe the ſame parabola. For if AB be the velocity and direction of a projectile, then AO is the horizontal velocity. When thè body comes to the vertex G, its motion is then parallel to the horizon, which parallel motion remains the ſame as before, that is equal to AO. Therefore it deſcribes the ſame parabola, as a body projected from G with velocity AO parallel to the horizon. Cor. 3. The velocity of a projectile in àny point of the curve, is as the ſecant of the angle of its direction above the borion. For A0 the horizontal velocity is the ſame at all points of the curve; and the velocity 4Bat 4, in the curve, is the ſecant of the angle of elevation Cor. 4. Thè velocity at any point of the curve is the ſame that is acquired by falling through & the latus rectum belonging to that poiut: Or (which is the ſame) through  the principal latus rectum  the abſciſa to that point. For let I be the ſpace fallen through to acquire the velocity in any point as 4; then the ſpace 4D deſcribed in the ſame time with that velocity in direction AV, vill be 24I (by Cor. 3. Pr. 14.) but in the ſame time, by the ſame force of gravity, the body will deſcend through an equal ſpace DH, therefore AD or MH æ 20H or 2M; but the latus rectum æ MH 4am or 4 AM. therefore AM or Alæ⸗2 aAM AM the latus rectum. P R O P. XVi. The horizontal diſtances of projections, made with any velocities, and at any elevations, are as the ſines of the doubled angles of elevation, and the ſquares of the velocities. Let v=velocity of the projectile meaſured by the ſpace it paſſes through in time I. F = deſcent of a body by gravity in the ſame time. x = AE the horizontal diſtance, or amplitude. , s of the elevation; VAE. =£ i ſ ſne . of twice the elevation. Then by trigonometry, 254, and 2:B8, when the radius is I. And in the right angled triangle AEV. c: x:: (rad.) I:  =Aav, and c c: x:: 5 æ = VE. and by Prop. IlI. l ll v: (time) 1:: (4v) -: z = time of deſcribing ſ AV. And by Prop. XIV. Vf: ũime) i:: VE) : ? — ſquare of the time c c of deſcribing E. Now the times of deſcribing AV, VE, und AGE ate all equal. Whence  2æ therecfuvvcc- fore x ã = E And therefore æ or 4E is 2 Cor. 1. Hence, ihe altitudes of projoctions are as the ſyuares of the ſines of elevation, and the ſquares of the vdlotities; or as the verſed sines of ihe doubled angles of elevation, and the ſquares of the velocities. PFor õ be the vertex, GP /2 CP æ , VE. And VE = pi 5 therefore GP æ zi; therefore GP is as vvuss or as vuB. Cor. 2. The times of flight of projettiles, are as the velocities, and the ſines of elevations. For the time æ x a Cor. 3. The greateſt random or horizntal projection, is at the elevation of 45 degrees. Aud the horizontal diſtances are equal, at elevatims equally diſtant above and below 459. SCH OLIUM. Let b be the height of the perpendicular projection vith the velocity v; then will h æ v whence Horizontal diſtance æ / 5 = 45ch2A, Altitude of the projectionm wB —ub =3Bh. aFY Time of flight 7 =25 væ. ] P R O P. XVII. The diſtances of projections made on any inclined planes; are in the complicate ratio of ihe ſines of ihe angles hich the lines of direction make ith the plane and æenith; and the ſquares of the velcrities, directly ; and the coſines ſqure of the tlanes elevations reciprocally. Let AZ be the inclined plane, AV the direction of the projectile, SA, CP, VE perpendicular to the horizon; AGE the path of the projectilee. And let v æ velocity of the projecuile in A, meaſured by the ſpace it deſcribes in ihe time I. f = ſpace deſcribed by a deſcending hody in the ſame time. - : 5s = ſine of VAE, c = ſine of VAS. æ="ne of SAE. x = AE the oblique diſtance, or random. Then by plain trigonometry, c: x (AE) :: æ: v=, and c: u:: s: VE =m 2. And by Prop. HI. Space v : time I n (AV) =: i = time of deſcribing AV. And by Prop. XIV, Space ſ: time 1:: E: : s ſquare of the time of deſcending through VE. But the times of deſcribing 4V, VE being equal, we have æ and f being a given quantity,  or 4E is as whence x Cor. 1. The heights above the plane are as the ſquares of the velocities, the ſquares of the ſines of elevation above ibe plane, directly; and the ſquares of the coſines of the planes elevations, reciprocally. For if AP æ PE, then G is the vertex of the parabola, in reſpect of the plane AE. And GP 32 VE= Cor. 2. The times of flight are as the velocities and ſines of elevation above the plane; and ihe coſines of the planes elevations reciprocally. For the time is= æVY Cor. 3 Hence alſo the altitude is as the ſquare of Ibe time of ſlight. : 3S55 5 For the altitude isas—, and the time as—, i æ NLY79 Cor. 4. The greateſt projection upon an inclined plane, is when the line of direction biſſecis the angle between the plane and æenith. And the projections are equal at elevations equally diſtant from this line, above and below. For upon the ſame plane, AE is as sc, and sc is greateſt when s/c. And at equal diſtances above and below sc is the ſame. Cor. 5. This Prop. holds true whether the projections be made up or down the planes. S C H O L. Let h= height of the perpendicular projection as before, then h  whence 4 Length of the projection =2 43h sæaæ] 2x2 Iteight of ibe projection = s il 4ſ7æ zz Time of flight 2as ſb f/am2 And if I—AE the length of the projection, then s5cv li af j 7 d, whence v=x2x / ⸗. And ſuppoſing the ut moſt random of one of our greateſt guns to be 5864 paces; then v=194 paces = 324 yards, ſo that a ball ſhot out of her moves at the rate of 324 yards in a ſecond. Alſo it may be noted, that by reaſon of a greater reſiſtance of the air, the upper ranges, ſcarce gO ſo far as the under ranges. And the greateſt random upon a horizontal plane is at ſomething leſs elevation than 45 degrees. _—uuum——— S ECT. IIL The Properties of the mechanical povers; the ballance, the leaver, the wheel, the pulley, the ſcrew, and the wedge. P R O P. XVIII. If at ibe ends of a ballance AB, which are equally diſtant from the center of motion C, two equal weights be ſuſpended ; they will be in equilibrio. Here AB that repreſents the ballance is ſuppoſed to be a right line, in which are the three points 4, B, C. Now the weights 4, B cannot act upon one another any otherwiſe than by means of the ballance 4B whoſe fixt point is C. Suppoſe then that any force applied at 4 puts the body A into motion, and by means of the ballance the body B; then ſince the brachia or ends of the beam CA and CB are equal; the arches a, Bb, deſcribed by theſe bodies will be equal. Conſequently the velocities and q uanties of matter of 4, B, being equal, their momenta or motions will be equa. And, becauſe ACB is a right line, they move in a contrary direction; and therefore by Ax. 9. theſe bodies cannot of themſelves raiſe one the other, but muſt remain in equilibrio. Cor. Hence equal forces A, B applied at equal diſtances from the center of motion C, will have ihe ſame effect in turning the ballance, P R O P. XIX. In any ſtreight leaver, if the power P be to the weight W, as the diſtance of the weight from the fulcrum C, to the diſtance of the power from the fulcrum; the power and weight (acting perpendicularly on the leaver) will be in equilibrio. A leaver is any inflexible beam. ſtaff, or bar, whether of metal or wood, &. that can any way be applied to move bodies. There are four kinds of leavers; 1. A leaver of the firſt kind is that where the fulcrum is between the weight and the power (fig. 10.). 2. A leaver of the ſecond kind is where the weight is between the fulcrum and the power, (ſig. 19P. 3. The leaver of the third kind is where the power? is between the weight and the fulcrum, (fig. 20.) 4. The fourth kind is the bended leaver, (fig. 12.) Cas: I. In the leaver of the firſt kind WCP, inſtead of the power P apply a weight P to act at the end CP. And let the leaver CP be moved into the poſition aCò, Then will the arches Wa, Pb be as the radii, CW, CP, that is as the velocities of the weight and power. Whence ſince P: :: CW: CP, therefore P: W:: velocity of : velocity of P: therefore P x velocity of PW x velocity of , conſequently the momenta or motions of  and W are equal. And ſince they act in contrary directions, therefore by Ax. 9, neither of them can move the other, but they will remain in equilibrioo. Case II. The leavers of the 2d and 3d kind may be reduced to the 1ſt, thus: make CH)m=CP, and inſtead of the power P. apply a weight equal to it at 2. then by caſe 1, the weight V and power ꝓ will keep one another in equilibrio; and (by Cor. Pr. 18.) the weight ꝓ and power P will have the ſame effect in turning the leaver, therefore the power  and weight &V will be in equilibrio. Cor. 1. In any ſort of leaver whether ſtreight or bended, and whether moveable about a ſingle point C; or an axis 4B; or whether the leaver be fixed to the axis and both together moveable about two centers A, B, or whatever form the leavers have; If AB be a right line, and from the ends P, W, there be drawn lines to the center C, or perpendicular to the Axis AB; and if the power and veight aſt perpendicular to theſe lines, and be always reciprocally as theſe diſtances drawn to the center C or axis AB; then they will be in equilibrio. Cor. 2. In any ſort of a leaver WCP, and in whatever directions the power and weight act on it; if their quantities be reciprocally as the perpendiculars on their ſeveral directions, let fall from the center of motion; they will be in equilibrio. For the power and weight will be in equilibrio if they be ſuppoſed to act at  and D; and by Ax. 14, it is the ſame thing whether they act at æ and D or at P and , Cor. 3. Hence univerſally, if any force be applied to a leaver; its effect in moving the leaver will be as that force multiplied by ihe diſtance of its line of direction from the center of molion. Cor. 4. If two bodies be in equilibrio on the leaver, each weight is reciprocally as its diſtance from the center. Cor. 5. In the ſtreight leaver when the weight and power are in equilibrio, and aſt perpendicularly on the leaver or in parallel direftions ; then of theſe three the power, weight, and preſſure upon the fulcrum, any one of them is as the diſtance of the other two. For if CP repreſent the weight V, then CIV will repreſent the power P. and in ſig. 10. C ſuſtains both the weights, and therefore the preſſure is P; and fig. 19, 20. C ſuſtains the difference of the weights, and therefore the preſſure will be IVP, P R O P. XX. If ſeveral weights be ſuſpended on a ſtreight lever AB; and if the ſum of the producis of each weight multiplied by its diſtance ſfrom the center of motion C, on one ſide be equal to the ſum of the producis on the otber ſide; then they vill be in equilibrio, and the contrar;. For the force of each weight to move the leaver is as the weight multiplied by the diſtance (by Cor. 3. laſt Prop.); and the ſum of the products is as the whole forces; which if they be equal, the forces on both ſides are equal, and the leaver remains at reſt. P R O P. XXI. If a bended leaver WCP be kept in equilibrio by two powers, actiug in the direclions PB, WA perpendicular to the ends of the leaver CP,, C; and if the lines of direction be produced till they meet in A, and AC drawn, ard CB parallel to A. I ſay the power P the weight or power lV, and the force acting againſt the fulcrum C, will be reſpectively as 4B, BC, AC; and in theſe very directions, Draw CB, CF parallel to WA, PA; then the angſe WFCWAPCBP, and the right angled triangles CP :: (by Cor. 2. Pr. 19.) power P: power W. Now ſince (by Ax. 14.) it is the ſame thing to what points of the lines of direction PB, WF, the forces P, W be applied; let us ſuppoſe them both to act at the point of interſection 4; then ſince the point 4 is acted on by two forces, which are as CF and CB, or as AB and AF ; and both theſe are equivalent to the ſingle force AC (by Cor. 2. Pr. 7.) therefore the fulcrum C is acted on by the force AC, and in that direction, by Ax. 1I. Cor. 1. Hence the power P, the weight W, and the preſſure the fulcrum C ſuſtains; are reſpectively as WC. PC, and PW, that is any one, is as the diſtance of the other two. n VPFor ſince the angles at P, & are right; CA is the diameter of a circle paſing through the points 4, P, C, ; therefore the angle WPCWACACB, and the angle CWP =CAP; therefore the triangles 4BC, WCP are ſimilar; and 4B: BC:: WC: CP, and AC: AC :: CP: PW. therefore &c. Cor. 2. In any leaver WCP, the lines of direction of the powers WP, WF, and of ibe preſſure on the fulcrum C; all tend to one point A. VFor if not; the leaver would not remain in equilibrio. P R O P. XXII. If AB, CD be two leavers moveable about A, and C; and ſome force acis upon the end B of the leaver AB, in direction BF; whilſt the leaver AB acts upon CD at B. If BE be drawn perpendicular to CB, and AE parallel to BF: Aud if itheſe leavers keep one another in equilibrio. Then I ſay, the force in direction BF, force againſt DC in direftion EB, and the priſsire againſt ihe center A; are reſpectively as AE, BE, A For ſince (by Prop. 9.) the leaver p acts upon BC at B in the direction EB perpendicular to BC; and the leaver CD reacts in direction BE; and (by Ax. 19.) the point 4 is acted on in direction BA. therefore the point B is acted on with three forces; BF the force applied at B, and BE the reaction of the leaver CD, and 4B the reaction of the center 4; and AE is parallel to BF; therefore (by Prop. 8.) theſe forces are as AE, BE, and /B. Cor. If two forces BF, BE acting perpendicular to the leavers 48B, DC, tep theſe leavers in equilibrio: The force BE, force BF, preſſure at A, are reſpectively as radius, Coſ. ABD, nd S. 4DB. For then 4BE is a right angled triangle; and theſe forces are as BE, AE, and 4B; that is, as radius, S. ABE, and S. AEB; that is, as radius, coſ. 4BD, and S. 4BD. P R O P. XXIII. It 4B, BC be two leavers moveable about the centers A and C; and if the circles KEM and DBE be deſcribed vith the radii BC, BA; and upon the circle BM as æ baſe, with the generating circle DBE, the epicycloid BNE be deſcribed ; and the lenver CB and epicycloid BNE le joined together in that very poſition ſo as to make but one continued leaver CRENE. Aud if theſe leavers CBENE, and A4B move about the centers C, 4; ſo that the end D of the leaver AD be always in the curve of the epicyeloid DE; I ſay that two equal and contrary forces at D and X, acting perpendicular to the radii DA, KC, will always eep theſe leavers in equilibrio. PFor let the leavers 4B, CBNE come into the poſition 4D, CKDF; then ſince the epicycloid XD is deſcribed by the point D, whilſt the arch DB rolled upon the equal arch BX; therefore the end D of the radius 4D hathmoved thro an arch BD equal tothe arch BE, thro which X has moved. Therefore the points D, X have equal velocities in any correſpondent places D, K. Therefore equal weights H, I, applied to the circles DB and BMG will have equal quantities of motion; and vill therefore keep each other in equilibrio, by Ax. 9. : Cor. 1. Hence if one leaver AD move uniformly about the center A, the other CKD vwiill alſo move uniformly obout its center C Aud the arch BD deſcribed by D will be equal to the arch BK deſcribed by X. Cor. 2. It is the ſame thing whether the leaver AB act againſt the convex or concave ſide of the leaver CKD, provided the end D be always in the curve XD. Cor. 3. Aſter a like manmer if BE be an epicycloid deſcribed within the circle BRM, by the generating circle BD. Hnud ihe leaver CRE be compounded of the right line CB and the epicycloid BE; then the leavers CBE and AB, by equal forces aciing at B, vill keep one another in equilibrio in any poſition, as CKF and AD. For when 4B is come to 4D, and CBE to CKDF; then the arch BKæ arch BD. Whence the weights or forces acting at the diſtances CB, 4B, have equal velocities; and therefore will ſuſtain one another. Cor. 4. If BC be infinite, or (which is the ſame thing) if BX be a right line perpendicular to AB; then BE or KDF will be the vulgar cycloid Therefore whilſt the point D moves unifſormly about the center A, the point K will move uniformly along the right line BK, qnd vith equal velocities and forces: The peint D in the mean time acling upon the cyclcidal tooth KD. And any equal oppoſite forces ill ſuſtain one another. In like manner if BA be infinite, or BD a right line perpendicular to BC; then BE or DK will be an epicycloid generated by the tangent DB revolving on the circle BRC. And the velocities of  in the right line BK, and of D in the right line BD, will be always equal : And equal forces will be ſuſtained at B, in all poſitions of the leaver CKD Cor. 5. If the figure of the tooth ef, at the end of the leaver AB be given; and the epicycloid BE be deſcribed as before. And if the leavers 4B, CB be made to revolve about their centers A, C; ſo that the point B always move in the epicycloid BE or KD. And if tbe traci of the extreme points of the tooth be marked out upon the plane of the cycloidal tooth, as at fęggge, or at fannne. And if the part fgDdKf he cut away, if the tooth be to act on the concave ſide of the epicycloid ; or ſue DdXf, if on the convex ſide. Then if the leavers revolve ſo that the tooth move along the curve gg or nn; the points D and X of the leavers AB, CD, will move with equal velocities, in the arches BD BK, as before. For the fixt point B in the tooth will ſtill deſcribe the epicycloid. Cor. 6. If the two epicycloids BE, BO be deſcribed upon BM, BL with the generating circles BD, BK; and the leavers AB, CB revolve about the centers A, C; ſo that the point B or D of the leaver AB move along the epicycloid BE or KDS. Then the point B or X, of the leaver CB, will at ihe ſame time move along the epicycloid BO or DKT; and the points D, X will deſcribe the equal arches BD, BX. Anud therefore it is the ſame thing on which leaver the cycloidal tooth be placed, or whether on one or both. For the epicycloid DKT generated on DB, will paſs through X, if BD=BK. Alſo the epicycloid KDS, generated upon XB, will paſs through D, when BKIBD. S C H O I. The leavers 4B, CB are ſuppoſed only to act upon one another, below the line AC; for was the action ſuppoſed to be continued above the line AC, the point B would no longer act on the ſame, but on a different epicycloid; and the Equality of motion would hold no longer. P R O P. XXIV. In ihe wheel and axel, if the power P be io the weight V, as the diameter of the axel EF where the weight acts to the diameter of the wheel AB, where the acts; then the power and weight will be in æquilibrio, and the contrary. For let 4B be the wheel, CD the axel; and ſuppoſe the wheel and axel to turn once round; then it is plain the power P will have deſcended a ſpace equal to the circumference of the wheel; and the weight vill have riſen a height equal to the circumference of the axis. Therefore velocity of P, to velocity of :: as circumference of the wheel, to circumference of the axis:: or as diameter of the wheel, to diameter of the axis:: that is (by ſuppoſition) as ?W, to P. Therefore the motions of ? and W are equal; and have equal forces to move each other, and therefore (by Ax. 9.) will remain in equilibrio. This prop. ill appear otherwiſe. For the wheel and axel may be reduced to a leaver of the firſt kind. For the fulcrum will be in the middle of the axis CD. therefore drawing lines from the middle of the axis to the power and weight, parallel to the horizon; and the radius of the wheel will be the diſtance of the power, and the radius of the axel the diſtance of the weight. And as theſe radii are reciprocally as the weight and power, therefore (by Prop. 19.) they will be in equilibrioo. And thus the wheel and axel is no more but a perpetual leaver. ] Cor. 1. If the rope have any ſenſible thictneſs ; then if the power P: weight W:: diameter of the axel + ihe diameter of the rope: diameter of the wheel where the power acis; they will be in equilibrio. For the weight really hangs half the thickneſs of the rope, beyond the axel. Cor. 2. If the direttion of the power is not a tangent to the wheel ; ſuppoſe it to aẽt at D or d, and let CA, be iulor to the line of direction; then if P: :: CB : CA, then they will be in equilibrio, by Cor. 2. Pr. 19. Cor. 3. If the wheel and axel, one or both have teeth; then if the power P acting on the teeth at B, be to the weight W acting on the teeth at A; as the diameter of the axel at A, to the diameter of the wheel at B, theu the wheel is in equilibrio. Cor. 4. And it is the ſame thing if inſtead of a wheel there be only ſpokes fixt in the axis, whoſe length is equal to the radius of the wheel: and any other equal force be applied for a power inſtead of the weight P. Cor. 5. The force of the weight is increaſed when ont or more ſpires of the rope is folded about ibe axel. For that in effect, augments the diameter of the axel. Cor. 6&. It matters not how low the weight hangs. For whilſt the axel remains the ſame, the reſiſtance of ihe weight remains the ſame; ſetting aſide the weight of ihæ rope. j P R O P. XæV. Let NBD, MBK be two toothed wheels in the ſame plane, and ifthe teeth of the wheel BM bhe the epicycloids BE, kd, KD, deſcribed on the baſe KBM, with the generating circle BN, and ibeſe teeth all equidiſiant; and if B, d, D the ends of the teeth of the wheel NBD be alſo equidiſtant, and theſe diſtances Bd, dD equal to BE, K. Then I ſay the points of the teeth B, d, D will all aſt togetber, on the cycloidal teeth BE. kd, KD. as the wheels turn round. And any points D?K, will move through equal arches BD, BK in equal times. Draw the radii AD, Ad, and CK, CE; then 4D and CKD may be conſidered as two leavers moving about A, C, and acting on one another in D: And the ſame of Ad, Ckd, acting at d. But by the motion of the wheels BD, BK, ſuppoſe D always to be in the epicycloid XD; then (Cor. i. Pr. 23) vill BDBE, and ſince DA=Kk, therefore Bd will be æ B, and conſequently (by Cor. 1. Pr. 23.), the point à will be in the epicycloid æ4. And thus if there be never ſo many teeth B, d, D, &c. they will always be in the curves of the epicycloids BE, d, KD, &c. therefore the working teeth either act all at once upon one another, or they act not all. And as the velocities of any points are equal in the two wheels BD, BK when only one tooth acts upon one; they will ſtill be equal; if never ſo many act together. IEl Cor. 1. Hence any equal weights or forces upplied t6 the circumferences of theſe two wheels; as at B, ani acting one againſt the other, will eep iheſe wheels in equilibrio. Likewiſe it is the ſame thing whether the wheel AB drive the wheel CB, its teeth acling upon the concave ſide of the ycloids; or the wheel CB drive 4B, Sect. Il. MECHANIC POWERS. the convex ſide of ihe cycloid acting againſt the teeth of AB. r Cor. 2. Hente, inſtead of the points B or ihe infinitely ſmall teeth of the wheel ABD; if any ſort of tooth rsbe placed at B; and if the wheels be made to move about ſo that the given point B may deſcribe the epiycloid BE or KD, whilſt the tract of the extreme points of the tooth is marked out as KeD, XfD; and the ſpace KeDf he cut away; and the ſame be done for all the other teeth, heing equidiſtant and of the ſame form and bigneſs. Then if one of theſe wheels is ſuppoſed to drive the other, by theſe teeth running in the ſpaces Dfe; I ſay the circumferences of theſe wheels will move with equal velocities, anũd all the working teeth ill act together. This is evident becauſe the points B, D ill by this motiondeſcribe the epicycloids as before. Cor. 3. If the epicycloid BV be deſcribed on the boſe BK, with the generating circle BD; and a portion of the epicycloid be placed at equal diſtances B, L, X, for teeth; then the teeth of the wheel A actiug againſt the cloidal teeth will mae the motion equal in the two wheels. Where we may tae as great a portion of the cloid as we will; and the ſides BO, LY which act not, may be of any figure, not to hinder the motion of the teeth of 4. And it is the ſame thing what part of the tooth LO, the tooth G acis againſt. Cor. 4. But the teeth ought not to act above the line AC, which joins their centers. And though the ſide BO of the tooth may be of any form, yet it is better to make them both ſides alite, which will ſerve to mate the wheels turn backwards. Alſo a part as pqr may he cut oway on the hack of every tooth, to make way for thoſe of A. And the more teeth that work together, the better; at leaſt one tooth ſbould always hegin before the other hath done working The teeth ought to be diſpoſed in ſuch manner as not to irouble cr hinder one anotber, ; fore they hegin to work; and that there be a convenient length, depth, and ibickeneſs given them, that they may more eaſily diſengage themſelves ; as well as for ſtrength. P R O P. XxVI. In a combination of wheels with teeth; if the power P be to the weight ; as the produẽt of the diameters of all the axels, to the produci of the diameters of all the uwheels, they ill be in equilibrio. pVFor by Prop. XXIV, The power P acting at 4: force on B:: diam. B: diam. 4, and force on B or C: Force on D:: diam. D: diam. q, and force on D or E: weight W at F:: diam F: diam. EE therefore ex equo, : Power P: weight W:: product of the diameters B, D, F: to the product of the diameters 4, G, E. Cor. 1. In a combination of wheels going by cords; if the power P be to the weight W; as the product of all the diameters of the axels B D, F, to the product of all v diameters of, the wheels A, C, they vill be in equiibrio. VFor the cords ſupply the place of teeth. Cor. 2. In any combination of wheels with teetb; if the power P he to the weight W; as the diameter of the axel F whers the weight acis, multiplied into the product of the teeth in each pinion or ſpindle; is to the diameter of ihe wheel A, where the power acis, multiplied by the product of the teeth iu each of the wheels (that the pihu⸗ act againſt) ; the weight and power will be in equiL15rio. For the number of teeth in each wheel and pinion that act againſt one another, are as the circumferences or as the diameters of that wheel and pinion. Cor. 3. Aud bence alſo, if the power he to the weight, in a ratio compounded of the diameter of the axel F; where the weight acis, to the diameter of the wheel A where the power acis, and tbe ratio of the number of icetb in the firſt wheel (E) to ihe number of teeth in the ſecond axis D), and to the number of teeth in the ſecond wheel (C), and to the uumber in the third axis (B) ; and ſo on till the laſt; then they vill be in equilibrio. Cor. 4. In a combination of wheels, the number of revolutions of the first wbeel F, to the number of revolutions of the laſt wheel A in the ſame time; is as the produſ? of the teeth in the pinions, to the product of the teeth in tbe wheels which act in them: or as the product of the diameters of the pinions, to the produſi of the diameters of the wheels. S CH O L. In wheels whoſe teeth work together, they ſhould not encounter before they come to the line joining their centers; becauſe the rubbing is greater on that ſide; but being paſt the line, the teeth ſlip eaſily along one another, in making their eſcape, ſo that the ſriction is very inconſiderable. P R O P. XXVII. If a power ſuſtain a weight by meaus of a rope going over a fixt pulley; then the power is equal to the weight. But if the pulley be moveable together with the weight, aud the other end of the rope sixed ; then the power will be half the weight. VFor ſuppoſe a horizontal line AB drawn through the center of the pulley C, then that line will repreſent a leaver, and (in fig. 39.) where the pulley is fixt, the center C being kept immoveable repreſents the fulcrum; whilſt the weight acts at B, and the power at A. and becauſe BC/C4, therefore (by Prop. 19.) the power P is equal to the weight V. And (in fig. 40.) the fixt point B is the fulcrum, and the weight acts at C, and the power at 4; and ſince BC is half AB; therefore (by Prop. 19.) the power P is half the weight »V. Cor. Hence all fixt pullies are equivalent to leavers of the firſ kind. And they add no new force to the power, but only ſerve to change tbe direftion, and facilitate the motion of the rope: But a moveable pulley doubles the force. Aud if a rope go over ſeveral pullies, A, B, C, whoſe blocts are all fixt; the pover is neither increaſed nor diminiſbed. lli P R O P. XXVIII. In a combination of pullies all drawn by one running rope; If the power P be to the weight ; as 1 to the number of paris of tbe rope at the moveable block A; they will be in equilibrio. For (by Ax. 18.) all the parts of the rope m, o, n, r, s, t, v, are equally ſtretched, and the weight W is ſuſtained by the number of ropes that act againſt the moveable block; and the rope v or the power P acts vith the force of one. Therefore the power is to the weight; as I to the number of ropes pulling at the moveable block 4. : ll Cor. Hence the power is to the force by which the imlll moveable block B is drawn; as 1 to the number of ropes acling againſt that immoveable bloct. P R O P. XXIX. In the ſcrew, if the prwer P be to the weight W; as the height of one thread (reckoned according to the length of the ſcrew) to the circumference deſcribed by one revolution of the power; then they will be in equilibrio. For the weight V riſes the height of one thread, whilſt the power deſcribes the circumference whoſe radius is PCC Therefore the velocities of the power and weight are reciprocally as their quantities. Therefore their motions are equal, and they are in equilibrio. lltl ll Cvr. 1. In the endleſs or perpetual ſcrev AB, whoſe ieeth take the teeth of the wheel CD. If you take the diſtance of two tbreads in the ſtcrew AB, according to the length of the axis AB; or the diſtance of two teeth in the wheel CD, in direction of the circumference And if a weight  act at the circumference of the wheel CD. then if the power P, be to the, weight W; as that distance (of the teeth or threads) to the length deſcribed by æe power P in one revolution; then they are in equiio. VFor in one revolution of P, the wheel DC with the weight W has moved the diſtance of one tooth. Cor. 2. And by reaſon of the obliquity of the teeth, the force acting perpendicular to the teeth, the lateral force perpendicular to the wheel, and the direQt force in the plane of the wheel; vill be reſpectively, as radius, the ſine and coſine of the obliquity of the teeth. For let GD be the ſide f a tooth acted on; GE parallel to the axis of the wheel, and DE perpendicular to it, or in the plane of the Wheel. Now if GD rereſent the force acting perpendicular to the tooth. hen DE, GE will be the forces acting in the directions GE, DE, (by Cor. 1. Pr. 8.) but if GD be radius, DE ĩs the ſine of the obliquity isi GE the coſine. c. 3. The leſſer the diſtances of the threads, and tbe longer the handle is; the eaſier any given eight i is moved. Cor. 4. What is here demonſirated ill hold equally irue, if the wheel CD act upon another wheel with obliquae teeth, inſteed of the worm AB. S C H O L. The force of the ſcrew reſembles the force that drives a body up an inclined plane; the force acting paralle b the iii of th plane. P R OP. XXX. Let EFG I the haſe f a wedge in form of an iſoceles triangle; then if the power acting perpendicular to the haſe FG, is to the force acling againſi cither ſide in direction perpendicular to that ſide; as the baſe of the undge FG, to cither of the sides EF, EG: then the wedge is in equilibrio. VFor draw the axis ED perpendicular to the baſe FG; and CA, CB, perpendicular to the ſides ZF, EG. Then DC is the directjon of the power. And (by Prop. 9.) the impediment to be removed, acts againſt the vedge in the directions 4C, BC, and therefore (by pediment, are as FG, FE, EG C respetiely, when they are in equilibrio. Cor. 1. The power ofting perpendicular to the haſe, is to the force actip againſi eitber ſide, in direction parallel to ibe baſe FG, of perpendicular to the axis DE; as thq baſe FG, to  the i ED: when the et is in librio. 5 the force EGH  may divided in into the two ED, DG (by Cor. 3. Pr. 7.] Then ſince (by this Prop.) EG is the force acting in direction CB, ED vill e the force acting in direction DG.Cor. 2. The ſbarper the wedge; or the more acute its ngle, the eaſier it u divide any ting or or overcome n S E C T. IV. Th deſcent of Bodies upon inclined Planes, and in curve ſurfaces; and the motion of pendulums.  PROP. XXXI. If a heavy hody W, be ſuſtained upon an incline plane , by a power acting in a direction parallel to that plane. Then The weight of the body, The length AC, The power that ſuſtains it,  The height CB, And its preſſure againſt the ( And the baſe AB, plane, are reſpectively, as] of the plane. Draw BD perpendieular to 4C; then the force of gravity tends perpendicular to the horizon, or parallel to CB; and the direction of the power is parallel to DC; and the preſſure againſt the plane is (by Pr. 9.) parallel to DB. And therefore their quantities are reſpectively as the three lines CB, CD, BD, (by prop : .); that is, by ſimilar triangles, as AC, CB, an lll  Cor. 1. The weight, power, and preſſure, are reſpectively, as radius, the ſine, and coſine of the planès elevation. »6 - - - - C Cor. 2. The relative weight of a hody, to mate it run doin an inclined plane, is as the height directly, and lngih reciprocally, or it is as the ſine of the planẽs elevation Cor. 3. If a &linder be ſuſtained upon an inclined plane, by a power drawing one end of a rope parallel to ibe plane, whilſt the other end is fiut. This power is to the weight of the ylinder; as half the height, to the length of the plane. VFor half the relative weight of the cylinder is ſuſtained by the other end of the rope which is fixt. VPZDPROP. xx5I. If a heòvy body W be ſuſtained upon an inclined plane AC, by a power acting parallel to the horizon. Then, The weight of the body, The baſe AB, Che power that ſuſtains it, CThe height CB, The preſſureagainſi the plane, And the lengt AC, are reſpectively as of the plane. For the body is ſuſtained by three forces, the power, the gravity, and reaction of the plane. The weight is perpendicular to 48B, the power is perpendicular to CB, and the preſſure is perpendicular to AC. Therei (by Cor. I. Pr. 8.) theſe forces are as 4B, CB, Cor. Hence the preſſure on the the plane, the power and the weight ; are reſpectively, as radius, the ſine and coſinè of the planè's elevation, I P R OP. XxxXiIl. If a heavy body W he ſuſtained upon an inclined plane AC, by a power P acting in any given direction WP. And if BED be let fall perpendicular on WP. Then DPower P, DB,  Weight of the body W, CAB, 2Preſſure upon the plane, CAD. vill be reſpectively, as For ſince BD is perpendicular to the direction of the. power, 4B to the direction of gravity, and 4D to the direction of the preſſure on the plane. Therefore (by Cor. 1. Pr. 8.) theſe forces will be reſpectively as BD, AB, AD; when they are in equilibrio. Cor. 1. The power, weight, and preſſure againſt the plane; ure reſpectively as the ſine of the planes elevation, coſine of ihe angle of iraction CWP, and the coſine of the direction of the power above the horizonn. The angle oſ traction is the angle that the direction of the power makes with the planee And in the triangle BD, the ſides are as the ſines of the oppoſite angles, where Z D = complement of DWP. Cor. 2. Hence whether the line of direttion of the power be elevated above, or below ihe plane ; if the angles of trattion be equal  equal powers will ſuſtain the weight. But the preſſure is greater when the line of direction runs below the plane. i lill Cor 3. The power P is leaſt when the line of directim is parallel to the plane. And infinite when perpendicular to it. And equal to the weight, when perpendicular to the horiæon. c Cor. 4. If a weight upon an inclined plane be in equilibrio with another hanging freely; ibeir perpendicular velocities will be reciprocally as their quantities. ll PFor let the weight at 7V be made to deſcend to 4, and draw r perpendicular to AE, and t Hv to AB: then the weight P will have aſcended a height =Ar, which is its perpendicular aſcent; and u4ĩ is the perpendicular deſcent of 7. The figures Arut and AEDV are ſimilar, as alſo the triangles 4EB, DvB. Whence Wt: 4Ar:: Dv: AE:: DB: 4B:: (by this Prop) P: 0. _xy Cor. 5. Aud therefore if any tuo hodies bt in equilibrio upon two inclined planes; their perpendicular velocities will be retiprocally as their quantities of matter. P R O P. XXXIV. The ſpace which a body (deſcending from reſt) deſcribes upon an inclined plane, is to the ſpace which a body falling perpendicularly, deſcribes in the ſame time  as the height of the plane CB, to its lenghth AG. The force wherewith a body endeavours to deſcend upon an inclined plane is equal to the power that ſuſtains it; and (by Pr. 51.) that power is to the weight of the body as CB to C⸗. Therefore the body is urged upon the plane, by an uniformly accelerating force which is to the force of gravity as CB to C4. But (by Pr. 5.) the motion generated in the ſame time, and in the ſame body is as the force, that is (ſince the body is given) the velocity ĩs as the force:. And (by Prop. 3.) the ſpaces uniformly deſcribed with: the laſt velocities will be as theſe velocities; and (by Cor. I1. Pr. 6.) theſe ſpaces are double the ſpaces deſcribed by the accelerating forces. Therefore the ſpaces deſcribed on the plane and in the perpendicular, are as the laſt velocities, or as the forces, that is as CB to C⸗. Cor. 3. Hence if BD be let fall perpendicular to AC; then in the time a body falls tbro the height CB; another body, deſcending along the inclined plane, will run through the ſpace CD. For theſe ſpaces are as CA to CB, that Is, as CB to CD, by ſimilar triangles. Cor. a. The velocity acquired upon an inclined plane, is to the velocity acquired in the ſame time by falling perpendicularly; as CB to CA, or as CD is CB. Cor. 3. The ſpace deſcribed by a body falling down any plane in a given time, is as the ſine of the planè's elevation. For if CB be given, CD is as the ine of CBD or Cor. 4. The ſpaces deſcribed by a hody deſcending on any given plane, are as the ſquares of the times. P R O P. XXXV. The time of a body's deſcending through the plane CD, is to the time of falling through the perpendicular height CE; as ibe length of the plane DC, to the height CE. For DE, AB being perpendicular to CB, and BD to AC. The time of deſcending through CD or the perpendicular CB: time of deſcending r CE:: (by Pr. 140 vCB: /CE :: CD: CE. Cor. IV the body be made to move bach again with the velocity acquired in deſcending, it will aſcend to the fame height on the plane, and in the ſamè tim. For it will be uniformly retarded i aſcending : and in all points will have the ſame velocity in aſcending as deſcending. S C H O I. Since the force by which bodies deſcend down an inclined plane, is a uniformly accelerative force; therefore whatever is demonſtrated of falling bodies in Sect. II. holds equally true, in regard to the motion of bodies upon an inclined plane; ſubſtituting the relative weight upon the plane, inſtead of the abſolute weight of the body. l Hence therefore a body projected on an inclined plane, will deſcribe a parabola. And if the velocity of projection upon the plane, be to the velocity of a projectile in the air; as the relative gravity on the plane, to the abſolute gravity. And both projected at the ſame obliquity; the ſame parabola will be deſcribed in both caſes. P R O P. XXXVI. a4 body acquires the ſame velocily in deſcending down an inclined plane CD, as by falling perpendicularly thro' the beight of that plane CE. For draw DB perpendicular to CD, and the bodies will deſcend through CD, CB in the ſame time; then (by Cor. 2. Pr. 34.) velocity in D: velocity in B :: CE: CD, and (Cor. 1. Pr. 14.) velocity in B: velocity in E :: VCB: /CE:: CD: CE. Therefore velocity in D: velocity in £:: CE: CE, and therefore the velocities in D and æ are equal. Cor. 1. 4 hody acquires the ſame velocity in falling from any height, whether it falls perpendicularly, or down an inclined plane of equal height. Cor. 2. Hence the velocities acquired by heavy bodies falling from the ſame height to the ſame horizontal right line, on any planes whatever, are equal among themſelves. Cor. 3. If the velocities be equal at auy two equal aoltitudes D, E; they will be æqual at any other two equal altitudes A, B: And acquire equal increaſes of velocity, in paſſing thr EB, DA of equal heighs. Cor. 4. The velucites acquired by deſcending doun aw planis uihatever, are as the ſquare rools of the heights. P R O P. XXXVIL In a cirele whoſe diameter CB is perpendicular to the horizon, a body will deſcend tbrough any cord CD or DB in the ſame time as it will deſcend perpendicularly through the diameter CB. For the angle at D is right, therefore (by Cor. I. Pr. 34.) the time of deſcending through CD ill be equal to the time of deſcending perpendicularly thro CB. Draw CE parallel to DB, then will CE be equal to DB; and a body will deſcend through the cords CE, DB in the ſame time. But the time of deſcending through CE is the ſame as falling through the diameter. Therefore the time of deſcending through any cord CD, DB, is the ſame as falling through the diameter CB. lili Cor. 1. The times of deſcending through all the cords of a circle, drawn from either point C or B, are equal 2. The velocity acquired by deſcendin thro h cord CD, or DB, is as the lengib of the ã . For draw DF perpendiular to CB; then cO VCEXCF and BD=CBXBF; and (by Pr. 36.) a body acquires the ſame velocity in deſcending thro CD, as in falling through CF, but this (by Cor. I. Pr. 14.) is as VCF, that is as CD. Alſo a body acquires the ſame velocity through DB as ?B, and that is as /BF or as DB. Cor. 3. But a body vill deſcend ſnoner through ihe ſmall arch of a circle, than through its cord TB. For if B, TG be t two  tangents, then the relative gravity at T in the arch and cord will (by Cor. I. Pr. 31.) be as the ſines of the angles 7GO, TBO, or as 5 and TG or EG, that is nearly as 2 to 1 when the arch is very ſmall. And the accelerative force in the cirele being double to that in the cord; theręfore the veloeity will be greater in the arch, and the time of deſcription ſhorter; though their lengths are nearly the ſame. PR O P. XXXVIII. If a body deſcends ſreely aolong any curve ſurface, and another body deſcends ſrom ihe ſame height in a perpendicular right line; their velocities will be equal at all equal altitudes. Let a body deſcend from 4 towards C perpendienlar to the horizon BC; and another deſcend through the curve ſurface AKB. Divide AC into an infinite number of equal parts, at the points D, E, F, &c. to which draw lines parallel to BC, interſecting the curve in I, X, G, &c. then the curve line 4xB will be divided into an infinite number of parts, X, XG, 8c. which may be taken for right lines; or the curve ſurface into an infinite number of planes, joining at I, X, G, &c. li Now if the velocities be ſuppoſed to be equal in any correſpondent points as T and D; then (by Cor. 3. Pr. 36.) they vill be equal in X and E, after the deſcent through T; and being equal in X and E, they vill alſo be equal in G and , after the deſcent thr KG, and ſo on. Therefore ſince the motion begins in A, they will acquire equal velocities in deſcending through the firſt jlane, and likewiſe through the 2d, 3d, 4th, &c. and therefore the velocities will be equal in all correſpondent points T and D, X and , G and F, &c. and at B and C. lill Cor. 1. Therefore if a body be ſuſpended by a ſtring, and by oſcillating deſcribes any curve AB; or if it is any way forced to move in any poliſved, and perfectly ſmooth ſurface AB; whilſt another body aſcends or desſcends in a right line. Then if their velocities be equal at any one equòl altitude ; they will be equal at all other equal altitudes. For the ſame thing is effected by the ſtring of the pendulous body, as by the ſmooth ſurface of a poliſhed body. Cor. 2. Hence a body oſcillating in any curve line whatever, acquires the ſame velocily in the curve; as if it had fallen perpendicularly from the ſame beight. And therefore the velocity in any point of the curve, is as the ſquare root of the height deſcended. Cor. 3. And a body after its deſcent sbroigh any curve, will aſcend to the ſame height in a ſimilar and equal curve, or even in any curve whatever. Aud ibe velocities will be IV. IN CURVE SURFACES. equol at all equal altitudes. And the aſcent and deſcent will be in ihe ſame time, if the curves are the ſame. For the forces that generated the motion in deſcending will equally deſtroy it in aſcending, and therefore they will loſe equal velocities by aſcending equal heights. And if the curves are ſimilar and equal, every particle of the curve will be deſcribed with the ſame velocity, and therefore in the ſame time, whether aſcending or deſcending. Cor. 4. This Prop. is equally true, whether the curve AKB be in one plane perpendicular to the horizon, or in ſeveral planes IK, KG, &c. winding about in nature of a ſpiral. P R O P. XXXIX. The times of deſcent through tuo ſimilar parts of ſimilar curves; are in the ſubduplicate ratio of their lengths, ab, 4B. Divide both curves into an equal number of infinitely ſmall parts, ſimilar to each other; and let 4e, BC, be two of them, ſimilarly poſitedl. And draw rb, RB perpendicular to ab, 4H. By Prop. III. the ſpace deſcribed is as the time and velocity, and the time of deſcribing any ſpace, is as the ſpace directly and yelocity reciprocally. By Cor. 2. Pr. 38, the velocities in b and B are as Vrb and VRB, that is becauſe arb, ARB are ſimilar, as /ab and V4B. therefore the time of deſcribing bc: to time of deſcribing BC :: be, BC., ab, 4B.,5 l Ja?' vAB  Jab . vãB: Vab: /4B : vad : JAD, becauſe the curves are ſimilarly dividedl Whence, by compoſition the whole time of deſcribing ab: whole time of deſcribing 4B:: is in the ſame given ratio of Vab : /4B. or vad: vAD. Cor. 1. Hence if two Pendulums deſcribe ſimilar arches; the times of their Vibrations, are as the ſquare roots of their lengths. or the lengths as the ſquares of the times of Vibration. li For let hàd, HD be the lengths of the pendulums; then becauſe the figures are ſimilar, it is ad: 4D :: hd : HD. Cor. 2. If a pendulum vibrates in a cirele. the velocity in the loweſt point is as the cord of the Arch it deſcribed in deſcending. For (by Cor. 2. Pr. 38) it acquires the ſame velocity in the arch as in the cord; and (by Cor. 2. Pr. 37.) the velocity in the cord, is as the cord. Cor. 3. The lengih of pendulums vibrating ſimilar arches, are reciprocally proportional to the ſquares oſ the number of their vibrations, in a given time. P R O P. XL. If a pendulum vibrates in a cycloid, the time of one vibration, is to the time of a body's falling perpendicularly tbrough half the length of the Pendulum; as the circumference of a circle to the diameter. Let ADa be the cycloid, FD its axis, FGD the generating circlee. Let the body deſcend from H, and in vibrating deſcribe the arch HDb. Divide HD into innumerable ſmall parts, and let BS be one of them. Through H, B, b, draw HMb, BL, bl, perpendicular to the axis D. about the diameter MD deſcribe QL, alſo draw LP parallel to MD, and DE, IG, GE The triangles CDG, GDE are ſimilar; and CDX DEGD* alſo the triangles QLN and ILP are ſimilar, and NL: PL: : QL: LI, and 2NL: Nn :: MD : LI. And ſince by the nature of the cycloid, the tangent in B is parallel to the arch GD, therefore Gg is equal and parallel to BS. Now ſuppoſe a body to deſcend from E through the inclined plane ED; ſince this is a motion uniformly accelerated, therefore (by Cor. i1. Pr. 6.) it would, in the time of its fall, deſcribe 22D, with the velocity acquired in D. And ſince (by Cor. Pr. 3.) the times are as the ſpaces directly, and velocities reciprocally; and (by Cor. 2. Prop. 38.) the velocities are as the ſquare roots of the heights; therefore 5 Ju 2 be, as time of deſcribing ZD: time in Cc:: an: Cc,, 2MD Nnin a5—i° m : J5pD or2, MD: 73N ::  VDX MN : Nn. by ſimilar triangles. Again, when the velocity is given, the time is as the ſpace deſcribed. therefore it will be às time in Ce ⸗ time in Bb :: Cc: Bb or G& 2CD : GD or V\CDOXDE : VCD: VDE:: V DN: VDM; by ſimilar triangles. therefore ex equo, time in ED: time in Bb:; VMDXMNXDN: Nunv DM :: 2 N }X DN or aNL : Nn:: MD: LI. therefore, by compoſition it is, as time in ZD: time in the arch Hb:: MD: arch Ml. And as the time in ED: whole time in HD: : MD : ſemicircumference MLD. And ſince the time of deſcending through HD is Zequal to the time of aſcending through Db: And (by Prop. 37.) the time of deſtending through ED is equal to the time in the diameter D. and 2 FD is æ DV the length of the pendulum (being the radius of Ralf the length of the pendulum D': time in ſIDb or time of one vibration:: diameter MD: circumference 2MLD. li EEE Cor. 1. Hence all vibrations great and ſmall ae performed in the ſame time. For the deſcent through HD is always the ſame, wherever the point is taken. Cor. 2. The time of deſcent in HB, to ibe time of deſcent in HD; is as the arch ML, io the ſemicircumſerence MLD. Cor. 3. The velocity of the pendulum in any point B, is as v DHDL?, or vH BXEDV. PFor (byCor. i. Pr. 14.) the ſquare of the velocity in B li EDAGDq ] lli is assMN, that is as MDND, op57 or DE? DB?; becauſe DH=2DE, and DB/2GD by the nature of the cycloid; and DF is given. æ Cor. 4. If the length of the pendulum VD be made double the axis FD; and ARV, arV, be two ſemicycloids equal to AHD, and ſo placed ihat the vertex as D be ãt A anã a. then the pendulum VH vibrating hetween ſbe oloidal checks ARV, arV; the point H vill deſcribe ĩhe ycloid AHDba ; and ibe time of its vibration will be3,1416X time of falling tbrougb FD, half the lengih oaf the pendulum. li EEi AAl this follows from the nature of the oycloid. Cor. 5. Hence alſo it appears from Experiments on penduluins, that at the ſurface of the earib, a heavy body will deſcend through a ſpace of 16, engliſb feet nearly, in one ſecond of time. VFor itis found by obſervation, upon clocks, that æ pendulum 39, 13 inches long, vibrates once ina ſecond; DI uu l therefore 59 = time of a body's falling through FD or v⸗ inches. And conſęquently (by Prop. 14.) the ſpace fallen through in i ſecond vill be u x 3 1416=153,096 inches = 16. o913 feet. Yet a Dentulum bting freely will be ſomething longer in vibrating than a clock; becauſe the palate wheel of the clock acting againſt it, takes off ſomething from its aſcent, and makes it return ſooner, or ſhortens the time. Cor. 6 Hence alſo if pendulums of the ſame quantity of inatter, and unequal lengibs be acted on by Stgren forces of gravity; their lengtbs will be as the forces of gravity, and ihe ſquares of the times oſ vibration. For the times of vibration are in a given ratio to the times of deſcent through half the lengths of the pendulums. And (by Cor. 3. Pr. 5.) if the matter be given, the velocity generated in deſcending bodies is as the force and time; and (by Pr. 6.) the ſpace deſcended is as the velocity and time, that is, as the force and ſquare of the time. therefore half the length of the pendulum, is as the force, and ſquare of the time of deſcending half its length; whence the length is as the force and ſquare of the time of vibration. Cor. . From tbe motion of pendulums it alſo follos that in any one place, ihe quantity of matter in any body is proportional to its weight.  For iĩt is certain from experience that pendulums of ual length, whatever quantities of matter they contain, vibrate in the ſame time. Therefore they will deſcend through half the length of the pendulum in the ſame time; and conſequently would acquire equal velocities in the ſame time. Therefore (by B. 5.) the velocity and time being given, the quantity of matter is as the force of gravity. ſlEl Cor. 8. Hence it alſo follos, that there are vacuities or empty ſpaces in bodies. For ſince (by Cor. 7.) the quantity of matter is as the weight of the body; if ĩt were true that there is an abſolute plenum; all bodies of the ſame bulk muſt be of equal weight: which is contrary to all experience. / P R O P. XLI. If a pendulum AT oſcillates in a circle TRQ, and in the mean time be acted on in the ſeveral points T, by a force tending perpendicular to the horiæon, which is to the uniform force of gravity; as the aorch TR, is to the ſine TN: the times of all vibrations will be equal, whether greater or leſſer. l Vor from any point T draw TZ perpendicular to the horizon, and 77 a tangent to the circle in T; and let AT expreſs the uniſorm force of gravity, TZ the variable force at T; draw ZY perpendicular to TY. then the force 7Z will be reſolved into the two 77, Z. of which 7Z, acting in direction AT does not at all change the motion of the body, but the force 7 directly accelerates its motion in the circle TR. The triangles 4TN, ZT7 are ſimilar, and TZ: TA:: 7Y: TN; but (by ſuppoſition) TZ: TA4 :: arch TR: TN, therefore TT æ arch TR. that is, the force 77 is as the arch to be deſcribed TR. Therefore if AT, At be Jet fall together from the points T, ?; the velòcities generated in equal times, will be as the forces 77, ty; that is as the arches TR, IR, to be deſcribed.' But the parts deſcribed at the beginning of the motion, are as the velocities, that is as the wholes to be deſcribed at the beginning; and therefore the parts which remain to be deſcribed, and the ſubſequent accelerations pro: portional to theſe Parts, are alſo as the wholes, &c. Therefore the velocities generated, and the parts deſcribed with theſe velocities, and the parts to be deſcribed are always as the wholes. And therefore the parts to be deſcribed, being every where as the velocities they are deſcribed with, ill be deſcribed in equal times and vaniſh together: that is, the two bodies oſcillating ill arrive at the perpendicular 4R together. Cor. 1. Hente, that the vibrations in a circle may he iſocronal ; the force TZ muſt be = £ x gravity. Cor. 2. Hence if a pendulum vibrates by the force of gravity only; the times of vibration, in very ſmall, different arches, vill be very nearly equal. For in ſmall arches the ratio of the arch to the ſine is nearly a ratio oſ equality. Cor. 3. But the time of vibration in larger arches, is greater than the time in leſſer arches of a circle. VFor the gravity at T being leſs than the iſocronal force; the body will be longer in deſcribing that arch. Cor. 4. Hence alſo if a pendulum vibrates in the ſnall arch of a circle; the time of. one vibration is to the time of õ bodys falling through twice the length of the pendulum; as half the circumference of a circle to the diameter. : . : For AR is the radius of curvature of a cycloid, whoſe axis is 4R. therefore the circle and cycloid coincide at R, and the ſmall arches of both will be deſcribed in the ſame time, that is, as expreſied by Prop. 40. only here we take twice the length of the pendulum and half the circumference, which comes to the ſame thing, by Cor. 1. Pr. 39. S C H O L. In theſe Propoſitions, the vibrating body is ſoppoſed to be very ſmall, and is thereſore conſidered only as a point. But if it be of any determinate bigneſs the point to which the length of the pendulum is meaſured, is not in the middle or center of gravity of the body; but in another place, and is called the center of oſcillation, as will appear in the VI. Section. It has been proved that a pendulum is longer in vibrating in a large arch of a circle than in a ſmall one. And it may be computed, that if a pendulum vibrates ſeconds in an extremely ſmall arch; and C be ihe length in inches, of the cord of any arch 4; then 32 CC will be the ſeconds loſt in 24 hours by vibrating in the arch 24. - Ant if a pendulum vibrates ſeconds in an arch 24, and c be the cord of à, or of half the whole arch. then 2;3CC c will be the ſeconds loſt in 24 hours, by vibrating in the arch, the cord of whoſe half is C. Alſo if the bob of a pendulum can be ſcrewed up or down; and you put n  number of threads of the ſcrew contained in an inch, y= time in minutes that the clock gains or loſes in 24 hourss Then it follows by the theory of pendulums, that , ny will be the number of threads or revolutions of the nut, that the bob is to be let down or raiſed, to beat ſeconds. -4 P R OP. XLII. lil If a line be drawn from the center of gravity of a od perpendicular to the boriæon; if this perpendicular tal within the baſe upon which the body refts, the body vill ſtand; bui if it falls without the baſe, it will fall deon.VVVV Cas: I. il Let C be the center of gravity, CD perpendicular to the horizon, falling within the baſe BEFG; draw RC and fuppoſe the whole body ſuſpended at the point C; then (by def. 12.) the body will be in equiIibrio, and remain at reſt upon DC. Now take away DC, and ſuppoſe the body to be ſupported only u on the line RC, moveable about R; then (by Ax. 5 the body 4B, together with the line RGC, will endeavour to deſcend from the poſition RC towards D. Alſo for the ſame reaſon the body and the line CS vill endeavour to deſcend from the pofition CS towards D; but as theſe two motions oppoſe one another, the body will be ſuſtained b & points R, S, and therefore it will ſtand without ſalling And the ſame is true of every two oppoſite points , S. Casæ II. But if CD fall without the baſe; then the line RC and the body at C will endeavour to deſcend towards D; alſo the body C and line GS will endeavour to deſcend towards D likewiſe, and as this motion does not oppoſe the other, there will be nothing to ſupport the body; therefore it muſt neceſſarily fall towards D. Cor. 1. Hence it follows that if the center of gravity of a hody be ſupported, the whole hody is ſupported. And the center of gravity of the body muſt be eſteemed the place of the body. And if it be ſuſtained by any leaver or eam, its place is at the point where the beam is cut by a line drawn from the center of Gravity perpendicular to the horizon. Cor. 2. All the grovity of a body, or the force it endeavours to deſcend with, is collecied into the center of Gravity: And therefore whatever ſuſtains the center of gravity, ſuſtains the whole weight. And the deſcent of a body muſt he eſtimated by the deſcent of its center of grovily. lli Cor. 3. Hence alſo the larger the baſe is, upon which a body ſtands, and the further within it ihe center of gravity lies, the firmer the body vill ſtand; and the more difficult 10 be removed. On the contrary, the leſs the haſe, or the leſs the center of grovity falls within it, ſo much the eaſier it is to be moved out of its placee. Cor. 4. Ifa body be laid upon a plane GF, and one end F gradually roiſed up; the body will ſlide down the plane, if the perpendicular CD fall within the baſe; but if it fall without, it ill roll down. P R O P. XLIII The common center of gravity C of two bodies A, B, is in the right line joining their centers of gravity; and the diſtance of either body from the common center of gravity, is reciprocally as the quantily of matter in it. Let A, B be the centers of gravity of 4 and B, and ſuppoſe 4B to be an inflexible right line, or leaver; and C the fulcrum. Then if C be the center of gravity of the bodies 4, B; theſe bodies (by def. 12.) vill be in equilibrioo. And conſequently (by Cor. 4. Pr. 195.) AC: CB:: B: 4. -Cor. 1. If there be never ſo many bodies; the common center of gravity of them all is in ihe right line draun from the center of gravity of any one, to the center of graovity of all ihe reſt; and it divides this line into two paris, reciprocally as that body to the ſum of all the reſt of ibe hodies. For let D be another body; and let B and 4 be laced in C; then will C: D:: DE: CE. and ſo on for more bodies. Cor. 2. If ſeveral bodius A, B, D, E, F be in equilibrio upon a ſtreight leaver AF; then the fulcrum C is at the common center of gravity of all the bodies,. PR OP. XLIV. If there be ſeveral bodies A, B, D, E, F; and if a plane PQ be drawn perpendicular to the horizon; the ſum of the producis of each body multiplied by its diſtance from that plane, if they are all on one ſide; b their difference, if on different ſides; is equal to _ ſum of all tbe bodies multiplied by the diſtance of their center of gravity from that plane. Draw lines perpendicular and parallel to the plane PQus in the fig. and let C be the center of gravity. then (by Cor. 3. Prop. 19.) the force of all the bodies to move the plane PQabout ’, will be mDXD+oE X EAr FxF—Aex ABIxB. that is dCHRCx DV eC+RCX E-- RC7Cx aC-RCx A--5CRCXB, or dC x D+eC Xx EſCx FaCx A—bCx B+RCxX DFE FVãF B. but becauſe C is the center of gràvity of the bodies, therefore (by Pr. 20) dx D+ cXE = fOxX FraCx A +bCxB; therefore we have nDXD0 EXE A rF x AXA—BIxB=RCxA8 D&+F. Cor. 1. This Prop is equally true for any plane whatever- For ſuppoſe the plane and the bodies to be put into any oblique poſition, all the diſtances will remain the ſame as before. Cor. 2. If any plane be drawn through the commm Center of gravity C, of any number of bodies A, B, D, &c. ard each body be multiplied by the diſtance of iis center of gravity, from that plane ; ihe ſum of the producis on each ſide arè equal ; AxaCBxX6C  Fx ſC DxaC ExeCC For the diſtance of a body muſt be eſtimated by the diſtance of ita center of gravity. - ĩl  ãllt Cor. 3. Hence alſo, the ſums (or differene) of vhe products of. each particle of a hody, multipliedby ĩts diſiance from any plane whatever, is equal io the wholè hody multiphied by ihe diſtance of its ouer of gruvity ſrom that plane, And if the plane paſi-sbraggh ihe xenier of Cor. 4. The ſim of the forces of a ſyſtem of hodies is the very ſume, as if all ithe bodies were colleẽted into their common center of gravity, and exerted their ſeveral forces there. PFor the ſum of all the forces are mDxD+0EXE, &c. or ROA+B+DFEFF. Cor. 5. 4nò the ſame is true of any forces whatever with regard to the center of gravity of iheſe forces. dnd therefore if ſeveral forces aẽt in parallel directions; the ſum of all theſe forces ill be equivalent to one ſingle force; and their common center of gravity, the lsce avbere it acis. At - ll Cor. 6& If a circle be deſtribed about the center of grovity G, of a ſyſtem of hodies A, B, C; and any point S be taten at pleaſure in the circumference; then SAXA4SB XB SCXC is a given quantily. For draw SG, on which let fall the perpendiculars Aa, B, Cc. Then (by Eucl. II. 12, 13.) S40 3 A+ SB: X BASC2 3X C=SC2  GA + 25G X Ga xA-+ SGGB2:25G X Gb X B+5G+GC255 x GexC. but (by Cor. 2.) Gox GbXB+GX}C/o, and all the reſt are given quantities. lll -P R OP. XILV. il If ihare be ſeveral forces in one plane, a sing againſ one anuibæ oint G, wihoſe quantities qnd ãirections suCA, B. CD; CE; CF; and if ihęy eep one anither in ”uiabvio? IayC is the center of gravity cf all the poinis A, B, C, D, E. And aiy one of ithem as&C being produced, will paſi tbrough the cluter of graviy G.of uii ibe reſt. Since all the forces are in equilibrio, the ſum of the forces acting againſt ZC will deſtroy its effects; and act againſt it in the ſame line of direction Upon EC let fall the perpendiculars 4a, Bb, Dã, Ff: then any force ACis divided into two Aa, aC. Now as the point C is in equilibrio, all the perpendicular forces Aa, Bb, on one ſide, are equal to all thoſe Dã, Ff on the other, by Ax. 11. And if the body 1 bæ ſuppoſed to be ſuſpended at 4, B, D, E, F. then ſince AaxiBbX iI=Ddx1 + Ffxi; the center of ravity of the bodies 4, B, C, D (and alſo of all the dies), is in the line ZC. Again it follows from the equilibrium of the forces, that ECHaC=còb-CãdCf, by Ax. 11. And therefore if the body 1 be ſuſpended at the points E, a, d, b, f,; C is their center of gravity; that is, Cis the center of gravity of E, 4, B, ; Cor. 1. If G be the center of gravily of A, B, D, F; then ECæCG X number of points A, B, D, . For EC=Cb+Cd+Cca æ CCxã4B+DFF, or 4CG, by Prop. 44. SE Cor. 2. Sum of all the perpendiculars on one ſide, Aa, Bb=ſum Dd, Ff on the other ſide of EC. And the ſum of their diſtances CE, Ca on one ſideæſum Cd, Gt, f on the otber ſide of C lll P ROP. XLV. If a body be aced on by ſeveral forces 4, B, C, D, E, in the porallel directions Au, Bb. &c. and hept in equilibrio; and if any plane RN be draun from an point R: the ſum of the forces on each ſide are equal, A4+DIBA+CHE; and the ſum lj the produbis on ench ſide, are equal to the lite ſum of the producis on the other ſide, RaxA+ RdXD=Rbx B- RexCRe xE : And tbe contrary. but any produci lying the contrary way from R muſt be taten negative. For ſuppoſe RN to be the plane, acted on by theſe forces; then (by Cor. 5. Pr. 44.) the effect of the forces 4 and D acting at a and 4, is the ſame as if the both acted at O, their center of gravity. And the v fect of B, C, E acting at b, c, e, is the ſame as if they all acted at their center of gravity; which becauſe the body is unmoved, is the ſame point O. And therefore becauſe of the equilibrium; 44DB8C E, for the quantity of force. In reſpect to their places, becauſe O is the center of gravity of 4 and D, as well as of B, C, and E, therefore (by Pr. 44) RaxARdXD =ROXA+D æ ROXBAVCHE = REX BRcxCRexE. And on the contrary if theſe forces be equal, the body will be in equilibrio, by Ax. 9.  Cor. 1. If a body FGIH be at reſt whilſt it is acted upon by ſeveral forces, in the ſame plane, whoſe quantities and directions are pA, qB, rC, sD, tE, cutting any line RN drawn in the body, at p, q. &c. and the perpendiculars Aa, Bb, &c. are drawn. then Iſay, I. the ſum of the perpendicular forces on each ſide are equal, Aa+Dd=2Bb +CcLEe. 2. The ſums of ibe contrary forces in direction of the line RN are equal, paqb=rc-+sd+te. 3. The ſum of the rectangles on each ſide, from any point R, are equal, RpxX Aa+Rsx Dd=Rqx Bb+RrxCcRtxEe. but where the points lye the contrary way from R, the rectangles muſt be negative. And when all theſe are equal, the body is at reſt For ſince it is the ſame thing whether any force 4 act at 4 at For at 5. we vill ſuppoſe it to act at ꝓ; then if the oblique force 24 be divided into the two pu, ad; and the ſame for the reſt: then the ſum all the forces pa muſt be equal to the ſum of all the contrary forces r, by Ax. 11. The reſt follows from this Prop. ll Cor. 2. Aud if a body be kept in equilibrio by ſeveral forces acting at different points, and in different directions, cither in the ſame plane, or in different planes; it will ſtill he in equilibrio, by the ſome forces, acting from any one point, and in directions reſpectively parallel to the foruer. ll VFo r in the ſame plane the forces parallel and perpendicular to RN, vill remain the ſame as before. And when the directions of any of the forces are out of this plane, all theſe extravagant or extraneous forces may be reduced to others, one part acting in the plane, the other perpendicular to it; and both theſe remain the ſame in quantity as before And ſince the forces acting in the plane, kept one another in equilibrio at firſt, they will do the ſame ſtil. And as the parts perpendicular to this plane, alſo kept one another in equilibrio at firſt, they will do the ſame when applied to their common center of gravity; or to any other point. Cor. 3. If ſeveral forces acting after any manner, eep a hody unmoved ; and any plane whatever be drawn; and the vagrant forces be all reduced to that plane; then all the perpendicular forces on one ſide are equal to thoſe on the other; and their centers of gravity fall in the sſume point. When this does not happen in all places, the body vill be moved ſome way or otber.  P ROP. XLVII. To find the center of ꝑęuiy of a ſyſtem of bodies 4, 3ll B, G. Draw any plane ST, and from the centers of gravity of all the bodies, draw perpendiculars to this plane, Aa, Bb, Cc. then (by C& 3. Pr. 19.) the forces of 4, B, C at the diſtances Aa, Bb, Cc, ſfrom the plane, vill be AxAa, Bx Bb, CxCe. let G be the center of gravity, then the ſum of the forces AxAa BXB8b+G xCc muſt be=A4 BCxG⸗™ the power of all the bodies ſituated in G (by Pr. 44.7 whence the diſtance of the center of gravity from the plane, that is Gg = Aa x A+5 ul xCuhere if any of the bodies be ſituate on the other ſide oithe plane, the correſpondent rectangles ill be negative. And if the diſtance be in like manner found from the plane TV, and likewiſe from another plane perpendicular to ST, TV; the point G will be determined. Cor. 1. Let b be aony hody, P any particle in it, d its diſtance from a given plane: then the diſtance of its center of gravity from that plane is= ſum of all the dp I; Cor. 2. To find the center of gravity of an irregular plain figure. ſuſpend it by the ſiring AEB, at E; and draw the plumb line ECF. then pnd it by another point of ihe ſtring as D, and draw another plumb line through E, to interſect CF, and the point of interſection is the center of gravity. Cor. 3. To find the center of gravity of a flexible body: lay it upon a board whoſe center of gravity is known, lay ihe center of gravily of the hoard upon the edge of a priſm; and lay the body upon it, and remove it back or forwards till it be in equilibrio upon the board. Eà S C H O L. The centers of gravity of ſeveral planes and ſolids have been determined to be as follows. 1. If two lines be drawn from two angles of a triangle to the middle of the oppoſite ſides, the point of interſection is the center of gravity. Therefore the diſtance of the center of gravity from the vertex is à the line biſſecting the oppoſite ſide. 2. In a trapeium ABCD the center of gravity ĩs found by dividing it into triangles. Find æ, G the centers of gravity of the triangles 4DB, CDB; and F, H the centers of gravity of ABC, ADC. Then draw EG, FH to interſect in O, the center of gravity of the trapezium. 3. The center of gravity of a right line, parallelogram, &linder, and priſm, is in the middle. 4u&. For the archof a circle, as ; arch: ſine of  arch :: radius: diſtance of its center of gravity from the center. 3. For the ſector of a circle, as arch: cord :: b radius : diſtance of its center of gravity from the center. 6. For the parabolic ſpace, the diſtance of the center of gravity ſfrom the vertex is  the axis. 7. In the cone and pyramia the diſtance of the center of gravity from the vertex is  the axis. 8. In a paraboloid, the diſtance of the center of gravity from the vertex is; the axis. 9. For the ſegment of a ſphere, let r = radius, Y/ height of the ſegment; then the diſtance of the cen. 8r12æ ter of gravity from the vertex is x. 127 4x P R O P. XLVIII. If two or more bodies move uniformly in an given directions; their common center of gravity vill either be at reſt, or move uniformly in a right line. CasE I. Let one body ſtand ſtill, and the other move directly to, or from it in a r ght line, then ſince the center of gravity divides the diſtance, in a given ratio; and the diſtance increaſes uniformly, thereforæ that center moves uniformly. Now ſuppoſe the other body likewiſe to move in the ſame right line, and any uantity of ſpace to move along with it; then ſince this body is relatively at reſt in this ſpace, the center of gravity, in regard to that ſpace, moves uniformly; to which adding or ſubſtracting the uniform motion of that ſpace; the center of gravity will ſtill move uniformly. CastE II Let the bodies move in one plane, in the directions DE, AB. produce their lines of direction till they meet in D. And when one body is in D and E, let the other be in 4 and B reſpectively. Let H be their center of gravity when in D and 4, and X when in E and B, and draw HE, and make BP/AD, and draw EP, and XL parallel to 4B. then DE is to 4B or DP in the given ratio of the motion of the bodies; and ſince the Z EDP is given, therefore all the angles of the triangle ZDP are given, and DP will bè to PE in a given ratio. But by ſimilar triangles PE is to PL in the given ratio of BE to BX, by the prorty of the center of gravity: therefore DP is to PL in a given ratio. And all the angles in the triangle DPL are given, and thereſore the angle PDL. therefore the point L is always in the line DL given in poſition. And hy the nature of the center of gravity, DA: DH:: EB: EX:: PB or DA: LE. therefore DH=LK, whence DHKL is a parallelogram, and HX parallel to DL, and therefore the angle BHK is given; and the center of gravity X is always in the right line X given by poſitionn. And becauſe all the angles of the triangles DPL, and DLE are given; therefore the lines DP, DE, DL, that is, 4B, DE, HK are in a given ratio; and conſequently the point E moves uniformly along the right line 7X. And the demonſtration is in the ſame manner, if one of the bodies B moves ſfrom B towards 4. CasE III. Let the paths of the bodies 4B, DE, be in different planes. Through the path 4B draw a plane Bdãe parallel to the path DE, and through DE draw the plane DdeE perpendicular to Bãde produce 4B. to ã, and let Dã, Ee be perpendicular to de. then the planes DdA, EeB will be perpendicular to the plane eãB. Let one body be in 4 and B when the other is in D and I reſpectively. Now if the body at D were to move in de, then by caſe 2d the center of gravity would move uniformly along ſome iight line H&, through ſK erect the plane HKEb perpendicular to BK. then by ſimilar triangles, and the nature of the center of gravity, 4b: hD :: (AH : Hd :: BK: Ke ::) BE: EE. therefore htis the path of the center of gravity of the bodies moving in 4B, DE. likewiſe Dà: Hb :: Ad : AH:: Be: BX:: eE or Dd: Kæ; therefore Hb =K&, and ht is equal and parallel to HK; therefore the center of gravity of the bodies (moving in 4B, DE) moves uniformly through the right line bæ. E CastE IV. The common center of gravity of two bodies, and a third is either at reſt or moves uniformly in a right line: for theſe two may be put into the place of their center of gravity, which before moved uniformly, and then the center of gravity of the three will move uniformly. likewiſe the common center of gravity of three bodies and a fourth, will move uniſormly in a right line. And ſo on. P R O P. XLIX. The common center of gravity of iwo or more bodies, does not change its ſtate of motion or reſt, by any actions of the bodies among themſelves, or by any forces they exert upon one another. Suppoſe any ſpace in which the bodies are incloſed to move uniformly along with the center of gravity of the bodies, before the actions of the bodies upon one another; then the center of gravity is at reſt in that ſpace. Now if to bodies mutually act upon ore another, ſince their diſtances from their center of gravity are reciprocally as the bodies; and as action and reaction are equal; the bodies will approach or recede from that center by ſpaces which are in the ſame ratio; therefore the center of gravity will ſtill remain at reſt. And in a ſyſtem of ſeveral bodies, becauſe the common center of gravity of any two acting mutually upon each other, is at reſt: And the actions of all the bodies being the ſum of the actions of every two; it is evident the center of gravity of all the hodies remains the ſame as if they did not act at all upon one another, and therefore is at reſt in this fpace or moves uniformly forward along with it. Cor. 1.. Hence if a body be projected into free ſpace ; if it have any circular mot on, this motion will be performed unitormly about an axis paſſing through tbe center of gravity. For if every particle of the body retained the diſtinct motion firſt impreſſed on it; the common center of gravity of the whole would move in a right line, by the laſt Prop. And ſince the coheſion of the parts of the body retains the particles in one maſs, therefore (by this Prop.) the motion of the center of gravity is not altered, which it would be if the axis oſ circular motion did not paſs thro' the center of gravity, but thro' ſome other point. Cor. 2. Aud if a body be hurled into the air, its center of gravity will either move in a right line, or deſcribe a parabola, whilſt that body revolves about an axis paſſing through the center of gravity, if it bave any circular motion. P R O P. L. The ſum of the motions of ſeveral bodies in any given direction, is the ſame as the motion of all the bodies in the ſame direction, moved witb the velocity of ibe common center of gravity. Let the bodies 4, B move round the center of gravity C at reſt, to the planes a b; draw BCA, ICa. then ſince 4: B:: BC: 4C:: hc: ac; therefore the the triangles 4Ca, BCA are ſimilar, and Z bBcCAa, therefore Bb is parallell to Aa, and the bodies move in contrary directions. Alſo ſince Aa: Bb : : AC: CB:: B: A, or Aa xX 4æ BEb X B. therefore the motions of 4, B in contrary directions are equal, or their motion the ſame way is 0. Now let the ſpace and bodies moving in it, be moved in any direction with any velocity v; it is manifeſt, the motion in each body in that direction will be greater than before, by the quantity of matter x velocity. Therefore the ſum of the motions is now v4 + vB or x}X7B, that is equal to the ſum of the bodies x velocity of the center of gravity. After the ſame manner the motion of three bodies is the ſame as the motion of two of them, moved with the velocity of their common center of gravity, together with the motion of the third; that is, (by what has been ſhewn) equal to the ſum of all the three moved with the velocity of the center of gravity of all the three And ſo for more bodies. Cor. The center of gravity of a body muſt be taken for ithe place of the body. Aud ihe motion of any body, or of an ſyſtem of bodies, muſt be eſtimated by the mo. ion of the center of grovity. P R O P. LI. If two weights on any machine keep one another in equilibrio; if they be amy how raiſed or moved by he'p of the machine, the center oſ gravity of the weight and power will always be in the ſame horiæontal right line. For in the leaver the center of gravity is at the fulcrum, and therefore it neither aſcends nor deſcends. In the wheel and axel, and in the pulley or any combination of pullies, the weight and power approach or recede from each other by ſpaces which are reciprocally as the bodies; and therefore their center of gravity is at reſt. And upon any inclined plane, the perpendicular velocities. of the power and weight (by Cor. 4. Pr. 33.) are reciprocally as their quantii ties; and the diſtance of the center of gravity from each, being in the ſame ratio, is alfo at reſtt And univerſally in any combination of theſe or any machine whatever, where the equilibrium continues; the aſcent and deſcent of the power and weiglht being reciprocally as their quantities: the center of gravity neither aſcends nor deſcends. P R O P. LII. If a heavy body AB be ſuſpended by two ropes AC, BD; a right line perpendicular to the horizon, paſſing thro the interſection F, of the ropes, vill alſo paſs itbrough the center of gravity G, of the body. For continue the lines AC, BD to F; then it is the ſame thing whether the forces that ſuſtain the body act at C and D, or at F, in the ſame directions; ſuppoſe therefore that the body AFB is ſuſpended at F; then ſince (by Ax. 7.) the body will deſcend as low as it can get; and (by Cor. Pr. 50.) the center of gravity muſt be taken for the place of the body; therefore the center of gravity G vill be in the line G perpendicular to the horizon. And it ĩs the ſame thing if AC, BD interſect in a point ſ below the body; for the body cannot be ſupported, e cept the center of gravity G, be in the perpendicular GF. Cor. 1. Hence, if GN be drawn parallel io AC; the weight of ihe bo.ly, the ferces acting at C, and D, are reſveciively as FG, GN and FN, or as the ſines of the angles AFB, GFB, and GFA. Cor. 2. The lines AC DB and FG are all in one plane perpendicular to the horior, Cor. 3. If ibe center of gravity falls not in the line FG, the body will not reſt iill it fall in that line. P R O P. LIII. If an body whatever as BC or any beam loaded with a veight, be ſupported by two planes AB, CD; at C and B; and from the points C, B, the lines CF, BE, be drawn perpendicular to theſe planes; and firom the interſection F, the line FH he drawn perpendicular to the horizon, it vill paſs through the center of gravity G of the bedy. For ſince the body is ſuſtained by the planes at B, C, and theſe planes react againiſt the body in the perpendicular directions BF, CF; thereſore it is the ſame thing as if the body was ſuſtained by the two ropes B, CF; and conſequently (by Prop. laſt), FH vill paſs through G the center of gravity of the whole weight. Cor. 1. If EG be drawn parallel to CF; then the whole weight, the preſſure upon ihe planes CD, AB; are reſpectively as FG, EG, EF; and in theſe very directions: or as the ſines of the angles BFC, BFG, and CFG. : Cor. 2. If tbe line FG drawn (frim the interſection of the perpendiculars FC, FB,) perpendicular to the horiæon, does not paſs itbrough the center of gravily; the body will not be ſuſtained, but will move till ihe center of gravity fall in that line. Cor. 3. Hence if the poſition of one plane CD be given, and the poſition of the bedy CB, and ils center of gravity GTbhe poſition of the other. plane AB may be found, by u hich the body vill be ſupported: By drawing CF perj pendicular to CD, and GF Perp. to the horizon; and from F draving FB, then BA perpendicular to it, is the other plane. P R O P. LIV. If a havy hody HD, whoſe center of gravity is G, be ſu ained by tbiee forces A, B, C, in one p one, acting in directions AH, BI, CD. nd if FG2 be druwn perpendiculor to the horiæen, and CD produced io cut t in P; ond if AH, BI, produced, iuterſecl in O; then if OP be drawn; and if EP, OF be droæn parallel 10 AO, PC; then I ſay the weight of the bocy, tbe three forces 4, B, C; are reſpeciively as FP, EP, EQ, OF-. Becauſe the line OP is unmoved; the point O is ſuſtained by three forces in directions OP, OA, OB; which therefore are as the lines OP, EP, OE Alſo the point P is ſuſtained by three forces in the directions PO, PC, GP; which therefore are as the lines OP, OF, FP: of which that in direction FP is the weight of the body, at G the center of gravity. And the forces at O, and æ in directions OP are equal and contrary. 3it Cor. Hence if any other force inſtead of the weight at at G, in direction GP; then the forces at P, 4, B, , vill he reſpeciively as FP, EP, EO, OF. S CH O L. If one of the forces be given; all the reſt may be found, if they act two and two at difſerent points O, P. But if five forces act in one plane, two of them muſt be given. P R O P. LV. If EBDF be any priſmatic ſolid erected upon a plane AD; and if it be cut by any plane AGH. Iſæy, the ſurface, or ſolid GBDH, cut off by this plane, is reſpectively equal to the ſurface or ſolid EBDF whoſe altitude is Cl, ibe lire paſſing through the center of gravity of the haſe, and parallel to the axis of the sſolid. I ſhall not demonſtrate this geometrically by meaſuring, but mechanically by weighing them. Suppoſe the periphery, or the baſe, D, to be divided into an infinite number of equal parts by planes perpendicular to the horizon, and parallel to the axis of the ſolid and to one another. And imagine 4D to be a leaver, and let each particle be placed on 4D where its plane cuts it. Then ſince the force of any particle to move the leaver 4D, is as that particle multiplied by its diſtance from 4, (by Cor. 3. Pr. 19.0 Therefore the ſorces of the equal particles at B, C, D, &c. vill be as 4B, AC. AD, &e. And the ſum of all as the ſum of theſc liness. And becauſe C is the center of gravity of all the particles. Therefore the ſum of all, 4B, AC, AD, &e. æ ſum of as many times 4C; that is (becauſe the parts of the baſe are given) =A4C x baſe. But GB, IC, HD, &c. are as 4B, AC, AD. therefore all the GB, IC, HD, &c. / whole baſe X IG. that is the whole ſurface or ſolid GBDH  whole ſurface or ſolid BEFD. Cor. 1. If a line right or curve, or any plane figure wheiber right lined or curvelined, revolve about an axis in the plane of the figure; the ſurface or ſolid generated is reſpe lively equal to the ſurſace or ſolid, whoſe baſe is the line or figure given, and height equal to the arch deſcribed by the center of gravity, Let BDãb be the figure generated. On the baſe BCD erect the ſurface or ſolid BDFE, and let C be the center of gravity. Since the arches Bb, Cc, Dd, are as the radii, 4B, AC, AD, that is as BG, CI, DH: therefore if CTæ Cc, then will all the lines £G, CJ, DH, &c. æ all the arches Bb, Cc, Dd, &c. that is, the ſurface or ſolid BDãL  BDHG, that is; (by this Prop.)  BDFE. : Cor. 2. Alſo if a curve revolves about any right line drawn through its center of gravity: the ſurfaces generated (either by a partial or total revolution) on oppoſite ſides cf the line, vill be equal. For by Cor. 2. Pr. 44. each part of the curve multiplied by the diſtance of its center of gravity from this Iine, muſt be equal on both ſidess. And by Cor. ⸗. each ſurface generated is equal to the curve multiplied by the arch deſcribed at that diſtance; and theſe arches (being ſimilar) are as theſe diſtances. Whence each ſurface ĩs as the curve multiplied by the diſtance of its center of gravity: And therefore they are equal. and gration. P ROP. LVI Let there be any ſyſtem of bodies A, B, C, conſidered without weight, and moveable about an axis paſſing thrò' S; and if any force f can generate the abſolute motionm in a given time; if the ſame force alt at P perpendicular to PS, the motion generated in the hiæ in the ſame time, revolving about the axis at S, vill bo AXSA B X SB C X SC æ 5 x m. AX SA+ B x SB?-C x SCFor ſuppoſe PS perpendicular to the axis at s, and to the line of direction PQ; And 84, SB, SC, perpendicular to the axis S And ſuppoſe the force f divided into the parts ꝓ, ꝗ, 7, acting ſeparately at P to move 4, B, C. then (by Cor. 3. Pr. 19.) the bodies 4, B, C ill be acted on reſpectively ith the forces sP SPSP : 57P 55? ST Since the angular motion of the whole ſyſtem is the ſame; the velocities of 4, B, C, are as SA, SB, SC; and their motions as 4x SA, B x SB, Cx SC; generated in a given time, by any force f, acting at P, perpendicular to PS, Is ã5 Sã4BxSBE—CxSC- SCa» For the angular velocity of the whole ſyſtem is the ſame as of one of the bodies 4. But the abſolute motion of 4 is and the abſolute velocity of 4æ _2, but the angular velocity is as the abſolute velocity directly and the radius or diſtance reciprocally; therefore the angular velocity of A, and conſequently of the whole ſyſtem is as or cu that is (becauſe m is as the force ſ) Cor. 3. Hence there will be ithe ſame angular velocity generated in the ſyſtem, and with the ſame force, as theræ would be in a ſingle body placed at P, and whoſe quantity of matter is AR 344 BX S03Lx s- B x6SCFor let P æ that body, then (by Cor. 2.) ſince f and SP are given; the angular velocities of the ſyſtem and body P, will be to one another as which being ſuppoſed equal, we ſhall have Cor. 4. The angular motion of any ſiyltem generatèt by a uniſorm force, will he a motion uniformly accelerated. P R O P. LVI. To fiud the center of percuſſion of a ſyſtem of bodies: or the point which ſtriking an immoveable objec?t; the ſitem ſvall incline to neither ſide, but reſt as it were in equilibrio. Through the center of gravity G of the ſyſtem, draw a plane perpendicular to the axis of motion in S. And if the bodies are not all ſituated in that plane, draw lines perpendicular to it from the bodies, and let A, B, C, be the places of thoſe bodies in the plane. Drav SGO, and let O be the center of percuſſion. Draw Af, Bg, Ch, perpendicular to SO, and Aad to SA, and make ad = SA, and draw ea perpendicular and de parallel to SO. Then a4 will be the direction of A's motion, as it revolves about S. And the ſyſtem being ſtopped at O, the body A will urge the point ⸗ forward, with a force proportional to its matter and velocity; that is, as AxXSA or Axad. And the force wherewith 4 acts at a in direction ea, is Axea or Ax5ſ. And the force of 4 to turn the ſyſtem about O is AxSſxaO (by Cor. 3. Pr. 19.) / AXSXSOSa = AXSſ x SOA x SA*. Likewiſe the forces of B and C to turn the ſyſtem about O, is as BXSęXSO EBExXSE?, and C x 8h X SO—CxSC2. And ſince the forces on the contrary ſides of O deſtroy one another; therefore 4xſxSO—axsABx Sg x SOBX SB CX Sh xX SO Cx SC2æ o. Therefore AxsAL BXSBL C X SC?, &c. s0 AX S  B X SgC x Sb, &. the dir tance of the center of percuſſion from the axis of motion. where note, if any points f, g, b, fall on the contrary ſide of §; the correſpondent rectangles rmuſt be negative, ax5ſ2BxSg, &c. Cor. 1. If G be the center of gravity of a ſyſtem of bodies A, B, C; the diſtance of the center of percuſſion from the axis of motion, that is, For (by Prop. 44.) 4 x SfBX Sg+Cx Shæ A+B+ Cx SG. Cor. 2. The diſtunce of the center of percuſſion from the center of gravity G; is, GO= GA: X A+GE2 xX B+ GCaxC SG xA4+ 8B C For 4Ax SAB x SB? + CX SC: æ A x SG+ GAA25G x Gf + Bx SG+ GB 25GX Gę  CX SG?-CG?+25G XGh, by Eucl. II. 12 and 13. But (by Cor. 2. Pr. 42) A4x G-BXGgHCxGh = o; therefore 4x SA  Bx SB:  Cx SC* A+ B Cx SG A4xGA:+ BX GB+- CxGC-. Whence (by Cor. i.) SO or SG+ co SG:xà B C + SG xX A4+ B C Ax GA B X GB + Cx GCSG xã BFC Cor. 3. Hence SG X GO æ the given quantity A}GA B XGB: -CXGC: : ;3 and therefore GO is reVF5 / ciprocally as SG. For each of the bodies 4, B, C, and their diſtances from G are given. lll Cor. 4. Hence alſo if SG be given, GO vill he given alſo. Aud therefore if the plane of the motion remain the ſame, in reſpect to ihe bodies, and ihe diſtance SG remain the ſame; the diſtance of O from G vill remain tbe ſame alſo. Cor. 5. If OT be drawn perpendicular to SO, then OT uill he the locus of all the centers of percuſſion. For the direction of O is in the line OT; and therefore it is the ſame thing which point of the line OT ſtrikes an obſtacle. P R O P. LVIII. To find the center of oſcillation of a ſyſtem of bodies: or ſuch a point, in which a body being placed, will vibrate in the ſame time, and with the ſame angular velocity as the whole body. Let the axis of motion be at s; perpendicular to which draw the plane in which the center of gravity G moves; draw SGO, and let Obe the center of oſcillation; draw the horizontal line S7, and from the bodies A, B, C, draw Aa, Bb, Ce perpendicular to SO; and alſo Ae Bu, Cd, Gg, Or perp. to sr. Put s /4x SA: + B X SE Cx SC2. then (by Cor. 2. Pr. 56.) the angular velocity which 4, B, C, generates in the ſyſtem by their weight, is ucn a nææ, nxz and the whole angular velocity generated by them all .l; SAtSixB +35 ſikeviſe ated in O, generates in the ſyſtem, by its weight, is Sr x ? Nã 250' 5õ- or triangles SG, SO. But their vibrations, and every part of them, are performed alike; therefore their angular velocities muſt be every where equal; that is S becauſe of the ſimilar SG XSO Sex ALSuxX B8d nCSg = c whence by re s S duction SO b p——g——— uction 8O=56X 7ã575&C But (o Pr 44.) Se x 4 + Su x B+ Sdx C=Sox 4+BLC. Therefore the diſtance of the center of oſcillation from the axis of motion, SO=/ -2IL — = SGXA+8-C AxSA+BxSB2-CxSC &c. SGx A+B+C, &c. Axsa+ B x SB+ CX SC2, & Wiere A x Sa + B x S&  C xX C, &ec. A x SA, BXSb, &c. muſt be negative, when 4, b, &c. lye on the contrary ſide of S. And ſince all theſe quantities are the ſame at all elevations of the axis SO; therefore the point O is rightly found; and the fyſtem has ſuch a point as is required. Likewiſe it appears by Cor. i. of the laſt Prop. that the center of oſcillation is the ſame with the center of percuſſion. Cor. 1. If P be an particle of a body, d its diſtance ſrom S, the axis of motion; G, O the centers of gravity and oſcillation. Then the diſtance of the center of oſcillation of the body ſrom the axis of motion, SO æ ſim of all tbe 2 dd ————————0 SG x Body . Cor. a. If the hodies A, B, C, be large; and therefore the center of oſcillation of ench, not in the center of gravity. Let d, e, f, be ihe reſpective diſtances of their tenters of gravity, and ꝓ, q, r, of their centers of oſcillation, from S. then vill the diſtance of the center of oſcillation from S the axis of motion, sO dA+ eqB +frc AxSaBXSb  CxSc dpA V eqB + frCC. —————————_u SGxA+B- C For let a, b, c be any particles in 4, B, c ; and x, J, æ their diſtances from S reſpectively. Then by this Prop. SO ſum xa + ſumyb ſ ſum æ2pgut SC}A+B-C ſ i-. =2, or ſum xxa = dpA, and ſom h =eqB, and ſum 2æ æ/ſr C; and SG x ABC æ Sa xA+ Sh x B8cxC. Cor. 5. To find tbe center of oſcillation of an irregular body ; ſuſpend it at the given point, and hang up a ſimple pendulum of ſuch a length, that making them botb vibrate, they may eep time together. Then the lengtb of this pendulum is equal to the diſtance of the center of ſuſpenſion ſrom the center of oſcillation of the body. Cor. 4. What has been demonſtrated in the laſt Prop. and cor. 1, 2, 3, 4. for the center of percuſſion; holds equally true for the center of oſcillationn S C H O L. In very ſmall bodies, or any bodies oſcillating at a great diſtance from the axis of motion, the center of oſcillation or percuſſion is in or very near the center of gravity. And the reaſon why the center of oſcillation or percuſſion is not always in the center of gravity; is becauſe the body in vibrating is made to turn about a center. But iſ it be ſo contrived as always 1o move parallel to ĩtſelf; without any circular molii tion; the centers of gravity, of oſcillation and percuſſion vill be the ſame. The diſtance of the centers of oſcillation and percuſſion, from the axis of motion, as calculated by Cor. I. is as follos. Where the axis of motion is at the vertex and in the plane of the figure. 1. In a right line, parallelogram, and ſmall cylinder, ĩ the axis of the figure. N . In a triangle, 2 the axis. . In the plane of a circle,J the radius. . In the parabola, ; the axis. 5 . Pyramid and cone, 4 axis, nearly.  . . In a ſphere, r= radius, d  diſtance of the axis of motion from jts centerr. Then the diſtance of the center of oſcillation from the axis of motion is d H 5d o P ROP. LIX. To find the center of gyration of a ſyſtem of bodies: or ſuch a point O, as that a given force, acting at a certain place, will in the ſame time, generate the ſame angular velocity, in the ſyſtem, about an axis SR; as as if the whole ſyſtem was placed in O. Draw the plane PQ perp. to the axis of rotation SR; and let 54, SB, SC be the neareſt diſtances of the bodies 4, B, C from the axis SR; and let the force f act at P in direction PQ perpendicular to S. Then (by Cor. 2. Pr. 56.) the Epgular velocity generated in the ſyſtem by the force ſ will be as SXr AXS AA BXS BCxSCæ O. it will be 6SPbxf ; and if theſe velocities ABCx SO be made equal, we ſhall have SOAx S+ Bx Sb + cx Scæ- Whence the diſtance a B+C ll of the center of gyration O from the axis of motion at S, that is, SO æ S 5æ + BxsE Cx SCarBC Cor. 1. Let b=quantily of matter in any body ABRCS, D any particle, dI/ap, its diſtance ſrom the axis of rotatien SR: then the ſquare of ihe diſtance of the center of 2iation from the axis of motion, that is SC2 I ſum of all the ddp. b , and in the ſyſtem placed in Cor. 2. If any part cf ihe ſyſiem be ſuppoſed to be placed in the center of gration of that particular part, the center of gyration of the whole ſyſtem will coutinue ibe ſame as befcre. For by this Prop. the ſame degree of force which moved this part of the ſyſtem before, along with the reſt; will move it now without any alteration. And therefore if each part of the ſyſtem be collected into its proper center of gyration; the center of gyration of the whole will continue the ſame. Cor. 3. If a circle be deſcribed from G, the center of grovily of ihe ſyſtem, ard the axis of rotation be made to roſs through any point S in its periphery; the diſtance of the center of g~ation from that point will always be the sſame. For (by Cor. 6. Pr. 44.) the quantity AxS4æ  Bx SB + C x SC- will be given. Cor. 4. Let D, G be the diſtances of the centers of oſcillation and gyration from S. then vill õVDX. It follows from this and the laſt Prop. S C H O L. It is the ſame thing on whatever ſide of the axis of rotation SR, the poin: O or center of gyration be taken, provided it be at its proper diſtance. By a computation from Cor. i. the diſtance of the center of gyration from the axis of rotation in the following bodies vill be I. In a right line or ſmall ꝗ&linder (revolving about the end) SOæ length x /. i 2. The plane of a circle, or &linder (revolving about the axis) SO æ radius x v 2.. 3. The periphery of a circle (about the diameter) SO æ radius x V 24 The plane of a circle (about the diameter) SO 7 radius. 5. The ſurface of a ſphere (about the diameter) SOæ rad. x v5. ll 6. A globe (revolving about the diameter) SO æ radius X V 3. 7. In a cone (about the axis) SOæradius X V . If the periphery of a circle revolve about an axis in the center, perpendicular to its plane; it is the ſame thing as if all the matter was collected into any one point in that periphery. And the plane of a circle of double the matter of this periphery, and the ſame diameter, vill in an equal time acquire the ſame angular velocity. SE 1If the matter of any gyrating body were actually to be placed in its center of gyration; it ought either to be diſpoſed of in the circumference of a circle, whoſe radius is SO, or elſe into two points O, diametrically oppoſite, equal and equidiſtant from S. For by this means the center of motions, will be in the center of gravity. And the body will revolve vithout any lateral force towards any ſide. P R O P. LX. It EF be any body at reſt in free ſpace, G its center of gravity, the points S, O, one the center of ſuſpenſion, the other of percuſſion: And if a moving bedy B ſtrike directly againſt the point. O, the motion generated in the hody EF by the ſtroke ſball be ſuch; that iu the time that the body mates one revolution about its center of gravity G, the center of gravity will move forward a ſpace equal to the circumference of a circle whoſe radius is SG. li IEitũ Let the body vibrate about the point s, and in a very ſmall time, from the poſition SGO, come into the poſition s59. Now the arches Gg, Od will be as the velocities of the points G, O, vibrating about ; therefore when it comes into the poſition SGO, if it were diſengaged from the int S; the center of gravity G would ſtill move forward vith the ſame velocity Gg; and the body, intead of revolving. about S, would (by Cor. I. Pr. 49.) revolve about G with the ſame angular motion as before. Therefore if rGo be drawn parallel to Sgã, Gg vill repreſent the velocity of G, and Oo the velocity of O about G. And becauſe Oo, Gg are very ſmall ſimilar arches, therefore their circumferences will be deſcribed in equal times; that is, in the time that O, or the body itſelf, makes one revoIution about G; the point G will advance forward a ſpace, equal to the circumference of a circle whoſe radius is 5G. Now this is the motion acquired by revolving about S. But (by Pr. 57.) if a body ſo revolving, ſtrikes an immoveable object at O; both the progreſfive and circular motion will be deſtroged; and the body will be at reſt. It is evident on the contrary, that if a moving body ſtrike the body at reſt in the point O, with the ſame force; the ſame motion ill vill be reſtored again; and is the ſame as above deſcribed. Cor. 1. At ihe beginoing of the motion, and alſo after every revolution of the body, when the line SGO comes into its original poſition, ſo as to be perpendicular to the line of direltjon OB; the poi s will be at reſ ſor a moment. : For in this poſition, it will be b this Prop ) as velocity of O about G: velocity of G:: OG: GS. And by compoſition, vel. O about G vel. G that is abſolute vel. O: abſolute vel. G:: OG + GS or OS: GS. Therefore ſince the abſolute velocities of O and G are directly as their diſtances from s; it follows that the point s is at reſt. Cor. 2. Let a bod a= G x body EF. 4nd ifV be the velocity which the i A aould receive by the direct body EF (or of its center of gravity G), which it receives by B impinging at O, will be vV. For let » be any particle of the body EF, and sp its diſtance from S. then (by Cor. 3. Pr. 56) if a body Sum of all S? x ꝓ 050q: the ſame angular velocity, by the ſtroke, about S at reſt; as the body EF when ſtruck in O. But (by Cor. I. Pr. 58.) ſum S& X p)=SO xX SG x body EF; SO x SG X body EF SO in O, receives the ſame angular velocity about S, as the point O of the body æF. but vel. of O or 4: vel Gi: SO: SG: for at the beginning of the motion, S is at reſt, by Cor. I. be placed in O, it will receive whence the body or A, placed Cor. 3. The velocity losſt in B by the ſrote will be hody EFSG Tody B X5OJ For the ſum of the motions of all the bodies, after the ſtroke, is the ſame as the motion of B before it. By Prop. X. S C H O L. The point S is by ſome called the ſpontaneous center of rotation; becauſę the body (or ſyſtem of bodies)at the beginning of the motion, moves as it were of its own ancord or without any compulſion, about the center at reſt. P P R OP. LXL Let DE be any body, C its center of grovily; and if from the center C, the circle BES be deſcribed ; and if about BFS as an axis, a cord ASBFS, be wound, and the end fixed at . And if O be the center of oſcillation in reſpect to the center of ſuſpenſion S. Then if the body deſcend by a rotation round the axis BFS, by unwinding the cord ASBF, &e. Then I ſay the ſpace deſcended by the whirling body DE, is to the ſpace deſcended in the ſame time, by a body falling freely, as SC to SOO IE Through the point of contact S and the center of gravity C, draw the horizontal line SCO. Then (by Pr. 58.) the angular velocity of the body about the point of ſuſpenſion s, at the beginning of the motion, vill be the ſame as if the whole bod was placed in O. But if a body was placed in O, its velocity generated at the beginning will be the ſame as of a body falling freely. Therefore drawing Sco infinitely near SCO, and the ſmall arches O0, Cc: then the velocity of O, is to the velocity of the center of gravity C, as Oo to Cc, or as SO to SC; that is the velocity generated by a body falling freely, is to the velocity of the deſcending body DE, as SO to SC. Now fince the points S and O are always in the horizontal line SCO, and the radius SC is given, and likewiſe (by Cor. 4. Pr. 57.) the diſtance CO. therefore the velocities of O and C in any times vill always be as SO to SC: that is the velocity of a body deſcending freely, is to the velocity of the whirling body DE, always in the ratio of SO to SC And therefore (by Prop. 6) the ſpaces deſcribed are in the ſame ratio. Cor. 1. The weight of the body DE, is ſo ihe tenſion of the cord AS; as SO to CO. For let the body be ſupported at O; then ſince C is the center of gravity, therefore (by Cor. Pr. 50. and Cor. 5. Pr. 19) the weight DE is to the preſſure at i, as SO to CO. Now iſ the point O be let go, the force acting at O will generate a motion about s, whilſt the preſſure at S, and conſequently the tenſion of the cord is neither increaſed nor decreaſed, but remains the ſame as before. ll Cor. 2. If a circular body as BES runs down an inclined plane, whilſt the tbread ASB unfolds; or if æ round body rowl down an inclined plane, and by its friction be hindered from ſliding: The ſpace it deſcribes in any time, is lo the ſpace deſcribed by a body ſliding doun freely without friction; as SC to SO. For the forces that generate their motions are both decreaſed, in the ſame ratio, that is as the abſolute Eit& to the relative gravity upon the plane; thereore the ſpaces deſcribed will remain in the ſame ratio of SC to SO. And in the rolling bſ,, the friction ſupplies the place of the cord, the ſame as if iĩt had teeth. lliltæ Cor. 3. This motion of the body DE by rotation, is a motion uniformly accelerated. And ihe tenſion of the cord is always the ſame, thr the whole deſcent. S C H O L. Let æ weight of a body, S æ ſpace deſcribed by a body falling freely. Then the ſpaces deſcribed by rotation or whirling, in the following bodies, as SBF, in the ſame time are, I. In the circumſerence of a circle SBF, or ſurface of a cylinder, ſpace 7 S. tenſion of the ſtring  2W. In the circumference of a circle SBF, weight, and the weight be in the center =S, tenſion of the ſtring=/ o. In the plane of circle SBE, or a cylinde =4%S, and the tenſion of the ſtring 45 In the ſurface of a ſphere SBF; ſpace æ the tenfion of the ſtring 48  3 W. In a ſphere SBF, ſpace æ35, and th ———remumm;—m—;_u S E CT. VII. The quantity and direction of the preſsſure of beams of timber, by their ueight; and ihe forces neceſſary to ſusſtain them. ——— P R O P. IXII. If a beam of timber, be ſupported at C and B, lying upon the wall ACE, with one end. And ifG be the center of gravity of the whole weight ſuſtained: and the line FGH be drawn perpendicular io the horizon, and CF and BH to CB; and BF drawn; Iſay the weight of the whole body FH preſſlure at the to C( BH Thruſt or preſſure at the baſe BCFB, are reſpectively as and in theſe ſeveral directions. If the beam ſupport any weight, the beam and weight muſt be conſidered às one body, whoſe center of gravity is G. Then the end C is ſupported by the plane BCE; and (by Cor. 3. Pr. 53.) the other end B may be ſuppored to be ſuſtained by a plane, perpendicular to BF; therefore (by Cor. I. Pr. 53.) the weight and forces at C and B, are reſpectively as FH, BH, and BF. Cor. 1. Produce FB towards , then BQ is the direction of the preſſure at B. And the preſure at B in directions BQ; FD, DB; are as FB, FD, DB. Cor. 2. Draw Dr perpendicular to BC, and draw CD: then the weight, preſſure at top, direct preſſure at bottom, and horizontal preſſure at hottom; are reſpectively as CB, BD, DC and Dr. For ſince the angles BCF, BDF are right, a circle deſcribed upon the diameter BF, will paſs through C, D. Therefore Z BCD æ BFD ſtanding on the ſame arch BD. And becauſe the Z GBH and Z3 at D are right, BHF = CBD,; therefore the triangles FHB and CBD are ſimilar, and the figure BHDF ſimilar to the figure DBC, whence Fl: BH : BF: BD:: are as CB: BD: DC: and Dr. Cor. 3. All this holds true for any force inſtead of gravity, acting in direftion GD. P R O P. IXIII If BC he any beam, bearing any weight, G the center of gravity of the wholee And if it lean againſt the perpendicular wall CA, and be ſupported in that poſition: draw BA, CF parallel, and FGD perpendicular to the horizon; and draw FB. Then the whole weight preſſure at the top C BD thruſt or preſſure at ihe bottom B (FB are reſpectively as and in the ſame directions. For the end C is ſuſtained by the plane AC; and if the end B be ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained by a plane permndicular to 8. Then (by Cor. 1. Pr. 53.) the weight, and preſſure at top and bottom; are as DF, DB, FB. If you ſuppoſe the end B is not ſuſtained by a plane perpendicular to 7B, the body won't be ſupported at all; by Cor. 2. Pr. 53. Cor. 1. If FB bhe produced to Q; then BQ; is the direction of the preſſure at B. And the perpendicular preſſure at B (FD), is equal to the weight ; and the horizontal preſſure at B (BD) is equal to the preſſure againſi C. P R O P. IXIV. If a heavy heam or one hearing a weight, be ſuſtained at C, and moveable about a point C, whilſt the other end B lies upon the wall BE. And if HGF be draun through the center of gravity G, perpendicular to the horizon; and BF, CH perp. to BC; and CF be drawn: then the whole weight YHF preſſure at B HC force acting at C CF, are reſpectively as dand in theſe directions. For the end B is ſuſtained by the plane CB; and (by Cor. 2. Pr. 53.) the end C may be ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained by a plane perp. to FC; or by a cord in direction CF. Then ſince HC is parallel to BF; the weight, force at C, preſſure at B; are reſpectively as HF, CF, HC; by Cor. I. Pr. ã2. or Cor. i. Pr. 53. Cor. But if inſtead of lying upon the inclined plane at B, the end B laid upon the horizontal plane AB; then the weight, the preſſure at B and G, are reſpectively as BC, GC, and EG: And in this caſe there is no lateral preſſure. For BF will be perpendicular to B4, and parallel to HF, and conſequently CF is alſo parallel to HF, therefore (by Cor. 5. Pr. 19.) the forces at C, G, B are as AG, BC, and Cs. P R O P. LXV. If a heavy b:am BC, whoſe center of gravily is G, be ſupportea upon two poſis BA, CD; and be moveable about the points, 4, B, C, D. And if AB, DC produced meet in any point H, of the line GF, drawn perpendicular to the horizon. And if from any point F, in the line GF, FE be drown parallel to AB; I say the whvle weight HF preſſure at C HE  Thruſi or preſſure at B (EF, are reſpectively as and in theſe directions. For the points 4, B, C, D being in a plane perp. to the horizon; the body may be ſuppoſed to be ſupported by two planes at B, C, perpendicular to AB, DC,; or by two ropes BH, CH. And in either caſe the weight in direction ſG, the preſſure at B, Ci n directions HB, FHC, are as HF, EF, and HE. i Cor. Hence, whether a body be ſuſtained by two ropes BH, CH; or by to poſts AB, CD; or by two planes perpendicular to BA, CD: The body can ihen only be at reſt, when the plumb line HGF paſſes through G, ihe center of gravity of the whole weight ſuſtained or which is the ſame thing, when AB, DC intérſect in the plumb line HGF paſſing ibrough the center of gravit. be fixed, as beforee All the angles at B, C, D &c. and conſequently the whole figure will remain the ſame as before : And that whether the lines AB, BC, CD &c. bhe flexible or inflexible, cords or timbers. This will eaſily appear by the demonſtration of the Prop. For the ratio of the forces at any angle C, will be the ſame, whether they act towards the point C or from it; by Prop. 8. That is, it will be the ſame thing whether the weight at any angle C, acts in direction Cm or Cs. And as the forces were ſuppoſed before to thruſt againſt C, the ſame forces now do pull from it. S CH O LIUM. I DABF be a ſemicircle, whoſe diameter is DF, draw AG perpendicular to DF. Then the force or weight at any place 4, to preſerve the equilibrium, vill be reciprocally as AG', or directly as the cube of the ſecant of the arch B4A Likewiſe it follows from Cor. 5. That if any cords of equal lengths be ſtretched to the ſame degree of curvature, the ſtretching forces will be as the weights of the cords.  E S E CT. VIII. The ſtrength of beams of timber in all poſitions; and their ſtreſs, by am veights acling upon them, or by any forces applied to them. P RO P. LXVII. The lateral ſtrength of any picce of timber, in any place whoſe ſeftion is a rectangle; is directly as the breadih and ſquare of the depth. Let BD be any beam, placed horizontally, and fixed at the end BC. And let AFG be the perpendicular ſection Divide the depth AF into an infinite number of equal parts at a, b, c, d, &c. whoſe number is AF or n; through which ſuppoſe lines drawn parallel to FG. And let any force be applied at P in direction DP, to break the beam at 4F: Ihen ſince the ſtrength of the timber is nothing but the force by which the parts of the timber at a, b. c, &c. cohere together: The breaking the timber is nothing but overcoming this force, and ſeparating the parts at ⸗, b, c. Suppoſe 1 æ force of coheſion of any of the parts Aa, ab, be, &c. And imagine Qda, Qub, QAe, &c. ſo many bended leavers whoſe fulcrum is at A. And let us ſee what will be the ſum of all the forces applied at  to break the timber at 4 Now (by Cor. I. Pr. 19.) the poyer applied at to equal or overcome the reſiſtances at 4, a, b, c, &c. will be o MdadAdb Adece i &c. till æ2 that is as a”Q a”au ã» a a aq” O I 2  I9t: ã9 cu 3 77 Therefore the effect of all the forces ppſe to ꝶ or the whole ſtrength of the beam at 4, will be L2ſ3+n AL m - - that is, becauſe 4Q is given, as un or Aſ-. 2) Nov if the breadth G be increaſed in any proportion; it is evident the ſtrength of every Part Ao, ab, &c. vill be increaſed in the ſame proportion; and therefore the abſolute lateral ſtrength will be as AF- x FG. Cor. 1. In ſquare timber, the lateral lrength is as the cube of the breadth or depth. Cor. 2. And in general, the lateral ſtrengtb of any pleces of timber, whoſe ſeciions are ſimilar figures, are as the cubes of the ſimilar ſides of the ſections. Cor. 3. Aud in any pieces of timber, whoſe ſections are ſuch ures, that the correſpondent ordinates, parallel 17 ihè horizo n, are proportional; the ſtrengths are as the breadihs and  ſuares of the depths; or as the ſections multiplied by the depths. S C H O L. What is here ſaid of timber, is true of any homogeneous bodies whatever ſort of matter they are of. But the abſolute ſtrength of any beam, leaver, rope, &c. vhen drawn in direction of its length, will be as the ſection of it. For every part does in this caſe bear an equal ſtretch; and the ſ um of all the parts is equal to the whole, and that is as the ſection. P R O P. LXVIII The ſtrength of a Tube or hollow cone AB, to that of a ſolid one CD; is as ihe ſection of the tube (excluding the hollow) to the ſection of the ſolid cane, and the diameter of the tube to the diameter of ihe ſolid cane, nearly. For by Cor. 2. of the laſt Prop. the ſtrength of the ſolid cylinder BF is 4F3, and the ſtrength of the inner ſolid cylinder, hoſe fulcrum is æt G, is æG3, and whoſe fulcrum is at  is greater than £G and leſs than Fi, and is nearly 2G+GF AF AED, that is AF3 AF2 x AE nearly. therefore the ſtrength of the tube FIGE, is the difference of the ſtrength of theſe cylinders, that is, 4/4AFt 4 AF:x AE or 34Fax AE. Likewiſe the ſtrength oſ the ſolid cylinder DCH is CH. thereſore the ſtrength of the tube FB: ſtrength of the cylinder ID:: 2AFæ xAE : CH?. but the ſection of the tube is as 472 EG2 or AF- AF2AL 44F X AE nearly, whence ſtrength of the tube B: ſtrength of the cylinder HD :: ?AV XAE : CH X CH? :: AFXAEX17 AF : CH: X CH :: ſection of the tube X 1ĩ its dlameter: ſection of the cylinder X its diameter:: ſect. tube x diameter: ſect. cylinder X diameter nearly. Otherwiſe. Let the area of the ring EGF be diſpoſed into another ring whoſe diameter is leſs than 4F; then ſince every particle of it acts at a leſs diſtance from the fulcrum Iſ, its ſtrength will be leſs in proportion; that is, ĩts ſtrength will be as the diameter of the ring. And when the ring is ſo far dimiriſhed as to become an entire circle, the proportion of their ſtrength will not differ far from the proportion of their diameters. Let the diameter of that circle be »: then ſtrength of the ring or tube: ſtrength of an equal circle:: AF: R. And the ſtrength of R: to that of CH:: R: CH'. Therefore ex equo, ſtrength of the tube BF: ſtrength of the cylinder HD :: AF X} R: R Xx CH :: Al R*: CH X CH: :: AF X area ring: CH x area of the cirele CH. Cor. Hence the ſtrengih of different tubes are as tbeir ſections, and diameters, nearly. P R O P. IXIX. If any force be applied laterally to a leaver, or beam; the ſtreſs upon any place, is directly as the force, and its diſtance from that place. For ſuppoſe PAF to be a bended leaver. It is evident the greater the power at P, the greater force is applied at F to ſeparate the parts of the wood. Alſo the greater the diſtance 4P, the greater power has any given force applied atP, to overcome the coheſion of the wood at . And therefore the whole ſtreſs depends on both. Cor. 1. If two equal weights lye upon the middle of two beams, or upon any other ſimilar places C; the ſtreſs in theſe places, will be as the lengths of the beams. For if C be the middle point; then 4 bears half the weight; therefore the ſtreſs at C is as 4Cx weight, that is, becauſe half the weight, or the force acting at4 is given; therefore the ſtreſs is as AC or half AB, and therefore as 4B. And if C be in any other fmilar ſituation in both beams, the ſame thing will ollow. Cor. 2. If two beams bear two weights proportional to their lengths and in a lie ſituation; the ſtreſs upon each vill be as ibe ſquare of its length. lE Cor. 5. And if two beams bear iwo weights reciprocally as their lengths, in a ſimilar ſituation , the ſtreſswhere the weights lie, is equal in both. P R O P. LXX. Let AB be any beam of a given lengih, ſupported at A and B; and any given weight either ſuſpended at any point C, or equally difſuſed through the whole length of the beam AB: Iſay in cither caſe, the ſreſs cf the beam in C, is as the rectangle ACX CB. CasE I Let the given weight be repreſented by the given length of the leaver 4B. Then (by Cor. 45. Pr. 19) the weight at 4, and the reaction equal thereto, will be CB, And by the laſt Prop. the ſtreſs at C will be æ he force acting at A x diſtance 4C, that is, AC x CasE II Let 48 be divided into an infinite number n of equal parts, each = 1. then as 4B repreſents the whole weight, I will be the weight ſupported upon I part of the beam, let it reſt at 2; then 7  its preſſure on B. Therefore (by the laſt Prop.) the ſtreſs ꝓi i5i; and the ſtreſs at C is ſLæC ariſing from the weight at . Conſequently the ſtreſs at C ariſing from the ſum of all the weights between 4 and l C, will be E&25C  3C, that Is, *bAC» x BC 24B by a like reaſoning, the ſtreſ”™ at C, ariſing from the cauſe AC is the number of them) And whole weight between B and C, will be cB x 22 conſequently the whole ſtreſs at C is ACa x BCL CE? x AC ACHCB L dB lill 218 xXACXCB= Aqx CB 2 n Cor. 1. The greateſt ſireſs of a beam is in the middle, the weight being either ſuſpended ihere, or equally diſpoſed over the whole length of the beam. Cor. 2. The ſtreſs of the beam at any point p, b&y a weight applied to any other point C; is as Ap x CB. VFor ACXCB is the ſtreſs at C, and (by Prop. laſt) AdpxCB will be the ſtreſs at . Cor. 3. The ſtreſs of the beam at any point C, by a weight ſuſpended there; is double the ſireſs of the beam at the ſame peint C, by the ſame weight preſſing uniformly on all paris of the beam. For by caſe 1, the ſtreſs at Cis ACX CB; and by caſe 2, the ſtreſs at C is Acx CB  Cor. 4. The ſtreſs of a beam at any point C by a weight ſuſpended i bere, is double to the ſireſs at C, when ihe ſame weight is uniformly diſperſed on all the parts of Cer. æ. If a weight preſs rqually on all the paris of ?C; the ſireſs at C, by that eſre is to the ſtreſs at C, whn ſupnded at C:: as ApAcC, to 2 4C. For (by Cor. 2.) the ſtreſs at C, by the weight r lying at ꝓ is ApæCB, and at C, is ACXCB. ThereI fore the whole ſtreſs at C, by the whole weight on all the points of C, is the ſum of all the Ap x CB æ Ap p ãp 2... ACx: CB  s x 2CX CB, But the ſtreſs by the whole weight at C is AC x CB x C; and the former is to the latter, as Ap4ac to AC. 2 Cor, 6. If a weight preſs equally on all the parts of Ap ; the ſtreſs at any point C by that weight, is to the ſtreſs at C if ſuſpended there :: as Ap to 2AC. For the ſtreſs at C by all the weight on Ap, is o V12... dpx CEæ a xXCB. And the ſtreſs by the weight 49 at C, is ACKCBxAp. Cor. 7. The ſtreſs at P by a weight at C; is equal to the ſreſs at C, by ihe ſame weight at ꝑ. P R O P. IXXI. If CD be a prominent beam, fixt horizontally at the end C, as in a wall; and if a weight, proportional to the length of the beam, be diſperſed uniformly on all parts of the beam. The ſreſs at any point F, vill be as DFa, the ſquare of the diſtance from the extremily. For let PD be divided into an infinite number of equal parts at 2, ꝗ, 7, s, &c. and let each be æ 1, and ſuſtain the weight I. then (by Pr. 69.) the ſtreſs at , by the weights at F, ꝑ, ꝗ,7, &c. will be ixo, ixFp, ixV4, &c. or as o, I, 2, 3, &c. reſpectively : therefore the whole ſtre at C will be oF 1+2+3... FD 2 Cor. 1. Hence the ſtreſs at F, by a weight ſuſpended Cor. 1. Produce FB towards Q, then B is the direction of the preſſure at B. nd the preſſure at B in directions BQ, FD, DB; are as FB, D, DB. Cor. 2. Draw Dr perpendicular to BC, and draw CD: then the weight, preſſure at top, direct preſſure at bottom, and horizontal preſſure at bottom; are reſpectively as CB, BD, DC and Dr. For ſince the angles BCF, BDF are right, a circle deſcribed upon the diameter BF, will paſs through C, D. Therefore Z BCD  BFD ſtanding on the ſame arch BD. And becauſe the Z GBH and Z3 at D are right, BHF = CBD; therefore the triangles FHB and CBD are ſimilar, and the figure BHDF ſimilar to the figure DBrC, whence FH : BH : BF: BD:: are as CE: BD: DC: and Dr. Cor. 3. All this holds true for any force inſtead of gravity, acting in direftion GD. P RO P. IXIII. If BC he any beam, bearing any weight, G the center of gravity of the wbole. And if it lean againſt the perpendicular wall CA, and be ſupported in that poſition: draw BA, CF parallel, and FGD perpendicular 0 the horion; and draw FB. Then the whole weight FD preſſure at the top C BD thruſt or preſſure at the bottom B (FB are reſpectively as and in the ſame directions. For the end C is ſuſtained by the plane AC; and if the end B be ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained by a plane permndicular to 8. Then (by Cor. 1. Pr. 53.) the weight, and preſſure at top and bottom; are as DF, DB, FB. If you ſuppoſe the end B is not ſuſtained by a plane perpendicular to B, the body wont be ſupported at all; by Cor. 2. Pr. 53. Cor. 1. If FB bhe produced to Q; then BQ; is the direction of the preſſure at B. And the perpendicular preſſure at B (FD), is equal to the weight ; and thæ horizontal preſſure at B (BD) is equal to the preſſure againſi C. P R O P. LXIV. If a heavy beam or one bearing a weight, be ſuſtained at C, and moveable about a point C;, whilſt the other end B lies upon the wall BE. And if HGF be drawn through the center of gravity G, perpendicular to the horiæon; and BF, CH perp. to BC,; and CF be drawn: then the whole weight YHF preſſure at B HC force acling at C CF, are reſpectively as dand in theſe directions. For the end B is ſuſtained by the plane CB; and (by Cor. 2. Pr. 53.) the end C may be ſuppoſed to be ſuſtained by a plane perp. to FC; or b a cord in direction CF. Then ſince HC is parallel to BF; the weight, force at C, preſſure at B; are reſpectively as HF, CF, HC; by Cor. i. Pr. 52. or Cor. 1. Pr. 53. Cer. But if inſtead of lying upon ihe inclined plane at B, the end B laid upon the horizontal plane AB; then the weight, the preſſure at B and G, are reſpectively as BC, GC, and EG: And in this caſe there is no lateral preſſure. For BF will be perpendicular to B4, and parallel to HF, and conſequently CF is alſo parallel to F, therefore (by Cor. 5. Pr. 19.) the forces at C, G, B are as BG, BC, and Cũ. P R O P. LXV. If a heavy b am BC, whoſe center of gravily is G, be ſupporteu upon two poſtis BA, CD; and be moveable about the points, A, B, C, D. And if AB, DC produced meet in any point H, of the line GF, drawn perpendicular to the horizon. And if ſfrom any point F, in the line GF, FE he drawn parallel to B ; I ſay j the whole weight HP preſſure at C HE Thruſt or preſſure at B( EF, are reſpectively as and in theſe directions. For the points 4, B, C, D being in a plane per9 to the horizon; the body may be ſuppoſed ſupported by two planes at B, C, perpendicular to AB, DC; or by two ropes BH, CH. And in either caſe the weight in direction ſG, the preſſure at B, Ci n directions HB, HC, are as HF, EF, and HE. Cor. Hmee, whether a body bæ ſu ſained by two ropes BHE, CH; or by two poſts AB, CD; or by two planes perpendicular to BA, CD: The body can then only be at reſi, when the plumb line HGF paſſes ihrough G, ihe center of gravity of the whole weight ſuſtained. or which is the ſame thing, when AB, DC interſect in the plumb line HGF paſſing lbrough the center of gravity. P R O P. LXVI. If ſeveral beams AB, BC, CD, &c. be joined together at B. C, D, &c. and moveable aboui the points A, B, C, &c. he placel in a vertical plane, the points A, F, being fixt, and ibrough B, C, D, draing ri, sm, Ip, perpendicular to the horiæon. And if ſeveral weights be laid on the angles B, C, D, &. So that : j S. BCD the weight on any angle C may be as S7CB nchThen all the beams will be kept in equilibrio by theſe weighis. Produce DC to r. then (by Cor. Pr. 8.) S. Z ABC: S. L ABr :: weight B: force in direction BC BXS ABr ,na s. BeD: S.DCs :: weight: force in S. ABC CxS. DCs : . direct. CBE= SECO which, to preſerve the equilibrium, muſt be equal to the force in direction BC, Bæ S. ABr Cx S.DCs.  no—m a a : C:: SAEC 55CDO Vhence B S ABC. S.BCD ] SIE- SDCs and by the ſame ay of reaſon ing, C: D:: S. BCD , 5.C DE YfE: SEDi weight B: weight D:: S ABC that is . Therefore ex equo, S.COE.. S. ABrxS. BCs S.DCs xS  EDii0 S. ARC, S.CDE S. ABi } S.CBi * 5.CDpxS. EDp? Cor. 1. Produce CD, ſo that Dw may be equal to Cr, and draw wæ parallel 10o Dp, cutting DE in x. Then the weight C, the forces in directions CB, and CD; are as rB, CB and Cr reſpectively And weight C is to the weight D, as Br to x. ll Cor. 2. The force or thruſt at C in direction CB, or ot B in direction BC; is as the ſecant of the elevation of the line BC above the horiæon. For, force in direction CB: force in direction CD:: CB: Cr :: S. CrB or 7?Cm or sCD: 7rBC:: coſ elevation of CD: coſ. elevation of CB :: ſec. elevation of CB: ſec. elevation of CDO: becauſe the ſecants are reciprocally as the coſines. Cor. 3. Draw Cp, Dm parallel to DE, CB; tlen the veights on C and D to preſerve the equilibrium, will be as Cm to Dp. Anud thereſore if all ihe weights are given and the poſition of two lines CD, DE, then the poſitions of all the reſt CB, BA, &e. will be ſucceſſively found. For let the force in direction CD or DC be CD; then r is the force in direction DE; and Dm, in direction CEE And Dp or the weight D, is the force compounded of DC, Cp: And Cm or the weight C is the ſorce compounded of CD, Dm: by Cor. 2. Pr. ⸗. Cor. 4If the weights lye not on the angles B, C, D, & c. let the places of their centers of gravity be at g&, h, k, I. And let g, h, k, I, alſo expreſs their weights. : AL hC, And take the weight B g+ 5 h, C BV, ED Ct, IE B5 3 1), 0 =5 rI&e. Then B, q, 2cb+556 D = t-  I &. Then B, C D, &c. vill be the weights lying upon the reſpeclive angles. This is evident by Cor. 5. Pr. 19. Cor. 5. If the weights were to act upwards in the directions mC, pD, &c. or which is the ſame thing, if the fizure A, B, C, D, E, F was turncd upſide down, and the weights remain the ſom, and the points 4, s be fixed, as beforee All the angles at B, C, D &c. and conſequently the whole figure vill remain the ſame as before ? And that whether the lines AB, BC, CD &c. be flexible or inflexible, cords or timbers. This will eaſily appear by the demonſtration of the Prop. For the ratio of the forces at any angle C, will be the ſame, whether they act towards the point C or from it; by Prop. 8. That is, it will be the ſame thing whether the weight at any angle C, acts in direction Cm or Cs. And as the forces were ſuppoſed before to thruſt againſt C, the ſame forces now do pull from it. S CH OLIUM. IF DABF be a ſemicircle, whoſe diameter is DF, draw AG perpendicular to DF. Then the force or weight at any place 4, to preſerve the equilibrium, vill be reciprocally as AG, or directly as the cube of the ſecant of the arch B. Likewiſe it follows from Cor. 5. That if any cords of equal lengths be ſtretched to the ſame degree of curvature, the ſtretching forces will be as the weights of the cords. l  m S E CT. VIII. The ſtrengtb of beams of timber in all poſitions; and their ſtreſs, by a veights acling upon them, or by any forces applied to them. P RO P. LXVII. The lateral ſtrengib of any picce of timber, in any place whoſe ſection is a rectangle; is directly as the breadib and ſquare of the depth. Let BD be any beam, placed horizontally, and fixed at the end BC. And let AFG be the perpendicular ſection Divide the depth AF into an infinite number of equal parts at a, b, c, d, &c. whoſe number is AF or n; through which ſuppoſe lines drawn parallel to FG. And let any force be applied at P in direction DP, to break the beam at 4F: I hen ſince the ſtrength of the timber is nothing but the force by which the parts of the timber at a, b. c, &c. cohere together: The breaking the timber is nothing but overcoming this force, and ſeparating the parts at ⸗, b, c. Suppoſe 1 m force of coheſion of any of the parts Aa, ab, be, &c. And imagine QAa, Qub, QAe, &c. ſo many bended leavers whoſe fulcrum is at A. And ]et us ſee what will be the ſum of all the forces applied at Q to break the timber at 4 Now (by Cor. 1. Pr. 19.) the poyer applied at Lto equal or overcome the reſiſtances at 4, a, b, c, &c. will be o Modb Ade Ad  AF  ,, ,  &c. till /, that is as a”’Zãa” ã” ã”l] a”] a 4 2L23  Therefore the efa a4 4a” aQ A~g fect of all the forces applied to Q, or the whole ſtrength - lill l llil . n of the beam at 4, will be oI Lor3.+n or um - - y 5, that is, becauſe 4Q is given, as un or AP-. 2% No if the breadth G be increaſed in any proportion; it is evident the ſtrength of every Part Aa, ab, &c. will be increaſed in the ſame proportion; and therefore the abſolute lateral ſtrength will be as 4F- x FG. Cor. 1. In ſquare timber, the lateral ſrength is as the cube of the breadth or depth. Cor. 2. Aud in general, the lateral ſtrengtb of any pleces of timber, whoſe ſeciions are ſimilar figures, are as the cubes of the ſimilar ſides of the ſections. Cor. 3. Aud in any pieces of timber, whoſe ſections are ſuch figures, that the correſpondent ordinates, purallel to the horiæon, are proportional; the ſirengths are as the breadihs and ſquares of ihe depths; or as the ſeflions multiplied by the depths. S C H O L. What is here ſaid of timber, is true of any homogeneous bodies whatever ſort of matter they are of. But the abſolute ſtrength of any beam, leaver, rope, &c. when drawn in direction of its length, will be as the ſection of it. For every part does in this caſe bear an equal ſtretch; and the ſum of, all the parts is equal to the whole, and that is as the ſection. P R O P. LXVIII. The ſtrength of a Tube or hollow cane AB, to that of a ſolid one CD; is as the ſection of the tube (excluding the hollow) to the ſection of the ſolid cane, and the diameter of the tube to the diameter of the ſolid cane, nearly. For by Cor. 2. of the laſt Prop. the ſtrength of the ſolid cylinder BF is 4F3, and the ſtrength of the inner ſolid cylinder, hoſe fulcrum is at G, is G3, and whoſe fulcrum is at ? is greater than EG? and leſs than £F3, and is nearly 2GGF AF AE, that is AP3 AFæ x AE nearly. therefore the ſtrength of the tube FIGE, is the difference of the ſtrength of theſe cylinders, that is, 4F'AdAPF 3 AF x AE or 34F2x AE. Likewiſe the ſtrength oſ the ſolid cylinder DCH is CH:. therefore the ſtrength of the tube FB: ſtrength of the cylinder I/ID:: LAF⸗ xAE : CH?. but the ſection of the tube is as 4F2 EG2 or AF- AF24E  4A4F X AE nearly, whence ſtrength of the tube FB: ſtrength of the cylinder HD :: 2 AF XAE: CH X CH? :: 4.4FXAEX1% AF : CHæ X CH :: ſection of the tube X i7 its dlameter: ſection of the cylinder X its diameter:: ſect. tube x diameter: ſect. cylinder x diameter nearly. Otherwiſe. Let the area of the ring EGF be diſpoſed into another ring whoſe diameter is leſs than 4F; then ſince every particle of it acts at a leſs diſtance from the fulcrum I⸗, its ſtrength will be leſs in proportion; that is, its ſtrength will be as the diameter of the ring. And when the ring is ſo far diminiſhed as to become an entire circle, the proportion of their ſtrength will not differ far from the proportion of their diameters. Let the diameter of that circle be ſ then ſtrength of the ring or tube: ſtrength of an equal circſe:: AF: R. And the ſtrength of R: to that of CH:: R': CH.. Therefore ex equo, ſtrength of the tube B7: ſtrength of the cylinder HD :: AF x R: R Xx CH :: AF R: CH X CH2 :: AF X area ring: CH x area of the cirele CH. Cor. Hence the ſrengih of different tubes are as their ſections, and diameters, nearlg. P R O P. LXIX. If any force be aopplied laterally to a leaver, or heam; the ſtreſs upon any place, is directly as the force, and its diſtance from that place. For ſuppoſe PAF to be a bended leaver. It ĩs evident the greater the power at P, the greater force is applied at F to ſeparate the parts of the wood. Alſo the greater the diſtance 4P, the greater power has any given force applied atP, to overcome the coheſion ofthe wood at F. And therefore the whole ſtreſs depends on both. Cor. 1. If two equal weights lye upon the middle of two beams, or upon any other ſimilar places C; the ſtreſs in theſe places, will be as the lengtbs of the beams. For if C be the middle point; then 4 bears half the weight; therefore the ſtreſs at C is as ACx weight, that is, becauſe half the weight, or the force acting atA is given; therefore the ſtreſs is as AC or half AB, and therefore as 4B. And iſ C be in any other ſmilar ſituation in both beams, the ſame thing will llow. Cor. 2. If two beams heor two weights proportional to their lengihs and in a lie ſituation; ibe ſireſ upon each vill be as ihe ſquare of its length. Cor. 53. And if two beams bear ro weights reciprocally as their lengths, in a ſimilar ſituation ,tbe ſtreſswhere the weights lie, is equal in both. P R O P. IXX. Let AB be am beam of a given length, ſupported ot A and B; and any given weight either ſuſpended at any point C, or equally difſuſed through the whole lengih of the beam AB : Iſay in cither caſe, the ſirqſs of the beam in C, is as the rectangle ACX CB. Casz I Let the given weight be repreſented by the given length of the leaver 4B. Then (by Cor. 4. Pr. i9) the weight at 4, and the reaction equal thereto, will be CB. And by the laſt Prop. the ſtreſs at C will be the force acting at A x diſtance 4C, that is, AC x CB. CasE II Let 4B be divided into an infinite number n of equal parts, each  1. then as 4B repreſents the whole weight, I will be the weight ſupported upon I part of the beam, let it reſt at ; then  its preſſure on B. Therefore (by the laſt Prop.) the ſtreſs Ap x BC AB ariſing from the weight at 2. Conſequently the ſtreſs at C ariſing from the ſum of all the weights between 4 and 1I1+23... AC at 2 is iæ=E and the ſtreſs at C is C, will be 5 x BC; that is, (becauſe AC is the number of them) , And by a like reaſoning, the ſtreſs at C, ariſing from the whole weight between B and C, vill be cB x AC 24B conſequently the whole ſtreſs at C is AC: x BCL CE? Xx AC ACHCB dB  248 xXACXCB= AGx CB 2 o Cor. 1. The greateſt ſireſs of a beam is in the middle, the weight being either ſuſpended there, or equally diſpoſed over the whole length of the beam. Cor. 2. The ſtreſs of the beam at any point p, b weight opplied to any other point C; is as Ap x CB. For ACXCB is the ſtreſs at C, and (by Prop. laſt) AdpxCB will be the ſtreſs at .. Cor. 3. The ſreſs of the beam at an point C, by æ weight ſuſpended there; is double ihe ſtreſs of the beam at the ſame point C, by the ſame weight preſſing uniformly on all parts of the beam. For by caſe 1, the ſtreſs at C is ACX CB; and by dCx CB : caſe 2, the ſtreſs at C is a. Cor. 4. The ſireſs of a beam at an point C by a weight ſupended ibere, is double to the ſreſs at C, when the ſame weight is uniformly diſperſed on all the paris of AC. li Cer. æ. If a weight preſs equally on all the paris of ?PC; the ſireſs at C, by that rſlre is to the ſtreſs at C, when ſupnded at C:: as Ap+AC, to 24C. For (by Cor. 2.) the ſtreſs at C, by the weight r lying at ꝓ is ApxCB, and at C, is ACXCB. ThereI fore the whole ſtreſs at C, by the whole weight on all the points of 2C, is the ſum of all the 4p x CB æ —— —p—m— C Ap pi1 Ap +2... ACx: CB ſr/ac 2C X CB. But the ſtreſs by the whole weight at C is AC x CB x C; and the former is to the latter, as aaC ac. 2 x Cor, 6. If a weight preſs equally on all ihe parts of Ap; the ſtreſs at any point C by that weight, is to the ſtreſs at C if ſuſpended there:: as Ap to 2AC. For the ſtreſs at C by all the weight on Ap, is o +172,.. dpx CB = a x CB. And the ſtreſs by the weight Ap at C, is ACxCBXAP. Cor. 7. The ſtreſs at p by a weight at C; is equal to the ſireſs at C, by the ſame weight at p. P R O P. IXXI. If CD be a prominent beam, fixt horizontally at the end C, as in a wall ; and if a weight, proportional to the lengih of the beam, be diſperſed uniformly on all parts of the beam. The ſtreſs at any point F, vill be as DFa, the ſquare of the diſtance from the extremily. For let FD be divided into an infinite number of equal parts at ꝑ, q, 7, s, &e. and let each be æ1, and ſuſtain the weight I. then (by Pr. 69.) the ſtreſs at , by the weights at F, ꝑ, q, 7, &c. will be ixo, ixFp, ixFq, &sc. or as o, 1, 2, 3, &c. reſpectively: thereforè 2he whole ſtreſs at C ill be o+1V+2+3... FD= 7 Cor. 1. Hence the ſtreſs at F, by any weight ſuſpended at D; vill be double the streſs at the ſame point F, when the ſame weight preſſes uniformly on all the paris between F and D. For (by Pr. 69.) the ſtreſs at Fby the veight DF, is DFXDF, or FDCor. 2. The ſtreſs at the end BC, by the weight P, is the ſame as the ſreſs upon the middle of a beam of twice the length DC, vith twice the weight P laid on its middle ; this beam being ſupported at both ends. For the ſtreſs now at C is the ſame as if DC was continued to the ſame length beyond C; and à weight equal to P ſuſpended at the end; andthen the ſulcrum C will be acted on with twice the weight P. And this is the ſame as if the beam was turned upſide down, and twice the weight  laid on the middle C. P R O P. LXXII. If there he two bheams ſtanding aſlope, and bearing two weights upon them, either in the middle, or in any given ſituation, or equally diffuſed over the whole length of the beams : The ſtreſs upon them vill be directly as the weights, and the lengtbs, and the coſines of elivation. For ( by Cor. I. Pr. 31.) the weight is to the preſfure upon the plane, as radius to the eoſ. elevation. Therefore the preſſure is as coſ. elevation x weight: And this is the force acting againſt the beam. Therefore (by Pr. 68.) the ſtreſs will be as its length and this force; that is, as the length, the weight, and coſ. elevation. Cor. 1. If ihe weights and length of the beams be the ſame: the ſreſs ill be as the coſine of elevation; and therefore greateſt when it lies horizontal. Cor. 2. If the beams lye horizontal, or at any equal inclinations; and the weight be as the length; then the ſtreſs is as the ſquare of the length. Cor. 3. If the weights are equal, on the horixontal beam AB, and the inclined one AC: and BEC be perp. to AB: then the ſtreſs will be equal upon both. lil For the length X coſ. elevation is the ſame in both, or ACB coſ. A æ AB X radius. Cor. 4. But if the weights on the ſame beams be as their lengths; then ihe ſtreſs will alſo be as their lengths, AB and AC. Cor. 5. And univerſally, the ſtreſs upon an point of a ſloping beam, is as the rectangle of the ſegments, and ibe weight, and coſ. inclination directly; and the lengih of the beam reciprocally. For in the horizontal beam 4B, if the welght & lie upon C, the preſſure at 4 will be 5 x l. and (by Prop. 69.) this preſſure or force x diſtance AC, vill be as the ſtreſs at C; that is, Athe ſtreſs at CCAnd if the beam lie aſlope, the ſtreſ™ (by Cor. 1 Pr. 31.) will then vary in proportion to the coſ. elevation. 3li x VW is as P R O P. IXXIII. It any beam of timber be to ſupport any weight, or preſſure, or force acting laterally upon it; the breadib multiplied by ihe ſmuaore of the deptb, or in ſimilar sſections, the cube of ibe diameter, in every place; ought to be proportional to the lengih multiplied by the weight or force acting on it; or as the ſireſs in that place. and the ſame is true of ſeveral different pieces of timber compared together For every ſeveral piece of timber, as well as every part of the ſame timber or beam, ought to have its ſtrength proportioned to the weight, Jorce, or prefſure it is to ſuſtain. And therefore the ſtrengih ought to be univerſally as the ſt7eſs upon it. But (by Pr. 67.) the ſtrength is as the breadth X ſquare of the depth. And (by Pr. 69.) the ſtreſs is as the weight or force X by the diſtance it acts at. And thereſore theſe muſt be in an invariable ratio. Cor. 1. If AEB be a prominent beam fixt at ihe end AE, and ſuſtaining a weight at the other end B. And if the ſecions in all places be ſimilar figures; and CD be the diameter in any place C; then CB vill be every where as CD:. And if ACB be a right line, EDB will be a cubic parabola. Therefore 7 of ſuch a beam may be cut away without any diminution of the ſtrengih. But if ibe beam be bounded ly two parallel planes, perpendicular to the horizæon; then CB vill be as CD?, and then EDB will he the common parabola. whence a thir d part of a beam may be thus cut awayCor. 2. But if a weight preſs uniformly on every part of AB; aond the ſections in all points as C, be ſimilar, then BC- will be every where as CD*; and EDB a ſemi-cubical parabola. But if the beam be bounded by porallel planes, perp to the horizon; that BC vill be as CD, and EDB a right line. here ralf g beam may be cut away, vithout loſing any ſtrength. Cor. 3. If AB bhe a beam ſupported at both ends, and if it bear a weight in any variable poiut C, or uniformly on all the parts of it. And if all the ſections be ſimilar figures, and CD be the diameter in that place C; then vwill CD? be every where as AC X CB. But if it be bounded by two parallel planes, pe p. to 1he horiæon; then will CD? be every where as AC x CB, and therefore the curve ADB is an ellipſis, ſuppoſing AB a right linę. Cor. 4. But if a weight be placed at any given point P, and all ſections ure ſimilar figures; and if CD be any diameter; then will BC be as CD}; and AQ and BQ are two cubic parabolas. But if the beam be bounded by two parallel planes, perp. to the horizon; then BC is as CD, and AQ and B are two common parabolas. S C H O L. All theſe things appear from the foregoing propoſitions, but it is here ſppoſed that the timber is homogeneous and of the ſame goodneſs; otherwiſe a proper allowance muſt be made for the defect. And vhat is here ſaid of pieces of timber, holds equally true of any other ſolid bodies, ſuch as pieces of metal, ſtone, &c. And if pieces of timber or metal be cut into the figures mentioned in the foregoing corollaries, all the parts will be diſpoſed to break together. And if a ſpring is to be made, its ſhape ought to be as in Cor. . And then every part will bear a ſtreſs proportional to its ſtrength. P R O P. LXXIV. If a weight A be ſupported upon the end of a crooked piece of timber ABD; and from the ends, a line AB be drawn perpendicular to the horizon ; and from the angle B, the line BC perp. to AD: The ſireſs at B will be as the perpendicular BC. For as the weight at 4 acts not in direction 4B, but in direction 4D; therefore it is the ſame as if it were applied at the point CC But a force applied at C, has a greater power to break the timber at B, in proportion as the leaver BC is longer. This force therefore, or the ſtreſs at B is as BC. Cor. 1. Hence if any tuo forces acting from or againſi one another, at the ends A, F, of any crooked beam ABDEF, and keep one another in equilibrio; and the line AF or the direclion of the forces being drawn: The ſtreſs at any point, is as the perpendic. upon AF. So ihe ſtreſs at b is bc; at B, BC; at D, DI; at E, EX: And at G, H, nothing. Cor. 2. Hence alſo; that the ſtrength in any part b, may be proportional to the ſtreſs there; the breadih multiplied by the ſquare of the depth, muſt be as the perpendicular be : reconing that the depth, which is in the plane paſſing through AF. PR OP. LXXV. Haoving the lengtb AB and weight W, of a &linder or priſm, that can juſt ſupport the weight P at the end ; to find the length of another beam FG, ſimilar to the former, and of the ſame matter, that vill Juſt breat with its own eight, or only ſupport iſer P R O P. LXXIV. If a weight A4 he ſupported upon the end of a crooked piece of timber ABD; and from the ends, a line AB be drawn perpendicular to the horiæon ; and ſrom the angle B, the line BC perp. to AD: The ſireſs at B will be as the perpendicular BC. For as the weight at 4 acts not in direction 4B, but in direction 4D; therefore it is the ſame as if it were applied at the point CC But a force applied at C, has a greater power to break the timber at B, in proportion as the leaver BC is longer. This force therefore, or the ſtreſs at B ĩs as BC. Cor. 1. Hence if any two forces acting from or againſi one another, at the ends A, F, of any crooked beam ABDEF, and heep one another in equilibrio; and the line AF or the direction of the forces being drawn: The ſtreſs at any point, is as the perpendic. upon AF. So the ſtreſs at b is bc; at B, BC; at D, DI; at E, EX: And at G, H, nothing. Cor. 2. Hence olſo; that the ſirength in any part b, may be proportional to the ſtreſs there; the breadib multiplied by the ſquare of the depth, muſt be as the perpendicular be : reckoning that the depth, which is in ihe plane paſſing through AF. PR OP. LXXV. Having the lengib AB and weight W, of a &linder or priſm, that can juſt ſupport ithe weight P at the end; to find the length of another beam FG, ſimidar to the former, and of ibe ſame matier, that vill Juſt break with its own weight, or only ſupport itſelf. Since the weights of ſimilar ſolids of the ſame matter are as the cubes of the lengths, it will be4B: ?:: FG*: FG- W æ the weight of the beam G. then AB: by Cor 2. Pr. 6. The ſtrength of the beam 4B is AC; and of , is FHl. And by Prop. 69. the ſtreſs at 4 is 7FP x aB ſ And the ſtreſs at  is WxFG. And ſince the beams are both —— to - ith theſe weights; therefore the ſtrength muſt be as the ſtreſs, that ĩs, FG* WdxAB: 78 wi:: AC:: FH?) :: AB': FG. FGHw 2 Whence = FG: x a8 x P W+4. or FG X =AB x : W24, whence : vta⸗ :: 4B: FG, the length required. Cor. 1. If eW=A. then FG|RNAB x — Cor 2. Hence there is one and only one beam that vill juſt brea by its own weight, or juſt ſuſtain itſelf. Cor. 3. The ſame Prop. will litewiſe hold good, inregord to h heams ſupported at both ends and breating in the midale, by Cor. 3. Prop. 70. Cor. 4. If the beam FG hreat by its own auin ⸗ beam of tice the length of FG, and ſupported at both ends will alſo break by its on  uegh or if one ſu iain itſelf, the other will. For the ſtreſs is the ſame in both of them, by Cor 3. Prop. 70. and Cor. I. Prop. 71. each of them being equal to the ſtreſs of a beam, twice the length of FG, and ſuſpended in the middle. P R O P. LXXVI. If any welght be laid on the heam AB, as at C, or a force applied to it at C; the beam will be bent thro a ſpace CD proportional to the weight or force applied at C. nd the reſiſtauce of the beam will be as the ſace it is bent through, nearly. ln order to find the law of reſiſtance of beams of timber or ſuch like bodies, againſt any weights laid upon them, or ſtraining them; I took a piece of wood planed ſquare; and ſupporting it at both ends 4, B, I laid ſucceſſively on the middle of it at G, I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7, and 8 pounds; and I found the middle point C to deſcend through the ſpaces 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;7, and 8, reſpectively. And repeating the ſame experiment with the weights 3, 6, 5 Ib. they all deſcended through ſpaces, either accurately or very nearly as the numbers 1, 2, 3. I tried the fame thing with ſprings of meral, and found the ſpace through which they were bent, proportional to the weight ſuſpended.. I alſo tried ſeveral experiments of this kind with wires, hairs, and other elaſtic flexible bodies, by hanging weights at them: And I found that the increaſe of their Iengths, by ſtretching, was, in each of them, proportional to the weights hung at them. Except when they were going to break, and then the increaſe was ſomething greater. It may be obſerved that none of theſe bodies regained their firſt Figure, when the weights were taken off, except well tempere ſprings; ſo that there are no natural bodies perfectly elaſtic. And even ſprings are obſerved by experience to grow weãker by often bending; and by remaining ſome time unbent, will recover pant ſtrength: And are ſomething ſtronger in cold than in hot weather. But at any time a ſpring, and all ſuch bodies obſerves this law, that they have the leaſt reſiftance when leaſt bent, and in all caſes are nearly bent through ſpaces proportional to the weights or forces applied. And therefore Ithink this law is ſufficiently eſtabliſhed, that the reſiſtance, any of theſe bodies makes, is proportional to the ſpace thro which it is bent; or that it exerts a force proportional to the diſtance it is ſtretched to. The knowledge of this property of ſpringy bodies is of great uſe in mechanicss For by this means a ſpring may be contrived to pull at all times with equal ſrength, as in the fuſee of a watch. Or it may be made to draw in any proportion of ſtrength required. The action of a r ring may be compared to the lifting up a chain of weights, lying upon a plain; or to the lifting a cylinder of timber out of the water endways. P R O P. LXXVII To ſind the lateral ſtrength of any heam of timber, whaſe tranſverſe ſection is any figure whatſoever. Let ERG be the ſection of the beam in the place vhere it breaks. Draw the ordinates IN, in; infinitely near each other and parallel to the baſe æG. put ER æd, EIæn RG æb, IR / I 5 rbe ũbſolutt ſirengtb of one fibre of the wood æ1, When the beam breaks, it is done by the ſeparation of the parts of the wood at E. Therefore Q”RE muſt be eſteemed a bended leaver, whoſe fulcrum is at æ. When the beam breaks, the fibres at Z are ſtretched to their full ſtrength, but thoſe nearer R are leſę ſtretched, and exert leſs force or reſiſtance in proportion to their diſtance from R (by the laſt Prop. ); and therefore the reſiſtance of a fibre at T= ; and the reſiſtance of all the fibres in the parallelogram ſn, æ x In; and the power of all the fibres in the parallelogram, in regard to the brachium IR ,is= x In. And the ſum of all the powers in the whole ſection = = ſum of all the Y ia x In. Let g, P, be the diſtance of the center of gravity and percuffion from RG, as the axis of motion. Then (by Cor. 1. Prop. LVIL) the ſum of all the v x In æ gꝑ x ſum of all the In = g& x ſection ERG. And the ſum of all thex In x ſection ERG. therefore the ſtrength of the beam at E is l x ſuction ERGC Cor. 1. If there be taken ROæ g a then all the fibres of the wood being ſuppoſed to be collected in O, and acting there with their full ſtrength; their total ſrengih at O, ſhall bẽ equal to the be ſirengih of the beam, at the ſection EEG. For ſuppoſe O to be ſuch a point; then the ſtrength of the beam, or &ſ x ſection ERG æ RO x ſection ERG, and RO æ. Cor. a If the ſection be a porallelogram g=3 d, and In a circle whoſe diameter is ER, g mi2 d, p = 3 4, and RO % d,æ4 d, nearly, as in the parallelogram. In the periphery of a circle (the beam being a hollow cane) g 4 d, and p =m 4 d, whence ROæ  d, /4d, nearly: as in the parallelogram. P R O P. LXXVIII. Given the weight that will break a beam laterallv, to find how much vill break it when drawn in direction of its length. Let DR be the beam. put l = its length DE, W  weight applied at D, that can breat it at E, d  depth ERR, g diſtance of the center of gravity of ihe ſection ERG from R, P = diſtance of the center of percuſſion of ERG from RG, then ai W— weight that will break it when drawn in direction of its length. But if the beam be ſupported at both ends, and ihe weight breoks it in the middle; ꝗ and ꝑ muſt be meaſurd from the upper ſide, and tae I for half its length, W jor half the weight that breas it. ĩill For by Cor. I. of the laſt Prop. if ROæ / i then all the fibres of the beam acting at O, will be equal to the ſrength of the beam; and ſince V, appli-d at D, can break it in either caſe, therefore by the nature of the leaver, it will be, I x W  RO x abſolute ſtrength g x abſolute ſtrength, therefore the abſolute ſtrength H or the weight that can break b it when drawn in length. Cor. Hence if there be taken RL g then the weight which being applied at L, will juſt break the heam horiæontally; the ſame ill juſt pull it aoſunder, when applied lengtbways. : For then I , and weight Wæ reſiſtance atO = ſtrength of the whole beam. ſTherefore if a piece of oak an inch ſquare and a foot long ſupported at both ends, bears 315 lIb. before it breaks; it will bear, when drawn in length, 2835 Ib. or I tun, 5 hundreds, 2 ſtone, 7 pounds; that ĩs, above a tun and a quarter. S C H O L. Here we all along ſuppoſe that the fulcrum at R remains fixt; but if it ou vary by the denting in of the parts at R, it will cauſe a little variation in the ſtrength, and make the beam ſomething weaker laterally. And that it will yield a little this way is evident from experiments, for the hardeſt bodies, ſuch as glaſs in ſmall threads, may be extended in length, and conſequently may be contracted by a contrary force; and balls oſ glaſs or wood let fall upon a hard body, will rebound; which they cannot do without the denting in of the parts, P R O P. LXXIX, If a weight be laid upon the ſtreight beam AB ſupported at both ends; its bending or curvature will be nearly, as the weight and lengib direcily; and as ibe breadth and cube of the depih reciprocally. It is found by Prop. 76. that if ſeveral weights be laid ſucceſſively upon a horizontal beam 4B, the ſpace CD through which the point D deſcends will be as the weight it bears. Now the parts at e, f, which are contiguous at the beginning of the deſcent, are gradually ſeparated; till at laſt the beam breaks. At which time, when it can bear no more, the infinitely ſmall diſtance ef is a given quantity. IF CD be ſuppoſed very ſmall, then CD is as the curvature at D, and this curvature is as the infinitely ſmall angle æDf, that is,; as i and when it breaks, as DF iiili Df Let L be the length of any beam, b its breadth, Df its depth; then (by Pr. 73.) its ſtrength, or the weight it will bear, is as b æ i Thereſore put bx Df ꝶ æũ for the greateſt weight, and F for the cur vature when breaking; & for any other weight, and C the correſpondent curvaturee And it will be as b©xDſf-. 1.. ::i W: C m/ao L Df bx Df Cor. 1. The quantity of deflexion CD of any beam, is as the weight and cube of the lengib direcily, and the breadth and cube of the depth reciprocally For when CD is very ſmall, AlB is very near a circle, or nearer a parabola; ſuppoſe it a circle and let its radius be R; then 2 R X CDO æ AD: or : LL; therefore cD CDO. wh pu,u h 7Z 5 whence TE is as the cur . LWV . vL? vature , that ĩs, as 5DP or CD is as ũ And if ACB, the original poſition of the beam, is not a right line; yet CD will ſtill be of the ſame quantity. Cor. 2. In ſimilar homogeneous ſtreight bodies, the curvature is as the weight direcily, and cube of the depth reciprocally: but the deflexion CD is as the weight direciby, and depth reciprocally. Cor. 3. In ſimilar bodies bending from a ſtreight line b their own weight; the curvature is given: And the deflexion is as the ſquare of the depth. Cor. 4. In the utmoſt ſtrength of beams, or their breaing poſiiion; the curvature is reciprocally as the depth ; and the defiexion as the ſquare of the length directly, and the depth reciprocall). For then bx Dſæ is as LW. Cor. 5. What is ſaid of ſtreight beams, is equally truæ of any beams in regard to the increaſe or variation of nu and to the deflection from their original poition. | S C H O L. What is ſaid of beams of timber in this ſection, is equally applicable to any ſolid bodies, acted on in a like manner as by weights. There are ſome bodies, in which a very little bending may have a great effect; as in the glaſies of large teleſcopes. For (by Cor. 3. of the laſt Prop) the deflexion from their true figure, ariſing ſrom their own weight, is as the ſquare of the diameter, when the glaſſes are ſimilar. And though this be inſenſible in ſmall glaſſes, it may produce ſome ſenſiblè error in large ones: And the ſame may happen to them in grinding by too much preſſure. From the foregoing propoſitions it follows, that if a certain beam oſ timber be able to ſupport a given weight; another beam of the ſame timber, ſimilar to the former, may be taken ſo great, as to be able but juſt to bear its own weight. And any bigger beam cannot ſupport itſelf, but muſt break by its own weight; and any leſs beam will bear ſomething more. For the ſtrength being as the cube of the depth; and the ſtreſs, being as the matter and length, is as the fourth power oſ the depth: It is plain the ſtreſs increaſes in a greater ratio than the ſtrength. Whence it follows that a beam may be taken ſo large, that the ſtreſs may far exceed the ſtrength. And that of all ſimilar beams, there is but one that will ſupport itſelf and nothing more. Likewiſe if any beam can bear ten times its own weight; no other ſimilar beam vill do the ſame. And the like holds in all machines and in all animal bodiess. And hence there is a certain limit, in regard to magnitude, not only in all machines and artificial ſtructures, but alſo in natural ones, which neither art nor nature can go beyond; ſuppoſing them made of the ſame matter and in the ſame proportion of parts. Hence it is impoſſible that mechanic engines can be increaſe to any bigneſs For when they arrive at a particular ſize, their ſeveral parts will break and fall aſunder by their weight. Neither can any buildings of vaſt bigneſs be made to ſtand, but muſt fall to pieces by their great weight, and go to ruin. Vaſt colunms and pyramids will break by their weight; and tumble down. It is likewiſe impoſſible for nature to produce animals of any vaſt ſize at pleaſure; or any ſuch thing as giants, or men of prodigious ſtature; except ſome ſort of matter can be found to make the bones u whic which is ſo much harder and ſtronger than any hitherto known: or elſe that the proportion of the parts be ſo much altered, and the bones and muſcles made thicker in proportion; which will make the animal diſtorted and of a monſtrous figure, and not capableè of performing any proper action. And being made ſimilar and of common matter; they wont be able to ſtand or move, but being burdened by their oun weight, muſt fall down. Thus it is impoſſible that there can be any animal ſo big as to carry a caſtle upon his back; or any man ſo ſtrong as to remove a mountain, or pull up a large oak by the roots: Nature will not admit of theſe things; whence it is impoſſible there can be animals of any ſort beyond a determinate bigneſs. Fiſh may indeed be produced to a larger ſize than land animals; becauſe their weight is ſupported by the water. But yet they cannot be increaſed to immenſity. becauſe the internal parts will preſs upon one another by their weight, and deſtroy their fabric. On the contrary when the ſize of animals is diminiſhed, their ſtrength is not diminiſhed' in the ſame proportion as the weightt. And therefore a ſmall animal vill carry far more than its own weight, whilſt a great one cannot carry ſo much as its weight. And hence it is, that ſmall animals are more active, will run faſter, jump further, or perform any motion quicker, for their weight, than large animals: For the leſſer the animal the greater the proportion of the ſtrength to the ſtreſss And nature ſeems to know no bounds, as to the ſmallneſs of animals, at leaſt in regard to their weight. Neither can any two unequal and ſimilar machines, reſiſt any violence alike, or in the ſame proportion; but the greater will be more hurt than the leſſer. And the ſame is true of animals; for large animals, by falling break their bones, whilſt leſſer ones falling higher receive no damage. Thus a cat may fall two or llli three three yards high and be no worſe,, and an ant from the top of a tower. It is likewiſe impoſſible in the nature of things, that there can be any trees of immenſe bigneſs; If there vere any ſuch, their limbs, boughs, and branches muſt break and fall down by- tneir great weight. Thus is impoſſible there can be an oak a quarter of a mile high; ſuch a tree cannot grow or ſtand, but its limbs willdrop off by their weightt. And hence likewiſe leſſer plants can better ſuſtàin themſelves than large ones can do. Neither could a tree of an ordinary ſize be able to ſtand, if it was compoſed of the ſame tender matter that ſome plants conſiſt of. Nor ſuch a plant if it was much bigger than common. And that plants, made of ſuch tender matter may better ſupport themſelves; Nature has made the trunks and branches of many of them hollow; by which means they are both lighter and ſtrongerr. The propoſitions before laid down, concerning the ſtrength and ſtreſs of timber, &c. are alſo of excellent uſe in ſeveral concerns of life, and particularly in architecture; and upon theſe principles a great many problems may be reſolved relating to the due proportion of ſtrength in ſeveral bodies, according to their particular poſitions and weights they are to bear; ſome of which I ſhall briefly enumerate. If a piece of timber is to be holed with a mortiſe hole, the beam will be ſtronger when it is taken out of the middle, than if it be taken out of either ſide. And in a beam ſupported at both ends, it is ſtronger when the hole is taken out of the upper ſide than the under one, provided a piece of wood is driven hard in to fill up the hole. Ifa piece is to be ſpliced upon. the end of a beam, to be ſupported at both ends; it will be ſtronger when ſpliced on the underſide of the beam, than on the upper ſide, But if the beam is ſupported only at one end, to bear a weight on the other; it is ſtronger when ſpliced on the upper ſide. : When a ſmall leaver, &c. is naiſed to a body, to move it or ſuſpend it by; the ſtrain is greater upon the nail neareſt the hand, or point where the power is appliedc  a beam is ſupported at both ends; and the two ends reach over the Props, and be fixt down immoveable; it will bear twice as much weight, as when the ends only lye Iooſe or free upon the ſupporters. If a ſlender cylinder is to be ſupported by two pins; the diſtance of the pins ought to be &% parts of the length of the cylinder, that is near its length; the pins equidiſtant from its ends; and then the cylinder will endure the leaſt bending or ſtrain, by its weight. By the foregoing principles it alſo follows, that a beam fixt at one end, and bearing a weight at the other; if it be cut in the form oſ a wedge and placed vith its parallel ſides, parallel to the horizon; it will be equally ſtrong every where; and no ſooner break in one place than another. 1I5 a beam has all its ſides cut into the form of a parabola, whoſe vertex is at the end, and abſciſſa perpendicular to the axis of the ſolid, and baſe a ſquare, a circle, or any regular polygon; ſuch a beam fixt at one end, is equally ſtrong throughout for ſupporting its own weight. lii By the ſame principles; if a wall faces the wind, and if the ſection of it be a right angled triangle; or the foreſide be perpendicular to the horizon, and the backſide terminated by a ſloping plane interſecting the other plane in the top of the wall. Such a wall will be equally ſtrong in all its parts to reſiſt the wind; if the parts of the wall cohere. ſtrongly together; bus if it be built of looſe materials; it is better to be convex on the backſide in form of a parabola. If a wall is to ſTupport a bank of earth or any fluid body; it ought to be built corcave in form of a ſemicubical parabola, whoſe vertex is at the top of the wall; this is when the parts of the wall ſtick well together. But if the parts be looſe; then a right line or ſloping plane ought to be its figure. Such walls ill be equally ſtrong throughout. All ſpires of churches in the form of cones or pyramids, are equally ſtrong in all parts to reſiſt the wind. But when the parts cohere not together; parabolic conoids are equally ſtrong throughout. Likewiſe if there be a pillar erected in form of the logarithmic curve; the aſymptote being the axis; it cannot be cruſhed to pieces in one part ſooner than in another, by its ovn weight. And if ſuch a pillar be turned upſide down, and ſuſpended at the thick end, in the air: it will be no ſooner pulled aſunder in one part than another, by its own weight. And the caſe is the ſame; if the ſmall end be cut off, and inſtead of it, a cylinder be added whoſe height is half the ſubtangent. Laſtly let AE be a beam in form of a triangular priſm, and if ADæ 5 b, and A / L A4C, and the point 4DIF be cut away parallel to the baſe; the remaining beam DICEF will bear a greater weight P, than the whole 4BCEG, or the part will be ſtronger than the whole; which is a paradox in mechanics. And upon the ſame principles, an infinite number of queſtions of like kind may be reſolved, which are curious i nough, and of great uſe in the commo fe. ſhall add here, is the ſtrength of ſome r as collected from experiments. A pie foot long and an inch ſquare, ſupported at both ends, will bear in the middle t 5, as follows, Pounds. Oak -N 3 a20 Elm --- 310 Beech -- 290 Fir -- 280 The properties of fluids; the principles of Hydroſtaticss Hydraulics, and Pneumatics. P R O P. LXXX. Motion or preſſure in a fluid is not propagated in right lines ; but equally all around, in all manner of directions. 3l Tf a force act at ⸗ in direction ab, that motion can be directed no further than theſe particles lye in a right line, as to c. But the particle c will urge the particles d, f obliquely, by which that motion is conveyed to e, 2 And theſe particles e, g, will urge the particle n, p, and 7, 5 obliquely, which lye neareſt them. Therefore the preſſure, as ſoon as it is propagated to particles that lye out of right lines, begins to deflect towards one ſide and the other; and that preſſure being farther continued, will deflect into other oblique directions, and ſo on. Therefore the preſſure and motion is propagated obliquely ad infinitum; and vill therelbre be propagated in all directions. Cor. If any part of a preſſure propagated tbrough ò fluid be ſtopt by an obſtacle; the remaining part vill deflect into the ſpaces bebind the obſtacle. Thus if a wave proceeds from C, and a part goes through the hole A; it expands itſel and forms a new wave beyond the hole, which moves forward in a ſemircircle whoſe center is the hole. VFor any part of a fluid preſſing againſt the next, is equally reacted on by the next, and that by the next to it, and ſo on; ſrom whence follows a lateral preſſure, (equal to the direct preſſure) into the places behind the obſtacle. r P R O P. LXXXI. A fluid can only be aot reſt when its ſurface is placed in a boriæontal ſituation. For let 4BCD be a veſſel of water or any ſluid: and let 4B be parallel to the horizon. Suppoſe the ſurface of the liquor to be in the poſition E. then becauſe the parts of the fluid are eaſily moveable among themſelves; therefore (by Ax. 7.) the higher arts at E will, by their gravity, continually deſcend to the lower places at F. Alſo the greater preſſure under E and the leſſer under F, will cauſe the parts at E to deſcend, and thoſe at F to aſcend. And thus the higher parts of the fluid at £æ deſcending, and ſpreading themſelves over the lower parts at F, which are at the ſame time aſcending: the ſurface of the fluid will at laſt be. reduced to a horiontal poſition AB. But being ſettled in this poſition,. ſince there is no pait higher than another, there is no tendency in any one part to deſcend, more than in another; and therefore the fluid will reſt in a horizontal poſition. Cor. 1. If the fluid does not gravitate in paorallel lines, but towards a fixt point or center C; then the fluid can only be at reſt when its ſurface tates the form of a ſpherical ſurface AB, whoſe center is C. For if any parts of the ſurface of the fluid 4 or B, vere further from Cthan the reſt, they would continually flow down to the places nearer C, towards which their weights are directed: till at laſt they would all be equidiſtant from it. Cor. 2. Any fluid being diſturbed, will of itſelf return to the ſame level, or horizontal poſition. Cor. 3. Hence alſo if a different fluid ABEF reſt upon the fluid ABCD; both ihe ſurface FE, and the ſurface AB that divides them, will lye in a level or horizontal ſituation, when at reſtt. For if any part of the ſurface B be higher than the reſt, it will deſcend to the ſame level. And ſince FE is alſo level, and therefore the height AF, BE in every place equal; the preſſure of it on all the parts of the horizontal ſurface AB will be equal. And therefore it cannot deſcend in one place more than another, but will continue level. Cor. 4. Hence water communicating with two places, or any way conveyed from one place to another; will riſe to the ſame level in both places. Except ſo far as it is hindered by the friction of the channel it moves through. P R O P. LXXXII. In any fluid remaining at reſt; every part of i, at the ſame depth, is in an equal ſtate of compreſſion. For let the plane EP be parallel to the ſurfact 4B. Then ſince the height of the fluid at all the points of EF is equal; therefore the weights ſtanding upor any equal parts of ZF are equal: And therefore the preſſure in all the points of ur is equal alſo. c Cor, 1. A fiuid being at reſt, the preſure at any dept is as the depth. For this preſſure depends on the weight of the ſuperincumbent fluid, and therefore is as its height. Cor. 2. In an given place, a fluid preſſes equally in all directions. l For (by Pr. 80.) as the preſſure in any place, acts in all directions; it muſt be the ſame in all directions. For if it were leſs in one direction than another, the fluid would move that way, till the preſſure becomes equal. And then the fluid would be at reſt, and be equally compreſſed in all directions. Cor. 3. The preſſure is equal in every part of a plane drawn parallel to the boriæon. Cor. 4. When a fluid is at reſt, each drop or particle of it, is equally preſſed on all ſides, by the weight of ibe fluid above it. Lã P R O P. LXXXIII In any veſſel whoſe baſe is parallel to the horiæon, ihe preſſure of a fluid upon the baſe, is as the baſe and vperpendicular altitude of the fluid; whatever be the figure of the containing veſſel. CasE I. Let ABCD be a cylinder or priſm, then (by Cor. I. Pr. 82.) the preſure upon a given part of the baſe, as a ſquare inch) is as the depth. And the preſſure upon the whole baſe is as the number of parts or inches, contained in it: and thereſore is as the baſe and altitude of the fluid. l li CasE II. Let the heights and baſes of the veſſels ABC, DEF be equal, to thoſe of the cylinder 4BCD,; then ſince any part of the baſes 4B or DE is equally preſt as an equal part of the baſe CD; therefore the whole preſſure upon the baſes 4B or DE is equal to the vhole preſſure upon the bale CD. And therefore is as the baſe and perpendicular height. Cor. 1. If two veſſels ABC, DEF of equal baſe and height, though never ſo different in their capacities; be fſilled with any the ſame fluid; their baſes will ſuſtain an equal quantity of preſſure; ihe ſame as a cylinder of the ſame baſe and heigòt. Cor. 2. The quantity of preſſure at any given depth upon a given ſurface; is always 1be ſame, whether the ſurface preſſed be parallel to the horiæon, or perpendiculas or oblique: or whether the fluid, continued upwards from ihe compreſſed ſurface, riſes perpendicular in a rectilinear direclion, or creeps obliquely through crooked cavities and canals ; and whether theſe paſſages are regular or irregular, wide or narrov. And hence Cor. 3. If ABDCF be any veſſel containing a fluid; ond BL, ED, HFOK, and GC be perpendicular to the horizon, and GHAB the ſurface of the liquor; ond FL, COD porallel to AB. Then the preſſurè at L and F is as BL or HF; at D, O, and C, as ED; at as HK. And tberefore the preſure at L and Fis the ſame. And the preſſures at D, O, C, are equal. Cor. 4. The preſſure is every where directed perpendiculorly againſt the inner ſurface of the veſſel. Therefore at X it is directed dounward, at L ſideways, and at F upwards. By Prop. 9. c Cor. 5. If two veſſels AB, CD communicate with om another by the tube BC: And if any liquor be poured into one AB, it will riſe to the ſame height in the other CD; and vill ſtand at equal heights in both; that is, AD will be a horizontal line. For if the fluid ſtand at unequal heights; the preſſure in the higher will be greater than in the lower, and cauſe it to move towards the lower. Cor. 6. If tuo different fluids ſuſtain one anotber at reſt, in two veſſels AB, CD, that communicate; their height above their place of meeting, will be reciprocally as their denſities or ſpecific gravities. Let the fluids join at C, and take the perpendicular height of eC, equal to that of 4B. Then if the denſities of the fluids were equal, they would ſuſtain one another at the equal heights 4B, Ce. Therefore that the preſſure of the other fluid may be the ſame at C; its height muſt be ſo much greater as the denſity is leſs; that is, CD: Ce or AB:: denſity of AB : denſity of CD. S C H O I. T he truth of the foregoing propoſitions may be eaſily proved experimentally. Take ſeveral tubes open at both ends, ſome ſtreight, ſome crooked, with their low ends turned in all directions; and of ſeveral ſizes, regular and irregular. Put theſe into a veſſel of water to any depth; and the water will riſe up to the height of the external ſurface of the water in them all. But this is to be underſtood of ſuch tubes as are ſufficiently wide: For in capillary tubes immerſed in a veſſel of water, it riſes ſomething above the level, and that to heights reciprocally. as. the diameters. Likewiſe if water can riſe and be ſuſpended at the height B in the capillary tube 4B; it ill be ſuſpended at the ſame height B, whilſt the part of the tube at B remains the ſame, whatever be the figure or videneſs of the under part CD. And the aſcent and ſuſpenſion of water is the very ſame in vacuo. The ſame holds for any other fluids; but different fluids rie to different heights. But quickſilver, inſtead of aſcending in a tube, ſinks in it; and has its ſurface depreſſed below the common ſurface, to depths which are reciprocally as the diameters of the tubes. But the forces by which fluids are ſuſpended in capillary. tubes, come under no hydroſtatic laws. P R O P. LXXXIV. If a homogeneous body be immerſed in a fluid of the same denſity with itſelf, it wiil remain at reſt in an place, and in any poſition. But a body of greater denſity than the fluid will ſint to the bottom; and a body of leſſer denſity will riſe to the top. CasE I. Let the body ZGF be immerſed in the fluid 4D: Then ſince the body is of the ſame denſity as the fluid; therefore the body will preſs the fluid under it Juſt as much as the ſame quantity of the fluid put in its placee And therefore the preſſ of the body, topether vith that of the fluid above it, preſſes the fluid low, as much as a column of the fluid of the ſame depth. Therefore the preſſure of the body at F againſt the fluid, is equal to the preſſure of the fluid at F againſt the body. And therefore theſe two preſſures ill remain in equilibrio, and the body will be at reſt. CasE II ll If the body is more denſe, the preſſure againſt the fluid underneath is greater pan that of an equal quan3 tity of the fiuid. Thèrefore the weight of the body vill overcome the preſſure of the fiuid under it; and it ill ſink. But if the body be lighter, the preſſure of the ſluid will overcome the weight of the body and it will riſe to the top. Cor. 1. If ſeveral fluids of different denfſities, be mixt together in the ſume veſſel; the heavieſt will get to the loweſt place, and the lighteſt to the iop; and thoſe of a mean denſity, 10 the middlee. And in any bodies whatever, tæe heavieſt vill be the loweſt. ill Cor. 2. Hence bodies placed in fluids have a two old gravity, the one true and abſolute, the other opparent or relative. Abſolute gravity is the force with which bodies tend downward: By this all ſorts of fluid bodies gravitate in their proper places; and their weight taken rogether compoſe the weight of the whole: For the whole is heavy as may be experienced in veſſels full of liquor. Relative gravity is the exceſs of the graovity of the body above that of the filuid. By this kind of gravity fluids do not gravitate in their proper places, that is, they do not preponderate; but hindering one anothers deſcent, remain in their proper places as if they were uot heavg. y] Cor. 3. Hence an irregular body, or one that is beterogeneous, deſcending in a fluid, or if it move in any direction; and à line be dràawn connecling the center q grovity and center of magnitudè of ihè bodĩ; the body will ſo dipoſe itſelf, as to movein that line, and that ihe center of gravity will go forenoſt, and ihe center of magnitude bebind For there being more matter and leſs ſurface near the center of gravity, that part will be leſs reſiſted than near the center of magnitude; therefore the cenrr of magnitude will be more retarded. thah vhe center of gravity, and will be left behind°o Sect. IX. HYDROSTATICS. Cor. 4. Hence no body can be at reſt within a fluid untys it be of the ſame ſpecific grovity as the fluid. S C H O L. What is here ſaid of bodies of greater denſity ſinking in a fluid muſt be underſtood of ſuch as are ſolid. For if a body be hollow it may ſwim in a fluid of leſs denſity. But it the hollows or cavities be filled ith the fluid, it will then ſink Likewiſe bodies of greater ſpecific gravity, being reduced to extremely ſmall particles, may then be ſuſpended in the fluid. But the forces by which this is done belong not to any laws of Hydroſtatics. P R o P. Lxxxv. Bodies immerſed in a tuid and ſuſpended i in it, loſe the ueight of an equal bulk of the suid. For ( the laſt Prop. ) if the body EF be of the ſame denſity as the fluid, it loſes all its weight; and neither endeavours to aſcend or deſcend. Therefore if it be lighter or heavier, it only endeavours to aſcend or deſcend with the difference of the weights of the body and the fluid: And has therefore loſt the weight of as much of the fluid. Cor, 1. The iiiii acquires the ueight u which the body loſes. 3E For the ſum of the eights of the ſolid and fluid is the ſame, both before and after emerſion. Cor. 2. All hodies of equal magnitude immerſed in a fiuid, loſe equal eights : And unequal bodies loſe eights proportional to their bults. Cor. 3. The weights loſt b imne gin one and the ſame body in different fluids, are as the denſities oſ the fluids, or as their ſpecific grovities Cor. 4. Hence alſo if to bodies of unequal bulks be in equilibrio in one fluid; they will loſe their equilibrium in another fiuid, of different denſily. S C H O L IUM. Since a body immerſed in a fluid, loſes ſo much weight as that of an equal quantity of the fluid; therefore it tends downwards, only with the difference of theſe weights: And this is the relative gravity of the body in the fluid. But if the body is ſpecifically lighter than the fluid, it ſeems to loſe more weight than it has; and hence the body will tend upwards with the difference of theſe weights. And this is the relative levity of the body in the fluid: Such as we ſee in feathers or ſmoke in the air, or cork in water. ll  P ROP. LXXXV. The weight of a ſolid hody floating upon a fluid, is equal to the weight of a quantity of the fuid as hig as the immerſed part of the ſolid, cut off by the plane of the ſurface of the fluid. For if the body be at reſt, the preſſure of the body upon the fluid underneath is Juſt the ſame as the preſſure of the fluid in the room of the immerſed part. And therefore the weight of one is equal to the weight of the other. r Cor. 1. If the tody be bomogeneous the weight o magnitude of the flouting body, is to the weight or magnitude of the part immerſed : : as the denſity or ſpecific gravity of the fluid, is to the denſity or ſpecific gravity of the bodyg. lilil For the denſity of the fluid: denſity of the body:: weight (of the fluid equal to the immerſed part, or the weight) of the whole body: weight of the immerſed part. lll  Cor. a. If one and the ſame body fioat or ſwim upon different liquids ; the immerſed part in each liquid will be reciprocally as their denſities. And therefore a body ſink deeper in a lighter fluid, than in a heavier. P R O P. LXXXVII If a floating body APBE, or ſyſtem of hodies, be at reſt in a fluid, and D be the center of gravity of the whole hody, and C the center of gravity of ihe suid AFB equal to the immerſed paort of the body: then I Aay the line CD will be perpendicular to the horiæon. For as C is the center of gravity of the fluid FB, it is the center of all the forces or weights of the parts of the water in 4FB, tending downwards; but becauſe the body is at reſt, the ſame point C is alſo the center of all the preſſures of the fluid underneath tending upwards, by which the weight of the fluid AFB or of the body 4FBE (equal to it by Pr. laſt) is ſuſtained. Therefore the ſum of all the forces tending upwards to C, is equal and contrary to the ſum of the forces tending downwards from D, by Ax. II. becauſe that preſſure ſuſtains the body. but the weight of the body tending from D is perpendicular to the horizon, therefore CD is perpendicular to the horizon. l Cor. If the whole body be as heavy or heavier than waoter, and be immerſed in it; the ceuter of zroviy will he the loweſt, and deſcend tbe foremoſt. P R OP. LXXXVIIL V a fuid, conſi dered without weight, be iucloſed in æ veſſel and ſtrongly compreſſed on all ſides; every part uithin it vill be in ihe ſame compreſſeòd ſtate. For if any particle was leſs preſed than anothen the greater preſſure would move the fluid towards the leſs compreſſed part, till their compreſſion became every where equal: And then the equal preſſures would ballance one another and remain at reſt. : Cor. 1. Hence any ſoſt body os GHI, wh7ſe parts cannot he condenſed ; being immerſed in a fluid incloſed in a veſl, and ſironghy couppreſsed on every ſide; the body will retain its ſigure, aond ſuffer na change ſrom the compreſſion of tbe ambient fiuid. Aud all its parts vill remain at reſt among ibemsilus and in the same c comreſ ſtate as the fuia. . 3. The motion of aw included hods as E, ; r of any number of hodies, will not be at all chauged b the compręſſion of tbe suid; hu will remoin the ſame as hefore. For the compreſſion atiog crer; y alike, can make no  alteration i in the motion of hodies. Co. 3. In on inflaible veſfel, a sfuid nill no  ſustain a ſironger preſſure on one ſide than anotber ; but will give way to any æxcsſs of preſſure in a momeni of time, and be mdued s to an nequaliy of preſſure. P R OP. Lxxxix air or any elaſtic fuid of ſmall denſity, be ſhut up in a cloſe veſſel ; cvery part of it will be in the ſame compre eaò ſtate. l : For let ABCD be a veſſel full of incloſed air; then the air at equal altitudes within the veſſel will 'be in the ſame ſtate of compreſſion. And the compreſſion in the bottom of the veſſel can only exceed that at the top, by the weight of a column of air of the height of the veſſel AC, by Cor. 1. Pr. 82. But the weight of ſuch a column of air js inſenſible in reſpect oſ the external preſſure, or the preſſure of the height of the atmoſphere,. And therefore the compreſſion in every part of the veſſel may he looked upon to  be the ſame. Cor. 1. In lite manner ihe compreſſin of the air n any two places near ” ite eartt' iſurface, is very nearly tha fame. For the difference i is only the veight of a column of air, whoſe height is the difference of the heights | of the two places ; which i is very inconſiderable. on. a. If air be comproſtd i in an veſii v the mſ ſre of the external air; ils elaſtic force is equal to the Joree and preſſure of the external air. . The air dos the ſame thingby its ſirinm a as a aui ſuid does by its weight or preſuure. For the ſpring or elaſticity of the air, is the force it exerts againſt the force of compreſſion; and therefors muit be equal to it. S C H O L. That the air is a heavy, elaſtic, compreſſible body is confirmed by many experiments made for that purpoſe. Its properties are theſe. 1. The air has ſome, though a very ſmall degree of, weight; which is ſo ſmall that it hardly becomes fenſible but in the weight of the whole atmoſphere, or body of air incloſing the earth. 2. The air is an elaſtic fluid, and capable of being condenſed and rarefied. And when it is condenfed or forced into a leſs ſpace, its ſpring or the force it exerts to unbend ſer is proportional to the force that compreſſes it. And the ſpace any given quantity takes up, is reciprocally as the compreſſing force: or its elaſticity is as its denſity. 3. All the air near the earth is in a compreſſed ſtate, by the weight of the atmoſphere or body of air above, which compreſſes it. And from hence the denſity of the air grows continually leſs, the higher it is above the ſurface of the earth. The weight of the atmoſphere at the ſurface of the earth, is at a medium about i14 Ib. averd. upon every ſquare inch. But at different times it differs, by reaſon of winds, hot or cold weather, &. But the height of the atmoſphere is uncertain, by reaſon it grows continually more rare towards the top, till ĩt vaniſhes. The weight of the atmoſphere is equal to the weight of water eleven yards high. lilli 4. The ſpring or elaſticity of the air is encreaſed by heat, and decreaſed by cold; ſo that if any quantity of air be incloſed in a veſſel, it will have a greater ſpring or preſſuss when heated; and vill loſe part of its ſpring by cold. ] P R O P. XC. To find the ſpecific gravity of bodies. Cast I. It it be a ſolid body heqvier than water; weigh it exactly, firſt in air, and then in water or ſome fluid vhoſe ſpecific gravity you know; and let The abſolute weight of the body  A, The weight in water, &c. æB, The ſpecific gravity of water, &c. æ , Che ſpecific gravity of the body = D, then will Dæ 7 3 C, the ſpecific gravity of the hody. Casr II. For a ſolid body lighter than water: Take any piece of metal and tye it to a piece of the light body, ſo that the compound may ſink in water: And putting 4, C, D as in Caſe 1, and E = weight of ihe metal in water, F = weight of the compound in water, then D = body. AC a in mar ZEp be ſpecific gravily of the light CasE III. For a fluid: Take a ſolid body of known ſpecifie gravity which will ſink in the fluid. And putting the ſame letters as in Caſe 1. then will C æ 423 : the Ipecific gravity of the fuid. Or ibus: ll Take a body that will ſink in the fluid and alſo n A = abſolute weight of the body, B æ its weight in water, i G æ its weight in the fluid, C æ ſpecific gravity of water. Z = ſpecific of gravity of the fluid required. then Z= cC. a4B8 But for mercury, or for powders, duſt, or ſmall fragments of bodies, you muſt uſe a glaſs or metãl bucket ; obſerving to ballance its weight both in air and water. And for bodies that will diſſolve in water; weigh them in oyl of turpentine inſtead of water. When the body is weighed in the fluid, it muſt be ſuſpended by a horſe hair, or a fine ſilk thread. Note, if the body and the fluid be near the ſame ſpecific gravity, your work will be more exact. lll To demonſtrate the rules. ĩt is evident (by Prop. 85.) that a body weighed in water, loſes the weight of as much water. Therefore in caſe I. the weight of an equal quantity of water is 4—B. But (by def. iI.) the ſpecific gravities are as the weights of equal quantities of matter: therefore /a8: 4:: C: D. And in caſe the 20 AEæ weight of the light body in water, (Which is negative when E is greater than F); and the weight of an equal quantity of water is AFLE or A+EVF, therefore (as in Caſe 1.) itis 4 E2VPF: A4:: C: D. And the rule is equally true whether D be lighter or heavier than water. In Caſe 3, ſince D= 2ſc. therefore C D. or in the other rule; 4B = weight of as much vater, and 4G æ eight of as much of the fluid. And thè ſpecific gravities being as the weights of qua quanites of the matter. Therefore B8: Cor. 1. Hence if a piece of metal or amy ſort of maiter is offered; to know what ſort ĩt is of. Find its ſpecific gravity by the rule above, which ſeet in the following table; and the neareſt to ĩt gives the name of the body, or what iud it is of. Cor. 2. And to find the ſolid content of a ſmall body heavier than water. weigh it in air and water, and ihe diffcrence of the weights reduced to grains, being divided by 256; Ihe quotient is the cubic inches it contains. For a cubic inch of water weighs 256 grains. Or a cubic foot weighs 76.4 Ib. troy, or 62  Ib. averdupoiſe, which is but 254 grains to an inch. Cor. 3. Hente alſo the ſolidity of o body being nown, the weight may be found : And the contrary. Thus, put n=o.5 75 ounces roy or O. 5587 ounces averdupoiſe; and D æ ſpecific- gravity of the body, by the following table. Then as 1: nD:: ſolid content in inches: weight in ounces; and one being given, sinds the other. For the weight of a cubic inch of water is. 575 oZ. troy, or. 5787 oz. averdupoiſe. A TABLE of the ſpeciſic gravities of bodies. S O L IDS. Fine gold 19.640 Standard goldA42 18.888 Lead Sfivã -DII.340 Fine Silverr ———/ —1I1I.092 Stændarò ſiver  —/ 10.536 Copper i—m—  q,000 opper half pence 8.915 Human blood I.O54 Sack F I.O33 Urine —7— 1.032 Milk S I.03I Sea- water ———I.O38 Serum of h. blood Witd 1 030 Alee-2}pM2 1.028 Vinegar NEEH 1.026 Common water —— I. Diſtilled waters&s 993 Red vine — 990 Lintſeed oyl / 932 Brandy  ———— 927 Oylolive 3uu 913 Spirit of turpentine 874 Spirit of wine E . .866 Oyl of turpentine - 810 Common air —- 00 I2 In this table you have the mean ſpecific gravities. For there is ſome difference in different pieces of the ſame ſort of body; by reaſon of their diſferent goodneſs, fineneſs, compactneſs, texture, dryneſs, being more or leſs free from mixzture, &c. And ſometimes by a greater degree of heat or cold, which affect all bodies a littlee. From whence there will ariſe a ſenſible difference in different parcels of the ſame ſort of matter, in almoſt all bodies, whether ſolid or fluid. P R O P. XCI. The center of preſſure of any plare ſuſtaining a fluid preſſing againſi it, is the ſame as the center of percuſſion; ſuppoſing the axis of motion to be at ibe interſetiion of this plane wiih tte ſurface of the fluid. The center of preſſure is that point againſt which a force being applied equal and. contrary to the whole preſſure; it will juſt ſuſtain it, ſo as the body preſed on, will incline to neither ſide. Let AF be the ſurface of the water, O the center of preſſure; draw 40; and parallel to AF, draw còã. Then the preſſure againſt any ſmall part cãd, is as d and the depth of the fluid, that is as cd x 4ab. And the force to turn the plane about O, is cd x AbxbO, or cd x Ab x AOcd xAb?2. And the ſum of them all muſt be equal to o. Therefore A0æ ſum of all cd x Alæ ſum oſ all cd x ab is the ſame as the center of percuſſion. , and therefore (by Prop. 57.) O Cor. 1. The center of preſſure, upon a plane porallel to the horiæon, or upon any plane where the eſr is uniform; is the ſame as the center of gravity of that plane. lll For the preſſure acts upon every part, in the ſame manner as gravity does. Cor. 2. The quantity of preſſure upon any plane ſurface; is egual to that of the ſame plane, placed parallel to the horiæon, at the deptb where its center of gravity is. Alnd the ſame is true of any number of ſurfaces, taken together. For the whole preſſure is as the ſum of all the Abx cd ; and upon the whole figure placed at the center of gravity it is 4BC Xx diſtance of the center of gravity from 4. But (by Cor. 3. Pr. 44.) theſe products are equal. And the ſame may be proved for ſeveral ſurfaces, or the ſurface of any ſolid, taking the center of gravity of all theſe ſurfaces. P R OP. XCII To find the center of equilibrium of a body, or a ſyſtem of bodies, immerſed in a fluidv The center of equilibrium is the ſame with reſpect to bodies immerſed in a fluid, as the center of gravity is to bodies in free ſpace: It is a certain point, upon which if the body or bodies be ſuſpended, they will reſt in any poſition. E Let 4, B, C, be three bodies, or the, quantities of matter in them; 2, ꝗ, 7, their relarive gravities in the fluid; 1 = abſolut gravity. Then ꝓ4, B, rC am: the weights of 4, B,, C in the fluid. Let G he the center of equilibrium. Then, by the ſame. reaſoning as in Prop. 49, the ſum of the forces of 4. B, C is pa x Aa ꝗ8 x Bb-rC x Cc æ Ggx pA+3B+C, the ſum of the forces or weights when ſituated in G. diſtance of the center of equilibrium from ST, in the fiuid. And ifany body as A is lighter than the fluid; then its relative gravity 4 will be negative. And if anmy body is ſituated on the other ſide of the plane, its dirtance from it muſt be taken negative. Cor. If the body or bodies be homogeneous; the center of equilibrium is the ſame as the centerof gravity. i & —: O i &r r The relative gravity is found thus. Take the ſpecific gravity of the fluid from that of, the body, and divide the remainder by the ſpecific gravity of the body. And theſe ſpecific gravities are had by Pr. 90. P R O P. XCiIII. T a ſyſtem of bodies oſcillate in a fluid without refiſtance; to find the length of an iſocronal pendulum vibrating in vacuo.o... Becauſt particles of different ſpecific gravities placed in any given point, will require diſferent times of vibrating in the fluid; therefore we muſt find the point where a particle of infinite denſity being placed will vibrate ĩn the ſame time as the ſyſtem: and this will be the center of oſcillation. For this particle will loſe nothing of its weight ĩn the flul4; its relative gravity being the ſame as the abſolutt. Whence the vibrations of this particle will be performed in the famẽ time as in vacuo. -mk Let 4, B, Cbe three bodies, or their quantities of matter; ꝓ, q, r their relative gravities: in the fluid; 1 æ abſolute gravity. Then pA; qB, rC are the weights of the bodies in the fluidl. Let G be the center of equilibrium: and O the center of oſcillation ſought. Put s A4XSAB X SB  C X SC. Then (by the ſame reaſoning and conſtruction, as in Prop. 58.) the angular velocities which the bodies 4 ] b B, C generate in the ſyſtem are, xea pa x æ Sã x rC , and the whole angular velocity generated 5 by them all, isS: x24 nx B t Sa x rC. Likewiſe the angular velocity which the particle P, u: . . Sr }X P ſituated in O, generates in the ſyſtem is 50Sr But their vibrations are performed alike: therefore their angular velocitiss muſt be equal. That i S C H O L. The center of percuſſion is the ſame in a ſluid as out of it. For there is nothing concerned in that, but the quantities of matter and velocities: both which are the ſame in the fluid as out of it. The relative quantities  q, 7 are found by the Schol. of the laſt Prop. lilll llES P R O P. XCIV. If a fuid runs through any tube, pipe, or canal, and always ſills it; it's velocity in any place will be reciprocally as ihe ſection in that place. Let 4B, CD be two ſections at 4 and C; and let the quantity of the fluid 4BDC, in a very ſmall time, be tranſlated into the part abdc of the pipe. Draw Pp, K4q perpendicular to 4B, CD or parallel to the motion of the fluid: then Pp, Q being indefſinitely ſmall, will be the velocities of the fluid at P and Q, or the ſpaces deſcribed in that ſmall part of time. Then, becauſe the pipe is always full, the quantity ABDC  abdc. Take from hoth, the part ab DC, which is common; and there remains 4Bba—=/ CDdc, that is the ſection 4PB x Pp æ ſection CQD xLLL Cor. 1. The quantity of motion of the fluid in the pipe AD, at any ſection CD; is equal to the motion of a &linder of that fluid, whoſe baſe is CD, and length the ſame with the pipe from the beginning to that ſection, and velocity that of the fluid at CD. e:2: I . For ſince the velocity in 4 is as 7FB the motion of ABba is that is.as P?2. And the motion of the whole, is as the ſum of all the Pp, or the length of the pipè; without any regard to the diameier B. Cor. 2. The velocity and quantity of motion is the ſame very near in crooked tubes as in ſtreight ones; and in pipes divided into ſeveral branches; taking the ſection of all the branches as the ſection of one tubee. P R O P. XCV. In an pipe whoſe ſection is ABCD, the ſtreſs or force to to ſplit any pari of the pipe at B, is equal to half the preſſure of the fluid upon the plane BD, drawn perpendicular to the curve in B, and of the ſame lengtb as tbat part of the pipe. Let Ee be any ſmall part of the ſurface; draw EO perpendicular to the curve Ee. Drav EN, en, perpendicular to BO, and er perp. to EN. And let OE repreſent the preſſure of a particle of the fluid, then EO x Ee  preſfure upon Ee. The force OE may be divided into the two ON, NE; of which ON tends only to ſplit the the tube at 4, but that in direction NE is the force to ſeparate the parts at B. Therelore EN x Ee is the ſtreſs at B. Fut the triangles Ler, EON are ſimilar. and ææe x EN æ EO X er or EOx Nn. Therefore the part of the preſſure on Ee, in direction NE, from whence the ſtreſs at B ariſes, is EOx Nn, that is æ to the preſſure upon the plane Nn. Conſequently the ſtreſs ariſing, from the preſſure on BE is = preſſure on BN, and from the preſure on BA is æ preſſure on BO. And the ſtreſs at D by the preſſure on AD, is equal to the preſſure on OD. Alſo we ſuppoſe the ſame forces acting in the ſemicircle BCD: but theſe ſerve only to keep the forces, acting upon BAD, in equilibrio. c Cor, 1. The ſtreſs on any part of a pipe ſull of water is as the diameter of the pipe, aud ibe perpendicular, height of ithe water above that place. A:d conſequently the thicknoſs of the metal ought to be in that ratio, Cor. 2. In any concave ſurface, caſt, or veſſel, generated by revolving round an axis, and filled with a fiuid; the ſtreſs as io ſplitting is equal to half the preſſure upon ihe plane paſſing through its axis. And the ſtreſs on both fides at B and D, equal to the whole preſſure on ibat plane. Cor. 3. Hence the internal preſſure on any length s the pipe, is to the ſtreſs it ſu ſfers as to Iplitting : : 2 x 3. 1416, to I. Cor. 4 Hence it ſellos, that the ſtreſs, ariſing from anm preſure upon any part, io ſplit it longitudinally, tranſverſely, or in an direction, is equal to the preſſure upon a plane drown perpendigular to the line of direction. Thus the ſireſs ar & ing from the preſſure m BE is& =pi ſure on BN. cn. 5. And iſ ihe pipe be ſuvible;  it will v the preſure, be put, into a Qindrical uſerms or sigh itat the ſection is a circle. For if BD be greater than A, there will be a greater preſſure in direction O4 than in direction OB. And the greater preſſure vill drive out the; ſides 4 and C, till AC become equal to BD; and ABCD be a circle. Beſides, a circle is more capacious than any other figure. And if a pipe be not flexible, yet the reſſure of the Aluid will always endeavour to puc it into a circular fgure Cor. 6. 4nd if an dlaſtic compreſſed nid be incloſud in a veſſel, flexible, and capable of heing d diſtended every way; it vill form itſelf into a ſphere, for the ſame reaſon. lll P R O P. XCVI. If a cloſe fiexible tube AB full of air be immerſed wholly or in part in the water CDEF; the force to ſplit it, in any place O, is proportional to AO, its height from For the air compreſſed at 4 is in equilibrio with the external preſſure of the water. At B and O the air is in the ſame compreſſed ſtate as in 4, but the external preſſure at B is leſs by the weight of the column of water 4B: And at any place O, the external preſſure is leſs than in 4, by the weight of AO. therefore the internal preſſure at O exceeds the external, by the weight of the column of water 40. And the ſtreſs at O is as that exceſs. Cori. The ſtreſs is greateſt at the top BG, ond at Ais nothing. Cor. 2. If the tube be inflexible; the ſtreſs will be according to the ſtate of the compreſſed air within it. If the air within be the ſame as the external air at B, then the ſireſs at O js as BO. If it be leſs iban the external air, the increaſe of the ſtreſs will be alſo as BO; acting at the outſide. If it be of very great denſity, the increaſe of ſtreſs at Ois as AO. l For the preſſure within ĩs uniform; but without, ũt is à5 the depth of the water. P R O P. XCVII. Tbe quantity of a fluid flowiug in any time through a hole in the boltom or ſide of a veſſel, always kept full, is equal to a &linder whoſe baſe is the area of the hole, and its lengih the ſpace a body will deſcribe in that time, with the velociiy acquired by falling through balſ ihe height of the liquor above ibe hole. Let ADB be a veſſel of water, B the hole, and take BC= BD the height of the water. And let the cylinder of water C fall by its weight through half DB, and it will by that fall. acquire ſach a motion, as to paſs through DB or BC uniformly in the ſame time, by Cor. 3. Prop. 14. But (by Prop. 83, and Cor. 2) the water in the orifice B is preſſed with the weight of  column of water. whoſe baſe is B and height BD or BC; therefore this preſſure is equal to the weight of the cylinder BC. But equal forces generate equal motions. Therefore the preſſure at B, will generate the ſame motion in the ſpouting water, as was generated by the weight of the cylinder of water BC. Therefore in the time of falling through half DB, a cylinder of water will ſpout out, whoſe length (or the ſpace paſſed uniformly over) is BC or BD. And in the ſame time repeated, another equal cylinder BC will flow out, and in a third part of time, a third, &c. therefore the length of the whole cylinder run out, will be proportional to the time, and conſequently the velocity of the water at B is uniform. Therefore in any time the length ofa cylinder of water ſpouting out, will be equal to the length deſcribed in that time, with the velocity acquired by falling through half DB. Cor. i1. Hence in the time of falling through half DB, a uantity of the fiuid runs out, equal to a cylinder whoſe baſr is the hole: and length, the height of the fluid above Cor. 2. The velocity in the hole B is uniform, and is equal to ihat a heay body acquires by falling through balf DB.  a Cor. 3. But ait a ſmall diſtance without ibe hilè, ibe preeim is cnt acted into a leſs diameter, and itz velocity imreaſed; ſo that if a fuid ſpout through a holè made in æ ihin plate of metal, it acquires a velocity nearly eqial to that, which a heavy bhody acquires by falling the Whole Eeight of the ſtagnant fiuid above the bole. 3z. il For ſince the fluid converges from all ſides towards the center of the hole BF; and all the particles endeavouring to go on in right lines, but meeting one another at the hole, they will compreſs one anòther. And this compreſſion being every where directeã ihe axis of the ſpouting cylinder; the parts cof the fiuid will endeavour to converge to a point, by which meãns the fluid will form itſelf into a ſort oſ a coniral figure at ſome diſtance from the holè, as BEGF. By this lateral compreſſion, the particles near the fidey or the hole are made to deleribe curve lines as HE, KG; and by the direct compreſſion, the fluid from the hole is accelerated outwards at æG; and thus the ſtream will be contracted at æ; in the ratio of about / 2 to I, and the velocity increaſed in the ſame ratio. æ, It. muſt be obſerved however, that the partjcles of the ſluid dont alway move right foruard; but near the hole, often in ſpiral lines. For no body can inftantly change its courſe in an angle, but muſt do it gradually, in ſome curve line. Cor. 4. The fiuid at the ſame depth, ſpouts out nearly with the ſame velocity, upwards, downwards, ſideays, or in any direction. Aud if it ſpout verticõlly, aleonds Cor. 5. The velocities of the fluid, ſpouting out at different deptbs, are as ihe ſuare roots of ihe depths. For the velocities of falling bodies are as the ſquare roots of the heights. Cor. 5. Hence if s = 16 ; fertt, D = depth of ibe veſſel to ibe center of the hole, F area of the hole, all in feet, trtime in ſeconds. Then the quantity of water running out in ibe time t, by this Prop. will be tF/æDs fert, or 6.128 iF V2Ds ale gallonss S C H O L. ſThere are ſeveral irregularities in ſpouting fluids ariſing from the reſiſtance of the air, the friction of the tubes, the bigneſs and ſage of the veſſel, or of the hole, &c. A fluid ſpouts fartheſt through a thin plate; if it ſpout through a tube, inſtead oſ a plate, t will not ſpout ſo far; partly from the friction, and ꝓpartly becauſe the ſtream does not converge ſo much, or grow ſmaller. A jet deau ſpouts higher, if is direction be a little inclined from the perpendicular; becauſe the water in the uppermoſt part of the jet, falls down upon the lower part and ſtops its motionn. We find by experience, a fluid never ſpouts to the full height of the water above the hole; but in ſmall heightę fall ſhort of it, by ſpaces, which are as the ſquares of the heights of the fluidl. And all bodies projected upwards, fall ſhort of theſe projected in vacuo, by ſpaces which are in the ſame ratio; from the reſiſtance of the air.  By exveriments, if the height of a reſervoir be 4 feet, a jet will fall an inch ſhort; and the defect will be as the ſquare of the height of the reſervoir. But ſmall jets fail more than in that proportion, from the greater reſiſtance of the air. li lll P R O P. XCVIIi If a noteh or ſlit, ſghi, in form of a parallelogram, be cut out of the ſide of a veſſel full of water, ADE; the quantity of water floing out of it, will be à the quantity flowing out of an equal orifice, placed at the whole depth gi, or at the baſe, hi; in the ſame time. The veſſel being ſuppeſed, to be always kept full. For draw the parabola, goh,. whoſe axis is gi, and baſe hi, and ordinate ro; then ſince the velocity of the fluid at any place r, is as v/gr, (by Cor 5. of the laſt Prop.) that is (by the nature of the parabola) as the ordinate ro; therefore ro will repreſent the quantity diſcharged at the depth or ſection rn. Alſo hi will repreſent the quantity diſcharged at the depth or baſe hi. Conſequently the fum of all the ordinates ra, or the area of the parabola, will repreſent the quantity diſcharged at all the places m And the ſum of all the lines hi or ru, or the area of the parallelogram ſęhi, will repreſent the quantity diſcharged by all the ſections 71, placed as low as the baſe hi. But the parabola is to the parallelogram; as 7 to I. Cor. 1. Let s/16; feett D æ gi, the depth of the ſlit. Pæ area of the ſlit, fhigz. Then the quantity ſowing out in any time or number of ſeconds t, is=% tV 2Ds. This follows from Cor. 6. of the laſt Prop. Cor. 2. The quantity of fluid diſcharged ibrough the hole rnbi, is to the quantity which would be diſcharged through an equal hole placed as low as hi; as ihe parabolic ſegment rohi, to the rectangle rnbi. æ⸗ s E C T. X. The reſiſtance of Auids, their forces and actions uron bodies; the motion of u, and pigiiun their ſails. P R OP. XCIX. A body deſcending in a fluid, adds a quantity of weight t2o the fluid, equal to the reſiſtance it meets with in falln. For the reſiſtance is equal to the gravity loſt by the body. And becauſe action ant reaction are equal and contrary, the gravity loſt by the body is equal to that gained by the fluid. Therefore the reſitance is equal to the gravity gained by the fluid. Cor. 1. If a body aſeend in a fluid; it diminiſhes the gravity of the fuid, by a quantity equal to the refiftance it meels with. Cor. 2. This increaſe of weight ariſing from the reſiſtance, is over ard àbove the additional weight mentioned in Cor. 1. Prop. 85. Cor. 3. If a heterogenous hody deſcend in a fluid; it will endcavour to move wiih its center of gravity foremoſt, leaving the center of gravity of as much of the fluid, bebind, For the ſide towards the centerf gravity, contains more matter, and will more eaſily make its way thro the fluid; and be leſę retarded in it. PROP. C. If any body moves through a fuid, the refiſtance it meets with is as the ſquore of its velocity. For the reſiſtance is as the number of particles ftruck, and the velocity with which one particle is ſtruck. But the number of particles of the fluid which are ſtruck in any time, is as the velocity of the body. Therefore the whole reſiſtance is as the ſquare of the velocity. Cor. 1. The reſiſtances of ſimilar bodies moving in any fluids, are as the ſquares of their diameters, the ſquares of their velocities, and the denfities of tbe fiuids. For the number of particles ſtruck are as the ſquares of the diameters, and the denſities of the fluids. Cor. 2. If two bodies A, B, vith the ſom velocity, neet with the refiſtances p and q; their velocities ill be as m ond ubo they meet with equal reſiſtances. For let b,, r be the given velocity and reſiſtance; v, æ any other velocity and reſiſtance. Then bb: æ;: vw: r. And vv and ſince b andr are given, V ĩs as a æ*or CI. The center of _ of à n ; 3line moving directly n ward in a fluid, is the ſame as the center of gravity. The center of reſiſtance is that point, to which ifa contrary force be applied, dt ſnall juſt ſuſtain the reſiſtance. Now the reſiſtance is equal upon all equal parts of the plane, and therefore the reſiſtance acts upon the plane after the ſame manner and with the ſame forces as gravity does; thereſore the center of both the reſiſtance and gravity muſt be thye ſame. Cor. 1. In am body moving thr a fluid; the line of direction of its motion vill paſs yough the center of reſi r tance and center of grevii a the ody. For if it do not, the ſorces ariſing from the weight and reſiſtance will not. ballance one another, which will cauſe the body to librate or oſcillate in the ſuid; till by degrees the ſituation of theſe two centers vili fall into the line of their motionC- 2. 4nd for the ſume reaſon; if a globe, moving in a fluid, oſcillates or turns round its axis; that ſside; which in oſcillating mves againſt the fluid, ſuffers a greater force or reſiſtance; and therefore the body is driven from that part, and made to recede ſrom that ſide, and deflect to the other ſide; and perbaps deſiribe a curve line in tbe fluid. P R O P. CII. If a non tenacious fluid, ſuch as the wind, & c. move againſt the ſail SA or any plane ſitait, in direction W it ſhball urge it in a direction WA perpendicular to its ſurface, ith a force, which isthe ſquare of the velocity, the ſquare of the ſine of the angle of incidence, the magnitude of the ſail, and the denſity of the of ihe fluid. Draw WA, AC perpendicular to S4, S?V; and the Force of the fluid upon 4, is as the force of one particle, and the number of them falling on 54. But (by Cor. 1. Pr. 9.) the force of one particle is as its velocity X S. Incidence WSA. And the number of them (ſuppoſing the denſity to be given) is as their velocity x CA4, or (ſuppoſing the ſail S4 given) as the velocity x S. SA. Therefore the force of the fluid upon the ſail 4, is as the ſquare of the velocity and the ſquare of the ſine of WSA. Increaſe the denſity of the fluid, and the magnitude of the ſail, in any ratio; and it's evident the force of the fluid againſt the ſail, will be increaſed in the ſame ratio. Cor. 1. Aud if a thin body move in a fluid at reſt; the ſame law holds in reſpect of the reſiſtance it meets with in the direction perp. to its ſurface. Cor. 2. If a fluid with a given velocity move in direction WS, againſt the ſail SA ;ſits force to move the ſail in an given direction SB, is as the ſquare of the S.SA x by the S. ASB. And if WSB be a right angle, as S.WSA x ſine of twice WSA. For let SD, DB be perp. to S4, SB. Then SD is the whole force acting at S, and SB the force in direction SB, and SB is as S. SDB or 4588. And if ASB be the comp. of WSA, then S.VSã x coſ. WSA is as S. twice WS, by trigonometry. Cr. 3. The force of a fluid in direction s, to move the ſail or body S in the ſame direction S; is (ceteris paribus) as the cube of the ſine of incidence WSA. For then SB will be one continued ſtreight line. Cor. 4. But the force of a given ſtream of a fluid, againſt any ſail SA, to move it perpendicular to its ſurface, is ſimply as the S. angle of incidence: But to move it in the ſame direction with iiſelf; as the ſquare of the S. incidence: all things elſe remaining the ſame. This follows from Cor. I. Prop. IX. and Cor. 2. of this. S C H O L. If the fluid be tenacious it will urge the body in the ſame direction with itſelf, and with a force which ĩs as the ſine of incidence: or univerſally, as the ſine of incidence, the ſquare of the velocity, the magnitude of the ſail, and denſity of the fluid. For by reaſon of the tenacity of the fluid, the ſail is acted by both the forces WAl, 45, which are equivalent to S. P R OP. CIII. If a very thin and light body SA, plain on hoth ſides, be placed in a very denſe fluid, which moves in direction S; and the body can mate little or no way through the fluid, but only in the direclion of ils lengih SA. Aud if ihe body be obliged to move parallel 70 itſelf in a given direction SD. I ſauy the body ill be ſo moved in the fiuid, that its abſolute velocity WSa : : S IB velocity of ihe fluid. will be = Draw DT parallel to 45, and produce S to T. Then whilſt a part of the fluid moves from S to 7, the body will be moved into the line 7D; and ſince SD is the direction of its motion, the point S will be found in D. And thereſore the velocities of the fluid, and of the body, will be as s7 to SD; that is, as S.TDS or DSA, to S. STD or VSA. Cor. 1. IfS ibe direction of the fiuid, is perpendicular to SD the direction of the body; then the veloctiy of the body SA will be = Tan. WSA X velocity of the ſluid. :  S.WSA S.S/ i —— 2I : A, rad For SID ſ. Wã Tan. S radius being 1. i Cor. 2. And hence if the body SA continually turn round an axis parallel to S; then the velocity of S4 in direction perp. to S, will be as the Tan. WSA X velocity of the fluid. For 54. in this caſe will always have the ſame poſition to the direction of the fluid, as before. Cor. 3. If a very thin body SA be obliged to move porallel to itſelf through a very denſe fluid at reſt; and if it be drawn with a given velocity in direttion always parallel to SW. Its abſolute velocity in the fluid will be reciprocally as the col. WSA, . and in direction SA. Draw AC perp. to SW. then by reaſon of the denſity and reſiſtance of the fluid, the body will not be able to move laterally, but only in direction S4. But the velocities of the point s in directions SW, SA, are as SC to §, or as coſ. C5A to rad. therefore vel. in dij radius  1: mrection S4 = ſ. Cã x vel. in direction SW. P R O P. CIV. If a plane ſurface SA, moving parallel to itſelf, with velocity and direction SD, be acted upon by a fiuid moving with velocity and direction S. And if WF be drawn parallel and equal to SD; and FS drawn. I ſay the fiuid acis upon the plane in the angle FSA, vith the relative velocity FS. Fore compleat the parallelogram WSDF; and let the body be at reſt, and the fluid move with the contrary motion DS or FV; and then their relative motions will be the ſame as before: And the fluid will have the two motions FV, FD in reſpect of the body SA at reſt. Therefore (by Cor. 2. b- 7.) the motion compounded out of theſe is S; which is the abſolute motion of the fluid ſuppoſing the body at reſt; or the relative motion of it, in reſpect of the moving body; and therefore acts on it in the angle 5⸗. Cor. If F fall in the line SA, then the fluid acis not at all upan the body. Aud if it fall on the contrary fide of it; then the fluid acis on the contrary ſide of the body Sã. P R O P. CV. Let SA be the ſail of a ſbip, SD the poſition of the keel ; SK, DK perpendicular to SA, SD. Aud if DE, DS be as the reſiſtances 3he ſhip has abead and aſide vith equal velocilies: and if DC is a mean proportional betiween DE and DK, then SC vill be th way of the ſhip, nearly. For let SX perpendicular to S4 repreſent the force of the wind upon the ſail. The force SX is reſolved into the forces SD, DE; SD is the direct force, and DX the force producing her lee way. By Prop. 100, Her reſiſtance a head with velocity SD: reſiſt. ahead with vel. DE : : SD?: DE?, And reſiſt. ahead with vel. DE: reſiſt. aſide with vel. DE :: DE: SD, And reſiſt. aſide with vel. DE: reſiſt. aſide with vel. DC:: DE?: DC-. : Therefore ex equo Reſiſt. ahead with vel. SD: reſiſt. aſide with vel. DC:: SD x DE? : DE? X SDX DC:: SD3DE: DCa. But the reſiſtances are as the forces producing them, thereſore SD: DK :: SD x DE: DC æ DEXDK. Cor. I. Let r ſtips reſiſtance abead, Rſbips reſiſtance aſide, ith the ſame velocity. Then R : r:: radius x cotan. ASD : tan. ſquare of DSC, the leeway. For let rad. æ I. tan. DSKæE1. then 1 :1:: SD: DK t xX SD; and SD : DC or VDE xX DK or  F + t X DE VixSD X DE:: 1: tan. DSC æ Cor. 2. Hence the tangent of the leeway, in the ſame ſhip, is as the the ſquare root of the cotangent of the angle ASD, which the ſail makes with the eel. Therefore if the leeway be known for any poſition of the ſail, it will be known for all. S CH O L. The leeway oſ a ſhip is generally ſomething more than is here aſſigned; becauſe her hull and rigging will make her drive a little to leeward, directly from the vind. P R O P. CVI. If the wind with a given velocity, in direclion S, fall on the ſail SA of a ſip, making little or no leeway; it ill urge the ſbip in direction oſ the keel SD, with a force which is as S SA X S. AD. Draw SC perpendicular to 54, and CDto SD. And (by Prop. 102.) the force acting upon the ſail in direction SCis as the ſquare of the ſine of SA. But the forces in directions SC and SD are as SC to SD, or as radius I to the ſine of SCD or 4D. Therefore the force in direction SDæIS. 48D x force in direction SC æS. ASDX Ssa. SAl. Cor. 1. The force acting in direction DC perpendicular to the keel is as SWSAa x coſ. ASD. Cor. 2. The force in direclion SD will be univerſally as S WSA x S. ASD, and the ſquare of the velocity of the wind, and magnitude of the ſail. Cor. 3. The velocity of the ſbip in direction SD, is as S.VSA X VS. ASD x velocity of the wind. For the ſquare of the velocity of the ſip in any direction, is as the reſiſtance in the water, or (its equal) the force of the wind upon the ſail in that direction; that is (by Cor. 2.) as SSãæ x S. 45D, and the ſquare of the velocity of the wind. The denſity and ſail being given. Cor. 4. Let the angle WSA be givenn. Aud if SDC be a ſemicircle deſcribed on an line SC; then the force in any direction SD oſ the keel, is as the cord SD; and the velacity as SD. ] Cor 5. The velocity of the ſbip t0 windward is as S.WSA x sS. AD x coſ. SD. For draw SP perp. toS, and DG to SP; and the velocities in directions SD, GD are as SD to GD; or as radius 1I to S. DSG: therefore the velocity in GD S. DSG x S.SA X S. ASD. Cor. 6&. The force of the ſail SA to turn the ſrip about, is as S.S Aæ x coſ. ASD. . This appears by Cor. 1. ſuppoſing the ſail placed in the head of the ſhip. P R O P. CVII. If a ſiream of any ſluid, as water, flos directly againsi any plane ſurface ; its force againſt that plane, is equal to the weight of a column of the fiuid, whoſe baſe is the ſection of the ſiream; and its length twice the height deſcended by a falling body, to acquire the velocity of the fluid. lll Let s= 16  feet, the height deſcended by a falling body in I ſecond. l v7 =velocity of the fluid, or the ſpace it deli ſcribes in one ſecond. B = baſe of the cylinder or column of vater. Then 25 velocity generated by gravity in falling through s. therefore (by Cor. 1. Pr. 14), 4535:5:: vC: = height fallen to gain the velocity v. and - = twice that height. Alſo bas B æ a cylinder of twice that height. N Now the motion which the cylinder's weight ill - - - vv generate in I ſecond is 20 X —/B8 or vB. the mo25 tion being as the body x by the velocity. And the force of the fluid againſt the plane is equal to the reſiftance of the plane. And the motion deſtroyed in I ſecond by the reſiſtance of the plane is v x Bv or vuB; which was alſo the motion generated by the weight of the cylinder i B, in the ſame time. But equal forces in the ſame time generate or deſtroy equal motiòns. Therefore the weight of the cylinder B = force of the fluid againſt the plane. Cor. 1. The force of a ſtream of water againſt any ptlane is equal to the weight of a column of water, vhoſe baſe is the ſection of the ſtream, and height ; or the height of the water, if it flow through a hole at the bottom of a reſervoir. Cor. 2. Moreover if any part of the water lye upon the plane ; the force will be augmented by the weight of ſo much water. Cor. 3. The forces of different ſtreams of water againſt m plane, are as their ſections and the ſquares of the veocities. Cor. 4. If the plane be alſo in motion; the relative velocity of the water againſt the plane, muſt he taken inſtead of the abſolute velocily. S C H O L. A cubic foot of water contains 6. 128 ale gallons, and weighs 625 Ib. av. LEMM A. If the quadrant EDA revolve about the radius CA, and deſcribe an hemiſphere ; and from all the points of its ſurface, as D, d, perpendiculars DB, db, be let fall upon the baſe EC. I ſay the ſum of all the perpendiculars BD, in the ſurface EDA, is to the ſum of as many radii CD; as 1 to2. For take Dd infinitely ſmall, and compleas the ſquare CAHN, and draw CH, alſo draw DFGR, dſgr parallel to EC. By the ſimilar triangles CDF, Dnua, DF1XDãd æ CD x nd; alſo BD æ CF æ FG. The ſurface of the ſpherical annulus DãfF is 3.14161 2 DFx Dd or 3.1416x20DX nd, that is (becauſe 3.1416 x 2CD is giver) as nd or Ff. And the ſum of all the BDs in the annulus is as BDX by its ſurface, that is as BD Xx If, or FG x Ff. Therefore the ſum of all the BDs in the annulus is expreſſed by the area FſgG. And for the ſame reaſon, the ſum of as many radii, by FfrR. Therefore the ſum of all the BDs in the hemiſphere: is to the ſum of as many radii:: as the ſum of all the FſG: to the ſum of all the Ff7R:: that ĩs as the triangle CAH: to the ſquare CAHN, or as I to L. P R O P. CVIII. If a &linder moves uniſormly ſorward, in direction of its axis, in a ſiuid of the ſame denſity, it meets with a reſiſtance equal to ihe force wbich con generate its motion, in the time it deſcribes twice its length. Let AB be the cylinder moving from A towards G; and take FBCG equal to 4887. And let us firſt ſuppoſe that the cylinder 4B, whilſt it moves forward, puhes againſt the feveral parts of the fluid, and drives them ſucceſſively before it, in direction of its axis, from the ſeveral places through which it paſes. So that in equal times it moves equal quantities of the fluid, and communicates to them the ſame velocity that it moves with. It is evident that the cylinder, aſter it has moved uniformly forward, the length of its axis, has removed the cylinder of the fluid 8CG equal to itſelf 488F, and has communicated a motion to it, equal to its oun. And ſince action and reaction are equal, the force that uniformly generated this gnotion, is equal to the uniform reſiſtance the cylindèr ſuffered in the mean time. And therefore the reſiſtance is equal to the force by which its motion can be generated, in the time it deſcribes its length. Al this is true upon ſuppoſition that every particle of the fluid is driven directly forward with the ſame velocity the cylinder has. But ſince in reality, the motion generated in the fluid is not directly forward, but (by Prop. 80.) diverges on all ſides, and in all manner of directions CD, Cd, &c. therefore if the quadrant 4E be divided into an infinite number of equal parts, Dd, and to all the points D, à the radii CD, Cd, &c. be drawn repreſenting the motions of the particles in all directions; and from any one D, the perpendicular DB be drawn on C. Then the motion CD (I CA) is reſolved into the two motions CB, BD; of which CB does not aſfect the cylinder;3 and the direct motion of the particle D is only BD, which is leſs than CD. Theretore the force to generate this motion, and conſequently the reſiſtance of a particle at D (equal to this force) muſt be leſs than before in proportion of CD to BD. Therefore the former reſiſtance, when all the particles are driven directly forward; is to the reſiſtance when they diverge on all ſides; as the ſum oſ all the radii CD, drawn to every point of the ſurface of a ſphere, to the ſum of all the correſponding ſines BD; that is (by the Lem.) as 2 to . Therefore the reſiſtance the cylinder meets with now is but half the former reſiſtance. Conſequently, ſince the force to generate any motion is reciprocally as the time; the reſiſtance will be equal to the force that can generate its motion, in the time that it deſcribes twice its length. Cor. 1. If a &linder moves in direction of its axis, in a fluid of the ſame denſity, and with the velocily acquired by falling in vacuo, from a height equal to its lengitb: It meets with a reſiſtance equal to its weight. Forthe force that generates its motion, in the ime of its moving twice its length (or of falling through once its length), is ĩts gravity. Cor. 2. If a &linder moves uniformly ſorward in any ſluid; its reſiſtance is to the force by which its whole motion may be generated, in the time of moving twice its length; as the denſity of the fluid, to the denſity of the linder. ll For if the denſity of the fluid be increaſed in any ratio; the reſiſtance will be increaſed in the ſame ratio. Cor. 3. The reſiſtance of a &linder moving in any fluid, is equal to the weight of a &linder of that fluid, of the ſame haſe, and its lengih equal to the height a body falls in vacuo, to acquire its velocityy By Cor. I. Cor. 4. Let s = 16  feet, B=baſe of ihe &linder, v=its velocity. or the ſpace deſcribed in 1 ſecond. Then its reſiſtance is = weight of the &linder B, of the ſluid. S C H O L. If the cylinder move in a fluid incloſed in a veſſel; inſtead of the abſolute velocity, the relative velocity in the fluid muſt be taken, in order to find the reſiſtance. And beſides if the veſſel be narrow, the reſiſtance will be increaſed more or leſs, becauſe the fluid, being confined by the veſſel, cannot then diverge in all directions. And if it be ſo confined, thatit cannot diverge at all, but is obliged to move directly forward; the reſiſtance then will be double; which is the greateſt it can poſſibly have, or the utmoſt limit of its reſiſtancẽe. Alſo by comparing the laſt Cor. with Cor. 1. Prop. 107. it appears that the force of a cylinder of water againſt a plane, is double the reſiſtance an equal cylindęr would meet with, moving in water with the ſame velocity. And this will not appear ſtrange, when we conſider that in the firſt caſe the whole motion of the water is deſtroyed by the reſiſtance of the plane; but in the latter caſe, the water diverges every way from the moving cylinder, and does not partake of its direct motion. But if the water was not ſuffered to diverge, but was driven directly forward with the motion of the cylinder, the reſiſftance would then be doubled; and theſe two caſes would become the ſame. L EM M A. If the quadrant ADE revolve about the radius CA, and generate an hemiſphere; and on every point B of the haſe, perpendiculars BD be drawn. I ſay the ſum of all the BD* on the baſe, is to the ſum of as many CD?, as I to 2. Let CD=r, CB x, BD=y, c3.1416; then 1c = circumference of BCC. Then The ſum of all the 7r: to ſum of all the, in the annulus Bb, is as 2cx X rr: 26 X:: rrx: yx. And ſum of all the -: ſum of all the  in the hemiſphere, Is as ſum rræ X Bb: ſum æ X Bb on the baſe; Or as fum of r7x x Bb: ſum of rr xx x x X B), Or as the the ſum of 7r/x x Bb: ſum rræx X BL TBut the ſum of all the  x Bb 1+2+3+4&&c. tor x1I=77r. +And ſum of all the rr x B//4 r*. putting BL/I. FAIſo the ſum of all the xxXB,m 1 2 + 334 40 &c. tor x1æ⸗r-. Therefore the ſum of all the 77: ſum of all the y, in the hemiſphere; is as ; r: 3-rt, or as; to I, that is 2 to I. V See Wards Math. Guide, PartV. P R O P. CIX. . If a globe move uniformly forward in a compreſſed infinite fluid; its reſiſtance is to the force by which its whole motion may be deſtroyed or generated in the time of deſiribingĩ parts of its diameter; as the denfſity of the fluid, to the denſity of ihe globe, very nearly. Let the globe move in the direction C4. Draw the tangent DH, and BDG parallel to CA; and GH perpendicular to DH; and let GD be the force of a particle of the fluid againſt the baſe B, in direction GD: Then GH will be the force acting againſt D, in direction DCC. And this force is to the force in direction GD as DC to DB. Whence the force againſt B, is to the ſorce againſt D, in direction GD; in a ratio compounded of GD to GI, and DC to DB; that is as DC? to DBE2. Therefore the force of all the particles of the fluid, againſt the baſe, is to their force againſt the convex ſurface; as the ſum of all the DC2, to the ſum of all the DB? on the baſe; that is (by the Lem.) as 2 to 1. Therefore the reſiſtance of the ſurface oſ the ſphere is but half the reſiſtance of the baſe, or of a cylinder of the ſame diameter. Now the globe is to the circumſcribing cylinder as 2 to 3; and half of that force (which can deſtroy all the motion of this cylinder, whilſt it deſcribes 2 diameters) vill deſtroy all its motion, whilſt it deſcribes 4 diameters. And therefore the ſame force that deſtroys the cylinder’s motion, in the time of moving 4 diameters, will deſtroy the globe’s motion whilſt it moves  of this length, or of its own diameter. But (by Cor. 2. Pr. 108.) halt the reſiſtance of the cjlinder, that is the reſiſtance of the globe, is to this force; as the denſity of the fluid, to the denſity of the cylinder or globe. Cor. 1. The reſiſtance of a ſphere is hut half the reſitance of a &linder, of the ſame diameter. Co?. 2. The relſiſtance of a globe moving in any fluid, is equal to the weight of a &linder of that fluid, of ibe ſame diameter; and its length equal to half the height, tbrough which a body falls in vacuo, to acquire the velocity of the globee. By Cor. 3. Pr. i08. Thereſore if s/ 16  feet, v  velocity of a globe, or the ſpace it moves in 1 ſecond; D æ its diameter; then its reſiſtance is equal to the weight of a &linder of the fuid, of the ſame diameter D, and its length And if =2a / . ils reſiſtance is equal to the weight of 3 : an equal globe of ihe fuid. Cor. 3. The greateſt velocity a globe can obtain, by deſcending in a fluid ; is that which it would acquire by falling in vacuo, through a ſpace that is to 4 the diameter; as the difference between the denſity of the globe ond the denſity of the fluid, is to the denſity of the fuid. For let G, F be the denſities of the globe and the fluid; D the diamerer of the globe. Ihen fince a globe is equal to a cylinder whoſe height is  D; thereſore the weight of the globe  weight of a cylinder eylindet of the Ruid, whoſe length is 3 D x G. And (by Prop. 85.) the weight of the globe in the fluid is weight of a cylinder of the fluid, whoſe length is . GF 7Dx v . But (by Cor. 2.) the reſiſtance of the globe moving with the velocity acquired by falling is in vacuo through the height  DX weight of a cylinder of the fluid whoſe length is 3D x c Thereſore the weight of the globe in the fluid is equal to the reſiſtance: And conſequently it cannot accelerate the globe. : GVF na hence if vI4 / r Ds, the reſiſtance is equal to the weight of the globe in the fluid. Cor. 4. Two equãl and homogeneous globes moving in B reſiſting medium; will, in times that are reciprocally as the firſt velocities, deſcribe equal ſpaces; and loſe a given port of their motions. For the motion loſt, in deſcribing two very ſmall equal ſpaces, is as the reſiſtance and time; that is (becauſe the ſpace is given) as the ſquare of the velocity directly and the velocity inverſely; that is directly as the velocity. And ſo in deſcribing any ſpaces, the motion loſt will always be as the firſt motion; and the time reciprocally as the firſt velocity. Cor. 5. Two homogeneous globes, moving with equal velocities in a fluid; loſe equal velocities in deſcribing ſpaces proportional to their diameters. For the velocity loſt in each, by deſcribing two mall ſmall ſpaces proportional to the diameters;3 will be as the reſiſtance and time directly, and the body inverſely, that is (becauſe the reſiſtance is as the ſquare of the diameter, and the time as the diameter) as the cube of the diameter directly, and the cube of the diameter inverſely: Therefore the velocity loſt is equal in both. And the like for any ſucceeding correſpondent parts. . S CH O LI UM. The reſiſtance of fluids is of three kinds. I. Tenatity o; Coheſion of the parts of the liquor, which is the force by which the particles of the fluid ſtick together, and cauſe them not to ſeparate eaſily; and this is the ſame for all velocities. 2. Friction or attrilim where the parts of the fluid don't ſlide freely by one another; and this is as the velocity. 3. The denſity or quantity of matter to be removed; and this is as the ſquare of the velocity. The two former kinds are very ſmall in all fluids, except viſcid and glutinous ones: and upon this account the foregoing theory regards only the laſt kind And therefore the reſiſtance there deſcribed is the very leaſt the body can poſſibly meet with, But ſince all fluids have ſome ſmall degree oſ friction and tenacity, they will increaſe the reſiſtance a littlee. Alſo when the velocity is very great; the compreſſion of the fluid ought to be ſo too, to cauſe the fluid to return with equal cale behind the moving body; and when this does not happen, the reſiſtance is increaſed upon that account. For a fluid yielding to a projectile, does not recede ad infinitum; but with a circular motion, comes round to the places which the body leaves. Likewiſe when bodies move in a ſtagnant fluid near the ſurface; the fluid cannot dilate itſelf upwards, to give. way to the moving body; and this will conſiderably increaſe the reſiſtancee Alſo if a body moves  a fluid incloſed in a veſſel; the relative velocity of city. But the reſiſtance it meets with will be increaſed, becauſe the fluid has not liberty to diverge every way. And the ſtraiter the veſſel, the more is the reſiſtance increaſed; and it may by this means be increaſcd till it be near double; beyond which it cannot go. For all that a body can do is to drive the fluid wholly before it, without any diverging. So that the leaſt reſiſtance a globe can have is the ſame as is laid down in Cor. 2. of rhe laſt Prop. and the greateſt can never exceed the double of it; ſo that it will always be between theſe limits. If the fluid in which the body moves be elaſtic and ſpring from the body, the reſiſtance will be greater than if it was non elaſtic. But theſe irregularities are not conſidered in the foregoing theory. There are ſome bodies that may be reckoned in a middle ſtate betwen ſolids and fluidss. And in ſome of theſe the tenacity and friction is ſo great, as in many caſes far to exceed 4he reſiſtance ariſing from their denſity only. For example. It appears by experiments, that if a hard body be ſuſpended at ſeveral heights, and be let fall upon any ſoft ſubſtance, ſuch as tallow, ſoft clay, wax, ſnow, &c. it will make pits or impreſſions, which are as the heights fallen, that is as the ſquares of the velocities. Likewiſe nails give way to a hammer in a ratio which is as the ſquare of the velocity. Comparing this with Schol. Pr. 14. it appears that in theſe caſes, the reſiſtance is the ſame for all velocities: which argues a very great degree of tenacity. Again, bodies projected into earth mixed with ſtones; the impreſiions are found to be between the ſimple and duplicate ratio of the velocities. Therefore in this caſe, the reſiſtance is in a leſs ratio than the ſimple ratio of the velocity: and therefore theſe ſort of bodies have both friction and tenacity.  And in different ſorts of bodies, there is great difference and variety in their nature and conſtitution. may be compared to the force of gravity, Iways the ſame; with this difference, that ts always contrary to the motion of the bohen the body is at reſt it is nothing. Alttrie compared to the motion of a body ſtrika given number of particles of matter in a , with any velocity; and therefore the reſuch Methods of communicating, directing, and regulating any motion in the practice of Mechanics. P R O P. CX. To communicate motion from one body to anotbher, or from one place to another. 1. The eaſieſt and ſimpleſt method of communicating motion from one thing 4 to another B, is by a rope or a leaver 4B, reaching between the two places, or things. 2. Motion is communicated from one wheel or roller DC to another 4B, by a perpetual or endleſs rope ABCD, going once or oftener about them: or if you will by a chain. That the rope ſlip not, make knots on it, and channels in the wheels, if neceſſary. 3. Motion is communicated from one wheel 4BC, to another DEF; by the teeth in the two wheels working together. Or thus, where the axis of 4 having but one tooth; one revolution of it anſwors to the motion of only one tooth in B. 4. Motion is communicated from one place & anther, by one or more beams or leavers, MB, BC, CE, ZF, FH, & c. moveable about the centers 4, B, C, D, E, F, G; of which 4, D, G, &Lc. are fixt. Here if the point  be moved, the point  will be moved; for MB, BC, CE, &c. all move one another to the laſt, H. 5. Motion may alſo be communicated from A to B, by a pinion at 4, and a ſtreight ruler with teeth, which bite one another. P R OP. I. By help of one uniform motion given; to produce another, either uniform or acceleratcã. 1. A uniform motion is produced in the wheel DEF; by moving the wheel BC uniformly, which carries it. Alſo a uniform motion is produced in vheels moving by cords, as 4B, CD: for one being moved uniformly, moves the other alſo uniformly. 2. The wheel BE may be made to move uniformly about the center C, by the motion of the wheel BD. On the baſe BF with the generating circle BD, deſcribe the epicycloidal tooth BE. Then the point B of the wheel 4B, moving uniformly about the center 4, and paſſing over the tooth BE; will move the wheel BF uniformly, about C. Here the acting tooth AB ought to be made crooked as 45, that it touch not the end E of the tooth BE, if it act on the concave ſide. Or elſe the plane of the wheel BD muſt be raiſed above the plane of BF, and a tooth mado at B to bend down perpendicular to the plane of the wheel, as 4G, to catch the tooth BE. æ 3. The leaver 4B may be made to move up and down with either a uniform or accelerated motion, after this manner. Let 4E be a wheel whoſe axis ĩs parallel to the leaver, and directly above it. Take any arch N4 and divide it into any number of equal parts at 1, 2, 3, &c. through which from the center O, draw Oa, Ob, Oc, Od. And make 14, 25, I30 4d, &e. reſpectively equal to 1, 2, 3, 4 equal parts. And through the points N, a, b, &c. draw the curve Nabcd. Then the part NàF being made of ſolid wood, and fixt to the wheel; and the wheel being turned uniformly about, in the order ENA; the part NF vill give a uniform motion to the leaver 4B, about the center of motion C And you may fix as many of theſe teeth to the wheel as you will. Again, in the tooth 4D, if A1, 12, 23c. be taken equal, and 14, 25, 3, 4d, &c. be taken equal to 1, 4, 9, 16, &c. equal parts; and the curve Aabcd be ſavn, and the tooth formed. Then the leaver will be moved with a unirormly accelerated motion. The accelerated motion is proper for lifting a given weight, at the end B, as a hammer; or for working a pump, by a chain going over the end B. 4. The leaver 4B, may alſo be moved thus, by help of a machine GFD, moving uniformly along GD. Make HI, IF right lines; and make as many ſuch teeth as you will; and theſe will give 'an uniform motion to the leaver; make the curves EFE all parabolæ’s, equal and equidiſtant; whoſe vertices are at F; and their baſes meet at ZE And theſe will make the leaver riſe and fall with an accelerated motion. Such parabolic teeth as theſe may be placed on a wheel, whoſe axis is perpendicular to the horizon, 5. One wheel may move ànother with an accelerative motion thus. On the circle or wheel EF, take Ea, ab, be, &c. equal to each otherr. And on the wheel BD take B1 a very ſmall part; and I3, 35,57, &. 3, 5,7, &c. times BI. Suppoſe the plane of the wheel ZF to be extended as far as the marks 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. then turn the wheel EF, till E fall on æ; then mark the point 1 on the plane of the wheel #V7. Then turn LF till E comes to b; and mark the point 3 on the plane of the wheel EZF. Likewiſe let Z come to c, d, &c. and mark the points 5, 7, &. on the plane of the wheel EF; then E 1 3 57 7 is the figure of the toorth of 3he wheel EVF, which being uniformly moved, will move DB with an accelerative motion. P R O P. II. To change the direction of any motion. 1. The direction of motion may be changed, by the leaver of the firſt kind, for the two ends have oppoſite motions. Likewiſe a bended leaver will chang the direction to any other direction. li 2. The direction of motion may be changed by the help of pullies, with a rope going over them. Thus the direction 48 is changed ſucceſſively into the direction BC, CD, DE, EV, FG. 3. The direction may be changed by wheels whoſe axels are perpendicular to one another. Thus the direction 48 is changed into the direction 2/; by the wheel C working in the crownwheel D. 4. The direction may be changed, by making the lantern B inclined in any given angle, to be moved by the coggs of the wheel 4. Here the rungs at F where they work muſt be parrallel to the planc of the wheel A, or perpendicular to the coggs. The ſame thing may be done by wheels with teeth, as C, D. P R O P. III. To regulate any moticn, or to make it uniform. 1. Any motion is made uniform, by help of a pendulum 4B, ſuſpended at 4 and vibrating. As the pendulum vibrates, it cauſes CDE to vibrate alſo, about the axis DE. The weight T carries the wheel R, and R moves LF. Now whilſt the pendulum vibrates towards M, a tooth of the wheel GF goes off the pallat I and another catches the pallat 7; and when the pendulum returns towards N, it draws the pallat & off the tooth, and another catches the pallat T; and ſo on alternately. So that at every vibration of the pendulum, a tooth goes off one or other of the pallats. 2. A uniform motion is effected by the pendulum CP, vibrating in the arch NM about the center of motion CC.As the pendulum vibrates it cauſes the piece ADE to vibrate along with it about the axis of motion DE. By this motion the leaf æ catches hold of a tooth of the horizontal wheel GF, in its going; and the leaſ b of another tooth, in returning. A wheel with a weight is applied to the pinion L, to keep the pendulum going. 3. A pendulum may, alſo be applied thus for the ſame purpoſee FG is a thick wheel, or rather a double wheel, whoſe axis is parallel to the horizon. nP a pendulum vibrating upon the axis DE, which is parallel to the planes of the wheel  G. anb two wings perpendicular to DE, and to nP. 1, I, I pins in the rim G, and 2, 2, 2 pins in the rim F. Theſe pins are in the planes of the wheel; but not perp. to the circumference, but inclined in an angle oſ about 45 degrees; and the pins in one end are againſt the ſpaces in the other. ab is parallel to the axis of the wheel FG, but neither in the ſame horizontal or perpendicular plane; but almoſt the radius of the wheel below, and ſomething more to one ſide. Whilſt the pendulum P vibrates in the arch MN, about the axis DE, the wing a catches hold of a tooth in the end ; and when it returns the wing b catches hold of a tooth in the end G. Thus the pins acting alternately againſt the wings a, b, keep the pendulum going by help of the weight V. l 4, A ſteady motion is continued by applying the heavy wheel 4BC, to the machine: or the croſs bar DE loaded with two equal weights at D and Z. Or a cylinder of ſome heavy matter may be applied: being made to revolve about its axis. By theſe the force of the power, which would be loſt, is kept in the wheel, and is equally diſtributed in all parts of the revolution. Such a wheel is of great uſe in ſuch machines as act with unequal force at different times or in different parts of a revolution. For by its weight it conſtantly goes on at the ſame rate, and makes the motion uniform and every where equal. By reaſon of its weight a little variation of force will not ſenſibly alter its motion: And its friction, and the reſiſtance of the air will hinder it from acc. leratirg. If the machine ſlackens its motion, it will help it forward; if it tends to move too faſt, it will keep it bock. Every ſuch regulating wheel ought to be fixt upon that axis, where the motion is ſwifteſtt And ought to be the heavier, the ſlower it is deſigned to move; and the lighter, the ſwifter the motion is. And in all caſes the center of motion muſt be in the center of gravity of the whee. And the axis may be placed parallel to the horizon as well as perpendicular to it. If the machine be large, and the axis of the heavy wheel be perp. to the horizon; the heavy wheel may be made to roll on the ground round that axis; by putting the wheel upon another axis fixt in the former at right angles to it; and thus the weight is taken off the firſt axis. And two ſuch wheels may be applied on oppoſite ſides. 5. Any ſwift motion may be moderated by a fly AB, moveable about the axis CD. This iĩs made of thin metal; ats is a ſpring to keep the axis and fly pretty ſtiff together. This bridles the rapidity of the motion of the machine to which iĩt is applied, by reaſon of its great reſiſtance in the air; and the refore it hinders the motion from accelerating beyond a certain degree. This ſort of fly is uſed in clocks, and is uſeful in any motion that requires to ſtop, or move a contrary vay. None of theſe regulating wheels or flyes add any new wer to the machine; but rather retard the moticn y their friction and reſiſtance. P R O P. XXIV. To deſcribe ſeveral ſorts of knots. As ropes are made uſe of in ſeveral ſorts of machines, and eſpecially aboard of ſhips, it is proper for a mechanic to know how to tye them. Therefore I ſhall here deſcribe ſeveral ſorts of them. Not ſo much to teach how to tye them, as to ſhew the form they appear in, when theyv. are tiedc For the method of tying them is beſt learnæd from thoſe that can tye them already. 1. A thumbEnot. This is the ſimpleſt of all; and is uſed to tye at the end of a rope, to hinder its opening out. Alſo it is uſed by tailors at the end of their thread. 2. A loop knot, this is uſed to join pieces of ropes to gether. 3. A draw knot, is the ſame as the laſt; only one (or both) of the ends returns the ſame way back, as abcde. By pulling at a the part becd comes thrò', and the knot is looſed. 4. A ring knot. This ſerves alſo to join pieces of rope together. 5. Another knot for tying ropes together. This is made uſe of when any rope is often to be looſed. 6. Ai urning knot to draw any thing cloſe. By pulling at the end 4, the rope is drawn thro the loop b, and the part cd is drawn cloſe about a beam, &c. 7. Another Enot, to tye any thing to a poſt; here the end may be put through as oft as you will. 8. Avery ſmall knot. There is a thumb knot made at the end of each piece; and the end of the other is to go thro it. Thus the rope ac runs thro the loop 4, and bd, thro' c. And then drawn cloſe by pulling at ⸗ and b. It the ends è, f, be drawn, the knot will be looſed again. 9. A fitbers knot, or water knot. This is the ſame as the 4th. only the ends are to be put twice throthe ring, which in that was but once; and then drawn cloſe. 10. A maſhing knot for nets; and is tò be drawn cloſe. 11. 4barbers not, ora knot for cauls of wigs. This muſt be drawn cloſe. 12. 4 bowline knot. When this is drawn cloſe it makes a loop that will not ſlip, as fig. R. This ſerves to hitch over any thing. 213. Aale knot is made with three ſtrands of a rope ſo that it cannot ſip. When the rope is put through a hole, this knot keeps it from ſlipping through, it is repreſented at S fig. 1953. I the three ſtrands are wrought round once or twice more after the ſame manner; it is called crowning. By this means the knot is made bigger and ſtronger. A thumb knot art. I. may be applied to the ſame uſe as this. i  kttꝶ t: dbœtæt  rtſbta t: stortttætœt, S E C T. XIL The povers and properties of compound engines; of forces acling within the machine ; of friction. P R O P. CXV, In any compounded machine, if the power and weigh keep the machine and its parts in equilibrio. Then tbhe power is to the weight, in the compound ratio of the power to the weight in every ſimple machine, of which the whole is compoſed. VFor let the compound machine be divided into all its ſimple mechanic powers; and in the firſt let the power be to the weight as 4 to B. Then conſidering the weight B in the firſt, as the power in the ſecond, to which it is equal (by Ax. 3.); let that power in the ſecond machine, be to the weight as B to C. Then ex equo, the firſt power 4 is to the ſecond weight at C; in the compound ratio of 4 to B and B to C. In like manner if the weight in the ſecond be taken for the power in the third, and this power be to the weight as C to D; then the firſt power 4 is to the laſt weight D, in the compound ratio of 4 to B, B to C, and Cto D. And ſo on through the whole. Cor. In any machine compoſed of wheels; the power is to the weight; in the compound ratio of the diameter of the axle where the weight is applied, to the diameter of that where the power is applied, and the number of teeth in the pinion of each axis, beginning at the power, to the number of teeth in each wheel they work in, tiil you come at the weight. Or inſtead of the teeth you may take their diameters. P R O P. CXVI. If the power and weight be in equilibrio on any machine; if they be put in motion, the velocity of the weight will be to that of the power; as the power is to the weight. For ſince they are in equilibrio; one of them cannot of itſelf move the other; therefore if they be put into motion, the momentum or quantity of motion of the weight, will be equal to that of the power: and therefore theirvelocities will be reciprocally as their quantities. Cor. 1. Hence it follows, that if any weight is moved by help of a machine; what is gained in power is loſt in time. For in whatever proportion the power is leſs than the weight; in the ſame proportion will the weight be ſlower than the power. Cor. 2. Hence the motion of ihe weight is not at all increaſed by any engine, or mechanical inſtrument; only the velocity of the weight is ſo much diminiſbed thereby; that the quantity of motion of the weight may not exceed the quantity of motion of the power. And therefore it is a vain fancy for any one to think that he can move a great weight with a litile power, and with the ſame velocity as vith a greater power. lElt ſ PFor the advantage gained by the power is loſt by the velocity. If any power is able to raiſe a pound vith a given velocity; it is impoſſible by the help of any machine whatever that the ſame power can raiſe two pounds with the ſame velocity. Yet it may, by help of a machine, be made to raiſe to pounds with half that velocity; or even 1000 pounds with the thouſandth part of the velocity. But ſtill there is no greater quantity of motion produced when 1000 pounds weight is moved, than when 1 pound: The 1000 pounds being proportionally ſlower. The power and uſe of machines conſiſts only in this, that by their means the velocity of the weight may be diminiſhed at pleaſure, ſo that a given weight may be moved with a given power; or that with a given force any given reſiſtance may be overcome. Mechanic inſtruments being only the means whereby one body communicates motion to another: And not deſigned to produce a motion that had no exiſtence before. ll l Cor. 3. Hence alſo it is plain, that a given power or quantity of force, applied to move a heavy hody by help of a machine, can produce no greater quantily of motion in that body, than if ithat force was immediately applied to the body itſelf.. Nor not quite ſo much, by reaſon of the friction and reſiſtance of the engine. And if the power he given, you may chooſe whether you will move a greater weight vith a leſs velocity, or a leſs weight with a greater velocity. But to do both is utterly repugnant L0 ihe eternal laws of nature. PR OP. CXVII. If any machine CD is to he moved by ihe help of leavers, uavbeels, &e. And if the power that moves it, acls intirely within the machine, and exeris its force againſi ſome external objec?t B. Then ihe force applied within, to move the machine, will be juſt the ſame as if the machine was at reſt, and thie cbjec?t B was io be moved. Suppoſing B to be as eaſily moved as the machine. For ſuppoſe firſt, the leaver AFB to be fixt, and to make a part of the machine; and let the external force acting at B, which is capable to move the machine, be . Now ſuppoſe the leaver FB, moveable about ; and a force applied at 4, ſo great, as to act at B with the force i. Then the action and reaction at B being the ſame as before; it is plain the machine will be moved as before. But the force now acting at 4 is xI; juſt the ſame as if the point F was fixed, and B was to be moved. And if more leavers, or any number of wheels be added, the thing will ſtill be the ſame. Otheruiſe. Let thè abſolute force to move the machine be r, and the force acting at 4 be f; and let us firſt conſider it as acting out of the machine. Then B being fixt is the fulcrum; therefore the force acting at F is x f. Now if the acting force be conſidered in the machine, it will not be urged forward with all this force, for the reaction will be equal to f, the power at A. Therefore the abſolute force the machine is moved vwith, is æ x /ſ or abr xf that s5 x fi but this is=1I, therefore f æ I. Cor. 1. Hence if the abſolute external force, to move any body or machine, be given; and the machine is to be moved by an internal power: That power may be nal object B was to be removed, and to require the ſemt abſolute force to move it. For it is the ſame thing, as to the power, whether the machine, or the external object be moved, whilſt the other is at reſt. Cor. 2. If the power acting within the machine, be not communicated to ſome external objeci, it will have no force at all to move the machine. Anud any force that both hegins and ends within it, does nothing at all to move il. VFor the power acting only againſt ſomè part of the machine, will be deſtroyed by the contrary and equal reaction. And the body being acted on by thoſe equal and contrary forces will not be moved at all. Thus if a man ſitting in the head of a boat, pull the ſtern towards him, by a rope; the boat will not be moved at all out of its place, by that force. P R O P. XVIII. To determine the friction, and other irregulorities in mechanical engines. The propoſitions hitherto laid down, ſuppoſe all bodies perfectly ſmooth, that they ſlide over one another without any friction, and move freely without any reſiſtance. But ſince there is no ſuch thing as perfect ſmoothneſs in bodies; therefore in rubbing againſt one another they meet with more or leſæ friction according to their roughneſs; and in moving in any medium, will be reſiſted according to the denſity of the medium. Even ropes going over pullies cannot be bended without ſome force. Among machines, ſome have a great deal more friction than others, and ſome very littlee. Thus a pendulum has little or no friction, but what ariſes from the reſiſtance of the airr. But a carriage has a great deal of friction. For upon plain ground a loaded cart requires the ſtrength of ſeveral horſes to draw it along: and all or moſt of this force is owing to its friction. All compounded machines have a great deal of friction, and ſo much the more as they conſiſt of more parts that rub againſt one another. And there is great variety in ſeveral ſorts of bodies, as to the quantity of friction they have, and even in the ſame bodies under different circumſtances: Upon which account it will be impoſſible to give any ſtanding rules, by which its quantity can be exactly determined. All we can do is to lay down ſuch particular rules as have been deduced from experiments made upon particular bodies; which rules will require ſome variation under different circumſtances; according to the judgment and experience of the artiſt. 1. Wood and all metals when oyled or greaſed have nearly the ſame friction. And the ſmoother they are, the leſs friction they havee Yet metals may be ſo far poliſhed as to increaſe friction by the coheſion of their parts. Wood ſlides eaſier upon the ground in wet weather than in dry; and eaſier than iron in dry weather. But iron ſlides eaſier than wood in wet weather Lead makes a great deal of reſiſtance. Iron or ſteel running in braſs, makes the leaſt friction of any In wood acting againſt wood, greaſe makes the motion twice as eaſy, or rather  eaſier. Wheel naves greaſed or tarred, go four times eaſier than when wet. Metals oyled makes the friction leſs than when poliſhed, and twice as little as when unpoliſhed. In general, the ſofter or rougher the bodies, the greater is their friction. 2. As to particular caſes: A cubic piece of ſoſt wood of eight pound weight, moving upon a ſmooth plane of ſoſt wood, at the rate of thice ſeet per ſeP cond; its friction is about ; the weight of it. But if it be rough, the friction is little leſs than half the weight. Upon the ſame ſuppoſition, other ſoft wood upon ſoft wood very ſmooth; the friction is about  the weight. Soft wood upon hard or hard upon ſoft, 7 or ꝗ the weight. Hara wood upon hard wood, 7 or ĩ the weight. Poliſhed ſteel moving on ſteel or pewter, 7 the weight: moving on copper or lead, 7 the weight: on braſs 7 the weightt. Metals of the ſame ſort have more friction, than different ſorts. The friction, cæteris poribus, increaſes with the weight, almoſt in the ſame proportion. The friction is alſo greater with a greater velocity, but not in proportion to it, except in very few caſes. A greater ſurface alſo cauſes ſomething more friction, with the ſame weight and velocity. Yet friction may ſometimes be increaſed, by having too little ſurface to move on: as upon clay, &e. where the body ſinks. 3. The friction ariſing from the bending of ropes about machines, differs according to their ſtiffneſs, the temper of the weather, degree of flexibility, &. but ceteris paribus, the force or difficulty of bending a rope is as the ſquare of the diameter of the rope, and its tenſion, directly; and the diameter of the cylinder or pulley, it goes about reciprocally. A rope of i1 inch diameter, whoſe tenſion, or weight drawing it, is 5b. going over a pulley 3 inches diameter; requires a force of 1lb. to bend it. 4. The reſiſtance of a plane moving through a ſluid, is as the ſquare of the velocity: And (putting v= velocity in feet, in a ſecond,) it is equal to the weight of a column of the fluid, whoſe baſe is the plane, and height And in a globe it is but half ſo 5. The friction of a fluid running through a tube is as the velocity and diameter of the tube. But the friction is greater in reſpect to the quantity of the fluid, in ſmall tubes, than in large ones; and that reciprocally as their diameters. But the abſolute quantity of the friction in tubes, is but very ſmall, exeept the velocity be very great, and the tube very longBut if a pipe be divided into ſeveral leſſer ones, whoſe number is n; the reſiſtance ariſing from the friction will be increaſed as Vu. For the area of the ſection of any one pipe, will be and the friction being as the circumference will be as , and therefore the friction in all of them, will be vP or as n. 6. As to the mechanic powers. The ſingle leaver makes no reſiſtance by friction. But if by the motion of the leaver in lifting, the fulcrum or place of ſupport be changed further from the weight; the power vill be decreaſed thereby. 7. In any wheel of any machine, running upon an axis; the friction on the axis is as the weight upon it, the diameter of the axis, and the angular velocity. This ſort of friction is but ſmall. 8. In the pulley, if , ꝗ, be to weights, and q the greater; and if  æ arq , then  is the weight + upon the axis of the ſingle pulleyy And it is not increaſed by the acceleration of the weight ꝗ, but remains always the ſame. The friction of the pullies is very conſiderable, P2  when the ſheaves rub againſt the blocks; and by the wearing of the holes and axels. The Triction on the axis oſ the pulley is as the weight W, its angular velocity, the diameter of the axis directly, and the diameter of the pulley inverſly. A power of 100 Ib with the addition of 50 Ib. will but draw. up 500b. with a tacle of 5. And 55 Ib. over a ſingle pulley will draw up only 14 Ib. 9. In the ſcrew, there is a great deal of friction. Thoſe with ſharp threads have more friction than thoſe with ſquare threadss. And endleſs ſcres have more than either. Screws with a ſquare thread raiſe a weight with more eaſe than thoſe with a ſharp thread. In the common ſcrew the friction is ſogreat that it will ſuſtain the weight in any poſition given, when the power is taken oſf. And therefore the friction is at leaſt equal to the power. From whence it will follow, that in the ſcre. TThe power muſt be to the weight or reſiſtance; at Jeaſt as twice the perp. height of a thread, to the circumference deſcribed by one revolution of the power; if it be able to raiſe the weight, or only ſuſtain it. This friction of the ſcrew is of great uſe, as it ſerves to keep the weight in any given poſition. 10. In the wedge, the friction is at leaſt equal to the power, as it retains any poſition it is driven into. Therefore in the wedge, The power, muſt be to the weight; at leaſt as twice the baſe, to the height; to overcome any reliſtance. 11. To find the friction of any engine, begin at the power, and conſider the velocity and the weight at the firſt rubbing part; and eſtimate its quantity of friction, by ſome of the foregoing articles. Then proceed to the next rubbing part, and do the ſame for itt. And ſo on through the whole. And note ſomething more is to be allowed for increanſe of friction, by every new addition to the pover. Cor. Hence will appear the diſiculty or rather impoſſibility of a perpetucl motion; or ſuch a motion as is to continue the ſame for ever, or at leaſt as long as the materials will laſt, that compoſe the moviug machine. For ſuch a motion as this ought continually to return undiminiſhed, notwithſtanding any reſiſtance it meets with, which is impoſſiblee. For although any body once put into motion, and moving freely without any reſiſtance, or any external retarding force acting upon it, would for ever retain that motion. Yet in fact we are certain, that no body or machine can move at all, without ſome degree of friction and reſiſtancee. And therefore it muſt follow, that from the reſiſtance of the medium, and the friction of the parts of the machine upon one another, its motion vwill gradually decay, till at laſt all the motion is deſtroyed, and the machine is at reſtt Nor can this be otherwiſe, except ſome new active force, equal to all its reſiſtance, adds a new motion to it. But that cannot be from the body or machine itſelf; for then the body could move itſelf, or be the cauſe of its own motion, which is abſurd. lEl P R O P. XIX. To contrive a proper machine that ſvall mve a given weight with a iven power ; or vith a given quantity of force, ſhall overcome any other given reſiſtance. If the given power is not able to overcome the given reſiſtance when directly applied, that is, when the power applied is leſs than the weight or reſiſtance given; then the thing is to be performed by the help of a machine made with leavers, wheels, pullies, ſcrews, &c. ſo adjuſted- that when the weight and ower are put in motion on the machine; the veſocty of the power may be at leaſt ſo much greater than that of the weight, as the weight and friction of the machine, taken together; is greater than the power. For on this principle depends the mechaniſm or contrivance of mechanical engines uſed to draw or raiſe heavy bodies, or overcome any other force. The whole deſign of theſe, being to give ſuch a velocity to the power in reſpect of the weight; as that the momentum of the power may exceed the momentum of the weight. For if machines are ſo contrived, that the velocities of the agent and reſiſtant, are reciprocally as their forces; the agent will juſt ſuſtain the reſiſtant: But with a greater degree of velocity will overcome it. So that if the exceſs of velocity in the power is ſo great as to overcome all that reſiſtance which commonly ariſes from the friction or attrition of contiguous bodies, as they ſlide by one another, or from the coheſion of bodies that are to be ſeparated, or from the weights of bodies to be raiò. The exceſs of the force remaining, after all theſe reſiſtances are overcome; will produce an acceleration of motion proportional thereto, as well in the parts of the machine as in the reſiſfting body. Now how a machine may be contrived to perform this to the beſt advantage, will appear from the following rules. Sliũli  1. Having aſſigned the proportion of your power and the weight to be raiſed: the next thing is to conſider how to combine leavers, wheels, pullies, &e. ſo that working together, they may be able to give a velocity to the power which ſhall be to that of the weight, ſomething greater than in the proportion of the weight to the power. This done you muſt eſtima mate your quantity of friction, by the laſt Prop. and if the velocity of the power be to that of the weight ſtill in a greater proportion, than the weight and friction taken together is to the power; then your machine will be able to raiſe the weight. And note, this proportion muſt be ſo much greater, as you would have your engine work faſter. 2. But the proportion of the velocity of the power and weight muſt not be made too great neither. For it is a fault to give a machine too much power, as well as too little. For if the power can raiſe the weight and overcome the reſiſtance, and the engine perform its proper effect in a convenient time, and works well; it is ſufficient for the end propoſed. And it is in vain to make more additions to the engine to increaſe the power any further; for that would not only be a needleſs expence, but the engine would looſe time in working. : 3. As to the power applied to work the engine, it may be either a living power as men, horſes, &. or an artificial power as a ſpring, &c. or a natural power as wind, water, fire, weights, &r. When the quantity of the power is known; it matters not as to the effect what kind of power it is. For the ſame quantity of any ſort will produce the ſame effectt. And different ſorts of powers, may be applied in an equal quantity, a great variety of ways. The moſt eaſy power applied to a machine is weight, if it be capable of effecting the thing deſigned. If not, then wind, water, &c. if that can conveniently be had. and without much expence. A ſpring is alſo a convenient moving power for ſeveral machiness. But it never acts equally as a weight does. But is ſtronger when much bent, than when but a little bent, and that in proportion to the degree of bending, or the diſtance it is forced to. But ſprings grow weaker by oſten bending, or remaining long bent; yet they recover part ſtrength by lying unbent. The natural powers, wind and water may be applied with vaſt advantage to the working of great engines, when managed with ſkill and Judgment. The due application oſ theſe has much abridged the labours of men. For there is ſcarce any labour to be performed, but an ingenious artificer can tell how to apply theſe powers to execute his deſign, and anſwer his purpoſe. For any conſtant motion being given, it may by a due application, be made to produce any other motions we deſire. Therefore theſe powers are the moſt exſy and uſeful, and of the greateſt benefit to mankind. Beſides they coſt nothing, nor require any repetition or renewing, like a weight or a ſpring, which require to be wound up. When theſe cannot be had, or cannot ſerve our end; we have recourſæ tò ſome living power, as men, horſes, &c. 4. Men may apply their ſtrength ſeveral ways, in working a machine. A man of ordinary ſtrength, turning a roller by the handle, can act for a whole day, againſt a reſiſtance equal to 30 lb. weight. And if he works ten hours in a day, he will raiſe a weight of 30 Ib. 37 feet in a ſecond; or if the weight be greater, he will raiſe it ſo much leſs in proportion But a man may act, for a ſmall time, againſt a reſiſtance of 50 Ib. or more. If to men work at a windleſs or roller, they can more eaſily draw up 70 Ib. than one man can 30 Ib. provided the elbow of one of the handles be at right angles to that of the other. And with a fly or heavy wheel applied to it, a man ray do ; part more work; and for a little while act with a force, or overcome a continual reſiſtance, of 80lb and work a whole day when the reſiſtance is but 40 Ib. Men uſed to carrying, ſuch as porters, will carry, fome  50 Ib. others 200 or 250 Ib. according to their ſtrergth. A man can draw but about 70 or 80 Ib. horizontally; for he can but apply about half his weightt. If the weight of a man be 140 Ib. he can act with no greater a force in thruſting horizontally, at the height of his ſhoulders, than 27 Ib. As to horſes. A horſe is generally ſpeakingas ſtrong as five men. A horſe will carry 240 or 270 Ib. A horſe draws to greateſt advantage, when the line of direction is a little elevated above the horizon, and the power acts againſt his breaſt. And can draw 200 Ib. for 8 hours in a day at 25 miles an hour. If he draw 240 Ib. he can work but 6 hours. and not go quite ſo faltt. And in both caſes, if he carries ſome weight, he will draw better than if. he carried none. And this is the weight a horſe is ſuppoſed to be 3ble to draw over a pulley out of a well. In a cart, a horſe may draw 1000 Ib. The moſt force a horſe can exert is when he draws, ſomething above a horizontal poſition. The worſt way of applying the ſtrength of a horſ, is to make him carry or draw up hill. And three men in a ſteep hill, carrying each 100 Ib. will climb up faſter than than a horſe with 500 Ib. A round walk for a horſe to draw in (at a mill &c.) ſhould not be leſs than forty feet diameter. 5. Every machine ought to be made of as few parts, and thoſe as ſimple as poſſible, to anſwer its purpoſe; not only becauſe the expence of making and repairing will be leſs; but it will alſo be leſs liable to any diſorder. And it is needleſs to do a thing with many, which may be done with fewer parts. 6. If a weight is to be raiſed but a very little way, the leaver is the moſt ſimple, eaſy, and ready machine. Or if the weight be very great, the common ſcrew is moſt proper. But if the weight is to be raiſed a great way, the wheel and axle is a proper power, and blocks and pullies are eaſier ſtill; and ſhe ſame may be done by help of the perpetual cremm. Great wheels to be wrought by men or cattle, are of moſt uſe and convenience, when their axels are perpendicular to the horizon; but if by water, &c. then it is beſt to have their axels horizontal. 7. As to the combination of ſimple machines together, to make a compound one. Though the leaver when ſimple cannot raiſe a weight to any great height; and in this caſe is of little ſervice; yet it is of great uſe vhen compounded with otherss. Thus the pokesof a great wheel are all leavers perpetually acting. And a beam fixt to the axis to draw the wheel about by men or horſes, is a leaver. The leaver alſlo may be combined with the ſcrew, but not conveniently with pullies or with the wedge. The wheel and axel is combined with great advantage with pullies. The ſcrew is not well combined with pullies; but the perpetual ſcrew combined with the wheel, is very ſerviceable. The wedge cannot be combined with any other mechanical power; and it only performs its effect by percuſſion; but this force of percuſſion may be increaſed by engines. Pullies may be combined with pullies, and wheels with wheels. Therefore if any ſingle wheel would be too large, and take up too much room; it may be divided into two or three more wheels and trundles, or wheels and pinions, as in clockwork; ſo as æ have the ſame power, and perform the ſame efect. In wheels with teeth, the number of teeth which play togerher in two wheels ought to be prime to each other, that the ſame teeth may not meet at every revolution; for when different teeth meet, they by degrees wear themſelves into a proper figure. Thereore, they ſhould be contrived that the ſame teeth 8. The ſtrength of every part of the machine ought to be made proportional to the ſtreſs it is to bear. And therefore let every leaver be made ſo much ſtronger, as its length, and the weight it is to ſupport, is greater. And let its ſtrength diminiſh proportionally from the fulcrum, or point where the greateſt ſtreſs is, to each end. The axels of wheels and pullies muſt be ſo much ſtronger as they are to bear greater weight. The teeth of wheels, and the wheels themſelves, which act with greater force muſt be proportionally ſtronger. And in any combination of wheels and axels, make their ſtrength diminiſh gradually from the weight to the power, ſo that the ſtrength of every part be reciprocally as the velocity it has The ſtrength of ropes muſt be according to their tenſion, and that is as the ſquares of their diameters. And in general whatever parts a machine is compoſed of, the ſtrength of every particular part of it muſt be adjuſted to the ſtreſs upon it, according to Sect. VIII. therefore in ſquare beams the cubes of the diameters muſt be made proportional to the ſtreſs they bear. And let no part be ſtronger or bigger than is neceſſary for the ſtreſs upon it: Not only for the eaſe and vell going of the machine, but for diminiſhing the friction. For all ſuperfluous matter in any part of it, is nothing but a dead weight upon the machine, and ſerves for nothing but to clog its motionn. And he is by no means a perfect mechanic, that does not only adjuſt the ſtrength to the ſtreſs; but alſo contrive all the parts to laſt equally well, that the whole machine may fail together. 9. To have the friction as little as poſſible, the machine ought to be made of the feweſt and ſimpleſt parts. The diameters of the wheels and pullies ought to be large, and the diameters of the arbors or ſpindles they run on, as ſmall as can bè conſiſtent with their ſtrength. All ropes and cords muſt be as pliable as poſſible, and for that end are rubbed with tarr or greaſe, the teeth of wheels muſt be made to At and fill up the opens; and cut into the form of epicycloids. All the axels, where the motion is, and all teeth where they work, and all parts that in working rub upon one another, muſt be made ſmooth: And when the machine goes, muſt be oiled or greaſed. If a joint is to go pretty ſtiff and ſteady, rub a little greaſe upon it. : l The axis a of a wheel, may have its friction diminiſhed, by cauſing it to run on two rollers B, C, turning round with it, upon two centers. Likewiſe inſtead of the teeth of wheels, one may place little wheels as 4, B, running upon an axis in its center. And this will take away almoſt all the friction of the teeth. And in lanterns or trundles, the rounds may be made to turn about, inſtead of being fixt. ; all machines with wheels, the axels or ſpindles ought not to ſhake, which they will do, if they be too ſhort. And their ends ought juſt to fill their holes. ; 10. When any motion is to be long continued; contrive the power to move or act always one way, if it can be done. For this is better and eaſier performed than when the motion is interrupted, and the power is forced to move firſt one way and then another. Becauſe every new change of motion requires a new additional force to effect it. Beſides a body in motion cannot ſuddenly receive a contrary motion, without great violencee. And the moving any part of the machine contrary ways by turns, with ſudden jerks, tends only to ſhake the machine to pieces. 11. In a machine that moves always one way, endeavour to have the motion uniform. Some methods of doing this may be ſeen in Prop. CXIII. and if one uniform motion be required to produce a motion either uniform or accelerated, ſome light may be had from Prop. CXI. likewiſe how to communicate motion conſult Prop. CX. and to change the direction ſee Prop. CXII. 12. But when the nature of the thing requires that a motion is to be ſuddenly communicated to a body, or ſuddenly ſtopped: To prevent any damage or violence to the engine, by a ſudden jolt; let the force act againſt ſome ſpring; or beam of wood, which may ſupply the place of a ſpring. 13. In regard to the ſize of the machine; let it be made as large as it can conveniently. The greater the machine the exacter it will work, and perform all its motions the better. For there will always be ſome errors in the making, as well as in the marerials; and conſequently in the working of the machine.. The reſiſtance of the medium in ſome machines has a ſenſible eſfectt. But all theſe mechanical errors bear a leſs proportion to the motion of the machine in great machines than in little ones; being nearly reciprocally as their diameters; ſuppoſing they are made of the ſame matter, and with the ſame accuracy, and are equally well finiſhed. Therefore in a ſmall machine they are more ſenſible; but in a great one almoſt vaniſn. Therefore great machines, will anſwer better than ſmaller, in all reſpects, except in ſtrength. For the greater the machine the weaker it is, and leſs able to reſiſt any violence. 14. For engines that go by water, iĩt is neceſſary to meaſure the velocity and force of the waterr. To get the velocity, drop in pieces of ſticks, &. and obſerve how far they are carried in a ſecond, or any given time. But if it low through a hole in a reſervoir or ſtanding receptacle of water. The velocity will be found from the depth of the hole below the ſurface; by Cor. a. Prop. 97. and its ſorce by Cor. I. Proꝑ. 107. i Thus let s =16/ feet. v=pvelocity of the fluid per ſecond. B æ the area of the holee. H æ height of the water; all in feet. Then the velocity v ævVasH, and its force = the weight of the quantity ; B oOr HB of vater, or u HB hundred weight: becauſe a cubic foot is = 627 Ib. avoird. Alſo a hogſhead is about 8 7 feet, or 551 Ib. and a ton is four hogſheads. When you have but a ſmall quantity of water, you muſt contrive it to fall as high as you can, to have the greater velocity, and conſequently more force upon the engine. 15. If water is to be conveyed through pipes to a eat diſtance, and the deſcent be but ſmall; ſo much ſrger pipes muſt be uſed, becauſe the water will come ſlo. Pipes of conduct coming directly from an engine, ſhould be made of iron with flanches at the ends to ſcrew them together, with lead between; or elſe ofwood; for lead pipes will bulge out at every ſtroke of the engine and burſt. But pipes next a jet muſt be leadl. Pipes ſhould not turn off at an angle, but gradually in a curve: Pipes of elm vill laſt twenty or thirty years in the ground.. But they muſt be laid ſo deep, that the froſt may not reach them; or ele the water muſt be let out; otherwiſe the froſt will ſplit them. The thickneſs of any pipe muſt be as the diameter of the bore, and alſo as the depth from the ſpring. For a lead pipe of ſix inches bore, and ſixty or ſeventy feet high, the thickneſs muſt be half an inch. And in wooden pipes two inches. lll  Water ſhould not be driven through pipes faſter then four feet per ſecond; by reaſon of the friction of the tubes. Nor ſhould it be much wire drawn, that is, ſqueezed through ſmaller pipes; for that creates a reſiſtance, as the water-way is leſs in narrow pipes. When pipes are windbound, that is when air is lodged in them that the water can hardly paſs; it muſt be diſcharged thus. Going from the ſpring till you come to the firſt riſingof the ground; dig it opentill the pipe be laid bare, then with a nail driven into it, at the higheſt part, or rather a little beyond, make a hole in the top. And all the air will blow out at the hole, and when the water comes, batter up the hole again. Do the ſame at every eminence, and all the air will be diſcharged. If the water run faſt through the pipes, the air will be beyond the eminence; but ſtopping the water; the air will aſcend to the higheſt part. If air be driven in at firſt along with the water; the nail hole muſt be left open; or a cock placed there to open occaſionally. Sometimes a ſmall leaden pipe is placed over the other, communicating with it in ſeveral places, in which is a cock at top to open upon occaſion. 16. When any work is to be performed by a water- wheel moved by the water running under it and ſtriking the paddles or laddle boards. The channel it moves in ought to be ſomething wider than the hole of the adjutage, and ſo cloſe to the floats on every ſide, as to let little or no water paſ5s; and when paſt the wheel, to open a little that the water may ſpread. It is of no advantage to have a great number of floats or paddles, for theſe paſt the perpendicular are reſiſted by the back water, and thoſe before it are ſtruck obliquely. The greateſt effect that ſuch a mheel can perform, in communicating any motion, is when the paddles of the wheel move with æ the velocity of the water; in which caſe, the force upon the paddles is à only; ſuppoſing the the abſolute force of the water agianſt the paddles, when the wheel ſtands ſtill, to be 1. So that the utmoſt motion which the wheel can generate, is but , of that which the force of the water againſt the paddles at reſt, would produce. This is when the wheel is at the beſt but oftentimes far leſs is done. Machines to raiſe water, though well made, ſeldom loſe leſs than ? the computed quantity of water to be raiſedl. The beſt contrived engine is ſcarce  part better than the worſt contrived engine, when they are equally well executed. A man vith the beſt water engine cannot raiſe above one hogſhead of water in a minute, 10 feet  high, to work all day. æ ' i; 5an 5 S E CT. XIi. : The deſcription of compound Machines or Engines, and the method of computing their powers or forces; with ſome account of the advantages or diſadvantages of their conſtruction. P R O P. XX. To deſcribe ſeveral ſorts of Engines, and to compute tiheir forces or effecis. There are two things required to make a good Mechanic or Engineer. The firſt is a good invention for contriving all the parts of a machine, to perform its motions and effects in the moſt ſimple and eaſy manner. The next is, to be able to compute the power or force of it ; to know whether it can really perform the effect expected from it or not. The foundation of both theſe has been already laid down in this book. What ſeems to be neceſſary further, is to give ſome examples in practice, by ſhewing the conſtruction of ſeveral mechanic engines, and computing their powers. As there is great ſkill and ſagacity in contriving fit and proper ways to perform any motion, ſo this is principally to be attained by practice, and a thorough acquaintance with machines of ſeveral kinds. I ſhall therefore give the mechanical conſtruction of ſevęral ſorts oſ machines, m_ for ſeveral different purpoſes, which will aſſiſt the reader's invention, and give him ſome idea how he may proceed in contriving a machine for any end propoſed. Of which I ſhall only give a ſhort explanation of the principal parts, not troubling the reader with any deſcription of their minuter parts, nor how they are joined together, or ſtrengthened, &e. it is ſuſficient here to ſnew the diſpoſition, and nature of the principal parts: The reſt belongs to carpenters, joiners, ſmiths, &c. and is eaſily underſtood by any onee. To compute ibeir powers. I. As to ſimple machines, they are eaſily accounted for, and their forces computed, by the properties of the mechanic powers. 2. For compound machines; ſuppoſe any machine divided into all the ſimple ones that compoſe it. Then begin at the power and call it 1, and by the properties of the mechanic powers, : find the force with which the firſt ſimple machine acts upon the ſecond, in numbers. Then call this force 1, and find the force it acts upon the third, in numbers. And putting this force 1, find the force acting on the fourth, in numbers; and ſo on to the laſt. Then multiplying all theſe numbers together, the product will give the force of the machine, ſuppoſing the firſt power I. 3. When pullies are concerned in the machine; all ithe parts of the ſame running rope, that go and returm ahout ſeveral pullies, freely and without interruption, muſt be all numbered alike for the force. And if any rope act againſt ſeveral others, it muſt be numbered with the ſum of all theſe, it acts againſt. llt 4. In ãa combination of wheels; take the product of the number of teeth in all the wheels that act upon and move others, for the power; and the product iiaa : I oDl of the teeth in all the wheels moved by them, for the weight. Or inſtead of the teeth take the diameters. 45. When a machine is in motion, if you meaſure the velocity of the weight, and that of the power, in numbèrs. Then the firſt number to the ſecond, gives the proportion of the power to the weight. Other things that are more complex and difficult muſt be referred to the general laws of motion. ExamMpLE I. Sciſſars, pinchers, & c. may be referred to the leaver of the firſt kind. A handſpike and crow are leavers of the firſt kind. Knives fixt at one end, to cut wood, bread, &c. are leavers of the ſecond kind. The bones in animals, alſo rongs, are leavers of the third kind. A hammer to draw a nail is a bended leaver. lill ExamMpLE II. A vindleſs, and a capſtain in a ſhip, and a crant to draw up goods out of a ſhip or boat, may be referred to the wheel and axel. ExampLE III. All eqge- tools and inſtruments with a ſharp-point, to cut, cleave, ſlit, chop, pierce, bore, &c as tnives, hatchets, ſciſars, ſwords, bodins, &c. may be reduced to the wedge Exa mpLE IV. The bar 4B bearing a weight C, may be referred to the leaver; where the weight upon 4: to the weight upon B:: is as BC: to 4C. ExampLE V. Likewiſe if two horſes draw the weight WV, in the directions 4 1, B 2, by help of the wing-tree AB; this may be referred to the leaver. And the ſtrength or force at 4, to that of B:: is as BC to AC. ExampLE VI. ACB is a ballance, where the brachia AC, CB being equal, the weights in the two ſcales D, E will be equa. The properties of a good ballance are, I. That the points of ſuſpenſion of the ſcales, and the center of motion of the heam, be in one right line. 2. That the brachia or arms be exactly of equal length from the center of motion. 3. That they be as long as poſſible with conveniency. 4. That there be as little friction as poſſible in the motion. 5. That the center of gravity of the beam be in, or but very little below, the center of motion. 6. That they be in equilibrio when empty. If one brachium AC be longer than the other CB, then the weight in the ſcale Z muſt be greater than that in D, to make an equilibrium. And then you will have a deceitful ballance, which being empty, or loaded with unequal weights, ſhall remain in equilibrio. For AC: CB :: weight in E: weight in D; by the property of the leaver. But changing the weights from one ſcale to the other, will diſcover the deceit; for the ballance will be no longer in equilibrio. ExamMpLE VII. The ſteelyard AB is nothing but a leaver whoſe fulcrum is C, the center of motion. If the weight P placed at D reduce the beam 4B to an equilibrium; and there be taken the equal diviſions Di, 12, 23, 34, &c, then the weight  placed ſucceſſively at I, 2, 3, 4 &c. will equiponderate with weights as , ſuſpended at B, which are alſo as the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. reſpectively. Moreover if the divifions Di, 12, 23, &c. be each æ CB; then if P be ſucceſſively placed at 1, 2, 3, &c. the weight V to ballance it, will be reſpectively equal to P, 2P, 535P, &c. that is to I, 2, 3 pounds, if P is a pound. For by the property of the leaver CP xX P+ CD x P  CB X W, that is, PD x P æ CB xW, and CB: PD:: P: W, univerſall. Whence if DP or Di1 æ CB, then WP, if DP or D2 æ2 CB, then W=nP, &c. ExamprLE VIII. Let 4B be a cheeſe-preſs; CE, FG are leavers moveable about the points, D, E, F, G by applying the hand at C. j, the ſtone or weight. A, the cheeſe. 1If CD æ 5, DEZ=2, FG 6, GH=2, FRæI, FH=4. then in the leaver CE, D is the fulcrum. Call the power at C 1; then the force at E or Fis3. And in the leaver FG, whoſe fulcrum is G; if the power at F be 1, the force at R isꝗ, therefore the power at C, to the weight ; is as 1 to à x ꝗ or 3. Alſo the weight of the ſtone at ’r, to the preſſure at H, as 2 to 5 or I to2. And the power at C, is to the preſſure at , as 1to 3 xX ; or 73. ExamprLE IX. Let EG be a ſpinning wheel. Diameter of the rim EF æ 18. Diameter of the twill ab æ 2. Diameter of the whorle cd æ 3. EabF the band going about the twill. EcdF the band going about the whorle. Therefore whilſt the rim makes 1 revolution the twill makes 95, and the whorle and feathers 6. therefore there are 3 revolutions of the twil, for 2 of the feathers n. And conſequently the difference of the revolutions which is 1, is the quantity taken up by the till, whilſt the thread i7rn is twined by theſe 2 revolutions of the feathers. The greater the difference of the revolutions of the twill and feathers, the more the wheel takes up. And the nearer an equality, the more ſhe twines. If they make equal revolutions in the ſame time, ſhe will not take up at all. And if the feathers make no revolutions, ſhe will tine none. The greater the proportion of the rim, to the whorle and twill, the faſter ſhe will do both.  ExaMpPpLE X. A machine to raiſe a weight by the force of the running water IH, carrying the wheel LK, by means of the floats F,  Let the diameter of the wheel LK be 103 of GB, 23 of DC, 113 of AE, 3 Let the power of the water againſt the floats , be . Then the force at B to move the wheel CD will be 5; again if the power at B he 1I, the force at A will be 35. therefore the force of the water, to the weight W,; is as 1to 55 35, oras I to 18 3. ExampLE XI. In the machine FB, which raiſes the weight &, by means of the wheel EG, and the perpetual ſcrew BE. Iet the circumference deſcribed by the power C be 30 inches, the diſtance of two threads of the perpetual ſcrew E, be 1 inch. Diameter of the wheel EG/3 feet, of DA  2. Therefore if the power at C be I, the force acting at æ to turn the wheel EG vill be 300 And if the power at E be 1, the force at D will be 2. Therefore the power at C, to the weight ; is as I to 30 X 2 4 or I tò 75. Note it is the ſame thing whether CB be ſtreight or crooked, whilſt the diſtance BC, in a ſtreight line is the ſame, and in meaſuring, you muſt always take the ſtreight line AG. ExaMPLE XII. In a machine compounded of- vheels t to raiſe a weight; let AB=54, diameter of the barrel N=/2, the number of teeth in the wheels and nuts,. as follows; CD 10, CE 40, FGæ12, I'tl  50, KIZæ12, IL=64. then the power applicd to B, ĩs to the weight W; as 1 X 10 X 12 x 12 t0 5 X 40 X 50x64; that is as 1440 to aꝶ or as I to 44& But if the power was at , to move the weight B; then the ratio will be inverted. For then the power will be to the force at B; as 444 to I. Or iſ the veJocity of B was required; you will have the velocity of W to that of B, as 1 to 444 i Exaeiæ XIII. a machine to raiſe a weight by heli of the Triangles IBEF, the windlace CC, and two pullies P, :⸗ Let the diameter HG where the rõpe goes, be / 2, radius COD  5. Then if the power at D be 1, the force at H is 57 And if the force at , drawn by one rope, be 1, the force at W drawn by twoẽ ropes, vill be 2. Therefore the power at D, to the veight W, is as I to 2 x 50r I).. If the leg 4B be wanting; the other two may- b ſet againſt a wall; or upheld itũ ropes; andthen it is called a pair of seers ò Exaupiæ xv. If the veight Ais to be lifted by he three ulles C, D, E, of which C is fixt. Call the power at B, I. then the force ſtretching 4E is 13 and both together is equal to the force of DE  2: and force DA æ 2. whence force DC æ 2; likewiſe force CA  4. Therefore the whole force acting at Ais 1 +2 +4, and the power at B to the weight 4; as 1 107. ExamprLE XV. In this machine AACD is a running rope fixt at D, B a fixt pulley. Let the power at b pulling the rope hA be . That on AC 1, and CD I. then will 4B be 2, and BC 2, BE 4. And the weight oppOſing AC, BC, and DC vill be 1-2 +1æ4 hence the power at b, to the weight ; is as I to 4. ExampLE XVI. Another machine withpullies. 4 a fixt pulley. the ends of the ſeveral ropes are fixt at B, C, D, E. ſuppoſe the power at Mæ1, then the force on AF, FB is 13 0n FG, GC, 23 on GH, HD, 4; on HI, IE, 8. but the weight P acts againſt HI, IE, and is therefore 16. And the power is to the weight as I to 16. ExamMpLE XVII. Let DE be a hoat rowed by oars; and let ABC be one oar. Here the power acts at 4, and the pin B will be the fulcrum; and the force at C acting againſt the water, is that which gives her motion. Let the pover at 4 be 13 then the force at C, by which the boat is moved, l Whence the longer 4B, or the ſhorter BC is, ſo much more power there is at A to move her forward. li Therefore long oars have the diſadvantage of loſeing power. Yet the oars may be too ſhort as well as too long. For if they be very ſhort, the motion of the boat will allow little time to ſtrike, and they will have but ſmall force to act againſt the water with, in ſo ſmall a time, as well as from the ſlow motion of the end C; which is a diſadvantage on the other ſide ſide. ExamMpLE XVIII. Let FR bo a ſvip, AS a ſail. Suppoſe a plumbline drawn through the center of gravity of the ſection of the ſhip and water; and another line BO, parallel to the horizon and to the axis or keel of the ſhip, and to paſs through the center of preſſure or reſiſtance 'ã the ſhip, which ſhe has by the water in her motion. Let this interſect the former plumbline in O. Through C the center of gravity of the ſail, draw CD perpendicular to the ſail; and CB perpendicular to BO, and S in the plane of the triangle CBD. Then if DC be the force of the wind againſt the ſail AS, then DB is the force generating her progreſſive motion, and BC is the force lifting the ſhip upwards. Now the force DB, acting at C, in direction DB, endeavours to turn the ſhip, round an axis paſſing thr O; with a force;which is equal to the abſolute force BD x by the diſtance CB, or CBEXBD; and this is the force by which her head is depreſſed. Likewiſe the force BC, in direction BC, endeavours to turn the ſhip round an axis at O, the contrary way; and that with the force BC x diſtance BO, or ACxBO; and this is the force that raiſes her headl. Therefore the force to raiſe her head is to the force to depreſs it, as CB x BO to CB x BD, or as BO to BD. Hence, if the point D fall before O, then the ſail endeavours to raiſe the ſhips head; if it be behind O, it endeavours to ſink it. If it be in O, it will keep her ſteady. And the height of the ſaill 45 contributes nothing to her progreſſive motion; the ſame ratio of the abſolute to the progreſſive force, remains ſtill as CD to DB. MpLE XIX. EF is a Cart or Carriage, BD a rub for the wheel CAD to paſs over, 4B the horizontal plane; DB, AC perp. and OD parallel to AB. C the center of the wheel. Then the horizontal force required to pull the wheel over the rub BD, Is as 0 And the difficulty of going over rubs increaſes in a greater ratio than that of their heights. Alſo the higher the wheels, the more eaſily they paſs over them; but then they are more apt to overturn. To draw the cart with the leaſt power over the rub BD, it ſhould not be drawn in the horizontal direction 4B or OD, but in the direction 4D. The advantage of high wheels, is that they paſs the rubs moſt eaſily, and thev have alſo leſs friction; And ſink leſs in the dirt; ahd more eaſily preſs down an obſtaclee. But their diſadvantage is, that they eaſily overturn; they alſo make cattle draw too high; for they can apply their ſtrength beſt when they draw low and upward, as in the direction 4D; which is the advantage of low wheels. Yet if the wheels are high, they may be made to draw low, by fixing the limmers or traces as ſar as below the axle as you will, which will then bè an equal advantage with low wheels. For the power not pulling at the wheel, but at the carriage, may draw from any part of it. There is another advantage in ſmall wheels, that they are better to turn with. lltãll u: A waggon with four wheels is more advantageous than a cart with only two wheels; eſpecially on ſand, clay, &. narrow wheels and narrow plates are a diſadvantage. There is a great deal oſ friction in all carriages, as is evident by the force required to draw them upon plain ground. And for that reaſon experience can only inform us how much force is able to draw any carriage. To make the reſiſtance as ſmall as can be, axles of iron, running in braſs boxes in the wheel naves, go the eaſieſt. The ſpokes in the wheel ought to be a little inclined outwards; that when a wheel ſinks into a rut, the ſpokes (bearing then the greateſt weight) may be nearly perp. to the horizon. ll The underſide of the axle-tree, where the wheels run ought to be nearly in a right line; if they ſlant much upward towards the ends, the wheel will work gainſt the lin sin. Yet this cauſes the wheels to be Either aſunder at top than at bottom, in the rut, becauſe the ends of the axle- tree are conical; which is an inconvenience. ExamMprLE XX, Suppoſe the waoggon FG is moved forward, by a wer acting within it. Which power turns the wheel E by the ſpokes 4D, AD, &c. and DE turns the wheel IC which cãrries the waggon. Let the poer at 4 be 1, then the force acting at £Z will be ; alſo if the power at E be 1. The force at C, by which i the waggon is moved, will be BE Therefore the EC power at 4, to the force by which the waggon can be moved; ĩs as I to Sax2. Or the power is to that force, as DE x BC to DA x EB. It will be the ſame hing, if inſtead of teeth, the wheel DE carries EB by a chain going round them. You muſt ſuppoſe the like wheels on the oppoſite ſide. Hence if the abſolute force to move the waggon vithout, be 13 the force within, applied at 4 to move it, will be 2z.æ ExampLE xxI. l ABCD are the ſails of a windmill, all alike inclined to their common axis, and facing the wind, and turning about in the order ABCD. C the direction of the wind parallel to the axis EH. Since WC is perpendicular to EC, draw CF in the ſail perpendicular to ZC, then the angle WCF will be the angle of incidence of the wind upon the ſail. Therefore the force of the wind to turn the ſails about the axis EH is as the ſquare of the ſine of the angle WCF x by its coſine. And the force acting againſt the mill in direction of the axis EH is as the cube of the ſine of WCF. No ſince the force of the wind to turn the ſails round, is as S. CF2 x coſ. WCF, therefore when that force is the greateſt, the angle WCF will be 4: 44. 5 And this is the moſt advantageous poſition of the ſails to move them from reſt; and would always be ſo, if the wind ſtruck them in the ſame angle when moving as when at reſt. But by reaſon of the ſwift motion of the ſails eſpecially near the end G; the wind ſtrikes them under a far leſs angle; and not only ſo, but às the motion at the end G is ſo ſwift, it may ſtrike them on the backſide Therefore it will be more advantageous to make the angle of incidence WCF reater, and ſo much more as it is further from E. herefore at the places n, 1, G, the tangents of the angles ought to be nearly as the diſtances, En, Eo, EG. And therefore the ſails ought to be twiſted, ſo as at r to lye more ſharp to the wind; and at G almoſt to face it. And by that means they will avoid the backwind. ExaurLE XXII. GB is a common ſucting pump. GKL the handle, CD the bucket. E, F two clacks opening upwards. When the end L is put down, the end G raiſes the ſucker or bucket CD, and the value or clack  ſhuts; and the water above the bucket being raiſed, the weight of the atmoſphere is taken off the water underneath in the pump. Then the preſſure of the external air in the pit or well MN, raiſes the water up the pump, opens the valve æ, and aſcends thro the hole B into the body of the pump DB. Again when the handle L is raiſed, the bucket CD deſcends, the valve F opens, and lets the water aſcend through it, and the preſſure of the water ſhuts the valve E, ſo that the water cannot return through B. Then whilſt the end L is put down again, the ſucker CD is raiſed again, together with the water above it, whilſt more aſcends through B. So that at every ſtroke of the handle water is raiſed into the pump; till at laſt it flows thro the pipe A. If the bucket CD be more than 30 or 32 feet from the ſurface of the water MN in the pit, no water will aſcend above it; for the preſſure of the atmoſphere reaches no further. Therefore it muſt always be within that diſtance, or this pump is uſeleſs for raiſing water. The weight of water which the bucket lifts at each ſtroke is that of a column of water whoſe height is MH, and its diameter that of the bore of the pump at CD where the bucket goes. Therefore as GK to KL :: ſo the power applied at L, to that weight. therefore it ſignifies nothing where the bucket is placed, as to the weight of water. If a leak happens in the barrel of the pump below the bucket CD; the air will get in and hinder the working of the pump: If above CD, only ſome water will be loſt; therefore CD ſhould be placed low; but then it will be bad to come at to repa it. The bucket, ſucker, or piſton is to be ſurrounded vith leather to fit exactly, and muſt move freely up and down in the barrel, and alſo muſt exactly fill it. of valves or clacks, ſome are flat, made of leather; others are conical; and they muſt all fit very cloſe; and move freely. To ballance the weight of water, the handle XL is commonly made heavy, as of iron, vith a knob at the end L. ExamMpLE XXIII. If a man ſitting in the ſcale E be in equilibrio with a weight in the ſcale 4; and if he thruſt againſt the beam CB, with a ſtick or otherwiſe, in direction ED, and by that means thruſts out the ſcale Z to the pofition BE. Then the man in the ſcale E will overballance the other ſcale 4, and raiſe the weight. For let EZL be perp. to FB; then the force at E to turn the ſcales is to the contrary force at F, as CL to CF or, CB. Forit is the ſame thing as if £ was ſuſpended at L. And when the perpendicular obſtacle GH hinders the ſcale from going out; and the center Cis alſo kept ſteady. Yet the ſcale E will ſtill preponderate. For Iet ED be the force acting againſt D; this is equivaIent to the two forces EB, BD, acting at E, and D. The force BD tending to or from the center, does nothing. But the force EB at E, acting at the diſtance CB, its power to bring down the ſcale E is CBx BE. And the ſame force acting at D, its power to puſh up the ſcale is CDXBE. And their difference DBXBE is the abſolute force to thruſt down the ſcale. And this force is to the whole thruſting force DE, as DB to DE. And if D were on the orher ſide of C, the force would ſtill be DBEXBE, or CEF-CDXBE. But if the ſcale Z was not moveable about B, as if it were tyd by the cord DE; then no force acting againſt any part of the beam FB, would have any effect to deſtroy the equilibrium. ExampLE XXIV. Suppoſe a man 4 ſtanding upon the plank CB, ſupported only at one end C, and pulling the end B towards him by the rope ZB, in order to keep himſelf and the plark from falling. Imagine the man and the plank to be one body; then the action and reaction in direction ZB, deſtroy one another, and his pulling does nothing. It would therefore be in vain for him to endeavour to ſupport himſelf by that force; for both he and the plank muſt fall down together towards B, by their own weight. ExauprLE XXV. CD is a machine with two wheels fixed to an axis DF, round which goes a cord GDFE. There is a power at E endeavouring to draw the machine toards , in a direction parallel to the horizon HO, by the cord EF, going under the axis DF. In the radius AH of the wheel, take 4B equal to the radius of the axle DF, towards ſ, becauſe the ſtring goes below it. Then the force to move the machine, is the ſame as if the ſtring was fixt at B; where IIis the fulcrum, A the weight. Then the force to move the machine towards E, vith the given power E, will be as BH. Therefore it would be in vain, by pulling at the ſtring, to endeavour to make the body roll towards D, the contrary way. But if DF was greater than the diameter of the wheel, that is, if B falls bevond H; then the force drawing towards æ, would move the body towards D the contrary way. If the direction of the power DE be elevated above the horiZon as fe; then the machine would approach or recede, till the direction of the ſtring æſ fell upon the point of contact II, and there it would iatt ExanpLE XXVI. AB is an ortificial kte, kept up by the wind blowing in direction WC, by drawing the ſtring 4IBIH, fixt at 4 and B. The kite will gain ſuch à poſition, that HI produced will paſę through the center of gravity of its ſurface at CC. Draw CO perp. to B4, and DO perp. to the horizon HO. Then OC is the direction of the force of the wind acting againſt the kite; and the force of the wind to keep her up, is as the ſquare of the fine of the angle ACH or COD. Now if DO repreſent the given weight of the kite, CO will be the force of the wind acting againſt her, and CD the force pulling at the ſtring. The tail EF (with a bullet  at the end) being always blown from the wind, keeps her head always towards the wind. As the direction of the thread always paſſes thro C, therefore the angle ACH and conſequently HCO, vill always be the ſame at all altitudess. And ſhe can never aſcend ſo high, till the angle of altitude CHO be equal to ACH. And hence it follows, that the leſſer the angle HCO is made, the higher ſie will riſe. And likewiſe the greater the wind is, or the lightex the kite, ceteris paribus, the higher ſhe will riſe. After a like manner a machine as ab may be contrived, to keep at the top of a running water, heing held by the ſtring de tied to a ſtone and ſunk to the bottom. ab is a thin board, b a piece of lead to ſink the end b, but the whole muſt be lighter than water, cd an iron pin fixt atc. Or the machine may have a looſe tail at b, heavier than water, as in the kite. ExaMmpLE XXVII. If AB is a machine to be moved by a power acting at C out of the machine, in direction DC. DF, GI, two leavers within the machine, moveable about the two fixt fulcrums E, . Call the power at C, 1; then the force at F to move the leaver Gl, is , Then if the force at Fbei, that fore if the power at C be 1, the force acting agaieſt the obſtacle at ſ, or which is the ſame thing, the force urging forward the machine towards B, is ; ; But the power at C draws back the machine with the force 1. Therefore the abſolute force DE x GH F }x HI urging forward the machine is DEX GHEFX HI Etxtil . Note, if the force at F be 15 the force againſt H, I Oor is æ But this is not the force urging forward the machine, but to tear her in pieces, or to ſeparate the fulerums E, H, from one ancther. If there had been three leavers, and the power at D; the third, had been directed towards X, the way the machine goes; then the power 1 muſt be added to the force at I, and the whole is the force urging forward the machine. Hence if the abſolute direct force to move the machine be 1, the power applied at D, which ĩs able . . EF x H] ll b m—v—m—-v——pB-&- a to move it, will be BEXCHEEXHI But if the power at D act within the machine; this power would only be EPX HIL ſince there is then no force DE XGH : to be deducted, for drawing back the machine. ExaMpLE XXVIII. DABH is a wooden-bridge, AC, AD, AB, BH, BO, beams of timber. DE, EL, SR, RH, braces to ſtrengthen the angles 4, B. The ſtreſs upon any of the angles, is cæteris paribus, ſo much greater as rhe angle is greater. But the ſtrength on any angle 4, is as the perpendicular ar Ex aum?rLE XXIX. AB a ſailing chariot. CDEF horizontal ſails, ſo contrived that the ſails D facing the wind may expand, and thoſe going from the wind may contract. The ſails are turned about by the wind coming from any coaſt. Theſe ſails turn the axis and trundle GH. And the trundle turns the wheel TL by the coggs in ĩt. Therefore the chariot may move in any direction. æ is a rudder to ſteer with. Suppoſe the chariot to go againſt the wind. Let D be the center of preſiure of the two ſails C, D, the wind blows on. And let the power (that is the force of the wind acting againſt the ſails) be I, then the force againſt the teeth in IL, is i; And this force being 1, the force at Lis alſo 1. Therefore the power at D to the force at L; is as I to or 3 Or as OH to GD. Now ſince the maſt is ſtrained by the power falling on the ſails, therefore by this power OH the chariot is urged backward. And by the force at I. which is GD, it is urged forward. Let R be the force of the wind upon the body of the chariot, together with the friction in moving. Therefore if GD is greater than the radius OH + R, the chariot will move forward againſt the wind; if leſo, backward. But if they be equal, it will ſtand ſtill. FxampLE XXX. FG a chariot or waggon to ſail againſt the wind. S the ſails of a windmill, turning in the order i, 2, 3' As the ſails go round; the pinion 4 moves B, and the trundlę C moves D, which has both teeth and coggs. D by its teeth moves ; and the trundle Z fixt to the axle-tree carries round the wheels II, I which move the waggon, in direction AG. The ſails are ſet at an angle of 45°, ſo the force to turn them and the force in direction of the axis, will be equa. This waggon will always go aſinſt the wind, provided you gve the ſalls power enough, by the combination of the wheels. but then her motion vill be ſo much ſſlower. ExamrLE XXXI. Let AB be part of a rope. cd, cd, &c. the particular ſtrands running about in a ſpiral manner. Let FH be the axis of the rope, the angle GFH or HFK the obliquity of the ſtrands. Draw KH, GH parallel to FG, FK, and draw GEK. Then the tenſion of the rope in direction HF, is to the ſtreſs on all the ſtrands in direction FG; as FH to FGH FK or FG+ GH, that is, as æF to FG. Therefore the abſolute force by which the rope is ſtretched, is to the ſtrain or ſtreſs upon all the ſtrands, or upon the twiſted rope; as PE is to FG; and ſo is the length of any part of the rope, to the correſpondent length of a ſtrand. Hence ropes the leaſt tiſted are ſtrorgeſt and bear the moſt weight; and the harder they are twiſted the ſooner they will breakk And for the ſame reaſon if they be double twiſted, they will be weaker ſtill. But as it is very diſficult to make all the fibres pull equally without twiſting, and impoſſible to make a rope hold together without it: Therefore it is neceſſary it have as much as to prevent, the fibres from drawing out; and a ſmall degree will not much impair its ſtrength. ExaMPLE XXXII. ABC a ſyphon or crane. If the ſhorter end 4B be immerſed in a veſſel of water 4D, then by applying the mouth to the end C, and ſucking till the water comes, it will continue to flow out at the end C, as long as that end is lower than the ſurface of the water at D. If there be a mouth. piece at æ, then ſucking at E (whilſt the end Cis ſtopt with the finger) will make the water flow, when the finger is taken off. And when the water is begun to flow, the hole at Z ſhould be ſtopped up, or elſe the water will flow no longer than till the ſurface at D be as low as æ. The reaſon of its flowing is this: the perpendicular height of the column of water BC being greater than that of BD; the preſſure at Cis greater than that at D; and the preſure of the atmoſphere being the ſame at D and C; therefore the greater weight at C will make it flow out there; whilſt the preſſure of the atmoſphere at D, forces more water up the tube DB; and ſo keeps it continually running as long as there is any water, and the ead C continues lower than the ſurface at D. Butif C is higher than D, the water will return back into BD. But if the height DB exceed the preſſure of the atmoſphere which is 30 or 32 feet; then it cannot be made to flow out at the end C; or if there be a hole in the ſyphon higher than the ſurface at D; the air will get in, and the water will return through BD. Or if the ſyphon be very wide, the air will inſinuate itſelr into the end C, between the water and the tube; which wili hinder it from running. To prevent which the end C may be immerſed into another veſſel of water, lower than the ſurface at D. If the ends of the ſyphon be turned up, as FG; then the water will remain in the ſyphon aſter it has done working, which in the other will all run cut. ExaMmpLE XXXIII. CDLF a veſiel of water; 4B a tube open at both ends, and about ĩ inch diameter. Aæ a quantity of mercury put into the tube. Then ſtopping the end B, let the other end 4 be imm:rſed deep enough in the water. Then opening the end B, the mercury will ſink ſo deep in the tube, till the height of the water AB be 14 times the height of the mercury 4E: And then the mercury vill be at reſt. For the ſpecific gravities of water and mercury being 1and 14, the column of water 4B will be equal in weight with the column of mercury AE. Therefore the preſſures at 4 being equal, they will ſuſtain one another. ExaMmpr LE XXXIV. A, B, are two barometers. ed is a tube, its bore } or  inch diameter at leaſt, cloſe at top, and communicating with the veſſel C, with mercury in it. Cis open to the external air. The uſe of this inſtrument is to ſiew the weight of the atmoſphere, and its variations. This tube and veſſel with mercury, is put into a frame, and hung perpendicular. Near the top of the tube is placed a ſcale of inches, by which the height of the mercury in the tube is known, and likeiſt a ſcale for the weather. At the top of the tube above the mercury, is a vacuum. Now the atmoſphere preſſing upon the ſurface of the mercury at C, keeps the mercury ſuſpended at the height à in the tube, which therefore will be higher or Iower according to the weight of the atmoſphere. The height of the mercury in the tube is generally 28, 29, or 30 inches; ſeldom more. If any air get into the tube it ſpoils the machine. Leſt the quickſilver ſtick to the glaſs, it is good to drum a little with the fingers upon it, in making any obſervation. Rules for obſervation of the weatber. 1. The riſing of the mercury preſages fair weather; and its falling, foul weather. it being generally high in good weather; and low in rainy or windy weather. 2. In very hot weather, the falling of the mercury foreſhews thunder. : 3. In winter rhe riſing foretells froſt; and falling in froſty weather foretells thaw. i 4. In continual froſt, the riſing preſages ſnow. 5. When ſoul weather happens ſoon aſter the falling of the mercury; or ſair weather aſter its riſing; expect but little of it. 6. In foul weather ariſing faſt and high, and continuing ſo two or three days beſore the foul weather be quite over; expect a continuance of fair weather to follow. V. In fair weather, falling faſt and low, and continuing two or threc days beſore the rain comes; expect a great deal of wer, and probably high winds. 838. Unſettled motion of the mercury denotes unſettled weather. Ex aMmr1 E XXXV. ABEis an ortiſicial fountain, A is an open veſſel, B a cloſe one; Z may be made cioſe by ſtopping the hole C; theſe veſſels all communicate by the tubes F, G. The tube F reaches near the top of E, and the tube G near the bottom of B. Pour water into C almoſt to the top of the pipe ; and ſtop the hole C. Then pour water into 4 which will run down into B. Then open the cock D, and the water will ſpout up to the height of 4B above D. For the air in B, F, E, is condenſed by the weight of the column of vater AB; and its preſſure on the water in C, is equal 10 the weight of that column; and will therefore make the water ſpout to that height above the water in C, nearly. But the pipe leading to D muſt be turned curve. ExaMmpLE XXXVI. AB is a dart or an arrow; at A, 5or 4 feathers are placed nearly in planes paſſing through the arrow. If the feathers were exactly in this plane, the air could not ſtrike againſt the feathers, when the arrow is in motion. But ſince they are not ſet perfectly ſtreight, but always a little aſlant; whilſt the arrow moves forward, the air ſtrikes the ſlant ſides of the feathers; by which force the feathers are turned round, and with the fearhers the arrow or recd. So there is generated a motion about the axis of the arrow; which motion will be ſwifter as they ſtand more aſlant. This motion is like the motion of the ſails and axle of a windmill, turned round by the wind. The head B is made of lead or iron, and will therefore go foremoſt in the air; and the feathered end 4 the hindmoſt, as being lighter. An arrow will fly about 50 yards in a ſecond. Exau?PLE XXXVII. AB is a veſſel which keeps its liquor till filled to a certain height; and if filled higher lets it all run out. EFG is a crooked pipe or crane open at both ends. i water be poured into the veſſel, it will continue in jt till it riſes above , and aſcend to the ſame height in the pipe £F. But riſing above F, the preſſure at E will make it run out through the pipe æFG, till the ſurface of the fluid deſcend as low as Z. This is ſometimes called Tantalus's Cup. The funnel EZFG may be put in the handle of this cup; Which will look neater. ExamMpLE XXXVIII. BEC, Cũ are two bones of an animal, moveable about the joint FX, by help of the muſcle XD. The joints of an mas are either ſpherical or circular, and the cavity they move in, is accordingly either ſpherical or circular. And the center of motion is in the center of the ſphere or circle, as at C Let  be a weight hanging at B, and draw CP, CK perpendicular to BW, KD. Then if the weight W be ſuſpended by the ſtrength of the muſcle XD; it will be as CK: P :: : tenſion of the muſcle XD. The bone BC is moved about the joint FX, by the ſtiength cf the muſcle XD. For when the muſcle is contracted, the point X is moved towards D; and the end B towards E, about the immoveable center of motion C The ſtrength of the muſcles is ſurprizingly great. Borelli (in his book de motu animalium, Part I, Prop 22.) computes the force of the muſcles to bend the arm at the elbow; and ſays a ſtrong young fellow can ſuſtain at arms end, a weight of 28 Ib. taking inn the weight of the arm. And he finds the length of CB to CKto be in a greater proportion than that of 20 to . Whence he infers the ſtrength of theſe muſcles to be ſo great, as to bear a ſtretch at leaſt of 560 Ib. It is evident that all animal bodies are machines. For what are the bones but leavers, moved by a certain power placed in the muſcles, which act as ſo many ropes pulling at the bones, and moving them about the joints? Every joint repreſenting the tulcrum or center of motionn. What are all the veſſels but tubes which contain fluids oſ dilſerent ſorts, deſtined for the uſe or motion of the ſeveral parts of the machine? And which by opening or ſhutting certain valves, let out or retain their contents as occaſion requires; or convey them to diſtant places, by other tubes communicating therewith., And thereſfore all theſe motions of an animal body are ſubject to the general laws of mechanics. ExaurLE XXXIX. The motion of a man walking, running, &e. will eaſily be accounted for. Let us firſt ſuppoſe a man ſitting in a chair; he cannot riſe from his ſeat, till by thruſting his head and body forward, and his feet and legs backward, the line of direction, or the perpendicular from the center of gravity, paſs through his feet, as the baſec. Likewiſe when we ſtand upon our feet, the line of direction muſt fall between our feet. Otherwiſe we cannot ſtand but muſt fall down towards the ſide the center of gravity lies on. And when a man ſtands firm upon his feet, his legs make an iſoceles triangle, the center of gravity lying between them. And then he is not ſupported by the ſtrength of the muſcles, but by the bones of the legs and thighs, which then ſtand in a right line with one another. i When a man AC endeavours to walk, he firſt extends his hindmoſt leg and foot S almoſt to a right line, and at the ſame time bends a little the knee A of his fore-leg. Thus his hind leg is lengthened, and his fore- leg ſhortened; by this means his body is moved forward, till the center of gravity V fallsbeyond the fore-foot B; and then being ready to fall, he preſently prevents it, by taking up the hind foot, and by bending the joints of the hip, knee, and ancle, and ſuddenly tranſlating it forward to T beyond the center of gravity: And thus he gains a new ſtationn. After the ſame manner by extending the foot and leg HB, and thruſting forward the center of gravity, beyond the foot S, and then tranſlating the foot B forward, he gains a third ſtationn. And thus is walking continued at pleaſure. His two feet do not go in one right line, but in two ing has a libratory motion, from one ſide to the other: And it is not poſſible to walk in a right line. Walking on plain ground is eaſy, pleaſant, and perſormed with little labour. But in going up hill is very laborious, by reaſon of the great flexure of the joints required to aſcend, and their ſuffering more ſtreſs from the weight of the body in that poſition. Leſcending down hill is, for the ſame reaſon, more laborious, than walking on plain ground, but not ſo bad as aſcending l The walking of birds is not unlike that of men; only their weight is entirely ſupported by the ſtrength oſ the muſcles; ſince their joints are always bent. Alſo their feet go in two parallel lines. A man in walking always ſets down one foot beſore the other be taken up: And therefore at every ſlop he has both feet upon the ground. But in running he never ſets one down till the other be up. So that at each ſtep he has but one foot upon the ground, and all the intermediate time, none. A good footman vill run 400 yards in a minute. FxamrLE XL. When a beaſt ſtands, the line of gravity muſt fall within the quadrilateral made by his ſour feet. And when he walks, he has always 3 feet on the ground, and one upa Suppoſe he firſt takes up the hind foot C. Before he does this, by extending his leg backwards, he thruſts forward his body and the center of gravity, then taking up the foot Che moves it forward to V. Then he immediately takes up the forefoot B on the ſame ſide, and carries it to I7; then he takes up the hind foot D, and tranſlates it forward; and then the ſorefoot 4; then F again, and ſo on. When he trots, he takes up two together, and ſets down two together, diagonally oppoſite. When he gallops, he takes up his feet one by one, mals ſtrike with the two forefeet nearly at once, and the two hind feet near at once, and have not above two feet on the ground at once. A good horſe will run half a mile in a minute. Animals with 6 or more feet, take up the hindmoſt firſt; then the next, and then the next in order, to the foremoſt, all on one ſide; and aſter that all the feet on the other ſide in the ſame order beginning at the laſt. It they were to take up the foremoſt firſt, the animals would move backward. ExaurLE XLI. AD is a bird flying in the air, by help of the wings F, T; and the tail C The ſtructure of their wings are ſuch, that in ſtriking downward they expand to their greateſt breadth, andbecome almoſt two planes, being ſomething hollow on the underſidee And theſe planes are not then horizontal, but inclined, ſo that the back part X is higher than the fore part DFG. But in moving the wings upward to fetch a new ſtroke, they go with the edge DFG foremoſt, and the vings contract and become hollow. Their bodies are ſpecifically lighter than men or beaſts. Their bones and feathers are extremely porous, hollow, and light. The muſcles by which their wings are moved downwards are exceeding large, being not leſs than a ſixth part of the weight of the whole body. When a bird is upon the ground and intends to fly, he takes a large leap; and ſtretching his wings right from his body, he ſtrikes them downwards with great force, by which they are put into an oblique poſition; and the reſiſtance of the air, acting ſtrongly againſt them by- the ſtroke, impells them, and the bird, in a direction perpendicular to their planes: which is in an oblique direction, or partly upwards, and partly horizontally forward: the part of the force tending upwards is deſtroyed by the weight of the bird; the horizontal force ſerves to carry him forward. ne OKC ſtroke being over, he moves his wings upwards, which being contracted, and turning their edges upward, they cut through the alr without any reſiſtance; and being ſuſficiently elevated, he takes a ſecond ſtroke downwards, and the impulſe of the air moves him forwards as beforee. And ſo from one ſtroke to another; which are only like ſo many leaps taken in the air. When he has a mind to turn to the right or leſt, he ſtrikes ſtrongly with the oppoſite wing. which impells him to the contrary ſidee. The tail acts like the rudder of a ſhip, except only that it moves him upwards or downwards inſtead of ſideways; becauſe its plane is horizontal. If a bird wants to riſe, he puts his tail into the poſition LH; or if he would fall, into the poſition LI. Whilſt it is in the horizontal poſition LC, it keeps him ſteady. A bird can by ſpreading his wings continue to move horizontally for ſome time, without ſtriking. For having acquired a ſufficient velocity; by keeping his wings parallel to the horizon, they meet with no reſiſtance; and when he; begins to fall by his weight, he can eaſily ſteer himſelf upward by his tail; till his motion be almoſt ſpent, and then he muſt renew it by two or three more ſtrokes of his wings. When he lights, he expands his wings and tail full againſt the air; that they may meet with all the reſiſtance poſſiblee. The center of gravity of a bird is fomething behind the wings: to remedy which, they thruſt out their head and neck, in flying; which carries the center of gravity more forward. It is impoſſible that ever Men can fly, by the ſtrength of their arms. For their pectoral muſcles are vaſtly too weak to ſupport ſuch a weight. For in a man they are not the 6oth part of the reſt of the muſcles of the body: But in a bird they are more than all the others put together. Some birds will fly 100 yards in a minute. ExXAMPLE XLII. AB is a fiſb ſwimming; which he does by help of his fins and tail. A fiſh is nearly of the ſame ſpecific gravity as water; and moſt fiſn have a bladder L, which they can expand or contract, and ſo make themſelves lighter or heavier than water, in order to riſe or fall in it. The muſcular force by which the tail is moved, is very great. The direct motion of a fiſh is by means oſ his tail BCD, moving from one ſide to the other with a vibrating motion. Which he performs thus: Suppoſe his tail in the poſition FG, being about to move it ſucceſſively to H, I and X; he turns the end G oblique to the water, which being moved ſwiftly through it in that poſition; the reſiſtance of the water acts obliquely againſt his tail and moves him partly forward and partly laterally. The lateral motion is corrected the next ſtroke, the contrary way; but the progreſſive motion is continued always forard. When his tail is arrived at X, he turns its obliquity the contrary way; that in moving back to G, it may ſtrike the water in the ſame manner as beforee And thus he makes one ſtroke after another, and moves forward thereby as far as he pleaſes. The oblique polition of his tail is moſtly owing to the elaſticity of his tail, which, by bending, is put into that form by the reſiſtance of the water. They can exert a very great force with their tail, and which is neceſſary, to overcome the reſiſtance which their bodies meet with in the water. By help of the tail they alſo turn to one ſide; by ſtriking ſtrongly vith it on that ſide; and keeping it bent, which then acts like the rudder of a ſhip. The fins of a fiſh ſerve to keep him upright, eſpecially the belly fins E; which act like two feet; without them he would ſwim with his belly up; for his center of gravity lies near his back. His fins alſo help him to aſcend or deſcend, by expanding or contracting them, as he can with pleaſure; and putting them in a proper poſition. His tail will alſo help him to riſe and fall, by inclining it obliquely, and turning a little, from an erect poſition, to one ſide. Fiſh can ſwim but ſow, yet ſome of them will ſwim 70 or 80 yards in a minute; but they ſoon tire. Birutes can ſwim naturally, for they are ſpecifically lighter than water; and require to have but a ſmall part of their head out, for breathingg. Alſo they naturally uſe their legs in ſimming, after the ſame manner as they do when walking. Birds ſim very eaſily, being much lighter than water; and readily move themſelves along with their web feet. Men cannot ſælm naturally, though they are ſpecifically Iighter than water. For their heads are very large, and require to be almoſt all out of the water for breathing. And their way of ſtriking has no relation to that of walking. Men attain the art of ſuimming by practice and induſtry. And this art conſiſts in ſtriking alternately with the hands and feet in the water; which like oars, will row him forward. When he ſtrikes with his hands, he neither keeps the palms parallel nor perpendicular to the horizon; but inclined. And his hands ſtriking the water obliquely, the reſiſtance of the water moves him partly upward, and partly forward. Whilſt his hands are ſtriking, he gradually draws up his feet; and when the ſtroke of his arms is over, he ſtrikes with his feet, by extending his legs, and thruſting the ſoles of his feet full againſt the water. And while he ſtrikes with his legs, he brings about his arms for a new ſtroke; and ſo on alternately. He muſt keep his body a little oblique, that he may more eaſily erect his head, and keep his mouth above water. After the ſame manner may the motions, velocities, powers, and properties of any machine be exlained and accounted for, by mechanical principles. ſhall proceed to lay down a ſhort deſcription of ſeveral other machines, without being ſo particular in the calculation of their powers and forces. The mechaniſm of which being underſtood, will aſſiſt the invention oſ the practical Mechanic, i in contriving a machine for any uſe. Ex amrLE XLIII AB a machine to raiſe a weight, and ſtay it in any poſition. CO a roller turned by the handle E. to the roller is fixt the wheel ?. GH is a piece of mettle moveable about , and forked at the end G, where it falls into the teeth oſ the wheel  As the roller is turned, the weight is raiſed by the rope ZKL. And the piece G, ſlices ſrcely over the teeth of the wheel; till the machine is ſtopt, and then the piece G falling i in between the teeth, keeps the wheel fixt there, that it cannot turn back again with the weight. ExampLE XLIV. KI is a machine to raiſe or depreſs the leaver GV, moveable about an axis at ſI, and to keep it at any poſition. Lſ a ſtring fixt at f, and 4, and going in the order abedef, through the holes b, c, d, e. I being put up or down raiſes or lowers the beam Gſ, at pleaſuree And more or fewer holes may be made in the piece TIſ, as occaſion requires. ExaMpLE XLV. CD another machine to ſtay a weight in any poſition. This is only a cylinder of wood, upon which is cut a channel for the rope to go in. If the weight B be liſted up, and 4 pulled down; then B will remain in any given poſition, by the friction of the cylinder and rope. And there may be taken as many turns of the rope about the cylinder; as there is occaſion for. ExamMprLE XLVI. C is a clock weight carrying the two wheels 4 and B. D the counterpoiſec  a pulleyy ADBFA ani endleſs cord. When the weight is down, draw the cord G, till the weight C riſe 10 the top; then the pin e keeps the wheel 4 from turning backwards. ExamMpLE XLVII. ADB a machine for reckoning the number of ſtrokes or vibrations made. DH is a wheel moving about a fixt axis, upon the neck of which axis goes a braſs ſpring L, to keep the wheel from ſhaking. 4B a piece of wood or metal, cut away between I and X to receive the wheel. The plane of the piecee TKB is perpendicular to the plane of the wheel. F, G are two ſtaples to guide the motion of the piece AB back and forward. When the piece 4B is moved from A4 towards B; the edge at I catches the tooth C, and ſiding along the edge, moves the wheel about from C to D; this brings the tooth  to the edge  And when the piece 4B is moved back from B to 4, the edge at X ſhiding down the tooth E, moves the wheel from E to H; which brings another tooth before the edge . So that at every motion of 4B back and forward; the wheel is moved the breadth of one tooth. And if the teeth be numbered, the index M will Thew vhen the wheel has made one revolution. ExamMprLE. XLVIII. ABED a machine moving one circle within another, concentrical to it. ABC repreſents a flat ring of braſs; and abe a ſmaller concentric ring lodged in a circular grove, turned within the larger; and kept in the grove by three ſmall plates of braſs, fixt to the outward ring, and reaching over the edge of the inner one. Upon the inner ring is fixed a concentric arch of a wheel de, having teeth in it, which are driven round by the threads of an endleſs ſcrew DF, turning in a collar at , and upon a point at F, both ſixed to the outward ring. By means of this ſcrew, any point of the circle abc may be ſet to a given point of the circle 4BV, by turning the ſcrew DEF. ExamPLE XLIX. ABE is a crane for hoiſting goods up. AF is a double wheel, within which a man 4 walks, and by his weight raiſes the weight V, by help oſ the rope FBEW, which goes round the axis of the wheel at E. At D are 2 pullies, one vertical and one horizontal; the vertical pulley facilitates the motion of the rope in hoiſting the weight; and the horizontal one ſerves for the rope to run on, when the crane CDE and weight are drawn aſide, by the rope GH, in order to be lowered. CDE moves about the axis BC. At E is another pulley, for the rope to run on. IF the rope FBEI go about a pulley at , and be fixt with its end at æ, the crane will lift tice the weight.: ExamMPLE L. AB a ſailing chariot. This is diven by the wind by help of the ſails C, D. R is the rudder. The wheels muſt be ſet at a greater diſtance, or the axletree adè Ionger, than in common chariots, to prevent overturning. Sailing chariots are proper for large planes and champion countries;; and are ſaid to be frequent in China. Eill ExampLE LI. BE is a ſmoat jack. AB is a horizontal wheel wherein the wings or ſails are inclined to the horizon. The ſmoak or rarefied air moving up the chimney at ; S. B DESCRIPTION OF B, ſtrikes theſe ſails, which being oblique, are therefore moved about the axis of the wheel, together with the pinion C, C carries the wheel D and E; and E carries the chain or rope F, which turns the ſpit. The vheel 4B muſt be placed in the ſtrait part of the chimney, where the motion of the air is ſwifteſt; and that the greateſt part of it may ſtrike upon the ſails. The force of this machine is ſo much greater as the fire is greater. ExampL: LII An engine to make a hammer ſtrikte.  the water wheel 7 or 8 yards diameter. D, D the fſloats. BEC the axle 3 or 4 feet diameter. H the hammer 3 or 400 weight, moveable about the axis OP. I, X four cogs in the axis lifting up the hammer as the axis goes round, that it may fall on the anvil 4. FG a beam of wood acting as a ſpring to give the greater force to the hammer. MN the couſ of the water, down an inclined plane. M the place where it iſſues out. LM the perp. height of the water, 3 yards. All the machine, except the water wheel is within the houſe. A hammer may alſo be made to ſtrike thus; A is the hammer moveable about the point C, G the axle of a water wheel, in which axis are the pins F, E, &c. As the wheel and axis goes about from F towards E, the pins F, E thruſt down the end B, and ràiſe the end 4 of the hammer. And when the end B E off the pin; the hammer falls upon the anvil D. ExamMpLE LIII. II a crooked axis or elbow for the ſucters of pumps. IK the peſtle or chain of the ſucker. Upon the axis is the lantern EF which ĩs turned by a great wheel, carried either by water, or men, or horſes. tern EF goes about; and each gives one ſtroke of the pump for one turn of the lantern. Place pullies or rolls at a, b, c, d, for the chain 7 to work againſt, when ĩt goes out of its perpendicular poſition; by the obliquity of the motion of the cranks I, I Exa MmpLE LIV. ABCD a particular combination of pullies. 7, T, T are poſts to which the tackles are fixt. ,. S, S are ſtays to keep them erect. If the power at 4 be 1, that at B is 33 atC, 9; and at D 27, where the weight is placed. llill ExamprL? LV. A, B are two bellos going by water, and blowing alternately, but neither of them with a continual blat;  the water wheel. DE the direction of the vater. FG the axis of the wheel; à, a, &c. four cogs of wood in the axis, forcing down the end of the bellows 4. b, b, &. 4 cogs forcing down the end of the bellows B. LM, NI two rods of iron, faſtened to the bellows and to the leaver MN, and moveable about the pins M, N. SP a piece of timber moveable about S and P. OP a beam ſerving for a ſpring, lying over the piece of timber QR. As the vheel and axle turns round, a cogg b forces down the end of the bellows B and makes it blow; this pulls down the end M and raiſes the end M of the leaver MN, which raiſes the bellows 4 And when the cogg b goes off; the bellows B ceaſe blowing; and a cogg a forces down the bellows 4, and makes it blow; and at the ſame time raiſes the bellows B. And thus the coggs a, b alternately force down the bellows 4, B and make them blow in their turns. is the hearth or fire. A pair of bellows may be moved by water thus; DESCRIPTION OF A is a water wheel carried by the water at w. CD a rod of iron going on the crooked axle-tree of the wheel3 DF a ſeaver moveable about EZEFG a chain going to the bellows B. T a weight. As the wheel goes about, the ends D and F of the leaver DF, riſe and fall: which motion raiſes the bellows, æ the weight I carries them down again. ExaMPLE LVI. aBi is a vheel vith teeth and a Roller to draw up any weight. H, H, H the handles, which may be wrought by two or three men. But the eaſieſt and ſimpleſt roller for common uſe are ſuch as C and D. u lll li ExampLE LVII. An engine to drine piles. a the rammer, drawn up by the rope BCD going over the pulley C DN, DN ſeveral fmall ropes for ſeveral men to pull at. M the pilee. EF a brace and ladder to go up. The rammer 4 is bound at bottom with iron leſt it ſplit; and has two tenants on the backſide, to keep it in the grooves made in the upright puncheons G, H, by which its motion is directed. The rammer is raiſed to the top by men pulling at the ropes DN, and then len⸗ go, all at once, it falls upon the head of the ile M b Old piles are drawn out, Bã ſtriking gently upon their heads; whilſt they are pulled by a ſtvong x rope ſtretched. Exa MPLE LVIII. ACL a pair of ſmit?s bellows. AL, BL, CL are three boards, the middle board BL divideęs the internal ſpace into two parts. In the middle board is a valve S opening into the pper part; and in the loueſt board is another valve T opening into the under part. The pipe P communicates only with the upper cavity. DE a leaver moveable about the axis GH. At I a weight is laid upon the upper board to make it fall. The bellows is fixed in the frame ME, by two iron pins which are faſt in the middle boauxd. And the pipe P lies upon the hearth,. When the end E is pulled down by the rope EF, the end D is raiſed, and the rope or chain DR raiſes the lower board CL, this ſhuts the valve T and opens S, and the air is forced into the upper cavity, which raiſes the upper board and blows through the pipe P. And when E is raiſed, the boards 4 and C deſcend, and the valve S ſhuts, and T opens. And the weight T forces the air ſtill out of the pipe, whilſt more air enters in at the valve T, which, when C aſcends, is forced again through the valve S as beforee And thus the bellows have a continual blaſt. Ex a MmPLE LIX. An engine to raiſe water. LMOT a great horizontal wheel. 4BP the axis, P the pevot or ſpindle it turns upon. Oſ the waves of the great whee. QR a ſmall wheel perpendicular to the horizon, and placed under the edge of the great wheel, this wheel is moveable about the center C, in the end of the leaver EFC which is moveable about the center D; EF the arch of a circle, whoſe plain is perpendicular to the horizon, and in the plain of the wheel QR. EG the chain of a ump. P Whilſt the great wheel, is turned by the leaver N4, from O towards I; the wave Q preſſes down the wheel QR, and raiſes the end E, which draws up the water in the pump G. But when the deepeſt part of the wave is paſt the wheel QrR, the wheel then riſes up into the hollow s, and then the chain EG deſcends, till the next wave raiſes it againn. And thus every wave makes a ſtroke of the pump. i The The wheel Qr is placed there only to avoid frietion, and ſo that a perpendicular to its plane may paſ throungh 4B. If the number of waves be odd, and another pump wheel and leaver be placed diametrically oppoſite, on the other ſide of the great wheel; then theſe acting by turns will keep the motion uniform, and the power at Nwill always act equally. ExamMprLE LX, BEG a Gorſtain, to draw great weights. BC the axis which is driven about by men acting at 4, A, by help of the leavers 4B, 4B. Here muſt only be ; or 4 ſpires of the rope DCE folded about the axis BC; for the axis could not hold ſo much rope as there is ſometimes occaſion for. And to hinder the rope from ſlipping back, a man conſtantly pulls at æ to keep it tight. And the axis made conical or rather angular at the bottom C,; to keep the rope from going any lower, whilſt the capſtain goes about. ExamrLE LXI. AL is a Tack to lift great weights. Z,is a pinion upon the ais FG, GC a toothed wheel, and D a pinion upon the ſame axis, working in the teeth of the rack 4B. The whole is incloſed in a ſtrong caſe, KI, all of mera. The handle GHI goces on the axis IG on the backſide of the cãſe. : When a weight ĩs to be lifted, the forked end 4is put under the weight; then turning the handle fl, the pinion Z moves the wheel GC, with the pinion D; and D raiſes the rack 4B, with the weight. ExamrLE LXII. An engine to raiſe and let fall to weights with contrary motions ſucceſſively, whilſt the moving power M two lanterns, ſo placed on the axis 4B, that the great wheel can only work one of them at once. When the cog wheel GH is turned by the leaver LI; it turns the lantern M, and raiſes the bucket Z, whilſt F deſcends. Then E being raiſed, moves forward the axis 4B, that the lantern M may leave the wheel, and N come to it. Then the great wheel moving the ſame way as before, will now work upon N, and turn the axis the contrary way, and raiſe the bucket 7 whilſt E deſcends. which done, move the axis back towards 4, and you will again raiſe the bucket æ; and ſo onn. This may alſo be performed by placing the lanterns M, N, ſo, that the great wheel may work them both at once; but making them moveable about the axis AB. Then there muſt be a pin to faſten either of them to the axis; ſo that firſt one lantern and then the other being thus fixt to the axis, whilſt the other is looſe; the buckets E, F will aſcend and deſcend alternately. ExamrLE LXIII. A mill for iron-worE. AB the ſſitting mill; CD the plate mill. SP the clipping mill. E, F are tno grt water wheels. After the water is paſt the wheel E, moving in direction QY; it comes about to thę wheel F, in direction X. The water wheel £ with the lantern G on the ſame axis, carries the ſpur wheels M and H, with the cylinders B and D. And the wheel F with the lantern I carries the wheels V and X, with the cylinders 4 and C. The cylinders 4and B, as alſo C and D run contrary ways about. And the cylinders 4 and B are cut into teeth, for ſlitting iron bars. G, D are 8 inches diameter; 4 and B about 12. And theſe cylinders may be taken out and others put in, and may be brought nearer to, or farther from one another, by help of ſcres, which ſcrew up the ſockets where the axles run. The axles of N, I, X lye all in one horizontal plane, And ſo do M, G, H. But the cylinders 4, B, and alſo C, D, lye one above another. For making the plates; if a bar of iron be heated and made thin at the end, and that end put in between the cylinders C, D whilſt the mill is going; the motion of the cylinders draw it through on the other ſide, into a thin plate. Likewiſe a bar of iron, being heated and thinned at the end, and put in between the toothed cylinders 4, B; it is drawn through on the other ſide and ſlit into ſeveral pieces, or ſtrings. Aud then if there be occaſion, any of theſe ſtrings may be put through the plate mill with the ſame heat, and made into plates. OPQ is the ſheers for clipping bars of cold iron ĩrto lengths. Va cog in the axis of the water wheel. OP òne ſide of the ſheers made of ſteel and moveable about P. The plane LPR is perpendicular to the horizonn. When the mill goes about, the cog V raiſes the ſide OP, which as it riſes clips the bar 7Q into two, by the edges SP, RP. All the engine, except the water wheels E, F is within the houſe. ExXaMpLE ILXIV, AFC a Vindmill to frighten birds from corn or fruit. This is made of wood. The ſulls F, F a foot long, and their planes inclined to the axis BC, 45 or 50 degrees. The piece B goes upon the end of the axis BC, andis pinned faſt on, and the ſalls and axis turn round together; and the axis goes through the board 4D; and is kept from flying out of the hole, by the piece B pinned ſaſt. The whole machine is movtable about the, perpendicular ſta? 4G, by which means the wind turns the mill about the axis AG, till the plane AD lies directly from the wind; and then the ſails face it. At  is a ſpring to knack as. it goes about; and the lie on the other ſide. ExampLE LXV. An Anemoſcope, to ſnew the turnings of the wind. CD is a weather cock of thin metal, fixt faſt to the long perpendicular axis DF, which turns with the leaſt wind upon the foot , and goes through the top of the houſe RS. To this axis is fixt the pinion 4, which works in the crown wheel B, of an equal number of teeth. The crown wheel is fixt on the axis PI, on the end of which the index NS is fixedc The axis PI goes through the wall LM, againſt the wall is placed the circle NESW, wirh the points of the compaſs round it. Then if the vane CD be ſet to the north, and at the ſame time the index SM fixt on the axis PI, to point at S. Then however the wind varies, it will turn the vane CD, and pinion 4, and A turns the wheel B with the index N; ſo that the index will always be directed to the oppoſite point of the compaſs to the vane DC; or to the ſame as th wind is in. ExaMpLE LXVI. DEF is a rog-pump, or chain pump. EF the barrel. CD the roller. GH an endleſs chain, to which are fixed ſeveral leather buckets 7, I, hollow on the upper ſide that aſcendss. 4B the handle. The uſe of this is to cleanſe foul waters from dirt and rubbiſh. The roller is ribbed to hinder the chain from ſlippng, in working. When the roller is turned, it draws up the chain through the pump, with whatever is in the water, and diſcharges it at the top. ExXaAMPLE LXVII. A Dyers and Fullers mill. A the great wheel carried D; together with æ, F, G. Then E turns the cog wheel H, with rhe axis IX, and the croſs pieces L, L. 1, 1 &c. are pullies or rollerss MN, MN wooden beaters turning upon an axis paſſing through N, N. Wihilſt the axis I turns about, the end à ſſides along the pulley 1, and falling off, the part M ſtrikes againſt the cloth in the trough at O, O. The lan1ern F carries the cog wheel , and the cranks Q, à, which work the pumps T, T by help of the leavers S, moveable about a. The trundle G carries the cog wheels V and W, and W carries the trundle X, with the piſton  that grinds the indigo in the veſſel cd; from whence it flows to the veſſel Z. The ends m, m &c. of all the axles run in pieces of timber going croſs the mill, and faſtened to one another, and to the walls of the houſe. ExaurLE LXVIII. A machine to empty ſtanding water. This is no more than a large pipe or cyphon 4BC, being extremely cloſe and tight that no air can get in. If the pool of water DE is to be emptied over the hill DHG; let the pipe be placed with its mouth 4 within the water DE, and the mouth C within the water FG, if the pipe be very large. Then ſtop up 4 and C, and fill the pipe with water by the cock B at the top. Then ſtopping the cock B very cloſe, open A and ſ; and the water will flow through the pipe, from DE into FG, which may run over at F, at a ſmall height above C, and go avay. Note, the end C muſt always be lower than 4, and the height of the top B above DE muſt not exceed 11 yards; for it do, the water will not flow. If the pipe be very ſtrait, the end C need not be immerſed in the water; but ĩf large it muſt; or elſe the air will inſinuate itſelf into the pipe at C, and hinder the flux of the water, ExaMrLE LXIX. EFGH is a Coal Gin. E the cog-wheeel in feet diameter, and 72 cogs; this carries the trundle F, near 2 ſeet diameter, and 12 rounds, together with the roll G, 4 feet diameter. 4H is the ſtart 20 feet long. The axis 4B runs upon the kevyſtock C. There are two croſs troes K, at the top, thro which the axis 4B goes. Theſe croſs trees are ſupported by four poſts KIL at the four cornerss. When the coals are .o be drawn up out of the pit, two horſes are yoaked at H and go round in the path O—L, and draw the wheel about And whilſt the loaded corf N, is drawn up to the top of the ſhaft M, by the rope going round the roll; the empty one at the other end of the rope is deſcending to the bottom And the loaded corf N being taken off and an empty one put on; the horſes are turned, and made to draw the contrary way about; till the other corf comes to the top loaded: And ſo as one corf aſcends, the other deſcends, alternately A corf of coals weighs about 57 hundred weight, and contains about 4 ; buſhels. A pit is 40 or 50 fathom deep. And 50 fathom of the rope weighs about 3 hundred weight. ExXaMPLE LXX. A worm jack for turning aſpitt. ABC the barrel round which the cord QR is wound. XL the main wheel of 6o teeth. N the worm wheel of about 30 teeth cut obliquely. LM the pinion of 15 or 16. O the worm or endleſs ſcrew, on which are two threads going round and making an angle with the axis of 60 or 75 degrees. X the ſtud, Z the loop of the worm ſpindle. ? a heavy wheel or ſly to make the motion uniform. DG the ſtruck wheel fixt to the ais FD. S, S ſeveral holes in the frame, to nail it end D going through it. HI the handle going upon the axis ET, to wind up the weight when down. R are fixed pulleys, V moveable pullies with the weight. The axis ET is fixt in the barrel AC, and this axis being hollow, both it and the barrel turn round upon the axis FD, which ĩs fixt to the wheel XL, turning in rhe order BT4; but cannot turn the contrary way by reaſon of a catch nailed to the end 4B, which lays hold of the croſs bars in the wheel L The weight, by means of the cord QR, carries about the barrel 4B, which by means of the catch, carries the wheel XL, which carries the nut LM ænd wheel N. which carries the worm O with the Hy 2.. Alſo the wheel LM carries the axis FD with the wheel D&, which carries the cord or chain, that goes rabout the ſpit head (a wheel like DG) which turns the ſpit. The more pullies at R and V, the longer the Jack will go; but then the weight muſt be greater. E The catch lies between the end 4B of the barrel and the wheel XIL, and is thus deſcribed f the barrel, n the main ſpindle, ãdr a tumbler moving eaſy on the center pin a, faſtened to an iron plate, nailed to the barrel. b a collar of iron, turning a little ſtiff on the ſpindle; from this proceeds the tongue 4e, paſſing through the hole c in the tumbler, 7 the catch of the tumbler. Now whilſt the barrel with the catch is turned about in the order fſ7g, upon the axis n; the collar is dravn about by the tongue be, which tongue acting backwards turns the tumbler about the rcenter 4,and depreſſes the catch ?2 But the barrel being turned the contrary way, the tongue then acts tovards ꝗ; this depreſſes the end d, and raiſes the catch r, which then takes the croſs bars of the main wheel, and. ſtops the barrel. This catch would alſo ſerve for a clock, and is better than a ſpring catch, Dbecauſe it makes no noiſe in winding up: l Note, the jack need not be plãces ſo, that the is FD: be parallel to the ſpit; but any way it can conveniently. For it is no matter whether the chain croſſes or not. ExaupLæ LXXI. DAF the hydroſtatical bellous. AB, EF two flat boards of cak, the ſides E, BF of leather joined very cloſe to the top and bottom, with ſtrong nails. CD a pipe ſcrewed into the piece of braſs in the top at G. If a man blows in at the pipe DC, he will raiſe a great weight laid upon the board 4B, or if he ſtands upon the board 4B, he may eaſily blow himſelf up, by blowing ſtrongly into the pipe DC. If water be poured in at D, till the bellows and pipe be full; the preſſure upon 4B within, will lift as much weight upon the top 4B, as is equal to a cylinder off water, whoſe bale is 4B and height CDO. Exaur: LXXII. ADM is a vater-mill for grinding comm 4 the water wheel 16 feet diameter, BC it3 axis. D the cog wheel, with 48 cogs. O a trundle, with 9 rounds. LI its axis. MN the ſtones, 6 or 7 feet diameter. The lower ſtone MN is fixt immoveable upon beams of wood; and the upper ſtone is fixt to the ſpindle LI, by a piecę of iron called the rind, fixt in the lower ſide of the ſtone, to go ſquare upon the ſpindle; between which and the ſtone there is room left for the corn to fall through upon the lower ſtone. The ſpindle goes through the lower ſtone and is: made ſo tight with a wooden buſh, as to turn round init eaſily. The upper ſtone and the. ſpindle Lſis ſupported with the end upon a horizontal beam of wood FE called the bridge, the end  being fixed, and the end E lying upon the beam HG fixt at G, called the brayer. The end  is ſupported by the lifting tre⸗ HE, by help of a wedge at X. By this means the iu. uau t⸗ - upper upper ſtone may be raiſed or lowered. For if KH bè raiſed with the leaver Xi; the end E, the axis LT with the. ſtone M, and the piece GF are all raiſed; and may be fixed there by the wedge X. Thus the ſtones may be ſet as near or far off; as you will. The lower ſtone is broader than the upper one, and is incloſed with the boards all around as ub, cloſe to the lower ſtone, and above the edge of the under one, to keep the meal in. And through one ſide of the boards is a hole called the mill-eye, through which the meal runs out into a trough. The ſurfaces of the millſtones are not flat but conical; the upper one an inch hollow, the under one ſwells up; of an inch. Sothe two ſtones are wider nearer the center, and come nearer and nearer; towards the circumference; which gives room to the corn to go in as far as  of the radius, where it begins to be ground. The upper ſtonè has a dancing motion up and down, by the ſpringing of the bridge, which helps to grind the corn. The flower as ſoon as made, is thrown to the outſide by the circulation of the ſtone and the air, and riven out at the mill eye. The quantity of flower pround æ nearly as the velocity and weight of the one. The ſtone ought not to go round above once ina ſecond. 0bu The corn is put into the hopper , which falling down into the ſhoe TV runs into the hole at top of the ſtone M. And the axis LM may be taken off and is made with 6 or 8 angles, which as it turns about, ſhakes the end V of the ſhoe, and keeps the corn always running downn. PQis the direction of the water, which acting againſt the floats R, carries about the wheel 4 and cog wheel D, which cog wheel carries the lantern or trundle O, and the upper ſtone M that grinds the corn. This is called an underſhot mill where the water comes underneath. But if the water comes over the top of the wheel at 4, it is called an overfall or overſhot mill. This requires leſs water than an underſhot mill; but there is not convenience A breaſt mill is that where the water is delivered into boxes, at about the height of the axis of the wheel, and moves the wheel by its weight. This requires more water than either of the other ſorts. The diameter of the wheel 4 muſt not be too large, for then it will move too ſlow; nor too little, for then it will want power. When a mill ĩs in perfection, the velocity of the floats, wings, or hands R upon the water wheel, muſt be + the velocity of the water. A wheel for an overſall mill is in form of fig. 282. Sometimes one water wheel A carries two pair of ſtones, and then two cog wheels D are put upon the axis BC, which carry two trundles with the ſtones. Otherwiſe the cog wheel D carries a trundle O and ſpur wheel, which ſpur wheel carries two lanterns with the ſ?tones, one lantern on each ſide the wheel. Or ſometimes, the ſame cogwheel D carries another lantern and cogwheel whoſe axis is parallel to the horizon; and this cogwheei carries another lantern with the ſtones. In theſe caſes when one pair of ſtones is to ſtand ſtill; there is either a looſe round to be taken out of its lantern; or elſe the bridge F is ſhifted towards , till the lantern O be clear of the teeth of D. A good overfall mill will grind 23 or 3 buſhels of corn in an hour; and requires 100 hogſhead of water for an hour, having 10 or 12 feet fall. The higher fall the water has, the leſs of it ill ſerve to carry the mill. It is brought to the wheel by a narrow channel called the mill race, in an underſhotmill: or by a trough in an overfall mill. The water is kept up in the mill-dam, and let out by the penſtock, when the mill is to go. The penſtock is raiſed or let down by help of a ſeaver. The penſtock being raiſed, opens a paſſage to the water io or 12 inches vide, through which it flows to the wheel. And when the mill is to ſtop, the penfioch : is let down, and the orifice ſtopt. DESCRIPTION OF ExaMmpLE LXXIII. AB is a Trap to catch vermin in, made of boards. GH a piece of wood ſuſpended over the bar IL, by the leaver DE moveable about D, æand the thread Fæ tied to the ſtart CK. ImB a piece of flat wood moveable about /m, and lying on the bottom, whoſe end B comes through a hole in the ſide, in which is a catch to take hold of the end X of. the ſtart, when the trap is ſett When the vermin go into the trap, they tread upon the board ImB, on which a bait iĩs laid, which puts down the end B; and the ſtart CK flies up. This gives liberty to the ſmall leaver DE to riſe up; then the piece of wood GH falls down and knocks them on the head. If two pieces of board were nailed on the ends G, H; to reach below the piece of wood GH; the trap would take the vermin alive. i ABE is another Trap, the end B is wire; and the end 4 ſlides up and down in two grooves in the ſides. When the trap is ſet, the end 4 is ſuſpended by the thread CD tied to the leaver DT moveable about O, the end I being held by the crooked end of the wire IS, moveable about ”, the end RS going within the trap. A buit is put on the end at S, and the end E of the trap being open, the vermin goes in and pulls at the bait ſ, this pulls the catch  from off the end of the leaver ID, which lets the end 4 fall down, and the vermin is taken. ExaMPLE LXXIV. An engine for moving ſeveral ſaws for the ſawing of ſtones, &c. ILLTis a ſquare frame, perpendicular to the horizon, moving in direction LL, in gutters made in the fixt beams 4M, CB; and running upon little wheels. TL two rods of iron fixt at I and L. OP two hands of iron running along theſe rods; to theſe are fixt the ſaws S, S. HIK is a triangle fixt to the axis of a great wheel. As the wheel and triangle go about from  towards I, the point T acting againſt the piece G, moves the frame towards MB, together with the ſaws S, S. When I is gone off, the angle X acts againſt the piece F, and moves the frame back again. Then H acting againſt G, moves it forward; and ſo the ſaws are moved back and forward, as long as the wheel turns round. As theſe ſaws work by the motion of the engine, the hands OP deſcend. The parts F and G ought to be made curve; and little wheels may be applied at the points of the triangle HI&, to take away the friction againſt  and G. The axle of the wheel may be made to carry more triangles, and work more ſaws, if the power is ſtrong enough. Inſtead of the triangle HIK, the frame may he moved by the two pieces al, cd; going thro' the axis, acroſs to one another. So that ab may only act on F, and cd on G. F being only in the plane of àbs motion; and G in that of cd So that  never falls in the way of ⸗d, nor G in the way of ab. ExaMpLE LXXV. A is an Ecolipile This is a hollow globe of braſs with only a very ſmall hole at the mouth. Taeke it by the handle B and ſet it on a fire till tis heated, then plunge it in cold water, and the air in it which was rarefied, will be condenſed, and water will go into it, till it be about half full. Then if it be ſet on the fire, the water will turn into vapour by the heat, and will blow out at the mouth with greac violence; and continue ſo till the water is ſpent. ExampLE EXXVI. ABD is a Hyeroſcope, BC is an index hung by the (therm) ſtring 4B, the point B hanging over the center of a circle, which is divided into equal parts. The ſtring AB twiſts and untwiſls by the moiſture or dryneſs of the air. By this means the index BGC turns about, and ſhews the degrees of drought or mòiſture, on the circumſerence DC. EXAMPLE LXXVII. A Winamill. AHO the upper room. HOZ the under one. 4B the axle- tree, going quite through the mill. STVW the ſails covered with canvaſs, ſet obliquely to the wind, and going about in the order STVW. CD the cogwheel of about 48 cogs a, a, a; 3 which carries the lantern EF, of 8 or 9 rounds, c, c; and its axis GN. IK the upper ſtone; LM the lower ſtone. QR the bridge, ſupporting the axis or ſpindle GN. Fe bridge is ſuppoited by the heams cd, X7, wedged up at c, d, and X Z the liſting tree ſtanding upright. ah, æf, leavers whoſe centers of motion are Z, u. fghi a cord with a ſtone i, for a ballance, going about the pins g&, , The ſpindle INis fixt to the upperſtone IK, by a piece of iron, called the rind, fixt in the underſide of the ſtone. The upper ſtone only turns about, and its whole weight reſts upon the bridge QR, and turns upon a hard ſtone fixed at N. The trundle EZF and axis Gr may be taken away; for ĩt fixes on the lower part at?, by a ſquare ſocket, and the top runs in the edge of the beam w. Putting down the end ſ of the leaver fe, raiſes b, which raiſes ZY, which raiſes 7X, and this raiſes the bridge QR, with the axis NG, and the upper ſtone I; and thus the ſtones are ſet at any diſtance. The lower ſtone is fixt immoveable upon ſtrong heams, is broader than the upper, upon which boards are ꝑlaced round the upper at a ſmall diſtance to confine the flower from flying away; and the flower is conveyed through the tunnel no down into a cheſt P is the hopper into which the corn is put, which runs along the ſpout r irto the hole 17, and ſo falls hetween the ſtones where it Is round. The axis GI is ſquare, which ſhaking the ſpout 7 as it goes about, makes the corn run out. 75 a ſtring going about the pin 53€7 which being turned about moves the ſpout nearer or further from the axis, and ſo makes the corn run in faſter or ſlower; according to the wind. And when the wind is great, the ſails S, T, V,  are only part of them, or one ſide of them, covered; or perhaps only a half of two oppoſite ſails T,  are covered. Towards the end B of the axle-tree is placed another cogwhtel, trundle, and ſtones with exactly the ſame apparatus as before. And the axle carries two pair of ſtones, at once. And when only one pair is to grind, the trundle ZF and axis Gt is taken out from the other. æ7l is a girth of pliable wood, fixed at the end ; and the other end  tied to the leaver æm moveable about 2. And the end m being put down, draws the girth æyl, cloſe to the cogwheel, and by this means the motion of the mill is ſtopt at pleaſure. ꝓ7 is a ladder going into the higher part of the mill. The corn is drawn to the top, by means of a rope going about the axis 4B, when the mill is going. In mills built of wood, the whole body of the mill turns round to the wind, on a tampin or perpendicular poſt. But in thoſe of ſtone, only the upper part turns. 1I. Is the mill houſe, which is turned about to the wind by a man, by help of the leaver or beam 2. 3 Is a roller to hoiſt up the ſteps 4. Concerning the poſition and force of the ſails, ſee Ex. 2 . before. ExaMrLE LXXVIII. AB a force pump. C the piſton fixt to the rod £C, moveable about Z-DF the handle moveable about D. a, d two clacks or valves opening upwards. The piſton C muſt move freely up and down in the barrel and exactly fill it, that no air get in. It is made cloſe by circular pieces of leather cut to fit the barrel, and ſcrewed cloſe between pieces of braſs. This pump acts by preſſing cown. For when the handle Fis raiſed, it raiſes the piſton ZC, and the water riſes from H, opens the valve à, and goes into the barrel, at the ſame time the valve a ſuts. But when  is put down, the piſton C preſſing upon the water ſhuts the valve d, and opens a, and forces the water that has been raiſed, through the pipe B°G.. ſlii LM is another force pump, or a liſting pump. the bucket. a, b, c valves opening upward. This pump is cloſe at the top s, and the ſmall rod of iron plays through a hole made tight with leather. This pump acts by forcing upwards, for when the handlæ P is put down, it lifts up the bucket N, the preſſure ſhuts the valve b, opens c, and forces the water in the barrel NS along the pipe QR. At the ſame time the valve a opens and lets in more water, from M into the barrel. And when P is raiſed, N deſcends, the valves a, c ſhut and b opens, and lets more water paſs through the bucket Minto the upper partt. And when the bucket N is drawn up again, the water ĩs forced along the pipe QR as before This pump is the ſame as a lifting pump, only there is added the valve c which is not abſolutely neceſſary. No hole or leak muſt be ſuffered below the piſton or bucket; for air ill get in, and ſpoil the working of the pump. And the buckets muſt always be within 30 feet of the watero. l There are ſeveral ſorts of valves uſed in pump work. as T, V, , that at T being made of two pieces of flat leãther is called a clack. Theſe at V, W are made conical or of any indented figure, and fit exactly into a hole of the ſame ſhape. At the bottom of the valve is put a pin acroſs it, to hinder its flying quite out of the hole. t UE - . p . : - v ExaMPLE ILXXIX. AB a Hydrometer, to meaſure the denſities of liuors, eſpecially ſpirituous liquors. This is a holow bãll of glaſs B, partly filled with quickſilver or ſhot; and hermetically ſealed at the top 4, when made of a due weight, by trials. The ſmall tube AB is divided into equal parts, and graduated at equal diſtances. And theſe diviſions noted to which it ſinks in different fluids of the beſt ſorts; which points muſt be taken as ſtandards to compare others with. Then if the Hydrometer be immerged in any fluid, and the point to which it ſinks in the ſurface be marked; it ſhews the denſity of it, and its goodneſs. For it ſinks deepeſt in the ligheſt liquor: And the ligheſt liquids are the berſt. ExXA MPLE LXXX. AB is a Thermmeter, to meaſure the degrees of heat. B is a glaſs ball with a long neck 4B. The ball and part of the neck is filled with ſpirit of wine tinged red with cochineal; and the end A4 is ſealed hermetrically; In the doing of which the end of the tube 4, the ſpirit and included air, are heated, which rarefies the air and ſpirit; ſo that when the end 4 is ſealed, and the tube cools; the ſpirit contracts, and there is a vacuum made in the top of the tube. And therefore the ſpirit expanding and contracting by heat and cold, has liberty to riſe and fall in the tube. This ball and tube is incloſed in a frame, which is divided into degrees. Then as the top of the ſpirit riſes or falls, the diviſions will ſhew the degrees of heat or cold. Theſe diviſions are arbitrary, and therefore two thermometers will not go together, or ſhew the ſame degrees of heat and rold; except they be made to do ſo by graduating them both by obſervation. This is commonly put in the ſame caſe with the barometer, fig. 218. There are other ſorts of Thermometers. CD is a ball with a long neck open at the end D, partly filled with tinged ſpirit of wine, and put with the open end into the veſſel D, near the bottom; Which veſſel is half full or more of the ſame ſpiritt. The top of the tube CE is air. So in warm weather when the air in C is rarefied by heat, ĩt preſſes the ſpirit down into the bucket D, and as the point æ deſcends, the diviſions being marked, ſhew the degrees of heat; or when it aſcends, the degrees of cold. But this ſort is affected with the preſſure of the atmoſphere, and therefore is not ſo true.  ExaupLE LXXXII. DA is an artificial fountain. AE a ſtrong cloſe veſſel of metal, 4B a pipe reaching near the bottom of the veſſel, and ſoldered cloſe at 4 F, A two cocks. If the cocks be opened and water poured in at 4, till the veſſel be about half ful. Then ſtop the cock F, and with a ſyringe inject the air at 4, till it be ſufficiently condenſed within the veſſel. Then ſtop the cock at 4, and take away the ſyringe. Then as ſoon as you open the cock at 4, the compreſſion of the air at C, will force the water up the tube BA4, and ſpout up to the height D. And a little ball of cork may be kept ſuſpended at le top of the ſtream D. But an artificial fountain is moſt eaſily made thus, take a ſtrong bottle G; and fill it half full of water, cork it well, and through the cork put a tube HI very cloſe, to reach near the bottom of the veſſel. Then blow ſtrongly in at H, till the air in the bottle he condenſed; then the water will ſpout out at I7 to a great height. Any of theſe fountains placed in the ſunſhine, will ſhow all the colours of the rainbow; a black cloth being placed behind. ExampLE LXXXII. rD is Archimedess Weoter- ſere. This is a cylinder turning upon the axis CD. About this cylinder there iĩs twiſted a pipe or rather ſeveral pipes no, ?g, running ſpiral ways from end to end. This cylinder is placed higher at one end D, than at the other. And its uſẽ is to ſcrew up the water from the lower end to the higher. AB is a river running in direction AB. a, b, c; d ſeveral floats fixt to the cylinder. EV the ſurface of the water. Since the eylinder ſtands ir an inclined poſition, the upper floats a, b are ſet out of the water; and the under ones c, d within it. So that the water acts only upon the under ones, ?, d; and turns about the cylinder in the order abcd. By this motion the water taken into the ſpiral tubes at the low end, is by the revolution of the cylinder, conveyed thro' theſe pipes, and diſcharged at the top into the veſſel G. If 4B is a ſtanding water, there is no occaſion ſor the floats ⸗, b, c, ã. And then the cylinder is to be turned by the handle at D. Inſtead of the pipe, à ſpiral channel may he cut round the cylinder, and covered cloſe with plates of leadl. The cloſer theſe ſpiral tubes are, the more water is raiſed; but ĩt requires miore force, Alſo the more the cylinder leans; the more water it carries, but to à leſs height. Examrt? LXXXIII AL a Rouling-preſs, for copper. plate printing. DE FG, two wooden rollers, of about 12 or 16 inches ai ameter, running upon the ends of two ſtrong iron ixels; that go quite through them, and are fixt in them. To the axis of the upper one DE is ſized the handle BAC. Theſe rollers run in braſs ſockets, and muſt run very true upon their axles, and may be brotght nearer, or ſet further from one another, by wedges in the iaue at ,, R. HIK is a flat table or plank going in bewern the rollers, and ſliding freely upon the frame. LM the frame. NO a ſhelf to lie the paper upon. When the preſs is uſed, the upper roller is folded round with flannel, that every part of the print may take an equal impreſſion; and a paper bottom, ſpread upon the table HIK, where the plate is to lye, to prevent the indenting of the plank. Then rubbing the plate with the ſort of ink proper for it, and laying it upon the paper bottom, on the table at H. Take the printing paper and laying it carefully upon the plate, and turning the handle CAB, the motion of the roller DE, turns the roller FG, and draws the table through between the rollers, together with the plate and paper; and the paper is printed. Note, the paper muſt be thoroughly wetted in a trough; and after it has laid about a day or two, it is then to be paſſed through a ſcrew preſs, to ſqueeze the water out, and then it is fit for printing. Exam?LE LXXXIV. The Fire-Engine to raiſe water. LL is à great beam or leaver about 24 feet long, two feet deep at leaſt, and near 2 feet broad; it lies through the endvall of the engine houſe, and moves round the center a, upon an iron axis. CC a hollow cylinder of iron 40 inches diameter and 8 or 9 feet longg the piſton ſuſtained by the chain LP. F the fire place under ground. BB the hoiler 12 feet diameter, which communicates with the cylinder by the hole 2, and ſteam pipe E, 6 or 8 inches diameter. The boiler is of iron, and covered over cloſe with lead. In this the water is boiled to raiſe a ſteam. 4, 5is the regulator, being a plate within the hoiler, which opens and ſhuts the hole of communication 2. This is fixt on the axis 34 coming through the boiler, on which axis is fixt the horizontal piece h53; ſo that moving h back and forward, moves the plate 4 5 over hole 2 and back again. hlis a horizontal rod oſ iron, moveable abont the joint h. æyeãdl a piece of iron vith ſeveral claws called the Wye, moving ahout the axis de in a fixt frame. The claw sſ is cloven at , and between them paſſes the end of , with two knobs to keep it in its place. 44 is the working beam, in which is a ſlit, through which the claws æ paſs, and are kept there by the pin 7 going between them. DDD is a leaden pipe called the injection pipe, carrying cold water from the ciſtern S into the cylinder CC, and is turnd up with a cap full of holes at the end, within the cylinder. f the injection cock, to which is fixt the iron rod fg, lying horizontal. The end Z goes through a ſlit in the end of the piece rę, and at the end is a knob ſcrewed on to keep it in. pebrg a piece of iron with ſeveral claws called the Eff, moveable about the axis bc. The claw rꝓ goes through the ſhit in the beam Aã and is kept there by the two pins o, n: The claw 7g g0es over the piece gſ. As the piece ofis moved back and forward, the injection cock f opens and ſhuts. I, 1, &c. are ſeveral holes in the beam A4, that by ſhifting the pins, ſet the pieces ꝓ, æ, ꝓ higher or lower, as occaſion requires. Nis a ſniffing clack, ballanced by a weight, and opening outwards, to let out the air in the cv ſinder at the deſcent of the piſton. in ſome engines a pipe goes from it to convey the ſteam out of the honſe G is a leaden pipe) called the ſinking pipe or eduction pipe, going from the cylinder to the hot well Z7 it is turned up at the end, and has a valve opening upwards; this carries away the water thrown in by the cold vater pipe. is the feeding pipe going from the hot well to the boiler to ſupply it with water, by a cock opening at pleaſure. i, i are two gnage pipes with cocks, one reaching a little under the ſurface of the water in the boiler, the other a little above it. By opening theſe cocks, it is known when there is water enough in the boiler; for one cock will give ſteam and the other water. They ſtand in a plate which may be opened, for a man to go into the boiler to clean or mend it.  is the puppet clack, from this a wice comes througha ſmall hole, to which is fixed a thread going over a pulley, with a ſmall weight at it; the weight on the clack m is about a pound for every fquare inch. 7Z the ſteam pipe going from the clack out of the houſe. When the ſteam in the boiler ĩs too ſtrong, it lifts up the puppet clack m; and goes into the ſteam pipe 7Z, by which it is conveyed away: Otherwiſe the boiler would burt. XK a pipe carrying water from the ciſtern S into the cylinder, to cover the piſton to a good depth. Ia cock opening to any wideneſs, that the water may run in a due quantity. M a hoke to Iet it out, thro' a pipe, into the hot well H, when too much. VVV a force pump with a bucket and clack, and two valves opening upwards. This pump is cloſe at the top R, and being wrought by the leaver LL, it brings water out of a pit inũ the ciſtern S.  the pit where the water is to be raiſed. XX the ſpeers which work in wooden pumps vwithin the pit. The cylinder is ſupported y ſtrong beams as 7, 8, going through the erigine houſe. 6, 6 is the firſt floor 7, 7 the upper floorr. At O in the end of the beam CL there are two pins, which ſtrike againſt two ſprings of wood, fixt to two timbers lying on each ſide the great leaver LL; theſe pins ſerve to ſtop the beam; and hinder the piſton coming too low in the cylinder. When the engine is to be ſet to work, the water in the boiler muſt be made to boil ſo long; till the ſteam is ſtrong enough; which is known by opening the valves i, i. Then the hole 2 is opened by moving the piece h3 by hand. Then the ſteam is let into the cylinder, which lets the end of the beam LC riſe up. This raiſes the working beam 44, moves the Eff, pr5, which moves gf, and opens the cold water cock ſ At the ſame time moves the wye æyl, which draws Ib, and ſhuts the hole 2. The cock f being open, the cold water ruſhing into the cylinder, is thrown up againſt the piſton, and deſcending in ſmall drops, condenſes the hot rarified ſtream; and makes a vacuum under the piſton. Conſequently the weight of the atmoſphere preſſing upon the piſton. brings down the end LC, which raiſes the other end Iꝗ, which works the pumps XX. As the end LC deſcends, the working plug 44 deſcends, and moving the eff ?ręf, and wye xys/b, ſnuts the cold water cock f, and opens the hole 2, and the ſteam goes into thæ cylinder, which takes off the preſiure of the atmoſphere; and the end LQ deſcends by the weight of the ſperes XX, And the end IC aſcends as before, which opens ſ and ſhuts 2 So by the motion of the beam A4 up and down, the cock ſ and hole æ ſhut and open alternately. And by this means of condenſing and rarefying the ſteam alternately within the cylinder, the leaver or beam LL conſtantly moves up and down. By which motion the water is drawn up by the pumps; and delivered into troughs within the pit, and conveyed away by drifts or levels. At the ſame time the motion of the beam LL works the pump VRV, and raiſes water into the ciſtern S. When the engine is to ceaſe working, the pins n, o are taken out, and the cold water cock is kept cloſe ſhut; whilſt the end LC is up. There is never made a perſect vacuum in the cylinder, for as ſoon as the elaſtic force of the ſteam within. ĩs diminiſhed, the piſton begins to deſcend. The vacuum is ſuch that about 8 Ib. preſſ'es upon every ſquare inch of the piſton. The diameter of the pumps within the pit, is about 8 or ꝗ inches. And the bores of theſe pumps, where the ſpeers XX work, ſhould be made wide at the top; for it they be ſtrait, more time is required to make a ſtroke, and the barrels are in danger of burſtingg And the engine will make 15 or 14 ſtrokes in a minute, makes a 6 foot ſtroke, and delivers 300 or more hogſheads of water, in an hour, to the height of 6o or 70 fathom. A cubic bic inches of ſteam: She conſumes about 0 buſhels of coals in 12 hours. ExamrL? LXXXV. AB is the Weater- Engine to quench fire. D, E arè two pumps 5 inches diameter, having each a clack a4, b opening upwards. CO a large copper air veſſel 9 inches diameter. This veſſel ſtands. upon a ſtrong plate æw, 5 or 6 inches above the bottom of the cheſt NM. S is a braſs pipe coming through the end of the cheſt at S; and at 77 it divides into two cavities going under the copper pot CO, to the two pumps E, D: The cavity YW leads to the pump E. And directly above this cavity at , there is another cavity y, communicating with the pump . And above the cavityy is placed the valve 7, opening upwards into the copper pot CO, from this cavity. There are the like cavities belonging to the pump D; the firſt going to the valve a; the other from the pump to the valve s of the copper pot, Theſe cavities are made of hollow pieces of braſs ſcrewed faſt together: Z is a cock, through which is a paſſage along the pipe SY, another at the ſide of the pipe into the cheſt NM. This cock by turning the handle ce opens one paſſage and ſhuts the other, as there is occaſion. Xæ a leather pipe to be ſcrewed on the end S, to draw water out of a well or river. PR is the conduit pipe reaching near the bottom of the veſſel CO, and ſoldered cloſe into the top ofit. AtR and Q are ſcrews, ſo that the pipe may be turned In any direction, by the man that holds it. And at Va copper pipe muſt be ſcrewed on, or elſe a long Ieather one, which being flexible ĩs carried into rooms and entries. Hſan iron axis to which the iron leavers FG, LX are fixed This axis moves in ſockets about H, I, which are ſcrewed hard down. FX, GL two wooden handles fixt to the leavers to work them by. gb, ꝓl are two arches of iron fixt on the axis HI. fã, mn the ſhanks of the piſtons, being two ſtrong rods of iron. ſg, ht, lq, mp, four iron chains fixt at f, ;5 and b, t; and l, ; and at m, p. At f and m are ſcrews to ſcrew the chains tight; theſe chains work the pumps. For when FK is put down, the chain fg pulls down the rod of the piſton ſ”l. And when FX is raiſed, the chain b pulls it up again. And the ſame way the chains l7, mnp raiſe and depreſs the piſton mn. In ſome engines there are two arches, like hę, 1, fixt near the end 7 of the axis; and chains at them; from the ends of which, as alſo from ? and 5 two boards are ſuſ;ended. Theſe boards ſerve for treadles for men to ſtand upòn, to help to work the engine. The veſſel CO and two pumps are incloſed in a cheſt AN, and the whole machine moveable on wheels, the fore axle-tree turning on a bolt in the middle, for the conveniency of turning to either ſide. But there are a great many forms of theſe engines. In ſome the leaver lies croſs over; in others lengthways; in ſome there is no chain work, but only pins for the piſtons to move uponn. When the engine is to play, if it is by the water in a river, &c. the pipe Xæ muſt be ſcrewed on at s, and the end æ put into the water. But if water is to be fetched, it muſt be poured into the cheſt M, which runs through the holes T into the body of the engine N. Then turning the cock cæZ to open the proper communication; the handles FX, GL, muſt be moved up and down by men; by which means water is drawn into the pumps E, D, and forced into the veſſel CO, and out of the pipe PR. For the piſton mn being raiſed, the water is drawn along the cavity ZYW, through the valve b into the pump 3 and when mn is depreſſed, the valve b ſhuts and the water is forced into the cavity y, through the valve r, and into the pot CO; which cannot return for the ſhutting of the valve r, when the piſton mn riſes againn. And the like for the other pump D. Since the piſton of one pump goes down whilſt the other goes up, the water is forced into the veſſel CO, by turns, by theſe pumps; ſo that there is always water going in. And the air confined at top of the veſſel at C being condenſed, will preſs the water up the pipe PRQV, and make it flow with a continual ſtream. If the water in C be compreſſed into half the ſpace, it vill force the water to 30 feet high. In ſome engines, there is ancther pipe as PR, coming through the copper pot, and thro the ſide of the engine, and theſe tvo pipes may p ay both at once if there is occaſion. And if not, the end of one is ſcrewed up. Ex MmPLE LXXXVI. A Ship. This is the nobleſt machie that ever waꝶ invented. It is ſo compounded and conſ. s of ſo maDy parts, that it would require a wh iclume t; deſcribe it. Some oſ the principai parts a:⸗ tneſe.  the Hull. B the Bow. C the Fore-Caſtle. D the main deck. E the Stern. F the ancient ſtaſf and enſign. G the Poop lantern. H the rudder. I the bowſprit.  the foremoſt. L the mainmaſt. M the mizen maſt. N top maſts. O top gallant maſts. i P Sails. K VYards, R Vanes. S the Jack. T the Pendant. V Stays. Vo Main-ſtay, &c. W Shrowds. X Main topmaſt back ſtay, &rc. Y The Crane line. Z The anchor, to which the cable is Ext I Main lifts. 2 Fore braces. 3 Main-top-ſail ſheets. 4 The fore tacks. 5 Fore Topſail clewlines, 6 Main- top-ſail leetch lines. 7 Fore bunt lines. 8 MiZen bowlines. 9 Main-top- ſail halliards. And the like for the reſt of the ſails. Moſt of theſe ropes are for hoiſting the ſails, and ſeting them in a proper poſition to the wind. For the wind always acts perpendicularly upon the plane of any ſail; ànd urges the ſhip in direction of that perpendicular. And by help of the rudder H, ſhe is made to keep any direction required. For if the rudder be put about to any ſide; the water (as the ſhip moves along) will act violently againſt it, and drive the ſtern the contrary way, or her head the ſame way, as the rudder. A ſhip with a briſk fair wind will ſail 8 or 10 miles an hour. ExamrLE LXXXVII. AT an Air-pump. C, D two braſs cylinders, 2 or 3 inches diameter and a foot high, having two valves at the bottom opening upwards. t, t two piſtons working in the cylinders, having two valves alſo opening upwardss. F a handle ging upon the axis of the wheel or lantern Z, which wheel by the teeth, moves the racks G, G; and by them the piſtons withip ported by the pillars I, I, I, . H the receiver of glaſs, which by the hollow pipe of braſs noco called the ſnan's neck, communicates with the cylinders by means o? a hollow braſs pipe PQ; into which the ſfwan's neck paſles. 77s a mercurial gage, being a glaſs tube ſtan ing in the bucket of mercury s, and communicating with the pipe no. X a cock under the table 45 to let in air into the pipe no, and ſo into the receiver, when there is occaſion. Wahen the air is to be drawn out of the receiverH, a wet leather is placed over the plate, and upon that the receiver . then raiſing the right hand , the piſton ? of the barrel D is raiſed, which takes off the weight of the atmoſphere; conſequently the air paſſes out of the receiver H, through the ſwan's neck no, and through the hollow braſs ꝗ, through the valve into the cylinder D. Then the right hand F put down, the valve at bottom of the cylinderD ſhuts, and the air paſſes through the valve at 7: At the ſame time that the left hand being raiſed, draws the air from the receiver, through noP, through the valve into the cylinder C So that by the motion of the handle FF up and down, the air is at length drawn out of the receiver H, by the pumps C, D. And the rarity of the air within the receiver, is known by the height of the mercury in the tube 75, which is known by the graduated frame. An abſolute vacuum can never be perſectly made For when the ſpring of the air is ſo we:k as not to be able to lift up the valves at bottom of the cylinders, no more air can be drawn out. The handle F is lately made to turn all one way, thus 4 is a crank turned by the handle #¥ NN the leader or. ſword going over the pin I, in the wheel æ. Wihilſt the crank 4 is riſing, it raiſes the ſide  of the wheel, and when the crank deſcends, it thruſts down the ſame ſide s of the wheel Z So the racks are alternately raiſed and depreſſed, as the crank goes about. There are ſeveral ſorts of glaſſes made uſe of for the Air-pump. As 4 a receiver open at top, covered with a braſs plate and oiled leather at D, and ept down by the croſ™ piece EF, ſcrewed down upon the pillars BC, which pillars are ſcrewed into the table 4B of the Air-pump. H a receiver open at top, with a plate and collar of wet leathers X, through which goes the ſlip wire GI, ſo tight as to let no air in. This ſerves to lift any thing up by the hook I. MP is a transferrer. N is a plate and leather, on which ſtands the receiver M. NP a hollow tube going through the plate. O a cock to open or ſhut the paſſagee The cock O being open, and the air exhauſted by the pump, and then the cock being ſhut, the receiver and pipe may be taken away from the Air Pump, the vacuum remaining in M. L a receiver cloſe at the top; with infinite others of like ſort. ExaMpLE? LXXXVIII. London Bridge Water-works. 4B the axis of the water wheel CO; which wheel is 20 feat diameter, and the axis 3 feet, and 19 feet long. æ, E 26 floats 15 foot broad. G a ſpur wheel fixt to the axis AB, 8 feet diameter, 44 coggs of iron; this moves the trundle , 45 feet diameter, and 20 rounds; A its iron axis. T a quadruple crank of caſt iron  inches ſquare, each crank being a foot from the axis. The crank is faſtened to the axis at I, by help of a wedge going through both, which cauſes the crank to turn. L, L four iron ſpears belonging to the cranks, and fixt to the four leavers MN, ;3 feet from the ends; which leavers are 24 feet long, moving on centers in a frame of wood. P, P four force pumps, Wwrought by four piſtons or rods NP, theſe pumps are 7 or 8 inches diameter having valves opening upward. O a hollow trunk of caſt iron, to which the pumps are cloſe fixt. a ſucking pipe going into the water. RR four hollow pipes 7 inches diameter, and cloſe fixt to the lower part of the pumps; theſe pipes are cloſe ſcrewed to the hollow iron trunk s; into which 4 valves open. T a pipe communicating with the trunk S; through which the water is forced to any height. There are alſo four forcers placed at the enda M, M of the leavers M N, and working in four more pumps. At B the other end of the axis there is placed exactly the ſame work as at 4; ſo that the great wheel CD works 16 pumps. There is alſo a machine made of cogwheels and trundles, contrived to raiſe the great wheel as the tide riſes. The great wheel vill go at any depth of water; and as the tide turns, the wheels go the ſame way with it; but ſtand ſtill at high and low water. As the great wheel ĩs carried about by the tide, it carries round the ſpur wheel G, which carries the trundle  with the cranks TX, which by the ſwords L move the leavers N. When the end M is pulled down, N is raiſed with the piſton NP in the pump P, by which means the water is drawn out of the river through the pipe  into the pump P; and when NP deſcends, the valve ſhuts, and the water is forced through the pipe R, through the trunk b, and along the pipe T into the tovn. And when V riſes up again by the motion of the cranks, the valve in S ſhuts, and that in the pump opens and more water riſes through the pipe  into the pump P. And as the cranks ſtand every way, there is always water Fiſing in ſome of the pumps; and ſome always forcing through r, S, T. When the tide is ſtrongeſt, the great wheel goes 6 times round in a minute. This engine is ſaid to raiſe 30 or 40 thouſand hogſheads of water in a day. Exa MmPLE LXXXIX. The Pile Engine ſor Weſtminſter Bridge.  the great cogwheel fixt to the great ſhaft D. MO, a trundle and fly turned by the cogwheel, this is to prevent the horſes from falling when the ram is diſcharged. B the drum or barrel on which the great rope is wound. C a leſſer barrel on which the rope L is wound, carrying the weight N. The uſe of this is to hinder the follower from falling too faſt. The barrels B, C are moveahle about the great axis D. The cogwheel and barrel B are fixt together by the bolt ? ꝑone through the codwheel into the barrel. I is leaver moveable about 1, going through the great ſaft D; this lifts up the bolt 7, the end æ being made heavier by a weight; by which means it locks the barrel B to the great wheel 4. X the forcing bar going into the hollow axis of the great ſhaſt D; this reſts upon the leaver ZI. X a great leaver moveablę about 3, the end X being heavier, which with the end 7 preſſes down the bar XI, thruſts down the end of the leaver at , and lets the bolt F deſcend, to unlock the barrel C Z a rope fixt at X and going up thro the guides at R. GK a crooked leaver moveable about 2, the roller at the end G being preſſed vwith the great rope, forces the end X againſt the catch at X, and hinders the bar XT from aſcending. When the rope  ſlackens, the ſpring7 forces the end X from the catch, and the bar XT aſcends. H the great rope going round the barrel B, over the pullèy P, up to the top and over the pulley Q. then down to the follower where it is fixt. T the ram that drives the piles. S the follower in which is fixt the tongs /V, moveable about the center. VV the guides between which the ram ſallss. At the inſide of the guides at R, where they are faſtend together, there are two inclined planess. At the bottom of the follower is a ſlit, to receive the handle 6 of the ram T, to be taken up by the tongs . a, b, c, d timbers for horſes to draw at, in direction abcã. As the liorſes go round, the great rope  is wound about the barrel B, and the fcllower S and ram T are drawn up, till the tongs come between the inclined planes, which ſqueezing the ends 44 together, opens the end 5 and Iets the ram fall down. Then the follower S taking hold of the rope Z raiſes the end X and depreſſes the end 7 of the leaver X, which thruſts down the bar XI, which thruſts down the end FT of the leaver æI, with the bolt 7, and unlocks the barrel B, which turning about the axis, the follower s deſcends by its weight, till it comes to the ram T; and the end 5 of the tongs ſlips over the handle 6 of the ram. Then the rope A ſlackens, and the ſpring 7 forces the end X from off the catch at top of the bar XI, and lets the bar riſe, and the weight  raiſes the bolt F, and locks the barrel B to the wheel 43 and the horſes ſtill going about, the end 5 of the tongs takes hold of the handle 6, and the ram T is drawn up as beforee. AlI this machine is placed upon a boat which ſwims upon the water; and ſo is eaſily conveyed to any place deſired. FxampLE XC. C3GH a blowing wheel. 4B, CD an iron croſs; to this is fixt the circle of iron ZF. To theſe are fixt 12 leaves I, I, I, which reach no nearer the center than the iron circlee. 1, 1, 1 are holes, through which the air paſſes into the cavities between the leaves. There is the ſame croſs and iron circle on the other ſide, but without any holee Through the centers of both ſides is put an iron axis and fixt there, and on the further end a handle is put to turn it by. This wheel is incloſed in a caſe which juſt touches the edges ſmall diſtance from the ends of the leaves. On this ſide or Flat, of the caſe there isa hole leſt againſt the holes I, I, to let the air through; the other flat is cloſe. LM is the ſucking pipe, being a tube fixt uron the caſe, ſo as to communicate with the cavities, by the holes 1, . G is the blowing pipe, and is another wooden tube communicating with the inſide of the caſe. The axis turns upon two concave pieces of metal fixed to the caſe, the handle being on the back ſide of the figure alcd is a thin ring oſ wood fſaſtening the leaves all together; and the like on the other ſide. On theſe rings are put two circles of blanketing to go cloſe to the caſe, and alſo upon the iron circle EF. The frame being fixt, and the handle turned about in the order BCAD. Thæ motion of the leaves moves the air very ſwiftly to the outſide, which being confined by the rim, is forced in a tangent along the tube G: whilſt new air aſcends along the ſucking pipe LM, paſſes through the hole in the frame, and through the holes 1, 1I, into the cavities between the leaves; and ſo thrown out of the wheel, through the tube blowing ipe G. p Ht the pipe LM be continued to the place where any foul air is; it may ſoon be thrown out through the tube G, and diſperſed abroad. Or if the tube LM communicate with the freſh air, and G with any cloſe room; freſh air may preſently be injected into the room. Ex aM?LE XCI. AB an artificial fountain to play with either end up. A4 and B two cavities; FO, KB two open pipes, fixt to the baſons at X and O. GHT and CDE two curve tubes open at both endss. When the fountain ſtands on the end 4, pour water in at O. Then turning the fountain like an hour glaſs upon the end B, the water will deſcend through the pipe CDE and ſprout out at Z.The air paſſing up the pipe OF to give it liberty. The water falling down upon the baſon ZX, runs through the pipe XB into the cavity B. And the fountain being turned, the water will deſcend through GHI, and ſpout out at I as before. And ſo being turned it will play afreſh as often as you vill. Note, while the jet Z is playing, if the end O of the pipe FO be ſtopt with the finger, the jet will ceaſe playing: which being taken off, it will begin again. And ſo may be made to play or ſtop at pleaſure. ExaMrLE XCII. AF a Water Barometer. AD is a ſmall tube open at both ends, cemented in the neck of the bottle CE. Then the bottle being a little warmed to drive out ſome of the air, the end 4 is immerged in water tinged with cochineal, which goes into the bottle as it cools. Then it is ſet upright; and the water may be made to ſtand at any pointB, by ſucking or blowing at 4. This is a very ſenſible barometer: for if it be removed to any higher place, a very ſmall decreaſe in the airs gravity, will make the water riſe ſenſibly in the tube. This may be made uſe of to find the level of places. But it is ſubject to this inconvenience, that it is a thermometer as well as 2 barometer, the leaſt alteration of heat, raiſing the water in the tube. To prevent which it muſt be incloſed in a veſſel of ſand; and then the air included in the bottle will retain the ſame degree of heat, at leaſt for a ſmall time. ExaMPLE xCIliI. ADOF is a Vet deau AB the reſervoir where the water is kept. CDIO the pipe of conduct which conveys water from the eſtrvor. O the cock or adjutage, being a ſmall hole in a thin horiontal plate fixt upon the end of the pipe, through which the water flows. OF the jet of water, ſpouting up thao XIII. COMPOUND ENGINES. the hole O, which deſcends again in the ſtreams FE and FH. OF the height of the jet. AG the horizontal height of the water in the reſervoir. If the part LIO of the pipe of conduct be buried under the ſurface of the water XH, and be inviſible; the jet will ſeem to riſe out of the water X7, as in many artificial fountains. The adjutage is ſometimes made conical, but the beſt ſort for ſpouting highcſt, is a thin plate with a hole in it. The bore of the adjutage ought to increaſe with the height of the reſervoir, and the larger the adjutage the higher the jet will go, provided the pipe of conduit be large enough to ſupply it with water. Pipes of conduit ought not to be made with elbows, but to turn off gradually in a curve as DIO. The diameters of pipes of conduct ought at leaſt to be 5 or 6 times the diameters of the adjutage, or elſe it will not ſprout ſo high. If a reſervoir be 50 foot high, and the adjutage half an inch; the pipe of conduct ſhould at leaſt be 3 inches; or if the adjutage be an inch, which is better, the pipe of conduct muſt be 6 inches. And in theſe caſes the jet will riſe to the greateſt height it can have. In general the diameter of the adjutage ought to be nearly as the ſquare rootof the height of the reſervoir. And if you would have the velocity in the pipe of conduct to be the ſame at all heights of the reſervoir, that the friction may not increaſe too muchã then the ſquare of the diameter of the pipe of conduct muſt be as the cube of the diameter of the adjutagec. When water is carried a great way through pipes; the friction of the pipes will diminiſh its velocity, and the jet will not riſe ſo high. A jet never riſes to the full height of the reſervorr. If the height be 5 feet 1 inch, the jet will only riſe to 5 feet; thus the jet OF wants the ſpace FG of the height of the reſervoir. And the defect FG is as the ſquare of the height of the reſervoir OG. But ſmaller jets fall ſnort more than in that proportion, being more retarded by the reſiſtance of the air. The greateſt jets never riſe 300 feet high; for the velocity is ſo great that the water is diſſipated into ſmall drops, by the reſiſftance of the air. If a ball of cork or light wood be laid at , it will be ſuſpended by the pillar of water, and play there without falling. Exa upLE XCIV. AGE is a compound ſteelyard, for weighing vaſt weights. IG, CK two leavers moveable about B and E. LE, MB two fixt pieces. AC a croſs bar ſupporting the end C, and moveable about the pins 4 and C. Tte center of gravity of IG and AC is in B; and of CK and the hook DN, in E. H the weight to be weighed.  the counterpoiſe moveable along the graduated leaver EG. This machine is hung upon the hooks at L M. Here the power F is to the weight H, as 4B X DE to CE x 5F. More examples of the conſtruction of engines might here be added. But as there is ſuch an infinite variety in the world, it would be an endleſs taſk to deſcribe all the kinds of them. Therefore I think it needleſs to produce any more, eſpecially ſince their conſtruction and uſe depend upon the ſame principles as theſe already deſcribed And if the reader does but thoroughly underſtand the powers and forces of theſe before mentioned; he cannot be at a loſs to find out the powers, forces, or motions of any other machine, though never ſo compounded. I297] .  Zockatæt,kot- ſock-œtaoct, & &octtaetat-ts ctoks æſ AN ALPHABETICAL I N D E X O F THE TERMS uſed in MECHANICS. A. Air Pump, a machine to draw the air out of a glaſ⸗. g Adjutage, the ſpout for a Jet deau in a fountain. Amplitude, the diſtance a ball is ſhot to. Anemoſcope, a machine 3 ſhewing the point of the wind. See ſig. 2 Angle of application, is the angle which the line of direction of a power makes with the leaver it acts upon.  0©*<f inclination, is the angle an inclined plane makes with the horion. of Traction, the angle which the direction of a power makes with an inclined plane. Aqueduct, an artifica river, or tube to convey water: Auuaust the axle or ſpindle of a wheel. ſig. 185. æf. Arcb, a hollow ah l made of a circular form, to ſupport any building. Aeometer, an inſtrument to meaſurc the weight of liquors. Arm, any piece of timber or metal, that projects horizontally from ſome part of a machine. Axle, or Axis, the line or ſpindle about which a wheel turns round. Fig. 185. ef. Axis in Peritrochio, a machine for raiſing weights, conſiling of a wheel, fixt upon a cylinder for its axis. n Balance, machine to weigh bodies in, one of the mechanie powers. Fig. 188. Balance- wheel, the flye or pendulum of a watch. Baromeler, a machine to ſhew the weight of the air or atmoſphere. See Fig. 218. Baroſcope, the ſame as barometer: a weather glaſs. Earrel of a wheel, is the axle, or cylindrical body, about which the rope goes. llls 4v of a pump, is the hollow part of the pump where the piſton works. Bars, ſtreight pieces of timber or metal, that run eroſs from one part of a machine to another. Baſe, the foot of a pillar. Baſil, that angle, the edge of a tool is ground to. Batten, a piece of timber 3 or 4 inches broad and an inch thick. to Batter, to lean backward. Baut, a long piece of timber. Beat, the crooked end of a piece of iron, to hold any thing faſt. Beam, a large piece of timber, lying acroſs any place. Beetle, a rooden inſtrument or mallet for driving piles. Bevil, angle that is not right. An oblique angle. Block; a lump of wood. ĩll lll Blocks, pieces of wood in which the ſheevers or pullies run, and through which the ropes go. F́. l 42. 4, B. : : li .. Evlts, large iron pins. ll li Bond, the faſtening ſeveral pieces of timber together, either by mortiſe and tenant, duſftailing, æ Brace, a piece of timber fixt obliquely into others, to y them from moving any way. Brackets, the cheeks of the carriage of a mortar. A cramping iron to ſtay timber work. Alſo ſtays ſet under a ſhelf to ſupport it. Brads, nails having no broad heads. Bridge, any horizontal beam, &c. that is a ſupport to fomething. Butments, thoſe ſupports on which the feet of arches reſt Buttreſs, a plece of ſtrong wall that ſtands on the outſide of another wall to ſupport it. C. Capſtand, a machine on board a ſhip, to hoiſt the maſts, or raiſe any weight. Fig. 248. Caſcade, a fall of waterr. Calaract, is a precipice, or violent fall of water in a river, through high rocks, cauſing the water to fall with a great noiſe and force. Catch, ſome ſmall part of a machine; which, in its motion, hooks or lays hold of ſome other part to ſtop it. Center of motion, the point about which a body moves. - of gravily, the point upon which a body being ſuſpended, it will reſt in any poſition. of magnitude, a point equidiſtant from the oppoſite extremes of a body; the middle. of percuſſion, the point of a vibrating body that gives the greateſt ſtroke. Center pin, a pin about which, as a center, a body moves. Chain pump, a pump having ſeveral buckets fixt to an endleſs chain, which goes through it, and is moved round upon an axle. Fig. 254. Chaps, two ſides of a machine which take hold of any thing. Itl Cheets, two upright parts in a machine anſwering to one another in poſition and uſe. Chronoſcope, a pendulum to meaſure time. Clack, a ſort of valve which is flat, like a board; ſerving to ſtop a fluid from running out. Fig. 268. T a flap. Clampt, when the edges of two pieces of boards are joined together, ſo as the grain of one may lye croſs the grain of the other. Claſp, a ſort of buckſe to faſten any thing. Cloſp nails, thoſe with little heads to ſink into the wood. Claws, ſlender crooked pieces of metal in a machine, which ſerve to move or hold any thing. Long teeth. to Clench or Clinch, to double back the end of a nail that ĩt may not draw out again. To rivet. Clench nails, nails that may be clinched. Cock, à braſs ſpout to let a fluid run out, or ftop it, by turning. Cog s, the wooden teeth of a great wheel. Fię. 185.4,8,a. Cog-wheel, a large wheel made of timber, where the teeth ſtand perpendicular to the plane of the wheel. Fig. 185. CD. Collar, a ring of metal that goes about any thing, near the top, in which ĩt turns round. Column, the ſhaft or trunk of a pillar. Contrate-wheel, a wheel in a clock, where the teeth are parallel to the axis, and tand on the underſide ] the rim. Corbel, a piece of timber or ſtone, ſet under another iece to diſcharge the weight. Crab, a ſmall capſtand with 3 claws to be placed on the ground, moveable from one place to another. This is called a flying capſtane. Crane, a machine for hoiſting goods out of a ſhip, or for raiſing timber or ſtone. Fig. 233. Crank, that part of an iron axis which ĩs turned ſquare vith an elbow. Fig. 238, I. Groſs- irie, a horizontal beam fixt acroſ another. Crow, a ſtrong ſquare bar of iron, forked at the end; to remove heavy timber, &c. by uſing it with the hands. Crown wheel, in a clock or watch, is that next the ballance, its teeth ſtand in the upper ſide of the rim, and not in the edge. Fig. 166. G. Cupulo, a hollow arched tower, in form of a hemiſphere, or a bowl turned upſide down. D. Denſity, is the greater or leſſer quantity of matter contained in a given ſpacee Detents, are thoſe fops which being lifted up, the clock ſtrikes; and falling down, ſhe ſtops. Dognails, nails uſed for faſtening hinges. Dome, a round vaulted roof or toer. A cupola. Dormant, a great beam lying croſs a houſe. A fummer. Dormer, a window in the roof of a houſe. Dovetailing, letting one piece of timber into another, with a joint in form of a doves tail, being broader at the end, that it may not drav out again. Drum, the lantern or rundle which is carried by a great wheel. Fig. 266. EF. Drum- head, a timber-head, or lump of timber, in form of a drum. : E. Edging, the outſide or border. Endleſs-chain, a chain with the ends joined together; by which any part Of a machine is wrought. Endleſs-ſcrew, a ſcrew working in the teeth of a wheel; which may be turned about for ever. Fig. I93, Engine, a mechanical inſtrument compoſed of wheels, levers, ſcrews, &c. Eolipyle, a hollow globe of metal, filled with water, and put in the fire; the heat and vapour ruſhes out at a ſmall hole, with a great noiſe, Fig. 264. Equilibrium, the equality of weight, of two or more ies, &c. keeping one another at reſt. Eye, a hole in ſome part of a machine, through which any thing is put. F. Face, the front or foreſide of a machine, or of ſomè princ ipal part of it. Fang, ſome ſmall piece of metal like a long tooth, that by its motion moves ſome other part. Fellies, pieces of wood on the outſide of a wheel, which make the rim. Ferril, a ſort of hoop. Floats, the flat boards ſet perpendicular on the edge of a water-wheel; by which the water drives the wheel about. Fig. 236. D, D. Fly, that part in a clock, &⸗. that regulates the motion, and makes it uniform. Fig. 168, 169, Force, ma thing that acts upon a body to put it in motion. Force-pump, a pump that diſcharges water by preſſing it upwards. Fig. 267, 268. Frame, the outwork of any machine, or what holds all the reſt together. Free, clear of all impediment. Friction, the reſiſtance that bodies have by rubbing againſt one another. Fulcrum, that which ſupports a leaver in moving any heavy body. Gin, a machine to raiſe great weights. Fig. 257. Gravity, the weight of bodies. ſvecific, by this one body weighs more or leſs than another of the ſame bulk. relative, is the weight of a body in a fluid, or on an inclined plane, Groove, a channel cut in wood or ſtone. Gudgeons, the eyes in the ſtern of a ſhip, on which the rudder hangs. The center pins of an axie. Gyration, a whirling round. H. Hand, an index or pointer. Handle, the part of an inſtrument to take hold on with the hand.  Handſpite, a wooden leaver to be uſed with the hand, in moving any thing. Head, the top part of any thing. i Hem, the edge of ſome cloth turned down and ſewed. flinge, an iron joint on which a door turns, &c. to Hitch, to catch hold on, with a hook or turn of a rope. l to Hoiſe y Hoiſt, to heave up, or raiſe by force. Hook pins, taper iron pins with a hook head, by which they are ſtruck out again. They ſerve to pin the frame of a roof or floor together, till wrought off. Hoop, a citcular ring to put about any thing, to keep it faſt. Hydraulics, the art of making engines, for water works. Hdrometer, an inſtrument to meaſure the denſity of Hydroſtatics, a ſcience teaching the weights, preſſures, motions and properties of fluids. Hydroſtatical Ballance, an inſtrument for finding the ſpeciſic gravity of bodies. Hygrometer, an inſtrument for meaſuring the moiſture Hygroſcope, t and dryneſs of the air. Fig. 265. I. Vack, an engine to lift up a loaded cart, or the roof of a houſe, &c. See Fig. 249. ,Alſo an engine to roaſt meat, Fig. 258. Vack-pump, a chain pump. Jaums, Door poſts, or window poſts, &c. Jet d eau, the pipe of a fountain, which ſpouts up water into the air. Fig. 287. Impetus, any blow or force wherewith one body ſtrikes or impells another. Foint, the place where one part ĩs fixt into another, or moves about it. oiſis, thoſe pieces of timber framed into the dormant, in a houſe, and on which the boards of the floor are laid. K. Keys, ſtones in the top of an arch, to bind the ſWeeps together. Kenk, a ſnarle or little turn upon a rope, that it cannot run. Knee, a crooked or angular branch of timber. L. Lantern, that part which is moved by the cogs of a ugreat wheel, acting againſt the ſpindles or rounds. The drum. Fig. 266. EF. Latch, that which faſtens a door, &c. a Snect. Leaver, a bar of iron or wood to raiſe a weight: one of the mechanic powers. Leaves, the teeth of a pinion. Fig. 185. c, c, c Ledge, a flat border or plain, adjoining to a thing. Level, an inſtrument to place any thing horiZontal. Linch-pin, a pin that keeps a whęel from coming off Lip, a thin edge turned hollo. Loop, a piece of metal having a hole in the end, which goes over ſomething. A nooſe in a rope that will ſlip. Machine, a mechanical inſtrument for moving bodies. Mechanics, a ſcience that teaches the principles of motion, and conſtruction of engines, to move great weights. Mechanit powers, are theſe ſix; the balance, lever, wheel, pulley, ſcrew, and wedge. Mitre, an angle of 45 degrees, or half a right one. And half mitre is a quarter of a right angle. Momentum, quantity of motion; or the force or power a body in motion has to move another. Mortiſe, a ſquare hole cut in a piece of ſluff, to receive the tenant. Motion, is the ſucceſſive change of place of a body; or its paſſing from one place to another. Moving ſorse, any active force or power that moves a y Mouth, the part or parts of a machine that take hold of any thing. The entrance into any cavity.. N. Naove or Naff, the block in the middle of a wheel. Nect, a part near the end, cut ſmall. Notch, a dent, nick or ſlit made in any thing. Nui, the pinion of a wheel. Fig. 185. AB. A ſmall piese of metal going upon the end of a ſcrew nail. O. Oſcillation, the vibration or ſwinging of a pendulum. P. Paddles, a ſort of oars; the laddle boards on the edge of a water wheel. Pedeſtal, the baſe or bottom part of a pillar. Peers, a ſort of buttreſſes, for ſupport and ſtrength. Peg, a pin to go into a holee. l Pendulum, a weight hung by à ſtring or wire, ſwinging back and forward to meaſure time. Penſtock, the ſluice or door, that opens or ſhuts the paſſage of the water to a water wheel. Percuſſion, the ſtriking of one body againſt another. Peſtil, a long piece of wood or metal, which riſes up falls down again to beat or bruiſe ſomething. Pevets or Pivots, the ends of the ſpindle of a wheel in a clock or any machine, which play in the Pevet holes, the holes in which the ends of the ſpindle or axel of a wheel turn. Fig, 185. eſPictet, a ſtake pointed with iron, to drive into the ground. Pillar, a perpendicular column ſupporting one end of an arch, &r. Pinion, a little wheel at one end of the ſ indle, conſſtingbut of a few leaves or teeth. Fig. 185. 4B. Piſton, a round piece of wood moving up and down within the body of a pump, to draw up the wat&er. Plate, a piece of timber, on which ſome heavy work is framed, as wall plate, &c. A ſlat piece of metal. Pneumatics, a ſcience teaching the properties of the air. Pole, a long ſtaff or ſender piece of wood. Poſt, a perpendicular or upright beam of wood. Power, the force applied to an engine to raiſe any uveight. Or any force acting upon a body to move it. to Project, to jet out or hang over. Projectiles, balls or any heavy bodies thrown into the aur. Prop, a ſtay or ſupport for any thing, to bear it up. Pulley, a ſmall wheel with a channel in the edge of it, moving about an axis fixt in a block; the channel is to receive a rope that goes over It. DDOne of the mechanic powers. Pump, an engine to raiſe water. Fig. 204. Punchins, ſnort pieces of timber, placed upright to ſupport Rag-whtel, the barrel oſ wheel in a chalæ pump. Rails, ſmall pieces of wood joined into others; thoſe pieces into which the pannels of doors, &. are fitted. , Rammer, an inftrument for driving ſtones or piles into the ground; or beating the earth. Random, the diſtance to which a ball is ſhot. Range, the direction a ball is ſhot in, from a piece of ordnancee to Range, tò run ſtreight or directly in a line. to Reeve, to paſs a rope through any hole. Return, the ſide that turns off from any piece of ſtreight worlm 3il Ribs, ſlender pieces of timber, ſerving for ſtrength and ſupport ll llũ Riglets, little fiat, thin, ſuare pieces of wood. Rim, the circular part or outſide of a wheel. to Rivet. to batter down the end of a nail, that ſit ddraw not out agãin. li Rod, a long ſlender piece of wood or metal. Roll or Roller, an engine turned by a handle, to raife weights. Fig. 243. Rounds, the ſtaves or ſpindles in a lantern, againſt i which the teeth of a great wheel work. Fp™. 266. c, . The ſteps in a ladder, &c. Ruler, à thin ſtreight piece of woodc. Rungs, ſpindles or rounds. Fig. 266. c, c. Runner, a flat circular ring, between the nave and limpin of a wheel. Alſo a ſort of rope on board a ſip, to hoiſt with Sails, large pieces of canvaſs, by which ſhips, windmills, &e are carried, by help of the wind. Scantlin, ſtuſf cut to a proper ſize. Screw, one of the mechanic powers, the tap with tbhe thread is the male ſorew, the hollow that receives it, is the female ſcrew. Seribing, drawing an irregular line upon one piece of ſtuff, parallel to the irregular ſide of another, vith a pair of compaſſes opened to a due diſtance; and carried along the ſide of it. Then the wood in the firſt piece being cut avay, theſe two pieces will fit each other. to Seaze, to bind or faſten a rope, &ce. Shaft, or Shan, any long part of an inſtrument, eſpedially that is held with the hands. Sheers, two poles ſet up an end ſoaping, and tied togerher at top; and ſecured by a rope from alling. Their uſe is to raiſe any weight by help of a block and tackle at top. Sheevers, pullies, the little wheels that run in blocks, . by a rope going over them. Shelf, a board, &c. fixt horizontally. Shoulder, a part of timber of metal cut thicker than the reſt, in order to ſupport ſomethingg. Shrouds, the ledges on the edge of a guttered wheel. Sills, Sells, or Groundſels, pieces of timber that lye on the ground, into which others are fixed.. Sole trees. Siphon, a crooked glaſs tube, for drawing off liquors. - Fig. 216. Sleepers, pieces of timber laid as a foundation and ſupport for others that are to lye upon them. Slings, theſe are made of a rope ſpliced with an eye at either end, to go over a caſk or ſome heavy thing, which is to be hoiſed. Snatch block, a great block with a ſheever in it; and a notch cut through one of the cheeks of it; to hitch the rope into the pulley, for readineſs. Socket, a hollow piece of metal, in which any thing moves. li Sole, the bottom of the gutter or channel, in a gutter&dwhee. ĩ Sole- tree, the loweſt piece of timber which lies flat on the ground, into which the upper works are framed. The Groundſel, Spaniſb Burton, a ſort of tackle to hoiſt goods, like fig. 197. Spear, a nẽ pointed iron, or piece of timber. Specific gravily, is that whereby one body weighs more or leſs than another of the ſame magnitude, llli Spite, a pointed iron, or piece of wood. Spindle, the axle of a wheel. Fig. 185. ef. Spires, the turns of a rope about a cylinder or roller. to Splice, to join two ropes together by working the li ſtrands into one another. potes, pieces of wood running from the center of a vheel to the circumſerence, like rays. Spring, an inſtrument made of ſteel, that being bent, it continually exerts a great force, that it may unbend itſelf again. Springing plates are ſometimes made of braſs. Spur, a ſort of prop, ſet aſlope to thruſt. Spurs, long wooden teeth ſtanding in the edge of a large timber wheel. Fig. 192. a, a, a. Spur wheel, a wooden wheel where the teeth ſtand in the edge of the rim. Fig. 192. CD. Staff, a ſtick or ſmall piece of wood. Statics, a part of mechanics, teaching the motions and properties of heavy bodies. Stay, a piece of timber, or other thing fixed as a prop or ſupport to ſome heavy body. Steelyard, an inſtrument to weigh bodies, conſiſting of a long beam and a moyeable weight. Fig. 190. Stoct, the wooden part of a thing, and into which it is fixed. Stopple or ſtopper, a plug that fits into a hole. Stops, any ſmall pieces in a moving machine, that ſerve to ſtop the motion. Strain, the ſtreſs or violence any thing ſuffers by a uweight or force acting againſt it. Stroaks or Straiks, the iron going round the circumference of carriage wheels. Stud, a knob or little buttonn. A ſolid piece of metal fixt to a plate. Stuff, any wood that joiners work upon. Suivel, a metal ring that turns about any way. Syphon; the ſame as Siphon. A crane. Fig. 216. Syringe, an inſtrument for injecting liquorsi into any place. T. Tactles, blocks with pullies and ropes in them, to heave up goods. Fig. 1965, 197. Tenon, the ſquare end of a piece of wood, made to fit into a mortiſe hole. Thermomeler, tan inſtrument to ſhew the degrees of Thermoſcope, § heat and cold. Fig. 270. Thread, the ſpiral ridge, that goes winding round a ſcrew. Thruſt, the action againſt a body to puſh it forward. Tight, ſtif, cloſe. Tongue, a thin ſſender piece of metal in a machine. Tool, an inſtrument to work with. Tooth, the indented part on the edge of a wheel that moves ſome other wheel. Or what ſerves to cut, or take hold on. Tranſom, an overthwart beam in a building. Triangle, an engine ſtanding on three legs, tò raiſe weights with. Fig. 195. Ti rundle, the part which is carried about by the teeth of a wooden wheel. The lantern or drum. Fi. 266, EF. Trunt, a hollow tube or box: Tumbler, a part in a machine that rolls about upon an axis, and plays back and forward. Tumbrel, a roller, or cylindrical beam of wood. Tympanum, a kind of wheel placed on an axle, and bas ſtaves or rounds inſtead of teeth, and is carried about by a great wooden heel. A trundle or drum. Fig. 266. EF. U. Valve, a piece of wood, &. ſo fitted into a hole, that it opens and lets a fluid paſs through one vay,; and ſhuts and ſtops it, the other. Fig. 2068. V. . Aſucting valve is that where the water follows the piſton. A4 forcing valve, when it is driven through before it. Vane, a fail, or fan; generally to ſew the point of the vind. an affection of motion, and is that by which a body paſſes over a certain ſpace in a given time. Swiftneſs, or celerit. Vibration, the moving or ſwinging of a pendulum back and forward. Vis inertiæ, a property of body, by which it reſiſts any impreſſed force, and endeavours to continue in the ſame ſtate. w. Velocity, Wallower, a Jrundie upon a horizontal axis. F™. 257, F. u an inſtrument to try the ſtrength of liquors. A Hydrometer. Web, the thin broad part of an inſtrument, as the veb of a key, &r. Wedge, an inſtrument to cleave wood. One of the mechanic powers. Weight, the tendency of bodies downward. The matter raiſed by an engine. Wheel, a machine conſiſting of an axis and a circular rim, with teeth in it, and then it is called a toothed wheel. ſmooth, a wheel without teeth, turned by a IOpc. Wheel nſ at a machine to raiſe weights. One of the mechanic powers, Fię. 30. i 5 3 Winch, u EXPLANATION OF, &c. Winch, an inſtrument with a crooked handle, to turn any thing about with. W inder, a winch or handle, to. wind about. Windleſs, a machine to raiſe great weights. On board a ſhip, it ſerves to hoiſt the anchor. It is an horizontal roller, turned round by handſpikes. Windmill, a mill to grind corn, moved by the wind. Fig. 266. V ing, a thin broad part that covers ſomething, or hangs over it. Alſo what helps to give due motion to any thing; as the hands in a water vheel; a part of a ſail, &c. Worm, a ſpiral thread running round a cylinder, forming a ſort of ſcrew. / The E ND of the TE RM S. 