O F Natural Philoſophy: With N O T E S, Ceontaining the MATHEMATICAL DEMONSTRATIONS, AND Some Occaſional RE Ma rRxS. In FOUR PARTS. VOL. I tavV lil BYy . ROWNING, M. A. Rector of AND ERBY in Lincolnſtire, and late Fellow of MAGDALEN College in Cambridge. L O N D O N, Printed for S AM. HARDING, on the Pavement in Br4 I2/ T H E t⸗ 77 PRE F A CE. I being an uſual Complaint ith thoſe who are unacquainted with Geometry, that they are diſcouraged by the Mathematical Demonſtrations, from peruſing Books of Natural Philoſophy; I apprehended that ſome Papers had drawn up for the Uſe of my Pupils in the Univerſity, would not be altogether unacceptable, if publiſhed in ſuch Form, that the Propoſitions, or Subſtance of the Book, might be read without Interruption from the Demonſtrations. I have therefore in the following Treatiſe laid down the ſaid Propoſitions, and endeavoured to prove them in a familiar and eaſly Manner, without Geometry, by way of Text: And for the ſate of rboſe who are ſtilled in that Science, have added the Demonſtrations, with ſome occaſional Remarks, by way of Notes. And whereas the Writers on this Subject have appropriated to themſelves a Stile too technical ſor Beginners, I have, in hopes of being more eaſily under ſtood, ſometimes choſe æ plainer and more popular Way of Expreſſion, though perhaps not aluqs ſo accurate. 1In the Introdution to ihe firſi Port, Notice is taken of the Method of Philoſophiſing made Uſe of by Des Cartes, and others before him, ſo far as the Deſign of this Compendium required. I ſhall add here a few Confſiderations relatiug to the Method which prevails at this Time. In the preſent Method of Philoſophiſing, all Matter is conſidered ſith reſpect to its Subſtance) as homogeneous, or of the ſame Kind ; and no other Cauſe or Principle of Action in Matter is alloed of, but what is well eſtabliſbed by Facis. Some Philo oſophors admit Elementary Fire, as they call it, among their Principles 7 or, which comes to the ſame thing, they conſider Fire as endowed ith active Powers diſtinct from thoſe of other Matier. Kell, in his Letter to Dr. Cockburn, De Legibus Attractionis, aliiſque Phyſices Principiis, makes uſe of ihree Principles, viæ. I. Empty Space. 2. The infinite Diviſibility of Quantity. 3. The Attraction of Matter. And affirms; that all Phyſics depend thereon. The firſt of his Principles ihe Reader may perbaps think ridiculous; but he may conſider, ihat at ihat Time of Day, the Notion of a Plenum was not wholly exploded : The laying down Empty Space as a firſt Principle was only calling out for Elbow-Room and a clear Stage X But not to trouble the Reader ith whaot others have done, I have choſen and every where ſtuck to three; and as oſt as a Pnænomenon occurred, which I could not account ſor by them, I have given it up as a Difficulty; not deſpuiring, but that when all the Circumſtances oſ the Phænomenon ſhall be thoroughly nown, they alone may be found ſufficient. It ſeems not conſiſent with the Regard a Philoſopher ſbould have to the Uni formity of Nature, every where obſervable, to call in a new Principle at every hnotty Point. Theſe which I make uſe are, Firſt, Attraction of Gravitation. That is, a Diſpoſition in Bodies to move towards each other, even when at great Diſtances aſunder. Secondly, Attraction of Coheſion. That is, a like Diſpoſition in Bodies to move tovards each other, but diſinct from the former, in as much as it is obſerved to take Place only when the Bodies are very near together. Thirdly, Repulſion, or a Diſpoſition in Bodies, whereby in ſome Caſes they endeavour to avoid, or fly from each other. The firſt of theſe is Matter of daily Obſervation. Thus a Ball let go from the Hand falls to the Ground. The ſecond may be ſeen in the following Inſtance. A ſmall Portion of a Fluid forms itſelf into a Sphere or Drop : Which can only happen from a Diſpoſition in the Particles of which it conſiſis, to come as near as poſſible to cach other. IE An Inſtance of the third is thiss. If Air incloſed in a Bladder, be ſqueeæed into a leſs Compaſs; the Air within, when the Preſſure is taken off, reſtores the Bladder to its former Siæe: A plain Indication that the Particles of which the Air conſiſls, endeavour to avoid or fly from each other (a) Theſe Diſpoſitions in Bodies are not the Reſult of any Mechanical Cauſe (a) See another Inſtance of this Diſpoſition, in Part lII. Page 161. Note m of this Compendium. vhatever  that is, ſuch as may aoriſe from the Effluvia of Bodies, or the Action of any other material Subſtance (b): They are therefore the Act of an immaterial Cauſe, in Virtue of which inactive Matter performs the Offices for which it was deſigned. From (b) Demonſtration. In the firſt Place it is well nown, that if Gravity acts upon Bodies with the ſame Degree of Intenſeneſs, whether they be in Motion or at Reſt, it may be demonsitrated, that Bodies, when projected, will deſcribe Parabola's; and that when vibrating in Cycloids, their Vibrations will be iſocronous, &c. In the next Place it is as well knoun, that Bodies when projected do deſcribe Parabola’s, and that when vibrating in Cycloids, their Vibrations are iſocronous, &c. Prom which two Propoſitions it demonſiratively follows, that if Gravity be the couſe of the abovementioned Effects, it muſt act upon Bodies with the ſame Force, whether they be in Motion or at Reſi. Again, it is well known, that, if Attraction of Coheſion acts upon Rays of Light with the ſame Degree of Intenſeneſs, whatever be the Velocity they move with, it may he demonſtrated, that the Ratio of the Sine of the Angle of Incidence to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction, will be givenn. But in Refraction of Light, the Ratio of thoſe Sines is given in Fact; if therefore Attraction of Coheſion le the Couſe of the Refraction of Light, it muſt act upon Rays of Light with the ſame Intenſeneſs, whatever Velocity thy move vith. But no Euvia of Bodies, no material Subſtance, and in sbort no material Cauſe whatever, can act with the sſame Intenſeneſi, or have the ſame Effect upon a Body in Motion, as upon the ſame Body at Reſt; becauſe as it is From the firſt and third Principle , together with the Properties of Matter enumerated in the firſt Chapter of this Compendium, which Properties muſt be always underſtood, the Elaſticity or Spring of the Air, and from thence the Nature and Propagotion of Sound are accounted for. Aud from the Spring of the Air conſidered as being augmented by Heat, and diminiſbed by Cold, as it is obſerved to be, and the Airs being very uell known to Mathematicians, to whom I addreſi this Note, Body can only act upon Body, according to the Sum or Difference of their Motions. It remains thereſore, that the tuo llim herein mentioned, are not the Reſult o any material Cauſe whatever: Which is one Part of ĩ Propoſition to be demonfiraied. As to the other Diſpoſition in Bodies, their Repulſion, fince Rays of Light are alſo affected by it, as it appears the;s are by an Experiment. of Sir Iſaac Newtons, referred to in the foregoing Note, it may very reaſmably be ſuppoſed, though we don't at preſent know the exact Law of its Action, to affect Bodies in Motion after the ſame Manner that it would do the ſume at Reſt, and that it therefore is alſo the Reſult of no material Cauſe whatever. (c) The Law or Mauner wherein theſe Principles aræ obſerved to act in different Cirtumſtances, are determined from Facis, in Part I. Chap. 3 The Law of the third, ſo far as it relates to the Air, will be found in Part IL. Chap. 3. of this Compendium. at the ſame time affected by the firſt Principle, the Phnænomena of the Winds are explained. By the ſecond Principle, the Cobeſion of Matter, the various Degrees of Hardneſs obſervable in it, the Diſſolution of Bodies by Fluids, vith other chemical Operations; and in particular the Phænomena of Fermentation, and conſequently the Cauſes of Thunder and Lightning, &. By this Principle alſo the riſing of Fluids in ſmall Tubes, and from thence the aſcent of Sap in Vegetables are accounted for; all vhich Particulars, except the tuo firſt, are treated of in the ſecond Part of this Compendium: as alſo the Reſraction of Light, and conſequently all that Train of Phænomena depending thereon, which is the Subject of the third Part. By the firſt Principle, the ſeveral Circumſtances relating to falling Bodies, and to the Motion of Projectiles, together with the Doctrine of Pendulums, ſireated of in the firſt and and likewiſe all thoſe which relute to the Preſſure of Fluids ſtreated of in the ſecond Part) are determined. And above all is deduced that moſt curious Doctrine of central Forces, juſt touched upon in the firſt, but largely and fully explained in the fourth Part, by which ſ(aſuming that the heavenly Bodies were at ſirſt put into Motion by their Creator) ve are enabled to aſſign the Cauſe of the Continuation thereof, with all its Modifications and Irregularities; to determine the neceſſary Shape of thoſe Bodies ; and to account for the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, &e. Difficulties, too great ſeemingly for human Reaſon to ſurmount Some of the Phænomena which I have not been able to give a ſatisfactory Account of, from the abovementioned Principles, are the Reflection of Light, its Emiſſion from luminous Bodies, and the Formation and Aſcent of Vapour. This may be only owing to the want of ſtances of thoſe Phænomena; rhat is, more ſufficient Data, or Facis to found their Solution upon: So that we ore not to conclude immediately, that the Principles are inſufficient; but rather to wait vith Patience: The Diligence of others may render that eaſy, which our utmoſt Efforts at preſent are not able to ſurmount. However, as a Reader unacquainted vith Studies of this Kind, may wonder that ſo many of the Phænomena or Appearances of Nature, ſould be accounted for by ſo few Principles; and becauſe it may be a Means of giving him ſome Inſight into the Subject of theſe Sheets, I will here lay down the following Protpoſitions, which are immediately deducible from the Principles, and alſo nearly connected with the Phænomena 1o be accounted for by them; by means of which, he will more readily perceive the Connection or Relation between the one and the other PROPOS ITION I. Matter is an unactive Subſtance; that is, it is quite indifferent either to Motion or Reſt; inſomuch that the leaſt Force imaginable acting upon it vwill move it, if at Reſt; and alter its Courſe when moving: And further no Body has a Power either of putting it ſelf into Motion, or of ſtopping or altering its Courſe when it does move. Notwithſtanding which, every Body acts upon all others (provided their Diſtances be not too great) perpetually endeavouring to put them into Motion. Hence we have the true Idea of the Gravity or Weight of Bodies belonging to the Earth, and their Diſpoſition to deſcend towards it on all Occaſions. Thoſe Bodies are equally indifferent to Motion or Reſt; but by Virtue of the firſt Principle are attracted, that is, drawn towards the Sun, the Moon, the reſt of the Planets, and the Ear h but towards this laſt more ſtrongly than 1wards any of the reſt; and ſo they tend, gravitate, or are heavy towards that The Reaſon that they are atiracted more forcibly towards the Earth, than towards thoſe other Bodies, is, that although it be one of the Laws of the firſt Principle, that it operates according to the RRuantity of Matter in Bodies, and therefore ihe Attraction of the Sun ſhould bhe ithe moſt prevalent, in as. much as that Body contains the moſt Matter; yet it is another Law of that Principle or Diſpoſition, that it acts more ſtrongly according to the nearneſs of Bodies to each other: This latter Conſideration in the preſent Caſe, overbalances the former and ſo the Bodies i us tend towards the E arth. PROP O8 IT ION II. If a large round Body be covered every where with ſmaller ones to an ſface; and if thoſe ſmaller ones tend towards the large Body, by virtue of the firſt Principle, and are, at the ſame time, diſpoſed to fly from each other by virtue of the third; and ſuppoſing farther, that when they touch or are very near each other, their Diſpoſition to avoid each other exceeds their Tendency to the large Body, and when they are at a certain greater Diſtance from each other, that Diſpoſition is leſs than their Tendency to the large Body: Then will thoſe ſmaller Bodies keep at certain Diſtances from each other, and conſtitute an elaſic, compreſſible Subſtance ſurrounding that large Body, and gravitating towards it on all Sides. Hence an Idea of the Nature and Condition of the Atmoſphere ſurrounding the Earth, with all its Properties. N. B. When I ſay a Body tends æo another, I dont mean that it moves 1wards it, but only that it would move towards it, if nothing prevented. Thus, a Bird while mounting aloſt into the Air, tends towards the Earth, as much as one that is falling down; for the one would fall as well as the oiher, v nothing prevented. P R OO I  ION III. If, while the abovementioned ſmaller Bodies are in the State ſuppoſed in the foregoing Propoſition, any one, or more of them, be made to move ſuppoſe for Inſtance half way) towards the next, it will by virtue of the third Diſpoſition, drive or impel thoſe it comes nearer to, cloſer together; which Bodies, when that other moves back again ſas it will immediately do, being repelled by them) will recede from each other again: That is, a kind of tremulous Motion will be communicated to them by that other, and for the like Reaſon, by them to the next; and ſo on through the whole, or at leaſt to a great Diſtance from where it began. AHence we may form an Idea how Sound is excited by the Tremors of a Body during its Vibration, and propagated through the Alir. PROPOS ITION IV. One of the Laws by which the ſecond Principle is obſerved to act, iĩs, that Bodies act upon one another, not in Proportion to the Quantity of Matter they contain, as by the firſt Principle; but only according to the Largeneſs of their Surfaces, and the nearneſs of the Surface of one Body to that of another. From hence we may under ſtand, that ſuch Particles of Bodies as are flat or ſquare, and ſo ſituated among each other as to touch or be very near one another in many Points, vill conſtitute what we call an hard Body, and thoſe Particles which are more round, or ſo ſituated that leſs Portions of their Surfaces are near together, will attract one another ith a leſs Force, and ſo form a ſoſter Body; thoſe which are round, or nearly ſo, will attract one another ſtill leſs, and alſo ſlide more eaſily over one another, and ſo form what we call a fluid Body. PROPOS ITION V. When two Bodies meet together, if the Particles which conſtitute the one, be diſpoſed, by Virtue of the ſecond Principle, to move towards thoſe of the other with a greater Degree of Force, than the Particles of either Body are diſpoſed to move towards themſelves; thoſe of the firſt will leave it, and run in among thoſe of the ſecond: And for the ſame Reaſon, thoſe of the ſecond will ſever from that, leave it and enter in between thoſe of the firſt. And i the Motion with which this is done, be very violent, and the Bodies be of the inflammable Kind, theirParticles by thus rubbing and claſhing one againſt another will be fufficiently heated to take Fire, and will burſt out into Flame. Hence Diſiolutions, Fermentations, Exploſions, Eruptions of Vulcano's, Thunder, Lightning, Aurora Borealis. With all otheor Phænomena of that Tribe. PROPOS ITION VI. If a Pipe, open at both Ends, and of a very ſmall Bore, have one End dipped into Water, the Water will run up into the Pipe above the Surface of the Water on the outſide (being drawn up by the Tendency it has by the ſecond Principle to that Part of the inner Surface of the Pipe, which ĩs juſt above it, as it riſes) till that inner Surface which is ſtill juſt above it, be loaded with as great a Weight of Water as that Tendency can ſupport. Hence a right Notion of the Aſcent of Sap in Vegetables; the Suction of Fluids by Spunges: With all other Phænomena reducible to that Head. PROPOS ITION VII. If a Body moving right forwards, but obliquely with reſpect to the Surface of another Body, at length comes ſo near that Body as to be diſpoſed by the ſecond Principle to tend towards it; inſtead of continuing to go right on, it will turn out of its Way towards that Body before it comes at it; and conſequently will ſtrike or enter it in a nearer Place; and in a leſs oblique Direction, than it would have done, in caſe it had gone right on. If it enters the Body, it ſtill keeps turning out of its Courſe the ſame Way as before, till it has got ſo far within it, that there ſhall be as many Particles of the Body behind it to attract it backwards, as there are before it near enough to attract it forwards: After which it goes right on in iĩts laſt acquired Direction, till it comes near the other Side; for while it is ſurrounded with as many Particles to attract it one Way as another, it is the ſame thing as if it were not attracted at al. When it has got ſo near the other Side, that there are fewer Particles before it to attract it forwards, than there are behind it, near enough to attract it backwards, it then begins to turn out of its Courſe towards the inſide of the Body; that is, from that Side of the Body towards which it is going; and continues to bend its Courſe the ſame Way, till it has got ſo far out of the Body, that there are no Particles of the Body behind it, near enough to it to attract it any more. Aſter which it purſues an undiſturbed Courſe in the Direction it acquired laſt of allæ Hence we have a juſt Idea of the Refraction of Light with all the Phænomena ariſing therefrom; which are no cther than ſo many Caſes of this Propoſition. PROPOS ITION VIII. If ſeveral Bodies be moving right forwards, and at length be attracted by another Body, as ſuppoſed in the foregoing Propoſition, but ſome with greater Degrees of Force or Intenſeneſs, than others; thoſe which are attracted with the greateſt Force, will turn the fartheſt out of their Way towards that Body; and conſcquently if all of them, before this happened, were moving in one Direction, they will be made to part from each other, and move different Ways. Hence an Idea of the different Refrangibility of the Rays of Light. PROPOS ITION x If 2æ Body be made to move from another Body, towards which by the firſt Principle it tends, its Motion will be retarded continually; that is, it will move ſlower and ſlower: If it moves towards that Body, its Motion will be continually increaſed; and unleſs it be made to move directly to or from it, its Courſe will always keep bending towards it, ſo that it ſhall deſcribe a Curve, concave, or hollow, on the Side next the Body. Hence all the Phænomena of falling Bodies, and of Projectiles. PROPOS ITION X. If a Body, that by the firſt Principle tends towards another Body, moves towards it on the Surface of an inclined Plane, its Motion ſas in the foregoing Propoſition) will be continually increaſed; and if it moves from it on the ſame Plane, its Motion will be retarded continually, but leſs in Proportion to the Obliquity of the Plane: (that is, leſs in Proportion as the Plane deviates from the Perpendicular) the Interpoſition of the Plane preventing in ſome Meaſure the Effect its Tendency to the other Body, would otherwiſe produce. And the Velocity ] it acquires by rolling down one Plane, will by virtue of its Inactivity, or that Diſpoſition Bodies have to continue their State of Motion or Reſt, inable it to roll up another fitly diſpoſed. Hence the Solution of the Phæno mena of Bodies deſcending on inclined Planes, and the Vibration of Pendulums. PROP OS ITION XI. If a Body, acted upon by the firſt Principle, be cauſed to move to or from another, in any other Direction than ſuch as paſſes through the Center of that Body, the firſt Body when left to itſelf, will begin to bend its Courſe towards that other Body; and if the Direction it moves in and the Velocity it moves with, be properly adjuſted to each orher, it will move quite round that Body without touching it or coming to it: and if that Adjuſtment be ſuch, that the Body ſhall return to the Place it ſet out from with the ſame Velocity and Direction it had when it was there before, it will revolve round that other Body over and over r again in the ſamo Path, From hence we have the Solution of the Motion of the primaery Planets round the Sun, and of ihe ſecondary ones round the Primary. PR OP OS  T ION xII. If a Body be revolving about another as in the laſt Propoſition, and a third Body approaches them, towards which they both ſhall alfo tend, the Motion of the revolving Body will be diſturbed: That is, its Path will be altered, and Irregularities in its Courſe will enſue; becauſe its Tendency to that third Body in ſome Parts of its Courſe will conſpire with, and in others perhaps be oppoſite to its own Motion. And not only ſo, but the Tendency it has to the Body about which it revolves, will in ſome Situations be increaſed, and in others be diminiſhed by the Action of the third; which will alſo conduce towards altering its Courſe. Hence Hence the Lunar Irregularities, and all. other Diſturbances in the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies on their too near Approach towards each other. PrROPOS ITION XIII. Imagine a large Body covered all over with ſmaller ones tending to its Center: Suppoſe alſo a diſtant Body, towards which they all tend, but the little ones with leſs Degrees of Force than they do towards the Body they cover. Then will ſuch of thoſe ſmaller Bodies, as are neareſt the diſtant one, loſe Part of their Tendency to the Body they cover; and ſo will thoſe ſmaller ones which are fartheſt off, or placed on the oppoſite Side the large Body. But, as to thoſe ſmaller Bodies, which are at the ſame Diſtance from the diſtant Body with the Center of the large Body itſelf, their Tendency Tendency to the Body they lie upon, will be increaſled. The reſt will have their Tendency increaſed or diminiſhed more or leſs, according to their Nearneſs to thoſe whoſe Tendency is increaſed or diminiſhed the moſt ſã). Hence ariſes the Difference in the Weights Bodies have upon the Eaorths Surface, at the Approach and Departure of the Heavenly Bodies, ſbut chieflty of the Moon,) to or from that Side of the Earth where the Bodies are; and conſequently the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the Water riſing where its Weight or Tendency to the Earth is diminiſbed, and ſinting at the ſame Time in thoſe Places where its Weight is augmentedl. That the Approach and Departure of the Moon ſhuld couſe æ greater Difference in the Weight of Bodies on the Earth, than the Ap(d) What is affirmed in this and the foregoing Propoſition, depends on a Train of Reaſoning too long to he inſerted here. To underſtand it throughly, read Chapters the 18th and i9th of Pari the Fourth. proach and Departure of the other Heavenly Bodies, is owing to the nearneſs of the Moon to the Eartb; which Confſideration in ihis Caſe overbalances the Conſideration of her Smallueſs, the above- mentioned Effects depending in a great Meaſure, on the Proportion the Diameter of the Earth bears to the Diſtance of the Heavenly Bodies. PROP OS I TION XIV. If a Body, whoſe Parts tend to the Center thereof, conſiſts wholly of a Fluid, or be partly ſolid and partly fluid, provided ſome of the Fluid be at the Surface, and very diſtant Parts thereof communicate with each other; and the Body have no Motion about its Axis, it will ſettle into a ſpherical Form, the mutual Tendency of its Parts towards each other, contracting it into the leaſt poſſible Shape. But if it revolves about its Axis, all its Parts will endeavour to fly off from that Axis; but fuch as are fartheſt from the Axis, more than the reſt: Conſequently thoſe Parts in its Surface, which are the fartheſt from the Extremities of that Axis, being alſo fartheſt from the Axis itſelf, will have a greater Endeavour to fly off, than ſuch as are nearer thoſe Extremities; beſides, as is evident, the former will endeavour to fly off directly from the Center, but the latter not ſoo. The above- mentioned Endeavour therefore in the former will take off a much greater Degree of their Tendency to the Center than the Endeavour of the Iatter will; and fince the fame may be ſaid of thofe which are at any other aſſignable equal Diſtances from the Center, all thofe which lie between the Center of the Body, and ſuch, as are fartheſt from the Extremities of the Axis, will have their Tendency to the Center much more diminiſhed; than thoſe will, which lie between the Center and the ſaid Extremities: Theſe latter Parts therefore will preſs in towards the Center, overbalance the former, and raiſe them to a greater Diſtance from it than they were at beſore, reſtoring thereby an Equilibrium of the Parts of the Body one among another. On which Account the Body will aſſume a flattiſb or oblate Form. That is, fuppoſing Lines drawn through the middle of its Axis at right Angles therewith, thoſe Lines will be lengthend and the Axis itſelf will be ſhore-'d : Hence the Figures of the Heavenly Bodies. PROPOS ITION XV. The Impetus or Force wherewith a Body in Motion endeavours to proceed forwards, depends not only on the Quantity of Matter in that Body, but likewiſe on the Swiftneſs the Body moves with: Thus, the Stroke of an Hammer is not only according to the Bulk or Weight of its Head, but is alſo according to the Swiftneſs of the Motion it ſtrikes with. If therefore two Bodies of equal Quantities of Matter be ſuſpended at the Ends of a Lever of equal Arms, each of them when the Lever turns on its Center, having equal Degrees of Swiftneſs or Velocity, will therefore have the ſame Impetus or Force whereby they endeavour to proceed (being in like Circumſtances with reſpect to both thoſe things, which alone can give the one a Force or Tendency to move with, ſuperior to the other) and conſequently neither of them vill preponderate. If one of the Bodies be larger than the other, the larger Body having the ſame Velocity with the other, but more Matter, will have the Advantage, and preponderate. If the Arms of the Lever are unequal, and the Bodies equal, that Body which is at the greateſt Diſtance from the Center of Motion, moving the quickeſt, vill have the Advantage over the other that way, and overpoiſe it. So that the leaſt Body or Power, imaginable, may be made to equiponderate, overpoiſe, or keep in Motion the greateſt, by being applied to fuch a Machine, and in ſuch Manner, that when the Machine moves, what it wants in Weight or Force, may be made out by the Velocity it has, compared with the Velocity the Body has at the ſame Time, which is to be equiponderated, over-poiſed, or moved by it. This holds equally in all Machines, and is the Foundation of their Theory. PROPOS ITION XVI. Imagine the Surface of a large round Body to be covered every where, or in Part, with ſmaller ones to an equal Height, and that theſe ſmaller ones tend towards the large Body by the firſt Principle; imagine alſo the whole Maſs of ſmaller ones divided into Columns reaching from top to bottom; thoſe Columns, if their Baſes be equal, will equiponderate, or be an equal Counterpoiſe to one another; and ſo they will, if their Baſes be unequal: For in this Caſe the Columns being of unequal Size in Diameter, if a larger Column ſubſides, the lower Parts of that Column (to find Room for themſelves) will raiſe a ſmaller Column farther than the larger one ſettled in the ſame time, and in ſuch Proportion that, what the little Column wants in Weight, will be made out to it in Velocity; and conſequently, according to what was ſhewn in the foregoing Propoſition, the little Column vill be a juſt Balance to the greater. Farther, if in the abovementièned Suppoſition, there be a Body among thoſe ſmaller ones, heavier than a Bulk of them equal to its own Bul, a Column of which that Body is a Part, will be heavier than any other Column of an equal Baſe; it will therefore ſubſide, permitting the Body to come to the Bottom: if the Body be lighter than a Bulk of the ſmaller ones equal to its own Bulk, a Column, of which it makes a Part, will be lighter than any other;3 the Body therefore will be buoy'd upwards, till it riſes ſo far out above the Surface, that it, together with the Column below it, may be a Counterpoiſe to another Column of equal Baſe. Hence the Effects oſ the Preſſure of Fluids upon one another, and upon Solids immerſed in them. ProrPos ITION XVII. Imagine the Surſace of a large round Body covered every where, or in Part, with ſmaller ones to an equal Height; and that theſe ſmaller ones tend towards the large one by the firſt Principle, and that they are at the ſame time diſpoſed to fly from one another by Virtue of the third, conſtituting thereby an elaſtic Subſtance ſurrounding that large Body, as in Propoſition the ſecond; and let them be divided into Columns, as in the laſt Propoſition. And let it be farther ſuppoſed, that the Diſpoſition in thoſe ſmaller Bodies, whereby they endeavour to depart from each other, is capable of being increaſed by Heat; and that at the Bottom of ſome of theſe Columns, that Diſpoſition is actually increaſed, but no where elſe, or at leaſt not in ſo great a Degree: then will the Bodies, where that Diſpoſition is increaſed, diffuſe themſelves into a larger Space, and ſo taking up more Room than an equal Number in the neighbouring Columns, a Column of which they are a Part, will become lighter than a neighbouring one of an equal Baſe For, ſince the Bodies in the lower Parts of this Column are more diſtant from each other, than ſuch as are in other Columns, this Column cannot contain ſo many of them; that is, it cannot be ſo heavy as another of equal Baſe, unleſs it be longer; that is, unleſs the uppermoſt Parts thereof ſtand out above the Tops of the neighbouring Columns; but this they will not do; for by Virtue of the Tendency thoſe Parts have to the large Body, they vwill immediately (like Water raiſed above the Banks, which before confined it) ſpread themſelves every Way. This Column therefore, which, acC cording to the foregoing Propoſition, before this happened, was a Counterpoiſe to thoſe, which are round about it, being now become lighter, is no longer ſo. The Conſequence of which is, that the lowermoſt Parts of the neighbouring Columns, will preſs in under this from all Sides to reſtore the Equilibrium. Neither can the Equilibrium be reſtored, ſo long as the Place we have been conſidering remains hotter, than thoſe which are round about it. For, ſince the Bodies, that come in, will ſpread themſelves into a larger Space by Means of the Heat they receive there, and fill up more Room, than the like Number in another Column of equal Baſe, the Column to which they belong, will, for the Reaſons abovementioned, always be lighter than another of equal Baſee And conſequently, according to the Tenour of the foregoing Propoſition, the neighbouring Columns will overpoiſe it, whatever Dimenſions, as to their Baſes, we ſuppoſe them to be of. magine the likte to happen to a Column or Columns of the Earth's Atmoſphere, and the loer Parts of the neighbouring Columns ruſbing in accordingly at the Bottom from all round, and you have an adequate Idea of the Couſle and Nature of the Winds; every Stream of the Particles of ihe Atmoſphere ruſbing in, as above, being a diſtinct Wind blowing from that Point of the Compaſs from which they come. And if you conceive the Center of that warmer Space to ſbift its Place variouſly upon the Surface of the Earth, you then get the Idea of the ſeveral Sorts of them, as the Trade Winds, Monſoons, &c. For Inſtance, if it ſbiſts regularly along the ſame Path, it cauſes Trade Winds ; if now forwards, and then backwards, Monſoons, &. i Theſe are the Principal Phænomena in Natural Philoſophy that are independent of each other ; the reſt are for the moſt Part, no other than ſo mony portitular Caſes, Circumſlances, or Conſequences of theſe, or, in ſbori one way or other related to them. For the Solution of which, I refer the Reader to the Book it ſelf. From a due Conſideration of the Propoſitions here laid down, the Reader vill be able to form a true Judgment of the Nature and Buſineſs of Natural Philoſophy ; will ſee the Uniformity and Conſiſtency of the ſeveral Parts thereoſ with each other, and therein the wonder ful Wiſdom and Contrivance of the ſupreme Being, in chooſing ſo ſbort and eoſy a Method of producing ſo great a Variety of Effecis. There is one Thing more I thin proper to be taken Notice of, before I put an End to this Preface; viz. That it has been a ſtanding Objection againſt all Natural Philoſophy in general; that whereas it aſcribes Effects to natural or mechanical Cauſes, acting by fixed and unalterable Laws, it 1herefore excludes a Providence and ihe immediate Care and Protection of the ſupreme Being, mating him no other than an Idle Spectator of Things here below. In Anſwer to this, it is to be conſidered in the firſt Place, that the Principles of the Philoſophy which is now received, are ſo far from being mechanical Cauſes, at leaſt thoſe which are here made Uſe of, that, as above demonſtrated, they are the very Reverſe; and conſequently can be no other than the continual acting of God upon Matter, quently Natural. Philoſophy, by endeavouring to account for the Phænomena of Nature by thoſe Principles, it is evident that it is ſo far from excluding the Deity from being concerned in the Affairs of this World ; that it tends to ſbew that none are performed without his Order- and Birection. either, ſecondly, does Natural Philoſophy inculcate, that the Laws by which thoſe Principles act, are fixed and unalterable: The Accuſation is therefore foreign. But to conſider this Matter a little more particularly. QuU}When, in Natural Philoſophy, æ Principle is ſaid to act according to a particular Law, the Meaning is not, that it acts neceſſarily and unalterably ſo; but only, that it does ſo ordinarily, and in common Caſes. Doubtleſs the Author, both of Matter and of thoſe very Priuciples by which it acts, can, notithſlanding thoſe Principles, couſe it to be not differently from what it would do in conſequence of them alone, and ſo by that means produce Effecis contrary to the common Courſe of Nature, whenever he ſball think proper. That he has done ſo, when wiſe Ends required it, appears from Hiſtory That it may be done a Thouſand Ways, unperceived by us, is evident. For Inſtance, though Lightning may be accounted for by theſe Principles; and in all Probability is ordinarily the Reſult thereof; yet who vill affirm, that in any one particular Caſe, that thoſe Principles formed ihat very Lightning, or that its Courſe was directed by them ? Upon the whole therefore, to preſume, that the ordinary and common Courſe of NVature is not ſometimes altered, is haſty and P R E F A CE. Firſt Edition. Line Inſtead of Read, I dele is 233 incerted inſerted APPENDIX to Part I. Firſt Edition. 34. Cuve Courſe Force in the other; and BG the Time 2 and 3 Time in the other  in one Caſe, and MN the Time in the other P A RT III. Second Edition2 iſituated at at, ſituated to 23 and 25 LM, BL LMq; BL P A RT IV. Firit Edition. 32 xv ;il. xXVI 13 CA EA 1 and2 II and 1i3 12 and 14 H E C ONTE NTS. P A R T I. MECHA NICS. E H E Introduction, Page r CHAPTER I. Of the Properties of Body, 7 CuAP. II. Of Vacuum, IO CHAP. III. Of Attraction and Repulſian, 12 CHAP. IV. Of the Laws of Motion, 20 CHAP. V. Of fulling Bodies, 24 CHAP. VI. GF ihe Deſcent of Bodies on oblique Planes, and of Pendulums, 28 CHAP. VII. Of Projectiles, 35 CHAP. VIII. Of Central Forces, 43 CHAP. IX. Of the Communication of Motion, A48 CHAP. X. Of the Mechanical Powers, 58 ArPENDIX tO PART I. CHAPTER I. OF ihe Vibration of a Pendulum in a Cycloid, CHAP. II. Of the Centers of Oſillation and Percuſſim, P A RT III. Hydroſtatics and Pneumatics. ER I. Of the Phænomena which ariſe from ihe mutual Action of the Particles of Fluids upon one another, Page 3 II. Of the Effect Fluids have on Solids immerſed therein, 27 III. x the Air, 33 IV. Of the Reſiſtance of Fluids, 41 tion I. OF Sound, 47 II. Of Capillary Tubes, 57 III. x the Origin of Fountains, 73 IV. Of the Barometer, 83 V. Of the Origin of the Winds, II 5 VI. Of the Formation and Aſcent of Vapours and their Reſoliion into Rain, Snow and Hail, I30 VII. Of the Cauſe of Thunder and Lightning, and of the Aurora Borealis, 143 VIII. Of Fermentation, 170 P A R T III. OP T ICS. ER I. Of the Nature and Propagation of Light, Page II. Of the Cauſe of Refraction and the bai whereby it is performed, 9 III. Of the Refraction of Light in paſſing through plain and ſpherical Surfaces, 18 IV. Of Lenſes, and the Manner in which Rays are affected in paſſing through them, 44 V. Of the Eye, 53 VI, Of ihe Nature of Viſion, 56 VII. Of the Appearance of Objects ſeen through Media of different Forms, ition I. Of the Horiæontal Moon, VIII. Of the Manner wherein Light is reflected, 0 IX. Of the Refiection of Light from plain and ſpherical Surfaces, IOO X. Of the Appearance of Bodies ſeen by Light reftected ſrom plain and ſpherical Surfaces, 118 XI. Of the different Refrangibility in the Rays of Light; of the Colours the diſtinct Species of them are diſpoſeil to excite; and of the Couſe of that Fim of Colours which is ol ſervable i in Bodies, XII. Of the Quai ualifications in Bodies, which di 5r them to reflect the Rays of different Colours, 147 XIII. OfF the Cauſe of Oparcity and Tranſparenqy in Bodies, I54 IL. ſA the Cauſe of Refraction of Light, 158 v Microſcopes and Teleſcopes, 169 the Rainbow, 189 Dita Camera, and the Magic Lantern, 210 P A R T IV. ASTRONOMY. roduction, ge 3 ER I. Of the Bodies which compoſe the Solar At their real Viotion, II the fixed Stars, 25 )f ſuch of the apparent Motions of the heavenly Buii as ariſe ſrom the Motion of the Earth itt its Axis, IV. Of the apparent Motion of the Sun ariſing ſ the Earths revolving about it, 35 V. Of the Earths annual Paratiun, the Nuu©bæ of the Poles, and the Preceſſion of ihe Equinoctial Points, 52 VI. Gf the Phænomena which ariſe from the Motion of the Earth, and of the inferior Planets Mercury and Venus, conjointly, 58 VII. Of the Phænomena which are owing to thæ Motion of the Earth, and ihat of the ſuperior Planets, Mars, Fupiter and Saturn, conjointly, 66 VIII. Of the Phænomena of the Moon, 71 IX. Of the Eelipſes of the Sun and Moon, 86 X. Of the Phænomena of the Satellites of Jupiter and Saturn; their Eclipſes and Occultations: And alſo of Saturs Ring, 93 XI. OF ihe Comets, 98 XII. Of the Parallax of th? heavenly Bodies, 113 XIII. Of ihe Reſraction of the Atmoſphere, and the Crepuſculum or Twilight, 11 XIV. Of the Doctrine of the Sphere, 1I23 XV. The Deſcription of the Orrery and the Globes, 147 XVI. Of the Equation of Time, 178 XVII. 5 the Diviſion of Time, 181 XVIII. Of the Forces neceſſary to retain Bodies revolving in circular and other Orbiis, 203 XIX. The Lunar Irregularities, the Proceſſion of the Equinoctial Points, the Nutation of the Poles of the Earth, and the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, accounted for, 249 CoM? E NDIOUS SYS TEM oOF Natural Philoſophy. P ART I. The INTRODUCTION. O Vild and extravagant have been the S Notions of a great part of Philoſophers, both ancient and modern, that it is hard to determine, whether they have been more diſtant in their ſentiments ſfrom truth, or from one another;3 or have not exceeded the fancies of the moſt fabulous Writers, even Poets and Mythologiſts. This was owing to a precipitate proceeding in their ſearching into Nature, their neglectingthe uſe of Geometry and Experiment, the moſt neceſſary helps to the finding out Cauſes and proportioning them to their Effects. THEIR manner of Philoſophizing was to BVvC bodies certain arbitrary properties, ſuch as beſt ſervd their purpoſc in accounting for the Phænomena  of Nature; from Whence proceeded ſo many various Sects of Philoſophers; every one aſcribing a different cauſe to ihe ſame appearance, as his particular genius and imagination led him. TnE chics agreement obſervable among moſt of the Ancient Philoſophęrs conſiſts in this, vig. that they conceived all bodies as compoſitions of Air, Earth, Fire, and Water, or ſome one or more of theſe, from Whence they acquired the name of Principles or Elements, which they ſtill retain. EPICURUS advancd a little farther, and aſferted, that though bodies conſiſted of ſome onc or more of theſe, yet that they were not ſrictly Elements, but that they themſelves confited of Atoms; by an accidental concourſe of vhich, (as they were moving through infinite ſpace in lines nearly parallel) qll things received theis Form and manner of Exiſtence ſ DrS CARTES has contrived an Hypotheſis very different from the reſt, he ſets out with a ſup-  BV a Phænomenon of Nature is meant any motion or ſituation of bodies among one another, which offers is ſelf to the notice of our ſenſes, and is not the immediate reſult of the action oſ an intelligent Being. + For the Opinions of the Ancient PEiloſopher conſult Diogenes Laertius and Stanliss Lives. poſition that the Univerſe at firſt was entirely full of matter, that, from this matter when firſt put in motion, there would neceſſarily be rubbed off (by the grinding of the ſeveral parts one againſt another) ſome particles ſuſficiently fine to paſs through the hardeſt and moſt ſolid bodies without meeting with any reſiſtance: of theſe conſiis his Materia ſubtilis, or Materia primi Elementi. He imagined that from hence alſo would reſult other particles of a globular form, to which he gave the name of ateria ſecundi Elementi. Thoſe which did not ſo far loſe their firſt figure, as to come under the denomination of Materia primi or ſecundi Elementi, he call'd Materia tertii Elementi; and maintaind that all the variety, which appears in natural bodies was owing to different combinations of thoſe Elemenits. HE likewiſe ſuppoſes that God created a certaim quantity of Motion and allotted it to this mals of Matter, Which therefore (being oreated) can no more be annihilated without an omnipotent hand, than Body it ſel?ſ; in conſequence of vhich he was obliged to teach, that the quantity of motion is always the ſame: ſo that if all the Men and Animals in the World were moving, yet ſtill there would be no more motion, than when they were at reſt; the motion loſt A 2 being being transferd to the æther. So unaccountable are the notions of this great Philoſopher, that it is ſurprizing his doctrine ſhould have met with ſuch univerſal reception, and have got ſo ſtrong a party of Philoſophers on its ſide, thar notwithſtanding it was more abſurd, than the Schoolmens Subſtantial Forms; they muſt all be cxploded to make way for his ingenious Hypotheſis. DES CARTES has been ſaid by a late Writer to have joyned ro his great genius an exquiſite skill in Mathematics, and by mixing Geometry and Phyſics togother to have given the World hopes of great improvements in the latter. But this Wrirer ought to have been told that what he look'd upon in Des Cartes's Book of Principles as Demonſtrations, are only llluſtrations, there not being a Demonſtration from Geometry in all his Philoſophical Workst. THE preſent method of Philoſophizing eſtabliſid by Sir Iſaac Newion is to find out the Laws of Nature by experiments and obſervations. To this, with a proper application of Geometry, is oving the great advantage the Mt. Woiun in his Relections on Ancient and Moder Learnin. t. See this Subject diſcuſ'd more àt lIrge in Xriſs Introduction to his Examination of Dr. Burne?s Theory &e. Second Edition. preſent Syſtem of Philoſophy has over all the preceding ones, and the vaſt improvement it has received within the laſt Age. It is indeed in vain to imagine, that a Syſtem of Natural Philoſophy can be framed by any other method: for without. obſervations it is impoſſible we ſhould diſcover the Phænomena of Nature, without experiments we muſt be ignorant of the mutual actions of bodies, and without Geometry we can never be certain whether the cauſes aſſign'd be adequate to the effects ve would explain, as the various Syſtems of Philoſophy built on other foundations evidently ſhev. THIS Way of ſearching into Nature was firſt propoſed by my Lord Bacon*, proſecuted by the Royal Society, the Royal Academy at Paris, the honourable Mr. Boyle, Sir Iſaac Newton, &c. WHAT vonderſul advancement i in the knowledge of Nature may be made by this method of enquiry, when conducted by a genius equal to the work, will be beſt underſood by conſidering the diſcoveries of that excellent Philoſopher laſt mentioned. To him it is principally owing, that we have now a rational Syſtem of Natural Philoſophy; tis he who, by purſuing the ſure and unerring method of rea-  See his Novum Organam. The Properties of Body. T being the deſign of Phyſcs or Natural Philoſophy to account for the Phænomena of the Material World, it muſt be our method to begin with laying down the known prope:ties of Body. THESE are I. Solidity. 2. Extenſion. 3. Diviſibility. 4. A capacity of being moved from place to placee 5. A Paſſiveneſs or InactivityTheſe are all the eſſential properties of Bodies that we are acquainted with, and that they are eſſential, appears from what follows. I. SoL1DITY, called alſo Impenetrability, ĩs that power which Body has of excluding all others out of its place. THAT Body, as ſuch, muſt be endued vith this property follows from its nature, for otherviſe to bodies might exiſt in the ſame place. which is abſurd. The ſofteſt are equally ſolid with the hardeſt; for ve find by experiment, that the ſides of a Bladder filled with Air or Water, can by no means be made to come together . n At Florence a hollow Globe of Gold was ſill'/d with Water, and then exactly clos'd; the Globe thus clos'd was put into a Preſs driven by the force of Screws; ; the Water finding no room for a nearer approach of its particles toward each other, made ita way through the pores of that cloſe Metal ſtanding in drops like Dew on the outſide, before the Globe would yield to the violent Preſſure of the Engine. V. Lockd's Ef=ay B. 2. c 4. 2. THAT Body is extendèd, is ſelf evident, it being impoſſible to conceive any Body which has not length, breadth and thickneſs, that is, Extenſionn. lli : 3. IT is no leſs evident that Body is diviſible, for ſince no two particles of Matter can exiſt in the ſame place, it follows that they are really diſtinct from cach other, which is all that is meant by being diviſible. IN this ſenſe the leaſt conceivable particle muſt ſtill be diviſible, ſince it will conſiſt of parts, which will be really diſtinct **. To illuſtrate this by a familiar Inſtance: Let the leaſt imaginable piece of matter be conceived lying on a ſmooth plane ſurface, 'tis evident the ſurface will not touch it every where, thoſe parts therefore, which it does not touch, may be ſuppoſed ſeparable from the reſt, and ſo on àas far as we pleaſe;3 and this is what is meant vhen we ſay matter is infinitely diviſible. ll * This Propoſition is demonſtiated Geometrically thus, ſuppoſe the line 4D (Fig. 1.) perpendicular to BF and another as G H at a ſmall diſtance from it alſo perpendicular to the ſame line; with the Centers CC C &c. deſcribe Cireles cutting the line G H in the points ę, æ, æ, &c. Now the greater the Radius 4C is, the leſs is the part e H. But the Radius may be augmented in infinitum, and therefore the part ?H may be diminiſhed in the ſame manner; and yet it can never be reduc'd to nothing, becauſe the Circle can never coincide with the right line 4F; conſequently the parts of any magnitude repreſented by GH mæy be diminiſhed in inſinitum.  E. D. V. Xeiſs Introd. ad Phyſ. Præl. 3, 4, 5Graveſandes Elem. Math. Phyſ. L. I. c. 4. Schol. How far maãtter may actually be divided, may in ſòme manner be conceivd from hence æ, that a piece of VWire, gilt with ſo ſmall a quantity as 8 grãins of Gold, may be drawn out to tHe length of r3000 feet, the whole ſurface of it ſtill remaining coverd vith Gold . A quantity of Vitriol bẽeing diſſolved and mixd vith 9000 times as much Water, vill tinge the whole, conſequently the Vitriol will be divided into as many parts as there are viſible portions of matter in that quantity of Watert. THERE arè Perfumes, which, without ã ſenſible diminution of their quantity, ſhall fill a very large ſpace with their odoriferous particles, which muſt therefore be of an inconceivable ſmallneſs, ſince there will be a ſufficient number in every part of that ſpace, ſenſibly to affect the organ of ſmelling. 4. THAT all matter is moveable follows from its belng finite: and to ſuppoſe it poſitively  We have a ſurptiæing inſtance of the minuteneſs of ſome partsof Matter from the nature of Light and Viſion. Let a Candle be lighted and placed in an open plane, it will then be viſible two miles round, conſequently was it placed two miles above the ſurficèe of the Earth, it would fill with luminous particles a Sphere; whoſe diameter was four miles, and that before it had Ioſt any ſenſible part of its weight. The force oſ this Argument will appear better when the Readeris acquainted with the cauſe of Viſion. li l 3l t Keiſs Introd. ad Phyſ Præl. 5. Religious Philoſ. Coniompl. 25: : l I Mem. de I Acad. 1706. infinite is abſurd, becauſe it conſiſts of parts . 5. BY the Paſſiveneſ or Inactivity of matter, (commonly calld its Vis Inertiæ) is meant the propenſity it has to continue its ſtate of Motion or Reſt, till ſome external force acts upon it. This will be farther explaind under the fir?t Law of Nature. C H A P. II. Of Vacuum. I. LACE void of Matter is call'd empty Space or Vacuum. lI. IT has been the opinion of ſome Philoſophers, particularly the Carteſians, that Nature admits not a Vacuum, but that the Umiverſe is entirely full of Matter, in conſequence of vhich opinion they were obligd to aſſert, that if every thing contain'd in a veſſel could be taken out or annſhilated, the ſides of that veſſel, however ſtrong, vould come together; but this is contrary to experience, for the air may be drawn out of a veſſcl by means of rthe Air Pump, which will nevertheleſs remain vhole, if its ſides are ſtrong enough to ſupport the weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere. III. SHOULD it be objected here, that it is impoſſible to extract all the Air out of a Veſſel, and  See Mr. Laus Tranilation of ABD. Kiug de Origine Malt Note 3. that there will not be a Vacuum on that account; the anſwer ĩs, that ſince a very great part of the Air that was in the Veſſel may be drawn out, as appears by the quick deſcent of light Bodies in a Receiveræ, there muſt be ſome vacuities berween the parts of the remaining Air: which is ſuſficient to conſtitute a Vacuum. Indeed to this it may be objected by a Carteſian, that thoſe vacuities are filld vith Materia ſubtilis that paſſes freely through the ſides of the Veſſel, and gives no reſiſtance to the falling Bodies; but ſince the exiſtence of this ſame Materia ſubrilis can never be provd, ve are not oblig'd to allow the objection, eſpecially as Sir Iſaac Newton has found, that all Matter affords a reſiſtance nearly in proportion 1o its denſity t. THERE arc many other Arguments to prove this, particularly the motions of the Comets through the Heavenly Regions without any ſenſible reſiſtance; the different weight of Bodies of the ſame bulk &e. but thoſe being not yet explaind are not ſo proper to bè inſiſted on in this place. * By this Term is meant any Veſel, out of which we extra&: the Air by the Air Pump. 1 Newtoni Opt. ꝑ. 310. I i;  A C H A P. i. Of Atraction and Repulſion IQESIDES the forementioned propetI ties of Mater, it has alſo certain powers or active Principles, known by the names of Attraction and Repulſion, probably not eſſontigl or neceſſary to its exiſtence, but impreſied upon it by the Author of jis Being, for the better performance of the Offices for which it was deſignd. II. ATTRACTION is of two kinds. 1. Coheſion, or that by which the ſeveral particles whereof Bodies conſiſt, mutually tend toward each other. æ. Gravitation, or that by which diſtant Bodies act upon cach other. III. THE Attraction of Coheſion is provd from abundance of Experiments, of which ſome of the moſt obvious are as follows, I. LET a ſmall glaſs Tube (commonly call'd a Capillary Tube) open at both ęnds, be dipt into a Veſſel of Water, the Water vill immediately riſc yp in the Tube to a certain height above the level. This riſe of the Water is manifeſtly owing to the Attraction of thoſc particles of the glaſs which lie in the inner ſurface of the Tube immediately above the Water: accordingly the quantity of Water raiſed is always proportionable to the largeneſ of that ſurface x. llt 2. LET two ſpheres of Quickſilver be ꝓlaced near each oſher and they will immediateIy run together and form one globule. IV. THE Laws of this Attraction are i14. That it acts only upon contact or at very ſmall diſtances, for the Spheres mentioned in the laſt experiment will not approach adh other till they are placd very near. æ. It acts according to the breadth of the ſurfacs of the Attracting Bodies, and not according to their quantities of Matter. Let there be two poliſ'd glaſ' Plates laid one upon another in ſuch a manner, as to touch at one end, and there make a very ſmall angle: if two unequal drops of oil be put between theſe plates at equal diſtances from the linę of contact, ſo that the Icaſt may touch both glaſſes, they will then both move towards the ends that touch, becauſe the Attraction of the  The heights the Water riſes to in different Tubes, are obſervd to be reciproœally as the diameters of the Tubes, from whence it follows rhat the quantities raiſed are as thę ſurfaces which raiſe them. 3ll ilili Dem. Let there he to Tubes, the diameter of the ſirſt double to that of the ſecond, the Water will riſe half as high in the firſt as in the ſecond, now was ĩt to riſe equally high in both, the quantity in the firſt would be four times as great as in the ſecond, (Cylinders of equal hęights being as the ſquares of their diameters; 11. El. 14) therefore ſince it is found to riſe but half as high, the quantity is but twice as much, and therefore as the diameter; but the ſurfaces of Cylinders are as their diameters, therefore the quantities of Water raiſed are alſo as the ſurfices. . 2. D. See a Diſſertation on this Subject. Part. II. m ſurfaces inclines that way; but the largeſt, touching the glaſſes in moſt points, will move the faſteſt. 3. Tis obſervd to decreaſe much more than as the ſquares, of the diſtances of the Attracting Bodies from each other increaſe: that is, whatever the force of Attraction is at a given diſtance, at twice that diſtance it ſhall be more than 4 times leſs than before *. li V. FROM hence it is eaſy to account for the different degrees of hardneſs in Bodies; thoſe whoſe conſtituent particles are flat or ſquare, and ſo ſituated as to touch in many points, will be hard; thoſe particles which are more round and touch in fewer points will conſtitute a ſofter Body; thoſe which are ſpherical will form a fluid t. VI. ATTRACTION Of Gravitation is that by which diſtant Bodies act upon each other. This is ſeen every day in the falling of heavy Bodies toward the Earth. VII. THE Laws of this Attraction are 1. That it decreaſes as the ſquares of the diſtances between the Centers of the attracting Bodies increaſe. Thus a Body at the ſurface of the Earth , e. about the diſtancę of 4000 miles from its Center,) which weighs 10 Pounds, if it was plac'd 4000 miles above the ſyrface of the Earthã. e. twiee as far diſtant from thę Center as before, V. Keilii Opera Ed 410. p. 626. 4 Newtoni Optic. ꝑ 335. would weigh 4 times leſs, if thrice as far, times le' &c. The truth of this Propoſitiom is not to be had from Experiments, (the utmoſ~t diſtance ve can convey Bodies to, from rthe ſurface of the Earth, bearing no proportion to their diſtance from its Center,) but is ſufficiently clear from the Motions obſervd by the Heavenly Bodies. 2. Bodies attract one another with forces proportionable to the quantities of Matter they contain; for all Bodies are obſervd to fall equally faſt in thæ exhauſted Receiver, where they meet with no reſiſtance. From whence it follows, that the action of the Earth upon Bodies is exactly in proportion to the quantities of Matter they contain; for was it to at as ſtrongly upon a leſs Body as upon a larger, the leaſt Body being imoſt eaſily put into motion wvould movæ the faſteſt Accordingly it is obſervable that the weight of a Body is the ſame, whether it be whole or ground to powder*. VIII. FRoM hence it follows, that vas a Body to deſcend from the ſurface toward the Center of the Earth, it would continually become lighter and lighter, the parts above attracting it as well as thoſe below, in which caſe it is demonſtrated by the Mathematicians that the Gravity would decreaſe with the diſtance of the Body from the Center. * Graveſande Lib. 4. Chap. 11. Cotes's Preface to Neavtors Princip. 1 Dsm. Let there be a Body as P, (Fig. 2.) placed any heæ Scholium. I may be proper to obſerve here, that when Philoſophers ſpeak of Bodies gravitaring to. or attracting cachi other, rhat Body is: ſaid to gravitate to another, WhicHi moves towards it, while: the other actually is; or appears to be at reſt; and this other is ſaid to attract the formeri; though indeed the force bewithin a concave ſpherę;,, as: B;, whicht let us ſuppoſe divided' into an infinite number of. thin. concentriœ ſurfaces; I ſay- the Body Pwill be attracted” equally each way by any one of theſe, v.5: the: interior THXL. ILet thore be: lines-as 7L, HX, &c. drawn through any point, of. the Body P, in ſuch-a manner as to form the ſurface of two ſimilar figures, ſuppoſe Cones, the diameters of whoſe baſes may: bo: IH; XL, which let be infinitely ſmall. Theſe baſes (being asthie ſquares of the lines: IH, L) (20. Elem. 6) will be directly as the ſquares of their diſtances from P (for the Triangles being infinitely ſmall are ſimilar.) But thoſe baſe⸗ include all the particlescof matter in the interior ſurface, that are oppoſite to each other; the oppoſite attractions are therefore in the ſame ratio with thoſe baſes, that is as the ſquares of the diſtances ? H, P I. But the attraction is- inverſely as the ſquares of the diſtances of the attracting. Bodies, §. 7: i: ææ inverſely as the ſquares of the ſame diſtances P X PI;, theſe two ratios deſtroying eãch other, it is evidem; thatif the concavity of the Sphere was filld with Matter, that, alone, whiẽh lies nearer the Center than the Body, ean affect: it, the reſpective actions of all the parts, that are more diſtant,, being equal, and in contrary. directions, ſince the ſame is: demonſtrable ofany of the remaining concentric ſurfaces. Let us then ſee what effect that which lies nearer the Center than the Body will have upon it, whieh may be confidered as a Sphere, on whoſe ſurface the Body is placdd. The diſtances of each particle of Matter from the Body, (taken collectively) will be as the diameter of the Sphere, or as the Radius, i. æ. as the iſtance of the Body from the Center; their action therefore upon the Body will be inverſely as the ſſquare of that diſtance ⸗ but the quantity of Matter will be as: the cube of that diftance; (18. Elem. 12.) the attraction thereſore wiſl be alſo in that proportion. Now, theſe two ratios being com pounded, the attraction will be only as the diſtance of the Body from the Center. Q E: D. ing mutual and equal on both ſides (as will be explain'd under the 3d Law of Nature) the ſame Term might be apply'd to cither the gravitating or attracting Body. IT is farther to be obſervd, that when we uſe the Terms, Attraction or Gravitation, we do not thereby determine the Phyſical Cauſe of it, as if it proceeded from ſome ſuppoſed occult quality in Bodies; but only ue thoſe Terms to ſignify an Effect, the Cauſe of which lies out of the reach of our Philoſophy. Thus ve may ſay, that the Earth attracts heavy. Bodies; or that ſuch Bodies tend or gravitate to the Earth: though at the ſame time we are wholly ignorant whether this is effected by ſome power actually exiſting in the Earth or in Bodies, or external to both: ſince it is impoſſible any error in our reaſonings can follow from hence; it being evident, that all the conſequences of ſuch tendency muſt be the ſame, let the cauſe be where or what it vill. X. REPULSION is that property in Bodies, whereby if they are placed juſt beyond the Sphere of each others Attraction of Coheſion, they mutually fly from each other. THUS if an oily Subſtance lighter than Water be placed on the ſurface thereof, or if a piecc of Iron be laid on Mercury, the ſurface of the fluid will be depreſd about the Body laid on it. This depreſſion is manifeſtC ly occaſion'd by a repelling power in the Bodies, which hinders the approach of the Fluid tovards them. BUT it is poſſible in ſome caſes to preſs or force the repelling Bodies into the Sphere of one anothers attraction; and then they will mutually tend towards each other, as when ve mix Oyl and Water till they incorporate XI. BESIDES the general Powers forementioned there are ſome Bodies that are endued with another call'd Electricity Thus Amber, Jet, Scaling-Wax, Agate, Glaſs and moſt kinds of Precious Stones attract and repel light Bodies at conſiderable diſtances. THE chief things obſervable in theſe Bodies are. 1. That they don't act but when hcated. 2. That they act more forcibly when heated by rubbing than by fire. 3. That when they are well heated by rubbing, light Bodies vill be alternately attracted and repell'd by them, but without any obſervable regularity whatever. 4. If a line of ſeveral yards in length has a Ball or other Body ſuſpended at one end, and the other end be fixed to a glaſs Tube; when the Tube is heated by rubbing, the Electrical Virtue of the glaſs will be communicated from the Tube to the Ball, which will attract and repel light Bodies in the ſame manner as the  We have an undeniable Proof of this Repulſive Force in Sir Iſaat Neavtou's Opticks. B. 3. and Query 31. glaſs it ſelf does. 5. If the glaſs Tube be emptied of Air, it loſes its Electricity *. XII. LAsTLY, the Loadſtone is obſerv'd to have Properties peculiar to it ſclf, as that by which it attracts and repels Iron, the Power it communicates to the Needle and ſeveral others t. CH AP. IV. Of the Laws oſ Motion commonly called Sir Iſaac Newton's Laws of Nature. L LL Bodies continue their ſtate of reſt or uniform motion in a right line, till they are made to change that ſtate by ſome external force impreſſecd upon them. THIS Lawv is no other than that univerſal property of Bodies, call'd Paſſiveneſs or Inactivity3 whereby they endeavour to continue the State they are in, whatever it be. Thus a Top only ceaſes to run round on account of the reſiſtance it meets with from the Air, and the friction of the plane whereon it  See Haulshee's Experiments. Philoſoph. Tranſact. Numb. 326. + Several ſolutions of theſe Properties of Electricity and Magnetiſm have been attempted by different Philoſophers, but all of them ſo unſatisfactory as not to deſerve a particular account m this Place. See Chambers's Dictionary in Electricity, and Des Cartes Opera Philoſophica. P. IV. §. 133. with ſeveral others cited in Quaꝗiones Philoſiphicæ. Ea moves. And a Pendulum when left to vibrate in vacuo, where there is nothing to ſtop it but the friction ariſing from the motion of the pin on Which it is ſuſpended, continues to move much longer than one in the open Air. II. THE change of Motion, producd in any Body, is always proportionable to the force, whereby it is effected; and in the ſame direction, wherein that force acts. THIS is an immediate conſequence of this Axiom, the Effect is always proportionable to its Cauſe. For inſtance, if a certain force produces a certain motion, a double force will produce double the motion; a triple force triple the motion &c. Ifa Body is in motion, and has a new force impreſſed on it in the direction wherein it moves, it will receive an addition to its motion proportional to the force impreſſed; but if the force acts directly contrary to its motion, the Body will then loſe a proportional part of its motion: again, if the force is impreſſed obliquely, it will produce a nev direction in the motion of the Body, more or leſs different from the former in proportion to its quantity and direction. * This caſe is expreſſed more accurately by Mathematicians thus. If the proportion and direction of æ forces acting upon a Body at the ſame time, be repreſented by the ſides of a Parallelogram, the Diagonal of that Parallelogram will repreſent the proportion and direction of theĩr united forces. Dem. Let the Body 4 (Fig. 3.) be impell'd with a force, which would carry it to E, in thę ſame time that another, acting III. REACTION is always contrary, and equal to Action; or the actions of two Bodies upon cach other are equal, and in contrary directions. TH US, ſuppoſe a Stone or other Load to be drawn by an Horſe; the Load reacts upon the Horſe as much as the Horſe acts upon the Load; for the harneſs, which is ſtretch'd equally between them both ways, draws the Horſe towards the Stone, as much as the Stone towards the Horſe, and the progreſſive motion of the Horſe is as much retarded by the Load, as the motion of the Load is promoted by the endeavour of the Horſe *. This will upon it in the direction 4D, would carry it to D. Imagine, that while the Body paſſes to E, the line 4D in which the Bo dy moves by the other force) moves to EB, in a direction parallel to ĩt ſelf; when the Body has advanc'd to G in the line 4E, the line 4 D will have got to GF, and the Body will have paſſed over ſuch a part of it GH, as bears the ſame proportion to the whole line GF, as AG does to AE, that is GH (the ſhorter ſide of the Parallelogram GM, is to GF, or, which is the ſame thing, to EB (the ſhorter ſide of the .Parallelogram ED,) as AG (the longer ſide of the former) is to AE (the longer ſide of the latter,) from whence the Parallelograms are ſimilar, El. 6. Dæf. 1. and conſequently, by 24. El. 6. the point H is in the Diagonal, that is, the Body will always be found in the line 4B. QE. D. Coroll. From hence we have an eaſy method of reſolving a given motion into any two, or more directions whatever; viæ. by deſcribing a Parallelogram about the given direction as a Diagonal, the two ſides oſ which will repreſent the directions ſought. Thus, ſuppoſe a Body was impell'd in the Line 48, we may conceive ĩt as acted upon by two forces at the ſame time, one towards E, the other towards D, or any other two whatever, provided the lines be drawn of ſuch length, that, when the Parallelogram is compleated, the given line 4B ſhall be its Diagonal. P It may be thought perhaps that (two equal and contraty be better explain'd from the following inſtance; let a Perſon ſitting in a Boat drav another æqually heavy towards him, they will both move tovards each other with equal velocities Iet the Boat he ſits in be the lighteſt, and it vill move the faſteſt; becauſe the action being equal on both ſides, the ſame quantity of motion will be given to each Boat, that is. the leſſer vill have the greater velocity *. WE have a farther confirmation of this from Attraction. Suppoſe two Bodies attracting one another, but hinder'd from meeting by ſome other Body placed between them: if their tendencies towards each other are not equal, then the Body that is between them, will be preſſed on one ſide more than on the other, and conſequently the ſtronger preſſure overcoming the weaker, they cannot remain at reſt, but will all move on continually in that direction wherein the ſtronger force acts; which is both contrary to the firſt Law of Nature and Experience. This may be tryd with a Loadſtone and Iron; which, being put into proper Veſſels contiguous to one another and made to forces deſtroying one another) the Horſe will in this caſe not be able to move at all, becauſe the Load draws him back, as much a3 he draws the Load forwards. But it is to be obſervd that the ftrength of the Horſe is not properly exerted upon the Load but upon the Gromd; conſequently the Ground reacting and continuing at reſt puſhes the Horſe forward with juſt ſo much force as the Horſe exerts, above what is counteracted by the Load. * See the diſtinction betwęen Motion and Velocity. o: 9 Chap. 5. Falling Bodies. a3 float on water, vill be an exact counterbalance to each other, and remain at reſt, whatever be the attractive power of the Loadſtone, or the proportion of their reſpective magnitudes. TuESE Laws receive an abundant additional proof from hence, viz. that all the concluſions that are drawn from them, in relation to the Phænomena of Bodies, how complicated ſoever their Motions be, are always found to agree perfectly with obſervation. The truth of which ſufficiently appears in all parts of the Newtonian Philoſophy æ. C H A P. V. The Phænomena of Falling Bodies. I. H E Laws of Nature being thus explained, ve proceed to account for thoſe Phænomena, which are ſolvable by them. II. TO begin with thoſe of Falling Bodies. Conſtant experience ſhews, that Bodies have a tendency towards the Earth, which is call'd Gravity, the Laws of which were enumerated in Chap. 3. §.7. Il. THE height, Bodies can be let fall from, bears ſo ſmall a proportion to their diſtance from the Center of the Earth, that it cannot  See theſe Laws explaind more at large b Cheyne in his Principles of Philoſophy. Xeiſs Introd. ad Phyſ. Præl Ii, 12. ſenſibly alter their Gravity; which therefore may be conceivd, as acting conſtantly and uniformly upon them, during the whole time of their fall: from whence they muſt neceſſarily acquire at every inſtant, an equal degree of velocity, which on that account will conſtantly increaſe, in proportion to the time the Body takes up in falling. IV. THE ſpaces Bodies fall through in different times, reckoning from the beginning of their fall, are as the ſquares of thoſe times; thus, a Body will fall 4 times as far in 2 minutes, as it does in one, and 9 times as far in 3, 16 times as far in 4 &r. * æ Inh order to demonſtrate this Propoſition, it will be neceſſ to lay down the following Theorem. viæ. That the ſpace a Body paſſes over, with an unifo is in a ratio compounded of the time and velocity. longer a Body continues to move uniformly, the it moves over; and the faſter it moves during val of time, the farther it goes; therefore the ſpace ĩs compounded of both, that is, is had by multiplying one other. Coroll. Therefore the area of a rectangle, one of whoſe repreſents the celerity a Body moves with, and the othe time of its motion, will expreſs the ſpace it moves through. This being premiſed, let the line 4B (Fig. 4) repreſent t time a Body takes up in falling, and let B C expreſs the celeri acquird by its fall; farther, let the line 4B be divided into a indefinite number of ſmall portions, ei, im, mp, &c. and let æf; ih, mn, ꝓ q, &. be drawn parallel to the baſlee Now ijt is eviden from §. 3. (viæ. that the velocities are as the times in which th are acquird) that the lines ef, i t, mn, pꝗ, &c. being to each othe 4. El. 6.) as the lines 4e, Ai, A m, Ap, && Will repreſent the celerities in the times repreſented by theſe: that is, æf will be as & the velocity of the Body in the ſmall portion of time æi, andwill be as the velocity in the portion of time im; in like mannex V. FrROM this Propoſition it follows, that a Body falls 3 times as far, in the ſecond portion of time, as it does in the firſt; 5 times as far in the third; 7 times in the fourth, and ſo on in the ſeries of the odd Numbers: for otherwiſe, it could not fall 4 ſpaces in 2 minutes, and 9 in 3, as the Propoſition aſſerts. VI. THE ſpaces deſcribd by Falling Bodies in different times are as the ſquares of the laſt acquird velocities. For by §. 4. the ſpoces are as the ſquares of the times, and bys. 3. the velocities arc as the times; therefore the ſpaces are alſo as the ſquares of the velocities. VII. THE ſpace a Body paſſes over from the beginning of its fall in any determinate time, is half what it would deſcribe in the ſame ?q Will be as the velocity in the portion oftime 0, which portions of time being taken infinitely ſmall, the velocity of the Body may be ſuppos'd the ſame, during any whole portion; and conſequently, by the Corollary of the foregoing Theorem, the ſpace run over in the time æi with the velocity æſ may be repreſented by the rectangle if: in like manner the ſpace run over in the time im with the celerity i , may be expreſ'd by the rectangle m4; and that run over with the celerity mn in the time mp, by the rectangle pn; and ſo of the reſt. Thereforethe ſpace run over in all thoſe times will be repreſented by the ſum of all the rectangles, that is, by the triangle 4 BC, for thoſe little triangular deficiencies, at the end of each rectangle, would have vaniſhed, had the lines ei, i m, mp, &c. been infinitely ſhort, as the times they were ſuppoſed to reent. Now as the ſpace, the Body deſcribes in the time 4B, is repreſented by the triangle 4BC, for the ſame reaſon the ſpace paſ'd over in the time 40 may be repreſented by the triangle Aor, but theſe triangles being ſimilar are to each other, as the ſquares of their homologous ſides 4B and 4o0 (æ0. El. 6.): that is, the ſpaces repreſented by the triangles are to each other, ãas the ſquares of the times repreſented by the ſides. L E. D. D time time moving uniformly with its laſt acquird velocity *. VIII. IN like manner, vhen Bodies are thrown up perpendicularly, their velocities decreaſe, as the times they aſcend in increaſe; their gravity deſtroying an equal portion of their velocity every inſtant of their aſcent. IX. THE heights Bodies riſe to, when thrown perpendiculatly upwards, are as the ſquares of the times ſpent from their ſirſt ſetting out, to the moment they ceaſe to riſe. That is, if a Body is thrown with ſuch a degree of velocity, as to continue riſing twice as long as another, it ſhall aſcend 4 times as high; if thrice, 9 times as high, &c. THESE two are the converſe of the 3d and 41h Sections. C H A P. VI. Of the deſcent of Bodies on oblique Planes, and of Pendulums. HEN a Body deſcends on an oblique Plane, its motion is contiually acce* For let the time be 4B, and the Iaſt velocity BC, the ſpace the Body runs over, while it is acquſring that velocity, is 4BC, but the ſpace it would paſs over In the time 4B, was it to move uniformly with the celerity BC, is, by the Theorem, (Note ꝓ. 24.) the ſpace 48BC D, double the former. . E. D. r See Xeil's Inuod. ad Phyſ. Præl. 11. Graveſande L. I. 17. IV. THE velocity a Body acquires by falling perpendicularly, as much exceeds that which it acquires by falling obliquely in the ſame time, as the ſpace of its perpendicular deſcent in that time exceeds that of its oblique one *. V. A Body takes up as much more time in falling down the oblique ſide of a Plane, than it does the perpendicular height of it, as the oblique ſide exceeds the height + Dem. It is evident that in all motions equally accelerated, the ſum of the velocities produced in any time (that is the ſpaces run over in that time) are as the generating forces, that is, the ſpace vaſſ'd over by the Body on the oblique ſide 4C, is to the perpendicular ſpace 2 Body would paſs over in the ſame time; as the action of gravity on the Body in the direction 4T, to its per, endicular action in the direction 4B: but theſe actions are to each other, (by § the Iaſt,) as the oblique ſide to the perpendicular height, the ſ jaces therefore paſs'd over will be in the ſame proportion. Q. E. D. * Since by § the laſt, a Body falls to G, (Fig. 5.) in the ſame time another falls to B, and by (Chap. 5. §. 7.) the ſpace a falling Body paſſes over in any time, is half that which it would run over in the ſame time moving uniformly with ĩts laſt acquird velocity, it follows that the Body falling down the oblique plane would paſs over double the ſpace G, moving uniformly with its Iaſt acquird velocity, in a portion of time equal to that in which it was acquird; likewiſe double the ſpace 4B would be paſ"'d over by the other Body, moving uniformly with its laſt acquird velocity, in a portion of time equal to that in which it was acquird; but ſince the velocities of Bodies moving uniformly are as the ſpaces they run over in equal times, the velocities of the Bodies in G and B are to each other a3 double the lines AG and 4B, that is as the lines themſelves, which by §. 3are as the ſpaces run through in the ſame time, from whence the Propoſition is clear. S V Dem. The ſquare of the time in which 4C (Fig. 5.) is run over, is to the ſquare of the time in which T is run over, as AG to 4G, (by Chap. s5. . 4) that is, ſince 4C, AB, AG are conèinually proportionãl 8. Elim 6.) as the ſquare of 4C ꝑ the VI. A Body acquires the ſame velocity in falling down the oblique ſide of a Plane, as if it fell freely through the perpendicular height of it * VII. A Body takes up the ſame time in falling through the Chord of a Circle, whether it be long or ſhort, as it does in falling perpendicularly through the diameter of the ſame Circle;. VIII. UPON this is founded the Theory of Pendulums: for from hence it follows, that ſuppoſing a Pendulum could be made to vibrate in a Chord of a Circle, inſtead of an arch, all its vibrations would require the ſame time, vhether they were large or ſmallj. ſquare of 4B (by Dæf. 10. Elem. 5.) therefore the times themſelves are as the lines 4C and 4B, that is, as the oblique ſide of the Plane to the perpendicular heightt. QE. D. æ Dem. The ſquare of the velocity a Body acquires by falling to G, is to the ſquare of the velocity it acquires by falling to C, as the ſpace 4G to the ſpace 4C (by Chap. 5. § 4) that is (by 8. Elem. 6. and Def. 10. Elem. 5.) as AGq to ABꝗ. But ſince AG is run over in the ſame time 4B8 is, (ſee Note to §. 3) the velocity in G is to the velocity in B, as 4G to 4B, (by i. 4) and conſequently ſince the velocities;both in C and B bear the ſame proportion to that in G, they muſt be equal to each other. . E. D. ”ſ Dem. It was demonſtrated (§. 3.) that a Body will fall from 4 0 G, (Fig. 6.) on the inclin'd Plane 4C, in the ſame time another would fall freely to B, provided 4GB is a right angle, in which caſe 4G (by 31. Elem. 3.) is a Chord of that Circle of which 48 is the —— therefore a Body falls through the Chord &. Q. E. D. I This may be illuſtrated by conceiving the laſt figure inverted (as in Fig. 7.), where ſuppoſing the Ball ſfuſpended in ſuch a mannei, as to ſwing in the right line GA inſtead of the Arch G4, It would always fall through it in the ſame time however long or IX. FRoM hence we ſee the reaſon, why the ſhorter arches a Pendulum deſcribes, the nearer its vibrations come to an equality, for ſmall arches differ leſs from their Chords than large ones. But if the Pendulum is made to vibrate in a Curve, which Mathematicians call a Cycloid ; each ſ(Wing will then be perform'd in the ſame time, vhether the Pendulum moves through a larger or leſſer ſpace. For the nature of this Curve is ſuch, that the tendency of a Pendulum towards the loweſt point of it, is always in proportion to its diſtance from thence; and conſequently let that diſtance be more or leſs, it vill always be run over by the Pendulum in the ſame time *. ſort it was, for the inclination of the line G4 to the horizontal line BC, is not alterd by inverting the figure.  The Deſcription of a Cychid. Upon the right line 4B, (Fig. 8.) let the Circle HD E be ſo plac’d, as to touch the line in the point H, then let this Circle roll along upon it from H to C, as a wheel upon the ground, then will the point H in one revolution of the Circle deſcribe the Curve HKC, which is calld a Cycloid. Now ſuppoſe two Plates of Metal bent into the form HX and XC, and placed in the ſituation LH and L C, in ſuch manner, that the points H and C may be applyd to L, and the points anſwering to X be applyd to H and C. This done, if a Pendulum as LP, in length æqual to LH, be made to vibrate between the Plates or Cheeks of the Cycloid LC and LH, it will ſwing in the line CKH; and the ime of each vibration, whether the Pendulum ſwings through a ſmall or a great part of the Cycloid, will be to the time a Body takes up in ſalling perpendieularly through a ſpace equal to ſ E, ſhalf the length of the Pendulum;) as the Circumference of a Circle to its Diameter, and conſequently it will always be the ſame. They that would ſee a Demonſtration of this and ſeveral other things relating to this Curve, may conſult Hugens Horol. OſcilIatorium or Cotess Harmonia Menſurqrum. l x X. THE time of the deſcent and aſcent of a Pendulum, ſuppoſing it to vibrate in the Chord of a Circle, is equal to the time in vhich a Body falling freely would deſcend through eight times the length of the Pendulum. FOorR the time of the deſcent alone upon the Chord is equal to that in which a Body would fall through the Diameter of the Circle by § 7.); that is, tice the length of the Pendulum: but in twice that time iæ. during a whole vibration) the Body would fall four times as far (Chap. 5. §. 4.). that is, through eight times the length of the Pendulum. XI. THE times, that Pendulums of different lengths perform their vibrations in, are as the ſquare roots of their lengths *. XII. THE Center of Oſcillation is a point in which, if the whole gravity of a Pendulum vas collected, the time of its vibration, would not be alter'd therebyt; this is the point from  Dem. Let there be two Pendulums 4 and B (Fig. 9. and 10.) of different lengths, the time the firſt vibrates in (ſuppoſe through a Chord) is equal, to the time in which a Body would fall freely through D4, the Diameter of the Circle (as demonſtrated §. 7.); in like manner the time B vibrates in, is that in which a Body would fall through FE. Now the times in which Bodies fall through different ſpaces are as the ſquare roots of thoſe ſpaces, that is, of DA and FB, or of their halvea CA and CB, i. e. of the lengths of the Pendulums. . E. D. 4 The Rule for finding the Center of Oſcillation. If the Globe 4B (Fig. i1.) be hung by the ſtring CD, whoſe weight is inconſiderable, the Center of Oſcillation is found thus; vhence the length of a Pendulum is meaſurd, which in our Latitude, in a Pendulum that ſWings ſeconds, is 39. 2. inches. XIII. THE ſquares of the rimes in which Pendulums, acted upon by different degrees of gravity, perform their vibrations in, are to cach other, as the gravities . ſuppoſe E the Ce nter of the Globe, take the line G of ſuch æ length, that it ſhall bear the ſame proportion to ED as ED to EC, then EH being made equal to b of G, the point H ſhall be the Center of Oſcillation If the weight of the Rod CD be too conſiderable to be neglected divide CD (Fig. 12.) in I, ſo that DI may be equal to of CD, and make a line as X, in the ſame proportion to CI, that the weight oſ the Rod bears to that of the Globe, then having found H the Center of Oſcillation of the Globe, as before, divide IH in L, ſo that IL may bear the ſame proportion to L H, as the line CH bears to the line ; then will L be the center of Oſcillation of the whole Pendulum. See Huygens Horol. Oſcillat. Pag. 141, 142.  Dem. The ſpaces falling Bodies deſcend through, are as the ſquares of the times, when the gravity by which they are impell'd is given (Chap. 5. 5. 4); and as the gravity when the time is given (for the ſum of the velocities produced in any time will always be as the generating forces): conſequently when neither is given, they are in a ratio compounded of both; the ſquares of the times are therefore inverſly as the gravities. [For if in 3 quantities a, b, c; a is as be, then b: , i, e. if a is . I given, as — or as inverſy.] But if the ſquares of the times in which Bodies fall through given ſpaces are inverſly as the gravities by which they are acted upon; then the ſquares of the times in which Pendulums of equal lengths, perſorm their vibrations, will be alſo in the ſame ratio, on account ofthe conſtant equality between the time of the vibration of a Pendulum, and of the àeſcent of a Body through eight times its length (5. 1.) FROM Whence it follows, that a Pendulum vill vibrate ſlower when nearer the Equator, than the ſame when nearer the Poles; for the gravity of all Bodies is leſs, the nearer they arc to the Equator; viæz. on account of the ſpheroidical Figure of the Earth, and its rotation about its Axis, as will be explain'd hereafter. To which we may add the increaſe of the length of the Pendulum occaſiond by the heat in thoſe parts; (for we find by experiment that Bodies are inlarged in every dimenſion, in proportion to the degree of heat that is given them:) for which reaſon (Chap. 6. §. 11.) the vibrations of the Pendulum vill alſo be ſlower. C H A P. ViII. Of Projectiles. 1 BODY projected in a direction parallel or oblique to the Horizon would proceed on in infinitum in a right line, (by the firſt Law of Nature) but being continually accelerated towards the Earth by its Gravity, it will deſcribe a Curve called a Parabola *.  Dem. Let us ſuppoſe the Body thrown from 4, in the direction AB horizontally ſ Fig. 13.) or obliquely (Fig. i4.) it would (if not attracted towards th] Earth) in equal times deſcribe equal parts of the line 4B, as AC, CD, DE, &c. but if in the firſt portion of time, while it moves from 4 to C, it deſcends by its Gravi 34 Projectiles. VPart I. II. THE greateſt diſtance, to which a Body can be thrown with a given velocity, is at the clevation of 45 degrees *. it will be found in H, and while it moves fom æ to D twice as far, it wĩll move downwards to M, 4 times as far as before (Chap. 5. 5. 4) and will therefore be found in T ſuppoſing DT 4 times as long as CH. Again, while it moves to Z three times as far from A as C is, it will have moved downwards 9 times as ſar as it did in the firſt portion of time, and therefore will be found in X, provided E X be ꝗ times as large as C H &c. that is the lines CH, D I, E X, &c. will be to cach other as the ſquares of the lines AC, 4D, AE, &c. which is the property of the parabolic Curve, De L Hoſpital B. I Prop. 1. Cor. æ. and Prop. 3. Cor. 1.) and conſequently the line 4H IX, &c. which the Body moves in, whether thrown horizontally or obliquely, is a Parabola.  E. D. It is demonſtrated by the Writers on Conic Sections, that the Quotient which ariſes from the diviſion of the ſquare of the line GH by the line 4G iæ. the quantity 5u the parabolic curves, ſFig. 13. or 14.), or of the ſquare of MI ſn⸗ 4) by the line 4M viz.  or of the ſquare of NX by 4N vizæ. ſin either of AM NK& J j . 5 &c. provided thoſe Iines are all parallel to 4B which touches the curve in the point 4, is always the ſame: which Quotient is calld the Parameter of the point 4. Now the velocity, with which the Body is projected from 4, being ſex hypoth, ) ſuch as would carry it to C, in the time it would fall by its own gravity to G; and to E in the time it would ſall tio N; and ſince it would move over twice the ſpace AN in that time, had it moved uniformly with the velocity acquird at N; it follows, that the velocity it moves with from A to E, is to that which a Body acquires by falling to N, as AE to twice 4N (Chap. 5. §. 7.) or as 3 AE to 4N. But the velocity a Body would acquire by falling through a fourth part NX i of the Parameter of the point 4 viæ. : 7 7 i to the velocity it would acquire by ſfalling to N, as 4E to 24N: (ſee this demonitrated in Notè ) therefore the velocity a Body ought to be projected with from 4 to make it deſcribe the given Parabola AH IK, is equal to the velocity it would acquire by falling through a fourth part of the Parameter belonging to that point of the Parabola from whence it is projected. ll + The ſquare of the velocity acquird by a Body in deſcendI æ NX ing through à fourth part of the Parameter, or æ 75 ſquare of that which is acquird by falling through the line4 N; as 1 aMNK u to 4N, (Chap. 5. §. 6.), that is, multiply ing both terms by AN, as a Kq to ANq; and by extraction of their ſquare roots; is 2NK to AN. E. D. : orol. This aords us an eaſy method of finding what direttion iĩt is neceſſary to throw a Ball in with a given velocity, in order to ſtrike an object in a given ſituation. v. g. Let ĩt be requi?d to ſtrike an object as X with a ball thrown from 4 with a given velocity. Here it is only neceſſary to make the triangle is to the N & ANK (ſuppoſe a right line drawn ſrom 4 to X) ſuch, that i AE : or which is the ſame thing - in the triangle 4E X, may be æqual to four times the ſpace a Body muſt fall through, to acquire ſuch a degree of velocity as that with which it is intended to be thrown, and then 4E will be the direction ſoight In order to this we muſt lay down the following Lemma. Let there be a Circle as 4BC (Fig. 15.) AX a Tangent in z Læ the point 4, AB perpendicular to the Horizon and parallel to 4E ili ll KE or XI, Itay Tę =AB. For the angle BE is equal tothe angle EAK ſ32. Elem 3.), and the angle BAE is equal to the angle AE K as alternatè, thereſore the triangles 4B E and 4 E X are ſimilar; conſequently 4B is to AE, as AE to EX, and multiplying the extreme terms together, and middle terms together, B x EXAæEq :: AEq and dividing both ſides of the equation by EX, 4 B  E. D. AlI By the ſame method of arguing jſ may be proved equal to AB. The P R O B L. E M. Let it be requird to ſtrike an object as X (Fig. 16.) with a Ball projected from 4 with a given velocũty. i III. If 2 Balls are thrown at different elevations (but with equal degrees of velocity), the one as much above 45 degrees as the other below, the horizontal diſtances (or Randoms) where they both fall will be the ſame . Solution. Erect AB perpendicular to the Horizon, and equal to four times the height a Body muſt fall from, to acquire the velocity with which the Ball is to be thrown; biſect this in the point G, through which draw HC perpendicular to 4B, and meeting the lIine 4C (perpendicular to AX) in C. On C as a Center with the Radius C4, deſcribe the Circle BD; laſtly through X draw the line XE I perpendicular to the Horizon, cutting the Circle in the points £ and I; I ſay AE or 41 will be the direction ſought. AE; AI4 For by the Lemma 4Bæ 72  TR"- but (ex conſiructione) AB is equal to four times the height a Body muſt fall from, to acquire the velocity with which it is to be thrown, AE A I thereſore its equal æ or 7 is the ſame, which by the Corollary was the thing requird to determine the direction ſought, conſequently the Parabola, which the Body will deſcribe, will paſs through the point . QE. D. Coroll. 1. From hence it is evident, that if the object to be ſtruck, be placed any where in the horizontal line 40 (Fig. 17.) beyond , the Problem is impoſſible; for then H Will not touch the Circle, and the Ball will not reach that point with an direction whatever. And that when the Ball is directed towards H, it will fall on Q the greateſt diſtance it can poſſibly be thrown 10; but the angle QLH being equal to 4B H in the oppoſite ſegment (32. Elem 3.) is equal to half GH at the Center (20. Elem. 3.) which is a right one; conſequently QAH is an angle of 45 degrees. * Coroll. 2 If the object is ſituated in the horiZzontal line AQ ſFig. 18.) but nearer to A4, than the greateſt horizontal diſtance at which it may be ſtruck, ſuppoſe in X; the two directions AE and 4I with which it may be hit, are equally diſtant from the direction AH; for the angles JAH and HAE are equal, aꝶ ĩnſiſting on equal arches JH and HE (28. Elem. 3) —- _ IV. IV. The height a Body will riſe to, when thrown perpendicularly upwards, is equal to half the greateſt horizontal diſtance it can be thrown to with the ſame velocity . FROM hence wve may eaſily know hov far a Mortar-Piece, or other ſuch Machine, will carry a Ball. Let the Ball be thrown perpendicularly upwards, note the time of its aſcent and deſcent, half that is the time of deſcent, from whence we learn the height, to which the Ball is thrown, for Bodies are obſerv'd to fall in the firſt ſecond of time 16 feet, conſequently in 2 ſeconds they fall 4 times 16 feet (Chap. 5. 5. 4.) in 3, 9 times as much &e. but  4.) the perpendicular height being dou. bled will give the greateſt horizontal diſtaneæ to which that Machine will carry the Ball with an equal Charge. V. THE Randoms of two Projectiles, having the ſame degrees of elevation, but thrown vith different velocities, are as the ſquares of the velocities: for by the laſt, the Randoms are as the heights to which the Bodies thrown perpendicularly upwards will aſcend, but the æ Coroll. 7. The altitude of a perpendicular projection ĩs equal to a fourth part of the height 4B; for the velocity with which the Body is projected, is ſex hypoth.) ſuch as it would acquire by falling through a fourth part of the line 4B; but a fourth part of the line 4B is equal to half the line GH, or 4 (Fig. 1 I ) that is half the greateſt horizontal diſtance to which the Body can be thrown. See Coteſ's Harmonia Menſurarum ꝑ. 87. Xeil's Introduct. ad Phyſ. Præl i16. heights are (Chap. 5. §. 6.) as the ſquares of the velocities. : VI. SUPPOSING the motion of the Earth, all Bodies, when thrown perpendicularly upwards, deſcribe Parabolas; notwithſtanding they appear both to aſcend and deſcend in the ſame right line. THIS may very eaſily be illuſtrated in the following manner; let there be a Body carryed uniformly along the line AB (Fig. 19.) by the motion of the Earth from A towards B; as it paſſes the point C let it be projected upwards by ſome force acting underneath it in the direction CO perpendicular to the former; the Body will not thereby loſe its motion which it had in common with the Earth towards B (by the firſt Law of Nature), but vill be carryed by two motions, onc tovards B the other towards O; let us then ſuppoſe, that in the time it would have advanced forvards to ? in the line AB, it riſes upwards to M in the line CO; it will then be found in D (Chap. 4. §. 2.): in like manner ſuppoſing it vould have advanced forward to Q vhile it riſes to N, it would then be found in E, afterwards in F, then in G &c: deſcribing the Curve CGL which (from what vas demonſtrated under §. 1.) is a Parabola *. * Dem. Suppoſe the motion the Body had in common with the Earth towa-ds-B ſFig. 2o.) and that with which it is projected towards O, ſuch, as being compounded (Ch. 4. §. æ) noulq THE reaſon why it appears to a Spectator to riſe and fall perpendicularly, is becauſe he is carryed uniformly along with it by the motion of the Earth in its firſt direction. æ. Suppoſe the Spectator at C at the inſtant the Body is thrown from thence, when it arrives at D, he will be moved to P, when the Body is at E he vill be at Q &c. as is evident from what was obſerved about the motion of the Body in the Curve; and they will both meet in L Therefore ſince the Spectator imagines himſelf ſtanding ſtil, and ſees the Body alvays perpendicularly over his head, he muſt of courſe think that it riſes right up and falls right down. IT may be proper to obſerve here, that Experiments relating to the motion of projected Bodies, do not exactly anſwer the Theory, the reſiſtance of the Air deſtrQying part of their motion: for which a ſmall allowance is to be made. have produced a motion in the direction CX; it will ſollo from thence, that the path deſcribed by it will be the ſame, as iſit had been thrown in that direction from a point as C at reſt; but in that caſe it would have deſcrib'd a Parabola as CGL ſi. 1.) therefore in thiss L E. D C H A P. VIII Of Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces. HE N a Body is projected in an horizontal direction and by its Gravity made to deſcribe a Parabola as demonſtrated Chapter the laſt; the curvature of that Parabola will vary in proportion to the velocity vith which the Body is thrown, and the Gravity which impels it towards the Earth. For the leſs its Gravity is in proportion to the quantity of matter it contains, or the greater the velocity is with which it is projected; the leſs vill ir deviate from a ſtrait line, and the further it will go, before it falls to the Earth. For inſtance, if a Bullet be ſhot out of a Cannon from the top of a Mountain with a given velocity in an horizontal direction, and gocs in a curve line, ſuppoſe to the diſtance of two Miles from the foot of the Mountain before it falls to the ground; the ſame Bullet ſhot with a much greater velocity would fly to a much greater diſtance before its fal. And by encreaſing the velocity, the diſtance to which it is projected, may be encreaſed as much as you pleaſc; ſo that it will not fall to the ground, till it is arrived at the diſtance of ten, or thirty, or ninery degrees; or till it has even ſurrounded the whole Earth, and arrives at the very top of the Mountain from whence it was projected: in this caſe it will perform a ſecond revolution, and ſo on in infinitum without a new projection, provided the reſiſtance of the Air is taken away. Nay it may be projected with ſuch violence, that it will continually recede from the Earth, moving in à Curve, till at length it gets out of the Sphere of the Earth's Attraction; after vhich it will go on in a ſtraight line without ever returning Which may thus be illuſtrated. LET ABC (Fig. 21.) repreſent the Earth, M the point from whence the Body is projected in the direction MQ: it may be thrown vith ſuch force as to carry it to B before it falls, or to C, or even to go round to M, deſcribing the Circle MDM; or laſtly it may be made to deſcribe the Curve MO, till it gets out of the Sphere of the Earth's Attraction, ſuppoſe at O, going on afterwards in the infinite ſtrait line OX, there being nothing to ſtop or alter its courſe. Farther, it may be projected with ſuch a force from M (Fig. 22.) as will cauſe it continually to recede from the Earth, till it arrives at the oppoſite point G, deſcribing the curve MKXG;3 and if the point G is within the Sphere of the Earth's Attraction, the Body will return to M, deſcribing the Curve GLM exactly ſimilar to MKG; and in moving nearer and nearer to the Earth till it comes to M, will regain what velocity it loſt in going from M to õ, its Gravity conſpiring with its motion from G to M in the ſame degree in which it oppoſed it from M to G; conſequently the Body when at M having recovered the velocity with which it ſet out, will be inabled to perform a ſecond revolution in the ſame Curve as before, and ſo on. AGaIN, ſuppoſc it had been projected from the point M vith a leſs degree of force than would have carryed it round in the Circle MDM (Fig. 21.). but greater than would have ſuffered it to have fallen to the Earth at the oppoſite point F (Fig. 22.); it would alſo in this caſe have arrived at the point M from whence it ſet out; for the exceſs of velocity it would have gained in F, by its tendency towards the Earth in its way thither, over and above that with which it was projected from M, would be ſufficient to carry it off again from the Earth, till it arrived at M; and to make it deſcribe the path FP M exactly ſimilar and equal to the former, Ioſing in its way from F to M juſt ſo much velocity, as it gained by paſſing from M to F; and thereby it would be inabled to perform an infinite number of revolutions in the ſame Curve without requiring a ſecond projection. ; FROM hence it follows, that ſuppoſing a Body projected from a point at any diſtance vithin the Sphere of the Earth's Attraction, with a force ſufficient to carry it half round without falling to the ſurface, it is impoſſible it ſould fall upon any part of the other half; but will return to the point from whence it ſct out, making continual ſucceſſive revolutions in the ſame Curve; provided it meets with no reſiſtance from the Medium through which it paſſes, nor any other obſtacle to obſtruct its motion , FroM hence alſo it is clear, that, the nearer the revolving Body approaches to the Earth, the faſter it moves; its velocity being continually increaſed during the time of ĩits acceſs towards the Earth, and as much retarded during its receſs from it. And this acceleration and retardation will always be ſuch, that the Body will deſcribe equal Areas in equal times: the meaning of which is, that if we imagine a line conſtantly extended from the Center of the Earth to the Center of the Body, that line vill always deſcribe or paſs through equal ſurfaces or ſpaces in equal times, for it conſtantly * Gravity is here ſuppoſed to be inverſely as the ſquares of the diſtances from the Earth, fortis poſſible that the force by which a Body tends towards another, may vary in ſuch a manner at different diſtances, that the projected Body ſhall deſcribe a Spiral line, continually approaching to or receding from that about which it revolves. becomes ſhorter the faſter it moves, and vice versà *. AND for the ſame reaſon that a Body projected with a ſufficient velocity may by the force of Gravity be made to deſcribe a Curve round the Earth, and perform continual ſucceſſive revolutions in the ſame; it follows that the Moon, may by the ſame force of Gravity be made to revolve about the Earth, or any  Dem. Let the time in which the Body performs one revolution be divided into equal parts, in the firſt of which let the Body deſcribe the right line 4 B ſ Fig. 23.): in the ſecond part of time, if not prevented, it wouldſgo ſtraight on to c, deſcribing the line Be equal to 4B by the firſt Law of Nature; the lines SA, S B, Sc being drawn, the triangles S BA, Sc B will be equal to each other, their baſes 4B and B being equal and their heights S the ſame (38. Elem. 1.). When the Body arrives at B, let the Centripetal force by one ſingle impulſe turn iĩt out of the ſtraight line Bc into the line C: in which let it move on uniformly without receiving a ſecond impulſe till it comes to C. Let Ce be drawn parallel to S B meeting BC in C then at the end of the ſecond part of time the Body will be found in C, having deſcribed the Diagonal of the Parallelogram Nc (Chap. 4. 5. 2.) Draw SC, and the triangle S CB will be equal to the triangle SeB, (each having the ſame baſe S B and being between the ſame parallels Cc and  B) and thereſore alſo equal to the triangle S BA. For the ſame reaſon, if the Centripetal force acts in the points C, D, E ſucceſſively, ſo as to make the Body deſcribe. the ſtraight lines CD, DE, EF, &c. in ſo many equal parts of time, the triangles SCD, SDE, SEF, & will be all ęqual to one another and to the triangle S4 B. Conſequently equal Areas are deſcribed in equal times. Let us then ſuppoſe the baſes of thoſe triangles, viæ. 4 B, BC, CD, DE, &c. diminiſhed in infinitum, and likewiſe the times in which they are deſcribed; then will the Perimeter 4, B, C, D, E, F, &c. become a Curve, and any number of thoſe triangles taken together, (or their Areas) will be proportionable to the times in which they are deſcribed,  Z. p.,.,... other other Planet by the like force about the Sun, if the velocities with which they move are duly adjuſted to the forces by which they arę acted upon. WHEN a Body revolves about another in this manner, that force or power by which it is prevented from flying off (as it otherwiſe vould do in a Tangent to the Curve vhich it deſcribes) is call'd the Centripetal; the counter-action of this, by which it endeavours to fly off, the Centrifugal; theſe, by the 30 Law of Nature being equal to cach orher, are called by one common name Central Forces; that vith which the Body is at firſt projected, or continues its motion from any point, is the Projectile force; and the time in which it performs one revolution, the Periodical time. TuESE forces properly relating to the motions of the Heavenly Bodies will be more largely treated of in another place. C H A P. IX. Of the Communication of Motion. I. D EFORE we proceed to explain the Laws, by which Bodies communicatę theit motion from one to another, it is very neceſſary to make a diſtindtion berveen Motion and Velocity; which ought ro be well. obſerv'd and is. as follows, BY the Motion of a Body (ſometimes called its quantity of motion, ſometimes its Momentum) is not to be underſtood the velocity only, with which the Body moves; but the ſum of the motion of all its parts taken together: conſequently the more matter any Body contains, the greater will be its motion, though its velocity remains the ſame. Thus, ſuppoſing two Bodies, one containing ten times the quantity of matter the other does, moving ith equal velocity; the greater Body is ſad to have ten times the motion or Momentum that the other has: fortis evident that a tenth part of the larger has as much as the other whole Body. In Thort that quality in moving Bodies which Philoſophers undęrſtand by the term Momentum or motion, is no other than what is vulgarly call'd their Force, vhich every one knows to depend on their quantity of matter as well as their velocity. This is that power a moving Body has to affect another in all actions that ariſe from its motion, and is therefore a fundamental Principle in Mechanics. See it farther explained in the next Chapter. II. Now ſince this Momentum or Force depends equally on the quantity of matter à Body contains, and on the velocity with which it moves; the method to determine how great it is, is to multiply one by the other. Thu; ſuppoſc two Bodięs, thè firſt having twice the quantity of matter and thrice the velocity which the other has; any two numbers that are to each other as two to one, vill expreſo their quantities of matter ſit being only their relative velocities and quantities of matter vhich we need conſider), and any two numbers that are as three to one, their velocities; now multiplying the quantity of matter in the firſt viæ. 2 by its velocity 3, the product is 6 and multiplying the quantity of matter in the ſecond by its velocity, viz. I by I, the product is one; their relative forces therefore or powers will be as 6 to I, or the Moment of one is ſix times greater than that of the other. Again if their quantities of matter had been as 3 to 8 and their velocities as 2 to 3, then would their Moments have been as 6 to 24, that is, as I1 to 4. THis being rightly apprehended, what follows concerning the Laws of Communication of Motion by Impulſe, and the Mechanical Powers vill be eaſily underſtood. The Communication of Motion. I. In Bodies not Elaſtic. III. THOSE Bodies are ſaid to be not Elaſtic, which when they ſtrike againſt one another do not rebound, but accompany one another after Impact as if they were joyned. This proceeds from their retaining the impreſſion made .upon their ſurfaces after the impreſſing ing is occaſioried by a certain ſpring in the ſurfaces of Bodies, whereby thoſe parts, which receive the impreſſion made by the ſtroke, immediately ſpring back and throw off the impinging Body; now this being wanting in Bodies void of Elaſticity there follows no ſeparation after Impact. IV. WHEN one Body impinges on another which is at reſt, or moving vith leſs velocity the ſame way, the quantity of the motion or Momentum in both Bodies taken together remains the ſame after Impact, as before; for by the 3d Law of Nature, the reaction of one being equal to the action of the other, what one gains the other muſt loſe. Tnus, ſuppoſe two Bodies one impinging with 12 degrees of velocity on the other at reſt: the quantities of Matter in the Bodies being equal, their Moments and velocities are the ſame; the ſum in borth I25 this remains the ſame after Impact (. 4.), and is equally divided between them : 3.)5 they have therefore 6 a piece, that is the impinging Body communicates half ĩits velocity and keeps half. V. WHEN two Bodies impinge on each other by moving contrary ways, the quantity of motion they retain after Impact, is equal to the difference of the motion they had before; for by the 30 Law of Nature, that which had the leat motion, will deſtroy an equal quantity in the other, after which they vill move together with the remainder, that is the difference. THUS for inſtance, let there be two equal Bodies moving towards each other, the one vith 3 degrees of velocity, the other with 5, the difference of their Moments or velocities will be 2 this remains the ſame after Impact ũũſ 5.) and is equally divided between them (§ 3.) they have therefore one a piece: that is, the Body which had 5 degrees of velocity, loſes 3 or as much as the other had, communicates half the remainder, and keeps the other halſ *, II. In Elaſtic Bodies. VI. BoDiES perfectly Elaſtic are ſuch as rebound after Impact with a force equal to that vith which they impinge upon one another: thoſe parts of their ſurfaces, that receive the impreſſion, immediately ſpringing back, and throwing off the impinging Bodies with a ſorcę æqual to that of Impact. æ From theſe poſitions it is eaſy to deduce a Theorem, that ſhall *ew the velocity of Bodies after Impact in all caſes whatæver. Let there be two Bodies 4 and B, the velocity of the firſt a of the other b5 then (5. 2.) the Moment of 4 will be expreſſed by 4 a, and of B by Bb: thereſore the ſum of both will be ſa BL; and AaEBb will be the difference when they meet. Now theſe quantities (by §. 4. and 5.) remain the ſame after Impact; but knowing the quantities of motion and quantities of matter, we have the velocity (which §. 3. is the ſame in both) by dividing the former by the latter, ſas follows from §. 2.) therefore A b i sb , dBE ill in all cal expreſ the velocity of F JF the Bodigs aſter Impact, VII. FROM hence it follows that the action of E laſtic Bodies on each other (that of the ſpring being equal to that of the ſtroke), is twice as much as the ſame in Bodies voĩd of Elaſticity. Therefore when Elaſtic Bodies impinge on each other, the one loſes and the other gains twice as much motion as if they had not been Elaſtic; we have therefore an eaſy way of determining the change of motion in Elaſtic Bodies, knowing firſt what it would have been in the ſame circumſtances, had the Bodies been void of Elaſticity. THUS if there be two equal and Elaſtic Bodies,. the one in motion with 12 degrees of velocity impinging on the other at reſt, the impinging Body will communicate twice as much velocity as if it had not been Elaſtic, that is, by §5. 4) 12 degrees or all it had; conſequently it will be at reſt, and the other will move on vith the whole velocity of the former. VIII. IT ſometimes happens that in Bodies not Elaſtic, the one loſes more than half its velocity, in which caſe ſuppoſing them Elaſtic it loſes more than all; that is, the exceſs of what it loſes above what it has, is negative, or in a contrary direction; thus ſuppoſe the circumſtances of Impact ſuch, that a Body which has but 12 degrees of velocity, loſe⸗ 16; the overplus 4 is to be taken the contrary way, that is, the Body will rebound with 4 termine the velocity of a Body after Impact againſt an immoveable object. Let us ſirſt ſuppoſe the Object and Body both void of Elaſticity: tis evident the impinging Body would be ſtopt or Ioſe all its motion, and communicate none; if they are Elaſtic, it muſt loſe twice as much (by §. 7.) and conſequently will rebound with a force equal to that of the ſtroke. IX. IT is ſufficient if only one of the Bodies is Elaſtic, provided the other be infinitely hard for then the impreſſion in the Elaſtic Body will be double of what it would have been, had they both been equally Elaſtic: and conſequently the force with which they rebound Will be the ſame as if the impreſſion had been equally divided between the two Bodies. X. THERE are no Bodies that ve know of, cither perfectly Elaſtic or infinitely hard; the nearer therofore any Bodies approach to perfection of Elaſticity, ſo much the ncarer do the Laws they obſerve in the mutual ecommunication of their motion, approach to thoſe we have laid down. XI. Sir Iſaac Newton made trials with ſeveral Bodies, and found that the ſame degree of Elaſticity always appeared in the ſame Bodies, with whatever force they were ſtruck; ſo that the Elaſtic power in all the Bodies he made trial upon, exerted it ſelf in onc con2 ſtant proportion to the compreſſing force. He found the celerity with which Balls of Wool bound up very compact, receded from each other, to bear nearly the proportion of 5 to 9 to the celerity wherewith they met; and in Steel he found nearly the ſame proportion; in Cork the Elaſticity was ſomething leſs; but in Glaſs much greater; for the celerity with which Balls of that material ſeparated aſter percuſſion, he found to bear the proportion of 15 to I6 to the celerity wherewith they met *. XII. WE have hitherto ſuppoſed the direction in which Bodies impinge upon one another to be perpendicular to their ſurfaces: vhen it is not ſo, the force of Impact will be leſs, by how much the more that direction varies from the perpendicular; for it is manifeſt that a direct impulſe is the greateſt of all others that can be given with the ſame degree of velocity t.  Newt. Princip. Phil. pag. 21. p The force of oblique Percuſſion ĩs to that of direct, as the Sine of the Angle of Incidence to the Radius. Dem. Let there be a plane as AD ſFig, 24.) agaimt which let a Body impinge in the point D in the direction BD: which line may be ſuppoſed to expreſ the force of direct Impulſe, and may be reſolved into two others (Chap. 4. §. 2.) BC and BA4; the one parallel, the other perpendicular to the Plane; but that force which is exerted in a direction parallel to the Plane can nn way affect it; the ſtroke therefore ariſes wholly from the other force expreſſed by the line B4; but this is to the line BD, as the Sine of the Angle of Incidence 4D B to tha Radius; from XIII. THIS is the caſe when Bodies impel one another by acting upon their ſurfaces; but in forces where the ſurfaces of Bodies are not concerned, as in Attraction &c. ve muſt not conſider the relation which the direction of the force has to the ſurface of the Body to be moved, but to the direction in which it is to be moved by that force. Here the force of action will be leſs, by how much the more theſe two directions vary from cach other. My meaning in both caſes will be underſtood from the inſtance of a Ship under Sail. The force by which the Wind acts upon rhe Sail, will be leſs, by how much the more its direction varies from one rhat is perpendicular to its ſurface: but the force of the Sail to move the Ship forward, will be leſs, by how much the more the direction of the Ship's Courſe varies from that in which ſnc is impelled by the Sail. If the ſurface of the Body to be ſtruck is a Curve, then let AD be made a Tangent to D the point of Incidence, and the Demonſtration will be the ſame. * The force of oblique action is to that of direct, as the CoSine of the Angle comprehended between the direction of the force, and that wherein a Body is to bę moved thereby, to the Radius. Dem. Let FD (Fig. 25.) repreſent a force acting upon a Bod as D, and Slò: E; but let DM be the only pies jn which it is poſſible for the Body to move; the force F D may be xeſolved (Chap. 4. §. Z.) into two others FG and FH, or which ĩs equal to ĩt GD; buttis evident that only the force GD impels it towardss M. Now, FD being the Radius, GD is the Co-Sine of the Angle FDG comprehended between the two diręctions FE and GM; from whencę the propoſition ĩs clear. XIV. To this ve may add the following Propoſition, relating to oblique forces, viæ. that if a Body is drawn or impelled three different ways at the ſame time by as many forces acting in different directions; and the quantity of thoſe forces is ſuch that the Body is kept in its place by them: then will the forces be to each other as the ſeveral ſides of a triangle drawn reſpectively parallel to the directions in which the forces act *.  Dem. Let the lines 4B, AD, AE, ſFię- 26.) repreſent the 4 forces acting upon the Body 4 in thoſe directions, and by that means keeping it at reſt in the point 4 Then the forces EA and DA will be equivalent to BA4 otherwiſe the Body would be put into motion by them (contra H;poth.) But theſe forces are alſo equivalent to 4C (Chap. 4. §. 2) conſequently 4C may expreſs the other force, and E C, which is parallel and equal to 4D, may expreſs that force: but 4 CE is a triangle whoſe fides are all parallel to the given directions, therefore the ſides of this triangle will expreſs the relation of thę forces by which the Body is kept at ?t. Z æ. D. C H AP. X. Of the Mechanical Powers. I. AVING in the foregoing Chapter accounted for the Communication of Motion by Impulſe; we proceed next to conſider motion as communicated without Impulſe which is done by means of certain Inſtruments, commonly known by the names of Mechanical Powers. The uſe of theſe Povers conſiſts chiefly in managing great Weights or performing other Works with a determinate force. II. THEY are uſually reckoned five. viæ. The Lever, the Wheel and Axis, the Pully, the Screw, and the Wedge; to which ſomæ add the Inclined Plane. To theſe all Machines how complicated ſoever are reducible. III. THESE Inſtruments have been of very ancient uſe; for ve find that Archimedes, was well acquainted with the extent of their Pover, as may be inferred from that celebrated ſaying of his, Ads 5 56, 1 7l ld uoœ. By which he meant that the greateſt imaginable Weight might be moved with the ſmalleſt Power. IV. THAT Body which communicates motion to another, is called the Power; that which cęives it, the neight, V. THAT point in a Body which remains at reſt, while the Body is turning round, is called the Center of Motion. Beſides this, there are two other Centers in Bodies, I. that of Magnitude, which is a point, as near as poſſible, equally diſtant from all the external parts of the Body; 2. that of Gravity, or that about which all the parts of the Body, in whatever ſiruation it is placed, exactly balance cach other. ĩl VI. VHEN a Body communicates motion to another, it loſes juſt ſo much of its own, as it communicates to that other; the action of one being equal to the reaction of the other, See Chapter the laſt §. 4. and 5. VII. WHEN two Bodies have ſuch relation to each other (ſuppoſe them fixed to different parts of the ſame Machine) that if one be put into motion, the other will thereby have neceſſarily ſuch a degree of velocity given it, that their Moments * vill be equal; it will then be impoſſible that one ſhould begin to move vithout communicating to the other a  It was propoſed (Chapter the Iaſt) to give ſome farther explication of the term Momentum in this place, and to ſiew that the Force or Power any Body has (except ſuch as does not proceed from motion) wholly depends upon it: it being then intended to treat this Subject in the uſual way. But the method here made uſe of renders ſuch explication unneceſſary; tis ſuſficient if the Reader underſtands by it the quantity of motion in a Body, or its quantity of matter multiplied by its velocity, as defined in that Chapter. l quantity of motion equal to its own; tis evident therefore from the la©t Propoſition, that if we ſuppoſe it to begin to move; in that very inſtant it muſt loſe all its own motion by communicating it to the other Body: and conſequently will remain at reſt, communicating none at all. Now the Moments of tvo Bodies are equal (Chap. 9. §. 2.) when the velocity of the firſt is to that of the ſecond, as the quantity of matter of the ſecond to that of the firſt; for if we ſuppoſe their quantities of matter as I to 3, then by the ſuppoſition their velocities arc as 3 to I; and if we multiply the quantity of matter in the firſt viæ. I, by its velocity 3, and that of the other viæ. 3 by its velocity 13 their products are equal; their Moments are therefore by the Definition (Chap. 9. 5. I. and 2.) equal. They will alſo be equal, when the ſpaces the Bodies paſs over are in that proportion; for the times they both move in being the ſame, the ſpaces will always be as the velocitics. VIII. FroM hence it follows, that in any Machine whether ſimple or compound, the Power however ſmall may have a Moment equal to that of the Weight; provided the Machine be ſuch, that when it is in motion, the velocity of the Power ſhall exceed that of the Weight, as much as the Weight is larger than the Power; for then what the Lower vants in quantity of matter or veight vill be made up in velocity; conſequently their Moments vill be equal by §. the la, and therefore by §. 7. they will exactly balance each other; or be in æquilibrio. IX. BuT if the POower bears a greater proportion to the Weight, than the velocity of the Weight to that of the Power; it will then have a greater Momentum than the other, and conſequently may communicate ſuch a Momentum to ĩt as it will receive, without loſing all its own; the remainder therefore, if ſufficient to overcome the friction of the Machine, vill put it into motion. We proceed nov to treat of each Mechanical Power in its order, and I. Of the LEVER. X. THE Lever is a right line (or bar whoſe weight in Theory is not conſidered) moveable on a Center, which is called its Fulerum, or fixed Poiut. XI. THE Equilibrium in this Machine is, when the diſtance of the Pover from the fixæd point is to that of the Weight from the ſame, as the quantity of matter in the Weight to that in the Poer. For ſuppoſing the Lever placed on its Fulcrum with the Weight to be raiſed at one end, and the Power applied to the other; tis evident the farther the Power is placed from the Fulcrum or center of motion, the larger will be its ſweep when the Machine is put in motion; that is, it will movę over ſo cOmmon Scales may be conſidered as a Lever of the firſt kind, where rhe Weight and Power are applied at equal diſtances from the fixed point. THE Steclyard is alſo a Lever of the firſt kind, whoſe arms are unequal. THE difference between the uſe of the Scales and the Steelyard conſiſts in this; that as in one you make uſe of a larger Power (or more Weights) to eſtimate the weight of an hcavier Body; in the other you uſe the ſame Power, but give it a greater velocity vith reſpect to that of the Weight by applyjng it farther from the fixed point, which by 5. 7. will have the ſame effect. II. The WHEEL and Axis. XII. THIS Machine is a Wheel, that turns round together with its Axis; the Power in this is applied to the Circumference of the Wheel, and the Weight drawn up by means of a Rope wound about the Axis. XIII. IN this there will be an quilibrium, when the Weight is to the Power, as the Diameter of the Wheel to the Diameter of the Axis. Tis evident, the velocity of the Power will exceed the velocity of the Weight, as much as the Circumference of the Wheel exceeds that of its Axis; becauſe the ſpaces they paſs over in one revolution will be as thoſe Circumferences; that is, as much as the Diameter of one exceeds that of the other, (the Circumferences of Circles being as their Diameters;) what therefore in this caſe the Power vants in weight will be made up in velocity, from vhence 8. 7.) there will be an Equilibrium . THE uſe of this Machine is to raiſe Weights to greater heights than the Lever can do, becauſe the Wheel is capable of being turned ſeveral times round, which the Lever is not; and alſo to communicate motion from one part of a Machine to another; accordingly there are few compound Machines without it. III. The PULLEY. XIV. A Pulley is an Inſtrument compoſed of one or more Wheels moveable on theit Axes. XV. A ſimple Pulley, if its Axis is fixed, is of no other uſe, than to alter the direction of the Power; for the Power and Weight will both move through an equal ſpace in the ſame time. But in a Pulley not fixed, as in Fig. 29. where the Rope runs under it, or in a combination of Pullies as in Fig. 30. the /Equilibrium will be, when the * Geometrically thus. Let B (Fig. 28.) be the Diameter of the Wheel, DE that of the Axis,  the Weight, and P the Power; when the Wheel begins to move, the point B and Dwill deſcribe ſimilar Arches about the Center C, in the ſame manner the point 4 and B in the Lever were ſiewn to do about the fixed point F (Fig. 27.) that is the point  will move as much faſter than D, as CB is longer than CD or 4B8 than DE, the motion therefore of P (5. 7.) will be equal to that of . F rom wheuge ihe Propoſition is ęlear. Pover is to the Weight, as one to the number of Ropes, that paſs between the upper and lower Pullies. SuPPOSE one end of the Rope fixed in B ſFig. 29.) the other ſupported by the Power P, iĩt is evident, that in order to raiſe the Weight V one foot, the Power muſt riſe two, for both Ropes viæ. BC and CP, will be ſhortencd a foor apiece, whence the ſpace run over by the Power, will be double to that of the Weight; if therefore the Power is to the Weight as I to 2, their Moments vill be equal: for the ſame reaſon if there be 4 Ropes paſſing from the upper to the lower Pullies as in Fię. 30. the velocity of the Power will be quadruple to that of the Weight, or as 4 to I. &c. In all caſes therefore when the Power is to the Weight, as one to the number of Ropes paſſing from the upper to the lower Pullies, ſ§. 7.) there will be an Aquilibrium. XVI. Ir the Pullies be diſpoſed as in Figure the 3 1ſ, each having its own particular Rope, the action of the Power vill be very much increaſed; for here ævery Pully doubles it, wherefore the Power is 4 times greater with 2 Pullies, 8 times with 3, I6 times vith 4 &c. For it is evident from the conſideration of the Figure, the firſt will move half as faſt as thę Power, the ſecond half as faſt as that, and fo on; wherefore (5. 7.) the Powęr is doubled by cach Pulley. TE uſe of the Pulley is nearly the ſame vith that of the Wheel and Axis, but it is more portable and eaſier to be fixed up. IV. The SCREV. XVII. IN this Machine the quilibrium vill be, vhen the Power is to the Weight, as the diſtance between any two contiguous threads or ſpirals in the Screw, to the way deſcribed by the Power in one whole revolution. It is manifeſt from the form of the Machine (Fig. 32.) that in one revolution of the Screw, the Weight will be moved through a ſpace equal to the diſtance of two contiguous threads, and that the Power will run through à ſpace equal to the compaſs it takes in one revolution, therefore . 7.) if the Weight exceeds the Power in this proportion, thero vill be an æquilibrium. THIS Machine is of great force. and very uſeful in retaining Bodies in a compreſſed ſtate, becauſe it will not run back, as the three foregoing will when the Power is removed. This ariſes from the great friction of thoſe parts in the Screw, which during its motion ſſide upon thoſe, that are at reſ. V. The VEDGE. XVIII. THIS Inſtrument is formed by two equal rectangles joined at their lower baſes, and ſeparated at their upper ones, by a third; which is called the Zack of the Wedge; thc other two, its sides, XIX. IN the foregoing Mechanical Powers we have all along conſidered the Weight, as moved in the ſame direction with that in which it is acted upon by the Machine, as is commonly the caſe; but in this, the Weight is generally applied in ſuch a manner as to be made to move in a direction different from that in which it is protruded by the Wedge; hence it is, that Mathematicians have differed in their determination of the Power of this Machine, Tome conſidering the Weight as moved by it in one direction and ſome in another. Nay there are ſome (I ſpeak of late Writers) that have differed from Truth it ſelf. We will therefore lay down the ſeveral Proportions they have given us for the determining the Power of this Machine and examine them one by one. I. It is demonſtrated by ſome, that the Power vill be equivalent to the reſiſtance of the Weight, when it bears ſuch proportion to it, as the breadth of the Back of the Wedge, does to the ſum of its Sides; or, which is the ſame thing, as half that breadth to one of its Sides. 2. Others make it ſomewhat larger, and demonſtrate that it ought to be as half the breadth of the back to the perpendicular height of the Wedge. 3. Some are of opinion, that there will not be an Aquilibrium in this Machine, unleſs the Power is to the Weight, as the whole breadth of the Back to the perpendicular height. allis, Xeil &c. 4. Chap. 10. Tte Wedye. 65 Graveſande in his Elements . I. Ch. 13.) gives us the ſame proportion with the la*t; and in his Scholium de ligno findendo, tells us, that when the parts of the wood are ſeparated no farther than the Wedge is driven in, the Aquilibrium will be, when the Power is to the Reſiſtance, as half the breadth of the Back of the Wedge to one of its Sides. THOSE Who lay down the firſt Proportion for determining the Power of this Machine, ſuppoſe the parts, which are ſeparated from cach other thereby, to recede from their firſt ſituation in directions perpendicular to the ſides of the Wedge. Thus let ACB ſFig 33.) tepre ſent a Wedge ; P. P, two Bodies to be ſeparated by iĩt, the one to be moved towards I, the other towards F, in the directions CI and CF perpendicular to AC and CB; then tis evident that when the Wedge is driven in to the ſituation M NO, the two Bodies will be moved to Q and Q; that is, one will have paſſed rhrough the ſpace CK the other through CL, but theſe ſpaces being equal, their velocities are the ſame às if they had both paſſed over one of them. v. 2. CL, or which is equal to it DG (drawn perpendicular to CB); therefore the Power which ve ſuppoſe applied at D moves through DC, while the obſtacle moves through DG, conſequently ſ5. 7.) when the Power is to the Weight as DG to DC, that is, as DB to CB*, or half the Back of the Wedge to one of its Sides, they vill be in Aquilibrio. This proportion therefore, when the parts of the Weight are moved by the Wedge in the directions CI and CF, may be admitted as true. l 2. THE ſecond proportion is alſo true, ſuppoſing the Bodies P, P, to recede from each other in the directions ON, CM,, parallel to AB the Back of the Wedge; for when the Wedge is driven in between them, to the ſituation M NO, the Bodies will have moved through a ſpace as CN, or which is equal to it DB, half the Back of the Wedge, and the Powver through a ſpace equal to its height as before; conſequently (. 7.) in this caſe, the quilibrium will be, when the Power is to the Weight, as half the Back of the Wedge to its height . * For (8. Elem. 6.) the triangles D CG and DCB are ſimilar, and conſequently DG: DC:: DI: BC. + The ſame may be otherwiſe demonſtrated from Section 14. Chapter 9 thus. Let there be a Body as L (Fig. 34.) drawn againſt the Wedge 4B C by the Weight V, in the direction LF; parallel to the back of the Wedge 4B; but prevented from ſliding down towards C by a Plane (whoſe upper ſurface we may ſuppoſe repreſented by EF) lying under it. I ſay, the Power vill be to the Weight, when they are in æquilibrio, as DB to DC. Dem. The Body L is here acted upon in three directions, viæ. by the force of the Weight W in the direction LF, by the two Planes CB and EF, in the directions LG and L I, perpendicular to their ſurfaces; let GE be drawn parallel to LI, then will the triangle LGE have all ijts ſides reſpectively parallel to thoſe diręctions; conſequently (Chap. 95. 14) if we ſuppoſe LE to 3. THOSE, Who imagine there will not be an Aquilibrium, unleſs the Power be to the Weight, as the whole breadth of the Back of the Wedge to its height, ſuppoſc as in the laſt caſe, that the Bodies to be ſeparated, recede from cach other in directions parallel to the Back of the Wedge; and endeavour to ſupport their opinion by the following Argument: viz. that, vhen the Wedge is driven in to the ſituation M N O (Fig. 33.) as before, each part of the Weight having moved through a ſpace equal to half the Back of the Wedge, the whole Weight has therefore moved through twice ſo much, or a ſpace equal to the whole Back: as much as to ſay, the whole has moved farther than its parts; which is abſurd. expreſs the force of the Weight W, G L will repreſent the preſſure of the Body L againſt the Wedge; and if that is reſolved into GE and GH the one perpendicular to the direction of the Power, the other parallel and contrary to it; the lait, viz. GE, will expreſs the whole force of the Weight to reſiſt the motion of the Power; but GE is to EL, as DB to D C ſfor the triangle EGL and D BC are ſimilar, the ſides of one being ex Conſiruct. reſpectively perpendicular to thoſe in the other; vV. & LG to CB, EL to DC and GE to DB); conſequently the Power is to the Weight, when they balante each other, as half the breadth of the Back of the Wedge to its heightt. ™, E. D. Corol. Suppoſe the Body L had been drawn againſt the Wedge in the direction GL perpendicular to ĩts ſurface, and to be moved by the Wedge ĩn the contrary direction towards G, as in the firſt caſe; then if GL expreſſes the forcę with which it is drawn towards the Wedge, GE will be that with which it reſiſts the Power; but GE is to GL as DB to BC, the triangles £GL and D BC being ſimilar; conſcquently in this caſe, the Power will be to the Weight, as half the breadth of the Back of thæ Wedge to one of its ſides; as was before demonſtratæd. 4. THis is Graveſandes miſtake in his Elements, the ſame he has alſo made in his Scholium de ligno findendo, and thereby determined the Power in both places to be twice as big, as it ought to be. If he had proceeded in the following manner, his Argument would have been eaſier, as well as the Concluſion juſter. Suppoſe the Wedge ABC driven into the Wood QLQq, ſas repreſented Fig. 35.) which is ſplit no farther than the point of the Wedge, or however no farther than is juſt ſufficient to give it room to move, I ſay that in this ſituation of the Wedge, the Power is to the Weight, as one fourth part of the Back of the Wedge to one of its Sides. For it is evident, that when the upper ends of the Wood, which preſs againſt the Wedge in the points G, H, are put into motion by the Wedge, they will move in the directions HI and GF, perpendicular to the ſides of the Wedge, becauſe they turn as it were upon a joynt at L, which we ſuppoſæe contiguous to C: again, ſince only the upper ends of the Wood are put into motion, and not the lower ones, which remain at L; tis evident that the motion of each piece (ſuppoſing their thickneſs the ſame from end to end, and their ſubſtance uniform) will be but half, what it otherwiſe would have been. Now vere all the parts of the Wood to have the ſame degree of velocity, the Power would be to the Weight, as in the fitſt caſe, viæ. i r as DB to BC (Fig. 33.)3 therefore in this caſe, it is as half DB to BC, or as one fourth part of the Back of the Wedge to one of its Sides. Which was to be proved. XX. THE form of the Inclined Plane being no other than that of half a Wedge, as is manifeſt from the repreſentation of it (Fig. 36.) it follows that what has been demonitrated of the one, may be applied to the other, and the properties of both will be the ſame. For inſtance, if the Weight W is to be raiſed up the Plane CB, by the Power P, in a direction parallel to the Plane; inſtead of that, ve may ſuppoſe the Weight prevented from running off the Plane by the String WB, and the inclined Plane driven under it like a Wedge in the direction DC: then will the Weight riſc tovards G in a direction perpendicular to CB, for ve muſt always ſuppoſc the String CB parallel to the Plane, as it would have been, if the Weight had been drawn up by it; then vill the action of the Plane upon the Weight be ſimilar to that of the Wedge in the firſt caſe; and conſequently the Power vill bear ſuch proportion to the Weight, as DB to BC; that is, as the height of the Plane to its length. Again, ſuppoſe the Weight was to have been drawn up the Plane by a String in the direction WF parallel to the baſe of the Inclined Plane CB; then if the Plane be driven under the Weight as bęfore, it muſt riſe in a direction perpendicular to CD, that is parallel to DB: then the caſe will be analogous to the 2 of the Wedge; conſequently the Power vill be to the reſiſtance of the Weight, when there is an quilibrium, in the proportion of DB to DCG, as there demonſtrated. XXI. THESE are the Powers or Machines, vhich under different forms, conſtitute all others how complicated ſoever; and as the quilibrium in any one of theſe is, when the Power and Weight are inverſely as their velocities; ſo in a Machine however compounded, the Power and the Weight will exactly balance each other, when they are in this proportion; for by §. 7. their Moments will then be equal, and the Machine, if at reſt will continue in that ſtate; and if put into motion by an external force, will gradually loſe it, when that force ceaſes to act; on account of the unavoidablęe friction of the Machine, and the reſiſtance of the Air, which it muſt neceſſarily meet with, unleſs its motion could be performed in a perfect Vacuum. From hence ve ſee the impoſſibility of contriving an Engine, whoſe motion ſhould be perpetual, that is, ſuch as does not owe its continuance to the application of ſome external force; a Problem that has given birth to an almoſt infinitc number of Schemes and Contrivances. For unleſs ſome method could be found out of gaining a force, by the artful dipoſiton and combination of the Mechanical Powers, equivalent to that which is continually deſtroyed by friction, and the reſiſtance of the Air, the motion which was at firſt given to the Machine muſt at length be neceſſarily loſt. But ve ſee, that thoſe Inſtruments are only different means, vhereby one Body communicates its motion to another;3 and not deſigned to produce a force which had no exiſtence before. A given force may be diſpoſcd between the Power and the Weight an infinite number of ways; but can never be augmentcd by any Mechaniſm whatever: ſo much as ve place in the Power will always be loſt to the Weight, and what we attribute to the Weight will never be found in the Power. Tis for vant of a due conſideration of this, that ſo many Mechanical Deſigns have proved abortive, ſo many Engines unequal to the performance for which they were deſigned, and ſo many impoſſibilities attempted.  IF it were poſſible, ſays Bp. Wiltins, to contrive ſuch an invention, whereby any conceivable Weight may be moved by any conceivable Power, both with equal velocity (as it is in thoſe things which are immediately ſtirred by the hand, without the help of any other inſtrument) the works of Nature wvould be then too much ſubjected to the power of Art; and Men might be thereby encouraged (vith the Builders of Batbel, or  the c t EN c c L] c c LL] c L t L t r the rebel Giants) to ſuch bold deſigns, as vould not become a created Being And therefore the Wiſdom of; Providence has ſo confinęd rtheſe human Arts, that what an invention hath in the ſtrengib of its motion. is abated in the ſouneſi of it; and what it has in the extraordinary quickneſs of its motion, muſt be allowed for in the great ſtrength requiſite in the Power, which is to move it, APPE NDI X to Part I. C H AP. I. Of the Vibration of a Pendulum in a Cycloid. PROPOSITION I. F a Pendulum be made to vibrate in a Cycloid, all its Vibrations, however unequal, will be iſocronous; that is, they will be performed in equal Times (⸗). (a) In order to demonſtrate this Propoſition, it will be proper to lay down the following Lemma's. LEM M A I. If a Body deſcends from A along the Line AX, ſAppendix Plate, Fig. 1.) by virtue of a Force vwhich decreaſes in Proportion as the Diſtance of the Body from X decreaſes; that is, if when the Bo% comes to M, N, O, &c. the Action of that Force upon the Body, be as the Diſtances XM, XN, XO, &c. reſpectively: And iſ ihe lasi acquirea Velocity of the Body; that is, its Velocity when it comes to X, be expreſſed, or ſet off, by the Perpendicular XB, e ual i in Length to the Line AX, and its Velocities at M, N, O, be ſet of there by the Lines MD, NP, O, &c. in Lengih trooriiable to each other and to the Line XB, as the Velocities of the falling Body at M, N, O, &c. are to each other and to its laſi Velocity at X: Anud if through the Extremities of theſe Lines, the Curve ADB be dravn; I ſay, that Curve will be a Portion of a Circle: And the Time in which the Body ill à sęhcend through the whole Spar or Line AX ſor any Part of it, as MO] avill be ſuch Time, as would be requiſite for it to deſcribe the avhole Arch AB ſor any Part as DQ, correſponding to MO] in, with its laſt acquired Velocity at X. Demonſiration of the Lemma. Parallel and contiguous to the Line MD, draw NP, in which Caſe the Line MN becomes a Point, and the Arch DP a Tangent to the Curve: Produce PD till it meets XA produced, in T; draw the Line XD; and let fall the Perpendicular DL. Then the Lines DL and TM being parallel, the Angles PDL and DTM are equal, as being alternate (by 27 Elem. 1.); and the Angles at L and M as being right ones; the Triangles therefore PDL and DTM are ſimilar, which for the Sake of referring to it afterwards, let us make the ſirſt Step of the following Proceſs ] 1 The Triangles PDL and DTM are ſimilar From the firſt Step we have this : Proportion (5 Elem. 6.) 2 PL: LD:: DM: MT. By the Figure 3] LDMN But MD being the Velocity when the deſcending Body comes to M, the Point MN is deſcribed with that Velocity; for there is no Acceleration during the Paſſage of a Body over a Point; conſequently MN is proportionable to MD; that is, 4 ]MN is as MD. Comparing the ſecond, third, and fourth Steps 51PL: MD:: DM: MT But MD and NP being the Velocities of the deſcending Body at M and N, LP the Difference of thoſe Lines, expreſſing the Increaſe of Velocity in the Body, will be proportionable to the moving Force at the Point MN; that is, by the Suppoſition, to the Diſtance XM; therefore ] 6]PL is as XM Comparing the fifth and ſixth 7XM: MD:: DM: MT Conſequently (5 Elem. 6.)O] 8] The Triangles XMD and DMT are ſimilar. And therefore, ſince their Angles at M are right ones, the Triangle TDX is (by the Converſe of Prop. 8. Elem. 6.) right angled at D. Conſequently ſince the ſame is true of any other Point of the Curve, as well as D, the Arch ADB Is a Portion of a Circle (16 Elem. 3.0 Which is the firſt Part. Secondly, comparing the firſt and eighth Steps, the Triangles PDL and XMD are ſimilar; therefore 9l LD: DM:: DP: DX ADB being a Portion of a Circle, as already proved o] DX æ XB Comparing the 3d, 9th and ioth Steps 11MN: DM:: DP: XB. Since then the Point MN bears the ſame Proportion to MD, or the Velocity it is deſcribed with by the falling Body, that the Point DP does to the laſt acquired Velocity XB, it follows that the former, MN, is deſcribed in the ſame Time with the Velocity the Body has when there, that the latter, DP, might be with the laſt acquired Velocity XB. And ſince the ſame is true of every other Part of the Arch ADB, it is obvious that the Time in which the Body will deſcend through any other Part of the Space AX, ſor the whole of it,] wili be ſuch as would be required for it to deſcribe any correſponding Part of the Arch ADB, ſor the whole of it,] with the laſt acquired Velocity XBbL Which was the other Part. Coroll. Hence it follows, that if a Body deſcends along the Line AX, by Virtue of Forces acting upon it at A, M, N, O, &c. proportionably to the Length of the Lines XA, XM, XN, XO, &cæ. and if on X as a Center, and with the Radius XA a Portion of a Circle, as ADB, be deſcribed; and if the Radius or whole Sine XB, be put to repreſent the Velocity of the Body when it comes to X, the other Sines MD, NP, OQ, &. will repreſent the reſpective Velocities of the Body at the ſeveral Points M, N, O, &c. And converſely, if one of the Sines, as MD, be put to expreſs its Velocity at M, the other Sines NP, O, and the Radius or whole Sine XB, will expreſs the Velocity of the Body at thoſe other Points N, O and X. LEMMA II. If a Body moves along the Line AX, (Fig. 2.) and he urged ull the ay by Forces proportionable to its Diſlance from the Ivint X; whatever Point of that Line it ſets out from, it will come to the Point X in the ſame Time. Which Time will bear ſucb Proportion to the Time it would mve over the whole Line AX in, with the Velocity it soall acquire by falling through the whole Line AX, as the Semicircumference of a Carcle does to its Diameter. D Dem. Let two Bodies A and P ſet out from the Points A and P at the ſame Time; and let them be urged by Forces proportionable to their Diſtances from the Point X: Iſay, thoſe Bodies will come to X at the ſame Inſtant of Time; that is, they will overtake one another at that Point. On X as a Center, and with the Radius's XA and XP deſcribe the two Quadrants AB and PQ and draw the Line SX, and the Sines RS and MN; and let the whole Sine or Radius XB expreſs the Velocity the Body A will acquire by falling to X: Then by Corollary of Lemma I. will the Sine RS, if taken as near as poſſible to A, expreſs the ſirſt Velocity of the Body A. But the Force, which urges the Body A is ſuppoſed to be to that which urges the Body P, as XA to XP (or becauſe the Archs AS and PN are ſimilar) as RS to MN: As therefore RS expreſſes the firſt Velocity of A, MN vill expreſs the firſt Velocity of the other hbody P: And therefore by the ſame Corollary, its Velocity when it comes to X, will be expreſſible by XQ. Farther, the Time the Body A fall to X in, is by Lemma I. equal to the Time the Arch AB would be deſcribed in with the Velocity XB; and the Time the other Body falls from P to X in, is equal to the Time the Arch PQ would be deſcribed in with the Velocity XQ. But a Body will be as long in moving over the Arch PQ_ith the Velocity xqQ, as over the Arch AB with the Velocity XB, the Lines XQan XB having the ſame Proportion to each other, that the Archs have. Therefore the Time the Body A falls to X in, is equal to the Time the other Body P would fall to that Place in. Which was the firſt Partt. Again by Lemma I. 1] The Time a Body would fall from A to Xin, is equal to the Time it would move over the Arch AB in, with its laſt acquired VeloAxiom, or ſelf evident city at X. Propoſition 2 ] The Time a Body would move over the Arch AB in with the laſt acquited Velocity at X, is to the Time it would move over AX in with the ſame VeComparing the firſt and locity, as AB is to AX. ſecond 3] The Time a Body would fall from A to X in, is to the Time it would move over AX in with the laſt acquired Velocity, as AB is to AX. Axiom 4 ]AB is to AX as twice AB is to twice AX. By the Figure 5] Twice AB is to twice AX as the . Semicircumference of a Circle Comparing the 3d, 4th is to its Diameter. and 5th Steps G ] The Time a Body would fall from A to X in, is to the Time it would move over A in with its laſt acquired Velocity, as the Semicircumference of a Circle is to its Diameter. Which was the ſecond Part. LEMM A IIL If from the lowermoſt Point of a Cirele, as X, (Fig. 3.) be dran the Chords XQand XO, the Power of Gravity whereby it ſrall cauſe a Body to deſcend along the former, avill be to the Power ahereby it ſball cauſe it to deſcend along the latter, as ihe Lengib of the former is to the Length of the latter. Dem. Draw the Diameter Y D, the Perpendiculars QR and OS; and join the Points QD and OD. Then (by 31 Elem. 3.) the Triangle XQD is rightangled at Q and therefore (by 8 Elem. 6.) 1]. R: 2Q::Q: XD. And for like Reaſons 2] S: XO:: O: XD But by Part I. Chap. 6. §2. ] 3] The Effect or Power of Gravity upon a Body deſcending alon the Chord Q,, is to that it exerts upon another falling freely; that is, to its whole Power, as R to Q And alſo 4 ] The Power of Gravity upon a Body deſcending along the - Chord O, is to its whole Power, as S to O. Comparing the iſt and 2d] 5] The Power of Gravity upon a Body deſcending along the Chord QX, Is to its whole Power, as  Qto D. Comparing the æd and 4th ] 6] The Power of Gravity upon a Body deſcending along the Chord OX, is to its whole Power, as XO to XD. Comparing the 5th and 6th Steps 7] The Power of Gravity upon æ Body deſcending along the Chord Q, ĩs to the Power of Gravity upon a Body deſcending along the Chord OX, as xQto XO. QOE. D. The Deſcription of a Cycloid, with the Defſinitions relating thereto. If a Circle as FCH (Fig 4.) be rolled along the Line AB, till it has turned once round; the Point C in its Circumference, which at firſt touched the Line at A, will deſcribe the Curve Line ACXB, which Curve is called a Cycloid. The right Line AB is its Baſe:I he middle Point X is its Vertex: And a Perpenc icular, as D, let fall from thence to the Baſe, is its Axis: And the Circle FCH, or any other as XGD, equal thereto, is called the Generating Circle. LEMM A IV. If on X2, the Axis of the Cycloid, as a Diameter, the generating Cirddle \GD be diſcribea; and if from a Point in the Gcloid, as C, the l ine CIK be drawn Paraliel to the Baſe, the Portion of it CG, will he equal to the Arch GX. Dem Draw the Diameter HF, then the Circles FCH and DGX being equal 1] KG æ ClI Adding GI to each of them 2  KI æ CG By the Figure 3] XI mDF Comparing the two laſt 4] CG æ DF By the Deicription of the Cycloid ] 5] The Arch CF æ AF By the Figure 6 ] The Arch CF  DG Con paring the 5th and 6th 7  AF DG By the Deſcription of the Cycloid] 8] AFD  DGX Con paring the 7th and Sth with the Figure 9] FDGX Comparing the 4h and the oth ic] CcG/ GX. QE. D. LEMM A V. The ſame Things being ſuppoſed as in the foregoing Lemma, a Tangent to the Celcic at the Puint C; is parallel to GX a Chord of the Cirile LrGAa Dem. It appears from the Deſcription of the Cycloid, that ſince the Ang e PCH is a rigit one, (as it is by 31 Elem. 3.) CH is parallel to GX; a Tangent therefore at the Point C, is parallel to GX, the Chord of the Circle DGX. QE. D. LEMM A VI. Things remaining as before, if from a Point of the Cycloid, as L, the Line LMK be dravn parallel to the Baſe AB, the Arch XL of the Gycloid, will be double of XM the Chorãd of the Circle correſponding thereto. Dem. Draw the Line SQparallel and contiguous to LX croſſing the Circle in R, and the Chord XM produced, in P, then vill LS, MR and MP become Points, the firſt having the Property of a Tangent to the Cycloid at LS, the ſecond that of æa Tangent to the Circle at MR, and the third, the Properties of a Production of the Chord XM. Join the Points X and R, and on MP let fall the Perpendicular RO: Produce alſo the Point RV, till it meets XN, a Tangent to the Circle at X. Then will the Lines XN and QS, being each perpendicular to the Diameter DX, be parallel; and the Triangles MNX and MPR will be ſimilar; as having their Angles at M vertical, and at P and X alternate. But the Iangents Nand NM are equal (by 36 Elem. 3.) the correſponding Lines thercſore PR and RM in the other Triangle, are ſo too: This laſt Triangle is therefore an Iſoſceles one; and therefore RO being perpendicular to its Baſe MP, MP is equal to twice MO. The Tangent LS is parallel to MP, (as being by Lemma 5. parallel to Mx) and therefore equal to it, the Lines LK and SQbeing parallel: It is therefore equal alſo to twice MO. But LS is the Difference between the cycloidal Archs XL and XS; and MO is the Difference between the Chords XM and æ R, for ſince .O and XR are cloſe together, RO which is perpendicular to one of them, may be conſidered as perpendicular to both: The Diſference therefore between any two Archs of the ycloid is twice that which is between two correſponding Chords of the Circle; and conſequently any Arch, as XI, is double of the correſponding Chord XM. Q E. D. Coroll. Since when the Arch XL becomes XB, the correſponding Chord XM becomes XD the Diameter of the Circle DMX; it is obvious, that the Semicycloid BX, or AX, is equal to twice DX the Diameter of the generating Circle DMX. LEMM A VII. If a Body deſcends in a Gycloid, the Force of Gravity ſſo far as it acls upon it in cauſing it to deſcend along the Cycloid) nill PRrROPOSI TION II. The Time in which a Pendulum vibrating in a Cycloid, performs a Vibration, is to the be proportionable to the Diſiance of the Body from the loweſt Point of the Cycloid. Dem. Let the Cycloid be AXB (Vig. 5.) whoſe Baſe is AB, and its Axis DX, on which laſt as a Diameter, deſcribe the generating Circle DQX: Draw the Chords OX and QX; through the Points O and Q and parallel to the Axis AB, draw the Lines LS and MR; draw alſo the Tangents LV and MY. Then becauſe by Lemma 5. the Tangent LV is parallel to OX, and the Tangent MY parallel to Q, it's obvious that Gravity exerts the ſame Power or Force upon a Body deſcending in the Cycloid at L (becauſe it then deſcends in the Tangent LV) as it would do upon the ſame Body deſcending along the Chord OX: And for the like Reaſon, it exerts the ſame Force upon it when it comes to M, that it would do ĩf it were deſcending along QX: But (by Lemma 3.) the Power or Force of Gravity upon Bodies deicending along the Chords OX and , are as the Lengths of thole Chorcs; that is, by Lemma 6. halves being proportionable to their wholes) as the Length of the Cycloidal Archs LX ard MX. The Force therefore of Gravity upon a Body decond ng n the Cycloid at the Point L ſor any other] is to its Foice upon the ſame when at M ſor any other Point] as the Space or Diſtance it ha: to move over in the former Caſe, beſcre ĩt gets to the loweſt Point X, to that it has to run over in the latter, beſore it arrives at the ſame Point. E. D. Demonſiration of the Propoſition in the Text to which this Note refers. By Lemma 7. The Force of Gravity ſo far as it cauſes a Body to deſcend in a Cycloid is proportionable tò the Diſtance of that Body from the lowe Point. imagine then that Eody to be a Penculum vibrating in the Cycloid, then whatever Point it ſets out Iiom, it will by Lemma 2. come to the loweſt Point in the ſame l ime: And conſequently ſince the like is true as to its aſcending from that Point, all its Vibrations be they large or ſmall, will be performed in the ſame Time. QE. D. Time Time in which à Body would fall freely thro half the Length of the Pendulum, as the Circumference of a Circle is to its Diameter (à). 3i PROB. ſ(ò) To demonſtrate this, the following Lemma’s will be of Uſe. LEM M A VIIL Iſ in a right-angled Triangle, as BFG, (Fig. 6.) the Perpendicular FI be let foll from the right Angle to the Hypothenuſe BG, the Line BI multiplied ly BG ill be equal to BFq. Dem. By 8 Elem. 3. the Triangles BFI and BFG are ſimilar, conſequently BI is to BF, as BF is to BG, and therefore BIX BG I BFI. Q.E. D. LEMM A IX. If a Body deſcends along a Curve Line, as AX (Fig. 7.) it aill acquire the ſame Velocity that another, or the ſame Body, would do, by falling from an equal perpendicular Height in the Line DX. Dem. Parallel to the horizontal Line AD, draw the Lines BM and FN contiguous to each other; in conſequencè of which, the Lines MN and BG are capable of being con? dered as Points; and therefore the Velocity the deſcending Bodies paſs over them with, as uniform; and the curve Line BG, as a ſtraight Line alſo, and as a Tangent to the Curve AX at the Point BG. Things being thus, let it be ſuppoſed that the Bodies begin their Fall at B and M, or, which comes to the ſame Thing, that they have equal Velocities at thoſe Points: Then the Velocities of the Bodies being uniform and equal to each other, (for there is no Acceleration in a Point) the Lines BG and MN may repreſent the Relation the Times they are paſſed over in bear to each other. Parallel to DX draw BF, and let the equal Lines BF and MN repreſent the Force of Gravity acting perpendicularly at thoſe Points; and let the Force BF be reſolved into two others, viæ. BI and IF, the one parallel, the other perpendicular to the Courſe of the Body at B: It is only the former of theſe, viæ. BI, that accelerates the Body along the Curve BG; the other, viæ. IF, neither accelerates it nor retards it, but is wholly ſpent in preſſing the Body cloſe to the Surface BG, if it be a Surface; or in ſtretching the String which ocp the Body in the Courſe ABX, if it be a String. Now the Velocity a Body acquires by moving over any Space, is proportionable to the Force that acts upon it, multiplied by the Time that Force acts. Since then BI repreſents the Force in one Caſe, and MN the Force in the other; and BG the Time in one Caſe, and MN the Time in the other; it follows that the Velocity generated in one Caſe, is as BI X BG; and in the other, as MN X MN; or ſince BF and MN are equal, as the Quantities BI X BG and BF X BF, (or BFY) which Quantities by Lemma 8. are equal to each other. The Velocity therefore the one Body acquires by deſcending along BG, is equal to that which the other acquires by falling through MN: But the Lines BM and GN being parallel, it is obvious there is the ſame Number of BGs in the Curve AX, as of MNs in the perpendicular DX; the Velocity therefore which a Body would acquire by falling through one, is equal to that which it would acquire in falling through the other. QE. D. Demonſiration of ihe Propoſition. Let AXB (Fig. 5.) be the Cycloid the Pendulum vibrates in. Then by Lemma 2. compared with Lemma 7. we have 1] The Time a Body would deſcend from A to X in, is to the Time it would move over the ſame Space in with its Iaſt acquired Velocity, as the Semicircumference of a By the Coroll. of Lem- Circle is to its Diameter. ma 6. 2 ] AX is equal to twice DX. By Lemma ꝗ. 3] The Velocity a Body acquires by falling from A to X, is equal to the Velocity it would acquire by From the three laſt falling from D to X. compared 4 The Time a Body would deſcend from A to Xin, is to the Time it would move over twice DX in, with the Velocity acquired by a Fall from D to X, as the Semicircumference of a Circle is to its By Part I. Chap. s. Diameter. § 7. 5] The Time a Body would move over twice DX in, with the Velocity acquired by falling from D to X, is equal to the Time it would fall Comparing the 4th and from D to X in. 5th 6 ] The Time a Body would deſcend from A to X in, is to the Time it would fall from D to X in, as the Semicircumference of a Circle ĩs to its Diameter. P R O B L EM. To mae a Pendulum vibrate in a given Cycloid. Solut. Let AXB (Fig. 5.) be the given Cycloid; its Baſe AB, its Axis DX, and its generating Circle DQ, as before: Produce XD to G, till DC be equal to DX: Through C draw the Line EF parallel to AB, and take CE and CF, each equal to AD or DB; and on the Line CE as a Baſe, and with the generating Circle AGE equal to DQ, deſcribe the Semicycloid CTA, whoſe Vertex will therefore touch the Baſe of the given Cycloid in A. And on the Line CF alſo as a Baſe, deſcribe From the Figure 7  The Time of Deſcent from A to X is half a Vibration. From the Solution of the following Problem it will appear, that 8 DX is half the Length of a Pendulum, which in vibrating ſhall deComparing the three]] ſcribe the Cycloid AXB. laſt Steps 9 The Time of half a Vibration is to the Time in which a Body would fall freely through half the Length of the Pendulum, as the Semicircumference of a Circle is to its Doubling the Antece- Diameter. dents of the laſt tep 10] The Time of an whole Vibration is to the Time in which a Body wpould fall freely through half the Length of the Pendulum, as the Circumference of a Circle is to its Diameter. QE. D. an equal Semicycloid CB. On the Point C, hang the Pendulum CTP equal in Length to the Line CX: And lIet the upper Part of the String of it, (as CT, in its preſent Situation in the Figure) as it vibrates this way and that, apply itſelf to the cycloidal Cheeks CA and CB: Then will the Ball of it P oſcillate in the given Cycloid AXB. QE. F. (0) CH AP. c) Draw TG and PH, each parallel to the Baſe AB; and join the Points AG and DH. Then by the Corollary of Lemma 6. 1]AC 2AE By the Figure (DC being equal to DX) 2 ]2AE /CX Comparing the iſt and æd Steps ] 3] AC— CX By Conſtruction 41CTP / X Comparing the 3d and 4th 5 ] AC CTP From the 5th Step compared with the Figure cl AT TP The String touching the Cycloid at'T) by Lemma j. 7 GA is parallel to TK By Conſtruction 8 ] GT is parallel to AK From the two laſt Steps compared, GATK is a Parallelogram, conſequently 9  GA=TEK, andGT=AK By Lemma 6. ] GA =æ 2TA Comparing the two laſt Steps nlTK /TA Comparing the 6th and 11th i12 TK2TP From the i12th Step compared with the Figure 13 TK=KP Comparing the laſt Step with the Figure 14] The parallel Lines GT and PH are equally diſtant from AD From the laſt compared with the Figure 15The Arch GA = the Arch DH . Comparing the laſt with the Fi-] ] gure 16] The Chords GA and DH are parallel, and GE/ Ii HX. C H A P. II. of the Center of Oſcillation and Percuſſion. T7 HE Center of Oſcillation is that Point in a Pendulum, in which, if the Weight of the ſeveral Parts thereof were collected, each Vibration would be performed in the ſame Time, as when thoſe Weights are ſeparate. The Point or Center of Suſpenſion,, is the Point on which the Pendulum hangs. A general Rule for finding the Center of Oſcillation. If ſeveral Bodies be fixed to an inflexible Rod ſuſpended upon a Point, and each Body From the 7th and 16th Steps compared with the Figure 7]1 KP is parallel to DH. And therefore (KD being by Conſtruction parallel alſo to PH)] KDHP is a Parallelogram, conſequently 18] KD /PH By Lemma 4. 191 GT = the Arch AG Comparing the ꝗth and i19th 20] AK I the Arch AG By the Deſcription of the Semieycloid CTA 21] AKD / AGE From the two laſt compared with the Figure 22]1 XD =/ GE Comparing the 18th and 22d 23 ’ H GE Comparing the 16th and 23d 24] PH / HX. But by Lemma 4. if PH be equal to HX, P is a Point in the Cycloid AXB; the Ball of the Pendulum CTP thereſore being at that Point, is in the given Cycloid. The Problem therefore was rightly ſolvedl. Q E. D. b be multiplied by the Square of its Diſtance from the Point of Suſpenſion, and then each Body be multiplied by its Diſtance from the ſame Point; and all the former Products when added together, be divided by all the latter Products added together, the Quotient which ſhall ariſe from thence, will be the Diſtance of the Center of Oſcillation of thoſe Bodies from the ſaid Point. Thus, if CF Fig. 8. be a Rod on which are fixed the Bodies A, B, D, &c. at the ſeveral Points A, B, D, &c. and if the Body A be multiplied by the Square of the Diſtance CA, and B be multiplied by the Square of the Diſtance CB, and ſo on for the reſt: And then if the Body A be multiplied by the Diſtance CA, and B be multiplied by the Diſtance CB, and ſo on for the reſt; and if the Sum of the Products ariſing in the former Caſe, be divided by the Sum of thoſe which ariſe in the latter, the Quotient will give CQ, the Diſtance of the Center of Oſcillation of the Bodies A, B, D, &c. from the Point C ſã). (d) Dem. That the Proceſs may be leſs complicated, let us ſuppoſe but two Bodies, as A and F, fixed to the Rod CF; and let AI and FL be the Archs which the Bodies A and F deſcribe when the Pendulum vibrates, and let the Pendulum be removed into the Situation CL. Contiguous to the Line CL draw CR; then may the Archs IP and LR be conſidered as Tangents at the Points I and L, and thoſe Tangents as inclined Planes, down which the Bodies I and L are to roll: Theſe Tangents being each perpendicular to CL, are equally inclined to the Horizon, the Bodies therefore will endeavour to roll down with equal Velocities; flexible Rod, they muſt deſcribe the unequal Archs IP and LR in the ſame Time. That is, the Body L will oblige the Body I to deſcribe a leſs Arch than it otherwiſe would have done; anũd the Body I will occaſion the Body L to deſcribe a larger Arch than it would have done. And the Effects of the Forces by which they act thus upon each other, like thoſe of Action and Reaction, will be equal. It remains to determine theſe Effects. In order to which, parallel to LI draw VN, and let the equal Spaces LM and IN be thoſe the Bodies would move over in the leaſt Time poſſible, had they been independent of each other. And let the Archs LR and IP be thoſe which the Bodies joined to the Rod deſcribe in the ſame Time. For the Reaſon juſt mentioned, the former of theſe, vi?. LR, will be larger, and the latter, viæ. IP, will be leſs than LM or IN; and the Arch which the Center of Oſcillation deſcribes will be equal to LM or IN, becauſe the Center of Oſcillation deſcribes that Arch which the Bodies would deſcribe in the ſame Time, if they were both together, and neither of them an hindrance or furtherance to the other. Conſequently the Center of Oſcillation is at Y, where the Lines MN and PR croſi. Now the Motion which the Body I loſes by being retarded, is its Motion over the Arch PN; and the Motion the other Body gains by being accelerated, is its Motion over MR: The Force or Moment of the firſt of theſe Motions, is the Product of the Body I multiplied by the Space PN; and the Force or Moment of the laſt is the Product of the Body L multiplied by the Space MR. Theſe are the Forces, Moments or Actions, which retard the one Body, and promote the Motion of the other. But obſerve, that theſe Forces or Moments, in as much as they act at different Diſtances from the Center C, about which the Bodies I and L, when the Pendulum ſwings, uo revolve; have each their Mechanical Advantage; but the one a greater than the other: For inſtance, L has an Advantage which is as LC, its Diſtance from the Fulchrum C; and I only the Advantage IC. As then in determining the Effect of a Power applied to a Lever, we multiply it by ĩts Diſtance from the Fulchbrum; ſo the abovementioned Forces or Moments ſviæ. I multiplied by PN and L multiplied by MR) muſt be multiplied by their reſpective Diſtances from C; and then we have I multiplied by PN multiplied by IC, and L multiplied by MR multiplied by LC for the Effects, which, as things are circumſtantiated, thoſe Forces or Moments have upon the Bodies Iand L. But, as obſerved above, thoſe Effects are equal, conſequently we have for the ſirſt Step The Center of Percuſſiion is that Point in a Pendulum, or in an inflexible Rod moving IIXPN X ICL X MR xX LC But the Triangles PNY and MRY are ſimilar, conſequently 2 PN: MR:: PY: RY Comparing the two la©t ]3 ] IxPYXIC=L XRYX LC Or taking the Pendulum in the Situation CPR, in which I coincides with P, and L with R, we have 4 P x PY X PC= R x RY X RC Or, which is the ſame thing 5 ]A X AQX ACæ F X FQXFC. That is, in Words, if one of the Bodies were multiplied by its Diſtance from the Center of Oſcillation, and the Product ariſing from thence were multiplied by the Diſtance of the ſame Body from the Center of Suſpenſion, this laſt Product would be equal to the Product of the other Body multiplied by its Diſtance from the Center of Oſcillation, multiplied by its Diſtance from the Center of Suſpenſion. And, ſince the ſame would be true if there were more Bodies, if each Body be multiplied by its Diſtance from the Center of Oſcillation, and that Product by the Diſtance of the ſame Body from the Center of Suſpenſion, all the Products relating to the Bodies on one Side the Center of Oſcillation taken together, will be equal to all thoſe which reIate to the Bodies on the other Side thereof taken together. Let then the Diſtances of any Number of Bodies, as A, B, D, F, from the Center of Suſpenſion be called a, b, 4, f, reſpectively, and the Diſtance of the Center of Oſcillation Qfrom the Center of Suſpenſion C, be called x: And ſuppoſe the Diſtances of the Bodies A, B, D, leſs than the Diſtance CQ, or æ; and that of the Body F greater, as in the Figure; then will the Diſtances of A, B and D from the Center of Oſcillation be expreſſible by xa, xæb, and x4d; and the Diſtance of F, by //æ; multiplying then each Body by its Diſtance from one Center, and the Product ariſing therefrom by the Diſtance of the ſame Body from the other Center, we ſhall have Aax Aaa + Bbx Bbb  Ddx Ddd / Fff  Efæ, which reduced gives x Aaa A Bbb  Ddd + Frf Ecuation is the Senũ a5DF 5 Which latter Equation is the Senſe of the Rule above laid down. round a Point, with which, if the Pendulum or Rod ſtrikes againſt an Obſtacle, no Jar or Shock at the Point of Suſpenſion ſhall be occaſioned thereby. l Thus, let CF (Fig. 8.) be an inflexible Rod, having the Bodies A, B, D, &c. fixed in it at the Points A, B, D, &c. and let O be an Obſtacle againſt which, as it.vibrates or ſwings round the Point of Suſpenſion C, it may ſtrike againſt: then, if there be no Jar or Shock occaſioned thereby at the Point C, the Point that ſtrikes againſt O, (as the Point Q Tuppoſe) is called the Center of Percuſſion. PROPOS ITI ON. The Center of Percuſſion is the ſame with the Center of Oſcillation; and conſequently may be determined by the ſame Rule ſe]). PROB. ſe) Dem. From the Deſinition of the Center of Percuſſion above laid down, it appears, that the Forces with which the Bodies A, B and D, which would paſs above O, move; muſt be a Counterbalance to the Fore of the Body F, which would paſs below it: and that the Force of F muſt be a Counterbalance to them. But the Forces wherewith thoſe Bodies move, are as their Maſſes multiplied by their Diſtances from C, their Velocities being as theſe Diſtances. Farther, when the Point Q comes to O, and is ſtopt there, the Bodies A, B and D, endeavouring to go on, ſway or bear againt F, and F againſt them; juſt as if they were fixed to a Lever, as AF, having its Fulchrum at Q. Conſequently the Forces of the former Bodies, ſo far as they act againſt the latter, are as their Diſtances from P ROBL EM. Let it be required to find the Center of Oſcillation, or Percuſſion of an inflexible Rod AB (Fig. 9. as a Bar of Iron, or the like) every where of equal Size, and vibrating in, or revolving round the Point A, as a Center of Suſpenſion (f). the former, ĩs as its Diſtance alſo from Q: the abovementioned Forces muſt therefore be multiplied by the Diſtances of the Bodies from Q but the former of them, as obſerved above, baIances the latter; and the latter them. So many therefore of the laſt Products as relate to the Bodies above Qtaken together, muſt be equal to that which relates to the Body (or Bodies) below it. But the like Products were equal to each other, when the Point Q was looked upon as the Center of Oſcillation (as in the 5th Step of the foregoing Proceſs) conſequently the Center of Percuſſion is the ſame with that of Oſcillationn. Q E. D. (f) Solut. Imagine the Rod to be divided into the leaſt poſſible Parts B, C, D, &r. each of which call Ore. Theſe Parts we may conſider as ſo many Bodies contiguous to one another; ſo that the Center of Oſcillation or Percuſſion of theſe Bodies vill be the Center of Oſcillation or Percuſſiion of the whole Rod. To find this, we are by the Rule above laid down in the Text, to multiply each of theſe Bodies by the Square of its Diſtance from A. The ſirſt of theſe Products then will be B ſor One) multiplied by AB ſquared; but one multiplied by AB ſquared, ĩs the ſame with AB ſquared; now AB ſquared is a ſquare Area or Surface, one of whoſe Sides is AB. In like manner the Body C, when multiplied by the Square of its Diſtance from A, is a quare Area, one of whoſe Sides is AC, ſomewhat leſs than the former Imagine this Area laid upon the former; and the next, which will be leſs ſtill, laid upon that; and ſo on till you come to the leaſt of all. Theſe will make a Pyramid, whoſe Baſe is the firſt Area, and its perpendicular Height will be equal to the Thickneſs of them all together; which Thickneſs vill be as the Length of the Line BA. The Value O ſond Content of this Pyramid will be AB7 (viæ. its Baſe) multiplied by a third Part of AB (its perpendicular Height). In the next Place we are to multiply each of thoſe Bodies by its Diſtance from A: Now the Body B (or One) multiplied by AB, give a Line, as AB; ſo the Product of C, multiplied by its Diſtance AC, give a Line, as AC; theſe Lines heaped one upon another (as the Areas were before) will make a Triangle, whoſe Baſe vill be AB, and its perpendicular Height alſo AB; the Value, or Area of which, will be AB multiplied by  AB. In the laſt Place, by the Rule, we are to divide the Sum of the Products in the firſt Caſe, by the Sum of the Products in the latter; that is, the Content of the Pyramid by the Area of the Triangle; that z AB is, AB? x ; AB, by AB X 3 AB, which gives /; that is, 7 AB, or two Thirds of AB: ſo that the Diſtance of the Center of Oſcillation or Percuſſion, (as E ſuppoſe) from A the Center of Suſpenſion, muſt be equal to two Thirds of AB, the whole Natural Philoſophy. With NOTES Containing the M a THEM A TICAL DEMONSTRA TIONS and ſome occaſional REM a R &S. P ART II. HYDROSTATIGS And PNEUMA TICS. To which are added ſome DISSERTATIONS relating to theſe Subjects. C A M B R I D G E. Printed at the UNIVERSITY-PRESS. -r A COMPENDIOUS SYs TE M Natural Philoſophy. ant n H YDROS TA TICS. CHAP. I Of the Phænomena which ariſe from the mutual Action of the Particles of Fluids upon one another. IL. WN the former Part of this Eſay, I have laid down and explained the general Laws of Nature, and deduced from thence thoſe Phænomena which are in a ſtrict and proper Senſe * denominated Me-  In a larger Senſe all the Effects and Operations of natural lodies upon one another may be called Mechanical; as beng all ſubject to the general Laws of Motion. In Hydroſtatics luids are governed by the Laws of Mechaniſm, as much as hæ Mechanical Powers are; the ſame holds of the Rays of chanical ; I proceed now to an Explanation of ſuch, as Philoſophers have comprehended under the Name of Hydroſtatics; the Intention of which is ro explain the Nature of Fluids, and the Manner in which they act upon one another and upon Solidss. H. THE Nature of a Fluid*, as diſtinguiſhed from that of a Solid or hard Body, conſiſis in this, viæ. that its Particles are ſo looſely connected together, that they readily move out of their Places, vhen preſſed with the leaſt Force one way more than anotherĩ. Light, as will be ſeen when we come to Optics; and in thæ larger Bodies of the Planetary Syſtem, Mechaniſm equally prevails, as has been demonſtrated by Sir Zſanc Nevton 3 which we ſhall endeavour to make out (When we treat of Aſtronomy) ſo far as the Nature of our Deſign will permit. * Some Philoſopherss make the following Diſtinction in Fluids; thoſe whieh flow or ſpread themſelves till their Surface becomes level or horizontal, they call Liquid ; in contradiſtinction to Flame, Smoak, Vapour &e. which are alſo Fluids, but do not acquire ſuch a Surfacee Thoſe which are capable of exciting in us the Idæ: of Moiſtneſs, as Vater, &c. they call Humid, diltinguiſhing them thereby from Air, Quickſilver and melted Metals. But thoſe Diſtinctions are quite unneceſſary in a Philoſophical Senſe: all Fluids being equally Liquid, when not prevented from putting on that Appearance by the Bodies about them; and as to Humidity, that is only æ relative Qualitv; for though Quickſilver will not moiſten, r ſtick to a Mans Fingers, it will to Silver or Gold. : + The common Deſinition, Fluidum eſt cujus partes imiſeſ fioni cuicunque cedunt, & cedendo facillimt moventur inter though it expreſſes very well the Nature of a compreſible F.;as Air, yet does not anſwer to that of Water, whoſe Parts Iæ è been ſound to yield to no Force with which they have been cpreſſed, uileſs it was greater on one ſide than on t. r From whence Philoſophers conclude, rhat they are excecdingly minute, ſmnoth, and round æ; it being orherwiſe impoſſible they The Definition thereſore ſeems Imperfect as not expreſſing the Inequality of Preſſure which is requiſite to move the parts of ſome Fluids one among another.  It is commonly obſerved, that the Roundneſs of the Particles conduces very much to Fluidity upon this Account, viæ. becauſe round Bodies touching one another in but ſcw Points, the Force with which they mutually attract each other is the weaker. But upon this Suppoſition the Particles or a Fluid ought to move with leſs Freedom one among ancther, by how much the greater the Weight is with which they are compreſſed, (for it is the ſame thing in this reſpect, whether they preſs againſt each other by virtue of their own Attraction, or by ſome external Force) but that they do ſo, we have no Experience. A Diver, upon plunging out of his Bell at the bottom of the Sea, never finds the Water leſs fluid, notwithſtanding the great preſſure from above. Mr. Boyle having cauſed a Tadpole to be put into a Veſſel of Water, and to be preſſed with a very great Force, tells us that in appearance it found no Inconvenience from thence, but ſam about with the ſame Frecdom and Briſkneſs as ever. Quære, whether the Particles of which Fluids conſilt are in Contact with each other, or not? Perhaps they are prevented from approaching, nearer than to a certain Diſtance, by a repelling Power diffuſed around each ſingle Particlee. The Obſervation, that Water is not renderd leſs fluid by Preſſure, ſeems to favour this Opinion; and the Property which the Air has of expanding or contracting it ſelf, according to the Weight which jt ſuſtains (as ſhall be ſiewn Chap. 3.) proves beyond contradiction, that its Particles are endued with ſuch a Power. But if the Particles of all Fluids have this Power, it will follow that they ought to be in ſome meaſure capable of being reduced into leſs Space by Preſſure, as Air is, which they have not as yet appeared to be. Further ſince it has been proved (Part I. Chap. 3.) that if the parts of Fluids are placed juſt beyond their natural Diſtances from each other, they will a proach and run together, and if placed ſarther aſunder ſtill, will ſhould move vith ſuch Freedom one among another upon the Ieaſt Inequality of Preſſure. repel each other; it follows upon the foregoing Suppoſition, that each Particle of a Fluid is ſurrounded with three Spheres of Attraction and Repulſion one within another: the innermoſt of which is a Sphere of Repulſion, which xeeps them from apoaching into Contact, the next a Sphere of Attraction diffuſed around this oſ Repulſon, and beginning where this ends, by which the Particles of Fluids are diſpoſed to run together into Drops; the outermoſt of all a Sphere of Repulſion, whereby they repel each other, when removed out of that of Attraction. If this were allowed, and we might go on, and ſuppoſe the Particles of all Bodies to attract and repel each other alternately at different Diſtances, perhaps we might be able to ſolve a great many Phænomena relating to ſmall Bodies, which are now beyond the reach of our Philoſophy. However upon the Suppofition of the three Spheres of Attraction and Repulſion juſt mentioned, nothing is more eaſy than to ſee how Solids may be converted into Fluids, and Fluids into Solids (as is done in Liquefaction and Freezing); for allowing that the firſt or innermoſt Sphere of Repulſion, ĩs capable, like that of the Particles of Air, of being augmented by Heat, and diminiſhed or totall fuſpended by Cold, it follows that Bodies muſt be more or eh fluid in proportion to the degree in which they are affected by Heat or Cold; for when the Action of the firſt Sphere of Reulſion is diminiſhed or deſtroyed by Cold, the Particles of the luid muſt neceſſarily be brought into cloſer Contact with each other by the Force of the circumambient Attraction, and by that means conſtitute an harder Body than beforee But we muſt not dwell too much upon an Hypotheſis which wants Proof; I ſhall only add, that although ſome Fluids, as Water, have not been as yet contracted in their Dimenſions, or made to take up leſs Space than they naturally do, by any Force with which they have been eompreſſed by Art; yet there are none but are naturally contracted by Cold, from whence it ſeems reaſonable to infer, that their Particles are at leaſt capable of being brought into cloſer Contact, which is ſome Confirmation of this Doctrine. It ĩs an obvious Objection to this, that Water by freeæing is augmented in its Bulk; but this may be owing to thoſe Bubbles or Vacuities obſervable in the Water after it is frozen, which IlI. THOSE Particles conſidered ſeparately are endued vith all the common Properties of Matter, and ſubject to the ſame Laws of Motion and Gravitation with larger Bodies. To enquire therefore into the Nature of Fluids, is to conſider what Appearances a Collection of very ſmall round Bodies, ſubject to thoſe Laws, will exhibit under different Circumſtances. In order to which, it is uſual with hydroſtatical Writers to conſider a Fluid, as divided into ſeveral perpendicular Columns contiguous to each other. Sometimes it is convenient to conceive it divided into thin Plates or Strata lying upon one another. In ſome Caſes, the ſame Fluid is conſidered as diſtinguiſhed both theſe Ways, viæ. into perpendicular Columns, and alſo into thin Strata or Plates. Figure I. repreſents a Veſſel filled with a Fluid to the Height EF, and divided into the Columns GH, IK, LM &pſ. and alſo into the Strata RS, TV, XY &e. IV. FROM this Obſervation concerning the Properties of the Particles conſidered ſeparately, immediately reſults the following Propofition, viæ. that in a Veſſel whoſe Form is ſuch as is repreſented by ABCD, (Fig. 1.) the Quantity of Preſſure which each Stratum ſuwere not in it before; and not to any general and uniform reamoval of the Particles of the Fluid from each other, which the Objection, if it is of any Force againſt what has been advanced, muſt ſuppoſe, ſtains from the Weight of the Incumbent Fluid, is in Proportion to the Number of thoſe Strata which reſt upon it, that is, as the Height of the Surface of the Fluid; for if we ſuppoſe the Strata of equal Thickneſs, the Quantity ſuſtained is proportionable to the Number of Strata of which it conſiſis V. VHEN the Surface of a Fluid is horizontal or level, each Particle thereof is diſpoſed to continue in its Place, being ſuſtaincd therein by the contiguous ones. LET the Fluid be ſuppoſed to be divided into Strata, each of the Thickneſs of a Partiticle of the Fluid, and if the Truth of this Propoſition is denied, let the Particle mn be one of thoſe which is not ſuſtained in its Place by the contiguous ones, but is moving from thence towards ſome other Part of the Veſſel, v. 2. towards D. Now ſince all the other Particles of that Stratum are at an equal Depth below the Surface of the Fluid with this, they alſo ſuſtain an equal Degree of Preſſure (by the laſt Propoſition,) conſequently for the ſame Reaſon that one of them is moving towards D, th]e reſt may all be ſaid to be moving in the ſame Direction: but this cannot be true of the whole Stratum, while the Veſſel is entire, and therefore of none of its Parts. Now the like Reaſoning will hold againſt the Motion of the Par ticle mn towards any other Part of the Veſſel, from whence it follows, that each Particle of the Fluid, is ſuſtained in its Place by the contiguous ones, and therefore diſpoſed to continue at Reſt , VI. FROM hence is derived a fundamental Propoſition in Hydroſtatics, viæ. That when the Surface of a Fluid is level, wharever Preſſure any ſingle Particle or ſmall Portion of it ſuſtains from the contiguous ones on one part, it ſuſtains the ſame on all the reſt, that is, it is preſſcd by them With an equal Degree of Force on all Sides. / FOR by the Definition of a Fluid . 2.) each Particle is diſpoſed to give Way, and move out of its Place, vhen the Preſſure is not equal on all Sides; and . 5.) cach Particle is preſſed by the contiguous ones in ſuch a manner that it is ſuſtained in its Place thereby, it is therefore preſſed with an equal Degree of Force on all Sides. Corol. FROM hence it follows that each æ This ews us the Abſurdity of ſome Philoſophers, who place the ſole Difſerence between Solids and Fluids in this, miæ. that the Particles of theſe are ever in Motion, while thoſe of the other are always at Reſt. + This Propoſition with ĩts Corollary is not ſtrictly ſreaking true, unleſs the Particle or Portion of Fluid we ſpeak oſ is ſuppoſed void of Gravity, for it preſſes downwards with a Force equal to the Weight of thoſe Particles which reſt upon it added to its own, whereas the Force with which it preſſes upwards iĩs only equal to the Weight it ſuſtains, iæ. that of the incumbent Fluid. But the P.rticles oſ Fluids are ſo exceedingly minute, and the Gravity oſ each ſo very ſmall, that the Error ariſing from hence can never be ſenſible. Particle or ſmall Portion of a Fluid preſſes vith the ſame Degree of Force in all Directions on thoſe which are contiguous to it. For by the third Law of Nature, every Particlc preſſecs upon the contiguous oncs with the ſame Degree of Force, with which it is preſſed upon by them. VII. THE Surface of a Fluid becomes level by its own Gravity, vhen no external Force prevents it from being ſo. FoRr the Particles of Fluids preſs in all Directions with Forces proportionable to the Height of their Surfaces (Cor. §. 6. and §. 4) if then the Surface is not level, the different Parts of the ſame inferior Stratum will be preſſcd not only downwards, but ſideways againſt each other vith unequal Forces; the greãter Preſſure therefore overcoming the weaker, the Particles which ſuſtain the leaſt Preſſure vill be driven out of their Places and raiſed up, till the Surface becomes level; the Surface being level, cach Particle will be equally preſſed in every Direction, . 8-) all therefore will remain at Reſt, and the Surface continuc in that State ,  This Demonſtration, as alſo the foregoing, Is ſounded tpon a Suppoſition, that Bodies tend dow nwards by their Gravity in Lines parallel to each other, which though phyſically true, is iot ſtrictly ſo, their Tendency being towards ihe Center of the Earth, and conſequently in Lines which meet in a Point: and therefore if we would be accurate, the Fluid contained in a Veſſel ſhiould be conſidered, as divided into Columns and VIII. FLUuIDS gravitate in Fluids of the ſame Kind. THIS Propoſition is a neceſſary Conſequence of what has been obſerved about the Nature of the Particles of which they conſiſt, vir. that they are ſolid, and enducd with the ſame Properties with other Bodies. The Reaſon why their Gravity is not ſenſible in the Fluid, is becauſe the lower Parts ſuſtain the upper, and hinder them from deſcending. But it does not follow from thence, that their Gravity is entirely taken avay, as Strata, as repreſented Figure the ſecond, where 48D is the Earth, C its Center, £FGH a Fluid contained in a Veſſel, and divided into Columns, which if continued down to the Center of the Earth, would there terminate in a Point C;3 and into the concentric Strata ab, cd, &c. having the Center of the Earth for the Center of their Convexity. And then conſidering the Strata tę be of this Form, and arguing from thence, in the ſame manner as beſore, we ſhall find that the Particles oſ the Fluid Will not be in quilibrio with each other, till all the Parts of ĩts Surſace are at equal Diſtances from the Center of the Earth, forming thereby the Surface æ F, concentric to that of the Earth. Conſequently the Surfaces of Fluids are not level or plain, but convex, having the Center of the Earth for the Center of their Convexity. This Convexity by reaſon of the great diſtance of the Earth's Center approaches ſo near to a Plane, that in ſmall Portions of it the Difference is not ſenſible, and thereſore may be neglected; but at Sea 'tis evident to Senſe: for when the Mariners put to Sea, the Shore firſt diſappears, then the lower Buildings, aſterwards the Towers, Mountains &e.; in like Manner, when they approach a diſtant Ship, the top of the Maſt and Sails appear ſirſt, while the Ship it ſelf is intercepted from their View, by the Convexity of the Water between them, but when they aſcend the Maſt of their own hip, ĩt may eaſily bę ſcen. ſome * Philoſophers have imagined; for by ſo much as the lower Parts preſs upon thoſe which are above them, juſt ſo much additional Weight do they receive from the Reaction of the other upon them: Thus their Weight is communicated to the Veſſel, which upon this Account weighs according to the Quantity of the Fluid it contains. IX. THE Preſſure of a Fluid is in Proportion to its perpendicular Height, and the Quantity oſ Surface againſt which it preſſes. TuHIs Propoſition admits of four Caſes. I. VHEN the Fluid is contained in a Veſſel of the ſame Dimenſions from top to bottom, and held in an erect Poſition, as that repreſented Fig. I. it is evident the Preſſure of the Fluid upon the bottom will be in Proportion to its Magnitude, and the perpendicular Height of the Surface of the Fluid above it. For concciving it divided into Columns, the Preſſure upon the Bottom by the fourth Propoſition, will be as the Length or Height of the Columns: and it will alſo be as the Number of them, becauſe the Quantity of Fluid which preſſes upon the Bottom is in that Proportion, that is, as the Magnitude of the Bottom preſſcd upon. But when the Veſſel is inclined or irregular, the Truth of this Pro-  This was the Notion of the Carteſians, who held, that when a Fluid is mixed with another of the ſame Kind, it loſes ĩts own Weight thereby. : poſition is ſo far from being evident, that it has been commonly looked upon as a Paradox. 2. LET the Veſſcl ABCD (Fig. 3.) be filled with a Fluid to the Height EF, and held in an inclined Poſition, as there repreſented; I ſay the Preſſure of this Fluid is proportionable to the Magnitude of the Baſe CD, and FG or HD the perpendicular Height of the Surface of the Fluid above it. FoRr ſuppoſing the Fluid divided into the Strata El, KM, LO, &c. ſo far as the firſt Stratum EI is prevented from preſſing upon KI the Surface of the next inferior Stratum, by being in ſome Meaſure ſupported by the Side of the Veſſcl FI, ſo far is its Preſſuræ augmented by the Reaction of the oppoſite Side E upon it, which is exactly equal to the Action of the former, becauſe the Fluid preſſing every Way alike, at the ſame Depths below rhe Surface, exerts an equal Force againſt both theſe Sidess. The Surface therefore of the ſccond Stratum is preſſed with the ſame Degree of Force with which it would be, if the Quantity of Fluid contained in the former Stratum was included within the Space HKQI, which is exactly equal to it, as having the ſame Baſe KI and the ſame perpendicular Height QIV. Now this being true of each Stratum, their Preſſure upon CD the Baſe of the Veſſcl is the ſame as if they were all placed per* 31. El. 11. pendicularly over it, and filled the Space RHCD; Which they would do, ſince the ſum of their perpendicular Heights QI, S, LT and NV is equal to HD the perpendicular Heignht of this Space, and cach of their Baſes I, LM, &c. is equal to CD its Baſe *. But by the foregoing Caſe, if the Space RHCD was filled with a Fluid, the Preſiure of it would be proportionable to rthe Dimenſions of the Baſe CD, and the perpendicular Height DH, therefore it is the ſame in the inclined Tube ABCDV. 3. LET the Veſſel ABC be irregular, as repreſented Figure the 4th and filled with a Fluid to the Height D, I ſay the Preſſure of the Fluid upon the Baſe C, is proportionable  1. EI. 1I. F Perhaps it may be thought more Geometrical to demonſtrate this Propoſition with the Generality of Authors from the Property of the inclined Plane. They cunſider BD the lower Bide of the Tube, as an inclined Plhine, on which the Fluid contained within it reſts, and argue that it loſes thereby a Part of itt Weight in Proportion to the Length of the Plane, and therefore occaſions no greater Preſſure upon the Baſe, than iĩf the Veſſel was held erect, and filled only to the ſame perpendicular Height, as when inclinedc But this Demonſtration proves too much, for by this Way of Reaſoning, onc might ſhew, that the Preſſure of the Fluid EFCD upon the Baſe CD is leſs than the Preſſure of R HCD a Column of the ſame Fluid having an equal Baſe and perpendicular Height with itt. For both the inclined and the perpendicular CoIumn contain the ſame Quantity of Fluid, upon account of the equality o? their Baſes, and perpendicular Heights, but that reſts upon an inclined Plane, which this does not, and therefore preſſes leſs upon the Baſe. But this is contrary both to Demoſtration and Experience, this Argument therefore proves too much to the Magnitude of the Baſe, and CD the perpendicular Height of the Surface of the Fluid above it. IN Ocder that the Proof of this Propoſition may be the better underſtood, we muſt premiſe the following Lemma. viz. THAT When a Fluid paſſes through a Pipe, as AB, (Fig. 5.) which in ſome Parts is larger than in others, the Moment or Force vith which it moves is every where the ſame. For vhile the Fluid is paſſing through the Tube, its Velocity in every Part will be reciprocally as the Quantity of Matter; for Inſtance it will be as much greater at C than it is at D, as the Quantity paſſing through C at any Inſtant of Time is leſs than at D, and ſo of the reſt; becauſe a leſs Quantity would be conveyed through the ſmaller Parts of the Tube in the ſame Time, unleſs it ſhould move faſter there in Proportion to the Smalneſs of them. Nov the Momentum of Bodies is partly owing to the Quantity of Matter, and partly to the Velocity3 (as explained Part I. Chap. 9. §. I.) conſequently what the Fluid, which is actually paſſing through the narrower Parts of the Tube, wants in Quantity, is compenſated by its Velocity in thoſe Parts, and what it vants in Point of Velocity in the other Parts is made up by the Quantity paſſing through them; ſo that the Moment is the ſame in every Part of the Tube, whether larger or nmarrower . The ſame is true, whatever be the Poſition the Tube is held in. LET us now conceive the Fluid in the Veſſcl ABC (Fig. 4.) to be diſtinguiſhed into the Strata EF, GH, IK &c. Let us alſo imagine the Bottom of the Veſſel C to be movcable, that is, capable of ſliding up and down the narrow Part of the Veſſel, v. ę. from C io GH, (without letting any of the Fluid run out.) Let it further be ſuppoſced that this moveable Bottom is drawn up or let down vith a given Velocity, while the Veſſel it ſelſis fixed and immoveable; it is evident th] Jowermoſt Stratum which is contiguous to the Bottom Will be raiſed or let down with the ſame Velocity, and vill thereby have a Moment proportionable ro that Velocity and the Quantity of Matter it contains: But by the Lemma, all the reſt of the Strata will have the ſamce Moment, conſequently the Moment of all taken together, (that is, of the whole Fluid,) is the ſamc, as if the Veſſel had been no larger in any onc Part, than it is at the Bottom, (for then the Moment of cach Stratum would alſo have been as great as that oſ the Iower-  Thus we may obſerve in a River or Canal, that by how much the Breadth or Depth is leſs in any Part, ſo much the more rapid is the Stream in that Part; and on the contrary where it is wider and deeper, the Motion oſ the Water is more gentle and langnid. So that the Moment with which it ſlows is the ſame in every Part. moſt;) the Preſſure therefore, or Action of the Fluid vith which it endeavours to force the Botrom out of its Place, is as the Number of Strata, that is, the perpendicular Height of the Fluid, and the Magnitude of the ſowermoſt Stratum, that is, the Botrom. 4. AGAIN, ſuppoſe the Veſſel ABC (Fig. 6) filled vith a Fluid to D; I ſay the Prcrſure upon the Bottom BC, is proportionable ro the Dimenſions of the Bottom, and DE the perpendicular Height of the Fluid. FoRr if we ſuppoſe the Bortom moveable, as before, and raiſed up or let down vith a given Velocity, the Moment of every Stratum Vill be the ſame with the lowermoſt by the Lemma; therefore the Moment of all taken together, is the ſame as if the Veſſel had been no leſs in any one Part than it is ar the Bottom; conſequently the Preſſure is proportionable to the perpendicular Height, and the Magnitude of the Bottom. This Caſe is the Converſe of the former, . Upon this Propoĩion I is founded the Practice of conveying Water through Pipes from Place to Place, &c. For from hence it follows, that If one end of a Pipe is Iaid in a Reſervoir of Water, the Fluid will run into the Pipe till it riſes to a Level at the other End with its Surface in the Reſervoir. Thus let ABC ſFig. 8.) repreſent à Reſervoir or Baſon of Water, DGE a Pipe laid from thence to EIf E the end of the Pipe is Jlaced above the Line 4BF the Level of the Water in the eſervoir, the Water will run into the Pipe till it riſes in the other End to F the Level with 4B, at which time the Water in the Pipe will be in æquilibrio with that in the Reſervoir, and remain at Ret. But if the End of the . is C elow FROM hence it follows, that if a Veſſel i is made of ſuch Form, as is repreſented (Fig. 7.) by ABCDEFG, and silled vith a Fluũ to the Height C, the Weight vhich the Bottom ſuſtains, is as great as it would be, had the Form of the Veſſel been IFG, which is every where of the ſame Dimenſions. that the other is of at the Bottom, and filled to the Toꝑp IK. Becauſe the Preſſure by the Propoſitjon is proportionable to the Bortom and perpendicular Height, hich in both Chſer are the ſame. THE Reaſon vhy the Veſel a B CPEFG vith the Fluid contained in it, does not vęigl⸗; ſo much, as the Veſſel IXFG- when full to; the ſame; Height- I. notwithſtanding the; Preſſure upon the Bottom is the ſame in both, is becauſ⸗ ABDE the uppsr Part or Cover helow the Surbiee c of the Water in e _ jt will eon⸗ tinue to run out, tiſll they are reduced to a Level. For le G H be the loweſt Part of the Pive, then ſince ? the perpendicular Height oſ the Fluid on one Side, is equal to B the perpe: — Height of the Fluid on the other, and G#, which (being the Pluce where the: Fluids preſs one againſt; another,) may be couſidered. as a Baſe, to both, is common ll it follows from, this Propoſition that the Preſſures on each Side are exactly equal, andtherefore being in contrary. Directĩons will neceſſarily deitroy each other, and the Fluid will remam in quilibrio- But while the End. Eis bęlow the Level, this quilibrium eannot be obtained; ; and therefore the F luid will continuè to run out. i VFor the ſame Reęſon, when twol or, more Tubes ſ—; nicate with each other, the Surſace of the Fluid they contain will ſtand at the ſame Level in all. X. THE Velocity, vith which a Fluid ſpouts out at an Hole in the Bottont of a Veſctl, is cqual to that which a Body would acquire by falling freely from the Level of the Surface of the Fluid to the Hole. LET there be a large cylindrical Tube ABCD (Fig. 9.) in the upper Part of which ]et us imagine a Cylinder of Ice FGHI exactly fitting it; let it ſurther be ſuppoſed that HI the lower Surface of the Ice is continually melting, ſo as to afford a Stream of Water running down the Middle of the Tubee Novw the Form of this Stream of Water will neceſſarily be ſuch as is repreſented in the Figure by HLI, for the Water falling freely vill deſcend faſter and faſter like other Bodies, cauſing thereby the Stream to become narrower and narrower. Nov let it be ſuppoſed that the Tube has a Bortom as CD vith an Hole in it at juſt ſuſficient to let the Stream paſs freely, it is evident there will be no Obſtruction on this Account, but that the Fluid vill paſs through the Hole with ſuch Velocity as it naturally acquires by falling from HI the lower Surface of the Ice. And if we ſuppoſe M and N the empty Parts of the Tube to be filled with Water, the Water will preſs equally upon the Sides of the Stream in every Direction ſ. 6.) and therefore will be no Impediment to its Motion on that Account, Laſtly let us ſuppoſe the Ice taken avay, and the the Stream ſupplyed from- tee-Water at the Sides,. as is the Caſe when a Fluid runs out through the Bottom of a Veſel; then will the Veſocity with which the Water flows. through the Hole continue the ſame; for ſo fat as the Water coming from the Sides endeavours to deſcend it ſelf, ſo far it obſiructs the Deſcent of the Stream, and no farther; and conſequently cauſes no Alteration in the Velocity or Quantity of Fluid running out. The Velocity therefore with which the Fiuid paſſes through the Hole, is equal to rhat which a Body would acquire by falling freely from the Level of the Surface of the Fluid to ihat Place. IFP the Hole is made in the Side of th Veſſel at the ſame Diſtance below the Surface, the Velocity will be the ſame, on Account of that equal Tendency Fluids have to move every Way alike *,  Upon this Principle is founded the Practice of making artificial Fountains. For if to a Veſſel or Reſervoir ABCD filled with a Fluid to the Height EF, be fixed the Pipe CH, (as repreſented Fig. 10.) with a ſmall Aperture at X, the Fluid will ſpout up from thence to FL the Level of the Surface of the Fluid in the Veſſel. For by this Propoſition it will ſpout from X with ſuch a Velocity, as a Body would acquire by falling from FL the Level of the Surface to the Aperture at X, that ĩs, ſuch as will carry it from the Aperture to the Level3 becauſe that Velocity which a Body acquires by falling from a certain Height is ſuſficient to carry it back to the ſame Height from whence it fell. But in Practice the Height the Fluid riſes to, is leſs than that of the Level of its Surface in the Reſervoir; this is owjng to the Reſiſtance it meets with from the Air, iĩts Friction XI. THE Velocity with which a Fluid ſpouts out from the Bottom or Side ofa Veſſel is as the ſquare Root of the Height of its Surface above the Hole æ. TH E Cauſc why a Fluid ſpouts out through an Hole made in the Bottom or Side of a Veſſel is the Preſſure or Weight of the Fluid incumbent upon the Hole; from whence it ſhould ſeem, that the Velocity ought to be as the Preſſure; but if ſo, then the Quantity run out vould alſo be as the Preſſure for the faſter the Liquor flows the greater is the Quantity thrown out in a given Time, and vice versà) conſequently upon this Suppoſition we ſhould have two Effects, each depending on the ſame Cauſe, and equal to it, which is abſurd,. Tis not then the Quantity againſt the Sides of the Pipe &. It is found impoſſible to make it much exceed the Height of an hundred Feet: For when it ſpouts out of the Aperture with a Velocity neceſſary to carry it higher, the Stream is immediately daſhed to Pieces by the Reſiſtance of the Air, whereby it loſes its Force, and js prevented from riſing to any conſiderable Height.  This Propoſition may be otherwiſe demonſtrated from the Int in the following Manner. For ſince the Velocity with which a Fluid ſpouts out through an Hole in the Rottom or Side of a Veſſel, is equal to that which a Body would acquire by falling from the Level of the Surface of the Fluid to the Hole, and the Velocities Bodies acquire by falling are as the ſquare Roots of the Heights they fall from (Part I. Chap. 5. 5. 5) ĩt follows that the Velocity, with which a Fluid ſpouts out from an Hole in the Bottom or Side of a Veſſel, is as the ſquare Root of the Height of the Level of the Surface of the Fluid abovę the Hole. of Fluid run out, nor the Velocity with which it flows, but its Moment or both theſe multiplied together, (Part I. Ch. 9. §. I.) that is the true and àdequate Effect of the Preſſure. Theſe therefore being ever in the ſame Ratio, will each of them be as the ſquare Root of the Preſſure: For then being multiplyed together, their Product or the Moment of the ſpouting Fluid is adequately as the Preſſure which occaſions it; but the Preſſure is as the perpendicular Height 4) therefore the Velocity and alſo the Quantity of Fluid ſpouting out is as the ſquare Root of the Height of its Surface above the Hole. To give an Inſtance or tvo; ſuppoſe two Holes made in the Side of a Veſſel, the one an Inch below the Surface of the Fluid it contains, the other four; the Velocity with which the Liquor flows out of the lower Hole, will not be four times as great, as that with which it flows through the upper, notwithſianding the Preſſure is four times greater: for if it ſhould, the Quantity run out in a given Time vould alſo be four times greater, conſequently the Effect produced would be ſixteen times greater than it is at the upper Hole, that is, four times greater than the Cauſe, which is abſurd. Whereas the Velocity and Quantity of Matter vill each be only twice as great as they are above, producing thereby a Force or Moment only four times as great, which is tionable to the Cauſe. So if an Hole were made ſixteen rimes lower than the firſt, the Velocity and Quantity of Matter will not be each ſixteen times greater than at tlię other, but only four times greater apiece, and ſo the Moment ſixteen times grearer, as the Preſſure is *. 2 From hence we may ſee the Error ſome of the foreſgn Mathematicians have fallen into with Regard to the Forces of moving Bodies, who contend that they are as the Squares of the Velocities multiplied by the Quantities of Matter. For from this Propoſition it is, that one of the principal Arguments brought in Favour of this Opinion is derivedd They argue thus, Effectls are ever proportionable to their Cauſes, the Presſure of the incumbent Fluid is the Cauſe of its ſpouting out, the Force with which it ſpouts out, is the Erfect, but by this Propoſition the Preſſure is as the Square of the Velocity it flows with, therefore the Force is likewiſe as the Square of the Velocityy True, it is ſo; but let ns ſee the Conſequencee The Force with which the Fluid ſpouts out is not only owing to the Velocity, but the Quantity run out in a given Time, they have each their Share in producing the Force, conſequently the Force is in a Ratio compounded oſ both, or as the Product of one multiplied by the other, or, which comes to the ſame Thing, ſince as was obſerved before, they are in the ſame Ratio with each other) as the Square of either of them; from hence it is, that the Forces of Fluids in Motion are ſaid to be as the Squares oſ their Velocities; not that they are ſo in Virtue of thoſe Velocities, as ſuch, but in Virtue of them, and the Quantitios oſf Matter taken together,, or becauſe the Squares of the Velocities is the ſame Thing with the ſimple Velocities miiltiplied by the Quantities of Matter. Therefore when it is ſaid, the Forces of Fluids are as the Squares of the Velocifies, that Part of the Foree which ariſes from the Quantity of Matter is really taken into Conſideration. How ridiculous then muſ©t it be in thoſe Gentlemen to fetch an Argument from hænce to prove, that the Forees of Bodies in Motion are as the Squares of the Velocities and Quantities of Matter too, when thev are a; the Squares of the Velocities, only becauſ the Quantitles of Matter are implied in themm XII. WHEN a Current of Water or other Fluid falls perpendicularly upon the Surface of a Plane, or flows againſt ir, (as the Wind againſt the Sail of a Ship, or the like) the Force, which the Fluid exerts upon it, is equal to the Weight of a Column of the ſame Fluid, vhoſe Baſe is equal to the Plane, and its Height ſuch, that a Body falling freely through it would acquire the ſame Degree of Velocity with which the Fluid moves *. IN Order to demonſtrate this Propoſition, let us ſuppoſe the Veſſel ABCD (Fig. 11.) filled with a Fluid, and having a large Hole EF in the Bortom, then will the Preſſure of the Fluid cauſe a Stream to flow out, which in the Hole it ſelf will have ſuch a Degree of Velocity, as a Body would acquire by falling freely from the Surface of the Fluid in the Veſſel to the Hole (as demonſtrated § 10.) In the midſt of this Hole, and conſequently in the Stream, let us ſuppoſe a Plane as PQ ſuſpended, but ſomewhat leſs than is ſufficient to fill the Hole, Ieaſt it ſtop the Current of ithe Waterr. Now tis certain this Plane ſupports a Column of the Fluid equal to that vhich preſſes upon any other Part of the Bottom of the Veſel of equal Dimenſions with * From this Propoſition is deduced the Method of computing the Power of a Machine, which ĩs to be moved by Wind or Water &e. See an Inſtance oſ ſuch a Calculation in the Menoirs it ſclf (for being thus placed, it may be looked upon as a Part of the Bottom) but every Part bears a Column, whoſe Baſe is equal to its own Dimenſions, and its Height the ſame vith that of the Surface of the Fluid in the Veſſel: Conſcquently this Plane ſupports ſuch a Column, that is, it is reſiſted by the Stream vith a Force equal to the Weight of a CoJumn, vhoſe Baſe has the ſame Dimenſions vith it ſelf, and vhoſe Height is equal to that of the Surface of the Fluid in the Veſſel, that is, ſuch an Height as a Body by falling frecly from, would acquire a Velocity equal to that vwith which the Fluid moves. XIII. THE Preſſure of a Fluid againſt a perpendicular Bank or Sluice &/c. is equal to the Weight of a Column of the ſame Fluid, whoſe Baſe is equal to ſo much of the Bank as is below its Surface, and which has half the Depth of the Fluid for its Height æ, IF the Preſſure upon every Part of the Bank from the Surface to the Bottom was as great as it is at the Bortom, the Preſſure againſt it would be equal to the Weight of a Column whoſe Baſe is equal to ſo much of the Bank as is under the Surface of the Fluid, and æ From hence we ſee the Reaſon, why the Water of the Sea or great Lakes is as eaſily kept within their Banks (ſetting aſide the Force which ariſes from the Motion of the Waves &c.) as that oſ the narroweſt Canal, 47œ. becauſe the Preſſure of Fluids is not in Proportion t to their Surfaces, but their Depths. which has the whole Depth of the Fluid for its Height; for the Preſſure upon every Part of the Bank at the Bottom is equal to the Weight of a Column, whoſe Baſe correſponds to the Part preſſed upon, and its Height is that of the Depth of the Fluid; conſequently if the Preſſure was the ſame every where from Top to Bottom, it would be equal ro the Weight of as many ſuch Columns as would anſwer to all the Parts of the Bank: But the Preſſure every where diminiſhes in Proportion as ve approach the Top, where it is Nothing; it is therefore but half what it would be in the other Caſc; from Whence the Propoſition is clear. C H A P. II. Of the Effects Fluids have on Solids immerſed therein. I. HE Specific Gravity of a Body is that, by which it is ſaid to be heavier or lighter than another of a different Kind: Thus Lead is ſaid to be ſpecifically heavier than os; becauſe ſuppoſing an equal Bulk of i x B eauſe the Sum of a Number of Terms in Arithmetical rogreſſion beginmnę from Nothing, is half the Sum of an equal Number of Ferms, each of which is equal to the lat in the Progreſon. cach, the one would be heavier than the other. From hence it follows that a Body ſpecifically heavier than another is alſo more denſe, that is, contains a greater Quantity of Matter under the ſame Bulk, becauſe Bodies weigh in Proportion to the Quantities of Matter they contain (Part I. Chap. 3. §. 7) II. IP a Solid is immerſed in a Fluid of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with it ſelf, it will remain ſuſpended therein, in whatever Part of the Fluid it is put. LET the Body FGHI (Fig. 12.) be immerſed in the Fluid ABCD to the Depth MN, or any other whatever; I ſay, it will continue in the ſame Part of the Fluid when left to it ſelf, without cither riſing towards the Surface, or ſinking towards the Bottom. Fo Rr the Body being (by the Suppoſition) of cqual Gravity with the Fluid, the Weight of the Column KLHI, which conſiſts partly of Fluid and partly of the Body, is the ſame as if it had been all Fluid; conſequently HI, that Part of the Surface of the Stratum MN which lies immediately under the Body, is preſſed vith the ſame Degree of Force, that any other Part of the ſame Dimenſions is, and therefore the whole Column KLHI will be ſupported in its Placec. Now the ſame being true of the Column KL HI whatever be its Length, tis evident the Body will be ſuſpended in its Place at any Depth. llI. BuT if the Body is ſpecifically heavier than the Fluid in which it is immerſed, it vill ſubſide to the Bottom: For then in whatever Part of the Fluid it is put, the Column KLHI, will always be heavier than an equal Column, that conſiſts all of Fluid; conſequently HI, thar Part oſ the Stratum MN, which lies immediately under the Body will ſuffer a greater Preſſure, than any other Part of the ſame Dimenſions; and therefore will give way and permit the Body to ſubſide continually till it reaches the Bottom. IV. ON the contrary if the Body is ſpecifically lighter than the Fluid, it will riſe to the Top in what Part of the Fluid ſoever it is put. For then the Column KLHI ill always be lighter than an equal Column vhich is all Fluid; conſequently HI Will be leſs preſſcd downwards than any other Part of the ſame Stratum of equal Dimenſions, and vill therefore continually riſe up carrying the Body with it, till it, arrives at the Top. V. A BoDY being laid on the Surface of a Fluid ſpecifically heavier than it ſelf, ſinks into it, till the immerſed Part takes up the Place of a Quantity of Fluid, vhoſe Weight is equal to that of the whole Body. LET EFGH ſ(Fig. 13.) be a Body floating on a Liquor ſpecifically heavier than it ſelf, it will ſink into it till the immerſed Part IKGH takes up the Place of ſo much Fluid, as is equal to it in Weight. For in that Caſe GH that Part of the Surface of the Stratum upon which the Body reſts, is preſſed with the ſame Degree of Force as it would be, wvas the Space IKGH full of the Fluid; that is, all the Parts of that Stratum are preſſcd alike, and therefore the Body after having ſunk ſo far into the Fluid is in æquilibrio with it, and will remain at Reſt. FR oM hence it follows, that the Body is as much ſpecifically lighter than the Fluid on which it floats, as the immerſed Part is leſs than the Whole. For by how much the leſs the immerſed Part is, ſo much the leſs Fluid is equal in Weight to the whole Body; that is, the Body is ſo much the lighter in Reſpect of the Fluidl. And if the ſame Body is made to float ſucceſſively in Fluids, whoſe ſpecific Gravities differ among themſelves, (but all exceed that of the Body), the lighter the Fluids are, ſo much greater vill be the Part immerſed *, VI. A BoDY ſuſpended in a Fluid ſpecifically lighter than it ſelf, loſes a Part of its Weight (or rather communicates it to the u This Phænomenon is what gave Riſe to the Hydrometer, an Inſtrument of great Uſe in aſcertaining the Genuineſs of Liquors3 for ĩt rarely happens, that the adulterated and the genuine Liquor (however they may agree in Appearance) are of the ſame ſpecific Gravity. Fluid) equal to that of a Quantity of Fluid of the ſame Bulk. LET us inſtead of ſuppoſing the Body ſuſpended in the Fluid, imagine it to be avay, and its Place filled with the Fluid; now tis evident, this being of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with the circumjacent Fluid, will be entirely ſupported by it, or if we ſuppoſe the Body to be of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with the Fluid, it will be wholly ſuſpended by. it3 ve ſee therefore the Preſſure of ithe circumambient Fluid, whereby it endeavours to buoy up the Body, is equivalent to the Weight of ſo much Fluid, as would ſill the Place the Body takes up. But ſince the Fluid preſſes only on the Surfaces of the Body, that Preſſure is the ſame, vhatever be the ſpecific Gravity of the Body; the Body therefore loſes ſo much of its Weight as the Fluid would naturally buoy up; that is, ſo much as is the Weight of a Quantity of Fluid of the ſame Bulk. TH I5 Propoſition affords us a Method of determining the Relation which the ſpeciſic Gravitics of Bodies, whether Fluid or Solid, bear to each other. For whereas by weighing a Solid in a Fluid, ſpecifically lighter than it ſelf, we ſind the abſolure Weight of a Quantity of the Fluid equal to it in Bulk (viæ. the Weight the Solid loſes) the Relation, that Weight bears to the Weight of the Solid, is cauſe the Weights of Bodies, whoſe Bulks are equal, are as their ſpecific Gravities: conſequently if the ſame Solid is weighed ſucceſſively in different Fluids (all lighter than it ſelf) we gain the Relation which the ſpecific Gravity of each bears to that of the Solid, and therefore to one another. Again, if different Solids are weighed in the ſame Fluid, the Relarion which the ſpecific Gravity of that Fluid bears to each Solid is had, and therefore alſo the ſpecific Gravities of the Solids among themſelves *. * Upon this is founded the Uſe of the hydroſtatical Balance for determining the ſpecific Gravities both of Solids and Fluids The Practice is thus. Firſt let the Solid be weighed in Air, that is, out of the Fluid; afterwards in it (this ought to be done by ſuſpending it at one End of the Balance by a String that is as nearly of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with the Fluid made Uſe of as poſſible, and letting it ſink into the Fluid, till it is wholly immerſed below the Surface; if the Fluid is Water, an Horſe Hair is moſt convenient to hang the Body at the End of the Balance by) then ſubſtract its Weight in the Fluid from its Weight in Air, the Difference is what it loſes in the Fluid. This done, ſay, by the Rule oſ Proportion, as the Weight loſt in the Fluid is to its Weight in Air, ſo is Unity, or any Number taken at Pleaſure, to a Fourth, which by its Relation to the former, will expreſs the Relation of the ſpecific Gravity of the Fluid to that of the Solidc Thus the Relation which the ſpecific Gravity of the ſame Fluid bears to that of various Solids, or of the ſame Solid to that of various Fluids, and conſequently the Relation of the ſpecific Gravities of all among themſelves may be obtained. L C H A P. III. Of the Air. I. H AT Part of Natural Philoſophy, which treats of the Properties of the Air, and the Effects of its Preſſure and Elaſticity, is called Pneumatics. IL. AIR is a thin tranſparent elaſtic Fluid ſurrounding the Earth to a certain Height, vhich taken together, is called the Aimoſphere. III. THAT Air is a Fluid, is evident from the eaſyy Paſſage it affords to Bodies moving in it: for this ſows it to be a Body, whoſe Parts eaſily yield to a Preſſure that is greater on one Side than on the other, which is the Definition of a Fluid. IV. AIR gravitates towards the Earth, or is heavy like other Bodies. T o prove this; we have Abundance of Arguments both from Senſe and Experiment. Thus, vhen the Hand is applied to the Orific of a Veſſel, it readily perceives the Weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere, as ſoon as the Air included in the Veſel begins to be dravn out. Thus, Glaſs Veſſels exhauſted or their Air (if not ſtrrong enough to ſuſtain the Preſ: ſure of the incumbent Atmoſphere) are cruſ©icd to Pieęes by the Weight of the Air vithll E our. outt. When the Air is exhauſted out of a Veſſel, the Veſſcl weighs leſs than before. With a great many more Experiments generally mentioned by Authors on this Subject . V. THE exact Weight of the incumbent Air is determined by filling a Tube with Mercury, and immerging the open End in a Veſſel of the ſame Fluid: for then the Mercury will run down the Tube, till its Surface is fallen only to the perpendicular Height of about twenty nine or thirty Inches above the Surface of the Mercury in the Veſſel; if the ſame Experiment is made vith Water, the Surface of it vill ſtand at about the Height of thirty two Feet above the Surface of that in the Veſſel; the Column of Mercuiy in one Caſe, and the Column of Water in the other exactly balancing the Weight of a Column of Air, which reaches to the Top of the Atmoſphere, and preſſcs upon the Surface of the Fluid in the Veſſels. This is what is called the Torricellian Experiment, from Torricelli the Inventor, and is the ſame with the common Barometer. FROM hence it follows, (Chap. I. §. 9 that all Bodies at the Surface of the Earth ſuſtain as great a Weight from the Preſſure of the Air, as is that of a Column of Water, whoſe Height is thirty two Feet, and its * See Boylè's Tracls; or Graveſande Lib. II, P. III. Baſe equal to the Surface of the Body preſſed upon *. VI. THAT the Suſpenſion of the Mercury in the Barometer depends on the Preſſure of the external Air, is beyond all Doubt; for if the Barometer is included in the Air Pump, the Mercury falls in the Tube in Proportion as the Air is exhauſted out of the Receiver; and if the Air is let in again gradually, the Mercury reaſcends proportionably, till it reaches its former Height. VII. Tn AT the Atmoſphere is extended to a determinate Height, appears from hence; viæ. that when the Torricellian Tube is removed to a more elevated Place, the ſuſpended Column of Mercury becomes ſhorter, which is, becauſe a ſhorter Column of Air preſſes upon it, or, that the Tube in this Situation is nearer the Top of the Atmoſphere.  The Preſſure of the Atmoſphere upon every ſquare Inch near the Surface of the Earth is about fiſteen Pounds, being æqual to the Weight of a Column of Mercury, whoſe Height is thirty Inches and its Baſe one ſquare Inch. Now ſuch a Column of Mercury would weigh about fifteen Poundss. The Weight of the Atmoſphere therefore which preſſes upon a Man's Body is equal to ſo many Times fifteen Pound, as the Surface of his Body contains ſquare Inches. The Reaſon why a Perſon ſuffers no Inconvenience from ſo great a Preſſure is owing to the Air included within the Pores and Fluids of the Body, which by its Reaction is a Counterpoiſe to the Preſſure of the external Air: as we ſhall explain more fully, when we come to o ſpsl of the Diving Bell, and the Manner of uſing it. VIII. THE Elaſticity of the Air is that Property by which it contracts it ſelf into leſs Space, when an additional Preſſure is laid upon it, and recovers its former Dimenſions, when the Preſſure is taken off. This is accounted its diſtinguiſhing Property, all the reſt being common to it with other Fluids. OF this we have numerous Proofs. Thus, a Bladder full of Air being compreſſed by the Hand, the included Air gives way; but when the Preſſure is taken off, the Air expands it ſcelf, and readily fills up the Cavity or Impreſſion made in the Surface of the Bladder. And if a larger Quantity of Air, than is naturally preſicd into a Veſſel by the Weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere, is forced into it by the Condenſer (an Engine for that Purpoſe) and if that Air is afterwards let out by opening the Veſſel, the Remainder is found to be of the ſame Weight as at firſt; from whence it follows, that the Air by means of its Elaſticity or Spring drives out all that which was forced in by the Condenſer, recovers its former Dimenſions, and fills the Veſſel as before. IX. FROM hence, together with what has been obſerved about the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, it follows, that the Air near the Surface of the Earth, is compreſſed into a much narrower Space by the Weight of the Air above, than that which it would naturally take up, was it frocd from that Preſſure; Preſſure; accordingly it is found by Experiment, that vhen the Preſlure of the Atmoſphere is taken off from any Portion of Air, it immediately expands it ſelf into a vaſt Extent. Hence it is, that thin Glaſs Bubbles or Bladders filled with Air, being included in the Receiver of the Air-Pump, are broke in Pieces by the Spring of the Air they contain vithin them, when the Preſſure of the exrernal Air is taken off. Thus a Bladder quite flaccid containing only a ſmall Quantity of Air in it, ſwells upon the Removal of the external Alr, and appears diſtended as if it contained as great a Quantity as poſſiblee. The ſame Effect is found in carrying a Bladder ſomewhat flaccid to a more elevated Place, for therè the external Preſſure being leſs, the Air included in the Bladder is in ſome meaſure freed from the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, it therefore dilates it ſelf, and diſtends the Bladder as in the former Caſe. X. IT is found by Experiment, that the greater the Force is with which a Quantity of Air is compreſſed, ſo much leſs is the Space into which it is contractedc From Whence it follows, that the Denſity of the Air is proportionable to the Preſſure which it ſuſtains. As to the utmoſt Degrees oſ Expanfion and Contraction which the Air is capable of, they are as yet unknown, In ſeveral Experiments made by Mr. Boyle, Air in its natural State, that that is, preſſed only with the Weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere, dilated it ſelf, when that Preſſure was taken off, into more than thirteen thouſand Times the Space it took up beforee. And he was able ſo far to compreſs it, that it ſould take up more than five hundred and twenty thouſand Times leſs Space than that into which it would dilate it ſelf when freed from its Preſſure . XI. FROM this Property it follows, that the Air in the inferior Parts of the Atmoſphere is more denſe, than that Which is at great Heights in the ſame; or, that the Denſity of the Air decreaſes continually as wè approach the Top of the Atmoſphere. For the Denſity of the Air is proportionãble to the Force with which it is compreſſed, and that Force continually decreaſes as we approach the Top. æ See Boyls Tracts and Experiments on the Spring and Preſſure of the Air. Various have been the Opinions of Philoſophers concerning the Cauſe of this prodigious Spring in the Particles of Air; ſome holding it to depend on their Figure, which they ſuppoſe to reſemble in ſome Manner little Bundles of Twigs or the Branches of Trees; ſome think them like Fleeces of Wool, others conceive them as rolled up like Hoops, or the Springs of Watches, and endeavouring to expand themſeælves by Virtue of their Texture. But Sir Ilaac Neavton is of Opinion, that ſuch a Texture ĩs by no Means ſuſficient to account for that vaſt Power of Expanſion obſerved above: but that each Particle is endued with a repelling Force, which encreaſes as they approach one another, and accordingly keeps them aſunder at Diſtances reciprocally proportionable to the Preſſure they ſuſtain.. Sce Hales's Statical Eſſays. Vol. I Chap. 6. Was the Denſity of the Atmoſphere every wvhere the ſame, as it is near the Surface of the Earth, its Height (as is computed from the Quantity of Preſſure it exerts in raiſing the Mercury in the Barometer) would be about five Miles. But whereas its Denſity continually decreaſes, as we approach the Top, and it is uncertain how far the Particles may expand themſelves where there is little or no Preſſure, the true Height cannot be obtaincd. It is computed to continue of a ſenſible Denſity to the Height of about forty five or fifty Miles. XII. THE Elaſticity of the Air produces the ſame Effects with its Preſſure. FoRrR Action being equal to Reaction, the Force which the Spring of the Air exerts in endeavouring to expand it ſcelf, is equal to the Force with which it is compreſſed; juſt as it is in the Spring oſ a Watch, which exerts no Force, but in Proportion as it is vound up; conſequently a Quantity of Air in ſuch a State of Contraction, as it vould be compreſſed into by the Weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere, exerts a Force equal to that Weight. If a Quantity of Air therefore is included in a Veſſel, and is of the ſame Denſity with the circumambient Air, its Preſſure againſt the Sides of the Veſſel is equal to the Weight of the Atmoſpheree Thus Mercury is ſuſtaincd to the ſame Height by the elaſtic Force of Air included in a Glaſs Veſſel no way communicating with the external Air, as by the Weight of the Atmoſphere it ſelf. XIII. THE Elaſticity of the Air is augmented by Heat and diminiſhed by Cold *. For if a Bladder, which is about half filled with Air, is laid before the Fire, it will, vhn it is ſuſficiently heated, be diſtended and burſt. Thus, Glaſs Bubbles being laid upon the Fire immediately burſt with great Violence by the augmented Spring of the included Air. XIV, THE Denſity of the Air thus contitinually varying, according to the different Degrees of Heat and Cold, to which jt is expoſcd, makes it difficult to aſcertain its true ſpecific Gravity. Ricciolus eſtimates it to be to  This Property is found in all Bodies both Solid and Fluid, but in a much leſs Degree, than it is in Air. Thus, iſ a Flaſk is filled with Water only to the lower Part of the Neck, and is then ſet upon the Fire, the Water, when it begins to grow warm, will riſe into the Neck, and continue to aſcend, as the Heat is increaſled. And when a Wire or Bar of Iron is heated, it is augmented both in Length and Diameter. Upon this Property depend the Phænomena of the Thermometer, which is a Glaſls Bubble with a ſmall hollow Stem ariſing from it This Bubble and Part of the Stem is uſually ſilled with Mercury, or Spirit of Wine, which will riſe or ſall in the Stem as they are affected by the Heat or Cold of the external Air. I a ſufficient Degree of Heat is ſuddenly applied to this Inſtrument, the Liquor is obſerved to deſcend a little before it riſes, becauſe the Glaſs diſtending it ſelf, the Capacity of the Bubble is augmerted, before the included Liquor is affected by the HeattOT. that of Water, as one to a Thouſand: Mer ſenuus as one to one Thouſand three Hundred Mr. Boyle by more accurate Experiments found it to be, as one to nine Hundred and Thirty cight, and thinks, that, all Things conſidered, the Proportion of one to a Thouſand may be taken as a medium; for there is no fixing any preciſe Proportion, becauſe not only the ſpecific Gravity of Air, but that of Water alſo is continually varying. However by ſome Experiments made ſince with more Accuracy before the Royal Society, the Proportion has been fixed at about one to cight Hundred and Eighty. XV. Ar is neceſſary for the Preſervation of Animal and Vegetable Life; neither will Fire ſubſiſt wirthout it. The Reaſon of this Is as yet unknown to Philoſophers. Mr. Hales by ſeveral curious Experiments in his Statical Eſſays makes it probable, that tis owing to its Elaſticity, See his Analyſis of it. Statical Eſſays Vol. I. Chap. 6. C H A ſ. IV. Of the Reſiſtance of Fluids. I. H E Reſiſtance a Body meets with in moving through a Fluid, is of three Kinds. The firſt ariſes from the Friction of the Body againſt the Particles of the Fluid; the ſecond, from their Coheſion or Tenacity among themſelves: the ithird, from their Inactivity, or the Tendency they have, in common with other Bodies, to keep the Places they poſſeſs. TH E firſt, viz. that which ariſes from the Friction of the Body againſt the Particles of the Fluid is very inconſiderable; for whatever the Weight is, which preſſes the Particles of a Fluid togerher, the Freedom, with which a Body moves through it, is not ſenſibly diminiſhed thereby. As was obſerved Chap. I. §. 2. in the Notes. THE ſccond, or that which ariſes from the Tenacity of the Particles of the Fluid, is as the Time the Body takes up in paſſing through it *; for the ſhorter the Time is in æ We have a very curious Argument in Confirmation of this, and which at the ſame time illuſtrates the Manner in which a Body makes its Way through a tenacious Fluid, by Sir Iſaac Neavton himſelf, in a Polteript to a Letter in the Philoſophical Tranſactions N. 371. It is as follows.  Suppoſe Pieces of è fine Silk, or the like thin Subſtance, extended in parallel Planes,  and fixed at ſmall Diſtances from each other. Suppoſe then a  Glohe to ſtrike perpendicularly againt the Middle of the  outermoſt of the Silks, and by breaking through them to loſe  Part of its Motion. If the Pieces of Silk be of equal Strength,  the ſame Degree of Force will be required to break each of  them; but the Time, in which each Piece of Silk reſiſts, will  be ſo much ſhorter as the Globe is ſwifter; and the Loſs of  Motion in the Globe conſequent upon iĩts breaking through  each Silk, and ſurmounting the Reſiſtance thereof, will be pro-  portional to the Time in which the Silk oppoſes it ſelf to  the Globe's Motion; inſomuch that the Globe by the Res ſiltance of any one Piece of Silk, will loſe ſo much leſs of its  Motion as it is ſwifſter. But on the other Hand, by hon which the Force of Coheſion is broke through, the leſs Effect it has in reſiſting the Motion of the Body. This Species of Reſiſtance is alſo very ſmall except in glutinous and viſcid Fluids, whoſe Parts are not eaſily ſeparated. THE third Species is the principal Reſiſtance, that Fluids give to Bodies, and ariſes from their Inactivity or the Tendency the Particles, of which they conſiſt, have to continue at Reſt. The Quantity of this Reſiſtance depends on the Velocity the Body moves with on a double Account. For in the firſt Place, the Number of Particles put ſinto Motion by the moving Body in any determinate Space of Time, is proportionable to the Velocity where with the Body moves; and in the next Place, the Velocity with which each of them is moved, is alſo proportionable  much ſwifter the Globe moves, ſo many more of the Silks it  will break through in a given Space of Time; whence the  Number of the Silkss, which oppoſe themſelves to the Mos tion of the Globe in a given Time, being reciprocally pros portional to the Effect of each Silk upon the Globe, the Reè ſiſtance made to the Globe by theſe Silks, or the Loſs of Mos tion the Globe undergoes by them in a given Time, will be s always the ſame.  Now if the Tenacity of the Parts of Fluids obſerves the  ſame Rule, as the Coheſion of the Parts of theſe Silks; nameè ly, that a certain Degree oſ Force is required to ſeparate and s diſunite the adhering Particles, the Reſiſtance ariſing ſfrom the  Tenacity of Fluids muſt obſerve the ſame Rule, as the Reè ſiſtance of the Silks; and therefore in a given Time the Loſe  of Motion, a Body undergoes in a Fluid by the Tenacity of s jts Parts, will in all Degrees of Velocity be the ſame; or s in fewor Words, that Part of the Reſiſtance of Fluids, which c ariſes from the Coheſion of their Parts, will be Uniſorm. to the Velocity of the Body; this Species thereſore of Reſiſtance is in a duplicate Proportion, or as the Square, of the Velocity, vith which the Body moves through the Fluid -, I. FARTHER the Reſiſtance a Body moving in a Fluid meets with from thence, may be conſidered with Regard to the Fluid; and then it will be found to be more or leſs, according to the Denſity of the Fluid. For by how much denſer the Fluid is, ſo much the greater Number of Particles are to be put into Motion by the Body in Order to make its Way through it. Il. THE next Thing to be conſidered is, the Effects of the Reſiſtance of Fluids upon Bodies moving in them; that is, the Retardation which they cauſe in the Motion of a Body by their Reſiſtance, or the Quantity of Motion they deſtroy. * This may be otherwiſe demonſtrated from the twelſth Section of the foregoing Chapter; for ſfrom thence it follows, that the Reſiſtance a Fluid gives to a Solid againſt which it moves, is proportionable to the Height a Body muſt fall from, to acquire ſuch a Degree of Velocity as the Fluid moves with: but the Heights Bodies ſall from are as the Squares of the Velocties they acquire by ſalling; conſequently the Reſiſtance a Fluid gives to a Solid, againt which it moves, is alſo as the Square of its Velocity, Now it matters not, as to the Reſiſtance, whether the Fluid moves againſt the Solid, or whether it be at Reſt, and the Solid moves in it; the Reſiſtance therefore which a Fluid gives to a Solid moving in it, is as thę Square of the Velocity, with which it. moves. ll A ND this in ſimilar Bodies of equal Magnitudes is inverſely as their Denſities, or the Quantity of Matter they contain; for by how much the greater the Quantity of Matter in any Body is, ſO much the more caſily does it overcome the Reſiſtance it meets with from the Fluid. Thus ve ſee the Reſiſtance of the Air has a much leſs Effect in deſtroying the Motion of an heavy Body, than oſ a light one vhich has the ſame Dimenſions. IV. IN ſimilar Bodies of equal Denſities, but different Magnitudes, the Retardation is inverſely as their homologous Sides. For the Reſitance Bodies meet with in a Fluid, is inverſely as the Quantity of Matter they contain (by the laſt,) that is inverſely as the Cubes of their homologous Sides; and it is alſo directly as their Surfaces, becauſe tis by them that they move the Fluid out of its Place, that is, diręctly as the Squares of their homologous Sides; conſequently the Retardation is inverſely as their homologous Sides *. HA VING given the fundamental Principies of Hydroſtatics; and ſhewn how Fluids borh compreſſible and incompreſſible are diſpoſed to act upon each other, and upon Solids by their Preſſure, Motion, Elaſticity and ] : Recauſc the inverſe Ratio of the Cubes of any Numbers being compounded with the direct Ratio of the Squares of the ſame, gives the inverſe Ratio of the Numbers themſelves. ſtance; I proceed now to account e of the more remarkable Phænom Nature, in which they are in Part or ther concerned: and this I deſign Subject of the following Diſſertations. DISSERTATION I Of Sound. J HEN the Parts of an elaſtic Body are put into a tremulous Motion by Percuſſion or the like, ſo long as the Tremors continue, ſo long is the Air included in the Pores of that Body, and likewiſe that which preſſes upon its Surface, affected with the like Tremors and Agitations: now the Particles of Air, being ſo far compreſſed together by the Weight oſ the incumbent Atmoſphere, as their repulſive Forces permit, (as has been explained Chap. 3.) it follows, that thoſe which are immediately agitated by the reciprocal Motions of the Particles of the elaſtic Body, vill, in their Approach towards thoſe which lie next them, impel them towards each other, and thereby cauſe them to be more condenſed, than they were by the Weight of the incument Atmoſphere, and in their Return ſuffer them to expand themſclves again; whereby the like Tremors and Agitations will be propagated to the next, and ſo on, till having arrived at a certain Diſtance from the Body, they ceaſe, being gradually deſtroyed by a continual ſucceſſive Propagation of Motion to freſh Particles of Air throughout their Progreſq. THUS it is that Sound is communicated from a tremulous Body to the Organ of Hearing. Each Vibration of the Particles of rhe ſounding Body is ſucceſſively propagated to the Particles of the Air, till it reaches thoſc which are contiguous to the Tympanum of the Ear, (a ſine Membranc diſtended acroſs it,) and theſe Particles in performing their Vibrations impinge upon the Tympanum, Which agitates the Air included within it, and that being put into a like tremulous Motion, affects the auditory Nerve, and thus excites in the Mind the Senſation or Idea of what ve call Sound. Now ſince the repulſive Force of cach Particle of Air is equally diffuſed around it every Way, it follows, that when any one approaches a Number of others, it not only repels thoſe which lie before it, in a right Line; but all the reſt, laterally according to their reſpective Situations; that is, it makes them recede every Way from it ſelf, as from a Center: and this being true of every Particle, it follows, that the aforeſaid Tremors vill be propagated from the ſounding Body in all Directions, as from a Center: and farther, if they are confined for ſome Time from ſpreading themſclves by paſſing through a Tube or the like, will when they have paſſed through it, ſpread themſelves from the End in every Direction. In like Manner, thoſe which paſs through an Holc in an Obſtacle they meet vith in their Way, vill afterwards ſpread themſelves from thence, as if that was rhe Place where they began; ſo that the Sound vhich paſſes through an Hole in a Wall or the like, is heard in any Situarion whatever, that is not at too great a Diſtance from it. Something analogous to this we may obſerve in the Motion of Waves upon the Surface of a Fluid, which are propagated equally through all Parts of the Surface in a Circle, though occaſioned not by a circular, but reciprocal Motion and Agitation of the Finger in a ſtraight Line. S 1N CE the repulſive Force with which the Particles of Air act upon each other, is reciprocally as their Diſtances, ( Chap. 3. §. 10.) it follows that when any Particle is removed out of its Place by the Tremors of a ſounding Body, or the Vibrations of thoſe which are contiguous to it, it will be driven back again by the repulſive Force of thoſe towards which it is impelled, with a Velocity proportionable to the Diſtance from its proper Place, becauſe the Velocity will be as the repelling Force. The Conſequence of this is, thatr, let the Diſtance be great or ſmall, it will return to its Place in the ſame Time; (for the Time a Body takes up in moving from Place to Place vill always be the ſame, ſo long as the Velocity it moves with is proportionable to the Diſtance between the Places.) The Time thereG fore in which each Vibration of the Air is performed, depends on the Degree of Repulſion in its Particles, and ſo long as that is not altered, vill be the ſame at all D ſtances from the tremulous Body; conſcquently, as the Motion of Sound is owing to the ſucce ſſive Propagation of the Tremors of a ſounding Body through the Air, and as that Propagation depends on the Time each Tremor is performed in, it follows, that the Velocity of Sound varies as the Elaſticity of the Air, but continues the ſame at all Diſtances from the ſounding Body. A ND as the Velocity, with which Sound is propagated, depends on the Elaſticity of the Air, ſo it does alſo on its Denſity; for when the Denſity of the Air is augmented, while its Elaſticity remains the ſame *, a greater Num* Perhaps it will not appear to every one, how the Denſity of the Air can be augmented without a proportional Increaſe of its Elaſticity, becauſe cateris paribus, the nearer the Particles approach each other, the ſtronger is the Action of their repulſive Force. But it is to be conſidered, that when the Air becomes colder, its Elaſticity is diminiſhed, and then the Particles are brought cloſer together by the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, till they acquire an Elaſticity equal to what they had before, viæ. ſuch as an'wers to the Preſſure they ſuſtain (Chap 3.§. 12) From hence we may inſer, that the Propagation of Sound is ſlower in Winter than in Summer, when the Mercury in the Barometer is at the ſame Height; for the Preſiure of the Air being the ſame, its Elaſticity which depends upon it, is ſo too; but the Air is denſer by Reaſon of the Cold, and therefore it Vibrations ſlower. ber of Particles will move forwards and backwards in each Vibration; now ſince we ſuppoſe the Cauſe by which they put cach other into Motion, viæ. their Elaſticity,) the ſame, they will each receive a leſs Degree of Velocity; and ſo the Vibrations will be performed in a longer Time, whence the Succeſſion of them Will be ſlower and the Progreſs of the Sound proportionably retarded *, WHERE AS the undulatory Motion of the Air, which conſtitutes Sound, is propagated in all Directions from the ſounding Body, it vill frequently happen, that the Air in performing its Vibrations will impinge againſt various Objects, which will reflect it back, and  The Method of determining the Velocity with which Sound is propagated, is (by the help ofa ſhort Pendulum) to eſtimate the Time which paſſes between ſeeing the Fire of a Gun at a Diſtance, and hearing the Report. Its great Velocity makes it diſficult to be determined exactly; accordingly Authors differ much in their Accounts. The moſt accurate Obſervers Dr. Halley and Dr. Durham have found it to be about one Thouſand one Hundred and Forty two Feet, which is almoſt a Quarter ofa Mile in a Second. The uſual Experiments to prove that the Air is neceſſary for the Propagation of Sound, are ſuch as theſe. A ſmall Bell being put into the Receiver of the Air-Pump may be heard at a conſiderable Diſtance before the Air is exhauſted out of it, but when the Air is much rarified by exhauſting, can ſcarcely be heard at al. When the Air is condenſed, the Sound is augmented in Proportion to the Condenſation. Theſe Experiments do not only ſucceed in forced Rarefactions and Condenſations, but in ſuch alſo as are Natural; Sound being obſerved to be much weaker on the Tops of high Mountains, where the Air is leſs condenſed by the Weight of the incumbent Atmoſphere, than in the Valleys below. ſo cauſe new Vibrations the contrary Way; nov if the Objects are ſo ſituated, as to reflect a ſuſſicient Number of Vibrations back (viæ. ſuch as proceed different Ways) to the ſame Place, the Sound will be there repeated, and is called an Echo*. And the greater the Diſlance of the Objects is, the longer will be the Time, before the Repetition is heard. Therefore when the Sound in its Progreſs meets vith Objects at different Diſtances ſufficient to produce an Echo, the Sound will be repcated ſeveral Times ſucce ſſively, according to the different Diſtances of thoſe Objects from the ſounding Body; and this makes what is called a repeated Echo. IF the Vibrations of the tremulous Body are propagated through a long Tube, they will be continnally reverberated from the Sides of the Tube into its Axis, and by that means prevented from ſpreading, till they get out of it; whereby they will be exceedingly increaſed, and the Sound rendered much Ioudcr than it would otherwiſe be j.  In Woodſioch Park in Oxfordſbire, there is an Echo which repeats diſtinctly ſeventeen Syllables, by Day and twenty by Night The Reaſon why it repeats more Syllables by Night than by Day, is becauſe the Air being colder at that Time, is more denſe; and therefore the Return of the Vibrations is ſlower. which gives Time for the Repetition of more Syllables. See Plors Natural Hiſtory of Oxforqſtire. 4 This is the Caſe in the Stentorophonic Tube or Speaking THE Difference of Muſical Tones depends on the different Number of Vibrations communicated to the Air in a given Time by the Tremors of the ſounding Body; and the quicker the Succeſſion of the Vibrations is, the acuter is the Tone, and è contra. A muſical Chord performs all it3 Vibrations, vwherher great or ſmall in the ſame Time. For if a String is ſtrertched between two Pins, and a Force is applied to the middle Point, to draw it out of its rectilineal Situation; it is found by Experiment, that the Diſtance (if it be ſmall) to which it is drawn, is as the Force applied conſequently the Velocity, with which it returns when left to it ſelf, will be as the Space it has to move over; it will therefore perform all its Vibrations in the ſame Time: this is the Reaſon, why the ſame Chord Trumpet. See Xircher de Re Muſicà. Lib. . Par. . Odi Philoſ. Natur Princip p. 293. Upon rhis Principle it is, that Sound is conveyed from one Side of a Whiſpering Gallery to the oppoſite one, without being perceived by thoſe who ſtand in the Middle. The Form of a Whiſpering Gallery is that of a Segment of a Sphere, or the like arched Figure; and the Progreſs of the Sound through it may be illuſtrated in the following Manner. Let ABC (Fig. 14.) repreſent the Segment of a Sphere, and ſuppoſe a low Voice uttered at D, the Vibrations expanding themſelves every Way, ſome will impinge upon the Points E, E, &c. from thence be reſlected to the Points F, from thence to G, and ſo on, till they all meet in C, and by their Union there cauſe a much ſtronger Sound, than in any other Part of the Segment whatever, even at D the Poilt from whence they came. however ſtruck produces the ſame Note. It is alſo found by Experiment, that when Strings of equal Diameters, but different Lengths, are equally ſtretched, the longer they are, ſo much the leſs Weights will drawv them from their rectilineal Situation to the ſame Diſtance; tl Forces therefore by which they return are leſs, and tl Times of their Vibrations longer. lil WVHEN two Chords perform their Vibrations in equal Times, the Tone produced is called an Uæi ſon. Ilf one performs two, while the other one, tis an Oave. If one three, vhile the other two; tis a Fifth. If one three, while the other four; tis called a Fourth &c. To make an Uniſon Sound, it is not neceſſary, that the Vibrations of the two Strings ſmould actually concur, but only that they ſhould be performed in equal Times; ſo that they would always concur, if they began at the ſame Inſtant. For the Ear perceives not the ſingle Vibrations diſtinctly, but only finds that Difference which proceeds from the Intervals of Time, that paſs between them *.  Upon theſe Principles we may account for that remarkable Phænomenon in Mufic, that an intenſe Sound being raiſed, either with the Voice or a ſonorous Body, another ſonorous Body near it and in Uniſon with it, will thereby be made to ſound. For the Vibrations of the Air, which correſpond to the Tremors of the firit ſounding Body, agreeing exactly in Point of Time with thoſe which are capable of being given to the other Body at Uniſon with it; when they have by their firſt Impulſe communicated a ſmall Degree of Motion to it, will, by conſpiring with it as it moves forwards and backwards continually increaſe its Motion, till it becomes ſenſiblee The contrary happens in Strings which are in Diſcord with each other; for in this Caſe, though the firſt Vibration of one may give Motion to the other, yet their Vibrations not being performed in equal Times the ſecond will come unſeaſunably, i. . when the other is moving the contrary Way, and obſtruct its Motion. It is farther obſervable that in two Strings, one of which vibrates twice, while the other once; if the firſt be ſounded, the two extreams of the other will each ſound an Uniſon with it, while the middle Point remains at Reſt. So if one vibrates thrice, while the other once, the laſt will be divided into three Parts, each of which will ſound an Uniſon with it, and the two Points between thoſe Parts will remain at Reſt. For otherwiſe that which vibrates twice, while the other once, muſt neceſſarily interſere with it at every ſecond Vibration; and that which vibrates, thrice while the other once, would interfere with it at every third; ſo that it would not be put into a ſuſficient Motion to produce a Sound. But when it is divided by the quieſcent Points, it becomes ſo many Strings at Uniſon with the former, each of which eaſily receives its Vibrations from thence. From hence likewiſe it is, that if we take two or three Drinking Glaſſes and put ſome Water or other Fluid into each of them and place them near to each other, taking Care to ſill them, to ſuch Heights, that (when ſtruck) their Tones ſhall be in Uniſon; and then if we ſlide the Finger along the Brim of one of the Glaſſes preſſing pretty ſtrongly upon it, (Which will cauſe it to ſound) we ſhall ſee the Surface of the Fluids in the other Glaſſes begin to tremble; which ſhews that the Vibrations of the firſt Glaſs cauſe the like in the other at Uniſon with it, though not perhaps in a Degree ſuſſicient to produce a Sound ſtrong enough to be heard diſtinctly ſrom the former. Thus it is that ſome Perſons are able to break a Drinking Glaſs by a Tone of their Voice at Uniſon with it. They firit try the Tone of the Glaſs by ſtriking it, then applying their Mouth near to the Brim oſ it, ſound the ſame Note with their Voice; this ſets the Glaſs a trembling; they then continually raiſe their Voice, ſounding ſtill the ſame Note; this encreaſes the Tremors of the Glaſs, which by that Means (if it is not too ſtrong) is broke in Pcices. The ſie o Muſic upon Perſons bit with the Tarantula, (iſ the Acc.. 11 we have of ĩt from abroad may Le credited) is very ſurpriſing. A Perſon bit with the Tarantula after ſome Time loſes both Senſe and Motion, and dies if deſtitute of Help. The moſt effectual Remedy is Muſic. The Muſician tries Variety of Airs, till he hits upon one that affects the Patient, who upon that begins to move by Degrees, and keeps Time with his Fingers, Arms and Legs, afterwards with his whole Body; he then raiſes himſel? up, begins to dance, and increaſes in Activity every Moment; till aſter five or fix Hours, being very much ſatigued, he is put to Bed to recover Strength. The next Day the ſame Air brings him out of Bed for a new Dance:. Which Exerciſe being thus continued, the Diſtemper is abated in the Space of four or ſive Days, the Effects of the Bite being in ſome Meaſure carried off by Sweat, and the Patient begins then to reeover his Senſe and Knowledge by little and little. The Reaſon why the Patient is thus affected by the Muſic, is becauſe the Nerves of his Body are ſo diſpoſed in that Diſtempen as eaſily to be agitated by the Vibrations which are occaiuned by the principle and ſtronger Notes of what is played. See on the Subject of this Diſſertation, Philoſoph. Tranſact. No. 134. 243. 302. 313 319. 337. Hiſt. de ' Acad. 1702. 1708. Grews Coſmolog. Sacr. Book I. Chap. 5. Mead upon Poiſons p. 59. Xeil's Anatomy p. 214. 2ã ' a DISSERTATION II Of Capillary Tidbes. D Y a Capillary Tube is generally underſtood a Glaſs Pipe, the Diameter of whoſe Bore is at moſt but about one tenth of an Inch; though any Tube whoſe Cavity does not cxceed that Magnitude, may be ſo called. TH E Phænomena of Capillary Tubes being ſuch as contradict a known Lav in Hydroſtatics, viz. that a Fluid riſes in a Tube to ihe ſame Height with ithe Level of its Source *; and likewiſe of Affinity with the Aſcent of the Sap through the Stems of Plants for the Nouriſhment of their Fruit, and vith divers other Operations of Nature: it has been thought of no ſmall Moment in Philoſophy to find out and eſtabliſh their true Cauſe; which after numerous Experiments and ſeveral Conjectures about it, is found to be no other than the Attraction of Coheſion, by which ſmall Particles of Matter mutually run together and form larger Bodies 1. I ſhall lay down the ſeæ See Chap. I. i. 9. Caſe 4. in the Notes. t See Hauksbe's and Powe s Experiments. Muſſchenbroech 4. Edit. Philoſoph. Tranſactt. No. 355. Mem. de ' Acad. 17035, 1714, 1722, 1724. With othor? referd to in Quæſtiones Philoſoph. veral Phænomena, as ſo many Matters of Fact, and ſubjoin to cach a Solution from that Cauſe. In order to which, it may nor be improper to premiſe the following Conſideration by way of Lemma. LET us ſuppoſe the Veſſel ABCD (Fig. 15.) filled with a Fluid to the Height LM, and let it be conceived as divided into the cqual Portions EFGH, GHIK, IKLM, &c. farther, let it be ſuppoſed, that each Particle of Matter in the inner Surface of the Veſſel, has a Sphere of Attraction, whoſe Semidiameter is equal to the Thickneſs of three of thoſe Portions; that is to ſay, that the Attraction of the Particle M reaches upwvards as far as F, and dovnwvards as far as S; and that of the Particle O upwards as far as H and downwards as far as U;3 and ſo of all the reſt quite round the Tube. From hence it will follow that every Particle oſ the inner Surface of the Veſſel, which lies between EF and RS conſpires in endeavouring to raiſe the Fluid towards AB the Top of the Veſſel, and that the Fluid is not affected by any other: for Inſtance, the Particle S, and all below it, will attract downwards three Strata of the Fluid (ſuch as are contained in three equal Diviſions of the Veſſel] from above, and as many upwards from below, and therefore will have no Effect at all in raiſing or depre ſling the Fluid: But the Particlc Q will attract only two Strata downwards, becauſe there are no more above it, and three upwards, and therefore will in ſome Meaſure tend to raiſe the Fluid; ſo the Particle O will attract but one downwards and three upwards, the Particle M, none downwards, and three upwards; the Particle  two upwards, and H only one: all which may clearly be ſeen by their Situations in the Figure with Reſpect to the Surface of the Fluid. Therefore in every Veſſel, where there is a mutual Attraction between the Fluid it contains and the Particles of which it is compoſed, there vill be a certain Number of Particles diſpoſcd around it in Form of a broad Periphery or Zone as repreſented by AB Fig. 16, half of which lies above the Surface of the Fluid and half below it, that will tend to make it riſe towards the Topæ. This being underſtood, the following Phænomena vill not be difficult. # I have been the more particular in explaining this Lemma, becauſe it is not a bare Periphery of no Breadth, to which the Aſcent of the Fluid is owing, but a Zone or Cingulum of Particles diſtended equally in Breadth both ways from the Surface of the Fluid; and becauſe it is upon the Breadth of this, that ſome oſ the following Solutions dependc. As to the Thickneſs of ĩt, that undoubtedly is equal to the Semidiameter of the Sphere of Attraction in the Particles of the Veſſel; and therefore Veſſels whoſe Sides are of diſfferent Thickneſſes (provided thoſe Thickneſſes be leſs than that Semidiameter) muſt have different Effects upon the ſame Fluid, though no one has as yet been ſo accurate as to obſerve itt. The Reaſon why a Fluid will not riſe in a large Veſſel, as well as in one that is Capillary, is becauſe the Attraction oſ its Particles does not reach far ęnough into the Middle of the Veſſel; and thereſore it only riſes about I. LET there be two Capillary Tubes AB and CD (Fig. 17.) open at both Ends, and having their lower Orifices A and C immerged belov the Surface of the Water contaned in the Veſſel FGHI: the Water will immediately riſe up in each Tube above the Surface of that in the Veſſel, beginning with a ſviſt Motion, vhich will gradually decreaſe, till as much Water has entered the Tubes, as they are able to raiſe: and the Heights to wvhich the Water will riſe in them, will be reciprocally as their Diameters. TH AT the Water ought to riſe in both Tubes is an immediate Conſequence of the foregoing Lemma ; becauſe the Column of Water within the Tube is rendered lighter than an cqual Column on the outſide, as being attracted upwards by a Portion of the interior Surface of the Veſſel; and therefore will riſe till it becomes as much longer than the external ones as it is made lighter, that the æquilibrium which was deſtroyed by the Attraction of the Tube, may be reſtored by the Weight of the Column. The Reaſon that the Velocity with which it riſes, ought conſtantly to decreaſe, is becauſe the heavier the Column is, the leſs is the Effect of the Attraction, which is always the ſame in a Tube of the ſame Diameter. the Sides, ſtanding higher there than in the middle: as may be Ieen in a Drinking Glaſs, when a Quantity of Water is put into 3t, ſomewhat leſq than ĩs ſufficient to fill ĩt. Diſtert. 2. Of Capillary Tubess 61 And the Heights to which the Water riſes in them, will be reciprocally as their Diameters; for then the Quantities raiſed will be directly as the Diameters*; but the Peripheries that raiſe them, (being always of the ſame Breadth and having their Lengths equal to the Circumferences of the Tubes,) are as thoſe Diameters; the Quantities of Water therefore being in the ſame Ratio, are as the Peripheries, ĩ. e. as the Cauſes by which they are raiſed. II. IF the Tubes before they are immerged in the Water, are filled to greater Heights, than thoſe to which it vould naturally riſe in them, and then have their lower Orifices immerged in Water, the Water vill ſubſide till it ſtands in each at the ſame Height to which it would have riſen; but if they are held in a perpendicular Poſition without being immerged, the Water vill not ſubſide in the Tubes quite ſo far. THE Reaſon why the Water in the Tube vhen its lower Orifice is immerged, ſubſides to the ſame Height it would have riſen to, had  The Heights to which the Water riſes, being in a reciprocal Ratio of the Diameters; and the Contents of Cylindrical Tubes being in a direct Ratio of their Heights, and of the Squares of their Diameters; the Quantities of Water raiſed in this Caſe will be in au reciprocal Ratio of the Diameters, and a direct one of the Squares of the ſame. Now theſe two Ratios being compounded together, give the direct one oi the Diameters themſelves; becauſe the ſimple reciprocal Ratio deſtroys one of thoſe, which are contained in the direct one of the Squares, the Tube been immerged when empty, is becauſe the Column is ſuſpended in one Caſe by the ſame Cauſe, by which it is raiſed in the other; but when the Tube full of Water is held erect, without being immerged, it will not ſubſide quize ſo far, becauſc the lower End of the Tube which the Water leaves behind it as it drops out, attracts it the contrary Way; ſo that the Column in this Caſe is ſuſpended not only by the inner Surface of the Tube at the Top, but alſo by its lower End; and therefore a greater Quantity of Water is ſuſpended rhan in the former Caſe, III. IF a Tube having its lower Oriſice immerged in Water, be held obliquely, it will raiſe the Water to the ſame perpendicular Height, as when held erect. FoRr ſince Fluids preſs according to their perpendicular Heights, the Weight of the CoIumn raiſed vill not be proportionable to the attractive Force of the Tube, till it has arrived at the ſame perpendicular Height, to which it would have roſe, if held erect. IV. IF a Tube, vhen the Water is riſen into it to its vonted Height, is laid in an Horizontal Situation, the Water will move towards the Middle of the Tube, leaving the End which was immerſed a little behind. Tu E Solution of this Phænomenon depends on what was obſerved in the Lemma about the Breadth of the attracting Periphery, and its being equally ſituated on each Side the Surface of the Water; for from thence it follows, that if the Water ſhould not run from the full End of the Tube, after it is laid in an Horizontal Situation, but remain contiguous to it, that End of the Column of Water would be attracted only by ſuch a Portion of a Periphery as lies within the Surface at that End; becauſe the End of the Tube coinciding with the Surface, the other Half of the Periphery is wanting. Whereas at the orher End of the Column there is a Periphery whoſe Breadth is intire, which overpowering the other, cauſes the Water to move towards the Middle of the Tube, till the Breadith of the Periphery at each End of the Tube is the ſame, after which the Water being attracted cqually cach way, remains at Keſt. V. LET there be a Tube ſFig. 18) conſiting of two Parts DR and RCK, of different Diameters, it follows from what has been ſaid, that DR the ſmaller Part of the Tube is able to raiſe Water higher than the other: let then the Height to which the larger would raiſe it be TF, and that to which it vould riſe in the leſſcr (vas it continued down to the Surface of the Fluid) be XL. If this compound Tube be filled with Water and the larger Orifice CK be immerſed in the ſame Fluid, the Surface of the Water] will ſink no farther than XI, the Height to which ſhe leſſer Part of the Tube would have raiſed it. BUT ifthe Tube be inverted as in Fig. 19. and the ſmaller Orifice XL be immerſed, the Water vill run out till the Surface falls to TF, the Height to which the larger Part of the Tube vould have raiſed it. The Size of the lower Part making no Alteration in the Height, at which the Fluid is ſuſpended in cither Caſc. IN order to account for theſe Phænomena, it muſt be conſidered, that when a Body is ſo diſpoſed, that its different Parts ſhall move with different Degrees of Velocity, the greater Proportion the Velocity of that Part to which a moving Power is applied, bears to that of the reſt, ſo much the more effectual is the Power in moving that Body; or that rhe ſame Pover applicd to different Parts, vill be equivalent in Effect to different Powers applied to the ſame Part: as is the known Caſe of the Lever, and all the other Mechanical Powers. Now let us conceive the Tube DR (Fię. 18.) continucd down to HI, and lIcet it be ſuppoſcd at preſent that the Fluids contained in the Tube XLHI and the compound one XLKC, arc not ſuſpended by the Periphery at L, but that they preſs upon their reſpective Baſes HI and CK. Let it farther be ſuppoſed, that theſe Baſes are cach of them moveable, and that they are raiſed up or let down with equal Velocities; then will the Velocity with vhich XLthe uppermoſt Stratum of the Fluid XL CK moves, exceed that of the ſame Stratun, conſidered as the uppermoſt of the Fluid in the Tube XLHI, as much as the Tube RCK is wider than DR (by the Lemma Chap. I. §5. 9.) that is, as much as the Space M N KC exceeds XLIH; conſequentſy by the foregoing ODbſervation, the Effect of the artracting Periphery XL, as it acts upon the Fluid contained in the Veſſel XLCK exceeds its Effect, as it acts upon that in XLHI, in the ſame Proportion. Since therefore it is able ſex Hypoth.) to ſuſtain the Weight of the Fluid X LHI by its natural Power, it is able under this Mechanical Advantage, to ſuſtain the Weight of as much, as would fill the Space MNKC: but the Preſſure of the Fluid XLCK is equal to that Weight, as having the ſame Baſe and an equal Height (Chap. I. §. 9.) its Preſſure thereforc, or the Tendency it has to deſcond in the Tube, is equivalent to the Power of the attracting Periphery XL, for which Reaſon it onght to be ſuſpended by it. AGAIN the Height (Fig. 19 at which the attracting Periphery in the larger Part of the Tube is able to ſuſtain the Fluid is no greater than NF, that to which it would have rai ſed it, had the Tube been continued down to MN. For hiere the Pover of the atI tracting Periphery acts under a like Mechanical Diſadvantage; and is thereby diminiſhed in Proporrion to the Capacity of the Tube TFNM to that of HIXL; becauſe if the Baſes of theſe Tubes are ſuppoſcd to be moved with equal Velocities, the Riſe or Fall of the Surface of the Fluid TFXL would be ſo much leſs than that of TFMN. And whereas rhe attracting Periphery TF is able by its natural Power to ſuſpend the Fluid only to the Height NF in the Tube TFMN it is in this Caſe able to ſuſtain no greater Preſſure than vhat is equal to the Weight of the Fluid in the Space HIXL: but the Preſſure of the Fluid TF XL which has equal Height and the ſame Baſe vith it, is equal to that Weight; and therefore is a juſt æquipondium to the attracting Power. VI. FrRoM hence we may clearly ſee the Reaſon, why a ſmall Quantity of Water put into a Capillary Tube, which is of a Conical Form and laid in an Horizontal Situation, will run towards the narrover End. For let AB (Fig. 20.) be the Tube, CD a Column of Water contained within it; when the Fluid moves, the Velocity of the End D will be to that of the End C reciprocally as the Cavity of the Tube at D, to that at C (by the Lemma Chap. I. § 9) that is, reciprocally as the Square of the Diameter at D, to the Square of the Diameter at C; but the attracting Periphery at D is to that at C, in the ſimple Rotio of the Diameter at D, to the Diameter at C. Nov ſince the Effect of the Attraction depends as much upon the Velocity of that Part of the Fluid where it acts, as upon its natural Force, its Effect at D will be greater than at C; for though the Attraction at D be really leſs in its ſelf than at C, yet its Loſs of Force upon that Account, is more than compenſated by the greater Velocity of the Fluid in that Part; the Fluid will therefore move tovards B. VII. FROM hence likewiſe it follows, that if a Veſſel as ABC (repreſented Fig. 21) of any Form whatever, have its upper Part dravn out into a Capillary Tube as B; and if this Veſſel is filled with Water, and have its lower Orifice placed on FG the Surface of the ſame Fluid; then the Water will remain ſuſpended in the Veſſel, provided the Capillary at the Top be ſmall enough, (was it continued down to the Bottom) to raiſe the Fluid to the Height B. Becauſe by the foregoing Propoſition the lower Part of the Tube makes no Alteration in the Height at which the Capillary B is able to ſuſtain the Fluid. VIII. AND if the ſame Veſſel be filled only to the Height DE (Fig. 22.) and a Drop of  12. El. 2. Water be put into the Capillary at B, ſthe intermediate Part DDE being full of Air) the Water vill continuc ſuſpended at the Height DE. FOR alihough the Fluid ACDE is not in Contact vith the Drop of Water in the Capillary Tube, and therefore not immediately ſupported by it; yet the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere upon the Surface FG, and againſt the upper Part of the Drop in the Capillary B keeps the Fluid ADE C, and the Drop and the intermediate Air from ſeparating, juſt as in the former Caſe the Attraction of Coheſion in the Particles of the Water prevented a Separation between that in the Veſſel and that in the Capillary. Conſequently as the Water in the Capillary was able in the former Caſe to ſuſtain as much Fluid as the Veſſel could contain, it is now ſufficient to ſuſtain the Fluid ADE C, IX. LET there be a Capillary Siphon, as that repreſented Fig. 23, 24 or 25. and let EF be the Height, to which Water might be raiſed by a Periphery equal to that at A Now ſince, (as  This happens quite otherwiſe in Vacuo, becauſe the Preſſure of the Air, which as it were connects the Drop with the Water 4D EC, being wanting, it immediately falls for Want of a Support. Whereasjthe former Phænomenon equally ſucceeds in Vacuo; which ſhews that the Parts oſ the Fluid in the Veſſel are connected with each other, and with that in the Capillary by their own mutual Attraction of Coheſion, there being nothing elſe whereby they can be ſupported. was obſervedã. æ.) the lower End of a Tube when it is not immerged, cauſes a longer Column to be ſuſpended than otherwiic would be; that is, it ſupports a ſhort Column beſides that which is ſuſtained by the atracting Periphery; let HI be the Height of ſuch a Column as might be ſuſpended by the End C: then if any of thoſe Tubes are filled with Water, and held as in the Figure (neither End being immerged) the Fluid will run out of the Tube at C, if CD the Difference of the Legs exceeds EF and HI added together, otherwiſe not. FOoR the Column AB is a Counterpoiſe to BD, being of the ſame perpendicular Height; and therefore it is only the Weight of the Column CD which determines the Fluid to move; unleſs that Weight therefore exceeds the Force of the attracting Periphery at A (Which the Fluid AB muſt leave in riſing up the Tube) and alſo what may be ſupported by the End C, that is, ſex Hypoth.) two Columns whoſe Heights are EF and HI, it cannot run out at C; otherwiſe it will, as being deſtitute of a ſuſficient Support. X. IF the End A is immerged in Water (ſuppoſing the Tube full as before), it will run out, though CD the Difference of the Legs, only exceeds H I. For then the Attraction at A ccaſes, and there is nothing to ſupport the Column CD, but the Power the End C has to prevent Drops from falling off it. XI. AGA 1N if the End C is immerged in Water, (and the other not) it will run out at A, if CD exceeds E F, otherwiſe not, FOR in this Caſe, therc is norhing to ſupport the Column CD, but the attracting Periphery at A, whoſe Power is ſuppoſed able to raiſe a Column as E F. and no more. XII. AND if both Ends are immerſcd (the Tube being ſuppoſed full as before) the Warer will run out at the lower, which ever it is. For then the Attraction of both Ends ceaſes; and the longer Column over- balancing the ſhorter, the Fluid is determined thereby to run out at the lower End. XIII. IF either of the Tubes (Fig. 23 or 24) are ſmall enough to raiſe the Water from A to B, and if the Orifice A is immerged, the Fluid vill riſe to B, paſſing on to C, where it will run out or be ſuſpended according to the foregoing Caſes: but if the Periphery at G (Fi™. 25.) is ſuch as vould not ſupport the Fluid higher than AM, it will ſtop, when it comes at G, and only the Part ABG ill be filled vith it. F o R that Fluid which has paſſed B aſſiſis by its Weight the attracting Periphery in raiſing the Column AB, and therefore runs down to C. But if when it comes to G, the Periphery there is nor able to ſupport more than AM the Difference of the Legs AB and BG, the Fluid muſt neceſſarily ſtop there; ſince BG is no more than a Counterpoiſe to M B, and A M is ſuppoſed to be as much as the Periphery at G can ſuſtain. XIV. THO a Capillary Tube be ſhorter than the Height to which its attracting Periphery is able to raiſe a Fluid, v. g. tho the Tube AB (Fig. 26.) be ſmall enough (vas it of ſufficient Length) to raife Water as high asC; yet when the End A is immerged the Fluid will not run out at B, but only be ſuſpended at that Height. F o R When the Fluid is riſen as high as B, it has then no more Periphery to attract it any farther; and if it was forced up a little higher, it would be attracted back again by the End -, XV. THE Aſcent of different Fluids in the ſame Tube is variouss. Muſſchenbroek has found that in a Tube in which Water vill riſe to the Height of twenty ſix Lines, Oyl of Wormvood Vill riſe but cightccn or ninetecn, whereas Urine vill riſe thirty three or thirty four. The Reaſon of which is becauſe ſome * Hence we ſee the Abſurdity of ſuppoſing that a Fluid may be made continually to flow from a lower Place to an higher by a Capillary Tube as ſuch; ſor whether the Tube be of ſuch Form, as is repreſented Fig. 23, 24, 25, or 26. the Fluid will always ſtop when it comes at the higher End; becauſe the Attraction &is then in a Direction contrary to its Motion, and the Weight of the Fluid contained in D C the Diſſerence of the Legs is likewiſe an Impediment to it. DISSERTA TION IIL El Of the Origin of Fountains. ANY have been the Conjectures of Philoſophers concerning the Origin of Fountains; and great Pains have been taken both by the Members of the Royal Society, and thoſe of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, in order to aſcertain the true Cauſe of it. It vas Ariſtortles Opinion, and held by moſt of the ancient Philoſophers after him, that the Air contained in the Caverns of the Earth, being condenſed by Cold near its Surface, was thereby changed into Water; and that it made its Way through, where it could find a Paſſage. But we have no Experience of any ſuch Tranſmutation of Air into Water. THOS E Who imagin, that Fountains ove their Origin to Waters brought from the Sea by ſubterrancous Ducts, give a tolerable Account, how they loſę their Saltneſs by Percolation as they paſs through the Earth; but they find great Difſiculty in explaining by what Power the Water riſes above the Level of the Sea, near to the Tops of Mountains, where Springs generally abound; it being contrary to the Laws of Hydroſtatics, that a Fluid ſhould riſe in a Tube above the Level of its Source. However they have found two Ways, whereby they endeavour to extricate themſelves from this Difficulty. The one is that of Des Cartes. who imagines that after the Water is become freſh by Percolation, it is raiſed out of the Caverns of the Earth in Vapour tovards its Surface; where meeting with Rocks near the Tops of Mountains in he Form of Arches or Vaults, it ſticks to them, and runs down their Sides, ſlike Water in an Alembic) till it meets vith proper Receptacles, from which it ſupplies the Fountains. Now, this is a mere Hypotheſis without Foundation or Probability; for in the ſirſt Place, ve know of no internal Heat of the Earth to cauſe ſuch an Evaporation; or if that vere allowed, yet tis quite incredible, that there ſould be any Caverns ſo ſmooth, and void of Protuberances, as to anſwer the Ends of an Alembic, in collecting and condenſing the Vapours together, in every Place where Fountains aariſe. There arc others (as Varenius &c.) who ſuppoſe, that the Water may riſe thro' the Pores of the Earth, as through Capillary Tubes by Attraction; but hereby they ſhew, that they arc quite unacquainted with what relates to the Motion of a Fluid through ſuch Tubes. For when a Capillary Tube opens inllEE to a Cavity at its upper End, or grows larger and larger, ſo as to ceaſec to be Capillary at that End; the Water will not aſcend through that Tube into the Cavity, or beyond where the Tube is Capillary; becauſe there the Force of Attraction is exerted the contrary Way: Nay, if the Cavity is continually ſupplied with Water, it will be attracted into the Capillary Tube, and run down it, as through a Funnel, if the lower End is immerged in the ſame Fluid, as in this Caſe it is ſuppoſed to be . IT has been a generally received Opinion, and much eſpouſed by Marriotte (a diligent Obſerver of Nature,) that the Riſe of Springs is owing to the Rains and melted Snow. According to him, the Rain Water which falls upon the Hills and Mountains, penetrating the Surface, meets with Clay or Rocks contiguous to cach other, along which it runs, without being able to penetrate them, till being got to the Bottom of the Mountain, or to a conſiderable Diſtance from the Top, it breaks out of the Ground and forms Springs. IN order to examine this Opinion, Mr. Perrault, De la Hire and D. Sideleau endeavourcd to make an Eſtimate of the Quantity of Rain and Snov, that falls in the Space of a Year, to ſee whether it would be ſufficient to afford a Quantity of Water, equal to that * See the latter Part oſ the foregoing Diſſertation. which is annually diſcharged into the Sea by the Rivers. The Reſult of whoſe Inquiries was, that the Quantity of Rain and Snow which fell in a Year into a Cylindrical Veſſel, would fill it (if ſecured from evaporating) to the Height of about nineteen Inchess. Which Quantity D. Sideleau  ſhewed, was not ſufficient to ſupply the Rivers; for that thoſe of England, Ireland and Spain diſcharge a greater Quantity of Water annually, than the Rain, according to that Experiment, is able to ſupPly. Beſides which, another Obſervation was made by them at the ſame Time, viæ. that the Quantity of Water raiſed in Vapour one Year with another, amounted to about Thirty two Inches, which is thirteen more than falls in Rain: a plain Indication, that the Water of Fountains is not ſupplied by Rains and meltcd Snov. TH US, the true Cauſe of the Origin of Fountains remained undiſcovered, till Dr. Halley in making his Celeſiial Obſervations upon the Tops of the Mountains at St. Helena, about cight Hundred Yards above the Level of the Sea, found that the Quantity of Vapour which fell there (even when the Sky was clear) was ſo great that it very much impeded his Obſervations, by covering his Glaſes with Water every half Quarter of an Hour; and upon that * Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences for the Year 1693. attempted to determine by Experiment the Quantity of Vapour, exhaled from the Surface oſ the Sea, as far as it ariſes from Heat; in order to try, whether that might be a ſuſſicient Supply for the Water continually diſcharged by Fountains. The Proceſs of his Experiment was as follows. He took a Veſſel of Water ſalted to the ſame Degree with that of Sea Water, in which he placed a Thermometer, and by mcans of a Pan of Coals, brought the Water to the ſame Degree of Heat, which is obſerved to be that of the Air in our hotteſt Summer: This done, he aſſixed the Veſſel of Water with the Thermometer in it, to one End of a Pair of Scales, and exactly counterpoiſed it with Weights on the other. Then at the End of two Hours he found by the Alteration made in the Weight of the Veſſel, that about a 60rh Part of an Inch of the Depth of the Water, was gone off in Vapour; and therefore in twelve Hours, one tenth of an Inch would have gone off. Now this accurate Obſerver allows the Mediterranean Sea to be 40 Degrees long and 4 broad (the broader Parts compenſating for the narrower) ſo that its whole Surface is 160 ſquare Degrees, which according to the Experiment muſt yield at leaſt 5280 Millions of Tons. In which Account no Regard is had to the Wind, and the Agitation of the Surface of the Sca3 both which undoubtedly promote the Evaporation. IT remained now to compare this Quantity of Water, with that which is daily conveyed into the ſame Sea by the Riverss. The only vay to do vhich, was to compare them with ſome known River; and accordingly he takes his Computation from the River Thames, and to avoid all Objections, he makes ſuch Allowances as arc probably more than the Truth. THE Mcditerranean receives the following conſiderable Rivers viæ. the Iberus, the Rhone, the Tibur, the Po, the Danube, the Neiſter, the Boryſtenes, the Tanais and the Nile. Each of theſe he ſuppoſes to bring down ten Times as much Water as the Thames, whereby he allows for ſmaller Rivers, which fall into the ſame Sca. The Thames then he finds by Menſuration to diſcharge about 20300000 Tons of Water a Day. If therefore the aboveſaid nine Rivers vield ten Times as much Water as the Thames doth, it will follow, that all of them together yeild but 1827 Millions of Tons in a Day; which is but little more than one Third of what is proved to be raiſed in Vapour out of the Mediterrancan in the ſame Time. We have therefore from hence a Source abundantly ſufficient for the Supply of Fountains. No wv having found, that the Vapour exhaled from the Sca, is a ſufficient Supply for the Fountains; he proceeds in the next Place to conſider the Manner in which they are raiſed, and how they are condenſcd into Water again, and conveyed to the Sources of Springs. IN order to this he conſiders, that if an Atom of Water was expanded into a Shell or Bubble, ſo as to be ten Times as big in Diameter as when it wvas Water, that Atom wvould become ſpecifically lighter than Air; and therefore would riſe ſo long as the Warmth which firſt ſeparated it from Zihe Surface of the Water ſhould continue to diſtend it ro the ſame Degree; and conſequently that Vapours may be raiſed from the Surface of the Sea in that Manner, till they arrive at a certain Height in the Atmoſphere, at which they find rhe Air of cqual ſpecific Gravity with themſeves. Here they will float, till being condenſed by Cold, they become ſpecifically heavier than the Air, and fall down in Dew or being driven by the Winds againſt the Sides of the Mountains, (many of which far ſurpaſs the uſual Height to which the Vapours would of themſelves aſcend) are compelled by the Stream of the Air to mount up with it to the Tops of them: Where being condenſed into Water they preſently precipitate, and gleeting down by the Crannies of the Stone, Part of them enters into the Caverns of the Hills; which bęing once filled, all the overplus of Water that comes thither, runs over by the loweſt Place, and breaking out by the Sides of the Hills, forms ſingle Springs. Many of theſe running down by the Valleys berween the Ridges of the Hills, and coming to unite, form little Rivulets or Brooks: many of theſe again meeting in one common Valley, and gaining the plain Ground, being grown leſs rapid, become a River3 and many of theſe being united in one common Channel, make ſuch Streams as the ’hine and the Danube; which latter, he obſerves, one would hardly think to be a Collection of Water conder ſed out of Vapour, unleſs we conſider how vaſt a Tract of Ground that River drains, and that it is the Sum of all thoſe Springs, which break out on the South Side of the Carꝑathian Mountains, and on the North Side of the immenſe Ridge of the Aſps, which is one continued Chain of Mountains from Svitæerland to the Black Sea. TH US one Part of the Vapours, which are blown on to the Land, is returned by the Rivers into the Sea, from whence it came; another Part falls into the Sea before it reaches the Land; and this is the Reaſon, why the Rivers do not return ſo much Water into the Mediterranean as is raiſed in Vapour. A third Part falls on the Low-Lands, and is the Pabulum of Plants, vhere yet it does not reſt, but is again exhaled in Vapour by the Action of the Sun, and is either carried by the Winds to the Sea, to fall in Rain or Dew there, or elſe to the Mountains to be there turned into Springs HOWEVER it is not to be ſuppoſed that all Fountains are owing to onè and the ſame Cauſe, but that ſome proceed from Rain and melted Snow, which ſubſiding through the Surface of the Earth, makes it Way into certain Cavities and thence iſſues out in the Form of Springs; becauſe the Waters of ſeveral are found to increaſe and diminiſh in Proportion to the Rain which falls: that others again, eſpecially ſuch as are ſalt, and ſpring ncar the Sea Shore, owe their Origin to Sea Water percolated through the Earth, and ſome to borth theſe Cauſes: though without doubt moſt of all, and eſpecially ſuch as ſpring near the Tops of high Mountains, receive their VWaters from Vapours, as beforc explained *.-  There is a certain Species of Springs which ebb and fſlow alternately, and ſome that ceaſe to flow for a Time, and from thence are called reciprocating or intermitting oness. Their Reciprocations may be accounted for in the following Manner. Let A4BC repreſent one Side of an Hill in which there is a Cavity DEF, and from this a ſubterraneous Duct JL. Now as this Cavity fills with Water (ſuproſe ſrom Vapours percolating through the Surſace of the Hilſ, or in any other Manner whatever) its Surſace will riſe in the Duct as it does in the Cavity, till it amæs at M, the Level with the upper Part of the Duct; a t which Tſme it will ruu over at u, filling XLA the other Part of the Duct. Now if the Column XL is ionger than XI it will overpoiſe the other, and ſo cauſe the Water to run out at 4, till its Surface in the Cavity ſinks as far as I, (provide l the Duct is large enough to gomey the Water away fates 8 The Origin of Fountains. Part II. than ĩt enters the Cavity) at which Time the Fountain at will ceaſe to play, till the, Surface of the Water in the Cavity riſes again to M, and runs over at X as beforee. The Reaſon whythe ter continues running (When the Duct is õnce full) till its Surface ſinks to I, ĩs becauſe the Air preſling againſt it as ĩt runs out at G and alſo upon its Surface in the Cavity, keeps the Duct full, as long as the Water in the Cavity is high enongh to ſeed its Orifice at IT. li See more on this Subject in Philoſop. Tranſact. Nè. 119. 189. 192. 384. 424. Hiſtory de ' Acad. 1693. 1703. 1713: Glielmini della Natura de Fiumi. Dalès Hiſtory of Haravich. Marriottes Hydroſtatics. Nieuentyt Contempt. 19: Varenius Geograph. Cap 16. Regnault Vol. 2. Converſat.. 6,. Haless Statical Eſſays Vol. 1. Experiment 19. Michelottus in Append.: ad J. Bernoullii de Efferveſc. Diſſert. IV. Of the Barometer. 8 3 DISSERTATION IV. Of the Barometer. N treating of the Properties of the Air (Chap. III.) I have already taken Notice of the Conſtruction of the common Barometer; and proved, that the Aſcent and Suſpenſion of the Mercury therein, is owing to the Preſſure * of the Air. I proceed now to a more particular Inquiry into the Original, and Uſe of this Inſtrument; and the different Forms under which it has appeared, ſince the Time of its Inventor Torricelli. in * To ſay the Aſcent and Suſpenſior of the Mercury is owing to the Preſſure and Elaſticity of the Air, as is commonly done, is inaccurate. The Variation, indeed, in the Height of the Mercury; may be aſcribed to the Elaſticity of the Air, but no otherwiſe; than as to its remote Cauſe; viæ. as it occaſions an Alteration in the Quantity of Air, impending over the Place where the Variation happens; which alters its Weight, and ſo the Mercury is proportionably raiſed or depreſſed. To illuſtrate this, let it be ſuppoſed; that the Air is every where in æquilibrio, quite round the Globe, and at perfect Reſt; and then, that its Elaſticity, in ſome one Place near the Surface of the Earth, is augmented by the Heat of the Sun, all the reſt of it remaining as before. The Conſequence of this will be, that the ſuperior Part of the Atmoſphere, over this Place, will be raiſed higher by the Expanſion of the inferior Air; and therefore, being unconfined, will ſpread itſelf; every way, over the neighbouring Columns, which we ſupſe to retain their formor State. The Quantity of Matter therefore in thoſe Columns of Air, in whoſe lower Parts its Elaſticity was increaſed, will be fiminiibal, and that of the neighbouring In the Beginning of the laſt Century, it was a prevailing Opinion among Philoſophers, that the Univerſe was full of Matter; and that Nature (as they expreſſed it) abhorred a Vacuum: Accordingly they imagined, that if a Fluid was ſucked up a Pipe with a ſufficient Force, it would riſe to any Height whatever; ſince Nature would not ſuffer any Part of the Pipe to remain empty. Galilæo, who flouriſhed about that Time, found upon Trial, that the common Pump would not raiſe Water, unleſs the Sucker reached within three and thirty Feet of ĩts Surface in the Well *: From lll hence ones augmented. A Barometer thereſore placed in thoſe Regions, where the Air was rarified, will ſubſide; while one in the neighbouring Countries will aſcend; and they will continue at different Heights, till the denſer Air, ruſhing in upon the rarified, reſtores the æquilibrium. Thus, we ſee, che Variation of the Airs Elaſticity is not the immediate Cauſe of the Variation in the Barometer; it ſirſt ⸗ſfects the Weight of the Air, by altering the Quantity incumbent over any Place, and that affects the Barometer. But, if we may have Recourſe to remote Cauſes, we may, if we pleaſe, go one Step farther; and ſay, the Aſcent and Suſpenſion of the Mercury is owing to the Heat of the Sun; for by the foregoing Inſtance, a Variation in the Heat of the Sun may ſometimes be the occaſion of a Variation in the Height of the Mercury. Neither is the Suſpenſion of the Mercury, in a Tube, that is Eept within Doors, to be aſcribed to the Elaſticity of the Air; for that exerts no Force, but as the internal Air is preſſed by the external, which endeavours to get in, where-ever it can find a Way.  It is a common Notion, that a ſucking Pump will not raiſe Water above thirty-three Feet, whereas it will raiſe it to any Height whatever, if the Sucker reaches within thirty-three Feet of the Surface of the Warer; as will be evident to any one that conſiders the Structure of the Pump: For all the Water, which has once hence he judiciouſly inferred, that a Column of Water thirty-three Feet high was a Counterpoiſe to a Column of Air of an equal Baſe, whoſe Height extended to the Top of the Atmoſphere; and that, for this Reaſon, the Water would not follow the Sucker any farther. Torricelli, obſerving this, took the Hint; and conſidered, that, if a Column of Water, of about thirty-three Feet, was equal in Weight to a Column of Air, of the ſame Baſe ; a coonce paſſed through the Valve in the Sucker, is ſupported by that, as the Sucker is drawn up, and reſts upon a Valve placed in the Pump below, as it is let down; ſo that it can be no Impediment to the riſing of the Water below the Sucker, whatever the Length of the Column, which it forms, may be. The placing one Pump above another, where Water is to be raiſed from great Depths, is rather for Strength and Conveniency, than out of Neceſſity. * Perhaps it may be enquired here, how it comes to paſs, that the Column of Air, which preſſes upon the lagnant Mercury in the Baſon, is always ſuppoſed to have an equal Baſe with the ſuſpended Column in the Tube; whereas, in Reality, its Baſe is equal to the Surface of the ſtiagnant Mercury. The Reaſon is, that, as the Baſe of the Column of Air increaſes, in the ſame Proportion the Velocity, wherewith it deſcends, decreaſes, when it forces down the Surface of the Mercury in the Baſon; conſequently its Moment, or Preſſure upon the Surface of the ſtagnant Mercury (ſo far as it relates to the ſuſpending of it in the Tube) is no greater, than it would have been, had its Baſe been equal to that of the ſuſpended Column; and thereſore, in conſidering it as ſuſpending a Fluid in a Tube, it is properly enough ſaid to be a Column of ſuch a Baſe. ] Neither is this Suppoſition inconſiſtent with the ninth Propoſition of the firſt Chapter, where it is demonſtrated, that the Preſſure of a Fluid is in Proportion to its perpendicular Height, and the Quantity of Surface, againſt which it preſſes. For. as the Surface of the Mercury may be conſidered as a Baſe on which the Column of Mercury, no longer than about twenty-nine Inches and a half, would be ſo too; ſuch a Column of Mercury being as heavy, as thirty-three Feet of Water. Accordingly he tried the Experiment in a Glaſ Tube (in the Manner laid down, Chap. III . 4.) and found it to ſucceed *. The Apparatus he made Uſe of, Column of Air reſts, ſo the Baſe of the Column of Air may be confiderd as a Surface againſt which the Mercury preſſes. Theſe two being equal, 'tis clear, that only the Relation of the Heights of the Columns are to be conſidered, and not that of their Baſes. * Notwithſtanding this clear Proof of the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, the Aſſerters of a Plenum would by no Means be prevailed upon to allow it to be ſuch; but tried all Ways to account for this Phænomenon from ſome other Cauſe. The moſt chimerical Solution, and which at the ſame Time gave the adverſe Party the greateſt Difficulty to overthrow, was that of Linus. He contended, that in the upper Part of the Tube, there is a Film, or Rope of Mercury, extended thro the ſeeming Vacuity, and that the reſt was ſuſpended by it, and kept from falling into the Baſon; and that this Film is able to ſupport about twenty- nine Inches of Merury. He confirms his Hypotheſis by the following Experiment. ake, ſays he, a ſmall Tube, open at both Ends, ſuppoſe about twenty Inches long; fill this Tube with Mercury, ſtopping the lower Orifice with your Thumb: Then cloſing the upper with our Finger, and immerging the lower in ſtagnant Mercury, you l perceive, upon the Removal of your Thumb, a maniſfeſt Suction of your Finger into the Tube; and the Tube and Mercury will both ſtick ſo cloſe to it, that you may carry them about the Room. Therefore, ſays he, the internal Cylinder of Mercury ĩn the Tube is not held up by the preponderant Air without; for if ſo, whence comes ſo ſtrong a Suction, and ſo firm an Adheſion of the Tube to your Finger? DOir if you fill the ſame Tube almoſt full of Mercury, leaving a little Space of Air within, and then immerge it in the ſtagnant ercury, you vill find, that, notwithſtanding its Surface is at fome Diſtance from your Finger, there will be a conſiderable Suci of, is now the common Barometer or Weather Glaſs*. The Mercury ſtanding at a leſs Height, the nearer it is carried to the Top of the Atmoſphere, tion of it, as before From hence he infers, that the Finger ſupports the Mercury, by Means of the abovementioned Film, and that the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere is not concerned. But, when it was found, that the Mercury would not ſtand ſo high in the Tube, on the Top of a Mountain, as below; and would quite fall, when the circumambient Air was extracted from it by the Pump, all Objections vaniſhed; and Linus's funicular Hypotheſis ſas it was called) though it ſeemed to ſolve all other Phænomena, relating to the Suſpenſion of the Mercury, was with Juſtice rejected. Kircher, when this new Doctrine of a Vacuum was firſt advanced at Rome, contended, that the Authors of it were eſtabliſhing Principles not only repugnant to thoſe of Nature, but ſuch as would be prejudicial to the Orthodox Faith; as endeavouring to evince by this ſubtle Experiment, that there might be in Nature Adocatum ſine loco, accidentia ſine ſubjecto, and therefore made the Experiment with Water, in the following Manner. He cauſed a ſmall Bell to be fixed in the upper Part of the Tube, imagining, that, if there ſhould be a Vacuum, the Bell would not be madæ to ſound: But in making the Experiment, ſome Air got into the Tube (for he tells us, that but ten Feet of Water remained in the Tube, after it was inverted) the Bell therefore was heard to ſound; and ſo the Notion of a Vacuum, till more accurate Experiments evinced the contrary, was exploded with Contempt. * Huygens obſerved, that, if a Tube ſeventy-five Inches long, was filled with Mercury well purged of its Air, the whole Quantity of Mercury would remain ſuſpended; whereas, according to the Torricellian Experiment, the Mercury ought to have ſubſided to the Height of about twenty-nine Inches. The Cauſe of this Phænomenon ſeems to be, that, by the great Weight of ſo long a Column of Mercury, it was preſſed into ſo cloſe Contact with the Glaſs in pouring in, that by the mutual Attraction of Coheſion between the Mercury and the Glaſi, the whole Column was ſuſtained, after the Tube was inveried. (Chap. IIL. §. 7.) renders it uſeful in determining the Height of Mountains; and finding out the different Elevation of one Place above another. Accordingly, Dr. Halley has given us a Table for that Purpoſe, in the Philoſophical Tranſactions NY. 181, ſhewing how many Feet the Deſcent of the Mercury each Inch anſwers to, as it is conveyed to the Top of a Mountain, or other elevated Placee And Dr. Nettleton has done the like in the Philoſophical Tranſactions NO. 388, ſhewing what Number of Feet anſwers to each tenth Part of an Inch, from twenty-ſix to thirty-one Inches of Mercury. But the principal Uſe of it is, to eſtimate the Gravity of the Air at different Times, in Order to foreſee the Alterations of the Weather, which are conſequent thereon. To this End, Dr. Halley in the ſame Tranſaction has alſo laid down the more remarkable Phænomena, relating to the different Heights of the Mercury at different Times, togęther with the Solution of each; which are ſo juſt, and ſo agreeable to true Philoſophy, that I doubt not but the Reader will excuſe me for giving his Account in his own Words, rather than to render it imperfect, by endeavouring to vary from it, or abridge it. j. In calm Weather, when the Air is in-  clined to Rain, the Mercury is commonly  low.  2. In ſerene, good, ſettled Weather, the Mercury is generally high. 32. Upon very great Winds, though they be not accompanied with Rain, the Mercury ſinks loweſt of al with Relation to the Point of the Compaſò the Wind blows upon. 4. Cæteris paribus, the greateſt Heights of the Mercury are found upon eaſterly and north-ea ſterly Winds.  5. In calm froſty Weather, the Mercury generally ſtands high.  6, After very great Storms of Wind, when the Mercury has been low, it gene. rally riſes again very faſt. 4. The more northerly Places have greater Alterations of the Barometer, than the more ſoutherly.  8. Within the Tropicss and near them, thoſe Accounts we have had from others, and my own Obſervations at St. Helenũ, make very little or no Variation of the Height of the Mercury in all Weatherss  Hence I conceive that the principal Cauſe of the Riſe and Fall of the Mercury, is from the variable Winds, which are found in the temperate Zone, and whoſe great Unconſtancy, here in England, is moſt notorious.  A ſecond Cauſe is the uncertain Exhalation and Precipitation of the Vapours lodging in the Air, whereby it comes to be at one Time, much more crouded than at another, and conſequently heavier, but this latter in a great Meaſure depends upon the former: No, from theſe Principles; I ſhall endeavour to explicate the ſeveral Phænomena of the Barometer, taking them in the ſame Order I laid them down. Thuss:  i. The Mercury's being low; inclines it to rain, becauſe the Air being light; the Vapours are no longer ſupported thereby, being become ſpecifically heavier than the Medium wherein they floated, ſo that they deſcend towards the Earth; and in their Fall, meeting with other aqueous Particles, they incorporate together, and form little Drops of Rain; but the Mercury's being at one Time lower than at another, is the Effect of two contrary Winds blowing from the Place where the Barometer ſtands; whereby the Air of that Place is carry'd both Ways from it, and, conſequently, the incumbent Cylinder of Air is diminiſhed, and accordingly the Mercury ſinks: As for Inſtance, if in the German Ocean it ſhould blow a Gale of weſterly Wind, and at the ſame Time an eaſterly Wind in the Iriſb Sea; or if in France it ſhould blow a northerly Wind, and in Scotland a ſoutherly; it muſt be granted, that that Part of the Atmoſphere impendant over England, would thereby be exhauſted and attenuated, and the Mercury would ſubſide, and the Vapours; which bet fore floated in thoſe Parts of the Air of equal Gravity with themſelves, would ſink to the Earth.  2. The greater Height of the Barometer is occaſioned by two contrary Winds blowing towards the Place of Obſervation, whereby the Air of other Places is brought thither and accumulated; ſo that the incumbent Cylinder of Air, being encreaſed both in Height and Weight, the Mercury preſſed thereby muſt needs ſtand high, as long as the Winds continue ſo to blow; and then the Air being ſpecifically heavier, the Vapours are better kept ſuſpended, ſo that they ave no Inclination to precipitate and fall down in Drops, which is the Reaſon of the ſerene good Weather which attends the greater Heights of the Mercury.  3. The Mercury ſinks the loweſt of all by the very rapid Motion of the Air in Storms of Wind. For the Tract or Region of the Earth's Surface, wherein the Winds rage, not extending all round the Globe, that ſtagnant Air which is left behind, as likewiſe that on the Sides, cannot come in ſo faſt as to ſupply the Evacuation made by ſo wift a Current, ſo that the Air muſt neceſſarily be attenuated, when and where the ſaid Winds continue to blow, and that more or leſs, according to their Violence; add to which, that the horizontal Motion of the  Air being ſo quick as it is, may, in all Pro-  bability, take off ſome Part of the perpendie cular Preſſure thereof; and the great Agitation of ĩts Particles is the Reaſon why the ss Vapours are diſſipated, and do not condenſe s into Drops, ſo as to form Rain, otherwiſe s the natural Conſequence of the Airs Rare⸗ faction +.  4. The Mercury ſtands the higheſt upon s the eaſterly and north-eaſterly Wind, be-  cauſe in the great Atlantic Ocean, on this  Side the thirty-fifth Degree of north Lati-  tude, the Winds are almoſt always weſter-  ly or ſouth-weſterly; ſo that whenever  here the Winds come up at eaſt and north-  eaſt,tis ſure to be checked by a contrary  Gale as ſoon as it reaches the Ocean; where-  fore, according to what is made out in our s ſecond Remark, the Air muſt needs be heap- La] + The Reaſon the Doctor aſſigns for the ſinking of the Mercury the loweſt of all in violent Storms of Wind, ſeems not ſufficient. Perhaps it may be better accounted for thus; the Cauſe why the Wind blows at all, is in order to reſtore the æquilibrium of the Atmoſphere, when loſl (as may be inferred from what was ſaid in the firſt Note of this, and will be more largely explained in the following Diſſortation;) it therefore always blows towards that Point, where the Air is moſt rarefied and lighteſt. Now the Air in its Progreſs to that Point, muſt certainly move faſter and ſaſter; for the Cauſe which gave it Motion at firſt, continues to act upon it all the Way. Conſequently, in whatever Place the Wind blows with great Rapidity, that Place is at, or near the Point, where the Air is moſt rarefied, and lighteſt; which is a ſuficient Reaſon for the Mercurys ſlanding low at that Place. ed over this Iland, and conſequently the Mercury muſt ſtand high, as often as theſe Winds blow. This holds true in this Country, but is not a general Rule for others, here the Winds are under different Circumſtances; and I have ſometimes ſeen the Mercury here, as low as twenty-nine Inches upon an eaſterly Wind, but then it blew exceeding hard, and ſo comes to be accounted for, by what was obſerved upon the third Remark.  5. In calm froſty Weather the Mercury generally ſtands high, becauſe ſas IT conceive) it ſeldom freezes, but when the Winds come out of the northern, and north-eaſtern Quarters; or, at leaſt, unleſs thoſe Winds blow at no great Diſtance off: For the north Parts of Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and all that Tract from whence north-eaſtern Winds come, are ſubject to almoſt continual Froſt all the Winter; and thereby the lower Air is very much condenſed, and in that State is brought thitherwards by thoſe Winds, and being accumulated by the Oppoſition of the'weſterly Wind blowing in the Ocean, the Mercury muſt needs be preſſed to a more than ordinary Height: and, as a concurring Cauſe, the ſhrinking of the lower Parts of the Air into leſſer Room by Cold, muſt  needs cauſe a Deſcent of the upper Parts of  the Atmoſphere, to reduce the Cavity made  by this Contraction to an æquilibrium.  6. After great Storms, when the Mer-  cury has been very low, it generally riſes  again very faſt: I once obſerved it to riſe  one Inch and a half in leſs than ſix Hours,  after a long continued Storm of ſouth-werſt  Wind. The Reaſon is, becauſe the Air be-  ing very much rarefied, by the great Evas cuations which ſuch continued Storms make  thereof, the neighbouring Air runs in the  more ſwiftly, to bring it to an æquilibrium; as we ſee Water runs the faſter for  having a greater Declivity.  5. The Variations are greater in the more e northerly Places, as at Stockholm, greater  than that at Paris (compard by M. Paſ-  chal;] becauſe the more northerly Parts  have uſually greater Storms of Wind than  the more ſoutherly, whereby the Mercury  ſhould ſink lower in that Extream; and e then the northerly Winds bringing the more  denſe and ponderous Air from the Neighs bourhood of the Pole, and that again being  checked by a ſoutherly Wind at no great  Diſtance, and ſo heaped, muſt of Neceſſity  make the Mercury in ſuch Caſe ſtand higher  n the other Extream.  8. Laſtly, this Remark, That there is  little or no Variation near the Equinoctial, does above all others, confirm the Hypotheſis of the variable Winds being the Cauſe of theſe Variations of the Height of the Mere cury; for in the Places above-named, there  js always an eaſy Gale of Wind blowing  nearly upon the ſame Point, viæ. eaſt-north-  eaſt, at Barbadoes, and eaſt-ſouth-eaſt at  St Helena æ, ſo that there being no contra-  ry Currents of Air to exhauſt or accumulate  jt, the Atmoſphere continues much in the  ſame State: However, upon Hurricanes  (the moſt violent of Storms) the Mercury  has been obſerved very low, but this is but  once in two or three Years, and it ſoon re-  covers its ſettled State about 29 Inches” Monſieur Leibnitæ accounted for the Deſcent of the Mercury before Rain, upon another Principle ;;, viæ. as a Body ſpecifically lighter than a Fluid, while it is ſuſpended by it, adds more Weight to that Fluid, than when, by being reduced in its Bulk, it becomes ſpecifically heavier, and deſcends; ſo the Vapour, after it is reduced into the Form of Clouds, and deſcends, adds leſs Weight to the Air, than before; and therefore the Mer* See the Cauſe of this aſſigned in the following Diſſertation. 4 Memoir. de Acad. 1711. cury falls. To which it is anſwered, iſ. That when a Body deſcends in a Fluid, its Motion, in a very little Time, becomes uniform, (or nearly ſo) a farther Acceleration of it being prevented by the Reſiſtance of the Fluid; and then, by the third Law of Nature, it preſſes the Fluid downwards, with a Force equal to that whereby it tends to be farther accelerated, that is, with a Force equal to its whole Weight. 2dly. The Mercury, by its Deſcent, foretells Rain a much longer Time before it comes, than the Vapour, after it is condenſed into Clouds, can be ſuppoſed to take up in falling. 3dly. Suppoſing that as many Vapours, as fall in Rain, during the Space of a whole Year, were at once to be condenſed into Clouds, and even quite ceaſe to gravitate upon the Air, its Gravity would ſcarce be diminiſhed thereby, ſo much as is equivalent to the Deſcent of two Inches of Mercury in the Barometer. Farther, in many Places between the Tropics, the Rains fall at certain Seaſons, in very great Quantities *, and yet the Barometer ſhews there very little or no Alteration in the Weight of the Air. The following are Mr. Patrics Obſervations on the riſing and falling of the Mercury. They are very juſt, and are to be accounted  See Diſſertation the vith.  on the ſame Principles with thoſe of Dr. alley. 1. The riſing of the Mercury preſages in general fair Weather; and its falling, foul Weather; as Rain, Snow, high Winds and Storms.  2. In very hot Weather, the falling of the Mercury foreſhews Thunder.  3. In Winter the riſing preſages Froſt; and in froſty Weather, if the Mercury falls three or four Diviſions, there will certainly followm a Thaw. But in a continued Froſt, if the Mercury riſes, it will certainly ſnow.  4. When foul Weather happens ſoon after the Falling of the Mercury, expect but little of it. And, on the contrary, expect but little fair Weather, when it proves fair ſhortly after the Mercury has riſen.  5. In foul Weather, when the Mercury riſes much and high, and ſo continues for two or three Days before the foul Weather is quite over, then expect a Continuance of fair Weather to follow.  6. In fair Weather, when the Mercury falls much and low, and thus continues for two or three Days before the Rain comes; then expect a great deal of wet, and probably high Windss. , The unſettled Motion of the Mercury denotes uncertain and changeable Weather.  8. You are not ſo ſtrictly to obſerve the Words engraven on the Plates (though, for the moſt Part, it will agree with them) a⸗ the Mercury's Riſing and Falling: For if it ſtands at Much Rain, and then riſes up to Changeable, it preſages fair Weather, although not to continue ſo long, as it would have done, if the Mercury were higher: And ſo on the contrary, if the Mercury ſtood at Fair, and falls to Changeable, it preſages foul Weather; though not ſo much of it, as if it had ſunk down lower.* Lã Lal ] - LJ L - L - - -- - - - - L4 - - Lal c From theſe Obſervations, it appears, That it is not ſo much the Height of the Mercury in the Tube, that indicates the Weather, as the Motion of it up and down; wherefore, in Order to paſs a right Judgment of what Weather is to be expected, we ought to know, whether the Mercury is actually Riſing or Falling, to which End, the following Rules are of Uſe. 1. If the Surface of the Mercury is convex, ſtanding higher in the Middle of the Tube than at the Sides, it is generally a Sign that the Mercury is then riſing. 2. If the Surface is concave, or hollow in the Middle, it is ſinking. And, 3. If it ĩs plain, the Mercury is ſtationary, or rather, if it is a little convex; for Mercur; being put into a Glaſ's Tube, eſpecially a ſmall one, will naturally have its Surface a little convex; becauſe the Particles of Mercury attract each other more forcibly than they are attracted by Glaſs. Further, 4. IF the Glaſt is ſmall, ſhale the Tube; and if the Air is growing heavier, the Mercury will riſe about half the tenth of an Ineh higher, than it ſtood before; if ĩt is growing lighter, it will ſink as much:. This proceeds from the Mercurys ſticking to the Sides of the Tube, which prevents the free Motion of it; till ĩt is difengaged by the Shock. And therefore; when an Obſervation is to be made with ſuch a Tube, it ought always to be ſhaken firſt, for ſometimes the Mercury will not vary of its own Accord, till the Weather, it ought to have indicated, is preſent. The Uſefulneſs of khowing, whether the Mercury is actually riſing or falling; and the Advantage that would ariſe from perceiving the moſt minute Variations in eſtimating the Heighits of Places; have given Occaſion to the Invention of ſeveral Kinds of Barometers different from the Torricellian, though founded on the ſame Principle; wherein the Scale of Variation, which in that is not above three Inches, ſhould be conſiderably larger. Of which I am now to give ſome Account. 1. The firſt is that of Des Cartes, which was made in the Form expreſſed Fig. 28. where AB is a Tube hermetically * ſealed at A, and having its lower Orifice immerged in ſtagnant Mercury EF, and filled with the ſame Fluid to G, from thence to H with Water, and empty from thence to the Top. Now, when the Mercury riſes in this Tube, ſuppoſe from G to L, the Water will be raiſed in the ſmall Tube, perhaps from H to M, viæ. as many Times further, as the Tube CA is ſmaller than CD; by which Means the Variations become much more ſenſible, than they are in the common Barometer. The Inconvenience of this was, that the Air, included in the Water, getting looſe by Degrees, filled the void Space at the Top, and ſo ſpoiled the Machine. 2. He then contrived it thus, ABC (Fig. 29.) Is a bent Tube hermetically ſealed at A, filled with Water from F to D (tinged with Aqua Regia to prevent its freezing,) from D to E with Mercury, and empty from thence to the Top. Then, upon the Mercury's riſing, ſuppoſe from * A Tube is ſaid to be bermetically ſealed, when the End is ſo cloſed, that noining can poſſibly evaporate through it. And, becauſe this is beſt done, when it is cloſed up with its own Subſtance or when its Bore does not reach quite through it, it is then ſaid to be hermetically ſealed. E to M, and falling as much at D, the Surface of the Water at F would ſink ſo many Times farther than the Surface of the Mercury at D, as the Tube CG was ſmaller than GH. The Woater here is liable to evaporate, though that may, in ſome Meaſure, be prevented, by pouring a few Drops of Oĩl of ſweet Almonds upon it. Others have contrived 3. The Horizontal or Rectangular Barometer (Fig. 30.) hermetically ſealed at A, and filled with Mercury from D to E; then as the upper Surface of it riſes in the Tube, ſuppoſe from E to F, the lower will be driven from D to G, as many Times farther, as this Part of the Tube is leſs than that at E But it often happens, that ſome Parts of the Mercury break o from the reſt in the Leg BC, and are left behind. This Inconvenience is remedied in 4. The Diagonal Barometer ABC (Fig. 31.) wherein the Mercury, inſtead of riſing from B to D (ſuppoſe that Space to correſpond to the Scale of Variation in a ſtrait Tube) will riſe from B to A; for it will alays ſtand at the ſame perpendicular Height, whatever be the Inclination of the Tube; becauſe Fluids preſ only according to their perpendicular Altitude ?: But the Tube AB muſt not be too much inclined, leſt the Mercury break in it, as in the former. * Chapter I. 5. 9. 5. AB (Fig. 32.) is Dr. RooPs WheelBarometer, wherein ABD is a Tube filled with Mercury from a to E; æ is an Iron Ball, ſwimming on the Surface of the Mercury; this as ĩt ſubſides with the Surface of the Mercury, draws the little Wheel m n round, to whoſe Circumference it is fixed by Means of the String a c *: This Wheel carries the Index PQ, which points to the graduated Edge of the Circle KL, and by its Motion ſhews the moſt minute Variations of the Mercury. When the Ball æ is raiſed by the Mercury on which it ſwims, the Index is drawn the contrary Way by a leſſer Ball 5, which hangs on the other Side the Wheel. The Friction in this Machine, unleſs it be made with great Accuracy indeed, renders it uſeleſs. 6. The pendent Barometer is another Contrivance to render the Variations more ſenſible. It conſiſts of a ſmall conical Tube, (repreſented Fig. 33) hermetically ſealed at A, and filled with Mercury from C to D, and empty from thence to A Now, ſuppoſing the Gravity of the Air encreaſed, it will raiſe the Mercury higher in the Tube, and ſo force it into à narrower Part; by which Means the Column becoming longer, its perpendicular Preſſure upon the Air below will be proportionably encreaſed.  The Tube is ſmaller at æ than at E, that the greateſt Variation may be at that Surface of the Mercury on which the Ball reſts. Piſſert. IV. Of the Barometer. 103 On the contrary, when the Air becomes lighter, the Mercury deſcends into a larger Part of the Tube, and by that Means has the Length of its Column proportionably contracted. The Inconvenience that attends this Barometer, is that the Tube muſt be very ſmall, otherwiſe the Mereury will fall out; or the Air will be apt to get into it, and divide the Column in ſeveral Places; and when the Tube is very ſmall, the Friction of the Mercury againſt the Sides of it, will hinder it from riſing and falling freely. 7. Dr. Hook, obſerving how unfit the common Barometer was to be uſed on Board of Ship, by Reaſon its Poſition ought to be ſteady, contrived the following one, called, from its Uſe, a Marine Barometer, conſiſting of two Parts, the one A B (Fig. 34.) the common Spirit Thermometer, the other CD, a Tube filied with Air from C to E, and from thence to the End D with tinged Water. This End is immerged in the ſame Fluid contained in the Veſſel GF; and having its Surface expoſed to the Preſſure of the external Air. Now, the laſt of theſse Machines will be affected both by the Warmth of the external Air, and alſo by its Preſſure: The former dilating the Air included in CE, and by that Means driving the Water downwards; the latter preſſing it up higher in the Tube: Whereas the other, viæ. AB, is affected 104 Of the Barometer. Part II. ſequently, were theſe Inſtruments graduated in ſuch a Manner, that, if the Gravity of the external Air ſhould always remain the ſame it was, when the Inſtruments were made, their Variations (then only depending on its Warmth) ſhould exactly correſpond with each other; that iss when the Spirit in the Tube AB, ſhould aſcend to 1, the Water in CD, ſhould deſcend to 1, &c. Then, whenever their Variations ſhould be obſerved to differ from each other, the Difference could only be aſcribed to ſome Alteration in the Preſſure of the Air upon the Surface of the Water in the Veſſel GF. In Proportion therefore as this Difference is greater, or leſs, ſo is the Alteration in the Gravity of the Air, from what it was when the Inſtruments were adjuſted. For Inſtance when the Water ſtands above the Diviſion, which correſponds to thatt which the Spirit points to in the other Machine, it is an Indication, that the Preſſure of the Air is greater at that Time, than when the Inſtruments were graduated, and vice verſũ. This Machine is not only more uſeful at Sea, than the common one, as not requiring a ſteady Poſition; but may have its Scale of Variation conſiderably enlarged, by making the Bore of the Tube CD very ſmall, in Proportion to the Capacity of its Head C. But it is obſerved, that in long keeping this Inſtrument, the included Air loſes ſomewhat of its Elaſticity; whereby, in Proceſs of Time, the Water ſtands higher than it ought, and therefore indicates the Gravity of the Air to be greater than what it is. In the Philoſophical Tranſactions N9. 427. I have given an Account of a Barometer, wherein the Scale of Variation may be encreaſed ad Infinitum. The Deſcription of it is as follows: A B CD (Fig. 35.) is a cylindrical Veſſel, filled with a Fluid to the Height W, in which is immerged the Barometer SV, conſiſting of the following Parts: The Principal of which is a Glaſs Tube TP (repreſented ſeparately at ?ꝓ) whoſe upper End T is hermetically ſealed: This End does not appear to the Eye, being received into the lower End of a Tin Pipe GH, which in its other End G receives a cylindrical Rod, or Tube ST, and thereby fixes it to the Tube TP. This Rod ST may be taken off, in Order to put in its ſtead a larger, or leſſer, as Occaſion requires. S is a Star at the Top of the Rod ST, and ſerves as an Index, by pointing to the graduated Scale L A, which is fixed to the Cover of the Veſſel A B CD. MN is a large cylindrical Tube made of Tin (repreſented ſeparately at m n) which receives in its Cavity the ſmaller Part of the Tube TP, and is well cemented to it at both Ents, that none of the Fluid may get 1mn. ] l The Tube TP, with this Apparatus, being filled with Mercury, and plunged into the Baſon V, which hangs by two, or more Wires, upon the lower End of the Tube MN, muſt be ſo poized; as to float in the Liquor contained in the Veſſel AB CD, and then the whole Machine will riſe, when the Atmoſphere becomes lighter, and vice verſã. j I ſhall here add a Computation, in Order to ſiew the Poſſibility of the Variation being infinite, upon a given finite Variation of the Weight of the Atmoſphere, and withal, the Reaſon why it may be ſfoo And for the Sake of thoſe who would ſee 2 Mathematical Proof of it, I ſhall give the Demonſtration in a Note below. ?* Let * Let the ſpecific Gravity of Quickfilver bè to that of Water, or to the Liquor the Barometer floats in, as s to 13 and if it be propoſed, that the Variations in this compound Barometer ſtall be to the contemporary Variations of the common Barometer in the given Ratio of æ to 1, this Effect will be obtained, by makimg the Dia meter of the Rod ST to the Diameter of the Cavity o the nV1 Tube HI, as / to 1, which may be thus demonſtrated. ns Lèt us ſuppoſe, that the Variation in the Height of the Quickſilver in the common Baromèter, hich we call æ, is ſuch, that a cubic Inch of Quickſilver ſhall riſe into the Vacuum XT; in Ordeèr 10 which, a cubic Inch of Quickſilver muſt riſe from the Veſſel V; that is, the Surface P muſt ſubfide ſo far, that a cobic Inch of Water (if that be the Fluid made Uſe of) ſhall enter the Veſſel V; by which Means the Baromẽter with the Parts annexed Let ĩt be ſuppoſed, that the Fluid made uſe of is Water, and that the given Variation in the Weight of the Atmoſphere is ſuch, that, by Now this additional Weight of a cubic Inch of Fluid, ill make the whole Barometer ſubſide (according to the Laws of Hydroſtatics) till a cubic Inch of the Rod HS, immediately extant above the Surface at W, ſhall come under it; but the Length of ſuch a Magnitude of HS will exeeed the Lengih of an equal Magnitude of Quiel fiver in the larger Tube X, as many Times as the Square of the Diameter at X exceeds the Square of the Diameter at H (the Lengths of equal Cylinders being reciprocal to their Baſes.) That is, the perpendicular Deſcent of the compound Barometer will be to , the perpendicular Acent of the Mercury in the common Barometer, as  to 1 ſſuppoſing this the Ratio of their Baſes, and conſequently will be equal to àv. But, by this Deſcent, the Diſtance PW, between the Surface of the ſtagnant Quiekſilver and the Top of the Fluid, will be augmented by a Column, whoſe Height is àdv, the Deſcent of the compound Barometer; and conſequently the Weight of the whole Column of the Fluid preſſing on the lower Surface of the Quickſilver to which the Height X is partly owing) will be encreaſed by a Column of ihat Length; and this ncreaſe would produce æ ſecond Aſcent of the Mercury at X equal to itſelf, namely, av, were the Fluid as heavy as Quickſilver; but ſince it is ſuppoſed to be lighter in the Ratio of s to 1, the Aſcent of the Quickſilver, dv on this Account, will only be S 6 But now, as in the former Caſe, when the Aſcent of the Mercury was v, the Deſcent of the compound Barometer was ſhewn dv to be av; ſo here, the Aſcent of the Mercury being the Deddv ſ and the next Deſcent of the common Barometer will be dd dv d4v s) and the next and ſo on to Infinity. Theres55) 33 b fore the whole Deſcent of the compound Barometer, is to the Aſcent of the Mercury in the common Barometer, that is, æ is to i ſcent dd ddda da ds as d D——pr——-+ &c5c. to 1, or as—1to15 be: 553 :3) s—d cauſe the Terms of the Series being in geometrical Proportion, the by preſſing upon the Surface of it at W, the Surface of the Mercury at X may be raiſed an Inch higher (meaſuring from its Surface at P) than before; and that the Breadth of the Cavity of the Tube at X, and of the Baſon at P are ſuch, that by this Aſcent of the Mercury, there may be a cubic Inch of it in the Cavity X more than before, and conſequently in the Baſon a cubic Inch leſss Now, upon this Suppoſition, there will be a cubic Inch of Water in the Baſon more than there was before; becauſe the Water will ſfucceed the Mercury to fill up its Place. Upon this Account, the whole Machine will be renderd heavier, than it was before, by the Weight of a cubic Inch of Water, and therefore will ſink, according to the Laws of Hydroſtatics (Chap II. §. 5.) till a cubic Inch of that Part of the Rod WS, which ds as Sum of them all i Hence we have and there5_ 2a) nVs fore nn= ds  dn; that is, 1: d:: ns: us:: : 1; ns and therefore, by extracting the ſquare Roots of each Term in the Proportion, 1: ã (that is, the Diameter of ST to the DiamenVs ter of FI) as 7/to 1.  E. D. n Example 1. Putting ,/14 and /1, the Variation in each Barometer will be equal, by taking the Diameter of ST to the IS Diameter of HI, as ,/ to 1, that is, as 30 to 29 nearly. 14 Example . If n be put infinite, the Diameter of ST will be I to the Diameter of HI, as Lto I, or I to,/ i45 that is, as 1 to 3 à nearly. s i Diſſert. IV. Of the Barometer. 109 was above the Surface of the Water at W, comes under it. Then, if we ſuppoſe this Rod ſo ſmall, that a cubic Inch of it ſhall be fourteen Inches in Length, the whole Machine vwill ſink fourteen Inches lower into the Fluid than before, and conſequently the Surface of the Mercury in the Baſon will be preſſed more than it was before, by a Column of Water fourteen Inches high. But the Preſſure of fourteen Inches of Water is equivalent to one of Mercury (becauſe Water is about fourteen Times lighter than Mercury) this additional Preſſure therefore will make the Mercury aſcend at X, as much as the ſuppoſed Variation in the Weight of the Air did at firſt. This Aſcent will give Room for a ſecond cubic Inch of Water to enter the Baſon; the Machine will therefore be again rendered heavier by the Weight of ſo much Water, and accordingly will ſubſide fourteen Inches farther. This will occaſion another additional Preſſure of Water, which will raiſe another Inch of Mercury, and make the Machine ſink fourteen Inches more, and ſo on, without ever approaching nearer to an æquilibrium with the external Air: and therefore a Scale, anſwering to the Variation of this Barometer, ought ſtrictly and properly to be of an infinite Length; becauſe after B Barometer has ſunk or riſen thouſands of Miles (if that were poſſible) it would ſtill have the ſame Tendency to ſink or riſe on, as when it firſt ſet out, 1I0 Of the Barometer. Part II. Now, was the Rod WS ſo ſmall, that a cubic Inch of it ſhould be more than fourteen Inches long (the other Parts remaining as was ſuppoſed above) the Variation in this Barometer would be more than infinite, or negative with Reſpect to thoſe of the common Barometer. The Meaning of which is, that whereas in the common Barometer, the ſuſpended Column of Mercury, by its rifing or falling, ⸗ proaches nearer to an Aquilibrium with external Air, this Barometer would continually recede from an Aquilibrium with it; ſo that the farther it ſhould move up or down, inſtead of acquiring by that Means a leſs Tendency to move on, as the Mercury in the common Barometer does, it would acquire a greater. On the contrary, when a cubic Inch of the Rod is leſs than fourteen Inches in Length, the Variation will be ſinite; and may he made to bear any Proportion to thoſe of the common Barometer whatever, as demonſtrated in the foregoing Note. While T am writing this, another Method occurs to me of making a Barometer, wherein the Scale of Variation ſal bear any Proportion to that of the common one. It is h Let there be a compound Tube, as ABC (Fig. 36.) hermetically ſealed at A, and open at C, empty from A to D, filled with Mercury from Diſſert. IV, Of the Barometer. 11I ter: Then, if the Tube FC be a little more than five Times leſs in Diameter than the Tube FA, the Variation in the lower Surface of the Water at E will be infinite; if it be above ſo many Times leſs, it will be more than infinite, otherwiſe it will be finite. See the Demonſtration in the Note , That * Let v denote a given Variation in the common Barometer, æ the corteſpondent Variation at E ſought. Let the Ratio of æ to 1, expreſs that of the ſpecific Gravity of Mercury, to that of Water; and 4 to 1, that of the Diameter of the Tube F to FC. Then the Variation at E, the lower Surface of the Water, bein ſuppoſed æ, the Variation of it at B, the upper Surface of it wil x be  and conſequentdy GE, the Diſference of the Legs EX and d d) KB, will vary - Again, the Variation of the Surface of the Mercury at B a be the ſame with that of the Water in a the x ſame Place, vix. ; and, if the Tube is of the ſame Diameter dd at D, as at B, the Variation of the Surface at D will alſo be the x ſame, that is, : The Sum of both Variations, or the Variation d d zx5 of HD the Difference of the Legs, will therefore be Now the dd Preſſure of the Mercury and Water together upon the Air atE, ĩs owing to the Lengths of HD and GE; and ſince one of theſe will always ſhorten, when the other lengthens, the Variation in their Preſſure will depend on the Variation of the Difference of their Weights, that is, of the Difference beteen the Weight of + ax — and ofBut the Weight of (being the Weight of dd daa Column of Water) compared to that or a Column of Mercury of the ſame Length, is only . The Diſference therefore bem 112Of the Barometer. Part II. That the Variation in this Barometer may be infinite, will appear from the following Computation. Let the Proportion between the Bores of the Tube AF and FC be ſuch, that when HD, the Difference of the Legs wherein the Mercury is contained, is augmented one Inch, GE ihe Difference of the Legs, wherein the Water is contained, ſhall be diminiſhed fourteen; then, as much as the Preſſure of the Mercury is augmented, that of the Water will be diminiſhed, and ſo the Preſſure of both taken together will remain as it was. And conſequently, after it has began to riſe, it will always have the ſame Tendency to riſe on, without ever coming to an Aquilibrium with the Air. How far this Barometer will ſucceed in Practice, muſt be left to Experience to determine,  2: andwill always be equal to the Variation in tween m x +5 the common Barometer, and therefor—æ/æ, and by dd m vmdd the common Method of Reduction,//——- 7-—AA9/:That is, : 2m ddd v:: mdd : 2mddi. Nov, if we put ni4, and d=3, Z, adqã and1 will be as much as 2m, and therefore 27add will be equal to nothing; and ſo  being by the Proportion as many Times more than v, as mãã is than nothing,tis infinite. And if m be pu=i4. and i—æ3, mnãad will be equal to 350, and 2mad1i1=2; and thereſore the Variations, in thi: Caſe. vill be to thoſe in the common Bai ometer, as 175 to one. Probably, if the Bore of the Tube FC be made very ſmall, viæ. about the twentieth Part of an Inch Diameter, the Air will not aſcend through the Water, as it is apt to do through the Mercury in the pendent Barometer; and the Smallneſ-of the Bore will not prevent the Woater, from moving, near ſo much as it does the Mercury in that Barometer. There is an Improvement of another Kind in the common Barometer, whereby it is rendered portable. The Tube containing the Mercury, inſtead of having its lower End immerged in a Veſſel of that Fluid, has it tied up in a leathern Bag, not quite full of Mercury. And though the external Air cannot get into the Bag to ſuſpend the Mercury in the Tube, by preſſing on its Surface, as in the common one; yet it has the ſame Effect by preſſing on the Outſide of the Bag, which, being pliant, yields to the Preſſure, and keeps the Mercury ſuſpended in the Tube at its proper Height. This Bag ĩs generally incloſed in a little Box, through the Bottom of which paſſes a Screw; with this Screw the Bag may be compreſſed, ſo as to force the Mercury up to the Top of the Tube; which keeps it ſteady, and hinders it from breaking the Tube by daſhing againſt the Top when it is carried about, as it otherwiſe would be apt to do. \ See more on the Subject of this Diſſertation, Weidleri Inſtitutiones Mathemat. p. 608. Melchior Verdries Phyſ Pars ſpecialis, Cap. IV. § 15. Mr. Paſchalls Traite de IEquilibre des Liqueurs. Sinclairs Ars magna Gravitatis & Levitatis. Mariottes Second Eſſay de la Nature de IAir. Philoſoph. Burgund. Tom. II. . 850. Saul's Treatiſe on the Barometer. Regnault's Philoſoph. Converſat. 22. Clares Motion of Fluids, p. 141. Mem. de IAcad. 1705, 1711. Philoſophical Tranſactions N9, 9, Io, II, 55, 86, 9I, 165, 181, 185, 208, 229, 236, 237, 240, 243, 269, 351, 366, 385, 388, 405, 406, 427. Cotess Hydroſtatical and Pneumatical Lecture. Lect. 7. With ſeveral other Authors referred to in v. Fobnſors Quæſtiones Philoſophicæ, Cap. VI. DISSERTATION V. Of the Origin of the Winds. HE Wind is no other, than the Mo-q tion of the Air, upon the Surface of ihe Globee Some of the Ancients took it to be Air, ruſhing out of the Bowels and Cavities of the Earth: And others thought it an Exhalation from its Surfacee But theſẽe are Hyporbeſes toc chimerical to ſtand in Need of a particular Confutation. Some of the Moderns, who held a Plenum, have accountd for it thus. They imagined, that the Air being confined above, as it muſt be, if we ſuppoſe a Plenum, would, when more than ordinarily rarefied, or ſtocked with Vapours, drive away the neighbouring Air, in order to make room for itſelf; and by this Means occaſion a Wind. Others; obſerving a conſtant and perpetual eaſterly Wind to blow at the Equator, aſcribed its Origin to the diurnal Rotation of the Earth, about its Axis from Weſt to Eaſt; which they thought would occaſion the Air upon its Surface; to ſeem to move the contrary Way, being in ſome Meaſure left behind But, whereas there are Winds, in ſome Places near the Zquator; that blow on other Points of the Compaſs (as we ſhall ſee hereafter) this Hypotheſis is inſufficient. Beſides, the Air preſſing upon the Surface of the Earth by its Gravity, like other Bodies; and having nothing to hinder it from moving freely along with it, muſt neceſſarily, in Time, acquire an equal Degree of Velocity, and ſo keep Pace with it, all the Way round. The principal Cauſe of the Wind, or, in other Words, of the Air's moving from Place to Place, upon the Surface of the Earth, is the Atmoſphere's being heated over one Part more than over another. For, in this Caſe, the warmer Air, being rendered ſpecifically lighter than the reſt, riſes up into the ſuperior Parts of the Atmoſphere, and there diffuſes itſelf every Way; while the neighouring inferior Air ruſhes in from all Parts at the Bottom, to reſtore the quilibrium. Upon this Principle it is, that moſt of the Winds may be accounted for. To begin with thoſe which. blow under the Equator. I. Under the Equator, the Wind is always obſerved to blow from the Eaſt Point *. ; VFor,  For the Reader's Eaſe (who perhaps is not furniſhed with the Philoſophical Trauſactions) I ſhall here inſert by Way of Note, ſrom Dr. Halleys Account, ſo much of the Hiſtory of the Winds, as may be neceſſary for the underſtanding this T heosT For, ſuppoſing the Sun to continue vertical ver ſome one Place, the Air will be moſt raefied there; and conſequently, the neighbouring s The univerſal Ocean, ſays he, may moſt properly be divided into three Parts, vizm. 1. The Atlantic and æthiopic Seas. 2. The Indian Ocean. 3. The great South Sea, or the Pacific Ocean.  I. In the Ailantic and æ thiopic Seas, between the Tropics, there is a general eaſlerly Wind all the Year long, without any conſiderable Variation; excepting, that it is ſubject to be deſlected therefrom, ſome few Points of the Compaſi, towards the North, or South, according to the Poſition of the Place.  I. Near the Coaſt of Africa, as ſoon as you have paſſed the Canary Iſles, you are ſure to meet a freſh Gale of North-eaſt Wind, about the Latitude of twenty eight Degrees North; which ſeldom comes to the Eaſtwards of the Eait-north-eaſt, or paſſes the North-north-eaſt. This Wind accompanies thoſe bound to the Southward, to the Latitude of ten Degrees North, and about an hundred Leagues from the Guinea Coaſt; where, till the fourth Degree of North Latitude, they fall into Calms and Tornadoes, or ſudden Storms.  2. Thoſe bound to the Caribbe Iſes, find, as they approach the dmerican Side, that the aforeſaid North-eaſt Wind becomes ſtill more and more eaſterly, ſo as ſometimes to be Eaſt, ſometimes Eaſt by South, but yet moſt commonly to the Northward of the Eaſt, a Point or two, ſeldom more. 'Tis likewiſe obſerved, that the Strength of theſe does gradually decreaſe, as you ſail to the Weſtward. s 2. That the Limits of the Trade and variable Winds in this Ocean, are farther extended on the dmerican Side, than the African; for, whereas you meet not with this certain Wind, till afier you have paſi'd the Latitude of twenty eight Degrees on this Side; on the contrary Side it commonly holds to thirty, thirty-one, or thirty-two Degrees of Latitude; and this is verified likewiſe to the Southward of the æquingctial ; for near the Cape of Good Hope, the Limits of the Trade Winds are three or four Degrees nearer the Line, than on the Coaſt of Branil. ing Air will ruſh in from every Quarter with c at qual Forcee But, as the Sun is continually ſifting to the Weſtward, the Part, where the Air  4. That from the Latitude of four Degrees North, to the aforeſ?id Limits on the South Side of the Equator, the Winds are generally and perpetually between the South and Eaſt, and moſt commonly between the South-eaſt and Eaſt; obierving always this Rule, that on the African Side, they are more ſourtherly, on the Braſilian more eaſterly, ſo as to become almoſt due Eaſt, the little Deflection they have being ſtill to the Southward. In this Part of the Ocean, it has been my Fortune to paſs a full Yeor, in an Employment that obliged me to regard more than ordinarily the Weather, and I found the Winds conilantly about the South-eaſt, the moſt uual Point South-eait by Fat: When it was eaſterly, it generally blew hard, and was gloomy, dark, and ſometimes rainy Weather: If it came to the Southwards, it was generally ſerene, and a ſmall Gale next to a Calm; but this not very common. But I never ſaw it to the Weitwards of the South, or Noi thwards of the Eaſt. s 5. That the Seaſon of the Year has ſome ſmall Effect on theſe Tràde Winds; for that when the Sun is conſiderably to the Northward of the Equator, the South-ea©t Winds, eſpecially in the Streight of this Ocean (if I may ſo call n between Braſil, and the Coaſt of Guinea, do vary a Point o two to the Southward, and the North- eaſt become more eaſterly; and, on the contrary, when the Sun is towards the ſTropic of Capricorn, the South-eaſterly Winds become more eaſterly, and the North-eaſterly Winds, on this Side the Line, veer more to the Northward. l  6. That as there is no general Rule, that admits not of ſome Exception, ſo there is in this Ocean a Tract of Sea, wherein the Rutherly and South weſt Winds are perpetual, viæ. all along the Coaſt of Guinea, for above five hundred Leagues iogether, from Sierra Leona, to the Iſle of St Thomas: For the South eaſt Trade Wind having pa'd the Line, and approaching the Coaſt of Guinea within eighty or an hundred Leagues, inclines towards the Shore, and becomes South-ſouth: s eaſt; and by Degrees, as you come nearer, it veers about to  South, Sourh-ſouth-weſt, and in with the Land South-weſt, and Air is moſt rarefied, is carried the ſame Way: and therefore the Tendency of all the lower Air, taken together, is greater that Way, than any other. s ſometimes Weſt ſouth-weſt. Theſe are the Winds, which are  obſerved on this Coaſt when it blows irue; but there are frequent Calms, violent ſudden Guſts, called Tornadres, frum all Points of the Compaſs, and ſomet mes unwholſome foggy : eaſterly Winds, called Hermitæ, by the Natives, which tvo s oſten inſeſt the Navigation of theſe Parts 7. That to the Northwards of the Line, between four and ten Degrees of Latitude, and between the Meridians of Cape Verde, and of the eaſtermoſt Iſlands that bear that Name, there is a Tract of Sea, wherein it were improper to ſay there is any Trade Wind, or yet a variable; for it ſeems condemned to perpetual Calms, attended with terrible Thunder and Lightning, and Rains ſo frequent, that our Navigators from thence call this Part of ihe Sea, the Rains: The little Winds that are, being only ſome certain Guſts, of very little Continuance, and leſs Extent; ſo that ſometimes each Hour you ſhall have a different Gale, which dies away into a Calm  before another ſucceeds: And in a Fleet of Ships in Sight of  one another, each ſhall have the Wind from a ſeveral Point of  the Compaſs: With theſe weal Breezes, Ships are obliged to  make the beſt of their Way to the Southward, through the : aforeſaid ſix Degrees; wherein it is reported ſome have been s detained whole Months for want of Wind. s II. In the Iudian Ocean, the Winds are partly general, a as in the æihiopic Ocean; partly periodical, that is, half the Year they blow one Way, and the other half, near upon the oppoſite Point:; and theſe Points and Times of ſhifting, are different in different Parts of this Ocean.  I. Between the Latitudes of ten Degrees and thirty Degrees  South, between Madagaſcar and Hollandia nva, the Gene-  ral Trade- Winds about the South-eaſt and by Eaſt, are found  to blow all the Year long, to all Intents and Purpoſes,  afier the ſame Manner, as in the ſame Latitudes in the s æthiopic Ocean, as it is deſcribed in the fourth Remark s aforegoingg. a - her. Thus the Tendency of the Air toards the Weſt, becomes general, and its arts impelling one another, and continuing to move -  2. That the aforeſaid South-ea©t Winds extend to within two Degrees of the Equator, during the Months of Fune, Fuly, and Auguſt, &c. to November, at which Time, between the South Latitude of three and ten Degrees, being near the Meridian of the North End of Madagaſcar, and between two and twelve South Latitude, being near Sumatra and Java; the contrary Winds from the North-weſt, or between the Nortih and Weſt, ſet in, and blow for half a Year, viæ. from the Beginning of December till May : And this Monsoon is obſerved as . as the Molucca Iſes.  3. That to the Northward of three Degrees South Latitude, over the whole Arabian and Indian Sea, and Gulf of Rengal, from Sumatra to the Coaſt of 4frica, there is another Monſoon, blowing from October to April, upon the Northeaſt Points: But in the other half Year, from April io October, upon the oppoſite Points of South-weſt and Weſt-ſouth- weſt, and that with rather more Force than the other, accompanied with dark, rainy Weather; whereas the North-eaſt blows clear. Tis likewiſe to be noted, that the Winds are not ſo conſtant, either in Strength or Point, in the Gulf of Bengal, as they are in the Indian Sea, where a cerain ſteady Gale ſcarce ever fails. Tis alſo remarkable, that thæ South we©t Winds, in theſe Seas, are generally more ſoutherly on the African Side, and more veſterly on the Iudian. s 4. There is-a Tract of Sea to the Southwards of the Equator, ſubject to the ſame Changes of the Winds, viæ. near the African Coaſt, between it and the Iſland Madagaſcar, or St. Laurence, and from thence Northwards, as far as the Line; wherein from April to October, there is found a conſtant freſh South- ſouth-weſt Wind, which, 2a5 you go more northerly, becomes ſlill more and more weſterly, ſo as to fall in with the Weit- ſouth-weſt Winds, mentioned before in thoſe Months of the Year to be certain to the Northward of the Equator. What Winds blow in thoſe Seas, for the other half Year, I have not yet been able to obtain to my full Satiſfaction: The Account which has been given me, is only i move till the next Return of the Sun, ſo much of its Motion as was loſt by his Abſence, is again reſtored, and therefore the eaſterly Wind becomes Perpetual. Some That the Winds are much eaſterly hereabouts, and as often to the North of the true Eaſt, as to the Southward thereof.  5. That to the Eaſtward of Sumatra and Malacca, to the Northwards of the Line; and along the Coaſt of Cæambiia and China, the Monſoons blow North and South; that is to ſay, the North-eat Winds are much northerly, and the South-weſt much ſoutherly. This Coniſtitution reaches to the Eaſtward of the Philippine Iſles, and as far northerly as Vatan; the northorn Monſoon ſetting in, in theſe Seas, in Ocioher or November; and the ſouthern in May, blowing all the Summer Months. Here it is to be noted, that the Points of the Compaſs from whence the Winds come, in theſe Parts of the World, are not ſo fixed, as thoſe lately deſcribed; for the ſoutherly will frequently paſs a Point or two to the Eaſtwards of the South, and the northerly as much as to the Weſtwards of the North, which ſeems occaſioned by the great Quantity of Land which is interperſed in thefe Seas.  65. That in the ſame Meridians, but to the Southwards of the Equator, being that Tract lying between Sumatræa and FJava to tha Weit, and New Guinea to the Eaſt, the ſame northerly and ſoutherly Monſoons are obſerved; but with this Difference, that the Inclination of the northerly is towards the North-veſt, and of the ſoutherly towards the South-eaſt: But the Plagæ Venti are not more conſtant here than in the former, viæ. variable five or ſix Points. Beſides, the Times of the Change of theſe Winds are not the ſame, as in the Chineſe Seas, but about a Month, or ſix Weeks later.  5. That the contrary Winds do not ſhiſt all at once, but in ſome Places the Time of the Change is attended with Calms, in others with variable Winds; and it is particularly remarkable, that the End of the weiterly Monſoon, in the Seas of China, are very ſubject to be tempeſtuous. The Violence of theſe Storms is ſuch, that they ſeem to be of the Nature of the .ſi India Hurricanes, and render the Navigation of theſe Parts very unſafe about that Time of the Year. Iheſe Tempeſts are i by Some are inclined to think, that the connual ſhifting of the Sun to the Weſtward, uld produce a weſterly Wind under the quator, by cauſing the Current of the Airfrom 1re Weſt to exceed and over-balance that; by our Seamen; uſually termd the Breating up of th?e Monsoons. III. The Third Ocean, called Mare Pacificum, whoſe Extent is equal to that of the other two ſit being from the Weſt Coait of America to the Philigpine Iſands, not leſs than an hunred and fifty Degrees of Longitude) is that which is leaſt lnown to our own, or the neighbouring Nations: That Navigation that there is on it, is by the Spaniards; who go yearl. from the Coaſt of Ne-Spain to the Manilha's: But that but by one beaten Track; ſo that I cannot be ſo particular here, as in the other Two. What the Spaniſb Authors ſay of the Winds, they ſind in their Courſes; and what is confirmed by the old Accounts of Drate and Candiſb, and ſince by Schuoten, ho ſailed the whole Breadth of this Sea, in the ſouthern Latitude of fifteen or ſixteen Degrees, is, that there is a great Conformity between the Winds of this Sea, and thoſe of the Atlartic and Ethiopic; that is to ſay, that to the Northward of the Equator, the predominant Wind is between the Eaſt and North eaſt; ard to the Southwards thereof, there is a conſtant, ſteady Gale; between the Eaſt and South-eaſt, and tbat on both Sides the Linæ, with ſo much Conſtancy, that they ſcarce ever need to attend the Sails; and ſtrength, that it is rare to fail of croſſing this vaſt Ocean in ten Weeks Time; which is about an hundred and thirty Miles a Day Beſides, tis ſaid, that Storms and Tempeſts are never known in theſe Parts, whereſore ſome have thought it might be as ſhort a Voyage to Japan and China, to go by the Sureights of Magellan, as by the Cape of Good Hope. 3i s The Limits of theſe General Winds are much the ſame as in the Atlantic Sca, viæ. about the thirtieth Degree of Latitude on both Sides. Beſides, a farther Analogy between the Winds of this Ocean, and the Ethiqpic, appears in that, that upon the Coaſts of Peru, they are always much ſoutherly, like as they are found near the Shores of Angola. ] which oppoſes it from the Eaſt. For, whereas the eaſtern Air retains its Heat ſome time after the Sun is removed from it; it muſt always be rarefied to a greater Degree, and alſo to a greater Diſtance from the Place to which the Sun is vertical, than the weſtern Air is; and therefore the weſtern Air, being more ponderous, ſhould be an Over-balance for the eaſtern, and drive its Current before it. But it is to be obſerved, that we are not to conſider the Point to which the Sun is vertical, but the Point of greateſt Rarefaction which, upon Account of the Sun's Motion to the Weſtward, lies always to the Eaſtward); and then ſee, which Side of the Column of Air, incumbent over that Point, ſuſtains the greater Preſſure from the neighbouring Columns. Now, although the Air is rarefied even farther to the Eaſt of this Point, than to the Weſt, yet ſtill, if we ſuppoſe the Point to keep its place, the Air over it will ſuſtain an equal Degree of Preſſure on each Side. For, ſince no Column can be aſſigned on the weſtern Side, but one alſo on the eaſtern, may be found under an equal Degree of Rarefaction, and therefore of the ſame ſpecific Gravity : And ſince Fluids of equal Heights, and the ſame ſpecific Gravities (Whatever be the Breadth of their Columns) preſęs equally againſt equal Objects, (Chap. I. §. 9.) tis very evident, that the Column of Air, over the Point of greateſt Rarefaction, is preſſed equally both Ways; and ſo, upon this Suppoſition, cach Wind will blow towards that Point with equal Forcee But, if we ſuppoſe the Point of greateſt Rarefaction to ſhift towards the Werſt, we ſhall find, that this æquilibrium will by that Means be deſtroyed, and the Motion of the Air (upon the whole) determined that Way. For let us conſider any Portion of the weſtern Air approaching towards the Point of greateſt Rarefaction, if that Point ſhifts, in the mean Time, towards the Weſt, then will that Portion reach the ſaid Point ſooner than it otherwiſe would have done; thereby loſing a Part of its Motion, by which Means the weſterly Current will be diminiſ'd. Again, if, while the Eaſt Wind blows towards the Point of greateſt Rarefaction, that Point moves on before it, then will the eaſtern Air have a greater Quantity of Motion, than it otherwiſe would have had; that, which ſhould have been an Impediment to it, being, upon this Suppoſition, in ſome Meaſure withdrawn; and ſo the Eaſt Wind will be augmented. Thus, the Weſt Wind having its Force leſſend by the Motion of the Sun; and the Eaſt one being increaſed, the latter at length as it were abſorbs the former, and carries it away in its own Direction. 2. On each Side of the Equator, to about the thirtieth Degree of Latitude, the Wind is found to vary from the Eaſt Point, ſo as to become North-eaſt on the northern Side, and South-eaſt on the ſouthern. The Reaſon of which is, that, as the equatorial Parts are hotter than any other, both the northern and ſouthern Air, ought to have a Tendency that Way; the northern Current therefore, meeting in this Paſſage with the eaſtern, produces a North-eaſt Wind on that Side; as the ſouthern Current joining with the ſame, on the other Side the Equator, forms a South-eaſt Wind there. Theſe two Propoſitions are to be underſtood of open Seas, and of ſuch Parts of them as are diſtant from the Land; for near the Shores, where the neighbouring Air is much rarefied, by the Reflection of the Sun's Heat from the Land, it frequently happens otherwiſe particularly, 3. On the Guinea Coaſt, the Wind always ſets in upon the Land, blowing weſterly inſtead of eaſterly. This is becauſe the Deſerts of Africa lying near the Equator, and being a very ſandy Soil, reflect a great Degree of Heat into the Air above them. This therefore being rendered lighter, than that which is over the Sea, the Wind continually ruſhes in upon the Land to reſtore the Zquilibrium. 4. That Part of the Ocean, which is called the Rains, is attended with perpetual Calms, the Wind ſcarce blowing ſenſibly either one Way or other. (See its Situation deſcribed in Note, Page 119, Remark 7th). For this Tract being placed between the weſterly Wind blowing from thence towards the Coaſt of Guinea; and the eaſterly Wind blowing from the ſame Place to the Weſtward thereof, the Air ſtands in æquilibrio between both, and its Gravity is ſo much diminiſhed thereby, that it is not able to ſupport the Vapour it contains, but lets it fall in continual Rain, from whence this Part of the Ocean has its Name.5. There is a Species of Winds, obſervable in ſome Places within the Tropics, called by the Sailors Monſoons, which, during ſix Months of the Year, blow one Way; and the remaining ſix, the contrary. The Occaſion of them in general is this: When the Sun approaches the northern Tropic, there are ſeveral Countries, as Arabia, Persfia, India, &c. which become hotter, and reflect more Heat than the Seas beyond the Equator, which the Sun has left; the Winds therefore, inſtead of blowing from thence to the Parts under the Equator, blow the contrary Way; and when the Sun leaves thoſe Countriess and draws near the other Tropic, the Winds turn about, and blow on the oppoſite Point of the Compaſ:. The Regularity of theſe Winds making them more than ordinarily uſeful in Navigation, they are from thence called Trade Winds. As to other Circumſtances relating to them, and the particular Times and Places of the Monſions, &c. See the Hiſtorical Account in the foregoing Note; all which might eaſily be ſolved upon the ſame Principle, had we Data to go upon, and were all the ſeveral Circumſtances of Situation, Heat, Cold, &. ſufficiently known *. From the Solution of the general Trade Winds, we may ſee the Reaſon, why in the Atlantic Ocean, a little on this Side the thirtieth Degree of North Latitude, or thereabouts, as was obſerved in the foregoing Diſſertation, there is generally a Weſt, or South-weſt Wind. For, as the inferior Air, within the Limits of thoſe Winds, is conſtantly ruſhing towards the Equator, from the North-eaſt Point, or thereabouts, the ſuperior Air moves the contrary Way; and therefore after it has reached theſe Limits, and meets with Air, that has little or no Tendency to  Some have thought, that the Regularity of the general Træd⸗ Winds is partly owing to the diurnal Motion of the Moon from Eaſt to Weſt. For, as the Sun renders the Air ſpecifically lighter by its Heat, ſo does the Moon by attracting it, in the ſame Manner, as it does the Sea, in raiſing the Tides. But it is to be obſerved, that as the Moon acts with the greateſt Force upon the ſuperior Parts of the Air, and as thoſe ſuperior Parts are unconfined, and therefore more at Liberty to ruſh in, in Order to reſtore the quilibrium; it will from hence follow, that the ruſhing in of the ſuperior Parts of the Atmoſphere will principally contribute towards reſtoring the æquilibrium; and ſo the Motion, produced below, will be very inconſiderable. any one Point more than to another, by Reaſon of the Sun's Diſtance, it will determine it to move in the ſame Direction with itſelf. In our own Climate we frequently experience, in calm Weather, gentle Breezes blowing from the Sea to the Land, in the Heat of the Day; which Phænomenon is very agreeable to the Principle laid down above: For the inferior Air over the Land being rarefied by the Beams of the Sun, reflected from its Surface, more than that which impends over the Water which reflects fewer, the latter is conſtantly moving on to the Shore, in order to reſtore the Aquilibrium, when not diſturbed by ſtronger Winds from another Quarter , From what has been obſerved, nothing is more eaſy than to ſee, why the northern and ſouthern Parts of the World, beyond the Limits of the Trade Winds, are ſubject to ſuch u In Confirmation of thi, we have an eaſy, and very pertinent Experiment, related by Mr. Clare, in his Motion of Fluids.  Take, ſays he, a large Diſh, ſill it with cold Water; into the Middie of this put a Water-Plate, ſilled with warm Water. The fisſt will repreſent the Oceæn; and the other an Iſland, rarefying the Air above it. Blow out a Wax Candle, and if the Piace be ſtill, on applying it ſucceſſively to every Side of the Diſh, the fuliginous Particles of the Smoak, being viſible and very light, will be ſeen to move towards the Plate, and riſing over it, point out the Courſe of the Air from Sea to Land. Again, if the ambient Water he warmed, and the Plate filled with cold Water, let the ſmoulcing Wick of the Candle be held over the Plate, and the contrary will happen. c c : - c : v l : r Variety of Winds. For the Air, upon Account of its Diſtance from the Equator, being undetermined to move towards any fixed Point, is continually ſhifting from Place to Place, in Order to reſtore the Aquilibrium wherever it is deſtroyed; whether by the Heat of the Sun, the riſing of Vapours, or Exhalations, the melting of Snow upon the Mountains, and a great Variety of other Circumſtancess, more than can be eaſily enumerated. We are told by Hiſtorians, of certain Caves that emit Wind; if ſo, it is when the included Air is rarefied by Heat, and therefore ruſhes out for want of Room; or, when the Preſſure of the external Air, incumbent upon the Mouth of the Cave, is diminiſhed, and ſo permits the internal Air to dilate itſelf, and iſſue out. For more on this Subject, ſee Neuwentyſs Religious Philoſopher. Regnault's Philoſophical Converſations. Clare's Motion of Fluids. Martins Philoſophical Grammar. And the Authors referred to in Mr. obnſon's Quæſtiones Philoſoph. Cap. IV. Quæſt. I. æ. DISSERTATION VI. Of the Formation, and Aſcent of Vapours, and their Reſolution into Rain, Snow, and Hail. T H AT Vapours are raiſed from off the Surface of Water by the Action of the Sun's Heat, is agreed on by all: But the Manner in which this is done, has ever been a Controverſy among Philoſophers; neither is it at this Time ſufficiently explaind by any one. If we conſult a Carteſian upon this Matter, he immediately tells us, that, by the Action of the Sun upon the Water, ſmall Particles of the Water, are formed into hollow Spheres, filled with Materia Subtilis, and by that Means becoming lighter than an equãl Bulk of Air, are eaſily buoyed up in it. But, as this Materia Subtilis is only a Fiction, the Solution is not to be regarded. Dr. Neuwentyt, and ſeveral other Philoſophers, Who maintain, that Fire is a particular Subſtance, diſtinct from other Matter, account for the Formation and Aſcent of Vapours thus: They ſay, that the Rays of the Sun, or Particles of Fire ſeparated from them, adhering to Particles of the Water, make up little Bodies, lighter than an equal Bulk of Air; which therefore, by the Laws of Hydroſtatics; will aſcend in iĩt, till they come to an Height where the Air is of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with themſelves. And, that Rain is produced by the Separation of the Particles of the Fire om thoſe of the Water; which laſt, being then left without Support, can no longer be ſuſtained by the Air, but falls down in Drops of Rain *. This Opinion is liable to the following Difficulties; Firſt, Fire has never been yet pro⸗ ved to be a diſtinct Element, or a particular Subſtance ; and the Change of Weight in Bodies in chymical Preparations, heretofore thought to ariſe from the Adheſion of Particles of Fire, is found to proceed from the Adheſion of Particles of Air s. Secondly, Should the above-mentioned Suppoſition be allowed, the fiery Particles, which are joined to the watery ones to buoy them up, muſt be conſiderably large, or elſe a very great Number muſt fix upon a ſingle Particle of Water; and then a Perſon; being on the Top of an Hill in a Clond, would be ſenſible of the Heat; and find the Rain produced from that Vapour, much colder than the Vapour it-  Seæe Nieuuenty?s Religious Philoſopher, Contempl. 19 1 See the Autnors referred to in Mr. Jobnſos Quæſtione⸗ Philoſoph. Cap. I. Quæſt. 30. § By Dr. Hales, in his vegetable Statics. ſelf: whereas the contrary is evident to our Senſes; the Tops of Hills, though in the Clouds, being much colder than the Rain which falls below. Beſides, the Manner in which the Particles of Water ſhould be ſeparated from thoſe of the Fire, ſo as to fall in Rain, is not eaſily to be conceived. The moſt generally received Opinion is, That by the Action of the Sun, on the Surface of the Water, the aqueous Particles become formed into Bubbles, filled with a Flatus, or warimn Air, which renders them ſpecifically lighter than common Air, and makes them riſe therein, till they meet with ſuch as is of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with themſelves *. But I ask, Firſt, How comes the Air in the Bubbles to be ſpecifically lighter than that without, ſince the Sun's Rays, which act upon the Water from whence they are raiſed, are equally denſe over all its Surface? Secondly, If it could be poſſible for rarer Air to be ſeparated from the denſer ambient Air, to form the Bubbles (as Bubbles of ſoaped Water are blown up by warm Air from the Lungs, whilſt the ambient Air is colder and denſer) what would hinder the external Air from reducing that, which is incloſed in the Bubbles, immediately to the ſame Degree of Coldneſs, and ſpecific Gravity with itſelf; (Cold being readily communicated through ſuch thin Shells of Water). By which means, the Bubbles would become ſpecifically heavier than the circumambiæent Air, and would no longer be ſupported therein; but fall down, almoſt as ſoon as they were formed? Thirdly, If we ſhould grant all the reſt of the Suppoſition, yet the following Difficulty will ſtill remain. If Cloud;s are made up of Bubbles of Water filled with Air, why do not thoſe Bubbles always expand, when the ambient Air is rarefied, and preſſes leſs upon them than it did before; and why are they not condenſed, when the ambient Air is condenſed by the Accumulation of the ſuperior Air? But if this Condenſation and Rorehction ſhould happen to them, the Clouds would always continue at the ſame Height, contrary to Obſervation; and we ſhould never have any Rain. The two laſt Opinions are more largely examined by Dr. Deſaguliers in the Philoſophical Tranſactions NV. 407. After which he ęndeavours to eſtabliſh one of his own. He obſerves, with Sir Iſaac Newton, that, when by Heat or Fermentation the Particles of a Body are ſeparated from their Contact, their repulſive Force grows ſtronger, and the Particles exert that Force at greater Diſtances; ſo that the ſame Body ſhall be expanded into a very large Space, by becoming fluid; and may ſometimes take up more than a Million of Times the Room it did in a ſolid and incompreſſible State.  Thus, ſays he, if the  Particles of Water are turned into Vapour,  by repelling each other ſtrongly, and repel  Air more than they repel each other; Ag-  gregates of ſuch Particles, made up of Va-  pour and Vacuity, may riſe in Air of different  Denſities, according to their own Denſity  depending on their Degree of Heat.” He obſerves farther, that Heat acts more powerfully on Water, than on common Air; for that the ſame Degree of Heat, which rarefies Air two Thirds, will rarefy Water near fourteen thouſand Times, changing it into Steam or Vapour as it boils it. And in Winter, that ſmall Degree of Heat, which in Refpect of our Bodies appears cold, will raiſe a Steam or Vapour from Water, at the ſame Time that it condenſes Air. Laſtly, he obſerves, That the Denſity and Rarity of this Vapour depends chiefly on its Degree of Heat, and but little on the Preſfure of the circumambient Air. From all which he infers;, That the Vapour being more rarefied near the Surface of the Earthi, than the Air is there by the ſame Degree of Heat, muſt neceſſarily be buoyed up into the Atmoſphere; and ſince it does not expand ĩtſelf much, though the Preſſure of the incumbent Air grows leſs, at length iĩt finds a Place where the Atmoſphere is of the ſame ſpecific Gravity with itſelf, and there floats, till by ſome Accident or other, it is converted again into Drops of Water, and falls down in Rain, And to ſhew that Air is not neceſſary for the Formation of Steam or Vapour, he gives us this Experiment.  ABCD (Fig. 357.) is a pretty large Veſſel of Water, which muſt be ſet upon the  Fire to boil. In this Veſſel muſt be ſuſpend-  ed the Glaſs Bell E, made heavy enough to ſink in Water; but put in, in ſuch a Manner, that it be filled with Water when up-  right, without any Bubbles of Air at ĩts  Crown within, the Crown being all under s Water. As the Water boils, the Bell will by Degrees be emptied of its Water, being preſſedd down by the Steam, which riſes  above the Water in the Bell; but, as that Steam has the Appearance of Air, in Order  to know whether it be Air or not, take the  Veſſel off the Fire, and draw up the Bell by a String faſtened to its Knob at Top, till only the Mouth remains under Water; then as the Steam condenſes by the cold  Air on the Outſide of the Bell the Water  will riſe up into the Bell at F, quite to the Top, without any Bubble above it; which  ſhews, that the Steam, which kept out the  Water, was not Air. This Hypotheſis, howevever plauſible it may appear, is attended with Difficulties, as well as the other. For, Firſt, If the repulſive Power of the Particles of Water is ſufficiently augmented by Heat as ſuch (and that by a very ſmall Degree of it) to make them recede from each other, and become ſpecifically lighter than common Air; how comes it to paſ, that all the Particles of Water, as ſoon as, or before it boils; have not their repulſive Forces thus augmented, ſince they are all under a much greater Degree of Heat, than is neceſſary to raiſe Vapour? Secondly, Allowing that they may riſe off from the Surface of the Water, and float in the circumambient Air, as being lighter than it, why do not their repulſive Forces, as they riſe up into the Air, and the ſuperincumbent Preſſure becomes leſs, drive them to greater Diſtances from each other, and ſo cauſe them to continue lighter than the Air about them at all Heights? Thirdly, If the Preſſure of the Air about them, when near the Surface of the Earth, is not ſufficient to bring them into ſo cloſe Contact, as to form Drops of Water there, what Force will they find ſufficient for it, when they are carried aloft into a Region of Air, where the Preſſure is not near ſo great? The Doctor hints, that they are formed into Rain,  when  by the great Diminution of the ſpecific Gra- vity of the Air about a Cloud, it has a  great Way to fall, in which Caſe, he ſays,  the Reſiſtance of the Air, which increaſes as the Square of the Velocity of the deſcending Cloud, cauſes the floating Particles of Water to come within the Power of each other's Attraction, and form ſuch big Drops as, being ſpecifically heavier than any Air, muſt fall in Rain But as the inferior Air, from the Cloud to a conſiderable Depth below it, cannot be ſuppoſed to leave it all at once, the Vapours muſt neceſſarily fall all the Way hrough a reſiſting Medium; ſo that the little Velocity the Cloud can acquire, while it is in the Form of Vapour, will never produce a Reſiſtance from the Air greater than the Preſſure which the Vapours ſuſtained below Laſlly, The Experiment, brought to make Way for this Hypotheſis, ſhows clearly, that Vapour formed without the Reſiſtance of Air, is immediately condenſed into Water again, as ſoon as it is ſuffered to cool: Which is widely different from what happens to Vapours buoyed up into the colder Regions of the Air, and floating there, till they fall in Rain. Theſe are all, or the principal Hypotheſes, that have been framed for the Solution of this common Phænomenon: Which as they ſeem inadequate to the Effects produced, and therefore unſatisfactory, I thought it not amiſe to ſuggeſt to the Reader the chief Difficulties, with which I conceive them to be attendedl. But as it is eaſier to pull down, than to build up, to overturn a weak Hypotheſis, than to raiſe and ſupport a ſtrong and ſufficient one; ſo, I muſt own, in this Caſe, Ican think of no Way of accounting for the Riſe of Vapours, accordding to the received Principles of Philoſophy, or ſay wherein their Nature conſiſtss. Upon this Account it is impoſſible I ſhould give a Philoſophical Account of their Reſolution into Rain. It muſt ſuffice juſt to mention the Cauſes, which are obſerved to produce that Change. The firſt is; That Part of the Air beneath them is carried away by contrary Winds blowing from the ſame Place*; for then the Remainder being too light to buoy them up, the upper ones, in all Probability, precipitate down upon the lower ones, unite with them, and forms Drops of Rain . Another is, great Quan* Perhaps it may be thought, that when the Air, which impends over any Place, is carried away from thence by contrary Winds; the Vapours which float in it ſhould be carried away too; and ſo the few that remain ſhould be eaſily ſupported; or, if they fall, ſiould not produce much Rain. Now, in Anſwer to this, it muſt be conſidered, that as the inferior Air is carried away from any Place by contrary Winds, the Height of the Atmoſphere is diminiſhed thereby; wherefore, in all Probability, the ſuperior Air ruſhes in by a contrary Current to fill up the Vacuity at the Top, which bringing in its Contents of Vapour affords a continual Supply for the Rain that falls. + A remarkable Inſtance we have of this, in that Part of the Atlantic Ocean, which the Sailors call the Rains, (ſee DiientV) Quantities of them, being driven by the Winds againſt the Sides of Mountains, are thereby made to coaleſce, and ſo conſtitute Rain* It from the frequent Rains that fall there: the Occaſion of which i⸗, that the Atmoſphere is diminiſhed by continual contrary Winds blowing from thence, ſo that it is not able to ſuſtain the Vapour It receves.  Upon this depends the Difference of the Seaſons of the Year at Malabar and Coromandel in the Eaſi- Indies, and at Jamaica in the Weſt. See Dr. Gordon's Diſcourſe on the Cauſes of ithe Change of Weather, Philoſophical Trauſactions, NO. 17 s The Rivers of Indus and Ganges, ſays he, where they enter the  Ocean, contain between them a large Cher ſoneſus, which is di-  vided in the Middle by a Ridge of Hills, which they call the Gate, which run along from Eaſt to Weſt, and quite through to  Cape Comori. On the one Side is Malabar, and on the other Coe romandel. On the Malabar Side, between that Ridge of Mouns tains and the Sea, it is after their Appellation Summer from Se⸗tember till April; in which Time it is always a clear Sky; with-  out once; or very little Raining. On the otner Side the Hills, on s the Coait of Coromandel, it is at the ſame Time their Winter; every Day and Night yielding Abundance of Rain. and from April to September it is, on the Malabar Side their Winter, and on the other Side their Summer: So that in little more than twenty Leagues Journey in ſome Places, as where they croſs the Hills to St. Thomas; on the one Side of the Hill you aſcend with a fair Summer; on the otheryou deſcend with a ſtormy Winter. The like is ſaid to be at Cape Raæalate in Arabia. And Dr. Tropham relates the ſame o Vamaica, intimating that there is  a Ridge of Hills which runs from Eaſt to Weſt, through the s midſt of the Iſland, and that the Plantætions on the South Side s of the Hills have, from November to 4pril, a continual Sum-  mer, whilt thole on the North Side have as conſtant ass Winter, and the contrary from 4pril to November. ss From theſe and ſuch like Accounts it ſeems evident, that a bare leſſening of the Atmoſphere's Gravity will not occaſion Rain, but that there is alſo needſul either a ſudden Change of Winds, ora Ridge of Hills to meet the Current of the Air and Vapours, whereby the Particles of the Vapours are driven together, and ſo fall down in Drops of Rain. And hence it is generally thought, That if the Vapours in their Deſcent paſs through a Region of Air ſufficiently cold, they are there frozen into Icicles, sthat whilſt the Wind blows from the North-eaſt, viæ. ſfrom Ns vember to April (ſee the Account of the Monſoons in the foregoing Diſſertation) * there are continual Rains in the northerly Pilantations of amaica, and on the Side of Coromandel in the Eaſi- Indies, becauſe the Winds beat againſt that Side of the Hills; and ſo there is fair Weather on the other Side of theſe Hills, in Malabar and in the ſouthern Plantations of Tamaica, there being no Winds to drive the Vapours together. But in the ſoutherly Monſoons, viæ. from April to November, Malabar and the ſoutherly Plantations of 7amaica have Floods of Rain, the Wind beating againſt that Side of the Hills, whilſt in Coromandel, and the other Side of Jamaica, there is fair  and clear Weather. Tĩhi: ſerves aiſo to clear the Singulariiy of Seaſens in Peru, beyond any other Parts of the Earth, and ſeems to beaſſigned by Aoſta as the Cauſe of it. Pæeru runs along from the Line Southwards about a thouſand Leagues. It is ſaid to be divided into three Parts, long and narrow, which they call Lanos, Sierrai, and Andes; the Lanos, or Plains, run along the South-Sea Coaſt; the Sierras are s all Hills with ſome Vallies; and the Andes ſteep and craggy Moun-  tains. The Lanos have ſome ten Leagues in Breadth, in ſome  Parts leſs. and in ſome more; the Siærras contain ſome twenty s Leagues in Breadth, the Andes as much, ſometimes more, ſometimes .els; they run in Length ſrom North to South, and in  Breadth from Eaſt to Weſt. This Part of the World is ſaid to have theſe remarkable Things: 1. All along the Coaſt, in the  Lanos, it blows continually with one only Wind, which is South  and South weſt, contrary to that which uſually blows under the  torrid Zone. Z. It never rains, thunders, ſnows, or hails in  ali this Coaſt, or Lano;, though there ſalls ſometimes a ſmall  Dew. 3. Upon the Andes it rains almoſt continually, though ii be ſometimes more clear than other. 4. In the Siærras,  which lie between both Extreams, it rains from September to April but in the other Seaſons ĩt is more clear, which is when the Sun is f. rtheſt off, and the contrary when it is neareſt. I..n tne Reaion of al ſeems to be this; The eaſtern Breeæes, which blow conſtantly under the Line, being ſtopp'd iæ the Icicles, and from Snow. But this Opinion ſeems to be falſe; becauſe it frequently ſnows when the Barometer is high, at which Time the Vapours cannot hegin to fall. It is therefore more probable, that they are firſt frozen into Icicles, and by that means ſhooting forth into ſeveral Points every wæ from the Center (agreeably to the Nature of Freezing) loſe their Form; and ſo becoming ſpecifically heavier than Air fall down, and in their Paſſage, ſeveral being congealed together, form Fleeces of Snow* Tai is evidently no other, than Drops of Rain congealed into Ice. This happens, when in their Paſſage through the inferior Air, they  Courſe by the Sierras and Andes, and yet the ſame Breezes beis ing to be found in the South Sea beyond Peru, as appears by s: the eaſy Voyages from Peru to the Philippines a Current of  Wind blows from the South on the Plains oſ Pæru, to ſuppy  the eaſtern Breeze on the South Seas, and there be ng but one  conſtant Gale on theſe Plains, and no contrary Winds or Hils a: for it to beat upon, this ſeems to be the Reaſon why the Va-  pours are never or very ſeldom driven into Rain. And the s Andes being as high pgrhaps in many Places as the Vapours  aſcend in the higheſt Degree of the Atmoſphere's Gravity, this s may probably be the Reaſon, why the eaſtern Breeze, beatin  conſtantly againſt theſe Hills, occaſions Rain upon them at A  Seaſons of the Year. And the Sierras being it ieems lower  than the Andes, therefore from Septumber to 4pril, when the : Sun is neareſt, and ſo the Atmoſphere's Gravity leſs, and the  Vapours lower, they are driven againſ©t the Sierras into Rain. The like is to be ſaid of other Countries. They are all, cæteris paribus, more or leſs rainy, as they are more or leſs mounãinous. Zgypt, which is quite without Mountains, has ſeldom or never any Kain; but is plentifully watered by the Nile, which yearly riſes above its Banks, and overſlows the whole Country.  See a Diſcourſe on the Nãture of Snow, Philoſophical Tranſactions N9. 92. meet with nitrous Particless which are known to contribute greatly to Freezing. Their Magnitude is owing to a freſn Acceſſion of Matter, as they paſ' along. Hence we ſee the Reaſon why Hail is ſo frequent in Summer, becauſe at that Time greater Quantities of Nitre are exhaled from the Earth, and float up and down in the Arr. LIf the Vapours, aſter they are exhaled from off the Waters, do not riſe very high in the Atmoſphere, but hover near the Surface of the Earth, they then conſtitute what we call a Fog. And, if they aſcend higher, they ſtill appear in the ſame Form to thoſe, who, being upon the Tops or Sides of Mountains, are at an equal Height with them; though to thoſe, who are below, they appear as Cloudss. If they fall to the Earth, without uniting into Drops large enough to be called Rain, they are then ſaid to fall in Dew. See farther on this Subject, Derhams Phyſ, Theolog. Book I. Chap. 3, and Book II. Chap 5. Spectacle de la Nature, Dialog, æ1, and 23. Nieuwentyt Contempl. 19. Clarès Motion of Fluidss Regnault, Vol. III. Converſat. 7. Muſſchenbroe? Epitom. Phyſ. Ma. themat. Par. II. Cap. 24. Melchior Verdries Phyſic. Pars ſpecial. Cap. V. §. 8. And the Authors referred to in Mr. Yohnſon's Queſtiones Philoſoph. Cap. IV, Quæſt. 7. DISS ERTATION VII. Of the Cauſes of Thunder and Lightning, and of the Aurora Borealis. HOSE Philoſophers, who maintain that 3 Vapours are buoyed up into the Air, by Particles of Fire adhering to them (as explained in the foregoing Diſſertation) account for the Phænomena of Thunder and Lightning, in the following Manner. They ſuppoſe, that from the Particles of Sulphur, Nitre, and other combuſtible Matter, which are exhaled from the Earth, and carried into the higher Region; of the Atmoſphere, together with the aſcending Vapours, is formed an inflammable Subſtance; which, when a ſufficient Quantity of fiery Particles is ſeparated from the Vapour by the Colliſion of two Clouds, or otherwiſe, takes Fire, and ſhoots out into a Train of Light, greater or leſs, according to the Strength and Quantity of ſhe Materials. j This Opinion is falſe for the Reaſons mentioned in the foregoing Diſſertation, which plainly ſnow, that it is impoſſible the Vapours ſhould be attended with ſuch fiery Particles, as is here ſuppoſed. Neither have we Occaſion to fly to ſuch an Hypotheſis; for, as Vapours exhaled from the Surface of the Water are earried up into the Atmoſphere: in like Manner, the Effluvia of ſolid Bodies are continually aſcending thither: Now we find by Experiment, that there are ſeveral inflammable Bodies, which, being mixed together in due Proportion, will kindle into Flame by Fermentation alone,* without the Help of any fiery Particles . When therefore See the Theory of Fermentation explained in the following Diſſertation. + Monſieur Lemery having covered up in the Earth about ſi Pounds of a Mixture compoſed of equal Paris of Sulphur, and Filings of Iron tempered with Water; after eight or nine Hours Time, the Earth, where it was laid, vomited up Flames. Hiſt de IAcad. 1700, P. 574 From this Experiment we ſee the true Cauſe of the Fire of Ama and Veſuvius, and other burning Mountainss. They probably are Mountains of Sulphur, and ſome other Matter proper to ferment with it, and take Fire. From like Cauſes proceeds the Heat of Bath- waters, and other hot Springs. Mix a ſmall Quantity of Gun-Powder with Oyl of Cloves, pour ꝶny upon this Mixture, two or three times as much Spirit of litre, and you will obſerve a bright Inflammation ſuddenly ariſing from itt. A Mixture of the two Fluids alone will take Fire; the Powder is added only to augment the Inflammation. Take two Pounds of Nitre, or refined Salt Petre well dried and reduced to the fineſt Powder, with a Pound of Oyl of common Vitriol: From this Mixture may be drawn by Diſtillation a Spirit of Nitre capable of inflaming Oyl of Turpentine. Mem. de IAcad. 1726, p- 97,. &. Put into a Glaſs an Ounce of this Spirit of Nitre, with an Qunce of Oyl of Vitriol; pour upon it an equal Quantity of Oyl of Turpentine, and a very fine Flame vill ariſe ſuddenly with a great Exploſion. When the Liquors are ſreſh the Effect is much greater. If we mix a Dram of the Spirit fore there haprens to be a proper Mixture of the Efluvia of ſuch Bodies floating iu the Air, they ferment, kindle, and flaſhing like Gunpowder, occaſion thoſe Exploſions, and Streams of Fire, which we call Thunder and Lightning. % to the particular Species of Effluvia, which compoſe this Mixture, that cannot exactly be determined; they are thought to be chiefly ſulphureous and nitrous: ſulphureous, becauſe of the ſulphureous Smell which Lightning generally leaves behind it, and of that ſultry Heat in the Air which is commonly the Fore-runner of it: nitrous, becauſe we don't know of any Body ſo liable to a ſudden and violent Exploſion, as Nitre is . The of Vitriol, the Mixture will take Fire immediately. If the ſame Experiment be made with the Balm of Mecca, a ſudden Flame will ariſe, with a Noiſe like that of the Report of a Gun. There are two celebrated Experiments of this Kind, though they do not come up exactly to the preſent Purpoſe, becauſe they will not ſucceed, unleſs the Ingredients be firit heated, the one of Aæ rum fulminans, and the other of Pulvis fulminans. The firſt is 2 Mixture of Salt of Tarar, and Gold diſſolved by Aqua Regia.A ſmall Quantity of this, if put into a Braſs Spoon, and heated with the Flame of a Candle, cauſes a ſudden Noiſe reſembling that of Thunder; and goes off with great Violence. The other is a Mixture of three Parts of Nitre, two of Salt of Tartar, and one of Sulphur. This Mixture when ſet upon the Fire, and warmed to a certain Degree, is diſſipated all on a ſudden with great Thundering, like the Aurum fulminan. See an Account of Exhalations taking Fire of their own Accord in Cole Pits. Power's Experimental Philoſophy, p. 62. and 181.  Dr. Liſter is of Opinion, That the Matter both of Thunder and Lightning, and alio of Earthquakes, is the Eſluvia of the The Effects of Thunder and Lightning are owing to the ſudden and violent Agitation the Air is put into thereby, together with the Force of the Exploſion*; and not to Thunderbolts falling from the Clouds; as ſuppoſed by the Vulgar +. Pyrites; as he does, that the Matter of Vulcand's is the Pyrites itſelf. This is a Mineral that emiis copious Exhalations, and is exceedingly apt to take Fire upon the Admiſfion of Moiſture. See the Doctor's Defence of his Notion in the Philoſophical Tranſaction, NO 155. He thinks this may be the Reaſon why Ergland is ſo lit:le troubled with Earthquakes, and Italy, and almoſt all Places round the Mediterrancan Sea, ſo very much, wiæ. becauſe the Pyrites are rarely found in England ; and where they are, they lie very thin, in Compariſon of what they do in thoſe Countries; as the vaſt Quantity of Sulphur, emitted from the burning Mountains there, ſeems to ſhev. * Lightning is ſaid to have diſſolved Silver, without burning the Purie it was in; and to have melted the Sword, without touching the Scabbard, and the like. The Occaſion of this may poſſibly be, that the Matter of the Exhalation may be ſo ſubtle and penetrating, that, as we ſee it happens with Aqua Fortis, or volatile Salts, it may paſs through ſoft Bodies without altering their ſexture, while ĩt ſpends its whole Force on hard ones, in which it finds the greater Reſiſlance. + Some are inclined to think, that Thunderbolts are artificial, and that they were applied by the Ancients to ſome Uſe. What confirms them in their Opinion, is, that they are found more frequently where Sepulchres have been, than in other Places. And, as it was the Cuitom of the Ancients to have their Arms buried with their Aſhes. they think they might be of ſome Uſe in War. Some are of Opinion, they were uſed in Sacrifices. See Melchior Verdrie's Phylic. Pars ſpecial. Cap. V. §. 5. Wedelius Exercit. Med. Philol. Cont. II. Dec. I. ꝑ. 103. Schminehius Profeſſ. Marpurg. Diſſertat. de Urnis Sepulchralibus, & Ar. mis Lapideis, A. 1714. Herman Nunningius Sepulchret. Weſt. phal. Mimigard. Gentil. p. 44. &o. Henr. Cobarſen Oſileg. The Diſtance the Thunder is from us, may nearly be eſtimated by the Interval of Time between our ſeeing the Lightning, and hearng the Thunder. For, as the Motion of Light is ſo very quick, that the Time it takes up, in coming to us from the Cloud, is not perceptible; and as that of Sound is about a thouſand Feet in a Second; allowing a thouſand Feet for every Second, that paſſes between our ſceing the one, and hearing the other; we have the Diſtance of the Cloud, pretty nearly, from whence the Thunder comes. VWe ſometimes ſee Flaſhes of Lightning, though the Sky be clear and free from Clouds; in this Caſe they proceed from Clouds, that lie immediately below our HoriZon. Of Affinity with the Phænomena of Lightning are thoſe of the Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights, which, of late Years, have very frequently appeared in our Climate *,. Theſe Lights differ ſo much from each other, that to give a Deſcription of one alone, would not bo * Phaænomena of this Kind are reported to have been very frequent in Groenland, Iceland, and Noraay, Countries near the Pole. The only ones, that are upon Record, as having appeared in England, betore that of March the 6th, 173;. are thoſe of January the 30th, 1560, October the 7th, 1564 Vvember 14th and 15th, 1574, and a ſmall one ſeen near Lonãon on the 9th of Auguſt, 1708. On November the 16th, i707, a imall one appeared in Ireland. Since that of March the 6th, 174, they have been, and ſtill continue very common. ſufficient to acquaint the Reader with all the Circumſtances wherewith they are attended. I ſhall therefore collect together ſuch Phænomena, as have been moſt generally obſerved, and reduce them to the ten following Propoſitions, adding in the Notes, by Way of Specimen, a full Account of that moſt remarkable Aurora, which was ſeen March the 6th 1 as it was laid before the Royal Society by Dy Halley, at their Requeſt *. The *  On Tueſday the 6th of March, in the Year 1716 he Afc ternoon having been very ſerene and calm, and ſomewhat s5 warmer than ordinary) about the Time it began to grow dark  (much about ſeven of the Clock) not only in London, but in  all Parts of England, where the Beginning of this wonderful  Sight was ſeen; out of what ſecmel a duky Cloud, in the  North-eaſt Paris of the Horizon. and ſcarce ten Degrees high, the Edges whereof were tinged with a reddiſh Yellow, like as if the Moon had been hid behind it, there aroſe very long lumi-  nous Rays, or Streaks perpendicular to the Horizon, ſome of  which ſeemed nearly to aſcend to the Zenith. Preſently aſter,  that reddiſh Cloud was ſwiftly propagated along the northern  Horizon into the North-weſt, and ſtill farther weſterly; and  jmmediarely ſent forth its Rays from all Parts, now here, now there they obſerving no Rule or Order in their riſingg Many of thoſe Ravs, ſeeming to concur near the Zenith, formed there a Corona, or Image, which drew the Attention of all Spectators. Some likened it to that Repreſentation of Glory, wherewith our Painters in Churches ſurround the Holy Name of God. Others to thoſe radiating Stars, wherewith the Breaſts of Enights of the Order of the Garter are adorned. Many com-  pared it to the Concave of the great Cupola of St. Pauſs s Church, diſtinguiſhed with Streaks alternately light and obſcure, and having in the Middle a Space leſs bright than the reſt, reſembling the Lanthorn. Whilſt others, to expreſs as ell the Motion as Figure thereof, would have it to be like the  Flame in an Oven, reverberated and rolling againſt the arched s Roof L - - : -- . : - The moſt general Phænomena of an Aurora Jorealis are theſe that follow. I. In the northern Parts of the Horigon, ere is commonly the Appearance of a very black Roof thereof: Some thought it liker to that tremulous Light, which is caſt againſt the Cieling by the Beams of the Sun, reflected from the Surface of the Water in a Baſon, that's a little ſaken. But all agree, that this Spec?trum laſted only a few Minutes. and exhibited itſelf variouſly tinged with Colours, Yellow, Red, and a dusky Green: Nor did it keep in in the ſame Place; for when firit it began, it appeared a little to the Northwards of the Zenith, but by Degrees declining towards the South, the long Striæ of Light, which aroſe from all Parts of the northern Semicircle of the Horiæhn, ſeemed to meet together, not much above the Head of Caſtor, or the northern Tavin, and there ſoon diſappeared. s Afſier the firſt mpetus of the aſcending Vapour was over, the Corona appeared no more; but ſtill, without any Order, as to Time or Place, or Size, luminous Radii, like the former, continued to ariſe perpendicularly, now oftener, and again ſeldomer; now here, now there; now larger, now ſhorter. Nor did they proceed as at firſt, out of a Cloud, but oſtener would emerge at once out of the pure Sky, which was more than ordinary ſerene and ſtil. Nor were they all of the ſame Form. Moſ of them ſeemed to end in a Point upwards, like erect Cones; others like truncate Cones, or Cylinders, ſo much reſembling the long Tails of Comets, that at firſt Sight, they might well be taken for ſuch. Some of thoſe Rays would continue viſihle for ſeveral Minutes; when others, and thoſe the much greater Part, jut ſewed themſelves, and died away. Some ſeemed to have litile Motion, and to ſtand, as it were, fixed among the Stars, whilſt others, with a very perceptible Tranſlation, moved from Eaſt to Weſt under the Pole, contrary to the Motion of the Heavens; by which Means they would ſometimes ſeem to run together, and at other Times to fly one another. ' s After this Sight had continued about an Hour and a half, thoſe Beams began to riſe much fewer in Number, and not near ſo high; and by Degrees, that diffuſed Light, which had illuſllll ack Cloud; but it is evident that it is no al Cloud, becauſe the ſmalleſt Stars are viole through it. This apparent Cloud is exnded ſometimes farther towards the We than trated the northern Parts of the Hemiſphere, ſeemed to ſubſide, and ſettling on the Horizon, formed the Reſemblance of a very bright Crepuculum. That this was the State of this Phænomenon, in the firi. Hours, is abundantly confirmed by the unan mous Conſent of ſeveral. For, by the Letters we have received from almoſt all the extreme Parts of the Kingdom, there is found very little Difference from what appeared at London and Oxford; unleſs that in the North of England, and in Scotland, the Lignt ſeemed ſomewhat ſtronger and brighter.  Hitherto I have related the Obſervations of others; as to myſelf, I had no Notice of this Matter, till about nine of the Clock: I immediately perceived toward the South and Southweſt Quarter, that though the Sky was clear, yet it was tinged with a ſtrange Sort of Light; ſo that the ſmaller Stars were ſcarce to be ſeen, and much as it is when the Moon of four Day: old appears after Twilight. I perceived at the ſame Time a very thin Vapour to paſs before us, which aroſe from the preciſe Eaſt Part of the Horizon, aſcending obliquely, ſo as to leave the Zenith about fſiſteen or twenty Degrees to the North⸗ ward. But the Swifineſs, wherewith it proceeded, was ſcarce to be believed, ſeeming not inſerior to that of Lightning; and exhibiting, as it paſſed on, a Sort of momentaneous Nubecula, which diicoverd itſelf by a very diluted and feint Whiteneſs; and was no ſooner formed, but before the Eye could well take it, it was gone, and leſt no Signs behind it. Nor was this a ſingle Appearance; but for ſeveral Minutes, about ſix or ſeven Times in a Minute, the ſame was again and again repeated; theſe Waves of Vapour regularly ſucceeding one another, and at Intervals very nearly equal; all of them in their Aſcent producing a like tranſient Nubecula.  By this Particular we were firſt aſſured; that the Vapour we ſaw, became conſpicuous by its own proper Light, without the Help of the Sun's Beams; for theſe Nebui⸗ did not diſcover themſelves in any other Part of their Paſſage, but only between the South-eaſt and South, where being oppoſite to the Sun. than to the Eaſt; ſometimes farther towards the Eaſt, then to the Weſt; and generally takes up a Quarter of the Horizon, more or leſs The they were deepeſt immerſed in the Cone of the Earths Shadow; nor were they viſible beſore or aſter. Whereas the contrary muſt have happened, had they borrowed their Light from the Sun.  On the weſtern Side of the northern Horizon, viæ. between Weſt and North weſt, not much paſt ten of the Clock, I obſerved the Repreſentation of a very bright Twilight, contignous to the Horizon, out of which aroſe very long Beams of Light, not exactly erect towards the Vertex, but ſomething declining towards the South; which, aſcending by a quick and undulating Motion to a conſiderable Height, vaniſhed in a little Time; whilſt others, though at uncertain Intervals, ſupplied their Place. But at the ſame Time, through all the reſt of the northern Horizon, wiæ. ſrom the North-weſt to the true Eaſt, there did not appear any Sign of Light to ariſe from, or join to, the Horiæon; but what appeared to he an exceeding black and diſmal Cloud, ſeemed to hang over all that Part of it. Yet was it no Cloud, but only the ſerene Sy, more than ordinary pure and limpid, ſo that the bright Stars ſhone clearly in it, and particularly Canuda Cyni, then very low in the North; the great Blackneſs manifeitly proceeding ſrom the Neighbourhood of the Light, which was collected above it. For the Light had now put on a Form quite different from all that we have been deſcribing, and had faſhioned itſelf into the Shape of two Laminæ, or Streaks, lying in a Poſitibn parallel to the Horiæon, whoſe Edges were but ill terminated. They extended themſelves from the North by Eaſt to the North-æaſt, and were each about a Degree broad; the undermoſt about eight or nine Degrees high, and the other about four or five Degrees over it; theſe kept their Places for a long Time, and made the Sky ſo light, that I believe a Man might eaſily have read an ordinary Print by the Help thereof. s Whilſt I was viewing this ſurpriZing Light; and expecting what was farther to come, the northern End of the upper Lamina by degrees bent downwards, and at length cloied with the End of the other that was under it, ſo as to ſhut up on the North-Side an intermediate Space, which ſtill continued open 2. The upper Edge of this Cloud (which ſometimes within leſs than ſix Degrees of  Horizon, and ſometimes forty or fifty above It) to the Eaſt. Not long aſter this, in the ſaid included Space, I ſaw a great Number of ſmall Columns, or whitiſh Streaks, to appear ſuddenly erect to the Horizon, and reaching from the one Lamina to the other; which inſtantly diſappearing, werę too quick for the Eye, ſo that I could not judge, whether they aroſe from the under, or fell from the upper; by their ſudden Alterations, they made ſuch an Appearance, as might well enough be taken to reſemble the Conflict of Men in Hattle. s And much about the ſame Time, there began on a ſudden to appear, low under the Pole, and very near due North, three or four lucid Areas, like Clouds, diſcovering themſelves in the pure but very black Sky, by their yellowiſh Light. Theſe, as they broke out at once, ſo after they had continued a few Minutes, diſappeared as quick, as if a Curtain had been drawn over them: Nor were they of any determined Figure, but both in Shape and Size might properly be compared to ſmail Clouds illuminated by the full Moon, but brighter.  Not long after this, from above the foreſaid two Laminæ, there aroſe a very great Pyramidal Figure, like a Spear, ſharp at the Top, whoſe Sides were inclined to each other, with an Angle of about four or five Degrees, and which ſeemed to reach up to the Zenith, or beyond it. This was carried with an eq uable, and not very ſlow Motion, from the North-eaſt where it aroſe, into the North-weſt, where it diſappeared, ſtill keeping in a perpendicular Situation, or very near it; and paſſiig ſucceſſively over all the Stars of the little Bear, did not effact the ſmaller ones in the Tail, which are of the fifth Magnitude; ſuch was the extream Rarity, and Perſpicuity of the Matter whereof it conſiſted.  This ſingle Beam was very remarkable for its Height above all thoſe, that, for a great while before, had preceeded it, or that followed it.  It being now paſt eleven of the Clock, and nothing ne offering itſelf to our View, but repeated Phaſes of the ſame Spectacle; I obſerved, that the two Laminæ, or Streaks, parallel to the Horizæon, had now wholly diſappeared; and the whole Spectacle reduced itſelf to the Reſemblance of a very pright it) is generally terminated with a very lucid Arch, from one to four or five Degrees broad, whoſe Center is below the Horizon. Sometimes Crepuſculum ſetting on the Northern Horizon, ſo as to be  brighteſt and higheſt under the Pole itſelf; from whence it  ſpread both Ways into the North-eaſt and North-weſt. Un-  der this, in the Middle thereof, there appeared æ very black  Space, as it were the Segment of a leſſer Circle of thę Sphere  cut off by the Horiæon. It ſeemed to the Eye like a dark Cloud, s but was not ſo; for by the Teleſcope the ſmall Stars appeared  through it more clearly than uſual, conſidering how Iow they were: And upon this as a Baſis, our Lumen Auroriforme reſts ed, which was no other than a Segment of a Ring, or Zoue  of the Sphere, intercepted between two parallel leſſer Circles,  cut off likewiſe by the Horizon; or the Segment of a very  broad Iris, but of one uniform Colour, viæ. a Flame-Colour  inclining to Yellow, the Center thereof being about forty De-  grees below the Horizon. And above this there were ſeen  ſome Rudiments of a much larger Segment, with an Interval s: of dark Sky between, but this was ſo exceeding feint and  uncertain, that I could make no proper Eſtimate thereof.  I attended this Phænomenon till near three in the Morning, and  the Riſing of tie Moon: But for Zbove two Hours together it  had no Manner of Change in its Appearance, nor Diminution,  nor Increaſe of Light; only ſometimes, for very ſhort Intervals,  as if new Fewel had been caſt on a Fire, the Light ſeemed to  undulate and ſparkle not unlike the riſing of a vaporous Smoak  out of a great Blaze when agitated. But one Thing I aſſured s myſelf of, that the Irislike Figure did by no means ove its  Origin to the Sun's Beams: For that about three in the Mom-  ing, the Sun being in the Middle between the North and Eaſt,  our Aurora had not followed him. but ended in that very Point s where he then was: Whereas in the true North, which the  Sun had long paſſed, the Light remained unchanged, and inits full Luſtre. Appearances of this Kind have been taken Notice of both by Plim, Seneca and Ariſiotle; the laſt of which calls the vibrating Light near the Zenith, Aanoſ; the more ſteady perpendicular Streams, Aoxbi; and rhe Aarora itſelf, from the apparent dark ®ud juſt below it, Xædo ua. That Aurora which was obſerved lii L - times there are two or more of theſe Arches, one above another. In ſome, the Cloud is not terminated by an Arch, but by a long bright : Streak by Monſieur Gãſſendi in Provence, on the 2iſt of September; in the Year 1621, was very remarkable, at that Time. He tells us, That about the End of Twilight in the Evening, when the Sky was very clear, and there was no Moon, there a?pred in the North a Sort of a riſing Mom, which aſcending by egrees, became intermingled with certain Streaks, as it were; or Rays perpendicular to the Horizon: And that at the ſame ſime there appeared ſome ſmall paſſing whitiſh Clouds between the South and the Place of the Suns ſerting in Winter; and that in the Place where the Sun ſets in Summer, a bright Redneſ"s ſeemed to ariſe in the Form of a Pyramid, which moved towards the ſetting of the Sun at the Equinox; and which was diſtinguiſhed into three ſeveral Pyramids, which in a little Time were confounded one with another, and at laſt diſappeared. When this Redneſs ceaſed, the northern Whiteneſs was riſen forty Degrees and more, that is, about the Altitude of the Pole- Star, forming itſelf into an Arch, and taking up near ſixty Degrees of the Horixon. After this, certain Chevrons, or Columns of Rays, ſome whiter, and ſome a little darker, began more plainly to be diſtinguiſhed, of about two Degrees in Breadth, and perpendicularly poſited; ſo that all that Part appeared as it were fluted. The whole Circumſerence immediately appeared ſcalloped; and then ſome of thoſe Columns which were in the Middle, and that were the whiteſt, began as it were to leave their Places with great Impetuoſity, and in leſs than a Quarter of a Minute, raiſed themſelves almoſt to the Top, putting on the Form of Pyramids, which they would retain four or five Minutes. It was about nine of the Clock, when the Arch of Whiteneſs began to decreaſe or ſink; at which Time certain very white Streams of õmoke began to iſſue out from the Columns which were remaining under the Pyramids, and darting upwards with very great Rapidity through the Pyramids, like Javelins, vaniſhed immediately when they came to the Tops of them. This Spectacle laſted about an Hour; aſter which the Whiteneſs ſunk down to about ſix Degrees of the Horiuon. Vide Abregi dt Gaſſendi, Tom. V. P. 245. 3ll Streak of Light, lying parallel to the HoriZæon. The Limb of this luminous Arch, or parallel Streak is not always even and regular, but ſinks lower in ſome Parts, than in others. 3, Out of this Arch proceed Streams of Light, generally perpendicular to the Horiæon, but ſometimes a little inclined to it. Moſt of them ſeem to end in a Point, like Pyramids or Cones; and often very much reſemble the Tails of Comets. Sometimes there is no Iuminous Arch, nor Streak of Light; and then the Streams ſeem to iſſue out from behind the dark Cloud, being diſtinct from each other at their Baſes. Eu 4. The upper Ends of the Streams inceſſantly appear and vaniſh again, as quick as if a Curtain were drawn backwards and forwards before them; which ſometimes cauſes ſuch a ſeeming trembling in the Air, that you would This Phænomenon appeared not only to Gaſſendi in Provence, but was ſeen at Places very diltant from thence, as at Toloſe, Montaubon, Bourdeaux, Grenoble, Dijon, Paris, and Roan, &c. and at moſt other Places in France, and the neighbouring Countries, that lie to the Northwards of Provence, unlels wherẽ it was intercepted by Clouds; but no where in ſuch as lie at any great Diſtance to the Southwards of it. Monſieur Gaſſendi is thought to have given the Name of Auroræ Borealis to this Phænomenon; but this is obſerved by Monſieur Mairan, to be a Miſtake. See Mr. Mairan's Phyſical and Hiitorical Treatiſe of the Aurora Rorealis, in the Memoires de I Academie Royale des Sciences, Annde 1731. or an Abſtract of it in Philoſoph. Iſranſact. N9. 431. imagine the upper Part of the Heavens to be, as it were, in Convulſions *. 5. They ſometimes ſeem to meet in the Zenith, or more commonly to the Southward of it, about ten Degrees, more or leſs (ſometimes they deviate a little to the South-eaſt of the Meridian, and ſometimes to the South-weſt); and there curling round, in ſome Meaſure, imitate Flame confined under an Arch; and being frequently tinged with various Orders of Colours, exhibit a moſt beautiful Appearance, reſembling a Canopy finely painted , of about ten or twenty Degrees in Breadih. In many Auroras, there are Streams aſcending from thoſe Parts of the Heavens, which lie ſeveral Degrees to the Southwards of the Canopy; and in ſome, they appear to ariſe, though very rarely, almoſt as large, and numerous from the ſouthern, as from the northern Parts of the HoriZon. 6. The Height of the Aurora Borealis is very great; for that of March the ſixth 1711 was viſible from the Weſt Side of Ireland, to the Confines of Ruſſia and Poland on the Eaſt, and perhaps farther; extending at leaſt over thirty Degrees of Longitude, and in Lo* See their Motions well deſcribed in the Account we have of an Aurora in the Philoſoph. Tranſact. Nò. 395, Art. 2. + See the various Colours oſ the Canopy, ãs well as thoſe of an Aurora itſelf, accurately deſcribed by Pr. Greenuood, in PhiJoſoph. Traniact. No. 418, Art. I. titude from about the fiftieth Degree over almoſt all the North of Europe, and at all Places, exhibiting, nearly at the ſame Time, the ſame Appearances. 7. Theſe Appearances have always been very frequent (as far as the Accounts we have of them inform us) in Countries that lie in, or near the frigid Zone, but very rare in thoſe of our Latitude; they are now become very frequent with us, but always ſeem to proceed from the North; and are as yet unknown to the Inhabitants of the more ſouthern Parts of our Hemiſpheree Whether they are ſeen to thoſe, who inhabit in, or near thę other frigid Zone, is to us unknown. 8. In ſome, there are Trains of Light running horiZzontally, ſometimes from the Middle to the Extremes, and ſometimes from one Extreme to the otherr. And from theſe Trains often ariſe Streams perpendicular to the Horiæon, and accompanying them as they paſi along. 9. When all the Streaming is over, the Aurora Borealis commonly degenerate nto a bright Twilight in the North, and there gradually dies avay. 10. It is probable, that theſe Phænomena often happen in cloudy Nights, though we are not ſenſible of them; fortis obſervable, that in ſuch Nights, there is frequently more Light 158 Of the Aurora Borealis. Part ITI. than what uſually proceeds from the Stars alone. li lll The moſt obvious Solution of the Aurora Borealis, or at leat what would appear ſo, to ſuch as have only attended to the Circumſtances of ſome particular ones, and which has accordingly been affixed by ſeveral * to their Aceounts of the Aurora's they have ſeen, ĩs that it is a thin Nitro- ſulphureous Vapour, raiſed in our Atmoſphere conſiderably higher than the Clouds; that this Vapour by Fermentation takes Fire, and the Exploſion of one Portion of it kindling the next, the Flaſhes ſucceed one another, till the whole Quantity of Vapour within their Reach is ſet on Fire. lll * Profeſſor Cotes, at the End of his Deſcription of a Phænome non of this Kind, inſerted in the Philoſophical Tranſactions N9. 3065, obſerves, that ſo ppoſing a Fund of Vapours or Exhalations at a conſiderable Height above us to be diffuſed every Way into a large and ſpacious Plane, parallel to the Horixon, that Fund of mixed Matier by Fermentation will emit Streams; and that if the Wind be ſtill, they will aicend perpendicularly upwards; otherwiſe they will be inclined towards that Point of the Horizon which is oppoſite to that from which the Wind blows; and that they wil appear, by the Rules of Perſpective, in the firſt Caſe, to converge to the Spectators Zenith, in the other, to ſome Point not far fiom it; and that if this Fund of Vapours be fituated more to he North than the South, it will produce Streams of Light attended with ſuch Cireumſtances, as then appeared: But he does not ſay, why the Vapours ſhoulẽ? be ſituated rather to the North ?han the South, or proceed to account for all the Phænomena of the Aurora Borealis in general from thence. Some have thought, that Vapours rarefied exceedingly by ſubterraneous Fire, and tinged with ſulphureous Steams, might from thence be diſpoſed to ſhine in the Night, and riſing up to the Top of the Atmoſphere, or even beyond its Limits (as we find the Vapours of Gun-powder, when heated in Vacuo, will ſhine in the Dark, and aſcend to the Top of the Receiver, though exhauſted) might produce thoſe Undulations in the Air, which conſtitute this Phænomenon. ll But theſe Hyporheſes have been rejected, as inſufficient: it having been thought impoſſible to account for all the Circumſtances cf the Aurora by them*, * In the Commentaries of the Academy of Sciences at Pætersburgh, l find à late Solution of the Aurora Borealis from Ex halations fermenting and taking Fire in the Atmoſphere, which the Author Chr. Maier ſays, occaſion the Appearance of the luqid Arch in the North, and thinks that the Streams, which ſeem to iſſue from thence, are no other than the Light of that Arch reſlected to us from the under Side of ſome thin Clouds, that lie above it. As to its appearing in the North rather than in the South, he ſuppoſes that may be owing to the Cold of thoſe Regions condenſing the Exhalations, and thereby rendering them more liable to ferment than they are in the ſouthern; but acknowledges ingenuouſly, that he has no Reaſon to ſuppoſe this, but ĩts being neceſſary to his Solution. At the End he tells, That it was known in ancient Times as well as lately: But omits taking Notice, that it appears much oftener of late Years in our Climate than it uſed to do; and ſo avoids accounting for that Particular. Vide Commentar. Academ. Scientiar. Imperial. Petropolitan. Tom. I. p. 351. Dr. Halley therefore has Recourſe to the magnetic Effluvia of the Earth, which he ſuppoſes to perform the ſame Kind of Circulation with Regard to it, as the Effluvia of any particular Terrella * do with reſpect to that, viæ. that they enter the Eorth near the South Pole, and pervading its Pores, paſs out again at the ſame Diſtance from the northern: And thinks, they may ſometimes, by the Concourſe of ſeveral Cauſes very rarely coincident, and to us as yet unknown, be capable of producing a ſmall Degree of Light, either from the greater Denſity of the Matter, or perhaps from the greater Velocity of its Motion; after the ſame Manner, as we ſee the Effluvia of Electric Bodies emit Light in the Dark. Monſieur de Mairan has given us a Phyſical and Hiſtorical Treatiſe of the Aurora Borealis, and endeavours to prove that it is owing to the Zodiacal Light, or the Atmoſphere of the Sun, ſpread on each Side of it along the Zodiac in the form of a Pyramid. This, he ſays, is ſometimes extended to ſuch a Length as  reach beyond the Orbit of our Earth, and then mixing itſelf with our Atmoſphere, and being of an Heterogeneous Nature, produces  A round Magnet, ſo called ſ m tle Reſemblance it bears to the Earth. the ſeveral Appearances, which are obſervẽd in the Aurora Borealis *. I have juſt mentioned theſe two Solutions, becauſe they come from two very ingenious Philoſophers; though I doubt not but the Reader will agree with me, that they are much too fine ſpun to hold, and that they are no other than the ingenious Reveries of Perſons determined to frame an Hypotheſis at any Rate. I queſtion not, but we may find Materials for the Aurora Borealis, without going ſo far for them, as theſe Gentlemen have done; and in particular that we have no Occaſion to have Recourſe either to the magnetic Effluvia of the Earth, or the Zodiacal Light, the Nature of both which we are wholly unacquainted with. The Materials employed in the firſt Solution I mean ſuch Effluvia as are continually exhaled from the Surface and Bowels of the Earth) if rightly conſidered, will afford a very eaſy and natural one, as I ſhall endeavour to ſhew in the following Manner. Firſt, we are aſſured by Experiment, that there are ſome Steams (as inflammable ſulphureous ones) which are capable of ſogreat a Degree of Expanſion, that they will render themſelves lighter than the Air they float in, though it : See his Account at large, referred to at the End of Note, be as rare, as it can be made by Art; for they will riſe to the Top of the Receiver, when exhauſted æ that is when as much Air, as is poſſible, is drawn out +: Such Steams therefore or Exhalations, riſing out of the Earth from Mines, Vulcano's; &c. muſt neceſſarily be buoyed up towards the Top of the Atmoſphers, at leaſt, till they come to a Region, where the Alr is as rare and expanded, as it can be mede by the Alir Pump, here below. This Height according to Dr. Halleys Computation , (which he found upon the Degree of the Air's Elaſticity) is about forty or fifty Miles: but probably it is much greater; for the Air, which is higher than Vapours and other Heterogeneous Matter that is not elaſtic, riſe to, being much purer than any we can make Experiments upon, may be indued with a much greater Degree of Elaſticity; and ſo the Atmoſphere may be conſiderably higher, than what he upon that Principle, computes it to be. Secondly, Theſe Efluvia being raiſed to the Top of the Atmoſphere, or near it, and floating there, will neceſſarily be carried towards the poplar Parts thereof, for the following Reafons. I. Becauſe the ſuperior Current * See Philoſoph. Tranſact. No. 347 ànd 360. H It is impoſſible to extract all the Air out of a Veſſel, becauſe it is by the Spring of the Air remaining in the Veſſel, that the Valves of the Pump are opened at each Suoke. § Philoſoph. Tranſact. NC. 181, of the Air, to a great Diſtance from the Equator, is that Way *. 2. We know from Experiment, that whatever ſwims upon a Fluid which revolves about an Axis, is thereby carried towards that Axis. This is exactly the Caſe of theſe Efluvia, for they ſæim near the Top of the Atmoſphere which continually revolves about the Axis of the Earth; they muſt therefore neceſſarily be carried towards the polar Parts thereof,. lll ll Thirdly, Theſe Efluvia being collected together at, or near the Poles, and of an inflammable Nature, may eaſily be ſuppoſed to ferment, when they meet with other hererogeneous ones proper to produce ſuch an Effect, and emit Streams of Fire; which Streams will naturally riſe up into ſuch Parts of the Atmoſphere as are ſtill lighter than that wherein the Efluvia reſt, that is; directly upwards from the Center of the Earth. But, according to the Rules of Perſpective, thoſe Streams, though they really diverge, as Radii from a Center, will appear to a Spectator on the Surface of the Earth to converge towards a Point: Which Point will ſeem to be directly over his Head, if the Streams aſcend in right Lines from the Center of the Earth: but if they deviate all one Way from that Direction, the Point will be on æ As explained in Diſſertation V. that Side the Zenith towards which they incline *, To illuſtrate this; ſuppofe ſeveral Strings hung down from the Ceiling of a Room, and a Candle placed upon a Table below them, the Shadows of them all will converge towards the Point, that is over the Candle. And, if they are made to incline, ſuppoſe all one Way, the Point of Convergency will remove from over the Candle, towards that Side of the Room to which the upper Ends of the Strings incline: Now if a Perfon had viewed them from the Place where the Candle was, and referred their Places to the Ceiling, they would have ſeemed to him to have converged towards the Point, where their Shadows did. And if the Streams ſpread themſelves- as they ariſe, but not too much, they will nevertheleſs appear tapering towards the upper Ends, like Cones or Pyramids; juſt as the Sides of a long Walk ſcem to a Perſon that views them * This may be made to appear in the following Manner; Let ADB (Fig. 38) repreſent the Concave of the Heavens, AB the Horiæon, C the Place of the Spectator, TV a luminous Subſtance ſending forth the parallel Streams EG, LM, NO, &c. Theſe Streams will all ſeem to converge towards the Point D, if that Point be taken ſuch, that the Line DC drawn from thence to the Spectators Eye, be parallel to the Streams. For Inſlance, the Stream EG will ſeem to riſe from æ to 53, LM from I o m, and FH from ſ to h, and ſo of the reſt. And NO will appear wholly in D the Place to which the reſt ſeem to converge. And if the Streams are as large, or ſomewhat larger at the upper Ends, than at the lower, they will itill appear leſs there, thoſe Ends being fartheſt from the Spectator's Eye. from one End of it, or from a diſtant Place, to approach each other at that which is fartheſt from him. This being premiſed, we may now account for the ſeveral Phænomena of the Aurora Borealis before laid down. As, 1. The Blackneſs of the Sky, which generally appears in the northern Parts of the Horiæon, like a dark Cloud, is occaſioned by the Brightneſs of the luminous Matter of the Aurora juſt above it. That the Sky is clear here, is evident (as was obſerved before) becauſe the ſmalleſt Stars are ſeen through it. 2. The lucid Arch immediately above, is the luminous Matter of the Aurora itſelf, which ſometimes exhibits the Appearance of a Curve, ſometimes of a ſtrait Line, according to its Form and Situation in the Atmoſphere, though generally that of a Curve: For, by the Rules of Perſpective, when a ſtrait Line is diſtended horizontally, and above the Spectators Eye, it ought to appear bent into a Curve, whoſe Center is below the Horiæon . Sometimes it appears on one Side the North Point, more  Thus, when a Perſon ſtands fronting a Row of Houſes, and looks over the Tops of them, if they are all of an equal Height, that Houſe which is neare him, will ſeem to cut the Heavens in a Point that will be higher than where it is cut by any of the reſt; and the Points where the Heavens will ſeem to be cut by the Tops of thoſe, which are on the Right and Left Hand of the Spectator, vill deſcend lower and lower, as the Houſes are farther off; ſo that the Points, taken all togedher, will repreſent a Curve. than on the other; ſometimes regular, ſometimes irregular, as the various Circumſtances of the Airs Motion at the Top of the Atmoſphere, and of the Situation of the flaming Matter may be, 3. The Streams of Light, iſſuing out of the lucid Arch, are Streams of Fire emitted upwards from the Matter of the Aurora, and ſeem, for the Reaſons already laid down, to converge towards the Zenith of the Spectator. Why they incline a little ſometimes hom the Perpendicular, will be explained in the fifth Remark, where we account for the Situation of the Canopyg. When no luminous Arch appears, it is probable, that it is intercepted by the Horiæon, or by the Vapours which float in great Quantities therein. 4. The trembling obſerved in the upper Part of the Heavens, is owing to the Quickneſ wherewith the Flaſhes ſucceed one another, and alſo to the irregular Motions and Agitations of the ſuperior Parts of the Atmoſphere. 35. S0 long as the luminous Matter of the Aurora is all of it towards the North of us, the Streams cannot ſeem to meet in a Point at the Top, as will appear to any one that conſiders the Figure referred to in the Note (p. 164), but after it has advanced forwards, or hecome kindled over our Heads, then they appear to meet, and form the Canopy already deſcribed; and when it has paſſed further ſtill they ſeem to ariſe from all Parts; though they are much fainter on the ſouthern than on the northern Side, ſo long as the main Body of the Aurora remains on the northern Side of the Canopy, which it rarely, if ever, paſſes. The Reaſon why the Center of the Canopy is generally a few Degrees to the South f the Spectators Zenitb æ is becauſe the luminous Streams, which iſſue forth from the extreme Parts of the Subſtance of the Aurora, will naturally diverge a little from the middle ones; and, as thoſe which appear to us, proceed chiefly from the ſouthern Side (that being neareſt to us) the Point of Convergency will neceſſarily be placed to the South of our Zenith, according to what was ſaid above about the Inclination of the Strings hanging from the Cieling of a Room. If the Center of the Canopy is ſometimes to the Eaſtward, and ſometimes to the Weſtward of the Meridian, that depends upon the Motion of that Part of the Air, which is above the Subſtance of the Aurora, and through which the Streams paſs, as they riſe. This alſo it is that makes the Streams ſeem to ariſe ſometimes a little obliquely. æ According to this Theory, the Center of the Canopy will always be near the Spectator's Zenith, where-ever he is; which I believe is the Caſe, for I have met with no Account where it is otherwiſe; and ſo every Spectator ſees a different Canopy, juſt as when ſeveral Perſons are viewing a Rainbow, no two Perſons ſeę the ſame Rainbow at the ſame Time. 6. The great Height of the Aurora is owing to the exceeding Lightneſs of the Efluvia, which compoſe the Subſtance of it ſas explained above] and the darting of the Streams upwards, into Regions perhaps quite above the Atmoſphere, occaſions it to exhibit at very diſtant Places the ſame Appearances at the ſame Time. 7. That the Aurora appears near the Pole, and never at or near the Equator, is becauſe of the Tendency the Matter of it has towards the Poles, as explained above. And that it appears in Places more diſtant from the Pole, than it formerly did, is becauſe the Efluvia, which are now raiſed from the Earth, are prevented from approaching ſo near the polar Parts of the Atmoſphere, as they uſed to do; thoſe Parts being already ſtocked with others, which were formerly raiſed, and are now grown effete by frequent Fermentations and Exploſions. 8, The horiæontal Trains of Light are the Subſtance of the Aurora juſt taking Fire, which runs from one Part to another, as in a Train of Gunpowder kindled in any one Part; and ſends up Streams perpendicularly from Places, where it meets with a greater Quantity of Matter than ordinary. lll 9. When the Matter of the Aurora is ſo far ſpent, as to emit no more Streams, it appears only as a bright ſteady Light in the North, which gradually dies away, for Want of freſh Fewel to ſupport it. 10. As the Vapours, of which Clouds are formed, never riſe ſo high, as where the Matter of the Aurora Boreelis floats; it is not at all inconſiſtent with the foregoing Theory, if it is ſometimes intercepted from our Sight, by the Interpoſition of Clouds below. See farther on this Subject, Ariſtotel. Meteor. Lib. I. Cap. 4 5. Plinii Hiſtor. Natural. Cap. 26, 27. Senec. Quæſt. Natural. Lib. I. Lycoſi. Prodigiorum ac Oſtentorum Chronicon, paſſim. Yulius Obſequens de Prodigiis, Cap. 13,43, 88. Gaſendi Animadverſ. in Diog. Laert. Lib. X. p. 1157. Cornelius Gemma de divinis Naturæ Characteriſmis. Nicephori Hiſtor. Eccleſiaſt. Lib. XII. Cap. 37. Iſid. Hiſpal. Hiſtor. Goth. Tom. I. p. 65. Bibliothec. Orientalis Clementino-Vaticana, Tom. I. P- 497. Gregor. Tur. paſſim. Mem. de Lit. de IAcad. des Inſcriptions & belles Lettres, Tom. V. p. 433. Miſcellan. Berolin. Tom. I. p. 337. Theatr. Comet. Staniſ. Lubienietæ, P. 264, 348. Mem. pour ſervir à Hiſtor. de France, Tom. I. p. 168. Mem. de IAcad. Royal. de Sciences, for almoſt each Year ſince 1716. Philoſoph. Tranſ. N9. 305, 3 10, 320, 347: 348, 349. 351, 352, 363, 365, 368, 376, 385395398, 399, 402, 419, 418, 431; and the Authors referred to by Mr. fohnſin, in his DISS E RTATION VIII Of Fermentation. Aving had Occaſion to mention ſome of the Effects of Fermentation, it may not be amiſs, before I put an End to theſe Diſſertations, to add a tort Account of the Nature of it, and to ſhew how thoſe Effects are produced by It. Fermentation isa mutual Commotion of the conſtituent Particles of Bodies, one among another; and ariſes from an Inequality in their Attractions of Coheſion. Authors diſtinguiſh it into two Kinds; the one is that which happens when a Solid is diſſolved by a Fluid; the other is, when two Fluids, being mixed together, ferment with each other. Thoſe Authors, who have treated of the firſt of theſe, tell us, That to cauſe a Fermentation between a Solid and a Fluid, ſeveral Circumſtances are neceſſary. Particularly Dr. Friend*, and Keil are of Opinion, I. That the Particles of the Solid muſt attract thoſe of the Fluid with a greater Force, than the Particles of the Fluid attract one another. * See his Chemical Lectures. r See his Letter to Dr. Coctburn, De Legibus Attractionis. 2. That the Pores of the Solid muſt not be too ſmall tòc admit the Particles of the Fluid into them. 3:. That the Body be of ſo looſe a Contexture, that the Force of Impact, with which the Particles of the Fluid ruſh into ĩts Pores; may be ſufficient to diſunite its Parts. 4. That the Elaſticity of the Particles tends very much to promote, and augment the Fermentation. Pr. Boerhaave makes alſd four Conditions requifite . i. That there be a due Proportion between the Size of the Particles of the Fluid, and the Poreiof the Body to be diſſolved. 2. That the Figure of the Particles of the Fluid have a determinate Relation to that of the Pores of the Solid. 3. That the Particles of the Fluid be ſufficiently ſolid, that their Moment, or Force of Action may not be too weakm 4. The Iaſt Qualification, he mentions, is a fit Diſpoſition of the Particles of the Fluid, when received into the Pores of the Solid, to make ſome ſtay there, and not immediately to paſs through; but to act every Way upon the Solid, as they move towards the external Surface thereof.  Pr. Borrhaave's Chemiſtry, by Shaav, p: 344- : But we have no Occaſion to have Recourſe to ſo many Suppoſitions; if the Particles of the Solid attract thoſe of the Fluid with a greater Degree of Force than either thoſe of the Fluid, or thoſe of the Solid attract one another *, it is ſufficient; and there will follow a Diſſolution of the Body, as may clearly be demonſtrated from the Laws of Mechanicss whatever the other Circumſtances relating to the Figure or Magnitude of Pores, &c. may be +. -_ en  This may be thought an impoſſible Suppoſition, for the Forœ of Attraction of Coheſion being as the Surfaces of the attracting Particles, whatever Size or Form the Particles of the Solid and Fluid are of, there cannot be a greater Quantity of Surface between every two Particles, one of which is a Particle of the Solid, and the other a Particle of the Fluid, than there is between every two Particles, which are either both of the Solid, or both of the Fluid; and therefore the Paniicles of the Solid cannot atiract thoſe of the Fluid with greater Force than either thoſe of the Solid or thoſe of the Fluid attract one another. But it is to be conſidered, that we are not ſo well acquainted with the Nature of the Attraction of Coheſion, as to deiermine æxactiy in what Manner, and by what Laws it acts. The Experiments made Uſe of for this Purpoſe, only ſhew that ſo long as we try them with the ſame Kind of Bodies, the Attraction is larger where the Contact is ſo. See Part I. Chap. III. But we have no Method of determining, whether the Difference of Attraction, which various Bodies exert upon one an- jriſe, ſolely ſrom a Difference in their Surfaces, or not. em. Ihus, let f, f, ſ, &c. (Fig. 39.) repreſent a Series of the Particles of a F iſi 5 3, ; & Ab of thoſe of a ſolid Body, contiguous io one another: and let the pricked Lines ſ f, ſf, &c. repreſent the Forces of Attraction between the Fiuid Particles one among another, and s 5, s 4, &c, thoſe of the ſolid ones among themſelves; and let the black Lines ſs, sf, &c. expreſs thoſe which are between the fluid and ſolid Particles Now, the latter Forces being by the Suppoſition ſtronger than the former, the ſluid Particies will recedo When a Solid is put into a Fluid, if their Particles have the above-mentioned Relation to each other, thoſe of the Solid, being attracted with greater Force towards the Fluid, than they are the contrary Way, they will fall off from the Fluid, and enter in between the Particles of the Fluid; and for the like Reaſon, thoſe of the Fluid will open to themſelves a Way in between thoſe of the Solid, and will ſeparate them from each other. Neither will their Reſpective Motions ceaſe, unleſs their from each other, and ſuſfer thoſe of the Solid to enter in between them; and ſfor the ſime Reaſon the ſolid Particles will give Way to thoſe of the Fiuid. By which moans, the Diſtances repreſented by the priched Lines berminè er, the Attractions, which they expreſs, will be diminiſæd; ſo that the ſluid Particles will enter quite in hetween the ſlid ones, and the ſolid ones hetween the fluid ones; and hoth of them together will conſtitute ſuch a Series, as is d in Figure 40, in the middle Row 5 ſ, , ſ &e. where the ſolid and fluid Particles lie mixed interchangeably one with another in 3 right Line. Now let it be ſuppoſed, that this Series is conti to one which conſiſts wholly of Fluid above it, as is exp in the Figure, and to another below, conſiſting of ſolid Particles only. Every ſolid Particle in this Series will be attracted upwards with greater Force, than it is downwards; and every fluid one with greater Foree downwards than it is upwards, as appears by bare Inſpection of the Figure, where the black Lines, as in the former, expreſ the ſtronger Attractions, and the pricked ones the weaker. And, if we ſuppoſe the Number of Particles in the Solid and in the Fluid to be nearly equal, thoſe of the Fluid will not itop, till they have quite paſſed through the Solid; for they will always find a Series wholly conſiſting of ſolid Particies before them, whilſt that which they leave behind, will be a Mixture of both. In like manner, the ſolid ones will paſs quite through the fluid ones; for they will always meet with more fluid ones before them, than they leave behind within the Sphere of their own Attraction. Quantities be very unequal, till they are diffuſed uniformly one among another, as we may very eaſily conceive; for till then, there will always be ſome Particles attracted with a greater Degree of Force one Way than they are another. And if more of the Solid be added to thiꝗ Fluid, the Particles of the Fluid will alſo enter into that Solid, till each is ſurrounded on all Sides with ſolid Particles, as far as its attractive Force reaches. After which the Fluid is ſaid to be ſaturated, and will diſſolve no more. Again, if more of the Fluid be poured upon that Solid, the ſolid Particles will diffuſe themſelves farther into the Fluid, till each of them is encompaſſed with Particles of the Fluid, as far as its attractive Force extends; and then they will ſpread themſelves no farther. But in either Caſe, if another Solid, or Fluid, the attractive Force of whoſe Particles differ from thoſe of the former, be added, a freſh Fermentation will begin, provided the attractive Forces between the Particles of the former Mixture, and of thoſe which are now added, have ſuch Relation to each other, as is neceſſary to produce it. Upon this Principle it ſhould ſeem, that a Fluid ſnould always be capable of diſſolvin more than an equal Quantity of a Solid; and that a Solid ſould be capable of entring in and diffuſing itſelf through more than an equal Quantity of Fluid. The Reaſon why it is frequently not ſo, is, becauſe it commonly happens, at the Fluid and the Solid are not of equal ſpecific Gravities. When the Solid is heavieſt, ſo many of its Particles will not aſcend and enter into the Fluid, as would otherwiſe have done; and on the contrary, when the Fluid is heavieſt, the Weight of its Particles will be an Impediment to their riſing into, and diſſolving the Solid. We have no Occaſion to diſtinguiſh Fermentation into two Kinds, with regard to its Cauſes; for, according to the foregoing Theory, whenever two Fluids, or a Solid and a Fluid, are put together, if the Particles of the one attract thoſe of the other, with greater Force than either thoſe of the one, or thoſe of the other attract themſelves, a Fermentation will equally enſue, the Cauſe being the ſame in both Caſes. Wnhen two Fluids, or a Solid and a Fluid, ferment with each other, if the Agitation and inteſtine Motion of their Particles be very great, or continues a long Time, and if the Subſtance of them be of the inflammable Kind, they will, by continually rubbing one againſt another, be ſufficiently heated to take Fire, and burſt out into Flame; as was ſaid of the ſeveral Compoſitions mentioned in the foregoing Diſſertation. CoMPENDIOUS SYSTEM oOF Natural Philoſophy. Vith N O T ES Containing the MATHEMATICAL DEMONS TRATIONS, AND Some Occaſional REMARXS. P ART III. oO P T I CS. To which is annexed a DIsSER TAT ION on the Subject of the Horizontal Moox. B J. ROWNING, M. A. Rector oſf ANDEREY in LINCOLNSHIRE, and late Fellow of MAGDALEN COLLEGE in CAMERIDGE. L O ND O N: Printed for SAM. H a R D1NG Bookſeller, on the Pavement in St. Martins Lane. CoMPENDIOUS SYSTEM OF Natural Philoſophy. P A RT III. OP TI OS. C H AP. L Of the Nature and Propagation of Light. N treating of the Nature of Fluids, I have explained ſuch Phænomena as reſult from ſmall Particles of Matter collected together, and acted upon according to the Laws of Mechaniſm; the Order of my Deſign now brings me to ſhew how according to the ſame Laws ſuch Phænomena, as reſult from the Emiſſion of infinitely ſmall Particles from Iuminous Bodies, are produced; which Phænomena, being the Means, whereby the Images of external Objects are repreſented to our Minds, by the Intervention of our Organs of Sight, are for that Reaſon called Optical, and the Doctrine, by which they are explained, the Science of Opticss. Every viſible Body emits or reflects inconceivably ſmall Particles of Matter from each Point of its Surface, which iſſue from it continually, (not unlike Sparks from a Coal) in ſtrait Lines and in all Directions. Theſe Particles entring the Eye, and ſtriking upon the Retina  Nerve expanded on the back Part of the Eve to receive their Impulſes) excite in our Minds the Idea of Light. And as they differ in Subſtance, Denſity, Velocity, or Magnitude 7, they produce in us the Ideas of different Colours; as will be explained in its proper Place. That * Optics is generally divided into two Parts, vi: Dioptrics, under which is comprehended every Thing that relates to the Appearances oſ Bodies ſeen through tranſparent Subſtances; and Catoptrics, or what relates to the ſeeing oſ Bodies by reflected Light. To theſe we may add a third, which properly comes under neither of the ſormer Diſtinctions, and that is, the Doctrine of Colours, which explains every Thing that relates to the Cauſes ol the Diverſity of Colours obſervable in natural Bodies. Tis more probable, that they differ eſther in Magnitude, or Denſũty, than in Velocity or Subſtance. For, if the Diſference of Colours ariſe from the different Velocity of the Rays oſ Light, then the Colours of Objects would appear changed to an Eye phaced under Water, or within any Medium differing from the Air in Denſity: For when a Ray oſ Light paſſes out of a Medium into another of different Denſity, it undergoes an Alteration in ĩts Velocity, as will be explained hereaſter. And to ſuppoſe them to differ in Subſtance, is contrary to that Uniformity of Things, which is obſervable in the Univerſe; as well as repugnant to that Homogeueity in the That the Particles, which conſtitute Light, are exceedingly ſmall, appears from hence, viꝶ. that if a Hole be made through a Piece of Paper with a Needle, all the Rays of Light which proceed at the ſame Time, from all the Objects on one Side of it, are capable of paſſing through it at once without the leaſt Confuſion; for any one of thoſe Objects may as clearly be ſeen through it as if no Rays paſſed through it from any of the reſt. Further, if a Candle is lighted, and there be no Obſtacle in the Way to obſtruct the Progreſs of its Rays, it will fill all the Space within two Miles of it every Way with luminous Particles, before it has loſt the leaſt ſenſible Part of its Subſtance thereby. That theſe Particles proceed from every Point of the Surface of a viſible Body, and in primogeneal Parts of Matter, which ſrom the Experiments hitherto made, is thought to exiſt every where Whereas, if we ſuppoſe them to diſfer either in Magnitude or Denſity, nothing is more eaſy than to ſee how thoſe of the ſfame Kind ſhould, however refracted, roduce the ſame Colours; and alſo how thoſe which produce diſerent Colours, ſhould ſuffer different Degrees of Reſraction in paſſing through the ſame Medium. As to the firſt, it is ſelſ- evident, becauſe Refraction cannot alter their Magnitudes or Denſities; as to the ſecond, it is probable that the more intenſe and ſtronger Colours, the Rays of which ſuffer the leaſt Reſraction, are ꝑroduced by the larger, or more denſe Particles of Light: For, that ſuch Particles ſould be leſs refracted than others, is quite conſonant to the Laws of Attraction oſ Coheſion, which, as it acts in Proportiòn to the Surſaces of Bodies only, muſt neceſſarily affect the larger, or the more denſe Particles, leſs than it does the reſt; becauſe ſuch have larger Momenta or Forces in Proportion to their Surſaces, than others have. all Directions, is clear from hence, viꝶ, becauſe where-ever a Spectator is placed with Regard to the Body, every Point of that Part of the Surface which is turned towards him, is viſible to him. That they proceed from the Body in right Lines, we are aſſured, becauſe jut ſo many and no more will be intercepted in their Paſſage to any Place, by an interpoſed Object, as that Object ought to intercept, ſuppoſing them to come in ſuch Lines. The Velocity, with which they proceed from the Surface of the viſible Body is no leſs ſurpriſing, than their Minuteneſs: The Method whereby Philoſophers eſtimate their Swiftneis, is by Obſervations made on the Eclipſes of Tupiters Satellites, which Eclipſes to us appear about ſeven Minutes ſooner than they ought to do by Calculation, when the Earth is placed between the Sun and him, that is, when we are neareſt him, and as much later, when the Sun is between him and us, at which Time we are fartheſt from him; from whenco it is concluded, that they require about ſeven Minutes to paſs over a Space equal to the Diſtance between the Sun and us, which is about cighty one Millions of Milos*, + This atſords us another Prooſ of the ſurprizing Fineneſ of the Particles oſ Light; ſor the above-mentioned Velocity of the Rays i. conſiderably more than a Million of Times greater than that of a Canon Ball. Were they not thercfore inconceivably ſmall, the Eye would be rather wounded, than delighted with them; and A Stream of theſe Particles iſſuing from the Surface of a viſible Body in one and the ſame Direction, is called a Ray of Light. As Rays proceed from a viſible Body in all Directions, they neceſſarily become thinner and thinner, continually ſpreading themſelves, as they paſs along, into a larger Space, and that in Proportion to the Squares of their Diſtances from the Body; that is, at the Diſtance of two Spaces, they are four Times thinner, than they are at one; at the Diſtance of three Spaces, nine Times thinner, and ſo on: the Reaſon of which is, becauſe they ſpread themſelves in a twofold Manner, viæ. upwards and downwards, as well as Side-Ways. the tender Flowers of Plants would be ſo far from being cheriſied by them, that they would be torn in Pieces, and not able to ſtand beſore them. * This Propoſition is demonſtrated mathematically thus; Let us conceive two concentric Surſaces ABD, and EFG (Fig. 1.) and in theſe, two ſimilar Portions ELFI, and AHBK; let :he Rays CE and CF, with the reſt proceeding from the Center C, fall upon the Portion ELFI and cover it; tis evident from Inſpection of the Figure, that the ſame Rays at the Diſtance CH will cover the Portion AHBK only; now theſe Rays being the ſame in Number at each Place, will be thinner in the former, than they are in the latter, in Proportion as that ĩs larger than this; but theſe Spaces being ſimilar Portions oſ the Surfices of Spheres, bear the ſame Proportion to each other, that the Surfaces themſelves do, that is, they are to each other as the Squares of their Radii CL, CH; the Rays thereſore are more diſfuſed, or thinner in Proportion to the Squares ofthe ſame Radii, or of their Diſtances ſrom the luminous Point C E. D. The Particles oſf Light are ſubject to the Laws of Attraction of Coheſion like other mall Bodies, for if a Ray of Light be made to paſs by the Edge of a Knife, it will be diverted from its natural Courſe, and be inflected towards the Edge of the Knife. The like Inflection happens to a Ray when it enters obliquely into a denſer or rarer Subſtance than that in which it was before, in which Caſe it is ſaid to be refratted; the Laws of which Reſraction are the Subject of the following Chapter. * The Carteſian Notion oſ Light, was not, that it is propagaeed from luminous Bodies by the Emiſſion of ſmall Particles, but that it was communicated to the Organ of Sight by their Preſſure upon the Materia ſubtilis, with which they ſuppoſed the Univerſe to be ful. But according to this Hypotheſis, it could never be dark; becauſe when a Fluid ſuſtains any Preſſure, if that Fluid lls all the Space it takes up, abſolutely, wihout leaving any Pores, which is the Caſe of the ſuppoſed Materia ſubtilis; then that Preſſure muſt neceſſarily be communicated equally and inftantaneouſly to every Part: And thereſore, whether the Sun were above or below the Horizon, the Preſſure communicated, and conſequently the Light, would be the ſame. And farther, as the Preſfure would be inſtantaneous, ſo would the Light, which is contrarv to what is eollected, as we obſerved above, from the Eclipũ©s; of Fupiters Satellites. C H A P. II. Of the Cauſe of Refraction, and the Law by which it is performed. Hatever Subſtance a Ray of Light paſſes through, or if it paſs through a Space void of all Subſtance, it is ſaid by Philoſophers to paſs through a Medium; and therefore if it paſſes out of any Subſtance, as Air or Glaſs, into a Vacuum, it is ſaid to paſs out of one Medium into another. All Bodies being endued with an attractive Force, which is extended to ſome Diſtance beyond their Surfaces; when a Ray of Light paſſes out of a rarer into a denſer Medium (if this latter has a greater attractive Force than the former, as is commonly the Cae, and what we ſhall hereaſter always ſuppoſe, unleſę it be mentioned to the contrary) the Ray juſt before its Entrance, will begin to be attracted towards the denſer Medium, and this Attraction will continue to act upon it, till ſome Timme aſter it has entered the Medium, as we ſnall ſnew by and by; and therefore if a Ray approaches a denſer Medium in a Direction perpendicular to its Surface, its Velocity will * In oily and inflammable Bodies it happens otherwiſe ; for they ire obſerved to attract more ſirongly than others of gieater Denſity. be continually accelerated during its Paſſage through the Space in which that Attraction exerts itſelf; and therefore, after it has paſſed that Space, it will move on, till it arrives at the oppoſite Side of the Medium, with a greater Degree of Velocity than it had before it entered. So that in this Caſe its Velocity only will be alteredl. Whereas, if a Ray enters a denſer Medium obliquely, it will not only have its Velocity augmented thereby, but its Direction will become leſs oblique to the Surface. Juſt as when a Stone is thrown downwards obliquely from a Precipice, it falls to the Surface of the Ground in a Direction nearer to a perpendicular one, than that with which it was thrown from the Hand. From hence we ſay a Ray of Light in paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, is refracted rowards the Perpendicular; that is, ſuppoſing a Line drawn perpendicularly to the Surface of the Medium, through the Point where the Ray enters, and extended both Ways, the Ray in paſſing through the Surface is refracted or bent towards the perpendicular Line; or, which is the ſame Thing, the Line which it deſcribes by its Motion after it has paſſed through the Surface, makes a leſs Angle with the Perpendicular, than the Line it deſcribed before. All which may be illuſtrated in the following Manner. Let us ſuppoſe firſt, that the Ray. paſſes cout of a Vacuum into the denſer Medium A BCD, (Fig. 2.) and that the attractive Force oF each Particle in the Medium is extended from its reſpective Center tõ a Diſtance equal to that which is between the Lines AB and EF, or AB and GH; and let KL bẽ the Path deſcribed by a Ray of Light in its Progreſs towards the denſer Medium. This Ray, when it arrives at L will enter the attrãctive Forces of thoſe Particles which lie in AB the Surface of the denſer Mediim, and will therefore ceaſe to proceed any longer in the right Line KLM, but will be diverted from its Courſe by being attracted towards the Line AB, and will begin to deſcribe the Curve LN, paſſing through the Surface AB in ſome new Direction as OQ, thereby making a leſs Angle with a Line as PR drawn perpendicularly through the Point N, than it would have done, had it proceeded in its firſt Direction KLM. Farther, whereas we have ſuppoſed the attractive Force of each Particle to be extended through a Space equal to the Diſtance betwoen AB and EF, it is evident the Ray after it has entered the Surface, will ſtill be attracted downwards, till it has arrived at the Line EF; for till that Time, there will not be ſo many Particles above it which will attract it upwards, as helow, that will to attract it downwards. So that aſter it has enB tered the Surface at N, in the Direction OQ, it will not proceed in that Direction, but will continue to deſcribe a Curve, as N S, afſter which it will proceed ſtrait on towards the oppoſite Side of the Medium, being attracted equally every Way; and therefore will at Iaſt proceed in the Direction XST ſtill nearer the Perpendicular PR than before. NoW if we ſuppoſe the Space ABYZ not to be a Vacuum, but a rarer Medium than the other, the Caſe will ſtill be the ſame; but the Ray will not be ſo much refracted from its rectilineal Courſe, becauſe the Attraction of the Particles of the upper Medium being in a contrary Direction to that of the Attraction of thoſe in the lower one, the Attraction of the denſer Medium will in ſome Meaſure be deſtroyed by that of the rarer. On the contrary, when a Ray paſſes out of a denſer into a rarer Medium, if its Direction be perpendicular to the Surface of the Medium, it will only loſe ſomewhat of its Velocity, in paſſing through the Space of Attraction of that Medium (that is, the Space wherein it is attracted more one Way than it is another). If its Direction be oblique, it will continually recede from the Perpendicular during its Paſſage, and by that Means have its Obliquity encreaſed, juſt as a Stone thrown up obliquely from the Surface of the Earth increaſes its Obliquity all the time it riſes. Thus, ſuppoſing the Ray TS paſſing out of the àdenſer Medium ABCD into the rarer ABYZ, when it arrives at S it will begin to be attracted downwards, and ſo will deſcrite the Curve SNL, æand then proceed in the right Line LX, making a larger Angle with the Perpendicular PR, thanthe Line TSX in which it proceeded during its Paſſage through the other Medium. The Space through which the Attraction of Coheſion of the Particles of Matter is extendæd is ſo very ſmall, that in conſidering the Progreſs of a Ray of Light out of one Mediam into another, the Curvature it deſcribes in paſſing through the Space of Attraction is generally neglected; and its Path is ſuppoſed to be bent, or in the uſual Terms, the Ray is ſuppoſed to be reſracted only in the Point where it enters the denſer Medium. Now the Line, which a Ray deſcribes before it enters a denſer or a rarer Medium is alled the Tucident Ray; that which it deſcribes after it has entered, is the Reſracted ay. The Angle, comprehended bet ween the Inident Ray and the Perpendicular, is the Angle of Iucidence ; and that between the refractæd Ray and the Perpendicular, is the Angle of Refſrattion. There is a certain and immutable Law or Rule, by which Refraction is always performd; and that is this; Whatever Inclination a Ray of Light has to the Surface of any MediB um before it enters it, the Degree of Refraction will always be ſuch, that the Proportion hetween the Sine of the Angle of its Incidence, and that of the Angle of its Refraction, will always be thę ſame in that Medium. li prr i; Hꝶ |n ie- , mo , * Lemima. It fiom a Point ass M (Fig. 4.) taken any where without the Circle PNQ, a Line as MP be drawn paſſing through the Center of the Circle, and terminated in the Circumference at P, the Product of MQ multiplied by MD is equal to the Difference between the Squares of ML and PL. Dem. Call MQ, a; and the Radius oſ the Cirele LQ or LI, b; then will the Diameter Q be expreſſible by 2h, and the whole Line MP, by a2h; then multiplying MQ by MP, that is, a by a+2b, we have for the Product oſ this, aa+2ab. Now the Square oſ the Line ML, which is expreſſible by a-b, is aa+2ab Hb, and the Square of PL is bb; but the Diſſerence between theſe Squares, vſæ. aa+22bhb and bb is evidently aa2ah; and rherefore the Product of MQ multiplied by MP is equal to the Diſſerence between the Squares of ML and PL. Q €. D. Dem. When a Ray oſ Light paſſes through the Space of Attraction of any Medium, it is evident that its Motion will be ſubject 1o the like Laws with that of Projectiles, provided we ſuppoſe  to be aſted upon with'ah equal Degree of Porce during iĩts whole Paſſage through that Space, as is the Caſe of Projectiles to whatever Height they are thrown ſrom the Earth. We will therefore pur a Caſe as nearly parallel as may be to that which was demonſtrarted of Projectiles in the ſeventh Chapter of the firſt Part; ad ſuppoſe firſt, that the Force of Attraction oſ the denſer Medium is at all Diſlances the ſame as ſar as ĩt reaches, and that the Ray proceeds out oſ a denſer into a rarer Medium; in which Caſe ĩt will be attracted back towards the denſer Medium, during its Paſſage through the Space of Attraction, in like Manner as a Projuctile thrown upwards is while ĩt riſes from the Earth. Let then AB CD (Fię. 4.) repreſent the denſer Medium, and ABEF the Space ol Arrraction; and let GH be a Ray about to enter the Force of Atrraction at lH, and let GH be produced to M. Now tis evint, rſat in this Suppoſi ion, the Ray when at l, is in the ſame Circumſtances with à Prjectile about to he thrown upwards from  mards M; it will thereſore deſcribe a Portion of a Pãrabola DTo illuſtrate this, Let us ſuppoſe ABCD ig. 3.) to repreſent a rarer, and ABEF a denſer Medium; let GH be a Ray of Light Honit soauni ; lœn r  5 aing as HI; to which the Line HM will be a Tangent at H; and the Line IK, in which it would proceed aſter it has paſled the Space of Attraction, a Tangent to it at I, for after having Jeſt the attractive Force at I, it goes ſtrait on in its laſt Direction. Let the Perpendicular IR be drawn meeting GH produced in M, am let ]T be produced to L. On the Center L with the Radius LI, deſcribe the Cirele PNqQ, let fall the Perpendicular LO upon MR, and join the Points L and N. Now itis demonſtrated in the Caſe of Pręjectiles, that the Pærameter oſ the Point HM i MI by MI is equal to HMq. And it is there farther demonſtrated, that the ſaid Parameter is equal to a fourth Part of the Height which a Bodj muſt ſall from, to acquire the Velocity the Projectile hàs at H; this Parameter therefore is a Quantity not at all depending on the Direction of the Projectile, but its Velocity only; and conſequently in the preſent Suppoſition it is a given Quantity, the Ray GH being ſuppoſed to have the ſame Velocity, whatever is its Inclination to the Surface AB. Now the Tangent KI being produced to L, will by the Property of the Parabola, biſect the other Tangent HM, whereſore the Line LO being parallel to HR, MR will alſo be biſected in O; and adding the equal Lines OI and ON to each Part, MN will be equal to IR; but the Line IR ĩs alſo a Line independent of the Inclination of the Ray GH, its Length being determined by the Breadth of the Space oſ Attraction ABEF only, and therefore MN is a given Quantity. Now, whereas MI, when multiplied by the Parameter of the Point H, which beſore was ſnewn to be a given Line, is equal to the Square oſ HM, thereſore the ſame Line MI when multiplied by any other given Line, (viz. MN) iſit is not equal to, will nevertheleſs bear a given Proportion to the Square of HM: But ſince MI multiplied by MN bears a given Proportion (viz. a Proportion that does not depend on the Inclination of the Ray GH) to the Square of MH, its equal, viz. the Product of MQ multiplied by MP (37. El. 3.) or what is equal to this, the Difference between the Squares of ML aud PL (by the foregoing Lemma). or, which is the ſame ſrhing, of ML and LI, (becauũ PL and Ll are Raaii of the ſame mn -, - - Circle) æ ſing through the firſt and entering the ſecond at H. and let HI be the refracted Ray; then ſuppoſing the Perpendicular PR drawn through  Poit H, on the Center H, and with any ircle) does ſo too. Now the Square oſf ML beats alſo a given Proportion to the Square ol MH (ML being equal to half MH) conſequently there is a given Proportion between the Square o M Iand the Difference of the Squares of ML and LI; and thereſor mhere is a certain Proportion between the Lines themſelves, viz. between ML and LI. But in every Triangle the Sides a proporæionãble to the Sines of their oppoſite Angles, therefore in the Triangle MLI, the Sine of the Angle LMI has a given Proportion tę xhe Sine of the Angle LIM, or of its Complement to two right ones MIK (for they have the ſame Sine): But LMI being an Angle made by the incident Ray AH produced, with the Perpendicudar RM, is the Angle oſ Incidence, and MIK being made by the xcſtacted Ray IK, and the ſame Perpendicular, is the Angle of ReAraction, thereſore in this Caſe there is a conſtant Ratio between æhe Sine of the Angle of Incidence, and that oſ the Angle of ReHraction. . E. . Ve have in the foregoing Demonſiration ſuppoſed that the orce of Attraction is every where uniſorm, but if it be otherwiſc, mrovided it he the ſame every where at the ſame Diſtances from The Surſace AB, the Proportion between the forementioned Sines æill ſtill be a given one. For, let us imagine the Space of Attraction divided into parallel Rlanes, and the Attraction to be the Aame through the whole Breadth of ęach Plane though diſferent in à:erent Vlanes, the Sine of the Angle o? Incidence out of each ill, by what has been demonſtrated above, be to the Sine of the Angle of Refaction into the next in a given Ratio; and zhereſore, ſince the Sine of the Angle of Refraction out of one uill be the Sine of, the Angle of dncidence into the next, it is evident that the Sine oſ the Angle of Incidence into the firſt ill be in a given Ratio to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction. out of Lrhe latt. Now let us ſuppoſe the Thickneſs of theſe Planes diminiſaed in infinitum, and their Number proportionably increaſed, xne Law of Refraction will ſtill sontinue the ſame; and therefore mhether the Attraction beuniſorm or not, there will be a conAant Ratio between the Sine of te Angie of Incidence and of _— urr il ĩl  a h Radius Radius deſcribe the Circle APBR, and from G and I where the incident and refracted Rays cut the Circle, let fall the Lines GK and IL perpendicularly upon the Line PR, the former of theſe will be the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, the latter of Refraction. Now if in this Caſe, the Ray GH is ſo refracted at H, that GX is double or treble; &c. of IL, then whatever other Inclination the Ray GH might have had, the Sine of its Angle of Incidence would have been double, or treble, &c. to that of its Angle of Refraction. For Inſtance, had the Ray paſſed in the Line MH before Refraction, it would have paſſed in ſome Line, as HN afterwards, ſo ſituated that MO ſhould have been double or treble, &c. of NQ. When a Ray paſſes out of a Pacuum into Air, the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is found to be to that of Refraction, as 100036 tIooooo. li When it paſſes out of Air into Water, as about 4 to 3. When out of Air into Glaſs, as about 17Z to 11. When out of Air into a Diamond, as about 5 to 2. CH AP m. Of ihe Refractio of Light in paſſing thio plain and ſpherical Surfaces. J A S Rays of Light are capable of having their Progreſs altered by Refraction or Reſlection, it is poſſible they may have various Inclinations and Directions different from thoſe which they naturally acquire by proceeding from the Surfaces of viſible BodiesWhen they recede from each other as they paſs along, they are ſaid to diverge; and the Point they proceed from, is called the Radiant Point. lili When they proceed towards any Point approaching nearer together in their Progroſs, they are then ſaid to converge; and the Point towards which they tend, is called the Focus. This Focus may be either real or imaginary; it is ſaid to be real, when the Rays actually proceed to it; but if they are intercepted in their Progreſs, or turned another Way before they reach it, it is called their imaginary Focus. Sometimes it happens, that Rays are ſo refracted or reſlected, that they proceed afterwards, as from fome Point, which is not their true Radiant, then alſo that Point is called Aheĩr imaginary Focus. When they proceed in parallel Lines, they are then called paraãllel Rays; and both their Focus and radiant Point is ſuppoſed to be at an infinite Diſtãance. When Rays paſs out of one Medium into another, they ſuffer various Alterations in their Motion. All which are expreſſed in the eighteen following Propoſitions. I. When parallel Rays fall obliquely on a plain Surface of a Medium of different Denſity, they are parallel allo after Refraction. For having all the ſame Inclination to the Surface, they ſuffer an equal Degree of Refraction. I II. When diverging Rays paſs out of a rarer into-ã denſer Medium through a plain Surface, they are made thereby to diverge leſs. For being all refracted towards their reſpective Perpendiculars, (hich Perpendiculars are parallel toone another) they are brought nearer to àa Paraleliſm themſelves, that is, they are made to diverge leſs than before. See this and the follrwing Caſes expreſed more determinately, and demonſtrated in the Note belo. III. When * I. When Rays paſs out oſ one Medium into another of different Denſity through a plain Suiface, if they diverge, the ſocal Diſtance will be to that of the radiant Point;; ĩf t iey converge; it will be to that oſ the imaginary Focus oſ the inident Rays, as III. When they proceed out of a denſer into a rarer Medium, the contrary happens; for then being refracted from their reſpective Perpendiculars, they are made to diverge morc. IV. So the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to that of the Angle of Reſraction. : This Propoſition admits of four Cales. Caſe 1. Of diverging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium. Dem. Let X (Fig. 10.) repreſent a rarer, and Z a denſer M⸗dium, ſeparated from each other by the plain Surface AB; ſuppole CE and CD two diverging Rays proceeding from the Point C, the one perpendicular to the Surface, the other oblique; through E draw the Perpendicular PXCThe Ray CD being perpendicular to the Surface will zroceed on in the right Line CQ, but the other falling obliquely on it at E, and there entring a denſer Medium, ill ſuer a Reſraction towards the Perpendicular EX. Let then EG be the retracted Ray, and produce it back till it interſects DC produced alſo, in F; this will be the ſocal Point. On tre Center E and with the Radius EF, deſcribe the Circle AP BQ, and 3roduce EC to H; draw HI the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, and CK that of Refraction; equal to this is F? or CM which let be drawn. Now if we ſuppoſe the Points D and E contiguous, or nearly ſo, then will the Line HE be almoſt colncident with FD, and thereſore FD will be to CD as HE to CE; but HE is to CE as HI to CM, becauſe the Triangles HIE and CME are ſimilar, that is, the focal Diſtance of the Ray CE is to the Diſiance oſ the Radiant Point, æs the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to that of the Angle of Reſraction. E. D. /ut I. Whereas ihe Ratio of IE to ME, or which is the ſame Thing, that of nD to CD bears the exact Proportion of HI to CM, and hecauſe this, (being ihe Ratio of the Sine of the Angle of Incidence to that of the Angle of Refraction) is always the ſame, ihe Line In is in all Inclinations of the Ray CE, at the ſame Diſtance from CM; conſequently had CE been coincident with CD, th? Point H had fallen upon n: and becauſe the Circle paſſes through both I and F, F would alſo have fallen upon n; upon IV. So when converging Rays paſs out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, through a plain Surface, they are made thereby to converge leſs. lll For which Account the Focus of the Ray CE would have heen there. But the Ray CE being oblique to the Surface DB, the Point H is at ſome Diſtance from n; and therefore the Point F is neceſſarily ſo t00, and the more ſo by how much the greater that Diſtance is : from whence it is clear, that no tao Rays flouing from the radiant Point C and falling with different Obliquities on the Surſace BD, will after Refraction there, proceed as from the ſame Point; thereſore ſtrictly ſpeaking, there is no one Point in the Line D produced, ihat can more properly be called the Focus of Rays flowing from C, than another: for thoſe which enter the refracting Surface near D, will after Refraction proceed, as has heen olſerved, from the Parts about. n; thoſe which enter near E, will flo as from the Parts about F; thoſe which enter about T, as from ſome Points in the Line DF produced, &c. And it is farther to be obſerved, that when the Angle DCE becomes large, the Line nF increaſes apace; wherefore thoſe Rays which fall near T, proceed after Refraction, as from a more diſfuſed Space, than thoſe which fall at the ſame Diſtancæ from each other near the Point D. Upon which Account it is uſual aith Optical Writers to ſuppoſe the Diftance between the Points where the Rays enter the pla in Surface of a refracting Medium, to he inconſiderable with Regard to the Diſtance of the radiant Point, if they diverge; or to that of their imaginary Focus, if they converge : and unleſs there he ſome particular Reaſon to the contrary, they conſider them, as entring the refracting Medium in a Direction as nearly perpendicular to its Surface as may be. Caſe 2. Of diverging Rays proceeding out of a denſer into a rarer Medium. Dem. Let X be the denſer, Z the rarer Medium, FD and FE two diverging Rays proceeding from the Point F; and ſuppoſing the Perpendicular PK drawn as before, FP will be the Sine of the Angle of Incidence of the oblique Ray FE, which in this Cale being reſracted from the Perpendicular, will paſs on in ſome Line as ER, which being produced back to the Circumſerence of the Circle will cut the Ray FD ſomewhere, ſuppoſe in C, this thèsei For being all refracted towards their reſpective Perpendiculars, they themſelves are brought nearer to a Paraleliſm, and ſo converge leſs. V. On ſore will be the imaginary Focus of the refracted Ray ER; draw RS the Sine oſ the Angle of Reſraction, to which HI wjll be equal: but here alſo FP or its equal CM, is to HI, as EC to EH, or ũif the Point D and E be conſidered as contiguous) as DC to DF, that is, the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to the Sine of the Ange of Rfſraction, as the ſocal Diſtance to that of thèe radiant Point.  . D. il Caſe 3. Of converging Rays naſſing out of a denſer Medium into a rarer. Dem. Let Z be the denſer, X the rarer Medium, and GE the incident Ray, this will be refracted from the Perpendicular into a Line as EH; then all Things remaining as before, GK, or its equal FP, or CM will be the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, and HI that of Reſraction: but theſe Lines, as beſore, are to each other, as DC to DF, that is, the ſocal Diſiance is to the Diſtance of the imaginary Focus, as the Sine oſ the Angle of Incidence to that of the Angle of Refraction. L ẽ. D. Caſe 4. Of converging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium.  Dem. Let Z be the rarer, X the denſer Medium, and RE the incident Ray; this will be refracted towards the Perpendicular mto a Line, as EF; C will be the imaginary Focus, and F the real one, HI which ĩs equal to RS, the Sine oſ the Angle of Inc dence, and F? that of the Angle of Reſraction: but theſe are of to each other, as DF to DC; and thereſore the ſocal Diſtance is to that of the imaginary Focus, as the Sine of te Angle of Incidence Js to that of the Angle of Reſraction.   When parallel Rays ſall upon a ſpherical Surface of diꝶerent Denſity, the focal Diſtance will be to the Diſtance of the Center of Convexity, as the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to the D fference between that Sine and the Sine of the Angle of æfracton. ili Tnis Propoſition admits of four Caſe:, V. On the contrary, when they proceed out of a denſer into a rarer Medium, they are refracted the contrary Way, and ſo made to converge more. All Caſe 1. Oſ parallel Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium through a convex Surface. Dim. Let AB (Fig. 11.) repreſent a convex Surſace, C its Center of Convexity; HA and DB two parallel Rays, paſſing out of the rarer Medium X into the denſer Z, the one perpendicular to the reſracting Surface, the other oblique: draw CB, this being a Radius, will be perpendicular to the Surſace at the Point B; and the oblique Ray DB being in this Caſe refracted towards the Perpendicular, will proceed in ſome Line, as BF, meeting the other Ray in F, which will thereſore be the focal Point: produce CB to N, then will DBN, or its equal BCA be the Angle oſ Incidence, and FBC that oſ Refraction. Now, whereas any Angle has the ſame Sine with its Complement to tuo right ones, the Angle FCB heing the Complement of ACB, which is equal to the Angle of Incidence, may here be taken for that Angle; and therefore, as ihe Sides of a Triangle have the ſame Relation to each other, that the Sines of their oppoſite Angles have, FB bheing oppoſite to this Angle, and FC being oppoſite to the Angle of Refraction, they may here be conſidered as the Sines of the Angles of Incidence and of Refraction; and for the ſame Reaſon CB may be conſidered as the Sine of the Angle CFB, which Angle being together with the Angle FBC, equal to the external one ACB G2. El. 1.) is itſelf equal to the Difference between thoſe two laſt Angles; and thereforè the Line FB is to CB as the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to the Sine oſ an Angle which is equal to the Diſference between the Angle of Incidence and of Refraction. Now, becauſe in very ſmall Angles as theſe are, ſor we ſuppoſe in this Caſe alſo the Diſtance AB to vaniſt, the Reaſon of which will be ſrewn by and by, their Sines bear nearly the ſame Proportion to each other that they themſelves do, the Diſtance FB will be to CB as the Sine of the Angle of Incidence is to the Diſference between that Sine and the Sine oſ the Argle oſ Reſraction; but becauſe BA vaniſves, FB and FA are equal, and thereſore FA ĩs to CA in that Proportion. L . D. 24 The Refraũim of Light, &e. Part III. All which may be illuſtrated in the following Manner. 1. Let AB, CD, (Fig. 5.) be two parallel Rays falling on the plain Surface EF Obſ. 2. It appears ſrom ihe foregoing Demonſtration, that the focal Diſtance of ihe oblique Ray DB, is ſuch, that ihe Line BF ſall be to the Line CB or CA as ihe Sine of the Angle of Incidence to the Sine of an Angle, which Angle is equal to the Difference between the Angle of Incidence and Refraction; therefore ſo Iong as the Angles BCA, &c. are ſmall, ſo long the Line CB is pretty much of the ſame Lengih, becauſe ſmall Angles have nearly ihe ſame Relation to each other that their Sines have. But when the Point B is removed far from A, ſo that the Ray DB enters the Surface ſuppoſe about O, the Angles BCA, c. lecoming large, the Sine of the Angle of Incidence begins to bear a conſiderably leſs Proportion to ihe Sine of an Angle which is equal to ihe Difference between the Angle of Incidence and Refraction than before, and therefore the Line BF begins to hear a much leſs Proportion to BC; wherefore its Length decreaſes apace : Upon which Acount thoſe Rays which enter the Surface about O, not only meet nearer the Center of Convexity than ihoſe which enter at A, hut are collected into a more diffuled Space. From hence it is, that the Point where thoſe only which enter near A, are collected, is reckoned the true Focus; and the Diſiance AB in all Demonſtrations relating to the Foci of parallel Rays entring a ſyherical Surface whether convex or concave, ĩs ſuppoſed to vaniſh. Caſe 2. OF parallel Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium throuoh a convex Surface. -Dem. Let X be the denſer, Z the rarer Medium, AB the Surſace by which they are ſeparated, C the Center of Convexity, and HA and DB two parallel Rays, as beforee. Through B the Point where the oblique Ray DB enters the rarer Medium draw the Perpendicular ON; and let the Ray DB, being in this Caſe refracted from the Perpendicular, proceed in the Direction BM; produce BM back to H; this will be the imaginary Focus, and DBN, or it; equal ACB will be the Angle of Incidence, and CBM, or its ęqual HEN ſfor they are vertical) that oſ Refraction; produce DR to L and drav EF ſuch, rhat the Angie LBF may be equal to DBH: then becauſe NBD and DBH together are equal to NBEH the Angle of Reſiæction, therefore BCA which is equal to the firſt, and LEF which is equal to the ſecond, are together equal to the EF of a Medium of different Denſity: now becauſe they both make equal Angles of Incidence with their reſpective Perpendiculars GH, IK Angle of Refraction; but LBF is equal to BFA (as being alternatè to it) conſequently BFA and BCA together are equal to the Angle of Refraction; and therefore ſince one of them, wiz. BCA is equal to the Angle of Incidence, the other is the Difference between that Angle, and the Angle of Refraction. Now FB the Sine of the Angle FCB, or which is the ſame Thing, oſ its Complement to two right ones BCA, the Angle of Incidence is to CB the Sine of the Angle BFC, as FB to CB, that is as HB to CB; for the Angles DBH and LBF being equal, the Lines BF and BH are ſo too; but the Diſtance BA vaniſhing, HB is to CB, as HA to CA: that is, the Sine oſ the Angle oſ Incidence is to the Sine of an Angle which is the Difference between the Angle of Incidence and Reſraction, or becauſe the Angles are ſmall, to the Difference between the Sine of the Angle of Incidence and that of Refraction, as the Diſtance oſ the Focus ſfrom the Surface is to that of the Center from the ſame. Q. è. D. Caſe 3. OF parallel Rays paſſing out oſ a rarer into a denſer Medium through a concave Surſace. Dem. Let X be the denſer Medium having the concave Surſace AB, and let LB and FA be the incident Rays. Now whereas, when DB was the incident Ray, and paſſed out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, as in Caſe the firſt, it was refracted into the Line BF, this Ray LB having the ſame Inclination to the Perpendicular, will alſo ſuffer the ſame Degree oſ Reſraction, and will therefore paſs on afterwards in the Line PB produced, v. g. towards P. So that, whereas in that Caſe the Point F was the real Focus of the incident Ray DB, the ſame Point will in this be the imaginary Focns of the incident Ray LB: But it was there demoniſtrated, that the Diſtance FA is to CA, as the Sine of the Angle oſ Incidence is to the Difference between that and the Sine of the Angle oſ Refraction, therefore the focal Diſtance of the refracted Ray BP is to the Diſtance of the Center of Convexity in that Proportionn. .  D. Caſe 4. Oſ parallel Rays paſſing out oſ a denſer into a rarer Medium through a concave Surſace. Dem. Let X be the rarer Medium, having the concave Surſace AB, and let LB and FA be the incident Rays, as beforee. Now IK, before Refraction, they will make equal Angles of Refraction with them afterwards, and ſo proceed on in the parallel Lines BL DM. whereas; hen DB was the incident Ray paſſing out of a denſer no a rarer Medium, it was reſracted into BM, as in Caſe the ſecond, having a Point as H in the Line MB produced, for its imaginary Pocus; therefore LB, ſor the like Reaſon as was given in the Iaſt Caſe, will in this be refracted into BH, having the ſame Point H for its real Focus. So that here alſo the focal Diſtance will be to that of the Center of Convexity, as the Slne of the Angle of Incidence is to the Difference between that and the Sine of the Angle of Refraction.  è. D. III. When diverging or converging Rays enter into a Medium oſ dſferent Denſity through a ſpherical Surſace, the Rætio compounded of that which the focal Diſtance bears to the Diſtance of the radiant Point (or of the imaginary Focus of the incident Rays, il they converge); and oſ that, which the Diſtance between the ſame radiant Point (or imaginary Focus) and the Center, bears to the Diſtance between the Center and the Focus, is equal to the Ratio, which the Sine of the Angle oſ Incidence bears to the Sine of the Angle oſ Refraction. This Propoſition admits of ſixteen Caſes. Caſe 1. Oſ diverging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, through a convex Surface, with ſuch a Degree oſ Divergency, that they ſhall converge aſter Refraction. Dem. Let BD (Fig. 12.) repreſent a ſpherical Surface, C its Center of Convexity, and let there be two diverging Rays AB and AD, proceeding from the radiant Point A, the one perpendicular to the Surface, the other oblique. Through the Center C produce the perpendicular one to F, and draw the Radius CB and produce it to K, and let BF be the refracted Ray; then will F be the focal Point: produce AB to H, and through the Point F draw the Line FG parallel to CB. AB being the incident Ray, and CK perpendicular to the Surface at the Point B, the Angle ABK, or which is equal to it, becauſe of the parallel Lines CB and FG, FGH, is the Angle of Incidencee. Now whereas the Complement of any Angle to tuo right ones has the ſame Sine ith the Angle itſelf, the Sine of the Angle FGB, ihat being the Complement of FGH to two right ones, may be conſidered as the Size DM. 2. Let the diverging Rays AB, AE; AF, Fig. 6.) paſs out of a rarer. into a denſer Medium; through the plain Surface GH” and of ihe Angle of Intidence; which Sine the Line FB, 4F ihe Sidet of a Triangle have the ſame Relation to each other, that ihe Sines of their oppoſite Angles have, may be taken for. Again, the Angle FBC is the Angle of Refraction, or its equal, becauſe alternate to it, BFG, to which BG bheing an oppoſitæ Side, may be ]ooked upon as the Sine. But FB is to BG in a Ratio compounded o FB to BA, and of BA to BG, for ihe Ratio that any tuo Quantities hear to each other, is compounded of the Ratio, which tbe firſt bears to any other, and of the Ratio which that other bears to the ſecond. Now FB is to BA, ſuppoſing BD to vaniſy, as FD to DA; and BA is to BG, becauſe of ihe parallel Lines CB and FG, as AC to CF. That is, the Ratio compounded of FD, the focal Diſtance, to DA, the Di ſtance of the radiant Point, and oſ AC, the Diftance between the radiant Point and the Centor, tò CF, the Diſtance between the Center and ihe Focus, is cqual to that which the Sine of the Angle of Incidence bears to the Sine oſ the Angle oſ Retraction. . . D. Obſ. 3. Whereas the focal Diftance of the oblique Ray AB if ſuch, that the compound Ratio of FB to BA and of AC to CF ſall he the ſame, whatever be the Diſtance between B and D; it is evident, that ſinte AC is always of ihe ſame Length, the more the Line AB lengihens, the more FB muſt lengthen too, or elſe FC musi ſorten; but it appears by Inſpection of the Figure, that if BP lengthens, CF avili do ſo too, and in a greater Proportion with reſpect to its own Length than BF will, therefore the Lengthning of BF will conduce nothing towardi preſerving the Equality of ihe Proportion: hut as AB lengthens, BF and CP muſt both ſrorten, which is the only poſſible Way wheræin the Proportion may be continued the ſame. And it is alſo apparent, that 1he farther B moves from D, towards O, the faſter AB lengthens, and therefore the farther the Rays enter from D, the nearer to the reſracting Surface is the Place where they meet, but the Space thev are collected in, is the more diſfuſed ? And therefore in ihis Caſe, as well as thoſe taken Notice of in the tavo foregoing Obſervations, different Rays, though flowing ſrom ithe ſame Point, ſnll ronſtitute different Focus's; and none are ſo effectual as thoſe avbich enter at or very near tbe Point D. And ſinco the ſame is ob; D and let the Ray AB be perpendicular to that Surſace; the reſt being refracted towards their re ſpective Perpendiculars EX, FM, will prolil ceed ſervable of converging as well as of diverging Rays, none except thoſe wbich enter very near that Point, are uſually taken into Conſideration; upon which Account it is, that the Diſtance DB, in determining the focal Di ſtances of diverging or converging Rays eniring a convex or concave Surface, is ſuppoſed to vaniſh. Thoſe who would ſee a Method oſ determining the preciſe Point, which the Ray AB, whether it be parallel, converging, or diverging to the Ray AF, converges to or diverges from aſter Refraction at B or any other given Point in the Surſace DO, may find it in the Appendix to Molineuxs Optics, which for the Sake of thoſe who have hot that Book, I ſhall ſubjoin at the End of this Note. Caſe 2. Of converging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſœ Medium through a concave Surface with ſuch a Degree oſ Convergency, that they ſhall diverge after Reſraction. Dem. Let the incident Rays be HB and FD paſſing out of ⸗ rarer into a denſer Medium through the concave Surface BD, and tending towards the Point A, ſrom whence the diverging Rays flowed in the other Cae; then the oblique Ray HB having its Angle of Incidence HBC equal to ABK the Angle of Incidence in the former Caſe, will be refracted into the Line BL ſuch, that its reſracted Angle KBL will be equal to FBC the Angle of Refraction in the former Caſe; that is, it will proceed aſter Refraction in the Line FB produced, having the ſame focal Diſtance FD with the diverging Rays AB, AD, in the other Caſe. But, by what has been already demonſtrated, the Ratio compounded of FD, the focal Diſtance, to DA, in this Caſe, the Diſtance of the imaginary Focus of the incident Rays, and of AC, rbe Diſtance betaeen the ſame imaginary Focus and the Center to CF, the Diſtance between the Center an the Focus, is equal to that which the Sine of the Angle of Incidence bears to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction. . . D. Caſe 3. Of diverging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium through a convex Surſace with ſuch a Degree of Divergency as to continue diverging. Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 13.) be the diverging Rays, and let their Divergency be ſo great, that the refracted Ray BL ſhall alſo diverge ſrom the other; produce LB back to F which will be the eed in the Directions EN and FO, diverging in a leſs Degree from the Ray AP, than they did before Refraction. 3. Had they proceeded BA likewiſe towards G, and draw FG parallel to BC. Then will ABK be the Angle of Incidencæ, whoſe Sine BF may be taken tor, as being oppoſite to the Angle BGF, which is the Complement of the other to two right ones. And LBC is the Angle oſ Refraction, or its equal KBF, or which is equal to this, BFG, as being alterrate; therefore BG the oppoſite Side to this may be taken ſor the Sine of the Angle oſf Refraction. But BF is to BG, for the like Reaſon as was given in Caſe the fiſt, in a Ratio compounded oſ BF to BA, and of BA to BG. Now BF is to BA (DB vaniſhing) as DF to DA, and becauſe of the parallel Lines FG and BC, the Triangles CBA and AGF are ſimilar, therefore BA is to AG as CA to AF, conſequently BA ĩs to BA together with AG, that is, to BG, as CA is to CA together with AF, that is, to CF. Therefore the Ratio conpounded of DF the ſfocal Diſlanę to DA the Diſtance of the radiant Point, and of CA the Diſtance between the radiant Point and the Center, to CF the Diſtance between the Center and the Focus, is equal to that which the Sine of the Angle of Incidence bears to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction. . ẽ. D. Caſe 4. Of converging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium through a concave Surface in ſuch Manner that they ſhall continue converging. Dem. Let HB and CD be the incident Rays paſſing out of the rarer into the denſer Medium through the concave Surſace BD, and tending towards A the ſame Point from whence the diverging Rays flowed in the laſt Caſle. Then becauſe the Ray HB has the ſame Inclination to the Perpendicular CK that AB had before, it will ſuſſer the ſame Degree of Reſraction, and paſs on in the Line LB produced, having ĩts Focus F at the ſame Diſtance ſrom the reſracting Surſace as that oſ the diverging Ray AB in the other Caſe. Thereſore, &. . . D. Caſe 5. Oſ diverging Rays faſing out of à denſer into a rarer Medium through a convex Surſace. Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 14.) be the incident Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium through the convex Surface BD whoſe Center of Convexity is C; and let BL be the refracted Ray, which produce back to F, and draw FG purallel to CB. Here ABK is the Angle of Incidence, to which ĩts aliemate æ2 ceeded out of a denſer into a rarer Medium, rhey would have been refracted from their Perpendiculars EX, FM, and therefore have diverged FGB being - FB the oppoſite Side may be eonſidered as the Sine of it. The Angle of Refraction is LBC or FBE, oſ which BFG being the Complement to two right ones, BG the oppoſite Side may Be looked upon as its Sine. But BF is to BG, in the compound Ratio of BP to BA and of BA to BG for the Reaſon given above. Now BD vaniſhing) BF is to BA as DF to DA and BA is to BG as CA to CF. That is, the Ratio compounded of the focal Diſtance to the Diſlance of the radiant Point, &. . . D. Caſe 6. Of converging Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium through a concave Sũrſace. Dem. Let HB, CD be the incident Rays tending towards the Point A which was the Radiant in the lalt Caſe, Then, for the Reaſons already given, the oblique Ray will ſuffer ſuch a Degree of Refraction, as to have its Focus F at the ſame Diſtance from the Surſace, as the diverging Rays AB, AD had in that Caſe. Thereſore, &c. . D When the Mediums through which Rays paſ, and the refracting Surfaces are ſuch, that Rays flowing from A (Fig. 12.) are collected jn F, then Rays flowing ſrom F through the ſame Medium; the contrary ay, will bæ collecled in A For when Rays paſ out of one Medium into another, the Sine oſ the Angle of Inc dence bears the ſame Proportion to the Sine of the Angle of Reſraction, as the Sine oſ the Angle of Refraction does to the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, when they paſs the contrary Way. This is applicable to each oſ the ſix following Caſes compared reipectively with the ſix ſoregoing; therefore they may be conſidered as the Converſe of them; or they may be demonſtrated independently oſthem, as ſollows. Caſe 7. Of diverging Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Pedium through a concave Surſace, ſ as to converge afterards. Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 15.) be two diverging Rays paſſing through the concave Surſace BD into a rarer Modium. Let C bę the Cenrer of Convexity, and BF the refracted Ray. Draw CB and produce it to E, and draw FG parallel to it meeting AB produæũ in õ. Then will ABC be the Angle of Incidence, of which ? being oppoſũte to iĩts alternate and equal Angle FGB, may be ranſigered  the ꝗine. The Angle of Reſracti on i FBX, of which Chap. 3. The Refractim of Light, &e. 31 verged more than beforee 4. Let the converging Rays AB, CD, EF (Fig. 7.) paſs out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, through the GB being oppoſite to its Complement to two right ones GFB, may be taken for the Sine. Now FB is to BG, in a Ratio compounded of FB to BA, and of BA to BG. But (BD vaniſhing) FB is to EA as FD to DA, and becauſe of the parallel Lines CB and FC, BA is to BG as CA to CF. Thereſore the focal Diſtance, &. : E. D. Caſe 8. Of converging Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium through a convex Surſace, ſo as to diverge afterwards. Dem. Let GB and FD be the incident Rays tending towards A, and produce FB to L. Then as AB in the laſt Caſe was reſracted into BF, GB will in this be reſracted into BL, for the Reaſons already given, having F for its focal Point. Thereſore, &c. ò. . D. Caſe 9. Of diverging Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium through a concave Surface, in ſuch Manner as to continue diverging Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 16) be two Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium, through the concave Surface DB whoſe Center of Convexity is CC Draw CB, produce it to K, and let BL be the reſracted Ray, produce BL back to F, and draw FG parallel to CR meeting BA roduced in G. Then will ABC be the Angle of Incidence, of which FB being oppoſite to its alternate and equal Angle FGB, may be conſidered as the Sine. The reſracted Angle is LBE, or its equal CBF, of which BG being oppoſite to its Complement to two right ones BFG, is the Sine. Now BF is to RG in the compound Ratio of BF to BA and oſf BA to BG: but BF is to BA as DF to DA; and becauſe of the paralIel Lines CB and FG, the Triangles BCA, AGF are ſimilar, therefore BA is to AG as CA to AF, and conſequently BA is to BG a5 CA to CF. Therefore, &. Q.: . D. Caſe 10. Oſ converging Rays paſſing out oſ a denſer into à raret Medium through a convex Surface, in ſuch Manner as to continue converging. Dem. Let HB, MD be the incident Rays tending towards the Point A Then will the oblique Ray HB for the Reaſons already given be reſracted into B?. Thereſore, &. . è. D. Caſe 11. Of diverging Rays paſſing out oſ a Tarer into a denſer Jedium through a concave Surſace, the plain Surface GH, and let the Ray A B be perpendicular to that Surface, then the other Rays being refracted towards their reſpective Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 17.) be the incident Rays paſſing out oſ a rarer into a denſer Medſum, through the concave Surface BD whoſe Center oſ Convexity is C, and ſuppoſing the Line CB drawn and produced to K, the refracted Ray BL drawn and produced beck to F, and alſo FG drawn parallel to CB, ABC will be the Angle of Incidence, of which FB being oppoſite to its Complement to two right ones BEGF, is the Sine. The Angle of Reſraction will be LEK or its equal FBC, of which BG being oppoſire to its equal and alternate one BFG, is the Sine. Now FB is to EG in the compound Ratio oſ FB to BA and of BA to BG.. Bu (8D vaniſhing) FB is to BA as FD to DA, and becauſe oſ the prallel Lines FG and CB, BA is to EG as CA to CF. Therefore,, &c. L. . D. Caſe 12. OF converging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium through a convex Surſace. Dem. Let HB, MD be the incident Rays tending towards A ihe radiant Point in the laſt Caſe; then, as was explained above, BEF will be the refracted Ray. Theretore, &. . E. D. Caſe 13. Of Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium ſrom a Point between the Center of Convexity and the Surfece. Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 18.) be two Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium from the Point A, which let be poſited between C tne Center oſ Convexity and the reſracting Suiface BD; through B draw CE, and let BL be the refracted Ray; produc BL back to F and draw FG parallel to BC. Then will ABC be the Angle of Incidence, oſ which BF being oppoſite to its Complement to two right ones BGF, is the Sine. LBK will be the Angle oſ Refraction, or its equal FBC, oſf which BG being oppoſite to its alternate and equal one BFG, is the Sine. But, as; beſore, BF is to BG in a compound Ratio of BF to BA and of BA to BG, and (BD vaniſhing) BF is to BA as DF to DA, and becauſe the Lines CB and FG are parallel, BA is to BG as CA to CF. Thereſore, &c. . E. D. Caſe 14. OF Rays paſſing out oſ a denſer into a rarer Med ium towards a Point between the Center of Convexity and the Surſace. Dem. Let the incident Rays be Mb, HE tending towards A from whence the other proceeded in tRe laſt Caſe. Then as in reſpective Perpendiculars DK, M, will proceed in the Directions DN, FN converging in a leſs Degree towards the Ray AN, than they did that Caſe the refracted Ray BL being produced back paſſed through F, in this the refracted Ray itſelſ, for the like Reaſons as were given in the foregoing Caſes, will paſę through that Point. Therefore, &c. .  D. Caſe 15. Oſ Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium from a Point between the Center oſ Convexity and the Surface. Dem. Let AB, AD (Fig. 19.) be two diverging Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium through the refracting Surface BD, whoſe Center of Convexity is C, a Point beyond tnat from whence the Rays flom. Through B draw CK, and let BL be the reſracted Ray, produce it back to F, and draw FG parallel to BC meeting BA produced in G. ABC will be the Angle oſ Incidence, of which BF being oppoſite to jts alternate and equal Angle BGF, is the Sine. The Angle of Reſraction is LBK or its equal FBEC of which BG being oppoſite to its Complement to two right ones BFG, is the Sine. But BF is to BG in the compound Ratio of BF to BA and of BA to BG; and (BD vaniſhing) BF is to BA as DF to DA, and hecauſe of the parallel Lines CB and GF, the Triangles AFG and ABC are ſimilar, BA therefore is to AG as CAto AF, conſequently BA is to BA and AG together, that is, to BG, as CA is to CA and AF together, that is, to CF; and therefore the focal Diſtance, &c. . . D. Caſe 16. OF Rays paſſing out of a rarer into a denſer Medium towards a Point between the Center of Convexity and the Surface. Dem. Let HB, MD be the incitlent Rays having for their imaginary Focus the Point A which was the Radiant in the laſt Cafe, and let C the Center of Couvexity of the refracting Surface be poſited beyond this Point. Then will HB, for the Reaſons already given, be reſracted into BF, having the Point F ſor its real Focus which was the imaginary one oſ the diverging Rays AB, AD in the former Caſe. Thereſore the Ratio compounded of that which the ſocal Diſtance bears to the Diſtance of the imaginary Focus oſ the incident Rays, and of that which the Diſtance between the ſam? imag nary Focus and the Center, bears to the Diſtance between the Center and the Focus, is equal to the Ratio which rhe Bine of the Anole of Incidence bears to the Sine of the Angle of BReſiaction. Q c. D. did before. 5. Laſtly, had the firſt Medium becn the denſer, they would have been refracted the other Way, and therefore have converged more. VI. When The firt Term in the foregoing Proportion (viẽ. that in Propoſition the 3d of this Note) being always an unknown Quantity, thoſe who are not well verſed in the Uſe of ſuch Propoſitions, may think iĩt impoſſible to inveliigate the focal Diſtance of any refracting Surſace by it: I ſiall therefore exempliſy it in the following Inſtan], by which the Manner of doing it in all others will clearly be uncerſiond. v. g. Let it be required to determine the focal Diſtance oſ diverging Rays paſſing out of Air into Glaſ through a convex Surface, and let the Diſiance of the radiant Point be 20, and the Radius oſ Convexity be 5: Now becauſe we muſt make Uſe of the ſocal Diſtance before we know it, let that be expreſſed by ſome Symbol or Character as æ: Then, becauſe by the aſoreſaid Propoſition the Ratio compounded of that which the focal Diſlance bears to the Diſtance of the radiant Point (chat is in this Suppoſition, of æ to 20); and of the Rætio which the Diſtance oſ the ſame radiant Point from the Center bears to the Diſtance between the Center and the Focus (in this Caſe, of 25 to æ3) is equal to the Ratio which the Sine of the Angle oſ Incidence bears to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction (that is, of 17 to 11), we ſhall have in the Inſtance beſore us, the following Proportion, viz i : ⸗ :2: 17: 1I, and compounding them Into one, which is done by multiplying the two firſt Parts together, we have 25: 2000I00:: I7: II, and multiplyinghe extream Terms and middle Terms together, 3301I700927 52, which Equation aſter due Reduction gives æ—3 52. In ſome Caſes which might have been put, the Quantity 65 would have been negative, and then the Quotient ariſing from 1700 divided by that, would have been ſo too; that is æ the focal D: ſtance would have been negative, in which Caſe the Focus mult have been taken on the contrary Side the Surſace to that on which is was ſuppoſed to fall in ſtating the Problem; that &s, it muſt have been taken on the ſame Side with the radiant Point, for in calling the Diſtance between the Center and the Focus 3 it waã ſuppoſed the Focus would fall on the ſame Side with the Center; VI. When Rays proceed out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, through a convex Surface, if they are parallel before Refraction, they become converging afterwards. llll For that Diſtante muſt have been expreſſed by æ/+5, as àny one may ſee by Inſpection of the I3th or 14th Figure, in which the Focus oſ diverging Rays entring a convex Surface, is ſuppoſed to fall on the ſame Side with the radiant Point. In like Manner as this Problem was perſormed, a general Theorem may be raiſed to ſolve it in all Caſes whatſoever, by uſing Charatters inſtead of Figures; as every one who is not unacquainted with algebraic Operations very well knows. See this done, and applied to the Paſſage oſ Rays through the Surfaces of Lenſes in the ſecond Note to the following Chapter. A Method oſ determining the Point which a Ray, entring a ſpherical Surſace at any given Diſtance from the Vertex of it, converges to or diverges from after Refraction at the ſame. From the Appendix to Molineux's Dioptrics.  Prop. To find the Focus of any Parcel oſ Rays diverging from; or converging to a given Point in the Axis of a spherical Lens Surface] and inclined thereto under the ſame Angle; the Ratio of the Sines in Reſraction being known.  Let GL (Fig. 20.) be the Lens,  any Point in ĩts Surface,  V the Pole I Vertex] thereoi, C the Center of the Sphere  whereof it is a Segment, O the Object or Point in the Axis to  or from which the Rays do proceed, OP a given Ray; and let  rne Ratio oſ Reſraction be as r tos5; make CR to CO as s tor  fſor the Immerſion of a Ray, or as ? tos for the Emerſion, (chat is, as the Sines oſ the Angles in the Medium which the Ray enters; to their correſponding Sines in the Medium out of which it comes) and laying CR from C towards O, the Point R ſhall be the ſame for all the Rays of the Point O. Then draw the Radius PC it Need be continued, and with the Center R and Diſtance OP ſweep a Touch of an Arch interſecting PC ii Q; sc the Line QR being drawn ſhall be parallel to the reſracted Ray, and PF being made parallel thereto, ſhall interſect the Axis in  the Point F, which is the Focus ſoughtt. Or make ©t as CQ:  CP:: CR: CF, and CF ſhall bæ the Diſtance of the Focus s ſrom the Center of the Sphere c La c c -n ) LE c c LAEEEE A c c n c e - For in this Caſe, the Perpendiculars at the Points where the Rays enter the Surface, are all drawn from the Center of Convexity on lll the '  Dem. Pet fall the Perpendiculars PX on the Axis, CY on the  olven Ray, and CZ on the refracted Ray. By the Conſtruction  PF and OR are parallel, whence the Triangles QRC and PFC s are ſimilar, and CR to OR, as CF to PF, that is CR to OP as c CF to PF. Now CP: PF:: CZ: PX ob ſimilia Iriang. & whence CR: OP:: CZ: PX, and CR: CZ:: OP: PX. Again,  CR is to CO as the Sines of Reſraction by Conſtruction, that t js, ass tor, or ? tos; and as CR to CZ, ſo (CO=/) 3 or s6 H CR to  orct, and ſo is PO to PX: But asPO to PX, t ſo CO to CY. Ergo CY=or cz, that is, CY to CZ is as c the Sines of Reſraction, but CY is the Sine of the Angle oſf In: cidence, and CZ of the refracted Angle. Ergo conſtat Propoſisc tio.  Hitherto we have conſidered only oblique Rays; it now remains to add ſomething concerning Rays parallel to the Axis: In this Caſe the Point O muſt be conſidered as infinitely diſiant, and conſt quently OP, OC, and CR are all infinite; and O? and OC are in this Caſe to be accounted as always equal, (ſincè ? they diſſer but by a Part of the Radius of the Sphere GPVL, which is no Part of either of them) whereſore the Ratio of CR to OP will be always the ſame, viz. as 5 to r for immerging Rays, and as r tos for thoſe that emerge And by this Propoſition CF is to PF in the ſame Ratio. It remains thereſore to  ſhew on the Baſe CP to find all the Triangles CPF, wherein CF is to PF in the Ratio given by the Degree of Refraction. This Problem has been very fully conſidered by the celebrated Dr. Hallis in his late Treatiſe o Algebra, ꝑ. 258, to which I  refer; but I muſt here repeat the Conſtruction thereof. See Fig. 21 and 22. sc Let GPVL be a Lens, VCor PC the Radius oſ its Sphere, and e Iet it be required to find all the Points ſ, f, ſuch, as Cf may ba to Pf in the given Ratio of s to r ſor immerging Rays, or as r to 5 for the emerging. Divide OV in K, and continue CV to F, that CK may be to VEK, and CF to VF in the propoſed Ræs& tio. Then divide KF equally in the Poiut 4, and with that l lill  Center --n L La rhe other Side; and therefore, as the Rays are refracted towards thoſe Perpendiculars, they are neceſſarily refracted towards each other, and thereby made to converge. Let it be remembered, that in the foregoing Caſe aud in all others where Rays are ſaid to paſs through a convex or concave Surface, the Surface is ſuppoſed to belong to that Medium, iuto which the Rays euter, not to that out of which they paſs. Thus, when Rays paſs out of a denſer Medium that has a convex Surface into a Vacuum, they are ſaid to paſs through a concave Surface, the Surface of the Vacuum iuto which they euter in that Caſe, being ſuch. VII. If they enter diverging, then for the ſame Reaſon, they are made to divorge leſs, to be parallel, or to converge, according to  Center ſweep the Circle FKF; this Cirele beins drawn gives  readily all the Fi of the parallel Rays OP, OP. for having s continued CP till it interſect the Circle in F, PF ſhall be always s equal to Vf the Diſtance of the Focus of each reſpective Parcel ‘ o Rays OP ſrom the Vertex or Pole of the Lens.  To demonſtrate this, draw the prickt Line VF, and by what ec js delivered by Dr. Wallis in the ꝗbove-cited Place, VF and CF  will be always in the ſame propoſed Ratio. Again, Vf being & made equal to PF, CF anò Cſ will be likewiſe equal, as are 7 CP, VC; and the Angles PCf, VCF being ad verticem are alſo  equal: Wherefore Pf will be equal to VF, and conſequently  Cf to Pſ in the ſame Ratio as CF to VF, whence, and by what s foregoes, the Points ſ, ſ, are the ſeveral reſpective Fori oſ the è ſeveral Parcels of Rays, OP, OP. . è. D. - n - Iſ any one would ſee how this is to he applied to all. other Inſtances, he may conſult the Place. the Degree of Divergency they have before they enter. For if they diverge very much, their being bent towards their reſpective Perpendiculars in paſſing through the Surface, may only diminiſh their Divergency; whereas, if they diverge in a ſmall Degree it may make them parallel, or even to converge. What Degree of Divergency or Convergency before Refraction in this and the following Caſes, is neceſſary to make Rays become parallel, will be ſnewn at the End of this Chapter. VIII. If they converge in ſuch Manner as to tend directly towards the Center of Convexity before they enter the Surface, they fall in with their reipective Perpendiculars, and ſo pſ on to the Center without ſuffering any Refraction. IX. If they converge leſs than their Perpendiculars, that is, if they tend to a Point beyond the Center of Convexity, they are made by Refraction to converge more; and if they converge more than their Perpendiculars, that is, if they tend towards a Point between the Center and the Surface, then by being refracted towards them, they are made to converge leſ. This and the three foregoing Propoſitions may be illuſtrated in the following Manner. 3. Let AB, CD Fig. 8.) be two parallel Rays entring a denſer Medium through the ity isE; and let one of theſe, æięz. AB be perpendicular to the Surface. This will paſs on through the Center without ſuffering any Refraction, but the other being oblique to the Surface, will be refracted towards the Perpendicular ED, and will therefore be made to proceed in ſome Line, as DG, converging towards the other Ray, and meeting it in G, which Point for that Reaſon is called the Ficus. æ. Had the Ray CD diverged from the other, ſuppoſe in the Line AD, it would, by being refracted towards its Perpendicular ED, have been made either to diverge leſs, be parallel, or to converge. 3. Let the Line ED be produced to F, and if the Ray had converged, ſo as to have deſcribed the Line FD, it would then have been coincident with its Perpendicular, and have ſuffered no Refraction at all. 4. I it had proceeded from any Point between C and F, as from H, or which is the ſame Thing, towards any Point heyond E in the Line BE produced, it would have been made to converge more, by being refracted towards the Perpendicular DE, which converges more than it; and had it proceeded from ſome Point, as I, on the other Side F, that is, towards any Point between B and E, it would then have converged more than its Perpendicular, and ſo, being refracted towards it, would have been made to have converged leſs. X. When Rays proceed out of a denſer into a rarer Medium, through a convex Surface, the contrary happens in each Caſe. For being now refracted from their reſpective Perpendiculars, as they were before towards them, if they are parallel before Refraction, they diverge aſterwards; if they diverge, their Divergency is increaſed; if they converge in the Direction of their Perpendiculars, they ſuffer no Refſraction; if they converge leſs than their reſpective Perpendiculars, they are made to converge ſtill leſs, to be parallel, or to diverge; if they converge more, their Convergency is increaſed. All which may clearly bo ſeen by the Figure, without any farther Illuſtration, imagining the Rays AD, CD, &c. bent the contrary Way in their Refractions to what they were in the former Caſes. XI. When Rays proceed out of a rarer into a denſer Medium, through a concave Surface, if they are parallel before Refraction, they are made to diverge. Vor in this Caſe, the Perpendiculars at the Points where the Rays enter the Surface, being drawn from a Point on that Side of the Surface from which the Rays tend, if we conceive them to paſs through the Surface, they will be ſo many diverging Lines on the other Side, and t herefore the Rays after they have paſſed through the ſame Points, muſt neceſſarily be rendered diverging in being refracted towards them. XII. If they diverge before Refraction, then for the ſame Reaſon, they are made to diverge more, XIII. Unleſs they proceed directly from the Center, in which Caſe they fall in with their Perpendiculars, and ſuffer no Refraction: or from ſome Point between the Center of Convexity and the Surface, for then they diverge more than their reſpective Perpendiculars, and therefore being by Refraction brought towards them, they become leſs diverging. XIV. Ifthey converge, then being refracted towards their Perpendiculars, they are either made leſs converging, parallel, or diverging, according to the Degree they converged in before Refraction. To illuſtrate this, and the three foregoing Caſes. 1. Let AB, CD Fig. 9.) be two parallel Rays entring the concave and denſer Medium X, the Center of whoſe Convexity is E, and the Perpendicular to the refracting Surface at the Point D, is EF; the Ray AB if we ſuppoſe it perpendicular to the Surface at B will proceed on directly to G; but the oblique one CD being refracted towards the Perpendicular DF, will recede from the other Ray AG in ſome Tine as DH. 2. If the Ray CD had proceeded from A diverging in the Direction AD it would have been bent nearer to the Perpendicular, and therefore have dive ged ter E, it would have fallen in with the Perpendicular EF, and not have been refracted at all: and had it proceeded from I, a Point on the other Side the Center E, it would by being refracted towards the Perpendicular DF have proceeded in ſome Line nearer it than it otherwiſe would have done, and ſo would diverge leſs than before Refraction. 4. If it had converged in the Line LD, it would have been rendered leſs converging, parallel, or diverging, according to the Degree of Convergency, which had before it entered into the refracting Surac. XV. If the ſame Rays proceed out of a denſer into a rarer Medium through a concave Surface, the contrary happens in each Suppoſition: The parallel are made to converge; thoſe which diverge leſs than their reſpective Perpendiculars,. that is, thoſe which proceod from a Point beyond the Center, are made leſs diverging, parallel, or converging, according to the Degree in which they diverge before Refraction; thoſe which diverge more than their reſpective Perpendiculars, that is, thoſe which proceed from a Point between the Center and the refracting Surface, are made to diverge ſtill more. And thoſe which converge, are made to converge more. All which may eaſily be ſeen by conſidering the Situation of the Rays AD CD, &c. with Reſpect to the Perpendicular EF; and thereſore requires no farther Illuſtration. XVI. When diverging Rays are by Refraction made to converge, the neãrer their radiant Point is to the refracting Surface, the farther is their Focus from it on the other Side, and vice versã. For the nearer the radiant Point is to the refracting Surface, the more the Rays which fall upon the ſame Points of it, diverge before Refraction, upon which Account they converge the leſs afterwards. lii XVII. When the radiant Point is at that Diſtance from the Surface, at which parallel Rays coming through it from the other Side would by Refraction be collected, then Rays flowing from that Point become parallel on the other Side, and are ſaid to have their Focus at an infinite Diſtance. For the Power of Refraction in the Medium is the ſame, whether the Ray paſſes one Way or the other. For Inſtance, if the parallel Rays AB, CD (Fig. 8.) in paſſing through the refracting Surface BD are brought to a Focus in G, then Rays flowing from G as a radiant Point will afterwards proceed in the parallel Lines BA and DC. And the Point G, where the parallel Rays AB and CD meet, is called the Focus of parallel Rays. : XVIII. When Rays proceed from a Point nearer the refracting Surface than the Focus of parallel Rays, they continue to diverge after Refſraction, and their Focus is then an imagi. nary one, and ſituated on the ſame Side the Surface with the Radiant. For in this Caſe, their Divergency being greater than that which they would have, if they had proceeded from the Focus of parallel Rays, they cannot be brought to a Paralleliſm with one another, much leſs be made to converge, and therefore they continue to diverge, though in a leſs Degree than before they paſfed through the refracting Surface; upon which Account, they proceed after Refraction, as if they came from ſome Point farther diſtant from the reſracting Surface than their Radiant. C H AD. IV. Of Lenſes, and the Manner in which Rays are affected in paſſing tbrough them. Lens, is a Medium terminated on one Side by a ſpherical Surface, on the other by a Surface either plain or ſpherica. And of theſe there are five Sorts. The firſt, as A, (Fig. 23.) is plain on one Side and convex on the other; the ſecond, B, convex on both Sides; the third, plain on one Side and concave on the other, as C; the fourth, D, concave on both Sides; the fifth, convex on one Side and concave on the other, as E, which is by fome called a Meniſcus. The Axis of a Lens is a Line paſſing perpendicularly through both its Surfaces: Thus, the Line FG is an Axis common to all the five. Lenſes are diſtinguiſhed into two general Kinds, convex and concave; the firſt and ſecond Lenſes are conſidered, as convex; the third and fourth, as concave: the laſt, if its Convexity is greater than its Concavity, is looked upon, as convex; if on the contrary, it is conſidered as concave.. A Lens is always ſuppoſed to conſiſt of a Medium denſer than the circumambient one, unleſs where the contrary is expreſſed. When. parallel Rays fall upon the Surface of a convex Lens, they are refracted towards each other in paſſing through it, and thereby collected to a Focus on the other Side. To explain this, let us trace the Progreſs of a Ray as AB Fig. 24.) through the convex Lens CDEH, whoſe Axis is I. Let L be the Center of the firſt Convexity CDE, and M that of the other CHE; and let the Ray AB be parallel to the Axis; through B draw the Line LN which will be perpendicular to the Surface CDE at that Point. The Ray AB in entring the denſer Subſtance of the Lens will be refracted towards the Perpendicular, and therefore proceed after it has entered the Surface at B in ſome Direction inclined towards the Axis as BP. Through M the Center of Convexity of this Surface and the Point P draw the Line MR, which paſſing through the Center will be perpendicular to the Surface at B, and the Ray now entering a rarer Medium will be refracted from the Perpendicular into ſome Direction as PF. In like Manner, and for the ſame Reaſons, the parallel Ray ST on the other Side the Axis, and alſo all the intermediate ones as XZ, &c. will meet it in the ſame Point, unleſs the Rays AB and ST enter the Surface of the Leus at too great a Diſtance from the Axis IF, the Reaſon of which has already been fully explained *, The Point F where the parallel Rays AB, ST, &c. are ſuppoſed to be collected by paſſing through the Leus CE, is called 7he Focus of parallel Rays of that LeusIf the Rays converge before they enter the Lens, they are then collected at a Point nearer 1o the Leus than the Focus of parallel Rays. If they diverge before they enter the Lens, they are then collected in a Point beyond F; unleſs they proceed from a Point on the other Side at the ſame Diſtance with the Focus of parallel Rays, in which Caſe they are rendered parallel. If they proceed from a Pqint nearer than that, they diverge afterwards, but in a leſs Degree than before they enter the Lens. If the Lens is plain on one Side and convex on the other, the Rays are refracted the ſame WVay, but in a leſs Degreę. » , - : . l . ? See Obſervation 3, in the ſoregong Note. Had the Rays AB, ST proceeded from a radiant Point on one Side the Lens, and been collected in a Focus on the other; then if they ſhould be ſuppoſed to proceed from that focal Point as from a Radiant, and-paſs through the Lens the contrary Way, they would be collected in that Point which was the Radiant in the other Caſe: and the nearer the Radiant Point is to the Lens, the farther is the Focus from it on the other Side, and vice versã. If the Rays AB, CD, EF, &c. (Fig. 25.) parallel to each other, but oblique to GH the Axis of the Lens IK, or if the diverging Rays CB, CF, proceed as from ſome Point C which is not ſituated in the Axis of the Lens, they will be collected into ſome Point as L, not directly oppoſite to the Radiant C, but nearly ſo: for the Ray CD which paſſes through M the Middle of the Lens and falls upon the Surface of it with ſome Obliquity, will itſelf ſufer a Refraction at D and N; but then it will be reſracted the contrary Way in one Place to what it is in the other, and theſe Refractions vill be equal in Degree if the Lens has an equal Convexity on each Side, as we may eaſily perceive if we imagine ND to be a Ray paſſing out of the Lens both at N and D, for it is evident the Line ND has an equal Inclination to each Surface at both its Extremities. Upon which Account the Difference between the Situation ſite to C, is ſo ſmall, that it is generally negleced; and the Focus is ſuppoſed to be in that Line, which a Ray, that would paſs through the middle Point of the Lens, were it to ſuffer no Refraction, would proceed in. All which is ſufficiently clear, from what has been ſaid concerning the Laws of Refraction explained in the foregoing Chapter. When parallel Rays fall upon a concave Lens, they are refracted from each other in paſſing through it, and thereby made to diverge, proceeding as from an imaginary Focus on the firſt Side the Lens. In order to comprehend this, let AB CD (Fig. 26.) repreſent a concave Lens, EF its Axis, GH the Radius of the firſt Concavity, IK that of the ſecond; produce HG to L, and let MG be a Ray of Light entring the Lens at the Point G. This Ray being refracted towards the Perpendicular GL, will paſs on to ſome Point as K in the other Surface more diſtant from the Axis than G, and being there refracted from the Perpendicular, IX will be diverted farther ſtill from the Axis, and proceed in the Direction KN as from ſome Point as O on the firſt Side of the Lens. In like Manner other Ravs as PQ parallel to the former, will proceed after Refraction at both Surfaces as from the ſame Point O; which upon that Account will be the imaginary Focus oſ parallel Rays of this Lens, If the Rays diverge before they enter the Lens, their imaginary Focus is then nearer the Lens than that of the parallel Rays. If they converge before they enter the Lens proceeding towards ſome diſtant Point in the Axis as E, they are then rendered leſs converging: if they converge to a Point at the ſame Diſtance from the Leus with the Focus of parallel Rays, they then go out parallel; if to a Point at a ]eſs Diſtance they remain converging, but in a leſs Degree than before they entered the Lens. VWVahen the Rays enter the Lens diverging, the nearer their radiant Point is to it, the nearer alſo is their imaginary Focus aſter Refraction, and vice versẽ. If the Lens is plain on one Side and concave on the other, the Rays ſuffer a like Refraction in each Caſe, but in a leſs Degree. The Truth of what has been ſaid concerning the Paſſage of Rays through a concave Lens, is eaſily to be deduced from the Laws of Refraction delivered in the foregoing Chapter. But. the Method of determining the exact focal Diſtances of Lenſes is to be had from the Propoſitions laid down and demonſtrated in the Note in the foregoing Chapter. Thus, the Progreſs of the Rays aſfter their Refraction at the firſt Surface where they enter a Lens, is had by one of thoſe which determines the focal Diſtance of Rays entring a denſer Medium of ſuch Formu And their Progreſs after their Refraction at the other Surface where they go out, is had by computing what Progreſs Rays, moving in the Direction they are found to have after their Entrance at the firſt Surface, will acquire by being refracted at the other; which is to be effected by one which determines the focal Diſtance of Rays paſſing out of a denſer Medium of like Form with that of the Lens. When * Or a general Theorem may be made aſter the following Manrer, to determine the Progreſs oſf Rays after Refraction at both Sides of the Lens, whatever be the Matter of it, or the Form wherein it is made. Thus ſuppoſe GH (Fig. 28.) to be a given Lens, and E a Point in its Axis from whence the diverging Rays EL, &. fall upon the Lens, AL the Radius of the firſt Convexity, and CK that of the ſecond; let L be the Direction oſ the diverging Ray EL aſter its Reſraction at the firſt Surface, and KF its Direction aſter Reſraction at both. Then will f be the Focus of the Rays after their firſt Refraction, and F the Point they will meet in aſter both. Let BD be the Thickneſs of the Lens, and let the Proportion which the Sine of the Angle of Incidence bears to the Sine oſ the Angle of Reſraction be expreſ=led by the Ratio of I to R. Call EB, à4 BD, t, AB, r; CD, 5; Bf, æ; DF, y: Now, to find f their Focus aſter Reſraction at L where they enter the firſt Surface of the Lens, comes under the third Propoſition in the forementioned Note: According to which the Ratio compounded oſ æ, the focal Diſtance ſought, to d, the Diſtance of the radiant Point; and oſ drv, the Diſtance hetween the ſame Foint and the Center, tO xr, the Diſtance beteen ihe Center and the Focus, is as ItoR; compounding theſe two Ratios thereſore (that is multiplying them together) we have dx+ræ: deadr: : Ito R; which Proportion being converted into an Equation, and duly reduced, gives æ4æ Idr Thus having found the Diſtance Bf, and conſequently the Point v, to which the Rays converge from L, we muſt proceed to find F, that to which they will converge aſter having paſſed through & is reſracted in going out of one, as much as it was in entring the other; and therefore proceeds afterwards not in the ſame Direction, but in one that is parallel to that which it had beforee. Thus if the Ray AB (Fig. 27.) enters the denſer Medium CDEF terminated by the parallel Surfaces CD and EF, it is refracted at B towards the Perpendicular BI, proceeding to a Point as G, where it is as much refracted from the Perpendicular GK in going out, and proceeds in the Direction GH not the ſame, but parallel to the former ABL. This Theorem may be applied to all Caſes whatever, even to plain Surfaces mutatis mutandis; v. gQ. the Radius of a concave Surſace being negative (as lying the contrary Way) with Reſpect to that o? a Convex, and the Radius of a plain Surface being an infinite Line; if we would apply this Theorem to a concave Sur face, we muſt change all the Sines of thoſe Members wherein the Symbol expreſſing the Rædius oſ that Surface occurs; and if to a plain Surface, all the Members which involve the Radius muſt be conſidered as infinite Quantities, that is, all, except them, muſt be ſtruck out of the Equation as nothing. So likewiſe, iſf we would have it extend to other Rays beſides diverging ones, the Point where converging Rays would meet, lying on the contrary Side to that from whence the diverging ones were ſuppoſed to flow, its Diſtance muſt be made negative; and the Diſtance where parallel Rays meet being infinite, it is only changing the Sines of all thoſe Members in which 4 is found, if theRays are ſuppoſed converging, or making thoſe Members infinite in Caſe the Rays are ſuppoſed parallel; which is done by ſiriking out all the reſt, as bearing no Proportion to them. See the Method of reducing this Equation to fewer Terms, where it is alſo illuſirated with divers Inſtances, in Dr. Browne's Appendix to Gregory's Optics; or in Dr. Halley's Method of finding the prineipa Focus of Optic Glaſſes univerſally; Phijoſoph. Tranſaqt; NO. 205. CH 3XCHAR V OF the Eye. T Form of the Eye is ſuch as is repreſented in Figure 29, and would be a perfect Sphere, were not the fore Part AA ſomewhat more protuberant than the reſ. The Deſcription of it, ſo far as is nęceſſary to explain the Nature of Viſion, is as follows. It is incloſed in three diſtinct Coats or Teguments; the outermoſt of which, 2iæ. aa, is called Tunica Sclerotica; the next cc, Choroides, or Uvea; the third and innermoſt d, derives its Name from that oſ its Diſcoverer, and is called Tunica Ruyſchiana. Theſe Coats are contiguous to each other every where, except on the fore Part of the Eye. Vſnat Portion of the Sclerotica which lies between A ànd A, is more protuberant than the reſt, is tranſparent, and has the Name of Tunica Cornea. That Portion of the Choroides which is ſituated between b and b, is called the Iris; and is that which by its Colour denominates an Eye black, grey, &c. In the Middle of this there is a round FHole as pp, called the Pupil. The Iris conſiſts of two Kinds of muſcular Fibres; the firſt lios extended from its Extremity like the Radii of a Circle, and point towards the Middlę of the Pupil as towards a Center: the other are circular ones and ſurround the Pupil having the Middle of it for their common Center. Theſe are connected to the former where they croſs: and therefore when theſe contract, the Pupil is diminihed; when the other, it is inlargedl. VWithin the Cavity of the Eye, ànd not far behind the Pupil, there is a ſoft tranſparent Subſtance CC, not unlike a douũlè convex TLens, one of whoſe Surfaces ass, ĩs more convex than the othor. Phis is called the Crriſralline Humour; and is ſuſpended within the Eve by certain Ligaments as Cſ, Cl, called Ligamenta Ciliaria, ot Proceſſus Ciliores : theſe are convex toWwards the Pupil, as expreſſed in the Figurè, and concave on the other Side, and are muſculat, and therefore capable of . Contraction and Dilatation. The convex Side of theſe Ligàments is lmẽd with æa very black Mucus or Sũbſtatice, ãs ĩs àlſo that Side õf the Iris whichi is next it:...:.:. The Tunica Ruyſchiona leaves the Choroides at I, and paſſing behind the Ligamenta Ciliarià and the Chriſtalline Humotr, ĩ con riguoũs to them, and joltis the Chordides again ãt I, on the other Side the Pupi. BEyV meãns of the ſoremortioned Parts, the Cavity of the Eye is divided into tio Portions; nearly of the ſame Denſity with Water, and is therefore called Humor Aqueus; the other TT contains a Fluid whoſe Conſiſtency is greater than that of the former, and is called Humor Vitreus. At the back Part of each Eye, but not directly oppoſite to the Pupil, there enters a Nerve as NN, whieh is called the Optic Nerve. The Fibres of this Nerve, after their Entrance into the Eye at N, ſpread themſelves over the imermoſt Coat of it as far as the Ligamenta Ciliaria, and form a very thin Membrane, called Turica Retina.,. lili The innermoſt Coat of the Eye is every where covered (except that Part of it which is contiguous to the back Part of the Chriſtalline Humour) with a very black Mucus, not unlike that with which the back Part of the Iris and fore Part of the Ligamenta Ciliaria were obſerved to be cover'd. This is to hinder any Light from being reflected from thoſe Parts on to the Retina; which would render the Images of Objects indiſtinct, as we ſhall ſeœ when we have explained the Nature of Viſion, which is the Subject of the following Chapter. C H A P, V. Of the Nature of Viſion. Uch is the Subſtance and Form of the Humours of the Eye, when lodged in their proper Receptacles, that Rays of Light in paſſing through them are affected in the like Manner àas in paſſing through a convex Lens, as we ſnall ſce immediately; and therefore to underſtand the Nature of Viſion, which depends on the Paſſage of Rays flowing from the ſeręral Points of a diſtant Object through thoſe Humours, little more is required than to know how the ſame Rays would be affected, were they ſuppoſed to paſs through a convex Lens. Which may eaſily be done by applying to this Caſe what has been delivered in the fourth Chapter concerning the Manner in which Rays flowing ſrom a ſiugle Point, are affected in paſfing through Lenſes of that Kindc VVWe have already ſeen, in the abovementioned Chapter, that Rays flowing from a ſiuglt radiant Point, and afterwards falling on a convex Lens, are collected to a Focus in ſome Point oppoſite, or nearly ſo, to the Radiant, Let us now ſuppoſe an Object placed before a Leus, but farther from it than the focal Diſtance oſ its parallel Rays, and let it ſend forth Rays from each Point of its Surface in every Direction, as from ſo many radiant Points. Some of the Rays which flow from each Point of that Surſace of the Object which is turned towards the Lens will neceſſarily fall upon it, and paſſing through it will be collected in ſo many diſtinct focal Points on the oppoſite Side, as there are diſtinct radiant Points in the Surface of the Object from whence they came. Now as the radiant Points are contiguous to each other in the Surface of the Object on one Side of the Lens, the focal Points will alſo be contiguous on the other; and as each focal Point is oppoſite to its reſpective Radiant, their Places vill have the ſame Relation to each other, that thoſe of the Radiants have; and conſequently theſe Points taken together will be a true Repreſentation and perfect Image of that Object; for each Point will exhibit the ſame Colour that its correſpondent Point in the Object is of. But becauſe each Point in the Repreſentation is oppoſite to its reſpective one in the Object, the Image will be invertedl. The Truth of this may eaſily be experienced, if we hold a clean white Paper facing the Lens in the Place where the focal Points are, and take Care to prevent all other Light from falling upon the Paper, except that which paſſes through the Lens To * On this depends the Structure of the Olbſtura Camera, which ĩs a Contrivancè to exhibit the Repreſenta. ion of ſuch Objects as may To illuſtrate this; Let PQR (Fig. 30) repreſent an Object placed before the Lous AB, and ſending forth Rays from each Point in its Surface; and let  be the focal Diſtance of Rays proceeding from Q and paſſing through the ſaid Lens. Then will all the Rays that proceed from the Point Q between the Lines QA and OB be collected in 7; in like Manner all that flow from P between the Lines PA and PB, will meet in the oppoſite Point 4; and ſo many as proceed from R and paſs thorugh the ILens will be collected in 7; and all the Rays that flow from the remaining Points between P and R and fall upon the Lens, will be collected in as many Points between ꝓ and 7; and pqr, if the Rays are received there upon a white Surface, will exhibit an Image of the Object PR, but inverted; becauſe the Rays PLp and RLr may be ſeen ſrom a Window, upon ſome plain white Surſace held beſore the Window within the Room. In order to do this, a common ſpectacle Glaſs or Burning Glaſs (both which are convex Lenſes) muſt be fixed in an Hole ĩn the Windowſhut; ſor then if mo Light be ſuffered to enter into the Room, but what paſſes through the Hole, and a Sheet of white Paper be held oppoſite to the Hole at that Diſtance where the Rays proceeding from the Objects abroad; and paſſing through the Glaſs are collected into their reſpective Foci; we ſhall have the Images oſ all the Objects which lie before the Hole, repreſented upon the Paper, inverted; but in a much more lively and exact Manner than can be done by the Pencil; and not only the Objects and their reſpective Situations, but, what ĩs peculiar to this Sort of Painting, their Motions will alſo be expreſſed. j b. Of itte Nature of Viſion. 59 croſs each other at L in paſſing through the Lens5s. Thoſe Rays which flow from the ſame Point of an Object, when conſidered together, are called a Cone or Percil of Rays. Thus the Rays QA, , &c. conſtitute a Pencil flowing from the Point Q; ſo the Rays PA, I'L, &rc. a Pencil from the Point P; and the middle Ray of each Pencil, as PL, Q—, &c. is called the Aæis of that Pencil, to which it belongs. ll Now in like Manner as the ſeveral Percils of Rays flowing from the diſtinct Points in the Surſace of an Object placed before a Lens, are collected in ſo many Points at a certain Diſtance on the other Side of the Lens, and form an Image there when received upon a white Paper; ſo Pencils proceeding from an Object placed tefore the Eye, and being refracted in paſſing through the Humous of it, are collected into their reſpective rci upon the Retina, where they form a Repreſentation of that Object; and by their Impulſes upon the tender Nerves of the Retina, an Idea of the Obiect is excited in the Mind. * Aburning Glaſ, is no other than a Piece oſ Glaſs ground into the Form of a convex Lens; for if the Rays of the Sun are prrmitteòa to paſ through ſuch an one, they will burn very ſtrongly in the Place where they are collected into their reſpective Fc?; upon which Account it is, that the Point where Ravs in general are colIected, is called their Focus, that is, their Place of Burning. The Progreſs of the Rays through the Humours of the Eye, are expreſſed in the 31ſt Figure: where FGt? is the Eye, FG the Tanica Crnea, pp the Pupil, AA the aqueous Humour, HH the chriſtalline, and VV the vitreouss. And RS repreſents an Object placed before it, emitting Pencils of Rays from its ſeveral Points R, S,'T, &c. The Rays which conſtitute the Pencil GTF, in entring the aqueous Humour, paſs out of a rarer into a denſer Medium through a convex Surface, in which Caſe diverging Rays are made to diverge leſs, to become parallel or to converge (Chap. 3. Prop. 7.); in entring the chriſtalline they do the like; and in paſſing out of that, they enter a rarer through a concave Surface (viæ. the concave Surface of the vitreous) which alſo has the ſame Efect (Chap. 3. Prop. 15.) BY which Means they are made to converge, as deſcribed m the Figure, and to meet together in a Focus at t a Point in the Retina. In like Manner the Rays flowing from R, and conſtituting the Pencil GRFE, will proceed as deſcribed in the Figure, and after Refraction meet in r; and the Rays proceeding from S will be collected ins, &c. by which Means an Image of the Object will be formed in r2s upon the Retina, but becauſe the Pencils croſs each other in paſſing through the Pupil, it will be inverted*, The * Of this we have experimental Proof: For if we cut away the back Part of an Eye, and apply a Paper there, we ſhall ſes the The leſs the Diſtance between the Object and the Eye is, the more the Rays which come from the Object, are ſaid to diverge, and è con2Ira: Not that the Situation of the Eye makes any Alteration in the Progreſs of thoſe Rays, but that, when the Eye is placed nearer the Object, it receives into its Pupil Rays which diverge in a greater Degree than thoſe which it can receive when placed farther off. The following Illuſtration will make this clear: Let AB (Fig. 32.) repreſent an Object emitting Rays from each Point of its Surface, and let Cd, Cr, &c. expreſs thoſe which flow from the Point C: let m be a Pupil of an Eye placed at the Diſtance Cm from it; tis plain this Pupil will receive into it the diverging Rays Cr, Cs; whereas the Rays Co, Ct will diverge the moſt of ary that can enter the ſame Pupil, when placed at the Diſtance Cn; but theſe diverge leſs than the former, the Angle oCt being included in the Angle rCs. Images of external Objects placed thereon, as aceurately as in the Obſcura Camera, provided no Light is permitted to fall upon the Paper, except that which paſſes through the Humours of the Eye, Optic Writers have made it Matter of great Difficulty to determine the Point where the Axes of the Pencils which enter the Eye, croſs each other; ſome placing it in the Center of the Eye, others in the Vertex oſ the chriſtalline Humour, others in that of the Tunica Cornea: But as the Rays oſ each Pencil fill the Pupil, or as the Pupil itſelſ is a common Baſe to each Pencil, ĩt ĩs inconceivable how the 4xes of thoſe Pencils ſhould croſs each other in any other Place than the Center of the Pupil. See Figure 31, or any other where ſeveral Pencils are repreſented, as paſſing through the Pupil Eye. Viſion is diſtinguiſhed into bright and olſcure; diſtinẽt and coufufed. It is ſad to be bright, when a ſuſicient Numer of Rays enter the Pupil at the ſame Time; obſcure, when too few. It is diſtiu't, when each Pencil of Rays is collected to a Focus exactly upon the Retina; cofuſed, when they meet before they come atit, or when they would paſs it beſore they meet; for in either of theſ laſt Caſes, the Rays flowing from difſerent Points of the Object, will fall upon the ſame Part of the Retina, which muſt neceſſarily render the Image confuſed and indiſtinct Now that Objects may aprear wth a due Drightreſs, whether more or fewer Rays proceed from them, we have a Power of contracting, or dilating the Dupil by means of the muſcnſar Fibres oſ the Iris (as explained in the foregoing Chapter), in order to take in more or fcwer Rays Occaſion requires. But this Power has its Limits. And that the Rays may be collected into Points exactly upon the Rerina, that is, that Objects may appear diſtincè?, whether they be nearer or farther off, that is, whether the Rays proceding ſrom them diverge more or leſs, we lave a Power of contracting or relaxing the Ligumeitu Gliari ia, and thereby altering the » In ſorne Animal; this Power is much greater than in others; rarienlarlv mm ſueh a5 are obliged to make Uſe of their Eyes by Night, a: well as by Day, as in Cats, &. Form of the chriſtalline Humour, and with that the focal Diſtance of the Rays. Thus, when the Object we view is far off, and the Rays fall upon the Pupil with a very ſmall Degree of Divergency, we contract the Ligamenta Ciliaria, which being concave towards the vitreous Humour, do thereby compreſs it more than otherwiſe they would do; by this means it is made to preſs harder upon the back Side of the chriſtalline Humour, which is thereby rendered flatter; and ſo the Rays proceed farther before they meet in a Focus than otherwiſe they would have done. Add to this, that we dilate the Pupils of our Eyes (unleſs in Caſos where the Light is ſo ſtrong that it offends the Eye) and thereby admit Rays into them, that are more diverging than thoſe which would otherwiſe enter. And when the Rays come from an Object that is very near, and thereſore diverge too much to be collected into their reſpective Foci upon the Retina, by relaxing the Ligamenta Ciliaria we give the Chriſtalline a more convex Form, by which means the Rays are made to ſuffer a proportionably greater Degree of Refraction in paſſing through it , * Some Philoſophers are of Opinion, that we do this by a Power of altering the Form oſ the Eye; and others, by removing the Chriſialline èrwards or backwards as Occaſion requires; but neither of theſe Opinions is probable; for the Coats of the Eye are too hard, eſpecially in ſome Animals, for the firſt; and as to moving the Chriſtalline out of its Place, the Cavities oſ the Eye ſeem to be too well filled with the other Humours to admit of ſuch And beſides this, by contracting the Pupils of our Eyes, we exclude the more diverging Rays, and admit only ſuch as are more eaſily refracted jnto their reſpective Foci?. But Viſion is not diſtinct at all Diſtances, for our Power of contracting and relaxing the Ligameuta Ciliaria is alſo circumſcribed within certain Limits. The nearer an Object is placed to the Eye, the greater is the Image of it upon the Retina. Becauſe the Pencils flowing from the extreme Parts of the Object when near, make a larger Angle with each other in the Pupil where they croſs, than the ſame Pencils do when the Object is placed farther off. Thus AB Fig. 33.) the Image of the Object CD, far exceeds EF that of the ſame Object GH, placed at a greater Diſtance from the Eye, as is evident from Inſpection of the Figure. In thoſe Eyes where the Tunica Cornea is very protuberant and convex, the Rays of Light ſuer a very conſiderable Refraction at their Entrance into the aqueous Humour, and are therefore collected to a Focus before they fall upon the Retina, unleſs the Object be placed very near, ſo that the Rays which enter the Eye, may have a conſiderable Degree of Divergency. People that have ſuch Eyes, are  Aceordingly it ĩs obſervable, that if we make a ſmall Hole wh the Point of a Needle through a Piece of Paper, and a;ly rar Hnẽ cloſe to the Eve, makng Uſe of it, as it were, inſtead f a Punil, we ſtall be able to ſee an Object diſtinctly throughit, houęh t7e Object be ;laced within halſ an Inch of the Eyee. l ſai ſaid to be purblind. Now the nearer an Object is placed to the Eye, the greater is the Image of it therein,; as ex plained above; theſe People therefore can ſee much ſinaller Objects than others, as ſeeing much neurer ones with the ſame Diſtinctneſs. And their Sight continues good longer than that of other People, becauſe the Tunica Cornea of their Eyes, as they grow old, becomes plainer, for Want of that Redundancy of Humours with which they were filled before. On the contrary, old Men having the Correa of their Eyes too flat for want of a ſufficient Quantity of the aqueous Humour to. fill them out, if the Rays diverge too much before they enter the Eye, they cannot be brought to a Focus before they reach the Retiua; on which Account thoſe People cannot ſee diſtinctly, unleſs the Object be ſituated at a greater Diſtance from the Eye, than is required for thoſe whoſe Eyes are of a due Form. Since the Images of the Objects we look at are inverted in the Eye, it may be thought the Objects themſelves ought to appear ſo; but it muſt be conſidered, that there is no natural Connection between the Idea in our Mind, and the Image upon the Retina; we find by Experience, that when ſuch an Idea is excited in our Mind, ſuch an Object ſtands before us in ſuch a Poſition and of ſuch a Form; when ever therefore the like ãdea is exted again, we conclude there is a like Cauſe of it. For it is found by Obſervation, that People who have been born blind, and have afterwards received their Sight, have had no Information from their Eyes at firſt, concerning the particular Situation or Form of Bodies; but have been obliged to ſtay till Experience has taught them what Figures and Situation of Bodies correſpond to ſuch and ſuch Senſations in the Mind. In like Manner it is from Experience that an Object appears ſingle, though there be an Image of it in each Eye; for after we find, that its Place, according to the Repreſentation of it in each Eye, is the ſame, we neceſſarily conceive it to be but one. The Manrer how we come to find this, ſeems to be as follows: There is one Part of the Retina upon which when the Image falls, the Object appears brighter and more diſtinct, than when it falls upon any other, as is evident becauſe we always ſee one Part of an Object with greater Diſtinctneſs than any of the reſt. This Point I ſhall hereafter call 7bæ Point of diſtiuct Viſion. This naturally leads us to turn our Eyes⸗ ſo, that the Object may be ſituated directly oppoſite to this Point. And this Action of ours is that which has given Riſe to thoſe imaginary Lines, which are ſuppoſed to paſs di* See Mr. Cheſſelden’s Obſervations on a young Gentleman couched by him at the Age ol 13 Years. Philoſoph. Tranſact. No. 402. rectly through the Eye and to terminate in the Object we view, and are commonly called the optic Axes. We therefore turn our Eyes ſo that the Object may appear in thoſe Lines. herefore ſince theſe Lines concur at the Object, when we indeavour to view it with Diſtinctneſs, each Eye affords us an Idea of the Object in the ſame Place, from whence it neceſſarily appears but one . When* There are other Methods oſ accounting ſor theſe two laſt Phanomena, ſome ol which, perhaps, the Reader may think more plauſible; ſor the Connection between the Image on the Retina and the Idea in the Mind, being purely metaphyſical, we can never hope to arrive at any Certainty in this Matter. Some are of Opinion, that we judge thoſe Rays which paint the uppermoſt Part of the Image in the Eye to proceed from the lowermoſt Part of the ObJect, becauſe they ſtrike upon the Retina, as coming from that Part; and that we conclude from hence that the Object is erect, though the Image be inverted; as if the Direction wherewith the Rays ſirike the Retina, inſormed the Mind which Way they came. This Solution ſerves alſo to explicate the Phænomenon of ſeeing but one Object with both Eyes; for as the Mind is informed by the Direction with which the Rays ſtrike the Retina of the Place from whence they come; thereſore when it appears that they enter each Eye as from the ſame Place, the Object neceſſarily ſeems to be but one; becaufe we cant ſuppoſe two to exiſt in the ſame Place at the ſame Time. Rut according to this Doctrine no Object could ever appear double; becauſe wherever it be ſituated, the Rays cannot affect the Retina otherwiſe than if they came from it alone. Some have been ſo abſurd as to embrace an Opinion, the firſi Author of which was Gaſſendus, that we ſee one and the ſame Point of an Object only with one Eye at a Time, (otiante alio, as they expreſs it) while the other does nothing. Vid. Gaſſendi Epiſiol. de Magnitud. Solis. Or Tacquet. Optic. Lib. I. Prop. 2. Some imagining that the optic Nerves conſiſt of a Bundle of ſmall ones wrapped up in one common Tegument, are of Opinion, that ſuch as lie upon the Retina at equal Diſtances ſrom the Point oſ diſtinct Viſion, and on the ſame Side of it in each Eye, are conll nected Whenever the Eyes are ſo ſituated with reſpect to an Object, that the ſame Part of the Retina in each Eye is affected by the Rays that flow from it; which are wont to be affected when two Objects are placed before the Eyes, the Mind receiving no Information from without, but by the Impulſes of the Rays upon the Retina, judges that there are two Objectss. Thus let A, B (Fig. 34.) repreſent two Eyes whoſe optic Axes are directed to the Point C, and let E be an Object on one Side the Point C, and F an Object on the other. Now Objects thus ſituated muſt appear ſeparate, otherwiſe every time we viewed an Object we muſt imagine all the different Points in its Surface to be but one, which is contrary both to Reaſon and daily Experience. In this Caſe, the Point  in each Eye will be affected by the Rays which flow from thoſe Objects; but ſo it will, if a ſingle Object be placed at D, and therefore for the Reaſon given above, an Object in that Situation ſhall appear as the two ſeparate ones E and F, that is, doublee. Anected together in one, before they terminate in the Brain; and ſo whether one or both are affected, only one Idea is excited in the Mind. Graveſand confirms this Opinion by aſſerting, that in all Animals which look at the ſame Object with both Eyes, the optic Nerves concur before they enter the Brain; and that in ſuch as look at one Object with one Eye, and at a different one with the other, they are ſeparate all the Way. Others, with Briggius (ſee his Opththalmog. Chap. 1I.) do not contend, that the forementioned correſponding Parts of the optic Nerves are connected beſore they terminate in the Brain; but that they are of an equal Tenſion, and thereſore excite the ſame Seuſation in the Mind. : in, let there be an Object placed without the optic Axer as at G, Rays flowing from this will affect the ſame Part in æach Eve, as if there were two diſtinct Objects, viæ. one at E and the other at H, this therefore will alſo appear double. Farther, as the Objects D and G are ſituated in this Figure, if both are attended to at the ſame Time (the optic Axes being ſtill directed to the ſame Point C) they will appear as three, being ſituated oppoſite to the three Points F, E, and H. And what has been ſaid of the Appearance of the Objects D and G as they are ſituated in this Figure, may be applied to their Appearance as they are placed in the next, where they are repreſented as being beyond the Line HF. So that wherever an Object is placed, provided it be nearer to the Eyes than the Point where the optic Axes concur, or farther from them, it appears double. There is one Part of the Retina of each Eye, upon which when the Image falls, the Object cannot be ſeen at all with that Eye; the Proof of this we have from the following Experiment. Fix two Objects upon a Wall, of ſuch Bigneſs rhat each may hide a ſquare Inch of it, or hereabouts, and at the Diſtance of about a ©oot or two from eãch other, and go back from rhe Wall about three times that Diſtance; then ſmutting the left Eye, look at the left Object vith the right one, and while the right Eye is in that Poſition, the right Object will not be ſeen. So if in that Station we look at the right Object with only the left Eye, the left Object vill diſappear. The Reaſon of this is ſuppoſed to be, that the Image then falls upon the bloodveſſels of the optic Nerve, from which no Senſation is conveyed to the Brain. TThe Angle comprehended between the Rays which flow from the extreme Parts of the Object, and croſs in the Pupil, is called the optic Angle. Tis by means of this Angle that we are able to form ſome Judgment of the Magnitude of an Object; becauſè the larger this is, the larger is the Image upon the Retina, that is, a greater Portion of it is affected by the Rays which flow from that Object. But this is not ſufficient alone, becauſe different Objecis at different Diſtances from the Eye, may ſubtend equal Angles at the Pupil We ought therefore to Enow alſo the Diſtance of the Object. This, if the Object be very near, we are able to form a tolerable Judgment of, by the Degree of Divergency, wherein the Rays which flow from the ſame Point of the Object enter the Eye; becauſe we find it neceſſary to adapt the Eye accordingly, in order to bring them to a Pocus upon the Retina. But when the Object is at a greater Diſtance from us, a conſiderable Variation in the Diſtance of it makes but a very ſmall one in the Divergency of thoſe Rays, and therefore this Rule of Judging ceaſes to be of Uſe. The only Expedient then is, the Angle comprehended between the optic Axes at the Object to which they are directed, or which is the ſame Thing, the Poſition of the Eyes with reſpect to each other when they view the Object*. But in very large Diſtances this Poſition varies ſo little, that it is alſo of no Uſe; in which Caſe we make the beſt Judgment we can from the Brightneſs, Diſtinctneſs, and apparent Magnitude of the Object, and likewiſe from its Situation with reſpect to others which are interpoſed . When we are unable to judge rightly concerning the Diſtance of an Object, we conceive it greater, the farther we imagine it to be from us, and vice versã ; becauſe it requires a larger Object to exhibit the ſame Image upon the Retina, when it ĩs ſituated at a great Diſtance, than when near. Thus we imagine the Sun and Moon to he farther off, when they are in the Horiæon, than when they are near the Meridian, and accordingly think them æ That the Poſition of the optic Ares is a Means whereby we judge of Diſtances, is evident from hence, viz. that they who have oũ the Sight of one Eye, find it much more difficult to eſtimate the Diſlances of Objects, than they did, when they had the Uſe of both. + We have a remarkable Inſtunce of the Error of our Judgment concerning the Diſtances of very remote Bodies, in that we look upon the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be all at the ſame Diſtance, wheras ſomg of them are a thouſand Times ſarther ſrom us than pthers. proportionably larger in one Situation than in the other, though they are found to exhibit the ſame Image upon the Retina in both Caſes. We are never able to ſee very diſtant Objects with Diſiinctneſs; this is not ſolely owing to the Pupil's not receiving into it a ſuſficient Number of Rays for that Purpoſe, or becauſe they are not collected into Foci upon the Retina, but becauſe the Object being very far off, the Rays which flow from Points of the Object that are contiguous, fall too near each other upon the Retina to excite diſtinct Senſations in the Mind, ſo that the Idea of the Whole is confuſed. C H A P. VII Of the Appearance of Objects ſeen through x Media of different Forms. ſtæ what we ſhall ſay upon the Subject of this Chapter may more readily be underſtood, we ſhall premiſe the five following Particulars; which are all compriſed in the foregoing Chapter, or follow immediately from what has been there laid down, 7iæ. 1. That as each Point of an Object when viewed by the naked Eye, appears in its pro* See the Diſſertation on the horizontal Moon, annexed to this Part. per Place; and as that Place is always to be found in the Line in which the Axis of a Pencil of Rays flowing from it, enters the Eye, we from hence acquire an Habit of judging the Point ſituated in that Line; and becauſe the Mind is unacquainted with what Refractions the Rays ſufſer before they enter the Eye, therefore, in Caſes where they are diverted from their natural Courſe by paſſing through any Medium, it judges the Point to be in that Line produced back in which the Axis of a Pencil of Rays flowing from it is ſituated the Inſtant they enter the Eye, and not in that it was in before Refraction. We ſhall therefore in what follows, ſuppoſe the apparent Place of an Object when ſeen through a refracting Medium to be ſomewhere in that Line produced back in which the Axis of a Pencil of Rays flowing from it proceed after they have paſſed through the Medium. 2. That we are able to judge, though imperfectly, of the Diſtance of an Object by the Degree of Divergency, wherein the Rays flowing from the ſame Point of the Object enter the Pupil of the Eye, in Caſes where that Divergency is conſiderable; but becauſe in what folIows, it will be neceſſary to ſuppoſe an Object, when ſeen through a Medium whereby its apparent Diſtance is altered, to appear in ſome determinate Situation; in thoſe Caſes where the Divergency of the Rays at their Entrance into the Eye is conſiderable, we will ſuppoſe the Object to appear where thoſe Lines which they deſcribe in entring, if produced back, would croſs each other; though it muſt not be aſſerted that this is the preciſe Diſtance; becauſe the Brightneſs, Diſtinctneſs, and apparent Magnitude of the Object, on which its apparent Diſtance in ſome Meaſure depends, will alſo ſuffer an Alteration by the Refraction of the Rays in paſſing through that Medium. 3. That we eſtimate the Magnitude of an Object by that of the optic Augle. 4. That Viſion is the righter, the greater the Number of Rays is which enter the Pupil. And, 5. That in ſome Caſes, the apparent Brightneſs, Diſtiuctueſs, and Magnitude of an Object are the only Means whereby our Judgment is determined in eſtimating the Diſtance of it. Prop. I. An Object placed within a Medium terminated by a plain Surface on that Side which is next the Eve, if the Medium be denſer than that in which the Eye is (as we ſhall always ſuppoſe it to be, unleſs where the contrary is expreſſed) appears nearer to the Surface of the Medium than it is. Thus if A be a Point of an Object placed within the Medium BCDE (Fig. 36), and Ab, Ac be two Rays proceeding from thence; theſe Rays paſſing out of a denſer into a rarer Medium will be reſracted from their. reſpective Perpendiculars bd, ce, and will enter the Eye at H; ſuppoſe in the Directions If, cęg, let then theſe Lines be produced back till they meet in F; this will be the apparent Plãace of the Point A; and becauſe the refracted Rays If, cę ill diverge more than the incident ones Ab, Ac (Chap. IIL Prop.3.), it will be nearer to the Points L and , than the Point A; and as the ſame is true of each Point in the Object, the Whole will appear to an Eye at H, nearer to the Surface BC than it is*. Prop. III * From hence it is, that when one End of a ſtrait Stick is put under Water, and the Stick is held in an oblique Poſition, it appears bent at the Surſace oſ the Water; viz. becauſe each Point that is under Water appears nearer the Surface, and conſequently higher than it is. From hence likewiſe it is, that an Object at the Bottom oſ æ Veſſel may be ſeen when the Veſſel is filled with Water, though it be ſo placed with Reſpect to the Eye, that it cannot be ſeen when the Veſſel is empty. To explain this; Let ABCD (Fig. 37.) repreſent a Veſſel, and let E be an Object lying at the Bottom of it. This Object, when the Veſſel is empty, will not be ſeen by an Eye at F, becauſe HE the upper Part of the Veſſel will obſtruct the Ray EH; but when it is filled with Water to the Height GH, the Ray EX being refracted at the Surface of the Water into the Line XF, the Eye at F ſnhall ſee the Object by Means of that. In like Manner, an Object ſituated in the Horizon appears above jts true Place, upon Account ol the Refraction oſ the Rays which proceed ſrom it in their Paſſage through the Atmoſphere of the Earth. For firſi, if the Object be ſituated beyond the Limits of the Atmoſphere, its Rays in entring it will be reſracted towards the Perpendicular, that is, towards a Line drawn ſrom the Point where they enter, to the Center of the Earth which is the Center oſ the Atmoſphere, and as they paſs on they will be continually refracted the ſame Way, becauſe they are all along entring a denſer Part, the Center of whoſe Convexity is ſtill the ſame Point; upon which Account the Line they deſcribe will be a Curve bendEK Prop. II. An Object ſeen through a Medium terminated by plain and parallel Surfaces, appears nearer, brighter, and larger, than with the naked Eye. For Inſtance, let AB (Fig. 38.) be the Object, CDEF the Medium, and GH the Pupil of an Eve, w hich is here drawn large to prevent Confuſion in the Figure. And 1ſt let RK, RL be two Rays proceeding from the Point R, and entring the denſer Medium at  and L; theſe Rays will here by Refraction be made to diverge leſs (Chap. IIL. Prop. 2.) and to proing downwards; and thereſore none oſ the Rays that come from that Object can enter an Eye upon the Surface oſ the Earth, except what enter the Atmoſphere higher than they need to do, iſ they could come in a right Line from the Object; conſequently the Obj ct muſt appear above its proper Place. Secondly, if the Obect be placed within the Atmoſphere, the Caſe is ſiill the ſame; ſor the Rays which flow ſrom it muſt continually enter a denſer Medium whoſe Center is below the Eye, and thereſore being refract2d towards the Center, that is, downwards as beſore, thoſe which enter the Eve muſt neceſſerily proceed as from ſome Point above the Objct, wherefore the Object will appear above ĩts proper Vlace. From hence it is, that the Son, Moon, and Stars appear above the Horizon, when they are juſt below it, and higher than they ought to do, when they are above it: Likewiſe diſtant Hills, Trees, &. ſeem to be higher than they are. Farther, the lower theſe Objects are in the Horizon, the greater is the Obliquity with which the Rays which flow from them, enter the Atmoſphere, or paſs ſrom the rarer into the denſer Parts of it, and thereſore they appear to be the more elevated by Reſraction; upon which Account the lower Parts of them are apparently more elevated than the other. This makes them ſeem ſhorter than they are; as is evident in the Sun and Moon, which appear o an oval Form when they are in the Horizon, their horizontal Dameters appearing of the ſame Length they would do if the Rays ſufferd no Reſract on, while their vertical ones are ſhortened thereby. ceed afterwards ſuppoſe in the Lines Xa Lb; at a and , where they paſs out of the denſer Medium, they will be as much reſracted the contrary Way, proceeding in the Lines ac, bd, para lel to their firſt Directions (ſee Chap. IV.) produce theſe Lines back till they meet in e, this will be the apparent Place of the Point R, and tis evident from the Figure that it muſt be nearer the Eye than that Point; and becauſe the ſame is true of all other Pencils lowing from the Object AB, the Whole will be feen in the Situation ſg, nearer to the Eye than the Line AB. 2d. As the Rays RE, RL. wonld not have entered the Eye, but have paſſed by it in the Directions Kr, I?, had they not been refracted in paſſing through the Medium, the Object appears brighter. 3d. The Rays Ab, Bi, will be refracted at h and ĩ into the leſs converging Lines hæ, il, and at the other Surface into æM, IM parallel to Ab and Bi produced ſſee Chap. IV.), ſo that the Extremities of the Object will appear in the Lines ME, MI produced, viæ. in fand g, and under as large an Angle ſMg, as the Angle A 78 under which an Eye at 7 would have ſeen it, had there been no Medium interpoſed to refract the Rays; and thereſore it appears lar™er to the Eye at GH, being ſeen through the interpoſed Medium, than otherwiſe it vould have done. But it is here to be obſerved, that the neãrer the Point e appears to the Eye on Accoũnt of the Refraction of the Rays RX, RL, the ſhorter is the Image ſg™, becauſe it is terminated by the Lines Mf and Mg, upon which Account the Object is made to appear leſs; and therefore the apparent Magnitude of an Object is not much augmented by being ſeen through a Medium of this Form. Farther it is apparent from the Figure, that the Efect of a Medium of this Form depends wholly upon its Thickneſs; for the Diſtancę bet ween the Lines R? and ec, and conſequently the Diſtance between the Points æ and R depends upon the Length of the Line Ka: Again, the Diſtance between the Lines AM and fl, depends on the Length of the Line bæ; but both Xa and b~ depend on the Diſtance betwęen the Surfaces CE àand DF, and therefore the Effect of this Medium depends upon its Thickneſs. Prop. III. An Object ſeen through a convex ILens, appears larger, brighter, and more diſtant, than with the naked Eye,. Do illuſtrate this, let AB Fãę. 39:) be the Object, CD the Lens, and EF the Eye. I. From A and B the Extremities of the Object draw the right Lines AYr, BX? croſſing each other in the Pupil of the Eye; the Angle Ar© gomprehended between theſe Lines, is the Angle under which the Object would be ſeen withthe naked Eye. But by the Interpoſition of a Tens of this Form, whoſe Property it is to 3ender converging Rays more ſo (ſeę Chãp. IV.) the Rays AY and BX. will be made to croſs cach other before they reach the Pupil. Therefore the Eye at E, will not perceive the Extremities of the Object by means of theſe Rays (for they will paſs it without entring), but by ſome others which muſt fall without the Points Y and X, or between them; but if they fall between them, they will be made to concur ſooner than they themſelves would have done, and therefore if the Extremities of the Object could not be ſeen by them, it will much leſs be ſeen by theſec It remains therefore, that the Rays which will enter the Eye from the Points A and B after Refraction, muſt fall upon the Lens without the Points Y and X; Iet then the Rays AO and BP be ſuch. 'I'heſe after Reſraction entring the Eye at r, the Extremities of the Object will be ſeen in the Lines rqQ, rT produced, and under the optic Angle QT which is larger than ArB, and thereſore the apparent Magnitude of the Objeũt will be increaſed, 2. Let GHI be a Pencil of Rays flowing from the Point G; as it is the Property of this Lens to render diverging Rays leſs diverging, parallel or converging (ſee Chap. IV.), it is evident, that ſome of thoſe Rays which would proceed on to M and N and miſi the Eye, were they to ſuffer no Refraction in paſſing through the Lens, will now enter it; by which means the Object will appear brighter. 3, As to the apparent Diſtance of the Object, that will vary acęording to the iiiii of it with reſpect to the Focus of parallel Rays of the Tens. 1. Then, let us ſuppoſe the Object placed ſo much nearer the Lens than its Focus of parallel Rays, that the refractæed Rays KE and LF though rendered leſs diverging by paſſing through it, may yet have a conſiderable Degree of Divergency, ſo that we may be able to form a Judgment of the Diſtance of the Object thereby. In this Caſe, the Object ought to appear where EX, VL produce hack concur, which, becauſe they diverge leſs than the Rays GH, GI, will be beyond ũ, that is, at a greater Diſtance from the Leus than the Object is. But Lecauſe both the Brightneſs and Magnitude of the O ject will at the ſame Time be augmented, Prejudice will not permit us to judge it quite ſo far off as the Point where thoſe Lines meet, but ſomewhere between that Point and its proper Place. 2. Let the Object be placed in the Focus of parallel Rays, then will the Rays KE and LF become parallel ( ſee Chap. IV.) and though in this Caſe the Object would appear at an immenſe Diſtance, if that Diſtance were to be judged of by the Direction of the Rays KE and LF, yet upon Account of the Brightneſs and Magnitude of it, we ſhall not think it much fartbher from us, than if it were ſeen by the naked Eye. 3. If the Object be ſituated beyond the Focus of parallel Rays, as in AB (Fig. 40), the Rays flowing from thence and falling upon the Lens CD, will be collected into their reſpective Foci at a and b, and the intermediate Points m, n, &c. and will there form an Image of the Object AB; and after croſſing each other in the ſeveral Points of it, as expreſſed in the Figure, vill paſs on diverging as from a real Object. Now if an Eve be ſituated at c, whero Ac, Bc, Rays proceeding from the extreme Points of the Object, make not a much larger Angle AcB, than they would do if there were no Lens interpoſed; and the Rays belonging to the ſame Pencil do not converge ſo much as thoſe the Eye would receive, if it were placed nearer to a or b, the Object upon theſe Accounts appearing very little larger or brighter than with the naked Eye, is ſeen nearly in its proper Place; but if the Eye recedes a little Way towards ab, the Object then appearing both brighter and larger, ſeems to approach the Lenus*: which is an evident Proof of what has * That the Object ſiould ſeem to approach the Lens in this Caſe, was a Difficulty that exceedingly puzzled the learned Ba rrow, and which he pronounces inſuperable, and not to be accounted for by any Theory we have of Viſion. Molineux alſo leaves it to the Solution of others, as that which will be inexplicable, till a more intimate Knowledge oſ the viſive Faculty, as he expreſſes it, be obtained by Mortals. They imagined, that ſeeing an Object appears farther off, the leſs the Rays diverge which fall upon the E/e; if they ſould proceed parallel to each other, it ought to appear exceedingly re mote, and iſ they ſnould converge, it ſnould then appear more diſtant ſtill: The Reaſon of this was, becauſe they looked upon the apparent Place of an Object, as owing to the Direct on oſ the Rays whatever it was, and not at all to ĩts apparent Magnitude or Splendour, been ſo often aſſerted, 9iæ. that we judge of the Diſtance of an Object in ſome Meaſure by its Brightneſs and Magnitude*; for the Rays converge the more the farther the Eye recedes from the Lens; and therefore if we judged of the Diſtance of the Object by the Direction of the Rays which flow from it, we ought in this Caſe to conceive it at a greater Diſtance, than when the Rays were parallel, or diverged at their Entrance into the Eve. Prop. IV. If an Object be placed farther from a convex Lens, than its Focus of parallel Rays, and the Eye be ſituated farther from it on the other Side, than the Place where the Rays of the ſeverãl Pencils are collected into their reſpective Foci, the Object appears inverted, and pendulous in the Air, between the Eye and the Lens. To explain this, Iet AB (Fig. 40.) repreſent the Object, CD the Lens, and let the Rays of the Pencil ACD be collected in a, and thoſe of BCD in b, forming there an inverted Image of the Object AB, and let the Eye be placed in F: Tis apparent from the Figure, that ſome of the refracted Rays which paſs through each Point of the Image, will enter * Perhaps it may proceed from our judging of the Diſtance of an Object in ſTome Meaſure by its Magnitude, that that Deception of Sight commonly obſerved by Travellers may ariſe; viz. that upon the firſt appearing of a Building larger than uſual, as a Cathedral Church, or the like, it generally ſeems nearer to them, than they aſterwards find it to be. the Eye as from a real Object in that Place, and therefore the Object AB will appear there, as the Propoſition aſſerts. But we are ſo littlo accuſtomed to ſee Objects in this Manner, that it is very difficult to perceive the Image with one Eye; but if both Eyes are ſituated in ſuch a Manner, that Rays flowing from each Point of the Image may enter both, as at G and H, and we direct our optic Axes to the Image, tis eaſy to be perceived. If the Eye be ſituated in  or b, òr very near them on either Side, the Object appears exceedingly confuſed, viæ. if at d, the Rays which proceed from the ſame Point of the Object converge ſo very much, and if at ę, they diverge fo much, that they canmot be collected together upon the Retina; but fall upon it as if they were the Axes of ſo many diſtinct Pencils coming through every Point of the Lens; wherefore little more than one ſingle Point of the Object is ſeen at a Time, and that appears all over the Lens; from whence nothing but Confuſion ariſes. If the Lens be ſo large that both Eyes may be applied to it, as in h and æ, the Object will appear double; fortis evident from the Figure, that the Rays which enter the Eye at b from either Extremity of the Object A or B, do not proceed as from the ſame Point with thar from whence thoſe which enter the other at æ ſeem to flow; the Mind therefore is here docei od, III an - I and Iooks upon the Ob ect as ſituated in two difſerent Places, and therefore judges it to be double. Prop. V. An Object ſeen through a concave ILens appears nearer, ſmaller, and leſs bright, than with the naked Eye. Thus, let AB (Fig. 41.) be the Object, CDO the Pupil of an Eye, and EF the Lens. Nov, as it is the Property of a Lens of this Form, to render diverging Rays more ſo, and converging ones leſs ſo, the diverging Rays GH, GI, proceeding from the Point G, will be made to diverge more, and ſo to enter the Eye as from ſome nearer Point &; and the Rays AH, BI which converge, will be made to converge leſs, and to enter the Eye as from the Points æ and I; wherefore the Object will appear in the Situation agh, leſ and nearer than without the Lens. Farther, as the Rays which proceed from G, are rendered more diverging, ſome of them will be made to paſs by the Pupil of the Eye which otherwiſe would have entered it, and therefore each Point of the Object will appear leſs brightt. llll Prop. VI. V%* FErom what has been obſerved about the Properties of convex and concave Lenſes, we may. ſee the Reaſon why the former Sort are made Uſe of by old People to help their Sight; and the latter by thoſe who are purblind. Old People, as was obſerved before, havinę the Tunica Cornea oſ their Eyes too flat, require that the Object be placed at a greater Diſtance from them, than other People whoſe Eyes are of a juſt Form, that the Rays which enter the Pupils oſ theit Eyes from the ſame Point of the Object, may not dillũũ Prop. VI. An Object ſeen through a polygmous Glaſs, that is, ſuch as is terminated by ſeveral plain Surfaces, is multiplied thereby. For Inſtance, let A Fig. 42.) be an Object, and BC a polygonous Glaſs terminated by the plain Surfaces BD, DE, &c. and let the Situation of the Eye F be ſuch, that the Rays AB being refracted in paſſing through the Glaſs, may enter it in the Direction BF, and the Rays AC in the Direction CF. Then will the Eyo by means of the former, ſee the Object in G, and by the latter in H; and by means of the Rays AI, the Object will appear alſo in its proper Situation A. Thus much for the Principles of Dioptics, and the Solution of ſome obvious Phænomena which tend to confirm the ſame:: Thoſe which yet remain to be accounted for, ſhall according to the Method we have hitherto obſerved, be treated of in the Diſſertations of this Part. verge too much. Now a convex Lens makes thoſe Rays diverge leſs, as they would naturally do if the Object was placed ſarther off. Again, thoſe who are purblind, having the Tunica Cornea too protuberant, require ſuch a Lens as may render thoſe Ray: more diverging, leſt they ſould be collected into their reſpective Foci before they ſall upon the Retiua; and thereſfore Lenſes of the concave Sort are of Uſe to them. l ~ DISS ERTATION I. Of the Horizontal Moon. H E Phænomenon of the horizontal Moon is this: when the Moon is juſt above the Surface of the Earth, cither immediately after ſhe is riſen, or juſt before ſhe ſets, ſhe appears four or five Times greater in Diameter, than when ſhe is in her Meridian Altitude: And yet her apparent Diameter, if taken by an Inſtrument, is found to ſubtend the ſame Angle in either Situation, The Moons apparent Diameter being found to ſubtend the ſame Angle, whether ſhie be in the Horizon or Meridian, it is evident the Image of her projected upon the Retina of an Eye, is of the ſame Dimenſions in either Caſe; and therefore that ſhe ſhould appear of a different Magnitude in one Situation from what What is ſaid here of the Moons Diameter, as taken by an Inſirument, nuſt be underſtood of her horixontal Diameter, and not oſ her vertical one, for the Length of this is diminiſhed by Retracton (as explained hap. VII. Note the firſt); and therefore if it be taken by àn Inſtrument, it will not be found to ſubtend the ſame Angle in the Horizon as in the Meridian: But notwithſtanding this, it appears longer to the naked Eye when in the ſormmgr, ihan in the latter Situation,: as well as the horizontal Diameter. The does in the other, has always been Matter of great Speculation among the Connviſſeurs both in Optics and Aſtrouomy. Des Cartes was of Opinion, that we think the Moon larger when ſhe is in the Horizon, than when ſhe is in the Meridian, becauſe in the former Caſe by comparing her Diſtance with that of interpoſed Objects, we imagine it greater than when ſhe is elevated: And that as we judge her Diſtance greater in that Situation, we of Courſe think her Diameter longer, becauſe it ſubtends the ſame Angle in either Caſe. But more of this by and by, when we come to the Explication Dr. Wallis has given of this Matter. Gaſſendus was of Opinion, that becauſe the Moon appears leſs bright when in the Horizon than in the Meridian, we view her in the former Situation with a larger Pupil, than we do in the latter; and from thence he concludes, that the Image of her upon the Retina muſt be larger. But this is contrary to the Laws of Optics; for if the refractive Power of the Humours of the Eye collects the Rays of the ſeveral Pencils into their reſpective Foci upon the Retina (and there is no Reaſon to ſuppoſe the contrary in this Caſe) the Breadth of the Pupil makes no Alteration in the Magnitude of the Image; becauſe the Situation of thoſe Foci is determined by the Axes of the ſeveral ter of the Pupil (as was ſnewn Chap. VI. pag. 61. in the Note) paſs on to the ſame Points of the Retina, whether the Pupil be broad or narrov. Molineux in the Philoſophical Tranſactions No. 187. tells us of a certain French Abbe, that revived the forementioned Suppoſition of Gaſſendus, and adding two others of his own, endeavourd to account for this Phænomenon. His Suppoſitions were theſe, vi⸗æ. ? That this  contracting and enlarging the Pupil (ſup-  poſed bY Gaſſendus) cauſeth a different Shape in the Eye; an open Pupil making the Chriſtalline flatter, and the Eye longer, and the narrower Pupil ſhortning the Eve, s and making the Chriſtalline Humour more  convex. The firſt attends our looking at  Objects that are remote, or which we think  ſo, the latter accompanies the viewing Objects nigh at Hand. Likewiſe an open Pusc pil and flat Chriſtalline attends Objects of  a more ſedate Light, whilſt Objects of more  forcible Rays require a greater Convexity,  and narrower Pupil. From theſe Poſitions, s continues Molineux, the Abbe endeavoured  to give an Account of our Phænomenon, as  followss. When the Moon is nigh the Hos riæon, by Compariſon with interpoſed Obs jects, we are apt to imagine her much far-  ther from us than when more elevated, and sc gherefore we order our Eyes as for viewing an La 3  an Object farther from us; that is, we ſome-  thing enlarge the Pupil, and thereby make the Chriſtalline flatter: moreover the Duſiſhneſs of the Moon in that Poſture does not ſo much ſtrain the Sight; and conſequently the Pupil will be more large, and the Chriſtalline more flat; hence a larger Image ſhall be projected on the Fund of the Eye, and “ therefore the Moon ſhall appear larger.  Theſe two forementioned Accidents, iZ-  the Moons imaginary Diſtance and Duſs iſneſs gradually vaniſhing as ſhe riſes, a different Species is hereby introduced in the  Eye, and conſequently ſhe ſeems gradually s leſs and leſs, till again ſne approaches nigh s the Horizon. As to what is taken for granted in this Solution concerning a Change in the Chriſtalline Humour and Form of the Eye, upon viewing an Object in a dusky or faint Light, that ſeems to be very ill grounded. We know of no ſuch Connection between the Muſclęs of the Iris and thoſe of the Ligumuta Ciliaria, as is neceſſary to produce this Effectt. And the Coats of the Eye are not ſo pliable, as eaſily to admit of an Alteration in their Form, Could the Author have made good his other Suppoſition, viæ. That by Compariſon with cC c cc C c cc a * See what has been obſerved concerning the Power we have of making an Alteration in the Eye, in order to ſee diftinctly. (Chap. VI. pag. 62) i interpoſed Objects we are apt to imagine her much farther from us, than when more elevated, he need not have had Recourſe to any other; this alone would have been ſufficient; but hic Labor eſtt This alone, I ſay, would have been ſufficient; for if by comparing her Diſtance with that of interpoſed Objects, we imagine it greater when ſhe is in the Horizon, than when ſhe is in the Meridian; as ſhe ſubtends an equal Angle in both Caſes, we muſt in Conſequence thereof (agreeably to Des Cartes'ss Notion above - mentioned) imagine her to be bigger in the former than in the latter; becauſe a diiant Object cannot ſubtend the ſame Angle at the Eye that one which is nearer does, unleſs it be proportionably larger. ] The famous Hobbs endeavour'd at a Solution of this Phænomenon, but it is hardly worth mentioning: The Figure he has drawn to explain his Solution by, ſeems to have been the Occaſion of his Errour. He draws a Circle to repreſent that blue Surface commonly called the Sky, in, which the heavenly Bodies ſeem to be fixed, and concentric to this, a leſſer, to repreſent the Surface of the Earth, but vaſtly too big in Proportion; ſo that a Spectator upon the Surface of this Earth, is conſiderably nearer to the upper Part of the * See Chap. VI. ꝑ. 7I, other Circle than to the Sides of it: Wherefore an Object that ſubtends the ſame Angle at different Heights, muſt neceſſarily hide a greater Portion of that Ark when it is in the Horizon, than when it is in the Meridian; becauſe that Ark is farther behind the Object in the former than in the latter Situation; from whence he concludes that the Moon muſt appear bigger in that Situation than in the Meridian. Had he drawn his Circles in any tolerable Proportion to that which he deſigned them to repreſent, he would eaſily have ſeen his Miſtake. . A few Years ago Mr. De Veil publiſhed a Treatiſe upon the Subject of the horizontal Moon, which he dedicates to the Ladies of Northampton. If I remember right, his Solution of it was in the following Manner. I. When an Object is placed beyond the Focus of parallel Rays of a convex Lens, the farther the Eye (ſituated on the other Side the ens) receeds from it towards the Focus of the Rays which flow from that Object, the larger that Object appears. 2. Rays of Light flowing from the Moon, and paſſing thr the Atmqſphere of the Earth, are collected into a Focus on the other Side of it. 3. When the Moon is in the Horizon, we are nearer to this Focus by almoſt a Semidiameter of the Farth, than when ſhe is in the Meridian: And therefore the Moon ought to appear larger when in the former than in the latter Situation. Tr The ſecond Propoſition in this Solution is true, but not applicable in the preſent Caſe; for unleſs we conſider the Refraction that Rays of Light which flow from the Moon, and paſ through the Atmoſphere of the Earth, ſuffer in their Emerſion, that is, while they paſs through the latter half of it, as well as that which they ſuffer in their Immerſion, or while they paſs through the former half, we ſhall find that they will not he collected into their reſpective Foci on the other Side the Earth, as this Gentleman imagines: Which if it can be ſhewn, his Solution falls to the Ground of Courſe; for the Refraction which the Rays. ſuffer in their Emerſion is not to be taken into Conſideration, becauſe they reach the Eye of a Spectator upon the Earth as ſoon as they have paſſed through the firſt half of the Atmoſphere, when the Moon is in his Horizon; and before they have paſſed through that half, when ſhe is in his Meridian. Let us then imagine two Rays flowing from ore and the ſame Point of the Surface of the Moon, it being neceſſary in order to conſtitute a Focus that ſuch Rays ſhould after Refraction meet in a Point; the meeting of ſuch as flow from different Points in the ſame Surface is not ſufficient; if it were, we might then have Foci where we pleaſed, and that as well without refracting or reflecting Surfaces as with them. And let the firſt of thoſe Rays ſall perpendieularly upon the Atmoſphere of the Earth, and be ſuppoſed to paſs through the Center of it, and let the other after Refraction paſs by the Surface of the Earth. Now the Moon's Parallax, that is, the Angle under which the Semidiameter of the Earth is ſeen from the Moon, being about one Degree, it is evident that theſe Rays muſt, before their Incidence upon the Earth's Atmoſphere, diverge the one from the other by ſuch an Angle. But it appears from Sir Iſaac Newton's Table of Refractions publiſhed by Dr. Halley in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, No. 368, that when any oſ the Heavenly Bodies appears in the Horizon, the Rays by which it is ſeen, are refracted but by an Angle of thirty three Minutes and forty five Seconds; and therefore the Ray which we have ſuppoſed after Refraction to paſs by the Surface of the Earth, will be refracted only by ſuch an Angle Which falling conſiderably ſhort of one egree, the Angle by which it diverged from the perpendicular one before Refraction; it will be ſo far from being made to converge towards it thereby, that it will ſlill be in a State of Divergency from it. And therefore Rays flowing from the Moon and refracted only in their Immerſion into the Atmoſphere of the Earth, vill not be collected into their reſpective Foci on the other Side: Which was to be ſewn. Dr. Wallis in the Philoſophical Tranſactions No. 187, gives us a Solution of the horizontal Moon (or rather an Explication of what Des Cartes had given before) which is as follows. He aſcribes this Phænomenon to the Deception of the Imagination, and accounts for that Deception in the following Manner. He obſerves firſt, that the Imagination doth not eſtimate the Greatneſs of an Object ſeen, by the optic Angle only, but by this compared with the ſuppoſed Diſtance. Sõœ©at if two Things are ſeen under the ſame or ſequal Angles, and if upon any Account whatever we apprehend one of theſe to be farther from us than the other, that which we apprehend to be farther from us, will to the Imagination appear greater. Secondly, That one great Advantage for eſtimating the apparent Diſtance of any Thing, is from the Variety of intermediate Objects between the Eye and the Thing ſeen; for then rhe Imagination muſt allow Room for all theſe Things. 3E  Now ſays he, when the Sun* or Moon is near the Horizon, the Proſpect we have of  Hills and Vallies, Plains and Woods, &c. e repreſont to our Imagination a great Diſ-  tance capable of receiving all theſe. Or if  it happens that theſe interpoſed Objects are  not actually ſeen; vet having been accuſtomed to ſee them, the Memory ſuggeſts to us a View as large as is the viſible Horizon.  BEut when the Sun or Moon is in an higher Poſition, we ſee Nothing between us and  them (unleſs perhaps ſome Clouds) and C li -  For 3he un appears larger in the Horizon, 35 well as ſhe I, loon. c c therefore Nothing that can preſent to our Imagination ſo great a Diſtance as the other is. And therefore though both be ſeen under the ſame Angle, they do not appear (to the Imagination) of the ſame Bigneſs, becauſe not fanſied at the ſame Diſtance: But that near the Horizon is judged bigger (becauſe ſuppoſed farther off) than the ſame, when at a greater Altitude. This is the Solution which has hitherto generally been received; but I am told that a more probable one will ſhortly be given by Dr. Smith, Plumian Profeſſor in the Univerſity at Cambridge, in a Treatiſe of Optics he is now preparing for the Preſs. If I might be allowed to mention any Thing of my own, after theſe great Genius's have given their Opinions upon this Matter, it ſhould be this, viz. That I have often thought, that he who would give a rational Account, why the Sun or Moon appears farther from us in the Horizon, than in the Meridian (for that is all that is requiſite towards a Solution of the Horizontal Moon, as has been already obſerved) ſhould firſt ſnow, why that apparent azure Surface we call the Sky, does not ſeem to be an entire concave Hemiſphere, but only a Portion of ſuch an one. For our judging the Heavens to be no more than ſuch a Portion, is undoubtedly the Cauſe why we judge both the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be farther from us when in the Horizon, than in the Meridian; becauſe  La becauſe we have Nothing elſe we can refer their Places to, but that. Now poſſibly the Cauſe why we think the Heavens of that Form, may after all be only this, iæ. that, as the Rays which come from the upper Parts of that imaginary Surface the Sky, paſc through a leſs Portion of the Armoſphere, than ſuch as come from the horizontal Parts of it, the Sky appears to us more diſtinctly and generally more bright in thoſe Parts, than in the latter; and therefore, ſince we daily obſerve that thoſe Objects which appear moſt iſtinẽt, are, generally ſuch as arę veareſt to us; and alſo as bright Objects, when we have Nothing but bare Imagination to determine us in eſtimating the Diſtance of them, appear nearer tõ us than the ſame Objects when leſs io*, we think the upper Parts of the Sky nearer us than the lower. Whereſore, ſince we refer all the heavenly Bodies to this Surface, we neceſſarily imagine them farther from us, and conſequently larger, and alſo more diſtant from each other ?, when near the Horizon; than when they are arrived at thęir meridian Altitude.  See what has been ſaid: concerning the Brightneſs of an ObJect being a Means whereby it appears nearer us, under Prop. 3, of the 7th Chagter. 1 The apparent horizontal Diſtance of two Stars from one another, is obſerved to be greater when they are in the Horizon, 