sstoquν Qài  πùσ f f ẽ NTRO D UCT TO SIR ISAAC NEWT H I L O S O P CONPTAINING T H E FIRST PRINCIP O F ECH ANICS, TRIGONOI OPTICS, and ASTRONC By a Fellow of the Royal S W I T H 1 ESS AY on the ADVANXCE L EARNINOG, In various Modes of Recreati JOHν RYLAND, A.M. of Not THRE SECOND EDITI To this New Edition APPENDIX is added, to rendc more uſeful to Schools. L O N D O N: rinted for EnwanRD and CHARLES DIL 2- x (ĩii ) n QνBη ſ uen coſe ctomive forscnuuſrιq cſlσαsatã ſas i& panæ actcσſννγαꝶ - aσσγ ADVERTISEMENT. HE APPENDIX, wWhich I have now added, is taken, by the conſent of my intimate and ingenious friend Mr. JA ME S F E R GU sSON, F. R. S. from his excellent Lectures; and I am happy in having his permiſſion for this purpoſe: No perſon can write with greater ſimplicity and clearneſs of thought on theſe ſubjects.I have, after many years experience and labour, endeavoured to propoſe his thoughts and words in the eaſieſt manner, knowing that young people are apt to be terrified with i imagtnary diſficulties, at their firſt ſetting out in the ſtudy of the Neuwtonian Philoſophy. I know, if we can but prevail on them to get the firſt principles in their heads, the power and beauty of Truth will irreſiſtibly charrn them to go on with admiration and incredible delight: And I would earneſtly perſuade the ingenious and virtuous Youth of Great Britain and our Colonies to diſdain ſenſual pleaſures, and ſordid purſuits, and make a trial of theſe rational and manly entertainments. If once they come to taſte that ſweetneſs there is in the natural truths of GEOME TRYEÆ ME C H ANIC S, and the other branches of PH I LO SOP H V, they will find their underſtandings ſo ſtrengthened and improved, as to aſtoniſh even themſelves; and they will be thereby ſo prepared for all other kinds of ſtudies, and important employments of life, and ſee ſuch folly and miſery attending ignorant Libertines, as will produce a rich abundancer of happy conſequences to themſelves, their parents, and their country. JouNν RY L AND. Northampton, January 1. 1772.  EucLin's ELEMENTS contain the greateſt number of natural truths of any book in the Pagan world, and is moſt wiſely adapted to habituate the underſtanding to the contemplation of TRUTH. In this view iſ is far ſuperior to any other production of the Greeks ol Tum ſhort treatiſe was drawn up, at my houſe, by a judicious friend, who is well acquainted with theſe ſciences, and has a happy talent for communicating knowledge in the moſt clear and eaſy manner. I am not at liberty to mention his name, which would do me honourexcite the attention of the publicand very much promote the ſale of the book. I had long wanted an easy and familiar treatiſe of this ſort, for the uſe of my ſcholars, and it gave me a moſt ſenſible pleaſure, when I had prevailed on my friend to execute it. The book with all the drawings, was begun and finiſhed in leſs than ſix weeks. It is not deſigned for the learned; it was written for the uſe of boys, and, with no deſign to go any farther than. my own ſchool; but the trouble of tranſcribing, with exactneſs, by each youth that wanted it, would be ſo great, as to prevent the eaſy communication of this kind of knowledge. I am convinced, by more than nineteen years experience in the province of inſtructing youth, that much more may be done, than has been done, towards furniſhing and adorning the human mind. in the early part of life. It is a grievous thing to conſider, how we are ſuffered to waſte ſeven or ten years, in learning little more than meer words, whilſt the improvement of the underſtanding and the reaſon, is almoſt entirely neglected in moſt ſchools, through this kingdom. . The minds of youth are happily vecant of the cares and buſineſs of life; they are very receptive of ideas of all κinds, provided you propoſe them in a ſimple and familiar manner, and avoid every thing that is abſtracted and remote from ſenſe. Logic, and metaphyſics, though extremely uſeful to perſons of riper underſtanding, are, by no means proper for young minds,; almoſt every other branch of ſcience, in the whole circle of learning, may be propoſed and communicated to ingenious youth, from ten to ſixteen years of age. The natural hiſtory of the air, the waters, minerals, plants, and animals, which is what we call ſenſible knowiedge, may be infuſed with eaſe and pleaſure into the infant mind, and certainly we have ſome of the beſt books for this purpoſe that can be well imagined.I mean Mr. Pluche's beautiful work intitled Spectacle de la Nature, in 7 vOl. 12mo. Dr. Brookes's Syſtem of Natural Hiſtory, in 6 volumes, 12mo, with the beautiful ſketches of every part of the creation in Mr. Hervey's works; as we never had a more paſſiona-e admirer of the beauties of nature, ſo nro man perhaps in our nation had a richer imagination, or a better talent of ſtrong and delicate expreſſion than himſelſ. Arithmetie, and, geometry, are exceedingly uſeful and important ſciences for youth, and they may be taught in a more pleaſing and inſinuating manner than they uſually are. Every thing ſhould be mixed with pleaſure, and familiarity, that belongs to youth. Arithmetic can never be enoùgh taught; it deſerves more attention than is given to it, we have two authors, who have made the ſcience more eaſy and pleaſant than ever the one is the Rev. Mr. Stephen Addington of Market Harborough, in Leiceſterſhire, the other is Mr. Daniel Fenning of London, their books in my opinion are the beſt adapted for the inſtruction of youth I beg leave to inſert here a general canon for the rule of proportion, which I conſtantly uſe in my own ſchool, and Iwould recommend it to maſters of the younger claſs to inſiſt upon it, that their fcholars work every queſon in ſingle proportion, in four different ſtatings, this will ſtrengthen the mind, and is the firſt and beſt method of teaching them the uſe of their reaſoning powers that I am acquainted with. GENERAL CANONOR RULE FOR SINGLE PROPORTION TRANGSPOSED FOUR WAYGG. If four numbers or quantities are proportional, their order may be ſo tranſpoſed that each of thoſe numbers or quantities may be laſt in proportion. And ſo of any four proportional numbers or quantities of uids or ſolids, if three be given it is wanting may be found thu AS FIRST SECOND THIRD F 1 : 4:: 8 H AS SECOND FPIRST FOURTH 4 : 1 32æ4 AS THIRD FOURTH FIRST 5 8 : 382 2: 1I:: AS FOURTH THIRD SECOND 324.: 8:: 34: Geometry, or the doctrine of continuous quantity, including eration of lines, ſuperfices and xt to divinity and hiſtory, this is  very beit ſcience in which) inſtructed. It has a prodigious tendency t ention, to ſtrengthen and en nd, to improve the memory, ar ideas, and an habit of juſt 1 is ſurely the beſt logic that eve nted for the uſe of mankind. The firſt ſix books of Euclids Elements may be taught to ſchool boys, in a way of play, by working all the problems, and moſt of the theorems, ĩ in the ſIand. Let a young maſter of a ſchool provide himſelt with a large pair of compaſſes, and a long ruler. Let him firſt take Le Clerès Practical Geometry printed for Meſtrs. John and Carington Bowles, work one or two propoſitions, in the court yard, or playing place of his ſchool every day, and in about ſix weeks, or two months, hãs ſcholars will be able to enter upon Euclids Elements in the ſfame manuer. In a year's time, he may have twenty or thirty boys able to give a good account of the firſt principles of geometry, and plain trigonometry, without loſs of time, or interrupting the buſineſs of their ſchool hours. I ſhould reckon it a great honour to my ſchool, to have it juſtly ſaid,  that the boys are taught geometry, as a recreation, and, that FEuclias Elements were as familiar as the Latin accidence, or the numeration table. Iam very ſure, that all the parts of philoſophy may be taught in the moſt eaſy and familiar manner, if ſchool maſters had but public ſpirit, good humour and condeſcention. In a word, if they had but a fatherly heart, and as much concern for the pleaſure and improvement of their ſcholars, as they have for their own private gratification, and the inferior amuſements of life. For inſtancea fire ſhovel, tongs, and poker, will ſnew the foundation of the mechanic powers; eſpecially the nature of leversA ſpinning wheel, will clearly ſhew the power of the wheel and axleA brick bat on a table, will ſhew the advantage of broad above narrow wheels.marbles, will teach a ſchool boy the nature of percuſſion, and the laws of motionBy the whipping and ſpinning of tops, we may ſhew the diurnal and annual motion of the earth The twirling of a chamber maids mop, will ſhew the nature of the centrifugal force of the planets The fall of a farthing ball, teaches the doctrine of gravitation, and the laws of falling bodiesA pennyworth of quick ſilver, divided on a table, and ſome bits of cork in a baſon of water, will ſhew you the attraction of coheſionA ſpunge will teach the riſe of water in capillary tubes.A ſyringe, or a ſquib, or ſucking with a reed, or a wheaten ſtraw, will ſhew the nature of pump work.A ſchool boy's jews harp, will ſerve to teach us, thoſe tremulous motions, which are the cauſe oſ ſounds; and a glaſs priſm, and ſoap bubbles * a looking glaſs, and an oOxès eye, from the butchers will be a happy foundation for opticsA few hoops, from the cooper's ſnop, placed with ſkill, will ſnew the grand circles of the fphere, viæ. the horizon, the meridian, and equiĩoctial line, the ecliptic or ſun's path, the two tropics, and the polar circles. A ſmall pillar, of the ſame ſize which is uſed for a barber's block, with a few rings of leather, or of horn, with ſome wires and wooden balls, will make a tolerable good orrery, to ſhew the ſituation, the diſtances, the motions, and magnitudes of the heavenly bodies, in the Newtonian ſyſtem of aſtronomy.Thus, I have given a few brief hints, how younger maſters may purſue the moſt popular methods, with little expence, for the inſtruction, pleaſure, and vaſt profit of their pupils, which would iſſue in their own honour and temporal advantage, and be an unſpeakable ſatisfaction ro the parents who entruſt them with their deareſt earthly treaſure. * Note, Let the man that laughs at this; be told that Sir Iſaac Newton made a fine improvement in opries by ſeeing ſome boys blow up ſoap bubbles in the air. I will, (now I am on the head of teach ing the ſciences, by way of recreation) ad vance this aſſertion, that all the branche of knowledge may be taught by cards. The method of teaching the ſciences, by the uſe of cards, is ſuch as, perhaps in no other way can be ſo eaſy, ſo popular, ſo pleaſant, and ſucceſsful. By cards I do not mean the common playing ones for gaming, which were firſt invented for the uſe of a lunatic French king, and continued in vogue to this day by millions of mankind, infected with a worſe ſpecies of lunacy; nothing but the height of raging madness could ever ſpreꝶd ſuch a fooliſh diverſion ſo wide, or continue it ſo long, to the deſtruction of the peace of the mind, the pleaſures of friendſhip, the health of the body, and the horrible ruin of thouſands of fine eſtates and familiesBut to ſuch a height of inſanity are multitudes arrived, as tò rendler all means for their cure ineffectual; I therefore diſmiſs them in deſpair, with this one reflection; that, were I capable of wiſhing the greateſt miſery, to the worſt enemy upon earth, and that he might be one of the moſt uſeleſs and contemptible animals in the world, I would wiſh him to be a conſtant and infatuated card-player. But whilſt common ſenſe, and the love of ones country can deſpiſe and abhor ſo fooliſh and inſipid a diverſion, this fame common ſenſe, and public ſpirit can invent a thouſand ways by which cards, that is to ſay, the ſame kind of blank papers, which are ufed for cards, may with very different kind of furniturè and application, be promotive of the glorious purpoſes of ſcience and virtue, ſome of theſe pleaſant uſes we will now explain. rsT. GEOGRAPHICAL CARDS. Take a pack of blank or meſſage cards, write on them the principal cities 5 of Europe, Aſia, Africa, and America, one city en each card, with the latitude, longitude, number of inhabitants, and their religion. When you have compleated the furniture of theſe cards, the manner of playing with them is as follous. In a rainy day, or a winter evening, when the weather does not permit them to play in the open air, let wwo, three or four boys, agree to play at a game of geography; deal out the cards and let the firſt boy begin, draw a card, inſpect it, name only the city, and turn it's face downward on the table. The ſecond boy muſt anſwer, thus for example. Suppoſe it was London. London (replies the ſecond) is the capital city of the kingdom of England, it's north latitude is 51 degrees, and 32 minutes, it's longitude is nothing, becauſe the firſt.degree of longitude, or the firſt meridian, begins at London. The number of inhabitants in the city and ſuburbs, are reckoned near a million, or ten hundred thouſand; and the people profeſs the proteſtant religion. If the ſecond boy, gives a true account of what is upon the firſt card, he has a right to play one of his, and the third boy muſt anſwer. But if the ſecond boy miſſes, and the third boy anſwers truly, then he ſits above him, or takes his place, plays his card, and the ſecond boy is obliged to anfwer, if he miſtakes again, and the fourth boy names right, he takes his place, and the ſecond boy is put lower with diſgrace. And thus let the boys go on, till their cards are all played out; and let him that has made the feweſt blunders, be called the captain for that day. II. CARDS OF ANTIENT HISTORY WITH THE CHRONOLOGY ANNEXED. The furniture of a pack of blank cardi with antient hiſtory muſt be thus ordered On the firſt card write on it thus: FIRST EPOCH. ADAM, OR THE CREATION, FIRST AGE OF THE WORLD. ANNO MUNDI, ANTE CHRISTUM. VEAR OF THE WORLD, BEFORE CHRIST, O 4004 On the ſecond card write, Second epoch, Noah, or the deluge, with the year of the world, and the years before Chriſt.  Third epoch, the call of Abraham.Fourthepoch, Moſes, or the written lawm. Fiſth epoch, the deſtruction of Troy.  Sixth epoch, Solomon, or the temple finiſhed.  Seventb epoch, Romulus, or Rome founded. Eighth epoch, Cyrus, or the Jews reſtored. Ninth epoch, Scipio, or the conqueſt of Carthage.  Tenth epoch, the birth of Jeſus Chriſt,; which is the ſeventh age oſ the world ANNO MUNDI ANNO ROMAÆSA ANNO CHRISTI 4004 754 Let every young perſon, according to his ability, aſter he has placed the above furniture on one ſide of his cards, write ſome peculiar ſelect facts which happened in each period, on the other ſide. By this means he will have many of the moſt beautiful and delicate parts of antient hiſtory at an eaſy rate within his power; and ſchool-boys may play at cards of this ſort with as much pleaſure and profit, as, with the geographical ones firſt mentioned. III. CARDS OF MODERN HISTORY WITH THE CHRONOLOGY ANNEXED. The beſt way of treating modern hiſtory, is to divide it into centuries, beginning with the birth of Jeſus Chriſt, and to denominate every century according to the principal facts tranſacted in that century. And I can think of nothing better than the epithets of that learned hiſtorian, Dr. William Cave, viz. He ſtiles Century I. Sæculum Apoſtolicum. Century II. Sæculum Gnoſticum. Century III. Sæculum Novatianum. Century IV. Sæculum Arianum Century V Sæculum Neſtorianum. Century VI. Sæculum Eutychicum. Century VII. Sæculum Monotheliticu Century VIII. Sæculum Eiconiclaſticu Century IX. Sæculum Photianum. Century X. Sæ culum Obſcurum. Century XI. Sæculum Hildebrandint Century XII. Sæculum Waldenſe. Century XIII. Sæculum Scholaſticum. Century XIV. Sæculum Wicklevianui Century XV. Sæculum Synodale. Century XVI. Sæculum Reformatum. Century XVII. Sæculum Doctiſſimum. I add to Dr. Cave, Century XVIII. Sæculum Luxurioſum. IV. GEOMETRICAL CARDS. The firſt and eaſy principles of geom⸗ nay be placed on cards in the follow imple manner, and a figure ſhould end each definition to make it more ea On the ſecond, a ſecant point.  On the third, a central point.  a right line a circular line  curve line a mixed line a plumb line  a perpendicular Iine horizontal line  oblique line parallel lines  a baſe line finite lines infinite lines  apparent lineoccult line  diagonal line  diameter line ipiral line  chord line  an arc  a tangent line  a ſecant line a right lined angle a curve lined angle a mixed angle  a right angle an acute angle an obtuſe angle and from thence proceed to all ſorts of ſurfaces. This will lay a ſure foundation for plain geometry, and prepare the ingenious boy for reading Euclid's Elements with pleaſure and ſucceſs. V. OPTICAL CARD S. Optics, or the conſideration of the nature of light, and the human eye, is one of the moſt ſublime ſciences in the world. Its firſt principles may be infuſed into ſchool-boys in the following eaſy manner: take ſome blank cards, let any ingenious man draw the figures, and write underneath, the eaſieſt definitions, from Dr. Rutherforth's Syſtem of Philoſophy, viæ a ray of light the inflexion of a ray of light-the refraction of a ray of light the reflexion of a ray of light  the angle of incidence the refracted angle the angle of refraction the angle of reflection diverging rays of light  converging rays of light  parallel rays of light a radiant point  a focus  a focus changed into a radiant  a double convex lens  a plano econvex lens a double concave lensa plano-concave lens  a meniſcus, or concavo-convex lens  a plane glaſs  a flat eonvex glaſs  a priſm  the axis of lens glaſſes  the poles or vertexes of a lens diverging rays falling on a lens form a cone, whoſe apex is the radiant point, and the lens is its baſethe axis of a beam of light direct rays upon a lens oblique rays upon a lens a pencil of rays the human eye the outer coat of the eye, called the Sclerotica  the middle or black coat of the eye, called the Choroĩides  the inner coat of the eye, or net work, called the Retina the three humours of the eye, viz. the Aqueous, or watry humour of the eye the Chryſtalline, or brighteſt humour of the eye, in the form of a double convex lens the Vitreous, or glaſſy humour of the eye. N. B. When theſe firſt principles and deſinitions are clearly underſtood and well remembered, it will be eaſy and pleaſant to proceed even to Sir Iſaac Newton's moſt beautiful and incomparable Treatiſe on Optics, which is much more within the power of good common ſenſe than is uſually imagined. VI. CARDS OF ANATOMY. The ſtructure and beauty of the human body ought to be ſtudied with delight and admiration by every man; and the knowledge of this elegant fabric may be conveyed into the minds of youth, with great eaſe and pleaſure, by the uſe of cards. I rhall only exemplify it a little with regard to the bones, and refer my ingenious young friends to that moſt exquiſitely delicate and alluring deſcription of a human body, which he will find in Mr. Hervey's Theron and Aſpaſio, Dialog. XII. Let an ingenious young man take Cheſeldens Anatomy, or the Tables of Anatomy engraved by Mr. Tinney, in Fleet-ſtreet, on folio ſheets; with his pencil copy on a blank card one bone, with its name; and thus proceed with his cards through the principal bones of the human body. And leſt I ſnould not be thoroughly underſtood, or the minds of young perſons be too indolent to purſue my advice, I will lead him farther, and mention the names of the bones, which are theſe: Os frontis  os bregmatis oOs temporis os occiptis  os jugale clavicula, or collar bone ſternum, or breaſt bone ſeven vertebræ of the neck tumwelve vertebræ, or joints of the back bone five vertebræ of the loins, in all twenty-four jointsſeven true ribs of a ſide five falſe ribs the ſcapula, or ſhoulderblade os humeri, or bone of the arm above the elbowthe radius and ulna, the two bones of the arm below the elbow nhbones of the carpus or wriſt  bones of the metacarpus or hand  bohes of the fingers  the os ſacrum  os coccygis os ilium  os pubis  os femoris, or bone of the thigh the patella, or knee-pan the tibia, or largeſt bone of the leg  the fibula, or leaſt bone of the leg os calcis, or bone of the heel  the tarſus, or ſix inſtep bones the metatarſus, or bones of the foot Iaſtly, the bones of the toes. Theſe, with the ſmaller bones, may be numbered thus: about ſixty in the head and neck; ſixty in the arms and hands; ſixty in the trunk of the body; and, ſixty in the thighs, legs, and feet; in all, about two hundred and fortyv And vwith theſe the all-wiſe and powerful God has built the ſtructure of the human body; and for which he deſerves eternal love and adoration. Ido not adviſe young men to ſtudy this ſcience with the accuracy of anatomiſts, but as a profitable and rational recreation, in order to increaſe their veneration for our omnipotent and good creator; and, I can aſſure them, after more than twenty years experience, that the pleaſure and profit of this ſtudy will richly reward them for their labour. VII. CARDS OF ASTRONOMY, AND ALIVINGORRERY, MADE WITH SIXTEEN SCHOOL-BOYS. Aſtronomy is a moſt ſublime and delicious ſcience: To form a juſt idea of the magnitude, motions, and diſtances of the heavenly bodies, has a powerful and happy tendency to enlarge and elevate the ſoul, and to give us ſtricing thoughts of the wiſdom, goodneſs, and univerſal agency of God. But can any notion of this ſcience be conveyed into the minds of ſchool-boys? Will it not rather puzzle and confound their brains, and unfit them for the more important employment of ſtudying dry words for ſeven years together ? I anſwer, No. It may be taught them in their play hours with as much pleaſure as they learn to play at marbles, or drive a hoop for an hour or two; and this may be done in manner and form following: Take ſixteen blank cards; write on one, the ſun, a ſeventeenth boy of a large ſize muſt be uſed for the ſun in the center, with his diameter, which is ſeven hundred thouſand miles. On another card write mercury, with his period, eighty-eight days, diſtance from the ſun thirty-two million, diameter two thouſand ſix hundred miles, and hourly motion, which is one hundred thouſand miles. So go on to venus, our earth, mars, jupiter, and ſaturn. Then write on your other cards the names and periods of the ten moons in our ſyſtem. Having thus furniſhed your cards, then provide the orbits for theſe ſnam planets, go into any plain field, or place, where boys can play, draw a circle of two hundred feet diameter, which you may eaſily do with a cord and a broomſtick, ordering one boy to hold the cord in the center, while you deſcribe the circle with the ſtick at the other end of the ſtring. When you have formed your circle, divide the ſemi-diameter neſs, take five of theſe parts from the center and deſeribe a circle for mercurys orbit, take ſeven parts for the orbit of venus; ten parts for our earth's orbit; fifteen parts for the orbit of mars; fſiftytwo parts, that is fifty-two feet for the orbit of jupiter. And let the outward circle of a hundred feet repreſent the orbit of ſaturn, which is the boundary of the Newtonian ſyſtem. After this draw your circles for our moon round the earth, for jupiter's moons round him, and laſt of all for ſaturn's five moons. There is no occaſion to be ſcrupulouſly exact till the boys are well verſed in theſe firſt eaſy notions, reduce them to accuracy by degrees. Mr. Whiſtons Aſtronomical Principles of Religion, andMr. Ferguſon's Aſtronomy will furniſh you with ample materials for all your purpoſes. Now begin your play, fix your boys in their circles, each with his card in his hand, and then put your orrery in motion, giving each boy a direction to move from weſt to eaſt, mercury to move ſwifteſt, and the others in proportion to their diſtances, and ecach boy repeating in his turn the contents of his card, concerning his diſtance, magnitude, period, and hourlymotion. Half an hour ſpent in this play once a week will in the compaſs of a yea fix ſuch clear and ſure ideas of the ſolal fyſtem as they can never forget to the laſt hour of life. And probably roue ſome ſparks of genius, which will indle into a bright and beautiful flame in the manly. part of life. AN ADDRESS TO THE INGENUOUS YOUTH OF GREAT BRI TAIN. ii Young Gentlemen, The deſign of this addreſs to you is to give you a few brief hints concerning ſome ſome ſelect books on the principal branches of ſcience in order to ſhorten your path to good learning and ſtrew it with flowers. I know by the painful experience of above thirty years what it is to pant for knowledge and books, ſometimes without any guide, ſometimes with inſufficient and ignorant ones, ſometimes with men of learning without genius, ſometimes with men of genius and furniture, but too lazæy and indifferent, or ſwelled with pride and a haughty ſtiffneſs, or poſſeſt of no talent for the communication of knowledge, or no no inclination or condeſcenſion to accommodate themſelves to the capacity anc taſte of enquirers after trutli. But the greatſt defect I have ever found in learned men is a want of public ſpirit, and a fervent love to the riſing generation: this is the worſt part of their temper, and an indelible ſtain in their character; for which they deſerve the ſevereſt rebuke. We have in this nation men well verſed in all the ſciences, and all the branches of learning were never better underſtood than at preſent. But if every learned man had a true love to the riſing generation and a condeſcending temper, I will venture ro aver that in ſeven years time, where we have one man of real knowledge uow, we might have an hundred, or perhaps five hundred then. We ſhould not ſee ſuch ignorance in thouſands of our miniſters of religion: nor ſuch wretched and ſhameful unacquaintance with the hiſtory, laws, and government of their country, as hath fully appeared in multitudes of our young nobility, and I am ſorry and grieved to ſay it, in the majority of the repreſentatives of a brave and powerful people. Now my dear ingenious youths, let me offer you a little aſſiſtance, give me your hand, and let me lead you into a moſt beautiful and pleaſant path, which I myſelf have trod. I do not pretend to write for men, nor for thoſe young perſons who have ſkilful tutors always to attend them. I write for all thoſe who have a good natural taſte, and a paſſionate fondneſs for real knowledge, but want an experienced guide, to ſuch the following hints will not be unwelcome, nor unſerviceable. Do you in the firſt place wiſh for two or three excellent books to guard you from errors in ſtudy, and to be your faithful guides in the purſuit of ſolid learning: then my dear boys read above all authors Dr. Watts's Improvement of the Mind, 8vO. Mr. Locke's Conduct of the Underſtanding, I2mo. and John Clarkes Eſſay on Study, 12mo. Would yonu gain clear and beautiful ideas of the works of creation, read Pluche's Nature Diſplayed, 4 vols. 12mo. Dr. Brooks's Natural Hiſtory, 6vols. 12mo. Ray on the Wiſdom of God in Creation, 12mo. VWeſley's Compendium oſ Natural Philoſophy, 2 vols. 12amo. Dr CottonMather's Chriſtian Philoſopher, 8vo. 1721. Dr. Derham's Phyſico Theology, 2 vols. 8v0o. Cambray on the Exiſtence of God, r1amo. a new beautiful edition of which is juſt publiſhing. Martin on the Exiſtence of a Deity, from Sixteen Fountains of Evidence, and his Young Gentleman's and Ladys Philoſophy, 2 vols. 8vo. Theſe are the beſt books, and the eaſieſt to introduce you to Voltaire's Elements of Sir Iſaac Newton's Philoſophy, tranſſlated from the French, 8vo. 1738. an excellent book. Algarotti's Six Dialogues on Sir Iſaac Newton's Philoſophy, 2 vols. 12mo. 1739. Rowning's Compendious Syſtem of Natural Philoſophy, 2 vols. 8v0. Martins xii Lectures on all the Branches of Experimental Philofophy, intitled Philoſophia Britannica, 2 vols. 8vo. and to crown all, Dr. Rutherforth's Syſtem of Natural Philoſophy, 2 vols. 4to. 1748. If your inclination ſhould lead you to enquire farther after books on natural philoſophy, you may be directed to the utmoſt of your wiſhes, in Johnſon's Quæftiones Philoſophicæ, 12mo. Cambridge, 1735. If ever your genius ſhould grow ſtrong enough to taſte the pleaſures of ſcience, abſtracted from ſenſe, and the rational entertainments ariſing from the conſideration of the doctrine of being and of ſpirits, I adviſe you to read but a few ſelect books, the beſt Iam acquainted with are Dr. Watts's. Scheme of Ontology, at the end of his philoſophical eſſays, and Dr. Doddridges Pneumatology in his Lectures, 4to. 1762.I have in MS. Mr. Henry Grove's beautiful Syſtem of Pneumatology. I wiſh from my heart that ſome bookſeller would venture to print it, on the footing of a ſubſcription from the learned world. This ingenious writer certainly was one of the cleareſt thinkers on metaphyſical ſubjects that our age has produced. Have you a taſte for the knowledge of numbers and quantity? Read and ſtudy theſe books, Mr. Addington's Syſtem of Arithmetic, 8v0. Le Clerc's Geometry, 12mo. echales Euclid, 12mo. VWIiſtons Edition of Euclid, 8vO. 1714. Theſe two editors of Euclid, ſhew the practical uſes of the problems and theorems; and will remarkably ſtrengthen your habit of attention, teach you to ſift and compare your ideas, and enlarge your reaſoning powers in a remarkable manner. Do you deſire to form a familiar acquaintance with the firſt principles of natural religion, and moral philoſophy? Read Sir Richard Blackmores Natural Theology, 8vo. 1728. Wollaſton's Religion of Nature Delineated, 4to. Reimarus on Natural Religion, 8vo. Fordyce's Elements of Moral Philoſophy, 12mo. 17. and to compleat your ſtudies on this head, read Groves Syſtem of Moral Philoſophy, 2 vols. 8vo. Ifreely own I prefer this for the ſavour of piety and delicate compoſition, beyond Dr. Hutchenſon's Syſtem, a vols. 4to. Do you love the grand ſcience of ſociety, government, and the laws of your country? This is indeed a moſt noble and important object of the human underſtanding: it gives an amplitude to the ſoul, and leads to a moſt exalted idea oſ the divine government of the univerſe. I am ſo far from adviſing you not to ſtudy politics, that on the other hand, I counſel you to employ your powers very often on the glorious ſtructure and excellence of the Britiſh conſtitution; and to aſſiſt you in your views, read the beſt books that were ever written, ſince Britain exiſted, Milton, Sydney, Locke and Dr. Campbell, Sydney's Treatiſe on Government, folio, 1696. Locke on Government, 8vo. Dr. Campbell's Preſent State of Europe, 8vo. s5th edition, and his excellent Sketch of Laws and Government publiſhed in the Preceptor, vol. 2. to theſe books add Dr. Blackſtone's Commentaries on the Laws of England, 2 vols. 4t0.Theſe are certainly ſuperior to every work of the Kind, that have appeared in our language. Above all things my dear young friends, ſtudy the evidences and contents of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION. The greateſt and beſt ſtep you can take for this purpoſe, is to conſider deeply and accurately, the inſufficiency of human reaſon to lead you to eternal happineſs, in the full fruition of the ſupreme good; ſtudy this ſubject to the utmoſt of your capacity, I can aſſure youafter twenty-two years inceſſant labour and thought on this moſt important and momentous point, that nothing does more mortify our native pride, and conceit of our ſtrength of reaſon than a juſt and impartial view of its inſufficiency, to conduct us to the higheſt end of man. If you do not believe me, try what you can do without your bible; ſummon up your beſt powers, and exert the utmoſt force of your genius to attain a clear and extenſive kKnowledge, of the attributes and providence of God; find out the true way of worſhipping God; tell me in the moſt convincing manner, wherein conſiſts the ſolid happineſs of human nature; declare to me and the world, the chief good of the ſoul; draw out a ſyſtem of true morality without any defect; explain every duty we owe to God and mankind; produce the richeſt, and moſt perſuaſive motives to excite to the exerciſe of every virtue; diiplay ſuch powerful reaſons, as ſhall prevail with every man, to diſcharge the whole of moral obligation, and perſevere in virtue and goodneſs to the laſt moment of his life; give me a moſt ſatisfying account of the origin of moral evil, which has ever raged with ſuch dreadful power and malignity all over the rational world; and ſhew me how this may be pardoned ſo as to ſatisfy a ſerious enquirer, and calm a guilty conſcience; demonſtrate to me by the ſtrength of your reaſon, how one ſinner, how millions of ſinners, may be introduced into the favour and friendſip of God, notwithſtanding all their paſt offences. and be happy in him for ever; aſſure me of an effectual means to curb every licentious paſſion, every vile appetite, every vicious inclination, every impure imagination and taſte; fhew me a ſufficient fund of moral and proximate power, to raiſe me above the wicked ſpirit and polluted manners of the whole world, and to perſiſt in virtue and goodneſs in ſpite of all temptations, to my laſt hour. If you think the powers of reaſon are fuſficient to conduct you to the ſupreme good and final happineſs of man; try your utmoſt ſtrength to ſupport yourſelf under che troubles of life, and the vexations and croſſes, you meet with in mind body, and eſtate, fortify yourſelf againſt all the tertors and ſtings of death; act a courageous part, when that ghaſtly monarch, who is ſtiled by an ancient and very acute philoſopher * the terrible of all terribles, ſhall come to ſeparate your ſoul and body; to turn the mortal part of your nature into corruption and duſt, and fix your character and ſtate in another world, which you muſt enter into with all your thinking powers, and moſt lively conſciouſneſs for evermore. Now if you have fortitude enough, enough, meet this king of terrors, and without the aſſiſtance of divine revelation, addreſs him boldly. Ol death, where is thy ſtingè? Ol grave, where is thy victory? This method of proceeding in order to prepare you, for ſtudying the evidences and contents of the chriſtian religion, is the beſt that can be thought of; becauſe it has a direct tendency to humble the pride of your nature, to abaſe the high conceit which every man forms of his own ſtrength and goodneſs of heart; and ſuch conſiderations as theſe, will bring you to the duſt as a guilty ruined creature; utterly inſufficient to conduct yourſels to the final perfection of your faculties, and the ultimate happineſs of your immortal ſpirit. In this temper of mind ſet yourſelf to examine the evidences of the truth and divine authority of the chriſtian religion. To aſſiſt you in this affair of infinite moment, I recommend to your peruſal Dr. David Jennings's two diſcourſes intiteled, An Appeal to common Senſe for the Truth of the Scriptures, and Dr. Doddridge's three ſermons on the Evidences of Chriſtianity, I2 mo. price 8d.  Theſe are perhaps the moſt clear and convincing of any ſermons in our language; but the moſt extenſive view oſ the whole ſubject, in all its parts and connexions, that has appeared in our world, you will find in Dr. Doddridge's Courſe of Divinity, 4to. 1763. including LIII. lectures (viz.) from lect. CI. to lect. CLIV. It is an act of juſtice to acknowledge, that no one ſingle book of a theological nature has equalled this in our land: and it is an honour to the good ſenſe and candour of ſome gentlemen, in public ſeminaries, that they have paid a proper attention to this excellent courſe of lectures on pneumatology, ethics and divinity *. In order to make your enquiries more eaſy, pleaſant and ſucceſsſful, I will lead you on a little farther. Our moſt learned and judicious divines have a thouſand times obſerved, that revelation ſtands on four principal pillars, or, in other words, is ſupported and confirmed by four capital arguments, viæ. the fulfilment of prophecies  the working of miracles * This celebrated work was the reſult of thirty years accurate ſtudy and labour, with the reviſal of all his beſt friends and c orreſpondents. the goodneſs of the doctrine  and the moral character of the pen-men, eſpecially the divine character of the great founder of the chriſtian religion. I. FULFILMENT OF PROPHECIES. This is a glorious argument to demonſtrate the divine truth and authority of the holy ſcriptures; and it has this excellence, that its evidence is ever growing by the accompliſhment of many prophecies now in the world. No age or country has been bleſſed with a brighter diſplay of this evidence in its vaſt extent and connexion than our own. It is enough to name Dr. Newton's 3 vols. of Diſſertations on Prophecy; it would be an affront to common ſenſe to ſay any thing in favour of a work which is ſo generally known and eſteemed, and which ſurpaſſes all commendation. However, it will be nodiſparagement to that incomparable work, to mention Dr. Gills Treatiſe on the Prophecies fulſilled in the Meſſiah, 8vO. 1728. The judicious Mr. Robert Fleming's Treatiſe on the fulfiling of the Scripture, a ſmall folio. And the excellent Mr. Benjamin Bennett's Diſcourſes on the Fulfilment of Scripture, towards good and bad Men, in his Sermons on Inſpiration, 8vO. 1730. Let me adviſe you to ſtudy this argument throughly: make yourſelf maſter of the ſubject in all its parts. Nothing ſtrikes a wiſe man's mind ſo ſtrongly as facts, and it muſt give you unutterable pleaſure to obſerve how the biſhop of Briſtol confirms and illuſtrates the prophecies and facts of ſcripture, by a judicious and moſt happy application of paſſages ſelected from antient hiſtory. It is no diſhonour to this great man to ſay, that our learned Dr. Prideaux, and an author who is the glory of the Kingdom of France, and whoſe name and writings will ever be dear to me, paved the way for Dr. Newton and pointed out the method which he has ſo well purſued. Would you know this laſt author? He is the amiable, I had almoſt ſaid the DIVINE, ROLLIN. II. THE WORKING OF MIRACLES. This is another excellent and moſt convincing argument to proves the divine inſpiration of the holy ſcriptures, and taker in connexion with the fulfilment of prophecies on the one hand, and with the goodneſs of the doctrine on the other, it riſes up almoſt to irreſiſtable demonſtration. I will not mention a thouſandth part of what has been ſaid for or againſt this head of argument; but will ſhew you the plaineſt and moſt pleaſing method of beginning your conſiderations upon it, ſo as to produce the moſt ſtricing conviction of its glory and evidence, only remarking, by the way, that the Deiſts have of late, as well as in former days, employed their utmoſt art and force to overthrow this argument, particularly David Hume, and Rouſſeau. The former has been fully anſwered by the late Dr. Leland, in his View of the Deiſtical Writers, Vol. II. 8vo. and by the Rev. Mr. Richard Price, F. R. S. in his Diſſertations juſt publiſhed. The latter i. e. Rouſſeau has been effectually confuted by one of his own country men and fellow citizens, Dr. Claparede, profeſſor of divinity at Geneva, whoſe work has been tranſlated from the French, and printed this year in London for Mr. Newbery, 8v0.I would adviſe you to read this little treatiſe on miracles with attention, as it is written vith remarkable clearneſs and preciſion and contains the ſubſtance of what you will find in larger volumes. But ſuppoſe you had no book on miracles except your bible, what would you do in order to have a clear and extenſive view of this ſubject, and anfwer your great end, which is a full and compleat conviction that the ſacred ſcriptures are inſpired from heaven? I will ſatisfy you, my dear young friend; I will point out to you the moſt eaſy and effectual method of ſtudying this ſubject. The ſirſt thing I adviſe you to do is this, endeavour to attain the cleareſt idea of a MIRACLE. The learned and judicious Mr. John Hurrion * defines a miracle thus  c Miracles arè extraordinary works of God, above, beyond or contrary to the courſe æ His ſixteen excellent ſermons, p. 436, intitled, The ſcripture doctrine of the proper divinity real perſonality, and the external and extraordinary works of the Holy Spirit, ſtated and defended at Pinners-hall, 1729, 1730, 1731. 8vo. Oſwald in the Poultry, 1734.Note. Few people in the world know the worth of theſe ſermons. On the ſubject they have no equal. of nature, or the power of ſecond cauſes, done to confirm the truth.' Dr. Doddridge * defines a miracle thus, e When ſuch effects are produced as (cæteris paribus) are uſually produced, God is ſaid to operate according to the common courſe of uature: but when ſuch effects are produced as are (cæt. par.) contrary to, or different from that common courſe, they are ſaid to be MirAcuULOUuSs. Dr. Claparede's & definition is the ſhorteſt and moſt eaſy to be underſtood, cc A miracle is a ſenſible change in the order of nature.? Nature is the aſſemblage of created beings. Theſe beings act upon each, other, or by each other, agreeable to certain laws; the reſult of which is what we call the order of nature. Theſe laws, being a conſequence of the nature of theſe beings, and of the relations which they bear to each other, are * See his lectures, part V. lect. CI. definition LXVII.  Read his conſiderations upon the miracles oſ he goſpel, 8vo. 25. 6d. Newbery, 1767. invariable: it is by them God governs the world. He alone eſtabliſned them. He alone therefore can ſuſpend them. The proper effect then of miracles is to mark clearly the divine interpoſition, and the ſcriptures ſuppoſe that ſuch too is their deſign. Hence I draw this conſequence, that he who performs a miracle performs it in the name of God and on his behalf, that is to ſay, in proof of a divine miſſion. But what are the characters of true miracles? H Ow may we know that the maſter of nature hath been pleaſed to modify or ſuſpend its laws? A queſtion of the higheſt importancel We have a clue to guide us in this reſearch: ſince the end of miracles is to mark the divine interpoſition, the miracle muſt have characters proper to mark this interpoſition. 1ſt. It muſt have an end important and worthy of its author. 2. Be ſenſible and eaſy to be obſerved. 3. Be independent of ſecond cauſes. 4. Be inſtantaneouſly performed. Now, my young friend, proceed to take a ſurvey of the miracles in what I would call A COMPENDIOUS VIEW OF THE MIRACLES RECORDED IN THE BIBLE. Deluge  confuſion of languages fire on Sodom burning buſh rod turned into a ſerpent  rivers made blood the plague of frogs duſt turned into lice ſwarms of ſlies  murrain on the cattle boils on man and beaſt hail mingled with fire locuſts  darkneſs to be felt death of the firſt bornred ſea divided bitter waters of Marah ſwueetened rock guſhes out with water law given at Sinai with thunder, fire, and earthquake quails given to eat for 600,000 men  manna given every morning for 40 years Nadab and Abihu burnt with fire earth opens to ſwallow up Korah, Dathan, and Abirambrazen ſerpent curinga dumb aſs ſpeaking with an human voice  Jordan divided  ſun and moon ſtanding ſtill for a whole day  Gideon's fleecepowers of Sampſonwater flowing from a jawbonemeal and oil multiplied widow's ſon raiſed-no rain for three years Shunamites ſon raiſed the wonders of Elijan and Eliſha - Naaman's leproſy cured  GehazZi made a leper for life one hundred fourſcore and five thouſand Aſſyrians Killed in one night  the ſun on the dial of Ahaz going ten degrees backward three heroes in the fiery furnance a man's hand writing on the walllions refuſing to devour Daniel in the dena fiſh ſwallowing Jonah, and after three days and three nights vomiting him up alive upon cthe dry land! MIRACLES OF THE. NEW TEGSTAMENT. The man Jeſus born without an earthly fatherwater turned into winea nobleman's ſon reſtored  leper cleanſed  centurion's ſervant healed  burning fever in Peter's wife's mother removed a raging tempeſt calmeddlegion of devils driven out npalſy cured with a word ſJairus's dead daughter raiſediſſue of blodd of twelve years ſtanding effectually removeddumb man made to ſpeaktwo blind men made to ſee withered hand reſtored  a man. made blind and dumb by the devil, reſtored to ſight and ſpeechfive thouſand fed with a few loaves and fiſhes  Jeſus walk. ing on the watry world a poor woman cured by touching the hem of his garment Syrophœnician womans daughter reſtored a man by the devil made a lunatick cured a fiſh bringing the tribute money in his mouthfig tree withering away deaf and ſtammerer reſtored to hearing and free ſpeech four thouſand fed wonderful draught of fifheswidow's dead ſon raiſed ſeven devils caſt out of Mary Magdalen  a woman crooked for eighteen years made ſtraight  ten lepers cleanſed  a man impotent for thirtyeightyears healed  a man blind from his birth made to ſee buyers and ſellers whipt out of the temple, æ(this is thought the greateſt miracle) LaZarus dead and putrified reſtored to life  darkneſs at Chriſts death  Chriſts own reſurrection, a glorious miracle lthe Saints ariſing with Jeſusa net full of great fiſnes, (one hundred and fifty three) yet the net not broken. Note. I1. Explain the preciſe circumſtances of each miracle. 2. Make pertinent and ſtriking reſlections on each. IL. GOODNESS OF THE DOC. TRINE. This is the moſt popular, convincing and attractive argument, to prove the divine inſpiration of the ſcriptures. Good, in its moſt ſimple idea, ſignifies any thing that is ſuited to pleaſe our taſte or promote our happineſs natural good, is any thing that is fitted to anſwer its end metaphyſical good is whatever is agreeable to the intention of the great and wiſe creator natural good, as conſidered with relation to ſenſible or rational and intelligent beings, ſignifies what is pleaſant, or that which tends to procure pleaſure or happineſs. Good, in a rational ſenſe ſignifies any being or thing that is poſſeſt of ſuch perfections as are proper for any valuable and important end. The goodneſs of a thing is its fitneſs to produce any particular end that is valuable and important to a reaſonable creature. The goodneſs of the doctrine of revealed religion is its fuitableneſs to increaſe our pleaſure, diminiſh our pain, continue the preſence of good, and to remove the preſſures of evil. Goodneſs, in the ſenſe in which we uſe it on this occaſion, ſignifies ſuch a revelation or diſcovery of God, as hath an exquiſite tendency to pleaſe a rational taſte, elevate and extend our perceptions, remove the preſſures of guilt, ſupport under a ſenſe of pain, and particularly aſſiſt and animate us, in the purſuit of the nobleſt ends of our exiſtence, and carry us on to the final deſtination of our nature, in its reſt in the ſupreme and eternal good, who is the final cauſe of our immortal ſpirits. That which has the fitteſt tendency to carry us with the ſureſt ſucceſs to the higheſt end, muſt be eſteemed the richeſt and moſt abundant good to man. In order to know the chief good of the human kind, we muſt conſider what we are; what are our chief ſprings of action; what are our principles of fruition,; and what is the laſt end of man. We find that there are three conſtituent principles, or properties, which diſtinguiſh human nature from the beaſts that periſh. Man has a perception of a firſt cauſe. whom we callGod-he has a moralſenſe, or perception, of the difference between moral good and moral evil and a lively apprehenſion of immortality in a future world. But in ſpite of human pride man is a guilty creature; he has ſwerved from his trueſt and nobleſt end; and has infinite need of a divine revelation, to reſtore him to his original ſtate, and raiſe him to an immortal dignity. The goſpel is adapted to this end, with the moſt exquiſite delicacy and wiſdom. It teaches us to confeſs the depravity of our own nature, and the rectitude and beauty of the divine; to acknowledge the holineſs of the law, and cover ourſelves with ſhame, for all our deviations from the wiſe and excellent order of heaven it inſpires us with ſentiments of veneration for the excellencies of God; and obliges us to ſee and own the tranſcendent beauty of his perfections, as the object of our choiceſt thoughts and higheſt eſteem. This bleſſed revelation perſuades us to truſt in the ſupreme mind, and commit all our concerns in life and death into the hands of that God, who is a Being of inſinite tenderneſs and fidelity; it animates us to a generous zeal for the honour of his perfections, when they are denied or degraded by the tongues and actions of infidels, who ſet themſelves againſt him. It teaches us to improve all our talents of nature, literature and goodneſs, all our power, wealth and reputation for the divine honour; and to produce the glorious fruits of knowledge and benevolence, proportionable to the advantage we enjoy; and thus to repreſent the beauty of God's moral perfections to mankind. l This excellent religion perſuades and aſſiſts us to acknowledge our infinite diſtance from God, our utter unworthineſs before him, and univerſal dependence on his vital preſence, and inceſſant energy to preſerve, enlighten and extend our powers; it teaches us to give him the higheſt glory, as the generous author of all our good, the ſource of all our bleſſings; to expreſs the utmoſt gratitude for his beneficence; to ſet an extreme value on all his bleſſings of nature and grace; and to preſferve a deep ſenſe of the precious benefits of health, wealth, and happineſs. * See Dr. Ridgley's body of divinity, p. 1-7. This generous religion pours a torrent of pleaſure through all the mind and ſoul of man,; it breathes eternal chearfulneſs into the diſtreſſed conſcience; it recommends God's ſervice as moſt agreeable to our faculties, moſt ſuitable to our rational powers, promotive of our beſt intereſt, full of ſolid ſatisfaction; and it ſweetly conſtrains us to avow in the face of the whole world, that we do not repent of engaging in the ſervice of our adorable maſter; that we do not wiſh we had purſued the paths of vice, and pleaſed the grand apoſtate, the firſt rebel in the world, rather than our omnipotent and good Creator, the ever bleſſed and immortal GOD. A MINIATURE PICTURE OF THE. CHRISTIAN RELIGION, OR A VIEVWOF THE BEAUTIFUL PERFECTIONS OF CHRISTIANITY. The goſpel is a bright diſcovery of a benevolent proviſion of happineſs for man; a proviſion of happineſs conſiſtent with eternal rectitude, and founded upon the invariable juſtice of the divine nature; mated by love, made effectual in its intentions byomnipotence, and carried on to its final iſſue under the conduct of the moſt exquiſite wiſdom and prudence. This revelation gives us the beſt ideas of God's perfections, it unfolds God's full character, it diſcovers all of God at once, as far as man in his preſent ſtate can apprehend.This glorious inſtitution teaches us the ſeveral relations of God to our world, as its almighty creator, proper owner, wiſe governor, generous benefactor, and impartial judge. This divine religion aſſerts the original dignity and happineſs of human nature, it ſfnows the revolt of all mankind from GOd, and their deviation from the eternal order of beings and the beautiful fitneſs which the will of God has ordained to run through his univerſal empireIt opens to our admiring eyes, God's inſinite compaſſions to milerable man, and the harmonious aſemblage of the divine perfections to recover us from ruin and raiſe us to final felicity. It gives a wonderful view ofſ commanding authority to awe the mind, and of love to allure the heart to obedience. Chriſtianity throws open the moſt ſublime truths to aſtoniſh and yet improve the human underſtanding, and elevate the mind to its higheſt perfection; it draws the moſt beautiful image of God upon the ioul, preſcribes the moſt intenſe adoration of man to his creator, and trains him np to the moſt generous devotion and the plcaſures of angels. This Iovely ſcheme of religion preſents us with the moſt perfect ſtandard of beautiful and found morals, it holds up to our view the beſt ſyſtem of true virtue that ever appeared in the world, a ſyſtem without redundancy, without defect; a ſyſtem adjuſted to the nature, the powers and the connections of man, and that is calculatedfor the perfect felicity, as well as the perfect rectitude of human nature. It likewiſe provides the beſt ſuccours for our feeble powers, and gives the ſureſt aids, the richeſt aſſiſtances to attain the glorious holineſs it preſcribes, and thus equally prevents a bold preſumption of independence, and a cowardly indolence and dreaming inactivity, ariſing from a want of ſtrength, or a cõnſciouſneſs of weakneſs. This chriſtian revelation diſcovers unutterable encouragement to diſtreſſed ſinners in the divine obedience of the Iuord Jeſus Chriſt; it opens a ſcene of the moſt glorious actions performed by the ſon oſ God in the nature of man; or in other words, it ſhews us the bleſſed Jeſus filled with heavenly dignity, and greatneſs of mind, animated by the moſt burning love to God and mankind, performing a regular courſe of the moſt beautiful actions and ſervices; or you may View his whole life as one entire grand action performed for the honour of God's moral attributes, ſuffering a death the moſt terrible and alarming with invincible reſolution and fortitude, and followed with the moſt precious conſequences to man, for it ſnews us that this one grand action and ſuffering compleatedin death, it ſhews us I ſay all this terminating upon us, as made rich by theſe meritorious actions and divine ſervices which entitle us to the full fruition of God What a contrivance of God's ſuperlative wiſdom is thisè to give us a l the infinite benefits ariſing from the glorious obedience, and moſt agonizing death of the higheſt perſonage in the world! Thus by reaſon of our relation to him and his conc nexion with us, we are made rich with his riches, and heirs of all Gods empire by virtue of our relation to him who is the heir of all things. This divine inſtitution humbles the ſinner and exalts the redeemer. It teaches us to form a very low opinion of the extent of our own knowledge and goodneſs, and to feel a deep ſenſe of our conſtant and abſolute dependance on God's univerſal agency, and a conſciouſneſs of our guilt: that we have offended the infinite majeſty of heaven, and deſerved his contempt and indignation. That we ought to be treated with abhorrence, and puniſhed with the loſs of all poſſible and infinite good through an eternal duration. In a word, this religion plainly ſnews us that ſin is an infinite evil, as it ſtrices at an infinite God, expoſes us to infinite loſs, fixes a ſtain in the ſoul through an infinite duration. Such views of ſin lay the ſoul in the duſt at the foot of God, and teaches us to adore and love that Saviour who with almighty power and boundleſs love hath reſcued us from eternal and overwhelming deſtruction. Our bleſſed religion ordains the moſt excellent buſineſs and uſeful employment for every day of our ſhort life upon earth, it teaches us to ſill up every hour with fuch generous deeds as ſhall follow us with honour into eternity and enlarge our glory and felicity for ever. Upon the chriſtian plan of principles and actions, we are saught that a contemplation of the moral perfections of God, devotion to him through Chriſt, and unwearied benevolence to man, are the only ends for which life is worth a wiſh or a rational thought. Conſequently This divine ſyſtem propoſes to us the nobleſt ſprings of action, and directs us to the moſt exalted ends of our exiſtence, it teaches us that God is the father and author of our being, that we ſprang ſrom his breath, ſhould reſemble his virtues, and tend towards him as our final reſt and infinite good. This bleſſed goſpel raiſes us to a daily correſpondence with heaven, a ſublime converſe with the greai father of reaſon, and the fountain of immortal ſpirits. This precious ſcheme of ſalvation, is excellently adapted to the welfare of the ſuuls of individual perſons, to ſtrengthen the ſtanding; to brighten our genius; refine our reaſon; to enlarge the heart with benevolence; fortify the ſoul with courage; and ſweeten all the devout and ſocial affections. This divine religion, gloriouſty promotes the good of all civil ſocieties, unites all ranks of men in one bleſſed band of fathers, brothers, ſons and ſubjects; it teaches the rich to be generous parents to the poor, and the poor to be dutiful, grateful children to the rich; it teaches kings to be fathers, and ſubjects to be ſons, and turns all mankind into one general family of friendſhip and love. . NORTHAMPTON, Jan. 1. 1768. JOHN RYLAND. Note, This diſplay of the beautiful perfections of the CHR IS T IAN religion will be continued in the SECOND ESSAY On the ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNν ING, and prefixed to a book now printing, entitled a Compendiun of Natural Philoſophy, containing Mechanics, Hydroſtatics, Pneumatics, Optics and Aſtronomy. By John Horſley, A. M. adapted to a courſe of Rxperiments performed in Glaſgow, 12mo. MECHANICAL POWERS. NY machine or engine by which A a man can raiſe a greater weight, or overcome a greater reſiſtance, than he could do by his natural ſtrength without it, is called a mechanical power. To every machine of this ſort, a power is applied, in order to raiſe a weight or overcome a reſiſtance. And the machine is ſo contrived, that the power which works it, ſhall move through a greater ſpace in the ſame time, than the weight or reſiſtance moves through: for without this, no advantage can be gained by it. The power or advantage gained by any machine, let it be ever ſo ſimple or ever ſo compound, is as great, as the ſpace moved through by the working power is greater than the ſpace through which the weight or reſiſtance moves, during the time of working. Thus, iſ that part of the machine to which the working power is applied, moves through 5, 10, 20, or (if you will) 1000 times as much ſpace as the weight moves through in the ſame time; a man who has juſt ſtrength enough to work the machine will raiſe 5, 10, 20, or 1000 times as much by it as he could do by his mere natural ſtrength without it. But then, the time loſt will be always as great as the power gained. For it will take 5, 10, 20, or I ooο times as much time for the power to move through that number of feetor inches, as it would do to move through one foot orone inch. The ſimple machines called mechanical powers, are ſix in number, viz. the lever, the wheel and axle, the pulleys, the inclined plane, the wedge, and the ſcrewvm. And of theſe, all the T H EÆ . L. E V E R, OR F I R S T M EC HANICAL POW E R. LEVRER is a bar of iron or wood, made uſe of for raiſfing great weights a little way from the ground, and ſupporting them until ropes be put unter them, to raiſe them higher by other mãchines, if required. Fig. I. ABC is ſuch a bar, placed upotra ſtone D in the ground E. The ſtone muſt be firm in the ground, to ſupport the lever or bar; and is called the prop. The parts AB and BC, on qiferent ſides of the prop, are called the arm of the lever. The end of the ſhorteſt arm AB is put below the weight F, and the hand (which is called the working power) is applied to the end C of the longeſt arm BC. Here it is plain, that if the hand at C either pulls or puſhes down the end C of the arm of the lever BC, the end A of the arm AB will raiſe the weight F. And, by means of this ſimple machine, a man will be able to raiſe as much more weight at F than he could raiſe by his natural ſtrength without any ſuch machine, as the arm BC is longer than the arm AB: and the power or hand at C will move through as much more ſpace than the weight F moves through, as BC is longer than AB. Hence, the power or advantage gained by this lever, or added to the natural ſtrength of a man, is as great as the arm BC is longer than the arm AB. To prove this by experiment, provide ſuch a bar as ABC (fig. 2.) and divide its length into any number of equal parts, as ſuppoſe 7, of which AB ſhall be one part, and BC the other ſix. Let the part AB be made ſo thick and heavy, as juſt to balance the part BC, when the bar reſt on the prop D, having the part AB on the leſt ſide of the prop, and the part BC on the right ſide. Then hang the weight E of one ounce, on the end of the arm BC at 6, and hang the weight F of ſix ounces at Aon the end of the arm AB; and the weight E will juſt balance and ſupport the weight F which is ſix times as heavy. Here, E may be called the power, and F the weight. F being as much nearer the prop than E is, as E is lighter than F. There are four diferent kinds of levers: the one here referred to is called a lever oſ the firſt kind, in which, the prop is between the power and the weight. The deſcription of the other three kinds follow in order. THE SECOND KIND OF LEVER. In this machine, the weight is between the prop and the power. Thus, the bar ABC is ſupported at the end A by the table D, a weight as E is hung any where upon the bar, as at B, and the power or hand is applied to the other end C of the bar, to lift up that end, and raiſe the weight. Théè power or advantage gained by this machine is as great as the diſtance of the hand from the table or prop D exceeds the diſtance of the weight from it. Thus, if the power or hand at C be ſeven times as far from D as the point B of the bar is, on which the weight E is hung, a power equal to the ſeventh paft of the weight will ſupport it. So that a man, taking hold of the end C of the bar or lever ABC, and pulling upward, could ſupport ſeven times as much weight hanging for the point B as he could carry in his arms without ſuch a machine; and he muſt raiſe the end C ſeven inches, in order to raiſe the weight E one inch. To confirm this by experiment, divide the length of the bar ABC (fig. 4.) into ſeven equal parts, and place the end A on the prop D: then tie the ſtring dd to the other end C of the bar, and put the ſtring over the pulley f which turns freely round its axis ſ5 the ſaid axis being ſuppoſed to be fixed in the wall of the room. This done, hang a weight F of one ounce to the end of the ſtring at 15 and hang a weight of 7 ounces on the point B of the bar AB, at a ſeventh part of the length of the bar from the prop D; and the weight E by endeavouring to deſcend, and raiſe the end C of the bar, will ſuſtain the weight E; ſo that, between theſe weights, the bar or lever will remain immoveable. THE THIRD KIND OF LEVER. In this machine, the power is between the prop and the weight. It cannot properly be reckoned a mechanical power, but rather the reverſe thereof; becauſe a man can lift as much more by his natural ſtrength than he can by this lever, as the diſtance oſ the weight from the prop is greater than the diſtance of the power from the prop. So that it is the lever of the ſecond kind reverſed. For, if the end A of the bar ABC (fig. 5.) be placed below the table D, and the bar be divided into ſeven equal parts, from A to C; and there be a weight of one ounce, as E hung upon the end C oſ this lever, and a man takes hold of the lever at B, which is only a ſeventh part of the whole length from the end A, and pulls upward, he muſt pull with a power or force of ſeven ounces at B to ſupport one ounce at the end C , and then, if he raiſes his hand one inch higher, the weight C will be raiſed ſeven inches. To prove this, divide the bar ABC (fig. 6.) into ſeven equal parts, put the end A under the table D, and tie one end of the ſtring dd to the diviſion 1 at B, and tie the other end of the ſtring at 7 to a weight F of ſeven ounces. Then, tie the weight E of one ounce to the ſeventh diviſion at the end C of the bar, and put the ſtring over the pulley e which is at liberty to turn round its axis ſ, and the weight F which acts as a power of 7 ounces to pull the lever upward, will be balanced by the weight E which is but one ounce, and pulls the lever downward with the force of one ounce. So that, if the part AB be made thick enough to balance the part BC without any weights, and the weights E and F be hung on as in the figure, they will juſt balance and ſupport each other. And if the weight F be pulled one inch downward, it will raiſe the weight E ſeven inches. THE FOURTH KIND OF LEVER. Tnhis lever disfers in nothing but its form, from the lever of the firſt kind: its power is the ſame, and its ſhape is repreſented in fig. 8. and is applicable to that of drawing a. nait out of wood by a hammer. Suppoſe the ſhaſt AB (fig. 7.) of the hammer ABC to be five times as long as the iron part BC, which draws the nail D; the part B of the hammet reſting on the point 5 of the board as a prop. Then, by pulling buekward the end of the ſhaft at A, a man will draw the nail D with a fifth part of the power that he could pull it out with pincers, in which caſe, the nail would move as faſt as his hand does; but with this hammer, the hand moves through five times the length of the nail by the time the nail is drawn out of the wood. . l To confirm this, make AB (fig. 8.) five times as long as BC, bending the bar ABC to the form of a carpenter's ſquare. Then let the heel B turn on a pin b, as a fixt axis or prop, driven into the wainſcot of a room, and let a ſtring fixt at A go over the pulley D which turns on the pin d alſo fixt into the wainſcot. Then hang a weight E of one ounce to the lower end of the ſtring, and a weight of five ounces as F, to the end C of the bended lever; and theſe weights will balance each other. Here the axis or prop òb is between the weight F and the power E, (whoſe action is at A) as in the lever of the firſt kind. ; All ſciſſars, pincers, and ſnuffers, are levers of the firſt kind, and the nail which holds them together crum or prop. Bakers knives, which are ſtaple at the point of the bl levers of the ſecond Eind, loaves. Rudders of ſhips, turning on hinges are ler ſecond kind, and ſo are oar The bones of a man's leg as levers of the third kind, the pinions and wheels of W H E E L AND AXL E, o R S E C O ν D MECHANICAL POW ER. INν this machine a cord C goes round the wheel A, and another cord E goes round the axle B, which is fixt into the wheel; ſo that for every time the wheel is turned round, the axle muſt turn round alſo. A weight F (fig. 9.) is fixt to the cord E that goes round the axle, and a power is applied at D to the eord C that goes round the wheel. If the power D bears the ſame proportian to the weight F rthat the diameter of the axle bears to the diameter of the wheel, the power and weight will balance each other. Thus, ſuppoſe the diameter of the wheel to be eight inches, and the diameter of the axle to be orie inch; then, one ounce acting as a power at D will balance eight ounces of weight at F; and a ſmall additional power at D will cauſe it to deſcend, and turn the wheel and its axle, and ſo raife the weight F. And for every inch that Eriſes, D will fall eight inches: ſo that the velecity oſ the ponver D will exceed the velocity of tbe Aocishi F as che eircum erenoe of the nobeel excebis the circumference of the nxle, which te here ſuppoſe ib be eight times: And by ſuch a machine a man pulling the cord C at D would be abie to rãiſe eight times as much weight at F hung to the cord E as he could raiſe by his natural ſtrength without ſuch a machine. Hence, the power and advantagè gained by this machine is as great as the diameter or circumference of the wheel exceeds the diameter or circumference of the axle. It is eaſy to conceive that the power of the wheel and axle is the ſame with that of a lever of the firſt kind. For, (in fig. 10.) let HC be a wheel, and Abòb its axle. Draw the ſtraight line ABC; then, as B is the center of the wheel, AB is the ſemi-diameter of the axle, and BC the ſemi-diameter of the wheel; and here, AB may be conſidered as the ſhorter arm of the lever ABC, BC as its longer arm, and a the prop. Now, if BC be eight times as long as AB, a weight D of. one ounce hanging from C will balance a weight F of eight ounces hanging from A. P U L L E , ilſ OR T H I RD MECHANICAL POWER. Single pulley as AB (fig. 11.) that turns round its axis in a fixt block as C, and does not move out of its place, ſerves only to change the direction of the power, but gives no mechanical advantage thereto. So that a man can raiſe no more weight by means of this pulley than he could lift by his natural ſtrength without it. For, if a rope DE goes over this pulley, and has the two equal weights F and G (ſuppoſe four ounces each) hung to its ends, they will balance each other; and if either of them be pulled down, through any given ſpace, the other will riſe through juſt as much ſpace in the ſame time: and therefore as the velocity of the weight is equal to the velocity of the power, the power muſt be as great as the weight to balance it. But if (as in fig. 12.) one end of the rope ABC be tied to a fixt hook D, and the rope goes under the pulley E which tufns in the moveable block F, and over the pulley G which turns in the fixed block H, a power equal to one ounce at the end of the rope C at I will balance a weight  of two ounces hung at the moveable block F. So that, where a pulley is uſed that will riſe with the weight, a power equal to half the weight will balance it. For the weight K of eight ounces fore, the part A of the rope ſuſtains one half of the weight, and the part B the other. And therefore, if a man was to take hold of the rope at B, and pull upward, he would only feel half the weight K, becauſe the other half hangs by the part of the rope at A. But as it is more convenient to pull downward than upward, if the rope be put over the pulley G, which turns in the fixt block H, and ſerves only to change the direction of the pull; a man pulling by the rope at C will raiſe twice as much weight at K as he could lift by his natural ſtrength without any machine. If there are two pullies in the lower block F, there muuſt alſo be two in the upper block H; and then, as the rope will be twice doubled in going over and under all theſe pullies, the weight will hang by four parts of the rope, and a power equal to a fourth part of the weight will balance it. Hence, the power of this machine is as the number of parts of the rope by which the lower block F hangs; and this will be always equal to twice the number of pullies in that block.T INCLINED P LANE, OR FO URT H MECHANICAL POWER. F a wedge ABC (fig. 13.) be cut lengthwiſe through its middle AED , it will be divided into two equally inclined planes, one of which is ABC (fig. 14.) whoſe acting ſide is AEDB. The power of this machine is as great as the length AB of the acting ſide exceeds the thickneſs or height of the back BCED where the blow is given. For (fig. 15.) if a moulding D was to be ſplit off from a thick plank E, by driving the inclined plane ABC beC tween the plank and moulding, the moulding will be as much eaſier ſeperated from the plank by this means, than it could be pulled off by a cord fixed to a ſtaple in the moulding at D, as BC is longer than AC. To prove this by experiment, let the inclided plane A (fig. 16.) run upon wheels, and be drawn forwards by means of a weight G, to which the line EE is fixed, and alſo to the inclined plane at B; the line going over the fixed pulley F. Let one end of the line D be fixed to a hóok in the wall, at five or fix feet from the inclined plane, in ſuch a manner, that when the other end of the line is tied to the frame of the roller C the line may be parallel to the acting ſide A of the plane. Now, if the weight G be as much lighter than the roller C and its frame, as the height or thickneſs g, 9f the plane is leſs than the length of the ſidęA, the plane will reſt under the load G, ſo as the load can neither make ic run back, nor can the weight G draw it forward. So that, if the length of the ſide A be four times as great as the perpendicular height a, a power at G equal to one fourth part of the weight of the load C will balance the plane under it. If you ſet the inclined plane (fig. 17.) againſt the piece A to Eeep it from moving backward, and let the roller be drawn by the line BB going over the fixed pulley D by means of the weight C. If C be as much lighter than the roller as the inclined ſide of the machine is longer than the machine is thick at A, the Ioad will be ſupported on the plane by the power of the weight C. And thus we ſind, that in drawing a catſ or waggon up-hill, if the power of the horſes be proportioned to the weight of the waggon as the perpendicular height of the hill is to the length of its ſide, the waggon will be kept from running back. And as much additional power as will overcome the friction of the axles, will draw the waggon up the hill. W E D G E, OK F I F T H MECHANICAL POWER. F two inclined planes (fig. 15.) which are equal and ſimilar, as ABd and CBdæ be joined together at their baſes Ba, they will become a wedge as ABC. CTuhaerefore, in cleaving wood, the power of the wedge will be to the reſiſtancè of the wood on the ſide BC as the length of that ſide is to the half back Cã of the wedge; and as the reſiſtance of the wood againſt the ſide EC is to the half back Ad. That is, the power or advantage gained by the wedge is as great as the ſide BC or BA exceeds the half back Ad or Cd. Or, putting the whole together, as great as the length of both the ſides AB and BC exceeds the length of the back AC where the blow is ſtruck by the hammer or mallet. For, in fig. 19, hefore the wedge ABC enters the wood EHG that is intended to be ecloven, the parts EF and GF are in edntact; but when the wedge is driven into the wood, the part G is removed as from d to C, and the part E is removed as from d to A: ſfo that, the veloeity of E or G (goitig off obliquely) is to the velocity of the wedge, as the length of the ſide of the wedge BA or BC is to the half back dA or dC. And, in this, as well as in all the foregoing mechanical powers, the power or advantage gainet is as great as the velocity of the power exceeds the velocity of the refiſtance. To prove this by experiment, let the two pieces of wood (fig- 20.) EH and GH be joined at HH by band or hinge, and be drawn together by the fmall cords Eſęf and Ghi, going over the pullies  and i, and having weights as K at the lower ends of the cords, (the weight on the line GÆi, equal to the weight K, being hid from ſight by the table M) and let the light wedge ABC be drawn into the wood EHHG by means of the weight L hanging at the cord DDB, faſtened to the wedge at B, and going over the pulley e. If the weight L be in the ſame proportion to the weight K as the half back Ad of the wedge is to either of its fides AB or CB, the weight L which acts as a power for making the wedge go into the wood, will balance the weight K which pulls the ſide EH of the cleft EHHG, as a refiſtance, againſt the ſide AB of the wedge; and will alſfo balance a weight equal to K hanging at the cord Ghi, and pulling the ſide GH of the cleft as a reſiſtance againſt the other ſide BC of the wedge. REV, OR SIXTH NICAL POWER of paper be cut into the an inclined plane ABC wrapped round and round B (fig.22.) from the perC to the point B, the ſide Ikept upon itſelf in wraplined ſide AB will form a ew as abed around the irals be cut deep into the ibed, as in fig. 23, and the and b of the wood do me; if the cylinder AB 34] be turned round and round by the winch W, the ſpirals or threads of the ſcrew abed will have a progreſſive motion, as from A toward B, advancing through the ſpace ab, or be, or cd, always in being once turned round. And, if the top of the ſtrong ſpring D (whoſe foot is ſixed into the heavy and immoveable block F) be put between any two of the ſcrew-threads, as at e, and thenm if the ſcrew be turned onoe round, the top of the ſpring will be moved from e to f, through a ſpace equal to the diſtance between any two of the threads æb or be; and the ſpring, which acts as a reſiſtance againſt the power that turns the ſcrew, will be bent into the form GE 7. Nouw, ſince the reſiſtance moves only from e to f, in the time that the ſcrew is turned once round, it is plain, that the power or force gained by the ſcrew is as great as the circumference of the cylinder AB on which the ſpirals are cut, exceeds the diſtance or ſpace between the neighbouring ſpirals, if the ſerew be turned round by hand, taking hold of the end of the cylinder at B. But, as the ſcrew is never turned in that manner, but by means of a lever or winch W, the power of the ſcrew is increaſed as much as the length of the lever from h to the handle W exceeds the ſemi-diameter of the cylinder AB. Thus, in fig. 24. the weight G is fixt to the end of the rack F whoſe teeth work in the ſcrew E belonging to the axis CD, on the top of which is the handle or winch AB, which being turned once round, will turn the ſcrew one round, and lift the rack and weight through the ſpace of one tooth, as from F to f. Now, ſuppoſe this ſpace e inch, which is lif d the length AB of ven inches; then the by the power that 1 will be forty-four erence. So that, as the power is fortyas the velocity of th could raiſe forty-tw weight ſallowing fo engine as he could POWERFUL ENGINE r on RAISING VERY GREAT WEIGHTS N the axis C of the winch AB is a pinion D turning the wheel E, on whoſe axis is a pinion F turning the wheel G, on whoſe axis is a pinion H turning the wheel I, on whoſe axis is a pinion K turning the wheel L, on whoſe axis M the rope N coils or winds (as the machine is turned by the winch) and draws up the weight O. Now, ſuppoſe each pinion to have eight leaves (ſometimes called teeth) and each wheel to have eighty teeth, it is plain that the pinion turns ten times round for once that the wheel can turn round in which the pinion works. Therefore, the pinion D will make ten revolutions for one of the wheel E and pinion F; the pinion F will make ten revolutions for one revolution of the wheel G, which wheel, together with the pinion H will make ten revolutions for one of the wheel I and pinion K, and the pinion K will maXe ten revolutions for one revolution of the wheel L and its axle M. And theſe four tens being multiplied into one another give a product of 10000. So that the winch AB muſt be turned round ten thouſand times, in order to make the wheel L turn once round, which will only raiſe the weight O through as much ſpace as it takes length of the rope N to go once round the axle M. . Hsence, if the axle C was to be turned round by hand; without a winch, a man could mife ten thouſand times as much weight by che rope coiling round the axle M as he could do if it coited round the axte C. But if he makes uſe of a winch as AB, of whith the length AB is ten times as great as the femidiameter of the axle C, the power of dhe engine will become ten times as great as before; and ten times ten thouſand is an hundred thouſand: ſo that, by this engine a man could raiſe an hundred times as much weight as he could do by his natural ſtrength without it: and, for every inch that the weight riſes the handle B of the winch would move through an hundred thouſand inches, or almoſt 2778 yards. Suppoſing all the axles equally big as the winch uſed, the rope going round the axle C would ei man to raiſe ten times as muc would do without it: round d 100 times as much; round times; round f 10000 times, a M 100000 times. So that t may be inereaſed at pleaſure chinery; but we ſee it may fo great as to be uſeleſs, on aſ the time that would be loſt in it: for the time loſt is always G EOM ETR?, BY SCALE AND COMPASSES. TRIGONOMETRVY, MEASURING OF HEIGHTS AND CONSTRUCTION  r ANGLES, SINES, TANCENTS. AND CHORDS. F I G. 1. BXP XAINE D. vER * arcie, grent or ſmall, is divided (or ſuppoſed to be divided) into 360 equal parts, called degrees. Thus, the quadrant DE of the large circle ABDE eontains 9o degrees, and ſo do the ſmaller quadrants G, H, I: and 4 times qo is 360. An angle is the ſpace intercepted by two lines, as CD and CF, meeting one another in the center of the circle at C: and its meaſure is the number of degrees contained in the arc DF, (as ſuppoſe 45) which is the ſame number as is contained in the arc G, or H, or I, bounded by the lines CD and CF. So that, the angular point C where theſe lines meet, is always ſuppoſed to be in the center of a circle; and the meaſure or quantity of the angle is the number of degrees in the circumference of the circle intercepted between the two points (as D and F) where theſe lines meet or cut the circle. . The diameter of a circle is a ſtraight line, as ACD, paſſing through the center C of the circle, and meeting its periphery in two oppoſito points, as A and D. The radius of a circle is half its diameter, as CA or CD. The chord of an arc is a ſtraight line drawn from one extremity of the arc to the other. Thus, AòB is the chord of the arc AeB: and as the arc AeB contains ꝗo degrees, its chord AbB contains the ſame number alſo. And if one foot of the compaſſes be conſtantly kept in the point A, where the arc and chord meet at one end, and the other foot be opened ſucceſſively to all the 9o degrees of the arc, and theſe diſtances of opening be tranſferred from the arc to the chord line, as in the figure, the chord line will be divided into 9o degrees. N. B. Sixty degroes on the chord line, taken from A to b, are equal to the radius of the circle from which the line of chords is made. Thus, Ab is equal to AC. The right line of an arc is half the chord of double that arc. Thus, dſ is the right ſine of the arc Dà; and is half of Dfg, which is the chord of the arc dDg. To make a line of ſines as for che 9o degroes of the arc AE, draw ſtraight lines, parallel to the radius AC, from every degree of the arc AE to the radius or ſemidiameter CE, and they will divide CE into a line of ſines, as in the figure. A tangent is a ſtraight line as DE, touching the circle into any given point as D. It may be divided into degrees by ſtraight lines drawn from the center C through the degrees of the arc DB, as in the figure. But youn can never get to the qoth degree on the line DE, becauſe it is parallel to the radius CB. So that the tangent of 9o degrees is infinite. PRO B L EM I. To lay down an angle of any given number of degrees leſs than 9o, as ſuppoſe of 25 degrees, fig. 2. Draw the ſtraight line AB, and let the angular point be at the end A. Open your compaſſes from A to b (fig. I.) that is, from the beginning of the line of chords to the 6oth degree thereof: and with that extent, ſetting one foot of the compaſſes in the end of the line at A (fig. 2.) with the other foot deſcribe the arc def. Then, ſetting one foot of the compaſſes in the beginning of the line of chords, extend the other foot to 25, the given number of degrees thereon: and, with that extent, ſet one foot in the end of the arc at d (fig. 2.) in the line AB, and make a mark with the other fooſ as at e, in the arc def. Laſtly, from A, draw the ſtraight line AeC, through the mark e; and the line AC vwill make an angle of 25 degrees with the line AB as was required. N. B. Where an angle is marked by three letters, as CAB, the middle letter A always denotes the angular point, or meeting of the lines which make the angle. PRO BL EM II. To meaſure the quantity of an angle (as CAB in fig. 3.) by the line of chords. With the chord of 6o degrees (that is, by taking 60 degrees of the line of chords in your compaſſes) ſet one foot in the angular point A, and with the other foot deſcribe the arc de from one leg (or ſide) of the angle to the other: then, ſetting one foot in the end d oſ the arc, in the line AB, extend the other foot to the other end of the arc at e, in the line AC. Laſtly, apply that extent to the line of chords, from the beginning of the line toward 90 and the number of degrees in the chord line that are intercepted between the points of the compaſſes will be the meaſure of the angle CAB, as was required. Which meaſure, in fig.3. will be found to be twenty-eight degrees. PRO BL EM III. To make ſcales of equal parts, for meaſuring lines; or for laying down lines which ſhall repreſent given diſtances taken in foet, or yards, or miles, &c. fig. 4. Draw ſeveral ſtraight lines on a flat ſmooth piece of box-wood, and, at one end, place the numbers 1o, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, as in the figure. Set off a whole inch at A, twothirds of an inch at B, half an inch at C, four tenths of an inch at D, one third of an inch at E, three tenths oſ an inch at F, and one quarter of an inch at G and divide the ſeveral lines ABC, &c. into as many of theſe ſpaces as they will contain. Then divide each of the firſt ſpaces as ABC, &c. into ten equal parts, and put the numeral figures to them. So ſhall the lines or ſcales ABC, &c. be divided in ſuch a manner, as that one inch ſhall be contained in ten parts or diviſions of A, in 15 of B, in 20 of C, in 25 of D, in 90 of E, in 35 of F, and 40 of G. The line of chords may be taken from fig. I. and inſerted on this ſcale. The equal diviſions either of the lines A, B, G, D, E, F, G, may be taken for feet, or yards, or miles, in plotting or meaſuring of any figure. And as the firſt ſpace at each of the above letters contains ten equal parts, all the other ſpaces being equally large in each particular line, is ſuppoſed to contain ten equal parts alſo. To take off any given number oſ parts with your compaſſes, from either of theſe ſcales, as ſuppoſe 26 from the ſcale A, which contains ten parts in an inch, ſet one foot of the compaſſes in 20 on that ſcale, and extend the other towards A, ſo far, as till it reaches the ſixth diviſion counted from o to a, and then you will have the given number of parts between the points of the compaſſes. In plotting maps or figures ſo that a ſmall part may take up a large ſhare of room on paper, the ſcales A or B may be uſed; but where a great deal is intended to be put in little room, the ſcales F or G are to be made uſe of. Thus, ſuppoſe I wanted to lay down so feet of diſtance, and had about as much ſpace allowed for it as from H to I Itake that extent in the compaſſes, and find by trial that it will agree with 50 parts of the ſcale A. But if I had no more ſpace than KL for repreſenting that diſtance, I find by trial, that I muſt lay it down from the ſcale G. and which-ever ſcale is begun with, the whole map or figure muſt be drawn by that ſcale. PRO BL EM IUV. To raiſe a per pendicular BC on the end of B of a given ſtraight line AB fig. 5. Open the compaſſes to any convenient width, and ſetting one foot in the end B of the line AB, let the other foot fall any where above the line (no matter where, in reaſon;) as at d, and make a mark there. Then, without altering the compaſſes, ſet one foot in the point 4, with the other foot deſcribe the circle efęh; and, laying the edge of a ruler to the interſection e (of the ccle with the line AB) and thro' the point d, draw the diameter edę. Laſtly, laying a ruler to B, at the end of the line AB, and to the end g of the ſaid diameter, draw the right line BęC, which ſhall be perpedicular to the line AB, as was required. DESCRIPTION OF A RIGHT ANGLED PLAIN TRIANGLE. The ſide AB (fig. 6.) is called the baſe, the ſide BC the perpendicular, and the longeſt or oblique ſide AC the hypothenuſe. The angle at B is called a right angle, which contains 9o degrees; for as BC is perpendicular to AB, the point B may be made the centre of a quadrant def, or quarter of a circle, containing 9o degrees. The angles at A and C are called acute angles, becauſe each of them is leſs than 9o degrees: for, if they be made the centres of the arcs llm and ghi, neither of theſe arcs contain 9o degrees; but both of them taken together always do. Thus, if the angle at A contains 31 degrees, the angle at C contains 59, which being added together make 9o0. And as the right angle at B contains 9o, all the three angles taken together contain 180 degrees. And hence it is, that if either of the acute angles of a right angled triangle be given, if its quantity be ſubſtracted from 9o degrees, the remaãinder will be the quantity or number of degrees in the other acute angle OLUTION OF THE SE? CASES OF RIGHT Aλ PLAIN TRIANGLES. B. In all the following ſev we ſhall keep by the ſcale 4.) in meaſuring the ſides triangle; and by the line of (fig. 4.) in meaſuring the and ſhall make the triangle ſerve for all the caſes. C A S E I. F I G. The two acute angles at A d the baſe AB, being given, e perpendicular BC. Iin the triangle ABC the giv gle at C is 41 degrees, and the baſe AB is 75 feet. Queſ. The number of ſcet in the perpendicular BC? Make AB equal to 75 parts of the ſcale C (fig. 4.) and make BC perpendicular to AB by Prob. IV. Then, ſetting one foot of the compaſſes in the beginning of the line of chords, extend the other foot to 6o degrees (which is called the radius, or chord of 60) and with that extent, ſetting one foot in A (fig. 7.) ſweep the arc ab with the other foot, and taking 49 degrees from the line of chords in your compaſſes, ſet that extent from b to a, and through the point b, from A, draw the line AacC, meeting the perpendicular at C. Then, taking the line BC between the points of your compaſſes, apply that extent of the compaſſes to the ſcale C (fig. 4.) and you will find it to be 86 parts or diviD;s5 ſions of that ſcale. And as the baſe AB is reckoned in feet, ſo muſt the perpendicular BC be. Hence, the perpendicular is 86 feet; which was required to be found. Quod erat demonſtrandum. CA S E II. FIG. 7. The two acute angles at A and C, and the baſe AB being given (as in caſe I.) to find the hypothenuſe AC. Project the triangle ABC, as taught in caſe I. Then take the hypothenuſe AC in your compaſſes, and applying that extent to the ſcale C in fig.4. you will find it to be 114 parts, which are feet if the baſe AB be taken in feet, or yards if the baſe AB be taken in yards. C A S-E III. F I G The two acute angles A and given, viẽ. A 49 degrees, and and alſo the hypothenuſe AC 1 Queſ. The number of feet in AB? The triangle ABC being p (as ſhewn in caſe I.) take thel in your compaſſes, and by mſ it on the ſame ſcale (C, fig. above, it will be found to con feet. C A S E IV. FI G Tnhe baſe AB being given, feet, and the perpendicular BC Queſ. The number of feet in th Make AB equal to 75 parts of the above ſcale, and draw BC perpendicular to AB, by Prob. IV. making BC 86 parts of the ſcale. Then draw the hypothenuſe AC, and meaſure its length by your compaſſes on the ſame ſcale, which length will be found to be 1 14 parts, which are feet, becauſe AB is reckoned in feet. CAS E V. FIG. 7. The baſe AB and perpendicular BC being given (as above) to the two acute angles at A and C. Conſtruct the triangle as directed in caſe IV. Then, with the chord of 60 degrees taken in the compaſfſes (ſee caſe I.) ſet one foot in the angular point A, and with the other foot deſcribe ing the compaſſes, ſet on angular point C, and w foot deſcribe the arc cd. theſe arcs at their extrem compaſſes, and by meaſur the line of chords (ſee Pr will find ab (the meaſure at A) to be 49 degrees, meaſure of the angle at degrees. Or, having fot theſe angles, ſubſtract it grees, and the remainde meaſure of the other. CAS EVI. F The baſe AB and the AC being given, the forn feet, and the latter 114, Make AB equal to 75 parts of the above-mentioned ſcale, and from the end B draw BC (long enough, be ſure) perpendicular to AB. Then, taking 114 parts from the ſame ſcale in your compaſſes, ſet one foot in the end A of the baſe AB, and with the other foot croſs the perpendicular BC in C, and draw AC. Then meaſure the angles at Aand C, as directed in caſeV; and you will find that the former contains 49 degrees, and the latter 41. CA S E VII. F IG. 7. The baſe AB and hypothenuſe AC being given (as ſuppoſe of the above meaſures) to find the acute angles A and C, and the perpendicular BC. Project the triangle ABC as directed in caſe VI. Then meaſure the angles A and C, as in that caſe; and the former will be found to be 49 degrees, and the latter 41. And by taking the length of the perpendicular BC in your compaſſes, and applying that extent to the ſcale C (fig. 4.) it will be found to be 86 parts, which are feet, as the baſe is taken in feet. HERE ENDETH ALL THE CASES OF RIGHT ANGLED PLAIN TRIANGLE S. SOLUTION OF THE SEVERAL CASES OF OBLIQUE ANGLED PLAIN TRIANGLES. In all theſe caſes we ſhall keep by the ſame ſcales of equal parts and chords which were uſed in the ſolution cf right angled plain triangles. N. B. In every oblique angled plain triangle (as ABC, fig. 8.) the ſum oſ all the angles make 180 degrees, which is equal to two right angles, or twice 9o degrees. CA S E I. F I G. 8. Two ſides and an angle oppoſite tc one of them being given, to find the angle oppoſite to the other ſide. In the triangle ABC there are given the ſide AB 104 feet, the ſide BC 53 feet, and the angle at A 30 degrees. Queſ. The number of degrees in the angle at C? Take 6o degrees from the line of chords (ſee Prob. II.) and, with that extent, ſetting one foot of the compaſſes in the angular point C, with the other foot deſcribe the arc eſę; then ſetting one foot in the extremity e of the arc, extend the other foot to the other extremity g thereof, and apply that extent to the line of chords. But, as it happens at preſent, this extent is greater than 9o degrees, which is the whole length of the chord line, and conſequently the angle at C is greater than a right angle. Therefore, taking the whole length of the line of chords in your compaſſes, ſet that extent from e to fon the arc efg; and then, taking the remainding part f5 of the arc in your compaſſes, meaſure it on the line of chords from the beginning thereof, and it will be found to be ten degrees; which added to the former 90 makes 1oo. So that the angle C contains 100 degrees: which was to be found. C A S E II. F IG . S8. The three angles and one of the fides being given, to find either of the other ſides. ll In the triangle ABC there are given the angle at A 30 degrees, the angle at B 50, the angle at C roo degrees, and the ſide AC 81 feet (by the ſcale C in fig. 4.) Queſ. The number of feet contained in the ſide AB? Take the line AB in your compaſſes, and meaſure its length on the ſcale C in fig. 4, and it will be found tc contain 104 of the equal parts of that ſcale, which are to be eſteemed ſo many feet, becauſe the given ſide AC is reckoned feet. CA S8 E III. F I G. S. Two ſides and an angle oppoſite to one of them being given, to find the other ſide. In the triangle ABC there are given, the ſide AB 104 feet, the ſide AC 81 feet, and the angle at 30 degrees. Queſ. The length of the ſide BC in feet ? Take BC in your compaſſes, and meaſure its length on the aforeſaid ſcale, and you will find it to be 53 parts or feet: which was required. C A S E IV. F Two ſides and the an between them being give other angles. In the triangle ABC the the ſide AC 81 feet, the feet, and the included an degrees. Queſ. The and B? Meaſure theſe angles prob. II. and you will fir A to be 30 degrees and 50: which was to be do CAS EV. F Two ſides and their in In the triangle ABC the ſame things are given as in caſe IV. And it is required to find the third ſide BC. Take BC in your compaſſes, and meaſure it on the ſame ſcale as you have hitherto uſed for this tria ngle, and you witll find it to be 53 feet. C AS E VI. F IG. S. The three ſides being given, to find cthe three angles. In the triangle ABC are given, the ſide AB 104 feet, the ſide AC 81 feet, and the ſide BC 53. Rueſ. The number of degrees in each oſ the angles AB and C? Meaſure the angles as taught in Prob. II. (anſwering to fig. 3.) and you will find the angle at A (fig. 8.) o degrees, the ang e angle at C 100: one. NDETH ALL THE C ANGLED PLAIN T ſhall next deſcribe t sn ſhew the metho lible heights and & ſome of the fore P RO BLEM V. A QUAD RAN T. FPIGURE ᴐ . Thhis is a fourth part of a circular plate, divided into 9o equal parts or degrees, which is a fourth part of the number contained in a circle. A thread Cã hangs from its centre C; and the end ã of the thread is fixt to æ little weight D, called the plummet. The thread is called the plumb-line, and the general uſe of the quadrant, thus fitted up, is to take the angular height of objects anove the level of the center C of the quadrant, or their depreſſion below it. Let GCE (fig. 9.) be am horiæontal line, and EF an upright object. It is plain, that if a man puts his eye to the corner A of the quadrant, and holds its face perpendicular to the horizon, ſo that the plumb-line may hang freely and perpendicularly on the face of the quadrant, and hold the quadrant ſo as that looking along the ſide AC he may juſt ſee the top of the object at F, the plumb-line will ſhew the angle of the object's height above the horizon, which will be equal to the number of degrees counted from B in the arc Bd. For, juſt as many degrees as the corner A oſ the quadrant is depreſſed below the horiZontal line GCE in the arc GA, ſo many degrees will the ſide CB of the quadrant deviate from the perpendicular Cã. And ſince ACſF and GCeE are ſtrait lines, the angle Ce muſt be equal to the oppoſite angle GCA; and therefore the arc ef muſt contain the ſame number of degrees as AG does; which is equal to the number of degrees in the arc Bd of the quadrant, namely 20. So that the angle of the height of the object EF above the level of the centęr C of the quadrant is 20 degrees. The depreſſion of any part of a viſible object below the level of the obſervers eye may be eaſily found by the quadrant, thus. If the obſerver be on the top or ſide of a hill (fig. 10.) as at C, and ſees an upright object as EF at the foot of the hill, and wants to know the angle of its depreſſion below the line COD which is on a level with his eye at C. Let him hold the quadrant ſo, as that by looking along the edge CB, he may juſt ſee the foot of the object at F, if he wants the depreſſion of the foot; and the plumb line hanging freely on the face of the quadrant will ſnhew the angle of de. preſſion, by the number of degrees it hangs upon, counted from A in the arc Ad (which is here repreſented to be 29 1-half) for the arc of depreſſion is bB, which is equal to the arc Ad; as is plain to ſight by the figure. The quadrant has generally two thin braſo plates with holes in them (called the ſights) to look through at the object. And a line drawn through theſe holes is parallel to the ſtraight edge of the quadrant. PRO B L E M VI. To find the height of a houſe or tower. provided it ſtands on level ground Fig. 11. Retire to ſome convenient diſtance from the tower, on level ground, as ſup. poſe ſeventy yards, and ſtanding there, obſerve the top of the tower through the ſights (or along the edge) of the quadrãnt, and rake the angle of its height, as ſuppoſe thirty degrees, above the level of your eye, as directed in the laſt problem (page 73.) Then go home, and project the triangle ABC, (fig. 11I.) as follows: the larger the EUSE Suppoſe the given diſtance AB from the tower to be ſeventy yards, and the angle A of the height of the tower to be thirty degrees. Queſ. The height of the tower BC in yards ? From either of the ſcales of equal parts, B, C, or D, (fig. 4. page 50.) as ſuppoſe from the ſcale B, take ſeventy parts in your compafſes, and make the line of diſtance AB equal thereto. Then draw the line AC, making an angle of thirty degrees with the line AB, and raiſe the line BC (for the tower) perpendicular to AB, drawing it on from B till it meets the line AC. Laſtly, take the length oſ the line BC in your compaſſes, and meaſure it on the ſame ſcale from which you laid down the line AB, and you will find it to be forty parts and about two-thirds of the forty-firſt part, which is to be eſteemed ſo many yards, ſince the diſtance was taken in yards. So that the height of the tower, above the level of the obſerver's eye, is forty yards and 2-thirds; to which add the height of the obſerver's eye above the ground, and the whole will be the height of the tower BC. When larger diſtances are taken, ſome of the ſmaller ſcales, as C, D, or E, &c. muſt be uſed, that the figure may come within the compaſs of the paper. This problem anſwers to caſe I. right angled plain triangles, page 47 P R O B L E M VII. To take the height of a tower ſtan ing at the foot of a hill, where level ground can be had to obſe it by. In fig. 12, let AB be part of i ſide of a hill, and BÆ a tower ſtandi at the foot of the hill; the height which tower is wanted to be known yards. Meaſure any convenient diſtance, ſuppoſe eighty yards, from B to A, the ſide of the hill; which may eaſily done if the ſlope is even, AbcdB. But if it has hollows in as at e, g, i, poſts muſt be ſet up them, ſo that their tops may be in a ſtraight line with the little riſings between them, and the ſtraight diſtances nd, db, he, &c. meaſured all the way from B to A. Standing at A, take the angle oſ depreſſion (by Prob. V. page 73.) of B the foot of the tower, by meansoſ the quadrant, and alſo the angle of depreſſion of the top of the tower at 4, both below the horiontal line AC: and write them down. Now let us ſuppoſe that the angle BAC of depreſſion oſ the foot of the tower at B was twenty-nine degrees i-half, and the angle of depreſſion CAÆ, of the top of the tower was three degrees 1-quarter; which being ſubſtracted from twenty- nine and an half, leaves twenty-ſix degrees 1-quarter for the angle of the tower's height. Draw the ſtraight lines AB and AC, making an angle of twenty-nine degrees 1-half (Prob. I. page 47.) Then, from any convenient ſcale of equal parts (as the ſcale B, page 50.) take off eighty equal parts for the yards of the obſerver's diſtance from the foot of the tower, and ſet them off with your compaſſes from A to B, and draw BÆC perpendicular to AC. This done, take twenty-ſix degrees 1-quarter from the line of chords, with your compaſſes, and ſet them off from c to m, in the arc em which meaſures the angle CAB: and, from A draw the ſtrait line Amù through the point n; and it will cut the upright line BC in the point Æ: ſo that the line BÆ will repreſent the height of the tower. Laſtly, take BÆ in your compaſſes, and meaſure its length on the ſame ſcale of equal parts by which you ſet off the eighty yards of diſtance from A & B; and you will find the height oſ the tower Bæ to be thirty-ſix yards. PRO BL EM ViIII. To find the height of a tower as BC when the diſtance from it cannot be meãàſured, on account of an intervening river as BD; and alſo to find the breadth of the river, Fig. 13. On the farther ſide of the river, (at D) from the tower, take the angular height of the tower, by the quadrant, which angular height we ſhall ſuppoſe to be fifty-two degrees. Then, from D (the ſide of the river BD) meaſure off any convenient number of feet, as ſuppoſe one hundred, to A: and ſtanding at A, take again the angular height of the tower; which we ſhall ſuppoſe to be twentynine degrees: and your work in the fields is done i Draw the ſtrait line ADB; and from any of the ſmaller ſcales (as from the ſcale F, page s50, of thirty-five parts in an inch) ſet one hundred parts which you are to reckon ſo many feet. Then from A draw the ſtrait line AC, making an angle of twenty- nine degrees with the line ADB; and from D draw the line DC, making an angle of ſifty-two degrees with DB; and the two obſerved angles of altitude will be projected. Now, as it is plain, that the top of the tower at C muſt be the 40int C where the lines AC and DC interſect each other; therefore, from the point C let fall the perpendicular CB on the line ADB: and taking CB in paſſes, meaſure its length on F (page 50.) and you will be one hundred parts, which : reckoned ſo many feet for t of the tower above the leobſerver's eye. take DB (the breadth of the your compaſſes, and by meaon the ſame ſcale, you will be ſeventy-ſeven feet. ollowing problem for finderpendicular height of a hill, for finding the breadth of of the baſe which is between ndicular and the obſerver, is f cthe ſame nature with this P RO BL EM IX. To find the perpendicular height of a hill, Fig. 14. Let E be a hill whoſe perpendicular height BC is to be found. Place yourſelf as near to the foot oſ the hill (ſuppoſe at D) as you can, ſee its top; and ſtanding at D, take the angular height of the hill by your quadrant, which we ſhall ſuppoſe to be forty-two degrees and an half. Then meafure off any convenient diſtanee, as ſeventy-five yards, towards A; and ſtanding at A, obſerve again the angular height of the hill, which we ſhall ſuppoſe to be twenty-eight degrees; and your work in the field is done. Draw the ſtrait line ADB, and taking ſeventy-five parts from ſome of the fore- mentioned ſcales, as ſuppoſe from the ſcale F, ſet theſe parts with your compaſſes from A to D. Then draw the ſtrait line AC, making an angle of twenty-eight degrees with ADB; and draw the ſtraight line DC, making an angle of forty-two degrees and an half with DB. And thus, having projected the two obſerved angles, the top of the hill muſt be at the interſection C of the line AC and DC. Therefore, from the point C draw CB perpendicular to DB; and taking CB in your compaſſes, meaſure its length on the ſame ſcale from which you ſet off the ſeventy-five parts from A to D, and you will find it to contain one hundred parts, which are to be eſteemed ſo many yards for the perpendicular height of the hill. By the ſame kind the part Be of the from the perpendic place where the hill the fide next the c found to be one h yards. Theſe examples ſhew the method of ble heights, we ſha to find inacceſſible d x P R O B L To find the diſtance object, as ſuppoſ Fig. 16. Provide a quadran as a, b, and c, d; and alſo with a moveable index as CD, turning on the center C, and having two ſights as e and f. whoſe holes for looking through are in a ſtraight line with the center C and the fiducial edge g5 which marks the degrees in the quadrant. In fig. 16, at any convenient place as A on the ſhore, lay the quadrant flat on a table, and from A meaſure off a convenient diſtance, along the fhore, as ſuppoſe one hundred and twenty fathoms, to B, and ſet up a mark at B. Then direct the edge Ab of the quadrant toward the mark at B, ſo as you may ſee the mark through the ſight-holes; this done, keep the quadrant ſteady, and move the index Ad till you ſee the ſhip at C through the ſight-holes of the index, and write down the number of degrees cut by the index on the quadrant, reckoning from b to d; which we ſhall ſuppoſe to be ſeventy-one degrees and an half. Then remove the quadrant to B, having left a mark where it ſtood at A; and placing it flat on the table, ſet it ſo as you may ſee the mark at A through the ſight-holes on the ſide Be. This done, move the index till you fee the ſhip at C through the ſightholes of the index, and write down the number of degrees cut by the index in the quadrant reckoning from e to g which number we ſhall ſuppoſe to be eighty-two. And you have done the part of your work without doors. Draw the ſtraight line AB for part of the ſhore, and taking one hundred and twenty parts, for ſo many fathoms,. from the ſcale G, ſet them with your compaſſes from A to B. Then, from A, draw the ſtraight line AC, making an angle of ſeventy-two degrees and an half with the line AB; and from B, draw the ſtraight line BC; making an angle of eighty-two degrees with the line BA. This done, take the lines AC and BC ſeparately in your compaſſes, and meaſure them on the ſcale G: the former will be found to be two hundred and ſeventy-ſix parts, for the number of fathoms that the ſhip is diſtant from A; and the latter will be found to be two hundred and ſixty-ſix fathoms for the diſtance of the ſhip from B. The ſhip being ſuppoſed to be lying at anchor. Laſtly draw Ce perpendicular to AB, and its length meaſured by the compaſſes on the ſcale, will be found to be two hundred and ſixty-four fathoms and an half from that point of the ſhore to which ſhe is neareſt. In the ſume manner may the breadth a river be found, by uſing C as a ark or object on the farther bank oſ e river. If your ſcale be too ſhort, ſet its hole length as from A to h, and then eaſure the remaining part hC. PRO B LE M XI. o find the diſtances of two inacceſſible objects as C and D (fig. 17.) from two given points as Aand B, and lixewiſe the diſtance of theſe objects from one another. For this purpoſe, inſtead of a quadat (as in the laſt problem) you muſt ve a ſemi-circle, devided into one ndred and eighty degrees, with a moveable index, and ſights, as in the quadrant. Pitch on two places, as A and B, from each of which you may ſee the inacceſſible objects C and D, and meaſure the diſtance from A to B, which we ſhall ſuppoſe to be one hundred and fifty poles æ. Place the ſemi-circle on a table at A, in ſuch a manner as that looking through the ſights on its edge bc you may ſee a mark ſet up at B. Then move the index till through the ſights on it you can ſee the inacceſſible object D, and write down the number of degrees cut by the index, reckoned from c; which number we ſhall ſuppoſe to be thirty-nine 1-quarter. Then move on the index till through its ſights you perceive the other inacceſſi* A pole or perch is ſive yards and an half, whicl makes ſixteen feet and an half. ble object C, and write down the number of degrees cut by the index from c, which we ſhall ſupposſe to be one hundred and ſix. Set up a mark at A, and remove the ſemi- circle to B, and placing it there on the table, ſet it ſo as you can perceive the mark at A through the ſights on the edge de; and then, moving the index till you can firſt ſee the inacceſſible object C through the ſights of the index, and then till you can ſee the other object D through them; write down the number of degrees cut by the index at both theſe times, counting from d; as ſuppoſe forty-three degrees for C, and an hundred and eight 1-quarter for D, and your work in the field is done. From eĩther of the ſmall ſcales (as from G, page 50.) take an hundred and fifty parts, for ſo many poles, and ſet them with your compaſſes from A to B, and draw the line AB. Then draw AD making an angle of thirtynine degrees r-quarter with AB, and draw AC making an angle of one hundred and ſix degrees with AB. Draw alſo BC making an angle oſ forty-three degrees with BA and BD making an angle of one hundred and eight degrees 1-quarter with BA. The interſections of theſe lines at C and D are the places of the abovementioned inacceſſible objects, whoſe diſtances from each other, and from the places of obſervation at A and B, are found by meaſuring the lines CD, AC, AD, BC, BD, on the ſcale G with the compaſſes; which diſtances will be found, from C to D two hundred and ſixty-five poles, from A to C two hundred and two, from A to D two hundred and ſixtyeight, from B to C two hundred and eighty-five, and from B to D one hundred and eighty, as in the figure. THE CONSIDERATION OF THE HUMAN EYE AND THE NATURE the ſun is upwards lions of miles; and it is di that light comes from the earth in 8 minutes. Hen locity of light is ſo great, t upwards of ro millions of minute of time. A cannon ball could not the earth to the ſun in le years. So that, light tra in 8 minutes as a cannon travel in ao years. But there are 10, 512,0 in 20 years. And this i ing divided by 8 minutes, quotes I,314,000, for the number of times that light moves ſwifter than a cannon ball. Now, ſuppoſe we ſay (for the ſake of round numbers) that light moves only one million of times as ſwift as a cannon ball moves; it is plain, that if a million of particles of light put together were as big as a ſingle grain of ſand, we could no more open our eyes to receive the impulſe of light, than we durſt to have ſand ſhot point blank againſt them from a cannon. When any obiject is illuminated, either by the ſun or a candle, every illuminated point of the object reflects the light in all manner of directions. And it is by this reflection of the light that objects become viſible. Tuhus, ſuppoſe the object ABC (fig. I.) to be illuminated by the ſun on the right-hand ſide, the points A, B, and C, reflect the rays of light every way through the hemiſphere DEFG; and therefore, theſe three points will be viſible to an eye placed any where in that hemiſphere. But all the intermediate points of the object reflect the light in the ſame manner: and therefore the whole object will be viſible to an eye placed any where on the enlightened ſide. The left-hand ſide, on which the ſun ſhines not, would be altogether inviſible, if it were not for the rays of light reflected upon it from the terreſtrial objects on that ſide. But as the leſt ſide is much dimmer than the right, we ſee how much ſtronger the direct light of the ſun is than the reſlection of light from rough and unpoliſhed objects. Every object would be dark, and conſequently if it reflected none of the ligh CONCERNING THE RE GIBILITY OF LIGH The rays of light proceedi a luminous body go on in lines, whilſt they continue medium of an equal and denſity or compactneſs. Bi they paſs out of one medium c into another, they are refracte out of their rectilineal courſe entrance into the different 1 Let AB (fig. 2.) be a glaſs c C a board ſet up between the a candle at D. The ſhadow the board will fall into the cuj there be no water in it, the will reach to à. So that if a tl of the board, and continued to the candle, it will come into the flame thereof, which ſhews, that the ray Dęhi goes on from the candle in a ſtraight line. Moreover, if a perſon places his eye below the bottom of the cup, at i, and looks over the top of the board C, he will ſee the flame of the candle even with the top of the board. Now let water be poured into the cup, ſo as to fill it up almoſt to the brim, and you will perceive the ſhadow move from i to Æ4 which ſhews that the ray Dęhi is bent from its rectilineal courſe, into the form Dęhæ, and that the bended part is at the ſurface of the water at b. So that, if a perſon now places his eye under the glaſs bottom at Æ, he will ſee the candle D juſt over the board; and the candle will ſeem to him to be raiſed from D to E, becauſe it will appear to him to be in the right line ÆbE, in direction of the bended part hè of the now refracted ray. When a ray of light falls perpendicularly on the ſurface of water, or any other medium, the ray goes on in the ſame perpendicular direction. Thus, the ray FEt, falling perpendicularly on the ſurface of the water at f, goes on in the ſame direction 'm, without ſuffering any refraction at all. Which ſhews, that the rays of light muſt enter obliquely into a medium, if they are refracted by it. The rays of light come ſtraight from the ſun, in the open ſpace, till they fall upon the earth's atmoſphere, and then they are refracted by the denſer medium of the atmoſphere, ſo as to bring the ſun in view every day, before he riſes in our horiZon; and to keep him in view for ſome time after he is really ſet below it. And by means of this refraction, we have about a whole ſummer's more ſunſhine in 100 years than we would have if there were no atmoſphere. Let ABC (fig.3.) be a portion of the earth, whoſe convex ſurface is gOb, and let debæ be the top of the atmoſphere. Let alſo HOR be the horizon of an obſerver on the earth's ſurface at O, and let S be the ſun, below the horizon. A ray of light Sab comes all the way ſtrait from the ſun till it ſalls obliquely on the top of the atmoſphere, as at 56, where it is turned out of its rectilineal courſe: and ſo, inſtead of going on in the ſame direction ble, it goes in the direction bo, to the obſerver's place at O, and therefore, to this obſerver, the ſun, even before he riſes in the horizon HOR, will appear above the horizon at T; becauſe he will be ſeen in the direction of Oò, the reF fracted part of the ray ObaS: and Oò produced ſtrait outwards, will be in the rectilineal direction ObeT. If a ray of light Siùl falls obliquely upon the ſurface of a plane glaſs ABCD at  (ſee the lower part of fig. 3.) the ray. will not paſs through the glaſs in direction ill, but will be refracted in the direction Im in the glaſo: and if the glaſs be equally thick, that is, if the ſide AD be parallel to the ſide (or ſurface) BC, the ray leaving the glaſs at m will be refracted the contrary way, and go on in the direction of mn, parallel to the direction iÆl in which it came to the glaſs. And, an eye at n will ſee the ſun S, not in his true place at S, but higher, in direction of the line mnst. If a ray op falls perpendicularly on the ſurface of the glaſs, as at ꝑ, it will ſuffer no refraction in paſſing through the glaſs, but will go on in the ſtrait line por continued: and an eye at  will ſee the ſun in his true place at U. Fig. 4. ſhews five ſorts of ground glaſſes edgewiſe. A, is called a planoconvex glaſs, becauſe it is plane on one ſide and convex on the other. B is called a double convex glaſs, becauſe it is convex on both ſides. C is called a plano-concave glaſs, becauſe it is plane on one ſide and concave on the other. D is a double-concave glaſc, being concave on both ſides. And E is called a meniſcus glaſs, which is concave on both ſides; but more ſo on one ſidẽe than the other. All theſe ſorts of glaſſes are called lenſes, and the right line FG is their axis. The ſuns rays may be reckoned parallel at the earth, as ABCD (fig. 5, 6.) at the earth's ſurface, on account of the ſunm's vaſt diſtance from the earth. If parallel rays, ABCD (ſig. 5.) fall on a plano-convex glaſs BDe, ſo as the middle ray def be perpendicular to the plane ſurface of the glaſs, they will be ſo refracted in paſſing through the glaſs, that they will meet in a point F, in the further ſide of a circle BDEFiB, of which the convex ſide of the glaſs BC is a part of a ſphere or globe whoſe diameter is equal to the diameter of the circle. The point F where the rays meet, is called the principal focus of the glaſs, and, iſ the rays are not ſtopt at the focus, but are ſuffered to paſs on, they will diverge from the focus toward the contrary ſides. Thus, the ray CDF will go on from the focus in the direction Fe, and the ray ABF will go on from the focus in the direction Fb. The middle ray deſ is not refracted at all, becauſe it falls perpendicularly on the glaſs. Whatever ſide of the glaſe is turned toward the ſun, the diſtance of the focus F will be the ſame from the plane fide e of the glaſs. If parallel rays, ABCD (fig. 6.) fall upon a double convex glaſs BDe, they will be ſo refracted as to meet and croſs one another in a point F, which is the center of a eircle BDÆfiB, equal to the diameter of a ſphere, of which either of the convex ſides BD or BeD is a portion. And the rays, after croſſing, will diverge to the contrary ſides, in the ſpace Fgh, juſt as much as they converged in the ſpace BFD; and would continue to go on in this diverging ſtate. But if ſuch another double-convex glaſs, gſb be placed in the ſide of the circle oppoſite to BeD, the rays, after paſſing gh the glaſs gſb will go on pato one another, in the ſpace continued in the ſame manner as ame parallel to one another in pace ACBD, to the glaſs BeD. becauſe they croſs in the focus F, change ſides afterward. Thus, arcel of rays ABdeF, which are e left ſide of the middle ray deF, meeting at F, croſe over to the ſide of the middle ray, and go on e ſpace Fhbf . And the rays F croſs the middle ray at F, and go on in the ſpace FgefF. So ABFbhb is one of the outſide rays, DpFgc is another. raidant point of any object is a from which rays of light proas F, in fig. 7. And theſe rays continually diverge in ſtraight every way from that point. If the radiant point be in the focus F of a convex glaſs AB, all the rays that fall upon the glaſs will be refracted in paſſing through it, and after leaving it they will go on in parallel lines in the ſpace GABH. If the radiant point R (fig. 8.) be further from the convex glaſs than its focus F, the diverging rays RA, RB, &c. which fall upon the glaſs AB, will converge aſter paſſing through the glaſs, in the ſpace ABIA; and will all meet in a point I, here they will form the image of the radiant point R. If the focal diſtance aF is Lnoun, and alſo the diſtance æR of the radiant point, from the glaſs AB; the diſtance of the image I, of the radiant from the other ſide of the glaſs, may be found by this rule: multiply the cal diſtance æF, and divide the product by their difference of diſtance; and the quotient will be the diſtance bI of the image of the radiant from the glaſe. Thus ſuppoſe the focal diſtance æF to be two inches, and the diſtance of the radiant R ſix inches; theſe being multiplied together make 12. But the difference between two inches and ſix inches is four; by which, divide the product 12, and the quotient is 3 inches for the diſtance of the image I of the radiant point R from the glaſs. If three radiant points (fig. 9.) as D, E, F, (or any other number) be placed at any diſtance, as AD, AE, AF from the glaſs AB, greater than its focal diſtance; all the rays which flow from theſe points through the glaſs will form the images of theſe points in an inverted order, as d, e, f, behind the glaſs. Thus, the rays DA, DC, DB from the radiant D are converged in the directions Ad, Cd, Bd; and from the image of the point D at d. The rays EA, EC, EB from the radiant E paſs through the glaſs and go on in the directions Ae, Ce, Be, and by meeting at e they form the image of the radiant E. And the rays FA, FC, FB from the radiant F, after paſſing through the glaſs, go on in the directions Af, Cf, Bf, meet in the point ſ, where they form the image of the radiant F. If more radiant points are placed between D and E, and between E and F, their rays will meet behind the glaſs, and form their reſpective images between d and e, and between e and f. Hence we may eaſily apprehend how the images of objects are formed by the rays which flow from the object through a convex glaſs, and fall on a piece of white paper held upright at a proper diſtance behind the glaſs. For, let ACB (fig. 10.) be a convex glaſs, and DEF an object farther from the glaſs than its focal diſtance. The rays which flow from the extremities D and F, and middle point E of the object, and paſs through the glaſs, will be collected into points at d, f, and e behind the glaſs, where they will form the images of the extreme and middle points of the object. But, as every intermediate point of the object between D and E, and between E and F, ſend out rays in the ſame manner, theſe rays which paſs through the glaſs will be collected into all the intermediate points between d and e, and between e and , and conſequently, a perfect image def will be formed of the object DEF; but in an inverted form: and the imageè will be as much leſs than the object, as the diſtance of the object from the glaſs is greater than the diſtance of the image from the glaſs. ; OF THE EYE, AND MANNER õ VISION. Fig. 11. tepreſents a ſection of the eye, very much magnified, and cut quite through the middle from the viſible or fore part, to the back part which is oncealed from ſight in the head. The eye conſiſts of three coats and three humours. The outer coat A is called the ſclerotica, the middle coat B the choroides, and the innermoſt coat C the retina, which is only a continuation of the fibres of the optic nerve K, ſpread over the choroides like a fine net-work; and on this, the images of all viſible objects are formed. The fore-part EEE of the ſclerotica is ttanſparent like fine thin clear horn, and is therefore called the cornea. The choroides B has a round hole in the fore part of it at F, and this hole is called the pupil, or ſight of the eye. Behind the pupil lies the cryſtalline humour G, which is perfectly tranſparent, and of the form of a doubleconvex glaſs or lens. From the edge of the chryſtalline humour, all around, there proceeds a membrane HH, called the ciliary ligament, whoſe outermoſt edge adheres to the choroides B, and keeps the chryſtalline humour G in its proper place. Under the cornea EEE is a fine tranſparent fluid aqaa, called the aqueous humour, which alſo fills the pupil F, and the ſpace between the choroides B and the chryſtalline humour G and ciliary ligament HH; at the back of which is the vitrious humour HII, which is tranſparent, but of a conſiſtence as thick as jelly, and fomewhat of a greeniſh colour like glaſo. When an object, as ABC (fig. 12.) is before the eye, ſome of the rays which flow from every point of the object on the ſide next the eye (as Ac, AP, Ae, &c.) will paſs through the pupil P, and ehryſtalline humour G, by which they will be collected into as many points, a, b, c, and every where between, from a to b, and from b to c; and will form an inverted image abe of the object upon the retina or bottom of the eye: for the chryſtalline humour G acts like a lens, or double-convex glaſe (as in fig. 10.) and by this means the ohject ABC comes to be perceived; and the judgment tracing the rays back toward the object, in the direction they came from it, the object appears not inverted, but direct. If the object ABC (fig. 13.) be brought nearer the eye, or the eye approaches nearer the object, the object will appear ſo much the bigger. For, the object ABC in fig. 12. is juſt equal to the object ABC in fig. 13. But the latter being twice as near the eye as the former, its image abc is twice as big on the retina. Let P (fig. 14.) be the pupil of the eye, and fdbace the retina. Now, it is evident by the figure, that the image of the object AB is limited to the ſpace ba on the retina: but if AB be brought nearer to the eye, as ſuppoſe to CD, its image on the retina will fill the larger ſpace dbac: and iſ it be brought ſtill nearer, as to EF, its image will take up the yet larger ſpace ſdbace. So that, the greater the angle be under which the ſeen, the larger the object w to the eye. In order that viſion may perfect or diſtinct, it is nece the rays which flow from ev cular point of the object ſhoul lected upon each particular the retina in ſo many point image; otherwiſe the image pear confuſed or indiſtinct (fig. 12.) the rays Ac, AP, flow from the upper extremi object ABC through the pupi be collected in a point a ont to form the image of the ext of the object: and ſo of all which flow from every other the object. When the object the eye, as in fig. 13. the cil ment contracts, and brings t and farther from the retina; otherwiſe we could ſee objects diſtinctly at only one diſtance. But the author of nature has ſo ordered it, that by means of this ligament, the chryſtalline humour ſhall be ſo adjuſted (in young eyes where the fibres are not rigid) as to advance backward or forward as the objects are ſarther or nearer, and ſo bring their rays to points on the retina. Wahen people grow old, the aqueous and chryſtalline humours of their eyes grow too flat (fig. 15.) and therefore the rays flowing from an object, as ABC, are not converged into points on the retina abe, but form broad ſurfaces thereon; which renders viſion imperfect and confuſed: for, if the rays could penetrate the retina and other coats of the eye, they would form the true image of the object behind the eye; as at deſ. ; This defect of the eye is helped by convex glaſſes or ſpectacles, which cauſe the rays, aſter pafſing through them, to come leſs diverging to the eye, or parallel, or a little converging if the caſe requires it: and ſo, being helped a little towards a converging ſtate before they enter the eye, by means of a convex glaſs at DE (fig. 16.) the humours of the eye converge them ſuſficiently afterward, ſo as to cauſe them to unite in points on the retina; and therein to form the perfect image abe of the object ABC. Although every point of an object AB ſfig. 17.) reflects the rays of light in all manner of rectilineal directons, yet only thoſe which come, in the ſpace de & from the point A can enter the pupil P of the eye, and be converged to a point for forming the extremity a of the image AB. The llce may be ſaid of the rays which flow from the point B by reflection; for only thoſe which come in the ſpace ghi can enter the pupil P, and be converged to a point at b, for forming the image of the point B of the object AB. And the like is true with reſpect to the rays which flow from every intermediate point of the object AB: but theſe are leſt out, to avoid confuſion in the figure. If a double convex glaſs as CD be placed between the eye F and the object AB, the object will appear to be magnified. Thus, all the rays that flow from the top A of the object AB, in the ſpace hlm, and through the glaſs between C and d, will enter verged into a point a on the retina, where they will form the image of the top of the object at A. And all the rays which flow from the lower point B of the object AB, in the ſpace nop, and paſs through the glaſs between D and e, will enter the pupil P and be converged in the point b where they form the image of the lower extremity B of the object. And as the object is ſeen through the glaſs under the angle GPH, equal to the oppoſite angle bPa, the object AB will appear ſo magnified as to fill up the whole ſpace GABH. The diſtances of the eyes E and F from the object are equal; but by means of the glaſe, the image ab on the retina of the eye F, is double the ſize of the image ab on the retina of the eye E; and therefore, the object AB will appear to be twice as long and twice as broad to the eyct F as it does to the eye E. The ſimple microſcope is only a ſmall double convex glaſs or ſens, at CD (fig. 18.) beyond which, at a little leſs ſpace than the focal diſtance of the glaſs, is placed a ſmall object, as ab, from which the rays, flowing through the glaſs, and through the humours of the eye, are converged into points on the retina, where they form the image AB, greatly magnified, of the minute object ab. Since the rays diverge from every point of every viſible object, and fall upon the eye in a diverging ſtate, which (eſpecially in young eyes) is neceſſary for diſtinct viſion, the object is always placed a little within the focal diſtance of this microſcope glaſs, which occaſions the rays that flow through the glaſs, from each point of the object, to diverge a little between the glaſs and the eye. If the rays come parallel from the glaſs to a common ſound eye, they would converge to points before they reached the retina, and would render the image indiſtinct thereon; much more ſo if they came from the glaſs to the eye in a converging ſtate. In the compound microſcope, (fig. 19.) the ſmall object AB is placed a little farther from the convex lens than its focal diſtance, in order that the rays flowing from each particular point of the object may converge into each particular point between C and D, in which ſpace they will form the image CD of the object. And if the focal diſtance of the other convex lens GH from the image, or rather a little within that diſtance, is the lens GH placed. Then, as the rays flow from each point of this image, through the glaſs GH, they will paſs on to the eye in a ſtate of ſmall divergeney; and entering the eye in that ſtate, they will be converged into points on the retina, by paſſing through the humours of the eye; and ſo they will form the image de of the image GH of the object AB. Sound and perfect eyes perceive objects beſt, without glaſſes, at ten or twelve inches diſtance. But ſmall microſcope objects are too minute to be ſeen by the bare eye at ſuch a diſtance. The magnifying power of the ſingle microſcope is as great as the focal diſtance of the glaſs CD (fig. ;8.) is leſs than ten or twelve inches. The magnifying power of the compound microſcope (ſig 19.) is compounded oſ the proportion which the diſtance of the image from the object glaſs EF bears to its diſtance from the eye glaſs GH, and of that which the diſtance of the obiect from the eye bears to its diſtance from the object glaſs. The aſtronomical teleſcope conſiſts of an object glaſs DE (fig. 20.) and an eye glaſs I&, placed at ſuch a diſtance from each other, that their focuſes, or centers of double convexities, may meet in a point as at G: and the pupil P of the eye is placed in the other focus of the eye glaſs. ABC is an object, ſuppoſed to be placed at a great diſtance from the teleſcope. The rays which flow from each point of the object ABC through the object glaſs DE, are by means of that glaſc converged and croſs each other in all the points between H and F, in which ſpace an inverted image FGH of the object ABC is formed in the focus of the object glaſs DE; and theſe rays going on through the eye glaſs I& will become parallel to one another between the eye glaſs and the eye That is, the rays from the point H will be parallel between I and P, the rays from the point G will be parallel between n and P, and the rays from the point F will be parallel between K and P; becauſe they flow from the image in the focus of the glaſs IK; and croſſing in the pupil P, they will be converged into all the points on the retina between L and N, where they will form the image of the object ABC. And this image being ſeen by the eye under the angle IPX, it will appear to be ſo much magnified, as to fill the whole ſpace OHGFO. To find the magnifying power of this teleſcope, divide the focal length Gm of the object glaſs by the focal length Gæ of the eye glaſo, and the quotient will expreſs the magnifying power. But this teleſcope ſhews the object in an inverted poſition, becauſe it has only one eye glaſe. The common teleſcope (fig. 21.) which ſhews objects (as ABC) in their true poſition, conſiſts of an object glaſs DE, and three eye glaſſes IK, MN. and QR, ſo placed, that the focuſſes of DE and IK may meet in G; thoſe of IK and MN may mect in L; and thoſe of MN and OR may meet in g. Then, the image of the object will be formed in an inverted poſition between H and F in the focus of DE; then the rays ſfowing through IK will become parallel which belong to each point of the image,. and croſſing at L, and going on, will paſs through the glaſs MN, which will converge them into points in its focus, and will there form the ſecond image erect; which image will be viewed the eye in the focus P of the eye s QR. And as this laſt image be ſeen under the angle QPR, it appear ſo magnified, as to fill the le ſpace OfghO. ll the three eye glaſſes, QR, MN, IK, are of equal focal diſtances; to find the magnifying power oſ teleſcope, divide the focal length of the object glaſs DE by the folength gn Of the eye glaſs QR, the quotient will expreſs the maging power of the teleſcope. S O LAR SY S TEM. H E ſolar ſyſtem conſiſts of the ſun, ſix primary planets, ten moons, and ſeveral comets, of which the number is not yet certainly known. The ſun is placed in the center of the ſyſtem, and all the planets move round him, in different times, and at different diſtances from him. One moon movés round the earth, four moons round Jupiter, and five round Saturn. The planets are moved by a projectile force impreſſed upon them by the deity at the beginning, which force would for ever have cauſed them to move in ſtraight lines: but the ſun being endued with an attractive power (no ways inherent in matter, or peculiar to it) this power draws the planets toward the ſun juſt as much as the projectile force would carry them off from the ſun ; and ſo compels them to revolve about the ſun, in the ſame orbits, over and over again, as they did at the beginning. Their periods round the ſun compleat their years, and their rotations on their axes compleat their days and nights. The times in which the planets make their annual periods round the ſun are found by obſervation; and their comparative diſtances from the ſun have been alſo aſcertained by obſervation. And it is found, that the ſquares of the periodical times bear the ſame proportion to one another as the cubes of their diſtances from the ſun do bear to each other. And hence it comes out, that the ſun's attractive power, which retains all the planets in their orbits, decreaſes as the ſquare of their diſtances increaſe from the ſun. The times in which the planets perform their revolutions about the ſun, and their relative or comparative diſtances from the ſun, are as follows, ſuppoſing the earth's mean diſtance from the ſun to be divided into 10000 equal parts. Periodical. Times. Comp. diſt. as in the ſcale days. hours. parts. of equal parts, Mercury 87 23 3871 in fſig. I. where Venus 2 24 17 7233 each diviſion The earth 365 6 10000 is ſuppoſed to Mars 686 23 15237 be ſub-divided Jupiter 4332 12 52009 into one hunSaturn 10759 7 95400 dred. Having found the comparative diſtance of the planets from the ſun, in ſuch parts as the earth's diſtance from the ſun contains 10000, if we can ſind the real diſtance of either of the planets from the ſun in miles, we may find thereby the real diſtances of all the reſt. By obſervations of the late tranſit of of Venus (A. D. 1761. June 6.) the earth's diſtance from the ſun is found to be 95, 173,000 Engliſh miles. Therefore, As 10,000 is to 95, 173,000, ſo is 387, Mercury's diſtance from the ſun in parts, to 36,841,465 his diſtance from the ſun in miles. And, AS 10,000 is to 95, 173,000, ſo is 7233, Venus's diſtance from the ſun in parts, to 68,891,466, her diſtance from the ſun in miles. Again, As 10,000 is to 95, 173,000, ſo is 15237, Mars's diſtance from the ſun in parts, to 145,014,348, his diſtance from the ſun in miles. Likewiſe, As 10,000 is to 95, 173,000, ſo is 52009, Jupiters diſtance from the ſun in parts, to 494,990,976, his diſtance from the ſun in miles. Once more, As 10,000 is to 95, 173,000, ſo is 95400, Saturn's diſtance from the ſun in parts, to 907,956, 130, his diſtance from the ſun in miles. As 7 is to 22, ſo is the diameter ofſ a circle to its circumference. Hence, from the above diſtances of the planets from the ſun, the circumſference of their orbits are as follows. Mercury's, 231,574,940 Engliſh miles; Venus's 433,032, 98 miles; the earth's 598,230,286, Mars's QlII, 517, 5025 Jupiter's 3, 11I, 371,849 miles; and Saturn's s,707, 152,817. Dividing the circumference of each planet's orbit by the number of hours contained in the planet's periodical revolution round its orbit, we have the number of miles which each planet moves in an hour. And they are as follows. Mercury, 109,699-55 miles; Venus 80,29555 ; the Earth 68, 2437553 Mars 55,2875 IJupiter 29,0835553; and Saturn 22, 10 1I-5, miles. Venus turns round her axis in 24 days 8 hours, the earth turns round its axis in 24 hours, Mars in 24 hours 40 minutes, and Jupiter in 9 hours 56 minutes. The times in which Mercury and Saturn turn round their axes are unknown to us. To bring all theſe things together in view, the following table is conſtructed. The moon is the earth's ſatellite; her diſtance from the earth is 240,000 miles; and ſhe goes round her orbit from change to change in 29 days 12 hours 44 minutes 3 ſeconds. Jupiter has four moons, and Saturn five. As the ſquare of the earth's period round the ſun (viæ. 365 days 6 hours) is to the cube of its diſtance from the ſun, ſo is the ſquare of any other planet's period round the ſun to the cube of its diſtance from him. The ſun's parallex, as deduced from the tranſit of Venus, is 8-55 ſeconds of a minute of a degree, which ſhews by calculations of a plain right angled triangle, that the ſun's mean diſtance from the earth is 95, 173,000 Engliſh miles. . For, the logarithmic ſine (or tangent) of 8565 ſeconds is 5,62 19I403 which being ſubſtracted from the radius 10,0000000, leaves remaining the logarithm 4,3780860, whoſe number is 2388284; which is the number of ſemidiameters of the earth that the ſun is diſtant from it. And this laſt number, 23388284 being multiplied by 3985, the number of Engliſh miles contained in the earth's ſemidiameter, gives 95, 173, 11I7 miles for the earth's mean diſtance from the ſun. But, becauſe it is impoſſible, from the niceſt obſervations of the ſun's parallex, to be ſure of his true diſtance from the earth within 1oo miles, we do at preſent, for the ſake of round numbers, ſtate the earth's mean diſtance from the ſun at 95, 17 3,000 Engliſh miles. In ſo ſmall an arc as 8-55 ſeconds of a degree, the ſine and tangent are ſo nearly equal, that we may without any ſenſible error conſider them as equal. And there is no difference between them in the logarithmie tables. OF SIDEREAL AND SOLAR TIME. In fig. 2, let S be the ſun, npqr the earth, turning round its axis according to the order of the letters, from weſt, by ſouth to eaſt; let n be any given place on the earth's furface, whoſe meridian is nag, and let N be a fixt ſtar, at ſuch an immenſe diſtance, that the whole orbit of the earth ABCDEFGHIKLMA is but a point in compariſon to that diſtance. Then let the earth be in any part whatever of its orbit, as at b, c, d, e, f, &c. when the ſaid meridian is in the poſition bn, cn, dn, en, fn, &c. its plane will paſs through the ſtar; that is, whenever the meridian becomes parallel to its poſition an, the ſtar will be upon that meridian, let the earth be in any part of its orbit whatever. When the meridian, on any day, becomes parallel to the ſituation that it had at any given inſtant on the day before, the earth has made a compleat revolution about its axis; and this it always does, when any given meridian has revolved from any ſtar to the ſame ſtar again; and the time of ſuch a revolution is in 24 ſidereal hours, which is called a ſidereal day. If the earth were always to remain at a, the meridian an would always revolve from the ſun to the ſun again in the ſame time that it does from the ſtar N to the ſame ſtar again; and then 24 ſiderial hours would be the ſame as 24 ſolar hours: for the plane of the meridian an continued, would paſe through the ſun's center S, at the ſame inſtant of its paſſing through the ſtar N. But as the earth has a progreſſive motion in its orbit through ABCD, ſo as to go round its orbit in a year, according to the order of the letters, the ſaid meridian will revolve ſooner and ſooner every day to the ſtar than to the ſun; and ſo much ſooner every day, that in 365 days, as meaſured by the ſun, the meridian will have revolved 366 times to the ſtar. So that, whatever the number of ſolar days in the year be, the number of ſiderial days will exceed it by one. Thus, when the earth is at a, the point n has both the ſun and the ſtar on its meridian; but in a month afterward, when the earth has advanced to tain number of revolutions to the ſtar, as often as it has been in the poſition of bn, parallel to an; but then when it is at bu, the point n (or place on the meridian) muſt revolve from n to o before it has the ſun on its meridian; and the arc no is a twelfth part of the earth's circumference, which is equal to two hours revolution. And therefore, the number of ſolar days in a month is (among them all) two hours longer than the number of ſiderial days in that time. When the earth is at C, the point n will be directed to the ſtar four hours ſooner than it can revolve through the arc no to the ſun. At d ſix hours ſooner; at e eight hours; at f ten hours; and at g the point n will have the ſtar N on its meridian at midnight; or 12 hours before it revolves half round, through the arc n to the the ſun S. At h the accompliment of the ſiderial day will be 14 hours ſooner than the ſolar, at i 16, at Æ 18, at I 20, at m 22, and at a 245; for at a, one turn of the earth on its axis will be loſt with regard to the number of days and nights in the year, on account oſ the earth's motion round the ſun. OF THE DIFFERENT SEASONS. In fig. 3 let S be the ſun, a s n æm, &c. the earth's annual orbit repreſented in a very oblique view; a, b, c, d, e, f, &c. the earth in twelve diſferent parts of its orbit; and ns the earth's axis, of which n is the north pole and s the ſouth pole. In the earth's whole annual courſe round the ſun, its axis ns is 232 degrees inclined from a perpendicular to its orbit; and its axis ſtill keeps the ſame oblique direction. Therefore, it is plain, that whilſt the earth moves through the ſigns m & πæε and nur, the north pole of its axis conſtantly inclines more or leſs toward the ſun, and moſt of all when the earth is at 5 as the earth moves through æm 2 v2r: and x its north pole n inclines more or leſs from the ſun; and moſt of all from him when the earth is at Æ This obliquity is the cauſe of all the viciſſitudes of the ſeaſons. In fig. 4, the obſerver is ſuppoſed to be placed at a great diſtance above the center of the earth's orbit a &  9 Umæm 2 1522, where he ſees the northern half of the earth, of which N is the north pole (ſee the earth at March 20) where all the meridians meet. P is the north polar circle, T the tropic of cancer, and E the equaH tor. The ſide of the earth that is al any time turned toward the ſun S has day, whilſt the ſide that is the turned from him has night. On the 20th of March, when the earth enters the beginning of æ Libra, and the fun as ſeen from the earth, appears to be at the beginning of the ſign æ Aries, the boundary of light and darkneſs cuts the earth in its north pole; and then all the places on the earth go equally through the light and the dark, which makes day and night then equal. In April the north pole is conſiderably in the light, and the day is longer than the night; in May more ſo, and on the a1ſt of June moſt of all; the whole north polar circle being then in the light, and the days at the longeſt in the northern half of the earth. From that time the days ſhorten and nights lengthen, till September 23, when they are again equal as on the 2oth of March. From September 23 to March 20, the north pole is continually in the dark, but moſt ſo on the 22d of December, when the whole polar circle is in the dark, and the days at the ſhorteſt and nights at the longeſt, all the way between the equator and polar circle. At each pole there is but one day and one night in the whole year. This figure ſhews the poſition of the earth at the time of its entrance into each ſign of the ecliptic, and how it is then enlightened by the ſun. Its motion round its axis being the cauſe of days and nights, and its motion round the ſun on its oblique axis the cauſe oſ the different lengths of days and nights, and of all the variety of the ſeaſons. VWhen the earth enters any ſig the ecliptic, the ſun then ſeen from earth appears to enter the opp ſign. OF THE MOTIONS AND PI SES OF THE MOON. Which ever ſide of the moon is ward the ſun S at any time, then be enlightened by the ſun; the other half will be in the d And as the moon goes round the ea ſhe will appear to be more or leſs lightened, as the enlightened ſide her is more or leſs turned toward earth. See fig. s. Let OPOR be the annual orbi the earth E, and T the orbit of moon, in which ſhe goes round carth from change to change, in days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, 3 ſeconds, according to the order of the letters ſghitlmm. When the moon is at f, her dark ſide is toward the earth, and ſhe becomes inviſible, becauſe ſhe can then reflect none of the ſun's light to the earth and has no light of her own to ſhine by. When ſhe is at g, a little of her enlightened ſide will be toward the earth; and ſhe will appear horned as at G. Whaen ſhe is at h, half her enlightened ſide will be toward the earth; and ſhe will appear half full, as at H, when we ſay ſhe is in her firſt quarter, encreaſing. When ſhe is at i, ſhe will appear gibbous, as at I, the greateſt part of her enlightenfide being thentoward the earth. When ſhe is at Æ, the whole of her enlightened ſide will be toward the earth; and ſhe will appear quite full, as cſ K. VWhen ſhe is at /, her whole enH lightened ſide cannot be ſeen from the earth; and ſhe will appear gibbous, on the decreaſe, as at L. When ſhe is at m, half her enlightened ſide will be toward the earth, and ſhe appears half decreaſed, as at M,; when we ſay ſhe is in her third quarter. When ſhe is at n, the greateſt part of her enlightened ſide is turned from the earth, and ſhe appears horned, not far from the change. And when ſhe comes to ſ, ſhe is all dark toward the earth, as at F; and then ſhe is quite inviſible; at which time we ſay it is nev moon. Both the earth and moon caſt ſhadows directly outward from their dark ſides. And hence, it is plain, that iſ the moon's orbit lay even (or in the ſame plane) with the earth's orbit, the moon's ſhadow would fall on the earth at every change, and the earth's ſnadow would fall on the moon at every full. In the former caſe there would always be an eclipſe of the ſun, and in the latter caſe an eclipſe of the moon. But one half of the moon's orbit is on the north ſide of the earth's orbit, and the other half on the ſouth ſide thereof. So that the moon's orbit eroſſes the earth's orbit in two oppofite points, which are called the moon's nodes. And there can be no eclipſe of the ſun but when the moon changes in or near either of the nodes; nor can the moon be eclipſed but when ſhe is full, in or about either of her nodes. The moon's orbit is elliptical, and the earth's center is in one of its focuſes. OBSERVATIONS ON THE ASTRONOMICAL PART OF THIS WORK. I. If the earth were fixed immoveable in its orbit, ſo as to have no progreſſive motion therein, and to turn round its axis with the ſame velocity it does at preſent; its axis being ſuppoſed to be perpendicular to the plane of its orbit: and the moon were to revolve in her orbit with her preſent velocity, her orbit being ſuppoſed to be circular, and ſhe to be of the apparent bulk of the ſun: In this caſe, the ſolar or natural day would be of the ſame length with the ſiderial day; namely, 23 hours 56 minutes 4ſeconds: the ſun would always appear to revolve in the plane of the equator, and the days and nights wonld be always of an equal length. The moon would likewiſe revolve in the plane of the equator, from the ſun to the ſun again, or from change to change, in the time ſhe now goes round her orbit; namely, in 27 days 7 hours 43 minutes. The diameters or breadths of the ſun and moon would always appear to be equal. The moon would eclipſe the ſun totally, but without any continuance of total darkneſs, at the time of every new moon. Theſe eclipſes would be no where total but at the equator; and partial every where elſe, ſo far as they extended, which would be about 2400 miles on each ſide of the equator; beyond which, farther north or ſouth, the ſun would never be eclipſed at all. The moon would be eclipſed by the earth's ſhadow every time ſhe was full; and the eclipſe would be total, as ſeen from any part of the earth. II. If the moon's orbit acquired an elliptical form, and all the other circumſtances remained the ſame as above. The length of days and nights, and of the lunations would be as above mentioned. Whatever part of the moon's orbit was once between the earth and the ſun would always be ſo. If it was the apogeal point, the moon would be too far from the earth at the change to hide the whole body of the ſun, even at the equator; at which all the ſun's eclipſes would be annular. If the perigeal point of the moon's orbit was toward the earth, all the ſun's eclipſes would be total at the equator, and the darkneſs would continue about four minutes. If the middle point betueen the apogee and perigee were toward the ſun, his eclipſes out any continuance of darkneſs. The lunar eclipſes total, as above. III. With theſe circumſtances, ſuppoſe now that the earth ſhould revolve about the ſun, with its preſent annual velocity, but in the plane of the equinoctial. The days and nights would always be of equal length, only the 24 ſolar hours would be 3 minutes 56 ſeconds longer than if the earth had no annual motion: but there would be no difference of ſeaſons. The lunations would be 29 days 12 hours 44 minutes 3 ſeconds in length. The eclipſes of the ſun would be ſometimes total with continuance, at the equator, ſometimes total without continuance, and at other times annular. Thoſe of the moon would be as above mentioned. IV. If now, the earth ſhould go round the ſun in the plane of the ecliptic, and the moon go round the earth in the plane of the ecliptic; and the earth's axis ſnould become inclined to the ecliptic as it is at preſent. This would bring on all the inequality of days and nights, and all the viciſſitudes of ſeaſons we now enjoy: but ſtill the ſun would be eclipſed at the time of every new moon, and the moon at the time of every full. But the central eclipſes of the ſun would not be confined to the equator; for, in our ſummer, the center of the moon's ſhadow would take the earth at the equator, where the general eclipſe would begin: at the middle of the general eclipſe the center of the ſhadow would fall on the northern tropic, and thence it would move obliquely ſouthward, and would go off the earth at the equator. In ſpring, the center of the moons ſhadow would go obliquely over the earth, from the ſouthern tropic to the northern: in autumn it would go obliquely over the earth from the northern tropic to the ſouthern. And in winter it would ſirſt touch the earth at the equator, then bend ſouthward to the ſouthern tropic; from thence toward the equator again, and would at laſt leave the earth at the equator. All the eclipſes of the moon would be total and central (as above) let them be ſeen from any part of the earth whatever. V. If the moon's orbit ſhould become inclined to the ecliptic, as it now is, and all the other circumſtances remain as above; the nodes of the moon's orbit having no motion, but always to keep in the ſame oppoſite points of the ecliptic; there could never then be above ſix eclipſes in the year; and when there were that number, four of them would be of the ſun and two of them of the moon. At other times, as the moon might happen to change in or near the nodes, there would only be three eclipſes; of which there would be two of the ſun and only one of the moon. And the time between theſe eclipſes about the different nodes would be half a year. So that, in whatever ſeaſons the eclipſes once fell, they would always do ſo again. The moon's eclipſes would ſometimes be total and at other times partial. VI. If the moon's nodes ſhould afterwards acquire a retrograde motion, ſuch as they now have, and every thing elſe continue as above: this would occaſion all the variety of eclipſes of the ſun and moon that we now have: to explain which, would require the writing of a large volume. TO REPRESENT THE MOON'ſ ORBIT ON A CELESTIAL GLOBE. Tie a ſilk thread round the ball of the globe on the ecliptic, and then find the place of the moon's aſcending node in the ecliptic by an ephemeris. This done mark the place of the aſcending node in the ecliptic with a chalk, and alſo the oppoſite points of the ecliptic for the place of the deſcending node: mark alſo the two points of the ecliptic which are half way be tween the nodes, or 9o degrees from each Then, reckoning 9o degrees from the aſcending node, according to the order of the ſigns, ſet the ſilk thread 53 degrees northward there, or halſ way between the nodes; and on the oppoſite ſide of the globe ſet the thread 52 degrees ſouth of the ecliptic: and laſtly adjuſting the thread by hand to be like a great circle on the globe croſſing the ecliptic at an angle of 52 degrees in the nodes, the thread will truly repreſent the moon's orbit in the heavens for that time, and ſhew what ſtars it paſſes either through, or near to. And finding the moon's place by an ephemeris for the given time look for the ſame place in the ecliptic, and right againſt it; under the thread, will be the moon's place in her orbit for that time. Tuhe diameter of the moon is to that of the earth as r100, to 365. The moon's velocity is about 2200 miles an hour. Note, In 24 hours the moon moves 13 degrees, 10 minutes of a degree and 35 ſeconds; and every minute of n the moon's orbit i le degree on the e in 24 hours the 35 miles. E I N I S. E R R AT A ace) l. 6. ſor, 31, r. 32. ace) l. s, 9. A ſeventeenth muſt be uſed for the fun int d have been printed as a after, table D, add (fig. 3sor, hanging for, r. hangin fsor, BC, r. BA. sor, forty-four, r. forty-tw aſter, AB, add, (fig. 25.) after, hundred, Ææd, thoul sor, right line, r. right ſint Jor, Desr. &ę. sor, 17, r. 56. sor, debt, r. debf. sor, parallex, r. parallax. ſ. N Eaſy and Pleaſant CoMPENDIUM of almoſt the whole Hæ BR Ew BIn L E. Containing in Select Verſes, a Quarter Part of the Book of PsALMs, divided into LVI. Short Leſſons of Ten Verſes each, including near 1200 Hebrew Roots of principal and frequent Uſe, with an Engliſh Tranſlation of each Root. II. A COMPENDIUM Of the GREEK TESTAMENT. Containing in near Two Thouſand Select Verſes, a Quarter Part of that Sacred Book, including near Five Thouſand Primitive Words, with an Engliſa Tranſlation of each Word. Both by JOHN RYLAND Of Noi thampton. III. One Hundred and Forty Four Familiar Latin Dialogues, on the moſt Common Subjects of Converſſtion, and on the Firſt Parts of the Roman Hiſtory. By Br. Lange of Hall, in Saxony. Printed for E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry. IV. Geograply made a Recreation on Meſſage Cards. V. Cards of Ancient Hiſtory in X. Periods. VI. Cards of Modern Hiſtory, with the Chronology annexed. VIU. Geometrical Cards. VII. Optical Cards. IX. Cards of Anadomy. X. Cards of Aſtronomy, and a living Orrery made with ſixteen School Boys. By Joimnν RYLAND oſ Northaimpton. Printed for and ſold by CARINGTON BOWLES, L O S OP F O R O O L- BO OR, AN P E N D T O T H E ion to the NBw D H I i O S OP H Y. three fhort and eaſy I inciples of ME CH ANIC excellent UsES, not only ſ rovement of the Mind, but re very well worth our Eno Ie of admirable Service to h Dr. WATTS S Improvement u  & . 6  æ.& .5 . L EC TUR E U The true Foundaſ O f all Mechanic Power: On one eaſy Principle The whole of Mechanics depe Which we thus explain F we conſider bodies in motion, And comparè tfiom together, Wae may do this either with reſpect To tbe quantities of matter they contain, Or the velocities with which they are moved. The heavier any body is, The greater is the power required Either to movs, itjox &o ſtop its motion. And again, the tniſter it moves Tne greaten ſbt ne orte. So that the whole momentum, Or quantity of foree Of a moving body, e the reſult of its quantity of matter, Multiplied by the velocity With which it is moved And when the products ariſing From the multiplication Of the particular quantities of matter In any two bodies By their reſpective velocities are equal; An example to explain thi H US, ſuppoſe n body (Whaiich we fhall callAy To weigh forty pounds (40) And cormourââ the rate of two milles nla And another body (which we ſhall call B) To weigh only four pounds (d4 &And to move twenty miles in a minute; The intire forces With which theſe tuo bodies lii Would ſt ike againſt any obſtacle,4 VWill be equal to each other: And therefore it would 1equire Equal powers to ſtop them. The Reaſon of this. FOR 40 multiplied by 2 gives 8,: l (The force of the hody A y And 20 multiplied by a givnes 80, (The force of thie body 1) Upon this eaſy Principl depends the whole of Mech AND it holds univerſally true That when two bodies are ſuſpended By any machine, 8q as to act contrary to each other, If the machine be put into motion, And the perpendicular aſcent of one body Multiplied into its weight, Ee equal to the perpendicular deſcent of the Multiplied into its weight; Theſe bodies, how unequal ſoever In theit weights, i Will balance one another in all ſituations; For, as the whole aſcent of one Is performed inthe ſume time Vith the whole deſcent of the other, Their reſpective velocities Muſt be ditectl õb te ſpaces They move through; Ilnx ,lq , - And the exceſs of weight ir Is conſpenſated by the exceſo Of velocity i ùi other. Upon this eaſy principle It is eaſy to compute . The power of any mechanical engine Whether ſimple or compound; For it is but only enquiring How much ſwifter the power moves Fhan the weĩght dpes q- èe.) How tnuch ucaſerte the ſame timo; And juſt ſo muce Is the power increaſed By the help of the ongine. R E M A R IN the theory of this ſcience, we ſ Alj planes peifectly even, All bodsirs per fectly ſmooth, I.evers to have no weight, Cords to be extremely pliahle, Machines to have no friction, And, in ſhort, all imperfections Mut be ſet aſide Until the theory be eſtabliſhed ; Andò then proper allowances are to b E ægu . ulhi n  898οοοοοοσοσσ ll. z 2æ21 Mechanic Powes .  1ſ1 T H E ſimple MAC HINES, uſually called MECHANICAL POWERS, are ſix in nur The lever. the wheel and axle-the pu The inclined planethe wedgeand th They are called mechanical powers, Becauſe they help us to raiſe weights Move heavy bodies, i And overcome reſiitances, iil Which we could not eſfect without them. Firſt MECHANIC PO The L E V E R. A Lever is a bar turning upon a prop Or centre of motion, And is uſed either to raiſe weights Or to overeome reſiſtances. CThere are three kinds of levè; s, And in each of them the velocity Oſ each point or end Is directly as its diſtance from the prop. A lever is ſaid to be of the ſirſt l When the prop is between the weight And the power: Here the power and weight Batlance each otherb, When the power is in proportron To the weight, As the diſtance oſ the weight from the prop Is to the diſtance oſ the power from the piop. Of this ſort are our iion crows, ſciſſars, Pincers, ſnuffers, and the like. Second &ind of LE VER Lever is ſaid to be of the ſecond kind, When the weight is betvveen the prop And the poverr Here thẽ mõwer. and weight Ballance each otherſi, l When the power is in proportion to the weight, AAs the diſthnoe of the weight from the prop Is to the diſtance of the power from rhe prop. Of this ſort are dogrs turning upon hinges, Rudders of ſuips, oars, and ſuch outting knives As are fixed at the points. Third Kind of L EVE R. . Lever is ſaid to be of the third kind,  When the power is between The weight and the prop: Inthis. the poweer and the weight Ballãnce each other, When the powenis in proportion to the weight As the diſtance of the weight from the prop Is to the diſtance of thè power from the prop. Of this ſort are the bones of our legs and arms, And the wheels of clocks and watches. Theſ bended lever diſfers in nothing but its forr From a lever of the firſt kind; Its power is the ſume, and is ſimilar To that of an hammer drawing a nail. Example of the third Kind of Le HUS, when the power ĩs applied To a lever (of a4 inches long, weighing æ o At the diſtance of ſix inches from the prop, It will require four ounces to ſupport the bare lev If the power be applied at four inches from the p It will require ſix ounces to ſupport it Or if at two inches, it will then require No leſs than twelve ounces to balance it. I put on a weight of one ounce, Aſt 24 inchęs diſtant from the grop, It will then require 1æ ounces mbreg; r7That is, 24 ounces in all, Twelve to ballance the lever. And 12 more to bullance the waĩghſt.ẽ α⸗ ru Second ME CH ANIC Pov The W H E E L and- AXI. 2 2v N the wheel and axle i The velocity of the power ia c To the velocity of the weights, As the circumference of the wheel Is to the circumference of the axle; And the advantage gained by this machine Is directly in the ſame proportion æ ? For the power and weight baltancr enen other, Wahen the power is in proporfion to the weight As the circumference of the axle ili Is to the circumference of the wheel. This mrachine is the principal part Of a common crane. An Example to explain this Pc Suppoſe the circumference of a wheel To be eight times as great As the circumference of the axle : Then a power equal to one pound, Hanging by a cord Which goes round the wheel, Will- ballance a weight of.eight pounde Hanging by a rope Which goes round the axle. [To be continued i- in ſeveral Lectures p hos sSockegoaqoksogkoasν kockaοkocko dfaix1 25εſtoſasrß- & 3 SàE4- en ssrus -ſ RCCπα caqosrõꝶ sCS Exu2 CxpoCHuporspocst EXPERIMENTAT P F I L O S O P H PO R S C H O O L- B OY LECT URBE II. Third Mæc n ANIC Pow 52 i 22 Tùhè P U E. L EVY. A Pulley that orty turns on its axis, And does not riſe with the weight, Serves only to change the diroction of the power; Jor it gives no meehanical- radvantage thereto. When, beſides the upper pullies, which run round in a fixed hiock, There is a block of pullies Moving equally with the weight;. The velocity of the weight is To the velocity of the power, As one is to twice the number of pullies In the moveable block; And the power and weight ballunce each other When the power is in proportion to the wei ghit,. As one is to twice the number of pullies In the moveable block; Or us one is to the whole number of cords. SUPPOSE a weight of cight cunces, Be hung at the lower end of a moveable block Which contains two pullies in it;i c And anosher weight of two ounces, Hung unto the end of a cord ſ Wnhich goes round the pullics, n& And two other pullies in a fixed block (To which the other end of the cord is faſtene Theſe weights will ballance one gnother In all ſituations; And the weight of two ouncesee Will move through four times the ſpace, And with four times the velocisctV, li In the ſame time that the other weight does. Fourth ME CH ANIC Po The INCLIN ED PſI.A A Weight raiſed, or a reſiſtanee moved By an inclined plane, Moves only through a ſpace equâal To the height or thickneſs of that plane, In the time that the power drives The plane through a ſpace Equal to its whole length. Hence the velocity of the power Is in proportion to the velocity of the weight, As the length of the plane Is to its thickneſs or height; And the power and weight ballance eaeh othi When the power is in proportion- to the weig As the thiecneſs of the plane is to the length All edge-tools which are chamfered Only on one ſide, Are inclined planes, àas far as the chamfer goes from the edge. iĩ EX AMP LE. SUPPO SE a load or roller of thirty-t To be ſtayed upon an inelined plane, Whoſe height is half its length; Then it will require æweight of ſixteen ou Acting contrary to the load, To ſupport it, and keep it from deſcending fBõοοον? te 2a 8is & Fifth MnE C H A N 1C P The W E D GE Wedge, in the common form, Is like two inclined planes Joined tégether at their haſes, And the thickneſs or height of theſe planes Mackes the back of the wedge, To which the power is applied in cleaving When two equal reſiſtances act perpendicul Againſt the oppoſiteſides of the wedge, And a power acts perpendicularly againſt The back of the wedge, The velocity of the power is in proportion To the velocity of the reſiſtance On eaeh ſide, As the length of the wedge is To half tho thick neſo of its bacle, And the poer ballances the reſiſtance Of the wood, When the power is In proportion to the reſiſtance, As half the thickneſs of the back Of the wedge is to its whole lengtli, If the harp edge go to the bottom Of the cleſt in the wood; (As it generally does) The velocity of the reſiſtance on eãeh f de i To the velocity of the power actiug on the As half the thickneſs of the wedge is To the whole length of the cleſt c And in this caſe the power anò reſiſtance Ballance each other, ilill When the power is to the reſiſtanee, ſ As half the thickneſs of the wedge (When it is driven quite into the woõσd) Is to the whole length of the cleſt Below the hack of the wedge. 4 ExAMPLE Of the Law of the THUS, ſixteen ounces of reſiſtance, That is, eight ounces on each ſide, Will ballance, or be equal to llũ Eight ounces of power At the back of the wedge, Whaen the back of the wedge Is equal to one of the ſides. But when the back of the wedge Is but half the length Of one of the ſides, liilli Then- four ounces of power ill Wil be equal to Hllli Sixteen ounces of reſiſtance On both the ſides. BCRGERC Eλ, Sixth MECHANIC P The SCREW ũſν Serew may be conſidered as if ii An inclined plane wrapt round a œ Hence the power muſt turn the cylinder Quite round in the time that the weight Moves through a ſpace equal to the diſtan Between the ſpirals or threads of the ſere Therefore the velocity of the power is In propottion to thę velocity of the weigl As the circumference of a cirele Deſcribed by the power, In one turn of ilie ſerew, Is to the diſtance between the ſpirals of t. And the power and reſiſtance ballance Each other when the former is to the latte As the diſtance between the ſpjrals i is To the cireumference of ile circle Deſeribed by the poer. This machinc, beſides the advantage Proper to itſelf, Has generally the beneſit of the wheel And axle, on aceount of the handle Or lever whercby it is turned. The Law of the Screw ma T H E power and reſiſtance ballance eaſ When the power is to the reſiſta nce As the diſtanoe between the ſpirals is To the circumference of the circle, Deſcribed by the power, cylinder, wheel, EX A MP L E Thus if the lever which turns the ſcrew Does in one rotation deſcribe a circle That meaſures thirty times the diſtance Contained between any two ſpirals, It will then gain thirty degrees of power. bockeſ,s hibchubaldidiceteſ àæâ r Kii the Mr cu Vicπũ combined together.. S the ſcrew includes the inclined plane, And. two equally inclined planes make We have all the mechanical powers combined Together in a common jack, If it be turned by the fſy, forthen we Have alſo the lever; the wheel, and axle, And the pullies. If this machine Be uſed for raiſing a weight, By means of a power applied to the ſiy, The power will ballance the weight, If it be in proportion.to the weight, As the velocity of the ueight is. To the velocity of the fly. i Now conſidering how faſt the fly moves, (With reſpect to the motion oſ the weight) It is evident, that a crane, Conſtructed in the manner of a common jack, Wonld be an engine of very great power:; Rut then the time loſt Would alſo be very great : For, in all engines, the time loſt In working them is As the power gained by them. H machines could be made without friction The leaſt degree of power added to that Wnaich hallances. the weight, Would be ſufficient to raiſe it. In the lever the friction Is next to. nothing.; Jn the wheel and æxle it is but ſmall; In the pullles itis very conſiderable; And in the inclined plane, wedge, LAVWS of MOTION. I ſil 1 πũ . LL bodies eontinue their ſtate of reſt, Or uniform motion, in a rightline, ililllũiâ Till they, àrę madèẽ fo change that ſtate By ſomę external force impreſſed upon thenm. L AVW II. Tu unge of motion produced ĩ in any body. Is always proportionable to the force Whaereby it is eſfected ; And in the ſame ne direction wherein the force acts. LAVW III. llli 4i4 7. ſ RE-ACTION is always contrary and equal to action; Or the actions of two bodies upon each other Are equal, and in contrary direction. LAW IV. BoDIES mutually attract each other In proportion to their reſpective quantities of matter, And their attractions diminiſh In proportion as the ſquare of the diſtance between the increaſes. i , Ser Dr. Cheynes Philoſophical Principles of Religion, aDr. Cotion Mather's Cùhriſtian Philosopher, 8vo. 5 n 1,1 . A abuuοrn AsT RoNOMY for School-Boys; O R. ; An INTRODUCTION to the Uſe of the WHIRLING TABLE. 7c1 a75 8 L E & τ iuĩ R :.e ſEI ù 28 2æt25 The Excellence and Uſefulneſs v Aſtronomy. F we look upward witr DAviD i6 theæ worlds above us, cc we conſider the heavens as the work- f the finger oſ G OD, and the moon and ſtus whichhe Ràtlr oruained. what amazing glories dileover themſelves to our fight Whaſ wonders of viſdom are ſeen in the exct tegularity of their revolutions  nor was there ever any ũù that has contributed to enlarge my apprehenſions of the IMMENSE POWER OF GOD, THE MAGNIFICENCE OF HIS CREATION, AND HIS OWN TRANSCENDENT GRANDEUR, ſo much as that little portion of ASTRONOMY which I have been able to at. tain. And I would not only recommend it to YOUNG STUDENTS for the ſame purpoſes, but I would perſuade ALL MANXIND (if it were poſtible) to gain ſome degrees oſ acquamtance with the vaſtneſs the diſtances and the motions of the planetary worlds on the ſame account. It gives an unknown enlargement to the underſtaunding, and affords a divine entertainment to the ſoul and its better powers. VWith what pleaſure and rich profit would men ſurvey thoſe aſtoniſhing SPACES in which the planets revolve, the hugeneſe of their BUL.κ, and the almoſt incredible ſwiftneſs of thtir MOTIONS: and yet all theſe govern'd and adjuſted dy ſus ηlps, that they never miſtake their way nor e, fotiiitutboꝶ tietr 1ime, or change their ap bpuinted cireuits for ſeveral thouſands of years! WHEN we muſe on theſe things we may loſe ourſelves in holy wondes, ani ery out with the pſalmiſt, ec LORD, whal is man that thou art mindful of him, and itie ſon of man a: that thou ſhouldſtiviſit him: Dr. Watts's Aſironomy, Preface, p. 7. THE immortal-8æ ISAAC NEWTON, beſides his other innumerable and wonderful inventions, has diſcovered the fountain and ſpring of all the celeſtial motions, and the QCREAT LAW which is univer fally diffuſed thro- the whole ſyſtem of nature, which the Almighty and wiſe CREATOR, has commanded all bodies to obſerve, viz. Ti AT EVERY PARTICLE &P &DTSR ATRACTS EACH OTHER IN A RECIPROCAL, DUPLICATE PROPORTIONν OF lisi DiIsTANCE. TH1Is law is, as it were, the cement of nature, and the principle of union by which all things remain in thejr proper ſtate and order; it detains not only the plangts, but the comets within their due bounds, and hinders them from making excurſions into the immenſe regions of ſpace, which they would do, if they were only actuated by motion once implanted in them, which naturally they would always preſerve according to the firſt and principal law of motion. WE are alſo obliged to the ſaid gentleman for the diſcovery of the law that regulates all the heavenly motions, ſets bounds to the planets orbs, determines their greateſt excurſions from the ſun, and their neareſt approaches to him. -To this ſublime GENIUS we owe, that now we know the cauſe why ſuch a conſtant and regular proportion is obſerved, by both primary and ſecondary planets, in their circulations round their central bodies, IN COMPARING THEIR DISTANCES WITH THEIR PERIODS; and why all the celeſtial motions are ſtill eontinued in ſuch a wonderful regularity, harmony, and order. Barrow's Dict. Aſtronomy. Tuelve Capital Exerꝶuen rs on the WHIRLINO TaꝶLE. g. æ EXPERTM EνT I. 17.3, e O ſhew the propenſity of, matter, to eep tliè ſtate it iſ im, whether motſor or xęũ, for guer. 4 lili L4E2, Æ& B.d r551: ùii , TO ſhew that bodies móving in orbite, Rare. a ten deney to ſiy out of theſe orbits. Xanu . E X P. lI. TO mew that bodies move fuſter in ſmall orbits than in large ones. 33 EXP. rvvxm. uùFEFr On centrifugal. forges. T O ſhew that when bodies ofi EQUAL quantities of matter revolve in EQUAL circles with EQUAL velocities, theſr cenſrifugal forces are EQUAL. EX P. V. i T O ſhew that the centrifugal forces of revolving bodies are in a direct proportion to their quantities of matter multiplied intq their reſpective velocities, or into their diſtances from the centres of their reſpective circles. E X P. VI. TO ew that a double velocity in the ſame circle is a ballance to a quadruple power of gravity. . i EX P. VII. TO tie, that  o one body mòves round ariothot, both oſ them muſt move round their comunon center of gi avity. Heire introduce the doemi-globe of two pouſidi weight, connected by a wire to. a little, ball.of onęg ounce: This ſmall ball, in a rapid motion, ùàſ & carry off the demiglobe from the tabie. in.1 E XP. VIII. TO demonſtrate he abſii- ſiity o of f the ( Carteſian doctii ine ol the planets moving ĩound.i ſing ſun in vortexes. OE X P. x illlũll fla;. ERũ i TO ſhew the reaſon.uy the ſudes uſe at t the ſame time on oppoſie ſides of the eagth-. u [ This is the beautiful apusiment. iventa by Mr. Ferguſon.] LEI E X P. Xx i TO ſew that . diameter of our earth is longer ai cthe equator than at the poles. ll [This muſt bo-done on the whirling- ſphere. ] E X P. XI. ll Eeplers Grand Problem illuſtrated, viæ. T H AT the ſquares of the periodical times of the planets round the ſun are in proportion to the cubes of their ditances from lim: and that the ſun's attraction is inverſely as the ſquare of the diſtance from his centre; that is, at twice the diſtance his attraction, is four times leſsat fhrice the diſtance nine times leſsat four times the diſtance ſixteen times leſs, andat five limes, tents five times. leſs, &c. EXP, XII. THE earth's motion round the ſun demon ſtrated fiom all the foregoing experiments. H i Rlli a , REE EXPERIMENT VI. r 17. Expl 466 & æ& H F bodies aſ equat ueighte Revolve in equal circles With unequal Qvcitio ies; Theixr centrifugal forces are As the ſquares of the velocities. ili To prove this law by experiment, Let two balls, A. and B. of equal weight, Be fixed on their cords at equãl diftanices From their reſpective centres of motiõn; Then let the cat- gut ſtring be put round Whoſe circumference is only one half Of the eircumference Hf the õther whee, And let four times as much weig ht t Be put into the tower B As in the tower A u Then turn the winch, And the ball B will revolve twice as faſt As the ball A in a cirele of the fame diam Becauſe they are equidiſtant from the cent: Of the circles in which théy revolve; And the weights in the towers Wili both riſe at the ſame inftant; Which ſnews that a double velocity In the ſame cirele, Will exactly ballance A qiadruple, or fourfold power of attract In the centre oſ the circle; For the weights in the towers May be conſidered as the attractive forces In the centers, ; Acting upon the revolving balls;,; Which, moving in equal circles, Is the ſame thing as if they both moved In one and the ſume circle. e all tbeſe Experiments explained at length in Mr. æe RRHR  ſn. . ELECT and EASY B O.O ÆS for-a YOUNG P HILOSOPHE R. EwWTONIAN Philoſophy, for Boys and Girls, by Tom Teleſcope, A. M. Twenty-fours. Newberry. Martin's Lectures on all the Sciences, ĩ ĩr his Introduction to the Engliſii Language, 12mo. Ferguſon's Analyſis of his xir. Lectures. 8vo. 6d. with his Lectures on ſelect Suhjects, 8vo. 7s. Locke's Elements of Natural Philoſophy, ramo. 6d. Martin's Familiar Introduction to the Newtonian Philoſophy, 8vo. as. 6d. ; Martin's Philoſophical Grammar, 8vo. 35 Rait. Young Gentlemen and Ladies Philoſophy, a Vols. 8vo. in Dialogues. In Martin' s Magesine of Arts and Sciences. Matho. a Vols 8vo. by Mæ. Baxter,A wort. of incomparable Strength and Beaut 1 ; 4 Nature diſplayed; by Mr. Pluche. Vois. iamo. . Ray s Wiſdom of God in ihę Creation. 8vo. . Dr. Derham's Phyſico Theology. a Vols. 24. . Dr. Cotton Mather s Chriſtian Philoſopher. 8voO. 1725. l. Above all read Monſ. Nollett's Laſt Legacy to young 