A R D E N5 COURS E OF LECTURE ON NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL P H IL O S OP HY v I 2Z. NATURAL PHILO- ſ GEOGRAPHY, SOPHY in General, ASTRONOMY, CHEMISTRY, HYDROSTATICS, ELECTRICITY, PNEUMATICS, MECHANICS, OPTICS, c. BY J AM ES A R D E N.  Cultura animi Philoſophia efi. Cic. Tuſc. 2. 5.  T H E S E C O ND E D IT I ON.  M D C CL XXXII. [Price One Shilling and Six-pence. ] 4 DVE RTIS EME NT-. Having frequently heard the Subſcribers to this Courſe requeſt the Publication of ſome ſuch Treatiſe as this, to ſerve by Way of Memorandum or PocketCompanion, for thoſe Parts which would be moſ litely to eſcape the Memory ; and at the ſame Time knowing that my Father was too much engaged in Buſineſs, to comply with thoſe Requeſis, induced me to draw up this Analyſis; which will, I hope, in ſome Meaſure; anfwer the End propoſed. 86 COURSE or LECTURES ON NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL P H I L O S O P H V.  LE CT U R E I. On the general Properties of Matter. HILOSOPHY is a Science that in every Age and Country, has, by the wiſe, and diſcerning Part of Mankind, been cultivated with the greateſt aſſiduity; nor if we conſider its immenſe Uſe, could it well be otherwiſe. To enumerate every Advantage which have accrued to the World from experimental Philoſophy, would far exceed the Bounds of this Analyſis. Suffice it then to ſay; that there is not a ſingle Art, or Science, to the Advantage of which it may not be applied. It inſpires us with noble and A 2 generous generous Sentiments, with the Love of Virtue, and the moſt exalted ideas of the Omnipotent Creator of the Univerſe; and guides us in our Reſearches through the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Worlds, which teem with Matter for the Exerciſe of our Minds: and nothing does in a more peculiar Manner aſſiſt us in demonſtrating the Truth of a general Providence, and in explaining ſome remarkable Parts of Scripturee How noble then is it to exert in a ſuperior Manner, the Faculty of our Minds which is the Glory of our Nature, in this ſublime Science; by which we are enabled to perform the higheſt Services to our Country, and to Mankind The Deſign of this Courſe of Experimental Philoſophy, being to demonſtrate in as familiar, and natural a Manner as the Nature of the Subject will admit, all thoſe Principles by which the Univerſe is governed, regulated, and continued, and account for the various Phœnomena, or Appearances of Nature, which ariſe therein; it will be neceſſary to conſider in the firſt Place, the known Properties of Matter. By which Word, we are to underſtand whatever Thing we can ſee, or feel; or whatever has any Weight, preſſes, or reſiſts Preſſure. MATTER perhaps is the ſame in all Bodies, and all the Variety we obſerve amongſt them, may ariſe from the various Forms, Connections, or Adheſions of their firſt Particles. l All All Bodies are EXTENDED. This Extenſion is that Property of Matter, by which any Body poſſeſſes or takes up ſome Part of Univerſal Space; which is called the Place oſ that Body. For all Bodies : are extended, either into Length only, and then it is called a Line; or into Length and Breadth, and then it is called a Superficies; or into Length, Breadth, and Depth, and then it is called a Solid. The Magnitude or Bulk of all Bodies, are by theſe three Dimenſions eſtimated. The Particles of all Bodies, are equally SOLID and IMPENETRABLE. The Particles of all Bodies, are capable of Separation, or Diſunion, from each other, which property, is called the DIVISIBILITY of Matter. In Theory Matter is Diviſible ad Infinitum, as is evident by the leaſt Conſideration; becauſe we cannot conceive any Particle of it ſo ſmall, but we may form an idea of a leſs; as half of it, or a quarter of it, or one tenth Part of it, &c. but this Diviſion in Practice is impoſſible to be performed; of the Diviſibility or ſurpriſing Smallneſs of ſome Particles, we have a great many Inſtances; as Gold-beating, and Diſſolutions of coloured Drugs in Water, carry the active Diviſion of Matter to a ſurpriſing Length. SPACE is a mere void, capable of r receiving any Body into it; but is without all Bodies, infinitely extended every way; or it is that Part A 3 of of the Univerſe which is entirely empty and void of all Matter, which by Philoſophers is called a Vacuum. ATTRACTION is a Property, with which all Matter is indued in a greater or leſs Degree, and it is that Power by which its Particles mutually accede to, or approach each other; it is divided into five Kinds, viz. of Cobeſion, Gravitation, Magnetiſm, Electricity, and Chemical Attraction. ATTRACTION of COHESION is that Power whereby the minute Particles of Matter tend to, and adhere or ſtick together. This Attraction acts univerſally between the Particles of all Fluids of the ſame Kind, except the Particles of Air, hot Steam, Smoke, and the Electrical Effluvia, which ſeem to repel each other. Alſo between different Fluids; and between certain Fluids, and Solids, with great Variety of Degrees in different Bodies. The Particles of all Solid Bodies ſtrongly attract one another; and ſome different Solids do the ſame. Some Fluids are ſtrongly attracted by ſmall Glaſs Tubes, and the ſmaller the Bore of the Tube is, the greater will be the Height of the Fluid. Different Fluids riſe to different Heights, but they always riſe in a reciprocal Proportion to the Diameter of the Tube. Mercury exhibits Pnœnomena juſt the reverſe; becauſe the Particles of Mercury attract each other other more ſtrongly than they are attrodted by thoſe of Glaſs. The upper Surface of the Fluid riſing between two Glaſs Plates iouching each other on one Side, vill form the Hyperbolic Curve: the Heights of whoſe ſeveral Points above the Surface of the ſtagnating Fluid, will conſequently be to one another reciprocally as their perpendicular Diſtances, from the Concourſe of the Plates. The great Power of Attraction of Coheſion is ſnewn by Experiments, with Lead, Copper, Braſs, &c. This Attraction does not act at the Point of Contact only, but at ſome perceptible Diſtance; as is evident from Salt of Tartar, Wormwood, Pot-Aſh, Common Salt, Nitre, Sugar, Vitriols, &c. being diſſolved by the Moiſture attracted from the Air. Hair and Hemp, Cords, &c. are affected by the ſame Means, and become thicker and ſhorter. The greater Diſtance any Bodies are from each other, the leſs will be their attracting Power till the Sphere of Attraction ceaſes, then another Power begins to Actl. Why ſome Bodies are Fluid, and others Solid, perha ps may be thus eaſily accounted for. Solid Bodies are rendered fluid by Heat; and fluid Bodies with ſufficient Degrees of Heat are turned into Vapours, i. e. Fluids exceeding rare, inviſible, and highly elaſtic; but different DeA 4 grees grees of Heat are requiſite to produce theſe Effects on different Bodiess. Many of the Subſtances thus volatilized or converted into a rare, inviſible, and elaſtic Fluid, by Heat, may be again condenſed, by expoſing them to a Heat leſs intenſe than that which was neceſſary to produce their evaporation, and will then again be reduced to their original ſtate. All thoſe rare, inviſible, and elaſtic Fluids which may by cold, or ſuch a Degree of it as has been hitherto applied, be thus condenſed, are called Vapours. Other Bodies converted by Heat or otherwiſe into highly elaſtic, inviſible, rare Fluids, cannot, by the Cold of the Atmoſphere, or by any Degree of Cold to which they have hitherto been known to be expoſed, be thus condenſed. Such is the common Atmoſpherical Air which we breathe, and ſuch atfe all the different Kinds of Air or Gas which are called permanently elaſtic. They are diſtinguiſhed from Smoke and other viſible Exhalations by their being inviſible, and from Vapours, by their not being condenſible by Cold. LECTURE HEMICAL ATTRACTION or COMBINATION, is the union of ſeveral Subſtances of different Natures, from which a new compound Body reſults. This Power which is ſometimes called Specific, or Elective Attraction, acts not only upon the integrant Parts of Bodies, but alſo upon their conſtituent Paris. The Union or Combination of conſtituent Parts, is incapable of Disjunction by mechanical Means; and attended with conſiderable Changes of their Properties. The Union of integrant Parts, is ſuch an Appoſition of theſe Parts, as are capable of being disjoined by mechanical Means, and without any Change produced upon their Properties. When two Subſtances are combined chemically, they may be ſeparated by Elective Attraction; (i. e.) the Application of a third Subſtance, which will unite with one, and ſeparate the other from it. As is proved by Experiments in diſcovering the the Strength of Vinous Spirits. Acid and Alkaline Fluids being mixed together, will ſtrongly attract one another, which vill cauſe a great Ebullition or Efferveſcence, and ſet at Liberty Liberty a large Quantity of Fixable Air from the Alkaline Fluid. Upon this Principle of Attraction, variety of Colours will be produced, deſtroyed, and reſtored: whence alſo may be deduced, Methods for taking out Stains in Silt, Iron-moulds out of Linen, and Tnk out of Tables, &c. As Ink when good, is an Article that is extremely Valuable; I have herè ſet down the Ingredients for making a good and durable Black Ink, as taken from Dr. Lewis. One Quart or three Pints of Wine, Vinegar, or Water; three Ounces of Galls; one Ounce of Green Vitriol; one Ounce of Logwood; one Ounce of Gum Arabic. The Ingredients may be all put together at once in any convenient Veſſel, and well ſhaken four or five Times a Day. In 10 or 12 Days, or ſooner, if ſet in a warm Place, the Ink will be fit for Uſe; though both its Colour and Durability will be improved by its ſtanding longer upon the undiſſolved Ingredients. Or the Logwood and Galls may be firſt boiled in the Liquor for Half an Hour, or more, with the Addition oſ a little more Liquor to make up for that which evaporates in the boiling: ſtrain the Decoction while hot, and add to it the Vitriol and Gum. Bits of old Iron, and broken Galls kept in the Veſſel with the Ink, vill improve the Colour. 3l Subſtances Subſtances may act chemically upon one another. Firſt, by Solution; when two Subſtances combinę together. When two Subſtances are combined chemically, one is called the Menſtruum, the other the Solvend. A Menſtruum, or Diſſolvent, will only combine with a certain Proportion of a Solvend. As Water will only diſſolve a certain Quantity of Salt. Secondly, by Precipitation, hen a Solvend unites with a Menſtruum, and ſeparates another from it, that falls to the Bottom. Thirdly, by Fermentation; which is a ſpontaneous inteſtine Motion in Subſtances, vhereby the Arrangement of the Parts is entirely altered. CRYSTALLIZATION, is a Property in Bodies, when they become Solid, to form themſelves into particular Shapes, and to run in certain Directions. This Power is capable of overcoming Reſiſtances; Hence, VWater in freezing, oſten breaks the Veſſel in vwhich it is contained. WATER is ſeldom, if ever, found perfectly pure. For Waters that run within, or upon the Surface of the Earth, contain, according to the different Subſtances through, or over which they run, various Earthy, Saline, Metallic, Vegetable, or Animal Particles. Snow and Rain Waters are much purer than thoſe, although rbæ alſo contain whatever floats in the Air, or has been exhaled along along with the watery Vapours. The Method of trying the goodneſs and foulneſs of Waters, and alſo of detecting Frauds and Subſtitutes i in Chemical Medicines, will be explained by proper Experiments. REPULSION is that Power, by which Bodies are made to fly from each other; and where the Sphere of Attraction ceaſes, a repulſive Power begins. It is upon this Principle that Water repels moſt Bodies, till they are made wet; and Flies walk upon it without wetting their Feet. This active Principle is proved by Experiments. Surprizing Experiments with Glaſs Bubbles, Proofs, &c.  LE CT U R E IIII. ELECTRICITY. HE Term ELECTRICITY, is derived from ſElektron] the Greek Name for Amber, which was firſt diſcovered to be in that Body, by Thales of Miletus, who flouriſhed about ſix Hundred Years before Chriſt. But the firſt Perſon who expreſsly mentions this Subſtance is Theophraſtus, about the Year 300 before our Saviours Time; who ſays, in his Hiſtory of Precious Stones, that it is the Property of Amber when when excited by Friction, to attract not only Straws, but thin Pieces of Copper and Iron. And from the great Improvements made ſince that Time, it is now extended to ſignify the like Power in all other Bodies wherein it reſides, as Glaſs, Wax, Reſin, &c. It has alſo been found by Experience, that ſome Bodies will admit this Electric Matter, to ſpread over their Surfaces, and enter their Pores, but others will not. The former of theſe, are called Non-electrics, or Conductors: which are Metals, Ores, moiſt Wooã, Water, Animal Bodies, and Vegetables. The latter, which will not admit the Electric Matter to enter their Pores, are called Electrics, or Non-conductors: which are Glaſs, Amber, dry Air, Wax, Silk, &c. : All Bodies upon the Earth, have a Quantity of this Electric Matter infuſed into them, which is called their natural Quantity, and it ſeems to lie in a quieſcent State, till acted upon by Friction, when it is emitted in the Appearance of Fire. Any Body having more than its natural Quantity of this Matter, is ſaid to be electrified poſitively, or Plus; but having leſs than its natural Quantity, is ſaid to be electrified negatively or Minus  which may be done either Way by the common Machine. And Bodies being electrified either of theſe Ways, will immediately repel each other; but ſome being electrified Poſitively, and others others Negatively, will mutually attract each other: one Body being electrified Poſitively, and the other having no more than its natural Quantity, will alſo attract each other. If a Feather be tied to the End of a Flaxen Thread, and preſented to the Prime Conductor of the Machine, it will be ſtrongly attracted by it, and if the Machine be kept electrified, the Electric Matter will be conducted from it, by the Thread to the Hand that holds it: ſo that notvithſtanding the Feather is continually receiving an additional Quantity of Fire, it is conducted from it by the Thread as faſt; by which Means the Feather muſt be conſtantly attracted towards the Prime Conductor. If a Feather be tied to the End of a Bit of SilEs, and preſented to the Conductor as in the laſt Experiment; it will be firſt attracted to it, by which Means it will receive more than ĩts natural Quantity of the Electric Matter, and as Silk is not a Conductor, the Feather will inſtantly be repelled, and will continue to be ſo till it has diſcharged its additional Quantity upon ſome conducting Body. This Electrical Attraction and Repulſion, will be further illuſtrated by ſeveral curious and entertaining Experiments. BY Means of the Friction of the Glaſs Cylinder againſt the Leather Cuſhion belonging to the Machine, is accumulated a large Quantity of Electrical Matter from the Table and Floor on which which the Machine ſtands; which is collected by ſome ſmall ſharp-pointed Wires placed near the Cylinder, in order to convey it to the Metal Tube that is ſupported upon Silk Strings, and which is generally called the Prime Conductor; near which if any conducting Body is held, Sparks of Fire will be perceived, accompanied with a crackling Noiſe, and is, what is called the ELECTRIC SPARK. The ſame Kind of Spark that is produced from the Earth by Machines, has, by the Aſſiſtance of an Electrical Kite, been brought from the Clouds; which was firſt attempted by the ingenious Dr. Franklinn. And by the Electric Matter thus obtained, he performed all the Electrical Experiments which are uſually exhibited by an excited Cylinder or Tube. From hence he deduced a Method of preſerving Buildings from the dangerous Effects of Lightning, by having Metalline Rods erected by the Sides of Buildings, to reſtore the equilibrium of the Electric Matter between the Clouds and the Earth. For the Clouds are ſometimes in a Poſitive and ſometimes in a Negative State of Electricity; and if two ſuch Clouds having different Quantities of the Electric Matter ſhould meet; that Cloud which is Poſitively electrified, will diſcharge its Abundance into the Cloud which is electrified Negatively, and with a Flaſh of Lightning the Equilibrium will be reſtored. The Fire in its Paſſage will rarify the Air, and the adjoining Air, in in ruſhing in with great Violence to ſupply its Place, will make the Report which we call Thunder. If Water be made to go thro the Bore of a Capillary Syphon, it will fall in ſmall Drops; but as ſoon as the Water becomes electrified, it will then run thro the Syphon in a quick Stream. Hencetis found that a Perſon's Pulſe is accelerated almoſt one third by being electrified. This acceleration has been found of infinite Service in Obſtructions of all Kinds, Rheumatiſms, &c. and the Electrical Shock has been found very efficacious in removing Deafneſs, Head-ach, Tooth-ach, ParaIytic Caſes, &c. The LEYDEN SHOCK, ſee an Explanation of it in the next Lecture.  LE C T U R EIV. ELECTRICITY. OR a Perſon to be ELECTRIFIED, it is neceſſary that he ſhould be inſulated, (i. e.) ſtand upon a Cake of Vax, Reſin, or upon a Stool vwith Glaſs Feet to it, (all of which are Non- conductors of the Electric Matter) to prevent any communication with him and the Floor; being ſo placed, if a communication be made from the Prime Conductor to him, he will be more replete vith vith Electric Matter than before; and Sparks of Fire may be drawn from any Part oſ his Body equally the ſame as from the Conductor of the Machine. The Electrical Matter is capable of ſetting Fire to ſeveral inflammable Bodies; ſuch as Spirits of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, Inflammable Air, and Gunpowder; proved by Experiments. In the Year 1743, the late Profeſſor Muſchenbroek diſcovered a Method of increaſing the Force of the Electric Shock in a very ſurprizing Manner. Having ſuſpended a Cannon by Non-conductors, and holding a Glaſs Veſſel in one Hand, containing Water, which had a communication vith the Cannon by Means of a Wire, and with the other Hand diſengaging it ſrom the Cannon, was ſurprized by a ſudden Shock in his Arms and Breaſt, which for ſome Time deprived him of his Senſes. Dr. Franklin has obſerved that after the Leyden Phial is charged by the Electrical Machine, there is no more Electric Matter in it than there was beforee. For whatever Quantity of Electrical Fire is thrown into the Iuſide, an equal Quantity muſt come from the Outſide. Therefore we can only alter the State oſf the Phial. And as no more Electrical Fire can be thrown into the Inſide of a Bottle, when all is driven from the Outſide, ſo in a Bottle not yet electrified, none can be thrown B into into it, when none can eſcape from without, as vill be illuſtrated by proper Experiments. The ſimilarity between Electricity and Lightning, appears, not only in ĩts being able to ſet Fire to inflammable Bodies; but alſo in fuſing Metals, killing Animals, and rending Bodies which reſiſt its Paſſage; proved by Experiments. That there is Fire in all Bodies, is proved by Phoſphori and other Bodies producing Fire by Friction i in a dark Room.  HE Earth attracts all Bodies that are near it: and the Force with which Bodies when they are ſo attracted tend toward the Earths Centre, is called Gravily. ATTRACTION of GRAVITATION is that Power, by which Bodies are made to tend towards the Earth and one another. This Power of Gravity from the Surface of the Earth, upwards, is, at different Diſtances from the Earth's Centre, as the Squares of thoſe Diſtances inverſly. That is, if the Gravity of a Body when it is at the Diſtance of one Semi-diameter from the Earth's Centre, Centre, is equal to 1, at the ſeveral Diſtances I, 2, 3, 4, &c. the Gravity of it will be as the Squares of thoſe Diſtances inverted. The Squares are 1, 4,.9, 16, &c. in this Proportion the Force of Gravity decreaſes, whilſt the Diſtances from the Centre increaſe in the ? Proportion 1I, 2, 3, 4, &c. The Momentum or Quantity of Motion in Bodies, is as the Velocity and Quantity of Matter contained in them conjointly. Therefore as the Quantity of Motion is always proportional to the moving Force; it is evident that two Bodies moving with equal Velocities, can make no Difference in the Power of their Strokes; except the different Quantities of Matter they containn. Thus two Balls, the one 500Ib. Weight, and the other 100Ib. moving with equal Velocities, the Ball of 5001b. will ſtrike with a Force four Hundred times s greater, than the Ball of 100b. MOTION, its various Kinds and Afections, are by Sir Jſlaac Newton laid down under three general Heads, commonly called the three Las of Motion., The firſt of which is, that all Bodies continue in the ſame State of reſting or moving uniformly in a ſtrait Line: unleſs ſome external Force impreſſed upon them, makes them alter that State. As is evident by conſidering, that it is a Part of the Eſſence of Matter, not only to be inactive or unable to produce Motion in itſelf, B 2 but but even to make a Reſiſtance to Motion when communicated to it by any external Cauſe. Alſo when a Body is in Motion, it is as impoſſible for it to ſtop itſelf, as it was to put itſelf in  Morion vwhen at reſt. For if a Veſſel of Water is ſuddenly moved forwards upon an horizontal Plane, the Water will not have the Motion of the Veſſel communicated to it ſuddenly, but remaining in its State of reſt, will, where the moving Force acts, riſe up againſt the Side of the Veſſel and daſh over. But when once the Water has the Motion of the Veſſel communicated to it, and begins to move with a Velocity equal to that of the Veſſel, then it will remain in a State of Motion; and if the Veſſel is ſuddenly ſtopped, it will run againſt the other Side and daſh over as beſore. The ſecond Law of Motion is, that the changes made in the Motion of Bodies, are always proportional to the moving Forces impreſſed, and are produced in the ſame right Line in which thoſe Forces act; that is, a double Force will produce a double Quantity of Motion, a triple Force, a triple Quantity, and ſo on. As ſuppoſe it was required to throw a Ball of Lead equal in Weight to 1lb. with a certain Velocity, we know that to throw the ſame Ball with double the Velocity, it will require double the Force. The third Law of Motion is, that re-action is tual Actions of two Bodies upon each other, are equal and in contrary Directions. Thus, if a Horſe draws a Stone forwards, the Stone draws the Horſe back equally: i. e. juſt ſo much Motion as the Horſe communicates to the Stone, he will loſe ſo much himſelf.. For ſuppoſe him able if hè had no Stone behind him, to puſh forwards with his Breaſt, a Weight equal to 6oolb. it is evident that when he has a Stone of 400lb. to draw, ſo much of his Strength will be laid out that Way, as to leave him able to puſh forwards with his Breaſt no greater Weight than 200lb. For 6004007 200lb. He has therefore loſt a Quantity of Motion forwards, juſt equal to what he has communicated to the Stone, or as much as he draws the Stone one Way, ſo much it draws him the contrary; and was it not for the Difference of 200lb. which he has on his Side, he would not be able to move. And from this Power oſ Aftion and Re-action, it is eaſy to account for the flying of Birds, ſWimming of Fiſh, and rowing of Boats; for when the Medium is by the Wing, Fin, or Oar, acted upon in any Direction, by an equal Re-action, the Bird, Fiſh, and Boat are moved in a Direction juſt the Contrary. In Bodies conſidered mechanically there are three different Kinds of Centres, viz. the Centre of Motion, Magnitude, and Gravity The Centre B 3 of of Motion is that Point round which all the other Parts move, while it remains at reſt. The Centre of Magnitude in any Body is that Point which is equally diſtant from all its Parts. The Centre of Gravity is that Point which being ſuſtained, or prevented from deſcending, the Body will continue at reſt. The Method of finding this Centre, ſnewn by Experiment, alſo how a heavy Body may be prevented from falling by adding a heavier to it. Some heavy Bodies when placed upon an inclined Plane ſide down, ſome roll, and others fall. A Body is ſaid to ſide down, when it deſcends with the ſame Baſe or Side continually towards the Plane. 1It is ſaid to sall or roll, when the Line of Direction let fall from the Centre of Gravity falls without the Baſe. From hence we may ſee the Reaſon why Towers and other Buildings much inclined do not fall; for whilſt the Line of Direction from the Centre of Gravity will fall within the Baſe, the Building vill ſtand firm; but if the Line ſhould fall never ſo little out of the Baſe, the Building will then fall. The ſimple Mechanic Povers are uſually reckoned ſix; but perhaps may more properly be reduced to three, viz. the Lever, Balance, and Wheel and Axle may be called one; the inclined Plane, Plane, Screw and Wedge, tuo; and the Syſtem of Pullies three. The LEVER is conſidered as an inflexible Line, void of Weight, and moveable about a fixed Point, called its Fulrum or Prop; and is applied either for raiſing Weights or overcoming Reſiſtances. They are of three Kinds. Firſt when the Fulcrum is between the Weight and the Power; ſecond when the Weight is between the Power and the Fulcrum; third when the Power is between the Weight and the Fulcrum. To thoſe of the firſt Sort belong the Iron Crows uſed for raiſing great Weights, as Stone, &c. Sciſſars alſo, and Snuffers, &c. are two Levers of the firſt Kind joined together. The ſecond Kind of Levers are Oars, &c. and cutting Knives as are made uſe of by Patten-Makers, that are fixed at one End. Levers of the third Kind are generally referred to the Bones of a Mans Leg or Arm; when a Weight is lifted by the Hand, the Muſcle that is exerted to raiſe the Weight, is fixed to the Bone about one-tenth Part as far from the Elbow as the the Hand is; and the Elbow being the Centre round which the Arm turns, the Muſcle muſt therefore exert a Force ten Times greater than the Weight raiſed. The Power of a Compound Lever is found by multiplying the Power of each into one another. B4 A BALANCE A BALANCE differs very little from a Lever, the Centre of Motion being looked upon as the Fulcrum. The Nature of which will be illuſtrated by proper Experiments. The WHEEL and AXLE, or Axis in Peritrochio, is a very plain and uſeful Machine; and the Power gained is juſt in Proportion as the Circumference of the Wheel exceeds that of the Axis; i. e. if the Wheel be ſix Times as large as the Axle, a Man may lift ſix Times as much. by it, as by his own Strength, allowing for Friction. PULLIES are either ſingle or combined. A ſingle Pully that only turns round upon its Axis, gives no advantage to a Power; it only ſerves to change the Direction thereof. But by a Combination of Pullies, great Advantage is gained. And the Method of computing the Advantage, is only to obſerve the Number of Strings that go to the lower Block of Pullies. Thus, ſuppoſe a Man by his own Strength, or by a ſingle Pulley, could raiſe and ſupport 1 C. Wt. by the Aſſiſtance of a Set of Pullies which had five Strings going to the lower Block, he would be able to ſupport 5 C. Wt. and ſo on. The INCLINED PLANE, may be uſed wijth Advantage in raiſing Weights: the Power of it ĩs, as its Length is to its Height; (i. e.) a Cylinder may be rolled up an inclined Plane, that is ten Yards in Length, and but one Yard perpendicular Height, with one-tenth Part of the Force that would would be neceſſary to lift it that Yard in a perpendicular Direction. The SCREW is nothing more than an inclined Plane turned round upon a Cylinder, and as the Circumference of the Cylinder is greater than the Diſtance between the Threads, ſo much may the Power be leſs than the Weight or Reſiſtance, and yet be able to Balance it. Thereſore the greater the Circumference, and the ſmaller the Diſtance of the Threads, the greater is the Power of the Screw. The WEDGE is a mechanical Power, conſiting of two inclined Planes; the Power of which is according to its Length, but the Reſiſtance iIs overcome according to its Thickneſs: therefore as the Length of the Wedge is to half the Thickneſs of it, ſo is the Power gained by its Uſe. Of any two or more of theſe ſimple Machines combined together, all other Machines, however complicated, are compoſed: and in treating of them, they are to be conſidered as mathematically Exact, and moving without Friction. Experiments relating to Friction, and the Method of loading Wheel-Carriages, will be illuſtrated by Experiments. The PILE-DRIVING ENGINE, made uſe of at Weſtminſter and Black-Fryars Bridges, was contrived by one Voulou, a Watch- Maker: it is fixed upon two Boats, and ſo contrived that while the the Horſes that work it, go continually round, the Ram riſes and falls from a great Height to the Top of the Pile, without the Horſes being fenſible when the Weight is diſengaged from them, as the inequality of the Draught is regulated by a Fly. The Ram is immediately followed by a Pair of Tongs, that bring it up again: the Tongs are nearly counterpoiſed by another Weight, whoſe ſmall Rope is wound upon a Spiral Fuſee, ſo as to cauſe the Tongs to fall with a uniform Velocity. A curious Model of a new- invented Seed Furrow Plough, that ploughs, ſows, and harrows three different Furrows at the ſame Time, will be thewn and explained.  MAGNETISM, of the GLOBES. HE MAGNET or LOADSTONE, is an Iron Ore, found in many Parts of the World, and moſt commonly in Iron-mines. Some of its moſt remarkable Properties are the following. () In every Loadſtone, there are two Points called its Poles, by which the Magnetic Virtue is emitted. (2) One of thoſe Poles attracts, the other repels Iron and Steel only. Q;) It ;) It communicates this Virtue to Iron by the Touch, which renders it ſtrongly Magnetic. ) A Piece of Iron, or Steel ſo touched, and ſuſpended upon a ſharp Point, will ſettle itſelf in a Direction nearly North and South. (5) The End of the Needle touched by the South Pole of the Stone, will point Northwards; and vice verſa. (6) This Virtue may be communicated to Iron or Steel, by a ſtrong Attrition all one Way. (7) It pervades the Pores of the hardeſt Bodies. (8) Iron Rods or Bars, by long ſtanding in a vertical Poſition, will acquire a magnetic Virtue. (9) This Power is entirely deſtroyed by Fire and Rufſt, alſlo by having their Poles laid all one Way. Hence, in order to preſerve Magnets, their Poles ſhould be laid the contrary Way; O. e.) a North, and Soutb Pole, together alternately. THESE, and may other wonderful Properties of the Magnet, will be illuſtrated by proper Experiments. ANY SPHERICAL BALL having a Map of the World accurately delineated upon it, will be a true Repreſentation of the Earth: for the higheſt Hills are as inconſiderable with Reſpect to the Bulk of the Earth, as the ſmall Aſperites upon the Rind of an Orange, are to thè Bulk of the Orange. Any Ball ſo conſtructed, is called a TERRESTRIAL GLOBE; the principal Circles vhereof are Ten. Six large Circles, and four ſmaller ones, Circles Circles are always divided, (or ſuppoſed to be divided) into 360 equal Parts, called Degrees: a large Circle divides the Globe into two equal Parts. A ſmall Circle divides the Globe into two unequal Parts. The ſix large Circles, are the Horiæon, Braſs Meridian, Equator, Ecliptic, and two Colures, viz. the Equinoctial Colure, and Solſiitial Colure. The four ſmaller Circles are the two Trępics, viz. the Tropic of Cancer towards the North, and the Tropic of Capricorn towards the South. And the two Polar Circles. The HORIZON, is either Senſible or Rational. For the Earth being a Spherical Body, the Horizon, or limit of our View, muſt change as we change our Place. The SENSIBLE HORIZON, is all that Space that we ſee round about us, terminated by the Heavens, where they ſeem to touch the EarthThe RATIONAL HORIZON, is a great Circle that may be ſuppoſed to be drawn parallel to the Senſible Horiæon, paſſing through the Centre of the Earth, and conſequently dividing that and the Heavens into two equal Parts or Hemiſpheres. The Horiæon ſerves to determine the Altitude, Azimuth, and Amplitude of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Times of their riſing, and ſetting, and the Length of their diurnal and nocturnal Arches. The / The MERIDIAN, is that great Braſs Circle wherein the Globe is ſuſpendedc. Any Place being brought to the graduated Side of it, it is ſuppoſed to be Mid-day or Noon; it ſerves alſo to determine the Latitude of any Place. The EQUATOR, is a large Circle that divides the Globe into two equal Parts, called the Northern and Southern Hemiſpheres. This Circle ſerves for the Hour-circle, upon Adams's New Globes, inſtead of the Braſs Circle, about the North Pole of the Old Globes;. parallel to the Equator is a ſmall Semi-circular Wire, which goes through the Braſs Meridian, and is inſerted at the Eaſt and Weſt Points of the Horizon, carrying an Index that points out the Hour; as the 24 Semi-circles drawn upon the Globe, each of which repreſents the Geographical Meridian of any given Place; divides the Globe into 24 equal Parts, conſequently as the Equator contains 360 Degrees, there vill be 15 Degrees contained between any two of theſe Semi-circles, which are neareſt to one another: for 22 x 15 æ 360. The Longitude oſ Places, is alſo reckoned upon this Circle. The ECLIPTIC, croſſes the Equator in two oppoſite Points, making an Angle of 235 Degrees on each Side oſ the Equator. So that one Half of the Ecliptic is in the Northern, and the other in the Southern Hemiſpheree. As the Earth goes round ĩt once every Year, the Sun will appear to do the ſame, changing his Place almoſt a Degree, at at a mean Rate, every 24 Hours. So that whatever Place or Degree of the Ecliptic the Earth is in, the Sun will appear in the oppoſite. The Ecliptic is divided into 12 Signs, and each Sign into 30 Degrees, which are again ſubdivided into Halves and Quarters. The great Circle that paſſes through the Equinoctial Points, at the beginning of Aries and Libra, and through the Poles of the World, (which are two oppoſite Points, each 90 Degrees from the Equinoctial,) is called the EQUINOCTIAL COLURE. And the great Circle that paſes through the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn and alſo through the Poles of the Ecliptic, and Poles of the World, is called the SOLSTITIAL COLURE. The TROPICS, aàre leſſer Circles in the Heavens, parallel to the Equator; one on each Side of it, touching the Ecliptic in the Points of its greateſt Declination; ſo that each Tropic i is 235 Degrees from the Equator. The POLAR CIRCLES, are each 232 Degrees from the Poles, all round. That which goes round the North Pole, is called the Arctic-circle, from the Greek Word, [Arktos] which ſignifies a Bear. The South Polar Circle, is called Antarctic Circle, from its being oppoſite to the Arctic. The Circles upon the Celeſtial Globe, are the ſame as upon the Terreſtrial Globe, but their Uſe is is ſomewhat different. As upon the Terreſtrial Globe, the Latitude of a Place is its Diſtance from the Equator, either North or South. And the Longitude of a Place is its Diſtance from the firſt Meridian either Eaſt or Wett. But the Latitude of a Star, &c. is reckoned from the Ecliptic Their Longitudes from the Equinoctial Colure, or firſt Point of Aries. Comuss ſurprizing Metals and Figures, ſhewn and explained.  L E CT U R E VVII. On the S O L A R S Y S T E M. STRONOMY, is a Science which teaches A us the Nature and Laws of the Heavenly Bodies, viz. the Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, and Comets. Various have been the Syſtems of Aſtronomy; but the only true one is called the Copernican, or Solar Syſtem, which conſiſts of the Sun, ſix Primary Planets, ten Secondary Planets, and the Comets. The ſix Primary Planets, are Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. The The ten Secondary Planets, are the Moon, which is the Earth's Satellite; four Satellites that move round Jupiter, and five that move round Saturn. The SUN is a vaſt Globe of Fire, placed] in the Centre, and is the largeſt of all; his Diameter is computed to be about a Million of Miles, and his Diſtance from the Earth 83 Millions of Miles. He revolves round about his Axis in 25 Days and 8 Hourss. Upon his Face when viewed through a good Teleſcope there are ſeen ſeveral dark Spots, by which his Revolution upon his Axis is diſcovered, as they are always uniform in their Motion over the Su's Diſk; what theſe Spots are, has not been yet diſcovered. The PLANETS move round the Sun, from Weſt by South, to Eaſt; in Orbits which are nearly circular, and but little inclined to each other. The COMETS move in all manner of Directions, in Orbits which are very long Ellipſes, much inclined to one another, and to the Orbits of all the Planets; how many there are, ĩs at preſent unknown. The Time in which any Planet moves round the Sun is the length of its Year; and the Time in which it turns round its Axis, is the Length of its Day and Night taken together. The firſt Planet, or that which is next to the Sun is MERCURY, whoſe Diameter is 3000 Miles, jts its Diſtance from the Sun is 42 Millions of Miles, and its hourly Motion in its Orbit is about 100 Thouſand Miles; its periodical Revolution round the Sun is performed in 87 Days 23 Hours; the Length of its Days and Nights are unknown, as it riſes and ſets too near the Sun for any Obſervations to be made of its Spots. The ſecond Planet is VGENUS, whoſe periodical Revolution round the Sun is in 224 Days 17 Hours; its Diameter is near 7900 Miles, its Diſtance from the Sun is 79 Millions of Miles, its hourly Motion in its Orbit is 69 Thouſand Miles, and it turns round its Axis i in 24 Days and 8 Hours. The third Planet is the EARTH, which revolves about the Sun in 365 Days 5 Hours 49 Minutes, at the Diſtance of 83 Millions of Miles, its Diameter is 7970 Miles, its hourly Motion in its Orbit is 68,243 Miles, and it turns round its Axis in 24 Hours; its Figure is not exactly round, but reſembles the Shape of a Bowl made uſe of upon a Bowling-Green, which is called an oblate Spheroid. The fourth Planet is MARS, at the Diſtance of 167 Millions of Miles from the Sun, its perioqdical Revolution is about 678 Days, and turns tound its Axis in 24 Hours 40 Minutes, it moves at the Rate of 47,000 Miles an Hour, and by Reaſon of a very denſe Atmoſphere with which it is ſurrounded, has a red Appearance, which is ſuppoſed to ſerve it as a Moon. C l The The fſith Planet is JUPITER, which is the largeſt of all, being near 90,000 Miles in Diameter, it revolves about the Sun nearly in 12 Years, its Diſtance from the Sun is 550 Millions of Miles, its hourly Motion in its Orbit is 30,000 Miles, and turns round its own Axis in  Hours 49 Minutes; it is attended with four Moons or Satellites. ſome larger and ſome leſs than the Earth, which revolve round it, as our Moon does round us. It alſo appears to have cloudy Streaks croſſing its Diſ&, which are called Belts, and are ſuppoſed to be Parts of its Atmoſphere drawn into Lines by its very quick Revolutions about its Axis. The ſixth and laſt primary Planet is SATURN, the ſecond in Magnitude: its Diſtance, which is the greateſt of all the Planets, is 99 Millions of Miles from the Sun; its Diameter is near 70,000 Miles, its hourly Motion is 18,000 Miles, it revolves about the Sun in nearly 30 Years, it is attended with five Satellites, and is alſo encompaſſed with a Ring, but its Uſe or what it is, has not been as yet diſcovered. The ten ſecondary Planets, Moons, or Satellites, are, firſt the MOON which belongs to our Earth, it revolves about the Earth from Change to Change in nearly 29 Days 12 Hours 4 Minutes, which is the Length of her Day and Night taken together, for as ſeen from the Sun it turns only once round on its Axis in that Time. It revolves round the Sun in one Year. The Moon ſhines only only by reflecting the Sun's Light, being itſelf entirely an opake Body. The periodical Revolutions of Jupiter s Satellites are as follow. Satellite Days Hours 1Iin 1I: Iz:: 36 2 33 : IZ: I5 37 3: 59 4 116 : I83: 30 The periodical Revolutions of Saturns five Satellites are as follow. Satellitue Days Hours I in : 22a'”: I5 2 2: I7T: 40 3  : I2: 125 4 I53: 22: 41 5197: 48 For the Sake of eaſing the Memory, the above Calculations are given in round Numbers, and are the lateſt that have been made. The apparent Motion of the Sun is owing to the diurnal Revolution of the Earth about its Axis from Weſt by South to Eaſt; conſequently thoſe heavenly Bodies which have no Motion of their own, muſt appear in the mean Time to revolve round the Earth from Eaſt to Weſ. The difference of Seaſons is owing to the Axis of the Earth being inclined to the Plane of the Ecliptic at an Angle of about 66; Degrees. C 2 The The inequality of Days and Nights is owing to the Rotation of the Earth round its Axis. An Eclipſe of the Sun can never happen but when the Moon is in, or near one of its Nodes, and when it is in a ſtrait Line between the Sun and the Earth. An Eclipſe of the Moon always happens at, or near the full, and when the Earth is between the Sun and Moon. All which with ſeveral other Phenomena will be very familiarly illuſtrated by an elegant ORRERY and PLANETARIUM, &c.  ſ L E cT u r E VVIILI. 25 HY DR O5ã Ti Cs, RGEE 5 The PROPERTIES of FLuIDS in GENERAL. HIS Science when firſt invented by Archimedes, conſiſted only in the Art of weighing Bodies in Water; but, as ſince improved, comprehends the Nature and Properties of F luids in general. A FLUID is a Body that yields to any Force impreſſed, and hath ĩits Parts moved eaſily one amongſt anotherr. The conſtituent Particles of a Fluid muſt be fmall, becauſe they cannot be diſcerned with the beſt beſt Microſcope; they muſt be round and ſmooth, becauſe they move ſo eaſily one among another; and hard, becauſe no Fluid except Air or Steam, is compreſſible, or can be preſſed into a leſs Space, than it naturally poſſeſſes, but in a very ſmall Degree. That Fluids gravitate or weigh in Fluids, is evidently proved by Experiment. That Fluids preſs in all Directions may be proved by four Glaſs Tubes, open at both Ends and bent into different kinds of Angles, the Ends of which being immerſed in Water, the Water vill riſe to the ſame Height (if the Diameters of their Bores be the ſame) in every one of them. Water conſidered Hydroſtatically, is ſuppoſed to to be divided into imaginary Surfaces. Thus take a long Glaſs, which, for the Sake of Illuſtration may be divided by Threads at èqual Diſtances; call the firſt Diviſion A; the ſecond B; the third C; and ſo on. Suppoſe each Diviſion contains an Ounce of Water, the Surſace then at B, will be preſſed by one Ounce; that at C, will ſupport two; that at D, three Qunces; and the Bottom vill lie under the Weight of four Ounces of Water. Conſequently the Fluid muſt remain upon a Level : as it is impoſible that the lower Diviſion ſhould riſe up and diſplace the other three, or that the upper one ſhould, with the Weight of one Ounce deſcend and diſplace two. It is neceſſary alſo to conſider Fluids as divided . CcC3 into into imaginary Columns, in Manner reſembling a Bundle of Reeds. Theſe being all of the ſame Height, and Weight, muſt, by preſſing equally on every Paris cauſe the Tluid to lie level. Bodies heavier than Water, when placed at a certain Depth under the Surface, will be ſupported and ſwim, by Means of the Preſſure of Water upward, if the downward Preſſure is by any Means kept from preſſing upon the upper Surface of the Body. Bodies lighter than Water, when preſſed down to the Bottom of the Veſſel ſo as to exclude all the Water from between it and the Veſſel, will there remain; as it will then not only have its own Weight to overcome, but that of a Column of Water equal in Diameter to the Body. A heavy Body immerſed in a Fluid always ende avours to ſink; but as it cannot deſcend without removing an equal Bulk of the Fluid, that equal Bulk will re-act againſt the deſcending Body with all its Power, and as theſe two Bodies act in contrary Directions, it muſt loſe as much of its own Weight, as is equal to the Weight of a Quantity of Water of its own Bulk. Bodies lighter than Water vill ſo ſwim in it, that a Quantity of Water equal to the Part immerſed, will be equal in Weight to the whole Body. As when a Piece of Wood floats upon Water, a Part of it is below the Surface; and as it ſinks by its oun Weight, it muſt diſplace a Quantity Quantity of Water juſt equal in Weight to its whole Bulk. The SPECIFIC GRAVITY of Bodies inifies the Gravity or Weight of one Body compared vith that of another under equal Dimenſions. If the Weight of a Body in Air be divided by what it loſes in a Fluid, the Quotient will ſew how much heavier ĩt is than its Bulk of that Fluid, or its Specific Gravity. Thus the Specific Gravity of Gold is to that of Water as 195 to I, (i. e.) a Cubic Inch of Gold will weigh 19 Times as much as a Cubic Inch of Water. A Table of the Specific Gravity of Bodies. Fine Goldd -- I9,640.] Caſt Braſs --- 8.. Standard Gold - 18,888. ] Stet --,85. Quickſilver --14.. Irom-L,645. Lead ---- 1I1,325. TI' --,32. Fine Silver -- II,91. ] A Diamond--3,4. Standard Silver - 19,535.  Common Water -1I. Biſmuth ---9,7 . Sea Water -- 1I,03. Copper - --9. Dry Oak ---, 925. The Method of finding the Specific Gravity of Bodies is performed by the Aſſiſtance of the Hydroſtatic Balance, the Nature of which will be fully illuſtrated by Experiments, together with the Hydrometer oo Water-poiſe, which is made uſe of for diſcovering the Strength of Spirituous Liquors, and alſo the different Speciſie Gravity of Fluids. The Preſſure of a Fluid upon the Baſe of a Veſfel i is always in Proportion to that Baſe, and C 4 the the perpendicular Height of the Fluid, whatever be the Quantity of Fluid or Figure of the containing Veſſel: Hence ariſes the Hydroſtatic Paradox, that a ſmall Quantity of Fluid may be made to preſs as much as any other Quantity how great ſoever; for two Tubes, the one a ſmall one and the other very large, being joined together at their Bottom, and having Water poured into either Tube, it will juſt riſe as high in the other, though one ſhould contain ten thouſand Times as much as the other does.  LE CT U R E IX. P NE UMAT ICS. HE AIR is a thin, tranſparent, corporeal, and elaſtic Fluid, in which we live and breathe; which is generally called the Atmoſphere. It ſurrounds the Body of the Earth to the Height of about 45 or 49 Miles high, in the ſame Manner as the Down of a Peach does the Body of the Peach. That the Air is a Body, is evident by its keeping all other Bodies out of the Place itſelf poſſeſſes; which may very eaſily be proved by taking a Glaſs, as ſuppoſe a Wine-Glaſs, and immerſing its Mouth under the Surface of Water; it will be found that no Water will riſe within the Glaſs, owing owing to the Reſiſtance it meets with from the Air, of which the Glaſs is ful. The ſame Glaſ' being afterwards filled with Water, and a Piece of ſmooth Writing-paper preſſed over the Top of it, ſo as to prevent any Air inſinuating itſelf, between the Surface of the Paper and Edge of the Glaſs; if the Glaſs is now inverted, the Water will, by the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, be kept in, and the Paper will remain Concave at the Bottom, which proves alſo, that the Air is capable of ſupporting great Weights. Air, when compreſſed always endeavours to free itſelf from that Preſſure, and regain its former Dimenſions, which proves that it is Elaſtic. The riſe of VAPOURS, is owing to the great Power of Attraction, between the Particles of Air and Water; for Air is found to diſſolve Water, in the ſame Manner as Water does Sugar; therefore thoſe Particles of Air that lie contiguous to thoſe of Water, by conſtantly rubbing upon them, attract as much Water as they can ſuſtain; which is afterwards taken up by the ſupra Parts of the Atmoſphere: and thereby leaves the loweſt Air in a State to attract and diſſolve freſh Particles of Water. Heat promotes both Evaporation and Solution; and Cold in a great Degree, ſtops both. Water raiſed by the Heat of a hot Day's Sun, immediately upon Sun-ſetting, precipitates in a fine Vapour, Vapour, forming Drops of DEW upon all cold Bodies near the Surface of the Earth. Air lying over marſhy Ground, after Sun-ſet growing cold, lets its aqueous Particles coaleſce into ſmall viſible Particless which form the MISTS that are obſerved to riſe over marſhy Ground, in Summer Evenings. Clouds, that are very replete with Vapours, will run into Drops, heavy enough to fall down in RAIN. And if the Atmoſphere ĩs cold enough to freeze thoſe Particles before they form Drops, jt will then become SLEET or SNOW.  But if the Drops of Rain are formed, and in their deſcent, the Cold ſhould be ſo great as to freeze them into Ice, they then fall down in Storms of HAIL. The Denſity and Spring, or Elaſticity of the Air, is always equal to the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere; becauſe it always ſuſtains that Preſſure. This Denſity is as the Force that preſſes it. Therefore it has been demonſtrated by Mathematicians, that the Air decreaſes upwards in a Geometrical Proportion to the Altitudes taken in Arithmetical Progreſſion. Thus, 7  a 14 16 ] 21 l Mile from the 64 ] Times more rari28 2 Surface of the 256 , fied than at the : ſu⸗ Air is Earths Surface. 42 49. 4096 16384 At the Altitude of That That the Air is heavy, is proved by weighing it in a Balance, the ſame as other Bodies; and by that Means its ſpecific Gravity is diſcovered. The Preſſure of the Air, among a Variety of other Experiments, may eaſily be proved by a Perſon laying his Hand upon the Top of an open Receiver, as the Air is exhauſting; when they may obſerve, and very ſenſibly feel, the Spring of the Air in the Hand, forcing the Fleſh down into the Glaſs, alſo the Weight of the Air on the Back of the Hand, will preſs down the Skin and Fleſh, between the Metacarpal Bones. The aſcent of Fluids in Capillary Tobes, the ſame in Vacuo, as in the open Air, proved by Experiments. Sounds are diminiſhed in rarified, and increaſed in condenſed Air, as is evident by placing a Receiver over a Bell, which when rung, the ſound vill be leſs, and when the Receiver is in part exhauſted it will ſtill be leſs, and could all the Air be exhauſted no ſound at all would be heard. Sir Iſaac Newton has demonſtrated, that Sounds as they riſe from the tremulous Motion of Elaſtic Bodies, are nothing more than the Propagation of a Pulſe in the Air ſaken thereby; ſo that by ſtriking upon the Drum of the Ear they put the internal Air in Motion by the Expanſion of the auditory Nerve which creates in us the Idea of Sound. It will be ſhewn by Experiment, how Perſons Perſons born deaſ may be made to hear, and conſequently taught to ſpeak, and converſe. A curious hearing Trumpet to help thoſe that have in a great Meaſure loſt their hearing. Owing to the Elaſtic Power of the Air it is, that it may, by the Aſiſtance of a forcing Syringe, be injected into Veſſels of Strength till it becomes ſtrong enough to throw a Bullet by its Spring to a very conſiderable Diſtance, as will be made evident by a new- invented Magazine Wind Gun.  L E CT U R E X. PNEUMATICS. HE Weight and Spring of the Air, may be proved by the few following Experiments. Two Marble-Plains being ſuſpended in a Receiver, and the Air exhauſted, they vill ſeparate by their own Weight if not too thin, owing to the Preſſure of the Air being taken away; for the lower Plain will then have nothing to ſupport it, but a ſmall Degree of Attraction of Coheſion. A Receiver having a Piece of Bladder, tied over one End of it, and placed upon the Pump, upon exhauſting the Air, the outward Preſſure vill preſs upon the Bladder and burſt it. t A ſquare A ſquare Glaſs Vial being placed under a Receiver, when the Air is exhauſted, the Spring of the Air within the Vial will be able to break it. And owing to this Spring and Preſſure of the Air, it is, that Variety of Jets of Water, and Quickſilver may be made. Two Braſs Hemiſpheres, four Inches in Diameter, being properly put together, and the Air exhauſted from between them, they will require about 1921b. to ſeparate them; for at a Medium, a Circular Inch is ſubject to the Weight of about 121b. and therefore we may take this for a general Rule, for finding the Quantity of the Air's Preſſure upon any Circular Plain whatever; ſince the Areas of Circles are in Proportion to the Squares of their Diameters. And the Air preſſes with the Force of i15lb. upon every ſquare Inch. From hence, by an eaſy Calculation, upon the Body of a middle ſized Man, there will found continually the Preſſure of 30 or 40 Thouſand Pounds. It was a common Opinion among the Ancients, that when a Receiver is fixed to the Pump by exhauſting the Air, it was owing to ſomething vwithin the Glaſs, drawing it down, which they called Suction. That it is not owing to Suction may be thus proved; a ſmall Receiver being placed on one Side the Hole of the Pump, and covered with a larger, upon exhauſting, the Air vill make its eſcape out of the ſmall Glaſs by its Spring; Spring; ànd when the Air is ſuddenly let in again, it will fall upon the ſmall Glaſs, and preſs it faſt down to the Pump: conſequently it is not owing to Suction, but an inequality of Preſſure. The Buſineſs of Reſpiration will be illuſtrated by proper Experiments for that Purpoſe. The Effects which rarified Air muſt have upon the Life of Animals, and upon Flame, is too obvious to need here a Deſcription; for it is very well known that an Animal cannot live without Air, nor can Flame be ſupported without it. When an Animal dies under an exhauſted Receiver, the Lungs of that Animal are expanded, and not collapſed, which is directly contrary to the general received Opinion. The Method of medicating and inſpiring Ais, vill be illuſtrated by a Machine invented for that Purpoſe by the Author of the Lectures. All Bodies fall equally faſt in Vacuo; as a Guinea and a Feather, let fall from the Top of an exhauſted Receiver, will reach the Bottom at the ſame Time: for as each Particle in both Bodies is urged down by the ſame Force, they muſt of Courſe fall with the ſame Velocity, there being no reſiſting Medium to hinder them. PROJECTILES, and the ART oF GUNNERY, will be illuſtrated by proper Experiments. LECTURE HE Art of Diving, or living under Water, is performed by a Machine in Shape reſembling a Bell; which is made of Wood or Copper, and loaded at the Bottom with a very conſiderable Weight to make it ſink when full of Air, in a perpendicular Direction with the Mouth downward: The Diver being placed under this Bell is let down with the included Air to the Depth deſired. For the Proper Management of this Machine it is neceſſary to remark the following Principſles. 1. That Air is phlogiſticated by paſſing through the Lungs of Animals. 2. That a Body immerſed in a Homogenial Fluid, is always preſſed with a Force proportionable to its Diſtance from the Surface. 3. That the Denſity of Air is always as the Force that preſſes it, viz. with 2, or 3 Times the Preſſure, it will be preſſed into half, or one third of the Space it before poſſeſſed. As this Diving-Bell has received great Improvements from the late ingenious Dr. Halliy, I ſhall beg Leave to give a Deſcription of it in the Doctor's own Words: The Bell I made Uſe of was of Wood, containing about ſixty Cubic-Feet in its Concavity, and was was of the Form of a Truncate Cone, whoſe Diameter at the Top was three Feet, and at the Bottom five. This I coated with Lead ſo heavy, that it would ſink empty, and I diſtributed the Weight ſo about its Bottom, that it would go down in a perpendicular Situation, and no other. In the Top, I fixed a ſtrong, but clear Glaſs, as a Window to let in the Light from above; and likewiſe a Cock to let out the hot Air that had been breathed; and below, about a Yard under the Bell, I placed a Stage which hung by three Ropes, each of which was charged with about one hundred Weight, to keep it ſteady. This Machine I ſuſpended from the Maſt of a Ship by a Sprit, which was ſufficiently ſecured by StQ”5 to the Maſt- head, and was directed by Braces to carry it over-board, clear of the Ship-ſide, and to bring it again within-board as Occaſion required. To ſupply Air to this Bell when under Water, I cauſed a Couple of Barrels, of about thirty-ſix Gallons each, to be caſed with Lead, ſo as to ſink empty; each having a Bung- hole in its Ioweſt Part to let in the Water, as the Air in them condenſed on their deſcent; and to let it out again when they were drawn up full from below. And to a Hole in the uppermoſt Part of theſe Barrels, I fixed a Leathern Trunk or Hoſe, well liquored with Bees-wax and Oil, and long enough to fall below the Bung- hole, being kept down by a Weight appended; ſo that the Air in the upper Part Part of the Barrel could not eſcape, unleſs the lower Ends of theſe Hoſe were firſt lifted up. The Air-Barrel being thus prepared, I fitted them with Tackle proper to make them riſe and fall alternately, after the Manner of two Buckets in a Well; which was done with ſo much Eaſe, that two Men, vith leſs than Half their Strength, could perform all the labour required; and in their Deſcent, they were directed by Lines faſtened to the under Edge of the Bell; the which paſſed through Rings placed on both Sides of the Leathern Hoſe in each Barrel; ſo that ſliding down by thoſe Lines, they came readily to the Hand of a Man, who ſtood on the Stage on Purpoſe to receive them, and to take up the Ends of the Hoſe into the Bell. Through theſe Hoſe, as ſoon as their Ends came above the Surface of the Water in the Barrels, all the Air that was included in the upper Parts of them, was blown with great Force into the Bell, whilſt the Water entered at the Bung- holes below and filled them; and ſo ſoon as the Air of the one Barrel had been thus received, upon a Signal given, that was drawn up, and at the ſame Time, the other deſcended; and by an alternate Succeſſion, furniſhed Air ſo quick, and in ſo great Plenty, that I myſelf, have been one of five, who have been together at the Bottom, in nine or ten Fathoms Water, for above an Hour and a Half at a Time, without any Sort of ill Conſequence; and I might havè continued there D as as long as I pleaſed, for any Thing that appeared to the contrary. Beſides, the whole Cavity of the Bell was kept entirely free from Water, ſo that I ſat on a Bench, which was diametrically placed near the Bottom, wholly dreſſed with all my Cloaths on. I only obſerved, that it is neceſſary to be let down gradually at firſt, at about twelve Feet at a Time; and then to ſtop and drive out the Water that entered, by receiving three or four Barrels of freſh Air, before I deſcended farther. But being arrived at the Depth deſigned, I then let out as much of the hot Air that had been breathed, as each Barrel would repleniſh with cool, by Means of the Cock at the Top of the Bell; thro whoſe Aperture, tho very ſmall, the Air would ruſh with ſo much Violence, as to make the Surface of the Sea boil, and cover it with a white Foam, notwithſtanding the great Weight of Water over us. Thus I found I could do any Thing that was required to be done juſt under us; and that, by taking off the Stage, I could, for a Space as wide as the Circuit of the Bell, lay the Bottom of the Sea ſo far dry, as not to be over Shoes thereon. And by the Glaſs Window, ſo much Light was tranſmitted, that when the Sea was clear, and eſpecially when the Sun ſhone, I could ſee perfectly well to write or read, much more to faſten and lay hold on any Thing under us, that was to be taken up. And by the Return of the Air-Barrels, I oſten ſent up Orders, written with an Iron Pen, on ſmall ſmall Plates of Lead, directing how to move us from Place to Place, as Occaſion required. At other Times, when the Water was troubled and thick, it would be dark as Night below; but in ſuch a Caſe, I have been able to keep a Candle burning in the Bell as long as I pleaſed, notwithſtanding the great Expence of Air requiſite to maintain Flame. This I take to be an Invention applicable to various Uſes; ſuch as Aſbing for Pearl, diving for Coral, Spunges, and the like, in far greater Depths than has hitherto been thought poſible; alſo for the fitting and planning the Foundation of Moles, Bridges, &c. upon rocky Bottoms; and for the cleaning and ſcrubbing of Ships' Bottoms, when foul, in calm Weather at Sea. But as I have no Experience of theſe Matters, I leave them to thoſe that pleaſe to try. I ſhall only intimate, that by an additional Contrivance, I have found it not impracticable for a Diver to go out of our Engine to a good Diſtance from it, the Air being conveyed to him vith a continued Stream by ſmall flexible Pipes; which Pipes may ſerve as a Clew to direct them back again, when he would return to the Bell. The Contrivance here mentioned, was a Veſſel made in the Shape of a Bell, ſo big as to go over a Man's Head and Shoulders; and when they came to the Bottom of the Sea, one of the Divers took this Veſſel, and having put it over his Head, walked out of the Bell upon the Bottom of the D 2 Sea, Sea, round about, and had the Air conveyed to him by flexible Tubes. BAROMETERS are Inſtruments made oſe of to determine the Airs Preſſure at any Time. Various have been their Conſtruction; the moſt uſeful, as well as fimple are made in the following Manner. Take a Glaſs Tube 34 Inches in Length, the Bore or Diameter of which ought to be Half an Inch; and the Top of it Hermetically ſealed: at the open End fill it with Mercury that is quite clean and pure, then place your Finger upon the open End and invert it into a Baſon of Mercury; ; upon taking your Finger avay, the Mercury will remain ſuſpended in the Tube, at the Height of about 29 Inches, ſometimes higher and ſometimes lower, according to the State the Air is in at that Time; for whenever the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere, on any Part of the Earth increaſes, the Mercury in the Barometer will riſe; and the Clouds floating in the Atmoſphere will be buoyed up to a greater Height; and there will conſequently follow clean and ſerene Weather; and on the contrary, when the Preſſure of the Atmoſphere i is by any Means decreaſed, the Mercury in the Barometer will fall; the Air will become thinner, and the Clouds floating in the Atmoſphere ill ruſh into that Place; and therefore there will follow cloudy or rainy Weather. THERMOMETERS are Inſtcuments made uſe of to meaſure the Degree of Feat and Cold in the the Air at any Time. They are made of ſmall Capillary Tubes with generally a round Bulb at the End, and filled to a certain Height with Mercury, and ſometimes Spirits. All Fluids and Solids are, with certain Degrees of Heat and Cold capable of expanding and contracting. Mercury is a Fluid that is moſt ſenſibly affected by the leaſt Degree of Heat and Cold, therefore is preferable to any other for the above Uſe. HYGROMETERS are made uſe of for diſcovering the Degree of Moiſture or Dryneſs of the Air; and are generally made of Cat-gut, Whipcord, or the Beard of a wild Oat. A Piece oſ Whip-cord ſuſpended from a conſiderable Height, and having a Weight and Index fixed at the Bottom, if the Air is replete with moiſt Particles, will twiſt up and become ſhorter, but if the Air is dry, it will be relaxed and become longer. PYROMETERS are made uſe of for ſnewing the different Degrees of Expanſion in Metals by Heat; the Nature of which will be illuſtrated by a curious Pyrometer that renders the Expanſion of Metals viſible to the 130,000th Part of an Inch. The great Quantity of Air in Eggs may be ſhewn by putting an Egg into a ſmall Jar of Water under a Receiver, and upon exhauſting, the Aĩr may be ſeen riſing up in little Streams thro the Pores of the Egg. Hot Water being put in a Glaſs Jar under a Receiver, when the Air is exhauſted; ; the Water D 3 vill vwill aſſume the Appearance of boiling, owing to the Heat cauſing the Air to expand itſelf in ſuch large Bubbles, when the outward Preſſure is taken off. i A Piece of raw Fleſh being put under the Receiver in a Jar of Water and the Air taken away, Bubbles of Air will riſe from its Surface. Alſo if an Apple be pricked full of Holes, and put into the Jar of Water under the exhauſted Receiver, great Numbers of Jets of Air will riſe from it thro the Water. If a Jar of cold Water be placed under a Receiver and Air exhauſted, the Air contained in the Weater will expand itſelf and ariſe very copiouſly from all Parts of the Water. A Jar of new Ale or Beer, placed under a Reeeiver, upon exhauſting, the Air contained in the Beer will riſe up and expand into innumerable Bubbles forming Hexagons, which by Means of the viſcid Particles of the Beer, will be kept together and form a large Froth to thę Top of the Jar. The Conſtruction of the Air-Pump, together with its Manner of working, will be illuſtrated by taking the Machine to pieces, and explaining its different Parts. LECTURE A LL the different Kinds of Air, or Gas, are exceedingly rare, highly elaſtic, inviſible Fluids, not condenſible by Cold; but may be fixed, abſorbed, or deprived of their Elaſticity by being combined with certain Subſtances, as Water, Calcarious Earths, &c. Common Air, promotes the combuſtion of inflammable Bodies, and the Air thus employed is altered by the Operation, as it becomes leſs in Bulk than it was before the Alteration, and is in part phlogiſticated. Phlogiſticated Air, is Air made noxious, and unfit for Reſpiration, from burning Charcoal, Flame of a Candle, breathing, and many other Things, and it is then fatal to all Animals that breathe it. It is lighter than Common Air, and differs in this and other Reſpects from Fixable Air. Fixable Air, is contained in moſt Bodies in the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Kingdoms; and may be procured from them by Means of Fire, Fermentation, and Solution or Efferveſcence. Machines for impregnating Water with Fixable Air, and thereby giving it the Taſte and medicinal Qualities of ſeveral mineral Waters. D 4 Fixable Fixable Air does not partake of the Nature of the Acid by which it is procured from Calcarious Subſtances; but is a particular Acid. Fixable Air proved to be an Acid by Experiments, as by the Taſte.By changing the Colour of blue Vegetable Tinctures red. Lime in Lime-water precipitated by Fixable Air, or Water impregnated with Fixable Air. Flame diſpoſes Common Air to precipitate the Fixable Air it contains, proved by Experiment. Fixable Air deſtroys Animal Life. Extinguiſhes Flame. Is capable of diſſolving Iron, and Calcarious Earths.Is heavier than Common Air.lIs expelled from Water by HeatAlſo by freezing as it is not contained in Ice.BYy the AirPump. Nitrous Air, is procured from a Solution of veral Metals in the Nitrous Acid. One of the moſt conſpicuous Properties of this Kind of Air, is the great Diminution of any Quantity of Common Air with which it is mixed. From hence it forms a Standard for trying the goodneſs or purity of Common Air, and how far it is fit or unfit for Reſpiration. A Machine for this Purpoſec This Prooſ is peculiar to Common Air, or Air fit for Reſpiration. Inflammable Air, is produced by a Solution of ſeveral Metals in a diluted, viiriolic, or muriatic Acid. A mixture  57] A mixture of Inflammable Air with Common Air, by applying a Candle, will go off with an Exploſion. Alſo with dephlogiſticated Air, when it makes a much greater Exploſion. Dephlogiſticated Air, is procured from various Earths, and the Nitrous Acid by Heat, in ſo pure a State, that Animals will live much longer in it than in the ſame Quantity of Common Aſr. From one Ounce of Nitre by great Heat, may be procured one Hundred Ounce Meaſures of very pure Dephlogiſticated Air. It qualifies Noxious Air, and Flame burns brighter in it. How Phlogiſticated 4r, or any Kind of Noxious Air in Ships, Hoſpitals, Mines, &c. may be made quite pure and ſalubrious in the moſt fimple and advantageous Manner.  L E CT U R E XIiII. O P T I CS. IGHT conſiſts of an infinite Number of the ſmalleſt and moſt ſubtle Parts of Matter, which flow in right Lines from a luminous Body; as from a lighted Candle, there are continually flowing ſuch Particles of Matter, in all Manner of Directions; and thoſe Particles by ſtriking upon our Eyes, excite in our Minds the Idea of Light. When When theſe ſmall Particles flowing from the Sun or from a Candle, or any luminous Body, fall upon any other Bodies, and are by them reflected to our Eyes, by a wonderful Property in Nature they excite in us the Idea of the Bodies they were laſt reflected from. Its Velocity is ſo great that it is computed to move aſter the Rate of near twelve Millions of Miles in a Minute: or it is demonſtrable by the Eclipſes of Jupiters Satellites, that it takes about eight Minutes to move from the Sun to the Earth. When a Ray of Light falls upon an opake Body, inſtead of paſſing through it, Part is abſorbed, and Part is bent back in the ſame Direction it came, which is called Reflection. A Ray of Light paſſing out of one Medium into another, does not paſs on in a right Line, but is a little bent, which is called Refraction. When a Ray of Light paſſes out of a rarer Medium into a denſer, it is bent towards the Perpendicular, and vice verſ/a. Hence by the Refraction of the Atmoſphere it is, that we ſee the Sun five Minutes before it riſes above the Horizon, conſequently we ſee it five Minutes after it is ſet. When Rays fall perpendicularly on any Medium, they paſs ſtraight through without any Refraction. A plain Looking-Glaſs being laid in an horizontal Poſition, having a Stick erected perpendicularly upon it; if a Ray of Light ſhould fall obliquely obliquely upon the Glaſs near to the Bottom of the Stick, it will be reflected on the other Side of the Stick in the ſame oblique Direction, making an equal Angle on each Side the Stick, the former of which is called the Angle of Incidence, the other that of Reſlection. Thoſe Bodies that are ſmooth and poliſhed ſo as to reflect the Rays of Light regularly, are called Mirrors, which are of three kinds, viZ. Plain, Convex, and Concave. An Object placed before a plain Mirror, always makes the Image of that Object appear as far behind it, as the Object is placed before; and gives the true Repreſentation of the Object, neither increaſing nor diminiſhing it, as is very well known by Experience in the common Looking-Glaſi. It is the Property of a Convex Mirror to diminiſh the Image of an Object placed before it. A Concave Mirror magnifies the Image of the Object: and a Perſon being placed before it at a certain Diſtance, will have the Repreſentation of a Body ſuſpended in the Air, betwein it and their Eye. Glaſſes for Optical Purpoſes, may be ground into ſix different Shapes, viz. 1. A Plain-Glaſs, which is ground plain on both Sides, and is of equal Thickneſs in all its Parts; will refract the Rays of Light, but not collect them into one Focus. 2. A Plano- 2. A Plano-Convex, being plain on one Side, and convex on the other; if parallel Rays fall upon it, they paſs through it, and are ſo refracted, as to unite in a Point called its Focus, juſt ſo far behind it, as is equal to the Diameter of the Sphere of its Convexity. ſi 3. A Double- Convex, one that is convex on both Sides; parallel Rays in paſſing through it, converge or meet in a focal Point, at Half the Diſtance they do through the Plano- Convex; and when theſe Rays meet in a focal Point, it will burn. 4. A Plano-Concave, one that is ground plain on one Side, and concave on the other, will diminiſh the Object, and make it appear leſs. 5. A Double-Concave, one that is ground concave, or hollow on both Sides, and according to the Laws of Refraction, parallel Rays in paſſing through, diverge or ſpread out, and make the Object appear leſs than the Plano- Concave. 6. A Meniſcus, or Concavo-Convex, which is ground concave on one Side, and convex on the other. Having already mentioned, that the Rays of Light are refracted in paſſing obliquely through different Mediums: IT muſt now obſerve, that ſome Rays of Light are more refracted than others; and that according as they are diſferently refracted, they excite in our Minds, Ideas of different Colours. If Af the Sun is let to ſhine through a ſmall Hole in a dark Chamber, and a Priſm be held obliquely before the Hole; the Rays of Light in paſſing through the Prifm, will ſuffer different Refractions; and falling upon the oppoſite Side of the Room, will paint upon it a Series of moſt beautiful, lively Colours; the largeſt Particles will be moſt attracted, and appear of a fine Indigo Colour; the next in Size, vill appear to be of a Violet Colour; the next Blue; the next Green; ; the next Tellow; the next Orange; and the laſt Red. Theſe Rays being blended together by means of a convex Lens, will appear of a Yellowiſh White. As White is a Compoſition of all Colours, ſo Black is a Privation of all, and thereſore, properly no Colour. . All Bodies appear of that Colou, vhoſe Rays they reflect moſt; as a Body appears red, when it seflects moſt of the red-making Rays, and abſorbs the reſt; a blue or green Body reſlects the blue or green- maing Rays, and ſo of the reſt. The Eye when taken out of the Head, is nearly globular; and conſiſts of three Humours, and as many Coats. The firſt Coat forms both the Anterior and Poſterior Part of the Eye; the Anterior Part, is called the Cornea, which is tranſparent; the Poſterior Part, which is a Continuation of the Cornea, is called the Sclerotica: next within this Coat, is a very thin, ſofi, black Coat, called the Choroides; and within this, is that moſt curious curious one, called the Retina. which is the immediate Organ of Viſion, and is an expanſion of the Optic Nerve. Cloſe under the Cornea, lies a Water- like Fluid, called the Aqueous Humour, which ſerves to keep up a due Degree of Convexity in the CorneaThe next Part that is met with is the Uvea, or Iris, in the middle of which is a Perforation or ſmall Hole, called the Pupil. It ſerves to regulate the Quantity of Light for diſtinct Viſion, by the Aſſiſtance of muſcular Fibres, with which it is ſupplied, called the Ligamentum Ciliaree. Theſe Fibres, by an admirable Power of contracting and dilating, alter the Convexity of the Cryſtalline Humour, and move it forward or backward in the Eye, to adapt it to the different Diſtances of Objects. llli Behind the Iris, lies a hard Jelly- like Subſtance, called the Cryſtalline Humour, in Shape reſembling a double Convex Lens, which converges the Rays that paſ throughi it, to a Focus on the Retina. The Cryſtalline Humour, is enveloped by the Vitreous Humour, which is about the Conſiſtence of the White of an Egg; it is tranſparent, and the largeſt of all in Quantity; it keeps the Eye in a globular Form, and ſerves to give the Rays of Light a free Admiſſion to the Retina. The The Rays of Light which flow from the ſeveral Points of an Object, through the different Humours, will meet each other again at ſo many reſpective Points upon the Retina, at the Bottom of the Eye; where there will be painted an inverted Picture of all Objects, that are e placed before the Eye. The Optic Nerve, is very viel placed a little on one Side of each Eye, to prevent the ſame Parts of an Image from falling upon the ſame Parts of the Optic Nerve in each Eye, at the ſame time; as there is inſerted the Optical Artery, near the Nerve, which renders the Image of Objects that fall upon it inviſible. If three Bits oſ Paper, be placed at about a Foot Diſtance from each other on a Wall, and the left Eye be covered, during the Time that the right looks ſteadfaſtly at the left Hand Paper; by walking gently backwards, the midale will diſappear; walk a little further back and the middle vill again appear, but the right Hand Paper will diſappear. The nearer any Object is placed to the Eye, the greater is the Angle under which it is ſeen; therefore at the Diſtance of one Mile any tall Object will appear twice as large, as it would at the Diſtance of two Miless. The Limit of diſtinct Viſion in moſt Eyes is at the Diſtance of eight, or ten Inches; but ſuch as have the Cryſtalline Fumour, or the Cornea, or both both of them, more convex than ordinary, can ſee diſtinctly at a leſs Diſtance, and are ſaid to be purblind, or ſhort-ſighted, and in order to ſee diſtant Objects diſtinctly, are obliged to make uſe of a Concave-Glaſs placed before the Eye. On the contrary, if the Cryſtalline Humour, or Cornea, or both of them be too flat, a Convex- Glaſs muſt be placed before the Eye, as is the Caſe in moſt old Eyes. A SINGLE MICROSCOPE conſiſts of a ſmall Convex-Glaſs, having the Object placed in its Focus, and the Eye at the ſame Diſtance on the other Side. The Method of finding the magnifying Power of this Glaſs, is thus: divide the ]eaſt Diſtance, at which an Object can be diſtinctly ſeen with the naked Eye, by the Focal Diſtance of the Glaſs, and the Quotient will ſhew how much the Glaſs magnifies. The DOUBLE or COMPOUND MICROSCOPE conſiſts of an Object-Glaſs, and one or two Eye-Glaſſess. The Object is placed a little farther from the Object-Glaſs, than its principal Focus; this Image is viewed by the Eye through the Eye-Glaſs; and according to the laſt Calculation, if each Glaſs magniſfies ſix Times, the Image will be magnified 36 Times in Diameter, and conſequently 36 Times 36, or 1296 Times in Surface. To this Inſtrument there belongs a Concave Mirror, which reflects the Rays of Light on the underſide the Object, and the Object being placed placed in the Focus of a moveable Lens, has its upper Side alſo enlightened. The SOLAR MICROSCOPE invented by Dr. Liberkun, a Pruſſian,, about the Year 1740, is made uſe of in the following Manner. Having procured a very dark Room, let a Hole be made in the Window-Shutter, about three Inches Diameter, through which the Sun may caſt a Cylinder of Rays into the Room. In this Hole place the Microſcope, and the Rays will be ſent in a rectilineal Line through the Tube, by the Reflection of the plain Mirror on the outſide; they will then paſs through a Convex-Lens, aſter which they will fall upon, and enlighten the Object, which is placed in the Focus ofa ſmall Magnifier, through which a large inverted, Image will be carried to a white Sheet placed at a  proper Diſtance for its Reception.  DIOPTRIC or REF RACTING TELESCOPES may be made of two Convex- Glaſſes, viz. an Object-Glaſs, and an Eye-Glaſs; but Objects ſeen through theſe Kind of Refractors are inverted, therefore they are only fit for viewing Celeſtial Objects. A REFRACTING TELESCOPE - viewing Terreſtrial Objects ſhould have two equal ConvexGlaſſes added to their Eye-Glaſs; and as theſe three do but compoſe as it were one Eye-Glaſs; they muſt all three ſtand at double their Focal Diſtances from one another. To find the magnifyE ing ing Power of theſe Teleſcopes, divide the Focal Diſtance of the Object-Glaſs, by that of any one of the Eye- Glaſſes. CATOPTRIC or REFLECTING TELESCOPES conſiſt of a great and ſmall Tube ſcreved to the End of one another. At the Bottom of the great Tube is placed a large Coneave Mirror with an Hole through its Middle. Parallel Rays falling upon this Mirror, are reflected back by it, and form the Image near the ſmall Concave Mirror placed towards the upper End of the Tube, and oppoſite to the Hole in the large one. The Rays from this Image diverge to the ſmall Mirror, where meeting with a Convex-Lens, are refracted ſo as to form the Image in the ſmall Tube, which now requires nothing but a proper Eye-Glaſs to ſend it duly magnified to the Retina. On the outſide of the Tube is fixed a Screw that joins to the ſmall Mirror to adjuſt it to the greater or leſſor Convexity of different Eyes; and alſo to the Object, for Rays coming from Terreſtrial Bodies do not come parallel, but diverge a little, by which Means the Image is formed nearer the great Mirror, than it is in viewing Celeſtial Objects; as the Rays from them always come parallel. Great Vatiety of other Optical Inftrumen- nill be ſhewn and explained. T H E E N D. 