AN AC CO UNT O F Sir ISAAC NEWTONS Philoſophical Diſcoveries, n F O UR BOOKS. B Y COLIN MACLAURIN, A. M. Late Fellow of the Royal Society, Profeſſor of Mathematios in the Univerſity of EDINEURGH, and Secretary to the Philoſophical Society there. Publiſed from the Author's Manuſcript Papers, By PATRICK M URD OCH, M. 4. and F. R. S. The THIRD EDITION.  LO N D ON: Printed for J. NourSE, W. STRAHAN, J. and F. RIVINGT08, W. JouNSTON, D. WiLS ON, T. LOWNDES, r . CabrLL, T. BECKET, W. RICHARDSON, T. LONGray, and W. OTRIDGE. lll : OF THAT JUST VENERATION WHICH HE AUTHOR MY DECEASED HUSBAN ALWAYS EXPRESSED FOR HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS TH E D U K E, HIS ACCOUNT OF SIR ISaaC NEWTON PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNE SS BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, ANNE MACLAURIN.T H E C O NTE NTS. An Account of ihe Life and Wiiting of the Author, i B O  K I. Of the method of proceeding in natural phileſophy, and the various ſyſtems of philoſophers. C H AP. I. Ageneral view of Sir lſaac Newtons method, and of his account of the ſyſtem of the vorld 3 CHAP. II. Of ibe ſyſtems of the ancient philo; ſophers 25 CH AP. III. Of the modern philo iis before Des Cartes 43 CHAP. IV. O the  philoſiphical principles of Des Cartes, the emendations of his folloers, and the preſent controverſies in natural philoſophy 66 H A P. V. Concluſions r the foregoing obfervations 94 B O O K II. f the theory of motion, or rational meics. H AP. I. Of ſpate, time, matter, and motion ioQ H AP. II. Of the laws of motion, and their general corollaries 118 H AP. III. Of the mechanical powers I54 H A P. IV. Of ibe colliſion of bodies 192 H A P. V. Of ihe motion of projectiles in vacuo; of the &ycloid, and ihe motion of a pendulum in it 20 B O O K III. CGravity demonſtrated by analyſis. H AP. I. Of the theory of grovity as far as it appears to have heen known hefore Sir Iſaac Newton 232 H A P. II. The moon is a heavy body, and gravitates towards tho eorth in the ſame manner as terreſtrial bodies 254 H A P. ill. Of ihe ſolar ſytem: and ibe parallaxes of the planets and fixed ſtars 268 H AP. IV. Of the general gravitation of matter 288 H AP. V. Of ibe quantity of matter, and denſity, of the ſun and planets 303 B O O KV. he effects of the general power of gravity deduced ſynthetically. H AP. I. Of the centre of the ſolar ſyſtem 310 H AP. II. Shewing how gravity produces ſome ſmall irregularities in ihe motions of the planets 315 H AP. III. Of the approach and receſs of the planets to and from the ſun, in every revolution 320 H AP. IV. Of the motion of the moon 338 H AP. V. Of the path of a ſecondary planet upon an immoveable plane; with an illuſtration of Sir Iſaac Newtons account of the motions of the ſatellites, from the theory of gravity 3352 HAP. VI. Of the figure of ihe earth, and the preceſſion of the equinoxes 362 the ebbing and flowing of tbe 3568 the comets u335897 he Supreme Author and Goverthe True and Living God 396 A C C O U NT OF THE LIFE and WRITINGS OF TH E  A U T H O R OLIN MACLAURIN was deſcended of an ancient family, which had been long in poſſeſion &f the iſnland of Tirrie, upon the coaſt of Argylesrire. His grandfather, Daniel, removing to Inverara, greatly contributed to reſtore that town, after it had been almoſt entirely ruined in the time of the civil wars; and, by ſome memoirs which he wrote of his own times, appears to have been a perſon of worth and ſuperior abilities. Joln, the ſon of Daniel, and father of our author, was miniſter of Glenderule; where he not only diſtinguiſhed himſelf by all the virtues of a faithful and diligent paſtor, but has left, in the regiſter of his provincial ſynod, laſting monuments of his talents for buſineſs, and of his public ſpirit. He was likewiſe employed by that ſynod in completing the verſion of the Pſalms into Iriſhb, which is ſtill uſed in thoſe parts of the country where divine ſervice is performed in that language. He married a gentlewoman of the family of Cameron, by whom he had three ſons; John, who is ſtill living, a learned and pious divine, one of the miniſters of the city of Gloſgow; Daniel, who died young, after having given prooſs of a moſt extraordinary genius; and Colin, born at Xilmoddan in the month of February 1698. His father died ſix weeks after; but that Ioſs was in a good meaſure ſupplied to the orphan family, by the affectionate care of their uncle Mr. Daniel Maclaurin, miniſter of Xilfinnan, and by the virtue and prudent œconomy of Mrs. Maclaurin. After ſome ſtay in Argyleſbire, where her ſiſters and ſhe had a ſmall patrimonial eſtate, ſhe removed to Dumbarton, for the more convenient education of her children: but dying in 1707, the care of them devolved entirely to their uncle.  In 1709 Colin was ſent to the univerſity of Glaſgow, and placed under the care of one of the beſt men, and moſt eminent profeſſors of this age, the learned Mr. Gerſhom Carmichael. Here he continued five years, applying himſelf to his ſtudies with that ſucceſs which might be expected from parts like his, cultivated with the moſt indefatigable care and diligence. We find, amongſt his oldeſt manuſcripts, fragments of a diary in which he kept an account of every day, àand of almoſt every hour of the day; of the beginning and ſucceſs of every particular ſtudy, enquiry or inveſtigation: of his converſations with learned men, the ſubjecs of them, and the arguments on either ſide. Here we read the names of Proeſtor Carmichael, the celebrated Mr. Robert Simſon, Dr. Johnſton, and ſeveral other gentlemen of learning and worth; who all vied who ſhould moſt encourage our young philoſopher, by opening to him their libraries, and admitting him into their moſt intimate ſociety and friendſhip. He could not, afterwards, find time to keep ſo formal a regiſter of his life, but we are aſſured the habit never left him; and that every hour of it was continually filled up with ſomething which he could review with pleaſure. His genius for mathematical learning diſcovẽred itſelf ſo early as at twelve years of age, when, having accidentally met with a copy of Euclid in a friend’s chamber, in a few days he became maſter of the firſt ſix books without any aſiſtance: and thence, following his natural bent, made ſuch a ſurprizing progreſs, that very ſoon after we find him engaged in the moſt curious and difficult problems. Thus much is certain, that in his ſixteenth year, he had already invented many of the propoſitions afterwards publiſhed under the title of Geometria Organica. In the fifteenth year of his age he took his degre- of Maſter of Arts, with great applauſe; on which occaſion he compoſed and publicly defended a Theſis on the power of gravity: and after having ſpent a year in the ſtudy of divinity, he quitted the univerſity, and lived, for the moſt part, in an agreeable country retirement at his uncle's houſe, till near the end of 27717. In this retirement, he purſued his ſtudies with the ſame aſſiduity as he had done at the univerſity; continuing his favourite reſearches in mathematics and philoſophy, and at other times reading the beſt claſic authors; for which he naturally had an exceeding good taſte. In the intervals of his ſtudies, the lofty mountains amidſt which he lived would often invite him abroad, to conſider the numberleſs natural curioſities they contain, and the infinite variety of plants that grow on them; or to climb to their tops, and enjoy the moſt extenſive and moſt diverſified proſpects. And here his fancy being warmed by the grand ſcenes which preſented themſelves, he would ſometimes break out into a hymn or poetic rhapſody on the beauties of nature, and the perfections of its Author. OF theſe ſome fragments ſtill remain; which, though ſo unfiniſhed that it can be only thro' forgetfulneſs they have not been deſtroyed, yet ſiew a genius capable of much greater things in that way. His friends, however, are obliged to the accidents that have preſerved them, together with ſome others of his juvenile performances; for however unfit they may be for the public view, they ſhew the progreſs he had made in the ſeveral parts of learning, at the time they were written: and what can be more delightful, than to obſerve the gradual openings and improvements of a mind like that of Mr. Maclaurin? In the autumn of i1717, he preſented himſelf a candidate for the profeſſorſhip of mathematics in the mariſhal college of Aberdeen, which he obtained after a comparative trial of ten days with a very able competitor: and being fixed in his chair, he ſoon revived the taſte of maihemati cal learning, and raiſed it higher than it had ever been in that univerſity. During the vacations of 1719 and 1721, he went to London, with a view of improving himſelf, and of being introduced to the illuſtrious men there. In his firſt journey, beſides Dr. Hoadly then biſhop of Bangor, Dr. Samuel Clarke, and ſeveral other eminent men, he became acquainted with Sir Iſuac Newton; whoſe friendſhip he ever after reckoned the greateſt honour and happineſs of his life. He was admitted a member of the Royal Society; two papers of his were inſerted in their tranſactions, and his book intitled Geometria Organica was publiſhed with the approbation of their preſident. In his ſecond journey to London in 1721, he became acquainted with Martin Folkes, Eſq; now preſident of the Royal Society; with whom he thenceforth culiivated a moſt entire and unreſerved friendihip, frequently interchanging letters with him, and communicating all his views and improvements in the ſciences. In 1722, Lord Polwarih, Plenipotentiary of the King of Great Britain at the congreſs of Cambray, engaged Mr. Maclaurin to go as tutor and companion to his eldeſt ſon, who was then to ſet out on his travels. After a ſhort ſtay at Paris, and viſiting ſome other towns in France, they fixed in Lorrain; where, beſides the advantage of a good academy, they had that of the converſation of one of the moſt polite courts in urope. Here Mr. Maclaurin gained the eſteem of the moſt diſtinguiſhed perſons of both ſexes, and at the ſame time quickly improved that eaſy genteel behaviour which was natural to him, both from the temper of his mind, and from the advantages of a graceful perſon. It was here likeiſe that he wrote his piece on the percuſſion of bodies, which gained the prize of the æoyal Academy of Sciences for 1724; the ſubſtance of this tract is inſerted in his Treatiſe of Fluxions, and alſo in Book II. Chap. a2, of the following work. u Mr. Maclaurin and his pupil having quitted Lorrain, were got as far on their tour as the ſouthern provinces of France, when Mr. Hume was ſeized with a fever, and died at Montpelier. An event ſo ſhocking muſt have affected a heart leſs ſenſible and tender than Mr. Maclaurins: in ſome letters written on this occaſion, he appears quite inconſolablee. His own grief for his pupil, his companion, and friend; and his ſympathy with a family to which he owed great obligations, and which had ſuffered an irreparable loſs in the death of this hopeful young nobleman, rendered him altogether unhappy. Travelliag and every thing elſe was become diſtaſteful, ſo he ſet out immediately on his return to his profeſſion at Aberdeen. But being now univerſally diſtinguiſhed as one of the firſt genius's of the age, ſome of the curators of the univerſity of Edinburgh, were deſirous of engaging him to ſupply the place of Mr. ames Gregory, whoſe age and infirmities had rendered him incapable of teaching. Several difficulties retarded this deſign for ſome time; particularly the competition of a gentleman eminent for mathematical abilities, who had good intereſt with the patrons of the univerſity; and the want of an additional fund for the new profeſſor. But both theſe difficulties were got over, upon the receipt of two letters from Sir Iſaac Newton. In one, addreſita to Mr. Maclaurin, with allowance to ſhew it to the patrons of the univerſity, Sir Iſaae expreſſes himſelf thus;  I am very glad to hear that you have a  proſpect of being joined to Mr. ames Gregory in the c profe ſſorſhip of the mathematics at Ldinburgh, not  only becauſe you are my friend, but principally becauſe c of your abilities, you being acquainted as well with the & new improvements of mathematics, as with the ſormer s ſtate of thoſe ſciences; I heartily wiſh you good ſues ceſs, and ſhall be very glad of hearing of your being c elected. I am, with all ſincerity, your faithful friend sc and moſt humble ſervant.” - In a ſecond letter to the then Lord Provoſt of Edinburgh, which Mr. Mailaurin knew nothing of till ſome yeais after Sir Iſaads death, he thus writes,  I am glad s to underſtand that Mr. Maclaurin is in good repute c amongſt you for his ſkill in mathematics, for I think & he deſerves it very well; and to ſatisfy you that I do  not flatter him, and alſo to encourage him to accept the sc place of aſiſling Mr. Gregory, in order to ſucceed him,  I am ready (if you pleaſe to give me leave) to contri-  bute twenty pounds per annum towards a proviſion for s him, till Mr. Gregorys place become void, if I live ſo  Jong, and I will pay it to his order in London. In November 1725, he was introduceũ into the univerſity: as was at the ſame time his learned collegue and intimate friend, Dr. Alexander Monro, profeſſor of anatomy. After this the mathematical claſſes ſoon became very numerous, there being generally upwards of a hundred young gentlemen attending his lectures every year: who being of different ftandings and proficiency, he was obliged to divide them into four or five claſſes, in each of which he employed a full hour every day, from the firſt of November to the firſt of June. In the firſt or loweſt claſs (ſometimes divided into two) he taught the firſt ſix books of Euclids Elements, plain trigonometry, practical geometry, the elements of fortification, and an introduction to algebra. The ſecond claſs ſtudied algebra, the Irth and 12th books of Euclid, ſpherical trigonometry, conic ſections, and the general principles of aſtronomy. The third claſs went on in aſtronomy and perſpective, read a part of Sir Iſuac Newton's Principia, and had a courſe of experiments for illuſtrating them, performed and explained to them. He afterwards read and demonſtrated the elements of fluxions. Thoſe in the 4th claſs read a ſyſtem of fluxions, the doctrine of chances, and the reſt of Newton's Principia. All Mr. Maclaurins lectures on theſe different ſubjects were given with ſuch perſpicuity of method and language, that his demonſtrations ſeldom ſtood in need of repetition: ſuch, however, was his anxiety for the improvement of his ſcholars, that if at any time they ſeemed not fully to comprehend his meaning, or if, upon examining them, tions which he had proved, he was apt rather to ſuſpect his own expreſſions to have been obſcure, than their want of genius or attention; and therefore would reſume the demonſtration in ſome other method, to try if, by expoſing it in a different light, he could give them a better view of it. Beſides the labours of his public profeſſion, he had frequently many other employments and avocations. If an uncommon experiment was ſaid to have been made any where, the curious were deſirous of having it repeated by Mr. Maclaurin: if an eclipſe or comet was to be obſerved, his teleſcopes were always in readineſs. The ladies too would ſometimes be entertained with his experiments and obſervations; and were ſurprized to find how eaſily and familiarly he could reſolve the queſtions they put to him. His advice and aſſiſtance, eſpecially to the young gentlemen who had been his pupils, was never wanting; nor was admittance refuſed to any, except in his teaching hours, which were kept ſacredl. His acquaintance and friendſhip was likewiſe courted by the ingenious of all ranks;3 who, by their fondneſs for his company, took up a great deal of his time, and left him not maſter of it, even in his country retirements. Notwithſtanding the neceſſary labour and the many interruptions and avocations which he had, he continued to purſue his own ſtudies with the utmoſt aſſiduity, reading whatever was publiſhed, from which he could expect any information or improvement. But to have time for ſo much ſtudy and writing, he was obliged to take from the ordinary hours of ſleep, what he beſtowed on his ſcholars and friends; and, by this, no doubt, greatly impaired his health. Sir Iſaac Newton dying in the beginning of the year 1728, his nephew Mr. Conduitt propoſed to publiſh an account of his life, and deſired Mr. Maclaurin's aſſiſtance; who, out of gratitude to his great benefactor, chearfully undertook and ſoon finiſhed the hiſtory of the progreſs which philoſophy had made before Sir Iſaac's time. This was the firſt draught of the following work; which was immediately ſent up to London, and had the approbation of ſome of the beſt judges. Dr. Runaãle, in particular, af4 terwards biſhop of Derry, was ſo pleaſed with the deſign, that he mentioned it to her late Majeſty; who did it the honour of a reading, and expreſſed a deſire to ſee it publiſhedl. But Mr. Conduitt's death having prevented the execution of his part of the propoſed work, Mr. Maclaurins manuſcript was returned to him. To this he afrerwards added the more recent proofs and examples, given by himſelf or others, on the ſubjects treated of by Sir Iſaac, and leſt it in the ſtate in which it now appears. Mr. Maclaurin had lived a batchelor to the year 1733: but being formed for ſociety as well as for contemplation, and deſirous of mixing more delicate and intereſting delights with thoſe of philoſophy, he married Anne, daughter of Mr. Walter Stewart, ſollicitor-general to his Iate Majeſty for Scotland  by whom he had ſeven children, of which, two ſons ĩohn and Colin, and three daughters, have ſurvived him. Dr. Berkley biſhop of Cloyne, having taken occaſion from ſome diſputes that had ariſen concerning the grounds of the fluxionary method, in a treatiſe entitled the Analyſt, publiſhed in 1734, to explode the method itſelf, and, at the ſame time, to charge mathematicians in general with infidelity in religion; Mr. Maclourin found it neceſſary to vindicate his favourite ſtudy, and repel an accuſation in which he was moſt unjuſtly included. He began an anſwer to the biſhop's book; but as he proceeded, ſo many diſcoveries, ſo many new theories and problems occurred to him, that - of a vindicatory pamphlet, his work came out a complete ſyſtem of fluxions, with their application to the moſt conſiderable problems in geometry and natural philoſophy. This work was publiſhed at Zdinburgh in 1742, in two volumes in quarto; in which we are at a loſs what moſt to admire, his ſolid 2nd unexceptionable demonſtrations oſ the grounds of the methud itſelf, or its application to ſuch a variety oſ curious and uſeful problems. His demonſtrations had been, ſeveral years before, communicated to Dr. Berkley, and Mr. Maclaurin had treated him with the greateſt perſonal reſpect and civility: notwithſtanding which, in his pamphlet on tar-water, he renews the charge, as if nothing had been done; for this excellent reaſon, that different perſons had conceived and expreſſed the ſame thing in different ways. A ſociety having ſubſiſted ſome years at Edinburgh for improving medical knowledge, Mr. Maclaurin propoſed to have their plan made more extenſive, ſo as to take in all the parts of phyſics, together with the antiquities of the country. This was readily agreed to; and Mr. Maclaurin's inſluence engaged ſeveral noblemen and gentlemen of the ſirſt rank and character, to join themſelves, for that purpoſe, to the members of the former ſociety. The Earl of Morton did them the honour to accept of the office of preſident; Dr. Plummer, profeſſor of chymiſtry, and Mr. Maclaurin were appointed ſecretaries; and ſeveral gentlemen of diſtinction, ngliſb and foreigners, deſired to be admitted members. At the monthly meetings of the ſociety, Mr. Maclaurin generally read ſome performance or obſervation of his own, or communicated the contents of his letters from foreign parts; by which means the ſociety was inſormed of every new diſcovery or improvement in the ſciences. Several of the papers read before this ſociety, are printed in the 5th and õth volumes of the Medical Vſſays. Some of them are likewiſe publiſhed in the Philoſiphical Tranſactions, and Mr. Maclaurin had occaſion to inſert a great many more in his Ireatiſe of Fluxions, and in his account of Sit Iſaac Newtos philoſophy. By which means the publication of any volume of the works of the ſociety has been retarded: but we may hope their labours will ſtill be continued with ſucceſs, notwithſtanding the loſi they have ſuſtained by Mr. Maclaurin's death. He likewiſe propoſed the building an aſtronomical oòſervatory, and a convenient ſchool for experiments in the univerſity; of which he drew an elegant and well-contrived plan: and as this work was to be carried on b private contributions, employed all his influence to raiſe money for that purpoſe; with ſo much ſucceſs, that had not the unhappy diſorders of that country intervened, the fabric might by this time have been far advanced. The Earls of Morton and Hoptoun ſhewed their liberality as well as their love of the ſeiences, upon this occaſion; as did the honourable Baron Clert, vice- preſident of the philoſophical ſociety: and ſeveral noblemen and gentlemen offered to contribute what inſtruments of value they were poſſeſſed of, as ſoon as the obſervatory ſhould be ready to receive them. The Earl of Morton being to ſet out for Oriney and Sbhetland in 1739, to viſit his eſtates there, wanted at the ſame time to ſettle the geography of theſe countries, which is very erroneous in all our maps; to examine their natural hiſtory, to ſurvey the coaſts, and to take the meaſure of a degree of the meridian: and, for this purpoſe, deſired Mr. Maclauris aſiiſtance. But his family affairs not permitting him to take ſuch a journey, he could do no more than draw a memorial of what he thought neceſſary to be obſerved, furniſh the proper inſtruments, and recommend Mr. Short, the famous optician, as a fit operator for managing them. i The account which he received of this voyage, made him ſtill more ſenſible of the erroneous geography we have of thoſe parts, by which many ſhipwrecks have been occaſioned; and therefore he employed ſeveral of his ſcholars, who were then ſettled in the northern counties, to ſurvey the coaſts. The reverend Mr. Bryce compoſed from obſervations a map of the coaſt of Caithneſs and Strathnaver, with remarks on the natural hiſtory and rarities of the country, together with directions for ſea-faring people. This map was preſented to the Philoſophical Society at Edinburgh, and publiſhed by their order. The reverend Mr. Bonnar drew likewiſe a map of the three moſt northerly iſlands of Shetland, which is among Mr. Maclaurins papers; and we expect ſoon the geography of the Orẽneys corrected by Mr. Mactenzie. It was from obſervations like theſe, made by ſilrul perſons, and with the beſt inſtruments, that Mr. aclaurin expected to ſee a good map of Scotland; not from the ſlaviſh copying of map- ſellers, nor from a painful collecting, and patching together of old draughts and ſurveys of little authority3 which he thought muſt contribute more to perpetuate than to rectify errors. Mr. Maclaurin had ſtill another ſcheme for the improvement of geography and navigation, of a more extenſive nature. After reading all the accounts he could procure of voyages, both in the ſouth and north ſeas, he imagined the ſea was open all the way from Greenland to the ſouth ſea, by the north pole. Of this he was ſo much perſuaded, that he has been heard to ſay, if his ſituation could admit of ſuch adventures, he would undertake the voyage even at his own charges. But when ſchemes, for finding out ſuch a paſſage, were laid before the parliament in 1744, and he was conſulted concerning them by ſeveral perſons of high rank and influence; before he could finiſh the memorials which he propoſed to have ſent, the præmium was limited to the diſcovery of a north-weſt paſſage, and Mr. Maclaurin uſed to regret that the word weſt was inſerted, becauſe he thought that paſſage, if at all to be found, muſt lie not far from the pole. Such was the zeal of this worthy perſon for the public good, in every inſtance; the laſt, and moſt remarkable, is that which we are now going to relate. When it was certainly known, in 1745, that the rebels, aſter having got between Edinburgh and the King's troops, were continuing their march ſouthwards, Mr. Maclaurin was among the firſt to rouze the friends of our happy conſtitution, from the unlucky ſecurity they had hitherto continued in: and tho he was ſenſible that the city of Edinburgh, far from being able to ſtand the attack of a regular army, could not even hold out any [nfisꝶb able time againſt the undiſciplined and ill-armed force that was coming againſt it; yet, as he foreſaw of how much advantage it would be to the rebels, to get poſſeſſion of that capital; and, the King's forces under the command of Sir John Cope being daily expected; he made plans of the walls, propoſed the ſeveral trenches, barricades, batteries, and ſuch other defences as he thought could be got ready before the arrival of the rebels, and by which, he hoped, the town might be kept till the King's forces ſhould come to its relief. The whole burden, not only of contriving, but alſo of overſeeing the execution, of theſe haſty fortifications fell to Mr. Maclaurins ſhare; he was employed night and day, in making plans, and running from place to place; and the anxiety, fatigue, and cold to which he was thus expoſed, affecting a conſtitution naturally of weak nerves, laid the foundation of the diſeaſe of which he died. How this plan came to be neglected, and in what manner the rebels got poſſeſion of the town, is not a proper enquiry for this place. They got poſſeſſion of it] and, their ſpirits being raiſed by this unaccountable ſucceſs, and by the ſupply of arms and proviſions which it gave them, they ſoon after defeated the Kings troops at Preſlon. The moderation which they had affected before that unhappy battle was now laid aſide, and obedience was to be given to whatever proclamations or orders they thought fit to iſſue, under pain of military execution. Among other deſpotic orders, one was, commanding all who had been volunteers in defence of the town, before a ſtated time, to wait on their ſecretary of ſtate, to ſubſcribe a recantation of what they had done, and a promiſe of ſubmiſfion to their pretended government, under the pain of being deemed and treated as rebels. Mr. Maclaurin had been too active and diſtinguiſhed a volunteer, to think he could eſcape the ſevereſt treatment, if he fell into their hands, after neglecting to make the ſubmiſſion required; he therefore withdrew privately into ængland, before the laſt day of receiving the ſubmiſſions; but, previous to his eſcape, found means to convey a good teleſcope into the caſtle, and concerted a method oſ ſupplying the garriſon with proviſions. ll As ſoon as his Grace, Dr. Thomas Herring, then Lord Archbiſhop of Yor, was informed that Mr. Maclaurin had fled to the north of England, he invited him in a moſt ſriendly and polite manner, to reſide with him during his ftay in that country. Mr. Maclaurin gladly accepted of the invitation, and ſoon after expreſſes himſelf thus in a letter to a friend;  Here (ſays he) I live as happily as a e man can do, who is ignorant of the ſtate of his family, s who ſees the ruin of his country. His Grace, of whoſe merit and goodneſs, Mr. Maclaurin ever retained the higheſt ſentiments, afterwards kept a regular correſpondence with him; and when it was ſuſpected that the rebels might once more take poſſeſſion oſ Edinburgh, after their retreat from England, invited his former gueſt again to take refuge with him. At Yort he had heen obſerved to be more meagre than ordinary, and with a ſickly look; though not being apprehenſive of any danger at that time, he did not call in the aſfiſtance of a phyſtcian : but having had a fall from his horſe on his journey ſouthward, and, when the rebel army marched into England, having on his return home been expoſed to moſt tempeſtuous cold weather, upon his arrival he complained of being much out of order. In a little time his diſeaſe was diſcovered to be a dropſy of the belly, to remove which, variety of medicines, preſcribed by the moſt eminent phyſicians at London, as well as thoſe of Edinburgh, and three tappings, were uſed without making a cure. His behaviour, during this tedious and painful diſtemper, was ſuch as became a philoſopher and a chriſtian; calm, chearful, and reſigned; his ſenſes and judgment remaining in their full vigour, till within a few hours of his death. Then, for the firſt time, his amanuenſis to whom he was dictating the laſt chapter of the following work (in which he proves the wiſdom, the power, goodneſs, and other attributes of the Deity) obſerved ſome heſitation or repetition: no pulſe could then be felt in any part of his body, and his hands and feet were already cold. Notwithſtanding this extremely weak condition, he ſat.in his chair, and ſpoke to his friend Dr. Monro with his uſual ſerenity and ſtrength of reaſon, deſiring the Doctor to account for a phæ nomenon which he then obſerved in himſelf: flaſhes of fire ſeeming to dart from his eyes, while in the mean time his ſight was failing, ſo that he ſcarce could diſtinguiſh one object ſfrom another. In a little time after this converſation, he deſired to be laid upon his bed; where, on Saturday the 14th of fune, 1746, aged 45 years and 4. months, he had an eaſy paſſage ſfrom this world to that ſtate of bliſs, which he had the moſt elevated ideas of, and which he moſt ardently longed to poſſeſs. The grief for the loſs of this excellent perſon was as general as the eſteem which he had acquired, with all ranks of men: but thoſe of greateſt worth, and who had moſt intimately known him, were the moſt deeply affected. Dr. Monro, in an oration ſpoken at the firſt meeting of the univerſity aſter Mr. Maclaurin's death (from which the ſubſtance of the foregoing account is taken) gives, particularly, a very moving picture of the grief of the late Lord Preſident Forbes, on this occaſion. A likeneſs of character, and a perfect harmony of ſentiments and views, had cloſely united them in their lives; in their deaths, ihey were alas too little divided: the preſident likewiſe, vorn out in the ſervice of his country, was ſoon to be the ſubject of a general mourning. In the ſame diſcourſe the Doctor ſhews, in a vãriety of inſtances, that acute parts and extenſive learning were, in Mr. Maclaurin, but inferior qualities; that he was ſtill more nobly diſtinguiſhed from the bulk of mankind, by the qualities of the heart; his ſincere love to Gop and Men, his univerſal benevolence and unaffected piety; together with a warmth and conſtancy in his friendſhips, that was in a manner peculiar to himſelf. He profeſſes likewiſe, that after an intimacy with him for ſo many years, he had but half known his worth; which then only diſcloſed itſelf in its full luſtre, when it came to ſuffer thæ ſevere teſt of that diſtreſsful ſituation, in which every man muſt at laſt find himſelf; and which only minds prepared like hie. armed with virtue and chriſtian hope, can bear uith dignity. / But the bounds we are confined to, do not permit us to follow the proſeſſor in this delightful track; nor would the modeſty of Mr. Maclaurin's ſurviving friends bear with our being ſo particula. We muſt content ourſelves to conſider him in the character in which he was univerſally known; by giving a ſhort account of his works, and of the taſte and manner in which he cultivated the mathematical ſciences; purſuing with ſuch indefatigable pains, ſtudies that ſeem, to many, rather curlous than uſeful. His firſt work, compoſed in his early youth, was the Geometria Organica, in which he treats of the deſcription of curve lines by continued motion. The firſt and ſimpleſt of curves is deſcribed by the motion of a right line on a plane, round one of its extremities. Sir Iſaac Newton had ſhewn, that the Conic Sections might all be deſcribed by aſſuming two centres or poles in a plane, and moving round them two given angles, ſo as the interſection of two legs be always found in a ſtreight line, given in poſition in the ſame plane; for thus the interſection of the other two will trace ſome conic ſection. In a ſimilar way, he deſcribes ſuch lines of the third order, as have a double point, that is to ſay, which returning upon themſelves, paſs twice through the ſame point; but the deſcription of the far greater number of thoſe lines, which have no ſuch point, Sir Iſaac declares to be a problem of much more difficulty. This was reſerved for Mr. Maclaurin; who not only happily reſolved it, but carried the ſame method of deſcription much higher. By aſſuming more poles, or by moving the angular points along more lines given in poſition, or, laſtly, by carrying the interſections along curve lines, inſtead of ſtreight, he has extended, or given hints of extending, the method as far as it can goo And becauſe, by the motion of rulers actually combined, as the caſe requires, ſuch deſcriptions may be effected, he calls them by the general name of Organical. When he wrote this treatiſe, the ſubjects being new and entertaining, his invention in its prime, and the ardor of his curioſity continually urging him on to farther diſcoveries, he did not take time to finiſh every demonſtration in ſo elegant a manner as he might have done. His page, we muſt own, is incumbered with algebraical calculations, and theſe have offended the delicate eyes of ſome critics; but, in anſwer to this, e may ſay that what offends them, may be very acceptable to younger ſtudents: nor indeed ſhould we at all have mentioned this blemiſh in ſo great a work, if himſelf had not ſomewhere hinted at it, and, in a letter to one of his friends, expreſſed an intention of reſuming, with his firſt leiſure, that whole theory, and adding to it a ſupplement; the greateſt part of which had been printed ſeveral years ago, but whereof we have only an abſtrac: in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, Ne. 439. In the ſame volume, he gives a new theory of the curves which may be derived from any given curve, by conceiving perpendiculars to its tangents to be drawn continually through a given point, whoſe interſections with the tangents will form a new curve; from which laſt a third may be formed in the ſame manner, and ſo on in infinitum. This furniſhes many curious theorems: there are likewiſe ſome propoſitions concerning centripetal forces and other ſubjects, which, with the quotations he uſes, ſnew the great progreſs he had already made in every part of mathematical learning, and how well acquainted he was with the writings of the beſt authors. We ſhall not here repeat what has been ſaid concerning his piece which gained the prize of the Royal Acadcmy of Sciences in 1724. In the year 1740, the Academy adjudged him a prize which did him ſtill more honour, for accounting for the motion of the Tides, from the theory of gravity; a queſtion which had bææn given out the former year, without receiving any ſolutionn. He happened to have onlv ten days time to draw up this paper, and could not find leiſure to tranſcribe a fair copy, ſo that the Paris edition of it is incorrect; but he afterwards reviſed the whole, and inſerted it in his Treatiſe of Fluxions. Nor need we mention the occaſions on which ſeveral pieces which he ſent to the Royal Society were written: the following liſt will ſhew their dates, and the ſubjects treated of in them. I. or the cnſiruction and meaſure of curuss, Phil. Tranſ. . 3562. A new method of deſeribing all tinds of curves, Ne. 359. 3. 4 Letter to Martin F olces, Eſq; on equations vith impoſſible roots, May, 1726. N. 394. 4 Continuation of the ſams; March, 1729. N°. 408. 5. Decem. 21, 1732. On the deſcription of curves; with an account of farther im mgt ouaments and a paper dated at Nancy, 27th Nov. 1722. 4396. An account of the annular eclipſe of the ſun, at Edinburgh, Feb. 18, 1736-7. Ne, 447. 7. hn account of the Treatiſe of Plurims, January 27ih, 1742-3. N°. 467. 8. 7he ſame continued; Mareh 1o1b, 1742-3. Ne, 469.  A rule for finding the meridional parts of a ſpheroid with ſume exatiueſi as of a ſphere, Auguſt 7741. Ne. 461. 10. the baſes of the cells wherein the ber depoſit their honey, Novem. 3, 1743. No, 471. But the great work, on which he beſtowed the moſt labour, and which wil for ever do him honour, is his Treatiſe of Fluxions. The occaſion of it was related above, namely the objections of ſome ingenious men againſt the doctrine of fluxions, on account of the different modes of explication which had been uſed.by different authors. Nor can it be denied, that the terms infinite and infiniteſimal were become much too familiar to mathematicians, and had been abuſed both in arithmetic and geometry ? At one time inb troducing and palliating real abſurdities, and, at others, giving theſe ſciences an affected myſterious air which does not belong to them. To remedy this growing evil, and for ever take away the handle which it gave to cavilling, Mr. Maclaurin found it neceſſary, in demonſtrating the principles of fluxions, to reject altogether thoſe exceptionable terms, and to ſuppoſe no other than finite determinable quantities, ſuch as Euclid treats of in his geometry; nor to uſe any other form of demonſtration than what the antients had Aequently uſed, and which had been allowed as ſtrictly concluſive from the firſt riſe of the ſcience: by which means he has ſecured this admirable invention from all future attacks, and at the ſame time done juſiice to the accuracy of the great inventor. The work coſt him infinite pains; but he did not grudge it: he though that in proportion  as the general methods are valuable, it sjs important that they be eſtabliſhed above all exception,  and ſince they ſave us ſo much time and labour, we è may allow the more for illuſtrating the methods themſelves æ,” To his demonſtrations of this doctrine he has added many valuable improvements of it, and has happily applied it to ſo many curious and uſeful enquiries, that his work mãy be called a ſtorehouſe of mathematical learning, rather than a treatiſe on one hranch of it. The particulars we need not enumerate, eſpecially as there iꝗ printed in the Philoſophical Tranſactions, Nè, 468, 469, a clear and methodical account of them; to which we reſer the reader. Throughout this whole work, thouęh not equally perfect in all its parts, becauſe of the infinite extent of the ficld into which he was led, there appears a very maſterly genius, and an uncommon addreſs. An ordinary artiſt follows the firſt, not generally the beſt, road that preſents itſelf, and arrives perhaps at the ſolution of his problem; but it will ſcarcely be either elegant or clear; one may ſee there is ſtill ſomething want* Introd. to Fluxions, at the end. of the AuT noR. xix ing, the reſult being little more ſcientific than that of an arithmetical operation, where the given numbers and their relations have all diſappeared. This was not the caſe of Mr. Maclaurin; he had a quick comprehenſive view, taking in at once all the means of inveſtigation; he could ſelect the fitteſt for his purpoſe, and apply them with exquiſite art and method. This is a faculty not to be acquired by exerciſe only; we ought rather to call it a ſpecies of that taſte, the gift of nature, which in mathematics, as in other things, diſtinguiſhes excellence from mediocrity. We have in all Mr. Maclaurin's latter works, eſpecially in his Treatiſe of Fluxions, numberleſs inſtances of this addreſs: We need only inſtance in his reducing ſo many ſolutions which uſed to be managed by the higher orders of fluxions to thoſe of an inferior order, and many of the queſtions concerning the maxima and minima, even ſome of the moſt difficult, to plane geometry. Theſe are all the writings which our author lived to publiſh ſince his deceaſe two volumes more have appeared, his treatiſe of Algebra, and this account of Sir Iſaac Newtor's philoſophy. His Algebra, tho it had not the advantage to be finiſhed by his own hand and publiſhed under his eye, is yet allowed to be excellent in its kind; containing, in no large volume, a complete elementary treatiſe of that ſcience, as far as it has hitherto been carried; all the moſt uſeful rules, which lie ſcattered in ſo many authors, being clearly laid down and demonſtrated, and in the order which he had found to be the beſt in a long courſe of methodical teaching. He is more ſparing, it is true, in the practical applications than moſt other writers, but this was deſignedly; he was of opinion that many of thoſe applications deſerve to be treated of apart; and to have taken too much of them into his plan, would have been like disfiguring the elements of Euclid, by mixing with them the rules of practical geometry. To this work is ſubjoined, as a proper uppendix, his Latin tract De Linearum Geometricarum proprietatibus generalibus. It is carefully printed from a manuſcript all written and corrected by the authors own hand; and we need only add, that as it was among the laſt, ſo it appears to have been, in his own judgment, one of the beſt of his performances. The account of Sir Iſaac Newton's philoſophy lies now before the reader; who, by caſting his eye on the rable of contents, may ſee the author's deſign and method; and in peruſing the work itſelf will not, we hope, find himſel? diſappointed. One queſtjon however may be put, which it is proper for us to obviat. Why, in this account, Sir Iſaac Newion's grand diſcoveries concerning light and colours, are but tranſiently and in general touched upon? To this it is anſwered, that our author's main deſign ſeems to have been to explain only thoſe parts of Sir Iſaacs philoſophy that have been, and are ſtill, controvertedl. But it is known, that, ever ſince the experiments, on which his doctrine of light and colours is founded, have been repeated with due care, this doctrine has ſuffered no conteſtation: WHereas his ſyſtem of the world, his accounting for the celeſtial motions, and the other great appearances of nature, from gravity, is miſunderſtood and even ridiculed to this day: the weak charge of occult qualities has been frequently repeated; foreign profeſſors ſtill amuſe themſelves with imaginary triumphs; even the polite and ingenious Cardinal àæ Polignac is ſeduced to lend them th harmony of his numbers. It was proper therefore that theſe gentlemen ſhould once more be told (and by Mr. Maclaurin) that their objections are altogether out of ſeaſon; that the ſpectres they are daily combating are a creation of their own, no more related to Sir Iſaac Newton's doctrines than obſervation and experience are to occult qualities; that the followers of Sir Ijauc Newton will for ever aſſert their right to ſtop where tney find they æan get no farther upon ſure round; and to make uſe of a principle firmly eſtabliſhed in experience, adequate to all the purpoſes they apply it to, and in every application uniform and conſiſtent with itſelf *; although they perhaps, deſpair of tracing the ulterior cauſe of that principle. : But beſides that Sir Iſaac Newtor's treatiſe of optics wanted no defencæ, it may be ſaid likewiſe, that it ſcarce admits of an explication; it is ſuch an abſolute maſterpiece of philoſophical writing, that it can as little be abridged as enlarged; and we had better take all his experiments, illuſtrations and proofs in the words in which he has delivered them, than riſque the injuring them by a different dreſs. As for the hints which he could not further purſue, and which he propoſes as queries; Mr. Maclaurin had too ſound a judgment, and had too thoroughly imbibed the genius and ſpirit of his great Maſter, to run away with them as materials for rearing doubtful theories: He leaves them as he found them, till future diſcoveries can give them another name. Beſides his printed and more finiſhed works, Mr. Macæ Iaurin had by him a number of manuſcript papers, and imperfect eſſays on mathematical and other ſubjects. Theſe the increaſe of his diſtemper did not give him time to put in order, or to leave particular directions how they were to be diſpoſed of; he therefore entruſted them all together to the care of three gentlemen, in whoſe hands he knew they would be perfectly ſafe: his honoured friend Martin Foltes, Eſq; preſident of the Royal Society; Andrew Mitchell, Efq; member of parliament for the ſhire of Aberdeen, ho, he knew, would ſpare no pains to do juſtice to the memory of a perſon whom he had ſo long, and ſo entirely, loved; and the reverend Mr. Vohn Hill, chaplain to his Grace the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, with whom he had for ſome years cultivated a moſt intimate friendſhip. In conſequence of this truſt, theſe gentlemen immediately ſet about publiſhing what Mr. Maclaurin had deſigned and prepared for the preſs; his algebra, and the account of Sir Iſ=aasc Newton's philoſophy: and becauſe e Of this we ſee a freſh inſtance in a ſecond admirable diſcovery of Dr. Bradleys; of a ſmall nutation of the earth's axis, from the motion of the nodes of the lunar orbit. they could not take upon themſelves the immediate care of theſe editions, they appointed, for that purpoſe, a perſon, whoſe regard for the Author's memory was a ſure pledge of his utmoſt diligence. They likewiſe ſet on foot and ſollicited a ſubſcription for the following work; which the ſituation of Mr. Maclaurins family made neceſſary. For not to mention, that the thoughts oſ a philoſopher are not much turned to the ſaving of money, nor is his curioſity to be gratified but at a conſiderable expence, Mr. Vaclaurins liberality was greater than his fortune could well bear: it was not advice and recommendation only that he furniſhed to young men, in whom he could diſcover a promiſing and virtuous diſpoſition; he often ſupplied them with money till his recommendations could take place. This, however, will not, we hope, upon the whole, be any loſs to his family; as it has been remembered, and rewarded by the generous manner in which many gentlemen of worth have promoted this ſubſcription. If we now look back upon the numerous writings of our author, and the deep reſearches he had been engaged in, his patience and aſſiduity will be equally aſtoniſhing with his genius. To endeavour to account for it to a perſon who has not himſelf taſted the pleaſures of a contemplative mind, would be a vain attempt. Whoever has devoted himſelf to worldly views, or to the mere joys of ſenſe and imagination, muſt be a ſtranger to the charms of truth, naked, unportioned, and unadorned; ſuch as Mr. Maclaurin courted her, through his whole life, with a moſt faithful and perſevering paſſion. Call his ſpeculations but a kind of luxury; it is however a higher and more refined luxury than other purſuits can furniſh: an exerciſe, in which the human faculties find themſelves the moſt rationally employed, and the moſt ſenſibly ſtrengthened and improvedl. At the ſame time, it beſt diſtinguiſhes the limits to which they are confined; inſpiring that humility which belongs to man, and makes a principal part of true wiſdom, the nowledge of one's ur How great an example Mr. Maclaurin was of this virtue, thoſe who had the happineſs of his acquaintance can teſtify, and his writings abundantly ſhew. The farther he advanced in the knowledge of geometry and of nature, the greater his averſion grew to perfect ſyſtems, hypotheſes, and dogmatizing; without peeviſhly deſpiſing the attainments we can arrive at, or the uſes to which they ſerve, he ſaw there lay infinitely more beyond our reach; and uſed to call our higheſt dicoveries but a dawn of knowledge, ſuited to our circumſtances and wants in this life; which, however, we ought thankfully to acquieſce in for the preſent, in hopes that it will be improved in a happier and more perfect ſtate. In weak and unexperienced minds, it is true, the ſtudy of mathematics has often wrought quite different effects: ſometimes an overweening and moſt ridiculous ſelfconceit, with a contempt of all other ſtudies; at other times a raſh confounding of the difſerent kinds of evidence, and the different ſubjects to which they can be applied; ſometimes, becauſe demonſtrative evidence is the moſQt perfect, it has been taken for granted there is none other; or moral evidence, to bring it to the ſame level, has been diſguiſed in an awkward and diſadvan5cous dreſs. But to oppoſe the ſingle example of Mr. aclaurin to ſuch pretenders, will be a ſufficient cenſure of their abſurd conduct; and at the ſame time a ſuſficient anſwer to the unjuſt reproaches, which, on occaſion of theſe abuſes, have been thrown out againſt mathematicians. It was not mental pleaſure and improvement only, that Mr. Maclaurin ſought in his favourite ſtudies; he ſaw their great importance in all the arts of civil life, in aſſiſting (as my Lord Bacon expreſſes it *) the powers of man, and extending his dominion in naturee Whoſoever is the leaſt acquainted with the hiſtory or the preſent ſtate of trade and manufactures, is fully apprized that there * Nov. Organ. Lib. I. ii l3 nothing great or beautiful, nothing convenient or expeditious, nothing univerſally beneficial, but wants their direction: nor are even the hints which accident throws In our way, to be improved to any tolerable purpoſe, without the help of Arithmetic and Geomelry. To this view of general utility, Mr. Maclaurin had accommodated all his ſtudies; and we find in many places of his works an application, even of the moſt abſtruſe theories, to the perfecting of mechanical arts. He had reſolved, for the ſame purpoſe, to compoſe a courſe of practical mathematics, and to reſcue ſeveral uſeful branches of the ſcience, from the bad treatment they often meet With in leſs ſkilful hands. But all this his death has deprived us of; unleſs we would reckon as a part of his intended work, the tranſlation of Dr. Dàvid Gregorys practical geometry, which he reviſed and publiſhed, with additions, in the year 1745. In his life-time, however, he oſten had the pleaſure to ſerve his friends and country by his ſuperior ſkil. Whatever difficulty occurrec concerning the conſtruction or perfecting of machines, the working of mines, the improvement of manufactures, the conveying of water, or the execution of any other public work, Mr. Maclaurin was at hand to reſolve it. He was likewiſe employed to terminate ſome diſputes of conſequence, that had ariſen at Glaſgow concerning the gauging of veſſels; and for that rpoſe, preſented to the commiſſioners of exciſe two elaborite memorials, containing rules by which the officers now act, with their demonſtrations. But what muſt have given him a higher ſatisfaction than any thing elſe of this kind, was the calculations he made, relative to that wiſe and humane proviſion, which is now eſtabliſhed by law, for the children and widows of the Scotch clergy, and of the profeſſors in the univerſities; entitling them to certain annuities and ſums, upon the voluntary annual payment of a certain ſum by the incumbent. In contriving and adjuſting the ſcheme, Mr. men who were appointed to ſollicit the affair at Londn, own that the authority of his name was of great uſe to them, for removing any doubts that were moved concerning the ſufficiency of the propoſed fund, or the due proportion of the ſums and annuities. To find himſelf thus eminently uſeful, even to late poſterity, muſt have been a delightful enjoyment. Bus what itill more èndeared his ſtudies to him, was the uſe they are of in demonſtrating the Being and Attributes of the Almighty Creator, and eſtabliſhing the principles of natural religion on a ſolid foundation; equally ſecure againſt the idle ſophiſtry of Epieureans, and the dangerous refinements of modern metaphyſicians. He agreed with the great Mr. Cotes*, in thinking that the knowledge of nature will ever be the firmeſi bulart againſi Atheiſm, and conſequently the ſureſt foundation of true religion. This knowledge does more than excite mere wondering; it inſpires love and adoration of the Creator, our reaſonable Service : for it muſt be a ſuperſicial view of nature, indeed, that ſuggeſts no relation, or duty, to Him in whom we live, move, and have our being. The argument from final cauſes, from the order and deſign that evidently ſhews itſelf throughout the univerſe, Mr. Maclaurin held to be the ſhorteſt and ſimpleſt of all others; and conſequently of moſt general uſe, and the beſt adapted to the human faculties: whereas metaphyſical deductions are to be apprehended but by the few, and are ever liable to be perverted. So that altho' he could uſe them with as much ſubtlety and force as any man living, he choſe rather, in his converſation as well as his writings, to bring the diſpute to a ſhort iſſue in his own way. He was no leſs ſtrenuous in the deſence of revealed religion; which he would warmly undertake as often as it was attacked, either occaſionally in converſation, or in thoſe pernicious books which have brought the name of Free- thinker into diſgrace, and have ſo much contributed to ſpoil our taſte as well as our morals: and how ſirm his * In Præſat. ad Neur Principia. own perſuaſion of it was, appeared from the ſupport it æaſforded him in his laſt hours. Such was the life of this eminent perſon; ſpent in a courſe of laborious, yet not painful ſtudy; in continually doing good to the utmoſt of his power: in improving curious and uſeful arts, and propagating truth, virtuę, and religion amongſt mankind. He was taken from us at an age when he was capable of doing much more; but has left an example which, we hope, will be long admired and imitated: till the revolution of human affairs puts an end to learning in theſe parts of the world; or the fickleneſs of men, and their ſatiety of the beſt things, have ſubſtituted for this philoſophy ſome empty form of falſe ſcience; and, by the one or the other means, we are brought back to our original ſtate of barbariſm. B O O KII. Of the method of proceeding in natural philoſophy, and the various ſyſtems of philoſophers. C H AP. I A general view of Sir IſTaac Newtons method, and of his account of the ſyſtem of ihe world. I. O deſcribe the phenomena of nature, to explain their cauſes, to trace the relations and dependencies of thoſe cauſes, and to inquire into the whole conſtitution of the univerſe, is the buſineſs of natural philoſophy. A ſtrong curioſity has prompted men in all times to ſtudy nature; every uſeful art has ſome connexion with this ſcience; and the unexhauſted beauty and variety of things makes it ever agreeable, new, and ſurpriſing. But natural philoſophy is ſubſervient to. purpoſes of a higher kind, and is chiefly to be valued as it lays a ſure foundation for natũral religion and moral philoſophy; by leading us, in a ſatisfactory manner, to the knowledge of the Author and Governor of the univerſe. To ſtudy nature is to ſearch into his workmanſhip: every new diſcovery opens to us a new part of his ſcheme. And while we ſtill meet, in our inquiries, with hints of greater things yet undiſcovered, the mind is kept in a pleaſing expectation oſ making a further progreſs; acquiring at the ſame time higher conceptions of that great Being, whoſe works are ſo various and hard to be comprehended. Our views of Nature, however imperfect, ſerve to repreſent to us in the moſt ſenſible manner, that mighty power which prevails throughout, acting with a force and efficacy that appears to ſuffer no diminution from the greateſt diſtances of ſpace or intervals of time; and that wiſdom which we ſee equally diſplayed in the exquiſite ſtructure and juſt motions of the greateſt and ſubtileſt parts. Theſe, with perfect goodneſs, by which they are evidently directed, conſtitute the ſupreme object of the ſpeculations of a philoſopher; who, while he contemplates and ado ires ſo excellent a ſyſtem, cannot but be himſelf excited and animated to correſpond with the general harmony of nature. In order to obtain thoſe great purpoſes, we muſt not proceed haſtily in our enquiries, but with the utmoſt cautionn. Falſe ſchemes of natural philoſophy may lead to atheiſm, or ſuggeſt opinions, concerning the Deity and the univerſe, of moſt dangerous conſequence to mankind; and have been frequently employed to ſupport ſuch opinionss. We have the more reaſon to be on our guard, becauſe philoſophers have, on many occaſions, ſnown an unaccountable diſpoſition to give into extravagant fictions in their accounts oſr nature. A conſiderable party adopted, of old, that monſtrous ſyſtem, which, excluding the influences of a Deity *, attempted to explain the formation of the univerſe from the accidental play of atoms, and derived the inefſable beauty of things, even life and thought itſelf, from a lucky hit in the blind uproar. An horror at the dire eſects of ſuperſtition may have induced them to have recourſe to a doctrine ſo oppoſite to common ſenſe and reaſon; but we have not even this % Lucret, de rerum natura, lib. I. v. 63, &. Chap. . PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES. 5 excuſe to offer in defence of ſome modern hiloſophers of great name, who ſeem to have copied too much aſter thoſe maſteis, i in their mechanical accounts of the production of the materiĩal ſyſtem. While we guard againſt atheiſm and opinions that approach towards it, we ought likewiſe to beware of liſtening to ſuperſtition; which diſcourages inquiries into nature, leſt, by having our views enlarged, we ſhould eſcape from her bonds, and our diſcoveries ſhould weaken ſome darling tenets. If thoſe tenets are true, they will rather be conſirmed by our inquiries; and if they are falſe, ſurely it is better they ſould be detected. We may purſue truth ſteadily, ſecure that it will be always found conſiſtent with itſelf, and ſtands in no need of the jealouſies and dark ſuſpicions of the ſuperſtitious to ſupport it; in whoſe hands truth itſelf is apt to ſuffer by the baſe alloy they mix with it, and by the deteſted means which they have too often employed to maintain ſo incongruous an union. The philoſophers who have been devoted to ſo mean views, have never ſailed to expoſe themſelves to juſt ridicule, without doing ſervice to the cauſe which they eſpouſed. Coſmas Indopleuſtes of old, miſled by an injudicious zeal, compiled a ſyſtem oF nature from ſome expreſſions in the ſacred writings; which, againſt the conſtant and univerſal uſe of language, he would needs underſtand in the moſt literal and the very ſtricteſt ſenſe. The earth therefore, ccording to him, was not globular, but an immenſe plane of a greater length than breadth, environed by an unpaſſable ocean.  Fabrit. bibliotheca græca, vol. II. ꝑ. 609, &c. where an account is given from Photius and others of this author, with a figure to illuſtrate his ſyſtem. He placed a huge mountain towards the north, around which the ſun and ſtars performed their diurnal revolutions; and from the conical ſhape which he aſcribed to it, with the oblique motion of the ſun, he accounted for the inequality of the days and the variation of the ſeaſons. The vault of heaven leaned upon the earth extended beyond the ocean, being likewiſe ſupported by two vaſt columns: beneath the arch, angels conducted the ſtars in their various motions. Above it were the celeſtial waters, and above all he placed the ſupreme heavens. However abſurd the conceĩts of this author, who wrote in darker times, may appear, we have a more inexcuſable inſtance, in the laſt century, of the ſame Iind, in what Kircher calls his Ecſtatic Voyage to the Planets; who, after many great diſcoveries had been made concerning the celeſtial bodĩes, produced nothing worthy * of ſo noble a ſubject, or of his own extenſive learning and invention, having determined to make a ſacrifice of both to certain decrees of the church oF Rome: he deſcends even ſo low as to adopt the folly or rather impiety, of aſtrologers, in deriving the good or evil that happens to man from the propitious or malignant influences of planets. True religion requires no ſuch ſacrifices; nor are its intereſts advanced by feigning philoſophical ſyſtems purpoſely to favour it: for when we afterwards find theſe to be ill-grounded, we may be in danger of falling into ſcepticiſm. An entire liberty muſt be allowed in our enquiries, that natural philoſophy may become ſubſer* In the planet Venus, for example, he finds no other amuſement but to admire the limpid waters and beautiſul cryſtals he found there; and to aſk the genie, his companion and guide, whether baptiſm with ſuch water would be valid. The reſt is of a piece with this. . vient to the moſt valuable purpoſes, and acquire all the certainty and perfection of which it is capable: but we ought not to abuſe this liberty by ſuppoſing inſtead of enquiring, and by imagining ſyſtems, inſtead of learning from obſervation and experience the true conſtitution of things. Speculative men, by the force of genius, may invent ſyſtems that will perhaps be greatly admired for a time; theſe, however, are phantoms which the force of truth will ſooner or later diſpel: and while we are pleaſed with the deceit, true philoſophy, with all the arts and improvements that depend upon it, ſuffers. The real ſtate of things eſcapes our obſervation: or, if it preſents itſelf to us, we are apt either to reject it wholly as fiction, or, by new efforts of a vain ingenuity, to interweave it with our own conceits, and labour to make it tally with our favourite ſchemes. Thus, by blending together parts ſo ill ſuited, the whole comes forth an abſurd compoſition of truth and error. Of the many diſficulties that have ſtood in the way of philoſophy, this vanity perhaps has had the worſt effects. The love of the marvellous, and the prejudices of ſenſe, obſtructed the progreſs of natural knowledge; but experience and reflection ſoon taught men to examine and endeavour to correct theſee. Tho' philoſophers met with great diſcouragements in the dark and ſuperſtitious ages, learning flouriſhed with liberty, in better times. The diſputes amongſt the ſects, more fond of victory than of truth, produced a talkative ſort of philoſophy, and a vain oſtentation of learning, that prevailed for a long time; but men could not be always diverted from purſuing after more real knowledge. Theſe have not done near ſo much harm, as that pride and ambition, which has led philoſophers to think it bèi neath them, to oſfer any thing leſs to the world than a complete and finiſhed ſyſtem of nature; and, in order to obtain this at once, to take the liberty of inventing certain principles and hypotheſes, from which they pretend to explain all her my ſteries. 2. Sir Iſaac Newton ſaw how extravagant ſuch attempts were, and therefore did not ſet out with any favourite principle or ſuppoſition, never propoſing to himſelf the invention of a ſyſtem. He ſaw that it was neccſſary to conſult nature herſelf, to attend carefully to her manifeſt operations, and to extort her ſecrets from her by well-choſen and repeated experiments. He would admit no objections againſt plain cxperience from metaphyſical conſiderations, which, he ſaw, had often miſled philoſophers, and had ſeldom been of real uſe in their enquiries. He avoided preſumption, he had the neceſſary patience as well as genius; and having kept ſteadily to the right path, he therefore ſucceeded. Experiments and obſervations, it is true, could not alone have carried him far in tracing the cauſes from their effects, and explaining the effects from their cauſes: a ſublime geometry was his guide in this nice and difficult enquiry. This is the inſtrument, by which alone the machinery of a work, made with fo much art, could be unfolded; and therefore he ſought to carry it to the greateſt height. Nor is it eaſy to diſcern, whether he has ſhewed greater ſ&ill, and been more ſucceſsful, in improving and perfecting the inſtrument, or in applying it to uſe. He uſcd to call his philolophy experimental philoſophy, intimating, by the name, the eſſential difference there is betwixt ĩt and thoſe ſyſtems that are the product of genius and invention only. Theſe could not long ſubſift, but his philoſophy, being founded on experiment and demonſtration, cannot fail till reaſon or the nature of things are changed. In order to proceed with perfect ſecurity, and to put an end for ever to diſputes, he propoſed that, in our inquiries into nature, the methods of analyſis and ſyntheſis ſnould be both employed in a proper order; that we ſhould begin with the phænomena, or effects, and from them inveſtigate the powers or cauſes that operate in nature; that, from particular cauſes, ve ſhould proceed to the more general ones, till the argument end in the moſt general: this is the method of analyſis. Being once poſſeſt of theſe cauſes, we ſhould then deſcend in a contrary order; and from them, as eſtabliſhed principles, explain all the phænomena that are their conſequences, and prove our explications: and this is the ſyntheſis. It is evident that, as in mathematics, ſo in natural philoſophy, the inveſtigation of diſficult things by the method of analyſis ought ever to precede the method of compoſition, or the ſyntheſis. For in any other way, we can never be ſure that we aſſume the principles which really obtain in nature; and that our ſyſtem, after we have compoſed it with great labour, is not mere dream and illuſion. By proceeding according to this method, he demonſtrated from obſervations, analytically, that gravity is a general principle; from which he aftervards explained the ſyſtem of the world. By analyſis he diſcovered new and wonderful properties oſ light, and, from theſe, accounted for many curious phænomena in a Vnthetic way. But while he was thus demonſtrating a great number of truths, he could not but meet with hints of many other things, that his ſagacity and diligent obſervation ſuggeſted to him, which he was not able to eſtabliſh with equal certainty: and as theſe were not to be neglected, but to be ſeparated with care from the others, he therefore collected them together, and propoſed them under the modeſt title of queries. By diſtingnuiſhing theſe ſo carefully from each other, he has done the greateſt ſervice to this part of learning, and has ſecured his philoſophy againſt any hazard of being difproved or weakened by future diſcoveries. He has taken care to give nothing for demonſtration but what muſt ever be found ſuch; and having ſeparated from this what he owns is not ſo certain, he has opened matter for the inquiries of future ages, which may confirm and enlarge his doctrines, but can never refute themm. He knew where to ſtop when experiments were wanting, and when the ſubtilty of nature carried things out of his reach: nor would he abuſe the great authority and reputation he had acquired, by deſivering his opinion concerning theſe, otherwiſe than as matter of queſrion. It was long before he could be prevailed on to propoſe his opinion or conjectures concerning the cauſe of gravity; and what he has ſaid of it, and of the other powers that act on the minute particles of matter, is delivered with a modeſty and diffidence ildon to he met with amongſt philoſophers of a leſs ame. Nor do they act in a conformity with the ipinit of this philoſophy who ſpeak dogmatically on theſe ſubjects, till a clearer light from new obſervations and experiments brings them from the claſs of querices, and places them on the level of demonſtrarion. 3. Such was the method of our incomparable philoſlopher, whoſe caution and modeſty vill ever do prejudiced. But this ſtrict method of proceeding was not reliſhed by thoſe who had been accuſtomed to treat philoſophy in a very different way, and who ſaw that, by following it, they muſt give up their favourite ſyſtems. His obſervations and reaſonings were unexceptionable; ſo, finding nothing to object to theſe, they endeavoured to leſſen the character of his philoſophy by general indirect inſinuations, and, ſometimes, by unjuſt calumnies. They pretended to find a reſemblance between his doctrines and the exploded tenets of the ſcholaſtic philoſophy. They triumphed mightily in treating gravity as an occult quality, becauſe he did not pretend to deduce this principle fully from its cauſe. His extending over all the ſyſtem a power which is ſo well known to us on the earth, and explaining by it the motions and influences of the celeſtial bodies, in the moſt ſatisfactory manner; and his determining the meaſures of, the various motions that are conſequences of this pover, by ſo ſxilful an application of geometry} to nature; all theſe had no merit with ſuch philoſophers, becauſe he did not aſſign the mechanical cauſe of gravity. I know not that ever it was made an objection to the circulation of the blood, that there is no ſmall difficulty in accounting for it mechanically; for they who firſt extended gravity to air, vapour, and to all bodies round the earth, had their praiſe, though the cauſe of gravity was as obſcure as before; or rather appeared more myſterious, after they had ſhewn that there was no body found near the earth, exempt from gravity, that might be ſuppoſed to be its cauſe. Why then were his admirable diſcoveries, by which this principle was extended over the univerſe, ſo ill reliſhed by ſome philoſophers? The truth is, he had, with great evidence, overthrown the boaſted ſchemes by which they pretended to unravel all the myſteries of nature; and the philoſophy he introduced, in place of them, carrying with it a ſincere confeſſion of our being far from a complete and perfect knowledge of ĩit, could not pleaſe thoſe who had been accuſtomed to imagine themſelves poſſeſſed of the eternal reaſons and primary cauſes of all things. But to all ſuch as have juſt notions of the great Author of the univerſe, and of his admirable workmanſhip, Sir Iſaac Newtons caution and modeſty will recommend his philoſophy; and even the avowed imperfection of ſome parts of it will, to them, rather appear a conſequence of its conformity with naturee. To ſuch, all complete and finiſhed ſy ſtems muſt appear very ſuſpicious: they will not be ſurprized that reſined ſpeculations, or even the labours of a few ages, are not ſufficient to unfold the whole conſtitution of things, and trace every phænomenon through all the chain of cauſes to the firſt cauſe. Is the admirable progreſs which has been made in this arduous purſuit to be deſpiſed or neglected, becauſe more remains behind undiſcovered? Surely we ought rather to rejoice that ſo much is opened to us of the conſummate art by which all things were made, and ought to be afraid to intermix with ĩt our own extravagant conceits. The proceſſes of nature lie ſo deep, that, after all the pains we can take, much, perhaps, will remain undiſcovered beyond the reach of human art or ſkill. But this is no reaſon why we ſhould give ourſelves up to the belief of fictions, be they ever ſo ingenious, inſtead of hearkening to the unerring voice of nature; ſor ſe alone can guide us in her own labyrinths; and it is a conſequence of her real beauty, that the leaſt part of true philoſophy is incomparably more beautiful than the moſt complete ſy ſtems which have been the product of invention. This ĩs particularly true of Sir Iſaac Newton's philoſophy; and we may compare it in this reſpect with thoſe celebrated pieces of Apelles, which, though they never received his laſt hand, were in greater admiration amongſt the ancients, than the moſt finiſhed pieces of other artiſts: and we wiſh poſterity may not find cauſe to ſay of this philoſophy what the ancients ſaid of thoſe pieces,rIpſum defecium ceſſilſe in gloriam artificis, nec qui ſuccederet operi ad præſcripta lineamenta inventum fuiſſe Plin. It was, however, no new thing that this philoſophy ſhould meet with oppoſitionn. All the uſeful diſcoveries that were made in former times, and particularly in the Iaſt century, had to ſtruggle with the prejudices of thoſe who had accuſtomed themſelves not ſo much as to think but in a certain ſyſtematic way; who could not be prevailed on to abundon their favourite ſchemes, while they were able to imagine the leaſt pretext for continuing the diſpute: every art and talent was diſplayed to ſupport their falling cauſe; no aid ſeemed foreign to them that could in any manner annoy their adverſ ſary; and ſuch often was their obſtinacy, that truth was able to make little progreſs, till they were ſucceeded by younger perſons ho had not ſo ſtrongly imbibed their prejudices. Sir Iſaoc Newton had very early experience of this temper of philoſophers, and appears to have been diſcouraged by it. He had a porticular averſion to diſputes, and was with diſficulty induced to enter into any controverſy. The warm oppoſ ition his admirable diſcoveries in optics met with, in his you ith , deprived the world of a full account of them ſor many years, till there appeared a greater diſ/poſition ai ſn&r among the learned to receive them; and induced him to retain other important inventions by him, from an apprehenſion of the diſputes in which a publication might involve him. He thus weighed the reaſons of things impartially and coolly, before a publication of them can be ſuſpected to have engaged him in their defence. It is well known how ſlow he was in publiſhing: and we cannot but obſerve that the temper and diſpoſition of mind, as well as the abilities of this great man, fitted him in a particular manner for penetrating far into nature and unfolding her harmony. Nor did his averſion to diſputes proceed from the love of quiet only. Philoſophy had been in high eſteem of old, but had loſt its antient luſtre from the endleſs idle Janglings that had ariſen amongſt the ſects; and could never recover it while a faculty of inventing a ſyſtem readily, and defending it obſtinately, were the admired talents of a philoſopher. While one age or ſect overturned for the moſt part the laborious productions of another, many of the wiſer ſort deſpaired of acquiring certainty in natural knowledge, and choſe rather to content themſelves with the general view of things, open to all men, than attach themſelves to ſchemes which produced no real fruit, and really led them farther from the truth. Our author therefore propoſed that all prejudices ſhould be lãid àſide, and the genuine method of treating natural philoſophy, which we have deſcribed from him, ſhould be cloſely followed. By his adhering to it himſelf, we are ſecure that truth and nature are on his ſide; and by following the excellent models which he has given us, we may be able to make farther advances. Others have pretended to explain the whole conſtitution of things by what they call clear ideas, and by mere abſtracted ſpeculations. They expreſs a contempt * for that knowledge of cauſes which is derived from the contemplation of their effects, and are unvilling to condeſcend to any other ſcience than that of effects from their cauſes. Therefore they ſet out from the firſt cauſe; and from their ideas of him pretend to unfold the whole chain, and to trace a complete ſcheme of his works. This is the philoſophy that ſtands in oppoſition to our authors to this day. It flatters human vanity ſo much, and ſets out in ſo pompous a manner, that they who attend not to the unexhauſtible variety of nature, and conſider not how uhequal the human powers are to ſo arduous an undertaking, are deluded by its promiſes. It may be doubted if ſuch a philoſophy lies within the reach of any created being; and it ſeems to be very plain that it far ſurpaſſes the reach of men. But ſince many are devoted to this phantom, and uſe all their art to adorn, and recommend it to more admirers, it will be neceſſary for the ſervice of truth, that, while we proceed, we have in view likewiſe the detection of this impoſture. 5. The view of nature, which is the immediate object of ſenſe, is very imperfect, and of a ſmall extent; but by the aſſiſtance of art, and the help of our reaſon, is enlarged till it loſes itſelf in an infinity on either hand. The immenſity of things on * Perſpicuum eſt optimam philoſophandi viam nos ſequuturos, ſi, ex ipſius Dei cognitione, rerum ab eo creatarum explicationem deducere conèmur, ut ita ſcientiam perfectiſſimam, quæ eſt effectuum per cauſas, acquiramus. Cartes Princip. part II. § 22. Aſterwards, having occaſion to ſpeak of the phænomena, he takes care to tell us, that he would not make uſe of them to prove any thing from them, becauſe he vanted to derive the Enowledge of effects from their cauſes, and not reciprocally that of the cauſes from their effects. Princip. part IlI. §4, &c. the one ſide, and their minuteneſs on the other, carrv them equally out of our reach, and conceal from us the far greater and more noble part of phyſical operationss. As magnitude of every ſort, abſtractly conſidered, is capable of being increaſed to infinity, and is alſo diviſible without end; ſo we find that, in nature, the limits of the greateſt and leaſt dimenſions of things are actually placed at an immenſe diſtance from each otherr. We tan perceive no bounds of the vaſt expanſe in which natural cauſes operate, and can fix no border or termination of the univerſe; and we are equally at a loſs when we endeavour to trace things to their elements, and to diſcover the limits which conclude the ſubdiviſions of matterr. The objects which we commonly call great vaniſh when we contemplate the vaſt body of the earth; the terraqueous ~lobe itſelf is ſoon Ioſt in the ſolar ſyſtem: in ſome parts it is ſeen as a diſtant ſtar. In great part it is unknown, or viſible only at rare times to vigilant obſervers, aſſiſted, perhaps, with an art like to that by which Galileo was enabled to diſcover ſo many new parts of the ſyſtem. The ſun itſelr dwindles into a ſtar; Saturs vaſt orbit, and the orbits of all the comets, croud into a point, when viewed from numberleſ places between the earth and the neareſt fixed ſtars. Other ſuns kindle light to illuminate other ſyſtems where our ſuns rays are unperceived; but they alſo are ſwallowed up in the vaſt expanſec Even all the ſyſtems of the ſtars that ſparkle in the cleareſt ſky muſt poſſeſs a ſmall corner only of that ſpace over which ſuch ſyſtems are diſperſed, ſince more ſtars are diſcovered in one conſtellation, by the teleſcope, than the naked eye perceives in the whole heavens*. * In the conſtellation of Orion, 2000 ſtars have been numbered by aſtronomers. After we have riſen ſo high, and left all definite meaſures ſo far behind us, we find ourſelves no nearer to a term or limit; for all this is nothing to what may be diiplayed in the infinite expanſe, beyond the remoteſt ſtars that ever have been diſcovered. If we deſcend in the ſcale of nature, towards the other limit, we find a like gradation from minute objects to others incomparably more ſubtile, and are led as far below ſenſible meaſures as we were before carried above them, by ſimilar ſteps that ſoon become hid to us in equal obſcurity. We have ground to believe that theſe ſubdiviſions of matter have a termination, and that the elementary particles of bodies are ſolid and uncompounded, ſo as to undergo no alteration in the various operation of nature or of art. But from microſcopical obſervations that diſcover animals, thouſands of which could ſcarce form a particle perceptible to the unaſſiſted ſenſe, each of which have their proper veſſels, and fluids circulating in thoſe veſſels; from the propagation, nouriſhment, and growth of thoſe animals; from the ſubtilty of the effluvia of bodies retaining their particular properties after ſo prodigious a rarefaction; from many aſtoniſhing experiments of chymiſts; and eſpecially from the inconceivable minuteneſs of the particles of light, that find a paſſage equally in all directions through the pores of tranſparent bodies, and from the contrary properties of the different ſides oſ the ſame rayt; it appears, that the ſubdiviſions of the particles of bodies deſcend by a number of ſteps or degrees that ſurpaſſes all imagination, and that nature is inexhauſtible by us on every ſide. Nor is it in the magnitude of bodies only that this endleſs gradation is 1o be obſerved. OF motions, ſome are t Newto's Optics. Query 26. ſò perſormed in moments of time; others are finiſhed in very long periods: ſome are too ſlow, and others too ſift, to he perceptible by us. T he tracing the chain of cauſes is the moſt noble purſuit of philoſophy; but we meet with no cauſe but what is, itſelf, to be conſidered as an eſſcct, and are able to number but few links of the chain. In every kind of magnitude, there is a degree or ſort to which our ſenſe is proportioned, the perception and knowledge of which is of greateſt uſe to mankind. The ſame is the ground- work of philoſophy ?; for tho all ſorts and degrees are equally the obje & of philoſophical ſpeculation; yet it is from thoſe which are proportioned to ſenſe that a philoſopher muſt ſet out in his enquiries, aſcending or deſcending afterwards as his purſuits may requiree. He does well indeed to take * Ifwe were to examine more particularly the ſituation of man in nature, we ſhould find reaſon to conclude, perhaps, that it is well adapted to one of his faculties and inchinations, for extending his knowledge, in ſuch a manner as might be conſiſtent with other duties incumbent upon him; and that they have not judged rightly who have con pared him in this reſpect (Spinoæ. Epiſt. 15.) with the animalcules in the blood diſcovered by microſcopes. He muſt be allowed to be the firſt being that pertains to this globe, which, for any thing we know, may be as conſiderable (not in magnitude, but i in more valuable reſpects) as any in the ſolar ſyſem, which is itſelf, perhaps, not inferior to any other ſyſtem ĩn theſe parts of the vaſt expanſe. By occupying a lower place in rature, man might have more eàſily ſeen what paſſes amongſ the minute particles of matter, but he would have loſt more than he could have gained by this advantage. He would have been in no condition to inſlitute an analyſis of nature, in that caſe. On the other hand, wę doubt not but there are excellent reaſons why he ſould rot have acceſs to the diſtant parts of the ſyſtem, and muſt be contented at preſent with a very imperſæt knowledge of them. The duties incumbent upon him, as a member of ſociety , might have ſuffercd by too great an attention to them, o- communicætion with them. Had he been indulged in a correſrondence with the planets, he next would have deſired to pry into the ſtate of the fixed ſtars, and at Iength to comprehend infinite ſpace. his views from many points of ſight, and ſupply the defects of ſenſe by a well- regulated imagination; nor is he to be confined by any limit in Tpace or time: but as his knowledge of nature is founded on the obſervation of ſenſible things, he muſt begin with theſe, and muſt ofſten return 0 them, to examine his progreſs by them. Here is his ſecure hold; and as he ſets out from thence, ſo if he likewiſe trace not often his ſteps backwards with caution, he will be in hazard of loſing his way in the labyrinths of nature. 6. From this ſhort view of nature, and of the ſituation of man, conſidered as a ſpec tator of its phænomena and as an inquirer into ĩts conſtitution, we may form ſome judgment of the project of thoſe, who, in compoſing their ſyſtems, begin at the ſummit of the ſcale, and then, by clear ideas, pretend to deſcend through all ĩts ſteps with great pomp and facility, ſo as in one view to expſain all things. The proceſſes in experimental philoſophy are carried on in a different manner: the beginnings are leſs lofty, but the ſcheme improves as we ariſe ſr om particular obſervations, to more general and more juſt views. It muſt be owned, indeed, that philoſophy would be perfect, if our view of nature, from the common objects of ſenſe, to the limits of the univerſe upwards, and to the elements of things downwards, was complete; and the powers or cauſes that operate in the whole were known. But if we comparc the extent of this ſcheme with the powers of mankind, we ſnall be obliged to allow the neceſſity of tuking it in parts, and of proceeding with all the caution and care we are capable of, in enquiring into each part. When we perceive ſuch wonders, as naturaliſts have diſcovered, in the minuteſt objects, ſhall we pretend to deſcribe ſo eaſily the productions of infinite power in ſpace, that is at the ſame time infinitely extended and infinitely diviſible? Surely we may rather imagine, that in the whole, there will be matter for the inquiries and perpetual admiration of much more perfect beings. Itis not therefore the buſineſs of philoſophy, in our preſent ſituation in the univerſe, to attempt to take n at once, in one view, the whole ſcheme of nature; but to extend with great care and circumſpection, our knowledge, by juſt ſteps, from ſenſible things, as far as our obſervations or reaſonings from them will carry us, in our inquiries concerning either the greater motions and operations of nature, or her more ſubtile and hidden works. In this way Sir Isaac NEwron proceeded in his diſcoveries: he eſtabliſhed his account of the ſyſtem of the world upon the bet attronomical obſervations, on the one hand; and performed himſelf, on the other, with the greateſt addreſs, the experiments by which he was enabled to pry into the more ſecret operations of nature amongſt the minute particles of matter. On either ſide he has extended our views very far, and has left valuable hints and intimations of what yet lies involved in obſcurity. For thoſe purpoſes he has given us two incomparable treatiſes, the moſt perfect in their kind philoſophy has to boaſt of; his mathematical Principles of Natural Philoſophy, and his Treatiſe of Optics. In the firſt he deſcribes the ſyſtem of the world, and demonſtrates the powers which govern the celeſtial motions, and produce their mutual influences. Theſe are extended from the center of the ſun to the utmoſt altitude of the higheſt comet, and probably to the fartheſt limits of the univerſe. Nor are theſe new or abſtruſe principles, like to thoſe which never had a being but in the imagination of philoſophers, but the ſame which are moſt familiar to mankind, and in common uſe, farther extended and more accurately defined. In the ſecond, he treats of light, which, though the moſt potent agent in nature, that is ſenſible to us, acts only at the ſcaſt diſtances. His admirable diſcoveries, on this ſubject, led him to ſearch into the motions that are amongſt the minute particles of matter, the moſt abſtruſe of all natural phænomena. In the firſt, he had the obſervations of aſtronomers for many ages to build on, with valuable conſequences that had been derived from them, by the laborious calculations of diligent and ingenious men, The conſtancy and regularity of the celeſtial motions had contributed, with the obſervations of ſome thouſands of years, to render aſtronomy the moſt exact part of the hiſtory of nature; the doctrine of comets only exceptedc. The vaſt diſtances of the great bodies which compoſe the ſyſtem, from cach other, rather favoured a juſt analyſis of the powers by which they act on one another; ſince by the greatneſs of the diſtance, theſe muſt be reduced to a few ſimple principles, and be the more eaſily diſcovered. In the ſecond treatiſe, he inquires into more hidden parts of nature, and had moſt of the phænomena themſelves to trace, as well as their cauſes. The ſubject is rather more nice and diſficult, becauſe of the inconceivable minuteneſs of the agents, and the ſubtilty and quickneſs of the motions; and the principles combined in producing the phænomena being more various, it could not be expected that they ſhould be ſo eaſily ſubjected to an analyſis. Hence it is, that what he has delivered in the firſt (thę ſtill capable of improvement) is more complete and ſiniſhed in ſeveral reſpects; while his diſcoveries of the ſecornd ſort are more aſtoniſhing. After having eſtabliſed the principle of the univerſal Gravitation of Matter in the firſt treatiſe, when he is not able to demonſtrate the cauſes of the phænomena deſcribed in the ſecond more evidently, he endeavours to judge of them, by analogy, from what he had found in the greater motions of the ſyſtem; a way of reaſoning that is agreeable to the harmony of things, and to the old maxim aſcribed to Hermes*, and approved by the obſervation and Judgment of the beſt philoſophers,  That what paſſes in the heavens above ĩs ſimilar and analogous to vhat paſſes on earth below.? He had found that all bodies gravitated towards each other, by a power that acts on all their particles equally at equal diſtances, and increaſes according to a ſtated law when the diſtance is diminiſhed. From a like principle, acting at leſs diſtances with greater vigour, and with more variety, but inſenſibly at larger diſtances, he ſuſpected that the more abſtruſe phæno mena of nature proceeded. It was a great matter in philoſophy to be ſecure of one general principle; and one was ſufficient for carrying on the regular motions of the heavenly bodies. A greater variety was neceſſary for conducting the different operations of nature in particular parts; and theſe being involved in ſome obſcurity, till better light ſhould appear, he could find no ſurer ground on which to found a judgment of them, than that principle he had already ſhewn to take place in nature. But be-  A principle not unlike this is aſcribed to the Perſian and Chaldean magi, ovu7aſũ eivai rà dvo 7dls naræ. Pſell. Declaratio dogmat. Chaldaic. Tho this, as other maxims, was much abuſed in progreſs of time, when philoſophers degenerated from itheir firſt ſimplicity, li cauſe we often ſind that phænomena, which, at ſirſt ſight, appear of a very diſferent ſort, ſlow nevertheleſs from the ſame cauſe, and ſeveral ſuch caules are often reſolved, on farther enquiry, into one more general principle; the whole conſtitution of nature (notwithſtanding the variety of appearances) manifeſtly leading to one ſupreme cauſc, this great philoſopher was hence induced, as well as from ſeveral obſervations he had m to think that all theſe powers might proceed from one general inſtrument or agent, as various branches from one great ſtem, whoſe eſficacy might be reſolved more immediately into the direction or inſluences of the ſovereign cauſe that rules the univerſe. But he ſpeaks of this in the manner that became a philoſopher who had ſo much ſtudied nature, and knew how obſcure thoſe arduous parts of her ſcheme muſt be to us. 7. As the moſt obvious views of the creation ſuggeſt to all men the perſuaſion of the being and government oſ a Deity ; ; ſo every diſcovery in “natural philoſophy enforces it: and with this improvement of his diſcoveries, this great man concludes both thoſe treatiſes. Nor is hs philoſophy to be thought of little ſervice for this purpoſe, though he has not been able to explain fully the primary cauſes themſelves. i The great myſterious Being, who made and governs the whole ſyſtem, has ſct a part of the chain of cauſes in our view; but we find that, as he himſelſf is too high for our comprehenſion, ſo his more immediate inſtruments in the univerſe, are alſo involved in an obſcurity that philoſophy is not able to diſſipate; and thus our veneration for the ſupreme Author is always increaſed, in proportion as we advance in the knowledge of his works. As we ariſe in philoſophy the firſt cauſe, we obtain more extenſive views of the conſtitution of things, and ſee his influences more plainly. We perceive that we are approaching to him, from the ſimplicity and generality of the powers or laws we diſcover; from the difficulty we find to account for them mechanically; from the more and more complete beauty and contrivance, that appears to us in the ſcheme of his works as we advance; and from the hints we obtain of greater things yet out of our reach: but ſtill we find ourſelves at a diſtance from Him, the great ſource of all motion, power, and efficacy; who, aſter all our enquiries, continues removed from us and veĩled in darkneſs. He is not the object of ſenſe; his nature and eſience are unfathomable; the more immediate inſtruments of his power and energy are but obſcurely known to us; the leaſt part of nature, when we endeavour to comprehend it, perplexes us; even place and time, of which our ideas ſeem to be ſimple and clear, have enough in them to embarraſs thoſe who allow nothing to be beyond the reach of their faculties. Theſe things, however, do not hinder but we may learn to form great and juſt conceptions of him from his ſenſible works, where an art and ſkill is expreſſed that is obvious to the moſt ſuperficial ſpectator, ſurprizes the moſt experienced enquirer, and many times ſurpaſſes the comprehenſion of the profoundeſt philoſopher. From What we are able to underſtand of nature, we may entertain the greater expectations of what will be diſcovered to us, if ever we ſhall be allowed to penetrate to the firſt cauſe himſelf, and ſee the whole ſcheme of his works as they are really derived from him, when our imperſect philofophy ſhall be completed. C H A P. II. Of the ſyſtems of the ancient philoſophers. I. H OS E who have not imbibed the prejudices of philoſophers, are eaſily convinced that natural knowledge is to be founded on experiment and obſervation. But there is a philoſophy that intoxicates the mind, while it pretends to elevate and ſatisfy it, which teaches to deſpiſe the plain and ſober way of truth. And it ĩs no eaſy matter to deal with thoſe who have loſt themſelves in the dark ſchemes of an inviolable and univerſal neceſſity, or with thoſe who are ever dreaming themſelves poſſeſt of the eternal reaſons and primary cauſes of things. The leaſt ſnew of an argument in their own vViſionary way takes infinitely more with them, than the cleareſt evidence from fact or obſervation; and ſo fond they appear of ſuch airy ſchemes, that they would chuſe rather to go on diſputing for ever, than condeſcend to acquieſce in certainty obtained in a lower way. To an impartial enquirer, Sir Iſaac Newton's method, deſcribed in the laſt chapter, approves itſelf; and ſome ingenious men have been ſenſible of the neceſſity of following it, in former times. But the general practice of philoſophers has been very diſferent; and ſyſtems founded on abſtracted ſpeculations ſtill ſo much prevail, that it will be neceſſary for our purpoſe to ſhew, by a few obſervations on the hiſtory of learning, how vain and fruitleſs ſuch attempts have always proved. Theories of this kind have been invented, and amended again and again, with great labour and expence of thought; but ſtill when they came to compare them with nature, how wide has been the difference libi omnis effuſus labor. If we look back into the ſtate of philoſophy in the diſſerent ages, we ſhall learn from the hiſtory of every period, that as far as philoſophers conſulted nature, and proceeded on obſervation, they made ſome progreſs in true knowledge; but as far as they pretended to carry on their ſchemes without this, they only multiplied diſputes. The beginnings of learning, as of other things, are uncertain and obſcured with fables: we collect, however, from ſeveral teſtimonies, that the oldeſt and moſt celebrated philoſophers of Phænicia and Greece made a vacuum and atoms, and the gravity of atoms, the firſt principles of their philoſophy *; whether theſe were ſuggeſted to them from their early obſervations of nature, before her plain appearances were obſcured by the imaginary ſchemes and the diſputes of ſpeculative men, or were derived from ſome other originn. Afterwards various ſyſtems appeared, but ſome traces of thoſe antient principles are for a long time to be diſcovered amongſt the doctrines of ſucceeding philoſophers, though interwoven with their own particular tenets;  According to Poſidonius the ſtoick, as cited by Strabo and Sextus Empiricus, the doctrine of Atoms was more ancient than the times of the Trojan war, having been taught by Moſchus a Phœrician, the ſame probably meant by Iamblichus, when he tells us that Pyrhagoras converſed at Sidon with the prophets, the ſucceſſors of Mochus the phyſiologer. In thoſe early times the characters of lawgiver and philoſopher were united, and this Mochus is ſuppoſed by many to have been the ſame with Moſes the legiſlator of the ſews. and what appears to be moſt uniform in the variety of their opinions ſeems to be derived from this ſource *, The more ancient atomiſts ſeem to have taught that there were living ſubſtances alſo, which pre-exiſted before the union of the ſyſtems of thoſe elementary corpuſcles, and continued to exiſt after their diſſolution. They ſaw the neceſſity of admiting active as well as paſſive principles, liſe as well as mechaniſm, throughout the world . But this entire and genuine philoſophy was diſmembered afterwards, and from an affectation of ſimplicity, or for other reaſons, one ſort of permanent ſubſtance was thought ſufficient. One party retained the paſſive and ſluggiſh matter only, and from the fortuitous concourſe of its corpuſcles pretended to explain the formation of the univerſec Others, more refined, aſcribed reality and permanency to active incorporeal ſubſtances chiefly, or only. And ſo ſimilar were their diviſions and diſputes to thoſe of our own times, that a third ſort ſeem to have rejected the reality of both, while they maintained that there was no ſtability of eſſence or knowledge any where to be found; that all being and knowledge was fantaſtical and relative only; that man was the meaſure of truth to himſelf in all things; and that every opinion or fancy of every one was true ?2. While one ſect thought that nothing was permanent, but that all things were in a continual flux or motion, and  They taught that nothing was made out of nothing, that no ſubſtance is generated or deſtroyed, that colour and taſte are not in the objects, &. which ſeem to be the genuine doctrines of this atomical philoſophy amongſt the Greeks. See æriſtot. de anima, Lib. III, Cap. I. who aſcribes ſuch opinions to moſt of the phyſiologers before his time. + See Dr. Cudorth's intellectual ſyſtem of the univerſe. Book I. Chap. I. I This was the dotrine of Protagora; the Abderite. Plat. Thætetus, &e, others, others, that all things conſiſted of one immoveable and infinite eſſence, it is no wonder that their ſucceſſors own themſelves at a loſs to underſtand their meaning ?. Oppoſition to each other ſeems to have driven them to extremes, and both aimed at too general and extenſive principles. As to the particular tenets of Thales, and his ſucceſſors of the Ionic ſchool, the ſum of what we learn from the imperfect accounts we have of them is, that each overthrew what his predeceſſor had advanced; and met with the ſame treatment himſelf from his ſucceſſor. One of. them ię ſaid to have made water the principle of all things;. another choſe air; a third fire; a fourth preferred earth; and ſome took them all in, and made thẽſe four the elements or principles of things. So early did the paſſion for ſyſtems begin, and diſputes in conſequence of ſuch precipitancy were unavoidable. 2. In the time of this uncertainty amongſt the phyſiologers (for ſuch all the more antient philoſophers were) Socrates appeared in the world. A ſublimity of genius, a ſimplicity of manners, a particular talent of inveſtigating truth and expoſing error, diſtinguiſhed this great man. In his youth he applied himſelf, as his predeceſſors had done, to natural nowledge, and endeavoured to reduce it to a method and principles. But after examining their ſchemes without receiving any ſatisfaction from them, he was too ſincere a lover of truth, and too juſt to manKind, to attempt to invent one of his own, or to diſſemble his ignorance of naturee. He ſaw that imaginary knowledge was the greateſt obſtruction to true ſcience, and made thoſe who were puffed u with ĩt very troubleſome to the lovers of ſolid learn-  Plat. Theætet. knowledge of final cauſes, than to attempt to derive a complete ſyſtem of the univerſe from the nature of the Deity, conſidered as the ſupreme efficient cauſe, or, after diſcarding mental and final cauſality, to reſolve all into mechaniſm and metaphyſical or material neceſſity. Surely this is the ſort of cauſes that is moſt clearly placed in our view; and we cannot comprehend why it ſould be thought arrogant in us, to atrend to the deſign and contrivance that is ſo evidently diſplayed in nature, and obvious to all men; to maintain, for inſtance, that the eye was made for ſeeing, tho we may not be able eſther to account mechancally for the refraction of light in the coats of the eye, or to explain how the image is propagated from the retina to the mind. Socrates, finding all dark and uncertain in the varicus ſyſtems of his predeceſſors, was ſatisfied that it was better to reſt contented with the general view of nature open to all, than adopt any one of them; and having applied himſelf to promote the practice as well as the theory of moral philoſophy amongſt his fellow-citizens, by his example and precepts, he merited the higheſt eſteem and admiration of manKind ?, Plato, however, and his followers, being ſenſible of the influence which natural knowledge * See Aul. Gellius, Lib. 6. ch. 10. where an extraordinary inſtance of this is given from Taurus a Platonic philoſopher. The Aihenians, upon ſome difference with the inhabitants of Megara, made it capital for any of them to enter Athens. Euclid of Megaro, after this edict, uſed to diſguiſe himſelf as a woman, and travel twenty miles in the night to hear Socrates. Whence Taurus takes occaſion to lament how much philoſophy was ſunk in eſteem in his time. Now, ſays he, ve ſee philoſophers run of their own accord to attend at the gates of the young and rich, and there ſit waiting to noon till their diſciples have ſiept out their laſt night's debauch. Diogenes Laertius, however, ſpeaks of a ſtranger who came 10 Aihens and found fault with Socrates in ſome things. muſt have on the moſt important truths, returned to it. The beauty of the univerſe was the favourite ſubject of the Platoniſts; and they uſed to recommend the contemplation and imitation of its regular and conſtant motions, by the practice of virtue, as the beſt means to recover their antient conformity with it in a prior ſtate, and to become worthy of returning to the ſame ſtate againn. While a ſect of the Atomiſts reſolved all things into the motions and modifications of matter, Plato ſtroye to raiſe the thoughts of men above the objects of ſenſe, and zealouſly maintained the pre-eminence of active incorporeal and intellectual beings. Theſe, according to him, are the true ſubſtances, the other the ſhadows; which laſt only, thoſe groſs philoſophers could perceive; as he who has his back towards the light ſees it not, or the bodies placed betwixt him and ĩt, but the images projected from them only *. He ſpeaks, however, ſometimes of the inſenſible particles of bodies, which can only be perceived by the mind and underſtanding, aſcribing different figures to them in the ſtyle of the atomical philoſophy . If he carried his fondneſs for his ideas too far, we muſt own, at leaſt, that he erred on the moſt innocent ſide of the queſtion, in oppoſition to the dangerous doctrines of Democritus and others. But however laudable the views of this amiable philoſopher may have been, ſurely the unintelligible myſtical doctrines of ſome of his followers ꝗ. ought to admoniſh us to be on our guard againſt exceſſes, even in a good cauſe. * Plato de republica, Lib. 7 & 10. 1 Plat. Timæus. 1 It were unneceſſary to cite here inſtances of the moſt profound myſticiſm from Plotinus, and other platoniſs. 3. In the mean time the followers of Pythagoras flouriſhed in Italy, and taught a philoſophy that does not appear to have been ſo much the reſult of their own obſervations, as to have been tranſplanted from the eaſt by their great maſter; who ſpent two and twenty years in thoſe parts, and ſcrupled not to compPly with the cuſtoms * moſt peculiar to the eaſtern nations, in order to obtain the freer acceſs to their learned men. And as he was a man of extraordinary qualities and at the moſt pains, ſo he ſeems to have been the moſt ſucceſsful of the ancients in getting acquainted with their philoſophy. We find that his followers taught the true account of the planetary motions, particularly that the earth moved daily on its own axis, and revolved annually round the ſun; and gave the ſame account of the comets which is agreeable to modern diſcoveries. They alſo taught that every ſtar was a world ſ;, and that each of them had ſomething correſponding to our earth, air, and water, in the vaſt expanſe. The moon particularly, according to them, was inhabited by larger and more beautiful animals than this globe. We find ſome hints concerning the gravitation of celeſtial bodies, in what is related of the doctrines of Thales and his ſucceſſors: but Pythagoras ſeems to have been better acquainted with it, and is ſuppoſed to have had a view to it, in what he taught concerning the harmony of the ſpheres s. * Fle was circumciſed in Egypt aſter the manner of the prieſts of that country, and is ſaid to have been the moſt graceſul perſon of his time. Clem. Alexandr. Strom. Lib. I. , 1 Ariſtot. Meteorol. Lib. I. cap. 6 Plutarch. de placitis philoſoph. Lib. III. cap æ. 1 Ibid. cap. 13, & 30. § Plin. Lib. II. cap. 22. Macrob. in ſomnium Sceip. Lib. II. cap. 1. See alſo Plutarch. de animal. procreatione, ẽ Timæo. 8ime marai SęorbyoI æpBuTaT òirã© bpyyara, uꝶæ Sò1, &c. to the end. A muſical chord gives the ſame notes as one double in length, when the tenſion or force with which the latter is ſtretched is quadruple: and the gravity of a planet is quadruple of the gravity of a planet at a double diſtance. In general, that any muſical chord may become uniſon to a leſſer chord of the ſame kind, its tenſion muſt be increaſed in the ſame proportion as the ſquare of its length is greater; and that the gravity of a planet may become equal to the gravity of another planet neærerto the fun, it muſt be increaſed in proportion as the ſquare of its diſtance from the ſun is greater. If therefore we ſhould ſuppoſe muſical chords extended from the ſun to each planet, that all theſe chords might become uniſon, it would be requiſite to increaſe or diminiſh their tenſions in the ſame proportions as would be ſufficient to render the gravities of the planets equal. And from the ſimilitude of thoſe proportions, the celebrated doctrine of the harmony of the ſpheres is ſuppoſcd to have been derived. As theſe doctrines of the Pythogoreans, concerning the diurnal and annual motions of the earth, the revolutions of the comets, the inhabitants of the moon and ſtars, and the harmony of the ſpheres, are very remote from the ſuggeſtions of ſenſe, and oppoſite to vulgar prejudices; ſo we cannot but ſuppoſe that they who firſt diſcovered them muſt have made a very conſiderable progreſs in aſtronomy and natural philoſophy. It is no eaſy matter to perſuade a perſon unacquainted with the true theory of motion, that the earth, which of all things in nature appears to be moſt fixed and ſtable, is carried on in ſuch a manner, and with ſo much rapidity, in the expanſec. To be ſatisfied of theſe doctrines, ſo as to reckon the earth amongſt the ſtars, and conſider the ſtars as ſo many worlds, one muſt have got over many difficulties from ſenſe, as well as from the religious prejudices that prevailed in thoſe days. When therefore we find the accounts of them given by the Greeks to be very imperfect, mixed with errors and miſrepreſentations, it ſeems reaſonable to ſuppoſe that they had ſome hints of them only from ſome more knowing nations who had made greater advances in philoſophy; and that they were able to deſcribe them perhaps not much better than we may imagine an ingenious Indian, after paſſing ſome years in Europe, and having had ſome acceſs to learned men, would repreſent our ſyſtems to his countrymen after his return. Hence it was that the Pythagereans do not ſeem to have been in a condirion to defend their doctrines, tho' true; and Ariſtotle refutes them with the appearance of reaſon on his ſidee What he ſays of their ſyſtem ſhews that either it was not deſcribed rightly by them, or that he miſunderſtood them. We are told that they taught that there was an earth oppoſite to our earth, and ſeveral other bodies revolving about the ſun which were concealed from us by the earth, and that from this, they explained why there were more eclipſes of the moon than of the ſun *. On this occaſion he urges againſt them a complaint, for which philoſophers have too often given ground,  That inſtead of ſuiting their s philoſophy to nature, they had miſrepreſented the t phænomena, that they might appear conformable c to their own ſuppoſitions But had he been  De cœlo, Iib. II. cap. 15. We may be the leſs ſurprized that the Greæts had ſo imperfect accounts of the eaſtern learning, if it be true that ſome of the moſt noted amongſ their philoſophers, travelled into Zg-7: from a very difſerent view than acquiring their philoſophy. Plaio's chieſ view is ſaid to have been to ſell his oil. better acquainted with the phænomena and this ſyſtem, he had formed a better judgment of it. At this time geometry was in high eſteem. We have reaſon to think that the fondneſs of the Pythaoreans and Platoniſis for it ſometimes miſted them, t inducing them to derive the myſteries of nature from ſuch analogies of figures and numbers as are not only unintelligible to us, but in ſome caſes ſeem not capable of any juſt explicationn. The uſe they made of the five regular ſolids in philoſophy is a remarkable inſtance of this, and muſt have been a very important part of their ſcheme, if we may depend upon the antient commentators on Euclid ; who tell us that he was a platonic philoſopher, and compoſed his excellent elements for the ſake of this doctrine. But as ĩt is a matter of pure ſpeculation, we cannot conceive that there can be any analogy between it and the conſtitution of nature; and they have not been ſucceſsful who have of late endeavoured to explain this analogy; as we ſhall have occaſion to ſhew afterwards, when we come to give ſome account of Keplers diſcoveries. Nor is this the only inſtance, where a purſuit of analogies and harmonies has led us into error, in philoſophy. Geometry can be of little uſe in it till data are collected to build on, and Lord Verulum has juſtly obſerved, Matheſin philoſophiam naturalem terminare debere, non generare aut procreare. 4. From Ariſtotles philoſophy we may learn, that the greaieſt penetration, without other helps, will ever be of leſs ſervice in enquiries into nature, than in metaphyſics and dialectics; where the force of genius may indeed atchieve wonders. Inſtead of the more antient ſyſtems, he introduced matter, form, and privation as the principles of all things: but it does not appear that this doctrine was of great uſe to him in natural philoſophy. He ſurpaſſcd all the other philoſophers, in ſtating the diviſions and definitions relating to his ſubjects, with peculiar accu. racy; yet ſome of his doctrines are ſo obſcurely expreſſed, according to the confeſſion of his moſt devoted diſciples, that tho' they took the utmoſt pains to diſcover his meaning (and ſome of them, as is reported, in a very extraordinary manner) they were not able to penetrate into it; and it is diſputed to this day what were his ſentiments on ſome of the moſt important ſubjects. He was enabled by the liberality of his pupil Alexander to make vaſt collections relating to the hiſtory of nature, at an immenſe expence, which have been often copied by natural hiſtorians ſince*. But in his general and theoretical writings concerning nature, tho his reaſonings may appear acute and ſubtle, the concluſions are commonly ſuch as are overthrown by later diſcoveries. How he deſcribed the Pythagorean doctrine concerning the two-fold motion of the earth, and endeavoured to refute it, we obſerved above: in one of the treatiſes that are aſcribed to him +, the author pretends to demonſtrate that the matter of the heavens is ungenerated, incorruptible, and ſubject to no alteration; and ſuppoſes the ſtars to be carried round the earth in ſolid orbs. In theſe doctrines he was generally followed, till Tycho by his obſervations, and Galileo by his arguments, expoſed their fallacy. Some have complained, that there is leſs mention of a Deity, in his - According to Pliny, Ariſtotle wrote fifty volumes concerning animals, and ſeveral thouſand perſons in Greece, and Aſia, by Alexander's orders, aſſiſted him in his enquiries. The expence is ſaid to have amounted to eighty talents. 1 De cœlo. extenſive and various works, than in moſt of the antient philoſophers; that IIl PI KOEMOT, (or, as ſome ſay it ought to be entitled, IIEPI IIANTOSR) excepted; which for this reaſon has been aſcribed to another author. But there are many who. judge this admirable piece to be Ariſiotl's; and Gaſſendus is of opinion that he compoſed it towards the end of his life, as the reſult of his moſt ſerious thoughts *. It may be obſerved in favour of this great philoſopher, that perhaps he did not intend his diſcoveries ſhould be well underſtood from his public writings; for we are told, that when his pupil * complained of his publiſing ſome of his treatiſes, he inſinuated, by his anſwer, that they would be underſtood by philoſophers only. Had we a more perfect account of his doctrines concerning forms and qualities, poſſibly they might appear in a better light: perhaps he meant only to aſſert, in oppoſition to that branch of the atomiſts who followed Democritus, that the phænomena of nature could not be accounted for from matter and motion only; but that the qualities of bodies ariſe from hidden powers acting variouſly on different combinations of the particles of matter, according to the laws eſtablilhed. The conduct of Calliſthenes, hom he recommended to Alexander to accompany him in his Aſiatic conqueſts, does great honour to Ariſtotle: A proſecution however, carried pn by the Athenian prieſts, obliged him to abandon their city, to avoid the fate of Socrates. Ariſtotle was for a long time called the Prince of Philoſophers; and poſſeſſed the moſt abſolute authority in the ſchools, not in Europe only, but even in ? De phyſiologia Epicuri. Africa, amongſt Mahometans as well as Chriſtians. They had tranſlations of his works in Perſia and at Samarcand; and no philoſopher ever acquircd ſo univerſal or ſo high an eſteem. His opinion was allowed to ſtand on a level with reaſon itſelf; nor was there any appeal from it admitted, the parties, in every diſpute, being obliged to ſew that their concluſions were no leſs conformable to Ariſtotle's doctrine than to truth. This, however, did not put an end to diſputes, but rather ſerved to multiply them; for neither was it eaſier to aſcertain his meaning than to come at the truth, nor was his doctrine conſiſtent with itſelf. It is not improper to have this ſlaviſh ſubjection of philoſophers in remembrance; becauſe an high eſteem for great men is apt to make us devoted to their opinions even in doubtful matters, and ſometimes in ſuch as are foreign to philoſophy. 5. We have already mentioned the Epicurean ſyſtem, and ſhall have occaſion frequently to make remarks upon it afterwardss. Whoever conſiders the extravagant doctrines of this ſect, and of the other Dogmatiſts, of whatever denomination, Peripatetics or Stoics, may admire ſome of them for their morality, and more for their eloquence, it having been their chief buſineſs to diſpute for their ſchemes and declaim upon them; but cannot be greatly ſurprized that, as to what relates to natural knowledge, fo many joined the ſceptics; and either maintained that it was impoſſible to diſcover truth, with ſome of them; or with others, that men were only in purſuit, not in poſſeſſion of it. The ſects, and ſubdiviſions of ſects, at length became ſo numerous, and their ſyſtems ſo various, that almoſt every perſon of any note addicted himſelf in ſome degree to philoſophy: for none could be at a loſs to find a ſect and doctrine ſuited to his taſte and inclination. But it does not appear that this great increaſe of philoſophers contributed much to the advancement of the ſcience, or did ſervice to truth: ſuch was their licentiouſneſs, and ſo great the variety of their opinions, that there has hardly appeared any doctrine, in later times, but may be ſupported by the authority of one or other of them. It has been juſtly obſerved that we may learn ſomething from the faults and miſtakes of others, in every art; but we do not find that the errors of one ſect in philoſophy ſerved to put others on their guard. The great maſters we have mentioned had given an unhappy example; and their ſucceſſors exceeded them in grafting one fiction upon another, to ſerve their purpoſes. Thus the Platoniſts became unintelligible myſtics, and the Peripatetics unwearied diſputants; while every ſect had its tale or ſcheme, magnified by the party, but condemned by all the reſt. When the antients, however, applied themſelves to conſider the heavens, or to collect the hiſtory of nature, they did rot loſe their labour; their obſervations, ſometimes, ſuggeſted to them imperfect views of the true cauſes which obtain in the univerſe: and we have reaſon to admire ſome hints of this kind that appear in ſeveral paſſages of their writings, and ſeem to be anticipations of ſome of the moſt valuable modern diſcoveriess But, generally ſpeaking, they indulged themſelves too much in abſtruſe fruitleſs diſquiſitions concerning the hidden eſſences of things, and ſought after a knowledęge that was not ſuited to the grounds they had to build on. As to their accounts of the ſyſtem of the world, the Pyihagorean doctrines were quite forgot, and the opinions of Ariſtotle and Eudoxus univerſally. prevailed. In proceſs of time great liberties were taken with nature, ſolid orbs and epicycles were multiplied, to anſwer every appearance, till the univerſe in their deſcriptions loſt its native beauty, and ſeemed reduced to a chaos again by their unhappy labours. It is not worth while, nor of uſe for our purpoſe, to trace the hiſtory of learning thro' ĩits various revolutions in the later ages, when philoſophy and philoſophers fell into contempt; when they became more diſtinguiſhed by their extravagant opinions, manners and temper *, than by any real knowledge and merit. How different they were, ſo early as m the times of the Cæſars, from the famous Pythagorean lawgivers, the incomparable Socrates, and others who adorned the firſt ages of philoſophy, we may learn from the picture given of them by Vacitus.  Nero, ſays this author, uſed to beſtow ſome time s after meals in hearing the reaſonings of different sc philoſophers, and while each maintained his own s ſect, and every one expreſly contradicted another, sthey all conſpired to expoſe their endleſs variance s and broils, as well as to diſplay their peculiar t and favourite opinions; nay, there were ſome of sc thoſe ſolemn maſters of wiſdom, highly fond of s being ſeen with their gloomy aſpect and rigid acs cent, amidſt the royal exceſſes and recreations of s Nero tV. * Sapientiam capillis et habitu jactant, ſays Lactantius ſpeaking of them. See alſo the complaint of Taurus the philoſopher, cited from Aul. Gellius above in the notes on § 2. of this chapter. t Tacit, annal. lib 1i4. We have ſaid nothing of the Chineſe, for thoo no nation has applied to aſtronomy for ſo long a time, or with ſo much encouragement from the public, they ſeem to have made little progreſs, by the accounts we have of them: this may be aſcribed, in part at leaſt, to their neglect of geometry (without which iĩt is impoſſible to make great advances in altronomy) and their having no correſpondence with other nations. But the ſtate of learning proved ſtill more deplorable in a later period; that ought to be remembered, becauſe it diſcovers to us the moſt cruel enemy to true philoſophy. Twas ſometime after the fall of the Roman empire, when the majeſty and policy of that people had given way to Gotbic barbarity, that ſuperſtition reigned uncontrouled, liberty of enquiry was proſcribed, and a ſavage zeal ſought to root out the memory of antient learning, by deſtroying the records of it, the ineſtimable product of the labours of paſt times. The fatal ſcheme proved but too ſucceſsful, for ſoon a thick cloud ſeems to have darkened the underſtandings of men, and to have almoſt extinguiſned their natural faculties; in ſo much that a part of the ſucceeding times obtained the appellation of the leaden ages, as worſe than the iron age of the poets. Authority for a long time uſurped the place of reaſon, and, under the abuſed pretence of making them more ſubmiſſive to heaven, mankind were enſlaved and degraded. Here and there ſome appeared worthy of better times; but theſe were obliged to conform to the genius of that barbarous age: if they applied to true philoſophy, it was either in a private and myſterious manner, or their abilities and merit ſerved only to provoke ſevere and cruel treatment from their bigotted cotemporaries. This was the fate of the famous Roger Bacon, who appears to have made ſurprizing advances in natural knowledge, for thoſe times, and ſeems to have been acquainted with ſome inventions that are moſt commonly ſuppoſed to bqę of a later date. Learning, neglected and deſpiſed in Europe, found a ſanctuary amongiſt the Saracens, to whom we are preſervation of ſome of the works of the antients. They had ſo great a value for theſe, that it was uſual with them to demand copĩes of them, by particular articles, in their treaties with the Gree emperors; tho they had deſtroyed an ineſtimable treaſure of this kind, at Alexandria, in their firſt conqueſts. The caliph Almaimon is celebrated for encouraging aſtronomical learning, erecting a great number of obſervatories over his dominions, and providing them with inſtruments of a prodigious ſize. By his order, a degree of the circle of the earth, was, firſt, meaſured with exactneſs, as far as ve know. But, at length, their philoſophers ſeem to have devoted themſelves abſolutely to Ariſtotle, in no leſs ſlaviſh a manner than the Europeans; and to a talkative philoſophy that ſerved only to produce endleſs diſputes. The cloud was, at length, gradually diſpelld in Europe: the active genius of man could not be enſlaved for ever. The love of knowledge revived, the remains of antient learning, that had eſcaped the wreck of the dark ages, were diligently ſought after; the liberal arts and ſciences were reſtored, and none of them has gained more by this happy revo]ution than natural philoſophy. C H A P. III Of ihe modern philoſophers before Des Cartes. 1. THE revolutions of learning were compared, by Ariſtotle, to the riſing and ſetting of the ſtars; and Pliny ſpeaks of four periods of ĩt that preceded his time, the Egyptian, Aſyrian, Chaldean, and Gretian. Learning, after it was once loſt of the produce of three of thoſe periods, there is little or nothing left. The weſtern parts of Europe have been more happy. After a long interval, learning has returned to them; and the period which commenced upon the revolution we have mentioned, has already continued ſome hundred years. It was uſhered in by ſeveral inventions of the greateſt uſe. If we may judge from theſe, from the valuable diſcoveries that have been made in its progreſs, and from thoſe which learned men are ſtill in purſuit of, (which afford matter for their enquiries, and at the ſame time keep up their curioſity and expectation) we may juſtly hope that it will be long ere it comes to an end: and if it ſhould likewiſe have its termination, it cannot, however, but be ever memorable in the hiſtory of learning, in future times; unleſs a general oblivion overwhelm all memory and record. The invention of convex and concave glaſſes was as old as the thirteenth century, tho no one thought of putting two of them together to make a teleſcope, till three hundred years later. Upon which it has been juſtly obſerved, that thoſe things which we handle daily may have valuable properties altogether unknown to us, which chance, or future tryals, may diſcover. The polarity of the magnetic needle, which was made uſe of in navigation early in the fourteenth century (if not ſooner) facilitated the correſpondence between diſtinct nations, and conducted Columbus to the diſcovery of the new world. It is obvious how advantageous to learning the art of printing has proved, which we owe to the ſame century. Theſe, with ſeveral other new and ſurprizing inventions, produced a great change in the affairs of the world; and a ſpirit of reformation ſoon ſhewed Chap. 3. PHILOSOPHICAL DiSCcovERIES. 43 itſelf, in every thing that had any connexion with the arts and ſciences. 2. Peurbachius, with his ſcholar Regiomontanus and others, revived aſtronomical learning, in the fourteenth century. The celebrated Copernicus (who was born at Thorn in Pruſſia in 1473) ſucceeded them,  a man, ſays Kepler *, of a vaſt genius, and  what is of great moment in theſe matters, of a  free mind. When he conſidered the form, diſpoſition and motions of the ſyſtem, as they were then repreſented after Ptolemy, he found the whole void oſ order, ſymmetry and proportion; like a piece (as he expreſſes himſelf) made up of parts copied from different originals, which not fitting each other, ſhould rather repreſent a monſter than a man. He therefore peruſed the writings of the antient philoſophers, to ſee whether any more rational account had ever been propoſed of the motions of the heavens. The firſt hint he had was from Cicero, who tells us, in his academical queſtions (book 4.) that Nicetas a Syracuſian had taught that the earth turned round on its axis, which made the whole heavens to appear to a ſpectator on the earth to turn round it daily. Afterwards, from Plutarch, he found that Philolaus the Pythagorean had taught that the earth moved annually round the ſun. He immediately perceived that, by allowing theſe two motions, all the perplexity, diſorder and confuſion, he had complained of in the celeſtial motions, vaniſhed, and that, inſtead of theſe, a ſimple regular diſpoſition of the orbits, and a harmony of the motions appeared, worthy of the great author of the world. % Prefatio ad Paulum III. pontiſ. max. T De placitis philoſophorum, lib. 3. cap. 13. Twas ſoon after the yvear 1500 he began to form this judgment of the ſyſtem, in his own thoughts: but being ſenſible how ill it would be received by the generality of men, and even of the learned of that time, he could not be induced to publiſh his account of the ccleſtial motions, for more than thirty years. He had a great inclination, as he tells us, to have followed the manner of the Pythagoreans, who would not publiſh their myſteries to the world, but choſe rather to deliver them from hand to hand to poſterity; not that they envied others the knowledge of them, but that the beautiful diſcoveries of great men, the fruit of all their labours, might not become the ſport of the preſumptuous and ignorant. It was not without the greateſt ſollicitations, and much ſtruggling on his part, that at length he gave his papers to his friends, with permiſſion to publiſh them; and he lived only to ſee a copy of his book in 1543, a few hours before his death. In this treatiſe, he reſtores the antient Pythagorean ſyſtem, and deduces the appearances of the celeſtial motions from it. Every age ſince has produced new arguments for it; and, notwithſtanding the oppoſition it met with, from the prejudices of ſenſe againſt the earths motion, the authority of Ariſtotle in the ſchools, the threats of ignorant bigots, and the terror of the inquiſition, it has gradually prevailed. The chief argument that had induced Ariſtotle, and his followers, to conſider the earth as the centre of the univerſe, was that all bodies have a tendency towards the centre of the earth. In anſ7er to this, Copernicus* obſerved, that it was reaſonable to think there * Equidem exiſtimo gravitatem non aliud eſſe quam appetentiam quandam naturalem, partibus inditam a divina providentia there was nothing peculiar to the earth in this principle of gravity; that the parts of the ſun, moon, and ſtars, tended likewiſe to each other, and that their ſpherical figure was preſerved in their various motions by this power. Thus every ſtep in true knowledge gives a glimpſe or faint view of what lies next beyond it, tho yet unrevealed, in the ſcale of nature. 3. The reſtoration of the Pythagorean ſyſtem was a ſtep of the urmoſt importance in true philoſophy, and paved the way for greater diſcoveries; but the minds of men were not ſufficiently prepared for it, at that time. A juſt account of the theory of motion was wanting to make them ſenſible of its ſimplicity and beauty, and to enable them to reſolve, in a ſatisfactory manner, the obvious arguments that appeared againſt it. According to Copernicus, the earth revolved onits axis, with a rapid motion, from weſt to eaſt. It was objected, that ſuch a motion could not but have ſenſible effects on many occaſions; that a ſtone, for inſtance, dropd from the ſummit of a tower, ought to ſtrike the ground, not at the foot of the tower, but at a diſtance weſtward, according to this doctrine; the tower being carried, by the diurnal motion, towards the eaſt, while the ſtone was falling. In anſwer to this, the motion of the earth was compared to the uniform progreſſive motion of a ſhip at ſea; and it was aſfirmed, that a ſtone dropd from the top of the maſt would ſtrike the deck at the foot of ĩt, tho the ſhip was under opiſicis univerſorum, ut in unitatem integritatemque ſuam ſeſe conferant, in formam globi coeuntes. Quam affectionem credibile eſt etiam ſoli, lunæ, cæteriſq; errantium fulgoribus, ineſſe, ut ejus eflicaciã in eãà qua ſe repreſentant rotunditate permaneant; quæ nihilominus multis modis ſuos efficiunt circuitus. Nicęl. Copernici revol. lib. 1. cap. ę. ſail, and advanced at a great rate while the ſtone was falling. This experimtnt is now beyond all queſtion: but ſome, who tried it without due care and attention, having reported to Tycho Brabe that it had not ſucceeded *, this, with a miſtaken Zeal for the ſacred writings, and perhaps an ambition of being the inventor of a new ſyſtem, induced him to reject the doctrine of Copernicus, and propoſe a middle ſcheme. Tycho was too well acquainted with the planetary motions to ſuppoſe their centre any where elſe than in the ſun; but that the earth might be quieſcent, he ſuppoſed the ſun, with all the planets, to be carried annually around it, while theſe, by their proper motions, revolved about the ſun in their ſeveral periods. Having rejected the diurnal rotation of the earth on its axis, hę was obliged to retain the moſt ſhocking part of the Ptolemaict ſyſtem, and to ſuppoſe that the whole univerſe, to its fartheſt viſible limits, was carried, by the primum mobile, about the axis of the earth every day. In this, however, he was abandoned by ſome of his followers, who choſe rather to ſave this immenſe labour to all the ſpheres, by aſcribing the diurnal motion to the earth, with Copernicus; and therefore were called Semi-Tychonics. Tho this noble Dane was not happy in eſtabliſhing a new ſyſtem, he did great ſervice, however, to aſtronomy, by his diligence and exactneſs in making obſervations, for a long ſeries of years. He diſcovered the refraction of the air, and determined the places of a great number of the fixed ſtars, with an accuracy unknown to the aſtronomers of former times. He demonſtrated that the comets were higher than the moon, from their having a very ſmall parallax, againſt the opinion which then pre* vailed. He diſcovered what ĩs called the variation in the motion of the moon; and, from his ſeries of obſervations on the other planets, the theories of their motions were afterwards corrected and improved. For theſe ſervices he will be always celebrated by aſtronomers. 4. Towards the latter end of the ſixteenth century, and about the beginning of the next, Galileo and Kepler diſtinguiſhed themſelves in the defence of the Copernican ſyſtem, and by many new diſcoveries in the ſyſtem of the world. The excellent Galileo was no leſs happy in his philoſophical enquiries, than in the celebrated diſcoveriecs which he made in the heavens, by the teleſcope. To the admirable Xepler we owe the diſcovery of the true figure of the orbits, and the proportions of the motions of the ſolar ſyſlem: but the philoſophical improvement of theſe phænomena was reſerved for Sir Iſaac Newton. Kepler had a particular paſſion for finding analogics and harmonies in nature, after the mnner or the Pythagoreans and Platoniſts; and to this diſpoſition we owe ſuch valuable diſcoveries as are more than ſufficient to excuſe his conceĩtss. Three things, he tells us, he anxiouſly ſought to find the reaſon of, from his early youth; why the planets were ſix in number, why the dimenſions of their orbits were ſuch as Copernicus had deſcribed from obſervations, and what was the analogy or law of their revolutions. He ſought for the reaſons of the firſt two of theſe in the properties of numbers and plane figurer, without ſucceſs. But at length reflecting that while the plane regular figures may be infinite in number, the ordinate and regular ſolids are five only, as Euclid had long ago demonſtrated; he imagined that certain myſteries in nature might correſpond with this remarkable limitation inherent in the eſſences of things; the rather that he found the Pythagoreans had made great uſe of thoſe five regular ſolids in their philoſophy. He therefore endeavoured to find ſome relation betveen the dimenſions of thoſe ſolids and the intervals of the planetary ſpheres; and imagining that a cube inſcribed in the ſphere of Saturn would touch by its ſix planes the ſphere of Jupiter, and that the other four regular ſolids in like manner fitted the intervals that are betwixt the ſpheres of the other planets, he became perſuaded that this was the true reaſlon why the primary planets were preciſely ſix in number, and that the Author of the world had determined their diſtances from the ſur, the center of the ſyſtem, from a regard to this analogy. Being thus poſſeſſed, as he thought, of the grand ſecret of the Pythagoreans, and being mightily pleaſed with his diſcovery, he publimed it in 1596, under the title of Myſterium Coſimographicumm. Kepler ſent a copy of this book to Tycho Brabe, who did not approve of thoſe abſtracted ſpeculations concerning the ſyſtem of the world, but wrote to Kepler, firſt to lay a ſolid foundation in obſervations, and then, by aſcending from them, to ſtrive to come at the cauſes of things. This excellent advice, to which we owe the more ſolid diſcoveries of Kepler, deſerves to be copied from his owvn account of it *.  Argumentum literarum Brachei (ſays he) hoc e erat, uti ſuſpenſis ſpeculationibus a priori de-  ſcendentibus, animum potius ad obſervationes,  quas ſimul offerebat, conſiderandas adjicerem.  Inque iis primo ęradu facto, poſt demum, ad * Notæ in editionem ſecundam M; ſterii Coſmographici. Chap. 3. PHILOSOPHICAL DiSCOVERIES. 51 s cauſas aſcenderem. In this judgment the great men of different times have frequently conſpired, but few have faithfully followed it. Tycho however, pleaſed with his genius, prevailed with epler to reſide with him near Prague (where he paſſed the laſt years of his life, aſter having left his native country on ſome ill ufage) and to aſſiſt him in his aſtronomical labours. Soon after this Tycho died, but Xepler made many important diſcoveries from his obſervations: he found that aſtronomers had erred, from the firſt riſe of the ſcience, in aſcribing always circular orbits and uniform motions to the planets; that each of them moves in an ellipſis which has one of its foci in the center of the ſun; that the motion of each is really unequable; and varies ſo, that a ray ſuppoſed to be always drawn from the planet to the ſun deſcribes equal areas in equal times. It was ſome years later before he diſcovęred the analogy there is between the diſtances of the ſeveral planets from the ſun, and the periods in which they complete their revolutions; He eaſily ſaw that the higher planets not only moved in greater circles, but alſo more ſlowly than the nearer ones; ſo that, on a double account, their periodic times were greater; Saturn, for example, revolves at a diſtance from the ſun nine times and a half greater than the eerths diſtance from it; and the circle deſcribed by Saturn is in the ſame proportion; and as the earth revolves in one year, ſo, if their velocities were equal, Saturn ought to revolve in nine vears and a half; whereas the periodic time of Satirn is above twentynine years. The periodic times of the planets increaſe, therefore, in a greater proportion than their diſtances from the ſun; but not in ſo great a proE portion as the ſquares of thoſe diſtances; for if that was the law of their motions (the ſquare of 9} being 90;) the periodic time of Saturn ought to be above 90 yearss. A mean proportion betwixt that of the diſtances of the planets, and that of the ſquares of thoſe diſtances, is the true proportion of the periodic times; as the mean betwixt 9; and its ſquare 90⸗ gives the periodic time of Saturn in years. Kepler, aſter having committed ſeveral miſtakes in determining this analogy, hit upon ĩt at laſt in 1618, May i15th, for he is ſo exact as to mention the preciſe day when he found, that  The ſquares  of the periodic times were always in the ſame  proportion as the cubes of their mean diſtances  from the ſun.” This is only a very brief and ſummary account of the fruits of his great labours for many years on the obſervations made by Tycho*. When Kepler ſaw that his diſpoſition of the five regular ſolids amongſt the planetary ſpheres was not agreeable to the intervals between their orbits, according to better obſervations, he endeavoured to diſcover other ſchemes of harmony. For this purpoſe, he compared the motions of the ſame planet at its greateſt and Ieaſt diſtances, and of the different planets in their ſeveral orbits, as they would appear viewed from the ſun; and here he fancied that he found a ſimilitude to the diviſions of the octave in muſicc. Theſe were the dreams of this ingenious man, of which he was ſo fond, that, hearing oſr the diſcovery of four nev planets (the ſatellites of jupiter) by Galileo, he owns that his firſt reflections were from a concern how he could ſave his favourite ſcheme, which was threatned * See his Tabulæ Rudolphinæ, and Comment. de ſtellà Martis. by this addition to the number of the planets *. The ſame attachment led him into a wrong judgment of the ſphere of the fixed ſtars +: for being obliged, by his doctrine, to allow a vaſt ſuperiority to the ſun in the univerſe, he reſtrains the fixed ſtars within very narrow limits. Nor did he conſider them as ſuns, placed in the centers of their ſeveral ſyſtems, having planets revolving round them; as the other followers of Copernicus, from their having light in themſelves, their immenſe diſtances, and from the analogy of nature, have concluded them to be. Not contented with theſe harmonies, which he had learned from the obſervations of Tycho, he gave himſelf the liberty to imagine ſeveral other analogies, that have no foundation in nature, and are overthrown by the beſt obſervations. Thus from the opinions of Kepler, th moſt juſtly admired, we are taught the danger of eſpouſing principles, or hypotheſes, borrowed from abſtracted ſciences, and of applying them, with ſuch liberty, to natural enquiries. A more recent inſtance of this fondneſs, for diſcovering analogies between matters of abſtracted ſpeculation and the conſtitution of nature, we find in Huygens, one of the greateſt geometricians and aſtronomers any age has produced: vhen he had diſcovered that ſatellite of Saturn, which, from him, is ſtill called the Huygenian ſatellite, this, with our moon, and the four ſatellites of Jupiter, completed the number of ſix ſecondary planets then diſcovered in the ſyſtem: and, becauſe the number of the primary planets is alſo ſix, and this number is called by mathematicians a perfect number, (being equal to * Diſſert. cum nuncio ſidereo. + Epitome Aſtronomiæ, lib. 4. part. I. the ſum oſ its aliquot parts, 1, 2, and 3,*) Huygens was hence induced to believe that the number of the planets was complete, and that it was in vain to look for any more t. We do not mention this to leſſen this great man, who never perhaps reãſoned in ſuch a manner on any other occaſion; but only to ſhew, by another inſtance, how ill-grounded reaſonings of this kind have always proved: for, not long after, the celebrated Caſſini diſcovered four more ſatellites about Saturn; ſo that the number of ſecondary planets now known in the ſyſtem is ten. The ſame Caſſini having found that the analogy, diſcovered by Kepler, between the periodic times and the diſtances from the center, takes place in the leſſer ſyſtems of Jupiter and Saturn, as well as in the great ſolar ſyſtem; his obſervations overturned that groundleſs analogy which had been imagined between the number of the planets, both primary and ſecondary, and the number ſix; but eſtabliſhed, at the ſame time, that harmony in their motions, which will, afterwards, appear to flow from one real principle extended over the univerſe. 5. But to return to Kepler, his great ſagacity, and continual meditation on the planetary motions, ſuggeſted to him ſome views of the true principles from which theſe motions flow. In his preface to the commentaries concerning the planet Mars, he ſpeaks of gravity as of a power that was mutual betwixt bodies, and tells us that the earth and moon tend towards each other, and would meet in a point ſo many times nearer to the earth than to the moon, as the carth is greater than the moon, if their motions did not hinder itt. He adds, that the tides e Elem Euclid. lib. 7. defin. ult. t See the dedication of his Syſtema Saturnium. ariſe from the gravity of the waters towards the moon. But not hàving juſt enough notions of the laws of motion, he does not ſeem to have been able to make the beſt uſe of theſe thoughts; nor does he appear to have adhered to them ſteadily, ſince in his epitome of aſtronomy, publiſhed eleven years after, he propoſes a phyſical account of the planetary motions, derived from different principles. He ſuppoſes, in that treatiſe, that the motion of the ſun on his axis is preſerved by ſome inherent vital principle; that a certain virtue, or immaterial image of the ſun, is diffuſed with his rays into the ambient ſpaces, and, revolving with the body of the ſun on his axis, takes hold of the planets and carries them along with it in the ſame direction; as a load-ſtone turned round in the neighbourhood of a magnetic needle makes it turn round at the ſame time. The planet, according to him, by its inertia endeavours to continue in ĩts place, and the action of the ſuns image and this inertia are in a perpetual ſtruggle. He adds, that this action of the ſun, like to his light, decreaſes as the diſtance increaſes; and therefore moves the ſame planet with greater celerity when nearer the ſun, than at a greater diſtancec. To account for the planets approaching towards the ſun as it deſcends from the aphelium to the peribelium, and receding from the ſun while it aſcends to the aphelium again, he ſuppoſes that the ſun attracts one part of each planet, and repells the oppoſite part; and that the part which is attracted is turned towards the ſun in the deſcent, and that the other part is towards the ſun in the aſcent. By ſuppoſitions of this kind, he endeavoured to account tor all the other varieties of the celeſtial motions. Now the laws of motion are better known than in Kepler's time, it is eaſy to ſhew the fallacy of every part of this account of the planetary revolutions. The planet. dors not endeavour to ſtop in its place in conſequence cf its inertia, but to perſevere in its motion in a right line. An attractive force makes it deſcend from the aphelium to the peribelium in a curve concave towards the ſun: but the repelling force, which he ſuppoſed to begin at the peribelium, would cauſe iĩt to aſcend in a figure convex towards the ſun. We ſhall have occaſion to ſhew afterwards, from Sir Iſaoc Newton, how an attraction or gravitation towards the ſun, alone, produces the effects, which, according to Kepler, required both an attractive and repelling force; and that the virtue which he aſcribed to the ſun's image, propagated into the planetary regions, is unneceſſary, as it could be of no uſe for this effect tho' it were admittedc For now his own prophecy, with which he concludes his book *, is verified; where he tells us that æ the diſcovery of ſuch things was reſerved for the ſuc-  ceeding age, when the Author of nature would s be pleaſed to reveal thoſe myſteries.” 6. In the mean time, Galileo made ſurprizing diſcoveries in the heavens by the teleſcope, an inſtrument inventerd in that time; and, by applying geometry to the doctrine of motion, began to eſtabliſn natural philoſophy on a ſure foundationn. He made the evidence of the Copernican ſyſtem more ſenſible, when he ſhewed from the phaſes of Venus, ]ike to the monthly phaſes of the moon, that Venus actually revolves about the ſun. He proved the ' Hæc et cætera hujuſmodi latent in pandectis ævi ſequentis, non antea diſcenda quam librum hunc Deus arbiter ſeculorum recluſerit mortulibus. æpit. Aſtron, revolution of the ſun on his axis, from his ſpots; and thence the diurnal rotation of the earth became more crediblee The four ſatellites that attend Vupiter in his revolution about the ſun, repreſented, in Yupiters leſſcr ſyſtem, a juſt image of the great ſolar ſyſtem; and rendered it more eaſy to conceive how the moon might attend the earth, as a ſatellite, in her annual revolution. By diſcovering hills and cavities in the moon, and ſpots in the ſun conſtantly varying, he ſhewed that there was not ſo great a difference between the celeſtial and ſublunary bodies as the philoſophers had vainly imagined*. He did no leſs ſervice by treating, in a clear and geometrical manner, the doctrine of motion, which has been juſtly called the key of naturee The rational part of mechanics had been ſo much neglected, that there was hardly any improvement made in it, from the time of the incomparable Archimedes to that of Galileo; but this laſt named author has given us fully the theory of equable motions, and of ſuch as are uniformly accelerated or retarded, and of theſe two compounded together. He, firſt, demonſtrated, that the ſpaces deſcribed by heavy bodies from the beginning of their deſcent are as the ſquares of the times, and that a body, projected in any direction that is not perpendicular to the horizon, deſcribes a parabola. Theſe were the beginnings of the doctrine of the motion of heavy bodies, which * Galil?o obſerved ſomething very extraordinary about Saturn, which he imagined to be two Satellites almoſt in contact with his body; and Des Cartes fancied theſe two Satellites were quieſcent in his vortex, hecauſe (as he ſuppoſed) Saturn did not turn round on his axis; but Huygens ſnewed that this appearance proceeded from a ring that encompaſſes his body, without touching it, and accompanies im in his revolution about the ſun. has been ſince carried to ſo great a height by Sir Iſaac Newton. He alſo diſcovered the gravity of the air, and endeavoured to compare it with that of water; and opened up ſeveral other enquiries in natural philoſophy. He was not eſteemd and followed by philoſophers only, but was honoured by perſons of the greateſt diſtinction of all nations. Des Cartes, indeed *, after commending him for applying geometry u phyſics, complains that he had not examined things in order, but had enquired into the reaſons of particular effects only; adding that, by his paſſing over the primary cauſes of nature, he had built without a foundation. He did not, tis true, take ſo high a flight as Des Cartes, or attempt ſo univerſal a ſyſtem; but this complaint, I doubt, muſt turn out to Galileo's praiſe; while the cenſure of Des Cartes ſnews that he had the weakneſs to be vain of the worſt part of his writings. But all the merit of this excellent philoſopher and elegant writer could not preſerve him from perſecution in his old age. Some pretended philoſophers, who had imprudently objected againſt his new diſcoveries in the heavens, when they found themſelves worſted and expoſed to ridicule, turned their hatred and reſentment againſt his perſon. He was obliged, by the rancour of the Jeſuits (astis ſaid ) and the weakneſs of his protector, to go to Rome, and there ſolemnly renounce the doctrine of the motion of the * Epiſtol. part 2. epiſt. -I. 1 Vir in omni mathematum parte ſummus Galileus Galilei, Jeſuitarum in ipſum odio, ac principis Thuſci ſub quo vixit ſogordi metu,; coactus ire Romam, ideo quod terram moviſſet, non vetante veſtro Hortenſio, durẽ habitus, ut majus vitaret malum, quaſi ab eccleſia edoctus, ſua ſcita reſcidit. Hug. Grotius in epiſiola ⸗ ad Voſſium, Lutet. 17. maii, 1655. earth, which he had argued for with ſo much ingenuity and evidence *. After this cruel uſage he wa* ſilent for ſome time, but not idle; for we have val able pieces of his of a later date. 7. Sir Francis Bacon Lord Verulam , who was cotemporary with Galileo and Kepler, is juſtly held amongſt the reſtorers of true learning, but more eſpecially the founder of experimental philoſophy. When he was but ſixteen years old, he began to diſlike the vulgar phyſics and what was called Ariſtotle's philoſophy. He ſaw there was a neceſſity for a thorough reformation in the way of treating natural knowledge, and that all theory was to be laid aſide that was not founded on experiment. He propoſed his plan in his inſtauratio maogna, with ſo much ſtrength of argument, and ſo juſt a Zeal, as renders that admirable work the delight of all who have a taſte for ſolid learning. He conſiders natural philoſophy as a vaſt pyramid, that ought to have the hiſtory of nature for its baſis; an account of the powers and principles that operate in nature, which he calls the phyſical part, for its ſecond ſtage; and the metaphyſical part, that treats of the formal and final cauſes of things, for its third ſtage. But as for the ſummit of this pyramid, the ſupreme of nature, opus quod operatur Deus a principio uſque ad finem, as he expreſſes it, he doubts if men can ever attain to the full knowledge of it. The philoſophers who ſtrive to erect theſe by the force of abſtract ſpeculation he compares to the * He was beſides condemned to a year's impriſonment in the inquiſition, and the penance of repeating daily ſome penitential pſalms. ; + He was born in 1560, Galileo in I 564. giants of old, who, according to the poets, endeavoured to throw mount Oſſa upon Pelion, and Olympus upon Oſa. An artiſt, ſays this noble author, would expoſe himſelf to the juſteſt ridicule, who, in order to raiſe ſome vaſt obeliſk, ſhould attempt it by the force of his arms, inſtead of employing the proper machines; or if, after finding himſelf unequal to the taſk, he ſhould call for the aid of more workmen in the ſame way. Would he appear leſs ridiculous if he ſhould next ſet about chuſing his men, and examining them carefully, that he might employ the vigorous and robuſt only? or if, after he found this was to no purpoſe, he ſhould then apply himſelf to ſtudy the athletic art, and learn to compoſe curious ointments for ſtrengthening their lIimbs, or conſult learned phyſicians, who, by proper medicaments, ſhould promote their health and vigour? Nor are they leſs abſurd, in our noble authors judgment, who labour to interpret nature by the force and ſubtlety of genius only, tho' they ſhould aſſume the aid of the acuteſt men in the ſame work, and carry the ſialectics or the art of reaſoning, to the greateſt height for this purpoſe. The empirical philoſophers, thoſe who have no higher view than to collect the hiſtory of nature, he compares to the ants, who gather the grain and lay it up as they find it (unleſs it be true, as is reported of them, that they firit take carè it ſhould not germinate or become fruitful;) the Sophiſts to the ſpiders, who form their webs from their own bowels, to catch unwary inſects in their acrial flights; while the bee that gathers the matter from the flowers of the field, from which with admirable ſkill ſne makes her honey, is the emblem of the true philoſopher; who neĩither truſts wholly to his own underſtanding, nor contents himſelf with recording the matter with which he is furniſhed from natural hiſtory or mechanical experiments; but, by reaſoning ſkilfully from them, brings forth truth and ſcience, the great and noble production of the human facultiess. From the neglect of experiments it aroſe, that while nature was infinite, natural knowledge was at a ſtand for many ages, and that the various ſects wandered in the dark, without kindling any light to guide them, or finding any path to conduct them in her mazes. But, from a happy conjunction of the experimental and rational faculties, Lord Verulam conceived the higheſt expectations. Alexander, he tells us, and Cæſar performed exploits that are truly greater than thoſe reported of king Artbur or Amadis de Gaul; tho they acted by natural means, without the aid of magic or prodigy. It was with great juſtice, and very ſeaſonably, he reprehended thoſe * who,  upon a weak conceit of  ſobriety, or ill-applied moderation, thought or  maintained that a man can ſearch too far, or be c too well ſtudied in the book of God’s word, or in c the book of God’s works. But rather, he adds,  Jet men awake themſclves, and chearfully endeac vour and purſue an endleſs progreſs and profi-  ciency in both; only let them beware leſt they  apply knowledge to pride, not to charity, to c oſtentation, not to uſe? He obſerves, that a ſuperficial taſte of philoſophy may perchance incline the mind to atheiſm; but a full draught thereof brings it back again to religion: in the entrance of philoſophy, when the ſecond cauſes moſt obvious to the ſenſes oſfer themſelves to the mind, we are apt La * Bacon's Advancement of Learning, lib. I. to cleave unto them, and dwell too much upon them, ſo as to forget what is ſuperior in naturee. But when we paſs further, and behold the dependency, continuation and confederacy of cauſes, and the works of providence, then, according to the allegory of the poets, we eaſily believe that the higheſt link of natures chain muſt needs be tied to the foot of upiters chair; or perceive  That philoſophy, like Facobs viſion, diſcovers to us a ladder, whoſe  top reaches up to the footſtool of the throne of cc God. The Ariſtotelian philoſophy appeared unſatisfactory to Lord Bacon, not from want of eſteem for its author, whom he always uſed to extol; but becauſe it ſeemed fit for diſputes only, and incapable of producing real fruit. Ariſtotle, he ſaid, had ſuited his phyſics to his logic, inſtead of giving ſuch a kind of logic as might be of real uſe in phyſics, To ſupply this defect, he compoſed his novum organum; where his chief deſign is to ſnew how to make a good induction, as Ariſtotl's was to teach how to make æ good ſyllogiſ/m. Had the philoſophers, ſince Lord Verulams time, adhered more cloſely to his plan, their ſucceſs had been greater; and Sir Iſaac Newtons philoſophy had not found the learned ſo full of prejudices againſt it, in favour of ſome ſyſtems lately invented and mightily extolled by ſpeculative men; that while all admired the ſublime geometry which ſhone throughout his work, few for ſome time appeared to be diſpoſed to hearken to his philoſophy, or in a condition to judge of it impartially. 8. However, Lord Bacon's exhortations and example had a good effect; and experimental philoſophy has been much more cultivated ſince his time 3. PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES. 63 than in any preceding period. Geometry and philoſophy advanced together at a great pace, and gave mutual aid to each other. The evidence of geometry began to take place in philoſophy, while all things were examined by number, weight, and meaſure; and the principles of the theory of motion, being now clearly underſtood, furniſhed excellent illuſtrations of the abſtruſe parts of geometry. Galileo had ſcholars worthy of ſo great a maſter, by whom the gravitation of the atmoſphere was eſtabliſhed fully, and its varying preſſure accurately and conveniently meaſured, by the column of quickſilver of equal weight ſuſtained by it in the barometrical tube. The elaſticity of the air, by which it perpetually endeavours to expand itſelf, and, while it admits of condenſation, reſiſts in proportion to its denſity, was a phænomenon of a new kind (the common fluids having no ſuch property) and of the utmoſt importance to philoſophy. Theſe principles opened up a vaſt field of new and uſeful knowledge, and explained a great variety of phænomena, which had been accounted for in an abſurd manner before that time. It ſeemd as if the air, the fluid in which men lived from the beginning, had been then firſt diſcovered. Philoſophers were every where buſy enquiring into its various properties and their eſfects; and valuable diſcoveries rewarded their induſtry. Of the great number who diſtinguiſhed themſelves on this occaſion, we cannot but mention Torricelli in Italy, Paſchal in France, Otto Guerict in Germany, and Boyle in England. The views of philoſophers began now to be mightily enlarged, not by their diſcoveries concerning the air only, but likewiſe by their enquiries into the more potent element fire and its effects, and into the chymical compoſition, reſolution, and changes of bodies. For about this time chymiſts began to ſpeak more intelligibly concerning their art, and to connect it in ſome degree with natural philoſophy, or to conſider it, at leaſt, as not quite foreign to it. This we owe in great meaſure to the honourable Mr. Boyle, whoſe favourite ſtudy chymiſtry is ſaid to have been, and who was happy in an eaſy and familiar manner of deſcribing the ſubjects which were treated by him. It muſt be owned that none ever took ſo great pains to promote natural knowledge, in all iĩts branches, or the beſt improvement that can be made of it, than this excellent perſon. It has been obſerved that he was born the ſame year that Lord Bacon died, as i he had been deſtind to carry on his plan. He ſpared no labour nor coſt in collecting the hiſtory of nature, and making curious and uſeful experiments of all ſortss. As Lord Bacon's plan comprehended the whole compaſs of nature, ſo the variety of enquiries proſecuted by Mr. Boyle, with great care and attention, is very ſurprizing, and perhaps not to be paralleldc Hydroſtatics, tho a moſt uſeful branch of mechanical philoſophy, had Lbeen but ill underſtood, till he eſtabliſhed its principles, and illuſtrated its paradoxes, by a number of plain experiments, in a ſatisfactory manner. The doctrine of the air afforded him an ample field; and, in all his reſearches, he ſnewed a genius happily turned for experimental philoſophy, with a perfect candour, and a regular condeſcenſion in examining with patience, and refuting, without oſtentation, the errors which philoſophers had been led into from their prejudices, and the many artful ſubterfuges by which they ſtrove to ſupport them. The unexceptionable integrity, extenſive charity, and ſingular piety of this excellent perſon did great honour to philoſophy, and formed an eminent part of his chãracter, The world he conſidered as the temple of God, and  c man (to uſe his own words) as born the prieſt of  nature, ordained (by being qualified) to celebrat:  divine ſervice, not only in it but for it? Not ſatisfied with having promoted the belief of a Deity and the evidence of true religion, to the utmoſt of his power, in the great number of volumes compoſed by him, on every occaſion during the courſe of a laborious life, he has taken care, by his will, to perpetuate a ſucceſſion of advocates for it, who ſould make the ſame improvement not of his diſcoveries only, or of thoſe of former times, but of what ſhould be produced by future ages. In this deſign, worthy of him, the ſucceſs has been anſwerable to his intentions; and ſurely ſuch a. man, we muſt alIow, was not an orhament to his own age and country only, but a publick beneſit to all times and nations. We are now arrived at the happy æra of experimental philoſophy; when men, having got into the right path, proſecuted uſeful knowledge; when their views of nature did honour to them, and the arts received daily improvements; when not private men only, but ſocieties of men, with united zeal, ingenuity and induſtry, proſecuted their enquiries into the ſecrets of nature, devoted to no ſect or ſyſtem. But we are obliged to abandon, at preſent, the agreeable taſk of following them in their diſcoveries, in this flouriſhing period of ſcience, to give account of a moſt illuſive ſcheme of ſpeculative philoſophy that prevailed amongſt many at this very time, and, by miſleading ingenious men, corrupted their notions and retarded their progreſs. It ſeems that, however  Bol?s Uſeſulneſs of Natural Philoſophy, part1. eſſay 3. this period was in new inventions, nature did not unveil herſelf readily enough to ſatisfy the impatience of ſome men, who could not be contented vith thoſe views of her which time and induſtry produced to them. Therefore they hearkened again to the vain promiſes of thoſe who pretended to unravel all her myſteries at once, by the force of their abſtracted ſpeculations. The Carteſian ſyſtem was the moſt extenſive, and (according to many) the moſt exquiſite in its contrivance, of any that have been imagined. The ãuthor of it was a bold philoſopher, and doubtleſs of a ſubtle genius, to indulge which he retired from the world for many years. He valued himſelf on his clear ideas; and is allowed to have contributed to diſſipate the darkneſs of that ſort of ſcience which prevailed in the ſchools. If we may believe ſome accounts, he rejected a void from a complaiſance to the taſte which then prevailed, againſt his own firſt ſentiments; and amongſt his familiar friends, uſed to call his ſyſtem his philoſophical romance. It had however great ſucceſs; and his doctrines ſtill prevail ſo much, that it is neceſſary for our purpoſe to give a ſhort account of them. CH AP. IV. Of the philoſophical principles of Des Cartes, 1he emendations of his followers, and the preſent controverſies in natural philoſophy. D E S Cartes begins his principia by ſhewing the neceſſity of doubting firſt of every thing, in order to our obtaining certain knowledge; and recommends to his reacers to conſider his reaſons for doubting of all things, not once only, but to employ weeks, or even months, on theſe alone, before he proceed farther. He firſt eſtabliſhes the certainty of our own exiſtence, and that of our ideas of which we are intimately conſcious to ourſelves; of the exiſtence of which, however, after all he has ſaid, it ſeems impoſſible for us to doubt for a momen:t. From our having the idea of a Being infinitely perfect and neceſſarily exiſting, he concludes that ſuch a Being actually is; upon whoſe will he makes the certainty of ſelf-evident propoſitions, or axioms æ, as well as of all other neceſſary truths, to depend. From the knowledge of the cauſe eſtabliſhed in this manner, he pretends to deduce a complete knowledge of his effects, by neceſſary ſteps. It is clear, ſays he }, that we ſhall follow the beſt method in philoſophy, if from our knowledge of the Deity himſelf, we endeavour to deduce an explicatſon of all his works; that ſo we may acquire the moſt perfect kind of ſcience, which is that of effects from their cauſes. As for final cauſes he rejected them from philoſophy, as we obſerved above; and from theſe paſſages, which repreſent the genius of this authors philoſophy, and from the manner in which he ſets out, ve may already form ſome judgment how hopeful his project was. From the veracity of the Deity, he infers the reality of material objects, which are repreſented to us as exiſting without us. He places the eſſence of matter in extenſion; for this alone remains, he ſays, * According to him, the Deity did not will that the three angles of a triangle ſould be equal to two right ones, becauſe he knew that it could not be otherwiſe; but, becauſe he would that the three angles of a triangle ſhould neceſſarily be equal to two right ones, therefore this is true and can be no otherwiſe. + See the paſſages cited above from his Principia, in the notes upon § 4, ch. I. when we reject hardneſs, colour, weight, heat and cold, and the other qualities which, we know, a Body can be without. Hence he eaſily concludes that there can be no void, or extenſion without matter. He adds, however, immediately afterwards, as properties of matter, that its parts are ſeparable and moveable; tho theſe ſeem o imply more than mere extenſion. He defines motion to be the tranſſtion of a body from the neighbourhood of other bodies that are in eontact with it, and are conſidered as quieſcent, to the neighbourhood of other bodies; and thus makes no diſtinction between abſolute or real, and relative or apparent motions; both of which equally agree to this definitionn. The reaſon he gives why the ſame quantity of motion muſt be preſerved for ever in the univerſe, without any augmentation or diminution in the whole, muſt appear conciſe, and very extraordimary. It is no other than that God muſt be ſuppoſed to act in the moſt conſtant and immutable manner. From the ſame property of the Deity, he infers that a body muſt continue in its ſtate as to reſt, motion, figure, &c. till ſome external influence produce a change; which is his firſt law of nature: that the direction of motion is naturally rectilinear, or that a body never changes its direction of itſelf; which is his ſecond Iaw: and that a body in motion, vhen it meets with another moving with a greater force, ĩs reflected without Ioſing any part of its firſt motion; but when it meets with a body moving with leſs force, it then carries this body along, and Ioſes as much motion as is transferred to it; and this is his third law of nature: He accounts for the hardneſs of bodies from their parts being quieſcent with reſpect to each other; and for fluidity, from their being moved perpetually in all directions. He concludes the ſecond part of his book with telling us, that theſe principles are ſuſficient for explaining all the phænomena of nature, and that no other ought to be admitted or even wiſhed for. He afterwards proceeds to ſhew how the univerſe might have aſſumed its preſent form, and may be for ever preſerved, by mechanical principless. He ſuppoſes the particles of matter to have been angular, ſo as to repleniſh ſpace without leaving any interſtices between them; and to have been in perpetual agitations, by which the angular parts being broke off, the particles themſelves became round, and formed what he calls the matter of the ſecond element. The angular parts, being ground into the moſt ſubtile particles of all, became the matter of his firſt element, and ſerved to fill all the pores of the other. But there being more of this firſt element than was neceſſary for that purpoſe, it became accumulated in the centers of the vortices, of which he imagined the univerſe to conſiſt, and formed there the bocdties of the ſun and ſtarss. The heavens were filled with the matter of the ſecond element, the medium of light. But the planets and comets conſiſted of a third element groſſer than the other two, the generation of which he traces at length through all its ſteps. According to him, the matter of the firſt element muſt have conſtantly flowed out through the interſtices between the ſpherical particles of the ſecond element, where the circular motion is greateſt, and muſt have returned continually at the poles of thi motion towards the centre of the vortex; where being apt to cohere together, they at length produced the groſſer particles of the third; and when theſe came to adhere in a conſiderable quantity, they gave riſe to the ſpots on the ſurfaces of the ſuns or ſtarss. Some being cruſted over with ſuch ſpots hecame planets or comets; and the force of their rotation becoming languid, their vortices were abſorbed by ſome more potent neighbouring vortex. In this manner the ſolar ſyſtem was formed, the vortices of the ſecondary planets having been abſorbed by the vortex of the primary, and all of them by that of the ſun. He contends that the parts of the folar vortex increaſe in denſity, but decreaſe in celerity, to a certain diſtance; beyond which he ſuppoſes all the particles to be equal in magnitude, but to increaſe in celerity as they are farther from the ſun. In thoſe upper regions of the vortex he places the comets; in the lower parts he ranges the planets; ſuppoſing thoſe that are more rare to be nearer the ſun, that they may correſpond to the denſity of the vortex where they are carried round. li He accounts for the gravity of terreſtrial bodies from the centrifugal force of the æther revolving round the earth; which, he imagined, muſt impell bodies downwards that have not ſo great a centrifugal force, much in the ſame manner as a fluid impells a body upwards that is immerged in it, and has a leſs ſpeciſical gravity than itt. He pretended to explain the phænomena of the magnet, and to account for every thing in nature, from the ſame principles. 2. There never was, perhaps, a more extravagant undertaking than ſuch an attempt, to deduce, by neceſſary conſequences, the whole fabric of nature, and a full explication of her phænomena, from any ideas we are able to form of an infinitely perfect Being. Was it not for the high reputation of the author, and of his ſyſtem, it would be hardly excuſable to make any remarks upon ſuch a rhapſody, Should we allow the principles he builds on, and his method, it muſt be obvious with how weak an evidence the conſequences arc connected with each other, in this viſionary chainn. How juſt a method he has taken to eſtabliſh the exiſtence and attributes of the Deity we ſhall not enquire, nor how far his making all truth and falſhood dependent on the will of the Deity tends to weaken all ſcience and confound its principles. While he ſuppoſes extenſion to conſtitute the complete eſſence of matter, he neglects ſolidity, and the inertia by which it reſiſts any change in its ſtate of motion or reſt; which diſtinguiſh body from ſpace. If extenſion be underſtood a0 be the eſſence of matter, it ĩs a trifling propoſition to affirm that all ſpace is full of matter, according to this definition. But ſtill the queſtion will remain, whether all ſpace is full of that ſolid, moveable and reſiſting ſubſtance commonly called body And as many parts of ſpace appear to make no ſenſible reſiſtance to motion, while others reſiſt variouſly in proportion to the denſity of the medium diffuſed over them, we thence learn there is ſpace void of what is commonly called matter. The comets which move vith equal freedom in all directions with very rapid motions, and carry along with them tails of a prodigious ſjze, conſiſting of ſome highly rarified matter, ſnew that the heavens are not repleniſhed with denſe fluids that admit no void. For it is evident in experimental philoſophy that the reſiſtance of ſluids increaſes, cæteris paribus, with their denſity; ſo that all motion would ſoon languiſh in a fluid, which, having no pores, muſt far ſurpaſ quickſilver, or the heavieſt] ſolids, in denſity. Nothing is more evident, than that the force requiſite to move two equal bodies with a given velocity, is double that which would produce the ſame celerity in eithor of themm,. When we compound greater bodies from leſſer, or when we reſolve them into their parts, we find that the reſiſtance or inertia increaſes or decreaſes in proportion to the quantity of matter. Therefore when the velocity is given, if a body moving in à denſer fluid diſplaces more matter to make way for itſelf, the reſiſtance which it meets with being equal to the motion communicated to the parts of the fluid, it muſt find a reſiſtance proportionally greater. SEEIt is not only from the free motions of the planets and comets that we learn the abſurdity of the doctrine of an univerſal plenitudee The moſt common and plain phænomena of the motion of bodies, at or near the ſurface of the earth, are ſuſficient to overthrow it; for we ſind that they meet with no ſenſible reſiſtance but from the air: whereas ſo denſe a fluid as would repleniſh all ſpace equally would neceſſarily produce a very great reſiſtance. l It is objected *, that by ſuppoſing this denſe fluid which repleniſhes ſpace to penetrate the pores of bodies with the utmoſt freedom, ſas light paſſes through tranſparent bodies, and the magnetic and electric effluvia through moſt kinds of bodies) its reſiſtance will then be incomparably leſs than in proportion to its denſity; for then the reſiſtance will not be meaſured by the denſity of the fluid, becauſe the much greater part paſſes through the pores of the body in motion, freely without refiſtancee Suppoſing this to be admitted, it is, however, obvious that; even in this hypotheſis, the reſiſtance of a golden ball in à plenum would be ſtill very great. For this ſubtle fluid, how penetrating ſoever it be, muſt reſiſt the  In a ſmall piece publiſed on this ſubject, a few years ago, by an ingenious gentleman. D ſolid parts of the ball; which cannot move in the fluid without diſplacing its parts, and loſing as much motion as muſt be communicated to thoſe parts; and this reſiſtance depends on the quantity of ſolid parts in the ball: whereas the reſiſtance which the ſame ball meets with in quick ſilver (which we ſuppoſe to have no paſſage through the ball) depends on the quantity of the ſolid parts in an equal bulk of the quick ſilver, which muſt be moved to make way for the bal. And this being leſs than the quantity of ſolid parts in an equal bulk of the golden ball, in proportion as the ſpecific gravity of quick ſilver is leſs than that of gold, it follows that the reſiſtance of a golden ball, moving in ſuch a ſubtile penetrating plenum, would ſtill be greater than its reſiſtance in quick ſilver. To illuitrate this farther, the ſpecific gravity of gold being to that of quick ſilver nearly as 195 to 140, ſuppoſe a golden ball conſiſting of 195 ſolid particles to move in the plenum with a given velocity, and to deſcribe a very ſmall ſpace; and then ſuppoſe the ſame ball to move in quick ſilver with the ſame velocity over the ſame ſpace; in the former caſe, the ſolid parts of the ball diſplace à certain quantity of the plenum, ſuppoſe a quantity equal to the ball, or 195 parts; in the latter caſe, they diſplace an equal bulk of the quick ſilver, that is, 140 ſolid particles. But becauſe it may be ſaid for thoſe who maintain an univerſal plenitude, that the golden ball meets with a reſiſtance from the ſubtile fluid that repleniſhes ſpace, while it moves in the quick ſilver, as well as from the quick ſilver itſelf; let this likewiſe be allowed, and let us even ſuppoſe it to meet with as much reſiſtance from the plenum, while it moves in the quick ſilver, as when it moves in a ſpace free from any groſs fluid; yet it will ſtill appear that the reſiſtance of the golden ball in the plenum ought to bear at leaſt as great a proportion to its reſiſtance in quick ſilver, as the denſity of gold is to the ſum of the denſities of gold and quick ſilver, or as 195 to 335, and conſequently ought to be eight times greater than iĩts reſiſtance in water. This is the leaſt reſiſtance ſuch a ball could meet vith in a plenum, ſhould we allow the ſuppoſitions that are moſt favourable in this doctrine; and this reſiſtance would ſoon put an end to the motions of bodies. But it is evident that we allowed too much in favour of their doctrine, when we ſuppoſed the ball moving in the quick ſilver to meet with a reſiſtance equal to the ſum of the reſiſtances that it would meet with from the alenum and quick ſilver ſeparately. For, according to this ſuppoſition, its reſiſtance in quick ſilver would be to its reſiſtance in water, as the ſum of the denſities of gold and quick ſilver to the ſum of the denſities of gold and water, that is, as 335 to 205, or 67 to 41; ſo that the reſiſtance of quick ſilver would not be double of that of water, or even double of that of air; than which nothing can be more contradictory to experiment. It is of no importancę to this argument how rare gold, quick ſilver, or the heavieſt bodies, be ſuppoſed; ſince the reſiſtance of quick ſilver in fact is known to be ver great, and is not altered by ſuch ſuppoſitions : neither is the proportion of the denſity of gold to that of quick ſilver (upon which proportion the argument is founded) affected by them. For it will always be found that the reſiſtance of ꝗ golden ball in a plenum (how freely ſoever it paſę through the pores of the ball, 2nd how large or numerous ſoever theſe pores may be) muſt correſpond to the ſolid matter in the ball; which iĩs greater than the ſolid matter in any equal bulk of any of our fluids; upon which their reſiſtance depends. The ſuppoſing the ſolid matter in the ick ſilver to occupy only the thouſandth or millionth part of its bulk, has no other effect but that it ſuppoſes the inertia of a given quantity of ſolid matter 10 be increaſed in the ſame proportion with the rarity of the quick ſilver, whoſe inertia is in fact aſcertained. The reſiſtance which ariſes from the tenacity or adheſion of the parts of fluids may be diminiſhed; but ſtill the reſiſtance which ariſes from the inertia of the matter remains: if this could be taken away, as the matter would have no reſiſtance, ſo it is not eaſy to conceive how it could have any activity or mechanical force to impel bodies, or to produce any of the effects which are attributed to the ſubtile matter of the Carteſians. For action and reaction are always equal, and we know of no force in bodies but what ariſes from their reſiſtance to change their ſtate, or their inertia. Without this there could be no centrifugal force, the favourite power by which thoſe philoſophers endeavour to explãain the phænomena of nature. They ſuppoſe the particles of thoſe ſubtile fluids to move conſtantly and equally in all directions; and, by the favour of this hypotheſis, they imagine that they may ſuppoſe them to act but not reſiſt. But they have neither made this ſtrange ſuppoſition probable, nor even credible, nor can they ſhew that it would anſwer their purpoſece A motion of a fluid favours the motion of a body in it, only as far as it is in the ſame direction; and an inteſtine motion of the parts of the fluid, equal in all directions, cannot make the reſiſtance leſs than if there was no motion of the parts. It is ſuppoſed by many that the particles of common fluids, water or air for example, are in a conſtant inteſtine motion; but this does not hinder thoſe fluids from reſiſting in proportion to their denſity. We are told by ſome, that it is impoſſible to conceive a vacuum. But this ſurely muſt proceed from their having imbibed Des Cartes's doctrine, that the eſſence of body is conſtituted by extenſion; as iũt would be contradictory to ſuppoſe ſpace without extenſion. To ſuppoſe that there are fluids penetrating 2ll bodies and repleniſhing ſpace, which neither reſiſt nor act upon bodies, merely in order to avoid the admitting a vacuum, is feigning two ſorts of matter, without any neceſſity or foundation; or is tacitly giving up the queſtion. As for Mr. Leibnitæ's arguments againſt a vacuum, we defer them till we come to conſider the emendations that have been made to this ſyſtem. The ſame quantity of motion is not always preſerved in the univerſe, as Des Cartes raſhly concluded from the immutability of the Deity. The quantity of abſolute motion is continually varying; it is diminiſhæd in the compoſition of motion, and, in many caſes, in the colliſions of bodies that have an imperfect elaſticity; and it is increaſed in the reſolution of motion, and, in ſome cales, in the colliſions of elaſtic bodies. It requires an active principle to account for the hardneſs of bodies; and the particles being at reſt is not ſufficient for this purpoſe; for this would not hinder them to be ſeparated from each other by the leaſt forcec. There is hardly one article in this ſcheme but what is, in like manner, liable to inſuperable difficulties. After all, Des Cartes ſaw the neceſſity of having recourſe to obſervation, tho unwillingly; and he appears to be at a loſs how to acknowledge it, after having boaſted ſo much of his principles. He tells us that he found theſe ſo extenſive and fertile *, that many more things followed from them than we find in the viſible world. Other philoſophers have complained that they were able to account for too little of nature: Des Cartos finds that his principles were more than ſufficient to account for all her phænomena, and ſeems only to fear leſt he ſhould account for too much. Therefore he has recourſe to the phænomena, not becauſe he would prove any thing from them; for he takes care that we ſhould not have ſo mean an opinion of his philoſophy, as to imagine he would eſtabliſh it on facts; but that he might be able to determine his mind to conſider ſome of thoſe innumerable effects, which he judged might proceed from the ſame cauſes, rather than others. He likewiſe acknowledges +, that the ſame effect might be deduced, from his principles, many different ways; and that nothing perplexed him more than to know which of them obtained in nature. In thoſe paſſages he magnifies his principles, in order to conceal the weakneſs of his ſyſtem, with an affectation that only ſerves to make it more evident, and appear unworthy of ſo great a man. 3. Des Cartes, by placing the eſſence of matter in extenſion alone, gave occaſion to others to draw * He cites the effects, as he tells us, Non quidem ut ipſis tanquam rationibus utamur ad aliquod probandum; cupimus enim rationes effectuum a cauſis, non autem e contrario cauſarum ab effectibus deducere; ſed tantum ut ex innumeris effæctibus, quos ab iiſdem cauſis produci poſſe judicamus, ad unos potius quam alios fonſiderandos mentem noſtram determinemus. + Sed confiteri me etiam oportet potentiam naturæ eſſe adeo amplam, ut nullum fere amplius particularem effectum obſervem, quem ſtatim variis modis ex iis principiis deduci poſſe non agnoſcam: nihilque ordinario mihi difficilius videri, quam invenire quo ex his modis inde dependet. De Methodo, § 6. conſequences, from this doctrine, of a dangerous nature; which undoubtedly he would have diſowned, ctho tis not eaſy to ſee how he could have got rid of them. As we are not able to conceive that ſpace can be annihilated, or that there ever was a time when ſpace or expanſion was not; ſo if we allow that extenſion alone conſtitutes the eſſence of matter, we cannot but aſcribe infinity, eternity, and neceſſary exiſtence to it. In this manner Spinoæa reaſons from the Carteſian principles, aſfirming that matter is not only infinite and neceſſary, but alſo that it is one and indiviſible ?.  This, ſays he, cannot be de-  nied by thoſe who reject the poſſibility of a vacuum;  for if matter could be ſo divided that its parts  ſhould be really diſtinct, why might not one part  be annihilated, the reſt remaining connected with  each other as before? ſince of things which are s really diſtinct from each other, the one can exiſt  and remain in its ſtate without the other. In another place, he tells us, that if any one part of matter was annihilated, all extenſion would vaniſh with it 7. This author appears to have been very con-  Nam ſi ſubſtantia corporea ita poſſet dividi ut ejus partes realiter diſtinctæ eſſent, cur ergo una pars non poſſet annihilari manentibus reliquis, ut ante, ĩnter ſe connexis ? Et cur omnes ĩta aptari debent ne detur vacuum? Sane, rerum quæ realiter ab invicem diſtin&tæ ſunt, una ſine aliã eſſe & in ſuo ſtatu manere poteſt. Cum ĩgitur vacuum in naturã non detur, ſed omnes partes ita concurrere debent ut detur vacuum, ſequitur hinc ætiam eaſdem non poſſe realiter diſtingui; hoc eſt, ſubſtantiam corpoream, quatenus ſubſtantia eſt, non poſſe dividi. Spinox. Ethic. part 1. prop. 15. ſchol. : Si una pars materiæ amihilaretur, ſimul etiam tota extenfio evaneſceret. Epiſi. 4. ad Henr. Oldenb. From theſe and other paſſages it appears, that this author was unhappily miſled by the doctrine of Des Cartes, that the eſſence of matter is conſtituted by extenſion. It muſt be owned, however, that many of the Carteſians endeavoured to wrangle away the dreadful concluſion: but they had ſhortned their woik, converſant in the writings of Des Cartes ĩ, the two firſt parts of whoſe principia he reduced into the geometrical form. Mr. Leibnitæ himſelf calls ſpinoZiſm un Carteſianiſme outrẽ; and it is apparent that his method, and many of his doctrines, were derived from this ſourte. As Des Cartes had concluded, from the idea of an infinitely perfect neceſſarily-exiſting Being, that ſuch a Being muſt exiſt; ſo Spinoæa, from our havin a true idea (that is a clear and diſtinct idea, às he himſelf explains it) of a ſubſtance, infers that it muſt neceſſarily exiſt*; or, to uſe his own words, that its exiſtence à5 well as its eſſence muſt be an eternal truth. As Des Cartes pretended to deduce all the phænomena of nature from the nature and properties of the firſt cauſe; ſo Spinoxa pretends, that all our knowledge is to be derived from true ideas ſ(as he always calls them) and that thoſe true ideas ought and had proceeded on better grounds, ĩf they had ręjected the principle. Yet Spinoæa, in his ſeventy-third letter, pretends to ſind fault with Des Cartes for defining matter by extenſion, which, according to him, ought to have been explained by an attribute that ſould expreſs an eſential and infinite eſſence. I Quum ille ſummo ſciendi amore arderet, quid in his ingeniĩ vires valerent experiri decrevit. Ad hoc propoſitum urgendum ſcripta philoſophica nobiliſimi & ſummi philoſophi Reæati Des Cartes magno ei fuetunt adjumento. pinox. oper. poſth. ræfat. : P * Si quis dicerit ſe claram & diſtinctam, hoc eſt veram, ideam ſubſtantiæ habere, & nihilominus dubitare num talis ſubſtantia exiſtat, idem herele eſſet ac ſi diceret ſe veram habere ideam, & nihilominus dubitare num falſa ſit (ut ſatis attendenti fit manifeſtum:) vel ſi quis ſtatuat ſubſtantiam creari, ſimul ſtatuit ideam falſam factam eſſe veram; quo ſane nihil abſurdius concipi potelt: adeoque fatendum neceſſario eſt, ſubſtantiæ exiſtentiam ficut ejus eſſentiam æternam eſſe veritatem. Eihic. part I. prop. 8, ſchol. 2. be produced by the mind +, from that idea which repreſents the moſt perfect Being, the origin and fountain of nature, Des Cartes rejected the conſideration of final cauſes from philoſophy; and Spinoza tells us they are nothing but human fiction ꝗ, and laughs at thoſe who imagine that the eyes were deſigned for ſeeing, or the ſun for giving lightt. He derives our notions of good and evil, order and confuſion, beauty and deformity, from the ſame ſource. As Des Cartes, repreſented the univerſe as a machine that might have been produced at firſt, and may continue to exiſt for ever, by mechanical laws only, the ſame quantity of motion remaining always in it unalterable; ſo Spinoæa repreſented it as infinite and neceſſary, endowed always with the ſame quantity of motion, or (to uſe his inaccurate expreſſion *) having always the ſame proportion of motion to reſt in it, and proceeding by an abſolute natural neceſſity; without any ſelf-mover or principle of liberty. In all theſe, Spinoæxa has added largely, from his own imagination, to what he had learned from + Ut mens. noſtra omnino referat naturæ exemplar, debet omnes ſuas ideas producere ab eà quæ refert originem & fontem totius naturæ, ut ipſa etiam ſit fons ceterarum idearum. pinoæ. de emendatione intellect. 1 Ut jam oſtendam naturam nullum ſibi finem præſixum habere, & omnes cauſas finales nihil niſi humana eſfe figmenta, non opus eſt multis, &c. Hoc adhuc addam, nempe hanc de fine doctrinam naturam omnino evertere, Append. prop. 36. part I. Eihic. lli ll  Omnia corpora ab aliis circumcinguntur, & ab invicem determinantur ad exiſtendum & operandum, certà ac determinatã ratione, ſervatà ſemper in omnibus ſimul, hoc eſt in toto univerſo, eàdem ratione motus ad quictem, æpiſt. 15.—Corpus motum vel quieſcens ad motum vel quietem determinari debuit ab alio corpore, quod etiam ad motum vel quietem determinatum fuit ab alio, & illud iterum ab alio, & ſic in infinitum. Eihic, part 2. prop. 13. lem. 3. Des Cartes. But from a compariſon of their method and principles, ve may beware of the danger of ſetting out in philoſophy in ſo high and preſumptuous a manner; while both pretend to deduce compleat ſyſtems from the clear or true ideas, which they imagined they had, of eternal eſſences and neceſſary cauſes. If we attend to the conſequences of ſuch principles, we ſhall the more willingly ſubmit to experimental philoſophy, as the only ſort that is ſuited to our faculties. It were unreaſonable to charge upon Des Cartes the impious conſequences which Spinoæa may have been led into from his principles: but we cannot but obſerve, to the honour of Sir Iſaac Newton's philoſophy, that it altogether overthrows the foundation of Spinoxa'ls doctrine, by ſhewing that not only there may be, but that there actually is a vacuum; and that, inſtead of an infinite, neceſſary, and indiviſible, plenitude, matter appears to occupy but a very ſmall portion of ſpace, and to have its parts actually divided and ſeparated from each other. It would be of no uſe to give a more particular account of the ſyſtem of Spinoæa; nor is it poſſible to deſcribe fully, in an intelligible manner, ſo abſurd a doctrine. It is allowed even by thoſe who, on other occaſions, have ſhewn a diſpoſition towards ſcepticiſm, in relation to the foundations of natural religion, to be the moſt monſtrous that can be imagined; and to be ſo oppoſite to the moſt evident notions we are able to form*, that no perſon of a right * Theſe are the words of Mr. Bqyle in the article of ſpinoxa; where he expoſes the abſurdities of this ſyſtem very clearly, and affirms that the weakeſt of ĩts adverſaries was able to have overturned it. Our view in giving ſome account of it, was not only to ſew the abſurd conſequences to which Des Cartes's ſyſtem right mind can be in hazard of giving into itt. He pretends, indeed, to proceed in the geometrical method ænd ſtyle; but while he aſſumes a definition of ſubſtance and of its attributes at his pleaſure, and paſſes from his deſinitions as true ideas (as he calls them) to the neceſſary exiſtence of the thing defined, by a pretended immediate conſequence, which he vill not allow to be diſpiited, his whole ſuperſtructure appears a mere petitio principii or fictionn. By his way of proceeding, any ſyſtem whatſoever might be eſtabliſoed But it does not appear poſſible to invent another ſo abſurd, while he maintains that there is but one ſubſtance in the univerſe, endowed with infinite attributes, (particularly, infinite extenſion and cogitation) that produces all other things, in itſelf, neceſſarily, as its own modifications; which alone is, in all things, cauſe and effect, agent and patient, in all reſpects phyſical and roral. The Carteſian doctrine has been often altered, and variouſly mended, ſince it was firſt propoſed by its author; and, for a hundred years together, many ingenious men have been making their urmoſt efforts to patch it up, and ſupport its credit, by reforming firſt one part, and then new-modelling another part of this extenſive ſyſtem. But the foundation is ſo faulty, and the æhole ſuperſtructure ſo erroneous, that it were much better to abandon the fabrick, and ſuffer the ruins to remain a memorial, in all time to come, oſ the folly of philoſophical preſumption and pride. leads, but likewiſe to trace sinæas doctrine to ĩts ſource (ſor the ſake of ſome who may have been miſled into a favourable opinion of iĩt,) which is no other than the Carieſian fable; of which almoſt every article has been diſproved by Sir Iaac MNenvion, or others. Mr. Leibnitæ retained the Carteſian ſubtile matter, with the univerſal plenitude and vortices; and repreſented the univerſe as a machine that ſhould proceed for ever, by the laws of mechaniſm, in. the moſt perfect ſtate, by an abſolute inviolable neceſſity; tho in ſome things he differs from Des Cartes. After Sir Iſaac Newtons philoſophy was publiſhed (in 1687,) he printed an eſſay on the celeſtial. motions Act. Erudit. 1689) where he admits of the circulation of the ether with Des Cartes, and of gravity with Sir Iſaac Newton;. but he never explained how theſe could be reconciled, and adjuſted together, ſo as to account for the planetary revolutions; or how gravity aroſe from the impulſe of this ether. Nor did he ſnhew how his harmonical circulation of the ether could be reconciled with the law of the motions of the ſeveral planets, in their reſpective orbits; which is very different from the law of the motions of the ſame planet, at its various diſtances from the ſun. The angular velocity of any one planet, decreaſes from the perihelium to the aphelium, in the ſame proportion as its diſtance from the ſun increaſes, and this is what he calls the harmonical circulation. If this law took place likewiſe in the motions of the different planets compared together, throughout the ſyſtem, this hypotheſis, of their being carried along with a circulating ether, might appear more tolerable: but the velocities of the planets, at their mean diſtances, decreaſe in the ſame proportion as the ſquare roots of the numbers which expreſs thoſe diſtances from the ſun. Neither did he ſhew how to reconcile this circulating motion of the ether with the free motions of the comets in all directions, or with the obliquity of the planes in which the planets revolve to the equator of the ſun and to one anoG ther; or reſolve the other objections to which this hypotheſis of a plenum and vortices is liable. Afterwards however, on occaſion of ſome diſputes that had ariſen concerning his title to the invention of the calculus of infiniteſimals, or method of fluxions, he appeared with great warmth againſt Sir Iſaac Newton's philoſophy, and placed himſelf at the head of its oppoſers. It is needleſs to inſiſt here on the paſſion and pręjudices that his followers have expreſſed againſt it, and againſt thoſe that have appeared in its defence. It is better to forget theſe, and to confine a philoſophical diſpute to philoſophical matters. Mr. Leibnitæ's ſyſtem has been the more acceptable to many, becauſe, from the wiſdom and goodneſs of the Deity, he concluded the univerſe, upon the whole, to be a perfect work, or the beſt that could poſſibly have been made. This doctrine was very agreeable in all times to the philoſophers who acknowledged a ſupreme beneficent governor; but the origin of evil perplexed them. The ſolution of this was what Socrates expected from the writings of Anaxagoras, but was diſappointed. The ſupreme Being, according to Timæus Locrus, was b œus0uos T& Eerriovoe. Plato taught that the ſupreme governor has diſpoſed and complicated all things for the happineſs and virtue of the whole, and that our complaints are groundleſs, ariſing from our narrow views of things. Chryſippus was of opinion * that it could  Exiſtimat Chryſipus non hoc fuiſſe naturæ principale conſiIium ut faceret homines morbis obnoxios, nunquam enim hoc conveniſſe naturæ auctori, parentique rerum omnium honarum; ſed quum multa atque magna gigneret, pareretque aptiſima & utiliſiima, alia quoque ſimul agnata ſunt incommoda iis ipſis quæ could never have been the aim or firſt intention of the Author of nature, and parent of all good, to make men obnoxious to diſeaſes; but that while he was producing many excellent things, and forming his work in the beſt manner, other things alſo aroſe, connected with them, that were incommodious; which were not made for their own ſakes, but permitted as neceſſary conſequences of what was bet. Mr. Leibnitæ has wrote at great length in defence of this doctrine, and has endeavoured to anſwer the objections that have been made againſt the perfection of the univerſe. But this learned authors ſpeculations, th they may perplex a cautious reader, cannot ſatisfy him. He propoſes two principles as the foundation of all our knowledge; the firſt, that ĩt is impoſſible for a thing to be, and not to be at the ſame time, which, he ſays, is the foundation of ſpeculative truth The other is, that nothing is without a ſufficient reaſon why it ſhould be ſo rather than otherwiſe; and by this principle, according to him, we make a tranſition from abſtracted truths to natural philoſophy. From this principle he concludes, that the mind is naturally determined, in its volitions or elections, by the greateſt apparent good; and that ĩt is impoſſible to make a choice between things perfectly like, which he calls indiſcernibles, from whence he infers, that two things perfectly like could not have been produced even by the Deity. For this reaſon, and other metaphyſical conſiderations, he rejects a vacuum, the parts of which muſt be ſuppoſed perfectly like to each other. For the ſame reaſon he alſo rejects atoms, and all ſimilar particles of matter; to faciebat cohærentia; eaque non per naturam, ſed per ſequelas quaſdam nece ſſarias, facta dicit, quod ipſe appellat xà7æ 7/pærornoiv. Aul. Gell. lib. 6. cap. I. each of which, tho diviſible in iufinitum, he aſcribes  a monad, or active kind of principle, in which, ſays he, are as it were perception and appetites. The eſſence of ſubſtance he places in action or activity, or rather (as he expreſſes it) in ſomething that is between acting and the faculty of acting. He aſfirms abſolute reſt to be impoſſible, and holds motion, or a ſort of niſus, to be eſſential to all material ſubſtances. Each monad he deſcribes as repreſentative of the whole univerſe from its point of ſight; and, after all, in one of his letters tells us, that matter is not a ſubſtance, but a ſubſtantiatum, or phenomene bien fondè. Such are the doctrines and expreſſions of a philoſopher who valued himſelf upon his clear and adequate ideas, and ridiculed the metaphyſics of the Engliſb, as narrow, and founded on unadequate notions. The criterion of truth is uſually placed in clear and evident perception; but ſome philoſophers ſeem to value doctrines in proportion as they are obſcuree. Who would imagine that, in natural philoſophy, ſuch arguments ſhould be preſerred to the plaineſt facts and experiments for determining the queſtion concerning a vacuum ? Let any man reflect on his own thoughts, from which only any notions we have of liberty (and conſequently of the divine liberty) can be derived; and if he is ſatisfied that he could chuſe between two deſirable things that appear equally good, rather than want both, ſuch arguments can have no force upon him. His diſiculty ſcoms ſtill to remain againſt the particles of matter, after all the pains he had taken to diſtinguiſh them by his monads; for how ſhall we diſtinguiſh the monads themſelves? or if that may be practicable,  Actæ Lipſiæ, 1698, P. 435. how ſhall we diſtinguiſh the ſame monad from itſelf, in all the moments of its exiſtence? If two things perfectly like to each other can exiſt in different times, ſurely they may exiſt in different places at the ſame time. This learned author appeared very averſe to thoſe doctrines which he imagined had a tendency to reſtore the exploded tenets of the ſcholaſtic philoſophy; yet theſe monads, as far as he has condelcended to deſcribe them, appear to be as incomprehenſible as their ſubſtantial forms, entelecheia, or moſt occult qualities. He makes great uſe of a compariſon between the effects of oppoſite motives on the mind, and of welghts placed in the ſcales of a ballance, or of powers acting upon the ſame body with contrary directions. His learned antagoniſt denies that there is a ſimilitude between a ballance moved by weights, and a mind acting upon the view of certain motives; becauſe the one is entirely paſſive, and rhe other not only is acted upon, but acts alloo. The mind, he owns, is purely paſſive in receiving the impreſſion of the motive, which is only a perception, and is not to be confounded with the power of acting after, or in conſequence of, that perception. The diſference between a man and a machine does not conſiſt only in ſenſation, and intelligence; but in this power of acting alſoo. The ballance for want of this pover cannot move at all, when the weights are equal: but a free agent, ſays he, vhen there appear two perfectly alike reaſonable ways of acting, has ſtill within itſelf a power of chuſing; and it may have ſtrong and very good reaſons not to forbear. It ĩs evident that as it is from internal conſciouſneſs I know any thing oſ liberty, ſo no aſſertion contrary to what I am conſcious of concerning it can be admitted; and it were better perhaps to treat of this abſtruſe ſubject after the manner of experimental philoſophy, than to fill a thouſand pages with metaphyſical diſcuſſions concerning it. But to leave this ſubject, the doctrine of liberty is ſo foreign to the queſtions concerning a vacuum and atoms, that it muſt appear a far-fetched uncommon ſtretch of metaphyſics to pretend to determine them by it; and very unaccountable to refuſe the Deity the power of producing, by one act of his will, all the matter in the univerſe at once, tho ĩt ſhould be ſuppoſed perfectly ſimilar and uniform. 5. From the ſame principle, Mr. Leibnitæ concluded, that the material ſyſtem is a machine abſolutely perſect, that can never fall into diſorder, or require to be ſet right; and that to imagine that God interpoſes in it, ĩs to leſſen the ſkill oſ the Author, and the perfection of his work. But this is more than his own principles require. For tho' it ſnould be allowed that nothing is limited without a ſufficient reaſon; yet, upon the whole, it may be better that the Author of the world ſhould act immediately in it, cheriſhing and governing his work, and ſometimes changing or renewing it. Can the beauty and perfection of the univerſe be the worſe for His acting in it, vho muſt be ſuppoſed to act always with perfect wiſdom? It was fit that there ſhould be, in general, a regularity and conſtancy in the courſe of nature; not only for the ſake of its greater beauty, but alſo for the ſake of intelligent agents, who without this could have had no foreſight, or occaſion for choice and wiſdom in judging of things by their conſequences, and no proper exerciſe for their other facultiess. But tho the courſe of nature was to be regular, it was not ples only which ariſe from the various motions and modifications of unactive matter, by mechanical laws; and it had been incomparably inferior to what it is, in beauty and perfection, if it had been left to them only. Sir Iſaac Newton was of opinion that the fabrick of the univerſe, and courſe of nature, could not continue for ever in ĩts preſent ſtate, but would require, in proceſs of time, to be re-eſtabliſhed or renewed by the ſame hand that formed it. Yet this philoſophy was condemned by Mr. Leibnitæ as leading to impiety; and, which is very ſurprizing, this particular doctrine was excepted againſt as having ſuch a tendency. He objècted, that as a good artiſt made his workmanſhip as perfect as poſſible, ſo it argued a want of power or ſkill in the Author of the world, if it ſhould ever require to be reformed or wound up again. But Sir Iſaac Newton thought it altogether conſiſtent with the notion of a moſt perfect Being, and even more agreeable to ĩt, to ſuppoſe that he ſhould form his work dependent upon himſelf, ſo as after proper periods to model it anew, according to his infinite wiſdom. To exclude the Deity from acting in the univerſe, and governing it, is to exclude from it what is moſt perfect and beſt, the abſence of which no mechaniſm can ſupply. Such a doctrine could not have been propoſed by one of Mr. Leibnitæs ſentiments concerning the perfection of the univerſe, if he had not been miſled by an exceſſive fondneſs for neceſſity and mechaniſm. The capital doctrine of this philoſophy that repreſents the univerſe as a perfect machine, ſuch as may continue for ever by mechanical laws in its preſent ſtate, is, that the ſame quantity of force and vigour 90 Sir Isaac NEwTONS Book I. remains always in it, and paſſes from one portion of matter to another, without undergoing any change in the whole. Des Cartes maintained that the ſame quantity of motion is always preſerved in the univerſe. Spinoæa called ĩt the ſame proportion of motion to reſt. Mr. Leibnitæ diſtinguiſhed between the quantity of motion, and the force of bodies; he owns that the former varies, but maintains that the quantity oſ force is for ever the ſame in the univerſc: and yet there is no doctrine more repugnant to perpetual experience and common obſervation than this is, even th we ſhould meaſure the forces of bodies by the ſquares of the velocities, according to his doctrine. If all bodies in the world had a perfect elaſticity, there might be ſome pretence for maintaining this principle. But there never has heen diſcovered as yet any one body, whoſe elaſticity is perfect; and when any two bodies meet with equal motions, they rebound with leſs motions, and there is always force loſt by their colliſion; and if the bodies are ſoft, they both ſtop, becauſe of the impenetrability of their parts; or, to ſpeak in this authors favourite ſtyle, becauſe there can be no ſuficient reaſon why one of them ſhould prevail, rather than the other. In this caſe, their whole motion is loſt; and the motion of the one being deſtroyed by the oppoſite motion of the other, it is without ground, and merely to ſave an hypotheſis, that a iluid is imagined, which they feign to receive and retain the forces oſ thoſe bodiess. When liberty is taken to ſupport one fiction by another, this by a third, and ſo on, any ſyſtem may be maintained. According to our firſt views of matter and motion, from the plaineſt experiments, matter appears to be an unactive ſubſtance of no elaſticity; yet they aſcribe a perfect elaſticity to all their ſubtile matter; and laws oſ motion are propoſed by them as general, which can hold of perfectly elaſtic bodies only, that is, of bodies not one of which has hitherto been found in nature. They have never been able to explain how this perfect elaſticity ariſes from the laws of mechaniſm; yet, according to them, the world is a mechanical perpetual movement. The genius of this kind of philoſophy appears on no occaſion ſo evidently, as from the arts which have been uſed to get rid of the inſuperable objections againſt the vortices. To remove the difficulty a ſtep borther, or to involve the queſtion in obſcurity, new vortices are introduced in every infinitely ſmall particle of matter. From theſe, if there be occaſion, they will deſcend into another order infinitely leſs; and ſo on; for they expreſly pretend to take the ſame beneſit from the infinite orders of inſiniteſimals, in philoſophy *, that is claimed by ſome late geometricians in the reſolution of their problems, Thus (as we obſerved elſewhere ) an abſurd philoſophy is the natural product of a vitiated geometry. For tho it follows from our notion of magnitude, that it always conſiſts of parts, and is diviſible without end, yet an actual diviſion in infinitum is abſurd, and an infinitely little quantity (even in Mr. Leibnitæs judgment ſ) is a mere fiction. Philoſophers may allow themſelves to imagine likewiſe infinite orders of infinitely ſmall particles of matter, and ſuffer themſelves to be tranſported with the idea; but theſe illuſions are not ſupported by ſound geometry, nor agreeable to common ſenſec. After all that has been ſaid for the vortices, there is not one experiment to favour them; and ſome of the moſt ' Mem. de I' Academie Royale des Sciences, 1729. ? Treatiſe of Fluxicus Introd. p. 47. 3 Eſſay de Theodicẽ, 5 70. common and ſimple are againſt admitting ſuch fluids and their motions. We have another inſtance of the art by which they ſupport their ſchemes, in the pretended demonſtration they give againſt the poſſibility of atoms, or of any perfectly hard and inflexible bodies. According to what they call the law of continuity, all changes in nature are produced by inſenſible and infinitely ſmall degrees; ſo that no body can, in any caſe, paſs from motion to reſt, or from reſt to motion, without paſſing through all poſſible intermediate degrees of motion; from which they conclude that atoms, or any perfectly hard bodies, are impoſſible; becauſe if two of them ſhould meet with equal motions, in contrary directions, they would neceſſarily ſtop at once, in violation of the law of continuity*. But upon what grounds have they made this an univerſal law of nature? Tho in common bodies (which are looſely compounded of particles that are themſelves compounded of others of a lower order, and ſo on; ſo that we cannot arrive at the elements, or atoms, till after wve know not how many reſolutions) the parts yield in their colliſions, we cannot affirm this. of the atoms or ultimate elements themſelves. This yielding is a conſequence of the contexture of bodies, which have always much more of void interſtices than of ſolid matter, and conſiſt of particles that muſt be ſuppoſed to adhere to one another with a force incomparably leſs than that by which the matter of the clementary particles themſelves holds together . The  Diſcours ſur le Mouvement, Paris 1726. + The author of the above cited ciſcourſe on motion, tells us3, that ĩif nature could paſs from a ſtate of motion to a ſtate of reſt at once, without paſſing through the intermediate degrees of The truth is, they found it neceſſary to reject bodies of a perfect hardneſs; becauſe it was impoſſible to explain the effects of their colliſions, in a manner conſiſtent with the preſervation of the ſame quantity of force in the univerſe, or with their new doctrine, That the forces of bodies are as the ſquares of the velocities; and therefore they had recourſe to this new law of continuity to proſcribe them. If ſuch a body ſhould ſtrike another equal quieſcent body, of the ſame kind, the velocity of the firſt would be equally divided by the ſtroke between them; but if we meaſure the force by the ſquare of the velocity, each of them would have but one fourth part of the force of the firſt body; and both together would have but one half of its force; ſo that the other half would be neceſſarily loſt, without producing any ſort of effect,. In order to get rid of objections of this kind, ſome of the favourers of the new doctrine, concerning the menſuration of the force of bodies, content themſelves with obſerving, that no bodies of a perfect hardneſs have been found in nature; tho there is the ſame objection againſt admitting and treating of bodies of a perfect elaſticity. But others boldly reject ſuch hard bodies as impoſſible, from thoſe far-fetched metaphyſical conſiderations we have deſcribedc. How much they have endeavoured to perplex the theory of motion, in its plaineſt parts, from à zeal for the ſame doctrine, will appear aſterwards. motion, then one ſtate would be deſtroyed before nature could know what new ſtate ſhe ought to determine herſelf to; and aſs how ſhe could then determine herſelf to any one ſtate rather than another? In anſwer, we need only obſerve, that to ceaſe to move is the ſame as to be at reſt, and that when the equal atoms ſtop each other at once, there is no interval between the ſtate of motion and that of reſt; and that when motion is deſtroyed, reſt neceſſarily enſues. The power of mechaniſm was never more magniſied than by Mr. Leibnitæs famous doctrine of a pre-eſtabliſbed harmony, as he calls itt. According to Des Cartes, the brutes were mere machines; and this doctrine, to many, appeared incrediblee But this is nothing in compariſon to what Mr. Leibnitæ would have us believe, when he tells us that the ſoul does not act on the body, nor the body on the ſoul; that both proceed by neceſſary laws, the ſoul in its perceptions and volitions, and the body in its motions, without affecting each other; but that each is to be conſidered as a ſeparate independent machine. The volitions of the mind are followed inſtantly by the deſired motions of the body, not in conſequence of thoſe volitions in the leaſt, but of the nice and well adjuſted machinery of the body. The impreſſions produced in the ſenſory have no eſfect on the mind, but the correſponding idea ariſes, at that preciſe time, in conſequence of a chain of cauſes of a different kKind. Thus all that men do or ſay, is no more than the efſect of exquiſite machinery, according to him. But it is time for us to leave thoſe fictions, leſt the reader ſhould be tempted to think that all philoſophy is illuſion. C H AP. V. Concluſions from the foregoing obſervations. I. H E ſum of what we have obſerved is, that tho theſe learned men may have ſhewn abundance of genius and invention in their writings; yet they, and all others who have followed a like method, have begun at the wrong end, in tracing the chain of cauſes, and have attempted to form a ſcheme of philolophy that far ſurpaſſes the human faculties. The eternal reaſons and primary cauſes of things, which they imagine they poſſeſs, riſe infinitely above them; while certain obſervation, and plain facts, perpetually appear in contradiction to their boaſted ſpeculations. We are to endeavour to riſe, from the effects thro the intermediate cauſes, to the ſupreme cauſe. We are, from his works, 10 ſeek to know God, and not to pretend to mark out the ſcheme of his conduct, in nature, from the very deficient ideas we are able to form of that great myſterious Being. Thus natural philoſophy may become a ſure baſis to natural religion, but it is very prepoſterous to deduce natural philoſophy from any hypotheſis, tho invented to make us imagine ourſelves poſſeſt of a more complete ſyſtem of metaphyſics, or contrived perhaps with a view to obviate more eaſily ſome difficulties in natural theology. We may, at length, reſt ſatisfied, that in natural philoſophy, truth is to be diſcovered by experiment and obſervation, with the aid of geometry, only; and that it is neceſſary firſt to proceed by the method of analyſis, before we preſume to deliver any ſyſtem ſyuthetically. We may alſo learn at length, from the bad ſucceſs of ſo many fruitleſs attempts, to be leſs fond of perfect and finiſhed ſchemes of natural philoſophy; to be willing to ſtop when we find we are not in a condition to proceed farther; and to leave to poſterity to make greater advænces, as time and obſervation ſhall enable them. For we cannot doubt but that nature has diſcoveries in ſtore for future times alſo, which may be retarded by our raſh and illgrounded anticipations. By proceeding with due care, every age vill add to the common ſtock of knowledge; the myſteries that ſtill lie concealed in nature may be gradually opened, arts will flouriſh and increaſe, mankind will improve, and appear more worthy of their ſituation in the univerſe, as they approach more towards a perfect knowledge of nature. 2.Twas thus the ſpeculative parts of the mathematics gradually aroſe, from ſmall beginnings, by the conſpiring labours of great men, in the diſtant ages of the worldd. The Egyptians began this ſcience, the Greeks purſued it, the Arabians preſerved it, when it was loſt in Europe, and ſet a high value upon it while their empire flouriſhed; and ſince the late memorable reſtoration of letters in Europe, its great progreſs has been the boaſt of modern learning. The inundations of the Nile made it neceſſary for the Egyptians to invent ſome art by which they ſhould be able to meaſure their land, and to this, we are told, geometry owes its origin and name. The prieſts of that country, abounding in leiſure and genius, improved it into a ſcience; and their kings wrote treatiſes upon it. Thales brought the principles of it into Greece, where it was ſo diligently cultivated that the elementary part was ſoon compleated, and was ſo highly eſteemed as to have the appellation of the maibemata in a manner appropriated to it. An oracle appointing the cubical altar of Apollo to be doubled was, we preſume, of greater advantage to geometry than to the Aihenians then aflicted with the plague; as it gave occaſion to Plato to conſider the famous problem of the duplication of the cube, and produced the ſolid geometry. It afterwards received great improvements from the incomparable Archimedes, ho ſquared the area of the parabola, made ſome progreſs in the menſuration tion of the circle, and enriched this ſcience with many diſcoveries worthy of ſo excellent a genius. It appears that it advanced but by degrees, and ſometimes by very ſlow ſteps: one, we are told, diſcovered that the three angles of an equilateral triangle were equal to two right ones; another went farther, and ſhewed the ſame thing of thoſe that have two ſides equal and are called iſoſceles triangles; and it was a third who found that the theorem was general, and extended it to triangles of all ſorts *. In like manner, when the ſcience was farther advanced, and they came to treat of the conic ſections, the plane of the ſection was always ſuppoſed perpendicular to the ſide of the cone; the parabola was the only ſection that was conſidered in the rightangled cone, the ellipſe in the acute-angled cone, and the hyperbola in the obtuſe. angled. From theſe three ſorts of cones, the figures of the ſections had their names, for a conſiderable time; till at length Apollonius ſnewed how they might be all cut out of any one cone, and by this diſcovery merited in thofe days the appellation of the great geometrician. i By ſuch ſteps this ſcience roſe, in proceſs of time, to that vaſt height for which it is admired. Problems that appeared of an inſuperable difficulty in one age were reſolved in another, and, in a third, were in a manner deſpiſed as too ſimple and eaſy; particular theorems were firſt inveſtigated that led to more extenſive diſcoveries; laborious methods were followed, till others were found that were more ſimple and general, but the greateſt care was always taken of the certainty and evidence of the ſcience, as it was carried on. There was indeed a long * Procli Comment. in Eucliãdem. interval of many ages, between the period when it nouriſhed in Greece, and revived in Europe: but the antients, having founded it on unexceptionable grounds, and carried it on with the utmoſt accuracy, vwhen learning was reſtored, their works ſerved for a baſis, as well as for models, to the modern inventors. Thus the gradual progreſs of mankind in this ſcience appears ſimilar, in ſome reſpects, to the advances of a man in vigour and knowledge. They firt made eſſays of a weak and unexperienced ſtrength, which by degrees acquired more and more force, till at length, aftær the ſucceſsful labours of ſeveral ages, nothing ſeemd too high for them. 3. From what we have obſerved concerning the hiſtory of natural philoſophy, it may eaſily be underſtood why its progreſs has been ſo different; and whence it proceeds that we ſeldom have found in it, as in geometry, that pleaſing gradual riſe ſfrom ſmall beginnings to greater heights. Inſtead of ſearching into- nature, men retired to contemplate their own thoughts; inſtead of tracing her operations, they gave their imaginations full play: where they ought to have heſitated, they decided; and where there was no dificulty, they doubted. What was ſimple they divided, and deſined what was plain; but in what was more intricate, the ſubterfuges of art were ſet up in oppoſition to nature, and captious ſcience againſt common reaſon; while one ill-grounded maxim was imagined, to ſupport another, and fiction was grafted on fiction. Hypotheſes were invented, not for reducing ſacts or obſervations of a complicated nature to rules and order, (for which purpoſe they may be of ſervice) but as principles of ſcience. Theſe were of ſo great authority as not to be overturned by contradictory obſervations, or by the extravagant conſequences that aroſe from them; but the author, charmd with his rhapſody, pròceeded, without minding theſe, to the concluſion of his fable. Thus one age or ſect could not but deſtroy, for the moſt part, the labours of another. Sometimes the numbers and harmony of the Pythagoreans ſerved for explaining what was moſt myſterious in nature; the ideas of Plato, the matter and fſorm of Alriſtotle prevailed in their turn; but theſe were of uſe only to veil the ignorance of men. Epicurus employed his philoſophy to overthrow the plain and evident dictates of ſenſe and reaſon; yet diſciples were not wanting to ſupport and adorn ſo abſurd a ſcheme. The Steptics went into the oppoſite extreme, and became ſo fond of darkneſs that they would not ſee the light tho never ſo clear; and ſome of them choſe rather to doubt that they doubted, than to acknowledge any thing; yet they too had numerous followers. Afterwards philoſophy was in no eſteem but as far as iĩt ſerved, by a perplexed and falſe gloſs, to promote the ends of ſuperſtition. Of late, the pretended clear ideas of Des Cartes, and metaphyſical ſpeculations of Mr. Leibnitæ, have been received by many for true philoſophy; not to mention the extravagancies of Spinoæa, and a thouſand crude notions that deſerve no memory. We have ſeen, in the foregoing account of the ſtate of philoſophy in different periods, that they who have indulged themſelves in inventing ſyſtems and compleating them, tho they have ſometimes ſet out in a manner that has appeared plauſible, yet, in purſuing thoſe ſchemes, ſuch conſequences have ariſen as could not fail to diſguſt all but ſuch as were intoxicated with the deceit. Some, from their fondneſs to explain all things by mechaniſm, have been led to exclude every thing but matter and motion out of the univerſe: others, from a contrary diſpoſition, admit nothing but perceptions, and things which perceive; and ſome have purſued this way of reaſoning, till they have admitted nothing but their own perceptions. Others, while they overlook the intermediate links in the chain of cauſes, and haſtily reſolve every principle into the immediate influence of the firſt cauſe, impair the beauty of nature, put an end to our enquiries into the moſt ſublime part of philoſophy, and hurt thoſe very intereſts which they would promote. In framing thoſe ſyſtems, he who has proſecuted each of them fartheſt has done this valuable ſervice, that, while he vainly imagined he improved or compleated it, he really opened up the fallacy, and reduced it to an abſurdity. Many who ſuffered themſelves to be pleaſed with Des Cartess fable, were put to a ſtand by Spinoæa's impieties. Many went along with Mr. Leibnitæs ſcheme of abſolute neceſſity,, but demurred at his monads and pre-eſtabliſhed harmony And ſome, willing to give up the reality of matter, could not think of giving up their own and other minds. The variety of opinions and perpetual diſputes amongſt philoſophers has induced not a few, of late as well as in former times, to think that it was vain labour to endeavour to acquire certainty in natural knowledge, and to aſcribe this to ſome unavoidable defect in the principles of the ſcience. But it has appeared ſuſficiently, from the diſcoveries of thoſe who have conſulted nature and not their own imaginations, and particularly from what we learn from Sir Iſaac Newton, that the fault has lain in the philoſophers themſelves, and not in philoſophy A complete ſyſtem indeed was not to be expected from one man, or one age, or perhaps from the greateſt number of ages; could we have expected the abilities of any one man, we ſurely ſhou had it from Sir Iſaac Newton : but he ſaw into nature to attempt it. How far he has this work, and what are the moſt important B O O KII. Of the theory of motion, or rational mechanics. C H AP. I Of ſpace, time, matter, and motion. I. S we are certain of our own exiſtence, and A of that of our ideas, by internal conſciouſneſs; ſo we are ſatisfied, by the ſame conſciouſneſs, that there are objects, powers, or cauſes without us, and that act upon us. For in many of our ideas, particularly thoſe that are accompanied vith pain, the mind muſt be paſſive, and receive the impreſſions (which are involuntary) from external cauſes or inſtruments, that depend not upon us. We eaſily diſtinguiſh theſe objects into two general claſſes. The firſt is of thoſe which we perceive to have a ſpontaneity, or ſelf moving power, and ſeveral properties and affections ſimilar to thoſe of our own minds, ſuch as reaſoning, judging, willing, loving, hating, &c. The ſecond general claſs is of thoſe in which no ſuch afſections appear, but which are ſo far of a paſſive nature, that they never move of themſelves, neither, when they are in motion, do they ever ſtop without ſome external influence. If one of theſe move out of its place, without the appearance of a mover, we immediately conclude that this is owing to ſome inviſible ſo much are we perſuaded of its own iuneriia. lay up one of them in any place, we expec nd it there at any diſtance of time, if no other powers have had acceſs to it. This paſſive nature, or inertia, is what chiefly diſtinguiſhes the ſecond claſs of external objects, which is called body or matter; as the former is called mind or ſpirit. 2. How external objects, of either claſs, act upon the mind, by producing ſo great a variety of impreſſions or ideas, is not our buſineſs at preſent to enquire: neither is it neceſſary for us to determine how exact or perfect the reſemblance may be between our ideas and the objects or ſubſtances they repreſent. In our ideas which are repetitions of other ideas, we ſind very different degrees of reſemblance between them and thoſe of which they are repetitions. The idea we form in our imagination oſ a perſon, place, or figure which we have often ſeen, has a much more perfect reſemblance to the impreſſion we receive from ſenſe, than the idea we are able in our imagination to form of pain, as to the ſenſation we have felt of it. And as it is no objection againſt the exiſtence of the ſouls of other men, that they may be very different from the notion or conception we may have formed of them; ſo it is no juſt reaſon againſt admitting the exiſtence of body, that its inward eſſence, or ſubſtiratum, may be very different from any thing we know of it. It is, however, rating our ideas of external objects by much too low, to compare them to words or arbitrary ſigns, ſerving only to diſtinguiſh them from each other. For it is from our ideas of them that we learn their properties, relations, and their influences upon each other, and upon our minds and thoſe of others, and acquire uſeful knowledge concerning them and ourſelves. For example, by comparing an ining our ideas, we judge of order and conf auty and deformity, fitneſs and unfitneſs, in things. The ideas of number and proportion, upon which ſo uſeful and extenſive ſciences are founded, have the ſame origin. 3. The mind is intimately conſcious of its own activity in reflecting upon ĩts ideas, in examining and ranging them, in forming ſuch as are complex from the more ſimple, in reaſoning from them, and in its elections and determinations. From this, as well as from the influence of external objects upon the mind, and from the courſe of nature, it eaſily acquires the ideas of cauſe and effect When a figure deſcribed upon a board produces a ſimilar idea or impreſſion on all thoſe who ſee it, ĩt is as natural to aſcribe this to one cauſe, as, when we ſpeak to a numerous audience, the effect of the diſcourſe is to be aſcribed to us; tho we may be unable to explain how the impreſſion of the figure is communicated to the ſeveral ſpectators, or the diſcourſe to the hearers. It were eaſy to make many more remarks on the philoſophy of thoſe whoſe principles would lead them to maintain, that external objects vary with our perceptions, and that the object is always different when perceived by different minds, or by the ſame perſon at different times, or in different circumſtances. It will not be expected from us that we ſhould enter farther, in a treatiſe oſ this kind, into the examination of doctrines as fruitleſs as they are extravagant. 4. Body not only never changes its ſtate of itſelf, in conſequence of its paſſive nature or inertia, but it alſo reſiſts when any ſuch change is produced: when at reſt, it is not put in motion without diſficulty; and when in motion, it requires a certain force to ſtop it. This force with which it ęndeavours to perſevere in its ſtate, and reſiſts àny change, is called its vis inertiæ; and ariſes froũ the inertia of its parts, being always proportional to the quantity of matter in the body; inſomuch that it is by this inertia only we are able to judge of the quantity of matterr. And this judgment is well founded, becauſe we conſtantly find that when we double or triple a body, or increaſe or diminiſh ĩt in any proportion, wve muſt double or triple the force that is requiſite to move it with the ſame celerity, or increaſe or diminiſh ĩt in the ſame proportion with the body. If the ſolid, uncompounded particles void of pores, of equal bulk, have their inertia equal, then this muſt be accurately true: but if matter be of kinds ſo different from each other, that the ſolid elementary particles of the one have a greater inertia than equal ſolid elementary particles of the other kind, then it is only when we compare thoſe of the ſame kind, that we can affirm the inertia to be proportional to the quantity of matter. Such different kinds of matter may exiſt for ought we know; but it is by diminiſhing or increaſing the number or dimenſions of the pores of bodies that they are condenſed or rarified, according to our experience, and thereby the inertia of a given bulk increaſed or diminiſhed. 5. Space is extended without limits, immoveable, uniform and ſimilar in all its parts, and void of all reſitance. It conſiſts indeed of parts which may be diſtinguiſhed into other parts, leſs and leſs, without end, but cannot be ſeparated from each other, and have their ſituation and diſtances changed. 6. Body is extended in ſpace, moveable, bounded by figure, ſolid, and impenetrable, reſiſting by its inertia, diviſible into parts, leſs and leſs, without end, that may be ſeparated from each other and have their ſituation or diſtances changed in any manner. 16 Sir Isaac NEWTONS Book II. 7. From the ſucceſſion of our own ideas, and from the ſucceſſive variations of external objects in the courſe of nature, we eaſily acquire the ideas of duration and time, and of their meaſures. We conceive true or abſolute time, to flow uniformly in an unchangeable courſe, which alone ſerves to meaſure vith exactneſs the changes of all other things. For unleſs we correct the vulgar meaſures of time, which are groſs and inaccurate, by proper equations, (as in predicting the eclipſes of the ſatellites of Yupiter, and moſt other aſtronomical phænomena) the concluſions are always found inaccurate and erroneous: and however various the ſlux of time may appear to different intellectual beings, it cannot, at leaſt, be thought to depend upon the ideas of any created being. Time may be conceived to be divided into ſucceſſive parts that may be leſs and leſs without end; tho, with reſpect to any one particular being, there may be a leaſt ſenſible rime, as well as a minimum ſenſibile in other magnitudes. 8. Motion is the change of place; that is, of the part of ſpace which the body occupies, or in which it is extended. The motion is real or abſolute, when the body changes its place in abſolute ſpace. It is called relative, when the body changes its place with relation only to ambient bodies; and ĩt is apparent motion, when the body changes its ſituation with reſpect to other bodies that appear to us to be at reſt. The parts of abſolute ſpace not being the objects of our ſenſes, it is one of the great difficulties in philoſophy to diſtinguiſh which motions are true and real, and which are apparent only. However, philoſophers by proper care are often able to effect this, by arguing juſtly from the cauſes of the motion when known, or from their properties and effects. A real circular motion, for example, is always accompanied with a centrifugal force, ariſing from the tendency which a body always has to proceed in a right line. Thus, from the centrifugal force which, at the æquator, diminiſhes the gravity and retards the motion of the pendulum, ſo that it moves more ſlowly there than towards either pole, we have a proof of the earth's diurnal rotation on its axis. At the ſame time, the diurnal revolution of the heavenly bodies about the earth muſt be apparent only; ſince if it was real, an immenſe centrifugal force would thence ariſe, which could not but diſcover itſelf; becauſe they move in free ſpaces, and the ſolid orbs have been exploded upon the moſt evident grouncs. 9. I know that ſome metaphyſicians of great character condemn the notion of abſolute ſpace, and accuſe mathematicians in this of realizing too much their ideas: but if thoſe philoſophers would give due attention to the phænomena of motion, they would ſee how ill grounded their complaint is. From the obſervation of nature, we all know that there is motion; that a body in motion perſeveres in that ſtate, till by the action or inſluence of ſome power it be neceſſitated to change it; that it is not in relative or apparent motion in which it perſeveres, in conſequence of ĩts inertia, but in real and abſolute motion. Thus the apparent diurnal motion of the ſtars would ceaſe, without the leaſt power or force acting upon them, if the motion of the earth was ſtopt; and if the apparent motion of any ſtar was deſtroyed by a contrary motion impreſſed upon it, the other celeſtial bodies would ſtill appear to perſevere in their courſe, the centrifugal force at the æquator would ſtill ſubſiſt, with the ſpheroidical figure of the fluid ocean; the conſequences of the real motion of the earth upon its axis. They who are not well acquainted with the theory of motion, more eaſily allow that a body at reſt continues at reſt, in conſequence of its paſſive nature or inertia, than that when in motion it continuęs in motion: but this perſeverance of a body in a ſtate of reſt can only take place with relation to abſolute ſpace, and can only be intelligible by admitting it. When a topp turns upon a ſmall pivot, its circular motion will continue ſmooth for a long time, but any body placed upon its ſurface does not continue in that place, but immediately flies off. When a ſhip moves ſteadily, any body placed in the cabin continues in its place, as if the whole was at reſt; but when the motion of the ſhip is ſtopt, the body flies off in the direction of its former motion; for, in conſequence of its inertia, it endeavours to perſevere, not in iĩts ſtate of reſt in the ſhip, but in its ſtate of motion or reſt with regard to abſolute ſpace. It were eaſy to enlarge on this ſubject, and to ſhew that there is ho explaining the phænomena of nature without allowing a real diſtinction between true, or real, and apparent motion, and between abſolute and relative ſpacee Whatever thoſe philoſophers may pretend, we have no clearer idea than of ſpace; and tho' ſome puzzling diſputes may ariſe in ſome of our enquiries concerning it, this is what we meet vith in all our enquiries into nature; our knowledge of which we ought to take care to have as clear and well founded as poſſible, tho ĩt is in vain to protend to make it complete and perfect; as we obſerved in the firſt book. 10. Body being diſtinguiſhed from ſpace by its vis inertiæ or reſiſtance, it is an obvious ſuggeſtion of common ſenſe that all ſpace is not equally full of matter; and it is the reſult of philoſophical enquiries, that the ſolid matter in the denſeſt bodies bears a ſmall proportion to their whole bulk. The rays of light find a paſſage through a glaſs globe in all directions, which argues the great rarity of the globe, as well as the ſubtility of light. The ſame is to be ſaid of the magnetic and electric effluvia, and of the ſubtile matter that pervades the pores of bodies with great freedom in chymical experiments. As for thoſe fluids which philoſophers have invented, in order to repleniſh the pores of bodies, ſo as to exclude a void out of the univerſe, we made ſome obſervations upon them in the firſt book; and we may have occaſion afterwards to ſhew how improper they are for accounting for the phænomena which have been aſcribed to them. I1I. Space and time ſerve to meaſure each other, reciprocally, by motion: time is in a perpetual flux and periſhing; but a repreſentation of it is preſerved in the ſpace deſcribed by the motionn. When the ſpace flows as the time, that is, vhen equal parts of ſpace are deſcribed in any equal parts of the time, then the motion is uniform, and the velocity is conſtant or unvaried during the motion. When the parts of ſpace, deſcribed in any equal ſucceſſive parts of the time, continually increaſe, the motion is accelerated; and when thoſe parts of ſpace continually decreaſe, the motion is retarded. In general, the velocity of motion is always meaſured by the ſpace that would be deſcribed by that motion continued uniformly for a given time. It is obvious that the ſpace, deſcribed by an uniform motion, is in the compound proportion of the time and velocity of the motion: but in general, let a B, (Fig. 1.] the baſe of a figure, repreſent the time of a motion, and the ordinate or perpendicular P M, at any point æ of the baſe, meaſure the velocity at the correſponding term of time, (that is, the ſpace which would be deſcribed by the motion continued uniformly from that term for a given time) then the area of the figure a B D ſo formed will meaſure the ſpace deſcribed by the motion, in the time repreſented by the baſe A 2B. Thus a rectangular parallelogram ſerves to meaſure the ſpace deſcribed by an uniform motion, the time being repreſented by the baſe, and the conſtant velocity of the motion by the perpendicular. The ſpace deſcribed by a motion which is uniformly accelerated (the velocity of which increaſes uniformly as the time, that is, receives equal augments in any equal ſucceſſive parts of time) is repreſented by a triangle; the time being repreſented by the baſe, and the increaſing velocity by the perpendicular, which increaſes in the ſame proportion as the baſe. Becauſe the triangle is the half of a parallelogram of the ſame baſe and altitude, the ſpace deſcribed by a motion uniformly accelerated, during any time, from the beginning of the motion, is one half of what would have been deſcribed if the motion had been uniform, and the velocity had been the ſame as is acquired at the end of that time. Becauſe ſimilar triangles are as the ſquares of their analogous ſides, the ſpaces deſcribed by a motion uniformly accelerated, being meaſured by ſuch triangles, are as the ſquares of the times from the beginning of the motion; or as the ſquares of the veſocities acquired at the end of thoſe times. The Ipaces deſcribed by motions uniformly retarded are meaſured in the ſame manner; only the times and velocities are to be taken in a contrary order, till the xtinction of the motion. In other caſes, the ſpaces are meaſured by curvilinear areass. And becauſe there are areas whoſe ordinates decreaſe in ſuch a manner, that tho the ũgure be produced indefiniteIy, the area never amounts to a certain finite ſpace; it appears that the velocities of a retarded motion may decreaſe in ſuch a manner, that, tho the motion was continued ever ſo long, yet the ſpace deſcribed by it ſould not exceed any certain given line. For example, if the velocity during the firſt hour be double of what it is in the ſecond Rour, and this be reduced to its half in the third hour, and ſo on for ever, then the ſpace deſcribed by this motion, tho it was to continue for the greateſt number of ages, will never amount to the double of the line deſcribed in the frſt hour. 12. The quantity of motion in a body being the ſum of the motions of its parts, is in the compounded ratio of ĩts quantity of matter and of the velocity of the motion. If the body a, of a quantity of matter repreſented by 2, moves with a velocity repreſented by 5, and the body B, repreſented by 3, moves with a velocity repreſented by 4, then the quantity of motion of 4, ſhall be to the quantity of motion of B, in the compounded ratio of æ to 3 and of 5 to 4, that is as 2 x 5 to 3 x 4, or as 10 to 12. There appears to be no ground for making a diſtinction between the quantity of motion, and the force of a body in motion; as all the power or activity of body ariſes from and depends upon its motion. We are not, however, to expect that all the effects of the motion of bodies ſiould be proportional to the quantity of motion, unleſs a due regard be had to the time of the motion, and to the direction in which ĩt. acts, according to the true principles of mechanics. A body, in conſequence of its uniform motion, deſcribes a certain ſpace in a certain time; but there is no ſpace ſo great that may not be deſcribed by it, if the time be not Iimited. When a body acts upon another body, the effect ĩs very different according to the direction in which ĩt acts. How neceſſary it is to have regard to theſe, n determining the effects of the motions and actions of bodies, will appear more fully in the next chapter. 13. When a body tends to move, but is hindered by Tome obſtacle, this tendency is called preſſure. It is not to be compared with the force of a body in motion, no more than a line is to be compared with the rectangle that is generated by it. Of this kind is the gravity of a body that reſts and preſſes upon a table, or of water upon the bottom of a veſſel, or of air upon the ſails of a ſip. When the obſtacle is removed, the continual action of the preſſure generates motion in the body, in any finite time. Thus gravity accelerates the motion of falling bodies, by acting inceſſantly upon themm. When an orifice is opened in the bottom of a veſſel, the preſſure of the fluid accelerates the motion of the iſſuing wvater, and, in an exceeding little time, brings its velocity to a height. When the wind acts upon the ſails of a ſhip, it accelerates her motion for ſome time, till the reſiſtance of the water (which increaſes with the increaſing velocity of the ſhip) ballances the action of the wind; after which her motion becomes uniform. In theſe, and all ſuch other inſtances, the motion begins from nothing; and it is in conſequence of the continual inceſſant action of the power or preſſure, that the velocity, generated in any finite time, is finite. If we were to ſuppoſe that each action of the power produced a finite augmentation of velocity, the motion acquired in the Jeaſt finite time would be infinite, or ſurpaſs any aſignable velocity; as we have demonſtrated elſewhere*. 14. Gravity is the beſt known to us of all thoſe powers or preſſures. Becauſe all bodies deſcend with equal velocity in a void, the gravity of bodies muſt be proportional to their quantity of matter; and depends not upon the figure or texture of the parts, but upon their folid matter only. This is evident by experiments of the motion of pendulums, made with the greateſt exactneſs. For when the lengths of the pendulums are equal, bodies of very different bulks, and different internal and external texture, perform their vibrations in times exactly equal in equal arcs, keeping always pace together, and acquiring always equal velocities at the correſponding po:nts of thoſe arcs, unleſs ſo far as the reſiſtance of the air acts upon them unequally. In the common buſineſs of life, the quantity of matter of bodies has been always meaſured out by their weight; tho the influence of the air is various in its different ſtates, and renders this menſuration ſmewhat unaccurate in things of great value. Though the gravity of bodies really ariſes from their gravitation towards the ſeveral parts of the earth (as will appear afterwards) yet, becauſe this power acts around in all parts, and its direction is nearly towards the centre of the earth, it is therefore called a centripetal forcee We ſhall, afterwards ſhew that ſimilar centripetal forces tend to the ſun and planetss. Theſe forces are of three Kinds: the abſolute force is meaſured by the motion that would be produced by it in a given body, at a given diſtance For example, the abſolute centripetal force tending towards the ſun is to that which tends towards the earth, as the motion which would be produced by the force tending toward the ſun in a given body, at a given diſtance without the ſun's body, is to the motion which would be produced by the force tending towards the earth in an equal body, at an equal diſtance from it. As when we compare the forces of two magnets, we muſt compare their effects at equal diſtances; ſo when we compare the abſolute forces which tend to the central bodies, the compariſon cannot be juſt unleſs it be from effects produced when the circumſtances are alike. The ſecond ſort of centripetal force is the accelerating force, which is meaſured by the velocity generated by iĩt in a given time, and is different at different diſtances from the ſame central body, but depends not on the quantity 6f matter of the body that gravitates, being equal in all ſorts of bodies at equal diſtances from the centree The third ſort is the weight, or the vis motrix, and is meaſured by the quantity of motion that is generated in a heavy body in a given time; and differs from the accelerating force in the ſame manner as motion differs from velocity. 15. Becauſe the power of gravity is ſo well known to us, when we enquire into other powers, we endeavour to compare them with that of gravity, and to determine their proportionn. We find a great variety of powers analogous to it in nature; ſuch as that by which the particles of ſluids form themſelves into drops; that by which the parts of hard bodies cohere together; that by which the rays of light, in entering into water or glaſs, or into any medium of a greater refractive power, are conſtantly bent towards the perpendicular, and when they are incident upon the farther ſurface of the glaſs, with a ſuſficient obliquity, are all turned back into the glaſs, though there be no ſenſible medium behind the glaſs to reflect it; in the ſame manner as a heavy body projected obliquely upwards is bent into a curve, and brought back to the earth again by its gravity. Thele, and many other powers in nature, have an analogy to gravity, but extend to leſs diſtances, and obſerve laws ſomewhat different. It has been found very difficult to account for them mechanically. For this purpoſe, ſome have imagined certain effluvia to proceed from bodies, or atmoſpheres environing them; others have invented vortices; but all their attempts have hitherto proved unſatisfactory. That ſuch powers take place in nature, and contribute to produce its chief phænomena, is moſt evident; but their cauſes are very obſcure, and hardly acceſſible by us. In all the caſes when bodies ſeem. to act upon each other at a diſtance, and tend towards one another without any apparent cauſe impelling them, this force has been commonly called attraction; and this term is frequently uſed by Sir Iſaac Newton. But he gives repeated cautions that he pretends not, by the uſe of this term, to define the nature of the power, or the manner in which it acts. Nor does he ever afſirm, or inſinuate, that 2 body can act upon another at a diſtance, but by the intervention of other bodies. It is of the utmoſt importance in philoſophy to eſtabliſh a few general powers in nature, upon unqueſtionable evidence, to determine their las, and trace their conſequences, however obſcure the cauſes of thoſe powers may be; and this he has done with great ſucceſ. 16. But however commodious the term attraction may be, to avoid an uſeleſs and tedious circumlocution, yet becauſe it was uſed by the ſchool-men to cover their ignorance, the adverſaries of Sir Iſaac Newton's philoſophy have taken an unjuſt handle from his uſe of this term, after all his precautions, to depreciate and even ridicule his doctrines; by which they only convince us that they neither underſtand them, nor have impartially and duly conſidered them. Mr. Leibnitæ made uſc of this ſame term, in the ſame ſenſe with Sir Iſaac Newton, before he ſet up in oppoſition to him; and it is often to be met with in the writings of the moſt accurate philoſophers, ho have uſed it without always guarding againſt the abuſe of it, as he has done. A term of art has been often employed by crafty men, with too much ſucceſs, to raiſe a diſlike againſt their opponents, and miſlead the unwary, and to diſguſt them from enquiring into the truth; but ſuch diſingenuity is unworthy of philoſophers. No writer hath appeared againſt Sir Iſaac Newton, of late, by whom this argument, tho altogether groundleſs, is not inſiſted on at great length; and ſometimes adorned with the embelliſhments of wit and humour; but if the reader will take the trouble to compare their deſcriptions with Sir Iſaac Newton's own account, he vill eaſily perceive how little it was minded by them; and that the ſum of all their art and ſkill amounts to this only, that they were able to expoſe a creature of their own imagination. Poſſibly ſome unſkilful men may have fancied that bodies might attract each other by ſome charm or unknown virtue, without being impelled or acted upon by other bodies, or by any other powers of whatever kind; and ſome may have imagined that a mutual tendency may be eſſential to matter, tho this is directly contrary to the inertia of body deſcribed above; but ſurely Sir Iſaoc Newton has given no ground for charging him with either of theſe opinions: he has plainly ſignified that he thought that thoſe powers aroſe from the impulſes of a ſubtile ætherial medium that is diffuſed over the univerſe, and penetrates the pores of groſſer bodies. It appears from his letters to Mr. Boyle *, that this was his opinion early; and if * See the life of Mr. Byle premiſed to the late complete edition of his works. he did not publiſh it ſooner, it proceeded from hence only, that he found he was not able, from experiment and obſervation, to give a ſatisfactory account of this medium, and the manner of its operation, in producing the chief phænomena of naturee. They who imagine that he has only introduced a new phraſe or two into philoſophy, without any real benefit, may be eaſily ſatisfied of their miſtake, if they will but conſider with what evidence he has reſolved the chief phænomena of the ſyſtem of the vorld from thoſe powers; how he has computed the quantity of matter and denſity of the ſun, and of ſeveral of the planets, from them; how nearly he has determined the motion of the nodes of the moon, from its cauſe; and explained many of her irregularities, and the other motions of the ſyſtem. But we have inſiſted upon this perhaps at too great length; for as no philoſopher ſcruples to ſay that the magnet attracts iron, and that electric bodies, when their virtue is raiſed by friction, attract light ſubſtances; it muſt be allowed to be at leaſt as juſtifiable an expreſſion, or even more unexceptionable, to ſay that the earth attracts heavy bodies towards it; ſince all of them deſcend towards it with forces proportional to their quantity of matter, at equal diſtances from it; and this power extends to all diſtances, varying according to a certain known lav. C H A P II Of ihe laws of motion, and their general corollaries. HE firſt l]aw of motion is,  That a body  always perſeveres in its ſtate of reſt, or t: of uniform motion in a right line, till by ſome  external influence it be made to change its ſtate.” That a body of itſelf perſeveres in ĩts ſtate of reſt, is matter of moſt common and general obſervation, and is what ſuggeſts to us the paſſive nature of body: but that it likewiſe, of itſelf, perſeveres in ĩts ſtate of motion, as well as of reſt, is not altogether ſo obvious, and was not underſtood, for ſome time, by philoſophers themſelves, when they demanded the cauſe of the continuation of motion. It is eaſy, however, to ſee that this laſt is as general and conſtant a law of nature as the firſt. Any motions we produce, here on the earth, ſoon languiſh and at length vaniſh; whence it is a vulgar notion, that in general, motion diminiſhes ahd tends always toward reſt. But this is owing to the various reſiſtances which bodies here meet with in their motion, eſpecially from friction, or their rubbing upon other bodies in their progreſs, by which their motion is chiefly conſumed. For when, by any contrivance, this friction is much diminiſhed, we always find that the motion continues for a long time. Thus, when the f iction of the axis is leſſened by friction wheels applied to it, and turning round with it, the great wheel will ſometimes continue to revolve for half an hour, And when a braſs topp moves on a very ſmall pivot on a glaſs plane, it will continue in motion very ſmoothly for a great number of minutes. Chap. 2. PuILOSOPHICAL DiScovERIES. 3ſ A pendulum, ſuſpended in an advantageous manner, vill vibrate for a great while, notwithſtanding the reſiſtance of the ai. Upon the whole, it appears, that, if the friction and other reſiſtances could be taken quite avay, the motions would he perpetual. But what ſets this in the cleareſt light, is, that a body placed on the deck, or in the cabin of a ſhip, continues there at reſt while the motion of the ſhip remains uniform and ſteady; and the ſame holds of a body that is carried along in any ſpace that has, itſelf, an uniform motion in a right line. For if a body in motion tended to reſt, that which is in the cabin of a ſhip ought to fall hack towards the ſtern, which would appear as ſurprizing, when the motion of the ſhip is uniform and ſteady, as if the body ſhould, of itfelf, move towards the ſtern when the ſhip is at reſt, It is for this reaſon that the uniform motion of the earth upon its axis has no effect on the motion of bodies at the ſurface; that the motion of a ſhip carried away with a current is inſenſible to thoſe in the ſhip, unleſs they have an opportunity to diſcover it by objects which they know to be fixed, as the ſhores, and the bottom of the ſea, or by aſtronomical obſervations; and that the motions oſ the planets and comets, in the free celeſtial ſpaces, require no new impulſes to perpetuate them. 2. It is a part of the ſame law, that a body never changes the direction of its motion, of itſelf, but by ſome external influence only; and it is as natural a conſequence of the paſſive nature of body, as that it never changes iĩts velocity of itſelfl. As body has no ſelf-motive power, or ſpontaneity, if it was to change its direction, how could it determine itſelf to any one direction rather than to another? This part of the law is likewiſe confirmed by conſtant experience. If upon any ſmooth plane a globe of an uniform texture be projected, it proceeds always in a right line, without turning to either ſide, till its motion be extinguiſhed by the friction of the plane and reſiſtance of the air. It is true, that, in certain caſes, a ball proceeds upon a billiard table firſt in a right line, and afterwards, returns of itſelf a little way in the ſame right line; but this ariſes from the ball's having a motion upon its axis, with a direction contrary to that of its progreſſive motion on the table which when the progreſſive motion is deſtroyed by the friction, brings the ball back again, till this motion is likewiſe deſtroyed by the ſame frictionn. When a ball is projected in the air, its gravity indeed bends its motion into a curve, but it continues to move in the plane of its firſt projection perpendicular to the horizon, without turning to either ſide of that plane; unleſs in ſome caſes, when, becauſe of its motion upon its axis, the reaction of the air makes it deviate ſomewhat from it. If bodies changed the direction of their motion of themſelves, they could not continue at reſt in a ſpace that is cqrried uniformly forward in a right line; as they are always found to do. As body, therefore, is paſſive in receiving its motion and the direction of its motion, ſo it retains them or perſeveres in them, without any change, till it be acted upon by ſomething external. This law iIs now generally received upon the beſt evidence, but was not clearly underſtood even ſo lately as in Kepler's time, as appears by the account we gave of his doctrines in the firſt book, From this law it appears, why we enquire not, in philoſophy, concerning the cauſe of the continuation of the reſt of bodies, or of their uniform motion in a right line. But if a motion begin, or if a motion already produced is eĩther accelerated or retarded, or if the direction of the motion is altered, an enquiry into the power or cauſe that produces this change is a proper ſubject of philoſophy: the chief buſineſs of which (as Sir Iſaac Newton obſerves) is to diſcover the powers that produce any given motions; or, when the powers are given, to trace the motions that are produced by them. 3. The ſecond general law of motion is, e that s the change of motion is proportional to the force  impreſſed, and is produced in the right line in  which that force acts Thus when a motion is accelerated, as that of a heavy body deſcending in the vertical line, the acceleration is proportional to the power that acts upon the body. If a body deſcend along an inclined plane, the acceleration of the motion along the plane is proportional not to the total force of gravity, but to that part only which acts in the direction of the plane, as will better appear when we come to treat of the reſolution of motionn. When a fluid acts upon a body, as water or air upon the vanes of a mill, or wind upon the ſails of a ſhip, the acceleration of the motion is not proportional to the whole force of thoſe fluids, but to that part only which is impreſſed upon the vanes or ſails, which depends upon the exceſs of the velocity of the ſfluid above the velocity which the vane or ſail has already acquired: for if the velocity of the fluid be only equal to the velocity of the vane or ſail, it juſt keeps up with it, but has no effect either to advance or retard its motion. It is, at the ſame time, of the utmoſt importance to have regard to the direction in which the force is impreſſed, in order to determine the change of motion produced by it. It would be very erroneous to ſuppoſe that the acceleration of the motion of the ſhip, in the direction in which ſhe ſails, is proportional to the force impreſſed when it acts obliquely upon the ſail, or when the poſition of the ſail is oblique to the direction in which the ſhip moves. The change of her motion is firſt to be eſtimated in the direction of the force impreſſed, and thence by a proper application of mechanical anq geometrical principles, the change of the motion of the ſhip in her own direction is to be derivedc When gravity or any centripetal force acts upon a body, moving with a direction oblique to the right line drawn from it to the center, the change of its motion is not proportional to the whole centripetal force which acts upon it, but to that part only, which, after a juſt reſolution of the force, is found to act in the direction of its motion. It appears from theſe inſtances, of how extenſive an uſe theſe general laws are in the doctrine of motion. 4. The third general law of motion is,  that  action and reaction are equal with oppoſite direc-  tions, and are to be eſtimated always in the ſame right line Body not only never changes its ſtate of itſelf, but reſiſts, by its inertia, againſt every action that produces a change in its motionn. When two bodies meet, each endeavours to perſevere in its ſtate and reſiſts any change; and becauſe the change which is produced in either may be equally meaſured by the action which it exerts upon the other, or by the reſiſtance which it meets with from it, it follows that the changes produced in the motions of each are equal, but are made in contrary directions. The one acquires no new force but what the other loſes in the ſame direction; nor does this laſt loſe any force but what the other acquires; and, hence, tho by their colliſions, motion paſſes from the one to the other, yet the ſum of their motions, eſtimated in a given direction, is preſerved the ſame, and is unalterable by their mutual actions upon each other. In collecting this ſum, motions that have contrary directions are to be affected with contrary ſigns; a motion eaſtward is contrary to a motion weſtward; ſo that if the motions are ſummed up as having a weſtern direction, a motion eaſtward is to be conſidered as negative, or to be ſubducted from the reſt. In this manner, this law ſerves to render the firſt law more general, and to extend it to any number of bodies; for as, by the firſt law, a body perſeveres in its ſtate of reſt, or of uniform rectilinear motion, till ſome external influence affect it; ſo it follows from this law,  that the ſum of the motions of c any number of bodies, eſtimated in a given di-  rection, perſeveres the ſame in their mutual acc tions and colliſions, till ſome external influence c diſturb them. La 5. The truth of this third law appears from manifold experiments, in the colliſions of bodies of all Kinds. But the meaning of it ſeems to have been miſtaken, in ſeveral inſtances, by ingenious men; which it is neceſſary for us to guard againſt. They who maintain the new opinion concerning the forces of bodies, meaſuring them by the compounded proportion of the quantity of matter and the ſquare of the velocity, found it impoſſible to explain the actions and colliſions of bodies of a perfect hardneſs, void of all elaſticity, conſiſtently with this doctrine. Therefore, in order to get rid of them, ſome pretended that it is abſolutely impoſſible ſuch bodies ſould exiſt, upon grounds the weakneſs of which was ſhewn in the firſt book; while others contented themſelves with obſerving that they knew of no ſuch bodies in nature, and thought this a ſufficient excuſe for giving no account of their colliſions; tho at the ſame time they treated largely of bodies of a perfect elaſticity, none of which are to be met vith in nature; and we have much better reaſon to conclude that there are bodies of a perfect hardneſs, than of a perfect elaſticity; becauſe we cannot but ſuppoſe the ultimate elementary particles of bodies that are void of all pores, or atoms, to be perfectly hard or inflexible, ſo as not to yield in the ordinary actions and colliſions of bodies. But after all this art in ſcreening their favourite opinion, the difficulty ſtill recurred in explaining the colliſions of ſoft bodies; and ſome farther new invention was requiſite to reconcile the phænomena with their doctrine. For if a ſoft body, with the velocity æ, ſtrikes another equal quieſcent ſoft body, they will proceed as in one maſs with the velocity L u, dividing the motion of the firſt body equally between them, in conſequence of the third general law of motion. According to the new opinion, the force of the firſt body before the ſtroke was u u, the force of each of them after the ſtroke is ; u x ; u or  uu; and the ſum of their forces after the ſtroke is 4 u u; ſo that the ſum of the forces, after the ſtroke, is only one half of what it was before the ſtroke, while the quantity of motion is preſerved the ſame as it was, without any change. Now the difficulty was, how to account for the loſs of one half of the force of the firſt body in the ſtroke: for this purpoſe, they advanced, without any other proof, this new doctrine, that when the parts of ſoft bodies yield without reſtoring themſelves, being void of elaſticity, a certain quantity of force is loſt in the compreſſion of their parts by the colliſion; whereas we know no way by which force is loſt in one body, but by its being communicated to another. The parts of ſoft bodies are indeed moved out of their places, in the colliſion, and ſome motion is loſt in the firſt body by being communicated, in this manner, to the parts tion otherwiſe than by communicating it to other parts, or by ĩts accruing to the whole body; ſo that there is no juſt reaſon for ſuppoſing that any motion or force is loſt in flattening or hollowing of ſoft bodies, in their colliſions; and this new tenet is invented merely to ſerve a particular purpoſe. 6. The moſt learned and ſkilful advocate for this new doctrine appears to have greatly miſtaken this third law of motion, when he tells us that the preſervation of the ſum of the abſolute motions of bodies, in their colliſions, is ſo immediate a conſequence of the equality of action and reaction, that to endeavour to prove it would only render it more obſcure, the augmentation or diminution of the force of the one (ſays he) being the neceſſary conſequence of the diminution or augmentation of the force of the other. Now it is plain that this third law of motion is general, extending to bodies of all kinds; and it is well known that when ſoft bodies meet in oppoſite directions, the ſum of their abſolute motions or forces is diminiſhed; and when the bodies are equal, and their velocities likewiſe equal, it is totally deſtroyed by their colliſion. It is not the ſum of the abſolute motions or forces of bodies, but this ſum eſtimated in a given direction, that is preſerved unaltered in their colliſions, in conſequence of this third lIaw of motion: nor can the preſervation of the ſum of the abſolute forces of any ſort of bodies be conſidered as an immediate conſequence of it. On the contrary, the ſum of the abſolute motions of even perfectly elaſtic bodies is ſometimes increaſed, and in ſome caſes diminiſhed, by their colliſions; ſo that a proof was neceſſary that the ſum of their abſolute forces (in whatever manner thoſe forces are meaſured) is preſerved unalterable, in their colliſion; eſpecially ſince this ſum, according to his own doctrine, undergoes an infinite variety of changes, during the ſmall time in which the bodies act upon each other, while the parts firſt yield and then reſtore themſelves to their former ſituations. 7. The ſame philoſophers miſtake this third law, or a moſt eſſential part of it, when they meaſure action and reaction on different right liness. In a celebrated argument which they advance for their new doctrine concerning the forces of bodies, and which is much applauded by thoſe who favour it, they ſhew that a body with a velocity as 2, is able to bend and overcome the reſiſtance of four ſprings, one of which alone is equivalent to the force of the ſame body moving with a velocity as 1; from which they infer that, in the former caſe, the force is quadruple, tho the velocity be only double of what it is in the latter caſe. In like maænner, becauſe a body moving with a velocity proportional to the diagonal of the rectangle is able to ballance the reſiſtance of two ſprings proportional to the ſides of the ſame rectangle, they thence infer that the force of a body moving with a velocity as the diagonal is equal to the ſum of the forces of two bodies moving with velocities proportional to the ſides of the rectangle; and, becauſe the ſquare of the diagonal is equal to the ſum of the ſquares of the two ſides, they thence infer that the forces of equal bodies are as the ſquares of their velocities. But in all theſe arguments (which are the moſt plauſible of any that have been offered for their new doctrine, and are moſt apt to miſlead their readers) they do not conſider that the force which one body loſes, in acting upon another, is not equal to that which it produces or deſtroys in the orher, eſtimated in any direction at pleaſure, but in that only in which the firſt body acts; and that body, in conſequence of its inertia, not only reſiſts any change in its quantity of motion, but likewiſe any change in the direction of its motion. If any planet revolves in a circle, the gravity of it towards the centre is employed, during the whole revolution, in changing the direction of its motion only, without producing the leaſt augmentation or diminution of the motion itſelf. But theſe things will more eaſily appear after we have treated of the compoſition and reſolution of motion: we only obſerve here, that, in order to ſupport their favourite doctrine, they embarraſs the plain, ſimple and beautiful theory of motion, in ſome caſes by neglecting the time, and in others by confounding the directions in which bodies act upon each other, or upon ſprings; while all the valuable conſequences which they pretend to draw from this doctrine follow more naturally, and in a ſatisfactory manner only, from the laws of motion rightly underſtood and applied. 8. Our authors firſt corollary, from the laws of motion, is, that when a body is acted upon by two forces at the ſame time, it will deſcribe the diagonal, by the motion reſulting from their compoſition, in the ſame time that it would deſcribe the ſides of the parallelogram by thoſe forces acting ſeparately. Let the body a (Fig. 2.) have a motion in the direction A B, repreſented by the right line a B, at the ſame time let another motion be communicated to it in the direction a b, repreſented by the right line a ; complete the parallelogram a B c D; and the body will proceed in the diagonal a c, and deſcribe it in the ſame time that it would have deſcribed the ſide A B by the firſt motion, or the ſide a D by the ſecond. To underſtand our author's demonſtration of this corollary, we muſt premiſe this obvious principle, that when a body is acted upon by a motion or power parallel to a right line given in poſition, this power or motion has no effect to cauſe the body to approach towards that right line or recede from it, but to move in a line parallel to that right line only; as appears from the ſecond law of motion. Therefore A D being parallel to B , the motion in the direction a D has no effect in promoting or retarding the approach of the body a towards the line B G; conſequently it will arrive at this line B c in the ſame time as if the firſt motion a B only had been impreſt upon it. In like manner, becauſe a B is parallel to D c, the motion a B has no effect in promoting or retarding the approach of the body a towards the line b c; conſequently it will arrive at the line o c in the ſame time as if the motion a D only had been impreſſed upon it. Therefore the body a will arrive at both the lines  c and D C in the ſame time, that, by the firſt motion alone, it would have deſcribed a B, or, by the ſecond alone, it would have deſcribed a p. But it can arrive at both the lines B C and D c no other way than by coming to their interſection c: therefore, when the two motions a B and a D are impreſt upon it at once, it moves from a to c, and deſcribes the diagonal a c, in the ſame time that, by theſe motions acting ſeparately, it would have deſcribed the ſides A B and a D. 9. Becauſe this corollary is of very extenſive uſe, it may be worth while to illuſtrate it farther. Suppoſe Fig. 3.) the ſpace E F 6 H to be carried uniformly forward in the direction a B, and with a velocity repreſented by A B. Let a motion in the direction a D, and meaſured by the right line a o, be impreſt upon the body a in the ſpace E F G H. To thoſe who are in this ſpace, the body a will appear to move in the right line A D; but its real or abſolute motion will be in the diagonal a c of the parallelogram a 2 c D; and it will deſcribe a c in the ſame time that the ſpace by its uniform motion, or any point of it, is carried over a right line equal to a B, Or that the body a4, by its motion acroſs the ſpace, deſcribes A p. For it is manifeſt that the line A D, in conſequence of the motion of the ſpace, is carried into the ſituation B c, and the point D to e; ſo that the body a really moves in the diagonal A C. 10. The converſe of this corollary is, that the motion in the diagonãl a c may be reſolved into the motions in the ſides of the parallelogram a B and A D. For it is manifeſt, that if (ſig. 4) a æ be taken equal to a D with an oppoſite direction, and the parallelogram a æx B c be completed, the right line A B ſhall be the diagonal of this parallelogram; conſequently, by the two laſt articles, the motion a c compounded with the motion a x equal and oppoſite to the motion a D, produces the motion A B; that is, if from the motion a c, in the diagonal, you ſubduct the motion a D in one of the ſides, there will remain the motion a B in the other ſide of the paraellelogram A B C D. 11. This doctrine will receive farther illuſtration by reſolving each of the motions a B and a D into two motions, one in the direction of the diagonal a c and the other in the direction perpendicular to it; that is, by reſolving (Fig. 5.) the motion a B into the motions a M and a N, and the motion a D int the motions a æ and a L. For the triangles a » x and B c M being equal and ſimilar, D ꝶ ĩs equal to E M, Or AL tO AN; ſo that the motions a L aud a N, being equal and oppoſite, they deſtroy each others effect: and it being an obvious and general principſe, that the motion of a body in a right line is no vay affected by any two equal powers or motions that act in directions perpendicular to that line, and oppoſite to each other, it thus appears how the hody A is determined to move in the diagonal A c; and, becauſe a x is equal to Mę, it appears how the remaining motions A M and a x are accumulated in the direction a c, ſo as to produce a motion meaſurcd by a c. It appears likewiſe how abſolute motion is loſt in the compoſition of motion; for the parts of the motions A B and a D that are repreſented by a æ and a L, being equal and oppoſite, deſtroy cach others efſect, and the other parts A M and a ꝶ, only, remain in the direction of the compounded motion a c: while, on the contrary, in the reſolution of motion, the quantity of abſolute motion is increaſed, the ſum of the motions a B and a D, or B C, being greater than the motion a c. But the ſum of the motions, cſtimated in a given direction, is no way æſſected by the compoſition or reſolution of motion, or indeed by any actions or influences of bodies upon each other, that are equal and mutual and have oppoſite directions. For ſuppoſe that (Fig. 6.) the motions are to be eſlimated in the direction a ? ; let c P, B R, D Q, be perpendicular to this direction in the points æ, R and ; then the motions a c, a B, A D, reduced to the direction a p, are to be eſtimated by AP, A R and Aa qreſpectively, the parts which are perpendicular to a r having no eſfect in that direction. Let a r meet B C in s3 then hecauſe n r is to s ?, as B C (or AD) to Cs, that is, as a  to s ?, it follows that n ois equal to ” P, and that a ?æ +4 q is equal to A r; thatis, rhat the ſum of the motions a B and a D, reduced to any given direction a P, ĩs equal to the compounded motion a e reduced to the ſame diroction. ral, when any number of motions are compounded together, or are reſolved according to this general corollary, the ſum of their motions continues invaably the ſame, till ſome foreign influence affects them. 12. The uſefulneſs of the ſame corollary has induced authors to invent other demonſtrations for the farther illuſtration of itt. We ſhall only add a proof of the ſimpleſt caſe, when the motions a B and 4 D are equal, and the angle B a D is a right one; in this caſe a B  D (Fig. 7, 8.) is a ſquare, and the diagonal a c biſects the angle B A D; and, becauſe the powers and motions of a D and a B are equal, and there can be no reaſon why the direction oſ the compounded power or motion ſhould incline to one of theſe more than to the other, it is evident that its direction muſt be in the diagonal a c; and that the compounded power or motion is meaſured by a c appears in the following manner. If it is not meaſured by a c, ſirſt let it be meaſured by any right line a ? leſs than a c; join B D interſecting A C in ꝶ, upon 4 c take a M greater than a ꝶx, in the ſame proportion that a c is greater than a æ; thro the point M draw the right line ? õ parallel to B D, meeting a D in G and a B in ?; complete the parallelograms a M õ H and A M F N: then becauſe theſe parallelograms are ſquares as well as a B C D, and a D is to a G, as A ẽ to A M, that is as A E to Ac; and aB to aF in the ſame proportion; and becauſe a E is ſuppoſed to be the power or motion compounded from a B and a p, it follows that the power or motion a D may be ſuppoſed to be compounded from the powers or motions a M and a ꝶ, and a B from A M and a N. But a u and a N, acting equally with oppoſite directions, deſtroy each others effet; ſo that it would follow that the reK maining powers or motions AM+Aa M (i. e. 24M) which are accumulated in the direction of the diagonal a c, ought to be equal to AE; which is abſurd, for AM is greater than a æ by the conſtruction, and 2 A M greater than 2 A æ or a c, which is ſuppoſed to be greater than a 2: In like manner, it is ſhewn (Fig. 8.) that the compounded power or motion, in the diagonal a c, is not meaſured by a right line reater than Aa c; and therefore it is meaſured preciſely by the diagonal a c ĩtſelſ. 13. The ſtate of any ſyſtem of bodies, as to motion or reſt, is judged by that of their centre of gravity, in the moſt ſimple and convenient manner. In a regular body of a homogeneous texture, the centre of gravity is the ſame with the centre of magnitude; and, in general, ĩt is that point of an heavy body, which being ſuſtained, the body is in conſequence itſelf ſuſtained. In two equal bodies it is in a right line joining their centres, at equal diſtances from both: when the bodies are unequal, it is nearer to the greater body, in proportion as ĩt is gre.ter than the other; or its diſtances from their centres are inverſely as the bodies. Let A (Fig. 9.) be greater than B, join a B, upon which take the point c, ſo that c Aa may be to  B, as the body B is to the body a, or that Ax c a may be equal to B X C B, then is c the centre of gravity of the bodies a and B; and we ſhall afterwards ſhew, that if A and B be joined by an inflexible rod a B void of gravity, and the point c be ſuſtained, then the bodies a and B ſhall be in æquilibrio. If the centre of gravity of three bodies be required, firſt find c the centre of gravity of a and B, and ſuppoſing a body to be placed there èqual to the ſum of a and B, find õ the centre of gravity of it and D; then ſhall õ be the centre of gravity of the three bodies a, B, and D: in like manner, the centre of gravity of any number of bodies i is determined. 14. The ſum of the products tHat ariſe by multiplying the bodies by their reſpective diſtances from a right Iline, or plane, given in poſition, is equal to the product of the ſum of the hodies multiplied by the diſtance of their centre of gravity from the ſame right line or plane, when all the bodies are on the ſame ſide of it: but when ſome of them are on the oppoſite ſide, their products when multiplied by their reſpective diſtances from it are to be conſidered as negative, or to be ſubducted. Let 1 L (Fig. 10.) he the right line given in poſition, c the centre of gravity of the bodies a and B, A, BS, Cſ perpendiculars to 1L in the points a, b, c; then if the bodies A and B be on the ſame ſide of 1L, we ſhall find AxAaa+Bx B b =aAH B X cc. For drawing thro C the right line M N parallel to IL, meeting a  in M, and Bb in N, we have a to B, as B C to ac, by the property of the centre of gravity; and conſequently a to B, as B N tO AM, Or AXx AMæ BEXBN; but Ax A+BX BL a x cc+Aax AMBX CC BXBN=AXCC+ BX C cA+ B XCC. When (Fig. 11.) B is on the other ſide of the right line 1L, and c on the ſame ſide with a, then AxX A BXBb=ax C-Ax AMBX BN BX Cc/ A B x cc: and when the ſum of the products of the bodies on one ſide of 1 L multiplied by their diſtances from it, is equal to the ſum of the products of the bodies multiplied by their diſtances on the other ſide of 1L, then c c vaniſhes, or the common centre of gravity of all the bodies falls on this right line 1L. 15. Suppoſe now the bodies a and B to proceed in the right lines AD and B E, (ſig. 12.) and when they eome to o and 2 their common centre of gravity to be found in õ: let D 4, E æ, õ g be perpendicuſars to IL, in d, e, g5 let M, E N, 6E, parallel to 1L, meet a a, B B b, C c, reſpectively, in the points M, N, E. By the laſt article, x d+8x E eAFB x õ g; and ſubducting this from the equation in the preceding article, viæ. Ax aa +BxBbL=a E B X CC, then a x AM +BXBN=A + BxCE. By proceeding in the ſame manner it will appear that a xD M+BxEN = AF B x 6 &. The motions of a and B being ſuppoſed uniform, the right lines A M and B ill increaſe uniformly, ſo as to become double in double the time; conſequently c æ ill alſo increaſe uniformly, or in the ſame proportion as the time. And becauſe D M, EN, increaſe uniformly, it follows, that G K alſo increaſes uniformly; and that c x is to X õ in the conſtant ratio of Ax AM+ BX BN tO AXD M+ B X EN. Hence it appears, that when any number of bodies move in right lines with uniform motions, their common centre of gravity moves likewiſe in a right line with an uniform motion; and that the ſum of their motions, eſtimated in any given direction, is preciſely the ſame as if all the bodies, in one maſs, were carried on with the direction and motion of their common centre of gravity. Becauſe the ſum of the motions of the bodies, eſtimated in any given direction, is preſerved invariably the ſame in their colliſions, without being affected by their actions upon each other, that are equal and mutual and have contrary directions; it follows, that the ſtate of their centre of gravity is no way affected by their colliſions, or any ſuch actions; and that it perſeveres in its ſtate of reſt or uniform motion, in the ſame manner as by the firſt law of motion any one body perſeveres in its ſtate, till ſome external influence diſturb it. Theſe propoſitions repreſent to us the theory of 3 motion motion in a plain and beautiful light; and enable us to judge the motions of a ſyſtem of bodies, with almoſt the ſame facility as of thoſe of one body. 16. The motions and actions of bodies upon each other, in a ſpace that is carried uniformly forward, are the ſame as if that ſpace was at reſt; and any powers or motions that act upon all the bodies, ſo as to produce equal velocities in them in the ſame or in parallel right lines, have no effect on their mutual actions or relative motions. Thus the motion of bodies aboard a ſhip, that is carried ſteadily and uniformly forward, are performed in the ſame manner as if the ſip was at reſtt When a ſleet of ſhips is carried away by an uniform current, their relative motions are no way affected by the current, but are the Tame as if the ſea was at reſt. The motion of the earth and air round iĩts axis has no effect on the actions of bodies and agents at its ſurface, but ſo far as it is not uniform and rectilineal. In general, the actions of bodies upon each other depend not upon their abſolute but relative motion; which is the difference of their abſolute motions when they have the ſame direction, but their ſum when they are moved in oppoſite directions. 17. No principle being more univerſally allowed than this, or more evidently eſtabliſhed upon common experience, ve deduced the following argument from it againſt the new doctrine concerning the forces oſ bodies in motion, in a piece that obtained the prize of the royal academy of ſciences at Paris, in 1724; which, becauſe of its plainneſs and ſimplicity we ſhall deſcribe here again. Let a and B (Fig. 13.) be two equal bodies that are ſeparated from each other by ſprings interpoſed between the (or in any other equivalent manner) in a ſpace EF G H, which in the mean time proceeds uniformly in the direction B A (in which line the ſprings act) with a velocity as 1; and ſuppoſe that the ſprings impreſs on the equal bodies A and B equal velocities, in oppoſite directions, that are each as I. Then the abſolute velocity of a (which was as 1) vill be now as 2 and according to the new doctrine its force as 4: whereas the abſolute velocity and the force of B (Which was as 1) will be now deſtroyed; ſo that the action of the ſprings adds to a a force as 3, and ſubducts from the equal body B a force as 1 only; and yet it ſeems manifeſt, that the actions of the ſprings, on theſe equal bodies, ought to be equal; (and Mr. Bernoulli expreſsly owns them to be ſo): that is, equal actions of the ſame ſprings upon equal bodies would produce very unequal effects, the one being triple of the other according to the new doctrine; than which hardly any thing more abſurd can be advanced in philoſophy or mechanics. In general, if m repreſent the velocity of the ſpace E F G H In the direction B 4, n the velocity added to that of a and ſubducted from that of B, by the action of the ſprings, then the abſolute velocities of A and B Will be repreſented by mn and man reſpectively, the force added to a by the ſprings will be 2 mn +n n, and the force taken from B Will be 2 m nn n, which differ by 2nn. Farther, it is allowed that the actions of bodies upon one another are the ſame in a ſpace that proceeds with an uniform motion as if the ſpace was at reſt: but if the ſpace EF G H was at reſt, it is allowed that the forces communicated by the ſprings to a and B had been equal; and, according to the new doctrine, the force oſ each had been repreſented by n n; whereas the force communicated to a by the ſprings in the ſpace E F O H Is repreſented by 2 m n+n n, and the force taken from B Will be 2 mn—nn. Theſe arguments are ſimple and obvious, and ſeem, on that account, to be the more proper in treating of this queſtion. They who maintain the new doctrine may define force in ſuch a manner, as to make the diſpute appear to relate merely to words; but, as the terms action and force ſeem to be very nearly allied to each other, it ſurely tends to confound our notions and language, to maintain that equal actions generate or produce unequal forces in the ſame time. But what evidently ſews that the authors on the ſide of this new opinion did not underſtand what they taught, is, their telling us, that the quantity of abſolute force is unalterable by the colliſions of bodies, andthat this follows ſo evidently from the equality of action and reaction, that to endeavour to demonſtrate it would only render it more obſcuree For hence it appears, that they underſtocd equal changes to be produced in the forces of bodies in conſequence of the equality of aiion and reaction; and yet it is evident from what we have ſhewn, that the changes produced in the forces of bodies muſt be very unequal, according to this new doctrine, though the action and reaction by which they are produced be equal. It ſeems to have been by a miſtake, that Mr. Leibnitæ firſt found himſelf engaged to maintain this new doctrine, in 1686; and in like manner, fome of his diſciples ſeem to have raſhly adopted the ſame, without having attended to the conſequences. 18. In the theory of motion, rightly underſlood, the ſame laws that ſerve for comparing, compounding, or reſolving motions, are obſerved likewiſe by preſſures; that is, the powers that generate motion, or tend to produce it: for forces are nothing elſe but the ſums of ſuch preſſures accumulated in the body, in conſequence of the continued action of the powers for a finite time; and preſſures are conſidered as infinitely ſmall forces, or as the elements from which the forces are produced: and it adds no ſmall beauty and evidence to this theory of motion, that both obſerve the ſame laws. When a force is generated in any body, by the accumulation of other forces or impulſes, that which is generated, in any direction, muſt be equal to the ſum of thoſe which are all employed and conſumed, in that direction, in producing it; and if the force is produced by a continual ſucceſſive action, the motion generated muſt be equal to the ſum of the preſſures that are exerted in producing it. In like manner, if motion is deſtroyed by the reſiſtance of any oppoſite power, it muſt be equal to the ſum of all the actions by which it is totally deſtroyed. On the other hand, the intenſity of the power that generates motion in any body, is proportional to the augment of force which it generates in a given time, and the intenſity of the power that reſiſts or deſtroys motion, is meaſured by the decrement of force produced in a given time; ſince the augment in the firſt caſe, and decrement of motion in the ſecond caſe, are the adequate eſfects of the power; which ĩs ſuppoſed to be of ſuch a nature as to be renewed every moment, and exert all its influence at once. In general, the intenſity of any power that generates or deſtroys motion is the greater, in proportion as the change of velocity produced by it in the direction of that power is greater, and the leſs the time is in which that change is produced, if the intenſity of the power continues uniform during that time: but if the power varies, its intenſity, at any given term of the time, is to be meaſured by the change of velocity which would have been produced, in a given time, by the power continucd uniformly for that time. : 13. The Chap. 2. PHILOSOPHICAL DiSCOvERIES. I39 19. The preſſure or power that generates motion in a body is in the compounded ratio of the quantity of matter in the body, and of the velocity which it would generate in it in a given time, if it was continued uniform for that time; and thoſe preſſures are equal in any two bodies, when their quantities of matter are reciprocally as thoſe velocities, that is, when the intenſity of the power that acts upon the greater body a, is leſs than the intenſity of that which acts upon the leſſer body B, in the ſame proportion as B is leſs than a. If two bodies that are acted upon by ſuch powers, with oppoſite directions, be in contact, neither of the powers will prevail, and no motion will be produced. In the ſame manner, if two bodies, moving with velocities inverſely proportional to their quantities of matter, meet with oppoſite directions, their motions will deſtroy each other, if they are ſoſt bodies; or if they are ſo perfectly hard as that their parts are quite inſlexible, they will both ſtop after the ſtroke: but if they have any elaſticity, they will be reſlected after the ſtroke with equal motions. Thus there is a perfect harmony between the laws of preſſures, or powers, and the laws of motions or forces produced by thoſe powers; as, in general, there muſt be an analogy between the powers that generate or produce any effect, and the effects themſelves which are generated. But this harmony is quite Ioſt, as to the forces of bodies, according to the new opinion concerning their menſuration; for, according to this opinion, when the velocity is ſinite, how ſmall ſoever it may be, the force is meaſured by the ſquare of the velocity; but when the velocity is infinitely little (as it is, according to the favourers of the new opinion) in conſequence of the firſt impulſe of the power that generates the motion, the force is ſimply as the velocity; and we cannot but obſerve, that this ſudden change of the law does not appear to be conſiſtent with the favourite principle of continuity, ſo zealouſly maintained by the ſame philoſophers. According to the ſame opinion, forces that ſuſtain each other, with oppoſite directions, and deſtroy each others effect, may be unequal in any given ratio; and when bodies meet with equal forces. in oppoſite directions, they do not therefore ſuſtain each other, but that which has the greater velocity carries it againſt the other. Let v denote the velocity of a, and v the velocity of B; then a x v will denote the motion or force of a, and B x v the motion or force of B; ſo that theſe motions are equal when a x v=238 x v, that is, when v is to v, as B is to a: and this is the caſe wherein conſtant experience teaches us that the motions ſuſtain each other, provided their directions be oppoſite. But, according to the new opinion, the force of a is meaſured by a x vv, and the force of B by B x v v, which are to each other in the ſame proportion as v to v, in the preſent caſe, becauſe we ſuppoſe a x v=q8 x v. Theſe forces, therefore, according to the new opinion, are ſo far from being equal, that the force of A is leſs than the force of B, in proportion as v is leſs than v, or B leſs than a; ſo that, according to this doctrine, a force might ſuſtain, or even overcome, a force 1000 times greater than itſelf, or greater than itſelf in any aſſignable proportion. According to the ſame doctrine, the forces of Aa and B are equal, when a x v væ38 x v v, that is, for example, when a being quadruple of B, the velocity of B is double of the velocity of a; in which caſe the quantity of motion, or momentum, of a is double of that of 3; ard the motion of a appears, from experience, to be more than ſuſficient to ſuſtain the motion of 2. It has coſt the favourers of the new opinion a great deal of pains to compoſe their accounts, by which they endeavoured to reconcile their theory with experience; and how unſatisfactory their accounts have proved, will eaſily appear to the reader who will take the trouble to examine them. 20. Let the bodies a and B (Fig. 14.) by moving towards each other, compreſs equal and ſimilar ſprings placed between them, till by the reaction of thoſe ſprings their motions be deſtroyed. Mr. Bernoulli expreſsly owns, that the actions of the ſprings on thoſe bodies are conſtantly equal to each other, and yet maintains that they deſtroy a force in B greater than the force of a, in the ſame proportion as the body a is greater than B, or (c being the centre of gravity of a and B) as  B is greater than c a. He therefore maintains, that equal preſſures or actions of ſprings generate, in the ſame time, forces that may be unequal in any aſſignable ratio; which is repugnant to the plaineſt notions we are able to form of action and force, and ſerves only to introduce myſterious and obſcure conceptions into the theory of motion, without any neceſũity. If we ſuppoſe the body a to compreſs the ſprings from a to c, then the body B Will compreſs all the ſprings from B tO C, in the ſame degree, and in the ſame time; and thence he infers, that the force of a is to the force of B, in the ſame proportion as the number of ſprings from C to a, to the number of ſprings from c to 2. But ſince the motion, force, or eſffect of any kind, produced or deſtroyed in a or B, depends upon the immediate action which produces the effect, and upon it only; and ſince, in this caſe, the actions of the ſprings upon the bodies a and B are thoſe which deſtroy their motions; and ſince it is allowed by him that the actions of the ſprings upon theſe bodies are equal, is it not evident that the forces deſtroyed by them in the ſame time muſt be equal? And is it not manifeſt, that the forces which are produced or deſtroyed in bodies, are to be meaſured by the efforts which the ſprings exert upon the bodies in producing this effect, and not by the number of ſprings? It is the laſt ſpring only, which is in contact with the body, that acts upon it, the reſt ſerving only for ſuſtaining it in its action; ſo that any change produced in the body, by whatever name it be called, ought to be determined from the action of this laſt ſpring only, and in juſt reaſoning ought to be computed from it alonee. Had he defined force by the number of equal and ſimilar ſprings, that, by a given degree of expanſion or compreſſion, produce or deſtroy it, juſt exceptions might have been made againſt the propriety and convenience of ſuch new and unneceſſary expreſſions, as tending to perplex and darken this moſt uſeful theory of motion, which was before very clear and evident: but then this controverſy would have appeared to relate chiefly to words and terms of art, and there would not have been ſo much danger of miſtakes ariſing from their doctrines. But he does not give this for the definition of force. 21. When a body deſcends by its gravity, the motion generated may be conſidered as the ſum of the uniform and continual impulſes accumulated in the body, during the time of its falling And when a body is projected perpendicularly upwards, its motion may be conſidered as equivalent to the ſum of the impulſes of the ſame power till they extinguiſh itt. When the body is projected upwards vwith a double velocity, theſe uniform impulſes muſt be continued for a double time, to be able to deſtroy the motion of the body; and hence it ariſes, that the body, by ſetting out with a double velocity, and aſcending for a double time, muſt ariſe to a quadruple height, before its motion is exhauſted. But this proves that a body with a double velocity moves with a double force, ſince it is produced or deſtroyed by the ſame uniform power continued for a double time, and not with a quadruple force, though it ariſe to a quadruple height. This, however, was the argument upon which Mr. Leibnitæ firſt built this doctrine; and thoſe which have been ſince derived from the indentings or hollows produced in ſoft bodies by others falling into them, are much of the ſame kind and forcee Cauſes are not to be meaſured by any effects produced by them, taken without any choice, or judgment, or regard to their circumſtances. Motions and forces are not to be meaſured by the effects produced, without regard to the times and directions of the motions, according to the principles of geometry and mechanics. In geometry, we judge of wholes by comparing their parts, or the elements from which they are generated; and, in mechanics, we can have no better method of judging of motions, or forces, than from the powers that produce them. The motion, or force of a body has a much more ſimple and plain analogy to the power that produces it, than to the ſpace deſcribed by it in ſoft clay or any other reſiſting medium. 22. The principle, * that the cauſe is to be meae ſured by its effect,” is one of thoſe that will be very apt to lead us into error, both in metaphyſics and natural philoſophy, if applied in a vague and indiſtinct manner, without ſufficient precautions. Force is defined to be that power of acting in a body which muſt be meaſured by its whole effect tll its motion be deſtroyed, by thoſe who favour the new opinion, or ſome of them at leaſt, and by ſoe who would repreſent this diſpute as merely about words. But the ſame authors tell us likewiſe, that force is proportional to the number of ſprings which it can bend before it be deſtroyed; and this they propoſe, without any proof, as a definition or axiom. Did they content themſelves with the latter of theſe only, we ſhould allow the diſpute to be of very little moment, farther than as ſuch liberties tend to confound our notions of the action and motion of bodies, as we obſerved above. But while they pretend that force, defined by them at their pleaſure, is to be conſidered as the cauſe of the effects produced by motion, and is to be meaſured by thoſe effects, the diſpute appears no longer to be about words only. Sir Iſaac Newton, in his ſecond law of motion, points out to us that the impreſſed force being conſidered as the cauſe, the change of motion produced by it is the effect that meaſures the cauſe; and not the ſpace deſcribed by it againſt the action of an uniform gravity, nor the hollows produced by the body falling into clay This law of motion is the ſureſt guide we can follow, in determining effects from their cauſes, or converſely the cauſes from thei effects. 23. The harmony between the laws of preſſures, or powers, that generate motion, and the laws of theſe motions themſelves, appears in a fuller light when we attend to their compoſition and reſolution. Povers acting in the directions a B and a D (Fig. 4.) proportional to thoſe right lines, compound a power that acts in the direction of the diagonal a c, and is meaſured by a c. Becauſe a c is leſs than a 2 44D, the power compounded from a B and 4 D is always leſs than thoſe powers themſelves; and this is fully accounted for by reſolving the power A B into a M and aN, (Fig. 5.) and the power. a D into A& and AL; of which A M and a L are oppoſite and equal and deſtroy each others effect, ſo that there remains AM + AE, or ac, the meaſure of the compounded power. The favourers of the new opinion agree with us in arguing in this manner, concerning powers and preſſures; but in a manner quite inconſiſtent with this, in the compoſition and reſolution of forces. When the angle B a D is right, the compounded force is equal to the ſum of the forces a B and a D, according to them; and no force is Ioſt, notwithſtanding the oppoſite directions of the forces A L and A N; tho it is not eaſy to gonceive how this ſhould not have an effect in the compoſition of forces, as well as of powers and preſſuress. When the angle B A D (Fig. 15.) is acute, the ſquare of the diagonal a c exceeding the ſum of the ſquares of a D and D ], (Euclid, 12. 2.) or of a D and a B, the two forces in the directions a D and a B, muſt, according to the new doctrine, compound a force a c greater than their ſum. Now this appears directly contradictory to the metaphyſical principle ſo much inſiſted on by them, that the effect is proportional to the cauſe which produces it; for in this caſe, the effect is greater than the cauſe; and this ſeems to be as abſurd, in mechanics, as that two quantities collected together ſhould produce a greater quantity than their ſum, in geometry. When this was objected, the anſwer * given to ĩt deſerves to be copied, for a ſpecimen of their way of getting over difficulties: it is no more but that  no abſurdity follows from the  new opinion, which by meaſuring forces, not by momenta, but, by the ſquare of the velocities,  concludes that on account of the angle o a B its  being acute, the ſquare of a c (which is the force * See Deſagulier's courſe of experimental philoſophy, vol. æ. in the note at the bottom of page 72.  compounded) is greater than the ſquares of a B  and a p, the ſum of what they call the compounding forces.” 24. To illuſtrate this farther, ſuppoſe that the elaſtic body a (Fig. 16.) receives its force, in the direction a B, from the equal elaſtic body H, and its force, in the direction a D, from the equal elaſtic body c, at the ſame time. According to the patrons of the new doctrine, the forces of H and õ are communicated to a by infinitely ſmall degrees, or by an uninterrupted ſucceſſion oſ preſſures, and the whole force communicated to a is the ſum of the effects of theſe preſſures. Now in every inſtant the preſſure, or infinitely ſmall force impreſſcd on a, is leſs than the ſum of the preſſures exerted in that inſtant by H and õ, in proportion as a c is leſs than a2B+a4D0, as is allowed on all ſidess. Therefore the ſum of all the preſſures, or the force impreſſed on a, muſt be leſs than the ſum of all the preſſures, or the ſum of the forces exerted by H and 6, in the ſame proportion of a c to A 2+ AD; that is, the forces of a, H, and õ, muſt be as the lines a c, a B and a D, and not as their ſquares. It ĩs not poſſible to conceive that while the force in A ariſes from the accumulation of the preſſures, or infinitely ſmall forces, which it receives every moment from the actions of u and , and each of theſe preſſures, or inſinitely ſmall forces, is leſs than the ſum of the actions of H and õ that produce them; yet the whole force of a ſhould nevertheleſs exceed the ſum of the whole actions or forces of H and 6&. I ſpeak here of inſinitely ſmall forces, to comply as much as poſſible with the ſtyle of the favourers of this new opinionn. To * this they gave no other anſwer than that what we call * Ibid. ꝑ. 73, in the laſt note. forces here ought to be called momenta. But they pretend not to explain how the infinitely ſmall forces impreſſecd upon 4, in the direction a c, come to produce a finite foree far greater than their ſum total; or how the effect ſhould be ſo far from correſponding to the cauſe; the metaphyſical principle which they ſeem to uſe, or reject, juſt as it ſerves their turn. If we ſuppoſe the angle 2 a D to be infinitely acute, the ſame forces (according to the new opinion) generate a force in a whieh exceeds their ſum as much as the ſquare of AB+aD exceeds the ſum of the ſquares of aB and aD; ſo that if A D be equal to a B, they will in that caſe generate at a a force double of their ſum, for then the ſquare of A B+ a D vill be equal to the ſquare of 2 a B, that is to 44 B; tho the two equal forces which are ſuppoſed to produce this, taken together, amount only to 24B?, according to their own computation; ſo that, in this caſe, a cauſe produces an effect of the ſame kind double of itſelſ. To this it has been  anſwered, that, according to the new opinion, a double momentum may produce a quadruple effect, if the velocity is double. But ſurely the author who gave this anſwer did not attend to the objection; for what we have proved, is not that a double momentum produces a quadruple effect, but that a double force, according to their own notion and computation, produces a quadruple force, according to- the ſame notion and computation. And indeed the ſum of the anſwers they have made to the abſurdities which have been deduced from their favourite opinion amounts to this, viæ. that they are no abſurdities, becauſe their new opinion obliges them to admit them. + Ibid. p. 74, in the notes. 25. The reſolution of powers, or preſſures, is a neceſſary conſequence of their compoſition. As motion is loſt in the compoſition, ſo ĩt is neceſſarily gained in the reſolution of motion; and as this is allowed of motions, and of the powers that generate motion, there can be no good reaſon given why it ought not to be allowed of the effects of thoſe povers, or of the force of bodies. The ſame reaſons that argue for an increaſe in the one caſe, prove, with the ſame evidence, that an increaſe of the other ought likewiſe to be allowed. Let the body c (Fig. 17.) moving in the direction D c, the diagonal of the parallelogram e L D x, ſtrike the equal body aA obliquely, ſo as to impel it in the direction c a the continuation of c x, and at the ſame time the equal body B, in the direction c B the continuation of cL; the body a will proceed in the right line c a, and the body B Will proceed in the direction c B the continuation of c L, and c having communicated all its force to them will ſtop. It will not appear ſtrange that the motions and forces of a and B exceed the motion or force of c, if we conſider that c communicates the whole motion or force c  to a, and the whole motion or force cL to B, that the reſiſtance or inertia of a reacting upon c, not in the direction of its motion c D, but in the direction c æ oblique to it, the abſolute motion or force of e, in the direction Dc, ĩs not ſo much diminiſhed by this reaction as if it was directly oppoſite to the motion of c; for no power, or reſiſtance, can produce ſo great an effect in any direction as in that wherein it acts. In like manner the reaction of B deſtroys the motion or force L c in the body c, in the direction in which B reacts; but not ſo great a motion or force in the direction D  to which it is oblique; and thus it appears, that the motion or force of c, in the direction D c, muſt neceſſarily be leſs than the ſum of the motions or forces of the bodies A and B in their reſpective directions. If it be objected, that, in this caſe, the motion of c, in the direction D ę, is the cauſe of the motions of a and B, in the directions c a and c B; ſo that a cauſe produces effects whoſe ſum is greater than itſelf; in anſwer to this, we have already obſerved, that as this is allowed on all hands of motions and preſſures, it cannot be abſurd to extend it to forces, but muſt obtain in them for the ſame reaſons, But farther, we are to obſerve, that, in conſequence of the inertia of body, it not only reſiſts any change of its motion, but likewiſe any change in the direction of its motion; and that when the action of bodies upon each other is not in a right Iine, both theſe are to be taken into the account. Suppoſe the body c firſt to ſtrike upon a4, then the reaction of a has a twofold effect; it ſubducts ſomewhat from the motion or force of c, and at the ſame time it produces a change in the direction of c; and the reaction of a (to which the motion or force produced in it is equal) is not to be eſtimated by one of thoſe effects only, but by both conjointly. After the body c has ſtruck a, it proceeds in the right line c B with a motion or force as c L, and, impinging upon B directly, it communicates its whole motion or force to B which reacts directly againſt itt. We have ſuppoſed the bodies c, a, and B to be perfectly elaſtic, in conformity to the ſuppoſitions of our oponents, ſome of whom confine themſelves in their enquiries to theſe only. 26. If we ſubſtitute ſprings in place of the bodies a and B, and their reſiſtances be meaſured by cx and C L, it will appear, in the ſame manner, that the reſiſtances of thoſe ſprings are not the proper meaſures of the force of the body c, but that taken together they muſt exceed it; for the ſpring a acts at a diſadvantage againſt the motion or force of c. It has its whole Pefect in the direction c X in which it reſiſts; but not ſo great an effect in the direction c n, which is oblique to that in which it acts. If the ſpring a acted with the ſame advantage as B, they would together produce a greater effect than in the ſituation they have in the figure; and therefore the greateſt reſiſtances which they are able to exert taken together, muſt exceed the force of the body c. Thus it appears that this argument, inſtead of overthrowing our doctrine, confirms it, and that they who advanced it ſuppoſed thoſe forces to be equal, which, according to the known principles of mechanics, are unequal. If it is aſked what becomes of the exceſs of the force of the ſpring a, above what is ſubducted from the force of c? It may be anſwered, that it is not without its eſfect: for the direction of the body is changed from the line D c into the right line c B;3 and no principle, either in metaphyſics or mechanics, teaches us that this effect is to be neglected, in comparing the cauſe and effects together on this occaſion. On the contrary, many inſtances might be given where a forcg is employed in producing a change in the direction of a motion of a body only, without either accelerating or retarding it. The force that is ſufficient to carry a body upwards in the perpendicular to the horizon, to a double diſtance from the centre of the earth, is equal to that which, impreſſed in a horizontal di: rection, would carry it in a circle about the earth for ever, abſtracting ſrom the reſiſtance of the air; as appears ſrom the theory of gravity: and yet the firſt would overcome the reſiſtance ariſing from the gravity of the body for a certain time only; whereas the other would overcome that reſiſtance for ever, vithout any diminution of motion. In the firſt caſe, the gravity of the body would act directly againſt its force; in the ſecond, it would act in a line perpendicular to the direction of its motion: in the firſt caſe, the action of gravity is entirely employed in conſuming the force of the body ; in the other, in changing its direction only. The arguments drawn in favour of the new opinion from the reſolution of motion, ſeem, at firſt ſight, the moſt plauſible of any that have been offered for it; but, from the conſiderations which we have ſuggeſted, it may appear to an impartial reader, that inſtead of overthrowing the common doctrine, they rather confirm it. As, in other inſtances, Mr. Leibnitæs followers neglect the conſideration of time, in reaſoning concerning the forces of bodies; ſo here we find that they have not due regard to the directions of motions and forces, in eſtimating and comparing their effects; which, however, in ncchanical enquiries, are of no leſs importance than the motions or forces themſelves. 27. We have inſiſted on theſe obſervations, becauſe they ſet the theory of motion in a plain and juſt lightt. We often obtain this advantage from diſputes concerning the elementary propoſitions of any ſcience, that they are the more carefully enquired into, and when found juſt, are illuſtrated and the better underſtood for having been diſputed. We cannot, however, leave this ſubject without mentioning an experiment, made by the ingenious and accurate Mr. Graham, to whom the mechanical ſciences are ſo much indebted. He prepared a pendulous body with a cavity in it capable to receive another body of an equal weight, at the loweſt point of its vibration; and when the body was dropd into it, he found, by the ſubſequent vibration, that the velocity of the double maſs was preciſely one half of what the velocity of the pendulum was before; from which it appears, that the ſame force produces in a double quantity of matter one half of the velocity only; which is agreeable to the common doctrine, but directly repugnant to the new one, concerning the forces of bodies in motion. Many ingenious pieces have been writ againſt this new doctrine by learned men, to which we refer the reader who deſires to ſee more on the ſubject *. It is pretended, that by this new doctrine we are enabled to reſolve problems in an eaſy manner, which are otherwiſe of great difficulty; but by the rejecting hard and inexible bodies, there is more loſt than gained in this reſpect, as we have ſhewn elſewhere, and as will appear afterwards, when we come to determine more particularly the effects of the colliſions of bodies. 28. It is becauſe aſtion and reaction are always equal, that the mutual actions of bodies upon one another have no effect upon the motion of the common centre of gravity of the ſyſtem to which they appertain. If there was any action in the ſyſtem that had not a contrary and equal reaction always correſponding to jt, it would ũ the ſtate of the centre of gravity of the ſyſtem, and diſturb its motion: and, converſely, if it be allowed that the ſtate of the centre of gravity of a ſyſtem is not diſturbed by the actions of bodies upon one another that are its parts, ve may conclude that their actions are mutual, equal, and have contrary directions. It will therefore be found agreeable to. the courſe of things, and to perpetual experience, that the third law of motion be extended generally to all ſorts of * As a piece of Mr. de Mairan, in the memoires de Iacademie royale des ſciences 1728. Several pieces of Pr. Jurin, Vhiloſophical Tranſactions, &e, ll i povers that take place in nature, thoſe of atiraction and repulſion as well as others, (and not to be a ſuppoſition arbitrarily introduced by Sit Iſaac Newton;) when thoſe powers are found to depend upon the bodies that are ſaid to attrac?i or repel, as well as upon thoſe that are attracied or repelled. We find the loadſtone attracts iron, and that iron attracts the loadſtone with equal force; and becauſe they attract each other equally, they remain at reſt when they come into contact. If a mountain, by its gravity preſſed upon the earth, and the earth did not react equally on the mountain; then the mountain would neceſſarily carry the earth before it, by its preſſure, with a motion accelerated in infinitumm. The ſame is to be ſaid of a ſtone, or the leaſt part of the earth, as well as of a mountain. Bodies act upon light in proportion to their denſity, cæteris paribus, by refracting jt when it enters into them; and converſely, light acts upon bodies by heating them and putting their parts in motion. This equality of action and reaction obtains ſo generally, that when any new motion is produced by any power or agent in nature, there is always a correſponding equal and oppoſite motion produced by its reaction at the ſame time, or ſome equal motion in the ſame direction deſtroyed. When from an engine a weight is thrown, the engine reacts with an equal force on the cearth or air. If it was not for this law, the ſtate of the centre of gravity of the earth would be affected by every action or impulſe of every power or agent upon it, But by virtue of this law, the ſtate of the centre of gravity of the earth, and the general courſe of things, is preſerved independent of any motions that can be produced at or near its ſurface, or within its bowels. By the ſame law, the ſtate of the leſſer ſyſtems of the planets, and the repoſe of the general ſyſtem, is preſerved, without any diſturbance from the actions of whatever agents there may be in them. We muſt therefore allow, that in the attracting and repelling powers which obtain in nature, from whatever ſort of cauſe they may ariſe, action and reaction are always equal; and ſince this law obtains in all ſorts of motions that ariſe from impulſe, we may be the more ſurprized if we ſhould find the philoſophers that explain thoſe powers from impulſe call it in queſtionn. Even in the motions produced by voluntary and intelligent agents, we find the ſame law take place; for though the principle of motion, in them, be above mechaniſm, yet the inſtruments which they are obliged to employ in their actions are ſo far ſubject to it as this law requires. When a perſon throws a ſtone, for example, in the air, he at the ſame time reacts upon the earth with an equal force; by which means the centre of gravity of the earth and ſtone perſeveres in the ſame ſtate as beforee. And the neceſſity of this law, for preſerving the regularity and uniformity of nature, well deſerved the attention of thoſe who have vrote ſo fully and uſefully of sinal cauſes, if they had attended to iĩt. C H A P. IIL. Of the mechanital powers. I. H E knowledge of mechanics is one of thoſe things that contribute moſt to diſtinguiſh civilized nations from barbarians: the works of art derive their chief beauty and value from it; and without it we can make very little progreſs in the knowledge of the works of nature. It is by this ſcience that the utmoſt improvement is made of every power and force in nature, and the motions of the elements, water, air, and fire, are made ſubſervient to the purpoſes of life, when induſtry, with materials for the neceſſary inſtruments, are not wanting. However weak the force of man appears to be, when unaſſiſted by this art, yet with its aid, there is hardly any thing above his reach. Itis a ſcience that admits of the ſtricteſt evidence; and certainly it is worth while to eſtabliſh it on ĩits juſt principles, and to cultivate it with the greateſt diligence. It is diſtinguiſhed by Sir Iſaac Newton into practical and rational mechanics; the former treats of the mechanical powers, viæ. the lever, the axis, and wheel, the pulley, the wedge, and the ſcrew, to which the inclined plane is to be added; and of their various combinations together. Rational mechanics comprehends the whole theory of motion; and ſhews, when the powers or forces are given, how to determine the motions that are produced by them; and, converſely, when the phænomena of the motions are given, how to trace the powers or forces from which they ariſe. Thus it appears that the whole of natural philoſophy, beſides the deſcribing the phænomena of nature, is little morè than the proper application of rational mechanics to thoſe phænomena; in tracing the powers that operate in nature from the phænomena, we proceed by analiſis; and in deducing the phænomena from the powers or cauſes that produce them, we proceed by Lyniheſis, But in eſther caſe, in order to proceed with certainty, and make the greateſt advances, it is neceſſary that the principles of this art ſnould be premiſed and clearly eſtabliſhed, being the grounds of our whole work. We have already conſidered the inertia or paſſive nature of body, according to which it perſeveres in its ſtate of motion or reſ, receives motion in proportion to the force impreſt, and reſiſts as much as it is reſiſted; which is the ſum of the three general laws of motion: from which, and their general corollaries, demonſtrated in the laſt chapter, we are now to deduce the principles of mechanics. As theſe laws and their corollaries take place, tho the cauſes of the motions, the nature of the impreſt force, or of the reſiſtance, be unknown or obſcurely underſtood; ſo the obſcurity of the nature and cauſe of the power that produces the motions, does not hinder us from tracing its effects in mechanics with ſuſficient evidence, provided we can ſubject its action to a juſt menſuration: and, in fact, we know that excellent contrivances have been invented for raiſing weights, and overcoming their reſiſtances, by ſuch as gave themſelves no trouble to enquire into the cauſe of gravity. 2. In treating of the mechanical engines, we always conſider a weight that is to be raiſed, the power by which it is to be raiſed, and the inſtrument or engine by which this effect is to be produced. There are two principal problems that ought to be reſolved in treating of each of them. The firſt is,  to de-  termine the proportion which the power and s weight ought to have to each other, that they  may juſt ſuſtain one another, or be in æquisclibrio The ſecond is,  to determine what  ought to be the proportion of the power and  weight to each other, in a given engine, that it s may produce rhe greateſt effect poſſible in a given time All the writers on mechanics treat of the firſt of theſe problems, but few have conſidered the ſecond; tho in practice it be equally uſeful as the other. As to the ſirſt, there is a general uniform rule that holds in all the powers, is founded on the laws of motion, and is another inſtance of the beauty and harmony that reſults from the ſimplicity of the theory of motion deſcribed in the laſt chapter. Suppoſe the engine to move, and reduce the velocities of the power and weight to their reſpective directions in which they act; find the proportion of thoſe velocities; then if the power be to the weight, as the velocity of the weight is to the velocity of the power, or, (which amounts to the ſame thing) if the power multiplied by iĩts velocity give the ſame product as the weight multiplied by its velocity, this is the caſe wherein the power and weight ſuſtain each other and are in æquilibrio: ſo that in this caſe, the one would not prevail over the other, if the engine was at reſt; and, if it is in motion, it would continue to proceed uniformly, if it was not for the friction of its parts, and other reſiſtances. This principle has a plain analogy to that by which the equality of the motions, or forces, of bodĩes was determined in general, in chap. 2.  19. For, as the motions of bodies are equal, and deſtroy each others effect, if their directions are contrary, when the firſt is to the ſecond, as the velocity of the ſecond is to the velocity of the firſt, the greater velocity of the leſſer body juſt compenſating its deficiency in quantity of matter; ſo the actions of the power and weight are equal, and deſtroy each others effect upon the engine, when the power is to the weight, as the velocity of the weight is to the velocity of the power. But tho' it is uſeful and agreeable to obſerve how uniformly this principle prevails in engines of every ſort, throughout the whole mechanics, in all caſes where an æ7uilibrium takes place; yet it would not be right to reſt the evidence of ſo important a doòtrine upon a proof of this kind only. Therefore we ſhall demonſtrate the law of the æquilibrium in the lever or vectis (whica is the foundation nics) by a new method, that ſeems to us to be founded on the plaineſt and moſt evident principles; to which we ſhall ſubjoin the demonſtration given by Sir Iſaac Newton of the ſame law, and that which is aſcribed to Archimedes. 3. In the fizſt place it is evident, thæat if equal powers act at equal diſtances on different ſides of the prop, or centre of motion, with directions oppoſite and parallel to each other, they will have the ſame effect Thus, a B (Fig. 18.) being biſected in c, if a power a act upon the lever in the direction a ꝶ, and an equal power B act upon it with an oppoſite and parallel direction B E, then the eſfects of thoſe powers, to move the lever about the centre c, vill be preciſely equal; ſo that the one may be always ſubſtituted for the other. A ſecond principle is, that, gravity being ſuppoſed to act in parallel lines, if the prop c (Fig. 19. n. 1.) be between the bodies a and B, it muſt bear the ſum of their weights; becauſe the lever being loaded with thoſe weights, it muſt give way if the prop does not ſuſtain their ſum; but that when the powers a and æ are on the ſame ſide of the prop or fulcrum c, (Fig. 19. n. 2.) in which caſe one of them, as a, muſt pull upwards, while the other B pulls downwards, that there may be an æquilibrium, it is then only loaded with the difference of the powers a and B. The one of thoſe caſes always follows from the other, if we conſider, that in the caſe of the æquilibrium, any one of the three powers that act at a4, B, and c, may be conſidered as that of the prop, and the other two as endeavouring to turn the ever about itt. From theſe principles we deduce the law of the æquilibrium in the lever, in the following manner. 4. Suppoſing firſt tvo equal powers, Aa and B (Fig. 20.) acting in the directions A F, BH, to carry a body c, upon the lever a B, placed at c at equal diſtances from them; it is evident, that, in this caſe, cach of the powers A and B ſuſtains one half of the weight c, by dividing it equally between them. Imagine now that the power a is taken away, and that, inſtead of reſting upon it, the end a of the lever reſts upon a prop at a; it is manifeſt that the power B, and the prop at a, ſuſtain, as before, each one half of the weight c; the prop now acting, in every reſpect, as the power at a before; and, the æquilibrium continuing, it appears, that, in this caſe, a power B equal to one half of the weight c ſuſtains and ballances it, when the diſtance of c from the prop a is one half of the diſtance of B from the ſame; that is, when B is tO C, as C a to B a, or B X B A=C X C 4. From this ſimple inſtance we ſee, that powers act upon a lever not by their abſolute force only, but that their effect neceſſarily depends upon the diſtance of the point where they act from the prop, or centre of motion; and particularly, that a power ballances a double power which acts at half its diſtance from the prop, on the ſame ſide of it, with an oppoſite direction. The caſe when the two powers act on different ſides of the prop, follows from this, by the principles laid down in the laſt articlee For let 2 H and c  (Fig. 21.) repreſent the directions and forces with which the powers  and c act upon the lever; upon B A produced take a E equal to a c, or  a B, and in place of the power c õ ſubſtitute an equal power E E at E, with an oppoſite direction; and, by the firſt oſ thoſe principles, this power E X will have the ſamæ effect as c ę, only the prop, or centre of motion, A will now ſuſtain the ſum of the forces E è and B H, by the ſecond principle in the laſt articlee. But the æquilibrium between the powers B H and E  Will continue as it was before between B H and c õ; ſo that the powers B H and E æ Will be in æquilibrio, vhen the power B H is one half of æ x, and the diſtance of E ę. from the prop a is one half of the diſtance of B H from the ſame; that is, when the power at B is to the power at E, as a E to a B, or BX B A=E XE A. In this caſe the prop a being loaded with both the powers B and E which act with the ſame direction, its reaction muſt be equal to their ſum E +B H æ B H, and muſt be in the oppoſite direction a ?2. In place of this reaction, Iet us now (Fig. 22.) ſubſtitute a power a ? at a, equal to thrice B H; and in place of the power  x, let us ſubſtitute a prop at E, ſuſtaining that end of the Jever B E; and ſince the æquilibrium continues as before, it follows, that the prop, or centre of motion, being at E, the power B H ſuſtains the power a rF which is triple of B u, when the diſtance of 3 H from the prop E is triple of the diſtance of the power a ? from the ſame, that is, when B H X B E  A F X A E. If we ſuppoſe the power E  to remain (Fig. 23.) but the end B Of the lever E B to reſt upon a prop, then the powers ar and E æ Will ſuſtain and ballance each other, the prop at B now coming in place of the power B H; in which, a 7=38 H, and E K 2 B H; ſo that a F is to E X as 3 to2; and the diſtances E B and A B being in the ſame proportion, it appears that when two powers in the proportion of 3 to 2 act upon a lever on the ſame ſide of the prop, or centre of motion, with oppoſite directions, at diſtances in the proportion of 2 to 5, they then fore, that when the powers are in the proportion either of 2 to 1, or of 3 to 1I, or of 3 to 2, and the diſtances of their application from the centre of motion are in the inverſe proportion, then thoſe powers ballance each other, or are in æquilibrio. 5. Upon B E produced (Fig. 25. n. 1.) take ' L= E A; and in place of the power a F ſubſtitute a power L M æ A F, but with a contrary direction; this power L M will have the ſame effect to turn the lever round the center of motion E as a ? had, by the firſt principle in § 3; conſequently it will be in æquilibrio with the power B H, as A  was. Therefore when two powers L M and B H, in the proportion of 2to I, at upon a lever with the ſame direction, they are in æquilibrio, if their diſtances from the centre of motion L E and E B be in the ratio of 1 to3; that is, when L MxXL E æD3 H X B E. In this caſe, the powers L M and B H acting with the ſame direction, the prop E muſt ſuſtain their ſum L M + B H=4 B H, by the ſecond principle of  3 Therefore a power at L as 3, and a power acting at B with the ſame direction as I, are ſuſtained by a power acting at æ, with a contrary direction, as 4. From which it follows, by ſubſtituting in the place of the power L M a prop at L, that a power at B as I ſuſtains a power at E as 4, acting with a contrary direction, when B L is to E L as 4 to 1; that is, when the powers are inverſely as their diſtances from the prop, or centre of motion. By ſubſtituting the prop at B in the place of the power B , it appears that a power L M at L, as 3, ſuſtains a power, acting with an oproſite direction, at E, as 4, when their diſtances L B and E B from the prop B, 2re to each other as 4 t1 3, or when L MXL 8 EEK EB. By taking upon L B produced B e æ B E, (Fig. 24. n. 2) and in place of the power at E, ſubſtituting an equal power at e vith a contrary direction, it appears, by the firſt principle in § 3. that a power at L as 3 ſuſtains a power acting at e, with the ſame direction, as 4, when the diſtance L B ĩs to the diſtance e B, as 4 to 3. In this caſe, the prop at B ſuſtains the ſum of the powers acting at L and e, that is, a power equal to ſeven times ? H. From which it follows, by ſubſtituting a prop at L, ore, in place of the powers that act there, that a power at æ as 4 ſuſtains a power at 2 as 7, about the centre of motion L, when their diſtances from it e L, B L are to each other as 7 to 4: and that a power at L as 3 ſuſtains the power at B as7, about the centre of motion è, when their diſtances from it, L e and B ę, are to each other as 7 to 3. 6. By proceeding in this manner, it appears, that when the powers are to each other as number to number, and when their diſtances from the centre of motion are in the inverſe ratio of the ſame numbers, then the powers ſuſtain each other, or are in æquilibrio. From which ĩt is eaſy to ſiew, in general, that when the powers are to each other in any ratio, thd incommenſurable, and the diſtances of their application from the centre of motion in the ſame inverſe ratio, then they are in æquilibrio; becauſe the ratio of incommenſurable quantities may be always limited, to any degree of exactneſs at pleaſure, between a greater and a leſſer ratio of number to number. And this I take to be the moſt direct and natural proof of the law of æquilibrium in the lever, the fundamental propoſition of mechanics. 7. When the centre of motion c is between the bodies a and B, jt is the ſame point which was called their centre of gravity, chap. 2. § 13. And hence it appears, that when the two bodies are ſuppoſed to be joined by an inſlexible rod void of gravity, if the centre of gravity be ſuſtained, then the bodies ſnall be ſuſtained. If two powers or weights, B and b, (Fĩg. 25.) act upon a lever at the diſtances B C and D c from the centre of motion, the forces with which they act upon the lever ſhall be in the ſame proportion of B X B C IO DXDC; that is, in the ratio compounded of the ratio of the powers, or weights, and that of their diſtances from the centre of motion. For the effort of B is ſuſtained by a, if a x a c be equal to B X BC; and the effort of the power D is ſuſtained by K applied at the diſtance c a, if x x A c  D x Dc. But the eſforts of the powers or weights, 3 and D, upon the lever, are in the ſame proportion to each other as the powers a and ꝶ, which, applied at the ſame diſtance c a from the centre of motion, ſuſtain them, or as a x Ac to æ xa c, and therefore as 2 XB C to D x Dc. From this it appears, that when any number of powers act upon a lever, if the ſum of the products that ariſe by multiplying each poWer by its reſpective diſtance from the centre of motion, on one ſide of it, be equal to the ſum of the products that ariſe by multiplying each power on the other ſide of the centre of motion by its reſpective diſtance from it, then theſe powers ſuſtain each other, and the lever is in æquilibrioo. But by what was ſhewn in § 13. chap. 2. the centre of motion coincides, in this caſe, with what was there called the centre of gravity. Therefore if any number of powers or weights act upon a lever, and, their centre of gravity being determined by the conſtruction in that article, if the prop or fulerum be applied at this centre, the lever ſhall be in æquilibrvio. In the ſame manner, if any number of powers or weights be applied upon a plane that reſts upon a given right line 1L, (Fig. 26.) and the centre of gravity of all the powers or weights fall upon that line, the plane ſhall be in æquilibrio: for, by that article, the ſums of the products that ariſe by multiplying each power by its reſpective diſtance from the axis of motion, being equal on the diſferent ſides of this axis, their efforts to move the plane muſt be equal and contrary, and deſtroy each others effect. Therefore as the ſtate of any ſyſtem of bodies, as to motion or reſt, depends on the motion or reſt of the point called the centre of gravity, by what was ſhewn above in the laſt chapter; ſo ĩt is another notable property of this point, that if the bodies be joined together, and to it, by inflexible lines void of gravity, and this point be ſuſtained, the whole ſyſtem ſhall be ſuſtained and remain in æquilibrio. 8. When æny powers B and D (Fig. 25, 26.) act upon a lever, endeavouring to turn iĩt about the centre of motion c, or when they act upon a plane, endeavouring to turn ĩt about the axis of motion IL, their effect is the ſame as if a power or weight equal to their ſum was ſubſtituted in place of them at their common centre of gravity N. For, by § 14. chap. 2. BX B C+DXD CEB +D x NC; OrifBb, D d, Nn be perpendicular to IL in the points b, d, n, then, by the ſame article, nx 8b+Dxnd=æ B + DXNn. If G, the centre of gravity of all the powers, or weights, that act upon the lever, fall on one ſide of e the centre of motion; or the centre of gravity of all the powers that act upon the plane, is on one ſide of the axis 1 L; then the preponderancy will be on that ſide, and will be the ſame as if, in place of all thoſe powers, one power equal to their ſum was ſubſtituted at their common centræ of gravity. For it was ſnewn that BxB CFDX DA x A cCa+84-Dx G c, when the power a acts on one ſide and the powers B and D on the other. Therefore, as when the centre of gravity of the powers reſts upon the centre of motion, the whole is in æquilibrio, and the prop c ſuſtains a force equal to their ſum; ſo when the centre of gravity is not ſuſtained by the prop, but falls on one ſide of it, the preponderancy is on that ſide, and is the ſame as if all the powers or weights were collected together at that centree. The analogy between theſe Rtatical theorems, and thoſe in the theory of motion relating to this centre, deſcribed in the laſt chapter, deſerves our attention; and farther illuſtrate the ſimplicity of this doctrine and the harmony of all its paris. 9. Sir Ifaauc Newton demonſtrates the fundamental propoſition concerning the lever, from the reſolution of motion. Let c (Fig. 27.) be the centre of motion in the lever æ L; let A and B be any two powers, applied to it at x and L, acting in the directions X a and L B. From the centre of motion c, let c M and c N be perpendicular to thoſe directions in M and N; ſuppoſe c M to be leſs than c N, and from the centre c, at the diſtance c N, deſcribe the circle N H D, meeting æ a in Dn. Let the power a be repreſented by D a, and let it be reſolved into the power D õ acting in the direction c D, and the power D F perpendicular to c D, by completing the parallelogram a ?F D 6l. The power D 6, acting in the direction c D from the centre of the circle, or wheel, D H N towards its circumference, has no eſfect in turning it round the centre, from D towards u, and tends only to carry it off from that centre. It is the part D F only that endeavours to move the wheel from D towards H and N, and is totally employed in this effortt. The power B may be conceived to be applied at N as vell as at L, and to be wholly employed in endeavouring to turn the wheel the contrary way, from N towards H and D. If therefore the power B be equal to that part of 2 which is repreſented by D F, theſe efforts, being equal and oppoſite, muſt deſtroy each others efect; that is, when the power B is to the power 4, as D F to D a, or, (becauſe of the ſimilarity of the triangles a ? D, D MC) as c M to C D, or as c M, to C N, then the powers muſt be in æquilibrio; and thoſe powers always ſuſtain each other that are in the inverſe proportion of the diſtances of their directions from the centre of motion; or, when the product of the one power multiplied by the diſtance of its direction from the centre, is equal to the product of the power on the other ſide multiplied by the like diſtance from it. lil 10. The demonſtration commonly aſcribed to Arctimedes is founded upon this principle, that when any cylindric or priſmatic body is applied upon a lever, it has the ſame effect as if its whole weight was united and applied at the middle point of its axis. Let a B (Fig. 25.) be a cylinder of an uniform texture, c ĩts middle point; and it is manifeſt, that if the point c be ſupported, the equal halves of the cylinder, c a and c B, Will ballance each other about the point c, and the body will remain in æquilibrio, Let the cylinder a B be diſtinguiſhed into any unequal parts, a D and D B; biſcct A D in E, and D B in?; then a power applied at E, equal to the weight of the part a n, with a contrary direction, will ſuſtain it; and a power applied at ?, equal to the weight of the part D B, with a contrary dircction, will ſuſtain that part; ſo that theſe two powers acting at E and F, reſpectively equal to the weights of AD and D B, have preciſely the ſame effect as a prop at c, ſuſtaining the whole cylinder a B, and may be conſidered as in æquilibrio with a power acting at c, equal to the whole weight of the cylinder. But the diſtance c E =c AAE' æ2 ABEFAD=;DB; and, in like manner, the diſtance c?=Cc BB F/F AB IDB 2 aDn; conſequently c E is tO CF, as D B ILO AD; that is, as the power applied at ? to the power applied at E, theſe being in æquilibrio with the weight of the whole cylinder applied at c. From which ĩt appears, that powers applied at æ and ꝶ, which are to each other in the proportion of c F to C E, ſuſtain one another about the centre c. 1I. Suppoſe the lever a  (ſũs. 29.) with the weights a and B, to turn round the centre c; the bodies a and B will deſcribe ſimilar arcs A⸗ and Bb; and a a vill be to Bb, as C A to CB, Or àas B lO A; conſequently a x aa =EBXBb; that is, the momenta, or quantities of motion, of a and B Will be equal; and conſidering one of them as the power and the other as the weight, the power will be to the weight, as the velocity of the weight to the velocity of the power. Therefore in this, as in all mechanical engines, when a ſmall power raiſes a great weight, the velocity of the power is much greater than the velocity of the weight; and what is gained in force is therefore ſaid to be loſt in time. In like manner, when a number of powers are ſuppoſed to act upon the lever, and it is turned round about their common centrè of gravity e, the ſums of the momenta on the different ſides of c are equal. 12. The lever, or vectis, is commonly diſtinguiſhed into three kinds. In the firſt, the centre of motion is between the power and weight. In the ſecond, the weight is on the ſame ſide of the centre of motion with the power, but applied between them. In the third, the power is applied between the weight and centre of motion. In this laſt, the power muſt exceed the weight in proportion as its diſiance from the centre of motion is leſs than the diſtance of the centre from the weight. But as the firſt two ſerve for producing a ſlow motion by a ſæift one; ſo the ſaſt ſcrves for producing a ſwiſt motion of the weight hy à ſ=ow motion of the power. It is by this kind ſ levers that the muſcular motions of animals are perſormed; the muſcles being inſerted much nearer ò the centre of motion than the point where the centre of gravity of the weight to be raiſed is applied; ſo that the power of the muſcle is many times greater than the weight which ĩt ĩs able to ſuſtain. Tho this may appear at firſt ſight a diſadvantage to animals, becauſe it makes their ſtrength leſ; it is, however, the effect of excellent contrivance: for if the power was, in this caſe, applied at a greater diſtance than the weight, the figure of animals would not only be avkward and ugly, but altogether unfit for motion; as Borelli has ſnewn in his treatiſe de motu animalium. 13. When the two arms of a lever are not in a right Iline, but contain any invariable angle at c, (ſig. 30.) the law of the æquilibrium is the ſame as in the ſormer caſe; that is, if the power ? be applied at B to the arnm c B, and the weight w act, by means of a pulley M, in the direction a M perpendicular to the arm c a, the power and veight vill ſuſtain each other if ? be to w, as C a to C B, Or P x C B = WX C A. If ſeveral powers act upon the arm C a, find their centre of gravity a, on the arm C 4, by § 13. chap 2. ſuppoſe all the powers to be united there; and if the power ? be to their ſum, as c a 10 C B, it Will ſuſtain them. The ſum of the powers being ſuppoſed given, it is manifeſt that the farther their centre of gravity a is removed from the centre of motion e, the greater reſiſtance they will oppoſe againſt the power æ, and it will require the greater force in the power to overcome them. From this Galileo juſtly concludes, that the bones of animals are the ſtronger for their being hollow, their weight being given; or, if the arm C B F repreſent their length, the circle c u D a ſection perpendicular to the length,  any power applied along their length, tending to break them; then the ſtrength or force of all their longitudinal fibres, by which the adheſion of the parts is preſerved, may be conceived to be united in a the centre of the circle c u D, which is the common centre of gravity of thoſe forces, whether the ſection be a circle or annulus. But it is plain that when the area of the ſection, or the number of ſuch fibres, is given, the diſtance c a is greater when the ſection is an annulus, than when it is a circle without any cavity; conſequently the power with which the parts adhere, and which reſiſts againſt » which endeavours to ſeparate them, is greater in the ſame proportion. For the ſame reaſon, the ſtalks of corn, the feathers of fowls, and hollow ſpears, are leſs liable to accidents that tend to break them, than if they were oſ the ſame weight and length, but ſolid without any cavity. In this inſtance, therefore, art only imitatcs the wiſdom of nature. 14. The ſame excellent author obſerves. that in ſimilar bodies, engines, or animals, the greater are more liable to accidents than the leſſer, and have a leſs relative ſtrength; that is, the greater have not a ſtrength in proportion to their magnitude. A greater column, for example, is in much more danger of being broke by a fall than a ſimilar ſmall one; a man is in greater danger from accidents of this kind than a child; an inſect can bear a weight many times greater than itſelf, whereas a large animal, as a horſe, can hardly bear a burthen equal to his own weight. To To account for this, it will be ſuſicient to ſhew, that, in ſimilar bodies oſ the ſame texture, the force which tends to break them, or to make them liable to hurtful accidents, increaſcs in the greater bodies in a higher proportion than the force which tends to preſerve them entire, or ſecure againſt ſuch accidents. Suppoſe the ſimilar beams a 3B D E, F G HE, (Fig. 31) of a cylindric or priſmatic figure, to be fixed in the immoveable vall 1L; and Iet us at preſent abſtract from any other force that may tend to break them, beſides their own weight. Biſect a B in c, and F õ in M; and their weights may be conceived to be accumulated at the points c and M, which are directly under their centres of gravity. For the greater facility of the computation, ſuppoſe AB=2 F, and conſequently the weight of the beam A BD E Will be eight times greater than the weight of the ſimilar beam F 0 H &; and the weight of the former being conceived to be accumulated in , and that of the latter in M, and a c being double the diſtance ? M, it follows, that the force which tends to break the former at a, being eight times greater than that which tends to break the latter at ?, and at the ſame time acting at a double diſtance, on both theſe accounts its effort muſt be ſixteen times greater than that oſ the latterr. Nov, to compare the forces which tend to preſerve thoſe beams entire, and fixed in the wall, let a rR E be a ſection of the greater beam, and F s æ a ſection of the latter, perpendicular to their Iengths at the points A and ?; biſect a E in 2, and rF  in ; then the number of longitudinal fibres, whoſe adheſion tends to preſerve the beams entire, or rather the quantity of this adheſion, in the greater beam, will be to the quantity of adheſion in the leſſer beam, as the area of the ſection A R E to the area of ithe ſection ? s ꝶ, that is, in the preſent caſe (becauſe of the ſimilarity of the ſigures) as the ſquare of a E to the ſquare of ?&, or as 4 to I. But the adheſion of the parts that are in contact with each other in the ſection A R E may be conceived to be accumulated at ꝓ their centre of gravity; and the adheſion of the parts in contact with each other in the ſection ? s  is to be conceived as accumulated in q, for the ſame reaſon. The adheſion, thereſore, which tends to preſerve the greater beam entire is quadruple of that which tends to preſerve the leſſer beam entire, and at the ſame time is to bẽ conceived as acting at a double diſtance from the centre of motion, becauſe a  = 2 F ꝗ; ſo that the eſfort which tends to preſerve the greater beam from breaking, is eight times greater than that which tends to preſerve the leſer beam entirec. We have found, therefore, that the eſfort which tends to break the greater beam at a, is ſixteen times greater than that which tends ro breal the leſſer beam at ?; but that the effort, which, on the other hand, endeavours to preſerve the adheſion of the greater beam entire, is only eight times greater than that which tends to preſerve the adhcſion in the leſſer beam. In general, it will eaſily appear, in the ſame manner, that the efforts tending to deſtroy the adheſion of the beams, ariſing from their own gravity only, increaſe in the quadruplicate ratio of their lengths; but that the oppoſite efforts, tending to preſerve their adheſion, increaſe only in the triplicate ratio of the ſame lengths. From which it follows, that the greater beams muſt be in greater danger of breaking than the leſſer ſimilar ones; and that, tho a leſſer beam may be firm and ſecure, yet a greater ſimilar one may be made ſo long, as neceſſarily to break by its own weight. Hence Galileo juſtly concludes, that what appears very ſirm, and ſucceeds well, in models, may be very weak and infirm, or even fall to pieces by its weight, when ĩt comes to be executed in large dimenſions according to the model. 15. From the ſame principles he argues, that there are neceſſarily limits in the works of nature and art, which they cannot ſurpaſs in magnitude. Were trees of a very enormous ſize, theĩr branches would fall by their own weight. Large animals have not ſtrength in proportion ro their ſize; and if there were any land- animals much larger than thoſe we know, they could hardly move, and would be perpetually ſubjected to moſt dangerous accidents. As to the animals of the ſea, indeed, the caſe is different, as the gravity of the water ſuſtains thoſe animals in great meaſure, and in fact theſe are known to be ſometimes vaſtly larger than the greateſt landanimals. Nor does it avail againſt this doctrine to tell us, that bones have been found which were ſuppoſed to have belonged to giants of an immenſe ſize, ſuch as the ſkeletons mentioned by Strabo and Pliny; the former of which was 6o cubits high, and the latter 46; for the naturaliſts have concluded, on juſt grounds, that in ſome caſes thoſe bones had belonged to elephants; and that the larger ones were bones of whales, which had been brought to the places where they were found, by the revolutions of nature that have happened in paſt times. Tho &t muſt be owned, that there appears no reaſon why there may not have been men that have exceeded, by ſome feet in height, the talleſt we have ſeen. The reader will find a curious and uſeful diſſertation on this ſubject, by the celebrated Sir Hans Sloane, in the Philoſophical Tranſaltions, or in the Memoires de VAcademie Royale des Sciences, 1727. If, in the other planets, the ſame law of coheſion and other attractions takes place as in the earth, it may be of uſe that the gravity near their ſurfaces ſhould nor be vaſtly different from what it is near the ſurface of the earth; ĩt was perhaps with ſome view to this, that Sir Iſaac Newton inſinuates, that it was not without deſign and contrivance that the gravities at the ſurfaces of the planets ſhould differ ſo much leſs from each other, than, at firſt ſight, might be expected from the attractions of bodies of ? unequal magnitude. 16. It follows, from § 14th, that, in order to make bodies, engines, or animals, of equal relative ſtrength, the greater ones muſt have groſſer proportions. Thus in order that the greater cylinder A B D E may be as firm and ſecure againſt accidents as the leſſer cylinder ? õ H K, the ſection a R E and its diameter A E muſt be increaſed till the effort ariſing from the adheſion of the parts bear as great a proportion to the effort that tends to overcome this adheſion, in the greater, cs in the leſſer cylinder. And this ſentiment being ſuggeſted to us by perpetual experience, we naturally join the idea of greater ſtrength and force with the groſſer proportions, and the idea of agility with the more delicate ones. In architecture, where the appearance of ſolidity is no leſs regarded than real firmneſs and ſtrength, this is particularly conſidered, in order to ſatisfy a judicious eye and taſte; the various orders of the columns ſerving to ſuggeſt different degrees of ſtrength. But by the ſame principle, if we ſhould ſuppoſe animals vaſtly large, from the groſs proportions, a heavineſs and unwieldineſs would neceſſarily ariſe, which would make them uſeleſs themſelves, and diſagreeable to the eye. In this, as indeed, in all other caſes, whatever generally pleaſes taſtes not vitiated by education, or by fabulous and marvellous relations, may be traced till it appear to have a juſt foundation in nature; tho the force of habits is ſo ſtrong, and their effects upon our ſentiments ſo quick and ſudden, that it is often no eaſy matter to trace, by reſſlection, the grounds of what pleaſes us. 17. We have inſiſted at ſo great length on the lever, that we may be brief in treating of the other mechanical powers. The common ballance is a lever that has equal arms a õ and oõ B, (Fig. 32.) with the centre of motion c commonly placed directly over a. If the centre of motion was in 6, equal weights ſuſpended from a and B, would ſuſtain each other, in any poſition of the lever A 83 but when the centre of motion is above 6, they ſuſtain each other when the lever a B is level only; and when the weight at a is but a little greater than the weight at B, the ends a and B deſcend and aſcend by turns, till their common centre of gravity g ſettles in the vertical line c ; where they ſuſtain each other, becauſe their centre of gravity is ſuſtained by c. The ballance is falſe when the arms a 6 and 6 B are unequal: and the exactneſs of this inſtrument chiefly depends upon making the friction, at the centre of motion c, as ſmall as poſſible. 18. The axis and wheel has a near analogy to the lever; the power is applied at the circumference of the wheel, and the weight is raiſed by a rope that is gathered up (while the machine turns round) on the axis. The power may be conceived as applied at the extremity of the arm of a lever equal to the radius of the wheel, and the weight as applied at the extremity of a lever equal to the radius of the axis; only thoſe arms do not meet at one centre of motion as in the lever, but in place of this centre, we have an axis of motion, viæ. the axis of the whole engine. But as this can produce no diſference, it follows that the power and weight are in æquilibrio when they are to each other inverſely as the diſtances of their directions from the axis of the engine; or when the power is to the weight, as the radius of the roller to the radius of the wheel, the power being ſuppoſed to act in a perpendicular to this radius; but if the power act obliquely to the radius, ſubſtitute a perpendicular from the axis on the direction of the power, in the place of the radius. Thus if A B D E (Fig. 33.) repreſent the cylindric roller, H P N the wheel, L Mm the axis or right line upon which the whole engine turns,  the point of the ſurface of the roller where the weight w is applied, P the point where the power is applied, the radius of the roller, c P the radius of the wheel; then if the power ? act with a direction perpendicular to c p, the power and weight will ſuſtain each other when P is tow, as 5X toC P or c H: but if the power act in any other direction P ꝶR, let c R be perpendicular from c, the centre of the wheel, on that direction; then ? and w will ſuſtain each other when P is to w, as K to c r; becauſe, in this caſe, a power P has the ſame effect as if it was applied at the point æ of ĩts direction, acting in a right line perpendicular to c r. 19. The ſimple pulley ſerves only to change the direction of the power, or motion, without any mechanical advantage, or any diſadvantage but what ariſes from the friction. Let m (Fig. 34.) repreſent a ſimple pulley, P  w the rope that goes over the pulley from the power ? to the weight w: and ĩt is manifeſt, that if ? and w be equal, they will ſuſtain each other as if ſuſpended at equal diſtances, M a and M B, from the centre of the lever a 3. But, if beſides the fixed pulley M, there be Iig. 35. another moveable pulley L, to which the weight w is fixed, and the rope that goes from the power p, over the fixed pulley M, and under the moveable pulley L, bæ fixed above at E, then it is manifeſt that the power ? ſuſtains only one half of w, becauſe the rope æ N ſuſtains only one half of it, the other half being ſuſtained by the rope x E. There is an obvious analogy between this caſe of pullies, and that wherein a power ſuſtains a double weight at half its diſtance from the centre of motion, on the ſame ſide For if a B be the diæameter of the pulley L, at whoſe extremities the parallel ropes, A E and B N, touch it, the power P may be conceived to be applied at B, the weight w at L, and the centre of motion to be at a. If we ſuppoſe the power ? and weight w to move, as ?P is equal to one half of w, ſo the velocity of w is one half of the velocity of æ, or P multiplied by its velocity gives a product equal to w multiplied by its velocity; for, that the weight w may be eſevated one inch, each of the parts of the rope ? § and X  muſt be ſhortened by one inch; and the power P that draws the whole rope from E by æ and N, muſt deſcend two inches. A ſimilar reaſoning may be applied to all the combinations of pullies. 20. When a weight w (Fig. 36.) deſcends along an inclined plane a c, a part of its gravity Is ſuſtained by the reaction of the plane, and the remaining part produces its motion along the plane. Let a B be the height of the plane, 3 c the baſe, and the gravity of the weight w being repreſented by the vertical line w M, let this power be reſolved into the power w N perpendicular to the plane, and w Q parallel to it. The former w N is deſtroyed by the reaction of the plane, and the latter w is that which produces the motion of the body along the plane. Becauſe the triangles wv oM and a B C are ſimilar, w is to wM, as a B to a c; and the force with which a body deſcends along the plane is to its gravity, as the height of the plane to ĩts length; conſequently a force acting upon the body w, with the direction W parallel to the plane a c, vill ſuſtain it, if it be to the whole weight oſ the body, as A B IO A C. 21. Let a B  (Fig. 37.) repreſent a wedge driven into the cleft æ D F, of which D E and D ? are the ſides; and if we ſuppoſe thoſe ſides D 2? and D ? to re-act upon the wedge with directions perpendicular to D E and D F, let the horizontal line ? F meet D F in F; then when the force impelling the wedge, ſuppoſed perpendicular to the horizon, is in æquilibria with the reſiſtances of the ſides of the cleft D ? and DF, theſe three powers are in the ſame proportion as the three right lines ? ?, D E and D ?. For it follows from the compoſition of motion, that when three powers are in æquilibrio with each other, they are in the ſame proportion as the three ſides of a triangle parallel to their reſpective directions, and, conſequently, as the three ſides of a triangle perpendicular to their directions; ſuch a triangle being evidently ſimilar to the former. But E F is perpendicular to the direction in which the welght of the wedge, or the power that impells it, is ſuppoſed to act; and D E, D F are perpendicular to the directions in which their reſiſtances are ſuppoſed to act, conſequently the power that impels the wedge and thoſe reſiſtances are in the ſame proportion as E F?, D E and D F. If other ſuppoſitions are made concerning the reſiſtances of the ſides of the cleft D E and D r, the proportions of the powers may be determined, from the ſame principles. 22. When a point moves along the ſide of a cylinder, with an uniform motion, upon its curve ſurface, while this ſide is itſelf carried with an uniform motion about the axis of the cylinder, the line traced, by this compounded motion, upon the curve ſurface of the cylinder, is called a ſpiral. When this line is raiſed upon the external ſurface of the cylinder, it is called the external ſcrew; but if it is carried on in the internal ſurface, it is called the internal ſcrew. While one of theſe is converted about the other, one of them ought to be fixed; and they form æ machine of great force for ſqueezing or moving bodies. If a power P (Fig. 38.) turn either of the ſcrews with a direction parallel to the baſe, it will ſuſtain the weight w which is to be raiſed, if it be to w in the ſame proportion as the diſtance between the two neareſt ſpirals is to the circumference of the circle deſcribed by the power » becauſe while the power makes a complete revolution, the ſcrew advances by the diſtance of the two neareſt ſpirals, and the velocity of the power is to the velocity of the weight, as the circumference deſcribed by ?P to that diſtance. The ſame will appear by conſidering the ſcrew as an inclined plane involved about a cylinder. In this engine the friction is very great. 23. From theſe ſimple machines, compounded ones are formed by various combinations, and ſerve for different purpoſes; in which the ſame general laws take place, particularly that which was deſcribed in § 3, That the power and weight ſuſtain each other when they are in the inverſe proportion of the velocities which they would have in the directions wherein they act, if they were put in motion. By theſe the famous problem is reſolved, of moving any given weight by any given power, provided the reſiſtance ariſing from the friction can be overcome. It being of great importance to diminiſh this friction, ſeveral contrivances have been invented for that purpoſee In wheel-carriages the friction is transferred from the circumference of the wheel (where it would act if the wheel did not turn round) to the circumference of the axis; and, conſequently, is diminiſhed in the proportion of the radius of the axis to the radius of the wheel. In theſe, therefore, the friction is always diminiſhed by diminiſhing the diameter of the axis, or by increaſing the diameter of the wheel. The friction is likewiſe diminiſhed by making the axis of an engine to reſt upon the circumferences of wheels that turn round with it, inſtead of reſting in fixed grooves that rub upon it; for by this contrivance, the friction ĩs transferred from the circumferences of thoſe wheels to their pivots; and the friction may be ſtill diminiſhed farther by making the axles of thoſe wheels reſt upon other friction-wheels that turn round with them. It is hardly poſſible to give general and exact rules concerning friction, ſince it depends upon the ſtructure of bodies, the form of their prominent parts and cãavities, and upon their rigidity, elaſticity, their coherence, and other circumſtances. Some authors have made the friction upon a horizontal plane equal to one third of the weight; but others have found that it was only one fourth of it, and ſometimes ohly L or of it. Of late, authors have told us that the friction depends not on the ſurface of the body, but its weight only; but neither is this found to be accurately true. In leſſer velocities, the friction is nearly in the ſame ratio as the velocities; but in greater velocities, the friction increaſes in a higher proportion, whether the bodies are dry or olled. 24. The ſecond general problem in mechanics, mentioned above, is to determine the proportion which the power and weight ought to bear to each other, that, when the power prevails, and the engine is in motion, the greateſt effect poſſible may be produced by it in a given time. It is manifeſt that this is an enquiry of the greateſt importance, though few have treated of it. When the power is only a little greater than that which is ſufficient to ſuſtain the weight, the motion is too ſlow; and tho a greater weight is raiſed in this caſe, it is not ſufficient to compenſate the loſs of time. When the weight is much leſs than that which the power is able to ſuſtain, it is raiſed in leſs time; and this may happen not to be ſuſficient to compenſate the loſs ariſing from the ſmallneſs of the load. It ought, therefore, to be determined when the product of the weight multiplied by its velocity is the greateſt poſſible; for this meaſures the effect of the engine in a given time, which is always the greater in proportion as the weight that is raiſed is greater, and as the velocity with which it is raiſed is greate. We ſhall, therefore, ſubjoin ſome inſtances of this kind that may be demonſtrated from the common elementary geometry; wiſhing that farther improvements may be made in this moſt uſeful part of mechanics. 25. When the power prevails, and the engine begins to move, the motion of the weight is at firſt gradually acceleratedl. The action of the power being ſuppoſed invariable, its influence in accelerating the motion of the weight decreaſes while the velocity of the weight increaſes. Thus the action of a ſtream of water, or air, upon a wheel is to be eſtimated only from the exceſs of the velocity of the fluid above the velocity already acquired by the part of Chap. 3. PuILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES. 181 the engine which it ſtrikes, or from their relative velocity. On the other hand, the weight of the load that is to be elevated, and the friction, tend to retard the motion of the engine; and when theſe forces, viæ. thoſe that tend to accelerate it, and thoſe that tend to retard it, become equal, the engine then proceeds with the uniform motion it has acquired. Let a B (Fig. 39.) repreſent the velocity of the ſtream, a c the velocity of the part of the engine which it ſtrikes, when the motion of the machine becomes uniform; and c B Will repreſent their relative velocity, upon which the effect of the engine depends. It is known that the action of a fluid, upon a given plane, is as the ſquare of this relative velocity; conſequently, the weight raiſed by the engine, when its motion becomes uniform, being equal to this action, it is likewiſe as the ſquare of c B. Let this be multiplied by a c, the velocity of the part of the engine impelled by the fluid; and the effect of the engine in a given time will be proportional to acx cB? æ (ſuppoſing c B to be biſected in D) ACX20Dx2D B= 4A CXCDXDB; conſequently the effect of the engine is greateſt when the product of a c, c D, and D B is greateſt. But iĩt is eaſy to ſee, that this product is greateſt when the parts a c, c D and D B are equal; for, if you deſcribe a ſemicircle upon a D, and the perpendicular c ? meet the circle in E, then acxD =CcEæ?, and is greateſt when c is the centre of the circle; ſo that in order that AC x DXDB may be the greateſt poſſible, A D muſt be biſected in c; and c B having been biſected in B, it follows that a c, c D, D 2 muſt be equal; or that A c, the velocity of the part of the engine impelled by the ſtream, ought to be but one third of a B the velocity of the ſtream. In this caſe, when (abſtractN ing from friction) the engine acts with the utmoſt advantage, the weight railed by it is to the weight that would juſt ſuſtain the force of the ſtream, as the ſquare of c B, the relative velocity of the engine and ;ream, to the ſquare of a B, vhich would be the relative velocity if the engine was quieſcent; that is, as 2x2 to 353 or 4 to 5. Therefore, that the engine may have the greateſt eſfect poſſible, it ought to be loaded with no more than à of the weight which iĩs juſt able to ſuſtain the efforts of the ſtream. Of this the reader will find more in my Treatiſe of Fluxions, § 908. 26. For another example, ſuppoſe that a given weight p, (Fig. 40.) deſcending by ĩts gravity in the vertical line, raiſes a greater weight w likewiſe given, by the rope P Mm w (that paſſes over the fixed pulley M) along the inclined plane 2 D, the height of which B A is given; and let it be required to find the poſition of this plane, along which w vill be raiſed in the leaſt time, from the horizontal line a D to B. Let B C be the plane upon which i? w was placed, it would be exactly ſuſtained by æ, and, by § 20, of this chapter, ? ſhall be tow, as a B to B C; but w is to the force with which it tends to deſcend along the plane B D, as B D to A B, by the ſame article; conſequently the weight P is to that force, as B D to B C. Ferebore the exceſs of P above that force (which exceſs is the power that accelerates the motions of æ and w) ĩs to ?, as B D—B C IO B D; Or, taking B H upon B C equal to B D, as c H to B D. But it is known that the ſpaces deſcribed by motions uniformly accelerated are in the compound ratio of the forces which produce them and the ſquares of the times; or, that the ſquare of the rime is directly as the ſpace deſcribed in that time, and inverſely as the force; conſequently, the ſquare oſf the time, in which B D is deſcribed by w, will be directly as æ D and inverſely : 2. ll as 5, and vill be leat when &is a minimum; . 2 that is, when '&  c H + 2 BC, Or (becauſe 2 B C is invariable) when E  C H is a minimum. Now as, when the ſum of two quantities is given, their product is a maximum when they are equal to each other; ſo it is manifeſt, that, when their product is given, their ſum muſt be a minimum when they are equal. Thus it is evident, that, as in the laſt ſection the rectangle or product of the equal parts a c and C D was c E?; ſo the rectangle or product of any two unequal parts, into which A D may be divided, is leſs than c 2, and a D ĩs the leaſt ſum of any two quantities the product of which is equal to c 2?. But the product of 2and cH is B c*, and conſequent- a given; therefore the ſum of : and C u is leaſt when theſe parts are equal, that is, when c u ĩs equal to B , or B D equal to 2 B c. It appears, therefore, that when the power P and weight w are given, and w is to be raiſed by an inclined plane, from the level of a given point A to the given point B, in the leaſt time poſſible, we are firſt to find the plane B c upon which w would be ſuſtained by , and to take the plane B D double in length of the plane B c; or, we are to make uſe of the plane B D upon which a weight that is double of w could be ſuſtained by the power P. 27. Let a fluid, moving with the velocity and direction a c (Fig. 41.) ſtrike the plane c ꝶ, and ſuppoſe that this plane moves parallel to itſelf in the direction c B, perpendicular to c a, or that it cannot move in any other direction; then let it be required  find the moſt advantageous poſition of the plane c E, that it may receive the greateſt impulſe from the action of the fluid. Let a ? be perpendicular to c E in p, draw a x parallel to c B, and let ? æ be perpendicular upon it in K; and A æ will meaſure the force with which any particle of the fluid impells uhe plane æ c, in the direction c . For the force of any ſuch particle being repreſented by a c, let this force be reſolved into a Q parallel to E c, and a p perpendicular to it; and it is manifeſt that the latter A P only has any effect upon the plane c 2: Let this force a ? be reſolved into the force a L perpendicular to c B, and the force a æ parallel to it; then it ĩs manifeſt, that the former, a L, has no eſiect in promoting the motion of the plane in the direction c B ſo that the latter A x, only, meaſures the effort by which the particle promotes the motion of the plane C E, in the direction c 2. Let E M and E N be perpendicular to c a and c B, in M and N; and the number of particles, moving with directions parallel to A c, incident upon the plane cE, Will be as ? u. Therefore the effort of the fluid upon c E, being as the force of each particle and the number of particles together, it will be as axxE M; or, becauſe a& is to A P (DEM,) as E N to CE, as EusEM 2EN, ſo that c E being given, the problem is reduced to this, to find when ? M? XEN iĩs the greateſt poſſible, or a maximum. But becauſe the ſum of æ M* and of æ * (Ic M?) is given, being always equal to c æ?, it follows that ? V xEM* is greateſt when 2N 22CE?; in the ſame manner as it was demonſtrated in § 25. that when the ſum of a c and c B as given, acxcBwas greateſt when a c æ a B. But when E N xEM* is greateſt, its ſquare-root ENxEM? is of neceſſity at the ſame time greateſtt Therefore the action of the eſt when E N? 3 C 2?, and conſequently ? M? æ  c E?; that is, vhen E M the ſine of the angle AcE in which the ſtream ſtrikes the plane is to the radius, as Vi2 to V 3; in which caſe it eaſily appears, from the trigonometrical tables, that this angle is of 54. 44 28. Several uſeful problems in mechanics may be reſolved by what was ſhewn in the laſt articlee. If we repreſent the velocity of the wind by a c, a ſection of the ſail of a wind-mill perpendicular to its length by c E, as it follows from the nature of the engine, that its axis ought to be turned directly towards the wind, and the ſail can only move in a direction perpendicular to the axis, it appears, that, when the motion begins, the wind will have the greateſt effect to produce this motion, when the angle a c ? in which the wind ſtrikes the ſail is of 54. 44. In the ſame manner, if c B repreſent the direction of the motion of a ſhip, or the poſition of her keel, abſtracting from her lee- way, and a c be the direction of the wind, perpendicular to her way, then the moſt advantageous poſition of the ſail c E, to promote her motion in the direction c B, is when the angle a c æE, in which the wind ſtrikes the ſail, is of 54. 46. The beſt poſition of the rudder, where it may have the greateſt effect in turning round the ſhip, is determined in like manner. And how this ſame angle enters into the determination of the figure of the rhombus's that form the baſes of the cells in which the bees depoſit their honey, in the moſt frugal manner, I have ſhewn in a letter to the learned and worthy Martin Foltes, Eſq; preſident of the Royal Society. Philoſophical Tranſactions, N°. 471. 29. But it ĩs to be carefully obſerved, that when the ſine of the angle a c E is to the radius as v/ 2 to V 3, or (which is the ſame thing) when its tangent is to the radius, as the diagonal of a ſquare to its ſide, this is the moſt advantageous angle only at the beginning of the motion of the engine; ſo that the ſails of a common wind- mill ought to be ſo ſituated, that the wind may indeed ſtrike them in a greater angle than that of 54°. 44. For we have demonſtrated elſewhere, that when any part of the engine has acquired the velocity c, the effort of the wind upon that part will be greateſt, when the tangent of the angle in which the wind ſtrikes it is to the radius, not as the V 2 to 1, but as V 2+ to, the velocity of the wind being repreſented Ly a. If for example c=4a then the tangent of the angle a C E ought to be double of the radius, that is, the angle a c E ought to be of 63°. 26. If c=a then A C E ought to be of 74°. 19 This obſervation is of the more importance, becauſe in this engine, the velocity of the parts of the ſail remote from the axis, bear a conſiderable proportion to the velocity of the wind, and perhaps ſometimes are equal to it; and becauſe a learned author, Mr. Daniel Bernoulli, has drawn an oppoſite concluſion from his computations in his hydrodynamics, by miſtaking a minimum for a maximum ; where he infers, that the angle in which the wind ſtrikes the ſall ought to decreaſe as the diſtance from the axis of motion increaſes, that if ca the wind ought to ſtrike the ſail in an angle of 45, and that, if the ſail be in one plane, it ought to be inclined to the wind, at a medium, in an angle of about 50. How he fell into theſe miſtakes, we have explained elſewhere *. In like manner, tho  Treatiſe of Fluxions, § 914. the angle a c E of 54. 46. be the moſt advantageous at the beginning of the motion, when a ſhip ſails with a ſide-wind, yet it ought to be enlarged afterwards as the motion increaſes. In general, let A a, parallel to c B, be to a c, as the velocity which the engine has already acquired in the direction c B, to that of the ſtream; upon a c produced take a to a c as 4 to 3, draw D õ parallel to c B, and let a circle deſcribed from the centre c with the radius c æ meet D õ in g; and the plane c E ſhall be in the moſt advantageous ſituation for promoting the motion of the engine, when it biſects the angle æ c g. It is generally ſuppoſed, that a direct wind always promotes the motion of a ſhip, the ſail being perpendicular to the wind, more than any ſide-wind; and this has been affirmed in ſeveral late ingenious treatiſes; but to prevent miſtakes, we are obliged to obſerve, that the contrary has been demonſtrated in our treatiſe of fluxions,  919; where other inſtances of this ſecond general problem in mechanics are given, to which we refer. 30. The mechanical powers, according to their different ſtructure, ſerve for different purpoſes; and it is the buſineſs of the ſkilful mechanic to chuſe them, or combine them, in the manner that may be beſt adapted to produce the effect required, by the power which he is poſſeſſed of, and at the leaſt expence. The lever can be employed to raiſe weighta a little way only, unleſs the engine itſelf be moved, as, for example, to raiſe ſtones out of their beds in quarries. But the axis and wheel may ſerve for raiſing weights from the greateſt depths. The pullies being eaſily portable aboard ſhips, are therefore much employed in them. The wedge is excellent for ſeparating the parts of bodies; and the ſcrew, for compreſſing or ſqueezing them together; and its great friction is even ſometimes of uſe, to preſerve the effect already produced by it. The ſtrength of the engine, and i its parts, muſt be proportioned to the effects, which are to be produced by it. As we found, that, when the centre of motion is placed between the power and weight, it muſt ſuſtain the ſum of their efforts; a ſmall ballance ought not to be employed for weighing great weights; for theſe diſorder its ſtructure, and render it unſit for ſerving that purpoſe with accuracy. Neither are great engines proper for producing ſmall effects: the detail of which things muſt be left to the ſkilful and experienced mechanic. : 31. But, beſides the raiſing of weights and overcoming reſiſtances, in mechanics we have often other objects in view. To make a regular movement, that may ſerve to meaſure the time as exactly as poſſible is one of the moſt valuable problems in this ſcience; and has been moſt ſucceſsfully effected, hitherto, by adapting pendulums to clocks; tho many ingenious contrivances have been invented to correct the irregularities of thoſe movements that go by ſprings. Some have endeavoured to find a perpetual movement, but without ſucceſs: and there is ground to think, from the principles of mechanics, that ſuch a movement is impoſſble. In many caſes, when bodies act upon each other, there is a gain of abſolute motion; but this gain is always equal in oppoſite directions, and the quantity of direct motion is never increaſledl. To make a perpetual movement, it appears neceſſary that a certain ſyſtem of bodies, of a determined number and quantity, ſhould move in a certain ſpace for ever, and in a certain way and manner; and for this, there muſt be a ſeries of actions returning in a circle, to make the movement ſolute quantity of force is increaſed, of which there are ſeveral ſorts, muſt have its correſponding counteraction, by which that gain of force is deſtroyed, and the quantity of force reſtored to its firſt ſtate. Thus, by theſe actions, there will never be any gain of direct force, to overcome the friction and the reſiſtance of the medium. But every motion will beabated, by theſe reſiſtances, of its juſt quantity; and the motions of all muſt, at length, languiſh and ceaſe. 32. To illuſtrate this, it is allowed, that, by the reſolution of force, there is a gain or increaſe of the abſolute quantity of force; as the two forces a B and A D (Fig. 2.) taken together, exceed the force a c which is reſolved into them. But you cannot proceed reſolving motion in infinitum, by any machine whatſoever; but thoſe you have reſolved muſt be again compounded, in order to make a continual movement, and the gain obtained by the reſolution vill be loſt again by the compoſition. In like manner, if you ſuppoſe A and B (Fig. 42.) to be perfectly elaſtic, and that the leſſer body a ſtrikes æ quieſcent, there will be an increaſe of the abſolute quantity of force, becauſe a will be reflected; but iſ you ſuppoſe them both to turn round any centre c, after the ſtroke, ſo as to meet again in àa and b, this increaſe of force will be loſt, and their motion vill be reduced to its firſt quantity. Such a gain, therefore, of ſorce as muſt be aſterwards loſt in the actions of the bodies can never produce a perpetual movement. There are various ways, beſides theſe, by which abſolute force may be gained; but ſince there is always an equal gain in oppoſite directions, and no increaſe obtained in the ſame direction; in the circle of actions neceſſary to make a perpetual movement, this gain muſt be preſently loſt, and vill not ſerve for the neceſſary expence of force employed in overcoming friction and the reſiſtance of the medium. 3. We are to obſerve, therefore, that tho it could be ſhewn that in an infinite number of bodies, or in an infinite machine, there could be a gain of force for ever, and a motion continued to infinity, it does not therefore follow that a perpetual movement can be made. That which was propoſed by Mr. Leibnitæ, in Auguſt 1650, in the Leipſict acts, as a conſequence of the common eſtimation of the forces of bodies in motion, is of this kind; and, for this and other reaſons, ought to be rejected. It is, however, neceſſary to add, that tho on many accounts, it appear preferable to meaſure the forces as well as motions of bodies by their velocities, and not by the ſquares of their velocities; yet, in order to produce a greater velocity in a body, the power or cauſe that is to generate it muſt be greater in a higher proportion than that velocity; becauſe the action of the power upon the body depends upon their relative motion only; ſo that the whole action of the power is not employed in producing motion in the body, but a conſiderable part of it in ſuſtaining the power, ſo as to enable it to act upon the body, and keep up vith it. Thus the whole action of the wind is not employed in accelerating the motion of the ſhip, but only the exceſs of its velocity above that of the ſail on which it acts, both being reduced to the ſame direction. When motion is produced in a body by ſprings, it is the laſt ſpring only which acts upon the body by contact, and the reſt ſerve only to ſuſtain it in its action; and hence a greater number of ſprings is requiſite to produce a greater velocity in a given body, than in proportion to that velocity. A double power, like that of gravity, will produce a double motion in the ſame time; and a double motion in an elaſtic body may produce a double motion in another of the ſame kind. But two equal ſucceſſive impulſes, acting on the ſame body, will not produce a motion in it double of what would be generated by the firſt impulſe; becauſe the ſecond impulſe has neceſſarily a leſs effect upon the body, which is already in motion, than the firſt impulſe which acted upon it while at reſt. In like manner, if there is a third and fourth impulſe, the third will have leſs effect than the ſecond, and the fourth leſs than the third. From this it appears what anſwer we are to make to a ſpecious argument that is adduced to ſhew the poſſibility of a perpetual motion. Let the height A B (Fig. 43.) be divided into four equal parts a c, CcD, D E, E B: ſuppoſe the body a to acquire by the deſcent a c, a velocity as 1, and this motion by any contrivance to be tranſmitted to an equal body B; then let the body a, by an equal deſcent c b, acquire another motion as I, to be tranſmitted likewiſe to the ſame body 2, which in this manner is ſuppoſed to acquire a motion as 2, that is ſuſficient to carry it upwards from B to A; and becauſe there yet remain the motions which a acquires by the deſcents D E and E B, that may be ſufficient to keep an engine in motion, while B and a aſcend and deſcend by turns, it is hence concluded that a ſufficient gain of force may be obtained in this manner, ſo as to produce a perpetual movement. But it appears from what has been ſhewn, that a motion as 2 cannot be produced in B, by the two ſucceſſive impulſes tranſmitted from a, each of which is as I. Some authors have propoſed projects for producing a perpetual movement, with a deſign to refute them; but, by miſtaking the proper anſwer, leſs expectations. An inſtance of this we have in Dr. Wiltinss Mathematical Magick, book 2. chap. 13. A load-ſtone at a (Fig. 44.) is ſuppoſed to have a ſufficient force to bring up a heavy body along the plane ? a, from F to B; Whence the body is ſuppoſed to deſcend by its gravity, along the curve B æ F, till it return to ĩts firſt place ?r; and thus to riſe, along the plane r 4, and deſcend, along the curve B æ F, continually. But ſuppoſing B Z E to be the ſurface upon which, if a body was placed, the attraction of the load ſtone and the gravity of the body would ballance each other, this ſurface ſhall meet B E F at ſome point æ between aA and F, and the body muſt ſtop in deſcending along a E F at the point E. C H A P VV. Of the colliſion of bodies. I. H O the laws of motion and principles of mechanics are ſufficiently explained and eſtabliſhed in the preceding chapters, it will be of uſe, before we proceed to apply them to ſubjects of a higher nature, to conſider the moſt ſimple and obvious motions and phænomena that are derived from them; by which they may be farther tried and examined, and our methods of reaſoning from them juſtified: and theſe are the motions which are produced by bodies impinging upon one another, which fall frequently under our obſervation, and can be repeated by us in experiments. It is always from the moſt ſimple kind of phænomena that we can trace with the greateſt certainty the analyſis of the Iaws of nature; from which we afterwards may proceed to ſuch as are more complicated and abſtruſe: but it would be contrary to the rules of good method to begin with the latter. Tt would be very prepoſterous, for example, in deſining or aſcertaining the true notion of the inertia of body, to begin with chymical experiments concerning fermentation, the ſolutions of bodies by menſtruums, the phænomena of generation and corruption, or others of that complicated kind. If we ſhould begin with fixing our attention on theſe, we ſhould be apt to aſcribe to body an activity which is really repugnant to its nature. It is from obſervations and experiments concerning the ſenſible and groſs bodies, that we muſt acquire our knowledge of the firſt principles oſ this ſcience. The doctrine of the colliſion of bodies was very plain and clear, and deduced in a ſatisfactory manner from the laws of motion, before ſome late authors endeavoured to cloud it, by introducing abſtruſe notions into it, in favour of their new doctrine concerning the eſtirmation of the forces of bodies in motion. But we ſhall have no regard to theſe; and ſhall endeavour to deduce it, in a plain and ſatisfactory manner, from the principles eſtabliſhed and illuſtrated in the ſecond chapter. 2. Bodies have been commonly diſtinguiſhed into three ſortsss Thoſe are called perfectly hard whoſe parts yield not at all in theſr colliſions, but are abſolutely inflexible; and ſuch the laſt elements of bodies, or atoms, are ſuppoſed to be. Thoſe are called ſoſt whoſe parts yicld in their colliſions, but reſtore not themſelves again towards their firſt poſitions. Thoſe are ſaid to be elęſiic which yield in their colliſions, but reſtore themſelves ſo as to recover their firſt ſituation; and they are ſaid to be perfectly elaſtic, vhen they reſtore themſelves with the ſame force with which they are compreſſcd. Tre actions of perfectly hard or inſlexible bodics on one another are conſlummuated in a moment: and, as there is no ſpring, nor any force, to ſeparate them, they muſt go on together after their colliſion as if they formed one body. But when an elaſtic body is acted on by any force or power, its parts yield at firſt, and afterwards reſtore themſelves by degrees to their firſt ſituations. There is a time required for this, which may be diſtinguiſhed into two portions; the firſt is the time during which the parts yield and become more and more compreſſed; the other is the time during which they reſtore themſelves to their firſt ſituations. When two ſpherical elaſtic bodies meet, at firſt they touch one another in a point, but their contact gradually increaſes, as the parts that touch and preſs on one another yield, till their greateſt compreſſion: and afterwards theſe parts recover by the ſame ſteps, tho' in a contrary order, their firſt ſituations. The actions of elaſtic bodies may be explained by imagining ſprings æ L placed betwixt hard bodies a and B (Fig. 14.); for the ſprings muſt have the ſame effect in this caſe, as the elaſticity of the parts of the bodies in the other cale. If A move towards B and compreſs the ſprings, and, by their mediation, act on B, the ſprings will become more and more compreſſed, till the to bodies have equal velocities in the ſame direction; and then, no force acting on the ſprings, they will have liberty to begin to expand tnemſelves; which they will do by the ſame degrees as they were compreſſed, in a contrary order: and this is the ſecond period of the action of the bodies on one another. In the firſt period of the action of elaſtic bodies, or of bodies acting by the intervention of ſprings, the ſame effects are produced as if the bodies were perfectly hard. At the end of this period the reſpective velocity of the bodies is deſtroyed, and in the ipſtant when it ceaſes the ſecond begins, the velocities of the bodies in the ſame direction being now equal. In this ſecond period of the action of the bodies, if the elaſticity is perfect, the ſprings expanding themſelves by the ſame force with which they were compreſſed, the bodies muſt be ſeparated with a reſpective velocity equal to that they had before their colliſion; and whatever motion was added to, or ſubducted from, either body, in the firſt period, as much will be added to, or ſubducted from it, in the ſame direction, in the ſecond; ſo that there will be twice as much force loſt, or twice as much gained, by either, as if the bodies had been perfectly hard. 3. The effects produced in the firſt period of the action of bodies that have an imperfect elaſticity are the ſame as when the bodies are perfectly elaſtic; but, becauſe their parts recover their firſt ſituations with leſs force than that whereby they were diſplaced from them, there is leſs force loſt or gained in the ſecond than in the firſt period. There is, however, a conſtant proportion obſerved between what is Ioſt or gained in theſe two periods, in the ſame ſort of bodies; ſo that there is a conſtant proportion between their reſpective velocities before and after their colliſion. In glaſs, for example, this proportion is obſerved to be that of 16 to 15. ll 4. In ſoft bodies, whoſe parts yield ſo as not to reſtore themſelves at all to their firſt ſituations, the actions muſt be the ſame as in the firſt period of perfectly elaſtic bodies, and the ſame as in perſectly hard bodies. By their colliſion their reſpective velocity is deſtroyed, the inertia, or reſiſtance of the parts, having the ſame effect in this caſe, as their ſpring in the other. After the colliſion they go on together as one maſs, there being no ſpring to ſeparate them. Becauſe the parts yield, in their colliſions, certain philoſophers have imagined that ſome force muſt be loſt in producing this effect: but there is no motion communicated to any one part that it can loſe without communicating it to others; a body moving in a fluid loſes no force but what it communicates to the parts of the fluid; and a body acting upon a ſoft body can Iloſe no force but what muſt be communicated to the parts of that body, which therefore muſt be accumulated to the force of the wholee. The parts are indeed moved out of their firſt places, but this can produce no loſs of force; for it is manifeſt, that if a move and ſtrike B, (Fig. 45.) and make it go into the place b, and there ſtrike c, ſo that it remain itſelf in the place b, all the force which a had at firſt muſt be ſtill found in a or c, and there can be none loſt or conſumed in carrying B from its firſt place B, to its laſt place b, ſince a loſt none but what it gave to B, and B could loſe none, but what is communicated to c. There can be no force loſt in this caſe more than if B had ſtruck c in its firſt place B, nOr would there be more force loſt in B moved twice or thrice as far before it ſtruck c. In like manner, when a body acts upon a ſoft body and moves its parts out of their places, the force which the firſt body loſes is employed in moving thoſe parts indeed, by which they acquire whatever is loſt by it, and loſe none of what they thus acquire, but by communicating to other particles; nor is it of moment how far they are moved from their places, but what force is communicated to them, which it is not poſſible to conceive they can loſe by merely moving out of their places, but by acting on other particles. 5. This will ſtill be found true, tho' you ſuppoſe the particles of the ſoft body to cohere with ſome certain degree of force. That caſe may be explained by ſuppoſing particles, B,  and b, (Fig. 46.) cohering by a ſtring of a certain degree of ſtrength, and that A impelling c changes the ſituation of the particles with reſpect to one another. In this caſe, A vill loſe no force which will not be all communicated to c, but ſome part, by mediation of the ſtring, muſt be imprinted on B and D, and all that A loſes and is not given to c, muſt be communicated to B and D, if we ſuppoſe the itring inſinitely fine, or abſtract from its inertia, and reckon all the force in the ſame direction. It is true the ſtring will be ſtretched Ly the force which is at firſt imprinted on e, but as c can loſe none but what B and D receive, there can be no force loſt from that cauſe; and, if the ſtring ſhould break, the only conſequence can be, that there will be no more force communicated from c to B and D after that happens. From the equality of action and reaction it follows, that the ſtring acts equally on c and B, and on c and D; ſo that it adds as much force to B and D as it takes from c; and, as this is always true, it muſt hold in the inſtant when the ſtring breaks, as well as before: the coheſion of the particles, therefore, can be the occaſion of no loſs of force, taking in all that are affected in the colliſion, and there appears no ground for ſuppoſing that any force is conſumed, in making the parts of ſoft bodies yield, but what is accumu ated to the whole maſs of body, while ĩts parts continue all together. 6. Theſe things being premiſed, firſt let the bodies A and B (Fig. 47. be ſuppoſed void of elaſticity, let c be their centre of gravity, ænd let a D and B D repreſent their velocities before the troke. Then ſuppoſing the ſtroke to be direct, after it they will proceed together as forming one maſs, and ther centre of gravity being carried along with them, their common velocity will be the ſame as the eloity of that centre, which (by § 15. chap. 2.) is the ſame after the ſtroke as before it. But while the bodies deſcribed a D and BE D before the ſtroke, their centre of gravity moves from c to b, the !place where they meet, or the one overtakes the other; therefore the common velocity of a and B after the ſtroke is meaſured by c , their velocities before the ſtroke being repreſented by a D and B D reſpectively. The right line c D ſhews the direction as well 35 the velocity of their motions after the ſtroke; for ĩt is always in the direction from  to D. If D fall upon c, then c D vaniſhes, and their motions are deſtroyed by the ſtroke. This propoſition ſerves for determining the caſes when the bodies are either perfectly hard, or perfectly ſoft. 7. But if the bodies are perfectly elaſtic, take c æ equal to c D in an oppoſite direction; and the velocities of a and B after the ſtroke, with their directions, will be repreſented by E a and E B reſpectively. For the change produced in their motions by the ſtroke, being, in this caſe, double of what it was in the former, by § 2, and the diſference of a D and c D (the change produced in the velocity of a in the former caſe) being equal to the difference of c B, or C E, and E a, it follows that the velocity of a after the ſtroke is meaſured by ? A; and the difference oſ E B and C D, or c E, Vig. C B, being equal to the difference of c D and B D, it follows, that E æ is the veIocity of B after the ſtroke. If B have no motion before the ſtroke, let A æ repreſent the velocity of a, take c E equal and oppoſite to c B, and E 4, E B, Will repreſent the velocities of a and B after the ſtroke: in which caſe, the velocity of a before the ſtroke is to the velocity of B after it, as A B to E B, Or 2 c B; that is, as one half a B to c B, and therefore (by the property of the centre of gravity) as half the ſum of the bodies A and B to a. From this theorem, all the caſes relating to the motion of bodies that have a perfect elaſticity may be immediately deduced. For example, if the bodies a and 3 be equal, then c A æ cB, and ſince CEæ C D, it follows that E A  B D, and E B æ a D; that is, the bodies exchange their velocities by the ſtroke. 8. But if the elaſticity of the bodies is imperfect, take c ? (Fig. 48. n. 1.) equal and oppoſite to c o, but c à is leſs than e 4, and cb leſs than c B, in the ſame proportion as their elaſticity is leſs than a perfect elaſticity; and the right lines E æ and E b will repreſent their velocities after the ſtroke, by § 3: becauſe if we diſtinguiſh the time in which the bodies act upon each other into two periods, as in that article, the effect produced in the ſecord period will be leſs than the effect produced in the firſt period, in that ratio. In this caſe their reſpective velocity after the ſtroke is repreſented by a b, and ĩs to their reſpective velocity before the ſtroke, as a b to a B. In glaſs, Sir Iſaa: Newton found this ratio to be that of 15 to 16, as was obſerved above; conſequently in determining the effect of their colliſions, we are to take c  C 4, and c b 3 C B. 9. If motion be communicated, in this manner, from a body a to a ſeries of bodies in a geometrical progreſſion, then the velocity ſucceſſively communicated to thoſe bodies will be likewiſe in a geometrical progreſſion; and if a and B be the two firſt bodies, the common ratio of the velocities will be that of half the ſum of a and B to a; that is, if the bodies a, B, be repreſented by the right lines o a and o b, (Fig. 48. n. 2.) and a b be biſected in e, the common ratio of any two ſubſequent velocities in the progreſſion ill be that of o ? to o ę; and if æ repreſent the number of bodies without including the firſt 4, the velocity of the laſt will be to the velocity of the firſt, as the power of o a whoſe èxponent is n to the ſame power of o æ. 10. Any three bodies being repreſented by o ⸗, o b, and o ã, take o fto o d, as o a is to o b; then ſuppoſing the motion to begin from the firſt o a (which was ſuppoſcd to ſtrike o b quieſcent, and o b afterwards to ſtrike o à quieſcent) the velocity communicated in this manner, to the third ſhall be to the velocity of the firſt, as o a is to one fourth part of the ſum of o a, o b, o f, and o d. For the velocity of the firſt o a is to the velocity of the ſecond o à, as the ſum of o a and o b to 2 0a; the velocity of o b is to that of o d, as the ſum of o b and o d to 205; conſequently the velocity of the firſt o a is to the velocity of the third o d, in the compound ratio of oa +0b to 2 o a and of ob+od to2 ob, that is, (ſince o a, o b; of, o d, are proportional, ſo that o a is to ob, as 0o a+o f to c b+od, and o ao b to ob, as the ſum of o a, ob, o f, and o d to o b+ o d) as the ſum of o 4, o b, o f, and o d is to 4 0o a. Hence the velocity of o a being given, the velocity communicated to o d is inverſely as the ſm of oæ, o b, o f, and o d, and is greateſt wnen this ſum is leaſt; that is, if oæ and o d be given, when o b and o f coincide with each other and with o æ the mean proportional between o æ and o d. Therefore the velocity communicated to o à is greateſt when o b, the body interpoled between o æ and o d, is a mean proportional between them. This is one of Mr. Huygenss theorems; from which it follows, that the more ſuch geometrical mean proportionals are interpoſed between o a and o ã, the greater ĩs the velocity communicated to o d. There is, however, a limit which the velocity communicated to o  never amounts to, (the bodies o a, o ã, and the velocity of o a before the ſtroke, being given) to which it approaches continually, while the number of ſuch bodies interpoſed between o a and o d ĩs always increaſedc And this limit is a velocity which is to the velocity of the firſt o a before the ſtroke, in the ſfubduplicate ratio of o a to o d; as we have demonſtrated in our fluxions, § 5141I. The ſame principles will ſerve for determining the effects of the colliſions, when a body ſtrikes any number of bodies at once, in any directions whatever. Let the bodies firſt be perfectly hard and void of elaſticity, and the body c (Fig. 49.) moving in the direction c D with a velocity repreſented by C D, ſtrike at once the bodies a, B, E, &c. that are ſuppoſed at reſt before the ſtroke, in the dũirections C F, C H, C , &c. in the ſame plane with c D, and let D a, D b, D è, be perpendicular to C F, C H, C æ, in a, b, and e, reſpectively. Determine the point P where the common centre of gravity of the bodies c, a, B, E, &. would be found, if their centres were placed at the points c, a4, b, , &c. reſpectively, (by § 13. chap. 2.); join D , and C L parallel to D ? ſhall be the direction of the body c after the ſtroke. Let ? ꝶ, perpendicular to D ?, meet C D in R, and D L, perpendicular to c D, meet c L in L; then if c L be divided in õ, ſo that c 6 be to c I in the ratio compounded of that of c D to c r, and that of the body c to the ſum of all the bodies, the velocity of c after the ſtroke will be repreſented by c õ; that is, the velocity of c after the ſtroke will be to its velocity before it, as c õ is to C D. Let õ f, õ h, and õ æ be reſpectively perpendicular to C F, CH, and c x, in f, b, and æ; and the velocities of a, B, and E, after the ſtroke, will be repreſented by c f, ch, and c. But if we now ſuppoſe the bodies to be perfectly elaſtic, or the relative velocĩties, before and after the ſtroke, to be always equal when meaſured on the ſame right line; produce D õ till D 5 be equal to 2 D 6, join c g, and the body c will deſcribe c &after the ſtroke, in the ſame time that it would have deſcribed a right line equal to c D, before the ſtroke. And, in like manner, the motions are determined when the elaſticity is imperfect, if the relative velocity after the ſtroke is always in a given ratio to the relative velocity before it in the ſame right line. Mr. Bernoulli has reſolved only a very limited caſe of this problem, in his Eſſay on motion, Paris 1726; for he ſuppoſes the bodies to be perfectly elaſtic, and that, for each body on one ſide of the line of direction D, there is always an equal body on the other ſide, that is impell'd in a right line forming an equal angle with c D; ſo that the body c moves with the ſame direction after the ſtroke as beforee The ſolution of this particular caſe, (which he repreſents as a matter of uncommon difficulty, and magnifies as the fruit of the new doctrine concerning the forces of bodies) he derives from this principle,  that the ſum of the bodies multiplied by the ſquares of their velocities is the ſame before and after the ſtroke; which principle, however, had never been demonſtrated by him; for it cannot be conſidered as an immediate conſequence of the equality of action and re-action, as he too haſtily concluded, by what was ſhewn above. But the ſolution of theſe and other problems of this kind is derived, in a natural, eaſy, and general manner, from the laws concerning the ſum of the motions of a ſyſtem of bodies eſtimated in a given direction, and concerning the motion of their centre of gravity, which is never affected by their colliſions, 12. The 12. The ſame things being ſuppoſed as in §7. becauſe c E=  D, (Fig. 47.) ĩt follows that a A E? =4C EXC A; and that EB?BD æ4CEXCEB. But AX 4CEX CA= BX 4CEXCB, by the property of the centre of gravity c: therefore axaD?a xaꝶ* = BXEBBXBD?, Or AXAD+EBXE D= AXAE  B x E B?; that is when the bodies are perfectly elaſtic, the ſum ariſing when each is multiplied by the ſquare of its velocity, is the ſame after the ſtroke as before it. The ſame things being now ſuppoſed as in the laſt article, let o , g, f m, hn, æ r, be perpendiculars to c 6, in o, q, m, n, and r; then the rectangles contained by c m and c 6, c n and c 6, c r and c õ, will be reſpectively equal to the ſquares of c f, c h, and c 2. If the bodies c, a, B, E, be ſuppoſed to have no elaſticity, their velocities after the ſtroke will he repreſented by c ę, c f, c h, and c æ, the velocity of c before the ſtroke being repreſented by c D, becauſe, in this caſe, no relative velocity is generated by the ſtroke in their reſpective directions; and the ſum of a x cm, B x C n, E XxCr is equal to c x õ Q, becauſe the ſum of the motions which would be communicated to a, B, and E, in the direction c 6, is equal to the motion which c would loſe in the ſame direction, by § 4. chap. 2. Therefore the ſum of a x c f2, 8B xch, E xcæ* is equal to C x c õ x 6 Q; and to theſe if we add c xc õ?, the ſum of all the bodies multiplied by the ſquares of theĩr velocities in this caſe would be cxcõ xcQ. But when the bodies are ſuppoſed to be perfectly elaſtic, the velocities of a, B, and E, are to be repreſented by 2 c f, 2 c h, and 2 c ⸗, reſpectively; the ſum of Ax46f, BX4.h and E x 4c*, is equal to C xX 4 C G X G qor (Elem. 8. 2.) cx c_Cxc ; to which if we add c x c g? (or c x c  c x D ) the tiplied by the ſquare of its velocity, is equal to c x c ; and conſequently the ſame after the ſtroke as it was before the ſtrokee When therefore the bodies are vold of elaſticity, this fum is leſs after the ſtroke than before it, in the ratio of c õ x c to c n?, or of C G to C L, L being the point where L D perpendicular to c D meets c 6l. And when the bodies a, B, E, move, before the ſtroke, in directions different from thoſe in which c acts upon them, the propoſition vwill appear by reſolving their motions into ſuch as are in thoſe directions (hich alone are affected by the ſtroke,) and ſuch as are in perpendiculars to thoſe directions, from Elem. 47. . This propoſition likewiſe holds when bodies of a perfect elaſticity ſtrike any immoveable obſtacle as well as when they ſtrike one another, or when they are conſtrained, by any power or reſiſtance, to move in directions different from thoſe in which they impell one another. But it is manifeſt, that it is not to be held a general principle or law of motion, ſince it can take place in the colliſions of one ſort of bodies onlv. The ſolutions of ſome problems which have been deduced from it may be obtained, in a general and direct manner, from plain principles that are univerſally allowed, by determining firſt the motions of hard bodies, which are ſuppoſed to have no elaſticity, and thence deducing the ſolutions of other caſes, when the relative velocities before and after the ſtroke are equal, or in any given ratio, 13. From what was ſhewn in the laſt article, we are led to the principle, which, by Mr. Huygens, was called the conſervatio vis aſcendentis. It is well known, and was proved in § II. chap. I. that the heights to which bodies will riſe againſt the direct reſiſtance of an uniform gravity are as the ſquares of the velocities with which they ſet out. In the laſt article we found that the ſum of the products, when the bodies are multiplied by the ſquares of their velocities, is the ſame after as before the ſtroke; provided the bodies be perfectly elaſtic. If, therefore, we ſuppoſe the motion of the bodies to be turned upwards in vertical lines, the ſum of the products when each body is multiplied by the height to which it would ariſe is the ſame after as before the ſtroke. But by the property of the centre of oravity, in § 15, chap. 2. the ſum of the products of the bodies multiplied by thoſe heights is equal to the product of the ſum of the bodies multiplied by the height to which their centre of gravity would ariſe. Therefore when the motions of bodies are ſuppoſed to be converted upwards in vertical lines, before or after their colliſions, their common centre of gravity will always ariſe to the ſame height; and that is what is meant by Mr. Huygens when he tells us the vis aſcendens of any ſyſtem of bodies is not affected by their colliſions or mutual actions, provided they be perfectly elaſtic; for if they are ſoft bodies, or have an imperfect elaſticity (which indeed is the caſe of all bodies we have acceſs to examine,) then it is obvious that by their colliſions their motions are often diminiſhed, and ſometimes totally deſtroyed; ſo that the centre of gravity will neceſſarily ariſe to a leſs height after their colliſion than before it, if the motions of the bodies be ſuppoſed to be converted upwards in vertical lines. 14. When bodies are moved by their gravity, and at the ſame time act upon each other, it will ſtill be found, that the ſum of the products that ariſe when each body is multiplied by the ſquare of the velocity acquired by it, is equal to the difference of the ſum of the products of thoſe that deſcend multiplied by tne the ſquares of the velocities that would have been acquired by the ſame deſcents, if the bodies had fallen freely without acting upon each other, and of the ſum of the products of the bodies that aſcend multiplied by the ſquares of their reſpective velocities that would be acquired by falling freely along the reſpective altitudes to which they have ariſen; provided that the elaſticity of the bodies be perfect; or if it be imperfect, that there be no colliſion, or ſudden communication of motion from one body to another. For if the relative velocities in their reſpective directions be leſs immediately after that action than before it; in thoſe caſes, the ſum of the products of the bodies multiplied by the ſquares of their velocities will be leſs than it would have been if the bodies had deſcended freely from the ſame reſpective altitudes; and if the bodies be ſuppoſed to aſcend with their reſpective velocities at any time, and their motions be retarded by their gravity only, the common centre of gravity will not aſcend to the ſame level from which it deſcended; as we have ſhewn at length in our Treatiſe of Fluxions; from $ 521 tO 533. 15. The true general principle on this ſubject, is, that when any number of bodies, moved by their gravity, are connected together in any manner ſo as to act upon each other while they move, the aſcent of their common centre of gravity, in their vibrations or revolutions, will be always found to be either equal to ĩits deſcent, or leſs than it, but never to exceed it. And, from this principle, the impoſſibility of a perpetual motion is juſtly derived. For it appears, that, in ſuch vibrations and revolutions, the ſucceſſive aſcents of the centre of gravity muſt tion of the parts of bodies, and the reſiſtance of the medium; ſince the aſcent of the centre of gravity being never greater than the deſcent (tho often leſs than it,) there can be no gain of force to overcome thoſe reſiſtances. All motion, therefore, muſt be abated and gradually languiſh in our mechanical engines, unleſs they be ſupplied by nev and repeated influences of the power. 16. It is very well known, that, when allowance is made for the defect of elaſticity in bodies, for attrition, and the reſiſtance of the medium, theſe concluſions are perfectly agreeable' to experience; and therefore ſerve to confirm the general laws of motion with their corollaries, and our methods of reaſoning from them. CH AP.V. Of ihe motion of projectiles in vacuo; of the &ycloid, and the motion of a pendulum in it*. L E M M 4 l Suppoſe the. motion of a body to be uniformly accelerated; let the time be repreſented by the right line A M, (Plate IV. Fig. I) and any part of it by A K, draw M N, E L perpendiculars to a M in M and x, and aA N interſecting them in N and L: then the velocities acquired in the times A M, a x, reckoned from the beginning of the motion, will be as the * To render the ſecond book more complete, we have added this ſupplement, from two pieces which the author uſed to give his ſcholars. The ſubſtance of them is taken from the learned Mr. Cotes's Tracts, printed at the end of his Harmonia Menſurarum. perpendiculars M N, æ L, but the ſpaces deſcribed in theſe times will be as the areas a M N, a4 è L. This propoſition has been demonſtrated elſewhere; but we ſhall here add the proof rhat is commonly given of it, by the method of indiviſibles. Since the motion of the body is ſuppoſed to be uniformly accelerated, that is, to receive equal increments of velocity in equal times, the velocities acquired will be always proportional to the times: ſo that if Mm Nrepreſent the velocity acquired in the time a M, it follows, becauſe a M: A :: MN: K L, that x L will repreſent the velocity acquired in the time a &. After the ſame manner, the velocities acquired in the times a B, A , a D, &. will be repreſented by the perpendiculars B E, C F, D 6, &. reſpectively. The ſpace deſcribed by any uniform motion is as the rectangle contained by the right lines that repreſent the velocity and the time: therefore the ſpaces deſcribed in the times A B, B C, C D, D H, &c. with the velocities B E, C F, D 6, H I, &. are as the rectangles A E, BF, C G, D I, &. and the ſpaces deſcribed in the whole time a x as the ſum of theſe rectangles. That the motion may be uniformly and continually accelerated, ſuppoſe the number of the parts a B, B C, C D, &c. into which the line a x is divided, to be increaſed in infinitum, and the ſum of the rectangles a B, B F, c 6, &. will become equal to the triangle A x L. Therefore, in a motion uniformly accelerated, the ſpaces deſcribed in any times A K, A M, from the beginning of the motion, are as the areas A K L, A M N. Corol. 1. The ſpace deſcribed by a motion uniformly accelerated, in any time, is half the ſpace that would be deſcribed, in the ſame time, by an uniform motion with the velocity acquired at the end of that time. The ſpace deſcribed by a motion uniformly accelerated, in the time a x, is repreſented by the triangle A æ L; the ſpace that would be deſcribed by an uniform motion, in the ſame time, with the velocity x L, is repreſented by the rectangle contained by a x and E L, but the triangle a æ L is half of that rectangle; and the propoſition is manifeſt. Corol. 2. The ſpaces deſcribed by a motion uniformly accelerated, are as the ſquares of the times from the beginning of the motion; for thoſe ſpaces are as the ſimilar triangles a æ L, AM N, whoſe homologous ſides a x, A M, repreſent the times. For the ſame reaſon, the ſpaces are alſo as the ſquares of ( L, M N,) the velocities acquired at the end of thoſe ſpaces. Corol. 3. If the accelerating force is ſuppoſed to be greater or leſſer in any given ratio, the velocities generated by it, in a given time, vill be increaſed or diminiſhed in the ſame ratioo. And in any times, the velocity generated by this force, will be to that generated by the former, in the compounded ratio of the forces and of the times. Corol. 4. The fall of heavy bodies, either perpendicular or along inclined planes, being a motion uniformly accelerated, the preceding Lemma and its corollaries may be applied to them. ll L E M M 4 Il. Fig. ll. If two heavy bodies fall from reſt at e to the horizontal line a B, one in the vertical c B, and the other along the inclined plane c a; the time of deſcent from C to B, Will be to the time of deſcent from C to 4, as C B to c 4; and the velocities acquired at B and a will be equal. For let the force of gravity by which the body deſcends in the vertical c B, be repreſented by c B, and reſolved into the forces æ D perpendicular to c a, and c D; the other body is urged along the inclined plane by c D only. Therefore the accelerating forces by which the bodies deſcend in the vertical c 3 and along the inclined plane c a, are repreſented by c B and c Dn. The ſpaces deſcribed in equal times, by the uniform continued action of any forces, are in the ſame ratio as thoſe forces: therefore the bodies will fall from c to B, and from c to D, in equal times. But the time of deſcent from C to ꝑD is to the time of deſcent from c to a (by Corol. 2. and 4. Lem. 1.) in the ſubduplicate ratio of c D to c 4, that is, (becauſe C D, C B, C 4, are in continued proportion) in the ratio of Cc D to C B, Or of C B tO C A. Again, the velocities generated in the falls are in the compound ratio of the generating forces, and of the times of their generation (Corol. 3. Lem. 1.) that is, in the preſent caſe, in the compound ratio of c a to c B, and of c B to c a; which compound ratio is that of equality. LE M M 4 III. Upon the ſame horizontal plane, let there be raiſed another plane c a, whoſe elevation is c 23 from c draw c 1 parallel to c æa meeting B A in 1, and from B the line B à perpendicular to c . Then o B repreſenting. as before, the conſtant force of gravity, c o, c d will repreſent the accelerating forces along the planes c a and (c1I or) c a; and their ratio being compounded of thoſe of c b to c B, and of c B to c d, that is, of c B to C 4, and (CI to C B Or) ca to cB it follows that thoſe accelerating forces are directly as the elevations of the planes, C B, C B, and inverſcly as their lengths c a, c a. Corol. 1. Compound now thefe three ratios; that of c a to c B, Of &/ C B tOV  B, and of cB tO  4, their ſum gives the ratio of the times of falling thro C a and c a, being the direct ratio of the lengths C 4,  a, and the inverſe ſubduplicate of the elevations c B, or c B. Corol. 2. The velocities acquired being as the accelerating ſorces and the times in which they act; compound the ratio of theſe found in the preceding Lemma and Corollary, and there will reſult that of the velocities, viæ. the direct ſubduplicate of the elevations c B, C B. Corol. 3 Hence likewiſe it is inferred, that if (Fig. IlL.] a body fall from reſt at c, to a in the horizontal line A B, along any number of planes c D, D E, E 4, inclined to each other any how, as at D and E, the vclocity at a will be the ſame as if the body had fallen in the vertical c B; abſtracting however from the loſæ of velocity that happens by its impulſes at D and E, upon the contiguous planes. That multiplying the number of planes from e to 1, till the path of the body becomes curvilinear, the velocity at A will be accurately the ſame as in the perpendicular fall c B. And laſtly, that if a ſeries of planes, f 4, à æ, &c. ſimilar and ſimilarly ſituated to the former, or two ſimilar and ſimilarly ſituated arcs of a curve, be the path of the body; the velocities will be as the lengths of the paths; and the times in the ſubduplicate ratio of thoſe lengths, of the heights c B, c , or of any two homologous lines belonging to the figures. i Corol. 4. Let a  (Fig. IV.) be the diameter of a circle touching the horizontal line in a3 C a, c ⸗4, any two chords drawn to a. Then, if bodies deſcend by the force of gravity along theſe chords, the times of deſcent will be equal; and the velocities will be proportional to the chords c a, c a. For, joining D c, D ?, and making c E, c e, perpendiculars to the diameter; becauſe the triangles D C 4, E C a are ſimilar, as allo ne a, ec a; it ĩs eaſily ſhewn that c a is to c a in the ſubduplicate ratio of the elevations a 25, a æ: and this compounded with the ſame ratio inverted, gives the ratio of equality; which, by Corol. 1. is that of the times. And, by Corol. 2. the velocities are in the ſubduplicate ratio of a E to a e, or that of c a to c a. I. Of the motion of projectiles. PROPOSITION I. Fę.V. The line deſcribed by a heavy body, thrown in any direction not perpendicular to the horiæon, is a parabola. Suppoſe a body projected in the direction a D, with the velocity it would have acquired by falling from B to 4, the body, by that force alone acting upon it, would uniformly deſcribe the right line a ; and any part of the line of direction, as a , repreſents the time in which it would be deſcribed. Suppoſe that the force of gravity, acting alone, would have, in the ſame time, carried the body from A to P; complete the parallelogram a P M H, and, at the end of the time repreſented by a , the body vill actually be found in M. Since, by the firſt Corollary of the firſt Lemma, the time in which the body falls from B tO A is the ſame in which it would deſcribe 2a B by an uniform motion, with a velocity equal to that acquired at a, therefore that time will be repreſented by 2 a B. But the time in which the body would fall from a to ? being repreſented by A H, it follows, from the ſecond Corollary of the ſame Lemma, that AP: A B:: A H: 4 AB*, and 4 ABX AP  A H P M: from which it appears that the point M is a point in the Parabola whoſe diameter is A P and vertex 4, having the parameter of that diameter equal to 4 a B. Corol. 1. It is evident that the line a H is a tangent to the Parabola in a, becauſe it is parallel to the ordinate P M. Corol. 2. Since 4. A B is the parameter of the diameter a p, it follows that the parameters belonging to the vertex a of the diameter a ? are always in the duplicate ratio of the velocities of the projection, the ſpace a B being always as the ſquare of the velocity acquired by falling from B to A. It follows alſo that the parameter of a P is the ſame when the velocity of the projection is the ſame, whatever the direction A H of the projectile be. Corol. 3. If from A as centre you deſcribe the ſemicircle B I, ĩits circumference ſhall be the locus of all the foci of the parabolas that can be deſcribed by a projectile thrown from a, with the velocity it could acquire falling from B to A: for, by a known property of the parabola, the diſtance of the focus from a is always equal to of the parameter of the diameter that paſſes thro a: that is, to L of 4. 4 B or to a B itſelf; all the foci muſt therefore be found in the ſemicircle B L. Corol. 4. Hence it is eaſy to determine the parabola deſcribed when the direction of the projectile is given; for you need only draw a F ſo as to make the angle ? a b equal to the given one D a B, which the direction A D makes with the perpendicular a B, and the point F where a F cuts the ſemicircle B L ſhall be the focus required; and if you draw thro' F the line ? n parallel to a B cutting the direfirix B E in N, it ſhall be the axis, and 1, the middle point betwixt ? and N, ſhall be the vertex of the parabola, 4 F I being the parameter of the axis. j Corol. 5. If you draw a line thro the vertex I rarallel to the directrix, meeting a B in  ĩt muſt be biſectcd by the line of direction in ; and if you n draw a line from the focus F, to D, it will be perpendicular to the tangent, and will paſs thr B if produced, as appears from the properties oſ the parabola: and therefore a ſemicircle deſcribed upon a æ as diameter will always paſs thro the point D, where the line of direction cuts cI the tangent to the vertex of the parabola. Definition. If you draw a line thro' the point a, parallel to the horizon, cutting the axis in o and the parabola in æ, then a œ is called the amplitude of the parabola. PROPOSITION II The amplitude of any parabola is always equal to four times the ſine of double ihe angle hich the line of direction makes ith the vertical, tuking the half of a B for radius. For a x=2 a o2 c1=4cD; but ax is the amplitude of the parabola, and cd is the ſine of the angle D G B, which is the double of B a D, if you take  B (=æ4 a B) for radius. Therefore the amplitude is equal to 4 times the ſine oſ double the angle B A D, which the vertical makes with the line of direction. Corol. 1. The velocity of projection being given, the amplitudes are to one another as the ſines of double the angles of inclination. Corol. 2. IF the angle  a D does not exceed 45°, then it is plain that the more acute that angle is, the amplitude a x muſt be the leſs; ſince the ſine of double that angle muſt become leſs, and the amplitude is equal to four times the ſine. When the angle B a D vaniſhes, then the parabola A IE coincides with the ſtreight line A B; and the projectile, inſtead of deſcribing a curve, vill only riſe to B and fall again to a. On the other hand, the more the angle s a D approaches to 45, the line c , which is the ſine of double that angle; becomès the greater: and therefore the amplitude a x, which is quadruple of that ſine, muſt alſo become the greater. Corol. 3. When the angle B a D becomes 459, the points ? and o ſhall fall on the point , where the ſemicircle B L cuts the horizontal line A æ; the ſine c D of double B a D becomes now the ſine of 99°, and therefore is equal to the radius õ a. But ſince the radius is the greateſt ſine, it is plain that now the amplitude a x is the greateſt that can be deſcribed by any projectile thrown from a with a velocity which it would have acquired by falling from B tO A: and this greateſt amplitude is always double of B A; for a  in this caſe is equal to 4 a 6 æ2 aB. Hence it appears, that if you throw a body in a direction that makes an angle of 45 with the horizon, it will be carried farther on the horizontal line, than if you threw it with the ſame force in any other direction. Corol. . When the angle B a D is greater than 45°, then according as it approaches to a right angle, the parabola becomes more and more open, but the amplitudes a x decreaſe as the angle B a D increaſes; for A R =4 C D, and c D muſt, in this caſe, decreaſe according as B A D increaſes. If of two directions a D and a 4ã, the elevation of the one exceeds that of 45 as much as the elevation of the other wants of it, their amplitudes will be equal; for the ſines of double theſe angles muſt be equal, becauſe they are ſupplements to two right angles, to one another: but the amplitudes of the parabola are always quadruple of theſe ſines, and therefore they muſt allo be equal to one another. That the doubles of theſe angles are ſupplements to one another appears thus: let their difference from 45 be called 4, and the greater ſhall be 45 + a, the leſſer 45a4, their doubles ſhall be 990 + 2 a and 9 2 4, which are ſupplements to each other becauſe together they make up 18o°. Corol. 7. When the angle 2 a D becomes a right angle, then A B becomes the axis, and a the vertex of the parabola, c D vaniſhes, and a æ becomes  O. Corol. . When the angle B A D becomes greater than a right one, then the curve deſcribed ſhall be only a portion of the parabola that we have conſidered in the preceding corollaries, lying on the other ſide of a. Corol. 7. If there is given the impetus or velocity wherewith the projectile is thrown, and the angle of elevation; or its complement B A D, you may find the amplitude a x, and the altitude of the parabola deſcribed by this projection. For ſeeing the amplitude of 45°is 2 a B (hich is the line that always expreſſes the velocity, ſince by falling thro it the velocity is acquired) you may ſay as the radius (or ſine ſine of 99°) is to the ſine of double the angle  a o, ſo is 2 A B to a x the amplitude ſought, (by Cor. 1): the amplitude being found, you may find the altitude by ſaying, as the radius s to the tangent of the angle of elevation, ſo is c D (m4 Aꝶ) Io Ac the altitude ſought. Corol. 8. If you have given the amplitude a x, and the angle of elevation D a x, you may find the impetus neceſſary to deſcribe a parabola that ſhall have that amplitude, by this proportion; as the ſine of double the angle of elevation, is to the radius, ſo is one half of the given amplitude to a B, the ſpace thro which a body muſt fall to acquire the neceſſary impetus. Corol. 9. If the impetus and amplitude be given, the direction may be found by this rulee. Firſt find A B, by falling thr- which the given impetus may be acquired, then ſay, as the double of this line to the given amplitude, ſo is the radius to the ſine of double the angle of elevation, and this angle or its complement will ſatisfy the problem. ?P ROPOSITION III. Fi. VI. A projectile thbrown in the direction A E, vith the velocity it would acquire by falling from B to a, will ſtrike any line A N in x, ſo that A X ſhall be equal to 4 c D: ſuppoſinug A G perpendicular to the line A N, the angle  B A=  A B, and that the circle deſcribed from G as centre, with the radius G a, cuts the direction A E in D, and that D C is parallel to AN, meeting A B in C. For it is plain that the angle a D e (Jnax) = D B 4, by Eucl. 32. 3. and that conſequently the triangles a D c, a D B are ſimilar, having the angle at A common, and the angle a D c = a4 B D; therefore AC: A D:: AD: AB:: (becauſe of the ſimilar triangles a C D, P a X) AP: ?P E:: (by the property of the parabola) ? : 4 a B, therefore a D 2 P x, and conſequently c D=æ4 A K, Or A K æ 4 C D. Corol. 1. Draw thr D a parallel to a B meeting the circle in 4, and draw a à, then will the projectile thrown in the direction a ã ſtrike the line a in the ſame point x; for c D =c d. Corol. 2. Let H L, parallel to a B, touch the circle in H, then ſhall a H be the direction which will carry the projectile fartheſt on the line A ; becauſe when D comes to H, then c D is the greateſt ĩt can poſſibly be, and conſequently a æ (I 4 C D) is then the greateſt diſtance the projectile can be carried to, on the line A n, by the velocity acquired by falling from B to a. But it is plain that the angle H A N= H B A=H a B, therefore the direction a H biſects the angle B A N which the line A  makes with the vertical A B. Corel. 3. The lines A D, aA d, make equal angles with a H, alſo the angle D a v d a B; and when theſe angles are equal the diſtance a x is the ſame. Corol. 2. When a æ is given and the direction is required, take a R = of a x, and thr rR draw R D parallel to A B, meeting the circle in D and 4; then draw a D, a d; and theſe will be the directions *. BEE  See more on this ſubject in Mr. Grays Treatiſe of Gunnery, Londen 1731. II. Of ibe &cloid; and the motion of a pendulum in it. Definitions. If the circle c D  (Fig. VIL.) roll on the given ſtreight line a B, ſo that all the parts of the circumference be applied to it one after another, the point c that touched the line a B in 4, by a motion thus compounded of a circular and rectilineal motion, will deſcribe the curve line a c 'E B which is called the cycloid. The ſtreight line a B is called the baſe; the line ? ? perpendicular to a B, biſecting it in ?, the axis; and the point E the vertex of the cycloid. The circle by whoſe revolution the curve line is deſcribed, ĩs called the generating circlee. The line c x parallel to the baſe A B, meeting the circle in c and the axis in x, is called an ordinate to the axis; and a line meeting the curve in one point, that produced does not fall within the curve, is called a rangent to the curve in that point. P ROPOS ITIONI. On the axis E F deſcribe the generating circle æ ò F, meeting the ordinate c X in ; and the ordinate will be equal to the ſum of the arc E  and its right ſine õ æ; I ſay, c R E GCH GK. It is plain, from the definition, that the line a B is equal to the whole circumference of the generating circle, and therefore A ? muſt be equal to the ſemicircumference 2  F?. It is alſo obvious, from the deſcription of the curve, that the arc c D is equal to the line a D, and conſequently the arc c  equal to D F Or I K or Cc G; but the arc c H is equal to the arc E G; therefore  õ is equal to the arc r ę, and Becauſe the triangles ?E N M, ? M are ſimilar, and E N=NV, therefore r is equal to oM; and the triangle P M being iſoſceles, the perpendicular o biſects the baſe P m;3 ſo that M P is double of M ę: but, by the Iaſt propoſition, L s is parallel, and conſequently equal, to M P, and L s is equal to 2 Mu. The Iine L s is the increment oſ the curve E L, generated in the ſame time that the chord E M increaſes by M ę, ſince E is equal to E o, when the points and M come together: Therefore the curve increaſes with double the velocity that the chord increaſes; and ſince they begin, at E, to increaſe together, the arc of the cycloid æ L will be always double of the chord E M. Corol. The ſemi-cycloid æ L B is equal to twice the diameter of the generating circle, ? ?; and the whole cycloid a c æ B is quadruple of the diameter E F. i PROPO SITION IV. Let E r be parallel to the baſe A B, and c R parallel to the axis of the cycloid; and the ſpace E C R, bounded by the arc of the &cloid E c and the lines ? R and R , ſhall be equal to the circular area E G . Draw c r parallel to cr; and ſince cu: cu::  x: E &; therefore E è x c u= 6  x C u, and conſequently R 7 x C R = 6 E x E E: therefore the little ſpace C R 7 c æ G X kg. So that the areas E CR, E GK Increaſe by equal increments; and ſince they begin to flow together, therefore they muſt be equal. ment cut off by the chord E 6, is equal to the rectangle contained by half the radius and the ſum of the arc E õ and its right ſine ò X; and the area E x r conſiſting of the ſector æ o x and the triangle x o F is equal to the rectangle of half the radius and the ſum of the arc E x and its right ſine b x; therefore the trapezium R C Zd is equal to- the ſum of the areas E GF and E X F. By the laſt propoſition, the area E C R is equal to E G , and E Z d =Ebx; from the trapezium r c Z d ſubtract the areas E c r, E Zã, and from the areas E G F, E XF, ſubtract the areas E 6 &, E b x, and there will remain the area c Z E c equal to the ſum of the triangles, ę F x, b F x. Corol. 1. Hence, an infinite number of ſegments of the cycloid may be aſſigned that are perfectly quadrablee. For example, if the ordinate c  be ſuppoſed to cut the axis in the middle of the radius o E, then æ and b coincide; and the area E c X becomes in that caſe equal to the triangle õ x F, and E bZ becomes equal to ? bx; and theſe triangles themſelves become equal. Corol. 2. Suppoſe now that x comes to the centre o, and c comes to 7; then becauſe o x vaniſhes, therefore E b vaniſhes, and the ſpace c Z E c becomes in this caſe E c i E, which is equal to 4 o æ; for the triangle b F x in this caſe vaniſhes. But to return from this digreſſion; PROPOSITION VI. Fi. VIII Let a r  be a ſemi-cycloid having its baſe E C parallel to the horiæon, and its vertex a downwards : ſuppoſe a ſiring, with a pendulum, of the length of the may be made to deſcribe the cycloid a v B in its oſcillations. P RO POSITION VII. Let vL, perpendicular to DV, be equal to any orc of the cycloid vM L; deſcribe with the ràdius v L the ſemicircle L 2 1, and ſuppoſing ibe pendulum to begin an oſcillation from L, the velocity acquired at M, in the crcloid, will be as M x the ordinate of the circle at the correſponding point M in the ſtreight linev L: and the force by which the motion of the pendulum is accelerated in M, is as the arc of the cycloid v M that remains to be deſcribed. Let LR, Ms be perpendiculars to the axis b v, meeting the generating circle in o and Q, and draw the chords v o, v o: then by Cor. 3. Lemna 3. the velocity of the pendulum at M, will be the ſame as would have been acquired by a body directly falling from R tO S, and the velocity acquired at v will be the ſame as would have been acquired by a body directly falling from R tOV; but theſe velocities are to one another as v R 5 to vi R v, by Cor. 2. Lemma 1. and ſince R v: sv: : vVO: v&, and R v: RV—SV (æRrRS):: vor: vo-v &: vL: VL' vM (becauſe vLæ2vo and uM æ2VQ), it follos that the velocity of the pendulum acquired in M ĩs to the the velocity acquired in v, as v vVL:VM to vvL⸗ , Or as M X to vV Z. The force of gravity that is ſuppoſed invariable, acting in the direction of the diameter b v, may be repreſented by D v; and may be reſolved into the rallel to ? M the ſtring, ſerves only to ſtretch the ſtring, and does not at all contribute to accelerate the motion of the pendulum; it is only the force repreſented by the chord v  that accelerates the motion of it along the curve mm, and is àll emploved to produce that effect, the direction v  being parallel to the tangent of the cycloid at M, by Prop. II. But v M=2 VQ, by Prop. III therefore the force that accelerates the pendulum at M, is as the arc of the curve v u. Corol. It is obvious from the demonſtration, that the part of the gravity which the ſtring ſuſtains in any point M, is to the whole weight of the pendulum, as the chord D to the diameter. P RO PO SIT ION VIII. Suppoſe that the circle L 2l is deſcribed by the body x with an uniform motion, by the velocity acquired by the pendulum in v; and any arc of the cycloid, as M N, will be deſcribed by the pendulum, in the ſame time as the arc of the circle x v by that uniform motion: taking VN, on the ſtreight line v L, equal to v N in the cycloid, and drowing N v parallel to væ, meeting the circle in Y. Let x m be an ordinate very near to x M, and draw x r parallel to thę diameter L I, meeting  m in r; then, ſince the triangles x r æ and v x M are ſimilar, it follows that xx: Mm (mxr):: vx: Mæ, that is, as the velocity of the body x to that of the body M: and conſequently the ſpaces x æ and Mm vill be deſcribed in the ſame time by theſe bodies, the times being always equal when the ſpaces are taken in the ſame ratio as the velocities. After the ſame manner, the other correſponding parts of the lines M  and x y will be deſcribed in the fame time; and therefore the whole ſpace Mm N will be deſcribed in the fame time as the arc x y. Cor. Therefore the pendulum will oſcillate from L tov, in the ſame time as the body x will deſcribe the quadrant L Z. P ROPOSITION IX CVThe time of a complete oſcillation in the cycloid is to ihe time in which a body would fall throo the axis of the &cloid D v, as the circumference of a circle toils diameter. The time in which the ſemi- circumference L Zlis deſcribed by the body x, is to the time in which the radius L v could be deſcribed with the ſame velocity; as the circumference of a circle, to its diameter. But the ſame time, in which the ſemi- circumference L Zl is deſcribed by the body x, is equal to the time of the complete oſcillation L vP in the cycloid, by the Corollary of the laſt propoſition. The time in which a body falls from o to v, along the chord ov, is equal to the time in which L v (m2 ov) could be deſcribed by the velocity acquired at the poit v, by Cor. 1 Lem. 1. and Cor. 3. Lem. 3. and the time of the fall thro' the chord o v is equal to the time of the fall thro the diameter o v, & Cor. 4 Lem. 3. conſequently the time in which L v could be deſcribed by a velocity equal to that of the body x, ĩs equal to the time of a fall thro the diameter ov. It follows thereFore that the time of the entire oſcillation L væ, is to the time of a fall thrò the diameter Dv; as the sireumſerm of a circle, to its diameter. Corol. 1. Hence the oſcillations in the cycloid are all performed in equal times; for they are all in the ſame ratio to the time in which a body falls thro' the diameter D v. If therefore a pendulum oſcillates in a cycloid, the time of the oſcillation in any arc is equal to the time of the oſcillation in the greateſt arc BV a, and the time in the leaſt arc is equal to the time in the greateſt. Corol. 2. The cycloid may be conſidered as coinciding, in v, with any ſmall arc of a circle deſcribed from the centre c; paſſing thro' v; and the time in a ſmall arc of ſuch a circle will be equal to the time in the cycloid; and hence is underſtood why the times in very little arcs are equal, becauſe theſe little arcs may be conſidered as portions of the cycloid as well as of the circle. : Corol. 3. The time of a complete oſcillation in any little arc of a circle, is to the time in which a body would fall thrę halſ the radius; as the circumference of a circle to its diamete: ant ſince the latter time is half the time in which a body would fall thro the whole diameter, or any chord, it follows that the time of an oſcillation in any little ar c, is to the time in which a body would fall thro its chord; as the ſemicircle, to the diameter. Suppoſe æ v a ſmall arc of the circle deſcribed from the centre c; then the time in the arc N v is ſo far from being equal to the time in the chord N v, even when they are ſuppoſed to be evaneſcent, that the Iaſt ratio of theſe times is that of the circumference of a circle to four times the diameter: and hence an error in ſeveral mechanical writers is to be corrected, who, from the equality of the evaneſcent arcs and their chords, too raſhly conclude the time of a fall of à body in any of theſe arcs equal to the time of the fall of a body in their chords. Corol. 4. The times of the oſcillations in cycloids, or in ſmall arcs of circles, are in a ſubduplicate ratio of the lengths of the pendulums. For the time of the oſcillation in the arc L v ? is in a given ratio to the time of the fall thrò D v, which time is in the ſubduplicate ratio of the ſpace D v, or of its double c v the length of the pendulum. Corol. 5. But if the bodies that oſcillate be acted on by unequal accelerating forces, then the oſcillatians will be performed in times that are to one another in the ratio compounded of the direct ſubduplitate ratio of the lengths of the pendulums, and inverſe ſubduplicate ratio of the accelerating forces: becauſe the time of the fall thr- D v is in the ſubduplicate ratio of the ſpace n v directly and of the force of gravity inverſely; and the time of the oſcillations ĩs in a given ratio to that time. Hence it appears, that if oſcillations of unequal pendulums are performed in the ſame time, the accelerating gravities of theſe pendulums muſt be as their lengths; and thus we conclude that the force of gravity decreaſes as you gO towards the equator; ſince we find that the lengths of pendulums that vibrate ſeconds are always leſs at a leſs diſtancę from the equator. Corol. 6. From this propoſition we learn how to know exactly what ſpace a falling body deſcribes in any given time: for finding, by experiment, what ſenaniꝶ oſcillates in that time, the half of the ength of the pendulum will be to the ſpace required, in the duplicate ratio of the diameter to the circumference; becauſe ſpaces deſcribed by a falling body, from the beginning of its motion, are as the ſquares of the times in which they are deſcribed; and the ratio of the times, in which theſe ſpaces are deſcribed, is that of the diameter to the circumference: and thus Mr. Huygens demonſtrates that falling bodies, by their gravity only, deſcribe 15 Pariſian feet and I inch in a ſecond of time. Schol. That it may be underſtood how the time in a ſmall arc is not the ſame with that in its chord, tho the evaneſcent arc is equal to its chord, we may here demonſtrate, that if v æ and N æ be two planes touching the arc u vin v and N. Tho the evaneſcent chord N V be equal to the ſum of theſe tangents v æ and N E, yet the time in the chord is to the time in theſe tangents as 4 to 3. By Cor. 1. Lem. 3. the time in N æ is to the time in N vVas N æ toNV, or as I to2; but æV being horizontal, the motion in æv muſt be uniform, and it vill be deſcribed by that uniform motion in half the time the body falls from N to æ: therefore if the time in which æv is deſcribed uniformly be called r, the time in which N æ is deſcribed will be 2 T, and the time in which the chord N v will be deſcribed will be 47: and conſequently the time in which a body would fall along the two tangents, is to the time in which it would deſcribe the chord, as 3 to4. B O O KI Gravity demonſtrated by analyſis, C H A P. I Of ibe theory of gravily, as far as it appears to have been known be efore Sir Iſaac Newton, 1. T ROM experiments and obſervations alone, we are enabled to collect the hiſtory of nature, or deſcribe her phænomena. By the principles of geometry and mechanics, we are enabled to carry on the analyſis from the phænomena to the powers or cauſes thac produce them; and, by proceeding with caution, we may be ſatisſied that our founclations are well laid, and that the ſuperſtructure raiſed upon them is ſecure. The firſ views which philoſophers had of nature were no better than thole of the vulgar, being the immediate ſuggeſtions of ſenſc. But by comparing theſe together, examining the nature of the ſenſes themſelves, correcting anũ aſſ ſting them; and by a juſt application of ceometrical and mechanical principles, the ſcherme of nature ſoon appears very diſferent to a philoſopher ſfrom that which iĩs preſented to a vulgar eye. At firſt ſight, the ſurface of the earth appears of an unboundcd extent, and of a moſt irregular form; while all ihe reſt of the univerſe, the clouds, meteors, moon, ſun, and ftars of all ſorts, appear in one concave ſurface bent towards the earth. This was the opinion concerning the ſyſtem that moſt commonly prevailed at firſt, while their imagination, influenced by ſuch prejudices, made men faney that they ſaw and heard things impoſſiblee. Thus the Roman poet repreſents their army when in Portugal (the weſtern boundary of the great continent) as hearing the ſun enter with a hiſſing noiſe into the ocean, Audiit herculeo ſtridentem gurgite ſolem. l Lucan,.. while other travellers have talked of àa vaſt cavity in the moſt remote parts of the eaſt, from whence the ſun was heard to iſſue every morning with an unſufferable noiſee But philoſophers ſoon diſcovered that the earth was not of an unbounded extent, but of a globular form; and that the meteors, planets, and ſtars, were not confined to one concave ſurface, but diſperſed in ſpace at very different diſtances; that their real magnitudes and motions are very different from their apparent ones, and are not to be deduced from the appearances in any one place, but from views raken from divers points of ſight, compared together by geometrical principles. 2. As our aralyſis of the ſyſtem muſt be founded upon the real figures, magnitudes and motions, of the bodies of which it iĩs compoſcd ; ſo we ſhall have an excellent inſtance of the method of proceeding by analyſis and ſyntheſis if we deſcribe in what manner we are enabled, from the apparent phænomena, to deduce an account of the real; without the knowledge of which our enquiries into the powers or cauſes that operate in nature muſt be doubtful or erronecus. The knowledge of the diſpoſition and motions of the celeſtial bodies muſt precede a juſt enquiry into their cauſes. The former is more ſimplt; the latter more arduous; and the former will prepare the way for the latter, and ſerve to make the reader acquainted with this method (the only one by which certainty can be acquired in this ſcience) in eaſy caſes, before he proceed to thoſe of a more complicated naturee. We ſhall therefore begin with the plainet and moſt ſimple inſtance of this kind, by ſhewing briefly how, from the phænomena, the true figure, magnitude, and motions of the earth are derived; and how, theſe being eſtabliſhed, innumerable phænomena are deduced by ſyntbeſis. 3. It is to ſight that our knowledge of the diſtant parts of the ſyſtem is owing, thoſe objects that are very near us falling under the obſervation of the other ſenſes only: but this ſenſe, however admirable, has its imperfections. Viſion depends upon the picture of external objects formed on the retina, together with a judgment of the underſtanding, acquireq by habit and experience; which is ſo immediately connected with the ſenſe, that it is impoſſible, by an act of reſlection, to trace it, or, when it is erroneous, ſuddenly to correct it. If viſion depended upon the picture only, then equal pictures upon the retina would ſuggeſt ideas of equal magnitudes of the objects; and if the ſmalleſt fly was ſo near that It could cover a diſtant mountain from it, the fiy onght to appear to us to be equal to the mountain, But we have, by habit, acquired a faculty of compounding the opinion, or prejudice, formed concerning the diſtance with the apparent magnitude or bulk of the image formed on the retina; and this vwith an inconceivable quickneſs of thought, ſo that the idea or image we form to ourſelves of its magnitude is the reſult of both; an allowance being made for the greater diſtance, agreeable to the notion we have conceived of itt. Hence it is eaſy to ſee how many fallacies in viſion muſt ariſe: for as we may be often miſtaken in our notion of diſtance, ſo every ſuch miſtake muſt produce a correſponding error in our idea of the magnitude of the object. Beſides, in many caſes, this notion of diſtance ariſes without reflection, from the force of habit; and we find the eſfect of it takes place even after the underſtanding is better informed, and the judgment corrected. Thus the moon continues to appear bigger 10 us at the horizon than at the meridian, even after it has been demonſtrated to us that her diſtance is then greater, ſo that ſhe ought really to appear leſs. Becauſe (according to Keplers obſervation) the heavens appear to us, not in an hemiſpherical dome, but as a ſegment of a ſphere leſs than the hemiſphere, we have been accuſtomed to aſcribe a greater real magnitude to objects ſeen at a great diſtance along the horizon, than to thoſe of an equal apparent magnitude (or that have equal images on the retina) ſeen at a conſiderable elevation about it; and hence he ingeniouſly accounts for the moons appearing bigger to us at the horizon than at the meridian. But after we are better informed, and know that the apparent magnitude of the moon is leſs at the horizon in the ſame proportion as the diſtance is greater, we continue to make an allowance not on this account only, but a much greater than this requires, from the great influence oſ habit and cuſtom*; the effect of which on rhe mind and its operations is a ſubject that well deſerves the particular attention of philoſophers, : Perbaps the concave ſurface of the heavens appears to us as a portion leſs than a hemiſphere, becauſe we have been always accuſtomed to fee greater diſtances along the horizon than in the vertical line towards the zenith. But whateyer the reaſon of this appearante (ſuppoſing it true) may be, it would ſeem that un hubitual way of thinking to the contrary ęught to huve ſome effect; and ſome obſerve that the moon never appears to them ſo large at the horizon, as it did formerly when they were young and unacquainted with her motions. but is improper to be inſiſted on in this place, leſt we ſhould ſeem to mix, without neceſſity, what is obſcure and uncertain with what is clear and ſatisfactory. For the analyſis we are to deſcribe, depends not on any diſputed principles, but on thoſe of practical geometry applied to thę heavens. 4. Experience has taught us ſeveral ways of forming a judgment concerning the diſtances of objects, when they are not very remote from us; as by the different diſpoſition of our eyes when we look at a near object with both; it being manifeſt that when the object is near, the eyes muſt be turned more towards each other, in order that they may be directed towards the ſame point of it, than when it is at a greater diſtancee. We ſoon learn from experience, likewiſe, that when the object is very near, the image is obſcure and confuſed, and we are obliged to ſtrain the eye to render it tolerably diſtinct. The image is alſo found to be more luminous and bright when the object is near than when it is remote. But the moſt uſual way of eſtimating the diſtance is from the intervening objects; or, when the object itſelf is of a kind ith which we are vell acquainted, by the bulk its image bears in the picture upon the retina. BY theſe, and perhaps other methods, we are enabled to form ſome judgment of the diſtance of near objects *,. But when they are very remote, and no objects . A learned author, of a diſtinguiſhed character, begins an ingenious treatiſe upon this ſubject, by obſerving,  it is, I .“ thin, agreed by all, that diſtance, of itſelf and immediately,  cannot be ſeen. For diſtance being a line directed endwiſe  1o the eye, it projects only one point in the fund of the eye, s which point remains invariably the ſame, whether the diſs tance be longer or ſhorter The diſtance here ſpoken of, is diſtance from the eye; and what is ſaid of it is not to be applied to diſtãnce in general. The apparent diſtance of two ſtars objects intervene, as is the caſe of the celeſtial bodies, theſe methods fail us, the ſenſe is at a loſęs in tomparing their diſtances together, and is unable to determine which are greater or leſs, without the aid of geometry, or ſome equivalent artt. In ſuch caſes, therefore, the objects are all referred by the ſenſe to one concave ſurfacee Thus the clouds, meteors, planets and ſtars of all kinds, appear to the ſenſe in one concave ſurface of heaven, though there he the greateſt variety in their real diſtances. It is in theſe caſes that practical geometry brings us its neceſſary and ſure aid. By it we ſoon find that the clouds are not only nearer us than the celeſtial bodies, which they often cover from us, but that their diſtance is only of a few miles; a ſmall change of the place producing a great change in their poſition with reſpect to us, while thoſe that are ſeen by us at one place are different in poſition from thoſe that are ſeen at the ſame time in places remote from it. We ſoon perceive that the moon is at a vaſtly greater diſtance; becauſe ſhe is ſeen over one half of the earth at once, and nearly in the ſame direction, or in the ſame ſituation among the fixed ſtars. We eaſily learn that the moon is at a leſs diſtance from us than the ſun, becauſe by coming between us and the ſun ſhe produces the ſolar eclipſes; and that Venus and is capable of the ſame varieties as any other quantity or magnitude. Viſible magnitudes conſiſt of part, into which they may be reſolved as well as tangible magnitudes, and the proportions of the former may be aũięned as well as of the latter; ſo that this author goes too far, when he tells us that viſible magnitudes are to be no more accounted the object of geometry than words; and when he concludes of diltance in general, what had only been ſewn of diſtance directed  end- wiſe to the eye; and pretends  to demonſtrate that the ideas of ſpace, outneſs, and  things placed at a diſtance, are not, ſirictly ſpeaking, the obs ject of ſight; and are not otherwiſe perceived by the eye than sc by the ear,” Mercury are nearer to us in their inferior conjunctions than the ſun, becauſe they are then ſeen as dark ſpots upon his diſk. If our inſtruments were abſolutely perfect, and our obſervations could be made with the utmoſt accuracy, then each celeſtial body might have its diſtance preciſely aſcertained, and the whole diſpoſition of the ſyſtem might be exactly known. But this ſubject being of the utmoſt importance in our preſent analyſis, it deſerves ſome farther illuſtration. 5. Let a and c (Plate III. Fig. 530.) repreſent two ſpectators, or two different ſtations of the ſame ſpectator, D the object or phænomenon whoſe diſtance is required. This object appears to the ſpectator at A in the right line a D ?, and to the ſpectator at c in the right line c DE; the angle contained by which, A D c, ſhews how much the poſition of the object o varies with reſpect to the two ſpectators. When this angle is great, the diſtance A D bears not a great proportion to Ac; but when this angle is very ſmall, as vhen the object is removed from D to H, then its diſtance from a muſt be much greater than a c the diſtance of the two ſpectators or ſtations; becauſe A C is always to a D, as the ſine of the angle a o c to the ſine of a c D, by common trigonometry. Thus when a c conſiſts of ſome miles, and D repreſents a cloud, the angle a o c is found to be conſiderable; and thence we learn that its diſtance is not very great. If E D C repreſent the right line in which the ſun ſhines, then c will repreſent the ſhadow of the cloud upon the plane a c; and the proportion of AD to a c may be determined by obſervations taken from one ſtation  But tho the right line a c conſiſt of hundreds of miles, if H repreſent the moon, it is found that the angle a H c is excoeding ſmall; and thence we conclude, that the diſtance of the moon is not to be expreſſed but by a great number of miles. 6. Let c (Fig. 51.)] repreſent the centre of the earth, A a place upon its ſurface, c a e the vertical line of this place, d any object or phænomenon in the Zenith; a D F a tangent to the ſurface of the earth at a, the fenſible horizon at that ꝓlace. Then the object à being ſuppoſed to project upon the fixed ſtar e, when in the vertical line, to a ſpectator at a as well as at c, it will be otherwiſe when the object d comes to the horizon at n. For tho the centre c, the object D and the ſtar E (abſtracting from their proper motions) be ſtill in a ſtrait line, yet D and æ are no longer in a right line with a the place of the ſpectator: but while D appears to be ſet at ?, the ſtar appears ſtill elevated above the horizon by the arc E ?, which meaſures the angle E D F, or a D]; the ſine of which is to the radius, as c a the ſemidiameter of the earth is to c D the diſtance of the object from the centre of the earth. This angle A D C is what is called the horizæontal parallax of the object or phænomenon, and ſhews under what angle the ſemidiameter of the earth c a would appear if viewed at the diſtance of the object c n. And to find this horizontal parallax of any object, is no more than to determine how ~reat (or under how many minutes and ſeconds) the ſemidiameter of the earth would appear viewed at that object. Suppoſe any number of objects in the right line A F, as D, G, H; and ſpectators at each of theſe viewing the ſemidiameter of the earth c Aa; it will appear to them under the reſpective angles c b a, C õ a, c H 4, which are the reſpective parallaxes of thoſe objects, and which gradually decreaſe as their diſtances increaſe. We diſcover therefore the diſtances of thoſe objects parent magnitude, the earths ſemidiameter makes at thoſe objects: and jt is obvious that this method is well founded, it being manifeſt, that the diſtances at which the earth appears great to a ſpectator muſt be leſs, and that thoſe diſtances at which the earth appears ſmall to him muſt be greater,. Thus to a ſpectator carried to a few hundred miles diſtance only, the earth would appear very large; to a ſpectator at the moon, the ſemidiameter of it would appear under an angle leſs than a degree; to a ſpectator at Venus, of much about the ſame bigneſs as Venus àppears to us; and to a ſpectator as remote as Jupiter or Saturn it would hardly be viſible at all, unleſs his ſenſe was more acute than ours, or aſſiſted by artt. And as, when the proportion of the diſtance of the ſpectator from the centre of the earth to its ſemidiameter is known, it is eaſily aſcertained how great an appearance the earth will make to that ſpectator; ſo converſely, when this appearance is determined, it is eaſy to aſſign the ſpectators diſtance from it. 7. In this manner, me: ſuration is carried from the earth to the heavens; and the diſtances of the celeſtial bodies compared with ſemidiameters of the earth, and with one ænother. For the further illuſtration of what is of ſuch importance in aſtronomy, a ſcience that affords us ſo noble and extenſive views of nature, let us imagine a ſpectator at a viewing the immenſe expanſe around him, while a right line D L, perpendicular to a D and equal to the ſemidiameter of the earth, moves off on the right Iine A F from the Ieaſt to the greateſt diſtances; then the parallax belonging to any diſtance is nothing elſe than the angle which the ſemidiameter of the earth at that diſtance ſubtends to the ſpectator at ., Thus the parallaxes belonging to the ſeveral diſtances a D, a-, A H, &c. are the reſpective angles D a L, õ a u, H A N, &; which meaſure the apparent magnitude of the ſemidiameter of the earth viewed, at thoſe diſtances, by a ſpectator at . While we ſuppoſe this ſemidiameter to be carried off in infinitum, theſe apparent magnitudes gradually decreaſe, nearly in the ſame proportion as the diſtance increaſes. The parallaxes decreaſe in the ſame manner; and a ſcale of the one affords us a ſcale of the other. It is obvious, that, from the moment any object departs from the vertical line, ĩt appears to a ſpectator at a depreſſed towards the horiZon, and is the more depreſſed in proportion as it is nearer to him. The true place of the object o is at E, where it would be ſeen from the centre c; but its apparent place to a ſpectator at a is at ?F, and ĩts depreſſion or parallax is meaſured by the arc E ?, or by the angle E D F equal to a D c. No, in order to find this depreſſion, it is ſufficient to make uſe of the fixed ſtar E, which has no ſenſible parallax, and was ſuppoſed to be in conjunction with the object in the vertical line a d e; for the depreſſion of the object D below the ſtar E, viewed from a, gives the parallax. By proceſſes of this kind, it is found, from aſtronomical obſervations, that the mean diſtance of the moon from the centre of the earth, is about 60L ſemidiameters of the earth. 8. The figure of a body is more eaſily known when we are able to view it from great diſtances than from very ſmall ones; becauſe when it is at a great diſtance, the eye takes in a conſiderable portion of it in one view, from which the figure of the whole is more eaſily collected: whereas when it is viewed at a ſmall diſtance, ſmall irregularities on its ſurface have too great an cſfect upon the ſenſe, and are apt to miſlead us in our judgment concerning the whole. It is very eaſy to ſee, for example, that the ſun and moon are globular, becauſe in all poſitions they conſtantly appear to us as bounded by a circle, a property which belongs to the ſphere or globe alone. But the figure of the earth is not ſo eaſily diſcovered by us, becauſe the largeſt views we are able to take of it, from the tops of the higheſt mountains, bear a ſmall proportion to the whole ſurface; and the curvature or ſphericity is hardly ſenſible in thoſe proſpects of it. However, we have undoubted proofs that the earth is globular, though not exactly ſpherica. We are aſſured that the meridian ſections of the earth, or ſections thro' ĩits poles, are circular, becauſe, as we go ſouthwards the northern ſtars are depreſſed, and the ſouthern ſtars elevated, nearly in a regular courſe; ſo that a degree of depreſſion of the former, or elevation of the latter, always correſponds to 60 Italian or geographical miles on the meridian; whence we conclude, that a meridian ſection of the earth is a circle, a degree of which is 60 ſuch miles, and the whole circumference is 6o x 360, or 21600, of the ſame miles. At the equator, both the poles are in the horizon; as we remove northwards, the northern pole riſes till we come to the pole of the earth, where the celeſtial pole is in the Zenith; and, in general, the elevation of the pole increaſes gradually and regularly with the diſtance from the equator. The equator and its parallels appear to be circular from the regular daily progreſs of light, from eaſt to weſt, along their ſurface. The ſun arrives at the meridian of places that are more eaſterly, ſooner than to the meridian of thoſe that are towards the weſt, in proportion to the diſtance of the meridians meaſured upon the equator. The ſpherical figure of the earth appears likewiſe from levelling, where it is found neceſſary to make an allowance for the difference between the apparent and the true level; the former being a plane that touches the earth’s ſurface, the latter the globular ſurface itſelf, which falls below the tangent plane. 9. But we have the plaineſt and moſt ſimple proof of the globular figure of the earth, from that of its ſhadow projected on the moon in a lunar eclipſe. For this ſadow being always bounded by an arc of n circle, it follows that the earth which projects it is of a ſpherical figure. If there was any remarkable angle, or very conſiderable irregular protuberance, on the earth, it would, on ſome occaſion or other, appear by the ſhadow. The mountains, indeed, are irregularities on the ſurface of the earth; but they bear ſo ſmall a proportion to its vaſt bulk, that they make no appearance upon its ſhadow. There is likewiſe a gradual riſing from the ſea- ſore towards the inland parts of the great continents; as in Europe from the ſhores of the ocean, the Mediterranean, and the Euxine ſea, towards Switæerland; but this gradual riſing is ſmall, and has little effect on the figure of the earth. If it was conſiderable, iĩt would carry the inland parts too high in the atmoſphere; but it is ſuſficient for giving a courſe to the rivers, and preſerving the beautiful circulation of water, ſo neceſſary to the good condition of this globe; and the extent of the continents has been probably contrived with a view to this great purpoſe. Upon the whole, the carth is evidently globular tho not an exact ſphere, and if ſeen at a diſttance would appear to us as the ſun or moon; that is, always terminated by a circular figure, unleſs this diſtance was ſo great as to make it appear like Venus or Mars; when, in conſequence of the contraction of the apparent diameter, the whole ſurface would appear to be crowded in one point, and the Alps, Pyrenees, and even the diſtant Cordelleras, would reſlect undiſtinR guiſhed rays. At ſuch diſtances its figure could not be diſcerned by ſenſe, unleſs it was aſſiſted by a teleſcope, or ſome equivalent inſtrument. 10. The ocean, which covers a great part of the ſurface of the earth, is more accurately globular than the ſolid parts; and it is manifeſt that this ariſes from the gravitation of its parts towards the earth, acting in right lines perpendicular to its ſfurfacee For if its direction formed an acute angle with the ſurface, the ſluid water would neceſſarily move towards that ſide, and could not be in æquilibrio till the direction of gravity became perpendicular to the ſurface every where, ſo as to give no inclination to the fluid to move towards either ſidee The perpendiculars to a ſpherical ſurface meet all in the centre of the ſphere. Therefore, ſince the earth is nearly a ſphere, the direction of the gravity is nearly towards its centre; not as if there was really any virtue or charm in the point called the centre, by which it attracted bodies, but becauſe this is the reſult of the gravitation of bodies towards all the parts of which the earth conſiſts; as will appear more fully afterwards. The direction of gravity is not any one fixed or determined one, as the vulgar are apt to imagine; nor is there any occaſion for pillars or inſtruments of any kind to ſupport the earth; that direction being always downwards which is towards the centre, or (to ſpeak more accurately) which is perpendicular to the ſfluid ſurface or level, on the concave ſide; and that direction being upwards which lies in a pęrpendicular to the ſurface on the convex ſidlee Was the earth all fiuid, all the ſurface would be on one level, and no one part would have a pre-eminence above the reſt in this reſpect; and bodies would be ſuſtained by the earth equally round all its ſurface with equal firmneſs and ſecurity. Thus there is no difficulty much if it deſcended freely in the plumb- line, or perpendicular to the horizon, and met with no reſiſtance from the air or ambient medium. When a body is projected in a right line that is not perpendicular to the horizon, it moves in a curve, but ſo as to fall always below the point in the line of projection which is directly over it, as much as it would have fallen by deſcending freely in the perpendicular in the ſame time; provided we ſuppoſe gravity to act in parallel lines, as was uſual before Sir Iſaac Newton found it neceſſary to conſider this ſubject more accurately, and which may be admitted, without any ſenſible error, in ſuch motions as our engines are able to produce. 12. The globular figure of the earth, with the direction and force of gravity, being diſcovered by this analyſis, a great variety of phænomena may be thence deduced by the Synthetic method. The whole doctrine of the ſphere may be explained from the figure of the earth, either in the Pythagorean or Ptolemaic ſyſtem. As the ſun appears to go round the whole circle of 360 degrees in 24 hours, ſo in one hour he appears to deſcribe 15 degrees, and one degree in 4 minutes of time, on the equator or its parallels. Hence the diſtance of meridians at two places, meaſured upon the equator, or their difference of longitude, being known, it is eaſy to compute how much the hours at one place precede the ſame hours at the other, by allowing four minutes of time for each degree of that diſtance; and converſely, the difference of time being given, the difference of longitude is computed by allowing one degree for each four minutes of time, and proportionally in greater or leſſer differences. And it is obvious that the hours of the day, which are ſucceſſive in any one place, are co-exiſtent when you take in the whole globe; ſo that no hour of the day can be aſſigned, but a meridian can be likewiſe aſſigned where it iĩs that hour at this preſent time. The ſenſible horiæon of any place is a plane perpendicular to the plumbline at that place, and tangent to the earths ſurface theree. The rational horiæon is a plane through the earths centre parallel to this, whoſe poles are the zenith and nadir, in the ſame manner as the north and ſouth poles of the world are the poles of the equator. The particular phænomena of places depend upon the poſition of their horizon with reſpect to the circles of the apparent diurnal motion of the Tun and ſtars. The horizon of a place at the equator paſſes through the poles, and divides equally the equator and its parallels. Hence the days and nights are always equal in ſuch places, and each of the ſtars performs one half of its revolution above their horizon, and the other half under it. The circles of diurnal motion are all perpendicular to their horizon, and therefore they are ſaid to be in a right ſpheree. When the ſun moves in the equator, he riſes directly from their horizon to their zenith, and then deſcends directly to their horizon again; in other caſes, after riſing perpendicularly, he ſlopes away in his parallel towards the north or ſouth ſide of their Zenith, according to the ſeaſon of the year; which muſt be a conſiderable relief to them, as the heat muſt thereby be abated. At the poles, their horizon coincides with the equator; ſo that the northern celeſtial hemiſphere muſt be always in view of the northern pole, being above their horizon, while no part of the ſouthern hemiſphere is viſible to them, being always beneath it. The circles of the diurnal motion being parallel to the equator, and conſequently to their horizon, the ſun and ſtars appear to them to move in parallels to their horion; the fixed ſtars never riſe nor ſet, and the ſun riſes at the vernal equinox and ſets at the autumnal; ſo that they have day for one half year and night for the other. They are ſaid to be under a porallel ſpbere. In intermediate places, the circles of the diurnal motion are oblique to their horizon; one pole is always elevated above it by an arc equal to the latitude of the place, and the other pole is depreſſed under it by an equal arcc. All the ſtars whoſe diſtance from the elevated pole exceeds not the latitude of the place are conſtantly above their horizon; and thoſe within the ſame diſtance of the other pole are depreſſed under it, and are never viſible to them. The equator and horizon being great circles divide each other equally, whence the days and nights are equal everywhere when the ſun deſcribes the celeſtial equator. But when the ſun is on the ſame ſide with the elevated pole, a greater portion of his parallel is above the horizon than under it, and therefore the days are longer than the nights: and when the ſun is on the other ſide of the equator, a greater portion of his diurnal parallel is below the horizon than above it; and conſequently the nights are longer than the days. Theſe are ſaid to be under an oblique ſphere. In all thoſe different places, the time in which they have day (that is, when the centre of the ſun is above the horizon) is equal to the time in which they have niglit, or when the centre of the ſun is beneath their horizon, taking the whole year together; abſtracting from the eſffects of refraction and the elliptic figure of the earth's orbit, which are not conſidered in the doctrine of the ſphere. But theſe equal times are diſtributed with a good deal of variety At the equator they have 12 hours day and 12 hours night, perpetually ſucceeding each other. At the poles they have their day all at once and their night at gnce, each of half à year. In intermediate places, the length of their days at one ſeaſon is compenſated by the length of the nights at another. Within the polar circles, they have the ſun continually for ſome days, or weeks, circulating above their horizon; but, in the oppoſite ſeaſon of the year, he continues as long beneath their horizon; and thus the equality of the times of day and night is preſerved, when we abſtract from the ſuns having a ſenſible diameter, from the effects of refraction and twilight, and the elliptic figure of the earth's orbit; but, in conſequence of theſe, the time in which they have day conſiderably exceeds what is commonly called night, particularly in the northern hemiſphere. The amplitude of the ſun, or his range upon the horizon, has likewiſe great varieties, which are eaſily deduced from the ſame principles. It is leaſt at the equator, amounting there to 235 29 on each ſide, towards the north and ſouth of the eaſt and weſt points. In the latitude of 56 it amounts to above 45°, on each ſide of the ſame points; and the arc between the moſt northern and ſourhern points where he riſes, and ſets, is above a quadrant. At the polar circles, his range on the horizon is the whole ſemicircle from north to ſouth. A circle perpendicular to the meridian and horizon is called the prime vertical, and, being a great circle, it cuts the equator equally, and all places that are under it bear due eaſt or weſt from us; whence many of the geographical paradoxes are explained. The art of dialling is deduced from the ſame principles. The moſt ſimple kind of dial is an equinoctial one, where the ſhadow is received upon a plane parallel to the circles of the ſun's diurnal motion, and is projected by a ſtylus, or right line, perpendicular to thoſe planes. Becauſe the ſun moves over equal arcs on its parallel in equal times, the motion of the ſadow in this dial muſt likewiſe be uniform, ſo rhat the intervals between the hours muſt be equal; which is therefore made by dividing a circle into 24 equal parts. The conſtruction of other dials is eaſily deduced from this: but our deſign obliges us to mention theſe things very brieſly. We have a remarkable inſtance of the beauty of truth when we obſerve what a variety of phænomena ariſe from ſo few ſimple principles as the ſpherical figure of the earth, iĩts diurnal motion, and the obliquity of its axis, as we take a ſurvey of the earth from the torrid to the frigid zone, or from the equator to the poles, and attend to the phænomena of heat and cold, as well as of thoſe of day and night, and of the apparent motions of the ſtars. A diverſity of phænomena ſo very great, ariſing from two principles of ſo ſimple a nature, affords a curious ſpeculation to the underſtanding, as well as a pleaſing entertainment to the imagination, and ſerves to ſuggeſt the admirable fertility of which nature is capable in its productions; inſomuch that upon one globe we have ſome image or repreſentation, in the climates from the equator to the poles, of that great variety that we may ſuppoſe to take place in the ſolar ſyſtem, from Mercury, the neareſt and hotteſt, to Saturn, the remoteſt and coldeſt of all the planets. 13. ThO the doctrine of the ſphere may be explained from the Piolemaic, as well as from the Pythagorean or Copernican ſyſtem, by ſuppoſing the primum mobile to penetrate the whole univerſe (the earth and its appendicles only excepted) and to carry every thing round the earth’s axis every day; yet this hypotheſis, to every thinking perſon who has not devoted his judgment entirely to the prejudices of ſenſe or dictates of ſuperſtition, appears ſo very abſurd, that it is now almoſt univerſally exploded. The motions of the comets, performed with ſo m It is day at any place while it revolves in the illuminated part, but night while it moves in the part that is hid from the ſun’s rays. The diurnal motion is from weſt to eaſt, and the ſun riſes to any place when it arrives at the boundary of light and darkneſs on the veſt- ſide, and ſets when it arrives at the ſame boundary on the eaſt The point where a right line joining the centres of the ſun and earth cuts the ſurface of the earth, is that which has the ſun in the vertex or zZenith, and is the pole or middle point of the illuminated diſk. The circle deſcribed by the earths annual motion, or the ſuns apparent motion, is the ecliptic, and, becauſe the axis of the earth is oblique to the plane of this circle, it cuts the equator (in an angle of 235 29), and the two points of interſection are called the equinoctial points; in which the ſun appears when the axis of the earth is perpendicular to the right line drawn from its centre to the centre of the ſun. Thoſe are called the ſolſtitial points which are at 90° diſtance from the former, and where the ſun appears when he declines moſt towards the poles. The equator being a great circle, ſo as to be equally divided by the boundary of light and darkneſs, the day therefore at the equator is always equal to the night. It is obvious that when the ſun appears on the north ſide of the equator, the northern pole muſt be in the illumined hemiſphere; ſo that it muſt be day there from the vernal to the autumnal equinox, but that they muſt be deprivcd of the ſun's light from the autumnal to the vernal equinox; and that it is the contrary at the ſouth pole. In any place that is on the ſame ſide of the equator with that which has the ſun in the zenith, à greater part of the parallel to the equator deſcribed by that place muſt be in the illuminated hemiſphere than in the other; ſo that the day muſt be longer than the night : but it is the contrary when the place is on the oppoſite ſide of the equator, and then the night muſt be longer than the day. In the ſame manner all the other phænomena of the doctrine of the ſphere may be deduced from the true motions in the ſyſtem. 15. We have given a ſummary account of what was known concerning the gravity of terreſtrial bodies, before Sir Iſaac Newton. As the figure of the earth is owing to this principle; ſo, as Copernicus very juſtly obſerved *, it is highly reaſonable to ſuppoſe that by a like principle, diffuſed from the ſun and planets, their figures are preſerved in their various motions. Various attempts and ſchemes have been propoſed, for explaining the nature of this power and its cauſe; but all have proved unſucceſſful. Des Cartes deduced it from the centrifugal force of his ſubtle matter revolving on the axis of the earth; but this account has been already refuted . Others conſidered it as a ſort of magnetiſm; but the powers of gravity and magnetiſm differ widely in moſt eſſential circumſtances. Others derived it from the preſſure of the atmoſphere; altho the air is ſo far from producing gravity, that it conſtantly ſubducts from the weight of bodies. But all we want to conclude here, is, that this power extends univerſally to all ſorts of ſenſible bodies, at or near the earts ſurface; and that it has theſe two remarkable properties; firſt, that it is proportional to the quantity of matter in bodies; ſecondly, that it acts inceſſantly or continually, and with the ſame force upon a body that is already in motion as upon a body that is at reſt. The laſt property appears from hence, that it produces equal accelerations in  See Book I. Chap. 3.  2. 1 See Book I. Chap. 4. § 4. falling bodies in equal times. Both theſe properties diſtinguiſh ĩt from ſuch cauſes as are wholly mechanical; which either act in proportion to the ſurface or to the bulk of bodies, and produce a leſs acceleration in a body that is already in motion, in the direction in which the cauſe acts, than upon a body at reſt, in the ſame time. We here obſerve theſe things concerning gravity, not with a view to determine any thing concerning its cauſe, but only to pave the way for what follows concerning the univerſality of this principle. C H A P II The moon is a heavy body, and gravitates towards ihe carth in the ſame manner as terreſtrial bodies. 1. OIR Iſaac Newton conſidering that the power of gravity acts equally on all matter on the ſurface of the earth or near it, that it is not ſenſibly leſs on the tops of the higheſt mountains, that it affects the air and reaches upward to the utmoſt limits of the atmoſphere, and that it cannot be owing to the influence of any ſenſible terreſtrial matter; he could not believe that it broke off abruptly, but was induced, on theſe grounds, to think it might be a more general principle, and extend to the heavens; ſo as to affect the moon at leaſt, which is by much the neareſt to us of all the bodies in the ſyſtem. The abſurdity of thoſe who had taught that the heavenly bodies were made of ſome inexplicable ſubſtance, eſſentially different from that of our earth, had ſufficiently appeared from modern diſcoveries: the philoſophers no longer made that diſtinction, which had been founded on ſuperſtition and vulgar prejudices only. The earth was allowed to be of the number of the planets, and the planets were conſidered as like our earth. To complete this reſemblance, our author has ſnewn that they conſiſt of the ſame heavy gravitating ſubſtance of which the earth is formed. 2. The effects of the power of gravity upon terreſtrial bodies may be reduced to three claſſes: Firſt, in conſequence of it, a body at reſt, ſupported by the ground, or ſuſpended by a ſtring or line of any kind, or that is any way kept from falling, endeavours, however, always to move; and in ſuch caſes, its gravity is meaſured by the preſſure of the quieſcent body upon the obſtacle that hinders its motion. Secondly, when a body deſcends in the vertical or plumb-line, its motion is continually accelerated, in conſequence of the power of gravi.ys acting inceſſantly upon it; or if it be projected upwards in the ſame right line, its motion is continually retarded, in conſequence of the ſame powers acting inceſſantly upon it with a contrary direction: and, in ſuch caſes, the force of gravity is meaſured by the acceleration or retardation of the motion produced in a given time, by the power continued uniformly for that time: but if the body deſcend or aſcend along an inclined plane, or move in a reſiſting medium, then, in meaſuring this power, due regard muſt be had to the principles of mechanics deſcribed in the preceding book. Thirdly, When a body is projected in any direction different from the vertical line, the direction of its motion is continually varied, and a curve line is deſcribed, in conſequence of the inceſſant action of the power of gravity, which in ſuch caſes is meaſured by the flexure or curvature of the line deſcribed by it; for the power is always the greater, cæteris paribus, the more it bends the vay or courſe of the body from the tangent or direction in which it was projected. Effects of the power oſ gravity, of each kind, fall under our conſtant obſervation, near the ſurface of the earth; for the ſame power which renders bodies heavy while they are at reſt accelerates them when they deſcend perpendicularly, and bends their motion into a curve line when they are projected in any other direction than that of their gravity. But we have acceſs to judge of the powers that act on the celeſtial bodies by the effects of the laſt ind only: we ſee bodies near the earth falling towards it; but this is a proof of the moons gravity that cannot be had, till the preſent ſtate of things comes to its diſſolutionn. When a body is projected in the air, we do not ſee it fall in the perpendicular towards the earth, but we ſee it falling every moment from the tangent to the curve, that ĩs, from the direction in which it would have moved if its gravity had not acted for that moment. And this proof we have of the moons gravity : for tho we do not ſee her falling directly towards the earth in a right line, yet we obſerve her deſcending every moment towards the earth from the right line which was the direction of her motion at the beginning of that moment; and this is no leſs evidently a proof of her being acted upon by gravity, or ſome power like to it, than her rectilineal deſcent would be, was ſhe allowed to fall freely towards the earth. 3. If we had engines of a ſuſficient force, bodies might be projected from them ſo as not only to be carried a vaſt way without falling to the earth, but ſo as to move over a quarter of a great circle of it, or (abſtracting from the effects of the airs reſiſtance) ſo as to move round the whole earth without touching it, and, after returning to their firſt place, commence a new revolution with the ſame force they firſt received from the engine, and after that a third, and thus revolve as a moon or ſatellite round the earth for ever. If this could be effected near the earts ſurface it might be done higher in the air or even as high as the moon, could the engine, or an equivalent power, be carried up and made to act there. By increaſing the force of the power, a body proportionally larger might be thus projected: and, by a power ſufficiently great, a heavy body not inferior to the moon might be put in motion at firſt; which, being perpetually reſtrained by. its gravity from going off in a right Iline, might revolve for ever about the earth. Thus Sir Iſaac Newton ſaw that the curvilineal motion of the moon in her orbit, and of any projectile at the ſurface of the earth, were phænomena of the ſame kind, and might be explained from the ſame principle extended from the earth ſo as to reach the moon; and that the moon was only a greater projectile that received its motion, in the beginning of things, from the Almighty Author of the univerſe. 4. But to make this perfectly evident, it was neceſſary to ſiew that the powers which act on the moon, and on projectiles near the earth, and bend their motions into a curve line, were directed to the ſame centre, and agreed in the quantity of their force as well as in their direction. All we know of force relates to its direction or quantity, and a conſtant coincidence and agreement in theſe two reſpects is ſufficient ground to conclude them to be the ſame, or ſimilar, phænomena derived from the ſame, or from like cauſes. It was ſhewn in the laſt chapter, that the gravity of heavy bodies is directed towards the centre of the earth; and it appears from the obſervations of aſtronomers, that the power which acts on the moon, inceſſantly bending her motion into a curve, is directed towards the ſame centre: for the find that the moon does not deſcribe an exact circle about the earth; but an ellipſe or oval; and that ſhe approaches to the earth, and then recedes from it, in every revolution, but ſo as to have her motion accelerated while ſhe approaches to the centre of the earth, and retarded as ſhe recedes from it; which is an indication that ſhe is acted on by a power directed, accurately or nearly, towards the centre. 5. That this may appear more fully, let us ſuppoſe that a body is projected in any right line, and, if no new force act upon it, then muſt ĩit proceed in that line, deſcribing equal ſpaces in equal times, by the firſt law of motion; and if you imagine a ray drawn always from the body to ſome fixed point, that is not in the line of ĩts motion, while the body moves over equal ſpaces in equal times, that ray vill deſcribe equal triangular ſpaces * in equal times; æ All the reaſoning here ſuppoſes only one propoſition very generally known, that ec triangles on the ſame bãſe, or on equal aſes, that have the ſame height, are equal to each other; from which it eaſily follows, i1. That hile a body by an uniform motion deſcribes the line A ?, ſFig. 52.) and moves over the equal parts a B, B C, in equal times, the triangles deſcribed by a ray drawn always from the body to the given points, viæ. A 5 B, BS C, muſt be equal, becauſe their haſes a B, B C are equal, and they have their common vertex in s. 2. Suppoſe a force to act on the body in B, directed toward s, that would carry it to E, if ĩt acted alone upon the body, in the ſame time in which the body by its uniform motion would deſcribe B c, and the body will now deſcribe B D the diagonal of the parallelogram B E D C in the ſame time, and the ray drawn from the body tos will deſcribe the triangle Bs D equal to B s c, becauſe they are on the ſame baſe 2s and hetween the parallels BS,  D; that is, the ſpace deſcribed now by the ray is equal to the ſpace that would have been deſcribed by it if no new force had acted on the body B: ſrom which it appears, that the ſpace defcribed by the ray is not increaſed or diminiſhed by any action of the body directed towards s, and thereſore the ray drawn from the body to s will ſtill continue to deſcribe equal ſpaces in equal times, if no ne force act upon it but what is directed towards s. becauſe theſe triangles, deſcribed by the ray in equal times, will have equal baſes on the line of projection, and one common vertex in that fixed point. Suppoſe next that a force, directed to the ſame fixed point, acts upon the body, and it will now be carried outof the firſt line of its motion into a new direction, but the area or ſpace deſcribed by the ray, drawn always from the body to that fixed point, will be equal to the ſpace that would have been deſcribed by the ray in the ſame time if no ſuch force had acted upon the body; for theſe ſpaces are triangles ſtanding on the ſame baſe ſviæ. the firſt diſtance of the body from that fixed point) and between the ſame parallel lines. The power, therefore, directed towards the given point has no effect on the magnitude of the area or ſpace deſcribed by the ray that is ſuppoſed to be drawn always from the body to that point; it may accelerate or retard the motion of the body, but affects not the area. Therefore the ray muſt ſtill continue to deſcribe the ſame ſpaces in equal times about the given point, as it would have done if no new force had acted on the body, but it had been permitted to proceeed uniformly in the line of projection. 6. As one impulſe towards the given point has no effect on the area, or ſpace, deſcribed by the ray tending always from the body to that point, ſo any number of ſucceſſive impulſes directed to the ſame point can have no effect on that area, ſo as to accelerate or retard its deſcription; and, if you ſuppoſe the power directed to that point to act continually, it will bend the way of the body’s motion into a curve; and may accelerate or retard ĩts velocity, but can never affect the area deſcribed in a given time by the ray ſuppoſed to be drawn always from the body to the given pint, vwhich therefore 2 be always of an invariable quantity, equal to that which would have been deſcribed in the ſame time, if the body had proceeded uniformly in a right line, from the beginning of the motion. 7. The corverſe of this theorem ſhews, that the equable increaſe of the areas deſcribed by a ray, drawn always from a body to a given point, is an indication that the direction of the power that acts upon the body, and bends its way into a curve, is directed to that point. It is eaſy to ſee, that if that power was directed to either ſide of the point *, it would increaſe or diminiſh the area deſcribed by the ray drawn from the body to the point; ſo that if equal areas continue to be deſcribed about it in equal times, we may be aſſured that the power is directed to that point. If a body deſcribe a circle with an equable motion, ſo as to move over equal arcs in equal times, the areas deſcribed in equal times by a ray drawn from the body to the centre of the circle will be equal, and it is plain that the force which bends the body into the curve muſt tend to that centre; for if it was directed to any other point, the body would be accelerated in its motion as it approached to that point, and retarded as it removed to a greater diſtance from itt. We have explained this propoſition at ſome length, becauſe ĩt is of the greateſt conſcquence in this philoſophy. From it we Iearn, that the force which retains the moon in her orbit is directed to the centre of the earth, becauſe ſhe deſcribes by a ray drawn to the centre of the earth, equal ſpaces in equal times, being accelerated  Ifa new force acted upon the body at B, that was directed to either ſide of s, the body, inſtead of being found in the line c D, would, in the ſame time, either paſs that line or fall ſhort of it, and the area deſcribed by the ray drawn from the body s would either be greater or leſs than  5 C. in her motion as ſhe approaches to the earth, and retarded as ſhe recedes from it. We ſhall, afterwards, ſee that a ſmall inequality in theſe ſpaces only ſerves to confirm our authors philoſophy. 8. There is, therefore, a power which acts on the moon, like to gravity, directed to the centre of the earth; and as this power makes her fall from the direction of her motion every moment towards the carth; ſo, if her projectile motion was deſtroyed, the ſame power would make her fall to the earth, in a direct line: and becauſe this power acts inceſſantly, bending, every moment, her way into a curve, it therefore would make her deſcend to the earth with an accelerated motion, like that of heavy bodies in their fal. It remains only to ſhew, that the power which acts on the moon agrees with gravity in the quantity of its force, as well as in all other reſpects. But, before we compare them in this particular, we are to obſerve, that the power which acts upon the moon, is not the ſame at all diſtances from the earth, but is always greater when ſhe is nearer to the earth. To be ſatisfied of this, it is only neceſſary to ſee that to bend the motion of a body into a curve, when it moves with a greater velocity, requires the action of a greater power than when it deſcribes the ſame curve with a leſs velocity. This is obvious enough, but may appear more fully thus: imagine a tangent (Fig. 53.) drawn at the beginning of a ſmall arc deſcribed by the body, and as this is the line which the body would have followed if no new power had acted upon it, the effect of that power is eſtimated by the depreſſion of the other extremity of the arc under that tangent: now it ĩs plain, that in arcs of the ſame curvature or flexure, the greater the arc is, the farther muſt one extremity of it fall below the tangent drawn at the other exS tremity; and conſequently when a body deſcribes a greater arc, it muſt be acted on by a greater power than when it deſcribes a leſſer arc in the ſame time. Now as the moon approaches to the earth, her motion is accelerated, is ſifteſt at her leaſt diſtance, and ſloweſt at her greateſt diſtance, and the arcs which ſhe deſcribes at her greateſt and leaſt diſtance have the ſame curvature, therefore the force which acts upon her at her leaſt diſtance, when her motion is ſwifter, muſt be the greater force. 9. It will not be difficult to ſee according to what lIaw this power varies, at her greateſt and leaſt diſtances from the earth. That it may appear more eaſily, let us aſſume a ſimple caſe, and ſuppoſe that her leaſt diſtance is the half of her greateſt diſtance. If this was true, the moon would move with a double velocity in her leaſt diſtance, that the area deſcribed there by a ray from her to the earth might be equal to the area deſcribed by ſuch a ray in the ſame time, at her greateſt diſtance; ſo that ſie would deſcribe at her leaſt diſtance an arc, in one minute, equal to the arc ſhe would deſcribe in two minutes at her greateſt diſtance; and would fall as much below the tangent at the beginning of the arc, in one minute in the lower part of her orbit, or the perigæum, as in two minutes in the higher part of it, or her a”gæum. If therefore her projectile motion was deitroyed at her leaſt diſtance, ſie would fall towards the earth as much in one minute, as in two minutes it her projectile motion was deſtroyed at her greateſt diſtance. But the ſpaces deſcribed by a heavy body in ſts deſcent are as the ſquares of the times, by Book I. Chap. 1.  113 and ſuch a body deſcends thro a quadruple ſpace in a double time; ſo that the moon deſcending freely at her greateſt diſtance, nutes as in one minute. Therefore ſne would fall thro four times as much ſpace, in one minute, at her leaſt diſtance, as at her greateſt diſtance in the ſame time. But the forces with which heavy bodies deſcend, are in the ſarne proportion as the ſpaces deſcribed, in conſequence of thoſe forces, in equal ſmall parts of time; conſequently the power that acts at the leaſt diſtance is quadruple of that which acts at the greater diſtance, when the latteris ſuppoſed to be double of the former; or the forces are as 4 to 1, when the diſtances are as 1 to 2. We find, therefore, that the force which acts upon the moon, and bends her courſe into a curvilinear orbit, increales as the diſtance from the centre of the earth decreaſes, ſo as to be quadruple at half the diſtance. In the ſame manner it is ſnewn, that if her leaſt diſtance was the third part only of her greateſt diſtance, her velocity would be triple at the leaſt diſtance, to preſerve the equability of the areas deſcribed by a ray drawn from her to the centre of the earth; and that ſhe would be acted upon by a power which would have the ſame eſfect there in one minute, as in three minutes at her greateſt diſtance; ſo that if ſhe was allowed to deſcend freely from each diſtance, ſne would fall nine times as far from the leaſt diſtance as from the greateſt, in the ſame time; conſequently, the power itſelf which cauſes her deſcent, would be nine times greater at the third part of the diſtance; or the diſtances being as I to 3, the force of gravity at thoſe diſtances would be as 9 to I, that is, inverſely as the ſquares of the diſtances. In the ſame manner, it appears that when the greateſt and leaſt diſtances are ſuppoſed to be in any proportion of a greater to a leſſer number, the velocities of the revolving planet are in the inverſe mtio of the ſame numbers; and that the powers, the centre of the earth decreaſes. Sir Iſaac Newton ſhews the univerſality of this law, in all her diſtances, from the direction of the power that acts upon her, and from the nature of the ellipſis, the line which ſhe deſcribes in her revolution; and it follows from the properties of this curve, that, if you take ſmall arcs deſcribed by the moon in equal times, the ſpace by which the extremity of any arc deſcends towards the earth below ĩts tangent at the other extremity, is always greater in proportion as the ſquare of the diſtance from the focus is leſs:; from which it follows that the power which is proportional to this ſpace obſerves the ſame proportion. l 1I. The moons orbit, according to the obſervations of aſtronomers, differs not much from a circle of a radius equal to ſixty times the ſemi-diameter of the earth; and the circumference of her orbit, is, therefore, about ſixty times the circumference of a great circle of the earth; which, by the French mathematicians, was found to be 123249600 Parifian feet. The circumference of the moon’s orbit is caſily computed from this; and, ſince ſhe finiſhes her revolution in 27 days, 7 hours and 43 minutes, it is eaſy to calculate what arc ſhe deſcribes in onę minute. Now, to compute by what ſpace one end of this arc falls below a tangent drawn at the other end, we learn from geometry that this ſpace is nearly a third proportional to the diameter of her orbit and the arc ſhe deſcribes in a minute; and by an eaſy calculation this ſpace is found to be i157, Pariſian feet. This ſpace is deſcribed in conſequence of her gravity towards the earth, which, therefore, is a power, that, at the diſtance of ſixty ſemi-diameters from the centre of the earth decreaſes, her gravity would be 6o x 6o times greater near the ſurface of the earth than at her preſent mean diſtance, and therefore would carry her through 6o x 60 x 15% Pariſian feet in a minute near the ſurface: but the ſame power would carry her through 60 x 60 times leſs ſpace in a ſecond than in a minute, by what has been often obſerved of the deſcent of heavy bodies; and, therefore, the moon in a ſecond of time would fall by her gravity near the ſurface of the earth 152, Pari iſi 7an feet; which therefore is the ſame with the gravity of terreſtrial bodies. 13.T hus Sir Iſaac Newton ſhewed that the power of gravity is extended to the moon; that ſhe is heavy, as all bodies belonging to the earth are found by perpetual experience to be; and that the moon is retained in her orbit from the ſame cauſe, in conſequence of which a ſtone, bullet, or any other projectile, deſcribes a curve in the air. If the moon, or any part of her, was brought down to the earth, and projected in the ſame line and ith the ſame velocity as a terreſtrial body, it would move in the ſame curve; and if any body was carried from our earth to the diſtance of the moon, and was projected in the ſame direction and with the ſame velocity with which the moon is moved, it would proceed in the ſame orbit which the moon deſcribes, with the ſame velocity. Thus the moon is a proectile, and the motion of every projectile gives an image of the motion of a ſatellite or moon. Theſe phænomena are ſo colncident, that it is manifeſt they muſt flow from the ſame cauſe. or without motion, and at other times they appear retrograde, or to go backwards from eaſt to veſt: and theſe irregularities, tho different in the different planets, are exactly ſuch, in all of them, as ſhould appear to us in conſequence of the motion of th earth in her orbitt. : 2. The motions of all the planets about the fun are conſtant and regular. They all move round him from weſt to eaſt, almoſt in the ſame plane, in elliptic orbits that have the ſun in one of the foci, but of which ſome approach very near to circles. Mercury poſſeſſes the loweſt place; where moving with the greateſt velocity of them all, and in the leaſt orbit, he finiſhes his revolution in two months and 28 days. The planet Venus, which is called by us ſometimes the evening ſtar, ſometimes the morning ſtar, according as it appears to us eaſtward or weſtward from the ſun, and conſequently ſets later or riſes earlier, is next to Mercury in the ſyſtem, and revolves in about ſeven months and I5 days. Above theſe ſnext in order revolves the earth, with her ſatellite the moon, in the ſpace of a yea. Mars is above the earth, and is the firſt which includes the earth, as well as the ſun, in his orbit; which he deſcribes in one year, ten months and 22 days. Higher in the ſyſtem and at a great diſtance 7upiter revolves, with his four ſatellites, in eleven years, ten months and 15 days. Laſt of all, Saturn, with five ſatellites, and a ring peculiar to him, moves in a vaſt orb with the ſloweſt motion, and finiſhes his period in 29 years, 5 months and 27 days. 3. Suppoſe the earth's mean diſtance from the fun to be divided into 100 equal parts, then the mean diſtances of Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, from the ſun, ſhall conſiſt of nearly 38. the triangle T 1s are known, with the proportion of its ſides, which is the ſame as of the ſines of thoſe angles; and thus the proportion of s I, the diſtance of Jupiter from the ſun, to s T, the diſtance of the earth from the ſun is diſcovered. The angle T 15 is that under which s T the ſemi-diameter of the earth's orbit would appear if viewed from i, or the elongation of the earth from the ſun as it would appear to a ſpectator at Yupiter. 4. In the ſir©t chapter of this book, we explained at length how the diſtances of the celeſtial bodies are diſcovered by what is called the diurnal parallax, that is, the angle under which the ſemi-diameter of the earth would appear at thoſe diſtances. By this method the diſtance of the moon from the earth is compared with its ſemi-diameterr. When Venus and Mars are at their leaſt diſtances from the earth, it is of uſe likewiſe for eſtimating thoſe diſtances. But in moſt other caſes, the diſtances of the celeſtial bodies are ſo great, and the ſemi-diameter of the earth bears ſo ſmall a proportion to them, that the angle under which it would appear, viewed at ſo great diſtances, cannot be diſcovered by our inſtruments, vwith any tolerable accuracy. Therefore aſtronomers have been obliged to have recourſe to other inventions. The method propoſed by Ariſtarchus for determining the diſtance of the ſun, by obſerving the time when the moons diſk appears to be half illuminated by the ſun, may be conſidered as an attempt to ſubſtitute the ſemi- diameter of the moons orbit in place of the ſemi-diameter of the earth. Let s and T (Fig. 56.) repreſent the ſun and earth, L the moons place when T L is perpendicular to s I, at which time her diſk ought to appear to us to be biſected by the boundary of light and darkneſs upon her ſurface; and iĩt is manifeſt that T, the diſtance of the earth from the ſun, is then to TL, the diſtance of the moon from the earth, as the radius to the ſine of the angle L s T, the complement of the angle S T L the elongation of the moon from the ſun at that time. But this method, though very ingenious, has proved unſucceſsful; aſtronomers finding it impracticable to determine the time of this biſection of the lunar diſk with ſufficient exactneſs for this purpoſe. We learn from it, however, that the diſtance of the ſun is vaſtly greater than that of the moon; for it is obvious, that the nearer the angle s T L approaches to a right one, the greater muſt the diſtance s T be in proportion to TL; and that if this diſtance s r was inſinite, then s TL would be a right anglee Now aſtronomers find it very difficult to diſcover any difference between the angle s TL and a right angle, or between the time when the lunar diſk appears to be biſected and the quadrature; from which it follows that s T is vaſtly greater than TL. 5. Aſtronomers finding the diurnal parallax of no uſe for determining or comparing the greater diſtances in the celeſtial ſpaces, the ſemi-diameter of the earth being too ſmall a baſe for this purpoſe, have had recourſe to what they call the annual parallax. In place, therefore, of the ſemi-diameter of the earth, they ſubſtituted the ſemi-diameter of the orbit deſcribed by the earth annually about the ſun; or, in place of two ſtations or ſpectators, one of which was ſuppoſed to be at the ſurface and the other at the centre of the earth, they ſubſtituted one at the earth and another at the ſun. In this manner they obtained a baſe that bears a conſiderable proportion to any diſtances within the ſolar ſyſtem, and with which they were able to compare them by accurate obſervations. As, in the former caſe, they compared the the earth, by finding under what angle it would appear at thoſe diſtances; ſo in this caſe, they compare the vaſt diſtances of the planets from the ſun vith the ſemi-diameter of the earths orbit, by finding under what angle this ſemi-diameter appears at thoſe diſtances. This angle is greater at the diſtance of Mars than at that of Jupiter, and is greater there than at the diſtance of Saturn; decreaſing always with the diſtance, till at length it become too ſmall to be diſcernible by the exacteſt inſtruments we have. Let 1 (Fig. 55.) repreſent any remote object in the ſyſtem, A the point where the earth paſſes betwixt the ſun s and that object 1, 1 T a tangent from the point I to the earth's orbit, ſuppoſed to be circular: and when the earth ĩs at a, the object 1 will appear in the ſame place to the earth and ſun; but when the earth comes to r, if we ſuppoſe 1 to have no motion, it will appear to the earth in the right line T I, and will appear to have gone backward by the arc that meaſures the angle T1s, the ſame which the ſemi-diameter of the earth’s orbit s T ſubtends at 1; and this angle being determined by obſervation, its ſine will be to the radius, as s T to s I that is, as the diſtance of the earth from the ſun to the diſtance of the object 1 from the ſun; which proportion, therefore, is eaſily computed by trigonometry. When the object 1 has a proper motion, an allowance muſt be made for this motion, after it is determined by obſervation. The appearances, in this caſe, may be explained in thę following manner. Let s 1 produced meet the ſphere in which the fixed ſlars are apparently diſpoſed in M, let the two tangents TI and ? I meet the ſame in  and n, and ſuppoſing the object 1 to vibrate continually between N and n like a pendulum, imagine this arc N æ itſelf to be carried along the arc  M E with the proper motion and direction of the object . IfI repreſent a planet, the arc M 7 which meaſures the angle N 17 or T 11, Will ſhew how much the planet is retrogade, the half of which angle is s1T; which being known, the proportion of s T10s T is computed as above. Itã We aſcribe the annual motion to the earth and not to the ſun, according to the Pythagorean ſyſtem revived hy Copernicus, for many reaſons; ſome of which were brieſfly mentioned in § r. and 2. BYy comparing the periodic times of the primary planets and their diſtances from the ſun, and by comparing the periodic times of the ſatellites that revolve about Jupiter and Saturn with their reſpective diſtances from their primary planets, it appears to be a general law in the ſolar ſyſtem, that when ſeveral bodies revolve about one centre, the ſquares of the periodic times increaſe in the ſame proportion as the cubes of the diſtance from that centre; that is, the periodic times increaſe in a higher proportion than the diſtances, and not in ſo high a proportion as the ſquares of thoſe diſtances, but accurately as the power of the diſtance whoſe exponent is 15, or as the number which is a mean proportional between thoſe numbers that repreſent the diſtance and its ſquaree. The earth isthe centre of the metion of the moon, in all the ſyſtems. If the ſun likewiſe revolved round the earth, we ſhould expect that the ſame general law would take place in their periodic times and diſtances ́ together; or that the ſquare of 27 days,  43 would be to the ſquare of 365 days, 6, 9, e the cube of the moons diſtance from the earth to the cube of the ſun's diſtance from the ſame: from which it is eaſy to compute that the ſuns diſtance ought to be little more than 55 times greater than the moons diſtance; whereas it is evident, Chap. 3. PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES. 275 from the minuteneſs of the ſuns diurnal parallax, that the ſun's diſtance is ſome hundred times greater than the moons diſtance from the earth. But if, with Copernicus, we ſuppoſe the earth to. revolve about the ſun in an orbit placed betwixt thoſe of Venus and Mars, this law will be found to obtain between the periodic times and diſtances of the earth and any of the planets from the ſun compared together; and the harmony of the ſyſtem will appear complete. The retrogradations and ſtations of the planets, and the many apparent irregularities in their motions, and diſtances from the earth, furniſh us with ſo many arguments againſt the Ptolemaic ſyſtem, according to which thoſe appearances are explained by a number of perplexed ſolid orbs and epicycles, in a manner unworthy of the noble ſimplicity and beauty of nature. It ĩs likewiſe to be remarked, rhat thoſe inequalities are different in the different planets, but in each of them are ſuch as ought to ariſe from the annual motion of the earth. The arguments derived from the magnitude of the ſun, and its great uſefulneſs to all the bodies in the ſyſtem, which ſeem to entitle it to the moſt centric place, are too obvious to require our inſiſting on them. The earth and planets revolve about the ſun, in order to enjoy the benefits of his light and heat; but no reaſon appears why the ſun and planets ſhould revolve around the earth. 7. There is but one argument againſt the annual motion of the earth that deſerves any notice, viæ. The want of an annual parallax in the fixed ſtars. Let T a ſ (Fig. 57.) repreſent the earth's orbit about the ſuns, T x the axis of the earth, and ſ, parallel to T x, ſhall repreſent the poſition of the ſame axis at the oppoſite point Z Suppoſe Tx to be diTa rected towards the ſtar ?; and it is manifeſt that the axis of the earth will not be directed to the ſame ſtar when it comes to the ſituation ? x, but will contain an angle x t ?» with the line ? ? joining the earth and ſtar, equal to the angle 7 ? r, under which the diameter Tt of the earths orbit appears to a ſpectator, viewed from the ſtar . It might be expected, therefore, that by obſerving the fixed ſtar » from the different parts of the earts orbit T, .. (which may be conſidered as two ſtations in this problem, the moſt ſublime of all that can be brought into practical geometry,) we ought to be able tõ judge, from its different appearances at thoſe ſtations, of the angle T ? , and conſequently of the proportion of TP, the diſtance of the ſtar, to T1, the diameter of the earth's orbit, or double diſtance of the ſun. Yet it is certain that aſtronomers, hitherto, have not been able to diſcover any difference in the apparent ſituations of the fixed ſtars, with reſpect to the axis of the earth or to one another, that can ariſe from the motion of the earth; though, ſince the reſtoration of the Pythagorean doctrine, they have taken great pains to examine this matter. In anſwer to this objection, it is obſerved, that the diſtance of the fixed ſtars is ſo very great, that the diameter of the earth's orbit bears no ſenſible proportion to it; ſo that the angle T ? ? is not to be diſcovered by our exacteſt inſtruments. Nor is this immenſe diſtance of the ſixed ſtars advanced by the Copernicans as an hypotheſis, merely for the ſake of ſolving this objection; for, as they had reaſon to ſuppoſe the fixed ſtars like to our ſun, they had ground to conclude their diſtance to be vaſtly great, ſince they appear to us with ſo faint a light, and of no ſenſible diameter, even in the largeſt teleſcopes. If we ſhould ſuppoſe the diſtance between us and a fixed ſtar to be divided into 300 equal parts, and a ſpectator, after paſſing over mmuuu over 299 of thoſe parts, ſould view it from the laſt diviſion, or at " part of the whole diſtance, the ſtar, indeed, would appear brighter to him, but not ſenſibly magniſied in diameter; becauſe it would appear of the ſame magnitude to him at that diſtance, as it was in a teleſcope that magnifſied 300 times. The immenſe diſtance of the fixed ſtars likewiſe appears from hence, that when the moon or any other planet covers them from us, this is done in an inſtant; they diſappear at once, and not gradually as the more remote planets when covered by the nearer ones. IF we join theſe obſervations together, they vwill rather appear to confirm one another and the motion of the earth, than to make againſt it. The mmenſe diſtance of the fixed ſtars, that ariſes from them jointly, rather ſtrengthens the evidence of the Copernican ſyſtem; becauſe the more remote the ſtars are, the more abſurd it muſt appear to ſuppoſe ſo immenſe a ſpace to revolve about our earth, ſo inconſiderable a point? that to our neighbouring planets it is ſeen but as a ſmall ſpark of light; to others of them is hardly known; and to ſome of the ſixed ſtars, neither it nor the whole ſolar ſyſtem to which it belongs is viſiblee How can it be imagined thot thoſe immenſe bodies, ſunk ſo deep in the abyſs of ſpace, deſcribe daily ſuch vaſt rounds about ſo mean a centre; eſpecially if it be conſidered that it is highly probable ſome of the fixed ſtars are immenſely farther diſtant than others, and that all the ſyſtem of the fixed ſtars, viſible to the naked eye in a clear night, form but a ſmall corner of the univerſal ſyſtem? 8. But this is not all we learn from the diligence and accuracy of late aſtronomers, in confirmation of the motion of the earth about the ſun, and that ſerves to reſolve this the only material objection againſt itt. An inſtrument was contrived by the famous Mr. Graham (for a deſcription of which we refer the reader to Dr. Smith's excellent treatiſe of Optics) and executed with ſurpriing exactneſs, which being placed in the vertical Iine, a ſtar in the conſtellation Draco that paſſed near the Zenith was obſerved by this inſtrument for a number of years, with a view to diſcover its parallax, by Meſſrs. Molyneux, Bradley, and Grabam. They ſoon diſcovered that the ſtar did not appear always in the ſame place in the inſtrument, but that its diſtance from the zenith varied, and that the difference of ĩts apparent places amounted to 21 or 22 ſeconds. This ſtar is ncar the pole of the eclipticc. They made ſimilar obſcervations on other ſtars, and found a like apparent motion in them, proportional to the latitude ofuhe ſtar. This motion was by no means ſuch as was 1o have been expected as the effect of a parallax; and it was ſome time before they diſcovered any way of accounting for this new phænomenon: but at length Mr. Bradley reſolved all its variety in a ſatisfactory manner, by the motion of light and the motion of the earth compounded together. Let a b (Fig. 58.) repreſent a ſmall portion of the earths orbit, c D a ray of light moving from the ſtar with the direction c D; and if the earth was at reſt, the teleſcope would be directed to the ſtar, by placing it in the right line A æ parallel to D c. Let A D be to n ę, as the velocity of the earth in its orbit to the velocity of light, and it is manifeſt that the teleſcope muſt now be placed in the ſituation a c, that the ray of light may run along its axis, and, after entering the middle of the object glaſs at c, may iſſue at the middle of the eye-glaſs at a3 becauſe, while the ray deſcribes the right line c , the point a is carried forwards to n, and the teleſcope by by moving parallel to itſelf is carried into the ſituation D c. But the apparent place of the ſtar is determined by the poſition of the teleſcope, and conſequently the ſtar will appear in the right line a c, and not in its true ſituation A E:. Thus a ſtar in the pole of the ecliptic will appear to have its latitude diminiſhed by the angle ? a c or a c D; which ill be found to exceed 20 ſeconds, if the velocity of light be to the velocity of the earth as 8000 to I: and this ſtar will in appearance deſcribe a ſmall circle round the pole of the ecliptic at a diſtance from it of about 200 In other caſes, the ſtar will appear to deſcribe a ſmall ellipſis having its centre in the true place of the ſtar, ſà. e: the place where it would appear if the earth was at reſt) ĩts tranſverſe axis parallel to the ecliptic, and its ſecond axis perpendicular to it; the former of which gives its greateſt aberration in longitude, and the latter its greateſt aberration in latitude. If the ſtar be in the plane of the ecliptic, the aberration then is only in longitude. In this caſe, if the rays from the ſtar touch the earths orbit in  and H, and be perpendicular to ĩt in a and B, the motion of the earth, at õ and H, being in the direction of the ray; the ſtar will appear in its true place, and there will be no aberration at thoſe points; but the aberration in longitude will be greateſt at A and B. He has explained all the appearances of the ſtars obſerved by Mr. Molyneux and himſelf, in this manner; and tho-he has not diſcovered any parallax by theſe obſervations, he has producced from them a new argument for the motion of the earth, by a ſeries of obſervations made on diſferent ſtars in different places. He finds ground to conclude from theſe, that the parallax of the fixed ſtars can hardly exceed one ſecond; from which their diſtance ought to be 400,000 greater than the diſtance of the ſun. The true motions in the ſyſtem being eſtabliſhed, we may now proceed ſafely with our analyſis. 9. Each of the primary planets bend their way about the centre of the ſun, and are accelerated in their motion as they approach to him, and retarded as they recede from him; ſo that a ray drawn from any one of them to the ſun always deſcribes equal ſpaces, or areas, in equal times: from which it follows, as in Chap. 2. § 5, 6, 7. that the power which bends their way into a curve line muſt be directed to the ſun. This power always varies in the ſame manner as the gravity of the moon towards the earth. The ſame reaſoning by which the gravity of the moon towards the earth at her greateſt and leaſt diſtances were compared together, in Chap. 2. § 8, 9, 10. may be applied in comparing the powers which act on any primary planet, as its greateſt and leaſt diſtances from the ſun; and it will appear, that theſe powers increaſe as the ſquare of the diſtance from the ſun decreaſes. Our author ſhews this generally, from the nature of the elliptic curve in which each planet moves. 10. But the univerſality of this law, and the uniformity of nature, ſtill farther appears by comparing the motions of the different planetss. The power which acts on a planet that is nearer the ſun is manifeſtly greater than that which acts on a planet more remote; both becauſe it moves with more velocity, and becauſe it moves in a leſſer orbit, which has more curvature, and ſcparates farther from its tangent, in arcs of the ſame length, than a greater orbit: By comparing the motions of the planets, it is found that the velocity of a nearer planet is greater than the velocity of one more remote, in proportion as the ſquare root of the number which expreſſes the li greater greater diſtance to the ſquare root of that which expreſſes the leſſer diſtance; ſo that if one planet was four times farther from the ſun than another planet, the velocity of the firſt would be half the velocity of the latter, and the nearer planet would deſcribe an arc in one minute, equal to the arc deſcribed by the higher planet in two minutes: and tho the curvature of the orbits was the ſame, the nearer planet would fall by its gravity as much in one minute as the other would fall in two, and therefore the nearer planet would deſcribe by ĩts gravity four times as much ſpace as the other would deſcribe in the ſame time, by the law of motion of falling bodies ſo often mentioned; the gravity of the nearer planet would therefore appear to be quadruple, from the conſideration of ĩts greater velocity only. But beſides, as the radius of the leſſer orbit is ſuppoſed to be four times leſs than the radius of the other, the leſſer orbit muſt be four times more curve, and the extremity of a ſmall arc of the ſame length will be four times farther below the tangent drawn at the other extremity in the leſſer orbit than in the greater; ſo that, tho' the velocities were equal, the gravity of the nearer planet would, on this account only, be found to be quadruplee On both theſe accounts together, the greater velocity of the nearer planet, and the greater curvature of its orbit, its gravity towards the ſun muſt be ſuppoſed ſixteen times greater, tho its diſtance from the ſun is only four times leſs than that of the other; that is, when the diſtances are as I to 4, the gravities are reciprocally as the ſquares of theſe numbers, or as 16 to 1. In the ſame manner, by comparing the motions of all the planets, it is found that their gravities decreaſe as the ſquares of their diſtances faces, and is extended around them, decreaſing in the ſame manner as that which is extended from the earth and ſun to all diſtances. 13. Theſe ſecondary planets muſt alſo gravitate towards the ſun. It is impoſſible they ſhould move ſo regularly round their reſpective primaries, if they were not acted on by the ſame powers. If we ſuppoſe them to be acted on by the ſame accelerating power in parallel lines, there will no diſorder or perplexity ariſe from thence; for they will then accompany their primary planets in their motions round the ſun, and move about them at the ſame time, with the ſame regularity as if their primary planets were at reſt. It will be as in a ſhip, or in any ſpace carried uniformly forward: in which the mutual actions of bodies are the ſame as if the ſpace was at reſt, being no way affected by that motion which is common to all the bodies. As every projectile, while it moves in the air, gravitates towards the ſun, and is carried along with the earth about the ſun, while its own motion in its curve is as regular as if the earth was at reſt; ſo the moon, which we have ſhewed to be only a greater projectile, muſt gravitate toward the ſun, and, while it is carried along with the earth about the ſun, is not hindered by that motion from performing its monthly revolutions round rhe earth. Jupitèrs ſatellites gravitate toward the ſun as every part of Jupiters body, and Saturms ſatellites gravitate toward the ſun as if they were parts of Saturn. Thus the motions in the great ſolar ſyſtem, and in the leſſer particular ſyſtems of each planet, are conſiſtent with each other, and are carried on with a regular harmony without any confuſion, or mutually interfering with one another, but what neceſſarily ariſes from ſmall inequalities in the gravities of primary and ſecondary planets, and not diverted in its courſe by approaching too near to ſome celeſtial body. In the ſame manner, a planet projected with a certain force would go off for ever in a parabolic curve having the ſun in its focus; and if it was projected with a force a little leſs would revolve in a very eccentric ellipſis having its focus in the ſun. All theſe motions, therefore, proceed from the ſame principle, acting in a various but moſt regular manner in different circumſtances, and are all analogous to the motions of heavy budies projected from our earth. Effects ſo ſimilar are to be reſolved into the ſame cauſe, and there is hardly more evidence for ſuppoſing that it is the ſame power of gravity that acts upon terreſtrial bodies in Europe and in America, at the equator and at the poles, than that it is the ſame principle which acts over the whole ſyſtem, from the centre of the ſun to the remote orb of Saturn, or to the utmoſt altitude of the moſt eccentric comet. 15. From ſeveral phænomena we have reaſon to conclude, that there is an atmoſphere environing the ſun and extended from it to a conſiderable diſtance. The ring of light obſerved around the moon, in a total eclipſe of the ſun, in 1605, mentioned by Kepler, and of late in 1706 and 1724, when it was obſerved to extend to 9 or 10 degrees diſtance from the moon, ſeems rather to have proceeded from the reflection of that atmoſphere, while the ſolar direct rays were intercepted by the moon, than from the refraction of any atmoſphere about the moon. The matter of this atmoſphere appears to gravitate towards the ſun, from the effect it has upon the vapour which ariſes in the tails of comets from their Nucleus and atmoſphere, with a direction oppoſite to that of their gravity towards the ſun. For this one vaſt unformed maſs of matter. It will not ſeem ſtrange that where the ſun itſelf is ſcarcely viſible, the gravity toward it ſhould be inſenſible; and that we ſhould here find no effects of any gravitation toward the fixed ſtars. 17. As action and reaction are always equal and in oppoſite directions, ſo that the earth, for example, gravitates toward every mountain as well as every mountain toward the earth, and gravitates toward every projectile while it is moving in the air, as well as the projectile gravitates towards it; and without this law nothing would be ſteady or conſtant in nature: hence it follows, that the ſun gravitates toward all the bodies in the ſyſtem, and that the primary planets gravitate toward their ſatellites. The primary planets alſo gravitate toward one another; ſome minute irregularities in their motions, eſpecially in thoſe of FJupiter and Saturn, the two greateſt planets, when they are in conjunction and come neareſt to each other, are evidences of this. The motions of the ſatellites of Jupiter and Saturn are alſo ſaid to be ſubject to irregularities that proceed from their mutual actions. From ſo many indications ve may at Iength conclude, that all the bodies in the ſolar ſyſtem gravitate toward each other; and tho we cannot conſider gravitation as eſſential to matter, e muſt allow that we have as much evidence, from the phænomena, for its univerſality, as for that of any other affection of bodies whatſoever. CH AP. IV. Of the general gravitation of matter. I. ITHERTO we have conſidered only the accelerating force of gravity at different diſtances, to which the velocity generated by it in a given time, is always proportional. It remains to ſhew that the motion produced by this power, at equal diſtances from a given centre, is always proportional to the quantity of matter in the heavy body; that the gravity of bodies ariſes from the mutual gravitation of their parts; and to aſcertain the law of the gravitation of the particles of bodies. It ĩs allowed as to terreſtrial bodies, and was confirmed from many accurate experiments by Sir Iſaac Newton, that bodies of the ſame bulk and figure, though of very different kinds, ſuſpended by lines of the ſame length, performed their vibrations, when mmoving as pendulums, exactly in the ſame time; from which it folIows, that the force of their gravity is exactly proportional to their quantity of matter: nor would there be any difference in the times of their vibrations though their figure and bulk were different, the diſtances between their centres of ſuſpenſion and of oſcillation being equal, if it was not for the reſiſtance of the air. It has been already ſhewed, that the moon would fall toward the earth with the ſame velocity as any other heavy body, if ſhe was at the ſame diſtance from its centre; and it is plain that the forces of bodies moved with equal velocities are as their quantities of matter: ſo that the weight of the moon would be to the weight of any heavy body at the ſame diſtance from the centre of the earth, in the ſame proportion as the matter oſ the moon is the matter of that heavy body. The primary planets are acted on variouſly in their different diſtances, but according to the law which ſhews that if they were at equal diſtances they would deſcend with equal velocities toward the ſun, ſo that their motion would be proportional to their quantity of matter. In the ſame manner it appears, that if the ſatellites of Vupiter and Saturn were at equal diſtances from the centres of their reſpective primary planets, they would deſcend towards them with equal velocities. The earth and moon, at equal diſtances from the ſun, are acted upon by equal accelerating forces, and would deſcend with equal velocities toward it. Vupiter and his ſatellites would deſcend with the ſame velocity toward the ſun, if their projectile motions were deſtroyed. The ſame is to be ſaid of Sæturn and his ſatellites. A very ſmall inequality in the accelerating forces that act upon the primary planet and its ſatellites would produce very great irregularities in their motion. In all theſe caſes, equal velocities being generated in equal times, the motions of the bodies, and conſequently the gravities that produce theſe motions, muſt be proportional to the quantities of matter in the bodies; from which it follows, that all equal portions of matter, at equal diſtances from the centre of gravitation, are equally heavy; without regard to figure, bulk, or the texture of their parts: and that the gravitation of bodies ariſes from the gravitation of the particles of which they are compoſed. 2. Becauſe action is always equal to reaction, if you ſtill ſuppoſe the planets at equal diſtances from the ſun, and therefore gravitating toward the ſun vith forces proportional to their quantities of matter, the ſun will gravitate towards each of the planets with forces in the ſame proportion. In general, otherr. The weight of a body toward the earth ariſes from the gravity of the parts of the body: the gravity of a mountain toward the earth ariſes from the gravitation of all the parts of the mountain towards itt. The gravitation of the northern hemiſphere toward the ſouthern ariſes from the gravitation of all its parts towards it; and if we ſuppoſe the earth divided into two unequal ſegments, the gravitation of the greater toward the leſſer ariſes from the gravitation of all the parts of the greater toward the leſſer. In the ſame manner, the gravity of the whole earth, one particle being excepted, toward that particle, muſt ariſe from the quantity of gravitation of all the other particles of the earth toward that particlee. Every particle, therefore, of the earth gravitates toward every other particle of it; and, for the ſame reaſon, every particle of matter in the ſolar ſyſtem gravitates toward every other particle in it. 5. We now proceed to an important part of this doctrine, to determine the law according to which the particles of bodies gravitate towards each other; after having diſcovered the law which is obſerved by bodies compoſed of thoſe particles. To a ſuperficial enquirer, at firſt ſight, the former might poſſibly appear to be neceſſarily the ſame with the latter: but it is eaſily ſnewn, that the law which is obſerved in the attractions of the minute particles of matter is often very different from that which is obſerved by ſpheres compoſed of ſuch particles. If, for example, the gravitation of the particles decreaſe in the ſame proportion as the cubes of their diſtances increaſe, or in any higher proportion, the ſpheres compoſed of ſuch particles will not gravitate towards each other with forces that decreaſe in the ſame proportion as the cubes of the diſtances of their centres increaſe, or in that higher proportion; for ſpheres lli U 2 in in contact ſhall attract each other, in thoſe caſes, with a force infinitely greater than when they are removed to the leaſt diſtance from contact, tho there be very little difference betwixt the diſtances of their centres in thoſe two caſes. This made it neceſſary for Sir Iſaac Newton to treat of this ſubject fully; and as ĩt is a very uſeful part of the theory of gravity, but not to be underſtood, as he has delivered it, without a profound ſkill in geometry and prolix computations, we ſhall endeavour to deſcribe it in a more eaſy manner, by chuſing (as on other occaſions) the moſt ſimple caſes. Suppoſe, firſt, that the gravitation towards any particle decreaſes in the ſame proportion that the ſquare of the diſtance from it increaſes, let ? a E a, ? B F b (Fig. 59.) be ſimilar cones conſiſting of ſuch particles, terminated by ſpherical baſes A E a, B  b that have their centre in P; and the gravitation at P toward the ſolid P AE 4, vill be to the gravitation at ? towards ? B F b, as ? A to ? B, Or in the ſame ratio as any homologous ſides of theſe ſimilar ſolidss. For let Mm N m be any ſurface ſimilar to a ? a, having its centre likewiſe in ?; and the gravitation towards the ſurface a E a will be to that towards Mm N m, in the ratio compounded of the direct ratio of the ſurface A E a to M N m (or P A* to P M) and of the inverſe ratio of P A? to P M?, that is, in the ratio of equality; conſequently, the gravitation towards the ſurface a E a a being repreſented by a, the gravitation towards the ſolid ? A E a ill be repreſented by a x ? a4, and that towards the ſimiIar ſolid » B F b by a x ? B, which are in the ratio of P A to P B. In the ſame manner, the gravitation towards the fruſtum that is bounded by the ſurfaces A E a, M N m, is repreſented by a x a M. It is evident, likewiſe, that, tho the ſurfaces a E a and M N m be of any other form, yet the ultimate ratio of the gravitations at ? towanis the conical or Pyramidical ſolids P A E a,  M N m, is that of P Aa to P M; and that if A and M q be perpendicular to ? H in and q, theſe forces reduced to the direction ? H vill be ultimately in the ratio of ?  to P 2. Whence it appears, that, if P B be equal to B a, the attraction of the particle P by the cone ? B 4, with which the particle is in contact, will be equal to the attraction of the fruſtum of the cone terminated by the ſurfaces A E a, B F b, when the attraction of the particles is ſuppoſed to increaſe as the ſquare of the diſtance decreaſes; and that, in. this caſe, the attraction of a portion of matter is not much greater when it is in contact with the particle attracted, than when it is removed to a ſmall diſtance from it. 6. But it is otherwiſe when we ſuppoſe the attraction of the particles to decreaſe as the cubes of their diſtances increaſee For, in this caſe, the particle P will tend to the ſurface Mm N m with a force that is as the furface, or the ſquare of ? M directly, and the cube of ? M inverſely; that is, with a force which is as ? M inverſely, or directly as M v the ordinate of the æquilateral hyperbola æ v I, deſcribed between the aſſymptotes P Aa and P H. Therefore the attraction of the fruſtum M N m A E a will be meaſured by the hyperbolic area M vI a bounded by the ordinates at A and M; and the attraction of the cone P M N m, by the infinite hyperbolic area that is conceived to be formed betwixt the ordinate M v and the aſſymptote P H. It follows then, that, if ſuch a law could take place, the particle » would tend towards the leaſt portion of matter in contact with it, with a greater force than towards the greateſt body at any diſtance, how ſmall ſoever, from it. The ſame is eaſily ſhewn when the attraction of the particles decreaſes as any powers of the diſtances, higher than their cubes, increaſe. It appears, therefore, that the atU traction of a particle in contact with a body is not ſenſibly increaſed by the addition or diminution of new matter, at any diſtance, how ſmall ſoever, from the contact; whether this addition or diminution be made to the body or particle; and, in ſuch caſes, the leſs the particle is, the motions produced in it at infinitely ſmall diſtances, by ſuch attractions, muſt be the more violent; becauſe the ſame force acting on a particle generates a velocity in it that is always greater in proportion as the particle itſelf is leſs. 7. The ſame things may be demonſtrated without having recourſe to the property of the hyperbolic area. Let » a (Fig. 60.) be to ? B, as P B tO P D; let A B and B D be conceived to be divided into an infinite number of ſimilar equal parts a æ, æ I, &c. and B m, m n, &c; then a æ will bæ to B m as A B tO B D, and the matter between the ſurfaces whoſe radii are ? A and ?P æ, ſhall be to the matter between the ſurfaces whoſe radii are » 2 and P m, as P A> x a æ to P B X Bm; that is, as  a to P B?. The attractive povers of equal particles placed betwixt the ſurfaces of the radii P a and p æ, and the ſurfaces of the radii P B and P m, are in the inverſe proportion, or as P B' tOP A°, by the ſuppoſition; and theſe two proportions compounded together give a ratio of equality. Therefore, becauſe the attractive powers of the matter bounded by two ſuch ſurfaces are in the compound ratio of the attractions of equal pãrticles, and of the number of particles, it follows that the attraction of the matter contained by the ſurfaces of the radii ? a and P ? muſt be equal to the attraction of the matter contained by the ſurfaces of the radii p B and P m. In the ſame manner the attraction of the matter contained by the ſurfaces whole radii are P æ and P, is equal to the attraction of the matter between the ſurfaces whoſe radii are ? m and ? n; and the attraction of the fruſtum a E aB Fb is equal to the attraction of the fruſtum B ? b D  . In the ſame manner, if ? B be to » D, as ?P D tO P H, the attraction of the fruſtum D õ d H R b appears to be equal to the attraction of the fruſtum a E aB F b; and if this ſeries of decreaſing geometrical proportionals be continued, the attraction of the fruſtum contained by ſurfaces whoſe radii are any two ſubſequent terms of the progreſſion, muſt be equal to the attraction of the firſt fruſtum a æ a B Fb,. But in this decreaſing progreſſion continued from ?P B the number of terms is infinite; and in the ſolid r B ? b there is an infinite number of fruſtums, the attraction of each of which is equal to the attraction of the firſt fruſtum terminated by the ſurfaces a E a, B ?b; therefore the attraction of the ſolid  ? b, which is in contact with the particle , is infinitely greater than the attraction of the fruſtum bounded by the ſurfaces A E a, B ? b, which is the greater ſolid, but is removed from the contact of the particle . We have taken this opportunity to illuſtrate and demonſtrate this theorem here, becauſe it will be of uſe to us afterwards, and ſerves to ſhew the advantages of the law of gravity which takes place in the ſolar ſyſtem above other laws; tho theſe, on other occaſions, may be preferable. 8. The gravitation of the particles being ſuppoſed to decreaſe as the ſquares of their diſtances increaſe, the forces with which particles, ſimilarly ſituated with reſpect to ſimilar homogeneous ſolids, gravitate towards theſe ſolids, are as their diſtances from any points ſimilarly ſituated in the ſolids, or as any of their homologous ſides. For ſuch ſolids may be conceived to be reſolved into ſimilar cones, or fruſtums of cones, that have always their vertex in the particles, and the gravitation towards theſe cones, or fruſtums, will be always in the ſame ratio by § 5. But if the gravitation of the particles decreaſe as the cubes of the diſtance increaſe, the forces, with which particles, ſimilarly ſituated with reſpect to ſimilar homogeneous ſolids, tend toward thoſe ſolids, ſhall be equal. For ſuch ſolids being reſolved into ſimilar fruſtums of cones that have always their vertex in the particles, and are ſimilarly ſituated with reſpect to them, the gravitation towards theſe fruſtums will be always equal, by what was ſhewn in the laſt article; in the ſame manner as the forces with which the particle ? tends toward ſimilar fruſtums a E a BF b, D G d H R b were demonſtrated to be equal. 9. The gravitation of the particles being ſuppoſed to decreaſe as the ſquares of their diſtances from each other increaſe, if a particle be placed within the hollow ſolid generated by the annular ſpace terminated by two concentric circles, or ſimilar concentric ellipſes, A DB E and a d b e, (Fig. 61.) revolving about the axis a B, it ſhall have no gravity towards this ſolid, For let » be any ſuch particle, any right line from ꝓ that meets the internal circle or ellipſe in any points f and q, and the external figure in æ and r; then if æ r be biſected in æ, f q will be likewiſe biſected in æ, becauſe the figures are ſimilar and ſimilarly ſituated; conſequently f æ is equal to q7; and the gravitations of 2 towards oppoſite fruſtums of the ſolid that have their vertex in ꝓ, and are terminated by the ſame right lines produced from &, with oppoſite directions, will be always equal, by § 5. and mutually deſtroy each others effect. It follows from this, that the gravity of any point in the ſemi-diameter c p, towards the ſphere or ſpheroid, is to the gravity at æ, as c  to ? c, ſuppoſing the point  to be within the ſolid: becauſc the gravitation tion towards the ſolid generated by the annular ſpace, which is included between a ? B and a Qb, has no effect upon a particle at ; ſo that the gravity at ę towards the whole ſolid a D B E is the ſame as the gravity at  towards the ſolid a à b e, which is to the gravity at ? towards the ſolid a D BE as c to c p, by the laſt article. It appears, therefore, that when a ſphere or ſpheroid, of an uniform denſity, conſiſts of particles that attract with a force decreaſing as the ſquare of their diſtance increaſes, the gravitation towards the ſolid decreaſes from the ſurface to the centre, in any given ſemidiameter, in the ſame proportion that the diſtance from the centre decreaſes. 10. Suppoſe now the particle » (Fig. 62.) to be placed without the ſphere a D B E, at the diſtance P C from the centre c; and this particle ſhall be attracted towards the ſphere with a force that decreaſes as the ſquare of the diſtance æ c increaſes. For let P N M be any right line from ? meeting the generating ſemicircle Aa D B in N and M, and the arc c H, deſcribed from the centre ? with the radius ? c, in L; let P n m be another ſuch right line from », conſtituting an infinitely ſmall angle with P M, meeting the ſemicircle in n, m, and the arc c H inl; draw L R, Ir, perpendicular to ? c in R and r7, and c v perpendicular to P M in v. Suppoſe another circle A d B  to interſect the circle a D B E in the axis Aa B, and to conſtitute with it an inſinitely ſmall angle; and let L u and I x, perpendicular to the plane a D B, meet a àd B in u and x. Then the gravitation of the particle 5, towards the matter in the phyſical ſurface L u æ I, ſhall be meaſured by L xX L u LI x Læu . . L or 5õ: conſequently the gravitation of towards the pyramidical fruſtum, terminated by the planes a D B and a à B, and by planes perpendicular to a D B in  M and n m, ſhall be meaſured by xN M, by § 5. of this chapter. But, the angle contained by the planes a d B, a d B, belng given, L u is to L r, as D ã, the arc intercepted by theſe circular planes at the diſtance e D, to c D (or c a;) and L being to R 7, as PL, or P , ©OL E, ſo that L IxL r is equal to ? c x R7; it follows that the gravitation of ? towards that fruſtum ſhall be ſi d b LIXLREX 2VMXD⸗a R7 X2VM X D a4 meaſure  V 9æ n. This gravitation is reduced to the direction ? c by diminiſhing it in the ratio of P v, or ?R, O P C; . DAXR TXPR and is then meaſured by q9 x 2 vM; oOr (the ſimultaneous increment of vM being repreſented by vo, and ? R?, Or P V', being equal to v u + N P M, by Eucl. 2. 6. or to vM?+ a ? B, ſo that A ? B being conſtant, the increments of P R and v M? muſt be equal, and r 7? x P R equal to voxVMm) D àdX 2 Vu? X Vo by]VV75: which is the ſimultaneous increx2 vu3 ment of 2- , in the ſame manner as the increCA x3 PC ment of vM?, while v M acquires the infinitely ſmall augment of vo, is 3v M?xvo. Therefore the attraction of the part of the ſlice of the ſphere terminated by the circular planes a D B, A 4 B, which is cut off by a plane perpendicular to a b B in the right line . D àa 2 v ui . N M, is as ca* &ã and the attraction of the portion of the ſphere which is generated by the revolution of the ſegment M D M about the axis aA B bearing the ſame proportion to the attraction of that ſlice, as the circumference of the whole circle to the .T . 3 arc D d, it is meaſured by - x 2 where - ex⸗ C2 preſſes the ratio of the circumference of a circle to the radius; and conſequently is directly as the cube of the chord M N, and inverſely as the ſquare of P C, the diſtance of the particle ? from the centre of the ſphere. Hence the gravity at p towards the whole ſphere is as the cube of its diameter, or its quantity of matter (the denſity being given) directly, and the ſquare of the diſtance æ c inverſely, the chord M N coinciding with the diameter a B, when the attraction of the whole ſphere is conſidered; ſo . . . c v 2 C A3 j that this attraction is meaſured by & 35C 11. It appears from what has been ſhewn, that any particle ?, without the ſphere, is attracted by it with the ſame force as if the whole matter of the ſphere was collected in the centre, and attracted as one particle from that centre. For the circumference of the circle a D B E is expreſſed by  x C a, its area by&x , the ſurface of the ſphere by 7x2 c a?, 3 and its ſolid content by -x æp ; ſo that the attraction of this ſolid content acting from the centre 3 e, at the diſtance ? c, is meaſured by =ẽ the very ſame which meaſures the attraction of the ſphere at that diſtance, by the laſt articlee The ſame is to be ſaid of the gravity towards the aggregate of any number of ſuch ſpheres that have a common centre; from which it follows, that however variable the denſity of a ſphere may be at different diſtances from the centre, provided the denſity be always the ſame at the ſame diſtance from it, the gravity of a particle (that is not within the ſphere) towards it will be as the quantity of matter in the ſphere directly, and the ſquare of the diſtance of the particle from its centre inverſely. If the attraction of the particles increaſed or decreaſed in the ſame proportion as their diſtances increaſe or decreaſe, the ſphere would act, in this caſe likewiſe, in the ſame manner as if all its matter was lodged in the centre as one particle; but the caſe is different when the attraction of the particles obſerves other laws. Suppoſe that the attraction of the particles is inverſely as the power of the diſtance of any exponent n leſs than 3, and the attraction of a ſphere conſiſting of ſuch particles, at its ſurface, will be to the force with which the whole matter of the ſphere collected in its centre would attract at the ſame diſtance, as 2n 3 x 2 to 3n x 5mn. If, for example, the attraction of the particles be the ſame at all diſtances (in which caſe we ſuppoſe n æ o) this ratio is that of 4 to 55; and if the attraction of the particles be inverſely as their diſtance, it is that of 3 to 4, as we have ſhewn elſewhere *. 12. Having ſewn that when the particles gravitate towards each other with forces that are inverſely as the ſquares of their diſtances, the action of a ſphere upon a particle placed without it obſerves the ſame law as that of the particles themſelves, and decreaſes in the ſame proportion as the ſquare of the diſtance of the particle from the centre of the ſphere increaſes; it follows, becauſe action and reaction are cqual, that the particle will attract the ſphere by a force varying in the ſame proportion; and if, in place of the particle, a ſecond ſphere be ſubſtituted conſiſting of Tuch particles, ſince the total action of this ſecond ſphere ill be the ſame as if all its matter vas lodged in its centre, therefore the to ſpheres  Treatiſe of Fluxions, § 902. muſt obſerve the ſame law, in acting upon each other, as two particles placed in their centres; that is, their attraction muſt decreae in proportion as the ſquare of the diſtance betwixt their centres increaſes. 13. The gravitation of bodies having been reſolved by Sir Ilaac Newton into the gravitation of their particles, and the law which is obſerved by the gravity of bodies having been diſcovered from the phænomena deſcribed at length above; it appears from the preceding concluſions, that the gravity of the particles of, which the bodies are compounded obſerves the very ſame law. He was likeviſe enabled, by the ſame ſteps, to determine the progreſs of gravity from the centre of any ſphere to the greateſt diſtance from it. At the centre a particle can have no gravity at all, being equally attracted every way by the matter of the ſphere about it. If it is placed within the ſphere at ſome diſtance from the centre, its gravity will be the greater, the greater this diſtance is, by § 9; for theſe parts of the ſphere only having an effect upon it that are at a leſs diſtance from the centre than itſelf, and its gravity being as the attracting matter directly and the ſquare of the diſtance from the centre reciprocally, ſince the matter is as the cube of the ſame diſtance, the gravity muſt be as the diſtance itſelf. From the centre to the ſurface, its gravity increaſes in proportion as its diſtance from the centre increaſes; at the ſurface, its gravity is greateſt; and from the ſurface upwards, its gravity decreaſes in proportion as the ſquare of its diſtance from rhe centre increaſes; regularly obſerving this law to the utmoſt limits of ſpace. Here we ſpeak of the accelerating power of gravity, which is proportional to the velocity that it is able to generate in any given ſmall moment of time; and ſince it generates the ſame velocity in the ſame time in all bodies whatſoever at the ſame diſtance, it follows that their weight or motion ariſing from it, muſt be proportional to their quantities of matter. In general, to eſtimate the weight or motion of any ſphere that is attracted by another whoſe parts are equally denſe at equal diſtances from its centre, we are to meaſure it by compounding three proportions, that of the matter in the heavy bodies that gravitate, that of the matter in the attracting ſpheres to which they gravitate, and the reciprocal proportion of the ſquares of the reſpective diſtances betwixt the centres of the ſpheres that tend towards each other; and this is the law which we found from the phænomena to take place in the ſyſtem. See Art. 2. of this chapter. 14. Thus Sir Iſaac Newton diſcovered and fully deſcribed, from undiſputed obſervations and unexceptionable calculations, this ſimple principle of the gravitation of the particles of matter towards each other; which being extended over the ſyſtem to all diſtances, and diffuſed from the centre of every globe, is the chain that keeps the parts of each together, and preſerves them in their regular motions about their proper centres. The ſame gravity, which is ſo well known to us on the earth, affects them all; the whole maſs of the ſyſtem is, in this reſpect, of a piece; and this one principle, ſo regularly diffuſed over the whole, ſhews one general influence and conduct, flowing from one cauſe equally active and potent every where. Several obſervations have been made of late that greatly confirm his doctrine, and particularly ſerve to ſhew that the gravitation towards bodies ariſes from the gravitation towards their particles. Of this kind are the meaſures of a degree on the meridian made lately, with great accuracy, by the French mathematicians; and the declination of the plumb. line from the true vertical, in conſequence of the attraction of a great mountain in the neighbourhood. C H A P. V. l Ihe quantity of matter, and denſity, f the ſun and planets. H U S far our author aſcends by way of analyſis, tracing the cauſes from their effects, and from the coincidence, or perfect ſimilarity of many effects, ſhewing the cauſe to be more general. But in order to deſcend by the ſyntbeſis, and to determine the effects from the cauſe now known, it was not ſufficient to eſtabliſh the general gravitation of the particles of matter; ĩt was requiſite to determine, as far as poſſible, the quantities of the powers which act in the ſyſtem. We have ſeen that there is a gravity extending from each body in the ſyſtem on all ſides, at equal diſtances from their centres proportional to their quantities of matter. We know, from experience, the force of this power at the ſurface of our own earth, and have ſeen how to eſtimate its efficacy at any other diſtance. In order to be able to eſtimate all the powers in the ſyſtem directed to their different bodies, it is necelſary to determine the proportion of their quantities of matter to that of our earth. If this is once obtained, all the powers that operate in the ſyſtem being known, it will require no more but a ſilful application of geometry and mechanics to determine the motions and phænomena of the celeſtial bodies, which all flow from them. 2. To meaſure the matter in the ſun and planets was an arduous problem, and, at firſt ſight, ſeemed above the reach of human art. But the principles of this philoſophy afforded a natural and eaſy ſolution of it in the moſt important caſes, and Sir Iſaac Newton has determined the proportions of the matter that is in the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Moon, to that in our Earth; that is, he has ſhewed how many earths might form a Sun, a upiter, or a Saturn. To underſtand how he was able to diſcover this, we are to recollect that the matter in each of theſe is in the ſame proportion as the force of gravity toward them, at equal diſtances from their centress. We know the force of gravity towards our earth from the deſcent of heavy bodies, and alſo by calculating how much the moon falls below the tangent of her orbit in any given time. We have no experience of any rectilineal deſcent of heavy bodies toward the Sun, Jupiter, or Saturn; but as the primary planets revolve about the ſun, and their ſatellites revolve about Yupiter and Saturn, by computing from their motions how much a primary planet falls below its tangent in a given time, and how much any of Vupiters and Saturns ſatellites fall below their tangents in the ſame time, we are able to determine the proportion which the gravity of a primary planet to the ſun, and of a ſatellite towards its primary, bears to the gravity of the moon towards the earth, in their reſpective diſtances: then from the general Iaw of the variation of gravity, the forces that would act upon them at equal diſtances from the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Earth are computed; which give the proportion of the matter contained in theſe different bodies. 3. That the quantity of matter in Yupiter greater than the quantity of matter contained in the earth, we may eaſily learn from the motion of his ſatellites; all of which revolve about his centre in leſs time than the moon revolves about the earth, and are all, excepting the firſt, at a greater diſtance from his centre than the moon is from the earth. The ſecond ſatellite is farther diſtant from Vupiter than the moon is from the earth in the proportion of 3 to 2 nearly; and moves in an orbit greater in the ſame proportion. But this ſatellite finiſhes its revolution in 53 days, 13 hours, which is leſs than a ſeventh part of the moons periodic time about the earth; conſequently its motion muſt be much more ſwift than that of the moon. A ſatellite nearer Vupiter would move ſtill more ſwiftly than this ſatellite: ſo that if a ſatellite revolved about Yupiter at a diſtance from his centre equal to the diſtance of the moon from the earth, it would move much more ſwiftly than the moon moves about the earth, and therefore would be acted on by a much greater centripetal force,; for it requires always a greater force to bend into the ſame orbit a body that moves with a greater velocity. But the quantities of matter in the central bodies are proportional to their attractive powers at equal diſtances, and therefore the matter in Jupiter muſt very much exeeed the matter in the earth. In like manner, we may eaſily obſerve that Mercury revolves about the ſun in very little more than thrice the time in which the moon revolves about the earth, and yet moves in an orbit about 140 times greater, being ſo many times farther diſtant from the centre of his motion; from which it is eaſy to ſee that if a ſatellite revolved about the earth as far diſtant from it as Mercury is from the ſun, this ſatellite would move vaſtly ſlower than Mercury: whence it follos that the attractive power oſ the ſun muſt be vaſtly fuperior to that of the earth, and therefore that the ſun muſt contain vaſtly more matter than the earth. The matter in Saturn is alſo found to be greater than that in the earth. From our authors calculations, founded on theſe principles, it follows that the quantities of matter in the Sun, Vupiter, Saturn, and the Earih are to each other as the numbers 1I, r7 7 3/æ 4. The quantities of matter in theſe bedies being thus determined, and their bulk being known from aſtronomical obſervations, ĩt is eaſy to compute what matter each of them contains in the ſame bulk; which gives the proportion of their denſities. Thus our author finds the denſities of the Sun, Fupiter, Saturi, and the Earth, to be as the numbers 100, 944, 67 and 400. From which it appears that the earth is more denſe than Jupiter, and Yupiter more denſe than Soturn; that is, thoſe planets which are nearer the ſun are found to be more denſe, by which they are enabled to bear the greater heat of the ſun. This is the reſult of our moſt ſubtle enquiries into nature, that all things are in the beſt ſituations, and diſpoſed by perfect wiſdom. If our earth was carried down into the orb of Mercury, our ocean would boil and ſoon be diſipated into vapour, and the dry land would become uninhabitable. If the earth was carried to the orb of Saturn, the ocean would freeze at ſo great a diſtance from the ſun, and the cold would ſoon put a period to the life of plants and animals. A much leſs variation of the earth's diſtance from the ſun than this would depopulate the torrid zone if the earth came nearer the ſun, and the temperate 7zones, if it was carried from the ſun. A leſs heat at Jupiters diſtance is adapted to the greater rarity of his ſubſtance: the conſequences might be as fatal in Vupiter, if he was carried into the orb of the earth, as it would be to us to be carried into the orb of Mercury The ſtill greater rarity of Saturn is fitted to his more remote orb; ſo that tho he is the laſt of the planets, and receives 90 times leſs light and heat from the ſun than we do, he may nevertheleſs be in the beſt ſituation that could poſſibly be aſigned him in the ſyſtem; and there the ſituation of Fupiter, and of all the lower planets, may appear as terrible as that of Mercury does to us. Saturn terminates the planetary revolutions; and, as if the heat of the ſun was too weak in the higher orbs, we ſind no bodies revolving higher, but ſuch as deſcend in ſome part of their orbit nearer to this great centre of light and heat. Upon the whole we have reaſon to conclude, that they are all diſpoſed in ſuch order, and in ſuch ſituations, from which any conſiderable variation would produce fatal effects. The hypotheſis of Des Cartes led him to place the more denſe planets at a greater diſtance from the ſun; but a philoſophy founded on the obſervation of nature correſponds better with the final cauſes of things, and proves, on every occaſion, the wiſdom of the author. 5. As aſtronomers have found no ſatellites revolving about Mercury, Venus, or Mars, we arce deprived of the like opportunities of comparing their atrractive powers and proportional quantities of matter. But it is highly probable, from what we have ſaid of the Earth, Vupiter, and Saturn, that the denſities of the other planets correſpond to their diſtances from the ſun, and are greater in the nearer planets. Our author has alſo computed the proportion of the attractive powers of the Sun, jjupiter, Saturn, and the Earth, at their reſpective ſurfaces, and finds them to be in proportion as theſe numbers, 10000, 943, 529, 435, reſpectively. From which ĩt appears that the force of gravity towards theſe very unequal bodies approaches ſurpriſingly to an equality at their ſurfaces; ſo that tho upiter be ſeveral hundred times greater than the earth, the force of gravity at his ſurface is very little more than double what it is at the ſurface of the earth; and the force of gravity at the ſurface of Saturn is but about greater than that of terreſtrial bodies. õ. The moſt conſiderable poyers that act in the ſyſtem being thus determined; before we proceed to conſider their effects, it is neceſſary, firſt, to enquire whether they act in a void, or if there is any medium that reſiſts the motions produced by them. We find that the air makes a conſiderable reſiſtance to the motion of projectiles near the earth; which, if it extended unto the planetary regions, would alſo very conſiderably affect their motions. But experiments ſhew that the denſity of the air is proportional to the force that compreſſes it, and that the weight of the ſuperincumbent atmoſphere is the force which compreſſes the air in every altitude; ſo that the higher any portion of air is, having a leſs weight of air above ĩit to compreſs it, it muſt have leſs denſity in the ſame proportion: and from this it follows, that if we abſtract from the diminution of gravity, and the altitudes from the ſurface of the earth be taken in arithmetical progreſſion, the denſities of the air at theſe altitudes will decreaſe in geometrical progreſſion *. Since therefore, it appears from ſeveral experiments, made in France and England, that the * See Dr. Hallęy in Phil Tranſ. N? 181. and Schol. Prop. 2æ. Lib. II. Princip. denſity of the air decreaſes in ſuch a manner, that at the height of ſeven perpendicular miles it is about 4 of the denſity i it has at the level of the ſea, at 14 miles it muſt be 7- of it, at 21 miles at Zmiles ,45, at 35 miles æ at 42 miles æ, at the height of 49 miles 437 part of it, and at the height of a ſemidiameter of the earth altogether inſenſible. It appears from the laws of motion, and from many accurate experiments, that the reſiſtance of fluids ariſing from the inertia of their matter, is proportional to their denſity; and therefore the reſiſtance of the air, tho ſenſible at the ſurface of the earth, would be 16384 times leſs at the height of 49 miles, and could not be ſenſible in the greateſt number of ages at the height of a ſemidiameter of the carth: it muſ©t be ſtill ſeſs at the diſtance of the moon, which therefore, meeting with no reſiſtance, continues to revolve for ever in her orbit, without any impediment or diminution of motionn. As for a more ſubtile medium than the air, no experiments nor obſervations ſhew that there is any here, or in the celeſtial ſpaces, from which any ſenſible reſiſtance can ariſ. of them, nor indeed any body in the ſyſtem, can be ſuppoſcd to be void of all motion 2. It is the centre of gravity of the whole ſyſtem that is the only point which can be ſuppoſed quieſcent in ĩt; the ſame point about which all the matter of the -n tem would ſoon be accumulated, if the progreſſve motions of the bodies in ĩt were deſtroyed, and theſr gravity was permitted to bring them together. The mutual actions of bodies on each other never afect the ſtate oſ this centre; their attracting or repelling each other produces no effect upon it; and it muſt either be quieſcent, or proceed unifornly in a right Iine. All ſeem agreed that the centre oſ the ſyſtem is at reſt, and no reaſon or obſervation argues for our aſcribing any motion to it. The centre of gravity oſf the ſyſtem is, thereſore, the only immoveable point, while all the bodies in the ſyſtem move round it with various motions. 3. As we have our knowledge of gravity, and the laws of purue from what paſſes on the ſurface of the earth, cannot illuſtrate the motions of the bodies o the ſolar ſyſtem, ariſing from their mutual gravity, better than by ſome images we find of them on the earth, after having ſhewn ſo fully the ſimilarity of the powers that act on the parts of the earth and on the celeſtial bodiess. We know that when, by any power or machine, a body is projected in the air, the power reacts on the earth with an equal forcœ. and that if the power was ſufficient to project a mountain or a much larger part of the earth, it would act on the remainder ? of the earth with an equal force, in an oppoſite direction; ſo that while the projected part began to move in ĩts curve, the remainder of the earth would begin at the ſame time to move in an oppoſite direction, with an equal quantity of motion, but with a velocity ſo much leſs as the matter in ĩt is greater than in the projected part; and both would revolve in certain orbits about the common centre of gravity, which would continue in the ſame ſtate as before the projection. If, by the reſiſtance of the medium, the motions of theſe parts of the earth came to be deſtroyed, they would come together again and be accumulated in one maſs about the ſame centre. If there were more ſuch parts of the earth projected, the centre of gravity of all would be no way affected by ſuch projections, but they would move round it, ſo that the ſum of the motions on one ſide of it ſould be equal to the ſum of the motions on the other ſide: and this obtains even in thoſe ſmall motions that are every day produced by powers and agents on the earth. 4. The motions of the great bodies in the ſolar ſyſtem are analogous to theſe: the different parts of the ſolar ſyſtem gravitate to each other, as the parts of the earth gravitate towards one another; and the different parts of the ſyſtem move in the ſame manner about their common centre of gravity, as the parts into which we ſuppoſed the earth to be divided, if projected in any direction, would all move about their common centre of gravity; or as the earth, and all the bodies that are actually projected every day on its ſurface, revolve about the common centre of gravity of the earth and theſe projectiles. Only there is this difference, that the bodies of the great ſyſtem were projected at great diſtances from each other, and in ſuch a manner that the planets revolve in orbits almoſt circular, ſo as not ta come too near to the ſun, or to be carried too far from him, in their revolutions. The Creator of the world had in vain if he had not projected them with the forces that were requiſite to preſerve them revolving at thoſe diſtances, or near to them; and as the greatneſs of the force impreſſed on thoſe vaſt bodies, ſome of which are many times greater than our carth, ſhews the power, its juſt quantity, varied regularly i in the different diſtances of the planets, and its proper direetion, ſew the ſkill of the firſt mover. 5. We may ſuppoſe that all the matter of which the ſyſtem conſiſts was formed firſt in one maſs, where now the centre of gravity of the whole ſyſtem is found; that of this maſs various bodies were formed and ſeparated from each other to proper diſtances, where they received their projectile motions; and that the powers which Ieparated and moved them obſerved the Iaw of nature that requires an equality between action and reaction, and is obſerved in all the actions of powers at preſent: and thus theſe. motions would begin, and continue for ever, without producing any motion in the centre of gravity of the ſyſtem. 6. When the bodies were thus moved in their juſt orbits, we may conceive ſome of them to have been ſubdivided again, by actions obſerving the ſame laws, into ſeveral other bodies, which in like manner were formed into leſicr ſyſtems; as that of the earth and moon, thoſe of Vupiter and Saturn and their ſatellites. There is not any of theſe quieſcent in its particular ſyſtem; the earth and moon move about their common centre of gravity, while it is carried with a regular motion round the centre of gravity of the whole ſyſtem. The ſame is to be ſaid of Yupiter and Saturn and their ſatellites; and it is certain from the laws of nature, that the motions in any leſſer ſyſtem about ĩts centre of gravity, and the motioꝶ terraqueous globe receives an impreſſion from every power that move projectiles in the air, and is, to ſpeak accurately, agitated a little by theſe powers with a very complex motion, yet we conſider it as at reſt, neglecting ſuch exceeding minute actions and their effects. : C H A P. II. Shewing how gravity produces ſome ſinall irregularities in 1be motions of the plauets. I. TF the planets were acted on by a power diI rected to the œntre of the ſun only, varying according to the general law of gravity, and that centre was quieſcent, their motion about it would be perfectly regular. But we found that each of the plancts was acted on by a power directed to every body in the ſyſtem:. In order to judge of the eſfects of theſe actions, our author firſt ſuppoſes two bodies equally gravitating towards each other, and revolving about their common centre of gravity: and, ſince the direction of their mutual gravitation paſſes always from the one to the other through their centre of gravity, and their diſtances from it vary always in the ſame proportion as their diſtances from each other: it follows, that they muſt deſcribe equal areas in equal times about that centre, and about each other, and deſcribe ſimilar ſigures about that point, and about each other *. So that in the motions of two bodies no irregularities ariſe in their motions about each other from their mutual attractions; whatever the law of their gravity be ſuppoſed to be: only they will finiſh their revolutions about  Princip, Lib. I. Piop. 58. i the centre of gravity in leſs time than if the one was to revolve about the other quieſcent, at the ſame diſtance, and with the ſame centripetal force; becauſe the orbit deſcribed about the centre of gravity being leſs than that which is deſcribed by any one of them ãbout the other quieſcent (their diſtance from each other being equal in both caſes) and being alſo ſimilar to it, it muſt be deſcribed in leſs time. 2. If three or more bodies mutually attract each other, the gravitation of any one, ariſing from the actions of the reſt, may be determined by the rule for the compoſition of motion; and if the law of gravity be ſuch as we find to obtain in the ſolar ſyſtem, its gravitation will not be always directed to the centre of gravity of the other bodies, or indeed to any fixed point, but ſometimes to one ſide of that centre, and ſometimes to the other; and therefore, equal areas will not be deſcribed in equal times about any point in the ſyſtem, and ſeveral irregularities will neceſſarily ariſe in the motions of the bodies. But if you ſuppoſe one of theſe bodies to be vaſtly greater than the reſt, ſo that the actions of the other bodies may be neglected if compared with its action, and the centre of gravity of the ſyſtem be always found near it, then the irregularities in the motions in ſuch a ſyſtem will be very ſmall. The areas deſcribed in equal times, about the centre of that great body, will be nearly equal, and the orbits deſcribed will be nearly elliptic, having that centre in their focus. That this is the caſe of the ſun and planets, appears from what we have ſhewn concerning their quantities of matter: and thus we ſee that not only the regular motions of the planets are to be derived from the principle of gravity, but alſo how their minute errors and irregularities are accounted for from it. The ſame is the caſe of Yupiter and Saturn and their ſatellites. As for the Earth and the Moon, though there be a leſs diſproportion in their magnitudes, and their common centre of gravity be ſenſibly removed from the earth, yet as there are only two in their ſyſtem, no irregularities ariſe from their mutual actions in their motions about their common centre of gravity, or they are eaſily determined when the poſition of their centre of gravity is known. Theſe leſſer ſyſtems of the Earth, Fupiter, and Saturn, are carried about the centre of gravity of the general ſolar ſyſtem, without receiving any diſturbance from any action of the ſun or planets, which is equal on all their parts and in the ſame direction. When a fleet of ſhips is carried away by a current that affects them equally, it has no effect on their particular motions amongſt themſelves, nor is the motion proceeding from the current diſcovered by them, if they have no body in ſight that is not affected by it. In the ſame manner, if the gravity towards the ſun acted equally, and in the ſame direction, on the parts of theſe leſſer ſyſtems, it would have no effect on their motions amongſt one another, and could only be diſcovered by comparing their motions with the fixed ſtars, or with ſome body foreign to that leſſer ſyſtem, which is acted on in a different manner by the ſun. But as there is ſome variation in the actions of the ſun upon the parts of theſe ſyſtems, and in the directions of theſe actions, from hence ſome irregularities neceſſarily ariſe. 3. Though the actions of the ſun and of the inferior planets, compounded together, do not always produce in a ſuperior planet a gravitation exactly directed towards their centre of gravity; yet, as upon the whole it is more nearly directed to that point than to any other, the motions of a ſuperior planet vill be found more regular by ſuppoſing that point would have no effect on the motion of Yupiter about the Sun, and it is by the exceſs of its action on Jupiter above its action on the Sun that it diſturbs the motion of Yupiter. This exceſs is found to be 55 of the action of the Sun on Vupiter, and therefore is much leſs than the force with which Jupiter diſturbs the motion of Saturn. The actions of the other planets on each other are incomparably leſs than theſe, and the irregularities proceeding from thoſe actions are always leſs in any planet as it is nearer the ſun. Only the orbit of the earth may appear a little more irregular than that of its neighbouring planets, becãuſe it revolves about the centre of gravity of the earth and moon, while that centre annually revolves about the ſun. 6. If the planets were attracted by the ſun and by one another, but the ſun was not reciprocally attracted by them, the centre of gravity of the ſyſtem, becauſe of the deficiency of this reaction, would neceſſarily be in motion; and this would be a new ſource of errors and irregularities. If the primary planets were not attracted by their ſatellites, as well as the ſatellites by their primary planets, other irregularities would neceſſarily ariſe. If the great planets, Jupiter and Saturn, had moved in the lower ſpheres, their influences would have had much more effect to diſturb the planetary motions. But while they revolve at ſo great diſtances from the reſt, they act almoſt equally on the ſun and on the inferior planets, and have the leſs effect on their motions about the ſun, and the motions of their ſatellites are at the ſame time leſs diſturbed by the action of the ſun. The earth and moon move in a lower ſphere, but their motions are the leſs irregular becauſe there are only two in their ſyſtem. We ſhall afterwards ſee that the comets continue for æ very ſmall time 320 Sir Isaac NEWTONS Book IV. among the planetary ſpheres, and that in the far gremer part of their revolutions they are carried to uch vaſt diſtances that their actions can have very Iittle effect on the motions of the planets. Such is the law of gravity, and the manner of its operation, and ſuch is the diſpoſition of the bodies in the ſyſtem, as ſeems well adapted for preſerving their motions with great regularity; but this will appear ſtill more fully from the following chapter. C H A P. III. Of the approach and receſs of the planets to and from the ſun, in every revolution. I. H US far we have conſidered the powers that act in the ſyſtem of the ſun, and have found that thoſe which produce the regular motions of the planets vaſtly exceed thoſe that diſturb them. We are next to conſider how the motions in their orbits proceed from the action of thoſe powers; and how the planet is made to aſcend and deſcend by turns, at the ſame time that it revolves about the centre of its gravitation. This requires an illuſtration, the rather, becauſe we have nothing ſimilar to it in the motion of heavy bodies at the earths ſurface; for theſe are always made to fall to the earth by their gravity: in whatever direction they are projected, upwards, perpendicularly, or obliquely, their gravity ſoon brings them down to the earth again. Hence many find it hard to conceive how a planet after approaching to the ſun can recede from it again, eſpecially ſince its gravity is increaſed as its diſtance decreaſes. They imagine that it ought to continue to approach to the ſun, and at length fall upon his body, as heavy bodies fall to the earth. lll 2. But we are to remember, that the force with which heavy bodies are projected, from our moſt powerful engines, is inconſiderable, compared with the motions which their Igravity could generate in them in a few minutes; and they move over ſuch ſmall ſpaces, when compared with their diſtance from the centre of the earth, that their gravity is conſidered as acting in parallel lines, without any ſenſible error, ſo that the centrifugal force ariſing from the rotation about that centre is altogether neglected. But when we exanine the motion of a projectile in larger ſpaces, and trace it in its orbit, we muſt conſider the action of gravity as directed to a centre, and take in the centrifugal force ariſing from its motion of rotation about that centre; and it will appear, that there are indeed ſome laws of gravity which would make the body approach to the centre continually, till it fall into it; but that there are other laws which make bodies approach to the centre, and ſuffer them to recede from it, by turns. How to diſtinguiſh theſe we ſhall now conſider. In the firſt place, it will be eaſily underſtood that if s Fig. 63.) be the centre of attraction, and a body is projected with a certain force in the line a E, perpendicular to as, it will deſcribe the circle a L æ with an equable motion, and after a complete revolution return to its firſt place a, with its firſt motion. The ſame gravity that acted at a upon it, and carried it below the tangent a E, acts upon it at any other point L, at an equall diſtance from the centre s, and brings it from the tangent at L thrò the ſame length in the ſame time. The centrifugal force, ariſing from its rotation, being equal to its gravity, neither of them prevails, and the body therefore If you ſuppoſe the motion of projection at a to be increaſed, the gravity neceſſary to keep it in the ſame circle muſt be increaſed alſo; ſo that if the velocity of the projection be double, the gravity requiſite to retain the body in the ſame circle muſt be quadruple; becauſe A  being double of a L, the point x falls four times farther below the tangent than the point L, as we ſhewed above: in general, the gravity neceſſary to retain a body in the ſame circle is in the duplicate proportion of the motion of projection; and the velocity, therefore, in the ſubduplicate proportion of the gravity; ſo that when the gravities are as 1 to 4, the velocities are as iI to 2. 3. If the body is projected at a leſs diſtance from the centre of attraction, as at D, with the ſame velocity, the gravity muſt be greater to retain it in a circle; becauſe the curvature being greater, the extremity ? of the arc D ?, equal to a L, falls farther below the tangent at p, than L falls below the tangent at a, in proportion as the arc o æ is more curve, that is, in proportion as the diſtance s D is leſs than S A. If the velocity of projection is increaſed at D, ſo that the body deſcribe a greater arc D oin the ſame time, than the force of gravity, neceſſary to retain the body in a circle there, muſt be increaſed in a duplicate proportion; becauſe or is to P r in the duplicate proportion of D to o Pp. If the velocity at D, for example, is greater than that at a in proportion as s A is greater than s D, then T Will be to ? r as the ſquare of s A is to the ſquare of s D, and r vill be to L M as the cube of s A is to the cube of S D; that is, the force requiſite to retain bodies in circles muſt be reciprocally as the cubes of the ſemidiameters, when the velocities in theſe circles are reciprocally verſely, if the gravities increaſe as the cubes of the diſtances from the centre decreaſe, the velocities neceſſary to carry bodies in circles, at different diſtances from the centre of attraction, muſt increaſe in proportion as the diſtances decreaſlee. 4. In general, as the gravities of bodies that deſcribe circles about the ſame centre increaſe in proportion as the ſquares of the velocities increaſe, and as the diſtances decreaſe; it follows converſely, that; in order to compare the velocities of projection that are neceſſary to carry bodies in circles at theſe different diſtances, we muſt compound the proportion of the gravities and the proportion of theſe diſtances together, for this compounded proportion will give that of the ſquares of the requiſite velocities. So in the ſolar ſyſtem, if the diſtances of two planets were as I to 4, the gravities being as 16 to 1, theſe proportions compounded give that of 16 to 4, or of 4 to 1, which is that of the ſquares of the velocities, and therefore the velocities themſelves are as 2 to I. In like manner we can determine the law according to which the velocities, neceſſary to carry bodies in circles about s, vary at any diſtances, in any given law of gravity. 5. If a body is projected at A (Fig. 64.) with a velocity leſs than that which is neceſſary to carry it in a circle there, it muſt fall within the circle, the centrifugal force, ariſing from the motion of rotetion about s, is leſs than that which it would have in the circle a L, in proportion as the ſquare of its velocity is leſs, and is therefore leſs than its gravity in the ſame proportion: the body, therefore, by the exceſs of ĩts gravity above its centrifugal force, is made to approach to the centree. The motion or the body, as it deſcends in the orbit a m B, muſt be accelerated ſo as to deſcribe equal areas in equal times abouts, and the velocity of its motion at æ muſt be greater than its velocity at a, in proportion as s a is greater than s P, the perpendicular from s on the tangent to its orbit at M; becauſe if the ares AE, M N, be deſcribed in the ſame time, the triangular ſpaces A s X, Ms N, being equal, the baſes a æ, M N muſt be reciprocally as their altitudes s a, s P, and the velocities are as the arcs a x, M N, deſcribed in the ſame time, and therefore reciprocally as s a, s P. The velocity, therefore, in the orbit from a to M, increaſes in a higher proportion than that in which the diſtances s a, s M decreaſe, becauſe s a is to s ? in a higher proportion than s aA is to s M: only if the direction of the body ever become perpendicular again to the ray drawn froms, at any point, as B, there s M and s ? will coincide, and the proportion of the velocities will be the ſame as the reciprocal of the diſtances s a, s B. 6. If a body is projected at B in a direction perpendicular to s B, with a velocity greater than that which is neceſſary to carry it in the circle B 6 n about the centre of attraction, at the diſtance s B, it muſt be carrried without that circle, and recede from the centre s. The centrifugal force, in this caſe, ariſing from its motion of rotation, is greater than that which would ariſe from its motion in the circle s õ H, and therefore greater than its gravity; and by the exceſs of its centrifugal force above its gravity, it recedes from s the centre of attraction. The motion of the body decreaſes as it riſes, being retarded by the action oſf its gravity, ſo that the velocity iĩs always leſs than the velocity at B, in proportion as s B is leſs than s , the perpendicular from s on the direction of its motion. 7. A planet deſcends from a, whieh is called its higher apſis, to B, which is called its lower a”ũs, and reaſcends again from B to A. It deſcends from A, approaching to the centre of attraction, becauſe its velocity at a is leſs than that which would be able to carry it in a circle about s, at the diſtance s a. As it deſcends to leſſer diſtances, its velocity in its orbit increaſes in a higher proportion than the velocities, which would be ſuſficient to carry bodies in circles at theſe diſtances, increaſe. For the velocity in the orbit at.B is greater than that at a, in proportion as s a is greater than s B, whereas the velocity in a circle at B ĩs greater than the velocity in a circle at a, asvs a is greater than V s B. Ifs a were to S B as 4 to I, the firſt proportion would be that of 4 to 1I, but the ſecond that of 2 to 1 only. Hence it appears how the velocity in the orbit at B, exceeds that in a circle at the ſame diſtance, though the velocity in the orbit at A was exceeded by the velocity that was able to carry it in a circle at the diſtance s A. In the higher part of the orbit, the velocity of the body is leſs than that which would carry it in a circle there about s; but the velocity in the orbit increaſes more, by the approach of the body to the centre of attraction, than the velocities requiſite for carrying bodies in circles do, and ſo gets the better of them in the lower part of the orbit. Of theſe two each prevails over the other by turns, in the two apſides; the velocity in the circle in the higher apſis, and the velocity in the orbit'in the lower apſis. After the body is carried off at B by ĩts ſuperior velocity, the velocity in a circle afterwards gets the better, becauſe it doę” not decreaſe ſo quickly as the velocity in the orbit, and the body is made to move, in its aſcent, in a ſemi-ellipſe equal and ſimilarly ſituated to that which iĩt deſcribed in its deſcent. 8. The gravity indeed at B is greater than the gravity at a, in proportion as the ſquare of the diſtance is leſs. But the centrifugal force ariſing from the circular motion about s increaſes in a higher proportion, viZ. as the cubes of the diſtances decreaſe; for theſe centrifugal forces are in the direct proportion of the ſquares of the velocities and ther inverſe proportion of the diſtances, compounded together: the firſt of theſe is the inverſe proportion of the ſquares of the diſtances, and the two together compound the inverſe proportion of the cubes of the diſtances. The centrifugal forces, therefore, increaſe more quickly than the gravities; and though the gravities prevail in the higher part of the orbit, the centrifugal forces get the better in the lower part of it. The gravity prevailing in the higher apſis makes the body approach to s, the centrifugal force prevailing in the lower apſis makes the body recede from it; and, by their actions, the body for ever revolves from the one to the other. 9. It is eaſy to ſee from what we have ſaid, that the body can deſcend from the higher apſis to the lower, and aſcend again from the lower apſis to the higher, when the veſocities neceſſary to carry bodies in circles about the centre of attraction increaſe, in approaching to that centre, in a leſs proportion than the velocity of a body moving in an orbit A M B increaſes. For though the velocity in a circle in the greater diſtances exceed the velocĩty in the orbit, this atter, by increaſing more quickly as the diſtance decreaſes, gets the better of the other in the lower part of the orbit, and carries the body of again. But if the velocities by which circles can be deſcribed about the centre of attraction increaſe, in approaching to that centre, in a higher proportion, or in the ſame proportion, as the velocity in the orbit increaſes, then this latter having been ſuppoſed at a leſs than the former, it muſt always continue leſs than it, and never get the better of iĩt, ſo as to be able to carry off the body; and therefore, in all ſuch caſes, the body can never recede from the centre after it has once begun to approach to it, but muſt deſcend to diſtances leſs and leſs, till it fall into the centre. It approaches at a, becauſe its velocity is leſs than that which is requiſite to carry it in a circle there: its veIocity indeed increaſes as it deſcends to leſſer diſtances, but the velocities which would carry bodies in circles at theſe diſtances about s, increaſing alſo in as great a proportion, the velocity in the orbit muſt ſtill continue to be leſs than in theſe circles, and the body muſt ſtill continue to approach to the centre. 10. To fix the limit of theſe two caſes, we arę to conſider, that the velocities in an orbit, at A and B, are in the inverted proportion of the diſtances there from the centre of gravitation; and that, if the gravity increaſe as the cubes of the diſtances decreaſe, the vęlocities neceſſary to deſcribe circles at A and B are in the ſame inverted proportion of the diſtances at a and B from s. In this caſe, thereſore, the velocities in circles, and in the orbit at a and B, vary in the ſame proportion, and the ſame which exceeds at the one diſtance muſt exceed at the other; ſo that, for the ſame reaſon for which the body approached to s at a, it would approach to it at B, and if it receded from it at B, it muſt recede from it at a; that is, if it once begin to approach, it muſt always approach to s, and if it once begin to recede, it muſt always recede from it. This alſo appears from what we ſaid of the centrifugal force, which, in the ſame orbit, increaſes as the cube of the diſtance decreaſes; and sonſeques ly in the ſame proportion in which the gravity is ſuppoſed to increaſe in this caſe; ſo that of theſe two, which ever is ſuppoſed to prevail in any one apſid, the ſame muſt prevail in any other apſid, if ſuch could be aſigned; and the body muſt either deſcend continually to the centre, or riſe from it for ever. 11. If the gravity increaſe in a higher proportion than as the cubes of the diſtances from the centre of attraction decreaſe, then the velocities neceſſary to carry bodies in circles about that centre, in approaching to it, will increaſe in a higher proportion than the diſtances decreaſe; that is, in a higher proportion than the velocity in an orbit increaſes from A to B; ſo that as the velocity, in a circle at A exceeded the velocity in the orbit there, it will much more exceed it at 3B, and therefore the body, acted on by a gravity varying in ſuch a manner, muſt approach to the centre till it fall into iĩt, if it once begin to approach to it at a; and if it once begin to recede from it, it muſt continue to recede from it for ever. The higher the power of the diſtance is to which the gravity is reciprocally proportional, the body will deſcend in a leſs number of revolutions to the centre, in like circumſtances. If the gravity is reciprocally proportional to the cubes of the diſtances, the body will deſcend after an infinite number of revolutions. If the gravity increaſe as the 4th power of the diſtance decreaſes, and the body is projected at a with | velocity leſs than that which would carry it in a circle about s in proportion as/ 2 is leſs than V 3, the body will deſcribe a certain epiycloid about s, and fall into it after half a revolution. If the gravity increaſe as the 5th power of the diſtange decreaſes, and the velocity of the projection be to that which would carry it in a circle about the centre s as I is to / 2, it will deſcẽnd in a ſemicircle deſcribed on the diameter s a, and fall into the centre in a quarter of a revolution. If the gravity increaſe as the 7th power of the diſtance decreaſes, and theſe velocities be as 1 to v3, it will fall into the centre in 3 of a revolution. In general, if the gravity increaſe as the n3 power of the diſtance decreaſes, and the velocity of projection at a be to the velocity which would carry the body in a circle there, about s, as 1 to V I +Z, it will fall into the centre in the part of a revolution. If the gravity increaſe as the 345 power of the diſtance decreaſes, and the velocities be as I to V I + ,55, the body muſt fall into the centre after 50 revolutionss We cannot pretend to demonſtrate theſe things here, and have męntioned them only to illuſtrate this theory *, 12. If the gravity increaſe in a leſs proportion than that in which the cubes of the diſtances decreaſe, the velocities, neceſſary to carry bodies in circles about the centre s, will increaſe, in approaching to it, in a leſs proportion than the ſimple proportion in which the diſtances decreaſe, and therefore in a leſs proportion than the velocity in the orbit from a to B; ſo that, tho' the former exceed in the greater diſtances, the latter may exceed in the leſſer diſtances, and the body may conſequently deſcend from the higher apſis to the lower, and aſcend from the lower apſis to the higher by turns. The gravity may prevail over the centrifugal force in the higher parts of the orbit, but, increaſing more ſlowly in deſcending to the leſſer diſtances than the centrifugal force, it is overcome by it in the lower parts of the orbit, and the body is made to recede again to ĩts firſt diſtance. If the gravity increaſe as the cubes of the diſtances decreaſe, the body never can arrive at the lower apſis B. If the gravity increaſe as the ſquares of the diſtances decreaſe, the body will deſcend in a ſemi-ellipſe from the higher to the lower apſis in half a revolution. li 13. If the gravity increaſe in the reciprocal proportion of ſome power of the diſtance betwixt the ſquare and cube, the body will take more than half a revolution to deſcend from the higher to the lower apſis, the more the increaſe of gravity approaches to the reciprocal proportion of the cubes of the diſtances; for the velocity in the orbit will find the more difficulty to get the better of the motion that would carry the body in a circle, or the centrifugal force will with more difficulty get the better of the gravity. But if the gravity increaſe in proportion as ſome power of the diſtance leſs than the ſquare decreaſes, the velocities in circles increaſing leſs in approaching to the centre, the velocity in the orbit will the more eaſily prevail, and the centrifugal force will ſooner exceed the gravity; and therefore the body will deſcend to the lower apſis in leſs than half a revolution, and return tothe higher apſis in leſs than a complete revolution. From which it appears, that as the apſides are fixed in the regular courſe of gravity, that is, while ĩit increaſes as the ſquares of the diſtances decreaſe, they muſt be carried forwards, in the direction of motion of the body, when gravity varies in a higher proportion than that, and muſt be carried backwards with a contrãry motion when gravity varies leſs than in that proportionn. As a change from the proportion of the ſquares to that of cubes gives an infinite motion to the apſides, ſo that the body never arrives at either of them again; a very ſmall change in the courſe of gravity will produce a ſenſible motion in the apſides, and the Ieaſt change from the regular courſe of gravity muſt become very ſenſible, in a great many revolutions, by the motion of the apſides. From which we learn, that ſince the apſides of the planets have ſo ſmall a motion that ſome aſtronomers neglect it altogether, and doubt if there is indeed any ſuch motion at all, ve may conclude that their gravity muſt obſerve very accurately, in its variations, the law of the ſquares of the diſtances. 14. Our author, to reduce to a computation the motion of the apſides ariſing from a variation from the regular courſe of gravity, ſuppoſes with aſtronomers, that the body moves in an ellipſe that is carried at the ſame time with a regular motion about s, which, in an entire revolution, gives the motion of the apſides. In a quieſcent ellipſis, (Fig. 65.) the curvature at a and B being the ſame, the centripetal forces there were found, above, to follow the inverſe proportion of the ſquares of the diſtænces S 4, S B. Suppoſing that the body moves in the ellipſe a I b, while this ellipſe itſelf is carried about s with an angular motion, ſo that s in the moveable orbit being equal to s L in the fixed orbit, the angle A S I may be to a s L in a conſtant invariable proportion, ſuppoſe that of õ to ?; then the increments of theſe angles, while s L and sſ decreaſe equally, will obſerve the ſame conſtant proportion; and the an⸗ gular motions about s of two bodies I and L, revolving in the ſame time in theſe orbits, will be in the ſame proportion, as alſo the areas deſcribed by rays drawn from theſe bodies to s: ſo that if the bodies be projected together at A with velocities in the ſame proportion, and are acted on by the neceſſary centripetal forces, they will move in theſe orbits, and approach equally towards s, and arrive at I and L in the ſame time, The motion of approach to the centre being the ſame at equal diſtances from , and this motion being cauſed by the exceſs of their gravities above the centrifugal forces ariſing from their circular motions about s; the gravity vill exceed the centrifugal force in the one orbit by the ſame exceſs as in the other, and therefore the difference of the centrifugal forces muſt be the ſame as the difference of their gravities; ſo that, to find the gravity in the moveable orbit, we are to add to the gravity in the fixed orbit, at the ſame diſtance, the exceſs of the centrifugal force in the moveable orbit there, above the centrifugal force in the fixed orbit at the ſame diſtancee Theſe centrifugal forces are in a given proportion to each other, viæ. in that of the ſquares of the angular motions, or in the proportion of õ* to ??, and their difference muſt be in a given proportion to either; the ſame centrifugal forces, at different diſtances, are reciprocally as the cubes of the diſtances, as we ſhewed above, and their differences muſt vary in the ſame proportion: ſo that the difference of the gravities in the moveable and immoveable, muſt vary in the reciprocal proportion of the cubes of the diſtances. 15. If the ellipſe is carried about s with a progreſſive motion, that is in the direction of the motion of the body, the angular motion of the body in the moveable orbit ĩs greater than in the fixed orbit, and the centrifugal force, and conſequently the gravity is greater. But if the ellipſe is carried about s with a retrograde motion, the angular motion in the moveable orbit, and conſequently the gravity, is leſſer. In the firſt caſe, the difference of the centrifugal forces is to be added to the gravity in the fixed orbit, to find the gravity in the revolving orbit at the ſame diſtance from s. In the latter caſe, the difference of the centrifugal forces is to be ſubtracted from the gravity in the fixed orbit, to find the gravity in the revolving orbit at the ſame diſtance from s. 16. The force in the fixed ellipſe increaſes as the ſquare of the diſtance decreaſes; add to this a force that increaſes as the cube of the diſtance decreaſes, and the ſum muſt increaſe in a higher proportion than that of the ſquares of the diſtances, but never in ſo high a proportion as their cubes. A bod therefore that moves in an ellipſe that has itſelf a progreſſive motion about s, muſt be acted on by a force that varies according to ſome power of the diſtance higher than the ſquare, but leſs than the cube. The greater this motion of the ellipſe is, the greater is the exceſs of the centrifugal force in the moveable ellipſe above that in the fixed ellipſe, at the ſame diſtance froms; and the greater is the quantity that varies as the cube of the diſtance in the aggregate, in proportion to that which varies in ĩt as the ſquare of the diſtance only; and the more does the proportion of the aggregate vary from that of the ſquares towards that of the cubes of the diſtances. In ſuch a moveable ellipſe, the gravity, which is as the aggregate, cannot be ſaid to vary in the proportion of any one power of the diſta;ce accurately; but if the ellipſe is very near to a circle, the proportion of the aggregate will be found to vary very nearly as a certain power of the diſtance, and the motion of the ellipſe may be adjuſted ſo as that the aggregate may vary, very nearly, as any power of the diſtance that can be aſſigned betwixt the ſquares and the cubes. 17. If from a force that increaſes as the ſquare of the diſtance decreaſes, you ſubduct a force that increaſes in a higher proportion, viæ. as the cube of the diſtance decreaſcs, the remainder muſt increaſe in a leſs proportion than that in which the ſquare of the diſtance decreaſles. A body, therefore, that moves in an ellipſe which revolves itſelf at the ſame time with a retrograde motion about s, muſt be acted on by a gravity that varies in a leſs proportion than the ſquare of the diſtance; and the greater the motion of the ellipſe is, the gravity will vary in a leſs proportion, ſo that if- the motion of the ellipſe be ſufficiently great, the gravity may decreaſe inſtead of increaſing as the diſtance decreaſes. By ſuppoſing the orbit near to a circle, the motion of the ellipſe may be adjuſted, that the remainder may vary according to any proportion leſs than that of the ſquares of the diſtances. 18. Our author has made an improvement of this, to judge of the motion of the apſides in any law of gravity: for, by ſuppoſing the gravity in the moveable ellipſe, when near to a circle, computed from the foreſaid principles, to vary according to any given law, he determines what muſt be the motion of the ellipſe, or of the apſides, in conſequence of this ſuppoſition; or, the motion of the ellipſe being given, he determines what is the power of the diſtance according to which the gravity varies, nearly, when the ellipſe revolves with that given motion. 19. We have ſaid as much as our deſign vill allow us, of the motions ariſing from gravity, that are performed in regular revolutions from the one apſis to the other; where the diſtance from the centre of gravitation varies indeed, but ſo as to keep within certain limits, betwixt which the body conſtantly revolves; and we have ſhewn that the motion * See Princip. Lib. I. Sect. ę. of the body may be of this kind, if the gravity decreaſe in a leſs proportion than that in which the cubes of the diſtances from the centre increaſee But the motion of the body is not always of this kind, in theſe caſes; for if the velocity of projection at æ is ſufficiently great, the body will, in ſome of theſe caſes, recede for ever from the centre of gravitation, and never arrive at the higher apſis . We have already ſhewed that if the gravity decreaſe as the cubes, or any higher powers, of the diſtance increaſe, and the velocity at B exceed, in the leaſt, that which would carry the body in a circle there, about the centre of gravitation; it will recede froms for ever. If the gravity decreaſe in a leſs proportion than that of the cubes of the increaſing diſtances, it may be projected at B with a motion which will ſtill carry it for ever from the centre, provided the gravity decreaſe in a proportion greater than that in which the diſtances increaſe: for the limit here is the inverſe ſimple proportion of the diſtances. If gravity vary more, the body may be carried off for ever from the centre by a finite motion of projection; but if the gravity varies in that proportion, or in any leſs proportion, then no finite force will be able to make the body move in ſuch a manner, as to recede from the centre s for ever: but the body in theſe caſes muſt always revolve betwixt the two apſides. 20. In order to ſee this, e may firſt ſuppoſe a body to be projected perpendicularly to the horizon, that is acted on by a gravity decreaſing in a higher proportion than that of the increaſing diſtances, and if the force of projection be ſufficiently great, it will riſe for ever with a motion continually retarded by the action of its gravity, but that ſhall never be aſtogether deſtroyed by theſe actions; becauſe they decreaſe in 7uch a manner that the ſum of an infinite number of them amounts to a finite quantity, 21. The ſame law of gravity is the limit betwixt the caſes of infinite aſcents, in curvilineal motions and in rectilineal: for our author has ſhewn, that if one body move in a curve, and another aſcend or deſcend in a right line, acted on by the ſame gravity, and their velocities be equal in any equal altitudes, they will be equal in all other equal altitudes *: and ſince the gravity of the body projected upwards in a vertical line, with a certain aſſignable force, is not able to bring it back again; it will not be able to make it return, if it was projected with the ſame force obliquely upwards, ſo as to move in a curve. For the centrifugal force, ariſing from the motion of rotation abont s, leſſens the effect of the gravity, and makes it leſs capable to deſtroy the motion of æ Suppoſe the velocities of bodies L and ? ſFig. 66.) to be equal at L and P, at equal diſtances s L, s ?; and let them deſcribe the very ſmall lines L /, ? ꝓ, ſo that s ꝓ being equal to s , and 4 Nl a circular arc deſcribed from the centre s meeting s L in N, L N muſt be equal to ? 5. The gravity of L toward s may be reſolved into two forces, one of which may be repreſented by L ꝶ, and acts in the direction of the tangent L r, the other in a direction R s perpendicular to the tangent or the direction of the body’s motion. The latter has no eroũ in accelerating its motion, being perpendicular to iĩt, and the former is to the gravity, as L r is tos L, or as L N is to LI. The motion of the body æ ĩs accelerated by its whole gravity, ſo that the forces which accelerate the bodies L and P are to each other, as L N (or ? 2) to L I; but the velocities at L and ? having been equal, the times in which L  and ? ꝓ are deſcribed are in the proportion of the ſpaces L land P 4; ſo that tho the hody I. ĩs accelerated by a leſo force in deſcending to , the time of its acceleration ĩs greater in the ſame proportion: from which it appears that their accelerations are equal in deſcribing theſe ſpaces, and their velocities conſequently equal at ſ and 3. The velocities thereſore of theſe bodies muſt be equal in all equal altitudes. See Princip. Matb. Lib. I. Prop. 40. ' aſcent in this caſe, than in the caſe of a perpendicular aſcent. Therefore if gravity varies in the reciprocal proportion of ſome power of the diſtance higher than unit, a body may run out to infinity in its orbit, if it be projected with a certain force, 22. If this force is the ſame which it would acquire by falling from an infinite height, it will go off in a curve of the parabolic kind. But if it is projected with a greater force than that which would be acquired even by an infinite deſcent, the curve will be of the hyperbolic kind. If it is projected with the ſame velocity which it would acquire by falling from an infinite height (aſſuming different laws of gravity, but other circumſtances ſimilar) it will go off to infinity after a greater or leſs part of a revolution, or after a greater or ſmaller number of revolutions, according as the power of the diſtance, which is reciprocally proportional to the gravity, is greater or leſs. The limit here ĩs a quarter of a revolution from the apſis, or the place where the direction of the body’s motion is perpendicular to the line drawn to the centre; for it muſt always take more than that to get off from the apſis to an infinite diſtance. If gravity obſerve the reciprocal ſeſquiplicate proportion of the diſtance, then the body will go off in 7 of a revolution. If ĩt obſerve the reciprocal duplicate, it will go off for ever in a parabola, in half a revolution. If it obſerves the reciprocal power of the diſtance, it will go off in a complete revolution. But if gravity obſerve the reciprocal triplicate proportion of the diſtance, and the body be projected oblique to the radius, it will go off in an infinite number of revolutions . 23. If  In general, if gravity vary as the m power of ithe diſtance reciprocally, and-the body Is projected obliquely upwarda with 23. If gravity decteaſe in a leſs proportion than the reciprocal ſimple proportion of the diſtances, and a body is projected from the apſis with any finite force whatſoever, it cannot riſe for ever; but will have the ſame velocĩty at any diſtance, as it would have had at the ſame diſtance, ſuppoſing it had been projected at a directly upwards with the ſame force of projection: and ſince any finite force would have been deſtroyed in the perpendicular, if the body move in a curve it muſt return again, and after paſing the higher apſis, deſcend again to the lower apſis, tho' that apſis be not in the ſame place as before. If gravity increaſe as the diſtance increaſes, . a fortiori the body will never be able to aſcend to an infinite diſtancee. Theſe obſervations ſew the limits of the various ſorts of motions, that can proceed from various laws of gravity. ul C H A P. IV. Of the motion of the moon. I. E have explained the motions of the bodies in the ſolar ſyſtem, from gravity, and have taken notice of ſome inequalities or errors in their motions, that ariſe from the ſame principle. a force that is to that which would carry it in a circle as 1 to v ni, Z it will riſe for ever ſrom the centre, and go off ĩn the / part of a revolution or in the 3 n part of the revolution. Suppoſing  to be the exceſs of3 above the number m. If the gravity follow the reciprocal proportion of the 2 power of the diſtance, the body will go off in 50 revolutions. See Fluxions,  416, & ſeq. But the manifold irregularities that are producẽd by it in the motion of the moon deſerve particularly to be conſidered, as ſhe is the neareſt to us in the ſyſtem, and as great advantages might be deduced from her motions, if they could be ſubjected to exact computation. Formerly they who built ſyſtems had great difficulties to reconcile their principles with the phænomena: our author anticipates obſervations, and the: more perfect our knowledge of the motions in the ſyſtem ſhall become, the more will this philoſophy be eſteemed. Poſterity will ſee its excellence yet more fully than we do, when the celeſtial motions ſhall be determined more accurately, by a ſeries of long-continued exact obſervations, 2. To give the principles of our author's computations on this perplexed ſubject, in as plain a manner as poſſible, we muſt recollect what has been already obſerved; that if the ſun acted equally on the carth and moon, and always in parallel lines, this action would ſerve only to reſtrain them in ther annual motions round the ſun, and no way aſfect their actions on each other, or their motions about their common centre of gravity. In that caſe; if they were both allowed to fall directly towards the ſun, they would fall equally, and their reſpective ſituations would be no way affected by their deſcending equally towards it. We might then conceive them as in à plane, every part of which being equally acted on by the ſun, the whole plane vould deſcend towards the ſun, but the reſpective motions of the earth and moon would be the ſame in this plane as if it was quieſcent. Suppoſing then this plane, and all in it, to have the annual motion imprinted on it, it would move regularly round the ſun, while the earth and moon would move in it, with reſpect to each other, as if the plane was at reſt, without any irrregularities. But becauſe the moon is nearer the ſun in one half of her orbit than the earth is, and in the other half of her orbit is at a greater diſtance than the earth from the ſun, and the power of gravity is always greater at a leſs diſtance; it follows, that in one half of her orbit the moon is more attracted than the earth towards the ſun, and in the other half leſs attracted than the earth; and hence irregularities neceſſarily ariſe in the motions of the moon, the exceſs, in the firſt caſe, and the defect, in the ſecond, of the attraction, becoming a force that diſturbs her motion: add to this, that the action of the ſun on the earth and moon is not directed in parallel lines, but in lines that meet in the centre oſ the ſun. 3. To ſee the effects of theſe powers, let us ſuppoſe that the projectile motions of the earth and moon vere deſtroyed, and that they were allowed to fall freely towards the ſun. If the moon was in conjunction with the ſun, or in that part of her orhir which is neareſt to him, the moon would be more attracted than the earth, and fall with greater velocity towards the ſun; ſo that the diſtance of the moon from the earth would be increaſed in the fall. If the moon was in oppoſition, or in the part of her orbit which is fartheſt from the ſun, ſhe would be leſs attracted than the earth by the ſun, and would fall with a leſs velocity towards the ſun than the earth, and the moon would be left behind by the carth; ſo that the diſtance of the moon from the earth would be increaſed, in this caſe alſo. If the moon was in one of the quarters, then the earth and moon being both attracted towards the centre of the ſun, they would both directly deſcend towards that centre, and by approaching to the ſame centre, they would neceſſarily approach at the ſame time to each Chap. 4. PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES. 341 each other, and their diſtance from one another would be diminiſhed, in this calee. Now, whereever the action of the ſun would increaſe their diſtance, if they were allowed to fall towards the ſun, there we may be ſure the ſuns action, by endeavouring to ſeparate them, diminiſhes their gravity to each other3 wherever the action of the ſun would diminiſh their diſtance, there the ſun's action, by endeavouring to make them approach to one another, increãſes their gravity to each other: that is, in the conjunction and oppoſition, their gravity towards each other is diminiſhed by the action of the ſun; but in the two quarters it is increaſed by the action of the ſun. To prevent miſtaking this matter, it muſt be remembered, it is not the total action of the ſun on them that diſturbs their motions, it is only that part of its action by which it tends to ſeparate them, in the firſt caſe, to a greater diſtance from each other; and that part of its action by which it tends to bring them nearer to each other, in the ſecond caſe, that has any effect on their motions with reſpect to each other. The other, and the far more conſiderable, part has no other effect but to retain them in their annual courſe, which they perform together about the ſun. 4. In conſidering, therefore, the effects of the ſuns action on the motions of the earth and moon vith reſpect to each other, we need only attend to the exceſs of its action on the moon above its action on the earth, in their conjunction; and we muſt conſider this exceſs as drawing the moon from the earth towards the ſun in that place. In the oppoſition, we need only conſider the exceſs of the action of the ſun on the earth above its action on the moon, and we muſt conſider this exceſs as drawing the moon from the earth, in this place, in a direction oppoſite to the former, that is, towards the place oppoſite to where the ſun is; becauſe we conſider the carth as quieſcent, and refer the motion, and all its irregularities to the moon. In the quarters, we conſider the action of the ſun as adding ſomething to the gravity of the moon towards the earth. 5. Suppoſe the moon ſetting out from the quarter that precedes the conjunction, with a velocity that would make her deſcribe an exact circle round the earth, if the ſun's action had no effect on her; and becauſe her gravity is increaſed by that action, ſhe muſt deſcend towards the earth, and move vithin that circle: her orbit, there, will be more curve than otherwiſe it would have been; becauſe this addition to her gravity will make her fall farther at the end of an arc below the tangent drawn at the other end of it; her motion will be accelerated by it, and will continue to be accelerated tll ſhe arrives at the enſuing conjunction; becauſe the direction of the action of the ſun upon her, during that time, makes an acute angle with the direction of her motionn. At the conjunction, her gravity towards the earth being diminiſhed by the action of the ſun, her orbit will be leſs curve there, for that reaſon; and ſhe will be carried farther from the earth as ſhe moves to the next quarter; and, becauſe the action of the ſun makes then an obtuſe angle with the direction of her motion, ſhe vill be retarded by the ſame degrees by which ſhe was accelerated before. 6. Thus ſhe vwill deſcend a little towards the earth, as ſne moves from the firſt quarter towards the corjunctioh, and aſcend from it, as ſhe moves ſrom the corjunction to the next quarter. The action which diſturbs her motion will have a like, in the other half of her orbit, I mean that half of it which is fartheſt from the ſun: ſhe will proceed from the quarter that follows the conjunction with an accelerated motion to the oppoſition, approaching a little towards the earth, becauſe of the addition made to her gravity, at that quarter, from the action of the ſun; and receding from it again, as ſhe goes on from the oppoſition to the quarter from which we ſuppoſed her to ſet outt. The areas deſcribed in equal times by a ray drawn from the moon to the earth will not be equal, but will be accelerated by the conſpiring action of the ſun, as ſne moves towards the conjunction or oppoſition from the quarters that precede them; and will be retarded by the ſame action, as ſhe moves from the conjunction or oppoſition to the quarters that ſucceed them. 7. Our author has computed the quantities of theſe irregularities from their cauſes. He finds, that the force added to the gravity of the moon in her quarters, is to the gravity with which ſhe would revolve in a circle about the earth, at her preſent mean diſtance, if the ſun had no effect on her, as 1 to 178%. He finds the force ſubducted from her gravity, in the conjunctions and oppoſitions, to be couble of this quantity, and the area deſcribed in a given time in the quarters to be to the area deſcribed in the ſame time in the conjunctions and oppoſitions, as 10973 to 11073. He finds, that, in ſuch an orbit, her diſtance from the earth in her quarters, would be to her diſtance in the conjunctions and oppoſitions, as 70 to 6q. 8. The moon does not move in the ſame plane, round the earth, in which the earth moves round the ſun, but in a plane that is inclined to it in an angle of about 5 degrees: and hence it is that the centre of the moon appears to us to trace a different circle from the ecliptic, the circle which the centre of the ſun appears to deſcribe in the heavens. Theſe circles cut each other in two oppoſite points, that are called by aſtronomers the nodes of the moon; at the greateſt diſtance from the nodes, theſe circles are ſeparated from each other by about five degrees. The eclipſes of the ſun and moon depend on their diſtances from theſe nodes, at the time of the new and full moon; for, if the change of the moon happen when ſhe is near one of the nodes, ſhe eclipſes the ſun; and, if the moon is full, near one of the nodes, he muſt fall into the ſhadow of the earth, and there become eclipſed. Aſtronomers have at all times been very attentive to the ſituation of the nodes, in order to calculate theſe eclipſes, which have been always a phænomenon much conſidered by them. The nodes are not fixed in the ſame part of the heavens, but are found to move over all the ſigns in the ecliptic, with a retrograde motion, in about eighteen or nincteen years. 9. Sir Iſanc Newton has not only ſiewed that this motion ariſes from the action of the ſun, but has calculated, with great ſcill, all the elements and varieties in this motipn, from its cauſe. We called theſe points the moon's nodes, in which her orbit cuts the plane in which the earth revolves abour the ſun, and the line that joins the points we call the line of the nodes. We ſay the motion of the nodes is direct when they procecd in the ſame way as the moon moves in her orbit, viæ. from weſt to eaſt, according to the order of the ſigns Aries, Taurus, &c. in the ecliptic; and we ſay their motion is re; trograde, when they move witha motion contrary ũ that of the mon, or from eaſt to weſt, contrary to the order of the ſigns. We conceive the plane of the moon’s motion to paſs always through the centre of the earth and the centre of the moon, and to be a plane in which the right line joining their centres, and the right line that is the direction of the moon’s motion, or the tangent of her orbit, are always found. It is certain, that if the earth and moon were always acted on equally by the ſun, they would deſcend equally toward the ſun; the plane determined always by theſe two lines, would deſcend with them, keeping always parallel to itſelf, ſo that the moon would appear to us to revolve in the ſame plane conſtantly, with reſpect to the earth. But the inequalities in the action of the ſun, deſcribed above, vill bring the moon out of this plane, to that ſide of the plane on which the ſun is, in the half of her orbit that is neareſt the ſun, and toward the other ſide, in the half of her orbit that js fartheſt from the ſun. 10. From which we have this general rule for judging of the effect of the ſun on the nodes; that while the moon is in the half of her orbit that is neareſt the ſun, the node towards which ſhe is moving is made to move towards the conjunction with the ſun; and while the moon is in the half of her orbit which is fartheſt from the ſun, the node towards which ſie is moving is made to move towards the oppoſition: but when the nodes are in conjunction with the ſun, its action has no effect upon them. In the ĩrſt caſe, the moon is brought into a direction which is on the ſame ſide, as the ſun is, of that direction which ſhe would follow of herſelf: and the interſection of a plane paſſing through rhis direction, and through the centre of the earth, will cut the ecliptic, on that ſide towards junction, than if there was no action of the ſun to diſturb her motion. In the other caſe, the action of the ſun has a contrary direction, and for the ſame reaſon makes the enſuing node move towards the oppoſition. When the line of the nodes produced paſſes thro the ſun, then the ſun, being in the plane of the moon’s motion, has no effect to bring her to either ſide; and therefore, in that caſe, the nodes have no motion at al. 11. From this general rule, it appears, that if you ſuppoſe the nodes to be in the quarters a and c, (Fig. 67.) after the moon ſets out from the node a, that is, in the quarter preceding the conjunction B, the enſuing node c moves towards the conjunction B, and is therefore retrograde; becauſe it moves in a direction oppoſite to that in which the moon moves; and, in all this revolution of the moon, the nodes are manifeſtly retrograde; for, after the moon paſſes the quarter c that ſucceeds the conjunction, then the enſuing node A moves towards the oppoſition D, ſo that the nodes are, in that half of her orbit alſo, retrograde. 12. Suppoſe the nodes in the ſituation N n, ſo as one of them may be between the quarter a and the enſuing conjunction B, while the other node n falls on the oppoſite point of the moons circle, between the ſubſequent quarter c and the oppoſition D. In this caſe, while the moon moves from a to N, the node N moves towards the conjunction B (by the general principle in § 10.) and therefore its motion is direct. While the moon moves from N to c, the enſuing node n moves towards the conjunction B, and therefore is retrograde; and becauſe the arc N c exceeds A N, the retrograde motion exceeds the direct motionn. While the moon moves from o to æ, the enſuing node n moves towards the oppoſition b, and the motion of the nodes is then direct. But while the moon moves from æ to 4, the enſuing node N moves towards the oppoſition D, and then the motion of the nodes being contrary to the motion of the moon, their motion is retrograde; and becauſe the arc n a exceeds n c, it is apparent that the motion is more retrograde than direct. 13. When (Fig. 68.) one node N is between the conjunction B and the enſuing quarter c, while the moon moves from a to N, the enſuing node N moves towards the conjunction B, and therefore is retrorade: while the moon moves from N to c, the enſuing node n moves towards the conjunction, and is direct. But as the arc a N exceeds N c, the retrograde motion of the nodes muſt exceed the direct motion. While the moon moves from c to n, the motion of the enſuing node is towards the oppoſition b, and is therefore retrogradee While the moon moves from n to a, the enſuing node N moves towards the oppoſition D, and therefore is direct. But, as the arc c n exceeds a n, it follos, that the retrograde motion exceeds the direct motion. It appears, therefore, that in every revolution of the moon, the retrograde motion of the nodes exceeds the direct motion, excepting only when the line of the nodes paſſes through the ſun, in which caſe there is no motion of the nodes at all. We ſee then, how, from the principle of gravity, the nodes of the moon are made t⸗ recede every year. Our author has determined the quantity * of this retrograde motion in every revolution of the moon, and agree very well with the obſervations of aſtronomers *. 15. The action of the ſun diminiſhes the gravity of the moon towards the earth, in the conjunctions and oppoſitions, more than it adds to it in the quarters, and, by diminiſhing the force which retains the moon in her orbit, it increaſes her diſtance from the earth and her periodic time: and becauſe the earth and moon are nearer the ſun in their perihelium than in their aphelium, and the ſun acts with a greater force there, ſo as to ſubduct more from the moons gravity towards the earth; iĩt follows, that the moon muſt revolve at a greater diſtance, and take a longer time to finiſh her revolution in the perihelium of the earth, than in the aphelium; and this alſo is conformable to obſervation. 16. There is another remarkable irregularity in the moons motion, that alſo ariſes from the action  To make the foregoing account of the motion of the moons nodes ſtill clearer, we have added Fig. 69, ſPlate VI.) in which, the plane of the ſcheme repreſenting that of the ecliptic, s is the ſun, æ the centre of the earth, L the moon in her orbit D N n3 N n is the line of the nodes paſing between the quadrature and the moon's place L, in her laſt quarter. Let now L æ, any part of L s, repreſent the exceſs of the ſun's action at L, above his action at r, and this being reſolved into the force L r, perpendicular to the plane of the moons orbit, and P ær parallel to it, tis the former only that has any eſſect to alter the poſition of the orbit, and in this it is wholly exerted. Its effcct is twofold; (1.) It diminiſhes its inclination, by a motion which we may conceive as performed round the diameter o 4, to which L T is perpendicular. (2.) Being compounded with the moon's tangential motion at L, iĩt gives it an intermediate direction L ?; thro' which, and the centre of the earth, a plane being drawn muſt meet the ecliptic nearer the conjunction c than before: and in the ſame manner, the other caſes are explained. of the ſun: I mean, the progreſſive motion of the apſides. The moon deſcribes an ellipſe about the centre of the earth, having one of the foci in that centre. Her greateſt and leaſt diſtances from the earth are in the apſides, or extremities of the longer axis of the ellipſe. This is not found to point always to the ſame place in the heavens, but to move with a progreſſive motion forwards, ſo as to finiſh a revolution round the earth's centre in about nine years. To underſtand the reaſon of this motion of the apſides, ve muſt recollect what was ſhewed above, that if the gravity of a body decreaſed leſs as the diſtance increaſes, than according to the regular courſe of gravity, the body would deſcend ſooner from the higher to the lower apſis, than in half a revolution; and therefore the apſis would recede in that caſe, for it would move in a contrary direction to the motion of the body, meeting it in its motion. But if the gravity of the body ſhould decreaſe more as the diſtance increaſes than according to the regular courſe of gravity, that is, in a higher proportion than as the ſquare of the diſtance increaſes, the body would take more than half a revolution to move from the higher to the lower apſis; and therefore, in that caſe, the apſides would have a progreſſive motion in the ſame direction as the body. In the quarters, the ſun's action adds to the gravity of the moon, and the force it adds is greater, as the diſtance of the moon from the earth is greater, ſo that the action of the ſun hinders her gravity towards the earth, from decreaſing as much while the diſtance increaſes, as it ought to do according to the regular courſe of gravity; and therefore, while the moon is in the quarters, her apſides muſt recede. In the conjunction ard oppoſition, the action of the ſun ſubducts from the gravity of the moon towards the earth, and ſubducts the more the greater her diſtance from the earth is, ſo as to make her gravity decreaſe more as her diſtance increaſes, than according to the regular courſe of gravity; ãnd therefore, in this caſe, the apſides are in a progreſiive motion. Becauſe the action of the ſun ſubducts more in the conjunctions and oppoſitions from her gravity, than it adds to it in the quarters, and, in general, diminiſhes more than it augments her gravity; hence it is that the progreſſive motion of the apſides exceeds the retrograde motion; and therefore, the apſides are carried round according to the order of the ſigns. 17. Thus the various irregularities of the moon's motion are explained from gravity: and from this theory, with the aſſiſtance of a long ſeries of accurate obſervations, her motion may be at length reduced ſo exactly to computation, and her appulſes to the fixed ſtars, over which ſhe paſſes in her courſe, may be predicted with ſo much accuracy, as to afford, on many occaſions, an opportunity to navigators, to diſcover their longitude at ſea. CH AP. V. Of the path of a ſecondary, planet upon an immoveable plane; with an illuſtration of Sir Iſaac Newtons account of the motions of the ſatellites, from the theory of gravity*. N deſcribing the motions of the ſolar ſyſtem, it I is uſual to conſider the primary planets, as revolving in immoveable planes, but to refer the motions of the ſatellites to planes that are carried along with their primaries about the ſun. Sir Iſaac Newton follows the ſame method, in accounting for their motions from the theory of gravity: by this analyſis, the explication of the motions themſelves, and of the powers that produce them, is rendered more ſimple and eaſy, than if we ſhould refer the motion of the ſatellite to an immoveable plane, and contemplate only the path deſcribed by it, in conſequence of ſo compounded a motion, in abſolute ſpace. The properties, however, of this path are more ſimple than perhaps will be expected on a ſuperficial conſideration of it; and the referring of the motion of the ſatellite to it, may be of uſe on ſome occaſions, particularly for reſolving the difficulties ſome have found to underſtand Sir Iſan: Newtons account of the motions of the ſatellites, from gravity. This path is, in ſome caſes, concave towards the ſun throughout; in other caſes, the part of it neareſt * The followlng chapter, as belonging properly to this place, 7s inſerted from a letter of the author, to his learned friend Dr. Benjamin Hoadley, phyſician to his Majeſty's houſchold. the ſun is convex towards the ſun, and the reſt is concave. An inſtance of the former we have in the moon, of the latter in the ſatellites of the ſuperior planets. The force that bends the courſe of the ſatellite into a curve, when the motion is referred to an immoveable plane, is, at the conjunction, the difference of its gravity towards the ſun, and of its gravity towards the primaryg. When the former prevails over the latter, the force that bends the courſe of the ſatellite tends towards the ſun; conſequently, the concavity of the path is towards the ſun: and this is the caſe of the Moon, as will appear afterwards. When the gravity towards the primary exceeds the gravity towards the ſun, at the conjunction, then the force that bends the courſe of the ſatellite tends towards the primary, and therefore towards the oppoſition of the ſun; conſequently the path is there convex towards the ſun: and this is the caſe of the ſatellites of fupiterr When theſe two forces are equal, the path has, at the conjunction, what mathematicians call a point of rectitude; in which caſe, however, the path is concave towards the ſun throughout. Becauſe the gravity of the moon towards the ſun is found to be greater, at the conjunction, than her gravity towards the earth, ſo that the point of equal attraction, where thoſe two powers would ſuſtain each other, falls then between the moon and earth, ſome * have apprehended that either the parallax of the ſun is very diſferent from that which is aſſigned by aſtronomers, or that the moon ought neceſſarily to abandon the earth. This apprehenſion may be æSee Coſmotheoria puerilis. eaſily removed, by attending to what has been ſhewn by Sir Iſanc Newton, and iĩs illuſtrated by vulgar experiments concerning the motions of bodies about one another, that are all acted upon by a third force in the ſame direction. Their relative motions, not being in the leaſt diſturbed by this third force, if it act equally upon them in parallel lines; as the relative motions of the ſhips in a fleet, carried away by a current, are no way affected by it, if it act equally upon them; or as the rotation of a bullet, or bomb, about its axis, while it is projected in the air, or the figure of a drop of falling rain, are not at all affected by the gravity of the particles of which they are made up, towards the earth. It is to the inequality of the actions of the ſun upon the earth and moon, and the want of paralleliſm in the directions of theſe actions, only, that we are to aſcribe the irregularities in the motion of the inoon. But it may contribute towards removing this diſficulty, to obſtrve, that if the abſolute velocity of the moon, at the conjunction, was leſs than that which is requiſite to carry a body in a circle there around the ſun, ſuppoſing this body to be acted on by the fame force which acts there on the moon, (i. e. by the exceſs of her gravity towards the ſun, above her gravity towards the earth, then the moon would, indeed, abandon the earth. For, in that caſe, the moon having leſs velocity than would be neceſſary to prevent her from deſcending within that circle, ſhe would approach to the ſun, and recede from the carth. But tho' the abſolute velocity of the moon, at the conjunction, be leſs than the velocity of the earth in the annual orbit, yet her gravity towards the ſun is ſo much diminiſhedd by her gravity towards the earth, that her abſolute velocity is ſlill much ſuperior to that which is requiſite to carry a body in a circle, there, about the ſun, that is acted on by the remaining force only. Therefore, from the moment of the conjunction, the moon is carried without ſuch a circle, receding continually from the ſun to greater and greater diſtances, till ſhe arrive at the oppoſition; where, being acted on by the ſum of thoſe two gravities, and her velocity being now leſs than vhat is requiſite to carry a body in r7 circle, there, about the ſun, that is acted on by a force equal to that ſum, the moon thence begins to approach to the ſun againn. Thus ſhe recedes from the ſun and approaches to it by turns, and in every month her path has two apſides, a peribelium at the conjunction, and an aphelium at the oppoſition; between which ſne is always carried, in a manner ſimilar to that in which the primary planets revolve between their apſides. The planet recedes from the ſun at the perihelium, becauſe its velocity, there, is greater than that with which a circle could be deſcribed about the ſun at the ſame diſtance, by the ſame centripetal force; and approaches towards she ſun from the aphelium, becauſe its velocity there is leſs than is requiſite, to carry it in a circle, at that diſtance, about the ſun. See my Treatiſe of Fluxions, Article 447. Tho the path of the moon be concave towards the ſun throughout, its curvature is very unequal: it is leaſt at each lower apſide or conjunction, and greateſt at each higher apſide or oppoſition. The path of a ſatellite of Jupiter has likewiſe two apſides, in the part which is deſcribed every ſynodic revolution: but in the lower apſide, the convexity is towards the ſun; and it has likewiſe two points or contrary flexure in every ſuch part*. : See the note to Corol. 1. Prop. II. below. By conſidering this path, we ſhall arrive at the ſame concluſions which Sir Iſauc Newton derived, more briefly from the laws of motion; that if the ſolar action was the ſame on the ſatellite and on the primary, and in the ſame direction, the motion of the ſatellite around the primary, would be the ſame as if the ſun was away. This will appear from the following propoſitions, where we ſuppoſe the orbits of the primary about the ſun, and of the ſatellite about the primary, to be both circular, and the motions in theſe orbits to be uniform and inthe ſame plane. PROPOSITION I. Fig.70. Plate VI. The path of the ſatellite, on an immoveable plane, is the epicycloid that is deſcribed by a given point in the plane of a circle, which revolves on a circular baſe, having ils centre in the centre of the ſun, and its diameter in the ſame proportion to the diameter of the revolving circle, as the periodic time of the primary about the ſun, to the time of ihe ſynodic revolution of the ſatellite about the primary: ihe tangent of the path is perpendicular to the right line that joins the ſatellite 10 the contact of the two circles: and the abſolute velocily of the ſatellite is always as its diſtance from that contacl. Let T denote the periodic time of the primary about the ſun, ? the periodic time of the ſatellite abou: the primary. Let s repreſent the ſun, a a the orbit of the primary; upon the radius as, take A E tO A S as t is tor. From the centre s deſcribe the circle E e Z, and from the centre a the circle EM F. Let this circle E M F revolve on the other E e 2, as its baſe: then a point L, taken on the Chap. 5. PuILOSOPHICAL DiscovERIBS. 357 plane of the circle E M F, at the diſtance a L, equal to the diſtance of the ſatellite from the primary, ſhall deſcribe the path of the ſatellite. For ſuppoſe the circle æM F to move into the ſituation e m f, the point a to a, L tol, and let a L and a l, produced, meet E M F and e m f, in M and m. Upon the arc æem take e r /E M, then the angle e a r= E AM. Let ar meet the circle c l d, deſcribed from the centre a with the diſtance æ I, in ꝗ; and beoauſe e a E A L, the angle e a q repreſents the elongation of the ſatellite from the ſun at its firſt place L. Becauſe em (er+rm) me ? +E M and  r =æE M, it follows that r m e E; conſequently the angle ram: es E: : SE: AE:: T1: 1; or, as the angular velocity of the ſatellite from the ſun, to the angular velocity of the primary about the ſun. But ES æ is the angle deſcribed by the primary about the ſun, conſequently r a m, or q a l, is the ſimultaneous increment of the elongation of the ſatellite from the ſun; Iis its place when the primary comes to a; and the epicycloid deſcribed by / is the path of the ſatellite. Becauſe the circle ?æM F moves on the point E, the direction of the motion of any point L is perpendicular to E L; or the tangent of the path at any point L is perpendicular to ? L. The velocity of any point L is as its diſtance E L; and, the motion of the primary a being ſuppoſed uniform and repreſented by E 4, the velocity of the ſatellite ſhall be repreſented by E L. P RO P O SITION II Upon A s take A B: AS: : tt: TT (or a B: A E:: AE: AS); upon the diameter  B deſcribe the cirche E & B meeting E L in B, tate L o a third proportional to L X and L E, on the ſame ſide of L with L X; and o ſhall be the centre of the curvature at L of the path, and L o the ray of curvature. Becauſe E L and e l are perpendicular to the path at the points L and , let them be produced, and their ultimate interſection o ſhall be the centre of curvature at L. Produce q¢æ till it meet L æ inv, join s v, and the angle s e v=qe a L E A =æS3 EV; conſequently the angle e vE =fs E, the angle : vs=es E, and the angle æ vs =E es, and s v is ultimately perpendicular to E o. Now the angle æ o f is ultimately to E Ve (SE se) as E V o E o, that is (becauſe E v: EX: : ES: EB:: AS. AE) as EKxXAS to E Ox a E. But the angular motion of E L being equal to the angular motion of ? a, while the circle I M F turns on the point E, L El is therefore ultimately equal to A E a4, which is to E Sæ as5 A to A E; and E oę beingto L E ſ as E L to L o, it follows, that EOC: ES e:: S AX EL: AE X LO:: E E XS A: E OX A E. Therefore EL: LO:: EX: EO, and E L: LE:: LO: EL, OrLE, L E and IL. o are in continued proportion. This theorem ſerves for determining the ray of curvature of epicycloids and cycloids of all ſorts; only when the baſe E æ is a right line, A B vaniſhes, and E B becomes equal to E a. Corol. . When a L or a c is leſs than a B, then (becauſe L o is always on the ſame ſide of the point L with L x) the path is concave towards s throughout. When A C æ A B, the curvature at the conjunction vaniſhes, or the path has there a point of rectitulee. When a c is greater than a B (Or 4s x 2), a portion of the path near the conjunction is convex towards s, becauſe a part of the circle c L d falls within the circle n X æ; and when L comes to ęither of the interſections of theſe two circles, the path has a point of contrary flexure *. Corol. 2. In the caſe of the moon,  ?: TT:: I: 178, and a B æ 50 A5;3 but 4 c ĩs about 4 x AS; conſequently a c is leſs than 4 B, and ihe path of the moon is concave tovards the ſun throughout. PROPOSITION III Let A B: AS:: t t: TT, and the force by which the path of the ſatellite can be deſcribed on an immoveable plane, is always directed to the point B upon the ray as; and is always meaſured by B L the diſtunce of the ſatellite from the point B, the gravity of the primary towards the ſun being repreſented by B A. We conceive the force by which this path could be deſcribed, on an immoveable plane, to be reſolved into a force that acts in the direction L o, perpendicular to the path, and bends the path, but has no effect on the velocity of the ſatellite; and a force perpendicular to L o that accelerates or retards the motion of the ſatellit. The former of theſe is meaſured by L x, the latter by B æ, the gravity of the primary towards the ſun being meaſured by a B. For the former is to the gravity of the primary a 2 - towards s, as2 to  ſthoſc forces being directly as the ſquares of the velocities, and inverſely as the  IfA Cæ a E, theſe points meet again, and form a cuſp: und if a c is greater than a g, the path has a nodus: which la is the caſe of the innermoſt of the ſatellites of Jupiter and Satura. rays of the curvature) that is, as L X to a B, by Prop. I. Therefore the gravity of the primary being repreſented by A B, the former force will be meaſured by L . The ſecond force that acts on the ſatellite in the direction of the tangent of its path, and accelerates or retards its motion, is as the fluxion of the velocity æ L directly, and the fluxion of the time inverſely. The fluxion of the time is meaſured by (a a being the arc deſcribed by the primary, and E A the velocity with which it is deſcribed) = rm l =laix22  (ſuppoſing ⸗ n and q u to be perpenE B E B XA C diculars to e  in n and 4, becauſe Iq: lu:: ac: an, or ac: an) 2xſæ Læ Therefore the force which i i EB XA N BK I i is meaſured by ſ u, the fluxion of the velocity E, or E L, divided by the fluxion of the time or æ, is meaſured by B X. The force, therefore, in the direction L E being meaſured by L æ, and the force in the perpendicalar direction X B by X B, the compounded force is meaſured by L B, and is directed from L to 2. It appears, from what has been demonſtrated, that the path may be deſcribed by a force directed towards the point B, (Which is given upon the ray A s, but revolves along with this ray about s) or by any forces which, compounded together, generate a force tending to B, and always proportional to L B, the diſtance of the ſatellite from B. Let L H be equal and parallel to a B, and a B H L ſhall be a parallelogram, and the force L x may be compounded of LH and L4, that is, the force L x may be the reſult of a force L H acting on the ſatellite, equal and parallel to a B, the gravity of the primary towards the ſun, and of a force L a tending to the primary, and equal to the gravity by which the ſatellite would deſcribe the circle c L D about the primary, in the ſame periodic time ?, if the ſun was away; becauſe ſuch a force is to the gravity of the primary towards L A AS the ſun, (repreſented by a B) as T4 to  or as aL 10 as x- as li TT Thus we arrive at the ſame concluſion which Sir Iſaac Newton, more briefly, derived from an analyſis of the motions of the ſatellite; that while the ſatellite gravitates towards the primary, if, at the ſame time, it be acted on by the ſame ſolar force as the primary, and with a parallel direction, it will revolve about the primary, in the ſame manner as if this laſt was at reſt, and there was no ſolar action. Theſe two forces, the gravitation towards the primary, and a force equal and parallel to the gravitation of the primary towards the ſun, are exactly ſufficient to account for the compounded motion of the ſatellite in its path, however complex a curved line it may appear to be. Nor is there any perturbation of the ſatellite's motion, but what ariſes from the inequality of the gravity of the ſatellite, and of the primary towards the ſun, or from their not acting in parallel liness. If we ſhould ſupppoſe them to move about their common centre of gravity, while this is carried round the ſun, or if we ſuppoſe the orbits to be elliptical, the concluſions will ſtill be found conſonant to what was more briefly deduced by this great author, CH AP VI. Of the figure of the earih, and the preceſſion of ihe equinoxes. I. YF the earth was fluid, and had no motion on its axis, the equal gravitation of its parts towards each other would give it a figure exactly ſpherical, the columns from the ſurface to the centre mutually ſuſtaining each other at equal heights from it. But, becauſe of the diurnal rotation of the earth on its axis, the gravity of the parts at the equator is diminiſhed by the centrifugal force ariſing from this rotation; the gravity of the parts on either ſide of the quagor is diminiſhed leſs, as the velocity of rotation is leſs, and the centrifugal force, ariſing from it acts leſs directly againſt the gravity of the parts; while the gravity at the poles is not at all affected by the rotation. The equilibrium that was ſuppoſed to be amongſt the parts will not therefore now ſubſiſt in a ſpherical figure, but will be deſtroyed by the inequality of theirmgravitation, till the water riſe at the equator and ſink at the poles, ſo as by a greater height at the equator, to compenſate the greater gravity at the poles; and till, by aſſuming an intermediate height in the intermediate places, the whole earth become of an oblate ſpheroidal form, whoſe diameter at the equator will be the greateſt, and the axis the leaſt, of all the lines that can paſs through the centre. 2. If the gravity of a body at the equator was deſtroyed, the motion of rotation would there make it go off in a tangent to the earth; and by moving in the tangent it would riſe, in a ſecond of time, from the ſpherical body of the earth, as much as one extremity of the arc which bodies deſcribe there, in a ſecond, falls below the tangent drawn at the other extremity: and this is found to be a ſpace of about 7,54 lines, French meaſure. The effect of the centrifugal force of bodies at the equator, in a ſecond of time, is proportional to this ſpace. The eſfect of the centrifugal force at any place at a diſtance from the equator, for example, at Paris, is leſs for the reaſons above mentioned; and, there, it is found by calculation, that it could only produce a motion of 3,267 lines in a ſecond. Add this to what, by experiments, bocies are found to deſcribe by their gravity at Paris, viæ. 15 feet, 1 inch and 2 lines, and the ſum 2177,267 lines will ſnew the ſpace which bodies would deſcribe by their gravity, in a ſecond of time, if there was no centrifugal force there. ã comparing this with the effect of the centrifugal force at the equator, in the ſame time, ve ſnall find that the centrifugal force, there, is the 35 part of the power of gravity, becauſe 7,54 is to 2 177,267 as I to 289. 3. &rom this it follows, that a body at the equator Ioſes 5, at leaſt, of its gravity; and the equator muſt be at leaſt, 35 higher than the poles from the centre of the earth. But as the parts of the equator loſe ſtill of their gravity as they riſe from the centre oſ the earth, and the regular courſe of gravity is altered by the change of figure, this is not the true proportion of the height of the earth at the equator, to its height at the poles. Our author, who was never at a loſs to find ſome expedient by which he might determine, accurately or near the truth, what he wanted; in order to take in theſe perplexed conſiderations, aſſumes, as an hypotbheſis, that the axis of the earth is to the diameter of the equator, as 100 to 1or; he thence determines what muſt be the centrifugal force at the equator, that the earth might take ſuch a form, and finds it muſt be... of gravity, and therefore would exceed the preſent centrifugal force there, which is only of gravity. By the rule of proportion, he ſays, that if a centrifugal force equal to, of gravity, would make the earth higher at the equator than at the poles, by 55 of the whole height at the poles, a centrifugal force that is theſ of gravity, will make it higher by a proportional exceſs, which is found by calculation to be of the height at the poles; and thus our author diſcovers that the diameter at the equator is to the diameter at the poles, or the axis, as 230 to 229. 4. This computation ſuppoſes the earth to be of an uniform denſity every-where: but if the earth is more denſe near the centre, then bodies at the poles will be more attracted by this additional matter being nearer to it; and, for this reaſon, the exceſs of the ſemidiameter of the equator above the ſemiaxis will be differentt. What we have ſaid of a fluid earth muſt hold of the earth in its preſent ſtate; for if it had not this figure in its ſolid parts, but a ſpherical figure, the ocean would overflow all the equatorial regions, and leave the polar regions elevated many miles above the level of the ſea; whereas we find the one is no more elevated aboyõahꝶ level of the ocean, than the other. lli 5. The planet Vupiter revolves on his axis with much more rapidity than our earth, and finiſhes his diurnal rotation in leſs than ten hourss. The denſity of that planet is alſo leſs; and therefore his figure is more different from a ſphere than the figure of u Hie i the the earth, and his equatorial diameter exceeds his axis in a greater proportion. Their difference is ſo ſenſible that they are found, by the obſervations of aſtronomers, to be to one another as 13 is to 12. 6. The decreaſe of gravity from the poles towards the equator, is very manifeſt from the motion of pendulums. A pendulum that vibrates, in a ſecond, in the northern regions, when carried to the equator, is always found to move too ſlow, and requires to be made ſhorter to vibrate truly in a ſecond.. This ſhews the gravity is leſs there: and this obſervation confirms the diurnal motion of the earth, and its oblate ſpheroidal figure at the ſame time. It ĩs alſo a conſequence of this figure of the earth, that the degrees in a meridian muſt increaſe from the equator to the poles; but the difference is ſo ſmall that it cannot be diſcovered, from obſervation, but in latitudes that differ conſiderably from each other; and the variation of the degrees, that are near one another, appears, by our authors computations, to be incomparably leſs adapted for judging of the figure of the earth, than the motion of pendulums, in which the leaſt variation becomes very ſenſible, in a great number of vibrations. 7. Some have imagined the ſlowneſs of the pendulums at the equator, may have proceeded ſrom the rod of the pendulum being extended to a greater length, by the heat: but our author has ſhewed, that this could produce but a very ſmall part of the effect. Mr. Richer, who was very careful in making his obſervations, found, that a pendulum vibrating in a ſecond of time, in the iſland of Cayenne, was ſhorter than one that vibrated, in the ſame time, at Paris, by one line and a fourth part of a line. Our author, with good reaſon, thinks that a diſference of one ſixth part of a line, may be allowed as the effect of the heat; and, ſubducting this from the difference obſerved by Mr. Richer, the remainder, 1 line and , of a line, is the difference owing to the decreaſe of gravity, and is very conſonant to what our author draws from his theory. This obſervation and our authors theory agree, in allowing feventeen miles for the exceſs of the height of the earth at the equator, above its height at the poles. 8. From the oblate figure of the earth, our author has accounted for the preceſſion of the equinoxes. We commonly ſuppoſe, that, while the earth moves in her orbit round the ſun, her axis continues always parallel to itſelf, ſo as to form an invariable angle with the ecliptic of about 66;2: from hence it is, that the plane of the equator is inclined to the eclipticc, in an angle of 235, and produced paſſes through the centre of the ſun, twice only in every revolutionn. The points of the heavens, where the centre of the ſun appears to be, in theſe two caſes, are called the equinoctial points. In any other parts of the earths orbit, the ſun is on one ſide of the plane of the equator; being to the north of it in the ſummer half of the year, and to the ſouth of it in the winter half. Theſe equinoctial points are not fixed in the heavens, but have a ſlow motion, from eaſt to weſt, among the ſtars, of about 67 in a year; and hence it is, that the interval of time betwixt any equinox and that ſame equinox, in the following revolution of the earth (which aſtronomers call the iropical year), is ſome minutes ſhorter than the ſidereal year, or the period wherein the earth revolves from one point of her orbit, to the ſame poim ugain: and, becauſe the retrograde motion of the equinoctial points thus advances the time of every squinoxa little ſooner than it would otherwiſe have happened, this phænomenon is called the preceſſion of the equinoxes. The philoſophers, who maintained the Ptolemaic ſyſtem aſcribed this motion to the fixed ſtars; and, in their ordinary way, made no ſcruple to contrive a ſphere for this purpoſe, which they ſuppoſed to revolve with a very ſlow motion on the poles of the ecliptic, and to carry all the fixed ſtars along with it; whereas this phænomenon is accounted for by a retrograde motion of the nodes of the equator and ecliptic, ſimilar to the motion of the nodes of the moon's orbit. It was ſhewn above, how the action of the ſun produces the retrograde motion of the nodes of the moon; and iĩt follows, from the ſame principles, that if a planet revolved about the earth near to ĩts ſurface in the plane of the equator, its nodes would alſo go backward, though with a ſlower motion than thoſe of the moon, in proportion as ĩts diſtance from the earth's centre was leſs than that of the moon. Suppoſe the number of ſuch planets to be increaſed till they touch each other, and form a ring in the equator, and the nodes of this ring would go backward in the ſame manner as the nodes of the orbit of any &ne planet revolving there. Suppoſe then this ring to adhere to the earth; and its nodes would ſtill go backward, but with a much ſlower motion, becauſe the ring muſt' move the whole earth, to which it is ſuppoſed to adheree. The elevation of the equatorial parts of the earth has the ſame effect as ſuch a ring would have; only the motion of the nodes of the equator, or of the equinoctial points, is ſlower, becauſe the accumulated parts of the earth, above a ſpherical figure, are diffuſed over its ſurface, and have a leſs effect than if they were all collected in the place of the equator, in the form of a ring. The moon has a greater force on this ring than the ſun, becauſe of her leſs diſtance from the earth; and they both contribute to produce the retrograde motion of the equinoctial points: the motion, however, produced by both is ſo ſlow, that thoſe points will not finiſh a revolution in leſs than 2 5000 years. Our author has determined the quantity of this motion, from its cauſes, and finds it, from the theory, to be perfectly conſonant with the obſervations of aſtronomers. There is another eſfect of the action of the ſun and moon on this ring, which is too ſmall to be ſenſible in aſtronomical obſervations: their action on the ring, makes its inclination to the ecliptic to decreaſe and increaſe, by turns, twice every year. C H A P. VII. Oſ the ebbing and floing of ibe ſea. T is not in the motions of the celeſtial bodies only, that the effects of their mutual gravitation are viſible, for ve are now to ſhew, that a phænomenon which paſſcs on our earth, and is known to every body, proceeds from the ſame principle; I mean, the ebbing and flowing of the ſea, the ſolution of which, from the bad ſucceſs of thoſe who attempted it before our author, had become a reproach to philoſophy. But he has very plainly and fully accounted for it, from the unequal gravitations of the parts of the earth towards the ſun and moon. It will be worth while, becauſe it is a very celebrated queſtion, to be the more particular in explaining his ſolution of it. Lt is obvious, that, if the earth was entirely fluid, and quieſcent, its particles, by their mutual gravity towards each other, would form themſelves into the figure of an exact ſphere. Suppoſe now, that ſome power acts on all the particles of this earth, with an equal force, and in parallel directions, the whole maſs will be moved by ſuch a power, but its figure vill ſuffer no alteration by it; becauſe all the particles being equally moved by this power, in parallel lines, they will ſtill keep the ſame ſituation with reſpect to each other, and ſtill form a ſphere, whoſe centre will have the ſame motion as each particle. For, as a drop of water, while ĩt falls towards the earth, retains its ſpherical figure; and, as the ſituation of bodies in a ſhip, that moves with an uniform motion forward, is no way affected by the motion which is common to the ſhip and all the bodies in it; ſo the ſituation of the parts of the earth, with reſpect to each other, can be no way affected by any power that acts with the ſame force, and in the ſame direction, on every part, and promotes each equally. We have already ſhewed, that the particles of the earth gravitate towards the moon, and if the gravitation of the particles was every where the ſame, and acted in the ſame direction, it would have no effect on the figure of the earth; ſo that, if the motion of the earth round the common centre of gravity of the earth and moon was deſtroyed, and the earth was left to the influence of its gravitation towards the moon, the earth falling towards the moon would retain ĩts ſpherical figure, all the parts being equally carried on, and retaining, therefore, the ſame ſituation with reipect to each other. But the actions of the moon, on diſferent parts of the earth, are unequal; thoſe parts, by the general law, being moſt attracted which are neareſt the moon, and thoſe being leaſt attracted which are fartheſt from the moon; while the parts that are at a middle diſtance, are attracted by a mean degree of force: nor are all the parts acted on in parallel lines, but in lines directed towards the centre of the moon: and, on theſe accounts, the ſpherical figure of the earth muſt ſuffer ſome change from the moons action. Suppoſe the earth to fall towards the moon, as before, and let us abſtract from the mutual gravitation of its parts towards each other, as allo from their coheſion; and it will eaſily appear, that the parts neareſt the moon would fall with the ſwifteſt motion, being moſt attracted, and that they would leave the centre or greater bulk of the earth behind them in their fall; while the more remote parts would fall with the ſioweſt motion, being leſs attracted than the reſt, and be left a little behind the bulk of the earth, ſo as to be found at a greater diſtance from the centre of the earth than at the beginning of the motion. From which it is manifeſt, that the earth would ſoon Ioſe its ſpherical figure, and form itſelf into an oblong ſpheroid, whoſe longeſt diameter would point at the centre of the moon. If the particles of the earth did not gravitate towards each other, but towards the moon only, the diſtances betwixt the parts of the earth that are ſuppoſed to be neareſt to the moon, and the central parts, would continually increaſe, becauſe of their greater celerity in falling; and the diſtance betwixt the central parts, and the parts that are fartheſt from the moon, would increaſe continually at the ſame time; theſe being lefi behind by the central parts, which they would follow, but with a leſs velocity. Thus the figure of the earth would become more and more oblong, that diameter of it which pointed towards the moon continually increaſing. But this is not the only reaſon why the earth would ſoon aſſume an oblong ſpheroidal form, if its parts were allowed to fall freely by their gravity towards the moons centre. The lateral parts of the earth (that is, thoſe which are at the diſtance of a quarter of a circle from the point which is directly below the moon) and the central parts deſcending vith equal velocities, towards the ſame point, viæ. the centre of the moon, in approaching to it, would manifeſtly approach, at the ſame time, to each other, and, their diſtance growing leſs, the diameters of the earth paſſing through them would become leſs; ſo that the diameter of the earth that points towards the moon would increaſe, and thoſe diameters of the earth that are perpendicular to the line joining the centres of the earth and moon, would decreaſe at the ſame time, and render the figure of the earth ſtill more oblong for this reaſon. Let us now allow the parts of the earth to gravitate towards its centre; and, as this gravitation far exceeds the action of the moon, and much more exceeds the differences of her actions on the different parts of the earth, the eſffect that will reſult from the inequalities of theſe actions of the moon, will be only a ſmall diminution of the gravity of thoſe parts of the earth which it endeavoured, in our former ſuppoſition, to ſeparate from its centre, and a ſmall addition to the gravity of theſe parts which it endeavoured to bring nearer to its centre; that is, thoſe parts of the earth which are neareſt to the moon, and thoſe which are fartheſt from her, will have their gravity towards the earth ſomewhat abated; whereas the lateral parts will have their gravity increaſed: ſo that, if the earth be ſuppoſed fluid, the columns from the centre to the neareſt and to the fartheſt parts muſt riſe, till, by their greater height, they be able to ballance the other columns, whoſe gravity is either not ſo much diminiſhed, or is increaſed by the inequalities of the action of the moon: and thus the figure of the fluid earth muſt be ſtill an oblong ſpheroid. We have hitherto ſuppoſed the earth to fall towards the moon by its gravity. Let us now conſider the earth as projected in any direction, ſo as to move round the centre of gravity of the earth and moon: it is manifeſt, that the gravity of each particle towards the moon will endeavour to bring it as far from the tangent, in any ſmall moment of time, as if the earth was allowed to fall freely towards the moon; in the ſame manner as any projectile at our earth, falls from the line of projection as far as it would fall by its gravity in the perpendicular, in the ſame time. Therefore the parts of the earth neareſt to the moon, will endeavour to fall fartheſt from the tangent, and thoſe fartheſt from the moon will endeavour to fall leaſt from the tangent, of all the paris of the earth; and the figure of the earth, therefore, will be the ſame as if the earth fell freely towards the moon: that is, the earth will ſtill affect a ſpheroidal form, having its longeſt diameter directed towards the moon. What muſt be carefully attended to here, is, that it is not the action of the moon, but the inequalities in that action, that produce any variation from the ſpherical. figure; E that if this action was the ſame in all the particles as in the central parts, and acted in the ſame direction, no ſuch change would enſue. Our author, therefore, to account for this matter, conceives firſt the attraction of the central parts to be diffuſed with an equal force over all the parts in the ſame direction, and then conceives the inequalities as ariſing from a power ſuperadded, and directed towards the moon where there is an exceſs, and directed in the oppoſite line where there is a defect, in the attraction of the parts, compared with the attraction of the central parts: for thus the ſum of theſe forces, in the firſt caſe, will account for the attraction where it exceeds, and their difference will account for the attraction where it is leſs than in the central parts. And when the effects of theſe powers are conſidered as they affect the figure of the earth, it is manifeſt that they muſt produce ſuch an oblong ſpheroid as we have deſcribed; the ſuperadded force drawing the parts neareſt the moon towards her, and therefore from the earths centre, while it draws the parts fartheſt from the moon in an oppoſite direction; and therefore ſtill draws from the centre of the earth alſo. The æction of the moon on the lateral parts is reſolved into two, one equal and parallel in its direction to her action on the central parts, and another directed from thoſe lateral parts towards the centre of the earth; the firſt of theſe can have no eſſect upon the figure of the earth, being conſidered as common to all the particles, and therefore to be neglected in this enquiry: it is the other that adds to the gravity of the lateral parts towards the centre of the earth, and, by adding to the weight of the lateral toluns, it makes them ſuſtain the other columns, whoſe gravity is diminiſhed by the action of the moon to a greater height; and the power which alters the ſpherical figure is to be eſtimated as the ſum of two powers, that which is added to the gravity of the one, and is ſubducted from the gravity of the other. Hitherto we have abſtracted from the motion of the earth on its axis: but this muſt alſo be conſidered in order to know the real effect of the moon's actions on the ſea. Was it not for this motion, the longeſt diameter of the ſpheroidal figure, which the fluid earth would aſſume, would point at the moon's centre; but, becauſe of the motion of the whole maſs of the earth on its axis from weſt to eaſt, the moſt elevated part of the water no longer anſwers preciſely to the moon, but is carried beyond the moon towards the eaſt in the direction of the rotation. The water continues to riſe after it has paſſed directly under the moon, tho' the immediate action of the moon there begins to decreaſe, and comes not to its greateſt elevation till it has got half a quadrant further. It continues to deſcend after it has paſſed at 90 degrees diſtance from the point below the moon, tho the force which the moon adds to its gravity begins to decreaſe there. For ſtill the action of the moon adds to its gravity, and makes it deſcend till it has got half a quadrant farther: the greateſt elevation, therefore, is not in the points which are in a line with the centres of the earth and moon, but about half a quadrant to the eaſt of theſe points in the direction of the motion of rotation. TThus it appears that the ſpheroidal form which the fluid earth would affect, will be ſo ſituated that the longeſt diameter of that figure will point to the caſt of the moon, or that the moon will always be to the weſt of the meridian of the parts of greateſt elevation. Suppoſe now an iſland in this fluid earth, and it will approach in every revolution to each elevated part of this ſpheroid, and the water on the ſhore of this iſland will neceſſarily riſe twice every lunar day; and the time of high water will be when it approaches to theſe elevated parts, that is, when it has paſſed to the eaſt of the moon, or when the moon is at ſome diſtance to the weſt of the meridian. We have hitherto taken notice of the action of the moon only: but it is manifeſt, that, for the ſame reaſons, the inequality of the ſun's action on the different parts of the earth would produce a like effect, and that theſe alone would produce a like variation from the exact ſpherical figure of a fluid earth. Indeed the effect of the ſun, becauſe of his immenſe diſtance, muſt be conſiderably leſs, tho the gravity towards the ſun be vaſtly greater. For it is not their actions, but the inequalities in the actions of each, which have any effect; as we have often obſerved. The ſuns diſtance is ſo great, that the diameter of the earth is a point compared to it, and the difference between the actions of the ſun on the neareſt and fartheſt parts becomes, on this account, vaſtly leſs than it would be if the ſun was as near as the moon, whoſe diſtance from us is about 30 diameters of the earth. Thus the inequality of the action of the earth on the parts of a drop of water is altogether inſenſible, becauſe the diameter of the drop is an inſenſible quantity compared with ĩits diſtance from the centre of the earth. However, the immenſe bulk of the ſun makes the effect ſtill ſenſible at ſo vaſt a diſtance; and therefore, though the action of the moon has the greateſt ſhare in producing the tides, the action of the ſun adds ſenſibly to it when they conſpire together, as in the change and full of the moon, when they are nearly in the ſame line with the centre of the earth, and therefore unite their forces; ſo that then the tides are greateſt, and are what we call the ſpringtides. The action of the ſun diminiſhes the effect of the moons action in the quarters, becauſe the one raiſes the water in that caſe where the other depreſſes it; and therefore the tides then are leaſt; and theſe we call the neap tides. Though, to ſpeak accurately, the ſpring and neap tides muſt be ſome time after; becauſe, as in other caſes, ſo in this, the effect is not greateſt or leaſt when the immediate influence of the cauſe is greateſt or leaſtt. As the greateſt heat, for example, is not on the ſolſtitial day, when the immediate action of the ſun is greateſt, but ſome time after. That this may be more clearly underſtood, Iet iĩt be conſidered, that, though the actions of the ſun and moon were to ceaſe this moment, yet the tides would continue to have their courſe for ſome time: For the water where ĩt is now higheſt would ſubſide and flow down on the parts that are Iower, till by the motion of deſcent, being there accumulated to too great a height, it would neceſſarily return again to its firſt place, though in a leſs meaſure, being retarded by the reſiſtance ariſing from the attrition of its parts. Thus it would for ſome time continue in an agitation like to that in which ĩt is at preſent. The waves of the ſea that continue after a ſtorm ceaſes, and every motion almoſt of a fluid, may illuſtratę this. The high water does not always anſwer to the ſame ſituation of the moon, but happens ſometimes ſooner, and ſometimes later, than if the moon alone acted on the ſea. This proceeds from the action of the ſun, which brings on high water ſooner when the ſun alone would produce a tide earlier than the moon, as the ſun manifeſtly would in the firſt and third quarter; and retards the time of high water a little, when the ſun alore would produce a tide later than the moon, as in the ſecond and laſt quarters. The different diſtances of the moon from the earth, produce likewiſe a ſenſible variation in the tides. When the moon approaches the earth, her action on every part increaſes, and the differences of that action, on which the tides depend, increaſe. For her action increaſes as the ſquares oſ the diſtances decreaſe, and though the differences of the diſtances themſelves be equal, yet there is a greater diſproportion betwixt the ſquares of leſs than the ſquares of greater quantities. As for example, 3 exceeds 2 as much as 2 exceeds I, but the ſquare of 2 is quadruple of the ſquare of 1, while the ſquare of 3 (viz. 9.) is little more than double the ſquare of 2 (viæ. 4 Thus it appears, that, by the moons approach, her action on the neareit parts increaſes more quickly than her action on the remote parts, and the tides, therefore, increaſe in a higher proportion as the diſtances of the moon decrealee. Our author ſhews that the tides increaſe in proportion as the cubes of the diſtances decreaſe, ſo that the moon at half her preſent diſtance would produce a tide eight times greater. The moon deſcribes an ellipſe about the earth, and in her neareſt diſtance produces a tide ſenſibly greater than at her greateſt diſtance from the earth: and hence it is that two great ſpring tides never ſucceed each other immediately; , for if the moon be at her neareſt diſtance from the earth at the change, ſhie muſt be at her greateſt diſtance at the full, having, in the intervening time, finiſhed half a revolution ; and therefore the ſpring tide then will be much leſs than the tide at the change was: and for the ſame reaſon, if a great ſpring tide happen at the time of full moon, the tide at the enſuing change vill be leſũ. It is manifeſt, that if either the fun or moon was in the pole, they could have no effect on the tides; for their action would raiſe all the water at the equator to the ſame height; and any place of the earth, in deſcribing its parallel to the equator, would not meet, in its courſe, with any part of the water more elevated than another; ſo that there could be no tide in any placee. The effect of the ſun or moon is greateſt when in the equator: for then the axis of the ſpheroidal figure, ariſing from their action, moves in the greateſt circle, and the water is put into the greateſt agitation; and hence it is, that the ſpring tides produced when the ſun and moon are both in the equator, are the greateſt of any, and the neap tides are the leaſt of any, about that time. But the tides produced when the ſun is in either of the tropics, and the moon in either of her quarters, are greater than thoſe produced when the ſun is in the equator, and the moon in her quarters; becauſe, in the firſt caſe, the moon is in the equator; and, in the latter caſe, the moon is in one of the tropices: and the tide depends more on the action of the moon than that of the ſun, and is therefore greateſt when the moons action is greateſtt. However, becauſe the ſun is nearer the earth in winter than in ſummer, hence it is, that the greateſt ſpring tides are after the autumnal and before the vernal equinox. When the moon declines from the equator towards e ther pole, one of the greateſt elevations of the water follows the moon, and deſcribes nearly the parallel on the earth's ſurface which is under that which the moon, becauſe of the diurnal motion, ſeems to deſcribe: and the oppoſite greateſt elevation, being Antipodes to that, muſt deſcribe a parallel as far on the other ſide of the equator: ſo that while the one moves on the north ſide of the equator, the other moves on the ſouth ſide of it, at the ſame diſtance. Now the greateſt elevation which moves on the ſame ſide of the equator, with any place, will come nearer to it than the oppoſite elevation, which moves in a parallel on the other ſide of the equator; and therefore if a place is on the ſame ſide of the equator with the moon, the day tide, or that which is produced while the moon is above the horizon oſ the place, will exceed the night tide, or that which is produced while the moon is under the horizon of the place. It is the contrary if the moon is on one ſide and the place on the other ſide of the equator; for then the elevation which is oppoſite to the moon, moves on the ſame ſide of the equator with the place, and therefore will come nearer to ĩt than the other eevation. This difference will be greateſt when the ſun and moon both deſcribe the tropics; becauſe the two elevations in that caſe deſcribe the oppoſite tropics, which are the fartheſt from each other of any two parallel circles they can deſcribee Thus it is found, by obſervation, that the evening tides in the ſummer exceed the morning tides, and the morning tides in winter exceed the evening tidess. The difference is found at Briſtol to amount to fifteen inches, at Plymouth to one foot. It would be ſtill greater, but that a fluid always retains an impreſſed motion for ſome time; ſo that the preceding tides aſfect always thoſe that follow them *, The * See Fig. 71. (from Sir Iſaac Neavien) in which the ſpher0id The phænomena of particular places agree with theſe general obſervations, if the ſituation and extent of the ſeas and ſhores, in which they are ſituated, are conſideredc. It has been always known that the tides follow the motion of the moon, riſing twice in one revolution of the moon to the meridian of any place;, which exceeds a ſolar day by above  of an hour, becauſe the proper motion of the moon retards ſo much her appulſe to the meridian of the place. All the effects of the ſun's action, ſometimes promoting, ſometimes abating the effects of the action of the moon, as before mentioned, are alſo conformable to perpetual obſervation: and the tides in places that lie on a deep and open ocean, where the water can eaſily follow the influences of the ſun and moon, are agreeable to this theory. That the tides may have their full motion, the ocean in which they are produced ought to be extended from eaſt to weſt 90°, or a quarter of a circle of the earth at leaſt. Becauſe the places, tor, ? any place not in the equator, ? 7 ĩts parallel o  a paralIel on the other ſide of the equator, L the moons place three hours beſore, u the place of the earth to which L ĩs vertical, and b ihe oppoſite place, x, 4, places 9o diſtant from theſe. Then will cH, ch, meaſure the greateſt elevations of the water, and C x, C 4, the lea©t. c ?, cf, c D, C 4, will be the elevations at F, f, b, d. And if N M is a circle of the ſpheroid, meeting the equator and theſe parallels in s, n, ?7, C N Will be the elevation of the vater at s, R, T, or any other places in the circle N Mm. The higheſt tides at any place ?, happen at ? and ſ, three hours aſter the moons paſſing the meridian, above or beIow the horizon; and the loweſt at three hours after her ſetting or riſing. And if ? and L are on the ſame ſide of the equator, the day tide will riſe higher than the night tide, c ? being greater than c . It is the contrary, when the moons declination and the latitude of a place o are of oppoſite denominations, the one north and the other ſouth; becauſe then c D Is greater than c 4. 3ii jliil where ãlilili æhere the moon raiſes moſt, and moſt depreſſes, the water, are at that diſtance from each otherr. Hence it appears, that it is only in the great oceans that ſuch tides can be produced; and vhy i in the larger pacific ocean they exceed thoſe in the Ailantic ocean. Hence alſo, it is obvious why the tides are not ſo great in the torrid zone, between Africa and America, where the ocean is narrower, as in the temperate zones on either ſide; and, from this alſo, we may underſtand why the tides are ſo ſmall in iſlands that are very far diſtant from the ſhores. It is manifeſt, that, in the Atlantic ocean, the water cannot riſe on one ſhore but by deſcending on the other; ſo that, at the intermediate diſtant iſlands, it muſt continue at about a mean height betwixt its elevation on the one and on the other ſhore. As the tides paſs over ſhoals, and run through ſtraits into bays of the ſea, their motion becomes more various, and their height depends on a great many circumſtances. The tide that Is produced on the weſtern coaſts of Zurope, in the Atlantic, correſponds to the ſituation of the moon we deſcribed above. Thus it is high water on the coaſts of Spain, Portugal, and the weſt of Ireland, about the third hour after the moon has paſſed the meridian. From thence it flows into the adjacent channels, as it finds the eaſieſt paſſage. One current from it, for example, runs up by the ſouth of England, another comes in by the north of Scotland : they take a conſiderable time to move all this way, and it is high water ſooner in the places to which they firſt come; and it begins to fall at thoſe places, while they are yet going on to others that are farther in their courſe. As they return, they are not able to raiſe the tide, becauſe the water runs faſter off than it returns, till, by a new tide propagated from the open ocean, the return of the current is ſtopped, and the water begins to riſe again. The tide takes twelve hours to come from the ocean to London-bridge, ſo that, when it is high water there, a new tide is already come to its height in the ocean; and, in ſome intermediate place, it muſt be low water at the ſame time. In channels, therefore, and narrow ſeas, the progreſs of the tides may be, in ſome reſpects, compared to the motion of the waves of the ſea. Our author alſo obſerves, that when the tide runs over ſhoals, and flows upon flat ſhores, the water is raiſed to a greater height than in the open and deep oceans that have ſteep banks; becauſe the force of its motion cannot be broke, upon theſe level ſhores, till the water riſes to a greater heignt If a place communicates with two oceans, (or two different ways with the ſame ocean, one of which is a readier and eaſier paſſage) two tides may arrive at that place in different times, which, interfering with each other, may produce a great variety of phænomena. An extraordinary inſtance of this kind is mentioned by our author at Baiſha, a port in the kingdom of Tunquin in the Eaſt Indies, of northern latitude 20 500., The day in which the moon paſſes the equator, the water ſtagnates there without any motion: as the moon removes from the equator, the water begins to riſe and fall once a day; and ĩt is high water at the ſetting of the moon, and low water at her riſing. This daily tide increaſes for about ſeven or eight days, and then decreaſes for as many days by the ſame degrees, till this motion ceaſes when the moon has returned to the equator. When ſhe has paſſed the equator and declines towards the ſouth pole, the water riſes and falls again, as before; but it is high water now at the riſing, and low water at the ſetting, of the moon. DOur Chap. 6 PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVERIES. 383 Our author, to account for this extraordinary tide, conſiders that there are two inlets to this port of Batſba, one from the Chineſe ocean betwixt the continent and the Manillas, the other from the Indian ocean betwixt the continent and Borneo. This leads him to propoſe, as a ſolution of the phænomenon, that a tide may arrive at Batſba, through one of theſe inlets, at the third hour of the moon, and aænother through the other inlet ſix hours after, at the ninth hour of the moon. For, while theſe tides are equal, the one flowing in as the other ebbs out, the water muſt ſtagnate: now they are equal when the moon is in the equator; but as ſoon as the moon begins to decline on the ſame ſide of the equator with Batſha, we have ſhewed that the diurnal tide muſt exceed the nocturnal, ſo that two greater and two leſſer tides muſt arrive at Batſba by turns. The difference of theſe will produce an agitation of the water, which will riſe to ĩts greateſt height at the mean rime betwixt the two greateſt tides, and fall loweſt at a mean time betwixt the two leaſt tides; ſo that it will be high water about the ſixth hour at the ſetting of the moon, and low water at her riſing. When the moon has got to the other ſide of the equator, the nocturnal tide will exceed the diurnal; and therefore, the high water will be at the riſing, and low water at the ſetting, of the moon. The ſame principles will ſerve to account for other extraordinary tides, which, we are told, are obſerved in places whoſe ſituation expoſes them to fuch irregularities. Our author does not content himſelf with theſe general obſervations, but calculates the effects of the ſun and moon upon the tides,; from their attractive powers. The augmentation of the gravity of the lateral paris of the earth, produced by the actioò of the ſun, is a ſimilar effect to an augmentation, eſtimated by him before, that is made to the gravity of the moon towards the earth by the ſame action, when the moon is in the quarters; only the addition made to the gravity of the lateral parts is* about 60L times leſs, becauſe their diſtance from the earth's centre is ſo many times leſs than the diſtance of the moon from it. The gravity of thoſe parts of the earth that are directly beneath the ſun, and of thoſe oppoſite to it, is diminiſhed by a double quantity of what is added to the lateral parts; and as the diminution of gravity of the one, and augmentation of the gravity of the other, conſpire together in raiſing the water under the ſun, and the parts oppoſite to it, above its height in the lateral parts; the whole force that produces this effect is to be conſidered as triple of what is added to the gravity of the lateral parts: and is thence found to be to the gravity of the particles as 1 to 12868200, and to the centrifugal force at the equator as I to 44527. The elevation of the waters, by this force, is conſidered by our author as an effect ſimilar to the elevation of the equatorial parts above the polar parts of the earth, ariſing from the centrifugal force at the equator; and, being 44527 times leſs, is found to be 1I foot and 1I” inches, Paris meaſure. This is the elevation ariſing from the action of the ſun upon the water. In order to find the force of the moon upon the water, he compares the ſpring tides at the mouth of the river Avon below Briſtol (hich are the effect of the ſum of the forces of the ſun and moon when their actions almoſt conſpire together,) with the neap tides there (which are the effect of the difference of theſe forces when they act almoſt againſt one anoPriucip. Lib. III. Prop. 36. li h ther,) and finds their proportion to be that of ꝗ to 5; from which, after ſeveral neceſſary corrections, he concludes that the force of the moon is to the force of the ſun, in raiſing the waters of the ocean, as 4,4815 toI; ſo that the force of the moon is able, of itſelf, to produce an elevation of 8 feet and 7,5 inches, and the ſun and moon together may produce an elevation of about 104 feet, in their mean diſtances from the earth, and an elevation of about I2 feet when the moon is neareſt the earth. The height to which the water is found to riſe, upon the coaſts of the open and deep ocean, is agreeable enough to this computation. It is from this laſt calculation that he is able to make an eſtimate of the denſity and quantity of matter in the moon. Her influence on the tides is the only effect of the moons attracting power which we have acceſs to meaſure, and it enables us to eſtimate her denſity compared with that of the ſun, which we find it exceeds in the proportion of 489I to 1000; and ſince the denſity of the earth is to that of the ſun as 4000 to 1000, it follows that the moon muſt be more denſe than the earth in the proportion of 489I to 4000, or of 11 to 9 nearly. The proportion of the diameter of the earth to that of the moon is known, from aſtronomical obſervations, to be that of 365 to 100; and from theſe two proportions it eaſily follows, that the quantity of matter in the moon is to the matter in the earth as 1 to 39,788; and the centre of gravity of the earth and moon muſt be, therefore, almoſt 40 times nearer to the earth than to the moon: and the ſituation of their centre of gravity being known, the motions in their ſyſtem may be determined with great preciſeneſs, Our author enquires into the figure of the moon: and becauſe the earth contains near 40 times more matter than the moon, the elevation produced by the action of the earth in the parts of the moon that are neareſt to it, and in the parts oppoſite to theſe, would be near 40 times greater than that which the moon produces in our ſeas, if this elevation was not to be diminiſhed in proportion as the ſemidiameter of the moon is leſs than the ſemidiameter of the carth, that is, in the proportion of 100 to 365. By compounding theſe proportions he finds, that the diameter of the moon that paſſes through the centre of the earth, muſt exceed thoſe that are perpendicular to it, by about 186 feet. He thinks the ſolid parts of the moon muſt have been formed into ſuch a ſpheroidal figure, having its longeſt diameter directed towards the earth; and this may be the reaſon why the moon always turns the ſame ſide towards the earth. If there were great ſeas in the moon, and if ſhe revolved on her axis ſo as to turn different ſides towards the earth, there would have been very great tides produced in them, ſuch as would exceed our tides ten times; but, by her keeping one ſide always towards the earth, there are no tides produced in her ſeas, but what proceed from the differences of their diſtances from the earth, and from the moons librations; for the action of the ſun can have very little effect upon them. C H A P. VIII. Of ihe comeis. I. T J Itherto we have treated of the planets: but, beſides theſe, ve find in the expanſe of heaven many other bodies belonging to the ſyſtem of the ſun, that ſeem to have much more irregular motions. Theſe are the comets, which, deſcending from the far diſtant parts of the ſyſtem with great rapidity, ſurprize us with the ſingular appearance of a train or tail, which accompanies them; become viſible to us in the lower parts of their orbits, and, after a ſhort ſtay, are carried off again to vaſt diſtances, and diſappear. Though ſome of the ancients had more juſt notions of them, yet the opinion having prevailed, that they were only meteors generated in the air, like to thoſe we ſee in it every night, and in a few moments vaniſhing, no care was taken to obſerve or record their phænomena accurately, till of lat. Hence this part of aſtronomy is very imperfect. The number of the comets is far from being known: many have been noted by hiſtorians formerly, and not a few of late obſerved by aſtronomers; and ſome have been diſcovered accidentally by teleſcopes, paſſing by us, that never became viſible to the naked eye: ſo that we may conclude their number to be very great. Their periods, magnitudes, and the dimenſions of their orbits, are alſo uncertain. This is a part of ſcience, the perfection of which may be reſerved for ſome diſtant age, when theſe numerous bodies, and their vaſt orbits, by long and accurate obſervation, may be added to the known parts of the ſolar ſyſtem. Aſtronomy will appear as a new ſcience, after all the diſcoveries we now boaſt of: but then it will be remembered, even in thoſe flouriſing days of aſtronomy, that it was Sir Iſanc Newton who diſcovered and demonſtrated the principles by which alone ſuch great improvements could be made; and that he begun and carried this work ſo far, that he left to poſterity little more to do, but to obſerve the heavens, and compute after his models. Having this part of aſtronomy to deduce almoſt from its elements, he begins with ſhewing, againſt the ſcholaſtio philoſophers, that the comets are above the moon; becauſe they participate of the apparent diurnal motion, riſing and ſetting daily, as all things that are not appendant to the earth do, and that without any ſenſible diurnal parallax. But, as they are all affected by the annual motion of the earth, appearing, like the planets, ſometimes direct, ſometimes retrograde, he concludes that, when they become viſible to us, they muſt be in the regions of the planets. As they are all affected by the motion of the earth, and ĩt is impoſſible to bring their motions to any regularity without allowing that motion; and it, alone, ſuffices for explaining the irregularities of every comet, as well as of every planet; we obtain from this a new confirmation of the motion of the earth, and find all the parts of this philoſophy perfectly conſiſtent. DOur author having ſewed that the comets deſcend into the planetary regions when they are viſible to us, againſt the opinion of Des Cartes, he proceeds to trace them in their courſes. It follos, from the general law of gravity already eſtabliſhed, that they muſt move either in parabolic, or very excentric elliptical, orbits, that have one focus in the centre of the ſun. He then enquires, with his uſual ſ&ill and a great deal of labour, how a motion in a parabola may agree with the obſervations that have been made upon the comets; and, for this end, ſhews how, from three obſervations, the parabolic trajectory which a comet deſcribes may be determined: and, from ſeveral examples which he has given, there appears ſo perfect a harmony between his theory and the obſervations, as adds a new evidence to it, and ſhews its uſe in carrying on the knowledge of our ſyſtem. He inſiſts particularly on the celebrated comet that appeared near the end of the year 1680, and in the beginning of 1681. He determines its trajectory, or curve, from three obſervations made by Mr. Flamſteed; and then compares all the obſervations, that were made by himſelf or others, with the motion of a body in that curve, and finds the differences betwixt the obſerved places of this comet and thoſe computed for it in the curve, for the ſame time, to be very ſmall. It was the ſame comet that was ſeen in November 1680, and in December, anuary, February, and March following, though they had been generally eſteemed two different comets. In November it was deſcending towards the ſun; it paſſed very near the ſun on the 12th day of December; where, having been heated to a prodigious degree, tho' the light of the head or aucleus was duller, yet, while it aſcended in the other half of its orbit, its tail was vaſtly greater than before, extending ſometimes 70 in length, and continuing viſible even after the head or nucleus was carried out of ſight. Dr. Halley, to whom every part of aſtronomy, but this in a particular manner, is highly indebted, has joined his labours to our authors on this ſubject; nor is it neceſſary for us to ſeparate them. Finding three obſervations of comets recorded in hiſtory, agreeing with this in remarkable circumſtances, and returning at the diſtance of 575 years from each other, he ſuſpected that theſe might be one and the ſame comet, revolving in that period about the ſun. He therefore ſuppoſed the paorabola to be changed into ſuch an excentric ellipſe as the comet might deſcribe in 55 years, and as ſhould nearly coincidę vith the parabola in its loweſt part; and, having computed the places of the comet in this elliptic orbit, he found them to agree ſo well with thoſe in which the comet was obſerved to paſs, that the variations did not exceed the differences which are found betwixt the computed and the obſerved places of the planets, whoſe motions had been the ſubject of aſtronomical calculation for ſome thouſand yearss. This comet may, therefore, be expected again after finiſhing the ſame period, about the year 2255. If t then return, it will give a new luſtre and evidence to Sir Iſaac Newton's philoſophy, in that diſtant age. And ſhould the inconſtancy of human affairs, and the perpetual revolutions to which they are ſubject, occaſion any neglect of our philoſophy in the intervening ages; this comet will revive it, and fill every mouth again with this great mans name. Nor need this be eſteemed a vain prediction; for we cannot but ſuppoſe that the attention of the aſtronomers of thoſe days, to this comet muſt be raiſed to a great pitch, becauſe in one part of its orbit it approaches very near to the orbit of our earth; ſo that, in ſome revolutions, it may approach near enough to have very conſiderable, if not fatal effects upon it. Nor is it to be doubted but that, while ſo many comets paſs among the orbits Of the planets, and carry ſuch immenſe tails along with them, we ſhould have been called, by very extraordinary conſequences, to attend verſe had not been at firſt deſigned, and produced by a Being of ſufficient ſkill to foreſee their moſt diſtant conſequences. Our earth was out of the way when this comet laſt paſſed near her orbit; but it requires a perfect knowledge of the motion of the comet, to be able to judge if it will always paſs by us with ſo little effect. We may here obſerve, that theſe great periods, and diſtant depending obſervations, promiſe this good effect, that they muſt contribute to preſerve the reliſh for learning from the revolutions it has been formerly ſubject to. By them, diſtant ages are connected together, and perpetual matter for reviving the curioſity of men is provided, from time to time. But we are not to wait for the return of this diſtant comet to have our authors theory verified, and to ſee predictions of this kind begin to take place. By comparing together the orbits of the comets that appeared in 1607 and 1682, they are found ſo coincident, that we cannot but ſuppoſe them to be one and the ſame comet, revolving in 75 years about the ſun. If this comet, according to this period, return in 1758, aſtronomy will then have ſomething new to boaſt of. It ſeems to be of thoſe that riſe ⸗ the leat height from the ſun, its greateſt diſtance being only 35 times greater than the diſtance of the æarth from the ſun; ſo that, at the fartheſt, it does not run out four times farther from us than Saturn. It will probably be the firſt that will be added to the number of the revolving planets, and eſtabliſh this part of our author's theory. Beſides theſe comets ve Rave mentioned, our author has conſidered the mòtions of ſeveral others, and finds his theory always conſonant with obſervation. He particularly computes the places of a reCc markable comet that appeared in 1664 and 1665. It moved over 200 in one day, and deſcribed almoſt ſix ſigns in the heavens before it diſappeared; its courſe deviated from a great circle, towards the north, and its motion, that had been before retrograde, became direct towards the end: and notvwithſtanding ſo unuſual a courſe, its places, computed from our author's theory, agree with the obſerved places, as well as thoſe of the planets agree vith their theory. lll The phænomena of all the comets, but eſpecially of the comet of 1680, ſhew them to be ſolid, fixed, and durable bodies. This comet was, in ĩts peribelium, 166 times nearer to the ſun than our earth is: and, from this, our author computes that it muſt have conceived a heat 2000 times greater than that of iron almoſt going into fuſion, and that, if it was equal to our earth, and cooled in the ſame manner as terreſtrial bodies, it would take 50,000 years to cool: to bear ſo prodigious a heat, it muſt ſurely be a very ſolid and fixed body. There is a phænomenon that attends each comet, and is peculiar to them, called its rail: ſome have imputed this appearance to the refraction of the funbeams paſſing through the nucleus or head, which they ſuppoſed to be tranſparent: others to the refraction of the beams reflected from the head, as they paſs through the intermediate ſpaces to us. Our author refutes both theſe opinions, and ſhews that the tail conſiſts of a vapour ariſing continually from the body of the comet, towards thoſe parts that are oppoſite to the ſun, for a like reaſon that vapour or ſmoke riſes in the atmoſphere of the earth. Becauſe of the motion of the body of the comet; the tail is bent a little towards thoſe parts which the comet leaves in its motionn. Theſe tails are found greateſt after it has paſſed its perihelium, or leaſt diſtance from the ſun, where its heat is greateſt, and the atmoſphere of the ſun is moſt denſe. The head appears after this, obſcured by the thick vapour that riſes plentifully from it. The tail of the comet of 1680 was of a prodigious ſize: it was extended from the head to a diſtance ſcarcely inferior to the vaſt diſtance of the ſun from the earth. As the matter of the tail participates of the motion of the comet, it is thereby carried along with the comet in its motTion, and ſome part of it returns again with it: and as the matter in the tail riſes, it becomes more and more rarified; as appears from the tail's increaſing in breadth upwards. By this rarefaction a great part of the tail muſt be dilated and diffuſed over the ſyſtem; ſome of this, by its gravity, may fall towards the planets, mix with their atmoſpheres, and ſupply the fluids, which, in natural operations, are conſumed; and may, perhaps, ſupply that ſubtile ſpirit in our air, which is neceſſary for the life of animals, and for other natural operations. Ve are not to expect that the motions of the comets can be ſo exact, and the periods of their revolutions ſo equal, as thoſe of the planets; conſidering their great number, and their great diſtance from the ſun in their aphelia, where their actions upon each other muſt have ſome effect to diſturb their motions. The reſiſtance which they meet with in the atmoſphere of the ſun, when they deſcend into the lower parts of their orbits, will alſo affect them. By the retardation of their motion in theſe lower parts, their gravity will be enabled to bring them nearer the ſun in every revolution, till at length they fall into him, and ſupply fewel to that immenſe body of ſire. The comet of 1680 paſſed at a diſtance from the ſurface of the ſun, no greater than the 6th part of his diameter; it will approach ſtill nearer in the next revolution, and fall into his body at length. The fixed ſtars may receive ſupplics, in the ſame manner, by comets falling into them; and ſome of them, whoſe light and heat are almoſt exhauſted, may receive new fewel in this way. Of this kind rhoſe ſtars ſeem to be, which have been obſerved to break out at once with great ſplendor, and to vaniſh gradually afterwards. Soch was the ſtar in Caſſiopeia, that was not viſible on the 8th of November 1572, but ſhone the following night with a brightneſs almoſt equal to that of the planet Venus, and decreaſed continually afterwards, till in 16 months time it vaniſhed. Another of the ſame kind appeared to Kepler's ſcholars in the right foot of Serpentarius, on the 30th of September 1604, brighter than Yupiter, though it was not viſible the preceding night; which alſo decreaſed gradually, and vaniſhed in fifteen or ſixteen months. By ſuch a new ſtar appearing with an extraordinary brightneſs in the heavens, Hipparchus is ſaid to have been induced to make his catalogue of the fixed ſtars. But thoſe ſtars which appear and diſappear, gradually increaſing and decreaſing by turns, ſeem to be of a different kind; and to have a luminous and an obſcure ſide, which by their rotation on their axis, they turn towards us alternately. The argument againſt the eternity of the univerſe, drawn from the decay of the ſun, iſtill ſubſiſts; and even acquires a new force from this theory of the comets: ſince the ſupply which they afford muſt have been long ago exhauſted, if the world had exiſted from eternity. The matter in the comets themſelves, that ſupplies the vapour which riſes from them in every revolution to the periheliom, and forms their tails, muſt alſo have been exhauſted long ere now. In general, all quantities that muſt be ſuppoſed to decreaſe or increaſe continually, are repugnant to the eternity of the world; ſince the firſt had been exhauſted, and the laſt had grown into an infinite magnitude, at this time, if the world had been from eternity: and of both kinds there ſeem to be ſeveral ſorts of quantities in the univerſe. The deſcent of the comets into the planetary regions ſhews that the ſolid orbs, in which the planets were ſuppoſed, by the ſchoolmen, to move, arè imaginary. And the regularity of their motions, while they are carried in very excentric orbs, in all directions, into all parts of the heavens, conſpire with many other arguments to overthrow the Carteſian vortices. illl Sir Iſaac Newton further obſerves, that while the comets move in all parts of the heavens, with diſfer; ent directions, and in very excentric orbits, whoſe planes are inclined to one another in large angles; it cannot be attributed to blind fate that the planets move round. the ſun, and the ſatellites round their reſpective primaries, all with one direction, in orbits nearly circular, and almoſt in the ſame plane. The comets, by moving in very excentric orbits, deſcend with a vaſt velocity, and are carried quickly thro' the planetary regions, where they approach the nearefſt to each other, and to the planets, ſo as to have as little time as poſſible to difturb their own motions, or thoſe of the planets. By their moving in very different planes, they are carried to a vaſt diſtance from each other in the higheſt parts of their orbits, or aphelia; where, becauſe of the ſlowneſs of their motions, and the weakneſs of the ſuns action at ſo great diſtances, their mutual actions, but for this precaution, would produce the greateſt diſorders. Thus we always find, that what has, at firſt ſight, the appearance of irregularity and confuſion in nature, is diſcovered, on further enquiry, to be the beſt contrivance, and the moſt wiſe conduct. Sir Iſaac Newton proceeds to make ſome reflections on the nature of the ſupreme cauſe, and infers, from the ſtructure oſ the viſible world, that it is governed by One Almighty and All-wiſe Being, who rules the world, not as its Soul but as its Lord, exerciſing an abſolute ſovereignty over the univerſe, not as over his own body but as over his work; and acting in it according to his pleaſure, without ſuffering any thing from it. What he has delivered concerning the Deity will be further explained in the next chapter. C H A P. IX. Of the Supreme Author and Governor of the univerſe, the True and Living God, I. 4R IS TOT L E concludes his treatiſe de mundo, ll with obſerving, that  to treat of the world without ſaying any thing of its Author would be impious; as there is nothing we meet with more frequently and conſtantly in nature, than the traces of an All-governing Deity. And the philoſopher who overlooks theſe, contenting himſelf with the appearances of the material univerſe only, and the mechanical laws of motion, neglects what is moſt excellent; and prefers what is imperfect to what is ſupremely perfect, finitude to infinity, what is narrow and weak to what is unlimited and almighty, and what is periſhing to what endures for ever. Such who attend not to ſo manifeſt indications of ſupreme vwiſdom and goodneſs, perpetually appearing before them wherever they turn their views or enquiries, too much reſemble thoſe antient philoſophers who made night, matter, and chaos, the original of all things. 2. As we have neĩther ideas nor words ſufficient to deſcribe the firſt cauſe, ſo Ariſtotle, in the concluſion of the above-mentioned treatiſe, is obliged to content himſelf with comparing him with what is chief and moſt excellent, in every kind *. Thus we ſay he is the king or lord of all things, the parent of all his creatures, the ſoul of the world, or great ſpirit that animates the whole,. Such expreſſions, though well meant at firſt, were ſometimes abuſed afterwards; particularly, that of his being the anima mundi, which was apt to repreſent him not only as the active and ſelf-moving principle, but likewiſe as paſive and ſuffering from the actions and motions of bodies. The abſtruſe nature of the ſubject gave occaſion to the latter Platoniſis, particularly to Plotinus, to introduce the moſt myſtical and unintelligible notions concerning the Deity and the worſhip we owe to him; as when he tells us that intellect or underſtanding is not to be aſcribed to the Deity, and that our moſt perfect worſhip of him conſiſts, not in acts of veneration, reverence, gratitude or love; but in a certain myſterious ſelf- annihilation, or total extinction of all our faculties. Theſe doctrines, however abſurd, have had followlli Kaòòns lè, mer b vit nuępvſinns, druali ſ2 ivioxos,  xrõ ſt nopuQæĩos, ẽv ?ore1 L rbuo, ẽv spælontdœ ſl iy]p|v Tẽo Seds ẽv nbouσ; æA€ naò ĩoor, vols uer næuæſnpiv 7 àuxæi, morvnlvſtv æę 5 æorvubu T ſ;, àrvæ, auotv T] 5 màon; nexoicubvov co uælinic avderętæ; ir nivę yã]p idpvubvQ: 7æàvlaæ nireũ, 5 æępdꝶ⸗I ſuov ſeAdlæei, g snus, & diarb;ors iſbaeis vę x; σI. Cap. . ers, who, in this, as in other caſes, by àiming too high, far beyond their reach, overſtrain their faculties, and fall into folly or madneſs; contributing, as much as lies in them, to bring true piety and devotion into contempt. 3. Neither are they to be commended, who, under the pretence of magnifying the eſſential power of the ſupreme cauſe, make truth and falſhood entirely to depend on his will; as we obſerved of Des Cartes, Book I. Chap. 4. Such tenets have a direct tendency to introduce the abſurd opiniun, that intelJectual faculties may be ſo made, as clearly and diſtinctly to perceive that to be true, which is really fallee. They judge much better, who, without ſcruple, meaſure the divine omnipotence itſelf, and the poſſibility of things, by their own clear ideas concerning them; affirming that God himſelf cannot make contradictions to be true at the ſame time; and repreſent the certain part of our knowledge, in ſome degree, as the knowledge and wiſdom of the Deity imparted to us, in the views of nature which he has laid before us. 4. The ſublimity of the ſubject is apt to exalt and tranſport the minds of men, beyond what their faculties can always bear: therefore, to ſupport them, allegorical and enigmatical repreſentations have been invented, which, in proceſs of time, have produced the greateſt abuſes. When metaphorical figures and names came to be conſidered as realities, in place of the true God, falſe deities were ſubſtituted without number, and, under the pretence of devotion, a worſhip was paid to the moſt deteſtable characteſs, that tended to extinguiſh the notions of true worth and virtue amongſt men. 5. As there are no enquiries of a more arduous mature than thoſe that relate to the Deity, or of near ſo great importance to intellectual beings, that diſcern betwixt truth and falſhood, betwixt right and wrong; ſo it is manifeſt, that there are none in which the utmoſt caution and ſoberneſs of thought is more requiſite. Hence it is a very unpleaſant proſpect to obſerve with how great freedom, or rather licentiouſneſs, philoſophers have advanced their raſh and crude notions concerning his nature and eſſence, his liberty and other attributes. What freedoms were taken by Des Cartes in deſcribing the formation of the univerſe without his interpoſition, and in pretending to deduce from his attributes conſequences that are now known to be falſe, we explained in the firſt book, almoſt in his own words. A manner of proceeding ſo unjuſtifiable, in ſo ſerious and important a ſubject, ought, one would think, to have diſguſted the ſober and wiſe part of mankind. Spinoza, while he carried the doctrine of abſolute neceſſity to the moſt monſtrous height, and ſurpaſſed all others in the weakneſs of his proofs as well as the impiety of his doctrines, yet affects to ſpeak, on ſeveral occaſions, in the higheſt terms of veneration for the Deity. Mr. Leibnitæ and many of his diſciples have likewiſe maintained the ſame doctrine of abſolute neceſſity, extending it to the Deity himſelf, of hom our ideas are ſo inadequate, and whom it ſo much concerns us not to miſrepreſent. But Sir Iſaac Newton was eminently diſtinguiſhed for his caution and circumſpection, in ſpeaking or treating of this ſubject, in diſcourſe as well as in his writings; tho he has not eſcaped the reproaches of his adverſaries, even in this reſpect. As the Deity is the ſupreme and firſt cauſe, from whom all other cauſes derive their whole foree and energy, ſo he thought it moſt unaccountable to exclude Him only out of the univerſe. It appeared to him much more juſt and reaſonable, to ſuppoſe that the whole chain of cauſes, or the ſeveral ſeries of them, ſhould centre in him as their ſource and fountain; and the whole ſyſtem appear depending upon him the only independent cauſe. 6. The plain argument for the exiſtence of the Deity, obvious to all and carrying irreſiſtible conviction with it, is from the evident contrivance and fitneſs of things for one another, which we meet with throughout all parts of the univerſee There is no need of nice or ſubtle reaſonings in this matter: a manifeſt contrivance immediately ſuggeſts a contriver. It ſtrikes us like a ſenſation; and artful reaſonings againſt it may puzzle us, but it is without ſhaking our belief. No perſon, for example, that knows the principles of optics and the ſtructure of the eye, can believe that it was formed without ſkill in that ſcience; or that the ear was formed without the knowledge of ſounds; or that the male and female in animals were not formed for each other, and for continuing the ſpecies. All our accounts of nature are full of inſtances of this kind. The admirable and beautiful ſtructure of things for final cauſes, exalt our idea of the Contriver: the unity of deſign ſews him to be One. The great motions in the ſyſtem, performed with the ſame facility as the leaſt, ſuggeſt his Almighty Power, which gave motion to the earth and the celeſtial bodies, with equal caſe as to the minuteſt particles. The ſubtility of the motions and actions in the internal parts of bodies, ſnews that his influence penetrates the inmoſt receſſes of things, and that He is equally aive and preſent every wheree The ſimplicity of the laws that prevail in the world, the excellent diſpoſition of things, in order to obtain the beſt ends, and the beauty which adorns the works of nature, far ſuperior to any thing in art, ſuggeſt his conſummate Wiſdomm. The uſefulneſs of the whole ſcheme, ſo well contrived for rhe intelligent beings that enjoy it, with the internal diſpoſition and moral ſtructure of thoſe beings themſelves, ſnew his unbounded Goodneſs. Theſe are the arguments which are ſufficiently open to the views and capacities of the unlearned, while at the ſame time they acquire new ſtrength and luſtre from the diſcoveries of the learned. The Deitys acting and interpoſing in the univerſe, ſhew that he governs it as well as formed it, and the depth of his counſels, even in conducting the material univerſe, of which a great part ſurpaſſes our knowledge, keep up an inward veneration and awe of this great Being, and diſpoſe us to receive what may be otherwiſe revealed to us concerning him. It has been juſtly obſerved, that ſome of the laws of nature now known to us, muſt have eſcaped us if we had wanted the ſenſe of ſeeing. It may be in his power to beſtow upon us other ſenſes of which we have at preſent no idea; without which it may bę impoſſible for us to know all his works, or to have more adequate ideas of himſelf. In our preſent ſtate, we know enough to be ſatisſied of our dependency upon him, and of the duty we owe to him the lord and diſpoſer oſ all things. He is not the object of ſenſe; his eſſence, and indeed that of all other ſubſtances, is beyond the reach of all our diſcoveries; but his attributes clearly appear in his admirable works. We know that the higheſt conceptions we are able to form of them are ſtill beneath his real perfections; but his power and dominion over us, and our duty towards him, are manifeſt. 7. Sir Iſaac Newton is particularly careful, always to repreſent him as a free agent; being juſtly appreD henſive of the dangerous conſequences of that doctrine which introduces a fatal or abſolute neceſſity preſiding over all things. He made the world, not from any neceſſity determinig him, but when he thought fit: matter is not infiite or neceſſary, but he created as much of it as he thought proper: he placed the ſyſtems of the fixed ſtars at various diſtances from each other, at his pleaſure: in the ſolar ſyſtem, he formed the planets of ſuch a number, and diſpoſed them at various diſtances from the ſun, as he pleaſed: he has made them all move from veſt to eaſt, though it is evident from the motions of the comets, that he might have made them move from eaſt to weſt. In theſe and other inſtances, we plainly perceive the veſtiges of a wiſe agent, but acting freely and with perfect liberty. As caution was a diſtinguiſhing part of Sir Iſaac Newton's character, but no way derogatory ſfrom his penetration and the acuteneſs and ſublimity of his genius; ſo we have particular reaſon on this occaſion to applaud it, and to own that his philoſophy has proved always ſubſervient to the molt valuable purpoſes, without ever tending to hurt them. 8. As in treating of this unfathomable ſubject we are at a loſs for ideas and words, in any tolerable degree, adequate to it, and, in order to convey our notions with any ſtrength, are obliged to have recourſe to figurative expreſſions, as was obſerved already; ſo it is hardly poſſible for the moſt cautious to make uſe of ſuch as may not be liable to exceptions, from angry and captious men. Sir Iſaac Newton, to expreſs his idea of the divine Omnipreſence, had ſaid that the Deity perceived whatever paſſed in ſpace fully and intimately, as it were in his Senſoriumm A clamour was raiſed by his adverſaries, as if he meant that ſpace was to the Deity what the Senſorium is to our minds. But whoever conſiders this expreſſion without prejudice, will allow that it conveys a very ſtrong idea of the intimate preſence of the Deity every where, and of his perceiving whatever happens in the completeſt manner, without the uſe of any intermediate agents or inſtruments, and that Sir Iſaac made uſe of it with this view only; for he very carefully guards againſt our imagining that external objects act upon the Deity, or that he ſuffers any paſſion or reaction from them. It is commonly ſuppoſed that the mind is intimately conſcious of the impreſſions upon the ſenſorium, and that it is immediately preſent there, and there only; and as we muſt derive our ideas of the attributes of God from what we know of our minds, or of thoſe of others, in the beſt manner we can, by leaving out all imperfection and limitation; ſo it was hardly poſiible to have repreſented to us the divine Omnipreſence and Omniſcience in a ſtronger light, than by this compariſon. But the fondneſs of philoſophers for their favourite ſyſtems, often irritates them againſt thoſe, who, in the purſuit of truth, innocently overturn their doctrines, and provokes them to catch at any occaſion of finding fault. 9. But the greateſt clamour has been raiſed againſt Sir Iſaac Newton, by thoſe who have imagined that he repreſented infinite ſpace as an attribute of the Deity, and that He is preſent in all parts of ſpace by diffuſion. The truth is, no ſuch expreſſions appear in his writings: he always thought and ſpoke with more veneration of the divinity than to allow himſelf ſuch liberties. On the contrary, he tells* us thas c thè  ZEternus eſt & infinitus, omnipotens & omniſciens id eſt, durat ab æterno in æternum, & adeſt ab infinito in infinitum: omD  the Deity endures fiom eternity to eternity, and is preſent from infinity to infinity; but that he is not eternity or infinity, ſpace or duration He adds indeed, that as the Deity exiſts neceſſarily, and by the ſame neceſſity exiſts every where and always, he conſtitutes ſpace and duration: but it does not aæppear that this expreſſion can give any juſt ground of complaint; for it is ſaying no more than that ſince he is eſſentially and neceſſarily preſent in all parts of ſpace and duration, theſe of conſequence, muſt alſo neceſſarily exiſt. 10. This idea is ſo far from giving any juſt ground of complaint, that it accounts for the neceſſary exiſtence of ſpace, in a way worthy of the Deity, and ſuggeſts the noble improvement we may make of this doctrine, which lies ſo plain and open before us. Sir Iſaac Newton is ſo far from repreſenting the Deity as preſent in ſpace by diffuſion (as ſome have advanced very unjuſtly) that he expreſly tells us* there are ſucceſſive parts in duration, and co-exiſtent parts im ſpace. But that neither are found in the ſoul or principle of thought which is in man; and that far leſs can they be found in the divine ſubſtance. As man is one and the ſame in all the periods of his life, and thro' all the variety of ſenſations and paſſions to which he is ſubject; much more muſt we allow the ſupreme Deity to be one and the ſame in all time, and nia regit, & omnia cognoſcit, quæ ſiunt aut fieri poſſunt. Non eſt æternitas & inſinĩitas, ſed æternus & infinitas; non eſt duratio & ſpatium, ſed durat & adeltl. Durat ſomper, & adeſt ubique, & exiſtendo ſemper & ubique, durationem & fpatium conſtituit. Neut. Princip Scholium Generale, pag. 525.  Partes dantur ſucceſivæ in duratione, coexiſtentes in ſpatio, neutræ in perſona hominis ſeu principio ejus cogitante; & multo minus in ſubſtantia cogitante Dei. Omnis homo quatenus res ſentiens, eſt unus & idem homo durante vità ſuà in omnibus & ſingulis ſenſuum organis. Deus eſt unus & idem Deus ſemper & ubique, ibid. : : in all ſpace, free from change and external influence. He adds, that the Deity is preſent every where, non per virtutem ſolam ſed etiam per ſubſtantiam, ſed modo prorſus incorporeo, modo nobis penitus ignoto. It is plain therefore, that he was far from meaning that the Deity was preſent every where by the diffuſion of his ſubſtance, as a body is preſent in ſpace by having its parts diffuſed in it. Nor is it ſurprizing that we ſhould be at a loſto give a ſatisfactory account of the manner of God’s omnipreſence. Our knowledge of things penetrates not into their ſubſtance: we perceive only their figure, colour, external ſurface, and the eſfects they have upon us, but no ſenſe, or act of reflection, diſcovers to us their ſubſtance; and much leſs is the divine ſubſtance known to us. As a blind man knows not colours, and has no idea of the ſenſation of thoſe who ſee, ſo we have no notion how the Deity knows and acts. 1I. His exiſtence and his attributes are, in a ſenſible and ſatisfactory manner, diſplayed to us in his works; but his eſſence is unfathomable. From our exiſtence and that of other contingent beings around us, we conclude that there is a firſt cauſe, whoſe exiſtence muſt be neceſſary, and independent of any other being; but ĩt is only a poſteriori that we thus infer the neceſſity of his exiſtence, and not in the ſame maænner that we deduce the neceſſity of an eternal truth in geometry, or the property of a figure from its eſſence: nor is it even with that direct ſelſevidence which we have for the neceſſary exiſtence of ſpace. We mention this only to do juſtice to Sir Iſaac Newtons notion, when he ſuggeſts that the neceſſary exiſtence of ſpace is relative to the neceſſary exiſtence of the Deity. Philoſophers have had always diſputes about infinite ſpace and duration; and probably their conteſts on theſe ſubjects will never have an end: all we want to repreſent is only, that what is ſo briefly and modeſtly advanced by this great man on thoſe ſubjects, is, at leaſt, as rational and worthy of the Deity, and as well founded in true philoſophy, as any of their ſchemes; though it muſt be expected that the beſt account we can form of matters of ſo arduous a nature, will be liable to difſiculties and objections. As for thoſe who will not allow ſpace to be any thing real, we obſerved above that the reality of motion, which is known by ex perience, argues the reality of abſolute ſpace; without admitting which, we ſhould have nothing but confuſion and contradictions in natural philoſophy. Many other arguments, particularly thoſe drawn from the axiom, non entis nulla ſunt attributa, for the reality of ſpace, whoſe parts are ſubject to menſuration and various relations, have been treated of largely by others. 12. We obſerved above, that as the Deity is the firſt and ſupreme cauſe of all things, ſo it is moſt unaccountable to exclude him out of nature, and repreſent him as an intelligentia extramundona. On the contrary, it is moſt natural to ſuppoſe him to be the chief mover throughout the whole univerſe, and that all other cauſes are dependent upon him; and conformable to this is the reſilt of all our enquiries into nature; where we are always meeting with powers that ſurpaſs mere mechaniſm, or the effects of matter and motion. The laws of nature are conſtant and regular, and, for ought we knov, all of them may be reſolved into one general and extenſive power; but this power itſclf derives its properties and efficacy, not from mechani'm, but, in a great meaſure, from the immediate influences of the firſt mover. It appears, however, not to have been his intention, that the preſent ſtate of things ſhould continue for ever without alteration; not only from what paſſes in the moral world, but from the phænomena of the material world likewiſe; as it is evident that it could not have continued in its preſent ſtate from eternity. 13. The power of gravity, by which the celeſtial bodies perſevere in their revolutions, penetrates to the centres of the ſun and planets without any diminution of virtue, and is extended to immenſe diſtances, decreaſing in a regular courſe. Its action is proportional to the quantity of ſolid matter in bodies, and not to their ſurfaces, as is uſual in mechanical cauſes: this power therefore, ſeems to ſurpaſs mere mechaniſm. But, whatever we ſay of this power, it could not poſſibly have produced, at the beginning, the regular ſituation of the orbs and the preſent diſpoſition of things. Gravity could not have determined the planets to move from weſt to eaſt in orbits nearly circular, almoſt in the ſame plane; nor could this power have projected the comets with all variety of directions. If we ſuppoſe the matter of the ſyſtem to be accumulated in the centre by its gravity, no mechanical principles, with the aſſiſtance of this power of gravity, could ſeparate the vaſt maſs into ſuch parts as the ſun and planets, and, after carrying them into their different diſtances, project them in their ſeveral directions, preſerving ſtill the equality of action and reaction, or the ſtate of the centre of gravity of the ſyſtem. Such an exquiſite ſtructure oſ things could only ariſe from the contrivance and powerful influences of an intelligent, free, and moſt potent agent. The ſame powers, therefore, which at preſent govern the material univerſe, and conduct its various motions, are very different from thoſe which were neceſſary to have produced it from nothing, or to have diſpoſed it in the admirable form in which it now proceeds. 408 SSir Isaac NEWTONS Book IV. 14. As we cannot but conceive the univerſe, as depending on the firſt cauſe and chief mover, whom it would be abſurd, not to ſay impious, to exclude from acting in it; ſo we have ſome hints of the manner in which he operates in nature, from the laws which we find eſtabliſhed in it. Though he is the ſource of all efficacy, yet we find that place is left for ſecond cauſes to act in ſubordination to him; and mechaniſm has its ſhare in carrying on the great ſcheme of nature*. The eſtabliſhing the equality of action and reaction, even in thoſe powers which ſeem to ſurpaſs mechaniſm, and to be more immediately derived from him, ſeems to be an indication that thoſe powers, while they derive their eſficacy from him, are however, in a certain degree, circumſcribed and regulated in their operations by mechanical principles; and that they are not to be conſidered as mere immediate volitions of his (as they are often repreſented) but rather as inſtruments made by him, to perform the purpoſes for which he intended them. If, for example, the moſt noble phænomena in nature be produced by a rare elaſtic ætherial medium, as Sir Iſaac Newton conjectured, the whole efficacy of this medium muſt be reſolved into his power and will, ho is the ſupreme cauſee This, however, does not hinder, but that the ſame medium may be ſubject to the like laws as other elaſtic fluids, in its actions and vibrations; and that, if its nature was better known to us, we might make curious and uſeful diſcoveries concerning its effects, from thoſe laws. It is eaſy to ſee that this conjecture no way derogates from the government and influences of Axaẽ ro7 ĩv 7ò Sæibraor, 7ò uerẽ pasãvn; ꝶ dnaũs xuvſoęw Tavrodlarã  duoręrnęl idbas, donẽr àuuenei dpdaiv õt unxæroroiol duã uiẽs opydve c xas nplaes, Toanæs x; mininæs tvepyòias dmornẽvTes. Ariſtot. ubi ſupra. the Deity; while it leaves us at liberty to purſue our enquiries concerning the nature and operations of ſuch a medium. Whereas they who haſtily reſolve thoſe powers into immediate volitions of the ſu preme cauſe, without admitting any intermediate inſtruments, put an end to our enquiries at once; and deprive us of what is probably the moſt ſublime part of philoſophy, by repreſenting it as imaginary and fictitious: by which means, as we obſerved above *, they hurt thoſe very intereſts which they appear ſo ſanguine to promote; for the higher we riſe in the ſcale of nature, towards the ſupreme cauſe, the views we have from philoſophy appear more beautiful and extenſive. Nor is there any thing extraordinary in what is here repreſented concerning the manner in which the Supreme Cauſe acts in the univerſe, by employing ſubordinate inſtruments and agents, which are allowed to have their proper force and efficacy; for this we know is the caſe in the common courſe of nature; where we find gravity, attraction, repulſion, &c. conſtantly combined and compounded with the principles of mechaniſm: and we ſee no reaſon why it ſhould not likewiſe take place in the more ſubtile and abſtruſe phænomena and motions of the ſyſtem. 15. It has been demonſtrated by ingenious men, that great revolutions have happened in former times on the ſurface of the earth, particularly from the phænomena of the Strata;, which ſometimes are tound to lie in a very regular manner, and ſometimes to be broken and ſeparated from each other to very conſiderable diſtances, where they are found again in the ſame order; from the impreſſions of plants leſt upon the hardeſt bodies dug deep out of * Book I. Chap. 5. Sect. 3. the earth, and in places where ſuch plants are not now found to grow; and from bones of animals both of the land and ſea, diſcovered ſome hundreds of yards beneath the preſent ſurface of the earth, and at very great diſtances from the ſea. Some philoſophers explain theſe changes by the revolutions of comets, or other natural means: but as the Deity has formed the univerſe dependent upon himſelf, ſo as to require to be altered by him, though at very diſtant perioda of time; it does not appear to he a very important queſtion to enquire whether theſe great changes are produced by the intervention of inſtruments, or by the ſame immediate inſluences which ſirſt gave things their form. 16. We cannot but take notice of one thing, that appears to have been deſigned by the author of nature: he has made it impoſſible for us to have any communication from this earth with the other great bodies of the univerſe, in our preſent ſtate; and it is highly probable, that he has likewiſe cut off all communication betwixt the other planets, and betwixt the different ſyſtems. We are able, by teleſcopes, to diſcover very plainly mountains, precipices and cavities in the moon: but who tread thoſe precipices, or for what purpoſes thoſe great cavities (many of which have a little elevation in the middle) ſerve, we know not; and are at a loſs to conceive how this planet, without any atmoſphere, vapours, or ſeas, (as is now the common opinion of aſtronomers) can ſerve for like purpoſes as our earth. We obſerve ſudden and ſurprizing revolutions on the ſurface of the great planet Jupiter, vhich would be fatal to the inhabitants of the earth. We obſerve, in them all, enough to raiſe our curioſitv, but not to ſatisty it. From hence, as vell as from the ſtate oſ the moral world, and many other conſiderations, we are induced to believe, that our preſent ſtate would be very imperfect without a ſubſequent one; wherein our views of nature, and of its great author, may be more clear and ſatisfactory. It does not appear to be ſuitable to the wiſdom that ſnines throughout all nature, to ſuppoſe that we ſhould ſee ſo far, and have our curioſity ſo much raiſed concerning the works of God, only to be diſappointed at the end. As man is undoubtedly the chief being upon this globe, and this globe may be no leſs conſiderable, in the moſt valuable reſpects, than any other in the ſolar ſyſtem, and this ſyſtem, for ought we know, not inferior to any in the univerſal ſyſtem; ſo, if we ſhould ſuppoſe man to periſh, without ever arriving at a more complete knowledge of nature, than the very imperfect one he attains in his preſent ſtate; by analogy, or parity of reaſon, we might conclude, that the like deſires would be fruſtrated in the inhabitants of all the other planets and ſyſtems; and that the beautiful ſcheme of nature would never be unfolded, but in an exceedingly imperfect manner, to any of them. This, therefore, naturally leads us to conſider our preſent ſtate as only the dawn or beginning of our exiſtence, and as a ſtate of preparation or probation for farther advancement: which appears to have been the opinion of the moſt judicious philoſophers of old. And whoever attentively conſiders the conſtitution of human nature, particularly the deſires and paſſions of men, which appear greatly ſuperior to their preſent objects, will eaſily be perſuaded that man was deſigned for higher views than of this lifee. Theſe the author of nature may have in reſerve to be opened up to us, at proper periods of time, and after due preparation. Surely it is in his power to grant us a far greater improvement of the faculties we already poſieſs, or even to endow us with new faculties, of which, æt this time, we have no idea, for penetrating farther into the ſcheme of nature, and approaching nearer to himſelf, the firſt and ſupreme cauſec. We know not how far it was proper or neceſſary that we ſhould not be let into knowledge at once, but ſhould advance gradually, that, by comaring new objects, or new diſcoveries, with what was Rnon to us before, our improvements might be more complete and regular; or how far it may be neceſſary or advantageous, that intelligent beings ſhould paſs through a kind of infancy of knowledge. For new knowledge does not conſiſt ſo much in our having acceſs to a new object, as in comparing it with others already known, obſerving its relations to them, or diſcerning what it has in common with them, and wherein their diſparity conſiſts Thus our knowledge is vaſtly greater than the ſum of what all its objects ſeparately could afford; and when a new object comes within our reach, the addition to our knowledge is the greater, the more we already Ienow; ſo that ĩt increaſes not as the new objects increaſe, but in a much higher proportion. 