INTENDED TO ILLUSTRATE A COURSE OF LECTURES, ON THE PRINCIPLES OP NATIRAL PHILOSOPHY, READ IN THE OBSERVATORY AT TRINITY COLLEGE, THE EISHOP OF PETERBOROUGH, MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, THE FOLLOWING PLAN OF A COURSE OF LECTURES ON THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED BY HIS LORDS H IP'S MOST OBEDIENT, AND MOST OBLIGED HUMELE SERVANT, London, November 12, GEORGE ATWOOD. DESCRIPTION, &e. M E C H A N I CS. EXPERIMENT I. F light bodies float upon the ſurface of water contained in a glaſs veſſel, they are obſerved to be attracted toward the ſide of it. That power (whatever be the cauſe of it) by which bodies are impelled toward each other, has been termed by Sir I. Newton, and others, attraction, gravity, or ſometimes gravitation, which only ſiznify the diſferent modes in which the ſame principle operates. Thus the ſmallei body is ſaid to gravitate toward the larger, and the larger to attract the ſmaller. ExpP. II. Glaſs planes, held contiguous to each other, are obſerved to attract the water in which they are immerſed, and to raiſe it up between them, above the level of the external water. Exr. III Capillary tubes attract the water in which they are immerſed, and raiſe it above the level of the external water. Exp. IV. A copper-wire, one tenth of an inch in diameter, and three inches in length, being ſtretched with weights, is obſerved to ſuſtain 270 pounds beſore it is broken. ExP. V. Plane ſurfaces of hard bodies, being poliſhed and brought into contact, ſtrongly cohere. Ex?. VI Bodies by their vis inertiæ are obſerved to reſiſt the impulſes of any force tending to ſet them in motion Bodies in motion, reſiſt the impulſes of any force tending to augment or diminiſh their motion. ExP. VII. A body any how attracting another body, is attracted by it with equal force. Bodies tending toward each other, by their mutual attraction, move with velocities, which are inverſely as their quantities of matter. The earth attracts the moon, and is equally attractea by it. Tt ſuantity of matter in the earth is about ſorty times greater than that con tained in the moon; wheace, if theſe bodies were to approach each other in a right line by means of their mutual attraction, while the earth moved towarã the moon one mile, the moon would in ĩts approach to the earth deſcribe forty miles. And their rel ative velocities being always an 40 to 1 they would at length meet impinging againſt each other in contrary directions, and with equal moments. ExpP. VIII. If a piece of gold and a feather fall at the ſame inſtant from the top of a glaſs receiver, well exhauſted of air, it is obſerved that they both deſcend to the bottom of the receiver in the ſame time. It appears from hence that hodies are attracted toward the earth with ſorces not proportional to their bulks, but to the quantities of matter con. tained in them: for ſuppoſing the weight oſ the guinea to be a thouſand times greater than that of the feather, it wili require 1000 times greater force to move the guinea than the feather, through the ſame ſpace in the ſame time. ExpP. IX. If two forces act at once upon a body in the direction of the ſides of a parallelogram, and are proportional to them in quantity, it is obſerved that a force oppoſed in the direction of the diagonal, and proportional to it, will counterpoize the other two, and the body acted upon will remain at reſt. ExP. X. If a body be acted upon by three forces, repreſented in quantity and direction by the three ſides of a triangle; or by four forces, repreſented in quantity and direction by the four ſides of a trapezium, it will be at reſt. ExP. XI. A body, or ſyſtem of bodies, will not be a reſt unleſs their center of gravity is ſupported. The center of gravity of an body or ſyſiem of bodies, is that point in which the weight of the whole is collocted, and conſequently will deſcend to the loweſt point poſiible. Exe. XII. If any plane figure be placed upon a point or fulcrum, it will not reſt in any poſition whatſoever, unleſs the centers of ſuſpenſion and gravity coincide. Ex?. XIII. If a body hang freely from a center of ſuſpenſion, it will not be at reſt, except when the line of direction produced paſſes thro' the center of ſuſpenſion. ExP. XIV. If a body vibrate freely round different centers of ſuſpenſion, the interſection of lines drawn from thoſe centers perpendicular to the horizon, when the body is at reſt, will be the center of gravity. E x P. XV. Bodies may be conſtructed in ſuch a manner, that they may appear to aſcend while their centers of gravity deſcend. E x P. XVI. Let two bodies, of any given magnitude and weight, be connected together by a rod, and let them revolve in an horizontal plane round different points in the rod; it is obſerved that the center of gravity will not be quieſcent, unleſs the center of motion coincides with it. The centriſugal forces of the two bodies revolving round a point in the rod w.ll not be equal, unleſs the centers of motion and gravity colncide,. E x P. XVII. If a cylinder be placed upon an horiZontal plane, the line of direction being without the baſe, the cylinder will fall; but if the plane is elevated in ſuch a manner, that the line of direction may fall within the baſe, the cylinder will be ſupported. E x ?. XVIIIL If ſolids of any kind be placed upon an inclined plane, when the lines of direction always fall without their baſes, they will roll down the plane; if the lines of direction fall within the baſes, and the ſurfaces beſmooth, the ſolids will ſlide down. E x r. XIX. Let weights be ſuſpended on a rod in the following manner: three ounces at ſeven inches from either extremity, four ounces at ten inches, and one ounce at eleven inches; then the diſtanceof the center of gravity from the fame extremity is 7x345101x1 ꝗ inches. 3H4+1 E x P. XX. If a rod be ſo conſtructed, that a line joining the centers of gravity and ſuſpenſion may be at right angles to it, the rod hanging freely upon its center of ſuſpenſion; will not be at reſt, except in an horizontal poſition. E x P. XXI. A weight which counterpoiſes an ounce when ſuſpended from the longer arm of a falſe balance, being added to the weight which counterpoiſes an ounce ſuſpended from the ſhorter arm, the ſum is obſerved to be greater than two ounces. L 7] E x P. XXII. Let a ſmooth ſurface, loaded with weights, be placed upon an immoveable horiZontal plane : if both ſurfaces be hard and well poliſhed, an horizontal force nearly equal to one third of the weight with which the upper ſurface is loaded will juſt move i along the plane. E x ?. XXIII. Let two ſurſaces be placed upon an immoveable horizontal plane, and be loaded with equal wẽights; equal forces will be required to move them along the plane; but if the weights are different, the greater weight vill require a greater force to move it, whatever be the proportion of the ſurfaces. E x P. XXIV. If a pendulum vibrate upon friction wheels, a given motion communicated to it will not be ſo ſoon deſtroyed, as when it is ſuſpended on an immoveable fulcrum. The effects of ſri tion may be eſtimated two ways. 1. By the quantity of motion loſt in a given time. 2. By the time in which a given quantity oſ motion ĩs deſtroyed; the lattr meihod is made uſe o? in the experiment. E x P. XXV. There will be an equilibrium on a ſtrait lever of any kind, when the power is to the weight, as the diſtance of the weight to the diſtance of the power from the fulcrum. For if not, let one of the weights preponderate.Thereſore the preponderateing weight has more moment than the other; but ſince by the hypotheſis, the weights are inverſely as the arms of the lever, it follows, that the vel cities of the weights are inverſely as their quantities ſol matter whence the moments of both are equal: but they were proveò unequal. This contraditory concluſion reſults from denying the prop ſition ffirmed, which is thereſore true. The ſame method oſ demonſtration mæy be extended to all the mechanical powers. Ex P. XXVI. There will be an equilibrium upon a bent lever, when the power and the weight are inverſely proportional to the lines drawn from the fulcrum perpendicular to the lines of direction. E x P. XXVII. IF weights be ſuſpended on the arms of a ſtrait lever, there will be an equilibrium, when the ſum of the products of each weight multiplied into its reſpective diſtance from the fulcrum, on one ſide, ĩs equal to the ſum of the products tuken in a ſimilar manner on the other. E x ?P. XXVIII. The ſame moment is produced on the arm of a ſtrait lever, whether weights are ſuſpended at any given diſtances from the fulcrum; or the ſum of the weights is ſuſpended at the diſtance of thei common center of gravity, E x P. XXIX. On a fixed pulley there is an equilibrium when the power is equal to the weight. E x r. XXX. On a ſingle moveable pulley, there will h an equilibrium, when the power is to the weight, as one to two. E x P. XXXI. There will be an oquilibrium in a ſyſtem of pullies, where the ſame ſtring goes round all the pullies contained in two blocks, when the power is to the weight, as unity is to the number of ſtrings at the lower block. E x P. XXXXII. There will be an equilibrium in a ſyſtem of moveable pullies, where a ſeparate ſtring goes round each pulley; when the power is to the weight, as unity to that power of two, whoſe index is the number of pullies. E x Pp. XXXIII. There will be an equilibrium in that yſtem of pullies, where the ſtring which goes round each pulley is fixed to the weight; when the power is to the weight, as unity to that power of two, whoſe index is the number of pullies, the whole being decreaſed by unity. E x Pp. XXXIV. When the reſiſtance which acts againſt a wedge is perpendicular to the ſides, there vill be an equilibrium, if the power be to the weight, as the back of the wedge is to the ſum of the ſides. E x P. XXXV. :i There will be an equilibrium on the ſcrew, when the power is to the weight, as the diſtance between two contiguous threads, to the circumference which the power deſcribes. E x ?r. XXXVI. There will be an equilibrium on the wheel and axle, when the power is to the weight, as the radius of the axle to the radius of the wheel. E x ?2. XXXVII. LIf a weight be ſuſtained upon an inclined Plane, by a power which acts in a direction parallel to the plane, the power will be to the weight, as the height of the plane te the length. E x P. XXXVIII. IF à weight be ſupported on an inclined plane, by a power which acts in a direction parallel to the baſe, the power will be to the weight, as the height of the plane to the baſe. E x Pr. XXXIX. If a weight be ſuſtained upon an inclined plane by a power which acts in a direction any how inclined to the plane, the power will be to the weight, as the ſine of the plane's elevation to the coſine of the angle, in which the direction of the power is inclined to the plane. E x?r. XL. On a compound lever, there will be an equilibrium, when the power is to the weight, as the product of the powers on each lever, to the product of the weights. The general rule ſor determining when there will he an equilibrium on a machine, compounded of any number of mechanic powers, is this: —Set down the ratios of the power to the weight on each mechinical power; the ſum of thele will be the ratio of the power to the weight, when therę is an equilibrium on the machine. l Ex ?. XLI. An ivory ball impinging directly againſt a quieſcent ivory ball of equal weight, communicates to it nearly the whole velocity ol the impact, and after the ſtroke remains almoſt quieſcent. E x r. XLII. Let the centers of any number of contiguous ivory balls, equal in weight, be placed in a right line; and let the firſt impinge againſt the next to iĩt in the direction oſ the line joining the centers: It is obſerved that the ball moſt remote from the ſtroke flies off with a velocity, nearly equal to that of the ſtriking ball, which, with the intermediate balls, remains almoſt quieſcent. Ex ?r. XLIII. An jvory ball impinging directly againſt a quieſcent ivory ball of twice the weight, communicates to it nearly two thirds of the velocity with which the impact is made. E x rp. XLIV. If an elaſtic ball impinge directly againſt I quieſcent elaſtic ball of greater weight, ihe ſtriking ball will be reflected. If a heavier ball ſtrike againſt a lighter one at reſt, both the balls, aſter the impact, will go on in direction of the ſtroke. E x?P. XLV. If two unequal weights be ſuſpended by a line joining them, and going over a fixed pulley, the heavier weight will preponderate; and in iĩits deſcent will deſcribe ſpaces which are as the ſquares of the times of falling from reſt. IF a body ſall freely by the force of gravity, ĩt will deſcribe ſixteen feet in one ſecond, and ſixty-four ſeet in two ſeconds of time; The velocity oſ this motion, is too great for any obſervation to be made in the roportion of the times oſ deſcent and ſpaces deſcribed, unleſs the body E from very great altitudes; but in this experiment, the abſolute force of gravity being diminiſhed, the velocity likewiſe will be ſo much diminiſhed, that the proportions of the times of ſalling, and of the ſpaces decribed, will be eaſily aſcertained during the deſcent through ſmaller altitudes, If the weights be  and 4, the ſpace deſcribed by the preponderating weight, will be 1670 & Hiꝶ feet in I ſeconds; wherefore i a= 83 ounces, and b=28 ounces, the heavier of theſe vill eſcend through about three inches in one ſecond, 34 inches in two ſeconds, 359 inches in three ſeconds, and ſo on, making allowance for the loſs oſ motion ariſing from fridtion, which muũ be very much diminiſied in order to make the experiment nearly corre ſpond with the theory.  Some uſeſul practical rules may be derived from the theory of bodies ſalling ſreely by the force of gravity. Suppoſe the ſpace deſcribed by a bedv falling from reſt in one ſecond, to be ſixteen feet, which it is nearly; (and the reſiſtance of the air will bring jt ſtill nearer:) let be any ſpace deſcribed in ſeet,  the velocity acquired at end of the deſcent in feet, ? in the time of falling in ſeconds; and we l - : V have s16t, 3/ =8V s, v]/ai, =Y t 64 4 32 Hence having given any one of theſe; viz. either the time of deſcent the ſpace deſcribed, or relociy acquired by a body which has ſullen fron reſt, the other two may be readily determined. E x ?. XLVI. IF two bodies begin to deſcend from the higheſt point of an inclined plane at the ſame inſtant, one of them will fall through the perpendicular height, while the other deſcends on the plane to the interſection of the perpendicular drawn from the oppoſite angle. E x P. XLVII. If bodies deſcend along inclined planes which have the ſame height, the times of deſcent will be as the lengths of the planes. For the times oſ deſcribing different inclined planes are directly as the lengths of the planes, and inverſely as the ſquare roos of their perpencicular heights: The heights being the ſame in this experiment, ĩt follous that the times of deſcription will be as the lengths. E x P. XLVIII. If two pendulums be equal in length, it is obſerved, that they deſcribe equal arcs in equal times, whatever be the proportion of their weights. From hence we infer that gravity acts upon bodies with forces proportional to their quantities oſ matter.For ſince the two pendulums vibrate through the ſame ſpace, in rhe ſame time, it ſollows that gravity muſt act upon the heavier with a force proportionally greater than that, with vwhich it impels the lighter, —Vide Exp. VIII. E x P. XLIX. If two pendulums be equal in length, it is obſerved that they deſcribe ſmall circular arcs in nearly the ſame time, whatever be the proportion of the arcs. Whenever the forces which accelerate bodies are proportional to the ſpaces to be deſcribed, the times of deſcribing thoſe ſpaces will be equal. In the preſent caſe, the forces which accelerate the pendulums are a the ſines of their angular diſtances ſrom the loweſt point; and the arca being ſmall, the ratio of their ſines will be nearly the ſame, as that of the ares themſelves, or of the ſpaces to be deſcribed. Whence it follows, that the ſemi- vibrations of the pendulums moving through the different ares, and conſequently the entire vibrations, will be deſcribed in nearly equal tmes. ExP. L. If the lengths of two pendulums be as four to one, it is obſerved that their times of vibration in the ſmall arcs of. a circle are as two to one. ExP. LI. Let a cylindrical rod vibrate in a vertical plane on one of its extremities, as an axis of motion: a pendulum, the length of which is two thirds of the cylindrical rod, will vibrate in the ſame time. The center of oſcillation is that point, in which all the moment of a body revolving round a center of motion is collected; in a cylindrical rod, vibrating ronnd one of it's extremities, this point is diſtant two thirds oſ the whole length ſrom the center of motion. The diſtance of the center of oſcillation from the center of motion determines the lengi oſ a pendulum. E x P. LII. In a compound pendulum, as the center of ſuſpenſion is brought nearer to the center of gravity, the diſtance of the center of oſcillation from the center of ſuſpenſion increaſes Let a compound pendulum conſiſt of two weights, Aand B, fired at the extremities of a rod; and let the diſtances of A and B from the cente of ſuſpenſion be a and à reſpetively : Iſ the weights be on the ſame ſide of the center of ſuſpenſion, the diſtance of the center of oſcillation from a a it will be u ; if the weights be on different ſides of the center ol Aat -50 fuſpenſion, the ditaneæ of the center oſ oſcillation will be—&-: in this caſe when 4aæB6, the center of gravity coincides with the cente: of ſuſpenſion, and the diſtance of the center of oſcillation from ĩt becomes . : t/, which is infinite. E xP. LIII. If the baſe of an inverted cycloid be parallel to the horizon, and bodies deſcend from different points of the arc to the loweſt point, it is obſerved that the times of deſcent are equal. The ſorces which accelerate bodies deſcending on the cycloidal are in the poſtion as deſcribed in the experiment, ae as the ſpaces to be deſcribed, whence the times cſ deſcent through them muſt be equal to each õther. E x e. LIV, If two bodies fall from reſt at the ſame inſtant, the one deſcribing the inverted ſemicycloid, the other deſcending in a right line joining the extremities of it, the body which deſcribes the curve, will arrive at the loweſt point before that which deſcends along the right line. The cycloid ĩs called from this property, the line of ſiſteſt deſcent. Ex ?. LV.Bodies projected near the ſurface of the earth, in any direction not perpendicular to horizon, deſcribe a parabola. Experiment will not exactly agreæ with the theory of projectiles, unleſi the reſitance oſ the air be taken into conſideration; but the difference ĩa not conſiderable. Some uſeful practical rules may be deduced from the principles of projectiles : In experiments made on the ſtrength of poder, and other circumſtances relating to guanery, the angle of elevation, or tha firſt direction of the project is uſually 45°, in which caſe the time of ſlight being given by obſervation; the horizontal range, the greateſt altitude, anà the velocity of projection will be readily aſcertained. Let a æ the greatoſt altitude of the projeòt  = the velocity of projection in ſoet. b = the horizontal range  =the time oſ ſlight in ſeconds then ? being given we ſhall derive from it E xP. LVI. If the velocity of projection be given, the horiZontal range is greateſt when the angile HY D R O STA TICS. ExrER IMB N T I. 1LE: a glaſ veſſel flled with water, be eighèd in air; being aſterwards weighed in water, it appears to loſe the greater part of its Weight. Beſore the principles of Hyanſatics vere ſully underſiood, this experiment induced philoſophers to imagine, that ſluids were deprived of their weight when immerſed injſiuids of the ſame ſort. The true reaſon of this apparent loſs of weight will appear in the ſucceœding experiments E x P. II. Let a hollow ſ;here be made heavy enough to ſink in water, and let it be eighed when immerſed: being filled with water, and again weighed when immerſed, it is obſerved to be heavier than before, by the weight of the included water. This experiment is a direct prooſ, that a fluid, when immerſeã in it own element, loſes no part of its weight. ExP. Ii. Let mercury be poured into tubes, open at both ends, and bent at different angles; upon immerſing the ſhorter arms in water, it is obſerved, that the mercury in all the longer arms is elevated. One of the principal properties of Ruids is their preſſure inall directions, which ĩs demonſtrated by this experiment. ExP. IV. Let a piece of cork be fitted to the bottom of a veſſel, ſo that the ſurface may be every where in contact. If mercury be poured into the veſſel, the cork will not aſcend, till the ſurface of it is ſeperated from the bottom of the veſſel. Cork being immerſed in mercury, is preſſed upwards with a force which is greater than its weight, and muſt therefore aſcend, unleſe the communication between its lower ſurface and the ſluid is prevented: thia is effected in the experiment; by which means the cork remains attached tq the bottom of the veſſel, partly by ita own weight, and partly by the weight of the mercury preſſiag on its upper ſurface. Ex?P. V. Let oil be poured into a bent tube, open at both ends; upon immerſing the ſhorter arm in water, it is obſerved that the oil aſcends in the longer arm, and deſcends in the other. This experiment is intended to prove, that a heavier fluid may gravitate upon a lighter. ExPr. VI, Let a tube, open at both ends, be immerſed in mercury, contained in a glaſs veſſel; if water be poured into the veſſel, it is obſerved that the mercury will riſe in the tube. This experiment proves, that a lighter ſluid may gravitate upon à heavier,it is ælſp concluded, ſrom hence, that however light à ſluid may be, a ſuſficient quantity of it preſſing upon the ſurſace of a heavier ſluid, may raiſe it up an immerſed tube, with the inſide of which, the lighter ſluid does not communicate. j i ExP. VII. If any number of tubes, however differing in dimenſion and figure, communicate with each other, ſo that a fluid being poured into one of them, may flow into the others, it is obſerved, that the ſurfaces of the fluid, in all the tubes, are on a level. Ex p. VIII. Let the ſhorter arm of a ſyphon be immerſed in mercury; if the air be removed from the inſide of the tube, it is obſerved, that the mercury will flow out of the longer arm, in a continued ſtream. It may be inferred from the preceding experiments, that the gravitation of bodies toward the center of the earth is not confned to thoſe which are uſually called heavy, but extends to matter in general; and that the terms heavy and light aræ merely relative expreſſions. The relative weights of ſubſtances, or their ſpecific gravities, are meaſured by the abſolute weights contained in bodies of equal magnitudes: Thus if a cubic inch of copper, weighs nine times as much as a cubic ineh of water, the relative, or ſpeciſic gravities of copper and water, will be as nine to one. From hence may be derived theſe general rules: I. The weights of bodies are proportional to their maznitudes anã ſpeciſic gravities jointly. 2. The magnitudes of bodies are as their weights directly, and ſpecific gravities inverſely. 3. The ſpeciſic gravities of bodies are a; their weights directly, and magnitudes inverſely. Exr. IX. Let a circular plate of braſs be exactly fitted, ſo as to cover the lower aperture of a ęylindrical tube immerſed perpendicularly in water. If the plate be immetrſed to æ4 depth of ecight times its own thickneſs, it will be juſt ſupported by the preſſure of the water. The weight oſ the braſes, ĩs equal to the weight of eight times its bulke of water; whence the preſſure on it muſt be equal to the weſht of a column of water, whoſe baſe is the ſurface preſſed upon, and altitude ita perpendicular diſtance ſfrom the ſurface of the water. Exr. X. Let a tube (open at both ends) be inſerted into a cloſed cylindrical veſſel. If water be poured in, ſo as to riſe in the tube to any altitude, it is obſerved, that the preſſure which the baſe of the veſſel ſuſtains, is equal to the weight of a cylinder of water, whoſe baſe is the ſurface preſſed upon, and altitude the ſame as that of the water in the tube. We obſerve from this experiment, that the quantity of preſure upon the haſe is much greater than the weight of the ſluid contained in the tube and veſſel, which has been eſteemed a paradox, but will be eaſily accounted for by obſeræing, that iſ an aperiure were made in the top of the incloſeò veſſel, the water by i's preſſure upward, would nſe to nearly the ſame level with that in the tube; whence the water being confined by the upper part of ite veſſel muſt preſs againſt the baſe with an equal force, actien and re-actjon being equal; ſo that the preſſure ſuſtained by the baſe, onſiſta borh of the weight of the fluid, and its re-action againſt the uprer ſurface of the veſſel. E x r. XI. If a ſolid float upon the ſurface of a fluid, it is obſerved, that the fluid diſplaced is equal in weight to the ſolid. From this experiment we may derive the followſng contluſion: Sinet the ſpecific gravities of bodies are as their weights directly, and magni; tudes inverſely; if their ueights are equal, the ſpecific gravities muſl be inverſely as their magnitudes. The weight oſ the water ciſplaced, and of the ſolid, are equal by the experiment; wherefore the magnituoe ſ the water diſplaced, muſt be 1o that of the ſolid, as the ſpeciſic gravit) of the ſoliã, to ihe ſpeciſic gravity of the fluid; or, ĩn other words, the part immerſed is to the whole, as the ſpecific gravity of the ſolid, to the ſpecific gravity of the fluid. Hence it appears, that ſhips diſplace a quantity of water equal in weight to that of the ſhip and its loadingif a quantity of water be let into the cavity of the ſhip, ſo as to make the weight of the whole, greater than the weight of an equal bulk of water, the ſip will fink. ExP. XII. If a cylinder, ſeven inches in length, the ſpecific gravity of which is nine times greater than that of water be immerſed in mercury; 2.5 inches of it will remain above the ſurface. From the laũt experiment, the part immerſed, ĩs to the whole as the ſpecific gravity of the ſolid to the ſpecific gravity of the fluid; or in the preſent caſe, as the part immerſed: 7 :: 9: 1I4 Whereſore the part immerſed 1 4.5. Aod the part remaining above the ſurſace 1 = 2.5 inches. E x p. XIII. If a cylinder of elm, (or any other ſubſtance of the ſame ſpecific gravity) ten inches inlength, be immerſed perpendicularly in water, the part remaining above the ſurface is obſerved to be four inches. 2. If the ſame cylinder be immerſed in ſpirit of wine, the part remaining above the ſurface is only three inches. Upon this principle the hydrometer is conſtructed. —For the ſpeciſic gravity and magnituòe of tha ſolid, continuing the ſame, we ſhall bavæ the ſpecific gravity of the fluid inverſly as the part immerſed; if thereſore the cylinder be graduated, the depth to which it ſinks when immerſed in different ſluids, ill ſiew their relative or ſpecific gravities: Thus the depth to which it ſunk in water, was obærved to be ſix inches, in ſpirits of wine ſeven inches; wherefore the. ſpecific gravity of water, ĩs to that of ſpirits of wine, ©n an inverſe proportion of thoſe numbers; or, as 7 to 6, or as Ito.857. l E x ?. XIV. Let a cylinder, ſeven inches in length, the ſpecific gravity of which is nine times greater than that of water, be immerſed in mercury; 2.5 inches of the cylinder will remain above the ſurface. If water be poured on the mercury till it covers the cylinder, 2.7 inches will now remain above the ſurface. It followed ſrom a preceding experiment, that if a ſolid floated upon the ſurſace of a ſluid, the part immerſed would be to the whole, as the ſpecific gravity of the ſolid to the ſpecific gravity of the fluid: and upon this principle, the part of the cylinder which remained above the ſurſace of the mercury, was at ſirſt 2. 5 inches; but by pouring on water, the cyilnder wai niſed, ſo that 2.7 inches remained above the ſurface. Hence the prior rule for findiog the proportion of the part of a ſolid immerſed to the whole, will be accurately true only in vasuo. The rule ſor determining this proportion, in the preſent caſe, ĩs as follows: as the part immerſeà ĩs to the whole, ſo is the difference of the ſpeciſic gravities of the ſolid und lighter ſluid, to the difference of the ſpecific gravities of the heavier and lighter fluids. It appears from hence, that if any ſubſtance float upon the ſurface of a fluid in vacuo, upon admitting the air, the floating body will riſe higher abore the ſurface, ſo that the proportion of the part immerſed io the whole will be ſomewhat leſs than before.The afitrence of the parts of a ſolid immerſed in a ſluid, when in vacuo and in open air, may be eſtimated in general thus: Let m= the magnitude oſ the ſolid 1 9æ its ſpecific gravity A = the part immerſed when in open air B æ the partimmerſed when in vacuo a =æ the ſpeciſic gravity of the ſluid in which the ſolid In immerſed. i g the ſpeciſic gravity oſ the air. x Then by the fiuſt rule B. m:: 1: a;3 and Bæmn the part immerſed when in vacuo. By the latter rule 4 :m:: : ag; wheace  uX 5 to the put immerſed when in air: and the diſference of the parts immerſed mx1 mXg8g - a scaſioned by the air's preſſureæBA mxa—;sa+ag r neuily. a a” at Hence we mav infer by making the computation, that the weight oſ the al? incumbent on the ſurface of water, whereon a body ſoats, m: kes ſo little difference in the proportion of the part immerſed to the whole, that it may be negle ea in any eſtimate of this kind, excep where the utmoſt accuracy is ræquireſ, Ex?P. E x ?. XV, A ſolid is obſerved to weigh leſs when immerſed in Water, than in open Air, by the weight of a quantity of water equal in bulk to the ſolid, All ſolids deſcend in a fluid with forces leſs than their weights; and the difference appears by the experiment, to be the weight of a quantity of the fluiò, equal in bulk to the ſolid. By means of this principle, the relative weights or ſpecific gravities of bodies are determined. The rule is this: Let the ſolid be weighed in air and in any fluid. —Then as the whole weight is to the difference of the weights, ſo is the ſpeciſic zravity of the ſolid to the ſpecific gravity of the ſluid. ExPr. XVI. A cubic in inch of any ſubſtance which will ſink in Water, being immerſed in it, weighs leſs by 253.2 grains than when it is weighed in air. From this experiment is deduced a concluſion, which greatly facilitates the computation of the ſpeci fic gravitics, magnitudes, and weights of bodies: The weight which the cubic inch Io es, in water, appears from the prececing experiment to be the weight oſ a cubic inch of water, wh.ch ĩs therefore2353.2 grains: conſequently a cubię toot of water or 1728 inches2353.2X 172894;7500 grains nearly, or 1CO0 ounces. Let = the weight of a body in ounces; s its ſpecific gravity, taken in that ſcale, where the ſpecific gravity of water= 1990; m its magnitude, in parũs oſ a cubic foor; and ue have the iollowing proporiion: 1I000:: WwW :: IoXI :: mXs or, as the number of ounces contalned in a cubie foot of water, ĩs to thæ number of ounces contained in the ſolid, ſo is the ſpecific gravity of the subic ſoot of water X into its magnitude, to the produẽt of the ſꝓcciſic ęravity and magnitude of the ſolid: whence u4 i=n:. Exam ple. ſfjo find the weight of 2. 16 cubic inches of bràſs. Here 2.16 i u2a.16x 'oco m=  parts of a eubic foot: :7 8000: and w=æmxX1m 1728P 1728 æ 10 ounces. Example 2. To ſind the magnitudę oſ a quantity of air, which weighs an ounce: ꝓ 10000 Lũ q60 : Here v=æ1 1 and n==—=:86 parts oſ a cubic oot, the magnitudę required. E x P. XVII. If a very thin veſſel be weighed when full of air, and when exhauſted, the difference of weights is obſerved to be nearly 7 of a grain for every cubic inch contained in the veſſel. E x P. XVIII. Let a piece of cork be exactly counterpoiſed in a ballance by a leaden weight: if the whole be placed under the receiver of an air pump, upon exhauſting the air, the cork will preponderate. Since all bodies deſcend in vacuo with forces which are proportional to their quantities of matter, or their weights, ĩt ſollows that two bodies which counterpoiſe each other in vacuo, contain accurately equal quantitie of matter; but when a body deſcends in a fluid of any kind, (not tenacious) ita ſorce of deſcent is diminiſhed by the weight of a quantity of ſfluid equal in magnitude to the ſolid. Hence it follows that the air's preſſure diminiſhes the weight of the corlk more than it does that of the lead; whence theſe ſub tances, belng counterpoiſed in air, will not contain equal quantities of matter; and the air being removed, the weight which is really the greateſt muſt preponderate. We learn ſrom hence that the rue weights of bodies are not obtained by weighing in air, unleſis the body to be weighed, and the weight, a ol the ſame ſpecific gravity. E x ?. XIX. If a piece of copper be exactly counterpoiſed in air by a braſs weight, and both the copper and braſs be immerſed in water, the copper will preponderate. The principle upon which this experiment depends, is this: the watei proſſes upward with greater ſorce againſt that body, which is the greatet in magnitude; whence the braſs will loſe more weight than the copper, which muſt thereſore preponderate. Let any two bod e: of equal weight, but diſferent ſpeciic gravities, be immerſed in a lighter Aduid; the ſollowing proportion, derived from the principles ol ſpeieſic gravities, will determine how much greater weight is loſt by the one than by the other: as the product of the ſpeciſic gravities, is to their difference, ſo ĩa the weight of either ſolid X into the ſpeciſic gravity o the ſluid, in which the ſolids are immeiced, to the difference of weighta ireà requireã. Example. Iſ 120 grains of braſs be counterpoiſed in air by a copper weight, upon immerſing them in water, the equilibrium is deſiroyea: the weight which muſt be addeò to the ſcale ſrom which the braſi is ſuſpended, in ordus to reſtore the equilibrium, will be determined by referring to rule: As 9x68: -8:1 1201: =m grain and two thirds, the weight required. r Example 2. If a guinea weighing 129 grains be counterpoiſeq In air by a braſi eight, and both be immerſed in water, Baxm_ Ju— 17.2 or ſomething more than 8ſ grains muſt be added  the ſcale from which the braſi is ſuſpended in order to reſtore the equilibrium which is deſtroyeà by the immerſion. E x P. XX. The ſpecific gravity of a body which will not ſink in water may be dẽtermined by uniting it to a ſolid, ſo that the compound may be ſpecifically heavier than water. l: method of determining ſpeciſic gravities may be expreſſed genethus: y Let A the weight oſ the heavier ſolia a —its ſpecific gravity B æ the weight of thè lighter ſolid x æ its ſpecific gravity ſought C = the weight of the compound  &its ſpecific gravity. 4 Then ſrom the principles oF ſpecific grayities, wo have B Z4 L Pac 7 vhence æ - the ſpecific gravity required. E x ?. XXI. Let a glaſs tube, 36 inches in length, be filled with mercury, and one extremity being cloſed, let the other be immerſed in a veſſel of mercury; it is obſerved, that the mercury ſinks from the upper end of the tube, and remains ſuſpended at an altitude of about twenty-nine inches and a half. E x P. XXII. A tube leſs than twenty-eight inches in length, being filled and immerſed, the the mercury will remain contiguous to the upper end of the tube. The weight of the mercury in the tube is this caſe leſs than the preſfore of the atmoſphere. E x ?. XXIII. If barometer tubes, of various dimenſions and inclinations, be filled and immerſed, it is obſerved, that the mercury remains ſuſpended at the ſame perpendicular altitude in them all. E x P. XXIV. Let a barometer be placed under the receiver of an air-pump, as the air is exhauſting, the mercury continually deſcends till it is nearly on a level with the mercury in the veſſel.—Upon admitting the air, the mercury riſes to its former altitude. E x P. XXV. Let a tube, thirty-ſix inches in length, open at both ends, be immerſed in mercury, contained in a veſſel, from the inſide of which the external air is excluded; if the tube and veſſel be placed under a receiver, it is obſerved, upon exhauſting the air, that the mercury is raiſed in the tube nearly to the ſtandard altitude. It is demonſirated from this experiment, that the elaſtic ſorce of the nir preſſing againſt any ſurface, is equal to the weight of the atmoſpher preũing upon the ſame ſurſace. Ex ?P. XXVI. Let a veſſel be filled with water, and the aperture of it be exactly covered with a braſs plate; if the veſſel be inverted, the plate will continue to adhere to it. E x P. XXVII. Let a thin glaſo veſſel, the aperture of ceiver of an air-pump, if the air be exhauſted from the receiver, the veſſel will be broken. E x P. XXVIII. Let a thin glaſs veſſel, the aperture of which is cloſed, be fitted with a valva opening outwards. If this be placed under the receiver of an air- pump, the air being exhauſted, and re-admitted into the receiver, the veſſel will be broken. E x P. XXIX. Let a thin plate of glaſc be fitted to the upper aperture of a receiver, ſo that there be no communication between the internal and external air; upon exhauſting the receiver, the plate of glaſs is broken. Expr. XXX. If a barometer be immerſed in a veſſel of mercury, and ſuſpended from the beam of a hallance; it is obſerved that the weight neceſſary to counterpoiſe it, excluſive of the tube, is equal to the weight of the mercury ſuſtained in the barometer, by the preſſure of the atmoſphere. Exr. XXXXI. Let two hollow braſs hemiſpheres be cloſely placed together ſo as to prevent the communication of the external and internal air; if the air be exhauſted from the cavity, it is obſerved that the hemiſpheres are preſſed together with a force which requires a weight of about fifteen pounds for every ſquare inch of a great circle of the biſſected ſphere to ſeparate them. Exr. XxxII. If the exhauſted hemiſpheres be ſuſpendded under the receiver of an air-pump, upon exhauſting the air, the loer hemiſphere will fall to the bottom of the receiver. Expr. XXXIII. If an exhauſted receiver be made to communicate with a veſſel of water, by means of a tube inſerted in the center of the plate on which the receiver ſtands; the water #ſcends through the tube, and ſtrike: againſt the extremity of the receiver with a continued ſtream. Ex?. XXXIV. Let a glaſs ſphere, having a ſmall orifice made in that part of it which is immerſed, float upon the ſurface of a veſſel of water: if the veſſel be placed under the receiver of an air-pump, upon exhauſting the air, and re- admitting it into the receiver, the ſphere will be filled with water, and ſink to the bottom of the veſſel. Ex?P. XXXV. Warm water, or newly fermented liquors, appear to boil, in vacuo. Ex?. XXXVI. The ſpaces into which a given quantity of air is compreſſed, are obſerved to be leſs in the ſame proportion, as the forces of compreſſion are greater. Ex?r. XXXVII. Let ten inches of air be included with the mercury in a barometer (exactly cylindrical) of thirty-five inches in length; ii the barometer be inverted and immerſed in mercury, the included air will now occupy twenty inches. From this experiment is derived the ſollowing proportion: As tht ftandard altitude ĩs to the deſct from it, ſ is the ſpace which the included all octuples aſter inverſion, to the ſpace ĩt oceũpted beron inverſion. Let  æ the fandira altitute d æ the dtfũt ſrom it  the diſference between the ſtandarã altitude and the length of the tube Z the qtàſitity of ⸗ir ded. Whence we huve in general :: à:: b-d : 2 and g bax a E If the quantity oſ air ĩnẽludtà be givn to nd the àœſæœt from the ftandard altitude, put æ equal to the deſeãt, and we have by the precedre: P: n u b)æ: 5. Wherefore æ2 4 3æ =1g; anã tui It thè Rtandara Mtĩtode bà reater than the length of the tube, the fign of b muſt be changeq; and the deſect from the ſtandatd altitude, or æ uill now be equal to vEũ+0 à The barometer tube being cylindrical, the quantity of air included before inverſion, and the ſpaces occupied aſter inverſion are eſtimated by the degrees, into which the Iength of the tube is divided. A general concluſion is derived from the two preceeding experiments, viz. the tlaſtic force of the air is ditectly proportional 1ò its denſity, ànd inverſely às the ſpace which ĩt octãpies. Exp. XXXViIII. The altitude of the mercury in a barometer, elevated above the ſurface of the earth, is obſerved to be leſs than the ſtandard altitude. i Since the ſuſpenſion of the mercury in the barometer, has been proved to ariſe ſrom the preſſure of the atmoſphere, it follows, that if any part of the airs weight mould be taken off, the altitude of the mercury in the tube will be diminiſhed. The fol owing rule will determine the height of à imountain by means of the barometer: ſſetting aſide the eſfeũts oſ the diſferent temperatures oſ the air. Let the altitude of the mercury in the barometer at the Bottom of the mountiin be a, the altitude at thi a 0 top 5: the height required will be log. l x n in parts of à mile. The log. of 7 is here ſuppoſed to be æriggr. Expr. XXXIX. If a tube be immerſed in a fluid, and the air contained in the tube be rarefied, the This experient ĩs ſimilar to Exp. XXV. but is immediately deſi gned to explain the operation of pumps in raiſing water: theſe inſtrumeats, however various in their conſtruction, all depend u the ſame principles, viz. the weight and elaſticiiy of the air. ii pria ExP. XL. If a tube, open at both ends, be immerſad in water, the ſurface of which is contiguous to air, compreſſed into one half the ſpace, which it poſſeſſes in the atmoſphere, the water will ſpout from the tube when placed vertically, to an altitude of about thirty- three feet, ſetting aſide the effects of friction, and the reſiſtance the air. Ex?. XLI. If a bell be ſtruck under the receiver of an air- pump, it is obſerved that the ſound becomes weaker the more the air is exhauſted. It appeara from this experiment, that ſound ĩs propagated by the air; but on account of the parts of the apparatus which communicate with the bell, ſome ſouad will always be porceived, though the air is as much exhauſted as poſſible. Ex ?. XLII. Flame is obſerved to be extinguiſhed in vacuo. If it be placed under a cloſe receiver, it will be extinguiſhed after ſome time, although the air be not exhauſted, Ex ?. XLIII. If water flows out of equal apertures made in the ſides of cylindrical veſſels, and the veſſels be kept conſtantly filled, it is obſerved that the quantity of water diſcharged in a given time is in a direct ſubduplicate ratio of the perpendicular diſtance of the apertures from the ſurface of the water. E x P. XLIV. If an aperture biſſects the altitude of a cylindrical veſſel, kept conſtantly filled with water, the horizontal diſtance to which the water ſpouts, is equal to the height of the veſſel, ſetting aſide the effects of friction, and the reſiſtance of the air. E x P. XLV. If apertures be made at different diſtances from the ſurface of the water contained in a cylindrical veſſel kept conſtantly filled, the horizontal diſtance to which the ſluid ſpouts, is obſerved to be the greateſt when the aperture biſſects the diſtance between the ſurface of the water and baſe of the veſſel. In general, let A bæ the altitde of the veſiel, D the diſtance of the iperture from the ſurface, then the parameter or the parabola deſcr bed by the fluid, will be 40, the abſciſſa  AD: And the ſquare of the ordinate, or oſ the horizontal diſtance is equal to 44D21D?, which quantity is the greate?t when A= 2 D. or when the aperture biſſects ihe diſtance betn een the ſurface of the water, and the baſe of the veſſcl. E xP. XLVI. Let apertures be made at equal diſtances from the bottom, and the top of a cylindrical veſſel kept conſtantly filled with water; the horizontal diſtances to which the water ſpouts from theſe apertures is obſerved to be EL ECTRIC ITV. ExPEIMENT I. IF a ghſs tube made very dry, be rubbed with a piece of ſilk, it is obſerved that light ſubſtances, ſuch as feathers; cork, balls, &c. being applied near to it, are firſ attracted and afterwards repelled. The power by which theſe light ſubſtances are attracte  and ræpelled, is called Electricity; the ſubſtance by the ſriction of which it is produced, is ſaid to be electric; the friction of ele&tric bodies, is calleã excitation. E x æ. II. Excited ſealing-wax being applied near to light bodies, firſt attracts and afterwards repels them. Amber, ſil, jet, dry wood, and a variety oſ other ſobſdances being excited, attract and repel light bodies, and are called ElectricsMetals, water and other bodies, the frition of which will not produce this power of attraction, and repulſion, are called Non- electrics. E x P. III. If a metalline cylinder be ſupported upon filk lines, or upon glaſs, and an excited electric be applied near to it, every part of the cylinder ill attract and repel Ilight ſubſtances, in the ſame manner as the excited electric itſelf. Metals poſſeſing the power of tranſmitting electricity, are called Conductors; to theſe may be added water, and all bodies which contain it. ExpP. IV. Let a ſilk line, or a glaſs rod made very dry, be ſuſpended on glaſs; it is obſerved that electricity cannot be tranſmitted through either of them. Glaſi being impervious to electricity is called a Non-conductor. Silk, jet, ſealing-wax, air, &c. are likewiſe Non. condutors; and in general, all bodies which are electrics, are Non-conductors; anã all bodies which are Nonelectrics, are conductors. A body which communicates with nothing but electrics, is ſaid to be inſolated. ExP. V. Let two cork balls be ſuſpended from lines about ſix inches in length, and inſulated; if excited ſealing- wax or glaſs be applied to them, they will repel each other; and after the excited electric is removed, they are obſerved to remain repelled. The uſe of inſulating bodies, is to confine the electiicity applied to them, and to render the eſfects oſ it permanent, E x P. VI. Conducting ſubſtances not inſulated, being held near to an excited electric, are obſerved to be attracted towards it. Definition. The electric power which is produced from the excitation of glaſi, ĩs called the Vitreous Electiicity; and the power which is produced ſrom the excitation of ſealing-wax ĩs called the Reſinous Electricity. E x P. VII. If the inſulated cork balls repel each other with the vitreous ælectricity, the reſinous power being applied to them, will deſtroy that repulſion, and will cauſe the balls to reel each other with the reſinous electricity, if the excitation be ſufficiently ſtrong. E x ?. VIII. The repulſion of the balls electrified with the reſinous power, is deſtroyed by the application of the vitreous. E x pr. IX. If glaſs and ſealing- wax equally excited, are at once applied to the inſulated cork balls, no electricity of either ſort will appear to be communicated to them. We obſerve ſrom the threæ preceding experiments, that the vitreom and reſinous powers counteract each other; whence if both are applied at once to a body, the electricity communicated upon the whole, will be snly the difference oſ the two, and will be of that ſort which is tha ftrongeſt, ExP. X. If bodies be electrified with contrar powers, they are obſerved to attract each other ſtrongly. General Properties of Electricity. 3, Bodies electriſied vitreouſly repel each other. 32. Bodies electrified refinouſſy repel each other. 3. Electrified bodies atiract bodies not electrified. 4. Bodies electriſied by contrary powers attraẽt each other ſrongly. E x r. XI. If a glaſs tube having it'spoliſh taken oſf be excited, it will communicate the reſinous electricity to bodies held near it. E x r. XII. A piece of down being applied to excited ſealing- wax, and touched at the ſame time with a conductor, is electrified with the vitreous power. It is concluded from this and the preceding experiment, that both reſinous and vitreous powers are productc ſrom the excitation either ofglaſi or oſ ſealing wax.For the ſake of diſtinction, that power whith is produced by the excitation of poliſheã glaſs, will be culied vitreous, anũd the contrary power reſinous. l E x P. XIII. If the rubber of a glaſs tube or cylinder be inſulated, and a conductor applied to rhè cylinder while excited, it is obſerved that the rubber is electrified reſinouſly. Whenever the eletric powers are ſeparated by excitation, one power ittaches itſelf to the excited electric, and the other to the rubber. E x P. XIV. If the rubber and conductor applied to an excited electric, are both inſulated, the leſs electricity will be produced, the more perfectthe inſulation is made. Neither the rubber nor conductor can be inſulated perfectly, on accoun oſ the moiſure which is always floating in the air. IF the air and the parts of the apparatus be very dry, little or no electricity will be excited in the circumſtancs above- mentioneò. It is concluded from hencæ that the eleẽtric powers do not exiſt in the lectrics themſelves, but that they are produced ſrom the earth by the exof electries. itn ſubſtance contained between paralled ſurſaces, however ſiſpoſed, ĩs called an electric plate. E x ?. XV. Electrified bodies attract bodies not electrified, although a thin electric plate be interpoſcd between them. E x r. XVI. Bodies electrified with contrary powers, attract each other ſtrongly, although an electric plate be interpoſed between them. Thus flame communicates heat through ſubſtances, which are impervious to the ſlame itſelf. H Y P OT H E S I S. I. The to electric powers exiſt together in all bodies. a. Since thes counteract each other when united, they can be made evident to the ſenſes, only by their ſeparation. 3. The two powers are ſeparated in nonelcctrics by the excitation of electrics, or by the application of excited electrics. 4. The powers cannot be ſeparated in electric ſubſtances. 5. The two electricities attract each other ſtrongly through the ſubſtance of electrics. 6. Electric ſubſtances are impervious to the two electricities. 7. Either power, when applieĩ to an unelectrified body repels the power oſ the ſame ſort, and attracts the contrary power. ExP. XVII. If one ſurface of a plate be electrified with either power, the oppoſite ſurface is electrified with the contrary power, if it be not inſulated. Either power being applied to one of ihe ſurſaces, attracts the contrar) power through the ſubſtaricę oſ the electriec, and repels the electricity ol the ſame ſort with itſelf. The two powen being thus brought to the oppoſite ſurſaces of the plate which ©s impervious to them, remair ſuſpended; ſtrongly attracting each other, till the interpoſed plate i: broken by their force, or a communication is ſormed between the twe ſurfaces by ſome conducting ſubſtance. When the two powers are ſuſpended on the oppoſite ſurſaces of a eleftric plate; the plate is ſaid to be charged. A condo&tinꝶ ſubſane which forms a communication between two charged ſurſaces ia called a circuit. l E x P. XVIII. Whenever,two powers unite by breaking a plate of air, an electric light is obſerved, which is attended with an exploſion if the charge be conſiderable; the union of the two electricities deſtroys the effeccts of each, and Ieaves the plate diſoharged. Whenever either power is accumulated in an electric cloud, the ſurface of the earth oppoſed ſo it js electrified by the contrary powerr. Theſe powers ſometimes unite by breaking the interpoſed plate of air. Exr. XIX. If plates of air and glaſs equal in magnitude and dimenſion, are charged by equal excitations, the plate of air is obſerved to be much more eaſily broken by the force of the charge, than the plate of glaſ. Exr. XX. If inſulated bodies be applied to either ſurface of a charged plate, at different diſtances from iĩt, ĩt is obſerved that the leſs the diſtance, the ſtronger the repulſive power. If bodies not inſulated are applied, the leſs the diſtance from the charged ſurface, the ſtronger is the power of attraction; from whence it is concluded, that the forces of electric repulſion and attraction vary in ſome inverſe ratio of the diſtance. It appears that every thing elſe being the ſame, a thin electric plate of glaſs will explode with greater force, than a thicker plate, the attraction of the two powers being the ſtronger, the nearer the charged ſurſaces an  each other. E x ?. XXI. The force of an electric charge is obſerved not to depend upon the ſhape in which the charged ſurfaces of a given magnitude and thickneſs are diſpoſed. It may be inferred ſrom the preceeding experiments, that the force ol a chaiged plate depe nds upon two things: 1. The quantity of the ſurfaces charged. 2. Their proximity. When the ſurfaces of an electric plate are charged with a certain quantity of the two powers, it is obſerved that no additional electricity can be communicated to them, however great an excitation is appliad ſor that purpoſe, Ex ?. XXII. If any part of the human body forms a portion of the electric circuit, ĩt is obſerved that the diſcharge is perceived in that part only which forms the communication, unleſs the charged ſurfaces are very great. Ex?r. XXIII. If circuits different in length and of different ſubſtances form a communication between two charged ſurfaces of an electric plate, it is obſerved that the diſcharge will be made through the beſt conductor, whatever be the lengths of the others. 2. If circuits of the ſame ſubſtance be different in length, the diſcharge will be made through the ſhorteſt of them. 3. If the circuits be the ſame in every reſpect, the diſcharge will be made through many of them at the ſame time. E x Pp. XXIV. The times of diſcharging the ſurfaces of an electric plate through the longeſt or ſhorteſt circuits are not ſenſibly different. Many miles of the earths ſurſace, large tracts of water, æc. have been made a part of the electiic circuit, and the diſcharge has been ina ſtlantaneous through them all. E x P. XXV, If either ſurface of a charged plate communicate with the earth, the power on the oppoſite ſurface will expand itſelf into a conductor which is contiguous to it, although the conductor be inſulated. E x P. XXVI. Let one ſurface of a charged plate be inſulated: although the other communicate with the earth, no diſcharge of either ſurface will follow. Ex r. XXVII. Let the ſurfaces of an electric plate be very ſlightly charged and inſulated, and let an interrupted circuit be formed; the two powers will be viſible, ĩlluminating the points of the interrupted circuit, and each power will appear to extend farther from the ſurface contiguous to it, the ſtronger charge is communicated to the plate; but if the illuminations on each ſide meet, there will immediately follow an exploſion of the whole charge. A cylindrical plate is that which is contained between two equal circles, the planes of which are parrallel to each other. Ex P. XXVIII. If a cylindrical plate of air contained in the receiver of an air-pump be charged, it is obſerved that the more air is exhauſted from between the ſurfaces, the more eaſily the two powers will unite. The diſcharge appears to be made from that ſurface which poſeſes the vitreous power. E x P. XXIX. IF an exhauſted receiver be made part of the electric circuit, and the charge fhould be not ſufficient to cauſe an exploſion, an electric light will appear to proceed in oppoſite directions from the parts communicating with the vitreous and reſinous ſurfaces. Iſ two contiguous clouds, very high in the atmoſphere, be eleẽtriſied with contrary powers, their diſcharge cauſes an appearance ſimilar & she diffuſe light obſervæd in the receiver. E x r. XXX. The ſtrength of the excitation being the ſame, it is obſerved that a charged plate of air will be the more eaſily broken, the ſmaller quantity of air is interpoſed between the oppoſite ſurfaces. Hence an electric plãte is more eaſily diſcharged thrugh an exhauſted receiver than in the open air, ſor the more rare the air is æade by exhauſtion, the leſs reſiſtance will be oppoſed ro the union of the two powen poſſeſſing the oppoſite ſurface:, and attracting each oiher through the ctric. PROPO SITION. The leaſt cylinder, the diameter of which is finite, and the thickneſs evaneſcent, is to the leaſt cylinder, the thickneſs of which is finite, and the diameter evaneſcent, in a greater than any aſſignable ratio. Expr. XXXI. The electric powers poſſeſſing the oppoſite ſurfaces of a cylindrical plate of air, whoſe diameter is evaneſcent, will be incomparably leſs reſiſted by the interpoſed electric, than by the thinneſt plate of air contained between two ſurfaces of a finite magnitude. Exp?. XXXII. Let a pointed body be oppoſed to either ſurface of a charged electrie plate; it is obſerved that whatever be the magnitude oſ the ſurfaces or the quantity of electricity, the whole will be ſilently diſcharged if the other ſurface be not inſulated. There being no reſiſtance to the unioa of the two powers, ther can be no accumulation or condenſation of them. Hence the diſcharge will. be made ſilently and gradually throngh a current formed between the point and the ſurface oppoſed to ĩt. Thus when an electric cloud and the ſurface of the earth directly under it are charged with contrary powers, they attract each other through the interpoſed plate of air. It is obſerved, that whatever be the quantity oſ the electric powers contained in the oppoſite ſurſaces, the whole is filently  chargsq, if the cloud approaches a pointed body communicating with the earth. If a conical pointed body were inſerted into ſimilar hollow cone, formed in an electrified ſolid, the ſurfaces of the two cones being every where equi. d tant, no greater diſcharge of the electricites would ſollow; than if the two conical ſurfaces had been plane and oppoſed to each other at the ſame diſtance. In order to increaſe the force of the charge, a number of electric plates are ſometimes joined together—the uſual method ĩs, to form a communication between the inſides of a number of coated glaſs jars, and another communication between the external coating. Jars ſo diſpoſed are called a battery, the effect: of which are exactly ſimilar to thoſe of a ſingle plate the ſame thickoeſs with the jars, and containing the ſame quantity of face. Ex?. XXXIII. If a large battery be diſcharged through a ſlender piece of wire, the wire will be broken to pieces or melted. Gunpowdèer or ſpirits of wine will be fired, if they are a part of the circuit. And if the diſcharge be made through a ſilver leaf confined between two glaſs planes, the glaſe will be broken to pieces and ſtained by the ſilver, which is driven by the force of the diſcharge, into the ſubſtance of the glaſ. Ex?P. XXIV. If a battery be diſcharged through a quire of paper, a perforation is made through it, and each of the leaves is protruded by the ſtroke from the middle toward the outward leaves. ExpP. XXXV.  If two electric plates be charged, and a communication formed between the vitrecus ſide of one, and the reſinous ſide of the other, no diſcharge will follow; unleſs a communication be formed between the other two ſurfaces, at the ſame time. The natural electricity in the atmoſphere is ſrequently diſcharged in this manner: Two clouds being electrified with oppoſite powers, he ſurfaces of the earth immediately under them are likewiſe electrified with power contrary to thoſe in the clouds above them; and the moiſture of earth forming a communication betweer the two contiguous charged ſurfaces, whenever the two clouds meet there will follow a diſcharge, both of the couds and the ſurfaces on the earth oppoſed to them. If the earth ſhould be dry, and conſequently afford a reſiſtance to the union of the two electricities accumulated on ĩts ſurſace, there will follow an exploſion in the earth, as well as in the atmoſphere, which will produce concuſſioni and other phænomena which liave frequently been obſerved to happen ©n dry ſeaſons, particularly in thoſe climates which are the moſt liable M A G N ET I S M. EXPERIMENT I. LET a ſlender iron rod exactly ballanced, be ſuſpended on a point ſo as to revolve freely in a plane parallel to the horizon: If the rod be touched with a loadſtone, one extremity of it ill be always directed towards the north. That power which the loadſtone communicates to iron is called Magnetiſm; a rod of iron poſſeſſed of this power is called a Magnot: Ma;netiſm is communicated to iron by magntical rods, as vell as by the Ioad ſtone itſelf: Iron rods alſo become magnetical by frictton, by being Eept for a long time in the ſame poſition, and by ekctricity, withou any ai©®tance from the loadſtone or magnets. The magnetical needle doea not point exaũ ly to the north, but is obſerved to change it's azimuth; ſometimes pointing toward the eaſt, and ſometimes to the weſt of the meridian. The extremities of a magnet are called Poles. A vertical circle in the Heavens which interſecta the horizon in the points to which the magnetical needle, when at reſt, mimm is called the Ma;netic Meridian. ExpP. II. If the north pole of a magnet be placed at the point of ſuſpenſion of a needle, and drawn along towards either extremity; that part of the needle which is touched by the magnet, will be directed to the ſouth. E x ?. III. If the ſouth pole of a magnet be placed to the point of ſuſpenſion of a needle, and drawn along toward either extremity; thai part of the needle which is touched, will be directed to the north. ExPe. IV. Either pole of a magnet is obſerved to attract iron, which is not magnetical. Expr. V. The north poles of two magnets repe each other when brought contiguous. Ex ?. VI. The ſouth poles of two magnets repel each other when brought contiguous. E xP. VII. The contrary poles of two magnets atattract each other ſtrongly. E x p. VIII. The northern magnetiſm is obſerved to be deſtroyed by the communication of the ſouthern and vice verſa. It appears ſrom hence, that the two ſorti of magnetiſm operate in ſuch  manner as to counteract each other; that if both be communicateã to the arm oſ a needle, the effect upon the whole will be only the difference of the two; and will be oſ that ſort which is the ſtrongeſt. Hence it is eaſy to reverſe the poles of the magnet. E xr. IX. Let a needle be exactly ballanced and ſuſpended, ſo as to revolve freely in a vertical plane; if it be made magnetical when hozont the north pole will be ſouth pole elevated E x P. X. liſcharge of the elect a needle, communicates the charge be ſufficient General Properties of Magnetiſi lance is capable of communicating o pt the loadſtone and iron, nagnet his two poles. poles of magnets repel each other. pole attracts iron not magnetical. ntrary poles of magnets attract eacl operiies of electricity and magneiſ o P T I C S. ExPERIMENT I. AYS of light proceed from luminous bodies in right lines and in all directons. ; It is generally agreed among philoſophers, that light conſiſts of very minote particles of matter, which are ſent forth by ſome jower, the cauſe oſ which is unknown, from luminous budies, in right lines and in all directions. Single particles of light, ſucceeding each other in a right line, conſiitute a ray of light, conſidered in a mathematical ſenſe; but, phyſically ſpeaking, a ray is the leaſt viſible portion of light ſeparated from the reſt. A ray of light being turned out of its courſe by ſalling upon a poliſhed ſubſiance: hrough which it dors not paſi, ĩs ſaid to be reflected. . Thę angle contained between the incident ray, and a line drawn ſerpendicular to the ſurface, ſrom the point whereon the ray falls, ĩs caliea the angle of incidence. ne angle contained between the perpendicular and the reſlected ray, is cal.ed the angle oſ refiection. E x r. II. The incident and reflected rays are in the ſame plane, and the angles of incidence and reflection are equal. The rays do not impinge upon the refleting ſurface; being turned ont of their courſe beſore they arrive at ĩt, hy ſume oWer wheh is cuntiguons to the ſurſace and acts in a direction perpendicuſar tu it. E x ?p. III. Rays of light proceed from illumined bodies, in right lines and in all directions. Thè ſurſaces of thoſe bodies which conſiſt of uneven and irregular parts, reflect the light in all directions. A ray oſ light being turned out of its courſe by falling obliquely upon the ſurſace of a tranſparent medium whicl it paſſes throvgh, ĩis ſaid to be reſracted; the angle contained betwæen the incident ray, and a perpendienlar to the ſurface, drawn from the point whereon the ray ſalls, is called the angle of incidence; the angle c nta ned hetween Ihe reſradied 135 and the perpendicular above- mentioned is calle the angl: oſ reſraction The difrerence of the angles of incidence and refraction, ĩs the anglt by which the ray deviates ſrom its origin.l direction, ani is called the angle of deviation. Ray oſ light are reſracted by ſome power contiguous to the reſracting lurſace. Rays oſ light being bent out of their courſe, by paſing near the ſarp tdges of bodies, are ſaid to be inſlected. Exr. IV. When a ray falls obliquely upon the ſurface of a denſer medium, iĩt is refracted towards the perpendicular; a ray, falling obliquely upon the ſurface of a rarer medium, and paſſing through it, is refracted from the perpendicular. A ray, falling perpendicularly upon a reſracting ſurface, is not turned out of ita courſe, but proteeds in the ſame direction with the incident ray.While a ray moves in the ſame uniform medium, it does not change its direction. The principles of Opties are demonſtrated upon a ſuppoſition that light is an homogeneal ſubſtance; and though light will appear to bę compounded of ſereral kinds of rays, yet the principles of refraction and reſlexion, &c. are mathemat cally true when applied to rays of any one ſort, Ex?. V, When a ray of light is refracted out of air into a given medium, or out of a given medium into air, the ſine of the angle of meidence is to the ſine of the angle of the refraction in a given ratio. Iſ a ray of light ĩs refracted out of air into glaſi, the ſine of incidence i 1 the ſine of reſration 15 31: 20, or as 5 to2 nearly; ou: of air into water, as 4 to3. Hence the ſine of incidence is to the ſine of refraction, hen a ray paſics out of water into glaſs, as à: 5 ora 95 : So. EX?. VI. A ray of light cannot paſs out of a denſer medium into a rarer, if the angle of incidence exceeds a certain limit. This limĩt is the angle, whoſe ſine is to radius as the ſine of incidenci ir to the ſine of refraction, out of the denſer medium into the rarer Thus a ray of light will not paſs out of water into air if the angle of in ti™c ner exceœds 459 36', the ſine of which is 4 of radius, : I A ray oſ light will not paſe out of glaſs into àit if the angle oſ incidence exceeds 40 11, the. fine of which ĩs F parts of radius; oĩ out of glaſs into water, if the angle of incidence exceeds about 55° 20. Ex?. VII. When a ray of light is refracted by paſſing out of a rarer medium into a denſer, if the angle of incidence be increaſed, the angle of deviation will alſo be increaſed. Let i, r, and d, repreſent the leaſt cotemporary variations of the angles of incidence, refraction and deviation; we have from the properties of thoſe angles i=r-d and di—r; but the leaſt increment of incidence is to the cotemporary increment of refraction as the tangent of incidence to the tangent oſ reſraction; hence ĩ is greater than r; therefore d being poſitive, the angle of deviation will of courſe increaſe whils the angle of incidence increaſes. The ſame reaſoning may be applied to demonſtrate, that when a ray oſ light is reſracted by paſſing out of a cenſer medium into a rarer, the angle of incidence being increaſed, the angle oſ deviſtion will alſo be increaſed. A priſm is a ſolid terminated by three rectangular parallelograms and two equal and purallel triangles. l A line drawn through the priſm parallel to the interſections of the parallelograms, is called an axis of the priſm. E x p. VIII. A ray of light paſſing through a denſer priſm, perpendicular to the axis, is obſerved to be refracted towards the thicker part of the priſm. TThe angle contained between the ſides of the priſm through which a tay paſſes, is called the refracting angle. It is always ſuppoſed, in optical experiments, that when a ray ĩs refracted through a priſm, the incident and emergent rays are perpendiculat to the axis. E x r. IX. If the angles of incidence in which a ray of light impinges upon the ſurfaces of a glaſ priſm be ſmall, the deviation of the ray rom its original courſe, after refraction, will equal about half the refracting angle. Two angles being diminiſhed, ſine limit;, may vaniſh in any given ratio, and their ſines will vam©h in the ſame ratio. This is a maihematical propoſilion; but in pradtic, alubonęæ twę angla; he ot granęſæat; yet B7 th-y exeeed not a few minute:, the ratios oſ the arco and of the ſinæ:  aie lo uearly the ſame, that as ſar as regarus experiments depending vpon them, no ſenſible difſerence can be obſerved, whether the ratio oſ ie arc or that oſ the fines be aſſumen: thus if the two arcs are 3 and 4' the ſines are as 23271 to 11636 nearly; which differs very litule from the ratio of 8: 4. l Cor. I. In general let T  the angle of incidence, R=the angle oſ etraction, out of the rarer medium into the denſer, and D = the angle ol deriation aſter the two refractions, Væ the reſracting angle of the V -_ priſm; then, iĩ the angles oſ incidence be very ſmall, D ibS :in the ſame priſm, therefore, the angle oſ derſation will remain the ſame, however the angles oſ incidence upon the ſurfaces (being always ſmall) ſhould van. Cor. II. In difſerent priſms ſorme⸗ oſ the ſame ſubſtance, the angle of àeation D will be proportional to the iefracting angles of the priſms. A double convex lens is a ſolid contained between two ſe;ments of ſpherical ſurſaces. A line joining the centers of the ſpherical ſurfaces, ĩs called the axis oſ the lens. Exr. X. There ĩs a point in every double convex lens, through which if a ray paſſcs, the incident and emergent rays will be parallel, however the incident ray be inclined to the axis of the lens; this point is called the center of the lens. Iſ rangents be drawn to the lens, at the points oſ incidence and emergrnce in any given plane, theſe tangents will be parallel The lens being very thin, or if the direction of the ray's naſſage be not much inclined to the axis, the incũdent and emergent rays will be nearly in the ſame ſirait line. It is to he underſtood, that the lenſes; pſiſms, Le. uſed in optical experiments, are formed of tranſpatent ſurlanes which are dcerſer than the medium throvgh which the rays ſlow before they arrive at the refracting ſurfaces. Theſe ſubſtances arc uſually glaſs or water. E x?r. XI. A ray of light falling upon a convex lens is bent by refraction towards the axis, unleſs the inclination of the incideut ay to the axis be very great. A ray of light falling upon any curve ſurſace, is reſracted or reſiected h the ſame munner as if it had ſallen upon a plane ſurface which touched e curve in the point of Incidence: whence it is the ſame thinę v hether a ray ĩs refracted through a lens, or through a priſm, the ſides ol which touch the lens in the points through which the ray paſſes. E xpP. XII. If a rav of light falling nearly parallel to the axis be refracted through a glaſs lens, it will deviate the more from its original direction the more remote from the center, it falls upon the lens. If the ũdes of a priſm be conceived to touch the lens in the points through which the ray paſſes, the angle at the vertex of the prſm will be the greater, the more remote thoſe points are from the axis of the lens; and conſequently, by Exp. IX. the angle of deviation will be the greater. E x?r. XII. If a ray of light be refracted through a medium, terminated by parallel ſurraces, the incident and emergent rays are parallel. The ſurfaces at the points of incidence and emergence are here ſuppoſed parallel. A ſlender portion of rays, ſeparated from the reft, is called a pencil oſ rays. Pencils of rays are uſually eylindrical or conical; the axis of a pencil h the ſame as the axis oſ the cone or cylinder. E x Pp. XIV. Parallel rays falling on a reflecting plane ſurface are reflected parallel. E x r. XV. If a pencil of parallel rays falls perpendicularly upon a ſpherical reflector, the focus of reflected rays biſects the diſtance between the ſurface and center. Foci are thoſe poinis ſrom which rays of light diverge, or to whish  s3] If parallel rays falling vpon a reſleſting or refracting ſurſace are eauſed to diverge ſrom, or converge to a given point, this point is called the principai focus. l The diſtance between the principal ſocus and the ſurſace of the reſractor or reſlector, is called the principal focal length. A ſpherical reſlector ĩs ſuppoſed to be a ſegment oſ a ſpherical ſurface. A line drawn throogh the centers of the ſphere, and of the leſſer tircle which terminates the ſpherical reſlector, ĩs called the axis. In the determination of foral lengths, the axis oſ the pencil of ĩincident rays is ſuppoſed 10 paſs through the centers of the refracting or reflecting ſurſaces; and the mathematical concluſions which follow aræ only true of thoſe rays which are contiguous to the axes; but experiment admits of a conſiderable deviation from the limitations abovementioned. Exr. XVI. If diverging or converging rays fall upon a ſpherical reſcòting ſurface, the diſtance of the focus of incident rays from the principal focus, half the radius of the reflector, and the diſtance between the principal focus and the focus of reflected rays, will be in continual proportion. Suppoſe the reſlector to be concave, and the rays to diverge from a ſocus, the diſtance of which ſrom the ſurſace æ à. Let the radius oſ the reſletor=r; we have by the preceding rule, / aæ :14 ——Z the diſtance between the ſocus of reſlected 2 a 2 4Dar rays and the principal focus. The ſocus of reflected rays ĩs in this caſe between the principal forus and the center of the reſlector, wherefore adding T to the quantity lant mf r ortadi ar i found, we have, 7 r r- for the ãi ftanee of the focus of reflected rays from the ſurſaee. This ſolution extends 1 all the caſes of foci formed by reflection ſrom a ſpherical ſurſace, by changing the ſign of r when the reflector ĩs convex, and of d whea the rays converge to a poſnt, the diſtance of which from the ſurface is à thus if rays converge upon a concave reſiector, the radius of which is 30 inches, and focos of converging ny: ſould be inches ſrom the ſurface, the focal length required will bæ : oxX10  idæ; in the preſent cale 2 = 6. 20 The diſtance between the ſorface of the reftector, and the focus ol eſæcted rays, ĩs salled the foral length. E xp. XVII. The foci of incident and reflected rays are always on the ſame ſide of the principal focus. If the focus of incident rays be moved along the axis of the reflector, the ſocus of reſlected rays will move on the oppoſite direction, and the foci will meet at the ſurface and center. E x P. XVIII. Parallel rays paſſing through one or more plane refracting ſurfaces, any how inclined, emerge parallel. E x Pp. XIX. The diſtance of the center of a glaſe ſphere, from the principal focus of rays refracted by it, is nearly equal to a radius and a half of the ſphere. 1. In general let r= the radius of the ſphere, the ſines of infidence and refraction I and R, the diſtance of the principal focus ſfrom the ceoter , r of the ſphere IF 2. Porallel rays paſiing through a globe of water are collected intoa focus, the diſtance of which ſrom the center is equal to a diameter of the ſphere. 3. If a pencil of parallel rays ſalls upon a ſphericæl refracting ſorface, we have the ſollowing proportion: as the difference of the ſines oſ incidence and refraction is to the ſine of incidence, ſo ĩs the radius of the furſace to the diſtance berween the ſurſace and focus of refracted rays; thereſore, T and R ſignifying as uſual, and r being the radius of the convex furface of a denſer medium, we bave the principal focal length Ir = : Ex?r. XX. A pencil of parallel rays falling upon a double convex glaſs lens, terminated by ſurfaces, the radii of which are equal, ĩs obſerved tance of which from the lens is neaily equal to the radius of eĩther ſurface. 15 the mãii of the ſurfaces be uneual, and the ſines of incidence and refraction Iand R, we have the ſollow ing rule. Find the principal focal length aſter reſraction from the firſt ſurſace, and it will be as the diſtance between the centers oſ the ſurfaces o the radius of the ſecond ſurface; ſo is the differente between the principal ſocal length, beſore ſfound; and the radius of the ſirſt ſurfate, 1 the ſocal length ræquired. Suppoſe the lens to be double convex; Let the radius of the firſt ſurface r the radius of the ſecond surface 2 , and we have ſrom Then the principal ſocallength oſthe firſt ſurſace æ the proportion beſore mentioned, r +2:5:: the principal focal length of the lens. Th s ſoluhon extends to the principal focal lengths of all lenſes, the thickneſs of which is inconſiętęble, the figns of r and: being changed vhen the ſurfaces are ncavę inſtead of convex; if either ſurface is plane, the radius which belongs to it becomes infne, in which caſe, the finite quantities added ©, or ſubſtracted from it, vanith. rtie or T nearly, when r  j as in the experiment, the principal focal length =r. In glaſs the principul ſòcal length æ Buppote the ſecond ſurface of a glaſs lens to be: ome pho-, ? then © radius. The principal ſocal lengih is the ſame, whiche ver ſprface ĩs oppoſcd the incident ra s. Exp. XXI. ,  the diſtance between the focus of incident rays and the center of a lens, r the principãl local Ilength, ſ the diſtance btween the focus of refracted rays and the lens, and we have the following proportion: as r: r, o is d: If the two radii of a glaſ lens be r and, ĩt appeared from the laſ rote that the principal ſocal length will be or E ſorſiciently accurate for moſt ex;eriments. Let the diſtance oſ : focus of incident ray], ſ the diſtance of the focus of emergent ray: ar an Every thinę elſe remaining, the focal length will be the ſame, whichever ſurface of the L ns be op oſed to the incident ravs. If the lens ould be of any ſubſtance in which the ſines oſ incidence and refraction are as I R, inſtead of we muſt ſubſti. r+: : : : RrRtute the general expreſſion t and the proportion will beI—rRX+ R- R- i tome à i—; / : à: f, whencè IRx; I'x+: Rdre , which is a general ſolution for all caſes of 7ĩt olo focal lengths when the thickneſs of the lens is inconſiderable. Having determined the properties relating t6 the foci of ſingle enci's of ravs. we procecd to conſider in what manner the comſnation of the foci of ſepãrate pencils forms images or pictureꝶioſ the objects from which the rays flow. l li E x?. XXII. Images formed by reflexion from a plane ſurface, are erect, ſimilar, and equal to the obiects, and are as far diſtant behind the ſurface as the objects àre before ĩt. E x P. XXIII. : Ahn object being immerſed in water, apears nearer to the eye than it really is by I of its depth from the water's ſurface. In general if ravs dſverge ſronĩ an object, and fall upon a refracting ſurface, out of a denſer medium into a rarer, the diſtance of image will be to the diſtance of the obect, from the refracting ſurſace, as the ſine of inridence to the ſine of refraction, out o the denſer medium into the rarer. E x ?2. XXIV. If an ohject be the arc of a cirele, having the ſame center with a ſpherical reflector, the image will be a ſimilar concentric arc; and the magnitudes of the image and object will be to each other in the ſame proportion as their diſtances from the eenter of the reflector. Having given r = radius of a concave reſlector, I= the diſtance of the objeet from the ſurface, we have the diſtance of the ar image - und the magnitudes of thie object and the image, u 2dr:r. The diſtances of the object and image, from the center of the reſleclor, are in the ſame proportion às their diſtanees ſrom the ſurſace. E x P. XXV. Every thing remaining as in the laſt experiment, the image is obſerved to be inverted, or erect, with reſpeet to the objeet, according as they are on different, or the fame ſide of the eenter of the reflector. If the object is moved along the axis oſ the reſlector, the image will be moved in a contrary iomm. E x Pp. XXVI. An object ſeen by reflexion from a ſoherical convex ſurface, appears diminiſhed. The apparent magnitude depend⸗ on the angle which the image ſubtends at the eye; in the preſent caſe the image being nearer to the center than the object, will be Ieſs than the òbjæct in the ſame proportion. E x P. XXVII. Images of plane objects, when feen by reflexion from a cylindrical poliſhed ſurface are not ſimilar to the objects; likewife plane objects apparently diſtorted appear, from the aforementioned reflexion, in their proper proportion. E x Pp. XXVIII. If the arc of a circle, the center of which vex lens, be conſidered as an object, the image will be an arc ſimilar to the object, and the magnitudes of the object and image will be to each other, as their diſtances from the center of the lens. The properties Cith regord to focal lengh) of all lenſes, the rincipal focal length of which is given, are the ſame. Wheree. let be the principal focal d the diſtance of an object from the lens; then, whatever be the radii of the ſurfaces, the ditance of the ;mage ſrom the lens æ Every thing elſe remaining, mo diſference is obſerved in the focal length, wh chever ſurface is oppoſed to the incident rays. The magnitude, poſition, and diſtance oſ the image from the lens remain the ſame, whatever be the figure of he apertur through which the rays flow.The brighineſs of the image will be a: the area of the aperture when the magnitude of the imags ũ given. he image of a right line formed by a lens is not rectilineat, but coincides with one of the conic ſe-tions, which is determinæd by the following conſtruction. K C E O F B Let B repreſent the couter, OE the axis ond FB the principal Tocal length of a double convex lens, let OK be a right line drawn perpendicular to the axis, be conſidered as an object. Draw BCBF, at right anges to BO:Join CO and produce àt, at the point C deſcribe the angle HCE5CO. B and E vill be the foci of the conic ſection which coincides with the image, the major axis of which =B&}CE. ſcor. L The point F being between B and O, the ſection is m ællipſe. or. II. If O coincides with F, OCE and ECH will be each 43 degrees, and BCE a right angle, whereſoæ CE will be parallel to BE, or E will be at an infinite diſtance. The conic ſection is in this caſe a parabola. Cor. III. If OB is leſs than BC, BCE will become greater than a right angle, and conſequently E will now be removed to the opppoſite ſide oſ B, in which caſe the ſection will he an hyperbola;3 ſe propeſties follow ſfrom the rinciples of conic ſectilons and of iocal l/v/ths. Coi. IV. S oppoſe OB/d, BC-p, we have likewiſe from the properties of conics, the ſemiaxis major of the ſection / ꝶ and the ſem axis minor  Cor. V. The principal parameter oſ the ſeõton Is always equal i0 twice t?⸗ principòl focal length cſ the lens. IFlE Cor. VI. The image oſ a very diſtant right line ĩs a rircle, the radius of which is equal to the pr ncpal focal Ilergrh oſ the ſens. Cor. VII. Whatever be the magnitudẽ or ſizure of ſhe image of a right ſine formed hy a gien ſns, that part oſ ĩt which lies contigueus 10 he xis will always have the ſane curvture as a circle, the radius oſ which is equãl to the princijal focal length of the lens. : Theſe principles are eaſily nplied to images oſ a right line formed by reſiexicon ſiom ſphèrical furfaces. illi Objects ſeen through a double concave lens appear diminiſhed. The apparenn magnitude of an ohjet, ſeen through lenſes of all Kinds, is deter mined by the angle which the image ſubtends at the eye. . The apparent magnitude oſ the image depends on two circumſtances: ſt. the real magnitude; and ædly, the diſtance of the eve ſrom ir; from whence we may derive an eſtimation of the apparent magnitude o. objects, ſeen through any given lens. The image being ſmall when compared with ĩts diſtance ſrom the eye, will ſubtend an agle at the eye, which is as the Iength of the image directly, and the diſtance of the eye ſrom iũt inverſely. Let 2= the diſtance of an object from a double concave lens, r = the principal focal length; the diſtance of the imãge ſrom the lens will be iu on the ſame ſide with the object; let è = the diſtance oſ the eye : om ſhe lens; then, acrording 'o the preceding principles, the anæle ſubtended by the ohjeci, when ſeen with the naked eye, will be to that which ĩt appears under, when viewed rough the lens, as to i4, livided by t; , or as It ĩs evident by inſpection that the latter quaniity muſt be ſmaller than the former: for which reaſon the obect will appeni diminiſhed, unleſs the lens be contiguous to the object or to ſhe Tn object ſeen through a double convex lens will apper magniſied, if its diſtance from the lens be leis than tue princ. pal focal length. li d =rthæ distance of mæ obiect from the lens; æ the diſtance ol eve; 7 the princinul focal length: toen the angle ſubtendeſ hy iæ o jeæct when eœn hy the aked eye, will be to that under whi- an ears, vh n vewed throug the lens, us re+drd o  +dr, the luter of w ch quanttes, being always greater than the ſormer, the ohiæct muſt a pear nagnified, unleſs the l-ns be contiguois to the object o o the eye. Thus iſ the principa fo al lenæth ol a eading ſhſs he iæ inche, the diſtance o the lens 'rom n obje ſ ſeen tough it 4 inches, and from the eve 6, he o ject willa; pear mu; nihæĩ in the proportion of 12X6-45 12 to 12 X64x n—3xX6, or oſ 5t 4. he ſame proporticn ob ains wnen the objt 1 ne ng placed at a greater d ſtance from the lens than the piincipal io al len⸗tò, the eye is ſitured between the lens and te image wer⸗ſoæ, when d=r, thot is, when the object is pla ed in th princ al tocus, the angl⸗ ſubte d-d hy it at he naked eye, wil be t ihat under which it anpears when viewed throuh the ſens, as 7 to r+2, ſo that the apparent magnitude oſ the image wil bear a greater proportion to that of he obecſ;, the ſurther tne eye ieced s om he lens. When the image i between the eve and the lens, the proportion abovem ntioned will become de—erIr o erIr, and when d is very sreat, as r 10 r. Whereſore, a ve y dirtant object, a: thẽ ſun, moon, &c. will appea: neither magniſiL or diminihed, when ſeen through a double convex lens, ĩif the tance ſ the eye ſfrom he ſens, be e ual to twice the nin l focal lengih; t the diſtance of the eye he greater the objet wil appear diminiſhed, if leſ, magnified. The image ind ohject will be erect or inverted, with reg io each other, acco ding as they are on the ſame or d. F rent ſides oĩ the lens: hence all real images muſt he inverted with reſyct L the objects.  If r repreſents the principal focal length oſ the lens, à its I ſtance ſiom the object, then the lineal magnitude oſ hæ imat will be to that of the object as Z : d, or as r: d—r. Cor. It follows from hence, that if the ohject be placel at a ditance of iwice the principal focal length from c lem, e image will be rormed at the ſame diſtance, and will be there n equal to the object. F x P. XXXI. The angle under which a very diſtant obect is ſeen, through a teleſcope conſiſting of two doul le convex lenſes, is to the angle, under which the ſame object is ſeen by the naked eye, as the principal focal ler gth of the object glaſt is to the principal focal Iength of the eye glaſ. In this ſort o teleſcope, the diance between the two lenſes is equal to the ſum oſ their principal foca: lengths. Let the diſtance oſ the eve from the object glaſs he æ, the principal ſoral lengh uſ the object glaſs =r; then, by the note to Exp. XXX, the ungle lubended by the objeer, when ſeen hy the naked eye, will be to tha: under which it appears rhrough the teleſcope, as er: r; that is, as the principal cal lengin of the eje glaſs to that of the ohject glaſ. E x P. XXXII. A minute object, when ſeen through a lens of very ſmall principal focal length, appears magnified and diſtinct, if the object be placed in the principal focus. The angle under which the object appears, will be to that which it ſubtends when ſeen with the nuked eye, as the diſtance at which ĩt ĩs viewed by the naked eye ditinctly, to the principal ſocal Iength of the lens. t the principal ſocal lengih of the lens does not exceed,⸗ of an inch; and the diſtance at which the e5æ can ſee ciſtinctly be about ſix inches; it follows that the lens will magniſy about 300 times in diameter. In this experiment, the rays flowing from any point in the object will emerge ſiom the lens parallel, and hei g collected into a focus vpon the ietina of the eye, ill render the image diſtinci: the uſual ſtructure of the eye is luch as to collect rays, which fall upon it nearly parallel, into a focus upon the retina, whereon the images of objects from which the 1ays flow are diſiinctly formed. It ſometimes happens that the eye, by too gi eat a degre: of convexity, cauſes each pencil to converge to a focur beiore it arrives at the retina, and conſequentlv, the rays whirh flow from each point of an object, are not collected into a correſonding pont upon the retina, but are diſperſed over a imall circle, whereby ihe object is mperſectly repreſcnted upon the retina, and the ſmall cireles above deſcribed, being intermixed, jncreaſe the confuſion of viſionThe application of a concave lens, properly adjuſted to the eye, removes the focus of each pencil further from the object, ſo as to fall exactly upon the retina. A contrary defect ariſes when the eye becomes ſo ſlat ened as to colect the rays into ſoci behind the retina, cauſing a conuſion of vifion ſimilar to the former. This is remedied by a convex lens, which aſſiſts the eye in collecting the rays, bringmg the foci of the ſeveral pencils nearer to the obiect, and thus, by forming the image upon the retina, renders viſion diſtinct. As to the ſtructure of the eye (the humours of which conſtitute a compound lens) and the uſes of its various parts; anatomical diſſection will convey more adequate ideas than can be derived from deſcription. E x P. XXXIII. Small objects may be ſeen diſtinct and magnified through a combination of two or more lenfes. Theſe combinations of lenſes are called compound microſcopes, of which there is a great variety oſ conſtructions. E x P. XXXIV. If a minute tranſparent object, illumined by the rays of the ſun, be placed before a ſmall lens, at a little greater diſtance from it than the principal focus, the image will be deſcribed on a ſcreen, properly placed, diſtinct and magniſied. IF the diſtance of the object from the lens be 4, and the principal focal lengih of the lens =, the diſtance of the ſcreen or ar image from the lens will be  and the lineal magnitude of the 7T aobject will be to that of the image as à: Jũ oras dr:r. Upon this principle the ſolar microſcope is conſtructed. E x P. XXXV. A ray of the ſuns light being refracted through a glaſs priſm, is obſerved to be ſeparated into rays of differeat colours. Theſe colours are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indię: nnd violet, and are called the priſmatic colours ſrom the experi: ment. The ſeparated rays deviate unequally from the courſe ol the inci'ent ray, whence they are ſa d to be differently refrangible. The reſrargibility of the rays anſWers to the order in which the colours appear in the priſmatic ſpecirum, the red heing the leaſt and rhe violet ray the moſt reſracted: either of ihe ſeven colours ſeparated from the reſt is called an humogeneal ray, or homogeneal light. E x P. XXXVI. Homogeneal light cannot be further ſeparated or altered, as to ĩts colour, by refraction through any number of priſns. E xP. xXXXVII.. i A ray of light, paſſing through an uniform medium, terminated by parallel ſurfaces, is not at all ſeparated into colours. It is always obſarved, that when. the homogeneal rays, afier having heen ſeparaed ſrom a common ray of li-ht, are cauſed by ſubſequent refraction to emerge paral el, the emergent rays are colourleſs; in this experiment, the homogeneal rays emerge aſter ihe ſecond reſraction parallel. E x Pp. XXXVIII. Thoſe rays which are the moſt refrangible are alſo the moſt reflexibleThe ſine of incidence is to the ſine of reſaction in the red rs, paſſing ont of glaſæ into air, as 50: 773 whereſore, theie will be retlected ſrom the ſurface of glaſs, when the angle of incidence exceeds 460 295, the ſine of which is of radius; the ſine of inc dence is to the ſine oſ ræfraction of ihe violet rays, as 50: 8; thoſe ra;:, thereſore, will be reſi-cted if the angle of incidence exceeds 350 52, the ſine of which is ꝗ of radius. E x P. XXXIX. The homogeneal ravs, being collected into a focus upon a ſcreen of whit⸗ paper, are colourleſs. E x P. XL. If one of the homogeneal rays be ſtopped beſore it reaches the ſereen, the ſpectrum conſiſting of the remaining rays becomes coloured. It appears ſrom the preceding Experiment, that ſolar light ĩs an heterogeneal ſubſtance, conſifting of ſeven ſorts f homogeneal raysLet a ray of ſolar light be reſracted out of air into any gven medium; the homogeneal rays will impinge vpon the refracting ſurſae at a common angle of incidence, but the ſines ol the angles in which the rays are reſracted will be different; the angle contained between the red and violet rays, after refraction, is called the ang'e of diſſipation, and is the difference of the laſt angles in which thoſe rays are refracted. Let the ſine of incidence be to the ſine of refraction of the rays of mean reſrangibility, paſing out of air into any medium, as m: 1, of the violet rays as m4m: 1, and of the red as m—m: 1. The quantity m being conſtant in the ſame medium, is therefore aſumed as a meaſure of the diryerſing or diſſipating power. Thus the ſine of incidence is to the ſine of refraction in the rays of mean reſrangibility, paſſing out of air into common glaſi, as L:5:4, of the red rays as ;5: I, and in the violet as 3: 1 whereſore, putting =m, we have 5 =m4 m and mæ IIn the ſame manner, if the ſine of incidence be to the ſine yo oſ reſraciion of the rays of mean reſrangibility, paſſing out of air into ater, as L5: 1, oſ the red rays as 7 1, and of the violet rays as  : 1, and w be made , we nall have "v =45, and m: àv, or the ratio of the diſpei ſing powers exiſting in the two mediums, whereby they ſeparate the homogeneal rays, is as 25: 5% or as 81: 50. : Suppoſe that the ſine of incidence ĩs to ithe ſine of-reſraction of red rays, paſing out of air into flint glaſs, as 1.565: 1, of iæ violet as I. 595: 1; then the ratio of reſraction in ihe rays of mcan rerangibiſty is as 1.58:1, and if n=1.58, n = :0 and ihe ratio of the diſpeiſing powers of fint and common zlaſt will be a: v : 5, or as 3:2. E x Pp. XLI. A ray of ſolar light being reſracted thro the ſides of an iſolceles priſm of common glaſs, the refracting angle of which is 309, when the rays of mean refrangibility paſi parallel to the baſe, the angle of diſſipation : / vill be about 39. If a ray of ſoar light he refracted through one ſurface only, let the tangent of reſraction of the rays of mean refrangibility, m: 1 the ratio of reſraction of the ſame rays, m the meaſure oſ ihe d ſi ating power; the angle of diſſipation will be ſubtended by an arc ' radius being I. Thus iſ a ſolar ray impinges upon a ſurface of common glaſ, at an angle oſ incidence=200, m being / , or i.55, the angle of refra tion of the ravs oſ mean refrangibility  i2°. 44 c2, and the are which meaſures the angle of diſſipation = o l n 2x lang 1a4-539.53, radius being =1. 100 X 1 55 Tf he rivs are reſi acted through two ſurſaces incl'ned to each other as the ſides of a priſm. Iet the ſine of the retracting angle = a, the coſine of he angle of reſiaction of the rays of mean refrangibility at rhe fi ſt ſirface— 4, the coſine oſ refraction at the ſe ond ſurſace=q́, then the angle of diſſipaion. at which the violet and red i1ays are inclined to each other, after the ſecond reſraction, /2, Thus in the experiment m  43, a = ihe ſine of 309, ꝓ E3 oſine of 159,  = coſine 23°.39'.5, and the arc which meaſures the angle of diſperſion (rad. being 1) 2 x ſine 30°  —Avv-—-—j&38.57. : 100 xcol. 1595coſ. 23°.39. 5 If a ray be refracted through parallel ſurfaces, the angle of diſſipation vaniſhes, becauſe 4, or the ſine oſ the reſracting angle, ĩs in that caſe nothing. E x P. XLII. Let the vertex of a flint glaſs priſm, the refracting angle of which 2 2359. 40, be applied to the baſe of a common glaſs priſm, the refracting angle of which = 25; a ray of ſolar light will paſs directly through the priſms, when their ſurfaces are contiguous, but the emergent ray will be coloured. It was ſormerly imagined, that a ray of ſolar light would, in lll caſes, emerge colourleſs after re'raction, if ĩt did not deviare rom the courſe of the incident ray, the contrarv to vhich, howver, appears ſrom this experiment. i i The ray is ſuppoſed to fall perpendicularlv upon the ſurface ol the priſm, the reſracting angle of which is the greateſt. The poſition of the priſms in the Experiment is ſuch, that the efects of reſraction upon the paralleliſm of the homoy;eneal ravs aſſing through them are contrary to each other, and conſequently if they were equal the rays would emerge parallel: but the ſlint priſm hy its greater diſſipat ng power more than counteracts the ſeparation of the rays cauſed hy their paſage through the fiſt priſm, which = 38'1, and, inverting the order oſ the coloms, cauſes the red and violet rays to emerge inclined to each other, at an angle of i173 which is ſuſficiently great to produce a ſenſible tinge oſ the priimaiie colours in the emergent rays. The difficulty which chieſiy impeded ihe improvement of teleſcopes was, to reſract a ray ſo, ihat while it ſould deviate confiderably from its original courſe, the diſperſion of the homogeneal rays might be counteracted, and that by this means hey might ali emerge parallel, and of courſe free from eolour, which is not hy any means to be effected, except hy the combination of traninarent ſubſtances, the reſracting and diſſipating powers of which are different. E x P. XLIII. Every thing remaining as in the Iuſt Experiment, let the vertex of a common glaſs priſm, the refracting angle of which is 109 be applied to the baſe of the fl nt rriſm; if a ray of ſolar light paſſes through the three priſms, when their ſurfaces ae contiguous, the emergent ray will deviate about 59. 35 from the courſe of the incident ray, but will be colourſeſs. in ths caſe he two common glaſ priſms reſracting the ra; in the ſame diieẽ|tion, cauſe it to devia te ſrom the courie of ihe incident ray ahout 50. 37' more than the deviaiion in the cont ary direction, ariſing from rehacton ihrough the flint priſm; but the latrer, by its gieater diſſipa ing pwer, exactly counteracts the ſeparation of the rays occaſioned by refraction through the orther two priſms, ſo that the homogeneal rays emerge at length paral el, and oſ courſe colourleſs. In this Exper'm nt the rays of mean reſrangilility emerge at an an;le of refiaction = 169. 55. If a ſolar ray impinged upon the ſurſace of the pii'm lat ;plied, at an angle ol incidence = i169. 57, the aæle cf diſſipatio, afierr emergenc: into air, would be 12' .It apprared ſrom the laſt Exper ment. that tie diſſipat on oſ ithe rays emerging ſrom the two prums i2; for which reaſon (anã on account of the contrary poſition of ihe priſms) the red and violet rays emerging inclined o each other at an angle o' 12 from the two priſms, and ſalling upon the ſurſace of the third, will be refracted out of it colourleſs. E x P. XLIV. If a ray of ſolar light paſſes directly through any two priſms, the diſſipating powers oſ. which are unequal, ĩt will be ſeparated into the homogeneal rays. Although the deviations of the ray, after reſraction at each priſm, be rqual and contrary, yet one of the priſms poſeſing a greater power o diſſipaiing the ray than the other, the homogeneal ray: emerge in ſimed to each other, and conſequently the emergent ray hecome: coloured. The aperture of a lens is terminated hy the cirr-umference of a circle, the center of which coincides with the axiæ of the lens; the circumſerence abovementioned is always ſuppoſed to be contgnous to the lens, and conſequently its plane is perpendicular to the axis.The annulus of th⸗ lens, which is more remote ſrom the axis than the circumſerence wh ch terminates the aperture, is ſuppoſed to be covered with an opake ſubſtance. I a point, or in practice, any ſmall lum nous ſMB, ſituated in the ax s of the lens, be conſidered as an object, the image which is ſo med by the rays flowing from it thi ough the leaſt aperiure, ſuſficient for viion, is called the principal image. If all the aperture be covered with an opake ſubſtance, except an annulus adjacent to ĩts circumſference, the image formed by rays paſſng through this annulus, is called the extreme image. E x P. XLV. If homogeneal rays flow from an object placed in the axis of a double convex glaſs Iens, the extreme image of the object will be nearer to the lens than the principal imagc. Hence it appears, that the ray: which diverge from a given point in an object, are not all collected into a pont in the correſponding image, many images of the point heing diſfuſed over the ſpare containẽd hetween the principal and extreme images. The diſtance hetween the principal and exti eme images, is called the ſrace of diffuſion. This aberration of the rays ſrom ihe geometrical focus, ariſing from the ſpherical figure of the reracting ſurfaces, is one oſ the tauſes of indiſtinct viſion in teleſcope:, &c. E x P. XLVI. The extreme image of an object, formed by a double convex lens, is coloured and indiſtinct, if the proportion of diameter of the aperture to the principal focal length exceeds a certain limit. , The eolour and indiſtinctneſs which ſl here cbſerved in the extreme image, ariſæ ſrom the different reſran⸗ ibility of the homogeneal rays commoſing ſolar light, which emerging from the lens with oo great : degree oſ obliquity, hecomes ſenſiblv ſeparated into the coloured avs; thæſe form many images of the ſame point, all of which are at d fferent diſtances ſrom the lens. This aherration cauſes an inliſtinctneſs even in the principal image, but in all the others, formed by rays flowing ithrough the lens more remote from the axis, the iniſtinct eſss very much increaſe.l. The two ſorts of aberration aove deſcribed are the chiel impediments to the perfect on of teleſcopes. The method uſed for obvating theſe diſficulties will appear in the following experiments. E x P. XLVII. An object glaſs may be compounded of three lenſes, whereof two are double convex, made of common glaſs, incloſing a double concave of flint glaſs, ſo that the extreme and principal images of ohjects formed by it ſhall nearly coiicide. The concave glaſs being of greater refractng power than the other two, will d/miniſh the angle of deviation of the extreme rays, more than of thoſe which are nearer to the axs; ihe refracted extreme rays will, therefore, interſect the axis furthier from the center of the compound lens than iſ ĩ had paſſed through a double convex lens only of th- ſme principal tocal length. The radii of the lenſes ahovement.oned may he ſlo adjuited thai the ſpace of diffuſion ſall vaniſh. Exp?. XLVIII. The refracting and diſſipating powers of pound object glaſs, being given, the radii of the ſurfaces may be ſo adjuſted to each other, that the extreme, principal, and the intermediote images of oljects formed by it ſhall be diſinct and colourleſs. I appears from the preceding Exper ments, that the ſame combination of lenſes, not oniy reduces the ſpae of difſuſion into an inſenfible quantity, but at the ſame ſime refracts the extreme rayi 1 the geometiieal focus without ſeparating them into the primary colors, wh rebv the aberration ariſing ſfrom the different re'iangibility of ihe rays, as well as from the ſ,/herical figure of the lens, r almoſt wholly removed. Lenſer, conſtruẽied upon theſe princip'es, have heen ralled perſect. A diſficulty ha⸗ ariſen in the conſtr ction of perſect lenſes, viz. to determine the nuwer of diſſipating the homogeneal rays in different refracting ſubſtances, which does not obſerve any law oſ ihe reſaciing power, denſity, or of any quantities formed out of them. E x r. XLIX. Let a common glaſs priſm, the refracting angle of which = 309, be apʒlied contiguous to a priſm of ſlint glaſs, the refracting angle of which / i199; lIet the vertices of the priſms be placed in oppoſite directions, a ſolar ray being reſracted thro' them will deviate from the courſe of the incident rav, but will not be ſeparated into the coloured rays. In this Experiment the angle of incidence upon the ſiiſt ſui ſace of the common glaſs priſm being =o, ihe angle oſ relraciiun al h h the ray energes irom the ſiint pritm = 16.373, and the arghe contained hetween the inc dent and emergent rays /z; . 1ſ a ſolar rav is refſmcted throngh the commun glals priim only, the angle oſ inridene beirg =o, the angle uſ reſiaction ai vnich te middle 1avs emerge  cõ. 45.18 vheretore, the ang'e of diſſiipat on will be meaſured by an aic (rad. he ng 1) 2 5 ſine 2° ]c  a50 = 4.247, by the rule in note to Expeiiment XI.I. In like manner if a ſolar ray impinges u on the ſint priſm at an ang e ol incivence 16.313, it will emerge at an ang e ol reſration = g00. 49. 18, and it Is inferred fiom hence that the angle of diſipation aſter emergence will be meaſured by au arc (radius belng 1) æ 7 x fine 19° 355 õſ. 5300. 45. 13" Xcoſ. 1°. 221. 2600 54The angles of diſipation above determined diſſer unly 24, which being imperceptible in experiments, the angles are, phyſicalty ſpea king, equal. Thus ĩt appears that the two priſms operate equally upon the paralleliſm of rhe homogeneal ravs, paſing through them in ſhe drections above deſcribed, and theſe efſcẽts by the joſition of the priſms tendſng to correct each other, the homogeneal rays will emergre, aſcer being reſra:ted through them, parallel and colourleſs. As to determining the powers oſ diſipation and ræfraction exiſting in different reſracting ſubſtances, the following method ſeæms as eligible as any. Suppoſe a ſolar ray to paſs through a priſm (the reſracting and diſſipating powes of which are requ red) impinging perpendicularly upon the firſt ſurfaceLet the angle of d ſipation and the angle oſ reſraction of the middle rays be accurately meaſured, and let a = the meaſure oſ the angle oſdiſpation, ? = the tangent of r fraction (radius being 1.) The angle of incidence upon the ſecond ſurſace being the complement of the refracting angle of the priſm to 900, and the angle oſ reſraction being d termined as ab ve, we obtain the ratio of reſraction: if this be as æ: I, then the meaſure of . I the diſipating power n = t It is to be remarked that the preceding rules concerning the angle of diſũipation are mathematically true, only when Z is leſs than any aſign. n able quantity; but in the practical application of them to ſuch refracting ſubſtances as are commonly uſed in optics (eſpecially when rhe angles oſ roſraction are ſmall) they will not differ from the truth more thãn a few ſeconds oſ a degree, the eſfect:s of which minute error are inſbnſible in experiment. E X P. L. Coloured ſubſtances reflect the homogeneal rays of light, which are oſ the ſame colour with themſelves, more copiouſly than the other rays. A red ſubitance held in green rays, if all other light bæ perfectly excluded, appears green, though ve y ſaintly; vhen held in the red rays, it appears oſ a very vivid red, which ſhe s that the ſubſtance is of ſuch a nature, as to reſleſt the red rays much more copiouſly than the green. E x P. LI. Let a circle be divided into ſeven ſectors, proport:onal to the ſpaces occupied by the colours in the priſmatic ſpectrum, and let theſe ſectors be painted with the primary colours, according to their proper order and proportion; if the circle be turned ſwiftly in its own plane round the center the whole will appear nearly white. The artificial colours being leſs pure than the natural, the mixture of the ſeven colours in the experiment will not produce a rtect whiteneſs, but will approach nearer to ir, the more care i' taken to divide the circle in the true proportions, and the more neailv the colours made uſe of approach thoſe which compoſe a ray of light. E x P. LII. The heat produced by collecting the rays of the ſun into the principal focus of a concave mirror or double convex lens, is obſerved to be the more intenſe the greater the area of the mirror or lens, and the leſs that of the focus into which the rays are collected. The intenſity of the heat produced by hurning mirrors or lenſes, ĩs proportional to the ſquares of their diameters directly, and the ſquares of their principal foral lengths inverſely. Hence the intenſity oſ ihe ſuns rays, collected into the principal focus of a concave mirror, will be the ſame as in the principal focus of a double convex lens of the ſame area, the principal focal Iength of which is one half the radius of the refiector. E x r. LIII. Rays of the ſun, however condenſed, ccmmunicate no heat to an uniform medium through which they paſs. E x P. LIV. If a ray of light falls upon a glaſs ſphere, and emerges after one reflexion and two refractions; the priſmatic colours will be moſt viſible in thoſe emergent rays, which are inclined to the incident rays at an angle of 179 50. The violet rays will apyear moſt copiouſly at the angle menriored in the Experiment, but the red rays will appear when the incident and emergent rays aie inclined at an angle of about 199.25: from whence it follows, that the breadth oſ a rainbow, tormed by one reſlexion and two refractions ſhrough ſpheres of glaſs, would æappear by obſervation  i°. 35432/27'. It may be uieful to ſubjoin a few notes concerning the rainbow. 1. The firſt rainbow is that which is moſt uſually ſeen in the he:vens, and ĩs formed by one reflexion and two refractions of the ſun's rays falling upon drops of ain; the ſecondary rainbow is formed by the rays falling upon drops of rain, and emerging aſter two reſractions and two reflexions. Theſe bows are never ſcen but when it rains and the ſun ſires at the ſame time, the dros of rain and the ſun heing, with regard to the ſpectator horizon, in oppoſite yaris of the heavens. 2. The apparent ſemi diameter of the how ĩs equal to the apparent altitude of the higheſt pint of the bow, together with the altitude of the ſun s center ahove tie horizon. : 3. The apoarent ſemi- diameter of the firſt rainhow is the difference hetween four times the angle of refraction andiwice the angle of incidence of thoſe contiguous ravs which fall upon the drops of rain and emerge parallel alter two reſractions and one reſlexion; this angle, belonging to the red rays, is about 4:20. a'; hence no primary rainbow can be ohſerved unleſs the altitude of the ſun's center above the horizon is leſs than 420. 2.For the ſuke ol brevity, the rays are here conſidered as ſlowing from the ſun's center only. 4. Contignous rays, falling uron a reſracting globe, emerge parallel afier two refractions and one reflexion, when the leait increment of the angle oſ incidence is to the cotemporary incre⸗ ment of the angle of reſracticn as æ: I. 5. Henee the tangent of incidence is to the tangent of reſraction as 2: I. j 6. To find thoſe two angles, the ſines of which are in the proportion of 4:3, and tangents as 2: I. Let æ andy æ the coſines of incidence and refrac ion reſpectively, then the ſquares of their ſines are 1— and 1/3, radius being unity, and the Iquares oſ their tangents will be 1 1; .: and , whence we have, by the conditions of ihę x E] problem : I/:: 16: 9  1xt 5; xæ ——-2x. & x2: y? :: 4:9 and :: I:4, and joining theſe ratios 2 and æx? 2 whereſore 9 47 1Ixæ ; whence, reſerring to the firſt proportion, 2 . -416 65, whence 3 q and y = N = coſine of ihe ahgle of refralion; hence we determine the aigle of refraction=407. 12 11, und the an; le of incidence (being that the ſine of which ĩs ro the ſine of 400. i2.V, as a: 3) =55°.23.283 which gives us J the angle contained between the incident and emergent rays, or : the ſemi-diameter of the bow— ix].7. n  55.23.25 = 21.. 5s4; wherefore, the angle between the incident and emergent rays, or the appa ent ſemidiameter of the bow, fo m-d by the red rays, = 42. 7. 45, or about 42°. 2'. In the ſdme manner the apparent ſemi-diameter of ithe 1àinbow, formed by the violet iays, is ſound to be about 49. 17, which heing ſubracted from 429. 2', leaves 1°. 45' ſor the appent b eadth of ihe bow. This would be the breadih if the ſolar ravs flowed ſrom the center o the ſun only; and ſince the apparent diame'er of the ſun is about à21, the apparent breadt of the bow will be increaſed by 32, ſo that it will appear by obſervation The following rules will extend to determines the angles oſ incidence and reſiact on of contiguous homogeneal rays, emerging parallel from refracting ſpheres of any kind, the number of ieflexions with n the ſpheres being in general =æ. 1. The contiguos rays will emerge parallel after n ræflexi- ns and two rẽſractions, when the leaſt variation of the angle of intidence ĩs to the corempoiary variation of the angle of refraction as n+1:I. 2. Suppoſe n+1:1 as I:, hence the tangent of incidence muſt be to the tangent of 1eſræction as I:ſ3 let the ſine oſ incidence be to the ſine oſ reſraction as I:s, then io ſind the angles of incidence and reſraction, call their coſines  and, and we have from the conditions of the problem, I—x: 1I—:: 1:  radius heing unity, : —/]T1:: : 1, joining theſe ratios, and and 2 , and 1I—x 9 ſubſtituting this value oſ I—nx2 in the firſt proportion, we have pl— 2::1:52, Whence 12/;⸗ I2 and ; andy A / = coſine of refraction in general. The ſine oſ re raction N p— ?, and conſequently the ſine of incidence V . x. The angle of incidence being determined  I, and the anglt of reſraciong; let  = 90°, m= the number of reſlexions +E; then half the angle contained beween the incident 1a 's ant Ihoſe which emerge contiguous and parallel will be  AS T RON OMVY. STRONOMY is a branch of natural knowledge, which relates to appearances in the heavens and the cauſes of them. Plain Aſtronomy iĩs that part of this ſcience which deſcribes the phenomena and their immediate cauſes only; Phyſical Aſtronomy demonſtrates the firſt known cauſes of the phenomena. A ſpectator viewing the heavens, conceives himſelf to be ſituated in the center of a ſphere, upon the concave ſurface of which all the heavenly bodies are diſpoſed. On this concave ſurſace ſeveral figures are ſuppoſed to be deſcribed, ing only as a means of referring to any known ſtar with greater facility : theſe figures are called conſtellations. It appears, that it is of no conſequence ſas ſar as regards the apparent places oſ the ſtars) oſ what magnitude this imaginary ſphere is, always ſuppoſing the center oſ ĩt to coincide with the centẽer of view; thus in an artificial celeſtial globe, the angular poſition of the ſtars is ſuch, as if viewed ſrom the center oſ the ſphere, would be ſimilar to that which is obſerved in the It comes next in order to conſider oſ ſome properties of the ſphere immediately relating to Aſtronomy. A circle, revolving round any diameter as an axis of motion, will generate a ſolid figure, which iĩs called a ſphere. The center of the generating circle ĩs the center of the ſphere, and any right Iline paſſing through the center, and terminated by the ſurface of the ſphere, is called a diameter. Any circle, the plane of which paſſes through the center of the ſphere, divides it into two equal parts, and is called a great circle, being diſtinguiſhed thereby from other circles, the planes of which not paſſing through the center, divide the ſphere unequally, and are called leſſer circles. The angular diſtance of two points ſituated on the ſurface of the ſphere is meaſured by the arc oſ a great circle intercepted between them. A line drawn from the interſection of any two lines in a plane, and perpendicular to them, is perpendicular to the plane itſelf. Hence any two lines in a plane, which are inclined to each other, being parallel to a given plane, the two planes will be parallel. Thus if any two lines inclined to each other in a plane bę horizontal, the plane will be parallel to the horizon. A diameter of a ſphere, drawn perpendicular to the plane of any great circle, is called the axis, and the extremities of the axis are called poles of the great circle. 1. Every point in the circumſerence oſ a great circle is 500 diſtant ſrom the poles. 2. Any two preat circles of a ſphere hiſſect each other, becauſe the interſection of their planes is a diameter common to them both, and every circle is biſſected by its diameter. Great circles paſſing through the poles of a great circle are called its ſecondaries. Any ſecondary biſſects its great circle and all the leſſer circles parallel to it. . The inclination of two planes to each other, is the ſame as the inclination of two lines drawn from the ſame point in the common interſection of the plancs, and perpendicular to it. The inclination of the planæs of two great circles to each other, is meaſured by the arc of a ſecondary common to them both, and intercepted betweer the planes. The planes of ſecondaries are perpenlicular to the planes of their great circles, becauſe the inclination of a ſecondary to its great circle is meaſured by a quadrant. . The inclination oſ the circumferences of two great cireles is called a ſpherical angle, and is the ſame as the inclination of the planes of the circles. The meaſure of a ſpherical angle is, therefore, an arc of a ſe ondary, common to both the great circles and int.rcep ed between them. . Three arcs of a great circle, neither being greater than 1809, compoſe a ſpherical triangle, in which there are ſix quantities, viz. three ſides and three angles, any three of which being given, the reſt may be determined by the rules in Trigonometry. Ax the anguln poſition of objects ſeen from a given pont, and ſitua ed m the ſame plane, is meaſured upon the ciroum fe ence of a circle oſ any inde erminate radius, the center ol which cincides w th the center of 1ieæ, in like manner the angular poſition of obects ſituate in difſerent planes is eſti. m⸗ted, hy reſerring them to the ſurſace oſ a ſphere, the centrr of whi h comcides with the center oſ view. In what manner the properties of the ſphere above deſcribed are applied to the determinat on of the angular poſi CORCERREING THE APPPARENT PLACE AND MOTION OF THE HEAVENLY BOBIES. All the ſtars appear to revolve daily in the heavens, deſcribing circles the planes of which are parallel to each other. Among the circles deſcribed by the heavenly bodies in their diurnal revolution, there is one only the plane of which paſſes through the ſpectator's center of view.This circle is called the equator. The eye of the obſerver ĩs ſuppoſed to be coincident with the center of the ſphere, upon the concave ſu face oſ which all the heavenly hodies are diſpoled; the equator the: efore muſt he a great ci cle of the heavens. All her circles deſcr bed by ſtars ſituated out of the equator, are leſer cireles of the ſphere parallel to be equator, and are called parallel's of declination. If one extremity of a line continuing fixed, the other be always directed to a ſtar revolving in a leſſer circle, the line will by its motion deſcribe the ſurface of a cone, the vertex of which coincides with the fixed extremity of the line abovementioned, and the circumference of the baſe with the leſſer circle, which the ſtar deſcribes parallel to the equator. Two points taken 900 from the equator, are called the poles of the equator, or poles of the world. Secondaries to the equator are calleã circles of declination; of theſe, 24 which divide the equaror into equal parts, containing I5 cach, are called hour circles. The declination of a ſtar ĩs its angular diſtance from the equator; meaſured on a circle of declination paſiing through the ſtar. Thus, in the middle of ſummer, the ſun's declination is a3°. 28 north; when the ſun is in the equator his declination is o. Stars appear to move with the leaſt velocity which are the moſt remote from the equator, where the velocity of their apparent motion is the greateſt. The apparent velocity of a ſtar in its diurnal revolution is as the coſine of declination. The ſun and ſome particular ſtars, hereafter to be mentioned, are obſerved to change their places among the fixed ſtars, and to perform their revolutions in various periodic times. The fixed ſtars always preſerve the ame angular diſtanees from each other, whereby they are diſtinguiſhed from the ſun und planets, which continually change their places both with regard to each other and the fixed ſtars. The proper motions which have been diſcovered in the ſtars, Arcturus, Capella and ſome others, are not here conſidered. The ſun compleats his revolution among the fixed ſtars in 36 days, 6 hours, and about 9 minutes, deſcribing a great circle in the heavens, called the ecliptic. The ccliptic is obſerved to be inclined to the equator at an angle of about 23° 28 The eclipiic and eqmtor, being great circles, biſect each other; whereſore the points of interſection mult he 18o degrees diſtani; theſũe are called the equinoctial points, for reaſons hereaſter to be given. The ecliptic is divided into telve portions, called ſigns, cach containing 30 degrees; the firſt point of Aries coincides with one of the equinoctial points, and the firſt of Libra with the other. The twelve ſigns are as follow.Aries, Taurus, Gemini,  3 r Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capriõ ũ m E cornus, Aquarius, Piſces. ã The appa: ent motion of bodies in the ſame direction as the ſun, ajpears to move among the fixed ſtars, is called motus in conſequentia ; and the motion in the contrary directiõ;, motlus in antecedentia.  The right aſcenſion of a ſtar is meaſured by an arc of the equator, intercepted between the firſt point of Aries, and a circle of declination paſſing thro the ſtar, reckoning according to the order of the ſigns. Thus in the middle of ſummer the ſun's right aſcenſion i 90 degrees. The Iongitude of a ſtar is meaſured by tween the firſt point of Aries, and a ſecondary to the ecliptic paſſing throngh the ſtar, reckoning according to the order of the ſigns. Thus in the middle of ſummer the ſun's longitude is 90 when the ſun enters libra the longitude is=i80* The latitude of a ſtar is its angular diſtance from the ecliptic, meaſured on a ſecondary to the ecliptic paſſing thro the ſtar. The latitude of the ſun is thereſore nothing. A ſecondary, common to the ecliptic and the equator, is called the ſolſtitial colure: a ſecondary to the equator, paſsing through the equinoctial points, is called the equinoctial colure. The inclination of the ecliptic to the equator is therefore meaſured by an arc of the ſolſtitial colure intercepted between them, and this arc will be the meaſure of the ſons greateſt declination  230. 28. The horizon is a great circle in the heavens, the plane of which is perpendicular to a plumb line hanging freely and at reſt. It is evident that the horizon with all the circles depending on it are moveable; every diſferent ſpectator having a different horizon. The pole of the horiſon above us is called the Zenith, the other pole the Nadir. Secondaries to the horizon are called vertical circles. The altitude of a ſtar is meaſured by the arc of a vertical circle, intercepted between the ſtar and the horizon; the complement of the altitude to 909 is the ſtars zenith diſtance. A ſecondary, common to the equator and the horizon, is called the meridian; the meridian, therefore, paſſes through the pole of the equator and the zeniih. Hence the meridian is a vertical circle, and the inclination of the equator to the horizon is meaſured by an arc of the meridian intercepted between them. The azimuth of a ſtar is meaſured by an arc of the horizon, intercepted between the meridian and a vertical circle which paſſes through the ſtan. A vertical circle, which cuts the meridian at right angles, is called the prime vertical. The interſections of the meridian and prime vertical, with the horizon are called the cardinal points; or the north, eaſt, weſt, and ſouth; the whole horizon being divided into 32 equal paits forms the mariner's compaſ. The diurnal apparent motion of the ſtars is from eaſt to weſt. When a ſtar is ſaid to move apparently ſrom eaſt to weſt, it is meant that a vertical circte always paſũing throngh the ſlar continually changes its azimuth, leaving the catward and approaching the weſtward parts of ihe horizon. . The direction in which the ſun moves in the ecliptic, among the fixed ſtars, is contrary to that of his apparent diurnal motion. The direction of the planets motion among the fixed ſtars is moſt frequently obſcrved to be in conſequentia, but ſometimes in antecedentia? the planets are alſo obſerved at times to be Itationary. . An arc of the meridian, intercepted between the Zenith and the equator, is called the latitude of the place. . An arc of the equator, intercepted between the meridians of two places, is called the difference of their longitude; or, if the longitude of one of them be referred to the meridian of the other, the arc above deſcribed is called the longitude. Thus if the longitude of Rome be reſerred to the meridian of London, it is 992 eaſt. When the center oſ the ſun is upon the meridian of any place, it is there ſaid to be noon- day; which theresore will be at different times at different places; and ſince the time elapſed between the ſun's leaving and returning to the ſame meridian is 24 hours, during which a circle oſ declination paſſing through the ſun's center will have deſcribed 3609, eſtimated on the equator; ĩt follows that in one hour it will havẽ deſcribed 159; in onè minute oſ time, 15; and in one ſecond oſ time;, 156 of a , &C. . The tropics are two parallels of declination, the diſtance of which from the equator ĩs equal to the ſun's greateſt declination. The diſtance oſ the tropics ſrom the equator is thereſore 23°. aò.. . The arctic and antarctic circles are two parallels of declination, the diſtance of which from the poles is equal to the diſtance of the tropics from the equator. The arctic dircle is 239, 28. ſrom the north : at the ſame diſtance ſrom the ſouth. pole, and the antartic arent time of day is meal gle contained between the the place and a circle of paſſing through the ſun's ing one hour for 59, and ly for minutes and ſeconds great cirele oſ the ſphere will he determi it to the circumſerence will be known, ) i ih extremities at the centor oſ the ſphere he m to apply the preceding principles to practical eceſſary to premiſe a ſew propoſitions conccrr gles. CONCERNING THE MENSURATION OF ANGLES. IF two objects appear coincident with the extremitics of a circular arc to the eye of a ſpectator, ſituated at the center of the circle, that arc will meaſure the obſerved angle ſubtended by the objects. I. Let a repreſent any arc, 4 the angle ſubtended by it, P a right angle, c the circumference, and 7 the radius of the circle; we have the following proportion: : A: 40:: a: c, whercfore A— vQ and ſince 49 is : : a a⸗ the ſame in all circles, 4° will be proportional to zorD: that is, the angle will be as the arc directly, and the ræadius of the ciicle inverſely. 2. Into whatever numher oſ equal parts the circumſere nce of a ciicle is divided, a right angle will he meaſured by 4 of them; whereſore if the circumſerence be divided inio 360 equal parts or degrees, a right angle will be ſubtended by 50°. 3. The arcs which meaſure ſmall angles are nearly equal to iheir ſines;, chords or tangenis, the radius of the circle being given: ſmall angles will ihereſare he nearly proportional to itheir ſines, &c. in the ſame circle, and in different circles will be as their ſines directly, and the radii of ihe tircles inverſely. 4. Small angles ſubiended by a given rectilineal object, which is perpendicular the axis of viſion, will be greater in the ſame proportion as the diſtances of the obſerver are leſs. 5. Let MP —57°. 17. 45. or 206265 (being the angle which is Iubtended by aun arc riadius. ) Since it appcared by note I, . M⸗ that 4. arxa .na by the properties oſ the circle * c c o a A it follows ihat 4° x MP. Hence a E xr. 6. If s be the ſine, chord, or tangent of a ſmall angle, the angle will be neorly — x Me. 7. If 0 = an angle of 1, ſince M 206265, it ſollows A=r⸗ j i di æn angle of 1 hat T =67 and an arc ſubtending B I . i , that is —part of radius: an arc of r' therefor 206265 206265 I 6bor I , or aboutpart of radius.  206265 3337 8 3438 les any two of iheſe quantities, viz btended by it, and the radius of the her may be determined. Th By the preceding ro a circular are, the angle ſu The ares of quadrants and iectors uſed for the menſuration of angles are divided into degrees, &c. and in inſtrumenis of a very large radius the diviſions are exrended (by means of a nonius hereaſer deſcriber) to ſeconds of a degree.An index of equal curvature with the arc is applied o the extremity of a moveable radius, by means of which the angle ſubtended between two obſerved objects is determined. To the moveable radius above mertioned, a teleſcope is applied, having a fixed point marked in the center of the field; a line joining this point and ihe center of the object glaſs is called the line of collima:ion: this line determines the directtion in which an obſervaiion is made. An obſerved angle will err from the truth, if the line of collimation be inclined to the plane of the quadrant with which the obſervation is taken. Suppoſe th- quadrant o be fixed in any given plane, the line of collimation may be conſidered as the radius of a ſphere, a great circle of which coincides with the arc of the quadrant. If the line of collimation be inclined o the plane of the quadrant, it will, during the motion of the index, he conſinually directed to a leſſer circle of ihe ſphere, and thereſore cannot determine the angular diſiance of objcls, which is always meaſured upon a great circle. It is ſuppoſed that every part of the graduaed arc, and the index contiguous to ĩt, lies in the ſame pnlane, which is called the plane oFin- quadrant, and iĩs, perpendicular to the axis of motion upon which the quãdrant or the index applied to it, moves. The plane of a quadrant being vertical, if one of the radii containing the right angle be horizontal, the other will be perpendicular to the horizon: an intermediate radius being directed to any ſtar, &c. will divide the quadrant into two arcs, one of which meaſures the Zenith diſtance, and the other the ſtars altitude above the horiæon. Although the plane of the quadrant be verticle and õincĩdent wirh that in which the line of eollimation moves, yet the fellowing errors may cauſe a difference between Ihe tru and obſerved altitudes. 1I. If the line of collimation be not horizontal when the index points to o ſor 909.) 2. It the divifions of the quadrant are inaccurate. The direction of all theſe errors coinciding with the plana of the quadrant ſould be conſidered ogether. The firſt circumſtance which occurs ĩs, that they do not neceſſarily combine to increaſe or diminiſh the obſerved altitudæ; but iĩt may happen that their effects being contrary, ſhall correẽt, or or even deſtroy each other. In order to form an eſtimate of the error which will probably ariſe on this account, let us ſuppoſe, firſt ihat the diviſion of the quadrant is mathemat ically exact; and that the adjuſtment of he line of colimation o the point o, and the reading off can be depended upon to à, and to no greater accuracy. It is an ꝗen probability which of the ſeconds between & a', and Js equal to the error on each account; for examnlæ he il  m-ſom of the two errors may 2& be ad, / 2, / &c. of which combinations there are 44, among iheſe there dx 7 7 (d being a very large number) from whence it is concluded that the probable error, or ihat which is an even chance the i dx 27 i7d error of the obſervation does not exceed 5 are 22, and no more, each of which exceeds L x v7 29 nearly. IFd —60 the probable error E Zabout;5 It appears likewiſe that  the error in the diviſion of the quadrant be taken into conſideration with the other two, and the limit of iĩt be of equal magnitude wi h the former, viz. a, the error of an obſervation compounded of rhe three errors above deſcribed, may be either 2&/ 3d, 24/ 7-3" on 37:, &e. of which combination there are 8?', among iheſe there are 4 and no more, each of which exceeds T being a very large number) from whence it is inſerred, that the probable error upon the whole . If d =60; ihe probable error = 42 nearly. Although an aſtronomical quadrant be free from all the errors above deſcribed, if the plane of it ſould be inclined to that of the vertical circle in which an obſerved ſtar is ſituated, the altitude deduced from obſervation will be greater than the true altitude. If the deviation of the quacrants's nlane from that of he rertical circle be an angle ſncomparably ſmaller than the altitude) the verſed ſine which  æ, let the ſine of the obſerved iltitude 3, the coſine =q, radius  I, M°  57°. 17. 45: ihen the diſference oſ the obſerved and true alũtudes, ariſing lrom ihe inclination of the quadram to the vertical circle, scu x M' Cor. I. The deviation of the quadrant being given, the error sc u X ;M* ill be the greateſt when the altitude =45°, becauſe the product of the ſine and coſine of 45° is greater than the prod uẽt of ihe ſine and coſine of any other angie. Cor. II. If the alũtude be the ſame, the error in ohſerving jt will be in a duplicate ratio of the deviation of the quadrants plane from the vertical, becauſe the verſed ſines of arcs are in a duplicate ratio of the arcs themſelves, when they are diminiſhed ſine limite. . The obſerved aliitude being a ſmall angle 2/ a, the eondition of the propoſition is aliered when the error of the quadrant bears a conſiderable proportion to à''.If u repreſents the verſed ſine of the quadrant's error as before, the error in altitude will now  ud'. Tf the line of collimation be inclined to the plane of a quadrant otherwiſe accurately adjuſted, the altitude of a ſtar deduced from an obſervation taken by it will be greater than the true altitude. IF the inclination of the line of collimation to the plane of he quædrant be an angle (incomparably ſmaller than the Zenith diſtance) the verſed fine of which = u, let T =the tangent of he obſerved altitude, M  579. 17. 45, the diſference between the true and cbſerved altitudes = T7x M*. Cor. I. The altitude being given, the error in obſerving it vill be in a duplicate ratio of the error oſ the line of collimation. Cor. II. The error o? the line of collimation heing given, the difference between the obſeived and ſrue altitude will be as ihe tangent of ihe altitude. When the obſerved enith diſtance is ſo ſmall that the error of ihe line of collimation bears a conſiderable proportion to it, let f= the error of the line of collimation, the ſmall zenith diſtance, deduced from direction, the error in altitude now becomes qd2 7ad. Suppoſe a great circle to paſs through a ſtar, and to interſect the horizon at any angle; if this angle and the arc of the great circle intercepted between the ſtar the horizon be taken by obſervation, the ſtars altitude above the horizon will be determined. it attended with conſiderable advantages. Let S repreſent the place of a ſtar, Qthe arc of ã vertical circle paſſing through the ſtar, OR an arc of the horix0n, SO the arc of a great circle paſſing through the ſtar and interſecting the horizon at the angle SOQ; According to the above method, the arc OF and the angle SOL are obſerved in order to find the arc S QSuppoſe each of theſe obſervations, i. e. of OS and S OL' liable to an error dr, then the correſponding difference in the arc  L=S n n ) ax 1ing S] dſ x tangsõ. ,hich quantity ũif a' be tang. OS tang. O given) isthe leaſt (SQ heing leſs than2ò) orihe greateſt poſſible ſSRbeing greater than 509) when the ſine of the angle O is a mean proportional hbetween the ſine of S and radius; that is, when the are SO ĩs equal to the meaſure of the angle S O”Q In either caſe it is found that, ſuppoſing the ſine of u .d' x tang. SQ,, d' x tang. 5 radius =r, the quantity  5 t õ will be equal to æd x æ : but ſince the two errors r 5 l abovementioned do not neceſſarily combine either to increaſe or dimiriſh the altitude, and may correct or even deſtroy each other, it appears ſrom theſe conſiderations, and from the note to art 3. that the prohable error, or that which it is an even chance, the error of rhe obſervation ſhall not excetd, / axsa. ſ 17d' = J- ly: wli th ⸗ x vVæ 25 x V- - nearly wliereas the probable error ariling in the direct menſuration of the vertiin : dn cal arc 5” æ a , which is in all caſes greater ſhan næ x 2 29 n determining the ſmaller altitudes by the r ſ indirect method, the probable error will become very inconſiderable.For inſtance,in meaſuring an altitude of 10, if the obſervations of OS and SO”are each liable to an error, which may ariſe to, but not exceed 60', the probauble error in the n altitude Ixeo x v fine 1uhich is no more 29 r  ſine 1 than 4.6, whereas the probable error which would be incident from the theory of which it appears, that making all allowance for the unavoidable impeifections in ihe confiruction of the inſtrument and in obſervation, the apparent diameter of the planets may be determined within 1ſ. If an arc of 159. 30 be divided into 30 equal parts, the arc contained between the firſt two correſponding diviſions from either extremity, will be 1', the arc between the next two diviſions will be 2', between the next 3, and ſo on, till the arc contained between the laſt correſponding diviſions 30, or ĩ a degree. In general, if an arc or right line containing ; parts, each ol which /+, be divided inro n equal parts, the diſtance between the firſt two correſponding diviſions from coincidence = z between the two next 2 and ſo on till the diſtance between the lat æ 2 or ꝓ. The nonius applied to aſtronomical and other inſtruments is conſtructed upon theſe principles. By means oſ ihis contrivance, angles are obſerved to an accuracy, much heyond what could be eſfected by actual diviſion of the quadrant. : Since an arc which ſubtends a ſecond of a degree?]— 2062645 pait of radius, iĩt is eaſy to find the length of any arc contained between two contiguous diviſions oſ a quadrant; thu: if the radius of the quadrant be 3 inches, and if the arc be divided into à minutes, the ſpace contained be: IX30 X tween two contiguous diviſions e2 r of an inch. 206265 IF the radius of the earth be 3570 miles, or 3970 X 1760 yards, it follows that a ſecond ol a degree meaſured upon a great circle oſ the earth æ = 34 yards nearly. If ſeveral obſervations be taken in order to determine the angle ſubtended between two given objects, the reſulis oſ theſe ohſervations will probably differ ſomething from each other: It is uſual in this caſe to àdd the reſults together, and to divide the ſum by the number of them: the quotient is called the mean of the whole, and every thing elſe being the ſame, will approach nearer tothe truth, the greater number of obſervations are taken, from which the mean is derived- - thus, it ,, and r be the reſults I or part 292 P f 3 obſervations, the mean of the three will be zr73 PRINCIPLES. Half the difference between the greateſt and leaſt meridian altitudes of the ſuns center, taken in any given latitude, is equal to the inclination of the ecliptic to the equator. The apparent altitude of all the heavenly hodies being increnſed by reſraction, is allowed for by referring to tables which are conſtructed for that purpoſe. The obſervation of a ſtars altitude, implies the previous determination of the horizoihis is effected two ways. 1. BYy a plumb line hanging freely and at reſt: a plane perpendicular to this Iine muſt be horizonta. 2. By the level. It a ſtar be obſerved by reflexion from an horizontal polihed ſurface, the angle ſubtended hy the image and the object, at the eye of the ſpectator, will be double to the ſtar's altitude above the horizon. In order to find the altitude of the ſun's center, two methods are uſed; 1. By obſerving the altitudes of ihe higheſt and loweſt points of the diſk: half the ſum will be the altitude oſ the ſun's center. 2. By obſerving the altitude of the loweſt point only, and adding the ſun's apparent ſemidiameter, correſponding to the time of obſervation, taken ſrom an ephemeris, wherein it is previouſly calculated. The latitude of a place, is equal to the altitude of the pole of the equator above the horiZon. 1. The diſtance between the zenith and the horizon, is equal to the diſtance between the pole and the equator, each of them being 900: take away the diſtance of the zenith from the pole, which is common to hoth, and there remains the diſtunce of the pole ſrom the horizon, equal to the diſtance of the zenith fr m the equator, or he latitude of the place. 2. The diſtance of the zenith from the pole, is equal to the complement of the latitude to 50°. 3. Ilence is derived the menſuration of the earth's circumſerence. It appears by experiment, to an obſerver, whe proceeds directly on the meridian 69.3 miles in the latitude of 559, that the diſſerence of the pole's altitudes is i°. From whence it is inferred, ſnppoſing the earth to be perfectly ſpherical, ithat an arc of one degree on the earnh's ſurſace 69.3 miles, and conſequently that the earth's circumference = 69.3360=24945, and the diameter 7941 miles. The ſpercidical figure oſ the earth, cauſes a ſmall diſſærence in the length of a degree, when meaſured on a great circle of the earth in diſferent latitudes. If the greateſt and leaſt altitudes of a circumpolar ſtar be determined by obſervation, half the ſum will be the latitude of the place. . The ſtar uſually called the pole ſtar, ĩs not exactly on the pole of the equator, the above method is therefore (among others) made uſe of in order to determine the true altitude ot the pole. The inclination of the equator to the horiZon, is equal to the complement of the latitude to 90. The diſtance of rhe zenith from the horizon = 9. The meridian diſtance of the Zenith from the equator the latitude: the arc of the meridjan therefore intercep ed between the equator and the horizon muſt be  the complement of the latitude to 90°. This arc meaſures the inclination of the equator to the horizon, becauſe the meridian is a ſecondary common to both thoſe circles. If equal altitudes of a ſtar be taken on different ſides of the meridian, the time elapſed between the obſervations being biſſected, will give the inſtant when the ſtat was on the meridian. From hence is derived the uſual method of determining the meridian by meãns of a tranſit teleſcope (previouſly adjuſted to the enith) and a well regulated clock. If the inſtant of the ſtar's tranſit obſerved in ihe teleſcoje, does not biſſect the time elapſed between the obſervations oſ the equal altitudes, the poſition of the tranſit muſt be corrected. The poſition of the meridian teleſcope, previouſly adjuſted to the zenith, may be verified by obſerving the the tranſits of a ciicumpolar ſtar, paſſing above and below the pole: if the time elapſed between the tranſits be not exactly 1ih. 58m. Q being halſ of the time in which a fixed ftar compleats itsdſurnal revolution, the line of collimation does not move in the plane of the meridian. The declination of a ſtar, is the difference of the ſtar's meridian Zenith diſtance, and the latitude of the place. The latitude of a place heing known, the declinations ol the ſtars are determined from ihe obſeivation of their merilian zenith diſtances. The difference in right aſcenſion of two ſtars eſtimated in time, is equal to the time elapſed between their tranſits over a given meridian. From hence we may veriſy, the poſition ofa tranſit teleſeope, or aſtronomical quadrant, previouſly adjuſted to the zenith, i. e. we may aſcertain whether the line of collimation moves in the plane of the meridian, by obſerving the tranſits of two ſtars, the declinations of which are conſiderably different: if the time elapſed between the tranſits be equal to the difference of he ſtars right aſcenſions, the line of collimation moves in the plane of the meridian, if not, a correction is necèſſary. This is the method uſed by the Rev. Mr. Malſkelyne, in his expe: ime: t upon the attraction of the mountain Schehallien, deſcribed in the Phil. Tranſact. for 1776. The declination of any ſtar,  and the inclination oſ the ecliptic to the equator being given, the right aſcenſion ĩt determined by the ſolution of a right angled triangle. The right aſcenſions of the reſt of the ſtars are found by the obſervation of iheir tranſits over the meridian. The latitude of a place is equal to the ſuns meridian Zenith diſtance + the declination in ſummer, and the declination in winter. Hence is deduced the uſual method of determining the Iatitude of a place by obſerving the ſun's meridian altitude or zenith diſtance. The ſuns aliitudæ or zenith diflance being accurately meaſured, the latitude will he deduced verv near the truth. For if the ſun's place in the ec'ipiic he comp ted true within 20, the error of the declination cannot exceed 75: but will never be ſo much exc/pt in the extreme caſe, when the eror of the ſuns longitude is he greaieſt poſſible, viz. 207, and ihe ſun is near either oſ the equinoctial points: we may conclude in general, that the computation of ihe ſun's declination does not eir more than 2' or 3' from the truth.The meridian alttude and declination of a ceeſt-al ohject heing determined, and proper allowance being made ſor the effects of refraction, &e. the latitude of a place my be determined, as will appear in t e following example, oſ an obſe: vation taken at Canbiidge; Auguſt the ;i, 1775. Apparent meridian Altitude of the ſuns lower limb H - = 353°. 46. 8 Suns appurent ſemidiameter / --è. i5. 5 Apparent altitude of the ſuns center / - 50. 1. Sub:ract on account of refraction&/&- o0. o. 41' Altitude of the ſuns center / - £4. I. I70 Zenith diſtane of the ſun's center /m -- 389. IA. 453 Add the ſun's declination/ --- Vẽ. 13. 5” The latitude of Cambridge / - £29. 12. 40 When the utmoſt acouracy is required, the effects of the temprature and weight of the aimoſphere, and the ſuns parallax muſt be taken inro the computation; but the variations in the obſerved altitude produced from theſe cauſes are too minute to be here particularly conſidered. The latitude of a place, and declination of the ſun being given, the apparent time may be determined, from an obſervation of the ſun's altitude. The diſtance of the zenith from the pole, the complement of the ſuns declination to 509, and the ſun's zZenith diltance, are the ſides of a ſpherical triangle, one of the angles of which is that contained between the meridian and ceclination circle paſſing through the ſuns center, and is the meaſure of the apparent time, which is therefore determined by the ſolution of the triangle. This is the method oſ finding apparent time, uſuallv pracliſed at ſeathe ſame problem may be effected by obſerving ihe altitude oſ a known fixed ſtar, with very little variation in the computation: but in each caſe, ſince it is impoſſible to meaſure altitudes above the horizon abſolutely freæ from error, the obſervation muſt be taken in ſuch a manner, that a given variation in the obſei ved a'titude will cauſe the leaſt poſſble variation in the time deduced: which is done by taking the altitude of the ſun or ſtar when on the prime vertical.Let a= the given variation of a ſtars altituce, h = the correſponding variation of the hour angle, then we ſhall have  = a X madius æ Cos: latitude x ſine azimuir 5 ; = t is conſtant, and a being by the ſuppoſition intariable; b, or the variation of the hour angle deduced from obThereſore, ſince ata given place ſervation will be proportional to which quanlllli ſne azimuth lity is the leaſt when the azimuth  990, r when the ſun Cor. I. It appears from hence ihat (every thing elſe being the ſame) it is of no conſequence to the accuracy of the time deduced, at what altitude a ſtar is obſerved upon the prime vertical. Cor. II. In the latitude of 520. r7'. 40, an error of i in obſerving the altitude of a ſtar upon the prime vertical cauſes r an error of  =97. 9 & ſix ſeconds and a col. 529. 12'. 40 half in the time deduced. If the obſervation be taken on any other vertical, the error in altitude being the ſame, the error in time before found ( 1 ſeconds) will be increaſed in the ratio of the ſine of the tars azimuth to radius. If the difference of the apparent time of duy at any two places be known, (at the ſame inſtant) their diſference of longitude will be known. One of the methods uſed for determining the difference of longi ude, is by two perſons obſerving an eclipſe of the ſun, one of Jupiters ſatellitcs, &c. or the occultation of a fixed ſtar by the moon.If either of theſe phenomena happened at diſferent apparent times to the two obſervers, the diffærence of theſe times (allowing for ihe effects of parallax, if neceſſary) will give the diſſerence of longitude requirel. This method can he practiſed only on land. The rollowing methods are uſed at ſea:---a watch vell regula ed to time at a given place, being carried 10 ſea eaſtward or weſtward, will ſew apparent time (by means of adding or ſubtratiing the equation) different from that which is deduced from obſervation of the ſun or ſtarss. This difference of time is eaſily converted into the diſference of longitude required.---The difference oſ longitude is now uſually determined at ſea by obſervi-g the angle ſubtended by the moons center and a fixed ſtar, not very dittant from the moons oibit. The moon's diſtances from ſeveral of the fixed ſtars, and the times correſpondinę, are calculated in the NauticalEphemeris for the meridian of Greenwich; hence hy obſervingthe diſtance of the moon ſrom a fixed ſtar, the time at Greenwich may be determined, and the time at the place of obſervation being known, the difference converted into degrees and minutes, will give the longitude from Greenwich. Eut it is here neceſſay to obtain the true diſtance of the moon from the ſtar, free from the effects of parallax and refraction, which altering the appa ent altitudes of the itar and moon, cauſes a variation in their apparent diſtance. The apparent a'titudes of the moon's cenrer anu a ſtar, with their apparent diſtance from each other being given by obſervation, we obtain the true difference o' their azimuths, which is not 3ſſecied by reſraction or parallax. The apparent zeni:h diftance, oſ the moon ard ſtar being known, theirelevations ariſi-g ſfrom reſraction, as well as thæ depreſſion of the moons center cauſed by parallax, will be known from the tables, from whence we derive their true zenith diftances: and the differerce of the azimuths being previouſly dete: mined, the ſolution of a ſperical triangle, gives the true diſtanc⸗ of the moon's center trom the ſtar.- This method of aſcertaining the longitude at ſea, was firſt brought into uſe by the Rev. Mr. Ma ſelyre. lIn a given latitude no ſtar will ſet below the horizon, the polar diſtance of which is leſs than the latitude of the place. In latitudes leſs than about 669. 32/, the ſun's center can never be totally above or below the horizon during 24 hours. When the ſun's declination is greater than the diſtance of the zenith from the pole, the ſun's center will not ſet beJow the horizon, or will not riſe above it, according as the declination is of the ſame, or a contrary denomination to the latitude. In this and the preceding article, the effecls of reſraction are not conſidered. If an obſerver be ſituated under the equator, the plane of his horizon is perpendicular to the plane of the equator and parallels of declination. The Sphere of the heavens, in this poſition, with regard to the ſpectator's horizon, is denominated a right ſphere. —The equator, and all the parallels oſf declination in a righ ſphere, are biſſected by ihe horizon; thereſore the ſun and al the ſtars are above the horizon during one half of iheir diurnal revolution. The poles oſ the world in a right ſphere coincide with tht horizon. If an obſerver be ſituated at either pole, his horizon is coincident with the equator, and the parallels of declination The ſphere of the heavens in this poſitjon, Jſpeciing the ſuectators horizon, is called a parallel ſphere. The ſun, hen ahove the horizon, appears to revove in a leſſer cire e, paralIel to the horizon, and at an altitude above it ęqual to his declination. In all other poſitions of the ſphere of he heavens, except thoſe deſcribed, the horizon is inclined to the equator and its parallels at ſome angle leſs than 99: in this caſe, the poſition of the ſphere is ſaid to be oblique. I a tangent be dravin to the ſurfaces of the ſun and earth, in the ſame plane with the linc joining their centers, a cirele deſcribed through the point of contãct at theẽarth's ſurface, the plane of it heing perpendicular to the abovetmentioned line, will be the circle which terminates light and darkneſs. The plane of this circle nearly, though not exactly, paſſes through the earth's center: it may be conſidered as a great circle, except when the utmoſt ac curacy is required. When the ſun is in either of the equinoctial points, the circle bounding light and darkneſs coincides with the poles of the world, and conſequently biſſects all the parallels to the equator. Hence it follows that, when the ſun is is in eitherof the equinoctial points, the days and nights in all parts of the world will be equal. When the ſuns declination is north, the circle terminating light and darkneſs divides the northern parallels of latitude unequally, thoſe parts being the greatet which lie within the ſaid circle. : Hence the days will be longer than the nights ro the inhabitants of the northern parãllels oſ latitude, when the ſuns declination is north. When the ſun's declination is ſouth, the circle terminating light and darkll neſs divides the northern parallels of latitude unequally, that part of them being the greateſt, which lies without the circle of illumination. Hence it is, that the nights are longer than the davs, to the inhabitants of the northern parallels, when the ſun is ſouth of the equator. When the ſun's declination is greater than the complement of latitude to 90, the parallel of latitude paſſing through the place, will fall either entirely within, or entirely without the circle of illumination. The ſuns center will therefore appear either to be entirely above or below the horizon to the inhabitants of that parallel, according as the declination is of the ſame, or of a contrary denomination to the latitude of the place. ON DIALLING, AND CONCERNING THE USE OF THE EQUATORIAL INSTRUMENT. If rays of light proceeding from the ſun's center ſhine upon a right line parallel to the earth's axis, the ſadow of the line will be in the ſame plane with the circle of declination, which paſſes through the center of the ſun. The ſhadow of any line is a plane which paſſes through the line, and through the ſun's center: the ſadow deſcribed in the propoſition, will cut the horizon, or any other great circle given in poſition, in the ſame right line, at a given time ofthe day, whatever be the ſuns declination. If a line be applied to the center of a circle, the plane of which is given in poſition, and this line be adjuſted parallel to the earth's axis, the inclination of the line's ſhadow to the plane of the meridian, is the meaſure of the apparent time of day; allowing one hour for 159 &c. From hence it ſollows, that, if circles of declinatior be projected upon any plane given in poſition, and à lint be applied to the plane, at their common interſection, parallel to the earth's axis, the ſadow of the line will determine the apparent time of the day. Let the axis of a ſphere, upon which the circles of declination are deſcribed, be directed to the pole of the heavens. The ſphere being biſſected by the plane of any great circle, the ſection vill be a dial, of which the axis of the ſphere is called the ſtyle. The interſection of the dial with the meridian is marked XII. the interſection of the adjacent hou circle, inclined to the meridian, at an angle of 15 is marked I. and ſo on; the intermediate times being marked at the interſections of the correſponding circles of declination, with the plane of the dial. Since, when the hour angle is the ſame, the ſection of the ſtyle's ſadow is the ſame, whatever be the ſuns declination; ĩt follows, that whenever the ſun ſhines upon the ſtyle, the time of the day being given, the ſhadow will always interſect the dial in the ſame right line: this line theretore vill determine the apparent time. A dial is called vertical, horizontal, equatorial, &c. according as the plane of it coincides with that of a vertical circle, the horizon or equator in the heavens. The equatorial inſtrument conſiſts of 3 circles, the planes of which may be ſo adjuſted as to coincide with the planes of the horizon, equator, and any given circle of declination in the heavens reſpectively. l A teleſcope is applied to the declination circle, to the plane of which the line of collimation is parallel. The moſt common uſes to which the equatorial inſtument is applied, are as follow; 1. To determine the poſition of the meridian by a ſingle bſervation. 2. To find the apparent time of the day. the right aſcenſion and declination of whih are known. In oſder to efect theſc problems, the inſtrument muſt be firſt rectified to the latitude of the place. Let the equatorial circle be inclined to the horizon, at an angle = to the complement of the Iatitude to 90. The inſtrument is adjuſted to the latitude. For the inclination of the equator in the heavens to thæ horizon, is equal to the complement of the latitude, to 50°9. In order to determine the meridian, the declination circle muſt be ſet to the declination of a known ſtar. If the ſtar be brought into the centre of the field, by means of the equatorial and azimuth circles, the plane of the equatorial circle will coincide with that of the equator in the heavens, (ſetting aſide the effects of refraction.) Hence the plane oſ a ſecondary to the equatoriãl and azimuth circles will coincide with the plane of the meridian; to which the line of collimetion will bèe directed, when the equatorial index points to XII. The inſtrument being adjuſted to the Iatitude. Ilet the declination circle be ſet to the ſun's declination, correſponding to the time of obſervation: if the line of eollimation be directed to the ſun's center, by moving the equatorial and azimuth circles in their own planes, the arc of the equatorial circle intercepted between XII. and the point to which the index is directed, will determine the apparent time of the day. ial, the In this caſe the equatorial circle hecomes a plane of which is perpendicular to the ſtyle, or, as it is uſually called, an squatorial dial. It is to be obſerved, that, in both the preceding articles, the opparent elevation of the r & eſtial objects, above their truè places, ariſing from reraction, will cauſe the ꝑoſtion of the meridian, and the cop?, to deviate ſomething from the truth. "Theſe errors bolh in the hour angle and azimuth may be eſtimated thus. Let r repreſent the àpparent clevation of the ſtar, or ſuns certer, cauſtd by refraction: s, the angle contained between a vertical circle and a cirele of declination, paſing through the ſtarthen the variation of the hour angle, cauſed by tſie ap: E arent elevation 6ſ the ſtar /—94& P cT. Tat. æ ſin. acimuth and the .. . r x Cotang. s. cotemporary variation in the àimithn—Aop/ 977—2- i ſin. Itars æcuith diut. Since by the properties of the equatorial inſtrument, when adjuſter, the plane oſ the declination cirele will always be vertical when the equatorial index points to XII. it follows that, the poſition of the meridian found in art. 6, will be corrected by moving the azimuth circle, in a direction conr x Cot. s. -  7 7 7 nin. zen. diſt. It may he inferred from hence, that in the latitude 50 12/ 40", refraction will cauſe no error in the poſitionof the meridian, determined as in art. 6, vhen the obſerved ſtars declination and altitude æ 629. 45/. Let the inſtrument be adjuſted to the latitude and the meridian; if the declination circle be ſet to the declination of any ſtar, &c. and the equatorial circle be moved in its own plane, the line of collimation will be always directed to the ſame parallel of declination, as the ſtar deſcribes in its diurnal revolution. : Hence it follows, that iſ the right aſcenſion and de clination of any ſtar be given, the line of collimation of the equatorial teleſcope may be directed to it; by which means Jupiter, Venus, and the ſixed ſtars of the firſt magnitude, may be obſerved in the day time. The altitudle of a celeſtial object above the horizon may be meaſured on the declination circle of the equatorial inſtrument. When the equatorial index points toXII. the plane oſ the declinatiun circle paſſes through the zenith, the line of collimation tereſorebeing adjuſea norizontal, and afterward directed direſtion to a ſtar, by moving the declination and azimuth cireles in their own planes; the index of the declination circle will determine the are of rhe vertical circle, intercepted hetween the ſtar and the horizon. The altitude of a celeſtial object may be determined, by meaſuring the arc of a great circle, intercepted between the ſtar and the horizon, and the inclination of the ſame great circle to the horion. This is the method deſcribed in page 92, art. 6. and may le put in practice hy means r the equatorial inſttument thus.Let the ſine of the eſimated aliitude of the chject, he s: elevate the equatorial circle above the horizon, to an angle, the ſine of which—,/s, rad. being /1. The declination circle being ſet to o, direct the line of collimation to the ſtar, hy the equatorial and arimuth circles, moved in their own planes; obſerve the arc of the equatorial circle, intercepted between the index and VI. if the ſine of this arę /Dp. the ſine of the obſerved altitude will be equal o 3 X P. rad. being 1. Suppoſe  to repreſent the zenith, (vid. fig. in note to art. 6,. p. 93.) s the place of a ſtar, s and Q the arcs of two vertical circles; s o, a great circle paſſing through the ſtar, and equal 1o o,If the arc o and the angle s o Qbe determined by obſervation, the zenith diſtance sq will be known. This method of determining 7enith diſtances is fimilar to the indirect menſuration of altitudes befare deſcribed, ard is capable of great accuracy, when the arc to be meaſured is ſmall, eſpecially ſince the line of collimnion by the conſtruction of the equeterial inũrument, may be accurately adjuſted to the zenith. The equatorial inſtrument may he applied to this method by means of the following ruleslet the ſine oſ the eſtimared 7enith diſtance=s: find an angle, the ſine of which/,/ s. radius being 1. Elevate the cquatorizl cirele above the hoiizon, to an angle, the ſine cf which ./5; and ſet the declination cirele to the complement of ihe ſame ange, to ”e,By means of the equatorial and azimuth cireles the ſtar: bſerve the arc intercepted between the equatorial index and XII.—the ſine of V, this are, multiplied into s, (rad. being =1) will be the ſine of half the zenith diſtance required. RALLAX, AND THE DETERMINATION OF INACISSIBLE DISTANCES. Let a line be drawn perpendicular to the diſtance between an adjacent object and any given ſtation, the apparent places of the object, when viewed from the extremities of the line, will be different. . The perpendicular line above deſcribed, iĩs callea- a nũ. 2. The extremities of the baſe, are called ſtations. 3. The angle ſubtended by the extremities of the baſe at the ohject is called the angle of parallax. 4. The baſe is to the leſſe of the two diſtances of the ol ject from the extremities of the baſe, as the tangent of parallax to radius; and to the greater, as the ſine of th] ſame angle to radius. Suppoſe lines to be drawn from the two ſtations to an object, one of the angles contained by theſe lines, and the baſe being a right angle, the other will be the complement of the parallax to 909. Hence, if the angles at the ſtations terminating a given baſe be known, the parallax, and conſequently the diſtance of the object, moy be determined. If the diſtance of an object be greater than 100000 times he baſe, the angles at the ſtations will not ſenſibly differ from two right ones, the lines drawn from the object to the ſtations are therefore, phyſically ſpeaking, parallel One of the angles at the baſe, in all the propoſition: contained in thiũs ſection, is ſuppoſed to be 5o0°. The moſt accurate inſtruments conſtruted for the menſuration of angles, cannot be depended upon, to leſs than ? the tangent of which is to radſus as 1 to 193132. That angle whoſe tangent ĩs to radius as 1 to 100000, is 2.56, or little more than two ſcconis. The parallax of an object which is above 1000330 times more diſtant than E& ũſl the two ſtations of obſervation, is inſenſible. If the ohject be at a greater diſtance from either ſtation, than 100000 times the baſe, ihe anre at one of the ſations being 90°, the angle at the other will be more than 89° 55, 57.9; the dũſerence of which angle and 500 heing ſcarcely more than 2, is too ſmall to hecome ſenſible by obſervation. f the parallax of an object (obſerved with an inſtrument ſuſficiently accurate to meaſurc an angle of 2) be inſenſible, the diſtance of it from either ſtation, cannot be leſs than 100000 times the baſe, from the extremities of which it is obſerved. It is to be remarked, that, although the diſtance of the object cannot be leſs than 107000 times the baſe, yet il may be greater, in any aſlignable ratio.Lines drawn from any giver poirt: in a haſe, to an ohject, ma;y be eſlteemed in prattice patullel, without ſenſible error, if the diſtance of the ohject is more than 1050800 times the baſe. . Rays diverging from any point of the ſun: diſ, upon the ſurface of the earth, mav be eſteemed parallel, if their diſtance from ench other exceed not about 1000 miles, at the earth's ſurface: becauſe 1000 miles is to the earth's diſtance from the ſun, in proportion of little more than r torooooo. In the ſame manncr, plumb lines hanging ſieely and ar reſt, not being diſtant more than about 68 yards from each other, may be accounted parallel. Rays diverging trom a ſixed ſtor, to any parts of the earth's orhit, are, phyſically ſpeaking, parallel, becauſe the parallax of the earth's oibit, ſecn at the ſtar, is leſs than 2. Two planes drawn parallel to each other, and paſſing through the extremities of a diameter of the carth's orbit, jf produced, vill appear to coincide with the ſame great circlè of the heavens; hecauſc the diameter of the earth's orbit when ſeen from the fixed ſtar, ſubtends an angle leſs than a.In like manner, if a plane, paſſing through ihe earths center, be parallel to a plane drawn to the iurface, theſe planes, when produced, apparently colncide with the OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM. HE ſolar ſyſtem confiſts of the Sun; and the Planets, and Comets revolving about it. There are ſix primary planets; viz. Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, all of which revolve according to the order of the ſigns in nearly circular orbits round the Sun as a center. The apparent annual revolution of the Sun in the ecliptic ariſes ſrom the real motion of the Earth in its orbit; Venus and Mercury revolve in orbits which are contained within that of the earth, and are called inſerior planets; Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, which revolve in orbits exterior to the earth's orbit, are called ſuperior planets. The orbits of all the planets are elliptical, but the Principal Phenomena which demonſtrate the truth oſ the Copernican ſyſtem, are the ſame, whe her the orbits are conſidered as ellipticãl or circular. The latter ſuppoſition is uſually adopted in giving a general deſcription oſ the diſpoſition and motion oſ the heavenly bodies. The planes of the orbits in which the planets revolve are inclined differently to the plane of the ecliptic, but none ſo much as 89. The latitude oſf no two planets can differ ſo much as 160. Three of the primary planets have ſatellites or ſecondary planets revolving round them as centers, in orbits nearly circular, and accompanying them in their revolutions round the Sun. The Moon is the only ſatellite attendant upon the earth, and performs its periodic ſcribing an orbit which is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic at an angle of about ⸗. Iſ the periodic times oſ any two oſ the heavenly bodies be a and b, the ſynodical period will = ſuppoſing their orbits to be circular, and abd their motion uriſorm. Tho periodical ume of the Moon = 27. 29; the periodic time of the earth = 365. 25 days; whereſore a ſynodical month 35.255 27:29 365.2527.20 =29.49 or about 29 days and a halſ. The Moon is obſerved to turn the ſame face towards the Earth in every part of her revolution. From hence it is inſerred, that the Moon turns round her axis, which 18 nearly perpendicular to the plane of her orbit, in the ſame timæ as ſhe compleats her revolution round the earth. Four ſatellites revolve round Jupiter, and five round Saturn. Saturn is encompaſſed with a luminous ring, the appearance of which varies according to the different poſitions of the ſpectator. The planets and their ſecondaries are opake and ſpherical bodies. . The earth turns round its axis which ĩs inclined to the plane of the ecliptic at an angle of 66 32, compleating its revolution in 230. 560. 48. The apparent diurnal revolution oſ the Sun and Stars ſrom eaſt to weſt, ariſes ſrom the real revolution of the earth round its axis ſrom weſt to eaſt. Iſ the Sun's Jlace in the ecliptic were always the ſame, 360 of the equator would paſs under a given meridian between the ſime oſ the Sun's leaving and returning to the ſamo meridian. But ſince the mean increaſe of the Sun's right aſcenſion in 24 hours is 5ę. 3, it follows, that duſing 24 houns, or a mean Solar day, 36°-5- ĩ of the equator u will paſs r a given meridian: whencẽ we dẽrive the time of the Earth's revolution round its axis by the ſollowing proportion; as  n n 36. 598: 365° ſo  24023. 56.4 the time ſought. The great circle oſ the heavens, in the plane of which the Earth perſorms its diurnal revolution, is called the equator. The different ſeaſons oſ the year are cauſed by the inclination oſ the ecliptic to the equator. . Other planets have been obſerved to revolve round their axes. The diurnal revolution oſ Jupiter, Mars and Venus, have been diſcovered ſrom the ſpots which are viſible upon their diſks; any one oſ theſe ſpots being obſerved appears to revolve, returning to the ſamo poſition which it has departed ſrom at equal intervals of time. It is diſcovered from the ſpots on the diſk, that the Sun turns round his axis in about 25 days. . The Earth is ſurrounded with a thin tranſparent fluid, called collectively the atmoſphere. TThe atmoſphere is the cauſe oſ the twilight, the apparent elevation of the Stars above their true places, and the gen diffuſion of the Suns rays. . Comets are a ſort of planets which revolve in very excentric ellipſes, round the Sun which iĩs ſituated in one of the foci. Comets are obſerved to revolve, both according to the order oſ the ſigns, and in the contrary direction. The planes of their orbits are inclined to the plane of the ecſptic al various angles, not being confined within any limit. IENOMENA WHICH DEMONSTRATE THE TRUTH OF THI COPERNICAN SYSTEM, AND SOME COROLLARIES. VENUS and Mercury are never ſeen in oppoſition to the Sun. A planet is ſaid to be in oppoſition, when the Sun and planet's Iongitudes differ by 180°. The angle of elongation of an inferior planet from the Sun, never exceeds a certain limit. The ſuperior planets are obſerved to be ſometimes in oppoſition, and ſometimes in conjunction. The ſuperior planets are retrograde in oppoſition, and progreſſive in conjunction. There is a certain angle of elongation from the Sun at which a planet appears ſtationary when ſeen from the Earth. Let the periodic time of a ſuperior planet, be to that of an inſerior, a 1:1, and let their diſtances ſrom the ſun be as 1: 5.an angle, the eoſine of which Neœct radius being 1, will be the angle of elon1-r: gation from the ſun, at which the inferior planet appears ſtationary when obſerved from the ſuperior. The angle of elongation oſ a ſuperior planet, when ſeen ſtationary ſrom an inſerior, is obtuſe: and the ſine of it ///ſ2xI radius being I. N/7/]3 It is here ſuppoſed, that the planets revolve uniſormly in the ſame planes, and in cireles, the common center of which coincides with the center oſ the ſun. I j j The obſervation of the planets ſtations will thereſore deviate ſomething ſrom the preceding rules. A ſpectator on the earth ſees that part of a planet's diſk only which ĩs contained I is from Nence that the moon anã the inferior ſlanets appear Eorneã when they are ſituated between the Earth and Sun. : The Circles of viũon and illuminaon always ſo nearly eoincide in the planets Jupiter and Saturn, that theſe plancts appear in all ſituations to ſhine with a ſull diſ. j In Mars, when near rature, theſe Circles being ĩnclined to each othtr, cauſe a part oſ the illuminated diſk to be intereepted from our view; in this poſition Mars is ſald to be gibbous. The parallax of the Sun is about 8 3. This is the parallax of the Stn when viewed in the Zenith and in the Horizon, or the Horizontal parallax. Whereſore the ſemidiamater of thæ Earth is to the diſtance oſ the Earth from the Sun as the ſine of 3& 10 radius, or as I: 23265.. and fince the radius of the Earth æ 300 miles, the diſtance of the Sua ſrom the earth  24266 X 3970  neac 97000000 miles. The parallax of a fixed Star ſituated in or near the pole of the ecliptic is not ſenſible. The parallax ĩs thereſore leſs °, and conſequently the diſtance of the Siar greater than 150000 times the baſe from the extremities of which it is obſcrved, that is, greater than 1ò times the diameter of the Earihs orbit, or greater than 160000 X 153000000 miles The parallax of a fixed ſtar being nor more than 2, the Sun when viewed from the ſtar would appear under an angle leſsthan  ” 3.6 , or leſs than the hundredth part 200000 of a ſecond, and therefore could not be diſtinguiſhed from a point. Stnce bodies equal in magnitude and ſylendor to the Sun, being pliced at the d ſtance of the fixed Stars, would appear tn us as the Star: row do, it may be readily inferred, that the fixed Stars are bodies every way ũmilar tõ the Sun, which is the ceoter of the ſolar ſyſtem. This being the caſe, the reaſon will appear why a fixed ſtar, when viewed throbgh a teleſcope magnifying, two hundred times, appears no other than a joint. For the apparent diameter of the ſtar being leſi I than — part of a ſecond, when magnified two hundred times, will fubtend an angle of not ſo mnch aræ at the eye of a ſpectator obſerring il io the teleſcope. The parallax of ihe fixed ſtar when viewed ſrom the ęꝑpofite paris of the earth's oibit, is here aſumed 2'; but it is prò: bahle that the parallax of the neareſt ſtar, is much leſs, and conſequently rthe diſtance greater in the ſame proportion, as the parallax is lſs. .. The appearance of the fixed ſtars in the heavens will be in every reſpect the ſame, in whatever part of the earth's, or even Saturns orbit, the ſpectator is ſituated. . The change of place or parallax of the moon, when ſcen in the Zenith and the horizon, is at a medium, 57'. . Comets have no ſenſible diurnal parallax. j It follows from hence, that the diſtance of comets muſt b greater than that of the moon from the earth. . Comets are obſerved to change their places in the heavens, on account of the earth's motion in its orbit. It is inferred fiom hencæ, that comets, when viſible, am eĩher within the regions of the ſolir ſyſtem, or not very far diſtant from the orbit of Saiurn. CONCERNING EOLIPSES. HE planets and their ſecondaries ſnine by the light of the ſun reflected from them. An opake body intervening between a planet and the ſun, will intercept part, or even all the rays of light from arriving at the planet, according to the magnitude, and proximity of the opake body. Any ſphere ſubtending an angle at ihe ſpectators eye, æqual to, or greater than the apparent diameter of the ſun, will 0tally intercept the rays of light, if the center of it be in a lino joining the center of the ſun and the eye of the ſpectator. The ſhadow of the earth is of a determined length, and will totally eclipſe the ſun from any part of the moons ſurface fituated in it. The ſigure of the earth's ſadow is a cone; the axis of which is a continuation of the line, which joins the centers of the earth and ſun; the earih being between the ſun and the vertex of ihe hadow. Tne lengih of a planets adow is to the ſemi- diameter of the planet, as radius to the ſine oſ the ſun's apparent ſemi- diameter. Suppoſe the poſition of the ſhadow to be reverſed, ſo that the vertex of the cone may be between the ſun and the planet, the axis remaining in the ſame direction as before; a continuation of this cone increaſing, ſine limite, is called the penumbra. If a ſpectator be ſituated in the penumbra of a planet, a part of the ſun's light will be intercepted from his view. . The ſun is never eclipſed hut at the time of a new moon, and the moon is never eclipſed but when at the full. . Eclipſes of the moon and ſun would happen at every full and new moon, ii the plane of the moons orbits were coincident with the plane of the ecliptic. . The plane of the moon's orbit is inclined to that of the ecliptic, at an angle ol The line in which theſe planes interſect eaeh other, ĩs called the line of the nodos. If the angular diſtance of the moons center from the node at the time of the new moon, be leſs than about ſixteen degrees and a half, there will be an eclipſe of the ſun. . If the angular diſtance of the full moon's center from the node, be leſ; than about twelve degrees and a halſ, the moon will be eclipſed. The limits of ſolar, being greater than thoſe of lunar eclipſes, there will happen in a given time a greater number of ecliphũ of the ſun than of the moon. But an eclipſe of the moon is viſible to the inhabitants of one half of the globe; whereas a ſo lar eclipſe can be obſerved on a ſmall proportion of tne earin's ſurtace only: For this reaſon, at a given place, moro lunar æclipſes will be viſible in a certain time, than eclipſes of the ſun. I. No primary planet can fall into the ſhadow of another primary planet; but rt of a planet's ſurface may be eclipſed by falling into the ſhadow of its ſecondary. Any planet may fall into the penumbra of an inferior planet. 2. When the earth falls into the penumbra of Venus or Mercury, the rays of the ſun are in part intercepted from our view; and the planet in paſſing over the ſun, appears as a dark ſpot upon the diſk. 3. Mercury and Venus would be obſerved to paſs over the diſk of the ſun at every inferior conjunction, if the planes of their orbits coingided with that of the ecliptic. OF THE PHENOMENA WHICH ARISE FROM THE EXCENTRICITY OF THE EARTH'S ORBBIT, AND CONCERNING THE DIVISION OF TIME. TV apparent diameter and hourly motion of the Sun are obſerved to vary as the earth revolves in its orbit: and the variations are ſuch as demonſtrate the orbit to be elliptical. If the earth's orbit be ſuppoſed an excentric cirele according to the idea of ſome ancient aſ rono mers, dæductions ſormed ſrom this Hypotheſs diſagreæ with obſervation. Iſ the earth be ſuppoſed to revolve in an ellipſe round the Sun placed in one oſ the Foci, whatever decuẽtions are ſormed from this ſuppoſition, preciſely agree With Phenomena. Suppoſing the excentricity and ſemiaxis major of the Earth's orbit to be known, if the Suns place in the ecliptic be given, the apparent ſemidiameter of the Sun may be determined. In any ellipſe let rthe ſemiaxis major c  the ſemiaxis minor m— the excentricity Let a point be aſſumed in the circumſerence of the ellipſe, and leta line be drawn joining the point aſſumed and the ſocus. Let 7 the coſine oſ the angle contained between the line drawn as above and the axis major, 2 then the diſtance oſ the aſſumed point from the ſocus 7 m Lt is immediately inferred ſrom hence, that if d' be the apparent ſemidiameter oſ the Sun when at its mean diſtance ſrom, the earth, in any other poſition in which the coſine of the Sun's longitude ſrom the æſm ca It appears that the obſervation of the Sun's apparent ſemidiamerer p accurately with the pæceding deduction, ſormed a priori ſfrom the iptic hypotheſis, oſ which this agresment is a confirm ation. In order to illuſirate this by an example, let it he required . determine the apparent ſemidiameter oſ che Sun, when his longitude 71° 25. 40 in the year 1776, ſuppoſing the excentricity oſ ihe cart's orbit ſ be 16. 84, the ſemiaxis major 1000, and the Sũn's mean ſemidiameter 16. 2.8. When the Sun's lontitude  7. 25'. 40, his angular diſtance ſrom the apogee =95°. 16  710. a5. 4c =27°. 5c1. 207: let the coſina of a73. 55: 20=t. From the preceding datà and the rule abon decribod, ſcrihed, we deduce the apparent ſemidiameter of the Sun100 x 562.. 1500 cos. 279. 50. 200 x 16.83. -riul x = 15. 43. 73. 16 It appears alſo, tat a" being the hourly apparent motion oſ the Sun in the ht when at the mean diſtance, the hourly motion when the Sun is in any point of the ecliptic, the coſine oſ the longitude ſrom the apoge: —anZ being I, will = aæ æ . . Theſe concluſions, and any other derived in a ſimilar manner ſor the àpparem ſemidiameter, and hourly motion of ehe Sun at a given longituda, do not differ ſenſibly ſrom obſervation, which is (among others) a demonſtration that the orbit in which the earth revolves is an ellipſe, the Sun being in one oſ the ſoci. A line joining the earth and ſun deſcribes equal areas in equal times during the revolution of the earth in its orbit. Since the interſection of the ecliptic and the equator divides the area oſ the Earth's orhit unequally, it ſollows that the times of the Sun's entering the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, will divide the year une y. The daily increaſe of the Sun's right aſcenſion ĩis variable on two accounts. 1. The variation oſ the Suns angular velocity in the ecliptic. a. The inclination oſ the ecliptic to the equator. Hence ariſes the inequality of the ſolar days; a ſolar day is time elapſed between the Suns leaving and returming to a given meridian; the lengih of it may be thus determined: Let  =the time oſ the earths revolution round its axis; æ the increaſe of the Sun's right aſcenſion during 24 hours; we have the ſollowing proportion 3600: 3609 4::1: æ rL: = to the length oſ the ſolar day required. Or thus:  Let a the increaſe oſ the Sun's right aſcenſion during 24 hours: the length of the ſolar day will be determinod by the ſolloing proportion, as 360°. 59. 3⸗ n to 365 +a ſo is 2 to 26 æ tt length oſ the ſolar day required. lidii Cor. 1. Hence it follows, that the ſolar and mean days will never be equal except when the increaſe of the Sun's right aſcenſion during a4 hours is  59 &. Cor. 2. It appears from hence, that the apparent time of day, deduced irom the menſuration oſ the angle contained between the meridian and a circle oſ declination paſſing through the Sun's center, is moſt commonly different ſrom true or equated time, ſuch as is ſnewn by a well reguIated Clock. The difference between true and apparent time, is called the equation of time; this is previouſly calculated in aſtronomical Ephemerides, for each day in the year. Iſ we determine apparent time hy obſervation oſ the Sun or Stars, true time will be obtained by adding or ſubtracting the equation, correſponding to the time oſ obſervation. The tropical year is the time elapſed between the Sun's leaving either of the tropics, and returning to the ſame. The tropical year conſiſts of 365 days, 5hours, and about 49 minutes. The ſidereal year is the time elapſed between the ſun's leaving any fixed ſtar in the ecliptic, and returning to the ſame ſtar. The ſidereal vear conſiſts oſ 2365 days, 6 hours, and about'ę minutes. From this diſſerence between ſhe tropical and ſidereal years, it is inferred that the eouinoxial points change their places in the heavens: revolvinu in a direct on contrary to the order oſ the ſigns at the rate oſ ahout 10 in 72 years. Hence the Colures will be ſuljcct to the ſame motion as the equinoxial points, and the pole oſ the equator will deſcriha a leſſer circle round the polè of the ecliptic at 250 æ from it, and will compleat its revclution in 72  79  25920 years. The variation of the equators inclination to the ecliptic is not heræ conſidered. The ſolar year is not compoſed of any exact number of days. Hence ariſes the neceſſity of applying a frequent correction to the Calendar, leſt the ſeaſons oſ the yeæar ſould craſe to correſpond with the ſuns place in the ecliptic, reckoning ſrom the equinoxes or tropics. The tropical year conſiſts of 366 days, 5 hours, and 49 minutes; if thereſore it were accounted only 365 days, accordĩng to the cuſtom of the Egyptians, the deficient 5 hours and 49 minutes, would in 4 years accumulate to a difference f 25 hours, 16 minutes, by which the calendar would precede the ſun; but if in order to compenſate ſor this a whole day be inſerted into the calendar every àth year, this will he allowing 100 much by 44 minutes, which renderũ it nẽceſſary to leave out à day about every hundredih year. ONCERNING THE PROGRESSIVE MOTION Or LIGHT. WHE N Jupiters ſatelites emerge from the ſadow of their primary, the light reflected from them after their obſcuration, is obſerved to arrive at their earth, about ſixteen minutes ſooner when Jupiter is in oppoſition, than when he is near conjunction. Hence it is inferred, that a ray of light paſſes over the earths orbit in about ſixteen minutes, or nine hundred and ſixty ſeconds of time, and conſequenily moves at the rate of or about 202083 miles in a ſecond. The fixed Stars appear to deſcribe ellipſes round their true places as centers. This apparent motion in the fixed ſtars ariſes ſfrom the progreſſive motion oſ ight, and the motion oſ the earth in its orbit. The longer axes oſ the ellipſes are parallel to the plane of the ecliptic, and ſubtend angles which are all equal to about 40/, and the ſhorter axes  4 x ſine ſtars latitudt. j The apparent ſatitude of a given ſtar, ĩs leaſt when the ſun is f beſore the ſtar in longituce. j : The apparent longitude is greateſt when the ſtar and ſun differ in longitude by 1800, and is the ſeaſt when the longitudes oſ the ſun and the ſtar are the ſame. The velocity of light ĩs to the velocity of the earth in its orbit, as radius is to the tangent of 20, or as 10313 to I. This proportion is deduced ſrom Br. Bradley's theory oſ the ſtars aberration; ſrom the eclipſes of Jupiter's ſatellites, it is inſerred, that the velocity oſ light is to that of the earth in its orbit, as 202083 to 19.31, or as 10465 to 1: the near agreement of theſe proportions, is a confirmation of the principle aſſumed ſor the explication oſ the phenomena. NCERNING THE CAUSES OF THE PLANETS MOTION. T% primary planets gravitate towards the ſun, and the ſecondary planets towards their reſpective primaries. A projectile force having been impreſſed upon a planet when at reſt, would cauſe it to proceed uniformly in a right line for ever, unleſs the ſun, by the continual action of its attractive power, deſlectod the pſanet from its rectilinear direction. This attraction is called a centripetal ſorce. The centripetal force varies with the diſtance of the planets from the ſun, ſo that a planet at half the diſtance would be attracted by a quadruple ſorce; at one ihird of the diſtance, the force of attraction would be nine imes as great. The planets revolve in ellipſes very little differing from circles, round the common center of gravity of the planets and the ſun. The ſun ſo much exceeds the planets in quantity of matter, that the center of gravity of the ſun, and all the planets, however ſituated, is very near the ſun itſelf. The areas deſeribed by the line joining a planet, and the point to which the centripetal force is always directed, are proportional to the time of a planet's motion in its orbit. Some of the properties of central forces may be illuſtrated xperimentally. Suppoſe two bodies, urged by centripetal and projectile forces, to deſcribe circles round a center of force ſituated in the common center of the circles; if the periodic times be the ſame, the centripetal or centrifugal forces will be in the ſame ratio as the radii of the circles. If the periodic times be directly as the radii, the forces will be inverſely as the radii. 1If the ſquares of the periodic time be as the cubes of the diſtances, the centripetal forces will be inverſely as the ſquare: This caſe cbtains in the revolutions of the planets and theũ ſecondaries, this diſference excepted, the planets and their ſecondaries perſorm their motions in ellipſes; whereas in the experiment, the bodies revolve in circular orbits; but the ſame properties are demonſtrated (as far as regards the experiment) wher the orbits are ellipſes as in the above example, changing ihe radius of the circle for the greater ſemiaxis of the ellipſe. The ſpheriodical figure of the earth is cauſed by the revolution of the earth round its axis. The earth is an oblate ſpheroid, an equatorial diameter, being greater than the polar, in the proportion of 230: 229. From ihis figure of the earth, the inclination oſ the ecliptic to the ator, and the atiraction oſthe ſun and moon, ꝶriſes the prece ſiion of the equinoxes. The centrifugal force of the earth revolving round the common center of gravity of the earth and moon, contributes to increaſe the tides in thoſe, of the earth which are moſt remote from the moon. The lunar irregularities are cauſed by the action of the ſun upon the earth and E R R AT A Page 3. line 25, ſor counterpoize, ræad counterpoiſeP. 17. l. 2, read perpendicular to the horizon. P. 21. l. 2. ſor up an immeſed tube, read np an immerſed tube. DP. 25 l. 19. ſor cubic in inch, read cubic inch. P. 27. l. 7. for ſpecieſic, riad ſpecific.l. 20, at the end, dele ora liule.P. 59 l. 6. ſor on the oppoſite direction, read in the oppoſite directſon. P. 60. l. a1. aſter nearly, inſert (:). /P. 63. l. 20. dele bee.P. 66. laſt line, dele upon the retina.P. 68. l. 24 ſor there, read theſle. P. 22. l. 21. sor object, read body. P. 73. l. 6. ſor is obſerved, read are obſerved.P. 91. l. 14. ſor n31, read n+i1P. 104. l. 37. read equatorial.P. 104. l. 39. read apparent places.P. 0. I. 39. Ior verticle, read vertical.P. iio. l. 5. al and. —P. 92. l. 35. dor direction, read obſervaiion. P. 9I. l. 13. read à'. and o, i18 equal, &e. l. 26. read combinations. —P. 101. l. 3. read revolve in a leſer circle. P. 108. l. 3. delt either of. P. 112. l. 7. for APP E  D I X. A METHOD OP ADJ USTING THE Euatoriat INSTRUMENT. Fig. I. D- L i. ET the circle ABC D repreſen the field oſ the teleſcope: c, the poini in the field through which the lint C of collimation paſſes. Let a line 4ſ paſing through ? be adjuſted parallel to the plane of the declination circle, and ſoppoſe BD to be drawn throvgh c perpendicular to AC. B 2. Having ſet the declination circle to 99 ] (in cither quadrant) direct the point ⸗ to a very diſtant fized object 4, and turn the equatorial circle in ĩta own plane 1800.-IF & does not now colncide with the point ę; imagine the lines » nti to be drawn perpendicular to  C and D B reſpectively: correct halſ the error c  by moving the oeclination circle in ĩts own plane, and half the error ꝓ q, by altering the inclination of the declination circle to the plane oſ tlie equatorial--IF the point c be now directed to the diſlant object ꝓ, and the equatorial circle be turned 180 in ĩts own plane, the points ꝓ and c will ſtill colncideBy a very diſtant object is meant any viſible point, the diſtance of which is not leſs than 400000 timæ: the perpendicular diſtance of ihe line oſ collimation ſfrom the axis of the declination circle. tt the declination honius to 90; and having tumed the declination circle 1800 in its own plane, direct the point  to the diſtant object ; ſFig. 1.) and move the equatorial circle in its own plane 1800.IF ꝓ now deviates from r, the error c 7 will ſhew double theerror in the diviſion oſthe declination circle, and cannot he cor ect: d by adjuſtment: ſuppoſe thereſore the point ꝓ to be ſomewhere in the line DE, and correct  of the error ſ e by altering the inclinat on oſ the declination cirelc to the plane of ſhe equatorial, and J of the ſame error 77 by moving the line of collimation perpend: Cular to the plane of the declination circle. When the preceding adjuſtments are correct ĩt appears, 1. That the Iine oſ collimation is parallel to the plane of the declination circlee. 2. That the plane oſ the declination cicle ĩs perpendicular to that of the equatorial. 3. The errors oſ diviſion, (if any) in the two oppoſite points of the declination circle (viæ. the two ꝗõ%) are diſcovered. . When the declination crle is ſet ę, the lne of tollimation is parallel, and when ſet to 999, (in cither quadrant) Fig. II. D 4. The a7imuth circle being adjuſted horizonnaſ⸗ make A C parallel to ĩt by turning the equatoral and azimuth circles in their own planes, and having directed the point to a very diſtant fixed object ꝓ, eſtimated to be in the horizon or near ir, movæ the azimuth and declination circles in their own jlanes 1899 each, ſo that the roint 2 may appear ſomewhere in the line DB: iſ - deviates ſrom⸗, biſſet ? in m the line oſ colllmatian being directed to m, will be horizontaLet m be marked on the horizon. i 2t the declination circle to 5, and turn the azimuth cirele in ĩts own plane ?, ſo as o bring the horizontal object m into the Iine D B, and direẽt the point f to m, by moving the equatorial cirele in ĩts own plane if neceſſary. The plane oſ the tec nation circle vill now be horizontal, and that oſ the equatorial circle vertical. urn the equatorial and azimuth cixles in their own planes 1809. Iſ m now deviates ſrom ?, m 7 will be the error in diviſion of the u3 and m  the error oſ divifion in the azimuth circle. Vig. II. n order to elevate the equatorial circle, above the horizon to an propoſed inelination, ſet the declination circle (in the ſouthern quadrant) to the propoſed a2ngle oſ elevation, and having brought XII on the equatorial cirele to point O on the index, diret the Iine of collimation to the horizontal point m, by altering the inclination of the equatorial circle to the horizon, and by turning the azimuth cirele in its own plane. n order to adjuſt the equatorial index, ſet the declination circle to 0, and by moving the equatorial and azimuth circles in their own plane:, direct the line of collimation 10 the horizuntal point m, and ſet the equatorial index to VI. BY means of the laſt adiuſiment, when the equatorial index points o XII. the plane of the declination cirele will colncide with a ſecondary common to the equatorial and azimuth circles; upon this ſecondary thereſore the inclination oſ thoſe circles to each other will be trucly meaſured.The 7th adjuſiment may be repeated iſ it be thought neceſſary. l IF the teleſcope magnifies 60 times, it ſollows ſrom the preceding adjuſtments, that any inclination of the line of collimation, or of the equatorial acis to the ;lane of the declination circle muſt he diſeovered, i it exceeds i;It ſollows alſo that, ũF th Ievels by means of which the poſiti n of the azimuth cĩicle ĩs rectified be tolerably good) the point m (deſcribed in art. 4) © truly horizontal within  or 8. It may be inſeried from hence, that when the plane oſ tha equatorial ciree eoincides with rhat of the equator or the hæavens, ie line oſ collimation will during the motion o the declinatior circle turning in ĩts own plane, paſs through the pole of the equator; without ſenſible error, and will conſequently deſcribe a circle of declination in the heavens: when the equatorial index points to XII, the line above mentioned will deſcribe a ſecondary common to the equator and horizon, or the meridian of the placẽ, and vill thereſore paſs through the pole of the equator and the zenith.The equatorial inſtrument in this poſition may be uſeà as a tranſit teleſcope. j The errors in the poſition of the meridian, and in the time deduced from obſervation with the equatorial inſtrument (defcribed and eſiimated in page 105.) may be corrected thus.---The teleſcope being of that ſort which repreſents the image inverted with reſpect :o the object, ĩt ſollows that the ſtar's apparent elevation ariſing from refraction will cauſe the image in the teleſcope to be depreſſed through a ſpace which ſubtends an angle at the center of the object glaſs, equal to the ſtar's refraction in altitude.---Suppoſe DB ſFig. II.] to bæ perpendicular to the line of collimation, and to be adjuited to the Jlane of a vertical circle which paſſes through an obſerved ſtar: cl repreſent the depreſſion oſ the ſtar's image abve deſcribed, which may be determined, if the principal focal length of the object gnt, and the ſtar's reſtaction in altitude be given: if I be now directed to the ſtar's apparent place, it ĩs man ſett that the line oſ collimation of the inſtrument which joins the point  and the center of the objæct glaſs, will be directed to the true place of the ſtar, whereby the eſſccts oſ reſraction upon the hour angle and poſition of the meridian are intirely removed. In determining the right aſcenſions and declinations of conets or ſiars by an equatorĩal inſtrument, perſeſtly adjuſted to the latitude and meridian, conſiderable errors ariſe ſfrom refraction.Let 7 repreſent the reſraction in altitude, a the right aſcenſion, and d the declination of a ſtar; à and ĩ the variations of right aſcenſion and declination cauſed by reſraction. Alſo, let s =the angle contained between a vertical circle, and circle of declination paſing through the ſtar: we have ſrtom the properties o ſpherica .. fſin. s . a=r X;ſa: and d =r X Coſ. s; radius being 1. Theſe erron in determining right aſcenſions and declinations with the equatorial inſtrument arè (as in the former caſe) correẽted in the ohſervation, iſ the point ⸗ through which the line oſ collimation paſſes, be previouſly depreſled in a vertical plane thiough a ſpace c] which ſobtends an angle at the center of the objeẽt glaſs equal to the ſtars refraction in alttude. ; i This is one among many other ſcientific improvements which have been aplivd to the conſtructioa oſ the equaturſal inltrument by uilæ for the conſtruction of perfect lenſes or object , Euler. Diopt. page 335. vol. I. eſe object glaſſes conſi©? oſ three contiguous lenſ 0n axis.The two outward lenſes are double con 1 glaſs, encloſing a double concave of flint glaſe. e ratio oſ reſraction, in the rays oſ mean reſrang ſ air into crown glaſs, ĩs that of - of air into ſlint glaſ©s, asas - - diſipating powers oſ ſlint and crown glaſ are as principal focal length oſ the perſect lenſes =. ] FIRST FORM. The radii of the ſurſaces are as ſollows: 1ſt ſurſface / o.5004 X P th ſ 2d ſurſace / 3.6665 X P er it ſorface 2/  o.5367 X P i i 2d ſurſace& /  o.4843  P ſt ſurface =/ o.5219 X P the ſ 2d ſurface 2/ o4757 X P er Semiaperture / o.1185 X P SECOND FORM: the I iſt ſorſace 2o.2820 X P 2d ſurtace / 2.0729 X P h iſt ſorface /  2.1459 xX P the 2d ſurface / o.2955 X P 1ſt ſurface =/ o.5538 X P the ſ 2d ſurface 2/2. 5006 xX P Ji ci Semiaperture /o.07307 X P. 