Y O UN G M AN 5 o0k Of Knowledge: : B E F N G A PROPE R SUPPLEMENT T O T H E TOUNG MAN COMPANION. IN S I X P ART S, vix. artτ I. Of Knowledge in gene 1I. A general Deſcription oſ the neral; the Advantages of gain- four Quarters of the World. ing it early, with a Definition] 2. The Sicuation, Extent, and thereof. Of God, his Eſſence chief Cities of the ſeveral Kingand Attributes. Oſ the Originl doms and Countries of each of Nature, and firſt Formation l Quarter. 3. The Nature and of Things. Oſ the Creation, Eall, Dẽſcription of the Globes, and and Reſtoration of Mankind. l Ex lanation of the Terms uſcd arT II. Theology, containing a Seography. 4. Tables oſ the an Account of the Religion and lacitude and Longitude of ſeveLaws of Nature. Supernatural ral principal Placès, with many Theology. Obſervations on thell uſeſul and neceſſary Problems Holy Seriptures, which teach us l on the Terreſtrial and Celeſtial the Know ledgẽe of God and our Globes, Duty Account of Judaiſm, I PaκTV. Geometry and AſtronoPaganiſm, Mahometaniſm, and l my, Navigation, and Plaln-SailChriſtianitt. Of the Sects oſ ingꝓγ with many uſeful, eaſy, the Jews. Different Tenets of ] and inſtructive Problems for the the principal Sects or Proſeſſors  young Practitioner in the ſurther of Chriſtianity. Oſ the Heathen Know ledge of thoſe Sciences. Mythology. and Alphabetical ſl PArT VI. Oſ Muſic and VibraAccount of the Heathen Deities. tion. Definition of Muſic. GaPaRT III. Natural Philoſophy i in]]l, mut or Scale, and Explanation general. of dividing Notes in Time, &c. PART IV. Geography, in a Man- Of the Diatonic Scale, an ner entirely new: Containing, Explanation. Different Kevs, ſby Queſſion and Anſwer) ll Time, Baſs, &c. &c. -  By D. F EN NI N G, l Author oſ the Rox L ENGLISH DICTIONARYV, Unaveæ SAL SP E LLING-BOOE, UsE of the GLoR ES, &. &c. &c. T H E FOURT H ED I TIO N, Reviſed, corrected, and greatly improvedThe GEOGR AP H ICAL, GEOMETRICAL, ànd ASTRONOMIC AL Parts, ByYy Mr. MOON, of SaLIS BURY. The MousrcarL Part, . By Dr. A R NO L D And the other Parts by a CLERG VMAN of the CHURCH Oſ ENGLAND L O N D O N: Printed ſfor S. CROWDER, i in Pater-noſter- Row, and B. C. COLLINS in SALISBURY. 1756. We whoſe Names are hereunto ſubſcribed, recommend the following Work to the neral: For though the Subjects are many, e of them uſeful, yet they are ſo well di ated of in ſo plain a Manner, that it cui very uſeful in Schools and of great nſtiud in general. The Rev. Mr. BERNARD. The Rev. Dr. CRISPE. Trhe Rev. Mr. FISKE. The Rev. Mr. FONTAINE. The Rev. Mr. KEMP. The Rev. Mr. Moss. The Rev. Dr. NAYLER. The Rev. Dr.: PORTER. The Rev. Mr. RYLAND, Maſter of a School at Northampton. The Rev. Mr. WaALLER. The Rev. Mr. WARNER. ù Mr. Jous COULTHIST, Maſter of a School at Layton-Stone. HEν. DEACON, Philomath. Mr. FRANELIN, Writing-Maſter. M-r. FERGUSOν. Maſter of the Acad Hiermitage-ſtreet. MU. RICH ARD KING, School- Maſter. Mr. MAxXSON, Accomptant. Jounν RuLn, A. M. Madtes of a Bonrd WILLIAM BECKFORD, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON, And one of their Repreſentatives in Parliament. MY LORD, S it is too common to find Dedications carried to too high an Extreme of flattering Encomiums, I perſuade myſelf Your Lord ſhip will the more readily accept of this, in the plain Dreſs of Simplicity, as I am ſenſible it is not agreeable to your Lordſhip o be flattered. I acknowledge, my Lord, the Preſumption is too great; but being ſenſible of your Lordſhip's Readineſs to promote every Thing that is of public Service and Utility, I was induced to lay this Work at your Lordſhips Feet: And the World cannot but commend me for ſending it abroad under the Favour and Protection of one who is not only a Lover oſ Learning, a Promoter of all Commerce and Induſtry, but one whoſe candid Diſpoſition, true patriotic Spirit, and undaunted Bravery, have been ſo eminently diſfinguiſhed in oppoſing every Meaſure that has appeared inconſiſtent with the Liberty of the Preſs, and a Free People.  -iv DE D I CAT I ON. My Lord, as I am proud of profeſſing myſelf a firm Proteſtant, I cannot but rejoice that my Patron is ſo truly attached to his preſent Majeſty, our moſt gracious Sovereign, and a Lover and Encourager of all His true and faithful Subjects: And Your Lordſhip will always ſtand in the Liſt of thoſe worthy Patriots who honour their King, and promote Harmony among the People. Though the following Lucubrations have coſt me much Time and Labour, yet I think myſelf duly compenſated in having the lonour of ſending them into the World under Your Lordſhip's Sanction and Approbation. I am, my Lord, With due Regard and Submiſſion, Tour Lordſbip's moſt obliged, and moſt obedient humble Servant, R E A D E R, But more particularly the Grown-up YOoUuTH Of GREAT-BRITAIN and IRELAND. YOUNG GENTLEMEN, I Here preſent you with a Work that has been wantec for many Years, and that cannot fail to be of Service to Mankind in general; and I have waited a lon Time, expecting it might have been done by a much abler Hand; but whether it has been for want oſ Thought of doing public Service, or whether for want of Condeſcenſion in Perſons of greater Abilities, I cannot pretend to determine; evident it is, that it has not beeri done in a Book of this Price. 2. Every Thing has its Defects; and therefore a Work upon ſo many Subjects, in ſo ſhort a Compaſs, cannot be without them; but, if it be ever ſo ſhort, yet if it be but ſo plain and intelligible, to convey a general Idea of Things, or to give the Reader a particular Account of the different Branches of the more ſuperior Parts of Learning, that is ſuſficient: If it does rhis, it anſwers the Deſign it was intended for; and a candid impartial Reader will pardon the more trivial Errors and eficiencies. ; 3. Every Perſon who has peruſed the Sheets allows, that what is here treated of is both ſhort and conſpicuous, and that it certainly will he of great Service to ſIankind in general, but particularly to the following Perſons: Firſt, to all ſuch Perſons who love to improve themſelves at all Opportunities, but have either left School too ſoon, or have not had the Advantage of reading different Authors, or converſing with ſuch as could improve them. adly, It will be of Service to all ſuch who have had a more ſuperior Education than at every common School, (ſuch as Academies, &c.) who are conſeious they have in lime paſt neglected their Learning, to the Prejudice of their Tutors, and their own palpable Mortifſication. And, 3dly, It cannot fail of being a great Help to all adult Perions, and grou nup Youth in Town and Country, who are ſincere Lovers of Improvement, but have neither had Time to read, nor Ability to purchaſe different Authors upon ſo muny Suhjects, and yet they have a hearty Deſire of being improved, and take equal Delight to improve others alſo: Theſe are the Perſons for whom the following Sheets were more particularly deſigned: For ſuch may, with Propriety, be called the true Lovers of Learning, and they are juſtly entitled to the Lubour of every Author, becauſe they do him Honour in endeavouring to underſtand whatever he treats of, and encouraging others to do the ſame. 4. But there is another Sort of Youth who more particularly deſerve Pity, and yet it is impoſſible to ſpeak any Thing concerning them without, in ſome meaſur expoſing their Folly. Theſe I would addreſs with al the Marks of Love and Ienderneſs, that they may the more readily attend to what I ſay, and take up the Reſolution to regulate their Conduct for the Time to come. I mean thoſe pretended polite and faſhionable young Bloods and Blades, who call themſelves Gentlemen, on Account of a ſuperior Fortune, and are very fond you ſhould know they have had a better Education than others. mBut are ſo far from being fond of making a good Uſe of it, that they take a Delight to ridicule it, and diſcourage the very Vrhing that they vaunt themſelves upon. However inconſiſtent this may appear, vet it is a Fact beyond Contradiction. Are there not Hundreds (nay, Thouſands) who have had no leſs than an academical, and many who have had even a collegiate Education, with ſuch Advantages oſ Time and Fortune, that they might very eaſily have been Maſters of ſeveral Languages, and have known the Theory of the Sciences in general; but, inſtead of this, theypſlte ſuch a Looſe to their Paſſions, and follgu. the firſt LChought that prompts them to every Pleaſure, without conſidering in the leaſt how, whera, or in what Manner it wiſl end. Say not this is Detraction. For do we not ſee many Youths, ſ(eſpecially in our Metropolis) who ſpend the main Part of that beautiful Stage of Life, from 16 to 26 at leaſt, in very little elſe but ſuch low, idle Traſh, and wretched, inconnected, inconſiſtent Stuff and Nonſenſe, that were it not for ſome Difference in their Dreſs, and ſometimes a little more polite outward Behaviour, rather than their Converſation, they could not be diſtinguiſhed from the more baſe, vulgar, illiterate, and unlearned. Thus, inftead of becoming ſhining Examples to others in Learning and good Senſe, they abuſe every Talent that kind Providence has beſtowed upon them; never think of the many indulgent Favours of their Parents and Friends, nor value how they grieve them; diſgrace their Tutors, and ſcandaliæe Learning in general. In ſhort, there are ſome, who, by a long Continuance in Vice, and a rotal Neglect of all good Learning and Morality, are become ſo abandoned and incorrigible, that it is che higheſt Inſult if you offer to reprove them ever ſo gently, or adviſe them in ever ſo preſſing and tender a Manner: For if they can but boaſt and hrag that they were born to a larger Fortune, or have had a better Education than others, they think theſe rotten Pillars are ſufficient to ſupport the whole Syſtem of their Pride, Balderdaſh, and Ribaldry. sS. From hence appears the wide Difference between Induſtry and Idleneſs: For it is evident, there are a great many who have had very little or no Education, and yet by conſtant Reading, and diligent Obſervation, have, in a ſhort Time, become far better Scholars than many others, who had all the poſſible Advantages oſ Learning, but have paid very little Regard to it while at School, and much leſs when they are out of it. 6. If this be the true State of the Caſe, (as it is plain it is) who then would be ſuch an Enemy to himſelf, to idle avay his Time and not try to learn ſomething ? And who but giddy, hair- brained Youth, or Madmen and Fools, would wilfully neglect and forget what they were taught ? Remember, young Gentlemen, that it is an unvariable and univerſal Maxim, that Self-love is inſeparably linked to our very Nature, and therefore it is abſurd for any of you to ſay, you really love yourſelves, while you neglect all Opportunities of improving both your Minds and your Morals. 7. Having made theſe Obſervations of the different Sorts of Youth, and deſiring they would ſeriouſly conſider the Advantages of gaining an early Knowledge, I ſhall now give ſome Account of the Work itſelf8. The Iitle-page iuſficiently ſets forth the whole of this ſmall Treatiie at one View, but I know it is expected there ſhould be ſome further Deſcription of the Particulars, and ſome Apology made for the Reaſon of the Undertaking. 9. The chicf Intention (as ſaid before) is for the further Improvement of all induſtrious Youth; and the Reaſon of making it public is, becauſe they might learn ſomething of the moſl material Subjects at a ſmall Expence. 10. I do not pretend to ſay the Whole is an Original; the hiſtorical Parts, in Courſe, I muſt have borrowed or quoted from other Authors; and they have no greater Claim for what was done before their Time than I have, for they were obliged alſo to write from the ſuppoſed Teſtimonies of others: If then what I have ſelected of this Sort be ſhort and plain, and the principal Parts be well digeſted, that is ſuſfficient; the ſhorter it is, the more engaging, the leſs burthenſome, and the ſooner underſtood and retained. 11. As to the Geometrical, Trigonometrical, Aſtronomical, and Philoſophical Parts, &c. I have taken all the Care (within the Compaſs of ſuch a Limitation) to be as plain and intelligible as I could; and that the young Tyro might not be at a Loſs in the firſt Rudiments of Geometry, &c. I. have given him the Draught or Figure of every Operation in the Margin or Page of the Work, in order that he may more readily comprehend the Problems; and as for the ſhort Treatiſe on Muſic, I have been careful to omit nothing that might help both its Theory and Practice; and I perſuade myſelf it will be of Service both to caſtrumental as well as vocal Performers: For as there are a great many who underſtand the Theory very well, and yet cannot play at all, ſo there are Numbers who can play very well, and yet have very little Judgment in the Rules of Harmony and Compoſition; and had not the Sheets been extended beyond their firſt I. imitation, I ſhould have been much fuller upon this Subject; but I hope there are ſufficient H ints for every diligent Reader. . 12. As for eritical Carpers, and half-learned Coxcombs, Iam content to ſhare the Fate of my Betters, in whatever Conſtructions they pleaſe to make, deſiring only this, that they would take Care, for their own Credit, not to animadvert upon Things they don't underſtand, on purpoſe to detract and leĩſen the induſtrious, well deſigned, and uſeful Performances of others. In fine; let me perſuade all Lovers of Learning to be conſtant and diligent in ſearching after Truth. Let neither the Gay nor the Giddy diſtuade you from purſuing, nor prevail upon you, by any Means whatever, to neglect your Duty to God and yourſelf: Therefore, Keep always ſuch Company as Tou may improve, or that may improve Iou: And if your Companions cannot make You, nor Fou Them better; remember to leave them, rather than be made worſe by them. I am, khind Reader, Tour Well-Wiſher, DANIEL FENNING ADVERTISEMENT TO T H E FOURTH EDITION: Addreſſed to the P UB L IC, and particularly to the INSTRUCTORS OF YOUTH. ũũi great Abilities of the Author of this Work, the late Mr. Daniel Fenning, are ſo generally known and acknowledged, that any particular Encomium uponi, or Recommendation of, his various and uſeful Publications, would be altogether ſuperfluous, eſpecially as theſe are read and admired in every Quarter of the Globe where the Engliſh Tongue is ſpoken. It may not be improper, however, to ſay a fev Words concerning the preſent Performance, in which Mr. Fenning has given a ſtriking Specimen of the happy Talent he poſſeſſed and exerciſed above all other Writers, of rendering the ſeveral Branches of Leaming intelligible to Perſons oſ the meaneſt Caacity. The rapid and increaſing Sale of this uſeſul ook through three large Impreſſions, in the Space of a few Years, is a Teſtimony of its Merit no leſs honourable to the Memory of its Author, than encouraging to the Proprietors. They are convinced, that a more valuable and inſtructive Companion cannot be put into the Hands of the Unlearned, particularly the Youth of both Sexes; and they have, therefore, been at great Pains and Expence in improving the preſent (which is the fourth) Edition. The Book has undergone a thorough Reviſal and Correction; and in the Articles of Geography, Geometry, Aſtronomy, and Navigation, the ingenious and aſſiduous Mr. Moon, of Saliſbury, has made the following valuable Additions and Improvements, viæ. §i the Geògraphical Part, he has introduced moſt ofſ the newly diſcovered Iſlands; and in the Account ol North America, the Boundaries and Extent of the ſeveral Provinces, States, &c. poſſeſſed by different Powers, are given as they were ſettled by the Treaty of Peace in 1783; and a ſhort Deſcription is ſubjoined oſ Louiſiana lIn the Uſe of the Globes, he hac preſented the Reader with an eaſy and expeditious Method oſ finding the Sunm's oppoſite Place in the Ecliptic; and where any of the Problems were found to be obſcure, he has endeavoured to render them more clear; particularly Prob. the 15th on the Celeſtial Globe. In the Geometrical Part, the Cuts have been very carefully examined, and new ones ſubſtituted in the Place ol thol- which were found to be either erroneous or imperfect. He has likewiſe given a general Problem (Page 265) for deſcribing an Oval when the Diameters are given, inſtead of that in the former Editions, which is applicable to a particular Caſe only, viæ. when the Diameters are in the Propyrifon of 3 to 4: And here it may be obſerved, that if the iameters are given in Numbers, the beſt Way will be to lay them down from a Scale of equal Parts; then their Difference being multiplied by . 68, and that Product taken from the ſame Scale, and ſet off from the Center a each Way upon the tranſverſo Diameter, will give the Points l and b more exactly. . In the Aſtronomical Part, he has given the mean Diſtances of the Planets from the Sun, as determined from the Obſervations of the Tranſit of Venus in 176r13 and alſo an eaſy Method (from Ferguſon's Aſtronomy) of finding the Moon's horizontal Parallax, in order to calculate her Diſtance from the Earth. . In the Article of Navigation, the Figures are all new drawn, and, it is preſumed, much improved, as they now ſtand in their proper Politions. He has likewiſe added a few Notes to the above-mentioned Parts, by Way ofſ Illuſtration. Laſtly, the Article on Muſic has been reviſed and corrected by the ingenious and celebrated Dr. Arnold. To conelude as this Work has hitherto met with ſo flattering a Reception from the Public, and particularly from thoſe Ladies and Gentlemen who are intruſted with the Education of Youth, it is to be hoped, that the reſent Edition will be found ſtill more deſerving of their ncouragement than any of the preceding ones, and conſequently will be honoured with an additional Share of their Countenance and Protection; a Favour, which will be ever gratefully acknowledged, by Their moſt humble Servants, l E N T S. P A R T I. Page Page OF Enonvledge 1 Arians, Arminians, and Of God's Attributes 4 Antinomians 6s8 Of the Creation, Fall, and Reſtoration of Mantind 7 Of tbe Fall of Man 8 Oſ Man's Reſtoration Ii P AR T II. Of Theology 25 Religion of Nature 26 Laavs of Nature, apart srom poſitive Evidence 28 Revealed Relig ion 31 The Holy Scriptures 33 Neaw Teſtament 37 Tudaiſm, Paganiſim, Chriſtianity, and Mabometani ſm 41 Sects of the Jeuos 45 Paganiſin 46 Mahometaniſim 47 Chriſtianity 55 Church of Rome 57 Church of England 63 Preſbyterians 65 Independants 66 Anabaptiſts and Quakers 67 Socinians, Calviniſts, Lutherans, Muggletonians, and Methodiſts 9 Oſ tbe Heathen Mythology, or Syſtem oſ the Heathen Geods 70 Alphbabetically digeſted, from 71 to 9a P AR T III. Of Natural Philoſophy 93 Axioms Matter 9 Extenſion and Dioiſibility of Matter 99 Solidity and Mobility 102 Celerity, Quantity, and Direction of Matter 103 Gravity and Levity, Attraction and Electricity 105 Tranſparency and Opacily i 10 Denſity and Rarity I1I Hardneſs and S oftneſ, Consſiſtency, and Fluiditp 112 Heat and Cold 113 Humidity, Siccity, and Elaſticity 114 Odours and Sæpours I15 Light 116 Colours 121 Sounds 123 Wind, Hail, Rain, Snou, Froſt and Ice 126 OFf Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, Clouds, &c. 128 ainbovw, Northern Lights, 135 c. O tbe Tides 138 of the Constituent Parts Earth 141 Volcanos and Earthquakes 142 oſſils 145 Minerals 149 Metals and Ores 151 Stones ; 156 P AR T IV. Oof Geography 162 Of the four Quarters of the World 163 I. EUROPE, vix. Scandinaviaæ, avhich contains Saweden, Denmarù, and Noravay 164 Muſcouy or Ruſſia, France and Germany 165 Poland 166 Spain, Portugal, and Italy 167 Pobiſb Creed 168 Turtey, nvitòh its Diviſions o Hungary, Greece, Little Tartary, and the Danubian Provincer 170, 171 European Iſlands. England, Scotland, ana reland 172 N T S. xii Leſer Iſlands, belonging to Great-Britain, Portugal. Saveden, Denmarâ, and Noravay 173 Mediterranean Iſtandæe 74 2. As ia ib. Of Tartary, China, and India 175 Perſia and Turùey in CEB Aliatic Iſlands 177 38. APF RIC A 28. Of erpi. Barbary, and Biledulgerid 178 Zaara or the Deſart, Negro Land, and Guinea 179 Nubia and Ethiopia Interior 1 80 Ethiopia Exterior, and the Asrican Iſlands, Madagaſcar, Cape Verd, Canaries, and Madeiras 181, 182 4. AMERICA, Norib 183 Britiſ America ib. American States 184 Spaniſb America 185 Florida ib. Old Mexico, or Meav Spain 186 Neav Mexico, including California 187 Lcuiſiana ib. Terra Arctica I188 AMERICA, South ib. Terra Firma ib. Peru 189 Amaæon Land and Brail 190 Chili and Paraguay 191 Terra Magellanica ib. Amer ican Iſlands 192 Neavſcundland and Cuba 192 Famaica, Hiſpaniola, Porto Rico and Caribbee Iſllands 193 Lucayos, Sotovento, Bermudus, and Terra Del Fuego 194 Deſscription and Use of the Globes 195 Circles ib. Tropics and Polar Circles 199 Appendants 200 Oſ ihe different Spheres 201 Zones and Climates Terms in Geography and Ajsi ronomy 203 Table ſ Latitude and Longitude 205 ꝗ ale of the Aſcenſicn, Decliuarion, Latitude, and Lougitude of some of the sfixed Stars 206 Problems on the Globes 207 to 238 P ART V. Of Geometry 239 Definitions 240 T heorems 249 Problems 257 to 269 OFf Legarithm: 270 Of Trigonemetry 274 Sector . 275 Plane Trigonometry 276 Seven Caſes of Practical Irigonometry 282 to 287 The ſix obliqueCaſes 288 to 292 Spherical Triangles 292 ꝗ avelve Caſes 298 to 304 Aſtronomy 304 Copernican Syſte 306 OF the Moon & ſ Æ ſc ææ hE H &ù459 DùAà202 CONTENTS S. Aſtronomical Explanations. Golden . mber or Prime 3 17 VEE 3 1 8 Cycle of the Sun 320 Dominical Letter 3 2 2 To ſind the Moon's Age 326 To find her Change and Time to next Full Moon 327 To ſfind her Southing 32 8 Mariner's Compass 330 A Table of the moſt noted Places, ſbenving the b i me of Ligh-Water, &c. 332 to 336 Navigation. Problems in Plane Sailing 337 to 343 Tables of Meridional Miles 3440 345. 326 Problems 34 Circular Sailing 350O Problems 351 to 359 P AR T VI. Of Muſic 360 Gamut 361 Explanation of the firſt and secend Copper Plates 364 Of Reſts and Pauſes 367 OſConcords and Diſcords 368 Of the Diatonic Scale 369 Explanation of the Diatonic Scale 372 Of Uime in general 375 Of a thbrough Baſs and Rules 377 A Hymn in four Parts; avith Hallelujah, an account of , a Victory gained by the 38 1 King of Pruſſia Y OU NG MAN s Book of Knowledge, &c. P ART I. Oſ KNOWLEDGE in general: The Advantage of gaining earhy Knowledge ; with a Definition of true Knowledge to that which is commonly cal.ed ſo, &c. D IALOG UE I. SECT. I. Between Tyro, a Learner, and Philo, his Inſtructor. Uyro. HAT do you mean by Knowledge ? WV Philo. Knowledge, in general, ſignifies Skill, Judgment, or Underſtanding: Or, Knowledge more ſtrictly ſi nifies Learning and Erudition, which is the Faculty of forming true and juſt Ideas of Things, and of perceiving and judging right of the Nature of the Object ſought after. Tyr. What do you mean by an Idea hil. An lIdea is the firſt Conception, Form, Model, or Pattern of a Thing exiſting in our Imagination, Mind, or Fancy; and therefore, Tyro, you ſhould be very careful to form true and juſt Ideas of Things, and then you will always be able to diſcover Truth from Falſhood. Tyꝑr. I grant, Sir, that it argues the higheſt Wiſdom in Youth, to furniſh their Minds betimes with the true Knowledge of Things. Phil. I am glad you are ſenſible of this; for it is really a melancholy Truth, that the Generality of Mankind do not ſeek after Knowledge at all; or elſe they miſtake the Word Knowledgc, and call Information Learning or Knowledge, which really is not ſo; and others there are who abuſe their Education, fruſtrate the good Defigns of their Friends, and are content to let the common Follies and Gaieties of Life poſſeſs their whole Souls and Inclinations to ſuch a Height, that they determine all Knowledge in (what they call) Taſte, and neglect ſo much the common Duties of Liſe, and the Practice of Literature in general, that they are Babes in Enowledge at the Age of forty; and nothing can convince them of the Want of it, but their own dear-bought Experience, when having by Extravagancies ran through a genteel Fortune, tuey very often (when too late) find chat true Knowledge is as inconſiſtent with Supineneſs and Careleſſneſs, as true Happineſs is with Wickedneſs and Folly. ꝗ3*. lhis is very true, Sir, indeed: But pray what do you call true Knowledge, or what Branches of Literature do you call the beſt of Knowledge? Phil. I am not to determine for you and the reſt of Mankind; becauſe there are many diſserent Degrees of Enowledge, viæ. a Knowledge of the different Languages, ſuch as French, Latin, Gree, Hebrew, &c. is a fine and oſten neceſſary Qualification, Latin and French in particular; but few are Maſters of them, for Want both of Time and Fortune; and many that have Time and Fortune, are ſo very careleſs and deficient in their Studies, that they make ſueh a Figure in the World, as will not bear Examination. Tyr. Very true, Sir: But what elſe do you call that Knowledge which Mankind in general ſhould be acquainted with; for every Perſon has not Time to learn diſferent Languq ges P ll . Phil. Why, Tyro, the Queſtion is hardly fair, becauſe of the different Opinions and Delights of Mankind. JBut if I muſt give my Opinion, I think that ſome Knowledge of the Latin, Frenchb, and Greel Languages, (without which we can never be perfect Maſters of our own) with a good Proficiency in Arithmetic, and reaſonable Intellig. ice of ſome higher Branches in the Mathematics, ſuch as Geometry, Trigonometry, Aſironomy, Algebra, &c. is ccitainly thè beſt and moòſt neceſſar temporal Science; becauſe it carries with it the greate OF ENOWLEDGE.; Satisfaction, built upon Truth itſelf, and leaves not the Mind in Doubt and Suſpenſe. Tyr. It is very true, Sir: But is there no other Knowledge neceſſary to furniſh the Mind with in our early Days? lls Phil. Yes; a more neceſſary Knowledge than all, the reſt, and to hich they oughit all to ſubmit, 2ill the Mind is firſt furniſhed with it. Tyr. What is that, pray? hil. An early Knowledge of God, as is revealed tò us by his divine Law in the Holy Scriptures. f9- I grant, Sir, what you ſay to be true: But you know ſuch is not faſhionable at all, neither is the κnowledge of the Holy Scriptures in any Reſpect counteòd neceſſary for the Qualification of the Gentleman at this ime of Day. Phil. It is very true, Tyro, indeed; but notwithſtanding this, yet it is evidently plain, that no Man was ever leſs a Gentleman for being religious; nor do the holy Scriptures claſh with the common Order of Decency and Good-breeding. but promote theſe Virtues, by teaching the Rich to know their Dependance, and to be eaſy of Acceſs; and the Poor to be humble, eaſy, and content in their Stations, and behave well to their Superiors. In ſhort, whatever may be thought neceſſary for a moderm Gentleman, I know not; but I am very ſerſible that the Knowledge of God is a neceſſary Qualification for every Chriſtian and every Gentleman. The Practice of it is productive of every Thing that is good: It is a Bulwark againſt all Evil; and when it is purſued under a true Senſe of our Duty, (at a proper Time and Manner, according to the Deſign of its divine Inſtitutor) is ſo far from hindering other Things, that it accelerates us in all our lawful Undertakings; and though it will not make a Fop of the modern Iaſte, yet, by teaching us the greãteſt Decency, it learns us the trueſt Gentility, viæx. Humility. ; Tyr. From whence, pray, ariſes the Ignorance of tha Knowledge of God, in an Age where every one has Time and Opportunity both to inſtruct themſelves, or be inſtructed, and profeſſes himſelſ a Chriſtian? piit Phil. It ariſes from many Cauſes; but the two principal Cauſes are, the Neglect of reading the Word oſ God, and the cuſtomary (I may ſay faſhionable) Breach of the Sabbath. Theſe Examples being ſet by too many Perſons of all Denominations, the riſing Generation follow them, and few indeed know their real Duty, for Want of knowing their great Obligation to God; and few know God, for Want of attentively reading the holy Scriptures. TIyr. Very trus, Sir: I ſhould be very glad then iſ ou would inform me a little more concerning God, his Kature. Attributes, &c. Phil. With all my Heart. S E C T. II. Of GOD; his Eſſence, Attributes, &c. i Qhat is God? il. God is a ſupreme, eternal, ſelf-exiſtent, neceſſa and independent iepren The chods itctua,ne ſ2 vernor, and Diſpoſer of all Things, and all Events, both paſt, preſent, and to come. * ꝗyr. What do you mean by God's Attributes? Biil. His Excellencies and Perfections, viæ. he is eternal, inviſible, immortal, incomprehenſible, omnipotent, omniſcient, and omnipreſent : He is alſo all-wiſe, alipower ful, all-Ænowing; full of Wiſdom, Power, Juſtice, Mercy, Goodneſs, and Truth, &c. Tyr. What do you mean by being incomprehenſible ? Phil. He is a Being ſo great, that he cannot be conceived or comprehended. ZY9yr. What do you mean by omnipotent ? ꝑhit That is AlmightyRHaving all Things in Heaven and Earth under l mand. . Tyr. Whaat is to be underſtood by God's being omniſcixnt ⸗ Phil. The Power and Faculty of knowing all, and all Manner of Things that are paſt, preſent, and to come, with the Certainty of their coming to paſs. Tyr. What is the meaning of omuſpreſent is Word, Power, and Com* Rev. i. 8, II. Phil. Phil. That God is preſent every where, at all Times, and in all Places. The Recollection hereof ſhould teach us, Tyro, to be very cautious and circumſpect in all our Actions, as all Things, and all even the moſt ſecret Actions, Deſigns, or Intentions, are naked and open to the Eye of HIM with whom we have to do, aò  through whom uwe live, breathe, and have our eing. S E C T. III. Of the Origin of Nature, and the firſt Formation of ings. Tyr. What do you mean by the firſt Formation of Things; or, how and in what Manner were they created? Phil. You muſt not expect I ſhould give you a very long Detail of the very firſt Principle of Things: Nor is it indeed neceſſary that I ſhould tell you the different Opinions of the Learned, concerning the active Parts of Matter. It is ſufficient if I tell you their various Opinions, and lead you at laſt into Truth. Firſt then, Anaxagoras affirmed that all Things were formed or generated from ſmall Particles, or minute Corpuſcles of Matter, entirely alike (he ſays, but not how, at firſt, formed); which being amaſſed or joined together, produced or formed all Things. 2. Ariſtotle (much later) held not only the ſame Principle of a fortuitous Concourſe of Atoms, but went further, and ſaid, the original Cauſe of all Things was from Matter, Form, and Privation; and that the whole Order of Nature was produced by Chance. This his Opinion continued in Vogue a full Century, and even ſome to this Day moſt ignorantly and wickedly adhere to, and ſubmit to this Abſurdity, as much as to the Authority of divine Revelation. 3. Heſiod, Diogenes, Heraclitus, Hippias, and Thales, helped and maintained the four Elements to be the only Principle of all natural Things and created Beings, viæ. Heſiod ſaid, that it was Earth which firſt ſprung from Cſaos. Diogenes ſaid, all Things were formed of Air,  Of thia ridiculous Notion of Matter and Chance, ſee Part III under that Head. which being both ſoft and flexible, is capable of receiving all Shapes. Heraclitus, &c. affirmed, that Fire was the firſt Mover of all Things; and Thales and his Followers maintained, that Water was the firſt principal Cauſe. Their different Reaſons for ſupporting either of theſe Arguments are ſo long, contradictory, and ridiculous, that they are better omitted, ſince it is evident neither oſ them are right, and certainly all cannot be ſo. Tyr. It is very ſurpriſing, that Men of ſuch Learnin ſhould maintain Principles ſo contrary to each other, an to Truth itſelſ. But, pray, were theſe the only Men? Phil. No; many were their Fellowers, vizæ. Anaximenes, Empedocles, Meliſſus, Xenophanes, drchelaus, Zareta, Oenopides, Pythagoras, Idochus, Plutarch, Zeno, Chrſippus, Socrates, Plato, &c. &c. Some of theſe joined and ſtuck very cloſe to the different Opinions of the firſt, and yet neither two agreed among themſelves concerning the true Cauſe of created Beings, and their Formation, any more than they could afterwards about the ſummum bonum, or Chief Good, or the true Object of Good, Homage, Obedience, Adoration, &c. Tyr. You are very kind, Sir: But how am I to diſtinguiſh between Right and IFrong, ſince ſuch learned Men as theſe differ ſo much, and each lays down his own Sentiments as Truth? Phil. Their differing ſo much is a plain Proof there is no Certainty in either of their Principles; and that their Schemes are abſurd, and (upon the whole) inconſiſtent to Reaſon. Tyr. But what ſurpriſes me is, that even now many Men of Learning and good Senſe follow many of the Principles adopted by the aforementioned Philoſophers, in believing the World is eternal, and that Matter always exiſted. Phil. Very true; too many believe ſo, but did ever any one give a Proof of it, either phyſically or metaphyſically? . bit I do not know: But ſtill, how am I to avoid falling into Error after all? il Phil. Why, Tyro, you muſt be on your Guard againſt every Author, and every Acquaintance, and be reſolvert with jourfel not to be ſo far impoſed upon, as to believe theſe Inconſiſtencies; for as it is evident that Matter has not a Power to thinùÆ, much leſs has it to act, therefore as the Elements could not create themſelves, they muſt have been created by ſome other Hand, who muſt neceſſariy exiſt im and of himſelf, viæ. GOD. yr. I thank you, Sir: and it plainly appears to me a Contradiction, for Matter to exiſt of itſelf; and I am ſatisfied that there is one eternal, immortal, and ſelfexiſtent Being, who not only at firſt created all Things, but that theſe Things which he ſo created, depend alſo upon his Preſervation. . Phil. I ſhould be very glad to ſind that every Perſon expreſſed ſo firm a Belief and Dependance on God; for the very Preſervation of his Church, and curbing or preventing the Deſigns of powerful as well as wicked Men, is a pfain Proof of his governing all and all Manner of Events, and that no Purpoſe, Deſign, Contrivance, or Expedition of Man can go beyond the Limits of his Permiſſion.Chance has no real Meaning, it is conſiſtent only with its own ſclf, and cannot be deſined. S E C T. IV. Of the Creation, Fall, and Reſtoration of Man. I. Of the Image of GoD in Man. Tyr. What is meant by the Image of God in Man? hil. Not Man's bodily Shape, as moſt Perſons ignorantly ſuppoſe But it is, that he was made by God in the Image of Righteouſneſs and true Holineſs, and therefore like the Creator, like unto God; except in this, that though created an upright Man, yet he was but a finite Creature, and in Conſequence thereof liable to be deceived. Tyr. Pray, Sir, give me a further Account of the Advantage Oſ the lmage of God in our firſt Parents? Phil. L willFir/t, Man had a juſt Knowledge oſ the Nature, Will, and Works of God. Secondly, A Vill freely tending to obey God; becauſe his Deſires, Eaculties, and Inclinations, were only towards God. TChirdly, He had a continual Enjoyment of Peace and Serenſty; a Body free from Diſeaſes; and a Soul full oſ 4 all proper Faculties to enjoy God. Fourthly, He had a full Dominion over all other Creatures, and they were created with a proper Aptitude to obey him, -In ſhort, He was created in ſo happy a State, that there was nothing to hinder him from worſhipping and contemplating God in a continual Series of Felicity and Bleſedneſs. cc He form'd thee, Adam, thee, O Man, c Duſt of the ground, and in thy noſtrils breath'd  The breath of life; in his own image he s Created thee, in the image of God  Expreſs⸗ Milton's Par. Loſt, B. 7, No. 524. Again: a Tthrice happy men,  And ſons of men, whom God hath thus advanc'd, o Created in his image, there to dwell & And worſhip him, and in reward to rule s Over his works, on earth, in ſea, or air, c And multiply a race of worſhippers sc Holy and juſt: thrice happy if they know s Their happineſs, and perſevere upright. Book 7, No. 625. Tr. Bleſſed State indeedHow is it poſſible it ſhould be loſt? Pray give me ſome Account of it, and the Alteration it made in Adam and his Poſterity? Phil. I will. II. Of the Fall of Man. Ty;. What do you mean by the Fall of Man? Bhil His changing from, or diſobeying the Command of his Creator, by which he fell ſrom his original State of Righteouſneſs. Tĩyr. In what Reſpect? Bil In eating of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and EvilThough he was toldſc In the Day  thou eateſt thereof thou ſhalt ſurely die. Tyr. What was the Fruit of this Tree? Biil No MatterSome ſay of the Apple Kind But Men are divided in Opinion what Fruit it was caſion of the Fall; but the Act of Diſobedience in eating, or doing that, which he was particularly commanded not to do. Milton finely expreſſes the Folly of Eve as follows: ; u So ſaying, her raſh hand in evil hour i Forth reaching to the fruit, ſhe pluck'd, ſhe eat: Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her ſeat Sighing through all her works gave ſigns of woe,  That all was loſt. Tyr. I underſtand you very well, Sir; and pray inforn me what followẽd this Act of Diſobedience? Phil. As it is impoſſible to deſcribe the Happineſs of firſt created in the Image of God: So it is impoſſible to expreſs the Unhappineſs, in the different Circumſtances and Alterations of the Nature of Man, after he had loſt that Image: For by his Diſobedience, he brought upon himſelf Sorrow, Labour, Pain, Grief, and continual Vexation of Spirit. He that had once a pure and free Will, an extenſive Underſtanding, a penetrating and unerring Judgment, and a tenacious Memory, has not only in a great Meaſure loſt theſe Gifts, but has rendered himſelf obnoxious to God's Diſpleaſure.  O Eve, in evil hour thou didſt give ear To that falſe worm, of whomſoever taught To counterfeit man's voice, true in our fall, Falſe in our promis'd riſing; ſince our eyes h Open'd we find indeed, and find we know Both good 'and evil, good loſt, and evil got, & Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know,  Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void, u Of innocence, of faith, of purity Our wonted ornaments, now ſoiſd and ftain'd,  And in our faces evident the ſigns  Of foul concupiſcence. Milton, B. 9, No. 1067. Tyr. What an Alteration did this Act of Diſobedience make in our firſt Parents! Phil. Alteration indeed, as was ſaid before! All feel the Effects of it, Tyro; but how and in what particular Manner every Individual ſuffers by this Conſequence ĩs out of the Power of any Man to determine, and therefore abſurd to attempt a Deſcription thereof: For ſome ſay, that the WordslIn the Day thou eateſt thereof, thoi ſbalt ſurely die extended to the natural Death of Adam, his Poſterity, and all Creatures.Others ſay, that the Word die, means Death, both temporal and efernal, both to him and his Poſterity; and others ſay again, that it is inconſiſtent with the Juſtice of God, to ſuppoſe that hæ ſhould charge me or you with a Part of, or puniſh us for an Offence, that we had no Power to do, nor could poſſibly have the leaſt Concern in, as we did not exiſt when it was committed. Tyr. But do you not think that this Tranſgreſſion has in fome Reſpect affected us, and in ſome Meaſure defaced the Image of God in us? Phil. I own, for my Part, that I believe this firſt Breach of God's Command, has been the Occaſion of the Diſeaſes and Failings of ſMankind ; and that by it we are not only ſubject to Death temporal, but that we have in a great Meaſure loſt that clear Knowledge of God which Man once was bleſſed with, and alſo that we have not that Aptitude and Power to ſerve, honour, and obey him, as Adam had; but that of ourſelves, free from the Laws of Education or Revelation, are now more naturally prone to Evil than Good. Tyr. My Spimon coincides with yours, and I think no one can confute us thus far: But pray what is your Opinion concerning the whole Race of Man (Infants not excepted ) being obnoxious to God's Wrath, by the a Phil. I told you before, that I ſhould not enter into negative and cavilling Diſputes concerning Thimgs we know not of, nor have any Right to preſume to determine upon; only ſay, that plain it is the Fall of our firſt Parents has acted ſo far upon us, as to make us unwilling of ourſelves to walk in the Ways of true Holineſs; that our Minds are naturally inclined to Pleaſure and Vanity, rather than Virtue and Sobriety; and that it is evident, that the Bent of our Inclination is rather tending to Folly, and to ſuch Emplosqiere as in the End will hurt us, rather than to thoſe Deeds which would OF KNOWLEDG E. 11 promote our eternal Happineſs, and do us Good.  How far Aimighty God excuſes us in this Situation, is alſo out of the Power oſ Man to determine; ſince he alone can be, and is, the unerring Judge of every Action, and every Circumſtance of the various Conſequences and Steps of Mankind, in all their different States and Capacities. li Tyr. Very true, Sir; but yet you have not ſatisfied me in that Part of my Queſtion concerning the Wrath of God on Adam's whole Poſterity, in which Infants are included. ; Phil. How far God, as the Almighty Diſpenſer of Juſtice and Mercvy, can, conſiſtent with his Attributes, inflict the Puniſhment of Adam on his Poſterity, I ſaid before, is impoſſible to determine; but if we may judge according to his Nature as God, and agrecable to the Goſpel of our Lord Teſus Chriſt, we cannot ſuppoſe that Infants are Objects of eternal Wrath; becauſe we have no Warrantee in Scripture even that hints, that we are immediately accountable to God for the Sins of another, but only for our own actual Tranſgreſſion of hjs Laws; and it would be the higheſt Abſurdity to accuſe me of breaRing a Law, before a Law was given, and more abſurd to condemn me of a Breach of a Law whith I never heard of, nor had Power in Infancy to violate. I think this is very clear, Tyro, from the Laws of. right Reaſon, and I am certain it is agreeable to the Precepts and Doctrine of the Prophets and Apoſtles.Were there no more Proofs of this (as there are many), them the poſitive Words of the Prophet Exekiel would be ſuſficient, which I here give you at Length, Chap. xviii. Verſe 20.  The Soul (ſays he) that ſinneth it ſhall die:  The Som ſhall not bear the Iniquity of the Father;  neither ſhall the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son:  But the Righteouſneſs of the Righteous ſhall be upon  him; and the Wickedneſs of the Wicked. ſhall be upom  him. 3. Of Man's Reſtoration: Tyr. You have given me great Satisfaction in giving a full Account of theſe important Subjects in a ſhort Compaſs; but pray, after this Act of Diſobedience, what Hopes had to be admicted aguin to God's Eavour hi Phil. He that before ſolemnly declared, In the Day thou eateſt thereof, thou ſbalt ſurely dieNow kindl aſſures Him, That the Seed 6f the Woman ſhall br the Serpent's Head: That is, the Son of God made Fleſh, and born in due Time, ſhould offer up himſeli to God for the Sins of Mankind, and ſhould reſtore him again to Favour, and, in the End, ſhould conquer Death, ell, and Sin. Milton moſt affectingly deſcribes the Juſtice of God being offended with Adam's Sin, and the Manner how the Anger of the Deity was appeaſed.For in that wonderful Poem God the Father, ſpeaking of the Heinouſaeſe of cddam's Crime, is ſuppoſed to ſpeak as follows, iii. No. 2 ro. & Die he or juſtice muſt; unleſs for him s Some other able, and as willing, pay sc The rigid ſatisfaction, death for death. ec Sar heav'nly pow'rs, where ſhall we find ſuch love? sc Which of ye will be mortal to redeem s& Man's mortal crime, and juſt th' unjuſt to ſave? & Duwells in all heaven charity ſo dear? o He aſk'd, but all the heav'nly quire ſtood mute, c And ſilence was in heav'n: on man's behalf sc Patron or interceſſor none appear'd,  Much leſs that durſt upon his own head draw  The deadly forfeiture, and ranſom ſet.  And now without redemption all mankind sc Muſt have been loſt, adjudg'd to death and hell & By doom ſevere, had not the Son of God,  In whom the fulneſs dwells of love divine, s His deareſt mediation thus renew'd. t& Father, thy word is paſt, Man ſhall find grace; c And ſhall grace not ſnd means, that finds her way, c The ſpeedieſt of thy winged meſſengers,  To viſit all thy creatures, and to all  Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unſought?  Happy for Man, ſo coming; he her ai  Can never ſeek, once dead in ſins and loſt;  Atonement for himſelf or offering meet & Indebted and undone hath none to bring: & Behold Me then; me for him, life for li æI of KNOWLEDGE. & J offer; on me let thine anger fall,  Account Me Man; I for his ſake will leave & Thy boſom, and this glory next to thee a Freely put off, and for him laſtly die  Well pleas'd; on me let Death wreck all his rag  Under his gloom, pow'r I ſhall not long  Lie vanquiſh'd; thou haſt giv'n me to poſſeſs u Life in myſelf for ever; by thee I live, . & Though now to Death I yield, and am his due c AlI that of me can die; yet that debt paid, & Thou wilt not leave me in the loathſome grave o His prey, nor ſuffer my unſpotted ſoul & For ever with corruption there to dwell;  But I ſhall riſe victorious, and ſubdue  My vanquiſher, ſpoil'd of his vaunted ſpoil; & Death his death's wound ſhall then receive, and e Inglorious, of his mortal ſting diſarm'd. oc  tarough the ample air in triumph high c Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and ſhow  The Pow'rs of darkneſs bound. Thou at the ſi  Pleas'd, out of Heaven ſhalt. looc down and ſm  Wiile by thee rais'd I ruin all my foes,  Death laſt, and with his carcaſs glut the grave: α Then with the multitude of my bedecturs i  Shall enter Heav'n long abſent, and return, & Father, to ſee thy face, wherein no cloud c Of anger ſhall remain; but peace aſſur'd  And reconcilement; wrath ſhall be no more  Thenceforth, but in thy preſence joy entire. To this Speech of our Redeemer, ſo full of paſſion and Affection, the Deity is ſuppoſed to re follows, No. 275. & O thou in Heav'n and Earth the only peace c Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou & My ſole complacence! well thou know'ſt how  ToO me are ll my works, nor Man the leaſt, & Though laſt created; that for him I ſpare  Thee from my boſom and right hand, to ſave, & By loſing thee awhile, the whole race loſt. Their nature alſo to thy nature join: And be thyſelſ Man among men on earth, Made fleſh, when time ſhall be, of virgin ſeed, By wondrous birth: be thou in Adam's room he head of all mankind, though Adam's ſon. As in him periſh all men, ſo in thee, As from a ſecond root, ſhall be reſtor'd As many as are reſtor'd, without thee none. His crime makes guilty all his ſons; thy merit Imputed ſhall abſolve them who renounce Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds And live in thee tranſplanted, and from thee Receive new life. So man, as is moſt juſt, Shall ſatisfy for Man, be judg'd and di And dying riſe, and riſing with him raiſe His brethren, ranſom'd with his own dear lifeSo heav'nly love ſhall outdo helliſh hate, Giving to death, and dying to redeem, So dearly to redeem what helliſh hate So eaſily deſtroy'd, and ſtill deſtroys In thoſe who, when they may, accept not graceNor ſhalt thou, by deſcending to aſſume ; Man's nature, leflen or degrade thine own. Becauſe thou haſt, though thron'd in higheſt bliſ Equal to God, and equally enjoying God-like fruition, quitted all to ſave . A world from utter loſs, and haſt been found By merit more than birthright Son of God, Found worthieſt to be ſo by being good, Far more than great or high; becauſe in thee Love hath abounded more than glory abounds, Therefore thy humiliation ſhall exalt With thee thy manhood alſo to this throne; Here ſhalt thou ſit incarnate, here ſhalt reign Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, Anointed univerſal king; all power Lgive thee; reign for ever, and aſſume Thy merits; under thee as head ſupreme Thrones, Princedoms, Pow'rs, Dominions I reduc All knees to thee ſhall bow, of them that bide In Heav'n or Earth, or under Earth in Hell. ſ BOOKOF ENOWLEDGE. Shalt in the ſy appear, and from thee ſend The ſummoning Arch-Angels to proclaim Thy dread tribunal; forthwith from all winds The living, and forthwith the cited dead Of all paſt ages, to the general doom Shall haſten, ſuch a peal ſhall rouſe their ſleep. Then all thy ſaints aſſlembled, thou ſhalt judge Bad men and Angels; they arraign'd ſhall ſink Beneath thy ſentence; Hell, her numbers full, Thenceforth ſhall be for ever ſlhut. Mean while The world ſhall burn, and from her aſhes ſpring New Heav'n and Earth, wherein the juſt ſhall dv And aſter all their tribulations long See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, With joy and love triumphing, and fair truth, Then thou thy regal ſcepter. ſhalt lay by. For regal ſcepter then no more ſhall need, God ſhall be all in all. But all ye Gods, Adore him, who to compaſs all this, dies, Adore the Son, and honour him as me.  No ſooner had ch' Almighty ceas'd, but all The multitude of Angels, with a ſhout Loud as from numbers without number, ſweet As from bleſt voices, uttering joy, Heav'n rung With jubilee, and loud Hoſannah's fill'd Th eternal regions: lowly reverent Towrrds either throne they bow, and to the grot With ſolemn adoration down they caſt Their crowns.' Here you have the bleſſed Spirits praiſing and ad od the Father, and the Son, for this wonderful mption and Reſtoration. And Adam himſelf, aſte rch- Angel Michael had told him of the Syſtem ol :demption, ſays, Book xii. No. 469. & O Goodneſs infinite, Goodneſs immenſe ſ That all this good of evil ſhall produce, And evil turn to good; more wonderful Than that which by creation ſirſt brought. forth Light out of darkneſs! full of doubt I ſtand, Whether I ſhould repent me now of ſin & Bv me done and occaſion'd, or rejoice re Much more, that much more good thereof ſhall ſpring,  To God more glorv. more good will to men  Jrom God, and over wrath grace ſhall abound. Thus you read concerning the Redemption, and after Chriſt the Deliverer was aſcended up to his Father, having completed his Office Then Hou read concerning the ſending of the Comſorter, or Holy Spirit, to aſũiſt Man in his Warfare. li Tyr. Moſt excellently fine indeed! hil. If you can read Blank Verſe, there is no Book that I would recommend to you preferable to Milton's Paradiſe Loſt, as an Accompanyment to the Word of God itſelf: Therein, my dear Tyro, you will read of the Creation and Fall of both Angels and Men The Ignorance of Men aſter the Fall, how they worſhipped various Deities.You have alſo a beautiful Proſpect of the various Acts of Providence in all Parts of the Creation, in Earth, Air, Fire, and Water. In ſhort, you have every Thing ſer forth whereby the Creature may have a very juſt Notion of the Greatneſs of his Creators Power, Wiſdom, Juſtice, Mercy, and Truth agreeable to the plain and ſimple Doctrine of the Goſpel oſ our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, without any whimſical Syſtems of modern Diſputants, or the old unconnected Suppoſitions and arbit Doctrines of ſome of the Fathers. sypr. I ſnall endeavour to take your Advice. Phit Do ſo, Tyro: You will not repent it in the End, when, by your conſtant Search after Truth, you find the greateſt Satisfaction that can be wiſhed for: Nay, ſuch a Satisfaction, that partial Men, who build their Faith purely upon Cuſtom, or from the Belief oſ any Man, or Sect of Men, never can arrive to. Iſf the Apoſtle St. Jobn gave a Charge to his Followers to ſearch after Truth, certainly we have the ſame undoubted Right from his Authority, and ought not to take our Faith upon Truſt. Tyr. It is very true, Sir; but there are ſo many contrary Opinions among the Learned, not only of the different Sects, but even amongſt thoſe of the ùme Perſuaſion, that it is impoſſible to pleaſe or think with them all. Phil. Very true; but I will tell you how you may prevent affronting any, except the obſtinate, bigotted, and dogmatical. . . Ur. I ſhall be glad of this Information. hil. In all curious Queſtione, and ſpeculative Surmiſes and Curioſities, if they have the Probability of, and may or may not be true and juſtly founded, wave the Argument, rather than hold an unneceſſary DiſputeBut whoever impoſes upon you any Article of Faith, though he pretends to the Sanction of ãny Man, Church, Nation, or People, who have no other Authority but Cuſtom, or the Tradition of their Fore-Fathers, to ſupport it, let not ſuch Authority at all bias you, except ſuch Article of Faith runs parallel with, and is agreeable to the Word of God itſelf: And ſhould any ſuch Article be inconſiſtent, not only to the Word of God, but com mon Senſe and Reaſon, (ſuch as the Doctrine of Tranſubſtantiation, &c. &c.) then it is your Duty to proceed further, according to your Knowledge, Power, or Ability: That is, not only to deny it, but to oppoſe it at all due Times and Places. But herein I would be underſtood, that you are not to oppoſe for Oppoſition's Sake, but with a modeſt Boldneſs mixt with every Mark of Love and Tenderneſs, Benevolence and Impartiality: Theſe added to, or accompanied with Knowledge, ſeldom fail not only to conquer and convince, but even to cauſe thoſe whom you have conquered to love you: For nothing, Tyro, is ſo great a Sign of Weakneſs, of a Man's having the wrong Side of an Argument, as his being obliged to have Recourſe to Anger, Ridicule, and Over-Bearingneſs, the conſtant and inſeparable Companions of Ignorance, the Props of Falſhood, and the Bane of Truth. Tyr. I have been an Eye and Ear Witneſs many Times to the Truth of what you aſſert. . Phil. If ſo, you are inexcuſable not to ſearch more and more after true Knowledge: For the nearer you approach to the Truth of ſuch Things as are, firſt of all, plainly ſet forth in Holy Writ, agreeable, at the ſime ime, with the natural Lav or Axioms of Reaſon, the more and more will you receive Satisfaction i and it will be ſo exalted a Pleaſure and Satisfaction, as fa not in the Power of Mankind to deprive you of. Tyr. You may depend upon my obſerving well what you adviſe. Phil. That is all I deſire; and therefore I ſhall ſay no more upon this Head, only leave the ſame Advice with jou as Michael the Arch-Angel left with Adam, after he ad been ſhewing him the wonderful Works of his Creator, and his due Obedience to him : c This having learn'd, thou haſt attain'd the ſum s Of wiſdom; hope no higher, though all the ſtars & Thou knew ſt by name, and all th' ethereal pow'rs,  All ſecrets of the deep, all Nature's workes, & Or works of God in Heavn, air, earth, or ſea, c And all the riches of this world enjoy'dſt, s And all the rule, one empire; only add a Deeds to thy knowledge anſwerable, add faith, e Add virtue, patience, temperance, add love. ec Then wilt thou not be loth & To leave this paradiſe, but ſhalt poſſeſs  AParadiſe within thee, happier far. Let us now return to and again conſider the Exiſtence and Attributes of the Almięxhty. You muſt know then that Man only, of all other created Beings, is able to make Diſcovery of a firſt Cauſe, the great Author and Mater of all Things, and which by us is called GopD. And as the whole Frame and Order of Things, which we behold, is what we call Nature; ſo that Act of the Mind whereby we conſider and compare Things, according to their various Natures and Relations, and deduce from thence the Exiſtence of a God, is what we call Reaſnn. And the Arguments and Motives which are afforded us from the View and Proſpect of Nature in her ſeveral Parts, and whereby we are induced and inclined to give our Aſſent to the Doctrine of the Being of a God, is what we call the Light of Nature. And before eckon ſix, eight, or ten Vears from our Births, we e able, in ſome Degree, to exert this noble Faculty oſ Reaſon, and make ſome Progreſs in the divine Diſcovery aforeſaid, viæ. of God's Exi ence a and moral Qualities: And this Faculty of Reaſon, as we grow in Years, becomes more ſtrong-and perfect, and works on the pure and untainted Mind with native orce, and ſuch powerful and clear Proof as we can neither deny nor withſtand. And thus, as Saint Paul has obſerved, what is neceſſary to be known of God, (or indeed can be known of him by us) is manifeſt in the Works of the Creation; even his eternal Power and Godhead is clearly ſeen, being underſtood by the Things which are made. So that aſ Perſons, capable of Reaſon, are without Excuſe, who do not readily acknowledge the Being and Glory of Almighty God. Nor is there any Part of Nature within our View, (nor any Place where there is not ſuch a View of Nature) which doth not loudly call upon us to receive and confeſs this great and divine Truth. The Heavens declare the Glory of God; and the ſplendid Decorations thereof, che Sun, the Moon, and Stars, ſhew themſelves to be his Handy-Work: Day unto Day uttereth Speech, and Night unto Night ſheweth Knowledge. There is no Nation on the Face of the whole Earth, where their Voice is not heard; for it is gone through all the Earth, and their Words to the End of the World. We ſee all Things conſiſt of Matter, which is for the moſt Part obvious to our Senſes; and we are moſt agreeably ſurpriſed with a wonderful and infinite Variety of Forms, Conditions, and Qualities of natural Subſtances. Some Parts of Matter we obſerve to be without Motion, Senſe, or active Life, as Stones and Earth: Others we ſee are endued with a Power of growing and extending themſelves into ſpecial Forms and Sizes, as Herbs and Trees, which therefore have innate Motion, and may be ſaid to live or have Life, though in the loweſt Degree. The next Claſs of Beings which preſent themſelves, are in a Degree much ſuperior to the foreoing, the Subjects of which are all endued with native otion, Life n the moſt perfect Degree, and the Qualitu of Senſation; that is, they are capable of, Seeing, earing, Taſting, Smelling, and Feeling., of all thoſe Objects which come within the Reach of any of thefe five Senſes. Theſe Creatures are therefore called Animals, becauſe they have the Faculty of Liſe, or are endowed with a living Spirit. . But Man alone is capable of uſing his Reaſon to the nobleſt Purpoſes, namely, the finding out the Being and Perfections of God, his Providence, and the Certainty of a future State after Death. For he can thus reaſon or argue: Every Thing that is, or doth exiſt, receives its Being either from itſelf, or ſome other Principle or Cauſo; but nothing can be the Cauſe of itſelf, for that implies, that while it is not, it is capable of acting, or producing its own Being, which is evidently abſurd; therefore it muſt receive its Being from without itſelf, or from ſome other Cauſe different from itſelf; and this firſt Cauſe we define Gobp. And this Reaſoning holds good towards all the various Kinds of Beings yet obſerved, and even of Man himſelf, the chief of all: For nothing is more certain, than that the Power of giving or retaining Life, either in himſelf, or any other Creature, is not in Man, and conſequentlſy in no other Being but God alone. But more particularly, the Exiſtence of a God is evident from the bare Conſideration of the Properties of Matter: For Matter, it is plain, is of itſelf not capable of Motion or Reſt, but is entirely liſtleſs and indifferent to both. Vet ſince all the Animal Creation is endowed with the Power to move or reſt at Pleaſure, it is evident this Faculty is not from Matter itſelſ, of which alone ali Things are formed; therefore it muſt ariſe from ſome other Principle or Cauſe, viæ. from GOD. This Argument is demonſtrated by the abſolute and conſtant Motions of the heavenly Bodies, which are ever revolving round one common Center in Orbits nearly circular. For ſince theſe Bodies, I mean the Planets, are vaſt Globes formed of Matter, they are not of themſelves capable of any Motion at all; therefore they were firſt ſet in Motion by ſome firſt Mover, which is able to communicate that Power to Matter; which is God only, as before proved. But this is ſtill more obvious from the Manner of their Motions, which is circular; for when Matter is put into Motion, it naturally proceeds in a direct or right Courſe; that is, ſtraight forwards, and not in a clſteu lar BOOREK OF KNOWLEDGE. Courſe or Orb, as the Planets all do. Now the Air is not of that Thickneſs or Denſity in thoſe Regions, as to ſtop the rapid Courſe of ſuch great Bodies, and turn them from a direct to a curve or circular Motion; but ſince this Motion cannot proceed from the Air, it muſt be the Reſult of ſome Cauſes, in thoſe Bodies themſelves, viæ. Gravity, Attraction, and Repulſion, whereby they tend to their common Center of Motion from a right Courſe, yet ſo adjuſted with reſpect to the Force of the firſt or direct Motion, that togeſner they form the circular Courſe; and ſo neither fly off in right Lines to infinite Diſtances, nor fall at once to the Center, and there loſe all Motion. Now all this moſt admirable Power and Contrivance clearly demonſtrates that great Author, of whom the Heavens are the Works of his Fiugers, and the Moon and Stars are of his ordaining. From the Conſideration of final Cauſes flow a thouſand Arguments to prove the Exiſtence of God. By ſinal Cauſes, I mean the Ends for which Things are vidently made, and intended to anfwer. Thus when.we conſider that the Light was created to render Objccts viſible, the Eye made on Purpoſe to behold them, and to direct us in our Purſuits of Life, when we conſider the Air as a Medium to convey Sounds and Scents, and the Ears and the Noſe made and contrived on Purpoſe to hear and ſmell the ſame: That in the Body there are Nerves which convey the Ideas received by thoſe outward Organs of Senſe to the Brain, which is the Seat of the Mind in Animal Bodies, to be there made Uſe of for the Service, and at the Diſcretion of the Creature, in the ſeveral Occaſions of Life: I ſay, when we conſider ſuch a wonderful Aſſemblage of Means appointed ſo evidently to anſwer ſuch a Series of proper and neceſſary Ends, it powerfully impels our Aſſent to the Doctrine of a Deity, who alone can be ſuppoſed capable of performing ſuch wonderful Works. Again: From a due and nice Examination of all the larger Parts of the Creation, ſuch as the Globe of Earth on which we live, the great Variety of its Produce in Animals, Plants, and Minerals; the exact Contrivance of Animal Bodies to ſuit them for the Medium in which they live; the Man, and larger Beaſts for Land. the Fiſhes for ſvimming in Water, the Fowls for ſlying in Air, the infinite Species of Creatures for the dark Abodes within the Body of the Earth; the rich and beautiful Variety of Herbs for the Paſturage of the Beaſts, and Service of Man; with all the mineral Tribes in the Bowels of the Earth; the great and uſeful Variety oſ Mountains, Valleys, Rivers, Springs, &c. with which its Surface is diverſified: As they all jointly ſerve the Uſes and Neceſſities or Mankind, ſo they call moſt emphatically upon us to acknowledge and adore their divine Author, for diſplaying and expending ſo much oſ his boundleſs Power and Providence for our Pleaſure and Service. In like Manner, the wondrous Atmoſphere ſurrounding the Earth, ſerving to the Generation of Winds, Rain, Luſtre of Day-light, &c. abſolutely neceſſary to the State of Man and Beaſts: Alſo the whole Frame and Structure of the Heavens; the Sun which rules the Day, and the Moon which rules the Night, with the Stars alſo, all powerfully induce us to confeſs, that tis GOD uho hath laid the Foundation of the Earth, and that the Heavens are the Work of his Hands. From the foregoing Arguments, and many others, it is evidently proved there is a God; and not the Exiſtence of the Deity alone, but we may from them, and by the ſame Arguments, plainly diſcover and infer moſt of his Attributes and Perfections, which render him, to us his Creatures, an awful and adorable Object. As firſt, that God is a neceſſary, ſelf-exiſtent and eternal Being; that he is an Unchangeable and Independent Being; that he is but One; that he is a Being moſt Simple, Uniform, Indiviſible, and Incorruptible; that he is Omnipotent, or All-powerful; Omniſcient, or infinite in Knowledge; that he is a Pure Spirit, acts freely as he pleaſes, without Neceſſity; and laſtly, that he is and muſt neceſſarily be a Being of infinite Goodneſs, Mercy, Juſtice, an Truth, and poſſeſſing all other moral Perfections; ſuch as baecome the ſupreme Ruler and Judge of the World. The Providence of God is moſt rationally inferred from his being proved to be the Author or Maker of the World, and all Things therein. For not only Man, as being endowed with Underſtanding and Wiſdom, but eeen Birds, Beaſts, Inſects, and all Creatures having Licc and Senſe, we conſtantly obſerve to have a natural ſpecial Care, Regard, and Tenderneſs of their Offspring; and as it is a Part of natural Goodneſs, can we, on any Accourt ſuppoſe the ſame Care and providential Regard to the Works of his Hands, wanting in that Almight Belng whom we allow to be poſſeſſed of infinite Goodneſs, Mercy, and Benevolence? But this Argument is directty proved from the ſeveral Obſervations on the Works of Nature, as the Motions of the heavenly Bodies, contrary to the apparently proper Laws of Nature, &c. to anſwer a general End. Wherefore we muſt conclude, that the ſame God who created all Things, and upholds and preſerves them by his continual Aſſiſtance and Power, does alſo, by his all-wiſe Providence, conſtantly govern and direct the Iſſues and Events of Things, that he takes Care of this lower World; and of all, even the ſmalleſt Objects therein; diſpoſes Events in a regular Order and Succeſſion in every Age from the Beginning of the World to its final Period; but inſpects, with a more particular Regard, the Actions of ſicn, whether they be good, or whether they be evil. A future State of Rewards and Puniſhments may be deduced alſo by the Strength and Light of Reaſon. For, ũ The Nature of Man is ſuch, that he acts freely, of hoice, and unconſtrained; and hath a Law imprinted in his Mind, which conſtantly directs him to do that, in every Caſe, which is fit and requiſite, and conſiſtent vith Juſtice and Truth. If he acts agreeable to this Law of right Reaſon, it is reputed Virtue; if contrary to it, it is called Vice: But Virtue merits Reward, and Vice Puniſhment, from their Nature: Yet theſe Rewards and Puniſhments, it is plain, are not equally diſtributed in this Life; and ſince they are from God, to whom alone Man can be truly accountable for his moral Actions, and he is a Being infinitely juſt, it follows that there muſt be another and future State, in which Virtue and Vice will receive a perfect and equitable Diſtribution of Rewards and Puniſhments, proportionable to their ſeveral Degrees of Merit and Demerit. ſ2) From the natural Inclination and Deſire of Immortality, and an unavoidable Proſpect of what is to happen hereafter, implanted in all Men, we may conclude a future State. q5 The Dignity and Excellency of Man's Nature when untainted by Sin plainly ſhew him deſigned and intended for a better and more worthy State of Life, than the beſt he can enjoy in this World. (4.) That ſevere and juſt Monitor Conſcience, by which all Men are ſecretl judged of their Actions in their own Minds, is by al allowed to be no light Proof of a future State of Account. (5.) It hath been the acknowledged Conſent and Opinion of almoſt all the Heathen World, and ſuch have obtained as univerſally, both as to Time and Place, nearly as the Notion of a God itſelf; and therefore muſt be the Reſult of Reaſon, and deemed a Certainty. Having eſtabliſhed in the Mind a firm and rational Belief of a Deity, his Providence and Government of the World, and a future State of Life, there muſt neceſſarily enſue the Practice of Piety, or an effectual Senſe of the Obligations we are under to love, fear, ſerve, raiſe, pray to, and adore the ſacred Name, and glorious Rajelty of God. From a firm and determined Reliance on him, we are induced to truſt in and depend upon him; to exerciſe Patience and Hope in Times of Affliction and Adverſity, and to keep ourſelves humble in Times even of the greateſt Proſperity and Felicity; to have always a due and ſolemn Regard to the moral Rectitude of all our Actions; and to be always in a proper Degree of Reſignation both of ourſelves and Fortunes, to the ſovereign Diſpoſal and Pleaſure of God, who though he be the Moſt High, and has Dominion over all, yet he is righteous in all his Ways, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works. . YOU NG MANS Book of Knowledge, &c P AR T II. OF T H E O LOG VY. S E C T. I. yr. H AT is Theology ? Philo. Theology ſignifies Divinity, and is that Science, whoſe Doctrine treats of, and inſtructs us in the Cnowledge of God and the Practice of true Religion. Theology is divided into five Parts, viæ. Natural, Supernatural, Moral, Poſitive, and Schilaſtic. Ter. What do you mean by natural Theologyè? Phil. Natural Theology is that which treats oſ the Exiſtence of Sod and the Works of Creation, as far as is diſcovered by the Light of Nature. Tyr. What is ſupernatural Theoligyè Biil. Supernatural Theology is the Will of God communicated or revealed to flankind by Revelation, by which we not only know more of God than by natural Reaſon only, but are more particularly bound by Obligation to perform our Duty to him as a Lawgiver; he having revealed ſuch Things to us that never could have been diſcovered by all the natural Reaſon of Man, nor even by the Conception of Angels. But I will not prevent you, Tyro, at preſent, as I ſhall give you a fuller Account of this by und by; therefore pray go on in your Endury. Tyr. What is moral Theology? Phil. Moral Theology is that which inſtructs us in that Part of the divine Law, which tends to the Well-being of Society in general, and the more particular Behaviour, Carriage, Duty or Deportment to each other in particular, in the different Callings, Variations and Circumſtances of Life, either as Superior, Equal, or Inferior. This, therefore, runs parallel with the Laws of revealed Religion, and comes under that Head. Tyr. What is pſiive E hil. Poſitive Theology is the Opinion of the Fathers of the Church concerninẽ the Holy Scriptures. Or, in other Words, it is that which obliges us to think of, and believe the Interpretation of the Sacred Writings, according to the Opinions, and agreeable to the Sentiments of the ancient Fathers of the Church, be it right or wrong. Tyr. What is Scholaſtic Theology ? Phil. Scholaſtic Theology is that which derives its Arguments from certain Rules of Reaſoning, and teaches us Religion, from ſome eſtabliſhed Opinions, Articles or Matters of Faith. Tyr. I perceive then, that all of theſe may be comprehended under natural and ſupernatural Religion. Phil. They may ſo. . Tyr. But ſ ſhall be obliged to you, kind Philomathes, to give me a fuller Account of natural and lupernatural Religion, with Reſpect to the different Ends they tend to. Phil. I will. S EC T. II. A farther Account of the Religion of Nature. Tyr. Is Man capable of knowing God by the Light of Nature or Reaſon only? . Phil. Moſt certainly he is, as far as relates to the Works of Creation and Providence. For God having created Man with a Power or Faculty of reaſoning, reflecting and conſidering; Man muſt of Neceſſity, as it were, acknowledge, that there is certainly ſome firſt Cauſe; and if he uſes his Reaſon, and further contemplates the Works of Nature, he cannot help at laſt to own and confeſs the Exiſtence of a God. Tyr. But there are ſome Perſons that either think not us all, or elſe ſpeak againſt their ovn Conſcience nai te vert Dictates of Nature, elſe whence comes the iseſ who ſays there is no God? Phil. Though there are Men ſo called, who have boldly denied the Exiſtence of God, yet there never was, nor is there now ſo many of this Stamp as is commonly reported: And in my Opinion, I cannot conceive there can be an Atheiſt, any more than I can he perſuaded that the Prieſts, Fryars, &c. of the Church of Rome do themſelves really believe the inconſiſtent Doctrine ofſ Tranſubſtantiation. For though it is very natural to ſuppoſe, that every Man believes rhat which he daily preaches and propagates, yet we oſten find to the contrar ; for ſuch Conduct often ariſes from a deceitful, wicked, and deviliſa Cuſtom and Infatuation, to ſerve ſome worldly Ends, or ſiniſter Views and Deſigns. Tyr. I beliere what you ſay is true: But pray, is the Lighc of Nature ſufficient to convince us of the Exiſtence of a ſupreme Being? Phil. Yes, in many Reſpects, would Man but follow its Dictates, and conſider it juſtly: For, (1.) Nature itſelf. (2.) The Order of the heavenly Bodies. (3.) The Power, Nature, and Faculties of various Animals. 4.) Their Aptitude to Man. (5.) The vegetable reation. (6.) Matter itſelf, c& c. alf owerfully proclaim the Exiſtence of an almighty, alicuiſe and allpowerful God. TIyr. Very true indeed; and prays does not Nature alſo inſtruct us to honour, reverence, worſhip, and fear this our Creator, and do Juſtice one to another? Phil. Nature, no Doubt, inſtructs us that there inot only a divine Being who created us, but that we ſhould alſo worſhip and adore him; but how, and in what Manner ſuch Worſhip and Adoration ate to be performed, and how Men are to act in reſpect to God and each other, in what is now called moral Acts, Nature has not ſo particularly inſtructed us, and Reaſon alone, before revealed Religion, always fell ſhort of itz there being no Law previous to the aw-Giver; and it is abſurd tò ſuppoſe one Man's Rules or Laws ſhould be binding to another, abſtracted from the Laws of their Creator, which are founded ù Juſtice and Mercy. 2 It is therefore evident, that natural Laws, built only upon natural Reaſon, are quite different from the poſitive Laws of the Creator himſelf, God having revealed his Will to Man, and given him Laws to walk by, to the End he might glorify his Maker, by a reverential Regard to his Rules, and enjoy his Favour and Affection for everThis, Nature itſelf has not Power to do. S E C T. III. ũll Shewing that the ſuppoſed Laws o Nature and Reaſon cannot be Hùſν beſesous ſerm pgtitut Law ſreas a ſuperior primary Being. Tyr. You have already ſhewn me, that by the Light of Nature alone Man may be convinced there is a divine Being; and that if he exerciſes his Reaſon, he will naturally be led to think, believe, and confeſs, that this Being is the greateſt Object of his Adoration. ũi Phil. Very well, I have ſo-What then? Tyr. Why you puzzled me when you ſaid the Laws of Nature are not binding to us, reſpecting moral Good and Evil. . . Phil. Dom't miſtake me, dear Tyro; when I ſpeak of the Nature, or the Dictates of Nature only, I would be underſtood as follows: That natural Reaſon itſelf is ſo far from having a poſitive Power to regulate our Actions, that without there had been ſome Laws or Rules laid down by a Law-Given Men would have been continually ſtriving for a Maſtery over each other, and involved in perpetual Conſuſion; becauſe Nature, of itſelf, tells me, I have an equal Right to command or preſcribe Laws for you, as you have for me; and when you ſpeak of the Power of Nature only, there can be no Superiority, conſequently thereby all Subordination ceaſes, all Men being upon a Level before ſome Law was given; and as for the Ocigin of moral Good and Evil, Dignity of human Nature, &c. they are not to be defined by the Light of Nature, being abſtract Ideas built only upon Hypotheſis, and the perpetual contradictory Opinions oſ Men, both ancient and modern, as you will ſee hereafter. Tyr. You are very ſmart upon me, Philomathes But pray give me Leave to aſk, Does not the Light of Nature teach us the Origin of moral Good and Evil, and that Man being the Head of the Creation, he ſhould act according to the Dignity of his Nature? Phil. &oc aik this Queſtion with ſuch Earneſtneſs, I cannot help ſmiling; becauſe I perceive plainly that you have blended Part of ſupernatural with natural Religion; but, as I told you before, we are now ſpeaking of all ſuch Nations or Individuals, who never hud, or have yet received, any Laws or ſuperior Rules or Commands to regulate them. 7YTyr. I ſhall be obliged to you to inſtruct me further on this Subject; but l always thought, that Man's chieſ Happineſs conſiſted in following the pure Dictates oſ Nature, and his own natural ReaſonIf I am wrong, pray convince me wherein? Phil. I will not engage to do this; but I will endeavour to prove that the Dictates of Nature, abſtracted (as I ſaid before) from poſitive Laws, never were capable of inſtructing us, much leſs of binding us to this or that particular Duty; nor can it be ſuppoſed, we ſhould have known wherein our real Happineſs conſiſts, had it not been for ſuperior Evidence. Tyr. Can you prove what you aſſert? hil. Very eaſily: For the Schoolmen themſelves never knew what they meant concerning the Origin of moral Good and Eviſ, nor could they define it: Neither did they ever agree rightly concerning the Summum Bonum (or chief Good) itſelf, though in the Schools of Greece (as Varro and others aſfirm) there were above two hundred Perſons daily diſputing upon, and as oſten diſagreeing in their Jſudgments concerning this and many other Subjects. Tyr. What did they uſe to ſay concerning Mant? Phil. They argued that Man is a noble Creature, that he has a penetrating Julgment, a capacious Underſtanamg, and a tenacious Memory, &e. and therefore he ſhould act according to the Dignity of his Nature, and purge his Soul from all Impurities; and thereby become a terreſtrial God, &c. But what of all this Doctrine ſuppoſe I was minded to act contrary to what they calſ the Dignity of my Nature, what then? Tr. Why, then, certainly you would do wrong, anc muſt render Account of your Conduct, and be anſwerable for it. Phil. I thought you would ſay ſo-But this Propoſition is abſurd, and is in itſelf a ſelevident Contradiction becauſe Nature and Reaſon have no determined bindin Laws: If ſo, then, Whoſe governing Authority have ſ contemned? or whoſe, or what Law have I broken? I cannot be guilty of a Fault in diſobeying a Command or breaking a Law, before I knew there was a Law-Giver; nor can I, by the ſame Reaſon, be guilty of any moral Turpitude, without breaking ſome Law or Command, which I was previouſly enjoined, and had engaged by CQath, on making one of a Society, to keep and maintain. Tyr. I muſt own, Sir, your Argument has great Reaſon in it, and I begin to ſee more plainly the Truth of what you firſt aſſerted. I ſhould be glad, however, if you could inſtruct me further on this Subject, that I may be yet more capable to ſupport the Argument myſelf, and inſtruct others. Phil. There remains very little more to be ſaid on this Head, except it be to point out to you the Diſſerence hetween negative and natural Laws, and poſitive obligatory Laws. Iherefore, from what has already been ſaid, the following Axioms, or ſelf-evident Truths, and Obſervations, may eaſily be deduced AXIOM I. No Law laid down or preſceribed by any one Man for another to act by, can poſſibly be binding, one having the ſame Right by the Laws of Nature as the other to preſcribe Laws alſo to him. AX IOM II. Natural, inherent, or intrinſic Good and Evil, Dignity of Nature, &c. abſtracted from the Laws of real Obligation from ſome ſuperior Law-Giver, are at beſt but Words without Meaning, and only Chimeras of Imagination, built upon nothing elſe but the Foundation of idle Fancy and falſe and imperfect Opinions. OF KNOWLEDGE. 31 AX I OM III. Since the Law of Man, abſtracted from ſome divine w, cannot be obligatory; it will naturally follow, that God, as Creator, has an indiſputable Right of Proprietorſhip; and therefore, he not only created Man fit to be ruled and to rule, but has himſelf given Laws, and ſignified to us that Man muſt of Neceſſity be ſo ruled in Subordination to his Will. Hence follows, . AXIOM IV. The Foundation of moral Good and Evil ariſes only from the preceptive and prohlibiting Will of God, made known to Mãn; God having given him Laws to walk by, which tend both to his own Glory and Man's tempora and eternal Happineſs; and therefore no one Man as a Right to attempt to compel another to aſſent to his particular Notions, ſuch being not only contrary to the aws of his Creator, but alſo a Violation of the Laws of right Reaſon, and an Inſult offered to the Underſtanding. Tyr. I ſincerely return you Thanks, dear Philomathes, and am now fully ſatisfied of the Truth of what you have rted. S E C T. IV. A further Account of ſupernatural Theology, by which th Will of God was more particularly revealed io Man, and Man more particularly bound to believe and obey him. Tyr. What do you fully mean by revealed Religion èPhil. Revealed Religion is the Manifeſtation of the Will of God, made finown to Man by Revelation, concerning his Son Jeſus Chriſt, coming in the Fleſh, taking our Nature upon him, dying for our Sins, and riſing again for our Juſtification. Thi ow was this revealed to Mankind ? Pehil. Sometimes by Viſion or Inſpiration, and ſometimes by ſpeaking to Mãn, as it were, perſonally with him, communicating not only Things which are preſent, but thoſe which are paſt and to come, and that never could have entered into the Mind of Man to conceive of, much leſs to predict the very Time of ſuch Events and Vſciſſitudes, which ſhould happen or come to paſs to his own Church, and to the different States and Nations, and this with an infallible Certainty; as witneſs, Yacob, Moſes, Iſuiab, and all the Prophets, whoſe Predictions did certainly come to paſs, as are plainly ſet forth, not only by the Apoſtles, who were endowed with a peculiar Inſpiration, but the Accompliſhment of the Truth oſ ſuch Prophecies were well known to the Jews themſelves, and have been acknowledged by Joſepbus and many other Hiſtorians of Credit and Veneration living at that ime. Ty-. Theſe Things are ſo evident, that certainly no body can doubt of the Iruth of them. Phil. One would think ſo, indeed, but yet, you are very much miſtaken; for we have Numbers of deiſtical Perions among us, who lead their Lives and Converſation with due Regara to all the Rules of Morality; and et are Captains over the Armies of ſuch as deny Revelacon and all revealed Religion; and not only laugh at all the ſacred Writings of the Apoſtles and Prophets, but tuke a Delight to ridicule thoſe who believe them, and with a ſeeming Surpriæe will tell you, That they thought you were a Man of deeper Senſe, than to be led aſide with ſuch bugbear prieſt-craft Stories, ſo contradictory to Reaſon itſelf, &c. Tyr. Why, you-ſurprie me, Philomathes: Certainly there cannot be ſuch a Set of Wretches living with the Profeſſors of Chriſtianity Phil. Moſt certainly there are ſuch Men; and therefore all true Chriſtians, of every Sect and Denomination, ſnould be upon their Guard, and ſhould take Care to furniſh themſelves with ſufficient Knowledge to withſtand ſuch dangerous and inſinuating Enemies. Tyr. Very true, Sir; but it is ſurprizing to me, that Perſons who pretend to Morality ſhould rail againſt the Scriptures; ſnce no Writings ever penned, treat ſo much and ſo clearly of all the relative Duties of King and Subject, Parents and Children, Maſters and Servants, as they do; whereby alone Society is maintained, and human lſappineſs preſerved; beſides enforcing the Obligation we are under (as you obſerved before) to a BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE. 3: tations of future Rewards and Puniſhments reſulting from the true Performance or Neglect of them. . Phil. I am quite pleaſed, Tyro, that you have given ſuch a full and ſatisfactory Anſwer; and I heartily wiſh you may increaſe in the Knowledge of theſe Things, and continue conſtantly in the Practice of them. . Tyr. I am obliged to you, and I hope Iſhall never live to ſee that Day to be a Companion with theſe Scoffers. However, if it be agreeable to you, we will at preſent paſs them by as unworthy our further Notice or Inquiry; and therefore, I will beg Leave to aſk you more particularly concerning the Chriſtian Religion, as it now ſtands n the different Opinions of the various Sects and Profeſſors of Chriſtianity now among us. Phil. I will give you an Account of every Thing as far as I can. . S ECT. V. Shewing that the Holy Scriptures teach us more of the Knowledge of God, and our Duty to each other, than any other Syſtem. Tyr. What do you fully underſtand by the Word Scriptures? Phil. The ſacred Oracles of God declared to Man, and conveyed to us by the Writings of certain inſpired Men, called Prophets and Apoſtles. Tyr. How are the Scriptures divided? hil. Into two Parts, one called the Old, and the other the New  eſtament. Tyr. What does the Old Teſtament chieſly ſet forth? Phil. The Old Teſtament teaches us (1.) That there is a God. (2.) That he created the Heavens and Earth, and all Things therein. (3.) That hié made Man after his own Image, in Righteouſneſs and true Holineſs. 4.) That Man by his Diſobedience in the Garden of uden fell from this original Righteouſneſs, and thereby rendered himſelf obnoxious to the divine Wrath, and drew upon himſelf and his Poſterity, Trouble, Sorrow, Sickneſs, Diſeaſes, Pain, and Death (5.) Ihat God deſtroyed the Inhabitants of the firſt Age of the World by a Deluge of Water, eight Perſons only excepted. Hlilll 5 (6.) It tells us alſo, how God revealed himſelf to Abraam in the promiſed Seed, out of whoſe Loins ſhould come forth a Redeemer to loſt Man. (7.) It informs us that Jacob propheſied of the certain coming of this Redeemer or Meſſiah. (8.) It ſhews alſo the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances given by God to his Servant Moſes, for the better regulating the Life and moral Conduct of the Jeus, and by which were ſignified to them, under various Types and Shadows, the Pruth ofſ this Bromiſe made before to Abrabam, their Father, concerning Chriſt. (9.) Here we ſee the binding and neceſſary Obligation of Man to God, ſummed up in the Ten Commandments given to the Children of Iſrael. The Prelude to them poſitively declares the Exiſtence of a God, from God's ovn Mouthc I am the Lord  thy God. Then Moſes proceeds to lay before them the Will and Law of God, ſet forth in two Tables of Stone (comprehending Ten Commandments) for their further Knowledge of their Creator, and the better regulating their Conduct in every moral Duty of Honou and Honeſty towards each other. 1. The firſt poſitively declares there is but one God. 2. The ſecond is a further Declaration of his Wiil concerning himſelf, and ſtrictly enjoins us not only to believe and adore God alone, but that we ſhould have ſuch reverential Regard for his very Name, and ſuch Thoughts of his Immenſity and Goodneſs, as not to dare to paint, carve, or form any Image, Similitude, or Likeneſs whatſoever to repreſent God, much leſs to fall down and worſhip ſuch Image: For he has declared himſclf jealous of his Attributes, and that he will not give his Honour to another. . 3. The third informs us, that the very Name of God is ſo lacred, that we are never to mention it but with the higheſt Reverence, much leſs to take it in vain, in ſwearing by it, and uſing it upon every light and frivolous Occaſion; and that ſuch as tranſgreſs this Law will not be held guiltleſs. 4. The fourth enjoins us to a particular Obſervation of the Sabbath, (or Sunday) and plainly tells us, that it is God's expreſs Will that this Day ſhould be kept holy; and that we are not only to abſtain from all worldly Buſineſs, but be well employed in Prayer and Meditation all the Day long. Too true it is, that the Sabbath is become a Day of Pleaſure, and one faſhionable SabbathBreaker has Power to entice and perſuade another, not only to neglect all Manner of religious Duty, both public and private, but even to commit all Manner of Sin at Home and Abroad: But if God was ſo ſevere, to cauſe. a Man to be put to Death, only for gathering a few Sticks on his bol, Day under the Law; what will be the Puniſhment of thoſe, or what can they expect, who perpetually and uwilfully profane it under the Goſpel, I muſt leave to their own Reflection and Conſideration. . 5. The fift Commandment is alſo the poſitive and declarative Will of God to all Children, againſt the unnatural Sin of Diſobedience: For herein God enjoins us not only to obey our Parents in all lawful Things, but likewiſe to honour and reverence them. And indeed the very Ties of Nature, and the natural Obligations to the Performance of this Duty, are ſuch, that (without an poſitive Command) one would hardly expect to find ſo ſhameful a Neglect of it as we daily witneſs; but more eſpecially as God himſelf has ſo cloſely enforced it, and alf Nations agree concerning the indiſpenſible Duty and Obligation that every Child lies under to perform it, without Diſtinction of Age or Sex.* 6. The ſixtb declares God's poſitive Command to abſtain from that abominable and deteſtable Sin of Murder; and under this may be eaſily perceived, that all indirect Means taken to deſtroy our own or the Health of others, either by Drinking, Debauchery, Vexations, &ec. come in ſome Meaſure within the Limits of this Command, and are a Breach thereof.  I would not have it thought that I mean here to dictate, or find Fault with the Miniſters and Brethren of the various Sects among us. -But this I may venture to ſay, that the Subject ofſ all relative Duties has not, nor is yet enforced from the Pulpit ſo oſten as it ſhould be. -pFor I perſuade myſelf, that were they preached upon oſtener, and in a proper, impartial and perſuaſive Manner, they would tend much morè to the Peace and Harmony of Families, and the HOnour and Glory of God, than dwelling upon controverſial Points and eternal Diſputations. See Dr. Biſbop Patrict, and alſo Fleetuood's relative Duties. 7. The ſeventb Commandment tends to promote Chaſtity; Adultery, and all Uncleanneſs, being poſitively forbid by God, ſuch Acts being contrary to his Nature, and therefore the more chaſte and ſober we are, the nearer we approach to our Creator, and deſerve his ove. 8. The eighth forbids very ſtrictly the Sin of Thefſt; that e are not to rob our Neighbour of his Property, by ſtealing from his Perſon, Houſe, or Premiſes, any Part of his Goods or Effects. It alſo teaches us to abſtain from all Manner of Pilfering, all Frauds, Monopolizings, and Over-reachings. The nintb Commandment is not only a poſitive and ſtrict Charge againſt the Sins of wilful Lying, falſe Witneſs, and corrupt Perjury, but even againſt the Sins of Uncharitableneſs and Detraction. For we are herein required to abſtain from all ſly Inſinuations, and ſpeaking privately againſt our Brethren, back-biting them, and thereby robbing them of their Character, good Name, and Reputation; and we are alſo to take Care not to give Ear to any little mean Tales or Stories, that may prejudice our Neighbour, much leſs to ſpread and propagate them at Random: Therefore, if Mankind in general would but conſider the golden Rule, & doing to athers as they deſire and expect to be done bn ey would diſcourage Reports of this Nature; and by ſhewing a faithful and honeſt Spirit accordingly, they never would fail to fruſtrate the Deſign of ſuch miſchievous Deſigners, and might prevent a great deal of Strife, which otherwiſe muſt naturally follow, when ſuch invidious deſigning Perſons are believed, ſmiled upon, careſſed and left wholly to the Liberty of an ungoverned Tongue, by our Silence and Connivance. In ſhort, nothing more plainly diſcovers both a revengeful Spirit and an uncharitable Diſpoſition, than conſtant Talebearing, and the Delight in encouraging ſo unjuſt a Practice, by hearing Stories with Avidity. See Eccleſ. Chap. xxviii. Ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, &c. Chap. xxi. Ver. 25, 26, and 28. 10. Uhe tenth and laſt Commandment not only forbids the Sin of Covetouſneſs, (which is more particularly conſtrued by ſome for graſping after Riches) but teaches OF KNOWLEDGE. 37 us to bridle and reſtrain the inordinate Paſſion of our Deſires in luſting, longing, and wiſhing for thoſe Goods which belong to others, and to take particular Care not to envy thoſe whom Providence has thought fit to place in a more exalted Station of Life, but to be content and eaſy in our Condition, faithfully diſcharging our Duty in that State of Life unto which it has or ſhall pleaſe God to call us. ; § Thus ſpeaketh the moral Law given by God to the Jews, and is now binding to us as well as them, as is confirmed not only by the Apoſtles, but by Chriſt himſelf, who ſays, Thou ſhalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Mind, with all thy Soul, and wit all thy StrengthAnd thy Neighbour as thyſelf. To which he further adds, ſaying On theſe tuo Commandments depend all ihe Law and the Prophets. Tyr. hat more does the Old Teſtament contain? bil. Not only the moral Law, containing what we are commanded to do; but alſo the Example of many ood and wiſe Men, whoſe Practice and Patience are eſſons for us to copy, and their Writings worthy our conſtant Peruſal and Attention, as witneſs the Book of ssob. the Pſalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, and is Book of Eccleſiaſtes, all which far ſurpaſs all the Writings and Sayings of the ancient Philoſophers. Tyr. I am of your Opinion, indeed, Sir. Phil. I am glad of it, Tyrò; but even theſe do not come up to the Spirit and Grandeur of many of the Prophecies, particularly thoſe of Iſaiah the Prophet, in which Book are ſuch ſublime Sentences and exalted Expreſſions, that it would have been impoſſible for any Man, diveſted of ſuperhatural Gifts, to have done the like, much leſs to foretell the coming of the Lord in the Fleſh, and the State of the Church, reſpecting both TJews and Gentiles, as the Prophets all have done, oſ which the New Teſtament is ſufficient Evidence. . 2. Of the New Teſtament. Tyr. What do you mean by the New Teſtament ? Bhil That Part of the Holy Seriptures, whisgh were written by inſpired Men, aſter the Aſcenſion of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt: giving a true and conciſe Aecount oſ his Birth, Acts, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Reſurrection, and Aſcenſion, according to the Prophecies oſ the Old Teſtament, and to which they themſelves are undeniable Witneſſes, that the ſame Prophecies were true, and completely accompliſhed in him; and therefore are more particularly and emphatically called the Apoſtles of Chriſt. Tyr. What does the New Teſtament principally teach s ? Phil. The chief and principal Point of all, no doubt, is this. (1.) That we ſhould firmly believe that Jeſus Chriſt came in the FleTh. (2.) That he led a holy and unſpotted Life, and went continually about doing Good. cat That he was crucified for our Sins, and offered unto God the Father a full, perfect and ſufficient Sacrifice for us. (4.) That God the Father accepted this his Son as a Sacrifice and Atonement. (5.) That he roſe again the third Day from the Dead. (6.) That this Advent is a Token or Confirmation of our Reſurrection alſo. (7.) That he aſcended into Heaven, and there inaketh continual Interceſſion to God for us: and, (8.) That he will come again from Heaven to judge both the Quick and the Dead, and will render to every Man according to his Works done in the Body, whether they be Good or Evil. Hebrews, Chap. i. Ver. 3. Chap. ii. Ver. o, and 17. Chap. vii. Ver. 25. St. John, Chap. v. Ver. 28, 29. 1 Cor. Chap. xxv. 1 Theſſ. Chap. i. Ver. 7, 8, 9 10 and many other Places Thus far concerns the Matter of our Faith and Belief-Next follows our Practice. Tyr. What does the New Teſtament teach us concerning our Carriage, Deportment, and Oeconomy? Phil. Every Thing conſiſtent with our Faith and Belief, not only forbidding us to abſtain from Vice of all Kinds, but in every Part charges us to follow all Chriſtian Virtues, according to the Example of him, in whom we believe; and agreeable to the Practice of all his Apoſtles and true Diſciples. . Tyr. I confeſs (with Shame!) that ſince I have been grown up, I have not read and attended to ſo much of the Scriptures as I ſhould have done; and I own that one Reaſon has been, I have often heard them ſpoken of in a very very indifferent Manner, viæ. that they contradict one another; were only contrived to frighten Mankind; and that no Man in his Senſes can believe ſuch marvellous, miraculous, and ſupernatural Stories as they contain. Phil. I am pleaſed with this free and candid Confeſſion.But let me aſk you one Queſtion: You ſay, you uſed to read the Bible but ſeldom; pray tell me as frankly upon what Motive, or with what View or Deſign did you read, when you was diſpoſed to look into it? Tyr. I ſuppoſe upon the ſame Motive as all deiſtical Perſons do, and that was to hunt after and pick out all the ſeeming Contradictions, which I was extremely proud to find, as I knew it would be a F eather in my Cap at our next Meeting. However, my Conduct is not ſo now; for I am convinced and acknowledge with reverential Awe that it is the beſt and moſt valuable Book in the World. Phil. And ſo would many thouſands more acknowledge beſides you, were they to read it often, with due Attention, and devoid of PrejudiceAnd why ſhould they not 3 there is a perfect Harmony and Agreement between the Prophets of the Old, and the Apoſtles of the New Teſtament, concerning the Syſtem of our Redemption; and therefore it is a fooliſh Criticiſm, to carp at, and cavil about the hiſtorical Part only, which is not at all material to us, and quite foreign to the moſt important Deſign of thoſe inſpired Writers, whoſe Buſineſs was chieſly to proclaim the glad Tidings of Salvation. Tyr. I am now very ſenſible of the Truth and Juſtice of your Remark, Philomathes. hil. But that which ſurprizes me moſt is, that any Man pretending to ſolid Senſe and good Manners, ſhould think he ſhines in Wit, becauſe he is polite enough to ridicule the Scriptures. And yet Numbers of theſe Deiſts are great Pretenders to, and great Pleaders for the Performance of all the Rules of moral Virtues. Reflect how unjuſt and inconſiſtent ſuch Conduct is lCan Seneca or any of the Heathen Philoſophers furniſh us with ſuch moral Virtues, or have any of them ever expreſſed themſelves ſo beautifully and emphatically concerning Prayer und Praiſes to God, and all the ręelative Duties of Mankind to one another in every Station and Degree of Life, as the inſpired Writers ?Let them read Moſes's conſtant Charge to the Children of Iſrael, the Pſalms of David, the incomparable Books of Proverbs and Eccleſiaſtes, in the Old Teſtament; likewiſe Chriſt's Sermon on the Mount, the Epiſtles of St. Paul, St. John the Divine, and St. James in purticular, in the Neu Teſtament; and then let them ſee whether all Manner of Vice is not forbidden, the preſent and future fatal Conſequences thereof evidently pointed out, and every ſocial and Chriſtian Virtue highly inculcated and inſiſted upon. In theſe Divine Books nothing is defectiveIn them is ſet forth evidently the Duty of Kings*, Subjects, Huſbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Maſters, Servants, and of all Mankind one towards another, in all their different Claſſes of Superiority and Subordination. The Holy Scriptures alſo teach us the following Virtues, viæ. Asfability, Amity, Beneficence, Benevolence, Brotherly- Love, Charity, Chaſtity, Comity, Equity, Fidelity, Friendſbip, Fortitude, Honeſly, Honour, olpalit. Humility, Humanity, fuſtice Liberality, Loving- hindneſs, Longanimity, Manſueiude, Mercy, Modeſty, Prudence, Sinceriiy, Sobricpnd TemperanceCan the Enemies of theſe ſacred ritings ſay the contrary ?GO then, whoſoever thou mayeſt be, thou partial Deiſt, thou Pretender to the Love and Practice of Moralitygo forthwith and learn Leſſons out of that Book, which thou haſt ſo long deſpiſed, that thou mayeſt eſcape the Judgment which it pronounceth againſt all obſtinate and unrepenting Scoffers of God's Word. Tyr. What you have ſaid in the Praiſe of the Old and New Teſtament is juſtly founded; and I am ſenſible that the Reaſon why ſo many rail againſt them, is grounded in believing the Reports of others, and not inveſtigating the Foundation of them; but would they but be reſolved to read theſe Authors often, and with a Spirit deſiring to be improved, I might venture to ſay of them, as an * Though I have here mentioned Kings before Subjects, in Order, yet the relative Duties and Obedience begin with the Inſeriors; that is, with the Subjects, Wives, Children, and Servants; then follow the Duties of the Superiors in return, which are equally obligatory. ii BOOKXK OF KENOWLEDGE. 41 eminent Author ſays in Praiſe of Milton's Paradiſe Loſt;  The oftener we read it, the more Beauties we u diſcover. Phil. You are very right. Tyr. Thus far, then, dear Philomathes, you and I agree; and now I ſnall be happy if you will give me ſome Account of the Riſe and Progreſs of Chriſtianity, and the different Tenets and Principles of the various Sects in Britain. Phil. You require too much to be here performed; however, I will d all I can. S EC T. VI. Of Judaiſm, Paganiſm, Chriſtianity, and Mahometaniſm. Tyr. What do you underſtand by Judaiſin ? hil. 1. The Cuſtom, Religion, Manners, and Profeſſion oſ the Jews, according to the Ceremonies oſ the Law only. They were firſt called Hebreus, from Heber, the Father of Abraham; and Iſraelites, from Vacob, whom GoOd called or named Iſrael; and afterwards they were called Jews, from Judaò, Jacob's fourthSon. So alſo the Land of Iſrael, the Lund of Judah, or Judea, are the ſame Thing. 2. The Hiſtory of the Jews, their Riſe and Bondage, their great Deliverance from it, the Law of God given to them, their Ceremonies and Manner of Worſhip, vou will find at large in the Pentateuch, or the five Books of Moſes, called Geneſis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. Here may be ſeen, their perpetual Deliverance from ſtrange and powerful Nations, and at the ſame Time their perpetual Ingratitude, Unthankfulneſs, and Murmurings, not only againſt Moſes, but even againſt God himſelf; till the Lotd was ſo provoked with them, as to deſtroy at one Time above 14,000 (Numb. Chap. xvi), and at another Time of a Plague 24,000 (Chap. xxv), with many other Inſtances of his Judgments; and notwithſtanding this, they kept continually murmuring againſt the Lord and his Servant Moſes, provoking him to ſpeak raſhly and unadviſedly with his ri s; ſo that at length, God told him, neither he nor they ſhould ever poſſeſs the promiſed Land of Canaan ; and accordingly Moſes died on Mount Horeb, and thei rebellious Bodies died in the Wilderneſs. 3. It alſo evidently appears, that Moſes foreſaw that this continual and ſtubborn Behaviour would certainly end in their final Deſtruction, without a Reformation of their Manners and Conduct; and therefore, it is worthy our Obſervation to ſee the Love he bare to them, notwithſtanding their Ingratitude. For before his Death he expreſſed himſelf to them in ſuch a pathetic Manner, and gave them ſuch fine Leſſons in every Part of their Duty, to be performed both to God and each other. that perhaps cannot be paralleled for Love, Beauty, an Eloquence. See Deut. Chapters iv. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. and xxxii. 4. After the Death of Moſes, Joſbua became their Head and Leader, and he conducted them over the River Jordan, fighting all their Battles, in which he was victorious over all the Nations that oppoſed him, till he brought them into the Land of Canaan, according to God's Promiſe. 5. After the Death of Yoſbua they had no particular Leader or Guide, but every Man did that which ſeemed right in his own Eyes, running after the Gods of the Heathens, making to themſelves Teraphims or Houſhold Images, forſaking the Covenant of the Lord their God, going to every Mount and Valley, and under every green Tree, to worſhip the falſe Gods of the Egyptians, the /mmonites, the Moabites, the Philiſtines, the Zidonians, &c. and not this alone, but they arrived at ſuch a Pitch of abominable Wickedneſs, as even to make their Children paſs through the Fire; and even offered their Sons and Daughters to Devils. Judges, Chap. xvi. and xvii. Numb. xxi. and xxii. 2 Kings xvii. Exeb. viii. 1 Kings xi. read alſo the Books of the Prophets Iſaiab, Jeremiab, Ex ekiel, &c. 6. The Government or State of the Jews has undergone various Changes, vix. 1i) It was hatriarchal when the Fathers of every Family were Kings an Prieſts in their own Houſes; and after their Deceaſe the Firſt-born had the ſame Power, to take in, caſt out, give, or diſinherit, bleſs, curſe, and puniſh with BOOK OF KNOW LEDGE. is the Power and Command of Moſes and Joſbua. (3.) It afterwards became ariſtocratical in thè. Time of the Juge- and alſo the Intervals between the Death of one udge and the chooſing of another, for then they were ruled and judged by the Sanhedrim, viæ. by the Authority of the great Court of the ſeventy Elders. (4.) Aſter this it was monarchical under Saul, their firſt King, and ſo continued in Judah till their Captivity, which was about 520 Years. (5.) In the Time of their Captivity they were under various Changes of Government, from Zeribbabel to Fobn Hircanus. (6.) They again became a monarchical and regal State, under twelve different King. 7. The Jews acknowledge the written Law of Moſes compreheriding the Ten Commandments, &c. but they prefer the Oral Law much before it; for they ſay this is the Explanation or true Annotation of the written Law; and that it was given to Moſes in the Mount, at the ſame Time the written Law was given; that he communicated it to Joſhua; Joſbua to the ſeventy Elders; theſe gave it to the Prophets; from thence it came into the great Synagogue; and there by the wiſeſt Reòbbies it was digeſted into Order; and, when finiſhed, was called the Talmud, or Holy Book, being, they ſay, the very Foundation of the written Law of Moſes, as that is very ſcanty and deficient, and the Talmud explains all the doubtful Paſſages, and is ſo fine a Supplement, that nothing is to be compared with the moſt holy Talmud. 8. The Ceremonies and Worſhip of the geus are ſo many and ſo different. it would be impoſſible, with our Plan, to relate themVparticularly; but concerning their Opinions, thus much may be ſaid, That they believe in one God only, the Creator of Heaven and Earth: That he is ſelf-exiſtent, immortal, abſolute, and irreſiſtible: That he alone is to be worſhipped, and that without a Mediator: That he knows and governs all our Actions: That Moſes was the greateſt Prophet of all others: That the Law which was given to him is of divine Authority, ãnd delivered by divine Inſpiration: That all its Precepts are immutable, and that we are to do what this aw commands, and avoid what it forbids: That the ſhall be raiſed, and every Man be judged according to his orks. 9. The Jews did always, and do ſtill obſerve and keep certain Feaſts or Feſtivals, viæ. (1.) Their Sabbath. (2.) The Paſſover, or Feaſt of unleavened Bread, kept at Eaſter. (3.) Their Pentecoſt, kept at lt hitſuntide. (4.) The Feaſt of Tabernacles, kept for ſeven Days, during which Time they uſed to live in Booths, Ze. (5.) The Feaſt of Trumpets. (6.) The Feaſt of Atonement, or Expiation. (7.) The Feaſt of New Moons, being the firſt Day of their Months. (8.) The ſabbatical Year, or Year of Reſt, being every ſeventh Year, in which they neither tilled the Ground, ſowed or reaped; this was in Commemoration of the Sabbath itſelf. 9) The Feaſt of Dedication. (10.) The Purim, or Feaſt of caſting Lots. (11.) The Y ear of Jubilee, called the Sabbath of ſabbatical Years, or every ſiſtieth Ycar, at which Time or Feaſt all Places or Eſtates returned to thoſe who ſold them, and all Slaves were ſet at gsurfect Liberty, &c. 10. The Orders of Men among them were, (1-) The High-Prieſt, of which Aaron was the firſt, and his Firſtborn after him in lineal Deſcent. This firſt HĩighPrieſt, Aaron, was undoubtedly a lively Image or Type of our High-Prieſt, the Son or the living God. Hebr. Chap. iii. and v. ſ2.) The common Prieſthood, which belonged particularly to the Sons of Levi. (3.) The Nethenims, (which were no FJews, but Gibeonites, Joſ. ix.) who were Hewers of Wood, and Drawers or Procurers of Water, and were Singers in the Service of the Temple. (4.) Elders or Miniſters of the Synagogue, ſome of which were called, (5.) Sheliac Zibbor, or the Meſſenger or Angel of the Church. (6.) The Cheſanims, or Overſeers, who had the Charge of the Synagogue, and kept the Book of the Law, and Liturgies, 8a5 all the Utenſils. (7.) The Chaxan, who ſtood by to overlook and direct thoſe who read the Law and the Prophets. (8.) The lInterpreter, whoſe Province was to render the Leſſons which were read to the People in Hebrew into the Chaldea Language, the common People having quite forgot the Hebrew Tongue in the Time of or taken out of the Law of Moſes, the fews call Torab, and the Explanation or Paraphraſe upon it, they call the Targum. . . Oſ the SECTS of the JEws, &c. 1. The Phariſees, who were the moſt noted Sect among the Fews, and in reſpect of which the others were caled Diſſenters: They profeſſed or received the written Canon of the Scripture, and held all Manner of Traditions, and Superſtitions of their own Invention: They are particularly pointed out for their Pride in chooſing the chief Seats at all public Aſſemblies, were remarkable for their going about making long Prayers, to be ſeen of Men, and to be eſteemed in the Eye of the Public more religious than their Neighbours, always uatching other People's Actions, and finding Fault with every Trfle. . 2. Scribes; theſe were of two Sorts, the one taught, tranſcribed, and interpreted the Law and the Prophets in the Schools; the other belonged to or profeſſed the Civil Law, and were called Latyers. . 3. The Sadducees were a Sect among the Fets, that with the Phariſees believed the written Law, and the Doctrines of the Reſurrection, Angels, and Spirits; but at laſt fell away therefrom, and embraced and maintained many falſe and impious Principles, denying the Reſurrection of the Dead, and the Being of Angels and Spirits; they were the very Riſe of the Epicureans, and cur modern Deiſts are greatly indebted to them, for their early Precedent and Example, in denying ſupernatural Power, and oppoſing every Thing that has not ocular Demonſtration. 4. The Samaritans were a Sect of mongrel Fews or Heathens; ſome however conformed to the Moſaic Law, but rejected all other Iraditions, and ſaid chat God ought to be worſhipped on Mount Gerizim, and not at Jeruſalem. You read in St. John, Chap. iv. that the Jews hated them ſo much, that they had no Dealings or Connection with them. 5. Ihere was another Sect, but not of much Note, called Karrites; theſe were ſuch Jews as abided wholly by the written Law of Moſes, rejectiug the Oral Law, and many other Traditions and Superſtitions of the Yeuws. There are many of this Sort among the Jews to this Day. 6. Herodians, or the Admirers and Followers of Herod the Great, whom they honoured with ridiculous Solemnities and Orations, believing him to be the Meſſiah, at other Times extolled him ſo as to call him God. See Matth. Chap. xiv. Luke, Chap. xiii. Acts, Chap. xii. 7. Publicans; theſe were only Officers, who collected Tribute, or gathered in the Taxes impoſed by the Roman Emperors upon the Jews, who never could eaſily ſubmit to ſuch Taxations, thereſore hated both the Impoſer and the Collectors of ſuch Taxes. 8. Another Set of Officers were called Maſorites; they examined all the Bible throughout very ſtrictly, and then put the Meaning of the Text, or diſficult Words, into the Margin, (which they call the Kert) right againſt the difficult or wrong Word, which they called Celib. Thus much, Tyro, for a general Hint of the Jewiſb Religion, Rites, &c. but for the general and particular Hiſtory of their Wars, Tranſactions, and Viciſſitudes of their State, from Time to Time, I refer you to Fosephus's Hiſtory of the Feus. . : Tyr. I am highly obliged to you for the Information you have given me, Philomathes. S E C T. VII. Of PAG ANI s M. Tyr. What is implied by Paganiſim ? hil. The Religion of the Sudhens or their Adoration and Worſhip of Idols and falſe Gods. Tyr. How and what were the Gods they worſhipped ? Phit. Not only Gods in the ſuppoſed Eorm of Men, ſuch as fupiter, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, Venus, Diana, &c. but even Birds, Beaſts, Fiſhes, creeping Things, as alſo Trees, Plants, and Vegetables. Tyr. Pray give me an Account of theſe Heathen Deities, their Origin, Titles, &c. puil BOOK OF ENOWLEDG E. 347 Phil. I will, as far as Time and Room will allow of, but this I wiſh rather to do under the Head of Mythology, which I ſhall very conciſely treat of hereafter; thoreſote we ſhall at preſent converſe upon Mahometaniſm. S E C T. VIII. Of MA H O M E T AN I S M. Tyr. What is Mahometaniſm ? Phil. The Religion of thoſe who profeſs and practice the Tenets of Mahomet. Tyr. Wherein does it partioulary conſiſt? Phit. (1.) That there is but one God, and he ought to be worſhipped. (2.) That the ſame God raiſed up various Prophets in the World, and that we ought to eſteem them as his Meſſengers, and obey them. ſa That Mahomet himſelf was one of the Head of theſe Prophets. (4.) They believe in Angels and Spirits, the Reſurrection and Day of Judgment. (5.) They hold vith the Duties of Prayer, Faſting, Alms-giving, &c. Tyr. Who, and what was Mahomet ? Phil. (1.) Mahomet was Son of Abdollab, of the Tribe of the Karaiſbes, his Mother's Name Amena : He was born at Mecca, a City of Arabia, A. D. 571. (2.) His Father dying while he was young, he Ieft him to the Care of li. ncle Abu Tuleb, a conſiderable Merchant. and he uſed to go with Camels trading to Syria. (3. Mahomet, it is ſaid, lived with his Uncle till he was about 25 Years old, at which Time one of his Uncle's Acquaintance, a great Merchant in Mecca, died, and left his Effects to Cadigha, his Wife, who invited Mahomet to tranſact his Buſineſs, which he did, and in three Y ears after married her, he being then about 28 Years of Age. (4.) Mahomet, trading largely to Egypt, Paleſtine and Syria, knew well the Opinion both oſ the Yews and Chriſtians, and their different Sentiments of Religion; and therefore being well known, and havin Æ me perſuaſive Powers over both, he bethought himiclt, that the beſt Way to be admired would be to frame, compoſe, and broach ſome new Syſtem of Religion, ſuitable to both Parties, which drew in Numbers of every Sect and Perſuaſion. (5.) In order to this, he. y by Degrees, not only grew very abſtemious in all Manne of ſuperfluous Eating and Drinking as uſual before Men but every Morning withdrew into ſome ſolitary Place or Cave, and there (as is reported) ſpent his Time in Abſtinence, Faſting and Prayer; but others ſay, he reſorted to theſe private Places, with divers Prieſts and Monks, and conſulted with them concerning this new Scheme of Impoſture. Thoſe that approved of it, he careſſed, and ſuch as did not he diſcarded, and being now a Man of great Power, his Ambition raiſed him to the Pitch of Sovereignty; ſo that at laſt, whatever Mahomet was pleaſed to ſpeak of, preach, or publiſh, few or none dared to gainſay or contradict. (6.) Having laid his Plan ſo well, the next Thing was to make fonverte to his new Syſtem of Impoſture; and thereore begins with his Wife, Cadigha, telling her how the Lord had appeared to him in dilferent Places and Times, both by Dreams, Viſions, and Voice, and had called him to be a Prophet among the People; but ſhe was not eaſily perſuaded into ſuch Stories, and told him ſhe believed they were only Fancies and Deluſions of his own; but Mahomet willing to convert his Wife rather by Perſuaſion than Foree, took into his Houſe a fugitive Monk, Prieſt or Friar, (whoſe Name is ſuppoſed to be Zal Abu, or Abu Taleb) and he confirmed to her all that Mahomet had told her, with the Addition of his having ſeveral Times converſed with the Angel Gabriel, and tht he had himſelf heard ſtrange and terrible Voices talking with him in Caves and different Places: By this Atteſtation, and other Schemes of Impoſture, contrived by Mahomet, and his impious cringing Votaries, they at laſt brought over Cadigha to believe every Thing that was ſaid concerning the Miſſion of her Huſband, whom ſhe at laſt confeſſed and believed to be a Prophet indeed. (7.) Having l Stratagem made his Wife a ſtrong and powerful Proſelyte, he ſoon made his whole Houſhold ſo; prevailing upon his Servants and Slaves to adhere cloſely to his Doctrine, by a Promiſe of their Freedom: They accordingly accepted it; and he made a Law, which remains to this Day, that all Slaves embracing bis Religion or Tenets ſhall be made free. (8.) Mahomet having accompliſhed his rur poſe thus far, now acted more openly, and converting ſome Principuls of the City of Mecca, he publicly declared himſelf a Prophet, ſent from God to convert them from Paganiſm to his true Religion. (9) He was never neglectful to aſſert the conſtant Attendance and Preſcnce of the Angel Gabriel, and as poſitively aſſerted that God had raiſed him up to correct the Errors of all other Prophets, and had revealed his Will and Deſig him of every Ihing he intended ſhould be done herce for the Advantage of his Church on Earth. (10.] I homet, in order to confirm the I'ruth of all he ſaid, anu jealous of not being belicued by the People in general, nroceeded vet further, and ſaid, that God himſel?, by the Angel Gabriel, gave him an Invitation to his foly Habitation, and accordingly he went thither. (11.) Mahomet alſo acted ſtrongly. upon the Paſſions of his Followers, by his deſcribing Heaven and Hell as Places of future Rewards of Virtue and Vice: For, as he lived in the Torrid Zone, (where there is no Want of Heat) he accordingly told thoſe Converts that embraced his octrine, that they ſhould certainly go to Hedven, and there enjoy Pleaſures equal to their moſt exalted Wiiſhes, vitx. Women, ever young, beautiful, and obliging; ſhady Walks, ever green, cool, and pleaſant; delightful Rivers and Streams; delicious Fruits of. all Sorts, and an eternal, uninterrupted Enjoyment of all Manner &ſ Dainties and Delicacies: But to all ſuch as held him or his Doctrine in Contempt, he pronounced their infallihle Condemnation to Hell, which he painted to their Senſes in very terrible Shapes; telling them, .it was a Place where there was nothing but a hot and ſcorching Air, and black Smoke, their continual Food would be Rriars, Thorns, Cinders, Aſhes, and burning Pitch, and their Drink, boiling hot Water, melted Lead, &ce. (12.) Mahomet, however, was oppoſed by many, and being required to work Miracles, or ſhew ſome Signs of his Miſſion, that they might believe, he told them, that God was angry with them for their Diſbelief, and therefore would not ſhew any more Signs and Wonders among them. (13.) Mahomet, however, was reſolved to be revenged of his Oppoſers, for he got an Army togecher, and went to Tudnat ano ſlew all that did not own him as God's great Prophet; telling them at the ſame Time, that as God had ſent Moſes, Jeſus, and other Prophets, who did Miracles, and they would not believe; he had now ſent him to chaſtiſe them with the Sword for their Infidelity. v 14.) Mahomet nevertheleſs knew that the working of Miracles would certainly gæin him more Reſpect, and therefore, as he knew he had no Power to work any, he artfully procured a Set of Men to atteſt they ſaw him do many, vix. that pure Water ſtreamed from between his Fingers; that the Trees went forth to meet him and follow him; that he once clave the Moon in ſunder, and put it together again; that a Shoulder of Mutton once ſpoke to him; with many other ridiculous Stories, by which Mahomet loſt the avour of thoſe, who had any Senſe to think at all, and became an Impoſtor in the Eye of the moſt ſenſible Part, both of Jews, Pagans, and Chriſtians. . Tyr. How could he expect any other? Could he imagine ſuch Nonſenſe as this ſhould be received without Thought and Conſideration? However, if you have any further Account to relate of his Pranks, pray relate them, for they are diverting. Hilll Phil. The moſt remarkable are of his being invited to Heaven; his Converſe with God there, and ſome other ridiculous and blaſphemous Things, I think unworthy of your Notice. ll Tyr. Pray now, my dear Philomathes, give me a little Account thereof, for I am ſure it will divert me more and more. ll Phil. Obſerve thent lil 2. Of Mahomet; Meſra, or Night - fourney to eaven, &c. Mahomet not being yet able to make all the People Proſelytes, contrived another Scheme, which was to retire one Night from his own Houſe in a very private Manner, and return the next Morning; during which Time he was carried to Heavemn, had Converſe with God himſelf, and returned with Inſtructions how to rule the People. The Story is as follows. (1.) Mahomet ſ(ubout twelve Years after his pretended Miſſion) being OF ENOWLEDG E. 5 in Bed, heard, at the dead Time of the Night, an uncommon Knocking at his Door, (which was contrived by him and his Cabinet Friends) and ſtarting up ſuddenly, he told nis Wife, that he knew he had a ſpecial Mefſage ftom God, and therefore haſtened down with ill Speed, and there found the Angel Gabriel, who took hin by the Hand, and with a pleaſant Countenance tod him, that he was ſent to conduct him to Heaven, is beirig a Favourite of God, and that he would there ſee Wonders, and learn Myſteries paſt Man's Underſtamding. Gabriel had ſeventy Pair of large expanded Wings, and brought with him Alborat, or the white ind holy Mule, for Mahomet to ride on. (2.) Gabriel bade him mount with Speed; but as Alborat had not carried any Prophet to Heaven ſince Chriſt, he was now grown idle and ſkittiſh, and  would not ſuffer Mahomet to molnt him, till he promiſed the Beaſt to get him a Place of Eaſe and Reſt in Paradiſe. (3.) Adahoes by this Promiſe mounted quietly, and Gubriel taking hold of the Bridle, they arrived at Veruſalem in an Inſtant of Time. ſ(1.) Mahomet proceeded to the Temple, at the Gates of which he was met by Moſes and all the departed Prophets, who hailed him, and accompanied him with Joy into the Temple, where they had ſome Converſation upon his Mifſion and Journey; and before their partin they all deſired his particular Prayers for them, an modeſtly left him. (5.) Mahomet now returned out of the Temple, found a Ladder of Luight fixt from the Earth to the firſt Heaven. He aſcended it with Gabriel, having firſt tied ſpoor] Alboraæ to a Rock, till he retumed. (6.) They ſoon arrived: at the firſt fleaven; which was pure Silver, where he ſaw Adam, who, after thanking God for ſo great and good a Son, he deſired Mahomet to remember him in his Prayèrs. Here he ſaw alſo Angels, Mèn and Beuſts; in all Shapes; but parcularly a Coek, whoſe Head reached from the firſt to the ſecond Heaven, though the Diſtance was ſo great that it will take (he ſays) soo Ycare Journey to arrive tere. This Coek is decked with Pearls; and God ſings ur ſpeaks to it every Morning, and then it crows; and fus all the Cocks in Heaven and Earth to crowing alſo. .) From hence they aſctſded tò the ad, 3d, 4th, gen. 2 i th, 6th, and 7th Heaven. In the ad Heaven he ſaw Noaqo in the 3 Abraham, in the 4th Jobn, in the sth Moſe in the 6th Yohn the Baptiſt, with whom he had mũc Talk, and they all recommended themielves to h Prayers. He alſo ſaw in the 3d Heaven the Ang: of Death, the Diſtance between whoſe Eyes would tak a Journey of 200 Years; who takes an Account of a Perſons that ever were horn, and when they die h ſtrices their Names out of the Book. (8) Muhom: now atrived at the 7th Heaven, and hoere he ſaw Jeſu. and aſter ſome Talk deſired that Jeſus would pray fo him. Paſſing on further he ſaw an nnumerable Com pany, one of which he could not help remarking, h having ſeventy thouſand Heads, and in every Head ſe venty thouſand Tongues, and every Tongue utterin ſeventy thouſund diſtinct. Voices at once, praiſing Go Night and Day. (9.) Mabomet being now at. the 7tl Heaven, Gabriel now told him he muſt leave him, bu gave him Directions which way to proceed to th Throne of God; and after paſſing through Snow, man Floods of mighty Waters, and other, great Difficultiehe at laſt heard a great but gracious Voice, ſaying, Mahomet, beloved of God, ſalute thy Creator. Ihei he came to a Place which fir exceeded the Sun for Ligh and Brightneſs:RHere he ſaw the Throne of God which ſurpalles al Ihought or Deſcription; on the right Side of which was written in Arabic, theſe Words LA ELLA ELLALLAH, MOHAMED RESUL OLLAH which is, There is no God but God, and Mahomet hi Prophet. (10.) Mahomet then drawing nearer, ſav God ſitting on his Throne; but did not ſec his Facc becauſe he had ſeventy thouſand Veils over it; but h ſays, God laid his Hand upon him, as a Mark of hi Favour towards him, but it was ſo extremely cold tha it ſtruck through the very Marrow of his Backbone But God very tenderly withdrew it, and familiarly en tered into Converſation with him; communicating u him the hidden Myſteries of the Law, and inveſted hit with a Power above any other, and laid a particuli Chuarge upon him to Rortes 2 the ſame to all M Xind upon his Return. (11.) Mahomet being diſmiſl from the Preſence of God, returns to Gabriel, ho coĩ ducted him back again to Yeruſalem, where, mounting the white Mule AlboraÆ, he retúrned to Mecca the ſame Night he ſat out upon this Journey. lil Tyr. A ſurpriſing Relation indeed But how is it poſlible for any Man in his Senſes to believe any Part oſ it, ſince Mahomet himſelf has acknowledged, that the Journey he performed in an Hour and a Half would take above four thouſand Years to complete. Phil. He has ſo; and this ſhews Mahomet's Judgment in Aſtronomy and Religion were much alike; for it is demonſtrated by Calculation, that at the Rate of forty Miles a Dav, it would take up five thouſand five hundred Years to arrive at the Diſtance of the Sun onl. whoſe Diſtance bears but little Proportion to the Diſtance oſ ſome Stars, or the empyreal Heaven; and therefore conſequently falls ſo infinitely ſhort of the Diſtance of the higheſt Heaven, that it will bear no Compariſon at all. Very true; but pray how did Mahomet manage Affairs aſter his Return'? Phil. You muſt naturally conclude, that ſome belived what he aſſerted, and others would nor could not; therefore it cauſed Contentions and Inſurrections; and the principal Men of Mecca were reſolved to examine m more cloſely upon it, and puniſh him accordingly; but he having timely Notice, fled ſecretly with his Party to Medina, a large City in Arabia; there he propagated his new Syſtem, built a Place for the Exereiſe of his new-fangled Religion, and iſſued out Orders that all mputation of Time ſhould begin the Day of his Flight, called Hegira: From hence commences the Mahometan ÆÆra, which was on July the 16th, in the Year of Chriſt 622. . Tyr. I am obliged to you, Philomathes; but how did he proceed in Medina è& ; bil. The ſame as in Mecca, always creating freſh Diſturbances, by propagating Lies and Impoſtures; but the People in general not believing his blaſphemous Tales, nor embracing his ridiculous Tenets, he (like the Ghurch, of Rome) took up the Sword of Chaſtiſement, ſtrictly forbidding all his Soldiers or Diſciples to diſpute or parley with the Chriſtians, or any other Sect, concerning the Authority of his Miſſion or Religion but to cut off all that dare to oppoſe it, and that woulc not immediately promiſe to embrace it. Thus he wen on till the ſeventh Year of his Hegira or Flight from Mecca, and then proceeded to Chaibar in Arabia, and was entertained by one Hoveſb, whoſe Daughters Name was Zamath, and ſhe being no Friend to Mahomet, was seſolved to try whether he was indeed a Prophet or not; and therefore poiſoned a Shoulder of Mutton, which he and his Friends were to partake of one Night at her Father's; and though ſhe was deſired to deſiſt from ſo raſh an Undertaking, ſhe ſaid ſhe could not, for that her Conſcience was very eaſy in the Deſign, as her Heart had continually told her, that ſhe would certainly do God and Mankind great Service, in cutting off ſuch a Tyrant and Impoſtor. She accordingly did it, and they had not eaten long before Baſber, one of his great Friends, fell down dead; but the Shoulder of Mutton told the Prophet what was done to it, upon which he ſpit out what he then had in his Mouth; however, he had eaten enough to anſwer Zamath's Deſign, for from that Time he lingered, pined, and waſted away, and died on his Birth-day in the City of Medina (being, according to their Account, juſt 63, and by ours 61 Years of Age) where he was buried, and not ſuſpended in the Air by Means of large Load Stones, as is falſely reported. Tyr. And what did his Followers do after his Death' Phil. Mahomet left behind him a Book which he compiled, called the Alcoran, or rather Coran, containing Rules ſor their Faith and Practice. This Book is held with ſuch Reverence, that whoever touches it with unwaſhed Hands is put to Death. It contains nothing but a Religious Jargon and Inconſiſtencies; ſuch as the Chapter of the Elephant, another of the Cou, the Fly, &c. &c. The Reaſon (it is ſaid) that the Mahometans hold this Book in ſuch Veneration is, becauſe Mahomet told them it was wrote with the Finger of God, upon exceeding fine Parchment, made the Skin of the very Ram which Abraham offered up for a burnt Offering inſtead of Iſuac his Son, and God ſent it from Heaven to him in a Roll, ſealed up by the Hand of the Angel Gabriel. BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE. s5 Thus much, Tyro, concerning Mahometaniſm, which to this Day is profeſſed in Turkey, and ſeveral other Places in the Eaſt. . Tyr. I am very much obliged to you, Philomathes, for this Information: and now pray give me Leave to remind yo. of your former Promiſe of giving me a more particula- Account of Chriſtianity, and the different Opinions c thoſe that profeſs it. ; Phi. I will. . l S E C T. IX. Of Chriſtianity, with a conciſe Account of the different ſonimni Conemandas, and eren af fyortimie the various Profeſſors of it. I. Of CHRISTIANITZV ni What do you mean by the Word Chriſlianity? hil. ( oj Chriſtianity, in the general Senſe, or common Acceptation of the Word, ſignifies a true Belief in Chriſt and his Doctrine, in Oppoſition to Idolatry and Paganiſn. But, (2.) it moro ſtrictly implies, not only a bare Belief in Chriſt, but a conſtant Perſeverance in all good Works; and an Abhorrence oſ, and abſtaining from every Thing that is evil, according to the Doctrinõ and Examples, which, hoth He and his Apoſtles taught and pracaled. and which are. ſo evidently ſet forth to us in the holy Scriptures.FHe who does this is a Chriſtian indeed, without puying any Regard to the Doctrines and Ceremonies of any particular national Church, Sect, or People; the Manner of Worſhip being only the Mode of Religion, but not Religion itſelr : For all Chriſtians, of all Perſuaſions whatever, acknowledge there is but one Way of worſhipping Godthat is, in Spirit and in Truth. See St. John, Chap. iv. Ver 24. . Tyr. It is very true, Philomathes; and as every national Church has its different Way of Worſhip, and every Sect among us different Notions of Theology, how can I, that am but young, or how can thoſe that are quite ignorant, know when they are right or wrongl? Phil. Very eaſily; by a conſfant Reading and Feruſal of the ſacred Books of the Old and New Teſlament. Tyr. But you know, Sir, that they are not, ſo eaſy to Phil. I grant they are not; but this is no Proof that they might not be better underſtood than they are, if they were read more conſtantly and with due Attention.But alas, Tyro, we never want a Plea for any Occaſion. (1.) Aſk yourſclf and your Acquaintance, who plead this ſgnorance of the ſacred Writings, whether you or they have read them ſo often as you ought to do? (2.) How is it poſfible to become àcquainted with the Knowledge of any Art or Science, without either converſing with Perſons that underſtand it, or attentively reading ſuch Authors as treat upon it? ſ.. The greateſt Reaſon then that the Scriptures are underſtood no better, is, becauſe uney are neglected ſo much. (4.) Ihis is evident, for you often meet with Men that are tolerable good Scholars, and profeſs themſelves Members of the Church, who are totally ignorant, mot only of the Senſe and Meaning of a plain Text of Scripture, but are almoſt totally ignorant that there is any ſuch Text or Sentence at all. (5.) If youtell them, you are ſurpriæed they dont remember ſuch and ſuch remarkable Paſſages, they immediately anſwer, that they have no Memory to retain Things like other Perſons. Behold what a ſeemingly modeſt Anſwer here is, to cover or excuſe a wilful Neglect, ſince the very Perſons who own their Deficiency in this reſpect, would conſider it a great Affront and Inſult, if any one ſhould dare to call in Queſtion their Knowledge, Memory, or Capacity in comprehending and retaining Matters in general. (6.) It is evident then, that it is not ſo much the Want of Capacity or Opportunity, as the Want of Reſolution and Delight. All who àre reſolved to read the Scriptures with theſe Advantages, I dare venture to aver, will ſoon underſtand all thoſe neceſſary Parts proper and ſuſficient for the Inſtruction, Duty, and Practice of a Chriſtian in every State of Life; and not theſe onlr- but would very ſoon be ready ſor capable) tfo give an Anſuer 10 every Man that aſteth them oſ the Reaſin of their Faith. St. Peter, Chap. ili. Ver. 15. (7.) In ſhort, was there an Embargo laid upon the Word of God in Great Britain, as there is in the Church of Rome, we might then have a juſt Plea; but our Situation, you know, is quite different from theirs: For there is no Doubt buſ - lse many many of them would be very. glad to read it oftener, but dare. not; but all Sects among us may not only read it when, and whereſoever they, pleaſe, but are even preſſed upon and iſvited to read it oftener, yet willlnot. Behold what a ſtrange Abuſe of Libęrty is here' What a grievous Neglect of Dutyis this: To let ſlip all Opportunities of reading and. per.hat ſucti Things as would enable us, not only to ſtand Proof againſt all the Adverſaries and Oppoſers of revealed Religion; but would furniſh our Minds with ſuch Knowledge as would give us unknown Satisfaction, and turn out much more to our Advantage than we at preſcnt conceive. 3. Qſ the ldifferent Tenets of the principal Sects, or Pro' &. is ſeſſors lopesibuitr illli 9yr. I ſhoudd be obliged to you, Philomathes, to give me a ſhòrt Actount bf the Ténets oſ the various Profeſors of the Chriſtian Religion. . Phil. To do this perfectly is almoſt impoſſible; therefore, you muſt be conteht if I tell you no more than the Tenets, Articles of Faith, and Mamer of Worſhip of the Profeſſors of the thtee priincipal Churches in Europe, viã, theè Church 6f Rome, the Church of England aid the Diſſenters. llllli l .7.. r tho Chureb of Rome.. p1 What, do you mean by Roman Catholies, & aniſtstsst c2. lil hil. The,æ pllomer ùi Profſeſſors of the Doctrine of the Romiſh Ghurch, or Bapiſtrty uu qua. Whnat qtè sii.plꝶcipal. Tenets oſ the Chureh of m hiiibù Piil. Jne ſay or, belicve, (1,). That qqus Chriſt is one of the Perſons in the moſt Holy Trinity. (2.) That he came from Heaven, took our Nature upon him, and ſuffered Death upon the Croſs. ſæ ) That before lie aſcended to Heaven, he inveſted the Apoſtle Peter vith the Power. of Infalbbilit/ (4.) That he gave him the Keys of Heaven and: Hell, with a full Power of remitring or retaining the Sins 6f Men. (5.) That in the Year of nriſf àon the Mpoſte Peter werit to Rome, and governec governed the Church there as ſupreme Biſhop above a⸗ Years, and was at laſt crucified with his ſt downwards. (6.) The Roman Catholics believe, that the ame Power and Authority which was veſted in the Apoſtle Peter deſcended to every next ſuccefſive Biſhop or Pope of Rome, by an uninterrupted Succeffion. (7.) Every ſuecceſſive bone, therefore, they ſay is God's Vicegerent, und ſupreme Head of all Nations, and of every nominal CHureh on Earth. (8.) They are further taught to believe tſiat he has a Power to create or ſet up Kings, and to depoſe them; and to ordain Biſhops and Prieſts, and excommunicate them at Pleaſure. ſ9 They believe that the Pope has a Power to grant ndulgencies to break through all Oaths and Promiſes, and to allow of all Mamnner of Sins, and then abſolve them. (10.) They believe in a Purgatory, or Place of Fire, to purify the Souls of che dep ted; and that the Prieſts, by offering up or ſaying can deliver iheir Souls from this State of Priſon and Miſery, and transfer them into Joy and Bliſs*. (11.) They. helieve that Feſus Chriſt, after he was crucified, deſcended perſonally into Hell, and releaſed from thence all the Souls, of tnè former Saints. iæ.) They aſſert that ihe bleſſed Virgin Mary is the Mother of God, and that ſhe atónes for the Souls of them that adore and worſThip her on Earth: Therefore her Picture, with the Picture of other Saints, ought to be had in great Reſpect and Veneration. tis They profeſs to do Works of Supererogation, and therefore they frequently ſell good Works to the Ignorant, and tell them that they will expiate any Crime. (14.) Their mendicant Prieſts go in a very naſty and be reſs, to make the Laity believe what Poverty they ſuffer for the Name of ſdui thou at the ſame Time they are very rich; for by this crafty Piece of Hypocriſy they excite Pity and Compaſſfion, and get a great deal of Money. (i5s.) They believè there are ſeven Sacraments, viz. Baptiſm, Confirmation, * It is to be obſerved, that theſe wrio leave Legacios to the Prieſts, or have rich and good Friends, their Souls are conſtantly prayed for, though it is many Years before they are releaſed, and. coſt a great deal, But Dean Savift ſuys, no Money, no Pater Noſ⸗ the Euchariſt, Penance, extreme Unction, Orders, and Moarriage. (16.) They forbid the eating of Fleſh in Time of Lent, and on certain Faſt Days; but notwithſtanding their. ſtrict Orders of Abſtinence and Faſting, they will eat, devour, and gormandiZe Fiſh and other Things moſt profuſely. Thus, Phariſee-like, they ſtrain at Gnats and ſwallow Camels. (u7.) I hey impoſe upon the Ignorant and Unthinking, inducing them to believe the ridiculous Doctrine of Tranſubſtantiation ; that is, aſter the Prieſt has bleſſed or conſecrated the Bread and Wine in, the Sacrament, the Symbols or Elements are then no more Bread and Wine, but really the very Body and Blood of our Lord Vſur Cbriſt: And what renders this Impoſition more ſhõcking is, that though they impoſe it upon the Laity as a very material Article of their Faith, they themſelves know it is quite repugnant to Faith itſelf, is a ſelf-evident Contradiction to the Word of God, and the philoſophical Law of Matter, and immediately contrary to Reaſon itſelf. Notwithſtanding theſe abominablèe and flagrant Abſurdities, yot they are very jealous and zealous in the Cauſe of their Reſigion, or rather Superſtition, making it a damnable and heinous Sin in all ſuch as will not adhere moſt ſtrictly to their infallible Dictates. (18.) They are exceedingly aſiduous to gain Converts, by a particular Method and a long unwearied Patience and Diligence, in every Country but their own, to bring over ignorant Souls by Flatteries and fair Promiſes; but it is not ſo where they have Power, for then they inſiſt upon a Belief and Compliance with every Thing; otherwiſe their Love is turned into Cruelty, their Zeal into Inhumanity, and their Perſuaſions into bloody Inquiſitions. (Laſtly,, Theſe and many other ridiculous Impoſitions, and, many Cruelties continually impoſed upon the Conſciences and Perſons of Men in all Nations, occaſioned a large Body of People to diſſent, ſeparate from, and roteſt againſt Popery or the Romiſb Church, and therefore are called Proteſtants, be they of what Sect or Denomination they pleaſe; and the Church of Rome, without Distinction, call al ſuch Proteſtants Heretics, und they all partake ol Tyr. One would hardly believe that a Church which pretends to have its Sanction from God, and its Examples from his holy Apoſtles, can poſſibly be ſo ridiculous in its Principles, and ſo cruel in its Practice. Phil. This the Hiſtory of all Nations ever allowed of; England has ſeverely felt her Rod, and the Proteſtants of many neighbouring Nations are not Strangers to her ſuperſtitious Follies and her cruel Inquiſitions und Perſecutions to this Day. il N. B. As there are many Perſons who are not eaſily perſuaded that the Tenets of the Church of Rome are ſo bad as are ſpoken of, I have been the more particular in pointing out and as there are many of the Roman Catbolic Perſuaſion, who would ſain poſſeſs the more ignorant Part of Mankind, that the Church of Rome is the beſt of Churches, and the Stories concerning the many Cruelties againſt the Proteſtants are all falſe: But that the Reader may ſee what Love they bear to all other Sects and Perſuaſions of Men. I thought proper to inſert the following Lines, in order to caution every Perſon to take Care how they are led aſide by the luuſible Inſinuations of her Prieſts, or the pretended Love of her miſſaries, while they lie perpetually under their execrable Cuiſes and Imprecations Here follows the Pope's dreadful Curſe upon Heretics; being the ſolemn Form of Excommunication, and which may be ſeen in the Ledger Book of the Church of Rocheſter in Kent. The Pope being ſeated, and everò. Thing ready for ſuch a Solemnity, he, or ſome Delegate appointed, ronounces againſt all other Churches, Sects, and Perſuanons of Men, as follows. i 1. The Dec aration alone. α By the Authority of God Almighty, the Father,  the Son, and the H ly Ghoſt; and alſo of the holy  Canons, and of the undefiled Virgin Mary, Mother and Patroneſs of our Saviour, and of all the celeſtial Virtues, Angels, Arch-angels, ſhrones, Dominions,  Powers, Cherubims, and Seraphims; and of the holy  Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangeliſts, and of  all the holy Innocents, who in the Sight of the Holy  Lamb are found worthy to ſing the new Song of the  holy Martyrs, holy Confeſſors, holy Virgins, and of u all the Saints, togẽther with allthe Holy of God, we & do hereby excommunicate and anathematiæe him nikem, & Malefactor or Malefactors. And from the Threſhold uof the holy Church of God Almighty we ſequeſter, u that he or they may be tormented, diſpoſed of, and & delivered over with Dathan and Abiram, and with  thoſe that ſay unto the Lord God, Depart from us. & And as the I ire is quenched with Water, ſo let the  Light of him or them for evermore, unleſs it ſhall res pent him or them to make Satisfactiorl. Amen. . 2. After this Declaration the Curſes follow, which are repeated by the whole Aſſembly, then gathered toether. LllE . s a (1.) May the Father, who created Man, curſe him  or them. (2.) May the Son, who ſuffered for us, u curſe him or them. (3.) May the Holy Ghoſt, who  was given to us in our Baptiſin, curſe him or them,  (4) May the holy: Croſs; which Chriſt for our Sal-  vation, triumphing over his Enemies, aſcended, eurſc & him or them. cof May the holy and eternal Virgin & Mary, Mother oſf God, curſe him or them. (6.) May u St. Michael, the Advocate of holy Souls, curſe him uor them. (7.) May all the Angels and Archangels, Principalities and Powers, and all the heavenly Hoſts,  curſe him or them. (8.) May St. Vobn, the iſſief  Forerunner of. Chriſt, ourſe him or themr. ꝙ May u St. Peter, St. Paul, and. St. Andreus und all othet of  Chriſt's Apoſtles, together with cthe reſt of his Diſ& ciples, and four Evangeliſts, who by their Preaching  converted the whole univerſal World, curſe him or c them. (10.) May the holy and wonderful Company  of Martyrs and Confeſſors, who by their holy Works  are found pleaſing to God Almighty, curſe him or u them. (1r.) May the holy Choir of the holy Vir-  gins, who for the Honour of Chriſt have deſpiſed the  Things of this World, curſe him or them. (12.) May all the Saints, who, from the Beginning of the World u to everlaſting Ages, are found to be beloved of God,  curſe him or thetti. ſlll  (13.) May be or they be curſed wherefoever they & he, whether in their Houſe, or the Field, or the  Highway, or the Path, or. in the Wood, or in the α Water, or in the Church. (14) May he or they be a curſed inliving. in dying, in eating, in drinkinẽ, ir α being hungry, in being thirſty, in faſting, in ſleepin ein ſlumbering, in waking, in walking, in ſtanding Æ hil fiting. in reſting, in p-ſſ-g, in ſh-tt-g, and in Biloodletting.  (15.) May he or ihey be curſed in all the Faculties sof their Body. (16.) May heæ or they be curſed in-  wardly and outwardliv (17.) May bhe or they be e curſed in the Hair of his or their Head. (18.) May  he or they be curſed in his or their Brain. (19.) Ma  be or they be curſed in the Top of his or their Head.  in their Temples, in their Forehead, in their Ears,  in their Eves and Eye-Brows, in their Choeks; in & their Jaw-Bones, in their Noſtrils, in their Teeth, in their Lips, in their Throats, in their Shoulders, sin their Wietits. in their Arms, in their Hands, in s their Fingers, in their Breaſt, in their Heart, in & che interior Part of their Stomach, in their Reins, in  their Thighs, in their Genitals, in their Hips, in c cheir Knees, in their Legs, in their Feet, in cheir & Toes, in their Nails. (20.) May he or they be curſed  from the Crown of their Head, to the Sole of their  Feet, may rfierè be no Soundneſs in him or them.  (ar.) May the Son oſ the living God, with all the s Glory of his Majeſty, curſe him br them, and ma & Heaven, with all their Powers: that move therein, riſe & up againſt him or them, 0 damn him or them, ùnleſs  they ſhall repent, co make Satisfaction. Amen. Amen. u So be it. liili 7 Tyr. Never did I hear any Relation ſo ſhocking as this is I ſnould think this very unpolitical as well as wickesl. lll. USE t Pihil. In Italy, and Countries more immediately under the Pope's Juriſùiction, it may perhaps be political; but plain it is, that through this abſolute, tyrannical, and perſecuting Spirit, the Church of Rome has loſt Ground, and has been ſinking in its Powercever ſincè the glorious Reformation under Martin Luther, in the Reign of ùenry the Eighth, in the Year 1517, and ſbe is abhorred by all Nations on Account of her Cruelties and Perſecu tions. Read Henry and Whiſton, us alſo the Margin of Queen Elixabeth's Bibles on the xiii. xiv. xv. xVi. xvii. xviii. and xix. Chapters of the Revelations. 7 Lo ſyr. yr. Pray tell me what followed aſter the Reformationã Phil. The eſtahliſhed Church, commonly called the Church of England. . 2. Of tbe Church of England.  Waat do you imply by the Churcb of England ? . Rol gion and Worſhip of the People of England, as ,c,. Law eſtabliſhed; it is governed by two Atchbiſhops. Bifhops, and inſèrior Clergy, of whom l Rin is Supreme. hat atc are the prineipal Tenets of the Churoh of e londè bil. You may ſee the Principles of this Church very particularly ſet fortn by and in thirty-nine Axticles, printed and publiſhed in their Book of ommon Prayer or * orm and Ceremonies of Worſhiæm. But I wiſh you would give ſome mort Accou of 0e principal Tenets of the Chureh of England, as to know this may be of Service to fuch of its Eqqlixc; e. who do nut underſtand them; and alſo remove the Prejudice of many others who now accuſe it unjuſtly. Phil. Vour Arguments are juſt. Therefore I ſhall give you an Account of ity acoording to its own Articles, , not tesirgqte sthe ninion of inarn Weritars. yr. SQir Phil. Becauſe the Clerg themſelves are diided into tuo Sorts; ſome being Calviniſts, others Arminians. Tyr. Sir, I.am ſatisfied; proceed now, iſ you pleaſe, to ãequaint me with the Church of Eugland, according to its Artiles or firſt Eſtablifament. Phil. I with (1.) The Church of England has thirtynine Articles, ſome contain the Matter ofFaith which relate torthè Church ofiod, and others are civil Arrcles relating to ĩte Government, Order, and Diſcigune. ſ(2.) The 1ſt, ad, 3d, 4th, and sth Articles ſet ſorth crat there is but one living.and trie God; that in the Godhead there are three Perſons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghoſt, all equal in Power] Majeſty, anth Glory; that? che ſecond Retrſon in this Tri q rimor t0k our Nature ꝶ him, ũnd is: both God mid n united in one iſ that he vas crucified for us in the Fieſh, was buried, roſe the third Duy from the Dead, according te the Scriptures, that he aſcended into Heaven, and there makes continual Interceſſion for us. (3.) They.own (in Art. nine) original Sin, and that by Adem's fitſt Diſobedience or I ranſgreſſion all Mankind are tainted or infected with Evil, have a natural Inclimation to Sin, and therefore are obnoxious to the Wrath oſf Gõd. (4.) In Article tenth, they ſay, that Maãn's: Condition ſince the Fall is ſuch, that: he has no Power, or free Will, of himſelf, to do good Works, acceptable to God. without the Grace of God working with him. (5. The eleventh Article affirms, that we are juſtified by Faith only, and are counted righteous before God, for or through the Merits of Chriſt only. (6.) The twelſth Article recommends the Practice of good Works, and ſays, they are the Prooſs of a true Farth. (7.) ĩ'his Church teaches us in Article thirteenth, that Works done before Juſtification, or before Grace is given, cannot be pleaſunt & God, nor do ſuch Works make us meet to receive Grace, as. they ſpring not from a true and. lively Faith. (8-) The iourteenth Article fiatly denies the Works of Supererogation, and acknowledges that when we have done all we can poſſibly do, we are ſtill unprofitable Servants. (ꝙ.) The ſeventeenth Article trents of the Doctrine of Electiom andi Rredeſtination. (10.) The eighteenth Article ſays; that the: Church holds all Perſons accurſed who ſhall preſume to ſay that any Man is ſaved by the Law, or by any Sect, Profeſſion; or Perſuaſion. (?1.) The twenty-ſecond:Article denies the Romiſ Doctrine of Purgatory; paying Adoration to Angels and Reliques of Saints. (i2:b The twentyfeventh und ſtwen cy-eighth Articles acknowledge cwo Bacraments only; viæ. Bdptiſmm and the Lord's Supper; and ſay, that afeenoConſecrationo the Bread and Wine ate unchanget, and both are to bè received by the Faithful; only in Commemoration of,the Bady and Blood-of Chriſt, broken and ſpilt upon the Croſs. ſr3.) The Churoh holds Infant Baptiſm, requires Godfathers and Godmothers, and marks the Child im the Forehead with the Sign of the Croſe by the Finger dipped in ihe Font: c14.)Theſe are the Articles relating to the Denets of the Church of England : the othe Articles contain only li ules Rules and Orders concerning its Government and Diſb cipline. . iſ iuo O  the Manner of Worſhip. l 1. The Church of England worſhip God, firſt, by. Confeſſion of Sins, then caſling upon his Name in Prayer, Praiſes, and ſinging of Pſalms. The Collects are ſhort Prayers uſed by the Miniſters and People, are allowed to be well ſuited to almoſt all Occaſions; and the whole Way and Manner of Worſhip is regularly and explicitly laid down in the Booc of Common Prayer. 2. As the Romiſb Chureh call all People Heretics who ſeparate from her Communion, ſo the Church of England call all thoſe who ſeparate fromi her Communion Schiſmatics. 11 inn43 v 3. As the Proteſtants ſeparate from the Doctrines of the Church'of Rome, on Account of its Errors and Superſtitions, ſo a certain Set of Men (formerly called Puritans) ſeparated from this Church under the Notion that ſcueral of its Forms and Ceremonies were unwarrantable, and that their Conſcience could riot bear them. 4. All other Sects who profeſs Proteſtantiſm: in. Englouſs but diſſent from the eſtabliſhed Church, are called iſſenters. c.I L85L 413 1,5ſ 1n 5. The Diſſenters are divided into many Sects, viæ. Preſtyterians, Independents, Baptiſts, commoniy. called Anabaptiſis, Quaters, Arians, Arminians, dntinomians, Socinians, Muggletonians, &c. but the moſt general or popular of thict are the Preſbyterians, Independents, and Quaters. uc i1a  tr 1. PRESBYTERIANS yr. What do you mean by Preſtyterians 8æ hil. All thoſe Perſons who deny Epiſcopacy, or the Government of the viſible Church by Htlhobs; or thoſe who aſſert that the Church ſhould be governed by Elders or Breſester- E,ù ul . Tn n what Manner do they chooſe their Miniſters ? hil. By making Choice out of ſeveral Perſons, whom the Elders firſt examine in Principles and Abilities, and when they have fixed upon a Paſtor, Teacher, or Miniſter, they nominate, elect, or ordain him by Eaſting, Prayer, and Impoſition of Hands. Soe Acts, Chap. i. er. 23. to the End. ll l Tyr. How do they govern their Church? Bil. All common Affairs in every particular Church or Aſſembly are regulated by their Miniſter and Elders. (2.) If Queſtions ariſe which require more Judgment to determine, they then appeal to the Miniſters and Elders of other Congregations. (3.) They have yet an higher Appeal than this; and in Caſe of Differences and Diſputes, they call a Court or Synod of the moft able among them, who meet to regulate all Affairs, and adjuſt every Diſpute to the Satisfaction of inferior Congregationse.. 1I I. l tlIII I 15C. 7Tyr. Vers xell; Sir; and pray what are the chief Tenets, and Manner of Worſhip of the Preſbyterians ? Piil. Thdir Tenets, concering God, the Trinity, the Sufferings of Chriſt, &c. &c. are equally the ſame as that of the Articles.of the Church of England; and they baptize Infanto by ſprinkling. and- have Sponſora for them as the Church has, but reſuſe the Names of Godfather and Godmotherr.. t 7ZY5r. What is them Munner of Worſhip p l Dhil- Some havè ànd othei's haue not any regular Form of Prayer, but worfhip by extempore Prayer, Preuching, and ſinging Pſalms; of tham frequenũſy conclude tbeir Prayers: with the Lord's Peayers Thele Secis are rather rminians than Culviniſis. uuLl 2 .IνbEPEνDEντSs. Tyr. What is meant by Independentst8 s8s: Biit The Word itſelf eavries its oun Meaning with it. They aręe a Sect who profeſs themſelves independent of all other Churches or Perſuaſions, of all Councils, Synods, and Juriſdictions, and argue that every Church or Aſſembly of Men have a Power lodged in themſelves; and fherefore deny all Superiority and Subordination. Their Worſhip is the ſamè as the Preſbyterian;, and their Tenets much the ſame, ęxcept it be ſhãt they hold a particular Redemntion, qnd arè in general rather Calviniſts than rminianssssæs. ùlli d44 I nn d ſt ſ 3. ANABAPTISTS Oor BAPTISTS. Tir. What do you mean by Anabaptiſis ? Phil. They are thoſe who oppoſe the Baptiſm of Infants, ſay it is unwarrantable, and that none are prope Objes of this firſt Sacrament but adult Perſons, an ſuch as are capahle of giving Account of their Faith in Chriſt Jeſus, and believe that it is an Ordinance that he enjoined all his Diſciples to follom. They ſay further, that ſprinkling with Water is not Baptiſm, but an Innovation, contrary to the Rules of Scripture, and that therefore nõ Perſon is truly. Baptiæed, who is not dipped into, or buried under Water, in the Name oſ. the Father, Son, and Holy Ghoſfftr. ii Tyr. To dip or plunge into Water is certainly the Method pointed out in Seripture. mBut ray, fro whence ſprang this Sect, and what are their Tenets ant Manner of Worſhinpnæ ĩlũlllũùi Phil. They appeared firſt in England ih 1521, and were the Followers of Nicholas Storat, Mark Stubner, and others, who were Diſciples of Martin Luther, in the Time of Henry VIII. (2.) Their Manner of Wort ſhip ĩs alſo by extemporè Prayer, Praiſes, Preaching, an ſinging Pſalms. (3.) Their Government or Diſciplinè is alſo by Elders, and their Principles are according to the ſeveriteenth Rrticle of the Church of England, being very ſtrong Predeſtinarians. lũlũſll lil 244 . QUAKERS. Tyr. Why are this Sect called Quaâersss . Bhit Becauſe at firſt when they ſpoke or preached they had violènt Shakings or Agitations. E yr. Who was their ſirſt Teacher, and what are their principal Tenets? Phil. Their fitſt Leader was one George Fox, in the Year 1650, who taught that the Light within is more ſufficient to guide Men to Heaven than the Holy Scriptures; but they are now greatly reformed, and pay a great Regard 16 God's Word, but ſtill deny the two Sacraments; and all Manher of Ceremonies. (2.) They refuſe to take any Quth'before à Magiſtrate, and therefore are indulged to give their Affirmation when called upo upon as Witneſſes. (3.) Their Worſhip is very abrupt, any Perſon riſing up to pray or preach according as he is moved. (4.) They pray and then preach, or inſtruct their Congregations in all moral Duties, and ſpeak continually againſt the Modes, Vanities, and Vices of the Age. (5.) They are very plain and ſimple in their Dreſs, and as for Order and Diſcipline in governing their different Aſſemblies and Congregations, and for Unity, Harmony, and brotherly Love, they really exceed any Chriſtian Sect of People or Church in the Univerſe. Oſ the leſſer or more private Sects. 1. Ariani, or the Followers of Arius, who in the Time of Conſtantine the Great, A. C. 315, taught that the Son of God is not equal or conſubſtantial with the Father, but only the firſt of all created Beings. His Opinion was condemned as heretical by the Council of Nice in A. C. 3215 but notwithſtanding this, the Arian inſected the Eaſtern Churches with their Principles, an though they are not a Church or Sect of themſelves, yet they are very numerous to this Day in ſeveral Churches, but particularly in that Church, whoſe Articles teach them quite the contrary. . . 2. Arminians, thoſe who adhere to the Doctrine of Arminus, who ſeparated himſelf from the Calviniſis in the ſixteenth Century, and taught that Predeſtination is grounded on foreſeen Works of Righteoufneſs; that a Man has Power of himſelf to embrace or reject the Motions of the Holy Spirit; and that he may finally fall from Grace aſter Juſtification. 1 i N. B. Ttiugh there is no particular Sect or Church in England under the Appellation of Arminians, yet they are very numerous in all the reformed Churches, except amõngſt the Baptiſts. 3. Antinomians, a Sect who reject not only the Moſaic Law of Ceremonies, but that aſſert alſo that all Manner of good Works, ſuch as Honeſty, Charity, Sobriety; Temperance, Chaſtity, &. ure of no Signification; becauſe good or evil Works neither forward nor hinder a Man in his Salvation; that our Righteouſneſ is already fully complete in the Offering of Chnih and that whoever believes faithfully that the Work of Redemption sa already finiſhed, it is ſufficient, whatever may be his Life and Converſation. There are ſeveral Leaders of this Sect in London, and the two moſt noted Teachers among them were Cudworth of Oxford Marhet, and the famous 7. Relly, of Coachmaker's Hall, London. & 34. Socinians, are thoſe.,who follous the Boctrine oſ one Faustu; Soninus, who taught that ſoſusi Ghriſt was culy mcce ſiſan, and had no hxiſtence lefate the u irgun dary. ME dlλ 2yeſ u è . ctCaluiniſts, or Superlapſarians, the Followers of the noted Reformer Calvin, who taught that Predeſtination is abſolute and unconditional from ãll Eternity, and that God elected certain Perſons before the Foundajion of the World, to eternal Salvation, and Holineſs. of Lire. 1 212 I.ſ,3113. ſF IO i 13113 c st4 6. Lutherans, the Eollowers. oe M. rtin. Luther, the noted Reformer in the Reign of Henry VIII. He wrote againſt Pope Leo X. concerning thè Abuſe of Indulgencies; his chief Tenets were a firm Belief in the Ciinity, and that we are juſtified by Faith only in Jeſus riſt. 1 Cu Hlù l vhi gletonians, the Followers of Lodewict Muggleton, a Journeyman Iaylor, who with one Reeves, in the Year 1647, taught thè People that God himſelf leſt his Glory in Heaven, under the Government of Moſes and Elias, and came down and ſuffered Death on ĩhe Croſs. They deny the Trinity, the Immortality of the Soul, and ſay they have æ Power of ſaving and damning. They frequently aſſemble together in Fields, and in the Evening both Sexes meet ãt Alehouſes or Places appointed, where, after ſome Sort of Preachment, the uiights are immediately put out, and, by the Actions ghat ſollow, it is evident that they don't believe the Soul is immortal. ,.3 9 Tyr. IThis is a ſtrange Sect, indeed But pray what are thoſe whom you call Methodiſts è P i&il. It is a Name given to all ſuch Perſons whoſe Way and Method is to preach in the Fields, or at the Head of any Street; but it is a Name more purticularly given to the Followers of Mr. Whitfield and Weſtl. Biit you are to note, that there is as much Differenct becween Whitfieldians and Weſtleyans, as between any ,s wò l ceæ two Sects, the former believing that Salvation is ohtained by Faith alone in Chriſt Jeſus, and that the Love oſ God to his Elect cannot be broken off: Whereas the other Sect believe a Man is juſtifie by Works and Grace, and that it is poſſible for a Man to go on in Defrocooſ Holineſ; till he arrives at laſt even to a State of erfection in this Life. The principal Places of Worſhip for the &hitfieldians are the Tabernacles in Moorfields and Tottenham-Court Road; and Mr. Waeſtley's principal Chapel is the Foundery in Moorfields.  Tyr. I am obliged to you, Sir, for your Information; and pray are there any more Sects or Profeſſions worthy our preſent Notieeststt . Phil. Not that I know of at preſent; for all the others are blended, compounded, or intermixed with thoſe already ſpoken of, in ſome Reſpect or other. ſyr. But you will be pleaſed juſt to mention them by Phil. I will. (1.) Cainites. (2) Eutychians. (3.) Ebionites. (4.) Eunomeans. (5.) Fataliſts. (6.) aeſiics. (7.) Libertines. (8.) Millenarians. (9.) Materialiſts. 10) Nejtorians. (11.] Origeniſts. (12.) Pelagians. U 3.) Solifidians. (14.) Sublupſarians. (15.) Supralapſalians. (16.) Stoics. (17.) Anti-Trinitarians, &c. ooncerning all or any of which you may read at Leifure. S EC T. Xx. ofr the Heathen Miitology, or a conciſe Account of the l Hieraoglyp ics of the Heathen Deities, i Tr. What do you mean by Mytholog v&æ& Pi il. A generaſ Account of the fabulous Hiſtory of the Gods of the Heathens. . lllili Tyr. What is the Uſe of Mythology & lllili Phil. It furniſhes our Minds q: Information neceſſary to be known, in order that we may underſtand the Writings of many great Men in the early Ages, but particularly thoſe Works which are wrote in Rhyme or Blank Verſe, in which you will find Similies and Alluſions run continually through the Works, and therere, for Want of being acquainted with Mythology, you cannot well underſtand the Deſign of ſuch Authors, who draw Alluſions from fabulous Hiſtories of this Sort. Tyr. I knowit; therefore I want ſome Inſtructions in cſheſe Things, and hope you will treat a little upon them. rl . i l ĩ tã ⸗ 1. iſh Phil. I will; and here follorcss . An Alphabetitat Account of the Heathen Deities. N. B. As I have very little Room for 2:8 biect which requires a Volume, I am goliged to treat upon it in the following Qrder, which is ſuſicient to give the Reader ſome Idea of theſe Things; but if he has a Fancy hereafter to read more fully concerning it, let him conſult Rogſe's new Pantheon, illuſtrated with a Variety of Cuts. ſx à Acheron, Son of Titan and Terràa; he furniſhed che Titans with Water. wheni they foughtl againſt the Gods, and therefore they turned him into a River in Hell; but others ſay Acheron always was a River, but afterwards was made-or converted iuto a ſulphureous õr ſtining Lake  i E (2.) Achilles, Son of Piletes and Thetis; his Mother Thetis was ſo forid. of him; that ſhe fed him daily with Ambroſia, and at Night covered him with celeſtial Fire, and alſo dipped him intol thè River. Styæ, by which all his Body hecame im uinerable: excent juſt the Heel ſhe held him by. He aſterwards was Pupil to the Centaur Chiron, who told him he would certainly be killed at the Siege of Troy, which was done by Paris, who, uith a poiſoned Arrow, ſhot him in the Heel, and thereby mortally wounded him. 7ĩ (3.) Aciæon, Son of Ariſtæus, a Prince noted for Hunting; but being curious to look at Diuna while fhe was bathing herſelf, ſhe changed him into a Stag, when his own Dogs purſued and killed him. ſ422 Adonis, the Son of Cynaras, King of Cyprus, and the Favourite of Venus. Mars turned himſelf into a wild Boar, and Adonis hunting it too eagerly, it turned and bit him in the Groin, and killed him: Vimtas flying to his Succour, ran a Thorn into her Foot, from whenceè the Blood falling upon a Roſe, turned it into a Curnation Red, and his Blood ſhe changed into a Flower, called Anemone. Sũſlli Crt (5.) Æolus; Son of Hippotes, and God of the Winds in general. See Boreas. (6.) Æſculapius, God of Phyſic, one of the Sons ol u by the Nymph Coronis. He was killed by 7Vugiter- becauſe Pluto complained he did ſo many Cures, e decreaſed the Number of the Dead. (7.) Amphion, Son of Jupiter and Antiope; he was ſfuch an excellent Rerformer. on the Lyre, that he even raiſed the Walls of T hebes by Harmony. 'l Amptitrite, Wife of Neptune. ſe Apollo, God of Light and Muſic, Son of Jupiur and Latona; he is repreſented in various Attitudes, but anu. ars accompanied with a Hurp or. Lyro in his Ueſe an (10.) Ariadne, the favourite Wife orMiſtreſs ol Bacchus, whoſe Crowiii is : placed among the. Coriſtellationas. i n21., 913- lluox (11.) Argus, was one employed by Juno, 1o uwait Tupiter's Motions with Io: He had an: hundred Eyes; two of which only ſlept, till Mercury lulled him to Sleep, and cut off his bead: But Juno; in Honour oſ his Services to her, placet his Eyus into che Tail of a Peacock. H§ it is common when we find æ- very diſcerning, penetrating Man, to ſay,  He has as many fyes as Argus: Or when we undertake to contrive any Thing by Cunniu and great Privacy, we ſuy, by way of Alluſion ad he the Eyes of Adrgus, he never could ſee or diſcover it. ili 12.) Alteria, Daughter of c æus, Who was accounte very modeſt, yet at laſt was defiled by Jupider ĩ in the Form of an Lagle. (13.) Aſtrea, the Goddeſs of Juſtice and Equity, Daughter of Tupiter by Themis: She is repreſented with her Eves bound or covered over, having in one Hand a Pair of balanced Scales, and in the other a Sword, to ſhew that Juſtice is not biaſſed, tiut acts impartially. She was moved to Heaven for her Uprightneſs, and makes a Conitellation, or one of the twelve Signs, called Virgo. or the Virgin. ſ(14.) Atlas, Son of Supiter and Clymene; he was a great Lover of Aſtronóõmy and Geography, and there fore is repreſented bearing the whole Earth or Sphere upon his Shoulders. (15.) Augeas, King of Elis, who was ſaid to keep o00 Oxen at a Time in one Stable, but as it had not en cleared for thirty Years, it was very noxious; and therefore he hired Hercules to clean it, and promiſed him the Tenth of the Beaſts for his Service. Hercules performed it by turning the Courſe of the River Alpheus through the Stable; but Augeas would not ſtand to his Bargain, therefore Hercules killed him for his Perfidy. (16.) Aurora, Goddeſs of Eight, and Harbinger oſ Titan, or Meſſenger of the Sun; ſhe was Daughter of Hyperion and Theia; ſhe bore Phaeton to Cephalus: But her greateſt Favourite was Tithonius; ſhe got him tranſlated to Heaven, and after that into a Graſchopper, which every Year change or caſt their Coat or Skin, and then will chirp afreſn and become lively. This Goddeſs is repreſented in various Ways; but in common ſhe is painted or pictured riding in a golden Chariot; upon her Head is the Morning Star, and her Attendants are the Dawn and Phæbus. ſ (17.) Bacchus, God of Mirth and Wine. He was Son of Jupiter and Semele; he is called by a great many other Names or Appellations, viæ. Dionyſius, Briſæus, Bimater, Burgenes, Tauriformis, Nyctilious, &. He is repreſented in various Shapes, by ſome mounted on a Tiger; by others, a very corpulent Youth, naked, with a very ruddy Face, crowned with Ivy and Vine Leaves, with a Thyrſis or Stalk in one Hand, and with the other pouring Wine into an Horn: But in general he is repreſented ſtriding acroſs a Caſk, with a Bottle and Glaſs in his Hands, and Mirth and Jollity in his Countenance. Hence all ſuch as are given too much to the Bottle are called Bacchanalians. (18.) Bellona, the Goddeſs of War, and Wife or Siſter to Mars, She is repreſented various Ways, ſometimes driving a Chariot with Violence, and ſometimes with a lightcd Torch or Trumpet in her Hand; her Hair compoſcd of Snakes, and her Garments ſtained with Blood. (19.) Cacus, Son of Vulcan, and a noted Robber, killed by Hercules. Qſ(2a0.) Cælus, called ſometimes Uranus, the Offspring ol Terra or Gaia, and the Father of the Sky or Firmament. (21.) Cæculus, the third Son of Vulcan. His Mother conveived him by Means of a Spark flying into her Lar while ſhe ſat by the Fire. He is repreſented with very ſmall Eyes. (22.) Caliſto, Daughter of Lycayon, and one of the Nymphs of Diana : She was debauched by Tupiter, and afterwards tranſlated into the Northern Conſtellation called the Bear. (23.) Caſtor and Pollux, two twin Brothers, Sons oſ Jupiter by Leda, Wife of Tyndarus, King of Sparta; they were both made a Conſtellation in Heaven, called Gemini. They are repreſented like two beautiful twin Youths, riding on white Horſes, with Stars in their Helmet. ſ23.) Cecrops, thoſe who took Wages of Jupiter to fight againſt Titan, but afterwards would not; therefore were turned into Apes. (25.) Cephalus, who ſhot his Wife Procris undeſignedly, with one of the unerring Arrows, which his beloved Aurora had furniſhed him with. l (26.) Cerberus, Pluto's Maſtiff, called the three-headed Dog of Hell, born of Typhon and Echidna; he fawned upon all who entered the infernal Regions; but always devoured every one who attempted to return. Hercules dragged him from Hell in ſpite of his Maſter Pluto; but the Monſter continually vomited Fire and Foam of Poiſon, which, wherever it fell, produced that deadly Herb called Aconite or Wolf's-bane. (27.) Corei, the Goddeſs of Corn and Plenty, Daughter of Saturn and Rhea; ſhe is alſo called Magna Dea, or the Great Goddeſs; alſo Aletrix and Mamneſa. from her nouriſhing all Seeds and Plants. She firſt taught the Art of Plowing and Sowing. She turned Abas into a Newt or Water Lizard. She loved Jaſon, Son of ove; but FJove, jealous of him, killed him with a hunderbolt. She is repreſented very majeſtic and fair, ellow Hair, crowned with Poppies, holding in her right and Ears of Corn, and ſometimes in her leſt a lighted Torch; and at other Times in a Chariot or Car, drawn by winged Dragons or Lions. 4 (28.) Chaos, according to Heſiod, the Father of the Gods; but it is evident this is a cumble, for which that famous Heathen Poet loſt great Credit. Abraham Depenbeke attempted to paint Chaos; but though the Work was performed well, yet there was ſuch a Medley oſ Light and Darkneſs, &e. wrong placed, that the whole Deſign was ſpoiled, and became ridiculous. See Boyſe's Pantheon, P. 2. ſa9.) Charon, the Son of Erebus and Nox. He is called the Ferryman of Hell, becauſe he uſed to ferry Souls over the Rivers Acheron and Styx. He is repreſented as a fat, rough-looking old Man, with a buſhy grey Beard, bleared Eyes, and wearing Rags, or very tattered Garments. (30.) Cupid, the God of Love; there are various Opinions of his Pedigree; but it is generally ſuppoſed, that he was the Son of Mars by Venus. He is repreſented blind, to ſhew that real L.ove ſees no Faults; and is alſo armed with a Bow and Quivers, or darting Arrows, to ſhew the Paſſion of the Mind through the Channel of the Eye; and with Wings, to ſhew plainly that nothing is more fleeting than the ſudden Paſſion of Love. He is the favourite Boy of Venus, and her conſtant Attendant in her Amours. 31.) Cybele. See Veſta. j 32.) &clop, Sons of Neptune and Amphitrite. They were Slaves or Journeymen to Vulcan, and uſed to forge Thunderbolts, &c. They had but one Eye, which was in the Middle of their Foreheads. (33.) Deianira, Wife of Hercules, and the Cauſe oſ his Beat. See Hercules. . . (34.) Diana, the Goddeſs of Chaſtity, Daughter of Jupiter and Latona, and Queen of the Woods and Foreſts. She had alſo ſeveral other Names, as Luna, Delia, Hecate, Cynthia, &. Though Diana was ſo remarkably chaſte on Earth, yet when ſhe aſcended to the Skies, ſhe had ſeveral Amours. She had a Daughter by her Father Yupiter, whoſe Name was Erſa, or the Deu : Pan alſo defiled her in the Form of a white Ram; but her Favourite was Endymion. Diana is repreſented many Ways, becauſe ſhe cuts a ſhining Figure in Hiſtory; but ſhe is commonly depicted in a high E 2 Stature; Stature, her Hair diſhevelled, a Bow in her Hand, a Quiver at her Back, a Deer's Skin faſtened to her Breaſt, with a purple Robe turned up to her Knees. and Gold Buckles or Claſps; being always attended with Nymphs in a hunting Dreſs, with Nets, Hounds, &c. (2.) As Hecate, ſhe is repreſented of exceſſfive Height; her Head covered with hideous Snakes; her Feet ſometimes by Serpents; and under this Name amd Character ſhe is called Goddeſs of the infernal Regions. ſſ As Luna, ſhe is repreſented with a Creſcent on her cad, riding in a Silver Chariot, drawn by white Hinds, and Gold Harneſs, but ſometimes by Mules, and at others by Oxen, becauſe of their Lunar'Horns. 35.) See Hercules. ; 5 Elyſian Fields; the fictitious Name of a Place for the Happineſs and Reſt of the Juſt and Good aſter their Departure. (37.) Epimethes, Brother to Prometheus, and Huſband to Pandora, who opened the Box of Evils upon Manckind. See Pandora. i 8.) Europa, Daughter of dęcnor, by the Nymph vha, ſeduced by Jupiter in the Form of a white Buſ: he afterwards tranſlãted her into the Conſtellation Taurus. (39.) Eurydice, Wife of Orpheus. (30.) Euryſtheus, Herculess Taſk- Maſter. See Hercules. 41.) Faunus, F ather of the Fauns or Demi- Gods, or Goddeſſes of the Woods. ſ42. Feronia, the Goddeſs of Woods and Orchards. (43.) Flora, called alſo Chloris, the Goddeſs of Flowers. Filora is generally repreſented in a cloſe Habit, holding in her Hands the ĩ lowers of Peas and Beans, & c. and the Painters have a great Field of Variety in painting her in ſeveral Attitudes, with Variety of Flowers of all Sorts. 44.) The Furies, three infernal Deities, called Goddeſſtes of Horror. Their Names were Teſiphone, Alecto, and Megara. They are repreſented with Hair, compoſed of Snakes, Eyes very fierce and furious, holding Chains in one nà and Whips in the other. (45.) Galaxy, the milcy Way. Sec Juno(46.) The Gorgons, four Siſters, of whom Meduſu was ehief. They are repreſented with Snakes apout their Hair, brazen Hands, golden Wings, and Tuiks like wild Boars. (47.) The Grææ were three Siſters of the Gorgons; they are repreſented like old Women; they had but one Eye and one long Iooth common to all, which they uſed occaſionally as each wanted, called alſo Lamiæ and Empuſe. li (48.) The Harpies are Aello, Celeno, and Ocypete, Daughters of Oceanus and Terra; they are repreſented with their Faces like Virgins, Ears like Bears, Bodies lice Vultures, human Arms and Feet, but having very long Claws. . (49.) Harpocrates, the God of Silence. (50.) Hebe, the Goddeſs of Y outh, Daughter of Jupiter and Juno; but others ſay ſhe was conceived by TJuno after her eating immoderately of Lettuces. She was ſo beautiful in the Eyes of FJupiter, that he made her his Cup-Bearer; but at a Feaſt of the Gods, poor ebe, in waiting, had a Slip with her Foot, and had ſo indecent a Fall that put all in Confuſion, and Fupiter diſmiſſed her; but to repair this Loſs and Shame, Jupiter married her to Hercules. She is called the Goddeſs of all Life and Bloom, from Spring to Autumn; then her Foot ſlips, the Leaves fall, and Ganymede ſucceeds her, who was the next Cup-Bearer to Jupiter, and ſome ſay was afterwards turned into the Conſtellation Aquarius. (51.) Hvcate. See Mana (34.) (52.) Helle, who, riding the golden Ram, fell off into the Sea between Europe and Aſia, from thence it is called the Helleſpont. (53.) Hercules, the greateſt Demi-God, Son of Yupiter and Alemena. JFuno hated Hercules, and cauſed his Mother to be a full Week in continual Pangs by her Enchantment, in the Shape of an old Woman; but GCalanthis at laſt ran to o and told her of the ſafe elivery of Alemena, upon which the Goddeſs recaſſumed her Shape, and fled: Alemena was that inſtant eaſy; but Galanthis, for her Tidings, was turned into a Weſel. (2.) Juno, not content with this, ſent two large Serpents to deſtroy him in his Cradle; but Hercules, though ſo young, ſtrangled them both with the THE YOUNG MAN Squeeæe of his Hands. (3.) His Labours would fill a Volume, therefore it muſt ſuffice to tell you, that June always ſought his Ruin by many Stratagems. (4.) She ſent the Nemæan Lion againſt him, but he tore the furious Animal in Pieces, and wore his Skin as a Trophy of Victory. (5.) He next deſtroyed that formidable Serpent or Monſter Hydra [ſee Hyaral. (6.) He defeated the Centaurs, and took the wild Boar alive; tired Diana's Hind; deſtroyed the Vultures or Birds of Prey in Arcadia. (7.) He bound the furious Bull which Neptune ſent againſt Minos, King of Crete. (8.) He ſlew the wild Horſes that breathed Fire, and devoured human Fleſh, the Property of Diomede the Tyrant. (9.) He alſo performed the hard Taſk of Augeas ſſee Augeas]. (10.) He defeated all the Amaxzons, carried their Queen Hippolita to Theſeus, and gave her Belt to his Taſk-Maſter Euryſtheus. (I1.) He killed Geryon, King of Spain, who had three Bodies, with all his furious Oxen; his Dregon of ſeven Heads, his Dog of two Heads, and his watchful Keeper. (12.) He ſtole the golden Apples at the Heſperides, and killed the Dragon with a hundred Heads, that was ſet to guard them. (13.) Euryſtheus, thinking to deſtroy Hercules, at laſt commandeèd him to go to Hell, and fetch Pluto's Maſtiſf, Cerberus, which he performed; Euryſtheus was ſurprized in the Perſormance, and afterwards ordered Cerberus back again. (14.) He releaſed Theſeus, chained to a Stone on the Banks of Acheron; opened a Paſſage through the Alps; ſlew the furious Robber, Cacus; with a Number of other heroic Actions too tedious to enumerate; and yet he was ſo captivated with the Love of Amphalia, Queen of Lydia, as even to ſpin amongſt her Women, and ſuffer F emale Chaſtiſement (15.) His Death was occaſioned by his Wife Deianira; for the Centaur Neſſus oſfering Violence to her, Hercules ſhot him with one of thoſe dreadful Arrows he had dipped in the Blood of Hydra, which Arrows poiſon all Things that they enter: Deianira, however, grew jcalous of Hercules on ſeveral Accounts, and at laſt managed it ſo as to get him to put on the poiſonous Garment of Neſſus, which he no ſooner had done, but he was taken delirious, ſuffered the moſt excruciating Tortures, and in Agony ran wild ; through through various Regions; he at laſt came to Mount Oeta, here he erected a Pile of Wood, ſet it on Fire, and threw himſelf into it, and was conſumed. Lycus, his Friend, followed him in this unhappy Situation, but Hercules threw him into the River Thermopolis, and he became a Rock; he gave his Arrows to Philoctetes, who afterwards buried his Remains in the River Dyra. (16.) Hercules is depicted ſeveral Ways, but in general in a ſtanding Attitude, with the Skin of the Nemæan Lion over his Shoulders, and reſting upon a large Club; at other Times naked, with his Club in his Hand (54.) Hermaphroditus, Son of Mercury and Venus, who was joined in one Body to Salmacis, by her Innovation; from hence ſprang the Hermaphrodites, or People in whom both Male and Female Sex are ſaid to be united in one Body. (55.) Heſperus, the Son of Atlas, transformed into the Morning Star. - . (56.) Hyacinthus, Apollo's beloved Boy, turned into the Flower Hyacinth. (57.) Hyades, (called Pleiades) the ſeven Daughters of Atlas. They grieved ſo much for the Death of their Brother Hyas, that Jupiter changed them into St rs, and they are blaced in the Heads of the Conſtellation Taurus, and their Riſing and Setting are ſuppoſed to be attended with Rain. . (58.) Hydra, a Serpent. See Hercules. (59.) Hymen, the God of Marriage, and Son of Bacchus and Venus. He is repreſented as having a very fair Complexion, in aRobe of Saffron-colour; and crowned with the Herb Amaricus, or Sweet Marjoram. ſ(60.) Hyperion, Son of Cælus and Terra. (61.) Janus, called alſo Biceps, Bifrons, and Didymæus, the God of the Months and Years; he is repreſented with two Faces, as looking to the paſt and coming Year, and in general ſignifies the Sun. (62.) Jaſon, Son of Æſan, who fetched the Golden Fleece from Colchis. . (63.) Iris, Daughter of Thaumas, and Juno's favourite Companion and Meſſenger; ſhe is repreſented of ſurpriſing Beauty, with Wings, and riding on a Rainow. . (61) Yuno, Queen of Heaven, and both Wife and Siſter of Yupiter. She is alſo the Goddeſs preſiding over Marriage and Childbirth; and bears too many Names to be inſerted here, the principal whereof arè Lucina, Pronuba, Juga, Domiduca, Unia, Cinxia, &. She was very proud and jealous, and left her Seat in Heaven in a Paſſion; but Fupiter, by the Perſuaſion of Citheron, had a very beautiful Image, which was called Platea, which rode in Jupiter's Chariot, and it was reported ſhe was going to be made Queen of Heaven inſtead of imperious ſJuno; upon this Juno returned, and attacked the new ride, and tore off all her Ornaments; but having found the Deceit, ſhe ſeemed to be pleaſed with the Contrivance, and lived more contented and complaiſant with her Huſband. Funo ſigniſies the Atmoſphere. She was given to reſent every Irifle, but none felt her Reſentment more than Hercules, though at laſt he was indebted to her for his Immortality; for Pallas brought him in his Infancy to FJupiter, who put him to Yuno's Breaſt to ſuck while ſhe was aſleep; but the Goddeſs waking ſuddenly, the Milk ran from her Breaſt, and falling ſuddenly upon the Sky, cauſed the Galaxy or milky Way, which runs in the Heavens ſrom North to South; ſome Drops falling upon the Earth cauſed the Lilies to become white, which before were yellow. This Galaxy is in Fact a vaſt Collection of Stars, too diſtant for Diſcernment by the nalged Eye. (65.) Jupiter, great King or Maſter of all the Deities; Son of Saturn and Rhea, or Veſta. His Exploits cannot be inſerted here: It is ſufficient to ſay; (1.) He firſt deſeated the Titans, who warred againſt his Father Saturn, and then afterwards dethroned his Eather. (2.) He had ſeveral Wives beſides Jfuno, viæ. Metis, whom he devoured when big witſi Child, and he himſelf became pregnant with Minerva, who ſprang out of his Head full rown. (3.) He turned himſelf into all Manner oſ Shanes and orms to betray the Honour and Chaſtity of the Nymphs and Goddeſſes. (4.) He deflowered Coliùo in che Form of the Goddeſs of Chaſtity, and then turned her into a Bear, and made her afterwards a Conſtellation of that Name. (5.) Alſo his Siſter Juuo, in BOOK OF ENOWLEDG E. &81 the Form of a Cuckoo, by whom he had Hebe, Mars, Vulcan, and Lucina. (6.) In Form of a white Bull, he carried off Europa into Crete; ſurprized Aleria inthe Shape of an Eagle; Ægina in the Similitude of a lambent Fire; lytoris in the Form of an Ant; Amphytrion in the Form of her own Huſband; and even Danae, though her Father built her a Tower of Braſs to ſecure her, he deſcended in a golden Shower, baffled the Keepers, and took her. (7.) He turned Lycaon into a Wolfs, for ſerving up the Fleſh of one of his Domeſtics at Table, while Jove was preſent, and conſumed his Palace with Lightèning. (8-) He alſo deluded Semele, Io, and many others; but worſt of all, (9.) He one Day ſeized the beautiful Boy Ganymede, Son of Tros, and made him Cup-bearer and Pander of his Luſt. (10.) The Reign of Jupiter not being ſo regular and mild as that of Saturn's, it was now called the Silver, inſtead of the Golden Age. (11.) Jupiter is repreſented various Ways, but in general like a grave, majeſtic Man, ſitting on a Throne, holding Thunder and an Eagle in his right Hand, and Darts or Victory in his left; at other Times the Eagle is at his Feet. pſge.) Latona, Mother of Apollo, and his twin Siſter iona. i (67.) Lethe, a River of Forgetfulneſs, whereby all who drink of its Waters forget all paſt Tranſactions. (68.) Lucina, one of the Names of Juno, and Diana. (69.) Mars, the God of War. Funo bare him alone, as Jupiter bare Minerva, and in Oppoſition to her Huſband, called him the God of War or Revenge. She appointed Thero or Fierceneſs to nurſe him, and ſent him afterwards to the barbarous Scythians for his Education. (2.) Mars is alſo called Quirinus and Gradivus. (3.) Mars is oſten fepreſented in a ſtanding Attitude, with Breaſt-plate and Helmet, a Sword or Weapon in his right Hand, and a Shield in his Ieft; but in general he is repreſented with a fiery Aſpect, completely armed, wn by raging Horſes, extending his Spear, and in the other Hand graſping a Sword, embrued with Blood, having Diſcord, Clamour, Terror, and Fear for his Attendants. (70.) Meduſa, raviſhed by Neptune, and her Hair turned into Sriakes by Minerva, and aſterwards had her Head cut off by Perſeus. (7 1.) Mercury, (Called alſo Hermes) the Son of Yupiter and Maia; he is eſteemed as a Demi-Deity, and called the Meſſenger of the Gods, or Meſſenger of Speed. He is ſaid to preſide over Eloquence, Sprightlineſs, and Activity. (2.) It is on this Account that he is called ſometimes the Father of Theft and Deceit, being capable of gaining his Deſign by cunning Tricks and deceitful Speeches. (3.) This he ſhewed very early; for Vulcan being fond of him in his Infancy, one Day dandled the little Brat in his Arms; Mercury, in Return for his Love, ſtole away all his Tools. (4.) He alſo ſtole the Ceſtus of Venus, and the Scepter of Jupiter; but attempting to ſteal his Thunderbolts, he burnt his Fingers ſeverely. (5.) After this he ſtole the Cows of Admetus. (6.) But he is in general called the God of Rhetoric, Eloquence and Oratory. He was alſo famous for his Skill in Muſic, and firſt taught the Art of Letters, and therefore was often called to decide Quarrels among the Gods as Arbitrator. (7.) He is repreſented ſtanding on his right Leg, his left Hand pointing upwards, and in his right Hand a winged Caduceus, and Wings upon his Head and his Heels. (72.) Midas, King,of Phrygia, who gave falſe Judgment, by praiſing Pan's pretended Harmony before Apollo's, was rewarded by having Aſ's Ears placed upon his Head. . (73.) Minerva, (called alſo Pallas) the Goddeſs of Wiar, Wiſdom and Sciences. She was born full grown in the Iſle of Rhodes, by Means of Jupiter's violentl ſtricing his own Head, whence ſhe ſprang; on whic Account ſhe is called Athena, becauſe ſhe never ſucked the Breaſt; and by others Ametroſs, as having no Mother. She excelled all others in the Art of Spinning, and therefore ſhe turned Arachne, the Daughter of Idmon, into a Spider, becauſe ſhe challenged her at this Art. Minerva is repreſented various Ways, but more fully in a fine Poſture or ſtanding Attitude, a ſteady, vet ſmiling Countenance, is completely armed, has a Gold Breaſt-plate, a Spear in her right Hand, and a frightful Igis in her left, with the Head of Meduſa, accompanied with Snakes. Sometimes ſhe has an Owl and Cock at her Feet or in her Hand; the ſormer an Emblem of Wiiſdom, and the latter denotes War. . ; (74:.) Minos, one of the Judges of Hell. (75.) Momus, the God of Pleaſantry and Humour. He was ſuppoſed the Son of Somnus and Nox. He is called Jupiter's Fool or Jeſter, and was often ſent for to make the Gods merry. A Story is related of him as follows: Neptune, Minerva, and Vulcan, one Day challenged each other for their Skill, and left it to Momus to decide. Neptune made a Bull, but he found Fault with it, becauſe his Horns were not ſet before his Eves that he might puſh with greater Certainty Minerva made an immoveable Houſe, which he diſliked, becauſe it could not be moved in caſe of bad Neighbours; and Vulcan made a Man, which he highly condemned, becauſe he had not a Window in his Breaſt, to ſee what was coming upon, or might happen to him. (76.) Morpheus, the God of Sleep and Dreams: He is repreſented by the Figure of a Ho aſleep, with one Arm or Elbow leaning on a black Marble, (ſignifying Night) and with a Bundle of Poppies under the other rm. (77.) Muſes, the Daughters of Yfupiter and Mnemoſyne. (1) Couittuſes ſtsen osar clus gut and vocal Muſic. (2.) Clio, the Muſe of Hiſtory and Narrations. (3.) Erato, the Muſe of Poetry, and Inventreſs of Dancing. (4.) Thalia preſided over Comedy, or whatever was merr (5.) Euterpe over Tragedy. (6.) Melpomene over Lyric and Epic Poetry, and Dignity of Style. (7.) Tertc ore, called Protectreſs of Muſic, Inventreſs of the Flute, and preſided alſo over Logic. (8.) Polyhymnia over Oratory, Poetry, and fine Geſture; and, (9.) Urania, the Muſe who preſided over all celeſtial Subjects, as Prayer, Praiſes, and divine Muſic. . (78.) Neiades, the Nymphs of Brooks and Rivers. (79.) Nemeſis, Daughter of Jupiter and Neceſſity; one of the Goddeſſes of Juſtice, having a Pair of Scales in one Hand, and a Whip in the other. (86.) Neptune, the moſt noted Son of Saturn and Ops or Veſta, and the Brother & Tupiter. His favouriee Wife was Amphitrite. who was gained to him by the Interceſſion of the Dolphin, which Neptune afterwards placed among the Stars. (2.) He had two other Wives, Salacia, from the Salt Water, and Venelia, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Tides. (3.) He is called God oĩ the Sea or Ocean. (4.) He changed Theophane into an Ewe, and himſelf into a Ram, and begat the golden fleeced Ram. ſ 5.) He is repreſented with dark Hair; his Garment a Sea-green, riding in a large Shell, drawn by Sea-Horſes, with a Trident in his Hand, attended x a long Train of Sea-G oddeſſes, Tritons, and Seaymphs. (81.) Nereus, Son of Oceanus, and Maſter of the Ægean Sea. ſ8) Nox, the moſt ancient of all the Deities. She had a numerous Offspring of Gods and Goddeſſes. She married Erebus, by whom ſhe had Labour, Emulation, Deceit, Fear, Darkneſs, Complaint, Miſery, Partiality, Care, Diſappointment, Diſeaſe, War, Hunger- Want, c (83.) Oceanus, the Son of Cælus and Terra. (84.) OPBs, one of the Names of Cybele. (85.) Oreades, Nymphs of the Mountains. (86.) Orion, the Son or Production of Jupiter, Nep1une, and Mercury. The Story is as follows: They all took a Tour to Tanagara, æ Cly of Bæotia, where they were well entertained by the hoſpitable Hyricus, in Return for which they deſired him to aſk what he pleaſed, and it ſhould be granted. Old Hyricus requeſted he might have a Son in his old Age; accordingly, they bade him bring an Ox- Hide, which was done; and after they had made Urine (or piſs'd) in it, they bade him bury it ten Months, and then take it up; which he did, and upon taking it up found a fine Boy, which he name Urion, from their Urine; but it being more decent, he was afterwards called Orion. He was killed by Diana in hunting, and afterwards tranſlated to a Conſtellation, called Orion, which uſed to be remarkable for producing Rain and Storms, when he roſe acronically. (87.) Orpheus, the Son of Phæbus, by the Muſe Calliope. He was ſo remarkably ſkilled in the Performance of Muſic, that he went down to Hell to fetch his be loved Wife Eurydice, and he effected his Deſign ; for he ſo charmed old Pluto and Proſerpine with his Harmony, that they had no Power to hold her. Some ſay he was tore to Pieces by Bacchus; others that he was transformed into a Swan; be this as it will, his Harp was tranſlated to Heaven, and formed a Conſtellation. He is oſten repreſented by a Youth, with Life and Sprightlineſs, playing on a Lyre or Siſtrum, with a tame Lion by him, to ſhew the Power and Efficacy of Muſic. . (88.) Orus, an Egyptian Deity, Son of Oſiris and Iſis, and is generally repreſented ſtanding between them, like a Cupid or winged Boy. . (89.) Uſiris, an Egyptian Deity, Brother and Huſband to Iſis, and Brother to Typhon. (9o.) Pales, the Goddeſs of Shepherds. (91.) Pallas. See Minerva. (92.) Pan, the God of Shepherds and Hunters, becauſe he preſided over Flocks and Herds. He is eſteemed as an Egyptian Deity, and is ſaid to be the Son of Penelope. tfe is repreſented with a ruddy Countenance, two ſhort Horns on his Head, a long thick Beard, cloathed with a ſpotted Skin, crowned with Pine, having a Shepherd's Crook in one Hand, and Reeds or Pipes of unequal Lengths in the other, with a Noſe, Feet, and Tail like a Goat. (93.) Paris, youngeſt Son to Priamus, King of Troy. ſut. ) Pandora, the firſt Woman formed by Vulcan. All the Gods and Goddeſſes preſented her with ſomething to add to her Perfection, Pallas gave her Wiſdom, Venus Beauty, Mercury Eloquence, Apollo Muſic, suno Riches ; but Jupiter thought ſhe was not yet a complete Woman, therefore he pre ented her ith a Bos aclca down, Qitaining Diſcord, Enuy, Calumny, Diſeaſes, Age, War Peſtilence, ſeo Famine; which her n Unimetheus opened, and let out all theſe Plagues among Mankind; nothing remained but Hope at the Bottom. (95.) Pegaſus, a winged Horſe, produced by the Blood which fell from Meduſa's Head. (96.) Perſeus, the Son of Jupiter and Danae. He was pretty famous for Arts and Literature, and alſo heroic Actions. He cut off Meduſa's Head; then he mounted Pegafus, and delivered Ændromeda, the Daughlll ter ter of Cepheus, from an horrible Sea-Monſter, and afterwards he was placed among the Stars. ( q Phœbus, one of the Names of Apollo. (98.) Phaeton was the Son of Apollo, by the Nymph Clymene : He was from his Infancy of an aſpiring Diſpoſition, and ſo remarkably conceited, that he undertook every Thing with a ſure Confidence of performing it; and though he had been often reproved for his Raſhneſs, yet he could not be diſſuaded from every Attempt; but the moſt remarkable of all is this: Being accuſed b Epaphus for being a Baſtard, he told his Father Æpollo thereof, and appeared uneaſy at the Reproach: Apollo, to appeaſe his fiery and hot Biſpoſiton, ſoothed him, by telling him that whatever he aſked of him ſhould be ranted; Phaeton then requeſted that he might drive the &nariot of the Sun round the Globe for one Day only: Apollo, ſorry he had made ſuch a Promiſe, endeavoured to convince him of the Danger, and prevailed upon ſeveral Friends to repreſent to him his Inability of a Taſk fo arduous, and beyond his youthful Years, and alſo with ſuch furious and ungovernable Horſes: But Phae1on perſiſting in his obſtinate Reſolve, and Apollo not being able to get off from ſo ſtrict and direct a Promiſe, ſubmitted to the giddy conceited Youth; but no ſooner did he mount the Chariot, than he felt the Conſequence of his Arrogance and Ambition, for the Horſes immediately ran unreſtrained and furiouſly along, nor could he, with all his Pride and Endeavours, command their Reins, ſo that they fled at Random, and had nearly ſet the World on Fire, but for the Interpoſition of Jupiter, who, with his Thunderbolts, ſtruck him headlong into the River Eridanus, now called Po. His three Siſters, Phæbe, Lampetia, and Phaethuſua, lamented him ſo much on the Banks, that they were at laſt changed into the black Poplar Tree. - . æ Of all the Tales in the Heathen Mythology. none affords a better Leſſon for Youth than that of Phaëton's Conceit and headſtrong Raſhneſs. For hereby they are taught not to aſpire beyond their little Spheres; but conſtantſy and readily to obey their Parents, and be ready to receive and follow all cood Advice, leſt they come to a ſudden and untimely End. (99.) Phle- H ſ 99.) Phlegeton, one of the ſulphureous Rivers of ell il (100.) Pleiades, the ſeven Daughters of Allas by Pleione; their Names are Maia, Electra, Halcyone, Celena, Aſterope, Taygete, and Merope; Jove tranſlated them into a Conſtellation, commonly called the ſeven tars. (101.) Pluto, Son of Saturn and Ops, and King or Ruler of Hell and all the infernal Regions. He is repreſented in a Chair, drawn by four black Horſes, with a black Wand in one Hand, and ſometimes a Sceptre in the other. i (102.) Pomona, the Goddeſs of Orchards and FruitTrees, but particularly of Apples. (103.) Prometheus, the Son of Iapetus. He was a great Favourite of Pallas; but having deceived Vupiter by making a Figure in Clay, and animating it by ſ ire, which he ĩtole from Heaven, the Thunderer reſented it ever after; and therefore ſent Mercury and Vulcan to ſeie and carry him to Mount Caucaſus, and chain him there to a Rock, and ſet a Vulturè to prey upon his Liver, which Jupiter moſt barbarouſly renewed every Day in Proportion to what the Vulture devoured: But Hercules killed the Vulture and releaſed him. (104.) Proſerpine, the Daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, raviſhed by Fupiter, in Form of a Dragon. She was married to Pluio. (105.) Proteus, the Son of Neptune, by the Nymph Phœenice, and Keeper of the Sea- Calves. He had Power to turn himſelf into all Manner of Shapes. (106.) Pygmalion fell in Love with an Image of his own making, and Venus changed it into a Woman ſfor him, and he married her. (107.) Python, an enormous Serpent, ſent by Juno to devour Latona, but Apollo killed it. ; uſ;oε.) Rhadamanthus, one of the inferior Judges of ell. (109.) Rhea, one of the Names of Cybele. (110.) Saturn, the youngeſt Son of Cælus and Terra. He was perſuaded by his Mother to exclude his elder Brother Titan, but on Condition of his reigning in Titan's Stead, he engaged to devour all his Male Childier that they ſhould not inherit after him; but Veſta hid one oy and preſerved him. Saturn heard of it, and demanded the Boy, but his Wife, inſtead of the Child fave him a Stone, which he greedily ſwallowed, and e, for the Honour, named the Stone Ab-addir. .) The Reign of Saturn was ſo mild and happy, that it was calle the Golden Age. (3.) Saturn is generally repreſented like an old Man, bare and bald-headed, full oſ Age and Infirmities; in his right Hand is placed either a Sickle, Scythe or Key, and a Serpent in his left, or twining in a circular Form, with his Tail in his Mout thereby repreſenting the Year, and Eternity, as the fir revolves into itſelf, and the other is without End. (111.) Satyrs, the Attendants of Bacchus, who reſided in Woods and Æ oreſts; they were very luſtful and wanton, and delighted to defile the Nymphs. They had deformed Heads, ſhort Horns, hairy Bodies, crooked Hands, Legs and Feet like Goats, and Tails like Horſes. (112.) Semele, Daughter of Cadmus, and one of Yupiterss Miſtreſſes, who vainly deſired the God to embrace er in the Radiance of his Glory, as Juno was uſed to receive him. Jupitir with Reluctance granted her Requeſt, and ſhe, for her Folly, was conſumed in the Effulgence of his Brightneſe being unable to withſtand the dazæling Luſtre. This was a deſigned Artifice of Juno to deſtroy her. (113.) Silenus, the God of Drinking. He was Preceptor to Bacchus, and is repreſented or depicted as a ſhort, corpulent, old Man, with a red Face, and prominent Forehead, a flat Noſe, and large Ears; ſeated upon an Aſs, and yet ſupporting himſelf with a long Stick or Staff in one Hand, and in the other a Cantharus or Pitcher, whoſe Handle ſeems to be worn out by frequent Uſe. llli Q(114.) Syſiphus. Authors differ about him, but it is ſaid that he was a Trojan Secretary, and very unfaithful to his Truſt: Others ſay he was a noted Robber. However, all agree that his Puniſhment was this: He was condemned to roll a great Stone to the Top of a very high Hill, which no ſooner came near the Summit but down it rolled again. From hence comes the common Saying, for Perſons who are in ſuch conſtant Toil, Labour, and Slavery, that ther. without a View of Eaſe and Freedom, are like Syſt us. (115.) Styx, one of the Rivers of Hell, noted for being as much too cold as Phlegethon is too hot. It is that River which Souls are ferry'd over by old Charon into the Elyſian Fields. (116.) Sylvanus, one of the Gods of che Groves. (117.) Senss Daugnhters of Achelous, ſo noted for their harmonious Voices, that whoever heard them were ſure to be decoyed and killed by them. Their upper Parts are lice a Woman, and their lower Parts like a Fiſh; and from hence comes the idle Tale of Meremaids, viæ. Maids of the Sea. (118.) Tantalus entertained the Gods with the Fleſh of his ovn Son, for which he was ſent to Tartarus, and there afflicted with eternal Hunger and Thirſt; having both Water and the beſt Meãts and Fruits within a very ſmall Space of his Lips, yet as often as he attempted to ſnatch at either, they were immediately removed from his Reach. Hence comes the Word to tantalize, or teie, by ſhewing Things deſirable, and yet denying em to us. ſ(119.) Tartarus, Hell, or the dark and diſmal Receſſes of the infernal Regions, the Place for wicked Souls, ſurrounded by the flaming Waters of Phlegeton, and committed to the Care of the three Furies, or avengeful Siſters, Alecto, Megæra, and Tiſiphone. ſ(120.) Thamyris, for challenging the Muſes in Muſic, &c. was ſteack blind by Jupiter, and ſent to Tartarus. (121.) Themis, the Goddeſs of Laws and Ceremonies. (122.) Tereus raviſhed Philbmela, and afterwards was transformed into a Lapuing. (123.) Terra, the Mother and Wife of Cælus. (124.) Theophane, a beautiful Virgin, transformed by Neptune into an Ewe, and he, in the Form of a Ram, begat the golden fleeced Ram of her. C(125.) Theſeus, Son of Ægeas. (126.) Thetis, Mother of Achilles; ſhe dipped him in the River Styæx to make him invulnerable, and then committed him to the Care of the Centaur Chiron, to inſtruct him in War. (127.) Tireſias, deprived of his Sight by Minerua, becauſe he happened to ſee her bathing in a Fountain. (128.) Tiſiphone, one of the Furies. Being rejected by Cythæron, ſhe killed him by throwing one of her Snakes round his Bod. (129.) Titans, monſtrous Giants, who ſprang from the Blſood of Saturn's Wound when caſtrated by his Son qupiter. SJupiter, for this Act of unnatural Diſobeience, was perpetually harraſſed by the Titans, who waged War continually with him; and had not Apollo, Juno, Mercury, and ſeveral other of the Gods, but particulary Hercules, aſſiſted, they had dethroned Jupiter; for Typhon, the moſt monſtrous of all the Giants, took Jupiter Priſoner, forced his own Sickle or Scymetar out of his Hand, and carried him on his Back to Cilicia, and bound him in a Cave; but he was reſcued, and Tython fled to Sicily, where he was covered with a huge ountain, which ever ſince vomits Fire, and is ſuppoſed to be Ætna. (1 & Tityus, Son of Jupiter and Elara. He attempted the Chaſtity of Diana and Latona; and Apollo killed him, and ſent him to Tartarus, where he was chained down flat on his Back, having a Vulture preying on his Liver. It is reported he was of ſuch an enormous Size as to cover nine Acres of Ground. (131.) Triton, Son of Neptune by Amphitrite; he uſed to ſteal the Cattle from the Tanagrian Fields, and deſtroy ſmall Veſſels on the Coaſts; but the Inhabitants made him drunk at an Invitation, and then cut off his. Head. Triton is repreſented with a large Mouth, bluiſh Eyes, and ſhort matted Hair, his Shoulders covered with Purple, variegated with Scales: From the Waiſt upwards e is like a Man; his Feet like a Horſe, and his lower Parts like a Dolphin, with a forked Tail, and ſometimes drawn in a Car by Horſes of a Sky Colour, having in his Hand a Shell Trumpet. (132.) Typhon or Typheus, the moſt noted of the Titans or Giants, ſaid to have an hundred Dragons Heads, Evyes of Fire, and uttering diſmal Sounds. See Titans. (133.) Venus, the Goddeſs of Love and Beauty. She ſprang from the Fermentation of Froth upon Saturn's ſhe is alſo called Adphrodite. She was ſo exceeding beautiful, that at the Aſſembly of the Gods, all had a Deſire to marry her; however, Vulcan at laſt gave her ſome Poppies, which threw her into a Sleep, and then took Poſſeſſion of her Perſon; but ſhe was even with him afterwards, having Amours with Apollo, Mars, Mercury, and Neptune; but her deareſt Favourite was Adonis. She had many Names, ſuch as Marina, from her being born in the Sea; Melanis, from her nocturnal Amours; alſo Meretrix, Genetrix, &. She had Temples almoſt in every Place. She is repreſented in various Attitudes, but generally clothed with Purple, glittering Gems on her Head, ſicting in an Ivory Car, drawn by Swans or Doves; at other Times in a ſtanding Poſture, a very ſmiling and engaging Countenance; attended by Doves, but ſeldom without her Son Cupid by her Side. . (134.) Veſta the Elder, called alſo Cybele, the Daughter of Cælus and Terra. As Veſta, ſhe is repreſented ĩitting., with a Sphere in one Hand, and a lighted Torch in another. As Cybele, ſhe is repreſęnted in a Phaeton or lofty Chariot, ducum by Lions, crowned with Towers, with a Key in one Hand extended. o (135.) Veſta the Younger, the Goddeſs of Fire, Daughter oſ Saturn by the Elder Veſta, and Siſter to Jupiter, Pluto, Neptune, Juno and Ceres. (136.) Vulcan, the God of Fire, Son of Jupiter and Juno, but others ſay of Juno only; however, it is agreed that he was ſo deformed, that he was caſt out of Heaven upon the Iſle Lemnos, and in his Fall had his Thigh broke, which rendered him vet more deformed. But to repair ſo great a Loſs, he erected a Forge, and taught the Art of working in all Manner of Metals. His Journeymen or Aſſiſtants were the Cyclops, and the princial Works he performed were as follows. He madæ hunderbolts for Tupiter. He alſo made Neptune's Trident; the invincible Helmet for Pluto; a golden Crown for Bacchus; a Chariot for the Sum and Mars; the divine Armour of Achilles; the invincible Armour oſ Æneas : But to ſhew his Skill, he made his Mother Juno a Chuir of Gold, which was ſo contrived by hidden Springs, that when ſhe ſat in it they cloſed her ſo faſt ance. (2.) He has alſo ſeveral other Names, viæx. Lemnius, Mulcifer, or Mulciber. He was very jealous oſ Venus, and that not without Cauſe; for Mars was one of her chief Gallants; but the Sum watched all theitr Motions. Mars perceiving this, placed the Boy Alectryon, or Gallus, to watch all Night, and give him Notice before Apalio aroſe in the Morning; but unlucky for them, their little Watch fell aſleep, and the Sun in the Morning ſaw Mars and Venus in Bed, and told Vulcan, who immediately made him a Net and caught them both in it, and there kept them ſome Time, and expoſed them to all the Gods and Goddeſſes moſt ſhameully Mars, to be revenged on Alectryon, turned him into a Cock, who, ever iince, gives Notice, by his Crowing, of the Approach of Apollo, vix. of the Sun's riſing. Vulcan is generally depicted like a ſqualid, lam and deformed Man, working at an Anvil, and attende by the Cyclops, his Journeymen. Thus, Tyro, have I given you a conciſe Account of the Heathen Mythology, which thos h not ſo comprehenſive as the Pantheon, by Dr. Up9n yet will help you very much to underſtand all poetical and other Authors, whorhave made, and do make or draw Alluſions from this fabulous Hiſtory. Tyr. I humbly thank you, kind Philomatbes. Y OU NG M AN s Book of Knowledge, &c. P A RT III. O F NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, &c. S ECT. I. Tyro. HAT is Philaſophy? Phil. Philoſophy is the Knowledge or Study of Nature and Moralit;, founded on the ſelf-evident Principles of Truth and right Reaſon. Tyr. What does it principally teach us? hil. Philoſobhy teaches us to ſearch after Truth itelf, has its Rules, Laws, or Axioms built upon right Reaſon, and therefore inſtructs us in the Knowledge of the Nature, Cauſes, Properties and Effects of Things in general. Tyr. What do vou mean by the Nature of Things? hil. That eſtabliſhed Order or Courſe; that eſſential Property, by which Things are diſtinguiſhed from each other: Or it is a Series of ſecond Cauſes, which the all-wiſe and eternal Creator has impreſſed upon Matter in all Bodies and Subſtances whatover. Tyr. Be ſo kind as to explain what you mean by ſecondary, or ſecond Cauſes, for I do not apprehend it. Is not a Perſon that does a Thing, or cauſes it to be done, the real Cauſe thereof? Phil. In many Caſes it may with Propriety of Language be ſaid ſo; but philoſophically it is not ſo; nor will the Laws of Philoſophy allow but one Cauſe, the Reſt, or Reſult of the firſt, being only Effects therẽof. Tyr. I am not quite clear in this yet. Suppoſe you were very cold, and I kindle you a Fire, by which you are comforted; or in any Diſtreſs, of Debt or Danger, and I deliver you, am not I the Cauſe of all this? Phil. I told you before, that in Language you may be ſaid to be ſo; it would look pedantic to expreſs it otherwiſe, and my Thunks are certainly due to you, at all Times and in all Places: But notwithſtanding this, as ou were not the primary Cauſe of theſe Ihings, I ſhou only call yol a ſecondary Cauſe, or an Effect oſ tho sirlt moving Cauſe. r. Why ſo? . Bril. Becauſe you could not have kindled the Fire without ſuch Matter ſuited thereto, which cauſes that Senſation in us, &c. Again, you cannot pretend to be the real Cauſe of delivering me from Debt or Danger, till you have both Power and Inclination; for had you Ability, you might want Inclination; had Jou Inclination, if you had not Ability you could not execute your Deſign without ſome further Aſſiſtance, which may be called a third Cauſe or Effect, and ſo on to ten thouſand. Theſe, however, depending on each other for Power, Ability, Intereſt, Diſpoſition, &c. are all called ſecond Cauſes; but even you, who were the firſt of theſe ſecondary Cauſes, neither did, nor can give yourſelf ſuch Power, Ability, Diſpoſition or Inclination, therefore you are only a ſecondary Cauſe in all the Actions, and are, with me, indebted to God, the primary Cauſe; but with this Difference, that you are indebted for that Power and Inclination, but I am (by the Laws of Philoſophy and right Reaſon) indebted to both; to Him, as the real Cauſe, and to Iou, as the Inſtrument or Effect thereof. Thus, you ſee, every Thing, or all created Beings, are but Effects or ſecondary Cauſes, though the Word is uſed with Propriety without ſuch Diſtinction. Thus we ſay, the Sun is the Cauſe of Vapours; Vapours the Cauſe of Clouds; Clouds of Rain; Rain of Springs, Rivers, &c. Tyr. I thank you, Sir, I underſtand you quite well; but pray what do you mean by the Property or Properties of Bodies or Beings of any Sort? Pphl l b Phil. The Properties of Bodies are thoſe Qualities Productions, and Operations peculiar to each Bod , and by which one is more particularly diſtinguithed from another: Thus it is the Property of God, the primary Cauſe, to be no other than good, merciful, unerring, &c. But of the Devil, or damhed Spirits, to be always bad, unmerciful, implacable, &c. It is alſo the Property ol Man to thint, to reflect, to laugh, to grieve, &. The Property of Glaſs ĩo be tranſparent and brittle 3 of Fire to burn or deſtroy; of the Wind to be inviſible, &c. Tyr. Pray what is an Effect? Is it the ſame as a ſecondary Cauſe, for you ſeem to have made very little or no Diſtinction ? Phil. In reſpect of the Primary Cauſe, all other may be called Effects; but to ſpeak of the Action of ſecondary Cauſes, they all have their Effects alſo. Thus congealed Water or Ice, is the Effect of a ſevere cold Air; a Thau the Effect of the Air being ſo warm as to melt it; a good Harveſt the Effect of Induſtry, and ſeaſonable Weather; a miſerable Life and Death the Ef fects of Vice; a comſortable Life, the Effect of Faſe and Plenty; and a bleſſed and happy End, the Effect of Virtue, Content and Reſignation, &c. S E C T. II. Contains a farther Definition 9 Philoſophy, with certain sarthg ſh o rabnichphrasuophi Tyr. What is farther neceſſary to be known to attain to the Knowledge of Natural Philoſophy? Phil. There are certain Axioms, Rules, or ſelſ-evident Principles upon which this Science depends; and of which you may ſoon make yourſelf Maſter, by reading them a few Times over; and if you obſervè them well, you cannot be led into Error by them, becauſe they are ſelf-evident Truths. . ãyr. Pleaſe to let me hear them, and if there be any Thing difficult in them, pleaſe to define them, becauſc I may not immediately apprehend them. . hil. I will. . 969 THE YOUNG MAN s AXIOM or RULE I. Nothing has no Properties; that is, Nothing, Non-entity, or Negation of Being have no Exiſtence, therefort can have no Property. AXIOM I. . Something doth exiſt; then every real Thing has or is endued with ſome Property or Properties, becauſe it exiſis. AXI OM III. There is no Medium between Exiſtence and Non-Exiſtence, between Something and Nothing; for a Thing muſt be or not be; and it is impoſſible it ſbould be ana not be, at one and the ſame Time. AXIOM IV. Nothing can never be made into Something; that is, Something never can be produced out of Nothing; or Nothing has no Properties, by Axiom l. AXIOMV. . Something can never be reduced to Nothing; that is, no Subſtance or Being can be really annihilated or reduced to a Siate & Negation. This is very clear from Axiom I. an l Th hich Axinù n Mend d conſe at which exiſts of itſelf, is independent, and conſequently all ouhp Ppeileds or Subſſances are dependent thereupon, and are but Effects thereof * The Atheiſts, Fataliſts and Free- Thinkers are very fond to keep up to the ſtrict Rules of this, and Axiom 4 and s, and draw curious and unneteſſary Arguments frum them, in order to overturn or leſſen every Thing tending to the Belief of the Self-Exiſtence of God and weaken the Syſtem of revealed Religion. The Fataliſts call God's Omnipotency in Queſtion, and ſay, Matter is eternal, according to Axiom 1ſt and 4th; but admit the Being of God cannot be ſelf-evidently proved by the Laws of Philoſophy. What then? Muſt we deny every Thing that we cannot comprehend  -We know thar there is a Circle an a Square, but the real and true Proportion to each other is not known, nay, is in itſelf contradictory, and ſo are many other Things in Nature. If then we cannot comprehend this, and many other Things that daily preſent themſelves to us; is it not vain to ſearch after thoſe that we never can comprehend? and is it not as equally abſurd to deny their Nature and Exiſtence, becauſe they are far beyond the Reach of Mans ſhallow Capacity? . AXIOM AX I OM VII. Whatever is not the real Cauſe of an Effect, can be na other than a ſecondary Cauſe, and as ſuch muſt be dependent, therefore is itſelf no other than an Effect, by Sect. I. li AX I OM VIII. Rvery Thing in Nature, after its Greation, would for ever econtinue in that State and Poſition ſù itſelf, were it not for ſome Cauſe acting upon it to olter either the State, Condition, or Poſition thereoſ. Therefore, AXIOM IX. Every Change is produced from ſome Cauſe or other. AXIOM X. Natural Cauſes produce natural Effects, but they can nover of themſelves broduce ſuper natur al ones; but a ſupernatural Cauſe may produce Effects of every Kind. N. B. This may at firſt appear abſurd to a eritical and quibbling Philoſopher, hut I believè it will not be thought unnatural ſrom th. Nature of God and the Law of Nature itſclf. . AX I OM XI. ll 4ll and every Change in any Body will always be in Proportion to the Power or Force M the Cauſe acting upon it. AXIOM XII. Nature acts conſtantly in an uniform Order to itſelf; doth nothing in vain (by Axiom ĩo). We muſt from henca then aſſign the ſume Reaſon and Cauſes for Heat in Water, as in Fire, and that of Reſpiration in Beaſts and Inſects as in ourſelves, &c. N. B. The Qualities and Properties of Bodies are not known hy mere Hypotheſis, and therefore Recourſe muſt be had to Experiments in many Things, which ſcldom fail to give us a ſenſible Satisfaction. Thoſe, therefore, who have Time and Opportunitr, would do well too peruſe Dr. Derbam, Dr. Deſaguliers, Mr. Rowning's, or Mr. Martins Natural and Experiméntal Philoſophy. Do you apprehend theſe Axioms? Tyr. I think they are very eaſy to be underſtood. Phil. Then we will proceed to S E C T. III. Of Matter in general, with a ſbort Account of ſome of its moſt material known Properties. Tyr. What is Matter ? d il. A hard, maſſy, diviſible and moveable Subſtance; the Eſſence or firſt Principle of all natura Things; and from whoſe Arrangements and various Combinations of Particles, ariſe the different Bodies oſ the Univerſe. ; Tyr. Is the intimate, inmoſt or internal Nature o Matter known? Phil. No, it is not; but ſome Properties belonging thereto are known to us, and it is evident the primary Particles or Atoms of Matter are the ſame in all Bodies. Tyr. Is Matter finite or infinite? 4 hil. Finite, becauſe it is limited within certain Bounds. Tn- How is Matter conſidered in every Body? Phil. Under the three Denominations of Length, Breadth, and Depth, or Thickneſi, the proper Names applicable to Solidity or any ſolid Body. Tyr. Have all Bodies Properties alike? hil. No; but there are certain Properties common to all Bodies; and others have their peculiar Properties. Tyr. ,Pray tell me what Properties are common to ies? . Phil. Every Body has at leaſt five common Properties, viz. I. Extenſion; for all Bodies fill, or take up ſome certain Spacè, and may be extended. 2. Diviſibility; for all Bodies may be divided into two Parts, thoſe two into four, and thoſe four into eight, &c. ad infinitum, or for ever. 3. Figurability; for there is no Body or Thing without ſome Shape or Figure. 4. Mobility; for all Bodies are capable of being removed into another Situation. And, s. Solidity; for the internal and external Particles of al ſolid Bodies are hard, and act upon one another in ſuch a Manner as to form Figures of various Shapes and Dimenſions. Tyr. I underſtand you well, Sir; but pleaſe to inform me what Bodies have their peculiar Properties? Phit Phil. The peculiar Properties belonging to certain Bodies are as follows, viz. 1. Gravity and Levity. 2. Attraction and Electricityp. 3. Tranſparency and Opacity. 4 Denſity and Rarity. 5. Hardneſs and Softneſs. 6. igidity and Flexibiliiy. 7. Conſiſtence (or Thichneſo ) and Fluidity. 8. Heat and Cold. ꝗ. Humidity (or Moiſlure) and Siccity (or Dryneſs)]. i0. Elaſticitp. 11. Odours and Sapours. 12. Light. 13. Colours. and 14. Sound. Of theſe in their Order. S E CT. IV. ; A Definition of the firſt five common Properties, Extenſion, ſi ũ Bßolettin &c. . ſon 2IL. Of EXTENSION. Tyr. What is Extenſion? Phil. Extenſion is the Diſtance between the extreme Particles of a Body, taken from any Part of the Surface, to the oppoſite Part thereof, and by this Extenſion, the Shape, Size, Dimenſion or Magnitude of any Body is meaſured or. known. Tyr. What do you mean by Magnitude & Phil. It is the ſame as Size or ek; but in Dhilesorhs it means the Quantity of Space that any particular Body fills or takes up, which is the juſt and true Magnitude or Dimenſions thereof. 2. OF DIVISIBILITV. Tyr. What is Diviſibility ? Pihil. It is the Act of dividing, or is the Property or Quality of Bodies capable of being divided into Parts, either mentally or actually. Tyr. I think I underſtand you; you mean no Bod or Particle of Matter is ſo ſmall but it may ſtill be divided into two Parts. Phil. I do; and not only into two Parts, but thoſe two into four; and thoſe four into eight, and ſo on for ever and ever. i Tyr. This is vaſtly ſurpriſing, and one would think incredible. Phil. It is very evident, that a Particle of Matter, though ever ſo ſmall, is capable of being divided into as many Parts as there are Grains of Sand on the whole Surſace of the Earth; nay, more ſo; for the Grains of Sand are finite, within the Limits of Space and Numbers, but a Grain may be divided infinitely. Iyjr. If the leaſt Particle is capable of infinite Diviſion, what then muſt the largeſt Mountain be ? Phil. You make me ſmile, that you have ſo innocently diſcovered yourſelf to be but a Tyro: For if the leaſt Grain of Sand is capable of infinite Diviſion, (as it is) the largeſt Mountain can but be ſo. Iyr. I aſk Pardon for my Inconſideration; but, however, I ſhould be glad if I could fee you demonſtrate it, if you poſſibly can. i . biù That I will, and nothing is more eaſy to be underſtood: For let ν R O NO be a right Line, . and P Q drawn parallel thereto, and draw alſo R3S per- iù πmG QF Q pendicular thereto, S which is to repreſent any Particle of Matter to be divided; then draw right Lines from N to a, o, p. Q. which will cut or divide the Line RS into four diſtinct Parts. Now let us ſuppoſe the Line P QO to be infinitely extended; then it is evident, that there might be an infinite Number of Points taken between S and Q conſequently then, Lines drawn from N to thoſe infinite boints would cut or divide R S infinitely or for ever. . ; Tyr. I underſtand you now very well, but ſtill I am nmaved, and can hardly find myſelf inclined to credit it, or aſſert what I know to be true. . Phil. I don't at all wonder at it; hut it will ſurpriæe ou more if I ſhould tell you, that the leaſt Particle oſ Viatter. after it has been thus divided, is capable of ſuch Extenſion as to fill or cover not only the Face of our Globe, but even the Surface of the greateſt Planet in our Syſtem, ſo as no Pore thereof ſhall be void. lil Iyr. This is ſo incredible, that I dare ſay you will lrave few Diſciples to believe it. Phil. I ſuppoſe ſo; but it is very evident from the very Nature of Matter, and the unaccountable Minuteneſs of its Particles. Tyr. nò Can you give me any further Satisfaction on this ead Phil. Not demonſtratively, for I think that has been ſufficiently done: But perhaps you may be cured of sour firſt Surprizve, in ſurprizing you further with more ncredibilities, as you call them. Tꝗyr. I aſk Pardon, but I hope my Incredulity will not prevent your communicating every uſeful Ihing to me. Pbil. Not at all; for I do hot wonder at your being ſurpriæed, and if we conſider the Minuteneſs and Ductility of RMatter, it is aſtoniſhing: For Mr. Aoyle ſays, that one Grain of Vitriol will tinge near 30,000 Grains of Water; how very ſmall then muſt the Particles of this Grain be, to diffuſe itſelf, and ſpread the whole Space of above two Quarts of Liquor. Again, the learned Dr. Keill has demonſtrated, that there are actually ſuch ſmall Animalcules or living Inſects, that one ſingle Droꝑ of Water will cover 100,000 of them; of what infinite Minuteneſs muſt the Globules of Blood be, which run or circulate through the Veins of theſe ſmall Creatures, ſince the aforeſaid Gentleman and others have proved, that one of theſe Globules does not exceed the res, gpσσσσσσσ σσο σσοσ,σ) σοοσσσο Fart of an Inch. A Number almoſt beyond ſinite Expreſſion or Conception l* Tyr. I am obliged to you, and am now ſatisfied concerning the Minuteneſs of the Particles of Matter; but pray what do rou mean by Ductility ? Phil. Ductility is that Property of Matter belonging to certain Bodies, which is capable of being preſſed or heaten out wider, or drawn out longer; and ſuch is the Nature of Gold, that Mr. Bojle ſays, that one Grain only may be beaten into a Plate or Leaf containing 50 Square Inches (which is upwards of ſeven Inches every Way in the Leaf) and therefore one Pound will cover a Room 2000 Feet ſquare, according to this Proportion. . Tyr. Surprizing indeed And pray what is the next Thing or Property you obſerve in Bodies? Phil. The next Property is commonly called Solidity. * See Keill's Aſtronomy and Natural Philoſophy, Martin s and Roauniug s Philoſophy, under the Articles of Diticoũy and Light. Philoſophical Traulustione. No. 194. . 3. Of SOLIDITY. Tyr. What do you mean by Solidity ? Phil. Solidity is that Property by Means of which one Body reſiſts another, and tries to keep its own Station or Situation, though preſſed upon or againſt on all Sides; and in ſome Caſes it is called Impenetrability, or impenetrable Solidity. Iyr. Have all Bodies then this Property? Phil. Moſt certainly; but why do you aſk ſuch à Queſtion' Tyr. Becauſe I thought it was only peculiar to ſome Bodies, as Iron, Steel, Stone, Lead, &c. Phil. You muke me ſmile again; is it not evident, that Air and Water are very great Reſiſters? And you know very well, that a Drop of Water or Particle oſ Air placed between any two Bodies will really hinder their Contact or uniting, the ſame as if there were the ſime Quantity of Stecl or any hard Body between em. ꝗIyr. In what does the Shape or Modification of Matter conſiſt? . Phil. In the Form of all the extreme Parts of a Body, on the various Parts of its Surface, by which we determine the Shape or Shapes thereof, and is therefore called Figurability, or the Shape, Mode and Form of a Body? Tyr. How do the inward Parts act upon one another to cauſe ſuch a Form? Phril. ſhis is not eaſy to account for; but, however, we ſhall ſay more upon this when we come to ſpeak of Ccheſion. 4. Of MOBIL ITV. Tyr. What do you mean by Mobility ? Phil. It is that Property of a Body which is capable of Motion, or being moved. ĩyr. What is Motion? Phil. The continual Change of any Body from one Place to another, or that State and Condition which is never at Reſt. . T3r. What do you mean by Reſt ? hil. Ceſſation of Motion, or the Continuance of a Body in one Place or State. Tyr. What is the Cauſe of Motion? Phil. Some external or internal Force or Power, which acts upon the Body at reſt, and drives or moves it out of its Place. Tyr. What is abolute Motion? hil. The real Change or abſolute Place of any moving Body. Tyr. &nat is relative Motion?ꝰ Phil. It is the Change of Place in reſpect of Bodies at reſt, for a Body may be at reſt, and yet may be in a relative Motion. Tyr. How do you makeèe this appear? Biit Very eaſy; for when we are in a Ship that is ſalling, though we ſit ſtill, yet we are in Motion, and ſo we are perpetually by the annual and diurnal Motion ofſ the Earth but this being a Motion which is not felt, is called inſenitle or relative Motion. Uyr. I underſtand you well; and pray is there any Thing further to be obſerved concerning the Nature and Effect of Motion? Phil. Yes, there are three Diviſions, Properties, or Affections in Motion, viæ. 1. Celerity or Swiſtneſs. 2. Quantity; and, 3. Direction. S E C T. V. Of the Celerity, Quantity, and Direction of Motion. Tyr. What dõ6 vou mean by Celerity? hil. Swiftneſs, or Rapidity; and in Philoſophy it means that Degree of Swiftneſs by which any Body puaſſes over a given Space in any certain Time; as ſuppoſe one Body was to paſs over a certain Space, and another was to paſs or run through the ſame in half the Time. then the Celerity of the Ilaſt would double the firſt, viz. would move as quick again. Tyr I underſtand you; and pray how do you compute the Quantity of Motion? Phil. By the Quantity of Matter and the Velocity compounded. . Tyr. I don't at preſent underſtand youp hil. Obſerve then: Suppoſe one Body to have 4 Parts of Matter and S Degrees of Velocity, and anoF THE YOUNG MAN s ther Body has 2 Parts of Matter and ro Degrees of Velocity, then the Motion of both would be equal, for 2X 52 20, and 2 X 10220. But if one has a Parts oſ Matter and 4 Degrees of Velocity, and another c Parts of Matter and 8 Degrees of Velocity, then the Quantitu of Motion in the firſt will be the Quantity of Motion in the ſecond as 8 to 48 for a x428, and x 8248. Tyr. I am obliged to you, kind Philomathes; and I can plainly ſee by what you have ſnewn me, that if the Quantity of Matter and Velocities of any two Bodies are equal, their Quantity of Motion will be equal alſo; but if either the Quantity of Matter or Velocity be not equal in each, then their Motion will alſo be unequal. Phil. You are very right, Tyro; but ſtill you muſt remember, that when the Quantities of Matter and the Velocity are in reciprocal or mutual Proportion to each other, then their Motion will be equal: Thus, ſuppoſe 8:4::12:56; that is, the Motion of a Body whoſe Quantity is 8, having 6 Degrees of Velocity, is equal to the Motion of another Body whoſe Quantity is 4 with 12 Degrees of Velocity; for 8 x6æ4 X12. Tyr. I thank you, Sir, for this kind Hint; but pray what do you mean by the Direction of Motion? Phil. Direction is an Impulſe or Force of one Body acting upon another, which is called ſingle Direction; but if two Bodies act upon any ſingle Body, it is called eompound Motion or Birection. Tyr. Pleaſe to explain this a little further to m'e. hil. Single, ſimple or direct Motion, is when a Body is moved out of its Place by a certain Impulſe, and will of itſelf (after ſuch a Force acting upon it) move continually in that Direction in which it firſt ſet out, or was acted upon, except it meets with any Obſtruction. Tyr What is compound Motion? Phil. When two or more Bodies act upon any ſingle Body by contrary Directions; for Inſtance, let a String be faſtened to a Ball, and laid on a ſmooth Table, it is evident that if I pull, the Ball will come to me in a direct Line, without it meets with any Obitruction or ſecond Force or Impulſe. 2. If another Perſon has a ſecond String faſtened to the Ball, and he ſtands in a right Line with me, and both pull ever ſo eaſy, or ever ſo hard, provided we pull with equal Force, the Body or Ball can never ſtir; but, 3dly, If the other Perſon directs his String in a right Angle to mine, and we pull both equal, the Ball will then paſs in the diugonul Iiĩne of a Square, and when it reſts will be equidiſtant from us, and the Velocity will alſo be ſwiſter; for the Body being acted upon by two Powers, will paſs through a Line or Space whoſe Square will be equal to the Squares of the Diſtance of both Powers from the Ball. Do you underſtand me? STyr. I can't ſay I do. Phil. Obſerve then: Suppoſe the two Strings fixt as aforeſaid, and we both give a ſudden Pull, Snatch or lmpulſe, you with 3 Degrees and I with 4 Degrees of Force, then I ſay, the Ball will fly in a diagonal Line or Direction, will iave 5 Degrees of Force, and will paſ over the diagonal Line of the Square in the ſame Time that it would paſs to us by either of our ſingle Powers acting upon it. This is plain (from Figure the 12th) for ſuppoſe the Ball be at A, ꝓou act upon it at B with 3 Deogees, I act upon it at C with Beqrees of Force, then I ſay the Ball will fly in the diagonal Line A D, with sS Degrees of Force, and in the ſame Time as it would arrive ſingly from A to B or to C: For 3 X 32:9, and 4 X 4216; now 16 4-9 25, whoſe is Æ5 AD. See Figure 2, in Geometry, Sect. V. Tyr. Now I underſtand it perfectly well. Phil. I am glad of it; then we will proceed to give Ipu ſome Account of other Properties reſpecting certain odies. i S ECT. VI. Of Gravity and Levity, Attraction and Electricity. Tyr. What do you mean by Gravityè? Phil. Weight; alſo the Power or Property of Bodies by which they naturally deſcend. or tend down towards the Center of the Earth, commonly called the Cente of Gravity? Ty9r. What is the Difference between Gravity and WVeight ? Phil. Some have aſſerted that Weight and Gravity are the ſame, but it is evident that Weight is only the Effect thereof. Tyr. What are the different Sorts of Gravity? hil. Gravity is divided into two Sorts, viæ. abſolute, and relative or ſpecific Gravity. Tyr. What is abſolute Gravity ? Phil. Abſolute Gravity is the whole Force or Power o a Body, whereby it tends towards the Center of the arth. Tyr. What is ſpecific Gravity ? hil. Specific Gravity is peculiar to certain Bodies, and diſtinguiſhes them from others when compared together: Or it is frequently taken for or called that Exceſs in one Body compared with the Quantity or Bulk of another. Tyr. How do you compute or meaſure Gravity in different Bodies? Phil. By the Quantity of Matter contained in them, for the Proportion will always hold good between em. Tyr. This then is the Reaſon, I ſuppoſe, that heavy Bodies deſcend ſooner or with greater Velocity than light ones. Phil. Not at all, Tyro, for the Property of Gravity is ſuch, that its Power or Force acts upon all alike without any Diſtinction of Size or Weight . Tyr. How can this bel? Is it poſſible a Feather ſhould deſcend or fall 20, 40, or 6o Inches, Feet or Yards, ſo ſoon as a Pound Weight of ſolid Lead, Iron, &c? Phil. Yes, it would, if it were as many Miles, were it not for the Reſiſtance of the Air which acts ſo forcibly upon the Feather and retards its Deſcent; but where there is no Air, that is, if the Air can be exhauſted, the Feather would fall or deſcend in the ſame Time, and with equal Velocity with the Pound Weight, as is evidently proved by the Air-Pump, out of which when the Air is exhauſted, both would equally deſcend with incredible Swiftneſs to the Bottom. τ i Tyr. Then I perceive it is not the Weight of Bodies, but the Power of Attraction over different Bodies; for every Particle of Matter, I ſee, is acted. upon by an ual Force of Gravity, only it requires a greater Force of Attraction to move the heavier Body Phil. You are right; for all Bodies gravitate towards each other, the Earth gravitates towards the Stone or Weight, which is falling or deſcending towards it, as much in Proportion as the Stone to the Earth, only the Bulk and Quantity of Matter is ſo great that we cannot perceive the Motion of one like that of the other. Tyr. Pray is there any determining the Time of the Deſcent of Bodies falling perpendicularly, or knowing with what Degree of Velocity they fall? Phil. Yes; for the perpendicular Deſcent is about 15 Feet in a Sẽcond of Time, and for all other following Seconds, the Spaces are as the Squares of thoſe Seconds; thus, let the Seconds be 1, 2, 3, 4 &c. then their Squares will be 1, 4, 9, 16, &c. and the Spaces aſſed through will be 15, 60, 134, 240, &c. and the Number or eet will be as the  dplcation of the umbers, 1, 3, S, 7, &c. that is, 1S, 45, 7 ) 105, &c. Or thus; the Spaces Bodies fall through are èual to the Squares of their Times: Thus a Body will fall 4 Times as far the 2d Minute as the 1ſt, becauſe 2x224, and 3X379, &c. therefore the Diſtance of falling will be 3 Times as far in the ad Portion of Time as in the 1ſt; 5 Times as far in the 3d, 7 Times as far in the 4th, &c. Tyr. I thank you, Sir; but if this be the Caſe in Bodies deſcending to increaſe, do not Bodies aſcending decreaſe in Proportion? Phil No doubt of it, for it is plain the Force is decreaſed as it riſes, and the Law of Gravity perpetually deſtroys the Aſcent: For if a Body be thrown up with any certain Force, ſo as to continuè riſing as long again as another Body, it will go 4 Times as high; if il aſcends 3 Times as long, it will go 9 Times as high c. F 6 2. O 2. Oſ ATTRACTION, COHESION, and ELECTRICITY. Tyr. What do you mean by Attraction ? hil. Attraction and Gravity are often expreſſed for one and the ſame Thing, and are uſed indifferently for the ſame Circumſtance in common Expreſſion; but yet there is a ſenſible Difference, for Gravity is the natural Tendency of all Bodies towards the Center of the Earth in their Deſcent; but Attraction is the Tendency oſ approaching or drawing near; or it is that Property in Bodies by which they affect, gravitãte or tend to each other, and this Power or Property is called Attraction. Iyr. I do hot righty apprehend this; I wiſh thorefore you would explain it further. Phil. Attraction then is conſidered in two Parts, viæ. I. Attraction of Gravity, and 2. Attraction of Coheſion. Tyr. What do you mean by Attraction of Graũῦity ? hil. Thaut Power or Property by which Bodies naturally tend to, or appronch one another, by u centripetal Force, viæ. tending to, or being impelled fo act towards the Centers of each other. Tyr. And pray what do you meun by Attraction of Cchæſim hil. I muſt firſt tell you what Coheſion is; and that is the Action of Atoms, or primary Corpuſcles of Matter, which act upon each other, ſo as to form viſible or ſenſible Particles; and then by the Law of Attraction, theſe Particles do ſo cohere or unite together as to cauſe the different Shapes of all the Maſſes or Lumps of ſolid Bodies, which preſent themſelves to our Sight; but how theſe Atoms or Particles act upon each other ſo as to form ſuch and ſuch a Shape, we know not, becauſe we cannot account for the Actions of the different conſtituent Parts of a Body ſo formed by the Coheſion of ſuch Particles *. x Many are the furprizine Effects of the Laws of Attraction, and thoſe whoſe Curioſity would lead them further into the Knowledge of theſe Things, may conſult Martin's Phil. Gram. Rovwning, and other eminent Authors on this Head; but yet, Tyro, be not curious, for I tell you that even the great Sir Iſaac Newton himſelf, though he makes the Law of Attraction and Gravity to be the very Baſis of Philoſophy; yet at the ſamè Time owns ſiimſelf entirely ignorant of the tal Caule of either. . OF ENOUW LEDG E. 109 Tyr. I am highly obliged to you, kind Philomathes, aund pray now give me Leave to aſk you what you mean by Eleciricity, and wherein it differs from Attraction è& Phil Electricity is that Virtue, Property, or Faculty of certain Bodies (ſuch as Amber, Glaſs, Sealing-Wax, &c.) that when rubbed for ſome ſmall Time, will, by the Power of ſuch Artrition, Friction, or Rubbing, attract all light Bodies, ſuch as Hairs, Feathers, &c. at a very ſenſible Diſtance, ſo as to cohere, or ſtick to the Body ſo agitated or rubbed, for a certain Space of Time, according to the Power of Attrition given to it; and the larger the Body, and the more the Friction, the further will it æattract, and the longer will the lighter Body ſo attracted ſtiok to it. . ãro, Then it will leave the electrified Body at laſt, will it ? Phil. Y es, moſt certainly, aſter the Virtue or Power given to the electrified Body by Friction ceaſes, and then it is as it were repelled, beaten or forced back from the ſaid Body, and will ſuddenly ſty off ſometimes with a Sort of a Snap) but never out of the Sphere of Attraction; for by rubbing the Body ſuſficiently again, they will inſtantly fly to it as if chey were compelled baok. Tyr. What may we lenrn from Electricity ? Phil. Many uſeful und amuſing Things, as, 1. That it conſiſts of, or is compounded both with the Power of Altraction and Repulſion. 2. Electrical or electrified Bodies attract all IThings; but the Load-Stone acts with very little Power or Attraction on any Thing, except lĩron or Steel. 3. If a light Fenuther be within the Power of Attraction of an electrical Body, there it will ſtick, und afterwards being repelled will fly off to ſome other Body, but it will always ſtretch out its Fibres towards the electrical Object. . . Many other Curioſities are to be obſerved from the Nature or Power of Electricity; but particularly this, that not only Plants have received freſh Vegetation by it, but even many Diſorders incident to Mankind, ſome very obſtinate, and others even ſaid to be hereditary. which have baffled all the Rules and Order of a regular Proceſs of Phyſics, have been removed by the Perſons N. B. Dr. Boyle ſays, that it is not by Neceſſity that ſmall attracted Bodies come to be electric ones; for if a Piece of Amber be rubbed ſtrongly on any dry or warm Body of as big Sie as itſelf, and then taken away, and afterwards tied ĩo a String ſo as to hang perpendicufar and quite at reſt; if the Body upoh which the ber was rubbed be put towards the Amber, the Body ſo rubbed will drav the Picce of Amber towards it, which plainly ſhews that other Bodies can move or draw the electric ones. See Dr. Brocom. Dr. Jobn Harris and Martin on Electricity. 3. Of TRANSPARENCY and OPACITY. T7yr. What do you mean by Tranſparency ? Phil. Clearneſs, free from C hudinoſ ; and is that Property of Bodiès which renders them eaſy to be ſeen through, ſo that any Object may be ſeen behind them or appear much the ſame as if no ſuch tranſparent Body was placed between the Eye and the Object, though perhaps not quite in the ſame Size and Magnitude. Tyr. What is this owing to? Phil. To the Nature or Conſtruction of all ſuch Bodies that admit the Rays of Light to paſs through them immediately in right Lines; ſuch is the Nature of all pellucid, diaphanous, or tranſparent Bodies, as Glaſs, Cryſtal, &c. by reaſon of their Pores, or ſmall Interſtices or Paſſages between the Particles of Matter contained in them; and theſe Pores are ſo great in ſome of theſe Bodies (particularly Glaſs) that the Quantity of Matter contained in the Bulk of theſe Bodies bears ſcarce any Proportion to the Size or Bulk itſelf. See Dr. Kcill's Introduction. . Tyr. I thank you, Sir; and pray what do you mean by Opacity ? Phil. iat State or Condition of Bodies which are void of Light, or the Quality of all ſuch Bodies as are dark and opaque, or are not to be ſeen through. T;r. I underſtand you, Sir, for I ſee plainly that Opacity is a ſecond Darkneſs, as it were; for though it is not really the Want of Light, yet it is Light obſtructed which cannot paſs through ſuch Bodies in right Lines, as in tranſparent Bodies. Phil. You ſay right, Tyro; but you are to obſerve that the ſmall Particles of opaque Bodies will become tranſparent in Liquids, or otherwiſe by ſilling their Parts or Pores with any Subſtance equal with the Denſity oſ their Parts. See Dr. Keills lntroduction. 4. Of DENSITY and RARITY. Tyr. What do you underſtand by Denſity ? . hil. Denſity, according to the common Acceptation of the Word, ſignifies Thickneſs, Solidity, or Comactneſs; but philoſophically, it is the Property of a ody, which ariſes from the Cloſeneſs of its Particles and Smallneſs of its Pores, by which it contains ſuch a Quantity of Matter under ſuch a Bulk: And therefore, in comparing one Body with another, we ſay, ſuch a one is leſs denſe than the other, which is more rare or thinner. Tyr. Then I ſee that Rarity is only Thinness, or is quite oppoſite to Denſity or Thickneſs. Phil. You are right. Tyr. What may we learn from hence? ꝑhit Several uſeful Things. 1. If two Bodies have the ſame Denſities, their Maſſes are as their Bulks. 2. The Denſities of any two Bodies are in a Ratio comRqunded of the direct Proportion of the Quantity of atter in their Maſſes, and a reciprocal Proportion of the Magnitude of ſuch Maſſes. Tyr. Pray explain this a little clearer. Blit. Suppoſe then there were two given Bodies, A and B; A has 6 Parts of Matter and 4 Degrees of Magnitude; and let B have 3 Parts of Matter, and 12 Derees of Magnitude; I ſay then, that A's Denſity is to 's as 5 to 15 that is, 5 Times greater than B's. Tyr. How do vou prove this ? Phil. Place the Numbers Fractionwiſe, but always obſerve, that the Parts of Matter muſt be made one Fraction, and the Magnitudes of each, another Fraction, but ſo that the Degrees of Magnitude which belong to the given Body muſt ſtand athwart or croſsways, and not under its own Parts of Matter; or in other Words, the Degrees of Magnitude of the one Body muſt be a Denominator, to the Parts of Matter in the other; then multiply the Fractions together, and compare the Numerator and Denominator, for that gives the Proportion of their Denſities. Thus in the ueſtion A §x1024825, therefore A's Denſity is s imes greater than B's. Tyr. I heartily thank you, kind Philomathes, for this plain Demonſtration. Phil. Then we will proceed to the next Thing, viæ. S. Of HARDNESS and SOFTNESS. Tyr. What do you mean by Hardneſs, or wherein does Hardneſs conſiſt? Phil. Hardneſs, in Oppoſition to Softneſs, conſiſts ol the moſt minute primogenial Particlèes of Matter conglutinated, ſtuck to, or cohered to each other, in ſuch a Marner, and into ſuch a Firmneſs or Solidity, that the Preſſure of the Finger is not able to make any Alteration on fuch a Bodipſo as to diſplace any of the Parts, or alter its outward Form or Shape; and the different Degrees of Hardneſ ariſe from ſuch Bodies, whofe conſtituent Particles are ftat or ſquare, ſo as to touch each other in many Points; whereas thoſe which are round or ſpherical, touch in fewer Poims or leſs Surface, and approach neater to Soſtneſs or Liquidity. . 6. Of RiGiDITY and FLEXIBILITVY. Tyr. I apprehend that Rigidity and Flexibility are much the ſame as Hardneſs and Soſtneſi; are they not ? Phil. No, Tyro5 Rigidity ſignifies Stiffneſs, and therefore is in Effect the ſame as Hardneſi for all rigid Bodies are hard: But Soſtneſs and Flexibility are not the ſame, for no Body can be ſoft without being flexible, but a Body may be fſlexible and not ſoſt; for Flexibility does not ſignify Softneſt but Thinneſs, or the Nature or Property of ſuch Bodies as are thin and pliable. Iyr. I thank you, Sir; and pray what next comes in Courſe? . 7. Of CONSISTENCY and F LUIDITY. Tyr. What is Conſiſtency è Phil. Conſiſtency ſignifies Thickneſs, and is ſet in Oppoſition to Fluidity, and is that State or Property of Bodies, whereby they are fixed like thoſe in a State of Solidity, but may be moved or acted upon with greater Eaſe: It is liewiſe called Fixidity or Fixity, and ariſe. from conſtituent Particles, the ſame as thoſe of Hardneſi and Rigidity, but of a leſs Degree. Tyr. What is Fluidity or Fluidneſs è Phil. That Quality of Bodies, by which the Parts are ſo diſpoſed as to ſlip by or over cach other, and flow all Manner of Ways, and will, contrary co Solidity or Hardneſs, give Way to the leaſt Touch or Preſſure. TIyr. What is the Reaſon or Cauſe of Fluidity? pil. It ariſes from the Similarity of the original or rimogenial Particles of Matter, together with their ubricity and Smallneſs, whereby they are ſo modified as to produce a ſluid Body, ſuch is the Property of Water, Oil, Fire, &c. Iyr. Then I find that Fluidity and Liquidity are the me. Phil. NO; there is a very ſenſble Difference, for Fluidity is a general Name for all Bodies whoſe Parts yield &o any Iouch or Impreſſion, ſuch as Sand, &ſc. which is called a Æluid as well as Water, &c. but that is called Liquidity, or a liquid Body, which when touched leaves a Moiſture or Wet upon theè Finger. 8. Or HEAT and CoLD. Tyr. What is Heat ? Pi il. Heat is a Senſation of the Mind, the Cauſe oſ which conſiſts in the Agitation of the ſenſible Parts oſ the Object, which produces in us that Senſation by which we pronounce the Object ſo agitated to be more or leſs hot or cold; for it is according to the Activity oſ the Motion of the Particles of the Bodies ; no Heat heing fenſible to us but ſuch whoſe Motion of its Parts act ſtronger upon us, and greater than the Organs of our Body. See Harris, Rowning, and Martin. . ù What is Cold, or what do you underſtand by it? hil. That which is contrary to Heat, and void oſ all the agitated Particles of Fire, and in that State when the Motion of the Parts of a Body is leſs than that of the Organ of our Touch or Fecling; then it excites in us ſuch a Senſation as is called Cold. Tyr. I thank you, Sir; but is not. Fire and Light one and the ſame Thing? piil Phil. No; but the Particles of Light and Fire act alike in many Reſpects, but yet they are very different; but shis Iſhall tell your more of when I come to treat of ight. 9 Very well, Sir; but pray what is Flameè hil. Flame is a Fluid, Fume, or Vapour, ariſing from intenſe or red-hot Bodies, by the Particles being inconceivably agitated, but ever in Motion whilſt there is any Air; for without Air there is no Flame, as appears by a Candle which will not burn in a foul or aduſt Air, and a Chimney (or any Vehicle or Tube) on Fire is very eaſily extinguiſhed by ſtopping the Mouth of it with a Blanket, or any Thing proper to keep out the Draught of the Air. 9. Of HUMIDITY and SICCITY. Dyr. What is Humidity? - . Phit. Moiſture or Dampneſs, which has the Quality or Property of wetting or moiſtening other Bodies, but not ſo as to make the wet Particles drop. Tyr. I ſuppoſe then that it may be called Fluidity ? Phil. Not with Propriety, for all Fluids will not wet, ſuch as Duſt, Sand, Quickſilver, &c. Tyr. Then, if I apprehend it right, Humidity is a Sort of a Medium between Wetneſs and Dryneſs. Phil. You are right, for Humidity is only a Mixture of Particles left after Liquidity, or elſe ſome liquid Particles ariſing, either from Steam or Dampneſs, upon certain Bodies, ſo as to make them humid or moiſt. Tyr. Siccity then, I perceive, is the ſame as Dryneſe, and I ſuppoſe is only the Want of Moiſture; for if a Body ſhould happen to be moiſt, yet if by the Heat of the Sun or Fire the Particles ſnould be exhauſted or driven out by Steam or Vapour, and this Heat keeps ſtill continuing, it will naturally make the Body ſo acted upon very dry, criſped, rumpled, or brittle; and I ſuppoſe this Property, Quality, or State, may be called iccity. Phil. You are very right, Tyro. 31O. Of ELASTICITVY. Tyr. What is Elaſticity, and what does it mean? Phil. It ſignifies Springineſs; and is that Property belonging to certain Bodies, by which they return to their former State, Shape, and Poſition, after they have been put out of ſuch Shape or State. Thus a Stick, Piecce of Cane, Whale Bone, &c. being bent, and letting them go ſuddenly, will return with great elaſtic Force and Swiftneſs to their former State: But of all Bodies, Air is moſt remarkably elaſtic; for being compreſſed (or pent up, as it is commonly called) by any Power or Force, when ſuch Power or Force quits the Office oſf acting upon it, then the Air returns with claſtic Rapidity to its former Station; but more of this by and by. Tyr. Are not all Bodies elaſtic? Phil. Yes: None are without the Power or Quality of Elaſticity; but this is in a greater or leſs Degree according to the Make, Shape, or Nature of diſferent Bodies. For Inſtance, ſoſt Bodies have little or no ſenſible Elaſticity but the Strings of every common Spinnet or Harpſichord not only ſhew the Nature of, but the Difference of Elaſticits in Proportion to their Vibration; for the longeſt Wire is elaſtic as well as the ſhorteſt; but the ſhorteſt has many leſs Vibrations than the longeſt; and therefore after it is ſtruck reſumes its natural State or Poſition ſooner than the other, and flies back with great Force and Velocity into its original Form; as ſhall be more fully proved, if we have Room to udat of Vibration. 1l. Of ODOURS and SAPOURS. Tyr. What do you mean by Odours? Phil. Such Bodies as excite in us the Senſe of Smelling; but it is more frequently applied to ſuch Bodies which ſend forth ſweet, fragrant, or perfume Scents. Tyr. What do you apprehend may be the Cauſe oſ theſe odoriferous Bodies, acting thus upon the Organs oſ Smelling? Phil. It ariſes, no Doubt, from exceeding fine, and inſenſible Vapours, which ſly off from ſuch Bodies floating in the Air, and acting circularly in all Manner oſ Directions; but more or leſs according to their Humidity or Sictity; as appears manifeſt by Flowers gnoſe Scent don't act upon our Senſe of Smelling till we are very near them, but when refreſhed by Moiſtures or a ſmall Shower of Rain, may be ſmelt at a conſiderable Diſtance. : T3r. Pray how do theſe Scents act upon the Organ or Senie of Smelling? Pbil. The Effiuvia of theſe odoriferous Bodies decreaſe according to the Squares of their Diſtance: Thus, if there is any odoriferous Body (ſuppoſe a Roſe, &e. placed 1 Inch, 1 Foot, or Yard, from me, and I ſuell it to a certain Degree; then let it be removed 2 Inches, Inches, 4 Inches, &c. from me, I ſay, the Scent o it will decreaſe in Proportion to the Squares of the Diſtance from the Body: 1X1æ1, 2x2 h 3 X 329. 4xX 4216, &c. ſo that the Scent will be i6 Times leſs ut 4 Inches off than at 15 9 Times leſs at 3 Inches of and 4 Times leſs at 2 Inches off; and alſo 4 Times more at 2 Inches oſf than at 4 Inches off, becauſe the Square of 2 is 4 Times leſs than the Square of 4. 12. Of LIGHT. Iyr. What is Light, and the Occaſion or Cauſe ol it Phil. Light is that Senſation in the Organ or Senſe of Secing., whereby all luminous Bodies are not only themſelves apparent to our Sight, but all other Objects that the Rays of Light act upon, are clear to our Senſei or Perception.The Cauſe of ight is unknown to the beſt Philoſophers; it is ſuſficient, Tyro, to ſay, that il exiſted only by the immediate Wor or Will of the great Creator.Let there be Light - and there was Light. Light, no doubt, is produced from Motion; bul then as all Motion will not produce Light, nor is o ductive of Light, it therefore muſt be rather the Quality of certain Bodies that are of themſelves luminous and have the conſtant and invariable Property of emitting or ſending forth Rays of Light to our Eyes much finer than Air itſelf: Such is the Property of the Sun, a Star, a Candle, and all Sorts of Flame, &ec. See Dr. Halley's Micrography, Dr. Harris and Rotuning, ant Maritin. ſ. BOOK OF ENOWLEDG E. m7 Tĩyr. What, do you make Light then a Body of itſelf? I thought the Sun was the Fountain or Cauſe of all Light. Phil You thought wrong then; for it is evident, that though the Sun is the moſt glorious Body of Light that we at preſent know of, yet it is not the Original of Light itſelf: For Light is produced a thouſand Ways where the Rays of the Sun have no Connection. dLight is produced by a Candle, by every Flame, by a Flint and Steel, nay, even by Friction and Percuſſion, ſuch as rubbing a Cat's Back, and by many other Things, Waye or Methods. yr. I perceive my Error, and own what Jou ſay to be true; and if ĩ underſtand you, I ſuppoſe that all luminous Bodies are made up with an infinite Number of Particles of ſuch Matter which are indued with, or have the Property or Quality of Light. Phil. You are right Tyr. Does not Light fly with incredible Swiftneſs ? bil. Yes, it flies above (1,500,000) one Million ſive hundred thouſand Times faſter than a Bullet from the Mouth of a Gun or Cannon, and about (750,000) ſeven hundred and fifty thouſand I'imes faſter than Sound. Tyr. This is incredible indeed But pray, dear Philo, give me a little farther Satisfaction of this amazing Swiftneſs. Hll Phil. It is proved by ſeveral Obſervations, that Sound fiies about rr42 Eeet in a Second of Time (but ſuppoſe 140) and a Bullet flies about 622 (but ſuppoſe 620) Feet in a Second of Time, therefore, as the Sun is about 81,000,000 Million of Miles diſtant from the Earth (which is about the ſame Diſtance of Half the Diameter of the Earth's Orbit) a CannonæBullet would be upwards of 31 Years in paſſing or arriving from the Earth to the Sun; but Lighi flies from the Sun to us in about 72 Minutes. Tyr. How do you prove this? l hil. It is proved by ſeveral Obſervations, but more particularly by the Eclipſes of the Sateilites of Jupiter; for when the Earth is between the Sun and this Flanet. thoſe Eclipſes will happen between 7 and 8 Minutes ſooner, than when the Earth is in the contrary Poſition for then Light has got to fly the Diameter of the Earth's Orbit more, which is about 162,000,000 Miles more than before. This plainly proves that Light is progreſſive or propagated in Time, and not inſtantaneous, as was ſuppoſed by ſome ancient Philoſophers. Tyr. I am much obliged to you; but what other Properties or Affections has Light? Phil. Many, for it is plainly proved long ago, that it is the very Cauſe of thoſe different Colours which appear to us, and are called by the various or diſtinct Names oſ Red, Tellow, Green, &c. which I ſhall tell you more o when I come to treat of Colours. Light alſo is reflexible and refrangible. i Tyr. hat do you mean by reflexible ? . Phil. Reflexibility is that bidoſton of the Rays oſ Light by Which they are thrown back, or turned from their natural Courſre. . . Tyr. What is Refrangibility? lili Phil. Refrangibility is the Diſpoſition of Rays capable of Refraction, or being turned out of their Courſe by paſſing into a denſer Medium. Tyr. Can you give me ſome Examples concerning Refiexibility and Refrangibility ? Phil. I have not foom for this, becauſe it requires not only Words but great Demonſtrations by Figures; but there are many very curious Things to be obſerved in the Nature of Viſion or Sight; and though we ſee Objects plainly, yet they are not always in the very Place that we ſee them with our Eye, for ſometimes we ſee them by Reflexion, and ſometimes by Refraction. Tyr. Why how can this be What, if I ſee an Object plainly in a certain Place, am I to be convinced it is not in that Placeb Phil. I hope ſo; for if it be made appear chat you are deceived, certainly you would not dare to deny Truth itſel upon Experiment. Tyr. Pray then tell me how this is. Phil. We are deceived many Ways by the Laws of Reflexion, and Things appear to us not as they really are. For Inſtance, take a Tub, whoſe Sides are ſtrait, and in the Middle on the Bottom lay a Shilling, or any other viſible Object, then go backwards ſo far that you tan but ſee the Object, there ſtand while another Perſon fills the Tub above half full with Water, then you will not ſee the Shilling where you ſaw it at firſt, but it will appear perhaps 1, 2, 3, 4 or io, 12, or a0o Inches further than it did before: (This is according to the Largeneſs of the Tub and Quantity of Water.) Or otherwiſe, if you walk ſo far backwards before the Water is poured in, that you cannot ſee the Shilling on Account of the Edge of the Veſſel or Tub; then let it be filled as before, and you will ſee the Shilling quite plain, but it will not appear to be in the Middle of the Tub, where it really is, but will appear as if it were many Inches further from you, and towards the further Side oſ the Veſſel. Tyr. This is very ſtrange; pray what is this owing toſ Phil. From Rays, or from a Ray of Light. which paſſes from the Shilling towards the Surface of the Water, but there meeting with the Air is refracted out oſ its Courſe, and ſtrikes the Eye; and as all Bodies are ſeen in a ſtrait Line, ſo will you ſee the Object, but yet not in its Place. From this very Thing, or on the Account of Reflexion and Refraction, the Sun is ſeen every Day, Morning and Evening, above the Horizon, when he is really below, or had been below it 35 Minutes upon a mean Rate daily. . Tyr. I ſuppoſe then you mean thus, that though the Sun is really ſet, his Rays ſtrike againſt the Atmoſphere, and from thence are refracted and paſs to the Eye of a Spectator then upon the Earth, and as Objects are ſeen in right Lines, a Spectator on the Earth will then ſee the Sun appearing above the Horizon, when he is really below it. Phil. Yes, I do Hli Tyr. What elſe is to be obſerved from Reflexion oſ the Eight, or the Deception of Sight in viewing Objects? i Phil. Yes, it is worthy Notice to obſerve, that if an Eye was placed perpendicularly over the Shilling which we were juſt now ſpeaking of in the Veſiel of VWater, the Spectator then will not ſee the Shilling or Object at the Bottom of the Tub, as it really is, but it will ſeem elevated perhaps one third, perhaps half the Depth oſ the Water, as if the Water bore it up, and yet we are ſenſible the Shilling is at the Bottom. Tyr. This is very pretty, indeed: I intend to try this ſmall Experiment the firſt Opportunity. Bhil. Bo ſo; but firſt, if you can, conſult Martin's Philoſophy, p. 67 and 69, and Rowning's Philoſophy, Part III. p. 100 and 134. Tyr. I heartily thank you, kind Philomathes; permit me to aſk you one Queſtion more concerning Light, and I will have done: if Light flies thus ſwift, and ſpreads itſelf every Way with ſuch ineredible Velocity, muſt not the Particles be ſurpriſinglty ſmall? Phil. Beyond Conception; for it is computed by the beſt Philoſophers, that there flies out of the End of the Flame of a burning Candle in a Second of Time (viæ. in a Moment) ten thouſand Millions of Times more Particles of Light than there are viſible Grains of Sand eontained in the Bulk of the whole Earth; the Particles or Number of Grains of Sand being computed to be only 1000000600000000000000000ooooooo, the other, as I ſaid before, ought to have ten more Cyphers added. Tyr. I am amazed  This is indeed paſt Conception! OGreat God, how infinite are thy Works! How ſtupendous are thy Power and Greatneſs lPhil. Pm agreeably ſurprized at your Aſtoniſhment and am glad you have ſuch a Notion of the Wiſdom an Knowledge of God: For moſt certain it is, that though God has given Angels and Men great Knowledge in many Things, and thas kindly condeſcended to reveal ſomething of himſclf to us, yet the Knowledge of all created Beings put together (you ſce) fulls infinitely more ſhort of the Knowledge of God himſelf, than the ſmalleſt Particle of Light compared in Size with all the Bodies of the Univerſe collected together in one Maſs. And though I dare be bound to ſay, that even the whole Earth would not contain the Number of Figures of the Difference between one of theſe inconceivable Particles of Light, compared with ſuch an enormous Bulk of Matter; yet a Compariſon may be made between all finite Things; but who can comprehend, or who can compare with Senſe or Propriety the Knowledge of the Creature with the Creator See Fob, Chap. xxvi. Verſe 6, to the 14th, alſo Eccleſ. Chãp. xxxix. and the 6 laſt Verſes. l 13. Of COLOURS. Jyr. What do you mean by Colours ? Bril. Colours are thoſe Qualities of certain Bodies which admit of certain Rays of Light, ſo diſpoſed as to reſlect them back upon the Organs of Signht, ſo as to cauſe in us the Senſation of different Colours. Tyr. You ſcem then to hint as if the Cauſe of Colours proceeds from the Rays of Light. Phil. It is very evident, that there would be no Colour at all without Light; and it is as evident that all Colours proceed from the Rays of Light, becauſe in thoſe Rays are contained all the primary, pure, origindl Colours. li Tyr. Pray explain this more fully to me, for I do not quite comprehend you. Phil. It is obſerved, that there are different Species oſ Rays of Light, which have different Degrees of Refrangibility, in paſſing from one Medium to another, and, according to this Refrangibility and Diſpoſition, they act upon us ſo as to cauſe red, green, blue, &c. Tyr. This is very ſtrange; but I am not fully ſatisfied yet, why ſuch Colours appear to us under ſuch Names as red, green, &e. except I can have a more ſufficient Proof of it: You'll excuſe the Freedom, Philomathes, I make no Doubt; for you deſired I would not be backward in aſking Queſtions; and your Charge to me was always to be ſatisfied with, and clear in all your kind Inqſtructions. Phil. I own it, and I am pleaſed that you do ſo much Juſtice to yourſelf. Obſerve then, there are certain Species of the Rays of Light, and each is ſo diſpoſed as to excite in us the Idea of a different Colour. Tyr. What do you call the principal or primary Colours, from whoſe intermediate Spaces the other Variety may be prouùuced and accounted for? Phil. The Rays of Light being refracted, will produce, 1. Red, 2. Orange, 3. Fellow, 4. Green, 5. Blue, siuithed according to the Refrangibility of the Rays. hus the leaſt refrangible Ray will appear red, and the greateſt refrangible Ray will be the very deepeſt Violet, and the intermediate Colours between them will be the other Colours before-mentioned, or a Mixture of thoſe different Colours approaching, more or leſs, to each Colour, according to the neareſt or fartheſt refrangible à Ray. . Sir, I am obliged to you, and I perceive my Miſtake, for I uſed to think that Colours were natural to certain Bodies; but now I plainly ſee that they appear ſo, according to the different Rays of Light painted upon or capable of being received by them, to cauſe ſuch Colours to affect our Sight. Phil. You are right; but I will ſatisfy you further by an Experiment, which you may try at any Time: hat is, to make a Lather with Sope and Water, then take a Pipe (that we commonly ſmoke in) and fill the Bowl full, and gently blow at the End, and you will find Bubbles ariſe, which you may blow off at Pleafure, (as Children do) or ſuſpend them on the Top ofſ Ine Boul; then let two, three, or more Perſons carefully obſerve the different Colours of thoſe Bubbles as they ariſe from the Bowl of the Pipe, (which is ſuppoſed to be done when the Sun ſhines) and they will perceive firſt Red, chen perhaps Blue, and by a Continuance of blowing or raiſing te Bubble, or depreſſing it, there will appear Orange, Green, Blue, Violet, and in ſhort here and there Manner of Colours; then will appear for a while a Tellow, then Whita und at laſt a Sort of Black. Tyr. You are very obliging. my dear Philomathes ; but ſince you have mentioned Bloct and πhite, pray give me ſome Account of them, for Pm at a Loſs how to define them. i Phil. Black and Whhite are never reckoned among the primary Colours; becauſe Blao? cannot with any Propriety be called a Colour, it being a Deprivation of all Eight for the Subſtance abſorbeth or ſucks up all the Rays, and therefore can reſtect none. Now White mar be called a Colour, becauſe in this are comprehended: the primary Colours in one. n Tyr. I don't underſtand this, Sir, at all; what if I mix all the Colours together, would they be White ? Phil. Doubtleſs they would. Tyr. Pray, Philomathes, give me a Demonſtration. Bhit I could prove it to you by many Experiments, but this one will be ſuſficient to convince you, and being gaſy. you may try it at Leiſure. t is found by Experience, that any Body being divided into 360 equal Parts, on which the abreſaid Colours fall, duat the Red Colour will take up 45 Degrees or Gradations of ſuch Parts; Orange 27; Yellow 483 Green 60; Blue 60 , Indico 40, and Violet 8oin all to 360. Now, take a Wheel, and paint the Circumference with 45 of Red, 27 of Orange Colour, &c. as afore directed; then let the Wheel be turned very ſwiftly round, and none of theſe Colours will be ſeen, but the whole Circumference will appear as if it were painted over with the very beſt White. Tyr. Vaſtly eaſy to try, and very ſurpriſing to conſider, but ſuppoſe I do not divide the Circumference juſt in the Manner or Proportion you directed; how then' Phil. Then you will not have a perfect White, nor will you have any one of the Colours before-mentioned, but a Variation of Colours, according to the Proportion of each Colour promiſcuouſly laid on, which will partake Part of one Colour, Part of another, lice the Bubble blown out of the Tobacco-Pipe. If you would be fully ſatisfied in this Theory of Colours, ſee Dr. Harris's 1 Lexicon, Derham's and Rouwning's Philoſophy. 14. Of SOUNDS. Tyr. What is the Cauſe of Sounds ? hil. Sounds are cauſed by the undulatory Motion oſ the Air when the Particles thereof are put in Motion by a Stroke on Bodies, which cauſes ſirſt of all a tremulous Motion in them, and then by Means of the undulatory Motion of the Air beats upon the Tympanum or Drum of the Ear, and affects the Nerves in ſuch a Manner as to cauſe in us this Senſation. . r. low is it proved, that Air is the principal Cauſe of Sounds Phil. Several Ways, but by none more than by the Experiment of the Air-Pump; for a ſmall Bell may be heard a great Diſtance before the Air is exhauſted, but when it is put into the Receiver, and the Air exhauſted, vyou can then ſcarce hear it. Tyr. I think, if I remember, you told me that Sound flies about 1ĩoo Feet in a Second of Time, that is, 1 Million 3 Hundred and 20 Thouſand Yards, or 7500 Miles in an Hour, which is about 8 Hundred Thouſand Times leſs in Velocity than Light. . Phil. I did ſp, and why do you repeat this again? T;r. I cannot help it, when I think of the Velocity oſ Light being ſo increſoly fwift: I aſk Pardon; but pray bow far are Sounds in general to be heard? Phil. It has been allerted, that Sounds continued or repeated have been heard at an incredible Diſtance. Thus Mr. Clare affirms, that he heard the Watch- Word, (vix. All is well) called by the Centinel from Old to Neuw Gibraltar, which is upwards of rof Miles;. and Dr. Hearne aſſerts, that in the Year 1685 Guns fired at Stockholm were heard r80 Miles; and in the Dutch War, 1672, they were heard near200 Miles. TIyr. I could never have thought Sounds could have been heard ſo far: But pray is there not a Difference between Sound flying before the Wind, and againſt it? Phil. There is, but not ſo much as ſome Perſons imagine. . T9yr. Does not Sound fly equal Spaces in equal Times ? . Phil. Yes it does, whether in Summer or Winter, Day or Night; but then the Sound is not always equally ſtrong, nor ſo full upon our Ears; for no Doubt but the Strength of Wind for and againſt, and alſo a thinner or denſer Air, will cauſe a Difference in this Reſpect; but yet not ſo much as is ſuppoſed in common. Tyr. Pm obliged to you, Philomathes; but pray give me Peave to aſk you how it happens, that ſome Sounds are ſo agreeable and harmonions, while others are ſo diſſonant and diſagreeable? Phil. Your õueſiom Tyro, is very difficult to anſwer, on Account. of the Prolixity which it naturally requires; and not only this, but even on the Account of the Words agreeable and diſagreeable; for you are to know for a Certainty, that that Sound which is now diſagreeable, may the next Minute become very agreeable to you. . ſil Tyr. How can this be? . . Phil. It is ſo indeed, according to what other Tone or Sound it is accompanied with Tyr. You. ſueak. of Sounds relating to Muſis, I perceive. . Phil. I do ſo. . Tyr. I wiſh you would give me ſome Account of the Nature and Paſſages of Mulical Sounds. Phil. That I ſhall do under the Word Muſic. Tyr. Pray- then, before you leave this Head, tell me the Cauſo of- Hchoes;3, or. why Sounds ſometimes anſwer back or repeat the ſame Word? ill lil Phil. An Æcho is cauſed by the vibrating Air being abrupted in its Paſſage. FEor, as the Air rolls or paſſes along like a Wave, it often meets with various Objects, and by ſtriking againſt them, is reflected back to us, and cauſes new Vibrations, which, (if the Object lies in a proper Situation) return to us and repeat the ſame Tone, Sound, or Word, as was firſt given, not. only once, but ſeveral Timos. . Tyr. This is very natural indeed, and eaſy to be conceived. . Phil. I told you that ſometimes Words are repeated ſeveral Times; but I have myſelf been in Places that would repeat 8, 10, or 12 Times over your Name, if I had called you once very loud. . Tyr. That's very extraordinary. llil bil. Not at alſ; for it is affirmed, that in IPpodſock Park near Oxford, there is an Echo, which wil æacho or repeat 16 or 17 diſtinct Syllables any ſime of the Day; and from 11 at Night to 3 in the Morning, it will repeat 20 Syllables, or a Monoſyllable 20 Times over. . But pray what is the Reaſon that it repeats more by Night than by Dap Phil.. Becauſe the Air being more denſe, the Vibrations are ſlower, and of Conſequence a Repetition of more Syllables co be heard. See Dr. Plot's Hiſtory of Oxfordſhire, and Dr. Harris under the word Echo. S E C T. VII. Of Wind, Rain, Hail, Froſt, Snow, and Ie. 1. Of the WIND. Tyr. What is Wind ? Phil. A great Motion, Stream, or Torrent of Air. Tyr. Erom what does this ariſe? Hlll Phil. From many Cauſes, but tis chieſly believed to ariſe from the ſwift and rapid Rotundity of the diurnal Motion of the Earth round its Axis, which leaves the fluid and refined Particles of Air behind; and then they uſher or break forth at certain Times into a violent Agitation, &c. But be this as it will, it is certain that the Air being turned out of its proper Order or Equilibrium, ſome Parts thereoſ are put into greater Agitation than others, ſo as to produce a Stream of Air, a Storm or high Zinâ. *e Wind gular in ũ .But pray is not ind more re in ſome Paris of the lobe than others ? Zhit. e'nese not diffrent Sorts of Winds pray? r. Are e not different Sorts o inds Bit Yes; there are common or accidental & in a. general Trade Winds, and 3 periodical Winds, calle or named Monſoons by Cord lacon. Tyr. What do you mean by trading Winds. hil. They are ſuch as blow from one ; thus in the Atlantie Ocean, they blow from the orth-Eaſt, or about North-Eaſt, to 30 Degrees Latitude on the North Side of the Equator; and in the Ethiopic and Indian Oceans, and great South-Sea, they blow from the South- Eaſt, or about the South-Eaſt, to about 30 Degrees Latitude on the South Side of the Equator. . Tyr. What is the Property of the Monſoons, or ſhifting periodieal Trade-Winds? ſll Phil. They are ſuch which blow, ſomie 3 Months one Way, and three the other; but the moſt regular or noted Monſoons are thoſe which blow 6 Months one Way and 6 the other. . ; Tyr. Pray where are they noticed, and what Time of the Year is it they blow à nil Phil. The Monſoons blow from the S. W. to the N. E. from April till the Beginning of October, in or about 50 Degrees Eaſt Longitude at the Equator, upon the Eàſtern Conſt of Africa, paſſing from the Eaſtern Ocean croſs the Arabian Sea; and then from September till Mareh, they return and blow S. W. But below the Bay of Bengal, as alſo about ten Degrees on the SouthSide of the India Ocean, they blow 3 Months one Way and 3 the other. Tyr. This is very ſtrange; but I ſuppoſe there is no immediate Method of accounting for it. Phil. There are ſeveral Reaſons to be given, why it may be ſo; ſuch as when the Sun paſſes the Equator Northward, he no doubt begins to reſreſh and warm thoſe Countries, and the Air being more rarefied by the Heat of its Beams, becomes leſs ponderous, and poſſibly may cauſe or carry with them ſuch a Motion of the Winds; and then, in the Return to the South the other Half-Year, cauſe the Monſoons alſo to return with them. There are ſeveral other ſuppoſed Reaſons; but as they are not capable of ſo clear a Demonſtration as many other Things, muſt be leſt to future Time for further Diſcoveries. Tyr. What Degree of Velocity has Wind in general ? hil. Dr. Derham and many others have plainly proved, that a gentle Breeze or a very ſmall Wind does not move above 1 Mile an Hour; a briſc Wind ſlies from 15 to 305 in a Storm from 30 to s0, and in a very eat Storm from 50 to 66 Miles an Hour. See r. Derham, Dr. Harris, Rouning and Martin; but articularly Lord Bacon's Hiſtory of the Wind, and the Bnitoſ Tranſ. No. 183. ; 2. Of Rain, Hail, Froſt, Snou, &c. Tyr. What is Rain? hil. Water deſcending from the Clouds, being broken by the Reſiſtance of the Air, falls upon the Earth in ſmall or great Drops, according to the Quantity contained in the Clouds. and is more or leſs in the elocity of its Deſcent, according to the Weight thereof, or being driven by the Wind, &c. Tp5r. Is not Deu like Rain, or has it not the Properties thereof? Phil. It has; but in this they differ, cthat whenever the Water in the Clouds is heavier than the Air, it rains; but Deuw, being a moiſt, inſenſible Miſt raiſed by the Heat of the Earth aſter Sun-ſet, aſcends like a Fog; but meeting with a colder Air, falls in ſmall Drops on the Ground, and is ſo very fine in its Particles, as to reſt even on the very Tops of the ſmall and tender Graſs. Tyr. What is Hail ? hil. Rain congealed more or leſs, according to the Height of the Clouds and the Coldneſs of the Region. Some Authors differ in their Opinions concerning it; the one aſſerts it is fro2en in the Clouds before it deſcends; and others ſay, it is congealed in its Paſſage. Tyr. What is Froſi? Phil. That State or Condition of the Air which becomes ſfo exceedingly cold, as to freeze Water, or b which the Motion and Fluidity of Liquors are ſuſpended, and become thick and ſroæen. Some ſay it ariſes from ſalt; ſaline Particles of Air, which are ſo ſharp pointed as to fix or inſunuate themſelves into the Pores of Water, and make hard the ſuperficial Parts, and when inereaſed become more and more a thick Ice. But, ſtrictly ſpeaking, 'tis the moiſt Surface of the Earth being eneruſted, which we call Æroſi, and the cryſtaliæed Superfices of the Water is called Ice. S E C T. VIII. . i Oſ Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, Thunderboit, &c. 1I. Of METEORS and VAPOURS. Tyr. What do you call Meteors, and what are the Cauſes of the different Sorts? Pi hil. Meteors are mixt, changeable, moveable, and imperfect Bodies, formed by Damps, Heats, and ſpirituous Exhalations out of the common Elements, ſome of which are very high in the Air, and others here and there upon, or very near the Surface of the Earth: There are ſeveral Sorts, 1ſt. Fiery Meteors, compoſed of fat, ſalt, and ſulphureous Exhalations, which are kindled in the Region of the Air, , violent claſhing together in nitrous Air. 2. Airy Meteors; theſe are ſuch as are produced from the Wind only, which often cauſes very odd Appearances in the Clouds, in Shape and Order. 3dly, IVatry Meteors; theſe are ſuch as proceed from Vapours; then theſe ſapours turn often to Miſis, theſe to Clouds, and Clouds to Rain, as was ſaid bẽfore. . Tyr. Pray, Sir, what do you call Vapours? hil. Small Particles of any Fluids ſeparated or diſſipated by Heat, which naturally aſcend into the Air, or by Exhalation are drawn off from the Surface, or õtherwiſe are forced up by Heat under the fluid Body, ſo as to cauſe a Steam, which in ſome Caſes may be called a Vapour, becauſe the Liquor is evaporated or drawn oſt. Tyr. I underſtand you; and I have often admired the Number of Particles that ſly off in boiling Liquors, which decreaſe fhe whole ſo inſenſibly by Degrees, that few Perſons pay any Regard to the Cauſe, and yet are often ſurpriſed at the Rũc Pi il. You ſay right, Tyro; for ſeveral: Liquors will waſte 3 of che whole in one Hour; ſome more and ſome leſs, according to their greater or ſeſs Fluiditt. Tyr. Then I perceive the Quantity of Steam or Vapours are in Proportion to the liquid Surface of the Plil. No Doubt of it; for tis computed by Dr. Halley, and feveral other eminent Mathematicians, that there is evaporated every Day out of the River of Thames only, in its whole Extent, about 20 Million Tons of Water every Day; but there is evaporated out of thu Mediterranean upwards of 5. Thouſand Million Tons every Day; how vaſt then muſt be the Weight and Quantity evaporated from the Surface of all the Seas and Waters in the whole Globe! 2. Oſ CLOUDS Tyr. I am ſurprized at the Quantity of Water, &c. drawn off by Evaporation; pray where does it go? Phil. I told you before into the Air, and by a Congeries or continual gathering together, mix with one another, and become thicker and more denſe, ſo as to form Clouds of various Sizes, Thickneſs, Shape, Colour, Weight, &c. The lighter Sort ſlying nore lo in the Air, while others more condenſe or weighty float or fly nearer the Earth. Tyr. I know the Clouds fly very low ſometimes, and I hàve heard that in ſeveral Plàces in England, but more particularly in Scotland, ſome Perſons have ſeen the Clouds paſs much lower than the Hills they have been travelling over. i Phil. No doubt of it; for it is evident that the Clouds ſometimes are not above ith of a Mile high, which is much leſs than mant Mountains in Great- Britain. Tor. What is the Shape and Colour of Clouds owing to Phil. The Colour of Clouds, or the different Colours of any Cloud, is no Doubt owing to the Rays of Light falling on them in different Poſitions; and as to their Shape, it is eaſy and natural to ſuppoſe, that this is owing to nothing but the different Force of Air or Wras which drives them here and there; and therefore, from their voluble or looſe Texture, produce various Forms and Shapes. . Tyr. I believe this is true, becauſe in very calm Days and Nights the Clouds ſeem as if they were fixed; at leaſt their Motion is very inſignificant to what it is at oſl scr judge very right Tyrn. Piil. Your judge very right, Tyro. Tyr. Pray what other air Meũcors are therebt Bi. The next Thing I ſhall give you a little Account of is, l ll 3. Of THUNDER and LIGHTNING. Tyr. What is the Cauſe of Thunder and Lightning ? hil. Thunder and Lightning, the moſt dreadful and dangerous of all Meteors, are ſus accounted for. The Air, abounding (in hot Weather) with Acids, Bitumen, Nitre, Sulphur, &c. exhaled from various BEodies, and raiſed by the Sun's Heat into the Region hereot and are there driven to and fro by the Wind, and being ſhut in between the Clouds Atmoſphere; their ſbarp, BOOK OF KNOWLEDG E. 131 unctuous, spirituous, nitrous, and ſulphureous Particles, eing mixed together, and violently agitated and furiouſly acting upon, or ſtriking againſt each other, force themſelves, or are forced through the Clouds with an Exploſion or Noiſe, called Thunder, accompanied with a Flame or Flaſh, which we call Lightning. Tyr. Which of theſe do you ſuppoſe cauſe the Thunder, and which the Lightning ? ll Phil. The bituminous and ſulphureous Particles occaſion the Flaſb, and the ſaline and nitrous Particles, no Doubt, cauſe che Noiſe or Exploſion, as plainly appears from the very Property of Gun-Powder. Tyr. What is the Reaſon of our ſeeing the Flaſb of Lightning for ſome Time before we hear the Thunder ? Paiil. Certainly, Tyro, you forget what you have but juſt before read concerning the incredible Swiftneſs of Light, otherwiſe you would never have aſked ſuch a Queſtion. . . qp9r. I aſk Pardon, indeed, and own it was for want of Thought; for I perceive the Reaſon is plain: For Light flying much ſwifter than Sound, it muſt of Courſe be ſeen much ſooner than Sound can be heard from the ſame Diſtance. . Piil. Now, indeed, you give me Pleaſure; for is it not the ſame by the Diſcharge of any Gun or Cannon'? every Body knows that the Fiaſh is ſeen long before the Sound is heard. Tyr. Pm quite clear in the whole thus far; and eonclude from hence that 'tis poſſible, by obſerving the Time or Interval between the Flaſh and the Sound of the Exploſion, to tell the Diſtance of the Cloud from us. Phil. Yes, very eaſily, by comparing the Proportion of one with the other, as before directed. . Ty. But pray give me ſome Account of the Nature of an Exploſion, or wherein, or in what Reſpect you think it dangerous or not dangerous: ; Phil. There is no Certainty, Tyro, in this; for if there was, then of Courſe thoſe that know more. of theſe Things than others do, would always take Care to avoid the Danger that they foreſaw. Plain it is then, that the Danger lies, more or leſs, in the Nearneſs or Diſtance of ſuch Exploſion. TIyr. I am quite clear in the Truth of this. But pray, Sir, what do you ſay concerning the Thunderbolt ? bpil. I ſay, Tyro, there is no ſuch Thing as it is commonly reported to be, ſuch as a large Bolt, Shell or Stone; but it is the more intenſe and moſt rapid F lame, which flies from the Clouds with incredible Swiftneſs immediately upon the breaking of the Cloud, and breaks down, drives before it, cuts off and deſtroys every Thing it meets with, even Towers, Trees, and even Mountains or Parts of Mountains, driving up the Stones and Earth for a conſiderable Diſtance, and in vaſt Quantities. ſ Tyr. What other Properties has this ſubtile and intenſe Lightning ? Snil fi is affirmed by ſeveral credible and eminent Writers, that it will ſometimes break the Bones and not hurt the Clothes, break a Sword in the Scabbard and not hurt the Scabbard, &ec. &c. The Reaſon ſome Philoſophers give (but it is mere Suppoſition) is, that the Particles of Light in different Flaſhes are different in the Reſpect of their Figure and Quality; but I ſhould think it rather proceeds from the Intenſity of them, and their incredible Velocity; for you remember the greater the Velocity or Celerity, the greater the Stroke or Force. 4. Of otber METEORS. Tyr. I am obliged to you, Philomathes; but pray what other Phenomena of Meteors can you tell me of? Phil. There are many other Meteors, ſuch as, 1. The Chaſma, or a ſhining from or between the Breaks of different Clouds, when they juſt ſplit or part. 2. The Lampas, or Lamp burning in one Part only. 3. Bolis or Dart, whem the Fire or Light is very long, and flies lice a Dart. 4. Draco Volans, or flying Dragon. 5. Capra Saltans, or the ſcipping Goat. 6. Stellæ Cad. ntes, or Falling Stars, which is when the more firm or ſubtile Parts are burnt away. There are many other Sorts of fiery, airy, and watry Meteors; but none of them are ſo much noted as the Ignis Fatuus, both for its Shape, different Appearance, and other Oddities. Tyr. Pray what is the Cauſe of them, and where are they moſt frequently ſeen? ù Phil. The Ignis Fatuus (vulgarly called by ſome Vact with a Lanthorn, and by others Will with a Wiſp) is cauſed by ſome fat or unctuous Vapours ariſing, which are immediately kindled, and by the Motion of the Air are wafted about here and there, on or near the Surface of the Earth, and often look like a Light in a Lanthorn. The moſt common Places where theſe are ſeen are in Church-Yards that lie flat and low, and alſo in boggy moiſt Ground and Marſhes, and ſometimes they appear in the more upland Places; but then it is to be obſerved, it is ſuch that border upon, or near ſuch boggy Grounds, and being wafted or driven thither, they ſoon go out, tò what thoſe do that continue in the more fat or unctuous Soil- . Tyr. You will excuſe me, I hope, Philomathes; but pray give me ſome further Account of this odd Phenomermſ 1 hink, ĩ ſtl i f aſki il. I thin , you are vaſtly curious of aſking odd Queſtions: Preul ſuſpect that you are afraid of Mr. Jack a LanthornCome, be free, and tell me if you know or have heard any Thing in particular about it. Tyr. Dear Sirl I could tell you a hundred Stories that my Father, my Uncle, and ſeveral Neighbours have told concerning this, thats and cthe other Perſon, having been led out of the Way by theſe Lights; others have been ſo terribly frightened, as not to recover it for a long Time aſter. Phil. You make me laugh to ſee how earneſt you tell this Tale; and yet I am a little vext to think you ſo ſilly as to think that there is any Danger in poor Jach See, Tyro, what the Prejudicè of Education is: This plainly ſfhews us the great Weakneſs and Folly of thoſe Parents and Nurſes, who tell ridiculous bugbeqr Stories to Children, of Apparitions, Noiſes, gact a L anthorns, &c. which poſſeſs their little Minds with ſuch early Fear and Dread, that oſtentimes they never get clear of. Tyr. What I tell you I know to be true, and perhaps, Philomathes, you may not have had the Op ortunity ol Phil. Here you are miſtaken again, Tyro; for I have ſeen ſometimes ten, at other Times upwards of thi together in one Ground, running here and there wi great Swiftneſs, and ſometimes mixt together as if the were dancing, then all at once ſeveral of them have diſappeared, ſwhich I ſuppoſe was occaſioned by their ſtriking againſt one another, or againſt ſome Object) and thus by their ſtrange Appearance and different Poſitions, they become a Terror to many People, but particularly oung Folks, whoſe Ears and Minds have been too muc led with idle Tales of the Danger that attends theſe Meteors. . ll ZTr. But pray, Sir, did you never know or hear yourſelf that any Body was led out of their Way by the Jach a Lanthorn? l. Phil. Yes many; ſo that they have not found their Way home by the Hours together, and gone Miles and Miles out of their Way; but then, as I obſerved before, I cannot allow that Jack leads them out of the Way, ſo much as the previous Fear of the Perſons themſelves; for when the Will with the Wiſp happens to overtake or approach near them, they are ſtruck with a Surprize at ſo ſhining a Light and ſo diſmal an Hobgoblin, and immediately in a Fright turn, or run out of the direct Path- Way, down any Turning, or into any other Field, which leads them quite contrary to their Home. But you may depend upon it, Tyro, that Reſolution and a good Preſence of Mind would prevent theſe Inconveniencies and Diſaſters. 7Tj7r. I am clear in your Opinion indeed; but what would you have poor innocent Children do, who have been and ſtill are poſſeſſed with ſuch Notions? Phil. I heartily pity them, and blame thoſe that inſinuate ſuch Traſh into their early Minds, inſtead of Things of more Moment; and thoſe who have been ſo unhappily brought up, and have had ſuch Fear and Dread inſtilled into their Minds: You, and all other Perſons, therefore, who know there is no Occaſion for fuch Fear, ſhould try to convince them of their Error, and diſſuade them from giving Heed to all fooliſh Fancies, and idle, ignorant, and inconſiſtent Stories of every Sort. i Tyr. Tyr. What you ſay is very true, Philomaths, and I ſhall do my Endeavour to improve my Acquaintance at all Opportunities. Phil. This is the greateſt Mark of a noble and generous Spirite Tyro, and not only anſwers the very End my inſtructing you, but undoubtedly anſwers the chie End of that little Knowledge which che great Benefactor has ſo freely given us; and in nothing we can more imitate him, than by freely communicating every uſeful ing to otherss. Tyr. Have you any other Meteors that you can give me an Account of ? Phil. Yes, there are many others, ſuch as the Rainbow, and Aurora Borealis, or Lights in the North; but I cannot well give you an Account of theſe at preſent. Tyr. Pray, Philomathes, oblige me ſo far, though it bo ever ſo ſhort. lũlll ſi Phil. Then I aſſure you ſhort it muſt be. S E C T. IX. Of the Rainbow, Parheliums, and Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights. lll Tyr. What is the Rainbou ? i Piil. The Rainbow is a Meteor in the Sky, appearing in the Time of Rain, or juſt after it, in the Form of a Bow. lliil Tyr. What is the Occaſion or Cauſe of its Appearance. l . Ppil. It is occaſioned or produced by the falling Drops or Particles of Rain, by the Reſfiection and Refraction of the Rays of Light falling upon them. SC Tyr. What is the Reaſon of the various Colours in the Bow il i . Phil. The very ſame that I told you before concerning Colours; that the leaſt refrangible Rays produce or paint Red, and the moſt refrangible ones naturally produce Blue and Violett. llii. . Tyr. I forgot myſelf indeed, Philomathes: But pray let me aſk you why ſome Bous appear ſo veryY large to Phil. This is owing wholly to the Height of the Sun for when the Sun is in the Merſdian or higheſt Altitude, the Bow will be leaſt to our Sight, being only a Segment of a Circle; but if the Sun be in the Horizon, or juſt ſetting, then the Bow is as large as it can be, being very nearly a Semi-Circle. il Tyr. This is very natural to conceive; but pray what Part iul the Hemiſphere does the Bow generally apear inſ . Phil. Always oppoſite to the Sun; I ſay always oppoſite, which ſhews an invariable Rule where to find it, and as true a Fact that it is cauſed by the Rays of the Sun ſhining upon the falling Drops of Rain. ; Tyr. But I have ſeen two Bows ſometimes, what is the Reaſon oſ that? Phil. The Reflection from the real Bow itſelf, which when the Sun ſhines very bright, and the op ſite Part of the Heavens is dark and cloudy, there are always ſeen two Bouws, and ſometimes three, two of which are vulgarly called Weather-heads. Tyr. Pm obliged to you, Sir. 2. OPPARHELIUMS, HALOS, &c. Tyr. What are Parheliums ? hil. They are what are commonly called mock Suns, and are cauſed by Reflection. E l Tyr. Are they tinged then with different Colours as the Rainbow is? . lillli Phil. Sometimes they are, and ſometimes not; but I imagine this is more or leſs owing to the Strength of the Rays of Light, and Poſition of the Spectators. Tyr. I think I have heard there has been ſeen two or three mock Suns at once. Phil. I make no Doubt of it, there has been ſeen two ſeveral Times in England and Scotland; but there was ſeen in Rome, March 1629, no leſs than four, one oſ which was very much tinged with various Colours like the Rainbow, and the others more faintly fo. 3997r. What are Halos? Hl Phil. They are luminous Met eors in the Form of a Ring or Cirele, appearing round the Sun and Moon, and fometimes the Stars. . Tyr. What is ſuppoſed to be the Cauſe of Halos? Phil. As the Rainbow is cauſed by the Reflection of Light on the Drops of falling Rain, ſo are Halos cauſed by the Reflection of Light on ſmall Hailſtones; for whereas the firſt are ſeen only in rainy Weather, ſo theſe Halos appear only in froſty Weather, in rhimy. thick, or froſty Nights or Days, round the Sun and Moon, having them for their common Center. 3. Of the ACRORA BOREALIS, or Northern Lights. Tyr. I ſhall be glad to hear ſomething about Lights in the Air, for I have been terribly afraid of them ſome ears ago. SHIE Phil. I make no Doubt of it, for they are ſometimes very ſtriking to the Senſes, and carry ſomething dreadful viù them when they ſly with ſuch Rapidity, and ſeem to claſh furiouſly together in the Zenith Tyr. Very true, Bſlemotbes, and eſpecially when they looc very angry, being tinged with Red, or bloodycoloured, as I have oſten ſcen them. l Phil. Wnat you ſay is very true; but, however, there is not the leaſt Occaſion to be afraid of them, as there is not the leaſt Danger ariſing from them, as there often is from Lightning and Exploſion from Clouds vaſtly lower. Tyr. fot what do you apprehend is the Cauſe, or what do cthe moſt eminent Authors ſay upon this Subject ? Phil. There have been various Reaſons aſſigned by different Mathematicians and Philoſophers, but there is no Room to give you theſe different Opinions; but this is plain, no Doubt, that there are certain Steams, Exhalations or Vapours, that riſe from Mines, Volcanos, & c. which are ſulphureous and inflammable, and being ſo very fine and thin, float in the Air, and neceſſarily and naturally, according to their Quantity, Force, or Celerity, ſhoot upwards towards the Zenith; and though theſe Steams are very wide helow, yet they will in theis Aſcent appear pyramidical, or to terminate in a Point at their higheſt or vertical Extents; but ſometimes the ſhoot even beyond the Zenith itſelf, but then expand vaniſh, or are loſt to the Sight: One would naturally think they muſt proceed from ſomething inflammable. for they have the very Action of Light and Lightning, except it be that theſe aſcend, being light and very fine, but Lightning deſcends, by Force and Exploſion. Tyr. But I have heard and read alſo that this ſtrange Phænomenon is never ſeen near the Equator. Piil. Very true, and it was once a great Rarity in England, but now common, though there have been no remarkable ones (in general Extent) except thoſe in 1574, 1716, and 1727; but thoſe in 1716 extended from Dolena to the Confines of Ruſſia, Poland, &c. Thus much for this extraordinary Meteor; only it is to be obſerved, that after theſe fiery Streams have ſpent themſelves for want of freſh Supply of Matter, there is left in general, a ſteady bright Light in the North. If you would know further Particulars of the Aurora Borealis, ſee Rowning's Philoſ. Vol. I. Part ii. p. 147, &c. S E CT. X. Of Tides, or the Flux and Reſiux of the Sea. Tm. Oſ all Thin in the Laws of Nature, I think nothing more wonderful, and to be admired, than the Flux and Reflux of Waters. . Phil. It is very true; and though the natural Cauſe is known, vet there is ſomething aſtoniſhing. when we conſider ſuch an immenſe Quantity of Water to roll Qekward and forward in ſuch conſtant and periodical rder. l Tijr. You ſay the Cauſe is known; pray be ſo kind then as to tell me the Reaſon of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Water? . e Phil. Tides are undoubtedly cauſed by the attractive Power of the Sun and Moon upon the Waters of the Ocean; but more particularly by the attractive Force of e Moon. Tyr. I wiſh ꝗou would demonſtrate this a little more ta me by ſome Scheme or Figure. ilil Phil. I will. Let E be the Earth, ABCD the Surface of the Water round the Earth: Let alſo N F repreſent the Orb of the Moon round the Earth, N New Moon, F Full Moon, S QQ the Sun in different Poſitions. Sil Now obſerve, 1. When the Sun and Moon are in njunction, viæ. S N, theſe two Powers or Forces will attract or draw the Water upon the Surface of the Eaqarth above, or beyond its common Courſe or Order, and cauſe it to riſe up as high as A, which will be the higheſt Tide of all, commonly called a Spring Tide. 2. hen the Moon is at the Full at F, then the Earth will be between the Sun and Moon, (that is, the Moon is in Oppoſition to the Sun) and there will be another Spring Tide rifing or ſwelling to B, but not ſo high, gou ſee, from the Surface as at A. Laſtly, When the Sun is ĩin his Quadratures Qor Qſviæ. a Quadrant or one Quarter of a Circle from the Moon) then the attractive Power of the Sun takes off Part of the attractive Force of the Moon, and therefore at C and D there will be the leaſt neap Tide of all. 1 . Tpr. I am highly obliged to you, Philomathes, for it appears quite ſimple and natural to me; but yet I do not imediately know what you mean by the leaſt neap ide. lli Phil. The Reaſon why I call it the leaſt neap is, becauſe all Tides which happen between A:C or A D, or between B C or B B,  are called neæp. Tides; thoſe at A and B being.only Spring Tides. or. I underſtand you, Sir; but pray dòitheſe Spring; Tides happen always upon the Day or at the Time of New and Fol Moon? . i 2 Phil. No; it is generally the ſecond or third Tide after; nor are the Tides at higheſt when the Moon is in the Meridian, but two or three Hours aſter;. and the Reaſom is plain, for the Motion communicated, or the active Force of Attraction cannot fully act upon Waters in narrow Rivers, and in ſhoally Places; therefore do not come or ſlow regular and full in ſuch Places juſt at that Time: So for the ſame Reaſon the greateſt Tides, as was ſaid before, are not immediately at she Time of Conjunction or Oppoſition. In the Ocean, or in any wide Sea or deep and extenſive Waters, the Tides ebb and flow very regularly; for it is evident, that in the great Paciſic Ocean;. they exceed-both in Largeneſs and Regularity thoſo:in. the Atlantic, and in the Atlantic they exceed others in more narrow Seas, &'e. for it is ſooner high Water in ſomo Blaces than others, and it is plain that the Water riſos in ſome Rivers or Places, while it falls in others. For Inſtance, it is high Water on the Coaſt of Portugal, Spain, and the Weſt of Ireland, much at the ſame Time, (tho' it is not till twoor three Hours aſter the Moon:had paſſed the Meridian) by the Water flowing from the Weſtern Ocean, and the Mediterranean Sea; from which: there iſtues two large Currents of Water, one of whichæpaſſes South of England,, and the other North of Scorland; and m theſe racts they naturall empty themſelves into: the large Channels, and theſe again into the ſmaller ones, and theſe laſt into the inland Rivers, &c. from which it plainly appears, that the Tides muſt be later in the Day in ſome Parts than in others, according to the Diſtane of ſuch Rivers from the Sea, and in Proportion to theiiNarrowneſs, Windings and Turnings, &c. 2dly, It alſo is evident, that while theſe Channels and Rivers are filling, by the Time they are full Tide, the Moon has paſſed or advanced yet farther from the Meridian ; but, however, this beimg once known, the Certainty of calculating high Water at any Place becomes very natural and eaſy, as was ſhewn before. 3dly, It is therefore very natural to conceive, that the Water falls in fome Places while it riſes at others; and as it takes upwards of twelve Hours between Tide and Tide, 'tis eaſy to conceive that while the Waters are returning from the various Channels and different Rivers, there will be another new Tide or full Water at Sea, which meets with or repulſes thoſe ſmaller Currents, and forces them back again with Order and Conſtancy daily, only ſomewhat later, as was ſaid before, becauſe the Moon comes later to the Meridian. . . T9r. Iam hghly obliged to you, indeed, kind Philomathes, and m very well ſatisfied. i Phil. I ownT have given you but a ſhort Account oſ theſe Things.If you would know every thing relatirg to them, you muſt conſult Sir Iſaac Newton, Dr. Hurris, Rouning and Martin, as alſothe Phil. Tranſ. S E C T. XI. Oſ the conſtituent Parts, and different Strata or Layers of lili the Earth. Tyr. What does the Earth in general conſiſt of? Bihit Waat it contains at a very great Depth or near the Center, is, and muſt be, for ever unknown; but the great Dr. Hall with many others, ſuppoſe, (and that very probable) that in arid about its Center there are large Quantitios of or one large Maſs of magnetic Matter, called the Loadſtone. However, thus far is known, that:there are vaſt Caverns, and Numbers of Receſſes for Reception of Water, and no Doubt but many Rivers, which feed the other ſmall Channels, and by a Number of Conveyances are carried from Place to Place in eonſtant and due Order, as the Waters upon the Surface, ſome very deep, and others more fleet, and ſo near the Surface as to break:forth from thence continually, ſome in great, others:in ſmall Quantities of running Water, properly called Springs, &c. ſu Tyr. Wnat does the more ſolid Parts chieſly conſiſt Phil. There we find Variety of different Sorts of Strata or Soil; for within a few Fathom deep in ſome Places, and but a few Yards deep in others, are found four or five various Sorts of Earth, ſuch as Clay, Gravel, or Sand, Loam, Marl, or fat Clay, then black rich Eartb, then red Earth, Chalt, Coals, &c. and perhaps the ſame over and over again, ſome Strata or Veins running perhaps but a Foot or a Yard deep, and for Miles in Length and Breadth; others 10, 20, or 30 Feet or Yards deep, and of leſs Extenſion; but as the conſtituent Parts are known very little more than 400 Feet deep, how then can we pretend to account for the Variety of the Strata, and of the ſalt, nitrous, and ſulphureous Matter and Subſtance, between the Surfàice and the Center, to the Depth of about 4000 Miles? Iyr. Very true, Philomathes; but cannot you indulge me ſo far as to give me your Spinion what is the Cauſe of Volcanos, Exploſions, and Earthquakes ? . Phil. I cannot deny you, Tyro, you alk with ſuch a Deſire of being improved. S E C T. XII. Of VOLCANOS and EARTHOUAKES. Va What is a Volcano ? ihl. A burning Mountain, which continually emits, or as it were, vomits Fire, and ſometimes breaks with a moſt hideous Noiſe, and ſends forth or vomits liquid Fire, throws up vaſt Quantities of red hot Stones, and ſuch Clouds of Smoke and Aſhes, as even to darken the Sky and cover the Earth for Miles round ſyr. Then I perceive that Volcanos are not only kindled by theſe Combuſtibles, but are actually fed by them. How terrible muſt they be l Phil. You would much more think ſo, did you ſee or . live near any of them, but eſpecially Veſuvius and Mount na. lii Tyr. Can you farther indulge me to let me know what Part of the World they are in, and what has been ſaid ol Phil. I will. Veſuvius is a large burning Mountain ſituate within ſix or ſeven Miles of Naples in Italy; i ſhall rather chuſe to ſpeak of ſome Events and Viciſſitudes that this Volcano has undergone. Tyr. m obliged to you, Sir; and pray where is Ætna ſituate ? Phil. Mount Ætna is ſituate on the Eaſt Side of the Iſland of Sicily, and is a very high and burning Mountain, which made the Inhabitants call it Monte Gibello, the Mount of Mounts. Its Diſtance or Aſcent from Catanea is about 30,000 Paces, or nearly 29 Miles. It is of a circular Form; the Circumſerence at the Bottom is about 100,000 Paces, or nearly 95 Miles, and its Height upwards of two Miles. It has had many Eruptions, viæ. in 1169, 1329, 1408, 1 1447, 1536 and 37, 1551, 1669, 1693, and a very large one in yr. Was there not great Damages done in theſe Eruptions ? . Phil. Yes, in all of them; but according to the beſt Hiſtorians, the moſt dfſmal of all was that in 1693, when there iſſued out from it a moſt dreadful Torrent of liquid Fire (which is more common to Veſuvius) and burning Matter, which broke forth with a moſt hideous Noiſe, cauſing the Earth round it to ſhake moſt terribly, and the Devaſtation was ſo great before it ceaſed, that it entirely deſtroyed 15 or 16 different πowns, 18 Eſtates, and upwards of 90,000 Souls. . Tyr. This was ſuch a terrible Viſita tion to the Inhabitants, that I cannot help ſhuddering at the very Thoughts of ſo diſmal a Scene. Phil. It is very true; but how eaſy is it for us to forget the Misfortunes of others; and though we live in an Iſland, perha s the leaſt remarkable or leaſt known to be ſubject to Colamitiec of almoſt any Sort, yet you will here find more Diſcontent and Murmuring, and particularly more Unthankfulneſs and Ingratitude to our merciful Creator and Preſorver, than you will find in any Nation perhaps under the Sun, when the different Circumſtances of Want, Pain, Sorrow, Grief, and Sufferings are rightly put together. Tyr. It is too true, indeed, Philomathes. But however, let me aſk you a Queſtion: Are not Earthquates in general produced from the ſame Cauſe as Polcanos, by ſulphureous Damps, nitrous Matter, and mineral Coruſcations or Eire, ſhut or pent up in the Earth? Phil. No doubt of it, and when they cannot have Vent, the Earth muſt more or leſs ſhake to ſuch a certain Depth or Breadth as: the Quantity or Force of ſuch Combuſtibles eonſiſt of, or are more or leſs agitated. Thus it happens, you have Earthquakes on a ſudden with an Exploſion, which ſometimes providentially break in uninhabited Parts, and only ſhake or cauſe the Earth to tremble for a Moment or two in ſuch Places as are inhabited. At other Times we have, as it were, a ſilent Earthquake, that is, a Shaking-only; and this is attended with great Danger, for avhen theſe fiery and agitated Bodies cannot break through the Surface, they ſometimes drive and tear away vaſt Quantities of Ground near the Surface, by which means, the Surface itſelſ, with all:the Inhabitants on that diſmal and unhapPx Spot, ſimc down ſuddenly to unknown Depths, and mu be unavoidably buried in Ruin and Deſtruction. But I think we have dwelt long enough upon ſo ſolemn a Subject, and ſhall only add this, that though theſe Things are produced by natural Cauſes, or the Courſe of Nature, it gives no Room at all for the Deiſt, Atheiſt, or Prophane of any Sort to ſport with, and laugh at, the Timidity of the more thinking Part of Mankind; ſincœ it is evident it is good to conſider, that theſe natural Cauſes are firſt acted upon by a ſupernatural Hand, ant therefore to have proper Thoughts upon, and pay a reverend and due Regard to the Creator and Diſpoſer of ſuch Events, in and at ſuch a Time in particular, cannot be bad; and if it is an Error, it is an Error of the right Side (as the common Saying is) and therefore, Tyro, let us venture to ſet our Timidity at all ſuch Times agai their Temerity; let them laugh at us, and Iet us pity them. Tyr. Sir, I thank vou for your Kind Inſtruction; and have you now any Thing elſe you can communicate to me worthy of Notice-? lli nh Phil. Yes; as I have told you of the Earth's terrible Productions, I think I ought to preſent you with ſome more agreeable. S E C T. XIII. Of other Conſtituent Parts and Productions of, the Earthe llii viæ. Foſſils, Minerals, Ores, Stones, &c. Tyr. What are Foſſils æ hil. The extenſive Meaning of the Word Poſſil ſignifies every Thing that is dug out of or hid in the Earth, fome of which are neither inflammable or ſoluble, others are ſo. Dr. Hill divides them into three Claſſes, ſimple; compound, and metallic, which comprehend all Minerals. Ores, &c. but we ſhall ſpeak of thoſe by themſelves; therefore, . . 1. Of FO s S I L s. Tyr. Is not Salt a Foſſil? hil. Yes, and there are many Sorts, but all may be reduced to three Sorts, two of which are volatile, viæ. acrid, which are hot and bitter; the third is lixivious, or drawn from Aſhes. Of theſe in Order. 1. Allum, or Roach Allum, is a Foſſil Salt or white Mineral, ſeparated firſt from the Earth by waſhing it with Water. Our Engliſb Allum is in very large Lumps, clear and tranſparent: In Yorkſhire it is made of a Sort of blue Stone, with Urine and Sea-Weed. There are other Countries which produce this Foſſil, as Liege, Conſtantinople, and Italy, Of hich it is ſaid this laſt is the beſt of all. 2. Borax, a Salt prepared from the Evaporation of Water, which runs from Copper Mines in Bengal and other Parts of the Indies: Ihere is another green coloured Sort found in the Veins of Braſ, Silver, or Gold-Ores. 3. ſſential Salt is a natural Salt between, or partaking of the Quality hoth of a fixed and volatile Salt; it is extracted or obtained from various Plants, from Criſtallization, or Combination of the ſaline Particles. ꝗ. Foſſil Salt called a Sal Gem) is dug out of ſeveral mountainous laces in Poland, Catalonia, Ruſſia, Perſia, &c. it is very tranſparent, and. very like ur common Salt. 5. Fixed Salt is that which is not rariſied, nor will not caſily paſs off by Exhalation, but remains fixed after Calcination, or paſſing through the Fire. 6. Volatile Salt is contrary to the fixed Salt, for this riſes in Heat, and flies off inſenſibly in Steam and Vapour; ſuch are the Salts of ſome Vegetables and Animals. But to give you a clearer Idea, this is ſuſficient; thoſe ſalt Particles that fly off in Steam or Vapour are called Volatile, thoſe that ſink or are found at the Bottom, are called Fixed. 7. Nitre or Salt-Petre is a cryſtalline, pellucid, whitiſh and bitteriſh Salt, generated from Urine, animal Subſtances decayed, &c. and is ſometimes found in or under old ruinous Juildings : Whaen it is found in this crude State, it has no Acidity; but having paſſed through the Operation by Fire, it becomes both acrid and acid; being impregnated with a Quantity of Spirits out of the Air, it becomes artly volatile and very ſtrong; and being mixed with Sulphur in the Air and agitated, it is this Spirit that kindles, or burſts into a Flame in Lightning, Gunpouder, &c. 8. Sal Ammoniac, a volatile Salt of two Sorts, natural and artificial. The natural is found in Lybia, and many Parts of Africa; the artificial is brought from Egypt, and is made of the Soot of Tufts, Dung of Animalt ſublimed; ſome alſo is brought from Venice. r Tartar or Salt of Tartar, is a hard Subſtance, which adheres to the Sides of Wine Caſs; it is ſeparated from the Liquor by Fermentation, and ſome is of a white or lightiſm Colour, and ſome reddiſh the White, if good, is eſteemed the beſt. 10. Sulphur is commonly taken for, or called by the Name of Brimſtone; but there is a ſenſible Diſtinction; for though all Brimſtone is Sulphur, or ſulphureous, yet all Sulphur is not Brimſtone; Sulphur however is well known to be an inflammable Foſſil; it is both native and factitious, and is found in ſeveral Places, partieularly in Sicily The Native is of ſeveral Sorts, viz. grey, red, and green; the Artificial, made from the Native or groſs grey Sort, is gencrally made up in Rolls, oſ a pale yellow, and then it is called Brimſtone; beſides t ie Native is like a Clay, very ſubjoct to crumble and take Fire; but the Yellow or Brimſtone has very little Earth, but contains much Oil, and an acid vitriolic Salt. It melts with a ſmall Heat, very ſoon takes Fire, burns away with a moſt excellent fine blue Flame, but a OF ENOWLEDGE. 141 ſtrong and noxious Scent. There is another Sort of a fine red, like Cinnabar, very tranſparent, but is ſo ſcarce and rare, as to be known ro where at preſent but in or near the Gold Mines of Peru. The Green is the hardeſt of all, and is found only about Mount Veſuvius. . j OBSERVATIONS. I am not willing, Tyro, to leave this Subject upon Sulphur without telling you ſomething further that may be of Service: And, 1. Sulphun. among Chemiſts, or in Chemiſtry, does not mean Sulphur itſelf, or Brimſtone, but all oily, reſinous, and fat Subſtances, whether oſ Animals or Vegetables. 2. Sulphur is of excellent Uſe and Service in many Reſpects. Firſt, In the Compoſition of making Gunpowder. Secondly, In whitening Silks, Woollen Stuffs, and Flowers, by the Fume or Vapour. Thirdly, The Vapour of Sulphur and Brimſtone ill even act upon the Feathers of Animals; ſeveral Crows, Rooks, and other Black Birds have been made perſectly white by it, ſo as to appear as if naturaly lo i 3. Sulphur is acknowlodged by all the Writers upon, and by all the Practitioners in Phyſics, to be of excellent Uſe; ſo much indeed, that its Virtues are not really known to this Day, which, it ſeems, is on Account of its being ſo cheap and ſo common; but however, it is evident, that all the Faculty in Phyſics allow, that it is the very beſt and ſafeſt Remedy in all cutaneous Diſorders, ſush as the Itch, or any ſcorbutic Diſeaſe ariſing in the Skin; becauſe anointirig the Parts vith its Flower made into an Ointment, with PorkLard or freſh Butter, not only ſtop- the Orifices of the Puſtles, prevents the watry Liquor from tainting other Parts, but more particularly kills the Diſeaſe by choaking or deſtroying the Animalcules or living Creatures. 4. Sulfhur is allowed to be a great Cleanſer and Purifier of the lood, but being apt to looſen the Bowels, ſhould be uſed wvith Caution. S. Flores Sulphuris or Flowers of Sulphur, is uſed in Medicine as a Pe ftoral, for healing Diſtempers , 2 in in the Stomach, Lungs, &c. 6. Balſam of Sulphur, is Flower of Sulphur boiled with four Times the Quantity of Oil of Olives, till it comes to a Conſiſtence, &c. It is counted a fine Pectoral, and a great inward Healer. Some is made with Sulphur and Rarbadoes Tar. 7. Precipitated Sulphur, called Milt of Sulphur, is made o Flower of Sulphur and Quick- Lime.  One Thing is very remarkable in the Nature of Sulphur, and that is, that whoever has uſed it in any cutaneous Diſorder, it never fails to tarniſh or change the Colour of Gold in their Pockets; the Silver will look as if it were rubbed with Gunpowder, and the Halſpence will turn to a mouldy Green. 2. Of other Sulphureous or Bituminous Bodies, &c. 1. Amber is a yellow, tranſparent, gummy or bituminous Subſtance, has a teſtnous Taſte and Scent, ſomewhat lice Turpentine. It is found in ſeveral ſmall Currents, eſpecially near the Baltic Sea; there are two other Sorts, black and white, ſome ſay they are natural, others artificial; be this as it will, it is plain that the yellor Amber being rubbed, has a powerful Force of Attraction according to its Size, and will draw Straws, Feathers, Hairs, &c. at a conſiderable Diſtance, ſo as to ſtick and adhere to it. 2. Ambergris, or Ambergreaſe, is a fragrant Drug of a greyiſh or Aſh-Colour; it is uſed as a Perfume or Cordial, and melts like Wax. It is a Kind of Bitumen, and found in ſeveral Parts on the Coaſt of Muſcouy and India. t Arſenic, though properly a Mineral, vet as it conſiſts o6f a vaſt Quantity of Sulphur, it is ranked under this Head: It is a great Cauſtic, Corroder, or Eater of the Fleſh. There are three Sorts, White, Yellow, and Red; ſome ſay the Yellow is the natural Sort, which is found in Copper Mines, and is called Orpiment, from which the others are made; the Red is called Sandaracha. See Cobalt. N. B. The corroſive Power of any of the Sorts of Arſenic, plainty diſcovers itſelf; for a very ſmall Quàntity mixt with almoſt every Metal, renders it friable. and deſtroys jts Malleability. Even Silver and Gold are not able to ſtand its ſnowin and fretting Quali; for which Reaſon the Refiners drend it in all their Operations: As for Iron and Copper, it ſoon deſtroys; and Tin, in particular, it will even calcine and ſoon reduce to Aſhęs. 4. Aſphaltum, or Aſphaltos, is a dark purple, brittle, inſammable, and bituminous Subſtance, found in the Aſphaltites or Dead Sea, Egypt, and Paleſtine; from which it is called Bitumen Judaicum, or Jewiſb Piteh. Some very credible Authors, both ancient and modern, affirm, that in or near all ſuch Places, where Aſphaltum abounds in Quantities, no Fiſh can live, nor can even the Birds ſiy over the Places, without great Hazard of their Lives. N. B. Nature, notwithſtanding theſe noxious Qualities of Aſphaltos, has provided it for the Service of Man; for it is cſ great Uſe, being one of the principal Things uſed by Engravers to rub over the Face of their Plates in etching, &c. Itis àlſo uled with Aquaſortis, in eating out the Figure or Form of any Benſt, Building, &c. S. Bitumen, a fat, combuſtible, olly Matter, found in ſeveral Places, but particularly about Babylon, Judea, or in the Lake Aſphaltites or Dead Sea. Some Sorts are hard lice Pitch, others glutinous, and ſpread lixke Mortar. Some Authors tell us, the Babylonian Walls and Nooh's Ark were built with this Matter. 6. Naphtha is a ſulphureous, clammy, inflammable, and bituminous Subſtance of different Colours, according to the Soil: There are great Quantities found in and about ſeveral Springs near the City of Hett, in Chaldea, which the Turs call Blacâ Maſticl. There are other Sorts found in Italy, France, &. The Property thereof is ſuch, that being once ſet on Fire, it is very difficult to extinguiſh it; Water making it burn with much more Fury. 7. Petroleum, or Rock Oil, called alſo Oil of Peter, is the moſt clear, lucid and tranſparent of all the inflammable and bituminous Subſtances. It diſtils or ouZes from the Clests of ſeveral Rocks in Provence, Italy, Sicily, &c. cauſed, as it is ſaid, by the Force of ſome ſubterraneous Fire. It is ſo very inflammable, that when it ſtands ſtill in any hollow Part, even the very Rays of the Sun will ſet it on Fire, and a Candle carried near it never fails of ſetting it in Fiames. 3. Of the more ſolid Foſſils, ſuch as Minerals, &c. 1I. Antimony, a mineral Subſtance, of a metalline Nature, having almoſt all the Qualities of a real Metal, except that of Malleability ; for which Reaſon it is by many called a ſimple Foſfil: It is found in Gold, Silver, and Lead Mines; but it is more common in Tranſylvonia, Germany, &c. It is biittle, full of little ſhining Veins oſ different Colours. It fuſes with ſome Diſfficulty in Fire, and diſſolves in Water. N. B. 1. Antimony is very valuable, being uſeful in Specula, or to finiſh concave burning Glaſſes, by giving tliem a fine Poliſh. 2. Being property mixed with Bell- Metal, ĩt adds to the Clearneſs of the Tone. 2. It is mixed with Tin to make it hard and white, and with Lead to make a proper Compoſition for the caſting of Letters or Types for printing. 4. Mr. Boyle ſays its Uſe is ſo great in Phyſics, that with tuvo or three other proper Things, it is almoſt ſuffieient to furniſh an Apothecary s Shop, with Catbartics, Emetics, Diuretics, or Diaphoretics. There are màny Names indeed, but it is ſuſficient to ſpeà anly of theſe that follow. 1. Crocus, or Saffron oſf Antimony, called by Farriers Crocus Metallorum. æ2. Waſhed Crocus, called Vimum Benedictum, being a powerful Emetic. 3. Butter of Antimony. 4. Regulus of Antimony. s. Tincture of Autimony, &c. &c. 2. Biſmuth, or Marcaſite, is a hard, ſmooth, white, brittle, metallic Body, ſomewhat like Tin, and therefore called by ſome Tin-Glaſi; it contains an arſenical Salt, and is very dangerous to take inwardly. There are ſeveral chemical Preparations made from it, and the Flower is uſed to take Spots out of the Face. 3. Chalt, a Sort of mineral Subſtance, of different Colours, but more commonly white, abounding in barren and mountainous Lands; yet, notwithſtanding, it is a reat Improvement to Lands, by being mixt with proper arth and ſpread upon the Surface. Black Chalt, or Ochre, is uſed by Painters on blue Paper, being a very fine Black-. Red Chalt, or Ocbre, is an indurated clayey Sort of Ocbre, uſed alſo in painting, there is alſo a yellow Sort, comnionly called Iellow Ochre. 4. Cinnabar, a red, heavy, and very brilliant mineral Stone, found in Mines by itſelf, but moſt frequent in Quickſilver. Some ſay it is only Quickſilver petrified. Vermillion is made of it, by being reduced firſt to Powder, and then ground with a Mixture of Spirits of Wine and Urine. . Coal, or Lithranthrax, is a black, ſulphureous. anâ bituminous Mineral, dug out of the Earth, and imany Places in England lies in Veins, mixcd promiſeu ouſly with other Strata, and other Places in very large Beds of great Extent and Depth. I he beſt is of a deep ſhining fack, very brittle, and vet very friable, and being ſet on fire, burns to a Calx, with a Mixture of Aſhes. . III. Of METALS or ORES. Tyr. What are Metols ? Phil. All ſuch ſimple Foſſil Bodies, that are capable of Fuſion, and become fluid by Fire, and when cold coagulate, and harden into a ſolid Maſs, and for the moſt Part are nralleable. Such are Copper, Gold, lron, Lead, and Tin; to which ſome add Mercury or Quickſilver, which is called a fluid or liquid Metal; others do not rank it with Metals, for its Want of Malleability. . 1I. Copper is an Ore, found in different Mines Abroad and at Home. It is of ſuch great Service in the making of various Inſtruments and Utenſils for the Service of Mankind, that it would be ſuperfluous to ſuy more oſ it: As to its Properties, they are, 1. Its Ponderoſity is next to that of Silver. 2. Its Firmneſs or Fixidity will endure the Fire longer than that of Tin or Lead, but not ſo long as Silver. 3. It muſt arrivę at that State oſ Ignition, or be red hot, beſore it fuſes or melts. 4. Itis diſſoluble by Acids, Alcaline, or any nitrous Liquids or Fluids, in Salt- Water, and by the Dew in open Air, &c. only with this Difference, Acids turn it Green, Altalinæ turns it Red, and Salt in general Blue. 5. When ſuſed with Lead or Antimony, it flies off in Vapour. 6. It is extremely elaliic, and moſt ſonorous of all Bodies. 7. It is very malleable, and may be drawn out into ſmall Wire to a great Length. 8. One Grain only, diſiolved with ſionpoo Grains of Water, will turn thie whole to a pale lue; ſo great is its Diviſibilit. 9. Copper is found in great Quantities in Sweden and Germany, in which Flaces there are even Mountains of it; but it is allowed, that Hungary has the beſt Mines and richeſt Ore. N. B. Braſi is made ſrom Copper, by grinding calcined Lapis Calaminaris very ſmall, and mixing it with fine Chareoal, and then incorporating it with Wiater into à Muaſs; then about ſeven Pounds of this Mixture mixed with about five Pounds of Copper, and put into a Wind-Furrace for about 11 or 12 Hours, will be converted into Braſs. 2. Iron is a very hard and brittle, yet a malleable and fuſible Metal; its Texture, conſiſting of Earth, Salt, and Sulphur, makes it very liable to Ruſt. The Properties are as follows: 1. Its Fixidity is ſuch, that inſtead of fuſing before Ignition, it requires not only a cloſe Confinement in Fire before it will melt or run, but even that Fire muſt be well ſupplied with Wind, and the Iron be made (what the Smiths call) white, or welding hot, before it will fuſe, run, or ſeparate; and by this Means many ſmall Pieces are welded, beaten, and united together in one Maſs; and if heated to a proper Degree, will adhere to each other cloſer and bet. ter than one Biece of itſelf of the ſame Length and Sizæe. 3. Iron, though made more pliable, and ductile, and more eaſy malleable by Ignition or Heat, yet itſ may alſo be made much harder and more brittle, by heating it red hot, and then ſuddenly immerging it in Water, which will make ſome Sorts of it ſnap like Gilaſs. 4. If it be firſt heated, and then quenched in Sal- Armoniac or Quick- Lime, it will turn all the Particles of it quite white and exceeding brittle. 5. It is not only rubiginous, or vaſtly ſubject to contract Ruſt, sither by Air, Dew, Fire, Salt, or Water, but even becomes diſſoluble in them. 6. It is very elaſtic and ſonorous, but not ſo much as Copper, except when it is made into Stæel; then it is more ſonorous than Copper itſelf, but not ſo ſonorous as Brose. 7. Of all Bodies, none are ſo acted upon, or attracted by the Load-Stone to ſuch a Degree as hard bright Iron, or rather Steel; and ſo great is the Action, Power, Virtue, Force, and Efficacy of the Load-Stone over it, that it evren communicates the ſame Virtue to it, eſpecially if it be poliſhed, ſo that it will become a Magnet, and attract other Bodies very ſtrongly. 8. Iron is found in Mines, not only in England, but in Poland, France, and Germany; but the greateſt Ores are found in Norway and Sweden. N. B. As Braſi is made from Copper, ſo Steel is made from Iron; for it is only Iroh purified in the Fire by Art with proper Ingredients, which cause it to be finer, whiter, and more hard and brittle. There are two Sorts, one called bliſter Steel, made of large Bars of Iron, which have Knobs or Bliſters upon them; and this Sort is uſed for large Edge- Tools, ſuch as Spades, Cleavers, Axes, ſc&. 3. Lead, called Saturn, is a very coarſe, heavy, droſſy and impure Metal, conſiſting of Sulphur, ſome little Mercury, and a great Quantity of black bituminous Earth. The Properties are, 1. It is the next Metal in Weight to Gold, being heavier than Iron or Copper. 2. It is the leaſt liable to Ruſt, and the leaſt caltic and ſonorous of all Metals, except Gold. 3. It is the ſoſteſt and eaſieſt malleable Body. 4. It requires the leaſt Fire of all Metals to melt it, or put it in Fuſion, (Tin excepted) and then it appears (after the Droſs is ſcimmed from the Surfacel much of the Colour and Conſiſtencè of Quickſilver, rolls about in a liquified State like it, but does not ſeparate in Parts ſo much, and if ſuffered to grow cool, does not paſs or run off in globular Bodies like the other. s. Lead not only ſoon melts, being put in any Ladle or proper Vehicle over a Fire, but being continued over the Fire, ſoon becomes ignitious, and will in a ſhort Iime repreſent a Body of liquid Fire. 6. Its Uſe is ſo well known for Service, in making of Ciſterns to hold Water and other Liquids, and for making of Pipes for the Conveyance of Water, &c. from Place to Place, that it needs no further Deſcription. 7. Lead is found in ſeveral Mines in Bngland, Germany, and Hungary, ſometimes pure, but much oftner in the mineral Ore 4. Silver, or Argentum, is the puteſt of all Metals except Gold, and is found in ſome Places pure, and in others in Ore, mixed with Copper, Cohalt, Antimony, Lead, Coal, and other Minerals; ſome of which is blackiſh, ſome brown, others grey, which is owing to the different Strata or Bodies of Earth in which it is found. Its Properties are as ſollows. r1. It is the next to lead in Weight; and its Fixidity, Ductility, and Malleability is next to that of Gold. 2. It reſiſteth the Power of Lead in Fuſion for a long Time, yet is refined by it; but when fuſed with Antimony, will, without great Care, turn to a Scoria or Droſs. 3. Silver is not difioluble by any Thing ſo ſoon as Aquafortis. 4. Its Fuſibility by Fire is eaſy, yet not fſo ſoon obtained as that of Lead, but melts immediately after Ignition. s. It amalgamates with Quickſilver, and volatiliæes with AnH timony. 6. It is more cenorous than Lead or Gold, but not ſo much as Iron or Copper, and may be drawn out into a very ũmall Wire. 7. The Chemiſis ſuppoſe Silver to have ſome Affinity with the Moon, and therefore called Luna, and mark it thus D, and in Heraldry it is called drent. 9- Its Beauty and Uſe are cnown tò moſt Families, and its Neatneſs and Durableneſs are ſuch, that nothing is ſo cheap in the End. 10. It is found in the Mines of Peru, Chili, &c. and it is of ſo high Efteem with all Nations, that it is not only uſed for Decoration, Shew, and Grandeur, but even as their current Coin Abroad and at Home. 11. Thè Standard for Silver Coins, called Sterling Silver, in England, is a Mixture of ii ox. 2 dwt. of pure Silver, with 18 duet. of good Copper, and ſo in Proportion for any greater Maſs or leſs Quantity. 5. Tin is a whitiſh colo ſulphureous Metal, found blended with almoſt all Subſtances. Its Properues are, 1. It is the lighteſt of all other Metals, and the ſoſteſt of all except Lead. 2. It loſes more oſ its Weight in Fire than any of the Metals, which ſhews that its Fixidity is the leaſt of all. 3. It is melted by a leſs Degree of Heat even than Lead. for being mixed together in a Maſs, and put in any proper Vehicle under a Fire, the Tin will run or ſeparate firſt from the Lead. 4. The proper Diſſolvent of Tin is the ſame as Gold, viæ. by Aqua Regia, and with Difficulty in this, but not by any other Menſtruum: s5. Tin, though like Silver in its Colour, and by Art mày be made to approach very near to it in Likeneſs, (Weight excepted) et it is lice a common Enemy to it; for if a Maſs oſ Silver be mixt with but one tenth Part of Tin, it will become almoſt as brittle as Glaſs. 6. Another ſtrange Property of Tin is, that though it is the leaſt ſonorous of all Metals except Lead, yet mixed with any of them, according to Art, reatly adds to the Clearneſs of the Sound. 7. It is alſo the leaſt elaſtic of all except Lead, et being mixed with others, increaſes their Elaſticity. Tain Ore is a heavy, ſpur ous Sort of Stone, princppally found in Cornwall, Devonſhire, &c. u BOOKOF ENOVWLEDG E. 155 6. Gold, when refined from its Ore, has the following Properties. 1. It is the neavieſt, moſt ductile, puieſi and moſt valuable of all Metals. 2. It requires a very ſtrong Fire to melt it, and its Fixidity is ſo great, that being melted many Times, it loſes but very little of its Weight. 3. Some ſay it is incapable of Ruſt, but it is known the ume. of Sea-Salt will ruſt or canker it. 4. It amalgamates with Quickſilver the moſt readily oſ all Metals. 5. It will remain in the Fire for Days and Days melted, and being taken out, will afterwards be found to loſe nothing of its Weight. 6. It is oſ ſuch ſurpriæing Ductility, as Dr. Halley tells us, that one Grain of it will gild ninety-eight ſquare Yards; and Mr. Boyle ſays, one Grain and à may be beaten out into an Area upwards of fifty Inches ſquare, and that one Ounce only may be drawn out into a Wire 274,500 Yards long, viæ. near 156 Miles in Length. 7. It is diſſoluble in no other Menſtruum than Aqua Regia, with ſome ſmall Quantity of Mercury. 8. Itis found in Ore, or in Duſt, in ſome Parts of Guinea, Chili, Peru, &c. 7. Of Mercury or Quicèſiver. Mercury is not allowed by ſome to be a Metal, but it is called in general a Semi-Metal, and by all a Fluid. Its chief Properties are, 1. It is the heavieſt of all Bodies except Gold. 2. It is the coldeſt to the Touch of all Bodies, and yet ſome Degree of Heat given to it, ſo as to make it juſt hot, will be ſufficient to make the Mercury bumn the Fleſh ſeverely. 3. Its Parts may be ſeparated more to the naked Eye than any other Body, the Diviſibility being apparent at any Stroke or ſudden Preſſure; a Piece, or rather one ſmall Drop or Globule, may be ſeparated into 100,000 vifible Parts. 4. It paſſes off in Vapour almoſt as thin as the very fineſt Air, and yet it is pure Mercury ſtill, and may be united. 5. It is quite volatile, and penetrates the Parts of other Bodies, making them brittle. 6. It diſſolves in a ſtrong acid Menſtrua, and alſo indifferently in Agoua Regia and Aquafortis. 7. Its Fluidity is ſo great, that it never congeals nor freezes. 8. The Ores of Mercury are various, the general ones are called Cinnabar, found in many Mines in Italj. ꝗ. There is alſo pure or Virgin Mercury, which is found running in ſeveral Cavities or Veins in the Earth. 10. Its Uſe in Phyſic is well known, and its Power and Force are ſo great, that if given, or taken by unſkilful Hands, it is preſent Death to ſome, and never fails to bring on a tyaliſm or Salivation, with trembling of the Nerves, and almoſt all Diſorders. IV. OF S TONνE s. There are ſo many Sorts of Foſſils under this Denomination, that it would require a large Treatiſe to explain their different Texture and Uſes. We hope therere our young Tyro's will be ſatisfied, if we ſpeak only of the coarſer Sort in general, and the more fine and valuable in particular. I. Oſ tbe. coarſer or common Stones. Of theſe there are five Sorts. 1. The common Stone oſ various Sorts and Sizes, found in Gravel or on the Surface of the Earth in every Place. 2. Chalk Stones. 3. Pebbles and other Stones uſed for Pavement. 4. Portland Stone. s5. Flint Stones, both uſed for Buildings; the laſt of which is ſo extremely fine, that it is called the Engliſb Agate, and ſome Sort is ſo fine, after its being oliſhed, that it is even ranked in the Order of Gems. o Stone will produce ſo much Fire as the Black Flint when ſtruck againſt hardened Iron or Steel, for which Reaſon it is not only uſed in Families, but cut into a proper Size for Guns; its Uſe alſo in the making ol Glaſs is ſo great and well known in general, that little more can be required to be ſaid concerning it. i 2. Oſ the finer Sort of Stones, viz. Alabaſter, Porphyr, . and Marble. 1. Alabaſter, a fine Stone, ſomewhat fike Marble but much ſoſter, and not ſo veiny or brittle. The beſ Sort is found in Egypt, and alſo in Cornwall, being excellently variegated with Veins of a pale red, whitiſh or brown Colour, upon a very fine and clear pale yellow Ground. It is uſed in ſmall Statues, Vaſes, and Columns; duced to Powder, then mixt with Water, and uſed like Plaiſter of Paris. i i 2. Porphyry is alſo a Sort of Marble, of various Colours; but that of the browniſh red Colour is called the beſt. It is ſo exceeding hard, that few Tools will cut it, and alſo is very difficult to calcine. It is found in Egypt in immenſe Strata: Alſo in Arabia, Germany, England, &c. but that found in the Iſland of Minorca is ſaid to be ſuperior to all the Italian Marble. l 3. Marble, a very hard, fine, and curious Stone, found in the Quarries of Ital, England, &c. and many other Places. It is much harder than Alabaſter, but not ſo hard as Porphyry. There are fourteen Sorts, ſome of which are white, brown, red, green, black, blue, yellow, veined, and variegated beyond the Power of Man to deſcribe; but the Italian Marble, called Brocatella, is counted the fineſt, being red, variegated with white and gold Veins. It bears an exceeding fine Poliſh, and its Uſe and Beauty in Buildings, and raiſing Monuments, are well known. 3. Oſ the ſmaller and more precious Stones, in alphabe; tical Order. 1. Adamant, (or Diamond) is not only the hardeſt, but the moſt precious of all Gems; there are ſeveral Adamonts of various Colours, viæ. darkiſh green, eryſtal, &c. but the eryſtal being the moſt pellucid, ſhining, and tranſparent, is counted the beſt. The real Adamant has an electric and attractive Quality, and in Hardneſs far exceeds all other Bodies; for nothing will cut Adamant or Diamond; nay, even the beſt hardened Steel will not cut common Glaſs, which Adamant cuts with Eaſe and Pleaſure. As there are ſeveral Gems taken for Diamonds in Appearance, it is by this Property of cutting other Bodies that the Adamant or Diamond is truly known and diſtinguiſhed. See the Word Diamond. 2. Agate, oc Achate, is a ſemi-pellucid Gem of various Colours, viæ. white, (called the Nocoa Stone) red, ſſrcen, and vellow; ſome of them when cut ure full of eins, hich repreſent Animals, Trees, Rivers, &c. and though an opake Stone, yet has a fine and beauti ll Surface, and ſhines very much by a ſtrong reſlected ight. 3. Amothyſt, a precious Stone or Gem of a purre Colour in general, but yet is ſometimes compoſed with, or tinged or mixed with a pale red, deep red, or violet; but when found colourleſs, or by heing made ſo by paſſing through the Fire, it then becomes very pellucid, and equal in Value to the Ruby and Sapphire; and it muſt be a Perſon of no ſmall Judgment, to diſtinguiſh it ſrom a Diamond. They are found in ſeveral Parts oſ Europe, but thoſe of the Eaſt and Weſt Indies are the beſt, being the hardeſt and moſt pellucid. It was the laũ in the gois Row of darane Breaſt Fiote Cul 4. Beryl, is a pellucid Stone, of a pale green Colour ſorethinꝶ of the Nature of a Cr ſia1. . It is foun about the Gold-Mines of Peru, alſo in the Earth at the Foot of Mount Taurus, and in the Euphrates, ſometimes in a Pebble-like Form, at others in hexangular Columns, terminating in hexangular Pyramids. Its Hardneſs is very near the Garnet, and its Size from a fmall Pear to a Walnut. It was the firſt Stone of the sourth Row in Aaron's Breaſt-Plate, on which was engraved Naphthali. ] 5 Bery Cryſtal, called by the Lapidaries the broun Cryſtal. . v Car buncle, a precious Stone of a ſcarlet or fiery Colour. It is in Hardneſs about the ſame Degree of the Sapphire, and found in general in angular Forms, about the Size of a Horſe Bean. It bears the Fire without altering, and being held up againſt the Sun, looks like a burning Charcoal. It is found in the Eaſt Indies. It was the laſt Stone in the firſt Row in Aarou's Breaſt Plate. . Cornelian, a Species of the Sardonyx, is a ſemipeſlucid Stone, of a reddiſh Colour freſt hard, clear, and free from 8 ts, found in the Eaſt Indies and other Places. This ſtone is moſtly uſed for Seals. 8. Chalcedony. a ſemi-pellucid Gem, variegated with different Colours, which reſemble ſo many white Clouds. The bluiſh Chalcedony is reckoned the moſt valuable. and is now ranked among the ordinary Sort of Agates, and is uſod for Seals, and often engraved with ll of Arms, &c. It is uſed alſo to make Vaſes, ſmall Cups, Crucifixes, and Beads. All the Sorts rexdily ſtrike Fire with Steel. 9. Chryſolite, is a precious Gold-coloured Stone, mixed with green, which gives it an exceeding fine Luſtre. It was the firſt Stone of the third Row in Aaron's Breaſt-Plate. It is called by the Jewellers a Topax. It is found in Sileſia, Bohemia, and New-Spain, in irregular pebble Forms, never columnar, and ſeldom larger than the Size of a Nutmeg. . ro. Chryſophroſus. a Species of the Praſius, of a pale but pure green Colour, and is one of thoſe mentioned in Revelations, Chap. xxi. Ver. 20. 11. Cryſtal, a very fine, pellucid, and tranſparent Stone, reſembling a Diamond, but being much ſofter, has not that Luſtre. Cryſtal is found on the Top of high Mountains, in various Places and different Shapes; ſome being columnar, with double Pyramids, others pentangular and hexangular, &c. i 12. Diamond, ſſee Adamant) the moſt precious, pellucid, and valuable of all Gems. They are found in the Iſle of Borneo, and in ſeveral other Places in the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, in various Sizes and Shapes but generally very ſmall, the largeſt (which ſever Authors agree is not ſo large as a Walnut) is ſaid to be in the Poſſeſſion of the Great Mogul; it weighs about 280 Carats, and is worth about 780,000 Pounds Sterling. 13. Emerald, (or Smaragdus) a precious, tranſparent Stone, of a fine green Colour, and next in Hardneſs to the Ruby, and for Beauty none exceeds it. This Stone is found both in the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, in various Shapes and Sizes. It was the firſt Stone in the ſecond Row in Aaron's Breaſt-Plate. 14. Hyacinth, or Jacinth cRev. Chap. xxi. Ver. 20.) is a precious Stone, of the Carbuncle Sort, of a fine red Colour (lie to the Flower of the ſame Name) but has not that Luſtre, nor appears ſo ſtriking to the Eye as Gems in general. The Jewellers divide them into four Sorts, viæ. 1. Hyacintha la Belle, a Sort of Flae or faint red mixed with yellov. 2. Amber Hyacintbs, mixed with a light yellow and red. 3. Saffron lyacinth, is partly ycllow and red, but not clear; and, 4. A Rubacella, which is a fine deep red, mixed with yellow. The firſt oſ theſe is found in the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, the laſt only in the Eaſt Indies. 15. Jaſper was formerly reckoned among the precious Stones, as appears from its being ranked with them in Rev. Chap. xxi. Ver. 195 but the Moderns count it only a ſemi-pellucid Stone at beſt, and very little better than the fineſt Marble, though it is harder, and will bear an excellent Poliſi. It is a Stone of various Coloure, but the Green, called Lapis Divinus, is the moiĩt common, which is found in ſeveral Parts of the Eaſt Indies.  There are others of various Shapes, and as for Sizc, they run from two inches to a Foot Diameter. jã was the laſt Stone in the fourth Row of Aaron's Breaſtate. lill 16. Onyx, a Sort of a ſemi-pellucid Gem, the Colour o cthe human Nails, having Zones of various Colours, but not red, and though compoſed with a Sort of Jaſper. debaſed with Earth. The higheſt colured Sort is foun in the Red Sea, the more dark Sort in ſeveral Parts in and about Babylon. It was the ſecond Stone in the fourth Row of Aaron's Breaſt- Plate. l 17. Praſus, is a Sort of an Emerald, but not ſo hard, and of a coarfer green. l 18. Ruby, a very precious Gem, of a fine red Colour, mixed ſometimes with a yellow or purple When it is found pure, it is of very little leſs Value than the Diamond, and very near as hard. It is alſo called Sardis, from a Place of that Name in Lybia in Aſia, where the pale Sort is found. It is ſuppoſed to be the firſt Stone of the ſirſt Row in Auron's Breaſt-Plate. . 19. Smaragdus. See Emerald. ſ 20. Sapphire, a precious pellucid Gem, of a fine blue. The deepeſt blue Sort is counted che beſt, and is in Value next to a Diamond. They are found in various Forms and Sizes in Pegu and many other Places in the Indies, alſo the Iſle of Ceylon, &c. It was the ſecond Stone in the ſecond Row in Auron's Breaſt-Plate. a1. Sardonyæ, a precious pellucid Stone, of a pale red Colour, a Sort of a Mixture of the Ruby and the Onyx. Some reckon four Sorts, viæ. 1. The red Sardonyx, variegated with the Onyæ. 2. Tne broad-æoned Sardonyx. 3. The horny Onyx, with white and yellow Zones; and, 4. The light blueiſh Sardonyx, with ycllow or orangecoloured Zones. The Cornelians are comprehended in the firſt Sort. i 22. Topax, a precious pellucid Gem, of a curious reen Colour, like the Emerald; but others ſay it is of a fine yellow, and for that was called Chryſolite. Theſe Gems run ſo very ſmall, that they are ſeldom found larger than a Pea. It is equal to the Ruby in Hardneſs, and in Value next the Diamond. They are found In the Eaſt Indies, alſo Bohemia, Sileſia, &. It was the ſecond Stone of the firſt Row in Aaron's Breaſt- Plate. Thus, Tyro, I have endeavoured to give you a ſhort Account of the moſt beautiful Stones and Gems. Ii jour Curioſity. ſnould lead yon farther aſter Foſſils, &c. refer you to Nature Delineated, or Philoſophical Converſations, tranſlated from the French of Abbe Le Pluche, wherein the wonderful Works of Providence in the animal, vegetable, and mineral Creation are laid open in the moſt curious and entertaining Manner, in four Vols. 12mo. with a great Variety of Copper-plates, curiouſly engraved. . Y OU NG MAN s Book of Knowledge, &c. PART IV. Of GEOG RAP H V. Tyro. H AT do you mean by Geography? Phil. Groοgrap is a Science, which teaches the Cnowledge of the Globe of the Earth, conſiſting of Land and Water, by giving a juſt Deſcription oſ all its Parts, as far as they have been hitherto diſcovered. Tyr. Into how many Parts is the Earth divided ? Phil. Into many, but all are contained under four Heads, called Quarters. 7Tp9-r. What are the Names of theſe four Quarters? Phil. They are called, 1. Europe, 2. Aſia, 3. Africa, and 4. America. ; Tyr. What are the other nominal Parts of the Earth; or how is it yet further divided in Relation to Land and Water ? . Phil. Into ten different Names; five belonging to the Diviſion of Land, viæ. 1. A Continent. 2. An Iſland. 3. A Promontory or Cape. 4. A Peninſula. And 5. An Iſthmus. And theſe anſwer to the next five belonging to the Water, viæ. 1. An Ocean. 2. A Lake. 3. A Bay. 4. A Gulf. And 5. A Strait. Theſe anſwer to each other (as was ſaid before) as more plainly appears by the following Deſcription. ; LAND. LAND. 1. A Continent is a large Tract, or vaſt Extent of main Land, not ſeparated by any Ocean. Thus Europe, Alia, Africa, &c. are Continents. 2. An lIſland is a Tract of Land ſurrounded with Water; as Great Britain, Ireland, Madagaſcar, &c. 3. A Promontory, or Cape, is a Portion or Part of Land running far into the Sea;, as Cape Verde, Cape of Good Hope, &c. 4. A Peninſula is a Part or Portion of the Earth almoſt ſurrounded with Water, ſave only a narrow Part or Neck of Land which ties or unites it to a Continent; as the Morea, Crim Tartary, Jutland, &c. 5. An Iſthmus is a narrow Part of Land, by which a Peninſula is joined to a Continent, or MainLand; as the Iſthmus of Panama, which joins North and South America together; the Iſthmus of Corint5 &c. WATER. 1. An Ocean (or Sea) is a large Extent or Collection of Waters, free from Land; ſuch as the Atlantic or IVeſtern Ocean, the lIndian Ocean, &c. 2. A Lake is a Tract of Water, ſurrounded by Land; as the Lake of Geneva, the Dead Sed, the Caſpian Sea, &c. 3. A Bay is a Portion or Part of the Sea running far up the Main-Land; as the for of Biſcay, Bay of Siam, c 4. A Gulf ſor inland Sea) is a Part of the Ocean almoſt ſurrounded with Land, ſave ſome Strait or narrow Gut of Water, by which it has Communication usr. the Ocean ; as the ulf of Perſia, the Red Sea, Subse hecsiaone Sea, &c. 5. A Setrait is a narrow Paſlage or Part of the Sea, which joins one Sea to another; as the Straits of Gibraltar, which join tHe Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean; the Straits oſ Babelmandel, &c. S E C T. II. A further Deſcription of the four Quarters of the World; a I. Or EUROP E. yro. What are the princi itel Europe is divided? pal Kingdoms or Parts int Phil. They are nine in Number, viæ. 1. Scandinavi. ſ(which comprehends Sweden, or Swedeland, Denmarꝶ, an Norway.) a. Muſcous, or Ruſſis. 3. France. 4. Germany. 5. Poland. c Spain. 7. Portugal. 8. Italy. And 9. Tortæ. ; I. Oſ SCANDINAVIA. Tyro. What do you mean by Scandinavia, and how, or whereabouts is it ſituate? Phil. Scandinavia is a large Tract of Land ſituate between 54 and 72 Degrees of N. Latitude; under which Name are comprehended the Kingdoms of Sweden, Denmarâ, and Norway, as was ſaid before I. S W E D E N. Topyr. How is Sweden fituate ? . ; Hiit Sweden is bounded on the N. and W. by Noruas, on the E. by Muſcovy, and on the S. by the Sound, and the Baltic Sea. Its Metropolis or Chief Town is Stockholm, whoſe Diſtance from London is nearly 13 Degrees, viz. about 890 Miles N. E. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts of this Country is about two Months, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern Parts about ſix Hours and a Hal. 2. DEN MAR X. Iyr. How is Denmart ſituate? . hil. Denmart is bounded by the Categate Sea on the N. by the Sound on the E. by the Baltic Sea and Germany on the S. and by the German Ocean on the W. Its Metropolis is Copenhagen, whoſe Diſtance from London is about 600 Miles Nue The Length of the longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts of this Country, is about 17 Hours and a Half, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about ſeven Hours. 3. NORW aAv. Tyro. How is Norway ſituate? Bril Norway is bounded on the N. W. and S. by Part of the Main Ocean, and on the E. by Sweden. Its Metropolis is Bergen, whoſe Diſtance from Loudox is about nine Degrees and a Quarter, viæ. 642 Miles N. by E. The Length of the longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts is above two Months, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about ſix Hours. IL. Oſ MUSCOVY or RUSSIA. Tyr. How is Muſcouy fituate? Phil. Muſcovy iS bounded on the N. by the great Northern Ocean, on the E. by Aliatic Ruſſia, on the W. b Poland, the Baltic Sea, and Sweden, and on the S. by Little Tartary and Turkey. Its Length is about 1500 Miles, and Breadth 1100. Its Chief Town is Peterſburgh, whoſe Diſtance ſrom London is almoſt i9 Degrees, viæ. about 1310 Miles N. E. and about 400 Vvines N. W. of Moſcou, the antient Capital. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part of this Conntry is about two Months, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about eight Hours and a Half. IL. Of F RANCE. Tyro. How is France ſituate? Phil. France (called Gallia, or Plate of the antient Gauls) is bounded on the N. by the Enugliſb Channel, on the E. by Germany and nel, on the S. by Spain and the Mediterraneon Sea, and on the W. by the Bay of Biſcay. Its Length is computed to be 600 Miles, and Birad 500. Its Metropolis is Paris, whoſe Diſtance from London is about three Degrees 8. S. E. viæ. 210 Miles. The Length of the longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part of this Kingdom is about 16 Hours and a Quarter, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern Part rubout nine Hours. IV. Oſ GERMANVY. Tyro. How is Germany divided? Phil. Germany is in Length about 700 Miles, and Breadth about 600. It is divided into three Parts, viæ. Holland, Planders, and Upper Germany 1. HO L L AN D. Tyr. How is Holland ſituate? Brit Holland is bounded on the N. and W. by the German Ocean, on the E. by Upper Germany, and on the S. by Flanders. Its Metropolis in the N. Part is /mſterdam, whoſe Diſtance is about 210 Miles E. of London; and Rotterdam in the S. which is about 190 Miles E. of London. ll 2. FLANDERS, or AUSTRIAN and FRENCH NETHER LANDS. S99r. How is Flanders ſituate? Phil. Flanders is bounded on the N. by Holland, o the E. b Upper Germany, on the S. by France, and on the W. by the German Ocean. It has many fair and rich Provinces, the Metropolis of which is Bruſſels, whoſe Diſtance from London is about 18o miles E. 3. UPPER GERMANY. Tyr. What do you mean by Upper Germany, and how is it ſituateV? . Phil. Upper Germany, including Switzerland, is Part of Germany itſelf, and Part of Gallia and Old Italy. It is bounded on the N. by Denmark and thè Baltic Sea, on the E. by Poland and Hungary, on the S. by Italy, and on the W. by France. Its Metropolis is Vieuna whoſe Diſtance from London is about 1i Degrees, viz. 765 Miles S. E. V. Oſ PO L AND. Tyr How is Poland ſituate? hil. Poland is bounded on the N. by Muſcovy and the Baltic Sea, on the E. by Muſcovy, on the S. by Hunary, Turhey, and Little Tartary, and on the W. by pper Germany. Its Length is about 700 Miles, and Breadth about 680. Its Metropolis is INarſaw, whoſe Diſtance from London is 13 Degrees, viz. about 9oo Miles E. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part of this Country is about 17 Hours and a Half, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern ubout eight Hours and a Quarter. BOOK OF KENOW LEDG E. 16Iyr. Are there any other remarkable Places belonging to Poland ? Pbil. Yes, Pruſſia Royal, whoſe chief Town is Dantxich; and Little, or Red Ruſſia, whoſe chief ſown is Lembourg. llil VI. Oſ SPAIN. Tyr. How is Spain ſituate? hil. Spain is bounded on the N. by France and the Bay of Biſcay, on the E. by the Mediterranean, on the S. by the Straits of Gibraltar, and on the W. by Portugal, and the Atlantic Ocean. Its Metropolis is drid, whoſe Diſtance is better than 11 Degreee vix. about 780 Miles S. by W. of London. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts of this Kingdom is about 15 Hours and a Quarter, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern Part about nine Hours and a Half. VII. Of PORTUG AL. Tyr. How is Portugal ſituate? hil. Portugal is bounded on the N. and E. by Spain, and on the S. and W. by the Atlantic Ocean. Its Metropolis is Liſbon, whoſe Diſtance from London is better than 14 Degrees S. W. by S. viæz. about 980 Miles. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts of this Country is about 15 Hours, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſoutheri about nine Hours and a Quarter. . VII. Of I TALFY. Tyr. How is Italy ſituate? . Phil. Italy is bounded on the N. by the Alps, on the N. E by the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice, und on the S. and W. by the Mediterranẽan and France. Its Metropolis is the city of Rome, (the Seat of Papacy, and Reſidence of the Pope, the pretended Succeſſor of St. Peter, and infallible Head of the Church in all ſpiritual Matters and Controverſies, as appears by the . . Articles Articles of their Faith*) whoſe Diſtance from London is nearly 13 Degrees S. E. vix. about 9o3 Miles. & Here ſollows a brief Accoum o the popiſh Creed, & hcticles of Faith, commonly called Pope Pius IVth's recd. Note, This Creed is divided into twenty-four Articles; the firſt twelve of which, being the very ſame as our Nicene Creed, I omit, and begin with their thirteenth Article. ; ll Art. 13. c I moſt firmly admit and embrace the apoc ſtolical and eccleſiaſtical fp& dition and all other Obs ſervations and Conſtitutions in the Church of Rome. Art. 14. cI do admit the Holy Scriptures in the ſame c Senſe the holy Mother-Chureh doth, whoſe Buſineſs cit is to judge of the true Senſe and Tnterpretation oſ s them; and I will interpret and receive them accordcing to the unanimous Conſent of the Fathers.' & Art. 15. cI do profeſs and believe that there are cſeven Sacraments of the New Teſtament, truly and cproperly ſo called, inſtituted by Jeſus Chriſt our Lord, cand neceſſary for the Salvation of Mankind, tho' not call of them to every one; viæ. Baptiſm, Confirmation,  the Euchariſt, Penance, extreme Unction, Orders, cand Marriage: And that they do confer Grace; and cthat of theſe, Baptiſm, Confirmation, and Orders may cnot be repealed without Sacrilege; I do alſo receive cand admit the receiveu and approved Rights of the cCatholic Church, in her ſolemn Adminiſtration of the cſaid Sacraments.' ùl Art. 16. tI do embraee and receive all and every s Thing that hath been defined and declared by the holy ſ Council of Trent, concerning Original Sin and Juſtication. . σ N. B. Art. 17. c I deo alſo profeſs that in the cMaſs there is offered unto God aà true, proper, and * As I am ſenſible the Emiſſaries of Rome are never wanting, by Artifice and Cunning, to gain many Proſelvtes to their Perſunſion. (and eſpicialls from the eſtabliſhed Church) ! think this Digreſſion will noſ be talken amiſs by true Lovers of Pioteſtuntiſm and Liberty; nnd as it may happen, that this ſmall Tract may ſall into ſuch Hande as have not yet heard of their Errors and Inconſiſtencies; i but one out of thoſc mayv by this Menns be prevonted from falling a Sacrifice to their pernicious Principles, it will both anſwer my Deiign and their Wſfate. there is truly, really, and ſubſtantially, the Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt; and that there is a Converſion made of the whole Subſtance of the Bread into the Body, and of the whole Subſtance of the Wine into the Blocd; which Converſion the Catholic Church calls Iranſubſtantiation x. Art. 18. c I confeſs under one Kind only, whole and entire, Chriſi and a true Sacrament is  taken and received.' Art. 19. c I do firmly believe that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls kept Priſoners there do receive Help by the Suffrages (or Prayers) of the Faithful. lli . & Art. 20. c I do likewiſe believe that the Saints reigning together with Chriſt are to be worſhipped and prayed unto; that they do offer Prayers unto God for us; and that their Relicks are to be had in Veneration.' Art. 21. c I do moſt firmly aſſert, that the Images of Cbriſt, of the Bleſſed Virgin, the Mother of God, and of the other Saints, ought to be had and retained, and that due Honour and Veneration ought to be given them. Art. 22. c I do affirm that the Power of Indulgencies was left by Chriſt in the Church, and that the Uſe of them is very beneficial to Chriſtian People. Art. 23.  I do acknowledge the Hol atholic Roman Church to be the Mother and Miſtreſs of all Churches; and I do promiſe and ſwear true Obedience to the Biſhop of Rome, the Succeſſor of St. * This Article is not only blaſphemous, but even ridiculous beyond Meaſure, ſince every one knows that Matter, (viæ. any Subſtance) cannot be in two or more Places at one and the ſame Time: Therefore let us charitably conclude, that the more learned Sort of Perſons cannot poſſibly believe this Article, though they are bound to give their Qtnt to it. F It is well worthy our Notice to obſerve, the Verb is, in this Article, is not good Grammar: For Chriſt and the Sacrament being two diſtinct Things, the Verb ſhould be are. But to reconcile this with the foregoing Article, they have put the Verb is to ſhew, that the real Body and Blood of Chriſt, bnù the Euchariſt, are one and the ſame. This is cunning, but wicked Inconſiſtency, and downright Sophiſtry. cPeter, the Prince of the Apoſtles, and Vicar of Veſus cChriſt. Art. 24.  I do undoubtedly receive and profeſs all cother Things which have been delivered, defined cand declared by the ſacred Canons and occumenical c Councils, and eſpecially by the holy Synod of Trent; and all other Things contrary thereunto, and all Hecreſies condemned, rejected, and anathematiZed by the c Church, I do likewiſe condemn, reject, and anathematize. Conſider, Tjro, whether theſe Impoſitions are conſiſtent with Chriſtian Liberty. . IX. Of TURKE Y in Europe. Tyr. How is Turhey ſituate? Biil. Turhey is bounded on the N. by Poland and Ruſſia, on the E. hy the Blact Sea and Turhkey in Aia, on the S. by the Mediterranean Ses, and on the W. by the Gulf of Venice and Germany. It lies between 36 and 49 Degrees of N. Latitude. Its Metropolis is Conſtantintola whoſe Diftance from London is 22 Degrees and a Half, viæ. about 1560 Miles E. by S. The Length of this Country is about 1000 Miles, and its Breadth about 900. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part is about 16 Hours, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about nine Hours and three Quarters. The Diviſion of T U R K E V. Tyr. Is not Turhey divided into different Parts or Claſſes? Pi òil. Yes, imto many, but chieſly into four, viæ. 1. Hungary. 2. Greece. 3. Crim and Little Tartary. And 4. The Danubian Provinces. I. H UNG A RVY. Hungary, though now chięſly under the Emperor of Germany, is notwithſtanding a Part of Turkey. It is bounded on thèe N. by Poland, on the E. by Tranſilvania, on the S. by Selavonia, and on the W. by Auſtria. Its chieſ City is Preſburgh, whoſe Diſtance B OOK OF ENOW LEDGE. 17 from London is more than 1i Degrees and a Half, viæ. about 8 1o Miles S. i 2. GER E E C F. Tyr. Howm is Greece ſituate? Phil. Greece is bounded on the N. by the Danubian Provinces, on the E. by the Ægean Sea, called Archipelago, on the S. and W. by the Mediterranean. Its chief Cities are Athens (or Settines) and Andrianople; the firſt of whichs about 332 Miles S. W. of Conſtantinople, and the other about 146 N. W. of the ſame. Corinth is about 54 Miles W. of Athens, and Thebes, or Stives, is about 45 N. W. oſ Athens. 3. LITTLE TARTARY. Tyr. H Ow are Crim and Little Tartary ſituate? Fhil. They are bounded on the N. by Part of Moſcovy, on the E. by Georgia, on the S. by the Black Sea, and on the W. by Podola. The Metropolis is Kaffa, ſubject to the Turks; it ſtands near the Black Sea, about 417 Miles N. E. of Constantinople, and about 750 Miles S. of Moſcow. 4. Of the D ANU B I AN Provinces. Tyr. What do you mean by the Danubian Provinces; and how are they ſituate ? . Phil. They are ſo called, becauſe they lie chieſly about the Danube, which riſes in the Blachk Foreſt in Germany, and after an eaſterly Courſe of more than 1620 Miles, falls into the Euxine, or Black Seca ſyr. How many Provinces are there ii Nine; 1. Tranſilvania. a. Walachia. 3. Moldavia. 4. Romania. 5. Bulgaria. 6. Servia. 7. Boſnia. 8. Sclavonia. And 9. Croatia. . -I. S EC T. III. Of the EUROP E AN lilands; and, BBTn Tyr. How is England ſituate? hil England (called alſo Anglia, Britannia, or Albion) is bounded on the N. by Scotland, on the E. by the German Ocean, on the S. by its own Channel, which parts it from France, and on the W. by St. George's Channel and the Iriſb Sea. It lies between 50 and 56 Degrees of N. Latitude. Its Length is about 360, and Breadth about 300 Miles. Its Metropolis is London. England contains 40 Counties: It has two Univerſities, Cambridge and Oxford, two Archbiſhopricks, and 24 Biſhopricks. r. Are theſe all the Counties in England ? hil. Yes, excluſive of Hales, hidh has four Circuits, 12 Counties, and four Biſhopricks. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part is about 17 Hours and a traſt, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about eight ours. I. Of SCOTLAND. Tyr. How is Scotland ſituate? . hil. Scotland (called alſo Caledonia) is bounded on the N. and W. by the Atlantic Ocean, on the E. by Part of the German Ocean, and on the S. by England. It lies between s5 and 59 Degrees of N. Latitude. Its Length is about 300, and Breadth about 150 Miles, and its Metropolis is Edinburgh, whoſe Diſtance from London is four Degrees and three Quarters, viæ. about 330 Miles almoſt N. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part of this Country is about 18 Hours and a Half, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern ſix Hours and a Half. Il. Of I R E L AND. Tyr. How is Ireland ſituate? . Phil. Ireland (called by ſome Britannia Parva, and S. by the Atlantic Ocean, and on the E. by St. George's Channel and the Iriſh Sea. It lies between s1 and 55l)egrees of N. Latitude. The Length is about 285, and Breadtl about 160 Miles. Its Metropolis is Dublin, which is diſtant from London four Degrees and a Quarter, viæ. about 295 Miles N. W. The Length of the longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part is about 17 Hours and a Half, and of the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about ſeven Hours and three Quarters. S ECT. IV. L. Oſ the leſſer European Iſtands, and firſt of ſuch as lie near Great Britain. . 1. Thoſe on the North are, 1. The Orkneys, or Arcades. 2. Shetland. 2. Thoſe on the Eaſt are, . 1, Holy Iſland. 2. Fern Iſland. 3. Coctet Island. 4. Sheepy Iſland. And 5. The Iſle of Thanet. 3. Thoſe on the South are, I. Portland Iſland. 2. The Iſle of Wight. 3. Portſea Iſland. And 4. The Iſlands of ſerſey and Guernſey. 4. Thoſe on the Weſt arbre, I. Lewis Iſtand. 2. Shye. 2. Mul. 4. Jura. s5. Ila. 6. Butè and Arran. 7. Man. 8. Angleſer. And 9. Scilly. l II. Of other Eusopean Iſſands more diſtant srom . ireat Britain. i i 1. The AZOR E s. Theſe Iſtands lie W. of England, and are ſubject to the King of Portugal. They uare nine in Number, viæ. I. St. Michael. 2. St. Maria. 3. Tercera. 4. Gratioſu. 5. St. George's. 6. Pico. 7. Fyal. 8. Flores. And 9. Cuervo. 2. Thoſe of S w ED E n. Theſe are ſeven in Number, vix. 1. Rugen. 2. Oelund. 3. Gothland. 4. Oſel. 5. Dago*. 6. Aland. And 7. IVeen. 3. Thoſe of DEN M ARE. Theſe are ten, viæ. I. Zealund. æ. Funen. 3. Langland. a. Laland. 5. Foliter. 6. Mona. 7. Feneren. 8. Alſen. 9. Bornholin. And ro. Iceland. 4. Thoſe of NORWAY. Theſe are four, vir. 1. Carmen. 2. Hiſteren. 3. Sanien. And 4. Suroy. 5. MEDITERRANEAN Iſlands. Tyr. IIow many Iſlands go under this Name, and how are they ſituate? Phil. There are a great many lſlands, which aãre ſituate S. of Europe, in or near the Mediterrantan Sea; but the following are the moſt noted, viæ. 1. Tĩica a. Minorca. 3. Majorca, ſituate E. of Valencia in Spqin. 3. Corſra. . Sardinia, lying S. of Genoa. 6. aelta. 7. Sicily, lying S. of Nap'es. 8. Cyprus. 9- Candia. And 10. Rhodes, S. of Natolia. The other ſmall Iſlands are of little or no Signification. Thus much for Europe. DIALOGUE III. SECT. I. Of A S I A. Tyr. T N what Part of the Globe is Aſia ſituate? i Phil. Aſia, though called the ſecond, yet is the principal Quarter of the Globe, lying to the E. of Europe. It extends from the Equator to 76 Degrees oſ N. Latitude, and is divided into five principal Parts, viæ. I. Tartary. 2. China. 3. India. 4. Perſia. And s. Turkey. * Oſel and Dago are now ſubject to Ruſſia. I. Oſ TARTARY. vVr. How is Tartary ſituate? Phil. Tartary is bounded on the N. by the Frozxen Ocean, on the E. by the Bocific or Eaſtern Ocean, on the S. by Cnina, India, and Perſia, and on the W. by Moſcovy. It lies between 30 and 76 Degrees of N. Latitude, and between the 4th and asth N. Climates; is about 4000 Miles long, and 3000 broad; its chief Towns are Toboſſti and Samarcund. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part is about three Months, anc the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſuuthern about ten Hours. It is divided into three Parts, viz. Ruſſian Tartary, Clineſe Tartary, and Independent Tartary. 2. Of CH I N A. Tyr. How is China ſituate? . Phil. China is bounded on the N. by Chineſe Tartary; on the E. and S. by the Pocifi Ocean, on thẽ W. it has India ithout the Ganges and Tibet. It lies between the third and ſeventh N. Climates, is about r400 Miles long, and 1260 broad, and its chief City is Pektin, whoſe Diſtance from London is 72 Degrees, viæ. about 5000 Miles S. E. and from Petin to Nantin about 600 Miles S. in the former of which is a Bell 11 Feet Diamoter, and 12 Feet high, weighing about 53 Tons and a lalf. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Part is about 14 Hours and three Quarters, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthermn is about r1o Hours and three Quarters. It is under the Government oſ its own Emperor, who is of the Tartarian Race. 3. OF IN D I A. Tyr. How is India ſituate? Phil. India is bounded on the N. by Tartary and China, on the E. by China and the Chineſe Sea, on te S. by the Indian Ocean, and on the W. by the ſame Ocean and Perſia. It lies between the Equator and 40 Degrees of N. Latitude, and in the firſt, ſecond, third, fourth, and fifth N. Climates. Its Length is about 3000 Miles, and Breadth about 2 100, and ie ivided into two grand Parts, viz. I. India within the Ganges, or the Great MogulPs Empire, containing Delly (his ſmperial Seat) Agra, Cambaia, Bengal, Decan, Golconda, Biſnagar, and Malabar. 2. India without the Ganges, whoſe chief Kingdoms are Pegu Tonquin, Cochinchina, Siam, and Malacca. The longe Day in the moiſt northern Parts is about 14 Hours and a Half, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern near 12. 4. Oſ PER s I A. Tyr. How is Perſia ſituate? Phil. Perſia is bounded on the N. by Turtary and the Coſpian Sea, on the E. by India, on the S. by the Perſian Gulj and Indian Ocean, and on the W. by Afſatic Turkèy. It lies between 25 and 45 Degrees of N. Latitude, and extends from the third to the ſeventh N. Climate. Its Length is computed about 1350 Miles, and Breadth 1250. It is divided into three Parts, North, Middle, and South. It is overned by the deſpotic Power of the Great Sophy. The eople are chieſly Mahometans. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts is about 15 Hours and a Half, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern about 1o Hours and a Quarter. ũ 5. Of TUREKEVY in As IA. Tyr. How is Turhcy ſituate? hil. Turkey in lia (including Arabia) is bounded on the N. by the Blach Sea and Circaſſia, on the E. by Perſia, the Perſtun Gulf, and Gulf of Ormus, on the S. by the Indian Ocean and the Straits of Babelmandel, and on the W. by the Red Sea, Iſthmus of Sueæ, Levant, and Archipelago. It lies between 12 and 46 Degrees of N. Latitude; is computed about 2300 Miles long, and 1500 broad. It contains ſix great Parts; viz. I. Natolia, whoſe chieſ City or Town is Burſa. 2. bratic whoſe Metropolis is Mecca. 3. Syria, whoſe Capit is Aleppo. 4. Diarbec, whoſe chief City is Bagdal. 5. Turcomonia, whoſe Capital is Aræerum. And 6. Georgia, whoſe Metropolis is Teſtis. This vaſt Country is inhabited by Chriſtians, Mahometans, Jews, &c. but S E CT. II. Oof the Aſiatic Iſlands. Tyr. How many Iſlands are here, and how are they ſituated? Phil. There are a great Number, but the chief are theſe ſix, whoſe Situation is as follows; 1. fapan Iſlands. E. of China. 2. The Philippine Iſlands, 8. W. of Japan. 3. IThe Moluccas, S. of Philippine. 4. The Sunda, W. of the Moluccas. s. The Banda, or Nutmeg Iſslands. And 6. Ceylon, w. of the Sunda, whoſe Capital is Candea, or Candy. lil yr. What other Iſlands are there belonging to Aſiaè Phil. During the laſt 20 Years ſeveral Voyages have been performed round the World, particularly by the celebrated Captain Cook, in the Courſe of which ſome new Iſſands have been diſcovered in the Great South Sea, or Pacific Ocean, and others more perfectly explored; though littlèe more than the Coaſts of any of them, except Ctcheite, is yet kcnown. I1. In the Eaſtern Hemiſphere (Longitude being reckoned from London) are New Zealand, the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, New Britain, New Irelund, New Guinea, and New Holland; the latter is an immenſe lſiand, as large as the Continent of Europe. 2. In the Weſtern Hemiſphere are the Friendly Iſlands, Obeteroa, Otaheite, the Society Iſlands, the Marqueſas, and the Sandwich Iſlands; at one of the latter, called Owhyhet, Captain Cook was killed, Feb. 14, 1779. DIALOGUE IV. SECT. I. Of AF RIC A. Tyr. OV is Africa ſituate? Phil. Africa, the third Quarter of the World, and ſituate S. of Europe, is almoſt ſurrounded by the Mediterranean Sea, the Atlantic, Ethiopian, and Indian Oceans, and is extended from 35 Degrees of S. Latitude to about 32 N. It is principally divided into eight Parts; viæ. Buypſ Barbary, Biledulgerid, Zaara, called the Deſart, Negro Land, Guinea, Nubia, and Ethiopia, beſides Iſlandss. 1. Of EG YP T. Iy3r. How is Egypt ſituate and divided? hil. Egypt is bounded on the N. by Part of the Mediterranean Sea, on the E. by the Iſthmus of Suex and the Red Sea, on the S. by Nubia, on the W. by Tarbaty and the Deſart. It was formerly called Miſraim. It is divided intò Lower Egypt, whoſe chief Towns are Grand Cairo, the Metropolis, and Alexandria; and Upper Egypt, whoſe Capital is Sayd or Thebes. It lies betwéen 21 and 1 Degrees of N. Latitude, and in the fourth and fifth Climates, is about 650 Miles long, and 300 broad. It is governed, for the Turkhiſo Emperor, by a Baſſa, who reſides at Grand Cairo. . . . 2. Oſf BAR BARVY. Tĩ;r. How is Barbary ſituate? Blit Bar bary is bounded on the N. by the Mediterranecan, on the E. by Egypt, on the S, by Biledulgerid, and on the W. by Part of the Atlantic Ocean; is extended ſrom 29 to 37 Degrees of N. Latitude, and ſies under the fourth and fifth N. Climates- Its Length is 2300 Miles, and Breadth 380. BSarbary is divided into ſeven different Parts, or Kingdoms, viæ. Morocco, Fex, Telenſin, Algiers, Tunis, Triſoi and Barca, whoſe chieſ Towns are of the ſame Name. It is chieſly under the Government of the Grand Turâ, and Emperor of Morocco, who is called alſo Emperor oſ Africa, King of Morocco, Fex, Sus, and Taſſale; Lord oſ Gago, Dara, and Guinea, and Great Zeriff ouf Mahomet; ud conſequently their Religion is Mahometaniſm. The longeſt Day is i4 Hours and a Quarter, and the ſhorteſt 1o Flours and a tral as in Eg pt. 3. Of BILEDULGERID. Tyr. How is Biledulgerid ſituate ? Pnil. Biledulgerid ſeſounded on the N. by Barbary, on the E by Egypt, on the S. by Zaara, and on the puoy Part of the Atlantic Ocean. It lies between 26 and 31 Degrees of N. Latitude, and in the third and fourth N. Climates. Its Length is about 2050 Miles, and Breadth 300. The Length of Days is from 14 Hours to 1o and a Quarter. It is governèd by many little Kings, but all ſubject to the Grand Turt, or to the Emperor oſ Muorocco. il 4. Of ZAAꝶA, or the DESART. Tyr. How is this Deſart ſituate? Phil Zaara is bounded on the N. by Biledulgerid, on the E. by Egypt and Nubia, on the S. by Negro Land, and on the W. by the Atlantic Ocean. It is divided into ſeven Parts, viæ. Borno, Gago, Bardoq, Lempta, Targa, Zuenxiga, and Zanhaga, whoſe Capital is Targaſſau; the others have the ſame Names as their Provinces. It lies between i5 and 26 Deg. of N. Latitude, and in the third and fourch N. Climates, is in Length about 2340 Miles, and Breadth about 330. The Days are from 1o Hours and a Quarter to 13 and three Quarters long. Their Government is by ſeveral Lords and Kings, called Xeques, and they are chieſty Mabometans. S. Of NEG RO LAND. Fyr. How is the Land of Negroes ſituate? Biil. Negro Land is bounded on the N. by Zaara, on the E. by Nubia, on the S. by Guinea, and on the W. by Part of the Atlantic Ocean. It lies between eight and 2æ Degrees of N. Latitude, and in the ſecond and third N. Climates. It is computed to be about 22 80 Miles long, and 600 broad. It is divided into 13 Provinces, viæ. Genoboa, Gelata, Tombut, Agades, Cano, Caſſena, Guangara, Melli, Mandinga, Gago, Guber, Zegæneg, and Zanfara, whoſe Capitals are of the ſame Namé. The Daygs are very little different in Length from thoſe in Æaara. It is governed by ſeveral Kings, but all, or moſt, are ſubject to the King of Tombut. Groſs Idolatry and Mahometaniſm prevail here. 6. Of q UIN E A. T;r. How is this Country ftuate ? lilbn Phil. Guinea is bounded on the N. by Negro Land, on the E. by Ethiopia Exterior, on the S. by &e Ethiopian Ocean, and on the W. by the Atlantic Ocean. It is divided inco four Parts; 1. The Coaſt of Mal- uette, whoſe Capital is Timan. 2. The Ivory Coaſt weſtward, whoſe Metropolis is Toba. 3. The Go'd Coaſt eaſtwarò, whoſe Capital is St. George de Mina. And 4. The Kingdoms of Benin, Metropolis Arda. Guinea lies between five and 13 Degrees of Nã Latitude. Its Length is 1320 Miles, and Breadth about 7400. It is ſubject to the Emperor of Guinea. Paganiſm is here practiſed to the leight of ridiculous Superſtition. Their Days are from 11 Hours and three Quarters to 12 and three Quarters. 7. Of NU B I A. Tyr. How is Nubia ſituate? Phil. Nubia is bounded on the N. by Egipt, on the E. by Ethiopia Exterior, on the S. by Ethiopia Interior, on the W. by Part of Zaara and Rigra Land. It lies between 14 and aaæ Degrees of N. Latitude, and in the ſecond and third N. Climates. Its Length is about 840 Miles, and Breadth about 70. It is divided by the River Nubia into N. and S. The Capital of North Nubia is Samna, and of South Nubia, a Town or City of the ſame Name. lilil It is governed by its own independent powerful Prince, who is reported io be very humane. Their Traſfic is chiefly at Grand Cairo. Fne Length of the Days are much the ſame as in Zaara. 8. Of ETHIOPIA INTERIOR. Tyr. How is this Country ſituate? Pit Ethiopia Interior, called alſo the Land of the Ab, ſſinians, is bounded on the N. by Nubia, and on the E. S. and Part of the W. by Edhiqpia Exterior. It lies in the firſt, ſecond, and third N. and S. Climates, and the Length is computed 3600 Miles, and Breadth about 2200. Ethiopia Interior is divided into eight Provinces, viz. 1. Barnagaſſo. 2. Tigremahon. 3. Dobolſat 4. Eatigar. s. Angote. 6. Amara. 7. Beleguanre. And i overned by its own indepenRubers called Naggaſi, whoſe OGovernS8. Begramedri. This is Government is deſpotical. He ſtiles himſelf the Beloved of God, (ſays he ſprung from the Stock of Judah) the Son of the Column of Sion, the Son of the Seed of Yacob, the Son of the Hand of Mary, the Son of Nahu after the Fleſh, and of St. Peter and Paul after the Spirit, &c. The longeſt Day in the moſt northern Parts oſ this Country is about 13 Hours and a Half, and the ſhorteſt in the moſt ſouthern 10 and a Half. ETHIOPIA EXT ER IOR. Ethiopia Exterior is bounded on the N. by Al yſſinia on the E. W. and S. by the Ethiopic Ocean. And, if to this you take in the Land of Hottentots, it extends to near 35 Degrees S. Latitude. It comprehends the Kingdoms of Bioara Loango, Congo, and Angola; the Empires of Monoemugi and Monomotapa; and the Coanſts oſ Caſres, Zanguebar, Ajan, and Abex. It is governed by various Princes, and the People are chieſly groſs Idolaters and Mahometans. As for the Hottentots, they ſhew no Sign of any Devotion, only very ſuperſtitious. The Days much as in Ethiopia Interior. S E CT. II. Of ibe AFRICAN lIſtands. Tyr. What are the principal Iſlands in Africa ? Phil. There are many ſmall Iſlands; but the moſt noted are comprehended under four Names, vizæ. 1. The Iſiand of Madagaſcar. 2. Cape Verd Iſlands. 3. The Canary. And 4. the Madeira Iſlands. I. MAD AG AS CAR. This is a large Iſland, lying S. E. of Ethiopia, and extends from 11 to about 25 Degrees of S. Latitude; is about 1000 Miles long, and 400 broad. It is called by the Por tuguexe St. Laurence, becauſe they firſt diſcovered it on that Day. The Inhabitants (except in the Eaſtern Part) are chieſly Pagans and Mahometans; and are ſo governed by their Prieſts (called Ombiaſſes) that they are under uncommon Superſtitions. Thus, if a Child be born upon ſuch a Day, they ſay it is unlucky, and therefore give it to the wild Beaſts; and if a Woman dies in Childbed, they bury the living Child with her, becauſe it is better ſo (they ſay) than to live without a Mother to take Care of it. And thus, by theſe Prieſt-cunning and deluſive Perſuaſions, this Iſland is very thin of Inhabitants. It is under no particular Governor. 2. Cape V E R D litſlands. Theſe lie S. W. of Barbary, and N. W. of Guinea, tween 13 and 17 Degrees of N. Latitude, and are as follows: I. St. Anthony. 2. St. Vincent. 3. St. Lucia. 4. St. Nicholas. 5. hſula de Sal. 6. Bonaviſta. 7. Mayo. 8. St. Jago. ꝗ. Iuſula del Fuego. 1o0. Bravo. The chieſ Town is St. Tago, ſubject to Portugal. 3. The CANAR Y lIſtands. Theſe lie N. of Cape Verd Iſlands, and between 27 and 29 Degrees of N. Latitude. They are ſeven in Number, viæ. 1. Lancerota. 2. Forte V'entura. 3. Canaria ſMetropolis the ſame). 4. Teneriffe, famous for its eak. S. Gomera. 6. Ferro, where the firſt Moeridian was formerly fixed by common Conſent, but now almoſt every Nation fixes it at its oun Metropolis. æ And 7. Pa.ma. They are ſubject to the King of Spain. 4. MADERA, or MADEIR as. This lies in about 32 Degrees N. Latitude, and W. Morocco. Its chie? Town is Funchal. It is ſubject to the Portuguexe. Tyr. Are theſe all the Iſlands? Phil. There are ſome of leſs Note, viæ. 1. Zocotora, ſubject to the Arabians. 2. Comora, N. W. of Madagoscor- 3. St. Thomas; 4. Prince's Iſland; and s. naboa, ſubject to the Portuguexe, lying W. of Ethiopia. 6. St. Helena, ſubject to ſie Engli , lying S. W. oſ St. Thomas's. And 7. The Iſe of Aſcenſion, N. E. of St. Helena. And thus much for Africa. . Tui I return you Thanks, Sir. hil. Now, Tyro, for the laſt Quarter of the World, . viæ. America. t Longitude n this Book is reckoned from the Meridian of London. DIALOGUE V. SEcrT. I. Oſ AME RI C A Tyr. HAT ,is America called, and how is it ſituate Phil. America is called the fourth or laſt Quarter of the World, and Weſtward on the Globe. It is divided into two principal Parts, one called North, and the other Souih America. When was America ſirſt diſcoveredP? PVhit In the Year 1492, by Chriſiopher Columbus, a Native of Genoa, and in the Service of Spain. But Great Britain derived her Claim tò North America from the firſt Difcover el of that Continent by Sebaſtian Cabot, in the Name of Henry cthe Seventh, Anno r1497. Of NORTH AMERICA. Tyr. Why is this called Norih America ? Phil. Becauſe it lies on the N. ſide, or Northward of the Equator. Tyr. Into how many principal Parts is this divided ? Pi The grand Diviſions are three, vix. I. Britiſb America, to the N. and N. E. Il. Thè American States, in the Middle; and III. Sponiſh America, to the S. and S. W. I. Oſ BRITISH AMERICA. How is this divided? Vi Into three Parts, viæ. 1. The N. Part, which comprehends the Countries lying about Hudom's Bay, called Newu Britain, or the Country of the Eſquimaux, including Labrador, and New Norih and Sodh Wales ; cthis is bounded on the N. by unknown Lands and fronen Scas, on the E. by the Auabtc Ocean, on the S. by the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Canada, and on the W. by Lands unknown. The Hu beee s Bay Company have four Forts on the W. Side of the Ba, viz. Churchill Nelſon, Severn, and qiibam, where they trade with the Natives for Skins ani urs. ; 2. CANADA, or the Province of QUEBEC. i How is this Country ſituated and bounded? hil. It lies between 45 and 52 Degrees of N. Latitude. It is bounded on the N. by New Britain, on the E. and S. E. by St. John's River, the Gulf of St. Lawrence Nova Scotia, or New Scotland, and New England, on the S. by New TIorù, and on the W. and N. W. by Lands unknown. Its Length is about 800 Miles, and Breadth about 200. Its chieſ Town is Quebec, ſituate on the W. ſide oſ the River St. Lawrence. 3. NOVA SCcoTIA, or NEW SCOTLAND. Iyr. How is Nova Scotia ſituated and bounded? Phit It lies between 43 and 49 Degrees of N. Latitude. It is bounded on the & by Canada, on the E. by the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Atlantic Ocean, by the ſame Ocean on the S. and by Canada and New Englond on the W. being about 350 Miles long, and 250 broad. The chief town is Halifax. I. Of ithe AMERICAN STATES. Tyr. How many are there of theſe, and how are they ſituated and bounded? . llilil Phil. They are 13 in Number, and lie between q and 49 Degrees of N. Latitude; are bounded on the N., and , W. by Cunada and the Lakes Ontario and Erie, or Oſwego, ón the E. by Nova Scotia and the Atlantic Ocean, on the S. by Florida, and on the W. by the River QMiſiſſib i; being about 1500 Miles in Length from N. to S. but bſ. Breadth is various, and in many Places undetermined; in N. Carolina and Virginia, it is about 70 Miles from the Atlantic Ocean to the River Miſſiſſibpi. ll l The UNITED STATES of AMERICA lie aſter each other srom North to South in the following Order. States. Chief Towns. ẽ ſ I. New Hampſhire Portſmouth ] 2. Mallachuſett's Bay Boſton Æ à 2. Rhode Iſland, &c. Newport i l 4. Connecticut . New London and 5S. New York : New York 6. New Jerſey Perth Amboy 7. Pennſylvania Philadelphia 8. Delaware Newcaſtle 9. Maryland Annapolis 10. Virginia Williamſburg 11. N. Carolina Vilmington 12. S. Carolina Charles- ſown 13. Georgia Savannah All theſe belonged to the Engliſb, but have lately renounced their Allegiance to the Crown of Great-Britain, and at the Concluſion of the War in r783, were acknowledged by his Britannic Majeſty, and the reſt oſ the European Powers, to be free, ſovereign, and independent States. III. Of SPANISH AMERICA. Tyr. Into how many Parts is this divided? Phil. Into four, 1. Florida. 2. Mexico, or New Spai n. 3. New Mexico, including Colifornia. And 4 Louiſiuna. 1. OF F LOR I DA. Tyr. How is Florida ſituated and bounded Phil. It lies between 25 and 32 Degrecs of N. Latitude, and is bounded on the N. by Georgia, on the E. by the Atlantic Ocean, on the S. by the Gulf of Mexico, and on the W. by the River Miſiſſirpi, which divides it from Louiſiana, being about 500 Miles long, and 440 broad. It is divided into Eaſt and Weſt Florida. St. Auguſtine is the chief Town of Eaſt Florida, and Penſacola of IVeſt. This Count y was ſirſſ poſteſſed by the Spaniards, and by them ceded to Great Britain in 1763, but at the late Treaty of Peace in 1783, it was again reſtored to Spain 186 THE YOUNG MAN:s 2. Oſ OLD MEXICO, or NEW SPAIN. Tyr. How is this Country fituated ? Phil. It lies between 8 and 30 Degrees of N. Latitude, and extends from 83 to 111 Degrees of W. Longitude: It is bounded by Netu Mexico on the N. by the Gulf of Mexico N. E. by Terra Firma in South America S. E. and by the Pacific Occan S. W. being about 2000 Miles long, and 6co broad. Tyr. Into how many principal Parts is this Country divided? Phil. Into three, called Audiences, viz. 1. Galicia, or Guadalajarra, which has a Capital of the ſame Name, viz. Guadalajarra. a. Mexico Proper; the chief Towns of which are Mexico, dcatules, ànd Vera Cruæ. And 3. G uatimala, whoſe Capital of the ſame Name, together with 8000 Families, which it contained, was ſwallowed up by an Earthquake on June 7, 1773. ew Guatimala has ſince been erected at ſome Diſtance from the Place where the old Town ſtood. . Maexico was diſcovered in 1518, and conquered by the Spaniaords in 15321; this was the firſt Country they ſettled on the Continẽnt of America, and it ſtill eontinues to be their principal Colony. The Climate is exceſſively hot, lying chieſly in the Drrid Zone. The inland Parts afford an agreeable Proſpect, and few Countries enjoy more oſ the Benefits of Nature, and the Neceſſaries of Liſe. But what forms the principal Riches, and firſt induced the Spaniards to ſettle here, are its Gold and Sùlver Mines. The chief Mines of Gold are in Varagua and New Granada, bordering upon Darien and Terra Firma. Thoſe of Silver, which are much more rich and numerous, are found in ſeveral Parts, but in none ſo much as the brovince of Mexico: All the Mines, whether of Gold or Silver, are generally found in the Mountains and barren Parts; Nature oſten making Amends one Way, for her Deficiency another. The ſongeſt Day in the moſt Northern Part of this Country is about 14 Hours, and in the moſt ſouthern about 12 Hours and a Half. It is governed (for the King of Spain) by a Viceroy, who reſides at Mexico. The Indiuns in general arè Idolaters, but the Spaniards here, as in Europe, are all of the Catholic 3. OF NEW MEXICO, including CALTFORNIA. Tyr. How is this Country ſituated? Phil Between 23 and 43 Degrees of N. Latitude, and extends from 94to 126 Degrees o W. Longitude; itis bounded by unknown Lunds on the N. by Old Mexico and the Pacific Ocean S. by Louiſiuna E. and by the Pacific Occan W. being about 2000 Miles long, and 1600 broad. Iyr. Into how many Parts is this Country divided? Phil. Into four: 1. New Mexico Proper, t the N. E. 2. Apacheira, S. E. 3. Sonora, S. And 4. California, W. The chief Town in the ſirſt Diviſion is Sonta Fe, the Reſidence of the Spaniſb Governor; in the ſecond, St. Antonio; in the third, Taupe; and in the fourth, St. Juan. This Country has à moſt delightful Climate, and a Soil productive of every Thing for Profit or Delight. It has rich Mines of Silver, and ſome of Gold, which are worked more and more everyDay; andit produces precious Stones of ſeveral Kinds. The Dew that falls in California and lights on the Roſe Leaves, candies and becomes har like Manna, having the Sweetneſs of refined Sugar. And in the Middle of the Country are Plains of Salt firm and clear as Cryſtal, which, conſidering the va Quamtities of Fiſh found on its Coaſt, might render it an invaluable Acquiſition to any induſtrious Nation. California is a Peninſula finely ſituated for Trade, and has a Pearl Fiſhery of great Value. It was firſt diſcovered by the great Conqueror of Mexico, Ferdinando Corteæ. Our farnous Admiral and Navigator, Sir Francis Drabke, took Poſſeſſion of it in 1578; and the principal King formally inveſted him with the Sovereignty. But the Government of Great-Britoin have not hitherto attempted to vindicate this Title. 4. Oſf LOUISIANA. Tyr. Houm is this Country ſituated? Phil. Louiſiana is bounded by unknown Lands on the N. by the Gulf of Mexico S. by the River Miſſiſſippi E. and by Net Mexico W. but as the Country is thinly imhabited by Europeans, the Length and Breadth are vel undetermined. New Orleans, on the Banks of the uæ ſiſſippi, is the chies Town. This Country, together with Florida, of which it was formerly reckoned a Part, was firſt diſcovered in 1512, by Juan Ponce de Leon, as he was rambling in Search of Bimini, one of the Lucayos, or Bahama Iſles, which was ſaid to contain a Fountain that reſtored thoſe who drank of it to their priſtine Y outh and Vigour. The French were the firſt Europeans who ſettled in it, and according to their Diviſion of Nortl America, Louiſiana wus made to extend through the interior Parts as far as Canada, and even to include ſome Part of Carolina. Since the Peace of 1763, they have ceded Louiſiana to the Spaniards. And now, T;ro, i Oſ TERRA ARCTICA. Tyr. What do you mean by this Name? Phil. It is called Arctica, becauſe it comprehends thoſe Countries which are ſituate far North, very near the North or Arctic Pole. or Polar Circle. Tyro. Which are they? Pbil. There are many of them; but the chief and moſt noted are, 1. Greenland. 2. Spitlber , 3. Nova Zembla. 4. Terra de Jeſſo. And 5. New Denmart. Theſe are known very little at preſent, but barely their M ames, therefore cannot be taken any further Notice or. Of SOUTH AMERICA. Tyr. Why is this ſo called? l Phil. Becauſe it lies chieſy on the S. Side of the Equator. ꝗyr. Into how many principal Parts is it divided? Phil. Into ſeven, viæ. i1. Terra Firma. 2. Peru, The Land of te Amazxons. 4. Brazil. s. Chili. 6. Paraguay. And 7. Terra Magellanica. 1. Of TERRA FIRMA. ſyr. How is this ſituate? llil Phil. Terra Firma was diſcovered in 1514, lies in the firſt and ſecond N. Climates, and is bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the N. and E. by Amagzonia and Peru S. and by Mexico and the Pacific Occam W. It lies between the BOOK OF ENOWLEDG E. 189 Equator and 12 Degrees of N. Latitude, and is extended from S0 to 82 Degrees of W. Longitude. It is computed to be about 1500 Miles long, and 750 broad. Tyr. How is it divided? hil. Into E. and W. The E. upon the River Oroonoko, called 1. Guiana, whoſe chieſf Town is Surinum. And 2. Neuw Andaluſia, or Paria, whoſe Metropolis is St. Thomas. Tne W. comprehends the Provinces of 1. Terra Firma Proper, or Darien, whoſe chief Town is Panama. 2. Carthagena, Metropolis the ſame. 3. St. Martha, Metropolis the ſame. 4. Rio de la Hacha, Metropolis the ſame. s. Venexuela, Metropolis the ſame. 6. Comana, Metropolis the ſame. 7. Neuw Granadã, Metropolis Santa Fẽ de Bugota. And 8. Popey.n, Metropolis the ſame. It is governed for the King of Spain, by a Vice- Roy reſiding at Mexico. The Natives of this Country, eſpecially in the Middle, are groſs Idolaters. 2. Of PE RU. Tyr. How is this Country ſituate? Pi il. Peru, firſt diſcovered by the Spaniards in 1525, is bounded on the N. by Part of Terra Firma, on the E. hy Amagzonia, on the S. by Chili, and on the W. by the Pacific Ocean. It lies between 24 Degrees of S. and one Degree of N. Latitude, and is extended from 6o to 81 Degrees of W. Longitude, and in the firſt, ſecond, and third S. Climates. Iyr. How is it divided? hil. Into three Provinces, viæ. 1. Quito N. whoſe chief Towns are Quito and Ra ta. 2. Lima, or Los Reyes, in the Middle, whoſe chief Towns are Lima, the Metropolis, and Cuſco. And 3. Los Charcos S. whoſe chief Towns are Potoſi and Porco. The Natives in general are very groſs Idolaters, worſhipping Sun, Moon, Stars, Thunder, Lightening, &c. But in ſome Parts there are Chriſtians, &c. It was quite conquered by the Spaniards in 1533, and they have the moſt conſiderable Part of it under theii 3. OFſ the Land of the AMAZONS. Tyr. How is this Land ſituate? Ehil. This Country, diſcovered by the Spaniards it 1541, is bounded on the N. by Terra Firma, on the E by ranil on the S. by Paraguay, and on the W. eru. . it lies in the firſt, ſecond, and third S. Climates. It is under no particular Government: The Inhabitants in general being a ſavage Sort of People, appearing always in Arms. It is ſuppoſed to take its Name from thoſe warlike Women called (by ſeveral Poets and Hiſtorians) Amaxons, of whom it is reported they cut off one of their Breaſts, not only for the better qualifying themſelves to hold their Bows, and ſhoot the ſurer, but that they might be the more ſavage and rapacious. 4. Of BR A2 I L. Tyr. How is Braxil ſituate? Phil. This Country, diſcovered by the Portuguexe, in about 1501, is bounded on the N. and E. by the Atlantic Ocean, on the S. by the Mouth of the River La Plata, and on the W. by a Chain of Mountains which divides it from Amaxonia. and Paraguay. It lies between the Equator and 35 Degrees of 8. Latitude, and in the firſt, ſecond, third, and fourth S. Climates. . Its greateſt Length is computed about 2500 Miles, and its Breadth about 700. Tyr. Into how many principal Parts is it divided? Piail. There is not any particular Account of its Provinces, Diviſions, &c. but the chief Towns that are known, or moſt worthy of Note, are as follow: 1. St. Vincent. a. Sanctos. 3. Angra Dos Reyes. 4. Rio de Yaneiro, or St. Sebaſiian. 5. Spiritu Sancto. 6. Porto Seguro. 7. St. Salvador. 8. Pernombuco. And 9. Parayha. ll The Natives are under no particular Government, nor profeſs any Religion, being chieſty ſunk into groſs Ignorunce, Idolatry, && S. Oſ C H I L I. TIyr. How is this Country ſituate? Phil. Chili, diſcovered by the Spaniards about 1554, is bounded on the N. by Peru, on the E. by Paraguay, on the S. by Terru Magellanico, and on the W. by the Pacific Ocean. It lies between 25 and 44 Degrees of S. Latitude, and in the fourth, fifth, and ſixth S. Climates. ; Its Length is computed to be about 1100 Miles. Tyr. Into how many Parts is Chili principally divided? hil. Into three, vizæ. 1. Chili Proper- 2. Chili Imperial. And 3. Cuyo, whoſe chief I'owns are Str. Jago, Baldivia, and St. fohn de Frontieræ. f is chieſly governed by the Vioe- Roy of Peru, under the King of Spain. 6. Of PARAGUAY. Tyr. How is Paraguay ſituate ? i Phil. This Country, diſcovered alſo hby the Spaniards, 1546, is bounded on the N. by the Land of the Amaæons, on the E. by Braxil, on the S. by Terra Magellanica, and on the W. by Peru and Cbili. i Tyr. Whence has it its Name? hil. From the River Paraguay; but it is called by the Spaniards (and currently by others) Ri- de la Plata. It fies between 12 and 37 Degrees of S. Latitude, and in the ſecond, third, fourth, and fifth S. Climates, and extends from j50 to 75 Degrees of W. Longitude. Its Length is cotmputed about 1500 Miles, and Breadth about 1 100. Tyr. Into how many principal Parts is it divided? Phil. The moſt material Provinces are five in Number, viæ. 1I. Guayra, whoſe chief Town is Cividad Real. 2. Paraguay Proper, whoſe chief Iown is Aſſumption. 3. Chaco, whoſe chief Town is Conception. 4. Tucuman. whoſe chief Town is St. Jugo. And s. Rio de la Plata, whoſe chief Town is Buenos Ayres. It is governed chieſly by a Vice-Roy. 7. Of TERRA MAGELLANICA. Phil. It is bounded on the N. by Part of Paraguay and Chili, on the E. by the Atlantic, on the S. by the Straits of Magellan, and on the W. by the Pacific Ocean. It was diſcovered about 1519, by one Ferdinand Magellan, from whom it took its Name. ; S E C T. II. Of ihe AMERIC AN Iſands. Tyr. What are the principal Iſlands in Americaẽ Piil. They are ten, which are thus divided. I. To the N. is Neuwfoundland. Cuba. YJamaica. Hiſpaniola. Porto Rico. Caribbees. Lucayos. Sotovento. Leſſer 9. Bermudas. 3. To the S. 10. The Iſland of Terra del Fuego. I. Of NEWFOUNDLAND. This Iſſland was diſcovered by the two Cabots, in the Time of Henry VII. 14975 but more perfectly by Thorn and Elcot, of Briſiol, in 1527. It lies between 46 and 52 Degrees of N. Latitude, near New Britain. The principal Towns are Bonaviſta, Placentia, and St. ſibus. This Iſſland produces Plenty of Timber fit for Maſts, Yards, &c. but is chieſly valuable on Account of the great Cod Fiſhery on its Banks. It is ſubject to the Crown of England. . i 2. OFf CUBA. This Iſſand was diſcovered by the Spaniards in 1594. It lies N. of Jamaica, N. W. of Enantolus and S. ol the Bahama lſlands, between 19 and 23 Degrees of N. Latitude, and extends from 74 to 87 Degrees of W. Lonitude. It is ſubject to the ſ of Spain; and the chieſ Towns are the Havanna and St. Jago. o . 3. & Greater 2. Middle, the Antilles, 3. Of JAMAIC A. This was diſcovered by Columbus, and taken from the Spaniards, by Penn and Venables, in Oliver Cromwell's Time: It was firſt called St. Jago, but afterwards Jamaica, in Honour of James Duke of York. It lies S. oſ Cuba, and W. of Hiſpaniola, and between 17 and 19 Degrees of N. Latitude, and extends from 75 to 79 Degrees of W. Longitude. It is ſubject to the EngliiiThe chief Towns are King ſton and Port Royal. ùi 4. Of HISPANIOLA. This was diſcovered alſo by Columbus in ag. It lies between 17 and 2o Degrees of N. Latitude. It has Cuba on the N. W. Famaica on the W. and Porto Rico on the E. It is chièfly ſubject to France; and its principal Town is St. Domingo. i 5. Oſ PorTO RICO. Porto Rico, (once called Johannes Inſula, and by the Natives Bonquin) lies E. of Jfamaica, in àbout 18 Degrees of N. Latitude. It takes its Name from the City and Haven of the ſame Name. It is ſubject to Spain. 6. Of the CARIBEEE Iſlands. Tyr. Why are theſe Iſlands ſo called? Duir From the Inhabitants, who, upon the firſt Diſcovery, were found to be Cannibals, and the Word is taken for the ſame. They repreſent the Segment of a Circle, are about thirty in Number, and extend from about 18 Degrees N. Latitude almoſt to Terra Firma. ſThe chief among them are, i. Anguilla, 2. St. Marlin. 3. St. Croix, or Santa Crux. 4. Barbuda. 5. St. Chriſtopher's. 6. Nevis. 7. Antigua. 8. Montſerai. o. Guadaloupe. 10. Marigalante. 1i. Dominica. 12. Marlinico. 13. Barbadoes. 14. St. Lucia. 15. St. Vincent. 16. Granada. And 17. Tobago. *Note, Some of theſe belong to the Engliſb, ſome to the French, andothers to the Duteh. The oſiet of neſt is Barbadoes, in about 13 Degrees and a Half N. llilil It is ſubiect to the Englsb 7. Oſ the LUCAvOs. Tr. Why are they ſo called? Pii. From Lucayis, the longeſt of them all. The extend from the Coaſt of Florida, to the N. of Hiſpaniola The chief of which are, 1. Babama. 2. Luccyos .Cignatio. 4. Guanahani. 5. Tuma. 6. Tama. 7. amana. And 8. Mayaguana. . The principal of theſe is Babama, near Cape Plorido and remarkable for Spiders, they being about two Inches long in general, having ſix Eyes very viſible. 8. Oſ the SOTOVENTO. Theſe are ſo called by the Spaniards, to whom thej chieſly belong, and are found from E. co W. along the Coaſt of Terra Firma. The principal of them are, 1. Trinidad. 2. Margarita. 3. Tortuga. 4. Orchilla. 5. Rocca. 6. Bonaire. 7. Curaſſou. And 8. Oruba. 9. Of BERMUD às. Bermudas, ſo called from JFohn Bermudas, a Spaniard, who firſt dilcovered it. It ſies between 32 and 33 Degrees of N. Latitude, about 240 Engliſb ſ eagues E. oſ Carolina, and is ſubject to the Crown of Great- Britain. 10. Of TERRA DEL Furoco. This (according to ſeveral Hiſtorians) is ſo called, on Account of ſeveral Volcanos. It is ſituate S. of Magellanica, and parted from the main Continent by the Straits 0 Mæ ellan, lying between 52 and 53 Degrees of S. atitude. And thus, Tyro, I have given you a ſhort and conciſe Account of every Thin , as far as I could in this Compaſs, and hope it will be ſufficient to excite your Curioſity, and to qualify you for the better underſtanding of ſuch Authors as ave written more largely upon this . Subject. DIALOG UE VI. Srer. I. Betuween Philo, a Tutor, and Tyro, his Pupil, concerning the Nature and Deſcription of the GLOBES. Tyr. HAT is a Globe or Sphere? , V Phil. A Globe, or Sphere, is a ſolid round Body contained under one Surface; having a Point in the Middle, called the Center, from whence all Lines drawn to the Surface are equal, and the two Poles are what it revolves or turns round upon, (like the Gudgeon of a Water-Wheel) and are repreſented by thoſe two Pieces of Iron or Wire, upon which the Globe turns: That which has for the Index or Dial Plate upon it is called the North Pole, and the other is the South Pole. Tyr. What are the Names of the Globes:? Phil. One is called the Teræſrial or Earthly; the other the Celeſtial, or Heavenly Globe. Tyr. What do they teach us? . Phil. Firſt the Ter reſtrial Globe teaches the Knowledge of the Earth and Sea, with the Situation of Places, their Difference of Latitude and Longitude, the Time of the Sun's riſing and ſetting, Length of Days and Nights throughout the Year, and the true Diſtance from one Place to another, &c. Secondly, the Celeſtial Globe not only teaches us the Sun's riſing and ſetting. but alſo the riſing and ſetting of any of the fixed Stars, their Declination and right Aſcenſion, Diſtance from each other, Time of ſouthing. &c. S E C T. II. Tyr. What are thoſe Lines called that are marked on the Globes? Phil. They are called the great and leſſer Circles. Tyr. What do you mean by a great Circle ? Phil. Great Circles are ſuch as cut the Globe into two èqual Parts, gaſfine through the Center; all ſuch as do not cut the Sphere in two equal Parts, are called leſſer Circles. Tyr. Pray how many are the great Circles? Phil. 1. The Equator, or Equinoctial. 2. The Ecliptic. 3. The Zodiac. 4. The Brazen Meridian. 5. The Horizon. And 6. The Colures. Of theſe in their Order. 1. The Equator on the Terreſtrial, or Equinoctial on the Colostial Globe, is a Line, or Circle, that cuts the Globe in two equaſ Parts, dividing the N. from the Sand upon the Globe is eaſily cnown by two broad Lines running parallel to each other, and a tne Hair Line between them: It is divided into 360 equal Parts, called Degrees, beginning at the firſt Meridian (or Sign Aries) and is marked from one with 1o, 20, 30, 40, &c. to 360, quite round; and upon Senex's Globes you Rave under the Eguator, at the Meridian of Londen, a Cypher, thus o and from thence are marked the Degrees of Longitude from London, with 10, 20, 30, &c. to 180 Degrees to the Right-hand, or Eaſt; and backwards from London, with 10, 20, 30, &c. to 180 Weſtward. * 2. The Ecliptic is another great Circle of the Sphere, which cuts the Equator at the two Points, Aries and Libra, making an Angle at each Point of 23 Degrees 30 Minutes, which is its furtheſt or utmoſt Extent, either N. or S. from the Equator. The Ecliptic (lice the Equator) is divided into 360 Degrees, but not numbered from 1, 10, 20, &c. as the Equator is, but is divided into 12 equal Parts, contãining 30 Degrees each, which are called Signs, and have different Nomes and Characters. Thus, The NORTHERN SIGNS are, Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. ùl ſ u 9 st ; The SOUTHERN are, Libra. Scorpio. Sogittarius. Capricorn. Aquarius. Piſces. &i m 1 v & x You muſt remember alſo, that Aries æ is called the Ram; Taurus  the Bull; Gemini u the Twins; Cancer the Crab; Leo S the Lion; Virgo m the Virgin; Libra æ the Balance; Scorpio m the Scorpion; Sagitturius . At the Equator the Days and Njghts are always equal, vix. 12 Hom each; but become more and more unequal from thence to each Pole, where it is Day one Halr the Year, and Night the other. 1 the Archer; Capricorn vꝑ the Goat; Aquarius 22 the Water-bearer; and Piſces X the Fiſhes. 3. The Zodiac is a broad imaginary Circle, which extends itſelf (according to the Rules of Aſtronomy) eight Degrees on each Side of the Ecliptic, and is that which contains the 12 Signs, and in which the Planets perform their Revolutions. 4. The Braxen Meridian is another great Circle, which divides the Globe into two equal Parts. It is repreſented by a thick Braſi Hoop, which ſurrounds the Globe from & to S. and divides the Equator into two equal Parts, viæ. the Eaſt from the Weſt, and is that on which the Globe itſelf is hung, or turns round upon by its Axis, the Extremities of which are called the Poles; that where the Dial-Plate is fixed is called the North Pole, and the other is the South Pole, oppoſite to it. Tyr. How is the Brazen Meridian marked or divided? hil. Like the Equator and Ecliptic, into 360 Degrees; but with this Difference, it is divided into four Nineties, viæ. from the Equator towards the N. and S. Poles the Meridian is marked with a Cypher over the Equator, thus (o), and on each Side with ro, 2o, 3 40 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90, which ends in each Pole. Then again, from each Pole to the Equator on the other Half of the Meridion, is marked 1o, 20, 30, 40, &c. to 90, which ends in the Equator. 5. The Horizon is that great Circle which divides the Heavens and Earth into two equal Parts, one called the upper, and the other the lower Hemiſphere. There are two Sorts, the one called the ſenſible or natural, the other the rational, or mathematicaol Horizxon, viæ. . 1. The ſenſible Horizon is that which divides the viſible Part of the Heavens from the inviſible; and is that great Circle which we ſee all round us (ſtanding upon any Hill, or at Sea) and ſeems as if the Heavens and Earth coincided, or joined together. . 2. The rational Horizon paſſes through the Center of the Earth, and is repreſcnted by that broad wooden Circle, lying with its Face upwards, having two Notches cut it, one in the N. and the other in the S. Part, in γhich the Brazen Miridian is ſlipt, or moved ur and down with Pleaſure. The Poles of the Horixon are the Zonith and Nadir. Tyr. Pleaſe to give me a further Deſcription o the Horizæom. Phil No general Deſeription of the Horiæon can be fivon that will anſwor to all Globes: But if you uſe enex's Globes, as improved by Martin, the orizon has on its upper Surface five Circles. a. The Circle next the Glube ſhews the Auimuss from the South Point. 2. The ſocond mews the Amplitude ſfrom the Eaſt and Weſt Points. h The third Circle contains the 32 Points of the ariner's Compaſs, each Boint bei cinę equal to rr Degrees and a àuarter⸗ for if 32 be tiplied by 11 and a Quarter, the Product will be 3 4. The fourth is that of the Ronths and Days throughout the Year. * S5. The fiftle Circle is8 the Ecliptic, and contains the Gnaracters Drames, and Figures of the 12 Signs of the odiac. Dhe Uſe of the Horiaon is'to ſhew the riſing and setting of the Sun; Length of Days and Nights; alſo the riſing and ſetting of the Stars in any Latitude; together with the Aximuth, Amplitude, Almicanter, &c. of the Sun, or an Star, and the Point they riſe and ſet upon, &c. he Colures are two great Circles, cutting the Eiaus at right Angles, and paſfing through cthe Poles the World The doctidial Colure is that great Circle which paſſes through Cancer and Caprises, ſhewing Winter and Summer. . The E uinoctial Colure paſſes through Aries and Libra, and ſhews the Spring and Autumn. . Since the Alteration of the Stile, i in 17 a, it has been cuſtomary to put tvo Circles of Months on the Horizon of moſt Globes, one according to the Julian Calendar, or Old Stile; and the other the Gregorian Calendar, or New Stile (the Difference being 11 gmen but tſiè latt untise. i er being now quite eſtabliſhied, t the former is gene il133 SBECT. 1 S E CT. III. Of the leſſer or parallel Circles. Yyr. What do you mean by the leſſer or parallel Circles? . . Phil. All ſuch Circles as do not divide, or cut the Globe into two equal Parts; but that cut off any Segment, or Part, leſs than the Half, are leſſer Circles. Tyr. Why are they called parallel Circles? hil. Becauſe they are parallel every where to the Equator. * Tyr. Which are the principal? hil. They are the Tropics and Polar Circles. 1. Of the TROPICS. Tyr. Pray which are the Tropic Circles? . Phil. Look for the Sign Cancer on the Globe, and vou will find a Circle drawn with a double Line from thence round the Globe, parallel to the Equator, which is called the North Tropic, or Tropic of Cancer, being 23 Degrees and a Half from the Equator northward, ſhewing the Sun's greateſt northern Declination. Then looking for the Sign Capricorn, you will find the ſame Sort of Circle, which is called the Southern Tropic, being alſo 23 Degrees and a Half from the Equator, ànd ſhews the Sun's greateſt ſouthern Declination, or Variation from the Equinoctial. 2. i the POLAR CIRCLE S. Tyr. Which are the Polar Circles? Phil. They are two ſmall Circles, lying near the Poles ſviæ. 23 Degrees and a Half Diſtance) drawn alſo with double Lines: that on the N. is called the Arctic Circle, and that on the S. the Antarctic Circle. Theſe Circles are deſcribed by the Poles of the Ecliptic. i Tyr. Pray what is their Uſe, or what do we learn from them? s Æ In the Latitude, or Parallel of London, a Degree of Longitude contains about 37 geogrighica Miles. piil Phil. All thoſe Inhabitants that live under theſe Line: have their longeſt Day juſt 24 Hours, and their longeſi Night the ſame ſſave the Benefit of Twilight, which is but trifling). If you go further towards the Poles, thei Days are two, three, and four Days, or two, three, four or ſix Months long. DIALOOG UE VII. SECT. I. Oſ the Appendants belonging to the Globes. Tyr. H AT do you mean by Appendants ? Phil. Appendants are in iome Reſpects the ſame as At urtenances, being ſuch neceſſary Things, both moveable and immoveable, as belong to Globes; the principal or chief of which are as follow. 1. The Index, or Hour Circle. 2. The Quadrant of Altitude. 3. Semi Circle And 4. The Nauſĩical Box. 1. Ihe Hour-Circle, called alſo the Horary Circle, or Di. l- Plate, is a ſmall Circle of Braſe, divided into 24 Hours; the upper 12 repreſent Noon, and the lower 12 Midnight. It is ſcrewed on the brazen Meridian round the North Pole, and to the Pole itſelf is placed the Index or Hand, which turns round with the Globe. Its Uſe is to tell the Time of the riſing and ſetting of the Sun or Stars, in any Latitude; and what o'Clock it is in any Part of the World, &c. 2. IThe Quadrant of Altitude is a thin Piece of pliable Braſ, divided into 9o Degrees, anſwering the Degrees of the Equator, beginning at the lower End with (0) to 10, 20, 30, &c. to 90. At which Figure it has a Nut, which ſlips upon the Meridian at Pleaſure, and is faſtened thereto by a Skrew. Its Uſe is to tell the Height of the Sun, or Stars, at any Hour, and when they are due Eaſt and Weſt. Alſo the Diſtance of the Stars ſfrom one another, and the Diĩſtance of one Place from another on the terreſtrial Globe, &c. &ec. &c. 3. The Semi-Circle is of Braſs, divided into 180 Degrees, anſwering one Half of the Equator. It may be * This and many other Things you will ſfind more ſully proved, and better explained, in my Uſe of the Globes. led Cca called a double SQuadrant of Altitude, but is uſed only in ſome particular Problems, the Quadrant, or Horizon, ſupplying its Place. 4. The Nautical- Box is an Inſtrument uſed in Navigation, having the 32 Points of the Wind marked or drawn on a Card or Sea Chart, and an Index being touched with a Loadſtone points always northward. This Card, or Chart, is hung in an Hvrizontal Plane, and fixed on any Part of the Horizon of the Globe, or elſewhere, to ſnew what Point of the Compaſs you are ſailing upon, or the Bearing of one Place from another. S E C T. II. Concerning the difſerent Names of the Sphere, according to its different Poſition, or Situation. Ty. What do you mean by the Sphere's having different Names according to its Poſition? Phil. There are three Sorts of Spheres, viz. a Parallel, a Right, and an Oblique Sphere. 1. A Parallel Sphere. A Parallel Sphere has this Poſition. 1. The Poles are in the Zenith and Nadir; that is, one Pole is right up, and the other right underneath. 2. The Equator will be in the Horixon. The Property of this Sphere. The Inhabitants of this Sphere are thoſe that live under the Poles, and have the longeſt Days and Nights of any other ſĩnhabitants; their ſhorteſt Day being 24 Hours long, and their longeſt ſix Months. * 2. ARight Sphere. ARight Sphere has this Poſition. 1. The Poles will lie, or be in the Horiæon. 2. The Equator will be in the Zenith and Nadir. 3. The Equator and all the leſſer Circles will cut the Horixon at right Angles, viæ. perpendicularly. .  Sce my Ocograghy Pages 61 and 62. . The Property of this Sphere. The Inhabitants of this Sphere are thoſe who live under the Equinoctial Line, or Equator, and have their Dars and Nights always equal; viæ. twelve Hours escac bl 3. An Oblique Sphere. An Oblique Sphere is that Poſition of the Globe, which has the three following Properties, viæ. 1. One Pole is as much above the Horizon as the other is underneath. 2. The Equator is Part above, and Part under the Horizon. 3. The Equator and all the parallel Circles cut the Horizon obliquely. . The Property of this Sphere. ; The Inhabitants of this Sphere are thoſe that live in all other Parts, except under the Poles and Equinoctial Line. S E C T. III. Of the ZONES, and CLIMATES. 1. Of the ZONES. Tyr. What do you mean by the Zones? bil. A Zone, or Girdle, is a Tract, or Space, that ſurrounds the Surface of the Earth, as a Belt, or Giradlt, does the Body. Tyr. How many Zones ate there? bil. Five, viæ. one Torrid, two Temperate, and two Frigid Zones. 1I. The Torrid Zone extends from the Equator to the Tropic of Cancer Northward, and to the Tropic of Capricorn Southbward, 23 Degrees and a Half each, (very nearly) viæ. 47 Degrees in all. 2. The Temperate Zones extend themſelves from the two Tropicst to the Polar Circles on each Side of the Torrid Zone, vix. 43 Degrees each, being together 86 Degroes. l 3. The Frigid Zones extend from the Polar Circles to the Poles, being each 23 Degrees and a Half, viæ. 4 in Breadth: So that 23 and a Half, 43, and 23 and a Half, make 9o Degrees; the Diſtance from the Equator to either Pole. t rather thus, the Torrid Zone contains 47 Degrees, the Temperate 86, and the Frigid 47, in all 180 Degreess. o a. Of the CLIMATES. * Phil. Climates are Tracts, or Circles, upon the Surrface of the Globe, of ſuch a certain Breadth from the Æquator to either Pole, that the Length of the anifiial Day (viæ. from the Sun-riſe to Sun-ſet) is juſt Half an Hour longer than in the next Climate nearer the Equator, till you come to the Polar Circles, and then, indeed, the Day differs in each Climate one entire Month. Tyr. How many Climates are there that differ by the Half Hour, and how many by the entire Month? Phil. There are ſixty Climates in all; viæ. 30 on each Side of the Equator, called accordingly North and South: Of theſe 60, 48 of them extend from the Equator to the Polar Circles, and each differs by Half an Hour. And the remaining 12 are contained between the Polar Circles and the Poles, each differing one entire Month from the er. DIALOG U E VIII. SEC T. I. An Explanation of the moſt uſeful Terms uſed in Geogral phy and Aſtronomy. Tyr. WIHAT are the Names of the Terms uſed in Geography and Aſtronomy. Phil. They are chieſly as follows. 1. Zenith, which is that Point of the Heavens that is right. over Head. i 2. Nadir, is that Point right under Feet, being directly, or diametrically, oppoſite to the Zenith. 3. Zenith Diſtance, is the Number oſ Degrees that the Sun, or any Sfar, wants of 90 Degrees, when they are upon the Meridian or greateſt Height. 4. Altitude, is Height. Meridian Altitude is the greateſt Altitude, or Height, at 12 o'Clock. 5. Declination, is the Diſtance of the Sun, or any Star, from the Equator, or Equinoctial, counted on the Brazen Meridian in Degrees, and is called North or South, according to which Side of the Equinoctial the Declination is. lliil . tE Great Britain (viæ. England and Scotland) lies in the ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and tieſcenth N. Climates. 6. Right Aſcenſion, is an Arch of the Equinoctial, contained between the Sign Aries æ, and the Degree of the Equinoctial, that is cut by the Brazen Meridian when the Sun or Star is brought to the Meridian. 7. Oblique Aſcenſion, is that Arch or Degree of the Equinoctial contained between the Sign e⸗, and the Degree of the Equinoctial, which is cut by the Horizon at the riſing of the Sun or Star. 8. Oblique Deſcenſion, is juſt the Reverſe, being tlie Degree of the Equinoctial cut by the Horizon at the ſetting of the Sun or Star. 9. Aſcenſional Difference, is the Difference in Degrees between the right and oblique Aſcenſion, which, converted into Time, by allowing 15 Degrees for every Hour, ſhews how much the Sun or Star riſes or ſets before or after Six. That is, ſubſtract the leſs from the greater, and the Remainder is the aſcenſional Difference. 10. Amplitude is an Arch of the Horizon, containei between the true E. or W. Point thereof, and the Centet of any celeſtial Object, as the Sun, or a Star, at its riſing or ſetting, and is called North or South Amplitude, accordingly. ; 11. Azimuth is, in effect, the ſame as Amplitude, ſave only with this Difference; that whereas dmplitude is only at riſing and ſetting, Aximuth ſhews the Diſtance from the E. and W. Points at any Time, when the Sun or Stars are above the Horizon. * 12. Elevation of the Pole is the ſame as Latitude. Latitude of a Place is its Diſtance from the Equator, either North or Soutb, numbered in Degrees on the Brazxen Meridian: Or, in other Words, it is the Elevation of the Pole above the Horizon. Longitude of a Plate is an Arch of the Equator, intercepted between the firſt Meridian (or Point Aries æ) on the Equator and the Meridian of the Place. - Note, Azimuth is not expreſſed alike in all Authors. Some call it always North, or South Axæimutb, and reckon the Aximuth fom theſe two Points Eaſtward or Weſtward. Others reekon it from the Eaſt and Weſt Points, either Northward or Southward, which, I think, is beſt, they being the two Points that Æximuth is neareſt to in our, or any leſſer Latitude, at any Hour: However, it matters not which, if you mind this one Rulè; ſuppoſe I ſay, the Sun has 60 Degrees Aæimuth trom the N. Eaſtward, it is the ſame as if I ſay he has 30 Degrees Aximutb from the E. Northward. S E CTτ . . li S E C T. I Containing two neceſſary and uſeful T A B L E A TABLE of the Latitude and Lo remarkable Places, from the late PLACES. Aleppo, Syria, Turhey, in Aſia - arthor gui Egypt, c A Ml - Amſterdam, Capital of Holland Bagdad, Chaldea, Turhey, in Aſia Bergen, Capital of Noræò - Bern, Capital of Savitxerland - Boſtor, eav England, Americaae Charles Tovun, S. Carolina, America Conſtantinople, Capital of TurhepCopenhagen, Capital of Denmarle Delly, or Delhi, Eaſt Indies, Aſia Dublin, Capital of Irelanda- Edinburghy Capital of ScotlanaFex, Morocco, Africa - - Gibraltar, Spainti- - firæ alem, Paleſtine, Aſia -- ſis oscisſim oningſherg, ital or Pr Tomintl post Sont) Americà - Liſbon, Capital of Portugal - l London, Capital of England - Madrid, Capital of Shain - Mecca, Arabia, Aſia - Mexico, Mexico, North America - Nantin, or Nanhing, China, Aſua Oſtend, Flanders, Netherlands - anama, Terra Firma, America Paris, Capital of France -hegus Eaſt Indies - - - Petin, Capital of China - - Peterſburgh, Capital of RuſſiaæPhiládelphia, Pennſylvania, AmericaQuebec, Canada, America Ell Rio Janeiro, Braſil, South America Rome, Capital of Italy - Samarcand, Tartarj, Aſiam -Stockhalm, Capital 6ſ SavedeumnmTobolſti, Siberia, Aſiatic Ruſſia Vienna, Capital of Germany Hearſaw, N. B. The Longitude in the foregoing om the Meridian of London, which is ne of the firſt Meridian at the Iſle of Ferr lobes): So that by adding or ſubſtractin w have the Longitude from the firſt Me knowing one, you may know both, the arked or graduated for both. T A B L E II. TABLE of the right Aſcenſion, Declina and Longitude of ſome of the moſt emin taten ſrom Sonex's celeſtial Globe, the Leqrner. l ames and Conſtellations. R. A. Declin. - ETii bl Aldebaran, in Taurus 65 15l26 15N.] 4 Bellatrix, in Orios 77 30] 6 15] 1 Cancbus, in Argo- Navis 95 30 53 oo S. 6 Caſtur, in Gemini 109 30 32 30 N. 9 Cdſtor s Bro. Pollux, do. 111 4528 30 7 Cor Hydra, Hydqra's Heart Cor Scorpio, Scorpio's Heart 138 30ſ 8 15S8. ſ 22 243 oo  26 oo 4 Cor Leo, called Regulus 148 ool13 oo N.. o Dubbee, in Urſa Major 175 ool 55 30 à47 EFomqcchant 341 oo 33 oo S. 21 Marhal, in Pegaſus 342 15l 13 30 N. ſ 19 Mencar, in Cetiis at1 36 3 15 12 Procyon, in Canicula. 111 oo] 6 oo 15 Pes Centauri 216 30 59 30 S. 42 Regel, in Orion's Foot 75 15] 9 15 31 1. Star in the Girdle of Orion ſ 79 30] 1 oo 23 2.  ditto 38O 30] 2 00 24 3.  ditto 81 15] 3 0O0 la5 Scheat, in Pegaſus 3a2 15 a6 15N. ſ 31 Sirius, in Cauis Major 98 oο '16 30 S. 39 Unpir.Pointer, in ũi 161 3063 30 N. ſ 50 Loaver Poin'er, ditto 16 20 58 OO 46 D I A L OG U E IX. Containin bme u ſeful and nece r Problems on the Ter5 ſeme uſeſ reſtrial &. . N. B. O) ſtands for Degrees, () for Minutes. P R O B. I. The Latitude being giuem, io rectify the Globe for that i ace. LE T it be required to rectify the Globe for the Laq titude of London 51ꝰ 32' N. and Madrid 400 25' N. proceed thus: . Turn the Pole on which the Dial Plate is fixed towards the Verge of the Horizon, ſlipping or moving che Globe backwards or forwards in the Notches of the Horizon, till the Horizon cuts the Brazen Meridian in 5190 32' (viz. a little more than s1 and a Half) ſo is the GlIobe rectified for the Latitude of London; that is, the N. Pole will then be elevated 51? 32' above the Horiæon; and London being brought to the Meridian itfelf, will then be in the Zenith, or right up, and at equal Diſtance from all Parts of the Horizæon. Depreſs the Pole till the Horizon cuts the Brazen Meridian at 400 25, and you have then the Poſition of the Inhabitants at Madriò. and turning the Globe till Madrid comes to the Meridian, you will find it in the Zexith, or Top of the Globe, under 406 25. . Note. If it were required to rectify the Globe for South Latitude, then you muſt elevate the S. Pole to the given Latitude inſtead of the N. Pole; but this is better explained by the next Problem. P R O B. II. The Latitude and Longitude of any Place given, to find the ame. Firſt, you are to obſerve whether the Longitude be reckoned from the Meridian of London, or from the Meridian of ſome other Place; for on ſome Glober the firſt. Meridian begins 239, on others 200, and on Senex's Globles, 188 W. of London; but if once you know where the firſt Meridian is on the Giobe, it is yery eaſy to know the Difference from the Meridian of ondon. . EXAMP LE. There are two certain Places, one has 180 N. Latitude, and 77 W. Longitude; the other is in 34 30'S. Latitude, and 186 E. Longitude from London; I demand what Places theſe are. Rule. For the firſt Place, I elevate the N. Pole 18, becauſe it is 18ꝰ N. Latitude. Then I turn the Globe to the Right Hand, or Eaſtward, (becauſe the Dlace lies Weſtward) till 77 upon the Equator, counted from the Meridian of London (which on Senex's Gilobe has a Cypher, thus (0), on the Equator) paſſes through, or under the Meridian: Or, in other Words, I turn the Gilobe till 77è Weſtward is brought under the Meridian, and here l ' the Globe with a Quill thruſt in betwixt the Globe and the Horizon; then I look under the Latitude 18e uhich is in the Zenitb) on the Meridian a-top of the Globe, and under 18ꝰ on the Meridian I find Port Royal, in Jamaica, the Place required. For the ſecond Place I elevate the S. Pole (though there is no Occaſion to elevate the Pole barely to find a Place, but it is better, becauſe you have then the real Situation of the Inhabitants) to the given Latitude 34 o, and then turn the Globe till 186 E. Longitude oſ Yondon come under the Meridian. Then I look under the Latitude 34 30 on the Meridian, and juſt under this I find the Cape of Good Hope, the Place required. P R O B. III. The Latitude of any Place given, to tell all thoſe Places that have the ſame Latitude. D E F I N I T I ON. AII thoſe Places that have the ſame Latitude have the Days and Nights of the ſame Length at the ſame Time of the Yea. Rule. Bring the given Place, or Places, to the Meridian, (ſuppoſe London 510 32, and Madrid 406 25 N.) then turn the Globe, and all thoſe Places that paſs under 51 32, have the ſame Latitude as London , vizæ. Prague in Germany, &c. and all that paſs under 400 a5 have the ſame Latitude as Madrid, which you will inc to be Petin nearly for one, and many other Places. P R O B. IV. To tell the Difference of the Latitude of Places. Here are two Variations, or Rules. Firſi, If the Latitudes be both N. or both S. then ſubtract the leſs from the greater Latitude, and the Remainder is the Difference, or Anſwer. Thus between London and Madrid is riꝰ 7, the firſt being in 510 32 N. Latitude, and the other in 406 25 N. And between Lima and Rio Yaneiro is 10ꝰ 39, ò Rio Janeiro is in 220 54' S. Latitude, and Lima is in 120 15 S. Secondly, If one Place lie on the N. and the other on the S- Side of the Equator; (that is, if one be N. and the other S. Latitudè) then add them both together, and their Sum is the Difference of Latitude required. Thus Copenhagen is in 550 40 N. and the Qape of Good Hope in Africa is in. 336 30 S. theſe added tõgether make 9oc ĩo, the Difference of Latitude required. P RO B. V. The Longitude of any Plice given from any Meridian, to tell thoſe Places having the ſaume Longitude. This is done after the ſame Manner as the other, only here the Anſwer will be on the Egquator, as the others were on the Meridian. I would know what Places have the ſame Longitude as London, and the ſame Longitude as Moſcow. The Rule is, Bring London to the Meridian, then all thoſe Places on the Globe (from the N. Pole to the S. Part of the Horizon) that lie under the Edge of the Meridian, have the ſame Longitude as London. Thus Port Naſſau, and Fort Mina, in Guinea, have the ſame, or very nearly the ſame Longitude as London. And Maoſcou, in Higeon. has very nearly the ſame Longitude as Aleppo, in Syria: Alſo Scandaroon, Antioch, and Tripoli in Syria, have the ſame Longitude, viæ. 37 30 from London. P R O B. VI. To tell the Diſference of the Longitude of Places. DE FINITION. No Place can exceed, or be above, 1800 of Longitude from another Place; for 181ꝰ E. Longitude is with more Propriety 179ꝰ W. Longitude, for 1819 taken from 3606, there remains 1799, which is nearer to the given Place than 1816. Rule. Here are two Variations. Firſt, If the Places lie both E. or both W. of th firſt Meridian, or where you reckon the Longitude from, viz. if they both be E. or both W. Longitude, then ſubtract one from the other, you have the Difference. Thus I find YVeruſalem has 350 25 E. Longitude from London, and Pekrin 1160 25 E. Longitude; therefore I ſubtract 352 25' from 116 25, and there remains 81ꝰ Difference of  ongitude E. or W. that is, Petin is 81ꝰ E. Longitude of Yeruſalem, or Jeruſalem is 818 W. Longitude of Pétin. Secondly, If one Place be E. and the other W. Longitude of the firſt Meridian (ſuppoſe London, or any other Meridian) then add their Longitudes together, and the Sum is the Difference of Longitude required. E X A M P L E. I would know the Difference of Longitude between Teruſalem ù 25' E. of London, and Port Royal in Jamaica 77è W. Here as one is E. and the other W. I add 357 25 and 77 ogether, and their Sum is 1129 a5 Difference of Longitude; that is, Yeraſalem is 112 25 E. of Port Royal, or Port Royal is 112ꝰ 25 W. of Jeruſalem. OF KNOWLEDG E. arr EXAMP L E. Petin in China is in 1160 25 E. Longitude, and Port Royal is in 77U W. I add theſe Sums together, and they make 1932 25' Difference of Longitude; but becauſe it is more than 180ꝰ, I ſubtract 1930 25 from 3609, and there remains 1666 35, the Difference required. Moſt of the following Problems are common to both Globes. P R O B. VII. The Day of the Month given, to find the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic. Rule. The Day of the Month being given, look on the inner Calendar on the new Globes, and you have the Sign and the Degree of that Sign that the Sun is in for that Day, according to the New Stile. . If it be upon old Globes, look on the outward Calendar, you have the Sign and the Degree of the Sign. N. B. You may further obſerve, that the Calendar uſed through Europe is the Calendar for N. S. viæ. Neu Stile, and is always known from the other, becauſe it has the Saints Days, and ſeveral other Things wrote upon it on the Horizon. EXAMP LE. I would know the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic on May the 2 1ſt, N. S. March the 21ſt, June the 2 1ſt, September the 22d, and December the 2 1ſt. I look for theſe Days of the Months in the Order they ſtand in the new Calendar; (viæ. for N. S. before deſcribed) and right againſt the Day of the Month in the innermoſt Circle on the Horixon, I find the Sun's Place among the Signs as follows: Thus right againſt Muy the 21ſt, Ifind 10 of π Gemini And alſo on March the 21ſt, I find he enters  Aries: On Tune the 21ſt, he enters ꝙ& Cancer: On September the 22d, he enters æ Libra: And on December the 2 1ſt, he enters u Capricorn. 8 Note, That in every Problem and Operation hereafter, except Old Stile be mentioned, it is to be underſtood for Neau Stile viæ. N. S. and Latitude always means N. Latitude, except expreſſed S outh P R O B. VIII. The Sun's Place given, to find the Day of the Montb. This is only the Reverſe of the former Problem; for having the Sun's Place given, ſeek it in the innermoſt Circle among the Signs; then againſt that Degree in the Calendar N. S. you have the Day of the Month required. EXAMP LE. I would know what Time of the Year the Sun is in 1ꝰ of m, as alſo when he enters v, , æ, and v ? Proceed according to the Rule, and you will find the Days to be May the 2 1ſt, March the 21ſt, June the 2 1ſt, September the 22d, and December the 211ſt, as in the laſt. P R O B. IX. The Latitude and Day of the Montb given, to find the Sun' Place in the Ecliptic, and rectify the Globe for Uſe. Rule. Find the Sun's Place on the Horizon by Prob. VII. and having noted what Degree he is in, look upor the Ecliptic on the Globe, and find the ſame Sign and Degree as you did on the Horizon, then bring this Degree of the Ecliptic very carefully to the graduated Edge of the Braxen Meridian, and holding the Globe ſteady. turn the Index exactly to the upper Twelve, (which repreſents Twelve at Noon) and thus is the Globe rectified for that Day, and the Degree of the Ecliptic that lies under the Equator, repreſents the Sun's Place at Noon, or Twelve o Clock that Day. & The Aſstronomer's Day is reckoned from, or begins at Twelve σClock; and, if you fix the Quadrant ol Altitude to the Latitude in the Zenith, the Globe will be compleatly rectified. P R O B. X. To tell the Deelination of the Sun on any Day of the Ttar. Rule. Having found the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic for the given Day, bring it to the Braxen Meridian, and obſerve what Degree oſ the Meridian it lies under and whether it be on the N. or on the S. Side of the Equator, or that is the Declination required, which is called N. r S. Declination accordingly. Thus on April the 21ſt the Sun has 1 1 30 N. Declination, and on May the 2 1ſt ae has 2oꝰ 30 Declination, but on October thè 27th he u 120 30 South Declination. P R O B. XI. The Latitude and Day of the Month ven, to tell the Sun's Meridian Altitude; viz. his Height at Noon. Rule. Bring the Sun's Place to the Meridian, and obſerve what Degree of the Meridian the Sun's Place is under for thoſe Degrees on the Meridian that are inerteptediγ lie between the S. Verge of the Horizon, ind the Degree which is over the Sun's Place on the Meridian, (Counted on the Meridian) is the Sun's Meridian Altitude required. Thus I find his Meridian Altitude at London, May the 21ſt, to be 59; but on November the sth he has but 23 30 Altitude. P R O B. XIlI. The Latitude and Day of the Month given, to tell the Sun's Altitude at any Time. Eample. On May the 21ſt, at Nine in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon at London, I would know the Sunms Altitude or Height. Rule. Rectify the Globe for the Latitude, and bring he Sum's Place (1 n) to the Meridian, and the Index o the upper Twelve on the Dial Plate; then ſkrew the Quadrant of Altitude on the Zenith (viæ. the left Edge f the Nut muſt be fixed on the Meridian at 51è 306) hen turn the Globe till the Index points to the Hour, vizæ. Nine in the Morning; this done, fix the Globe oy thruſting in a Quill between it and the Horixon; aſtly, turn the Qua rant about till the graduated or igured Edge touch the Sun's Place, (viæ. 118 1) and he Degrees on the Quadrant, counted from the Hoizon upwards on the uadrant, is his Height at that Iime, viz. 43 30. Then turn the Globe ll i Index points to Five in the Afternoon; and alſo turn the uadrant on the W. Side, (without unſkrewing it till it touches the Sun's Place, and you have about 24 on the Quadrant, his Altitude at that Time. N. B. At North Cape (vix. N. Latitude 720) at Nine in the Morning., May 21, he will be but about 32 high. RR O B. XIII. The Latitude given, to tell the Rifing and Setting of ih Sun, and Length of the Day and Night at any Time oj the Xear in any Place. Rule. Rectify the Globe (vix. elevate it for the La. titude, bring the Sun's Place to the Meridian, and Indes to the upper Twelve) then turn it till the Sun's Plact comes even with, or lies right againſt the inner Verge or the E. Side of the Horizon, then the Index will ſhew you the Time of the Sun's riſing; turn it to the W. Sid or Verge of the Horizon, and the Index will ſhew yol the Setting. Or thus, having  got the Hour the Sun riſes count how many, it wants of Twelve, for ſo many Hour will he ſet after. Thus, if the Index points to Four in the Morning, at riſing, he will of Courſe ſet at Eight at Night, &c. Note 1. If you double the Time of riſing, that is, double the Hours it wants of Twelve at the Time of riſing, it gives you tht Length of the Day from Sun riſing to ſetting. Note 2. If yoũ ſubtract the Length of Dey srom Sun riſing to Sun ſetting, from Twenty-four, the Remai ſhews you tù Length of the Night, Twilight included. Sce Prob. 25. Proceed thus, and you will find the Sun, on May 26, at London, to riſe about Four in the Morning, and ſeſ at Eight at Night. Now double what it wants ol Twelve at riſing, viæ. eight Hours, and it gives the Length of that Day at London, viz. ſixteen Hours. PRERO B. XIV. To tell the Sun's right Aſcenſion. Bring the Sun's Place to the Brazen Meridian, and note what Degree of the Equator is cut by the Meridian, for that is his right Aſcenſion required. : I wouldknow the Sun's right Aſcenſion on Marech the 21ſt, fune the 21ſt, September the 22d, and December the 2iſt. I find the Sun's Place for theſe different Days, and bringing it to the Meridian, I find the Meridian cuts the Equator in (o) in (9o) in (180) and in (270) his right Aſcenſion required. Note, When the Sun enters æ, March 21ſt, he has no right Aſcenſion, becauſe it is counted from, or begins at m5 therefore, on Mareh the 2oth, he muſt complete his greateſt right Aſcenſion, viz. 3600. P RO B. XV. To find the Sun's oblique Aſcenſion and Deſcenſion at an ſi Time, Cna dieſ Juidu qoeſ i v Rule 1. Rectify the Globe for the Latitude, and bring the Sun's Place down to the Eaſtern Verge of the Horizxon, then obſerve what Degree the Horizxon cuts the Equator in, for that is the oblique Aſcenſion required. 2. Turn the Globe till the Sun's Place comes to, or lies level with the Weſtern Verge of the Horizon, and the Degree of the Equator cut by the Horizon, is the oblique Deſcenſion required. us on March the 21ſt, Tune the 21ſt, September the 2ad, and December the 21ſt, viæ. when the Sun enthers æ, g9, æ, and v, you will find his oblique Aſcenſion at London to be (o) (56) ſ180) and ſgoAnd on the ſame Days his oblique Deſcenſion will be (o) (123) (180) and (237 and a Half). P R O B. XVI. The Latitude and Day of the Month given, tò tell the Sun's oſcen ſional Difference, viæ. how much he riſes, or ſets efore ond after Six; and, conſequently, to tell the Lengil of the Days, ſuppoſe there were no Index to the Globe. Rule. By the laſt Problem find the Sun's right and oblique Aſcenſion; then ſubtract the oblique from the right Aſcenſion, or the contrary, and the Remainder is the aſcenſional Difference required; which divide by fifteen, the Degrees of the Equator that paſs through the Meridian for one Hour (òr ſeven and a Half for Half an Hour) gives the Anſwer in Time that the Sun riſes and ſets before and after Six. Thus on May the 26th I find the Sun in 6ꝰ of n, and his right Aſcenſion is 64, and on the ſame Day his oblique Aſcenſion is 45 ; now 34 from 64 there remains 300, his aſcenſional Difference; which divide by fifteen, gives two Hours, the Time that he riſes before, or ſets after Six. N. B. The right exceeds the oblique Aſcenſion from Aries to Libra, when the Sun riſes before Six; but the other Half Year that he riſes after, or ſets before Six, the oblique exceeds the right Aſcenſion. . . P R O B. XVI.. The Latitude and Day of the Month given, to tell the Sun's Amplitude, viz. his Diſtance from the E. and W. Points at his Riſng and Setting, and the Points of the Compaſs he riſes and ſets upon. Rule. The Globe being rectified, bring the Sun's Place to the eaſtern Verge of the Horiæon (which ſhews his riſing) then the Degrees upon the innermoſt Circle oſ the Horizon, counted ſrom the true E. Point to the Place where the Sun's Place lies againſt on the Horiæzon, ſhews you the Sun's Amplitude. li illltlli Proceed aceording to the Rule, you uwill find t.e Sun's Amplitude at London, (May the 21ſt) at riſing, to be about 340 from the E. to the N. and at ſetting 340 from the si to the N. and the Point he riſes upon is N. E. by E. and he ſets N. W. by W. But on November the sth he has about 250 and a Half Amplitude from the E. to the S. and at ſetting 252 and a Hall from the W. to the S. The Point he riſes upon is E. S. E. and the Point he ſets upon is W. S. W. P R O B. XVIII. The Latitude ond Day given, to tell the Sun's Aximuth, viæ. his Diſtance from the E. and W. or from the N. and S. Points at any Timee. Rule. Rectify the Globe in general, then turn the ing done, turn the Quadrant till it touches the Sun's Place for the given Day; and then the Quadrant will cut the Horizon in the Azimuth required from the E. or W. Points, or from the N. or S. Points, for you may reckon from either, only then name it properly and accordingly. . . lll Thus, on Auguſt the 17th, at Nine in the Morning, the Sun wlll have about 300 Aæimuth from the E. to the S. or, which is the ſame, 60c from the S. to the E. for go and 306 make 90ocꝰ, the whole Quarter from E. to D. i N. B. Some Authors call this 600 S. Amplitude; but others call it 30 S. Amplitude; that is 306 from the E. to the S. as I ſaid before. P R O B. XIX. The Latitude, Day, and Hour given, to tell the Sun's Almicanter. DE FINITION. Almicanters are Circles of Altitude that run parallel to the Horizxon, whoſe Poles are the Zenith and Nadir; ſo that you may imagine as many Circles of Altitude, vix. Almicanters, as you pleaſe. Rule. The Almicanter is found the ſame as the Altitude of the Sun at any Time, therefore I reſer you back to Prob. XII. P R O B. Xx. The Latitude and Length of the Day ſiuem to tell what other Day of the Har will be of the ame Length. Rule. Having found the Sun's Place for the given Day, bring it to the Meridian, and obſerve well its Declination; then turn the Globe till ſome other Defiec of the Ecliptic comes under the ſame Degree of eclination under the Meridian; this being done, ſee what Day of the Month anſwers to the Sun's Place then under the Meridian, for that is the Day required; which you may ealily prove. Thus you will find that July the 13th, and Auguſi the 2oth, is of the ſame phes as May the 29th, ſuctſine: che 2 2d. P R O B. XXI. The Latitude and Day given, to tell the Beginning, Ending, and (conſequently) the Length, or Continuance of Tuilight. DEFINITIO N. i Twilight is that faint Light which begins immediately aſter the Sun ſets in the Evening, till he is 180 below the Horizon; and it begins in the Morning when the Sun comes within 180 of the Horizon on the E. Side, and ends when he riſes. Therefore it is plain, that Twilight is not only longer when the Days are long, but it is alſo much ſtronger, as you will ſee preſently by the Work of the Problem. TIyr. I have heard that this Problem is very diſficult to what ſome are. li . Phil. It is ſomething longer in its Operation, but very eaſy, if you mind the Rule and Operation together. OBSERVATION. Note, You were told that Twilight begins and ends when the Sun is 186 below the Horixon, and as the Quadrant of Altitude reaches no lower than the Horizons therefore the Rule is this: Rectify the Globe, and bring the oppoſite Degree of the Sun's Place to the Quadrant of Altitude, ſo that it touches juſt 180 on the Quadrant (then it is plain that the Sun's real Place will be depreſſed 186 below the Horizon); then look on the Index, for that will point (if among the Morning Hours) to the beginning, or ſif among the Evening Hours) ending of Twilight. Notæ 1. What I mean by the oppoſite Place of the Sun 1s this; it is that Degree of the Ecliptic oppoſite to, or 180 from the given Place of tlie Sun. Thus, ſuppoſe the Sun was in an, then I bring ĩts oppoſite Sign (viæ. æ) to 180 on the Quadrant, ſo will an be depreſſed 189, and the Index will ſhew the Hour. n Note æ. There is no real Night at London (but Twilight) from Ma the 22d, to qub the 2oth, the Sun all that Time being leſs than 15è below the Horixon. Note 3. The moſt expeditious Way of finding the Sun's oppoſite Place, is by bringing his Place in the Ecliptic, for the given Day, to the Meridian, and fittng the Index to 1a at Noon; then turn the Globe till the Index points to 12 at Night, and the Sun's oppoſite Place will be under the Meridian. Proceed then according to the Rule, and you will find that on March the 2iſt, and September the 22æd, Twilight begins about Four in the Morning, and ends about Eight at Night. he Sun on theſe Days you know riſes and ſets at Six. Add, therefore, the Length of Morning and Evening Twilight to 12 Hours (the Length of the Days then) and it gives 16 Hours; this ſubtracted from 24 Hours, leaves eight Hours, the Length of the real or dark Night. So alſo on April the 24th, Tuillght begins about Half paſt Two, ends about Half paſt Nine, and laſts in all, Morning and Evening, four Hours and 38 Minutes. But on December the 20oth it begins at Six, and ends at Six, and laſts in all but four Hours and 14 Minutes. i P R O B. XXII. The Hour where you are being given, to tell what Hour it is in any other Part of the World. Rule. Bring the given Place to the Meridian, and ſet the Index at the given Hour; then turn the Globe till the other Place, or Places, come under the Meridian, and the Index will point to the real Time in the Place required. Example. When it is Two o'Clock in the Afternoon at London, I would know the Time at Jeruſalem, and at Port Royal in qumaica ? Proceed according to the Rule, and you will find, that when it is Two in the Afternoon at London, it is about 22 Minutes paſt Four at Jeruſalem; and but 52 Minutes paſt Eight in the Morning at Port Royal. Or thus by Problem VI. Jeruſalem is 350 25' E. Longitude of London; I divide, therefore, 350 25 by 15, and the Quotient is two Hours, and the Remainder is 50 25, which is five Times four, or 2o Minutes, and the 2 tv odd 25 Minutes of a Degrec make one Minute and two Thirds of Time, ſo that the Difference is two Hours, 21 Minutes, and two Thirds of a Minute; and as Jeruſalem is E. of London, it has its Hour before us, therefore it is 21 Minutes and two Thirds paſt Four in the Afternoon. And thus for other Places. P R O B. XXIII. The ho of the Month given, to tell thoſe Inbabitants that will have the Sun in their Zenith, (or over their Heads) on that Day. OBSERVATION. This cannot happen to any other Inhabitants but thoſe in the Torrid Zone, that is, to all ſuch as have not above 230 and a Half of Latitude. either North or South. Rule. Bring the Sun's Place to the Meridian, and obſerve exactly his Declination for that Day; then turn the Globe any Way, and obſerve what Places paſs under that Degree of Declination on the Meridian; for all ſuch will have the Sun right over their Heads ſome Time or other on that Day. I would know what Inhabitants, or Places, will have the Sun in their Zenith on May the 2 iſt. Poroceed as directed by thèe Rule, you will find St. Yago in Hiſpaniola, St. Jago in Cuba, Campeachy, the City of Mexico, and many other Places, will paſs under that Degree of Declination, viæ. 200 N.) and will have the Sun in their Zenith that Day. Alſo on April the 16th, the Inhabitants of Porto- Belis, the Oroonoko Iſlands, Bay of Siam, Iſle of Ceylon, and the Philippine Iſlands, will have the Sun thãt Day in or near their Zenith. ſ P R O B. XXIV. he Day and Hour given in any Place, to tell thoſe Inbabitants, or that Place, to which the Sun is then verticol, Viæ. in the Zenith. Rule. Bring the given Place to the Braxen Meridian and turn the Index to the given Hour; this done, turr the Globe till the Index points to the upper 12, or Nooni el - i then look under the Degree of the Sun's Declination on the Globe for that Day, for that is the very Spot or Place to which the Sun is then vertical. Example. On May the 13th, at eight Minutes paſt Five in the Afternoon, at London, I would know what Place has the Sun in its Zenith. Anſwer, Port Royal in Jamaica. N. B. The Sun is vertical twice a Year to every Place between the Tropics; to thoſe under the Tropics, once a Year, but never any where elſe. i Thus alſo you will find when it is 44 Minutes paſt Six in the Morning at London, on April the iath, and Auguſt the 30th, the Inhabitants of Candy in the Iſland of Ceylon will have the Sun then nearly in their Zenith. P R O B. XXV. To tell the Diſtance srom one Place to another in Degrees and Minutes (viæ. Miles) in an Arch of a great Circle, as alſo their Bearing, or Situation, in reſpect of each other. Rule. Bring one of the Places to the Meridian, and elevate the Globe for the Latitude of it, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith: Then turn the &ilobe till the Quadrant touches the other Place, and the Degrees on the Quadrant between Place and Place ſhew the Diſtance; and the Quadrant at the ſame Time will cut the Horizon in the Point of the Compaſs, called the Bearing, or Bituation, from the firſt Place, viz. the Angle of Poſition. Example. I would know the Diſtance from London to Port- Roy il, Jeruſalem, and Moſcow, as alſo their Situation in reſpect to London ? Proceed according to the Rule, and you will find that from London Degrees. Miles. To Port Roral 687 ,1. ſfuii W. To Yeruſalem 331: 2311 E. S. E. To Maoſcow 23 s noarly 15983 E. N. E.  Note, Sixty Miles, or Minutes, are reckoned a Degree in general; but this is a vulgar Error, for it is proved that every Degree on the Earth's Surface in every great Circle Cvch as the Equqtor, Meridian, &c.) is 698 Miles; therefore multiply the Degrees by 591, you have ihe Diitance in Bnglijs Miles. P R O B. XXVI. The Latitude and Day given, to tell what Time ibe Sun will be due Eaſt or Weſt. Rule. Rectify the Globe and Quadrant as before directed; then turn the Quadrant till it touches the E. or W. Point of the Horizon; this done, turn the Globe till the Sun's Place for the given Day comes to the Ldge of the Quadrant (holding the Quàadrant to the E. or W. Point) ſo will the Index point to the Hour oſ his being due E. or W. on that Day. Proceed thus, and you will find about five Minutes paſt Seven in the Morning, on May the 2 iſt, at London, the Sun will be due E. and about five Minutes before Five in the Evening due W. On Yune the 21it, he will be due E. about 22 Minutes paſt Seven in the Morning, &c. but on December the 21ſt, he is due E. about 35 Minutes paſt Four in the Morning, and due W. about a5 Minutes paſt Seven in the Evening. P RO B. XXVII. To find the Antœci to any Place. . EXPLANATION. Antœæcians are thoſe Inhabitants who have the ſame Longitude, that is, lie under the ſame Meridian, but have the ſame Latitude South as we have North. 2. Tteir Property. 1. Their Hour is the ſame as ours at all Times. 2. Their Days are equal to our Nights, and their Nights to our Days. And 3. Their Summer is our Winter. 3. To find the Antœci to any giuen Place (ſuppoſe London). Bring London to the Meridian, and count on the Meridian from the Equator as many Degrees of Latitude S. as London has N. (vizx. 510 327) and there make a Dot, for that is the Place of the Aniœci. P R O B. XXVIII. To ſind the Periœci 1. any Place. . EXPLANATION. The Periœcians are thoſe who lie under the ſame Parallel of Latitude, but have 180 Degrees Difference o Longitude. 2. Their Property. 1. They have contrary Hours, viæ. Noon when we have Midnight. 2. Their Days and Nights are of the ſame Length as ours. 3. Their Seaſons are alſo the ſame 3. Rule to find them. Bring London to the Meridian, and turn the Globe till 180 Degrees of Longitude paſs under the Meridian; then under the ſame Latitude as London, (viæ. under 519 32 North Latitudel make a Dot, for that is the Place of the Periæci. P R O B. XXIX. Tao find the Antipodes. 1. EXPLANATION. Antipodes are thoſe who live diametrically oppoſite to us; that is, have the ſame Latitude South as we have North, but differ 180 Degrees of Longitude. a2. Their Properiy. Theſe Inhabitants have, 1. Their Hour is contrary to ours. 2. Their longeſt Day is our ſhorteſt. 3. Their Day is our Night. And 4. Their Sumimer is our Winter, &c. 3. To find them. There are three Ways, but the two beſt are theſe. I. Bring London to the North Verge of the Horizon, which is done by ſlipping the Globe up and down till L 4 London London lies cloſe to the Edge of the Brazen Meridian, and cloſe to the Horiæon on the North: This being dane, look on the South Verge of the Horizon cloſe to the Brazen Meridian, and there make a Dot on the Globe, for that is the Place of the Antipodes of London, which you will find to be in the Great Ghath Sea 51V 32 S. Latitude, and 1800 E. or W. Longitude, viz. near the South Raſt Part of Netw Zealand. 2. Bring London to the Meridian, and turn the Globe till i80ꝰ paſs through the Meridian, and there fix the Globe, then count from the Equator ſouthward on the Meridian 51ꝰ 32, and you will find the ſame Dot to lie cloſe to the Meridian (at 510 32ꝰ) below the S. Part of the Horizon. P R O B. XXXx. The longeſt Day in any Lat itude given (ſuppoſing London sixteen Hours and a Half) to tell in what other Lugitudi tbhe longeſt Day is one, two, three, &c. Hours longer than in the given Place. Rule. Rectify the Globe for the given Latitude ſviæ. London) and bring the ſolſtitial Colure ſvizæ. ) to the Meridian; then where the Horizon cuts the Tropic of , make a Dot on the Tropic at the Verge of the Horiæon: This done, turn the Globe weſtward, till 7ꝰ and a Half of the Equator paſs under the Meridian, and then make a ſecond Dot on the Tropic againſt the Horiæon as before; then turn the Globe back to its firſt Poſition, (vixæ. to g) and then elevate the Pole, till the ſecond Dot appears at the Edge of the Horiæon, and the Horizon at the ſame Time will cut the Meridian in the Latitude requirrcd . Proceed as above, and you will find that in the Latitude 569 20, the Days are one Hour longer than at London. . 2 . If you want to know the Latitude where the Day is two Hours longer than at London, then proceed as before, only inſtead of cauſing 70 and a Half to paſs under the Meridian, you muſt now turn the Globe till 150 paſs under the Meridian, and make then a ſecond Dot on the Tropic, and proceed as before. Note, If yon want to know the Latitude where the longeſt Day is an Hour ſhorter than in Loædon, only turn the Globe eãſtward inſtead of weſtward, till ſeven Degrees and a Half paſs through the Meridian, and make a Prick on the Tropic, and depreſs the Pole till this lies even with the Horizon, you will find the Latitude about 4i- and a Half. Thus for two Hours longer about 600, for four ours about 652 205 but for two Hours ſhorter the Latitude is about 366 and a Halfl. P R O B. XXXI. Any Time not exceeding ſix Monibs given, to tell that Latitude, or thoſe Places, where the Sun will not ſet for all that Time. Note, That twenty-eight Days are here reckoned to the Month. Bring the given Time into Dayè, and take the Half of the Number of Days; Sut remember to abate 1, if the Half exceeds 30, then count from Cancer on the Ecliptic the ſame Number of Degrees as the Half amounted to, and where this Reckoning ends make a Dot on the Ecliptic.- Laſily, Bring this Dot to the Meridian, and as many Degrees as are intercepted, or lie between the Dot and the Pole itſelf, counted on the Meridian, is the Latitude required. Example. I demand the Place, or Latitude, where the Sun does not ſet for the Space of four Months and 16 Days ?] This is in all 128 Days, the Half is 649, abate 10 is 639; this I count from  on the Ecliptic, and make a Dot, and bringing it to the Meridian, I find there are nearly 800 between the Dot and the Pole; viæ. the Latitude is 80, which is at Smith's Inlet, the upper Part of Greenland. So alſo in the Latitude of 850, he ſets not for five Months twvo Weeks. And in the Latitude of 860 30 for five Months, three Weeks, and three Days; an in the Latitude of 9oo, not for ſix Months; as you will 26 THE YOUNG MAN P R O B. XXXII. To tell in the Latitude ninety (the longeſt Day there being six Months) how long it continues 1o be Tuilight after Sun-ſet; and how long their Night is oſter Tuilight ends, before Tuwilight begins again. Note, Remember you were told before, that Twilight begins and ends when the Sun is 180 below the Horizon, and thãt on September the a2d the Sun begins to ſet to the Inhabitants at the North Pole, and to riſe to the Inhabitants at the South Pole; ſo that Twilight begins September the 22d to the Inhabitants at the North Pole; therefore, Rule 1. Elevate the Pole to the Zenith, and turn the Globe till ſome Degree of the Sun's Place in rho Ecliptic lies under 180 of the Brazen Meridian, and under the S. Part oſ the Horizæon, and you will find it 210 of m; vix. November the i3th, the Ending of Twilight, that is, they have Twilight from September the 22d, to November the 13th, and then they begin to have dark Nights (ſave the Advantage of the Moon, till the 28th oſ amuars. For 2. Turn the Globe till ſome other Point of the Ecliptic comes under 189, as before, and you will find it about 9e of 2:, which anſwers to the 28th of January, the Beginning of Twilight to the Inhabitants at the N. Pole, and then on March the 21ſt, the Sun riſes with them. Thus it appears, that the Length of their Day (from Sun-riſing to Sun-ſetting) is from March the 21ſt to September the 22d. Thhe Length, or Continuance, of wilight, is from September the 22d to November the 13th, and from Yanuary the 28th to March the 21ſt, in all about 104 Days; and their real Night is from November the 13th to January the 28th, vix. about 7 ays. Note. The ſame holds good to the Southern Inhabitants at the S. Pole, for he riſes with them when he enters æ, and ſets with them when he come to æ, cc. b DIALOG UE X. SECT. I. Containing ſome uſeful Problems on the Celeſtial Globe. P R O B. I. To find the right Aſcenſion of any Star. RING the Center of the Star to the Meridian, and the Degree of the Equinoctial, cut by the Meridian, is the right Aſcenſion required. Thus you will find the right Aſcenſion of Aldebaran, in Taurus, to be about 6565 Arcturus, in Bootes, about 2100 45', Regel, in Orion, about 750 i5'; and Sirius, or the Dog Star, about 980, &c. &c. P R O B. II. The Latitude given, to tell the oblique Aſcenſion and Descenſion of any Star. Rectify the Globe, and bring the Star down to the Eaſtern Verge of the Horizon, and the Degree of the Equinoctial that is then cut by the Horixon, is the oblique Aſcenſion required. Turn the Star to the Weſtern Side, and the Degree of the Equinoctial, cut by the Horizon, is the Star's oblique Deſcenſion. Proceed thus, and you will find the obliquæ Aſcenſion of Regel to be about 866 30, of Marbas in Pegaſus, about 325 ; and of Aldebaran, or the Bull's Eye, about 439 o. urn each of theſe to the Weſtern Side, you will nd their oblique Deſcenſion 640, 360 nearly, and 879. Note, There is this Difference between the right and oblique Aſcenſion and Deſcenſion of the Sun and Stars. For the Sum's oblique Aſcenſion, &c. differs every Day in the ſame Latitude, but the Stars oblique Aſcenfion is every Dar the ſume. / P R O B. III. To tell the Declination of the Stars. As for the Sun's Place, ſo alſo here, bring the given Star to the Braxen Meridian, and obſerve what Degree of the Meridian lies right over the Center of the Star, ſfor that is the Declination æither N. or Si according to which Side of the Equinoctial it lies. THE YOUNG MANs Thus you will find the Declination of Aldebaran to be about 16 45 N. the upper Pointer to the Pole (in Urſa Major) about 639 4, and the lower one 589; but Regel, in Orion, I find about  S. and Cor Scorpionis about 260 South Declination, &è &c. P RO B. IV. The right Aſcenſion and Declination of any Star given, to i ſind the ſame at oncẽ. . Bring the given Degree of right Aſcenſion on the quinoctial to the Brazxen Meridian, then look under the Degree of Declination on the Meridian, and you will find the Star at the Meridian, under the given Degree of Declination. Thus, ſuppoſe I wanted to find Aldebaran, whoſe right Aſcenſion is 65, and his Declination 160 45 N. fil bring 656 of the Equinoctial. to the Meridianm; and looking under 166 45 N. Declination on the Meridian, I find Aldebaran. So alſo Sirius has 98è right Aſcenſion, and 160 30 S. Declination; therefore I bring 98e of the Equinoctial to the Meridian, and looking under 16ꝰ 30' S. Declination on the Meridian, I find Sirius, juſt at the Meridian. The ſame for any other Star. PRO B. V. To tell the riſing and ſetting of the Stars, and the Point o the Compaſs any Star rit or ſets upon in any Latitude, and on any Day of the Ycar. i Rectify the Globe, and bring the Sun's Place to the Meridian; then turn the Globe till-the given Star comes to the Eaſtern Verge of the Horizon, and the Index will point to the Time of riſing, and the Horizon will ſhew the Point it riſes upon: Turn it to the Weſt, and the Index will point to the Time of ſetting, and the Horizon will ſhew you the Point it ſets upon. Proceed thus, and you will find that Aldebaran, on November the 5th, at London, riſes a little paſt Six in the Evening, and ſets about Nine in the Morning. The Point he riſes upon is E. N. E. and the Point he ſets upon is W. N. W. Bqut Regel, in Orion, the ſame Night, riſes a little before Nine at Night, and ſets about Half paſt Seven in the Morning. The Point of riſing is E. by S. and of ſetting W. by S. Note, The Stars riſe and ſet eſery Day on the ſame Point of the Compaſs, though at different Hours. P RO B. VI. To tell the Time, viæ. how many Hours any Star continues above the Horizon, from its riſing to its ſetting, in any Latitude. Rectify the Globe, then bring the Star to the Eaſtern Verge, and note the Time of riſing; then turn the Globe to the Weſtern Side; and the Number of Hours that paſſed through the Dial Plate tells you the Continuance of that Star above the Horizon. Thus I find Aldebaran at London continues up from the Time of his riſing on any Day (for Example, take December the 25th) about 15 Hours; and Regel about 10 Hours and a Half. At Stockholm, Aldebaran continues up above 16 Hours; but at Port Royal he continues up about 12 Hours and three Quarters. P R O B. VII. To tell the Diſtance of one Star from unother in Degrees and Minutes, in the Arch of a great Circle. To this Problem are three Variations; I. Iſ the Stars lie under the ſame Meridian, bring them to the Brazem Meridian, and the Degrees intercepted between them, counted on the Meridian, is the Diſtance required. . le Thus I find the two Pointers in the Great Bear to be about 503 diſtant from each other; and Eridef and the Dolphin's Eye about 2993 diſtant. 2. If they lie under the ſame Declination, bring the firſt (at Pleaſure) to the Brazen Meriaian, and note the Degree cut by the Equator; then bring the other to the Meridian, and note how many Degrees Difference has paſſed through the Meridian, for that is their Diſtance required. Thus I find the Difference between Aſſengue, and Caput Meduſæ, to be about 12293; for Aſſengue (3803 Declination) being brought to the Meridian, cuts the Equator in 2770 30, viæ. 82ꝰ 30 from  Weſtward; and Caput Meduſæ cuts 40 of the Equator Eaſtward; their Diſtance, cherefore, is 122ꝰ 30. llil 5 If neither of the Stars lie under the ſame Degree of the Meridian, or Declination, then bring either of them to the Meridian, and elevate the Pole to the ſame Height as the Star has Declination (that is, the ſame as you elevate the Terreſtrial Globe to the Latitude of a Place) for then the Star will be in the Zenith: Therefore. fix the Quadrant to the Zenith, over the Center of the given Star, and extend it to the other Star, and the Degrees on the Quadrant is the Diſtance required in a true Arch of a great Circle. Note, Though the Diſtance of the Stars from each other is thus determined in Degrees, yet you are not to ſuppoſe their Diſtance is ſo many Degrees to be converted into Engliſt Miles; but it only means, that they appear ſo far diſtant under ſuch an Angle. i Thus I find the Diſtance between Capella and Cor Hydræ to be about 70 and between Aldebaran and Sirius, about 466 30, &c. 4. If the Stars be at ſuch a Diſtance from each other, that the Quadrant will not reach them, then bring either SOf them to the Horizon, and elevate, or depreſs the Pole, till the other lies alſo at the Verge of the Horizon, and the Degrees counted upon the Horizon, between Star and Star, is their Diſtance in Degrees. Thus between Aldebaran and Cor Scorpienis you will find about 170 Degrees. P R O B. VIII. The Latitude, Day of the Month, and Height of any Stor given, to tell the Time or Hour of the Night. Rule. Rectify the Globe for the Latitude, &c. &e. then fix the Quadrant in the Zenith, and move the Globe and the Quadrant together, till the Star cuts the Quadrant in the given Height; and the Index will point to the Hour. Thus, on January the 21ſt (at London) in the Evening, I obſervèd Aldebaran E. S. E. to be about 40 high i I demand the Time of this Obſervation? Anſ. Alittle paſt Five in the Evening. Again, on December the a5th, in the Evening, I obſerved Sirius to be about50 high and at the ſame Iime Regel to be about 28ꝰ  high; i demand the Hour? Anſ. About Ten at Night; and Aldebaran is nearly under the Meridian at the ſame Time. P R O B. IX. To tell what Stars never riſe, and thoſe that never ſet at . London. 1. Only obſerve what Stars have above 380 2 N. Declination; for all ſuch never ſet at London, but are always above the Horizon. 2. Obſerve alſo thoſe Stars that have above 380 3 S. Declination, for thoſe never riſe, but are always under the Horizæon at London. Thus the Pointers in the Great Bear, Aridef in Cygnus, and many others, never ſet. . Alſo, Canobus in Argo, Navis and Pes Centauri, and many others, never riſe at London. Note 1. From what you have been taught, Tyro, it is eaſy to eonceive that to the Inhabitants under the North Pole no South Star can ever be ſeen; nor can the Inhabitants at the South Pole ever ſee one of the Stars in the other Hemiſphere. But, 2. The Inhabitants under the Equator have a pleaſant Sight of all the Stars from Pole to Pole; for they riſe and ſet with them at right Angles; therefore no Star can continue above twelve Hours above their Horizon. P R O B. EX. To know at any Time of the Vear (in the Latitude of London) where to find any Star, or tell the Name of any Star at Pleaſure. Rectify the Globe for the Day, and turn it till the Index points to the given Hour; then by a Quadrant take the Height of the required Star; or for want oſ this (in a common Way of gueſſing) obſerve well what Part of the Heavens it is in, vix. whether E. N. E. S. W. or the like, as alſo its Tleight as near as you can gueſs: This being done, ſet the Globe in due Order for the Day and Hour, and you will find the ſame Star on the Globe; and, by applying the Quadrant, you will find THE YOUNG MANEs the exact Point of the Compaſs, and the real Height the Star then has, which, though not perhaps near to what you gueſſed it at, yet, if it be any noted Star, you may aſſure yourſelf you are right, as there is no other Star of Note near it about that Height, and upon the ſame Point. Thus, on December the 25th, at Eight at Night, I obſerved a bright Star (as near as I could gueſs) on the S8. E. Point, and about 47 high; I would know what Star it is P Anſ. Aldebaran. I rectify the Globe, and turn the Index to the Hour, and then turn the Quadrant to the given Point of the Compaſs, and lookimg about 47ꝰ high on the Quadrant, I find Aldebaran to be the neareſt bright Star by the Quadrant on that Point and at that Height; therefore, I conclude it is Aldebaran. Alſo at three Quarters paſt Ten, the ſame Night, I fee two very bright Stars, one on, or near, the Meridian, about 30 high, and the other near the S. E. Point, and about 350 high; I demand their Names? Anſ. Regil in Orion's Foot, and Procyon in Canicula. ; P R O B. XI. To tell the Latitude and Longitude of the Stars. Firſt, Obſerve whether the given Star be on the N. or S. Side of the Ecliptic; for if it be on the N. Side, elevate the N. Pole 6623, and turn the Globe till and vr lie in the N. and S. Points of the Horixon; viæ. till the Ecliptic be parallel, or even with the Horizon, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenitb: Then keeping the Globe ſteady, turn the Quadrant till the Edge oſ it touches the Center of the Star, and that Degree on the Quadrant, viæ. the Altitude of the Star in the Latitude 6602 is the Latitude required, and the Degree of the Ecliptic, cut by the Quadrant, reckoned from Aries (or rather reckoned among the Signs, as it happens) is the Longitude required. Thus you will find Arcturus in Bootes to be about 3004 N. Latitude, and 2039 Longitude from æ, or rather 232 of æ. Alſo, Alcair is about 2905 of N. Latitude, and 28 of Longitude in vs. 2. For any South Star. Elevate the S. Pole 66ꝰ 2, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith, and apply it to the Star, as before directed, you have the Latitude and Longitude required. Thus ou will find Pes Centauri to have about 420 2 of S. ſatitude, and 2366 Longitude from æ, or rather 269 in m; and thus for any other Star. P R O B. XII. The Latitude and Day of the Month given (ſuppoſe December 25, at Zh à Night, btiunoclirtaſul the Globe ſo as to repreſent the Face of the Heavens at that Time, and ſbew your Acquaintance the Numes and Poſitions of the moſt eminent fixed Stars. Rectify the Globe for the Latitude, and bring the Sun's Place to the Meridian, and the Index to twelve. Then turn the Globe to the given Hour, viæ. Nine at Night, and there fix it, ſo will every Star on the Globe (if you ſet the Globe N. and S.) correſpond with, or point to, the ſame Star in the Heavens. Thus (at London) I find Capella E. by S. about 750 high; Caſtor and Pollux, the firſt about 409, and the other about 459 high, near the E. Point; Procyon below them, to the left Hand, 23 high E. S. E. Sirius yet lower, to the left, S. E. about 100 high; Betelguexe higher, on the ſame Point, about 380 high; Regel more ſouthward, about 266 high; Aldebaran, on the ſame Point, much higher, viæ. about 53; the Seven Stars, or Pleiades, S nearly about 620 high; Mencar, S. by W. 40 high; Aridef, N. W. about 26ꝰ high, &c. &c. . P R O B. XIII. To tell the Time of the acronical riſing and ſetting of any DEFINITION. 1. The acronical riſing of a Star, is when the Star riſes juſt at Sun-ſet. . 2. A Star is ſaid to ſet acronically, when it ſets with Bring the Sun's Place for the given Day to the weſtern Side of the Horiæon, and all thoſe Stars that are on, or near the eaſtern Side of the Horiæon, riſe acronically; and thoſe on the wefſtern Verge of the Horiæon ſet acronically. i Thus I find on December the 6th, that Aldebaran riſes acronically, but it ſets acronically on May the 2rſt. Alſo Sirius riſes acronically on February the 4th, and ſets acronically on M.y the 14th. . P RO B. XIV. To tell-the coſmical riſing ana ſetting of the Stars in any atitu DEFINITION. 1. A Star is ſaid to riſe coſmicall, when it riſes with the Sun. 2. AsStar is faid to ſet coſmically, when it ſets at Sunriſing. Rectify the Globe, &c. and bring the Sun's Place to the eaſtern Side of the Horizon for the given Day; then all thoſe Stars cut by the eaſtern Verge of the Horizon rife coſmicalls. The Globe ſtill remaining in the ſame Poſition, look at the weſtern Verge, or Edge of the Horizon, and all thoſe Stars cut by it, or that are very near it, ſet on that Day coſmically. Thus I find that Arcturus, and two ſmall Stars in Hercules's Thigh, riſe coſmically, September the 25th. Alſo two Stars in Eridonus, Aſſengue in Lyra, &c. &c. ſet coſmicall. Marhal in Peseſus is but juſt below the Horizon, therefore may be ſaid to ſet nearly coſmically, as it will within a Day or two. For the coſmical ſetting. Turn the Gilobe till the Star comes to the weſtern Side of the Horiæon, and obſerve the Degree of the Eeliptic then cut by the caſtern Side of the Horizon, for that will anſwer to the Day of the coſmical ſetting. Thus Arcturus ſets coſmically, JTune the 22d. Alſo BOOK OF KNOMW LEDG E. 235 P R O B. XV. To tell the heliacal riſing, or ſetting of the Stars. DEFINITION. 1. Heliacal riſing, is when a Star once in the Sun's Beams gets out of them, ſo as to be ſeen at the eaſtern Verge of the Horizon, juſt before Sun-riſing. 2. Heliacal ſetting, is when a Star once in the Sun's Beams gets out of them, ſo as to be ſeen ſetting on the weſtern Side of the Horizon, juſt after Sun-ſet. Note 1. This heliacal riſing and ſetting of the Stars is different, according to their different Magnitudes. For, Note 2. Stars oſ the firſt Magnitude are ſeen riſing and ſetting when the Sun is but 12ꝰ below the Horizon. Stars of the ſecond Magnitude are not erfoctiy ſeen till the Sun is 130 below the Horizon. Thoſe of the third Degree, when he is 148. Thoſe of the fourth Deee of Magnitude, when he is 15ꝰ below the Horixon. Thoſe of the fifth Degree, when he is I&&. Thoſe of the ſixth Degree, when he is 1725 àãnd the nebulous, or ſmall ones, not till he is 18ꝰ below the Hori zxon, viz. about the beginning and ending of Twilight. To find the heliacal riſing, the Rule is, rectify the Globe, and bring the given Star to the eaſtern Verge of the Horizon; then fix the Globe, and turn the Qua drant to the weſtern Side, till 12ꝰ of the Quadrant touches the Ecliptic (for then will the real Place of the Sun be depreſſed 12 below the Horixon on the eaſtern Side); this done, note the Degree of the Ecliptic cut by the Quadrant, and find the oppoſite Degree to that, and the Day of the Month againſt the ſame Degree of the Ecliptic upon the Horizæon will ſhew the Time of the Star's heliacal riſing. The ſame is to be obſerved with the Quadrant on the eaſtern Side for the heliacal ſetting. Thus ou will find Aldebaran riſes heliacally July the 4th, and ts heliacally May the sth And Sirius, the Dog Star, riſes heliacally about Auuſt the 26th. * . guſi S E CT. . N. B. The Poets, and others, formerly uſed to reckon their Dies Caniculares, or Dog Days, from the heliacal riſing of Sirius; but they did not agree wherĩ they ended. Some reckoned them to continue thirty or forty, and others fift Days. However, in this they agreed, tlhiat the Weather at that Time was very ſultry and faint 236 THE YOUNG MAN:s S E C T. II. Containing ſome uſeful Problems in Navigation. P R O B. I. The Sun's Declination and Hour, wben he is due Eaſt, given, c0 find the Latitude, viæ. the Elevation of the Pole. Rectify the Globe to the ſame Latitude as the given Number of Degrees of Declination, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith; then convert the Hours that the Sun is due E. before, or after, Six oClock, into Degrees, count the ſame Number of Degrees on the Horizon from the Eaſt Point fouthward, and bring the Quadrant to that Degree of the Horizon, ſo ſhall the Degree on the Quadrant that is cut by thè Equator be the Complement oſ Latitude, which taken from 90c0, gives the Latitude itſelf, or Height of the Pole. Example. Sailing May the 21ſt, I made an Obſervation that the Sun was due Eaſt about ſeven Minutes paſt Seven in the Morning, and his Declination 20 N. I demand what Latitude I was in? Proceed by the Rule, you will find the Latitude to be 513 nearly. i il P R O B. II. Having the Sun's Azimuth at Six o Cloct, and Declination. to ſind the Latitude. Rule. As many Degrees as are contained in the Aximuth given, ſo much elevate the Pole, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith, and bring æ to the Meridian: Ihis done, count on the Quadrant upwards, the Complement of the Suns Declination to 9oè, and bring that Degree to the Equator, then the Degree of the ſorizon, cut v the Quadrant, ſhall be the Complement of Latitude, for five or ſix Weeks after the riſing of Sirius. But (as it was then, ſo now) itis a ridiculous Whim; for Sirius does not now riſe beliacally till near September, though our Almanack makers (for what Reaſon I know not) continue the beginning of Dog Days, July the 30th. But, however, it is plain that Siriùs can no ways be ch with bringing this ſultry Weather; becauſe three or four thouſand Years hence he will not riſe heliacally till November, and then perhaps, aill be charged with bringing ãs much Cold by the ſame Kule. counted from the E. Point, or elſe from the W. as it may happen, and the Remainder to 9oc is the Latitude required; or otherwiſe, the Degrees counted from the other two cardinal Points, either N. or S. as it may happen, will give the Latitude. Thus I find the Sun's Aximuth, at Six o'Clock, to be 120 52', and his Declination 20è 10, what is the Latitude ? Work according to the Rule, you will have the Anſwer 386 21 Complement, that is 515 Latitude required. ; P R O B. III. The Sun's Amplitude and aſcenſional Difference given, to find the Elevation of the Pole and Sun's Declination. Rule. Raiſe, or elevate, the Pole ſo many Degrees as is the aſcenſional Difference, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith, and bring æ to the Meridian, then count on the Quadrant upwards the Complement of Amplitude, and move the Guadrant till that ſame Number on the Quadrant cuts the Equator; and the Quadrant will cut the Horizæon in the Degree of the Poles Elevation, (counting from the E. or W. towards the N. or S.) and the Equator in the Degree of Declination. Example. I made an Obſervation, that the Sun's aſcenſional Difference was 279 10, and his Amplitude 33ꝰ 20, I demand the Latitude and Declination? . Proceed according to the Rule, and you will find the Latitude 510 30, and the Declination 239 10. P RO B. IV. The Sun's Altitude E. and his Declination given, to prove . the BElevation of the Pole. Rule. Elevate the Pole to the Complement of the Sun's Altitude at E. and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith, and bring æ to the Meridian, then number on the Quadrant of Altitude the Degree of Declination, and bringing the ſame to the Equator, obſerve what Degree the Quadrant cuts the Equator in; for its Complement to 90 is the Height of the Pole. Example. The Sun's Declination is 200 106' N. his Altitude E. (at London) is nearly 260, I would know whether the ſuppoſed Latitude (5104) agrees herewith in Operation? H Cre I ſubtract 26ꝰ from 90ꝰ, and there remains 64 Complement of Altitude, and I elevate the Pole accordingly, &c. Then I bring v to the Meridian, and cauſe 200 10 on the Quadrant to cut the Equator, and find it nearly 3853, the Complement of Latitude required; which ſubtracted from 9oꝰ gives 5194, the real Latitude of the Place. P RO B. V. The Sun's Declination and Amplitude given, to find the Height of the Pole. Rule. Elevate the Pole to the Complement of Amplitude, and fix the Quadrant in the Zenith, and bring æ to the Meridian, then count the Sun's Declination on the Quadrant, and bring that Degree to the Equator; and the Degree of the Equator cut by the Quadrant is the Latitude required. Example. Suppoſe the Sun's Amplitude 330 20, his Declination 200 10, what's the Latitude? Proceed according to the Rule, you will find it about 510 30. Y O UN G MAN s Book of Knowledge, &c. PART V. G E O M E T R V. DIALOGUE I. Skscr. I. Tyr. Y A T H AT is Geometry, and its Uſe? Phil. Geometry ſhews the Relation or Proportion of one Line to another, or of one Angle, Curve, Arch, or Mathematical Figure to another; as allo how to meaſure irregular Figures, by firſt turning them into equal regular Figures; it is now indeed uſed for, and conſidered only as the Science of Quantity, or Extenſion. Iyr. Erom whence had Geometry its Riſe hil. There are various Opinions concerning this, nor is it of any Signification to us; but 'tis plain from the Authority of many, that in Egypt it was improved in the following Manner: The River NNile every Year overflowed the Country, and covered the Land with Mud, which obliged the Inhabitants to ſet down Doles or large Stakes, and then they drew Maxks from each, and platted every Man's Property; and from this they drew iguros ſimilar to thoſe in the Mud, and by further Practice. became more and more acquainted with the Relation and different Proportion of Lines, &c. and conſequently, more and more with Geometry itſelf. S E C T. II. Geometrical Definitions. STp9r. Pleaſe to define or explain ſuch Things as art neceſſary to the Knowledge of this Science. Phil. Things previous to be underſtood, are only ſuct Figures as conſiſt of various Forms, and which have a Connection or Dependence on one another, and ought tc be ſo got by heart as to remember the Names and their Uſe at the firſt Sight. They are as follows: r ig. 1 1. A Point or Dot is a Thing conſidered as the A very Beginning, or Formation of Motion or Mag- ſ nitude, and without Parts of itſelf, as the Point at A, Fig. 1. . Fig. 2. 2. A Line is generated from a Point A B moving or proceeding from its firſt Place to any other Place in a direct Line, Fig. à. . ĩll Fig. 3. 3. A Curve Line alſo is made by the B C Motion of a Point moving inditectly B from B till it reſts at C, Fig. 3. lltill Fig. 4 4. An Angle is made by the meeting E together of two Lines in one Point, ĩ and it matters not at all whether one Line (or Leg) of the Angle be longer shan the other. Iſ one Line ſtands right up, or per- A pendicularly upon the other, it is called a right Angle, (containing 902) or a Quarter of a Circle, as you will more plainſy ſee hereafter. Thus the two Lines meeting in the Point A form a right Angle, Fig. 4 Fig. 5. 5. An obtuſe Angle is whenm two Lines are extended wider i than a right Angle, and contains more than 9oꝰ or æ C Quarter of a Circle, and may be repreſented by a Pair of Compaſſes extended verſ wide, as C, Fig. s. Fig. 6. 6. An acute Angle is when two Lines meet ẽ cloſer or nearer together than a right Angle, and is leſs than 9o6 or the Quarter of a Circle: An acute Angle is well repreſented by a Pair of Compaſſco opened a little Way at Random, as B, Fig. 6. ; Fig. 7. B 18. 7 5 1. A Triangle is made by the meeting together of three Lines in three Points, as Fig. 7, 8, 9, 1o, and 11. ſyro. Have not theſe Triangles disferent Names, as the Angles before had ? 8. Phil. Yes, Triangles take theit Names from the diſfferent Adngles they are formed from: Thus the Triangle A BC, (Fig. 7.) is a right angled Triangle, becauſe it has one right Augle at A. n F The Triangle DE F, ùs an obtuſe angled Triangle, becauſe it has one obtuſe Angle at Db. Fig. 8. Fig. . ux 9. An equilateral Triangle has all its Sides equal, and all its Angles acute, as c DE, Fig. 9. C a Fig. 1o ù 10. An lIſoſceles, or equicrural Trianglo, has two Sides equal, and the two Angles at the Baſe equal, as EF G, Fig. 10. Fig. 11. 11. A ſcalenous Triangle ma be either obtuſe or acute angled, but has never any two Sides or Angles equal. See Fig. 11. 12. A Square is a regular Geometrical Figure, formed by a right Line of any Length (ſuppoſe AB) paſſing down, or through the Space ABCD, as Fig. 12. 13. A Parallelogram (vul- a garly called a long Square) ,.. is an oblong Figure, whoſe oppoſite Sides are equal and parallel, and all its Angles ight ones, as a bc d. c 14. A Diagonal (called alſo the Hypothenuſe) is t Line which runs acroſs the Figure from Corner Corner. Thus the Line AD, Fig. 12, and a d, F 13, are Diagonals. . Fig. 14. 15. A Rhombus is a Dia- A B mond-like Figure, having all its Sides equal; it has two Angles obtuſe, as A and D, and two acute, as B and C, Fig. 14. ñ 7 Note, A Rhombus is only a Square put out f its natural Orde for the Rhombus ABCD is equal to the Squase à B cà as is ovider by the very Sight of Fig. 14. 16. A Rhomboides is a Figure repreſenting anitregutarDſamonò. It is equal to a Parallelogram, as the i Rhombus is equalt o &Æ ; a Square. Thus the C CT D c Rhomboides ABCD is equal to the Parallelogram AB c a i Hl Fig. 16. l lilli 17. A Trapexium is a Fi- C gure of four unequal Sides : and Angles, ſome being acute, and others obtuſe, as ABCD, Fig. 16. li Fig. 15. ii ib ibl hbl b l l ù bil N. B. The Diagonal B D in this Figure is moſt commonly called the Baſe, becauſe it parts the Traperium, and makes thereof two Triangles, of which D is a common Baſe to bothh . Fig. 17. 18. A Polygon is a Figure C of more than four Sides ; and when the Sides are unequal, as thoſe of Fig. 17, it is called an rregular Polygon; but when the ides are all equal, as thoſe of 18. 18, it is called a regular Polygon. Fig. 18. 19. An Hexagon is a Figure of ſoc equal his and equal Angles, each containing 6oc at the Center, in all 360, Fig. 18. If it be divided into Triangles, it will contain ſix equilateral Triangles, all equal, of which DGC is one, fimilar to CDE, Fig. 9. N. B. From the bure Inſpection of this Figure, you . may form a very juſt Vax of all that are here ſubjoined by Name only, and may very eaſily draw any of them; and by the Table tell the Angles and Area of each. T A B L E. Names of the ſ No. Angles at ] Angles at ſ Areas, the Figures. of the Center. che Cir- Squ. being er- Sides. cum ference. ] one Inch. A Square, 4 ] 90. 90. 1. 0o00 A Pentagon, 5 l72. 108. I.7204 An Hexagon, I 6 ] 6o. 1 20. 2. 598 An Heptagon, 7 l 51.4285 l 128.5714] 3.633 An Octagon, 8 l 45. 135. 4. 8284 A Nonagon, 9  40. 140. 6. 1818 A Decagon, 10 l 36. 144. 7.6942 An Undecagon, l 11  32.72 147. 27 9.3656 A Dodecagon, l 12 ] 30. l 150. 1l. 197 Fig. 19. 20. A Circle is a perfect round Figure, made from the Motion or Rotation of the Line A d moving upon the Point A, from d towards e, and continuing its Motion round b d to b and c till it arrives again at d, Fig. 19. æ 21. The Diameter is that Line which parts the Cirele into twoequal Parts, (or Semi-circles) as the Line h A 3 an and the Radius of a Circle is always half the Diameter, or is that Line which forms the whole Circle round the Center; thus A b Ac, Ad, Ae, are all or either o them equal to the Radius. 22. A Quadront is a Quarter of a Circle, as the Arch b &, or c d, Fig. 19. ill 23. A Sector is Part of a Circle more or lIeſs than a Quadrant, as the Arch b e, or d e, Fig. 19. - Fig. 20. 24. A Chord Line is that which l runs from any Part of the Verge of a Circle (called the Periphery) to the oppoſite Part; thus & the Line a c is the Chord of the . Arch a b c, or the great Arch a Cæ, Fig. 20. 25. A Segment of a Circle is a Part cut off by a Chord Line; thus a b c is the leſs Segment, and C a Cc is the greater Segment of the Circle Ab BC, Fig. 20. Fig. 21. 26. A Tangent is a Line that runs ct perpendicular to the Diameter, and meets it juſt at the Verge or Perigr of the Circle; thus the Line a is a Tangent to the Arch BC; alſo C θCc, and C d, are Tangents to their reſpective Arches, Fig. 21. 27. A Secant is a Line drawn from the Center of the Circle Thus the Line ABa, is the Secant to the Tangent Ca and Arch BC: through the Periphery (or Verge) till it meets hih the Tangent. NUſlll So alfo Ab, Ac, and Ad, are Secants . to the Tangenis that meet them, Fig. 21. Fig. 22. 28. The natural Sine or Sines cde ; of any Arch or Arches are b Lines drawn perpendicular to the Diameter of the Circle: Thus the Line Ce, is the right Sine of A B the Arches Ae and fie. ſo alſo the Lines b, c; and d, are Sines of their reſpective Arches; and the 4 Lines Ai, A2, A3, A4, are call- I 5 ed Chord Lines of their reſpective 2 Arches, Ai, A2, A3, Aq, &c. S E C T. III. Concerning ſomething more of the Nature of a Circle, witl ihe Sine, Sine Complement, and ver ſed Sine of an Arch. Tyr. What do you mean by a Sine, Sine Complement, &c. of an Arch? . Phil. That I will explain to you in a few Minutes; but it will be neceſſar hrit that you ſhould underſtanc ſome certain Marks or Signs in order for the better underſtanding this Work. i. This Character, or Mark () ſignifies more, and ſhews that all the Numbers or Things before and aſter are to be added together: Thus 14  12 added together make 26, and 6  5  9 r 7 make 27; ſo alſo a  d ſhew that the Numbers belonging to a, b, and d, are to be added together . ii 2. This Mark () ſignifies leſi, and is the Sign oſ Subtraction, and ſhews that the Quantity or Number after it is to be ſubtracted out of. the Quantity or Number before it: Thus 24-15, is 24 leſs 15, or ſhews that 15is to be taken out of 24, &c. 3. This Mark (x) is the Sign of Mulltiplication, and ſhews that all the Numbers before and aftcr it are to be continually multiplied: Thus 5 x 14 makes 705 and 5 X 7 X 8 makes 280. . . 4. This Mark (Æ,) is the Sign of Diviſion, and ſhews the Number before it is to be divided by the Number aſter it Thus 48--by 6 is 8, and 84 -7 is 12. 5. This Mark (Æ) is the Sign of Equality, and ſhews that all the Numbers or Quantities before it are equal to thoſe after it: Thus 4  7æ11; that is 4 more 7 is equal to 11: Alſo 197  12 is 19 leſs 7 equal to 12. 6. Two Dots one over the otherithus (:) ſignify the Word to. Hl§ 7. Four Dots thus (::) ſignify ſo is; and when the are put together they are the Sign of Proportion or Rule of Three Direct. For ſuppoſe 2, 4, 4, and 8, had theſe Marks, thus 2: 4::4: S, they are thus read, as  to 44 ſo is 4,to 8. Or, a: b:: b d, is thus read, as a to b, ſo is to d. 8. This Character () ſignifies or ſtands for Degrees, and this () for Minutes or Miles. il 2 This Mark (5) ſignifies an Angle, this (Æ5) ngles. 10. This (A) a Triangle, this (As) Triangles. 11. This (O) ſtands for a Square. 12. This ſr) for a Rectangle or Parallelogram. Tyr. I ſhall endeavour to make myſelf Maſter of theſe Characters or Signs forthwith. ;i El ig. 1. Phil. Obſerve then c what follows; firſt, the right or natural Sine of an Arch is a Line drawn from any Part of a Circle perpendicular to the Diameter: Thus, ſuppoſe the uadrant (or ore of the Circle) DCB to be divided into two Parts, viz. Bbæ429, andCbæ489; then from b draw the perpendicular Line eb; ſo is eb the Sine of the Arch Bò 4293 and bd the Sine of 486. 2. The Complement of an Arch is the Remainder of any Arch to 906. Thus the Complement of the Arch Bòæ42, is tlie Arch 5Cæ48 . . 3. The Coſine or Sine Complement of an Arch is the Sine of the Complement of that Arch: Thus (as was ſaid before) the Sine of the Arch Bòb is eb; and the Coſine or Sine Complement to a Quadrant, is the Line d b, the Sine of the Arch Co. i 4 The verſed Sine is that Line, or Part of the Diameter which èxtends from the Periphery of the Circle to the Point where the right Sine falls upon the Diameter: Thus the Line Be is the verſed Sine of the Arch Bb, and Cd is the verſed Sine of the Arch Cb. 5. & Always remember this, that the verſed Sine and Coſine (or Sinæ Complement) of an Arch are àlways equal to the Radius or Semi- Diameter: Thus the verſed Sine Be and the Coſine d b, ( to De) are equal to DB the Radius; for d b is equal to D e by Inſpection; and Be--DeæÆ DB, the Radius itſelf. TIyr. I thank you, Sir; but before you leave this Section, pray give me ſome Account of the Nature and Properties of a Cone. Phil. I am ready to anſwer any Thing that lies in my Power: But a Cone being a ſolid Body, it is at preſent a little foreign to our Purpoſe; however, as it may be of ſome Service to you, obſerve well the following ition of a Cone, both as to its Make and Generation, as well as to its Properties. ig. 2. 1. A Cone is made or generated thus; ſuppoſe a String was B faſtened at the Point B, and extended to the Periphery of the Circle either at A or D; I ſay, by taking the String in your , and moving it gent round the Circle ſor Hoop) A DE, it will form the Cone ABCDEF, (Fig. 2.) N. B. A Cone has five Sections, by which five different Figures are produced, viæ. A Triangle, a Circle, an Rilipſis, a Parabola, and a Hyperbold, as folloms : 1. If the Cone be cut in Halves A from the Point B through the Center C, that Section on the Face of the Cut will be a Trianle. 8ſ If a Cone be cut bv the Line a ò, parallel to its Baſe, that Section will form . x If a Cone be cut obliquely, or athwart, from Side to Qn (as by the Line b g) that Section will form an ipſis. 4. If a Cone be cut by a Line parallel to one oſ its Sides ſus the Line a cparallel to & D) that Section will form a Parabola. Hilli 5. If a Cone be cut by a Line parallel to its Axis, (viæ. by the Line b c) that Section will form an H, perbola. But this you will ſee more of hereaſter. S E C T. IV. Geometricat Theorems. Tyr. I thank you, Sir, for theſe Inſtructions; he pleaſed to ſhew me ſomething more concerning the Nature of Angles, Circles, &c. Phil. I will.  You remember I told you all Angles are Parts of a Circle, and contain ſome certain Degrees oſ an Arch thereof, to meaſure which is called Trigonometry, as you will ſee by and by under that Head. Previous to this you are to obſerve, t. If a Circle be C cut by two right Lines, as AB and CD, I ſay that the Circle will be cut into four Parts or Angles, the oppoſite of which are equal, viæ. aæa and bæb; alſo the acute or leſſer Angle a, with the obtuſe or greater Angle b, will both together be æ to a Semi-Circle. Fig. 1. Fig. æ 2. If tvo E . right Lines be drawn parallel to à each otherà at any Diſtance, as A B and CD, and be cut by a third EF, at any Angle whatſoever, the Angles of the one will be equal to the Angles of the other, vix. the Angles a, a, a, a, are equà to each other, and ſo are the Angles ò, b, b, b , b, b, b. Fig. 3. 3. An Angle at the Center is double an Angle at the Circumference, as appears by the three following Figures: For A in Fig. 3, the Angle BCD at the Center is double the Angle BAD, or ABC at the Circumference; for the Arch BD is ; double the Arch Cd, as may be proved by a Pair of Dividers, for take off the Diſtance Cę and ſetting one Foot of the Compaſſes in D, it will be juſ half the Extent or Diſtance of the Arch DB. Fig. 4 B 4. Again, In Fig. 4, the Angle BCA, at the Center, is double the Angle BAC at the Circum⸗ ference; for the Arch BA is l Fig. 5. So alſo in Fig. 5, the Angle BCD, at the Center, is double the Angle BAD at the Circumference; for the ſireh BD is double the ſmall Arch D 5. If an equilateral Triangle be inſcribed in a Circle, the internal Angles are all acute and equal; and all together are equal to a SemiCircle, or 180. AB or C are each internally Æ 6o, for 6o x 3 Z180. But externally each is Æ 120, for 120 X 3Æ 360. F ig. 6. 6. Every Angle drawn in a Se- a mi-Circle, or whoſe Legs extend exactly the Width of the Diameter of a Circle, will be a right Angle, viz. I a Quadrant or 9oc, as the Fig. 8. 7. An Angle in an Arch B greater than a Semi-Circle, whoſe Legs take up more than an Arch contained in a SemiCircle, (as B d C) will be an C &ue Angle, or leſ than a uadrant or 9oq, as the Angle B, Fig. 8 αs Fig. 9. C 8. An Angle in an Arch leſs than a Semi-Circle, whoſe Legs take up leſs Space than a Se- d mi- Circle, ſas C è d) will be an d obtuſe Angle, greater than a Quaàdrant, or 9o, as the Angle C, Fig. 9. 9. Any rightlin'd Triangie. made between two parallel Lines, the internal Angles are equal to the external, and all the three Angles 1 taken together are equal to a Semi-Circle, or 180 Degrees, vizæ. the external Angle a is equal to the internal Angle c, and b is equal to d, and A is the Complement f the Angles a and b to a Semi-Circle, and likewiſe oſ the Angles c and d, Fig. 10. Fig. 11. 10. Any plane Triangle(asABC) being cut by a Line parallel to any one of its Sides (ſuppoſe by the Line DE) will make a Triangle ADE, ſimilar to the origi- D nal one ABC, and the Sides alſo will be in the ſame Proportion For, as AB: AD: : BCIDE, or as AB: AD: : AC: AE. Fig. 12. i1. If a Line AB be dividE B ed into two Parts, a Square made of the whole Line AB (viæ. ABCD) will be equal - Id to the Squares made of the Line AB, or be, vix. CF bc, and che Square of the Line EB, vix. E Bed; togecther with the two Rectangles C D or Parallelograms made of i the Parts themſelves, viæ. AE be  FD e d, that is, the O ABCD is æ the O CFùòc  the O EBcd  the CIAES  the CI FDced, as appears by Fig. 12. T;yr. I think I underſtand you; but however if you can further explain it to me I ſhall be thankful. Phil. I will demonſtrate it then by common Arithmetic. Demonſtration of Fig. 12. Let the whole Line AB, in the foregoine Figure, be 2 30 Feet; and let AE be 20, and EB 10 Feet. Now 30 X 3029007 U ABCD, and 20 X 202400 to the O CFòc; and 1o x 1oæ 1o0Æto the ſmall O EBcd. Now O X 302900; but 20 X 26-- 10X 10 Æ but 500, thereore the Squares made of the Parts want 400 Feet of the Square made of the whole, viæ. the two Els AEòc, arid FDed: Now by the Figure cdæ 1o, and AE, Cb or Fcæ 20, and 20 X 1022200, one of the Cs,  20025400, both the Rectangles or Cis, which were wanting in the Square itſel? to make up 9o0 Feet; does this appear plain to you? . Tyr. Sir, I underſtand it clearly. Fig. 13. 12. If any Parallelo- A - B gram have Unity (or 1) ; at the Ends; if the Ends! 40 be encreaſed by Unity C ſriium  um semem erruteme D ſor 1) that Parallelogram vill be double the Area 1 the Line ABæ492CDqo9, and let the Ends of the Parallelogram be encreaſed as wide again; that is, ſuppoſe the Line CD was continued down, or to fall as low as EF, Unity or 1 further; then I ſay that the Paralleloram ABEF is double ABCD, viz. æABCD CDEF. rom a due Conſideration of the Figure it will be eaſy to ſolve all ſuch critical Queſtions of this Sort, as are too often ſtarted in Company by a Set of Ignoramuſes who often put Perſons of far more ſuperior Knowledge to the Bluſh. An Example is as follovss: If 100 Hurdles or Pens will fold or keep roo Sheep how many will fold or keep 200? Can you do it, Tyroâ TIyr. Yes, ſurely, it is only a Rule of Three Sum and I ſtate it thus, If 100 bè r1o0, what will 200 beſ? Anſ. 200. li Phil. You make me laugh, Tyro, for it is very evident that 102 Hurdles will fold 200 Sheep. Tyr. How can that be? ; . hil. Only conſider the Nature of the Figure itſelf, and you will ſoon ſee it. Firſt I ſet down 49 Hurdles from A to B, and 49 more from C to D, which is in all 98 Hurdles, then I ſet one at each End, viæ. from A to C, and from B to D, which make roo Hurdles in all, and the Parallelogram ABCD uwill fold roo Sheep; now remove the 49 Hurdles from CD down to Ee and it is plain the Parallelogram is juſt as big again; then I place 2 more Hurdles, viæ. one from C to E, and the other from D to F, and the whole is compleated, which ſhews that 2 Hurdles more will fold 200 Sheep. Tyr. Sir, I ſee it very evidently; and now I ſhould be obliged to you to ſhew me ſomething more of the Nature of a right angled Triangle, and the Proportion the Sides bear to each other. Phil. I will. i ili SECT. V. Concerning the Nature of a right angled Triangle, and the Relation one Side bears :o another, and its great Uility in ſeveral Math matical Operations. Tyr. Have you any particular Names for the different Sides of a Triangle? s Phil. Yes, three; for that Side which lies next your Breaſt, or fronting you, (viæ. the Line CA) is called the Baſe; the Side which ſtands upright upon the Baſe (as the Line AB) is c called the Cathetis, or Perpendicular; and the ſlant or longeſt Side ſae the Line CB) is called the Hypothenuſe, or Diagonal Line. : Tyr. I underſtand you well. But pray what Proportion have the Sides, and the Squares of the Sides to each other. ll Phil. The Sides and the Proportion to each other are found by the Square Root; but any two Sides being given, and the third Side required, the Relation of the Xiuares to each other is eaſily known by the following ules. l li . 1. The Sum of the Squares of the Baſe and Perpendicular will be always equal to the Square of the Hypothenuſe. 2. The Square of the Perpendicular taken out of the Square of the Hypothenuſe, there will remain the Square of the Baſe. Or, . 3. The Square of the Baſe taken from the Square of the Hypothenuſe, leaves the Square of the Perpendicular. Tyr. I underſtand the Rules, and they appear very clear; but I ſhould be glad if you would give me a further Demonſtration by ſome Draught or Figure. Fig. 1. . . hèl Fig. a. Phil. I will, Tyro. -Dbſerve then, In the Triangle ABC (as before) let the Perpendicular AB be equal to three Inches, Feet, Yards, or any Thing; ſuppoſe alſo the Baſe ACZ4; then will the Hypothenuſe CB bexæ 5. Fig. 2. hπò as you ſee by the ittle Squares in the 3 Perpendicular; and the Square of 4216 Squares in the Bap. Now 94 16-25 the Squares in the Hypothenuſe. A 2. Again, 25-1629, the Square of the Perpendicular. n 3. From 25 take ꝙ, there remains 16, the Square oſ the Baſe. Does this appear plain? Iyr. I underſtand it perſectly. P iil. From hence then you will eaſily diſcover how to augment any Square, and how much muſt be added to any Side to make another Square double, triple, or quadruple, to the given Square. See Sect. VI. Prob. V. S E C T. VI. Of Geometrical Problems. Tyr. I think I ſhall lixe to make Uſe of my Caſe ol Inſtruments. Phil. I am glad you think you ſhall like to work Problems, for they are diverting as well as uſeful; and if you mind the Words themſelves, and proceed from Step to Step, you cannot miſunderſtand any one of them. P RO B. P R O B. I. To raiſe a Perpendicular on the End of a Line. Fig. 1. Firſt open the Compaſſes at s Ii any Diſtance ſhorter than the α b Line itſelf, and ſetting one Foot in B, deſcribe the Arch D CDE, with the ſame Extent E and one Foot in C, make the Interſection at D; then ſetting B one Foot in D, deſcribe the C Arch a c; and with the ſame Diſtance ſetting one Foot in c, deſcribe or croſs a c in b; then from this Interſection, and thro' the Point B, draw the Line FB, and it ſhall be a true Perpendicular required. Another Way. Fig. 2. Having drawn the Line AB, place one Foot of your Compalſes any where (ſuppoſing at C) and deſcribe the Circle AE FB to paſs thro' the Point B; this done, lay a Ruler from A to C, and draw the Line ACF; then draw the Line BD thro the Point F, and it ſhall be a true Perpendicular required: . R O B. I. To divide a Line into two equal Parts, which ſball be perpendicular to the Line both above and elou ig. 3. D Open the Compaſſes to any Diſtance more than half the Line AB, and ſetting one Foot in A, deſcribe the Arch a b; then with the ſame Diſtance ſetting one Foot in B, deſcribe the Arch c d to interſect a b, then thro' theſe Interſections draw the Line DCE, and it will divide the Line AB into two equal Parts in C, and CD and CE will be the two Perpendieulars P R O B. III. To divide any right-lin'd Augle or Triangle, into two equa ts. ar * Fig. 4. D B From the Point A, at any Diſtance deè draw the Arch ac, then ſet one Foot in a, with the Diſtance a c deſcribe the Arch dec, and with the ſame Opening of the Compaſſes ſet one Foot in c, α and deſcribe a b; laſtly, thro' this Interſection draw a ſtraight Line from A to D, and it will divide the Angle BAC into two equal Parts. P R O B. IV. To deſcribe a Circle round any Triangle, or to bring an three Points (not in a ſtraight Lines into the Circumference of a Circle. c A Fig. s5. Let the three Points be ABC, thro which the Circle is to paſs. Firſt ſet one Foot in A, and with any Diſtance more than half AB deſcribe the Arch a; with the ſame Opening, one Foot being in B, deſcribe the Arch b to croſs or interfect a, then ſetting one Foot in C, with more than half the Diſtance CB deſcribe the Arch m, and with the ſame Opening, one Foot being in B, deſcribe the Arch n; then thro the Interſections of theſe Arches draw the two ſtraight Lines DE and DF, which will croſs or interſect each other in D, and the Point D will be the Center, from which you may deſcrine a Circle that will paſs thro' the given Points æ D P RO B. V. To augment or increaſe a Square, or to find a Line whoſe Square ſball be double, triple, or quàdruple, the given Square. ill Fig. 6. Let the given Square A be ABCD. Firſt ſet off the Diſtance AB from B to E, and draw DE, ſo ſhall the O of C DE be Æ the Double. Then ſet the ſamæe G Diſtance (viz. AB, or BE) from E to F, and perpendicular or at right Angles with DE, and draw the Line DF, I ſay the O of DF will be triple the O of AB: Again, make FG Æ AB, and draw it perpendicular to DF, then draw DG, and it ſnall be a Line or Side of a O quadruple to the OABCD, and thus you may go on encreaſing the Square at Pleaſure. hi P RO B. VI. Having the Sides of tuo, three, or more Squares, to fina the Side of a Square equal to all their Squares. Let there be four Lines ABCD, it is Aoe required to find a Line whoſe Square B ſhall be equal to the Squares of the gi- C ven Lines added together. D Eirſt draw the Line E F, l anâ raiſe the Perpendicular F G, then take the ſhorteſt Line A in our Dividers, and ſetting one Evot in F, ſet from F to a, and the Line B from E to b, and then draw a b, whoſe Square ſhãll be  the Squares of the two Lines A and B. Then ſet ab from F to d, and the Line C from F to c, and draw cd, whoſe UO is Æ the Squares of the three Lines A B C. Laſtly, ſet cd from F to g, u. ,, .. ,,. and the Line D from F to e, and draw eg; ſo ſhall the laſt Line eg be the Side of a n, equal to the Squares o of all the given Lines ABCD. P R O B. VII. To find a Line uhich ſball be a true Geometrical mean Proportional between any two given Lines. Let the two Lines be A and B, oſ A any Length) it is required to fin mean Proportional. Fig. 8. Join the two Lines A and B together, and make them equal to AC; then divide the Line AC into two equal Parts as at E, and upon E the Center deſcribe the Arch or Semi-circle  B c ADC,; then from B (viæ. at A E the joining of the Lines A and B) erect the Perpendicular B D, and it will be a true Geometrical Mean between the Lines A and B. oſ hus ſ ſup oſe ACæ50, Aæ ABæ 34, and Bæ BCæ16; D be æ 23.3 Purts, o ich is a Mean be breqql 34 and 16. For multiply 3 l 16, and extrac the Square Root, you will have che 23.3 ; P R O B. VIII. To divide a right Line into any proportional Parts. ig. 9. Let the Line AC be equal n to ſix Feet or Inches, and let it be required to divide it into ſuch Proportion as A to , viæ. as 5 to 4. Firſt, make the Angle ABC, and c draw A B, take the Line ben , and ſet i from A to D, an the Line 4, from D to B, and draw C, ùrame alſo DE paralleſ to i TJT E è &7 BC, ſo ſhall AC be æ 6, vix. A E Æ 28 and ECZ2.667, and by drawing the prick'd Line E B, you will have the Triangle ABE alſo in Proportion to the Triangle EBC, as the Lines are, vix. as 5 to 4. Arithmetically. Add the two Lines together thus, s--4-93 then, as 9:6:25:3.333, the greater Part of AC; and 63.3335 2.86RV& the leſs Part. From a due Conſideration of this Law of Proportion will follow this practical Queſtion. . Two Grarziers, A and B, had a Field in the Form of cthe Triangle CDE, at one Side of which is a Pond of Water (at G) for the Cattle to drink: But the Graziers fell out, and 'twas agreed to divide the Ground into two equal Parts, it is required to know in what Manner the Field ought to be divided ſo as each ſhall have an equal Share of the Graſs and Water. See next Problem. P R O B. IX. To divide a Triangle into tuo equal Parts. Fig. 1o0. II Let the Triangle D be CDE, to be divided into two equal Parts from the Point G (which repreſents a Pond, by the Queſ- b tion in Prob. VIII.) C & F E Firſt draw the Line from D to the Center or Point at G, then divide CE into two equal Parts at F, and draw FH parallel to GD, then draw the Line GH, ſo is the Triangle divided into two equal Parts: For CDE and GHE being ſimilar Figures, CDOHG is æ GHE. P R O B. X. Any tuo Numbers or Lines given, to find a third Line or Number in Proportion. Let the two Lines be A and B, to find a h third in Proportion Cn Fig. 11. Firſt draw the D ſtraight Line CE, (to any aſſigned Length) then draw at Random the Line CD, making therewith any Angle at Pleaſure; then take the . G ſhorter Line B, and ſet it from C to B, and the Line A from C to A; then take CA in your Compaſſes, and ſel it from C to F, and draw FG parallel to BA, and it i done. For, as CB:CA:: CF (or CA): CG. O ,i, a: CB:BA:CF (or CA) FG, &c. P R O-B. XI. Three Lines or Numbers given, to find a fourth, fiſth, or . sixth; &c. in Proportion. Let the three Lines be ABC, to find a A fourth, fifth &c. in Proportion. Firſt draw the horizontal or ſtraight C Line DM, and Fig. 12. make the An- G le LDM at leaſure; then from any Scale of equal Parts take the Line Aand ſet from D to A, and B E H X the Line B ſet from D to B, and draw AB; then ſet the Line C from D to G, and draw CE parallel to AB. Then, as DAIDB: DCDE & c. Then from the ſame Scale of equal Parts ſet off (at Pleaſure) the Diſtance el to FH, and 'tis done: For, as DA:DB: : DF :DH; or, as DAIAB: : DG GE, &c. &c. P RO B XiII. To reduce a Trapexium to a Triangle. Fig. 13. Let the C rapezium be ABCD. Firſt draw the Diagonal Line BD, and A i E continue AD to E, and draw CE parallel to BD, and then draw the Line BE, ſo ſhall the Vriangle ABE be  the Trapezium ABCD. P R O B. XIII. To reduce an irregular Figure cor Polygon) of five Side into a Triangle. Fig. 14 Let the Polygon be ABCDE. Firſt with a ſtraight Ruler continue the Side AE to F and G at Pleaſure; then draw the prick'd Lines Q s CAandCE, then dravmv ? DGparallel to CE, and H . BF parallel to CA; and V : . laſtly, from the Point F A E G C draw the Lines CF and CG; ſo ſhall the Triangl CFG be Æthe Polygon ABCDE. N. B. By the ſame Rule you may reduce any irregular ſided Fi e to a Triangle, which is of great Uſe in Land-meaſuring; th riangle being always equal to Half a Parallelogram of the ſam Height and Length as the Triangle. P R O B. XIV. To draw a Helix or Spiral Line (oulgarls called a Scroll) with a Pair of aſſes. Let there be two fiven Points, A and , in order to deſcribe the Spiral Line BCDEF. Firſt draw CE through the Points AB, then ſet one Foot of the Compaſſes in A, and extend the other to the Point B, and deſcribe the ſmall Semi-circle Be; then ſetting one Foot of the Compaſſes in B, extend the other Foot to join the firſt Semicircle in c, and ſweep the Arch or Semi-circle cd; ther place one Foot in A and extend the other to d, and ſweer the Arch de; then place one Foot in B and extend the other to e, and ſweep the Arch æf; then fet one Foot in A, and extending the other to f, ſweep the Semi-circle fg; then again, one Foot in B with the Diſ tance B g, deſcribe the Semi-circle gh; and thus go or making one Semi-circle above to join the other belov and you will deſcribe the Figure here annexed, which is very uſeful in ſeveral Things that require to be carved in Wood, &&. P R O B. XV. To deſcribe or draw Ouals. DE FINITION. 21. Ovals are long circular Figures, and vary acc ord' inmng to their Length and Breadth; for as a Parallelo ram approaches nearer to a true Square when its ength and Breadth are nearly equal; ſo alſo do Ovals approach to or are more like Circles, when their Diameters are nearly equal. Therefore, 2. Ovals may be made longer or ſhorter at Pleaure OF ENOW LED GE. 265 ſome being made from Parallelograms and others from inſeribed Circles, as will more plainly appear by the following Operation. Tw: Lines, AB and CD, given, to make thereos an Oval. ig. 18&. Firſt drav AB and CD dividing each other equally and at right Angles in a, ſecondly make Aõφ equal to CD, and dividing B into three ⸗ equal Parts, ſet off two of thoſe Parts from a to b, and from a to l; then with the Diſtance lb make two equilateral Triangles I d b ⸗ . and le b, whoſe Angles are the Centers; then fix one Point of the Compaſſes in e and the other in C, and deſcribe the Arch n Cm; with the ſame Extent, and one Point in d, deſcribe the Arch æ D æ; then ſet one Foot of the Compaſſes in b and the other in B, and draw the Arch m Bx; with the ſame Extent, and one Foot inl, deſcribe the Arch n Ar; ſo is the Oval finiſhed, and AB is called the Tranſverſe and CD the Conjugate Diameter. N. B. The Centers e and d will ſometimes be without the Oval.  R P R O B. XVI. To draw an Oval by the Help of a Parallelogram or tue Geometrical Squares. Firſt draw the Line AG, and make CFæ:CB, which will be half the Line AC; then draw DF parallel to AC; draw BCEF; then draw the diagonal Lines AE, BD, andBF, CE, andopening o 266 THE YOUNG MAN the Compaſſes with the Extent of AE or CE, place one Foot in E, and draw the Arch AC; then with the ſame Extent, one Foot placed in B, deſcribe the Arch DF; then ſet one Foot in G. and with the Diſtance GA ſweep the Arch DA, and with the ſame Extent from H ſweep the Arch Ck, and ſo is the Oval LIMK comleated; and is allowed to be the neateſt Oval of any Sort. and is vulgarly called the Egg Oval. P R O B. XVII. Having a Line equal to the given Length of an Ouol, to miate thereos b true Oval. . Fig. 18. Let AB be the given Line : of any Length); divide it rſt into three equal Parts; then from the Poimt 6, with the Diſtance 68, deſcribe the Circle Ba Ce, and upon the other Diviſion at a, draw the Circle Ab Gæ. Theſe two Circles will interſcct one another in the Center of each, and alſo at the Points d and c. Draw C)ſ and F a d parallel; alſlo G ac and H b d parallel; ther from c with the Diſtance Ge ſweep the Arch GNC, and from d with the ſame Extent ſweep FKH, and you have a true Oval. ù P R O B. XVIII. YFo d aw an Oval from three Circles. Fig. 19. This Problem, in Effect, is like Prob. XVI. For having drawn the Line AB, divide it into four equal Parts, and on the three Points ꝰ DCE deſcribe three Circles; drav MG, and OF parallel B O OK. OF: ENO WL ED G E. 267 draw EN, and LG parãllel thereto. Then on G, with the Extent GL or GM, deſcribe the Arch LuM, and upon F with the ſame Extent deſeribe NXO. Laſtly, upon the Point Ddeſcribe OAL, and upon E deſcribe MBN, and the Ovall is finilhes EEπũi liap dr  oſr0655  4  c OB B S E RVATITON. Tv9r. I thank you for theſe kind Inſtructions, but pray ſuppoſe I had the tranſverſe Diameter of an Oval given, how ſhall I be &ble eò tell the lLength of the Conjugate before I draw it. aa Phil. Very eaſily, as follows: Let the tranverſe Diameter AB (in Prob. XVII.) beæ 1, l ſay then the Conjugate NK will beæ. 756 Parls, vwhich may be thus proved. Take any Number whoſe Square Root; &rc. may be had without Eractions. Let us ſuppoſe then that AB is Æ 12 Inches, Yards, &c. then will a d or alb be 24, (being ; of AB) whoſe Square is æ16; and Da or DEæ2, whoſe n is 24: Now 164 Æ 12, whoſe Square Root is Æ 3.46  Dd or De. Now 3. 464 3. 466.92æ de, and CeAæBaz8. Now 8 the Diameter of the Circles) the Line deæ 6.922 1. 8&Naã or Kc: And 6.92  1 o8 F 1.08æNK 9.08. Now to reduce this to Unity as before, I ſauyuy, AB NX AB NX As 12 9.08:: 1 : .756, or, AB NX AB NX As 1 : 756:: 1a: 9.0 8 . Therefore frp hence you have three Numbers to find a fourth, let the Diameters be what they will. , T;r. I underſtand it quite well; and I think I can fin ſijthe conjugate Diameter to the Oval in Prob. Phil. That you may, if you are certain you underſtand the laſt RRustti you a. illi v ſTyr. Obſerve then, this Oual being drawn on three Circles, I will ſuppoſe the tranſverſe Diameter ABæ 40, then will CE 7 thereof be Æ 10, whoſe b is Æ 1oò the O of CFæ106; bõth theſe are æ 206, the ſquare Root of which is Æ 14. 4Æ8F EEHC; and HC  CKæHE THE YOUNG MAN:s 28.28. Now to prove this, Philo, by your own Method, I ſay, æ AB HK AB ic As 40: 28.28: And the Angles D, E, F, & bunu each i in a Semi. Circle, are all right Ahgles; and therefore let the tranſverſe Diameter be what it will, you have the Conjugate by this one Rule: As i:. o17: : any tranſverſe to its conjugate Diauteter P R O B. XIX. To drau a true Tangent to any Circle. Fig. 20- l Draw the Circle CA ; . ꝑi and placing one Foot & deſcribe the SemiCire e EBC to paſs thro' the Point at B, (called the Point of Contact) then draw the Line EB, and it ſhall be a true Tangent to the Point of Contact B; and E C is the Secant: For the Angle EBC being in a Semi- Circle, is a right Angle. P R O B. XX. To reduce a Circle to a Square. Note, As 7: 22, ſo is the Diameter of any Circle to its Circumference nearly true in vhele Numpess . ig. 21 l Divide therefore the Diameter A D into fourteen equal Parts, and at ſeven of thoſe Parts at C ſtrice the Semi-Circle; then on three or on eleven of thoſe Parts at B A. B D raiſe the Perpendicular BE; and then draw the Line DE, and it ſhall be the Side of a Square (very nearly) equàl to the given Circle. P RO B. XXI. To reduce a Square to a Circle. Notæ, When the Side of a Square is eleven, the Diameter of a Circle equal thereto is 12. 41 nearly. Thereſore, i Iit1 Divide the Side AB of the iven Square into eleven equal rts, and at 5.5 of thoſe Parts at e draw the Semi-Circle; and at eight of thoſe Parts erect the Perpendicular CD, draw AD, and continue it to the Side of the Square at E, fo is AE the Diameter of a Circle nearly equal in Content to the given quare. illi C P R O B. XXII. . ACircle being given, to find the Side of a Triangle, Square, Pentagon, &c. or, in other Words, to divide it into any Parts, from two to thirteen. Firſt, draw the Circle and the two Diameters AC and BD, either of which will divide the Cirele into tve equal Parts. 2. Take Radiuu A E, which is one ſixth Part of the Circle, and ſet it from C to E; and gin from F to , then draw GC, and it ſnall be the Side of an BE 2L . equilateral Triangle, or one third of the Cirele. N 3 3. Drav Fig. 22. 3. Draw a Line from any one of the four Quarters to the next Quarter, as the Line AD or DC, and it will be the Side of an inſcribed Square, or four ſided Figure. l 4. The Diameter AC is the Side of a circumſcribed 5. Let fall a Perpendicular from G to H, and draw the Line BH, make HM equal to BH, and draw BM, which ſhall be the Side of a Pentagon, or one- fifth Part of the Circle. iilil 255 6. The Semi- Diameter AE or EC, &c. is the Side of a Hexagon, or one ſixth Part. 7. The Line GH is the Side of a Heptagon, or one ſeventh Part. ſ . 8. Divide the Arch AD into two equal Parts in I, qnd draw Al, for the Side of an. Octagon, or one eighth art. i ſ l l 1 9. Divide CFG into three equal Parts at the Point E and draw CK, which is the Side of a Nonagon, or nine ſided Figure. nn 10. The Line EM will be the Side oſf a Decagon, or ten ſided Figure. . lliũl 11. The fine EL is the Side of an Endecagon or eleven ſided Figure. oβL.2 V2  & : 12. The Line FB or BG, will be the Side of a Dodecagon, or twelve ſided Figure. And thus may you divide the Periphery of the Circle into any Number of Parts by ſubdividing any of the other Lines. li l . Tyr. I am obliged to you, Sis, and now I ſhall be glad to have ſome Inſtructions in Trigonometrr. . Pi il. I am reàdy, Tyro, to do you any Service; but it will be very neceſtary firſt of all that you ſhould underſtand, at leaſt know ſomething of the Nature oſ Logarithms, for tis by them that we work the Doctrine of Iriangles, &c. S E C T. VII. Oſ ihe Nature and Uſe of Logarithms. 1. Oſ ibe Nature ofLogaritms. Tyr. What dò you mean by Logarithms & Phil. Logarithms are artificial Numbers in arithmetical Progreſſion; firſt contrived by that indefatigable Nobleman Lord Napier, Baronof Mercbiſton in Scotland, OF KNOWLEDG E. 271 in the Year 1714, and finiſhed by our ingenious Countryman Henry Briggs, of Oxford. Tyr. I wiſh you could tell me the Nature of conſtructing a Table of Logarithms. Phil. That would be impoſſible in this Place, nor is it ſo neceſſary as to tell you the Uſe of them; but, however, I am willing to ſatisfy your Curioſity as far as Room will allow of. 1. Let there be any Series of Numbers in Geometrical Progreſſion, and a Series of Numbers in Arithmetical Progreſſion placed over them, thus, . . Prog. o. 1. 2. 3. 4. S. 6. 7. 8. 9. &c. G. Prog. 1. 2. 4. 8. 16. 32. 64. 128. 256. 512. &c. . r, 2. A. P. o. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. &c. G. P. I. 10. 100. 1000, 10000. 100000. &'c. Theſe Numbers are increaſed tenfold in the Geometrical Progreſſion, and the Numbers above them in Arithmetical Progreſſion are the Indexes or Indices of the proper Logarithms belonging to them. ll ZTy97r. I do not underſtand, Sir, what you mean by the ſndexes to their proper Logarithms. Pehil. You will ſoon underſtand this by the very firſt Sight of the following Table. 1 Numbers. Logarithms. I O. OOOOOO l 10 ſi 1.00000 10o ll. 2.00000 IOOO 3. OoOOOO 10000, II 4.q00οO 100000 ll 5.90000, & . 3. Now from Unity or Number 1, there is no Index or whole Number till you come to the Number 103 the Number 10; and every other Number from 1o0 to 100 has 1 for its Index; thus the Logarithm of s is 0.698970, of.7 is. œ.845098, which have no Index, but the Logarithms are like Decimal Fractions: without a whole Number before them; but from 1o to 1o0 the Index is . Thus the Logariibm of 95 is 1.977723. 4. Again, all Numbers from 100 to 1000 haveè  for 272 THE YOUNG MAN:'s their Index and a Number beſides, which look like a whole Number and a Decimal aſter it. Thus the Logarithm of 954 is 2.979548. 5. So alſo all Numbers from rooo to roooo will have 3 for their Index; thus the Logaritbm of 9541 is 3.979594- See another Example. Numbers. T.ogarithms. 954 2.979548 95.4 1.979548 9.54 o.979546 o 954 9.979548 06954 .8.979548 020954 ll 7.979548 Thus you ſee that when the Number conſiſts of 5 Places, the Index is 4; when it conſiſts of 4 Places, the Index of the Logarithm is 3, &e. Always obſerve the Index is 1 leſs than the Number given. ſTyjr. Now, Sir, I underſtand you; but I ſuppoſe it would be neceſſary to have a T able of Logarithms, would it not? i Phil. Moſt certainly, and tho' Sherwin's Tables are counted the beſt (or as good as any) yet there are many others that will equally anſwer your Purpoſe. 2. Of the Uſe of the Tubles of Logarithms. Tyr. How may I moſt readily find the Logarithm ol any Numberſĩ Phil. Tis ſo eaſy, that there needs no farther Direction than this: Turn to the Number itſelf in the Table under N, and againſt it you will find the Logarithm, to which prefix the Index 1 Place or Number leſs, as before directed, provided the Tables have no Index, as ſfome have not. Thus you will find the Logaritbm of 46 to be 1.662758, of 540 to be 2u and of 987 to be 2.994317. But if you want a Decimal of a mixt Number, ſuppoſe 547.6 tenths; look ſor the Number 547, and carry your Eye in the ſame Line or Direction to the right Hand till you come to the Column that is under 6 at the Top of the Tables, and you will find the Logarithm to be 738463; and the given Number having 3 Places of Figures, (viæ. 547) I conclude the Index muſt be 2. thereſore the true Logaritbm is 2.738463. The ſame is to be obſerved for any other Number or Numbers. . Note, Thus by havi Logaritbm find the Number bebonõ:ag  it by lacting c asartiner o naeſt bogaritbmm nd its correſpondent neareſt whole Number. . 3 . To find ihe Logarithm of . a Vulgar Fraction. Firſt find the Logarithm of the Denominator, and then take the Locarithm of the Numprator out oſ it, and you have the Logarithm of the Vulgar Fraction. Example. Let thè Vulgar Fraction be 232. The Logorithm of the Deriominator, 432, is 2. 635484 The Logarithm of-the Numerator is 1.732394 The Logaritbm of , 123 is 203090 If it be a mixt Number, reduce it to an improper Frocon and take the Logarithm of the Denominator out of the Logarithm of che Numerator. Thus you will find 47 râ Æ 534, whoſe Logarithm is 1.6774554. The Ufe of Logerithms in muliiplying one Number by IL i3. danither. . Add the Logarithms of the Multiplicana. and Multiprer together, and the Sum is the Logarithm of the roduèc Maultiply 83 Logarithm z I. 919078 by 12 Legarithm æ 1.079181 . x  TI l ra urita Product 996 Log. Æ 2.998259 Biviſion by Epgarithms. Subtract the Lagar itbo of the Diviſor out of the Logarithm of the Dividend, and the Remainder is the Laogarithm of the Quotient. SECBMBMUE r Sl.. I 11 I l 51' 7I I ei I Hl 9m o1 Diuide Divide 648 by 72. 54 Logaritm of 648 is 2.811575 of 72 is I.857332 Quotient or Anſwer 0.954243 ,,,  alſo the Quotient of 434-34 by7. 6a is 575 z32. 755874. To extract the Square Root. lill Divide the Logarithm of the given Number by 2; and e Quotient is the Logarithm of the Root required. What is the Square Root of 144? Logarithm 2.1 58362 2)u. οrqisi Antver So alſo the Square Fooſ of 2830. 24 1 is 53. 2 vhot ogarithm is 1.72591. Cube Root. 91 Divide the Logarithm of the & ven Number by. 3, and ou have the Logaritbm of the oor required: I demand the Cube Root of The Logarithm of 729 ù 2. 862728 . il l Diride by 3). 954242 Ancwer. What is t the Biquadrate Root of 6252 Tuhe Logarithm of 625 is 2. 795880 Divide by 4). 658970 Anſwer. D I A L O G Uu 2 .. OF5 Trgonometry. S E C T. LI. Tyr. T Am afraid I ſnall not be able to underſtand any Thing of Trigonometry. Ppil. You always had. this Fear; but, however, l commend you for it, ſince it does not conquor youl Reſolutions to try at that Which is propoſed to you: nuſt own 'tis very modeſt in you; but yet I sneye: new, knew, Tyro, but what you could always underſtand any Thing that has hitherto been propounded. Iyr. But how am I to work Trigonometrical Queſtions? Phil. By the Logarithms, as I ſaid before; but you muſt find out the different Angles, Sines, Tangents, and Secants, by meaſuring them upon a Scale of Chords, Sines, and Tangents; though the beſt Inſtrument is a Sector, becauſe you may then draw your Circles larger or ſmaller at Pleaſure. Hlllllhùl; . Z9yr. But I don't know at preſent what a Sector is, and how can I know its Uſe . i Phil. I ſhall ſhew you the Uſe of this, and ſeveral other Inſtruments, by and by; but, however, I will give you here a little Idea of it, which will be of ſome Service. / Or ibhe Sector. The Sector is made like a common Rule, uſed by Carpenters, &c. but of various Sizes, ſome being (when moò 6, others 8, && 12 Inches long, which are called 6 or 12 Inches in Radius. As there are a Variety of Lines upon this Inſtrument (which I ſhall more fully treat of hereafter) it will be ſufficient for the preſent to ſpeak only of the Line of Lines, Chords, Sines, and Tangents, as follows: 1. The Line of Lines (marked L) runs from 1 to ro, and you may call the firſt t Ten, and then 2 will be 203 3, 30, &c. to 100. he Line of Chords (marked C) runs from 1 in the Center to 6o. 3. The Sines (marked S) begin with 1 and end at 9. And 4. The Tangents (marked T) run from 1 to 45. N. B. Here you are particularly to obſerve, that the Radius is always equal tò the Chord of 60è in the ſame Circle. That is, let the Sector be ſhut or opened at Pleaſure, then ſet one Foot of the Compaſſes in a little Braſs Point on the Chords, and extend the other Point to 6o on the other Leg of the Sector, and with Diſtance deſcribe any Circle, then that ſame Diſtance will reach from 90 to 9o on the Sines, and from 45 to 45 on the Tangents. 276 THE YOUNG MAN'S T9yr. I heartily thank you, Sir, but could wiſh you would demonſtrate it to me by ſome familiar Example hil. Obſerve then I ſay the Chord of Goc, the Sine of 90c, and the Tangent of lii are all ual. For decle ABCD, then take the Radius ll or GC, and open or ſhut the Sector till AG or CG will reach from 60 to 6o on the Chords Cpum ways, or from ,22 Tesèo Leg; with this Diſtance, and orie Poirit or thie Coimpaſſes in C, deſcribe the Arch GFE, and draw CF, ſo will CF be the Chord of 600. o 2. Biſect the Quadrant BC 90, and make CH æ45ꝰ, and draw the Secant GHE. 3. Draw the Tangents BE and'CE; I ſay then that the Chord of 606, vix, CF, the Tangent of BH or and the Sine of 90o, vizæ. GB or GC, are all equal to Radius, and conſequently equal to one another. Do you underſtand it now? ll . r. Yes, Sir, very plainluuy Phil. Then we ol proceed to ſome practical Operations. ll lli S EC T. DL. Of Plane Trigonometry. T9yr. If there be any Thing more necefſary for me to know, dcar Philo, let me beg you will explain l to me. 1. . Pbil. I think there is no great Neceſſity, but how cver, perhaps a full draun Sehome to unfold more o llili the che Nature of Sines, Tangents, &c. muy not be amiſs: Whaat ſay youl? Tyr. Sir, I return you Thanks for your Care. Phil. Obſerve then, Take the Sector, and open or ſhut it till the Line of Chords from 60 to 6o croſsways be made æ to AG or CG ſor if you like it better any other Diſtance at Pleaſure) then qlacing one cot of the Compaſſes in C, withthe Diſtance CG, deſcribetheArch GE, ſor make a Mark at E) and draw CE, vhich i is the Chord of 600. 2. From C raiſe the Perpendicular CF, and it ſhall be the Tangent of 6. PFrom the Center G draw GF through E, and GF mãi be the Secant of 666. 4. Let fall the Perpendicular EH, aùndò it ſhall be the Sine of 606 S. The Line HC is the uefed Sine of 60o. The remaining Part of fe uadrant co , viæ. BE is æ300, for the Arch CE 606  EB 3005 Now the Sine of BE is KE, which is he Coſie of ſùλ BI is the Tangent of 30, which is the Co-tangent of CE; GI is the Secant of 3056, and BX is the verſed Sine of 300. N. B. Pra ber that th d Si d Sine Compl. ore equal to te Radius or Stmi Dianen ine anc Sine Complomnt. Do you underſtand it? qyr. I underſtand it very well, except that I cannot ſee at preſent that the verſed Sine and Sine Complement are equal to the Radius. Phil. That's ſurpriſin fing. Obſerve then firſt the ver hi Sine of CE is CH the Sine Complement of æGH; now CHTKE GHZGC the Radius. Again the verſed Sine i the Arcb BE is BE and the Mtocoplonio of BE is EHæIGE; now BEGERadius GB. Tyr. Now I underſtand it plainly. SEC T. II. ,DD  Plane Trigonometry. Æ. Pray how do you find the Sides of a plane Triongles Phil. Very eaſli. making either the Baſe, the Perpendicular, or Vpnenuſ Radius of a Circle as will be ſhewn by an And the Relation and Proportion to each other may be ſeen by the following Obſervations drawn from the foregoing Figure. OB S ERV A TION I. As the Coſine is to the Sine, ſo is the Radius to the ù& rœνενl vix. As KE: EH: : GC CF, or as HE: . OBS E RVATION II. As the Radius is to the Sine, ſo is the Secant to the Tangent, viz. as GE: EH: : GF FC. OB S ERVATIO N IL. As the Sine is to the Radius ſo is the Radius to the Co-ſecant, viz. as EH: EG: : GB: GI. OBSERVATION IV. As the Tangent is to the Radius, ſo is the Radias to the Co-tangent, viz. as FC: cũ. GB: BI. OBSERVATIONV. From the foregoing Obſervation it appears, that the Rectangle made by the Tangent and Co-tangent of any Arch is equal to the Square of the Radius. O B SERVATION VI. Ecvery Triangle has ſix diſtinct Parts, that is three Sides and three Angles; any three of which being given, except the three Angles of a plane Triangle, the other three are eaſily found. OBSERVATION VII. i The Angles of a Triangle are meaſured by a Scale ol Chords. and the Sides by a Scale of equal Parts, or found by the Rule of Three in common Arithmetic. OBS ERVATION VII. 15 any Angle be given larger than 9oò, and cannot be found in the Tables, then work with the Complement thereof to 180è62. lll OBSERVATION IX. From the foregoing Obſervations it is very. eaſy to perceive that whatever Part of a Triangle is required to be found, there are in any Table of Logarithms (particularly Sherwin's) the Sine, Tangent, and Secant, of ſuch a Triangle ready calculated, and that if the Sides be given im Miles, Rods, Yards, Feet, or Inches, and the Angles to any Degree; that the Sides and Angles oppoſite to, or anſwering ſuch Sides, will always be in Proportion to each other. This being duly conſidered, any Angle, or Side of a Triangle, may be found as follows. OBSERVATIONX. If one Side of any right-angled plane Triangle be made the Radius or Semi- Diameter of a Circle, the other two Sides will become Sines, Tangents, or Secants; and the ſame Proportion as the Side made Radius has to the Radius, each of the other Sides vill have to he Sine, ſTangent, or Secant, which it repreſents, as will more plainly S E C T. IVu. A arther Demenſtration oſ the Doctrine of right-angled riangles, etery Side thereof being alternately madt Radius. . C A S E I. ĩllãl Fig. 1. l B in the rightmmgled Triangle ABC, let the Perpendicular ſor Cathetus] BC be made Radius. Firſt ſet one Foot of the Compaſſes in B, and extend. he other to C, and ſweep the Arch CD ſ(which obſerve is Part of a whole Circte, whoſe Semi- Dia- . meter is BC. Then, 2i1 1ſt. The Arch CD is the Meaſure of the Angle at B a 2dly. C A 'tis evident is the Tamgent of the Angl B naà. B A is the Secant of the ſame Angle. . i i I Therefore, . i A:s Radius or Sine of 90è BC: B C ſnow Raãdius): the Tangent of the Angle B: C A the Tangent itfulf. Or, ; . l . l As BC: Radius (or Sine of 9oè):: the Side AC 4the Tangent A C. The ſame for the Secant. C A S E L. . - - l 1 il . Fig. . tu Now make the Baſe AC . n Radius, and ſetting one Foot of the Compuſfes in A, ſweep the Arch D C, which is the Meaſure of the Angle A; UB is the Tangent, and A B freporden- haidsgood 22 ta A Proportion e nunur e C A S E III. The Hypothenuſe being made Radius. Fig. 3. 1. Set one Foot of the Compaſſes in A, and extend the other to B, and deſcribe the Areh B D, then it is evident by the Figure in Sect. II. that the Arch B D is the Meaſure and B C is the Sine of the Angle A, . and C D the verſed Sine. i Again ,LIE 2. Set the Compaſſes on B, and with the E fweep the Arch AE; which is the Meaſure of the Angle B, and AC is the Sine thereof: Therefore tis evident that every Side is the Sine of its oppoſite Angle, and the Proportion is, As Radius or Sine of the Angle at C is to the Side AB, ſo is the Sine of the æ B to the Side AC; and ſo is the Sine of the 2 A to the Side B C, &c. In ſhort, the Proportion is the ſame as in the Rule of Three in common Arithmetic. For the firſt and third Terms, and the ſecond and fourth Terms, muſt be of one Name. That is, iſ the firſt Term be an Angle, the third muſt be an Angle; if a Side, the third muſt be a Side; and ſo alfo whatever is required muſt be your ſecond Number, and then your fourth Number will be the Anſwer to the Thing required, as in the Rule of Three. See Obſervation VII. i underſtand it plainly. il. Then we will proceed to . S EC T. V. l Practical Trigonometry, or to meaſure or find the Sidei or Angles of any Triangle. Tyr. How am I to find the Sides and Angles of a Triangle? Phil. If an Angle be required, let your firſt Number be a Side; if a Side be required, let your firſt Number be an Angle, or the Sine or Tangent of ſuch an Angle Then work as in the Rule of Three Direct, by the general Rule in Caſe I. &c. dn Explanation of other Signs. S ſtands for Sine. Sc for Co-ſine, or Sine Complement. T for Tangent. Tc for Tangent Complement, or Cotangent. Se for Secant, Cs for Co-ſecani. æ for Angle. 4.s for Angles. Ar. Com. for Aritbmetical Complement. X for Difference. Z for Sum. Obſerve likewiſe, in Trigonometry and Navigation, when the Sides or Angles ol a Triangle are marked with a Daſh, thus (), it ſignifies they are given; and when marked with a Cypher, thus (o), that they are required. Theſe being underſtood, we will proceed to the ſeven regular Caſes in the Doctrine of a right-angled Triangle, as follows: C A S E I. The two acute Angles A and B, with the Baſe AC, being given, ſo find the Perpendiculor BC. Theſe Problems are performed three different Ways, as under, but in all of them you have . t4 general Rule. Add the Logarithms of the ſecond and third Terms together, and from their Sum ſubtract the Logarithm of the firſt Term, and the Remainder is the Logarithm of the fourth Term (or Anſwer) required. I. By making the Perpendicular BC Radius. * * See Fig. 1. in the laſt Section. As the T of the  B 510 30 Log. 10.099395 To the Baſe AC 144. Luog. 2.358302 So is the Radius Log. 10. j uid ſHaving taken out the top Log.) 12.158362 To the Perpendicular BC1 4. ë Log. 2.058967 Anſ. 2. By making the Baſe AC Radius: 1 ſ p? See Fig 2. in the laſt Section, As the Radius Log. ro. To the Baſe AC r44 Log. 2.158362 So is the T of the  A380 3606 LOg. 9.900605 l add To the Perp. BC 114. 5 (abating Rad. ) L. 2. 058967 3dly. By making the Hypothenuſe AB Radius. * E See Fig. 3. in the laſt Section. As the S of æ B 510 30 Log. 9.893544 To the Baſe AC 144 . Log. 2. 158 362 So is the S of the  A 380 30 LoOg. 9 794149 mnmumm. (Abating the top Log. from this) 11.95251t To the Perpendicular BC 114.5 Log. 2.058969 Tyr. Theſe Examples appear very plain to me: But in the Explanation of the Signs you mentioned ſomething about Arithmetical Complement, or Co- Arithmetic, I cannot ſay I underſtand that at preſent. Phil. The Arithmetical Complement of a Logarithm is what it wants of 10.000000 or 20.000000, and is found by ſubtracting the given Logaritum (whether of a Sine, Tangenc Secant, &c.) from 10. ooοoo or 20. coοοο. Thus, From . ili 10. co00OO Take the Log. Sine of 51 3 9.893544 Remains the Arithmet. Com. o. 166456 Or, From 20. co0οοο Take the Log. Secant of 510 3060 10.205851 Remains the Arithmet. Com. 9.794149 Tyr. I underſtand it plainly, but pray what is the Uſe of this? Phil. In all Caſes where Radius is not in the Prortion, (as in this laſt Example) inſtead of the firi Term or Sine of 51ꝰ 30, I uſe the Arithmetical Complement of it for che firſt Term, and ſet the other two Terms under it as Before, and now add all the three Terms together, and from their Sum ſubtract Radius, and you have the Anſuer. cFha Thus in the ſoregoing Example. As the S. of  B 510 30, Ar. Com. Log. o. 106456 To the Baſe AC 144 a. 158362 è add So is S of  A 380 30. 6069.7594149 To the Perp. BC 114.5 (abating.Rad.) 2.058967 Same by Gunter. Always remember to extend from one Term to the Term of the ſame Name on the ſame Line; and that Extent will reach from the other Term to the Anſwer, on the ſame Line, be it Sines or Numbers, &c. Thus I ſet one Foot of the Compaſſes in 510 30 in the Line of Sines, and extend the other to 38è 306' (its Complement) in the ſame Line: This Extent I carry to the Line of Numbers, and ſetting one Foot on 144 (2 AC) I turn the other backwards and find it touches 114 and 5 Parts, viz. 1143, the Perpendicular BC as before. Take this for a general Rule. i Tyr. I thank you, kind Philo. C A S E II. The two acute Augles A and B, with the Baſe AC, being given, to find the Hypothenuſe A * . * See Figures 1, 2, 3, in Section IV. 1. By making the Baſe Radius. As the Radius Log. 1o0. . To the Baſe AC 144 r a.158362 So'is the Secant  of  A 380 306 ,ansqae add To the Hypothenuſe AB, viæ. 184. Cabating Radius) 2.264818 4 Note, The Secant of any Axch or Angle is found by ſubtracting the hoſurithm of the Sine Com usngle] that Arch out of the double Radius, vi. 20.900000; thus, let the Secant of 380 30' be required; the Sine of its Complement, viæ. 51030'is 9. 893544, which en out of 20. 0οοο leaves 10. 106456, as above. li b 2. By making the Hypothenuſe Radius. As the S æ B 510 300 Log. 9.893544 To the Baſe AC 144 2 15836 So is Radius t 2 36. staca To the Hypothenuſe AB 184 2.264818 3. Or by making the Perpendicular Radius. As the T of æB 510 30. Log. 10.99395 To the Baſe AC 144 ilili 2. 158362 So is the Secant of  B 510 30 10. 20585 r Abating the top Logaritm) 212.36421 ſi flypothenuſe AB 184 2264818 o the C A S E III. The two acute Angles A and B, with the Hypotheni being given, to ſind the Baſe AC. 1. By making the Hypothenuſe Radius. As Radius or S of e0 Log. ro. To the Hypothenuſe AB 184 2. 2648 18 So is the S of æ B 510 30 9.893544 To the Baſe AC 144 2..158362 * Remember when you add theſe two together to ſubtrac Logarithm for the Anſuwer. 2. By making the Baſe Radius. As the Se of Æ A 380 30 Log. 10. 106456 To the Hypothenuſe AB 184 2.264818 So is Radius . o. To the Baſe AC 144, as above 2. 158362 3. By making the Perpendicular Radius. As the Se of  B 510 30 Ar. Com. Log. 994140 To the Hypothenuſe AB 184 2.2648 1 So is the T of Æ B 510 30 10.099395 (abating double Rad.) lll s 2856 TH Æ YOUNG MAN'S A S E IV. The Baſe AC, nꝗ Perpendicular BC, heit given, t libe tuo acute Angles A und 1I. By making the Perpendicular BC Radius. As the 'pcrpendicular BSG 114.5 LoOg. 2.058967 To the Radius 54 l110: l So is the Baſe AC r44 & co 2. 158362 1 To the T of the Angle B 5 1 30- nDo. ofuꝶ n s Complement to 9oꝰ or a right Angle is 3 the T making the Baſe AC Radius. A- n e AC 144 ſill Log. 2. 158362 1 l 1 iccmmmmmũnù To the Radius l So is the Perpendicular BC sæ- PHl a 2t589 To the T of the A 38 30 ſi 900605 Whoſe Complement to Æi E 305 è Kngic . The Baſe AC and the Hypothenuſe Vin bein ive aſe ind the two Angles A and 1. isi I1. By making the Elypothenuſe AB Radius. As the Hypothenuſe AB 184 LOg. 2.264818 To Radius or Sine of 90è 10. l So is the Baſe AC 144 - 2. 158362 To the S of the  B 51ꝰ3 9.893544 Wahoſe Complement i is aie 30 the  A. C A S E iilii The Baſe AC, and Perpendicular BC, being given, ſt. Eypothenuſe. N. B. Firſt an Angle muſt be found by Caſe IV. By makinę the Hypoth. Radius to find the Hypot As the S of the  B 510 30 Log. 9.893544 To the Baſe AC 144 2. 158362 So is Radius 99 10. s3 j To the Hypothenuſe AB 184 v 264818 C A S E VII. Tbe Baſe AC, and the Hypothenuſe AB, being given, to ſin ert Eb pndiculireut ridoſs acute ngles. ſi 1. By making Hypothenuſe Radius to find the Angles. As Hypothenuſe AB 184 Log. 2.204818 To Radius or Sine of 90 1o. l So is the Baſe AC 144 2. 1583562 To the S of the Angle B 510 30 9.893544 Whoſe Complement is 38è 306, the Angle A. And, 2. As Radius lli Log. 1o. To the Hypothenuſe AB 184 2.264818 So is the S of the  A 38 30 9.794149 To the Perpendicular BC 114. 2.058967 . Geometrically. Any of the foregoing Caſes may be wrought geometrically, by a Scale of Chords and equal Partss. EX AMP LE. In the following Figure let the Baſe AB 144, and the Angl A 380 30 be given, and the Hypothenuſe AB, Perpendicular BC, and the Angle B required. Fig. 1. Firſt draw the Line or Baſe AC at Random, and from any diagonal Scale, or Scale of equal Parts, take 144, and ſet it from A to C; and from C raiſe the Perpendicutar CB, then . 3 take 60 off the Line of AÆ hntcs.ſòl Chords in your Compaſſes, and ſetting one Foot in A deſcribe the Arch DC, and from the ſame Line of Chords take 380 30 and ſet from C to D, then draw AB through the Point D till it guts he Perpendicular in B; then if you meaſure AB upon the ſame Scale, you will find it 184, and BC 114.5. You may find the Angle B by the ſame fictnexs. making BC æÆ 6o on the Chords, and ſtriking the il CE, which if meaſured on the ſame Chords, will be found z510 30. . Shus Tyro, I have given you a full Deſcription oſ the Nature and Property of right-angled Triangles in all the various Caſes; and if you now turn back to Section IV. you will more fully underſtand the Proportion of the Sides and Angles laid down in the three Obſervations thereunto belonging. S E C T. VI. . Of oblique-angled Triangles. Tpr. I underſtand very well, kind Philo, what you have hithétto ſhevn me, and now beg your farther Inſtructions in oblique Triangles. Philo. I will, but then I ſhall not work every Problem or Queſtion as I have hitherto done; vet I will not leave you wholly without Examples; for I ſhall give you the real Proportion that the Sides and Angles have to one another, and then the Operations will be eaſy, and the Work the ſame as in the foregoing Examples. C A S E I. Uwo Sides and an Angle oppoſite to one of them being giden, to find ſir, presd Fig. 1. In the Triangle ABC let the Side CAæ 30 Parts, BCæ49.78, and the Angle Bæ379 be given, to find the obtuſe Angle at A. Aꝗπ As the Side CA 30: the S of the Angle B o 1: the Side BC 49.78 the S of the Angle A 930, &c hoſger Vote, Proportion. Note, The three Angles of every plane Triangle (as was ſaid before) are equal to two right ones, or 1806: Thus 504-93 37 T180. ll C A S E II. The Angle B 37, the Side AC 30, and the Angle C 500 given, to find the Sidæe AB. Proportion. As the S of the Angle B 370: the Side AC 30:: the S of the Angle C 52: the Side AB 38. 19. C A S E III. The Sides CB 49.78, and CA 30 Parts, and the Angle Cs50 being given, to find all tbe other Parts ana Properties. . Firſt, Having drawn the former eblique Triangle ABC, I divide it into two right-angled Triangles by the Perpendicular AD, and then proceed as follows: Fig. 2. Firſt, The Side AC 30, the Angle at C 506, and lV-q the right Angle D being given, 'tis required to find the Angle CAD, together with the Baſe CD, and Perpendicular AD. ſ 26& 1I92 D I9q. æ EIĩL.3 Now to find the Perpendicular AD, you will firſt note, that the Angle CAD muſt be Æ 406 (being the Complement of the Angle C 5 to a right Angle) therefore the Firſt Proportion. As Radius or S of 9è to the Hypothenuſe CA 30, ſo is the Sine of the Angle C 500, to the Derpendiculat AD 22.9 Parts. . Second Proportion. As Radius or S of 90oφ: the Hypothenuſe AC 30 Parts : the S of the Angle CAD 406: the Baſe CD 19.2. C A S E IV. In the Triangle ABD (in the preceding Ficure) let there be given the Side AD 22.9, and the right Angle ct D, to ſiud the Sides DB and AB, and the Angles DAB and Firſt, To find DB, take CD 19.2 out of the whole Side CB 49.7, there remains the Baſe DB 30.5: So you have the two Sides of the Triangle DAB, viæ. DBI 30.5, and ADZæ22.9, and the Angle at D a right one; therefore as the Perpendicular AD to the Radius, ſo is the Baſe DB 30.5, to the T of the Angle DAB 530. Now the Angle B is only the Complement oſ the Angle A to 90o, which is 37. Secondly, To find the Hypoth. AB, tbis is the Analogy or Proportion. As the S of the Angle DAB 532 to the Baſe DB 30. 55 ſo is Radius to the Hypothenuſe AB 38. 19 (or 38.2 nearly.) And thus you have the Angle CAD 406 F the Angle DAB 535Æ the Angle CABæÆ93ꝰ. C A S E V. The three Sides of an oblique angled Triangle being given, to find the Angles. 1I. Now to find the Segment EB, the Analogy is, As the Baſe CB aòſ to the Sum of Sides CA and AB 68. 19; ſo is the ſſference of the Sides CA and AB, viæ. 8. 19, to the Segment EB 11.3. Now take this out of the whole Baſe CB 49.7, the Remainder is EC 38.4 of which CD is 19.2, anhd DE 19.25 therefore CD 19. taken from the whole Baſe 49.7, leaves the Baſe of the Triangle DABZ30. 55 and thus you have all the Sides ol the two Triangles CAD and DAB; therefore, 2. To find the Angles DAB and B. As the Hypothenuſe BC 38.19 to Radius, ſo is the Baſe DB 30.5, to the Sine of the Angle DAB 539, whoſt Complement to 9o is the Angle B 370. 3. To ſind the Angles CAD and C. As the Hypothenuſe CA 30, to Radius, ſo is the Baſe CD 19. 2, to the Sine of the Angle CAD 40, whoſe Complement to 9œ is the Angle C 500. Proof. From the foregoing Operations all the Parts of the Triangle CAB are known; and though it is difficult ſometimes to tell whether the Angle at A may be obtuſe or not, yet by theſe Methods it is eaſily found; for DAB2535 CADZ 40, now 5304 406930 the Angle of the Triangle CAB. Do you underſtand it, Tyro? Tyr. If you can by any Figure yet more clearly explain this Matter, by ſhewing me how to meaſure the three Angles of an oblique-angled Triangle by a Scale of Chords, I ſhould be thankful. Phil. I will endeavour, Tyro, to do it; and you muſt remember I told you, that ſometimes all the Angles will be acute, and never but one obtuſe, which will always be the Angle oppoſite the longeſt Side; and all of them will be æ180ꝰ, and you may find each Angle as in other Triangles, by making each Side Radius (on any Scale of Chords) as by the following Figure. EXAMPLE. P4 1 I demand the An- XUF gles A, B, and C, ſeparately of the Triangle . §ieit, I take the Line AC in my Com- C E ] u paſſes, and make ita. D arallel of 60 on the Sector in the Line of Chords (or on a ſmall Scale) and ſweep the Arch AD; and with the ſame Extent, one Foot in B, ſweep the Arch EF; then take AD and meaſure it on the ſame Scale, you will find it 49è 15, and EF 330 155 that is, the Angle C is 490 15'  the Angle B 330 i5' is Æ8206 305 therefore the Angle A, viæ. the Arch CG, will be found to be 97ꝰ 30, for 970 30 4 820 30 Æ1800. Ncte, You cannot meaſure CG at once, being above 6065 therefore prick off coꝰ from CG to D, and make a Dot in the Arch CG at D; and then take the Remainder DG, and you will find it 370 30: Or macke a Dot at Random, any where in the Arch CG, and meaſure the two Barts ſeparately, you will find it the ſame, vix. 97ꝰ 30. S E C T. VI. Oſ Spherical Triangles. Tyr. What do you mean by a Spherical Triangle, and how is it made? Phil. 1. A ſpherical Triangle is a part of the Surface of a Sphere or Globe; formed or made by the Interſection of the Arches of three great Circles, dravn upon. and interſecting each other on the Surface thereof; and as the Sides of right- lined Triangles are meaſured by a Scale of equal Parts, theſe are meaſured by a Scale oſ equal Degrees and Minutes or Miles. 2. Great Circles are ſuch as cut the Sphere or Globe in two equal Parts; ſuch are the Equator, the Ecliptic, the Horiæon, &c. Every ſpherical Triangle is either right, or elſe oblique angled. . 4. That in any right-angled ſpherical Triangle, the Side ſubtending, or that is oppoſite to the right Angle, is called the Hypothenuſe; the other two Sides are generally called Sides, but for Diſtinction's Sake either of them may be called the Baſe, and the other the Perpendicular. . 5. Every ſpherical Triangle contains ſix diſtinct Parts, viz. three Sides and three Angles; and the Sides ma be turned into Angles, and the Angles into Sides, as will be demonſtrated by and by. 6. What was ſaid in plane Trigonometry, ſtands here for a general Rule, viæ. that the Radius is a Meun Proportional between the Tangent of an Arch, and the sungont Complement of the ſame Arch. See Sect. III. all . 7. The Sines of the Angles of ſpherical Triangles are in Proportion to the Sines of their oppoſite Side Sines of their oppoſite Sides to the Sine Angles. l much at preſent ſuffices; thereſore, ĩ v ſee how a ſpherical Triangle is made. Oo make a right-angled Spherical Triangl Open the Compaſſes to any Diſtance d deſcribe the Circle on the Center one Foot on the Periphery of the Ci ibe A, which will paſs through C rſections of theſe two Circles at B the Circles B and D, ſo you uwill gled ſpherical Triangles, maked 1, 2, ihe following Figure. To draw a ſpherical Tringle AB C. Firſt, upon the Center N, draw the Circle ATOG, and make three Dots (promiſcuouſly) at ABC. 2 Set one Foot oſ the Compaſſes on A, and with the Diſtance NA dieſcribe lẽtren D 3 then ſet one Foot in B, and deſcribe FNR; then ſetting one Foot in C, deſcribe the farchoſs; which will complete the Triangle 3. Set one Foot in L, and turn the other to B, and deſcribe the Arch BCP,; laſtly, ſet the Compaſtes on M, and deſcribe A C O, ſo have you now completely formed the ſpherical Triangle ABC. Do you underſtand it? Tyr. Very well, Sir. But now, how am I to meaſure this Triangle? Phil. That you will ſoon ſee: For you were told, that the Angles might be turned into Sides, and the Sides into Angles: Obſerve then, Let AB C be an obtuſe-angled Triangle, obtuſe-angled at B, then will D E be the Meaſure of the Angle D AE, becauſe AD and AE are Quadrants (viæ. are drawn at the Diſtance of the Radius itſelf) and therefore F G will be the Meaſure of the acute Angle F BG, the Complement of the Angle B, and ACDP is its Supplement; for P is not only Ææ B, but all other Sides and Angles are Complements of the Triangle ABC. Thus the Side CP is the Complement of B C to a Semicircle. BOOEK OF ENOWLEDG E. 295 4. Let KI be che Meaſure of the Angle at C; then MN E ED, becauſe M E and ND are Quadrants, and their common Complement is N E. 5. The Side LN is Æ F G, becauſe N F and L G are Quadrants, and their common Complement is N G. 6. Again, LM is ÆXKI, for KL and MI are Quadranto and their common Complement is the Arch Thus it appears evident, that the Sides of the Triangle L. MN are equal to the Angles of the Triangle A BC, taking for the greateſt Angle AB C its Comſaernent, viæ. the Angle DBC; and ſo by the ſame ule the Sides of the ITriangle ABC are equal to tne Angles of the Triangle LMN; for the Side AC is ZEI, and EI is the Meaſure of the Angle H ME, the Complement of the obtuſe Angle LMN. Again, 7. The Side AB is Z RQ; now RQ is the Meaſure of the Angle MNL; and laſtly BC is æ KG, which is the Meaſure of the Angle at L; for AE and CI are Quadrants; ſo are AQ and BR; BG and CK; and CE, AR, and CG are Complements of their Arches reſpectively: Therefore the Sides of a ſpherical Triangle may be changed into Angles, and the Angles into Sides Q. E. D.) which was to be proved. OBSERVATION I. All Sides that are equal to a Quadrant (or Radius) are called Quadrantal; therefore, in the foregoing Figure, N D, NQ, NR, NEF, &c. are Quadrantals, being equal to the Radius of the Primitive Circle AT O or being equal to the Sine of 9ο0ò, Chord of 609, or Iangent of 456, as was ſaid before in plane Trigonometry. OBS ERV AT IO N II. In plane Trigonometry, if twuo Angles are known, the third is alſo known, being the Complement to 1803 but it is not ſo in ſpherical Trigonometry, becauſe the three Angles of a Spherical Triangle are greater than two right ones. OBVERVATIO N III. Where the Sides of a Triangle are all Quadrantal, and the Angles right, 'tis then called a Quadrantal Triangle, as KL C in the foregoing Figure. Tꝑyr. I heartily thank you, Sir. Now I ſhould be glad if you would give me ſome Inſtructions in meaſuring the Sides and Angles. Phil. I will, but it muſt be very ſhort and conciſe, therefore your Application muſt be greater. Tyr. Pleaſe to give me an Example or two by working ſome Problems at large. Phil. The Manner of working a Problem here, being the ſame as in plane Trigonometry, I ſhall give you only one Example, having room for no more; and by the blelp of the ĩollowing Ilable, you may work the reſt a ciſure. S EC T. VIII. Oſ the ſixteen Caſes of right-angled Spherical Triangles. CA S E I. The Side AB (27 54) and the Angle at A 23ꝰ 30 being given, to find ihe Per pendicular or Side B C. Then, C II.3O 27.54 As Radius or Sine of 9oꝰ ro. To the S of the Side A B 27ꝰ 54 9.6701 8 So is the T of the Angle A 236 30 9.63830 To the T of the Side BC 110 30 9.30848 And ſo on for any oſ the other Sides, as in the following Table. A SyNOPSIS, or ſbort TABLE of the ſixteen Caſes of right-angled Spherical Triangles, with their nũ or Proportions. i N. B. Two Capitals together ſignify a Side, and one Letter ſhews the Angle. Required BC lAs Rad. : S. of AB:: I' 2 A: the ſof BC C lAs Rad.: Sc of AB:: S  A: Sc ÆC. AC lAs Rad.: ScofÆ A:: Tcof AB: Tcof AC C lAs Sc of BC: Rad.:: Sc of  A: S ÆC AC lAs S Z A: Rad.:: S of BC: the S of AC AB lAs Rad.: Tc 2Z A:: TofſBC: the Sof AB AB lAs Rad.: Sc æ A:: TofAC: the Tof AB BC As Rad.: S of AC:: S 2 A: S of BC. C lAs Rad.: Sc of AC:: Tof  A: Tc æC AC lAs Rad.: Sc of BC:: Sc of AB: Sc of AC A lAs. Rad.: Sof AB:: Tc of BC: Tcof Æ A BC lAs Sc of AB: Rad.:: Sc of AC: Sc of BC A lAs Rad.: Tof AB:: Tcof AC: Sc of LA C lAs S of AC: Rad.:: S of AB: S of 2 C. XVI A&CI BC lAs S of 2 C: Rad.:: Scof  A: Sc or BC C lAs Rad.: Tcof 2 C:: Teof  A: Sc of AC Given Proportions. S E C T. IX. Of oblique-angled Spherical Triangles. n How are oblique Spherical Triangles ſolved? hil. If the Things given be oppoſite the Ihings required, they are ſolved like right-angled ſpherical Triangles, by this Rule; that the Sines of the Sides are in direct Proportion to the Sines of their oppoſite ngles. CA S E I. Two Sides, and an oppoſite Angle to one of them, given, t hial the other Angle. ſ ibem Fig. 1. q& O Let AC Æ 705, B C æ 380 30, the Angle Agoc 28, be given, to find the Angle at B. As the S of the Side B C 380 30 9.794149 To the S of the Angle A 30 28 9.705040  ,0d So is the S of the Side AC 70 9.972986 To S or Sc of the Angle B srmmnunm From this 19.67 8026 Take the Top Log. and there will remain 9.883877 The Logarithm anſwering to the Sine of 49 57, whoſe Complement to 180 is 1300 33 the Angle at B, as by the Figure. And thus for all the reſt. CA S E II. Fig. 1. Two Angles, viæ. B 1300 3, C 310 34, and the Side AC 70 , being given, to find the Side A B. Analogy. As the S of the Angle B 130 3: S of the Side AC 700:: S of the Angle at C 310 34: S of the Side AB 400. . CA S E III. Fig. 1. Two Sides, viæ. AC 706, and A B 400, with the Angli A 300 28, being given, io find tbe Angles at B and C. R U L E LI. Add the Sides AC and AB together, and take the half of it, which is 5555 alſo take 1-half the Diſference of AB, and of AC, viæ. 155 as alſo 1-half the Angle A, vix. 155 14. Then as 8 of 1-half the Sum of the Sides AC, and AB, (vix 552): the S of 1-hal the Difference 155:: Tc of vhai? the Angle A, viz . 1s 150 14 T of 1- half the Difference of the Angles B and C 490 14 30.. Again, 2. As the S c of 1-half Sum of Sides AC and AB, viæ. 552: Sc of 1-half their Difference 150:: Tc of r-half the Angle at A 150 14: T of 1-half he Sum of the Angles B and C 800 48 30Add the 1-half the Difterence of the unknown Anvles B und C 49 14 30 to the 1-half the Sum 80ꝰ 48 g0 , it giues ꝰ30 3, the Angle at B; and 49 14 30- taken from 80ꝰc 48 30, gives the Anglc C Z 31 34, as above. C A S E IV. Fig. r Tqvo Angles, viæ. A 300 28, and B 130 3, and their interjacent Side A B 40, heing given, to find the other Sides B C and AC. Tuke the Sum and Difference of the two Angles, and you vill find the Sum 1606 gur whoſe 1-half is 80 15 30. Their Difference 99 ; whoſe 1-half is 49 47 30. The Side A B is 406, fnoſe i-half is 200. Then the Analogy is, 1. As S of 1-half the Sum of the Angles A and B 806 15 30': S of r-half their Difference 496 47 T of r-half the Side AB 200 T of 1-half the Lbim. rence BC and AC 15ꝰ45. Ag: 2. As the Sc of Tnat the Sum of 'the Angles A and B 80ꝰ is5 20, to the Sc of 1-half their Difference 490 47' 30:: T of r-half the Side A B 200: T of iohal the Sum of the Sides B C and AC, viæ. 54ꝰ 15. Add therefore r1-half the Difference of the Sides n& and AC 15ꝰ 45 to 1-half their Sum 549 15, and it gives 700 for the Side AC,; but if deducted, leaves the leſs Side B C 380 30. C A S E V. Fig. Two Sides, viz. AC 700, and BC 380 30, ond the Angle A 30 28, being given, to find the Side AB. N. B. By Caſe the firſt, the  B is found Æ 130 3. Rule. Take the ; Sup of the two Angles, viæ. 1600 31, which is 806 15' 30', and i their Difference, which is 496 47 30', and 1 the Difference of the Sides, which is 1006 45. Then As the S of 1 Difference of the Zs B and A 49 47' 30: the S of I their Sum 86 15' 30:: the T of 8 Difference of the Sides AC and BC: T of i the Side AB 20, which doubled gives 406 æ the Side A B. C A S E VI. Fig. 1. Two Angles, viz. A 30 28, B 130 3, and the Side AC Z 700, being given, to find the Angle at C. N. B. Firſt, by Caſe 2. find the Side BC Æ 380 30.. 1. Add the Sides AC and B C together, they make 108ꝰ 30, whoſe  is 540 15 the Difference of the Sides is 316 30, whoſe 1 is 15 45'. 2. The Difference of the s B and A is 99  35, whoſe  is 4096 47 30'. Then the Proportion is As the S of à the Difference of the Sides B C and AC 15 45 the S oſ i the Sum of the Sides B C and AC 540 15':: T of à the Difference of the s B and 49 47 30: Tc of ; the æ at C 156 475 whoſe Double is 31ꝰ 34, the æ at C required. C A S E VII. Fig. 1. Tuo Sides, AC 70, and BC 380 30, and the o pesite Angle A 30 28, being given, to find the Angle C. Firſt, by Caſe 1. I find the Æ at B 130 5.. 1. The Difference of the Angles B and A is 99 35, whoſe à is 49 47' 30'. 2. The Sum of the Sides AC and BC is 1080 30/, whoſe à is 54ꝰ 155 their Difference is 310 30, whoſe i is 15 as hen, . 3. As S of ; Difference of the Sides, viæ. 150 45': S oſ 2 the Sum of the Sides 540 15:: T of 1 the tirie. rence of the s B and A, viz. 49 47'30: Tc of i the æ at C 15 47, which doubled gives 310 34. C A S E ViIII. Fig. 1. Two Angles, viz. C 310 34, and B 130 3, and the oppoſite Side A C 70, given, to find the Side B C. Firſt, I find the Side A B (by Caſe 2.) to be 406. 1. The Sum of the 2 Æs B and C is 1610 37, whoſe I is 800 48 30 their Difference is 98ꝰ 29, whoſe 5 is ꝰè14 30. 19, 'ùrhe Diference of the Sides AB and AC is 30e, whoſe à is 156. Now, As S of ĩ the Difference of the s B and C 490 14 30: S of the , Sum oſ the ſaid Æs 8oœꝰ 48 30:: ſ of à ihe Difference of the Sides AB and AC, viæ. 150: T of 2 Side BC 190 15, which doubled gives 380 30, the Side BC. C A S E IX. In the Triangle ABC, let there be tuwo Sides, CB 380 30, and AC 70, and the Angle C 310 34, given, to find the Side AB. Fig. 2. This is done twvo Ways, either Cæ28230 by letting fall a Perpendicular within or without the Triangle. I. Let fall the Perpendicular BD, which will divide the Triangle ABC into two Rectangulars ADB and BDC; then may the Side AB be found as follows. As Rad.: Sc of the included i C:: Tof the leſs Side C B 38 30: T of a 4th Arch qus 8', which ſubtracted from the greater Side AC 700, eaves 359 52, called the reſidual Arch. 2. As Sc of this ath Arch 346 8 Sc of the reſidual Arch 35 52:: Sc oſ the leſs Siae CB 380 30: Sc oſ the Sidèe AB 40, as required. i 1 N. B. That the Perpendicular may and will often happen to fall without the Triangle, as in Figure 3d annexed. Then muſt the Sides of the original Triangle be continued to make two Rectangulars, the one being . . included in the other, as in the Triangle ABC, in which the Perpendicular let fall will be DC falling from Con the Side AB continued, and forming the two ectangulars Rectangulars BDC and ADC: and therefore the Side BC may be found as in the former Directions. N. B. If the s at the Baſe be both of one Kind or Name, the Perpendicular will then fall within the Triangle; but if the s are different, it will fall without the Triangle. C A S E X. Fig. 2. Two Angles, C 310 34, B 130 3, and the Side CB 38ꝰ 30 being given, to ſua the Angle at A. N. B. See Fig. 1. and 2. 1. Divide the oblique Triangle ABC into two rectangled Triangles by the Perpendicular BD; this will make two different Triangles CBD and DBA, whoſe Angle CBD is 64 19, and the Angle ABDÆ65 44. Now the Angle at A is thus found. As the S of the  CBDZ64 19 Log. 9.954823 To the S of the  ABD 656 4 - 9.95982 So is the Sc of the  C 310 34 - q.9308251 add To the Sc of the Z at A (firſt tacking 19. 890280 the top Log. out of this Sum) viæ. 30028 9.935457 C A S E XI. Three Sides given, to find the obtuſe or oblique Angle B. R U L E. Add all the Sides together; then take the Arithmetical Complement of the two leſſer Sides (which here is CB and AB) and the Sine of 2 the Sum of the Sides; and alſo the Sine of the Difference between the longeſt Side and the Half of the Sum of the three Sides; add all theſe four together, and take the Half of the Logarithm oſ their Sum; the Logarithm that remains will be that of ; the Angle (B) required. See the Work. The Side AC 700 Co. Arith. The Side CB 38. 30 -- ο. 205 850 The Side A B 40. -- ο.. 191933 148.30 I this is 74.15. - Sine 9.983380 Subtract AC 70 Difference 46 15 Sine 8.869868 Emmu Sum 19.251031 The 3 of this is 9.625515 This Logarithm 9.625515 anſwers to 65 1 30, which doubled gives 1300 3, the Angle at B required. Tyr. I thank you very Eindly, Philomathes, for this Demonſtration. Phil. It is diſficult, no doubt, to be apprehended by a few Words only; and you are alſo to take Notice, that this Operation helps you to find the Beginning and End of Twilight; likewiſe the Variation of the Needle, the Sun's Azimuth, the Declination of a Wall, or any Plane in Dialing. . C A S E XiII. i The three Angles, A 300 28, B 1300 3, and C 310 34 being given, to fnd the Side AB. N. B. See Fig. 1. and 2. This Caſe is performed like the laſt, by converting the Angles into Sides, or the Sides into Angles. And in order to have the Anſwer complete, the odd Seconds 304 THE YOUNG MAN s in each Angle, which have hitherto been neglected as immaterial, are now taken into the Accompt. For let the æ Cæ316 34' 26' Co. Arith. Angle at A æ 30. 28. II. O. 294920 Complement Æ B, To 180c, 49. 56. 49. o. 116084 Sum - III. 59. 26.  this Sum 55. 59. 43. Sine - 9.918549 From this take 4C31. 34. 26. nmmmmu Difference 24. 25. 17. Sine - 9.616417 Sum -C 19.945970 Whoſe 2 Sum is - Sora9ò5 Which is the Sc of 2065 this doubled gives the Side AB 400. . N. B. Iſ the greater Side AC were required, then the Operation would produce the Complement thereof to a Semi-Circle, or 1806; therefore by ſubtracting it from 1809, you would have the Side AC. D I A L O G U E III. Of ASTRONOMY. S E C T. I. Tyr. HAT do you mean by Aſtronomy? Phil. Aſtronomy is that Part of the Mathematics that teaches us the Sſtem of the Univerie, by diſcovering the Motions, Magnitudes, and Diſtances o the heavenly Bodies; together with their Revolutions, Riſing, and Setting, the Cauſe of Eclipſes, and the true ime when ſuch Eclipſes will happen, &c. 7Tyr. How many Spſtems are there? hil. Eight in all; but the firſt ſeven, by Reaſon ſmaking the Earth in the Center, and other Bodies ing or rolling round it with eccentric and ſolid and ſuch like ridiculous Stuff, we ſhall take rther Notice of, than only by ſaying, they are ſet aſide, and the Copernican Syſtem only allowed being conſiſtent with ſruth, and agreeable to the non Capacity of Mankind, by undeniable Demonons. hil. Why is it called the Copernican Syſtem? yr. From Nicholas Copernicus, of Thorn, in Pruſſia, n in 14733 he being the great Reviver or Improver cthis Syſtem; though it is aſſerted by the beſt Viſtoas, that Pythagoras taught the ſame (or nearly the ne) s40 Years before Chriſt, and therefore it is often lled che Pythagorean Syſtem. Pythagoras, it is plain, as not quite clear in reſpect to the true Motions of e Earth, and other Bodies round the Sun; but Coernicus, by Application, diſcovered evidently the two Motions of the Earth, viæ. one round its own Axis in twenty. four Hours (which makes Day and Night) and the other round the Sun in the Space of a Year, which occaſions the various Seaſons. Tyr. Has no-body ſince that Time made further Improvements in this Syſtem? Pbilo. Yes, the unparalleled Sir Iſuac Newton, the Glory of England, and the Maſter-Piece of Nature. This great Man was favoured with more than a natural Genius, and Heaven vouchſafed to convey to us through this Channel many Things unknown to the Ancients, and which there is not ſufficient Room here to treat of: But, however, he regulated and completed whatever Copernicus was ignorant ofHe diſcovered the juſt Laws of Gravitation of Matter to Matter, or of one Body to another, by which the Accuracy, Harmony, and Agreement of the Heavenly Bodies are ſeen by one ſimple Principle, and their amazing Revolutions and Velocities round the Sun, as their common Center, eaſily accounted for, and the Power and Wiſdom of the Great Architect (in ſome ſmall Meaſure) at the ſame Time are beheld by. Man to an aſtoniſhing Pitch of Admiration, in order to humble him, when he duly conſiders the infinite Diſproportion between the Creature and Creator. S E C T. II. Oſ the Copernicun Syſtem, or the Doctrine of the Sun and the ſix primary Planets. Z;r. Pray, kind Philo, give me ſome Account of the Sun, and ſome other of the heavenly Bodies. Phil. I will, as far as Room will allow of; and firſt we will ſpeak of that huge and glorious Body of Light, the Sun. Tyr. What do you mean by calling it a huge Body? it appears to me to be but very ſmall. Phil. No matter how it may appear to the naked Eye; plain it is, that the Sun is ſo vaſtly large above the Globe of the Earth, that it will hardly bear any Compariſon; it being conſiderably more than 1,000,000 (vix. a Million) Times ſarger; for its Diameter is computed to be 822, 148 Miles, and its Bulk not leſs than (290, 97 1,000, 000, 000, oo Miles) 2 hundred and 9o0 thouſand, 971 Millions of Millions of ſolid Miles. * 7TYyr. Very ſurpriſing, and almoſt incredible l Phil. It is quite ſo to Perſons who know nothing of the Nature of Angles and Circles, and they naturally think that you are impoſing upon them, and aſſerting Falſities: But however, as Ignorance and Obſtinacy are inſeparable Companions, if at any Time you meet with ſuch as will not give Credit to theſe hings, be not too raſh with them, but reaſon calmly, and let them knosv that this Number is even as nothing in Compariſon to that which would be required to expreſs the Diſtance of the fixed Stars; and therefore there is little Cauſe to wonder at ſuch an Aſſertion; and much leſs, would they truly conſider the infinite Power and Wiſdom of the heavenly Architect. Tyr. Very true, Sir; but there are many Perſons as well as myſelf, that may be very ready to believe this; . Since the Tranſit of Venus in 1761, the Diameter, and, conſequentiy, the Solidity of the Sus, are known to be much greater than as given above. but yet would like to know how to prove it, or ſee it demonſtrated. Phil. No doubt of it; and I am ſenſible that you will allow, that when the Diameter of any Circle or Body is lenown, the Area and Solidity are eaſily found; and it is well known, that 'tis as eaſy to tell the Diſtances and Bulks of any Hodies, when we know the different Times of their Motions roumd different Circles, having one Center; or (which is more natural and eaſy) by comparing the apparent Diameter of any diſtant Object with the real Diameter of the Image thereof, by imaginary Lines drawn from the extreme Parts of the one to the extreme Parts of the other, &c. Do you underſtand this? Tyr. I can't ſay I do as yet; and therefore beg, if you can, you will demonſtrate it by ſome Figure. Phil. That I will with all my Heart. And I think iſ ſqu do but mind the Nature and Deſign of the following lgure, and well obſerve the Compariſon of the two Objects, you will ſoon ſee it is not ſo difficult to underſtand as you imagined.  Obſerve then, 1. Take a double Convex Glaſs (or Lens); let there be a ſmall Hole as at R; place this Lens in the Windowſhutter of a darcened Room; this being done, fix a Sheet of Paper at any proper Diſtance, according to the Size of the Room, (ſuppoſe from 10, 12, or more Feet from the Lens) and you will find two Rays of Kignt paſſing from the Extremity of the Body of the Sun CD, through the Lens R, making the Lines CRB, and DRA; which will form an Image oſ the Sun itſelf, whoſe Diameter will be AB, and in proportion therewith from the Diſtance of the Lens. 2dly, But though this Proportion holds good always, vet the Work will vary according to the Diſtance of the Lens from the Image; but let us ſuppoſe the focal Diſtance RAERB to be 12 Feet or 144 Inches, then by carefully meaſuring the Diameter of the lmage AB (if the Hole of the Lens be of a proper Size) it will be found one Inch and 34 Parts, and the Semi-Diameter e B or e A, o.67 Parts. 3dly, Then it will be, As RA or RB 144: 3 the Diameter AB, viæ. e A or e B o.67 Parts :: RaÆl dius to the Sine of the àf e RA, or e RB 16 and & therefore the  ARB uwill be 32' Æ to the Diameter of the Image or the aparent Diameter AB. herefore, 4thly, The Proportion will be thus, in order to find the Diameter. As the Diſtance of the Image, viæ. RA, to its Diameter; ſo is the given Diſtance of the Sun viæ. 95, 173,000 Miles ſince the late Tranſit of Venus) to his Diameter, which in this Caſe will be 885,637 Miles, which is leſs than is computed by more than 4000 Miles, but notwithſtanding this, it is ſo trifling, that it produces no Error, nor makes any ſenſible Difference in calculating Eclipſes in general. N. B. The Tranſit oſ Venus in 1761, afforded c i . sgur α an Opportunity of calcus Unvù lating the Diſtances of the viſũ Planets from the Sun with ich greater Accuracy than had been done before; d their mean Diſtances from the Sun, in Engliſh Miles, re then found to be as follows, viz. the §)iſtance of ercury 36, 841,468 Miles; of Venus 68,891,486 Miles; the Earth 95, 173,000 Miles; of Mars 145,014,148 Miles; Jupiter 494,990,976 Miles, and of Saturn 907,956, 30 Miles. So that by comparing theſe Diſtances with thoſe in the foregoing Iable (and attending to the Note at the Bottom of Page 306) it will appear that the Dimenſions of the Solar S9ſicm are much greater than what was formerly imagined. and conſequently that all the Planets (except the Earth) are much larger than as ſtated in the Table. . Tyr. I thank you, dear Philo; and now pray give me a little Account of the Moon. Phil. I will. S E C T. III. Oſ the Moon. Tyr. What do you apprehend the Moon to be? Phil. The Moon is allowed to be a dark ſpherical Body, like to the Earth in Matter and Form, and borrows her Light from the Sun by Reflection, ſhining upon that Part, or thoſe Parts of the Surface that conſiſts oſ Hills, Mountains, or plain Land; for Water itſelf will not admit of Reflection; and therefore thoſe Parts that look lice dark Spots on the Face of the Moon, are, no Doubt, either Water, large Caverns, or Pits, &c. Tꝗ;r. If this be the Caſc, Sir, I ſhould think then, that qur Earth muſt be a Sort of Moon to them at certain imes. Phil. Moſt certainly it is. Tyr. What Diſtance, pray, do you compute the Moon to be from the Earth? Phil. Her mean Diſtance from the Earth's Center is about 238,920 Miles. ZTjpr. Pray what is her Diameter; Superficies, and Magnitude? . Phil. Her Diameter is allowed to be about 2 180 Miles, her Superficies about 145930, 166 ſquare Miles; and her ſolid Content about 5, 424,626, 98o cubic Miles. 4Sj;r. How do you find the Diameter and Diſtance ol the Moon? Phil. By the following Methods, viæ. 1. Let AC be the Earth; Z the Moon in the Equinoctial, and on the Meriridian; ZBD the Quarter of a Circle deſcribed by the Moon in revolving from the Meridian to the Meridian again; AD the rational, and C8 the ſen- B po Slentinn,ntae 9 ZE ſible Horivon, to an Obſerver at C, extended to the Moon's Orbit; CBA is the Angle under which the Earth's Semi-Diameter CA is ſeen from the Moon at B. Now as the Moon revolves about the Earth from the Meridian to the Meridian again in about 24 Hours 48 Minutes, ſhe will go a fourth Part round in a fourth Part of that Time, viæ. in 6 Hours 12 Minutes, as ſeen from A, the Earth's Center; but as ſeen from C. the Obſerver's Place on the Earth's Surface, the Moon will ſeem to have gone a Quarter round the Earth when ſhe comes to the ſenſible Horizon at B. Let the exact Móment when the Moon is ſeen at B (which will be when ſhe is in or near the ſenſible Horizon) be carefully noted, allowing about 34 Minutes of a Degree for Refraction, that it may be ſnotn in what Time ſhe has gone from Z to B; which Time ſubtracted from 6& Hours 12 Minutes (the Time of her going from Z to D) leaves the Time of her going from B to D, and affords an eaſy Method of finding the Angle BAD, which is equal to the Angle CBA, called the Moon's horizontal Parallax: For as the Time of the Moon's deſcribing the Arch ZB is to 90 Degrees, ſo is 6 Hours 12 Minutes to the Degrees of the Arch ZD, from which ſubtract 9oò, and the Remainder is the Degrees of the Arch BD. which meaſures the Angle BAD, and comes out at a mean Rate about 57 18. Now in the Triangle ABC, the Angle B Æ 57' 18', the right Angle at ẽ and the Earth's Semi- Diameter CAS 82 iles, Rlſũũũũ Miles, being given, the Side AB, the Diſtance of the Moon from the Earth's Center, is found by this Proportion: As the Sine of the  B 57 18 Log. 8 221860 To the Side CA one Semi- Diameter . oοοοοο So is the Sine of the Æ C ꝗo - 10. οoοοοο To the Side AB 60 Semi-Diameters 1. 778 140 Now the Semi-Diameter of the Earth being 3982 Miles, 3982 X 602238,920 Miles, the Moon's iiſtanee from the Center of the Earth; from which ſubtract AC, the Earth's Semi-Diameter Æ 3982, and the Remainder will be 234,938 Miles, her Diſtance from the Earth's Surface. To find the Side CB, the Proportión is, As the Sine of the  B 5718 to the Side AC 3982, ſo is the Sine of the  A 89 2' 42' to the Side CB. To find her Diameter. Let Z be the Moon, and o her Center, draw Ao and A E, then o E will be her apparent Semi-Diameter at the Center of the Earth, and the Angle E Ao Æ 15 40'. Therefore, As the Sine of the  AE o æÆ 89 44' 20 9.999995 To the Side Ao Æ 234,938 Miless 35.378253 So is the Sine of the æ E Ao Æ 15' 40 7.658701 To the Side or Semi- Diameter E o 2 1089 3.036959 This x 2 Æ 2178 Miles, the Diameter itſelf, which is very near Truth. T;r. I heartily thank you, Sir; but pray does the Moon move round her own Axis, and round the Earth; as the Earth does round her Axis, and round the Sun? Phil. Yes, ſhe does, for ſhe is called the Earth's Satellite, or Attendant, being a ſecondary Planet, appointed by the Law of Nature to attend upon the Earth in its annual Courſe round the Sun. Tyr. But you ſaid juſt now, that the Moon moves round the Earth, as well as round her own Axis; pray in what Time does ſhe perform this? Phil. Both in the ſame Space of Time; for ſhe revolves about her Axis in 27 Days, 7 Hours, 43 Minutes; and alſo round the Earth in the ſame Iime. BOOK OF KNOWLEDG E. 313 Iyr. This is a Myſtery to me at preſent, hut I ſuppoſe there is no Certainty of what you aſſert. Phil. It is very evident it cannot be otherwiſec. Tyr. Why ſoſ? Piil Becauſe we ſee the ſame Face, Figure, or Side of the Moon at the ſame I'imes, or Spaces of I'imes, from one New Moon to another; which never could happen, unleſs by her periodical Motion (viæ. in her wnole Revolution) ſhe turned ſo much of her Body from the Earth as is turned towards the Earth by her daily Motion round her own Axis. Tyr. I apprehend it now very clearly: But pray, Sir, let me aſk what the Form of the Moon's Orbit is? Phil. Her Orbit is eliptical; but ſo irregular is the Motion, that ſhe is by this Means perpetually changing both her Place and Figure. T9yr. Erom what does this proceed? Phil. From the Eccentricity of her Orbit, and the Obliquity, Crookedneſs, or Irregularity of her Axis in her diurnal Motion in the Ecliptic. . T,;r. Why, does not the Moon move regularly in the Ecliptic then? Phil. No, for if ſhe did, you would find an Eclipſe of the Sun every Conjunction, or every New Moon. ZTy9r. Then I perceive that ſhe does not move directly in the Plane of the Ecliptic. ũl Phil. You are right; for ſhe makes an Angle therewith of about 56 17' 20, by two Interſections, in 2 Points exactly oppoſite to each other, called Nodes: This & is called the Dragon's Head, or aſcending Node, it being that Point of the Ecliptic which the Moon interſects when ſhe paſſes out of South into North Latitude; and this 8 is called the Dragon's Tail, being the deſcending Node, or Point that ſhe interſects paſſing from North into South Latitude. Tyr. Pray have theſe Nodes any Motion? Phil. Yes, they have a diurnal Motion of about 3 11, and that contrary to the Order of the Signs themſelves. Tyr. I am obliged to you, Sir; but pray what is the Reuſon we ſee the Moon riſe or ſet about an Hour later every Night than ſhe did the Night before; is this owing to any particular Motion? Phil. Yes, ſfrom a diurnal Motion of about 13 10 from Weſt to Eaſt round her Orbit, which, together with the Motion of the Earth round her Orbit, makes very near an Hour's Difference of riſing and ſetting one Night with another, according to vulgar Computation, but it is not ſo every Night, being ſometimes as much again as at others, according to the different Times of the Year, and the different Parts of the Ecliptic, that the Earth and Moon may then happen to be in: which different Poſitions will of Courſe make different Aſpects in both at certain Times; as is evident from the different Aſpect of the Moon towards the Autumn, vulgarly called the Harveſt Moon, which looks larger than at other Times, and riſes about the ſame Time for ſeveral Nights together. Tyr. I am glad you mentioned this, becauſe I know many Perſons as well as myſelf are ignorant of the Reaſon why it appears ſo at this Time. Be ſo kind therefore to give me ſome further Account of it. . Phil. You will ſoon ſee the Reaſon, if you will but attend to the following Obſervations. . I. In all oblique Spheres, every great Circle interſecting the Horivon muſt in the Revolution cut or interſect the Horizon in different Parts and at different Angles. 2. When the Sign Libra riſes in the Eaſt Point, the Ecliptic then makes a much greater Angle with the Horizvon, than when Aries riſes orient or in the Eaſt, and when Capricorn riſes orient, then the Ecliptic cuts the Horizæon in an Angle, which is a Mean between the other two. 3. Hence it is, that when the Moon is at the full in, or about Libra, ſhe will then be depreſſed the loweſt under the Horizon, and in or near Aries leaſt of all; conſequently therefore the Difference of her riſing at, or towards the Autumnal Equinox will be leſs for ſeveral Nights together, than towards the Vernal Equinox. 4. When the Nodes ſhall happen to be in or near the Equinoxes, a full Moon then that hãppens in the Be. ginning of Libra, will not riſe the next Night for upwards of one Hour and a Quarter after the Time ſhe roſe the Night before, and ſo on nearly for ſeveral Nights together. fut; 5. Should the Moon at this Time be in Perigium, (vix. at her neareſt Diſtance from us) then the Intervals of her riſing will be greater in Spring than in Autumn. 6. Thus it is plain the Autumnal or Harveſt Moon (vix. the full Moon before the 21ſt of September) riſes with leſs Intervals, or with much leſs Difference Night after Night, than the Vernal full Moon, or that which happens before or neareſt the 21ſt of March, as may be ſeen in a common Almanack of any Date, but more particularly by the following Table. A TABLE of the nightly Difference of the riſing of the Vernal and Diemmis Full hiu: for the Year ig &c. Full Moon, March iſt. Full Moon Aug. 26. Day riſes Difference Day riſes Diſference æ I G6n. 8 ſ h. m. l 27 I7h 53ſ h. m. 3] 7. 19.] I. I1I 28 ſ 8. II J O. 1I& 4 S8. 30.] I. 11I ] &c.] 29] 8. 28] oO. 17 5 9. 38. ] 1. 8 30 ] 8. 46 l o. 18 1O. 47. I. I 9. 8 O. 22 Tyr. I am highly obliged to you, kind Philomathes, and am now quite ſatisfied it is ſo; but now I don't know the Reaſon why it riſes ſooner at one Time than at another. . Phil. You have been told Part of the Reaſon already; but however the chief Reaſon of the Diſterence is, that at one Time the Moon cuts the Horiæon nearer to right Angles at riſing than at the other I'ime, and conſequently is longer before ſhe appears above the Horizon. Tyr. I humbly thank you, Sir, and am now very clear in what you have ſhewn me. . Phil. Then I am ready to anſwer you in what you ſhall farther aſk. Tyr. I ſhould be glad then, Sir, to know ſomething concerning New and Full Moon, the RKeaſon of her appearing in ſuch various Aſpects, and alſo to be inP ſtructed a little concerning Eclipſes, of which I have very little Notion at preſent. hil. Any Thing, my dear Tyro, that I can ſerve you in, you are welcome to; but you muſt expect but a ſmall Hint of theſe Things; which therefore requires your greater Attention and Application. However, my Opinion is, that you ought firſt to underſtand the eaning of ſeveral Words and Phraſes previous to the better underſtanding of what we ſhall hereafter treat upon. TIyr. Sir, you are very kind, and I am ſenſible of the Neceſſity of what you ſay. Phil. Then we will proceed to S E C T. IV. An Explanation of ſeveral Things neceſſury to the KnowP . ù of Aſtronomy, H4 Tyr. What do you mean by a Periodical Month? hil. The I ime that the Moon takes to complete one Revolution, from any Point of the Zodiac to the ſame Point again, which is about 27 Days, 7 Hours, 43 Minutes. Tyr. What is a Synodical Month? Phil. Exactly the twelſth Part of a Year, or the Time the Sun is paſſing through one Sign of the Zodiac, being about 30 Days, 10o Hours, 30 Minutes, which is alſo called an Aſtronomical Month. Tyr. What is the Difference between this and a Lunar Synodical Month? Phil. A Lunar Synodical Month is the Time or Space between two Conjunctions with the Sun, or from one New Moon to another, being about 29 Days, 12 Hours, 44 Minutes. * TꝘjr. What do you mean by an lIlluminative Month? i Phil. That Space of Time from the Beginning ol the New Moon's ſhining till ſhe diſapppears again, being about a6; Days. Jyr. What is a Lunation? Piil. The ſame as a Lunar Synodical Month. * Note, This is a mean Synodical Month; for you muſt obſerve, every Synodical Month is not quite equal; for about the Summer Solſtice the Sun moves much ſlover than in Winter; and the Synodical Month is then but a9 Days, 6 Hours, 4 Minutes, but in Winter it is 29 Days, 19 Hours, 37 Minutes. lii oo Tyr. What is a Lunar Year? ; Phil. It contains 12 Lunations or Synodical Months, vix. about 354 Days, 8 Hours, 48 Minutes, 38 Sec. (vizæ. 29 Days, 12 h. 44 3' 11 X 12, nearly. Iyr. What do you mean by a Tropical or natural Year? Phil. It is that Space of Iime in which the Sun, being in any Point of the Zodiac, departing therefrom, returns to ĩt again: or, in other Words, it is tilut Space of Time the Sun takes to finiſh his Courſc through the Zodiac, which is nearly 365 Days, 5 Hours, 48 Minutes, t3. Soconde Iy-. Then I perceive there is almoſt ri Days Difference between the Lunar and the Iropical Yeur. Phil. Very true, and this is what is calied the Epact itſelf, and by the Help of this the Moon's Age is found at any Time. . Tyr. Now you have mentioned the Epact, I wiſſi you would explain this farther, and alſo ſhew me how io ſind the Golden Number, &c. Piil. That I willdo with all my Heart. S E C T. V. To find the Prime or Golden Number, the Epact, Cycle of the Sun, Dominical Letter, &c. L. Ots the PR I M E. TꝘyr. What do you mean by the Prime or Golden Number? Phil. The Prime or Golden Number is the Cycle oſ the Moon, viæ. a Circle, Revolution or Period of 19 Years; at the End of which the Changes of the Moon will fall upon the ſame Day (but upwards of an Hour ſooner) and ſhe makes the ſame Aſpect with the Sun, & c. as ſhe did 19 Years before: It is ſaid that it took its Name of Golden Number from YJulius Cæſar, who cauſed it to be inſerted in the Calendar in Letters of Gold. T9yr. What is the Uſe of the Golden Number? Phil. To find the Age and Changes of the Moon, &c. Tyr. How is the Golden Number found? Bhi Add 1 to the Year of our Lord, or Date oſ the Year, then divide by 19, and the Remainder at laſt is the Golden Number. ſſ B. If nothing remains after the Diviſion, then r9 itſelf is the Golden Number x 318 THE YOUNG MAN ?s EX AMP L E. I demand the Golden Numbers for the Years r748 1760, and 1785. 1748 1760 1785 1 add 1 add 1 add 19) 1749(92 19) 1761(9æ 19) 1786(94 171 171 171 39 51 76 38 38 76 o remains Therefore 19 is G. N. 2. Oſ the EPACT. * Tyr. What is the Epact? hil. The Epact is the Exceſs or Number of Days that the Solar exceeds the Lunar Year; the Solar being vulgarly accounted 365, and the Lunar 354 Days, the Difference is 11, which is called the Epact; thus you ſee one Year is ri Days, a Years 22 Days, 3 Years 33 Days, & c. but 30 being accounted a whole Lunation, you are to ſubtract 30, when it is above that Number, and the Remainder is the Epact. Tyr. But pray give me a general Rule with an Example or two. Phil. 1. To find the Epact according to the Julian or Old Stile. Rule. Divide the Golden Number by 33 if nothing remains, the Epact is the ſame as the Golden Number; but if 1 remains, add 10; if 2, add 20, and that will be the Epact. 2. To find the Epact according to the Gregorian or New Style. Rule. From the Golden Number take 15 then divide the Remainder by 3, and if nothing remains, the Epact will be the ſame as the Dividend, viz. 1 leſs than the Golden Number itſelf; but if r remains, add 1o to the Dividend; if æ remains, then add 2o to the a See the Rule, Page 326. G. Num. 1 G. Num. 13 ividend, and the Sum ſhall be the Epact for l hus in the laſt Section, the Golden Number for 13; and for 1785, 19. Then, G. Num. 1760 G. N. 1785 I3 19 Subtract I Subtract 1 3)12(4 3)18(6 12 18 12 18 o remains, oO  Epat therefore the Epact is 12. Again, 1753, G. Num. 6 Subtract 1 3)5(1 3 2 remains, therefore ac 5 the Dividend, it gives 25, the Epact. redellnus a TABLE of 19 Epacis for the Julian regorian Account, with their Golden Numbers. nr] Julian Gregoriar Julian Gregoq 3N. E2.s Ep. ν. S. G.N-E2-&.5 in ist I II 29 i 1] ao 2. 22 1I 12 12 i 3 3 22 13 13 12 æ 14 3 a 4 23 2 I I S§  a li& 28 7 17 6 17 7 26 8 28 17 18 18 7 9 9 28 19 29 18 3. Of the CXCLE of the Sun. Tor. I remember you told me the Cycle of the Moon is a Revolution of 19 Years; pray what is the Cycle oſ the Sun? Phil. This is a Revolution of 28 Years, at the End of which the Dominical or Sunday Letters A BCD E F and G (which are generally placed ægainſt the Sundays in common Almanecks) return again to the ſame Order they were in 28 Years beſore, and the a9th Year begins a new Cycle. ꝗ;r. I underſtand you in Part but why do you uſe juſt 7 Letters, and never more or leſs? Phil. Becauſe there are 7 Leap Years included in this Cycle; for every 4th Year you know is Leap Year, and 7 X 4 æÆ 28, the Cycle. Tyr. I am obliged to you; but how is the Cycle for any Year paſt, or to come, found? Ppil. By the following Rule. Add 9 to the given Year, and divide by 28, the Remainder is the Cyctle. EX AMP LE. For 1760 For 1795 9 9 28) 1769(63 28) 1804 (64 168 168 89 124 84 . II2 5 Cycle u1a2 Cyecle Tyr. I underſtand it plainly; but pray will this Rule nold good for any Time to comel? Phil. No longer than till the Year 1799; ſor every centeſimal Year being a Leap Year, it is omitted, and therefore another certain Number muſt be added to every Year of the next, or 19th Century; and in the 20th Century another certain Number. Tyr. By what Rule then am I to find the Cycle ol the Sun for the next Century. . Phil. As follows. To find the Cycle of the Sun the next Century. Add 25 to the Date of the Ycar (as you added 9 before) then divide by 28, and the Remainder will be the Cycle of the Sun for that Year; and this Rule ſtands good from 1800 to 1900. EX AMP L E. For 1860 For 1879 25 25 28) 1885)67 28) 1904(68 168 168 205 224 196 224 9 Cycle remains o therefore the Cycle is 285. Tyr. But how is the Cycle ſound in the 2oth Century, viæ. from 1900 to 2000. Phil. As follows. Rule. To the Number you added in the i9th Century (viz. 25) add 16 more, and from that Sum take 28, and the Remainder will be the Number to be added to the Date of the Year from 1900 to 2000. Thus 25  16 Æ 41 28 Æ 13, the Number to be added in the 19th Century, &c. Example. What is the Cycle of the Sun for 196o? ? r9co 13 28) 1973(70 196 , Cycle zr. I underſtand the Rule ve very well; but will not the Method of finding the Dominical Letter after this Century be changed, as well as for finding the Cycle. Phil. Yes, certainly,; ; but that will be better explained when we come to treat of the Dominical Letter; in the mean Time you will do well to remember that the Ycars 1800, 1900, 2000, &c. being Leap Years, ſhould have 2 Letters, according to the Old Style or Julian Account; but the Leap Year will be omitted every Century, and the Method or Rule of finding the Dominical Letter for any Time to come ſhall be ſhewn under that Head. 4. Oſ the DOMINICAL LETTER. ù What do you mean by the Dominical Letter? hil. The Dominical Letter is ſo called by being the Lordly Letter, or that which is placed in every common Almanack againſt the Lord's-Day or Sunday. Tyr. But is this Sunday, or Dominical Letter, always the ſame? Phil. No; there are 7 Dominical Letters, anſwering the 7 Days of the Weel., viæZ. ABCD EF and G; and theſe Letters alſo are uſed for every Month of the Year; A being ſet for January, B for February, C for March, &c. till you come to G; and then you begin with A again. ZTj5r. But pray, Sir, how am I to know what Letter is to be placed or put down for any Year to come in its due Order? Phil. That I will ſhew you by and by at large; but I think it will be neceſſary firſt, to give you ſome further Account of the Rotation, and Retrogradation of theſe Letters, and the more ſo, becauſe, as we keep our Reckoning now in England by the Gregorian Account, or New Style, the Rule for ſinding the Dominical Letter, according to the Julian Account or Old Style, will not do for any Year ſince 1752, for the Difference being 11 Days, there are 2 different Rules to find the Dominical Lecter for the ſame Year, according to the Style given, as you will ſee hereafter by an Example in each. Tyr. What is the Occaſion of the Variation of theſe Alphabetical Letters every Year? Phil. You will ſee the Reaſon, if you obſerve; for the common computed Year being 365 Days, and 7 Days make a Week, it is evident that dividing 365 by 7, the Quotient is 52 Weeks and 1 Day over; this 1 Day will conſequently be the laſt Day of the Month December, which ſhould be the Letter A, but this is uſed for January, as we ſaid before. 2. Now let us ſuppoſe the Year to conſiſt only of 364 Days, then there would be an even Number of 52 Weeks; all the Years would begin on the ſame Day of the Week, and each Month the ſame Day of the Week; but being 365 Days, the Year ends with the ſame Day it begins with; ſo in everv common Year, ſuppoſe the firſt Day of January to fall upon a Sunday, the firſt Day of January the next Year will fall on a Monday, and Sunduy will be the 7th Day of January, or Letter G, and the next Year will begin on Tueſday, and the Sunday upon the 6th Day; therefore, the Dominical Letter will be F, &c. 3. But every fourth Year is called Leap Year, and conſiſts of 366 Days, and therefore the &Srder of the Dominical Letter will be interrupted, and will not return again till the End of the whole Cycle, viæ. 28 Years Æ 4 X 7, which ſhews there are 7 Leap Years in the Cycle. Therefore, 4. If in a Leap Year the i1ſt of January ſhould fall on a Sunday, and the Dominical Letter ſhould be A, then the 2qth of February will fall on a Priday, and the 25th on Saturday, and the Letter uſed for both Days will be F; and the next Day being Sunday will have the Letter G; ſo that Leap Year, you ſee, will have 2 Letters; one, or that firſt found by the Rule itſelf, ſerves from the 25th Day of February to the End of the Year; and the other from the 1ſt of Yanuary to the 24th of February. Tꝗyr. How do you ſind the Dominical Letter in general? Phil. By this following Rule. Add the à Part of the Year, omitting Fractions, to the given Year itſelf; divide that Sum by 7, and the Remainder ſubtracted from 7, leaves the Figure, which repreſents or ſhews the Number of the Letter according to the Order of the Alphabet, viæ. 1is A; 2, B; 3, C 4, D; s, E; 6, F5 and 7 is G. N. B. If nothing remains after dividing by 7, then G is the Dominical Letter. For For 4)1760 4)1785 440 is ; adò 446 add 7) 2200(314 7)2231(318 21 21 1o 7 13 7 7 ? 7 5 30 3S E, the D. Lec. 6t1 2 or B 28 56 OS rne remains 2 remains 5 Then take this Remainder a from 7, there remains s, as above, which anſwers to E, the Dominical Letter. But this Year, 1760, being a Leap Year, has 2 Dominical Letters, and therefore ought to have 2 Letters, as was obſerved before. Tyr. But how am I to know theſe two Letters for a Certainty Phil. Having found the Letter according to the Rule; that will be the Dominical Letter, from the 24th of February to the 31ſt of December (now called the End of the Year); the other Letter from January to the 24th of February, will be always the next in the Order of the Alphabet: Thus in 1760, the Dominical Letter is E, ſerving from February to January; then from Yanuary to February place F, ſo will F ẽ be the Dominical Letters for 1760. . Tyr. Then I perceive the Letters in Leap Year, as weil as in other Years, ſometimes move retrograde or backwards. Phil. Yon are right, for 1776 will be a Leap Year, and you will find the Dominical Letter A, to be placed ſrom the 23th of February to the End of December; but B is the next in Order, therefore B is from Vanuary to the 24th of February, and the 2 Dominical Letters for 1766 are BA. Do you underſtand me now? Tyr. Yes, quite well; but will this Rule hold good after this Century? Pbil. No; for the Years 1800, 1900, &c. are Leap Years, and therefore, according to the Julian Account, ſhould have two Dominical Letters, but after this Century will have but one; becauſe every centeſimal Leap Year will be omitted, and the Rule altered, as it was for finding the Cycle. Tyr. Pray give me the Rule, and an Example. A Rule for finding the Dominical Letter after the ſear i 1800. I demand the Dominical Letter for 1845. Cut off æ Figures, thus. 181 45, divide the firſt 2, vix. :8, by 4 (regarding no Remainder) it makes 4, from which take 1, and the Remainder will be 3, which taken from the original Number 18, leaves 155 this Number taken from 21, (viæ. the Number of Sevens that are neareſt the Number 18) leaves 6, the new Number to be added to the given Yean, beſides its 4th; then divide by 7, as in the old Rule, and the Remainder ſhall be the Figure anſwering the Dominical Letter as before. 4) 1845 461 the 4th ; add 6 new Number ) 7) 2312(330 2 I 2 remains 2I Emmmmm 21 5 or E. the Dom. Letter 2 remains. Deo you underſtand this? Tyr. Yes, very well; but if you had not demonſrated the Rule itſelf, I believe I ſnould not have eaſily underſtood it. Phil. Then I will now give you a Table of Cycles and Dominical Letters for this Century. THE YOUNG MANs 5. A TABLE of the Cycles of the Sun and Dominical Letters, till the Tear 1800, according to the Gregorian Account, or New Style. ũ 1. Cycles of the Sun till 1800 N. S. Cycles] Letrs. ICycles ſLetrs. ICycles ILetrs. ICyclesl Letrs. DC 8 B 15 G  22 ĩ E 2 B 9 JAG] 16 F 23 D 3 A  10 F 17 ED] 24 C 4 G 11I1 E 18 C 25 BA S FE] 12 D 19 B 26 G 6  D 13 CB 20 A 27 F 7 CIl 14 A 2r  GF l 28 E To find the Gregorian Epact for ever. Rule. Divide the Centuries of any Chriſtian /Era by 4, (rejecting the ſubſequent or odd Number) multioly the Remainder by r75 then to this Product add the Quotient, multiplied firſt by 43, to which add 86, and divide this laſt Sum by 25; then multiply the Golden Number by 11, from which ſubtract the laſt Quotient, and rejecting the Number 30 as oſten as you can, the Remainder will be the Epact. See Page 318. S E C T. VI. The Uſe of the foregoing Tables, &c. with ſome practical aſe, Conbernſ the Change of the limæt HighWater at any Place, &c. and the Method of finding them. 1. To tell the Moon's Age at any Time. R U L E. Add to the Epact for the given Year as follows, viæ. for Tanuary (o), for February 2, for March 1, April 2, May 3, June 4, July s, Auguſt 6, September 8, October 8, Ròember 10, and December 10, and to this Sum add alſo the Day of the Month, if the Sum of theſe 3 Numbers be under 30, it gives the Moon's Age, il above 30, then ſubtract 30, and the Remainder is the Moon's Age, and if juſt 30, it is New Moon ſome Time on that Day. EXAMP L. E I. I would know the Moon's Age, YJune 20, Epact ꝗ for 1757 Add 3 for the Month June 20 the given Day r,l 33 30 ſubtracted n,,,,3 the Moon's Age. EXAMP L E 2. How old, or what is the Age of the Moon, 11, 1761? Epact 23 for 1761 10 for the Month 1i the Day given 44 Subtracted 30 14 Moons Age, which is the nearly ſo, that ſhe is at the full. 2. The Moon's Age given, to tell ho many D be to the Change or next New Moon. R U L E. Obſerve how many Days the Month coni which the preceding New Moon happened, the Number of Days contained in that Mont the Moon's Age, and the Remainder leſs 1 is t ber of Days to next New Moon. EXAMP LE. I find by the laſt Example, that on October the Moon was 24 Days old, conſequently Moon happened in September; therefore, September has 30 Days October 4 D's Age 24 6 I Æ 5 Tyr. I underſtand you well. bil. Inen we proceed, 3. To tell the Time to full Moon. R U L E. Add 15 to the Days of Change; if the Sum be under j0, it gives the Number of Days to Eull Moon; but f it exceeds 30, the Overplus gives the Number of Days. E X A M P L E. I find by the laſt Example, that on the 4th of October the Days to change, or to the next New Moon, are 5; therefore S  15 æ 205 ſo that on the 2oth of October the Moon will be at the Full. Again, June the 2oth, 1760, I find the Change or New Moon 22 Days, then 22 F 15 Z 37  30 Æ 7, ſo that on the 27th, it will be Fyull Moon. 4. To tell the Time of the Moons Southing. Rule. Multiply her Age by 4, and divide the Product by 5, and the Quotient viil fe the Hour, and the Remainder the fractional Parts of another Hour or the Minutes. I demand what Time the Moon will be full South on the 21ſt of April, 1761. I find her Age to be ſix Days, therefore 6 Days, / 4 -5)a4 4 2 Anſ. or 48 Minutes ù That is 48 Minutes paſt 4 in the Afternoor. ) o underſtand it? Tyr. Yes, very well; and pray what have you further to obſerve? Phil. Several Things inore which are very uſeful. As, 5. The Time of the Moon's Suuthing being given, to tell the T ime of High-Water at London Bridge. Rule. Add3 to the Time of her Southing, and you have very near the Time of High-Water at London Bridge, rejecting 12, if it be above that Number. Thus, by the foregoing Example, I find the Moon full South 48 Minutes paſt 4 in the Afternoon on April 27, 17615 to which if I add 3, it will be 48 Minutes paſt 7 in the Evening, the ſimo (very nearly) of HighWater at London-Bridge. TZyr. I underſtand you well; but why is the Number 3 in particular to be added, will no other Number doĩ? Phil. Not for the Port of London, but for other Ports or Places you muſt add different Numbers. Tyr. I am now quite at a Loſt, and ſhould be very glad if you would ſhew me the Rcaſon of High-Water ut a few noted Places, and how I may always find it. Phil. That I will very readily do. 6. Sheus the Reaſon of High-Water at London-DBridge, and the Method of ſinding it in any other Port or Place. Tyr. You told me that if I add 3 to the Moon's Southing, it tells me the Time of High-Water at London- Bridge; but for what Reaſon, pray? Phil. The full Tide in any Place depends upon the Point of the Compaſs the Moon happens to be upon; and the Diſtance in Degreus of ſuch Point from the North or South Point, converted into Time, gives the Hours and Minutes to be added to her Southing. Tyr. But how am I to know the Method of reducing theſe Degrees into Time? Phil. Very eaſily; for I take it for granted, you know how many Points there are in the Compaſs, and alſo which are oppoſite one to the other. Tyr. Indeed I do not. . Phil. Then it is high Time you ſhould, and you may ſoon do it by looking over the following Figure, called 7. The Mæriner's Compaſi. 1. This Figure ought to be learnt by Heart, beginning at the North Point, and proceeding to the Eaſt. and ſo quite round. 2. You are alſo to learn what the Mariners call boxing the Compaſo giæ. to know immediately what tpoint are oppoſite; S. E. is op oſite N. W. and N. W. by N. is oppoſite S. E. by ls, Tyr. I underſtand you ett, but what has this to do with telling me High- Water at different Places. il. Very much, it depends upon the Compaſs in a great Meaſure. Tyr. Why ſo? and 15 Degrees contain 1 Hour in Time, for 15 x 24 Æ 360. Tyr. This I underſtand very well, but what is all this to our preſent Purpoſe il. Very much; for as the Circle of Time is divided into 24 Parts of 15 Degrees each; ſo in this Figure, containing 32 Parts or Points of Wind, the Circle is divided by 32, each Point being ;; Part ol the Whole, or 1i Degrees i5 Minutes, viæ. 113, and therefore, whatever Part the Moon is upon from the North or South Point (converted into Time) ſhews the Time of High-Water at the different Places, according to the Point ſhe is upon, as ſhall be ſhewn here after. TIyr. I begin now to underſtand you, but hope you will not take it amiſs, that I enquire into the Reaſon of Things; for I know you would rather I ſhould aſk twent ueſtions after a Thing, than to tell you I underſtand it when I do not. Phil. That I had; but becaùſe I have neither Room nor Time to explain the Nature of theſe Things b proper Calculations, I ſhall give you a Table whic vill ſufficiently anſwer your Purpoſe. THE YOUNG MAN T A B L E I. 8. An alphaletical Liſt of ſeveral of the mofi noted on or near te Couſis of Great-Britain, rrance land, &c. ſbewing l ũt Point of the Compaſi tht is upon, to maoke fug. Water, as alſo the T ime of Water at ſuch Places. Places. l roints. A Aldborough SE by S & NW by N Amſterdam ꝶ & S W Antwerp E & Beachy and Blacktail N& §S Berwick NE by N& S W by S reſt NE by E& S W by W Briſtol Key E by S & W by N Bridge water ESE & W NW Cork, Calais, C. Clear ENE & WSW Caſkets ]ISE by S & NW by N Cowes SSE& NNW Dartmouth E & V Dover Pier & off Dunkirk N & S over, Diepe and Downss SSE & NNW ublin SE by E& NW by W Dunbar 55 & NW Embden r N& S Flanders Coaſt N & S luſhing N by E & S b w ſlamborough ENE & WSW oulneſs and Falmouth o E by S & W by N Foreland South SSE& NNW Foreland North S by E & N by W Gibraltar Road N& S Places. Points. Severn at the Mouth Southampton, at the Spits and along the N& S 12 Swin Tinmouth and Tees NE & S W Texel Cliffs ENE & W S W 30 Torbay E & V Uſhant Bay within ENE & WSW 30 Uſhant without E & M 6 Winchelſca N by E & S by W 45 ells, eymout æ and Watdshed h, à E & V 6 Yarmouth SEDY E&Nχ by Wl] 8lis5 Yarmouth Road SSE & NNW lioſ0 Zealand Coaſt NNE & S S W 1l30 9. An Explanation of the foregoing Table. Tyr. Be ſo kind, Sir, as to give me an Example or two of the proper Uſe of this Table. Phil. Suppoſe I wanted to know the Time of HighWater at London, at the Full and Change of the Moon, and what Point the Moon is upon at the Time of HighWater. I look in the Table for London, and find againſt it NE and S W, which is 4 Points of the Compaſs from the North or South Point; that is 4 Times 11â, which is 45 Degrees; now every 15 Degrees make 1 Hour, therefore 45 muſt be 3 Hours from 12 o'Clock: But at Torbay I find the Hour to be 6; therefore the Moon at that Time is either on the Eaſt or Weſt Point of the Compaſs. Tyr. I underſtand this quite well; but how am I to find the Time of High-Water at any Place. Phil. By either of the following Tables. TABLE II. TaABLE III. Shews che Time of the] Time of F ull Sea at Full and Moon's Southing onſChange given (by Table I.) every Dav of her Age. ]ſto tellĩtatany Time or Place. Mooms Age.ſ Southing.  Moons Age. Time to be Hours Min. added. 1 16 o 48 1 16 o 43 2 17 1 36 2 17 1 20 3 18 2 24 3 18 I S2 4 19 3 12 4 19 2 22 5 20 4 5 20 2 572 6 21 4 48 6 21 3 26 7 aaæ s 356 7 22 4 7 8 23 6 24 8 23 4 55 9 24 7 12 9 24 5 Spo 10 25 8 10 25 6 53 11 26 8 48 11 26 7 59 1- 277 9 36 12 27 9 34 13 28 10O 24 13 28 ro 8 14 29 1I 12 14 29 1I s5 16 30 12 IS 30 oO OOο The Uſe of Table II. Example. Suppoſe the Moon to be io Days old; I demand the Time of her Southing? I look into the Table for io, her Age; and againſt it in the ſecond Column I find 8, therefore I conclude that 8 Hours paſt Noon, viæ. at 8 at Night, the Moon will be full South at 10 Days old. N. You muſt note, that in the firſt Column you find æ5 againſt 10, therefore as 8 in the ſecond Column ſtands againſt 25, as well as 1o, the Moon will be ſull South at 8 when ſhe is 25 Days old, as well as when ſhe is 10 Days old; but with this Difference, that at 25 Days old it will be 8 oClock in the Morning inſtead of the Evening. 10. The Moon's Age being given, to tell the Time of HighWater on any Day at any Place. . Example. Suppoſe the Moon 1o Days old (as in the laſt) I demand the Time of High- Water at LondonBridge, Tarmouth, and Torbay. I. I find by Table II. that the Moon is full South at 8 at Night, when ſhe is ro Days old (by the laſt Example) and turning to Table I. I find right againſt London 3 Hours; this being adòed to her Soutnhing, (viæ. 8) makes 1i; the Hour of the Night of HighWater at London-Bridge. 2. For Yarmouth. Look in Table I. as before, and right againſt it I find 8 Hours 15 Minutes, which I add to 8, the Moon's Southing (as before) and it gives 16 Hours 15 Minutes. This being above 12, I ſubtract 12 from it, and find 4 Hours i5 Minutes remain; therefore it is 4 Hours 15 Minutes paſt Midnight, viæ. 15Minùtes paſt 4 in the Morning. For Torbay. I find 6 in the firſt Table, therefore I add 6 to the Moon's Southing, vix. 8, which gives r4 which being 2 above 12, ſhews it is High-Water at Torbay at 2 in the Morning, when the Moon is 10 Days old. And thus for any other Places. Tyr. I underſtand you quite well; but what is the Cſe of Table III? . Phil. Much the ſame in Effect as ſable II. for having found the Time of Full Sea, or High-Water, upon the Full and Change Days by Table I. then ſeek the Age of the Moon, that Time in this Table, and the Hours and Minutes that ſtand againſt her Age in the ſecond Column hereof, which are to be added to what you found in the firſt Table, will give the Time of High- Water nearly at that Place and I'ime. Tyr. Pray give me an Example. Phil. I will. Suppoſe the Moon 9 Days old, I demand the Time of High-Water in the Downs. By Table I. The Moon being SSE, or NNW, makes a Full Sea upon Full and Change Days; look in Table I. and againſt the Word Downs you will find 10 Hours 30 Minutes. Alſo againſt 9, her Age in Table ble III. ſtands 5Hours 50 Minutes, which added to 10 Hours 30 Minutes, gives 16 Hours 20 Minutes; from which take 12, (when it is above 12) there remains 4 Hours 20 Minutes, which is 20 Minutes paſt 4 in the Morning. Do you underſtand it? Tyr. Quite wellAnd now I ſhould be glad if you would ſhew me a few Queſtions in Navigation. S E C T. VII. OF NAVIGATION. 7Tpypr. What do you mean by Navigation? hil. Navigation is that Branch of the Mathematics, or that Art, which teaches to guide or conduct a Ship ſafely from one Port to another, or to any known Place in the World, and is built upon the Knowledge and Practice of Geometrſy and Trigonometry, &c. Tyr. What are the different Methods of practical Navigation? Phil. It is divided into three principal Parts, vix. Plane Sailing., Mercator's Sailing, and Circular Sailing. I. Of PLANE SAILING. Tyr. What do you mean by Plane Sailing? Phil. Plane Sailing is the Foundation of the others, being the moſt ſimple and eaſy of all, and will do very well at or near the Equator, but becomes more and more erroneous the further we are from that Line or Part oſ the World. Tyr. What is the Reaſon of this? hil. Becauſe at, or near the Equator, the Degrees oſ Longitude are nearly equal to thoſe of Latitude, but ir advancing towards the Poles are not ſo. ZTy5r. Pleaſe to give me an Example or two. Phil. I will. P ROBLEM I Suppoſe a Ship to ſail S E by S (called the Rhumb or Point of the Compaſs) 124 Leagues, I demand her Diſffe rence of Latitude and Departure from the Meridian, viæ N. B. Always remember to bring the Leagues into Miles or Minutes before you work the QueſtionDE FINITION. In the Triangle ABC, the Hy- Fig. 1. pothenuſe AC is the Diſtance A ſailled or Rhumb-Line, BC the Departure or Difference of Longitude, and A B the Difference of Latitude. Then, 1. To find the Differenceof Latitude. As Radius or S of ꝗ90 φ To the Diſt. ſailed 372' Sois the Sc of L A 566 15'the Courſe To the Side A B 309'.3 B This divided by 60 gives 56 9' 18ꝰ, the Difference of Latitude. 2. To find BC, the Departure from the Meridian. As Radius 90 To the Diſtance AC 372 So is the S of  of the Courſe A 330 45 To the Side BC 206.6 her Departurè, which divided by 6o gives 30 26' 36 the Difference of Longitude. OBSERVATION. By the firſt Operation, you may tell how far you have ſailed North or South, called Northing or Southing; by the ſecond, how far you have ſailed Eaſt or Weſt, called Eaſting or Weſting. By GUNTER'S Scale. Set one Foot of the Compaſſes in eight Points on the Line marked S R, (viæ. Sine Rhumhs) and the other in three Points, that Extent on the Line of Numbers will reach from 372 the Diſtance, to 206. 6 the Departure. 2dly, Extend from Radius, or eight Points, to five Points, ſthe Complement of the Courſe) on the Line S R, and the ſame Extent on the Line of Numbers will reach from 372 the Diſtance, to 309.3 the Difference ol Latitude. * In conſtructing Figures relating to a Ship's Courſe, let the upper Part of the fools or whateves the figure be drawn uponrepreſent the North, the lower Part the South, the Right Eaſt, and the Left che Weſt, as in the Figure above. § v N. B. This Example by Gunter, well underſtood, vil be ſufficient for all. PROBLEM I.. The Rhumb (or Point of the Compaſi the Ship ſaii upon) and Difference of Tiare being given, to  du iſtance and Departure. . DEFINITIO N. In the foregoing Figure A BC, ſuppoſe a Ship to ſai S E by S till the Difference of her Fatituòt e Al Z 309.3 Minutes; I demand her Diſtance ſailed, viæ AC, and her Departure from the Meridian, viæ. EC. . 1. To find the Diſtance. As Sc of  of the Courſe A 56015 To the Side AB, the Diſff. oſLat 300.3 So is Radius or S of 90 To the Side AC 372 Whaich is the Diſtance ſailed. HE 2. For the Departure. As the Sc of Æ of the Courſe A 560 15 To the Side A B the Disf. of Lat. 309.3 So is the S of the æ of the Courſe A 330 45' To the Side B C the Departure 206.6. Or, As Radius to the Diſtance 372, ſo is the Sine of the Courſe 330 45 to the Departure 206. 6. N. B. This is only the Reverſe of Problem the firſt, and therefore eaſily performed by Gunter's Scale. PRO B L EM III. The Digference of Latitude and Longitude being giv to find Bsn or Courſe, and Diſtance.  gtuem 435 THE YOUNG MAN:s DEFINITION. Fig. 2. In the Triangle ABC, let A repreſent any Place B (ſuppoſe the Lizard) that che Ship is in, A B the direct Line or Parallel thereof; let the Point C be called the Iſſe of St. & Mary in the Azxores, and CB its Meridian: Then there is given the Side AB Z 816, the Diſtance of the Lizard from the Meridian of St. Mary, or ſli the Difference of Longitude; and B C the Difterence of Latitude 768: Now 1. To find the Rhumb or Angle at C. As the Side B C 768 To Radius or S of 9o So is the Side A B 816 . To the Tangent of the Rhumb or Angle at C 466 443 this divided by 113 (the Degrees in one Point or ubhſ gives four Rhumb Points. and 1 44 more, which ſhews that the Rhumb or Point of the Compaſs from the Ligard to St. Marys is the 4th Rhumb from that Meridian and 10 44' or nearly 1 2 Degrees more, viz. S W and 1 3 Degrees nearly ſtill more weſterly: But if you take it from St. Mary's to the Lizard, then it will be the oppoſite Rhumb or Point of the Compaſs, viæ. N E and 1044 more eaſterly, the Reverſe of the former. 2. For the Diſtance AC. As the S of the Rhumb or  at C 466 44 To the Side AB 8 16 So is the Radius To the Hypoth. AC 1120.5, which is the Diſtance from the Liæard to St. Murys, the Diſtance by the plain Chart or Sailing. Do you underſtand it, Tyro & 4Sjyr. I underſtand it very well, Sit, but ſhould have been better pleaſed if you had wrought the Queſtions out at ſ.ength. Phil Phil. I thought ſo with myſelf; but I aſſure you it is of more Advantage to you upon the whole; for conſider, T;ro, I have not left you without the Manner of working every Queſtion, and certainly you cannot be ſo idle as not to put theſe Rules in Practice; and though I grant it is a little more Trouble, yet I am ſenſible, if you work them yourſelf, and find them agreeable to the Anſwers here laid down, it will increaſe zou Knowledge more, and give you ten Times the Satisfaction than if they were fully anſwered to your Hand. Tyr. I believe what you ſay to be true, Sir, for indeed I own, as you have given all the Sides, Angles, &c. I have nothing more to do but to find their Logarithms accordingly, and work as before: But pray then give me another Example, if it be of any further service. Phil. I will. PRO BLEM IV. Tuo Ships ſail from a certain Port A; one ſails ENF 40, the other E by S, ſo far till ſbe finds the fiu ſſ Ship to beur from her N W ùby W; I demand the ſecond Ship's Diſiance from the Port A; and their Diſtance then from each other. - DE FINIT ION. In the Triangle ABC, let A be the Port from which both Æ the Ships ſail, AB the ENE Courſe, and A C the Courſe E by S: Then 2, T ſind the Diſtance of the ſecond Ship. As the S of the  C 220 30 To the Side AB 40 . So is the S of the æ at B 1230 45 342- THE YOUNG MAN s To the Side AC 86.98, the Diſtance of the ſecond Ship from the Port. . 2. To find the Diſtance of the tuwo Ships, viz. the Side BC. As the S of the  at C 22ꝰ 30 To the Side A B 406 So is the S of the  A 339 45 To the Side B C 58. 12, the Diſtance of the two Ships, vizx. B and C. Do you underſtand it, Tyro ? Tr9r. Sir, I acknouledge I am not quite perfect, but I ſee the Nature and Manner of working of the Problems very plainly. Phil. That's ſufficient; then I will ſet you a few Queſtions or Problems, by way of Exerciſe, to which you may prefix any Angles or Numbers. PROBLEMV. A Sbip ſails S W by W, till her Difference of Longitude (viz. her Deporture from ihe Meridián) is 226 Minutes, demand the Diſtancè ſailed, and Difference of Latitude. 1. For the Diſtante. As S of the Courſe SW by W, (viæ. 560 15') to the Departure 220: So is Radius, to the Diſtance 265 Minutes ÆZ 88 Leagues one Mile. 2. For ibe Difference of Latitude. As Radius: Diſtance 03 : Sc of 56 15', the Courſe, viz. 330 45': Difference of Latitude 147.2 Minutes, vi. 29 27' 12'. By GUNTER. Extend the Compaſſes from s Points to 8 Points on the Line S R, and that Extent on cthe Line of Numbers will each from 220 the Departure, to 265 the Diſtance. Again, extend from 8 Points to three Points, ſthe Complement of the Courſe) that Extent on the Line of Numbers will reach from 265 the Diſtance, to 147.2 the Difference of Latitude, as above. P RO B LEM VI. The Diſtunce 247, and Departure 197, given, to find the Courſe and Difference of Latitude. 1. For the Courſe. As the Diſtance 247: Radius:: the Departure 197: S of the Courſe 52ꝰ 54. . For the Difference of Latitude. As Radius Diſtance 247:  Sc of Courſe 76: Difference of the Latitude 149. â : By GUNTER. Extend the Compaſſes from 247 to 197, and the ſame Diſtance will reach from Radius to the Sine of the Courſe 2ꝰ 54.. Alſo the Extent from Radius to the Sc of the ourſe 370 6 will reach the ſame Way from the Diſtance 247 Minutes, to the Difference of Latitude 149 Minutes. Tyr. I am obliged to you, Sir; and neĩ leaſe to tell me ſomęthing concerning what is commonly called Mercator's Sailing. lili Phil. It muſt be very little then, becauſe if Opporgunity would allow of it, Room will not; but however I will grant your Requeſt. - ll ll 2. Of sajling by the true Chart, called Mercator's. - . Tyr. What do you mean by Mercator's Sailing; and what is the Difference between this and Plane Sailing? Phil. By Mercator's Chart all Places on the Globe are laid down with great Truth, reſpecting both their Latitudes, Longitudes, Bearings, and Diſtances; but this is better underſtood by the following Table of Meridional Parts or Difference of Latitudes, and its Uſe applied to Practice. * Though this is called Mercator's failing. yet it appears by the beſt of Authors that I could ever vet ſee, that the Invention belongs Tyr. What is the Uſe of this Table? hil. The Uſe is to find the Meridional Miles or Parts in any Latitude, or between two given Places differing in Latitude, as follows: ſ r. If one Place be at the Equator, and another in North or South Latitude, then the Number anſwering to the laſt is the Meridional Miles; thus the Difference between the Meridional Miles at the Equator, which obſerve is ſo) and in N. Latitude 526 is 3665 Miles. and in 25ꝰ Latitude it is 1549 Miles; as you will find to ſtand right againſt theſe Numbers, 25 and s52. 2 If two Places have both North or both South Latitude, then the Meridional Parts or Miles belonging to each ſubtracted, will give the Meridional Difference of Latitude in Miles Thus, ſuppoſe one Place 52U North ſgihich is 3665') the other 4066 N. (which is 2622') their ifference is 1043, the Meridional Difference, &c. 3. If one Place be in North, and the other in South Latitude, then adding their Meridional Parts together, gives the Meridional Difference: Thus, in 52 North, the Miles anſwering in the Table are 3665; and againſt any other Number at Pleaſure ,ſuppoſinẽ 40 South) ſtands 26223 this added to 3665 North, gives 6287, the Meridional Difference of Latitude. And thus for any Places. T3r. This is eaſy enough; but pray can't you give me an Example or two at large? Phil. I il do any Thing to ſerve you, but it will be proper firſt of all to give you an Example of the Uſe oſ the Table. llii . The Uſe of the TABLE. Suppoſe one Place in 216 North Latitude, the other in 526 N. What is the Meridional Difference of Latitude in Miles 2 The Meridional Parts of 522 are - 3665 The Meridional Parts anſwering to 21ꝰ are 1289 Difference 2376 N. B. If one had been North and the other South, then add them: 52ꝰNN. and 21S. is only adding the above Numbers togetlier anſwering thereto, which is 4954. PROBLEM LI. Having the Latitude and Diſtance of tuo Places, to fina the Rhumb and Difference of Longitude. . . To find the Rhumb or Courſe. As the Ditance to Radius, ſo is the Difference of Laſitude to the Sine Complement of the Rhumb required: hen, 2. To ſind the Difference of Longitude. As Radius to the Difference of Latitude in Meridional Parts, ſo is the Tangent of the Rhumb, to the Difference of Longitude required. P RO B L E M II. Tte Latitudes and Diſfference of Longitude of any tun Places being giuen, io find the Rbumb and Diſtance. To find the Rhumb. As the Mendone Difference of Latitude i in Miles to Radiuss fo is the Difference of Longitude in Miles, to the Tarſgent of the Rhumb required. 2. To find the Diſtance. Firſt find the Difference of Latitude in the common Way, and bring it into Miles, by multiplying by 60o; then ſay As the Sine Complement of the Courſe, to the pror Difference of Latitude in Miles, ſo is Radius to the Binuncc! in Miles. PROBL EM III. Having the Latitude and Rhumb of tuo Places given, to ſind their Diſtance, and Difference of Longitude. . To ſind the Diſtance. As the Sine Complement of the Courſe to the Difference of Latitude, ſo is the Radius to the Diſtance. 2. To find the Difference of Longitude. As Radius to the Difference of Latitude in Meridional Parts, ſo is the Tangent of the Rhumb to the Diſference of Longitude required. . . PRO BLEM IV. Having the Rhumb, Diſtance, and one Latitude given, to sind the other Latitude with ihe Difference of Longitude. 1. To find the other Latitude. As Radius to the given Diſtance, ſo is the Sine Complement of the Rhumb, to the other Latitude required. 2a. To find the Difference of Longitude. As Radius to the Difference of Latitude in Meridional Parts, ſo is the Tangent oſ the Rhumb, to the Difference of Longitude required. llilll lii PROBLEM V. l Having the Digſerence of Longitude, the Rhumb, and one Luatitude giv'n, to find the Diſtance and other Latitude. 1. To fſind the other Latitude. As the Tangent of the Rhumb to the Diſference oſ Longitude in Parts, ſo is the Radius to the Meridional Difference of Latitude in Parts required. Hiũlll a.PFor the Diſtance. ĩliũ As the Sine Complement of the Rhumb to the Diſference of Latitude, ſo is the Radius or Sine of 9o, to the Diſtance requirrcd . Theſe Problems, Tyro, you may eaſily try by any Numbers you pleaſe; and therefore, I ſhall now give you an Example or two in Circular Sailing. 3. Of CIRCULAR SAILING. T,. What do you mean by Circular Sailing? l Circular ſàling is ſailing by the Rules of Spherical Trigonometry, or by the Knouledge of Spherical Circles, and therefore muſt be the moſt exact Way, and beſt Method of all llilil Plnefa ZTyr. en I perceive that Plane Sailing only ſuppoſes the  arth to be like a Circle or Plane Sut ſcico. opoſ Piil. You ſay right, and therefore Plane Trigonometry will anſwer all ſuch Queſtions; and from hence it may very properly be ſaid to ſail, or to ſuppoſe to ſail in Plano, or otherwiſe Plane Sailing. lli Tyr. But pray how is it poſſible to keep ſailing for æ ponſiderable Diſtance, exactly in the Arch of a great ircle ? . Pbil. Tis impoſſible to keep quite cloſe to this Method, becauſe of the Roughneſs of the Sea at different Times and Places, and the Uncertainty of the Wind, &c. but vet, Circular Sailing is of great Advantage, barticularly in long Voyages, that have direct Eaſt and MVeſt Courſes. yr. Pray tell me, in ſhort, what the Difference is then between Circular Sailing and the two formerit Pbil. In Plane and Mercator's Sailing, Meridians, Rhumbs and Parallels are uſed as the Sides of Triangles; but in Circular Sailing, the Rhumbs are uſed as feſte Spherical Lines, but the Parallels are not uſed as the Sides, becauſe they are not the Arches of great Circles. In ſhort, in Circular Sailing, the Meridian, or Arches of Meridians and Equator, are uſed to form, or make a Triangle agreeable to, and anſwer every Courſe and Diſtance. Tyr. I underſtand your Meaning very well; but are there no Rules firſt to be known before we begin to work any Problems ? hil. I ſee no Occaſion for any, as you have before been taught Geograph?; however, obſerve, ꝗ 1. Should two or more given Places lie under the Equinoctial, then is their Poſition Eaſt and Weſt; therefore the Difference of their Longitudes converted into Miles gives their proper Diſtance. And 2. Should they lie under the fame Meridian, cviæ. North and South of each other) then their Difference in Degrees. converted into Miles tells the Difference oſ their Latitude. P R O B. I. Let there be two Places (or tuo Ships at Sea) lying in the same Latitude, and let the Difference of the Longitude be given; it is required to find the neareſt Diſtance from ea other in the Arch of à great Circle, and the true or direct Poſition or Situaĩion fom each other. 1. For their neareſt Diſtance. As Radius to the Sc of the given Latitude; ſo is the S of à the Difference of Longitude, to the S of ; the Diſtance required, the Double of which gives the Diſtance required. 2. For the direct Poſition or Situation. As Radius, to the S of the Latitude; ſo is the Tangent of I the Difference of Longitude, to the Sc of the  of Poſition required. llil P R O B. II. Suppoſe iwo Ships ſor two Places) are one under the Equi1 noctial, and the other in any given Latitude, their Difſerence of Longitude being given; it is required to find, firſt, The Biance ſsrom each other; 2. The direct Poſition or Situation from the firſt to the ſecond, and alſo the direct Poſition or Situation in reſpect of each other. 1. To find the neareſt Diſtance. As Radius to the Sc of the Difference of Longitude, ſo is the Sc of the Difference of Latitude, to the Sc of the Arch of the Diſtance required. 2. 2. To find the Poſition from the ſirſt to the ſecond Place. As Radius to the S of the Difference of Latitude, ſo is the Tc of the Difference of Longitude, to the TC o the Angle of Poſition. Hll 3. For the Poſition from the ſecond to the firſt Place. As Radius to the S of the Difference of Longitude, ſo is the Tc of the Difference of Latitude, to the Tc of the Angle of Poſition. P R O B. III. Coming off the main Ocean, I had the Sight of a Canes and intended to ſoii to it; Ifind it to bear from me NNW, and by  omputation 335 Miles Diſtance. But having continued my Courſe N for 36 Miles from this Obſervation, I there anchored . I deſire to now how ihe ſaid Cape now bears, and its Diſtance from me? In the annexed Figure or Triangle ABC, I ſuppoſe the Ship to be at A, and the Cape at B to bear from me NN W 33 then ſailing from my firſt Station A to α c the ſecond Station at C, 36 North, q I would then know the Diſtance β § and Bearing of the Cape B from &) o the Point C. bà S 1. In this Triangle are given æ ABæ33, ACæ36, and the Angle Z za258 30. lll lili A 1. To find the Angle at C. A  the Sum of the Sides AC and AB, to the Difference of the ſame Sides, ſo is the T of ; the unknown xcs, B and C, viæ. 789 45, to the T of 12ꝰ 20, their à ifference; which taken from the ; Sum, leaves 66 a5' for the Angle C, which is equal to 6 Points, all but 10 5; therefore the Bearing of the Cape B from C is W S W, and iꝰ 5 more ſoutherly. Do you underſtand me? . BOOK OF KNOVWLEDGE. 353 Tyr. Very well, except it be, I don't know from whence the above hęo 45' comes. Phil. I am ſurpriſed to ſee you at a Loſs in Things ſo plain. Obſerve then the Angle A 22ꝰ 30, then muſt the other 2 4 B and C be Æ 157 30, becauſe 1579 30 4 226 30' Æ 1806ꝰ  to all the 5s of any Plane Triangle; now the  of 1570 30 Ææ78 45 Tyr. I thank you, Sir, asſ. am now t ſatisfied with the whole Operation. Phil. Then Pll proceed, 2. To ſind the Diſtance B from the Ship at C. As the S of the  C 6c 25, to the Side AB 33, ſo is the S of the Angle at A 22 30, to the Side B C 13 78'; ſo that the Cape is diſtant rat er more than 133 Miles. S E C T. VIII. Here follows a Collection of Problems proper for the youn Practitioner, in the further Knoule edge v Airinons Nevi gation, &c. P R O B. I. The Sun's Place given, to find his right qſgenß- n. As Radius to the T of the Sun's Longitude from the neareſt Equinoctial Point, ſo is the Sc of his greateſt Declination, to the T of his right Aſcenſion from the neareſt Equinoctial Point. P R O B. II. The Declination of the Sun being given, to ſind the Sun's Place or Longitude from Aries. As the S of the s greateſt Declination, to Radius; ſo is the S of his preſent Declination to the S of the Sun's Place. P R O B. II. The &s Declination given, to find his right Aſcanſion. As Radius to the Tc of the Sun's greateſt Declination; ſo is the T of the given Declination, to the right Aſcenſion from æ or æ, as required. P R O B. IV. The Latitude and Sun's Declination giuen, to fiud the Aſ cenſional Difference. As Radius to the T of the given Latitude, ſo is the T of the Sun's Declination given, to the S of the Aſcenſional Difference required in begrees and Minutes, which converted into Time (as in Prob. 16. p. 216.) gives the Time the Sun riſes or ſets before and after Six o'Clock. P R O B. V. Toa fſind the Sun's oblique Aſcenſion and Deſcenſion. 1. Find his Right-Aſcenſion by Prob. 1. and his Aſcenſional Difference as in the laſt; then obſerve, if his Declination be North, to fubtrace the Aſcenſional Difference out of his Right- Aſcenſion in the 6 northen Signs, and it gives the oblique Aſcenſion; but added to the Right Aſcenſion, gives the oblique Deſcenfion. 2. But ſhould the Sun have a South Declination, then add the Aſcenſional Difference to the Point given im the 6 ſouthern Signs to the right Aſcenſion, gives the oblique Aſcenſion, but ſubtracted from the ſame gives the oblique Deſcenſion. . P R O B. VI. Thbe Latitude and Sun's Declination given, to find his Amplitude. As the Sc of the Latitude, to Radius; ſo is the S of the Sun's Declination, to the S of the Amplitude from the Eaſt or Weſt Point of the Horiaon. N. B. This Problem is of t Uſe for finding the Variation of the Needle; for the Sum or Bifference of the Suns Amplitude, and Magnetic Amplitude (according as it may happen) gives the Variation required. P R O B. VII. Having the Sun's Amnplitude srom the North Point, and bis Declination given; to find the Latitude. As the Sc of the Amplitude from the North Point, Radius; ſo is the S of the given Declination, to the c of the Latitude required. v . P R O B. VIII. The Latitude and Sunm's Declination given, to tell on any Day what Time the Sun will be upon the true Eaſt and Waeſt Points. As the T of the Latitude, to the T of. the Sun's Declination; ſo is Radius, to the Sc of the Hour from Noon. P R O B. IX. The Latitude and Sun's Declination given, to ſind his Altitude at Six o' Clock. As Radius to the S of the Sun's Declination, ſo is the S of the given Latitude to the Sun's Altitude at Six. P R O B. X. The Latitude ond Sun's Declination given, to find the Aximuth at Six o'Cloct. As Radius to the T of the Sun's Declination, ſo is the Sc of the Latitude of the Place, to the T of the Azimuth ſought. N. B. This Problem is of t Uſe to find the Poſition or Declination of any Place from the North and South in order to fix a Sun-Dial. P R O B. XI. Having the Latitude and Sun's Declination, to find his Aititude on the Eaſt and Weſt Points. As the S of the Latitude to Radius, ſo is the S of the Declination to the S of the Sun's Altitude at due Eaſt and Weſt. P R O B. XII. The Latitude given, to find the Sun's Altitude at any Time. As Radius: Tc of the Latitude: : the S of the Sun's Diſtance from Six o'Clock: T of a 4th Arch, which being taken out of the Sun's Diſtance from the Pole, gives a 5th Arch: Then ſay, A As the Sc of the 4th Arch thus found: Sc of the remaining or sth Arch:: the S of the Pole's Heignht of Latit e: S of the Sun's Altitude all the Time required. P RO B L E M XiII. The Sun's Declination, Altitude, ond Hour from Noon given, to find the Aximuth. As the Sc of the Sun's Altitude: S of the Hour from Noon:: the S c of the Sun's Declination: S of the Azimuth required. PRO B LE M XIV. The Sun's Altitude, Declination, and Aæzimuth given, to il find the Latitude. As the S of the Sunm's Azæimuth: S of his Diſtance from the North Pole:: the S of the æ of the Sun's Poſition: Sc of the Latitude required. PR O B L EM XV. Having the Latitude given, as alſo the Sun's Altitude ana Hiour from Noon, to find the Angle of the Sun's Poſition. As the Sc of the Sun's Altitude: S of the Hour from Noon:: the Sc of the Latitude to the S of the  of the Sun's Poſition. . PRO BL EM XVI. To find what Angle the Ecliptic makes with the Meridian. As Radius: S of the Sun's greateſt Declination: : Sc of the Sun's Right Aſcenſion from the next Equinoctial Point: Sc of the  of the Ecliptic with the Meridian. PRO BL EM XVII. Having the Sun's Altitude, Declination, and Aximuth, tfind the Latitude. As the S of the Suns Azæimuth: S of his Diſtance from the N. Pole: : the S of the Angle of the Sun's Poſition: N. B. Here follows a Collection of Problems relating to Aſtrology, rather for Curioſity than any immediate Dependance upon future Events; though many of them are not without their Advantages, nor altogether without ſome Certainty, if what the Problem is built upon is true, both as to Circumſtance and Time, in which Caſes man natural Preſages and Predictions have happened according to ſuel and ſuch Calculations. PRO BI EM XVIII. The Diſtance of the Sun, from either u the Equinoctial it Points  or æ, being given, to find its Declination. As Radius or S of 9o: S of the Sun's Diſtance from the next Equinoctial Point:: the S of the Sun's greateſt Declination: S of his preſent Declination. PRO BL EM XIX. To find the Quantity of any Angle of the 12 Houſes, or the Giaites of the Uull which the Circles of the 12 Houſes mate with the Meridian. As Radius: Tang. of 30 for the 2d, 6th, 8th, and 12th Houſe (or the Tang. of 6o for the 3d, sth, 9th, and 11th Houſe):: the Sc of the Pole: Tc of any Houſe with the Meridian. N. B. The 1ſt Houſe is called the Horoſcope or Angle of the Eaſt; the 7th Houſe the Angle of the Weſt; the 4th the Angle of the North; and the roth the Angle of the South. PRO BLEM XX. To find the Right Aſcenſion of the Point of the Equinoctial o ſ Aſenſinsithe cumto quinocit Find the Sun's Right Aſcenſion, then reduce the Time from Noon laſt paſt into Degrees, and add this to the Suns Right Aſcenſion; and the Sum ſhall be the Right Aſcenſion of the Point then in the Equinoctial, which is called Medium or Cor Cæli. PRO BL EM XXI. To ſind the Angle of the Ecliptic with the Horizon. As Radius: Sc of the Altitude of Cor Cæli :: the S of the  of the Ecliptic with the Meridian: Sc of the  of the Ecliptic required. 358 THE YOUNG MAN PRO BLEM XXII. Having the Altitude of Medium Cœli, and the Angle of the Ecliptic with the Meridian given, to find the pi tance of the Azimuth from the Reriatem otherwiſe i Amplitude of Ortive Gſ the Aſcendant, * or Horoſcope. As Radius or S of 90èφ: S of Medium Ccœli:: the T of the  of the Ecliptic with the Meridian: Fc of the Amplitude Ortive of the Aſcendant. P RO BLEM XXIII. Having the Angle of the Ecliptic and the Altitude of Medium Cæli given, to find ihe Cuſp of the firſt Point oſ any of the 12 Houſes. N. B. The Amplitude Ortive of the Aſcendant is equal to the Diſtance of the Avimuth of 9o from the Meridian, therefore the Cuſp or Aſcendant Degree of the firſt Houſe is thus found. As Radius or S of 90: Sc of the  of the Ecliptic with the Meridian:: the Tc of the Altitude of Cor or Med. Cœli to the T of the Diſtance of Med. Cœli from the Aſcendant Degrees. llùi PROB LEM XXIV. To find the Altitude of the Pole above any of the Circles of the 12 Houſes. N. B. If the Angle of the Circle of the Houſe be not given, find it by Problem 19th. Then, As Radius: Sc of æ of the Circle of the given Houſe :: S of the Pole's Elevation or Latitude: S of the Altitude of the Pole above the Circle of Poſition of any given Houſe. * The Aſcendant is that Degree of the Equator which riſes the Time any Perſon is born, &c. and Horoſcope is that Degree of the Aſcendant of that Star or Planet which riſes, and which is then taken Notice of in order to predict any Event, or calculate the Time and Circumſtance of future Events. v P H PRO BL EM XXV. laving the Latitude and Declination of any fixed Star given, to tell when it will be due Eaſt and due Weſt. As the S of the Pole's Altitude: Radius:: the S o the Star's Declination: S of the Star's Elevation above cthe Horizon, upon the true Eaſt and Weſt Points. PRO B L EM XXVI. To find the Moon's Horizontal Parallax. As the Diſtance of the Moon from the Center of the Earth: Earth's Semi-Diameter:: Radius or S of 90 : S of the Moon's Horizontal Parallax in that Diſtance. P RO BLEM XXVII. EHaving the Moon's Altitude and Horixontal Parallax given, to find her Parallax in any apparent Latitude. As Radius: S of the Moon's Altitude:: the S of her Horizontal Parallax: the S of her Parallax in that Altitude and Latitude. . 360)) T H E YOUNG MAN s Book of Knowledge, &c. PART VI. Of Mu s 1c and VIBRATIONS, &c. N. B. This little Treatiſe being already extended beyond its original Deſign, the Author propoſes to treat more particularly upon the Theory of Muſic onlt which will be of as great Service to many that can already play and ſing well, as to thoſe who have at preſent little or no owlelgs o this Science. For it is to bt noted, that a Perſon may poſſibly know a great deal of Muſic. who can neither ſing or playg; and may alſo ſing and play very well, without being a proper Judge o&f the Reaſon of Harmony. This being evident, I ſhall endeavour to make the following Pages ſerviceable to the Lovers of Muſic in general. Tyr. HAT is Muſic? P xiil. Muſic, ſtrictly ſpeaking, ſignifies only true Harmony of Sóunds, and is one of the liberal Sciences, which teaches us the Manner of ſinging or plaing right, according to the Rules of Compoſition; ut, in general, it is uſed for all Manner of Sounds, whether by Nature or Art; and the Study and Practice of it has ever been counted both uſeful and diverting, freeing the Mind from every Thing which may preſi too hard, or dwell too long upon it, and mightily diſfipates anxious and melancholy Thoughts, helps to accelerate Buſineſs, and if pr nd ſeaſonably uſed, enlivens the whole Man. Æ & T;r. What is the ſirſt neceſſary Step towards ing Muſic? Phil. To get the following Gamut (or the ( in Table I.) by Heart. he Gamut or Scale of MusrIc. (See Table I. and Oſul reut in alt  ſol ifa-ut s fa E llli e CCùt l ſi oſol-læa B guq. b-mi E Vn o or Mee ſ A dla-mi-re la ] G ſolre-ut  gs: Treble- ſpl F ant a ic cſ5 iimi ol-re m c C erk u-ut  ſtt. Tenor v B fa-b-mi ls Mi § àtlarmi re E. l Gſol-re-ut o F Thturiu , Baſs 1 fa l E E lo-mi Enlli le l-re ſo u ut ti b. ſi 5 mi Mi A ære m la Gamut ſol 1. Explanation of the eſor egoing GAMUT. See aelſo. . ſabſes I. and II. T;. You ſay it is neceſlary to learn the Ga Ieart. but pleaſe firſt to tell me how I am to beg Phil. You may begin at the bottom Line of t as it ſtands, and learn the Notes from Gamut G ſol-re-ut in alt; or you may learn the Baſs fit chen the Treble, E&e. which you like beſt. ꝗyr. Pleaſe to explain a little further what yo by learning each Part ſeparate. Mi is ahvays pronounced lika Mee. N. B. The Stars ſnow the Blace of the Semitones. R a Phil. You are to note, Tyro, that there are always five Lines ruled on Paper, on purpoſe to place the Notes upon; or elſe in the Space- ways between them, according as the Nature of the Tune requires. Cyr. This I know very well, Sir. hil. Then it can be no hard Taſk to underſtand the foregoing Gamut; for if you obſerve, it is divided into three Parts, vizæa the Treble or Tenor, 2. the Counter Tenor, and 3. the Baſi. Every one of theſe contains five Lines, and four Space-ways between thoſe Lines, (as appears by the crooked Lines which are placed on the right Hand, and hooks in, or circumſflexes each Part ſeparately:) Now begin with any one of them upon the firſt or hottom Line of the five, and call the Note by its Name, then go to the firſt Space-way that lies between the bottom Line and the ſecond Line, and ſo go on till you come to the top Line of each; thus will you ſoon know what the Name of the Notes are in any one or all the Parts. Iyr. I underſtand you. Suppoſe then I begin with the Baſs. I ſay the firſt Note on the firſt Line is Gamut, the firſt Space- way is A-re, the ſecond Line B-mi, the ſecond Space-way, or Space between the two next Lines, is C-fa-ut, the third or middle Line D-ſol-re, the third Space-way E-la- mi, the fourth Line F-fa-ut, the fourth or upper Space-way Gx-ſol-re-ut, and the top or upper Line A-la-mi-re. Is this right ? . Piil. Very right; proceed then. Tyr. There is no Occaſion, I think, Philomathes, to ſay any more upon a Thing ſo plain; for I perceive the firſt Line of the Countcr Tenor begins at, or is counted from the fourth Line oſ the Baſs, viæ. at F fa-ut, and ſo goes on till it comes into the ſecond Line of the Tenor or Treble, viæ. to G-ſol-re-ut; and I alſo as plainty ſee, that the Tenor or Treble have alſo five Lines and four Space-ways; the firſt Line of which is E-la-mi, the firſt Space-way is Efa-ut, the ſecond Line G-ſol-re-ut, and ſo I go on, Linc and Space-way, till I come to G ęſl-re-ut in alt. tllli hil. You are right, Tyro, but yet you need not get thoſe cramp Words by Heart; there is a much ſhorter and eaſier Way, which anſwers the ſame End: For, ; obſerve, obſerve, as every eighth Note in Muſic has the ſame Effect of Sound upon the Ear, by Reaſon of its being the moſt perfect Concord to the eighth below, or above it; ſo the eight Letters of the Alphabet ſerve very pertinently to expreſs the eight Notes of Muſic; and they never go any farther than from A to G, and then you begin at A again, and ſo go on to G, if there be ever ſo many aſcending Notes: But, 2. Becauſe the Learner ſhould not miſtake, it is better that he ſhould begin to learn G at firſt, than to come back in the Alphabet to A, ſor that is the next Note after G) then B, thenC, then D, Sc. in all aſcending Notes; but if you begin at G and deſcend to lower Notes, then only count backwards in Order, as thoſe Letters ſtand in the Alphabet, vix. G, F, E, D, G, B, A, and then the next G again, &c. as before. (õee Table II. Tyr. Sir, I am much obliged to you. This is eaſy enough; I am ſure any Body may ſoon learn the Name of the eight Notes, if this be all. Phil. This is all; and if you look into Table I. you will ſee that the Notes are the ſame there as here, only placed in another Order; but every Letter of the Alphabet ſtands againſt the Name of the Note by which it is called. Tyr. I ſee it plain enough, but what do you mean by this Star π between ſome of the Notes, both in this Gamut and in the Scale, ITable I. Phil. The Star is placed between thoſe Notes which are but half a Note or Semitone diſtant in Sound from each other, and if you obſerve, there are but two Halfnotes or Semitones in the whole Gamut; and that is from B to C, and from E to F. Tyr. Are the Half-notes always between theſe Letters. Phil. No: They are only common to the natural Order of the Gamut; but they become variable or ſhiftable by the Affection of Plats or Staerps, placed on different Iines or Space-ways, which you will ſee the Reaſon of, when we come to ſpeak of the various Keys in Mulic. Tyr. I am ſatisfied; but pray what do you mean by ſolfa, &c. in the Gamut. Phil. This and ſeveral other Things are better explained by the Table in the Copper-plates annexed, of which we ſhall ſpeak in their Order. Explanation of TABLE I. PLATE I. This Table or Scale has eleven Lines like the foregoing Gamut, and is in Effect the ſame as the other, containing Treble, Tenor, and Baſs; each of which has fine Lines, by running one into another: The firſt Line of the Baſs begins at Gamut or G, and aſcends ten Notes to B; the firſt Line of the Tenor, (called ſometimes Counter Tenor) begins at the fourth Line of the Baſs, viæ. at F, and aſcends alſo ten Notes till it comes to A, or the ſecond Space-way in the Tretlle; and the firſt Line of the Treble begins at E, and aſcends to G in alt. ou may ſte, therefore, very plainly, that from Gamut (or G), the firſt Note of the Baſs, to F, the firſt Note of the Tenor, there are ſeven Notes in the natural Order of the Gamut or Scale itſelf; and alſo from F, the firſt Note of the Tenor, to E, the firſt Note of the Treble, are contained the ſame; both of which in Muſic are commonly expreſſted a Seventh diſtant one from another: This plainly ſhews, that though the firſt ſeven Letters in the Alphabet expreſs the firſt ſeven Notes in Order ſo taken; yet to make up the whole Octave or eight Notes, the firſt Letter which we begin with muſt be repeated again and included: Thus from A to A, .B to B, C to C, &e. both included, make eight Notes or a perſect Octave, as appeurs more plain by Table II. Of TaBLE II. PLATE I. In this Table, Tyro, you have the Names of the Notes of both the other Gamuts diſtinct in their Order and Parts, with the Names of the Notes under each, beinning at G, &c. ſo that any one may learn the cight fibie. in any one of the Parts in a very ſhort Time. Tyr. It is very plain indeed; but what do you mean by sol-fau, as I obſerved before? Phil. There is really no Occaſion for the Rules of ſol-fa or ſol-fuing (as it is commonly called) to underſtand the Notes, or to learn to ſing, becauſe the whole Art oſ Singing depends upon knowing where the different Se. mitones lie in every Key, and that may be done with much more Eaſe than ſol-faing. lli Tyr. I thought it was univerſally approved of, in the Practice of vocal Muſic, eſpecially in Pſalm I'unes and Church Muſic. Phil. No doubt but it may be of ſome Uſe in Pſalmody, eſpecially to all ſuch as have no Maſter to teach them any other Method: But don't you know that it is à Maxim, and a ſelſ-evident Principle, in Arithmetic and the Mathematics, that that Rule or Axiom which will not always hold good, is no Rule or Axiom at all. Tyr. But why does not the Rules of ſol- faing hold ofod, as it ſhews the Place of the Semitones in any Æ. according to Table II. and V. . &dhii. I grant that from ſmi to fa] and ſrom ſla to fa] æare only Semitones; but you ſee how ſhiftable Mi is, and therefore, as this mechanical Sound governs the Place of all the reſt, ſt is ſtraining the Memory of Perfons in general; and vou ſhall find very few of what we call the tip-top Church Singers, who are able at Sight to ſol-fa a Tune in above two or three of the moſt common Keys, though they have laboured hard for Years; others even-who know the Tune before-hand are not uble to ſol-fa it in other different Kevs; which ariſes, as I ſaid, from the pecpetual changing of Mi, from one Line or Space-way to another: But even ibis is not all; there is a worſe Objection ſtill. . ZYP7r. What is that ? llt 2111 2Pail. I told you before, that that is not worthy to be called a Rule that cannot always be put in Practice without a Contradiction to itſelf: Now, I grant a Perſon may ſol-fa a Pſalm I une ſet in Minums, or perhaps being perfect, may, in very ſtor Movements, ſol-fa Crotchets; but how is he to ſol-fa a Diviſion or Run ſas it is commonly called) in Quavers; and how much leſs then will he be able to expreſs thoſe articulate Words of ſol-la-mi-fa, when there happens to be a Run of Semi-quavers ? Now, though he may ſing the Minums right by this Rule, yet if he cannot perform the Whole by the ſame Rule, it is evident that he muſt either perform it ſome other Way, or elſe leave it imperfſect. Beſides this, you will ſind, that the Prac3 tioners of Pſalmody in general, will allow that there requires a great deal of Time to ſol-fa Tunes in the various Keys common to Pſalmody: Now, it is worthy Notice to obſerve; that  it be difficult and burthenſome to the Memory to ſol-ſa in the moſt eaſy Keys, (which are common to Pſalm Tunes) how much more burthenſome tò the Memory muſt it be to do it in all the various Keys in Muſic. Tyr. It is very true what you ſay. Sir but though this Rule cannot be well put in Practice with Quavers and Semiquavers, vet I ſuppoſe you will grant it is very practicable and certain in ſlow Movements. &g Phi. Practicable in a great Meæſure. it may be, but I will not ſay certain, were it for this Reaſon only; that it is poſſible a Perſon may ſol-fa ten Tunes Ught one after the other, by calling every one of the Notes according to the Order of the Words, and vet not ſing the Tunes right, becauſe he may as well ſound a whole Note from mi to fa, or from la to fa, as he may from ſol to la; nay, I aſſure you, I have often heard it done, and thereſore, I only mention it thiat I would not have the Learner think that 'tis impoſſible to ſing a Tune wrong, becauſe he names or pronounces ſol-la-mi-fa ngut 2y Name, and eſpecially when tlie Notes lie cramp and at a Diſtance from each other. Yyr. If this be the Caſe then, what Methcd is the Learner to take to come to a greater Certainty V& Pbi. There can be no better Way than by obſerving the exact Places of all the Flats and Sharps in the various Keys, which ſoon may be done, and there are many odd Words or Syllables to be found which are much more practicable in ſinging than ſol-fa; but more of this by and by Tyr. Well, for my own Part, I know nothing of Mulic, and only ſpeak what I have heard others ſay concerning fol-faing; however, I know the Names of all the Notes in every Line and Space-way, and ſhould like to know more if you would take the Trouble to inſtruct me. ; Phi. That I will- with all my Heart; and as you ſa you know the Names oſ the Notes, A BCD E F and & in every Line and Space-way, the next Thing you muſt underſtand is, Qf TaABLE III. PLATE I. Oſ tbe dividing Notes in Time, according to their Names. This Table contains five Sorts of Notes by Name, and is equal every Way, as appears at Sight. The firſt Note is called a Semibrieue, (that is, Half a Brieve, a Note now ſeldom uſed) which contains tvo Minums, one Minum contains two Crotchets, one Crotchet two Quavers, one Quaver contains tvo Semiquavers, and one Semiquaver two Demiſemiquavers, ſo that the Table is equal every Way, one Semibrieve containing two Minums, or four Crotchets, or eight Quavers, or ſixteen Semiuavers, or thirty- tvo Demiſemiquavers; that is, ſixteen emiquavers, eight Quavers, &c. are played to the Time of one Semibrieve. Jjyr. I underſtand you well. O s TasBtr IV. PLATE I. Piil. A Dot made after a Note makes it half as long again in Time as it was before, and is commonly called à ſpect'd Note: Thus, a ſpectd or dotted Minum makes of contains three Crotchets; a ſpecæd Crotchet makes three Quavers, and a ſpecP'd Quaàver makes three Semiquavers, &c. ſ . CDouasLEV. PuATE I. Tyr. What is the Uſe of this Tableæee Bii This ſhews you the different Reſts or Pauſes in Muſic; the two firſt broad Strokes drawn from, or extended through two Space-ways, or three Lines, ſtand for eight Bars Reſt, and wherever this Mark is found, either in vocal or inſtrumental Muſic, it ſignifies that Part is to reſt or ſtop eight full Bars; the next broad Stroke only extends to two Lines or one Space-way, and ſignifies two Bars Reſt, or a Pauſe in that Part reſt. ing two Bars, and ſo on with the reſt, which the Table itſelf ſufficiently explains. u Tyr. It is plain and eaſy enough to be underſtood. 368 T HE YOUNG MAN TABLEVI. and VII. PLATE I. Tyr. I ſee theſe twvo Tables ſhew the Concords and Liiicords; but what Uſe am I to make of this? Phil. As you have done, or ought to do with all other, to get them ſo by Heart as to know the Nature of Concords and Diſcords in general, what Notes are ſuen by Compariſon, and what are really not of either ort. ꝗ73r. But how can I be a Judge in this Reſpect ? Phil. That is a Queſtion I cannot reſolve at preſent; it muſt be the Effect of Time and Obſervation to make you Maſter of this; but ſtill it is proper you ſhould know hefore-hand what are real Concorùs of themſelves, and what are Diſcords to thoſe Concords. . ijr. I ſuppoſe you now ſpeak of Muſic in two or more Parts. Plil. Moſt certainly I do; for there can be no Diſcords n any ſingle Part of Compoſition, becauſe every Air or Tuue is abſolute; bũrt when another Part is added, that is, when there are other compound Notes to be played with the firſt Part, or any two Parts or Sounds to be played or ſung together, then the proper Concords or Dicoras will evidently appear, and even a good Ear (though no great Judge) will eaſily diſcover the Diſference, and whether the Diſcords are out of theirproper Place. llill Tyr. Why, theh, I perceive your allow of Diſcords ſemc times. . E Aæàbil. No Doubt of it: It would be a very heavy Piece of Compoſition that had not this Mixture; but then the Diſfficulty lies to know where they are to be properly introduced, to make the Harmony yet more complete and agreeable; but this I ſhall endeavour to explain by and by, if I have Room: However, for the preſent, you may obſerve thus much, that the fourth reckoned from any Key-Note downwards, becomes an Accompaniment to the ſixth from the ſame Note, and the ſixth from the upper Note or Key-Note above it, will become only a rthird from the eighth below the original Key-Notè: IThereſore, if you begin below upon b l llili i H he i .. i hi ù - il æ. iill 7 l lli 2 Hõũ lii - iſ i .. - - l l . OQλe l l svt it... - ſ 1 . i, Eli LElli *re. . . -3 l b ll l e r1 Hù . i - ll Ell l . l 1 ll 31.5 &ſ. q 3 .2 -, - . Bi : H 1i4 l lTill tlitl iiiiH lilt - t THCHES E l 1 REEl 3 bl 3 , i1 .x d t:1:i ,7t lili hi ir rrer . rv31. lli li l lili in-xne ia  . it . l . l , l - r 1txr l - . Elllll - . . IE . - ili i A i - l ll . Ell ſ ùl bl . H ſElii ſ H . . . i i i i i : . . - - i a . . , . bl ll tilil . bi . Digitiæed Vii UEL VP LTTLLT i - - uisii ã u *5 è q E § è & 1 *  & u dvintton l nmun mme x H νKd ſ x & ν o c5 S Eſ. hl § & A ſſi nal ſl ſ ſl ls Gaæmut ſ1 Ilæ in 4 .. l , the Octave Key-Note and aſcend, the ſame Notes will now become chird, fiſth, and eighth; which before, in deſcending, were fourth, ſixth, and eighth to the KeyNote above them: In this Caſe a fourth becomes a proger Concord, becauſe it is a perfect fifth from the Octave elow. . Tyr. I don't quite apprehend you; pray give me an Example. Phil. Suppoſe then I begin at A, and want to make all the proper Chords downward to A, I ſay that E, C, and A will be a fourth, ſixth and eighth to the A above them; but if I begin at A below, and want the proper Chords or Concords to it upward, I then find that C, E, and A vill be a third, fifth, and eighth, which are the very ſame Notes as before, only diffterently named: This will appear evidently to any one who knows the leaſt of Muſic, or is acquainted ever ſo little with the Nature of the Keys or Notes of any Organ or Harpſichord, &ec. ii ꝗyr. I do not quite apprehend you at preſent. Phil. But you will ealily perceive it, if you do but eonſider well what I have told you, and mind what is laid down in the next Iable, where the Keys oſf the Inſtruments and their correſpondent Notes conſpicuouſly appear to every diligent Reader. TæBLE VIII. (PLATE II.) Fro. I. Oſ the Diatonic Scalè, ſbewing the Reaſon of the natural Piroduction of the various Tones and Semitones, from the Laws of Proportion and Vibration. ZTyr. Though I underſtand the Notes very well, vet I confeſs I know nothing of this Table, nor what vou mean by Proportion of Sounds at preſent. Phil. May be ſo; but you will ſoon underſtand it iſ you give but the leaſt Attention to the Explanation. Obſerve then, and look on the Figure while you read. 1. Let SCS repreſent a Scale divided into rẽo equal Parts, and let any Note in the Gamut or Scale berdrawn up to any Ione or Pitch at PleaſurenBut that the Definition muy appear more clear, we will take the nauu R 5 tural 33 THE YOUNG MAN s tural eight Notes, or the Notes of the natural Kelo beginning at C, with the proper Semitones, till yõu come to its Octave C, or an eighth higher; which Octave contains thirteen different Sounds, or twelve Semitones included. ſli . i 2. Let then the Line CCC be equal to the Ke or firſt Note C, and alſo equal to the Scale itſelf S CS of 100 Parts; then the Length of any other Note will very eaſily be found as follows, vix. 3. As the Denominator of any Note is to its Numerator, ſo will the original Scale or Denominator roo be to the Length of the String of any Note required 4. Now, in the Scale of Chords and Diſcords, there is a Compariſon made of the Octave, double Octave, treble Octave, &c. which when underſtood, the fractional Parts or Invervals of the Diatonic Semitones, throughout the whole Scale, are found by the Rule oſ Proportion only: For, . 5. Though twice 8 is 16, and three Times 8 is 24. four Times 8, 32, &c. in common Multiplication, yet it is not ſo in the Doctrine of Sounds; for in Mufſic 2 Sths or a Octaves make but 15; three Octaves malke but 22, and four Octaves but 29 whole Notes;. the Reaſon is evident, becauſe the laſt Note of every Octave is always counted the firſt Note of the next Octave. 6. This being conſidered, we muſt now ſee the neceſſary Fractions in the Intervals of the Octave; and as every whole Note contains two Semitones, it will follow that there muſt be twelve Semitones in the natural eight Notes, becauſe there are two half Notes included, vix. ſrom E to F, and from B to C natural, as appears from Plate I. Table I. 7. Novw it is evident that theſe twelve different Semitones muſt have a Proportion of Sound between the firſt original Note C, and its Octave C, and every one of them muſt be a fractional Part of the Octave, or double Octave: Thus the greater or ſharp 7th would be i, but is more properly called 23 to avoid Fractions in the different Numerators. Let us then S8. Suppoſe the firſt Note C equal to the Scale of 100, then the Fraction will be 363 Æ 2, equal to Unity itſelſ, or the ſirſt original Tone from whence the reſt muſt be calculated; therefore everv next aſcending Semitone muſt be more acute, and of Conſequence a Part of the whole Scale. li 9. The Fractions then for all the Sounds in the Diatonic Scale will ſtand thus in Order, n, 78, 8,32, ,3, 3, 3, 3, 2, 5, 2, and 2. To find the Length of the String or Chord in Proportion, obſerve, 10. As the Denominator of every or any of the Fractions, is to its reſpective Numerator, ſo is the whole Scale of 100 Parts to the Length of the Chord or String belonging to it. For Example: I would know the Length of the Strings which ſhall properly vibrate to bring out the Tones of 3 and 3, with the correſpondent otes belonging thereto. I only ſay, as 9: 8 :: 100 : 88.8 equal Parts out of the Scale of 1oo, which in the Table anſwers to the Note D, or whole Tone ffom C. Again, as 5 4: 100: 80, which anſwers to the Note E, being the greater Third from C. And thus may any Note or ITone, half Note, or Semitone, found; either the Length productive of ſuch a Tone or Note, or the Note requiring ſuch a Length. 11. Hence then it appears, that all Notes which vibrate ? are Uniſons, and all which vibrate 3, or as 2 to 1, are Octaves; and that all ſuch which vibrate any otherwiſe, are certain Notes having a Compariſon between i and 3. 12. Therefore, ſuppoſe it were required to find a true harmonieal Mean between Uniſon and Octave; add the Numerators and Denominators together, you have 4; which in the Table anſwers to G, the perfect sth from C, or perfect 4th from its Octave C. 13. Again, to find the greater Third. Thus  X 323§5 X 2 Æ3. Now 3 Æ 15513 Æ3 or 8o Parts, which anſwers in the Scale to the greater Third, &c. 14. Thus may any harmonical Mean be found between any two extreme Notes: For let x and e repreſent two Extremo-. and let it be required to find m the Mean, it is evident to any Perſon that underſtands the leaſt of Algebra, or.the true Order of the Laws of Pro2xæe portion, that the Mean will be m Æ ,4 Lhus, ſor Example, multiply the Extremes by 2, and dividè the Product by the Sum of the Extremes, and you will have the harmonical Mean. Thus between Uniſon and Octave. Firſt, 2  2 Æ 2 X 2243 this æ 2 § 1 Æ 13 the harmonical Mean; that is, , 13, and 1, are the three Terms, which being multiplied by the Denominator of the Mean Fraction, will produce 6, 4, and 3, whoſe Ratios are 3: 2 and 4: 3; the firſt of which anſwers to the 5th, and the other to the 4th in the Di:tonic Scale. 15. But in order to find all the real Chords, there necd only be drawn a ſimple Line, which being divided into four Parts only, will Siſcover the Length of the Uniſon, Octave, and all the intermediate Chords; and nothing ui pe wanting but common Apprehenſion to underand it. A further EXPLANATION of thte DIATONIC SCALE. PLATE II. FIG. 2. Let the Line AB repreſent a Scale of 100 equal Parts, the ſame as the Diatonic Scale itſelf. Let AB be divided-into two equal Parts in C; then divide CB into two equal Parts in D; and alſo divide C D into two equal Parts in Æ; then you will have the following Proportions. As AB  AC: : 2 1 the Octave 1 2 AD : AC: 3 2 the perfect 5th 3 AB : AD :: 4 3 the perfect 4th 4 AE IAC : :5 : 4 the greater 3d 5 AMAMAE IAE:: 6&: s the leſſer 3d i 6 AE : EB : i 5 3 the greater th 7 AB : AE:: 8  5 the leſſer 6th N. B. The Diſcords ad, or 9th; Sharp 4th, Natural 7th, or Sharp nth, muy be found by the ſamèẽ Compariſon or Proportion: Do you underſtand me, Tyro, or not ? l Tꝓyr. I will not ſay I am quite Maſter of what you fay, but I will take Care to look over it again very attentively; and therefore if you have any Ihing further to ad. I beg you will proceed to inſtruct me. ' Phil. The next Ihing then, Tyro, is to underſtand the Nature oſ the various Keys in Muſic, ſor upon this and keeping good Time, depends the whole practical art. lilii 2. O tbhe different Keys. PLATE II. FI.. 3. Tyr. What do you mean by the Keys in Muſicè Phil. The Key-note, which gives Motion to all the reſt, and in the Baiſs always ends in the Key, or on the Key-note itſelf. i I11 Tyr. How many Keys are there in the natural Order of the Gamut ? ili li Phil. Strictly ſpeaking there are no more than tavo, viæx. C natural, the ſharp Key; and A natural, the flat Key; all ofher Keys beſides being only artificial, viæ. made by the diſſerent Diſpoſition of Flats and Sharps, on the different Lines and Space-ways. l Tyr. What do you mean by a flat and a ſbarp Key; and why is C called a ſharp Key, and A a fiat Key? Pix il. On account oſ the greater or leſſer Third ſfrom the Key-note itſelf, for a ſbarp Key has the greater Third, or tuio whole l'ones or Notes from the Keynote; hut the flab Key has the lefler Third, which contains only one whole Tone and a Semitone, which is deficient or leſs than the ſharp Key by one Semitone. c 11t5 . Tyr. I own I never knew this before, for I have heard others ſev, and always thought ſo myſelf, that that was a fharp Key when Sharps were ſet at the Beginning, and a flat ey when it had Flats. l li ebil: But I hope you ſce the contrary now. Do you not?ſ - . . i I ElPI Tyr. Very plainly; and I perceive alſo very plainly, that every Key after C, ant every Key after A, is only the ſame two Keys moved one Line and one Spaceway higher at Pleaſure, with ſuch proper Flats and Sharps to make them have the ſame Ihird; and I ſuppoſe this is what is called Tranſpoſition; is it not? Phil. Yes, and nothing is calier;-ſor ſuppoſe I found a I'une in Cnatural, and wanted to ſet it five Notes higher or four Notes lower, which is the ſame; then I find it muſt Eſet in G or Gamut Sharp, having a Sharp on F onl, as the Iable plainly ſhews; if I want it ſix 373. ITHE YOUNG MANE Notes higher, or a Third lower, which is A, then I find three Sharps are neceſſary, viæ. one on G, one on F, and one on G; if I want the I une a greater Third higher, viz. in E, I find four Sharps are neceſſary, viæ. one on G; one on F, one on D, and one on C; but if I want it a leſſer Third higher, viæ. im E flat, then I find three Flats neceſſary, viæ. one on E, one on. B, and one on A, which is ſtil a ſharp Key as before, becauſe from E flat to G natural is greater Third, the ſame as from E natural to G ſharp, or from C natural to E natural. The ſame is to be obſerved in tranſpoſing from flat Key to flat Key, due Regard being had alſo to move all additional Flats and Sharps, as many Notes higher or lower as you tranſpoſe to; but Practice and Obſervation are the chieſ Things. Hil r. I underſtand you, Sir; and have you any Thing farther to ſay concerning the Keys? . Phil. Only this, that all artificial Keys ending on the natural Keys of a Harpſichord, or the natural Letter itſelf, are, for Diſtinction ſake, called perfect artiſicial Keys; thoſe which end on the half Notes, or between any two natural Notes, are called imperfect artificial Keys, and ſuch are thoſe which have the Stars over them in the Plate. - i Iyr. You have ſufſficiently defined what I wanted concerning the Enowledge of flat and ſharp Keys: Bul pray are theſe all the Keys? hil. Theſe are the Names oſ thoſe that are conſtantly uſed both in vocal andiinſtrumentol Muſic Some indeed have faid, there are 96, others 72 Keys; however, it is evident there are 48; vix. 24 flat, and 2q sſharp Keys; but as there is no Uſe for more than I have inſerted, I omit the others, being uſeleſs. Tyr. I am obliged to you, Sir; and pray what is the next more neceſſary Thing in the Practice of Muſicè? Phil. One more ſo neceſſary, that without it all the Performance, though ever ſo right in reſpect of Flats and Sharps, would be but conſtant Claſhing and Confuſion. Hil Tyr. What can this be then? OF ENOWLED GE. 375 . i Of TIME. ZYp9r. What do you mean by Time in Muſicc& : Blan That perfect Regulation by which every preceding Bor (from Bar to Bar) throughout any Piece of Mulio, is performed exactly in the ſfame Space of Time as the preceding Bar, or Bar before. Tyr. I ſuppoſe you call the Bars thoſe perpendicular Strokes drawn croſs the five Lines; and if I apprehend you, you mean that if one Bar has but 2 or 3 Notes, and the next 6, 8, 1o, &c. the Bars muſt ſtill be performed in the ſame Time, becauſe they are equal, according to Plate I. Fig. 4. -. Pi il. Your Notion is very juſt. Iyr. How many Sorts of Iime are there? Phil. Strictly ſpeaking but two, viæ. Binans or common Time, and Trenary or Triple Time. ; ZTyr. Why are they ſo called? l bil. 1. Binary ſignifies to riſe and fall equal, or to divide every Bar in Muſic into two equal Parts, beating with the Hand or Foot half the Quantity down and half up, or by the Pendulum of a Clock, &c. 2. Trenary Time is divided as 2 to 33 that is, into three equal Parts, two Parts of which are played or ſung with the Foot down, and the other Part with the Foot or Hand up. Tyr. By what am I to know or diſtinguiſn common Time, and the Meaſure? Phil. By obſerving what follows. Of COMMON TIME. See PLATE II. F1G. 4. Tyr. What are the Marks, Signatures, or Characters of common Time ? Phil. They are certain Characters ſet beſore the Tune, by which the Movement is duly regulated. Tyr. Il perceive then there are four Sorts of common Time; pray explain them. ll . Phil. The firſt of theſe Characters of itſelf ſignifies the ſloweſt of all the Movements, and has four Crotchets in every Bar (or Notes equal to them) and is generally placed at the Beginning of all Adaegio's, Largo's, or rery 376 THE YOUNG MAN'S ſſow Parts. The ſecond Character is the moſt common in vocal and inſtrumental Muſic in general; it has alſo four Crotchets in a Bar, and its Movement is half as faſt again as the former. The third and fourth Characters denote a very quick Movement, and are genefally ſet before Pieces of Muſic or Tunes called Gavots; and the only Difference between them is, the firſt has in general four Crotchets in a BEar, but the other never But two in a Bar, and is ſometimes called retortive imsæe. s T9r. I am obliged to vou, Sir; and now pray what are the Characters belonging to Trenary Meaſure, or Triple Time è See Plate IIl. Fig. 4. . Eũl hil. There are nine C haracters, or rather fractional Figures, viæ. firſt 3, which ſignifies three Minums in a Bar; 3, which has three Crotechets in a Bar; 3, which contains three Quavers in a Bar; theſe are beat or meaſured two Parts of the Bar down and one Part up: 2dly, 2, which has ſix Crotchets in a Bar, and beat like common Time, threè down and three up; that is, half the Bar down and half up; §, ſignifies ſix Quavers in a Bar, three down and three up; 2, fhews there are nine Crotchets in a Bar, ſix down and three up; 3, is nine Quavers in a Bar, ſix down and three up; 22, ſignifies twelve Crotchets in a Bar, ſix down and ſix up; and  ſignifies twelve Quavers in a Bar, ſix down and ſix up. Do you underſtand meè li Tyr. Yes, very well; but how am I to know whether I jla or ſing Time too faft or too ſlomP Phil. Good Time or true Meaſure is not determined by one Perſon's ſinging or playing fuſter than another. Maſters of vocal or inſtrumental Muſic often ſing and play the ſame Thing faſter or ſlower than one another; nay, even themſelves ſingly will do ſo at different I'imes of performing. 2 Pi a-5 æ. . Tyr. If ſo, how am I ever to judge of their Time? MAtbil. Not hy their performing faſter or ſlower at one Time than another, but by their performing ever Bat throughout in the ſame Space of Time; if this is done the Ferformer is a good Timeiſt; for it is not to be ſuppoſed, that any one would pretend to ſing or play Minums or Crotchets (inthe ſume common Iime) as faſt as poſſible; nor would they be ſo fooliſh to play a quick Movement (ſuch as Jigs and Minuets ſet in òabers) as ſtow as a Pſalm Tune. Tyro. I underſtand you very well, Sir; and if you have Time and Room, I would beg Leave to intreat you, to tell me ſomething concerning a thorough Baſs, for I never could conceive the Reaſon of the Figures ſtanding over the Baſc. Hillll li . Phil. To underſtand a thorbugh Baſs well requires Practice, but when it is umderſſood, it diſcovers the Beauty. and Harmony of all the Parts, and in ſhort is the Foundation of Compoſition itſelf, as you may ſee by what follows: ig ia n ni æ 4. Of a THOROUGH BAss. Tyr. What do you mean by a thorough Baſs ? ꝑlil Sometimes it is taken for a continual Baſs running through the whole Piece, without any Bars reſting or pauſing; but more ſtrictly it ſigunifies thet Baſs in Mulic whioh has Figures ſet over or under she Notes. The Notes themſelves are played with the Lefſt Hand upon the Harpſichord, or any key'd Inſtrument, and the Figures over the Notes are played with the right Hand to fill up the other Parts of the Compoſition. Tyr. Can you give me ſome ſhort Rules whereby I muy gain a little cnowledge of this Art. . VPuhil. I can, but ſhort they will be; but it is to be obſerved, that before you can underſtand them uell, you muſt be well acquainted with the Nature of Fluats d Sharps, arid the various Notes inthe diſferent eys. . e Short RULES for a THOROUGH BASS. Rule 1. When you are playing a rhorough Baſe, and there are no Figures ſet. over the Baſs Note or Notes, then it ſigniſies that you are to play the perfect or common Chords to ſuch Notes, viæ. the 3d, 5th, and Sth Rule 2 The Foundation of the true Knowledge of a thorough Baſs very much depends upon knowing what Chords and Diſcords depend upon all the Intervals ol eight Notes in either of the natural Keys. Thus, fup poſe I pitch upon C natural in the Baſs, and diſcerned eight Notes in Order of the Gamut; I ſay, the Keynote itſclf will have 3d, sth, and Sth that is, E, G, and C, will be the common Chords to it. . Rule 3. If I begin at C and find a common Chortd to it, is 3 5th, and 8th; then if I aſcend one Note higher in the Baſs to D, the former Chords, 3d, sth, and 8th to G, will now become 7th, 4th, and 2d to D; alſo 6th, 3d, and 8th to E; 7th, sth, and 2d to F; 6t, 4th. and 8th to G; 7th, 3d, and sth to A; and 6th, 4th, and ad too B . Rule 4. The Accompaniments of the Figures that are Diſcords, ſuch as the 2d; then obſerve, if the. Treble or leading Part be a Minum, and the Baſs contains two Crotchets, the firſt of which is a common Chord, and the next deſcerids one Note; then the ſame Chord is continued with the right Hand while the Baſs deſcends, and will become 2d, 4th, and 6th, to the ſame Note; nbut if the Baſs lies ſtiil, viæ. has the ſame Note continued by a Hold or Circumfſlex from Bar to Bar, and the Minum, or 2d Minum, has a Figure oſ 2 ſet over it, or by the Side, then you muſt accompany that ad with a perfect 4th, or a ſharp 4th, according to the Key you are playing in; but in this Caſe the 4th ought to be ſet down with the 2d, which is often neglected, to the great Hurt of Learners. Rule s. If you ſee a 4 and a 6 over any Note, count only four Notes, and ſix Notes ſrom the Baſs Note itſelf, according to the Order of the Key, and put the 8th to them for an Aceompaniment. ũiſe Rule 6. When you find 6 and 45 and s and 3 over one Note of the Baſs, then play 6, 4, and 8, the Half of that Note, and 3d, 5th, and 8th, to the other Half; this often happens within three Notes of the Cloſe; in ſuch Caſes the 6th and 4th are reſolved into the s5th and fſharp 3d. , l llili li Rule 7. An imperfect or flat sth is accompanied with a 3d, and ſo is a 6th, when it has no other Figure placed with it. ll ERule S. When you meet with a 4 and a 5 over one another, and a ſharp Flat natural, or Figure of 3 by the Side of the 4 that ſhews that the 4th is to be reſolved into the 3d accordingly; this happens generally before Cadences or Cloſes, eſpecially when the 4th is to be reſolved into the Sharp 3d, as in Rule the 6th. Rule 9. The 7th is always accompanied with the 3d, and oſten with the 5th, as Occaſion may require; the th being neceſſary in ſome Caſes, in others it is too eavy. Secondly, When the Baſs aſcends by 4ths, or deſcends by sths, you generally ſee the Notes with 7' over them. Thirdly, When the Baſs deſcends Half a Note (into any Note which is ſharped) the 3d Note before the Cloſe, it is generally marked with a flat 7th, flat 5th and 3d, but the 7th in this Caſe is more properly called an extreme flat 7th, being no more in Quantity of Semitones than a perfect 6th, though called a ſib. on account of the Key. Fourthly, When the aſs deſcends Note by Note, then you will generally find a Figure of 7 and 6 aſter it over every Note, which ſhews you are to play a 7th and a 3d to Half the Time of the Baſ- Note, and den reſolve or convert the 7th into the 6cth, (according to the Nature of the Key you glay in) ſtill continuing the 3d for the other Half of the ime. ; . Rcule 10. When the Baſs moves by even Quavers, ſuch as 40r 8 in a Bar, it is common to play the firſt two Quavers to the Chord of the firſt ote, and the next two to the Chord of the 3d Note, or to ſuch Figures and Accompaniments belonging to the firſt and third Notes, except it be figured to the contrary. Tyr. I am obliged to you for your kind Inſtructions, but I cannot ſay I underſtand them at preſent. Phil. I do not expect you ſhould: It is to be ſuppoſed you ſhould know ſomething more of the Harpſichord, and be firſt of all more acquainted with the Nature of the various Keys in general, and the natural Order and Diſpoſition of Flats and Sharps in each. Nothing of this Sort can be underſtood without tlis; and even then, without Practice and Obſervation, you would be at a Loſs; though the Rules I have laid down are very plain to be underſtood by any one who has a mind to learn, and pay a due Attention to what. he reads: But it is too common a Practice juſt to read an Author careleſsly over, and then unjuſtly to ſay, That . e 33608 THE YOUNG MAN s he has treated ſo dark and intricate upon the Subject that they can't underſtand it. Tyr. It is very true, Sir, but you ſhall never have that to ſay of me. Ican ſay, I have always attended to your Inſtructions, and I will try, at all proper Opportunities, to make myſelf Maſter of what I am ſtill deficient in. li . Phil. I make no Doubt of it, Tyro; and it is for the Sake of ſuch diligent and induſtribus Learners as you, that every Author takes Pains, and they are happy in ſuch Pupils, and take a Plealure to ſay, that you have done great Honour to them, as well as Service to yourſelf. ZTyr. I am obliged to you; kind Philomathes, for your Opinion of me; this encourages me to afk you a further Favour, and that is, to give me one Example or Movement in a thorough Baſs; for though I do not now immediately underſtand it, yet I polſibly may. Phil. It is very true; Labour (it is ſaid) overcomes all Things; but I ràther would chooſe to ſay, Delight conquers all Undertakings; and as I have found you, my dear Iyro, purſuing earheſtly after Truth and Knowidge, it gives me Pleaſure to inſtruct you, and you have your Deſire in this Reſpoct alſo, by. one full Example of a thorough .aſs, Plate II. Fig. 5. And now, Tyro, what would you have more? ZY9r. I am asſi , Sir, with what you have inſtructed me in; and give me Leave to rereat once more, that I promiſe to peruſe every Thing you have treated of till I am Maſter of it; and therefore beg you would recelve my hearty Thanks for your indulgent Favourss. tſ8 r ll Piùil. You are quite welcome; and to give you further Encouragement in the Progreſs of this innocent and uſeful Science, I here preſent you with a Hymn in four Parts, which has been highly approved of, and Ihope will be agreeable to you and your Acquaintance. n, or Song of Thankſgiving on Accou lle Victory ꝗained by the ing Pri ſtrians near Lignitæ, on the i5th Day o [S8ee the Muſic, Plate III. I. ll To celebrate thy Praiſe, O Lord, We vwill our Hearts prepare; To all the liſt ning World thy Worck: Thy wond'rous Works declare. II. The Thoughts of them ſhall to our S Exalted Pleaſure bring; Whaile to thy Name, O thou Moſt IH ITriumphant Praiſe we ſing. III. All thoſe who have his Goodneſs pro Will in his Truth confide; Waoſe Mercy ne'er forſook the Man That on his Help rely'd. IV. §in ù Praiſes therefore to the Lord, rom Zion his Abode Proclaim his Deeds till i the World Confeſs nonę other God. ù a Every Verſe is to be ſung quite thro Parts only, and then repeat the two horus, loud. n the bottom, fe⸗ helped, 1 Cor. XxV. Million. ſdrianople; line 17, read ſ (the Longitude of Paris) see Prob. 21. d 17, inſtead of 45, read Baſe AC. ng page 306, line 11, under 238, 920. 2 and 18. 7th, read 7th of Tuly. SHELFMARK... . THIS BOOK HAS E MICROFILMED ( ſ 