7 ON T H E EMENTARY PRINCIPI N A T URERE AND T H E S I MP L E L AW S Y WHICH THEY ARP GOVERNE BEING AN ATTEMPT  DEMONSTRATE. THEIR EXISTEN A N D IXPLAIN THEIR MODE. OF ACTI RTICULARLY INTHOSE STATES, IN VH THEY PRODUCE THE ATTRACTIONS O IESION, GRAVITATION, MAGNET AND ELECTRICITY; LQXD aALsO FIRE, LIGHT, Axp WATER EY E. PEART, M. D. GAIN S BORO UG ii: STED BY II. MOZ LES; AND SOLD BY J. EDnW PALL-MALL, LONDON, ANDC. ELLIOT, I PARLIAMENT-SOUARF. EDINBURG H. I T twelve months ago, I puban Eſſay on The GENERAT ION L HEAT, which was preceded oduction, pointing out the ElePrinciples of Nature, and the al Laws by which they are GoAt the ſame time, intimating ons of publiſhing, a full Explathoſe Principles and Laws. planation, Inow oſfer to the world wing Pages. I meant to have extended it to the particular agents and operations of Chemiſtry, but, being uncertain whether even this will be read, or not, I thought it beſt to ſuſpend my reſearches, at leaſt for the preſent. i tbe Principles of Naiure, evidently preſenting ibemſelves io the Mind; as being eſſentially neceſſary, to produce the various appearances, every where offering themſelves to its Contemplation. S ECT I ON II. n Altempt to prove, ihat ihe Elementary Principles, propoſed in the preceding Section, in reality Exiſt ; and to point tbem out in Nalure; so that they may be known, and diſtinguiſbed from each.other with certainty. S E C TI O N III. On tbe Earthy Principle. S EC TION IV On the Acidifying Principle. S ECTION V. On Pblogiſton. S ECT I ON VI. On Ætber. S E CT I O N VII. On the Attraction of Cobeſion, and the bich the different degrees of Solidity, idity of bodies, in the common tempe S EC TIO N VII On Gravity, or the Power by which diſta attract each other. S E CT I ON IX. On Magnetiſin. SECTION X. S E CT I O N XI. On Fire. S E C TI O N XII. On Light. S E C T I O N XIII. On Water. RECAPITULATION. E R R A T A. N. B. ſb) Signiſies ſrom the Bottom In ſome few places, Subtil is printed for Sub in a great number of places, a Colon is put inſ Camena d d p. 138 l. 5) for à Page o line 11 and 12-and p. 138 l. or ir fe. read indeſtructible. iliili u12 l. aſH for its evident, read s evident 23 I. 5 for ſixed particles, read a ſixed pari 235 I. 6 Tò) Tor progeſſive, tead stogesiae ſ à& I. 12 dele the comma after ſolid. 44 I. iò for ennumerate, read enumerate. c61 I. 5 for meduim, read medium. c68 I. for well unite, read will unite. 8§7 I. 1 in ſome ſew copies, ſul og printed inſtead of Jully proved. ſece. 1062 I. IO ſ67and p. ago I. 5 for invelope, velop. t1it1t1 l. 1o for depend, read depends. e236 l. 10 for charged, read changed. 249 I. G for expelled, read octee . πhiteneſc. . l l hl l b . ll i . li . i LANA T I OF T H E NTARY PRINCI O F T U R ECTION LI. ples of Nature, evidently the mind; as being eſſentiall e various appearances, ever) lves to its contemplation. a comprehenſive view o avoid perceiving the exi the diſferent ſtates, from penetrable ſolid, to the and expanſive fluid. But whatever be the ſtate in which it is, we ſtill are convinced of its materiality, by its action upon our material organs o ſenſation; nothing being capable of exciting the perception, or idea oſ its exiſtence, preſence, and action, but what is material. Every thing therefore which we can perceive, and know to exiſt, muſt be material, howſoever rare or expanded; and the only definition of a particle of matter, which I wiſh at preſent to give, is, that it is an impenetrable point or atom, indiſtructible, and conſequently by no natural means diviſible. All things therefore exiſting, muſt be compoſed of particles of matter; and their different ſtates, with reſpect to ſolidity, muſt depend upon the manner, in which thoſe particles are combined with each other the nearer they approach in every direction, the more ſolid and ponderous the compound. And upon this mode of arrangement alone, all the various ſtates of ſolidity and ceive it poſſible, for a particle of matter, to act at a diſtance ſrom itſelf, or where it is not; therefore, there can be no ſuch power exiſting as repulſion, or attraction, unleſs the particles attracting, or repelling be in contact. We may arrange every thing in nature under ſfour general beads or claſſes, with reſpect to their ſtates of ſolidity; theſe will be Solids, Liquids, ueriform Fluids, and highly expanſive Fluids. The ſirſt claſs comprehends every body or ſubſtance, whoſe component particles nearly approach, and are forcibly attracted to each other; fo as to ſtrongly reſiſt any power, applied to ſeparate them from the ſtate they are in, and the preſent connexion they have, with reſpect to each other. To this claſs belongs every thing which we in general call a Solid body, or ſubſtance; for inſtance, Stones, Metals, Wood, &c. The ſecond claſs contains thoſe parts of nature, which ſtrongly reſemble the former; except in this reſpect, that the particles of which they are compoſed, have little attraction amongſt themſelves; conſequently, by any moderate force, they may be made to recede, and eaſily move amongſt each other in any direction. Of this kind are all liquids, as Water, Quickſilver, Oils, Spirits, &c. O  the third class, are all thoſe rare, expanſive fluids, which are known by the names of Gaſes, Airs, or elaſtic fluids; and alſo vapours. Theſe though as evidently material as the other, contain fewer ſolid particles, with very large interſtices; and though they have weight, and a certain degree of ſolidity, or power of reſiſtance, yet, that weight and ſolidity are ſmall, when compared with the ſubſtances of the former claſſes; and conſequently, the number of ſolid particles they contain, muſt be ſar leſs, than the number compoſing a ſolid, or liquid of equal extent. . Cliſ l,11 To the fourth class belong thoſe highly expanſive, ſubtil, and peculiar fluids, Fire, Light, and the Magnetic and Electric fluids. Their exiſtence is known by their actions; and conſequently they are as certainly material, as the ground upon which we tread; for nothing can act upon matter, but what is material: nothing can produce ſenſation, or the perception of its action upon our material organs, but what exiſts; and whatever we know to exiſt, muſt be material. It appears then, that the moſt ponderous ſolid, and moſt ſubtil fluid, are compoſed of particles equally material, and impenetrable; but the number of ſolid particles contained in a cubic inch oſ uir, cannot be nearly equal to the number contained in an equal bulk of metal, as is evident from the difference of their ſpecific gravities; thereſfore tis certain that thoſe ſolid particles cannot be ſo near to each other in air, as they are in metals. llil But it hath been mentioned, and cannot be diſproved, that no particle of matter can act u here it is not; thereſore, the particles forming air, muſt be in contact with each other, from the centre to the circumſerence; but as a certain extent, or bulk of air, is not ſo denſe or ſolid, as an equal bulk or extent oſ metal: it muſt contain ſewer particles of matter, and more interſtices; conſequently, if the particles of matter are in contact, from the centre to the circumference of a particle of air, the cauſe of its rarity muſt be, that the lines of contiguous particles, forming that extent, cannot be in contact, but muſt form radii of particles, diverging from each other, in proportion as they recede ſrom the centre. Pure air we know when decompoſed, ſo as to loſe its aeriform ſtate, affords a ſmall quantity ol acid; in a ſtate occupying much leſs ſpace than before; and much more ſolid or denſe. Thoſt particles of acid therefore, when in the ſtate of pure air, could not be nearly in contact, but were kept from each other at a conſiderable diſtance; conſequently, not being capable of acting where they were not, in that expanſive ſtate, they muſt have been kept aſunder, by the interpoſition of ſome other particles of matter, ſurrounding them in lines, like radii, in all directions, diverging from each other as they receded from the acid particles as centres, ſo as to form atmoſpheres around them; which reſiſting each other, when brought into contact, kept thoſe acid centres at a certain diſtance; in the ſame manner, as two light balls, electrified with the ſame kind of electricity, repel, or keep each other at a diſtance, proportionate to the extent of their reſpective atmoſpheres of electric fluid; or in the ſame manner, as two ſimilar poles of twuo magnets, refuſe to approach each other. For lines of particles, forming radii, extending in all directions ſrom different centres, cannot penetrate, or approach each other, nearer than where they come into contact, becauſe, though the lines of particles at the centre of contact, are parallel, or in the ſame direction, the ſurrounding diverging radii will act upon each other at certain angles, approaching to a right angle, as they recede from the centre of contact; conſequently, two ſimilar atmoſpheres will not be able to penetrate each other. It appears therefore, that the acidifying particles forming the baſe of pure air, excite certain particles of matter, to attract each orher, ſo as to arrange themſelves in an atmoſpheric form, like radii, round each acid particle as a centre; and that the rarity, elaſticity, and levity of pure air, depend upon this atmoſpheric arrangement; where the lines of particles, diverging as they recede from the acid centre leave large interſtices, between them, and form a particle of Air, light, yielding, elaſtic, and yet ſufficiently ſolid, to keep every ſimilar particle at a diſtance, equal to its extent; if not overpowered by preſſure ab extra. If a little nitrous acid be put into a phial, and expoſed to the action of ſolar light; a quantity oſ pure air will be produced: but not without being expoſed to the light; conſequently the particles of acid do not produce pure air, by their own arrangement, amongſt themſelves; but, by their affinity to light, or ſomelhing partly compoſing it, they attract to themſelves atmoſpheres of that ſometbing, and form pure air; therefore, a particle of pure air, is a particle of acid, ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of particles of ſome other kind, attracted from light; thoſe particles by the attraction of the acid, being united to it, and excited ſelves into lines, like radii, ſurrounding the particle of acid in an atmoſpheric form; therefore we may naturally conclude, that there are tuo kinds of matter; a fixed kind, forming the baſes of all ſolid particles, or compoſitions of ſolid particles; and an uctive kind, whoſe particles being attracted by the: fixed particles of matter, become excited to attract each other; ſo as to form lines in an atmoſpherie form, ſurrounding the fixed central partieles; and diverging from each other, as they recede from their exciting centres; in the ſame manner, as a number of iron filings when expoſed to the action of a magnet, are excited to attract each other, and arrange themſelves in a certain manner, like an atmoſphere around it. Inflammable air reſembles pure air in its expanſibility, rarity and levity, in which laſt reſpect it even greatly exceeds it; conſequently it contains but few particles of fixed matter, and thoſe particles are kept at a diſtance from each orher. by the atmoſpheric arrangement oſ active particles If a quantity of this inflammable air, be mixt with a proper proportion of pure air, and the attraction of thoſe atmoſpheres to their reſpective centres, be weakened by being extended and dilated by a certain degree of heat; they will penetrate, and unite with each other, ſo as to bring their reſpective fixed centres into contact; which unite and form water; by which union the atmoſpheres being diſengaged, combine and form fire, or light; conſequently the atmoſpheres of the particles of inflammable air, have an affinity to the atmoſpheres of the particles of pure air, by which they unite, and draw their reſpective centres into contact: but atmoſpheres ſurrounding particles of pure, or inflammable air, have no attraction, or power of penetrating and uniting with ſimilar atmoſpheres of the ſame kind of air; therefore the atmoſphere ſurrounding a particle of inflammable air, is of a different kind, from that inveloping the acid particle, and producing pure air; as having an attraction oſ union to it, exceeding the attraction of arrangement among its own ſimilar particles; and reſembles the atmoſphere ſurrounding a ball of cork, poſitively electrified; which will not unite with another, with a ſimilar electric atmoſphere; but rapidly ruſhes into union with a ball ſurrounded by an atmoſphere oſ the contrar. electricity. It appears therefore, that there are ſæo kinds ol active purticles; that the particles of either kind being attracted by fixed particles of matter, become excited to arrangement, in an atmoſpheric form, round their reſpective fixed particles; that each hath an attraction for the other kind, when in a ſimilar ſtate: ſuſficient to deſtroy its peculiar arrangement; and that the conſequence of that union, is, an united effort, to draw their reſpective centres into contact. The particles of matter, compoſing the univerſe, and producing all the phenomena of nature, therefore, ſeem to be oſ ſπo general Kinds. The ſirſt Kind, are ſimple, impenetrable, or ſolid particles of matter, poſſeſſed oſ a pouerful attraction, to particles of the other kind; theſe for conveniencv, may be called liacd or nilid parCo ticles of matter; as forming the ſolid baſes, oſ evident ſubſtance of the firſt and ſecond claſſes o matter; and affording the fixed centres, round which the particles of the other kind, arrange themſelves like atmoſpheres, to form the aeriform fluids of the third claſs. The second kind of matter, are ſimple, ſolid particles, poſſeſſing a Kind of polarity; by which, when attracted by the fixed particles of the firſt kind, becoming excited, they attract each other into cloſe contact, ſo as to form lines of contiguous particles, extending like radii, in all directions from the centre; which lines muſt recede from each other, as their diſtance from the centre increaſes. But as their excitement, and arrangement, depend upon the attraction of the fixed central particle: tits evident, that their attractive force of arrangement, muſt be leſs, as their diſtance from the exciting centre becomes greater. The particles of this ſecond kind, I call, for the ſake of diſtinction, active purticles of matter. But though all the active particles, reſemble each other, in being equally attracted by fixed matter; and by that means excited to atmoſpheric arrangement; they are certainly of fio different ſorts. Active particles oſ either ſort, when excited, attracting ſimilar particles to arrangement; and two atmoſpheres of the ſame kind of active particles, having no power of attracting or approaching each other, nearer than where they come into contact; while radii of particles forming atmoſpheres, of the oppoſite, or diſſereni ſorts, attract each other into parallel lines, extending ſrom one fixed centre to the other; which by their united force, they draw into contact. That this diverſity oſ active particles, actually exiſts, is ſully proved by both clectricity, and mvagnetiſm. For inſtance, two light cork ball if poſitively electriſicd, will not approach neai each other; but if one be poſſitively, and the other negatively electrified, they will ruſh into contact with violence. In like manner the north pole of one magnet, will not approach the north pole of another; but will rapidly meet the ſouth pole, and retain it with force. It appears thereſore evident, that there are ſqt active powers in nature; or ſwo active material fluids, eſſentially different in their properties, or diſpoſitions. Each of them hath an attraction for fixed or ſolid matter; but certain circumſtances render the ſame ſubſtance, attractive to one active fluid, but not to the other. And ttis indeed neceſſary, that there ſhould be ru00 active principles of different natures; becauſe, if there were not, the ſimplicity of ſolid matter, and the uniform, equal attraction, of one ſimple active fluid, would unite all nature, into one homogeneous, inorganic, lifeleſs maſs. Since then it is neceſſary, and natural to conclude, that there are ruo active fluids, in nature, oſ different properties, and diſpoſitions, though agreeing in ſubtilty, expanſibility, the property of attraction to fixed matter, and atmoſpheric arrangement around it; we muſt likewiſe allow, that they have an attraction for each other. For if a certain body, poſitively electriſied, or ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of one active principle, will not come near another in the ſame ſtate; it ſneus that each body attracts its own electric atmoſphere, and recedes, if poſſible, from the ſimilar atmoſphere ſurrounding the other.;. but when preſented to a body negatively electriſied, they mutually ruſh into contact; becauſe the body negatively electrified, hath an atmoſphere formed by the other active fluid. The ſame in magnetiſm; the two active fluids, form ſimilar. atmoſpheres, around the oppoſite ends of the needle; the ſame fluid, always ſurrounding the ends oſ different needles, pointing the ſame way; in conſequence of which, the ſimilar ends will not unite; but the oppoſite ends will, forcibly; becauſe the active fluids of the twvo oppoſite poles oſ the needles, being different, attract each other. The ſame reaſon is to be given, for the union even oſ a particle of acid with an alkali. We may thereſore conclude, that beſides the ſimple partic les of ſivxed matter, there are ræo kind oſ active particles in nature; that the ficed particles, equally attract botb kinds of active particles; that either kind by that attraction, becomes excited to atmoſpheric arrangement around the fixed centre: by means of the peculiar property, or polarity, by which active particles of the ſame kind, attract: each other, ſbas to form lines, extending from the fixed matter, like radii from a centre; that the atmoſpheric radii of different kinds, have an attraction of combination with each other, when in ſimilar ſtates of excitement, by which they draw their reſpective fixed centres irto contact; but that when in the atmoſpheric ſtate, neither of theſe active fluids, will attract the ſame kind of fluid, in the ſame manner ſurrounding its reſpective ſolid centre; becauſe their attraction is exerted upon the centres themſelves, which each reſpectively is united to. But if one centre has a greater atmoſphere than the other, that other will attract ſo much from it, as to make an equilibriuim; where each atmoſphere will extend to an equal diſtance from its centre. Having now found matter, conſiſting of ſolid or ſixed particles; and two active fluids, or kinds oſ active particles, each having an aſfinity with the ſolid or fixed particles, round which they form atmoſpheres: which will not unite with ſimilar armoſpheres; but having an attraction for each other, by which, particles of ſolid matter poſſeſſed of atmoſpheres oſ the different fluids, are attracted to unite; we muſt next ſee, what will be the reſult of their union with thoſe fixed particles of matter; and then with each other. Theſe two active principles, being equally attracted by the fixed particles of matter, will each attract and unite itſelf, to the fixed particles expoſed to it; and conſequently, each ſolid particle, will form a centre to an atmoſphere, of one or other of theſe active kinds of particles, (which ſor the ſake of conveniency when in that atmoſpheric ſtate of excitement, I ſhall occaſionally call actis c fluids,) by which the very properties of theſe fluids, will be united to the particles of ſolid or fixed matter; and that union will form a compound where the inertia oſ the ſolid particles, and the elaſticity and rarity oſ the active fluids, muſt be each diminiſhed, by their mutual attraction and union. Theſe compound particles, will therefore have partly the ſame general properties, as the active fluids themſelves have. Particles with ſimilar atmoſpheres will not unite, but with different atmoſpheres they will. And theſe active fluids being equally and univerſally diffuſed as far as ereation extends; and being equally and powerfully attracted by the fixed particles of matter: every fixed particle of matter muſt have an atmoſphere of either one or other of theſe active fluids; but as they are each equally attracted by ſolid matter, 'tis evident, that whichever of the fluids is firſt united to any ſolid particle, that atmoſphere to a certain extent, the particle muſt for ever retain; becauſe that fixed particle cannot meet with any thing, to which it hath a ſtronger affinity; and that active atmoſphere can never be more forcibly attracted by any other power, than that, wvith which it is already combined. Conſequently, that atmoſphere uill never be attracted from diately acted upon, but by ſirſt deſtroying its atmoſphere; which can never happen, as nothing can attract it more ſtrongly than its centre does even were it diſengaged; but by being already united to it, it muſt for ever ſo remain, to a certain extent or diſtance from its fixed particle; as its attraction for every other matter, is weakened in proportion as it attracts its centre. Every ſolid particle of matter, therefore, actuates an atmoſphere of one or other of the two active fluids; but as thoſe fluids are different from, and have an attraction to each other; ſo muſt the particles, which as atmoſpheres they actuate; therefore, every particle of ſolid matter, muſt be thus actuated; and the whole will form ræo claſies, or principles, each poſſeſſed of different properties: and each having an affinity, and pouer of union with the other. Of one or other, or both oſ theſe claſſes of actuated particles, all the various ſubſtances in nature, which contain any fixed matter as their baſes or in their compoſitions, muſt be formed; ſuch are thoſe of the finſt, ſecond, and ibird claſſes ol matter; and all the other ſubſtances, or fluids exiſting. howſoever ſubtil or elaſtic, muſt be produced by the two active fluids, ſeparately or conjointly; ſuch are the highly expanſive fluids of the sourth claſs. If we chemically examine the different ſolids, fluids and aeriform ſubſtances in nature, we in reality find, that all of them contain an eariby, or an acid baſe or matter; an alkali and an earth, are of the ſame nature, or the ſame principle, in different ſtates of combination: but the alkali ſeems to be the ſtrongeſt in its general affinities, and conſequently the moſt active; but that activity or alkalinity, ſeems to be a quality depending upon circumſtances: therefore, I include bolb under the general title of eariby matter; having a ſtrong attraction to the other, the acid matter. Theſe two ſubſtances being of different natures, and having a ſtrong attraction to, and power of uniting with each other; are the two claſſes of ſolid, or fixed particles, with atmoſpheres of the wo different active fluids; I ſhall thereſore call the fixed particles of matter, ſurrounded by one oſ the active fluids, the earthy principle; and thoſe particles, having an atmoſphere formed by the ather active matter, the acidifying principle; and theſe are the two ſolid principles of nature; compounded ofſ ſimilar central particles of ſolid or fixed matter, as baſes or centres, to atmoſpheres of the ſwo different active fluids. And now, having pointed out the two more ſolid principles of nature, and diſtinguiſhed them by proper names, agreeable to thoſe which are univerſally adopted; 'tis neceſſary, to diſtinguiſh the other two, the active principles, by their reſpective names alſo. One of them is known, admitted, and named already; 'tis thereſore only neceſſary to point it out, and aſſign to it, the nume univerſally given to it. To arrive at this ditinetion. ve muſt firſt oſ alf ſav, that the earthe principie is a particle of ſixed matter, with an atmoſphere of one of the active fluids; that this atmoſpheric, or compound particle, will not unite with a ſimilar one; but will, with one ſormed by the other active fluid. A metal; is allowed to be formed of an earth; united to Phlogiſtou; that is, a metal is compoſed of a number of particles of earth, united together by cheir general attraction, to the active fluid, of a different nature, to their reſpective atmoſpheres; which interpoſed between the earthy particles, attracts each equally, and conſequently, draws them ĩnto coheſion, or a ſolid form. But this active fluid, giving eoheſion, and metallic properties, to the earthy particles of which the metal is formed, Philoſophers and Chemiſts by general conſent, call Phlogiſion. Phlogiſton therefore, is the name by which one of theſe active fluids, ſhall continue to be diſtinguiſhed, in the following pages, as ſuſficiently anſwering the purpoſe of diſerimination. But, if phlogiſton be the cementing principle, which attracts the particles of earib together, ſo as to form a metal: 'tis evident, that the atmoſpheres of the eartby particles, muſt be compoſed oſ the other active fluid; and likewiſe, that as the particles of the acidifying, and earthy principles, have different atmoſpheres, it muſt ſollow, that an acidifying particle, is formed of fixed particles of matter, ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of phiogiſion. But what name are we to give to the orber active fluid2 Chemiſtry hath none for it, becauſe it hath entirely overlooked it. What name then ſhall we ſelect, or fabricate, for a ſluid, by the Almighty wiſdom and power, endoued with active properties, and amavzing ſubtilty and expanſibilitt ? What name better than that which the truly great Sir Iſaac Newton gave, to a fluid, whoſe exiſtence he ſuppoſed neceſſary, and poſſeſſed of ſome properties, ſimilar to this now waiting for a name? that there is a fluid of this kind, in nature, Philoſophers allow; and with Sir Iſaac Newton and others call it Æætber. By the name of Ætber, I ſhall therefore again take the liberty to call it; not from fanciful fondneſs for the name, but becauſe it is a name given to a fluid of ſimilar ſubtilty and expanſibility, allowed to exiſt; and I retain that name, becauſe it anſwers my purpoſe, oſ diftinguiſhing it, from the otber active principle, known and admitted by the name oſ Phiogiſton. And now we are able to ſay how an earthy particle is compoſed, for if an acidifying particle, hath a different atmoſphere from an earthy one, and an acidifying particle hath a phlogiſtic atmoſphere; tis evident, that the earthy principle, is a fixed particle of matter, actuated, by being intimately attracted by, and ſurrounded with, an ætherial atmoſphere. The elementary priuciples of nature, therefore are tbree; iuo active, and one more paſſive or fixed. The tuwo active principles, are Æther and Phlogiſton; and each of theſe, by their union with the more paſſive principle, forms a ſecondary or more fixed principle; a fixed particle of matter, with an æthereal atmoſphere, forms an cariby particle or principle, and with a phlogiſtic atmoſphere, the acidifying principle. All nature is therefore formed, of ſolid or ſixed particles, and particles poſſeſſed of atmoſpheric arrangement; that is of matter and the actuating property of attraction. For though there are ſuo active principles, yet, they perfectly reſemble each other in their aſfinity to fixed matter, in their power oſ ſirmly uniting with it: in a peculiar polarity, or attraction of arrangement of their particles, in right lines, when excited: and in thelr general attraction to each other. Were we to ſuppoſe, that there were rtvo original kinds of ſolid particles, one earthy, the other acid; that one would unite with one active principle, and the other with the other active principle only; for inſtance, that an acid particle would combine with the ætherial, but not with the phlogiſtic principle; the ſyſtem would be more complex, and conſequently leſs perſect; for then we ſhould have occaſion for a principle, or property of repulſion, or a power of cloice, by which one principle could chuſe with what other principle to unite, and which to repel or refuſe; for inſtance, the ætherial principle would have an attraction to the acid principle, or ſolid acid parE ticle, to enable it to combine wvith it; and a repulſion, or power of refuſal, by which it would decline any union with the earthy principle. But this would be multiplying cauſes, principles, and properties, without neceſſity; for ſimple matter, poſſeſſed of the active property of general attraction, is alone ſufficient, to ſolve all the phenomena in nature; and conſequently the moſt conſentaneous to our ideas of the perfect wiſdom of the Dei1y; for to produce any certain effects, the fewer the principles, or inſtruments employed, the more exalted muſt be our idea, of the wiſdom which contrived or employed them. It appears then, that the ſimpleſt, and moſt perfect idea which we can form of nature, is, that all things are produced by ſolid or fixed attractive matter, and active matter, having the property oſ artraction and atmoſpheric arrangement: that the fixed particles of matter, are equally capable of attracting every active particle: that the active particles, mutually and equally attract each other; and yet, that by the union of theſe ſixed particles come poſſeſſed of properties. very different from thoſe acquired by ſimilar fixed particles, united to another part or kind of that active matter; which ſhews, that, though every particle of active matter, is poſſeſſed of an equal power of attracting fixed matter, and uniting with it; and likewiſe of arrangement amongſt its own particles, ſo as to take an atmoſpberic form, around that fixed particle as a centre: yet, there is this eſſential difference in thoſe active particles, that one fixed particle, with an atmoſphere of æther, or phlogiſton, will not unite with, or come near another particle, ſurrounded with a ſimilar atmoſphere; but will ruſh into contact, with a particle poſſeſſed of a different atmoſphere. Thus a particle with an æſberial atmoſphere, will not approach near another, with an atmoſphere of æther; but will rapidly combine with a particle, whoſe atmoſphere is of phlogiſton. It is evident therefore, that though all active matter poſſeſſes an attraction to fixed matter, yet that there are ſwo Kinds of active matter, perfectly ſimilar in every reſpect but this, that 1œo atmoſpheres of the ſame active fluid, when excited by union to two ſimilar fixed particles, cannot atE tract, or penetrate each other, ſo as to unite, or occupy a leſs ſpace than they do already; but, that two atmoſpheres one of each kind of active particles, can attract, and penetrate each other, ſo as to firmly combine, and occupy a ſpace when united, leſs than when ſeparate. The reaſon why ſimilar atmoſpheres, will noi penetrate each other, muſt be, that ſimilar particles, have only an attraction of arrangement : while particles of different kinds, have an attraction of union, overpowering the attraction of regular arrangement, when the tuo atmoſpheres are in a ſtate of equal excitement. This polarity, or peculiar arrangement oſ active particles, being excited by their attraction to ſolid or fixed particles as centres: 'tis evident, that the nearer the centre, the greater the excitement, and the more powerful will be the property of arrangement. With this difference between the attraction ofſ ids, when excited, ſo as to take an atmoſpheric form round their reſpective centres, we ſhall find no difficulty in ſolving the various appearances of nature, which may preſent; without having the leaſt occaſion to ſuppoſe, that the ſume particle of matter is poſſeſſed of both attraction and repulſion: which, cannot, conſiſtently with reaſon, be conceived as exiſtent at the ſame time, in the ſame particle of matter; for being oppoſite and equal effects, ariſing from the ſame particle or centre, they would deſtroy each other; neither need we ſuppoſe, that the ſame particle has a power oſ choice, by which it will unite to one ſimple particle, but refuſes every union with anotber; for all that is neceſſary to be proved, is, that ſimilar excited atmoſpheres, in this ſtate of arrangement, cannot unite or penetrate each other; but, that excited atmoſpheres of the ſo different active principles, can; and by that union, occupy leſs ſpace than before their combination; which I would explain in the following manner. Suppoſc a quantity of diſengaged, or unexcited ty but fluidity, or a tendency to keep itſelf in an equilibrium. If, two particles of fixed matter, be introduced to this æther, they will attract it powerfully: and by that attraction, the contiguous particles of æther, will become excited, ſo as to attract the ſurrounding particles, and they others; ſomething like what takes place, when a number ofſ ſmall needles are arranged ſo as to form a line, by being applied, the extremity of one, to the end of another; or when a number of iron filings are promiſcuouſly ſpread; in that unexcited ſtate, they have no attraction, or action upon each other; but, if a magnet be applied to one extremity of this line of needles, or filings, that extremity is firmly attracted to the magnet, and all the other needles, or filings, inſtantly become excited, ſo as to attract each other. So it is with reſpect to the ætherial particles, the firſi being attracted by the ſixed particle, becomes excited; and that excitement is communicated to every contiguous particle; ſo that lines of particles are formed, extending like radii from the centre, in every direction. It is evident therefore, that theſe excited active fluids will each ſurround its centre in an atmoſpheric form: that atmoſpheres of the ſame kind, of æther for inſtance, cannot penetrate each other, mechanically, but muſt preſs upon, or reſiſt each other, if brought into contact: and that they have no other power of uniting, becauſe the only property which theſe excited ætherial particles have with reſpect to each other, is that of arranging themſelves around their reſpective centres. Ifone central fixed particle, indeed, poſſeſſes a larger atmoſphere of excited ætherial particles than another, in contact with it; the external particles will be leſs powerfſully attracted, or excited to it, than by tbat which hath the ſinaller atmoſphere; in which caſe, the latter will by its ſuperior excitement, attract ſo much of the atmoſphere from the firſt, as to render the ruo particles poſſeſſed of equal atmoſpheres. The ſame takes place, in ſimilar excited atmoſpheres of phlogiſion; which for the ſame reaſon will preſs upon, or reſiſt each other, when brought in contact; but cannot unite. But if an excited ætherial atmoſphere, be brought into contact, with an equally excited atmoſphere of phlogiſton: they will attract each other: the radii of each, will be attracted to inſinuate themſelves between the radii of the other: the ſpace they occupy, will become gradually leſs, as they approach: till at length, having penetrated, and united with each other, as much as poſſible, their force of attraction, or cohefion is become as great as it can be, in thoſe circumſtances; each atmoſphere attracting its own central particle, and the oppoſite atmoſphere alſo; ſo that not being able to quit their reſpective centres, ſo as to unite and form a diſengaged compound: they can only unite ſo far, as to form the attraction of coheſion, by drawing and holding the centres together. It appears alſo, that the force with which æther and phlogiſton attract each other, is always proportionate to the number or quantity of particles; and as their denſity is greater as they approach the central particle, it muſt follow, that they will attract each other with a force inverſely proportionate, tres; the nearer they are to thoſe centres, the greater their force of attraction to each other; in the ſame manner, as two bodies electrified, the one with poſitive, the other negative electricity: or the north and ſouth poles of tvo magnetic needles, attract each other with a force, increaſing in ua certain ratio, as their diſtance decreaſes. The attraction of arrangement to a certain extent, around a fixed particle, will exceed the attraction of union with the other kind of active particles; unleſs they are in an equal ſtate of excitement: in which caſe, they will attract each other, ſo as to draw their reſpective centres into contact, without being able to ſeparate from themIf particles of æther, for inſtance, be ſtrongly excited to arrangement, they will form no union. even with particles of phlogiſton, ſslightly excited: becauſe their attraction to cach other, in that ſtate of nearneſs to their exciting centre, exceeds the ſorce of the attraction of union, which the ſlightl excited particles of phlogiſton, in that ſtate, are capable of exerting. . In conſequence of the ſuperior force of the attraction between the two fluids, to that by which ſimilar particles arrange themſelves to each other, when extending beyond a certain diſtance from the exciting centre, it will follow, that, if a central particle be ſurrounded by an atmoſphere oſ æther for inſtance, of that certain extent: that ætherial atmoſphere, will rather unite to a diſengaged phiogiſion, than extend itſelf, by taking into arrangement, a greater quantity of æſher; but thoſe Phlogiſtic particles, having no previous excitement or atmoſpheric arrangement, of particles, will be ſimply attracted ſo, and united cvith the external particles of the ætherial atmoſphere; and in conſequence of that attraction becoming excited, they will take their uſual form of arrangemeut amongſt themſelves, and form an atmoſphere oſ phiogiſtic particles, whoſe centre, is an atmoſphere of æther, excited by its central particle of fixea matter. In like manner a phlogiſtic atmoſphere oſ a certain extent, around its original particle, may have an external atmoſphere of æther. If theſe rwo different compound particles, be brought into contact, the external atmoſphèeres being different, will attract and approach each other: till, by approximation the internal atmoſpheres are brought into contact; they being different, will penetrate, unite with; and ſatisfy each other; in conſequence of which, they will loſe their attraction for their reſpective external atmoſpheres, which will therefore unite, and ſeparate from the other compound; and that union, more or leſs perfect, according to the degree of excitement they reſpectively had, or acquire, by the circumſtances which effected their union, will produce a conpound active fluid, or fluids, differing in their properties, as the degree of excitement, or intimacy of the union, between the particles of the two active fluids of which they are compoſed, ſhall differ; ſuch are Fire and Light. Having now taken a progeſſive view, of the ſimple principles, or elements, of which the univerſe is compoſed; their properties, and the general lats by which thoſe principles are governed or actuated; I ſhall take the liberty to recapitulate, or give the following conciſe view of the whole. i. Nothing can acfi or produce eßpet which does not exiſt as a cauſe. 2. Nothing can act at a diſtance from itſelf, becauſe nothing can act where it is not. 3. Every thing in nature is produced by matter, and attraction, when particles of matter are in contact; for unleſs they be in eontact, no body, or ſubſtance can act upon another; therefore attraction, or repulſion, at a diſtance from the acting body, can not exiſt, becauſe they imply a power by which matter acts where it is not. 4- There are in nature a nunber oſ Qouia points, atoms, or particles: diveſted of every property but attraction, and impenetrability, theſe I have called fixed particles of matter. S. There are ortber particles of impenetrable matter, which when attracted by the former, become excited to arrange themſelves in right lines ſo as to form an atmoſphere of radii diverging from the fixed particle a à centre; theſe Tealt actine porticles 1ſi Ini.in 6. Thee active particles na become excited, ſo as to exert or ſhew their attractive puuer, when they have an opportunity of uniting with fixed particles; or with other particles rendered active, hy being united to fixed particles as centres. i 7. When active particles of matter are excited, by a particle of fied mutter, they then attract other particles of the ſame kind oſ active matter: which therefore become excited; and by a peculiar polarity or property, arrange themſelves in right lines, ſurrounding the fixed particle like an atmoſphere. 8. Excited atmoſpheres of active particles forming lines like rays round their exciting central particles, the further they recede from thoſe centres, the leſs will be their excitement, and the greater their diſtance ſrom each other. 9. The active particles of matter are of rux kinds, ſimilar in their becoming excited by the attraction of fixed matter: and in their polarity, or property of their particles arranging themſelves in right lines, in conſequence of that excitement. To theſe ttvo active matters, I give the names ofſ æther and phlogiſton: æ ther being an active fluid, adopted by Philoſophers, but overlooked by Chemiſts; and phlogiſton an active matter, adopted by Chemiſts, but neglected by Philoſophers. 10. Theſe ivo kinds of active matter, when excited, beſides their attraction to fixed matter, and attraction of arrangement amongſt themſelves, have a powerful attraction mutually to each other, when in ſimilar ſtates, or degrees of excitement. 11. When a ſixed particle of matter, is once ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of æther, they can nevor more be entirely ſeparated. The fſixed particle attracting no other matter more powerfully than æther; and æther, being attracted by nothing more forcibly, than the fixed particle it already cle of eurtb; one of the fixed, though ſecondary or com pound principles of naturae. 12. A particle of fixed matter, inveloped by an atmoſphere of phlogiſion, can never be entirely ſeparated; and that union forms, the otber ſixed, but ſecondary or compound principle of nature, the acidifying principle. -LLLxr13. Atmoſpheres of ſimiar Kinds of active particles, cannot penetrate, or unite; but when in contact, will ht upon at and ſ reſ ù each other. . EREE 14. But, atmoſpheres of the two di ſinu kinds, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, will attract each other; and by that means dram their reſpective exciting centres into contact. 15. A particle of the earthy principle, being compoſed of a fixed particle of matter, with an ætherial atmoſphere, that æther will at a certain diſtance fromits exciting centre, attract the particles of phlogiſton, rather than thoſe of æther; when moſphiere, the partieles of pblogiſiton become excited, and arrange themſelves in an atmoſpheric form around the otber. And in the ſame manner, a partiele of the acidifyiug principle, will attract and be ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of æther. Each ol ctheſe fixed principles, by means of theſe external atmoſpheres, acquiring properties, different from what they poſſeſs in their ſimple ſtates. 16. An active atmoſphere, to a certain extent around its fixed centre, is inſeparable; it will therefore only attract an atmoſphere of the orber kind, in a ſimilar ſtate, ſo as to form the attraction of cobeſion: by which, the fuo particles or fixed principles, or centres, will be forcibly drawn and kept together. 17. But an external atmoſphere of one kind, meeting with an external atmoſphere of the otber, will unite, and by drawing their reſpective actuated centres into contact, will become diſengaged, by the attraction of the internal actuated particles, ſatisfying each other. . 18. If a particle oſ the eartby principle, ſurrounded by an external, or phlogiſtic atmoſphere, be brought into contact with a particle of the acidifying principle, ſurrounded by an external therial atmoſphere: the attraction between the two external atmoſpheres, will cauſe them to penetrate each other, and unite ſo far, that the internal atmoſpheres, eſſential to the earthy and acidifying principles, will come into contact; when, they being oſ the ſuo different fluids, will attract each other, and unite alſo: forming a ſolid compound, different from either earth oracid; in conſequence of which union, the two internal, or eſſential atmoſpheres, being ſatisfied with each other, loſe their attraction to the external atmoſpheres intirely; which therefore will unite, and ſeparate, in a form different from either of the ſimple active fluids, as being compoſed of bothb; and the ſame two fluids, under different circumſtances, where the mode, the violence of excitement, or intimacy oſ union is different, will produce compounds oſ different properties; ſuch are Fire and Light. 19. No exterual atmoſphere, can ſeparate from its exciting ſixed principle as a centre, unleſs it can meet with the other kind of active matter with which to combine: at the ſame time, that the centre from which it ſeparates, can attract its oppoſite principle, to ſupply the place of the diſengaged atmoſphere. 20. An atmoſphere of either kind, ſlightly excited, by a ſurface with which it cannot intimately unite, will readily ſeparate, to unite with the oppoſite active fluid in a ſimilar ſtate; which will oporate alſo; and eſcape combined with the former, in the form of an active ſenſible fluid. Having now delivered my general Explanation oſ the elementary Principles of Nature, and the law by which they are governed; I ſhall next endeavour to demonſtrate their actual exiſtence, and point them out, ſo that they may be certainly Xnown and readily diſtinguiſhed from each other. S E C T I O N II. An Attempt to prove, that the Elementary Principles, propoſed in the preceding Section, in reality exiſt ; and to point them out in Nature, ſo that they may be known, and diſtinguiſhed from each other with certainty. L L the ſolid bodies or ſubſtances in nature, when chemically examined, are found to have ſolid baſes oſ particles, which are either An altali and earth, in the moſt perfect ſtate of purity in which we can procure them, ſo nearly reſemble cach other in their leading properties, thal we may ſuppoſe them to be the ſame principle more or leſs combined with ſome other principle or principles: however to deviate as little as poſſible from the common mode of expreſſion, and to avoid prolixity, I ſhall claſs them loth under the ſame general title, the earthy principle; rather than under that of alkali, or the principle of alkalinity. To ennumerate the diſtinguiſhiug properties of acids, and earths, would be ſuperfluous; their exiftence is univerſally allowed, therefore I need not ſpend time in proving what is already granted. All I ſhall further add at preſent, by way of explaining my ideas of an acid and earth, is, that an acid particle is known by its taſte, and other properties, to Chemiſts and Philoſophers; and that the baſis of every ſolid, liquid, or acriform ſubſtance in nature, which is not formed of thoſe acidifying particles, is compoſed with an eartby baſe; or with the particles of the earthy and acidifying principles, combined in certain proportions. The acidifying particles form one fixed principle therefore, and the earthy the other; ſimilar in the properties of ſolidity, fixity, or ſubſtantiality; and in their mutual attraction to each other; but difſerent in their other properties and aſſinities. An earth and acid being granted, as the rſuo principles, as baſes, giving ſolidity to all bodies, I ſhall next proceed to conſider, and point out the other two principles. If a certain quantity of phoſphorus, be conſined in a ſufficient quantity of pure air, light and beal will be produced: the volume of air will be abſorbed: and a quantity of acid will remain, exceeding the original weight of the phoſphorus employed. It is certain therefore, that the additional acid. was furniſhed by the air. But thoſe additional particles of acid, when in their aeriform ſtate could not be in contact; becauſe they then occupied a ſpace vaſtly greater, than that which they now poſſeſs; but as no particle of matter can act where it is not, 'tis evident, that they could not puſb each other to that diſtance: therefore the; muſt huve been ſurrounded by atmoſpheres of ſome kind oſ active fluid; whicb atmoſpheres, preſſing upon each other, kept them aſunder; and ibis active fluid, be it what it may, I call æther. But ſince the particles of acid, by combuſtion with phoſphorus, are now condenſed into a much more ſolid form, and occupy much leſs ſpace than beſore, in their aeriform ſtate, 'tis evident, that they are no longer ſurrounded by their ætherial atmoſpheres. The æther muſt therefore have eſcaped. Is it not natural then to ſay, that it paſſed of in the form of light, or ſire, which were evidently produced, ſo long as the æther continued to ſeparate from its acid baſe, during the combuſtion of the phoſphorus? Again, If mercury be diſſolved in nitrous acid, the acid will unite with the earſb of the mercury, and form a Calx or Metallic ſalt. This calx, is therefore evidently compoſed of the carib of the mercury, and the acid. Expoſe this calx to the action of ſire, in cloſe veſſels; the reſult will be, thar the mercury will recover its metallic ſtate, and the receiver be filled with pure air. What change It hath loſt the acid with u hich it was combined when in the What can have become of that it muſt be contained in the pure air. then hath the mercury undergone? form of calx. acid? It is evident therefore, from this and the preceding obſervation, that the baſe of pure air is an acid. But the aciâ employed, was not poſſeſſed of ætber, ſufficient to ſurround it in an atmoſpheric form; and the particles of ſbat acid, combined vith the mercury in a ſolid form, could ſtill leſs retain it; from twhence then, had thoſe ſolid particles of acid, the æſber ſufficient, to give them their elaſtic form oſ pure air, by keeping them aſunder! they could acquire it from nothing but the ſire, neceſſary to the operation. It appears thereſore that ſire was produced by means of æther in the firſi caſe: and that æſther was furniſhed by the fire in this caſe. But what is this elaſtic, ſubtile fluid, which ſeparates the particles of acid, at ſuch a diſtance from each other, as to give them the rarity, and elaſticity of pure air, and which hath been called æther? Is it fireif it be, every thing which can give to particles of acid, this ætherial atmoſphere, muſt be, or contain in its compoſition, fire. It is well known, that fire will give this ætberial atmoſphere to nitrous acid, when it ſeparates it from the mercury, as hath juſt now been mentioned; that light will give it the ſame kind of atmoſphere, if the nitrous acid be expoſed to it, in the ſtate of vapour: and that the electric fluid, taken in ſparks or ſhocks through the ſame, will give the ætherial intermedium alſo; in each caſe, giving the acid the ſame form, and properties, thoſe of pure air. It is evident therefore, that fire, light, and the electric fluid, equally communicate this ætherial fluid, to the particles of acid, to give them the form of pure air; and conſequently, that they are either one and the ſame fluid: or that ibis ætberial fluid, is an eſſential conſtituent part, in each. But if they were one and the ſame fluid, they would have no properties, different, the one from the other; but they have different properties: therefore, they are fluids of different kinds; and one principle, common to them all, is, this æther, which united to the acid principle, forms pure air. But, if fire, light, and the electric fluid, all contain æther: and having diffétent properties, require ſome other principle to be joined with that æther, to give tboſe properties, wherein they differ: what becomes of tbat other principle, when the æther ſeparates from it, to unite with and ſurround the particles of acid, when they take the form of pure air?it muſt unite with the ſubſtance, or matter from which the acid particles ſeparate; and the change produced upon metals, or the nitrous acid, being the ſame when pure air is produced, by which ever of the ibree it is effected, fhews, that the otber principle, which they each of them are compoſed of, beſides æther, is the ſume; that their different properties, depend, upon the mode or intimacy of union, between the æther and the other fluid; and trhat other fluid, we may for the future, diſtinguiſh by the name oſ Phlogiſton; as being an active, elaſtic fluid, lite æther; to which it hath an affinity; but they differ in their affinities with the other principles; æther only attracting the acidifying, and phiogiſion the carthy principle. It appears therefore evident that fire, light and the electric fiuid, ate compoſed of the ſame principles: that thoſe are æther and phlogiſion: that their different properties depend upon the mode, or intimacy of their union, or their degree of excitement, or both: and that one may be changed into the other, by altering the mode of their union, or the degree of their excitement. Thus, light when agitated, confuſed, and obſtructed in its paſſage through an opaque body, is altered in the mode of union between the particles of æther and phlogiſton, compoſing it as light; in conſequence oſ which, thoſe two principles acquire a nearer, or different mode of union, forming heat or ſire, as is evident from experiments with the burning glaſs. The electric ſuid, paſſing through a slightly reſiſting medium, undergoes a change in the ſtate of combination of the external electric particles moſt obſtructed, and forms light; but if the reſiſtence be ſtill greater, it becomes fire, as is evident from its accending gunpowder, melting metals, &c. Tis evident therefore, that neither fire, light, nor the electric fluid, can render ſolid particles of earth or acid, permanently elaſtic, but by being decompoſed; and that that decompoſition, cannot take place, unleſs each principle when ſeparated, hath another principle with which to unite. For if any ſubſtance, or fluid is thrown into the ſtate of vapour, by heat, without decompoſing that heat or fire; ſo ſoon as the particles of that vapour come in contact, with any body poſfeſſed oſ leſs heat: they are robbed of it, and condenſe into their original fluid or ſolid form. But, as a further proof of the actual exiſtence of theſe four principles; and the veracity of the preceding concluſions, I ſhall bring the following chemical experiment. If a certain proportion of pure air, and inflam mable gas or air, be mixed together, and exploded by any ignited particle of matter; the reſult will be fire or heat, light, and water. Pure air, from the experiments with phoſphorus or calx of mercury, mentioned before, we know for a certainty, contains a number of acid particles, which cannot be in contact, and therefore cannot act upon each other; conſequently they muſt be kept aſunder, by ſome active fluid, ſurrounding them as atmoſpheres; ibis active fluid, I have called Æther; ſo that pure air is compoſed of acid particles, with ætherial atmoſpheres, ſurrounding and keeping them aſunder. But when this pure air is exploded with inflammable air, the æther is ſeparated, and the acid particles are condenſed: but though the volume of both the airs is loſt, we find no reſiduum of pure diſengaged acid; what then can have become of it? it could not eſcape through the ſides of the glaſs, in which the experiment was made; it muſt therefore be contained in the Water. But water is an inſipid, neutral fluid; vyet the acid muſt be there; and muſt therefore be combined witl ſomething, capable of uniting with, and neutralizing it. That ſomething, cannot be æther, becauſe with æther, it formed pure air: which ſtate of elaſticity, and rarity, it hath now loſt, by being ſeparated from its æther; it muſt therefore follow, that the acid is now combined with the eartby principle: with which it is united to ſaturation; for earib is the only thing, with which the acid could be ſaturated, or unite, when deprived of æther. The water, then, produced by this operation, is compoſed of the acid particles of the pure air, when ſeparated, at leaſt to a certain degree, from their ætherial atmoſpheres: united to, and ſaturated with, particles of earth, retaining but little of their atmoſpheres. But by what was this earth ſupplied? not by the pure air, becauſe it contained only æther and acidifying particles; conſequently, it was procured from the inslammable air. Theſe particles of earib therefore, formed the laſe of the inflammable air. But when in that aeriform ſtate, they occupied a ſpace much larger, than thal they nowv poſſeſs, as forming part oſ the ſmall reſiduum of water: 'tis certain therefore, that they in their acriform ſtate were far ſeparated from each other: that lbat ſeparation, could not be effected by their action upon each other; matter not acting where it is not; 'tis evident therefore, that they were ſeparated, by the interpoſition of an active elaſtic fluid, ſurrounding them like atmoſpheres; in the ſame manner, as the particles of acid were by æther, when in the form oſ pure air. The particles of matter forming the baſe of inflammable air, muſt therefore be of the earihy principle; and thoſe particles in that aeriform ſtate, muſt be kept aſunder by ſome active elaſtic fluid; but what is that fluid? It cannot be æther, or that kind of elaſtic fluid what can it be? which ſeparates the particles of the acidifying principle, in pure air; becauſe rshat fluid, tbai æther, hath no aſfinity with the earthy principle; it muſt therefore be an elaſtic, ſubtile fluid, poſſeſſed of the ſame attraction to the earthy, which æther hath for the acidifying principle; and to diſtinguiſh it in future, let it be called phlogiſion. Inflammable air then, is compoſed of particles of the earthy principle, ſurrounded by atmoſpheres ol phlogiſion; pure air of particles of the acidifying principle, ſurrounded by æther; theſe when mixed together, and exploded, produce fire and light: at the ſame time that they loſe their elaſtic, expanded form: and the reſiduum is water. Water muſt therefore, be compoſed, of the ſolid baſes, or particles, of the ſwo airs; the acid and earthy particles; which uniting, ſaturate each other, and form lhat neutral compound; at the ſame time, the rrx diſengaged elaſtic fluids, the ærtbher of the pure air, and phlogiſion of the inflammable, unite, and form fire, or light; according to the circumſtances, to which diſferent parts, of the two ſluids, are expoſed, during their combination. From the experiments, and obſervations, univerſally allowed, and eſtabliſhed, which are recited in the preceding pages, tis impoſſible to deny, that pure air, contains the principle of acidity, or acidiſying particles, as its baſe: that thoſe acidiſying particles, enter into the compoſition of the water, produced by exploding pure air with inſiammable gas: that in ihat ſtate, they ſhew no ſigns acidity, and are therefore neutralized: that the only ſolid, or liquid matter, capable of neutrali2ing an acid, is of an altaline or earthy nature: conſequently, that thoſe particles of acid, are neutralized by being united with an eartby matter: and that that earthb, was furniſhed by the inflammable Gas. Theſe facts being proved, it muſt follow, that before any one can diſprove the exiſtence oſ the ſæo active fluids, neceſſary to give theſe ſolid particles, the elaſtic, expanded form of air: he muſt firſt of all, demonſtrate, that matter can, and does act where it is not; or that one particle of matter, can act upon another, at a diſtance from itſelf, without any intermedium. That it can, is not poſſible to be conceived, and therefore ought not to be aſſerted, or permitted; and that it does, there is not one decided proof, and therefore I utterly deny it. If then matter cannot per ſe, act where it is not: the particles of the acidifying principle, entering into the compoſition oſ the water, produced in the preceding experiment, when expanded in the form of pure air, could not be in contact; and conſequently, muſt have been kept aſunder, by the interpoſition of ſome other active, ſubtile, elaſtic fluid; and the particles of eartb, when expanded in the form of inflammable gas, muſt have been kept ſeparate, by a ſimilar kind of active fluid. That theſe fluids are different, is evident from their different properties: from their attraction for, and union with each other: from that union producing compounds, poſſeſſed of different properties, according to the intimacy or mode of combination, the degree of their excitement, or different proportions: and from each having an affinity to one ſolid principle, and total inability to unite with the other. Indeed, theſe rwo active principles, are poſſeſſed of ſimilar properties, to what the two paſſive principles have. The acidifying, and eariby principles, will unite, and form a conpound, different from either; ſo will the ſvo active principles. The acidifying principle will unite with one active principle, but not the other, ſo will that other unite with the earthy, but not vith the acidifying principle. That active principle therefore, which will unite with the acidifying principle, I call invariably by the name of Ætber, and the other active fluid, capable of uniting with the earthy principle, is as conſtantly diſtinguiſhed by the name of Phblogiſton. Again, let us ſuppoſe, that every aeriform fluid, owes its elaſtic, expanded form, lo fire, or that principle which in action produces, the ſenſation of heat; and conſequently, that fire is an element, or ſimple principle, capable of uniting with ſimple particles of matter, and by removing them to a diſtance from each other, of giving them the form of elaſtic fluids. Suppoſe this ſimple element oſ fire, the only ageni in nature, capable of giving the aeriform ſtate to ſolid particles; for to ſuppoſe another, is much the ſame, as to allow the principles for which I contend. Pure air then, being proved to contain an arid, will be compoſed of a number of acid particles, ſeparated from each other, by being united to the ſimple element, of fir. Mercury then, may be ſuppoſed a ſimple ſubſtance, as the Antiphlogiſtians pretend; and this mercury, by means of fire, will attract the acid baſe of the pure air, and form a calx. But in this operation does the mercury abſorb the pure air, that is the acid and ſire entire, or only the acid 2-Suppoſe we ſay that it only unites with the acid, or oxygenous baſe; the fire then muſt become disengaged, and eſcape in its proper form of fire. Tis evident therefore, that the mercury when heated, hath a greater aſſinity to the acia principle, than ſire hath. But, if this calx, or mercury combined with the acid principle, be heated by itſelf, in cloſe veſſels, preventing any foreign communication, the fire will attract the acid from the mercury, and take the form of pure air; while the mercury regaining its metallic ſtate, will remain ſimple, and pure behind. Tis evident in this caſe that fire, hath a greater affinity to the acid principle, than heated mercury hath; becauſe, it will take it from it. But the ſirſt operation proved, that mercury had a greater attraction to acid, than ſire hath; therefore, theſe tvo oppoſite concluſions, ſhew, that ibeſe principles are inſufficient and unphiloſophical. Suppoſe then, that mercury attracts the air entire, that is, both the acid or oxygenous baſe, and the fire which gives it the form of air. We muſt then ſay, that mercury when heated, attracts the acid principle, and the ſire, neceſſary to give it the form of pure air, alſo, by which union it becomes a calx, or compound of mercury, acid and fire. If this compound be cut off, from every external communication, and heated, the acid principle with the fire will ſeparate, in the form of pure air; and the ſimple mercury will remain, having recovered its metallic properties. Tis evident therefore, that mercury, when heated, loſes its attraction to pure air, or a compound of acid and fire. But the former operation was to prove, that mercury when heated acquired the power of attracting pure air; therefore 'tis plain that the opinion of mercury being a ſimple or uncompounded ſubſtance, and pure air a compound of the acid or oxygenous principle and ſire, and that fire a ſimple ſubſtance alſo, is puerile, and unphiloſophical. Tis evident, that mercury, when ſlowly heated, will attract the acid baſis of pure air, from its elaſtic meduim; but when violently heated, it cannot retain that acid in combination; for which reaſon alſo mercury, when violently heated will ſublime, or evaporate without decompoſition, or becoming a calx. But if mercury be a ſimple ſubſtance, and pure air a compound of acid particles and fire, the quuutity of fire thrown into the mercury, cannot make any difference, in the attraction between the mercury and acid principle, no more than the quantity oi water, combined with an altali, can alter the attraction between thoſe alkaline particles, and the particles of acid combined with water; we muſt therefore of neceſſity, have recourſe to ſome ather mode of explanation. Pure air alone, we know is unchangeable in any degree of heat; ſo is mercury. But mercury without heat, will not decompoſe pure air; with a certain degree of heat, it will decompoſe it, by attracting its acid: but in a greater degree of heat. will loſe that attraction for the acid, and part with it. But heat, can produce no change in ſimple bodies, but that of expanſion. An allali, always retains its alkaline properties, howſoever heated; and an acid is always an acid, in every degree of heat. However, ttis evident that the acid baſe of the air, hath ſometimes a greater attraction for mercury, than for its elaſtic principle, and in a greater or leſs degree of heat, it hath a ſtronger attraction to the fluid which gives it its aeriform ſtate, than to mercury. But the attraction of the acid to its elastic fluid being always the ſume: and its aſfinity to mercury being always the ſame, it muſt follow, that when the mercury will not unite with the acid, ſome change muſt have taken place in the mercury; that change cannot be the loſs of its aſffinity to the acid, becauſe original natural properties, are unalterable by heat; therefore, its inability to unite with the acid principle, muſt be owing to its attraction to, and union with ſome other principle, which in ihoſe circumſtances, it hath a greater aſſinity with, than it hath for the acid principle. Mercury muſt therefore be a conpound; and the affinity of its baſe with the acidifyiug principle, and its appearance when calcined, prove, that rbat baſe is an earth, as hath been univerſally allowed. Mercury then is an cartb, united to ſome other principle; and pure air is an acid, combined with another principle. Are thoſe two principles the ſame?è are they botb Fire? or are they different principles, which by their union when diſengaged, from their reſpective baſes of Earth and Acid, produce Fire? Let us for a moment ſuppoſe, that both theſe principles, are the ſame, and that ſbat principle is fire; and conſequently a fluid, ſimple and uncompounded. Mercury will then be an eartb united to ſire and pure air, an acid combined uwith the ſame active principle, fſire. By the operation of calcination, tis proved that the eartb of the mercury, will quit its fire, to combine with the acid of the air when heated together; but when this calx or compound of earth and acid, is ſufficiently expanded by means of heat, the earth quits the acid, regains its fire, and becomes mercury; while the acid alſo recovers it priſtine ftate, that of pure air; therefore at one time the attraction of acid to earth, is greater than their united attraction to fire; and at another time their attraction to fire, exceeds the affinity with each other, conſequently, the idea of mercury being an earth united to fire, as a principle, upon which its metallic properties depend, muſt be erroneous. But it hath been proved, that mercury ſuppoſed to be a ſimple ſubſtance, is alſo inſuſficient, and falſe: therefore, it muſt follow, that mercury is an earth, combined with ſome astive principle, different from fire; and that that principle, may be called by the name of phiogiſton, by way of diſtinction, rather than by any other name; becauſe it is a principle, whoſe exiſtence in mercury, hath been long admitted, and never diſproved. We are certain then, that mercury contains an earth, united to an active principle called Phlogiſion; which phlogiſton is not fire, but a ſomething proved to be very different from it; and we are equally certain, that pure air is compoſed of an acidi fing baſe, combined with ſome kind of elaſtic fluidſ Wehat is this elaſtic fluid, which gives the particles of the acidifying principle their aeriform ſtate is it phlogiſton -no-it cannot; for if mercury were cartb and phlogiſton, and pure air acid and phiogiſton, the ſame inconſiſtency would ariſe, as was the caſe when ſire was ſuppoſed united to each in the place of phlogiſton: that is, ſometimes the earth and acid, would have a greater attraction for cach other, than for phlogiſton; and at others, they would attract phlogiſton with more force than each other; which being oppoſite effects, ariſing from the ſame cauſes, declare the ſuppoſition at once to be falſe. Let us ſuppoſe then, that it is fire, a ſimple principle, which gives the particles of acid the form oſ pure air. We ſhall then have mercury, an eartl united to phlogiſion; and pure air an acid, combined with fire. ũ Tis evident then, that in the degree of beat, neceſſary for calcination, the acid of the pure air, muſt have ſo great an attraction to the eartb of the mercury, that it will part with its fire, and diſplace the phlogiſton from the mercurial earth. But during the reduction of the mercury, the acid hath ſo powerful an attraction to fire, that it will ſeparate from the carth, to unite with it. This is inconſiſtent. Or ſuppoſe we ſay, that the united attractions between the earth and acid, and the phlogiſton and fire, exceed the attractions of the earth to the phlogiſton, and the acid to the fire, with which they are now combined; in conſequence of which, a double decompoſition takes place, and rwo neu compounds are produced: the earth and acid combine and form a calæ; and the diſengaged fire and phlogiſton unite, and eſcape in the form of what!? not firebecauſe, the compound is fire and ſay any thingſay phlogiſtonwhat then? light for inſtance. If this compound of earth and acid, then, be expoſed to the action of fire in cloſe veſſels, the attractions of the acid to fire, and of the earth to phlogiſton, will now excerd the attractions of earth to acid, and fire to phlogiſton, whith were the moſt powerful in the former caſe; in conſequence of which, the acid and fire will again become pure air, and the earth and phlogiſton, mercury. But if fire be a ſimple ſubſtance, whence had the earth its phlogiſton, ſo as to become mercury? avoid this difficulty, we will ſay that the degree of heat, or ſire neceſſary to the operation, was acto companied with light, which furniſhed the phlogiſton at preſent be it ſo, ſtill the ſacts contradict each other, admitting thoſe principles: therefore i1boſe principles are falſe, which make pure air a compound of acid and fire. For the earth and phlogiſton of mercury, being unalterable principles, in every ſituation poſſeſſed of the ſume properties; and the acidifying principle of pure air, being poſſeſſed of certain properties, by no means deſtructible: it muſt follow, that if the acidifying principle hath a greater attraction to ecarth, than to ſire at one time it muſt at all times; and conſequently ſince it will at one time quit its elaſtic fluid, to unite vith the earth of the mercury; and at anotber, will quit the earth to reunite with its elaſtic fuid, 'tis eviK dent, that rbat elaſtic fiuid, is not fire, but ſome other principle: which is more, or leſs intimately combined with its acidifying baſe, as it contains leſs or more of the matter of ſire in its interſtices; that when intimately united to its baſe, it will attract that acidifying baſe more forcibly, than the earthy particles, united to their phlogiſton will; but vwhen the quantity of fire penetrating it, is ſo great as to ſeparate it at a greater diſtance from, or weaken its attraction lo its baſe: and the phlogiſton of the earth is in the ſame ſtate, by the ſame means: its attraction then becomes greater for the phlogij1ton oſ the earth: and the attraction of its acid becomes alſo greater to that eartb; in conſequence of which, this elaſtic fluid of the pure air, well unite with that phlogiſton, and form fſire or light, or both; and the acid and earth, will combine and form a calx. Tis evident thereſore, that the sſiuid which gives the particles of the acidifying principle, the form of pure air, caunot be fire; and from the preceding reaſons, 'tis equally certain, that it cannot be phbiogiſton; but it muſt be, and is, ſomething; and that ſomething ought to have a name: and that name may be what you pleaſe; only preſerve the idea of a ſubtile elaſtic ſluid, capable of uniting with the principle of acidity, and forming an aeriform siuid, which is able to ſupport the combuſtion of inflammable malter, and the reſpiration of animals: and of uniting with phlogiſton, when ſeparated by heat, from the ſubſtances which contain it, and forming ligh or fire. That this fluid, may not want a name to diſtinguiſh it by, I have ventured to call it æther, till ſome one ſhall find a better; and give ſu eſicient reaſons for the change. Having therefore been under an abſolute neceſſity, of admitting and adopting run different active, or ſubtile elaſtic fluids, and an acidfying and an earthy principle: let us apply them, to the explanation, of the very operations, which could not be conſjſtently accounted for, by any other theory, and with any other principles, different from theſe. Mercury is compoſed of the earthy principle, intimately combined with phlogiſton; pure air ol acidifying principle, united to æther. In this ſtate, in the common temperature of the air, they have no ſenſible action upon each other; which ſhews, that phlogiſton hath a greater affinity with the earthy principle, when cloſely united with it, than with æther when combined with the acidifying principle. But if the degree of heat neceſſary to promote combuſtion, or calcination, be applied, that fire will penetrate every part of the mercury, and pure air: by which the active principle in each, will be expanded, and conſequently leſs forcibly attracted, and detained by its baſe, or fixed centre. The æther and phlogiſton being therefore more at liberty, their attraction to each other, will become greater, than their power of attraction to their reſpective baſes ; therefore they will penetrate and unite into aſtractive lines of particles, drawing their reſpective baſes into contact; thoſe ſolid baſes will attract each other, and unite, ſo as to form a calx; and by their union the two active fluids will be diſengaged, combine, and form ſire or light, in which ſtate they will eſcape. If this calx be expoſed to a ſtill greater degrec heat, in cloſe veſſels, preventing every external communication with the air, and the volatiliæation and diſperſion of the calx: the quantity of fire now employed, will inſinuate itſelf ſo copiouſly, into every part, and between every particle, as to ſeparate the particles of earth and acid; by which ſeparation, or diſunion, they can no longer attract each other. But though their union is broken, by the interpoſing fire, their properties of attraction are not altered or diminiſhed: therefore, as they cannot in ſo violent a degree of heat, unite with each other: each will attract its proper active principle, by decompoſing a part of tbe fire; the earth will unite with phlogiſton, and form mercury; and the acid with the æther, and produce pure air. The æther of pure air therefore, will never quit its acid, to unite with the phlogiſton of mercury, but when the quantity oſ fire employed, is ſo greal as to ſeparate the phlogiſton and æther from their baſes, or expand them ſo much as to render their attractions for their reſpective baſes, leſs than their affinity for each other; but not ſo great as to keep the carth and acid from uniting, by its interpoſition. For iſ the earth and acid cannot unite, on account of the quantity of heat interpoſed, they will never ſeparate from their active principles; for that decompoſition can never take place, but when the anited attractions of the æther to phlogiſton, and the earth to the acid, exceed the united force of the attractions of æther to its acid, and earth to phlogiſton; which never can happen, but when the degree of heat, by rarifying the actixe principles, weakens their union to their reſpective baſes, by expandiug them: without being ſo copious, o great, as to prevent the union of the earthy and acidifying principles. v I have ſaid, that æther, and phiogiſton, eſcape in the form of ſire, or light; and. that by uniting, they form one, or the other, or both, according to circumſtances; and every operation where fire and light are concerned, tends to corroborate it, and no one inſtance offers to diſprove it. Mercury hath been proved to contain phlogiſton: and all inflammable matters, are capable of furniſhing phlogiſton to its calx, ſo as to revive it; 'tiſ evident therefore, that inflammable or combuſtible ſubſtances, contain phlogiſlon. When this phlogiſton is weakened in its union to its baſe; by a ſufficient degree of heat, if in contact with pure air, it burns: a great quantity of fire and light are produced: and at the ſame time, the air loſes its bulk, its æther, and the infltammable ſubſtance its phlogiſton; the acidifying and earthy particles, remaining entire in the reſiduum; or elſe forming water, by the heat rarified into vapour, and in that ſtate paſſing away, if in the open air. The fire and light, muſt therefore be produced, by the union of æther and phlogiſton. Again, the earth of mercury, and the acid forming a calx, when ſeparated by heat, ſo as to be no longer able to attract, and remain united with each other, decompoſe part of the fire itſelf, as already mentioned; the earth acquiring phlogiſton, and the acid æther; therefore, the fire ſupplied both the phiogiſton and æther: and conſequently, was compoſed of them. The calx of Gold, or Silver, is compoſed of earib, and the acid principle. By being expoſed to the action of light, the earth regains its phlogiſton, and becomes Gold, or Silver, at the ſame time that the acid acquires æther, and becomes pure air; conſequently, light furniſhed phlogiſion to the one, and æther to the other, by its decompoſition; and muſt therefore be compoſed of iboſe two principles. And if pure nitrous acid be expoſed to the light, in a phial which it does not fill: a quantity of pure air is produced and the acid becomes phlogiſticated, which again proves, that light is compoſed of æther and philogiſton, becauſe it gives ætber to the acid now in the ſtate of pure air, and phlogiſion to the reſiduum. If a number of rays of light be collected into a focus, by means of a concave mirrour, or convex lens, in a Iranſparent medium, through which they can paſs undiſturbed: the light paſſes through it, unaltered; but, if rhat focus of condenſed light, be thrown upon an opaque body, through which it cannot paſs readily, and undiſturbed: the conſuſion and condenſation, ariſing from the reſiſtance of the opaque body, and their velocity together, alter the mode of combination, of the two component principles, of the light, the æther and phlogiſton; in conſequence of which, they are mixed together, and form a cloſer or different union, producing ſire. This fire muſt be produced by the obſtructed particles of light: therefore, light and ſire muſt be compoſed of the ſame principles, in a different mode of combination. If an opaque body, be ſuſpended in vacuo, in a glaſs receiver, and light be thrown upon it in a ſocus, or condenſed ſtate: the quantity of heat or ſire produced, will be intenſely great, though the opaque body, ſuffers no change in its principles, or no decompoſition; therefore tbis fire, muſt be produced by the light, condenſed, confuſed, and violently agitated, ſo as to loſe its natural combination, or ſtate of exiſtence; and not in the leaſt, by the opaque body, which produces that change by its reſiſtance; and this fire muſt be compoſed, of æther and phiogiſton, becauſe all ſire is ſo: as hath been proved by its reducing the calæ of mercury, and producing pure air with the acid; and becauſe i is produced from condenſed and obſtructed light, which light is known to be compoſed of æther and phlogiſton, becauſe it will give the latier to the ecarth of Gold: and the former to the acid ſeparated from that earth, when it is revived, by uniting with phlogiſton. And conſequently, ſince fire is produced by the intimate combination, of the æther, and phlogiſion of light: the heat or ſire produced during combuſtion, is produced, by the ſame means, the union of the æther of the pure air, with the phlogiſion of the inflammable ſubſtance; both being diſengaged by that operation, muſt unite: and that union, will always produce the ſame compound, with the ſame kind, or degree of excitement, and intimacy of union; a violent excitement, and intimate union, will always produce fire; but if the diſengaged æther, and phlogiſton, combine leſs intimately or with leſs force, or in a different manner, they will produce light, which light, may again be changed into fire, if it hath velocity enough when it meets with reſiſtence, and is thrown into confuſion, to produce motion, or excitement ſufficient, to take the union, which is neceſſary to change it into fire. The doctrine of latent or abſolute heat, which accounts for every production of ſenfible heat, by ſome change, in the capacities, of the bodies giving out this ſenſible heat, muſt therefore be falſe. That ſome ſolids, and fluids, have a greater attraction for heat, and have a greater capacity for containing it than others, is undoubtedly true; and that theſe when they alter their form, ſtate, or modes of combination, will either require more heat, or give out part of that they were before poſſeſſed of, accordingly as their capacities are altered by this change, is alſo true; and conſequently, that ſome ſenſible heat, will be produced, when that capacity for containing it is diminiſbed. But this is by no means a proof, that all ſenſible heat is produced by that change of capacity; and that it is not ſo, the condenſation of light, moſt abundantly proves. For an opaque body, in vacuo, by means of a focus oſ condenſed ſolar light, may be intenſely heated, without ſuffering any change in its capacity, or any decom poſition of its principles; conſequently, the heat muſt be produced, by the particles of light; the principles oſf which they are compoſed, in conſequence oſ the reſiſtence of the opaque body, acquiring a different, or more violent, or intimate combination, and thus producing ſire, or the matter of beat. Tis evident therefore, that light and fire are compoſed of the ſame principles : that thoſe principles are æther and phiogiſton: and that æther and phlogiſton, when ſeparated from their reſpective haſes by means of heat, always form by their union, light or fire. But there is another active fluid, very different from cither of theſe, in its properties as a fluid; that is, the electric fluidb, whoſe production and properties, come next under conſideration. Glaſss, is a ſubſtance, which in no chemical operation whatever, gives any ſigns of its containing phlogiſion. Sulphur is a matter, which evidently contains a great quantity of phlogiſton: therefore Glaſs and Sulphur, are ruo ſubſtances, very different fromeach other. If a tube of Glaſs, be excited by friction, it acquires an electric atmoſpbere; and if tavo light bodies be ſuſpended near it, by filaments of ſilk, they will be attracted to it: and acquiring ſimilar electric atmoſpheres, will recede from it; 'till the ſurfaces of the atmoſphere ſurrounding the ſube, and thoſe of the light bodies, only touch each other; and ſo long as the electric fluid retains its excitement, around theſe reſpective centres; ſo long will ihoſe atmoſpheres, prevent the light bodies from approaching near to the tube or each other. If a ſtick, or globe of ſulphur be excited, by friction, it will acquire, in lice manner, an electric atmoſpbere; which will attract light bodies, of a fimilar kind, and ſuſpended in the ſame manner as the former; in conſequence of which, rbey will acquire ſimilar electric atmoſpheres, and recede from the globe, and from each other, in like manner and upon the ſame principles as the former. If the two light bodies, which acquired their electric atmoſpheres from the glaſs tube, be brought near each other: they will not unite, but repel or puſb each otber to a diſtance, proportionate to the extent of their electric atmoſpheres; which ſhews, that iboſe electric atmoſpheres, have no attraction for each other; but only for the ſolid ſubſtances as centres, round which they take the form of atmoſpheres. The two light bodies, poſſeſſed of electric atmoſpheres from the excited ſulphur, in like manner will not unite, or approach; thoſe atmoſpheres having no attraction to each other. But, if the two light bodies, with their electric atmoſpheres, from excited glaſs, be brought near the two others, electrifie by means of ſulphur: they will ruò into contact; their atmoſpheres will unite : and that union, vill deſtros every appearance of electricity; the light bodies, having now no properties, different ſrom what they had, previous to their being ſurrounded by atmoſpheres oſ the electric fluid. But, if the electric fluid were a ſimple ſubſtance, ed around ſimilar bodies, as centres, to which they were attracted by excitement, would always repe each other; as is the caſe, when the electric fluid is produced by friction, from ſubſtances oſ ſimilai chemical properties, and compoſition. But, the electric fluid produced by means of glaſs, will nor repel, but forcibly attract and combine, with the electric fluid produced by ſulpbur: therefore 'tis evident, that the electric ſuid, is not a ſimple ſubſtance, but is compoſed of two principles, differeni from each other: that glaſs will excite one of them, to become active, and take an atmoſpheric form, and ſulphur the other: that in that form, each reſiſts an atmoſphere ſimilar to iſſelſ, and by preſſure, keeps it at a diſtance: but that each will rapidly unite with a ſimilar atmoſphere, formed by the other principle, to which it hath an attraction, producing union, and a deſtruction of thoſe properties, which they have contrary to each other, when excited around their reſpective centres. Electricity being therefore of ſuo diſtinct hinds, called improperly poſitive and negative, or more properly vitreous and reſinous, muſt be compoſed of ſiwo equally active fiuids, of different properties when excited, by friction; eacb having the property of arrangement, in an atmoſpheric form, around its reſpective centre, and an attraction to the otber. Poſitive electricity, is always produced by one of thoſe active principles, when excited: and ſbat particular fluid, is always excited by means of glaſs; and negative electricity, by the other, which is invariably excited by means of ſulphur. The electric fluid, is therefore evidently compoſed of two active principles; and thoſe two principles, are as evidently, no other than æther and plogiſton ; and conſequently, the electric fluid is compoſed of the ſame principles, as fire and light are. Fire and light, are produced by the combination of æther and phlogiſton, when /eparated from their reſpective baſes, by means of heat or fire; but the electric fiuid is produced whenever æther and phlogiſton are excited to become active, and capable dies, to unite with each otber, by any other means than chemical decompoſition by heat. That it is compoſed of the ſame principles as fire or light, is certain, becauſe when paſſed in ſparks or ſhocks through nitrous acid vapour, it affords æther to the acid, ſo as to enable it to take the form of pure air; and it communicates phlogiſton to the calces of metals, ſo as to revive them; and becauſe when it meets with a ſlight reſiſtence, as in paſſing through air, it changes the mode of combination ofſ its principles, and becomes light; and when it meets with ſtill greater reſiſtence, as in paſſing through gun-powder or the powder of reſin, the reſiſtence of the ſubſtance to its rapid motion, cauſes its principles to unite ſtill more intimatelv, and take the form and properties of fire. But if the electric fluid, changes nitrous acid into pure air, and revives metallic calces, it muſt aſford æther to one, and phiogiſion to the other; and conſequently, muft be compoſed of iboſe two priuciples; therefore, it cannot be different from fire or light, but in the mode of combination, and intimaM cy of union, which takes place between thoſe ſuo principles, when in ihoſe different ſtates, or forming thoſe different fluids; which is fully confirmed, by its being convertible either into light or fire, by different degrees of reſiſtence, producing a different ſtate of combination. Indeed, unleſs we allow ræ active principles, or ſluids, each capable by excitement, of aſſuming an atmoſpheric eleciric form, around the bodies excited, or immerſed in that atmoſphere, but having an aſfinity to each olher in that excited ſtate, greater than ſlo the bodies they ſurround: ttis impoſſible to conceive, or explain, why glass by means of friction, will always produce poſitive, and ſulphur negative electricity: why atmoſpheres of poſitive or negative electricity, will nut admit the near approach of ſimilar atmoſpheres: why an atmoſphere of negative electricity, will eagerly or violently ruſb into union, with another of poſitive electricity: or why, by tbat union, every appearance oſ electricity, whether poſitive, or negative, is deſtroyed. Two active, different fluids therefore, there muſt be, and are, which, when excited by friction, produce the phenomena of electrical attrastion and repulſion, and by their union; form the Electric ſboce. By this violent union, according as circumſtances differ, light or fire, may be produced: the calces of metals may be revived: and the acid principle acquirè the properties, and form of pure air. ZTheſe tuo principles therefore, oſ the electric fluid, are the ſame, as thoſe compoſing fire or light; and one of them uniting with the metallic earth, ſo as to revive it, muſt be phlogiſion; and the other, combining with the diſengaged acid, and giving it the elaſtic form of pure air, muſt be the active principle which I have called æther. Fire, light, and the electric fluid, are therefore evidently compoſed of fwvo. active principles, diſtinguiſhable from each other, by the names of Phiogiſton and Æther, as well as by any other; which principles, by the difference of the intimacy or mode of their combination, produce the bree fluids, of different properties, in their intire ſtates. Each of theſe compound fluids in certain circumſtances, is capable of decompoſition, and of decompoſing ces; conſiſting of earth and acid, will decompoſe them: and they the calces: The earth will com-: bine with the phlogiſion, and form a metal: and the acid will unite with the æſther and produce pure air. And theſe tuo active principles, when by interpoſing heat or fire their intimate union, or cloſe connexion; with their reſpective baſes of earth or acid is prevented, and their attractions to thoſe baſes weakened, will again unite and form fire or light, and leave the acid to combine with the Earth. Thus have I propoſed the Elementaty Principlet of Nature, and brought arguments, ſupported by facts, to prove their exiſtence; ſuch argumenſts, as bring full conviction to my own mind, and make me reatly to defend them, as being the real primary inſtruments in the hands of the Deity, by which alone all the phenomena of nature are produced; and conſequently, 'till thoſe arguments and facts ſhall be diſproved, and the non-exiſtence oſ thoſe elements demonstrated, I make no ſcruple to inſiſt upon and apply them, as principles, whoſe ence is fully proped, and who unt for every appearance in n r and ſatisfactory. Iaving therefore taken a gener principles of which all thing laws governing thoſe principl ing their exiſtence; aſſuming all proceed to examine them S ECTION On the Earthy Pri exiſtence of an earth, in nature, hath never Tis known by its ſoli impenetrability, of its ts affinity to acids, in di ucing ſaline matters of ieutral when ſaturated: portions, producing metals, and combuſtible or inſtammable ſubſtances, of different kinds, according to their relative proportions. Every ſubſtance in nature, capable of combuſtion in pure air, muſt contain the earthy principle and pblogiſton; for by combuſtion, pure air is decompoſed. But pure air cannot be decompoſed, but by a double affinity: the acidifying principle, will never part from its æther, but when it is artracted by the eartby principle: nor the æther from its acidifying principle, but when it is attracted by phlogiſion , and when thoſe united attractions, overpower the attractions of the æther to its acid, and the earth to its phlogiſton, a decompoſition muſt take place; the earth and acid will unite, and form the reſiduum: while the æther and phlogiſton produce the fire and light attending combuſtion, and produced by it. Every ſolid ſubſtance then, compoſed of. the earlhy principle and phiogiſion, is combuſtible or deſtructible in pure air, in ſuch a degree of heat, as is neceſſary to weaken the afſinity, between the earth and phlogiſton, by inſinuating itſelf betwixt them, and expanding the phlogiſton to a greater diſtance from its earthy baſe; by which, its aſfinity will be leſſened, as the expanſion increaſes; till at length its attraction to the æther of the pure air, will exceed the attraction of its centre. The earthy principle, ſaturated with the acid principle, forms a neutral compound, having no attraction to acids or earth: ſhewing no ſigns of phiogiſton, when heated in pure air: nor any of æther in inflammable air, hy decompoſing them: an earth ſuperſaturated with the acid principle, forms the different acids. But if not ſaturated with it, the compound will be an alkali or carth, having an avidity to unite with acids. . But, earth may enter into a number of compoſitions very different from theſe ſimpler ſtates; for inſtance, an earth may be partly ſaturated with acid, and partly with phlogiſton, and that in an infinite variety of proportions; in which caſe, it will partake of the properties both of the inflammable, and neutral ſaline combinations; or it maj be combined with ſome phlogiſton, and ſome acid not wholly diveſted of æther; and theſe in a variety of proportions, which at preſent it is not neceſſary to conſider. However, we may ſay that every ſolid particle of fixed matter, capable of uniting with an acid or with phlogiſton, is a particle oſ the earthy principle. Every ſolid or fluid matter, capable oſ combiſtion in pure air, contains the carthy principle combined with phlogiſton; and every ſolid or fluid matter, having no affinity with either acid or earth, and not deſtructible or combuſtible in either pure or inſlammable air, is compoſed of the earthy principle, combined to ſaturation with the acidifying principle; and by theſe general properties, the earthy principle may be always known when preſent. Having pointed out its diſtinguiſhirg properties, let us next endeavour to acquire the ſimpleſt idea poſſible, of this earthy principle, conſiſten with reaſon, and the properties it muſt poſſeſs a a principle, ſubject to certain invariable laws. The ſimpleſt idea we can form of matter, is that of a ſolid point or particle, ultimately ſmall, poſſeſſed of no property but impenetrabilitp. A particle of this kind, I would call a portiele of inert matter; but to render theſe particles uſeful in nature, tis neceſſary that they be alſo pofſeſſed oſ the ſimple property of univerſal attraction. But æ particle of the earthy principle, gives a more complex idea, as requiring the properties oſ attraction to the acidifying principle and to pblogiſton, and repulſion or inability to unite with æther. In like manner, n particle of the acidifying principle differs from a particle of fixed matter, in having an attraction to, or power of uniting with the earthy principle or with ætber, but refuſing every connexion with phlogiſion, and the ſame may be ſaid of æther and phlogiſton, each rill attract one ſolid principle, but not the otber, though they will attract each other. But if a particle of the earthy principle, conſiſts of a ſimple particle of matter, attracting phlogiſton but refuſing æther, it muſt be different from a particle of the acidifying principle, attracting æther and refuſing to unite with phlogiſton; we muſt then admit oſ four kinds of ſimple particles of matter; any one of which, will unite with ſwo certain others, but not with the ibird; thus æther will unite with phlogiſton, or with the acidifying principle, but not with the earthy; and each of theſe ſimple particles, muſt have a power of choice, or two properties, one of attracting, and the other oſ refuſing to unite with certain other particles oſf matter. But, this is departing from the beautiful ſimplicity of nature, and multiplying properties without neceſſity, or gaining anty advantage by it, nay even involving ourſelves in inextricable perplexities. The ſimpleſt idea therefore, which we can form of nature, is, that every thing is produced by ſimple matter, and attraction: that the baſes oſ all ſolid bodies are formed of particles of fixed matter, diveſted of every property but impenetrability, and univerſal attraction: that theſe fixed particles, as baſes, are actuated by particles of matter poſſeſſed oſthe property of univerſal attraction to themſelves; and to fixed matter indiſcriminately: that theſe active particles, when attracted by fixed particles of matter, arrange themſelves in right lines, ſo as to form atmoſpberes around them; and that the phenomena produced by theſe two diſtinct active principles, depend upon their attraction to each otber, being greater, than the attraction of arrangement exiſting between ſimilar particles; when in ſtates of equal excilements; and extending beyond a certain diſtance, from their exciting centres of fixed matter; for to that certain extent, they are inſeparable from their ſixed centres, and can only draw thoſe centres into contact, without being able to ſseparate from them. That there are ſolid particles of matter, none can deny: that there is an attractive power, no one can refuſe aſſent to, and that there is a polarity or mechanical arrangement in particles of matter, none can deny who hath ever ſeen, and paid attention, to the regular arrangement of the particles of water, ſalts and metals, when loſing their fluid ſtate, they become ſolid, and unite with each other at gertain angles, ſo as to produce cryſtals, or regular figures. The active particles of matter, therefore, being of tuwo tinds, muſt form atmoſpheres around the fixed particles of matter, which they meet with, diſengaged; and this firt ſimple union, nothing hath power to entirely ſeparate or deſtroy: each active principle, having an equal attraction to theſe fixed particles, would originally unite itſelf to its ſhare of them: and rhat union would produce particles of fixed matter, with active atmoſpberes, different from ecach other, as being compoſed of the ruwo different active ftuids. A particle of the earthy principle thereſore, as before concluded, is a particle of fixed matter, ſurrounded by an ætbherial atioſphere; conſequently it will attract phlogiſion, becauſe æther and phlogiſton have a ſtrong affinity to cach other; and for the ſame reaſon, will it unite with a particle of the acidifying principle, becauſe it is compoſed of a particle of matter, with a phlogiſtic atmoſphere. I by no means wiſh to inſiſt upon the particles of matter forming the baſes of the earthy and acidifying principles, being exactly ſimilar in every property: nor, that a particle of earth, is a particle of fixed matter, ſurrounded with an atmoſphere oſ æther: and a particle of the acidifying principle, a ſimilar particle of matter, with a phlogiſtic atmoſphere; but every circumſtance conſpires to make me believe it. All that I inſiſt upon is, that a particle of the earthy principle, will attract and unite with a parricle of the acidifying principle, or with phlogiſton, but not with æther; a particle of the acidifying principle with earth, or æther, but not with phlogiſton; and æther and phlogiſton with each other. But to avoid multiplying cauſes, properties or principles without neceſſity, it appears reaſonable and neceſſary to me, that, the baſe of an earthy and of an acidifying particle, be a particle of the ſume kindof fixed matter: and that their earthy or acidifying properties, as priuciples, depend upon their being united to, or ſurrounded by one or other of the tive principles, a fixed particle having a phlogiſtic atmoſphere, becomes poſſeſſed of the properties attributed to the earthy principle, and with an ætherial atmoſphere, it acquires the properties which diſtinguiſh the acidifying principle. By admitting this explanation, we have in reality, no occaſion for more principles than rthree; fixed particles, and ſno active fluids: each of which active fluids is compoſed oſ particles, which being attracted by fixed matter, become excited, to attract each other into atmoſpheric arrangement, around the exciting fixed centres: or the particles of the orher kind, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, into union, by which their reſpective fixed centres, are drawn and held firmly together. The two active principles of nature, therefore, are æther and phlogiſion: each of theſe when combined with ſixed particles of matter, becoming active, can never more be intirely ſeparated from thoſe exciting fixed particles, and will therefore form rsæo other more ſolid principles, the earthy and acidifying; æther combined with or ſurrounding fixed particles forming the earihy principle, and phlogiſton with the ſame kind of fixed particles, the acidifying principle; and the earthy and acidifying principles muſt, on account of their actuating atmoſpheres, have the ſame affinity to each other, that æther and phlogiſton have. Tis evident likewiſe, that a particle of the acidifying principle having a phlogiſtic atmoſphere, will attract æther alſo, as well as the ætherial atmoſphere of the earthy particles; and that particles of the earthy principle, will attract phlogiſton, as well as the phlogiſtic atmoſphere of a particle of the acidifying principle; and for the ſame reaſon, that is, the attraction of union, exiſting between the two active fluids, æther and phlogiſton. But ſimilar principles, or particles of fixed matter poſſeſſed of ſimilar atmoſpheres, as hath before been ſhewn, will not unite: becauſe, ſimilar particles, of the ſame active fluid, when excited by their union with fixed matter, have no attraction, but to that fixed matter, except the attraction ol arrangement, with reſpect to each other: by which they unite, ſo as to take an atmoſpheric form, around the fixed ſubſtances, or particles, as centres; conſequently, two ſimilar particles will not unite: each atmoſphere tending to its reſpective centre. To explain my idea of theſe ſour principles, and their mode of action ſtill further, and at the ſame time, prove that they are perfectly conſiſtent with nature, let us ſuppoſe four cork balls, ſuſpended by ſilk cords, to repreſent four particles of fixed matter, having no powers, or properties, but impenetrability, or ſolidity: the tfuo electricities, will repreſent the tiwo active fluids: poſitive electricity being ſuppoſed to be æther, and negative to be phlogiſton. If two oſ theſe balls be poſitively electrified, they will repreſent two particles of the earthy principle, having each a fixed or ſolid centre, ſurrounded by an ætherial atmoſphere. If the other two be negatively electrified, like two particles of the acidifying principle, they will have atmoſpheres of phlogiſton. Tnhe two balls poſitively electrified, will not unite, but recede from each other, like two particles, of the earthy principle: and the two negatively electrified balls, will refuſe to come in contact with each other, in the ſame manner, as two particles of the acidifying principle refuſe to unite. If one of the balls poſitively electrified, be brought between the two negative balls, they will attract, and unite with each other, in the ſame manner, as two particles of the earthy principle unite, and form a ſolid, by the interpoſition of phlogiſton. And a ball negatively electrified, will forcibly attract another poſitively electrified, in the ſame manner, as a particle of the earthy and acidifying principle, will attract and unite with each other. And the light and heat, produced by the union of theſe two oppoſite electric atmoſpheres, when uniting, and ſeparating from their reſpective centres of matter, is juſt the ſume, as the light and heat produced, when the phlogiſton of . one ſubſtance is diſengaged from its baſe, and combines with the æther ſeparated from another ſubſtance, of a different and oppoſite nature. I have been thus explicit here, that my meaning might be perfectly underſtood; and have made the preceding compariſon, not only by way of elucidation, but alſo to ſhew, that the ideas I have formed, with reſpect to the acidifying and earthy principles, being poſſeſſed of ſimilar particles oſ fixed matter, as baſes, ſurrounded by atmoſpheres ol the rwo different active fluids, are ſimilar to, and perfectly conſiſtent with the operations of nature, and properties of matter, every moment preſented to our view. But according to the general laws laid down and explained in p. 34, and p. 39. prop. 15. it appears that either æther or phlogiſton, when ſurrounding a fixed particle of matter, ſo as to form a compound or ſolid principle, to a certain extent around that centre, is excited to attract ſimilar particles to atmoſpheric arrangement, ſo powerfully, as never more to be ſeparated; but beyond that certain extent, the active particles have a greater attraction or diſpoſition to unite, with the oppoſite tina of particles, than to extend themſelves, by taking more ſimilar particles into arrangement; conſequently, the atimoſphere of either principle being naturally violently excited, and always ſurrounded by. the oppoſite active fluid in ſome ſtate or other, vill conſtantly attract it in that ſtate; thus, the earthy principle, being a fixed particle of matter, ſurrounded by ætber to that certain extent, will unite itſelf either to the phlogiſtic atmoſphere of the acidifying principle, and form a neutral compound: or to diſengaged phlogiſton, with which it will invelope itſelf as a second or external atmoſphere. And in the ſame manner, the phlogiſtic atmoſphere of the acidifying principle, will either ſatisfy itſelf with the ætherial atmoſphere of the earthy principle, or will take an external atmoſphere of ætber. So that on account of the violent degree of excitement, of the atmoſpheres, ſurrounding the fixed centres as principles, we can never procure thoſe principles, totally diſengaged, either from the oppoſite fixed principle, or the active principle of the contrary kind. The earthy principle therefore, when in the ſtate the moſt diſengaged from the acidifying principle, which we can procure, will ſtill not be the pure earthy principle: becauſe its ætherial atmoſphere will then attract a phiogiſtic one; and upon ſbat phiogiſion, its alkalinity ſeems to depend. If the quantity, or extent oſ phlogiſton be ſmall, its excitement, and activity vill be ſo much the greater, rendering the earthy particle cauſtic or altaline; if the phlogiſton be more abundant, its altaline properties will be leſs powerful, or evident. Thus vcolatile alkali, when deprived, as much as poſſible, of acid, and phlogiſton, by any other ſubſtance having a greater aſfinity with them, as for inſtance quick-lime, is rendered powerfully cauſtic and altaline; but if heated, it will decompoſe the fire, by attracting its phlogiſton, and become alkaline air, (for if it did not decompoſe the ſire, it could not become permanently elaſtic) in which ſtate, it is leſs cauſtic or alkaline than before; and iſ this alkaline air, hath an opportunity, tric fluid, paſſed through it in ſhocks, it will ſtill furtber expand itſelf, and become inflammable; in which ſtate, the quantity of phlogiſton, ſurrounding the ætherial atmoſpheres of the earthy principle, is ſo great, and conſequently ſo little excited, as to ſhew no ſigns of cauſticity or alkalinity. The altaline properties therefore, oſ the earthy principle, depend upon the phlogiſton ſurrounding its ætherial atmoſphere; and the degree of alkalinity, muſt be inverſely proportionate to the quantity of phlogiſton: or directly ſo, to the excitement of that phlogiſton. I ſhall now conclude this Section with the following definition. Aparticle of the earthy principle is a particle ol fixed matter, ſurrounded to a certain extent, by an atmoſphere of æther; in conſequence of which it hath an affinity to the acidifying principle, on account of its phlogiſtic atmoſphere: and alſo to phiogiſion, by which being ſurrounded, it acquires the properties which conſtitute an alkali. SECTION IV. On ihe Acidifying Principle. NG entered ſo largely into the nature c more fixed principles of nature, or thoſ he baſes, of all ſolid ſubſtances, general d, in the preceding Section, where thi of acidity was alſo taken into conſidera r as it was related to the ſubject, by it ith the earthy principle, there treate d having there given my reaſons, fo 106 ON THE ACIDIFYING ſuppoſing, that botb the earthy and acidiſying principles, are compoſed of ſimilar particles of fixed matter, ſurrounded with atmoſpheres of different active fluids; by which union they become active principles, reſembling the fluids which give them their activity, and different properties, and their attraction to each other, I ſhall have leſs to ſay upon the preſent ſubject. Acids are univerſally known, and their exiſtence conſequently generally allowed, as admitting no denial, and wanting no demonſtration. The acidifying principle, is capable of taking different degrees of fluidity or ſolidity, according to circumſtances, and its mode of combination; for, a pure uncombined acidifying particle was never ſeen, nor ever can be, no more than a particle of the earthy principle, pure and uncombined; yet, an acid in every ſtate, ſufficiently manifeſts the exiſtence, ſolidity and impenetrability of its particles. Tis known, in certain ſates, by its taſte: alſo by its affinity to earthy or alkaline ſubſtances, and by its attraction to æther. With the earthy principle, combined to ſaturation it forms neutral compounds: if the acid principle predominates, different acids are formed: iſ it be inſuſficient to ſaturate the earth, the compoſition is kenown by the names of caleareous earths, alkalis, &c. and by the property of attraction to acids. With æther it forms pure air, and the different kinds of acids, which differ in the quantity of æther they contain; ſo, that the differences between the various Kinds of acids, depend upon the proportion of æther they retain: the quantity oſ earth united with them, or botb; and the neutral ſalts, formed by the combination of theſe different acids, with earthy ſubſtances of different degrees of purity, vill differ from each other alſo. So that the acidifying principle, may be partly or wholly ſaturated, either with earth or ætber: or it may be partly ſaturated with earth, and partly with æther: or it may be combined with æther, and an earth partly ſaturated with phlogiſton, producing an infinite variety of compound ſubſtances, of different properties, according to the different principles, or proportions of thoſe principles, entering into their compoſition. Every fluid or ſolid ſubſtance in nature, capable of effecting the decompoſition of inſlammable matters, or phlogiſtic ſubſtances, or ſupporting their combuſtion, muſt contain the acidifying principle and æther. For the earth and phlogiſton of inflammable, or phlogiſtic ſubſtances, will never feparate, neither will the acidifying principle and æther, unleſs each of them, can meet with the orher principle to which, in ihoſe circumſtances, it can more iutimately unite, than to bat vith which it now is combined; therefore, every ſubſtance capable of promoting, or effecting the decompoſition of inflammable matters, muſt contain, and furniſh æther, to combine with the phlogiſton, diſengaged from the earth; by the union of that earth with the acidifying principle, depoſited by the æther; the earth and acid forming a calx, or reſilii duum: and the æther and phlogiſton, ſire or light, If the cearthy principle contains a ſuperabuudance of phlogiſton, and that phlogiſton during combuſtion, be ſaturated with æther, the quantity of acid diſengaged from that æther, if the æther and acidifying principle were combined to ſaturation, as in pure air, will as much excced the point of ſaturating the earth, as the phlogiſion did, which is now ſeparated from it; and conſequently, the reſiduum muſt be an acid, or an earth ſupeuſuturateq with acid. But, if the earth be not ſaturated with phlogiſton, the quantity of æther required to ſaturate that phlogiſton, will depoſit a quantity of acid, not ſus. ſicieut to ſaturate that earth; therefore, the reſiduum vill ſtill have a power of attracting more qcid. Indeed, an inſinite variety muſt take place, not only in the reſidua or combinations of the two fixed principles, but alſo in the combinations oſ ed principles they may retain after certain decompoſitions, according to the different proportions, which they bear to each other, in the ſubſtances employed, and producing thoſe decompoſitions, and new combinations. Every ſolid or fluid matter, therefore, capable of effecting the combuſtion of inflammable ſubſtances, or ſubſtances compoſed of the eartby principle and phlogiſiono, muſt be compoſed of æther and the principle of acidity; and every ſubſtance having an affinity with either the earthy principle or æther, is a particle of the acidifying principle. But, for the reaſons delivered in the laſt Section, on the earthy principle, and in the former parts oſ this work, it appears, that this acidifying principle is compoſed, of a fixed particle of matter, ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, to a certain extent; to which diſtance from the fixed exciting centre, its particles are ſo ſtrongly excited to arrangement, and ſo powerfully attracted by that fixed centre, as to be inſeparable. But beyond that extent, the phlogiſtic particles being leſs forcibly excited to attract their centre, acquire a ſtronger diſpoſition to unite with æſber, than to take a greater extent of pblogiſtic particles into arrangement; conſequently, the acidifying particles, will forcibly attract the eartby particles on account of their ætherial atmoſpheres; or if thoſe are abſent, they will attract the æther, every where preſent, which vill form an external atmoſpbere, around the eſſential phlogiſtic one. Upon this external atmoſphere of æther, the acidity of the particles depend: the more extenſive the ætherial atmoſphere, the leſs the degree of excitement, and manifeſt acidity; but when the quantity of æther is ſmall, its excitement muſt be great, and its activity and acidity powerful. Thus, particles of the acidifying principle, with large external ætherial atmoſpheres, form pure air, where no ſigns of acidity are perceived: but if part of that æther be taken away, by combuſtion, or any other means, the acidity will become evident, and the particles no longer capable of preſerving their aeriform ſtate, will be condenſcd into that of a liquid acid. We may therefore give the following A particle õſ the atidifying principle, is à fixed partiele of matter, ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of phlogiſion, to ibat extent; where it ceaſes to be inſeparable, and acquites a ſirong atiraction to æther; conſequently, it will have an affinitp with the ear⸗ ihy principle, on account oſ its ætherial atthoſpherẽ; ãnd alſo an attraction t& diſengaged æther, which being excited to ſurround it, acquires all thoſe properties which conſtitute ai acid. Having now pointed out the diſtinguiſbing., or characteriſtic properties of the eartby and neidifying, or the iwo fixed principles, forming the bcaſes of all ſolid bodies; and endeavoured to ſhew their natures and affinities, and to trace them to the ſimpleſt ſtate; of which we can form any idea of them, conſiſtent with reaſon: I ſhall hext proceed, to conſider the tivo active principles, Phlogiſton and Æther; in orders. S ECTIONV. On Pblogiſton. N the former parts of this work, I'1 voured to ſhew, not only the abſolu ere is, to admit of two active principle t alſo, that they do in reality exiſt. Theſe two active principles or fluids, fixed particles of matter, form tfuo compound, but more fixed principles; pound fixed principles in certain ſtates, are univerſally called Eartb and Acid, and the two active fluids I call Phlogiſton and Ætbher. Theſe iuo active fluids muſt be material, becauſe they exiſt, and are capable of uniting with fixed matter, and giving it new properties; and of uniting with each other and producing effects evident to the ſenſes; nay even when excited alone, they are capable of manifeſting their exiſtence, and materiality. But when they form magnetic, electric, or aeriform atmoſpheres around solia matter, though evidently material, they have not that ſolidity, and viſibilitt which ſolid ſubſtances have: conſequently, their particles muſt have large, and numerous interſtices between them, which muſt ariſe from the peculiar arrangement which takes place, amongſt thoſe particles, when excited; and the power os reſiſtence, and force of attraction muſt diminiſh, in proportion to the diſtance from the ſolid centre, as it is natural to ſuppoſe, from the arrangement the active particles take in right line: like radii, in every direction, round their centres: the diſtance between thoſe lines being inverſely proportionate to their excitement, and, ihat to their diſtance from the centre. This arrangement of active particles, at once explains the nature of elaſtic or aeriform fluids, with ſolid baſes; and alſo the power of excited atmoſpheres, either to reſiſt or attract, being greater as the lines approach each other and the centre; and unleſs we admit this mode of explanation, 'tis impoſſible to account for a number of phænomena, which we cannot deny. The calx of antimony, conſiſts of particleswhich will not even unite into a ſolid form; but ſupply the requifite quantity of phlogiſton, and they will become a ſolid, where the methodical arrangement of its particles, at certain angles, with reſpect to each other when conſolidating, producing ⸗ figured form, is too evident to be denyed. Hert then, as well as in many other inſtances, we have a peculiar polarity, or arrangement taking place between the particles of matter; and that proper ty of methodical arrangement, evidently depends upon the phlogiſton; conſequently, I have authority from nature to ſuppoſe, that particles of phiogiſton, have a certain polarity or arrangement amongſt themſelves, when excited by fixed matter; and the eryſtalliation of acids, proves that particles of ætber have ſo 0. Allowing therefore that active particles of matter, by excitement, take an atmoſpheric form: that their activity depends upon their property of univerſal attraction to each other, and to fixed matter; and finding that ſome atmoſpheres will reſiſt each other, while orbers will attract and unite, as before more largely conſidered, we muſt conclude, nay we are certain, that theſe active atmoſpheres are of tœo kinds: ſimilar in attraction to ecach other, and to fixed matter, but differing when excited, in this, that ſimilar atmoſpheres, or atmoſpheres oſ the ſame kind of active fluid, will not come nearer than ſimple contact; but, atmoſpheres of the two different kinds, will penetrate each other, and unite. Phlogiſton thereſore is a ſubtile, elaſtic fluid, compoſed of particles of matter, actuated by the property of attraction; when theſe particles are excited, they have an attraction for each other, producing an arrangement in right lines: in conſequence of which, they aſſume an aſmoſpheric form, around the ſolid ſubſtance, or particle as a centre. Theſe phlogiſtic particlès, are powerſully attracted by fixed particles of matter; by which attraction of union, they become excited to arrangement, and form atmoſpheros around thoſe fixed particles never more to be ſeparated intirely. Theſe ſixed particles with phiogiſtic atmoſpheres, being unalterable, form the fixed or ſolid principle oſ nature called the cidifying principle. The particles of phlogiſton, have an attraction to the particles of æther, when diſengaged, or in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement: by which, they can unite; and if at the ſame time they become diſengaged from their ſolid baſes, they form ſire, or light, according to the degree of intimacy with which they combine. Phlogiſton hath alſo an attraction to particles of the earthy principle, becauſe they are compoſed of particles of fixed matter, with ætherial atmoſpheres. Particles of phlogiſton, ſurrounding a ſolid centre of fixed matter, will to a certain diſtance attract that centre, more powerfully than æther; but beyond that diſtance, they will have a more powerful attraction to the particles of æther, in a diſengaged ſtate, than to their fixed baſes; in conſequence of which, the æther will be excited to take an atmoſpheric arrangement around them. Particles of phlogiſton, when excited to arrange themſelves round ſolid ſubſtances, with which they cannot enter, into cloſe or chemical union, will leave thoſe ſubſtances, and loſe their atmoſpheric arrangement, to combine with æther in ſimilar circumſtances. Diſengaged particles of phlogiſton, when they meet with ætherial excited atmoſpheres, which cannot quit their baſes, become excited by the external particles of æther, and form a phiogiſic atmoſhere, around the ætherial one. Every ſubſtance therefore, capable of yielding light or fire: or every combuſtible or inflummable matter, capable of being decompoſed in pure air, muſt contain phiogiſton, united to the earthy principle; and conſequently, Phlogiſton united to the earthy principle, produces according to the different proportions, in which they enter into compoſition, all the ſubſtances, which are inflanmable or combuſtible in pure air, or with ſubſtances containing the acidifying principle and ætber. Phlogiſton with ætber, forms fire or light, according to the mode, or force of eombination. Phlogiſton with the acidifying principle, will not unite; becauſe an acidifying particle, is already ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of phlogiſton. Phiogiſton may therefore be knoun, by its uniting with particles of the earthy principle, and giv. ing them ſolidity, or coheſion, or when mor abundant, by giving them the elaſtic form of air. and by its power of decompoſing pure air, or compounds oſ the acidifying principle and æther, by uniting with the æther, and paſſing off in the form of fire or light, and leaving its earth, to unite with the acid left by the æther. But beſides theſe ſimpler ſtates, phlogiſton may exiſt in a great variety of compofitions; it may be partly united to the earthy principle, and partly with æther; or to an earth, or to æther partſaturated with the acidifying particles; or to an earth, and at the ſame time, partly to æther not wholly diveſted of its acidifying particles. We may therefore conclude this Section, with the following definition. Phlogiſton is a principle, compoſed of particles of matter, poſſeſſed of the active property of attraction; when excited by their affinity to fixed matter, they have an attraction of arrangement amongſt themſelves, forming lines of particles, around their exciting centres, of fixed matter, in an atmoſpheric form; with æther it will unite: and likewiſe, with the earthy principle; but not with a particle of the acidifying principle, becauſe, it is a particle of fixed matter, already united to a ſurrounding atmoſphere of phlogiſton. SECTION VI. On Xtber. THER is that active matter, which when united to particles of the acidifying principle, in a full proportion, gives that ineſtimable fluid, pure air. Pure air, we know, contains a ſmall quantity of acid particles, as its baſe, which in that aeriferm ſtate, muſt be very diſtant from each other, and poſſeſs a wonderfſul elaſticity; were the ſurrounding preſſure removed, they would expand into a bulk ſtill much more extended, where the particles of acid, would be ſtill further removed from each other, as I have before inſiſted. A particle of matter cannot act where it is not, conſequently, the expanſive power, by which theſe particles of acid are kept aſunder, at a diſtance, inverſely proportionate to the preſſure, or reſiſtance, they meet with, muſt be a ſomething, different from the acidifying fixed particles themſelves, forming an atmoſphere around ecach of them: which atmoſphere, is capable of condenſation, or extenſion, and therefore muſt be elaſtic; and as the particles of which theſe atmoſpheres are formed, muſt be ſolid matter, and conſequently impenetrable, 'tis certain, that theſe particles, do not touch each other, in all directions, as they then would form a ſolid, opaque maſs: but they do not, becauſe they are penetrable to light, fire, and ſolid matter of every kind, when in motion, to which they give little reſiſtence. But though they touch not each other, in all points, or directions, they muſt in ſome, becauſe they attract and unite with each other, and therefore muſt be in contact: conſequently, they muſt form lines oſ active parR ticles, around the acidifying particles, as centres, diverging as they recede from thoſe centres. VWhatever this active ſomethbing may be, which can give to particles of the acidifying principle, an aeriform ſtate, I call it æſber. That it is not phlogiſton, many operations of nature, and chemiſtry, prove; though phlogiſton is a principle, equally active, and poſſeſſed of the ſame property of atmoſpheric arrangement, when excited by fixed matter; yet they differ in their aſfinities. . Whaatever therefore, is capable of giving the acidifying principle an elaſtic form, by uniting with it, ſo as to be able to ſupport, and effect the decompoſition and combuſtion of inflammable ſubſtances, muſt contain æther; which, uniting with the phlogiſion of the inflammable or combuſtible body, will form fire or light, and depoſit its acidifying particles, to combine with the earth, diſengaged from its phlogiſton. Fxther, with a ſuperabundance of acidifying particles, will not be able to ſupport rhat quantity in an aeriform ſtate, in a moderate temperature ol heat; the compound will therefore, be a liquid, and that liquid evidently acid. Acids will diſfer from each other, in proportion to the quantity oſ æther they contain, in any certain quantity ol acid; and they may have other different properties, ariſing from the admixture of pure earth, in different proportions; or even of earth, partly combined with phlogiſton. Neither æther, nor phlogiſton alone, can produce heat; but we know that they will attract each other: and that wher they ſeparate ſrom their reſpective baſes, and are loſt as ſuch, their eſcape is always in the form of fire or light. Light we know, may be changed into fire, by condenſation, and violent commotion; as is evident, from the fire, or heat produced by the rays of light, condenſed in a focus upon any opaque body, in the open air, or in vacuo; which proves, that æther and phlogision, are capable of uniting, vith different degrees of force, or intimacy: perhaps, ducing fire; and the revival oſ metals, and production of pure air at the ſame time, by means of fire or light alone, fully proves, that eitber of them muſt impart phlogiſton to the earthy, and æther to the acidifying particles, to give them their metallic, or aeriform ſtates; and conſequently, that both fire and light, are compoſed of æther and phlogiſton. cther therefore, will unite with phlogiſton or the acidifying principle: but it hath no aſfinity with the earthy principle. But, if the particles of æther, are actuated by the property of univerſal attraction to matter: and a particle of earth be a ſimple particle of matter: æther ought to attract ibat partiele of the earthy principle; but it will not: conſequently, either the particles of æther, have a power of chuſing with what they will unite, and what they will not, or otherwiſe, a particle of the carthy principle, is not a ſimple particle ol matter. But, to allow the former, uwill be granting to matter, different and inconſiſtent properties, without any neceſſity for departing from the more ſimple, and ſingle property, univerſal attraction: therefore, I conclude, that a particle of the earthy principle, is not a ſimple particle of matter; and indeed after ſhewing that fixed particles of matter do exiſt, and likewiſe two active fluids, equally powerful in their attractions to thoſe fixed particles, 'tis impoſſible to deny that thoſe arive principles, when once united to thoſe fixed particles, can never more be ſeparated entirely; and conſequently, that the particles of fixed matter, ſurrounded by, and united to æther, will by that means acquire active properties, different from thoſe actuated by phlogiſton; in the ſame manner, as æther and phlogiſton differ from each other. But, as æther is known to have an affinity to phlogiſton, and an attraction for the acidifying principle, 'tis evident, that a particle of that kind being a particle of fixed matter, muſt have a phlogiſtic atmoſphere; and a particle of the earthy principle, only differing from an acidifying particle, in its actuating atmoſphere, muſt have an atmoſphere of æther; with which, particles of æther have no affinity, but that oſ arrangement. Vitber thereſore, is an active principle, compoſed of particles of matter, endowed with the property of attraction, to every other kind of matter, exiſting in nature; and in conſequence of rbat attraction, becoming excited, they attract each other, and arrange themſelves in right lines, ſo as to aſſume the forms of atmoſpheres, around the ſolid centres, by which they are attracted. A particle of fived matter, thus ſurrounded by ætber, forms an inſeparable compound, which is called the earthy principle. The particles of æther, when excited by a body whoſe particles already poſſeſs atmoſpheres of phlogiſton of a certain extent, with which they cannot enter into intimate or chemical union, will form themſclves into an atmoſphere, around the phlogiſtic one: which external atmoſphere will ſeparate from that body, entirely, to combine with an atmoſphere of excited phlogiſton, in a similar ſtate. An atmoſphere of æther, conſiderably exciteò around a body, with which it cannot intimatel; combine, vill attract the ſurrounding phlogiſtor difengaged, or lightly connected with other bodies: to which however, in ſhis ſtate of excitement, it hath leſs attraction, than to the excittg body. conſequently, it will not quit its atmſpheric arrangement, but attracting the phlogiſion to the ſurface of its atmoſphere, thoſe particles of phlogiſton, will become gently excitéd, and form an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, around the ætherial one; in lice manner, an excited atmoſphere of phlogiſton, may be ſurrounded òy an atmoſphere of ærber. The deſinition, of the ætberial principle, with which I ſhall conclude the Section is this. Aitber is a principle, compoſed of particles of matter, actuated by the property of attraction, or the power of uniting, with every otber kind of matter: by which union, they become excited to attract each otber, and arrange themſelves in right lines, forming radii around the ſolid centres, extending in every direction, like an atmoſphere. It hath an attraction to phlogiſton, and to the acidifying principle: with both of which it will unite, in any proportion; but, it hath no affinity with the earthy brinciple, becauſe, its properties as depend, upon its being already unite rounding atmoſphere of æther; to whi fore, can have no affinity of union. Having now taken a view, of the ſi of nature: their properties, and the la they are governed: and given ſuch c them, as cannot fail, to enable us, w to diſtinguiſh them, ſrom each other proceed, to conſider, the different ſi S E C T I O N VII. On ibe Altraction of Cobeſion, and the Cauſes on which the different degrees of Solidity, or Fluidity of Bodies, in the common temperature of heat, depend. S I MP L E particles of homogeneous matter, having no attraction of union for each other, can never per ſe, become ſolid; therefore, the attraction of cobeſion, muſt depend upori ſume olher principle, being interpoſed, having an attraction to thoſe ſimple particles. The baſe of every ſolid ſubſtance, is either of the earthy or acidifying principle; conſequently, particles of either of them may be rendered  ſolid, by means of a certain proportion, of either of the two other principles, to which they have an affinity. Thus, particles of the earthy principle, may be united together, by means of phlogiſton, or the acidifying principle; and particles of the acidifying principle, by the interpoſition of æther or earth. Particles of the earthy principle with phlogiſion, not ſufficient to ſurround them, with complete atmoſpheres, mutually attract tboſe interpoſed particles of phlogiſton, by which they become united, firmly to each other. Thus, Metals are compoſed oſ particles of the earthy principle, united by a small proportion of phlogiſton; hence their greal ſolidity, and ſpecific gravity. Particles of the earthy principle, vith a greate quantity of phlogiſton, cannot attract with ſo much force as the former: therefore they will form compounds, leſs ſolid or ponderous, and more inflammable; ſuch are the ſolid inflammable ſubſtances in general, as Bitumens, Reſins, Wax, &c. But, if the proportion of phlogiſton be ſtill greater, the particles will have a freedom of motion amongſt themſelves, and form inflammable liquids; as for inſtance, Alcohol, and Oils of different kinds. . But, with a quantity of phlogiſton, ſuſficient to give the earthy particles complete atmoſpheres, they will become elaſtic, or aeriform fluids; as for example, Inflammable Ailr. When particles of the earthy principle are united by means of phlogiſton, the ſmaller the proportion of phlogiſton, if ſufficient to interpoſe between each earthy particle, the ſirmer and more ſolid, the union; becauſe, if the phlogiſton were ſufficient, to form a complete atmoſphere, around each particle, thoſe elaſtic atmoſpheres would no more unite, and form a ſolid, than the particles oſ But yet, though ſimilar atmoſpheres have ro power of penetrating or uniting firmly with each other, they have an attraction of afrangement, which may give their external particles, a ſlight degree of attraction: for, the external particles of each atmoſphere, being excited, have an attraction of arrangement ſfor each other, which attraction ſtill ſubſiſts between them, though neither of them can quit their preſent ſtate of arrangement, around their reſpective centres: and the ſmaller the atmoſphere, the ſtronger its excitement, and the greater its attraction of arrangement, to the external particles of a ſimilar atmoſphere. Particles of the earthy principle therefore, with a ſmall quantity of phlogiſton, form ſolid ſubſtances: with a greater quantity, liquids; and with large phlogiſtic atmoſpheres, they take the form of elaſtic fluids, or gaſes; all of which, are inflammable, or combuſtible in pure air. But, particles of the earthy principle, are differently circumſtanced, when combined with the acid ed, when the particles of earth, and acid, are equal, and alternately interpoled between each other, forming a neutral, fixed, ſolid maſs ; ſuch a ſimple combination is glaſs. For inſtance, a metal, its earthy baſe by calcination in pure air, loſes its phlogiſton, and acquires an acid: which acid and earth, being intimately applied to each other, by a degree of heat, ſuſſicient to fuſe them, form a Glass. If the particles of the carthy principle have not acid enough to ſaturate, and firmly unite them, they formmcompounds leſs ſolid and compact: having ſtill an attraction to acid particles; ſuch are calcareous earibs. But if the quantity of acid be very ſmall, the earthy particles will attract phlogiſton alſo, and become alkalis. Earthy particles with a ſuperabundance of acid, form compounds, likewiſe leſs ſolid: ſuch are known by their affinity to earth; as the various chemical and native acids, or acid compounds, ſolid and fluid. But, on account of the attraction, which the particles of the earthy principle have to ꝑ ton, and to the acidifying principle, and æther, we perhaps have fetw compounds earthy principle, and phlogiſton, without mixture of ætber, or acidifying particles and nor oſ the earthy and acidifying principles out ſome phlogiſton, or æther, or bothb; which of principles and proportions, produces th derful diverſity of ſubſtances, of different ſtates, and properties, which every where chemſelves to our contemplation. The particles of the Acidifying Principle particles of fixed matter, with phlogiſtic pheres, can have no attraction, or power ting ſirmly, with each other; but, if a quantity of ætber be added, not ſufficient round the acid particles, they will mutuall it, and by that attraction, be united, and fo compounds; ſuch for inſtance, I ſuppoſe ble ſubſtances to be. With a greater quantity of æther, the ac cing the different kinds of acids; which however, in general, are not without ſome admixture of earth, and frequently of phlogiſton alſo. If the quantity of æther, be ſtill greater, the particles of the acidifying principle, will be ſurrounded by it, in an atmoſpheric form, taking the ſtate and properties oſ pure air. The fixation oſf the acidifying particles by means of particles of earth, hath already been mentioned; and likewiſe the infinite variety oſ compound ſubſtances which muſt reſult, from the endleſs diverſity of proportions, in which r2o, or more of the principles, may be employed. It appears therefore, that particles oſ the earthy or the acidifying principles, or both, form the baſes of every ſolid, fluid, or aeriform ſubſtance in nature: that the leſs the quantity of phlogiſton, or æſber, combined with cither the carthy or acidifying principles, ſingly, the more ſolid they are: that particles of the carthy principle chieſly conſolidated, or combined by means of phlogiſton, form the different kinds of combuſtible or iuflammable bodies that particles of earth united by means of the acidifying principle, not ſufficient to ſaturate them, form altalis, calcareous eartbs, and all ihoſe earthy ſubſlances, capable of uniting with acids; which however in general, contain more or leſs phlogiſton, to which the earth hath a great affinity, and oftentimes by means of that acid and phlogiſton, more or leſs ether is united into the maſs, which entering in different proportions, give the properties, wherein eartbs differ from each other: that particles of earth, conſolidated by means of the acidifying principle, combined to faturation, produce the different kinds oſ neutral ſalts, differing in their properties, from the ſame cauſes, as the different earths and acids do, that is, the proportions of phlogiſton, or æther, which were united, to the earth or acid, which by their combination, are not wholly ſeparated: that particles of the acidifying principle, united by means of a ſinall proportion of æther, produce all kinds of vitrifiable ſubſtances, indiſtructible in pure air, but capable of neutralixing earlbs or alkalis, whichb will unite to their acidifying baſes, and form neutral compounds or glaſſes : and ry tbing, which is unalterable by means of fire, in pure air : and even pure air ilſelf, when the æther is ſufficient to give complete atmoſpberes, to thoſe particles of the acidifying principle. But when tho acidifying particles are not volatilixed by atmoſpheres of æther, but yet have ſuch a proportion of it, as is more than ſufficient, to attract them to cloſe and ſolid union, by ſimple interpoſition, the particles being only attracted to each other by the attraction of arrangement, which eacb atmoſphere exerts, upon the contiguous atmoſpheres, will form the different kinds of acids, which are capable oſ different degrees of ſolidity, and fluidity; and at the ſame time, are ſeldom free, from a conſiderable proportion of earth, and very frequently, have ſome ſhare of phlogiſion; upon which principles and proportions, their different properties depend. Perhaps, another cauſe of the different degrees of ſolidity, and ſpecific gravity, may be the quantity of eſſential atmoſphere, ſurrounding a particle of fixed matter, giving it the properties of an earthy, or an acidifying particle; for inſtance, a particle of the earthy principle, by change of circumſtances, being deprived as much as poſſible of its original quantity of æther: that æther, will be ſtrongly excited, by its nearneſs, and attraction to its fixed baſe; conſequently, its attraction to phlogiſton, will be greater, than it would be, were its ætherial atmoſphere larger, or more extended; and the attraction of union between ſimilar particles, will be more ſolid, and the maſs more ponderous, by their force of attraction to the interpoſed phlogiſton, Particles of the earthy principle then, form a ſolid ſubſtance, by their attraction to a quantity of phlogiſion preſent; which phlogiſton is prevented from arranging itſelf around any one particle, by the cqual attraction, of fuo or more particles, to which it hath an equal affinity, and which are therefore firmly united, by that attraction to the phlogiſton interpoſed between them. ll If the quantity of phlogiſton be greater, the forco of coheſion will be leſs; but on account of the equal attraction of every particle of the earthy principle, to the phlogiſton, and the ſtrong attraction of arrangement, exiſting between thoſe phlogiſtic particles, by reaſon of their nearneſs to the exciting particles of earth, their arringement will be imperfect around the earthy baſes: and that force of attracting each other to arrangement, sufficiently great, to produce that ſlighter combination or union, between neighbouring particles, which is called ſluidity, on account of the facility with which the particles may be moved, from their ſicuations, with reſpect to each other. Hiillil lili If the quantity of phlogiſton, as before mentioned, be ſo great as to form complete atmoſpheres, around each earthy particle, they become elaſtic, and tuks the ſorm of air. lll What hath been ſaid of the earthy principle and phlogiſton, in a ſimilar manner, takes place between the acidifying principle and æther. The acidifying and earthy principles, are capable by interpoſition and mutual attraction, of fixing each other. But it appears, that a particle of the acidifying principle, when poſſeſſed of a ſufficient quantity o æther, to form a complete atmoſphere, as in pure air, loſes every appearance of acidity; but when deprived of a certain quantity of that æther, ſo as to loſe its elaſtic form, and become a liquid, it regains thoſe properties, which we call acid; but even in this ſtate, it evidently retains ſome æther; therefore, it appears, that the quality which we call acidity, depends upon the degree of excitement, or ſiate of the ther ſurrounding a particle ofſthe acidifying principle, as before mentioned. When the æther is ſo abundant, as to extend to a great diſtance around the acidifying centre, its excitement is ſo ſmall, as to have no ſenſi iſible action- If a part of that atmoſphere be taken away, the external particles then expoſed to action, being nearer the centre, and more excited, ſhew their activity, by producing the ſenſationof acidity, and by readily uniting with alXaline sarths, or philogiſton. which arę the chemical characteriſtics of acidity. In like manner, a particle of the earthy principle, manifeſts the property of altalinity, when the atmoſphere of phiogiſton ſurrounding it, is not extenſive, and conſequently is much excited; in which ſtate, it will ſtrongly attract acids and ætber. The acidifying principle, on account of its powerful attraction to the earthy principle, and to æther, can never be procured intirely free from one or both: neither can the earthy principle, be found free from acidifying particles or phlogiſton: by the different proportions of which, the different ſtates or degrees of ſolidity, and fiuidity of all bodies are produced. Particles of the earthy principle therefore, are fſixed particles of matter, actuated by a quantity oſ æther; if thoſe particles are not combined with particles of the acidifying principle, their ætherial atmoſpheres will attract ſurrounding phlogiſton in different proportions, producing atmoſpheres oſ different extent, and conſequently, of different degrees of excitement; and the properties produced by that degree of excitement, being thoſe we er, as the quantity of ſurrounding phlogiſton, ane its diſtance from the earthy centre diminifhes. And a particle of the acidifying principle, being a fixed particle of matter, actuated by phlogiſton, will always be more or leſs completely combined either with the earthy principle or with æther. If it be ſurrounded by a large atmoſphere oſ æther, the external particles being but little excited, will be ſcarcely active; but as the quantity of æther is diminiſhed, the particles nearer the centre, being more excited, proportionately manifeſt their activity; which, from its effects is called acidity. The degree of acidity or activity, of a particle of the acid principle, will therefore, be inverſely proportionate, to the quantity of æther ſurrounding it. A particle of earth in proper circumſtances, or giſton, and all its altaline properties, to combine with a particle of acid: which at the ſame time, will diſengage its external ætberial atmoſphere, and Ioſe its acid properties, to unite with the earthy principle, and form a ſolid compound, neither acid nor alkaline. When particles of the earthy or acidifying principle are firmly united, by the interpoſition of a ſmall quantity of phlogiſton, or æther, they ſhew no appearance of altalinity in one caſe, or acidity in the other; becauſe, the active principle interpoſed, being equally attracted by each ſurrounding particle of earth, or acid, is prevented from aſſuming that atmoſpheric excited ſtate, whoſe properties are diſtinguiſhed by the name of alkalinily in eartby matters, or acidity in the other principle. The attraction of coheſion, ar degree of ſolidity of all bodies, therefore, depends either upon the proportion of one or other, or both of the active priuciples, phlogiſton and æther, when combined with the two ſolid principles, the earthy and acidifying: or upon the union of the rtuo active, or two fixed principles, alone. The tuo fſixed principles together, or with a small proportion of the active principles, produce the moſt ſolid and ponderous ſubſtances: with a greater proportion they form liquids: and with a ſill greater, aeriform fluids; while the noo active principles, by uniting, produce thoſe extremely ſubtile and elaſtic fluids, Light and Fire. But, independant of the principles, of which bodies are compoſed, their ſtate of ſolidity, or power of coheſion, by which one particle attracts another, is liable to very great alterations, from cauſes, foreign to themſelves. Thus, ſolid ſubſtances, may be reduced to ſmall parts, by mechanical means: acids, alkalis, and many ſaline matters, may be diſſolved by means of water; and almoſt every ſubſtance in nature, undergoes ſome change in its ſolidity, ſtate of aggregation, or exiſtence, when expoſed to the action oſ fire. But, as tbeſe laſt, are only accidental changes, chiefly produced by the mechanical action of water, or ſtances in their natural ſtate, when the water or fire is again withdrawn: I ſhall at preſent paſs over them, without further notice, and proceed to ihe next Section; in which, I ſhall endeavour to explain, the pover or property of Gravitation, or the univerſal attraction of matter; upon the principles here delivered. S ECT I ON VIII. vity, or the Power by uhich diſtant B each other. S very evident, that diſtant bodies power, by which they attract, or cy to approach each other: that t th, and every planet in our ſolar mutual tendency to, or attraction f for were not the attraction for inſtar ot the natural tendency of the earth, actuated by its given motion, to move in a right line, it would not be drawn from that line, ſo as to move in the nearly circular orbit, in which we know it does. Tnis attraction is called the attraction of gravitation, or the power, which if not counteracted, by the direct tendency of motion, would bring the earth into contact with the fun, in the ſame manner, and from the ſame cauſe, as a ſtone raiſed on high, when leſt to itſelf, will fall, or be attracted to the earth. To point out the laws, relative forces, and mathematical prooſs of gravity, and its influence upon moving bodies, is not conſiſtent with my plant: they are already known; and tis ſuſficient for me, that the exiſtence oſ an attraction, or gravitating power, producing a mutual tendency in all bodies to come into contact, is univerſolly admitted: the attraction of the earth to the ſun, or the moon to the carth, is an inſtance in larger mafſes of matter; ed to the earth, when removed from it, ſhews that the ſame property exiſts in ſmaller bodies. But; as no body can act where it is not, 'tis evident, that ſwo diſtant bodies can have no action upon, or attraction to each other, but by means of ſomething interpoſed; that ſomething we know is not air, fire, light, or any thing groſſer than theſe: it muſt therefore be ſomething elſe, more ſubtile and rare, even than they areWhatever this ſomething may be, 'tis eviderit, that it hath an univerſal attraction to matter: that it is exterided from the ſuhi to the eærth, to Herſchels planet, and moſt probably far as creation itfelf: that its power is excited by matter, and conſequently, that the quantity or degree oſ that power or the force of attraction, is in a compound ratio, to the quantity of matter, and nearneſs to the exciting body: and that it penetrates all bodies If tvo bodies have each of them radii of theſe attracting particles, extending from one to the other; cach body muſt move towards the other, becauſe each ſucceeding particle of theſe excited intermediate lines of attracting particles, being uearer to the diſtant body, muſt be more excited, and attract with greater force, than the preceding more diſtant particle: conſequently, each body will be drawn towards the other; and the force and velocity will increaſe, as their diſtance decreaſes, cill at length they ruſh into mutual contact; and as every ſolid particle of matter, is capable of giving an equal degree of excitement, to this active medium, tis evident, that a body compoſed oſ 100 ſolid particles, will attract with ro times the ſorce, of a body containing but 10; thereſore, the lighter or ſmaller body, will move with 1o times the velocity, and conſequently, through 1o times as much ſpace, when attracting each other to union, as the heavier body will; as being only attracted, with one tenth of the force, with which it atrracts the ſmaller body. This attracting or gravitating power, muſi thereſore be a ſubtile active fluid, whoſe particles artracting matter, are excited to attract each other, and form lines, or radii, ſurrounding the body in every direction. What is it ?-is it æther or is it phlogiſton, both of which in a ſimilar manner, attract matter and become actuated, ſo that their particles attract each other?-noit cannot; bocauſe the globe of the earth, equally attracts all bodies, whether they have atmoſpheres of æther or phlogiſton: it therefore cannot be æther, becauſe this gravitating power acts upon a particle ſurrounded with an ætherial atmoſphere; neither can it be phlogiſton, becauſe a particle of matter is equally attracted by it, to the earth, although inveloped by an atmoſphere of phlogiſton. But iſ it is neither æther, nor phlogiſton, what then iſ it? ſIt is an effect ariſing from bolb, which when excited, attract each other, and by that means, the ſolid bodies, to which they are connected, and by which they are exeited; and is effected by the ſame general laws, by which a particle of the earthy principle, with its ætherial atmoſphere, attracts a particle of the acidifying principle, with its phlogiſtic atmoſphere; two atmoſpheres of the two different fluids, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, attracting each other, from one centre to eies, whoſe only property is, that of attraction; by which, they drau their reſpective centres together. If then an atmoſphere of æther, uniting with another of phlogiſton, have the property of drateing the two ſolid centres which they ſeparately ſurround, forcibly into contact, in a direct line: in that ſtate of combination, they muſt be arranged in lines, extended from one ſolid centre to the other: and be poſſeſſed of the very properties, which produce the phenomena of attraction, or gravitation. But the effects being the ſume, the cauſes muſt be ſo too; conſequently, the acive power, which attracis all bodies, and drates them la eacb otber, is no other, than the attraction of combination of the two active principles, æther and phlogiſton; which being excited, by attraction to ſolid bodies, ſo as to form right lines, extending in every direction, to all diſtances, thoſe radii of dijferent kinds, will attract, and drai each other into parallel lines, immediately extending from one ſolid centre to the other; which centres, by thoſe attractive lines, will alſo be draton towards cach olber. It appears therefore, that æther and phlogiſton, are the two ſubtile, active principles of nature, equally expanded, far as the univerſe extends, and equally preſent in every part of Creation. By their equal attraction to fixed matter, and power of inſinuating themſelves into the interſtices, or spaces left between the atmoſpheric lines ſurrounding fixed particles, they become gently excited: ſo that every ſolid body, of whatſoever kind, will communicate a certain degree of excitement, to one or other of theſe ſurrounding fluids; which by that attraction, becoming active, will attract the particles of the orher kind, excited by another body; in conſequence of which, thoſe /œo diſtant bodies will be dratmun in a right line, into contact. Tis well known, that the gravity, or weight oſ any body, is not always in proportion to its ſurface, but to the quantity of matter it contains: therefore, the active fluids, are capable of permeating every ſolid body, aund of receiving a certain gentle excitement, ſrom every ꝑ rticle of either, or both of the fixed principles, forming the baſes oſ thoſe ber of fixed particles contained in any body, the greater will be the number of excited lines of active particles, extending in every direction, from that body: and the greater muſt be its force, or power of attraction, when ſhoſe radii, meet with others of the oppoſite kind, extending from ſome other exciting body. Since then, the ſpecific gravity of any body, is proportionate to the number of ſolid particles compoſing it, it is natural to conclude, that every particle, of either of the solid principles, is capable of giving this moderate degree of excitement, producing gravitation, either to æther, or to phlogiſton: that 'tis highly probable, that the ætherial atmoſphere, eſſential to a particle of the earthy principle, gives this excitement to the diſengaged phiogiſton ſurrounding it: and that the phlogiſtic atmoſphere, eſſential to the acidifying principle, excites æther; conſequently, when theſe ſlightly excited atmoſpheres of æther and phlogiſton, come into contact, they will attract each other, and draw their reſpective centres, together; and any ſmaller body, will be forcibly drawn to another much larger, compoſed of both the fixed particles, as for inſtance, a ſtone to the garth, becauſe of whichever kind the atmoſphere of the ſmaller body may be, it will meet with an infinite number of lines of particles of the oppoſite kind, extending from the larger maſs of particles, by which it will be moſt powerfully attracted. Æther and phlogiſton therefore, are univerſally diffuſed, and every particle or every maſs oſ fixed matter, gives to one or other, or both of them ſome excitement: the conſequence ofſ that excitement is, an arrangement in right lines of ſimilar particles; and a line of particles of one kind, extending from any body, meeting with a ſimilar line of particles of the other kind, excited by another body, will attract and be attracted by thoſe particles, in a progreſſive motion from the particles more diſtant, or leſs excited, to thoſe more excited, and nearer to the diſtant body, till at length, the oppoſite or exciting centres, ai⸗ drawn together. A fixed particle oſf matter, ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of æther, or of phlogiſton, ſo as to become a particle of the earthy, or acidifying principle, may without any interruption excite the phlogiſton, or æther every where preſent, ſo as to enable them to produce the phenomena of gravity: becauſe, æther, or phlogiſton, strongly excited by the fixed central particle, can have no power of uniting witb, or diſturbing the arrangement of phlogiſton or æther, in this slighter ſtate of excitement; no more than an atmoſphere of the electric fluid, can interrupt, or deſtroy the arrangement or power of a magnetic atmoſphere; both of which attractive powers we know may exiſt in ſull force, at the ſame time, in the ſame needle; for if a magnetic needle, be electrified, it will ſhew all the phenom ena, of electrical attraction and repulſion, that another needle, not magnetic, will, in the ſame circumſtances: and at the ſume time, it uill attract or repel another magnet, and ſhew that it is ſtill poſſeſſed of its magnelic power of atiraction, Tis evident thereſore, that the globe oſ the earth, and every large maſs of compound matter. being ſurrounded by the ætber and phlogiſton univerſally diffuſed, and being compoſed of both the fixed principles, will excite that æther and phlogiſton, to arrangement in right lines: that thoſe ætherial, and phlogiſtic lines of particles, will like radii, extend, diverging as they recede from the earth as a centre, to the moſt diſtaut parts oſ creation, unleſs they meet with lines of phlogiſtic, or ætherial particles, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, from ſome other maſs of matter; for inſtance, the ſun; in which caſe, the lines of phlogiſtic and ætherial particles, excited by the earth, vill attract the ætherial and philogiſtic lines, from the ſun; and by that union, would drau their reſpective centres, the earth and ſun into contact: did not the direct tendency of the earth's motion, and the force or degree of that motion, counteract the power with which the ætherial and phlogiſtic rays of particles, by their mutual attraction, draw them to each other; and in the ſame manner, the attraction of the earth to the moon, and between leſſer maſſes of matter muſt be accounted for; as well as the attraction of a particle of the earthy, to a particle of the acidifying principle. We may conclude therefore, that the attraction of univerſal gravitation, is the ſume, as the attraction between an acid and an alkali; and that lorb are produced by the ſume cauſe, the attraction oſ excited particles of æther, to particles of phlogiſton, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement: that æther and phlogiſton are univerſally diffuſed, and every chere preſent, and are, capable of being ſo much excited, by the fixed principles of either kind, as to become atmeſpheric, and attractive to each olber: and that when they come into contact, in that ſtate of excitement, by their affinity to each other, they progreſſively unite, and form lines of particles, ſtrongly drawing the ſolid centres, around which they are excited, into contact; becauſe, the next approaching particles of æther, or phlogiſton, being uearer to their reſpective centres, than the preſent particles, will attract with more force, than they do; conſequently, the ſolid centres will be drawvn together, with a force increaſing, as their diſtance diminiſhes, till they are brought into contact; where nain firmly united, as ne of their ſolidity, can reſſive attraction of combin active principles, æther ittractive power called ( gravitation by which, onnected with every other whoſe beauty, order, S EC T I O N IX. On Magnetiſin. M AGNETISM is that property peculiar to Iron, by which one particle or maſs of it, is capable of attracting, or forcibly uniting with another. This magnetic virtue, is capable of acting at a conſiderable diſtance: but the greater the diſtance, the leſs the force, or power of attraction. This property depends upon the principles of which iron is compoſed, and tbeir proportions; for if it be decompoſed, or deprived, to a certain degree of its phlogiſton, and acquires a certain addition of the acidifying principle in its place, it is no longer capable of magnetic influence. If a piece of iron be magnetic, it hath a general attraction to iron not in the ſame magnetic ſtate; but if two bars, or needles oſ iron, be magnetic, they will not attract each other, unleſs one of them be inverted. A magnetic needle, when not interrupted, will always arrange itſelf, with one certain end to the north, and the other to the ſoutb. If another needle not magnetic, be applied in the ſame direction, with its ſouth end, to the nortl end of the excited needle, it will be attracted, and in conſequence of that attraction, will become magnetic; ſo that when ſeparated, that end, which was applied to the north pole of the other, will ther end to the north. Or iſ it be applied to the ſouth pole of the magnetic needle, it will ſtill acquire the magnetic virtue, and that end which touched the ſouth pole, will point to the north. If tuo magnetic needles be ſuſpended, ſo as to have freedom of motion, and the north pole oſ one be brought near to the ſouth pole of the other, they will attract each other at a conſiderable diſtance, and mutually ruſh with accelerating force, and velocity into contact; but as two needles, cannot act upon each other at a diſtance, when not magnetic, 'tis evident, that this attractive property, muſt depend upon ſome otber principle or active fluid, ſurrounding the needle in an atmoſpberic form when magnelic. i Tuhis magnetic fluid therefore, is an atmoſphere of active particles, ſurrounding the excited pole and attracting, or drawing towards it, with a certain force, any particle or particles of iron, with. in a certain diſtance. Iſs the nortb pole of an excited needle; therefore be brought near another needle not excited, it will draw it to it: but, if rbat nortb pole, be brought near to the north pole of another excited needle, they will not approach, but recede from each other; the ſame if two ſouth poles, be brought near each other. We have then a magnetic needle, whoſe north pole will attract ecither end of a needle not excited, with a certain force: which will attract the ſouth pole of an excited needle, with a ſtill greater force, and to a much greater diſtance: but which will not attract, or come near to the morib pole oſ an excited needle; though bat north pole itſels, will attract an unexcited needle, in the ſame manner as the other north pole will. Tis evident therefore, that each pole of a magnetic needle, is ſurrounded by an atmoſphere oſ magnetic fuid: that each aimoſphere, hath an equal artraction to iron in general: that the atmoſphere ſurrounding. the ſouth pole, will ſtrongly atrract the norib pole of another magnet: but that the atmoſphere ſurrounding the nortb pole, will not come near, but recede from the nortb pole oſ the rounding the north pole, muſt be a fluid, different from that, inveloping the ſouth pole, though ſimilar in its attraction to iron, and power of aluming an atmoſpheric formIt appears thereſore, that ſimilar atmoſpheres will not approach, but that oppoſite atmoſpheres, will forcibly unite, and attract each other: that the pole of every excited needle, pointing to the nortb, hath a ſimilar atmoſphere: as have all thoſe pointing to the ſouth: but that the atmoſphere of the north pole, is a different ſiuid, from that, actuating the oppoſite pole, of every magnetic needle. The magnetic ſuid is therefore of roo different tinds; or rather, tuo different fluids when rendered active, by excitement, are capable of forrning themſelves into atmoſpheres, around certain particles of iron, by which excitement, they become attractive to iron and to each other. Thefe ievo active subltile ſluids, being exactly ſimilar in their properties, to ther and phlogiston, can be no other; there&ſte, if the north pole of a magnet be ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of æther, the ſouth pole muſt have an atmoſphere of phlogiſton. The natural compoſition of iron is ſuch, that it ſtrongly attracts around it, a conſiderable quantity botb of æther and phlogiſton: if by any means, ſuch as a ſmart ſtroke upon one end of a needle, or an electrical ſhock paſſing through it, either the phlogiſton or æther be peculiarly excited, at ibat end, it takes an atmoſpheric form around it; and the other active fluid, will immediately aſſume a similar active ſtate of arrangement, around the other end; in conſequence of which, the needle will become magnetic; one atmoſphere or pole pointing t to the north, the oſber to the ſouth. Iſ the end of another needle, not excited, be applied to the north pole of this excited needle, i that excited pole be ſurrounded with æther, it will attract the phlogiſton, naturally ſurrounding the unexcited needle, to that end which is applied to it; tohich phlogiſton, by that attraction, will become excited, and take an atmoſpberic forn: while thęe ætber, being diſengaged, becomes equally excited, arranges itſelf around the oppoſite end of the meedle; by which it becomes magnetic alſo; its ætherial atmoſphere always pointing to the north, and the phlogiſtic pole to the ſouth. The north and ſouth poles of tvo magnetic needles, will attract each other, and unite; becauſe, one hath an ætherial atmoſphere, and the other a phlogiſtic one; therefore, they will penetrate each other, unite, and deſtroying each other's regular arrangement, will form lines of attracting particles, drawing their reſpective poles into contact, in the ſame manner, as when by a more moderate excitement, they produce the attraction of gravitation, or tendency to unite between other bodies. But two ſimilar atmoſpheres of æther or phlogiſton, ſurrounding ſimilar magnetic poles, cannot penetrate or unite with each other, as having no attraction, but that of arrangement; conſequently, thoſe atmoſpheres will preſs upon, and reſiſt each other; having no power to leave their reſpective centres, or poles, round which they are excited to arrangement. The tivo poles of a magnet thereſore, very much teſemble the ſwo fixed principles of nature, the earthy and acidifying particles; if the ætherial pole of a magnet, be that which always points to the north, like a particle of the earthy principle, it will be a centre of fixed matter, with æn ætherial atmoſphere; and the ſouth pole, will be like a particle of the acidifying principle, a fixed centre, with an atmoſphere of phlogiſion; the fixed centres being the ſame, in each pole, or each fixed principle: and their peculiar properties, produced by the active atmoſpberes around them. The north and ſouth poles readily, and forcibly attract each other: ſo do the earthy and acidifying principles. Two ſimilar poles will not attract each, other: neither will two particles of the ſame fixed principle. Two ætherial, or north magnetic poles, may be made to unite, if a phlogiſtic, or ſouth pole be brought between them: ſo two ætherial, or earthy particles, will unite, if phlogiſton, or a particle of the acidifying principle with a phlogiſtic atmoſphere, be introduced between them. Indeed, the properties of a particle of the earthy and a particle of the acidifying principle, and their relation to each other, ſo strongly reſemble the properties of the rwo contrary poles of a magnet, and their relation to, and influence upon each other, that there can be no doubt, that both depend upon the ſame cauſes, and that iboſe cauſes, are the rvo active principles, æther and phlogiſion, which being excited to arrange themſelves like atmoſpheres around them, as centres, give the properties of the earthy or acidifying principles to fixed particles of matter, and the polarity of magnetiſm, to the poles of the needle; the pole ſurrounded by one active fluid, always pointing to the north while the pole ſurrounded by the other, as conſtantly points to the ſouth; in the ſame manner, as a particle of fixed matter ſurrounded by æther, acquires the properties of the earthy, and a ſimilar particle, with an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, acquires the properties of the acidifying principle, ſtrongly tending to combine with the earthy principle, as the north pole of a magnet, ruſhes into contact with the ſouth. Magnetiſm, and all its phenomena thereſore, depend upon the two active principles, æther and phiogiſton; which, by the peculiar nature of iron, which they naturally ſurround, are capable either oſ them, ſingly, of becoming excited to ſuch a degree, as to ſurround one end of a needle, or bar, like an atmoſphere; but which ever of the two active fluids is ſo excited, the other by ſeparating from its common union vith it, becomes excited alſo, and ſurrounds the oppoſite end of the needle; which being robbed of its natural quantity of the otber fluid, attracted and excited to the other end, ſtrongly attracts this other fluid into an atmoſpheric form alſo; ſo that a bar of iron, hath a natural quantity of the two active principles, equally diffuſed around it. If one of thoſe fluids, for inſtance æther, be excited at one end of a needle, it will attract into arrangement, all the particles of æther naturally ſurrounding that needle, and form an atmoſphere citement, it attracts the needle with more force; than it does phlogiſton: therefore, the phlogiſton being diſengaged, will become equally excited, and form a ſimilar atmoſphere around the other end; and the needle thus having all its æther at one end, and all the phlogiſton ſurrounding the other, will become magnetic; that is, ſimilar poles, or poles ſurrounded with atmoſpheres of the ſame kind of fluid, cannot attract or come near each other: but a north and ſouth pole, of two magnetic needles, having atmoſpheres of the different fluids, one being ætherial and the other phlogiſtic, will attract, and be drawn forcibly to each other. Either of theſe atmoſpheres will attract iron, on account of the oppoſite principle naturally ſurrounding it; but if either of theſe excited poles, ſuppoſe the ætberial one, be applied to the end of a needle, of unexcited iron, the æther will attract all the phlogiſion naturally belonging to the non-magnetic needle, to that end; in conſequence of which, the ætber, naturally attending the phlogiſton attracted by the magnetic pole, will recede to the other end ol the needle; therefore, each being exeited, will form atmoſpheres, around their reſpective ends and this necdle alſo, will be a magnet; that end by which it was excited, always having an atmoſphere of the oppoſite fluid, to that of the magnetic pole applied; and conſequently, pointing in a contrar) direction. The reaſon why the two diſſerent atmoſpheres of a magnetic needle, will not unite ſo as to ſeparate from their fixed centres, ſince they have ſo great an affinity to each other, is owing to the degree of their attraction to their reſpective poles oſ iron, being greater, than the force of attraction for each other; as is evident, from this, that though the north and ſouth poles of tvo magnets uill forcibly unite, yet if drawn aſunder, the ætherial and phlogiſtic atmoſpheres will part with each other, rather, than from their exciting poles oſ the needles; in like manner, the æther around one pole of the needle, will attract the phlogiſton around the other, but that attraction is not ſo great, as the attraction to the poles of the needle, therefore they will not leave their reſpective poles; but their attraction to each other, will deſiroy the ing moſt deranged, which are the moſt oppoſed to the contrary atmoſphere. It appears therefore, that a needle, in its common ſtate, hath the ſame quantity of æther and phlogiſton ſurrounding it, as when excited; and that the only difierence is, that in the natural ſtate, the æther and phlogiſton are promiſcuouſly and equally united, on every part of the ſurface: but when that needle is excited, ſo as to become magnetic, all that natural quantity of æther, is collected and intimately attracted to one end, and all the phlogiſton to the other; and that this is in reality the caſe, every property of the magnetic needles corroborates, and the following circumſtance ſufficiently proves. If an iron rod, of conſiderable length, and thickneſs, be rendered magnetic at one end, it will be magnetic to the other; ſuppoſe that the excited end hath an atmoſphere of ætber, and will attract the ſoutb end of an horizontal magnetic needle, at the diſtance of ibree inches: if it be moved nearer to the needle, upwards, in a perpendicular direction, it will attract that ſouth end, for ibree inches of its length; thereſore, the ætherial at⸗ moſphere, is ſix inches in diameter; three inches from the end, or pole, each way. If the rod be ſtill moved upwards, the norib end of the magnetic needle will become attracted, which ſhews, that then the phlogiſtic atmoſpbere commences: and the ſame nortb pole will be attracted, till ſix inches of the rod paſs by it; which ſfhews, that the phlogiſtic atmoſphere extends ſix inches alſo, that is, three inches each way, from its centre or pole. If now the rod be ſtill moved upwards, the ſouth pole of the needle will be again attracted, as at firſt; which proves, that the ætherial atmoſphere again commences, and extends ſix inches as before. But, if a ſmaller rod be employed, the extent oſ thoſe atmoſpheres, will be leſs; and conſequently, the poles, or centres of thoſe atmoſpheres, will be ncarer to cach other. But a magnet in vacuo, will render a needle magnetic, without loſing any of its own power: conſequently, the needle acquires no additional principles; and its acquired magnetic power is ing ſeparated, and becoming atmoſpheric, one at one of its ends, and the other at the other; and the grealer the ſurface of the needle, the greater muſt be the quantity of thoſe fluids, naturally ſurrounding it; and therefore, the more extenſive will be the almoſpheres, formed by thoſe fluids, the æther and phlogiſton, when excited to the magnetic arrangement; and the more diſtant muſt be their poles. Whatever can deſtroy this arrangement, as a ſmart ſtroke, an electric ſhock, the action of fire, or the decompoſition of the iron, immediately deprives the needle of its magnetic properties, which, in all caſes may be recovered, by the touch of a magnet; except, when the iron is decompoſed; in which caſe, it is incapable of magnetic excitement, unleſs its principles, and their proportions be reſtored as at firſt; without which, it cannot give that excitement, and attraction to the ſurrounding æther and phlogiſton, which conſtitute the magnetic power. The reaſon why a magnet will attract no othei poſed of different principles, or of the ſame principles in different proportions, hath ſo ſtrong a natural attraction to loth æther and phlogiſton, as iron hath; therefore, if the ætherial pole of a magnet, be brought near to another body, although ſurrounded by phlogiſton, it will not attract ibat body, unleſs it attracts its phlogiſton ſo as to give it an excitement, ſimilar to the magnetic ſtate, or ſo ſtrongly, that it will not part with it; in which caſe, the ætherial pole of the magnet, attracting the phlogiſton, muſt draw the body along with it alſo; but no other ſubſtance can be attracted by the magnet: therefore, no other body is ſo powerfully attractive to ſurrounding ætber and phlogiſion, as iron is; and conſequently, can neither be attracted by the magnetic atmoſpheres, nor become magnetic. For if iron, in its natural, or in its magnetic ſtate, gives to ætber or phlogiſton a much more porerful excitement than other bodies do, as appears from the power of magnetic attraction: 'tis evident, that the weaker excitement given to them, by other bodies, will not enable either of them, in that i ſtate, of ſlight excitement, and weak attraction ol union to its oppoſite, to overcome the ſtronger attraction of arrangement in this magnetic ſtate, oſ great excitement; conſequently, the magnetic arrangement, will not give way to the feeble attraction of any otber ſtate of excitement, around any otber kind of matter whatſoever, having leſs attraction to æther and phlogiſton, than iron hath. Having now examined ætfher and phlogiſton, in two different ſtates of excitement, forming atmoſpheres around ſolid bodies, as centres; in the ſimpler ſtate of excitement, producing the attraction of Gravity: and when more ſtrongly and peculiarly excited by the attraction of iron, producing the attraction of magnetiſm; it next follows, to conſfider the ibird ſtate of their excitement, in which, they are capable of taking an atmoſpberic form, around their exciting bodies, producing the rhird kind of attraction, that of electricity.; which will form the ſubject of the enſuing Section. SECTION X. On Electricity. LECTRICITY is that ſtate, or property communicable to bodies, by which they attract, or repel each other, according to circumſtances; independent of either gravity or magnetiſmEvery appearance therefore of attraction, or repulſion, which is not the eftect of either gravitation or magnetiſm, is produced by Electricity. But as bodies by means of electricity, are capable of acting upon each other, at a conſiderable diſtance: tis certain, that all the phenomena of electrical attraction or repulſion, are produced by ſome ſubtile active medium, extending from the excited body, to the body acted upon; and that active medium, is univerſally called the Electric fluid. If glaſs be excited by friction; it will acquire an atmoſphere of this electric fluid, which will attract a light ball of cork, or any other ſubſtance ſuſpended by a ſilk thread, at a conſiderable diſtance; and drawing it to itſelf, will communicate a ſimilar atmoſphere of electric fluid, to the cork; in conſequence of which, it will be repelled; which ſhews, that the electric atmoſphere of the glaſs, hath a general attraction to all unexcited matter, by which it draws it to the excited glaſs: that the body, by that attraction brought to the ſurface of the glaſs, becomes ſurrounded by that electric atmoſphere, unites to a part oſ it, and is then repelled; and conſequently, that rcco bodies, poſſeſſed of the ſame electric fluid, acquired from the excited glaſs, will repel each other. If a piece of ſulphur be rubbed, it acquires an atmoſphere of electric fluid, which in like manner, will attract a cork or other body, and then repel it; therefore, the electric ſluid excited by means of ſulpbur, hath an attraction to all unexcited bodies; and riwo bodies furrounded by it, will repel each other. Tuo balls therefore, ſurrounded by atmoſpheres of electric fluid, excited by glaſs, will repel each other; ſo will two balls electrified by means oſ ſulpbur. But a tall electrified by excited glaſs, will artract a ball electrified by means of excited ſulpbur; and every appearance of electricity will vaniſh, in the form of light, accompanied with a ſnapping noiſe: conſcquently, the electric fluid produced by exciting glaſs, is different from thal produced from ſulpbur; becauſe, they forcibly attract, unile, and deſtroy each other's electric properlies: therefore, they are two different fluids of different properties: each capable of being excited, and of attracting, and ſurrounding all bodies like atmoſpheres: in which ſtate, neither of them can unite with, or come near to bodies poſſeſſed of ſimilar atmoſpheres: but, atmoſpheres of the two different fluids, will attract, unite, and by uniting, deſtroy thoſe electric properties, which each had when ſeparately excited. It appears therefore, that their attraction to each other, is greater than their attraction to the bodies by which they are excited, or round which they take an atmoſpheric form: that they poſſeſs the properties of attraction or repulſion, which we call electric, when excited ſingly: but, when they unite, every electric property ceaſes, they ſeparate from their exciting ſurfaces, and light or fire is produced, metallic calces may be revived by acquiring phlogiſton from them, and the acid principle become pure air, by their ſupplying it with æſher. Theſe things conſidered, and their attraction to matter, their atmoſpheric arrangement, the inability of ſimilar atmoſpheres to coaleſce, and the attraction and union of the two diſferent kinds of atmoſpheres, being ſo exactly ſimilar to the two active fiuids, æther and phlogiſton, leave no room to doubt, that they are the ſame principles, rendered active, or having acquired the properties which citement. For, if metals contain phiogiſton, and pure air ætber, which I think I have ſufficiently proved, then the union of the two electric fluids producing a ſpark, which is compoſed of both æther and phlogiſton: and rbat electric ſpark being produced by the union of the two oppoſite electric fluids, which in their ſeparate electric ſtates, poſſeſſed different properties: one of them muſt have been ætherial, and the other phlogiſtic; therefore, poſitive and negative, or vitreous and reſinous electricity, are no other than æther and phiogiſton ſeparately, in that ſtate of excitement which we call electric. But, if glaſs be excited by means of a rubber, the electricity of the glaſs will be oppoſite to that of the rubber: that is, the one will poſſeſs æther in an elctric ſtate, and the other phlogiſton. If the inſide of a jar, properly coated, be connected by means of ſuch bodies, as readily conduct the electric fluid, with the excited glaſs, and the outſule coating of the jar, be connected with the rubber, the jar will acquire a quantity of the ſame kind of electric fluid as the excited glaſs, on its inſide ſurface: while the outſide, will become electric by the contrary fluid, the ſame as the rubber; one ſide having the ætherial electricity, and the other the phlogiſtic. If a conductor, or ſubſtance of any kind, be ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of either ætherial, or phlogiſtic electricity, that atmoſphere will attract any other body, which, if light will be drawn to it, and then repelled; and it will have equally the ſame effect, if a piece of glaſs be interpoſed, between the excited body and the body attracted; which fully proves, that either the ætherial, or phlogiſtic electricity, readily penetrates glaſs, and loſes none of its electric properties; ſtill attracting, and then repelling the light body, the ſame as when no glaſs is interpoſed. Again, if the inſide of a coated jar, communicates with an exciting body, while the outſide is inſulated, or not connected by conducting ſubſtances with the rubber, the electric fluid produced by the globe, will diffuſe itſelf over the inſide of the jar, but will not unite with it, ſo as to charge it 3 but is looſely expanded upon the ſurface of the coating, forming an atmoſphere in the ſame looſe ſtate, as that ſurrounding the conductor; which keeps flying off from the ſurſace, or ſome edge, point, or corner, as faſt as it is generated by the globe; the form in which it eſcapes, is that of light, accompanied with a hiſſing noiſe, and phoſphoreal ſmell. But, if the external coating oſ the jar, be connected by conducters to the rubber, the electric fluid thrown into the jar, will become fixed, and condenſed there; and the jar will be charged; while the outſide will be equally charged, with the contrav kind of electric fluid. Here again, the action of either or both of the electric fluids, tbrough glaſſ, is evident; for by their attraction to each other, they become ſixed to the oppoſite ſurfaces of the glasſs: though neither of them could fix to it, when not attracted by the contrary ſluid, on the other ſide. Ifa communication be made, by means of conductors, between the two oppoſite ſurfaces of the jar, the two fluids will ruſh into union, with violence and noiſe, and produce fire or light; by which, both the fluids loſe their electric properties. But if the two oppoſite electric fluids, have a greater attraction to each other, than to the ſurfaces on which they are excited, and each of them is capable of readily penetrating glaſs, v hat is the reaſon, why, when excited, one on each ſurſucc oſ the jar, they do not attract each other through the glaſs and unite; in the ſame manner, as they would through an equal, or much greater thickneſs of metal? But iſ, as is certainly the caſe, the electric æ.lurial fluid be on one ſide the glaſs, and the clectr phiogiſtic fluid on the other ſurface: and each nthrough the glaſs, ſo as by its attraction 1o h oppoſite fluid on the other ſide, to become ſxæ and condenſed on its reſpective ſurface ſi r ſon why they do not ruſh into union ugr glaſs, muſt be, that each fiuid is as much attracted by some other matter, with which it is combined, as it is by the oppoſite fluid on the other ſide the glaſs. It is not the oppoſite ſurfaces of the glaſs that attracts them, becauſe, they will leave thoſe ſurfaces, to ruſh into union; it muſt thereſore, be ſome fluid of ſome kind or other, by which each is attracted ſo ſirongly, as to be prevented from paſſing through the glaſs, to unite with its oppoſite. Whaat is this other fluid? when either a globe of glaſs, or ſulphur is excited, or when eitber the electric ætherial, or phlogiſtic fluid is copiouſly produced, that it appears luminous, or eſcapes in the form of light. we know that But light we know will communicate phlogiſton to metallic earth, and æther to the acid principle and is therefore compoſed of æther and phlogiſton; conſequently, as light is always compoſed of the ſame principles, the light produced by the excited electric fluid, when eſcaping from the exciting globe, whether the fluid be of the negative, or poſitive kind, ſhews, that each of the tuo oppoſite electrie fluids, is compoſed of both æther and phlogiſton: and conſequently, the poſitive or negative ſtate; depends upon which oſ the two active principles, is excited by the ſurface of the globe, and ubich forms the exterual atmoſphere. Sulphur we know, contains much philogiston, which when excited by a ſuſficient degree oſ heat, readily attracts the æther from pure air, with which it will unite and fly off in the form of ſire or light; we may therefore naturally ſuppoſe, that when ſulphur is excited gently by friction, it will attract the æther excited on its ſurface by that friction; for æther as well as phlogiſton, are always, and every where preſent, in ſome ſtate or other. But, ſince the phlogiſton of the ſulphur, cannot in the moderate degree of heat produced by this friction, separate from its chemical union with the other principles, with which it is combined to form ſulphur: neither can it enter into chemical union with the ſurrounding æther; the conſequence of their excitement therefore will be, that the æther will be attracted by the philogiſtic ſurface of the ſulphur, and aſſume an excited almoſpheric form. But the phlogiſton which was uaturally preſent, and united to that æther, becomes equally excited by that friction; and being diſengaged from the æther attracted by the ſulphur, becomes as powerfully attracted by, and united to the ſurface of the rubber ; but yet, the excited æther and phlogiſton, being in contact, ſtrongly attract each other, as is natural to ſuppoſe, from their ſtrong affinity; and as is ſuſficiently evident, by the attraction ſubſiſting betueen the globe and the rubber. But, when by the rotation of the globe, or progreſſive motion of the rubber, their excited ſurfaces muſt ſeparate from each other, the æther excited by the globe, not being able to enter into chemical union with it, will attract along with it ſome phiogiſion, which will ſurround it in an armoſpheric form; and the excited phlogiſton, forced over the edge of the rubber, will take along with it an atmoſphere oſ æther, and retreat to the back of it; at the ſame time, the other parts of the rubber, deprived by this excitement of their natural quantity of æther and phlogiſton, attract thoſe principles from the ſurrounding bodies, to which they are connected by proper conductors; for if the rubber cannot acquire phlogiſton and æther, in their natural ſtate of union from ſurrounding bodies, no electric fluid can be produced, more than juſt that quantity of æther and phlogiſton will afford, which naturally ſurrounds the globe and the rubber; becauſe, the principles will be wanting, which become electric by being excited by friction. When a globe, or ſtick of ſulphur therefore, is excited by friction, ſo as to attract æther, that æther will attract an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, which will exhibit all the phenomena of negative electricity; while the rubber, poſſeſſed of excited phlogiſton, with an external atmoſphere of æther, will be poſitively electried. But, theſe electric ſtates, of the excited ſulphur and its rubber, are directly oppoſite to thoſe of glaſs and the rubber, by which it is excited: therefore, glaſs by excitement attracts phlogiſion, which being equally excited, attracts an atmoſphere oſ ælher around it; acquiring by that arrangement the properties of poſitive electricitp. And at the ſame time, the æther diſengaged from its union with the phlogiſton attracted by the glaſs, will become excited to the ſurface of the rubber; and when by the motion of the globe, the excited glaſs ſeparates from the edge of the rubber, tho excited ætber of the rubber, will attract around it, and take along with it, the phiogiſton ſeparated ſrom the external atmoſphere of æther, ſurrounding the phlogiſton attracted by the ſurface of the globe, and flowing over the edge, will recede with it to the back of the rubber. The whole of electric excitement then, is ſimply this, ætber and phlogiſion in a certain natural ſtate of union, univerſally exiſt; when theſe are excited by friction, between the rubber and a globe oſ glaſs for inſtance, the glaſs having a greater attraction to pblogiſion, on account of the acidifying and æthereal principles entering into its compofſition, than to æther, by this excitement attracts ſome of it to its ſurface; and the ætber, naturally combined with that portion of phlogiſton, being equally excited, will attract the ſurface of the rubber; when theſe excited ſurfaces part, the phlogiſton excited by the globe, will attract an atmoſphere of ætber, ſrom the remaining part of the compouhd of æther and phlogiſton naturally ſurrounding the rubber: and the phlogiſton diſengaged from ibat æther, will be attracted in an atmoſpheric form, around the excited æther of the rubber. The progreſſive rotation of the globe, carries theſe electric atmoſpheres along with it, by its attraction to the phiogiſion forming the internal atmoſphere; and the excited atmoſpheres of the rubber, at the ſame time, and by the ſame motion, are forced over its edge, and retreat to its back parts. The other parts of the rubber, thus deprived of their natural quantity of æther and phlogiſton, conſtantly attract it from every ſubſtance around; and ſo long as it is ſupplied with them, from the ſurrounding bodies, ſo long will the motion oſ the globe and rubber, by their mutual friction, excite thoſe principles, to take the ſtates of puſitive electricity around the glass, and negative around the rubber. If the inſide of a coated jar, be connected by a conducting ſubſtance to the eacited glass, and its oulſide to the rubber, the phlogiſion with its ætheriai almoſphere, will paſs along the conductor, from globe to the inſide coating of the jar: and the æſther with its phlogiſtic atmoſphere, will paſs from the rubber, to its oulſide coating; the internal phlogiſton on the inſide of the jar, attracting the internal atmoſphere of æiber on the outſide, will fix each other to their reſpective ſurfaces; by which means, the quantity on each ſide, may be ſo accumulated, as to render the jar charged. In that ſtate 'tis evident, that the inſide of the jar, contains an atmoſphere of phlogiſion on its ſurface, ſurrounded by an atmoſphere of æther: and the external ſurface, hath an atmoſphere of æther, ſurrounded by another of phlogiſton. The atmoſphere of phiogiſion or the internal ſurface of the jar, cannot paſs through the glaſs, to unite with the æther, on the external ſurface, becauſe, it is equally attracted by the æther ſurrounding it, in an atmoſpberic form, in the inſide of the jar. But, if a quantity of pblogiſton, rendered electric by an atmoſphere of æther, paſſes into a jar, it will not ſix itſelſ to the inner ſurface oſ the jar, unleſs it meets with an equal quantity oſ æther, rendered electric by a phlogiſtic atmoſphere, on the outſide ſide of the jar; but if æther be preſent, by its attraction to ſhat æther on the external ſurface, it becomes fixed to the internal ſurface, and may be accumulated till the jar be charged, and can take no more, If now a communication be made, between the two oppoſite ſurfaces, the ſwo external atmoſpheres of æther and phlogiſton, of the two ſurfaces, will firſt of all attract each other; in conſequence of which, the two internal atmoſpheres being drawn from their reſpective ſurfaces, will be brought into contact alſo when, loſing their electric properties and arrangement, the whole will unite with violence; ſome ſire or light being produced, by the new mode of union of the teo principles. That each ſtate of electricity, is compoſed of the two active principles, æther and phlogiſton, in one, the ætber being excited to take an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, and in the other, phlogiſton being excited to take an atmoſphere of æther, on which different modes of arrangement, the different properties oſ negative, and poſitive electricity depend, is therefore ſufficiently evident, and further proved by the following facts. If a large ball of metal, be poſitively electrified, and a ſmall cork ball be brought near it, the cork will be attracted and then repelled; but if the poſitive electric atmoſphere, be one ſimple fluid, why is the ball repelled after being attracted 2for, when iron is attracted by either phlogiſton, or æther, rendered magnetic, by their ſimple excitement round the poles of a needle, it is not again repelled: but the cork is repelled after being attracted: therefore, the electric atmoſphere, is not ſimple, nor compoſed of one homogeneous fluid. The reaſon oſ its repulſion after being attracted, is therefore this, the cork is attracted by the external atmoſphere of ætber, by which it is drawn to the internal atmoſphere of phblogiſion, immediately ſurrounding the metal ball; ſhat internal atmoſphere, is communicable ſrom one ſubſtance, to another: but the external atmoſphere is not, unleſs the internal atmoſphere, ſirſt ſeparates. As ſoon therefore, as the cork comes into contact with this internal phiogiſtic atmoſphere, it becomes ſurrounded by it, and in conſequence of ibat, is again attracted by the æther, whicb gives it an external atmoſphere tion for the ætherial atmoſphere in which it floats, by its levity it is puſhed to the ſurface of that ætherial atmoſphere, ſurrounding the heavier and greater body. But, if the ball of metal be large, and ſtrongly excited, by being ſurrounded by a great quantity, or extent of electric atmoſphere, and the cork ball be ſinall, if it be forcibly puſhed into the internal phlogiſtic atmoſphere, and completely covered by it, it will remain there, firmly united to the ball of metal, and may be moved around it, without ſeparating from it; but if it be raiſed out of that phlogiſtic atmoſphere, part of which will adhere to it, ſo ſoon as it comes into contact with the ſurrounding æther, it will attract it, and be attracted by it; in conſequence of which, it will acquire an etberial atmoſphere alſo, and be puſbed to the ſursace; ſo that its external atmoſphere, will only touch the utmoſt verge, of the external ætherial atmoſphere of the ball of metal. Again, if a ball poſſitively electrified, be brough near another negatively ſo, their external atmoCc ſpheres will attract each other, at a conſiderable diſtance. If they be permitted to approach, conſiderably nearer than where they begin to attract, they ſtill may be drawn aſunder, and will be found to poſſeſs the ſame degree of electricity as before; but if they be ſuffered to approach ſo near, that the iwo internal atmoſpheres come into contact, they immediately ruſh violently into union with each other, and with their external atmoſpheres; and every appearance of electricity ſuddenly vaniſhes, with the peculiar arrangement of the principles, upon which it depended, and by which it was produced; and the two active fluids, the æther and phlogiſton, return to their natural ſtate; except that part of them, which by the violence o their union, took the form of light or fire, according to the force, and mode of combination, with which they united together. Another experiment may be brought, to prove the ſame, which is, that if a conducting body, communicating with the earth, or not inſulated, be brought within the electric atmoſphere of any excited body, it will acquire an electric atmoſphere the contrary kind: and the nearer it approaches the excited body, the more will it become poſſeſſed of the oppoſite kind of electricity; 'till at length, being brought ſufficiently near to each other, the lwo oppoſite atmoſpheres will unite, and forming a luminous ſpark, their electric ſtates, and all the properties depending thereon, will be deſtroyed, and each body left equally devoid of electric excitement of either kind. Suppoſe the excited body be poſitively electrified, it will then have attracted to its ſurface, an atmoſphere of phlogiſion, ſurrounded by another of æther: this external ætberial atmoſphere, acting upon the conductor, ſurrounded by its natural quantity of æther and phlogiſton, in their common ſtate, will attract the phiogiſton; in conſequence of which, the ætber, naturally combined with that phlogiſton, will become exciled, and adhere to the surface of the conductor, like an atmoſphere; and at the ſame time, ſtill retain an attract ion to rhat phlogiſton, which will now ſurround it like an atmoſphere. The two external atmoſpheres, continuing to attract each other, cannot unite perfectly, becauſe they are each ſtill retained, by the attraction of the internal atmo 198 ON ELECTRICITY. ſpheres, adhering to the oppoſite bodies: the nearer the ætherial atmoſphere approaches the conductor, the more powerfully will it attract phlogiſton from it: and the greater muſt be the quantity of æther, diſplaced from its intimate natural union wvith that phlogiſton, and excited to attract the ſurface of the conductor. The external ætherial atmoſphere therefore, oſ the electrified body, will keep attracting the phlogiſton of the conductor: and that phlogiſton will keep depoſiting its naturally combined æther on the ſurfaceoſ the conductor, where it will become excited, and attract /bat phlogiſton as an atmoſphere: till the two bodies approach ſo near to each other, that the internal phiogiſtic atmoſphere, of the electrified body, can touch the internal atmoſphere of æther, acquired by the conductor; when, they will rapidly ruſb into union with each other, and with their external atmoſpheres, mutually; in conſequence of which, light and ſire, will be produced, with a noiſe and ſbock; and every appearance of electricity of eitber kind, in either body, will at the sune ĩ inſtant diſappear. ELECTRICITY. 19 The phenomena therefore of electricity, are produced by the rwo active fluids, Æther and Phlogiſton: when by Friction, they become excited to attract the ſurfaces of certain bodies. Thoſe ſubſtances which have naturally a greater attraction to æther, than to phlogiſton, ſuch are for inſtance, amber and ſulphur, when rubbed, attract and excite that æther, which then takes an atmoſpheric form upon that ſurface; and the phlogiſton naturally combined with it, by this ſeparation and friction, becomes equally excited, on the ſurface of the rubber; and the globe, and rubber, by means of thoſe atmoſpheres, attract each other. But, when the two excited ſurfaces part, the æther will not quit the ſurface of the globe of ſulphur: neither will the phlogiſton quit the rubber: but the æther not being capable of entering into a cloſe, or chemical union with the ſulphur, although ſtrongly excited to it, and in a ſtate oſ great activity, ſeizes ſbat phlogiſion, which in the common, or natural ſtate, is ſupplied by the rubber: and the globe becomes electric; having an atmoſphere ing ſurrounded by an external atmoſphere ot philogiſion. But, at the ſame time that the ſtrongly excited ætberial atmoſphere of the globe, when it parts from the rubber, ſeizes the neighbouring phlogiſion; the equally excited pblogiſion on the ſurface of the rubber, ſeizes the æther ſeparated from ibat phlogiſton; with which it invelopes itſelf like an atmoſphere, as it flows over the edge of the rubber. The oppoſite takes place with reſpect to the globe and rubber, when glaſs is employed. Gtlaſs from its chemical nature and compoſition, hath a greater attraction for phlogiſton, than to æther; when excited therefore by friction, it will attract the excited phlogiſion to its ſurface; which not being capable of chemically combining with the glaſs, although ſtrongly excited, will ſeize upon æiber ſuſficient to ſurround it. And the other oppoſite principles, diſengaged in theſe caſes, will become equally excited to the rubber; the æther by means of the exciting glaſs, deprived of its phlogiſton, will ſtrongly attract the rubber, and that excited æther, when forced to ſeparate from the phlogiſton, excited by, and attracted to the globe, will aſſume an external atmoſphere, compoſed of the phlogiſton, ſeparated from the æther forming the external atmoſphere of the glaſs. It appears therefore, that as the magnetic poles, reſemble the earthy and acidifying principles, as being ſolid centres of matter, ſurrounded by atmoſpheres of æther or phlogiſton: each mutually attracting the other; ſo, two balls poſitively and negatively electrified, will greatly reſemble the ſame tuo fixed principles, when in the ſtates of evident alkalinity or acidity. For the earthy principle never manifeſts its alkaline properties, but when ſurrounded by more or leſs phlogiſton; neither does the acidifying principle appear evidently acid, but when it is ſurrounded with ſome æther; if that atmoſphere of æther be ſmall, it will be ſo much the more excited, and that excitement produces the ſenſation and phenomena of acidity; but if it be very great, or widely extended, it will be ſo gently excited, as to ſhew mno evident acidity, as when in the ſtate of pure air. A particle of the earthy principle is a particle of fixea matter, actuated by being united to, and ſurrounded by the æiberial principle; and when that is ſurrounded by an external atmoſphere of phiogiſton, it becomes evidently altaline: but if ſurrounded by ſo large a quantity of phlogiſton as to become in an aeriform ſtate, its alkaline properties are not ſenſibly evident, as in inflammable air; in which ſtate, it reſembles a body electriſied by means of ſulpbur, or of any phlogiſtic electric; as being a ſolid body, having an internal atmoſphere of æther, ſurrounded by an external atmoſphere oſ phlogiſton. In like manner, a particle of the acidifying principle, is a fixed particle of matter, actuated by phlogiſton, which phlogiſton by being ſurrounded by an external atmoſphere of æther, forms a particle evidently acid: in which ſtate, this acidifying particle is ſimilar to a particle of matter, electrified by excited glaſs; the ſolid centre attracting phlogiſton, and that phlogiſton taking around it an atmoſphere of æther. The chief difference betueen the two ſolid principles, when in that ſtate in which they are aeriform or ſurrounded with complete external atmoſpheres, and tvo bodies ſurrounded by the two oppoſite ſtates of electricity, is, that the acidifying and earthy particles, can only be deprived of their external atmoſpheres by uniting, becauſe their internal atmoſpheres being immediately united to their reſpective fixed particles, can never more be ſeparated, as being excited by thoſe fixed particles, to attract with the greateſt force they are capable of exerting. But, any body will part with èoth its internal and external electric atmoſpheres, when thoſe atmoſpheres can meet with atmoſpheres of the contrary fluids, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement: in which caſe, each fluid meeting with its oppoſite, to which it hath a ſtrong attraction, will unite, and by that union, the arrangement of botb kinds will be deſtroyed, and with it every appearance of electricity, as being a property ariſing from that arrangement; therefore, theſe excited atmoſpheres of of the two diſferent kinds, mutually ſatisfying each other, will deſtroy the attraction by which they were held to their reſpective ſurfaces; becauſe they were not chemically, or intimately united to thoſe ſurfaces, but only ſlightly and ſimply attracted by being in contact. Ether or phlogiſton have therefore, only a ſlight attraction to the ſurfaces of electric ſubſtances: and when excited by friction, neither of them can ſufficiently attract the electric ſurface ſo as to ſix itſelf, or acquire the electric ſtate, unleſs it can meet with the oppoſite principle to attract around it; by which, and the attraction of the electric ſurface together, its excited attraction will be ſuſficiently ſatisfied, ſo as to enable it to aſſume, and preſerve that atmoſpheric ſorm, upon which its electric properties depend. The electric ſtates of æther and phlogiſton, are therefore very different trom thoſe ſtates, in which, by the powerful attraction between them and iron, they aſſume the magnetic arrangement. For by iron, they are ſo equally and powerfully attracted and excited, that either of them is capable of forming an atmoſphere around it, which by its powerful excitement, will ſtrongly attract the oppoſite principle, and with it the excited pole, or iron, which it ſurrounds and attracts; and when the two oppoſite poles, or one of thoſe poles and iron are in contact, they will remain ſtrongly united. But, when a body is attracted by an electric atmoſphere, it is dravn towards the excited body, till it touches the internal atmoſphere, by which it becomes ſurrounded, and by that means acquires an attraction to a part of the external atmoſphere alſo: which having acquired, it becomes equally electriſied, as the excited body, and is no longer attracted, but recedes to the ſurface of the external atmoſphere ofſ the firſt body. They diſſer in this too, that two fluids forming one kind of electric atmoſpheres, have a greater attraction to the ſwo oppoſite fluids, in a ſimilar bul contrary atmoſpheric ſtate of arrangement, than they have for the ſurfaces to which they are attracted; in conſequence of which, they will leave thoſe ſurfaces to unite with each othet. But when in the magnetic ſtate of excitememt round iron, they have a greater affinity to that iron, than to each other; in conſequence of which, they will not quit the iron, to unite, ſo as to deſtroy their magnetic excitement. But they reſemble each other in this reſpect, that when one fluid is peculiarly excited to magnetic arrangement, around one pole of a needle, the other fluid aſſumes a ſimilar ſtate around the contrary pole: in the ſame manner, as when one ofſ them is peculiarly excited to take the elecric ſtate around the globe, the orher becomes equally excited and attracted by the rubber. All bodies are naturally ſurrounded by æther and phlogiſton in their common ſtate of combination, in which ſtate either of them is capable of being attracted by its oppoſite, in the electric ſtate of excitement; conſequently, an electrified body, will attract another body of any kind; which ſhews, that the degree of excitement in the common ſtate, is not much different from that in the electric ſtate; and that the chief difference is, that in the common ſtate, the tvo fluids are uniformly mixed, but, in the electric ſtate, they are ſeparated ſo as to become atmoſpheric, each to tbe other. For neither the æther nor phlogiſton naturally combined, and attracting all bodies, will ſeparate, or enter into new combinations, unleſs rthe other can aſſume a ſimilar ſtate of excitement. But the phlogiſton ſurrounding any otber body than iron, will not have any attraction to the ætherial magnetic atmoſphere of a needle, becauſe the magnetic attraction of arrangement, is to0 great to be affected by the weaker attraction of union, of the oppoſite fluid in the common ſtate; but if it could be attracted by the magnetic ætherial atmoſphere, the æther with which it is combined, would not be ſo ſtrongly attracted by ibat body, as to enable it to take the ſimple form and ſorce of attraction, neceſſary, to give it a magnetic arrangement; for if the body did not attract the æſher ſurrounding it, ſo forcibly as the ætherial magnetic atmoſphere did the phlogiſion they would not ſeparate and form magnetic at. moſpheres; therefore, which ever were attracted, the other would go along it: conſequently, nc ſubſtancebut iron, inan unexcited ſtate, attracts the naturally ſurrounding æther and phlogiſton, with ſo much force as to enable them to be att racted and drawn towards the magnet, by means of their attraction to it: and therefore, no ſubſtance but iron can attract an atmoſphere of either æther or phlogiſton, with ſuch force as to render it magnetic. . That no ſubſtance but iron can become magnetic, or be attracted by a magnet, is therefore evident from this, that when either phlogiſton or æther is excited, every particle hath its attraction of arrangement to ſimilar particles, and its attraction of combination to the particles of the other kind, in a degree proportionate to that excitement: if therefore two particles of ætber be excited, ſo as to attract each other, with the force of 1, each contiguous particle muſt have nearly the ſame force; therefore, their mutual attraction of arrangement, will be with the force of 2, and their attraction of combination to phlogiſton will be in tire ſame proportion; but if two particles oſ phlogiion be each excited to attract the other, with the force of 2, they will unite together with the force of 4, and their attraction to æther will bear the ſame proportion. Apparticle of this phlogiſton thereſore, whoſe excitement is equal to 2a, being brought into conract with oue of ihoſe particles of ætber, whoſe excitement was as 1, they will attract each other into union with the force of 354 but two of thoſe particles of phlogiſion attract each other to arraugement, with the force of 4: conſequently, thoſe phlogiſtic particles will not ſeparate from their arrangement, to combine with the æther; becauſe, the mutual attraction of arrangement, in that ſtate of great excitement, is more powerful, than the altraction of combination with the æſtber, ſlightly exciled. The particles of æther or phlogiſton thereſore, when they form magnetic atmoſpheres around iron, are ſtrongly excited, and ſtrongly attract each other to arrangement: but when they form electric atmoſpheres, around bodies, they are but genily excited, and weakly attract each other; and conſequently, their attraction of combination, with the oppoſite kind of particles, muſt be proportionately weak; ctis evident therefore, that they will attract the oppoſite kind of particles, ſtrongly excited by the magnetic arrangement, with leſs force than thboſe particles attract each other; conſequently, the magnetic particles will ſuffer no derangement, and the magnetic and electric at moſpheres, though formed of the two different principles, being ſo differently excited, and attracting with ſuch difſerent degrees of force, will never derange, or unite with each other. An ætherial magnetic atmoſphere will therefore, not be ſenſibly attracted by a phlogiſtic electric atmoſphere in a much leſs excited ſtate, becauſe the magnetic attraction of arrangement beween the particles of æther, is much greater rthan, and will not give place to the weaker attraction of union, exerted by the ſlightly excited electric atmoſphere of phlogiſton; therefore there can be no approximation of their reſpective centres: becauſe not being equally excited and active, they cannot deſtroy each others arrangement, and form lines of attracting particles, drawing one centre to the other. For the ſame reaſon, ibat combination of æthe and phlogiſton, ſurrounding all bodies, and producing univerſal attraction, or gravitation, being a ſtill gentler degree of excitement, cannot derange or be deranged by thoſe fluids, when in different ſtates of excitement they acquire different degrees of attraction, and conſtitute electrie or magnetic atmoſpheres: becauſe, the gentle attraction of that arrangement, producing univerſal attraction, can never deſtroy the ſtronger force with which iboſe particles attract each other, when they are excited to take the oſber modes of arrangement. Bui But whether theſe active principles are ſo excit ed, as to produce the attraction of gravity, electricity, or magnetiſm, they aluays in the ſame ſtate, have the ſume degree of excitement; ſo that in any one of theſe three general ſtates of attraction, they always have a power of acting upon each other; but not in any to different ſtates; and the difference of force with which they attract in the ſame ſtate of excitement, is always produced by the difference of the quantity, or number of particles excited. The other two ſtates of excitement, reſemble that producing general attraction in this reſpect, that when an atmoſphere of either the electric or magnetic excitement, approaches an atmoſphere o the other active principle, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, they attract and deſtroy each others peculiar atmoſpheric arrangement, and form lines oſ the two different kinds oſparticles, parallel, contiguous, and progreſſively uniting to each other; and conſequently, attracting and drawing into contaci, the bodies to which they extend; exactly in the ſame manner, as when in that ſtate producing univerſal gravitation or attraction. Having now taken a view of the two active principles, in their different ſtates of excitement, when combined with, or attracted to fixed particles of matter, or bodies containing and compoſed with ſolid matter: I ſhall next examine them, in their ſtates of combination, unconnected with ſolid bodies; or not depending upon any union with, or excitement from them; which will be the ſubject of the two following Sections. SECTION XI. On Fire. is that ſubtile fluid, which etrating and expanding all b ikewiſe by the ſenſation of , by its action upon the bod herefore is heated, or hot, quantity of this fluid conta or flowing from its ſurface, containing a leſs quantity, than the heated body. Tnhat fire is a ſubtile fluid actually exiſting, and by its action or motion, produces heat, or that ſtate of bodies which we call heated, is too evident to need inſiſting upon; for if it were not, an active fluid, like all other fluids endeavouring to reſtore or keep itſelf in an equilibrium, how is it poſſible that a heated body, ſuſpended in vacuo, ſhould communicate a part of its heat, to a colder body at a conſiderable diſtance from it? if heat were no other than a violent motion of the particles of which bodies are compoſed, the ſuſpended heated body, could not communicate motion, or heat to another body not in contact, when there is nothing but a vwid between them; or if it could, it muſt be by means of the ſubſtance by which it is ſuſpended: and in that caſe, the upper part oſ the exhauſted receiver to which the ſuſpending ſubſtance is faſtened, would be bot, ſoouer than that part of the receiver oppoſite to the heated body; but it is not ſo, the heated body communicates its heat to any other near body, not in contact, municates ſomething flowing from its ſurface, to the colder body; that ſomething by its action produces the ſenſation which we call heat, or communicates to bodies, thoſe properties by which we know them to be healed; and ihat ſomething is fire, whoſe exiſtence is known by its action and eſfects; its action we call heat; and its affects are thoſe which muſt ariſe, when the component principles of bodies are ſeparated by the interpoſition of fire; conſequently, its effects upon diſferent ſubſtances muſt be different: and the greater the proportion of the two active principles, entering into the compoſition of bodies, the more evident will be thoſe effects. A metal conſiſts of particles of the earthy principle, attracted to each other by a ſmall proportion of phlogiſton, interpoſed between thoſe earthy particles. If a number of igneous particles inſinuate themſelves between ihoſe particles, they will cauſe them to recede a little from each other, and the conſolidating or attractive power oſ the connecting phlogiſion will be weakened, as ibat diſtance between the earthy particles increaſes. Iſf the quantity of intervening fire be conſiderable the attractive power of the phlogiſton will be ſo weakened, that the earthy particles will be capable of being eaſily moved among each other, ſo as to be in a ſtate of ſluidity; and if the quantity of heat be ſiill augmented, by inſinuating itſelf between every line of active particles, ſurrounding the fixed central particles of matter, and between every particle forming thoſe lines, they will be ſo far removed from their centres, and their attraction to them ſo weakened, thatbotb the etherial atmoſpueres immediately ſurrounding the fixed particles, forming the earthy principle, and the connecting phlogiſton, will be ſo far dilated, by the fire interpoſed between every particle, that they will recede to ſo great a diſtance, as to become volatilized, and eſcape in the form of vapour. But ſo ſoon as the igneous particles ſeparating and diſtending them, are removed, by paſſing off into ſurrounding bodies, leſs beated: thoſe expanded atmoſpheres will gradually contract, and become ſiuid, or ſolid in progreſſion, as the particles oſ fire eſcape from the interſtices, betwixt the atmoſpheric lines which thoſe active fluids form around thoſe fixed particles. . Fire therefore is a fluid, or compoſed of ſubtile particles, and its action partly mechanical, weakening the attraction between the component principles of bodies, by inſinuating itſelf into the interſtices, formed by the arrangement of thoſe principles, around their fixed centres; and even between each particle, and increaſing their diſtances from each other; by which, their attractive powers are proportionately diminiſhed. The particles of fire ſeem to have but little attraction to each other, but a general attraction to the atmoſpheres of other bodies, of whatſoever kind: they ſeem to poſſeſs a fluidity, or tendency to equal diffuſion, like water; and conſequently, cannot form any atmoſpheric arrangement around other bodies: from all of which, when accumulated in, or upon them, it ſeems to flow of, according tc the laws of fluidity, ſeeking to reſtore itſelf to an equilibrium. It evidently differs therefore, from æther and phlogiſton in their ſimple ſtates, or in their ſtates of excitement around bodies producing the phenomena of coheſion, electricity, or magnetiſm: it can therefore be neiiber one nor the otber of them, ſingly; but, there can be no doubt that it is compoſed of ihe too; as is evident, both from ſyntheſis and analyſis. The electric ſiuids are phlogiſton and æther, in certain ſtates of excitement; which, when they unite, form fire; as is evident from their melting metals, firing gunpowder, &c. Iuflammable ſubstances when ignited in pure air, produce ſire; at the ſame time that they loſe their phlogiſion, and the pure air its æther; therefore, the phlogiſion and æther uniting, form ſfire. Certain calces, compoſed oſ carth and acid when ſeparated by the interpoſition of ſire, ſo fai from each other, as to be no longer attractive, or attracted, are capable of decompoſing that ſire itſelf ly excited, as to attract thoſe particles together in a ſulid form, while the æther ſurrounding the acidifying particles in the form ofpure air, is but looſely combined, and conſequently moderately excited; therefore, 'tis natural to ſuppoſe, that when ſhat phlogiſton combines with this æther, it will be more excited than the æther is; but, being forced to ſeparate from its earthy baſe, by the acid of the pure air attracting it, it muſt of neceſſity unite with the ærber, and that union will produce ſire, a compound of æſber and phlogiſton, in which ſtate of union, however, the phlogiſion appears to be moſt excited, and conſequently moſt active. In conſequence oſ this greater excitement of the phlogiſton, it will manifeſt its ſuperior power, and have a greater degree of attraction to thoſe ſubſtances which contain æiher, either ſimple or compound, tban to thoſe chieſly compoſed with phlogiſton; with ſuch kind of ſubſtances therefore, it will form a ſlight union, ſo as to be detained in their interſtices, in a combined or quieſcent tate; but with ſubſtances containing phlogiſton, or more phlogiſton l * t than æther, it cannot combine, and will therefore flow through them ſimply as a ſfluid. Pure air therefore, being compoſed chiefly oſ æther, widely extended in an atmoſpheric ſtate around its centres oſ the acidifying principle, will ſirongly attract fire, on account of the ſuperior activity of its phlogiſion, which it will retain in a quięſcent ſtate, in its interſtices, or between its particles; but inſlammable air, will not attract and retain it; becauſe, its aeriform ſtate depends upon atmoſpheres of phlogiſton ſurrounding the earthy particles as centres; therefore, the quantil) of ſire attracted by a certain meaſure of pure air, vill greatly exceed the quantity flowing through an equal meaſure of inflammable air. In like manner, a metal containing phlogiſton will not attract the fire flowing through its interſtices, ſoas to fix oraccumulate it: but if that metal, by caleination, be deprived of its phlogiſton, and in its place attracts the acidifying principle, the calx formed by that combination, will attract tity of the fire, which it in part compoſes; becauſe, the acidifying principle in its acid ſtate, hath an atmoſphere of æther of ſmall extent, and therefore the more active. The ſuperior activity of phlogiſton, when combined with æther ſo as to form fire, appears highly probable, and readily accounts for the different capacities of different kinds of ſubſtances, for containing heat; a ſolid or fluid, containing much æiber, will attract and fix a certain proportion oſ fire: but a body containing much phlogiſton, will not attract or retain it: therefore, it flows from it on one ſide as faſt as it is thrown in on the other; if any ſolid or fluid containing a leſs quantity, be near to receive it. Pure air, on account of the æther in a great meaſure compoſing it, contains, or attracts and detains a conſiderable quantity of fire. If a piece of phoſphorus, containing much pblogiſton, be put into a certain meaſure of it, the phlogiſton of the ther, and eſcape in the form of light and fire: by which combination, its acid baſe will be depoſited and the ſinall quantity of fire, combined vwith its ætherial atmoſpheres, now in a great meaſure loſt, will be diſengaged and become ſenſible alſo  excepting that ſmall part of it, attracted and detained by the acid. The leſs the quantity of fire contained in a certain meaſure of pure air, the greater the quantity of heat it will produce by combuſtion with inflammable ſubſtances; becauſe, the æther will be leſs rarified or expanded; and conſequently, a certain meaſure of pure air, will contain a greater quantity of it, capable of combining with a greater quantity of phlogision, and producing more fire, iban when rarified by a greater quantity of heat. Fire is never chemically produced, but when æther and phlogiſton have an opportunity of combining together, and ſeparating from their reſpective ſubſtances; therefore, an inflammable ſubſtance, ignited in pure air, can only produce fire by decompoſing each other; when the phlogiſion of the ſubſtance, combines with the æſher of the air, and forms light or ſire: and the acid of the air, unites with the earib of the inflammable body; and that this is in reality the caſe, not only the diſappearance of the phlogiſton of the inflammable body, and the æther of the air, when fire is produced, proves, but likewiſe, the decompoſition of fire itſelf by certain metallic calces, where it evidently affords phiogiſion to the earth of the metal, and revives it: and at the ſame time, ſupplies the acid with æther, and converts it into pure air. Fire is therefore evidently compoſed of æther and phlogiſton, combined with each other in a ſtate of great excitement; in which ſtate they were ſeparated from the ſubſtances with which they were previouſly combined; but it ſeems, that the phlogiſion entering into the compoſition of fire, is rather more excited and active than the æther is. Perhaps the nature and properties of fire, depend upon the phlogiſton being more excited than the æther with which it is compoſed: and when æther æther and phlogiſton combine, each being equally exciled, they ſo perfectly counteract each other, as to produce no ſenſible effects; but, when the æther is more excited, than the phlogiſton, they then by uniting, form light. However, ſire is evidently a fluid, compoſed of æther and phlogiſton, intimately united: where the phlogiſton appears to be moſt active, or moſt abundant: but yet, they are ſo cloſely combined, and mutually ſaturated, that they deſtroy each others elaſticity, or arrangement, and become a compound fluid, poſſeſſed of properties peculiar to itſelf; and thoſe principles are never decompoſed, or ſeparated from each other, ſo as to form chemical combinations with earth, or acids, but when the quantity of fire is ſo great, and violent, as to deſtroy the power of union, between the ear21hy and acidifying particles compoſing a body; in which caſe, thoſe particles will ſeize upon the fire itſelf: the earth will exert its power of attraction upon the pblogiſton, and the acid upon the æther, and form two new compounds. Fire then is an active fluid, whoſe properties as a compound of the two active principles, are very ſimilar to thoſe of waler, a compound of the two fixed principles. Water hath a very general attraction to bodies: ſo hath fire. Water hath ſo ſtrong an affinity with many kinds ofſ ſolid or more fixed ſubſtances, as to overpower their attraction of coheſion, and remove their component particles at a diſtance from each other, by inſinuating itſelf between thoſe particles; but when the water is evaporated, the particles are left unaltered in their natures or properties. Juſt ſo it is with fire, with reſpect to the atmoſpheres of active fluids, eſſential to the principles of which bodies are compoſed, or connecting thoſe principles together; for fire hath a general attraction to active particles of either kind, and when eitber of iboſe are arrangeed around fixed principles in either a ſimple or compound ſtate, ſo as to form acids, earths, alkalis, neutral compounds, metals, or any other kind of ſubſtances: thoſe eſſential or connecting atmoſpheres of whichſoever kind, are attracted by this active compound; and if it be preſent in ſufſicient o or ON FIRE. ficient quantity, thoſe atmoſpheres are as it were diſſolved by it, becauſe it inſinuates its particles into every interſtice, and even between every particle compoſing them; in conſequence of which, they become more extended, the bulk of the body is increaſed, the attraction of thoſe atmoſpheres to their fixed centres, are proportionately weakened, and indeed according to the quantity of fire inſinuating itſelf between the particles forming thoſe atmoſpheres, ſolid bodies may be rendered fluid, and fluids expanded into vapour; but ſo ſoon as the particles thus ſeparated by the diſſolving or interpoſing fire, are deprived of that fire, by ſuffering it to eſcape, they return to the ſtate, and acquire the properties they poſſeſſed, before they were heated. Indeed, Water and Fire ſeem to be the two grand ſolvents, and chief agents in nature; water being chieſty compoſed of the rto ſixed principles, hath its attraction, or exerts its diſſolving powers chieſly upon them; while ſire, being a compound of the ivo active principles, ſhews irs attractive power upon thoſe active particles, by inſinuating itſelf between them, ſo as to weaken their connection and increaſe their extent. Both water and fire enter into the compoſition of moſt bodies, in a greater or leſs degree, or quantity; in which ſtate, their peculiar properties do not appear; but if thoſe bodies be decompoſed, or their particles approximated, the water, or fire, or both may become evident. Though fire hath a kind of diſſolving power, upon atmoſpheres of either kind of active particles, the ſame as water hath with reſpect to acids and alkalis, yet it ſeems to be moſt attracted by ælhber, or ætherial compounds, which have an aſſinity with it, and a power of combining with a certain proportion of it, ſo as to keep it in a latent ſlate, or in fact, combined with thoſe ætherial atmoſpheres: ſo acids, or compounds containing much acid, have a ſtrong aſſinity with water which they take into their compoſition, in a latent centration by heat, may be rendered evident; in the ſame manner, as fire may become ſenſible by condenſing or altering the ſtate of a body detaining it, to a more ſolid form. Water may be decompoſed by certain bodies, as for inſtance by iron: the earth of the iron attracting its acidifying particles, and forming a calæ, or ſlag, while the earthy principle of the water, combines with the diſengaged phlogiſton of the iron, and becomes inflammable air; in like manner, fire may be decompoſed by the calx of mercury for inſtance, the earth of the calx attracting its phlogiſton, and becoming mercury, and the acid diſengaged from that earth, combining with its æther, and forming pure air. And an carth and acid in certain ſtates, combining together, as invariably produce water: as æther and phlogiſion, when ſuſficiently excited, by uniting form fire. Fire therefore, is evidently compoſed of æther and phlogiſton, in a ſtate of ſtrong excitement; and is a compound fluid, having a general attraction to thoſe principles in an atmoſpheric ſtate: and a peculiar attraction to ætherial compounds, with which it can ſo far enter into combination, as to loſe its active properties, and become latent, or inactive. S E C T I O NN XII. On Light. L I G H T is an elaſtic fluid, whoſe general properties of refraction, reflection, &c. are well known to all philoſophers. It is evidently of different kinds, or compoſed ticity, velocity, &c. but when ſeparate producing difſerent ſenſations, or ideas of colour different from each other; and the different kinds compoſing a beam of ſolar light are ſeven, (or perhaps bur three;) which, when ſeparated, and in that ſingle or uncombined ſtate, falling upon the reticular expanſion of the optic nerve, produce the ſeven different perceptions or ideas, which are called the ſeven primary colours. Light is evidently compoſed of ætber and phiogiſton, becauſe, it is almoſt always produced when inflammable ſubſtances loſe their philogiſton, by combuſtion in pure air, which by that ſame proceſs, loſes its elaſtic principle, its æther; therefore, the phlogiſton and æther uniting, eſcape in the form of fire, accompanied with light. And the ſame is fully proved, by metallic calces acquiring pblogiſion, by being expoſed to the ſolar light; and at the ſame time, the diſengageſ ælber of the light, forming pure air by uniting with the acidifying principle, diſplaced ſfrom the calx calx by its acquiſition of phlogiſton, and becoming a metal. And indeed, ſo many circumſtances tend to prove it, and ſo much hath already been ſaid upon the ſubject, in different parts of this work, that I ſhall only mention this one additional circumſtance. Vegetables by expoſure to light, evidently decompoſe it, and retain and fix its phlogiſion, at the ſame time, that the ærher the other part of light, is thrown off as uſeleſs or excrementitious; it therefore combines with the acid particles in the fluids of the vegetable, and is expelled in the form of pure air. Light is very different from either æther, or phlogiſton ſingly; becauſe, being compoſed oſ botb, their peculiar attractions, and arrangements, counteract each other; and it will therefore neither form atmoſpheres around bodies, nor enter into chemical union, unleſs it be decompoſed. It differs from fire, though compoſed of the ſame principles, as being much more elaſtic, and ſubject to refraction and reflection, according to circumſtances. However, fire when rapidly flowing off from the ſurface of any body, in which it is greatly accumulated, is parily changed into light; and light when thrown in a condenſed ſtate, upon a body which reſiſts its motion, and refuſes it a ready paſſage through its pores, becomes partly changed into fire. Fire and light therefore, are evidently compoſed of the ſame principles, æther and phlogiſton; but having different properties, thoſe principles muſt be in different ſtates of combination; in cne ſtate exciting the ſenſation of heat, and poſſeſſing thoſe properties which we attribute to fire: and in ihe other, producing the ſenſation of colours, lights and ſhades, and all the phenomena of light. Though æther and phlogiſton, when in that ſtate of combination which we call light, deſtroy each others peculiar affinities to other bodies and arrangement, ſo as to form a fluid almoſ any chemical affinities, yet it appears, that the æther is the moſt excited and active of the two; becauſe light will paſs readily through bodies chiefly compoſed of æther or acid: but to bodies containing much earth or phlogiſton, it ſeems to have ſo great an aſfinity, that it will not eaſily leave them; and therefore, in pafſing through them, it loſes ſo much oſ its force and elaſticity, as to be incapable of exciting the perceptions or ideas of light, and in general is charged into ſire, and gives the ſenſation of heat; for moſt carthy bodies, and inflammable ſubſtances, are opaque and become heated by expoſure to light. It appears therefore, when æther and phlogiſton combine and form fſire, that the phlogiſton is moſt excited; but when they form light, the ætber is the moſt active; and when by any circumſtance, they ſuſfer a conſiderable change in their mode oſ combination, they may be converted from one ſtate to the other; and when expoſed to each others action, in the two different ſtates, they may counteract and deſtroy each other, as we evidently ſee is the caſe, when the light of the ſun ſalls upon a fire, the ſuperior activity of the æther in the light, counteracts the greater excitement of the phlogiſion of the fire, by which they deſtroy each other: the fire becomes dull, and is at length extinguiſhed. But ſince light is compoſed of æther and phlogiſton, how does it happen, that different particles oſ it, are poſſeſſed of diſferent properties, and produce different ſenſations or ideas of colour? It muſt be owing to different parlicles of the ætber, having different degrees of excitement: or, to the different proportions of phlogiſton combined with that æther. If glaſs contai ns uo phlogiſton, but as I have hefore mentioned, be chiefly compoſed of acidifying particles firmly united by a ſmall proportion oſ æther, or with a ſmall quantity of earth, it will follow, that the violet rays of light, being more refracted by the priſm, than the red, muſt contain more phlogiſton, or æther leſs active, than the red rays do; as being more impeded, or drawn aſide in their paſſuge through the phlogiſtic atmoſphere attracted to the ſurface of the priſm. For if glaſs be chiefly compoſed of acid and æther, it will naturally attract the circumambient phlogiſton, like an atmoſphere, to its ſurface; and this phlogiſton will attract the active æther of light; but, as they, cannot combine, the motion of the particles of light will carry them forwards; which accounts for the transparency of glaſs, which tranſmits light without reflecting it. But, inflammable ſubſtances, gold for inſtance being compoſed of earth and phlogiſton, will naturally attract to its ſurface the ſurrounding æther, every where preſent, and /hat ætber will repel every particle of light, whoſe æther is in a ſtate of excitement ſimilar to itſelf, gold therefore attracts to its ſurface an atmoſphere of æther, which is excited by that attraction to a certain degree: if a beam of light falls upon this, the ætber of the yellow rays, being juſt as much excited more than its phlogiſton, as the æther ſurrounding the gold is, will be repelled or reſtected, and give the perception or idea of a yellow colour, in different degrees of light and ſhade, according to the form ofſ the ſurface expoſed. But ihoſe rays, whoſe æther is either more, or leſs excited, than the æther attracted to the ſurface of the gold, will only be partly and weakly reflected; part ofthem having perhaps evena ſlight attraction of arrangement, to that more or leſs excited ætherial atmoſphere of the gold, will therefore paſs through it, to the gold itſelf, where, being attracted by its phlogiſton, they will loſe their velocity, and the peculiar excitement of their æiber, upon which the properties of light depend; and rbai æther, will then combine with the phlogiſton accompanying it, now equally active, as itſelf, or perhaps iore ſo; and by that new mode of combination, they will form ſire. Tis evident therefore, that no particles of light will be repelled, or reflected with their full force, or velocity, but thoſe whoſe ætber is in a ſimilas ſtate of excitement, and equally attracted by itbeir otn phlogiſion, as the ætherial atmoſphere of the metal is, with reſpect to the phlogiſton entering into the compoſition of that metal, in which caſe they cannot unite, or penetrate each other; therefore, thoſe particles of light will be repelled by their velocity and elaſticity, while the other particles will be ſlightly reflected, or partly retained, and being promiſcuouſly and violently mixed together, will loſe their elaſticity and form fſire, and give the ſenſation of heat inſtead of light. Since then the violet rays are the moſt, and the red the leaſt refracted by glaſs, it appears, that the violet rays, or particles of light, contain æther in the leaſt active ſtate, and the red rays have their æther in the moſt excited ſtate; conſequently, as excitement is inverſely proportionate to the quantity, or extent of atmoſphere, it muſt follow, that particles of light giving the idea or perception of a violet colour, are compoſed of phlogiſion, with a large almoſphere of æther: and red rays, ol phlogiſton, with a ſmall and more excited atmoſphere of æiber; and the intermediate rays of the ſpectrum, have their æther more or leſs excited, or extenfive, as they appronch, or recede from thoſe extremities of the ſpectrum, of ſeparated light. Lead in its native ſtate, contains much phlogiſton; that quantity of phlogiſton being conſiderable, and loogſely united to the earthy baſe of the lead, will be bur ſlightly excited; and in conſequence of that, will attract an atmoſphere of æther to its ſurface, which will be ſlightly excited alſo; vhen thereſore, rays of light fall upon the lead, the æther of the blue rays being but ſlightly excited, and in a ſimilar ſtate with the æther ſurrounding the lead, will be forcibly reflected; but the other rays, green, yellow, orange and red, having æther im a more exeited ſtate, and more attractive to phlogiſton, will only be partially and weakly reflected; while the other part paſſing through the armoſphere on its ſurſace, will enter into the ſubſtance oſ the lead; where, they will loſe their properties oſ light; and becoming ſire, will heat the metal. But if lead be deprived of part of its phlogiſton, by calcination for inſtance, ſo as to form minium, that remaining phlogiſton will be ſmall in quantity, cloſely combined, and much excited; conſequently, it will attract ſurrounding æther with more force, than in its metallic ſtate; whicb æiber will therefore become more excited; in this ſtate it will repel the red rays, becauſe, their æther is in a ſimilar ſtate of ſtrong excitement; but the other rays will be partly reflected with little velocity, and partly attracted, and condenſed in the lead ſo as to form fire. Lead when it contains its full quantity of phlogis1on, is of a bluiſh white colour: when deprived by calcination of part of it, it becomes greeniſò; when more calcined, yellow : then orange, and laſt of all red; therefore, the more phlogiſton it contains, the nearer it approaches the violet colour: and the more it is deprived of that phlogiſton, the nearer it gradually approaches, the otber end of the natural ſcale of colours, till at laſt it becomes of a beautiful red. The kind of rays of light reflected, depends therefore upon the quantity of phlogiſton, whoſe excitement, is inverſely proportionate to that quantity: and the quantity of æther naturally ſurrounding the ſurface of that lead, will be excited always in proportion to the excitement of that phlogiſton; therefore, as the æther forming different particles of light, is in different ſtates of excitement, being the leaſt excited in the violet rays, and proportionately more and more ſo to the red, 'tis evident, that the more the lead is deprived oſ its phlogiſton, the more will the remainder be excited, and with it the ſurrounding æther: and that ælber, being repulſive to particles of light in the ſame ſtate of excilement from phlogiſton, as itſelſ, will repel firſt one kind of light, and then another, in progreſſion; at firſt when little excited, it will reflect the blue rays: when more excited, the green, or yellow: and when at laſt the phlogiſton of the lead is much diminiſhed, and much excited, its ſurrounding æther will be in the ſume violent ſtate of excitement as the æſher of the red rays are; and conſequently, the red rays alone will be reflectca vith their full force, or degree of velocity, upor which their power of exciting the ſenſation of co lour, in a great meaſure depends. Gold, as before mentioned, reflects moſt forcibly the yellow rays; becauſe its ætherial atmoſphere, is in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, with the æther of the particles of light, forming the yellow rays: therefore, they will be repelled with their full force. But the other rays having their æther more or leſs excited, will not be ſo fully acted upon by the ætherial atmoſphere oſ the gold, therefore, they will in part, paſs through that atmoſphere, and be attracted into the gold, ſo as to form fire; and partly be repelled, but withdiminiſhed force, producing a faintiſb while, if the yellow rays be intercepted; but if they be not, the force with which thoſe others are reflected, being much diminilbed, they will not injure the more powerful effect of the completely reflected yellow rays; which, will therefore produce the ſenſation of a yellow colour. The ſolar rays, undoubtedly contain all the diferent pound rays, or beams, when entire, give the ſenſation of whilenoſs; therefore, every thing which appears white, reflects all kinds of particles, or rays of light. A body that appears red, muſt evidently reflect the red rays: but, it will likewiſe appear blue, green, or yellow, if thoſe kinds of rays be thrown ſiugly upon it; which ſhews, that a body may appear red, though it reflects rays of every other colour, as well as the red ones; and the reaſon muſt be, that the red rays are more perfectly and completely reſected, than thoſe of any other kind; conſequently, their velocity and ſuperior activity will produce ſo ſtrong an excitement of the optic nerve, as to render it incapable of perceiving the weater impulſes of the other kinds, partially reflected, and with diminiſhed velocity. Bodies containing no phlogiſion, ſuch as glaſs, vitrifiable ſubſtances, and many kinds ofſ ſalts, give no particular colour: but readily tranſmit through them rays of light of every kind; ſuch kinds of ſubſtances, certainly contain the acidifying principle with æther, and that æther may be naturally ſuppoſed to have a peculiar attraction to the phlogiſion univerſally preſent, rather than to æther; as appears evident from glaſs, which when rubbed, excites an atmoſphere of phlogiſton to become electric; therefore we may ſuppoſe, that theſe kinds of ſubſtances have an attraction to phlogiſion in their natural ſtate, which is gently excited, and attracted to their ſurfaces. The rays of ſolar light, falling obliquely upon this phlogiſton, as in experiments with the priſm, are all readily tranſmitted through it, and through the glaſs itſelf, which ſhews, that thoſe rays of light have their æther in a more active ſtate, than their phlogiſion; becauſe, they are unot reflected, but readily tranſmitted; and as ſome oſ iboſe rays are more refracted, or bent ſrom their direct courſe, than others, it proves, that ſome of them have iheir æther more excited, than others. Perhaps the more excited the ætber, the leſs will it be giſtic atmoſphere of the priſm, as being of leſs extent, and leſs reſiſted, as is the caſe with the red rays; and the leſs excited and more extenſive the æther of a particle of light, the more will it be affected and detained by the ſlightly excited phlogiſtic atmoſphere, and be drawn ſo much the more from its direct courſe, or be ſo much the more refracted, as is the caſe with the violet rays. If light then is compoſed of phlogiſton, and æther in a more active ſtate than that phlogiſton, and ſome rays have their æther more excited than others, tis evident, that phlogiſtic ſubſtances, attracting the circumambient æther to their ſurfaces wvill reſlect thoſe rays, more or leſs perfectly. Ii all the rays are reflected, the body will appear white; but if one kind of rays be more perfectly or forcibly reflected than the others, the body will appear to be of ihat colour, which thoſe completely reſltected rays naturally excite. It appears therefore, that every body which reflects rays exciting the idea of one certain eolour, hath its ætherial atmoſpbere in the ſame degree of excitement, as the æther compoſing that kind of ray: hath; in conſequence of which. they are reflected perfecily, and with their full velocity. but thoſe ſubſtances, reflecting no certaiu kind of colaur, have their ætherial atmoſpheres in a ſtate of excitement, different from the degree of excitement, of the æther compoſing any particle, oſ any of the differeni kinds of light. Thoſe rays of light which are imperfectly and partially reflected, will portly paſs through the ætherial atmoſphere, into the body itſelf. where, meeting with the phlogiſton partty compoſing it, they will be detained, and mixed togetber, ſo as to loſe their velocity, and properties, as light; in conſequence of which, they will combine in a different manner, and form ſire, as before intimated. Colouring particles of phlogiſtic matter, ſuſpended in tranſparent liquids, will act in a ſimilar manner: only inſtead of thoſe particles of light, whoſe æther is in a fimilar ſtate of excitement with that ſurrounding them, being reſiected by them, they will in general be puſbed aſide, and paſs by cthem, through the liquid in which they float, and by whicti they are eaſily tranſmitted; ſo that the colour tranſinitted, is that, which is excited by rhoſe rays, expelled by the phlogiſtic or colouring particles; and rbat light, or colour, may be reflected through the liquor, by any proper ſurface on the further ſide, ſo as to give the idea of light, or colour reflected by the colouring particles rthemſelves. Bodies of a looſe texture containing a ſuperabundance of phlogiſton, and that ſo little excited, as to have no power of attracting a ſufficiently denſe ætherial atmoſphere around its particles, attract and fix rays of light of every kind on account of their æther; which rays, being confuſedly and forcibly mixed together, in the irregular vacuities of the ſubſtance, will form ſire;, and no part oſ them being reflected, the matter appears black. But thoſe ſubſtances, of an irregular or looſe compoſition, and containing æther in a denſe ſtate, or in a ſtate of excitement different from, or greater than that of tHe æther compoſing any of the rays of light, will repel or reflect thoſe rays of every kind, and produce the ſenſation of a white colour. Tnat bodies of all kinds, have an attraction to the æther, or phlogiſton naturally preſent: one or other of which, they always excite in ſome degree or other, to ſurround them in an atmoſpheric form, in their natural or common ſtate, is undoubtedly a fact; for rays of light we ſee, are acted upon, at a conſiderable diſtance from the body by whoſe atmoſphere they are attracted. But, as a full proof, that bodies do attract atmoſpheres around them, to a conſiderable extent and that phlogiſtic ſubſtances have an atmoſphere ol a contrary nature, or kind, to what glaſs or ætberial ſubſtances have: and conſequently, that moſſ al atmoſphere, and an ætherial body a phlogiſtic one: I need onlymention the experiment of expoſing glaſs, and metal to air when depoſiting dew. The ætherial atmoſphere ſurrounding the metal, repels, or drives away the water in that atmoſpheric ſtate of vapour, ſo that not a particle of it can fall within that atmoſphere, or upon the metal: while the phlogiſtic atmoſphere, attracted to the ſurface of glaſs, attracts thoſe particles of water in their atmoſpheric ſtate, and condenſes them upon its ſurface, in the ſtate of det or waler. This mode of explaining the fact, that certain bodies reflect rays of one colour, more forcibly or evidently than others of a different kind, is only offer'd as a conjecture; all that I at preſent inſiſt upon is, that light is compoſed of the two active fluids, æther and phlogiſion: that it is produced when in certain circumſtances they unite: that in other circumſtances, it is capable of being decompoſed, and giving phlogiſion to certain earthy ſubſtances, and ælher to the acidifying principle: and that when condenſed, and forcibly crowded in certain bodies. not capable of tranſmitting it, it and evidently heats the obſtructing l Having now given an explanati ments, or firſt principles of natu re, by which they act or are governed, then, in the different ſtates of e which they can exiſt ſingly: as well pler ſtates of combination: I ſhall next other very common ſtate of their exi the four principles are mutually ſatu otber, ſo as to form that ineſtimable S EC T I O N XIII. On Water. ſTER is a ſimple neutral fluid, which different degrees of heat, is capable oſ ifferent appearances, and degrees of ſothe quantity of heat be diminiſhed to low that, of Fahrenheit, its particles atother, ment, and in ſo forcible a manner as to become a ſlid body, which is called Ice; but if the heat be increaſed to 2129. or upwards, its particles then become repulſive, and expand with great force into the ſtate of vapour. Water is evidently material, and even manifeſtly compoſed of the more fixed principles; yet, it is neither acid nor alkaline: conſequently, it muſt be formed of acidifying particles, united with the carthy priuciple. When the earthy and acidifying particles come into contact, they ſtrongly attract each other, and form a ſolid ponderous compound, ſuch as glaſs; but glaſs is more ſolid and ponderous, and leſs fuſible than ice: and requires a much more violent degree of heat to render it fluid, or evaporate it, than ice does: therefore 'tis natural to ſuppoſe, that the two fixed principles compoſing water, are cach accompanied with the active principle to which it hath an affinity, excited to ſurround it to a certain extent: but not ſuſficient to give it ſo complete /n almoſphere, as to render it aeriform. Ice will therefore be compoſed of particles of the earthy principle, ſurrounded by ſimall atmoſpheres of phlogiſton, conſequently in an active ſtate: united to, and conſolidated by particles of the acidifying principle, ſurrounded by atmoſplieres of æther, of a certain extent, and in an active ſtate; thoſe atmoſpheres firmly attracting, and ſaturating each other, ſo as to form the ſolid neutral compound, Ice. If a quantity of fire be applied to this ice, it will inſinuate itſelf into every interſtice, between thoſe atmoſpheric lines of particles; and by its general attraction to the active particles of either kind, when in an atmoſpheric ſtate, it will inſinuate itſelf between tboſe particles themſelves, forming thoſe atmoſpheric lines; in conſequence of which, the peculiar attraction by which one compound particle, was arranged and attracted to the contiguous particles, ſo as to form a ſolid, will be weakened: and thoſe reſpective atmoſpheres ſo extended, as to readily admit a freedom of motion among thoſe compound particles; ſo that they may be moved in any direction, by the ſlighteſt force. In this ſtate oſ fluidity, they are called water. If now the quantity of fire be much inereaſed, it will inſinuate itſelf ſo copiouſly between every active particle, as to increaſe their atmoſpheric extent to a great diftance from their reſpective centres; in conſequence of which, their attraction to thoſe centres will be greatly weakened, and therefore the attraction between the earthy and acidifying principles muſt be very much diminiſhed; ſo that each fixed principle, will be ſurrounded with atmoſpheres, ſo extended, by the particles of fire taken into arrangement, and inſinuated between the lines of active particles forming thoſe atmoſpheres, that they will be in an aeriform ſtate, or that of vapour; each particle on account of its widely extended atmoſpheres, keeping every other at a conſiderable diſtance: and having little attraction of union to particles of the oppoſite kind, becauſe the natural excitement of thoſe atmoſpheres are weakened, in proportion as they are removed from their reſpective exciting centres. At the ſame time, thoſe particles of fire, by entering into combination with thoſe atmoſpheric particles, lofe, in a great meaſure, their peculiar properties as fire, and only reſume them, ſo as to manifeſt their heating pouer, when they leave that combination, to enter into bodies poſſeſſing a leſs quantity of them; in conſequence of which, thoſe atmoſpheres will again contract: and the fixed principles uill gradually approach, ſo as to regain the ſtate of waſer, and ice in progreſſion, as the iguecus particles eſtape. To explain the ſubject ſtill ſurther, by a compariſon, the fixed principles, being compoſed of ſixed particles of matter, ſurrounded by inſeparabie atmoſpheres of one, or other of the active priuciples, capable of giving aſmſpheric arrangement to active particles of the oppaſite kind, may be compared to particles of iron giving mugnetic excitement, to one or other oſ the active principles. The cariby principle, with a suall atmoſphere of pblogision, will reſemble the magnetic pole, pointing to the suxib; and the acidiryiig principle, with an atmoſphere ol ætber, will be like the magnetic pole pointing to the north. A particle of water thereſore, being compoſed of a particle of the earthy principle, ſurrounded by ſome phlogiſton, combined with an acidifying particle, exciting a ſmall atmoſphere of æther, will reſemble a magnetic needle: the earthy particle being the ſouth, and the acidifying particle the north end of that compound particle of water. Ifanother particle of water, be brought near to the former, the earthy particle of each, will attract the acidifying particle of the other, by which, they will therefore be firmly attracted together, and arranged in an inverted poſition with reſpect to each other; the ſame as the ſouth pole oſ one magnetic needle, will attract and forcibly hold in contact, the north end of another. In this ſtate, the needles will reſemble ue: the oppoſite poles being firmly united, and peculiarly arranged, to each other. If thoſe two particles of ice, be ſeparated, or puſhed to a diſtance from each other, by the interpoſition of particles of fire, they will reſemble the two magnetic needles, when forcibly ſeparated to a ſmall diſtance; in which ſtate, their mutual attraction being weakened by diſtance, they may be caſily moved, but will ſtill attract each other with evident force; ſo the particles of ice, now mutually attracting with diminiſhed force, are capable of being eaſily moved, from their preſent ſituations with reſpect to each other; in which ſtate, they form that fluid called Water. But were thoſe magnetic poles totally ſeparated from each other, by any interpoſing inedium combining with their magnetic atmoſpheres, ſo as to extend them to ſuch a diſtance, as nearly to deſſro) their magnetic excitement: at the ſame time, that cvery interstice was ſilled with the interpoſed medium: tis evident, that they would be made to recede ſrom each other, by the preſſure oſ that medium ſurrounding every pole, and have but little power of counteracting that ſeparating force, by the attraction oſ the oppoſite poles, in that ſtate of debility. So it is with the compound particles of water, when much ſire is mixed with them; for the interpoſing ſire, extends the atmoſpberes of the two fixed principles ; weakens their natural excitement, and ſeparates them nearly into diſtinct partiL. cles, each ſurrounded by its reſpective atmyſpheres, extended and turgid with the particles of fire interpoſed, and connected with thoſe atmoſpheres; in conſequence of which, each particle muſt be forced to a diſtance, from every other, and the phlogiſtic fiery atmoſphere of the cariby particles, will have but litile tendency to unite, with the ætherial atmoſpberes of the acidifying particles, as replete and ſaturated with igneous particles as themſelves: therefore, the particles of the water, will expand into the ſtate of vapour. Tis evident alſo, in this ſtate of vapour, where the fixed principles, compoſing water, are ſo ſeparated, as to have ſcarcely any connection, that they may be readily decompoſed; which in fact may eaſily be affected, and is a proof of the veracity of the principles propoſed. For inſtance, iron is compoſed of eartby parti2les, rendered metallic, and connected together oy means of much phlogiſton. If this phlogiſton be cles weatened by means of fire, and in that ſtate be expoſed to the action of water, in the violent ſtate of vapour, by means of ſire diſuniting its component fixed principles, and rendering them aeriform, by combining with and extending their reſpective atmoſpheres of active particles, 'tis evident, that the phlogiſion of the iron, will attract the ætberial atmoſpheres of the acidifying particles compoſing the water, by which thoſe acidifying particles, will be drawn into contact vith the earthy particles of the iron, and aſtracted by them: in conſequence of which, thoſe earthy particles will loſe their attraction to their phlogiſton, which will be expanded and cagerly attracted by the eariby particles of the avater, now rendered powerfully active, by loſiug thoſe acidifying particles attracted by the earth of the iron, with which rihey were before combined and ſaturated; but now being entirely ſeparated from them, theſe earthy particles of the water, thus leſi with small, unſatisied, and active atmoſpheres of phiogiſton, will eagerly attract into arrangement, the phlogiſton diſplaced from the earth of the iron, ſo as to ſurround themſelves with complete phlogiſtic atmoſpheres; by which they will acquire an aeriform ſtate, and become poſſeſſed of thoſe properties, which diſtinguiſh them to be inflammable air. It appears therefore, that when violently heated, the attraction of the eartb of iron, to the acidiſying particles of water, in an active ſtate, and of the carib of water not ſaturated with phlogiſton, to the phlogiſton of iron, together, are stronger, than the united attractions of the earth of iron to its phlogiſton, and of the carthy principle of water, to the acidifying principle; each fixed principle being in an active ſtate, and, by means of ſire, ſeparated, ſo as not to be capable of ſaturating or ſatisfying each other. Heated iron therefore, expoſed to water in the ſtate of vapour, will attract the acidifying particles of ibat water, and form a calx or ſlag; and at the ſame time, will give its phlogiſton to the diſengaged active earthy pariicles of the water; which, attracting that phlogiſton around them, will become acriform, or poſſeſſed of complete atmoſpheres, O widely extended, as to be no longer evidently xcited, or poſſeſſed of alkaline properties; in which ſtate, they are called inflammable air. Water therefore, is compoſed of the acidifving principle, ſurrounded with a certain quantity of æiber, which æther is in that ſtate of excitement, which is called acid, being ſtrongly attractive, either to phlogiſton in a ſimilar ſtate, or to diſengaged particles of æther themſelves; ſo that the æther ſurrounding each acid particle, by its attraction of arrange ment, will attract æther ſuſficient to invelope every particle with a complete atmoſphere, by which they acquire the properties and name oſ pure air. Thoſe particles, in this acid, or active ſtate combining with particles of the earihy principle ir a ſtate of great activity, mutually attract and ſaturate each other, ſo as to form that neutral com pound, water; for the eartby particles, thus ſatisf;. ing the acidifying particles, are each inveloped ir a small atmoſphere oſ phlogiſton, which in that ſtatc gives them the properties which are called altaline, having a ſtrong attraction to acids: and alſo a power of tacing into arrangement, ſo great a quantity oſ phlogiſton, as to give them the ſtate and properties of inflammable air. Pure air is therefore compoſed of acidifying particles, fully ſaturated with, and ſurrounded by complete atmoſpheres of æther; and inflammable air, of particles of the earthy principle, rendered aeriform, by perfect atmoſpheres of phlogiſton; each being in a great meaſure inactive, on account oſ the great extent of its atmoſpheres, which become leſs excited as their diſtance from their reſpective actuating fixed principles, as centres, increaſes. If theſe two airs, or gaſes be mixed together, and their reſpective atmoſpheres of æther or phlogiſton be ſtill further extended by means of fire, or any ignited body, the external and leſs forcibly attracteâ particles of thoſe atmoſpberes, will unite, and ſeparate from their reſpective centres; and in that ſtate, they will form fſire, or light, or both, and eſcape; and at the ſame time, the fixed earthy and acidifring principles, each ſtill retaining a certain portion of thoſe external atmoſpheres, by which they were ſurrounded, and which, to a certain extent, they &o powerſully attract, to be eaſily ſeparated ſfrom, are by thoſe remaining atmoſpheric particles attracted to unite, and form tvater. The indefatigable, and juſtly celebrated Dr. Prieſtley, hath lately doubted the production, or generation of water, by exploding pure and inflammable æairs together; becauſe, in his Experiments, the fluid reſiduum, was not pure ualer, but evidently contained ſome acid. But thoſe Experiments, in reality prove no more than this, that the quantity of inflammable air, neceſſary to ſupply phlogiſton ſufficient to ſaturate the æiber of the pure air employed, did not contain enuugh oſ the carihy principle, depoſited by that phlogiſton, to ſaturate the acid particles ſeparated from the æther oſ the pure air; or, that the quantity of phlogiſton in inflammable air, is in to0 great proportion to the æther in pure air; in conſequence of which, the acidifying particles are too much deprived oſ their æther, and the remainder is in that ſtate of activity, which conſtitutes acidity. So that if the proportion of phlogiſton be too great, or of the earth too ſmall in the inflammable air employed, the acidifying particles will be left too active, or not ſaturated, and the compound reſiduum will be water with a ſlight acidity. And that this diſproportion, is the cauſe oſ the acidity of the water generated, is abundantly evident, from comparing the quantity of acid found in Dr. Prieſtleys Experiments, with the much greater quantity, which the ſume meaſure of pure air would have depoſited, had it been decompoſed by phoſphorus. For in the Drs. Experiments, 500 ounce meaſures of pure air only afforded as much acid as was equivalent to 12. 54 grains of concentrated acid of vitriol; which quantity of acid is capable of ſaturating as much vegetable alkali as is contained in 221 grains of nitre cryſtallived in mean temperature. The ſediment of the ſame liquor was alſo ſuppoſed to contain, at leaſt, as much acid as the liquor itſelf. So that the whole quantity of acid depoſited may be ſuppoſed to be equal to about 25 grains of concentrated vitriolic acid. The so0 Ounce meaſures therefore of pure air, by combuſtion with inflammable air, depoſited ſo much acid as was equivalent to about 25 grains of vitriolic acid, which would ſaturate about 15 grains of ſoda: but had that quantity of pure air been decompoſed by combuſtion with phoſphorus. it would have depoſited about 380 grains of acid, which would have ſaturated upwards of 1000 grains of ſoda. But in Dr. Prieſtley's experiments, that quantity of pure air, when decompoſed by inflammable air, produced only 25 grains of acid, in the liquor and ſediment; which together, if we ſuppoſe of the ſame tind, and ſtrength, as that generated by combuſtion with phoſphorus, would only ſaturate 70 grains of ſoda: therefore, as the whole quantity oſ pure air is nearly equally decompoſed in both caſes, the other 355 grains of acid muſi be contained in the liquor produced by the operatiM on; where being not evident, as an acid, it muſt be combined to ſaturation with ſomething capable oſ neutralizing it; and that ſomething muſt either be æther, or cartb, or both; but if it were æther, the acid would ſtill be aeriform which it is not, therefore, it muſt at leaſt in part be the earthy principle, in a ſtate of great activity, or in that ſtate which we call alkaline; and that earthy principle in its altaline ſtate, muſt be ſupplied by the 1000 ounce meaſures of inflammable air employed in the experiment, partly deprived of its phlogiſton, by that phlogiſton's uniting with the æther of the pure air and producing light and fire; in eonſequence oſ which, the carihy principle with its active reſiduum of phlogiſton, combines with the acidifying principle with its active reſiduum of ætber, and forms twater. But 1000 ounce meaſures of inflammable air, weighing about 60 grains, exploded with 500 ounce meaſures of pure air weighing about 380 grains, produce about 440 grains of water, containing about 25 grains of acid; conſequently, iſ thoſe 25 grains oſacid are abſtracted, the remainder will be water in its perfect, or neutral ſtate. It appears therefore, that if the a s grains of acid furniſhed by the pure air, be deducted from the weight of the pure air employcd, the remainder of that pure air, about 355 grains muſt enter into the compoſition of the water. Of what do thoſe 355 grains conſiſt?If roo grains of pure air be decompoſed by phoſphorus, the phoſphorus will gain 100 grains in weight, and thoſe 100 grains are acid, and capable of ſaturating 280 grains oſ ſoda: conſequemtly, the weight of pure air is that of its baſe, and lhat baſe is acid; therefore, the 355 grains, entering into the compoſition of the water, in the former experiment, are 355 grains of acid: and that quantity is combined with the baſe of the inſlammable air, and neutralized ſo as to form tvater. But an acid can be neutralized, or diſpoſſeſſed oſ its acid properties, by nothing but the carhy priuciple in an active or alkaline ſtate, or by æther; thereſore, the baſe of inflammable air is an carib. But the inflammable air only weighed about 6c grains, therefore could not afford more than 6c grains of earth to combine with, and ſaturate thoſe 355 grains of acid: conſequently, the proportion oſ the earth to the acid in water, cannot be greater than about 1I to 6. But, water is a neutral fluid, neither evidently acid nor alkaline: therefore, the acid compoſing it, muſt be partly ſaturated with the earthy principle in an active ſtate, and partly with æther. But, from Mr. Kirwan's Experiments, pure air it ſeems may contain about one eighth of its weight of water, and inflammable air about one half; therefore, if thoſe proportions be deducted, the 355 grains of pure air, will be found to contain about 310 grains of acid, and the 60 grains of inflammable air, about 30 grains of earth; which uniting, will form water, and mix with that which they contained already formed. Water therefore, in reality, ſeems to be compoſed of a greater number of acid than of earthy particles; the proportion, without pretending to aſcertain it, may be ſuppoſed, for conveniency, to be ro of the former, to 1 of the latter; and conſequently, the ætherial particles forming atmoſpheres around thoſe acidifying particles, muſt be ſo far extended, as to have only about one tentbofthe activity or excitement, which the phlogiſtic particles, ſurrounding the earthy particles to a proportionately leſs extent, have: by which proportion, the activity of thoſe ætherial particles, will be ſo diminiſbed, as to render their acidity imperceptible; and the water they compoſe, by combining with the more active phlogiſton of the earthy particles, will ſtill be neutral. When water contains but little fire in its interſtices, eacb earthy particle with its ſmall phlogiſtic atmoſphere, if unaccompanied with other earthy particles, would attract ro particles of the acidifying principle, to its ſurface; and they would arrange themſelves around it, in angles of about 60 degrees, ſo as to equally divide the ſurface of that atmoſpheric earthy particle amongſt them; and in that caſe, the external phlogiſtic atmoſphere oſ the earthy particle, would unite with the external ætherial atmoſpheres of the acidifying particles and draw each of them towards it, till their reſpective internal eſſential atmoſpheres came into contact; by which, they would become firmly fixed to each other, in that particular mode of arrangement, ſo as to form a ſolid particle of Ice. It appears therefore, when a number of acidifying particles with ætherial atmoſpheres, of moderate extent and excitement, are mixed with a ſmaller number of earthy particles, with phlogiſtic atmoſpheres, of leſs extent and greater excitement, in a certain proportion, that they counteract each other, ſo as to produce a neutral compound. If theſe neutral or compound particles, be mixed with a number of igneous particles, ſufficient to weaken their mutual attraction by expãnding their atmoſpheres, each earthy particle, will be furrounded, by its proportion, of the acidifying particles, moderately attracted to its ſurface; but not ſo firmly united, but, that every particle can be moved with the gentleſt force; ſo that the whole, will be in that ſtate of sluiditp which we call water. In this ſtate, each acidifying particle being ſurrounded by ætberial rays, extending in all directions, ihoſe on that ſide next its particular carthy centre, will be attracted with conſiderable force, by the phlogiſtic atmoſphere of that centre; while rhoſe extending outwardly, or in a contrary direction, will attract the phlogiſtic rays of the neighbouring earihy centre, extending through that ſpace lefi between the acidifying particles, (attractedat certain angles, or diſtances to that ſurface, ) whieb is oppoſed to thoſe ætherial rays: in conſequence of this, the particles of water, have a mulual attraction to cach other. If the quantity of fire, commixt with theſe particles, be diminiſbed, till the reſpective atmoſpheres ſurrounding each particle, be ſufſiciently contracted and active, the phlogiſtic armoſpheres ofſ the earthy centres, will gradually attract the therial atmoſpheres of the ſurrounding acidifying particles, till their reſpective internal, or eſſential atmoſpheres come into contact; when, they will be ſuddenly and violently drawn into cloſe union, ſo as to become a ſolid, or ice; and the fire, before conN nected with thoſe atmoſpheres, will become diſengaged and be expelled. But in the ſtate of water, the particles were ſo ſlightly connected, as to move in any manner, or direction, ſo as to give the moſt ſpace to the moving body, and occupy the leaſt room; but now, each atmoſphere acquiring its proper force, by becoming diſengaged from the interpoſing particles of fire, a certain arrangement takes place, at the moment of congelation; every cariby centre altracts and ſirmly fixes its proper number of acidi. ſying particles to its ſurface, at certain angles or diſtances ſrom each other; and as the ætherial atmoſpheres of thoſe diſtant acidifying particles, attract the phlogiſtic rays of the neighbouring earthy particles, extending from the /paces between tbeir reſpective acidifying particles, 'tis evident, that at this moment of congelation when each acidifying particle becomes fixed in its proper place, to its own proper centre, that it will attract the neighbouring particle of water, to arrange itſelf ſo, that it may attract the centre of bouring earthy particle, which is moſt diſtant from the acidifying particles properly ſurrounding it; and in lhat poſition, or mode of arrangement, the two particles will become ſirmly united, and capable ol taking otbers into a ſimilar arrangement, ſo as to form a ſolid mnaſs of ice. But, if the water, inſtead of being robbed oſ the quantity of fire neceſſary to its fluidity, be expoſed to the action oſ a ſill greater degree of heat, equal to 2120 or upwards, that increaſed quantity of fire, will diſtend every atmoſphere, of every particle compoſing that water, and enter into atmoſpheric arrangement with them, by attracting and inſinuating itſelf, between every active particle, forming thoſe atmoſpheres of either kind; by which, they will be ſo extended, and their activity ſo weakened, that their reſpective fixed centres, vill be very far removed from each other; and the contrary kinds of particles, forming each particle of water, will be but ſlightly connected. VWhen When the quantity of ſire becomes ſo great, as to expand thoſe atmoſpheres to a certain extent, the ætherial atmoſpheres extending from the ſurrounding acidifying particles of one particle oſ water, will loſe their power of attracting the phlogiſtic rays extending from the central earthy particles of the neighbouring particles of water; partly on account of each atmoſpheric ray being reakeued by extenſion, and partly by the ætherial atmoſphere of each acidifying particle, ſurrounding cach earthy centre, being ſo turgid and expandea, as to preſs upon each other, and fill up thoſe spaces naturally left between them in their ſtate of water; by which, the egreſs of the phlogiſtic rays extending from each reſpective earthy centre, will be perfectly intercepted, and every attraction between the particles of water muſt ceaſe; and each compound particle of water, being thus prevented from having any attraction to thoſe near it, the turgid atmoſpheres of each, at that moment when every counteracting attraction of conſolidation ceaſes, will inſtantly and forcibly expand, and recede to their full extent from each other, ſo as to aſſume the ſtate of vapour. At the very moment too, when thoſe atimoſpberes ceaſe to be confined by the attraction uniting one particle of water to the other, they will attract into arrangement a number of the particles of fire, which before were only crowded into the interſtices of the lines of particles forming thoſe atmoſpheres; by which, they will become ſtill more extended, and expand into the ſtate of vapour; and the quantity of active fire or ſenſible heat will be diminiſbed, by the number of its particles attracted by thoſe atmoſpheres into combination vith them; in which ſtate, the igneous particles muſt loſe conſiderably of their activity, and become latent: till thoſe atmoſpheres be again contracted ſo far, that one compound particle can attract another, and become water; by which attraction, the atmoſpheres will be condenſed, the fixed centres approximated, and the interpoſcd particles of fire preſſed out, ſo as to flow oſſ in their active diſengaged ſtate, and produce ſenĩible heat. It appears thereſore, when for the ſake olſi ing a general idea oſ cater, I compared one oſ it particles, compoſed of the earthy and acidifying principle in active ſtates, to a needle, rendered magnetic by having all its phlogiſton excited at one of its ends, and all its æther to the other, that the compariſon was not ſtrictly juſt; for although the particles of water are held together, by means of the phlogiſtic atmoſphere oſ the earthy principle of one, attracting the ætherial atmoſpheres of the acidifying particles of others, as before aſſerted, yet there is this difference, that inſtead of a particle of water being formed of one earthy particle, united to one acidifying particle, ſo as that each may form one end of the particle of water they compoſe, the earthy particle with its atmoſphere of phlogiſton, reſembling the ſouth pole, and the acidifying particle with its ætherial atmoſphere the north pole of a magnet, in reality, each earthy particle with its excited phlogiſtic atmoſphere, is ſurrounded on every ſide by a certain number of acidifying particles, actuated by ætherial atmoſpheres; and thoſe acidifying particles are arranged to that earthy centre at certain angles with reſpect to each other. Suppoſe the angle formed, by the rays extending from any two acidifying particles to that earthy centre, be 60. thoſe ſuo particles with their ætherial atmoſpheres, and the phlogiſtic atmoſphere of the earthy particle in the centre, will reſemble an iron rod of a certain length and proper thickneſs, having an ætherial magnetic atmoſphere at each end, and a phlogiſtic one in the centre, particularly, if it be bent at its centre to an angle of 6oe. If another rod of the ſame ſize and figure, and in a ſimilar ſtate ofexcitement, be brought near and parallel to it, 'tis evident, that it cannot be attracted: but if either of its ætherial ends be brought into the middle of the ſpace between the two ends of the former, it will paſs betoeen them, and be attracted to their phiogiſtic centre. In like manner, the acidifying particle of one particle of water, will paſs between the ætherial atmoſpheres of any two acidifying particles partly compoſing another, and its oton æiherial atmoſphere will be ſo attracted by the phlogiſtic atmoſphere of the earthy centre of the others, that it will be held in that certain poſition, or arrangement; and be immoveablyfixed there, iſ the quantity of ſire be not ſo great, as to prevent their internal atmoſpheres, from being drawn into contact. Water appears thereſore, evidentlyto be compoſed of particles of the earthy principle, with ſmall atmoſpheres of phlogiſton in a very active ſtate, combined with a greater number of acidifying particles, with more extended atmoſpheres of æther, conſequently, in a leſs excited ſtate, than tht phlogiſton of the earthy particles with which they are united: the greater activity, of the phlogiſton, making up for the deficiency of the number oſ earthy particles, ſo as to enable them to ſaturate thoſe acidifying particles, and form with them this neutral fluid, water. Their proportions I at preſent have not data ſufficient to enable me to determine. The decompoſition of water when violently expanded by means of fire, ſo as to be in the ſtate of vapour, or ſteam, by iron made hot; ſufficiently proves theſe principles; ſfor the earth of the iron attracting the acid of the water, becomes a calx, . d and at the ſame time gives out its phlogiſton, which is ſeized upon by the active eartby particles of the water, then perfectly diſengaged, and attracted by them into arrangement, ſo as to form complete phlogiſtic atmoſpheres around them; by which, they become expanded into inflammable air. The additional weight acquired by the earth of the iron, and the weight of the inflammable air produced, together, being equal to the weight of the water diſappearing. And as a further proof, I ſhall juſt mention the production of pure air, when pure nitrous acid is expoſed to the action of light. Nitrousacid is evidently compoſed oſwater, witha ſuperabundance of acidifying particles with ſmall ætherial atmoſpheres; conſequently, in an active, or acid ſtate. In this compound, the acid particles ſtrongly attract the earthy particles of the water; in conſequence of which, thèéy inuſt retain their proper acidifying particles with a force leſs than natural. In that ſtate, if they be expoſed to light, which is a compound of æther and phlogiſO on, thoſe acidifying particles will attract the æther of the light; and the phlogiſton ſeparated from that æther, will be attracted by the earthy particles, which, by being thus ſatisfied with phlogiſton, will loſe their attraction to their natural acidifying particles, at the very moment when thoſe acidifying particles attract æther from the light, ſuſficient to give them complete atmoſpheres, and enable them to expand and become pure air. Thoſe earthy particles, with their acquired phlogiſton, will be attracted by the particles of nitrous acid, and diſſolved or equally diffuſed among them. Water is produced, when pure air, which is certainly compoſed of particles of the acidifying principle, and æther, and inflammable air, which is compoſed of particles of the earthy principle with phlogiſton, are mixed together in certain proportions, and exploded: it is decompoſed when iron, in proper circumſtances, attracts its acid, and at the ſame time gives out pblogiſton plete atmoſpheres, which in that ſtate become inſlammable air: and it likewiſe is decompoſed by nitrous acid, which attracts its earthy particles, if at the ſame time its acidifying particles cam meet with æther, enough to give them ſufficiently extended atmoſpheres; as is the caſe when the mixture of nitrous acid and water, is expoſed to the action of light, with room to expand; in which caſe, the acidifying particles of the water, will reſign their earthy particles to the nitrous acid, and attracting the æther of the light, will expand and become pure air; the diſengaged phiogiſton oſ the light being at the ſame time attracted by the earthy particles of the water, and equally diffuſed amongſt the nitrous acid: conſequently, cater is compoſed of particles of the earthy principle with pblogiſton, united to acidifying particles with ætber, mutually ſaturating each other: where, however, the acidifving particles ſeem to be moſt numerous, and their æſberial atmoſpheres moſi extended; and conſequently, leſs active than the phlogiſton ſurrounding, and actuating the earthy particles with which they are combined. I have now explained what I mean ments of nature; and attempted to their exiſtence; to point out the g properties which each is poſſeſſed ſhew, that thoſe ſimple elements anc ſingly, or combined, produce thc agents of nature, whoſe wonderful efi with awe, or fill us with admiration! I ſnall here therefore conclude the for the ſake of bringing the whole, poſſible, into one point of view, ſhall Recapitulation. thing is compoſed of n the property of attractio bserations and phenomel ; of two kinds, one of and the other active. of fixed matter havel lity, and general attractiſ of active matter, when each other into arrangement, ſo as to form lines extending like radii around the fixed particles; and receding from each other as their diſtances from thoſe fixed centres increaſe, ſo as to form expanded atmoſpheres around them. 5. The particles of active matter are of rwe kinds, each being equally attracted by fixed particles, and in conſequence of that, excited to attract particles of its ovn kind, into atmoſpberic arrangement. One kind of theſe active particles I call Æther, and the other Phlogiſion. 6. Tixed particles of matter, ſurrounded by atmoſpheres of ether, will form compound particles, which cannot be decompoſed, becauſe that æther can never be attracted with greater force, by any thing, than by the fixed particle which it already is united to: theſe compound particles being therefore indeſtructible, will form a fixed, or solid principle; which I thereſore call the Earihy principle. 7. In like manner, fixed particles of matter attracting atmoſpheres of phiogiſton, will produce the indeſtructible compound particles which form the acidiſyig principle. 8. The active particles of matter, beſides this attraction of arrangement amongſt ſimilar particles, when excited to become atmoſpheric around fixed centres, have likewiſe an attraction mutually to each other, when in ſimilar ſtates; by which, their particles move into union from their circumferences, progreſſively to their centres, until thoſe reſpective fixed centres are drawn into contact. This attraction between atmoſpheres of the diſferent active particles, drawing and holding their fixed centres together, is called the Artraction of Cobeſion: therefore, 9. Particles of the eariby principle, by means of the ætherial atmoſpheres eſſential to them as principles, will attract the phlogiſtic atmoſpheres, of particles of the acidifying principle, by which their reſpective fixed centres will be drawn into contact, ſo as to form a ſolid maſs. ro. Æther and phlogiſton being univerſally diffuſed, in their unexcited fluid ſtate, are capable of penetrating between the lines of active particles, arranged around fixed particles, or fixed principles; in conſequence of which, one, or both vill receive a certain degree of excitement from every fixed particle, or fixed principle; which excitement, will cauſe them to attract ſimilar particles to arrangement, and form lines of ætherial, or phlogiſtic particles, which would extend in all directions, far as creation itſelf, if they were not to meet with rays of the oppoſite kind, in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, from other bodies. But when rays of æther, or phlogiſton, excited by the fixed particles of one body, meet with lines of the contrary active particles, excited by anotber, they will draw thoſe bodies into contact: the greater the number of fixed particles, the greater will be the number of active particles thus excited; and conſequently, the more powerful their attraction. Thus is produced the Attraction oſ Gravity. by which every maſs of matter is connected with every other. 1II. Fixed particles of matter, give to active particles their excitement, by which the active particles of one kind, become attractive to thoſe of the other; conſequently, the attraction between fixed and active particles when in contact, is moſt powerful: but, as that attraction is weakened by diſtance, thoſe atmoſpheres, at a certain extent from their fixed centres, will begin to have a greater attraction of union to active particles oſ the other kind, than of arrangement to ſimilar particles; in conſequence of which, they will attract an external atmoſphere of the oppoſite hind, rather than extend themſelves, by taking more particles of their otn hind into arrangement Therefore. 12. The ætherial atmoſphere ſurrounding a particle of fixed matter, ſo as to form a particle of the earthy principle, when of a certain exteni around that fixed particle, will attract an atmoſphere oſ phlogiſton, by which it will acquire the property which is called Altaline; if that phlogiſtic atmoſphere be fully, or widely extended, its excitement will be ſinall, and its alkaline properP ty ſcarcely evident; but, if it be of little extent, the particles will be powerfully alkaline. 13. In like manner, the phlogiſtic eſſential atmoſphere of a particle of the acidifying principle of a certain extent, will invelope itſelf, with an external atmoſphere of æther; which will manifeſt its activity, by a proportionate degree of that property called Acidity. 14. The eſſential atmoſphere of every ſixed particle of matter, rendering it a fixed principle, being at ſuch a diſtance from its exciting centre, as to have its attraction to the oppoſite active fluid greater, than its attraction of arrangement to ſimilar particles, will attract thoſe particles of a contrary Kind, into arrangement around them; and to a certain extent, ibeir attraction of arrangement, will be greater than their attraction of union, to the contrary active particles. 15. A particle of either of the fixed principles, will therefore, if poſſible, ſurround itſelf with an atmoſphere of the oppoſite kind of active particles, to that extent, where the attraction of arrangement, ccaſes to be moſt powerful; in which ſtate, the particle becomes aeriform Conſequently, 16. An earthy particle, with its full external atmoſphere of phlogiſton, or in the ſtate of inflammable air, will not ſenſibly act upon a particle of the acidifying principle, with a complete atmoſphere of æther, forming a particle of pure air; becauſe, each is in ihat fiate, in which, their external particles have no decided tendency, either to arrangement with ſimilar particles, or to unite with the oppoſite kind. But, 17. If thoſe external atmoſpheres be extended by heat or ſire, with that increaſed diſtance, from their reſpective centres, they will acquire a tendency to unite, as being removed to ihat diſtance from thoſe reſpective centres, where, the attraction of union, exceeds the force of arrangement. 18. A particle of the earthy principle, with a partial, or ſuall external atmoſphere of pblogiſton will, therefore, be in that ſtate of activity which we call altaline; having an attraction of uniou to the acidifying principle, whoſe æther is in a ſimilar active, or acid ſtate, but having a sſill greater attraction of arrangement to phlogiſton, which if it can meet with, in proper circumſtances, diſengaged, it will attract, in preference to the acidifying principle: as is the caſe when water in the ſtate oſ ſteam, is expoſed to the action of iron, properl/ heated; the eartby particles of the water, will ſeparate from the acidifying particles with which they were combined, to attract into arrangement complete atmoſpheres of phlogiſton, from the iron; by which the earth of the iron, will be leſt to unite with the acidifying particles of the water, and the earthy particles of that water with their complete phlogiſtic atmoſpheres, will expand and become inflammable air. So likewiſe, when the earthy particles of water, are attracted by nitrous acid, its acidifying particles will attract into ararrangement, the æther of light, and become pure air, ratber than remain united to the earthy particles. Therefore, 19. When thoſe external atmoſpheres of the earthy and acidifying principles, are very ſmall, and very active, they will unite, and draw their internal atmoſpheres into contact, and union alſo, ſo as to form neutral compounds, if each be in proper proportion: If they be each of moderate extent, when their external atmoſpheres are drawn into contact, and ruſh into cloſer union, part of thoſe external atmoſpheres will be diſengaged, and unite and eſcape: but, if each be widely and fully extended, they will be ſo inactive as to form no union with each other, capable of ſeparating them ſrom their preſent connexions; unleſs by means oſ ſire, they be ſo far removed from the centres by which they are reſpectively attracted, as to acquire an attraction of union, greater, than that ol arrangement: in which caſe, part, or all of both will unite and form fire, or light; and the mort active remaining particles of each, if any remain being ſtrongly retained by their fixed principles will unite alſo, and draw thoſe centres into combination; as is the caſe with pure and inflammable air, when by means of fire, they combine and produce Fire, Light, and Water. 20. No fixed principle will part from its external atmoſphere, unleſs it can acquire the oppoſite fixed principle, to attract and ſatisfy it, in the place of its active principle diſengaged; neither will that active atmoſphere, ſeparate from its fixed principle, unleſs it can meet with the other active principle wherewith to combine, at the ſame time, that their reſpective fixed principles unite: unleſs the principles be diſproportionate, in which caſe, the active principle diſengaged from onue, may be attracted to arrangement around thoſe particles of the fixed principle of another, to which it hath an affinity, ſo as to give them complete atmoſpheres and render them Aeriform. 21. Compound bodies, may contain both the fixed and active principles, in ſuch proportions, as to have a ſtrong attraction, to bolh ſher and phlogiſton in their common ſtate; in which caſe, they will reſemble two ſfixed particles of matter, ſurrounded with a compound of æther and phlogiſton; if the æther were excited particularly to ſurround one fixed particle, the other, being deprived of its ſhare of that æther, would exert its full force, upon the phlogiſton, and attract it around itſelf. Thus, 22. lron, is ſuch a compoſition, that it naturally attracts both æther and phlogiſton. If one ol thoſe active fluids be excited at one end oſ a rod ol iron, it will attract all the ſimilar particles, near it. into arrangement; while the olber fluid will become more powerfully attracted, at the other end ol the rod, than uſual, by the whole attraction of thal end, being then exerted upon it alone; therefore it will form an atmoſphere at that end, and tht rod will become muguelic. ò no . 23. If the ætherial end of this magnet, be applied to the end of another iron rod in its natural ſtate, it will attract and excite all the phlogiſton o that natural rod to that end, and all its æthes will recede to ibe olher, and form an ætherial atmoſphere; in conſequence of which, this ſecond rod will become a magnet alſo. 24. The ætherial pole therefore, is like a particle of the earthy principle, as being a fixed centre with an atmoſphere of æther; inſeparable, on account of the ſtrong natural attraction of the iron: and the phlogiſtic pole, will reſemble a particle of cthe acidifying principle. The oppoſite poles, like the contrary principles, ſtrongly attracting each other, but refuſing every connexion with ſimilar poles. 25. Theſe two different magnetic atmoſpheres, cannot ſeparate from their reſpective poles, by uniting, becauſe, they botb are equally attracted by the iron, either ſingly, or combined: therefore, their attracting each other, does not prevent their being ſtill attracted, and retained, by the iron. 26. Compound bodies, containing either æther, or phlogiſton in a ſtate of ſome activity, in ſome meaſure reſemble the fixed principles, as having an attraction to active particles of the contrary hind; and by a proper excitement, they may be made to attract thoſe oppoſite particles, into an atmoſpheric form around them. For inſtance, 27. Sulphur, contains much phlogiſton; and being always naturally ſurrounded by both æther and phlogiſton in their common ſtate, when its ſurface is excited, it will attract an atmoſphere oſ æther; and the phlogiſton, naturally combined with that æther, by being thus ſeparated, will become equally excited; but the ſulphur hath no attraction for pblogiſion, therefore it muſt unite itſelf to the ſurface of the rubber. But in this caſe, the quantity of æthber being great, and the degree of excitement, which the phlogiſton of the ſulphur is capable of giving, being ſmall, the attraction of arrangement of that ætber muſt be leſs, than the attraction of union to phlogiſton; as being extended furtber from the exciting ſurface, rban wbere the attraction of arrangement, ceaſes to be moſt powerful: in conſequence of which, its external particles will ſtrongly attract the external particles of the phlogiſton ſeparated from it, or excited to the ſurface of the rubber; and when that union is deſtroyed by the ſeparation of the rubber, from the ſurface of the ſulphur which it excites, the attraction of union, of the æther, to the oppoſite principle, being left in full force, it will immediately attract an external atmoſpbere of phlogiſton, from the æther and phlogiſton ſupplied by ſurrounding bodies, in their common ſtate; which phlogiſton it will take along with it: at the ſame time, that the phlogiſton excited to the rubber, will ſurround itſelf with the æther, diſengaged from that phlogiſton which now forms the external atmoſphere of the ſulphur: ſo that the ſulphur will have attracted to its ſurface, an atmoſphere of æther ſurrounded by another of phlogiſton, and be negatively electrified; while its rubber, will poſſeſs an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, with an external one of æther, and be poſitively electriſied. 28. Glaſi 28. Glgſs, on the contrary, by friction, will attract to its ſurface an atmoſphere of phlogiſton, which will aſſume an external atmoſphere of æther; uhile the oppoſite active principles, ſeparated from thoſe, will form an electric atmoſphere of æther, enveloped with an external one of phlogiſton, on the rubber. So that, 29. Sulphur, in its electric ſtate, reſembles a particle of earth in its alkaline, or aeriform ſtate; being a fixed centre, with an internal atmoſphere of æther, attracting an external one oſ phlogiſton: and glaſs, when excited to become electric, is like a particle of the acidifying principle, in its acid, or aeriform ſtate. The two fixed principles, in theſe ſtates, will attract each other, unite, and diſengage, at leaſt part of their external atmoſpheres: but the oppoſite electric atmoſpheres, will botb unite with their contraries and ſotally ſeparate in the ſtate of fire, or light; becauſe, they were not ſo ſtrongly attracted, by their reſpective exciting ſurfaces, as to be inſeparable; thoſe ſurfaces, in reality, only exciting them by virtue oſ the active principle, moſt excited and powerful in each. 30. Æther and phlogiſton in very different ſtates of excitement, have no action upon each other; for if æther be greatly excited, and phlogiſton but gently ſo, the attraction of arrangemeni between the particles of æther, will not give place to the weaker attraction of union, of the ſlightly excited particles of phlogiſton: ſo that in fact, a needle may be ſurrounded with a magnetic atmoſphere, an electric atmoſphere, with light, with fire, with air, and at the ſame time, with odorous particles, flowing off, or ſurrounding it in every direction, none of which, interſere with the other, but all preſerve their peculiar properties, and produce their proper effects, without interrupting each other. 31. When ætber and phblogiſion combine and ſeparate, form ſolid bodies or principles, they may become exciling baſes to each other; in ſuch a caſe, if the phlogiſton be moſt excited, or active, it appears probable, that they form Fire, qchich, be that as it may, is certainly a compound oſ the two active ſubtile principles, and is capable of pervading every ſubſtance, and is ſubject to the laws of fluidity; having however, a peculiar attraction, or l power of combination with the active principles oſ all bodies. 32. By this general attraction to active particles, of both kinds, fire not only flows readily into the ſpaces left between the lines they form by arrangement, but alſo inſinuates itſelf between each particle; in conſequence of which, the atmoſpheres they form, become extended, and their attraction to their reſpective centres weakened; ſo that atmoſpheres of the contrary kinds, which before, were inactive, having as great an attraction to their reſpective centres, as to each other, now being further removed from thoſe centres, their attraction of union, or tendency to unite with each other, becomes greater, than their attraction of arrangement; in conſequence of which, they will now attract and decompoſe each other, firſt drawing their reſpective centres, or fixed principles into contact, and then leaviug them, combined together, to unite themſelves, and paſs off, in the ſtate of Fire, or light. In cvery caſe however, its combinations ſeem to be thoſe of neceſſity, owing to the quantity of it preſent, as it readily leaves bodies, howſocver accumulated, to ſl into other bodies, containing a leſs quantity of it: except thoſe, containing much æther, with which it ſeems to have a peculiar affinity; and which ſeems to prove the conjecture, that the phlogiſion, entering into its compoſition, is more excited, or active, than its æther. 33. When æther and phlogiſton are ſeparated from their fixed principles, and combine, in a certain manner, they form Light; which, paſſes unaltered, and uninterrupted through bodies containing much æther, as ſeeming to have no attraction to them. But thoſe ſubſtances which contain much phlogiſton, attract and detain it in it paſſage through them; by which detention, it loſes its peculiar arrangement and properties, and is changed into beat, or fire; which gives ſufficient room to conjecture, that the ætber, partly compoſing Light, is more excited, or active, or expoſed to action, than its other part, its phlogiſton is: and, as fire and light are compoſed of the ſame principles, and are convertible the one into ibe otber, it ſeems probable, that their peculiar properties as fire, or light, depend upon the phlogiſion being moſt active, or moſt expoſed to action when forming ſire, and when the ætber is moſt ſo, they become Light. Therefore we may ſuppoſe, that 34. Different particles of Light, have different proportions of ætber; and that the different ſtates, or degrees of excitement of that æther, produce rays oſ light, acting upon the optic nerves with ſuch different degrees of force, as to produce the ſenſations of different colours; therefore, 35. Bodies, compoſed with phlogiſton, will naturally attract to their ſurfaces, the every where ſurrounding æther, and rbat ætber will be in different ſtates of excitement, according to the ſtate oſ the combined phlogiſton of the body. When a ray of light falls upon a body of this kind, thoſe particles of that light, whoſe æther is in a ſimilar ſtate of excitement, with the æther ſurrounding the body, will be completely repelled, or reflected, and the body will appear to be of the particular colour, which that reflected ray, naturally excites in the eye: while the other rays, will be parily absorbed, and by being mixed together, will product 304ſ RECAPITULATION. beat, or fire; and, being partly reflected, but with leſs force, or velocity, than the other particular kind, would produce a dull white, did not that olher ray, more perfectly and potently reflected overpower it. Therefore 'tis probable, that, 36. No bodies reflect any certain ray, or appear of any diſtinct colour, but thoſe ſurrounded with æther, in a ſtuce of excitement, ſimilar, and equal to the excitement of the æther, of ſome certain rays, or particles of light; which particles, by that means are reſlected with that degree of force, or velocity neceſſary to produce the ſenſation, or diſtinct idea of a certain colour; in all other ſtates, the rays of light are ſo reflected, as to produce the ſenſation oſ white, of different degrees of intenſity, proportionate to the force with which they are reflected; or if a pblogiſtic body, hath no ætherial atmoſphere, or none capable of reflecting any of them, they will be abſorbed and changed into fire, and the fubſtance will appear to be black, and become heated, in proportion to the quantity of light abſorbed. 