VARD COLL LIBRARY THE GIFT OF  PERCIVAL ME OF BOSTON Class of 1882 NEWTONIAN SYSTENM n OF H I L O S O P HVY Adapted to the Cupacities of DUNG LADIES AND GENTLEMEI And familiariZcd and made entertaining, r Objects with which they are int mately acquainted: Being the Subſtance of Six Lectures, Read to a Select Company of Friends, BY TOM TELELESCOP E, 4. M. ſt collected and methodized by the late M Newberry, for the Inſtruction and rational Entc ainment of the Youth of theſe Kingdoms. u Illuſtrated wit Copperplates. ANXEVW EDITION, nſed and enriched by an Account of the late ne Philoſophical Dilcoveries, BY WILLIAM MAGNET, r. L.s. ceæ U, vormm. L OND ON.: nted for OGILVY and SPEARE, Middle- Ro. HOLBORN. 1794. NTRODUCTION, page 1. LECTURE I. Of Matter and Motion. he Laws of Motion, age 5. Attraction and Gravitation, 8s.Figure of the Earth, Magnet or Loadſ one, II Coheĩion, 12The Sphere of Attraction and of Repulſion, 13. ECTURE II. Oof the Univerſe, and particu-  larly of the Solar Syſtem. he Horĩzon, 15.The Reſſecting Teleſcope, 17. The Refracting Telsicope 18.Fixed Stars, 19. qT he Orrery 22.Tne Sun and Planets, 23. o mets, a5Ihe Moon and Tides, 25. Eclipſes of the Sun and Moon, 26.The Motion of the Earth, 30. The Armillar Sphere, 30. The Terreſtrial Globe, 32.The Seaſons, 33 Velocity of Light, 34. ECTURE III. Oſ ihe Air, Aimoſphere, he Four Elements, 38.The Air and Atmoſphere, ao. The Triple WeatherGlaſs. 42 Elaſticity of the Air, 44. The Air-Gun. 46 Earthquakes, 47. Water, 48. Light and Sound, 48. Echo, 40- The Air-Pump, sO Ventilators, 54.- ſhe Alr Balloon, 55. in Winds, 55 Miſts, Fogs, and Clouds, 59.5 Rain, 60. Thunder and Lightning, 63, 70. The Electrical Machine, 64- Snow and Hail, 67.Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights, 67.lIgnis Fatuus, or Jack-with-a- Lantern, 68. ainbow, 69. Halos, 70. ECTURE IV. Oſ Mountains, Springs, Rivers, and the Sca. ſountaims, 74- Burning Mountains, 78.Mount Etna, 79.Hoecla, 80. Veſuvius, 81 -Springs, 82.Rivers and Lakes, 84- Iſic Sca, 65. ECTURE V. OF Minerals, Vegetables, , and Animals. arths, 88.Sand, Gravel, Earth, and Rocks, 89. Foſſils, 90.Vulgar and tones, 0.Salts, ꝗI. Minerul Subſtances, φ1.Plants, 93.Animals, 10O The Microſcope, 104. ECTURE VI. Of the Five Senſes of Man, and of his Underſlanding. rigin of our Ideas, II I.Seeing, 115. Separating Colours by the Priſm, 118. Hearing, 120.Smelling, 121. Taſting, 122.Touching, 125 Heat and Cold, 126.Pleaſure and Pain, 128. Of the Underſtanding, 120. Being the Subſtance of A LE TTER to the Hon.  xææ DEAR SIR, AM deſired by the Marchioneſs oſ Setſtar to give you ſome account oſ thoſe young Gentlemen and Ladies whom you ſaw enter the ſaloon the morning you left us, and who came to his Lordſhip's ſeat on an adventure the moſt extraordinary and the moſt to be admired of any l ever knew. You may remember it was holidaytime, and theſc little gentry being come from ſchool, met ſirſt at the Counteſs of Twilights to divert themſelves; where they were ſo divided in their taſte for amuſements, that warm debates enſued. One propoſed Threading the Needle, another Hot Cockles, a third Shuttle-cock, a fourth Blind Man's Buſf; and at laſt Cards B were mentioned. Maſter Teleſcope, a voung gentleman of diſtinguiſhed abilities, ſat ſilent, and heard all with complacency and good temper till this diverſion was propoſed; but then he ſtarted from his ſeat, and begged they would think of ſome more innocent amuſement. Playing at cards for money, ſays he, is ſo nearly allied to covetouſneſs and cheating, that I abhor it; and have often wondered, when I was at Bath with my papa, how people, ſeemingly of years of diſcretion, could ſo far miſtake themſelves and abandon common ſenſe, as to lead a young urchin juſt breeched, or a little doddle- my-lady in hanging ſleeves, up to a gaming table, to play and bet for ſhillings, crowns, and perhaps guineas, among a circle of ſharpers. Parents, continued he, might almoſt as well teach their children to thicve as to game; for they are kindred employments, and generally terminate in the ruin of both fortune and character. Lady Twilight, who is no friend to the modern modes of education, ſmiled at this young gentleman's remark, and deſired him to point out ſome diverſion himſelf. Tis impoſſible for me, Madam. ſays he, to find out an amuſement ſuitable to the taſte of the company, unleſs I was perſcctly acquainted with their diſpoſitions; but were I to chuſe, I ſhould prefer thoſe which not only divert the mind, but improve the underſtanding: and ſuch are many of the diverſions at the ſchool where I am placed. We often play at ſnam Orations, comical Diſputes, meaſuring of Land and Houſes, tacing the Heights and Diſtances of Mountains and Steeples, ſolving Problems and Paradoxes on Orreries, Glohes, and Maps, and ſometimes at Natural Philoſophy, which I think is very entertaining, and at the ſame time extremely uſeful; for whether our knowledge is acquired by theſe amuſements and reading little hooks, or by ſerious and elaborate ſtudy, what is obtained will be equally ſerviceable: nay, perhaps that which is acquired in the enterraining manner may have the advantage; for, as it is conveyed to the mind with a train of pleaſing ĩdeas, it will be the more permanent and laſting, and the eaſier called up by the memory to our aſſiſtance. The Counteſs was very deſirous of knowing what ſort of diverſion could be made of Natural Philoſophy: and finding her young viſitors in the ſame diſpoſition, ſhe conducted them to the Marquis of Setſtar's, that they might have the uſe of proper inſtruments. As my Lord Marquis was engaged in compuny, Iady Tuwilight, though nearly related to his Lordſhip, would not diſturb him, but led them through the ſaloon into a private parlour, where our little Philoſopher, at the requeſt of her Ladyſhip, immediately opened the Lecture, without making idle excuſes, or waiting for farther ſolicitations; which he knew would be ill manners. Of Matter and Motion. BY!I Matter, my Joung friends, we mean the ſubſtance of all things, or that oſ which all bodies are compoſed, in whatever form or manner they may preſent themſelves to our ſenſes: for this top, that ivory ball, the hill before us, and all things you ſee, arè made of matter differently formed. As to Motion, I may ſavo myſelf and you the trouble of explaining that; for every Lhoy who can whip his top knouws what motion is. Matter, or Body, is indifſerent to motion or reſt. As for example, when I whip my top, it runs round, or is in motion; but when I lcave oſf whipping, the top falls down, and is at reſt. When a body is in motion, as much force is required to make it reſt as was required w hile it was at reſt, to put it in motion. Thus: Suppoſe a boy ſtrikes a bull from a trap, and another ſtands eloſe by to catch it, it will require as much ſtrength or force to ſtop that ball, or put it in a ſtate of reſt, as the other gave to put it in motion; allowing for the diſtance the two boys ſtand apart. Ko body or part of matter can give itſelf either motion or reſt: and therefore a body at reſt will remain ſo for ever, unleſs it be put in motion by ſome external cauſe; and a body in motion will move for ever, unleſs ſome external cauſe ſtops it. This ſeemed ſo abſurd to Maſter Wilſon, that he burſt into a loud laugh. What! ſays he, ſhall any body tell me that my hoop or my top will run for ever, when I know by daily experience that they drop of themſelves, without being touched by any body ? At this our little Philoſopher was angry, and having commanded ſilence; Don't expoſe your ignorance, Tom Wilſon, for the ſake of a laugh, ſays he; if you intend to go through my Courſe of Philoſophy, and to make yourſelf acquainted with the nature of things, you muſt prepare to hear what is more extraordinary than this. When you ſay that nothing touched the top or the hoop, you forget the friction or rubbing againſt the ground they run upon, and the reſiſtance they meet with from the air in their courſe, which is very conſiderable, though it has eſcaped your notice. Somewhat too might tween the top, or the hoop, and the earth; but that you are not yet able to comprehend, and therefore we ſhall proceed in our Lecture. A body in motion will always move on in a ſtraight line, unleſs it be turned out of it by ſome external cauſe. Thus we ſee that a marble ſhot upon the ice, if the ſurface be very ſmooth, will continue its motion in a ſtraight line, till it is ſtopt by the friction of the ice and air, and the force of attraction and gravitation. The ſwiftneſs of motion is meaſured by diſtance of place, and the length of time in which it is performed. Thus, if a cricketball and a fives-ball move each of them twenty yards in the ſame time, their motions are equally ſwift; but if the fivesball move two yards while the crick et-ball is moving one, then is the motion of the fives-ball twice as ſwift as the other. But the quantity of motion is meaſured by the ſwiftneſs of motion as above deſcribed, and the quantity of matter moved, conſidered together. For inſtance: If the ericket-ball be equal in bulk and weight to the fives-ball, and move as ſwift, then it hath an equal quantity of motion. But iſ the ericket-ball be twice as big and heavy as the fives-ball, and yet move tqually ſwift, it hath double the quantity of motion; and ſo in proportion. All bodies have a natural tendency, attraction, or gravitation towards each other. Here Tom Wilſon, again laughing, told the com pany that Philoſophy was made up of nothing but hard words. That is becauſe you have not ſenſe enough to enquire into, and retain the ſignification of words, ſays our Philoſopher. All words, continued he, are difficult till they are explained; and when that is done, we ſhall find that gravity or gravitation will be as eaſily underſtood as praiſe or commendation; and attraction as caſily as correction, which you deſerve, Tom Wilſon, for your impertine nce. Gravity, my dear friends, is that univerſal diſpoſition of matter which inclines or carries the leſſer part towards the centre of the greater part; which is called weight or gravitation in the leſſer body, but attraction in the greater, becauſe it draws, as it were, the leſſer body to it. Thus, all bodies in or near the earth's ſurface have a tendency, or ſeeming inclination, to deſcend towards its middle part or centre; and but for this principle in nature, the earth (conſidering its form and ſituation in the univerſe) could not ſubſiſt as it is, fór we all ſuppoſe the earth to be nearly round (nay, we are ſure it is ſo, for Captain Cook, and other navigators, you know, have round it); and as it is ſuſpended in mighty void or ſpace, and always tion, what ſhould hinder the ſtones, and other parts of matter falling fr ſurface, but the almighty arm of G this principle or univerſal law in⸗ of attraction and gravitation, which eſtabliſhed to keep the univerſe in To illuſtrate and explain what I hav let us ſuppoſe the following figuri the earth and ſeas: let Tom Wilſor at this point of the globe or earth ſite part of the earth, with his feet (as they muſt be) towards us: if Tom drop an orange out of his hand, it will fall down towards Hal: and if Hal drop an orange, it will fall ſeemingly upwards (if I may ſo expreſs myſel) towards Tom: and if theſe oranges had weight and power ſufficient to diſplace the other particles of matter of which the earth is compoſed, ſo as to make way to the centre, they would there unite together, and remain fixed: and they would then loſe their power of gravitation, as being at the centre of gravity and unable to fall, and only retain in themſelves the power of attraction. This occaſioned a general laugh; and Tom Wilſonſtarting up, aſked how Maſter Thompſon was to ſtand with his feet upwards, as here repreſented, without having any thing to ſupport his head? Have atience, ſays the little Philoſopher, and I will tell you: but pray behave with good manners, Maſter Wilſon, and don't laugh at every thing you cannot comprehend. This difficulty is ſolved; and all the ſeeming confuſion which you apprehend of bodies flying off from each other is removed, by means of this attraction and gravitation. Aſk any of the ſailors who have been the people on the part of the globe overagainſt us do not walk upon their heads, though the earth is round; and though their heels are oppoſite ours, they are in no more danger of falling into the mighty ſpace beneath them, than we are of falling (or rather rifing, I muſt call it here) up to the moon or the ſtars. But beſides this general law of attraction and gravitation, which affects all bodies equally and univerſally, there are particular bodies that attract and repel each other, as may be ſeen by this Magnet or Loadſtone, which has the property of attracting or bringing iron to it with one end, and repelling or forcing it away with the other end: and Sam Jones's knife, which was whet on a loadſtone ſome years ago, ſtill retains the power, you ſce, of picking up needles and ſmall pieces of iron. But this is but a ſmall part of the virtues of the Loadſtone; for until its uſe was diſcovered, ſailors never ventured with their ſhips out of ſight of land. Vou certainly Joke Sir, ſays Hal Thompſon, for it is impoſſible that a piece of iron like that can be of any ſervice in navigating thoſe large ſhips I ſaw ſome time ago. I am ſorry, replies our Philoſopher, that you, like moſt ignorant people, ſhould think all things which you do not know the cauſe of, impoſſible; but I will ſoon ſhew you, for it is very ſimple. They firſt procure a iece of ſteel, made ſomething like a needle, but flat, about four inches long: this they rub with the Loadſtone, and then balance it exactly on two pivets, ſo that it may turn round freely. One of the ends of the needle thus balanced, will always point towards the north. This needle, when put in a box, is called the mariners compaſs. Thus the ſailors can ſteer to any part of the world; which they could not do without the help of this piece of iron. When bodies are ſo attracted by each other as to be united or brought into cloſe contact, they then adhere or cohere together, ſo as not to be eaſily ſeparated: and this is called in Philoſophy the Power of Coheſion, and is undoubtedly that principle which binds large bodies together; for all large bodies are made up of atoms or particles inconceiveably ſmall. And this coheſion will be always proportioned to the number of particles or quantity of the ſurface of bodies that come into contact, or touch each other; for thoſe bodies that are of a ſpherical form will not adhere ſo ſtrongly as thoſe that are flat or ſquare, becauſe they can only touch each other at a certain point; and this is the reaſon why the particles of water and quickſilver, which are globular or round, are ſo eaſily ſeparated with a touch, while thoſe of metals and ſome other bodies. are not to be parted but with great force. To give us a familiar inſtance of this coheſion of matter, our Philoſopher took two leaden balls, and filing a part off each, ſo that the two ſlat parts might come into cloſe contact, he gently twiſted and preſſed them together; and they united ſo firmly, that it required conſiderable force to get them aſunder. The ſame force applied to two different bodies will always produce the ſame quantity of motion in each of them. To prove this, we put Maſter Jones into a boat, which (including his ovn weight) weighed ten hundred, on the Thames by the MillBank; and on the Lambeth ſide, juſt oppofite, we placed another boat of one hundred weight, with a ſtring tied to it. This ſtring Maſter Jones pulled in the other boat; and we obſerved that as the boats approached each other, the ſmall boat moved ten feet for every foot the other moved: which proves what we have before obſerved as to the quantity of motion. C l Attraction is the ſtronger the nearer the attracting bodies are to each other; and in different diſtances of the ſame bodies it decreaſes as the ſquares of the diſtance between the centres of thoſe bodies increaſe. For if two bodies at a given diſtance attract each other with a certain force, ar half the diſtance they will attract each other with four times that force. But this I ſhall further explain in my next courſe of Lectures. LECTURE II. Oſ ihe Univerſe, and porticularly of the Solar Syſtem. HE laſt Lecture was read at the Marquis of Setſtar's, who was ſo well pleaſed at theſe young gentlemen meeting thus to improve themſelves, that he ordered them to be elegantly treated with tarts, ſweetmeats, ſyllabubs, and ſuch other dainties as his Lordſhip thought were moſt proper for youth: and I muſt obſerve that the Marchioneſs did them the honour of her company, and was particularly pleaſed with the converſation of Maſter Teleſcope. As it was a moonlight night, her Ladyſhip, after ſupper, led them to the top of the manſion, where his Lordſnip has an obſervatory, furniſhed with all the inſtruments neceſſary for aſtronomical and philoſophical obſervations; and the place itſelf is the beſt that can be conceived for enquiries of this kind, and for meditation. To ſee an extenſive horizon shus ſhaded by the brow of night, and at intervals brightened up by the borrowed light of the moon dancing among the clouds, was inexpreſſilly pleaſing. Nothing was heard but a gentle brecæe whiſpering the top of the battlements; the dying murmurs of a diſtant caſcado; the melancholy hootings of the bird of night, who kept watch in an ivy tower near us; the manſion clock, that recorded the time; and old Echo, who repeated the hours from the ſide of a rock, where ſhe has ſecluded herſelf ever ſince the deluge. Night, the nurſe of Nature, huſhed all things elſe to ſilenceDBut ſilence was ſoon broke by our Philoſopher, who thus began his Lecture. Look round, my dear friends, ſays he, you ſee the carth ſeems to be bounded at an equal diſtance from us every way, where it appears to meet the ſky, that forms this beautiful arch or concave over our heads. Now that diſtant round where we loſe ſight of the earth, is called the horiæon; and when the ſun, moon, and ſtars emerge from beneath, and come into our ſight, we ſay they are riſen, or got above the horion. For all this gilorious canopy beſpangled with lights that bedeck the ſky and illuminate the earth, as the Sun, the Fixed Stars, the Comets, and Planets (to which laſt our Earth and Moon belong) This teleſcope, from its conſtruction, magnifies more than any other kind. It contains, within ſide, two metallic ſpeculums, a large and a ſmall one. Theſe, with two glaſſes contained in the ſmall tube, marked B, ſerve ſo to reflect and refract the rays of light iſſuing from the object, as to ſhew them under a magnified appearance. In uſing the teleſcope, to adjuſt it exactly to your ſight, you turn the long ſcrew C on the ſide, while your eye is Iooking through at 8, and the end A turned towards the object, till you can ſee the object you want to examine in the moſt perfect manner. In the Refracting Teleſcope. vhich conſiſts of glaſſes only, diſtant objects alſo ſeem to be both magnified and brought nearer to the ſight. The large end muſt be placed pointing toward any diſtant object which we wiſh to ſee more diſtinctly. In the other end is a tube which ſlides in or out of the teleſcope, and is adjuſted to the proper diſtance by gently ſliding it inwards Ol or outwards. Now if you Iook through the glaſs, at the end to that part of the heavens to which I have pointed it, or indeed any other part, yon will perceive more ſtars than vou ſaw before with your eye alone. Theſe are fixed ſtars, and are called fixed, becauſe they always keep the ſame diſtance from one another, and the ſame diſtance from the ſun, which is ſuppoſed to be alſo fixed; and were he placed at the immenſe diſtance they are at, would probably appear no bigger than one of them. Hence ſome philoſophers have concluded, and I think not without reaſon, that every fixed ſtar is a ſun that has a ſyſtem of planets revolving round it, like our ſolar ſyſter. And iIf ſo. how immenſely great, how wonderfully glorious is the ſtructure of this univerſe, which contains many thouſand worlds, large as ours, ſuſpended in æther, rolling like the earth round their ſeveral ſuns, and ſilled with animals, plants, and minerals, all perhaps different from ours, but all intended to magnify the Almighty Architect; cwho weighed the mountains in his cgolden ſcales, who meaſured the ocean in cthe hollow of his hand, who drew out the c heavens as a curtain, who maketh the e clouds his chariot, and walketh upon the cc wings of the wind. i r The fervor and air of piety with which he delivered this, ſilenced all his companions, and gave infinite ſatisfaction to the Marchioneſs. Maſter Wilſon, who haid before been very impertinent, began now to conſider himſelf a fool in compariſon oſ our philoſopher; and as Maſter Teleſcope had mentioned the ſolar ſyſtem, he begged that he would explain it to him. That I will with pleaſure, replied the Philoſopher, if you will be kind enough to hand me that Orrery that is in the corner of the obſervatory, and place it on the table: but firſt let me obſerve to you, that of theſe heavenly bodies ſome are luminous, and lend us their own light, as doth the Sun and Fixed Stars; while others are opaque, and have no light of their own to give us, but reflect to us a part of the light they receive from the ſun. This is particularly the caſe with reſpect to the planets and comets of our ſolar ſyſtem, which ail give us a portion of the light they have received, and we in return reflect to them a portion of ours; for I make no douht but cthoſe who inhabit the moon have as much oſ the ſun's light reflected to them from the earth, as we have reflected to us from the moon. The inhabitants of the moon! ſays Maſter Lovelace, with ſome emotion: Whither will you lead me? What! are the ſtories that have been told of the Man in the Moon, then, true? I don't know what ſtories you have heard, replied the philoſopher; but it is no extravagant conjecture to ſuppoſe that the moon is inhabited as well as the earth; though what ſort of inhabitants they are, we on the earth are unable to diſcover. As to my part, I am loſt in this boundleſs abyſs. It appears to me that the ſun, which giVes life to the world, is only a beam of the glory of God; and the air which ſupports that life is, as it were, the breath of his noſtrils. lli Do thou, O God! ſupport me while I gaze with aſtoniſtrment at thy wonderful productions; ſinee it is not idle impertinent curioſity that leads me to this enquiry, but a fervent deſire to ſee only the ſkirts of thy glory, that I may magniſy thy power and thy mercy to mankind. Of the Solar Syſtem. Now, by means of this Orrery, I will ĩlluſtrate our Solar Syſtem; which con- tains the ſun (marked a) in the centre, and the planets and comets moving about it. s d b a c. e & But how is it, then, ſays Tom Wilſon. that we daily ſce the ſun, move round the horizon? Your queſtion, replies Maſter Teleſcope, is very natural; for it was an opinion held by the ancients ſome thouſand years, that the earth was the centre of thè univerſe, and the ſun and planets revolved round it: but I think this is eaſily refuted by a matter which happens very oſten in a kitchen; I mean a ſmall bird roaſting on a ſpit before a large fire. Would not you think it very abſurd if the cook ſhould ſet about contriving a method to make the grate with the large fire move round the ſmall bird on the ſpit? Certainly I ſhould, anſwers Tom Wilſon; for ſurely it would be better for the bird to turn round before the fire, than the fire to turn round the bird. Very well, then, ſays our philoſopher, we have certainly reaſon to believe that the ſun is the centre of our ſyſtem, and the earth and other planets move round it. But you will underſtand this better if you look at the plate I have drawn of the ſun and the planets, in their ſeveral orbits or eircles, with their reſpective diſtances from the ſun, and from each other; together with the orbit of a comet. The planets, as I have already obſerved, are bodies that appear like ſtars, but are not luminous; that is, they have no light in themſelves, though they give us light; for they ſhine by reflecting the light of the ſun. Of theſe there are two kinds: the one called Primary, and the other Secondary planets. There are ſeven primary planets; and theſe are marked on the Orrery as follows: Mereury b, Venusc c, the Earth &, Mars e, Jupiter ſ, Saturn g, and the Georgium Sidus (which, being of ſuch recent diſcovery, is not repreſented in this Orrery.) The laſt of theſe was diſcovered only a few years ſince by Dr. Herſchel, and calleq by him, out of reſpect to his preſent Majeſty King George III. the Georgium Sidus, or Georgian. All which move round the ſun, as yYou ſee by my turning the winch of the Orrery; whereas the ſecondary planets move round other planets. The Moon, you know (which is one oſ the ſecondary planets) moves round the Earth: four moons, or ſatellites, as they are frequently called, move round Jupiter; five round Saturn; and only two have yet been diſcovered to move round the Georgian; though we have great reaſon to beIieve there are more; but from the immenſe diſtance of that planet, we have not yet perceived them. Thus has the Almighty provided light for thoſe regions that lie at ſuch an immenſe diſtance from the ſun. I have here made out a table of the periods, diſtances, and diameters of the ſeveral planets. Mercury Diftances from] Diameter Annual periodl the Sun in in Ruground the Sun.  Engliſh miles. lifh miles. Mercury 87 d. 23 h. 32,000, 000] 2,600 Venus 224 d. 17 h. 59,000,000] 7,906 Earth 365 d. 6 h. 82,000,000 7,970 Mars 686.d. 23 h. 125,000,000 4,444 Jupiter 4,332 d. 12 h. 426,000,000  81, 000 Saturn 10,759 d. 7 h. 780,000, oo0  67,000 Georgian ſ 30,456 d. 2 h. 1,565.000,coo 25, 000 They all move round the ſun from weſt to eaſt; but in their progreſs do not deſcribe a perfect circle, but an orbit, a little inclining to an oval: the reaſon whereof I ſhall give you in a future Lecture. The comets move about the ſun in a long ĩſlender oval, of an amazing extent; one of the focuſes being near the centre of the ſun, and the ſhorteſt of the other far beyond the ſphere of the Georgian; ſo that the periodical revolutions of any are not performed in leſs than 70 or 8o years. But let us quit theſe bodies, of which we know ſo Iittle, and ſpeak of our old companion  æe Moon, with whom uwe ought to b oetter acquainted; ſince ſhe not only lignts us home in the night, but ſends her aid to get our ſhips out of the docks, and to bring in and carry out our hr ic. l rnerÆi merchandize; for without the aſfiſtance of Lady Luna you would have no tides. But more of this hereafterA little more now, if you pleaſe, ſays Tom Wilſon. What then, does the moon pour down water to occaſion the tides? I am at a loſs to underſtand you. No, replied our philoſopher, the moon does not pour down water to occaſion the tides; that were impoſſible: but ſhe, .by attracting the waters of the ſea, raiſes them higher; and that is the reaſon why the tides are always governed by the moon. The Moon's diameter is a, 180 miles: ſhe moves round the earth in the ſame manner as the earth does round the ſun; and performs her ſynodical motion, as it is called, in a29 days, 12 hours, and 44 minutes, though the periodical is 27 days, 7 hours, and 43 minutes. By this motion of the moon are occaſioned the eclipſes of the ſun and moon, and the different appearances, aſpects, or phaſes ſhe at different times puts on: for when the earth is ſo ſituated between the ſun and the moon. that we ſee all her enlightened parts, it is Full Moon: when the moon is ſo ſituated between the ſun and the earth that her enlightened parts are hid or turned from us, it is New Moon; and when her ſituatio ſ is ſuch that only a portion of her enlightened part is hid from us, we ſee a Horned Moon, a Half Moon, or a Gibbous Moon, according to the quantity of the enlightened part we can perceive. The total or longeſt eclipſe of the moon happens when the earth is directly berween the ſun and the moon, and prevents the light of the ſun from falling upon and being reflected by the moon; as vou will underſtand by looking at the figure I have here drawn. We will ſuppoſe the candle a, to be the un; the cricket-ball 4, to be the Earth; and the fives-ball , to be the Moon. A ſtring being tied to each of the balls, I tie them up to the ceiling, or any other ſupport, in a direct line from the light of the candle; the ericket-ball about eight inches . li D 2 from from the candle, and the fives-ball about two inches from the cricket-ball. Whenever the earth and moon come in the poſition of theſc balls, a total eclipſe of the moon enſues; becauſe the light of the candle (or ſun) ſhining on the cricket-ball (or the earth) totally obſcures or eclipſes the ſives-ball (ſor the moon); but if we move the fives-ball a little higher up, or lower down, ſo that the light from the candle may paſs by the cricket-ball and ſhine upon part of the fives-ball, it will of coure be only partially eclipſed. An Eclipſe of the Sun is occaſioned by the moon's being betwixt the ſun and the earth, and preventing the light of the ſun from coming to that part of the earth we inhabit: which you will immediately underſtand by looking at this cut, If the moon hides from us the whole body of the ſun, it is a total eclipſe; but if the wholc be not hid, it is a partial one. An eclipſe of the ſun never happens but at a new moon; nor one of the moon, but when ſhe is at the full. The moon, when ſeen through the teleſcope I ſhewed you ſome time ago, appears not much unlike our earth, as to matter and form; which you may perceive by this map of it. Tnhe bright parts are ſuppoſed to be the high illuminated tracts of land; as mountains, iſſlands, &c. and the dark parts, it is imagined, are the ſeas, lakes, and vales; which reſlect but little light. But of this there is no certain li The order of the ſigns of the Zodiac; which we ſhalt hereafter explain. ll But beſides this annual motion or revolution about the ſun in the line of the Ecliptic, the earth turns round upon its own axis in about 24 hours; io that it hath two motions at one and the ſame time. The Marchioneſs, whoſe curioſity had kept her there during the Lecture, deſired to have this explained. That ſhall be done, Madam, in a minute, ſays the little philoſopher, and I can never have a better opportunity; for I ſee the Duke of Galaxy is coming to make your Ladyſhip a viſit :? his coach is juſt entering the iron gates, and will preſently wheel round the circle, or rather oval, before the portico. Pray, Madam, fix your eyes on one of the wheels; which you may do as it is moon-light, and you will perceive it turn round upon its own axis, at the ſame time that it runs round the circle before the houſe. This double motion of the wheel very fitly repreſents the two motions of the earth, which have heretofore been explained by the motion of a bowl on a bowling-green; but I helieve your Ladyſhip will think the inſtance or example before us is better. It is hard to reaſon from ſimilitudes, becauſe they generally fail in VYour Ladyſhip knows perfectly that the earth, turning on its own axis, makes the difference of the day and night: you will therefore give me leave, Madam, to addreſs my diſcourſe to theſe young gentlemen and ladies, who may be ignorant of this branch of philoſophy. That the turning of the earth on its own axis makes the difference of day and night is moſt certain; for in thoſe parts of the earth which are turned toward the ſun it will be day, and of courſe it muſt be night in thoſe which are turned from it. ut the length of days and nights, and the variations of the ſeaſons, are occaſioned by the annual revolution of the earth about the ſun in the Ecliptic; ſor as the earth in this courſe keeps its axis equally inclined everywhere to the plane of the ecliptic and parallel to itſelf, the earth in this direction has ſometimes one of its poles neareſt the ſun, and ſometimes the other. Hence heat and cold, ſummer and winter, and length of days and nights. Vet notwithſtanding theſe effects oſ the ſun, which give us light and heat, his diſtance from us is ſO great, that a cannon-ball would be twenty-five years coming from thence to the earth, even if it flew with the ſame velocity as it does when it is firſt diſcharged from the mouth of a cannon. Here they were all amazed; and Lady Caroline ſaid this doctrine could not be true; for if the ſun were at that immenſe diftance, his light could not reach us every morning in the manner it does.I beg your pardon, Madam, replied the philoſopher, your Ladyſhip's miſtake ariſes from our not knowing, or at leaſt not conſiderIng the amazing velocity of light, which flies after the rate of 200,000 miles in a ſecond of time; ſo that notwithſtanding a cannon-hall would be twenty-five years in coming from the ſun, the lighr finds its way to us in about eight minutes. But if you are ſo ſurprized at the ſun's diſtance, Madam, what think you oſ the fixed ſtars, which are ſo far remote from us, that a cannon-ball, flying with the ſame velocity as when firſt diſcharged, would be 700,000 years in coming to the earth? Yet many of theſe ſtars are ſeen, and even without the uſe of teleſcopes. There are other things obſervable in our Solar Syſtem, which, if attended to, will excite our admiration: ſuch as the dark ſpots which are ſeen on the Sun's ſurface, and which often change their place, number, and magnitude. Such alſo is the amazing Ring which encompaſſes the body of the planet Saturn; and ſuch are the belts that gird the hody of Jupiter: concerning all which there are various conjectures; but conjectures in philoſophy are rarely to be admitted. LECTU RE Il. Oſ ite dir, Amiſphire, and Metiors. V luar was ſaid by the Marchioneſs and Lady Caroline in favour of Maſter Teleſcope, excited the Duke of Galaxy's curioſity to ſee him; and the next morning he came into the Obſervatory juſt as thè Lecture began. The preſence of ſo great a perſonage as the Duke put our young gentlemen into ſome confufion, and ſeveral of them offered to go away; which the Duke obſerving, ſtepped into the next room; and Maſter Teleſcope took this opportunity to correct their folly. Gentlemen, ſays he, I am amazed at your meanneſs and ill manners. What ! becauſe the Duke does you the honour of a viſit, will you run away from him? There is nothing betrays a mean ſpirit and low education ſo much as this ridiculons awe and dread which ſome people ſhew in the company of their ſuperiors; and beſides, it is troubleſome; for the uneaſineſs one perſon is in, communicates itſelf to the reſt of the company, and abridges them of a portion of their pleaſure. The eaſier you appear in the company of the great, the more polite you will be eſteemed. None but a clown hangs down his head, and hides his face; for a gentleman always Iooks in the face of his ſuperior when he talks to him, and behaves with openneſſs and freedom. As to my part, I venerate his Grace; but then it is for his great worthineſs of character, which has engaged my affection, and inclines me to wiſh for his company, not to avoid it. Civility we owe to every one, and reſpect is due to the Great: it is claimed, and it is given, in conſequence of their ſuperior birth and fortune, but that is all; for our affection is only to be obtained by worthineſs of charadter. Birth and fortune are merely accidental, and maày happen to be the portion of a man without merit; but the man of genius and virtue is ennobled, as ĩit were, by himſelf, and is honoured not ſo much for his grandfather's greatneſs as his own. This reproof had its proper effect; for they all ſat down, and his Grace being returned, with Lady Caroline, our Philoſopher began his Lecture on the Nature and Properties of the Air, Atmoſphere, and Meteors contained therein. We have already conſidered the earth as a planet, ſays he, and obſerved its diurnal and annual motion; we are now to ſpealc of the materials of which it is compoſed, and of the Atmoſphere, and the Meteors that ſurround and attend it. In order to explain theſe effectually, ſays the Duke, you ſhould, I think, Sir, begin with an account of the firſt principles of the four Elements, which are Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, and then ſhew how they affect each other, and by their mutual aid give motion, life, and ſpirit to all things; for without fire, the water would aſſume a different form, and become ſolid ice; without water, the fire would ſcorch up the earth, and deſtroy both animals and plants; without air, the fire perhaps would be unable to execute its ofſice; nor without air could the water, though exhaled by the ſun into clouds, be diſtributed over the earth for the nouriſhment of plants and animals. Nor is the earth inactive, but lends her aid to the other elements. She filters, or ſtrains and purifies, the ſaltwater which runs from the ſea, and makes it freſh and fit for the uſe of animals and plants; and, by reflecting the ſun's beams, occaſions that warmth which nouriſhes all things on her ſurface; but which would be very Vinconſiderable and ſcarcely felt, if a man was placed on the highgſt mountain, O  the Air, Atmoſphere, &c. 39 in ſuch a ſituation as to be deprived of her reftection. All this, my Lord Duke, I have conſidered, replied the Philoſopher; and had thoughts of carrying it farther, and ſhewing how thoſe elements pervade and are become indeed conſtituent parts of the ſame body; for Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, are to be drawn even from a dry ſtick of wood. That two ſticks rubbed violently together will produce fire, is very well known; for coach or waggon wheels frequently take fire when not properly clouted with iron, and ſupplied with greaſe: and if pieces of wood, ſeemingly dry, be put into a glaſs retort over a furnace, you'll obtain both air and water; and then if you burn the wood to aſhes, and waſh out the ſalts with water, as the good women do when they make lye, the remaining part will be pure earth: and thus we can at any time draw the four elements out of a ſftick of wood. But as theſe ſpeculations are above the comprehenſion of ſome of the young gentlemen whom I have the honour to inſtruct, I ſhall defer the conſideration of ſuch minute and abſtruſe matters till another opportunity. Seience is to be taught as we teach children the uſe of their legs; they are at firſt ſnewn how to ſtand alone; after this, they are taught to walk with ſafety, and then ſuffered to run as faſt as they pleaſe: and I beg your Grace will permit me to purſue this method in the courſe of my Lectures. The Duke gave his aſſent with a nod; and our Philoſopher thus proceeded : The air is a light, thin, elaſtic or ſpringy body, which may be felt but not ſeen; it is fluid, and runs in a current like water (as you may perceive by opening the window); but it cannot, like water, be congealed into ice; and the Atmoſphere is that great body or ſhell of air which ſurrounds the earth, and which reaches many miles above its ſurface, as is kenown by conſidering the elaſticity or ſpringineſs of the air and its weight together for a column of air is of equal weight to a column of quickſilver of between 29 and 30 inches high. Now quickſilver being near fourteen times heavier than water, if the air was as heavy as water, the Atmoſphere would be about fourteen times higher than the column of quickſilver or about 34 fect; but the air is near 1000 times lighter than water; therefore the Atmoſphere muſt be many miles high, even at this rate of computing. And when with this you conſider the elaſticity of the air, which, when the preſſure of the incumbent Atmoſphere is taken taken oſf, will dilate itſelf ſo as to fill more than 150 times the ſpace it occupied before, you will perceive that the height of the Atmoſphere muſt be very great. For as the air is a ſpringy body, that part next the earth muſt be more denſe than the upper part, as being preſſed down by the air above it. Look at that hay-ſtack yonder, which the groom is cutting, and ou'll perceive that the hay at the bottom is much cloſer and harder to cut than that at the top, becauſe it has been preſſed into leſs ſpace than it otherwiſe would have occupied, by the other hay above it; and had not the whole ſtack been trodden and preſſed down by the men who made it, the difference would have been ſtill more conſiderable. The air, however, even near the earth, is not always in the ſame ſtate. It is ſometimes rarefied, and becomes lighter than at other times, as appears by the quickſilver's falling in the Barometer, and the rain's deſcending on the earth. llili It may be acceptable here, ſays the young Philoſopher, to explain the conſtruction of that triple weather-glaſs that I ſee hanging up before me. So walking up to it, he deſcribed it in the following manner:The uppermoſt inſtrument contained in the round braſs box, is called the Hygrometer, (marked a). It conſiſts of a braſſ plate, divided into degrees both ways, right and left, from o to 180. To the left is engraved Moiſt, and to the right Dry. In the center of the plate is fixed the beard of a wild oat, with a piece of ſtraw glued thereon, as an index. The Index is firſt ſet to o of the diviſions, ſo that any ir that happens afterwards Moiſt or Dry, the beard imtwiſting itſelſf from the r, will by the Index point ly on the ſcalę. Oſ the Air, Atmoſphere, &c. 43 The open ſquare part next below, is called the Barometer, (marked b). It conſiſts of a glaſs tube about 32 inches long, cloſed at the top, firſt filled with quickſilver, and then inverted on a reſervoir or leather bàg below, of quickſilver. By this means the quickſilver in the tube ſubſides to its pioper height, as acted upon by the preſſure of the air, or atmoſphere; for it is the denſe ſtate, or heavineſs of the air, that raiſes the quickſilver in the barometer, and prevents the clouds from diſtilling through the air in rain; and, on the contrary, its lightneſs that admits the fall in ſhowers, &c. But what is the uſe of that ſcrew at the bottom of the inſtrument ? ſays Maſter Wilſon. I thank you for the queſtion, ſays the Philoſopher; for many a young ignoramus has totally ſpoilt a good barometer, by fooliſhly playing with that ſcrew till they forced it up, broke the bag, and let out all the quickſilver. Let it be particularly known, that this ſcrew is only provided by the inſtrument- maker, to force up the quickſilver in its tube in a gentle manner, ſo that in conveying the inſtrument into the country or abroad, it is thus made quite portable, and not liable to have the ſilver againſt the top of the tube. The next inſtrument below is called the Thermometer (marked c). It contains a long glaſs tube, partly filled with quickſilver, and ſcrewεd down to a braſs ſcale, on which are marked diviſions and terms of various degrees of heat and cold, from boiling water down to freezing, found and adjuſted by actual trial of the maker. The freezæing point is marked 32, ãnd the boiling water 212. This is called Fahrenheits Scale, as being the name of the inventor. The heat of the air expands the quickſilver in the ball; and it accordingly riſes in the tube; whereas, on the contrary, cold contracts the quickſilver, and it of courſe falls, ſo that at any time by mere inſpection, the change of the temperature of the air is immediately ſhewn. The elaſtic principle in the air, which renders it ſo capable of being rarefied and condenſed, has been productive of the moſt wonderful eſfects. But before you proceed farther, ſays Lady Caroline, pray do me the favour, Sir, to convince me, by ſome experiment, that the air is endowed with this wonderful qualitt. That he cannot do, replied the Duke, without the uſe of proper inſtruments. Almoſt any thing will do, an't pleaſe your Grace, ſays the Philoſopher. ſfopner.Little Maſter's pop-gun that lies in the windowu, is ſuſficient for my purpoſe. Do me the honour to ſtep this way, Lady Caroline. You ſee here is a pellet in the top of this tube, made of hemp or brown paper. With this piece of paper we will make another pellet, and put it into the other end. Now with the gun-ſtick drive it forwvard. There you have forced the pellet ſome part of the way with eaſe; but it will be more difſicult to get it farther, becauſe the air, being compreſſed and made more denſe or compact, will make more reſiſtance; and when you have preſſed it ſo cloſe that its force overpowers the reſiſtance which the pellet makes at the other end, that pellet will fly off with a bounce, and be thrown byv the ſpring of the air to a conſiderable diſtance There, ſee with what force it is thrownl This you have taken little notice of, becauſe it is a ſchool-boy's action, and is ſeen every day; for, indeed, we ſeldom trouble ourſelves to reaſon about things that are ſo familiar; yet on this principle, my Lady, depends the force of a cannon; for it is not the gun-powder and fire that drives out the ball with ſuch prodigious velocity; no, that force is occaſioned by the fire's ſuddenly rarefying the air which was contained in the cha mber or breech of the cannon, and that generated by the power itſelf. As a proof of this, place the ſame ball in the ſame quantity of powder in an open veſſel, and when fired you will ſcarce ſee it move. But there have been guns lately invented, called Air-Guns, which abundantly prove what I have advanced; for they are charged only with concentrated or condenſed air. Here is one, I perceive, hanging over imy head, where you are to obſerve that the ball, which is previouſly filled by a ſyringe with the condenſed air, is ſcrewed under the back, and by pulling the trigger, a valve is puſhed in the ball, by a pin; the air ruſhes from thence through the back into the barrel againſt the bullet, and drives it to a great d the air in the ball is ſufficient ſix or ſeven balls, one after the of which would kill a buck or ery conſiderable diſtance. all amazed, and I don't wonder rou have never yet conſidered the extraordinary properties of this element; and it muſt ſeem ſtrange to you that the air, which is ſo neceſſary for life, that without it we cannot breathe, ſhould be tortured into an inſtrument of deſtruction. You will, however, be more ſurpriſed when I tell you that this is probably the cauſe of earthquakes; and that the noble city of Liſbon was ſome years ago deſtroyed by a ſudden rarefaction of the air contained in ſome of the caverns of the earth, and perhaps under the ſea. Tom Wilſon gave a leer of impertinence, but was aſhamed to ſhew his folly before ſuch good company. All the reſt ſtared at each other without ſpeaking a word, except Lady Caroline, who proteſted ſhe could not believe what he had ſaid about earthquakes; for, ſays ſhe, I remember to have read in the news-papers, that the flames burſt out of tbe ground. That might be, my Lady, ſays the little Philoſopher, for there could be no ſuch ſudden rarefaction of the air without fire. Fire therefore did contribute towards the earthquake, and fire might burn down a mountain compoſed of combuſtibles; but fire could never blow one up. No, my Lady, that effect is the ſole property of the air. This diſpute would, in all probability, have taken up much time; but his Grace ut an end to the controverſy, by declaring it was true philoſophy. In this property of being rarefied and condenſed, the air differs amaæingly from water, which, though compoſed of ſuch ſmall particles as not to be diſtinguiſhed or ſeen ſeparately with a mieroſcope, and notwithſtanding its readineſs to riſe or be evaporated with heat, and to be ſeparated with a touch, cannot, when confined, be at all concentrated, or brought into a leſs compaſs. Hlii Air is the medium which diffuſes light to the world; for if there was no atmoſphere to refract the ſun's rays round the globe, it would be almoſt as dark in the day-time as in the night; and the ſun, moon, and ſtars, would only be viſible. It is alſo the medium of ſounds, which are conveyed by the tremulous motion of the air when agitated by any noiſe. Let me throw this peach-ſtone into the moat, and you will perceive circles of ſmall waves diffuſe themſelves by degrees to a great diſtance round it. Now, as the air is fluid as well as the water, we may conclude that ſound is conveyed ſomewhat in this manner; though as that is nearly a thouſand times lighter than water, ſounds are propagated at an amaring rate: ſome ſay after the rate of 1, 142 feet in a ſecond of of cime; but however that be, we ma reſt aſſured that ſound is conveyed in this manner:Only throw up the ſaſh and halloo, and the echo which I ſpoke of in the beginning of the Second Lecture, will return you the ſound; that is, the waves or pulſes of air, which are put in motion by the noiſe you make, will ſtrike againſt the rocks, and return to you again: for echo is nothing but the reverberation of ſound. And that there can be no ſound conveyed without air, is proved by experiment; for a bell, ſtruck in an auted receiver in an air-pump, cannot be heard; that is, it has little or no ſound. Without air there would be no merchandize; for your ſhips could not ſail to foreign elimates; and without air.the birds could not fly, ſince they would have nothing to ſupport them, and their wings would be uſeleſs; for we know that a feather falls with as much velocity as a guinea in an exhauſted receiver of an air-pump. But above all, air is the principle which preſerves life both in plants and animals; there is no breathing without air: and you know, when our breath is ſtopt, we die. This is one of thoſe truths that are called ſelf-evident; becauſe it is univerſally known, and needs no confirmation; but, if demonſtration be thought neceſſary, vo By the help of this machine, all that I have ſpoken concerning the weight and claſtieity of the air, is demonſtrated in the moſt fimple and elegant manner. For by working the handle (marked A) all the air that is contained within the glaſe-receiier (marked B) is pumped out; and if any living animal is put within the receiver, all the air in its body is pumped out likewiſe : then, as I mentioned before, air being the principle which preſerves life, the animal dies, unleſs freſh air be immediately admitted, which may be done by turning a ſcrew (marked C). Our philoſopher then put the rat into the receiver; and when the air was nearly exhauſted, it appeared in great agony, and convulſed; and more air being pumped out, it fell on its ſide for dead; but freſh air being immedi atel admitted, it ruſhed into his lungs, vhich put them in motion again, and he recovered. The manner of the animals recovery, puts me in mind, ſays the philoſopher, of an accident which I once ſaw, and which I would have you all remember; for it may be of ſervice to manckind. Some time ago I was bathing with ſe. veral of my ſchool-fellows in a river by the road-fide. Maſter Curtis, who was 52 O fs ihe Air, Atmoſphere, &e. an obſtinate ſilly boy, would daſtard the reſt, as he called it; that is, he would fooliſhly exceed them in running into dangers and difficulties; and with this view, though he could ſwim no more than a ſtone, he plunged into a part oſ the river, which we told him was greatly above his depth, where he roſe and ſtruggled to get out, but could not. We were all, you muſt imagine, in the utmoſt diſtreſs, and unable to aſſiſt him; for none of us could ſwim. At this inſtant ſome gentlemen on horſeback came up, who immediately diſmounted, and got him out; but not till after he had ſunk the third time. He was brought to the ſhore without ſigns of life, and blooded without any effect; when one of the gentlemen, who I have ſince heard was a great philoſopher, adviſed them to blow ſome air down his throat: this was done, and the elaſticity of the air put his lungs in motion, as I imagine, for a pulſation immediately enſued; he recovered almoſt as ſoon as this animal. Now, from what I heard that gentleman ſay, and from the inſtance before us, there is reaton to believe that the lives of many might be ſaved, who are ſuppoſed drowned, if this method was fut in practice of conveying air to the ungs; for you are to conſider, that unleſs the lungs are in motion, there can be no circulation; and it was for want of air that their motion ceaſed in the water. Pray, gentlemen, let this be remembered, for it is a matter of great importance. We are to obſerve, gentlemen, that aĩr which has paſſed through fire, or is become foul or ſtagnated. and has loſt its ſpring, ĩs unfit for reſpiration. It was the want of freſh air, or, in other words, the being obliged to breathe air that was foul, and had loſt its ſpring, or elaſtic force, that, ſome years ago, killed ſo many of our poor countrymen in cthe black hole at Calcutta, in the Eaſt Indies: and this breathing of foul air in inflammatory, putrid, and eruptive diſorders; ſuch, for inſtance, as the ſmall-pox and ſome fevers, has deſtroyed more than can be imagined. If therefore you ſhould be ſeized with any of theſe diſorders, adviſe the people about you to make uſe of their common ſenſe, and not, becauſe a man is ill, deprive him of that vital principle the air, without which he could not live, evon in a ſtate of health. Never ſuffer your curtains to be drawn cloſe, or exclude the freſh air, even when you ſleep. I am greatly miſtaken, ſays Lady Caroline, if the air we are now in has not loſt its ſpring; ſor I breathe with diſfiF culty Was that the caſe, Madam, replied the little philoſopher, you would not be able to breathe at all; but if your Ladyſhip finds the air ſo diſpoſed, you ſhould make uſe of the inſtrument that lies by you; which, by putting the air in motion, will in part recover its ſpring. What inſtrument, Sir? ſays the Lady. Your fan, Madam, returned the philoſopher. Every fan is a philoſophical inſtrument, and was originally contrived, we may ſuppoſe, for the purpoſe above-mentioned. Abird dying in an air-pump will be in ſome meaſure recovered by the convulſive fluttering of his oun wings; becauſe that motion alters the ſtate of the air remaining in the receiver, and for a time renders it fit for reſpiration. Motion is the only preſervative for air and water; both of which become unwholeſome if kept long in a ſtate of reſt; and both may be recovered and made ſalutary by being again put into motion. Ifs foul and ſtagnated air has ſuch dire effects, hov much are we obliged to the learned and ingenious Dr. Hales for diſcovering the Ventilator: an inſtrument which, in a little time, diſcharges the foul air from ſhips, priſons, and other cloſe places, places, and ſupplies them with that which is freſh! The ceſearches of our modern philoſophers, ſays our Lecturer, have been the means of many new diſcoveries in regard to air. They now produce and prove the exiſtence of many diſferent ſorts of airs: ſuch as our comimon air, inſſlammable air, nitrous air, mephitic, more technically denominated by them gaſſes or elaſtic fluids. But to convey to you a clear idea, would ſuppoſe ſome knowledge of chemiſtry in my readers. I muſt therefore beg leave to diſpenſe with the account of theſe now, and only to adviſe my hearers to a ſtudy of chemiſtry as now improved, as a ſcience that will aſford them much pleaſure and information in Nature's wonderful operations. When you mentioned inflammable air, fays Maſter Wilſon, I thought you would have mentioned the Balloon; which, of all wonders, I think the greateſt. I proteſt it perplexes me to account how in nature it is poſſible for any large hollow ſubſtance, although filled with air, ſhould float in the atmoſphere, particularly when weighed down with a boat and two men in it, as repreſented in this picture hung near me; which records the memorahle Mr. Blanchard and Dr. Jefferieſ the Engliſh Channel from Dovi C. i / ll urpriſed at ſo ſimple a queſtion, philoſopher. Why, ſurely, you ſidered the reaſon of thoſe balls we ſeen you make by ſoap and it to a lather, and blown out o of a tobacco-pipel The air hy ey are blown, iſſuing from your ſpecifically lighter than the comeven when oontained in that thin lobe. Now, inſlammable air js ili ahout about ten times lighter than common air; ſo that a large hollow ſilk balloon, filled with inflammable air, although loaded with a boat, two men, and ſundries, is lighter in its bulk than common air; and conſeuently, when releaſed from its cords that Ldten it to the ground, it riſes majeſtically, and ſoars along in and above the clouds, according to the direction of the wind. We are now to ſpeak of the Wind, which is only a ſtream or current of air, as a river is of water, and is occaſioned by heat, eruptions of vapours, condenſations, rarefactions, the preſſure of clouds, the fall of rains, or ſome other accident that diſturbs the equilibrium of the air: for Nature abhors a vacuum, and for that reaſon, when the air is extremely rareſied in one part, that which is more denſe will immediately ruſh in to ſupply the vacant places, and preſerve the equilibrium; as is the caſe with water and other fluid ſubftances. Only raiſe a veſſel of water ſuddenly out of a ciſtern, and ĩee with what ſpeed the other water will ruſh in, to ſill up the ſpace and preſerve its level. And theſe rarefactions in the air may happen near the earth, or much above it; and is This occaſioned the loſs of the great kite, which we were a whole fortnight in making; for though there was ſcarcely wind in the park ſufficient to raiſ it, yot when lifted extremely high by the air, it was ſeized by a current of Wind, and torn in pieces. Winds are violent or gentle, in proporrion to the rarefaction or diſturbance there has been in the atmoſphere. A violent wind, in a great ſtorm, flies after the rate of so or 6o miles in an hour, and is oſten ſo denſe, or ftrong, as to bear down, trees, houſes, and even churches before it. What the ſailors call a briſk wind, flies after the rate of about 15 miles an hour, and is of great uſe in cooling the air, and cleanſing ĩt from poiſonous and peſtilential exhalations. The winds have various qualities; they are generally hot or cold, according to the quarter from whence they blow. I remember, ſome years ago, we had a ſouthweſt wind in February, which blew ſo long from that quarter, that it brought us the. very air of Liſbon; and it was as fot as in ſurumer. VWinds from the north and north-eaſt, which come off large rraũs of land, are generally cold. Some winds moiſten and diſſolve, others dry and thicken: fome raiſe rain, and others diſperſe it: ſom e winds blow conſtantly from one quarter, and are therefore called the General v rade Winds; theſe are met with on each fide of the Equator, in the Atlantic, Ethiopic, and Pacific Oceans. Some winds, agaĩn, blow conſtantly one way for one half, or one quarter of the vear, and then biow the contrary way. Theſe are met with in the Eaſt lndian ſeas, and are called Monſoons, or Periodical Trade Winds. But as theſe ſubjects are abſtruſe and difficult, and afford little entertainment, we ſhall defer an explanation of them till our next courſe of Lectures, and endeavour to give you ſome account of the Meteors that attend the air. We have already obſerved, that, beſides pure air, the atmoſphere contains minute particles of different ſorts, which are continually ariſing in ſtreams from the earth and waters, and are ſuſpended and kept ſloating in the air. The moſt conſiderable of theſe are the ſmall particles of water, which are ſo ſeparated as to be lighter than air, and are raiſed by the ſun's heat, or lifted up by the wind from the ſea, rivers, lakes, and marſhy or moiſt parts of the ecarth; and i ĩlli which which deſcend again in Dews, Rain, Hail, and Snow. When theſe ſmall particles are, by a rarefied ſtate of the air, ſuffered to unite many of them together, and deſcend ſo as to render the hemiſphere more opaque, and by its humidity to moiſten bodies on the earth, ĩt is called a Miſt. And, on the contrary, thoſe particles of water that ari ſe after a hot day from rivers, lakes, and marſhy places, and by filling the air moiſten objects and render them leſs viſible, are called Fogs. Cilouds are the greateſt and moſt beneficial of all the meteors, for they are borne about on the wings of the wind, and, as the Pſalmiſt obſerves, s Diſtribute fatneſs cc to the earth. Clouds contain very ſmall particles of water, which are raiſed a conſiderable diſtance above the ſurface of the earth; for a cloud is nothing but a miſt flying high in the air, as a miſt is nothing but a cloud here below. That theſe vapours are raiſed in the air, in the manner above-mentioned, muy be readily conceived; for it is an action that is ſcen every day in common diſtillations; but how theſe inviſible particles which float in the air, are collected into clouds, in order to bring the water back again, ſs not ſo eaſy to determine. Perhaps, ſays the Marchioneſs, who had juſt before entered. the room, it may be occaſioned by the winds driving the clouds together, and uniting the particles; which may by that means become ſpecifically heavier than the air, and therefore fall down. There is reaſoh, my Lady, in what you ſay, replied the philoſopher; but I would wiſh to know how theſe clouds are ſometimes all of a ſudden collected. It frequently happens, Madam, that you go abroad when the ſky is ſo ſerene and clear, that not a cloud is to be ſeen: and before your Ladyſhip has taken a turn round the Park, you ſhall ſee clouds gather round, and all the hemiſphere overcaſt, and the drops begin to fall. How happens this? There were no clouds for the winds to drive againſt each other, nor could the aqueous vapours ariſe from the eãrth, and deſcend at the ſame inſtant of time. Whence then could they come? I am afraid, Madam, ſaid the Duke, this young gentleman has ſhaken your Lady ſhip's philoſophy; for the queſtion he has put is not to be anſwered without ſome knowledge of chemiſtry; which is, I think, too little ſtudied in this kingdom. I am not uneaſy about it, my Lord Duke, ſays the Marchioneſs, he is the Lecturer, let him account for it if he canI ſhall get little honour by ſolving this ueſtion, ſays the philoſopher, ſince his Crace has pointed out the only method by which it can be done, that is to ſay, by Chemiſtry; for that action of bodies which the chemiſts call Precipitation, will anſwer it in all reſpects; but the explanation of it is a taſk ſo difficult, that I muſt defer it till another opportunity. However, I will endeavour to give theſe young gentlemen ſome idea of Precipitation, if your Ladyſhip will favour me with that tincture of bark which I ſaw in your hand this morning. The bark, gentlemen, at leaſt the reſinous part of the bark, is here ſuſpended in the ſpirits of wine; and ſo ſuſpended, that you ſee it is perfectly bright. Now, in order to precipitate this bark, I muſt find out a body which has a elofer affinity or relation with the ſpirits of wine than the bark has (for things inanimate have all their relations when chemically conſidered); that body is water; which when I add to the tincture, you will perceive it grou foul; for the ſpirits of wine will immeodi⸗ately let go the bark to lay hold of the water, which will occupy the ſpace the bark before filled, and that will fall to the bottom. This perhaps may be the caſe it uif u - i the atmoſphere: ſome ſubſtance may be brought into the air, to which it is nearer allied than to the water that it ſuſpended before in ſuch a pellucid manner as not to be ſeen; but which water becomes obvious when the air lets it go to embrace its nearer ally; and by uniting firſt into ſmall drops, then into larger, becomes too heavy to be ſuſpended by the air, and falls down ĩn rain. We come now to deſcribe the cauſes of Thunder and Lightning; but here I muſt take the Electrical. Machine to my aid. On account of the late many improvements that have been made in the ſcience of electricity, the inſtrument-makers have made electrical machines upon various conſtructions. The one Lam now going to deſcribe is not of the moſt modern of theſe: ; but as the eſſential parts are exactly the ſame in all, you will obtain by this a ſuſficiently complete and juſt information of the curious properties belonging to them. All the phenomena called Electrical, are ſuppoſed to be eſfected by an inviſiblè ſubtile noid exiſting in all the bodies of the earth. The Electrical Machine is made to extract this fluid from the earth, in the manner I will deſcribe to you. Of the Air, Atmoſphere;, &'c. e handle (marked A) being I, by means of ſome wheelwor marked B) turns round the glaſ narked C); this cylinder rubs OF the Air, Aimoſphere, &e. 65 the Rubber (marked D); by this means the electric fluid is extracted from the rubber and carried round by the glaſs to the points (marked E) which it enters, and remains in the tin tube or conductor (marked F), which is fixed upon a glaſs ſtem (marked G): as the electric fluid cannot pervade glaſs, this ſtem hinders it from returning again to the enrth. When the machine is worked, if a perſon place a knuckle ahout half an inch from tle braſs knob at the end of. the conductor (marked H) the electric fluid will dart like a bright ſpark of fire from it to the knuckle, and give the perſon a ſmall degree of pain. If, inſtead of the knuekle, a coated jar is placed to the conductor, the fire. will be received by it, and accumulated therein: ſo that if a perſon touches the bottom of the jar with one hand, and the ball at the top of it with the other, he will receive che charge of electricity through him, and feel the ſenſation of a ſudden ſhock. . The ſimilarity of lightning and electricity is not to be femarked in a few appearances only, but is obſervable throughout all their various effects. Lightning deſtroys edifices, animals, trees, &c. it always goes through the beſt conductors; ſuch as metal or water; but if it meets with ſubſtances which will not conduct it, (ſuch as ſtone or wood) it rends them, and diſperſes them in every direction. Lightning burns, and often melts metals and other ſubſtances. All theſe effects, as l ſaid he fore, may be produced by electricityſut beſide the great ſimilarity exiſting between lightning and electricity, what fully proves them the ſame, is, that the matter of lightning may be actually brought down from the clouds by means of electrical kites: but as this is rather a dangerous experiment in unſkilful hands, I will not now, deſcribe the method of making them. Clouds have almoſt always ſome electrical matter in them; and the lightning accompanied, which is ſuppoſed to be collected from the earth with the thunder, is only that matter darting from one or more clouds into another cloud, or elſe upon the earth; in which caſe it prefers the moſt lofty and pointed places, and by this ſtroke produces all thoſe dreadful effects that are known to be occaſioned by lightning. But, ſays Miſs Carolina, you have nor yet mentioned thoſe pointed rods on the tops of many large buildings: I have been told they protect the buildings from lightning. That certainly do, Madam, ſaid Maſter Teleſcope, for the lightning is attracted from the clouds by the pointed rod, and is by it El cono conducted down the ſide of the building to the neareſt water, without damaging it. Theſe rods were the invention of the late ingenious Dr. Franklin of America. People in general, when they happen to be caught in a thunder ſtorm, run for ſhelter under a tree; but that is very wrong; for che lightning is attracted by the tree, and by this means accidents often happen. The beſt way is to get into an open place and lay at a diſtance all metal which you may have about you: if you do this, there is very little danger in thunder and lightning. Snow ſeems to be the ſmall particles of water frozen in the air before they had united into drops: and hail ſeems to be drops of rain frozen in the fall. The Aurora Borealis, or northern lights, are occaſioned, by certain nitrous and ſulphureous vapours, which are thinly ſpread through the atmoſphere above the clouds, where they ferment, and, taking fire; the exploſion of one portion kindles the next, and the flaſhes ſucceed one another, till all the vapour is ſet on fire, the ſtreams whereof ſeem to converge towards the zenith of the ſpectator, or that point of the heavens which is immediately over his h ead. At this inſtant, up ſtarted Maſter Long. and told her Ladyſhip, if ſhe had done, he would be glad to aſk a queſtion. Sir, ſays ſhe, with à ſmile, it was you mãde the compliment; I ſhould be glad to hear your ueſtion, for, I dare ſay, it will be a ſenJhle one. I wiſh you may find it ſo, replied he; but what I want rto have an account of, is this ſame Jack-with-a-Lantern, which ſo haunts my Lord Marquis's park, and Pother day led my friend Tom Wilſon into a large pond. Maſtes Wilſon, you are to underſtand, had been at his uncles, where he had ſtaid rather too late, and thereforc his uncle ordered the footman to light him home; but Tom, being a very courageous fellow, and a little obſtinate, would walk home alone, and in the dark: but juſt as he came into the marſhy meadow, who ſhould he almoſt overtake but this ſame gentleman, this Jack-with-a-Lanterh, whom he miſtook for Goody Curtis, the chair-woman, and thought ſhe was lighting herſelf home from work. Tom ran to overtake Dame Curtis; but Mr. Jack- with-hisLantern ſtill kept out of reach, and led imiy friend Tom out of the path, which he did not perceive till he had loſt himſelf: on which Tom ran, and Jack ran: Tom hallIoσd, and Jack would not anſwer. At laſt ſouſe came Tom into Duckweed Ponũ, where he might have lain till this time, if MOr. Goodall had not heard him call out, as he was riding by, and ran to his aſſiſtance. This put all the company in good humour; and Tom had good nature and good ſenſe enough to join them in the Iaugh; which being ſubſided, our Philoſopher thus proceeded in his Lecture : The Ignis Fatuus, Jack-with-a-Lantern, or Will-witb-the Wiſp; as it is frequently called, ſays he, is ſuppoſed to be only a fat, unctuous, and ſulphureous vapour, which in the night appears lucid; and being driven about by the air near the garth's ſurface, is often miſtaken for a light in a lantern, as my friend Maſter Wilſon can teſtify. Vapours of this kind are in the night frequently kindled in the air, and ſome of them appear like falling ſtars; and are by ignorant people ſo called. It may be here neceſſary to mention that beautiful phenomenon the Rainbow, ſince it has the appearance of a meteor, though, in reality, it is none; for the Rainbow is occaſioned by the refraction or reſlection of the ſun's beams from the very ſmall drops of a cloud or miſt ſeen in a certain angle made by two lines, the one drawn from the ſun, and the other from the eye of the ſpectator, to thoſe ſmall drops in the cloud which reflect the ſun's beams: ſo that two perſons, looking on a Rainbow at the ſame time, do not, in reality, ſee the ſame Rainbow. There are other appearances in the atmoſphere which ought to be taken notice of; and theſe are the halos, or circles which ſometimes ſeem to encompaſs the ſun and moon; and are often of different colours. Theſe always appear in a rainy or froſty ſeaſon, and are therefore, we may ſuppoſe, occaſioned by the refraction of light in the frozen particles in the air. Here the Lecture would have ended, but a ſudden clap of thunder brought on freſh matter for meditation. Some of the company, and particularly the ladies, endeavoured to avoid the lightning; but Maſter Teleſcope, after the ſecond clap, threw up the ſaſh, and aſſured the ladies and gentlemen there was no danger, for that the clouds were very high in the air. The danger in a thunder ſtorm, ſays he, is ĩin proportion to the violence of the tempeſt and the diſtance of the clouds; but this tempeſt is not violent; and that the cloud is at a great diſtance, or high in the air, you may know by the length of time there is between your ſeeing the flaſh of lightning lightning and hearing the clap of thunder. Look, ſee how the ſ&y opens to emit the fire preſently you will hear the thunder; for you know we ſee the fire from a gun at a diſtance, long before we hear the report. There it is! and how tremendous'Thnheſe tempeſts always put me in mind of that beautiful paſſage in Shakeſpeare's King Lear; where, when the good old King is out in a ſtorm, and obliged to fly from his unnatural children, he ſays, Let the great Gods That keep this dreadful thund'ring o'er our heads, Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch, That haſt within thee undivulged crimes Unwhipt of juſtice hide thee, thou bloody hand, Thou perjur'd, and thou ſimular of virtue. That art inceſtuous! Caitiſf, ſuake to pieces, That under covert, and convenient ſeeming, Has practiſed on mans life Cloſe pent- up Guilt, Rive your concealing continents, and aſk Theſe dreadful ſummoners grace l This tempeſt will not give me leave to ponder On things would hurt me more Poor naked wretches, whereſoe'er you are, That bide the pelting of this pitileſs ſtorm! ouſeleſs heads, and widow'd raggedneſ h as theſe 2-O, I h f this Take phyſic o feel what wretche ſhake the ſuperſlux cavens more juſt. LECTURE. IV. OF Mountains, Springs, Rivers, and the Sea. E come nov, ſays the Philoſopher, to the conſideration of things with which we are more intimately acquainted, but which are not, on that account, the leſs wonderful. How was that Mountain lifted up to the ſcy ? How came this cryſtal Spring to bubble on its lofty brow, or that large River to ſlow from its maſſy ſide ? But above all, how came this mighty body of water, the Sea, ſo collected together? and why and how was it impregnated with ſalt, ſeeing the fiſn and other animals taken out of it are perfectly freſh ? Theſe are queſtions not to be anſwered, even by the Sages in Science. Here the Philoſopher, at the end of his judgment, and loſt in admiration, can only ſay with the Pſalmiſt, e They that go down into the c ſea, and occupy theirbuſineſs in the great cc waters, theſe men ſee the greatneſs of God, ceand his wonders in the deep. Wonderful te are thy works, O Lord; in judgment haſt ce thou made them alllThe earth is full sof thy greatneſs 1ꝰ 1 It is the buſineſs of Philoſophy, however, to enquire into theſe things, though our enquiries are ſometimes vain. We ſhall therefore, in this Lecture give the beſt account we can oſ Mountains, Springs, Rivers, and the Sea. . The antients ſuppoſed that Mountains were originally occaſioned by the Deluge; before which time they imagined that the earth was a perfect level:and acertain Abbot was taken into cuſtody and puniſhed for aſſerting that the earth was round; though there is ſo great a neceſſity for its being ſo, that, according to the properties with which the Almighty has endowed the ſubſtances that compoſe the world, it could not conveniently ſubſiſt in any other form; for, not to mention the formation of rivers, which are generally occaſioned by the miſts that fall on the mountains, if the earth was not round, it would be for ever covered with water; for itis, I think, ſuppoſed, that there is full as much water as earth; and as the water is ſpecifically lighter chan earth, that would be always uppermoſt, and we ſhould have no dry land. iliiã I proteſt, ſays Lady Caroline, I think you carry this argument too far, and ſcęm to queſtion the power of the Crentor. . How can you tell that the earth and water thus diſpoſed would have that effect iFrom daily experience, Madam, ſays the Philoſopher. Throw this ſtone into the moat, and you will ſee it ſink; or this clot of dirt, and it will fall to the bottom. But, ſays ſhe, this is not always the caſe; for when I water my flowers, the water ſinks into the ground and diſappears. That is becauſe there is abundantly more earth than water, Madam, ſays he; and the earth being poroùs, or hollow, the water runs into the cavities, and fills them; but was you to continue pouring out of the water-pot till all theſe creviees were full, you would find the water flow at top, and the garden-mould, or earth, would remain at the bottom; for if you take a pint-pot of earth, and another of water, and mix them ever fo well together, the earth will in a little time fubſide or fall to the bottom, and the water will be ſeen at the top. This is to me a demonſtration, Madam; and it is ſo far from calling in queſtion the wiſdom of God, that it is vindicating his wiſdom in the works of Creation. So that you may perceive from hence, as well as from the motion of the heavenly bodies, that the carth is round; and that the antients were in an error. And vwith regard to Mountains, though the Deluge might throv up many, and much alter the face of the earth, yet from the great uſe mountains are of in collecting the waters of the atmoſphere into ſprings and rivers, it is reaſonable to ſuppoſe there were mountains even in the furſt age of the world. If I am not miſtaken, ſay. Lady Twilight, it has been ſuppoſed, and by men of learning, that this irregularity of the earth's ſurface was occaſioned by ſome Comets ſtricing againſt it: and this opinion, I know, put Lady Lucy and many others in great pain when the late Comet was expected. What ſay you to this, young Gentleman? lam unable to anſwer for all the extravagant conceits and ridiculous follies of the human race, Madam, ſays he; and your Ladyſhip might as well expect me to give a reaſon for the poor ſoldier's propheſying an earthquake ſome time ago, and of the terrors of the people on that occaſion, as to account for this. That the Earth has undergone amazing changes ſince its firſt formation, is, I think, evident from the contents of ſome mountains, even in our own country; in which we find not on petrifactions in abundanee, but the ſhelis of of ſea-fiſn, and even the bones of animals, that were never inhabitants of this climate. At Reading in Berkſhire, which is above forty miles from the iea, there is a ſtratum of oyſter ſhells, which appear like real oyſters, and are ſpread through a hill of conſiderable extent; they lie upon a chalky rock in a bed of ſand, much reſembling that of the ſea; and the upper part of the hill, which is a loamy ſoil, is thirty or forty feet perpendicular above them: and at Burton near Petworth, in Suſſcx, was dug out of a pit, the bones or ikeleton of an elephant. Numberleſs curioſities of this kind have been diſcovered here (ſome of which I ſhall take particular notice of in my next courſe of Lectures); but I think there are few but what may be accounted for from the effects of the deluge, earthquakes, and ſubterraneous fires. Earthquakes at the bottom of the ſea, for inſtance, have ſometimes thrown up mountains or little iſlands, with the fiſh upon them, which have been covered by the ſandy or looſe earth giving way, and falling over them. It is not long ſince an iſland was raiſed in this manner, in the Archipelago, of ten miles circumference, the hills of which abound with oyſters not y⸗t petrified, and which are much larger the. thoſe taken on the coaſt; whence we may conclude, that they were thrown up from the deepeſt part of the ſea. Seafiſn have been alſo found in other mountains; ſome of which have been petrified, while others have been found with the fleſh only browned or mummied. And from the amavzing quantity of fire contained in the earth, and of the ſubterranean air rarefied thereby, great alterations muſt have been made in its ſurface in the courſe of ſo many years. Very well, ſays Lady Caroline; and ſo you are going to turn the earth into a hotbed, and I ſuppoſe, we who are its inhabitants, are by and by to be complimented with the title of muſhrooms and cucumbers, or perhaps pumpkins This is fine philoſophy, indeed. Have patience, my dear, ſays the Marchioneſs. Patience, Moam. returned Lady Caroline, why l hope your Lady ſhip would not have me believe that we have a furnace of fire under us I don't know, Madam, whether it be immediately under us or not, replied the little Philoſopher; but that there are numbers of theſe furnaces in the earth is beyond diſpute, and is evidently proved by the great number of burning mountains, which are continually ſending up flames, attended with large ſtones and metallie ſubll ſtances. I am ſorry his Grace of Galaxy is gone, Madam; for he would have ſet you right in this particular, which, pardon me, I ſhall not attempt, ſince I find my veracity ſo much queſtioned.The company all laughed at the Philoſopher in a pet; but the Marchioneſs took up the matter, and ſoon put an end to the diſpute. She blamed Lady Caroline for offering to decide upon a point which ſhe did not underſtand; and then turning to the young gentleman, told him, that patience ought to be a principal ingredient in the character of a Philoſopher. Upon which Lady Caroline and he compoſed their difference with a mutual ſmile, and after aſking the Marchioneſs pardon for betraying too much warmth, even in the cauſe of truth, he told Lady Caroline, ſhe ſnould have ſome account of theſe mountains from the beſt authority; when, taking a book out of his ocket, he read as follows: cc The moſt famous of theſe mountains is Ætna in Sicily, whoſe eruptions of flame and ſmoke are diſcovered at a-great diſtance, by thoſe that ſail on the Mediterranean, even as far as the harbour of Malta, which is forty Germanmiles from the ſhore of Sicily. Though fire and ſmoke are continually ticular times it rages with greater violence. In the year 1536 it ſnook all Sicily, from the firſt to the twelfth of May; after that, there was heard a moſt horrible bellowing and eracking, as if great guns had been fired: there were a great many houſes overthrown throughout the whole iſtland. hen this ſtorm had continued about eleven days, the ground opened in ſeveral places, and dreadful gapings appeared here and there, from which iſſued forth fire and flame with great violence, which in four days conſumed and burnt up every thing that was within five leagues of tna. A little after, the funnel, which is on the top of the mountain, diſgorged a great quantity of hot embers and aſhes for three whole days together, which were not only diſperſed throughout the whole iſland, but alſo carried beyond ſea to Italy; and ſeveral ſhips that were ſailing to Venice, at two hundred leagues diſtance, ſuffered damage. Facellus hath given us an hiſtorical account of the eruptions of this mountainj and ſays, that the bottom of it is one hundred leãgues in cireuit.  Hecla, a mountain in Iceland, rages fometimes with as great violence as Æætna, and caſts out great ſtones. The impriſoned fire oſten, by want of vent, cauſes horrible ſounds, ſounds, like lamentations and howlings; which make ſome credulous people think it the place of Hell, where the ſouls of the wicked are tormented. c Veſuvius in Campania, not far from the town of Naples, though it be planted with moſt fruitful vines, and at other times yieldeth the beſt Muſcadel wines, yet it is very often annoyed with violent eruptions. Dion Caſſius relates, that in the reign of Veſpaſian, there was ſuch a dreadful eruption of impetuous flames, that great quantities of aſhes and ſulphureous ſmoke were not only carried to Rome by the wind, but alſo beyond the Mediterranean, into Africa, and even into Egypt. Moreover, birds were ſuffocated in the air, and fell down dead upon the ground; and fiſhes periſhed in the neighbouring waters, which were made hot and infected by it. There happened another eruption in Martials time; which he elegantly deſcribes in one of his epigrams, and laments the ſad change of the mountain, which he ſaw firſt in its verdure, and immediately after black with aſhes and embers. When the burning ceaſed, the rain and dew watered the ſurface of the mountain, and made theſe ſulphureous aſhes and embers fruitful, ſo that they produced a large increaſe of excellent ; wine; wine; but when the mountain began to burn again, and to diſgorge fire and Tmoke afreſh (which ſometimes happened within a few years) then were the neighbouring fields burnt up, and the highways made dapgerous to travellers. cc A mountain in Java, not far from the town of Panacura, in the year 1586. was ſhattered to pieces by a violent eruption of glowing ſulphur (though it had never burnt hefore); whereby (as it was reported) ten thouſand people periſhed in the under-land fields. It threw up large ſtones, and caſt them as far as Panacura; and continued for three days to throw out ſo much black ſmoke, mixed with flames and hot embers, that it darkened the face of the ſun, and made the day appear as dark as the night. There are a great number of other mountains, or (as your Ladyſhip is pleated to call them) furnaces in the known world; which I ſhall take ſome notice of im my next courſe of Lectures. Wo come now to the conſideration of Springs; nliich are occaſioned principally, we may ſ uppoſe, by the water exhaled from the ſea, rivers, lakes, and marſhy places; and, forming elouds, aro diſperſed by the winds. Theſe clouds, when they arenſo cnlbected together as to become too heavy to to be ſupported by the air, fall down in rain to water the herbs and plants; but thoſe that are lighter, being driven aloft in the air, daſh againſt the mountains, and to them give up their contents in ſmall particles; whence entering the erevices, they deſcend till they meet together, and form ſprings: and this is the reaſon why we have ſuch plenty of ſprings in mountainous countries, and few or none in thoſe that are flat. And you may obſerve that it frequently rains in hilly countries, when it is clear and fine in the vallies beneath; for the air in the vallies is denſe enongh to ſupport the clouds, and keep them ſuſpended; but being driven up among mountains, where, in conſequence of their height, the air is ſo much lighter, they deſcend in miſts or ſuch ſmall drops of rain that will not run off, as is the cate in a heavy rain, hut ſink into the crevices of the earth in the manner already mentioned. Now that a great part of this water is exhaled from the ſea, may be known by the extraordinary raims and great dews which fall upon iſlands that are ſurrounded by the ſea: but ſome ſprings, it is reaſonable to ſuppoſe, have their ſource from the ocean, ſince thoſe which we meet with near the ſea are generally ſomewhat ſalt or brackiſh. Theſe ſprings, thus ſformed by the miſis on mountains, and the rain meeting together, form little rivulets or brooks; and thoſe again uniting, compoſe large ñvers, which empty themſelves into tlie ſca: and in this manner the water. exhaled from the ſea by the ſun, is returned to ĩt again; for Providence has eſtabliſhed ſuch wiſe laws or regulations for the world, that no part of the element can be annihilateq. But the very large rivers muſt have ſome other ſource befides the ſprings formed by the miſts, dews, and rains, ſince theſe ſeem inſufficient to ſupport their prodigious diſcharge; it is therefore no impròbable conjecture, to ſuppoſe that they have ſome communication with the ſea, and that the ſalt water is purified and rendered ſweet by paſſing through the ſand, gravel, and crevices of the earth. And this I ſhall endeavour to prove in my next courſe of Lectures. llill . Lackes are collections of water contained in the cavities of the ſurface of the earth; ſome of which are ſaid to be ſtagnant, arnd made up of the waſte water that flows, after rain or ſnow, from the adjacent countries; and theſe muſt be unwholeſome. Other lakes are ſupplied by rivers, the contents of which they receive and convey under ground, to form other ſprings and rivers: others, again, are fed by ſprings which ariſe in the lake itſclf; and ſome (as that of Haerlem, and other ſalt lakes) have a communication, it is ſuppoſed, with the ſea, whence they receive their waters, and afterwards diſcharge them by ſubterranean ſtreams. The ſea is a great collection of water in the deep vallies of the earth; I ſay, in the deep vallies; for if there were not prodigious cavities in the earth to contain this ama⸗zing quuantity of water, thus collected together, the whole ſurface of the globe would be overſlowed; for the water being lighter than the earth, would be above the earth, as the air is above the water. Now you ſpeak of the ſea, ſays the Marchioneſs, I wiſh you would tell me why the ſea-water is always ſalt. Madam, replied he, I wiſh I could; but it is beyond the reach of my philoſophy; and, indeed, I believe, of any philoſophy whateves. You might as well alk me why there is water, as why there is ſalt in the water; which indeed ſeems almoſt as much an element as that: and I have often thought, from the prodigious quantity of ſalt diſtributed in the earth and water, that it muſt have qualities that we know not of, and anſwer purpoſes in the ſcale of being with which we are unacquainted. lil The moſt remarkable quality in the ſea, next to its ſaltneſs, is that motion or riſing and falling of the water, which we caſt tides, and which is occaſioned by the attraction of the moon; for that part of the water in the great ocean which is neareſt the moon, being ſtrongly attracted, is raiſed higher than the reſt; and the part oppoſite to it, on the contrary ſide, being leaſt attracted, is alſo higher than the reſt: and theſe two oppoſite ſides of the ſurface of the water, in the great ocean, following the motion of the moon from eaſt to weſt, and ſtriking againſt the large coaſts of the continent, ſrom thence rebound back again, and ſo make floods and ebbs in narrow ſeas and rivers, at a diſtance from the great ocean. This alſo accounts for the periodical times of rhe tides, and for their conſtantly following the courſe of the nioon. . i t hl 33  dæ 3 i LECTUREV. ii or Mamnerali, V egetables, and Animals.  IOULD a philoſopher condeſcend to ; envy the great, it would not be for their ſumptuous palaces and numerous attendants, but for the means and opportunities they have of enquiring into the ſecrets of Nature, and contemplating the wonderful works of God. There is no ſubject ſo worthy of a rational creature except that of promoting the happineſs ol mankind; and none, except that, can give a man of reſined taſte and good underſtanding ſo much real ſatisfaction. But it is our misfortune, that few engage in thoſe enquiries but men of ſmall eſtate, whoſe ciroumſtances will not permit them to ſpare the time nor ſupport the expence of travelling, which is often neceſſary to obtain the knowledge they ſeek after; and for the want of which they are obliged to depend on the relations of thoſe who have not, perhaps, been ſo aceurate or ſo faithful as they ought. Conſidering the quantity of foreign drugs that are uſed in Britain, it is ama2æing how liittle even thoſe who deal in them know of the matter: ſo little, indeed, that they cannot tell where they grow, or how they are found or manufactured; are unable to diſtinguiſh the genuine from the fictitious, and may therefore, through miſtake, often ſubſtitute the One for the other. Health and life are of too much conſequence to be triſled with; yet theſe are neglected, while ſaſhion, dreſs, and diverſions, are ſought after throughout the world. This is a melancholy conſideration; but this, you'll ſay, is no part of our Lecture, therefore we ſhall drop a ſubject which has thruſt itſelf, as it were, into our way, and ſpeak of the contents of che earth, and its products and inhabitants: for this globe, beſides the earth and water, which are neceſſary for the production and ſupport of plants and animals, contains other materials which have been found uſeful to man. That reſſlecting teleſcope, this gold watch, and Lady Caroline's diamond ear-rings, were all dug out of the earth; at leaſt the materials were there found, of which theſe things are comoſed. ll Thoſe ſorts of earth which with the aſſiſtance of rain produce vegetables or plants in ſuch abundance, are common mould, loam, clay, and ſandy ſoils. There are carths alſo that are different ſrom ctheſe, and which are uſed in medicine; as the Japan earth, Armenian Bole, &c. The barren parts of the carth are, for the moſt part, ſand, gravel, chalk, and rocks; for theſe produce nothing, unleſſ they have earth mixed with them. Of harren ſands there are various kinds, though their chief difference is in their colour; for the ſand which we throw on paper to prevent blotting, and that the maid throws on the floor, are both compoſed of little irregular ſtones, without any earth; and of ſuch there are large deſarts in ſome arts of the world, and one in particular, Bhere Cambyſes, an eaſtern monarch, loſt an army of 50,000 men. Sure, ſays L.ady Caroline, you muſt miſtake, Sir. How was it poſſihle for a whole army to be loſt in that manner 2Why, Madam. returned the philoſopher, the wind, as it frequently does in thofe parts, raiſed the ſands and clouds, for many days together, and the whole army was ſimothered. And if you read the life of Alexander the Great, you'll find, Madam, that his army was in great danger when he croſſed the ſame deſart, in his frantic expedition to viſit the temple of his pretended father Jupiter Aminon.But we return to our ſubject. Beſides theſe materials which eompoſe the ſurface of the eartlr, if we dig deeper, we frequently find bodies very different from thoſe we diſcover near the ſurface; and theſe, becauſe they are diſcovered by digging into the bowels of the earth, are called by the common name of Foſſils; though under this head are included all metals and metallic ores, minerals, or half metals, ſtones of various ſorts, petrifaetions, or animal ſubſtances turned into ſtone; and many other bodies which have a texture betwecn ſtone and earth; as oker of ſeveral ſorts, with one of which the farmers colour their ſheep; black lead, with which are made thoſe pencils that we uſe for drawing; and ſome Kinds of chalk; ſea-coal, and other bodies that are harder than earth, and yet not of the conſiſtency of perfect ſtone. li Of ſtones there is an amazing variety. They are claſſed by naturaliſts under two heads; that is to ſay, ſpars and chryſtals: and by others, into vulgar and precious ſtones. Some of the moſt conſiderable; both for beauty and uſe, are marble, alabaſter, porphyry, granite, free-ſtone, &c. Flints, agates, cornelians, and pebbles, under which kind are placed the precious ſtunes, otherwiſe called gems or jewels; which are only ſtones of an exceſſive hardneſs, and which, when cut and poliſhed, have an extraordinary luſtre. The moſt valuable of theſe are diamonds, rubies, fapphires, amethyſts, emeralds, topazes, and opals. But there are other ſtones, which though void of beauty, may, perhaps, have more virtue than many of thoſe already mentioned; ſuch as the loadſtone, which I deſcribed to you in my firſt Lecture: ulſo the whetſtones, with which we ſharpen our Eknives and other edge-tools; limeitones, talk, calamine, or lapis calaminaris, and many others. Beſides the bodies already mentioned, there are alſo found in the earth a variety of ſalts; ſuch as rock-ſalt, or ſal-gem, vitriol, nitre, and many others. The minerals, marcaſites, or ſemi-metals, as they are called by the chemiſts, are antimony, vink, biſmuth, &. Theſc are not inflammable, ductile, or malleable, but are hard and brittle, and may be reduced to powder; and the firſt, after melting, maày be calcined by fire. Mereury, or quickſilver, has generally been claſſed with ſemi-metals, and indeed, fometimes among the metals; ; but I think it oughit not to be claſted under either of theſe heads, but conſidered ſeparately; as alſo ſhould brimſtone, though it be a part of the compoſition of crude antimong Ores are thoſe kinds of earth which are dug out of mines, and that contain in them metallic particles, from whence metals are extracted. il Metals are diſtinguiſhed from other bodies by their weight, fuſibility or melting in the fire, and their malleability or givin way and extending under the ſtroke o thi hammer without breaking in pieces. Theſe are ſix, viz. gold, ſilver, copper, tin. lead, and iron. They are ſeldom or ever found in any part of the earth but what is mountainous, which, by the way, in ſomè meaſure proves what we ventured to aſſert in a former Lecture, viz. that there wert mountains before the deluge; for that thert were metals before the deluge appears. by what is ſaid in holy writ concerning Cubal Cain, who wrought in braſs, &c. and wis the inventor of organs. lllllls What ſort of bodies are to be founꝗ deeper in the earth, I mean towards its centre, is unknown to us; for we can onſty make ourſelves acquainted with the foſſils contained in its ſhell, and the vegetables and animals on its ſurface, whoſe nature and properties alone are, indeed, too many to be diſcovered by human ſagacity. Of Vegetables or Planis. The vegetables or plants growing on the earth, may be divided into three Cclaſſes; I mean thoſe of herbs, ſarubs, and trees. Herbs are thoſe ſorts of vegetables whoſc ſtalks are ſoft, and have no wood in them; as pariley, lettuce, violets, pinks, graſs, nettles, thiſtles, and an infinite number of others. Shrubs are thoſe plants which, though woody, never grow into trees, but bow down their branches near the carth's ſurface. Such are thoſe plants that produce roſes, honey ſuckles, gooſeberries, currants, and the like. But Trees ſhoot up in one great ſtem or body, and riſe to a conſiderable diſtance from the grourd before they ſpread their branches; as may be ſeen by the oak, the beech, the elm, the aſh, the ſir, the w alnuttree, che errv tree, &. PFrom the bodies of trees we have our timher for building; and of the oak-tree in particular for ſhip- Cuiloing, no timber being ſo tough, ſtrong, and durable as Engliſh oal neither does any tree, perhaps, yicld more timber; for there was one lately ſold for forty pounds, from Langley woods, belonging to the Biſhoꝑ of Saliſoury, which meaſured ſix feet two inches in diameter, contained ten tons ol timber, and was ſuppoſed to be à tho uſand ycars old. BSl c From a ſmall acorn ſee the oak ariſe lil à Supremely tall, and tow'ring to the ſciest Quecn cf the groves, her ſtately head ſhe rears, i Her bulk encreaſing by the length of yearsscs: Now ploughs the ſea a warlike gallant ſhim. Whilſt in her womb deſtructive thunder ſieep:  2 Hence Britain boaſts her wide extenſive reign, And by tlexpanded acorn rules the main. ⸗ The moſt conſiderable parts of plants ure the root, the ſtalk, the leaves, the flowus ers, and the ſeed; moſt of them have theſe ſeveral parts, though there are ſome, indeed, that have no ſtalk, as the aloe; others that have no leaves, as ſavine; and orhers that have no flowero; as fern. But I think there are none without root or ſeed. æ. What moſt excites bur wonder with reſpect to plants (and what, indeed, has beon the ſubject of much diſpute among the learned) is their nouriſhment and pr gation This, ſays Maſter Bloſſom, I have oſten often heard my father diſcourſe upon when I have been in the garden with him; but as what he ſaid has eſcaped my memory, ſhould be glad, Sir, if you would tell me how they receive their nouriſhment, and how their ſpecies are propagated. A ddiſquiſition of this nature, ſays the little phiIoſopher, would take up too much of your time, and could not be underſtood without reciting many experiments and obſervations that have becn made by the learned: I ſhall, cherefore, defer the conſideration of it till my next courſe of Lectures. I ſee no reaſon for that, ſays Maſter Wilſon; nor to me does there appear any difficulty in the affair. Why, they receive their nouriſhment from the earth, don't they? And you ſow the ſeeds of the old plants, and they produce new ones. Vou are too apt, Maſter Wilſon, ſays the philoſopher, to talk atout things you don't underſtand. The earth has not, perhaps, ſo much to do with the nouriſhment of plants as is generally imagined; for, without water, and particularly rainater and dew, there would be but little ĩncreaſe in vegetables of any kind; and this you may know by the languid ſtate of plants in a dry ſeaſon, ,though watered &ever ſo oſten from the river or well. This is known alſo by the ſmall quantity oſ carth which is taken up in the growth oſ plants; for both Mr. Boyle and Dr. Woodward raiſed ſeveral plants in earth watered with rain or ſpring-water, and even diſtilled water; and upon weĩghing the dry earth, both before and after the production of the plants, they have found that very little of it was diminiſhed or taken up by the plantTaken up by the plant ſays Lady Caroline, in ſome ſurpriſe, why you don't imagine there is earth in herbs and trees Indecd I do, Madam, replied the little philoſopher, and have alrcady hinted as much in what was ſaid on the four elements, and at the ſame time told your Ladyſhip,ꝰ if I miſtake not, how it might be extracted from the plant; which was, by burning the plant to aſhes, and waſhing off the ſalts, as your laundrymaid does when ſhe makes lye; for when theſe ſalts are waſhed away, the remainder will be eãarth. lli Iſ the carth contributes ſo little towards the production of plants, ſays Maſter Blyth, the water, I apprehend, muſt be a good deal concerned; and that is evident from the quantity of water which moſt plants require to keep them in a ſtate ot health and vigour. Your obſervations, ſays the philoſopher, deſerve ſome notice. but how will you account for the growth Sof plants in ſandy deſarts where it ĩeldom Taĩins, and of plants too that contain juices ĩn great abundance; for God Almighty, for the preſervation of his creatures, has cauſed thoſe wonderful plants to grow in ſuch barren deſarts, to ſupply in ſome meaſure the want of water; and ſome are ſo conſtructed as to hold great quantities of water for the uſe of animals. This is the caſe of the ground- pine, which, though it feems to grow like a fungus or exereſcence on the branch of a tree, often contains a pint or a quart of ſweet water for the birds, beaſts, and even men, to refreſh themſelves within the ſultry climates where they abound. But a plant may hold much waæer for the ſubſiſtence of animals, and yet not ſubſiſt on water itſelf; and that this is the caſe experience teſtifies. Dr. Woodward put a plant of ſpearmint, which weighed 27 grains, into a phial of water, where it ſtood 77 days, and in that time drank up 2,558 grains of ſpring water: and then being taken out, weighed 42 grains; ſo that the increaſe was only 15 grains; which is not an hundredth part of the water expended. We are therefore to look for bridâ principles of vegetables than what arr generally known: but this I ſhall conſider in my next courſe of Lectures. ii What the plant can obtain by the earth; water, -and otherwiſe for its nouriſhment, is generally ſuppoſed to be received by the fibr s of the roots, and conveyed by thè ſtalc or body of the plant up into the branches and leaves through ſmall tubes, and then returned by the bark to the root again; ſo that there is a conſtant circulation of vital fluids in plants as well us in animals. ButI am inclined to think, that a great pait of the nouriſhment of plants is received by the pores of the leaves and ſcin, or bark, as well as from the root; elſe how happens it that plants are ſo much refreſhed by the dew? Plants alſo require air for their nouiiſhment, as well as æ circulation of theſe alimentary juices; for they reſpire as well as animals, and for that reſpiration require reſh air, and even exerciſe; ſince we know that plants that are always confined in à cloſe room will never riſe to perfection: and that they perſpire as well as animals is evident, from the inſtance of the mint growing in ſpring-water above-mentioned; for, if not a hundiedth part of.the water taken up by that plant beca it part of the plant itſelf, all the reſt mu iſ h iii *E perſpired through the pores, or little imęrceptible holes in the ſkin and leaves. his calls to my mind, ſays Lady Caroline, a charge my Lord Marquis gaye me; which was, never to ſit in the yew arbor; for the matter perſpired by the yew-tree, ſays he, is noxious, and will make you ill; and I believe that was the reaſon of his Lordſhip's ordering that old arbor to be demoliſhed. But pray, Sir, why and in what manner. do plants perſpire -For the ſame reaſon, Madam, and in the ſame manner, perhaps, that animals do, returned the philoſopher. It is occaſioned, probably, by heat; for we know they perſpire abundantly more in ſummer than in winter; nay, when this vegetative principle has heen long checked by cold, it breaks out with ſuch force when warm weather comes on, that it is no uncommon thing, in the cold northern countries, to ſec the trecs covered with ſnow one week, and with bloſſoms the nextt. Pilants are propagated different wayvs; but the moſt general method is by ſecd. Some plants, however, are raiſed by a part of the root of the old plant ſet in the ground, as potatoes; others, by new roots propagated from the old ones, as hyacinths and tulips; others, by cutting off branches and putting them into the ground, which will there take root and grow, as vines; and others are propagated by grafting and budding, or inoculation. Of Animals. We are now to ſpeak of the animals that inhabit the earth; which are naturally divided into Men and Brutes. O f Men, there ſeem to be four different ſortsNay, don't be frightened, Lady Caroline Sir, ſays ſhe, I ſhould have made no objection, had you ſaid four hundred, provided you had diſtinguiſhed them accordin to their different diſpoſitions True, Midum ſays the philoſopher, or according to their different features, and then you might have ſaid four hundred thouſand; for it is very true, Madam, though very wonderful, that out of four hundred thouſand faces you will not find two exãctly alike; and but for this miraculous and gracious providence in God, the world would have been all in confuſion. But the diviſion I would willingly make of men, Lady Caroline, is that of white, tawny, black, and red; and theſe you will allow are, with reſpect to colour, eſſentially di fferent. Oſ Animals. ro1 different. Moſt of the Europeans, and ſome of the Aſiatics, are white; the Africans on the coaſt of the Mediterranean Sea are tawny; thoſe on the coaſt of Guineàa black; and the original Americans red, or of a red copper colour. How they came ſo, is only known to their Maker; and therefore I beg you would ſpare yourſelves the trouble of aſking me any queition on that head. Brutes may be divided into four claſſes; that is to ſay, 1. Aerial, or ſuch as have wings, and fly in the air; as birds, waſps, flies, &c. ,.oerreſtrial, or thoſe which are confined to the earth; as quadrupeds, or four-footed beaſts; reptiles, which have many feet; and ſerpents, which have no feet at all. 3. Aquatie, or thoſe that live in the water; as fiſh of all kinds, whether they are covered with ſcales or ſhells, or are, like the eel, without either. 4. Amphihious, or thoſe that can live for a long time either upon the earth or in the water; as otters, aligators, turtles, &c. I ſay for a long time, becauſe I apprehend that the uſe of both theſe elements are neceſſary for the ſubſiſtence of thoſe animals; and that chough they can live for a conſiderable time upon land in the open air, or as long in lhe water, excluded in a manner from air, yet they would languiſh and die if conſined entirely either to the one or the other of theſe elements. In this diviſion of animals we are to obſerve, however, that there are ſome which eannot be conſidered under either claſs, being, as it were, of a middle nature, and partaking of two kinds: thus, bats ſeem to be partly beaſts and partly birds. Some reptiles, likewiſe, and ſome of the wateranimals, want one or more of the five ſenſes with which other animals are endowed; as worms, cockles, oyſters, &c.If I miſtake not, ſays Lady Caroline, I have ſeen the animals divided into different claſſes in books of natural hiſtory, and deſcribed under the heads of beaſts, birds, fiſhes, and inſects. Very true, Madam, ſays the philoſopher, but the preſent method ſuits my preſent purpoſe the beſt, and can make no alteration in the nature of things; however, as I have not yet mentioned the word Inſects, though they are included in my diviſion of animals, it may be neceſſary for me to obſerve, that they are ſo ealled from a ſeparation in their bodies, by which they are ſeemingly divided into two parts, thoſe parts being only joined together by a ĩmall ligament; as in flies, waſps, &&c. And as ſome of theſe inſects undergo diſfferent ferent changes, and in time become quite different animals, I ſhalt conſider them more particularly in my next courſe of Lectures, not having time for it at preſent; for it is a field that is full of wonder- ought to be examined with great attention. There is ſomething ſo amazing and miraculous in the transformation of inſects, that I am loſt in reflection whenever the ſubject ſtrices my mind; and ſometimes inclined to think that other animals may undergo ſome ſuch change. Who, that had not made the obſervation, would thinc, Madam, that this grub, grawling or rather ſleeping here, would by-and-by become a fine butterſly, decked out in allthe gaudy colours of the rainbow or that this ſilcworm ſhould be capable of aſſuming ſo many different forms l And is it not altogether as miraculous, that if ſume animals are cut in pieces, every ſeparate piece or part of the origimal animal will become one entire animal of itſelf Vet that the polype or olypus is endowed with this property, has Peeu demonſtrated; and I have here one that was divided into ſeveral parts ſome rime ago, which parts are now become diſtinct and perfect polypes, and alive; as reſlected upon it by the mirror C. To æadjuſt the object to the glaſſes, you move che ſtage B up or down upon the pillar, while you are looking through the glaſſes at A, till the objects appear the moſt diſtinctMaſter Teleſcope then placed one Of the polypes in the microſcope, and begged Pad; Caroline to look at it.This is really wonderful, ſays Lady Caroline, for the polypes ſeems now to be 40 or 50 times bigger than it was before. Your wonder will be increaſed ſtill more, Maclam, replied our philoſopher, when I inform you, that it is ſuppoſed there are as many animals which can only be diſcovered by the microſcope, as thoſe we can ſee without it. Maſter Teleſcope having ſatisfied the curioſity of the young gentlemen by letting them ſee this wonderful inſtrument, proceeded in his Lecture. Birt the ſagacity and acute ſenſes of ſome of the animals (in which they ſeem to exceed man) are altogether as ſurpriſing; as I ſhall demonſtrate in my next courſe. In your next courſel ſays Maſter Wilſon, why don't you do it now 2DPeace, prithee, Tom, ſays the philoſopher, learn this firſt, and then PlI talk to you about beavers building houſes; bees forming themſelves to goverp them; birds knowing the latitude and longitude, and ſailing over ſed through vaſt tracts of air, from one country to another, without the uſe of any compaſs; and of other things, which art ſuſficient, I think, to lower the pride.oſ man, and make even Philoſophers bluſh at their owvn ignorance.And now, Lady Caroline, prepare to hear a few hard words, and I will finiſn this Lecture, Bur why mutt it be finifhed in an unintelligiblé manner ? ſays the Lady. Becauſe I cannot deliver what I am going to ſay, Madam, without making uſe of thè terim of ant, ſays he; and thoſe I muſt deſirè your Ladyſhip, and the reſt of the good company, to learn from Bevis's Rocket Dicſionary, or ſome.other book of ghat kind&. r2æ All animals receive their food at the mouth; and moſt animals, but eſpecially thoſe of the human kind, chew it there tĩll it is intimately mixed* with the ſaliva or ſpittle, and thereby prepared for the eaſier and better digeſtion in the ſtomach. When the ſtomach has digeſted the food, it ĩs thence conveyed into the guts (pardon tliè expreſſion, Ladies, for I cannot avoid it) through which it is moved gently by what is called the periſtaltic motion; as it paſſes there, the chyle, which is the nutritive part, is ſeparated by the lacteal veins; from the excrementitious parts, and by them conveyed into the blood, with which it circulates, and is concocted into blòóod alſo; and this circulation is thus performed:æThe blood being, by the vena cava, brought intò the right ventricle of the heart, by the contraction of that muſcle, is forced into the pulmonary artery of the lungs; where the air, which is continually inſpired or drawn in by the lungs, mixes with and enlivens it; and from thence, the blood being conveyed by the pulmonary veiminto the left ventricle of the heart, the contraction of the heart forces it out, and by the arteries diſtributes it into all parts of the body; from whence it returns by the veins to the right ventricle of the heart, to purſue the ſame courſe again, in order to communicate life and heat to every part of this wonderful machine, the body. But this is not all; for, according to Anatomiſts, ſome part of the blood, in the courſe of its circulation, goes to the head; where a portion of it is ſeparated by the brain, and concocted into animal ſpirits, which are diſtributed by the nerves, and impart ſenſe and motion throughout the body. The inſtruments of motion, however, are the muſcles; the fibres or ſmall threads whereof, contracting themſelves, move the different parts of the body; which in ſome of them is done by the direction of the mind, and called voluntary motion; but, in others, the mind ſeems not to be concerned, and therefore theſe motions are called involuntary. Tunis is th progreſs of animal Iife; by which you will perceive that a man may, even at home, and within himſelf, ſee the Wonders of GOD in the Works of Creation. We have now finiſhed our ſurvey of the Univerſe, and conſidered theſe great maſſes of matter, the Stars and Planets; but particularly our earth and its inhahitants; all which large bodies are made up of inconceiveable ſmall bodies, or atoms: And by the figure, texture, bulk, and motion of theſe inſenſible corpuſcles, or infinitely ſmall bodies. all the phænomena of large bodies may be explained. LECTURE VI. OFf the Five Scuſes of Man, and of his Understanding. T our next meeting there was a great deal of good company, who came to hear the Boys Philoſophy, as they called it; on which account I could obſerve that Maſter Teleſcope took leſs pains to be underſtood by the young gentlemen and ladies; and addreſſed himſelf more particularly to thoſe of greater abilities. As the company came in laughing, and affected to talk and behave in a ſupercilious manner (which even ſome great perſonages do in theſe our days of refinement) he ſtood ſilent, till my Lord Marquis deſired him to open the Lecture; upon which he bowed to his Lordſhip and the reſt of the company, and began; but had ſcarcely ſpoken three words before he was interrupted by Sir Harry: he therefore ſtopped for ſome time, and then began again; but the tongue of the young Baronet ſoon ſilenced him; and he ſtood without ſpeaking a conſiderable time. On this the company looked at each other; and the Marquis bade him go on. My dear, ſays the Marchioneſs, how can you expect this young gentleman to read a long Lec ture, when you know that Sir Harry, who loves to hearhimſelf talk, of all things, has not patience to ſupport ſo much taciturnity -Why, Madam, ſays the Ambaſſador of Bantam (who came in with the Marquis) l thought we had all been aſ ſembled to hear this LectureThat was indeed the intention of our meeting, ſays the Marchioneſs; but l hope your Excellency knows the polite world better, than to expect people ſhould be ſo old faſhioned as to behave on theſe occaſions with any ſort of good manners or decorum. lIn my country, ſays the Ambaſſador, all the company keep a profound ſilence at theſe meetings.lt may be ſo, replied the Marchioneſs; but I aſſure your Excellency, it is not the cuſtom here. Why, Sir, I have been often interrupted in the middle of a fine air, at an Oratorio, by a gentleman whiſtling a hornpipe; and, at the Rehearſal at St. Paul's, it is no uncommon thing to hear both gentlemen and ladies laugh louder than the organ Huſh, Madam, ſays the Marquis. if your friends and neighbours are fools, you ought not to xpoſe them, and eſpecially to ſorcigners. Take Take care, while you condemn this unpolite behaviour in others, that you don't run into it yourſelf. Politeneſs is the art of being always agreeable in company; it can therefore ſeldom deal in ſarcaſm or irony; becauſe it ſhould never do any thing to abrides the happineſs of others; and you ſee, Dear, you have made Sir Harry uncaly , for he bluſhesThe companvy laughed at Sir Harry, who joined them; and being determined to hold his tongue, our Pnhilòſopher thus proceeded: After the ceurſory view of nature, which was concludled in my laſt Lecture, it may not be amiſs to examine our own faculties, and ſee by what means we acquire and treaſure up a knowledge of thoſe things; and this is done, I apprehend, by means of the ſenſcs, the operations of the mind, and the memory; which laſt may be called the Storchouſe of the Underſtanding. The firſt time little Maſter is brought to a Iooking-glaſs, he thinks he has found a new play- mate, and calls out, Little boy ! Little boy! for having never ſeen his own face before, it is no wonder that he ſhould not know it. Here is the idea, therefore, of ſomething new acquired by ſight Preſcnily the father, and mother, and nurſe come forward to partake of the child's diverſion. Upon ſeeing theſe figures in the glaſs with whom he is ſo well acquainted, he immediately calls out, There, Papal there, Mamma ! there, Nurſe lAnd now the mind begins to operate; for feeling his father's hand on his own heac, and ſeeing it on the little boy's head in the glaſs, he cries, There mel Now this tranſaction is lodged in the memory, which, whenever a looking-glaſs is mentioned, will ive back to the mind this idea of its reflecting objects. The whole company were pleaſed with this familiar demonſtration; but Sir Harry aſked how he came, of all things, to make uſe of a looking-glaſs Becauſe, Sir, ſays he, it is an object with which ſome people are the moſt intimately acquainted. As Sir Harry is an egregious fop, this reply produced a loud laugh; and Maſter Teleſcope was looked upon to be a Wit as well as a Philoſopher. However, I am inclined to think the expreſſion was accidental, and not intended to hit Sir Harry, becauſe I know his good ſenſe would not permit him to treat an elder and ſuperior in that manner.The laugh being a little ſubſided, our Philoſopher thus proceeded onhis Lecture ãQnul. All our ideas, therefore, are obtained either by ſenſation or reſlection; that is to ſay, by means of our ſive ſenſes; as ſceing, hearing, ſmelling, taſting, and touching, or by the operations of the mind. Before you proceed farther, ſays the Counteſs of Twilight, you ſhould, I think, explain to the company whq;ʒ is meant by the term Idea.That, ſ apprehend, is ſuſficiently explained by what was ſaid about the Iooking-glaſs, ſays the Philoſopher; but if our Ladyſhip requires ⸗ another definition, you ſhall have it. By an ldea, then, I mean that image or picture, Madam, which is formed in che mind of any thing which we have ſeen, or even heard talk of; for the mind is ſo adroit and ready at this kind of painting, that a town, for inſtance, is no iooner mentioned, but the imagination ſhapes it into form, and preſents it to the memory. None of this company, I preſume, have ever ſeen Lyons; yet there is not one, perhaps, but has formed, or conceived in lus mind, fome idea or picture of that unhappy city. Not one of us ever ſaw Tippoo Saib's prodigious army and elephants, yet we have all formed to ourſelves a picture of their running away from a imall party of our brave countrymen, led againſ them by the gallant and courageous Cornwallis When we read in the newspapers a deſcription of a ſea engageme nt, or of the taking of Louiſbourg. Quebec, or any other important fortreſs, the mind immediately gives us a picture of the tranſaction, and we ſee our valiant officers iſſuing their orders, and their intrepid men furling their ſails, firing their guns, ſcaling the walls, and driving their foes before them. To purſue this ſubject a little farther:No man has ever ſeen a dragon, a griffin, or a fairy; yet every one has formed in his mind a pictureimage, or, in other words, an idea, of theſe imaginary beings. Now when this idea or image is formed in the mind from a view of the object itſelf, it may be called an adequate or real idea; but when it is conceived in the mind without ſeeing the object, it is an inadequate or imaginary idea. li i I ſhall begin my diſcourſe of the SENSES with that of the Sight, ſays he, becauſe, as Mr. Addiſon obſerves. the ſight is the moſt perfect and pleaſing of them all. The organ of ſeeing is the eye, which is made up of a number of parts, and ſo wónderfully contrived for admitting and refract ing the rays of light, that thoſe which come from the ſame point of the object, and fall upon different parts of the pupil, are again brought together at the bottom of the eye; and by that means the whole object is painted on a membrane called the Retina, which is ſpread there. But how is it poſfible, ſays Sir Harry, for you to know that the object is thus painted on the retina -ſIn ſome meaſure from the ftructure of the eye, replied the Philoſopheér; but, I think, it is manifeſt from that diſorder of the eye, which ſurgeons call the gutta ſcrena; the very complaint which my Lord's butler has in one of his eyes. If you examine it, you will find that he has no ſight with that eye, though it looks as perfect as the other, with which he ſees well; this is, therefore, occaſioned by ſome paralytic, or other diſorder in that membrane, or expanſion of the optic nerve, which we call the Retina; and proves that all viſion ariſes from thence. That which produces in us the ſenſation which we call Seeing, is light; for without light nothing is viſible. Now light may he conſidered either as it radiates from luminous hodies directly to our eyes; and thus we ſee theſe luminous bodies themſelves; as the Sun. a lighted torch, &c.or as it is reflected from other bodies; and thus we flected from them to our eyes by the rays of light. It is to be obſerved, that the bodies which reſpect the light are ocf three ſorts, 1. Thoſe that emit the rays of light; as the ſun and fixed ſtars : 2. Thoſe that tranſmit the ray: of light; as the air: and, 3. Thoſe that reflect them: as the moon, the earth, iron &c. The firſt we call Luminous, the ſecond Pellucid, and the third Opaque bodies. It is alſo to he obſerved, that the rays of light themſelves are never ſeen; but by thieit means we ſce the luminous bodies, from whicl they originally came; and the opaque bodies, from which they are reflected; thus, for inſtance, when the moon ſhines, we cannot ſee the rays which paſs from the ſun to the moon; but, by their means, we ſee the moon, from whence they are reflected. If the eye be placed airectly i in the medium, through which the rays paſs to it, the medium] is not ſcen; for we never ſee the air through which the rays come to our eyes. But if a pellucid body, through which the rays are to paſs, be placed at a diſtance from our eye, that body will be ſcen, as well as thoſe bodies from whence the rays came that paſs through it to our eves. For inſtance, he . ho looks through a pair of ſpectacles, not only ſees bodies through them, but alſo iees the glaſs itſelf; becauſe the glaſs, being a ſolid body, reflects ſome rays of light from its ſurface; and being placed at a convenient diſtance from the eve, may be ſeen by thoſe reflected rays at the ſame tiime that bodies at a greater diſtance are ſecn by the tranſmitted rays; and this is the reaſon, perhaps, why objects are ſeen more diſtinctly through a reſlecting than through a refracting teleſcope. There are two kinds of opaque bodies; namely, thoſe that are not ſpecular; as the moon, the earth, a man, a horſe, &c. and others that are ſpeculur, or mirrors, like thoſe in reflecting teleſcopes, whoſe ſurfaces, being poliſhed, reflect the rays in the ſame order as they came from other bodies, and ſhow us their images; and rays that are thus reflected from opaque bodies always bring with them to the eyc tlſe idea of colour, thoush this colour in bodies is nothing more than a diſpoſition to reflect to the eye one ſort of rays more copiouſly, or in greater plenty than another; for particular rays impreſs upon the eye particular colours; ſome are red, orthers blue, yellow, green, &c. Now it-is to he ohſerved, that every body of light which comes from the Sun, ſeems to be compounded oſ thoſe various ſorts of rays; and as ſome oſ them are more refrangible than others, that is to ſay, are more turned out of their courſe in paſſing from one medium to another, it neceſſarily follows that they will be ſeparated after ſuch refraction, and their colours appear diſtinct. The moſt refrangible of theſe are the violet, and the leaſt the red: the intermediate ones, in order, are indigo, blue, green, yellow, and orange. How do you know, Mr. Philoſopher, that colours are ſeparated in this manner? ſays Sir Harry: I have no notion of theſe doctrines without demonſtration.That you may have, if you pleaſe, replied the Philoſopher. Pray, Maſter Lovelace, hand me that Priſm. Novw, Sir Harry, if you will pleaſe to hold this Priſm in the beams of che Sun, you will ſee the colours ſeparated in the manner I have mentioned. Pleaſe to look, Lady Caroline; the ſeparation is very leaſing, and you vwill find what I have ſaid of the rainbow in my third Lecture, confirmed by this experiment. All theſe rays differ not only in refrangibility, but in reflexibility; I mean the proerty ſome have of being reflected more caſily than others And hence ariſe all the various colours oſ bodies. The whiteneſs of the Sun's light is owing, itis ſuppoſed, toa mixture of all the original colours in a due proportion; and whiteneſs in other bodies is a diſpoſition to reflect all the colours of light nearly in the ſame proportion as they are mixed in the original rays of the Sun; as blackneſs, on thec contrary, is only a diſpoſition to abſorb or ſtifle, without reflection, moſt of the rays of every ſort that fall on thoſe bodies; and it is for that reaſon, we may ſuppoſe, that black clothes are warmer than thoſe of any other colour. The inhabitants of Naples, though in ſo hot a clime, for the moſt part wear black. Light, as we have already obſerv ed, i is ſucceſſively propagated with moſt amaving ſwiſtneſs; for it comes from the Sun to the Barth in about ſeven or eight minutes, though at the diſtance of eighty-two millions of miles. ; Hearing is the next moſt extenſive of our ſenſes; the organ of which is the Ear, whoſe ſtructure is extremely curious; as may be ſeen in the books of Anatomy. Tnhat which the ear conveys to the brain is called Sound, though till it reaches and affects the perceptive part, it is in reality nothing but motion; and this motion, which produces in us the perception of ſound, is a vibration of the air occaſioned by a very ſhort and quick tremulous motion of the body from whence it is propagated. That ſound is conveyed in this manner, may be known by what is obſerved and felt in che ſtrings of muſical inſtruments, and of bells, which tremble or vibrate as long as we perceive any ſound come from them: and from this effect which they produce in us, they are called Sounding Bod ies. Sound is propagated at a great rate; hut not near ſo faſt as light.I don't know that, ſays Lady Caroline Then your Lady ſhip has forgot what paſſed in our Lecture upon Air, eplied the Philoſopher; and to confirm by experiment what I advanced, I muſt beg his Lordſhipto order one of the ſervants to go a diſtance into the park, and diſcharge ⸗ gun.The gentlemen were averſe to this ĩt being an obſervation they had made a hundred times; but to gratify the young people, my Lord ordered his game-keeper out; and when the piece was diſcharged, they had the ſatisfaction of feeing the fre long before they heard the report. i Sinelling is another ſenſe which ſeems to be excited in us by external bodies, and ſometimes by bodies at a great diſtance; but that whichimmediately affects the noſe, the organ of ſmelling, and produces in us the ſenſation of any ſmell, are effluvia, or inviſible particles that fly from thoſe bodies to our olfactory nerves How do you prove this, young gentleman? ſays Sir Harry. Sir, repſted the Philoſopher, had you been here yeſterday, you would not have aſked this queſtion; for, as the wind was north-eaſt, the effluvia from my Lord's brick-Kilns were ready to ſuſfocate us; but now the wind is turned to the ſouth-weſt, you obſerve no ſuch thing, becauſe thoſe effluvia are driven a contrary way. The power which ſome bodies have of emitting theſe effluvia or ſteams without being Vifbly diminiſhed, is to me moſt amauving; yet that it is true, we know by abundant experience. A ſingle grain oſ muſk will ſcent a thouſand rooms, and ſenc forth theſe odoriferous particles for a great number of years without being ſpent. Surely theſe particles muſt be extremely ſmall; yet their minuteneſs is nothing when compared with the particles of light which pervade and find their way through glaſs, or to the magnetic effluvia which paſs frecly through metallic bodies; whereas thoſe effluvia that produce the ſenſation of ſmelling, notwithſtanding their wonderful property of ſcenting all places into which they are brought, and without any ſenſible diminution, are yet too groſs to paſs the membranes of a bladder; and many of them vwill ſcarce find their way through a common white paper. There are but few names to expreſs the infinite number of ſcents that we meet with. I know of none but thoſe of ſweet, ſtinking, rank, muſty, and ſour; for ſo barren is our language in this reſpect, that the reſt are expreſſed either by degrees of compariſon, or from epithets borrowed from bodies that produce ſcent; which muſt, in many caſes, be very inexpreſſive; for the ſmell of a roſe, of a violet, and of muſk. though all ſweet, are as diſtinct as any ſcents whatever. The next ſenſe under our conſideration is Taſte, the organ of which are the tongue and the palate, but principally the tongue. Ay, and a pretty organ it is, ſays Lady CarolineWhen uſed by your Lady ſ hip's diſcretion, Madam, replied the Philoĩopher. But I muſt obſerve to your Ladyſhip, and the reſt of the good company, that though bodies which emit light, ſounds, and ſcents are ſeen, heard, and ſmelt at a diſtance, yet no bodies can produce taſte without being immediately applied to the organ; for though the meat be placed at your mouth, you know not what taſte it will produce till you have touched it with your tongue or palate. Though there is an amazing variety of taſtes, yet here, as in ſcents, we have but a few general names to expreſs the whole; ſweet, ſour, bitter, harſh, ſmooth, and rank, are all that I can recollect; and our other ideas of taſte are generally conveyed by borrowed ſimilitudes and expreſſions by thoſe of ſcents. It is ſurpriſing, ſays the Ambaſſador, that in this age of gluttony, your language ſhould be ſo barren as not to afford you words to expreſs thoſe ideas which are excited by exquiſite flavours. Sir, ſays the Marquis, this may be eaſily accounted for. I muſt inform your Excelleney, that we are indebted for our moſt expreſſive terms to the Pocts, who were never much acquainted with good cating; and are leſs ſo ſince literature has loſt its 2eſtVery true, my Lord, ſays Sir Harry, their diſhes, poor creatures, have lately been of the mental kind; but had you a few rich Poets that could afford to live like people of taſte, inſtead of your ſweets and iours, and ſuch old faſhioned terms, you would have the calapaſh and calapee flavour, the live lobſter ſlavour, the whipt pig flavous, and a liſt of others, as long as my arm. Fie, Sir Harry, ſays the Marchioneſs, no more of that, I beg; you know LadyCaroline can't bear the name of barbarity.Nor I, ſays the Ambaſſador; but pray what barbarity is there in this, Madam?rOh' none at all, replied Sir Harry, I only mean to inſinuate that ſome of our greæt people are not content with having food brought from the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, and every other part of the World, to gratify their palates, but they muſt roaſt lobſters alive, and whip young pigs to death to make them tender. Good God! ſays the Ambaſſador, are there people in Englund capable of ſuch acts of inhumanity ? A man that would do that would murder me, if the law did not ſtand between us; and the law is but a poor ſcreen where humanity is loſt and conſeience lulled to Ileep. Pll apply to the King my maſter for my diſmiſſion, and no longer live with a people who have adopted ſuch diabolical cuſtoms.The Ambaſſador was ſo much in a paſfion, that it was with difficulty my Lord Marquis pacified him; and poor Lady Caroline, whoſe kind ſoul ſympathizes with every creature in diſtreſs, was in tears at the bare rehearſal of theſe acts of cruelty. Here the Baronet apologiæed to the company for having interrupted the Lecturer: perhaps he never before ſhowed ſo much good ſenſe; for he certainly deſerved ſevere reprehenſion for introducing any ſubject which diſturbed that harmony and attention from the hearers, Vhich had hitherto been preſerved. Waen ſilence was reſtored, our Philoſopher aroſe and thus purſued his Lecture : I have already taken notice of four of our ſenſes, and am now come to the fifth and laſt, I mean that of the Touch; which is a ſenſe ſpread over the whole body, though it is more particularly the buſineſs of the hands and fingers; for by them the tangible qualities of bodies are known, ſince we diſcover by the touch of the fingers, and ſometimes, indeed, by the touch of other parts of thę body, whether things are hard, ſoſt, rough, ſmooth, wet, dry, &c. But the qualities which moſt aſfect this ſenſe are heat and cold, and which, indeed, are the great engines of Nature; for by a due temperament of thoſe two dononte qualities., moſt of her productions are formed. What we call heat is occaſioned bv the agitation of the inſenſible parts of the body that produces i in us that ſenſation; and when the parts of a body are violently agitated, we ſay, and indeed we feel, that body is hot; ſo that that which to our ſenſation is heat, in the object is nothing but motion.  n Heyr-day, ſays Lady Caroline, what ſort of Philòſophy is this Why, Madam, ſays Sir Harry, this is a poſition which has been laid down by theſe airy gentlemen for a long time, but which never has been proved by experiment.Take care, Baronet, ſays the Marquis, or you'll forfeit all pretenſions to Philoſophy The forfeiture, myLord, is made already, ſays the Philoſopher; Sir Hurry has been bold enough to deny that which experience every day confirms for truth. If what we call Heat is not motion, or occaſioned by the mot on of bodies, how came my Lord's mill to take fire the other day, when it was running round without a proper ſupply of corn? And how came youùr poſt-chariot to fire while running down Break neck- hill; Sir Harryi? Coniider, there was nobody vith with a torch under the axle- tree; but this is a part of philoſophy known even to the poor ignorant Indians, who, when hunting at a great diſtance from home, and wanting fire to dreſs their meat, take a bow and a ſtring, and rub two pieces of wood together till they produce flame. But you may ſee, Sir Harry, that heat is occantoneq by the motion of bodies, by only rubbing this iece of ſmooth braſs on the tableſtay, Pi rub it: it muſt he done briſkly. There, now you'll fecl it hot; but ceaſe this motion for a time, and the braſs will become cold again; whence we may infer, that as heat is nothing but the inſenſible particles of bodies put into motion, ſo cold, on the contrary, is occaſioned by the ceſſation of the motion of thoſe particles, or their being placed in a ſtate of reſt. But bodies appear hot or cold in proportion to the temperament of that part of the human body to which they are applied; fo that what ſeems hot to one, may not ſeem ſo to another. This is ſo true, that the ſame body felt by the two hands of the ſame man, may at the ſame inſtant of time appear warm to one hand and cold to the other, if with the one hand he has been rubbing any thing, while the other was kept in a ſtate of reſt; and for no other reaſon but becauſe the motion of the inſenſihle particles of that hand with which he has been rubbing, will be more briſk than the particles of the other which was at reſt. I have mentioned thoſe objects which are peculiar to each of our ſenſes; as light and colour to the ſight; ſound to the hearing; odours to the ſmell, &c. but there are two others common to all the ſenſes, which deſerve our notice, and theſe are Pleaſure and Pain, which the ſenſes may receive by their own peculiar objects; for we know that a proper portion of light is pleaſing, but that too much offends the eye; ſome ſounds delight, while others are diſagreeable, and grate the ear ſo heat, in a moderate degree, is very pleaſant, yet that heat may be ſo increaſed as to give the moſt intoterable pain. But theſe things are too well known to be longer inſiſted on. Now, from the ideas or conceptions formed in the mind by means of our ſenſes, and the operations of the mind itſelf, are laid the foundation of the human underſtanding, the loweſt degree of which is perception; and to conceive a right notion of this, we muſt diſtinguiſh the firſt objects of it, which are ſimple ideas, ſuch as are repreſented by the words, Red. Blue. Bitter, Swoet, &c. from the other objects of cur fenſes; to which we may add the internal operations of our own minds, or the objects of reflection; ſuch as are thinking, willing, &c. for all our ideas are firſt obtained by ſenſation and reflection. The mind having gained variety of ſimple ideas, by putting them together, forms what are called compounded or complex ideas; as thoſe ſignifiel by the words, Man, Horſe, Marygold, Windmill, &c. The next operation of the mind (or of the underſtanding) in its progreſs to knowledge, is that of abſtracting its ideas; for by abſtraction they are made general; and a general idea is to be conſidered as ſeparated from time and place, and lodged in the mind to repreſent any particular thing that is conformable to it. Knowledge, which is the higheſt degree of the ſpeculative faculties, conſiſts in the perception of the truth of affirmative or negative propoſitions; and this perception is eirher immediate or mediate. When, by comparing two ideas together in, the mind, we perceive their agreement or diſagreement, as that black is not white; that the whole is bigger than a part; and that two and two are equal to four, &c. it is called Immediate Perception, or Intuitive Knowledge; poſitions is ſo evident as to be known by a ſimple intuition of the ideas themſelves, they are alſo called Self-evident Propoſitions. Mediate perception. is when the agreement or diſagreement of two ideas is made known by the intervention of ſome other ideas. Thus: If it be affirmed that my Lord's bay horſe is as high as my father's, the agreement or diſagreement may be ſeen by applying the ſame meaſure to both: and this is called Demonſtration, or Rational Knowledge. The dimenſions of any two bodies which cannot he brought together may be thus known, by the ſame meaſure being applied to them both But the underſtanding is not confined to certain truth; it alſo judges of probability, which conſiſts in the likely agreement or diſagreement of ideas; and the aſſenting to any propoſition as probable, is called Opinion, or BeliefWe have now finiſhed this courſe of Lectures. I hope not, ſays Lady Caroline, with ſome emotion Why, Madam, returned the philoſopher, we have taken a curſory view of natural bodies, and their cauſes and effects; which I have endeavoured to explain in ſuch a manner as to be intelligible, at leaſt, if not entertaining; and pray, what more did your Ladyſhip expect Sir, replied the Lady, I am greatly pleaſcd with the account you have given us; and I thank you, Sir, for the pains you have taken to anſwer the many queſtions I have troubled you with. What I had further to hope, was, that you would have given us, when you was on the ſubject of Animals, ſome ſtrictures on the cruelty with which they are roo oſten treated; and have thrown in reſlections and obſervations tending to enforce in mankind a diſfferent conduct. This I wiſhed for, and ſhould have been glad to have had Sir Thomas and his Lady here at the ſame time; who are both extremely fond of their little domeſtic creatures; and I admire them for their tenderneſs and compaſſion. Theſe feelings and ſentiments of the human heart, Madam, ſays the philoſopher, add much to the dignity of our nature; and I am greatly delighted with ſuch behaviour; but I am afraid, Lady Caroline, that we often miſtake characters of this kind, and take that for humanity and tenderneſs which is only the effect of fancy or ſelf-love. That Sir Thomas has compaſſion, I grant you; but I am aſraid it is only for himſelf. He Ioves his dogs and horſes, becauſe his dogs and horſes give him pleaſure; ; but ro other creatures that aſford him none, he is abſolutely inſenſible. I have ſeen him, even at Chriſtmas, feed his pretty pups, as he calls them, with delicacies; but rave at the ſame time, in a mercileſs manner, at poor children who were ſhivering at his gate, and ſend them away empty-handed. Our neighbour, Sir William, is alſo of the ſame diſpoſition: he will not ſell a horſe that is declining, for fear he ſhould fall into the hands of a maſter who might treat him with cruelty; but he is largely concerned in the ſlave-trade (which, I think, is carried on by none but we good chriſtians, to the diſhonour of our celeſtial Maſter) and makes no diffſiculty of ſeparating the huſband from the wife, the parents from the children, and all of them from their native country, to be ſold in a foreign market, like ſo many horſes, and often to rhe moſt mercileſs of the human race. I remèember him in great diſtreſs for his pointer Phillis, who had loſt her puppies; but the ſame afternoon I ſaw him, without the leaſt compunetion of mind, preſs a poor man into the ſca-ſervice, and tear him from his wife and children, for no other crime but becauſe he had fought bravely for his King and country in the laſt wai; and being now and of his Underſlanding. 133 ſettled in buſineſs, and having a family, did not chuſe to enter the ſervice again. Is chis humanity, Madam ? Is this moralityꝓ But above all, is this chriſtianity!? And are theſe the bleſſed effects of the liberty we boaſt of 2I don't expect a reply, Lady Caroline, for I ſhall have occaſfion to ſay much more on theſe ſubjects in my next courſe of Lectures, and then, perhaps, you will honour me with your obſervations. But in the mean time, don't lIet us be miſled by ſpecious pretences. We cannot judge of any man, Madam, by one ſingle action, but by the tenor and reſult of all his actions; and this requires deep penetration, and an intimate knowledge of human iife. Bsenevolence, Lady Caroline, ſhould be univerſal, for it is an emanation of the Supreme Being, whoſe mercy and goodneſs are extended to all his creatures, as ours alſo ſhould he; for they arc fellowtenants with us of the globe we inhabit. I. have often thought, Madam, that moſt of the miſchiefs which embarraſs ſociety, and render one contemptible to another, are owing to inordinate ambition, or extreme love of power and wealth; for all the gold a man poſſeſſes, beyond that portion which is requiſite for himſelf and family, only ſerves to inflame his ambition; as all the wine we drink, more than is neceſſary to recruit the drooping ſpirits, anſwers no other purpoſe but to intoxicate the mind. l have ſeen a book, Lady Caroline, in my papa's library, which gives ſome account of one Lycurgus, an old Grecian lawgiver; with whoſe character you ought to be acquainted. This man, Madam, was of opinion, that religion, virtue, and good manners, were the only natural cements and preſervation of liberty, peace, and friendſhip; which he found had been deſtroyed and extirpated by means of wealth and ſelf-intereſt; he therefore prohibited the uſe of gold and ſilver, and all kinds of luxury in the ſtate, and eſtabliſhed ſuch a plan for the education of youth of every denomination, as was moſt likely to confirm and habituate them in the practioe of religion and virtue, and ſecure to the Spartans and their poſterity the bleſſings of liberty and peace. The event proved that his inſtitutions were founded on ſound policy, and a perfect knowledge of human nature: for in the ſpace of ſive hundred years, that is to ſay, from the time of Lycurgus to the introduction ſander, in the reign of the firſt Agis, there was no mutiny among the people; every man ſubmitted cheerfully to the laws oſ Lycurgus, and all were ſo united and powerful in conſequence of their virtue, ſobriety, and the martial diſcipline he had eſtabliſhed (which was that of a national militia) that Sparta, a very ſmall inconſiderable ſtate, not only gave laws to the reſt of Greece, but made even the Perſian monarchs tremble, though maſters of the richeſt and moſt extenſive empire in the world. But when this great and virtuous people of Sparta had conquered Athens, and from thence introduced wealth and luxury into their own country, they loſt their virtue, dwindled to nothing, and were themſelves enſlaved. Nor is this a matter of wonder; for where religion and virtue are ſet at a diſtance, and wealth leads the way to poſts of honour and truſt, ſome people will ſtick at nothing to obtain gold; but were dignities of this kind conferred on the moſt deſerving, and none but men of virtue and ſuperior abilities promoted to places of truſt and power, there would be no frauds in the ſtate, or violence among the people; and we might then hope to enjoy the felicities of the Golden Age. Man in that age no rule but reaſon knew, And with a native bent did good purſue; Unaw'd by puniſument, and void of fear, His words were ſimple, and his ſoul ſincere By no forc'd laws his paſſions were confin' For Conſcience kept his heart, and ealm'd Pecace o'er the world her bleſſed ſway maint And e'en in deſarts ſmiling Plenty reign'd. TH E END. Directions to the Binder. Frontiſpi ce to face Lecture on Matter and Motion S lar Syſtem nulII Mount Veſuvius b -0 Inſtruments mentioned in this Book; tbe Prices at which they are made sold, by n. and S. JONES, Optic No. 135, Holborn, London. A Reſlecting Teleſcope, one foot, in braſe A Refracting ditto, from ros. 6d. to A Planetarium, according to the wheel. ſA Pocket Terreſtrial Globe, in a caſe El 5 3 work, from 1l. 15. tae 1o An Accurate Map of the Moon , o An Armillary Sphere, on card paper o A Nine Inch ditto, all in braſs, completely and elegantly madle 9 APair of Twelve Inch Globes, beſt ſort s5 A Triple Weather-glaſs (deſcribed in page 42) bn 3 Air-Gun, for experiments onluy 16 Air- Pump, with Receiver, from 4l. 14. 6d. to 6 Apparatus to ditto, from 1l. 1s. to  10 Electrical Machines, from 2l. 125. 6d. to. 8 Microſcope, with Apparatus 1 Glaſs Priſm , E o With all other Kinds, at the Loweſt Prices For more particulars, ſee Meſſrs. Jones's Ge Catalogue. To be had gratis. Orders ſent to the Publiſhers of this Work, he ſollowing BOOKS, written for the Æmuſſement and Inſiruction of Touih, are ſold b OGCILVY and SPEARE, Midãle- Row, Holborn, London. The Pocket Dictionary, or Complete Engliſh Ex poſitor; ſhewing the parts of ſpeech to which each word belongs; its various ſenſes, if more than one, placed in proper order, and the language from whence derived, pointed out immediately after the explication. Exhibiting alſo the technical terms uſed by artiſts, the names of the cities and principal touns, their diſtance from London, &c. &c. with the proper accent marked on each word to facilitate its pronunciation. To which is prefixed, an Introduction, containing a Hiſtory of the Engliſn Language, with a comprehenfive Grammar, and a Recommendatory Letter from Dr. Bevis. ſmall 8vo. 35. bound. The above Dictionary will be found particularly uſeful to explain any diſficult word whicn may occur in this, or other volume, treating on philoſophical or miſcellaneous ſubjects. Preſent for an Apprentice; or a ſure guide to gain both eſteem and an eſtate; with rules for his conduct to his maſter and in the world. By a Lord Cheſterfield's Advice to his Son, on Men and Manners, or a New Syſtem of Education; in which the principles of politeneſs, the art of acquiring a knowledge of the world, &c. &c. are laid down in a plain, eaſy, and familiar manner. 1 8mo. 15. 6d. neatly bound in red. . . The Ladys New YVear's Giſt, or Advice to a Daughter. By the Right Honourable George Saville, Marquis of Halifax. 18mo. 15. bound. Mbral Inſtructions of a Father to his Son, ready to take a long voyage; or an Eaſy Manner of forming a Young Man to all Kinds of Virtue. 18mo. 15. bound. Oeconomy of Human Life, in two parts; a new edition, 18mo. 1s. bound. A Compendious Hiſtory of the World, two vol. 18mo. illuſtrated with ſeveral copperplates. 1s. 6d. bound in the vellum manner. An Account of the Conſtitution and Preſent State of Great Britain; together with a View of its Trade, Policy, and Intereſt reſpecting other Nations; and of the Principal Curioſities of Great Britain and Ireland: with copperplates. 18mo. 25. 6d. bound. Hiſtorical Mitror, or Biographical Miſcellany; in which are exhibited the moſt ſtriking ſentiments and examples upon the more intereſting branches of duty, viz. Religion, Humanity, Induſtry, &c. o. An Introduction to the Study of Hiſtory; ſhewing the proper method of reading hiſto ical works, in order to acquire a perfect knowledge of manKind. 12mo. 35. bound. 1. The KEey to Polite Literature, or a Compendious Dictionary of the Fabulous Hiſtory of the Heathen Gods, Heroes, &c. 18mo. 2s. bound. 2. An Introduction to the Study of Geography; or a General Survey of Europe. By A. F. Buſching. 12mo. 35. bound. 5. Sermons upon Various Subjects, preached to Young People, defigned for promoting early piety. By John Evans, D. D. 12mo. 25. bound. 4. Literatura Graeca : containing the Geography and Hiſtory of Ancient Greece; Memoirs of irs Stateſmen, Orators, Artiſts, &c. A View of its Antiquities, Government, Religion, Laws, &c. with an Eſſay on the Study of the Greek Language. For the uſe of Schools. By Richard Jackſon, M. A. 12mo. 25. 6d. bound. 5. The Inſiructor, or Young Man's Beſt Companion: containing a great variety of uſeful information. By George Fifher, 12mo. 2s. bound. 5. The Friend of Youth; conſiſting of Apt Stories, Entertaining Dialogues, and Moral Dramas. From the French of Berquin: with Copperplates. 12 vols. 16mo. 125. ſewedl. hi. oPs a b xcxv - - COSe ,- mm——.n. HπHũſfcſũſſiim 